
==== Front
BMC CancerBMC Cancer1471-2407BioMed Central London 1471-2407-7-S1-A4310.1186/1471-2407-7-S1-A43Meeting AbstractPercutaneous interventional procedures with ultrasonographic guidance in patients with cancer Brom-Valladares Rocío 1rocitla@hotmail.comPatiño-Zarco Mario 1Sotelo-Regil Rita 2Chanona-Vilchis José 3Ibarra Margarita 21 Computerized Tomography, Ultrasound and Magnetic Resonance Department, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología. México D.F., México2 Cytopathology Department, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología. México D.F., México3 Pathology Department, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología. México D.F., México2007 5 2 2007 7 Suppl 1 24th Annual Meeting of the National Cancer Institute of MexicoAlfonso Duenas-Gonzalez, Dolores Gallardo-Rincon, Luis A Herrera, Myrna Candelaria, Adolfo Fuentes-AlburoA43 A43 Copyright © 2007 Brom-Valladares et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.2007Brom-Valladares et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.14–17 February 2007 24th Annual Meeting of the National Cancer Institute of Mexico Mexico City, Mexico
==== Body
Background
Percutaneous interventional procedures offer diagnostic, curative and palliative treatment options to patients with cancer. Ultrasound (US) is an alternative guiding technique for various procedures including biopsy oflung, spleen, soft tissue and bone, and procedures like tumor ablation and abscess drainages among others. US has advantages like versatility, availability, lesser cost and time, lack of ionizing radiation and contrast media exposure, and complete visualization of the needle track in real time. This is a description of the various interventional procedures performed at the Instituto Nacional de Cancerología under US guidance, its technical success and complications.

Materials and methods
We retrospectively analyzed the procedures performed under US guidance from January 2005 to October 2006. No procedures performed on the mammary gland are included. The diagnostic and therapeutic procedures performed, its complications and the technical success are described: quality of biopsy material for cyto-histological diagnosis and success rate for completing the therapeutic procedures. We compare our results with those published in the medical literature.

Results
373 procedures were performed on 356 patients. The procedures were distributed as follow: A) biopsies: thyroid, prostate, soft tissue masses, liver, transvaginal, diagnostic thoracentesis and paracentesis, kidney, pancreas, muscle. B) therapeutic interventions: thoracentesis, paracentesis, transvaginal and retroperitoneal drainages, pelvic lymphocele sclerosis, hepatic radiofrequency ablation. Complications: 18 patients with minor discomfort; 5 patients with pain during transvaginal biopsies. No hospitalization or specific intervention was needed. The cyto-histopathology results will be described in the final format.

Conclusion
US is a safe and reliable imaging method for guiding interventional diagnostic and therapeutic procedures in patients with cancer.
