
==== Front
BMC CancerBMC Cancer1471-2407BioMed Central London 1471-2407-4-71505383610.1186/1471-2407-4-7Case ReportActinomycosis of the parotid masquerading as malignant neoplasm. Varghese Bipin T 1geenu@eth.netSebastian Paul 1deepakpaul@eth.netRamachandran K 2rcctvm@md2.vsnl.net.inPandey Manoj 1manojpandey@vsnl.com1 Department of Surgical Oncology, Regional Cancer Centre, Trivandrum 695011, Kerala, India2 Department of Imageology, Regional Cancer Centre, Trivandrum 695011, Kerala, India2004 4 3 2004 4 7 7 9 10 2003 4 3 2004 Copyright © 2004 Varghese et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.Background
Primary actinomycosis of the parotid gland is of rare occurrence and can mimic a malignant neoplasm both clinically as well as radiologically.

Case presentation
We present here a case of primary actinomycosis of the parotid gland presenting with a parotid mass lesion with erosion of skull bones.

Conclusions
Clinical presentation of cervico-facial actinomycosis is characterized by the presence of a suppurative or indurative mass with discharging sinuses. The lesion demonstrates characteristic features on fine needle aspiration cytology and histology, however at times the findings are equivocal.

Actinomycosissalivary glandparotidinfectiontumourpseudotumour
==== Body
Background
Although cervico-facial actinomycosis is well described, primary actinomycosis of the parotid gland is rare. Actinomycosis was considered to be the commonest of all deep mycotic infections or mycetomas in the past [1]. However now it is well established that it is a granulomatous lesion characterized by chronic suppuration usually caused by Actinomyces israelii which is a gram positive, non-acid fast, anaerobic, commensal bacteria within the oral cavity (tonsillar crypts and tartar of teeth). Unlike most of the mycotic infections, actinomycosis is not an opportunistic infection and the portal of entry is not through inhalation. Actinomycosis usually occurs in healthy individuals when the local condition favours its growth and very often, it is a mixed bacterial growth [2]. It commonly affects the facial soft tissue although it can spread to adjacent, salivary gland, bone, and skin of face and neck. Primary actinomycosis of the parotid gland is very rare and can mimic malignancy [3].

The diagnosis of this rare condition can be reasonably made empirically even when conclusive histological or microbiological evidence is not available. A case of primary actinomycosis of the parotid gland, which was diagnosed by its clinical features, radiological findings and its response to empirical medical management, is presented.

Case presentation
A 38-year-old man presented with a 5 × 4 cm rapidly progressive, firm swelling in the left parotid region with discharging sinuses on the overlying skin. The swelling was not painful and its size did not change with meals. There was no history of fever, malaise, cough, breathlessness, haemoptysis, trauma, surgery, recent tooth extraction, or dental infection. There was no history suggestive of Hansen's disease or sexual contact. He was not diabetic or immunocompromised. The swelling was confined to the parotid region (Fig 1, 2) rest of the face including submandibular region appeared normal. A 1.5 × 1.5 cm firm jugulodiagastric lymph node was palpable in the neck. Oral cavity, oropharynx, and indirect laryngoscopic examinations were normal. Mouth opening was adequate and there was no facial nerve palsy. Routine investigations including blood counts, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and chest X-ray were normal. ELISA test for HIV antibody was negative. The computerized tomographic (CT) scan showed a large parotid swelling extending to the base of skull with involvement of the skull bone (Figure 3). The mass lesion was seen extending into the parapharangeal space with thinning of the lateral wall of the maxilla on the left side (figure 4). The picture was suggestive of malignant neoplasm of the parotid gland.

Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the parotid swelling and the neck node showed dense collections of neutrophils and macrophages with phagocytic activity, suggesting a chronic inflammatory process. Incision biopsy of the nodule with underlying parotid tissue showed salivary gland tissue with periductal lymphocytic infiltration in some of the ducts and adipose tissue, muscle bundles, sheets of lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, neutrophils and necrosis, suggestive of chronic sialadenitis. No fungal hyphae or bacteria or spores could be demonstrated in either the FNAC or in biopsy. AFB staining was negative.

Based on the clinical, radiological and pathological findings a provisional diagnosis of chronic inflammatory pathology, probably actinomycosis was arrived at and the patient was started empirically on oral penicillin 500 mg 6 hourly for three weeks with complete clinical response (Fig 5, 6). The patient is disease free after and on regular follow-up after 2 1/2 years.

Discussion
The commonest cause of a painless progressive swelling in the parotid region is the parotid neoplasms, the other causes being very rare (Table 1) [4-6]. A diagnosis can very often be made by clinical and radiological features followed by a fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC). Actinomycosis of the parotid gland is rare and is often diagnosed by the presence of bacteria or spores in either FNAC or biopsy specimen. Microscopy may show features of granuloma with suppuration, chronic inflammatory cells, fibroblasts and giant cells. If suppuration is marked, the picture is that of an acute inflammation. It is uncommon to find colonies of microorganism in viable tissues although they are more easily demonstrated in discharge. Histological appearances are not characteristic and not much is expected from the biopsy [1]. However it can be diagnosed empirically, by mere exclusion, even in the absence of a conclusive pathological or microbiological report

Recognized routes of entry for cervico-facial actinomycosis include caries tooth, tooth extraction site and tonsils. It can also occur as a complication of trauma to respiratory and digestive tracts including operative procedures. Infection usually starts in the subcutaneous and submucous tissues and spreads by direct continuity [1,2].

Clinical presentation of cervico-facial actinomycosis is characterized by the presence of a suppurative or indurative mass with discharging sinuses. Pus from the discharging sinuses contains tiny yellow sulphur granules, which are diagnostic [1]. Common initial symptoms of infection including pain, fever, erythema, oedema, and suppuration may be absent [5]. Histopathological feature are similar to that of chronic inflammatory disease. FNAC and exfoliative cytology may demonstrate Curshmann's spirals and actinomycetes filaments in fortuitous cases [7].

Ultrasound and radiological investigations fail to differentiate them from malignancy, although conventional sialography or computerised tomography (CT) with sialography has been suggested to present a consistent pattern in infections [8]. A CT scan finding of soft tissue and bony invasion, simulating malignant neoplasm, helps in distinguishing actinomycosis from other suppurative or granulomatous masses.

Drug of choice is penicillin or tetracycline. Anaerobic cultures may be helpful in selecting the appropriate antibiotic in refractory cases. Treatment is essentially medical with adjuvant surgical procedures like incision and drainage, and wound toilet [9-11]. A high index of clinical suspicion and negative tissue diagnosis of malignancy is the key to a presumptive diagnosis of this rare condition.

Competing interest
None declared.

Authors contributions
BTV carried out the literature search, prepared the draft manuscript and its subsequent revisions. PS, helped in preparing the manuscript and revised it for its scientific content. KR, did the imaging studies and contributed to the scientific content of the manuscript. MP contributed to the preparation of the manuscript and material for publication, edited the manuscript and coordinated the submission. All the authors were involved in the active patient management. All authors read and approved the final manuscript

Pre-publication history
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:



Acknowledgement
Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of the patient's details.

Figures and Tables
Figure 1 Clinical photograph of the patient at initial presentation showing the parotid swelling.

Figure 2 Clinical photograph of the patient (left profile) at presentation showing parotid swelling and the draining sinuses.

Figure 3 CT scan showing mass in the parotid region with erosion of the base of skull, suggestive of a malignant parotid neoplasm.

Figure 4 CT scan showing the mass lesion in the parotid region with extension into left parapharyngeal space and thinning of lateral wall of maxilla.

Figure 5 Clinical photograph showing the full face of the patient after completion of the treatment, Regression of the parotid swelling can be appreciated

Figure 6 Clinical photograph (left profile) of the patient after completion of the treatment showing the healed sinuses.

Table 1 Differential Diagnosis of Painless parotid mass

Parotid Neoplasms	
 Benign	
 Malignant	
Chronic Suppurative diseases	
 Mixed Infections / Actinomycosis	
Granulomatous diseases	
 Tuberculosis	
 Leprosy	
 Cat scratch disease	
 Syphilis	
Mycotic Infections	
 Histoplasmosis	
 Coccidiomycosis	
 Cryptococcosis	
 Mucormycosis	
Osteomyelitis	
Branchial cleft cyst	
Parapharyngeal Tumours
==== Refs
Boyd W  A textbook of Pathology Henry Kempton 1970 8 401 404 
Robbins SL Cotran RS Kumar V  Pathologic Basis of Disease WB Saunders Company, Philadelphia 1984 3 349 350 
Lang-Roth R Schippers C Eckel HE  [Cervical actinomycosis. A rare differential diagnosis of parotid tumour] HNO 1998 46 354 358 9606651 10.1007/s001060050252 
Ermis I Topalan M Aydin A Erer M  Actinomycosis of the frontal and parotid regions Ann Plast Surg 2001 46 55 58 11192037 10.1097/00000637-200101000-00012 
Mullins JE Jr Ogle O Cottrell DA  Painless mass in the parotid region J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2000 58 316 319 10716116 
Parkin JL Stevens MH  Unusual parotid tumours Laryngoscope 1977 87 317 325 190495 
Mair S  Curschmann's spirals and actinomycosis in a fine needle aspirate of the parotid Acta Cytol 1989 33 903 906 2588922 
Sa'do B Yoshiura K Yuasa K Ariji Y Kanda S Oka M Katsuki T  Multimodality imaging of cervicofacial actinomycosis Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1993 76 772 782 8284085 
Hensher R Bowerman J  Actinomycosis of the parotid gland Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1985 23 128 134 3158334 
Hopkins R  Primary actinomycosis of the parotid gland Br J Oral Surg 1973 11 131 138 4522523 
Russo TA  Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Isselbacker KJ  Actinomycosis Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine 1983 10 New York Mc Grew-Hill 185
