
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac5011052ArticleCoupling Isotachophoresis with Affinity Chromatography
for Rapid and Selective Purification with High Column Utilization,
Part 1: Theory Shkolnikov Viktor Santiago Juan G. *Department
of Mechanical
Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States* Tel.: 650-723-5689. Fax: 650-723-7657.
E-mail: juan.santiago@stanford.edu.17 06 2015 17 06 2014 01 07 2014 86 13 6220 6228 27 03 2014 31 05 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyTerms of Use

We present a novel technique that
couples isotachophoresis (ITP)
with affinity chromatography (AC) to achieve rapid, selective purification
with high column utilization. ITP simultaneously preconcentrates an
analyte and purifies it, based on differences in mobility of sample
components, excluding species that may foul or compete with the target
at the affinity substrate. ITP preconcentration accelerates the affinity
reaction, reducing assay time, improving column utilization, and allowing
for capture of targets with higher dissociation constants. Furthermore,
ITP-AC separates the target and contaminants into nondiffusing zones,
thus achieving high resolution in a short distance and time. We present
an analytical model for spatiotemporal dynamics of ITP-AC. We identify
and explore the effect of key process parameters, including target
distribution width and height, ITP zone velocity, forward and reverse
reaction constants, and probe concentration on necessary affinity
region length, assay time, and capture efficiency. Our analytical
approach shows collapse of these variables to three nondimensional
parameters. The analysis yields simple analytical relations for capture
length and capture time in relevant ITP-AC regimes, and it demonstrates
how ITP greatly reduces assay time and improves column utilization.
In the second part of this two-part series, we will present experimental
validation of our model and demonstrate ITP-AC separation of the target
from 10,000-fold more-abundant contaminants.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac5011052document-id-new-14ac-2014-011052ccc-price
==== Body
Affinity
chromatography (AC)
is a chromatographic technique that leverages a specific binding agent—the
affinity ligand—for purification, separation, and/or analysis
of sample components. The affinity ligand (probe) is used to selectively
yet reversibly capture the sample component of interest (target).
Numerous samples and sample components have been and continue to be
analyzed or purified using AC, including enzymes, lectins, other proteins,
and nucleic acids.1−4 For many samples, including important biological samples (e.g.,
blood, cell lysate), the component of interest is present in very
low concentration, while background, potentially fouling species are
present in relatively high concentrations. This necessitates processing
of a substantial sample volume through the affinity substrate. In
addition, low target concentrations imply low target-probe binding
rates.5 These factors each increase the
time of the affinity assay, can lead to poor substrate utilization,
and/or poor purification yield, limiting applications of the method.

The aforementioned limitations of AC can be addressed by increasing
the forward binding rate constant of reactions,5 but the binding rate constant is often difficult to improve
upon.2 A second method is to preconcentrate
and purify the target prior to the affinity reaction. Here, we explore
the effect of increasing target purity and concentration using isotachophoresis
(ITP). ITP uses a buffer with a high mobility co-ion (same charge
as the analyte) and a second buffer with a co-ion that has lower mobility.
Analyte species of intermediate mobility focus between these co-ions
and are thereby preconcentrated and separated.6,7 ITP
has been demonstrated in a variety of applications related to the
current work, including extraction and purification of nucleic acids
from complex biological samples,8 and 14 000-fold
acceleration of homogeneous nucleic acid hybridization reactions in
free solution.9

ITP has been used
in conjunction with affinity assays in several
applications, and several models for these processes have been developed.
For example, Garcia-Schwartz et al. presented an approach combining
ITP and an affinity reaction to detect micro-RNA.10,11 They used ITP to accelerate hybridization between a mobile target
species and a mobile fluorescent DNA probe in a microchannel. This
ITP zone was then transported into a channel section containing cross-linked
polyacrylamide gel functionalized with DNA complementary to the fluorescent
DNA probe. This method was used to remove signal background (a negative
enrichment strategy) and, therefore, enhance quantitation and specificity.10,11 Garcia-Schwartz et al. presented a volume-averaged model for the
reaction of the mobile species. However, their analysis did not treat
the spatiotemporal dynamics of the surface (gel) affinity reaction.
Their analysis focuses on reactions prior to and after the affinity
column and assumes that the affinity capture occurs instantaneously
in negligible space. Recently (work published during preparation of
this manuscript), Karsenty et al. used ITP to accelerate a reaction
of a DNA target to an immobilized DNA probe on a short region of stationary
magnetic beads and present a model for this process.12 Their model captures the temporal, volume-averaged dynamics
of a reaction between a target preconcentrated with ITP and a bead
immobilized probe. However, their model only addresses the regime
where the target concentration remains approximately constant during
the reaction and is only applicable to short (order of ITP peak width)
capture regions. Their model does not address the spatial dynamics
of the reaction. Despite these related studies, we know of no model
or analysis of the coupled spatiotemporal dynamics of a reaction between
a species focused in ITP and a surface, gel, or porous region.

Here, we investigate the theory behind physicochemical processes
of integrating ITP and AC. We consider the case of an AC column composed
of a porous polymer monolith (PPM) functionalized with a synthetic
cDNA ligand. However, the current approach is easily extended to any
integration of ITP and a stationary affinity column. The goal of this
type of integration is to (a) drastically reduce assay time; (b) improve
column utilization; (c) allow for capture of targets with higher dissociation
constants; (d) obviate the need for high-pressure specialized pumps;
(e) directly integrate an automatic wash step into the process, eliminating
a separate wash step; and (f) reduce affinity substrate fouling (and
competing reactions) by partially separating sample compounds by their
electrophoretic mobility.

We describe the principle of coupling
ITP preconcentration and
AC purification. We derive and present an analytically solvable one-dimensional
transport model for coupling of ITP with a semi-infinite AC porous
column and second-order reversible reaction kinetics. Our model describes
the spatiotemporal dynamics of target-probe binding in the affinity
region, allowing for complete capture of the target. This includes
the coupled effects of target distribution width, distribution intensity,
ITP zone velocity, forward and reverse reaction constants, and probe
concentration on necessary affinity region length, assay time, and
capture efficiency. Our new analytical approach allows us to collapse
these six independent variables down to three nondimensionalized parameters
summarizing all regimes. In the second part of this two-paper series,13 we experimentally validate our model and demonstrate
sequence specific purification of 25 nt target DNA from 10 000-fold
more-abundant fish sperm DNA.

Concept and Theory
Method Concept
We aimed to decrease the assay time
and improve affinity region utilization by purifying the target and
increasing the affinity capture reaction rate. Figure 1 summarizes the key aspects of our approach and the initial
conditions for our model. As in the experiments we will show in the
second part of this two-paper series, we consider a free-standing
capillary that contains a porous affinity region. The affinity region
contains pores sufficiently large to allow easy pressure-driven pumping
of liquid or air. First, we fill leading electrolyte (LE) in the LE
reservoir and in the entire capillary (including the porous affinity
region). We then fill the trailing electrolyte (TE) reservoir with
a mixture of trailing electrolyte buffer and sample. Upon application
of the electric field, the target is extracted from the TE reservoir,
preconcentrated into the LE/TE interface, and transported toward and
through the affinity region (Figure 1a). Possible
contaminating species that are neutral, oppositely charged of the
target, or co-ionic but with a lower electrophoretic mobility magnitude
than the TE co-ion are excluded.8 Upon
reaching the affinity region, the target reacts with the immobilized
capture probe and is captured. After capture, we pump air through
the system to remove all liquid from the column and therefore arrest
further reactions.

Figure 1 (a) Schematic of assay for ITP-aided affinity chromatography
(ITP-AC).
We consider an assay in a capillary with a semi-infinite affinity
capture region as shown. Under the influence of an electric field,
the target is extracted from a sample reservoir, separated from contaminants,
and concentrated at the LE/TE interface. It is then transported to
and through the affinity region. Within the affinity region, the target
reacts with the immobilized capture probe via a second-order reversible
reaction where k1 and k2 are the forward and reverse reaction rate constants,
respectively. (b) Initial conditions for our model of ITP-AC. At t = 0, the target has a Gaussian distribution with standard
deviation σ and peak concentration a; its peak
is located 3σ from the entrance of the affinity region. The
target moves with velocity u through the affinity
region. The affinity region is semi-infinite beginning at z = 0 (where z is the axial coordinate
of the capillary) and containing a uniformly distributed probe of
volume-averaged concentration N.

The initial focusing of ITP is selective6,8 and
helps prevent fouling of the affinity region by unfocused background
species. The increase of the target concentration via ITP promotes
faster capture reaction and the target is captured in a smaller, upstream
region of the column. Exposure of the ITP-focused analyte to reaction
sites on the column is temporary and is followed by a wash associated
with the TE zone entering the column. We limit the time between this
electrokinetic wash step and the removal of liquids with air to control
the stringency of the wash step. This approach limits the time for
dissociation reaction to occur so the captured target concentration
is effectively “frozen” by the introduction of air.
This enables capture of targets with relatively high dissociation
rate, if necessary.

Transport and Focusing of Trace Analytes
in Isotachophoresis
ITP is an electrokinetic technique used
to preconcentrate and separate
analytes.6,7,14 Here, we leverage
a mode of ITP known as “peak mode” ITP, where trace
analytes co-focus into a relatively narrow peak at the interface of
LE and TE.14−16 In peak mode ITP, trace analytes do not appreciably
contribute to local conductivity. The peak width and analyte locations
are determined by the mobilities of the ions of LE and TE and electric
fields established by and at the interface between TE and LE buffers.16 The analyte mobility in the TE zone is higher
than that of the TE co-ion. The analyte mobility in the LE zone is
also lower than that of the LE co-ion. This arrangement of mobilities
enables purification of, for example, nucleic acids from complex mixtures
and excludes possible fouling species from the ITP zone.8,14 If, as in our case, the analyte mobility is significantly different
from that of the LE and TE ions, the target distribution is narrow
and approximately Gaussian in shape.16

One-Dimensional Transport Reaction Model
We derive
an unsteady, one-dimensional model for ITP which we will show captures
the essential dynamics of the process. We chose a reduced-order model
to identify the key governing parameters of the process. We model
focusing of an ionic target in peak mode ITP, and migrating toward
a semi-infinite affinity capture region. In the affinity region, the
target reacts with the surface bound probe according to a simple second-order
reversible reaction of the following form: Target + Probe ⇌
Target – Probe. We set time t = 0 at the point
where the target just starts to enter the affinity region (Figure 1b). We assume that the target has a Gaussian concentration
profile with a width given by the interface width between the LE and
the TE. This is a common assumption for modeling the distribution
of trace analyte focused at the LE/TE interface.9,15,17 As usual for peak mode ITP, we further assume
that the change in concentration of the target has no effect on the
electric field in ITP.9,15,17 We start with the general advection-diffusion equation for the solution
inside the porous affinity region with second-order reversible reaction
at the surface: 1  where c′ is the local
target concentration, u⃗ the target velocity, D the target diffusion coefficient, and t time. The reaction with the target occurs at the boundary between
the solvent and the surfaces of the porous solid. The solid is impermeable
to the target and fluid. Hence, at this boundary, we have 2  where q⃗ is the unit
normal to the surface of the monolith, n′
is the surface density of the captured target (moles per area), N′ is the initial surface density of the probe, and k1′ and k2′ are the forward and reverse constants, respectively.
We also have an auxiliary relation for n′: 3  

To simplify these three-dimensional
(3D) equations, we note that the net flow occurs along the direction
of the axis of the macroscopic porous affinity region and that this
region is homogeneous and anisotropic. We model the region as a bundle
of tortuous cylindrical pores18 with a
mean tortuosity τ. We define a coordinate s that follows the center contour of these tortuous cylindrical pores,
the coordinate r that is locally normal to s, and the azimuthal θ for cylindrical coordinates.
We also note that we assume the target diffusion coefficient D to be constant everywhere. Therefore, we rewrite eqs 1 and 2 as 4   5  where r0 is the
radius of the pore. We assume that inside the tortuous pore the fluid
flows only in the axial direction, and, hence, ur = uθ =
0. This simplifies eq 4 to 6  

Next,
we consider the rates of diffusion from the bulk of a pore
to the pore surface where the reaction takes place, and the rate of
reaction. The time for the target to diffuse from the center of the
pore to the pore surface scales as19 7  and the time for the target
to be captured
scales as 8  

We take the diffusion coefficient of our target DNA oligomer
to
be roughly 10–6 cm2 s–1. This is a typical magnitude of the diffusion coefficient for 20
nt oligomers in aqueous solution.20 Using
this, and the forward rate constant, the probe density, and the pore
size that we obtained in this work (see Part 2 of this two-part series13), we find tdiff ≈
10–6 s and trxn ≈
20 s. We conclude that the pore remains locally well mixed via diffusion,
despite the reaction, yielding an approximately uniform concentration
through the microscale tortuous pore cross-sectional area. Therefore,
we simplify eqs 6 and 5 further by defining the averaged concentration based on the pore
cross-sectional area: 9  

We then integrate eq 6, subject to the boundary
condition desribed by eq 5 over r from 0 to r0 and over θ from 0
to 2π and obtain 10   11  

Next, we transform eq 10 into the axial coordinate
of the porous monolith, z (which is along the major
axis of monolith and capillary, see Figure 1). As is usual, the coordinate z is related to the
pore coordinate s through tortuosity τ such
that τ = s/z. 12  

Next, we define an effective concentration
averaged over the cross-sectional
area for the monolith as 13  where AM is the geometric cross-sectional
area of the monolith, Acap the total cross-sectional
area of the pores,
and M the total number of the tortuous cylindrical
pores making up the monolith. We define the void fraction (φ)
to be φ = Acap/AM. We apply this average to all tortuous
cylindrical pores in the tortuous pore bundle concentration, which
is described by eqs 12 and 11 to obtain 14   15  where v is the superficial
velocity.18 We henceforth work with this
concentration as it directly defines the capacity of the affinity
region (i.e., moles of target that can be captured per geometric volume
of affinity region) and is directly, experimentally observable.

We simplify eq 14 by expanding the target
velocity into a uniform velocity, u (i.e., not a
function of z), and a perturbation ũ, which depends on z and t as follows: 16  

The expansion of eq 14 follows: 17  

For our process, we assume our target remains focused by ITP,
so
that its velocity v is governed by the electric field
of the ITP near the LE/TE interface.6 Our
experimental observations confirm that this assumption is accurate
for the cases we considered (e.g., where the target has strong affinity
for the immobilized probe). Experimentally, we observe zones of unbound
analytes remain focused in ITP and traveling at ITP-controlled velocities,
despite potential reactions with the affinity column (see the second
part of this two-part series13). We note
that, for situations where pressure-driven and electro-osmotic flow
are important, we hypothesize that we can assume the advection velocity
of the LE/TE interface will be the arithmetic sum of the macroscopic
ITP and bulk flow velocities through the column. Next, we use this
empirical observation concerning analyte velocity to construct an
approximate (heuristic) description of the analyte velocity distribution
near the ITP zone interface.

The target is a trace analyte,
so it does not contribute significantly
to the conductivities of the zones and, hence, the local electric
field.9,15,17 Hence, for
a trace analyte focused at the LE/TE interface, its velocity is governed
by the electric field distribution near the TE-to-LE interface. This
shape of the electric field distribution can be approximated as a
sigmoidal curve, being highest in the TE and lowest in the LE.6,21 Here, we approximate the electric field as an error function. Furthermore,
the LE/TE interface electromigrates at the ITP zone velocity, so we
assume that the inflection of the sigmoid also migrates with the LE/TE
interface. We let the deviation of the target velocity from the ITP
LE/TE interface velocity u be some small fraction
of the LE-TE velocity (εu). We set the characteristic
width of the LE/TE interface as σ. Hence, we express the target
velocity as 18  which has the form of a uniform
velocity plus a perturbation, as in eq 16. We
approximate the quantity εu, the amplitude
of the error function, as the difference between the analyte velocity
in the adjusted TE (equal to μa,TEETE, where ETE is the electric field in the TE) and that the ITP LE/TE interface
(equal to μTE ion,TEETE6). Therefore, we write the smallness parameter as simply 19  μa,TE is
the mobility of the analyte in the TE, and μTE ion,TE is the mobility of the TE ion in the TE. To exclude many contaminating
species from focusing with the analyte, we choose the TE ion mobility
to be near to that of the analyte (for example, within 10%–20%),
which makes ε small.

Next we cast eqs 17 and 15 in dimensionless form as follows: c* and n* are free-target and bound-target
concentrations normalized
by initial probe concentration N; t* is the time normalized by the reaction time scale 1/(k1N) and z* is the axial
coordinate normalized by the advection-reaction length scale u/(k1N); and
β is the nondimensionalized equilibrium dissociation constant
(β = k2/(k1N)). We scale ũ by
εu for ũ*. We obtain 20   21  

As we shall show in Part
2 of this two-part series,13 our process
is well-characterized by the following
parameters: D ≈ 10–6 cm2 s–1,20k1 ≈ 103 M–1 s–1, N ≈ 30 μM, u ≈ 0.05 mm s–1, and τ =
1–2. We therefore estimate Dk1N/(τ2u2) to
be between 0.0003 and 0.001, significantly smaller than unity. We
thus drop the first term on the right-hand side and simplify eq 20 to 22  

We combine eqs 22 and 21 as 23   24  

We seek a straightforward
expansion for the solution of eqs 23 and 24 in the form c = c0 + εc1 + ε2c22 + ..., and n = n0 + εn1 + ε2n22 + .... Then substitute these into
eqs 23 and 24. Collecting
the coefficients of each power of ε and equating: ε0:
25   ε1:
26   ε2:
27  

For simplicity
and emphasis, here, we concentrate on the first-order
accurate (zeroth-order) equations, since we feel these represent the
simplest engineering approximation that captures the essence of the
problem. We will later show in Part 2 of this two-paper series that
predictions from these equations agree well with measurements of key
ITP-AC parameters under our experimental conditions.13 For interested readers, in section
SI 1 in the Supporting Information, we discuss the more-accurate
second- and third-order accurate formulations of our problem.

Initially, the affinity region is free from target, which supplies
the initial condition c(z,0) = 0, n(z,0) = 0 (see Figure 1b). We model the Gaussian profile of the ITP focused target
entering the affinity region as a time-varying boundary condition
on the affinity region, 28  representing a Gaussian distribution
with maximum concentration a and standard deviation
σ traveling at ITP velocity u (Figure 1b). We chose arbitrarily that, at t = 0, the Gaussian’s maximum is 3σ to the left of the
start of the affinity region and therefore just beginning to interact
with the affinity region (Figure 1b). We then
cast the initial and boundary conditions in the following nondimensionalized
form: 29   30  We further introduce the following nondimensional
parameters, 31  and rewrite the boundary
condition as 32  Here, α
represents
the peak concentration of the target in the Gaussian distribution
scaled by the initial probe concentration N. The
Damkohler number (Da), as usual, describes the characteristic
ratio between an electrophoretic (advection) time scale σ/u and the time scale of reaction 1/(k1N). Da is also usefully
interpreted as a characteristic width of the Gaussian distribution
scaled by advection-reaction length scale u/(k1N). The product αDa is the total amount of target in the Gaussian distribution
scaled by u/k1 and, as
we will show later, determines whether the affinity region locally
saturates. We perform a straightforward expansion of the boundary
and initial conditions (eqs 29 and 32), similar to that for eqs 23 and 24, and obtain 33  

Therefore, eqs 25–27 and the initial and boundary conditions
described in eq 33 constitute a well-posed,
simplified description
of our problem. Below, we present solutions to these equations, identify
key figures of merit, and discuss a series of limiting regimes of
practical interest to the experimentalist.

Results and Discussion
Analytical
Solution for Bound- and Free-Target Concentration
We analytically
solved eqs 25 and demonstrate
a solution method for eqs 26 and 27. Our approach is similar to that of Thomas,22 but, here, subject to our boundary and initial conditions
(eq 33), including our heuristic description
of ITP zone shape and propagation. Briefly, we transformed eqs 25, 26, and 27 into a coordinate system moving with the ITP velocity. Then,
we converted the result into a potential function form that collapses
the two equations into a single equation. We then solved the resulting
equation using Laplace transforms. We provide the full solution in section SI 1 in the Supporting Information. We
obtained the following first-order accurate equations for the nondimensionalized
bound target concentration, 34  and for the free target
concentration 35  where 36   37   38  Here, I0 is the
modified Bessel function of the first kind of zeroth order. For convenience,
we evaluated numerical values of the solution using custom MATLAB
scripts. We use these solutions to consider the effects of nondimensionalized
target-probe dissociation constant, nondimensionalized target distribution
width, and nondimensionalized peak distribution concentration on key
affinity capture figures of merit: capture efficiency (n/N), capture length (pz), and capture time (pt). We then examine three important regimes of the
solution: (a) αDa < 1, (b) Da ≫ 1, and (c) βcn ≫ βtarget (where the subscript “cn” refers to the contaminant).

Spatiotemporal Dynamics Predicted by Analytical Solution
Effect of
Nondimensionalized Equilibrium Dissociation Constant
β
In Figure 2, we plot representative
solutions for the scaled bound-target concentration n/N versus scaled distance along the axis of the
channel, and scaled times associated with a range of β from
10–6 to 3. These plots can be interpreted intuitively
as spatiotemporal plots of the bound-target concentration (scalar)
as a function of scaled distance and time in the abscissa and ordinate,
respectively. In Figures 2a, 2b, and 2c, αDa = 4.3 × 10–4 and α = 1.1 × 10–3. In the regime of αDa <
1, the affinity region is not locally saturated (n/N < 1). For relatively low β (e.g., 10–6), the forward (affinity) reaction dominates and captured
target remains bound. Here, as the target Gaussian peak enters the
affinity region, the target binds and the concentration of the bound
target n at the leading edge gradually increases
with time (Figure 2a). At the same time, some
of the target does not bind at the leading edge and is able to penetrate
deeper into the affinity region and bind there. Even as this penetration
proceeds, the target continues to bind near the leading edge. This
creates the J-shaped bound-target concentration contours shown in
Figure 2a. Under these conditions (as we will
show in the section entitled “Control of Capture Length (pz) below), 95% of the target is captured in
∼2.8 advection-reaction length scales, providing an inherent
nondimensional capture length. As β increases to ∼10–1, some of the target can desorb and readsorb during
the effective capture time, and so the target can penetrate deeper
into the affinity region (Figure 2b). For β
on the order of unity and higher, the concept of a capture length
becomes invalid, as the target migrates through the affinity region,
continuously adsorbing and desorbing as it travels. For our characteristic
values of Da and α, this continuous transport
becomes very prominent at β = 3 (see Figure 2c). We hope to further study high-β, chromatographic-separation-type
regimes in the future.

Figure 2 Model predictions of spatiotemporal dynamics of the bound
target
scaled by the initial probe concentration (n/N). The abscissa and ordinate can be interpreted as scaled
axial distance and time, respectively. We show various values of nondimensionalized
equilibrium dissociation constant β and saturation parameter
αDa. Panels a, b, and c show the dependence
of the spatiotemporal capture dynamics on β for αDa = 4.3 × 10–4 and α = 1.1
× 10–3 (nonsaturated regime, αDa < 1). This set of αDa and α
is similar to that in one of the experiments we will describe in Part
2 of this two-part series.13 As β
increases, the capture reaction becomes more reversible until β
≈ 3, where the target is no longer effectively captured and
streaks through the affinity region. Panel d shows spatiotemporal
capture dynamics in a saturated regime (αDa > 1). Here, the leading edge of the affinity region becomes saturated,
shifting the spatiotemporal capture contours upward and to the right.

In the regime of αDa > 1, the leading edge
of the affinity region becomes saturated (n/N = 1). This forces the target to bypass the leading edge
and penetrate deeper. In Figure 2d, we show
the case where αDa = 8, while α is still
only 1.1 × 10–3. We see that the effect of
leading edge saturation is to establish a new effective leading edge
for new captures. This new effective leading edge shifts up in time
and rightward in the axial coordinate as free target penetrates and
explores new regions of available sites (Figure 2d). The J-shaped profiles shift up and right accordingly. Under these
conditions (as we will show in the section entitled “Control
of Capture Length (pz)” below),
the length of the affinity region needed to capture 95% of the target
depends mostly on the absolute amount of target and the capacity of
the affinity region, N (and less sensitive to balances
between reaction and advection times).

Control of Capture Length pz
Figure 3 summarizes the major
trends between advection, reaction, and capture length and time scales.
We here formally define the dimensional capture length (pz) as the physical length of the affinity
column necessary to capture 95% of the target. Therefore, the inverse
capture length is therefore a measure of efficiency of column utilization
for columns of constant cross-sectional area. The parameter pz is defined and useful only
for small values of β, where the target is captured (versus
transported through the region). We nondimensionalize this length
by the advection-reaction length scale u/(k1N) and call this pz*.

Figure 3 Model predictions for the (a) scaled capture
length, (b) scaled
capture time, and (c) maximum capture efficiency as a function of
(a, c) scaled peak target concentration α and (b) scaled target
distribution width Da for low β (plotted at
β = 10–4). Inset in (a) shows a linear plot
of scaled capture length as a function of α from 0 to 40. In
(a), when αDa < 1 and so the affinity region
is not locally saturated, capture length is only governed by the balance
of reaction and advection, i.e., u/(k1N). Therefore, in this regime pz* is invariant of α
or Da. When αDa > 1 the
affinity
region becomes locally saturated and the length of saturated region
governs the capture length. Since the length of locally saturated
region is proportional to αDa, pz* is proportional to both α and Da. In (b), scaled capture time pt* is approximately 4.3 for Da <
0.1. For Da > 1, scaled capture time increases
linearly
with Da. Interestingly, the scaled capture time is
independent of total scaled target amount, αDa (since the length scale of capture region is insensitive to capture
amount provided ligand is not saturated, αDa ≤ 1). In (c) n/N increases
linearly with α and Da for αDa < 1 (i.e., when the affinity region is not saturated). For αDa > 1 the affinity region becomes locally saturated
and n/N = 1.

Figure 3a shows major trends of pz*. Most importantly, we see
that pz* solutions collapse
to a constant value of 2.8 for αDa < 1 (Figure 3a). α and Da represent the
scaled target distribution height and width, respectively, so the
product αDa represents the scaled total target
amount. Only when αDa > 1 does the target
zone
contain a sufficient amount of target to locally saturate the affinity
region near the leading edge (Figure 2d). For
αDa < 1, the target amount is insufficient
to locally saturate the affinity region. Therefore, for αDa < 1, the capture length only depends on the balance
of advection and reaction, i.e., u/(k1N). Hence, in this regime, pz is proportional to u/(k1N). Thus, also pz* is independent of α
or Da as long as the product αDa < 1 (Figure 3a). For αDa > 1, the affinity region becomes locally saturated and the length
of the locally saturated region dominates the capture length. Also
in this regime, the saturated length increases in direct proportion
to the total amount of target and, therefore, pz* increases linearly with the product αDa (see Figure 3a).

Control of
Capture Time pt
We define a capture
time (pt) as the time
necessary to capture 95% of the target. Similar
to capture length, this time is defined only for small values of β,
where the target is captured and does not appreciably desorb during
the capture process. The capture time is proportional to the ITP-AC
assay time for assays designed to capture nearly all of the target.
We nondimensionalize this time by the reaction time scale 1/(k1N) and call this parameter pt*. For the unsaturated regime
of αDa ≤ 1, scaled capture time pt* depends only on scaled target
distribution width Da and is insensitive to the total
to the total amount of target αDa. Thus, we
see that scaled capture times all collapse to a value of 4.3 for Da less than ∼0.1 and for αDa ≤ 1 (Figure 3b). In this regime, the
target distribution standard deviation is significantly less than
the advection-reaction length scale and the target distribution effectively
acts as a Dirac delta distribution. Consequently, the time scale for
capture is governed solely by the reaction time scale, 1/(k1N). In this regime, the absolute
capture length pz is
still ∼2.8u/(k1N), and the target’s travel lasts 4.3/(k1N). For Da > 1 (i.e., sufficiently wide scaled distributions), pt* increases linearly with Da (Figure 3b). The latter is simply because
it takes proportionally more time for a wider distribution to completely
enter the affinity region and be captured.

These observations
lead us to the conclusion that there is little need to decrease the
target distribution width below ∼0.1u/(k1N). That is, the regime of Da < 1 is sufficient to remove dependence on the initial
target distribution. As we shall show in Part 2 of this paper, such
target distribution widths are readily achievable using ITP focusing.

In traditional AC, the target is introduced to an affinity column
with spatial distributions, which are much wider and lower concentration
than ITP achieves. ITP has been demonstrated to increase target concentration
(and proportionately decrease target distribution width) up to 106-fold under ideal conditions,23 and to order 104-fold for the case of nucleic acids from
complex biological samples.8 The trends
discussed above therefore suggest that increases in concentration
via ITP can translate to proportionally lower capture times and lower
capture lengths. For example, consider that reaction times for wide
distributions (Da ≫ 1) benefit directly from
any decrease in target zone width (c.f. Figure 3b). Furthermore, consider that, for a fixed assay time, ITP preconcentration
enables much lower advection velocity u and so proportionally
lower capture lengths, thus maximizing column utilization.

Control
of Capture Efficiency (n/N)
We define the capture efficiency as the concentration
of target captured over the initial concentration of probe, n/N) (a
maximum of unity). The trends of capture efficiency are summarized
in Figure 3c. For small β (i.e., approximately
irreversible reactions), the highest value of n/N occurs at the leading edge of the affinity region, where
the affinity sites see the largest amount of target. For small β
and αDa < 1 (locally not saturated), the
highest n/N (at the leading edge) is proportional to the total amount of target
that enters the affinity region. Hence, the highest value of n/N increases linearly with αDa until αDa reaches unity. For αDa ≥1, the capture zone saturates near the leading
edge, yielding a n/N value near
unity.

In Figure 4, we summarize the
effect of β on capture efficiency as a function of the scaled
target distribution width Da, and scaled distribution
peak concentration α. Here, we plot the maximum value of n/N, max(n/N), normalized by the scaled total target amount αDa. Overall, as β increases, the capture efficiency decreases
(Figure 4), because of increasing reversibility
of the capture. This increased adsorption/desorption of the target
“smears” the target over a larger area of the affinity
region (see Figure 2c). As the affinity region
becomes more locally overloaded (i.e., as α approaches and becomes
greater than unity), the affinity region locally cannot capture the
entire target distribution, necessitating the target distribution
to migrate some distance. This widens the target distribution. When
β is relatively large (e.g., 10–3), desorption
is prominent and so the wide bound-target distribution is smeared
over longer distances. Therefore, increasing α decreases capture
efficiency in this regime. Similarly, when desorption is prominent,
the wider the target distribution entering the affinity region (i.e.,
the larger the Da), the more smeared the distribution
becomes. Hence, capture efficiency decreases with increasing Da. Thus, decreasing Da (such as with strong
ITP preconcentration) enables efficient capture of targets with larger
dissociation constants.

Figure 4 max(n/N) scaled
by αDa for values of β between 10–6 and
1, Da between 0.01 and 1000, and α between
0.01 and 100. As β increases the reverse reaction (dissociation)
becomes more prominent until no effective binding occurs and the target
streaks through the affinity region. Capture efficiency n/N always decreases with increasing β, and
this effect becomes more pronounced with increasing Da and α. Therefore, decreasing Da (e.g., by
preconcentrating the target with ITP) allows one to achieve larger
capture efficiencies for a given dissociation constant.

Limiting Regimes of ITP-Aided Capture Dynamics
We summarize
several limiting regimes of immediate interest to the experimentalist,
as well as associated closed-form (algebraic) solutions for the associated
figures of merit.

Capture Length in the Low αDa Regime
The low αDa regime
is associated with an
affinity region that is not locally saturated; thus, the concentration
of bound target remains proportional to the total target amount (see
the section entitled “Control of Capture Efficiency (n/N)”). Therefore, this is an important
regime for analytical quantification of target using ITP-AC. In this
regime, pz* ≈
2.8, and this value is invariant of αDa, as
shown in Figure 3a. Therefore, we can express
the dimensional capture length as simply 39  

This relation predicts the capture
length to within 1% for αDa < 0.1 and to
within 20% for αDa < 1. This relationship
also allows a simple way to measure the forward rate constant k1 from a measurement of pz, as u is set by setting
running current for ITP (and measured by simple observations), and N is easily measured (see the section entitled “Measurement
of ITP-AC Parameters” of Part 2 of this two-part series13).

Capture Time in the High Da Regime
In the high Da regime, the scaled
target distribution
width becomes much larger than the advection-reaction length scale
and, therefore, much larger than the capture length (albeit for nonsaturated
conditions, so that αDa < 1). In this regime,
the capture time is solely determined by the time for the ITP zone
to enter the affinity region and we can write (c.f. Figure 2b) 40  This relationship predicts the capture time
to within 13% for Da > 100 and αDa ≤ 1, and to within 24% for Da > 10 and αDa ≤ 1.

Separation
Resolution of ITP-AC
In ideal ITP-aided
capture, βcn ≫ βtarget (where
the subscript “cn” refers to contaminant). This creates
the opportunity to capture target (in time pt) while allowing contaminants to migrate
through the column. Here, we consider a regime where the target is
completely captured (e.g., β < 10–6) while
the contaminant species remains focused in ITP and migrates at the
ITP velocity. Following the common definition of resolution given
by Giddings,24 and setting the width of
captured target distribution as pz and approximating the width of the ITP peak as per the classic
theory of MacInnes and Longsworth,21,25 we can obtain
the scaling for resolution for ITP-AC as 41  Here, kB is the
Boltzmann’s constant, T is the absolute temperature, e is the electron charge, and μL in LE and μT in LE are the mobilities of the
LE ion in the LE and the TE ion in the TE, respectively. We observe
that the resolution for ITP-AC scales as proportional with time t. This is in sharp contrast to the resolution of traditional
electrophoresis or of AC which scale as t1/2.26 We provide more details regarding
the derivation and analysis of resolution of ITP-AC processes in the section SI 2 in the Supporting Information.

Conclusions
We have developed an analytical model for
the spatiotemporal dynamics
of isotachophoresis coupling with affinity chromatography (ITP-AC).
We investigated the coupled effects of target distribution width,
distribution intensity, application velocity, forward and reverse
reaction constants, and probe concentration on necessary affinity
capture length, assay time, and capture efficiency. We collapsed these
six independent variables to three nondimensionalized parameters (α,
β, and Da) and identified key limiting regimes
in the problem.

We showed that scaled capture length (length
necessary to capture
95% of the target scaled by the advection-reaction length scale) approaches
a constant value of ∼2.8 for the regime where the scaled total
target amount, αDa, is less than approximately
unity. (α and Da represent the scaled target
distribution height and width, respectively.) In this regime, the
affinity region is not locally saturated and the maximum concentration
of bound target is proportional to the total amount of target in the
distribution. Therefore, this regime provides a simple way to quantify
the total amount of target. For αDa values
greater than unity, the affinity region is locally saturated and the
scaled capture length increases linearly with αDa. The saturation effectively shifts the leading edge of the capture
zone progressively downstream until new capture sites are available.
We also showed how increasing the nondimensionalized equilibrium dissociation
constant β decreases the capture efficiency n/N. The strength of this effect increases as both
α and Da increase.

We showed that the
scaled capture time (time necessary to capture
95% of the target, scaled by the reaction time scale) asymptotes to
∼4.3 for Da < 0.1 and αDa ≤ 1. In this relevant regime, the target distribution acts
a Dirac delta function. For Da greater than approximately
unity, the scaled capture time increases linearly with Da, indicating that the capture of wide target distributions in this
regime is simply limited by the time for them to enter the affinity
column. By focusing the target into a narrow distribution, as is achieved
with ITP, we decrease Da and therefore decrease the
overall assay time. Furthermore, assay time is set by the time required
to advect the target into the affinity region, which scales as the
target distribution width divided by the target velocity (σ/u). Therefore, for a fixed assay time, preconcentration
yields a proportionally lower capture length pz, and improved column utilization.

Lastly, we showed that the resolution of the most common mode,
ITP-AC purification, should scale proportionally with time. Experimental
validations of our model and a demonstration of ITP-AC purification
of a target from a 10 000-fold more-abundant contaminant will
be presented in Part 2 of this two-paper series.13

Supporting Information Available
This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac5011052_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge
support from the National Institutes
of Health Progenitor Cell Biology Consortium (No. 5U01HL099997, subcontract
SR00002307). We also gratefully acknowledge support from the National
Science Foundation under contract number CBET-1159092 and for a Graduate
Research Fellowship for Viktor Shkolnikov.
==== Refs
References
Hage D. S.  Handbook of Affinity
Chromatography ; CRC Press : Boca Raton, FL , 2006 .
Hage D. S. 
Clin. Chem. 
1999 , 45 , 593 –615 .10222345 
Mallik R. ; Hage D. S. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2006 , 29 , 1686 –1704 .16970180 
Pfaunmiller E. L. ; Paulemond M. L. ; Dupper C. M. ; Hage D. S. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2013 , 405 , 2133 –2145 .23187827 
Levenspiel O.  Chemical
Reaction Engineering , 3 rd Edition; John Wiley & Sons : New York , 1999 .
Everaerts F. M. ; Beckers J. L. ; Verheggen T. P. E. M.  Isotachophoresis:
Theory, Instrumentation, and Applications ; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 1976 .
Bocek P.  Analytical Isotachophoresis ; VCH : Weinheim,
Germany , 1987 .
Rogacs A. ; Marshall L. A. ; Santiago J. G. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2014 , 1335 , 105 –120 .24444800 
Bercovici M. ; Han C. M. ; Liao J. C. ; Santiago J. G. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci.
U.S.A. 
2012 , 109 , 11127 –11132 .22733732 
Garcia-Schwarz G. ; Santiago J. G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 6366 –6369 .22803507 
Garcia-Schwarz G. ; Santiago J. G. 
Angew. Chem. 
2013 , 125 , 11748 –11751 .
Karsenty M. ; Rubin S. ; Bercovici M.  Anal. Chem. 2014 , 86 , 3028 –3036 .24517175 
Shkolnikov V. ; Santiago J. G.  Anal.
Chem. 2014 , DOI: 10.1021/ac5011074 ).
Garcia-Schwarz G. ; Rogacs A. ; Bahga S.
S. ; Santiago J. G.  J. Visualized Exp. 2012 , 61 , e3890 (DOI: 10.3791/3890 ).
Khurana T. K. ; Santiago J. G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 6300 –6307 .18642874 
Garcia-Schwarz G. ; Bercovici M. ; Marshall L. A. ; Santiago J. G. 
J. Fluid Mech. 
2011 , 679 , 455 –475 .
Shim J. ; Dutta P. ; Ivory C. F. 
Numer. Heat Transfer, Part
A 
2007 , 52 , 441 –461 .
Dullien F. A. L.  Porous Media: Fluid
Transport and Pore Structure , 2 nd Edition; Academic Press : New York , 1991 .
Incropera F. P. ; DeWitt D. P.  Fundamentals of Heat
and Mass Transfer ; John Wiley & Sons : New York , 1996 .
Stellwagen E. ; Stellwagen N. C. 
Electrophoresis 
2002 , 23 , 2794 –2803 .12210184 
MacInnes D. A. ; Longsworth L. G. 
Chem. Rev. 
1932 , 9 , 171 –230 .
Thomas H. C. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1944 , 66 , 1664 –1666 .
Jung B. ; Bharadwaj R. ; Santiago J. G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 2319 –2327 .16579615 
Giddings J.
C. 
Sep. Sci. Technol. 
1969 , 4 , 181 –189 .
Shkolnikov V. ; Bahga S. S. ; Santiago J. G. 
Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2012 , 14 , 11534 –11545 .22806549 
Landers J. P.  Handbook of Capillary
Electrophoresis ; CRC Press : Boca Raton, FL , 1997 .
