
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac401646qArticleReal Time Observation of X-ray-Induced Surface
Modification Using Simultaneous XANES and XEOL-XANES Adriaens Annemie †Quinn Paul ‡Nikitenko Sergey §Dowsett Mark G. *∥† Department
of Analytical Chemistry, Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281 S12, B9000, Ghent, Belgium‡ Diamond
Light Source Ltd., Harwell Science and
Innovation Campus, Chilton, Didcot OX11
ODE, U.K.§ Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO), DUBBLE@ESRF, BP220, 38043, Cedex 9, France∥ Department
of Physics, The University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, U.K.* E-mail: m.g.dowsett@warwick.ac.uk.18 09 2013 15 10 2013 85 20 9556 9563 03 06 2013 18 09 2013 Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society2013American Chemical SocietyTerms of Use CC-BY

In
experiments preliminary to the design of an X-ray-excited optical
luminescence (XEOL)-based chemical mapping tool we have used X-ray
micro (4.5 × 5.2 μm) and macro (1 × 6 mm) beams with
similar total fluxes to assess the effects of a high flux density
beam of X-rays at energies close to an absorption edge on inorganic
surfaces in air. The near surface composition of corroded cupreous
alloys was analyzed using parallel X-ray and optical photoemission
channels to collect X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) data
at the Cu K edge. The X-ray fluorescence channel is characteristic
of the composition averages over several micrometers into the surface,
whereas the optical channel is surface specific to about 200 nm. While
the X-ray fluorescence data were mostly insensitive to the X-ray dose,
the XEOL-XANES data from the microbeam showed significant dose-dependent
changes to the superficial region, including surface cleaning, changes
in the oxidation state of the copper, and destruction of surface compounds
responsible for pre-edge fluorescence or phosphorescence in the visible.
In one case, there was evidence that the lead phase in a bronze had
melted. Conversely, data from the macrobeam were stable over several
hours. Apart from localized heating effects, the microbeam damage
is probably associated with the O3 loading of the surface
and increased reaction rate with atmospheric water vapor.

document-id-old-9ac401646qdocument-id-new-14ac-2013-01646qccc-price
==== Body
Imaging techniques which can
chemically map surfaces in air or a controlled environment (liquid,
gas) are few in number. X-ray excited optical luminescence (XEOL)1−5 is a potentially rich source of information on the chemistry, local
atomic order, and electronic structure of a surface. Because the emission
concerned lies in the wave bands from the near UV to the near IR,
a detector based on more or less conventional light optics can be
used.6,7 This makes the technique capable of mapping
in conjunction with either an X-ray microprobe, in which case the
detector can be based on a light collection system and a device such
as a broadband photomultiplier, or a broader X-ray beam (such as that
from a bending magnet) when an imaging detector such as a CCD camera
is required. A further attraction of the technique is that, for input
X-ray energies from around 3 keV upward, a surface may be observed
in air or in a controlled ambient such as a corrosive gas. Under some
circumstances, the surface may even be immersed in a liquid,7,8 although the changes in optical constants induced by radiolysis
from the probe complicate the interpretation of the data.9

It is well-known that, provided the signal
is not swamped by background
fluorescence and phosphorescence, the XEOL emission is modulated by
the escape probability of a photoelectron at and above an absorption
edge. This channel can therefore carry similar X-ray absorption near
edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure
(EXAFS) information to the X-ray fluorescence channel leading to a
technique sometimes known as optically detected X-ray absorption spectroscopy
(ODXAS). This leads immediately to the possibility of chemical and
electronic structure imaging with (at least) micrometer scale lateral
resolution.

Our interest in the technique lies in its potential
for monitoring
surface chemical changes in real time, especially in the context of
heritage and other metal corrosion and protection. It is therefore
relevant to determine the extent to which the probing X-rays can themselves
cause changes in the surface chemistry and to see whether this is
related to the total energy absorbed on a pixel during image acquisition
or to the energy absorption rate (power), given that, for the same
statistical precision in the image, the same number of X-ray photons
must be absorbed. Previous studies of damage induced by X-rays in
the keV range have shown that both dose and dose rate can be important,10 that X-ray-induced heating can play a role,
for example in the reduction of oxides,11 and the effects are highly dependent on chemical composition, even
in organic thin films.12 Types of damage
are varied, but include reduction,11 optical
damage,13 hydrocarbon chain breaking, reactions
with ozone and other radicals, and thermal14 and electronic damage.15 Simultaneous
use of XEOL and XANES or XEOL and X-ray diffraction (XRD) to assess
surface damage occurring during analysis seems to be uncommon, but
the latter combination has been used in the study of protein crystals.16

This work will inform the design process
for a XEOL-based microscopy
system, in particular the choice between a microprobe device (resolution
determined by the X-ray spot size) and a microscope (resolution determined
by the light optics and a pixelated detector).

Experimental Section
Microbeam measurements were carried out on a beamline I1817 at Diamond Light Source (DLS), using a microprobe
beam containing a total flux in the range from 1011 to
1012 s–1. X-rays were incident at 45°
to the sample surface, and the illuminated pixel size was 4.5 ×
5.2 μm. The incident angle was chosen to preserve a small beam
footprint at high flux density suitable for microprobe imaging. At
9 keV, this gives an input power density of 61.3 W mm–2. Copper K-edge XANES spectra were collected on two parallel channels
simultaneously: X-ray fluorescence, using a 4-element Vortex ME4 (Hitachi
Inc.), and a broadband optical channel from 185 to 850 nm, using a
custom detector [optically detected X-ray absorption spectroscope
(ODXAS1)] based on fused silica optics and a Hamamatsu 8259-01 broadband
photomultiplier tube (see Figure 1).

Figure 1 Schematic cross
section of the light collection system ODXAS1.

In what follows, “XANES” will refer to data
collected
using X-ray fluorescence, and “XEOL-XANES’ will be used
to describe the parallel optical data. Macrobeam XEOL-XANES measurements
were made on a BM26A (DUBBLE)18 at the
ESRF. Again, the X-rays were incident at 45°, and an area 1 ×
6 mm was illuminated uniformly. Parallel XANES were not collected.
ODXAS1 consists of an uncoated fused silica objective 40 mm in diameter
with a 40 mm focal length (Knight Optical LX 4040) and a similar 25
mm diameter demagnifying lens with a 25 mm focal length (Knight Optical
LX 2525). Silica is used to avoid secondary fluorescence and to obtain
high transmission from the near UV to the near IR, and coatings are
avoided to prevent any secondary fluorescence in the optical system.
There is a filter carrier for 25 mm diameter optical filters between
the two lenses. This was used to filter the emission in the macrobeam
experiments. The sample surface is placed 50 mm from the first principal
plane of the objective. Since the photomultiplier has no lateral resolution,
the optical system is designed to transport as much light as possible
into its 4 × 20 mm aperture. The optical axis of ODXAS1 is normal
to the sample, and the Vortex detector take-off angle was 10°
to the surface (I18 at DLS).

The housing is made from an acetal
copolymer, which we have found
causes minimal background fluorescence, and a manifold in front of
the objective admits X-rays, contains a sample illumination and web-cam-based
viewing system, and allows other detectors, such as the Vortex, a
view of the sample. A remotely operated fast shutter protects the
photomultiplier. The whole device fits onto our electrochemical/environmental
cell (eCell),19 which was used to hold
the samples here.

The samples were clean or corroded copper
or lead-bronze discs,
12.5 mm in diameter. Copper discs were pressed from 99.9% pure 2 mm
thick sheet (Advent), and the lead bronze was an archeological simulant
from the IMMACO project.20 Corroded discs
were covered with cuprite (Cu2O), nantokite (CuCl), or
a mixture of atacamite and paratacamite [isomeric hydroxychlorides
Cu2(OH)3Cl]. The protocols used to produce the
corrosion layers are described in detail elsewhere,21−23 as are typical
XANES data from these samples.7,8

The microbeam
scan parameters and X-ray flux were chosen to be
compatible with the acquisition of XANES and XEOL-XANES spectra from
each pixel with acceptable statistics on a practical timescale. For
each sample, a sequence of 5 XANES scans across the Cu K edge was
taken on the same position. Each scan took 10 min and was divided
into two: a pre-edge region from 8.830 to 8.962 keV with a step in
monochromator angle of 8.3 mdeg (approximately 5 eV), and a XANES
region out to 9.165 keV, sampled at a step of 0.7 mdeg (approximately
0.5 eV). The XANES and XEOL-XANES signals were sampled for 1 s at
each step, and the monochromator stepping time was approximately 2
s. The reduction in scan rate at 8.962 keV sometimes leads to significant
features in the XEOL-XANES pre-edge signal. These are discussed below.
The macrobeam scan parameters were compatible with the acquisition
of a microscope image in the XEOL-XANES mode (i.e., the use of a light
optical system to collect an image resolved by a pixelated detector
rather than a scanned probe), although imaging was not possible with
the optics in this proof of concept device. Scan times varied between
5 min and 3 h according to the experiment and were structured similarly
to those above, with large monochromator steps in the pre-edge region
and smaller steps subsequently. Additive and subtractive dichroic
filters (Edmund Optics, U.K., red #52-528, green #52-534, blue #52-531,
long pass #47-620, and short pass #47-286); cyan #52-537, magenta
#52-540, and yellow #52-543) were used to obtain preliminary information
on the spectral content of the XEOL for the macrobeam experiments.

No attempt was made to protect the samples with a gas blanket since
the main objective of these experiments was to see whether X-irradiation
related damage could be observed on the samples and to what extent
realistic time lapse measurements might be made (for example) in a
controlled environment with which the surface was reacting.

Processing of the raw data was carried out using our software esaProject
2013.23 In order to display the data so
that relative changes between spectra were preserved, raw spectra
were first normalized point-by-point to the beam monitor. Then the
mean value of the postedge intensity between 8.990 and 9.165 keV was
found separately for the first spectrum in each set of 5 XANES spectra
and all five normalized to this. Similarly, the mean value in the
same postedge energy range was found for the first XEOL-XANES spectrum
in a set, and all the spectra in the set were normalized to it. This
process leaves the spectra unchanged in shape compared to the raw
data. Standard fitting and normalization techniques were not applied
to these spectra because they distort the XEOL-XANES data unacceptably,
for reasons discussed below.

Results and Discussion
Figure 2, for comparison with Figures 3–8, contains reference
XANES spectra measured in the X-ray fluorescence mode and gathered
under macrobeam conditions. These are plotted conventionally as normalized
μ(E) versus beam energy E and
the data collection and processing is described in detail elsewhere.8

Figure 2 Reference spectra gathered in the X-ray fluorescence mode
using
the DUBBLE beamline.8

Copper
Figure 3 shows the sequence
of 5 XANES and XEOL-XANES spectra collected in parallel from a polished
copper surface cleaned with 2-propanol. The main features of both
sets of spectra are typical of Cu K-edge XANES. However, whereas the
Cu edge rises around 3 orders of magnitude in the XANES data, the
XEOL-XANES shows a high level of pre-edge fluorescence in the UV–NIR
region sampled. This is a typical difference observed between XANES
and XEOL-XANES across all the spectra from the cuprous surfaces reported
here and, indeed, spectra from tin, lead, and other materials.

Figure 3 Five 10 min
scans using an X-ray microbeam to collect K-edge XANES
from a polished copper surface. The X-ray fluorescence XANES channel
(left) and XEOL-XANES (right) were collected simultaneously. While
the XANES is stable (successive scans superimpose), the XEOL-XANES
shows a monotonic increase in the pre-edge background and the postedge
signal. The geometric similarity of the edge and postedge regions
in both types of spectra shows that the pre-edge background in the
XEOL-XANES comes from emission channels which turn off at the edge.
The inset shows data from the macrobeam where the pre-edge signal
is much higher.

The XANES spectra are
identical with one another within the noise.
For the XEOL-XANES, there is a rise of 0.02 in the pre-edge fluorescence
and 0.029 in the mean post-edge value. The latter is partly accounted
for by the increase in background, but there is also a small but significant
increase in the height of the Cu edge itself.

The modulation
of the XANES spectra is decreased a little by self-absorption
in comparison with that of the XEOL-XANES, but there is no sign of
an edge shift or structural change with X-ray dose in either case.
The surface specificity of XEOL-XANES compared to XANES has been demonstrated
elsewhere.7 In addition, a technique specific
to the top nanometer or so, such as ultra low-energy dynamic secondary
ion mass spectrometry (uleSIMS), will show these surfaces to be coated
with a complex cocktail of organic contaminants and alkali-metal compounds,
despite the cleaning in propanol. We therefore attribute a small part
of the background fluorescence in the XEOL-XANES to this material,
and the increase in the Cu-edge height to its partial breakdown and
removal, possibly in reactions with ozone generated by the beam.

A comparison of the first XEOL-XANES scan from the microbeam of
I18 with the macrobeam on DUBBLE (inset to Figure 3) gives a pre-edge signal which is 10 times higher on I18,
whereas the signal just postedge is 22 times higher. An absolute difference
in signal levels (>106 counts/sec on I18 and >6 ×
104 counts/sec on DUBBLE) is to be expected because DUBBLE
was used with no sagittal focusing, and the ring at ESRF was, in any
case, running in 16-bunch mode (around 25% of the current at DLS at
that time). However, the fact that the edge height above the pre-edge
signal is a factor of >2 higher on I18 suggests that only the end
stages of the cleaning process were observed in the scans on I18,
implying a far more rapid change in the first few moments of the data
taking.

Although we explain a small fraction of the pre-edge
signal in
the XEOL-XANES from I18 by optical fluorescence from surface contamination,
a comparison between the edges in the XANES and XEOL-XANES data shows
that most of the pre-edge signal in the latter is due to copper-related
radiative processes in the top 100 nm or so, as follows.

The
peak due to the interband transition at 8.981 keV occurs at
a relative height of 0.7 in both types of spectrum. This means that
the XEOL pre-edge signal of 0.4 is not the zero level for the spectrum,
otherwise this peak would be at a higher relative intensity in the
XEOL data. So, the postedge data are not “sitting on”
the pre-edge signal (as, for example, they would be if the optical
emission was from a surface contaminant). The pre-edge signal must
therefore arise from radiative de-excitation of the ionization of
all the Cu L and other outer levels through channels which do not
persist at high probability once X-rays are absorbed on the K level
(although the end states may be the same).24,25 This leads to the following problem in data processing: Typically,
XANES data might be processed by fitting a spline to the pre-edge
region and subtracting this, then normalizing the data to a second
spline representing the local mean of the postedge data. Subtracting
the high background level from the XEOL-XANES data in a similar way
will significantly increase the edge gradient and change the relative
position of features on the edge, such as the interband transition
at 8.981 keV. Instead, the subtraction process might be replaced by
fitting a spline to the lower part of the edge itself (e.g., the region
0.45–0.7 relative intensity in these data) and extrapolating
this to zero. Unfortunately, one cannot take this as a blanket approach
to all the XEOL-XANES data in this paper, as the background is clearly
additive to the spectrum in some cases.

Mixed Hydroxychlorides
[Atacamite/Paratacamite–Cu2(OH)3Cl] on
Copper
Figure 4 shows a similar data
set from a layer of mixed atacamite
and paratacamite on copper several hundred micrometers thick. Here,
the relative proportions of the XANES and XEOL-XANES spectra show
that some part of the pre-edge signal in the latter is additive. Again,
the XANES data for each scan are superimposed to within the noise
level, showing that the are no measurable changes in the bulk of the
layer. However, the first XEOL-XANES spectrum shows a rapidly decreasing
background with a sharp dip at 8.962 keV where the monochromator step
becomes much smaller. Although the measurement time stays the same,
the decreased scan rate means that the time taken to scan a given
energy range increases more than 10 times. The decrease in signal
in the pre-edge region is symptomatic of the destruction of a light-emitting
compound on the surface, and the change of slope shows that it is
probably a phosphorescent substance that is being destroyed. (The
light emission is decaying on a timescale which is long compared to
the 1 s acquisition time.) However, the fact that the postedge detail
stays the same shape (characteristic of paratacamite) shows that it
is not a copper compound which is being lost (but it is possible that
the fluorescence of a copper compound is being modified by the X-rays).
X-ray diffraction data show that the protocol used to prepare the
paratacamite layer leaves behind significant amounts of sodium chloride
and sodium nitrate. It is possibly one or both of these that is being
destroyed, and the phosphorescence of Cu-doped sodium chloride due
to both radiation damage and the doping has been described by others.26,27 Another possibility is suggested when considering these data in
comparison with that from nantokite below. With regard to Figure 4, in the 10 min scan time of the first scan, the
XEOL background signal decreases by a factor of 2.8. In the four subsequent
scans, the decrease is much less, but the postedge intensity decreases
by significantly more than the background. This suggests a shift in
the wavelength of the optical emission as the edge is crossed and
an increasing effect of either an absorber for this wavelength range
or damage to the emitter.Figure 4 Parallel XANES (left) and XEOL-XANES (right) from a thick
corrosion
layer of copper hydroxychlorides [atacamite and paratacamite, isomers
of Cu2(OH)3Cl) on copper]. The sharp knee in
the pre-edge region of scan 1 in the XEOL-XANES (arrowed) occurs where
the monochromator stepping rate (eV/s) is reduced.



A comparison of data from the red, green, and
blue filters
(Figure 5), using
the macrobeam, shows there is indeed a shift in the wavelength. The
data in Figure 5 have been normalized to the
mean postedge value of the unfiltered signal. The pre-edge signal
is predominantly green (in the range of 500–575 nm), and this
also contains the phosphorescent component. Postedge, there is a relative
increase in the blue emission (400–500 nm). The white line
is characterized by an enhanced emission in the green band, entirely
lacking in the blue. The macrobeam signals all show flat pre-edge
signals (no damage) but a dip where the scan rate decreases (phosphorescence).

Figure 5 XEOL-XANES
data from a copper coupon coated with a mixture of atacamite
and paratacamite taken using the macrobeam. Three successive scans
through red, green, and blue bandpass filters show a significant increase
in the blue emission postedge. Data from the other filters mentioned
in the text is consistent with this.

Nantokite (CuCl) on Copper
Nantokite is produced on
copper through the application of a simple protocol, which involves
soaking a clean copper coupon in saturated CuCl2 solution
and rinsing the residual CuCl2 away with water. Unfortunately,
both this latter process and subsequent exposure to air result in
decomposition of the CuCl through fast and slow hydrolization to form
cuprite and paratacamite.23,28

Figure 6 shows XANES and XEOL-XANES
data from a freshly made nantokite layer an hour or so old. The XANES
data are entirely characteristic of the underlying copper because
the nantokite layer is thin.7 The XEOL-XANES
data show the presence of a mixture of nantokite and paratacamite
(compare with reference spectra in Figure 2). In particular, the white line observed at 8.986 keV is characteristic
of nantokite (arrowed in the left pane of Figure 6). (The term “white line” is used in X-ray absorption
spectroscopy to describe a peak occurring more or less at the top
of the edge. It comes from the appearance of data recorded by dispersion
of transmitted X-rays across a photographic plate in early measurements.)
With consideration of the pre-edge region first, the behavior here
is similar to that for paratacamite, but there are no sodium compounds
involved in the production. Measurements on other nantokite layers
aged for several days show significantly less nantokite (and more
cuprite and paratacamite) and also around 20% less phosphorescence
at the start of the analysis. Other features are identical to those
shown here. It therefore seems likely that the rapidly decaying pre-edge
signal originates from the nantokite. At the same time, the white
line decreases in intensity as the X-ray dose increases, until only
the signatures of paratacamite and cuprite remain in the spectrum.
Since nantokite reacts readily with oxygen and water vapor in the
air, it is not surprising that the power input from the beam, combined
with the O3 generation, causes the nantokite to decompose.
The macrobeam data (inset) consistently show a rather different spectrum,
which we demonstrate elsewhere7 is characteristic
of nantokite. In particular, the white line is more prominent (and
remains stable over several hours). It therefore seems that the microbeam
has started to decompose the nanotkite early in the first scan.Figure 6 Microbeam scans
of XANES (left) and XEOL-XANES (right) from nantokite
(CuCl)-coated copper with macrobeam XEOL-XANES of nantokite as an
inset. The XANES is entirely characteristic of copper because the
layer is thin. The macrobeam XEOL-XANES is characteristic of nantokite,
and the microbeam XEOL-XANES is loosing a phosphorescent emitter and
decomposing to paratacamite under the beam.



Cuprite (Cu2O) on Copper
The XANES and XEOL-XANES
data shown in Figure 7 are characteristic of cuprite7 with its
pronounced interband transition on the edge at 8.982 keV. The geometrical
similarity of the edge and postedge regions in both types of spectrum
(especially the similar relative positions of the midedge feature)
shows that, as for copper, the pre-edge background in the XEOL-XANES
comes from emission channels which turn off at the edge. Copper itself
does not show any tendency to oxidize in the 50 min of X-ray exposure
(Figure 1). On the other hand, preoxidized
copper in the form of cuprite was one of the few examples we observed
where the XANES showed some variation over time as well as the XEOL-XANES.
Figure 7 shows a small increase in the cuprite
intensity in XANES over the 5 spectra. However, since the layer is
initially thick enough that there is no sign of copper in the first
spectrum taken, this cannot be due to an increase in the cuprite thickness.
Looking at the XEOL-XANES, we see that there is a 7% decrease in the
pre-edge background, between the first and second spectra, with a
corresponding decrease in the postedge average. In subsequent scans,
the pre-edge level stays similar, while the postedge level increases.
This suggests the removal of a fluorescing surface compound, which
was absorbing both a fraction of the X-ray fluorescence and a larger
fraction of the optical fluorescence from the cuprite. The cuprite
is made by immersion of the copper in sodium sulfate solution. The
observed behavior is consistent with the decomposition of this by
the beam.Figure 7 Microbeam XANES (left) and XEOL-XANES (right) from cuprite (Cu2O) on copper. As for copper, the edge and postedge regions
of both XANES and XEOL-XANES spectrum are geometrically similar, showing
that the pre-edge background in the XEOL-XANES is from emitters which
turn off at the edge.



Cuprite (Cu2O) on Lead Bronze
A more complex
example of surface modification is found in the examination of a lead-bronze
alloy coated with cuprite. Under the microbeam, this sample showed
strongly varying behavior from place to place. In some locations,
for example, the 5 XANES spectra overlaid and were characteristic
of copper (thin cuprite layer), whereas the XEOL XANES showed high
levels of pre-edge fluorescence (rather than phosphorescence), which
decreased by a total of 10% in the 50 min, and a noisy edge, and a
postedge signal characteristic of mixed copper and cuprite spectra
(copper seen through thin or patchy cuprite). Figure 8 shows different behavior.
The XANES is characteristic of copper but decreases monotonically
from scan-to-scan by 20% overall. The XEOL-XANES is characteristic
of cuprite on a high and mostly fluorescent background. This increases
scan-to-scan, apart from the destruction of some phosphorescence in
scan 1. The height of the copper edge above the background also increases.
In this material, the lead and copper phases are partially separated,29 and the grains are quite large (up to 100 μm
across).

Figure 8 Five XANES (left) and XEOL-XANES (right) scans from a thin cuprite
layer on lead bronze. The XANES is characteristic of the copper substrate
because the layer is thin, but the copper is apparently being covered
up during the measurement. Conversely, the background and the edge
height on the XEOL-XANES (characteristic of cuprite, cf. Figures 2 and 7) are enhanced.

Moreover, we find that macrobeam
measurements of XEOL from lead
and several of its compounds show high levels of pre-edge fluorescence.
The irradiated region in Figure 8 most likely
includes both lead and copper grains. Given their respective melting
points (Pb = 327.46 °C, Cu = 1084.62 °C), heat capacities
(Pb = 26.65 J mol–1 K–1, Cu =
24.44 J mol–1 K–1), and enthalpies
of fusion (Pb = 4.77 kJ mol–1, Cu = 13.26 kJ mol–1), it is easy to show that if all the input power
from the beam (1011–1012 9 keV photons
s–1) thermalized into a cubic grain 50 μm
on a side, the lead would melt in 0.06 to 0.6 s, and the copper in
0.48 to 4.8 s, nearly 8 times longer. Allowing for heat loss mechanisms,
it is not nreasonable to find that the lead melts on a short timescale
compared with that of the experiment, whereas the copper does not
melt at all. One hypothesis to explain the data is therefore that
a nearby lead grain melted and wetted the copper, diminishing the
XANES signal. At the same time, cuprite grains (melting point 1232 °C)
were floating on, or protruding through, the lead. Then lead, or a
lead compound, contributes increasingly to the copper pre-edge signal
in the XEOL-XANES, and a small increase in X-ray backscattering from
the lead enhances the cuprite yield.

Conclusions
For
all the surfaces reported here, differences between XANES and
XEOL-XANES measurements indicate that a microbeam of sufficient power
to acquire chemical images of corroded metal surfaces, also modifies
the near surface region. Except for the nantokite system where the
evolution of the surface into paratacamite was obvious, the determination
of the exact surface changes would require a very considerable amount
of work on each system. However, reasonable hypotheses have been advanced
to explain the data. The proposed effects range from surface cleaning
for bare copper, through dissociation of surface contaminants left
by the corrosion protocols, to melting of lead grains in a lead bronze.

Comparison between XANES and XEOL-XANES for the cuprite and copper
samples shows that the pre-edge background in the XEOL-XANES comes
from emission channels, which are blocked with the onset of K-level
ionization. In general, therefore, it would not be correct to subtract
the pre-edge level when processing the data because it would artificially
increase the edge gradient and distort near-edge features. Extrapolation
of the edge function downward would be a better strategy in some,
but not all, cases. The XANES data from a reference sample would,
in this context, give a useful guide to the XEOL-XANES processing
in general.

Because of the rather rapid onset of surface modification
observed
here, we decided to construct a XEOL-based chemical mapping system
with the ability to image using a macroprobe beam (i.e., with the
imaging vested in a pixelated detector on microscope optics). In this
mode, X-ray fluorescence XANES images cannot easily be collected in
parallel. However, the provision of some means to collect the total
XANES from the irradiated region (e.g., a PIN diode) is straightforward,
and the macroprobe imaging system can, in any case, still be used
with a microprobe beam, especially if the light is dispersed over
the camera face to prevent saturation (e.g., in the wells of a CCD
camera). Better still, a photomultiplier-based detector such as that
used here can be provided to operate in parallel. However, a critical
fator in determining which imaging system is most appropriate is the
ability of the sample to absorb the required power density from the
beam without damage.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Diamond
Light Source for access to beam line I18
under award SP4051. ODXAS1 was constructed by Derrick Richards (University
of Warwick) and EVA Surface Analysis (U.K.). Software control was
by Gareth K. Jones and EVA Surface Analysis. The proof of concept
instrument ODXAS1 and the eCell were part-funded by the Paul Instrument
Fund of the Royal Society (U.K.). The authors acknowledge, with thanks,
the financial support from the Research Foundation-Flanders (FWO).
==== Refs
References
Taylor R. P. ; Finch A. A. ; Mosselmans J. F. W. ; Quinn P. D. 
J. Lumin. 
2013 , 134 , 49 –85 .
Martínez-Criado G. ; Alén B. ; Sans J. A. ; Homs A. ; Kieffer I. ; Tucoulou R. ; Cloetens P. ; Segura-Ruiz J. ; Susini J. ; Yoo J. ; Yi G. 
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys.
Res. 
2012 , 36 –39 .
O’Malley S. M. ; Revesz P. ; Kazimirov A. ; Sirenko A. A. 
J. Appl. Phys. 
2011 , 109 , 124906-1 –124906-5 .
D’Silva A. P. ; Fassel V. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
1977 , 49 , 638 –641 .
Hayakawa S. ; Hirose T. ; Yan L. ; Morishita M. ; Kuwano H. ; Gohshi Y. 
X-ray Spectrom. 
1999 , 28 , 515 –518 .
Quinn F. ; Poolton N. ; Malins A. ; Pantos E. ; Andersen C. ; Denby P. ; Dhanak V. ; Miller G. 
J. Synchrotron Radiat. 
2003 , 10 , 461 –466 .14551448 
Dowsett M. G. ; Adriaens A. ; Jones G. K. C. ; Poolton N. ; Fiddy S. ; Nikitenko S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 8717 –8724 .18855415 
Adriaens A. ; Dowsett M. G. ; Jones G. K. C. ; Leyssens K. ; Nikitenko S. J. 
Anal. At. Spectrom. 
2009 , 24 , 62 –68 .
Holroyd R. A.  and Preses J. M.  Radiation Chemical
Effects of X-rays on Liquids . In Chemical
Applications of Synchrotron Radiation: X-ray Applications ; Sham T-K.  , Ed.; World Scientific : Singapore , 2002 ; Vol. 2, Chapter 21, pp 987 –1008 .
Tresmin A. S. ; Pearson J. F. ; Nichols A. P. ; Owens A. ; Brunton A. N. ; Fraser G. W. 
Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res., Sect. A 
2001 , 459 , 543 –551 .
Paparazzo E. 
Surf. Sci. Lett. 
1990 , 234 , L253 –L258 .
Neuhold A. ; Novák J. ; Flesh H.-G. ; Moser A. ; Djuric T. ; Grodd L. ; Grigorian S. ; Pietsch U. ; Resel R. 
Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res., Sect. B 
2012 , 284 , 64 –68 .
Ohmori Y. ; Yamaguchi M. ; Yoshino K. ; Inuishi Y. 
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 
1997 , 16 , 181 –182 .
Nygård K. ; Gorelick S. ; Vila-Comamala J. ; Färm E. ; Bergamaschi A. ; Cervellino A. ; Gozzo F. ; Patterson B. D. ; Ritala M. ; David C. 
J. Synchrotron Radiat. 
2010 , 17 , 786 –790 .20975225 
Magorrian B. G. ; Allinson N. M. 
Nucl. Instrum. Meth. in
Phys. Res., Sect. A 
1988 , 273 , 599 –604 .
Owen R. L. ; Yorke B. A. ; Pearson A. R. 
Acta Crystallogr. 
2012 , D68 , 505 –510 .
Mosselmans J. F. W. ; Quinn P. D. ; Dent A. J. ; Cavill S. A. ; Moreno S. D. ; Peach A. ; Leicester P. J. ; Keylock S. J. ; Gregory S. R. ; Atkinson K. D. ; Rosell J. R. 
J. Synchrotron
Radiat. 
2009 , 16 , 818 –824 .19844019 
Nikitenko S. ; Beale A. M. ; van der Eerden A. M.
J. ; Jacques S. D. M. ; Leynaud O. ; O’Brien M. G. ; Detollenaere D. ; Kaptein R. ; Weckhuysen B. M. ; Bras W. 
J. Synchrotron Radiat. 
2008 , 15 , 632 –640 .18955771 
Dowsett M. ; Adriaens A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 3360 –3365 .16689538 
Beldjoudi T. ; Bardet F. ; Lacoudre N. ; Andrieu S. ; Adrianes A. ; Constantinides I. ; Brunella P.  Rev. Metall. (Les Ulis, Fr.) 2001 ,
September, 803 –808 .
Lamy C.  Stabilisation d’Objets
Archéologiques Chlorurés en Alliage Cuivreux ; Report ARC’Antique, Nantes, France , 1977 .
Adriaens A. ; Dowsett M. 
Acc. Chem. Res. 
2010 , 43 , 927 –935 .20218677 
Dowsett M. G. ; Adriaens A. ; Martin C. ; Bouchenoire L. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 4866 –4872 .22568435 
Emura S. ; Moriga T. ; Takizawa J. ; Nomura M. ; Bauchspiess K. R. ; Murata T. ; Harada K. ; Maeda H. 
Phys.
Rev. B 
1993 , 47 , 6918 –6930 .
Sparks C.
J. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1974 , 33 , 262 –265 .
Nanto H. ; Endo F. ; Hirai Y. ; Murayama K. ; Nasu S. 
Nucl. Instrum. Meth.
in Phys. Res., Sect. B 
1994 , 91 , 205 –209 .
Hirai M. 
J. Phys. Chem. Solids 
1990 , 7 , 737 –745 .
Scott D. A.  Copper and Bronze
in Art: Corrosion, Colorants, Conservation ; The Getty Conservation Institute : Los Angeles , 2002 .
Constantinides I. ; Gritsch M. ; Adriaens A. ; Hutter H. ; Adams F. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2001 , 440 , 189 –198 .
