
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac501492fArticleGlyQ-IQ: Glycomics Quintavariate-Informed Quantification
with High-Performance Computing and GlycoGrid 4D Visualization Kronewitter Scott
R. Slysz Gordon W. Marginean Ioan Hagler Clay D. LaMarche Brian
L. Zhao Rui Harris Myanna Y. Monroe Matthew E. Polyukh Christina A. Crowell Kevin L. Fillmore Thomas L. Carlson Timothy
S. Camp David G. IIMoore Ronald J. Payne Samuel H. Anderson Gordon
A. Smith Richard D. *Biological
Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory, P.O. Box 999, Richland, Washington 99352, United States* E-mail: rds@pnnl.gov.31 05 2015 31 05 2014 01 07 2014 86 13 6268 6276 13 01 2014 31 05 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical SocietyTerms of Use

Glycomics quintavariate-informed
quantification (GlyQ-IQ) is a
biologically guided glycomics analysis tool for identifying N-glycans
in liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS) data.
Glycomics LC–MS data sets have convoluted extracted ion chromatograms
that are challenging to deconvolve with existing software tools. LC
deconvolution into constituent pieces is critical in glycomics data
sets because chromatographic peaks correspond to different intact
glycan structural isomers. The biological targeted analysis approach
offers several key advantages to traditional LC–MS data processing. A priori glycan information about the individual target’s
elemental composition allows for improved sensitivity by utilizing
the exact isotope profile information to focus chromatogram generation
and LC peak fitting on the isotopic species having the highest intensity.
Glycan target annotation utilizes glycan family relationships and
in source fragmentation in addition to high specificity feature LC–MS
detection to improve the specificity of the analysis. The GlyQ-IQ
software was developed in this work and evaluated in the context of
profiling the N-glycan compositions from human serum LC–MS
data sets. A case study is presented to demonstrate how GlyQ-IQ identifies
and removes confounding chromatographic peaks from high mannose glycan
isomers from human blood serum. In addition, GlyQ-IQ was used to generate
a broad human serum N-glycan profile from a high resolution nanoelectrospray-liquid
chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (nESI-LC–MS/MS)
data set. A total of 156 glycan compositions and 640 glycan isomers
were detected from a single sample. Over 99% of the GlyQ-IQ glycan-feature
assignments passed manual validation and are backed with high-resolution
mass spectra.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac501492fdocument-id-new-14ac-2014-01492fccc-price
==== Body
Glycosylation
strongly affects
how proteins are folded and maintain the proper structure required
for interacting with other proteins and their environment. The fusion
of proteomics, glycomics, glycoproteomics, and mass spectrometry has
the capability of completely characterizing glycoproteins and determine
which glycans are attached to which glycosylation site on the protein
backbone.1 Including glycan profiling with
bottom up glycoproteomics analyses technologies has been shown to
decrease the false positive identification rate by bounding the relatively
large amount of possible glycans to experimental evidence.2

N-Glycosylation is a widespread posttranslational
modification
of proteins commonly found covalently attached to asparagine. N-Glycans
are complex branched biopolymers of monosaccharides constructed by
glycosidase and glycosyltransferase enzymatic reactions in the Golgi
and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) cellular organelles. The nontemplate
driven process produces families of glycans that relate to each other
by one enzymatic step and resulting in glycans related to each other
by a difference of one monosaccharide.3,4 As a result,
end-product glycan mixtures contain multiple isomer forms based on
different monosaccharide connectivity. Determining the monosaccharide
composition of glycans and how many isomers are present is an important
step toward in-depth structural characterization analysis. Characterizing
glycan structures provides a basis for, among other things, insights
on structure–function relationships present in biological systems.

Glycan isomer profiling can be accomplished by coupling liquid
chromatography with mass spectrometry (LC–MS). Glycomics annotation
of LC–MS data involves two critical aspects of analysis: feature
detection and glycan assignment. LC–MS features are commonly
defined by m/z peak intensities
(e.g., for their isotope profile) in the mass spectra dimension and
chromatographic elution profile from their extracted ion chromatogram
(EIC). For simplicity, the isotopic envelope for a species can be
collapsed or “deisotoped” to a single value. In the
case of glycan annotation, exact monoisotopic mass from each feature
can then be matched to glycan masses calculated theoretically or via
experimentally generated libraries to develop a composition profile
that attempts to describe all of the monosaccharides present in the
glycan mixture. Since many glycans have isomer structures, the structures
can be often separated chromatographically and retention times for
each isomer assigned.

Several informatics tools have been developed
that facilitate one
or multiple aspects of the glycan annotation process and vary in the
analytical features included, type of mass spectrometry data required,
and overall sensitivity and specificity of the results.5−8 When chromatographic information is available as in LC–MS
experiments, LC–MS features are commonly detected by assembling
the monoisotopic masses derived from each mass spectrum and then annotated
with the glycomics tool.6,7,9−11 In general, glycomics data is challenged with partially
resolved chromatographic peaks (common for glycan isomers) and convoluted
isotopic profiles. Although efforts to deconvoluted overlapping isotope
distributions have been previously explored (NITPICK,12 Glycolyzer,6 MultiGlycan9), they generally work solely in the mass spectra
isotope profile space and are limited to averagine13/averagose14 based isotope model
approximations. Several advances have been made in chromatographic
processing for LC–MS/MS proteomics,15 yet the algorithms have not been applied to glycomic challenges
where closely related isomers are common. In addition to the advanced
chromatographic deconvolution presented here, this algorithm leverages
exact chemical formula based isotopic profiles and insource fragmentation
information to support feature detection and annotation.

We
have developed a new targeted software application, Glycomic
Quintavariate Informed Quantification (GlyQ-IQ) to analyze and annotate
enzymatically released N-glycan LC–MS data sets with high-performance
computing. GlyQ-IQ includes all of the signal processing and spectra
averaging, peak detection, targeted deisotoping, feature finding and
glycan composition annotation required to convert raw data files into
annotated results. The Informed Quantification (IQ) framework includes
robust liquid chromatography processing that includes LC peak modeling
and robust correlations between extracted ion chromatograms to increase
annotation confidence. In addition, the robust correlations are used
to identify insource fragmentation and increase the specificity of
the analysis. Insource fragmentation is identified when glycans and
glycan fragments chromatographic elution profiles correlate.

This work describes the methodology behind the GlyQ-IQ algorithms
and the use for N-glycan profiling of N-glycans enzymatically cleaved
from glycoproteins. A case study is also included involving characterization
of high mannose glycans in human serum and how insource fragmentation
can be used to differentiate intact glycans from insource fragments
and confirm glycan composition assignments. Problems related to interfering
peaks in EICs, correlation coefficients involving nonideal data, and
imparting glycan biology into the annotation process are discussed.
This work is broken into two parts focusing on data processing in
the mass spectra and chromatography dimensions. The software is available
online at http://omics.pnl.gov/software.

Methods
Materials
All materials were of high purity, and the
same pooled human blood serum (male, blood type AB, not heat inactivated)
was used for all analyses (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). All other
chemicals and procedures used were consistent with those previously
described for 100 μL of serum to produce reduced, nonderivatized
glycans.16 Briefly, N-glycans were enzymatically
cleaved from serum glycoproteins with PNGase F in acidified reaction
conditions (pH 5.5). The enzymatic cleavage was catalyzed with a microwave
reactor (CEM Discover, Matthews, NC). The released glycans were purified
by 80% ethanol precipitation/centrifugation and reduced with sodium
borohydride before further purification and desalting. A dual cartridge
(C8, GCC) automated solid phase extraction and desalting was performed
using a Gilson GX-274 ASPEC liquid handler (Middleton, WI) with customized
algorithms optimized for this process. The aqueous glycan samples
were first passed through a C8 cartridge to remove any residual peptides
or lipids and the flow-through was directly loaded onto a graphite
cartridge for salt and small molecule removal.

Data Acquisition
Data was acquired using a constant
flow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) coupled to a Velos Pro Orbitrap Mass
spectrometer with 100K mass resolution. The LC column was packed with
3 μm diameter Hypercarb porous graphitized carbon particles
(Thermo Scientific) and had a length of 70 cm long × 360 μm
o.d. × 75 μm i.d. (Polymicro Technologies Inc., Phoenix,
AZ) and a 1 cm sol–gel frit for media retention.17 Human blood serum N-glycans previously identified
with GlyQ-IQ software were used to populate a mass list for targeted
fragmentation. High-resolution (60k mass resolution) collision induced
dissociation (CID, energy 30 for 10 ms) and higher energy collision
dissociation (HCD, energy 20 for 0.1 ms) were used for fragmentation.

The atomicity of the glycan targets makes the IQ based algorithms
attractive for parallel computing since they do not depend on each
other for the bulk of the analysis. Each target requires a large amount
of processing because of the multiplicative effect of target charge
states, isomers, possible insource fragments, and insource fragment
charge states. For example, if 4 charge states and 4 fragment ions
are considered for a single target, 512 additional subtargets need
to be discovered and processed. This multiplicative effect on targets
is illustrated in Figure 1. For each target,
EICs need to be determined, theoretical isotope profiles generated
and compared to mass spectra, and LC curves modeled and fit.

Figure 1 Glycan compositions
detected in LC–MS experiments can be
in multiple forms that need to be identified in the data sets (isomers,
charge states). The multiple forms need to be cross correlated and
searched for consistency. The multipliers used in this example represent
1 glycan target containing 4 charge states, 4 isomers, searching for
fragments in both directions (2, greater or smaller by one monosaccharide),
4 monosaccharide differences to search for, and 4 charge states possible
for the fragment ions.

When thousands of targets are searched, millions of subtargets
need to be correlated and analyzed. The GlyQ-IQ software was deployed
on a Windows 2012 R2 based HPC cluster with a head node and 1 504
compute cores. The HPC acceleration reduced the runtime by 99.92%
(550× faster) when compared to executing the same job on a single
core processor. Additional HPC Compute Cluster and Microsoft Windows
Azure Cloud deployment information was included in the Supplementary
Text S1 and Supplementary Figure 1 in the Supporting
Information.

Mass Spectrometric Data Processing
Targeted
Deisotoping
Isotopic profiles were evaluated
by comparing a theoretically generated isotopic profile for exact
targeted elemental compositions with the experimental data. The experimental
isotopic envelope (or profile) abundances are populated by extracting
all the masses contained in the theoretical isotopic envelope from
the spectra. A user determined number of spectra (e.g., 9 spectra
in this study, see below) surrounding the EIC peak apex are averaged
together to increase the ion statistics of the isotopic envelope and
signal-to-noise ratio (e.g., noise decrease by a factor of ∼3,
square root of N = 9).

A detectable area filter
is applied to the experimental isotopic envelope so that experimental
profiles which are missing critical abundant ions are removed. A key
feature of this filter is it improves detection of high quality features
independent of mass range as shown in Supplementary Figure 2 in the Supporting Information which contains examples
ranging from 1000 to 5500 Da. Removing mass dependency bias from the
algorithm improves the quality of the result and allows for an even
response when an isotope fit score cutoff is applied. The total isotopic
profile area is calculated from the theoretical isotopic profile through
integration by summing the abundances of the individual isotopic peaks.
The critical required ions are determined by including the most abundant
ions contributing to 75% of the total isotope area. Experimental profiles
missing the critical ions are rejected. Additional ions beyond the
critical ions are included if present in the experimental data.

Isotope Profile Fit Scoring
All charge states that
produce ions within the m/z range
covered by the spectra are considered independently. For the ions
of one charge state, the intensities are extracted and the fit scores
are based on a modified chi squared test. Modifications to the fit
score calculations used in Decon2LS18 and
THRASH19 were incorporated here to account
for the number of ions detected in the isotope profile. The fit score
used in GlyQ-IQ is divided by the number of ions detected in the profile
to decrease the score biases against high masses with several isotopes.
The equation is included as eq 1 below where E is the experimental data, T is the theoretical
data, and n and N are the number
of observed isotopes. 1  

Figure 2 Example
depicting the penalization of the isotope fit score calculations
when an unrelated peak lower in mass (1 Da, 0.33 m/z at 3+ charge) is observed in the mass spectra.
(A) Fit score calculated when modeled data is fit to the observed
data with 1 Da penalty assigned. The high fit score greater than 0.1
cutoff triages further chromatographic analysis. (B) EICs from the
most abundant isotope m/z and the
penalty peak m/z are modeled, fit,
and correlated. Failed EIC correlations trigger a rescoring of the
isotope profile while excluding the penalty peak because it was deemed
not part of the targeted distribution. The large score decrease from
1.07 to 0.011 leads to a correct assignment of the target. The mass
differences between the 3+ charge state isotopes are shown in blue
at the bottom.

Additional details explaining
the effect of the modified equation
are included in the Supplementary Text S2 and Supplementary Figures
3 and 4 in the Supporting Information.

A strict 0.10 fit score cutoff was chosen to increase the specificity
of feature detection and resulted in fewer features that need to be
removed by manual inspection; 99% of the glycans assigned with GlyQ-IQ
passed the manual inspection process and include ions with a mass
that fall in the range from 912 up to 4500 Da. A total of 689 glycan
isomer peaks from this data set were detected by GlyQ-IQ (including
45 insource fragmentation fragments see below) and 685 passed manual
validation. The sensitivity was also increased as well since large
masses with formerly relatively high (i.e., poor) fit scores were
rescored to lower (i.e., good) values that fall in the acceptable
range (see Supplementary Figure 4 in the Supporting
Information). The additional larger masses detected pass manual
inspection and are included in the 99% success rate calculation. However,
masses greater than 4500 Da are still detectable but the sucesss rate
is decreased because the monoisotopic mass is often no longer present
and the 1 Da penalty peaks have less discriminiation (as noted below).

Increased Mass Spectra Data Quality
Mass spectra averaging
provided by the C# MSFileReader DLL (Thermo Scientific, San Jose,
CA) was used to increase sensitivity and improve the ion statistics
in the glycan isotopic profiles. Provided the noise level is relatively
constant and randomly distributed within a few mass spectra scans
during a LC–MS run (corresponding to a fraction of a second
up to a few seconds of time depending on detector acquisition rate
and amount of MS/MS scans collected), signal averaging can decrease
the effective noise level of the measurement by the square of the
number of spectra and improve isotope fit scores. In addition, spectral
averaging incorporates isotopic profile information from several spectra
into the observed profile which improves the accuracy of intensity
distribution in the profile. This is especially important for ions
with low abundance that have insufficient ion statistics to produce
a well-defined profile.

Implementing raw spectra averaging shows
a striking advantage in sensitivity (at constant specificity) when
applied to our human serum data as shown in Supplementary Figure 5
in the Supporting Information. For this
data set, the optimal number of spectra averaged is 9 and was selected
by the number that produced the lowest average fit score and highest
number of manually verified glycan annotations. Implementing optimal
signal averagine, the number of glycan features detected increased
by 56%, the average fit scores decreased by 15%, and the GlyQ-IQ analysis
runtime increased by 38%.

1-Dalton Errors
One common problem
with deisotoping
mass spectra is false annotations caused by 1 Da (Da) mass errors
in monoisotopic mass assignments. The framework implemented here attempts
to mitigate this effect by searching for an ion 1 Da lower than the
monoisotopic mass, populating its abundance, and use it as a penalty
value in the fit score calculation. Since the fit score equation used
here is based on the sum of the squared errors, any ion present will
contribute a significant difference (as compared to zero abundance
in the model) and increase the fit score. If the intensity of the
precluding peak is large, the increase in fit score caused by the
penalty ion error is typically sufficient to increase the score beyond
the 0.10 cutoff used here. An example is shown in Figure 2A,B where two ions partially coelute (compound A,
monoisotopic m/z 881.996, fifth
isotope at 883.334 and Compound B (target), monoisotopic m/z 883.663) and produce a multiplexed isotope pattern.
Ions that have higher than the fit score cutoff due to the penalty
ion contribution are triaged for advanced chromatographic analysis.
This is particularly beneficial for the relatively low mass range
(500–4500 Da) and less helpful as the mass increases due to
the decreasing contribution of the monoisotopic mass intensity to
the overall distribution.

Triaged isotopic profiles provide
at least two possible solutions to dealing with this problem and finding
the correct answer for the experimental data: (1) the simplest answer
(with the least amount of assumptions) is the raw data fits a single
compound (compound A, 1 or more Da lower in mass) with a different
elemental composition, or (2) the distribution is a convolution of
two near perfectly overlapping isotope profiles, but offset in mass,
containing 2 or more multiplexed ions of target compound B and lower
mass compound A. Implementing chromatographic information can unambiguously
separate the problem cases by using EIC profiles and correlations.
If the extracted ion chromatogram of compounds A and B have peaks
within the point range of the most abundant isotope and correlate
greater than our 0.95 cutoff (see below), case 1 is deemed correct
and the desired target (compound B) is considered not present. If
the EIC do not coelute (R < 0.95) as in case 2,
the target ion is discrete and rescored and tested for acceptance.

Chromatogram Processing
EIC Generation
GlyQ-IQ is a chromatography
centric
data analysis tool which involves significant EIC processing. Since
each target has an empirical formula and subsequent theoretical isotopic
distribution, the most abundant isotope can be chosen as a target
for chromatogram generation. EIC widths are calculated based on the
data using the following method. The largest peak (consistent with
a target isotopic profile) in the default EIC window is chosen and
its full-width at half-maximum (fwhm) is calculated in the mass domain.
This width is then divided in half (or a user defined divisor) and
the data driven ppm mass tolerance is used to center the EIC extraction
mass window for subsequent target processing.

Smoothing
EICs often contain significant amounts of
variation, particularly for lower intensity species due to the stochastic
limitations, microinstabilities in the electrospray process, and other
sources of measurement noise. To eliminate artifact peaks and focus
the algorithms on chromatographic peaks of interest, a digital Savitzky-Golay
(SG) smoothing filter (degree 2) is applied. Windowed extracted ion
peak chromatograms are typically used in these algorithms and are
bounded by a scan range of interest. However, since the SG filter
is a moving average based filter, edge effects are accounted for by
buffering all EICs with extra points (2 times the number of smoothing
window points) from the full range peak chromatogram. A 9 point SG
smoothing filter window is applied to Man8 from human blood
serum and plotted in Supplementary Figure 6 in the Supporting Information that shows that the smoothed data sufficiently
represents the experimental chromatograms and does not introduce new
artifact peaks. SG smoothing was chosen to better distinguish the
peak centroid, peak width, and peak concavity required for robust
correlations, and such buffered EICs preserve the data quality and
have faster execution time than full range EICs.

Peak Detection
Chromatographic peaks are detected and
filtered from the smoothed extracted peak chromatograms to reduce
chromatographic noise. Nevertheless noise and artifact peaks still
need to be identified and filtered out of the smoothed data, including
peaks and shoulders with too few data points.

A set of candidate
peaks is established via three point differential peak detection and
then the centroids were determined to find the apex. The minima of
each peak is also calculated and used to determine how many points
constitute half the peak shape (center point–minima point,
etc.). The half peak shape is used instead of a full peak shape because
it allows the better detection of partially resolved species. If the
peak has less than a minimum amount of points (2 in this case) on
either side, it is removed.

Chromatographic Artifact
Peak Removal
A layer of complexity
is observed on postsmoothed data because single point peaks (a peak
consisting of 3 points, e.g., 2 baseline points surrounding 1 nonzero
point) can resemble broader peaks once smoothed. Five points are often
considered the minimum needed for defining a peak apex and width reliably.20 However, this criterion does not directly map
to SG smoothed data because the number of points defining a peak increases
as the smoothing window point number increases. Examples of the smoothing
effect broadening simple peaks are presented in Supplementary Figure
7 in the Supporting Information where peaks
defined with one or five points are smoothed with different SG windows
(the five points peak series is inverted). The relationship between
an acceptable number of points and the SG windows can be calculated
by plotting the number of points across a raw peak versus the number
of points across a smoothed peak (at various smoothing levels). This
is shown to be linear in Supplementary Figure 8 in the Supporting Infiormation. A minimum of 4 points
per side (>8 points for full peak) is set for a 9 point SG smooth.
This is sufficient to remove three point peak equivalent peaks from
the raw data and improve confidence in peak assignments by removing
artifacts caused by single point peaks. Using this equation presented
in Supplementary Figure 8 in the Supporting Information, the peak detection parameters are automatically set based on the
smoothing parameter supplied by the user.

Partially Resolved Chromatographic
Peaks
An asymmetric
peak shifting parameter is included for better shoulder detection
of partially overlapping peaks. This allows up to two points to be
shifted from one side to the other for the case where shoulder peaks
are well-defined on the nonconvolved side (min number of points +
2) and have less than the number of points on the convolved side (min
number of points – 2). Two points were chosen to maintain the
8 points across the peaks at the smoothed level (9 point SG window).

EIC Peak Shape Fitting
After peaks with insufficient
data points are removed, each peak is modeled with a Gaussian function
and the models were compared to the data. This helps determine the
characteristic curve associated with the peak and allows integration
to estimate relative abundance. A Gaussian peak shape is fit to each
peak using a Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm (ALGLIB21) using a 0.85 R2 coefficient of determination cutoff. As shown in Supplementary Figure
9 in the Supporting Information, the coefficient
of determination cutoff value was chosen by fitting a Pareto distribution
to the distribution of coefficients of determination and setting the
cutoff to the 99th percentile (0.85).

For peaks with noisy or
tailing bottoms that do not fit Gaussian line shapes, points are removed
from the bottom until the optimization algorithm converges. This helps
remove low signal-to-noise peaks and peak tailing from the fit while
maintaining the peak centroid which is the most determinate factor
in the correlation value calculation and ultimately improving correlation
score robustness. Although other peak shapes have been used in the
past to model chromatographic peak shapes,22 defining the peak tops and apex is the most important parameter
for correlations and insource fragmentation. If chromatographic peak
tailing is present in the elution profiles, other functions could
be implemented such as expanded Gaussian models.23 For this study, each peak in the EIC is deconvoluted into
its constituents by Gaussian model fitting. A sample deconvolution
of the Man8 EIC from human blood serum is shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3 Deconvolution of Man8 EIC into Gaussian peak
shapes.
Summing the individual deconvoluted features provides the model dotted
line that is consistent with the smoothed EIC. Observing multiple
isobaric chromatographically separated compositions with different
elution times correspond to different chemical isomeric structures.

When a sufficient fit is achieved
for a single peak, the coefficients
for the corresponding Gaussian model are obtained and used for integrating
the area under the curve. The quantification area is calculated numerically
using the trapezoidal rule over 100 points. The fit coefficients are
also used for calculating a new interpolated peak shape model optimal
for peak interchromatogram correlations.

Chromatogram Correlations
Pierson
Product-Moment Correlation (R)
The robustness
of correlation analysis was increased by mapping correlation
values to the same scale so that a constant cutoff could be used regardless
of peak height, resolution, and offsets. Addressing for different
sampling point densities across the LC peaks was addressed by modeling
the peak shapes and interpolating a constant number of points. Additional
information is included in the Supplementary Text S3 and Supplementary
Figure 11 in the Supporting Information.

Insource Fragmentation Determination and Future Target Detection
Insource fragmentation occurs due to labile covalent glycosidic
bonds between monosaccharides that are broken during ion formation
or transport through the interface prior to the m/z analysis. Generally optimizing electrospray ionization
source conditions for decreased fragmentation is achieved by decreasing
the energy imparted to the ions during ionization and transport into
lower pressure regions of the instrument.24 However, decreasing the energy imparted to the ion–solvent
clusters decreases desolvation and results in lower signal intensity.
Although nonderivatized glycans are detected in the native form (with
the exclusions of the reducing-end modifications) they are generally
more susceptible to insource fragmentation than their derivatized
counterparts (e.g., permethylated).25

One type of insource fragments considered here consists of the loss
of one monosaccharide unit from the parent. The loss of a monosaccharide
indicates the peak target compound is a glycan. This is detectable
by correlating EICs for the parent and the fragment since both will
exhibit the same chromatographic elution profile. Comparisons are
made between the parent and fragment across all allowable detectable
charge states for all allowable monosaccharides. For example, this
allows for a 3+ charged parent to be correlated with a
2+ charged fragment. The correlation coefficients were
calculated for the human blood serum glycan targets (including isomers)
and their insource fragments (including larger compositions) and the
counts are presented as a histogram in Supplementary Figure 12 in
the Supporting Information. Correlation
coefficients with values greater than 0.95 are used to distinguish
insource fragmentation. The 0.95 cutoff was determined based on the
fitting a Pareto distribution to the correlation coefficient trace
in Supplementary Figure 12 in the Supporting Information and establishing the cutoff at the 99th percentile.

In addition
to the parent-fragment relationships, parent-to-larger-composition
relationships are also considered which indicate that the target compound
is a glycan fragment. In this case, glycans with an extra monosaccharide
beyond the target’s composition are searched for and correlated.
Correlating hits become future targets in subsequent analysis and
are added to the glycan library. Discrete glycan isomers are identified
in the case when no other larger compositions are detected.

When insource fragmentation is detected, it confirms that the compositional
assignment assigned by accurate mass is correct and the peak is glycan
related. All 86 glycans features detected with insource fragmentation
were consistent with its assigned monosaccharide composition. Insource
fragmentation detection helps confirm feature detection and largely
eliminates the need for manual inspection of the data. The quintavariate
glycans (insource fragmentation detection + the other 4 pieces of
information) provided a 100% acceptance rate for manual feature inspection.
In addition, the insource fragmentation removes the identified glycan
fragments from the accepted list thus decreasing the false positive
glycan hits reported.

Charge State Correlation
Chromatographic
centric algorithms
process EIC for each charge state separately and common chromatographic
peaks apexes can shift slightly. Modeled chromatographic peaks from
neighboring charge states are correlated to determine consistency.
A histogram of R correlation values from charge state
correlations (a monoisotopic mass at different charge states) is presented
in Supplementary Figure 13 in the Supporting Information. A cutoff value (R > 0.95) was determined based
on Pareto curve fitting and a 99th percentile cutoff. Once correlated,
coeluting charge states are combined by averaging the monoisotopic
masses detected and summing the abundances. Summing the abundance
values from each charge state provides an aggregative abundance value
for each glycan species.

Incorporating Glycan Characteristics
Glycan
Family Relationships
Glycans are created enzymatically
in the Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum by a complex process involving
the addition and subtraction of monosaccharides. Consequently glycans
are often detected in families that differ by one or more monosaccharides
and can serve as a glycan signature. Thus, we set a key requirement
that for all glycans reported, at least one other glycan was also
detected that differed by one monosaccharide and that used a single
linkage clustering algorithm to identify glycans families.

Tandem
Mass Spectrometry
Targeted high resolution tandem
mass spectrometry was performed to add an additional level of verification
beyond the GlyQ-IQ paradigm. GlyQ-IQ results from an initial precursor
MS only run were used to populate a targeted fragmentation list for
the Velos Pro Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The 60k resolution MS/MS
scans were used to provide accurate diagnostic masses (preferential
in HCD) and monosaccharide differences (preferential in CID). Ions
detected from the list were fragmented with CID and HCD and annotated
with glycan diagnostic ions and monosaccharide differences. The characteristic
diagnostic oxonium ions and monosaccharide differences used to confirm
glycan compositions are presented in Supplementary Table 1 in the Supporting Information.26 At least one diagnostic ion or monosaccharide mass difference is
required for acceptance at this additional validation level.

Data Visualization
GlyQ-IQ Viewer
The GlyQ-IQ feature
viewer is based
on the SIPPER viewer engine27 facilitates
the rapid visualization and review of LC–MS features. The GlyQ-IQ
viewer uses the IQ base results files and works well with GlyQ-IQ
output files. The GlyQ-IQ viewer was used to drill down into the raw
data and display a smoothed EIC and averaged mass spectrum corresponding
to the chromatographic peak and isotopic envelope of the result. Each
result was viewed in one screen and accepted or denied by a user before
being exported to from the final result list. Glycan family relationships
are calculated after false hits have been removed. A screen shot of
the GlyQ-IQ viewer is included in as Supplemental Figure 14 in the Supporting Information.

GlycoGrid 4D Visualization
A GlycoGrid is a fast and
efficient method for viewing and comparing N-glycan composition profiles
on a single plot.16 The GlycoGrid 4D visualization
software presented here plots the four compositions (hexose, HexNAc,
fucose, and sialic acid) in a four-dimensional grid and denotes detection
of a composition by coloring a grid square and populating the grid
square with a number denoting the quantity of isomers detected (font
too small to be displayed here). Distinct peaks in the EIC that are
not related to other compositions via insource fragmentation are considered
glycan isomers. Because of the increased size of the retrosynthetic
glycan library from our previous publications,4,16 the
GlycoGrid dimensions have increased in size, respectively. Zoom functionality
has been incorporated to focus on individual glycan compositions or
families and compare across multiple data sets. When zoomed in, the
number of isomers (chromatographic separated features) is displayed.
The software is a Windows Model View ViewModel application written
in C# and is available online at http://omics.pnl.gov/software along with a description of the features incorporated.

Results
and Discussion
Results
Human Serum High Mannose
Glycans
The high mannose glycans
in human serum provide a good case study because there are a relatively
fewer compositions relative to complex or hybrid glycans. In this
work, separable chromatographic peaks of isobaric masses consistent
with glycan compositions are considered isomers. Further structural
analysis of isomeric peaks is still required for detailed linkage
analysis. Chromatographic features were either annotated as glycan
isomers with all 5 GlyQ-IQ variables including supporting insource
fragmentation (5-Var), confirmed glycan fragments by insource fragmentation
(Fragment) or detected with the other 4 GlyQ-IQ variables (exact mass,
Isotope fit score, LC profile coefficient of determination, and glycan
family relationships). Glycans with discrete chromatographic peaks
without coeluting larger glycan masses are considered glycan isomers.
A table of the high mannose glycan isomers is presented in Supplementary
Table 3 in the Supporting Information.
An example of the insource fragmentation detection for convoluted
isomers of Man6 has been selected and presented in Supplementary
Figure 15 in the Supporting Information. EIC from Man5 and Man7 are depicted to show
inter EIC relationships of family glycans. Both 1+ and 2+ charge starts
are shown and the 2+ is inverted for clarity. Tie lines show how many
glycans have mapped elution peaks indicating insource fragmentation
and do not represent specific isomers present in the solution.

Human
Blood Serum N-Glycan Profile
A total of 156 N-glycan
compositions and 685 isomers were detected with the GlyQ-IQ software
within −0.6 ± 2 ppm mass error. In total, 46 of those
compositions had confirmation with insource fragmentation, and targeted
MS/MS confirmed an additional 60 (32 were confirmed with both). The
glycan profile results are presented in a GlycoGrid 4D image (Figure 4) and a detailed GlyQ-IQ output table (Supplementary
Table 4 in the Supporting Information).
The GlycoGrid clearly depicts which glycans were detected (green)
and which were confirmed with tandem MS/MS (yellow). Glycans detected
and identified as insource fragments are depicted in red. Although
the entire prospective ion list was used for targeted fragmentation,
96 compositions were not selected for fragmentation during the run
due to low abundance or limited instrument duty cycle.

Figure 4 GlycoGrid 4D of 156 human
blood serum glycan compositions annotated
with GlyQ-IQ (green) and confirmed with CID or HCD (yellow). Glycans
identified as insource fragments are depicted in red. The major Y axis corresponds to the number of hexose and the minor Y corresponds to the number of fucose. The major X corresponds to the number of N-acetylhexosamine
and the minor X corresponds to the number of sialic
acid.

Insufficient fragmentation information
derived from low abundance
glycans restricts the overall glycan profile achievable with MS/MS
confirmation and also highlights the added information obtained with
an MS-based approach. Of the 156 compositions, 29% were confirmed
at the 5-variate level via insource fragmentation and 38% with tandem
MS/MS.

For comparison, 96 glycan compositions were detected
in our previous
work from a different aliquot of the same human blood serum sample
and comparable sample processing and HPLC (45 cm vs the present 70
cm long).16 Note that different column
lengths will have a larger effect on the total number of discrete
isomers separated and detected but the compositions are roughly comparable
because we are not limited to only tandem mass spectrometry for annotations
and subsequently instrument duty cycle limited. Previously, the data
was acquired on an Agilent 6538 Q-TOF MS in contrast to the Velos
Pro Orbitrap MS used here.16 Although the
number of glycan compositions is consistent, GlyQ-IQ was able to confidently
determine how many isomer peaks are present for each composition and
remove false positives assignments caused by insource fragmentation.

Discussion
Targeted Approach
The Glycomic Quintavariate
Informed
Quantification (GlyQ-IQ) software has been developed to more effectively
reveal N-glycan compositions in high resolution LC–MS data
sets. Informed quantification (IQ) based algorithms are targeted chromatograph
centric algorithms and subscribe to the paradigm that compounds are
known or predicted before the analysis takes place; i.e., an array
of assumed possible target compounds inform the analysis. This helps
restrict the search space and improves success because the compound
can be accurately modeled a priori before searching
for its fingerprint in the data and quantifying its amount. GlyQ-IQ
is an extension of this design applied to N-glycan profiling.

Since glycan synthesis is not a template driven process (as compared
to peptides and proteins which can leverage the genome), target libraries
need to be experimentally determined or predicted in silico. The retrosynthetic glycan library approach28 has been expanded into an informed targeted approach where each
composition in the glycan libraries is considered a distinct target.
Briefly, the retrosynthetic glycan approach is to constrain the library
to the largest glycan structure from each glycan class postulated
by the glycosyltransferases present in the system (or experimentally
detected). Then it is assumed that if there is sufficient glycan machinery
to create the largest structure, any glycan containing fewer monosaccharides
may be present. This helps bound the size of the glycome and imparts
biological rules for glycan compositions.28 The glycan library approach allows for searching for adducted glycan
by incorporating adducts into the target list and researching the
data set. The high speed of the HPC deployment of GlyQ-IQ makes multiple
searches with large numbers of targets a pedestrian task. The library
implemented here is bounded by the glycan rules presented previously28 and modified to allow for increased sialylation.
The 2 195 target compositions searched are bounded in monosaccharide
count as follows (hexose 3–12, N-acetylhexosamine
2–8, fucose 0–7, Neu5Ac 0–9).

Knowing the
monoisotopic mass of the glycan and elemental composition
upfront, we are able to search the LC–MS data space for its
mass and exact isotopic envelope. Better isotopic envelope models
improve the fit scores, increasing discrimination between correct
and false fits. The targets are readily parallelized because each
target is processed atomically and does not rely on other targets
until the finalization step. The first step is to create a set of
charged targets that correspond to each charge state of interest (determined
from the data) and process them independently. The general flow of
a charged target is to discover associated candidate LC peaks in an
EIC (at that charge state) in the time domain and validate each LC
peak’s isotope profile in the mass domain to remove false hits
such as within-tolerance isobaric isotopes and noise peaks. For each
acceptable target LC peak, candidate insource fragments are searched
for and their EIC generated. The chromatographic peaks of the target
and the fragment are subsequently modeled and the modeled peaks are
robustly correlated. During the finalization steps, a triage of results
analyses is performed to differentiate which LC peaks are intact glycans
or glycan fragments.

Confidence via Quintavariate Metrics
Orthogonal pieces
of information can be orchestrated at the feature detection level
and glycan assignment level to annotate glycans with a confidence
greater than each level independently. The mass dimension is characterized
by modeling isotopic distributions, fitting it to the data, and scoring
how well the experimental data fits the model (Fit Score). Observed
isotope profiles that fit well provide the monoisotopic mass useful
for exact mass measurements and determining the mass measurement accuracy
(typically measured in parts-per-million, PPM). The LC dimension is
often divided up into EICs in which a single mass (±a few ppm
mass tolerance) is traced out over time. Elution profiles can be characterized
by smoothing the data to remove noise, fitting a model peak shape
and then scoring how well the model fits the data. Since many glycans
have sequential, positional, and linkage isomers (multiple structures
with the same mass and elemental composition), the EIC can have multiple
peaks, one corresponding to each glycan isomer structure. In the absence
of structural information, isobaric glycan features with multiple
LC elution peaks are considered glycan isomers.

Glycan discovery
is based on multivariate detection, and each additional orthogonal
variable improves confidence of assignment. Up to five orthogonal
measurements are implemented: mass measurement error, isotopic envelope
fit score, LC peak shape, monosaccharide family relationships, and
monosaccharide insource fragmentation. A table consisting of the different
confidence levels of annotation is included in Table 1. Acceptable metrics in all five measurements are required
for glycan compositional confirmation and the four variables (excluding
insource fragmentation) required for annotation (see the Methods section). Since most glycans did not have
detectable insource fragmentation, much of the annotation was determined
by the remaining four variables. In combination with glycan family
relationships, this indicates all annotated glycan reported have at
least 8 variables within tolerance supporting the assignment.

Table 1 Table of Different Degrees of Confidence
in Annotationsa
 	basic	relationship	insource fragmentation	fragmentation with relationship	
trivariate	quadravariate	quintavariate	
variate	category	3-Var	4-Var	5-Var	
1	mass accuracy (ppm)	7	7	7	7	
2	isotope fit score (0–1)	0.1	0.1	0.1	0.1	
3	EIC LC peak size (scans)	9	9	9	9	
3	LC Peak
model fit (0–1)	0.85	0.85	0.85	0.85	
4	monosaccharide relationships (yes,no)	 	yes	 	yes	
5	insource fragmentation correlation (0–1)	 	 	0.95	0.95	
a Variables 2 and 3 correspond
to the two-dimensional quality of the LC–MS feature detection,
and variables 1, 4, and 5 correspond to the glycan annotation of the
feature.

Conclusion
GlyQ-IQ is a software application for glycan MS based upon an algorithm
centric nontargeted analyses approach. Combining spectral averaging,
mass-independent fit score calculations, tight fit score tolerances,
and a 1 Da interfering peak deconvolution result in over 99% of all
glycans identified passed manual inspection and juxtaposition to high-resolution
mass spectra. In addition to high specificity LC–MS feature
detection, key integration of glycan relationships and insource fragmentation
detection further increased the annotation confidence and decreased
the false positive rate. Hig- performance computation allowed for
550-fold speed up which translates hours of runtime into a few minutes
for large glycome searches (2 156 candidate glycan targets).
A total of 156 N-glycan compositions were detected and with 640 intact
glycan isomer peaks provide an improved perspective on the glycans
present on human blood serum glycoproteins.

Supporting Information Available
Additional information
as noted
in text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac501492f_si_001.pdf

 ac501492f_si_002.xlsx

 ac501492f_si_003.xlsx

 ac501492f_si_004.xlsx

 ac501492f_si_005.xlsx

 The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Portions of this work were supported by the U.S. DOE office
of Biological and Environmental Research Pan-omics project of the
Genome Sciences Program, as well as by the NIH GMS Grant P41 GM103493-11.
Work was performed in the EMSL, a DOE-BER national scientific user
facility PNNL. High-performance computing research was performed using
PNNL Institutional Computing at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory.
The Microsoft Azure Research was made possible by a Windows Azure
Research Pass Grant. We also acknowledge Daniel Fay and Wen-ming Ye
from Microsoft Research (http://azure4research.com, Redmond,
WA), Magnus Mårtensson from Mårtensson Consulting (Malmö,
Sweden), and Alan Smith from Active Solutions (Stockholm, Sweden)
for their expertise and support with the Microsoft Windows Azure Cloud
Deployment. PNNL is a multiprogram national laboratory operated by
Battelle Memorial Institute for the DOE under Contract DE-AC05-76RLO
1830.
==== Refs
References
An H. J. ; Froehlich J. W. ; Lebrilla C. B. 
Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 
2009 , 13 , 421 –426 .19700364 
Strum J. S. ; Nwosu C. C. ; Hua S. ; Kronewitter S. R. ; Seipert R. R. ; Bachelor R. J. ; An H. J. ; Lebrilla C. B. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 5666 –5675 .23662732 
Goldberg D. ; Bern M. ; North S. J. ; Haslam S. M. ; Dell A. 
Bioinformatics 
2009 , 25 , 365 –371 .19073587 
Kronewitter S. R. ; An H. J. ; de Leoz M. L. ; Lebrilla C. B. ; Miyamoto S. ; Leiserowitz G. S. 
Proteomics 
2009 , 9 , 2986 –2994 .19452454 
Goldberg D. ; Sutton-Smith M. ; Paulson J. ; Dell A. 
Proteomics 
2005 , 5 , 865 –875 .15693066 
Kronewitter S. R. ; De Leoz M. L. ; Strum J. S. ; An H. J. ; Dimapasoc L. M. ; Guerrero A. ; Miyamoto S. ; Lebrilla C. B. ; Leiserowitz G. S. 
Proteomics 
2012 , 12 , 2523 –2538 .22903841 
Ceroni A. ; Maass K. ; Geyer H. ; Geyer R. ; Dell A. ; Haslam S. M. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2008 , 7 , 1650 –1659 .18311910 
Maass K. ; Ranzinger R. ; Geyer H. ; von der Lieth C. W. ; Geyer R. 
Proteomics 
2007 , 7 , 4435 –4444 .18072204 
Yu C. Y. ; Mayampurath A. ; Hu Y. ; Zhou S. ; Mechref Y. ; Tang H. 
Bioinformatics 
2013 , 29 , 1706 –1707 .23610369 
Vakhrushev S. Y. ; Dadimov D. ; Peter-Katalinic J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 3252 –3260 .19341273 
Maxwell E. ; Tan Y. ; Tan Y. ; Hu H. ; Benson G. ; Aizikov K. ; Conley S. ; Staples G. O. ; Slysz G. W. ; Smith R. D. ; Zaia J. 
PLoS
One 
2012 , 7 , e45474 .23049804 
Renard B. Y. ; Kirchner M. ; Steen H. ; Steen J. A. J. ; Hamprecht F. A. 
BMC Bioinf. 
2008 , 9 , 355 .
Senko M. W. ; Beu S. C. ; McLaffertycor F. W. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
1995 , 6 , 229 –233 .24214167 
An H. J. ; Tillinghast J. S. ; Woodruff D. L. ; Rocke D. M. ; Lebrilla C. B. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2006 , 5 , 2800 –2808 .17022651 
Rost H. L. ; Rosenberger G. ; Navarro P. ; Gillet L. ; Miladinovic S. M. ; Schubert O. T. ; Wolski W. ; Collins B. C. ; Malmstrom J. ; Malmstrom L. ; Aebersold R. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2014 , 32 , 219 –223 .24727770 
Marginean I. ; Kronewitter S. R. ; Moore R. J. ; Slysz G. W. ; Monroe M. E. ; Anderson G. ; Tang K. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 9208 –9213 .23025344 
Maiolica A. ; Borsotti D. ; Rappsilber J. 
Proteomics 
2005 , 5 , 3847 –3850 .16130174 
Jaitly N. ; Mayampurath A. ; Littlefield K. ; Adkins J. N. ; Anderson G. A. ; Smith R. D. 
BMC Bioinf. 
2009 , 10 , 87 .
Horn D. M. ; Zubarev R. A. ; McLafferty F. W. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2000 , 11 , 320 –332 .10757168 
Barkauskas D. A. ; An H. J. ; Kronewitter S. R. ; de Leoz M. L. ; Chew H. K. ; de Vere White R. W. ; Leiserowitz G. S. ; Miyamoto S. ; Lebrilla C. B. ; Rocke D. M. 
Bioinformatics 
2009 , 25 , 251 –257 .19073586 
Bochkanov S. ; Bystritsky V.  ALGLIB ; 2013  (www.alglib.net).
Goodman K. J. ; Brenna J. T. 
Anal. Chem. 
1994 , 66 , 1294 –1301 .8210045 
Schulz-Trieglaff O. ; Pfeifer N. ; Gropl C. ; Kohlbacher O. ; Reinert K. 
BMC Bioinf. 
2008 , 9 , 423 .
Gabelica V. ; De Pauw E. 
Mass Spectrom. Rev. 
2005 , 24 , 566 –587 .15317019 
Zaia J. 
OMICS: J. Integr.
Biol. 
2010 , 14 , 401 –418 .
Huddleston M. J. ; Bean M. F. ; Carr S. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
1993 , 65 , 877 –884 .8470819 
Slysz G. W. ; Steinke L. ; Ward D. M. ; Klatt C. G. ; Clauss T. R. W. ; Purvine S. O. ; Payne S. H. ; Anderson G. A. ; Smith R. D. ; Lipton M. S. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2014 , 13 , 1200 –1210 .24467184 
Kronewitter S. R. ; An H. J. ; de Leoz M. L. ; Lebrilla C. B. ; Miyamoto S. ; Leiserowitz G. S. 
Proteomics 
2009 , 9 , 2986 –2994 .19452454
