
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac503823pLetterCollection of Analytes from Microneedle Patches Romanyuk Andrey
V. †Zvezdin Vasiliy N. ‡Samant Pradnya †Grenader Mark I. †Zemlyanova Marina §Prausnitz Mark R. *†† School
of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 311 Ferst Drive, Atlanta, Georgia 30332 United
States‡ Biochemistry
and Cytogenetics Department, Federal Scientific
Center for Medical and Preventive Health Risk Management Technologies, 82 Ordgonikidze Street, Perm 614045 Russia§ Perm
State University, 15
Bukireva Street, Perm 614990 Russia* E-mail: prausnitz@gatech.edu.17 10 2015 17 10 2014 04 11 2014 86 21 10520 10523 12 10 2014 13 10 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Clinical medicine and public health
would benefit from simplified
acquisition of biological samples from patients that can be easily
obtained at point of care, in the field, and by patients themselves.
Microneedle patches are designed to serve this need by collecting
dermal interstitial fluid containing biomarkers without the dangers,
pain, or expertise needed to collect blood. This study presents novel
methods to collect biomarker analytes from microneedle patches for
analysis by integration into conventional analytical laboratory microtubes
and microplates. Microneedle patches were made out of cross-linked
hydrogel composed of poly(methyl vinyl ether-alt-maleic
acid) and poly(ethylene glycol) prepared by micromolding. Microneedle
patches were shown to swell with water up to 50-fold in volume, depending
on degree of polymer cross-linking, and to collect interstitial fluid
from the skin of rats. To collect analytes from microneedle patches,
the patches were mounted within the cap of microcentrifuge tubes or
formed the top of V-bottom multiwell microplates, and fluid was collected
in the bottom of the tubes under gentle centrifugation. In another
method, microneedle patches were attached to form the bottom of multiwell
microplates, thereby enabling in situ analysis. The simplicity of
biological sample acquisition using microneedle patches coupled with
the simplicity of analyte collection from microneedles patches integrated
into conventional analytical equipment could broaden the reach of
future screening, diagnosis, and monitoring of biomarkers in healthcare
and environmental/workplace settings.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac503823pdocument-id-new-14ac-2014-03823pccc-price
==== Body
Developing methods to collect
biological samples that are minimally invasive and, in some cases,
self-administered by patients is highly desirable for screening, diagnosis,
and monitoring in healthcare and environmental/workplace settings.1 Current methods of blood collection by venipuncture
and lancets are painful, generate biohazardous sharps waste, and in
some cases, require expert administration by a healthcare professional.

An alternative approach has recently been developed to collect
interstitial fluid (ISF) from the skin using needles of micrometer
dimensions. ISF has been shown to contain many biomarkers of interest
for systemic and dermatological analysis.2,3 Microneedles
developed initially for delivery of drugs and vaccines to the skin,
have been adapted for collection of dermal ISF by crossing the skin’s
outer stratum corneum barrier and accessing the fluid found in viable
epidermis and dermis below.4,5 Microneedles have been
shown to be painless, simple to administer, and safe.6 Collection of ISF biomarkers has been studied using hollow
microneedles to withdraw fluid under suction7 or collect biomarkers by passive diffusion through the microneedle
bores,8,9 solid microneedles with sensors designed
to measure ISF biomarkers in situ in the skin,10,11 solid microneedles to puncture the skin and withdraw fluid through
the resulting holes,12 solid microneedles
coated with capture antibody to collect specific antigens,13 and hydrogel microneedle patches that swell
and thereby collect ISF over time.14,15

While
microneedle technology to collect ISF from the skin has advanced
considerably, there has been little attention paid to collection of
analytes from microneedle patches for analysis using conventional
biodiagnostic protocols and equipment. Therefore, the goal of this
study was to develop methods to collect analytes from microneedle
patches that interface with microtube and microplate devices used
in the conventional analytical laboratory.

We first fabricated
hydrogel microneedle patches based on micromolding
methods described previously.16 Briefly,
a blend of 15% poly(methyl vinyl ether-alt-maleic
acid) (PMVE/MA) and 7.5% poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) was cast onto
a poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) microneedle mold and filled into the
mold cavities under vacuum (see the Supporting
Information). After drying, the patches were cured at 80 °C
to cross-link the polymers. Cross-linking for 72 h produced patches
that swelled approximately 3-fold with low variability after incubation
in water for 24 h, whereas less-extensive cross-linking for 24 h produced
less-desirable patches that swelled more than 50-fold with high variability
(Figure 1 and Figure S1 in the Supporting Information).

Figure 1 Swelling of microneedle
patches made of cross-linked hydrogel.
Microneedle patches were prepared by casting and drying an aqueous
solution of poly(methyl vinyl-alt-maleic acid) and
poly(ethylene glycol) into a micromold, after which the polymers were
cross-linked by incubation at 80 °C (a). In the dry state, each
microneedle measured 600 μm in height and 300 μm in width
at the base (b1, c1). Upon incubation in water for 24 h, microneedles
swelled to different sizes depending on the degree of hydrogel cross-linking
during molding: cross-linking for 72 h (b2, c2) and 24 h (b3, c3).

To quantify the collection of
a model analyte from microneedle
patches, we used a double casting method to make the patches. We first
cast a hydrogel solution containing the dye sulforhodamine B exclusively
into the microneedle mold cavities and then cast the same hydrogel
solution, but without the dye, onto the mold to form the patch base.
To enable this process, we develop a new casting method involving
a hydrophobic Teflon filter that facilitated selectively loading of
the mold cavities (see the Supporting Information). This method produced patches with a controlled amount of dye (i.e.,
the model analyte) in the microneedles to simulate patches loaded
with an analyte (Figure S2 in the Supporting Information).

A rigid backing was affixed to the microneedle patches to
facilitate
interfacing of the patches with analytical laboratory equipment. One
method involved attaching a polystyrene disk to the microneedle patch
using a double-sided adhesive disk. An alternative method, which avoids
the need for an adhesive layer that can be a problematic source of
moisture after drying, employed a polystyrene disk treated with plasma
that was attached to the microneedle patch during molding while it
was still wet (see the Supporting Information). After drying for 24 h at 80 °C, the patch and polystyrene
backing were firmly attached without the need for adhesive (Figure
S3 in the Supporting Information).

To demonstrate ISF extraction, microneedle patches were applied
to the skin of rats in vivo and then removed after 1 h. As a negative
control, microneedle patches were prepared with blunt-tipped microneedles
that should not penetrate skin and were similarly applied to the skin.
Application of a dye that stained sites of skin puncture after patch
removal confirmed that the sharp-tipped microneedles penetrated the
skin, whereas the blunt-tipped control patches did not (Figure S4
in the Supporting Information). All patches
were weighed before and after application to the skin, which indicated
that the microneedle patches extracted 0.84 ± 0.24 mg of ISF
(average ± standard deviation, n = 7 replicates,
see methods in the Supporting Information).

We next developed methods to collect analytes from microneedle
patches by integrating them into conventional microtubes and microplates
used in the analytical laboratory. The first method employed microneedle
patches affixed within the cap of microcentrifuge tubes (Figure 2). The protocol involved dispensing 100 μL
of water (or another buffer/solvent) onto the patch, incubating for
up to 10 min to extract the model analyte (sulforhodamine), closing
the cap and centrifuging for 20 s at 300g to collect
the extracted analyte solution. In some cases this cycle was repeated
once or twice. To assess the efficiency of this method, we varied
the length of incubation time and the number of process cycles. Efficiency
increased with both length of incubation time and number of cycles
(Figure 2d, two-way ANOVA), where only 53%
recovery of the model analyte was achieved after a single cycle with
a 1 min incubation, but 100% recovery was achieved after three cycles
independent of incubation time. Further optimization of the method
is needed and will depend on the analyte being collected, especially
if there is binding of the analyte to the microneedle matrix material.

Figure 2 Collection
of analytes from the microneedle patch by centrifugation:
(a) A microneedle patch containing analytes of interest is adhered
to the inner surface of a microcentrifuge tube cap (1). A drop of
water is dispensed to the microneedles (2), allowed to extract/dissolve
analytes from the microneedles (3), and the cap is closed (4). The
analytes are then centrifuged to draw the analyte solution from the
cap to the base of the microcentrifuge tube (5), which can then be
removed from the bottom of the tube for subsequent analysis (6). This
method is illustrated by showing a microneedle patch containing pink
dye (sulforhodamine), which serves as a model analyte, before (b)
and after (c) application of water and centrifugation. The results
are quantified in part d, which shows the percentage of analyte collected
from the microneedles into the elution fluid after application of
100 μL of water for 1, 5, or 10 min, and centrifugation at 300g, which was carried out one (1×), two (2×), or
three (3×) times (n = 5 replicates ± standard
deviation error bars).

For high-throughput analysis, we adapted the technique by
using
the microneedle patch with rigid backing to form a cap with a water-tight
seal on top of the wells in a V-bottom multiwell microplate (Figure
S5 in the Supporting Information). In this
protocol, water was dispensed into each well of the plate, a microneedle
patch was affixed to the top of each well using adhesive, the microplate
was turned over and incubated for a period of time to extract the
model analyte from the microneedles, the microplate was turned over
again and briefly centrifuged to collect the extracted analyte, and
finally the microneedle patches were removed so that the solution
could be analyzed in situ in the microplate or removed for additional
manipulation (e.g., further purification or concentration) and analysis.

We next developed methods for sample preparation in multiwell microplates
without the need for centrifugation to separate extracted analytes
from the microneedle patches. The simplest approach involved affixing
microneedle patches to the bottom of each well in flat-bottom multiwell
microplates using double-sided adhesive tape (Figure S6 in the Supporting Information). Water was dispensed
into each well to extract the model analyte from the microneedles.
Further sample preparation could be performed within the wells for
subsequent analysis using a microplate reader or samples could be
removed for analysis elsewhere. While this approach is simple, it
has the drawback that an adhesive tape must be used, which could affect
sample preparation and analysis.

To address this limitation,
we prepared bottomless multiwell microplates
with double-sided adhesive film patterned to cover the surface of
the microplate. While these devices were hand assembled, we expect
that they could be mass produced at low cost by a commercial manufacturer.
Microneedle patches with a rigid backing were then affixed on one
side of the microplates, thereby creating a bottom to the microwells,
to which water could be added to extract analytes from the microneedles
(Figure 3). An alternate approach affixed microneedle
patches to the open side of conventional flat-bottom multiwell microplates,
thereby sealing the wells on all sides. In this case, water and/or
any other reagents needed for analysis was added to the wells before
affixing the microneedle patches.

Figure 3 Collection of analytes by integration
of microneedle patch into
the multiwell microplate. (a) Microneedle patches with a hard backing
are affixed to form the bottom of the wells of a bottomless multiwell
microplate (1). A drop of water is dispensed to the microneedles (2,
3) to extract/dissolve analytes from the microneedles (4) to enable
subsequent in situ analysis. (b) Microneedle patches adhered to the
wells of a 96-well microplate. (c) View of dye solution (sulforhodamine)
added to two wells and water added to neighboring wells, all sealed
on the bottom with microneedle patches, demonstrating lack of material
transfer between the wells after incubation for 12 h.

To demonstrate that these microwells were tightly
sealed to avoid
cross-contamination between wells, we filled alternating microwells
sealed with microneedle patches with concentrated solutions of sulforhodamine
and the other microwells with water. After incubation for 12 h, fluorescence
in the microwells containing sulforhodamine solution was 2.3 ×
106 ± 0.2 × 106, whereas fluorescence
in the adjacent microwells containing water was at background levels
of 13 ± 5 (expressed in arbitrary units, as measured by spectrofluorimetry)
(Figure 3d), indicating no cross contamination
between wells.

Altogether, these methods to collect analytes
from microneedle
patches can be a useful component to bring microneedle patch technology
into use for screening, diagnosis, and monitoring in healthcare and
environmental/workplace settings when used in combination with previous
reports showing collection of analytes from the skin using microneedles.4−15 However, previous research has not addressed how analysis of microneedle
patches could be integrated into the conventional analytical laboratory.
The methods described here show that suitably designed microneedle
patches can be incorporated into microtubes and microplates to collect
analytes for subsequent analysis, thereby facilitating future automated
and high-throughput assays.

After extraction of analytes from
microneedles, we expect that
further sample preparation and assays can be performed in situ within
the microwells containing the microneedles. Alternatively, analyte
solution can be removed from the microtubes or microwells for analysis
using other instrumentation.

One of the motivations for developing
microneedle patches to collect
biomarkers from the skin is that its simplicity may allow use by minimally
trained personnel in large screening campaigns or in developing countries
where healthcare workers are in short supply.4−6 Microneedle
patches might also be used directly by patients for monitoring of
clinical biomarkers or workplace environmental exposures. By simplifying
not only the biological sample acquisition through the use of microneedle
patches, as demonstrated by others before,4−15 but also simplifying the analytical processing of the sample using
methods shown here, microneedle patches may, with further development,
increase the reach of screening, diagnosis, and monitoring of biomarkers
to settings currently not well served.

Supporting Information Available
This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac503823p_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): Mark Prausnitz is an inventor
of patents that have been licensed to companies developing microneedle-based
products, is a paid advisor to companies developing microneedle-based
products, and is a founder/shareholder of companies developing microneedle-based
products. The resulting potential conflict of interest has been disclosed
and is managed by Georgia Tech and Emory University.

Acknowledgments
This
work was support in part by funding from the Ministry
of Education of Perm Krai (Russia), Perm State University (Russia),
and the National Institutes of Health (U.S.). We thank Donna Bondy
for administrative support.
==== Refs
References
Vaught J. B. ; Henderson M. K. 
IARC Sci. Publ. 
2011 , 163 , 23 –42 .22997855 
Paliwal S. ; Hwang B. H. ; Tsai K. Y. ; Mitragotri S. 
Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 
2013 , 50 , 546 –556 .23159445 
Wang C.Y. ; Maibach H. I. 
Cutaneous Ocul. Toxicol. 
2011 , 30 , 1 –6 .
Kim Y. C. ; Park J. H. ; Prausnitz M. R. 
Adv. Drug Delivery
Rev. 
2012 , 64 , 1547 –1568 .
El-Laboudi A. ; Oliver N. S. ; Cass A. ; Johnston D. 
Diabetes Technol. Ther. 
2013 , 15 , 101 –115 .23234256 
Norman J. J. ; Arya J. M. ; McClain M. A. ; Frew P. M. ; Meltzer M. I. ; Prausnitz M. R. 
Vaccine 
2014 , 32 , 1856 –1862 .24530146 
Li C. G. ; Lee C. Y. ; Lee K. ; Jung H. 
Biomed. Microdevices 
2013 , 15 , 17 –25 .22833155 
Miller P. R. ; Xiao X. ; Brener I. ; Burckel D. B. ; Narayan R. ; Polsky R. 
Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2014 , 3 , 876 –881 .
Jina A. ; Tierney M. J. ; Tamada J. A. ; McGill S. ; Desai S. ; Chua B. ; Chang A. ; Christiansen M. 
J. Diabetes Sci.
Technol. 
2014 , 8 , 483 –487 .24876610 
Windmiller J. R. ; Zhou N. ; Chuang M. C. ; Valdés-Ramírez G. ; Santhosh P. ; Miller P. R. ; Narayan R. ; Wang J. 
Analyst 
2011 , 136 , 1846 –1851 .21412519 
Invernale M. A. ; Tang B. C. ; York R. L. ; Le L. ; Hou D. Y. ; Anderson D. G. 
Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2014 , 3 , 338 –342 .
Wang P. M. ; Cornwell M. ; Prausnitz M. R. 
Diabetes Technol.
Ther. 
2005 , 7 , 131 –141 .15738711 
Muller D.
A. ; Corrie S. R. ; Coffey J. ; Young P. R. ; Kendall M. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 3262 –3268 .22424552 
Donnelly R. F. ; Mooney K. ; Caffarel-Salvador E. ; Torrisi B. M. ; Eltayib E. ; McElnay J. C. 
Ther. Drug Monit. 
2014 , 36 , 10 –17 .24365984 
Sakaguchi K. ; Hirota Y. ; Hashimoto N. ; Ogawa W. ; Sato T. ; Okada S. ; Hagino K. ; Asakura Y. ; Kikkawa Y. ; Kojima J. ; Maekawa Y. ; Nakajima H. 
Diabetes Technol. Ther. 
2012 , 14 , 485 –491 .22537393 
Lee J. W. ; Park J. H. ; Prausnitz M. R. 
Biomaterials 
2008 , 29 , 2113 –2124 .18261792
