
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac5036082ArticleHybridizing Ultraviolet Photodissociation with Electron
Transfer Dissociation for Intact Protein Characterization Cannon Joe R. †Holden Dustin
D. †Brodbelt Jennifer S. *Department of Chemistry, University
of Texas at Austin, 1
University Station A5300, Austin, Texas 78712, United
States* J. S. Brodbelt. Phone: (512)
471-0028. E-mail: jbrodbelt@cm.utexas.edu.01 10 2015 01 10 2014 04 11 2014 86 21 10970 10977 25 09 2014 30 09 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We report a hybrid fragmentation
method involving electron transfer
dissociation (ETD) combined with ultraviolet photodissociation (UVPD)
at 193 nm for analysis of intact proteins in an Orbitrap mass spectrometer.
Integrating the two fragmentation methods resulted in an increase
in the number of identified c- and z-type ions observed when compared to UVPD or ETD alone, as well as
generating a more balanced distribution of a/x, b/y, and c/z ion types. Additionally, the method was shown
to decrease spectral congestion via fragmentation of multiple (charge-reduced)
precursors. This hybrid activation method was facilitated by performing
both ETD and UVPD within the higher energy collisional dissociation
(HCD) cell of the Orbitrap mass spectrometer, which afforded an increase
in the total number of fragment ions in comparison to the analogous
MS3 format in which ETD and UVPD were undertaken in separate
segments of the mass spectrometer. The feasibility of the hybrid method
for characterization of proteins on a liquid chromatography timescale
characterization was demonstrated for intact ribosomal proteins.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac5036082document-id-new-14ac-2014-036082ccc-price
==== Body
Electron
capture dissociation
and electron transfer dissociation (ECD and ETD, respectively)1,2 have become landmark ion activation/dissociation methods in the
field of proteomics due to their ability to maintain labile post-translational
modifications (PTMs) while indiscriminately fragmenting the polypeptide
backbone. Both ECD and ETD promote similar mechanisms of ion activation
and fragmentation and have been used extensively for localization
of PTMs in bottom-up peptide-based analysis and in top down mass spectrometry
for characterization of intact proteins.3 A compelling feature of electron-based activation methods is the
ability to generate charge-reduced ions, including ample abundances
of odd electron (radical) precursors that may be isolated and further
energized. In this way, the fragmentation of odd electron (radical)
versus even electron (closed shell) peptides and proteins may be conveniently
compared, not only shedding light on the fundamental impact of radical-mediated
processes but also allowing access to a different, often complementary,
type of fragmentation behavior with analytical merits (sequencing,
localization of modifications, etc.). The intriguing opportunities
afforded by production and analysis of radical-type ions have motivated
several groups to explore hybrid methods that combine ETD with a second
activation method. For example, Heck and co-workers have recently
devised new approaches based on hybrid combinations of fragmentation
methods for more complete peptide fragmentation.4 In one case, electron transfer dissociation followed by
transmission of all resulting ions into a multipole for higher energy
collision induced dissociation (so-called EThcD), was shown to provide
an informative array of predominantly b-, c-, y-, and z-type ions.4 Although the greater number of fragmentation
channels increased both the complexity of the product ion spectrum
and the fragment ion search space for all candidate peptides that
fell within the precursor mass tolerance, the net increase in information
more than compensated for the decrease in confidence from a typical
database search.4 Moreover, the hybrid
EThcD method improved the localization scores obtained for identification
of phosphorylation sites of peptides.5 We
have evaluated the use of hybrid methods combining electron transfer
reactions to generate radical cations, followed by collision-induced
dissociation (CID), infrared multiphoton dissociation (IRMPD), or
ultraviolet photodissociation (UVPD) for characterization of the sites
of modification of nucleic acids.6 The
most diverse array of fragment ions was obtained from the ETUVPD hybrid
method, an outcome that proved particularly beneficial for specific
localization of modifications for which fragmentation was suppressed
for other activation methods.6 We have
also explored the use of UVPD to characterize radical peptide cations
produced by electron transfer reactions, finding that the location
of very basic sites (like Arg) at the C- versus N-terminus influenced
the resulting fragmentation behavior and the preference for radical-directed
versus photoactivated cleavages.7

Now that available bioinformatic platforms can accommodate high
throughput top down MS/MS analyses that result in a multitude of ion
types, such as the diverse array of fragments that arise from UVPD,8 the potential for hybrid fragmentation of intact
proteins is feasible even for complex mixtures. Recently, we have
demonstrated the utility of 193 nm UVPD for intact protein characterization
in both single protein infusion and high throughput type liquid chromatography
mass spectrometry (LC-MS) experiments.8−10 Typically, product ion
spectra following UV photoactivation are characterized by a large
proportion of the total ion current residing in the surviving precursor
ion and a complex distribution of fragment ions (a, b, c, x, y, z) in an array of charge states. For
those proteins in higher charge states, the crowded spectra confound
deconvolution algorithms and are artifactually enriched in fragment
ions of low mass and lower (and more easily deconvoluted) charge.9 This spectral complexity is the result not only
of closely spaced isotopic peaks due to high charge states but also
from the multitude of ion types generated by UVPD. In general, previous
studies of 193 nm UVPD for top down proteomics have reported product
ion spectra that have large contributions from a-
and a+1-type ions representing the N terminus (with
much lower proportions of b- and c-type ions), and a mixture of x-, y-, y–1-, and z-type ions
arising from the C terminus.8,10 Despite the increase
in search space associated with accommodating all of these ion types
in an unweighted search algorithm, the sheer number of identified
fragment ions has been shown to allow nearly complete protein characterization
(via backbone cleavages present at nearly every inter-residue position).8,10 Although the number of fragment ions is very high, the method could
benefit from an increase in the number and abundances of complementary
C-terminally derived ions, such as the radical containing z-type ions that result from ETD, as well as a decrease
in ions that are duplicative for the same inter-residue position (a and a+1, for example). The recent strategy
from the Heck group for performing ETD in a DC gradient-only multipole11 affords an opportunity to implement ETD and
UVPD together in a high performance Orbitrap mass spectrometer,8,12 as described herein. Although ETUVPD can be readily implemented
in an MS3 format (in which the ETD step
in the LIT precedes UVPD in the HCD cell), the ability to perform
ETD in the HCD cell, per the Heck concept,11 provides more flexibility. For example, ETD can precede or follow
UVPD in the HCD cell or both activation processes can be undertaken
simultaneously. Ultraviolet irradiation electron transfer dissociation
(UVIETD), has the potential to alleviate one of the main drawbacks
of UVPD when performed by itself. A high proportion of the total ion
current in the product ion spectrum resides in and/or falls very close
to the m/z of the unfragmented precursor.
This high peak density results in crowded spectra that are difficult
to deconvolute due to their high charge states and close proximity
to one another. Because ET kinetics have strong charge state dependence,13 initiating the ETD reaction following UVPD favors
the likelihood of preferential dissociation of the (more highly charged)
unreacted precursor above the fragment ions also present in the cell.
Here we report the analytical merits of hybridizing ETD and UVPD for
top down proteomics, with emphasis on the ability to achieve a more
balanced array of product ions as well as a more uniform distribution
of the ion current across the available m/z landscape.

Materials and Methods
Model Protein Studies
Bovine ubiquitin, horse myoglobin,
and bovine carbonic anhydrase were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St.
Louis, MO) and intact ribosomes were purchased from New England Biolabs
(Ipswich, MA). All other solvents and chemicals were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich. Proteins were suspended in 50/49/1 methanol/water/formic
acid (v/v/v) at a final concentration of 10 μM. They were infused
directly into an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Bremen, Germany) customized for implementation of UVPD.12 Ultraviolet irradiation was achieved via a single
(unless otherwise noted) 5 ns laser pulse from a Coherent ExciStar
(Santa Clara, CA) 193 nm excimer laser. Feasibility studies utilizing
an MS3 mode were performed via electron
transfer dissociation in either the linear ion trap (LIT) or the higher
energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell, followed by UVPD of the
resulting ETD product ions in the HCD cell. The m/z range of the ion isolation window was varied
to accommodate solely the singly charge reduced radical precursor
or to encompass as many of the product ions and charge-reduced precursors
as possible (±300 m/z around
the initial multiprotonated precursor). For intact protein studies,
ubiquitin, myoglobin, and carbonic anhydrase were reconstituted at
10 μM in 50/49/1 acetonitrile/water/formic acid (v/v/v). Spectra
were acquired using 75, 200, and 500 averaged scans, respectively.
Both MS1 and product ion spectra were acquired at 240k resolving power
(at m/z 400). For all analyses,
the HCD cell pressure was reduced to ∼2 mTorr relative to the
standard HCD cell operating pressure of 10 mTorr (a pressure difference
of 0.04 × 10–10 Torr measured in the Orbitrap
chamber) which enhanced the detection of low abundance and larger
fragment ions in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

ETUVPD
Custom
changes to the ion trap control language
(ITCL) were made to allow the ETD reaction to occur within the HCD
cell and to accommodate laser triggering for ion irradiation in the
HCD cell of the Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

Ribosomal LC-UVPD-MS/MS
Ribosomes were prepared as
described elsewhere.10,14,15 Briefly, intact ribosomal protein was isolated via acid precipitation
of rRNA. Ribosomes were mixed with acetic acid (1 M) to a final concentration
of 60% (v/v). The nucleic acids were allowed to precipitate, and the
samples were centrifuged. The protein containing supernatant was reduced
and alkylated. Ribosomes were analyzed using an Eksigent nanoLC Ultra
system coupled to the Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. MS1 and tandem
mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra were acquired using 1 or 3 averaged
scans, respectively.

Bioinformatics
Fragment ion matching
for intact proteins
was performed using a version of ProSightPC 3.0 (Thermo Fisher) that
was customized to accommodate the fragment ion types encountered with
193 nm UVPD.8 All product ions were matched
within 10 ppm of their theoretical masses.

Results and Discussion
To date, UVPD has yielded extremely rich fragmentation patterns
of intact proteins, yielding high sequence coverages and exceptional
capabilities for pinpointing modifications albeit at the expense of
sensitivity due to the greater division of ion signal into many fragment
ion channels.8−10 Optimizing the utility of the diverse fragmentation
pathways for protein identification and characterization has required
search algorithms to accommodate an array of fragment ion types (a, a+1, b, c, x, x+1, y, y–1,
and z),8 and with this
multiplicity comes a penalty due to the concomitant increase in fragment
ion search space.10 Despite this trade-off,
the amount of information obtained using UVPD outweighs the reduction
in sensitivity and expanded search space.10 We have shown previously that the successful characterization of
intact proteins such as ubiquitin, myoglobin, and carbonic anhydrase
by UVPD arises in large part from the significant number of mostly a-type ions that span a high proportion of the protein backbone.8 By combining both ETD (which results in predominantly c- and z-type ions) and UVPD, we anticipated
that the ion current might be more evenly distributed, especially
balancing C-terminal fragment ions with N-terminal ions. This hypothesis
holds true for some proteins (e.g., myoglobin, 22+; carbonic anhydrase,
34+) but is less notable for others (ubiquitin, 13+) by ETD, UVPD,
and ETUVPD, as shown in Figure 1 for ubiquitin
and in Figure S1 (Supporting Information) for myoglobin. As expected, c/z ions are more dominant in the ETD spectra, and the UVPD spectra
display primarily a ions along with contributions
from b, c, z, y, and z ions. The ETUVPD spectra show
distributions that are intermediate between the ones observed for
ETD and UVPD.

Figure 1 MS/MS spectra of ubiquitin (13+). (A) ETD (15 ms in HCD
cell),
(B) UVPD (one pulse, 2.5 mJ in HCD cell), (C) ETUVPD (15 ms ETD in
HCD cell followed by UVPD using one pulse 2.5 mJ in HCD cell), and
corresponding distribution of ion types in panels D, E, and F. All
spectra are shown on the same scale.

An additional consequence of uniting ETD and UVPD is the
ability
to enhance the analysis of odd electron ions (such as charge-reduced
precursors formed upon ETnoD and radical fragment ions initially formed
upon ETD), ones that may dissociate by different, highly informative
pathways and further enrich the resulting MS/MS spectra. Improved
results have been reported for CID after electron transfer reactions
by capitalizing on the instability of electron adducted precursors
for peptide level proteomics in so-called “charge-reduced CID”
(CRCID).16 The general idea of enhancing
ETD fragmentation by supplemental activation has been termed “activated-ion
ETD”,17−20 but as of yet, there have been no studies integrating ETD and UVPD
at the protein level.

Additional feasibility experiments were
conducted by comparing
ETD in the linear ion trap (LIT) versus in the HCD cell prior to ultraviolet
irradiation. The apparent decrease in efficiency of electron transfer
from the reagent ion to the protein polycation was observed as expected11 when the reaction was performed in the HCD cell
when compared to the reaction in the LIT. In the HCD cell, the reduced
overlap between the reagent ion and analyte ion clouds leads to a
decrease in the frequency of collisions between reagent anions and
analyte cations. For this reason, hybrid ETUVPD experiments were undertaken
to evaluate the overall dissociation efficiency when the ET step was
undertaken in the LIT (8 ms ET reaction time) versus the HCD cell
(15 ms reaction period), in each case with UVPD performed in the HCD
cell. Similar distributions and types of product ions were observed
for both hybrid variations, as illustrated for ubiquitin (13+) in
Figure S2 (Supporting Information). For
ETUVPD in which both ET and UVPD were undertaken in the HCD cell,
a longer activation period was required to attain the same level of
S/N due to the lower effectiveness of ET in the HCD cell, as mentioned
above. The initial ETUVPD feasibility experiment provided evidence
that there is little to no additional secondary fragmentation resulting
in convoluting internal ions, an outcome consistent with prior results
obtained using EThcD for peptides.4,5 Although internal
ion formation can be used for diagnostic purposes in top down experiments
with extensive a priori knowledge of the protein of interest,21 accommodating internal ions in a high throughput
identification search strategy would cause a prohibitively large increase
in fragment ion search space.

Performing MS/MS in the HCD cell
allows trapping, activation, and
analysis of a wider m/z range of
product ions compared to MS/MS undertaken in the LIT. Specifically,
performing ETD in the LIT allows isolation and transfer to the HCD
cell of a range of product ions ±300 m/z units of the selected precursor ion. Undertaking ETD in
the HCD cell and subsequent activation by UVPD does not require reisolation
after ETD, and so all product ions may be simultaneously trapped,
activated, and analyzed. This allows comparison of ETUVPD based on
isolation of specific charge-reduced precursors from ET or broad populations
of ions encompassing nearly the entire product ion spectrum resulting
from ETD. For example, ubiquitin was infused and the z = 13 charge state was selected for ETD in the LIT, and the dominant
product ions (as expected) were charge-reduced precursors (ETnoD).
Subsequent photoirradiation of individually isolated singly, doubly,
and triply charge-reduced species in the HCD cell resulted in mainly
UVPD-type fragmentation, shown in Figure 2A,B,C.
The abundance of the intact charge-reduced proteins decreased with
each electron adduction, and for that reason, the signal-to-noise
of the resulting fragment ions also decreased during the subsequent
UVPD step, resulting in identification of only the most abundant fragment
ions (Figure 2F). Also, because a large population
of UVPD fragments have m/z values
close to the precursor, fragment ions of higher m/z values are more likely to be identified upon
photodissociation of more charge-reduced precursors (because the selected
charge-reduced precursor and resulting fragment ion isotopes in lower
charge states are less crowded and shifted higher in the m/z landscape) (Figure 2C).
This latter benefit of ETUVPD is further illustrated in Figure S3
(Supporting Information) for which the
number of fragment ions specific to each activation method and their
respective distributions across the m/z range from m/z 300 to 950 are
shown. These results for individual charge-reduced precursors showcase
the potential benefits of combining ETUVPD results from several charge
states or ideally via analysis of multiple precursor charge states
at once (as is possible in the HCD cell).

Figure 2 ETUVPD (8 ms ETD of ubiquitin
(13+) in the LIT followed by one
1 mJ laser pulse in the HCD cell): (A) 12+·, (B) 11+··,
(C) 10+···, and corresponding distribution of ion types
in panels D, E, and F. All spectra are shown on the same scale.

This strategy of simultaneous
UVPD of a broader range of precursors
and product ions was implemented and evaluated via ETD of the z = 13 charge state of ubiquitin in the HCD cell followed
by UVPD of the entire population of both charge-reduced and nonreduced
precursors as well as product ions arising from ETD. This “broadband”
ion activation by UVPD offers two potential benefits. First, the total
ion population available for UVPD activation is increased relative
to UVPD of a single charge-reduced species. Second, the potential
for broad ion isolation in the HCD cell allows detection of a wider m/z range of product ions generated in
the initial ETD reaction as well as the additional ones from UVPD.
In the context of characterization of intact proteins, obtaining high
sequence coverages and maximizing dissociation efficiencies are premium
benefits, both of which are feasible with the broadband ETUVPD approach.
To capitalize on these benefits, ETUVPD with broad ion isolation was
undertaken for ubiquitin along with comparison to UVPD alone and ETUVPD
with selected ion isolation (see Figure 3).
Electron transfer activation in the HCD cell followed by a single
5 ns UV pulse (2.5 mJ) resulted in a fragment ion distribution that
resulted from contributions from both ETD and UVPD (Figure 3C). Figure 3 shows expansions
of the spectral region from m/z 720
to 780 for UVPD (12+), ETUVPD in which the charge-reduced 12+·
ions generated by ETD in the LIT were isolated and subjected to UVPD
in the HCD cell, and for ETUVPD in which all the products arising
from ETD of the 13+ ions of ubiquitin in the HCD were subsequently
subjected to UVPD. The shaded regions are unique fragments not seen
upon standalone UVPD or UVPD after isolation of the charge-reduced
12+· ions in the selective ETD/UVPD spectrum and are only observed
upon broadband ETUVPD. Although many of the fragment ions are the
same in all three spectra, the new ones generated upon ETUVPD using
broad precursor isolation provide additional sequence coverage. After
demonstration of feasibility of ETUVPD and evaluation of initial metrics,
all subsequent hybrid MS/MS experiments were performed via both ETD
and UVPD in the HCD cell.

Figure 3 (A) UVPD (one 2.5 mJ laser pulse) of ubiquitin
12+, (B) ETUVPD
(8 ms ETD in LIT of ubiquitin 13+ followed by one 1.8 mJ laser pulse
of ubiquitin 12+·) (MS3), (C) ETUVPD (15 ms ETD of 13+ ubiquitin
in HCD cell followed by one 2.5 mJ laser pulse of all product ions).
All spectra are shown on the same scale.

ETUVPD Decreases Spectral Congestion
Although UVPD
of intact proteins provides the richest spectra of any MS/MS method
due to fragmentation at nearly every inter-residue position, a resulting
complication is the spectral congestion and overlapping isotopic envelope
of the fragment ions, thus requiring high resolution of the mass analyzer.
The resolving power of Fourier transform mass analyzers is proportional
to acquisition time, and for the crowded spectra that are produced
by UVPD, maximum resolution is required. Heck and co-workers have
shown previously that the ETD reaction for intact proteins in the
HCD multipole is a slow reaction that culminates largely in charge-reduced
peaks of the unfragmented (intact) precursor.11 Although this outcome is not particularly beneficial for generating
informative fragment ions, the result is quite advantageous for the
hybrid ETUVPD method. The extent of spectral crowding and the difficulty
associated with accurate deconvolution of the complex product ion
spectra that result after UVPD have been reported previously using
a set of green fluorescent protein (GFP) variants.9 The assignable product ions were routinely biased toward
lower charge states, even for interrogation of higher charge state
precursors, due to the difficulty associated with effectively deconvoluting
the higher charge products in the crowded spectra.9 Taken together with visual inspection of the spectra and
the total number of deconvoluted product ions (including those that
were not matched to assignable fragment ions in the protein sequence),
it is likely that the observed difficulty in deconvolution was the
result of the combination of higher charge states (which have more
closely spaced isotopic peaks) and product ions that overlap the same m/z region of the highly charged precursor.9 For the present study, intact proteins of varying
sizes were infused and analyzed in an optimized method in which both
activation events were performed in the HCD cell prior to detection
in the Orbitrap analyzer (Figure 4). Ubiquitin
(8.5 kDa), myoglobin (16.9 kDa), and carbonic anhydrase (29 kDa) were
activated using all methods under investigation; UVPD, ETD, and ETUVPD.
In all cases, the greatest total number of matched fragment ions resulted
from ETUVPD (as exemplified by the results for myoglobin in Figure 4). Visual inspection of the spectra in Figure 4 clearly depicts how the ion current is distributed
more effectively across the m/z landscape
by combining the two activation methods. ETUVPD spectra from the z = 22 charge state of myoglobin showed not only a moderate
increase in the number (and percentage) of matched fragment ions compared
to UVPD or ETD alone, but also an increase in the total number of
deconvoluted ions and percentage of the fragment ions matched to the
protein sequence.

Figure 4 Shown for each of the three fragmentation strategies are
(A) the
total number of matched fragment ions (with the number of redundant
ones shown in parentheses), (B) the total number of deconvoluted fragment
ions (matched plus unmatched), and (C) the percent of fragment ions
matched to the protein sequence (calculated by dividing the number
of matched fragment ions by the total number of deconvoluted fragments).
All results correspond to the z = 22 charge state
of myoglobin (16.9 kDa). On the right are product ion spectra resulting
from (D) UVPD, (E) ETD, and (F) ETUVPD of myoglobin (22+). All activation
events were performed in the HCD cell. All spectra are shown on the
same scale.

The increase in the number
of deconvoluted fragment ions was observed
for both ETD and ETUVPD, an expected outcome owing to the ability
of ETD to more effectively spread the ion current out across the m/z landscape via charge reduction. If
this increase in the number of deconvoluted ions was accompanied by
a substantial decrease in the percentage of those ions that were matched
to the protein sequence, one could assume that the new ions were largely
due to secondary or nonspecific fragmentation, but combining ETD with
UVPD resulted in increases in the total number of deconvoluted fragments
and in the percentage that could be matched to the protein sequence
relative to UVPD alone. The increase in the number of deconvoluted
fragment ions relative to UVPD alone corresponds to a more even distribution
of “true positive” fragment ions, further confirmed
by evaluation of the standard deviation of both the abundances and
the m/z distribution of all identified
ions. UVPD still gave the best overall sequence coverage (87%) relative
to ETD (68%) or ETUVPD (79%) for myoglobin.

With respect to
the product ion abundances for each of the MS/MS
methods, the average abundance was 4.0 × 103 (±7.7
× 103) for UVPD, 1.0 × 104 (±1.0
× 104) for ETD, and 7.7 × 103 (±9.4
× 103) for ETUVPD. The distributions of all matched
product ions were grouped in 100 Th bins for each method (Figure S4, Supporting Information). The matched product
ions fall into a greater number of bins for ETD and ETUVPD, thus indicating
a broader distribution of product channels and more product charge
states. These metrics reflect the ability of ETUVPD to enhance protein
characterization by apportioning product ion current more evenly for
both the x (mass to charge ratio) and y (intensity) variables, resulting in more informative spectra.

In this context, evaluation of the ion type distributions of the
three model proteins reveals a trend toward more evenly distributed
fragment ion pairs (i.e., a/x, b/y, c/z) for ETUVPD. Shown in Figure 5 are the ion
type distributions obtained using UVPD, ETD, and ETUVPD for each protein,
which are abbreviated as U, M, and CA for ubiquitin (averaging 13+,
12+, and 11+ precursor charge states), myoglobin (averaging 23+, 22+,
and 21+ charge states), and carbonic anhydrase (34+), respectively.
The distribution of fragments for UVPD is generally biased toward a- and x-type ions, especially as the protein
mass increases. ETD resulted in a majority of c- and z-type ions, as expected. ETUVPD showed the most uniform
distribution between a/x and c/z types, thus supporting the concept that ion types from
both standalone UVPD and ETD are combined for the hybrid methods.
Interestingly, the portion of N-terminal versus C-terminal product
ions does not vary significantly from UVPD to ETD to ETUVPD (Figure S5). In terms of sequence coverage (calculated
based on the number of interresidue cleavages relative to the total
number of interresidue backbone bonds), the coverages obtained for
myoglobin (22+) were 87% for UVPD, 68% for ETD, and 79% for ETUVPD.
For carbonic anhydrase (34+), the sequence coverages were
68% for UVPD, 62% for ETD, and 73% for ETUVPD. The sequence maps for
myoglobin and carbonic anhydrase are shown in Figures S6 and S7 (Supporting Information), respectively. Thus,
although the distribution of ions changes for the hybrid method relative
to UVPD or ETD alone, the net sequence coverage does not improve significantly.

Figure 5 Shown
are percentages of ion type pairs of total fragment ions
identified by UVPD, ETD, and ETUVPD for (A) ubiquitin (U), (B) myoglobin
(M), and (C) carbonic anhydrase (CA), with all activation events performed
in the HCD cell (UVPD, one 2.5 mJ laser pulse; ETD, 15 ms; ETUVPD,
4 ms ETD, and one 1.0 mJ laser pulse).

LC-UVIETD and LC-ETUVPD
From the optimization and survey
results for ubiquitin, myoglobin, and carbonic anhydrase, several
sets of hybrid fragmentation conditions were chosen for analysis of
the E. coli ribosome. The ribosomal proteome is composed
of approximately 55 small and basic proteins. The positively charged
Lys and Arg side chains interact with the rRNA phosphate backbone
to maintain the ribosomal structure as a whole. This proteome is an
ideal sample for evaluating the hybrid methods due to the likelihood
of observing high charge states and the well-known positive correlation
between precursor charge and ET reaction efficiency.13 For this phase of hybrid activation experiments, all fragment
ions (and nondissociated and charge-reduced precursors) were simultaneously
subjected to ETUVPD in the HCD cell. Additionally, further assessment
of the impact of the ET reaction period on ETUVPD was undertaken for
higher throughput LCMS applications. Using a digital delay generator,
laser irradiation could be triggered either at the end of the electron
transfer reaction period (termed ETUVPD, as described above) or at
the beginning of the electron transfer reaction period (termed ultraviolet
irradiation ETD or UVIETD), and the duration of the electron transfer
reaction period could be varied. Two electron transfer reaction periods
were chosen: 10 and 30 ms. A 10 ms period was chosen to maximize the
production of intact charge-reduced proteins, and as such, distribute
the ion current more effectively across the m/z landscape prior to UVPD. A 30 ms period was used to enhance
the degree of radical-directed dissociation of the proteins in a manner
complementary to the distinctive fragmentation promoted by UVPD.

Experiments utilizing all configurations (10 or 30 ms electron transfer
period and preceded or followed by UVPD) were compared based on several
metrics. The false discovery rate (FDR), average −log (E value) (where lower E values or higher
−log (E values) reflect better matches), average
number of fragments, and individual protein E values
were compared to deduce which method was most ideally suited for combining
both identification- and characterization-centric approaches. Interestingly,
the FDR curves associated with all four iterations of the hybrid methods
(ETUVPD 10 ms, ETUVPD 30 ms, UVIETD 10 ms, and UVIETD 30 ms) resulted
in nearly identical curves (see Figure S8, Supporting
Information). The nearly identical FDR curves as well as the
earlier infusion studies that confirmed similar percentages of matched
ions (32% for UVPD compared to 36% for ETUVPD, Figure 4) indicate that there is a low degree of additional internal
fragmentation resulting from ETUVPD. Internal fragments cause a massive
increase in product ion search space that is prohibitive for high
throughput analysis, and one could expect that sequential activation
using two methods is more likely to result in this undesirable outcome.
Our results show that ETUVPD does not result in extensive internal
fragmentation. We have previously shown that the laser energy required
for efficient photodissociation is roughly inversely proportional
to protein mass, meaning that fragmentation of larger proteins (or
polypeptides) is achieved with less energy deposition than that required
for efficient fragmentation of smaller proteins (or peptides).8 The lack of internal fragments observed from
the hybrid formats can be explained by the propensity of each method
alone to preferentially fragment larger (and more highly charged)
polypeptides.

Among the proteins that were identified by all
dissociation methods
(n = 33 proteins, see Table S1, Supporting Information), UVPD resulted in the highest average
−log (E value) at 60, followed closely by
the ETUVPD for 30 ms (58) and then UVIETD for 10 ms (58) (where a
higher −log (E value) indicates a better match).
As for the protein complement identified in all analyses, UVPD by
itself achieved the best fragmentation outcomes (as defined by the
best E values) for 11 of the proteins, UVIETD for
10 ms was optimal for 9 of them, and ETUVPD for 30 ms was the best
option for 7 of them. Both ETUVPD for 10 ms and UVIETD for 30 ms were
only best for 3 of the 33 proteins each. This disparity in which method
is optimal can be attributed to the vastly different ion type distributions
achieved with each method. Shown in Figure 6 is the distribution of ion types for each method for the 33 protein
identifications.

Figure 6 Histogram showing the distribution of ion types using
UVPD and
the hybrid methods for a ribosomal protein mixture. Shown above each
set of bars in parentheses is the E value contribution
per fragment ion.

From the fragment ion
distributions shown in Figure 6, it is clear
that hybridizing ETD with UVPD allows optimization
of the ion population to suit the application. While one could argue
that the total number of matched ions should be the only metric used
to determine which method is best, changing the ion type distribution
for higher confidence could be very useful for exploiting unweighted
search algorithms. This is best exemplified by examining the average
contribution of each matched fragment ion to the total E value for each identified protein (−log (E value)/number of identified fragments). For the UVPD data in Figure 6, the a- and x-type ions are dominant, typical of “canonical” 193
nm UVPD. UVPD, on average, produced more than 95 fragment ions per
protein identification; however, a large proportion of the ion current
resided in a- and x-type ions, which
are sometimes duplicative for the same inter-residue position in the
protein sequence. Comparing this to the results obtained by using
UVIETD (10 ms), the average number of identified ions was lower (around
79), but it still gave the best score for 9 of the 33 proteins identified.
The increase in the contribution of c- and z-type ions (which are not duplicative for the same inter-residue
position) compensates for the overall lower total number of fragment
ions and results in a positive impact on the E value
per fragment ion. This simple calculation for these two methods revealed
that the contribution per fragment to the E value
using UVPD was 0.56 compared to 0.66 for UVIETD for 10 ms. In essence,
this increase in the E value contribution per fragment
underscores the possibility of achieving greater sensitivity via creating
fewer fragment ions but ones with a more optimal distribution of ion
types. UVPD alone of the Escherichia coli ribosome provides a high level of protein identification and characterization
but is dominated by a- and x-type
ions,10 as reconfirmed in this study. The
primary utility of using hybrid ETUVPD activation is the ability to
modulate the fragmentation distribution more evenly among identifiable
ion types.

Conclusions
Presented is a new method
that combines ETD and UVPD simultaneously
performed in the HCD cell of an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer to
provide a more balanced contribution from each complementary pair
of ion types, and specifically, to increase the contribution of c- and z-type ions. Pilot studies on several
benchmark proteins of varying size as well a mixture of intact ribosomal
proteins demonstrated the utility of ETUVPD and UVIETD as compelling
methods for enhancing top down protein characterization. The enhancement
arises from the production of a more diverse set of ion types facilitating
characterization via representation of overlapping sections of the
protein sequence from both termini, especially when exploiting the
advantage of the ultrahigh resolution available in single protein
infusion experiments. Additionally, the ETUVPD and UVIETD approaches
demonstrate successful hybridization of activation methods with the
ability to modulate the activation time in the ETD step to achieve
the preferred ion types characteristic of either ETD or UVPD.

Supporting Information Available
Various MS/MS
spectra of myoglobin
(ETD, UVPD, ETUVPD, 22+) and ubiquitin (ETUVPD, 13+), the distributions
of ion types and percentages of N- and C-terminal product ions, the m/z distribution of product ions of myoglobin
(UVPD, ETD, ETUVPD, 22+), sequence coverage maps of myoglobin (ETD,
UVPD, and ETUVPD, 22+) and carbonic anhydrase (34+), the false discovery
rate curves for MS/MS of the E. coli ribosomal proteome, and summaries of the E (expectation)
values of all E. coli ribosomal proteins
identified by each MS/MS method. This material is available free of
charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac5036082_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
† Both authors contributed equally to this
work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Funding from the NSF (CHE-1402753), NIH 1K12GM102745
(fellowship
to J.R.C.), and the Welch Foundation (F1155) are gratefully acknowledged.
We thank Jens Griep-Raming and Dirk Nolting of Thermo Fisher Scientific
for assistance in modification of the Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer
for photodissociation and for providing assistance with performing
electron transfer dissociation in the HCD cell.
==== Refs
References
Zubarev R. A. ; Kelleher N. L. ; McLafferty F. W. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1998 , 120 , 3265 .
Syka J. E. P. ; Coon J. J. ; Schroeder M. J. ; Shabanowitz J. ; Hunt D. F. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2004 , 101 , 9528 .15210983 
Li X. ; Yu X. ; Costello C. E. ; Lin C. ; O’Connor P. B. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 6150 .22746280 
Frese C. K. ; Altelaar A. F. M. ; van den Toorn H. ; Nolting D. ; Griep-Raming J. ; Heck A. J. R. ; Mohammed S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 9668 .23106539 
Frese C. K. ; Zhou H. ; Taus T. ; Altelaar A. F. M. ; Mechtler K. ; Heck A. J. R. ; Mohammed S. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2013 , 12 , 1520 .23347405 
Smith S. I. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 83 , 303 .21141922 
Madsen J. A. ; Cheng R. R. ; Kaoud T. S. ; Dalby K. N. ; Makarov D. E. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
Chem.—Eur. J. 
2012 , 18 , 5374 .22431222 
Shaw J. B. ; Li W. ; Holden D. D. ; Zhang Y. ; Griep-Raming J. ; Fellers R. T. ; Early B. P. ; Thomas P. M. ; Kelleher N. L. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 12646 .23697802 
Cannon J. R. ; Kluwe C. ; Ellington A. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
Proteomics 
2014 , 14 , 1165 .24596159 
Cannon J. R. ; Cammarata M. B. ; Robotham S. A. ; Cotham V. C. ; Shaw J. B. ; Fellers R. T. ; Early B. P. ; Thomas P. M. ; Kelleher N. L. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 2185 .24447299 
Frese C. ; Nolting D. ; Altelaar A. F. M. ; Griep-Raming J. ; Mohammed S. ; Heck A. R. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 1663 .23605687 
Vasicek L. A. ; Ledvina A. R. ; Shaw J. ; Griep-Raming J. ; Westphall M. S. ; Coon J. J. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2011 , 22 , 1105 .21953052 
Good D. M. ; Wirtala M. ; McAlister G. C. ; Coon J. J. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2007 , 6 , 1942 .17673454 
Hardy S. J.
S. ; Kurland C. G. ; Voynow P. ; Mora G. 
Biochemistry (Moscow) 
1969 , 8 , 2897 .
Cannon J. ; Lohnes K. ; Wynne C. ; Wang Y. ; Edwards N. ; Fenselau C. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2010 , 9 , 3886 .20557100 
Wu S.-L. ; Hühmer A. F. R. ; Hao Z. ; Karger B. L. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2007 , 6 , 4230 .17900180 
Horn D. M. ; Ge Y. ; McLafferty F. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2000 , 72 , 4778 .11055690 
Ledvina A. R. ; Beauchene N. A. ; McAlister G. C. ; Syka J. E. P. ; Schwartz J. C. ; Griep-Raming J. ; Westphall M. S. ; Coon J. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 10068 .21062032 
Taouatas N. ; Drugan M. M. ; Heck A. J. R. ; Mohammed S. 
Nat. Methods 
2008 , 5 , 405 .18425140 
Ledvina A. R. ; McAlister G. C. ; Gardner M. W. ; Smith S. I. ; Madsen J. A. ; Schwartz J. C. ; Stafford G. C. ; Syka J. E. P. ; Brodbelt J. S. ; Coon J. J. 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 8526 .
Cobb J. ; Easterling M. ; Agar J. 
J.
Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2010 , 21 , 949 .20303285
