
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac5024217ArticleMetabolite Content Profiling of Bottlenose Dolphin
Exhaled Breath Aksenov Alexander
A. †Yeates Laura ‡Pasamontes Alberto †Siebe Craig †Zrodnikov Yuriy †Simmons Jason †McCartney Mitchell M. †Deplanque Jean-Pierre †Wells Randall S. §Davis Cristina E. *†† Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering, University of
California, Davis, California 95616, United States‡ National
Marine Mammal Foundation, San Diego, California 92106, United States§ Chicago Zoological
Society, c/o Mote Marine Laboratory, Sarasota, Florida 34236, United States* E-mail: cedavis@ucdavis.edu.25 09 2014 04 11 2014 86 21 10616 10624 01 07 2014 25 09 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Changing ocean health and the potential
impact on marine mammal
health are gaining global attention. Direct health assessments of
wild marine mammals, however, is inherently difficult. Breath analysis
metabolomics is a very attractive assessment tool due to its noninvasive
nature, but it is analytically challenging. It has never been attempted
in cetaceans for comprehensive metabolite profiling. We have developed
a method to reproducibly sample breath from small cetaceans, specifically
Atlantic bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus).
We describe the analysis workflow to profile exhaled breath metabolites
and provide here a first library of volatile and nonvolatile compounds
in cetacean exhaled breath. The described analytical methodology enabled
us to document baseline compounds in exhaled breath of healthy animals
and to study changes in metabolic content of dolphin breath with regard
to a variety of factors. The method of breath analysis may provide
a very valuable tool in future wildlife conservation efforts as well
as deepen our understanding of marine mammals biology and physiology.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac5024217document-id-new-14ac-2014-024217ccc-price
==== Body
Cetacean
species are long-lived,
feed high in the food chain, and have a blubber layer that acts as
an energy store as well as can store chemical and toxins that may
be concentrated up through the food chain and environment. Due to
these traits, their health is often reflective of their ecosystem.1 Some cetacean populations, including Alaska’s
Cook Inlet stock of beluga whales, Southern Resident killer whales,
and North Atlantic right whales, have become depleted over the years.
Understanding baseline health and causes of disease in cetaceans may
help to reverse occurring negative health trends. Health assessments
of dolphin populations are especially important during unusual mortality
events or other die offs occurring due to known or suspected emerging
infectious diseases, contaminations, harmful algal bloom-associated
biotoxins, or sudden changes in prey.2 Unfortunately,
close and routine monitoring of cetaceans, especially large cetaceans,
in their natural habitat can be fundamentally challenging. Robust
health assessments often require the collection of biological samples
that are difficult to acquire, such as skin biopsies or blood samples.
It would be of great benefit for conservation efforts, as well as
for monitoring the health status of managed cetacean populations,
to develop a minimally invasive and diagnostically useful test to
assess the health of evasive marine mammal species. For humans, breath
analysis has been explored as a noninvasive alternative to traditional
point-of-care testing. Prior studies in humans have sought to identify
and link relevant biomarker compounds in the complex mixture of exhaled
metabolites to specific health states, thus providing a noninvasive
“window” into the physiological state of the organism.3,4 The main challenges associated with breath analysis are great variability
and low abundance of exhaled metabolites. Consequently, to a large
extent, the advances in the breath analysis field are contingent on
advances in analytical chemistry.

Certain anatomic features
of cetaceans may make breath analysis
methods particularly suitable. In terrestrial mammals including humans,
the nasal cavity and the mouth meet at the pharynx at the back of
the nose and mouth. The pharynx is part of the digestive system as
well as the respiratory system because it carries both food and air.
The two systems share a common pathway allowing for incidental contamination
of the breath chemicals by odors from the digestive system. Cetaceans,
however, have separated digestive and pulmonary systems (the larynx
extends up into the nasal cavity rather than opening into the throat).
Further, the cetacean trachea is short, with a large diameter to allow
small cetaceans like Tursiops to be explosive breathers.5 These animals exchange 70–90% of total
lung capacity in 0.3 s,6 with peak air
flow of 24 L per second, depending on the animal’s body size.6,7 This breathing behavior also leads to rapid gas exchange, which
makes cetaceans ideal candidates for breath metabolomic studies. Furthermore,
dolphins’ lungs contain significantly more alveoli than human
lungs do. While most mammals have only one capillary layer, dolphin
lungs are made up of two layers of capillaries, thereby increasing
the efficiency of gas exchange. This double layer of capillaries means
the surface area of the lungs is greatly increased and gas exchange
can occur more quickly, potentially resulting in a higher content
of metabolites that partition from the blood into the exhaled breath
compared to terrestrial mammals. All of the above factors may lead
to enhanced excretion of various compounds that can be potentially
elucidated for diagnostic purposes or facilitate biomarker discovery.
Breath analysis has been previously indicated to be potentially useful
in physiological studies of bottlenose dolphins and California sea
lions (Zalophus californianus), including measurement
of oxygen (O2) consumption and carbon dioxide (CO2) production during dives.8 While these
studies measured several fractions of gaseous components, they did
not have the technology required to measure the comprehensive metabolite
components present in breath.

Human breath is known to contain
trace amounts of volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) such as acetone, methanol, ethanol, aldehydes, and
alkanes, typically in parts-per-billion (ppb) or parts-per-trillion
(ppt) molar fraction ranges.4 Nonvolatile
compounds such as lipids and proteins/peptides, as well as virus particles
or entire cells such as bacteria or epithelial cells, may be also
present in breath aerosol droplets carried in the exhaled breath stream.
Because these aerosols are likely generated from the liquid lining
of the lung, it is thought that these compounds represent a surrogate
profile of the bloodstream. Hundreds of different endogenous and exogenous
chemicals have been identified in the exhaled breath of humans.3 Diet, activity, environmental air/water quality,
and health status can all leave a “mark” in exhaled
breath. Thus, breath analysis provides the opportunity to simultaneously
view physiological interactions between an organism and its environment.

Currently, very little knowledge exists on the baseline breath
metabolite composition of marine mammals; however, several studies
have shown that cetacean breath potentially has great diagnostic value.
Previous breath collection devices relied simply on placing a surface
such as glass beaker, nylon gauze, or plastic sheet in the stream
of blow and collecting a small fraction of the exhalate. Even such
a simple approach allowed for detection of DNA,9 hormones,10 and various bacteria11,12 in the cetacean blow. Detection of volatiles has also been reported
for whale breath using sorbent.13 These
methods cannot accommodate the collection of a higher volume of exhalate
required to detect and quantify various low abundance trace metabolites.
In the present work, we develop analytical methodology to efficiently
trap cetacean exhaled breath and to lay the groundwork for application
of breath analysis for marine mammal health diagnostics and conservation
efforts. Integrating veterinary information with information gathered
using the new technology developed here will further aid in assessing
an animal’s health status. Furthermore, the potential of discovery
of breath-based metabolite biomarkers in cetaceans may provide valuable
insight for relevant indicators of health in human breath and help
to better understand their metabolic origin. Here, we present a method
and application that we believe will have an impact in not only analytical
chemistry but also other disciplines including marine biology, ecology,
and physiology.

Experimental Section
Sampling Device
We have developed an exhaled breath
condensate (EBC) collection device specifically adapted for marine
mammal anatomy and physiology (Figure 1a).
The dimensions of the device were as follows: the length of the condenser
tube, 37 in. (94 cm); the inner diameter of the condenser tube, 1
in. (2.54 cm); the outer diameter, 1–1/4 in. (3.18 cm); the
length of the insulated housing, 36 in. (91.5 cm), the length of the
ice bath section inside the housing, 32 in. (81.3 cm). The collection
tube was made of borosilicate glass. The material used for the outer
casing was plastic (PVC), and the intake manifold parts were made
of PTFE. A standard soft rubber surgical mask was placed on the manifold
and was the only part of the device that came into contact with the
animal (each animal had an individual mask; the masks were degassed
for several days in a vacuum oven at 50 °C prior to use). For
EBC sample collection, a glass tube is placed inside the plastic casing
and the space between the glass tube and casing is filled with crushed
dry ice (Figure 1a). During exhalation, the
expired breath passes through the chilled tube, while during inhalation
a one way valve closes and allows incoming ambient air to bypass the
chilled tube. This design is intended to prevent exposure to the animals
from extreme temperature differences in inhaled air temperatures.
After collection, the device is disassembled and condensed breath
is removed from the tube using a plunger and placed in a vial using
a scoopula (if frozen) or pipette (if thawed). In order to limit cross-contamination,
the device was thoroughly cleaned in between collections. Each individual
part that was in contact with the EBC sample or animal besides the
glass tube was thoroughly rinsed with DI water, submerged in a 70%
ethanol/water solution bath and soaked for ∼10 min, and then
allowed to air-dry until complete solvent evaporation. The glass tube
was also rinsed with DI water followed by a rinse with 70% ethanol
and then thoroughly wiped with Kimwipe tissues before the next use.
Brand new borosilicate vials with stainless steel silicon septa caps
were used for sample storage. When possible, additional sample thawing
and/or transfer between sample collection and analysis were avoided
(e.g., the following headspace sampling or sample lyophilization occurred
directly in the sample vial). Sea water and air condensate blanks
were collected to account for possible environmental contaminants
presence (Figures A3 and A4 in the Supporting
Information). For the water blank, an aliquot of seawater in
the general vicinity of the collection area was placed in the vial.
For an air blank, the cleaned collection tube was chilled with the
dry ice and exposed to open air in the general vicinity of the collection
area for approximately 5 min. The condensate in the form of powdery
snow was then scraped from the surface and placed in the vial. The
blanks samples were sealed and stored at −80 °C until
analysis similarly to the EBC samples.

Figure 1 (a) Schematic view of
the breath sampling device. Left: the exploded
view of the device assembly. Right: the assembled device (not to scale).
The space between the glass tube and outer casing is filled with cooling
material (dry ice pellets), and the tube is locked in place with end-caps.
For breath collection, the soft mask on the bottom of the device is
placed around a dolphin’s blowhole. When the animal inhales,
the inhale one-way valve opens, while the exhale valve closes and
air is routed from the intake; when the animal exhales, the inhale
valve closes, the exhale valve opens, and exhaled air is expelled
through the chilled glass tube out of the exhaust. (b) Sampling breath
from a trained dolphin.

EBC Sample Collection from Managed Animals under Human Care
An EBC sample collection with managed animals was carried out with
the U.S. Navy Marine Mammal Program in San Diego, CA. Prior to the
studies, several samples were collected and their chemical content
was evaluated using GC/MS in order to establish further study feasibility
and sample quality. In addition to preliminary feasibility studies,
both a small-scale study (May 2011) and larger-scale study (December
2011) were conducted. For the small study, a total of 9 EBC samples
was collected from 3 animals (3 from nonfasting, 6 from fasting animals:
2 males/1 female). For the large scale study, 46 EBC samples were
collected from 13 animals: 6 males, 7 females. We collected samples
from these animals on 5 consecutive days, both fasting and nonfasting.
In total, 19 samples were collected from fasting animals (6 from males,
13 from females) and 27 from nonfasting animals (12 from males, 15
from females). For nonfasting animals, the samples were collected
on average 3 h after a feeding of 1.4 kg of capelin, therefore likely
catching the end of the postprandial phase. Some of the samples were
collected from animals with identified health conditions.

For
the collection, animals breathed normally while positioned by trainers
at the water’s surface (Figure 1b).
Some of the trained animals were asked to beach themselves onto a
padded mat and had the sample collected outside of water. The collection
device was positioned over the animal’s blowhole and held for
the duration of the sampling (5 min or 10–20 breaths, depending
on the animal). All but one dolphin breathed normally during the breath
collection procedure. In the latter case, the dolphin had a pre-existing
respiratory condition causing more rapid and shallow breaths. Immediately
after collection, samples were placed on dry ice and later stored
in a −80 °C freezer. The collected samples were further
routed for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis as described below.

An additional set of experiments was conducted to establish the
effect of rebreathing valves on metabolic content. We have determined
that removing the valves and holding the device directly above the
animal’s blow hole during exhalation did not result in any
changes of metabolic content, although the collected volumes were
typically smaller. The collection mode without valves was employed
for the EBC collection from a wild population (described in the following
section).

EBC Sample Collection from Wild Dolphins
The EBC collection
device was utilized for collecting samples from the long-term resident
wild dolphin population in Sarasota Bay, FL as part of a bottlenose
dolphin health assessment effort conducted by the Chicago Zoological
Society’s Sarasota Dolphin Research Program under National
Marine Fisheries Service Scientific Research Permit No. 15543. The
device was taken on a boat during the dolphin capture and release
exercises, and the EBC samples were collected in a course of several
days as a part of large suite of samples and measurements comprising
a comprehensive panel of health assessment tests.2 Upon capture, each animal was transferred onto the padded
and shaded deck of a specially designed veterinary examination boat
for ∼40–50 min. The EBC samples were collected within
that time frame when instructed by the project leader and veterinarians.
The federal permit under which the studies were carried out did not
allow for any objects touching the blowhole of a dolphin, as this
might elicit a negative response from wild animals. Therefore, the
EBC collection device without a rebreathing valve was utilized (the
one way valve assembly was removed and a soft gas mask was placed
directly on the tube inlet). The EBC collection device was then held
immediately above the animal’s blowhole without contact. Ten
breaths were collected for each animal (when possible) in about ∼2
to 10 min time frame. Since in this collection mode some of the breath
may escape, the collected volumes were typically smaller compared
to those for the managed population animals and varied in the range
of ∼100–400 μL depending on the animal’s
size and behavior during collection. During examinations and sampling,
veterinary staff members were constantly assessing the animal’s
condition and making decisions regarding whether some tests would
be performed. As a result, some of the animals were released without
collecting EBC samples. In a few cases, animals exhibited hyperventilation
with small, shallow breaths. For these animals, smaller amounts of
EBC were procured. In addition, several animals were moved from the
deck back into the water to complete sampling. The EBC collection
was allowed to be carried out directly in the water with the animal
being held with its blowhole above the water by team members and the
collection device was held above the blowhole.

In total, 21
samples were collected:12 samples in May 2011 and 9 samples in May
2012. Of these, 2 animals produced very small samples due to hyperventilation.
Both males (13) and females (8) ranging in age from 2 to 41 years
were tested. Individual health status varied as well, with some animals
exhibiting symptoms of infection (e.g., brownish-colored discharge
accumulated around the blowhole, breath malodors). Upon collection,
all of the samples were immediately placed in dry ice and later stored
in a −80 °C freezer for chemical analysis.

Gas Chromatography/Mass
Spectrometry Analysis of Volatile Fraction
The volatile organic
compound (VOC) chemical content of the samples
collected from dolphins was studied using gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry (GC/MS). For the analysis, a Varian 3800 GC with a 4000
Ion Trap MS (Varian, Walnut Creek, CA) with an electron ionization
(EI) source and a VF-5 ms 5% phenol/95% PDMS GC column (Varian, Walnut
Creek, CA) instrument was used. An aliquot of thawed sample was placed
in a vial to be tested for VOC content in the headspace. The volatiles
were sampled from the headspace using carboxen/polydimethylsiloxane
(CAR/PDMS) d.f. 75 μm partially cross-linked (black hub) solid
phase microextraction (SPME) fibers (Supelco, St. Louis, MO) to preconcentrate
the compounds prior to measurement. An optimal sample volume that
allows for good S/N while requiring minimal amount of sample was determined
by performing experiments with a series of aliquots, ranging from
300 to 50 μL of sample. The minimum required volume was found
to be 100 μL, while an optimal volume was found to be 500 μL.
When available, 500 μL of each sample was used for analysis.
For VOC extraction enhancement, 0.5 mL of saturated NaCl solution
was added to the EBC.

For sample extraction, a borosilicate
vial sample containing an EBC sample was agitated at 90 °C and
the volatile chemicals contained in the EBC were collected on the
SPME fiber. After sampling, the SPME was inserted into the heated
GC inlet and the adsorbed/absorbed chemicals were desorbed and injected
into the GC column. The GC column oven cycle was optimized to allow
optimal peak separation for benchmark human EBC samples. The protocol
was then adjusted for the dolphin breath samples based on the obtained
results. The scanned m/z range was
35–600 Th. The ion source and detector were switched off for
the first 4 min of the GC protocol to avoid detector saturation during
elution of the carbon dioxide peak, since a large amount of carbon
dioxide was trapped in the sample due to the high content in dolphin
breath, as well as possible contamination from the dry ice collection
tube chilling material. The obtained GC/MS data were then analyzed
offline.

The chemicals in the sample were identified on the
basis of electron
ionization (EI) MS fragmentation data. Compound identification was
carried out as follows; the GC peak of interest was selected, and
the corresponding mass spectrum was matched against existing database
entries. Mass Spectral Search Software v. 2.0 with NIST 2005 and Wiley
2009 MS libraries was used. If the match score exceeded 80%, the match
was presumed to be correct. Otherwise, the list of the potential compounds
was reviewed and the most likely tentative candidate(s) was selected
on the basis of fragmentation patterns. If the match score for the
best match was below 20%, the compound was presumed unidentified and
not included into the list of detected metabolites. An example of
fragmentation pattern matching is shown (Figure A1b) in the Supporting Information.

Additional GC/MS
experiments were conducted using chemical derivatization
of the sample at the Genome Center of University of California, Davis.
A 675 μL aliquot of the sample was lyophilized and derivatized
with methoxylamine hydrochloride (MeOx) solution in pyridine and N-methyl-N-trimethylsily trifluoroacetamide
(MSTFA). The analyte was then directly injected into a 6890 GC (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) equipped with a cryo-cooled injection
system inlet (CIS4, GERSTEL, Inc.) interfaced to the Pegasus IV time-of-flight
mass spectrometer (Leco, St. Joseph, MI) operated in the 1D reflectron
mode. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Rtx-5SilMS column
with a 10 m integrated guard column [95% dimethyl/5% diphenyl polysiloxane
film; 30 m × 0.25 mm (inside diameter) × 0.25 μm d.f.
(Restek, Bellefonte, PA)]. The GC oven temperature program was as
follows: initial temperature of 45 °C with a 2 min hold followed
by a 20 °C/min ramp up to 300 °C with a 2 min hold followed
by a 20 °C/min ramp up to 330 °C with a 0.5 min hold. As
expected, less volatile compounds such as carbonic acids were detected
in this method (Table A1 in the Supporting Information).

Liquid Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry Analysis of Nonvolatile
Fraction
For liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS)
analysis, the 0.1 mL aliquot of sample (upon availability) was lyophilized
and then redissolved in 100 μL of 90% acetonitrile in water.
Five μL of resuspended sample was then injected for analysis.
For the in-depth MS/MS analysis, 1 mL of total volume was pooled from
multiple animals’ samples. The CUDA (12-[[(cyclohexylamino)carbonyl]amino]dodecanoic
acid) in methanol/toluene, 9:1 v/v internal standard, was used for
quality control and to assess reproducibility. Chromatography was
performed on an Agilent 1200 Series high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Samples were
housed in an autosampler maintained at 4 °C, and material was
separated on a Kinetex 2.6 μm (HILIC) 100 Å HPLC column
(150 mm × 2.10 mm) (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA), held at 40 °C
during analysis. Mobile phase A consisted of water. Mobile phase B
was 90% acetonitrile in water. Ammonium acetate and acetic acid were
added to each to obtain a pH of 5. Starting mobile phase composition
was 100% B; over 15 min, the flow of mobile phase B was decreased
to 45% and replaced by mobile phase A. The flow rate was held constant
at 0.35 mL/min over this time. LC eluents were analyzed with an Agilent
6530 accurate-mass Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Santa Clara, CA) equipped
with an Agilent Jet Stream ESI source in positive and negative ion
modes. The mass range was set to 60–1700 Thomson (m/z); scan rate was 4 spectra/second, and sample
analysis time was 21 min per sample. Fragmentor voltage was 120 V;
sheath gas flow was 11 L/min, and sheath gas temp was 350 °C.
An additional experiment was conducted with the reverse phase Waters
Acquity CSH C18 column 1.7 μm, UHPLC (2.1 × 100 mm) (Milford,
MA USA) (column for broader metabolite coverage). For this mode, the
CUDA (12-[[(cyclohexylamino)carbonyl]amino]dodecanoic acid) in methanol/toluene,
9:1 v/v internal standard, was also added for quality control and
to assess reproducibility. The samples were separated on the column
held at 65 °C during analysis. Mobile phase A consisted of 60%
acetonitrile in water. Mobile phase B was 10% acetonitrile in isopropanol.
Formic acid and ammonium formate were added to make the final concentration
of each mobile phase 10 mM for both formic acid and ammonium formate.
Mobile phase composition at time (minutes) 0 was 15% B, at time 4
was 30% B, at time 5 was 48% B, at time 22 was 82% B, and at time
23 was 99% B and held for 1 min before the column was re-equilibrated.
Flow rate was 0.6 mL/min. The entire sample was dried down and then
resuspended in 100 μL of 9:1 methanol/toluene. Three μL
of sample was then injected. Samples were analyzed by MS and identified
by MS/MS spectra using an Agilent 6530 accurate mass LC-QTOF in positive
ionization mode. The mass range was 60–1700 Thomson (m/z); the scan rate was 2 spectra/second,
and sample analysis time was 30 min per sample. Fragmentor voltage
was set at 120 V; sheath gas flow was 11 L/min, and sheath gas temperature
was 350 °C. For both analyses modes, compound annotations were
performed by comparing sample MSMS spectra to NIST and Metlin libraries,
using the software MSpepSearch and NISTMS.

Chemical identification
was carried out automatically by MS/MS fragmentation of the parent
ion from analytes in the LC eluent with the following matching of
MS/MS patterns to METLIN and RESPECT mass spectral libraries with
a 3 mTh window. For some of the selected compounds of interest for
which MS/MS data were not obtained, tentative identification based
on exact mass was carried out using the METLIN library. Automatic
software matching may result in incorrect identification for some
metabolites leading to repeating entries for identified compounds
at different retention times. In order to establish the correct structures
in each case, confirmation of identified compounds through use of
chemical standards is necessary. Further tentative identification
was carried out by manually selecting the best match. The manually
identified compounds are listed in Table A13 in the Supporting Information.

Statistical Analysis
The LC/MS raw data files were
first processed with the “Find By Molecular” feature
in Agilent’s Mass Hunter Qualitative Analysis B.05.00SP1 software
in order to deconvolve each peak. The deconvolved chromatograms were
then exported to .cef data format, and the peaks were aligned using
Mass Profiler Professional 12.1 software. The alignment window was
set at 0.5 min. The files were then put to recursive analysis using
the “Find by Formula” feature of the Mass Hunter Qualitative
Analysis B.05.00SP1 software. In the compiled peak tables, the minimum
intensity value of each individual peak over all the samples was found,
and each of those values was divided by three. This was done in order
to reduce the impact of zero values in PCA and PLS. Captive and wild
dolphin data were treated as a single data set for deconvolution and
alignment. All of the peaks that were present in any of the blanks
were removed from the table. In order to remove any spurious peaks,
a “70% filter” was applied: peaks which were present
in less than 70% of the samples in one group and more than 20% in
another were removed. Furthermore, peaks that were present in less
than 20% of samples in both groups were also removed.

After
preprocessing, the obtained peak tables data were analyzed using partial
least square discriminant analysis (PLSDA).14 Partial least-squares (PLS) regression is a multivariate latent-variable
method that relates one dependent variable or predictand (y) to a set of independent variables, or predictors, X. Partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA)
is the application of PLS to the classification of problems in which y is a vector that codifies the class of each sample (male/female,
fasting/nonfasting, or managed/wild animals). The class label of an
unknown sample is decided from the y-value predicted
by the PLS model. Ideally, the predicted y should
be close to the coded class values, such as organized in the range
rather than stochastically assigned. In practice, it is a real number
and different approaches can be used to convert the predicted y into a class label.

Results
We collected
and analyzed exhaled breath from managed (San Diego
Bay, CA USA) and wild (Sarasota Bay, FL USA) bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus) populations, as described in the Experimental Section. The design of the condenser
was found to allow for minimal restriction to exhaled breath thus
allowing animals to breathe comfortably while collecting a sufficient
amount of exhalate. The breath collection process was found to be
very efficient for dolphins, and the target sample volume of ∼0.5
mL could be collected from trained animals in under 5 min (approximately
10 full breaths from an animal). Prior to further large-scale sample
collection, the chemical content of the samples collected from trained
animals was analyzed using GC/MS to confirm that the collection method
allows capturing metabolites in exhaled breath. Breath samples from
three animals (one female, two males) were tested. In addition, sample
collection with and without the rebreathing valve was conducted on
several animals to verify that the valve presence/absence does not
affect the metabolomics content of the samples. The sampler performance
and the sampling method were evaluated/validated by comparing the
samples obtained from the same animal back-to-back and on different
days, as well as for different animals. Samples with abnormally small
volumes (less than ∼0.2 mL for 10 full breaths) coupled with
abnormal animal behavior during collection were verified for metabolic
content. GC/MS analysis was not used for quantitative measurements
but only to document the compounds in the volatile fraction. For the
nonvolatile fraction, the internal standard was employed and data
scaled as described above to allow for semiquantitative analysis.
In the protocol development study, we have determined that an excellent
run-to-run reproducibility was achieved for samples from the same
animal, but sample collection conditions have had pronounced effects.
Examples of gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) and liquid
chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) data, as well as a list of
identified compounds, are provided in the Supporting
Information (Figures A1 and A2 and Tables A1–A13); note
that chemical identification assignments are putative with varying
degree of certainty.

Our results indicate that, similarly to
human breath, dolphin breath
is a very complex mixture of various compounds, many of which are
present in trace amounts. A large number of detected compounds have
been reported to be present in human breath, especially volatile compounds
such as various aliphatic and aromatic alcohols, hydrocarbons, and
carbonyls.3 Some of the prominent compounds
found in the volatile fraction of dolphin breath are small amines,
such as 1-pentanamine, bis (2-hydroxypropyl) amine, and 5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-pyrrolidinone,
many of which have not been reported in humans.3 The latter compounds are presumed to be responsible for
the characteristic “fishy” smell of dolphin breath.
Compounds detectable in nonvolatile fractions of exhaled breath condensate
of bottlenose dolphins included amino acids, peptides, lipids such
as steroids, phospholipids, prostaglandins, carbohydrates, and small
molecules such as carbonic acids, amines, and pharmaceuticals. Due
to the “explosive” breathing of cetaceans, we presume
that we are able to capture many nonvolatile compounds originating
from the aerosolized droplets from the deep lung alveolar space.

In addition to a large number of compounds that are obviously of
biogenic origin, some compounds may be attributed to external sources.
Examples of such compounds are phthalates (plasticizers); 2,4-diisocyanato-1-methyl-benzene
(environmental contaminant); 2,6-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione
(known water contaminant); and some of the long-chain alcohols (potentially
a water-soluble fraction of urban runoff). A list of volatile compounds
identified in seawater is given in Table A3 and in ambient air condensate,
in Table A4 in the Supporting Information. The proposed chemical identities are tentative, and in upcoming
years, we anticipate to confirm the identities of key metabolites
of interest in the database through the use of chemical standards.

As in humans,4 we observed variations
in the chemical content of dolphin EBC. This may be partially attributed
to the effect of the breath sampling procedure itself on chemical
content, which is well documented in human studies.15 However, we also expect normal biogenic variation among
animals. An example of changing GC patterns for different animals
is shown in Figure A1 in the Supporting Information. To further explore links between breath chemical composition and
an animal’s life history and health status, we utilized established
bioinformatics approaches. Animal breath metabolome patterns were
analyzed as described in the “Online Methods”. Partial least square discriminant analysis (PLS-DA)14 was applied to the data for fasting versus nonfasting animals,
as well as males versus females. We have determined which compounds
have had the highest contribution to discrimination analysis between
the two states indicating potential metabolites of interest. In addition,
the total metabolome could be represented and compared using principal
component analysis (PCA). An example of PCA plot for the LC/MS data
is shown for the managed dolphin population (Figure 2). In order to know how to classify different groups, PLS-DA
was applied and Figure 3 shows the PLS-DA score
plot of male versus female animals in San Diego Bay. The PCA plot of fasting
versus nonfasting animals is also shown (Figure 4). Finally, Figure 5 shows the PCA plot for
the two populations: wild animals in Sarasota Bay and managed animals
in San Diego Bay.

Figure 2 Principal component analysis (PCA) of LC/MS samples. Abnormal
breathing
behavioral or health issues were identified for each of the three
dolphins outside of the cluster. All other dolphins were known to
be healthy at the time of sample collection.

Figure 3 Partial least square discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) of LC/MS samples
for male and female dolphins. No apparent clustering is observed on
the basis of sex alone.

Figure 4 Partial least square discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) of LC/MS samples
for fasting and nonfasting animals. Weak clustering is observed for
the fasting status.

Figure 5 Partial least square
(PLS) of LC/MS samples for wild (Sarasota
Bay) and managed (San Diego Bay) populations. Apparent clustering
is observed; animals in the wild population are significantly more
dissimilar to each other compared to the animals in the managed population.

The metabolome comparison was
carried out for the LC/MS data, as
the chemical composition of the nonvolatile fraction of the sample
was found to be more consistent with better day-to-day reproducibility
(data not shown) than for the volatile fraction. The lower reproducibility
for the volatile fraction is presumed to result from greater effects
of the sampling conditions (such as ambient temperature, humidity,
and wind speed) on the amount of trapped chemicals during sample collection.
This variability in human studies has been also observed, and it has
been previously suggested to confine EBC measurements to nonvolatile
compounds16 due to this phenomenon.

Discussion
As discussed in the Results section, our
data indicate that dolphin breath contains a large variety of low-abundance
metabolites, many of which are common with those found in human breath.17 In humans, changes in the presence or abundance
of some of these compounds have been considered as indicative of health
status, e.g., linked to malignancy.18 In
addition to biogenic compounds, potential environmental contaminants
were also present. Such contaminants could be introduced into the
EBC sample through sample handling; for example, sample contact with
plastic surfaces may lead to introduction of phthalates. Thus, we
took great efforts to minimize sample contact with any surface other
than clean glass and conducted sample collection in a way to minimize
cross-contamination, as described above. Since phthalates are easily
released into the environment, an alternative introduction route into
the samples may be through contamination of the animals’ habitat.
As San Diego Bay and Sarasota Bay, Florida, are heavily urbanized
environments, large amounts of chemical and biological waste are inevitably
present in runoff waters, likely leading to contamination. As would
be expected, several compounds known to be industrial environmental
pollutants were found both in the water as well as the EBC (Table
A3 in the Supporting Information). This
is not surprising, as dolphins spend their entire lives in water and
are exposed to contaminants over long durations of time. San Diego
is home to several industries, a commercial airport, and high levels
of commercial and recreational boat traffic. Sarasota Bay is also
a highly urbanized coastal area with a high level of recreational
boating. External contaminants may be absorbed through the skin as
well as inhaled or ingested by dolphins, metabolized, and subsequently
exhaled.

Figure 2 shows the PCA score
plot for the
managed population based on metabolites detected in the nonvolatile
fraction of the EBC. As can be seen, several outliers are present.
Interestingly, each outlier coincides with a specific health issue,
including a bone lesion (animal 3) and pneumonia (upon retrospective
analysis, animal 2). Animal 1, on the other hand, exhibited abnormal
behavior and shallow breathing during the sample collection and was
unlikely to be exhaling alveolar air. For this dolphin, a very small
amount of sample was procured. Also, the sample was found to be diluted
by water as it contained only a small amount of biogenic metabolites.
Consequently, the animal was expected to be an outlier. The animals within the
main cluster were all healthy. A future larger scale study may help
to establish whether specific health status conditions (or sample
collection and treatment differences) would result in distinct differentiation
of animals with and without health or other issues. Upon removal of
the outlier animals, no discernible clustering can be observed for
the baseline healthy animals. The scatter indicates small variations
in chemical composition among animals. In addition to individual differences
between animals, variations in the metabolic content of exhaled breath
are likely to occur due to a multitude of factors associated with
a normal life cycle, including contaminants from the environment,
diet, age, health status, and environment as well and many others.
These factors will likely lead to fluctuations in the chemical signature
of dolphin breath.19 Furthermore, changes
in sampling conditions, such as ambient temperature and wind speed,
may have also introduced bias into our sampling in determining concentrations
of breath metabolites, especially for volatile compounds. Follow up
studies using chemical standards are necessary to precisely measure
abundances and changes in abundances of key metabolites of interest
in EBC.

The PLS-DA score plot of males versus females (Figure 3) shows that breath metabolite differences between
sexes are not immediately apparent. This suggests that either sex-specific
chemicals such as hormones were present in insignificantly different
amounts during the time of sampling or their relative contribution
to the total metabolome is small enough to minimize group differences
based on gender alone. This observation is in contrast with human
studies where noticeable differences in breath composition between
males and females were reported,20,21 although those
studies did not comprehensively map the breath metabolome. At the
same time, the PLS-DA score plot of fasting versus nonfasting animals
(Figure 4) does show a weak separation. This
implies that some of the differences in metabolism due to fasting
status (such as glucose or lipid levels) may affect the composition
of exhaled breath in dolphins. In the present study, the sample collection
was carried out near the end of the postprandial phase.22 It is possible that collecting samples immediately
at postprandial state may lead to better discrimination between fed
and unfed animals. Metabolic differences in fasting and nonfasting
status were previously investigated for humans, and subject-specific
metabolite changes (specifically in lipids and amino acids) were consistently
reflected in various biological fluids including breath.23 We expect that such metabolic changes would
occur in dolphins as well. The most relevant biomarker discriminating
fasting and nonfasting groups (base peak m/z 1144.345 Th/retention time 21.8415 min) was tentatively
identified as (6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z,18Z)-3-oxotetracosapenta-6,9,12,15,18-enoyl-CoA.
This compound has been putatively functionally linked to the HADHA
gene, which provides instructions for making part of the mitochondrial
trifunctional protein enzyme complex required to metabolize long-chain
fatty acids, the major source of energy used by the heart and muscles
during periods of fasting.24,25 Another compound that
was found to be important for discrimination of both fasting and nonfasting
female animals (base peak m/z 975.7548
Th/retention time 1.65733 min) was tentatively identified as a triglyceride.

Comparison of breath metabolite profiles for the managed (San Diego
Bay, CA) and wild (Sarasota Bay, FL) dolphin populations, shown in
Figure 5, indicates that apparent differences
exist between these two groups. Although both populations of animals
are of the same species and both originated in the Gulf of Mexico,
the groups are clearly distinguishable from each other. When comparing
the managed and wild populations, it is apparent that wild animals
are more dissimilar to each other compared to managed population animals.
A variety of factors such as geographic spread of the wild individuals
may drive the difference between the two populations. However, the
most likely explanation is that the managed population is maintained
in a stable environment. The dolphins sampled from the managed population
are fed a consistent diet composed of a predominant mixture of commercially
caught capelin, herring, mackerel, and squid and are supplemented
with vitamins specially formulated for marine mammals. The managed
dolphins in this study were not exhibiting obvious reproductive behavior,
had known health status, were housed in sea pens in the same general
area each day, and received daily health checks and medical care when
needed. In contrast, wild populations are subject to shifts in environmental
conditions, prey species availability, and may have unidentified health
conditions.26 Within the well-defined,
long-term range of the resident community, wild dolphins may be exposed
to differing levels of environmental conditions including runoff,
algae, and natural micro bacteria populations. The wild dolphin samples
included a greater variety of life history categories (for example,
mother and calf were present in wild population but not in the managed
population), as well as other factors (for example, sampling in the
wild population occurred during the height of the reproductive season).

In summary, our results indicate that breath metabolite analysis
is a promising noninvasive method of monitoring cetacean health, both
in managed populations and in the wild. Due to respiratory system
anatomy and breathing behavior, this method appears to be even more
amenable to cetaceans than humans. This finding potentially opens
up possibilities of learning from dolphin-based studies to help advance
human breath research.27 Our newly developed
method is intended to provide useful diagnostic information via monitoring
of EBC metabolome content which can be used by veterinary personnel
and conservation managers in their decision making processes. In the
present study, we demonstrate how the developed methodology can be
used to establish a baseline of the total metabolic “fingerprint”
of an animal as reflected in exhaled breath. We also elucidated the
chemical basis of specific differences in dolphin populations. As
we continue to expand the information on the metabolome, the understanding
of the metabolite’s origin and comparison across species can
ultimately enhance our knowledge of underlying metabolic processes.

We hope the reported analytical methodology will lay the groundwork
for further developments in cetacean health monitoring via exhaled
breath. In the future, it will be important to establish which chemicals
(biomarkers) in dolphin breath can be reliably linked to certain health
conditions or exposures. Longitudinal comparison to other routinely
acquired diagnostic measures (blood, urine, fecal, and ultrasound
tests) would provide an excellent basis to assess the potential of
dolphin breath diagnostics for “personalized medicine”
approaches to managed animal care. In turn, this may enable rapid
health assessment by monitoring for the presence or absence of specific
biomarker compounds during routine health assessment or surveillance
of wild populations. Tracking breath biomarkers may provide diagnostic
information about a specific animal and also can be helpful in tracking
the effects of environmental stress in marine life populations and
monitoring ecosystem health and recovery progress. Further work is
needed to assess the total metabolic variance over medium- and long-term
studies. These longitudinal observations could also be further correlated
with the existing studies in human models. When benchmarked, the proposed
methods may serve as a future “gold standard” for reliable
and noninvasive health status monitoring of marine mammals.

Supporting Information Available
Examples of GC data for EBC
of dolphin; examples of LC data for EBC of dolphin; loadings plot
for the PLSDA analysis; compounds in dolphin breath identified with
GC/MS using chemical derivatization; compounds in dolphin breath identified
with GC/MS using head space SPME extraction; list of volatile metabolites
(GC/MS) detected in seawater; list of volatile metabolites (GC/MS)
in air condensate; lists of nonvolatile metabolites (LC/MS) for managed
and wild population animals using HILIC and RP columns in positive
and negative ion modes; manually selected best tentative matches for
nonvolatile metabolites (LC/MS). This material is available free of
charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org/.

Supplementary Material
ac5024217_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the Office of Naval
Research (ONR)
grant #N-00014-13-1-0580 [CED], under an animal care and use protocol
reviewed and approved by the Navy Marine Mammal Program Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee and the Navy Bureau of Medicine, and
partially by Dolphin Quest [RSW], The Hartwell Foundation [CED] and
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) through
grant #UL1 TR000002.
==== Refs
References
Bossart G. D. 
Vet. Pathol. 
2011 , 48 , 676 –690 .21160025 
Wells R. ; Rhinehart H. ; Hansen L. ; Sweeney J. ; Townsend F. ; Stone R. ; Casper D. R. ; Scott M. ; Hohn A. ; Rowles T. 
EcoHealth 
2004 , 1 , 246 –254 .
de
Lacy Costello B. ; Amann A. ; Al-Kateb H. ; Flynn C. ; Filipiak W. ; Khalid T. ; Osborne D. ; Ratcliffe N. M. 
J. Breath Res. 
2014 , 8 , 014001 .24421258 
Amann A. , Smith D.  , Eds. Volatile Biomarkers: Non-Invasive
Diagnosis in Physiology and Medicine ; Elsevier : Boston , 2013 ; p 563 .
Kooyman G. L. ; Cornell L. H. 
Physiol. Zool. 
1981 , 54 , 55 –61 .
Ridgway S. H. ; Scronce B. L. ; Kanwisher J. 
Science 
1969 , 166 , 1651 –1654 .5360592 
Irving L. ; Scholander P. F. ; Grinnell S. W. 
J. Cell. Comp. Physiol. 
1941 , 17 , 145 –168 .
Ponganis P. J. ; Kooyman G. L. ; Winter L. M. ; Starke L. N. 
J. Comp. Physiol., B 
1997 , 167 , 9 –16 .9051904 
Frere C. H. ; Krzyszczyk E. ; Patterson E. M. ; Hunter S. ; Ginsburg A. ; Mann J. 
PLoS
One 
2010 , 5 , e12299.20811619 
Hogg C. J. ; Rogers T. L. ; Shorter A. ; Barton K. ; Miller P. J. O. ; Nowacek D. 
Mar. Mammal Sci. 
2009 , 25 , 605 –618 .
Schroeder J. P. ; Raverty S. ; Cameron C. ; Zabek E. ; Eshghi A. , Bain D. ; Wood B. , Hanson B. ; Rhodes L.  Investigation into the Microbial Culture and Molecular
Screening of Exhaled Breaths of Endangered Southern Resident Killer
Whales (SRKW) and Pathogen Screening of the Sea-Surface Microlayer
(SML) in Puget Sound . In Proceedings of the
2009 Puget Sound Georgia Basin Ecosystem Conference , Seattle,
Washington USA, February, 8–11, 2009 .
Acevedo-Whitehouse K. ; Rocha-Gosselin A. ; Gendron D. 
Anim. Conserv. 
2010 , 13 , 217 –225 .
Cumeras R. ; Cheung W. H. K. ; Davis C. E. ; Gulland F. ; Goley D. 
Metabolites 
2014 , 4 , 790 –806 .25222833 
Westerhuis J. A. ; Hoefsloot H. C. J. ; Smit S. ; Vis D. J. ; Smilde A. K. ; van Velzen E. J. J. ; van Duijnhoven J. P.
M. ; van Dorsten F. A. 
Metabolomics 
2008 , 4 , 81 –89 .
Risby T. H. ; Solga S. F. 
Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt. 
2006 , 85 , 421 –426 .
Effros R. M. ; Casaburi R. ; Porszasz J. ; Morales E. M. ; Saraswat A. ; Rehan V. 
J.
Breath Res. 
2012 , 6 , 048001 –048002 .23326824 
Phillips M. 
Anal. Biochem. 
1997 , 247 , 272 –278 .9177688 
Amann A. ; Corradi M. ; Mazzone P. ; Mutti A. 
Expert Rev. Mol.
Diagn. 
2011 , 11 , 207 –217 .21405971 
Phillips M. ; Herrera J. ; Krishnan S. ; Zain M. ; Greenberg J. ; Cataneo R. N. 
J. Chromatogr., B 
1999 , 729 , 75 –88 .
Lechner M. ; Moser B. ; Niederseer D. ; Karlseder A. ; Holzknecht B. ; Fuchs M. ; Colvin S. ; Tilg H. ; Rieder J. 
Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 
2006 , 154 , 478 –483 .16510318 
Tsang K. W. ; Ip S. K. ; Leung R. ; Tipoe G. L. ; Chan S. L. ; Shum I. H. ; Ip M. S. ; Yan C. ; Fung P. C. ; Chan-Yeung M. ; Lam W. 
Lung 
2001 , 179 , 83 –91 .11733851 
Venn-Watson S. ; Carlin K. ; Ridgway S. 
Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 
2011 , 170 , 193 –199 .20951701 
Krug S. ; Kastenmueller G. ; Stueckler F. ; Rist M. J. ; Skurk T. ; Sailer M. ; Raffler J. ; Roemisch-Margl W. ; Adamski J. ; Prehn C. ; Frank T. ; Engel K.-H. ; Hofmann T. ; Luy B. ; Zimmermann R. ; Moritz F. ; Schmitt-Kopplin P. ; Krumsiek J. ; Kremer W. ; Huber F. ; Oeh U. ; Theis F. J. ; Szymczak W. ; Hauner H. ; Suhre K. ; Daniel H. 
FASEB J. 
2012 , 26 , 2607 –2619 .22426117 
Kamijo T. ; Aoyama T. ; Komiyama A. ; Hashimoto T. 
Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 
1994 , 199 , 818 –825 .8135828 
Kamijo T. ; Aoyama T. ; Miyazaki J. ; Hashimoto T. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
1993 , 268 , 26452 –26460 .8253773 
Wells R. ; McHugh K. A. ; Douglas D. C. ; Shippee S. ; Berens McCabe E. J. ; Barros N. B. ; Phillips G. T. 
Front. Endocrinol. 
2013 , 4 , 139 .
Schivo M. ; Aksenov A. A. ; Yeates L. C. ; Pasamontes A. ; Davis C. E. 
Front. Endocrinol. 
2013 , 4 , 163 .
