
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac403750zArticleNucleic Acid Test to Diagnose Cryptosporidiosis: Lab
Assessment in Animal and Patient Specimens Crannell Zachary
Austin †Castellanos-Gonzalez Alejandro ‡Irani Ayesha ‡Rohrman Brittany †White Arthur Clinton ‡Richards-Kortum Rebecca *†† Rice
University, 6500 Main
Street, Houston, Texas 77251, United States‡ University
of Texas Medical Branch, 301 University Boulevard, Galveston, Texas 77555, United States* E-mail: rkortum@rice.edu.30 01 2015 30 01 2014 04 03 2014 86 5 2565 2571 18 11 2013 30 01 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
Society

Diarrheal diseases cause more morbidity
and mortality around the
world than human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), malaria, or tuberculosis.
Given that effective treatment of persistent diarrheal illness requires
knowledge of the causative organism, diagnostic tests are of paramount
importance. The protozoan parasites of the genus Cryptosporidium are increasingly recognized to be responsible for a significant
portion of diarrhea morbidity. We present a novel nucleic acid test
to detect the presence of Cryptosporidium species in DNA extracted from stool samples. The assay uses the isothermal
amplification technique recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA)
to amplify trace amounts of pathogen DNA extracted from stool to detectable
levels in 30 min; products are then detected visually on simple lateral
flow strips. The RPA-based Cryptosporidium assay
(RPAC assay) was developed and optimized using DNA from human stool
samples spiked with pathogen. It was then tested using DNA extracted
from the stool of infected mice where it correctly identified the
presence or absence of 27 out of 28 stool samples. It was finally
tested using DNA extracted from the stool of infected patients where
it correctly identified the presence or absence of 21 out of 21 stool
samples. The assay was integrated into a foldable, paper and plastic
device that enables DNA amplification with only the use of pipets,
pipet tips, and a heater. The performance of the integrated assay
is comparable to or better than polymerase chain reaction (PCR), without
requiring the use of thermal cycling equipment. This platform can
easily be adapted to detect DNA from multiple pathogens.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac403750zdocument-id-new-14ac-2013-03750zccc-priceThis paper was published ASAP on
February 12, 2014, with missing funding information in the Acknowledgements
section. The corrected version was reposted February 14, 2014.
==== Body
Despite advances
in diagnosis
and treatment, diarrheal illness remains one of the leading causes
of morbidity and mortality in the developing world.1,2 Parasitic
infections are typically responsible for episodes of persistent diarrhea,
which in turn can lead to dehydration, wasting, and frequently death.3Cryptosporidium spp. are increasingly
being found to be responsible for these persistent diarrheal episodes,
accounting for 20% of diarrheal morbidity in children in both developed
and developing countries.4Cryptosporidium is a particular threat for individuals with HIV, affecting them
more than any other diarrheal parasite.2

Current diagnostic methods for cryptosporidiosis are suboptimal
leading to misdiagnosis or inappropriate treatment. In many cases,
because it requires specialized tests, clinicians do not even test
for Cryptosporidium in high risk populations.5 The traditional approach to identify stool parasites
relies heavily on microscopic analysis of stool smears. Even with
a highly trained laboratory technician using appropriate methods,
microscopic identification of stool parasites using acid fast staining
has a high limit of detection (∼50 000–500 000
oocysts per gram of stool).6 The limit
of detection of microscopy is higher than that associated with many
clinically significant infections, where the number of organisms can
range from as few as 103 oocysts per gram of stool to more
than 107 oocysts per gram of stool.7 Fluorescent stains, such as Auramine O, are more sensitive than
acid fast staining; however, the frequency of false positive tests
led the CDC to recommend that diagnosis by fluorescence microscopy
be confirmed with a secondary test such as an immunofluorescence antibody
(IFA) test or an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay.8 Both IFA tests and fluorescence staining require the use
of a fluorescence microscope, limiting their usefulness in low resource
settings. Enzyme-linked-immunosorbent-assays (ELISA) and lateral flow
tests that rely on antibodies have been developed to detect parasite
antigens; however, their reported sensitivity in the field varies
widely. In a multicenter, blinded study the four leading commercial
assays demonstrated clinical sensitivities between 47.2% and 68.8%.9

The gold standard for Cryptosporidium detection
is widely considered to be PCR, with a limit of detection (LOD) of
≤103 oocysts per gram of stool.10 Because of the increased sensitivity associated with polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) as compared to microscopic methods, the rate
of detection of Cryptosporidium and other intestinal
parasites is nearly twice as high with nucleic acid-based tests.11 Despite these advantages, PCR still requires
the use of thermal cycling equipment. Because of the high cost associated
with thermal cyclers ($3 000–$10 000), there
is a high investment burden on clinics or laboratories wishing to
conduct PCR. For this reason PCR assays are typically only available
in reference laboratories and are seldom used for initial diagnosis.

A number of isothermal nucleic acid amplification techniques have
been developed to enable performance of nucleic acid testing outside
of reference laboratories. Nucleic acid sequence based amplification,
loop-mediated amplification, rolling circle amplification, strand
displacement amplification, and recombinase polymerase amplification
among others have been explored.12,13 Recombinase
polymerase amplification (RPA) offers significant advantages over
other isothermal amplification techniques because of its speed and
low temperature requirements. RPA is an isothermal process that functions
efficiently between 25 and 42 °C.13 Because the RPA enzymes function well between room temperature and
body temperature, it is theoretically possible to completely alleviate
the need for heating equipment. The reaction enzymes are stable in
dried formulation and can be safely stored without refrigeration for
point-of-care use for up to a year.14 Perhaps
most significantly, with simple primer modifications, it is possible
to detect RPA amplicons using commercially available lateral flow
strips. Using this technology, we developed an RPA-based Cryptosporidium assay (RPAC) to detect DNA from Cryptosporidium spp. using nucleic acid isolated from stool samples.

Materials and
Methods
Ethics Statement
All human stool samples were collected
from normal healthy volunteers according to Rice University IRB approved
protocol 11-101E. Informed, written consent was given by all human
volunteers. Animal testing was completed in Galveston, TX at the University
of Texas Medical Branch in compliance with the Animal Welfare Act
(Public Law 89-544) and university protocols (IACUC approval no. 1005021A).

Study Design
The objective of this study was to develop,
optimize, and evaluate the performance of a new RPAC assay to detect Cryptosporidium in stool samples. Controlled laboratory
experiments were first performed to optimize assay parameters and
evaluate assay performance using samples spiked with oocysts spanning
a clinically relevant range of concentrations. Assays were performed
in triplicate or quadruplicate, as described below. In all cases,
positive and negative test results were objectively determined using
a predetermined signal-to-background ratio (SBR) threshold; no data
were excluded from analysis.

Once optimized, experiments were
performed to assess the performance of the RPAC assay using stool
samples from 18 animals infected with Cryptosporidium and 10 healthy controls. The sample size of the pilot animal study
was based on the availability of banked samples. Finally, the RPAC
assay was performed using banked stool samples from 10 patients with
cryptosporidiosis and 10 healthy volunteers. The sample size of the
pilot preclinical study was based on the number of banked stool samples
available from state health authorities. Positive or negative RPAC
assay results were determined using the same predetermined threshold;
results of the RPAC assay were compared to the gold standard of PCR
which was performed in duplicate. The RPAC assay and PCR testing of
animal and human samples were performed at separate institutions by
different operators, with the RPAC assay operator blinded to whether
specimens were from healthy or infected subjects. No data were excluded
from analysis.

RPAC Assay Development and Optimization
The RPAC assay
was initially developed using the TwistAmp Basic kit (TwistDX, U.K.).
TwistAmp Basic reactions were performed according to the manufacturer’s
recommended protocols with the amplified products detected via gel
electrophoresis.

A 208 base pair DNA target sequence specific
to Cryptosporidium spp. was selected on the 18S RNA
gene as an RPA target. A number of forward and reverse primers were
screened for their ability to efficiently amplify the 18S gene target
(data not shown). The forward primer (RPAF6, 5′-GTGGCAATGACGGGTAACGGGGAATTAGGG-3′)
and reverse primer (RPAR7, 5′-AATTGATACTTGTAAAGGGGTTTATACTTAACTC-3′)
were ultimately selected based on their ability to consistently amplify
the targeted sequence. All primers and probes were purchased from
Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA).

RPA reactions
were mixed in sterile 1.5 mL screw-top microcentrifuge
tubes according to the manufacturer’s instructions, then incubated
at 37 °C for 30 min (optimal time identified from experiments
with times ranging from 10 to 40 min; data not shown). The reaction
was stopped and products were purified using the Qiagen MiniElute
PCR Purification Kit according to the manufacturer’s recommended
protocol (Germantown, MD). Amplified products were electrophoresed
on a 3% agarose gel and read with a Bio Rad Gel Doc XR+ gel reader.

As a proof of concept, we went on to develop a lateral flow RPAC
assay to detect Cryptosporidium spp. using commercially
available lateral flow strips (HybriDetect MGHD1, Milenia Biotec,
Germany). The lateral flow strips contained a sample pad with dried
gold nanoparticles that were conjugated to rabbit anti-FITC antibodies;
streptavidin was immobilized at the detection line on the lateral
flow strip. Dual-labeled RPA products with a 5′FITC label on
one strand and a 5′biotin label on the complementary strand
attached to the anti-FITC gold. The DNA-gold conjugates were then
captured at the streptavidin detection line. The strips also contained
a control line functionalized with antirabbit antibody that captured
any anti-FITC gold nanoparticles not captured at the detection line.
This is shown schematically in Figure 2A.

Dual labeled RPA products are generated with the TwistAmp nfo kit
(TwistDx, U.K.) using an unlabeled forward primer, a biotin labeled
reverse primer, and a TwistAmp LF probe. The TwistAmp LF probe has
a 3′ blocker and an internal abasic site that replaces a nucleotide.
The LF probe binds to the single-stranded, antisense DNA generated
by the biotin labeled reverse primer. In turn, an endonuclease cuts
the probe’s internal abasic site, unblocking the end of the
probe and allowing it to act as a primer. A polymerase then extends
the probe and generates a dual labeled RPA product that can be detected
using a lateral flow strip. Generation of these dual-labeled products
required a biotin labeled reverse primer (5′-Biotin-AATTGATACTTGTAAAGGGGTTTATACTTAACTC-3′)
as well as the addition of a FITC labeled probe (5′-FITC-ACAGGGAGGTAGTGACAAGAAATAACAATA-idSp-AGGACTTTTTGGTTTTGTA-3SpC-3′).

As with the basic reactions, the reactions using lateral flow detection
were incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. After incubation, two microliters
of amplified products were added directly to 98 μL of running
buffer (supplied with the HybridDetect lateral flow strips), briefly
vortexed, and 10 μL of the diluted products were added to a
Milenia HybridDetect lateral flow strip. The sample-end of each strip
was then placed into a well of a 96-well plate containing 100 μL
of running buffer. After 3 min, the strips were removed and scanned
using a flatbed scanner.

Image Analysis to Assess Test Results
Positive test
results contain two visible lines: a control line next to the absorbent
pad indicating the test ran successfully and a second line next to
the sample pad indicating the presence of Cryptosporidium. Generally the distinction between a positive and negative test
result was visually apparent – a negative test result had only
a single control band visible. Occasionally it was difficult to determine
whether a faint test band qualified as a positive or negative test
result. To resolve this issue, we determined a signal-to-background
ratio (SBR) threshold to differentiate a positive test result from
a negative test result. This was done by scanning images of 10 negative
control strips. Using a custom-built Matlab script (Mathwork, Natick,
MA), the signal-to-background ratio (SBR) of each test line was calculated
by dividing the average signal intensity of the test line by the average
signal intensity of the area surrounding the test line. For the 10
negative controls, we calculated the average SBR and standard deviation.
A positive SBR threshold was set at the average of the 10 negative
controls plus 3 times their standard deviation.

DNA Extraction
from PBS Spiked with Oocysts
The RPAC
assay was evaluated using DNA extracted from PBS solutions containing Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts in PBS purchased from Waterborne,
Inc. (New Orleans, LA). Oocysts was serially diluted to create 450
μL solutions with 106, 105, 104, 103, 102, 101 oocysts/mL PBS.
Total nucleic acids were extracted from each solution using a modified
protocol for Qiagen’s QIAamp DNA mini kit (Qiagen, Germantown,
MD). After total nucleic acids were extracted, they were used as a
template for the RPAC assay described above. Negative controls containing
PBS without oocysts also underwent the modified extraction protocol
as well as the RPAC assay.

Briefly, the modified nucleic acid
extraction protocol consists of the following steps. Each tube containing
sample was centrifuged for 5 min at 4000g. The supernatant
was removed, and 180 μL of buffer ATL and 20 μL of proteinase
K was added to each tube (all buffers supplied with the QIAamp kits).
The tubes were vortexed continuously for 1 min and then set to incubate
in a heat block at 55 °C for 2.5 h. During incubation, the samples
were briefly vortexed every 30–45 min. After incubation, 200
μL of buffer AL was added to each tube. Samples were vortexed
15 s then set to incubate in a heat block at 70 °C for 10 min.
After incubation, 200 μL of ethanol was added to each tube,
and the total nucleic acids were purified using a QIAamp DNA Mini
Spin Column (Qiagen, Germantown, MD) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

DNA Extraction from Stool Spiked with Oocysts
Uninfected
stool samples were collected from healthy volunteers in Houston, TX
according to Rice University IRB approved protocol 11-101E. Volunteer
stool samples were used fresh within 1 day. DNA from oocysts spiked
into fresh stool samples was extracted using the Autogen Quickgene
DNA tissue kits (Holliston,MA) and the Autogen QuickGene-Mini80 DNA
extraction device. A total of 250 μL of stool diluted with PBS
(50% stool, 50% PBS) was incubated with the supplied tissue lysis
buffer and proteinase K for 1 h at 80 °C. The stool samples were
then centrifuged at 8 000g for 5 min. The
supernatant was removed, added to a tube containing 180 μL of
the second supplied lysis buffer, vortexed for 15 s, and incubated
for 10 min at 80 °C. Lastly, 240 μL of ethanol was added
to the lysate and vortexed for 15 s. The lysate was added to a DNA
binding column and washed three times using the supplied washing buffer.
Nucleic acids were eluted in 200 μL of the supplied elution
buffer or water.

Testing the Specificity of the RPAC Assay
The RPAC
assay was tested for specificity against a number of other organisms
that present similarly in the clinic. Purified nucleic acids prepared
from cultures of Clostridium difficile, Salmonella
enterica, Giardia intestinalis, and Blastocystis hominis were purchased from ATCC (Manassas,
VA). DNA was also extracted from a stool sample that tested positive
for Fasciola by PCR and microscopy. A volume of 10
μL of DNA (100 ng DNA per μL) from each extraction was
used as a template in an RPA reaction with the lateral flow RPAC assay.
A positive control containing DNA extracted from 106Cryptosporidium oocysts/mL PBS (8.4 ng DNA per μL)
and a negative control containing no template DNA were also tested.
DNA extractions from non-Cryptosporidium organisms
contained an excess concentration of DNA to ensure that RPAC assay
negativity was not due to lack of DNA.

Testing the RPAC Assay
with Stool Samples from Infected Animals
To test the performance
of the RPAC assay using stool from infected
animals, SCID-beige mice were infected orally with 1 × 106Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts (Iowa strain)
by gavage. After 4 days of infection the mice were treated daily for
10 days with 1000 mg/kg of Paromomycin, 100 mg/kg of pyrazolopyrimidine,
or placebo. Negative controls included uninfected animals. Stool pellets
were collected at various time points and stored at −20 °C
until DNA was extracted and tested for Cryptosporidium infection by real time qPCR. For DNA extractions 25 mg of stool
from each mouse was used. DNA was extracted and purified using the
QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). The purity and concentration
of DNA was determined by spectrophotometry using a Nanodrop (Thermo
Scientific, Wilmington, DE).

The parasite burden was determined
by real time qPCR using the Applied Biosystems 7500 Real-Time PCR
Systems (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY), the Platinum SYBR Green
qPCR SuperMix-UDG Kit (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY), and primers
for the C. parvum CP23 gene (CP-F, CAATCAGCAACCAAGCTCAA
and CP-R, TTGTTGAGCAGCAGGTTCAG). The conditions for PCR
were 5 min 95 °C × 1 cycle, 15 s at 95 °C, 1 min at
66 °C × 60 cycles. To test the specificity of the primers,
an additional dissociation stage was added at the end of the reaction
for dissociation curve analysis. A standard curve was generated from
serial dilutions of DNA from a known number of parasites and was included
in each reaction plate. Extracted DNA samples from 18 infected and
10 uninfected mice were blinded for RPA testing, and results were
compared to that of PCR.

Testing the RPAC Assay with Stool Samples
from Infected Patients
and Healthy Controls
Human stool samples from 10 infected
patients were generously provided by the Texas Department of State
Health Services Lab under a material transfer agreement. All stool
samples were stored in liquid zinc-polyvinyl alcohol (Zn-PVA) and
were previously confirmed to be infected with Cryptosporidium by a regional reference lab using the acid-fast staining method.
DNA was extracted from each sample. The extracted DNA was tested for
the presence of the Cryptosporidium CP23 gene using
PCR with amplified products detected via gel electrophoresis and quantified
via qPCR. Extracted DNA from these 10 samples along with 11 samples
from healthy volunteers was tested using the RPAC assay; samples were
coded so that the individual performing RPA did not know whether the
specimen came from a patient or a healthy volunteer.

Evaluating
the RPAC Assay in a Paper and Plastic Device
We previously
described a paper and plastic foldable device designed
to facilitate RPA use in low-resource settings.15 This RPA device was used to perform the RPAC assay using
DNA from the 10 infected human samples and the 11 uninfected control
samples.

Briefly, the devices were constructed of five components
cut with a laser cutter. Components consisted of an acetate base layer,
a double-sided adhesive layer for alignment, a cellulose wicking strip
patterned with melted wax, a cellulose master mix pad, and a glass
fiber pad for holding magnesium acetate. All components were purchased
from Grafix (Maple Heights, OH), GE Healthcare (Waukesha, WI), or
Millipore (Billerica, MA). Devices were assembled by stacking components.

Once assembled, the devices were used as a platform for the lateral
flow RPAC assay. First, the reagents were added to their respective
pads: the master mix pad received 37.5 μL of master mix containing
rehydration buffer, water, primers, and probes while the magnesium
acetate pad received 2.5 μL of magnesium acetate. The wicking
strip was placed into a tube containing extracted DNA to capture 10
μL of solution containing template DNA. The wick was then folded
down to bring the template DNA into contact with the master mix pad.
Lastly, the reaction was initiated by folding the device in half to
bring the magnesium acetate pad into contact with the sample wick
and master mix pads. The sealed device was then incubated on a heat
block at 37 °C for 30 min.

After incubation, the devices
were removed from the heat block
and peeled open. A volume of 2 μL were taken from the master
mix pad with a pipet and diluted with 98 μL of running buffer.
A volume of 10 μL of each dilution were added to the sample-end
of a Milenia lateral flow detection strip which was then placed into
an individual well of a 96 well plate containing 100 μL of running
buffer. After 3 min, the strips were removed and scanned using a flatbed
scanner.

Results
Performance of the RPAC
Assay in Solution with Spiked Stool
Samples
Using total nucleic acids extracted from PBS containing
oocysts, amplified products from as few as 103 oocysts/mL
PBS were detectable via gel electrophoresis (Figure 1A). When using nucleic acids extracted from stool, amplified
products from as few as 104 oocysts/mL stool are detectable
via gel electrophoresis (Figure 1B).

Figure 1 Gel detection
of RPA products. Amplified products were detected
using gel electrophoresis stained with ethidium bromide. Using DNA
extracted from oocysts spiked into PBS, RPA products from as few as
103 oocysts/mL PBS (A) are visible on the gel. Using DNA
extracted from oocysts spiked into uninfected stool samples from healthy
volunteers, RPA products from as few as 104 oocysts/mL
stool (B) are visible on the gel.

As seen in Figure 2B, RPA products amplified from as few as 102 oocysts/mL
PBS could be detected visually using lateral flow strips (objective
determination of a positive versus a negative test result outlined
previously in the Materials and Methods section).
It should be noted that the performance using lateral flow strips
is 1–2 orders of magnitude more sensitive than detection of
products by gel electrophoresis. Similarly, RPA lateral flow reactions
were performed using template DNA extracted from stool spiked with
oocysts. As shown in Figure 2C, products amplified
from as little as 102–103 oocysts/mL
stool could be detected visually.

Figure 2 Lateral flow detection of RPA product.
Dual labeled amplicons can
be detected visually using lateral flow strips (A). Anti-FITC conjugated
gold nanoparticles dried in the sample pad bind to the FITC label
on RPA amplicons. Gold nanoparticles wick down the strip where amplicon
bound nanoparticles are captured at the streptavidin detection line
and those nanoparticles not bound to amplicons are captured at the
positive control line. RPA products from DNA extracted from as few
as 102 oocysts/mL PBS (B) can be detected visually. RPA
products from DNA extracted from as few as 102 oocysts/mL
stool (C) can be detected visually.

RPAC Assay Consistency
The assay was repeated multiple
times using aliquots from the same sample in order to assess the intrasample
variability of the RPAC assay. Nucleic acids were extracted from stool
samples spiked with varying concentrations of oocysts (102–106 oocysts/mL stool). Three separate RPAC assays
were performed on aliquots from each of the DNA extractions in order
to assess the variability in assay results between samples. For every
concentration tested, all three RPAC assay repeats yielded the same
result, consistently detecting as few as 102 oocysts/mL
stool (Supporting Information).

Sample-to-sample
consistency was also determined by repeatedly (n =
4) creating serial dilutions of stool with varying concentrations
of spiked oocysts. Nucleic acids from each spiked stool sample were
extracted and tested using the RPAC assay and PCR. The RPAC assay
performed well when benchmarked against PCR, consistently demonstrating
equal or better performance (Table 1). Calculated
oocysts per reactions were based on starting concentration of oocysts
per mL of stool, amount of stool used in each extraction, elution
volume, and volume of DNA elution used per reaction according to details
described in the Materials and Methods sections.

Table 1 Testing the RPAC Assay on Different
Dilution Seriesa
 	 	dilution
series 1	dilution
series 2	dilution
series 3	dilution
series 4	
concentration (oocysts/mL)	calculated oocysts per reaction	RPAC	PCR	RPAC	PCR	RPAC	PCR	RPAC	PCR	
105	625	+	+	+	+	+	+	+	+	
104	63	+	+	+	+	+	+	+	+	
103	6	+	–	+	+	+	+	+	+	
102	≤1	+	–	–	–	+	–	–	–	
0	0	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	
a To assess
sample-to sample reliability,
PCR and the RPAC assay were performed using DNA extracted from four
separate dilution series of stool samples each containing the various
concentrations of parasites typically found in stool. The RPAC assay
demonstrated comparable or better performance compared with PCR.

Specificity of the RPAC
Assay
The RPAC assay was tested
for specificity using DNA extracted from a number of other intestinal
pathogens that cause illness with similar clinical presentation to Cryptosporidium. The RPAC assay yielded a positive result
on the lateral flow strip only for the sample containing Cryptosporidium; the test line was visually negative for all other organisms tested
(Figure 3).

Figure 3 Testing the RPAC assay for specificity.
RPA products detected using
lateral flow RPAC assay yield visually positive results only when
tested using DNA extracted from PBS spiked with Cryptosporidium; results are visually negative for all other organisms tested.

Performance of the RPAC
Assay with Stool Samples from Infected
Animals and Healthy Controls
Once the RPAC assay was optimized
using spiked samples, it was tested using DNA extracted from fecal
pellets of 18 Cryptosporidium-infected and 10 uninfected
mice; quantitative PCR to detect Cryptosporidium DNA
was used as a reference standard. Visual readout of the lateral flow
strips correctly identified the presence of Cryptosporidium DNA in each of the infected samples. The RPAC assay correctly identified
the absence of Cryptosporidium in 9 out of the 10
uninfected samples (Table 2). The RPAC assay
was falsely positive for one uninfected mouse sample. This sample
was retested using the RPAC assay; results of the second test were
negative.

Table 2 Performance of RPAC Assay Relative
to qPCR for DNA Extracted from Stools of Infected and Uninfected Mice
 	RPAC assay positive	RPAC
assay negative	
qPCR negative	1	9	
qPCR positive	18	0	
Performance of the RPAC Assay with Stool Samples from Infected
Patients and Healthy Controls
A total of 10 human stool samples
clinically verified to contain Cryptosporidium by
a reference laboratory and 11 stool samples from healthy volunteers
presumed to be uninfected were deidentified and tested using the RPAC
assay. The samples were also tested by real time quantitative PCR
and by PCR with gel electrophoresis detection (Table 3). All stool samples from infected patients that were verified
by a reference laboratory to contain Cryptosporidium using acid fast staining also tested positive by RPA with lateral
flow detection. PCR with gel electrophoresis was positive for 6 of
10 samples, while qPCR was positive for 5 of 9 samples for which DNA
was available. All stool samples from healthy volunteers tested negative
by the RPAC assay and PCR (data not shown). While PCR is generally
reported to be more sensitive than acid fast staining, we hypothesize
that PCR may have given negative results in some acid-fast positive
cases due to degradation of DNA during the 8 month interval between
when acid fast staining was performed and when DNA was extracted.

Table 3 Performance of the RPAC Assay Compared
to Various Gold Standards
sample number	acid fast staining	RPAC assay	RPAC
device	PCR/gel	real-time qPCR (units = parasites/g stool)	
1	+	+	–	–	0	
2	+	+	–	–	0	
3	+	+	+	–	0	
4	+	+	+	+	0	
5	+	+	+	–	5.4 × 103	
6	+	+	+	+	1.2 × 107	
7	+	+	+	+	1.5 × 107	
8	+	+	+	+	1.6 × 107	
9	+	+	+	+	3.9 × 108	
10	+	+	+	+	DNA not available	
Performance of the RPAC Assay in a Paper
and Plastic Device
We tested all 21 of the human stool samples
with the RPAC assay
using a previously described paper and plastic platform (Figure 4). Results were positive for 8 of 10 infected samples
and negative for all of healthy volunteers (Table 3).

Figure 4 RPA testing using a paper and plastic foldable device. (A) The
reagents are first added to their respective pads, (B) the wick is
then dipped into the tube containing DNA extracted from the stool
specimen, (C) and the device is folded to initiate and perform the
RPA reaction.

Discussion
This
paper describes a novel RPA-based assay for Cryptosporidium (RPAC assay); in laboratory evaluation, the RPAC assay was positive
when tested with DNA extracted from stool samples spiked with as few
as 100–1,000 oocysts per mL of stool (1–10 oocysts/reaction).
The RPAC assay further demonstrated specificity when tested using
a nucleic acid panel of five organisms that cause diarrheal illness
with clinical signs and symptoms similar to cryptosporidiosis.

In preclinical testing, the RPAC assay properly detected Cryptosporidium in DNA extracted from 18/18 infected mouse
stool samples and 10/10 infected human stool samples; all but one
of the 21 negative controls tested negative. When the single false
positive specimen was retested the RPAC assay accurately identified
it as negative, indicating that the initial positive reading was likely
due to amplicon carryover contamination during the RPAC assay setup.
The likelihood of carryover contamination can be reduced in the future
by implementing the RPAC assay on a compact, fully enclosed device
that completely contains the reaction.

As a step toward demonstrating
that the RPAC assay could be performed
in a low-resource setting, we implemented the assay in a paper and
plastic foldable device requiring only a micropipet, pipet tips, and
a single temperature heater (Figure 4). When
implemented in this device, the RPAC assay properly identified Cryptosporidium DNA in 8/10 infected human stool samples.
The two samples which were falsely negative by RPAC assay in the paper
and plastic device were also negative by PCR, suggesting a low concentration
of target DNA available to amplify. It is important to note that this
paper and plastic device only represents a step toward a fully integrated
device. Future iterations of the device should provide sample to answer
results without requiring that the device be unsealed to introduce
amplified products onto lateral flow strips. While such products currently
exist on the commercial market (i.e., Biohelix’s BESt Cassette),
implementation on a paper and plastic substrate would significantly
reduce their price and broaden their widespread usage.

A complicating
factor in assessing the performance of the RPAC
assay with clinical samples is the choice of an appropriate gold standard.
While PCR is generally considered to be the most sensitive test for Cryptosporidium, it was negative in several of the clinical
samples identified as positive by acid-fast staining. RPA is widely
considered to be more robust than PCR and we attribute the lower apparent
sensitivity of PCR to inhibitors found in fixatives compared to that
of the RPAC assay. The difference could also be due to the different
genetic sequences targeted by RPA and PCR.

As described in the Materials and Methods section, positive and negative
results were objectively determined
by scanning strips and using image analysis software to determine
whether the signal at the test line exceeded a threshold. We recognize
that a smaller signal-to-background ratio tended to correspond to
a lower level of infection and that in settings without access to
a scanner or image processing software, a faint test line might have
been considered an indeterminate test result. That being said, of
the 70 human and mouse results presented in this paper, only a single
visual determination differed from the objective electronic determination.

One limitation of the RPAC assay, like all DNA-based assays, is
their inability to distinguish between viable oocysts and nonviable
oocysts. While the ability to discern viable, infectious oocysts from
nonviable oocysts would be useful to assess the efficacy of water
treatment methodologies, the RPAC assay was developed with clinical
use in mind where the presence of any oocysts is of concern. The mRNA-based
platform NASBA identifies only viable oocysts and has demonstrated
comparable sensitivity as the RPAC assay;16,17 however, RPA offers several advantages over NASBA including lower
temperature requirements, speed of reaction, ease of detection of
products, ease of transport, etc. Using industry standard water preconcentration
techniques, the RPAC assay could still prove useful for water quality
assessment approaches that seek to determine whether oocysts are present
within a sample.

The primary limitations of our study involve
the pilot sample size
and complexity of sample preparation. Future field studies with a
larger number of samples will be necessary to fully characterize the
assay performance. Given the robustness of oocysts and the inhomogeneity
of stool samples, DNA extraction from stool samples at the point-of-care
is a difficult challenge. Govindarajan et al. have described a field-deployable
DNA extraction device that does not require electricity and can be
used at the point-of-care for viscous samples.18 This device or a similar type of device could be designed
to process fresh stool samples at the point-of-care.

Conclusion
The RPAC assay provides a sensitive nucleic acid test to diagnose
one of the most common causes of persistent diarrhea. Using RPA reagents
that are stable enough for use in field studies, Cryptosporidium testing could finally be accomplished without the need for expert
microscopy or costly thermal cyclers. This device could greatly impact
the approach to studies of the epidemiology of cryptosporidiosis and
greatly advance clinical care.

Supporting Information Available
Additional
information as noted
in text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac403750z_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Cathy Snider
and Charles Stager, Ph.D. for providing
clinically infected stool samples. Research reported in this publication
was supported by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases of the National Institutes of Health under award number U54AI057156.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes
of Health.
==== Refs
References
Lozano R. ; Naghavi M. ; Foreman K. ; Lim S. ; Shibuya K. ; Aboyans V. ; Abraham J. ; Adair T. ; Aggarwal R. ; Ahn S. Y. ; Alvarado M. ; Anderson H. R. ; Anderson L. M. ; Andrews K. G. ; Atkinson C. ; Baddour L. M. ; Barker-Collo S. ; Bartels D. H. ; Bell M. L. ; Benjamin E. J. ; Bennett D. ; Bhalla K. ; Bikbov B. ; Bin Abdulhak A. ; Birbeck G. ; Blyth F. ; Bolliger I. ; Boufous S. ; Bucello C. ; Burch M. ; Burney P. ; Carapetis J. ; Chen H. ; Chou D. ; Chugh S. S. ; Coffeng L. E. ; Colan S. D. ; Colquhoun S. ; Colson K. E. ; Condon J. ; Connor M. D. ; Cooper L. T. ; Corriere M. ; Cortinovis M. ; de Vaccaro K. C. ; Couser W. ; Cowie B. C. ; Criqui M. H. ; Cross M. ; Dabhadkar K. C. ; Dahodwala N. ; De Leo D. ; Degenhardt L. ; Delossantos A. ; Denenberg J. ; Des Jarlais D. C. ; Dharmaratne S. D. ; Dorsey E. R. ; Driscoll T. ; Duber H. ; Ebel B. ; Erwin P. J. ; Espindola P. ; Ezzati M. ; Feigin V. ; Flaxman A. D. ; Forouzanfar M. H. ; Fowkes F. G. R. ; Franklin R. ; Fransen M. ; Freeman M. K. ; Gabriel S. E. ; Gakidou E. ; Gaspari F. ; Gillum R. F. ; Gonzalez-Medina D. ; Halasa Y. A. ; Haring D. ; Harrison J. E. ; Havmoeller R. ; Hay R. J. ; Hoen B. ; Hotez P. J. ; Hoy D. ; Jacobsen K. H. ; James S. L. ; Jasrasaria R. ; Jayaraman S. ; Johns N. ; Karthikeyan G. ; Kassebaum N. ; Keren A. ; Khoo J.-P. ; Knowlton L. M. ; Kobusingye O. ; Koranteng A. ; Krishnamurthi R. ; Lipnick M. ; Lipshultz S. E. ; Ohno S. L. ; Mabweijano J. ; MacIntyre M. F. ; Mallinger L. ; March L. ; Marks G. B. ; Marks R. ; Matsumori A. ; Matzopoulos R. ; Mayosi B. M. ; McAnulty J. H. ; McDermott M. M. ; McGrath J. ; Mensah G. A. ; Merriman T. R. ; Michaud C. ; Miller M. ; Miller T. R. ; Mock C. ; Mocumbi A. O. ; Mokdad A. A. ; Moran A. ; Mulholland K. ; Nair M. N. ; Naldi L. ; Narayan K. M. V. ; Nasseri K. ; Norman P. ; O’Donnell M. ; Omer S. B. ; Ortblad K. ; Osborne R. ; Ozgediz D. ; Pahari B. ; Pandian J. D. ; Rivero A. P. ; Padilla R. P. ; Perez-Ruiz F. ; Perico N. ; Phillips D. ; Pierce K. ; Pope C. A. 3rd; Porrini E. ; Pourmalek F. ; Raju M. ; Ranganathan D. ; Rehm J. T. ; Rein D. B. ; Remuzzi G. ; Rivara F. P. ; Roberts T. ; De Leon F. R. ; Rosenfeld L. C. ; Rushton L. ; Sacco R. L. ; Salomon J. A. ; Sampson U. ; Sanman E. ; Schwebel D. C. ; Segui-Gomez M. ; Shepard D. S. ; Singh D. ; Singleton J. ; Sliwa K. ; Smith E. ; Steer A. ; Taylor J. A. ; Thomas B. ; Tleyjeh I. M. ; Towbin J. A. ; Truelsen T. ; Undurraga E. A. ; Venketasubramanian N. ; Vijayakumar L. ; Vos T. ; Wagner G. R. ; Wang M. ; Wang W. ; Watt K. ; Weinstock M. A. ; Weintraub R. ; Wilkinson J. D. ; Woolf A. D. ; Wulf S. ; Yeh P.-H. ; Yip P. ; Zabetian A. ; Zheng Z.-J. ; Lopez A. D. ; Murray C. J. L. 
Lancet 
2013 , 380 (9859 ), 2095 –2128 .23245604 
White A. C.   Cryptosporidium Species. In Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of
Infectious Diseases , 7 th ed.; Mandell G. L. , Bennett J. E.  , Eds.; Elsevier : Philadelphia, PA , 2009 ; pp 3547 –3560 .
Guerrant D. I. ; Moore S. R. ; Lima A. A. M. ; Patrick P. D. ; Schorling J. B. ; Guerrant R. L. 
Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 
1999 , 61 (5 ), 707 –713 .10586898 Putignani L. ; Menichella D. 
Interdiscip. Perspect. Infect. Dis. 
2010 , 2010 , 753512 .20706669 Mondal D. ; Haque R. ; Sack R. B. ; Kirkpatrick B. D. ; Petri W. A. Jr.
Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 
2009 , 80 (5 ), 824 –826 .19407131 
Fletcher S.
M. ; Stark D. ; Harkness J. ; Ellis J. 
Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 
2012 , 25 (3 ), 420 –449 .22763633 
Chalmers R. M. ; Campbell B. M. ; Crouch N. ; Charlett A. ; Davies A. P. 
J. Med. Microbiol. 
2011 , 60 (11 ), 1598 –1604 .21757501 
Weber R. ; Bryan R. T. ; Bishop H. S. ; Wahlquist S. P. ; Sullivan J. J. ; Juranek D. D. 
J. Clin. Microbiol. 
1991 , 29 (7 ), 1323 –1327 .1715881 
Bushen O. Y. ; Kohli A. ; Pinkerton R. C. ; Dupnik K. ; Newman R. D. ; Sears C. L. ; Fayer R. ; Lima A. A. M. ; Guerrant R. L. 
Trans. R. Soc.
Trop. Med. Hyg. 
2007 , 101 (4 ), 378 –384 .16934303 
Center
for Disease Control and Prevention . Laboratory
Identification of Parasites of Public Health Concern . http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ss6105.pdf (accessed August
8, 2012).
Agnamey P. ; Sarfati C. ; Pinel C. ; Rabodoniriina M. ; Kapel N. ; Dutoit E. ; Garnaud C. ; Diouf M. ; Garin J. F. ; Totet A. ; Derouin F. ; Natl A. C. 
J. Clin. Microbiol. 
2011 , 49 (4 ), 1605 –1607 .21289154 
ten Hove R.-J. ; van Lieshout L. ; Brienen E. A. T. ; Perez M. A. ; Verweij J. J. 
Diagn. Microbiol.
Infect. Dis. 
2008 , 61 (3 ), 280 –283 .18424043 Haque R. ; Roy S. ; Siddique A. ; Mondal U. ; Rahman S. M. M. ; Mondal D. ; Houpt E. ; Petri W. A. Jr.
Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 
2007 , 76 (4 ), 713 –717 .17426176 
Amar C. F. L. ; East C. L. ; Gray J. ; Iturriza-Gomara M. ; Maclure E. A. ; McLauchlin J. 
Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol.
Infect. Dis. 
2007 , 26 (5 ), 311 –323 .17447091 
Compton J. 
Nature 
1991 , 350 (6313 ), 91 –92 .1706072 Notomi T. ; Okayama H. ; Masubuchi H. ; Yonekawa T. ; Watanabe K. ; Amino N. ; Hase T. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2000 , 28 (12 ), e63 .10871386 Demidov V. V. 
Expert Rev. Mol.
Diagn. 
2002 , 2 (6 ), 542 –548 .12465451 Craw P. ; Balachandran W. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 (14 ), 2469 –2486 .22592150 Asiello P. J. ; Baeumner A. J. 
Lab Chip 
2011 , 11 (8 ), 1420 –1430 .21387067 Walker G. T. ; Fraiser M. S. ; Schram J. L. ; Little M. C. ; Nadeau J. G. ; Malinowski D. P. 
Nucleic Acids
Res. 
1992 , 20 (7 ), 1691 –1696 .1579461 
Piepenburg O. ; Williams C. H. ; Stemple D. L. ; Armes N. A. 
PLoS Biol. 
2006 , 4 (7 ), e204 .16756388 
Forest M.  RPA Storage Question ; Crannell Z.  , Ed.; TwistDx : Cambridge, U.K. , 2013 .
Rohrman B. A. ; Richards-Kortum R. R. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 (17 ), 3082 –3088 .22733333 
Aguilar Z. P. ; Fritsch I. 
Anal. Chem. 
2003 , 75 (15 ), 3890 –3897 .14572058 
Connelly J. T. ; Nugen S. R. ; Borejsza-Wysocki W. ; Durst R. A. ; Montagna R. A. ; Baeumner A. J. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2008 , 391 (2 ), 487 –495 .18311563 
Govindarajan A. V. ; Ramachandran S. ; Vigil G. D. ; Yager P. ; Boehringer K. F. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 (1 ), 174 –181 .22068336
