
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac5030232ArticleMultiwavelength Fluorescence Otoscope for Video-Rate
Chemical Imaging of
Middle Ear Pathology Valdez Tulio A. *†‡#Pandey Rishikesh §#Spegazzini Nicolas §Longo Kaitlyn †‡Roehm Corrie †Dasari Ramachandra R. §Barman Ishan *∥⊥† Otolaryngology
- Head and Neck Surgery, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut 06269, United States‡ Otolaryngology
- Head and Neck Surgery, Connecticut Children’s
Medical Center, Hartford, Connecticut 06106, United States§ Laser Biomedical
Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States∥ Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, United
States⊥ Department
of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, United States* Tulio A. Valdez, MD. E-mail: tvaldez@connecticutchildrens.org.* Ishan Barman, PhD.
E-mail: ibarman@jhu.edu.16 09 2015 16 09 2014 21 10 2014 86 20 10454 10460 14 08 2014 16 09 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyTerms of Use

A common
motif in otolaryngology is the lack of certainty regarding
diagnosis for middle ear conditions, resulting in many patients being
overtreated under the worst-case assumption. Although pneumatic otoscopy
and adjunctive tests offer additional information, white light otoscopy
has been the main tool for diagnosis of external auditory canal and
middle ear pathologies for over a century. In middle ear pathologies,
the inability to avail high-resolution structural and/or molecular
imaging is particularly glaring, leading to a complicated and erratic
decision analysis. Here, we propose a novel multiwavelength fluorescence-based
video-rate imaging strategy that combines readily available optical
elements and software components to create a novel otoscopic device.
This modified otoscope enables low-cost, detailed and objective diagnosis
of common middle ear pathological conditions. Using the detection
of congenital cholesteatoma as a specific example, we demonstrate
the feasibility of fluorescence imaging to differentiate this proliferative
lesion from uninvolved middle ear tissue based on the characteristic
autofluorescence signals. Availability of real-time, wide-field chemical
information should enable more complete removal of cholesteatoma,
allowing for better hearing preservation and substantially reducing
the well-documented risks, costs and psychological effects of repeated
surgical procedures.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac5030232document-id-new-14ac-2014-030232ccc-price
==== Body
Despite the high incidence of
clinical visits that pertain to middle ear pathologies, our ability
to make a rapid and accurate diagnosis of these conditions has not
improved considerably over the years. Reliable diagnosis of middle
ear conditions remains challenging, and the accuracy of currently
available methods is limited.1−3 At present, standard ear evaluations
include interpretation of the clinical history combined with otologic
examinations for visual inspection. Otoscopic examinations rely primarily
on the white light otoscope reflection utilizing a device that has
undergone relatively few modifications since first described in the
1860s. Although pneumatic otoscopy and adjunctive tests offer additional
information, white light otoscopy has proved to be the diagnostic
tool of choice for well over a century. White light otosocopy has
been routinely used by both primary care physicians and specialists
for evaluation of middle ear pathologies ranging from highly proliferative
and destructive conditions such as cholesteatomas to acute otitis
media (AOM) and tympanic membrane perforations.

As a case in
point, cholesteatomas are expansive and destructive
lesions characterized by migration of keratinized hyperproliferative
squamous epithelium with a fibrous stroma that can occur in the middle
ear and mastoid cavity.4 Under the invading
epithelial layer, ossicular and bony erosion occur with potential
complications ranging from otomastoiditis and facial nerve paralysis
to intracranial meningitis and perilymphatic fistula.5 While the underlying pathophysiology remains a subject
of much debate, these lesions do not metastatize and are not genetically
unstable. Nevertheless, they represent a surgical condition and resolution
of the disease process can only occur after complete externalization
or removal of the lesion.4,6 The objective of cholesteatoma
surgery is to obtain a dry safe ear; however, this may require multiple
surgical procedures, creating significant burden both economically
and in the quality of life on those affected by this disease.7 Consequently, it is imperative to develop new
tools that can provide near real-time, reliable and low-cost diagnosis
of cholesteatoma and facilitate its complete removal during surgery.
It is envisioned that such tools would permit early and robust detection
of a wide variety of ear pathologies while also providing specific
molecular insight into the onset and progression of the disease states.

Clearly, such an in vivo diagnostic approach should allow direct
visualization through the tympanic membrane, thereby allowing clinicians
to determine transtympanic middle ear pathologies. This guiding principle
underscores the importance of having a photonic/endoscopic method
that can adopt the general architecture of the otoscope, which successfully
achieves this functional requirement (presumably one of the principal
factors behind its longstanding usage) and that can be adapted to
an otoendoscope, which can be used at the time of the surgical procedure.
However, classical otoscopic evaluation suffers from observer variability
and provides limited insight into a disease’s defining biochemistry.
Molecular methods, in contrast, provide objective biomarkers for diagnoses,
may permit disease detection prior to morphologic manifestations and,
most importantly, can provide patient stratifications for more effective
therapy. In this milieu, spectroscopic imaging offers a novel approach
to bridge the chemical and morphologic domains.8,9 Driven
by the promise of nondestructive and nonionizing measurements that
can provide observer-invariant diagnosis, molecular spectroscopy has
received considerable contemporary attention for diagnosis of diabetes10 and cancers in various organs including breast,11 skin12 and bladder.13

The chemical imaging of middle ear pathologies,
however, is largely
unexplored and no method exists to reproduce or exceed otoscopic capabilities.
Although there are a few published reports in the broader domain of
neoplasia detection in otorhinolaryngology,14−16 relatively
less attention has been focused on middle ear evaluation. The first
spectroscopic findings of significance by Sikora, Richards-Kortum
and co-workers highlight the potential of optical imaging with a high-resolution
microendoscope but requires the application of exogenous imaging agents
(proflavine).17 We have, on the other hand,
suspected that exploiting the endogenous biochemical contrast may
provide sufficient information to aid the process of middle ear disease
diagnosis and guidance for excision of cholesteatoma.

In this
article, we propose a novel diagnostic strategy based on
acquisition of autofluorescence signatures that reflect the tissue
composition. We have developed a multiwavelength, video-rate fluorescence-based
imaging device to detect the underlying biochemical changes of middle
ear pathology. Critically, our device design used the existing otoscope
architecture as the platform and incorporates readily available optical
components as a self-contained, modular (“add-on”) feature,
which can also be implemented in an otoendoscope. This ensures the
ability to make concomitant fluorescence measurements and conventional
otoscopic evaluation and substantially reduces registration errors
that are frequently observed in similar devices. Though our approach
is generally applicable to broad-spectrum evaluation of middle ear
pathology, we demonstrate its utility here using cholesteatoma as
the paradigm. The proposed device provides a novel mechanism to acquire
real-time intraoperative images of the tissue epithelium thereby optimizing
the value of the initial procedure and reducing the necessity for
a revision surgery for residual disease.

Materials and Methods
Design
and Construction of the Fluorescence Otoscope
The multiwavelength
fluorescence otoscope was designed to acquire
autofluorescence signals from the middle ear, the tympanic membrane
and transtympanic membrane space (Figure 1).
Harnessing the multiwavelength measurements would not only enable
the fluorescence-based estimation of multiple endogenous tissue chromophores
(prominently collagen, NADH, elastin, tryptophan, FAD and porphyrins)
but would also provide the ability to explore differences in tissue
absorption and scattering. The latter is of value in understanding
the optical penetration depth, which would provide a valuable parameter
for identification of fluid presence in diagnosis of AOM.

Figure 1 Schematic diagram
of fluorescence otoscopy of the middle ear. Our
design incorporates regular ear speculums that allow adequate maneuvering
in the external auditory canal.

Here, two specific wavelengths were chosen for the proof-of-concept
experiments, i.e., 405 and 450 nm based on their relative ability
to excite these fluorophores. Specifically, the former is expected
to serve as principal indicator of collagen18 as well as the redox ratio,19 which is
defined as the ratio of the FAD fluorescence to the sum of FAD and
NADH signals; whereas the latter would provide a baseline signal corresponding
to the nonspecific tissue autofluorescence background (and presumably
the tail end of the some of the aforementioned autofluorescence signals).
This is based on previous findings that observed a strong correlation
between the increase in tissue metabolic activity associated with
the progression of epithelial neoplasm and an increase in NADH fluorescence.20−23 The latter would result in a corresponding decrease in the redox
ratio.

The multiwavelength fluorescence otoscope module is based
on the
Welch Allyn Macroview otoscope head (Figure 2). The use of this otoscope head allows for 30% greater magnification
than a traditional otoscope with the ability to adjust focus for variable
ear canal length. The excitation source of this prototype consists
of two high power light emitting diodes (LEDs), visible (LZ4-00MD00,
Mouser Electronics, Mansfield, TX) and UV (LZ1-000A00, Mouser Electronics,
Mansfield, TX) LEDs. The visible LED source consists of four LEDs
of different colors, i.e., red (625 nm), green (523 nm), blue (450
nm) and white, which can be individually operated independently. The
UV (400–405 nm) LED source has a single LED. Both the LED sources
are mounted on two individual heat sinks (located just beneath the
Welch Allyn otoscope head) that are designed to hold LEDs in a stable
enclosure using a spring locking mechanism for maximum efficiency.
Light from the heat sink cavity was directed into the ear through
the Welch Allyn otoscope head. The light emitted was then passed through
emission filters mounted on the custom-built filter wheel. An aluminum
optical insert was designed to secure the filter wheel into the base
of the frame. The filter wheel comprises of three 1″ diameter
filter slots. A single filter compartment was left empty to permit
traditional white light otoscopic evaluation. Each specific excitation–emission
modality could be swapped into the detection module serially. A 425
nm long pass filter was employed for 405 nm excitation, whereas a
500 nm long pass filter was used in conjunction with the 450 nm LED
source. The bright field and fluorescence images were recorded on
a CMOS camera (DCC1645C, 1280 × 1024 square pixels of 3.6 μm,
Thorlabs Inc.) mounted on the otoscope frame, with the user-defined
capability of recording either single-shot images or videos at up
to 25 frames per second.

Figure 2 Block diagram of the fluorescence otoscope prototype.

Data Acquisition from Human
Subjects
To demonstrate
the utility of the device through proof-of-principle experiments,
we conducted human subject studies at the Connecticut Children’s
Medical Center. The study protocol was approved by the hospital’s
institutional review board (IRB) and participants provided informed
consent prior to their participation. Inclusion was limited to patients
undergoing an otologic surgical procedure under general anesthesia.
In this pilot study, we tested 11 patients suffering from cholesteatoma
(3, congenital; 8, acquired) with their contralateral normal ears
serving as study controls. Additionally, several healthy human subjects
were tested to test for potential variations from the normal controls.

After initial visual inspection, any impeding cerumen or debris
were removed to provide an optimal view of the tympanic membrane.
A video otoscope using a 2.5 or 4 mm speculum was inserted into the
external auditory canal until the tympanic membrane was adequately
identified under standard white light inspection. Once adequate identification
of the normal anatomic landmarks of the tympanic membrane and middle
ear was established, fluorescence image acquisition was initiated.
As per the established study protocol, the 405 nm excitation source
was first used to acquire the fluorescence image using the 425 nm
long pass filter. Subsequently, the 450 nm excitation source was employed
to acquire the fluorescence image (with a 500 nm emission filter).
The digital images were saved in bitmap (bmp) format and videos were
stored in avi format. Image acquisition was performed from normal
ears and congenital cholesteatomas. The relevant clinical information
(pathophysiological condition and spectral dataset) with donor information
removed was submitted for analysis and interpretation. Spatial intensity
maps and contrast enhancement was pursued in the Matlab 8.3 environment
(The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA). In addition, contrast enhancement
of the color images is done by transforming the image to a color space,
which has image intensity as one of its components. Singular value
decomposition (SVD)-based denoising was performed in conjunction with
contrast-limited adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE) operation.

Following identification and image acquisition, the cholesteatoma
specimens were surgically removed and sent for histological processing.
Specifically, the samples were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin
and paraffin-embedded. Sections were subsequently cut for hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) staining prior to microscopic examination by a
board-certified pathologist.

Results
As alluded
to in the Materials and Methods section, white
light illumination was employed to adequately identify
the anatomic landmarks in the middle ear, as per the standard operating
procedure of a clinical examination. This allows for adequate detailing
of the tympanic membrane anatomy and vasculature. Additionally, it
also offers adequate transtympanic illumination of the promontory
in the middle ear, which is visible due to the translucent nature
of the tympanic membrane.

Normal Ear
Otoscopic evaluation
of a normal ear involves a variety of structures
with different tissue types, from external auditory canal skin to
the thin translucent tympanic membrane to highly reflective bony ossicles
and promontory. The various structures of the middle ear and mastoid
have different histological compositions and different concentrations
of endogenous fluorophores. All these structural variations give specific
optical properties that can be potentially targeted using different
excitation wavelengths of light.

Figure 3 shows representative images of
normal tympanic membrane and middle ear obtained using (A) standard
white light otoscopy and fluorescence imaging with (B) 405 nm and
(C) 450 nm excitation, respectively. It is evident that the overall
intensity of the white light image is (expectedly) much higher than
that obtained from autofluorescence. The obtained intensity patterns
were quantified and plotted, following adaptive contrast enhancement
(Figure 3D–F, in order to better highlight
features and margin of the lesion. To obtain the bottom row of figures,
contrast-limited adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE) was performed
in Matlab. In contrast to conventional histogram equalization, this
algorithm operates on small data regions (tiles) rather than the entire
image. Each tile’s contrast is enhanced so that the histogram
of each output region approximately matches the specified histogram
(assumed to be a uniform distribution by default).

Figure 3 Images of normal tympanic
membrane and middle ear using standard
white light otoscopy (A) and fluorescence imaging (405 nm excitation
(B) and 450 nm excitation (C)). The vascularity along the ear ossicle
is well-defined on the white light image. The fluorescence images
display very faint signals along the ossicle. Panels D–F represent
the contrast-limited adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE) and denoised
counterparts of the raw images (A–C).

The white light image exhibits the cone of light phenomenon,
which
is commonly observed during examination of the tympanic membrane with
an otoscope.24 This is simply a light reflex
event where shining light on the tympanic membrane produces a cone-shaped
reflection of light to materialize in the anterior inferior quadrant.
Distortions of the cone of light are often used as a marker for increased
inner ear pressure. On the other hand, fluorescence imaging with 405
nm excitation and 425 nm emission filter clearly shows that there
is no observable signal from the tympanic membrane. However, evidence
of fluorescence from the lateral process of the malleus and faint
fluorescence from the bony promontory is present. Significant hemoglobin-based
absorption is also noticeable, especially in the malleus. Such absorption
provides an additional diagnostic marker, but also complicates quantification
of the intrinsic fluorescence signal and therefore extraction of direct
biochemical information about the identity and concentration of the
tissue fluorophores.25 Autofluorescence
in the lateral process of the malleus and promontory is also seen
using 450 nm excitation. There was also evidence of a strong fluorescence
signal form cerumen in the external auditory canal at both excitation
wavelengths.

Congenital Cholesteatoma
In this
study, we specifically investigated congential cholesteatomas
that are defined as epithelial inclusions behind an intact tympanic
membrane in a patient without history of otitis media.26 Figure 4 displays the
white light image and the fluorescence images with 405 and 450 nm
excitation acquired from a representative congential cholesteatoma
in vivo. The white light image shows the clear presence of a cholesteatoma
in the posterosuperior aspect with increased vascularity of the tympanic
membrane. Importantly, the cholesteatoma shows a broad fluorescence
pattern with evidence of autofluorescence at both 405 and 450 nm excitation.
Furthermore, in both the fluorescence images, there is little or no
interference from the autofluorescence emitted by the bony promontory
and complete absence of autofluorescence from the tympanic membrane.
This is promising from a clinical translation standpoint, as the fluorescence
images provide clear differentiation between the cholesteatoma and
the surrounding uninvolved mucosa. The presence of the cholesteatoma
is also unambiguous in the bright field image due to the its highly
reflective nature stemming from the large keratin content; however,
the presence of the blood vessels and, critically, the boundaries
of the lesion are better defined in the autofluorescence images.

Figure 4 White
light (A) and fluorescence images (405 nm excitation (B)
and 450 nm excitation (C)) of a congenital cholesteatoma on the superior
anterior quadrant of the tympanic membrane. Panels D–F represent
the CLAHE and denoised versions of the raw images shown in panels
A–C.

An interesting aspect
of our observations is the presence of substantive
autofluorescence at the two different wavelengths in cholesteatoma.
Although the exact origin of these two signals is not known at this
time and requires detailed spectroscopic investigations possibly in
an in vitro model, one could reasonably infer the contribution of
multiple fluorophores to the overall signal levels. Prior reports
detail the peak fluorescence emission for keratin at 382 nm with a
50 nm full width at half-maximum for excitation at 277 nm.27 Thus, the fluorescence signals acquired here
would reflect the tail end of the keratin signal with the 405 nm excitation
image displaying substantially larger component of the keratin contribution
compared to the 450 nm excitation image. Furthermore, Wu et al. have
shown that strong keratin fluorescence from the keratinized epithelial
layer exhibits similar excitation and emission characteristics to
those of collagen.19 This could also interfere
the assessment of NADH/FAD fluorescence in epithelium and collagen
fluorescence in stroma, since the former has an optimal excitation
in the same wavelength region. This would potentially necessitate
the application of multivariate calibration techniques to unscramble
the specific contributions in a spectral dataset. Figure 5 shows the H&E stained histologic image of the
cholesteatoma, which illustrates the presence and abundance of keratin
in this class of hyperproliferative lesions.

Figure 5 Histologic image of cholesteatoma
using H&E stain showing the
laminar nature of the keratin in the surface of cholesteatoma resembling
the squamous epithelium in the epidermis of skin resting on connective
tissue.

Discussion
Standard otoscopic evaluation
currently requires subjective visual
interpretation of white light reflecting off the tympanic membrane
and the middle ear promontory. In other words, the entire process
of examining the normal structure, diagnosing diseases and providing
critical input for therapy relies extensively on human recognition
of morphologic patterns in vivo. This approach is the basis for the
current decision-making that has been shown to be less than ideal
for a number of conditions, in particular, when it relates to ear
examination.1,2 Specifically, congenital cholesteatomas
tend to be asymptomatic until they reach a significant size and rely
on an astute clinician to make a diagnosis before the lesion causes
significant damage to middle ear structures.5,28 Detection
of congenital cholesteatomas with simple otoscopic examination can
be missed altogether or confused with normal conditions such as myringosclerosis.
Investigators have opined that even otoscopy with a microscope may
not be reliable in predicting the presence or extent of a congenital
cholesteatoma.29

Through this report,
we propose a video-rate, in vivo chemical
imaging tool that relies on the differential intrinsic fluorescence
signatures observed in tissue and in disease. Our broad hypothesis
is spectroscopic measurements of tissue biochemistry represents a
measure of objective disease detection and grading that is currently
unattainable in clinical practice. In the proof-of-concept studies
presented here, the middle ear pathology definition in chemical, rather
than morphologic, terms has major implications in the near future.
First, the endeavor of lesion margin definition becomes facile and,
compared to the existing methods, can improve the quality of surgical
input. Second, it has been hypothesized that biochemical modifications
in the margins are precursors of lesion development and growth.30 Put differently, the morphologically benign-appearing
tissue at the margins of proliferative lesions is reported to be biochemically
distinct from uninvolved tissue. Identifying molecular targets from
this spatial region, then, can establish new opportunities in detection
at an early stage and of relapse.

Our data here suggest that
different tissue chemical compositions
in the tympanic membrane and middle ear provide important information,
which is useful in differentiating the cholesteatoma from the normal
mucosa at the point of care. We attribute the ability to demarcate
the margins to (a) the high keratin content present in cholesteatoma
and (b) the metabolic activity in the hyperproliferative lesion. Cholesteatomas
have shown a higher apoptotic rate when compared to other external
canal cells.31 This may help explain why
cholesteatomas are metabolically more active than the normal tympanic
membrane and external auditory canal tissue, resulting in significant
NADH/FAD-based autofluorescence. Evidently, determining measurable
chemical and metabolic differences between normal and pathologic ear
conditions (including inflammatory processes) can help in the development
of better diagnostic instrumentation, improving early detection and
considerably reducing the number of recurrences following surgery.
Our future studies will involve introducing more wavelengths and narrowband
filters to improve our diagnostic algorithms to better identify these
conditions. Also, time-resolved fluorescence studies may provide vital
clues in extricating the precise source of the fluorescence signals,
as the NADH/FAD and collagen fluorescence exhibit substantively different
time-decay processes.

Additionally, pathologic changes in proliferative
lesions in the
middle ear such as cholesteatoma require increased vascularization
of the surrounding perimatrix to sustain growth.32 This increase in vascularity was evident due to the ability
of hemoglobin to absorb light in this blue-green region of the visible
spectrum. We also observed significant fluorescence in cerumen most
likely due to the high keratin concentration. Finally, although there
was no actual autofluorescence emitted from the tympanic membrane,
it allowed fluorescence from the promontory to be captured due to
its translucent characteristics. We envision that these properties
may be altered in cases of severe inflammation and could be of value
in detection of other pathologies such as AOM.

In summary, the
nonperturbing nature of this imaging approach is
attractive in augmenting otoscopic examination, as is the capability
to provide information without the use of contrast agents, which may
be ototoxic. Significantly, this imaging modality can be readily adapted
to otoendoscopes, which are currently used in otologic surgery to
reach difficult access areas intraoperatively.33

Conclusion and future prospects
The present work provides
the first report of the design and application
of a novel multiwavelength fluorescence-based video otoscope. In this
article, we have demonstrated the ability to provide relevant chemical
images that map the spatial distribution of important constituents
such as collagen, NADH, FAD and keratin. Using congential cholesteatoma
detection as a test case, we have shown that the new fluorescence
otoscope provides additional information on the proliferative lesion,
especially in highlighting its contours and vascularity. This proof-of-concept
experiment shows the feasibility of applying the proposed approach
for direct in vivo imaging of cholesteatomas in order to aid surgical
removal of the lesion, thereby reducing the likelihood of residual
disease and improving surgical outcome and patient prognosis. In fact,
the presence of residual lesion (which has been reported to be as
high as 30%)4 is widely attributed to be
a primary driver of cholesteatoma recidivism.6

The results are promising and warrant detailed follow-up investigations.
First, the present device prototype only serves to acquire signals
from the brightest chromophores and does not provide an adequate signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) for the weakly fluorescent constituents. To overcome this
hurdle, the system will have to be redesigned to maximize throughput
including installation of a camera with higher quantum efficiency
in the UV–visible region. It is worth noting that the SNR drawback
of the current system can be partially alleviated by application of
denoising algorithms. For example, wavelet-based denoising algorithms
have been employed with varying degrees of success by transforming
the data in a manner where only a few large (and therefore meaningful)
coefficients are retained with the noise being removed by eliminating
the smaller wavelet coefficients.34,35 Also, a larger
number of excitation–emission combination wavelengths will
have to be studied in order to accurately evaluate their relative
diagnostic merit in discerning normal middle ear mucosa from cholesteatoma.
It is possible that our current choice of wavelengths, although promising,
do not provide optimal performance as far as delineation of proliferative
lesions is concerned.

Second, modifications to the current optical
design would allow
true spectroscopic imaging, i.e., the acquisition of spatial-spectral
data cubes where a spectrum is obtained at each uniquely defined spatial
point (x, y). Although the current
fluorescence imaging dataset has been of value in segmenting lesions
from uninvolved tissue, elucidation of the identities and content
of the chromophores and/or scatterers would enable true molecular
imaging. Multivariate curve resolution of the hyperspectral datasets
could provide the spatial distributions of biochemical markers that
indicate changes in pathophysiological functions. Additionally, one
could envision the use of fluorescence lifetime imaging for otoscopic
examination, as it provides an additional dimension of information
missing in time-integrated steady-state measurements and is sensitive
to biochemical microenvironment. As is well-known, lifetimes (in contrast
to direct intensity measurements) are also unaffected by variations
in excitation intensity and sources of optical loss and thus may offer
a better route to quantification for in vivo measurements. Moreover,
the interpretation of the current autofluorescence signals is confounded
by the multilayered tissue structure, as the images reflect the volume-averaged
contributions of the fluorophores from different tissue layers. A
depth-resolved technique, such as confocal fluorescence imaging, would
provide a more accurate understanding of the layer-specific fluorescence
signals while also avoiding the nonanalyte specific absorption and
scattering effects.

From a clinical perspective, the device
needs to be prospectively
tested in an in vivo clinical study with a substantially larger number
of patients and as adjuvant during the surgical procedure. Additionally,
other routinely encountered diagnoses, especially acute otitis media
(AOM), should be probed in future investigations. AOM represents the
most common affliction necessitating medical therapy for children
younger than 5 years in the USA and has a significant impact on the
health of children and cost of providing care. We anticipate that
the proposed strategy will be sensitive to fluid accumulation, which
is a hallmark of AOM. Since most diagnoses made today are of moderate
grades with physicians prescribing antibiotics even in the presence
of significant diagnostic uncertainty, a tool that can robustly segregate
AOM subtypes would be of immense value in routine ENT examination,
especially for pediatric cases. Finally, our laboratories have previously
employed vibrational spectroscopic methods, namely Raman spectroscopy,
for diagnosis of precancerous lesions and cancers in a number of organ
systems. By combining the exquisite chemical specificity of Raman
spectroscopy with wide-field fluorescence imaging, a multidimensional
algorithm capable of differentiating a broader range of middle ear
pathologies may be obtained.

Author Contributions
# These authors
contributed equally.

This research
was supported by the Connecticut Institute for Clinical and Translational
Science (CICATS), the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering (9P41EB015871-26A1) and the JHU Whiting School of Engineering
Startup Funds.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
==== Refs
References
Pichichero M. E. 
Eur. J. Clin.
Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 
2003 , 22 , 519 –524 .12938004 
Takata G. S. ; Chan L. S. ; Morphew T. ; Mangione-Smith R. ; Morton S. C. ; Shekelle P. 
Pediatrics 
2003 , 112 , 1379 –1387 .14654613 
Rosenfeld R. M. 
Int. J. Pediatr.
Otorhinolaryngol. 
2002 , 64 , 89 –95 .12049821 
Sheehy J. L. ; Brackmann D. E. ; Graham M. D. 
Ann. Otol., Rhinol., Laryngol. 
1977 , 86 , 451 –462 .889222 
Tall A. ; Ba M. C. ; Essalki I. ; Diallo B. K. ; Ndiaye M. ; Loum B. ; Ndiaye I. C. ; Diouf R. ; Diop E. M. 
Dakar Med. 
2006 , 51 , 5 –9 .16924842 
Vartiainen E. 
J. Laryngol. Otol. 
1995 , 109 , 590 –592 .7561462 
Roche J. P. ; Adunka O. F. ; Pillsbury H. C. 3rd; Buchman C. A. 
Otol. Neurotol. 
2013 , 34 , 1311 –1315 .23921939 
Fernandez D. C. ; Bhargava R. ; Hewitt S. M. ; Levin I. W. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2005 , 23 , 469 –474 .15793574 
Bhargava R. ; Fernandez D. C. ; Hewitt S. M. ; Levin I. W. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
2006 , 1758 , 830 –845 .16822477 
Chaiken J. ; Finney W. ; Knudson P. E. ; Weinstock R. S. ; Khan M. ; Bussjager R. J. ; Hagrman D. ; Hagrman P. ; Zhao Y. ; Peterson C. M. ; Peterson K. 
J. Biomed. Optics 
2005 , 10 , 031111 .
Breslin T. M. ; Xu F. ; Palmer G. M. ; Zhu C. ; Gilchrist K. W. ; Ramanujam N. 
Ann. Surg. Oncol. 
2004 , 11 , 65 –70 .14699036 
Rajaram N. ; Reichenberg J. S. ; Migden M. R. ; Nguyen T. H. ; Tunnell J. W. 
Lasers Surg. Med. 
2010 , 42 , 716 –727 .21246575 
Draga R. O. ; Grimbergen M. C. ; Vijverberg P. L. ; van Swol C. F. ; Jonges T. G. ; Kummer J. A. ; Ruud Bosch J. L. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 5993 –5999 .20524627 
Muller M. G. ; Valdez T. A. ; Georgakoudi I. ; Backman V. ; Fuentes C. ; Kabani S. ; Laver N. ; Wang Z. ; Boone C. W. ; Dasari R. R. ; Shapshay S. M. ; Feld M. S. 
Cancer 
2003 , 97 , 1681 –1692 .12655525 
Roblyer D. ; Richards-Kortum R. ; Sokolov K. ; El-Naggar A. K. ; Williams M. D. ; Kurachi C. ; Gillenwater A. M. 
J. Biomed. Opt. 
2008 , 13 , 024019 .18465982 
Stone N. ; Stavroulaki P. ; Kendall C. ; Birchall M. ; Barr H. 
Laryngoscope 
2000 , 110 , 1756 –1763 .11037840 
Levy L. L. ; Jiang N. ; Smouha E. ; Richards-Kortum R. ; Sikora A. G. 
Laryngoscope 
2013 , 123 , 1016 –1020 .23299781 
Volynskaya Z. ; Haka A. S. ; Bechtel K. L. ; Fitzmaurice M. ; Shenk R. ; Wang N. ; Nazemi J. ; Dasari R. R. ; Feld M. S. 
J. Biomed. Opt. 
2008 , 13 , 024012 .18465975 
Wu Y. ; Qu J. Y. 
J.
Biomed. Opt. 
2006 , 11 , 054023 .17092172 
Georgakoudi I. ; Jacobson B. C. ; Muller M. G. ; Sheets E. E. ; Badizadegan K. ; Carr-Locke D. L. ; Crum C. P. ; Boone C. W. ; Dasari R. R. ; Van Dam J. ; Feld M. S. 
Cancer Res. 
2002 , 62 , 682 –687 .11830520 
Sokolov K. ; Galvan J. ; Myakov A. ; Lacy A. ; Lotan R. ; Richards-Kortum R. 
J. Biomed. Opt. 
2002 , 7 , 148 –156 .11818022 
Pradhan A. ; Pal P. ; Durocher G. ; Villeneuve L. ; Balassy A. ; Babai F. ; Gaboury L. ; Blanchard L. 
J. Photochem. Photobiol., B 
1995 , 31 , 101 –112 .8583278 
Drezek R. ; Brookner C. ; Pavlova I. ; Boiko I. ; Malpica A. ; Lotan R. ; Follen M. ; Richards-Kortum R. 
Photochem. Photobiol. 
2001 , 73 , 636 –641 .11421069 
Cavanaugh R. M. Jr.
Pediatrics 
1987 , 79 , 520 –523 .3822670 
Zhang Q. ; Muller M. G. ; Wu J. ; Feld M. S. 
Optics Lett. 
2000 , 25 , 1451 –1453 .
Derlacki E.
L. ; Clemis J. D. 
Ann. Otol., Rhinol.,
Laryngol. 
1965 , 74 , 706 –727 .5846535 
Pena A. ; Strupler M. ; Boulesteix T. ; Schanne-Klein M. 
Opt. Express 
2005 , 13 , 6268 –6274 .19498639 
Sanna M. ; Zini C. ; Gamoletti R. ; Delogu P. ; Russo A. ; Scandellari R. ; Taibah A. 
J. Laryngol. Otol. 
1987 , 101 , 1221 –1226 .3430041 
Kazahaya K. ; Potsic W. P. 
Curr. Opin. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 
2004 , 12 , 398 –403 .15377951 
Lieber C. A. ; Nethercott H. E. ; Kabeer M. H. 
Biomed. Opt. Express 
2010 , 1 , 975 –982 .21258523 
Kojima H. ; Tanaka Y. ; Tanaka T. ; Miyazaki H. ; Shiwa M. ; Kamide Y. ; Moriyama H. 
Arch. Otolaryngol., Head Neck Surg. 
1998 , 124 , 261 –264 .9525508 
Fukudome S. ; Wang C. ; Hamajima Y. ; Ye S. ; Zheng Y. ; Narita N. ; Sunaga H. ; Fujieda S. ; Hu X. ; Feng L. ; Lin J. 
JAMA Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 
2013 , 139 , 273 –278 .23657791 
Ayache S. ; Tramier B. ; Strunski V. 
Otol. Neurotol. 
2008 , 29 , 1085 –1090 .18836388 
Donoho D. L. 
IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory 
1995 , 41 , 613 –627 .
Kwiatkowski A. ; Gnyba M. ; Smulko J. ; Wierzba P. 
Metrol. Meas. Syst. 
2010 , 17 , 549 –559 .
