
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical Society 10.1021/ac4017715ArticleSeparation
of Escherichia coli Bacteria
from Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells Using Standing Surface Acoustic
Waves Ai Ye *†Sanders Claire K. ‡Marrone Babetta L. *‡† Pillar of Engineering
Product Development, Singapore University of Technology
and Design, Singapore 138682, Singapore‡ Bioscience Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, United States* E-mail: aiye@sutd.edu.sg.* E-mail: blm@lanl.gov.23 08 2013 01 10 2013 85 19 9126 9134 13 06 2013 23 08 2013 Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society2013American Chemical SocietyTerms of Use

A microfluidic
device was developed to separate heterogeneous particle
or cell mixtures in a continuous flow using acoustophoresis. In this
device, two identical surface acoustic waves (SAWs) generated by interdigital
transducers (IDTs) propagated toward a microchannel, which accordingly
built up a standing surface acoustic wave (SSAW) field across the
channel. A numerical model, coupling a piezoelectric effect in the
solid substrate and acoustic pressure in the fluid, was developed
to provide a better understanding of SSAW-based particle manipulation.
It was found that the pressure nodes across the channel were individual
planes perpendicular to the solid substrate. In the separation experiments,
two side sheath flows hydrodynamically focused the injected particle
or cell mixtures into a very narrow stream along the centerline. Particles
flowing through the SSAW field experienced an acoustic radiation force
that highly depends on the particle properties. As a result, dissimilar
particles or cells were laterally attracted toward the pressure nodes
at different magnitudes, and were eventually switched to different
outlets. Two types of fluorescent microspheres with different sizes
were successfully separated using the developed device. In addition, Escherichia coli bacteria premixed in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) were also efficiently isolated using the SSAW-base separation
technique. Flow cytometric analysis on the collected samples found
that the purity of separated E. coli bacteria was
95.65%.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac4017715document-id-new-14ac-2013-017715ccc-price
==== Body
Biological
samples generally
consist of highly heterogeneous cell populations. As a result, an
effective separation of specific cell types is usually required prior
to further biomedical analysis. Most biological cells carry a size
on the order of a few to tens of micrometers, which renders microfluidics
an ideal platform for efficient cell separation. To date, several
techniques including dielectrophoresis, magnetophoresis, flow fractionation,
and inertia flow have been implemented to separate synthetic particles
or biological cells in microfluidic devices, as comprehensively reviewed
by Lenshof and Laurell.1

Acoustophoresis,
referring to the migration of particles subjected
to acoustic waves, has recently emerged as a new noninvasive technique
for particle separation in microfluidics. In such a scheme, piezoelectric
transducers are introduced to generate a standing acoustic wave field.
A particle exposed to the acoustic field is subjected to an acoustic
radiation force that is highly dependent on its physical properties,
such as size, density, and compressibility. Therefore, acoustophoresis
can selectively manipulate particles or biological cells based on
their physical properties, which is more flexible than existing label-free
manipulation techniques. As a result, heterogeneous cell mixtures
could be separated based on different motion responses arising from
the acoustic radiation effect. In addition, acoustophoresis has no
or minor negative impact on the viability and functionality of biological
cells,2 required in many cell analysis
applications. Most earlier acoustic-based microfluidic devices were
constructed by attaching a bulk acoustic transducer onto a silicon
microchannel. Incident acoustic waves, together with the reflection
from the channel wall, can form a standing acoustic wave field across
the channel. Separation of particles or biological cells with different
physical properties has been successfully demonstrated using bulk
standing acoustic waves.3−10 Since the development of soft lithography,11 soft polymer materials, such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), have
been widely adopted in the fabrication of microfluidic devices. However,
most of these polymer materials have a quite poor acoustic reflection
property, which make them incompatible with bulk acoustic transducers.
In addition, bulk acoustic transducers cannot be easily miniaturized
and integrated with other microstructures.

Recently, surface
acoustic wave (SAW) devices have gained increased
attention due to their low power consumption, flexible design, easy
miniaturization, and integration into microfluidic devices. A standing
surface acoustic wave (SSAW) field can be generated across a microchannel
by radiating two identical SAWs toward the channel. Shi et al. observed
a particle focusing phenomenon subjected to a SSAW field,12 which was later used for two-dimensional (2D)
particle patterning.13,14 Separation of dissimilar synthetic
particles in a continuous flow using SSAW has been successfully demonstrated.15,16 Moreover, isolation of platelets from a blood sample has been implemented
using the same technique.17 All the aforementioned
particle separations were primarily based on different lateral movements
induced by size-dependent acoustic radiation effects. As the acoustic
radiation force acting on the particle also depends on its density,
the application of SSAW on density-based particle separation has also
been recently demonstrated.18 Most recently,
SSAW was utilized to sort individual droplets dispersed in an oil
phase.19,20 In addition to the application of SSAW for
particle manipulation, a single traveling SAW has also been widely
used for mixing, pumping, and transport of fluids or droplets in microfluidics.21−27 It is very obvious that SAW has become a promising and versatile
technique for noninvasive manipulation of fluids and particles in
microfluidics.

In this article, we presented a SSAW-based microfluidic
device
for efficient separation of synthetic particles and biological cells.
Most previous SSAW-based devices were designed to have one single
pressure node in the middle of the microchannel. This design requires
a very tight alignment of SAW devices with the microchannel to maintain
an efficient separation. In our design, the pressure nodes of the
SSAW field were located near the two sidewalls of the microchannel.
When the width of the microchannel is smaller than a half acoustic
wavelength, the alignment of SAW devices with the microchannel is
not very critical, which accordingly reduces the complexity of fabrication.
A numerical model was developed to simulate the acoustic pressure
field across the channel generated by the SSAW field, which provided
an insight into the SSAW-based particle manipulation. Two different
particle mixtures were used in the separation demonstration to validate
the developed device: fluorescent synthetic microspheres of different
sizes and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) mixed with Escherichia coli bacteria. The ability to separate bacteria
from blood cells would enable rapid diagnosis of bloodstream related
infections.28 Human immune function could
also be evaluated by measuring the proliferation or other changes
in PBMCs stimulated with E. coli or other bacteria.29,30 The efficiency of the E. coli/PBMCs separation
was quantitatively evaluated by traditional flow cytometric analysis.

Working
Principle and Theory
Acoustic Radiation and Working Principle
Figure 1 shows the schematic illustration
of the developed
microfluidic device and the working principle of size-based particle
separation using a SSAW field. The SSAW generator is basically a pair
of interdigital transducers (IDTs) patterned on a piezoelectric substrate.
A microchannel is located between the two IDTs to form the microfluidic
device. When an ac signal is applied to the IDTs, two series of identical
SAWs propagate toward the microchannel in opposite directions. Constructive
interference of the two SAWs gives rise to a SSAW field across the
channel. Particles through the SSAW field are subjected to a time-averaged
acoustic radiation force, given as31 1  In the above, Vp is the volume of the particle, ρf is
the density
of the fluid medium, cf is the speed of
sound in the fluid medium, β = ρp/ρf is the density ratio, and γ = cp/cf is the speed of sound ratio.
The subscripts “p” and “f” denote, respectively,
the material parameters for solid particle and fluid medium. p is
the pressure generated by the acoustic wave, k =
ω/cf is the wavenumber with ω
denoting the angular frequency. Considering a one-dimensional model
with x denoting the distance from the pressure node,
the pressure can be expressed as 2  where p0 is the
pressure magnitude. Substituting eq 2 into eq 1, we can get 3  The time average term, ⟨cos2(ωt)⟩ = 1/2, can further simplify
eq 3 as32 4  where 5  is the acoustic contrast factor. When φ(β,γ)
> 0, the acoustic radiation force pushes particles to the pressure
node where the pressure change is always zero. On the contrary, particles
are attracted to the antipressure node when φ(β,γ)
< 0. In general, most solid particles and biological cells suspended
in aqueous solutions have a positive acoustic contrast factor and
are thus attracted to the pressure node.8 The resonant frequency of the generated SSAW mainly depends on the
distance between two adjacent electrode fingers of the IDTs. In this
device, the wavelength of the resonant SSAW is approximately twice
the channel width, and the pressure nodes are located at the two sidewalls
of the channel, as shown in Figure 1. The entrance
of the device has three inlets with the particle mixture solution
in the middle and the sheath flow at the two sides. The faster sheath
flow hydrodynamically focuses the particle mixture into a very narrow
stream along the centerline of the channel, as shown in Figure 1. When particles enter the SSAW field, the size-dependent
acoustic radiation force starts to attract particles into the pressure
node. Larger particles laterally move to the pressure node at the
sidewalls faster than smaller particles, resulting in the size-based
particle separation. Therefore, larger particles are switched to the
side outlets and are accordingly separated from smaller particles
flowing into the middle outlet, as shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1 (a) Schematic illustration of the microfluidic device and separation
mechanism using a SSAW field. A mixture solution with two differently
sized particles is focused to the centerline of the channel by two
faster side sheath flows. A SSAW field is generated by two IDTs on
both sides of the channel. Dissimilar particles experience different
lateral movement in the SSAW field arising from the size-dependent
acoustic radiation force. As a result, the two particles are shifted
to different outlets. (b) Cross-section of the hydrodynamic focusing
before the SSAW field. (c) Cross-section of the SSAW-induced particle
separation. Pressure nodes are located at the two sidewalls where
the two particles are attracted.

Numerical Modeling
A finite element method (FEM) based
numerical model (COMSOL Multiphysics 4.3, www.comsol.com) was developed to study the acoustic-piezoelectric interaction problem.
As the SSAW is uniform in the longitudinal direction of the channel,
we simply considered a 2D modeling of the device cross-section in
a frequency analysis. Therefore, the acoustic-piezoelectric interaction
module at frequency domain was selected to perform the modeling of
the developed SSAW-based device. A PDMS layer was located on the top
of a piezoelectric substrate, and a tiny fluid layer was sealed between
them. The propagation of SAW in a piezoelectric substrate is governed
by the Maxwell’s equations for electric field and the stress–strain
equations for mechanical motion. The linear piezoelectric constitutive
equations are given as 6   7  where T is the mechanical stress
vector, CE is the elasticity matrix, S is the strain vector, e is the piezoelectric
stress matrix, E is the electric field vector, D is the electric displacement vector, and ε is the dielectric matrix. The superscript “tr” represents
the transpose of the matrix. The acoustic pressure field in the fluid
and PDMS domains is governed by the well-known Helmholtz equation, 8  where 9  In the above, ρi, ci, and αi are the density, speed
of sound, and acoustic
attenuation coefficient in the corresponding domain, j = (−1)1/2 is the imaginary unit. The acoustic
velocity is given by 10  

For the
electric field in the piezoelectric
substrate, a sinusoidal ac signal with a peak-to-peak magnitude of
10 V was applied to the interdigital electrodes on the piezoelectric
substrate. The other boundaries of the piezoelectric substrate were
assumed zero charge surfaces. For the elastic mechanical motion arising
from the piezoelectric effect, the surface with interdigital electrodes,
excluding boundaries in contact with the fluid and PDMS domains, was
set to free, referring to no force loads or constraints. Because of
the interaction between the elastic mechanical motion and acoustic
pressure field, a force load was applied on the boundaries in contact
with the fluid and PDMS domains, 11  where n is the unite normal vector
of the applied boundaries. Zero normal displacement was applied on
all the other boundaries. The harmonic vibration of the piezoelectric
substrate propagated acoustic waves into the fluid and PDMS at the
interface, which is mathematically described by an acceleration boundary
condition 12  Strictly speaking,
the standing acoustic wave
field in the fluid across the channel was actually generated by the
SAWs radiated into the fluid from the piezoelectric substrate. The
outer surface of the PDMS domain was specified as a sound hard boundary 13  Acoustic pressure and velocity
were continuous
across the interface between the fluid and PDMS. Simulations with
different mesh sizes were implemented to ensure that numerical results
were converged and mesh-independent. A coarse mesh with a size of
20 μm was generated near the bottom of the piezoelectric substrate,
and a fine mesh with a size of 3 μm was employed in the microchannel
to accurately capture the pressure nodes of the SSAW field.

Device
Fabrication and Experimental Details
Chip Fabrication
The PDMS channel in the device was
fabricated using a standard soft lithography technique.11 Briefly, a 25 μm thick negative photoresist
(SU-8 25, MicroChem Corp., Newton, MA) was first spin-coated on a
clean glass slide, followed by a two-step soft bake (65 °C for
3 min and 95 °C for 7 min). The photoresist covered by a 20 000
dpi mask with a channel pattern was then exposed to 365 nm ultraviolet
light with an energy density of 150 mJ/cm2 (Figure 2a), followed by another two-step hard bake (65 °C
for 1 min and 95 °C for 3 min). Subsequently, a master mold was
obtained by developing the photoresist in a commercial SU-8 developer
solution for 4 min (Figure 2b). Degassed PDMS
mixture (Sylgard184 Silicone Elastomer Kit, Dow Corning Corp., Freeland,
MI) of prepolymer and curing agent at a ratio of 10:1 by weight were
poured over the master and cured at 65 °C for 4 h (Figure 2c). The fully cured PDMS was peeled off from the
master mold. Inlet and outlet holes were created using a small drill
bit for external tubing interconnection. The IDTs for SSAW generation
were fabricated on a 128° rotated Y-cut X-propagating lithium
niobate (LiNbO3) piezoelectric substrate using a lift-off
technique. Basically, the LiNbO3 substrate was first spin-coated
with a 1.25 μm thick positive photoresist (AZ 5214E-IR, Capitol
Scientific, Dallas, TX), followed by a soft bake (100 °C for
60 s). The mask-covered photoresist was patterned by exposing to the
ultraviolet light with an energy density of 70 mJ/cm2,
followed by a 35 s development in AZ 300 MIF developer solution (Figure 2d). A double metallic layer (Cr/Au, 5 nm/80 nm)
was then deposited onto the developed LiNbO3 substrate
by an electron beam evaporator (Figure 2e).
Subsequently, the LiNbO3 substrate was sonicated in acetone
for half an hour to remove photoresist and undesired Cr/Au layer on
its top (Figure 2f). The previously obtained
PDMS substrate and the patterned LiNbO3 substrate were
loaded into an oxygen plasma cleaner (Harrick Plasma Inc., Ithaca,
NY) for surface activation (Figure 2g). Later,
the two substrates were well aligned under a microscope with the assistance
of markers on both substrates and were eventually brought into contact
to form permanent bonding (Figure 2h).

Figure 2 Fabrication
procedure of the microfluidic device: (a–c)
fabrication of the PDMS microchannel, (d–f) patterning of IDTs
on the LiNbO3 substrate, and (g,h) surface activation and
bonding of the two layers to form the device.

Experimental Setup
Figure 3 shows
the image of the final microfluidic device. The width and height of
the main channel are 120 and 25 μm, respectively. The lengths
of the main channel and IDTs are 15 mm and 9 mm, respectively. Each
IDT has 20 electrode finger pairs with 300 μm finger pitch and
75 μm finger width, corresponding to a SAW wavelength of λ
= 300 μm. The channel width is slightly smaller than the half
wavelength, which aims to provide a reasonable tolerance for the alignment
prior to the permanent bonding. Therefore, a tight alignment of IDTs
with the microchannel is not critical to achieve an efficient separation.
The speed of sound in LiNbO3 substrate is approximately
3900 m/s, leading to a resonant frequency around 13 MHz. In practice,
the best resonant frequency of the fabricated IDTs was found to be
13.0168 MHz by an impedance analysis. A sinusoidal ac signal at the
resonant frequency was generated by a signal generator (Tektronix,
Beaverton, OR) and then amplified by a power amplifier (OPHIR RF,
Los Angeles, CA). The IDTs were excited by the amplified ac signal
to generate a SSAW field across the channel. The device was loaded
on the stage of a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss Axioskop Microscope)
to conduct the separation experiments. Particle mixtures (cell mixtures)
and DI water (1× phosphate buffered saline solution) were, respectively,
injected into the device through the inlets labeled “particle
mixture” and “sheath flow” using syringe pumps
(New Era Pump Systems Inc., Farmingdale, NY). In order to avoid particle
or cell adhesion to the channel wall, all the solutions were mixed
with 0.5% surfactant of Pluronic F68 (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad,
CA). Particle motion and separation were captured and recorded at
30 frames per second by a Sony camcorder installed on the microscope.
Fluorescence filters were manually switched to visualize a specific
excitation and emission light of fluorescent particles or stained
cells. The recorded videos were later processed by a free image processing
program, ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/).

Figure 3 Photograph of the fabricated microfluidic device for particle separation.
The upper-left inset is the zoomed-in view of the three-outlet junction.
The upper-right inset is the zoomed-in view of the IDT.

Sample Preparation
Two different
particle mixtures
were used in the separation experiments. The first mixture included
two types of fluorescent synthetic microspheres (Particle I, 1.2 μm
in diameter, green emission; Particle II, 5.86 μm in diameter,
red emission, both from Polysciences Inc., Warrington, PA). Both particles
were diluted to a concentration of 2 × 107 particles/mL.
The second sample was a mixture of purified human PBMCs (Bioreclamation
LLC, Hicksville, NY) and E. coli bacteria. PBMCs
were washed and then fixed for 15 min using 2% formaldehyde in phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) solution. Cells were stained with 1 μg/mL
Hoechst 33342 (Calbiochem, Billerica, MA) for 10 min, spun down and
resuspended in PBS. The average size of PBMCs is approximately 7.23
μm in diameter. Thermostable green protein (TGP, ECGP123 variant)
expressing BL21 E. coli bacteria were induced with
isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) for 4 h at 30 °C
and then grown on kan agar overnight at 37 °C.33 Later, the bacteria were resuspended in PBS and mixed with
the PBMC solution. E. coli bacteria are typically
rod-shaped with a diameter of 0.5 μm and a length of 2 μm,
which has a similar volume as a sphere with a diameter of 1.1 μm.
The concentration of both cells is approximately 3 × 106 particles/mL. Separation purity of the cell mixture was determined
by a flow cytometric analysis (LSR II, Becton Dickenson, San Jose,
CA). Pure samples were used to calibrate the settings and also exclude
the debris from the cytometric results. A combination of relative
size based on light scatter and whether the cells were positive for
Hoechst or TGP-10 was used to evaluate purity.

Results and Discussion
Simulation
of SSAW Field
To theoretically verify the
design of the SSAW-based particle separation, we first applied the
FEM model to simulate the SAW propagation and acoustic pressure field
generated on the cross-section of the fabricated device. A frequency
analysis from 12.2 to 13.2 MHz was performed to find the resonant
frequency, which was around 12.98 MHz and agreed well with the practical
value. The attenuation coefficients of water and PDMS at 13 MHz are
36.67 dB/m34 and 8224 dB/m,35 respectively. Figure 4a shows the numerical result of the acoustic velocity field on the
cross-section of the device, in which the fluid and PDMS are located
in the midpoint between two IDTs. Two identical SAWs propagate from
both sides toward the fluid and PDMS. When the SAW first encounters
the PDMS, it partially radiates into the PDMS at a Rayleigh angle,
θR = arcsin (cPDMS/cL), where cPDMS and cL are, respectively, the speed of sound in the
PDMS and LiNbO3. As the two individual SAWs travel further
and meet each other, the constructive interference of the two SAWs
forms a SSAW field in the LiNbO3 and also across the fluid
and PDMS layers, as shown in Figure 4a. The
distance between two adjacent peaks is half of the SSAW wavelength.
It is calculated from the numerical modeling that the SSAW wavelength
in the LiNbO3 is about 300 μm, equal to the designed
IDT pitch. The SSAW in the PDMS layer along the vertical direction
has a shorter wavelength because the speed of sound in the PDMS is
lower than that in the LiNbO3. Because of the attenuation
effect, the SSAW strength gradually decreases as it is located further
from the interface between PDMS and LiNbO3. Figure 4b shows the resulting acoustic pressure field inside
the fluid. The pressure node with a zero magnitude is a single plane
perpendicular to the LiNbO3 substrate, located in the horizontal
center of the channel. As a result, suspended particles with a positive
acoustic contrast factor are attracted to the middle of the channel,
referring to the acoustic focusing effect.12 In Figure 4c, the fluid and PDMS are shifted
75 μm toward the IDT on the right-hand side. Similarly, a SSAW
field is generated over the entire cross-section of the device. However,
the pressure node is shifted to the two sidewalls of the channel,
as shown in Figure 4d. Therefore, the location
of the pressure node across the channel can be precisely controlled
during the alignment process prior to the permanent bonding. To verify
the location of the pressure node in the fabricated device, a highly
concentrated 5.86 μm Particle II was injected into the channel
and eventually became stationary with a random distribution. A SSAW
field was subsequently turned on with a power of 23.8 dBm (1 dBm =
10 log(U), where U is the input
power applied on the IDTs in the unit of mW). Movie file 1 in the Supporting Information shows that all the particles
were quickly attracted and accumulated at the two sidewalls of the
channel once the SSAW field was turned on. This observation confirmed
that the pressure node in this device is located at the sidewalls.
Some particles, initially located at the same distance from one of
the sidewalls, moved toward the sidewall at different speeds. This
phenomenon may be attributed to the nonuniform acoustic pressure field
at different heights of the channel, which was verified by the numerical
results shown in Figure 4b,d.

Figure 4 Numerical results of
a SSAW field on the cross-section when the
fluid is located in the midpoint between the two IDTs (a) and when
the fluid is shifted 1/4 wavelength to the right (c). Corresponding
pressure field in the fluid with a pressure node along the centerline
(b) and two pressure nodes at the sidewalls (d).

Separation of Synthetic Microspheres
Next, the separation
of the first mixture (1.2 μm Particle I and 5.86 μm Particle
II) was demonstrated using the fabricated device. The flow rates of
the particle mixture and the sheath flow were 0.2 μL/min and
1.6 μL/min, respectively. The sheath flow was later evenly split
into two side streams at the inlet junction (Figure 5a); therefore, the flow rate of each individual side sheath
flow was 0.8 μL/min. As the inlet junction is away from the
SSAW field, a pure hydrodynamic focusing of both particles to the
centerline of the channel was observed (Figure 5a,b). When the SSAW field was turned off, both particles kept flowing
near the centerline along the entire channel due to the nature of
a laminar flow. Therefore, both particles flowed into the middle outlet
(Figure 5c,d). The motion of both particles
at the outlet junction without a SSAW field can be seen from movie
file 2 in the Supporting Information. Later,
a SSAW field with a power of 23.8 dBm was turned on. When the particle
mixture entered the SSAW field, the acoustic radiation force acting
on the 5.86 μm Particle II was much greater than that acting
on the 1.2 μm Particle I. Therefore, the larger Particle II
was pulled out of the particle mixture, laterally moving toward the
pressure node at the sidewalls. The acoustic radiation force was maximized
at the antipressure node and gradually decreased to zero when approaching
the pressure node. As a result, the lateral movement stopped at the
pressure node, and Particle II exactly followed the sheath flow thereafter.
The acoustic radiation force acting on the smaller Particle I was
insufficient to pull it out of the middle stream before leaving the
SSAW field. Thus, Particle I remained near the centerline at the outlet
junction and flowed into the middle outlet (Figure 5e). Particle II, however, was switched to the side outlets
(Figure 5f), indicating a successful separation.
The separation of the two particles using a SSAW field can be seen
from movie file 3 in the Supporting Information.

Figure 5 Captured fluorescence images at the inlet junction (a,b) and outlet
junction (c–f) in one single experiment by tuning the power
applied on the IDTs. No SSAW field was applied in parts c and d, while
a SSAW field with a power of 23.8 dBm was applied in parts e and f.
Flow rates of the particle flow and a single side sheath flow were,
respectively, 0.2 μL/min and 0.8 μL/min. Green and red
emission lights represent the 1.2 μm Particle I and the 5.86
μm Particle II, respectively. Each image was obtained by superimposing
a series of images captured at the same location. Dashed lines represent
the boundary of the microchannel.

Figure 6 shows the particle trajectories
in the middle region of the SSAW field with different input powers.
When the SSAW field was turned off, the two particles both remained
near the centerline (Figure 6a,b), exactly
as they were at the inlet junction. When a SSAW field with a power
of 19.3 dBm was turned on, Particle I stayed near the centerline due
to a weak acoustic radiation force and an insufficient SSAW exposure
time (Figure 6c). In contrast, Particle II
started to laterally shift toward the two sidewalls (Figure 6d). When the power of SSAW field was further increased
to 25.3 dBm, the stream width of Particle I became larger as a result
of a minor lateral movement (Figure 6e). Meanwhile,
Particle II was further laterally shifted near the sidewalls because
of an increased acoustic radiation force (Figure 6f). An efficient SSAW-based separation relies on a sufficient
difference in lateral movements of dissimilar particles. In order
to achieve the SSAW-based separation at high flow rates, one can increase
the input power or maintain a sufficient SSAW exposure time by extending
the SSAW field.

Figure 6 Captured fluorescence images at the middle region of the
channel
in one single experiment by tuning the power applied on the IDTs:
(a,b) no SSAW field, (c,d) a SSAW field with a power of 19.3 dBm,
(e,f) A SSAW field with a power of 25.3 dBm. Green and red emission
lights represent the 1.2 μm Particle I and the 5.86 μm
Particle II, respectively. Each image was obtained by superimposing
a series of images captured at the same location. Dashed lines represent
the boundary of the microchannel.

Separation of E. coli and PBMCs
Finally,
we used this device to separate E. coli bacteria
from PBMC samples. Both cells were found to move toward the pressure
node when exposed to a SSAW field, indicating a positive acoustic
contrast. We increased the flow rates of both cell mixture and sheath
flow to test the throughput of the developed device. Hence, the power
applied on the IDTs was increased to maintain a sufficient lateral
movement for PBMCs. The optimum acoustic power was determined by observing
the cell separation at the outlet junction under the microscope. The
fluorescence of stained E. coli bacteria was not
very bright, and when the flow rate of the cell mixture was too high,
it was quite difficult to observe the trajectory of E. coli bacteria. Therefore, the visibility of the cell separation process
limits the throughput of the developed device. To clearly visualize
the separation process, the maximum flow rate of the cell mixture
should not exceed 0.5 μL/min, which was used in the separation
of E. coli and PBMCs. Accordingly, the flow rate
of the sheath flow was adjusted to 4 μL/min to maintain a highly
focused middle stream before entering the SSAW field. A SSAW field
with a power of 26.7 dBm was turned on for about 4 h to separate the
two cells in a continuous flow. The separated E. coli bacteria and PBMCs were, respectively, collected from the outlets
labeled “Outlet A” and “Outlet B”, as
shown in Figure 3. The premixture and collected
samples were analyzed in a flow cytometer to quantify the respective
cell contents. The ratio of each cell type was defined as the number
of corresponding cells detected through the flow cytometer to the
total number of counted cells. The cell populations were plotted in
terms of forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter (SSC) to show the
cell content in each sample. Figure 7a confirms
that the premixture mainly consisted of E. coli and
PBMCs with very little debris. The ratios of E. coli and PBMCs in the premixture were, respectively, 46.23% and 53.06%
(Figure 7d), as they were intended to mix at
a similar cell concentration. After flowing through the SSAW field, E. coli bacteria were successfully extracted from the premixture,
as shown in Figures 7b and 7c. The ratios of E. coli and PBMCs in the
samples collected from the outlets labeled “Outlet A”
and “Outlet B” were, respectively, 95.65% and 91.48%
(Figure 7d). The difference in density and
compressibility of E. coli and PBMCs could result
in the different acoustic contrast factors and eventually affect the
acoustic radiation forces acting on the cells. However, we found that
the cell size remains the key factor influencing the separation of E. coli from PBMCs. These results demonstrated that the
developed device could effectively separate synthetic particles or
biological cells based on their sizes using a SSAW field.

Figure 7 Flow cytometric
scatter plots (forward scatter versus side scatter)
of the premixture (a), separated PBMC sample (b), and separated E. coli sample (c). (d) Quantitative cell content in each
sample.

Conclusions
We
have demonstrated the efficient separation of dissimilar particles
or cells in a continuous flow using a SSAW field with a resonant frequency
near 13 MHz. The configuration of two pressure nodes near the sidewalls
of the channel narrower than a half acoustic wavelength reduces the
requirement for the alignment of IDTs with the channel. A FEM model
was developed to simulate the acoustic pressure field generated by
the SAWs radiated into the fluid, which is of great help to understand
the SSAW-based particle manipulation. In this device with a channel
height of 25 μm, the pressure nodes across the channel were
individual planes perpendicular to the LiNbO3 substrate.
The location of the pressure node across the channel could be adjusted
by shifting the location of the channel with respect to the IDTs on
both sides. Particles and biological cells used in this study had
positive acoustic contrast factors, which moved them toward the pressure
node as a result of the acoustic radiation effect. The 5.86 μm
particles were successfully separated from the 1.2 μm particles
based on different lateral movements toward the pressure nodes located
at the two sidewalls. The separation efficiency and throughput of
a SSAW-based device can be adjusted by tuning the applied acoustic
power and flow rates of the sheath flow and particle mixture. The
throughput of the developed device was limited by the visibility of
the cell separation process, which could be overcome by integrating
sensors capable of size measurement in all the outlets. Separation
of E. coli bacteria from premixed PBMCs with a purity
of 95.65% indicates that this technique could be further developed
to diagnose bacteria-induced bloodstream infections and assist the
evaluation of immune responses of PBMCs. Conclusively, the SSAW-based
separation technique is a promising approach for the isolation of
specific cell types from heterogeneous biological samples for a variety
of applications.

Supporting Information Available
Movie files 1–3. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac4017715_si_001.avi

 ac4017715_si_002.avi

 ac4017715_si_003.avi

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported
by the National Center for Research
Resources and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of
the National Institutes of Health (Grant P41 RR01315) through the
National Flow Cytometry Resource (B.L.M.), by a Laboratory Directed
Research and Development award (20130239ER) from Los Alamos National
Laboratory (B.L.M.) and, in part, by the International Design Center
(Grant IDG11300101) from Singapore University of Technology and Design–Massachusetts
Institute of Technology Alliance (Y.A.). This work was performed,
in part, at the Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, a U.S. Department
of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences user facility, and we gratefully
acknowledge Jon Kevin Baldwin for the assistance of Cr/Au deposition.
We also would like to thank Patricia S. Langan for providing TGP expressing E. coli.
==== Refs
References
Lenshof A. ; Laurell T. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2010 , 39 3 1203 –1217 .20179832 
Burguillos M. A. ; Magnusson C. ; Nordin M. ; Lenshof A. ; Augustsson P. ; Hansson M. J. ; Elmér E. ; Lilja H. ; Brundin P. ; Laurell T. ; Deierborg T. 
PLoS ONE 
2013 , 8 5 e64233 .23724038 
Petersson F. ; Nilsson A. ; Holm C. ; Jonsson H. ; Laurell T. 
Analyst 
2004 , 129 10 938 –943 .15457327 
Petersson F. ; Nilsson A. ; Holm C. ; Jonsson H. ; Laurell T. 
Lab Chip 
2005 , 5 1 20 –22 .15616735 
Petersson F. ; Nilsson A. ; Jonsson H. ; Laurell T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 5 1216 –1221 .15732899 
Petersson F. ; Åberg L. ; Swärd-Nilsson A. M. ; Laurell T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2007 , 79 14 5117 –5123 .17569501 
Jung B. ; Fisher K. ; Ness K. D. ; Rose K. A. ; Mariella R. P. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 22 8447 –8452 .18847218 
Liu Y. ; Lim K.-M. 
Lab Chip 
2011 , 11 18 3167 –3173 .21826293 
Yang A. H.
J. ; Soh H. T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 24 10756 –10762 .23157478 
Cushing K.
W. ; Piyasena M. E. ; Carroll N. J. ; Maestas G. C. ; López B. A. ; Edwards B. S. ; Graves S. W. ; López G. P. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 4 2208 –2215 .23331264 
Xia Y. N. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Annu. Rev. Mater.
Sci. 
1998 , 28 , 153 –184 .
Shi J. J. ; Mao X. L. ; Ahmed D. ; Colletti A. ; Huang T. J. 
Lab Chip 
2008 , 8 2 221 –223 .18231658 
Shi J. J. ; Ahmed D. ; Mao X. ; Lin S. C. S. ; Lawit A. ; Huang T. J. 
Lab Chip 
2009 , 9 20 2890 –2895 .19789740 
Ding X. ; Shi J. ; Lin S.-C. S. ; Yazdi S. ; Kiraly B. ; Huang T. J. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 14 2491 –2497 .22648600 
Shi J. J. ; Huang H. ; Stratton Z. ; Huang Y. P. ; Huang T. J. 
Lab Chip 
2009 , 9 23 3354 –3359 .19904400 
Nam J. ; Lee Y. ; Shin S. 
Microfluid. Nanofluid. 
2011 , 11 3 317 –326 .
Nam J. ; Lim H. ; Kim D. ; Shin S. 
Lab
Chip 
2011 , 11 19 3361 –3364 .21842070 
Jo M. C. ; Guldiken R. 
Sens. Actuators,
A: Phys. 
2012 , 187 0 22 –28 .
Nam J. ; Lim H. ; Kim C. ; Kang J. Y. ; Shin S. 
Biomicrofluidics 
2012 , 6 2 024120 .
Li S. ; Ding X. ; Guo F. ; Chen Y. ; Lapsley M. I. ; Lin S.-C. S. ; Wang L. ; McCoy J. P. ; Cameron C. E. ; Huang T. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 5468 –5474 .23647057 
Wixforth A. ; Strobl C. ; Gauer C. ; Toegl A. ; Scriba J. ; von Guttenberg Z. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2004 , 379 7–8 982 –991 .15257426 
Shilton R. ; Tan M. K. ; Yeo L. Y. ; Friend J. R. 
J. Appl. Phys. 
2008 , 104 1 014910 .
Renaudin A. ; Sozanski J.-P. ; Verbeke B. ; Zhang V. ; Tabourier P. ; Druon C. 
Sens.
Actuators, B 
2009 , 138 1 374 –382 .
Brunet P. ; Baudoin M. ; Matar O. B. ; Zoueshtiagh F. 
Phys. Rev. E 
2010 , 81 3 036315 .
Ai Y. ; Marrone B. L. 
Microfluid. Nanofluid. 
2012 , 13 5 715 –722 .
Masini L. ; Cecchini M. ; Girardo S. ; Cingolani R. ; Pisignano D. ; Beltram F. 
Lab Chip 
2010 , 10 15 1997 –2000 .20526514 
Trung-Dung L. ; Vinh-Nguyen P. ; Nam-Trung N. 
Microfluid. Nanofluid. 
2011 , 10 3 619 –625 .
Mach A. J. ; Adeyiga O. B. ; Di Carlo D. 
Lab Chip 
2013 , 13 6 1011 –1026 .23380972 
Kew S. ; Banerjee T. ; Minihane A. M. ; Finnegan Y. E. ; Williams C. M. ; Calder P. C. 
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 
2003 , 77 5 1278 –1286 .12716683 
Komura T. ; Sakai Y. ; Honda M. ; Takamura T. ; Matsushima K. ; Kaneko S. 
Diabetes 
2010 , 59 3 634 –643 .19959758 
Gorkov L. P. 
Sov. Phys. Doklady 
1962 , 6 , 773 .
Yosioka K. ; Kawasima Y. 
Acustica 
1955 , 5 , 167 –173 .
Kiss C. ; Temirov J. ; Chasteen L. ; Waldo G. S. ; Bradbury A. R. M. 
Protein Eng.,
Des. Sel. 
2009 , 22 5 313 –323 .19364809 
Mordfin L.  , Handbook of Reference
Data for Nondestructive Testing ; ASTM International : West Conshohocken, PA , 2002 .
Tsou J. K. ; Liu J. ; Barakat A. I. ; Insana M. F. 
Ultrasound Med. Biol. 
2008 , 34 6 963 –972 .18207310
