
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac503716zArticleEffects of Physiologic Mechanical Stimulation on Embryonic
Chick Cardiomyocytes Using a Microfluidic Cardiac Cell Culture Model Nguyen Mai-Dung †Tinney Joseph
P. ‡Ye Fei ‡Elnakib Ahmed A. †Yuan Fangping ‡El-Baz Ayman †Sethu Palaniappan ∥Keller Bradley B. †‡§Giridharan Guruprasad A. *†† Department
of Bioengineering and Mechanical Engineering, Speed School of Engineering, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40208, United States‡ Kosair
Charities Pediatric Heart Research Program, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, United States§ Department
of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University
of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, United States∥ Division
of Cardiovascular Disease, Departments of Medicine and Biomedical
Engineering, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, United States* Phone: (502) 852-2589. Fax: (502) 852-1795. E-mail: gagiri01@louisville.edu.24 12 2015 24 12 2014 17 02 2015 87 4 2107 2113 17 08 2014 24 12 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Hemodynamic mechanical cues play
a critical role in the early development
and functional maturation of cardiomyocytes (CM). Therefore, tissue
engineering approaches that incorporate immature CM into functional
cardiac tissues capable of recovering or replacing damaged cardiac
muscle require physiologically relevant environments to provide the
appropriate mechanical cues. The goal of this work is to better understand
the subcellular responses of immature cardiomyocytes using an in vitro cardiac cell culture model that realistically mimics in vivo mechanical conditions, including cyclical fluid
flows, chamber pressures, and tissue strains that could be experienced
by implanted cardiac tissues. Cardiomyocytes were cultured in a novel
microfluidic cardiac cell culture model (CCCM) to achieve accurate
replication of the mechanical cues experienced by ventricular CM.
Day 10 chick embryonic ventricular CM (3.5 × 104 cell
clusters per cell chamber) were cultured for 4 days in the CCCM under
cyclic mechanical stimulation (10 mmHg, 8–15% stretch, 2 Hz
frequency) and ventricular cells from the same embryo were cultured
in a static condition for 4 days as controls. Additionally, ventricular
cell suspensions and ventricular tissue from day 16 chick embryo were
collected and analyzed for comparison with CCCM cultured CM. The gene
expressions and protein synthesis of calcium handling proteins decreased
significantly during the isolation process. Mechanical stimulation
of the cultured CM using the CCCM resulted in an augmentation of gene
expression and protein synthesis of calcium handling proteins compared
to the 2D constructs cultured in the static conditions. Further, the
CCCM conditioned 2D constructs have a higher beat rate and contractility
response to isoproterenol. These results demonstrate that early mechanical
stimulation of embryonic cardiac tissue is necessary for tissue proliferation
and for protein synthesis of the calcium handling constituents required
for tissue contractility. Thus, physiologic mechanical conditioning
may be essential for generating functional cardiac patches for replacement
of injured cardiac tissue.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac503716zdocument-id-new-14ac-2014-03716zccc-price
==== Body
Cardiovascular
disease is the
leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the world, resulting in
a healthcare burden of >$300 billion annually. Cardiomyocyte apoptosis
is the major cause of cardiac pathology that precedes heart failure.
Cardiomyocytes stop differentiating and have limited proliferative
potential after birth.1,2 As a result, scar tissue replaces
the damaged cardiac tissue, resulting in a loss of cardiac contractility
and function. In addition, in vivo cardiac tissues are affected by
the cyclic mechanical stimulation from hemodynamic loading and unloading
(stretch, pressure, frequency, and fluid flow). These biomechanical
cues are essential for the proper cardiac development and function,3,4 and alterations in these biomechanical cues may result in cardiac
dysfunction. A concerted effort is underway to restore cardiac tissue
structure and function through regenerative approaches. Cardiac tissue
engineering requires a suitable cell culture system for in vitro cardiac
cell culture. However, replicating all aspects of the cyclic mechanical
loading and unloading environment for the in vitro cardiac cultured
cells is a challenging task as CM are under constant mechanical stimulation
and rely on the conversion of these cues into intracellular signals
to control cell phenotype and mass during growth and remodeling.

Our understanding of the molecular and cellular processes of in
vitro cardiac tissue growth and remodeling is limited by the lack
of a suitable culture system that replicates the biomechanical stimulation
that occurs in vivo. We previously developed a dynamic and tunable
cardiac cell culture model (CCCM) for cardiac tissue studies and generation
(Figure 1A).5 This
system replicates all phases of the cardiac cycle and, thus, provides
physiologic biomechanical cues necessary for cardiac tissue proliferation,
differentiation, and functional maturation.

Figure 1 (A) Picture of the experimental
setup of the CCCM system and (B)
map of experimental design for ventricle chick embryonic cells. The
day on the map was based on a 21 day chick embryo gestational.

Subcellular responses of embryonic
chick CM under physiologic mechanical
stimulation were examined using the CCCM. Embryonic chick hearts have
been used as primary cell lines for the study of cardiovascular functions
and maturation.6 In a previous study, embryonic
chick CM cultured in CCCM demonstrated a higher proliferation rate,
better alignment, higher contractility and beat rate (BR), and maturation.5 We hypothesized that the higher contractility
and BR may be due to augmented gene expression or proteins synthesis
relating to the calcium handling regulation in response to physiologic
mechanical stimulation in the CCCM. In this manuscript, the effect
of mechanical stimulation on the gene expression and protein synthesis
relating to calcium handling regulation proteins (sarcoplasmic reticulum
calcium ATPase2a (SERCA2a), phospholamban (PLB), Troponin T (TnT),
and Alpha and Beta-Myosin Heavy Chain (α-, β-MHC)) were
evaluated. Further, the effects of the tissue exposure to isoproterenol
(ISO) on β-adrenergic receptors (β-ARs) were also examined
between the control and mechanically stimulated groups.

Materials and
Methods
Embryonic Chick Cardiomyocyte Isolation and Culture
Ventricular CM was isolated from fertile white leghorn chicken eggs
(Charles River, North Franklin, CT), incubated in a forced-draft and
constant-humidity incubator until day 10 (Hamburger-Hamilton stage
36). Excised day 10 embryonic left ventricles were digested with a
3 mg/mL collagenase type II solution, followed by a 0.05% trypsin-EDTA
solution (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) for 30 min. The CM were then filtered
and preplated. After 1 h incubation, the cells were rotated overnight
to reaggregate viable CM clusters.

Cardiomyocyte clusters (∼3.5
× 104) were seeded on a glutaraldehyde cross-linked
collagen matrix in each cell culture chamber. On day 2 of seeding,
cells cultured in CCCM chambers were either conditioned by mechanical
stimulations or cultured in a static condition as controls.

In order to compare gene expression between the 2D and 3D culture
formats, isolated embryonic CM clusters (∼3.0 × 104 clusters) were also mixed with collagen solution (0.667 mg/mL),
seeded in the TT-4001C Tissue Train plates (Flexcell International
Corporation, HillSborough, NC) using the Flexcell FX5K Tension system
until the collagen solution cured to form 3D engineered cardiac tissues
(ECTs) as previously published.7,8 These ECT constructs
were cultured under static conditions for 5 days prior to analysis
for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as described below.

Cell
suspension from ventricular cardiac tissues from day 16 chick
embryos were also isolated using a GentleMACSTM dissociator
(MACS Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA), preplated, and rotated before
being collected for cDNA and proteins. At the same time, ventricular
tissues from day 16 were also collected for cDNA and proteins. The
overall experimental design is shown in Figure 1B.

Mechanical Stimulation within the CCCM
The cell culture
chamber, with seeded cells, was transferred to the CCCM for mechanical
stimulation for a period of 4 days at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The fabrication, operation, CCCM preparation, and cell seeding
methodologies have been previously published.5 An 8–15% passive stretch and ∼10 mmHg peak pressure
at a frequency of 2.0 Hz, with the fluid flow rate of 44 μL/cycle,
were applied. At the end of 4 days of mechanical stimulation in the
CCCM, the cell culture chamber was removed from the CCCM platform,
cultured for 3 h in static condition, then analyzed as described below.

Isolation of RNA from Samples
Cardiac constructs were
generated from at least three independent experiments. Fresh cell
suspension samples, CCCM cardiac constructs, and chick embryonic ventricles
were homogenized by an Omnitip tissue homogenizer (catalog no. 6615-7273,
Scientific, Ocala, FL). Total RNA was isolated with an Invitrigen
Trizol combined RNeasy MINI Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA; catalog no.
74104). RNA quality and quantity were measured using a NanoDrop ND-2000
(Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA). High-quality RNA were
processed for qPCR.

Real Time Quantitative PCR
First
strand cDNA synthesis
was performed with a SuperScriptVILO cDNA Synthesis Kit (catalog no.
11754-050, Invitrogen) using 2.5 μg of RNA according to manufacturer’s
guidelines. Q-PCR was performed in triplicates using the TaqmanGene
Expression Master Mix and TaqmanGene Expression Assay (SERCA2a, α
and β MHC, PLB, and GAPDH), carried out on a ABI 7900HT system
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). A fold change for each gene
of interest was determined by ΔΔCt using chick
ED16 ventricles as the calibrating sample for comparison to the native
in vivo level of expression.

Western Blotting
Total protein was
collected from the
samples using the Complete-Lysis M solution (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis,
IN). Soluble protein concentration was determined using the NanoDrop
2000 Spectrophotometer. Total cellular proteins were separated using
8% and 10% SDS-PAGE and transferred to Immobilon-FL membranes (Millipore
Corporation, Bedford, MA). After blocked with 5% nonfat milk, the
membrane was probed with different primary antibodies including anti-SERCA2a
(1:500) (LSBio, Seattle, WA), anti α-MHC (1:150) (Santa Cruz,
Dallas, TX) and β-MHC (1:500) (Bioss, Woburn, MA), anti-Actinin
(1:500) (Abcam, Cambridge, MA), anti TnT (1:1000) (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO), and anti β-actin (1:1000) (Cell Signaling, Beverly,
MA). The secondary antibody was Cy3goat anti-Rabbit IgG (1:500) (Life
Technologies, Grand Island, NY) and Cy5 goat antimouse IgG1 (1:500)
(Abcam, Cambridge, MA). The labeled membrane was finally visualized
and photographed using a Typhon 9400 system and NIH ImageJ software.
Protein content was compared between the CCCM control and CCCM stimulated
groups. In contrast to the RNA analysis, we did not include parallel
protein content from ED16 chick embryonic ventricles in this analysis.

Effect of Isoproterenol (ISO) on Stimulated Cardiac Tissue
The cell culture chamber, with the intact tissue construct, was
put on a 37 °C thermo plate (Nikon) under a microscope. Increasing
concentrations of ISO from 0.5 μM to 50 μM (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO) were added to the cell chamber using a brief equilibration
period after changes in ISO dose. For each ISO application, movies
were recorded for beat rate and contractility analysis. Maximum CM
contractility (% shortening) was calculated using a MATLAB program.
Six experiments were performed.

Data Analysis
Data are reported as means ± SEM.
At least three samples with paired data were used for data analysis
in each experiment. Statistical significance was determined using
two-tailed paired Student t test with significance
assigned as P < 0.05.

Results
Gene Expression
Figure 2A demonstrates
total RNA synthesis obtained from 2D cardiac CCCM groups: the control
and the stimulated ones. From the plot, the embryonic chick cardiac
tissues stimulated yielded more RNA (1803 ± 218 ng/μL)
than the tissues cultured under the static condition (1186 ±
102 ng/μL), which represents ∼50% fold increase. Figure 2B–E demonstrates that gene expression decreased
progressively from cells suspension to 2D CCCM culture compared to
the level of gene expression in the embryonic chick ventricle for
all three genes: SERCA2a, α-MHC, β-MHC, and PLB. The gene
expression on 2D constructs, both the controls and the CCCM stimulated
samples, was much lower than ventricular tissues or cell suspension
on day 16, as was shown in a previous study.9 Gene expressions between the control and the CCCM stimulated groups
showed no significant change; however, expression of these genes was
partially restored by 3D ECT in vitro culture.

Figure 2 (A) Picture of the experimental
setup of the CCCM system. Schematic
of experimental design for chick ventricle embryonic cells. The day
on the schematic was based on the 21-day chick embryo gestation. Abbreviation,
ISO, isoproterenol. (B) SERCA 2a gene expressions, (C) α-MHC
gene expressions, (D) β-MHC, and (E) PLB gene expressions. All
samples were collected on day 16 (out of 21 days of gestation). Fold
change for each gene of interest was determined by ΔΔCt using chick ED16 ventricles as the calibrating sample for
comparison to the native in vivo level of expression. N ≥ 3 and p > 0.05. Abbreviations: ECT,
engineered
cardiac tissue; PLB, phospholamban.

Protein Synthesis
More than 10 paired samples (controls
and CCCM stimulated groups) were used to determine total protein in
each group. Total protein in the CCCD stimulated constructs significantly
increased (97.15 ± 4.97 mg) versus total protein in 2D controls
(71.52 ± 4.14 mg) (Figure 3)

Figure 3 (A) Total proteins
of the 2D cardiac tissue constructs. N = 12. Two
tailed significance was set at ** p < 0.005. (B)
Images of Western blot bands of the interested proteins
in the 2D control and CCCM stimulated groups.

Five different CM proteins (SERCA2a, α- and β-MHC,
α-actinin, and TnT) were selected for the Western blot (Figure 4). The target proteins collected from different
conditions are shown in Figures 3 and 4. Proteins SERCA2a, TnT, and β-MHC from the
cell suspension were much lower than those in the ventricular tissues.
Interestingly, the amount of α-Actinin protein almost doubled
after cell isolation from ventricular tissue. As noted in the previous
study, protein levels decreased in response to 2D culture. However,
when mechanically conditioned in the CCCM system, protein levels were
modestly increased, except for myosin heavy chain proteins.

Figure 4 Graphs of interested
protein with ventricular proteins set as the
control state. (A) SERCA2a protein synthesis, (B) α-MHC protein
synthesis, (C) β-MHC protein synthesis, (D) TnT protein synthesis,
and (E) α-actinin protein synthesis. N ≥
3 and two tailed significance was set at *p <
0.05 and **p < 0.005.

Effect of Isoproterenol on Beat Rate (BR) and Contractility
The ISO effects on BR and contraction of the constructs cultured
in the mechanically active CCCM system and in static conditions were
observed. The BRs before and after each ISO application were recorded.
The baseline BR before 0.5 μM ISO solution was used as the referent
BR to determine the percentage change in BR in response to ISO (Figure 5). The results show that the BR of the CCCM group
increased in response to increasing ISO doses to a maximal response
at 10 μM ISO, then declined. In contrast, the BR of the control
group showed no positive inotropic response to ISO and instead displayed
a progressive decline in HR in response to increasing doses of ISO
above 0.5 μM consistent with a toxic response.

Figure 5 (A) Plot represents the
percentage change in beat rate of the cardiac
tissue under the effects of isoproterenol. While the control group
showed cellular toxicity with increasing ISO concentration, the beat
rate of the stimulated group increased and reached its peak at 10
μM ISO. (B) Changes in the cardiomyocyte contraction with and
without the influence of ISO: controls (black) and CCCM stimulated
(clear) constructs. Measurements were made at three different locations
on each sample. N = 6. SEM was used for error bars;
two tailed significance was set at ** p < 0.05
and ***p < 0.001.

Cardiac contractility with and without ISO was also examined.
Movies
of each ISO application were made, and maximum contraction was chosen
to determine tissue shortening. Shortening was calculated as described
in the previously publication.5 With ISO
applications, contractility of the stimulated tissues significantly
increased versus the unstimulated group, to 7.55 ± 0.78% versus
4.52 ± 0.43%, respectively. In response to ISO, contractility
increased 67% in the conditioned group versus 36% in the unconditioned
group. These results suggest that mechanical stimulation may have
accelerated CM maturation as measured by reduced toxicity and increased
BR and shortening in response to ISO stimulation.

Discussion
During cell isolation from the native 3D myocardium, cell–cell
contacts are disrupted and extracellular matrix is destroyed, causing
cells to lose extra cellular network connections that influence many
cellular functions including calcium handling and contractility. Consistent
with the negative impact of cell isolation is the disruption of gene
and protein expressions of contractile relating proteins.9 As outlined in the results, gene and protein
expression of the Ca2+ regulating protein (SERCA2a) and
contractile proteins (β-MHC) were lower in the cell suspension
group and CCCM groups compared to the ventricle group. This may be
due to the reduced metabolic activity of CM in 2D culture versus the
in vivo state or the microenvironment of 3D engineered tissues. However,
CM transcriptional and translational processes still occur and viable
CM recover and mature in the CCCM. The proteins α-MHC obtained
from the cell suspension showed higher than those in the ventricular
tissues, but the p value shows no significant difference
between these two groups. However, when these embryonic cardiac cells
were cultured under 3D, gene expressions of α-MHC, β-MHC,
and PLB increased versus CCCM culture, suggesting that 3D culture
may be necessary for engineered cardiac tissues to maximally regulate
transcriptional processes. Similar results have been noted using neonatal
rat tissues.14 While this study did not
compare protein content or cellular toxicity in CCCM culture versus
3D engineered cardiac tissues, that comparison would provide insights
into the regulation of CM maturation in 3D culture and is planned
for future studies. It is also important to note that while in vitro
measures of CM function (beat rate, force generation) and both gene
and protein expression correlate with CM maturation, the ultimate
measure of the ability of immature CM to augment cardiac repair requires
in vivo implantation and functional analysis studies.

Different
from all of the other CM associated proteins, α-actinin
protein synthesis doubled in the short time from ventricle tissue
isolation to cell suspension. In cardiac cells, α-actinin protein
is the cytoskeletal actin-binding protein to stabilize the contractile
apparatus.10−12 Once the extra-cellular network was disrupted during
cell isolation, increased α-actinin may be required to restore
CM cell shape and integrity.

We noted SERCA2a protein synthesis
increased in stimulated 2D CCCM
constructs versus unstimulated controls; however, SERCA2a gene expression
was similar. Embryonic chick CM are known to have immature sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR).13 SERCA become fully functional
only around birth and hence, limited adaptive differences in SERCA
gene expression is to be expected in immature cardiomyocytes (days
10–15) before birth (day 21). Further, the level of PLB in
the CCCM tissues was similar to static culture tissue, suggesting
that cells did not undergo negative regulation in response to mechanical
stimulation within the CCCM system. Finally, total RNA and protein
obtained from the conditioned group was higher than controls, consistent
with a positive effect of CCCM and conditioning on tissue maturation.
Understanding these biomechanical responses of immature cardiac cells
will also be important for engineering myocardial tissues from stem
cell derived CM. It is also important to note that the increased maximal
beat rate noted in the CCCM stimulated group may reflect increased
CM ion channel maturation and studies that have used chronic pacing
suggest improved functional CM maturation occurs at higher beat rates.

The two cardiac MHC isoforms reciprocally shift their expression
depending on developmental stage and physiological conditions. β-MHC
is the main ventricular MHC isoform prior to birth and then β-MHC
decreases dramatically concurrent with increased α-MHC expression.
No significant change in α- and β-MHC gene expression
or protein synthesis occurred within the control and stimulated CCCM
groups. Static β-MHC gene expression levels indicate that tissues
undergoing mechanical treatment in the CCCM system were not overstressed,
consistent with static PLB gene expression levels. Because this study
was performed during embryonic and fetal stages, 5 days before hatching,
α-MHC expression would not be expected to become dominant. Finally,
the MHC isoform switch is regulated by thyroid hormone T3 levels which
were not supplemented in the CCCM system.14 Applying mechanical stimulation at an early stage of cardiac tissue
development may not be enough to promote α- and β-MHC
gene expression shifts or changes in protein profiles.14,15 Therefore, thyroid hormone supplementation may be required to optimally
mature CM within engineered tissues.

Catecholamine stimulation
affects the mechanical performance of
cardiac tissues through the activation of β-AR.6,16,17 Under normal physiological conditions,
catecholamine stimulation induces positive inotropic and lusitropic
responses through a β1-AR-activated pathway. Once stimulation
of β1-ARs via ISO binding occurs, cAMP accumulation rapidly
increases which indirectly promotes the phosphorylation of PLB and
enhances cardiac contractility. Subtype β1-ARs become dominant
as CM mature under normal physiological conditions.16,18 Under abnormal physiological condition of the heart, or heart failure,
β1-ARs expression and function decreases but β2-ARs increases,
leading to increased ISO related CM toxicity.17

After adding ISO, CCCM conditioned constructs yielded a higher
percentage of contractions compared to the control ones; and the BR
of the conditioned tissue increased until a 10 μM ISO solution
(2.5 mg/mL) was added. However, for the controls, ISO concentrations
higher than 10 μM created negative inotropy and reduced BR,
ultimately resulting in noncontraction, similar to early studies from
Serverin.19 Thus, the increased tolerance
of ISO and increased ISO mediated BR in the CCCM stimulated construct
is consistent with mechanical conditioning mediated cell maturation.
Higher BR and ISO resistance may be the result of higher cell–cell
connection, more maturity, and/or higher cell density. Futher experiments
are required to quantify the maturation of β1-adrenergic signaling
in mechanically stimulated CCCM culture.

Conclusion
We
have demonstrated that mechanical stimulation is needed to maintain
CM proliferation and enhance protein synthesis of embryonic CM during
embryogenesis. Mechanical stimulations also help to maintain the calcium
regulation inside the cells. By providing a suitable mechanical stimulus
for in vitro cardiac cultured tissues, our CCCM system holds significant
promise for generation of functional cardiac patches for replacement
of injured cardiac tissue.

Future Studies
The CCCM system opens
a wide opportunity to understanding the behavior
of cardiac cells on molecular and cellular levels. It also provides
a reliable tool to regenerate mature cardiac tissue for tissue transplants,
which is our ultimate goal. Therefore, 3D constructs that incorporate
mammalian CM lineages, such as human iPS-derived CM, and potentially
incorporate both mechanical and electrical stimulation should be developed
to optimize in vitro engineered tissues for cardiac repair and regeneration.

Supporting Information Available
Additional information on methods
and discussion. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac503716z_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Manasaa Kannan for help with fabrication
and testing
and Dr. Roger D. Bradshaw for the tensile tests. Mai-Dung Nguyen was
supported via a Ph.D. fellowship from the Southern Regional Education
Board (SREB) and the Louisville graduate interdisciplinary scholarship.
This work was supported via NIH Grant 1R15HL115556-01A1 (G.G.), NIH
Grant 1R01HL085777-01-A2 (B.B.K.), and Kosair Charities Pediatric
Heart Research Program (B.B.K.). Drs. Keller and Giridharan served
as comentors on this research project.
==== Refs
References
Samarel A. M. 
Am. J. Physiol.-Heart
Circ. Physiol. 
2005 , 289 , H2291 –H2301 .16284104 
Bursac N. ; Parker K. K. ; Iravanian S. ; Tung L. 
Circ. Res. 
2002 , 91 , E45 –E54 .12480825 
Giridharan G. A. ; Nguyen M. D. ; Estrada R. ; Parichehreh V. ; Hamid T. ; Ismahil M. A. ; Prabhu S. D. ; Sethu P. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 7581 –7587 .20795703 
Goenezen S. ; Rennie M. Y. ; Rugonyi S. 
Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 
2012 , 11 , 1187 –1204 .22760547 
Nguyen M. D. ; Tinney J. P. ; Yuan F. P. ; Roussel T. J. ; El-Baz A. ; Giridharan G. ; Keller B. B. ; Sethu P. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 8773 –8779 .23952579 
Crossley D. ; Altimiras J. 
Am. J. Physiol.-Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 
2000 , 279 , R1091 –R1098 .10956270 
Clause K. C. ; Tinney J. P. ; Liu L. J. ; Keller B. B. ; Tobita K. 
Tissue Eng. Part
A 
2009 , 15 , 1373 –1380 .19196150 
Tobita K. ; Keller B. B. 
Am. J. Physiol.-Heart Circ.
Physiol. 
2000 , 279 , H959 –H969 .10993756 
Khait L. ; Birla R. K. 
Artif. Organs 
2009 , 33 , 3 –15 .19178436 
Sjoblom B. ; Salmazo A. ; Djinovic-Carugo K. 
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 
2008 , 65 , 2688 –2701 .18488141 
Mills M. A. ; Yang N. ; Weinberger R. P. ; Vander Woude D. L. ; Beggs A. H. ; Easteal S. ; North K. N. 
Hum. Mol. Genet. 
2001 , 10 , 1335 –1346 .11440986 
Squire J. M. 
Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol. 
1997 , 7 , 247 –257 .9094325 
Lompre A.
M. ; Anger M. ; Levitsky D. 
J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 
1994 , 26 , 1109 –1121 .7815455 
Pandya K. ; Pulli B. ; Bultman S. ; Smithies O. 
Gene Express. 
2011 , 15 , 51 –59 .
Krenz M. ; Robbins J. 
J. Am. College Cardiol. 
2004 , 44 , 2390 –2397 .
Steinberg S. F. 
Circ. Res. 
1999 , 85 , 1101 –1111 .10571542 
Wallukat G. 
Herz 
2002 , 27 , 683 –690 .12439640 
Khan M. ; Mohsin S. ; Avitabile D. ; Siddiqi S. ; Nguyen J. ; Wallach K. ; Quijada P. ; McGregor M. ; Gude N. ; Alvarez R. ; Tilley D. G. ; Koch W. J. ; Sussman M. A. 
Circ. Res. 
2013 , 112 , 476 –486 .23243208 
Severin E. ; Sartore S. ; Schiaffino S. 
Experientia 
1977 , 33 , 1489 –1489 .923720
