
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac5035314ArticleImprovement of Shotgun Proteomics in the Negative Mode by Carbamylation of Peptides
and Ultraviolet Photodissociation Mass Spectrometry Greer Sylvester
M. Cannon Joe R. Brodbelt Jennifer S. *Department of Chemistry, University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, United
States* E-mail: jbrodbelt@cm.utexas.edu.24 11 2015 24 11 2014 16 12 2014 86 24 12285 12290 20 09 2014 24 11 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Although acidic peptides compose
a substantial portion of many
proteomes, their less efficient ionization during positive polarity
electrospray ionization (ESI) impedes their detection in bottom-up
mass spectrometry workflows. We have implemented a derivatization
strategy based on carbamylation which converts basic amine sites (Lys,
N-termini) to less basic amides for enhanced analysis in the negative
mode. Ultraviolet photodissociation (UVPD) is used to analyze the
resulting peptide anions, as demonstrated for tryptic peptides from
bovine serum albumin and Halobacterium salinarum in
a high throughput liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS)
mode. LC/UVPD-MS of a carbamylated H. salinarum digest
resulted in 45% more identified peptides and 25% more proteins compared
to the unmodified digest analyzed in the negative mode.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac5035314document-id-new-14ac-2014-035314ccc-price
==== Body
With the
advent of modern mass
spectrometric-based proteomics, hundreds or even thousands of proteins
can be identified in a single experiment.1 Several hurdles still remain in the path to efficient sampling of
a complete proteome in high-throughput applications. Chief among these
hurdles is identification of underrepresented proteins (based on analysis
of the corresponding peptides created upon proteolysis in the typical
bottom-up approach). Underrepresented proteins include those that
have fewer copies per cell (low abundance) as well as those for which
the proteolytic peptides are undersampled due to a variety of factors.
These factors include low protein solubility under the digestion conditions
utilized (resulting in ineffective proteolysis and inefficient production
of representative peptides), suboptimal peptide size (mass is too
large or too small), and peptides being too hydrophilic or hydrophobic
resulting in unsatisfactory chromatographic properties and/or poor
ionization efficiencies. Moreover, peptides are routinely “missed”
due to the stochastic nature of data dependent tandem mass spectrometry
(MS). Several strategies have been developed to address undersampling
due to low abundance. These approaches include reducing sample complexity
by fractionation,2 enriching low abundance
peptides3 (that could contain a targeted
post translational modification, for example), preferential proteolysis
and depletion of the most abundant proteins,4 and immunodepletion of abundant proteins.5 Fewer studies have reported means to improve the analysis of peptides
that ionize poorly upon positive polarity electrospray ionization
(ESI) after a conventional low pH liquid chromatography (LC) separation.6,7In silico digestion of whole proteomes typically
result in a bimodal distribution of peptide isoelectric points (pI), even when performed with trypsin as the proteolytic
agent (which leaves a basic site at both termini).8 This natural bimodal pI distribution of
proteolytic peptides (as illustrated in Supporting Figure 1 in the Supporting Information) from several model proteomes
justifies extra effort in targeting the substantial acidic portion
of a given peptidome. Although rarely employed in high-throughput
proteomics experiments, negative polarity mass spectrometry provides
access to the acidic peptidome which is not well-suited for positive
mode analysis. At neutral and slightly basic pH, deprotonation of
glutamic and aspartic acid residues promotes the formation of peptide
anions which can be readily detected and characterized in the negative
mode. In order to achieve the most efficient deprotonation, high pH
mobile phases are typically required for LC–MS experiments
utilizing negative polarity ESI. Raising the pH of the mobile phase
several units above the pKa of the amino
acid side chains results in deprotonation; however, in practice high
pH mobile phases are generally incompatible with standard silica based
stationary phases and capillaries used in peptide separations.

Aside from the high pH required for efficient deprotonation of
peptides, the ability to generate informative fragmentation patterns
of peptide anions is also challenging. Negative mode analysis suffers
from a dearth of options for efficient peptide fragmentation. While
positive mode peptide analysis is proficiently accomplished using
collision induced dissociation (CID),9 electron
capture or electron transfer dissociation (ECD10 or ETD,11 respectively), infrared
multiphoton dissociation12 (IRMPD), or
some combination of the above methods, negative mode tandem mass spectrometry
(MS/MS) analysis is more limited. Electron detachment dissociation13 (EDD), negative mode electron transfer dissociation14 (NETD), and 193 nm negative mode ultraviolet
photodissociation15 (NUVPD) have been shown
to provide diagnostic fragmentation of peptide anions, and the latter
two methods have been implemented for the successful analysis of elaborate
proteomic mixtures. Kjeldsen optimized EDD for the generation of diagnostic a and x fragment anions and demonstrated
it for LC–MS/MS analysis of a simple single protein digest
as well as for phosphopeptide identification from 12 model proteins.13 Using NETD and a mobile phase around pH 10,
Coon and co-workers identified 1412 unique peptides from yeast proteins
and showed 45% greater coverage of the acidic yeast GRX1 protein when
compared to solely positive mode CID and ETD activation.6 Despite these positive gains on single proteins,
NETD required lengthier (>100 ms) activation times which made it
less
compatible with high-throughput LC time scales. Madsen et al. reported
the identification of over 2000 peptides and 659 proteins upon ultraviolet
photodissociation (UVPD) analysis of HeLa cell lysates analyzed in
the negative mode.7 UVPD at 193 nm is successfully
implemented using a 2–10 ms activation period (to allow multiple
laser pulses) and commonly produces multiple diagnostic ion series;
most notably x-, a-, b-, and z-type fragments and occasionally c- and y-type ions. UVPD and NETD have
been directly compared15 for LC–MS
analyses of tryptic digests in the negative mode, with the finding
that either method, when combined with complementary positive mode
CID data, increased sequence coverages and peptide identifications
compared to CID alone.16 UVPD has also
proven to be particularly proficient for analysis of peptides with
labile acidic post-translational modifications17 (PTMs), like phosphorylation18 and sulfation,19,20 as these PTMs are not lost during
UVPD.

Here we introduce a highly efficient means to lower the
pKa of the N-termini and lysine side-chains
of
peptides by converting the reactive amines to amides. This simple
derivatization procedure is readily implemented on complex proteolytic
mixtures and results in detection and identification of significantly
more peptides in the negative mode by UVPD than obtained for noncarbamylated
peptide mixtures, as demonstrated for whole cell lysates of Halobacterium salinarum.

Experimental Section
Materials
HPLC solvents and buffer components were
obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Proteomics-grade trypsin
was obtained from Promega (Madison, WI). All other reagents and solvents
were obtained from ThermoFisher Scientific (Fairlawn, NJ). The model
peptides DRVYIHPFHL and WAGGDASGE were obtained from American Peptide
Company (Sunnyvale, CA). Bovine serum albumin was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO). Halobacterium salinarum was obtained
from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). The bacteria
were grown in the recommended medium (American Type Culture Collection
medium 2185). Cells were suspended in 10 mM Tris-HCL, 10 mM KCl, 1.5
mM MgCl2 at pH 8 to swell and were lysed by dounce homogenization.
The whole cell lysate was centrifuged to clarify the soluble lysate
and to remove the insoluble pellet.

Sample Preparation
Both bovine serum albumin and proteins
isolated from H. salinarum were digested at 37 °C
overnight with trypsin. Prior to digestion, proteins were reduced
in 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 55 °C and subsequently alkylated
in 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min.
Alkylation was quenched with a second aliquot of dithiothreitol, thus
bringing the final concentration of dithiothreitol to ∼10 mM.
Trypsin was added to achieve a 1:20 enzyme-to-substrate ratio, and
the solution was buffered at pH 8 in 150 mM ammonium bicarbonate.
After digestion the sample was dried in a vacuum centrifuge for subsequent
derivatization.

Derivatization
Carbamylation was
performed as previously
reported.21 Briefly, each sample was split
into two aliquots; one for derivatization and one as a control. Each
was resuspended in 200 mM Tris-HCl in the presence or absence of 8
M urea. Both samples were incubated at 80 °C for 4 h. Derivatized
peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Pierce, Rockford, IL),
then evaporated to dryness and resuspended in solvent to match the
LC starting conditions (2% acetonitrile/98% water/0.05% acetic acid).
The peptides DRVYIHPFHL and WAGGDASGE were derivatized as described
above.

LC–MS/MS
The H. salinarum samples
were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 193 nm
excimer laser (Coherent, Santa Clara, CA) and modified to allow UVPD
activation in the HCD cell.25 Photodissociation
was implemented in a manner described previously.7 Chromatographic separations were performed using water
(A) and acetonitrile (B) mobile phases containing 0.05% acetic acid
on an Eksigent Nanoultra 2D Plus liquid chromatography system (Redwood,
CA). The trap (35 mm × 0.1 mm) and analytical column (with integrated
emitter) (15 cm × 0.075 cm) were packed in-house using 3 μm
Michrom Magic C18 packing (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Approximately
3 μg of digest was loaded onto the trap column at 2 μL/min
for 20 min and separated with a gradient that changed from 0 to 35%
B over the course of 240 min at a flow rate of 300 nL min–1. For nanospray, 2.1 kV was applied at a precolumn liquid voltage
junction for negative polarity mode, and the tip–inlet distance
was carefully adjusted to mitigate the occurrence of corona discharge.
Survey and MS/MS scans were acquired by averaging one and three scans,
respectively. Automated gain control targets were 1 000 000
for both survey MS and MSn scan modes. The maximum ion
time was 200 ms for MS and MSn.

All data-dependent
nano LC–MS methods on the Orbitrap involved an FT survey scan
(m/z 400–2000) at a resolution
of 120 000 followed by a series of MS/MS scans on the top 10
most abundant ions from the first survey. The minimum signal required
for MS2 selection was 100 000, and the isolation width was
fixed at 3 m/z. Dynamic exclusion
was enabled for 30 s with a repeat count of one and a list size of
500 m/z values. For UVPD, three
2-mJ pulses were delivered during an activation period of 6 ms. Product
ions from UVPD were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15 000.

The RAW data files collected on the mass spectrometer were converted
to mzXML files by use of MassMatrix data conversion tools (v3.9, http://www.massmatrix.net/download). All data were searched
using an in-house MassMatrix Web server (v2.4.2, http://www.massmatrix.net). The search parameters in MassMatrix employed were (i) enzyme,
trypsin; (ii) missed cleavage, maximum 2; (iii) modifications, fixed
iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine
(fixed carbamylation of n-term and lysine, when appropriate for modified
samples); (iv) precursor ion mass tolerances, 15 ppm for Orbitrap
data; (v) product ion mass tolerances, 0.02 Da for UVPD-MS data on
Orbitrap; (vi) maximum number of modifications allowed for each peptide,
3; (vii) peptide length, 6–40 amino acid residues; (viii) score
thresholds of 5.3 and 1.3 for the pp/pp2 and pptag scores,
respectively. The Halobacterium_sp_nrc1 database
was used for Halo data sets. Peptide and protein identifications were
both filtered at a 1% false discovery rate. The peptide spectral matches
were ranked by confidence and listed in descending order. As the percentage
of matches to the decoy database approached one, all spectral matches
below that point on the list were discarded.

pKa Calculation
The change
in pKa between carbamylated and unmodified
lysine residues and N-termini were calculated using Marvin (http://www.chemaxon.com/marvin/sketch/index.php), a widely available chemical visualization and property calculation
tool (Marvin 14.7.7, 2014). The inverse log of Ka values were calculated using the default parameters.

In Silico Digestion
In silico digests
were performed using freely available software (http://omics.pnl.gov/software/protein-digestion-simulator). FASTA files containing the proteomes for H. sapiens, S. cerevisiae, E. coli, and H. salinarum were downloaded from the Swiss-prot database
(http://beta.uniprot.org/uniprot/? query=*&fil=reviewed%3Ayes) in their reviewed forms. Tryptic digests were performed allowing
up to two missed cleavages.

Results and Discussion
In order to expand the depth and breadth of coverage in proteomics
applications, in particular the ability to analyze intrinsically more
acidic peptides which may be less effectively ionized in positive
mode, negative mode offers an appealing option. Having previously
demonstrated the capabilities of UVPD for analysis of peptides in
both the positive and negative modes,7 we
wished to further extend the proteome coverage by enhancing the range
of peptides suitable for analysis in the negative mode. Owing to the
often lower efficiency of electrospray ionization in the negative
mode (which remains an area of active interest),22−24 the development
of methods to make peptides more amenable to deprotonation is a key
objective. In practice, this includes strategies to reduce the basicities
of the most basic sites (such as lysines and the N-termini in peptides),
thus suppressing protonation and/or increasing the acidities of acidic
groups to enhance deprotonation. The high pKa of the primary amine functional groups is a particularly
significant factor, which may strongly influence negative mode ESI
efficiencies of peptides. The strategy reported here uses a simple
and highly efficient carbamylation reaction which converts primary
amines to amide groups, thus decreasing the pKa values of those functional groups (in particular the lysine
side-chains and N-termini). The carbamylation reaction is shown schematically
in Supporting Figure 2 in the Supporting Information, resulting in a mass shift of +43.0058 Da per carbamylation.

Feasibility experiments were undertaken using model peptides in
order to optimize the carbamylation reaction (i.e., minimize the presence
of partially reacted species) and cleanup procedure (i.e., minimize
sample loss). The carbamylation and C18 spin column cleanup procedure
was extremely simple and efficient for individual peptides and, in
fact, translated remarkably well to complex mixtures of tryptic peptides,
as described later. Reaction efficiencies were estimated based on
examination of the abundances of carbamylated and unmodified peptides
obtained from extracted ion chromatograms for individual peptides
subjected to carbamylation. The ESI mass spectra obtained in the negative
mode for one representative unmodified peptide (DRVYIHPFHL) and the
same peptide after carbamylation are shown in Figure 1. The unmodified peptide is observed primarily as a singly
deprotonated species; the carbamylated peptide is observed predominantly
as a doubly deprotonated species and its abundance is nearly a factor
of 10 greater than that of the unmodified peptide. Examples of the
LC traces used to estimate reaction efficiency are shown in Supporting
Figure 3 in the Supporting Information,
in which the reaction efficiency of carbamylation was estimated to
be 97% for peptide LVNELTEFAK (based on integration of the peak areas
for the unmodified and carbamylated peptides). Carbamylation resulted
in a modest shift in retention times of peptides because the ionizable
amine groups are converted to more hydrophobic amide functionalities.
It is estimated that the conversion of the primary amines (N-terminus
and lysine side-chains) to amides changes the pKa of those groups from 9.5 and 10.5, respectively, to an estimated
pKa of −1.7 (Marvin 14.7.7 2014 http://www.chemaxon.com). This is also consistent with the
shift in charge state noted for the DRVYIHPFHL peptide (in Figure 1) as well as other peptides upon carbamylation.

Figure 1 Negative
ESI mass spectra of peptide DRVYIHPFHL: (A) the unmodified
peptide and (B) the carbamylated peptide. Δ represents carbamylation.

In the negative ESI mode, the
unmodified peptides typically are
detected in low charge states, often as singly deprotonated species
of modest abundance, whereas the corresponding carbamylated peptides
are observed in higher charge states and with much greater abundances.
It is well-known that CID of deprotonated peptides predominantly yields
fragment ions resulting from uninformative neutral losses of water
and CO2. In contrast, UVPD of deprotonated peptides results
primarily in diagnostic a/x sequence ions in addition to lower abundances
of b/y and c/z ions and charge-reduced precursors (i.e., via photoinduced
electron detachment).14 Examples of the
rich UVPD mass spectra of an unmodified peptide, GEEVTAEVADGPQSVIFDQAENR,
and its carbamylated counterpart are shown in Figure 2. The relative abundances and types of fragment ions are similar
for both the unmodified and carbamylated peptide, indicating that
carbamylation does not suppress or significantly alter the UVPD process.

Figure 2 UVPD mass
spectra of GEEVTAEVADGPQSVIFDQAENR from H. salinarum: (A) unmodified (2−) and (B) carbamylated
(2−). # indicates the loss of water.

While these initial experiments were important for proving
the
feasibility of the method, to evaluate the scalability of the carbamylation
reaction for more complex mixtures of tryptic peptides, BSA was digested
and the resulting peptides were carbamylated. Extracted ion chromatograms
(EIC) were generated to monitor the elution of both unmodified and
the corresponding carbamylated peptides. The areas of the extracted
ion peaks were used to measure the efficiency of carbamylation according
to the following equation where A is chromatographic
peak area:  In agreement with the reactions of individual
model peptides, the reaction efficiencies of the measured BSA tryptic
peptides averaged more than 97%. Other derivatization reagents (such
as the popular 4-sulfophenyl isothiocyanate) have been used in the
past successfully to enhance negative mode ionization, but their success
for high-throughput proteomics applications have proven to be subpar
due to the low reaction efficiencies for complex multicomponent mixtures.25 As also noted above, the dominant charge states
of the resulting carbamylated tryptic peptides of BSA were typically
shifted by one charge (e.g., from 1– to 2−), and the
abundances increased by a factor of 7.6 on average relative to the
unmodified peptides.

Trypsin was used as the protease of choice
in this study because
it is the enzyme most commonly used for mass spectrometric-based bottom-up
proteomics applications. One advantage of using trypsin for conventional
positive mode LC–MS studies is that it generally results in
at least two very basic sites (N-terminus and C-terminal K or R residues)
which enhances the formation of multiply charged peptide cations that
are ideal for CID and database searches. Carbamylation reduces the
pKa values of the lysine side-chain and
N-terminus, thus reducing the basicity of those sites and making them
less ionizable in the positive mode and overall making the peptides
more amenable to negative mode ESI. By retaining the use of trypsin
in the present study, the protein mixtures can be subjected to tryptic
digestion, then split into two samples: one for traditional bottom-up/positive
mode approach and the other processed in parallel using the carbamylation/negative
mode UVPD strategy. This dual positive/negative MS/MS approach should
extend the range of peptides (and therefore proteins) identified with
confidence. Moreover, the nearly stoichiometric carbamylation reaction
efficiencies observed for the model peptides and BSA digest allowed
carbamylation of the Lys side-chains and N-termini to be treated as
fixed modifications.

A summary of the observed carbamylated
peptides and their corresponding
peak areas is shown in Supporting Table 1 in the Supporting Information for carbamylated BSA tryptic peptides.
In cases where peptides contain multiple primary amines (i.e., one
or more lysine side-chains plus the N-terminus), the predominant products
were the fully carbamylated species (see Supporting Figure 4 in the Supporting Information). Despite the reaction
undertaken in somewhat basic conditions (pH 8), the pKa of the arginine side-chain is substantially greater
(pKa 12.5) and thus the majority (>99%)
of arginine side-chains remained protonated and unreactive.

To evaluate the carbamylation/UVPD strategy for a larger array
of peptides, the method was applied to the analysis of the H. salinarum proteome. Many of the proteins in the H. salinarum proteome are naturally acidic, thus resulting
in a large distribution of tryptic peptides possessing lower than
average pI values (average 5.8) (Supporting Figure
5 in the Supporting Information). In fact,
over 65% of the predicted tryptic peptides are expected to have pI values below 7. Carbamylation was used to further reduce
the average peptide pI values by decreasing the pKa values of the N-termini and lysine residues.
After tryptic digestion of the proteins extracted from the H. salinarum lysate, the peptides were incubated and carbamylated
in 8 M urea and desalted. Upon comparison of the chromatograms obtained
from the carbamylated and noncarbamylated tryptic peptides, the carbamylated
peptides were retained on the column for between 5 and 15 min longer
than their underivatized counterparts, and the degree of the retention
time shift scaled with the number of carbamylated sites. This increase
in hydrophobicity agrees with the findings mentioned earlier for the
model peptides and BSA peptides and is consistent with replacement
of the ionizable primary amines by the more hydrophobic amide moieties.
Despite the increased retention times, most carbamylated peptides
eluted when the mobile phase composition contained less than 35% (v/v)
acetonitrile.

An example of an LC trace for a carbamylated tryptic
digest of H. salinarum and a representative UVPD
mass spectrum for
one peptide (ΔDNVAAIIIGSR carbamylated at its N-terminus)
is shown in Figure 3. The UVPD mass spectrum
is dominated by a/x ions with lower abundances of z ions, and the
sequence coverage for this peptide is very high (as is also the case
for many of the other carbamylated tryptic peptides). Inspection of
the charge state distributions of those peptides identified by UVPD
for H. salinarum demonstrates a shift in average
charge state for the carbamylated peptides, as summarized in Figure 4. Among the 789 carbamylated peptides identified
by UVPD, a larger portion was detected as 3– and 2–
charge states, whereas more were detected as 2– and 1–
charge states among the 549 peptides identified for the noncarbamylated
digest. More importantly, the average peptide abundances were higher
for the carbamylated digest than the unmodified digest by a factor
of 2.4, thus confirming the signal enhancement obtained by reducing
the net pI values of the peptides upon carbamylation.

Figure 3 (A) Negative
mode LC–MS trace (total ion chromatogram) of H. salinarum tryptic peptides. Inset: ESI mass spectrum
acquired at 195.3 min. (B) UVPD mass spectrum of carbamylated peptide
DNVAAIIIGSR (2−) eluting at 195.3 min.

Figure 4 Distributions of charge states for carbamylated (light bars) and
unmodified (dark bars) tryptic peptide spectral matches (PSMs) found
for the digest of H. salinarum.

The UVPD fragmentation patterns of the more highly charged
peptides
give better peptide sequence coverage. For carbamylated peptides,
1.7 diagnostic ions per residue on average were generated for peptides
in the 3– charge state, 1.3 diagnostic ions per residue for
peptides in the 2– charge state, and 0.6 diagnostic ions per
residue in the 1– charge state. The similarities in the average
number and types of fragment ions for carbamylated versus noncarbamylated
peptides offers assurance that the carbamylation reaction does not
suppress or significantly alter the rich UVPD patterns generated for
peptide anions. With respect to the types of fragment ions, the distributions
are nearly identical for both the carbamylated and unmodified peptides:
averaging 50% a/x ions, 30% b/y ions, and 20% c/z ions (see Supporting
Figure 6 in the Supporting Information).

The average number and standard deviation of peptides and proteins
identified from the H. salinarum proteome were calculated
from triplicate negative mode LC–MS UVPD analyses of the carbamylated
and the unmodified tryptic digests, as summarized in Figures 5 (histograms) and 6 (Venn
diagrams). Combining three runs led to the identification of 1086
peptides for the carbamylated digest compared to 747 for the unmodified
digest. Similarly, at the protein level, 430 proteins were identified
based on the peptides found in the carbamylated digests compared to
348 proteins for the unmodified digests. Upon combining the results
of three runs, 682 peptides were found uniquely for the carbamylated
digest, 343 peptides were found exclusively for the unmodified digest,
and surprisingly only 404 were found for both digests. At the protein
level, 156 proteins were uniquely identified from the results of the
carbamylated tryptic digest, whereas 74 were exclusively found for
the unmodified digest, and 274 proteins were identified in both cases.
The results show 45% more peptide identifications and 25% more protein
identifications after carbamylation when compared to the unmodified
digest. With respect to the charge states of the peptides that were
identified, on average 267 carbamylated peptide spectral matches (PSMs)
were found in the 3– charge state compared to 174 PSMs for
unmodified peptides, 1325 carbamylated PSMs were found in the 2–
charge state compared to 1086 PSMs for unmodified peptides, and 19
carbamylated PSMs were found in the 1– charge state compared
to 49 PSMs for unmodified peptides.

Figure 5 Average number of peptide and protein
identifications from negative
LC/UVPD-MS analyses of carbamylated and unmodified H. salinarum tryptic peptides (in triplicate).

Figure 6 Combined number of (A) unique peptide and (B) protein identifications
from LC/UVPD-MS analyses of carbamylated and unmodified tryptic peptides
from H. salinarum in the negative mode in triplicate.

Interestingly a reasonably large
number of peptides (343) were
identified only from analysis of the unmodified digest. Given the
stochastic nature of data dependent acquisition and bias toward the
most abundant peptide precursor ions,26 many peptides are not selected for fragmentation in a routine mass
spectrometry proteomics experiment.27 Closer
inspection of those peptides identified only for the unmodified tryptic
digests show larger peptides on average than ones commonly identified
for the carbamylated digests (Supporting Figure 7 in the Supporting Information). On the basis of the
retention times of these peptides (Supporting Figure 8 in the Supporting Information), they are also more hydrophobic
(with longer elution times), and thus carbamylation of these large
peptides would be expected to further increase their hydrophobicities
and further delay elution. This may account in part for why this set
of peptides was not identified for the corresponding carbamylated
digest.

Conclusion
Carbamylation of lysine residues and N-termini
was utilized to
enhance the ionization of peptides by negative polarity ESI and improve
the sensitivity of negative mode LC/UVPD-MS analyses. Results show
a significant enhancement in negative mode ionization of carbamylated
peptides compared to unmodified peptides, consistent with the significant
decrease in pKa upon carbamylation of
primary amines. Carbamylation of tryptic digests resulted in 45% more
peptide identifications and 25% more protein identifications compared
to that obtained for the unmodified digests, confirming the enhancement
in sensitivity in the negative mode. The improvement in peptide identification
metrics also arises from a shift to higher charge states, thus yielding
more efficient UVPD. The carbamylation method could be combined with
other proteases, like LysC, to ensure multiple modifications of each
peptide.

Supporting Information Available
pI distributions
of in silico generated tryptic peptides from three proteomes, a reaction
scheme showing the carbamylation of a peptide, extracted ion chromatograms
and ESI mass spectra of carbamylated and unmodified peptides, the
distributions of ion types arising from UVPD of carbamylated and unmodified
tryptic peptides, mass distributions of peptides from carbamylated
and unmodified tryptic digests, the peptides identified for an unmodified
tryptic digest, and a summary of peptides for carbamylated and unmodified
peptides from bovine serum albumin. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac5035314_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Funding from the NIH (Grant R21GM099028) and
the Robert A.
Welch Foundation (Grant F1155) is gratefully acknowledged. J.R.C.
acknowledges support from the NIH (Grant 1K12GM102745).
==== Refs
References
Bensimon A. ; Heck A. J. R. ; Aebersold R. 
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
2012 , 81 , 379 –405 .22439968 
Gunaratne J. ; Schmidt A. ; Quandt A. ; Neo S. P. ; Sarac O. S. ; Gracia T. ; Loguercio S. ; Ahrne E. ; Xia R. L. H. ; Tan K. H. ; Lossner C. ; Bahler J. ; Beyer A. ; Blackstock W. ; Aebersold R. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2013 , 12 , 1741 –1751 .23462206 
Gygi S. ; Villén J. 
Nat. Protoc. 
2008 , 3 , 1630 –1638 .18833199 
Fonslow B. R. ; Stein B. D. ; Webb K. J. ; Xu T. ; Choi J. ; Park S. L. ; Yates J. R. Jr.
Nat.
Methods 
2013 , 10 , 54 –56 .23160281 
Kuhn E. ; Whiteaker J. ; Mani D. R. ; Jackson A. ; Lei Z. ; Pope M. ; Smith D. ; Rivera K. ; Anderson N. L. ; Skates S. J. ; Pearson T. W. ; Paulovich A. G. ; Carr S. A. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2012 , 9 , 184 –196 .
McAlister G. C. ; Russell J. D. ; Rumachik N. G. ; Hebert A. S. ; Syka J. E. P. ; Geer L. Y. ; Westphall M. S. ; Pagliarini D. J. ; Coon J. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 2875 –2882 .22335612 
Madsen J. A. ; Xu H. ; Robinson M. R. ; Horton A. P. ; Shaw J. B. ; Giles D. K. ; Kaoud T. S. ; Dalby K. N. ; Trent M. S. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2013 , 12 , 2604 –2614 .23695934 
Schwartz R. ; Ting C. S. ; King J. 
Genome Res. 
2001 , 11 , 703 –709 .11337469 
Wells J. M. ; McLuckey S. A.   In Methods in Enzymology ; Elsevier : Amsterdam,
The Netherlands , 2005 ; Vol. 402 , pp 148 –185 .16401509 
Cooper H. J. ; Håkansson K. ; Marshall A. G. 
Mass Spectrom. Rev. 
2005 , 24 , 201 –222 .15389856 
Syka J. E. P. ; Coon J. J. ; Schroeder M. J. ; Shabanowitz J. ; Hunt D. F. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2004 , 101 , 9528 –9533 .15210983 
Gardner M. A. ; Ledvina A. R. ; Smith S. ; Madsen J. ; Schwartz G. C. ; Stafford G. C. ; Coon J. J. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 8109 –8118 .19739654 
Kjeldsen F. ; Hørning O. B. ; Jensen S. S. ; Giessing A. M. B. ; Jensen O. N. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2008 , 19 , 1156 –1162 .18555696 
Coon J. J. ; Shabanowitz J. ; Hunt D. F. ; Syka J. E. P. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass. Spectrom. 
2005 , 16 , 880 –882 .15907703 
Madsen J. A. ; Kaoud T. S. ; Dalby K. N. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
Proteomics 
2011 , 11 , 1329 –1334 .21365762 
Shaw J. B. ; Madsen J. A. ; Xu H. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 1707 –1715 .22895858 
Henderson J. C. ; Fage C. D. ; Cannon J. R. ; Brodbelt J. S. ; Keatinge-Clay A. T. ; Trent M. S. 
ACS Chem. Biol. 
2014 , 9 , 2382 –2392 .25068415 
Luo Y. ; Yogesha S. D. ; Cannon J. R. ; Yan W. ; Brodbelt J. S. ; Zhang Y. 
ACS
Chem. Biol. 
2013 , 8 , 2042 –2052 .23844594 
Han S. W. ; Lee S. W. ; Bahar O. ; Schwessinger B. ; Robinson M. R. ; Shaw J. B. ; Madsen J. A. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
Nat. Commun. 
2012 , 3 , 1153 .23093190 
Robinson M. ; Moore K. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 1461 –71 .24845354 
Angel P. M. ; Orlando R. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2007 , 10 , 1623 –1634 .17465008 
Allen S. J. ; Schwartz A. M. ; Bush M. F. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 12055 –12061 .24224685 
Douglass K. A. ; Venter A. R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 8212 –8218 .23901825 
Konermann L. ; Ahadi E. ; Rodriguez A. D. ; Vahidi S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 2 –9 .23134552 
Vasicek L.
A. ; Ledvina A. R. ; Shaw J. B. ; Griep-Raming J. ; Westphall M. S. ; Coon J. J. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2011 , 22 , 1105 –1108 .21953052 
Liu H. ; Sadygov R. G. ; Yates J. R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2004 , 76 , 4193 –4201 .15253663 
Michalski A. ; Cox J. ; Mann M. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2011 , 10 , 1785 –1793 .21309581
