
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac5035924ArticleSelf-Digitization
Microfluidic Chip for Absolute Quantification
of mRNA in Single Cells Thompson Alison
M. †Gansen Alexander †Paguirigan Amy L. ‡Kreutz Jason E. †Radich Jerald P. ‡Chiu Daniel T. *†† Department
of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, United States‡ Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98109, United States* E-mail: chiu@chem.washington.edu. Fax: 206-685-8665. Phone: 206-543-1665.12 11 2015 12 11 2014 16 12 2014 86 24 12308 12314 24 09 2014 12 11 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Quantification
of mRNA in single cells provides direct insight
into how intercellular heterogeneity plays a role in disease progression
and outcomes. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), the current
gold standard for evaluating gene expression, is insufficient for
providing absolute measurement of single-cell mRNA transcript abundance.
Challenges include difficulties in handling small sample volumes and
the high variability in measurements. Microfluidic digital PCR provides
far better sensitivity for minute quantities of genetic material,
but the typical format of this assay does not allow for counting of
the absolute number of mRNA transcripts samples taken from single
cells. Furthermore, a large fraction of the sample is often lost during
sample handling in microfluidic digital PCR. Here, we report the absolute
quantification of single-cell mRNA transcripts by digital, one-step
reverse transcription PCR in a simple microfluidic array device called
the self-digitization (SD) chip. By performing the reverse transcription
step in digitized volumes, we find that the assay exhibits a linear
signal across a wide range of total RNA concentrations and agrees
well with standard curve qPCR. The SD chip is found to digitize a
high percentage (86.7%) of the sample for single-cell experiments.
Moreover, quantification of transferrin receptor mRNA in single cells
agrees well with single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization
experiments. The SD platform for absolute quantification of single-cell
mRNA can be optimized for other genes and may be useful as an independent
control method for the validation of mRNA quantification techniques.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac5035924document-id-new-14ac-2014-035924ccc-price
==== Body
Intercellular
heterogeneity
plays a role in cell differentiation as well as disease development,
progression, and remission or relapse in response to treatment.1−3 Studying mRNA expression at the single-cell level can provide a
means to characterize variability in cellular activity and thus study
disease etiology and pathology. Standard macroscale methods for quantitative
assessment of gene expression are not designed to handle very small
volumes and are limited by their sensitivity and accuracy when applied
to single-cell analyses.4,5 In response to these
challenges, various microfluidic platforms have been developed to
measure gene expression in single cells using digital polmerase chain
reaction (dPCR). High-throughput platforms, such as the BioMark HD
system (Fluidigm), have provided a way to study expression levels
of multiple genes in a set of single cells simultaneously.6 However, challenges persist in dealing with the
technical variability in single-cell protocols, where uncertainty
can be introduced from cell lysis, reverse transcription, preamplification,
PCR, and other steps.7 It has been found
that when performing microfluidic RNA quantification, using different
reagents and protocols can give varying results for each step and
that some methods do not work for certain genes.8 It has also been shown that when dealing with the small
quantities of mRNA from a single cell, detection of mRNA transcripts
at or below 102 copies per cell may be unreliable.9 This unreliability complicates the assessment
of the biological variability within single cells and makes the comparison
of different preparation methods impractical. Technical advancements
are still needed in instances where sensitive and absolute measurement
is necessary, such as single-cell gene expression measurements, and
in validation of evolving quantitative or semiquantitative gene expression
instrumentation.

Digital PCR has been used to perform highly
accurate quantitation
of DNA or cDNA,10−12 but RNA measurement requires reverse transcription
(RT), an additional enzymatic reaction that can introduce error. RNA
must be measured indirectly through enzyme-generated cDNA; the efficiency
of this RNA-to-cDNA conversion varies between RT enzymes and across
the transcriptome.13 Digital PCR platforms,
where RNA-to-cDNA conversions are performed prior to digitization,
have shown these measurements to be precise under consistent reaction
conditions in larger homogenized samples8 and for single cells when compared to quantitative PCR (qPCR).14 However, these techniques demonstrate cDNA quantification
and may not reflect the actual quantity of RNA present in the original
sample. Digital PCR measurements have thus far not demonstrated absolute
quantification of mRNA present in a single cell.

In this study,
both RT and PCR occur in digitized volumes without
prior reverse transcription or preamplification, hereinafter referred
to as one-step digital RT-PCR. A few reports of one-step digital RT-PCR
have demonstrated quantification results that agree well with those
of other quantitative or semiquantitative methods using RNA standards15 or standard virus quantification methods15−17 to indirectly quantify RNA for comparison with system performance.
While digital RT-PCR has been established in general, and analysis
of cDNA from a single cell has been carried out using dPCR, direct
analysis of mRNA from single cells using digital RT-PCR has not been
performed. This is significant as we believe this facilitates the
most optimal performance of the RT step and avoids potential bias
from a bulk RT step or preamplification.

In this work, we show
some of the limitations of using standard
qPCR measurements to study single-cell heterogeneity. We then show
an absolute quantification method of single-cell gene expression analysis.
This method uses the self-digitization (SD) chip platform, a microfluidic
device without valves or moving parts that digitizes a high percentage
of the sample volume. We assess the performance of our device for
one-step digital RT-PCR using two methods. In the first approach,
we demonstrate that direct quantification using the digital assay
compares well to a qPCR standard curve, validating the general performance
of the assay. In the second approach, we compare the direct quantification
of single-cell mRNA from the digital assay to another direct RNA counting
method, single-molecule FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization),
indicating the accuracy of postdigitization RT.18 We demonstrate that the reverse transcription step can
be performed reliably in digitized volumes; this workflow successfully
performs single-cell analysis. We also demonstrate that the absolute
mRNA quantification in single cells can be accurately performed using
digital microfluidics.

Experimental Section
Single-Cell qPCR
Quantitative PCR data shown in Figure 1 were
acquired using flow cytometry sorted K562
cells. Single K562 cells were flow-sorted into PCR plates so that
the wells were known to contain 1, 10, or 100 cells. Reverse transcription
was performed in 10 μL of the high-capacity master mix (Applied
Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA), and duplicate reactions were analyzed by
qPCR based on duplex hydrolysis probes to simultaneously measure expression
levels of the target gene, BCR-ABL, and the control gene, wild-type
ABL. The fold change in gene expression was calculated relative to
the average of all samples in the category (1, 10, or 100 cells).
For extracted RNA experiments, total RNA was extracted from K562 cells
using Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Quantities were assessed by UV absorbance (Nanodrop 2000,
Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).

Microfluidic Device Fabrication
Devices were prepared
by soft lithography as described previously19 with the following modifications. The main channel height was measured
to be 25 ± 1 μm, and the chamber height was 104 ±
3 μm for the serpentine design and 113 ± 5 μm for
the bifurcated design as determined by a custom-built white-light
interferometer.20 The serpentine device,
used in single-cell experiments, contained 1020 chambers, while a
bifurcated main channel device, used in dilution series experiments,
contained 1024 channels. Details of the device dimensions and assembly
are available as Figure S-2 and S-3 (Supporting
Information).

Device Loading
The RT-PCR reaction
mix was prepared
from the CellsDirect one-step qRT-PCR kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad,
CA). A PCR master mix was prepared according to the manufacturer’s
guidelines with the addition of bovine serum albumin (Invitrogen)
to a final concentration of 3 mg/mL and Tween 20 (Millipore, Darmstadt,
Germany) to a final concentration of 0.15% (m/v). The concentration
of SuperScript III RT/Platinum Taq mix was doubled from that in the
manufacturer’s guidelines. PCR assays for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and transferrin receptor (TFRC) were purchased
from the library of prepared PrimeTime qPCR 5′ nuclease assays
available from Integrated DNA Technologies (GAPDH assay Hs.PT.42.1164609,
TFRC assay Hs.PT.56a.3164874, IDT, Coralville, IA). PCR assays were
purchased with FAM/ZEN/Iowa Black FQ probes. Final primer concentrations
were 500 nM forward/reverse primer and 250 nM probe. The lysate mixture
was prepared separately. For RNA dilution experiments, 2 μL
of RNA diluent (total RNA control (human), Applied Biosystems) was
prepared by serial dilution to concentrations of 52, 35, 17, 7, and
1.4 pg/μL in 10 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.0 (1 M Tris, pH 8.0, Ambion,
Carlsbad, CA, diluted with UltraPure DNase/RNase-free water, Invitrogen).
This RNA sample was added to 6 μL of CellsDirect lysis solution.
This RNA mix was incubated according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (cell lysis step), and then 3 μL of RNA/lysis mix
and 7 μL of RT-PCR master mix were mixed and added to the SD
chip inlet.

For single-cell experiments, 0.5 μL of SKBR3
cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA) suspended in 1× PBS (10× phosphate-buffered
saline, Sigma-Aldrich, diluted with UltraPure water) was pipetted
onto the inside of a lid from a PCR tube (0.2 mL PCR tube strips,
BioRad, Hercules, CA). The droplets were inspected with an inverted
bright-field microscope (Axio Vert.A1, Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany)
with a 20×, 0.45 NA objective to determine cell quantities. For
lids containing a single cell in suspension, 1.6 μL of CellsDirect
lysis solution was pipetted into the lid. These lids were again observed
with a bright-field microscope, and only lids twice confirmed to contain
only a single cell were used in analysis. These lids were capped onto
the PCR tube base, stored inverted on ice, and transferred to −80
°C for storage for up to 4 weeks. Frozen samples were thawed
on ice, and the droplets were covered with 20 μL of continuous-phase
oil mix and incubated according to the manufacturer’s instructions
to perform cell lysis. These samples were cooled briefly on ice before
6 μL of master mix was pipetted under the oil layer. The prepared
reaction mix was stored on ice and transferred to a 4 °C cold
room for device loading.

A continuous oil phase, composed of
Abil WE 09 (Evonik Industries,
Essen, Germany), Tegosoft DEC (Evonik Industries), and light mineral
oil (M8410, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), was prepared within 24
h of device priming. The concentrations were, by weight, 0.075% Abil,
90% Tegosoft, and 9.9% light mineral oil. This continuous phase was
pipetted into the inlet and outlet of the device main channel. The
device was then placed in a vacuum chamber under vacuum overnight
to displace air from the channel and array.

Samples were digitized
in a 4 °C cold room. A vacuum manifold
formed from poly(methyl methacrylate) was attached via double-sided
Kapton tape to the SD chip outlet. Drilled access holes in this piece
were used to interface up to four SD chips in parallel to the vacuum
pump via connected tubing. In this arrangement, four devices were
simultaneously connected to a vacuum pump (DOA-P104-AA, Gast, Benton
Harbor, MI) that generated a 575 mmHg vacuum to create a pressure
differential along the device channels to drive flow.

Digital RT-PCR
Thermal cycling was performed in an
Eppendorf Mastercycler fitted with an in situ adapter (Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany). A layer of light mineral oil was sandwiched between
the in situ adapter and the device. GAPDH or TFRC amplification was
performed at two-step thermal cycler conditions to optimize the signal-to-noise
ratio: reverse transcription at 50 °C for 35 min, hot start at
95 °C for 2.5 min, denature at 95 °C for 15 s, and anneal/extend
at 61 °C for 30 s (GAPDH) or 45 s (TFRC).

Data Processing
Imaging was performed using a variable-mode
imager (Typhoon FLA9000, GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) as described
previously.19 Analysis was performed using
ImageJ (http://rsbweb.nih.gov). The same rolling ball background
subtraction was performed on each image. A macro was written in ImageJ
to overlay region-of-interest (ROI) grids on the array to collect
the mean and integrated intensities from the center and total area
of each chamber. Two such ROI grids were used per image. The first
grid covered a small area in the center of the well, 16 × 8 pixels.
The mean intensity in the center of the chamber was used to determine
PCR-positive status, as chambers typically fall into either a PCR-negative
or PCR-positive cluster as seen in Figure 4. Chambers with a mean intensity below a low threshold were considered
unfilled and were discarded from analysis. Chambers with mean intensity
above a high threshold were discarded due to possible fluorescent
fibers or dust that would give inaccurate assessment. A second ROI
grid covered the entire chamber area, 48 × 27 pixels, and the
total intensity for this area was determined in ImageJ. The ratio
of total chamber intensity to mean pixel intensity at the chamber
center multiplied by the total chamber pixels was used as a second
quality metric. It was found that this value should be near 1 for
a fully filled chamber. Chambers with values below a low threshold
were considered low volume and discarded from analysis, while chambers
with values above a high threshold were discarded due to possible
fluorescent fibers or dust. The volume of droplets on the outer edges
of the array was found to decrease during thermal cycling; therefore,
these volumes were not used in the analyses.

The total number
of filled volumes, total number of PCR-positive volumes, and volume
of the solution analyzed were then used to calculate the concentration
of mRNA. This concentration was multiplied by the total volume of
the loaded sample to determine the absolute mRNA copy number per sample.
Details of this calculation are provided in the Supporting Information.

RNA Standard Curve
An RNA standard curve was generated
from total RNA (total RNA control (human), Applied Biosystems). First,
the total RNA was reverse transcribed using a combination of random
primers and oligo(dT)s (iScript RT supermix, BioRad). The resulting
cDNA underwent two rounds of PCR amplification (SsoFast EvaGreen supermix,
BioRad) using GAPDH primers that incorporated the T7 sequence. The
PCR-amplified cDNA was purified (MiniElute, Qiagen, Germantown, MD),
and its purity was confirmed by melt-curve analysis and gel electrophoresis
after each round of PCR. From the purified cDNA, a 594 base pair ssRNA
standard was generated using a MegaScript kit with TurboDNase treatment
(Life Technologies). The resulting RNA standard was purified (MegaClear
kit, Life Technologies), confirmed to be a single product by gel electrophoresis,
and quantified by UV absorbance (Nanodrop 2000, Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Each kit was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Single-Cell FISH
Cells were grown on Lab-Tek chambered
cover glass (Thermo Fisher) for 2 days. The cells were washed with
1× PBS and incubated at room temperature in fixation buffer (4%
formaldehyde in 1× PBS, Sigma-Aldrich) for 10 min. The cells
were washed twice with 1× PBS and stored in 70% ethanol at 4
°C for 1 h. The cells were incubated for 5 min at room temperature
with wash buffer (10% formamide, Ambion, in 2× SSC, Ambion) and
then overnight in a 37 °C incubator in a hybridization buffer
(10% formamide, 2× SSC, 125 nM FISH probes, 10% dextran sulfate,
Sigma-Aldrich). TFRC FISH probes were obtained from Biosearch (Stellaris
FISH probes, human TFRC with Quasar 570, Biosearch Technologies, San
Francisco, CA). The following day, the cells were incubated at 37
°C with wash buffer for 30 min followed by a 30 min, 37 °C
incubation with nuclear dye (wash buffer with 5 ng/mL DAPI, Sigma-Aldrich).
Before imaging, the cells were washed with 2× SSC and covered
with 25 μL of Vectashield mounting medium (Vector Laboratories,
Burlingame, CA) and an 18 × 18 mm no. 1 coverslip. The cells
were imaged using a Nikon Eclipse Ti inverted microscope fitted with
a 60×, 1.4 NA objective. Image stacks were created by manually
focusing on image planes containing individual RNA spots, approximately
30 images per cell. Image slices were evaluated using software developed
by the Arjun Raj laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania (http://rajlab.seas.upenn.edu/StarSearch/launch.html).

Cell Culture
SKBR3 cells were cultured in McCoy’s
5A medium (ATCC) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL
penicillin, and 100 mg/mL streptomycin. K562 cells were cultured in
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (ATCC) supplemented
with 1× l-glutamine, 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL
penicillin, and 100 mg/mL streptomycin.

Results and Discussion
Real-time qPCR is considered to be the gold standard method for
gene expression assays.9 To analyze homogeneous,
larger input samples well above the qPCR limit of detection, ΔΔCT calculations are often used. These calculations
relate expression of the target gene to that of a control gene in
the same sample, and the results are normalized to a uniform input
sample.21 This accounts for random changes
in the target amount. As the input is reduced to quantities near the
limit of detection, the validity of this calculation is questionable.
For single-cell measurements, errors are introduced from the variability
of sample handling and PCR protocols. Comparisons of target and control
genes are no longer relevant at the single-cell level, as cycles of
gene expression burst and degradation are known to occur across all
genes, including housekeeping or control genes.2,22 As
a result of these sources of variability, ΔΔCT calculations tend to compound error in single-cell measurements
rather than reduce the contribution of qPCR’s inherent experimental
uncertainty.

To demonstrate the specific limitations of ΔΔCT qPCR for single cells, we analyzed populations
of a leukemia cell line, called K562, which is known for its high
expression of the BCR-ABL gene. BCR-ABL is a fusion gene resulting
from a translocation that is the hallmark of chronic myeloid leukemia.
Typically, BCR-ABL expression is compared to that of a reference gene,
such as wild-type ABL. Traditional qPCR methods were adapted for use
with single cells to accurately quantify the fold differences between
BCR-ABL and ABL expression levels down to less than single-cell quantities,
as defined by typical quality control descriptions (such as linearity
of the standard curve for titrated RNA, Figure S-1, Supporting Information). When this assay was applied to populations
of cells, we saw that, as the cell number input into the reactions
decreased from 100 to a single cell, more apparent variability in
BCR-ABL gene expression was observed while the mean of each population
size was identical to that observed in extracted, homogenized RNA
from these cells (Figure 1). The high variability observed in these single cells shows
that, even in cell lines presumed to be homogeneous, the differences
in the expression levels of target and control genes are high. Additionally,
it is challenging to identify with certainty that the variability
demonstrated was truly biological heterogeneity or was due to an unaccounted
for artifact. In this way, ΔΔCT comparisons between target and control genes are inappropriate for
single-cell assays. Thus, an absolute quantification of gene expression
is preferable for single-cell gene expression analysis.

Figure 1 Traditional
qPCR approaches adapted for use in single cells show
that, even in homogeneous cell lines using a ΔΔCT calculation to interpret qPCR data, intercellular
variability can be observed. The fold difference in expression of
BCR-ABL for each cell population was compared to the average BCR-ABL
expression of the extracted RNA. For K562 cells, the use of ABL as
a control gene and comparison of its expression to BCR-ABL gene expression
is a typical approach. As the input cell number decreases, the mean
expression value, indicated by a horizontal red line in each group,
remains the same as that of extracted control RNA, but the intercellular
variability becomes more apparent.

We hypothesized that microfluidic, digital RT-PCR could overcome
some of the limitations of standard qPCR for single-cell analysis.
We performed these experiments using a microfluidic device, the SD
chip. The SD chip was developed to automatically digitize an aqueous
plug into discrete volumes in a continuous oil phase without valves
or other moving parts.23 This device, made
out of poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS), consists of a continuous or
branching rectangular main channel with rectangular sample cavities
(chambers) evenly distributed along one side of the channel (Figure 2). An aqueous sample plug enters the oil-primed
device and fills the main channel and chambers. The aqueous plug is
followed by the continuous oil phase, which fills the main channel
and traps the aqueous sample into individual volumes with minimal
loss to the sample outlet. The SD chip has been previously used for
small-molecule crystallization studies23 and for isothermal loop-mediated DNA amplification (LAMP).19 In this study, we extend its use to digital
one-step RT-PCR. The SD chip is an excellent platform for a single-cell
sample. First, an oil barrier prevents the aqueous sample from contacting
the surfaces of the device, minimizing adsorption of the analyte.
Second, the design maximizes the amount of sample digitized in the
array, which becomes important when the quantity of genetic material
is small. Finally, the flexibility in the size and number of sample
cavities per device makes the platform amenable to match the dynamic
range and resolution requirements for the gene of interest.

Figure 2 Components
of the digital RT-PCR self-digitization chip. (A) Image
of the assembled device with a sketch of the chip components. (B)
Schematic of the serpentine chip design used for single-cell experiments.
The actual devices contain 1020 wells. (C) SD chip filling mechanism.

The implementation of RT-PCR in
the SD chip, however, required
four notable modifications over the design previously used for isothermal
amplification.19 First, since PCR requires
higher temperatures than the LAMP reaction, additional measures were
necessary to reduce evaporation of the digitized solution through
the semipermeable PDMS substrate. Second, the number of chambers had
to allow for quantification of low to intermediate abundance transcripts
present in a single cell (less than 1000 copies).24 Third, the continuous-phase composition had to be modified
to accommodate both viscosity changes and the switch in surfactant
for the final PCR mix; the digitized volumes had to be prevented from
shifting into the device main channel at the PCR denaturation temperatures.
Fourth, modifications to the sample inlet and pressure source had
to be made to facilitate sample loading and minimize sample loss in
the inlet.

An image and diagram of the device are shown in Figure 2, and assembly details are shown in Figure S-2 (Supporting Information). Notable features of
this device compared to its predecessor include (1) a tapered, funnel-like
sample inlet, interfaced with the microfluidic channel to minimize
dead space, to direct a pipetted sample into the main channel, (2)
a thin PDMS microfluidic feature layer sandwiched between the spin-coated
PDMS glass microscope slide and the glass coverslip to prevent evaporation
above and below the array, and (3) an oil-filled channel surrounding
the array which acts as a horizontal evaporation barrier during thermal
cycling (Figure S-4, Supporting Information). To fill the device, we found that thermally stable oil–surfactant
systems adopted from emulsion PCR systems ensure that the high temperatures
achieved during thermal cycling do not cause digitized volumes to
enter into the main channel where they might combine with neighboring
volumes. Additionally, loading the chip with negative pressure, using
a vacuum pump on the outlet versus positive pressure on the inlet,
prevented overloading of individual chambers in the compressible PDMS
substrate (Figure S-5, Supporting Information). Despite these modifications, small amounts of sample were sometimes
observed to remain in the sample inlet, and sample often collected
at the sample outlet due to emulsion formation during filling. With
these modifications, 86.7% (SD = 3.3%) of the single-cell sample was
digitized in the 12 single-cell experiments. With further optimization
to the sample inlet and adjustment of surfactant concentrations and
solution viscosities, this loading efficiency could theoretically
reach 100% in the SD chip.23 In contrast,
workflows for high-throughput, single-cell, microfluidic qPCR using
preamplification of cDNA before digitization typically use less than
5% of the sample.25 Workflows not incorporating
preamplification for single-cell assays, instead performing microfluidic
digital PCR of cDNA, often digitize approximately 50% of the sample.14,26

Analysis of postamplification array images showed two distinct
intensity clusters for sample volumes corresponding to PCR-negative
and PCR-positive reactions (Figure 3). From
the proportion of positive to total volumes in the array, application
of Poisson statistics allowed us to determine the concentration of
molecules on the device.27 The Wilson score
method was then used to calculate the 95% confidence intervals about
this estimation.28−30 The outermost rows and columns were excluded from
analysis because a low chamber volume due to evaporation was indistinguishable
from a failure in chamber filling. Imaging the array before and after
RT-PCR, as opposed to end-point-only imaging, could allow us to compensate
for these changes and analyze these chambers for future experiments.
Before and after images of a digitized sample in the full array are
shown in Figure S-3 (Supporting Information).

Figure 3 Postamplification well intensity. (A) Typical well intensity distribution
for single-cell amplification of TFRC RNA. A high intensity value
indicates target amplification. (B) Background-subtracted image of
a serpentine array after single-cell digital RT-PCR. Dark volumes
indicate target amplification. This image excludes the outermost rows
and columns of the array.

A theoretical dynamic range for the device can be determined
using
Poisson statistics and is dependent on the total volume of sample
analyzed and the number and size of digitized volumes. We define the
dynamic range from the concentration corresponding to the result of
three positives per array volume to three negatives per array volume.
These concentrations would be expected to give results corresponding
to at least one positive well or one negative well, respectively,
95% of the time. For this design this corresponds to a range of 0.41–680
copies/μL or 3.3–5500 copies per single cell. A detailed
description of this calculation is given in the Supporting Information.

The choice of enzyme to perform
reverse transcription of RNA to
cDNA was essential to assay performance. Ideally, each chamber in
the array containing RNA would contain one or more corresponding cDNA
molecules after reverse transcription, so that these chambers would
yield a positive signal following PCR. For this reason, we chose a
reverse transcription enzyme known for high yield and stability.31 A long incubation time was used to allow the
enzyme sufficient time for reverse transcription.

We first tested
the ability of this device to perform digital and
one-step RT-PCR by analyzing a dilution series of total RNA for GAPDH
mRNA copy number. The response was linear (R2 = 0.999) and matched closely to that of qPCR using a standard
curve of GAPDH RNA. The SD chip indicated slightly lower quantities
of GAPDH mRNA in the sample (qPCR, 102 GAPDH copies/pg of total RNA;
digital one-step RT-PCR, 71.8 GAPDH copies/pg of total RNA) (Figure 4A). This result is consistent
with those of other studies showing that qPCR can yield a higher result
than digital PCR or digital RT-PCR.8,10,11 This may result from the fact that the qPCR measurement
is dependent on quantification of the RNA standards by UV absorbance;
it is known that UV absorbance measurements can overestimate the number
of amplifiable template molecules due to the presence of contaminants,
damaged RNA, or off-target oligomers.8,10,11

Figure 4 Amplification of GAPDH transcripts from total RNA. (A)
Measured
GAPDH copies versus total RNA input measured by qPCR or the SD chip.
Error bars represent confidence intervals. (B) Estimated GAPDH starting
concentration determined by digital RT-PCR at five dilution points.
Dark blue bars represent the concentration estimation and 95% confidence
interval (CI) for each run; light gray bars represent the concentration
and CI estimation for the sum of positive and total chambers for the
three SD chips analyzed at each dilution.

Results from the GAPDH mRNA dilution series were also multiplied
by their dilution factors to return to the starting concentration
of GAPDH mRNA in the total RNA starting sample (Figure 4B). The final two points in this dilution series fell slightly
below the average starting concentration. This may be due to an error
in the creation of the dilution series, caused by either pipetting
error or a loss of the minute quantities of RNA inside the pipet tips
or vessels used to prepare the reagents. These data are significant
because they show that any bias between low and high copy numbers
of the mRNA transcript is minimal. However, this result does not show
that the absolute quantities determined from the analysis reflect
the absolute quantities of mRNA present in a single cell.

Having
shown that the SD chip’s digital one-step RT-PCR
gave results comparable to those of qRT-PCR, we next sought to validate
the absolute quantification of mRNA in single cells by comparison
with another single-cell mRNA quantification technique, single-molecule
mRNA FISH. FISH is independent of the variable efficiency of reverse
transcription and PCR and was developed specifically for quantification
in single cells. For these reasons, it is an excellent independent
validation method. In this method, direct counting of single RNA molecules
is performed in a sample of fixed cells by attaching multiple probes
labeled with fluorophores along the length of each RNA. With high-resolution
fluorescence microscopy, it is possible to identify single RNAs as
diffraction-limited spots in a z-stack of images.
Challenges with probe design and spatial resolution of fluorescent
signals limit the compatibility of this method for highly concentrated
transcripts or for those that cluster within the cell.32 We chose to study the TFRC gene, a relevant
protein in some cancers such as mantle cell lymphoma.33 The typical intercellular mRNA spatial distribution and
concentration for this gene made it an excellent candidate for this
study; a well-characterized TFRC FISH assay was commercially available.

We found that results from both methods agreed well, yielding on
average 455 (SD = 171, n = 31) copies of TFRC transcripts
per single cell using FISH and 442 (SD = 207, n =
12) copies using the SD chip with digital RT-PCR (Figure 5). These values are similar to TFRC values found
in HeLa cells using single-molecule FISH.34 We also found that the distributions of TFRC mRNA copy number were
similar between the two methods. The statistical error for dRT-PCR
data, displayed as 95% confidence intervals, are small compared to
the variation in TFRC in these cells. The magnitude of associated
theoretical uncertainty per cell in digital PCR is dependent on the
total number of volumes analyzed and thus can be reduced to fit the
needs of the user by adding more reaction volumes per sample.35,36 Importantly, unlike single-molecule FISH, digital, one-step RT-PCR
is not limited by the optical resolution of mRNA transcripts that
cluster in vivo. The number of digitized volumes per device also can
be scaled to quantify transcripts of any abundance.

Figure 5 Absolute quantification
of TFRC mRNA copies in single cells. (A)
Comparison of single-cell TFRC copy number distributions using FISH
or the SD chip. Individual single-cell measurements are presented
(left) as well as the distribution of mRNA values (right). The dashed
line represents the average copy number for each detection method.
The histogram bin size is 150 mRNA copies. The average copy numbers,
standard deviations, and distributions were similar for the two methods.
(B) False-color mRNA FISH image. Nuclei are colored blue, and TFRC
mRNA appear as white spots. The scale bar is 10 μm.

Conclusions
The SD chip is a simple
device for sample digitization that is
compatible with single-cell digital RT-PCR. The device maximizes the
fraction of sample digitized into the array, making the design ideal
for working with the occasional low mRNA copy numbers present in a
single cell. We have demonstrated that digital RT-PCR with reverse
transcription performed in the digitized volumes gives a linear response
to the mRNA template concentration. Additionally, absolute quantification
of mRNA from single cells agrees well with the copy numbers obtained
from another absolute mRNA counting technique with the same transcript
and cell line.

Counting absolute quantities of mRNA allows us
to overcome the
need for a reference gene or calibration standard, which is a restriction
at odds with the stochastic nature of gene expression at the single-cell
level and which introduces technical variability. We feel that this
method based on the SD chip can also be valuable as a calibration
or validation tool for new mRNA measurement techniques, such as digital
systems with RT-PCR protocols, and other single-molecule counting
techniques, such as next-generation sequencing platforms or imaging
techniques. Validation by an independent device, such as the SD chip,
would allow for single-cell expression data to be shared between laboratories
even when different instruments and workflows are used.

Further
improvement of the SD chip should allow us to digitize
a sample up to the previously reported 100% sample digitization.23 This is expected to allow for high precision
in quantifying low-concentration samples. For example, DNA or mRNA
present in only one or two copies per single cell would be detected
in such a device. Digitization of 100% would be important to ensure
detection of both copies of a gene pair or to properly quantify a
low-abundance gene copy number at a single-cell level. Other future
work to improve the SD chip for single-cell genetic analysis will
focus on increasing throughput. We recently demonstrated a high-density
array for self-digitization of sample volumes that could be adapted
for improved copy number resolution in this device.35 Another modification could be a multiple-channel, parallel
scheme for the rapid analysis of many cells. The chip could also be
used for multiplex gene detection when combined with spectrally resolved
probes in each reaction chamber.

Supporting Information Available
Additional information as noted
in text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac5035924_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): D.T.C. and
J.E.K. have financial interest in Lamprogen, which has licensed the
SD technology from the University of Washington.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge support from the National Institutes
of Health (Grant R01CA175215) and the Department of Defense CDMRP
Program (Grant BC100510).
==== Refs
References
Lorthongpanich C. ; Cheow L. F. ; Balu S. ; Quake S. R. ; Knowles B. B. ; Burkholder W. F. ; Solter D. ; Messerschmidt D. M. 
Science 
2013 , 341 , 1110 –1112 .24009393 
Raj A. ; Peskin C. S. ; Tranchina D. ; Vargas D. Y. ; Tyagi S. 
PLoS Biol. 
2006 , 4 , e309 .17048983 
Almendro V. ; Cheng Y.-K. ; Randles A. ; Itzkovitz S. ; Marusyk A. ; Ametller E. ; Gonzalez-Farre X. ; Muñoz M. ; Russnes H. G. ; Helland A. ; Rye I. H. ; Borresen-Dale A.-L. ; Maruyama R. ; van Oudenaarden A. ; Dowsett M. ; Jones R. L. ; Reis-Filho J. ; Gascon P. ; Gönen M. ; Michor F. ; Polyak K. 
Cell Rep. 
2014 , 6 , 514 –527 .24462293 
Thompson A. M. ; Paguirigan A. L. ; Kreutz J. E. ; Radich J. P. ; Chiu D. T. 
Lab Chip 
2014 , 14 , 3135 –3142 .24789374 
Bengtsson M. ; Hemberg M. ; Rorsman P. ; Ståhlberg A. 
BMC Mol. Biol. 
2008 , 9 , 63 .18631407 
Livak K. J. ; Wills Q. F. ; Tipping A. J. ; Datta K. ; Mittal R. ; Goldson A. J. ; Sexton D. W. ; Holmes C. C. 
Methods 
2013 , 59 , 71 –79 .23079396 
Reiter M. ; Kirchner B. ; Müller H. ; Holzhauer C. ; Mann W. ; Pfaffl M. W. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2011 , 39 , e124 .21745823 
Sanders R. ; Mason D. J. ; Foy C. A. ; Huggett J. F. 
PLoS One 
2013 , 8 , e75296 .24073259 
Fox B. C. ; Devonshire A. S. ; Baradez M.-O. ; Marshall D. ; Foy C. A. 
Anal. Biochem. 
2012 , 427 , 178 –186 .22617801 
Sanders R. ; Huggett J. F. ; Bushell C. A. ; Cowen S. ; Scott D. J. ; Foy C. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 6474 –6484 .21446772 
White R. A. III; Blainey P. C. ; Fan H. C. ; Quake S. R. 
BMC Genomics 
2009 , 10 , 116 .19298667 
White R. A. III; Quake S. R. ; Curr K. 
J. Virol. Methods 
2012 , 179 , 45 –50 .21983150 
Ståhlberg A. ; Kubista M. ; Pfaffl M. 
Clin. Chem. 
2004 , 50 , 1678 –1680 .15331507 
White A. K. ; Heyries K. A. ; Doolin C. ; VanInsberghe M. ; Hansen C. L. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 7182 –7190 .23819473 
Shen F. ; Sun B. ; Kreutz J. E. ; Davydova E. K. ; Du W. ; Reddy P. L. ; Joseph L. J. ; Ismagilov R. F. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 17705 –17712 .21995644 
Rački N. ; Morisset D. ; Gutierrez-Aguirre I. ; Ravnikar M. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2014 , 406 , 661 –667 .24276251 
Beer N. R. ; Wheeler E. K. ; Lee-Houghton L. ; Watkins N. ; Nasarabadi S. ; Hebert N. ; Leung P. ; Arnold D. W. ; Bailey C. G. ; Colston B. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 1854 –1858 .18278951 
Levesque M. J. ; Raj A. 
Nat.
Methods 
2013 , 10 , 246 –248 .23416756 
Gansen A. ; Herrick A. M. ; Dimov I. K. ; Lee L. P. ; Chiu D. T. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 2247 –2254 .22399016 
Yen G. S. ; Fujimoto B. S. ; Schneider T. ; Huynh D. T. K. ; Jeffries G. D. M. ; Chiu D. T. 
Lab Chip 
2011 , 11 , 974 –977 .21229183 
Bustin S. A. ; Benes V. ; Garson J. A. ; Hellemans J. ; Huggett J. ; Kubista M. ; Mueller R. ; Nolan T. ; Pfaffl M. W. ; Shipley G. L. ; Vandesompele J. ; Wittwer C. T. 
Clin. Chem. 
2009 , 55 , 611 –622 .19246619 
Chubb J. R. ; Trcek T. ; Shenoy S. M. ; Singer R. H. 
Curr. Biol. 
2006 , 16 , 1018 –1025 .16713960 
Cohen D. E. ; Schneider T. ; Wang M. ; Chiu D. T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 5707 –5717 .20550137 
Carter M. G. ; Sharov A. A. ; VanBuren V. ; Dudekula D. B. ; Carmack C. E. ; Nelson C. ; Ko M. S. H. 
Genome Biol. 
2005 , 6 , R61 .15998450 
Devonshire A. S. ; Baradez M.-O. ; Morley G. ; Marshall D. ; Foy C. A. 
Anal. Biochem. 
2014 , 452 , 103 –113 .24631519 
Warren L. ; Bryder D. ; Weissman I. L. ; Quake S. R. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
2006 , 103 , 17807 –17812 .17098862 
Dube S. ; Qin J. ; Ramakrishnan R. 
PLoS One 
2008 , 3 , e2876 .18682853 
Wilson E. B. 
J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 
1927 , 22 , 209 –212 .
Newcombe R. G. 
Stat. Med. 
1998 , 17 , 857 –872 .9595616 
Shen F. ; Du W. ; Kreutz J. E. ; Fok A. ; Ismagilov R. F. 
Lab Chip 
2010 , 10 , 2666 –2672 .20596567 
Wacker M. J. ; Godard M. P. 
J. Biomol. Tech.: JBT 
2005 , 16 , 266 –271 .
Raj A. ; van Oudenaarden A. 
Annu. Rev. Biophys. 
2009 , 38 , 255 –270 .19416069 
Salaverria I. ; Zettl A. ; Beà S. ; Moreno V. ; Valls J. ; Hartmann E. ; Ott G. ; Wright G. ; Lopez-Guillermo A. ; Chan W. C. ; Weisenburger D. D. ; Gascoyne R. D. ; Grogan T. M. ; Delabie J. ; Jaffe E. S. ; Montserrat E. ; Muller-Hermelink H.-K. ; Staudt L. M. ; Rosenwald A. ; Campo E. 
J.
Clin. Oncol. 
2007 , 25 , 1216 –1222 .17296973 
Battich N. ; Stoeger T. ; Pelkmans L. 
Nat. Methods 
2013 , 10 , 1127 –1133 .24097269 
Schneider T. ; Yen G. S. ; Thompson A. M. ; Burnham D. R. ; Chiu D. T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 10417 –10423 .24099270 
Heyries K. A. ; Tropini C. ; Vaninsberghe M. ; Doolin C. ; Petriv O. I. ; Singhal A. ; Leung K. ; Hughesman C. B. ; Hansen C. L. 
Nat. Methods 
2011 , 8 , 649 –651 .21725299
