
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical Society 10.1021/ac502054pArticleCharacterization of Ion Dynamics in Structures for Lossless Ion Manipulations Tolmachev Aleksey
V. Webb Ian K. Ibrahim Yehia M. Garimella Sandilya V.B. Zhang Xinyu Anderson Gordon A. Smith Richard D. *Biological Sciences Division Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 3335 Innovation Avenue (K8-98), P.O. Box 999, Richland, Washington 99352, United States* E-mail: rds@pnnl.gov.23 08 2015 23 08 2014 16 09 2014 86 18 9162 9168 04 06 2014 23 08 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyTerms of Use

Structures for Lossless Ion Manipulation (SLIM) represent a novel
class of ion optical devices based upon electrodes patterned on planar
surfaces, and relying on a combined action of radiofrequency and DC
electric fields and specific buffer gas density conditions. Initial
experimental studies have demonstrated the feasibility of the SLIM
concept. This report offers an in-depth consideration of key ion dynamics
properties in such devices based upon ion optics theory and computational
modeling. The SLIM devices investigated are formed by two surfaces,
each having an array of radiofrequency (RF) “rung” electrodes,
bordered by DC “guard” electrodes. Ion motion is confined
by the RF effective potential in the direction orthogonal to the boards
and limited or controlled in the transversal direction by the guard
DC potentials. Ions can be efficiently trapped and stored in SLIM
devices where the confinement of ions can be “soft”
in regard to the extent of collisional activation, similarly to RF-only
multipole ion guides and traps. The segmentation of the RF rung electrodes
and guards along the axis makes it possible to apply static or transient
electric field profiles to stimulate ion transfer within a SLIM. In
the case of a linear DC gradient applied to RF rungs and guards, a
virtually uniform electric field can be created along the axis of
the device, enabling high quality ion mobility separations.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac502054pdocument-id-new-14ac-2014-02054pccc-price
==== Body
Mass spectrometry (MS) continues
its rapid growth as a key technique for analyzing complex chemical
and biochemical samples with an increasing array of applications.1,2 Combining MS with separation techniques, e.g. liquid chromatography
or ion mobility spectrometry (IMS), enables analysis of more complex
samples. Different combinations can present challenges, due to differences
in sample flow rate characteristics, carrier media and/or gas pressure
conditions, etc., which often results in throughput and/or sensitivity
compromises. We are developing new approaches based upon Structures
for Lossless Ion Manipulation (SLIM) that aim at enabling much more
complex sequences of ion manipulations in one platform, with potential
advantages that include greater speed and reduced sample size requirements.
SLIM constitutes a novel class of ion optical devices, relying critically
on a combined action of radiofrequency and DC electric fields and
specific buffer gas density conditions. The lossless operation, that
is, an ability to transmit and store ions with negligible losses,
is one of the key attributes of the SLIM concept. The property is
inherited, e.g., from the ion funnel and ion funnel trap devices,
for which it has been demonstrated both theoretically and in a number
of experimental studies.3−6 Early experimental evidence for the lossless operation
included the observation of ion current transmitted though the ion
funnel without noticeable losses.4,5 Such highly
efficient transmission is observed over a wide m/z range and can be maintained using a range of RF voltages
and frequencies, in line with the theoretically predicted lossless
regime characteristics.3,5 From the ion dynamics perspective,
the lossless regime is realized when the potential well exceeds the
ion kinetic energy. In the 1 Torr pressure range ions are efficiently
thermalized and the potential well sufficient for the lossless operation
needs to be significantly higher than the thermal energy, which can
be achieved using appropriately chosen electrode configurations.

The SLIM concept introduces the use of DC elements to confine ions,
in addition to the assembly of RF electrodes generating the pseudopotential
well, as used previously in the ion funnel and related devices, and
can greatly increase the versatility of potential devices based upon
the approach. In contrast to conventional constant field drift tube7−9 and traveling wave10,11 devices, SLIM can potentially
be readily assembled into many alternative arrangements. Here, we
demonstrate this ability by evaluating a basic building block needed
to enable complex manipulations, a linear SLIM component, comprising
RF/DC guiding electrodes and DC guard electrodes. Using printed circuit
board (PCB) based SLIM allows for a multitude of electrode designs
to be rapidly fabricated, tested, and applied at low cost based on
the results of ion trajectory and potential calculations. The SLIM
are not fundamentally limited to IMS experiments and can be configured
for various pressure environments. We aim to utilize these devices
in the future to allow for extended series of ion manipulations of
biologically relevant macromolecules and complex mixtures currently
unattainable by state-of-the-art instrumentation.

Initial experimental studies have demonstrated the feasibility
of the SLIM concept.12 This report offers
an in-depth consideration of the ion dynamics properties of the devices,
based on ion optics theory and computer modeling. Ion dynamics theory
is applied to analyze the ion motion driven by radiofrequency (RF)
and DC electric fields, in a bath gas environment. We begin with analysis
of the potential wells generated by SLIM electrodes, considering how
various proportions of the device influence the ion focusing properties.
Ions transmitted in the SLIM experience combined action of DC electric
fields and intense RF fields, which can provide conditions for collisional
activation, as we consider next. Further, we explore the ion capacity
of a linear section of the SLIM. Finally, we analyze the potential
performance of a SLIM configured as an ion mobility spectrometer (IMS).

Methods
The modeling and theoretical approach was originally developed
for the simulation driven development and optimization of the ion
funnel.3,5 The SLIM considered in this study is formed
by two planar and parallel boards, each having a sequence or RF “rung”
electrodes, bordered by DC “guard” electrodes (Figure 1). Ion motion is confined by the RF effective potential13,14 in the direction orthogonal to the boards and is limited by the
guard DC potentials in transverse directions. Figure 1 illustrates the coordinate system used in the context of
a short SLIM segment. The RF voltages are applied to the rungs with
alternating phase on adjacent electrodes. In addition to the RF voltages,
the rungs can carry a DC gradient that can direct ion motion along
the Z-axis. Such an arrangement is often implemented
in ion funnels and related devices.3−6 The DC-only guard electrodes limit ion motion
in the transversal dimension (i.e., X-axis).

Figure 1 Segment of a Structure for Lossless Ion Manipulation, formed by
two planar boards, each having DC guard electrodes and central RF/DC
rung electrodes; the coordinate system as used for modeling is shown
on the left.

Thus, ion motion in SLIM is driven by a combination of forces produced
by the sum of the DC electric field EDC and the effective potential field Eeff:  

Here z is the charge state of the ion, and e is the elementary charge; the total force F, as well as EDC and Eeff, are 3D vector functions
of coordinates X, Y, and Z. The effective potential field Eeff is calculated as a gradient of the effective
potential Veff, which
in turn is a scalar function of coordinates, defined by the local
intensity of the RF electric field ERF:13,14  

The ion mass m is expressed in SI units; the angular
frequency ω is related to the RF frequency f (Hz) as ω = 2πf. The DC and RF potential
distributions can be obtained by solving the Laplace equation, using
the DC and RF potentials applied to boundaries shaped as the SLIM
electrodes. There is no exact analytical expressions for such geometries;
thus, we rely on numerical solutions. The potential calculations reported
here are based on a custom developed approach that provides direct
potential calculations for complex 3D geometries.15−17

Results
Effective Potentials in SLIM
The RF field distribution
between the two surfaces forming the SLIM is depicted in Figure 2. Equipotential contours in the top portion of Figure 2a show intense electric fields in areas close to
rungs; at the plane of symmetry in the center the field intensity
is reduced forming a nearly field-free region. The transversal cross
section (Figure 2b) shows flat equipotential
contours in the center region and negligible field intensity extending
beyond the central rungs between guard electrodes. Such a distribution
produces steep effective potential wells along RF rung electrodes
and a nearly flat potential at midplane. There is no confinement in
the X-direction, as opposed to the ion funnel, where
circular RF electrodes surround the area of ion drift. In the border
between the RF rungs and the guard electrodes, a repulsive force is
created which drives ions outward. Opposing this repulsion force is
the DC electric field, defined by the DC offset between the guard
electrodes and RF rungs. The DC potential can be applied to the guards
to constrain ion motion in the X dimension and confine
ions in the central region between the arrays of rung electrodes on
the opposing surfaces. Two example geometries are considered in Figure 3a, showing the guard DC potential as a function
of X. In each case RF/DC rungs are 5.3 mm long and
0.76 mm wide, with separation of 0.76 mm and a DC offset of 10 V applied
to the guards. A wider gap between the boards (5.7 mm) leads to an
increased penetration of the DC potential to the center, ∼2.5
V at the minimum. In the case of a narrow gap (2.7 mm), the central
DC potential is reduced to ∼0.45 V. The smaller penetration
for the narrower gap results in weaker ion focusing in the transversal
directions, i.e., a wider area around the center that can be occupied
by ions.

Figure 2 Equipotential contours for the RF fields from potentials applied
to the central rung electrodes: (a) cross section along the YZ plane of symmetry; (b) transversal cross section, XY plane.

Figure 3 (a) DC potential profiles for rungs 5.3 mm wide, for either 2.7
mm or 5.7 mm spacing between the SLIM surfaces. The wider gap (5.7
mm) provides tighter focusing in the transverse (X) dimension due to greater penetration of fields from the guard electrodes;
(b) SLIM effective potential in the vertical (Y)
dimension, at the midplane X = 0, for different interboard
spacings. A local maximum in the center between boards, Y = 0, is increased for wider spacing, 5.7 mm (blue) due to increased
field penetration from the DC guards. The local maximum is reduced
for 4.2 mm spacing (red) and disappears for the smaller 2.7 mm spacing
(green).

Ion density distributions for the SLIM designs considered here
will result from the combined action of the DC field from the guard
electrodes and the effective RF focusing generated by the rungs. Figure 3b shows profiles for the combined potential, Veff+ VDC, as a function of the vertical coordinate
(Y). The effective potential Veff was calculated for RF rungs configured
as described above, f = 0.8 MHz, RF voltage 100Vp-p, m/z 1000.
The DC potential at the central plane YZ shows a
local maximum at the center that is reduced near the surfaces due
to increased screening of the external DC field by the rungs. The
combined potential can have the local maximum in the center (Y = 0), when the guard DC potential is high enough, so that
the local VDC(Y) maximum prevails over the central minimum of the effective
potential Veff(Y). A pronounced local maximum is seen in the case of wider
gap, 5.7 mm; the “hump” is reduced for 4.2 mm gap and
completely removed in the case of narrow gap, 2.7 mm. The configurations
in Figure 3b were calculated for rungs 5.3
mm long; when using a wider SLIM configuration having 8.4 mm long
rungs, the local maximum was not created for a 4.2 mm gap. However,
such a configuration compromises ion focusing in the X direction due to a combination of wider rungs and poor penetration
of the guard DC field.

A smaller gap, < ∼4 mm, has the advantage of a
more robust operation with respect to imperfections of the guard potentials,
such as created when the guard length covers a number of rungs. Larger
gaps, up to 6 mm, require a more precise adjustment of the guard potential,
possibly using shorter guards covering fewer rungs, but also have
the advantage of better focusing in the direction orthogonal to the
ion path. However, the increased penetration of the guard DC field
also serves to increase the extent of ion collisional excitation,
as discussed next. Based on such considerations, we selected an interboard
gap of approximately 5 mm in conjunction with designs having 5.3 ×
0.76 mm rungs and 0.76 inter-rung spacing as among those for more
detailed theoretical end experimental evaluation.

Collisional Activation of Ions in the SLIM Designs Studied
One initial SLIM implementation has used a spacing of 4.76 mm between
surfaces (to be described in detail elsewhere12), which is in line with the optimal gap dimensions for devices with
the electrode dimensions discussed above. Ions confined between the
surfaces will tend to be localized in two potential wells ∼1
mm above and below the midplane (Figure 3b)
and separated by a barrier of 0.24 V. While small, the barrier is
sufficient in the absence of significant space charge to divide ions
into two distinct packets, since the ion density distribution along
the vertical (Y) axis is governed by the Boltzmann
distribution with the thermal energy (0.025 eV) in the denominator
of the exponent.18,19 This configuration differs from
the one encountered in collisional focusing multipoles, with ions
occupying an area along the axis of symmetry and where the RF field
intensity vanishes.19 In the current configuration,
the DC electric field shifts the ion equilibrium position into a region
of nonzero RF field intensity, where some limited collisional activation
can occur. The degree of the RF ion heating can be evaluated in terms
of the effective temperature:20  

The ion temperature is increased above
the gas temperature by ΔTeff = 21 K, corresponding to only minor collisional activation.
The calculation used mg = 28 for the N2 gas molecular mass, the ion mass and
charge m = 1000, z = 1, and the
effective potential at the local minimum Veff = 0.1 V. While further optimization of the gap
and electrode dimensions can undoubtedly further reduce such effects,
we also conclude that the ion confinement by means of the combination
of the DC electric field and the RF effective field in the present
SLIM configuration provides a viable alternative to RF-only devices,
such as RF multipoles.

Ion Charge Capacity for the SLIM Design Studied
The
ion charge capacity for SLIM can be estimated based on the opposing
forces of Coulombic repulsion and that due to the DC electric field
and effective RF field generated from the potential applied to the
SLIM electrodes. Figure 4 shows electric fields
balancing the Coulomb repulsion of the stored ion charge. The electric
field produced by the stored ions is balanced by the DC electric field
from guard electrodes, EDC, plus the field Eeff due to the effective potential generated by RF electrodes, with
the ion population split into two strips, aligned as noted above.
The effective field orthogonal to the electrodes confines Coulombic
driven expansion in the Y-direction. The field produced
by DC guards contributes to the vertical (Y) component
with the opposite sign, slightly reducing the RF effective focusing.
Figure 5a shows transversal (X) profiles of the vertical (Y) components of the
DC electric field and the RF effective field, calculated based on
3D potential modeling, using parameters of the trapping experiment:21 RF frequency 2.4 MHz, RF voltage 165 Vpp, ions m/z 466.3, singly charged, and the DC guard
offset 6.6 V. The total confining field (solid curve, Figure 5a) reaches 18.7 V/cm in the center (X = 0), and decreases to 12.5 V/cm approaching the sides of the RF
rungs at X = ±2 mm. The Ey profiles in Figure 5a were calculated for a vertical position Y = 1.8
mm from the midplane, corresponding to efficient confinement from
the sides. Figure 5b shows vertical (Y) profiles of the horizontal fields Ex, confining the stored ion charge from the
sides, plotted for the vertical XZ plane at X = 2 mm, bordering the range of Y-confinement
in Figure 5a. The total of two x-fields (solid curve in Figure 5b) reaches
a maximum of 11.8 V/cm at y = ±1.5 mm and declines
steeply for vertical offsets above 2 mm. The decline of X-confinement at high vertical positions is due to two factors: the
DC field screened by the rungs and the RF effective field acting to
eject ions from the area of high effective potential close to RF rungs.
As a result, the vertical expansion of the ion cloud is effectively
limited at Y < ≈2 mm; further expansion
leads to leakage of ions through the reduced x-barriers
at the sides. Accordingly, the total stored ion charge Q can be estimated based on the confining field intensity, using Gauss’s
relationship:  

Figure 4 Storage of ions in the SLIM. The Coulomb repulsion forces are balanced
by the DC electric field produced by guard electrodes and the RF effective
focusing field from RF rung electrodes.

Figure 5 Electric field confining stored ion charge (a) in the vertical
dimension, Y-components, and (b) in the horizontal
dimension, X-components. The DC electric field produced
by the guard electrodes (dashed), effective potential field from RF
rung electrodes (dotted), and a sum of the two fields (solid).

Here ε0 is the electric constant; the electric
field flux FE is defined
as an integral of the field produced by the stored charge over a closed
surrounding surface.22 Considering the
two-dimensional approximation, the electric field flux is estimated
as  where Δx and Δz are the x and z dimensions
of a rectangular area of the stored charge; the Coulomb field Ey is counterbalanced by the
total field in Figure 5a. The total number
of elementary charges stored in the SLIM segment would be  

The X-range used for the estimation is Δx = 4 mm; the length of the trapped charge region is equal to the
length of the trapping SLIM segment, Δz = 15.24
cm; electric field Ey =15 V/cm corresponds to experimental conditions,
as evaluated above (Figure 5a).

The estimated charge capacity agrees with that observed in initial
experiments using a linear SLIM segment to trap ions,21 and is among the highest stored charge amounts reported.
The ion funnel trap used with IMS is capable of storing up to 107 elementary charges.23 In terms
of the linear charge density, the value obtained, Qz ∼ 10−10 C/m,
compares favorably with the charge capacity of RF multipoles.24 The ability of the device to create the DC field
gradient to stimulate a ion transport along the axis can be used to
achieve significant ion currents; e.g., for the field Ez ∼ 40 V/cm, the ion velocity vz ∼ 100 m/s, and the
ion current is i = Qzvz ∼ 10 nA,
corresponding to the high end of use in MS with, e.g., ESI or MALDI
sources.

Potential for Ion Mobility Separations in SLIM
As discussed
above, ions can be efficiently trapped and stored in SLIM devices;
the confinement of ions can be “soft” with respect to
collisional activation, similar to RF-only multipole ion guides and
traps. An additional functionality of SLIM is provided by the segmentation
of the RF rung electrodes and guards along the Z axis
resulting in electric field profiles that will stimulate ion motion.
We consider a basic case of a DC linear gradient applied to RF rungs
and guards, such that a virtually uniform electric field Ez is created along the axis of the device.
Considering the elevated pressure, > ∼1 Torr nitrogen bath
gas, the ion motion stimulated by the electric field represents a
drift with a constant velocity, defined by the ion mobility K:25  

The pressure conditions are similar
to IMS-TOF MS platforms incorporating electrodynamic ion funnels23,26,27 with an ion drift region, in
the form of a drift tube, where a constant and uniform electric field
and a bath gas having negligible flow velocity provide conditions
for the ion drift according to the above equation.7−9 In the case
of a linear SLIM segment having a constant axial field, the ion cloud
is shaped by confining fields, the effective RF focusing in the vertical
dimension, and DC electric fields generated by the guard electrodes.

A computer model of the ion motion has been implemented to analyze
details of the ion motion in such a configuration (Figure 6). Ions form into two elongated packets, each occupying
a local Y-potential well (Figure 3b). The ion density distribution along the Z-axis takes the form of a Gaussian having the exponential width defined
by diffusion. The vertical split is orthogonal to the ion drift and
does not affect the Gaussian arrival time distribution (Figure 6c).

Figure 6 Modeling the ion mobility separation in a linear SLIM segment.
Ion density distribution for a pulse of ions in a horizontal XZ projection (a), vertical XY planar projection
(b), and calculated ion arrival time distribution (c).

The ion drift time and IMS resolving power have been modeled for
conditions of an initial experimental study12 for ions of m/z 922. The ion cross
section was measured independently using the IMS TOF instrument27 and used to calculate the ion mobility for 4.1
Torr nitrogen, at 298 K, the conditions employed in our experimental
study.12 The ion drift time vs electric
field intensity shows a close agreement between the model and experiment.12,28 The IMS resolving power in Figure 7 has been
modeled for the guard DC offset of 5 V, the same as experiment, and
for an increased offset of 40 V. For the lower offset, 5 V, modeling
results approach the theoretical IMS resolving power for low electric
fields and trend lower for higher fields. Modeling results for the
increased guard offset of 40 V show a resolving power profile noticeably
lower than the theoretical one across the range of electric fields.
This can be explained considering the axial variations of the effective
potential, which contribute to the temporal dispersion of ions, when
the increased DC field drives ions closer to RF electrodes. We conclude
that the RF field and irregularities of the DC gradient do not degrade
the quality of IMS measurements in SLIM when reasonably optimal conditions
are chosen. This is supported by the initial experimental study showing
SLIM IMS resolving power closely matching theoretical calculations.12,28 We also note that mobility separations using transient DC fields
(e.g., traveling waves) are similarly feasible. 

Figure 7 Ion mobility resolving power as a function of electric field intensity.
Modeling results for the guard offset 5 V (diamonds), offset 40 V
(triangles), and calculated assuming the ideal IMS drift tube (dashed).

Conclusions
The ion confinement in SLIM is accomplished by a combination of
the effective potential generated by the RF rung electrodes, and DC
potential offset from the guard electrodes. The relative sizes of
the electrodes, applied voltages, and surface spacing have been initially
optimized for ion confinement conditions. Potential calculations have
been applied to analyze the RF and DC potential profiles for various
SLIM geometries. Configurations having rung electrode lengths significantly
shorter than the separation between boards display a significant penetration
of the guard DC potential into the central volume. This creates conditions
for ion packets such that they can be split into two volumes. Alternatively,
geometries with smaller interboard gaps produce a single, nonsplit
ion packet extended in the transversal direction.

Ions confined in SLIM experience combined effects of the DC electric
and RF fields, which create conditions for potentially sustained collisional
activation. For the optimal geometry and moderate guard potentials,
however, only very minor collisional ion activation is produced, with
the effective ion temperature increased above the bath gas temperature
by ∼10 K. In this respect, SLIM provide a viable alternative
to the RF-only multipole ion guides and traps, with negligible collisional
activation of ions.

The ion capacity of a linear section of the present SLIM design
is estimated to be ∼108 elementary charges for a
section 10 cm long, an ion population among the highest achievable
in ion traps.

Computer modeling of ion motion supports the lossless ion transmission
for the SLIM configurations studied. A precise modeling of the ion
diffusion inside a linear drift region supports the capability for
high quality ion mobility measurements using SLIM, a finding that
we experimentally confirm elsewhere.12,28 Overall, the
SLIM ion dynamics modeling study is consistent with initial experimental
observations, as well as the observation of efficient ion transmission
in IMS experiments, and with the lossless ion trapping and storage
extending to high ion populations, up to 108 ions, and
for significantly extended times, ≫1 s.21

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Portions of this research were supported by grants from the
National Institute of General Medical Sciences (P41 GM 103493-11),
the Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program at Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory, and the U.S. Department of Energy Office
of Biological and Environmental Research Genome Sciences Program under
the Pan-omics project. Work was performed in the W. R. Wiley Environmental
Molecular Sciences Laboratory (EMSL), a DOE national scientific user
facility at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL).
==== Refs
References
Chait B. T. 
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
2011 , 80 , 239 –246 .21675917 
Angel T. E. ; Aryal U. K. ; Hengel S. M. ; Baker E. S. ; Kelly R. T. ; Robinson E. W. ; Smith R. D. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 3912 –3928 .22498958 
Tolmachev A. V. ; Kim T. ; Udseth H. R. ; Smith R. D. ; Bailey T. H. ; Futrell J. H. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2000 , 203 , 31 –47 .
Kim T. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Harkewicz R. ; Prior D. C. ; Anderson G. A. ; Udseth H. R. ; Smith R. D. ; Bailey T. H. ; Rakov S. ; Futrell J. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2000 , 72 , 2247 –2255 .10845370 
Page J. S. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Tang K. ; Smith R. D. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2006 , 17 , 586 –592 .16503158 
Kelly R. T. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Page J. S. ; Tang K. ; Smith R. D. 
Mass Spectrom.
Rev. 
2009 , 1 –19 .19004022 
Bowers M. T. ; Kemper P. R. ; von Helden G. ; van Koppen P. A. M. 
Science 
1993 , 260 , 1446 –1451 .17739800 
Clemmer D. E. ; Jarrold M. F. 
J. Mass Spectrom. 
1997 , 32 , 577 –592 .
Eiceman G. A. ; Karpas Z.  Ion Mobility Spectrometry , 2 nd ed.; CRC Press : Boca Raton, FL , 2005 .
Giles K. ; Pringle S. D. ; Worthington K. R. ; Little D. ; Wildgoose J. L. ; Bateman R. H. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2004 , 18 , 2401 .15386629 
Giles K. ; Williams J. P. ; Campuzano I. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2011 , 25 , 1559 .21594930 
Webb I. K. ; Garimella S. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Zhang X. ; Chen T. ; Norheim R. V. ; Anderson G. A. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 10.1021/ac502055e .
Dehmelt H. G. 
Adv. Atom Mol.
Phys. 
1967 , 3 , 53 –290 .
Gerlich D.   In State Selected and
State-to-State Ion−Molecule Reaction Dynamics. Part 1. Experiment ; Ng C. Y. Baer M  , Eds.; Wiley : New York , 1992 ; Vol. LXXXII ; pp 1 −176 .
Tolmachev A. V. ; Robinson E. W. ; Wu S. ; Smith R. D. ; Paša-Tolić L. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2011 , 22 , 1334 –1342 .21953187 
Tolmachev A. V. ; Robinson E. W. ; Wu S. ; Smith R. D. ; Futrell J. H. ; Paša-Tolić L. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 1169 –1172 .22565507 
Tolmachev A. V. ; Robinson E. W. ; Wu S. ; Smith R. D. ; Leach F. E. ; Futrell J. H. ; Paša-Tolić L. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 325 , 45 –50 .
Tolmachev A. V. ; Chernushevich I. V. ; Dodonov A. F. ; Standing K. G. 
Nucl. Instrum. Methods
B 
1997 , 124 1 112 –119 .
Tolmachev A. V. ; Udseth H. R. ; Smith R. D. 
Int. J. Mass Spec. 
2003 , 222 , 155 –174 .
Tolmachev A. V. ; Vilkov A. N. ; Bogdanov B. ; Paša-Tolić L. ; Masselon C. D. ; Smith R. D. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2004 , 15 , 1616 –1628 .15519229 
Zhang X. ; Garimella S. ; Prost S.
A. ; Webb I.
K. ; Chen T. ; Tang K. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Norheim R. V. ; LaMarche B. L. ; Danielson W. F. 3rd; Baker E.
S. ; Anderson G. A. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Smith R. D.  An Initial
Evaluation of Ion Traps in Structures for Lossless Ion Manipulation
(SLIM) at a High Pressure: Ion Storage, Ion Accumulation and Ion Ejection . Anal. Chem.  (in preparation).
Grant I. S. ; Phillips W. R.   In Electromagnetism , 2 nd ed.; Manchester Physics Series; John Wiley & Sons : 2008 ; ISBN 978-0-471-92712-9.
Tolmachev A. V. ; Clowers B. H. ; Belov M. E. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 4778 –4787 .19438247 
Tolmachev A. V. ; Udseth H. R. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2000 , 72 , 970 –978 .10739200 
Mason E. A. ; McDaniel E. W.  Transport Properties
of Ions in Gases ; Wiley : New York , 1988 .
Tang K. ; Shvartsburg A. A. ; Lee H. N. ; Prior D. C. ; Buschbach M. A. ; Li F. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Anderson G. A. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 3330 –3339 .15889926 
Baker E. S. ; Clowers B. H. ; Li F. ; Tang K. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Prior D. C. ; Belov M. E. ; Smith R. D. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2007 , 18 , 1176 –1187 .17512752 
Sandilya V. B. Garimella S. V. B. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Webb I. K. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Zhang X. ; Anderson G. A. ; Smith R. D.  . Simulation
of Electric Potentials and Ion Motion in Planar Electrode Structures
for Lossless Ion Manipulations (SLIM) . J.
Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. , accepted for publication.
