
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac4030736ArticleOptical Impedance Spectroscopy with Single-Mode Electro-Active-Integrated
Optical Waveguides Han Xue Mendes Sergio B. *Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, United States* E-mail: sbmend01@louisville.edu.13 01 2015 13 01 2014 04 02 2014 86 3 1468 1477 05 09 2013 13 01 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical Society

An
optical impedance spectroscopy (OIS) technique based on a single-mode
electro-active-integrated optical waveguide (EA-IOW) was developed
to investigate electron-transfer processes of redox adsorbates. A
highly sensitive single-mode EA-IOW device was used to optically follow
the time-dependent faradaic current originated from a submonolayer
of cytochrome c undergoing redox exchanges driven
by a harmonic modulation of the electric potential at several dc bias
potentials and at several frequencies. To properly retrieve the faradaic
current density from the ac-modulated optical signal, we introduce
here a mathematical formalism that (i) accounts for intrinsic changes
that invariably occur in the optical baseline of the EA-IOW device
during potential modulation and (ii) provides accurate results for
the electro-chemical parameters. We are able to optically reconstruct
the faradaic current density profile against the dc bias potential
in the working electrode, identify the formal potential, and determine
the energy-width of the electron-transfer process. In addition, by
combining the optically reconstructed faradaic signal with simple
electrical measurements of impedance across the whole electrochemical
cell and the capacitance of the electric double-layer, we are able
to determine the time-constant connected to the redox reaction of
the adsorbed protein assembly. For cytochrome c directly
immobilized onto the indium tin oxide (ITO) surface, we measured a
reaction rate constant of 26.5 s–1. Finally, we
calculate the charge-transfer resistance and pseudocapacitance associated
with the electron-transfer process and show that the frequency dependence
of the redox reaction of the protein submonolayer follows as expected
the electrical equivalent of an RC-series admittance diagram. Above
all, we show here that OIS with single-mode EA-IOW’s provide
strong analytical signals that can be readily monitored even for small
surface-densities of species involved in the redox process (e.g.,
fmol/cm2, 0.1% of a full protein monolayer). This experimental
approach, when combined with the analytical formalism described here,
brings additional sensitivity, accuracy, and simplicity to electro-chemical
analysis and is expected to become a useful tool in investigations
of redox processes.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac4030736document-id-new-14ac-2013-030736ccc-price
==== Body
Characterizing,
understanding, and controlling at a molecular level the structure
and kinetics of electron-transfer process in molecular assemblies
at electrode surfaces are crucial to several biological, chemical,
and physical phenomena with important impacts in many technologies
such as biosensing, catalysis, and organic electronics.1 The determination of the electro-chemical faradaic
current and the associated reaction rate constant by ac impedance
spectroscopy, ac polarography, or ac voltammetry have been extensively
reported in the literature. However, large electric double-layer capacitance
and solution resistance make the determination of redox properties
of an electro-chemically active submonolayer very difficult by those
traditional electrochemical techniques.2 Spectro-electrochemical methods, where an optical signal is spectrally
tuned to probe exclusively the faradaic process, can potentially provide
a superior route to investigate electron-transfer processes in molecular
adsorbates by avoiding nonfaradaic components that typically hinders
conventional electrochemical approaches using electrical signals alone.2,3

Niki and Sagara have developed an electro-reflectance (ER)
technique2,4 to study the kinetics of redox couples where
an ac-modulation in the electric potential is applied to a thin-film
under investigation to drive the reflected optical signal from the
sample. From measurements of the optical response at several modulation
frequencies, it is then possible to determine the time response of
the electron-transfer process. Fujishima and co-workers have implemented
an analogous technique using transmittance measurements,5 which is known as color impedance spectroscopy.
However, those approaches use configurations with either a single-bounce
in reflection or a single-pass in transmission on the sample of interest.
As a consequence, the amplitude of the ac optical response is often
too small to be detected either (i) for a redox couple with a small
difference in their extinction coefficients or (ii) for molecular
assemblies with low surface densities, or (iii) for an adsorbate with
a low number of electro-chemically active species.

Saavedra,
Doherty, Araci, and co-workers6a−6c have successfully developed and
applied a technique that enhances the analytical signal by using an
attenuated total reflectance geometry with multiple bounces to probe
an adsorbed electro-active layer under potential modulation. The potential-modulated
attenuated total reflectance (PM-ATR) platform in those works used
thin glass slides with a thickness of either 1 mm or 150 μm
as an internal reflection element. Those devices can then enhance
the optical signal by about 35–100 compared to single-bounce
reflectance or single-pass transmittance geometries. This enhancement
in the analytical signal is usually termed as a sensitivity factor7 and described by the variable S.

An integrated optical waveguide (IOW) can be considered as
the ultimate limit of an ATR geometry where the thickness of the internal
reflection element is reduced in order to increase the number of bounces
on the analytical surface and enhance the sensitivity factor for probing
surface-adsorbed species with the evanescent field. As the thickness
of the guiding element gets smaller (in the order of the light wavelength),
the discrete nature of the propagating guided modes must be considered
for proper description of the optical phenomena. As shown elsewhere,7a,8 the maximum sensitivity for probing surface-adsorbed species is
reached for an IOW device with a tight confinement of the light beam
that only one guided-mode is allowed to propagate along the IOW geometry;
this geometry is known in literature as a single-mode IOW. Because
of (i) the tight confinement of the guided light beam and (ii) the
long path length of interaction between the surface-adsorbed species
and the evanescent field of the propagating lightwave, the single-mode
IOW has been demonstrated to reach values of the sensitivity factor, S, that are higher than 10 000 compared to single-bounce
reflection or single-pass transmission geometries.7a,8

Previous work by Mendes, Saavedra, Armstrong, and co-workers7a,9 have demonstrated the feasibility of performing spectro-electrochemistry
with single-mode electro-active IOWs. An extremely thin layer of a
transparent conducting electrode (ITO) deposited over a single-mode
IOW has been shown to create an electro-active (EA) interface that
could be used to study electro-chemically active adsorbates by measuring
either (i) a monochromatic optical signal under a cyclic voltammetry
(CV) scan or (ii) a broadband spectrum at specific electric potentials.
The present work benefits from those previous accomplishments and
further develops the single-mode EA-IOW technology.

To enable
extremely sensitive investigations on the kinetics and structure of
electron-transfer processes of surface-adsorbed species, in this work
we develop an optical impedance spectroscopy (OIS) technique that
employs a single-mode electro-active integrated optical waveguide
(EA-IOW) platform. The OIS approach is based on the application of
an ac-modulated electric potential to drive the redox state of surface-adsorbed
species and on the use of an optical signal guided along a single-mode
EA-IOW to follow the time-dependent spectro-electrochemical event.
Thus, OIS is a frequency-domain measurement of potential-modulated
light absorption using a highly sensitive single-mode EA-IOW. In order
to properly retrieve electro-chemical information from the modulated
optical signal, a mathematical formalism is introduced here. Such
formalism is required to account for intrinsic and systematic changes
that invariably occur in the optical baseline of a single-mode EA-IOW
device under potential modulation. Experimental optical data are then
analyzed to reconstruct the faradaic process in a molecular adsorbate
and determine several electro-chemical properties including the temporal
response of the electron-transfer event as defined by the reaction
rate constant.

The presentation of our work is organized in
the following way. First, in Experimental Setup, we provide details of our device fabrication and experimental setup.
Next, in Theory for OIS with EA-IOW, we establish
a mathematical formalism to retrieve results of the electro-chemical
process from the measured optical data in the general case when the
optical baseline cannot be considered constant under potential modulation.
Our analysis prescribes how the modulated optical signals obtained
in the presence and in the absence of the redox adsorbate (including
both dc and ac components) must be used to properly determine the
optical absorbance related exclusively to the redox process. Next,
we show how the ac-component of the modulated optical absorbance can
be used to calculate the faradaic current density of surface-adsorbed
redox species under interrogation. Then, we demonstrate that by combining
the faradaic current with simple measurements of the electric double-layer
capacitance and the electrical impedance of the whole electro-chemical
cell it is straightforward to determine the reaction rate constant
associated with the electron-transfer process. In Experimental Results of OIS with EA-IOW, we report on experimental
results that fully benefit from the developed analysis in the electro-chemical
characterization of redox properties of a submonolayer of the cytochrome c protein adsorbed to an ITO surface.

Experimental Setup
Single-Mode
EA-IOW
The single-mode electro-active integrated optical
waveguide employed in this work was formed by a three-layer stack
of alumina (409 nm), silica (15 nm), and indium tin oxide (13 nm),
as schematically shown in Figure 1. The electromagnetic
mode-field profile of the multilayer integrated optical waveguide
was calculated using a transfer-matrix method,7a,10 and the results are displayed in the inset of Figure 1 for the TE polarization. In order to couple a light beam
in and out of the EA-IOW device, a pair of surface-relief gratings
were fabricated on a glass substrate, as reported by us elsewhere,7b,11 prior to depositing the multilayer stack. When the surface-relief
gratings (both with a pitch size of 323 nm in this work) are combined
with highly anamorphic and large numerical aperture optics,12 they enable broadband light (propagating in
free space) to be coupled to the single-mode EA-IOW device. For the
current experiments, the waveguide grating-couplers and associated
optics were designed and fabricated to provide a spectral width of
more than 100 nm centered at 530 nm. The separation between the two
gratings, which defines the propagation length along the EA-IOW device,
was set to 2.54 cm during device fabrication. After the grating fabrication,
each glass substrate was coated with highly transparent alumina and
silica layers using an atomic layer deposition (ALD) process as developed
by our group.13 The silica layer was included
in the stack to protect the alumina layer from possible ion migration
during the deposition and annealing of the ITO film. A pulsed dc sputtering
technique was used to deposit the ITO layer. A careful calibration
and optimization of the ITO deposition process was performed14 to reach both high electrical conductivity (resistivity
of about ρ = 10–3 Ω cm) and high optical
transparency (extinction coefficient of about 10–3). In addition to the optimized deposition process, the EA-IOW device
with its 13-nm ITO film was submitted to two annealing processes to
improve its optical and electrical properties. One inert-annealing
in nitrogen atmosphere at 250 °C and one reactive-annealing in
room air at 100–150 °C were used to further optimize the
ultrathin ITO film. After such procedures, a single-mode EA-IOW device
with an attenuation loss of about 6 dB/cm loss and square resistance
of about 2 KΩ/square (with a resistivity of ρ = 3 ×
10–3 Ω cm) was achieved. The thickness of
each layer in the fabricated device was determined by measuring the
transmittance spectrum after the ALD and sputtering depositions and
fitting those results with theoretical calculations15 to find the optical constants and thickness of each layer.
Accurate information on each layer thickness and refractive index
are critical to calculate the sensitivity factor, S, defined as the absorbance measured by the EA-IOW device divided
by the absorbance measured in a direct transmission configuration
for an arbitrary but identical layer of chromophores.7a,8 For the single-mode EA-IOW device described in Figure 1 in the spectral region of interest here (∼550 nm),
we calculated a sensitive factor of S = 14 428
at the transverse-electric (TE) polarization, which is very high due
to the single-mode operation of the IOW and long propagation length
(2.54 cm) along the device (see the Supporting
Information for an experimental determination of the sensitivity
factor). Such high sensitivity provides the possibility to detect
molecular adsorbates with low surface densities (small fractions of
a monolayer) and/or weak molar absorptivities.

Figure 1 Schematic representation
of the spectro-electrochemical cell (not to scale) with the multilayer
structure of the single-mode EA-IOW structure. The inset shows the
electromagnetic field distribution across the guiding structure for
the TE polarization with the color bands representing each layer in
the structure.

Electrochemical Cell
Prior to its deployment, the fabricated single-mode EA-IOW device
was initially incubated for at least 24 h in buffer solution (Na2HPO4, 5 mM, pH 7) in order to stabilize the ITO
film. Then the device was removed from the solution, rinsed with DI
water, dried out by blowing nitrogen gas, and set for electrical connections
as indicated in Figure 1. To provide electrical
contact to the potentiostat (CHI 660D), a platinum wire was fixed
to the ITO working electrode surface by using a carbon tape. To ensure
that the ITO film would provide about the same electric potential
across its active surface, a thin layer of silver paste was placed
on the periphery of the EA-IOW device (near but away from the optical
path). An insulating epoxy layer was then used to cover the silver
paste and prevent the silver metal to interact with the solution inside
the electrochemical cell. A homemade Ag/AgCl pseudoreference electrode
and a platinum counter-electrode were mounted in the flowcell just
above the working ITO electrode. Our pseudoreference electrode showed
an offset of (−0.085 ± 0.006) V with respect to a standard
reference electrode of Ag/AgCl–1 M KCl (from CH Instruments,
Inc.). All the electrical arrangements were made such that the light
path between the two light-coupling gratings would not be disturbed
during its operation. Each electrically wired EA-IOW device was then
further stabilized inside the flowcell filled with buffer solution
under CV modulation from −0.4 to 0.8 V using scanning rates
of 0.20 V/s, 0.10 V/s, and 0.02 V/s.

Solutions of oxidized cytochrome c were prepared from horse heart, which was purchased from
Sigma Aldrich with 99.7% purity and diluted to 100 nM in phosphate
buffer solutions (Na2HPO4, 5 mM, pH 7). As a
control experiment, one of the oxidized cytochrome c solutions was submitted to a chemically reducing agent and conventional
spectrophotometric measurements confirmed that 100% of the dissolved
species could be chemically reduced.

Theory for OIS with EA-IOW
We start our theoretical analysis by describing the waveform of
an electric potential with a sine wave modulation at an angular frequency
ω: 1  where Edc represents the dc bias term
and ΔEac represents the amplitude
of an ac modulation. For small amplitudes of the potential modulation
(ΔEac ≪ (RT/nF), where R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, n is the number of
electrons transferred in each redox event, and F is
the Faraday constant), the output response described by the optical
intensity propagating through the single-mode EA-IOW device can be
expressed in the linear regime. Thus, the time-dependent optical response
of the baseline signal can be described by 2  and the optical signal obtained
when redox species are adsorbed to the analytical surface can be described
similarly by 3  Those three waveforms (i.e.,
eqs 1–3) constitute
the fundamental pieces of data to be collected from the experiment,
and they form the basis from where all other outcomes will be derived.
Obviously Idc,0 and Idc represent terms that are constants in time and their
values will depend solely on Edc. The
terms ΔIac,0 and ΔIac represent the amplitudes, and the terms θ0 and θ represent the phases of the optical signal response
originated under the electric potential modulation. In general, both
amplitudes and phases are functions of Edc, ΔEac, and ω. From the definition
of absorbance and using eqs 2 and 3 we have 4  Because (nFΔEac)/(RT) ≪ 1 then the
terms ΔIac/Idc and ΔIac,0/Idc,0 inside the natural logarithmic functions are small
numbers and we can truncate the Taylor series expansion of those functions
to the linear term and write 5  where 6   7   8   9   10  

Essentially, eq 5 prescribes that the absorbance response to an ac-potential modulation
follows the standard pattern of a dc term, Adc, and an ac-modulation term with an amplitude, ΔAac, and a phase, δa. Equations 7–10 instruct us on how
to determine the amplitude and phase of the optical absorbance from
quantities that are experimentally measured in response to the potential
modulation. As seen in eqs 7 and 8, the ac components of the absorbance (both the in-phase and
the out-of-phase components) depend on the difference between a measurement
of the baseline and a measurement of the sample. Obviously, if the
baseline is constant during the potential modulation, then ΔIac,0 = 0 and the baseline term vanishes, as
assumed a priori in previous works of ER and PM-ATR.6b,16 However, in general the baseline term can depend on the potential
modulation and thus must be included in the measurements and calculations
to reach proper results. We also observe in eqs 7 and 8 that in addition to the amplitudes of
the ac terms, ΔIac and ΔIac,0, one also needs to measure the dc terms, Idc and Idc,0, to
perform the calculations of the ac-amplitude of the absorbance, ΔAac. Therefore, our experimental setup for the
optical impedance spectroscopy to be described in Experimental Results of OIS with EA-IOW will consider provisions
for those measurements.

Now, as we have determined the optical
absorbance connected to the redox process, we aim to use such result
to derive the associated faradaic current. We first notice that the
faradaic current density, iF, can be determined
by the rate of change of surface-confined species undergoing redox
exchanges, dΓ/dt, using the following expression:2 11  A key point in the analysis
is that we can link the rate of change of surface-confined species
undergoing redox exchanges, dΓ/dt, to the rate
of change in the optical absorbance, dA/dt, by using 12  where S is the sensitivity factor
of the single-mode EA-IOW device (as previously defined) and Δ∈
is the change in molar absorptivity of the redox couple at the light
wavelength. Then, by using eqs 11 and 12 and the time derivative of the absorbance from
eq 5, we get 13  where 14   15   16   17  And we can define in eq 16 18  which corresponds to the surface density of redox species participating
in the electron-transfer process for a potential modulation of amplitude
ΔEac at an angular frequency ω.

Up until now we have considered the output iF (with its amplitude and phase) of the faradaic process in
response to a potential modulation Eac across the whole electrochemical cell, as schematically represented
in Figure 2 with electrical components for
the solution and electric double-layer, and equivalent electrical
components for the electro-chemical redox process2,6a described
by Rct and Ca. Now, in order to specifically determine the time-response of the
redox process and to factor out time-delay effects from other components
in the electrochemical cell, we need to relate the faradaic response iF to a potential modulation imposed directly
to the electron-transfer process, which is indicated in Figure 2 by the term described as Eac,F. In other words, we need to find the admittance YF as defined by 19  where IF = iFAeff and Aeff is the effective
electrode surface area involved in the faradaic process. But also
from Figure 2, we can write 20  where Idl and Ydl are, respectively, the current and admittance
associated with the electric double-layer component. The double-layer
current, Idl, can be written in terms
of the total current It using Idl = It – IF, so we get 21  But, as typically IF/It ≪ 1 (see the Supporting Information) then we can write 22  where we have used It = Eac/Zt with Zt to represent the total electrical impedance
measured across the whole electrochemical cell. Now, considering that
the admittance of the electric double-layer admittance Ydl can be written as Ydl = j ωCdl, then we get 23  The admittance YF(ω) as calculated above describes the
frequency dependence of the output response of the faradaic current
to an input electric potential modulation of unit amplitude Eac,F applied directly to it. Now, considering
that the faradaic process can be represented by an RC-series (specifically
described by Rct and Ca in Figure 2),17 the admittance YF is then given
by 24  And it is straightforward to calculate the derivative of the imaginary
part of YF(ω) and show that 25  at the frequency 26  which is the resonant frequency of the faradaic process. Therefore,
we can use the experimental data to determine the resonant frequency
by employing the following relation: 27  We will find later that the approach
of determining the resonant frequency by using the derivative of the
imaginary part of the admittance, as described in eq 27, to be very useful (at least from an experimental perspective)
because it only uses the angular frequency dependence present in the
term: Re[ωZt(ω)iF(ω)], and it avoids possible experimental
errors in the evaluation of the constants contained in the term CdlAeff/ΔEac. Once the resonant frequency ωr of the redox process has been determined we can then obtain
the reaction rate constant17 by the following
expression: 28  

Also, at the resonant frequency, we notice from eqs 24 and 26 that 29  which is useful
to determine Rct and Ca, after ωr has been determined.

Figure 2 Electrical
components of the electrochemical cell. The faradaic components are
represented by Rct and Ca, the electric-double layer capacitance is given by Cdl, Z1 can account
for the solution resistance, and Z2 for
an arbitrary additional electrical component.

Experimental Results of OIS with EA-IOW
In this section,
we apply the OIS technique with a single-mode EA-IOW device in order
to characterize an electro-active adsorbate of cytochrome c species, and we demonstrate how the experimental data
benefits from the previous theoretical analysis. For the experimental
measurements, we employed an ac-modulation in the electric potential
of ΔEac = 10 mV (20 mV peak-to-peak)
at several different dc bias potentials (Edc from −0.20 V to +0.08 V) with a series of angular frequencies
(ω from 2π rad/s to 40π rad/s). As the optical probing
wavelength we utilized a spectral band centered at 550 nm with a full-width
at half-maximum (fwhm) of 3 nm obtained from a supercontinuum laser
source (FemtoPower 1060, Fianium Ultrafast Fiber Lasers) combined
with an acousto-optical tunable filter. The transverse electric (TE)
polarization was selected for all experiments described in this work.
The out-coupled signal from the EA-IOW was collected by a PMT (H5783,
Hamamatsu) that was connected to a low-noise current preamplifier
(SR570, Stanford Research Systems). An oscilloscope (DSO 8104A, Agilent)
was used to simultaneously acquire the waveforms of the electric potential
(originated by the potentiostat) and the optical signal response (provided
by the current preamplifier). The electrical impedance across the
electro-chemical cell as measured by the potentiostat was also recorded.
Baseline signal (when no redox species were present in the flowcell)
for each dc bias potential and each modulation frequency was measured
first. Afterward, cytochrome c in buffer solution
was injected into the flowcell, let it incubate for 30 min, and a
similar sequence of measurements was applied. We note that, as the
protein concentration in the solution phase was quite low (100 nM),
the data above was collected without rinsing the electrochemical cell.
Preliminary data (not shown here) have demonstrated that the dissolved
bulk phase species had no measurable impact on the results.

Results of
dc Absorbance
Figure 3a shows at each
dc bias potential the measured dc optical signals in the presence
(red bars) and absence (blue bars) of the electro-active protein layer.
The plot displays the average and error bar of the dc optical signals,
which were calculated over the set of measured modulation frequencies.
As expected, at a particular dc bias potential, the error bar is quite
small indicating that the dc component of the optical response is
independent of the modulation frequency. We also observe that the
dc optical component of the baseline signal changes with the dc bias
potential and it exhibits similar behavior as the baseline tested
under a CV potential scan (data shown in Figure S.1b in the Supporting Information).

Figure 3 (a) dc component of the
optical out-coupled intensities for the baseline and the cytochrome c adsorbed layer under ac potential modulation. (b) dc absorbance
term, Adc, at each dc bias potential.

The dc absorbance term of the
cytochrome c layer was calculated using eq 6, and the results are shown in Figure 3b. At the 550-nm wavelength, the molar absorptivity of cytochrome c at the two redox states18 are
∈ox = 9.0 × 103 M–1 cm–1 and ∈red = 27.7 ×
10–3 M–1 cm–1 (which considered that the adsorption process does not significantly
affect the protein molar absorptivity19). As we have initially injected oxidized cytochrome c into the flowcell and observed the absorbance to stabilize at a
value of about 0.465 ± 0.003, we can then conclude that at positive
values of the dc bias potential cytochrome molecules are fully oxidized
with a total surface coverage of Γtot = (Adc(Edc > 0 V))/(S ∈ox) = 3.58 ±
0.02 pmol/cm2, which corresponds to about 16% of a full
monolayer (22 pmol/cm2). Toward negative values of the
dc bias potential, cytochrome c molecules start to
reduce, and the redox process is observed to reach a plateau for values
of the dc bias potential smaller than −0.16 V. Again, by using
the measured dc absorbance (and considering no desorption/adsorption
under potential modulation, as demonstrated in the Supporting Information) we have found that 11% of the adsorbed
species (0.39 pmol/cm2) were electrically reduced as the
dc bias potential was driven to negative values.

Results of
ac Absorbance
The experimental data for the ac optical intensity
collected under potential modulation at several frequencies and several
dc bias potentials are schematically summarized in the complex plane
shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4 Schematic representation
of the ac absorbance in the complex plane, where the x–y coordinates correspond, respectively,
to the in-phase and out-of-phase components of the optical signal
shown in eqs 7 and 8.
Blue diamond, data from the baseline measurement; red square, data
measured with the adsorbed redox protein layer. Each point corresponds
to a particular frequency, which increases clockwise from the smallest
(1 Hz) to the largest (19.95 Hz). The distance between two points
with the same frequency (black arrow) determines the amplitude of
the ac absorbance term, ΔAac. The
distance in the x-axis (green arrow) represents the
in-phase component of the ac absorbance, ΔAac,in. Likewise, the distance in the y-axis (purple arrow) corresponds to the out-of-phase component, ΔAac,out.

Each plot shows data measured for both the baseline (blue
diamonds) and when the redox-active layer is present (red squares).
The amplitude of the ac absorbance, ΔAac, is mathematically described (see eqs 7 and 8) by the distance between two points
with the same frequency, as schematically illustrated by the black
arrow at the −0.08 V plot. The horizontal distance between
those two points (green arrow) corresponds to the in-phase component
of the ac absorbance, ΔAac,in, and
the vertical distance corresponds to the out-of-phase component, ΔAac,out. As we can observe in the plots of Figure 4, the contributions from the baseline (blue diamonds)
are not negligible and its magnitude changes as we apply different
dc bias potentials and/or different modulation frequencies. As we
already pointed out, their contribution must be considered for accurate
results. From a general inspection of the plots in Figure 4, we can qualitatively conclude that the ac-amplitude
of the absorbance reaches a maximum for a dc bias potential in the
vicinity of −0.12 V and −0.08 V. A more quantitative
statement of this observation can be found in Figure 5, where we have used eqs 7–9 to plot the ac-amplitude of the absorbance, ΔAac (the y-axis on the right
side of the plot in Figure 5), against the
angular frequency in the x-axis at different dc bias
potentials. We observe a maximum AC absorbance of about ΔAac = 0.0183 at Edc = −0.08 V. We can confirm the consistency of
this result by comparing it to the previous dc absorbance measurements.
In Figure 3b, we note that the dc component
of the absorbance has a maximum slope of dA/dE ≅ 0.877 V–1 (at Edc = −0.08 V). Now, for a peak-to-peak swing in
the potential of 0.02 V (ΔEac =
10 mV), one would expect from these results an absorbance change of
ΔA = 0.0175, which agrees remarkably well with
the results from the ac measurements (ΔAac = 0.0183).

Figure 5 The y-axis on the right side displays
the amplitude of the ac absorbance, ΔAac, against the angular frequency for an ac amplitude modulation
of 10 mV in the electric potential at several dc bias potentials.
The y-axis on the left side displays the corresponding
surface density of cytochrome c molecules, ΔΓac, that are driven by the potential modulation.

We then apply our previous relation, ΔΓac = ΔAac/S Δ∈, to obtain the amount of cytochrome c molecules engaged in the electron-transfer process under the ac
potential modulation. In Figure 5, the y-axis on the left side shows ΔΓac against the angular frequency for each dc bias potential. At the
dc bias potential of −0.08 V, a maximum of 68 fmol/cm2 of active cytochrome c responded to the ac potential
oscillation. As the dc bias potential moves away from the formal potential,
we observe as expected that the number of species involved in the
redox process decreases. It is important to notice that the ability
to detect such small amounts of species participating in the redox
process is a direct consequence of the high sensitivity provided by
the single-mode EA-IOW device.

Electro-Chemical Results
Next, we apply eqs 13–17 to determine the amplitude ΔiF and phase δF of the faradaic current density.
Those results are shown in Figure 6a,b, where
the faradaic process is plotted against the angular frequency at several
dc bias potentials. At the lower end of the angular frequency spectrum,
the amplitude of the faradaic current shows a linear behavior with
a higher slope for those dc bias potentials that are closer to the
formal potential.

Figure 6 Faradaic current density versus angular frequency for
a potential modulation of 10-mV amplitude at several dc bias potentials
(a) ac amplitude and (b) phase.

Because it provides the maximum amplitude of the faradaic
current, we now consider the angular frequency of ω = 49.9 rad
s–1. We use the experimental data at this particular
angular frequency to plot the amplitude of the faradaic current density
ΔiF against the dc bias potential.
Those experimental results are summarized in Figure 7. A Gaussian fit of the experimental data allow us to determine
the formal potential at E0 = (−0.094
± 0.002) V with a fwhm of ΔE1/2 = (0.097 ± 0.006) V. Taking into account the offset in our
pseudoreference electrode, we determine a formal potential for cytochrome c adsorbed to the ITO surface of −0.012 V against
a Ag/AgCl electrode, which is consistent with reported data.20

Figure 7 Black diamonds: experimental data for the faradaic current
density versus dc bias potential at the angular frequency of 49.9
rad/s. Red curve, a Gaussian fitting curve that gave the following
results: formal potential E0 = (−0.094
± 0.002) V with fwhm ΔE1/2 =
(0.097 ± 0.006) V.

Information on the apparent number of electrons na involved in the redox process2 can then be obtained from na = 0.0906
V/ΔE1/2. So, na is very close to 1 (0.93) indicating that the interaction
between adsorbed cytochrome c molecules is weak,
as one would expect due to the extremely low surface-density.

Electron-Transfer
Rate Constant
To determine the reaction rate constant, we
combine the data on the faradaic current, iF(ω), described above with electrical measurements of the impedance
across the electro-chemical cell, Zt(ω),
and the capacitance of the electric double-layer capacitance, Cdl. Those conventional electrical measurements
are described in the Supporting Information. We also determined the ITO area in our EA-IOW that was electrically
active to be about Aeff = 7.1 cm2. Then, with those measurements in hand, we used eq 23 to determine the admittance of the redox process. In Figure 8a we plot the imaginary part of the admittance against
the modulation frequency. As described earlier, the angular frequency
where the derivative of imaginary part of the admittance, dYF,im(ω)/dω, vanishes corresponds
to the resonance frequency of the associated RC-series of the electron-transfer
reaction. We used the experimental results summarized in Figure 8a to find a value of ωr = 53 rad/s
for the resonant frequency. As we pointed earlier, this procedure
for determining ωr is immune to any experimental
error in the evaluation of Cdl and Aeff, which is certainly relevant because we
can then reach better accuracy in determining the reaction rate constant,
which is given by eq 28. Our result of K = 26.5 s–1 for the reaction rate of
cytochrome c adsorbed to an ITO surface under our
particular aqueous buffer environment is consistent with previous
work21 in this field.

Figure 8 (a) Imaginary part of
the impedance, YF,im, as described by
eq 23. (b) Complex plane representation of the
faradaic impedance YF: dots correspond
to experimental data from eq 23, solid line
corresponds to theoretical results from eq 24 based on a RC-series model for the electro-active protein assembly
described by Rct and Ca.

Next, we used the obtained
value of ωr and eq 29 to determine
the value of the charge transfer resistance and pseudocapacitance
associated with the redox process. Our findings for those quantities
were Rct = 5.62 KΩ and Ca = 3.35 μF. We then utilized those Rct and Ca values to calculate
the Nyquist diagram at several angular frequencies of an RctCa-series admittance as
determined by eq 24. In Figure 8b those calculated results are represented by the continuous
solid line, and the measured experimental data are represented by
the discrete squares. We observe a strong agreement among those results
that corroborates the original assumption of an equivalent electrical
circuit formed by the resistor-capacitor components in series to describe
the chemical electron-transfer process.

Finally, we would like
to mention that, as described in our theory Theory
for OIS with EA-IOW, we have quantitatively taken into consideration
the fact that Eac,F applied to the faradaic
unit is different from Eac applied to
the working electrode. A similar consideration but using different
approaches has been previously reported in the literature by other
research groups (e.g., Gaigalas,22 Finklea,23 Sagara,24 and Ohtsuka25). These approaches mainly use the uncompensated
resistance to calculate Eac,F. Among the
merits of such approaches include the fact that (i) the uncompensated
resistance has a value that is frequency- and potential-independent
and (ii) the uncompensated resistance can be measured with high accuracy.
In this work, we have used the condition that IF ≪ It, which combined with
a constant capacitance for the electric double-layer Cdl, allowed us to derive a simple methodology for the
determination of the reaction rate constant. Because such conditions
were satisfied in our experiments, we were able to exploit several
benefits from them: (i) the derivation of the faradaic admittance,
eq 23, does not require any additional information
about the electrochemical cell beyond what has already been described
in Figure 2; no additional model or value for
a specific electric component was required and (ii) the total electrical
impedance of the cell Zt was measured
directly through the electrical data collected by a potentiostat for
every angular frequency in the experiment (see Figure S.3 in the Supporting Information) and those measurements
automatically included the effects of any electrical component (for
instance, those generically described by Z1 and Z2 in Figure 2) regardless of their nature or specific characteristics, (iii) the
experimental measurements for Zt and IF were performed simultaneously and under exactly
the same working conditions. Those benefits were valuable to reach
good agreement between the experimental data and theoretical calculations
shown in Figure 8b. However, it is quite possible
that under certain experimental conditions the requirements above
may not be satisfied and the approaches already reported in the literature
(and referenced above) may provide an alternative for extracting the
aimed information on the reaction rate constant from our optically
reconstructed faradaic current using the single-mode EA-IOW platform.

Conclusions
In this work we developed an optical impedance
spectroscopy technique that uses a highly sensitive, single-mode,
electro-active integrated optical waveguide to investigate electro-chemical
properties of surface-bound redox species. The experimental results
show that even for small surface-densities of species involved in
the redox process (e.g., fmol/cm2) our approach provides
strong analytical signals that can be readily monitored and analyzed.
The optically reconstructed faradaic process allowed us to determine
several electro-chemical properties of a redox process in a molecular
adsorbate including the temporal response of the electro-chemical
process as defined by the reaction rate constant. The mathematical
formalism and experimental methodology, which was put forward here
to address data measured in the single-mode EA-IOW device, can also
be applied to other configurations (e.g., ER, PM-ATR) and may potentially
be helpful in these approaches as well. The outstanding sensitivity
provided by the single-mode EA-IOW is expected to help in studies
of redox couples with small differences in their extinction coefficients,
molecular assemblies with low surface densities, or adsorbates with
a low number of electro-chemically active species. The OIS using a
single-mode EA-IOW combined with the analytical formalism described
here brings additional sensitivity, accuracy, and simplicity to electro-chemical
analysis and is expected to become a useful tool in investigations
of redox processes.

Supporting Information Available
CV potential scans are reported
on the optical baseline of the single-mode EA-IOW device to confirm
the systematic changes already reported here under ac potential modulation,
optical absorbance data reported to confirm the constancy of the surface-density
of redox species under potential modulation, experimental data for
measurements of the electrical impedance across the electro-chemical
cell and the capacitance of the electric double-layer capacitance,
and experimental data to independently quantify the sensitivity factor.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac4030736_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge
financial support from National Institute of Health (NIH Award RR022864),
National Science Foundation (NSF EPSCoR Award 0814194), and the Kentucky
Science and Engineering Foundation (KSEF Award 1869-RDE-012).
==== Refs
References
a Dimitrakopoulos C. D. ; Malenfant P. R. L. 
Adv. Mater. 
2002 , 14 2 99 . b Forrest S.
R. 
Nature 
2004 , 428 6986 911 –918 .15118718  c Katz E. ; Willner I. 
Electroanalysis 
2003 , 15 11 913 –947 .
Feng Z. Q. ; Sagara T. ; Niki K. 
Anal. Chem. 
1995 , 67 19 3564 –3570 .
a Kuwana T. ; Winograd N.   In Electroanalytical
Chemistry ; Bard A.  , Ed. Dekker : New
York , 1974 ; Vol. 7 ,
pp 1 –78 .b Heineman W. R. ; Hawkridge F. M. ; Blount H. N.   In Electroanalytical
Chemistry ; Bard A.  , Ed. Dekker : New
York , 1984 ; Vol. 13 ,
pp 1 –113 .
Sagara T. ; Igarashi S. ; Sato H. ; Niki K. 
Langmuir 
1991 , 7 5 1005 –1012 .
a Amemiya T. ; Hashimoto K. ; Fujishima A. 
Denki Kagaku 
1992 , 60 12 1075 –1081 . b Amemiya T. ; Hashimoto K. ; Fujishima A. 
J. Phys. Chem. 
1993 , 97 38 9736 –9740 . c Amemiya T. ; Hashimoto K. ; Fujishima A. 
J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1994 , 377 1–2 143 –148 . d Amemiya T. ; Hashimoto K. ; Fujishima A. ; Itoh K. 
J. Electrochem. Soc. 
1991 , 138 10 2845 –2859 .
a Araci Z. O. ; Runge A. F. ; Doherty W. J. ; Saavedra S. S. 
Israel J. Chem. 
2006 , 46 3 249 –255 . b Doherty W. J. ; Wysocki R. J. ; Armstrong N. R. ; Saavedra S. S. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 10 4900 –4907 .16526729  c Araci Z. O. ; Shallcross C. R. ; Armstrong N. R. ; Saavedra S. S. 
J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2010 , 1 12 1900 –1905 .
a Mendes S. B. , Saavedra S. S. ; Armstrong N. R.   In Optical Guided-Wave Chemical and Biosensors , Zourob M. , Lakhtakia A.  , Eds.; Springer : Heidelberg, Germany , 2010 .b Wiederkehr R. S. ; Hoops G. C. ; Mendes S. B. 
Opt. Eng. 
2011 , 50 7 071109 .
a Mendes S. B. ; Li L. F. ; Burke J. J. ; Lee J. E. ; Dunphy D. R. ; Saavedra S. S. 
Langmuir 
1996 , 12 14 3374 –3376 . b Mendes S. B. ; Saavedra S. S. 
Opt. Express 
1999 , 4 11 449 –456 .19396302 
a Dunphy D. R. ; Mendes S. B. ; Saavedra S. S. ; Armstrong N. R. 
Anal. Chem. 
1997 , 69 15 3086 –3094 .21639329 b Dunphy D. R. ; Mendes S. B. ; Saavedra S. S. ; Armstrong N. R.  Interfacial
Electrochemistry ; Wieckowski A.  , Ed.; Marcel Dekker : New York , 1999 ; Chapter
29. c Bradshaw J. T. ; Mendes S. B. ; Armstrong N. R. ; Saavedra S. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2003 , 75 5 1080 –1088 .12641226 
Offersgaard J. F. 
J. Opt. Soc. Am.
A 
1995 , 12 10 7 .
Hayes C. M. ; Pereira M. B. ; Brangers B. C. ; Aslan M. M. ; Wiederkehr R. S. ; Lake J. H. ; Mendes S. B. 
17th Biennial
University/Government/Industry Micro-Nano Symposium 
2008 , 227 –232 .
Pereira M. B. ; Craven J. S. ; Mendes S. B.  Opt. Eng. 2010 , 49  (12 ).
Aslan M. M. ; Webster N. A. ; Byard C. L. ; Pereira M. B. ; Hayes C. M. ; Wiederkehr R. S. ; Mendes S. B. 
Thin Solid Films 
2010 , 518 17 4935 –4940 .21359156 
Han X. ; Mendes S. B.  SPIE Optics and Photonics , San Diego, CA, August 12–16, 2012 .
Macleod H. A.  Thin-Film Optical
Filters , 2 nd ed.; Macmillan
Pub. Co. : New York , 1986 .
Feng Z. Q. ; Imabayashi S. ; Kakiuchi T. ; Niki K. 
J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1996 , 408 1–2 15 –20 .
a Lelievre D. ; Plichon V. ; Laviron E. 
J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1980 , 112 1 137 –145 . b Laviron E. 
J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1979 , 97 2 135 –149 .
Margoliash E. ; Frohwirt N. 
Biochem. J. 
1959 , 71 3 570 –572 .13638266 
Wiederkehr R. S. ; Hoops G. C. ; Aslan M. M. ; Byard C. L. ; Mendes S. B. 
J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2009 , 113 19 8306 –8312 .
El Kasmi A. ; Leopold M. C. ; Galligan R. ; Robertson R. T. ; Saavedra S. S. ; El Kacemi K. ; Bowden E. F. 
Electrochem. Commun. 
2002 , 4 2 177 –181 .
a Araci Z. O. ; Runge A. F. ; Do Herty W. J. ; Saavedra S. S. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 5 1572 –+ .18193877  b Araci Z. O. ; Runge A. F. ; Doherty W. J. ; Saavedra S. S. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 33 13205 –13205 .
a Ruzgas T. ; Wong L. ; Gaigalas A. K. ; Vilker V. L. 
Langmuir 
1998 , 14 25 7298 –7305 . b Gaigalas A. K. ; Ruzgas T. 
J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1999 , 465 1 96 –101 . c Li L. ; Meuse C. ; Silin V. ; Gaigalas A. K. ; Zhang Y. Z. 
Langmuir 
2000 , 16 10 4672 –4677 .
a Brevnov D. A. ; Finklea H. O. ; Van Ryswyk H. 
J. Electroanal. Chem. 
2001 , 500 1–2 100 –107 . b Brevnov D. A. ; Finklea H. O. 
J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2000 , 147 9 3461 –3466 .
Sagara T. ; Kato N. ; Kakashima N. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2002 , 106 6 1205 –1212 .
Yamada T. ; Nango M. ; Ohtsuka T. 
J. Electroanal. Chem. 
2002 , 528 1–2 93 –102 .
