
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac501259nTechnical NoteFluorescence-Based Assessment of Plasma-Induced Hydrophilicity
in Microfluidic Devices via Nile Red Adsorption and Depletion Guckenberger David
J. †Berthier Erwin †‡Young Edmond W. K. §Beebe David J. *†† Department
of Biomedical Engineering, Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1111 Highland Avenue, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, United States‡ Department
of Medical Microbiology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1550 Linden Drive, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United States§ Department
of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, Institute of Biomaterials
and Biomedical Engineering, University of
Toronto, 5 King’s
College Road, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G8 Canada* E-mail: djbeebe@wisc.edu.04 07 2015 04 07 2014 05 08 2014 86 15 7258 7263 07 04 2014 04 07 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyTerms of Use

We
present a simple method, called fluorescence-based assessment
of plasma-induced hydrophilicity (FAPH), that enables spatial mapping
of the local hydrophilicity of surfaces normally inaccessible by traditional
contact angle measurement techniques. The method leverages the change
in fluorescence of a dye, Nile Red, which is adsorbed on an oxygen
plasma-treated surface, and its correlation with the contact angle
of water. Using FAPH, we explored the effect of microchannel geometries
on the penetration distance of oxygen plasma into a microchannel and
found that entrance effects prevent uniform treatment. We showed that
these variations have a significant impact on cell culture, and thus
the design of cell-based microfluidic assays must consider this phenomenon
to obtain repeatable and homogeneous results.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac501259ndocument-id-new-14ac-2014-01259nccc-price
==== Body
Hydrophilicity, or wettability,
is an important physical property of microfluidic systems, especially
regarding its internal surfaces. Many microfluidic systems rely on
surface hydrophilicity to achieve various functions such as (i) facilitating
capillary fluid flow into microchannels (i.e., priming);1 (ii) preventing nonspecific hydrophobic adsorption
of sample molecules;2,3 and (iii) promoting attachment
of mammalian cells in tissue culture for cell-based applications.4,5 For microfluidic systems fabricated in glass, the internal surfaces
are naturally hydrophilic and thus do not require additional treatment
to achieve the above functions. However, for microfluidic systems
fabricated in other commonly used materials such as poly(dimethylsiloxane)
(PDMS),6 polystyrene (PS),7 and cyclo-olefin copolymers (COC),8,9 the
internal surfaces are naturally hydrophobic and require surface modification
to render them hydrophilic. Because these materials are becoming increasingly
popular for the development of microfluidic systems,10,11 the ability to not only render these materials hydrophilic but to
also retain and characterize their hydrophilicity are crucial to advancing
microfluidics technology and expanding its applications.

A common
method of achieving hydrophilicity is to expose surfaces
to oxygen plasma. Plasma treatments are used in many applications
including the removal of organic contaminants,12,13 the control of surface wettability,14 and the traditional application of making plastic substrates hydrophilic
to facilitate cell adhesion and growth in laboratory plasticware (e.g.,
polystyrene Petri dishes and well plates).15 In addition, oxygen plasma treatments activate surfaces to enable
bonding between two interfaces16 and have
been widely employed in the microfluidics community to bond PDMS to
glass (or other materials) to create enclosed microchannels.17 The convenience and accessibility of plasma
treatment allows it to be incorporated into laboratory procedures
without the need for dry or wet chemical processes.

Although
achieving hydrophilicity is straightforward, the ability
to retain hydrophilicity is dependent on the material. PS retains
its hydrophilicity, allowing commercial plasticware to have long shelf
lives (i.e., years). PDMS, conversely, is known to undergo hydrophobic
recovery in a matter of hours.18 This often
imposes a time constraint on experimental procedures, adds variability
to test conditions, and constitutes one of several important factors
that has hindered widespread adoption and commercialization of PDMS-based
microfluidic systems. Because of the steady convergence of microfluidics
and cell biology applications and the ongoing pursuit of commercial,
user-friendly microfluidic technologies (including tools for point-of-care
diagnostics19 and platforms for microfluidic
cell culture7), there is a clear need to
develop microfluidic systems made of common manufacturable materials
like PS and COC that have potential for high volume industrial production
and can maintain stable surface characteristics such as hydrophilicity.10 Thus, researchers have been studying and developing
methods to facilitate the testing and characterization of robust,
surface-treated plastic microfluidic devices in the lab, in hopes
of eventually translating these techniques to industry.3,7,10,20−24

Two current challenges in fabricating robust plastic microfluidic
devices are (i) the ability to apply uniform plasma treatments within
the entire device and (ii) the ability to characterize the surface
hydrophilicity after treatment to assess its uniformity. In the case
of PDMS-PDMS and hybrid PDMS-glass microfluidic devices, plasma treatments
are typically applied prior to device assembly because it simultaneously
activates the surfaces for bonding and uniformly hydrophilizes all
internal surfaces. However, in the case of thermoplastic microfluidic
devices, oxygen plasma treatment prior to thermal diffusive bonding
tends to reduce bond strength,7 making
plasma treatment before device bonding undesirable. Applying plasma
treatment after bonding is plausible,23 particularly for microfluidic devices that employ open access ports,25 but because the plasma is entering only through
the access ports, the treatment may not be uniform within the device
and penetration into microchannels may be limited (Figure 1A).26,27 Further research is therefore
necessary to advance our ability to generate and retain uniform hydrophilic
surfaces via plasma treatment in plastic microfluidic devices. In
addition, improved methods that characterize the uniformity of plasma
treatment and correlate it to surface hydrophilicity are needed. While
measuring contact angles of droplets is the most common method for
assessing wettability,28 it relies on the
use of relatively large (microliter) droplets that are not suitable
for assessing local wettability at high spatial resolution.

Figure 1 (A) Plasma
treatment before device assembly can adversely affect
bond quality. While it is advantageous to plasma-treat after bonding,
the effectiveness of the treatment within the channel is unknown.
(B) The FAPH method: (1) apply the NR coating, (2) assemble microchannels,
(3) plasma treat, (4) remove microchannels, and analyze fluorescence.
Penetration distance, δ, is determined by finding the half-maximum
of fluorescence intensity. (C) Relationship between contact angle
and fluorescence intensity, normalized to maximum intensity (untreated
PS).

Here, we describe a novel approach
called fluorescence-based assessment
of plasma-induced hydrophilicity (FAPH) that is suitable for characterizing
local surface wettability at high spatial resolution (Figure 1B). The approach relies on adsorption of a hydrophobic,
fluorogenic molecule, Nile Red (NR), on the substrate surface, subsequent
plasma treatment to deplete NR molecules, and fluorescence image analysis
to quantify the level of NR depletion and determine the in
situ surface hydrophilicity. The purpose of FAPH is to provide
microfluidic designers with insight on microscale geometries and physical
dimensions that account for how plasma treatment modifies surface
hydrophilicity. By applying this approach, we explored the effects
of geometry on plasma treatment penetration and, as a demonstration
of its importance in future cell-based applications, studied the downstream
effects of the applied plasma treatment on the adhesion of mammalian
cells in microscale cell culture.

Methods and Materials
Microchannel
Fabrication
Microchannels were fabricated
in PDMS using established soft lithography techniques.6,17 A master mold was fabricated by spin-coating photoresist (SU-8 100,
Microchem, Newton, MA) onto a silicon wafer (WRS Materials, San Jose,
CA) and patterning the channel features using UV light (Omnicure series-1000,
EXFO, Mississauga, Canada). Unexposed photoresist was removed with
SU-8 developer (PG-MEA no. 484431, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO).
Features were molded by soft lithography using PDMS (Sylgard 184,
Dow Corning, Midland, MI) mixed in a 10:1 ratio of elastomer base
and curing agent and baked on a hot plate at 80 °C for 4 h. Channels
varied in height from 100 to 350 μm and in width from 0.10 to
1.0 mm. PDMS microchannels were then passively bonded to PS substrates
for subsequent tests.

PS Sample Preparation
Samples were
fabricated in 1.2
mm thick PS sheets (no. ST313120, Goodfellow, Huntingdon, England).
Large (60 mm × 90 mm) and small (25 mm × 25 mm) samples
pieces were cut using a Personal CNC Mill (PCNC 770, Tormach, Waunakee,
WI). Samples were cleaned by rinsing with deionized (DI) water, sonicating
for 15 min in 50 °C isopropyl alcohol (IPA), and rinsing again
by submerging in a DI water bath for 1 min. Cleaned samples were pulled
out of the DI water bath slowly to ensure that the surface was free
from any satellite water droplets. Nile Red (NR) (no. N3013, Sigma-Aldrich)
was diluted to 5 μg/mL in DMSO (no. D2650, Sigma-Aldrich) to
obtain a stock solution, and then further diluted 1:200 (v/v) in IPA
to yield the working solution. The working NR solution was applied
on one side of the PS sample at ∼0.35 μL/mm2 using a micropipet and left on the surface for 30 s. The sample
was then promptly placed in DI water and rinsed as previously described.
During rinsing, it was important to remove all satellite water droplets
because they tended to leave dried spots on the surface that affected
image analysis. After rinsing, NR-coated samples were protected from
light and dust until ready for use.

Plasma Treatment
NR-coated PS samples were either assembled
to create enclosed microchannels or left unbonded to expose the entire
sample. Samples were treated with oxygen plasma using a plasma cleaning
system (Femto, Diener Electronic, Ebhausen, Germany). Plasma treatments
varied in exposure time (5–50 s), oxygen gas flow rate (20–40
mL/min), and power (25–50 W), which were chosen based on previously
published work.7,23,25 Unbonded PS samples were used to obtain a correlation between NR
fluorescence intensity and contact angle measurements made via standard
goniometry of sessile drops (see Contact Angle
Measurements). Assembled PS samples, with the passively bonded
microchannels, were used for characterizing plasma treatment penetration
into microchannels by fluorescence quantification. In these experiments,
PDMS microchannels were passively bonded to the NR-coated samples,
plasma treatment was applied into the channels, and the PDMS microchannels
were then removed after plasma treatment, exposing the entire sample
surface to image analysis. Plasma treatments in these experiments
were applied consistently for 50 s, at 50 W, and with an oxygen gas
flow rate of 20 mL/min.

Contact Angle Measurements
Surface
hydrophilicity of
PS samples was characterized by measuring and averaging contact angles
of three 6 μL DI water droplets on the sample surface using
a goniometer (model 200, Ramé-Hart, Succasunna, NJ). For all
PS samples that were NR-coated and imaged for fluorescence, fluorescence
imaging was always performed prior to contact angle measurements,
to prevent potential disruption of the homogeneous NR coating via
the 6-μL DI water droplets.

Fluorescence Imaging and
Analysis
All NR-coated samples
were imaged on an inverted fluorescence microscope (Eclipse Ti, Nikon)
using appropriate filters. Images of NR-coated samples were acquired
both before and after plasma treatment to enable assessment of the
depletion of NR fluorescence caused by plasma treatment. To obtain
a correlation between NR fluorescence intensity and contact angle,
each NR-coated PS sample was imaged at nine locations, which were
averaged to represent the fluorescence intensity for that PS sample
(three samples per treatment condition). To spatially “map”
fluorescence within microchannels, images were flatfield-corrected
using ImageJ and stitched using Adobe Photoshop. To quantify penetration
distance of plasma treatment, the fluorescence intensity along the
channel length was averaged across the channel width. The resulting
intensity profile was analyzed to determine the location where the
intensity reached half of its maximum, and this location was then
defined as the penetration distance, δ (Figure 2).

Figure 2 Penetration distance, δ, is determined by finding the half-maximum
of the fluorescent intensity along the channel length. The representative
stitched fluorescence maps of 800-μm microchannels are shown
for 20-μm (top image) and 150-μm (bottom image) tall microchannels.
The fluorescence intensity profiles (averaged across channel width)
are normalized to the maximum intensity of each channel, determined
by averaging the intensity of the last 4 mm of the channel length
(scale bars represent 1 mm).

Cell Culture, Imaging, and Analysis
See the Supporting Information for details on cell culture,
imaging, and analysis.

Results
Overview
We developed
a method called fluorescence-based
assessment of plasma-induced hydrophilicity (FAPH) that allows characterization
of local surface hydrophilicity of internal surfaces within microchannels
(Figure 1B) and informs how microfluidic geometries
and dimensions can impact the effectiveness of plasma treatment. The
methodology relies on the following steps: (1) uniform coating of
sample with NR, a hydrophobic fluorescent dye that adsorbs to hydrophobic
surfaces because of hydrophobic interactions; (2) passive (reversible)
assembly of PDMS microchannels onto the NR-coated sample; (3) treatment
with plasma under desired parameters; (4) removal of PDMS microchannels
to expose the plasma-treated substrate; and (5) fluorescence quantification
of NR over the entire microchannel pattern, and correlation to surface
hydrophilicity via contact angle calibration.

FAPH relies on
the observation that upon plasma treatment, adsorbed NR on a surface
undergoes a decrease in fluorescence intensity, or a fluorescence
depletion, correlated to the level of plasma applied. An important
aspect of the method is the need to establish a uniform NR coating.
We accomplished this by dissolving NR in IPA, which leveraged IPA’s
low surface tension and its inherent property of enhancing NR fluorescence.29 We found the optimal adsorption time for NR
to range between 15 and 30 s, which allowed the dye to quench,30 yielding a dimmer but more homogeneous and repeatable
NR coating with adequate fluorescence (Figure S1 in the Supporting Information). We thus chose a 30 s
adsorption time for all experiments. When protected from light, external
contaminants, and extraneous contact, NR-adsorbed PS samples were
found to be stable for several weeks and could be safely stored for
weeks before experimentation.

NR Fluorescence Intensity
vs Contact Angle Correlation
To use NR fluorescence as a
quantitative indicator of hydrophilicity,
we correlated NR fluorescence to contact angle measurements, the standard
for characterizing surface wettability. Contact angles were measured,
both before and after plasma treatment, via goniometry with water
droplets placed on NR-adsorbed PS samples. Adsorbed NR itself did
not significantly affect the contact angle measurement, as evidenced
by negligible differences between NR-adsorbed and non-NR-adsorbed
samples (Figure S2 in the Supporting Information). Plasma treatment was controlled by tuning the power, flow rate,
and exposure time. We found a linear relationship between NR fluorescence
intensity and contact angle (Figure 1C) for
angles between 15° and 50°. We were unable to obtain contact
angles between ∼50° and 85° (note, 85° was the
contact angle of untreated PS), because the most gentle plasma treatment
applied (i.e., lowest power setting, highest pressure setting, and
shortest duration) resulted in a decrease in contact angle to ∼50°.
We were also unable to obtain measurements of contact angles <15°
because all angles less than 15° could not be distinguished from
0° by goniometry and were thus considered highly hydrophilic.
Nevertheless, our results yielded two important observations: (1)
fluorescence intensity is linearly correlated to contact angle, and
(2) fluorescence intensity can be used to inform us of the contact
angle, and thus the surface hydrophilicity. Importantly this information
is independent of the plasma treatment parameters used to achieve
the contact angle. If two different sets of treatment parameters achieved
the same contact angle (e.g., high power over short exposure time
versus low power over long exposure time), then the resultant fluorescence
intensity would be the same. This result confirmed that NR fluorescence
intensity can be used as an indirect metric for contact angle and,
by extension, the hydrophilicity of internal microchannel surfaces.

NR Microchannel Characterization
The linear correlation
between NR fluorescence intensity and contact angle allowed us to
employ the FAPH method to assess surface hydrophilicity after plasma
treatment within microchannel geometries. To assess the effect of
geometry and entrance effects on the penetration of plasma treatment
into microchannels, we fabricated microchannels with different heights
(20, 150, and 350 μm) and widths (0.1–1 mm, Figure 3A and Figure S3 in the Supporting
Information). The microchannels were open on only one end (left,
entrance indicated by dotted red line) to allow unidirectional plasma
penetration and were all treated under the same parameters (see the Methods and Materials). We observed a visible decrease
in NR fluorescence intensity beginning at the channel entrance and
extending into the channel for a specific distance (solid red line
path), followed by transition back to the original level of NR fluorescence
intensity. On the basis of our observations that NR fluorescence intensity
is linearly correlated with contact angle (Figure 1C) and specific contact angles are correlated to applied plasma
treatment, the observed intensity decrease was attributed to local
oxygen plasma exposure that depleted the adsorbed NR.

Figure 3 (A) Stitched fluorescence
maps of plasma-treated NR coatings in
20 and 150 μm tall channels. (B) HUVECs cultured on plasma-treated
surface after microchannel removal. Insets show HUVEC morphology in
hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions of channel (green = f-actin stained
via phalloidin; blue = nuclei stained via Hoechst dye). In parts A
and B, dotted red line = entrance; dashed red line = δ. (C)
Graph comparing measured δ in parts A and B. (D) Stitched fluorescence
map of a microchannel network. Red lines indicate δ measured
as a straight line path from inlet port P. δPQR =
2.24 mm and δPQS = 2.38 mm.

We defined the plasma treatment penetration distance, δ,
as the distance from the entrance to the location where the NR fluorescence
intensity returns to 50% of the original NR level. On the basis of
this definition and the curve fit between fluorescence intensity and
contact angle (Figure 1C), δ represented
a contact angle of ∼28°, considered moderately hydrophilic.
δ was then compared across different microchannel cross-sectional
dimensions (Figures 2 and 3A). First, we found that δ was influenced most by microchannel
height. For 20 μm tall channels, δ ranged from ∼1
to ∼1.4 mm, while for 150 μm tall channels, δ reached
5.5 mm. Second, we found that channel width had little impact for
20 μm tall channels but had significantly more impact for 150
μm tall channels. For 20 μm tall channels, δ consistently
reached ∼1 mm for widths ranging from 0.1 to 1.0 mm. In contrast,
for 150 μm tall channels, δ reached 3 mm into a 0.1 mm
wide channel and 5.5 mm into a 1 mm wide channel. We note that microchannels
as tall as 350 μm were tested (Figure S3 in the Supporting Information), but these results displayed
high variability, suggesting that plasma treatment became less uniform
for taller channels. Overall, the results showed importantly that
δ depended on microchannel cross-sectional dimensions. Furthermore,
the results demonstrated the utility of FAPH to enable visualization
of plasma treatment levels and led to local “spatial mapping”
of surface hydrophilicity. The acquired spatial maps indicated a hydrophilicity
gradient from the entrance inward.

Microchannel Cell Characterization
After visualizing
spatial maps of surface hydrophilicity and measuring δ in microchannels,
we investigated the impact of the observed hydrophilicity gradient
on cell culture (Figure 3B). We hypothesized
that cell adhesion and spread in the microchannels would vary depending
on a gradient of surface hydrophilicity and that this gradient would
lead to a similar gradient in cell adhesion, i.e., more adherent cells
would be near the more hydrophilic entrance region and fewer adherent
cells would be seen further into the microchannel. We used the same
microchannel design and plasma treatment parameters as for the NR
microchannel characterization above but used non-NR-adsorbed PS samples
to avoid unnecessary interaction with cells. After plasma treatment,
channels were removed and the sample was submerged in a suspension
of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) for 24 h to allow
homogeneous and geometry-independent cell seeding (Figure 3B). HUVECs were chosen because they are known to
demonstrate a noticeable difference in adhesion and spread when cultured
on hydrophobic versus hydrophilic surfaces (Figure S4 in the Supporting Information). We measured the distance
from the channel entrance to the point at which cell adhesion was
half as high as in the treated area (Figure 3B) and compared this to δ obtained by NR depletion. As hypothesized,
we observed cells adhering more to the hydrophilic regions compared
to hydrophobic regions. Adhesion correlated with penetration distance
δ and similar trends were observed for both 150 and 20 μm
tall channels, with results matching more closely for the taller channels
(R2 = 0.95) than for the shorter channels
(R2 = 0.77) (Figure 3C and Figure S5 in the Supporting Information).

FAPH in Microchannel Networks
Finally, we applied FAPH
to a multichannel network consisting of multiple 500 μm wide
horizontal microchannels extending from a main 1 mm wide vertical
microchannel (Figure 3D). Such a configuration
mimics the design for a cell culture microchannel connected to perpendicular
conduits, which may then be attached to adjacent cell culture compartments
(not shown). We were interested in visualizing the effect of oxygen
plasma treatment into an open port (P) and through this configuration.
When we analyzed δ in the vertical main channel, we found δPQR = 2.24 mm, which did not reach the entrance of the second
horizontal arm. When we subsequently analyzed δ in all the horizontal
arms, only the channel closest to the inlet port showed detectable
NR depletion, with δPQS = 2.38 mm. This total straight-line
path measured from the inlet port P to location S (Figure 3D) was ∼6% longer than the straight-line
path from P to R, indicating a consistency in the penetration distance
due to plasma treatment, independent of the tortuosity of the path.
Collectively, these results show the importance of homogeneity of
plasma treatment in microchannels, and the potential of FAPH for characterizing
plasma treatment in simple and complex channel designs

Discussion
To our knowledge, FAPH is the first fluorescence-based approach
for characterizing the internal surface hydrophilicity of microchannels.
The main advantage of FAPH is its ability to provide quantitation
of the local surface hydrophilicity in a manner that cannot be obtained
by conventional methods such as goniometry. Goniometry is effective
and efficient for large planar substrates where droplets can be placed
on a flat surface and imaged to determine contact angles. Enclosed
microchannels, however, are not accessible to contact angle measurements
via goniometry because they are not open to sessile drop formation.
Furthermore, contact angle measurements only provide a measure of
the surface hydrophilicity over areas that cover the footprint of
the droplet or larger, so spatial resolution is limited. FAPH is applicable
for simple and complex channel designs and configurations (Figure 3D) and is useful for assessing plasma treatments
in enclosed microchannels quantitatively in terms of penetration distance
δ. δ was found to correlate closely in cell culture systems
with the channel location delineating regions of high and low cell
adhesion (Figure 3B) and was found to be dependent
on channel dimensions (Figure 3C). Specifically,
δ appeared to decrease with decreasing channel width for deep
(150-μm tall) channels but was found to be so short for shallow
(20 mm tall) channels that decreasing channel width had no additional
effect on δ. It was also discovered that δ was similar
in length for different tortuous paths in a complex microchannel network
after plasma treatment through a single inlet port (Figure 3D). These geometric effects on plasma treatment
are important in cases where microdevices are treated after assembly,
which is commonly done for microdevices fabricated in PS because plasma
treatment before assembly can adversely affect bonding procedures.7 FAPH enables characterization of the quality
of local plasma treatment in the microchannel network with unparalleled
spatial resolution. The technique offers a convenient visual readout
via fluorescence that spatially “maps” the surface hydrophilicity,
which is impossible with goniometry. This visual information can then
be used to inform the user about heterogeneities in wettability and
guide optimization. Depending on the biological or fluidic requirements
of a microchannel, the designer could choose to use the appropriate
microchannel height to ensure homogeneous surface treatment in the
channel. For example, if a total channel length of 10 mm is desired,
a microchannel that is 1 mm wide and 150 μm tall will ensure
plasma penetration of at least 5 mm from one port. Adding a second
port at the other end of the microchannel will therefore ensure complete
plasma treatment into the center due to penetration from both ends.
δ was found to be independent of the quantity of access ports
and simply dependent on channel geometry (see the Supporting Information).

FAPH currently works best when
NR is precoated on the substrate
prior to device assembly because it ensures uniform NR adsorption
on the surface. The method also yields more consistent fluorescence
quantification when the device is disassembled after plasma treatment
and before image analysis. We currently achieve this by using a passively
bonded PDMS channel layer that can be removed after plasma treatment.
This was sufficient to model the effects of channel dimensions on
plasma treatment effectiveness, since it was found during preliminary
testing that the PDMS, instead of PS, did not change the resultant
measurements of δ. Future
work will investigate how to extend the FAPH method to work directly
in enclosed, fully assembled microchannels without the need for precoating
of substrates or the need for device disassembly.

In terms of
the choice to use NR, we tried other fluorophores (e.g.,
Texas Red) and found NR to offer the most sensitive detection and
yield the most repeatable results. NR sensitivity was further improved
by dissolving NR in IPA, which offered increased fluorescence intensity
while also improving surface coverage during the dye adsorption step
because of the low surface tension of IPA. NR emission wavelengths
can be adjusted by changing the solvent,29 so further optimization can be achieved for other applications if
necessary.

The underlying physics of plasma treatment continues
to be an active
area of research.31 FAPH has potential
to uncover answers to previous questions related to the mechanisms
of plasma treatment, particularly in its penetration and effectiveness
in complex geometries and configurations. In addition, there may be
potential applications where nonuniform plasma treatment is an advantage.
In such cases, FAPH will provide a quantitative method for optimizing
designs to provide the desired surface treatment, and to assist with
the visual “mapping” of surface hydrophilicity.

Conclusion
FAPH is a method for characterizing and mapping the local plasma
treatment within microchannels. Our data suggests that NR fluorescence
can be directly correlated to contact angle and by extension plasma
treatment penetration. Microchannel cross-sectional shape appears
to have a significant effect on plasma treatment penetration distance.
Channel design therefore plays a critical role in plasma treatment
quality. Using this method, channels can be characterized prior to
cell culture, thereby aiding device design and reducing the time needed
to develop and optimize a functional cell-based assay.

Supporting Information Available
Cell culture methods
and analysis,
motivation for the method based on cell adhesion, data on NR quenching,
the impacts NR on contact angle, 350 μm tall microchannels,
effects of hydrophilicity on cell adhesion, and a comparison between
NR characterization of δ and cell culture results. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac501259n_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): D.J. Beebe has ownership
in BellBrook Labs, which licenses part of the technology demonstrated
in this manuscript.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank both the Nancy Keller lab and the University
of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center for use of their microscopes. We
thank Professor Leon Shohet for his advice of the plasma phenomena.
This work was funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation through
a Grand Challenges in Global Health Initiative Grant OPP1028788, National
Institutes of Health Grants R01 EB010039 and R01 CA155192, and National
Science Foundation Project EFRI-1136903.
==== Refs
References
Zhou J. ; Ellis A. ; Voelcker N. H. 
Electrophoresis 
2010 , 31 , 2 –16 .20039289 
Vogler E. 
Adv. Colloid Interface 
1998 , 74 , 69 –117 .
Van
Midwoud P. M. ; Janse A. ; Merema M. T. ; Groothuis G. M. M. ; Verpoorte E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 3938 –3944 .22444457 
Dowling D. P. ; Miller I. S. ; Ardhaoue M. ; Gallagher W. M. 
J. Biomater Appl. 
2011 , 26 , 327 –347 .20566655 
Yang S. Y. ; Kim E. ; Jeon G. ; Choi K. Y. ; Kim J. K. 
Materials Science and Engineering 
2013 , 33 , 1689 –1695 .23827625 
Jo B. ; Van Lerberghe L. ; Motsegood K. M. ; Beebe D. J. 
J. Microelectromech S 
2000 , 9 , 76 –81 .
Young E. W. K. ; Berthier E. ; Guckenberger D. J. ; Sackmann E. ; Lamers C. ; Meyvantsson I. ; Huttenlocher A. ; Beebe D. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 1408 –1417 .21261280 
Mair D. A. ; Geiger E. ; Pisano A. P. ; Frechet J. M. ; Svec F. 
Lab Chip 
2006 , 6 , 1346 –1354 .17102848 
Jena R. ; Yue C. ; Lam Y. 
Microsystem tech. 
2012 , 2 , 159 –166 .
Berthier E. ; Young E. W. K. ; Beebe D. J. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 1224 –1237 .22318426 
Sackmann E. K. ; Fulton A. L. ; Beebe D. J. 
Nature 
2014 , 507 , 181 –189 .24622198 
Lee C. ; Kim H. W. ; Kim S. 
Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2007 , 253 , 3658 –3663 .
Grace J. M. ; Gerenser L. J. 
J. Disper Sci. Tech 
2003 , 24 , 305 –341 .
Guruvenket S. ; Rao G. M. ; Komath M. ; Raichur A. K. 
Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2004 , 236 , 278 –284 .
Barker S. L. ; LaRocca P. J. 
Journal of Tissue Culture
Methods 
1994 , 16 , 151 –153 .
Tang L. ; Lee N. 
Lab
Chip 
2010 , 10 , 1274 –1280 .20445880 
Duffy D. C. ; McDonal J. C. ; Schueller O. J. A. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
1998 , 70 23 4974 –4984 .21644679 
Eddington D. T. ; Puccinelli J. P. ; Beebe D. J. 
Sensor Actuat B-Chem. 
2006 , 114 , 170 –172 .
Chin C. D. ; Linder V. ; Sia S. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 2118 –2134 .22344520 
Becker H. ; Gaertner C. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2008 , 390 , 89 –111 .17989961 
Wang Y. ; Balowski J. ; Phillips C. ; Phillips R. ; Sims C. E. ; Allbritton N. L. 
Lab Chip 
2011 , 11 , 3089 –3097 .21811715 
Su X. ; Young E. W. K. ; Underkofler H. A. S. ; Kamp T. J. ; January C. T. ; Beebe D. J. 
J. Biomol Screen 
2011 , 16 , 101 –111 .21131594 
Guckenberger D. J. ; Berthier E. ; Young E. W. K. ; Beebe D. J. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 2317 –21 .22592853 
Young E. W. K. ; Berthier E. ; Beebe D. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 44 –49 .23249264 
Berthier E. ; Guckenberger D. J. ; Cavnar P. ; Huttenlocher A. ; Keller N. P. ; Beebe D. J. 
Lab Chip 
2013 , 13 , 424 –431 .23229806 
Tan S. H. ; Nguyen N. T. ; Chua Y. C. ; Kang T. E. 
Biomicrofluidics 
2010 , 4 , 032204 –1 -
032204–8 .
Riaz A. ; Gandhiraman R. ; Dimov I. 
Lab
Chip 
2012 , 12 , 4877 –4883 .23032697 
Kwox D. Y. ; Neumann A. W. 
Adv. Colloid Interfac 
1999 , 81 , 167 –249 .
Dutta A. ; Kamada K. ; Ohta K. 
J. Photoch Photobio
A 
1996 , 93 , 57 –64 .
Bohnert J. ; Karamian B. ; Nikaido H. 
Antimicrob Agents
Ch 
2010 , 54 , 3770 –3775 .
Eden J. G. ; Park S. J. ; Cho J. H. ; Kim M. H. ; Li B. ; Kim E. S. ; Kim T. L. ; Lee S. K. ; Kim K. S. ; Yoon J. K. ; Sung S. H. ; Sun P. 
IEEE
Trans. Plasma Sci. 
2013 , 41 , 661 –675 .
