
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac402904hArticleAutopilot: An Online Data Acquisition Control System
for the Enhanced High-Throughput Characterization of Intact Proteins Durbin Kenneth
R. Fellers Ryan T. Ntai Ioanna Kelleher Neil L. *Compton Philip D. *Departments of Chemistry
and Molecular Biosciences Northwestern University, 2145 North Sheridan Road, Evanston, Illinois 60208, United States* E-mail: n-kelleher@northwestern.edu.* E-mail: philip-compton@northwestern.edu.08 01 2015 08 01 2014 04 02 2014 86 3 1485 1492 11 09 2013 08 01 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical Society

The ability to study organisms by
direct analysis of their proteomes
without digestion via mass spectrometry has benefited greatly from
recent advances in separation techniques, instrumentation, and bioinformatics.
However, improvements to data acquisition logic have lagged in comparison.
Past workflows for Top Down Proteomics (TDPs) have focused on high
throughput at the expense of maximal protein coverage and characterization.
This mode of data acquisition has led to enormous overlap in the identification
of highly abundant proteins in subsequent LC-MS injections. Furthermore,
a wealth of data is left underutilized by analyzing each newly targeted
species as unique, rather than as part of a collection of fragmentation
events on a distinct proteoform. Here, we present a major advance
in software for acquisition of TDP data that incorporates a fully
automated workflow able to detect intact masses, guide fragmentation
to achieve maximal identification and characterization of intact protein
species, and perform database search online to yield real-time protein
identifications. On Pseudomonas aeruginosa, the software
combines fragmentation events of the same precursor with previously
obtained fragments to achieve improved characterization of the target
form by an average of 42 orders of magnitude in confidence. When HCD
fragmentation optimization was applied to intact proteins ions, there
was an 18.5 order of magnitude gain in confidence. These improved
metrics set the stage for increased proteome coverage and characterization
of higher order organisms in the future for sharply improved control
over MS instruments in a project- and lab-wide context.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac402904hdocument-id-new-14ac-2013-02904hccc-price
==== Body
The high
throughput analysis
of intact proteins by mass spectrometry has become increasingly relevant
due to the recent and rapid acceleration in the development of enabling
technologies. Front-end separations1 have
undergone a transformation as methods for solution-based intact protein
separation have provided a viable alternative to the bottom up approach
of in-gel digestion.2 These new separation
techniques are amenable to lower initial sample amounts and can be
coupled to nano-LC prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Additionally,
order of magnitude increases in sensitivity and speed enable modern
instruments to more adequately handle the rigors of complex mixtures
replete with high mass intact proteins.3 These improvements in separations and instrumentation have transformed
top down mass spectrometric analyses from single protein direct infusion
experiments to high-throughput proteome-wide analyses up to 100 kDa.4 Recent analyses have shown confident identification
of thousands of proteoforms and nearly 2000 unique accession numbers.4,5

The focused efforts in separations and instrumentation, along
with
new and existing bioinformatics tools (e.g., ProSight PC 3.06), have largely bypassed the realm of high-throughput
mass spectrometric data acquisition. However, intelligent acquisition
of mass spectrometric data holds great promise for increased experimental
efficiency. Real-time adjustments to fragmentation parameters driven
by decision logic have been successfully incorporated into bottom
up proteomics workflows.7,8 The incorporation of
“intelligence” yielded sizable increases in the number
of peptides identified in subsequent experiments. For intact protein
analysis, intelligent acquisition strategies have been used to increase
the number and quality of protein identifications resulting from an
LC-MS analysis but relied on additional offline analysis.9 Extending these efforts to an online data acquisition
and analysis platform for TDP offers an exciting way to increase the
value of these proteomics data sets.

Further development of
data driven acquisition will not only increase
the efficiency of data collection but also result in more effective
use of the data that is generated during an analysis. High-throughput
proteomics can generate immense quantities of data; however, each
new fragmentation event is typically treated as a single, isolated
event instead of part of a data set for a unique mass species. This
leads to redundancy in data collection, which hinders deep exploration
of the proteome. Additionally,
project wide dynamic exclusion instead of an LC-MS run based dynamic
exclusion would prevent much unneeded analysis of proteins that are
already well characterized. Because of the mismatch of dynamic range
between protein expression and mass spectrometers,10 the very most abundant proteins (e.g., histone and heat
shock proteins) can be fragmented thousands of times over the course
of a proteomic investigation.2 Unfortunately,
these proteins are frequently fully characterized upon the first fragmentation
so additional fragmentation of the protein produces no additional
information.

Here, we demonstrate an upgraded TDP workflow driven
by intelligent
data collection through a software termed Autopilot. Online mass detection,
supplemented with prior knowledge of past fragmentation events, guides
precursor selection and fragmentation. Proteins not sufficiently characterized
are subjected to repeat fragmentation with optimized parameters based
on a fragmentation logic scheme. Spectral data are searched immediately
and the information is added to a proteomic repository for reference
in current and future runs. Each distinct mass builds a fragmentation
history with new fragmentation data joined with previous data to produce
the best possible sequence coverage of proteins. Through accretion
of data from different fragmentation types, energies, and charge states,
more complete protein characterization can be achieved. Furthermore,
proteins which have exceeded a threshold of characterization are excluded
from all forthcoming analysis to permit characterization of the maximal
number of proteins in the given proteome analysis.

Methods
Cell Culture
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 (ATCC 15692) was plated
on Mueller Hinton II agar plates and
incubated at 37 °C. A single colony was inoculated in 50 mL of
Mueller Hinton broth (MHB) and incubated overnight at 37 °C.
This starter culture was used to inoculate a larger culture at an
inoculum to culture ratio of 1:500. Cells were harvested at midlogarithmic
growth phase (OD600 ≈ 0.4) by centrifugation at
5000 × g.

Sample Preparation
PAO1 cells were lysed in 4% SDS
and 25 mM Tris, pH 7.4 with Halt protease inhibitors (Thermo Pierce,
Rockford, IL) and 1 mM DTT. The cell lysate was acetone precipitated
with three volumes of cold acetone and centrifuged at max speed for
10 min. The precipitated pellets were dried and 400–500 μg
of protein was fractionated on a GELFREE 8100 Fractionation system
(Expedeon, San Diego, CA) with either 10% or 12% cartridges. The collected
fractions were precipitated with MeOH/CH3Cl/H2O as previously described to remove SDS.11 Prior to MS analysis, the samples were resuspended in 30 μL
of buffer A (95% H2O, 5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid).

LC-MS/MS
Briefly, each GELFrEE fraction was injected
onto a 2 cm, 150 μm i.d. PLRP-S trap column and a longer 10
cm, 75 μm i.d. column was used for the online separation as
described previously.12 Both the trap and
analytical columns were packed in-house with 5 μm diameter,
1000 Å pore size PLRP-S. An Ultimate 3000 RPLCnano (Thermo Scientific
Dionex) with 300 nL/min flow rate setup was used for online chromatography.
An LTQ Velos Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) was the mass spectrometer
used for all data acquisition. The resolution settings were 60 000
and 30 000 for precursor and fragmentation scans, respectively,
at 400 m/z. An isolation window
of 15 m/z was used for mass selection. For the Xcalibur data acquisition,
the method implemented precursor and fragmentation scans with four
μscans and dynamic exclusion with a repeat count of 1, a repeat
duration of 240 s, and an exclusion duration of 5000 s. The maximum
inject time for both precursor and fragmentation scans was 1000 and
400 ms for SIM scans. Autopilot utilized 4 μscans for precursor
scans and SIM scans, 6 μscans for HCD fragmentation, and 12
μscans for ETD fragmentation. For Autopilot operation, the Thermo
LTQ component object model (COM) is used in conjunction with an advanced
user’s license for the Orbitrap Elite. Several ion trap control
language (ITCL) changes were applied to enable ETD and HCD fragmentation
by Autopilot. The source code for the Autopilot logic interface is
included in the Supporting Information. Instructions
on the implementation of the fragmentation logic, an analysis to infer
mass, online search are included.

Raw mass spectrometry data
has been deposited in the IU Scholar Works Repository. The data is
available at http://hdl.handle.net/2022/17234.

Online Data
Analysis
Autopilot applies Xtract with
a 3 signal/noise cutoff to full precursor scans, SIM scans, and fragmentation
scans. For fragmentation data, the system performs online absolute
mass searches against the PAO1 database with the precursor mass from
Xtract. The search window is a 2000 Da tolerance around the precursor
mass while the fragment tolerance is 10 ppm. The search is accomplished
with the ProSight search engine and requires a minimum number of 4
matched fragments, with only the top hit (the most confident P-Score)
returned from the search.

Offline Data Processing
The LC-MS/MS
data files acquired
by Xcalibur files were processed with an in-house software, cRAWler.
The cRAWler produces ProSight upload format (.puf) files, which contain
Xtract detected precursor masses linked with fragment ions from the
corresponding data-dependent scan. The completed .puf files are then
searched by ProSight PC 3.0 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) against
the PAO1 database. A multitier search was implemented in ProSight
PC with an initial small window absolute mass precursor search of
2.2 Da, followed by a large window absolute mass search of 100 000
Da if no hits were found in the first search. For data-dependent Xcalibur
fragmentation scans with no associated precursor masses, a 100 000
Da window centered on 55 555.55 Da is searched.

Results
and Discussion
Characterization
Increased protein
characterization
in an automated fashion was the primary goal of this work. However,
TDPs currently lacks a “characterization” score. Therefore,
the P-score, which is a measure of the confidence of protein identification,
was used as an indirect measure of characterization. As described
previously, this score generally improves with an increasing number
of matched fragment ions, which indicates better characterization.
The score also decreases with an increasing number of unmatched fragment
ions, breaking the direct link between characterization and this score.
While it is recognized that this does not directly equate to characterization,
the development of a characterization score is beyond the scope of
this work.

Workflow
For mass spectrometric
workflows to operate
at optimal efficiency, the acquisition platform must utilize real-time
and stored information during an analysis to enable the instrument
to react to current acquisition needs in a productive manner. To properly
guide acquisition, an accurate survey of the current protein elution
landscape is of primary importance (Figure 1, top left). From a full MS spectrum, the data points can be directly
piped from the instrument into an isotope determination routine, Xtract,
which outputs a list of the average and monoisotopic masses present
in the spectrum (Figure 1, top right and Figure
S1A of the Supporting Information).13 Along with mass information, Xtract includes
the charge state distribution of the species, which enables charge
states of a particular species to be grouped as a single “target”.
The strategy of isotope analysis for mass detection is suitable for
the mass range of proteins the Orbitrap Elite is able to isotopically
resolve on an LC-MS time scale. For proteins no longer isotopically
resolved (i.e., >30–35 kDa), a short transient FT scan or
low
resolution ion-trap scan can be combined with charge state deconvolution
for intact mass determination.14 However,
this study focuses on lower molecular weight proteins that can be
isotopically resolved by the Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

Figure 1 Data acquisition
workflow on an example protein. A full precursor
scan is taken, followed by HCD fragmentation of the 9+ charge state
on the detected mass 7246.26 Da. After an online search, the software
determines more analysis should be performed as the P-Score (1.8 ×
10–47) is not below the cutoff. An ETD scan of the
highest charge state is taken and searched. The fragment ions are
combined and the final P-Score of 5.0 × 10–102 is below the cutoff. All charge states of the 7246.26 Da species
are permanently excluded from further fragmentation and the system
goes in search of the next target mass.

The protein species detected by Xtract represent the potential
targets for focused fragmentation events. The mass list is parsed
to group similar masses and account for simple hardware and software
artifacts such as oxidation and off-by-one errors that result from
incorrect isotope matches. The mass list is further culled to remove
previously fragmented species identified at a high confidence level.
Here, a very high degree of confidence cutoff (P-score <1 ×
10–50) was selected to showcase the characterization
abilities of the software. The remaining targets, sorted by decreasing
abundance, are placed in a queue. This first-in, first-out queue supplies
a new fragmentation scan definition to the instrument as soon as the
data from the previous scan is returned.

Upon the initial fragmentation
of a species, the lowest charge
state is selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision
energy (NCE) of 25 (Figure 1, bottom right).
The lowest charge is fragmented first as it typically will yield the
largest number of unique fragments.15 The
underlying instrument control language translates the NCE into a HCD
energy in eV to be applied based on a combination of the NCE value
and the m/z of the fragmentation
target. We apply Xtract to the fragmentation spectrum for fragment
ion detection. After Xtract analysis is complete, a wide-window (2000
Da) absolute mass search of the fragment set is immediately started.
The search is against the 5763 gene, 23 176 form pseudomonas
PAO1 database with a 10 ppm fragment tolerance. The top hit is added
to the fragmentation history of the mass species.

When a precursor
mass of a previously fragmented species is redetected
by Xtract, whether in the same run or a subsequent injection, the
history of the species is queried from the proteomic data set. The
best previous fragmentation event for the species is compared to an
identification confidence cutoff. If the confidence of the identification
exceeds the cutoff, the target is placed on an exclusion list. If
it is below the set score cutoff, a fragmentation decision tree (Figure
S1B of the Supporting Information) charts the
course of action to optimize the energy, charge state, and fragmentation
technique chosen for the reanalysis of the protein. The resultant
spectrum from refragmentation is then processed in a similar fashion
to the first fragmentation and the database record for the target
is updated accordingly.

If no new targets are found in the precursor
scan, the platform
queues a scan event for the acquisition of a 15 m/z SIM scan. The region selected for the SIM scan
is from a part of the spectrum not occupied by an Xtract detected
mass. The SIM scan is for discovery purposes, as SIM scans can provide
the increased ion statistics required for Xtract to discover new targets.
With the noise reduction of the LTQ software, there are frequently
areas of the spectrum with no signal and a dedicated SIM scan of these
areas can often reveal protein species in this space. In Figure S2
of the Supporting Information, a SIM scan of
the highlighted region was taken. While that region had very little
signal in the full precursor scan, Xtract detection on the SIM scan
produced nine precursor masses, including two methylations. This discovery
mode effectively increases the dynamic range of the experiment by
preventing the monopolization of the ion current in a given scan by
highly abundant protein species.

Acquisition Mode Comparison
Study
A comparison of the
data acquisition control system described above, named Autopilot,
to the standard acquisition software of Thermo mass spectrometers,
Xcalibur, was conducted on the low mass GELFrEE fractions from a 10%
T GELFrEE fractionation of PAO1. Each fraction was analyzed in technical
triplicate with both systems. At a 1% FDR cutoff, Autopilot enabled
the confident identification of 234 unique accession numbers while
the standard data dependent software identified 230 unique accession
numbers, with 180 accession numbers shared between the two data sets
(Figure 2A and Table S1 of the Supporting Information).

Figure 2 Comparison between Autopilot and the standard
data acquisition
software for Thermo mass spectrometers, Xcalibur. (A) All Autopilot
identifications were generated online during data acquisition with
a 2000 Da absolute mass search mode. Meanwhile, the Xcalibur identifications
were generated with offline searches with a search tree capable of
up to 100 000 Da absolute mass searches. At a 1% FDR cutoff,
Autopilot was able to identify 234 unique accession numbers compared
to 230 by Xcalibur. (B) The total analysis time for the online data
acquisition and offline data analysis with the Xcalibur acquisition
mode was 48 h, with 18 h of instrument time. The time for each run
is the LC-MS acquisition time of 90 min plus 30 min for spectral summing
and ion detection and another 1–2 h for database searches and
reports. Because Autopilot processes the data concurrently with acquisition,
the time from first injection to end of analysis is 18 h, which is
a 270% increase in overall experimental throughput. (C) The decoy
and forward gamma distributions from the calculated instantaneous
FDRs for every identification event from both data acquisition methods
are shown.

Importantly, the identifications
from Autopilot were found with
searches performed during data acquisition by an absolute mass search
with a 2000 Da precursor tolerance. This search strategy was chosen
to sufficiently limit the search space to enable searches to be performed
on the same desktop computer that controls acquisition and finish
within the cycle time of the instrument.

The identification
mode for Xcalibur utilized an in-house software
for precursor and fragment detection followed by a ProSight PC 3.0
search. The ProSight search incorporated a search tree with a first-pass
2.2 Da precursor tolerance absolute mass search and a larger window
absolute mass search with a 100 000 Da precursor tolerance
if needed. Additionally, for fragmentation scans without an associated
precursor, the large window 100 000 Da precursor search was
performed.

Figure 2A and B demonstrate
the advantages
of an online search. Even with the much larger search space used in
the offline searches, Autopilot produced more protein identifications
with the simple online search. Further, Figure 2B compares the total amount of processing time required to obtain
a meaningful list of identifications. With Autopilot searches performed
simultaneously with acquisition instead of the typical online acquisition,
offline analysis approach, the number of identifications/time increases
from 4.8 identifications/hour with the conventional workflow to 13
identifications/hour with Autopilot, a 270% increase in throughput.

To validate our search results, the instantaneous FDR, a Bayesian
posterior p value to measure the FDR for each identification
event, was calculated for each Poisson-based P-Score.4 The instantaneous FDR plots in Figure 2C indicate our directed fragmentation strategy significantly
improves the characterization of the identified proteins as the calculated
FDRs for each data set are substantially different. The 1% FDR cutoff
for Autopilot was 1.1 × 10–5 while the cutoff
for Xcalibur was 2.6 × 10–10. This difference
can be attributed to the shift of the decoy distribution toward higher
P-Scores with a subsequent shift of the forward distribution toward
lower, more confident P-Scores. In other words, there are more matched
fragments with a corresponding lower number of unmatched fragments,
which reinforces the use of P-score as a reasonable substitute in
the absence of a true characterization score.

Fragmentation and Reanalysis
of Protein Forms
The increase
in characterization seen in the comparison experiment is a result
of directed reanalysis of protein targets. Because not every protein
behaves in a predictable manner, each fragmented species must be examined
to determine if additional fragmentation is needed. After the online
protein identification discussed above, the top P-Score proteoform
from the search is considered the correct hit for the mass. If the
top hit is above the confidence cutoff, the mass is excluded from
all future analysis; meaning, when detected again, no fragmentation
event will be triggered on any charge state of the species. Alternatively,
if the fragmentation led to mediocre results that missed the cutoff
for a characterized identification, another fragmentation event can
be queued. The subsequent fragmentation of a mass target follows a
decision tree composed of ETD fragmentation with a variety of different
reaction times and HCD fragmentation with energy optimization (Figure
S1 of the Supporting Information).

The
fast speed of HCD coupled with generally robust fragmentation coverage
makes HCD an ideal starting point for characterization. The first
fragmentation event of any detected mass is an HCD scan on the lowest
charge state with an NCE of 25. If more fragmentation is required,
a different fragmentation technique is used for the first reanalysis.
As ETD and HCD have been shown to be complementary fragmentation techniques,16 the combination of the two can increase overall
sequence coverage. An ETD scan of the highest charge state is therefore
applied for the reanalysis. The scan has twice as many μscans
as the HCD scans to maximize ion statistics of the many, low abundant
fragment ions produced from ETD. The highest charge state is selected
because the ETD reaction becomes faster and more efficient as the
charge increases on the protein. McLuckey and co-workers have demonstrated
that the rate of an ion–ion reaction is dominated by Coulombic
interaction.17 Therefore, the reaction
time is calculated by a simple expression: tprecursor = zprecursor2 × (topt/zopt2), where opt indicates a measured optimal
reaction time for a species with a known charge state. In this case,
60 ms for a +3 ion was utilized. If the first ETD attempt does not
yield the desired coverage, the software will try various reaction
times in an effort to better maximize the ETD reaction and fragmentation.
When the ETD optimization is complete, the program will shift efforts
to HCD fragment energy optimization if the confidence cutoff has still
not been reached.

HCD Optimization
A past attempt
was made to generalize
the HCD fragmentation energy selection for proteins with a method
to estimate optimal energy as a function of the protein’s mass
and m/z.18 The equation to govern the choice of energy outlined in that article
was developed on a small data set from standard proteins. We applied
this equation, along with several other energies (NCE of 20, 25, and
30), across the set of detected proteins from the PAO1 proteome during
high-throughput Top Down proteome analysis. We then visualized the
P-Scores obtained from the varied HCD energies across the data set
with a random set of proteins from the run (Figure S3 of the Supporting Information). The general shape of the
energy distributions in relation to the corresponding P-Scores is
a defined maximum with steep falloffs on each side.

We adapted
this new knowledge into our HCD optimization. To accomplish our optimization,
different fragmentation energies are surveyed until a local maximum
is found. A quadratic is then fit to the maximum and the closest points
on each side. The software will continue to fit the points until the
best fit is found. In Figure 3A, the software
takes HCD scans of 25, 30, and 34 NCE. The scan of 30 NCE produces
a P-Score better than the 25 NCE scan. A higher energy scan (34 NCE)
is taken in an effort to produce even better coverage. When the 34
NCE scan returns a P-Score worse than the 30 NCE scan, the quadratic
is fit to the three points. This fit is repeated two more times until
the optimal value is discovered (orange dot, Figure 3A).

Figure 3 (A) Example of the HCD optimization process is shown for the 10+
charge state at 1032 m/z of the
50S ribosomal protein L7 (RL7_PSEAE). Each colored line is a different
quadratic fit to find the energy that will produce the best P-Score.
The maximum for each fit is the energy applied in the new fragmentation
scan. After three quadratic optimizations, the best energy for this
protein was determined. Table S2 of Supporting Information lists the energy, matched fragments, and P-Score for each fragmentation
event. (B) The gamma distributions for the decoy and forward search
spaces. The distribution for those species that were optimized more
than three times undergoes a sizable shift to the right, which results
in a greater percentage of the masses moving past the 1% cutoff. (C)
The number of matched fragments from the most optimized scan are compared
to those from the first pass, an HCD fragmentation scan with 25 NCE.
(D) A similar graph to (C) but with −Log10(P-Score)
shown instead.

Figure 3B–D showcases the result
of this optimization throughout the entire data set. From 1342 unique
mass species, 408 were targeted for refragmentation at least once
and 204 were retargeted more than three times. Figure 3B illustrates the shift in the forward P-Score gamma distributions
upon optimization. After full HCD optimization, the forward distribution
has shifted very significantly to the right of the previous distributions.
If applied to a completely optimized, full proteomic investigation,
many species would be shifted from the unacceptable FDR range to a
confident value. Additionally, the −log10 of the
P-Scores were continually increased on average as the proteins were
reanalyzed with different HCD energies (Figure 3D). The mean change to the −log10 value of the
P-Score was 4.0, 6.0, and 18.5 after one, two, and three or more reanalyses,
respectively. As evidenced by panel C, there is an almost universal
improvement in the characterization of proteins with repeated, directed
fragmentation. Furthermore, panel D indicates that, generally, the
increase in number of matched fragment ions does not come at the expense
of more unmatched fragment ions.

While the end result of Figure 3A is a modestly
improved P-Score, the difference between a protein falling outside
of the FDR cutoff can often be only a couple of fragment ions. A fragmentation
optimization of proteins on the boundary of the confidence cutoff
can easily lead to gains that can bring the protein identification
into acceptable confidence levels.

Fragmentation History
By analyzing data and intelligently
directing acquisition online, metadata generated at runtime may be
used to improve the quality of information extracted from a data set.
If fragmentation scans were previously performed (during any analysis
in a project) on the mass of interest, the former fragment spectra
corresponding to that mass can be combined with the new fragmentation
spectrum through spectral averaging of the centroid data. The summation
of scans increases signal-to-noise of real ions and can lead to detection
of new fragment ions. From there, the averaged scan is Xtracted and
searched. An improved version of the ProSight search engine, capable
of database retrieval on the different sets of ions generated by the
different fragmentation techniques in the same search, completes the
search. The combination of CID or HCD with ETD ions from the same
protein form bolsters identification confidence and improves overall
protein characterization. The confidence score for the combined ion
types is unchanged if we make a simplification to the score assignment.
The score used is similar to the Poisson distribution calculation
outlined in Meng et al.:19Pf,n = ((xf)n × e–xf/n!) where x = (1/111.1)
× 2 × (Ma × 2), f is the number of detected fragments, and n is the number of random fragment ion matches. The first factor of
2 in x is the number of different ion types in the
search type. With separate ETD and HCD searches, the final results
can be pooled together and scored with this P-Score calculation if
Y ions generated during ETD are ignored. That is, the ETD search will
have two ion types, C and Z, and the HCD search will have two ion
types, B and Y. Typically, only a small number of Y ions are produced
by ETD so any detrimental effects of extra unmatched fragment ions
will be minor to the overall score.

On one PAO1 GELFrEE run,
significant improvements were produced in the coverage of the masses
that were targeted again (Figure 4). The median
improvement for the overall combined history in comparison to the
individual target was 13 orders of magnitude. The mean improvement
was even larger, with a gain of >42 orders of magnitude in confidence.
In terms of matched fragments, the median coverage had 29.0 more matched
fragments while the mean had 41.1 more matched fragments. A few species
had lower P-Scores or less matched fragments because of a poorly fragmented
protein spectrum being averaged with the best previous individual
fragmentation spectrum. However, this combined result would be ignored
in favor of the best individual spectrum upon selection for further
fragmentation, but is included for illustration purposes here. Also,
an increase in number of matched fragments is not always accompanied
by a commensurate increase in P-Score. This can be attributed to a
higher number of unmatched fragments detected in the averaged scan,
thereby lowering the P-Score.

Figure 4 Comparison of targeted masses with greater than
one fragmentation
event. (A) The utilization of a fragmentation history results in greater
sequence coverage (i.e., more matching fragments) and a more confident
P-Score than the top hit from the best fragmentation event. (B) The
fragmentation maps of the 50 S ribosomal protein L29 depicts the fragmentation
history of the 7195.89 Da species. The top map shows the results from
the initial HCD fragmentation. The map in the middle is the HCD fragmentation
together with the fragments from the first ETD pass. The bottom map
is the culmination of all the fragmentation data from the species,
with the total combination yielding a confidence score of 2.2 ×
10–118.

Conclusion
This work demonstrates that the implementation
of several important
data acquisition features can produce large enhancements in the characterization
of proteins observed during TDPs investigation. When past data from
the same species is coupled with current fragmentation data, a vast
improvement to the overall fragmentation coverage of many proteins
in our samples was achieved. Further, performing data analysis in
parallel with data acquisition enabled increased characterization
of proteins in significantly less overall time.

While this work
focused on increased characterization of proteins,
the benefits of this software in terms of increased unique protein
accession numbers will be more visible and directly tractable on newer
mass spectrometers that feature tremendous improvements in speed paired
with quadrupolar selection of mass species. The speed is desirable
for different MS1 modes, such as SIM scans. As shown in
Figure S2 of the Supporting Information, the
SIM scan discovery mode can uncover many species previously undetectable
because of dynamic range issues. With the quadrupole on these instruments,
such as the Thermo Q Exactive, precise selection of these new SIM
mass targets should enable large increases in the number of identified
proteins. The tight isolation windows will prevent the current problem
on hybrid instruments of nearby, abundant proteins being isolated
and fragmented with the target species of interest. The abundant fragment
ions drown the signal of the target species, making identification
of the lower abundance species difficult. With quadrupole isolation,
this limitation is all but eliminated.

In addition to cross-platform
capabilities, the data acquisition
structure of Autopilot is extensible by nature and can eventually
be operated in more complex ways. For instance, after initial determination
of the protein form with a first pass fragmentation mode, the system
could precisely fragment the protein based on primary sequence composition.
Also, our flexible database allows for offline searches to be imported
into the database which will enable time and computationally intensive
searches, such as biomarker searches, to be done offline on a cluster
or supercomputer. The results of those searches can then inform future
data acquisition decisions in real-time. Lastly, the database is compatible
with our previously collected data, which will allow past data sets
to be seamlessly incorporated into future proteomic studies.

As TDPs continues to advance, a necessary part of its evolution
is more efficient and intelligent data acquisition. The characterization
improvements presented here, coupled with advanced instrumentation,
will serve as the foundation for a more complete elucidation of the
complex proteoforms that comprise higher organisms.

Supporting Information Available
Additional materials as described
in the text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac402904h_si_001.xlsx

 ac402904h_si_002.pdf

 ac402904h_si_003.zip

 Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation, the National Center for Genome Analysis
Support, or Indiana University.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institute of
General
Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under award
number R01 GM067193 (N.L.K.). We would also like to acknowledge Bryan
Early, Paul Thomas, and Yihan Li, as well as the rest of the members
of the Kelleher Research Group, for their help with this work. This
research is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under grant No. ABI-1062432 to Indiana University.
==== Refs
References
Tran J. C. ; Doucette A. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 6201 –6209 .19572727 
Lee J. E. ; Kellie J. F. ; Tran J. C. ; Tipton J. D. ; Catherman A. D. ; Thomas H. M. ; Ahlf D. R. ; Durbin K. R. ; Vellaichamy A. ; Ntai I. ; Marshall A. G. ; Kelleher N. L. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2009 , 20 , 2183 –2191 .19747844 
Ahlf D. R. ; Compton P. D. ; Tran J. C. ; Early B. P. ; Thomas P. M. ; Kelleher N. L. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2012 , 11 , 4308 –4314 .22746247 
Tran J. C. ; Zamdborg L. ; Ahlf D. R. ; Lee J. E. ; Catherman A. D. ; Durbin K. R. ; Tipton J. D. ; Vellaichamy A. ; Kellie J. F. ; Li M. ; Wu C. ; Sweet S. M. M. ; Early B. P. ; Siuti N. ; LeDuc R. D. ; Compton P. D. ; Thomas P. M. ; Kelleher N. L. 
Nature 
2011 , 480 , 254 –U141 .22037311 
Catherman A. D. ; Durbin K. R. ; Ahlf D. R. ; Early B. P. ; Fellers R. T. ; Tran J. C. ; Thomas P. M. ; Kelleher N. L. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2013 , 12 , 3465 –3473 .24023390 
Zamdborg L. ; LeDuc R. D. ; Glowacz K. J. ; Kim Y. B. ; Viswanathan V. ; Spaulding I. T. ; Early B. P. ; Bluhm E. J. ; Babai S. ; Kelleher N. L. 
Nucleic Acids
Res. 
2007 , 35 , W701 –W706 .17586823 
Bailey D. J. ; Rose C. M. ; McAlister G. C. ; Brumbaugh J. ; Yu P. Z. ; Wenger C. D. ; Westphall M. S. ; Thomson J. A. ; Coon J. J. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2012 , 109 , 8411 –8416 .22586074 
Graumann J. ; Scheltema R. A. ; Zhang Y. ; Cox J. ; Mann M. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2012 , 11 , M111.013185.22171319 
Wenger C. D. ; Boyne M. T. II; Ferguson J. T. ; Robinson D. E. ; Kelleher N. L. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 8055 –8063 .18841935 
Zubarev R. A. 
Proteomics 
2013 , 13 , 723 –726 .23307342 
Wessel D. ; Flugge U. I. 
Anal. Biochem. 
1984 , 138 , 141 –143 .6731838 
Catherman A. D. ; Li M. X. ; Tran J. C. ; Durbin K. R. ; Compton P. D. ; Early B. P. ; Thomas P. M. ; Kelleher N. L. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 1880 –1888 .23305238 
Zabrouskov V. ; Senko M. W. ; Du Y. ; Leduc R. D. ; Kelleher N. L. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2005 , 16 , 2027 –2038 .16253516 
Durbin K.
R. ; Tran J. C. ; Zamdborg L. ; Sweet S. M. M. ; Catherman A. D. ; Lee J. E. ; Li M. X. ; Kellie J. F. ; Kelleher N. L. 
Proteomics 
2010 , 10 , 3589 –3597 .20848673 
Fabris D. ; Kelly M. ; Murphy C. ; Wu Z. C. ; Fenselau C. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
1993 , 4 , 652 –661 .24227669 
Skinner O. S. ; Catherman A. D. ; Early B. P. ; Thomas P. M. ; Compton P. D. ; Kelleher N. L.   Unpublished work, 2013 .
McLuckey S. A. ; Stephenson J. L. ; Asano K. G. 
Anal. Chem. 
1998 , 70 , 1198 –1202 .9530009 
Patrie S.
M. ; Ferguson J. T. ; Robinson D. E. ; Whipple D. ; Rother M. ; Metcalf W. W. ; Kelleher N. L. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2006 , 5 , 14 –25 .16236702 
Meng F. Y. ; Cargile B. J. ; Miller L. M. ; Forbes A. J. ; Johnson J. R. ; Kelleher N. L. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2001 , 19 , 952 –957 .11581661
