
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac501194jArticleFluorescence-Enabled Electrochemical Microscopy with
Dihydroresorufin as a Fluorogenic Indicator Oja Stephen
M. Guerrette Joshua P. †David Michelle R. ‡Zhang Bo *Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-1700, United States* B. Zhang. E-mail: zhang@chem.washington.edu. Tel: 206-543-1767. Fax: 206-685-8665.18 05 2015 18 05 2014 17 06 2014 86 12 6040 6048 02 04 2014 17 05 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyOpen Access on 05/18/2015

Recently, we introduced a new electrochemical
imaging technique
called fluorescence-enabled electrochemical microscopy (FFEM). The
central idea of FEEM is that a closed bipolar electrode is utilized
to electrically couple a redox reaction of interest to a complementary
fluorogenic reaction converting an electrochemical signal into a fluorescent
signal. This simple strategy enables one to use fluorescence microscopy
to observe conventional electrochemical processes on very large electrochemical
arrays. The initial demonstration of FEEM focused on the use of a
specific fluorogenic indicator, resazurin, which is reduced to generate
highly fluorescent resorufin. The use of resazurin has enabled the
study of analyte oxidation reactions, such as the oxidation of dopamine
and H2O2. In this report, we extend the capability
of FEEM to the study of cathodic reactions using a new fluorogenic
indicator, dihydroresorufin. Dihydroresorufin is a nonfluorescent
molecule, which can be electrochemically oxidized to generate resorufin.
The use of dihydroresorufin has enabled us to study a series of reducible
analyte species including Fe(CN)63– and
Ru(NH3)63+. Here we demonstrate the
correlation between the simultaneously recorded fluorescence intensity
of resorufin and electrochemical oxidation current during potential
sweep experiments. FEEM is used to quantitatively detect the reduction
of ferricyanide down to a concentration of approximately 100 μM
on a 25 μm ultramicroelectrode. We also demonstrate that dihydroresorufin,
as a fluorogenic indicator, gives an improved temporal response and
significantly decreases diffusional broadening of the signal in FEEM
as compared to resazurin.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac501194jdocument-id-new-14ac-2014-01194jccc-price
==== Body
Electrochemical
fluorogenic
and fluoroquenching reactions have been of great interest for several
applications. Fluorescent-voltammetry single-molecule spectroscopy
(F-V/SMS) and, later, single-molecule spectroelectrochemistry (SMS-EC)
were developed by Bard, Barbara and co-workers. These techniques were
used to monitor single, reversible electron-transfer events within
nanoparticles of organic polymer dyes.1−3 Chen and co-workers also
demonstrated the use of fluorogenic redox reactions to study site-specific
electrocatalytic activity of single-walled carbon nanotubes.4 A key in achieving single-molecule level sensitivity
in these experiments is the use of fluorescence to significantly amplify
the electrochemical signal.

Recently, we introduced the technique
of fluorescence-enabled electrochemical
microscopy (FEEM), which involves the use of a fluorogenic redox reaction
to report the progress of a conventional, nonfluorogenic redox reaction
of interest.5 The key concept of FEEM includes
the use of a closed bipolar electrode (BPE) to electrically couple
two separate redox reactions and the use of fluorescence microscopy
to simultaneously visualize electrochemical signals on parallel electrodes.
A closed BPE consists of a conductor embedded in an insulator substrate
that completely separates two solution compartments (Figure SI-1, Supporting Information). A potential can be applied
across two driving electrodes to couple faradaic reactions at each
pole of the BPE, enabling control of the system without any direct
electrical connection to the BPE. Bipolar electrodes, especially those
found in an open microfluidic platform, have been extensively studied
by Crooks6−8 and others9−12 in the last two decades due to their increasing importance
in analytical chemistry.

A key fluorogenic reaction used in
FEEM is the reduction of resazurin
(S), which generates a highly fluorescent product, resorufin
(P). As a cathodic indicator process, this reaction can
be used to study electrochemical oxidation processes of various analytes
(R) through a closed BPE or its array. This same reaction
has been the core of numerous studies by the Chen group to investigate
(electro)catalytic activity at single nanoparticles.4,13−16 A unique feature of FEEM is the use of highly sensitive fluorescence
microscopy to optically monitor nonfluorogenic redox reactions of
interest. Importantly, FEEM has enabled us to simultaneously monitor
electrochemical kinetics on large arrays containing thousands or more
ultramicroelectrodes.

Scheme 1a shows
the two-electron, two-proton
reduction of resazurin to form the highly fluorescent product resorufin.17 In our previous work, we limited our discussion
to the study of analyte oxidation reactions (R → O) coupled to this fluorogenic reduction process as shown
in Scheme 1b. Since the development of FEEM,
we have been interested in finding a suitable fluorogenic oxidation
reaction to compliment the reduction of resazurin previously used
with the technique. We sought a fluorophore with high extinction coefficient
and quantum yield similar to resorufin in order to achieve sufficient
signal amplification. Resorufin has an extinction coefficient, ε
(570 nm), of approximately 57 000 M–1 cm–1 and a quantum efficiency, φ, of ∼0.97,13 making it an ideal fluorophore for FEEM. Fortuitously,
resorufin can also be generated from the reversible electrochemical
oxidation of the nonfluorescent dihydroresorufin (PH2). By starting with a solution of dihydroresorufin
instead, we can extend the use of FEEM to the electrochemical detection
and study of analyte reduction reactions (O → R) (Scheme 1c).

Scheme 1 (a) Reaction Scheme
for the Fluorogenic Production of Resorufin from
Either Resazurin by Reduction or from Dihydroresorufin by Oxidation
and (b and c) Illustrations of FEEM for the Detection of an Oxidizable
and a Reducible Species, Respectively
In panel b, the oxidation
of an analyte (R) at the anodic pole of a BPE is coupled
to the fluorogenic reduction of resazurin (S) at the
cathodic pole. In panel c, the reduction of an analyte (O) at the cathodic pole of a BPE is coupled to the fluorogenic oxidation
of dihydroresorufin (PH2) at the anodic pole.

Dihydroresorufin can be obtained from the chemical
reduction of
resorufin in a basic solution containing glucose, as shown in Scheme 2. This solution is often used in a chemistry classroom
demonstration18 commonly known as the “Vanishing
Valentine Experiment” and is similar in concept to the more
popular “Blue Bottle Experiment”,19,20 which uses methylene blue in place of resorufin. In the classroom
demonstration, a pink solution of resorufin reacts with a deprotonated
glucose molecule (Glu–) to become the colorless
dihydroresorufin over time. Oxygen enters the solution upon shaking,
oxidizing dihydroresorufin and restoring the pink color and fluorescent
properties. Alternatively, the chemically reduced species dihydroresorufin
can undergo a heterogeneous electrochemical oxidation localized at
the electrode surface. Here, we demonstrate the use of dihydroresorufin
for the FEEM-based detection of reducible redox species such as ferricyanide
and ruthenium(III) hexamine. Our results have shown three distinct
advantages of using dihydroresorufin as an indicator molecule for
FEEM as compared to our previous scheme. First, the presence of a
strong reducing environment shifts the chemical equilibrium to dihydroresorufin,
leading to a greatly suppressed fluorescence background. Second, the
fluorescent product, once generated on the electrode surface, is quickly
reduced back to the nonfluorescent substrate molecule, dihydroresorufin,
significantly lowering the accumulation of fluorescent species around
the electrode. Therefore, diffusion becomes less significant in our
current work compared to our previous study. Third, unlike resazurin
reduction, the fluorescent signal detected at any given time represents
the rate at which dihydroresorufin is oxidized at the electrode. As
such, one can monitor the electrochemical signal by directly monitoring
the total fluorescence. Together, these two fluorogenic pathways shown
in Scheme 1a provide a more complete fluorescent
voltammetry tool kit with the ability to optically monitor the progress
of any electrochemical reaction.

Scheme 2 Reaction Scheme Showing the Fluorophore-Consuming
Chemical Reduction
of Resorufin and the Fluorogenic Production of Resorufin through Electrochemical
Oxidation
For further details regarding
the deprotonation and subsequent chemical oxidation of glucose, readers
are referred to reference (20).

Experimental Section
Reagents, Chemicals, and
Dihydroresorufin Solution Preparation
Resazurin sodium salt
(Aldrich, dye content ∼75%), sodium
hydroxide (J.T. Baker, 98.5%), glucose (Sigma, 99.5%), potassium ferricyanide
(K3Fe(CN)6, Sigma-Aldrich, 99%), potassium chloride
(J.T. Baker, 99.8%), ascorbic acid (Sigma, 98%), and hexaammineruthenium(III)
chloride (Ru(NH3)6Cl3, Aldrich, 98%)
were all used without further purification. Deionized water (>18
MΩ·cm)
was obtained through a Barnstead Nanopure water purification system
and used for all aqueous solutions. A dihydroresorufin solution containing
glucose and 0.5 M NaOH was prepared fresh daily. The dihydroresorufin
concentration was 100 μM and the glucose concentration was 67
mM except where noted. Ascorbic acid solutions were prepared analogously,
substituting ascorbic acid for glucose and 0.5 M KCl for NaOH.

Fluorescence
Microscopy
All fluorescence microscopy
experiments were conducted on an Olympus IX70 inverted microscope
equipped with an IX-FLA inverted reflected light fluorescence observation
attachment. The excitation source consisted of a Thorlabs M530L2 Collimated
LED powered by a DC2100 LED Driver and filtered using a cube with
a HQ535/50 excitation filter, a Q565lp dichroic mirror and a HQ610/75
emission filter. The excitation and emission wavelengths were chosen
based off of a fluorescence spectrum of resorufin reported by the
Chen group.13 An Andor iXon+ EMCCD camera
cooled to −80 °C and Andor SOLIS software was used to
record and process all videos and images. Video was recorded at a
frame rate of 33.887 Hz for all experiments using a preamplifier gain
setting of 5.1.

Cyclic and Linear-Sweep Voltammetry
A Chem-Clamp voltmeter/amperometer
(Dagan) interfaced to a Dell computer through a PCI-6251 data acquisition
board (National Instruments) via a BNC-2090 analog breakout box (National
Instruments) was used for all experiments. LabView 8.5 (National Instruments)
was used for voltage function generation as well as acquisition of
the current–voltage data. A scan rate of 200 mV/s was used
for all potential sweep experiments unless noted otherwise. All reported
potentials are referenced to Ag/AgCl.

Results and Discussion
Fluorogenic,
Reversible Oxidation of Dihydroresorufin
To better utilize
dihydroresorufin in FEEM experiments, an understanding
of its basic electrochemical behavior was needed. We used a conventional
two-electrode (nonbipolar) cell to study the fluorogenic oxidation
of dihydroresorufin. It was found that the chemically reduced dihydroresorufin
solution provides a unique advantage over the resazurin solution previously
used in FEEM experiments. Previously, we5 and others1,21 have demonstrated the proportionality
between the time derivative of the fluorescence intensity and the
electrochemical current for fluorogenic and fluoroquenching electrochemical
reactions. In the resazurin/phosphate buffer solution, electrogenerated
resorufin remains in solution and continues to fluoresce throughout
the experiment. However, in the dihydroresorufin solution used here,
the presence of glucose at a sufficiently high concentration (i.e.,
67 mM, or 670 times greater than that of the dihydroresorufin) in
a basic media assures that resorufin, when generated at the anodic
pole, can be rapidly consumed from the solution, restoring dihydroresorufin
and effectively eliminating fluorescence accumulation. It is therefore
the fluorescence intensity itself and not the time derivative that
is proportional to the electrochemical current.

Figure 1 shows the cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of a 25 μm
diameter Au electrode in a conventional two-electrode setup along
with the corresponding fluorescence cyclic voltammograms (F-CVs) for
potential sweep experiments of various concentrations of dihydroresorufin
in 67 mM glucose and 0.5 M NaOH. As can be seen in the CVs (Figure 1a,b), an oxidation wave with an onset potential
of −520 mV is present, which corresponds to the oxidation of
glucose.22 As expected, there is no fluorescence
signal when no dihydroresorufin is present (Figure 1c, black trace). When dihydroresorufin is added to solution,
the electrochemical and fluorescence signals become coupled in an
interesting manner. Predictably, increasing the concentration of dihydroresorufin
increases the overall fluorescence signal, as more of the fluorogenic
redox species is present in solution and available for fluorogenic
oxidation. However, somewhat surprisingly, this results in a significantly
diminished electrochemical current signal. As the first step of glucose
oxidation involves its adsorption onto the electrode,23,24 this pattern indicates that dihydroresorufin blocks this oxidation
step, resulting in a decreased electrochemical signal as the dihydroresorufin
concentration increases. It is also known that the second wave of
glucose oxidation produces more weakly adsorbed products.23,24 This results in a less-blocked surface, which we propose is the
cause of the second wave of fluorescence intensity at −100
mV for dihydroresorufin concentrations from 10 to 200 μM. As
seen in the CV for 1000 μM dihydroresorufin (Figure 1a,b, orange trace), a new oxidation wave arises
with an onset of −600 mV. This coincides nearly exactly with
the onset of the fluorescence signal (−580 mV), indicating
that this wave is from the electrochemical oxidation of dihydroresorufin.
This can be seen more clearly in Figure 1d,
which shows the simultaneously recorded CV and F-CV obtained for a
solution of 1000 μM dihydroresorufin overlaid. The fluorescence
signal directly correlates to the electrochemical current signal,
indicating that this reaction can be used as a fluorogenic indicator
for FEEM. The CV gives a steady-state current of approximately 3.8
nA. The theoretical steady-state current, iss, can be calculated from the following equation:25 1  where n is the number of
electrons transferred per molecule, F is Faraday’s
constant (96 485 C/mol), D is the diffusion
coefficient, C* is the bulk concentration of redox
species, and r is the electrode radius. Using a diffusion
coefficient of 4.8 × 10–6 cm2/s,26 the expected steady-state current for 1000 μM
dihydroresorufin at a 25 μm diameter microelectrode is 4.6 nA.
The experimental value corresponds nicely to this theoretical value
when considering that glucose is also adsorbed onto the electrode
surface and thus blocking some of the electroactive area from dihydroresorufin
oxidation.

Figure 1 Electrochemical and fluorescence CVs obtained using a 25 μm
Au electrode at various concentrations of dihydroresorufin in 67 mM
glucose and 0.5 M NaOH. (a) Electrochemical CVs for a scan from −1
to +0.3 V. (b) Zoom-in of panel a for dihydroresorufin concentrations
of 100, 200, and 1000 μM. Only the potential range from −0.8
to 0 V is shown. (c) Fluorescence CVs corresponding to the electrochemical
CVs shown in panel a. (d) Overlaid plot of the simultaneously recorded
fluorescence (red trace) and electrochemical (black trace) CVs of
1000 μM dihydroresorufin for a scan from −0.7 to −0.4
V at 10 mV/s.

Studying variations in
the oxidation of dihydroresorufin on a Au
electrode as compared to a carbon fiber electrode (CFE) also provides
insight into the coupled electrochemical and fluorescent properties
of this system. Figure 2a shows the overlaid
CV and F-CV for a solution of 100 μM dihydroresorufin, 67 mM
glucose, and 0.5 M NaOH obtained with a 25 μm diameter Au working
electrode for a potential sweep from −1 to +0.3 V. During the
forward scan, the fluorescence onset potential is at −540 mV
and a second higher intensity wave appears at approximately −100
mV. In addition to the potential-dependent blocking effect of adsorbed
glucose and its oxidation products, we propose there is at least one
other factor leading to the general shape of this curve. At electrode
potentials between −540 and −100 mV, the fluorescence
intensity is limited somewhat by the relatively high concentration
of glucose in solution adjacent to the electrode. At potentials above
−100 mV, glucose is electrochemically oxidized to a greater
degree, as can be seen in the CV in Figure 2a, depleting the concentration of this species in the vicinity of
the electrode surface. This process, in addition to the ongoing oxidation
of dihydroresorufin, results in a second, higher intensity fluorescence
wave. It is thought that both of these factors contribute to some
degree to the presence of two distinct waves as well as the slightly
higher fluorescence signal on the return scan. The three still-images
presented in Figure 2b were taken from a video
recorded during the F-CV experiment and show the burst of fluorescence
at the 25 μm Au electrode as the potential is swept to oxidize
dihydroresorufin. At +200 mV, the electrode spot size is noticeably
larger as well due to the depletion of glucose and the therefore slower
chemical reduction process. The fluorescence intensity (and the concentration
of resorufin) at or near to the electrode in Figure 2b and subsequent figures is likely controlled by several processes
including oxidation of dihydroresorufin, oxidation of glucose, the
chemical reduction of resorufin by glucose, and various diffusion
processes.

Figure 2 (a and c) Comparison of a conventional cyclic voltammogram (CV)
with a corresponding, simultaneously recorded fluorescence cyclic
voltammogram (F-CV) for (a) a 25 μm diameter Au disk electrode
and (c) a 10 μm diameter CFE, direct connect (not BPE) in a
solution containing 100 μM dihydroresorufin, 67 mM glucose,
and 0.5 M NaOH. (b) Fluorescence still images captured from a video
recorded during the potential sweep experiment shown in panel a at
select potentials. The dashed yellow ring in the left panel of panel
b indicates the actual size and position of the electrode. Note the
different fluorescence intensity and current scales in panels a and
c. Only the forward scan of the CV is shown in panel c.

Figure 2c shows the results
of an experiment
similar to that in Figure 2a except the working
electrode was replaced with a 10 μm diameter carbon fiber electrode
(CFE). The intensity of both the electrochemical CV and the F-CV were
significantly lower than that of the Au electrode, likely due to relatively
lower electrocatalytic activity of carbon, but the initial fluorescence
onset potential was still at approximately −540 mV. Glucose
oxidation occurs at a much lower rate for carbon as compared to Au,27 therefore leaving the concentration of glucose
relatively unperturbed prior to the chemical reaction with resorufin.
We propose this is why only one wave is observed in the CFE F-CV,
indicating that the extent of the glucose side reactions (i.e., adsorption
and electrochemical oxidation) on a CFE is much smaller as compared
to on a Au electrode.

To more completely understand the dynamics
of the fluorogenic electrochemical
oxidation of dihydroresorufin and subsequent chemical reduction of
the product resorufin by glucose, the effect of altering the glucose
concentration was studied. Figure 3 presents
F-CVs from potential sweep experiments conducted using a conventional
two-electrode setup in which the concentration of glucose was varied
from 1 to 1000 mM. A 25 μm Au working electrode was used, and
the total concentration of resazurin/resorufin/dihydroresorufin was
100 μM for all solutions. The fluorescence intensity was found
to increase as the glucose concentration in solution was increased
from 1 to 10 mM. This can be explained by the increasing concentration
of dihydroresorufin in solution. Altering the concentration of glucose
will affect the equilibrium between these three species, with higher
concentrations of glucose favoring the fully reduced species, dihydroresorufin.
This can be observed visually (Figure SI-2, Supporting
Information), as the solution color changes from blue (resazurin)
to pink (resorufin) to clear (dihydroresorufin) as the glucose concentration
is increased. A higher concentration of dihydroresorufin enables the
fluorogenic oxidation to proceed at a higher rate, resulting in an
increased fluorescence signal.

Figure 3 F-CVs obtained with a 25 μm diameter
Au disk electrode in
solutions with a total resazurin/resorufin/dihydroresorufin concentration
of 100 μM and varying concentrations of glucose in 0.5 M NaOH.
The potential was swept from −1 to +0.3 V at 200 mV/s.

Interestingly, further increasing
the glucose concentration to
67 mM and beyond results in a clear decrease in both the recorded
fluorescence intensity and the hysteresis of the F-CV. We propose
two factors contribute to this decrease in intensity. First, the amount
of surface-adsorbed glucose on the electrode likely increases with
solution concentration. The adsorbed glucose physically blocks dihydroresorufin
oxidation, resulting in a lower rate of reaction and hence a lower
fluorescence intensity. Second, at higher solution concentrations,
more glucose will be present in solution adjacent to the electrode
surface. This glucose can quench fluorescence by chemically reducing
resorufin back to the nonfluorescent dihydroresorufin. This quenching
effect becomes greater as the glucose concentration increases, thus
decreasing overall fluorescence intensity. The quenching effect also
explains the change in hysteresis of the fluorescence voltammograms.
At low concentrations of glucose (i.e., 1–10 mM), resorufin
produced at the electrode via dihydroresorufin oxidation has a much
longer lifetime in solution than at higher glucose concentrations,
as each resorufin molecule is less likely to encounter glucose and
undergo reduction back to dihydroresorufin. This time delay between
resorufin production via dihydroresorufin oxidation at the electrode
and resorufin consumption via reduction by glucose becomes less as
the glucose concentration increases, thereby decreasing the hysteresis
in the F-CV. The use of ascorbic acid as an alternative reducing agent
was also briefly investigated, with the results presented in Figure
SI-3 (Supporting Information). The same
overall trends were observed, but the fluorescence signal was more
than 2 orders of magnitude lower with ascorbic acid. We suspect this
is due to solution instability, as a precipitate began forming shortly
after preparing the solutions.

Use of Dihydroresorufin
in FEEM to Study Analyte Reduction
With an understanding
of the electrochemical and fluorescence properties
of the dihydroresorufin oxidation reaction, we could then use it in
a bipolar FEEM setup to study analyte reduction reactions. We used
a simple bipolar setup (diagram shown in Figure SI-4, Supporting Information) to demonstrate the electrochemical
coupling of the fluorogenic oxidation of dihydroresorufin to the reduction
of ferricyanide (Fe(CN)63–). Two 25 μm
diameter Au disk electrodes were connected in series to form a closed
BPE as described previously.28,29 The cathodic pole was
placed in 250 μM ferricyanide with 1 M KCl supporting electrolyte
and the anodic pole was placed in a solution of 100 μM dihydroresorufin
with 67 mM glucose and 0.5 M NaOH and positioned on a microscope for
observation. The dihydroresorufin solution was illuminated to excite
resorufin fluorescence, and a triangular waveform from +1.2 to +0.2
V was applied to two Ag/AgCl driving electrodes to reduce ferricyanide
at the cathodic pole. This reduction is coupled to the oxidation of
dihydroresorufin at the anodic pole, resulting in the production of
the fluorescent product, resorufin.

Figure 4 shows five background-corrected still-images of the anodic
pole taken from a video recorded over the potential sweep experiment.
The last panel of the figure displays the voltage-dependent total
fluorescence intensity recorded at the anodic pole. As can be seen,
the onset of the fluorescent burst occurs at approximately 830 mV.
This onset potential can be understood from an analysis of the onset
potentials for the reduction of ferricyanide (310 mV vs Ag/AgCl in
a two-electrode cell, Figure SI-5, Supporting
Information) and that for the oxidation of dihydroresorufin
(−540 mV vs Ag/AgCl in a two-electrode cell, Figure 2a). The onset potential of the coupled ferricyanide
reduction/dihydroresorufin oxidation here corresponds roughly to the
difference in the two onset potentials,30 agreeing within 20 mV. As the potential is swept in the negative
direction, ferricyanide is reduced at an increasing rate at the cathodic
pole, resulting in an increasing rate of dihydroresorufin oxidation
at the anodic pole and thus greater fluorescence intensity. As the
potential is swept back in the positive direction, ferricyanide reduction
slows down, resulting in a decrease in fluorescence intensity until
fluorescence is no longer observed. The fluorescence intensity is
also slightly higher on the return scan. This can be visualized by
comparing the top-right (+0.6 V forward scan) and bottom-middle (+0.6
V return scan) panels of Figure 4. We propose
this is due to the depletion of glucose in solution adjacent to the
electrode surface on the forward scan, which lessens the quenching
effect and results in a slightly higher fluorescent signal on the
return scan. We also used dihydroresorufin as an indicator molecule
to report the reduction of Ru(NH3)63+. Figure SI-6 (Supporting Information)
shows a series of fluorescence images recorded during the electrochemical
reduction of 250 μM Ru(NH3)63+ in a separate FEEM experiment. Importantly, the onset potential
of the coupled reaction, as determined by the fluorescent signal,
agreed to within 10 mV of the predicted onset potential. These results
demonstrate that dihydroresorufin can be used in FEEM for the study
of reducible redox species.

Figure 4 Series of fluorescence still-images captured
from a video of the
FEEM detection of 250 μM ferricyanide at a 25 μm diameter
Au disk electrode using a solution of 100 μM dihydroresorufin,
67 mM glucose, and 0.5 M NaOH. Potential was cycled from +1.2 to +0.2
V at a scan rate of 200 mV/s as applied to two Ag/AgCl driving electrodes.
The bottom-right panel shows fluorescence intensity at the electrode
as a function of electrode potential. The dashed yellow ring in the
top-left panel indicates the actual position and size of the electrode.

We then investigated the use of
dihydroresorufin for the quantitative
detection of a reducible analyte using FEEM. Again, two 25 μm
Au electrodes were connected in series to produce a single BPE. The
anodic pole was placed in a solution of 100 μM dihydroresorufin,
67 mM glucose, and 0.5 M NaOH and positioned on a microscope for observation,
and the cathodic pole was placed in a solution containing ferricyanide
with 1 M KCl supporting electrolyte. The potential was swept from
+1.2 to +0.2 V at 200 mV/s. Presented in Figure 5a is a series of fluorescence intensity signals recorded over the
course of the voltage scans with analyte concentrations from 25 to
750 μM. The concentration dependence of the fluorescence intensity
at the switching potential is shown in Figure 5b. The concentration range over which the data is linear is from
50 to 400 μM ferricyanide. Above 400 μM ferricyanide,
the curve begins to plateau as the oxidation of dihydroresorufin at
the anodic pole of the BPE becomes limiting. At ferricyanide concentrations
of 50 μM and below, the fluorescence response becomes insensitive
to the concentration of ferricyanide and is approximately constant,
as oxygen reduction, rather than ferricyanide reduction, is now primarily
coupled to the oxidation of dihydroresorufin. Deoxygenating these
low concentration solutions results in no observable fluorescence
signal, however, indicating that the current from ferricyanide reduction
in these solutions is below the threshold current necessary for fluorescence
generation (Figure SI-7, Supporting Information). This can be understood by considering the electrochemical and
chemical processes in the dihydroresorufin solution. There are three
competing processes at the anodic pole: the electrochemical oxidation
of dihydroresorufin to generate resorufin, the electrochemical oxidation
of glucose, and the chemical reduction of resorufin back to dihydroresorufin.
When the concentration of ferricyanide is below 50 μM, the electrochemical
oxidations of dihydroresorufin and glucose are both relatively slow,
resulting in a very small rate of resorufin generation. As such, in
the presence of a large concentration of glucose, resorufin is quickly
reduced back to dihydroresorufin. Admittedly, the range over which
a linear concentration response is observed is very narrow and the
lower limit of detection leaves much to be desired, limiting the use
of this system as a quantitative technique to readout analyte concentrations.
However, it is anticipated that modifying the electrode to selectively
oxidize dihydroresorufin or using a nonfouling reducing agent that
is electrochemically inactive in the desired potential range will
lower the limit of detection.

Figure 5 FEEM-based detection of various concentrations
of ferricyanide
at a 25 μm diameter Au disk BPE using a solution containing
100 μM dihydroresorufin, 67 mM glucose, and 0.5 M NaOH. Potential
was cycled from +1.2 to +0.2 V at a scan rate of 200 mV/s as applied
to two Ag/AgCl driving electrodes.

Improved Spatial and Temporal Resolution of FEEM using Dihydroresorufin
In spite of the relatively high limit of detection of FEEM using
dihydroresorufin, we found that this system gives rise to several
significant benefits. As already demonstrated, the electrochemical
current signal can be reported by directly monitoring the total fluorescence
signal rather than the time derivative of this signal as with our
previous report. More importantly, FEEM using dihydroresorufin as
the fluorogenic reporter appears to give enhanced spatial and temporal
resolution than FEEM using resazurin as the reporter. A simple potential
step experiment, shown in Figure 6, demonstrates
this point. In this experiment, two 25 μm diameter Au electrodes
were connected to form a closed BPE. One pole was placed in a solution
that was 250 μM in both ferricyanide and ferrocyanide with 1
M KCl as supporting electrolyte. The opposite pole was placed in either
100 μM dihydroresorufin, 67 mM glucose, and 0.5 M NaOH or 100
μM resazurin in 50 mM phosphate buffer. An 8 s pulse at a potential
sufficient to drive the coupled redox reactions was applied (“on”
state), followed by an 8 s period at which the potential was adjusted
below the onset potential (“off” state). For the coupled
dihydroresorufin oxidation/ferricyanide reduction, the “on”
state was +0.3 V and the “off” state was +1.2 V. For
the coupled resazurin reduction/ferrocyanide oxidation, the “on”
state was +1.2 V and the “off” state was +0.3 V. Figure 6a shows the normalized fluorescence intensity recorded
over the length of the pulse cycle for both coupled reactions. As
seen, the fluorescence response of the two fluorogenic indicators
is markedly different. The dihydroresorufin system reaches a steady-state
fluorescence intensity within 2 s of the start of the “on”
pulse, while the fluorescence intensity of the resazurin system increases
throughout the “on” pulse, failing to reach a steady-state
in 8 s. When the potential is switched to the “off”
state, the fluorescence intensity of the dihydroresorufin system decays
to its initial intensity within 1 s, while the intensity of the resazurin
system shows an immediate spike, followed by a slow decay, failing
to return to its initial intensity within 8 s.

Figure 6 Voltage pulsing experiment
comparing the FEEM detection of ferricyanide
using dihydroresorufin to the detection of ferrocyanide using resazurin
at a 25 μm Au electrode. (a) Comparison of the normalized fluorescence
intensity over time of the resazurin system and dihydroresorufin system.
The voltage pulse was in the “on” state (a potential
sufficient to drive the coupled reactions of interest) for 8 s and
then switched to the “off” state for 8 s. (b) Linescans
across the electrode over the course of the voltage pulse. (c) Fluorescence
images of the electrode over the course of the voltage pulse. The
maximum intensity on the color scale was set to the maximum pixel
intensity recorded at the electrode at 8 s.

The difference in the temporal response of the two systems
can
be explained by considering the differing mechanisms through which
the electrogenerated fluorescence decays. In the dihydroresorufin
system, electrogenerated resorufin is chemically reduced back to nonfluorescent
dihydroresorufin. In the resazurin system, electrogenerated resorufin
is only “consumed” by photobleaching or diffusion out
of the field of view. The photobleaching and diffusion processes are
much slower than the chemical reduction process, which accounts for
a more sluggish fluorescence response from the resazurin system. We
propose the large spike in fluorescence intensity observed in the
resazurin system when the potential is switched to the “off”
state is due to resazurin adsorbed onto the electrode surface. In
the “on” state, these surface-bound molecules are fully
reduced to dihydroresorufin, and upon switching the potential to the
“off” state, they are immediately oxidized back to resorufin,
resulting in the observed spike.

The effect of fluorophore diffusion
can be readily seen in Figure 6b, which presents
a series of line scans across
the electrodes over the course of the voltage pulse. The fluorescent
signal from the resazurin system broadens significantly over the course
of the experiment due to diffusion of electrogenerated resorufin.
By comparison, the signal from the dihydroresorufin system shows minimal
broadening, as the electrogenerated resorufin is chemically reduced
back to dihydroresorufin before it has time to diffuse a significant
distance from the electrode surface. Figure 6c presents background corrected images of the electrodes over the
course of the voltage pulse. The different temporal response and the
effect of fluorophore diffusion can be easily observed in these images.
At 0.18 s into the “on” state, a strong signal is observed
in the dihydroresorufin system whereas the resazurin signal is weak.
At 8 s, however, both systems show strong signals, but the signal
from the resazurin system has significantly broadened due to diffusion.
At 8.05 s (0.05 s into the “off” state), the resazurin
system shows a large spike in intensity, while the signal from the
dihydroresorufin system has decayed to about half its steady-state
intensity. At 10 s, no signal is observed from the dihydroresorufin,
while a strong, diffusion-broadened signal is still observed from
the resazurin system. As can be seen, using dihydroresorufin as a
fluorogenic indicator in FEEM gives an improved temporal response
and lower diffusional signal broadening than resazurin. We expect
these properties of improved spatial and temporal resolution in FEEM
to be especially important in FEEM imaging applications where high-density
arrays of thousands or more ultramicroelectrodes would be used to
image dynamic electrochemical processes. These applications include
screening of new electrocatalysts and imaging transient biological
processes such as neuronal exocytosis. Work is currently underway
to image dynamic diffusion layers of ultramicroelectrodes, which we
expect to report on in due course.

Conclusion
In
summary, we have demonstrated the ability to use fluorescence-enabled
electrochemical microscopy for the analytical detection of reducible
species using a solution containing dihydroresorufin that undergoes
a fluorogenic electrochemical oxidation to form resorufin. This process,
together with the previously described fluorogenic reduction of resazurin,
provides for a more complete electrochemical fluorogenic toolkit and
greatly increases the applicability of FEEM. The fluorescence intensity
measured from the system described here was found to be directly proportional
to the electrochemical current. The signal from this system is therefore
easier to interpret than the signal from the fluorogenic reduction
of resazurin where we previously showed the correlation of the time
derivative of fluorescence intensity and the electrochemical current.
Due to the presence of a chemical reducing agent that quickly consumes
the electrogenerated fluorophore, this system was found to have an
improved temporal response as well as lower signal broadening from
diffusion than the resazurin system.

Supporting Information Available
Additional information as noted
in text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac501194j_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
† Department
of Chemistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill

Author Present Address
‡ Washington State University, Neuroscience Program

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support provided
by the National Science Foundation (CHE-1212805) and National Institutes
of Health (GM101133). M.R.D. thanks the Amgen Foundation for support
of an undergraduate research assistantship.
==== Refs
References
Gesquiere A. J. ; Park S. J. ; Barbara P. F. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2004 , 108 , 10301 –10308 .
Palacios R. E. ; Fan F. R. F. ; Bard A. J. ; Barbara P. F. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 9028 –9029 .16834364 
Palacios R. E. ; Fan F. R. F. ; Grey J. K. ; Suk J. ; Bard A. J. ; Barbara P. F. 
Nat. Mater. 
2007 , 6 , 680 –685 .17643107 
Xu W. ; Shen H. ; Kim Y. J. ; Zhou X. C. ; Liu G. K. ; Park J. ; Chen P. 
Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 3968 –3973 .19366213 
Guerrette J. P. ; Percival S. P. ; Zhang B. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 855 –861 .23244164 
Mavre F. ; Anand R. K. ; Laws D. R. ; Chow K. F. ; Chang B. Y. ; Crooks J. A. ; Crooks R. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 8766 –8774 .20815405 
Fosdick S. E. ; Crooks R. M. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 863 –866 .22185603 
Fosdick S. E. ; Knust K. N. ; Scida K. ; Crooks R. M. 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 10438 –10456 .
Duval J. F. L. ; Minor M. ; Cecilia J. ; van Leeuwen H. P. 
J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2003 , 107 , 4143 –4155 .
Ulrich C. ; Andersson O. ; Nyholm L. ; Bjorefors F. 
Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 3034 –3036 .
Arora A. ; Eijkel J. C. T. ; Morf W. E. ; Manz A. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2001 , 73 , 3282 –3288 .11476226 
Zhang X. ; Chen C. ; Li J. ; Zhang L. ; Wang E. K. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 5335 –5339 .23635353 
Xu W. ; Kong J. S. ; Yeh Y. T. E. ; Chen P. 
Nat. Mater. 
2008 , 7 , 992 –996 .18997774 
Han K. S. ; Liu G. K. ; Zhou X. C. ; Medina R. E. ; Chen P. 
Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 1253 –1259 .22276804 
Zhou X. ; Andoy N. M. ; Liu G. ; Choudhary E. ; Han K. S. ; Shen H. ; Chen P. 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 , 237 –241 .22343380 
Zhou X. ; Choudhary E. ; Andoy N. M. ; Zou N. ; Chen P. 
ACS Catal. 
2013 , 3 , 1448 –1453 .
Twigg R. S. 
Nature 
1945 , 155 , 401 –402 .
Shakashiri B. Z.  Chemical
Demonstrations: A Handbook for Teachers in Chemistry , Vol. 2 ; University of Wisconsin Press : Madison, WI , 1989 .
Campbell J. A. 
J. Chem. Educ. 
1963 , 40 , 578 –583 .
Anderson L. ; Wittkopp S. M. ; Painter C. J. ; Liegel J. J. ; Schreiner R. ; Bell J. A. ; Shakhashiri B. Z. 
J. Chem. Educ. 
2012 , 89 , 1425 –1431 Note: Although this work details the deprotonation and chemical oxidation
products of glucose for the reduction of methylene blue, we suspect
it is highly likely that the same process is followed for the reduction
of resorufin. .
Lei C. ; Hu D. ; Ackerman E. J. 
Chem. Commun. 
2008 , 5490 –5492 .
Matsumoto F. ; Harada M. ; Koura N. ; Uesugi S. 
Electrochem. Commun. 
2003 , 5 , 42 –46 .
Beden B. ; Largeaud F. ; Kokoh K. B. ; Lamy C. 
Electrochim.
Acta 
1996 , 41 , 701 –709 .
Park S. ; Boo H. ; Chung T. D. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2006 , 556 , 46 –57 .17723330 
Saito Y. 
Rev. Polarogr. 
1968 , 15 , 177 –182 .
Schilling E. A. ; Kamholz A. E. ; Yager P. 
Anal. Chem. 
2002 , 74 , 1798 –1804 .11985310 
Vassilyev Y. B. ; Khazova O. A. ; Nikolaeva N. N. 
J. Electroanal.
Chem. 
1985 , 196 , 127 –144 .
Plana D. ; Jones F. G. E. ; Dryfe R. A. W. 
J. Electroanal.
Chem. 
2010 , 646 , 107 –113 .
Guerrette J. P. ; Oja S. M. ; Zhang B. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 1609 –1616 .22229756 
Cox J. T. ; Guerrette J. P. ; Zhang B. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 8797 –8804 .22992030
