
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical Society 10.1021/ac400105eArticleMultiplexed
Microcolumn-Based Process for Efficient
Selection of RNA Aptamers Latulippe David
R. †§∥Szeto Kylan †§Ozer Abdullah ‡Duarte Fabiana M. ‡Kelly Christopher V. †⊥Pagano John M. ‡White Brian S. ‡▽Shalloway David ‡Lis John T. ‡Craighead Harold G. *††School
of Applied and Engineering Physics and ‡Department of Molecular Biology
and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, United States* E-mail hgc1@cornell.edu; telephone 607-255-8707; fax 607-255-7658.11 02 2013 19 03 2013 85 6 3417 3424 11 01 2013 11 02 2013 Copyright © 2013 American
Chemical Society2013American
Chemical Society

We describe a reusable microcolumn
and process for the efficient
discovery of nucleic acid aptamers for multiple target molecules.
The design of our device requires only microliter volumes of affinity
chromatography resin—a condition that maximizes the enrichment
of target-binding sequences over non-target-binding (i.e., background)
sequences. Furthermore, the modular design of the device accommodates
a multiplex aptamer selection protocol. We optimized the selection
process performance using microcolumns filled with green fluorescent
protein (GFP)-immobilized resin and monitoring, over a wide range
of experimental conditions, the enrichment of a known GFP-binding
RNA aptamer (GFPapt) against a random RNA aptamer library. We validated
the multiplex approach by monitoring the enrichment of GFPapt in de
novo selection experiments with GFP and other protein preparations.
After only three rounds of selection, the cumulative GFPapt enrichment
on the GFP-loaded resin was greater than 108 with no enrichment
for the other nonspecific targets. We used this optimized protocol
to perform a multiplex selection to two human heat shock factor (hHSF)
proteins, hHSF1 and hHSF2. High-throughput sequencing was used to
identify aptamers for each protein that were preferentially enriched
in just three selection rounds, which were confirmed and isolated
after five rounds. Gel-shift and fluorescence polarization assays
showed that each aptamer binds with high-affinity (KD < 20 nM) to the respective targets. The combination
of our microcolumns with a multiplex approach and high-throughput
sequencing enables the selection of aptamers to multiple targets in
a high-throughput and efficient manner.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac400105edocument-id-new-14ac-2013-00105eccc-price
==== Body
Nucleic acid
aptamers are short
(∼100 nucleotide, nt) structured oligonucleotides that have
been selected from large sequence-diverse libraries and shown to display
high-affinity and specificity for a wide range of targets ranging
from simple metal ions1 to complex surface
proteins on living cells.2 This combination
of properties has led to growing interest in applications of aptamers
in fields including therapeutics, chemical analysis, biotechnology,
chemical separations, and environmental diagnostics.3 Aptamers are identified from large libraries of random
nucleic acid sequences via an iterative in vitro process called SELEX
(systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment).4−6 A typical SELEX round includes the following three steps: (i) binding,
incubation of the library with the target; (ii) partitioning, separation
of target-bound library sequences from unbound ones; and (iii) amplification,
generation of a new pool of nucleic acids by making multiple copies
of the sequences that bound to the target. These steps are then repeated
in an iterative fashion to obtain an enriched pool and the target
binding aptamers are identified via cloning and sequencing processes.

Different selection strategies have been developed to separate
or partition the free and target-bound sequences, a critical step
to ensure the successful identification of only the strongest binding
aptamers. Affinity chromatography is one such partitioning strategy
that uses specific binding onto resin-immobilized targets to purify
macromolecular solutes from dilute solutions.7 It is a well-documented aptamer selection technique, given that
it can achieve a level of purification greater than 95% in a single
step and that numerous types of resin media are available to bind
a wide variety of targets. However, there is limited understanding
of the relationship governing the process parameters (target loading,
resin volume, etc.) and the selection quality, and thus, many selection
rounds (typically 12–15) are required to identify aptamers
with the desired specificity and affinity for the target. This approach
is particularly challenging when working with RNA libraries because
it takes approximately 2 days just to complete the amplification step.
Some work has been done to parallelize the use of libraries and the
selection process to multiple targets in order to save time and reagents.8,9

Affinity chromatography-based selections are typically done
in
two different modes of operation. In batch mode, a small amount of
target-immobilized resin (∼20–200 μL) is incubated
with the nucleic acid library, or alternatively, target-free resin
is incubated with a mixed suspension of target and nucleic acid library.10−12 Any unbound sequences in the supernatant are removed, and the target-bound
sequences remaining on the resin are then exposed to other solutions
for the subsequent processing steps. For this approach, the entire
selection process is quite laborious, because each step must be done
manually and repeated several times. This is especially true when
multiple targets are considered for selection. The second mode of
operation, flow mode, uses small columns (∼0.5–3 mL)
packed with resin.1,13,14 The primary advantage of this approach is that the resin is physically
confined within the column, allowing all of the selection steps to
be automated by use of pumps and/or centrifuges and thus completed
more efficiently than the batch strategy. This approach was used in
one of the landmark papers on aptamers; Ellington and Szostak5 used a 3.5 mL column filled with dye-immobilized
resin. However, there are a few limitations to this approach. The
standard columns that have been used previously are not practical
for the simultaneous selection of aptamers for multiple targets. These
columns require more resin than the batch mode, as well as more of
the immobilized target (e.g., protein), which can be both limiting
and expensive. Thus, with the current affinity chromatography-based
strategies, there is a noticeable lack of means to rapidly screen
for aptamers to multiple targets in a high-throughput and efficient
manner.

To address these limitations, we developed a process
utilizing
reconfigurable microcolumns of varying capacity for selecting RNA
aptamers. The microcolumns require only microliter volumes of affinity
chromatography resin (∼2–50 μL), they can be easily
assembled in various configurations to accommodate multiple targets,
and they can be easily integrated with common laboratory equipment.
In addition, these microcolumns are not restricted to RNA and other
nucleic acid aptamer selections but are also suitable for other affinity
chromatography needs where small column volumes are desired. The assembly
of microcolumns and aptamer selection process are shown in Figure 1 with the experimental details provided below.

Figure 1 Aptamer
selection workflow for multiple targets by use of microcolumns.
(A) Microcolumn filled with 10 μL of GFP-immobilized chromatography
resin. (B) Multiplexed selection of RNA aptamers: (1) The starting
RNA library is dynamically loaded onto multiple microcolumns that
are connected in a serial configuration. (2) The devices are rearranged
into a parallel configuration and the subsequent cycles in the process
are done independently but simultaneously. (3) Unbound and weakly
bound RNAs are washed away. (4) The remaining bound RNAs are eluted
from each column separately. (5) The RNA molecules are reverse-transcribed
into cDNA and (6) a small fraction is analyzed via qPCR. (7) The remaining
cDNA is PCR-amplified and then (8) transcribed back into RNA to make
a new amplified pool for (9) the next selection round. The steps shown
with dashed arrows are optional and are not necessarily done in each
round.

We first evaluated the design
space of our process using computer
simulations of the binding kinetics of a model library over a wide
range of experimental conditions. Next, we evaluated the performance
of our microcolumns at those same conditions by monitoring the behavior
of a known RNA aptamer (GFPapt) that binds tightly to green fluorescent
protein (GFP) and its derivatives.14 Our
results show that predictions based on simple kinetics fail to reproduce
the behavior of low-affinity binders under flow, suggesting that typical
SELEX processes based on theoretical kinetics are likely to be far
from optimal. Furthermore, we observed the best performances at protein
concentrations 100 times less than the capacity of the resin. We also
empirically validated a multiplex approach by monitoring the enrichment
of GFPapt in de novo selection experiments with GFP, two nonrelated
protein preparations, and an empty microcolumn. To examine the utility
of our device, multiplex and in-line negative selections were performed
on two human heat shock factor (hHSF) proteins, hHSF1 and hHSF2. High-throughput
sequencing was used to identify enriched candidate aptamer sequences
for hHSF1 and hHSF2. Fluorescence electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(F-EMSA) as well as fluorescence polarization (FP) confirmed the selection
of novel high-affinity aptamers for hHSF1 and hHSF2.

Materials and
Methods
Selection Simulations
Computational simulations were
performed with a custom-made Matlab routine to test a wide variety
of experimental parameters. The differential equations of association
and dissociation kinetics (first-order with respect to each species)
were numerically integrated with respect to time, distance along the
microfluidic channel, and each aptamer type within the modeled library.
Additional details are available in Supporting
Information

Preparation of Protein-Immobilized Resins
For each
selection round, a fresh batch of protein-bound resin was prepared.
Nickel–nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA) Superflow or glutathione–agarose
resins were extensively washed with binding buffer [Ni-NTA binding
buffer contained 25 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris), pH
8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 25 mM KCl, and 5 mM MgCl2; glutathione
binding buffer contained 10 mM N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N′-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES)–KOH pH 7.6,
125 mM NaCl, 25 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 0.02% Tween-20]
to remove any residual storage components. Hexahistidine- or GST-tagged
proteins were prepared as described in the Supporting
Information and immobilized onto the washed resin at 4 °C
with constant mixing. The protein-bound resin was then degassed in
a vacuum desiccator for approximately 20 min and carefully pipetted
into the device (Figure 1A).

Nucleic Acid
Library and GFP-Binding Aptamer
A random
library containing ∼5 × 1015 sequences of 120-nucleotide
(nt) DNA templates, hereafter referred to as N70 library, was chemically
synthesized by GenScript. It consists of a 70-nt random region flanked
by two constant regions as described elsewhere.15 The GFP-binding RNA aptamer used in this work was previously
identified as AP3-1 and characterized elsewhere.14 Details on the library preparation and oligos used in this
work are available in Supporting Information.

Microcolumn Selection and Amplification Protocol
All
of the solutions were degassed prior to use and introduced into the
microcolumns via a standard syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus). First,
yeast tRNA (Invitrogen) in binding buffer was introduced to block
any possible nonspecific RNA binding sites. For each loading step,
the RNA library was diluted in 1 mL of RNase-free binding buffer,
heat-denatured at 60 °C for 5 min, renatured by cooling down
to room temperature while degassing, and then spiked with 200 units
of RNase inhibitor (Invitrogen). A 10 μL aliquot was collected
and used as a standard for the quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR) analysis. Each device was then washed with 3 mL of binding
buffer (supplemented with 10 mM imidazole for selections with Ni-NTA
resin) to remove unbound RNA. Finally, the RNA–protein complexes
were eluted from individual microcolumns by flowing elution buffer
[binding buffer + 50 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)] at
a rate of 50 μL/min for 6 min. Eluted RNA and the input samples
were phenol/chloroform-extracted and ethanol-precipitated together
with 1 μL of GlycoBlue (Ambion) and 40 μg of yeast tRNA
(Invitrogen), and the resulting pellet was resuspended in RNase-free
water.

Both the resuspended pools and standards were reverse-transcribed
with Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (MMLV-RT).
For the optimization experiments, ∼10% of the selected pool
and the input sample were reverse-transcribed in a separate reaction
for GFPapt quantitation. Residual RNA was eliminated by treating the
samples with RNase H (Ambion). A small amount (less than 5%) of the
cDNA product was analyzed on a LightCycler 480 qPCR instrument (Roche)
to determine the amount of RNA library and GFPapt that was retained
on each device. Two different sets of oligos (see Supporting Information for details) were used to independently
evaluate the amount of the RNA library/pool and GFPapt, respectively.
The cDNA samples from each round were PCR-amplified and then subjected
to phenol/chloroform and chloroform extractions and a final purification
step on DNA Clean & Concentrator (Zymo Research) spin columns.
A fraction of the purified PCR product was used to make the RNA pool
for the next round of SELEX. A typical 72 μL transcription reaction
consisted of 500 ng of DNA, 546 pmol of each ribonucleoside triphosphate
(rNTP, Sigma), T7 RNA polymerase, 72 units of RNase inhibitor (Invitrogen),
and 0.12 unit of yeast inorganic pyrophosphatase (New England Biolabs).
The reactions were incubated at 37 °C for various times depending
on the desired amount of RNA for the next selection round. The resulting
RNA pool was treated with DNase I (Invitrogen) to remove the template
DNA, verified by denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE)
for length and purity, and finally quantified by Qubit BR RNA assay
(Invitrogen).

High-Throughput Sequencing
A small
amount of the purified
PCR product from each target pool for various selection rounds (e.g.,
hHSF1 round 5) was PCR-amplified by use of primers that contain a
unique 6 nt barcode and the necessary adapters for the HiSeq 2000
(Illumina) sequencing platform. Sequences of the primers and the barcodes
are available upon request. Additional details on the sequencing data
filtering and clustering analyses are given in the Supporting Information

Fluorescence Electrophoretic
Mobility Shift Assay
Candidate
aptamer sequences were amplified from the final round 5 pool and prepared
from sequence-verified plasmid constructs (see Supporting Information). The candidate aptamers were 3′-end-labeled
with fluorescein 5-thiosemicarbazide (Invitrogen) as described previously.16 Binding reactions (50 μL) were prepared
with 2 nM fluorescently labeled RNA and decreasing amounts of protein
(2000 to 0 nM) in binding buffer containing 0.01% IGEPAL CA-630, 10
μg/mL yeast tRNA, and 3 units of RNase inhibitor (Invitrogen).
Reactions were incubated at room temperature for 2 h, spiked with
6× loading dye, and then loaded into the wells of a refrigerated
1.5% agarose gel prepared with 0.5× Tris–borate–EDTA
(TBE) buffer with 1 mM MgCl2. The gel was run for 80 min
at 100 V in refrigerated 0.5× TBE. Images were acquired at the
fluorescein scan settings on a Typhoon 9400 imager (GE Healthcare
Life Sciences). The resulting bands were quantified with ImageQuant
software and the data were fit to the Hill equation by use of Igor
(Wavemetrics) to estimate the equilibrium dissociation constant (KD).

Results
Fabrication
of Microcolumns for Selection of Aptamers
Our microcolumns
were assembled from both custom-fabricated and commercially
available parts. The column consists of a transparent biocompatible
plastic rod fitted with a porous frit that retains the resin in the
device (Figure 1A). By varying both the length
and internal diameter of the column, we were able to fabricate columns
with a range of volume capacities from 2 to 50 μL. NanoPorts
(IDEX Health and Science) that accommodate standard tubing connectors
were bonded to either end of the column. Overall, this design has
a number of important features: simple union connectors can be used
to arrange multiple microcolumns into various configurations, the
dead volume between the devices is minimized and is generally less
than 1 μL, and they can be connected to common laboratory equipment
to automate the selection steps. To perform the multiple target aptamer
selection, we developed a workflow process wherein a set of microcolumns,
each prefilled with a different target-immobilized resin, are arranged
into a serial configuration (Figure 1B). With
our pump system, a typical arrangement could contain up to 10 parallelized
assemblies of devices, but the general approach can easily be scaled
up for a larger number of parallel processes. A single aliquot of
the starting random library is then flowed through these devices,
allowing the target binding aptamers to be captured on the resin within
each individual column. The library molecules that do not bind to
any target are discarded and then the individual microcolumns are
disconnected and reorganized into a parallel configuration (Figure 1B). This arrangement allows for specific elutions
from each target and thus separate processing of only the bound sequences
to create target-specific amplified pools for the next selection round.
Note that, following reverse transcription of the RNA aptamer into
cDNA, we used quantitative PCR to determine the amount of nucleic
acid recovered from each device. This information was used to determine
the optimal number of PCR cycles and thus minimize the chance of amplification
artifacts.17 Although Figure 1B shows the microcolumns arranged exclusively in a parallel
configuration after the first selection round, it is also possible
to use a serial configuration in later rounds. This arrangement would
allow for negative or counter selections to be done simultaneously
with the selection step to enhance specificity for the target.

The size of our microcolumns was chosen for primarily two reasons.
First, they are small enough that they require only small amounts
of material for each selection round, yet their internal dimensions
are sufficiently large enough that they could be easily filled with
a variety of different resins. Second, we simulated the binding kinetics
of a model library binding to a model target molecule within our device
and discovered that aptamers with strong binding affinities for the
target (i.e., equilibrium dissociation constant KD = 0.5 nM) were preferentially retained at the input
end (i.e., in the first few microliters) of the microfluidic column
(Figure 2). Aptamers with weaker binding affinities
for the target (KD ≥ 50 nM) were
distributed almost uniformly throughout the microfluidic column with
concentrations nearly identical to the input concentration. Therefore,
smaller columns increase the mean density of strong binders, a condition
that would require fewer selection rounds to identify aptamer candidates.
A previous study used an affinity capillary column that was physically
cut into smaller pieces to isolate the highest affinity aptamers in
the earliest column segments.18

Figure 2 Dependence
of aptamer recovery on microcolumn volume. Solid and
dashed lines are the simulation results for the input-normalized concentrations
of aptamers with various binding affinities (KD ranging from 0.5 nM to 5 μM) as a function of microcolumn
volume. Data points are the experimentally measured binding densities,
given as percent of the total, of high-affinity GFPapt (green solid
circles) and low-affinity, nonspecific-binding N70 random library
(red solid diamonds) as a function of microcolumn volume. Input-normalized
aptamer concentrations are defined as the bound aptamer concentration
at a point along the column divided by the initial aptamer concentration.
Probability densities for binding are defined as the probability per
unit volume for molecules to bind in the vicinity at a point along
the column. The two y-axes are related by the total
loaded sample volume. The dashed vertical line at 10 μL marks
the volume of the devices used for the optimization experiments.

We evaluated experimentally the
binding distribution of an RNA
aptamer, hereafter referred to as GFPapt, on microcolumns that were
filled with various amounts of GFP-immobilized resin. It had been
previously shown that this aptamer has a strong binding affinity (KD ∼ 5 nM) for GFP14 and thus serves as a model molecule for the high-affinity
target-binding aptamers that are presumed to be present in random
libraries. In order to determine the amount of nonspecific, low-affinity
(i.e., “background”) binding within the microcolumn,
a small amount of the random RNA library (∼5 pmol) was included
in addition to the GFPapt (0.064 pmol). We used 0.6 μg of GFP/μL
of resin, binding and washing flow rates of 100 μL/min, and
qPCR assays to quantify the amount of both the GFPapt and the random
library captured on the microcolumn. The experimental results are
shown in Figure 2 as a percentage density of
the amount of both the GFPapt and the N70 random library loaded onto
the device. The experimental results are well fit by the simulations
for both high-affinity (KD = 5 nM for
GFPapt) and low-affinity (KD ≥
10 μM for the N70 random library) binding.

Optimization
of Aptamer Selection Conditions
To optimize
the performance of our devices and to further test our simulation
predictions, we used microcolumns filled with GFP-immobilized Ni-NTA
resin to evaluate the binding behavior of GFPapt and the random N70
library over a wide range of experimental conditions. The results
are shown as a percentage of the amount loaded onto the device (Figures 3A and 3C). For each condition,
the GFPapt enrichment was calculated as the ratio of the percent amounts
of GFPapt to random library (Figures 3B and 3D).

Figure 3 Optimization of microcolumn-based selection. (A) Percent
recovery
of GFPapt (green) and N70 random library (red) and (B) GFPapt enrichment
for different amounts of GFP immobilized onto Ni-NTA resin in a 10
μL microcolumn; loading and washing flow rates were 100 μL/min.
(C) Percent recovery of GFPapt (green) and N70 random library (red)
and (D) GFPapt enrichment for different flow rates; the amount of
GFP immobilized onto Ni-NTA resin was 0.6 μg/μL. Solid
lines show the effect of loading flow rate at a fixed washing flow
rate of 100 μL/min; dashed lines show the effect of washing
flow rate at a fixed loading flow rate of 100 μL/min. Error
bars represent the standard deviation of triplicate experiments and
measurements at each condition.

Affinity chromatography resins were developed primarily for
protein
purification applications and thus are capable of binding relatively
large amounts of target molecules; the reported binding capacity of
the resin used in our experiments is 20–50 μg of protein/μL
of resin. Despite the widespread use of these resins for aptamer selections,
there is no information available on how this parameter affects the
selection performance, since none of the previous studies optimized
the resin binding conditions.7 In order
to determine the optimum amount of bound target, we prepared five
different batches of resin with varying amounts of immobilized GFP,
from 0.024 to 15 μg of protein/μL of resin in 5-fold increments.
The amount of GFPapt captured within the device was strongly dependent
on the amount of GFP target on the resin (Figure 3A). Interestingly, we found that the highest recovery (∼40%)
was obtained at the intermediate value of 0.6 μg of protein/μL
of resin (∼15 μM). Library recovery was essentially independent
of the amount of target, and so the GFPapt enrichment was also maximized
at the same intermediate value (Figure 3B).
We had initially hypothesized that saturating the resin with GFP would
maximize the number of target binding aptamer molecules while also
minimizing nonspecific binding sites on the resin surface, yielding
the highest GFPapt enrichment. Kinetic simulations done by a similar
approach to that described for determining the optimal device size,
except with a higher fraction of strong-binding aptamers (∼1%)
to match the experimental conditions, correctly predicted that there
was no effect of target amount on recovery of the random library (Figure
S-1B, Supporting Information). However,
the simulations predicted that the highest recovery of the strong-binding
aptamer would occur at the conditions with the highest amount of bound
target (Figure S-1A, Supporting Information). We believe that this discrepancy between our experimental observations
and simulation results is primarily due to steric hindrance, where
macromolecular crowding effects on the resin surface decrease the
binding affinity of the specific aptamer sequence; a similar phenomenon
has been reported for the binding of soluble proteins to surface lipid
vesicles.19 Formation of the aptamer–target
complex could also hinder the binding of other aptamer molecules.
Our results support the use of concentrations below a critical packing
density that is determined by the larger of the two biomolecules.
All of the subsequent optimization experiments were conducted with
resin prepared at the optimum value of 0.6 μg of protein/μL
of resin.

It is well known that the best affinity chromatography
performance
is realized when the loading step is operated at the lowest possible
flow rates to approach equilibrium conditions. However, there is a
practical limitation to the experiment time. In order to determine
the optimum condition while also keeping within a practical experimental
timeline, we varied the loading flow rate from 1 to 1000 μL/min.
The recoveries of GFPapt and library were both strongly dependent
on the flow rate but with considerably different trends (Figure 3C). At the lowest flow rate, we observed the highest
GFPapt recovery, the lowest library recovery, and thus the best GFPapt
enrichment. By operating the process at higher flow rates, we observed
a gradual decrease in performance as measured by a decrease in GFPapt
enrichment (Figure 3D). Our kinetic simulations
correctly predicted that the highest recovery of the strong-binding
GFPapt molecule would be obtained at the lowest flow rate (Figure
S-2A, Supporting Information). However,
the simulations also predicted the same trend of decreasing recovery
with increasing loading flow rate for the random library (Figure S-2B, Supporting Information). This disagreement between
simulation and experimental results for the library is discussed below.

After completion of the loading step, a fixed-volume washing step
was employed to improve the separation performance by removing any
unbound or weakly bound sequences. We varied the washing flow rate
from 3 μL/min to 3 mL/min. We observed similar results to those
seen before in that the recoveries of both GFPapt and library had
different trends with increasing flow rate. Whereas the GFPapt recovery
increased at higher flow rates, the library recovery decreased (Figure 3C). Thus, the best GFPapt enrichment was obtained
at the highest washing flow rate (Figure 3D).
Together, all of the optimization experiments enabled us to choose
the optimal experimental conditions that maximize the enrichment of
strong-binding aptamers for each selection round, while keeping within
practical experimental and time constraints. These conditions are
particularly important for the earliest selection rounds when there
are only a few copies of each aptamer sequence. Our results also revealed
the importance of empirical validation and characterization of different
selection conditions, since the kinetic simulations were unable to
properly predict all the experimental trends. For example, simulation
results for the washing step predicted a gradual increase in the recovery
of random library (Figure S-3, Supporting Information)—the exact opposite trend to that seen experimentally. In
our simulations, the behavior of each species was determined by the
on- and off-rate kinetic constants. They do not include other phenomena
such as shear or pressure-related flow effects that could preferentially
affect the behavior of weak binders and the ultimate separation performance
of our microcolumns.

After fully characterizing the operating
conditions to maximize
the enrichment of strongly binding aptamers in our microcolumns, we
then proceeded to validate our selection strategy empirically by monitoring
the enrichment of GFPapt molecules in de novo selections with multiple
protein targets, including GFP. For each round, three microcolumns
were filled with Ni-NTA resin that had been preimmobilized with either
GFP or two unrelated proteins, CHK2 and UBLCP1. The latter two were
chosen because they have similar size and charge properties as the
specific target GFP and were readily available with hexahistidine
affinity tags (Table S-1, Supporting Information). An empty microcolumn was also included as a control to enable
us to discriminate target-binding from device bias.

For the
first selection round, four devices were arranged in a
serial configuration in the following order: empty, UBLCP1, CHK2,
GFP. The GFP target was put at the end so that all of the GFPapt molecules
that were combined with the random RNA library would have an opportunity
to bind to the other targets; the loading solution for the first selection
round contained 40 nmol of the random RNA library (∼5 copies
of each sequence in the 5 × 1015 library) and 6.4
fmol of GFPapt in 1 mL of binding buffer. Thus, the initial molar
ratio of library to GFPapt molecules was greater than 6 million to
one. Enrichment of GFPapt was determined for each microcolumn from
qPCR analyses of the eluted samples (Figure 4). Only the microcolumn filled with GFP-loaded resin showed significant
GFPapt enrichment. In the first round, the recoveries of the GFPapt
and the random library were 20% and 0.022% of the corresponding inputs,
respectively, yielding a GFPapt enrichment of approximately 900-fold.
However, for the other three devices, the GFPapt enrichments were
all near unity, indicating that there was no affinity for GFPapt over
the random library. To decrease the material used in the selections,
for the next two rounds the amount of the amplified RNA pool loaded
onto each device was decreased by 20-fold from the amount used in
the previous round. An appropriate amount of GFPapt was “spiked-in”
with the amplified RNA pool to maintain the same molar ratio that
was recovered in the previous round. After round 3, the amounts of
GFPapt that were recovered on the three non-GFP devices were well
below the qPCR detection limit, and therefore, no GFPapt enrichment
results could be obtained. However, for the GFP device the GFPapt
enrichments were much greater than 100-fold per selection round, giving
rise to a cumulative enrichment of over 108-fold. At the
end of round 3, approximately 95% of the GFP selected pool was composed
of GFPapt.

Figure 4 Validation of specific aptamer-target enrichment for multiplex
SELEX. UBLCP1, CHK2, and GFP were preimmobilized on Ni-NTA resin at
a density of 0.6 μg of protein/μL of resin and an empty
microcolumn was also included as a control. The loading flow rate
for all the rounds was 1 μL/min. The enrichment of GFPapt was
monitored on all four microcolumns for three consecutive selection
rounds. Results are presented in the same order that the four devices
were arranged in the serial configuration used in round 1. GFPapt
enrichment was calculated as the ratio of the percent amounts of GFPapt
to random library. The error bars represent the standard deviation
of triplicate measurements for each microcolumn.

Microcolumn SELEX for Human Heat Shock Factor Proteins
To
conclusively demonstrate the multiplex utility of the microcolumns,
we performed multiplex SELEX for a set of GST-tagged proteins: hHSF1,
hHSF2, and four other related proteins. hHSF1 and hHSF2 are transcription
factors that regulate stress response, including heat shock in human
cells, and hHSF1 plays a critical role during tumor formation and
maintenance.20 However, important questions
remain unanswered regarding their molecular interactions and the specific
mechanisms that are used to execute their functions. An RNA aptamer
against the Drosophila melanogaster HSF (dHSF) has been selected previously and used to inhibit the
binding and recruitment of dHSF to the promoters of heat shock genes.21,22 However, only moderate cross-reactivity with the hHSF proteins limits
the use of this aptamer in functional studies in human cells.23 Given the biological importance of HSF, we decided
to select for aptamers directly to hHSF1 and hHSF2, which can be used
as inhibitory tools to dissect the mechanisms of actions of these
proteins.

Each protein was preimmobilized onto glutathione–agarose
resin at approximately 1 μg of protein/μL of resin. The
GST tag was also included as a control and thus seven 20 μL
microcolumns were arranged in a serial configuration for round 1.
Following the procedure outlined above, another aliquot of the starting
RNA library (∼5 copies of each sequence in the 5 × 1015 library) was loaded onto the seven-microcolumn assembly
and then separated into a parallel arrangement for all the subsequent
rounds.

A total of five selection rounds were completed. For
rounds 2 through
5, in-line negative selections were done by connecting a 10 μL
microcolumn filled with GST-immobilized resin to the inlet of each
of the six microcolumns for the GST-tagged proteins. These precolumns
were removed after the loading step for the subsequent wash and elution
of the target protein-bound aptamers from each microcolumn.

We analyzed the sequences from the RNA pools from rounds 3 and
5 for both hHSF1 and hHSF2 by high-throughput sequencing.24,25 The total number of sequencing reads per pool ranged from 6 million
to 9 million. For both proteins, there was a noticeable shift toward
higher multiplicity values from round 3 to round 5. In round 3, the
top 20 highest multiplicity sequences for each protein represented
only ∼0.04% of the total pool. However, in round 5, the top
20 sequences represented 85.0% and 76.5% of the hHSF1 and hHSF2 selected
pools, respectively (Table S-2, Supporting Information). In addition, of the top 20 highest multiplicity sequences in round
3, between a quarter and a half of them were also among the top 20
highest multiplicity sequences in round 5 for hHSF2 and hHSF1. The
detection of enriched candidate aptamer sequences in earlier selection
rounds was possible because of the high-throughput sequencing, which
allowed us to select candidate aptamers for subsequent analysis.

We decided to investigate the potential binding of one of the top
candidate sequences for hHSF1 and hHSF2. We chose the highest ranked
sequences from the round 5 pools that were also highly ranked in round
3. For hHSF1, this was the first-ranked sequence in round 5, hereafter
referred to as hHSF1-R5-1, which was also the 11th-ranked sequence
in round 3 (Table S-2, Supporting Information). For hHSF2, this was the second-ranked sequence in round 5, hereafter
referred to as hHSF2-R5-2, and also the sixth-ranked sequence in Round
3 (Table S-2, Supporting Information).
The full-length sequences and predicted structures of these two aptamer
candidates are available in the Supporting Information (Figure S-4). These two candidates represented 13.4% and 6.8% of
the corresponding round 5 pools. The full-length aptamer candidates
(including the constant regions) were PCR-amplified from their respective
pools by use of a candidate-specific forward oligo and the reverse
constant region oligo, and then cloned into plasmid vectors to obtain
a pure template.

The putative RNA aptamers were fluorescently
end-labeled and then
tested for binding to their hHSF targets by F-EMSA and FP assays.16 An image of a typical F-EMSA result is shown
in Figure 5A for hHSF1-R5-1 aptamer binding
to hHSF1 protein. The fraction of bound aptamer was calculated as
a function of protein concentration and then plotted as shown in Figures 5B and 5C for various aptamer–protein
pairings; KD values were determined by
fitting each data set to the Hill equation. Overall, both aptamers
showed high-affinity binding to hHSF1 and hHSF2 (KD < 20 nM). Interestingly, both aptamers also bound
to hexahistidine-tagged dHSF, although slightly more weakly (KD ∼ 70 nM), and no binding was observed
to the GST-tag alone. The F-EMSA results were confirmed by the FP
assays (Figures S-5 and S-6, Supporting Information). Thus, the observed binding is not due to the affinity tags on
the protein targets but rather to specific domains of the targets
themselves. Given that the highest degree of sequence similarity between
hHSF1, hHSF2, and dHSF is in the DNA binding and trimerization domains
(DBD-TD)26 and that the previously selected
dHSF aptamer was found to bind the DBD-TD of dHSF,21 we predict these novel hHSF aptamers are likely to bind
the HSF proteins in a similar fashion. Contrary to their functional
similarity, these two aptamers did not show any similarity in secondary
structure as predicted by mFold27 (Figure
S-4, Supporting Information). Although
beyond the scope of the present work, the detailed mechanism of these
and other potential aptamers’ binding to HSF proteins as well
as the consequences of binding await further study. However, successful
selection of two distinct high-affinity aptamers, hHSF1-R5-1 and hHSF2-R5-2,
targeting two closely related proteins, hHSF1 and hHSF2 respectively,
in a single selection demonstrates that our microcolumn-based SELEX
technology is capable of yielding high-affinity aptamers (KD < 20 nM) in as little as five rounds of
selection, whereas most conventional SELEX methods require typically
12 rounds of selection.7

Figure 5 Evaluation of candidate
aptamers binding to target proteins. (A)
Typical F-EMSA results for hHSF1-R5-1 aptamer binding to a two-thirds
dilution series (from 2000 nM to 0.2 nM) of hHSF1 protein. (B, C)
Binding curves measured by F-EMSA for hHSF1-R5-1 and hHSF2-R5-2 aptamers
to hHSF1, hHSF2, dHSF, and GST tag. The same dilution series in panel
A was used in panels B and C. The solid lines are the best fits of
the Hill equation to the experimental data for each aptamer–target
pair with the appropriate KD values given
in the figure legends.

Conclusions
We have developed a microcolumn-based technology
for the efficient
selection of nucleic acid aptamers for multiple targets. Our microcolumns
have a number of advantages over other chromatography-based processes.
First, they can be readily assembled in various configurations to
accommodate multiple targets during the selection step; as a proof
of principle, we used a single aliquot of starting RNA aptamer library
to perform selections for seven different immobilized target proteins
in separate microcolumns. Second, as either assembled or disassembled
units, they do not require any specialized equipment to perform the
selection step; we used a multirack syringe pump to control the solution
flow rates during the selection step. Third, they require very small
amounts of resin and target molecules. For this study, we focused
on the selection of RNA aptamers; however, our approach would also
work for DNA aptamers. The multiplex selection presented in this work
is simpler and thus easier to perform than previous microfluidic techniques
that use sol–gel chemistry.8 Also,
compared to filter-plate-based methods,9 our modular columns allow “counter-selections” to
be done simultaneously with the selection step to enhance target specificity.

The overall performance of our devices was evaluated in two different
sets of experiments. In the first, we looked at a single selection
step and optimized its performance by monitoring the enrichment of
GFPapt, a known RNA aptamer for GFP. The performance was strongly
dependent on the amount of target immobilized onto the resin and the
flow rates for both the loading and washing steps. In the second,
we used the optimal conditions as part of a selection and amplification
strategy to verify specific GFPapt partitioning over three protein
preparations (UBLCP1, CHK2, and GFP), followed by a complete multiplex
selection against hHSF1 and hHSF2. High-throughput sequencing analysis
of the selected pools from multiple rounds showed an enrichment of
specific aptamer sequences. For hHSF1 and hHSF2, the sequences from
round 5 with the highest multiplicity values also had high interround
enrichments. Those sequences were target-specific and could be easily
identified as being preferentially enriched after just three selection
rounds. We tested a single candidate each to hHSF1 and hHSF2 and found
both to be high-affinity aptamers to full-length hHSFs.

Although
HSF proteins have been extensively studied and characterized,
we are still limited by the available methods and lack approaches
to perturb the activity of specific factors to tease apart molecular
interactions. Aptamers can act as inhibitors that bind to a protein
surface and disrupt specific interactions or functions. When expressed
in vivo in a temporally and spatially controlled manner, these aptamers
provide a way to rapidly disrupt targeted domains of proteins and
efficiently assess their primary functions and mechanisms of actions.
We previously demonstrated the utility of inhibitory RNA aptamers
to study macromolecular interactions in vivo.21,22,28 However, there were some limitations on
the methodology used to select those aptamers, and we believe that
our new method will significantly improve the SELEX efficiency by:
(1) allowing the selection of aptamers for many targets, including
different domains of a single protein, at the same time and (2) reducing
the number of SELEX rounds to achieve the selection of high-affinity
aptamers. With this multiplexed technology, we believe it will be
possible to efficiently select aptamers that bind to the distinct
domains of HSF and other proteins, which will be extremely valuable
to study the interactions of these proteins.

Extensions of the
microcolumn devices and approach developed in
this work could be used for selection strategies with various combinatorial
libraries, including but not limited to genomic sequences,29 mRNA display,30 and
peptide nucleic acids.31 Also, our multiplex
approach would easily facilitate the discovery of multivalent aptamers
to distinct target binding sites32 by performing
a final selection by use of serially arranged microcolumns with different
target subunits in each. Finally, our microcolumn devices could be
used to discriminate for aptamers based on their on- or off-rate binding
characteristics by enforcing certain restrictions on the flow rates
used for the loading step and washing step, respectively.33

Supporting Information Available
Additional text, two
tables,
and six figures as described in the text. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac400105e_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
∥ D.R.L.:
Department of Chemical Engineering, McMaster University.

Author Present Address
⊥ C.V.K.: Department of Physics and Astronomy, Wayne State University.

Author Present Address
▽ B.S.W.: Department of Internal Medicine,
Division of Oncology and
The Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine.

Author Contributions
§ D.R.L. and
K.S. contributed equally to this work.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institutes
of Health
R01 GM090320. We thank Dr. Peter Schweitzer at the Cornell University
Genomics Facility for his help with the high-throughput sequencing,
Colin Waters for sequence clustering and analysis, and Dr. Seung-min
Park for early discussions. Also, we thank Heather Deal and Harvey
Tian for preparing the workflow diagram in Figure 1B.
==== Refs
References
Ciesiolka J. M. ; et al. RNA 
1995 , 1 , 538 –550 .7489515 
Shangguan D. ; et al. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2006 , 103 (32 ), 11838 –11843 .16873550 
Tombelli S. ; Mascini M. 
Curr. Opin. Mol. Ther. 
2009 , 11 (2 ), 179 –188 .19330723 
Joyce G. F. 
Gene 
1989 , 82 (1 ), 83 –87 .2684778 
Ellington A. D. ; Szostak J. W. 
Nature 
1990 , 346 , 818 –822 .1697402 
Tuerk C. ; Gold L. 
Science 
1990 , 249 (4968 ), 505 –510 .2200121 
Gopinath S. C. B. 
Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 
2007 , 387 (1 ), 171 –182 .17072603 
Park S. ; et al. Lab
Chip 
2009 , 9 (9 ), 1206 –1212 .19370238 
Jolma A. ; J. ; et al. Genome Res. 
2010 , 20 (6 ), 861 –873 .20378718 
Nieuwlandt D. ; et al. Biochemistry 
1995 , 34 , 5651 –5659 .7537093 
Liu J. ; Stormo G. D. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2005 , 33 (17 ), e141 .16186128 
Cheng C. ; et al. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 
2008 , 366 (3 ), 670 –674 .18078808 
Holeman L. A. ; et al. Folding
Des. 
1998 , 3 (6 ), 423 –431 .
Shui B. ; et al. Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2012 , 40 (5 ), e39 .22189104 
Cox J. C. ; et al. Biotechnol.
Prog. 
1998 , 14 (6 ), 845 –850 .9841645 
Pagano J. M. ; et al. J.
Biol. Chem. 
2007 , 282 (12 ), 8883 –8894 .17264081 
Eulberg D. ; et al. Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2005 , 33 (4 ), e45 .15745995 
Nitsche A. ; et al. BMC
Biotechnol. 
2007 , 7 , 48 .17697378 
Leventis R. ; Silvius J. R. 
Biophys. J. 
2010 , 99 (7 ), 2125 –2133 .20923646 
Dai C. ; et al. Cell 
2007 , 130 (6 ), 1005 –1018 .17889646 
Zhao X. ; et al. Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2006 , 34 (13 ), 3755 –3761 .16893958 
Salamanca H. H. ; et al. Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2011 , 39 (15 ), 6729 –6740 .21576228 
Unpublished
work, Cornell University, 2009 .
Zimmermann B. ; et al. PLoS
One 
2010 , 5 (2 ), e9169 .20161784 
Cho M. ; et al. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2010 , 107 (35 ), 15373 –15378 .20705898 
Anckar J. ; Sistonen L. 
Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 
2007 , 594 , 78 –88 .17205677 
Zuker M. 
Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2003 , 31 (13 ), 3406 –3415 .12824337 
Shi H. ; et al. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
1999 , 96 (18 ), 10033 –10038 .10468557 
Singer B. S. ; et al. Nucleic
Acids Res. 
1997 , 25 (4 ), 781 –786 .9016629 
Wilson D. S. ; et al. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2001 , 98 (7 ), 3750 –3755 .11274392 
Brudno Y. ; et al. Nat.
Chem. Biol. 
2010 , 6 , 148 –155 .20081830 
Gong Q. ; et al. Anal.
Chem. 
2012 , 84 (12 ), 5365 –5371 .22624874 
Gold L. ; et al. PLoS
One 
2010 , 5 (12 ), e15004 .21165148
