
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac502838tArticleAutomated Anatomical Interpretation of Ion Distributions
in Tissue: Linking Imaging Mass Spectrometry to Curated Atlases Verbeeck Nico †‡Yang Junhai §De Moor Bart †‡Caprioli Richard
M. §Waelkens Etienne ∥⊥Van de Plas Raf *§† Department
of Electrical Engineering (ESAT), STADIUS Center for
Dynamical Systems, Signal Processing, and Data Analytics, KU Leuven, Kasteelpark
Arenberg 10, Box 2446, 3001 Leuven, Belgium‡ iMinds
Medical IT, Kasteelpark
Arenberg 10, Box 2446, 3001 Leuven, Belgium§ Mass
Spectrometry Research Center and Departments of Biochemistry, Chemistry,
Pharmacology, and Medicine, Vanderbilt University, 465 21st Avenue South, MRB III Suite
9160, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, United States∥ Sybioma, KU Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg O&N 2, Herestraat 49, Box
802, 3000 Leuven, Belgium⊥ Department
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg O&N 1, Herestraat
49, Box 901, 3000 Leuven, Belgium* E-mail: raf.vandeplas@vanderbilt.edu. Tel: +1 (717) 723−8370. Fax: +1 (615)
343−8372.25 08 2015 25 08 2014 16 09 2014 86 18 8974 8982 29 03 2014 30 07 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyTerms of Use

Imaging
mass spectrometry (IMS) has become a prime tool for studying
the distribution of biomolecules in tissue. Although IMS data sets
can become very large, computational methods have made it practically
feasible to search these experiments for relevant findings. However,
these methods lack access to an important source of information that
many human interpretations rely upon: anatomical insight. In this
work, we address this need by (1) integrating a curated anatomical
data source with an empirically acquired IMS data source, establishing
an algorithm-accessible link between them and (2) demonstrating the
potential of such an IMS-anatomical atlas link by applying it toward
automated anatomical interpretation of ion distributions in tissue.
The concept is demonstrated in mouse brain tissue, using the Allen
Mouse Brain Atlas as the curated anatomical data source that is linked
to MALDI-based IMS experiments. We first develop a method to spatially
map the anatomical atlas to the IMS data sets using nonrigid registration
techniques. Once a mapping is established, a second computational
method, called correlation-based querying, gives an elementary demonstration
of the link by delivering basic insight into relationships between
ion images and anatomical structures. Finally, a third algorithm moves
further beyond both registration and correlation by providing automated
anatomical interpretation of ion images. This task is approached as
an optimization problem that deconstructs ion distributions as combinations
of known anatomical structures. We demonstrate that establishing a
link between an IMS experiment and an anatomical atlas enables automated
anatomical annotation, which can serve as an important accelerator
both for human and machine-guided exploration of IMS experiments.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac502838tdocument-id-new-14ac-2014-02838tccc-price
==== Body
Understanding
the spatial context
in which molecular interactions take place is becoming increasingly
important in the study of biological and pathological processes in
living organisms. The spatial distribution of biomolecules and the
localization of biochemical interactions throughout tissue often hold
crucial clues toward determining the biological functions of these
biomolecules. Imaging mass spectrometry (IMS)1,2 is
a molecular imaging technology that can deliver such spatial information
with high chemical specificity for various classes of biomolecules,
including metabolites, lipids, peptides, and proteins. IMS has been
gaining considerable momentum in recent years, primarily in the field
of tissue biomarkers3,4 and drug delivery,5,6 and has been successfully applied to tissues of various origin,
including insect,7 mammalian,8 and human tissue.9−11 IMS makes it possible
to monitor many hundreds of biomolecules simultaneously, making it
a prime technology for exploratory studies. However, this exploratory
advantage is hampered by the large amount of data that a single IMS
experiment can deliver, making interpretation and analysis difficult.

Previous work has employed both supervised and unsupervised computational
methods,12−15 such as hierarchical clustering, principal component analysis,16,17 and probabilistic latent semantic analysis,18 to perform comprehensive analysis of these large data sets. While
these methods aid human interpretation by reducing the data size and
complexity, they often operate in a blind fashion in the sense that
they lack access to an important source of information that many human
interpretations rely upon: anatomical information on the tissue in
question. This information is available in textbooks and through publically
accessible anatomical atlases for various organ types and organisms.
However, the use of such information in IMS studies remains largely
restricted to manual comparison,19−21 which poses a practical
challenge for larger multiexperiment studies and brings with it a
risk of introducing human bias into the analysis. In order to fully
utilize this body of anatomical insight for the interpretation of
ion distributions in IMS data, a computer-traversable bridge between
IMS and curated anatomical info is essential. Recent work by Abdelmoula
et al.22 has taken a first step toward
this integration by developing a workflow that performs automated
spatial registration of IMS data to anatomical information through
microscopy. We extend this line of research further by focusing on
the applications that become possible once a registration is available.
In order to do so, we first (1) establish and demonstrate our own
algorithm-accessible link between curated anatomical data and empirically
acquired IMS data and then (2) move beyond registration by applying
the established IMS-anatomical atlas link toward automated anatomical
interpretation of the ion images obtained through IMS.

Since
a substantial amount of IMS research focuses on the rodent
brain,23 our case studies use MALDI-TOF
IMS data from mouse brain tissue as the empirical data source and
the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas24 as the curated
anatomical data source. Both data types have been used in studies
of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s,
and healthy mouse brain.25,26 However, the methods
developed in this paper are not specific to these case studies, a
particular species, disease model, or atlas. They can be readily applied
to any IMS-atlas combination that makes sense within the context of
a particular study.

Methods introduces
the two data sources
and describes the three computational methods that implement the anatomy-aware
analysis approach we developed: (i) registration, (ii) correlation-based
querying, and (iii) automated anatomical interpretation. Results & Discussion applies the developed methods
to both a protein-focused and a lipid-focused case study, with complementary
details in the Supporting Information.

Methods
The first objective, the integration of the two data sources, entails
development of two computational methods. The first method spatially
registers the IMS data to the anatomical atlas. Registration is a
necessary step that precedes anatomical interpretation and makes direct
mapping of findings across data sources possible by establishing a
common coordinate system.27−29 Since the methods that follow
are independent of how this spatial mapping is established and are
quite robust against registration errors, we provide a relatively
basic registration implementation. A more advanced and automated registration
procedure is available in Abdelmoula et al.22 Since the registration needs to account for cutting artifacts, tissue
deformations due to extraction and freezing of the brain, and other
spatial perturbations, nonrigid registration techniques27,28 play a central role here. The second method utilizes the established
link to interrogate the combined data sources for correlations. Correlation-based
queries deliver insight into the spatial correlations between ion
images in IMS and anatomical areas in the atlas. In previous studies
the authors, as well as several other groups, have successfully demonstrated
the potential of correlation-based approaches to guide the user toward
relevant findings.22,30−34 When the integration objective is complete, anatomical
regions are implicitly annotated with biochemical findings from mass
spectrometry, and biomolecular distributions are inherently mapped
to a set of anatomical definitions.

The second objective moves
beyond registration and simple correlation
and uses the established IMS-anatomical atlas link to develop an automated
anatomical interpretation method for IMS data. We define the anatomical
interpretation of an ion image as decomposing the ion distribution
into a combination of known anatomical areas that are tentatively
tied to that specific ion. Anatomical interpretation becomes possible
once a registration of IMS data to an atlas is available. Since it
is independent of the particular method that was utilized to attain
such registration, and it is assumed that registration errors are
always present to some extent, automated anatomical interpretation
methods can be developed largely orthogonal to but still benefit from
any registration advancements. The interpretation method we develop
can therefore be used in any setting where IMS is coupled to an atlas.
Although the correlation-based queries demonstrate the functioning
of the IMS-to-atlas mapping and provide a first step toward exploration
of the combined data, they are insufficient to power automated anatomical
interpretation of ion images. The main reason is their inadequate
handling of ions that are present in several anatomical areas simultaneously.
An automated anatomical interpretation of ion images therefore needs
to be able to handle membership of an ion to multiple anatomical structures
and preferably should include a measure of abundance. To this end,
the third computational method of this work develops an algorithm
that uses the IMS-atlas link to automatically interpret any ion image
in the IMS data set as a combination of atlas-provided anatomical
structures, without the need for human intervention.

Anatomy Data
The
publicly accessible Allen Mouse Brain
Atlas (AMBA) is used as the anatomical data source. This atlas is
based on the brain of a 56-day-old C57BL/6J mouse, and has a user
base that exceeds 10000 users per month.25 The brain is dissected into 528 coronal tissue sections at 25 μm
separation, which are Nissl-stained, registered to each other, and
assembled into a reconstructed brain volume. A low resolution (25
μm voxel width) gray scale version of this reconstructed brain
volume is accessible through the application programming interface
provided by the AMBA Web site35 and is
imported into MATLAB 2012b (The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA) to establish
a local copy for further computation (Figure 1).

Of the 528 coronal tissue sections, 132 are hand annotated
and combined to create a three-dimensional (3D) anatomical reference
atlas (Figure 1). This atlas is registered
to the brain volume constructed from the Nissl stains and contains
over 800 anatomical structures. It can be consulted using Brain Explorer
2 (AMBA Web site).

Figure 1 Registered microscopy and anatomy in the Allen Mouse Brain
Atlas.
The microscopy volume contains 528 coronal Nissl-stained tissue sections
(left). These data are imported into and visualized using MATLAB,
color-coding intensity from red to yellow. The 3D anatomical reference
atlas contains over 800 anatomical structures (right). These data
are visualized using Brain Explorer 2.

IMS Data
Coronal tissue sections of a 12 μm thickness
were acquired from a healthy adult mouse brain that had been frozen
in liquid nitrogen. Two neighboring sections from this brain were
selected for IMS measurement and mounted on ITO-coated glass slides.
A third neighboring section was mounted on a glass slide and Nissl-stained
for matching against the Nissl stains of the AMBA. We give an overview
of the staining and IMS measurements below and refer to the Supporting Information for full details. One
IMS measurement focuses on protein imaging, acquiring ions between m/z 3000 and 22000. The other IMS measurement
focuses on lipids with a m/z range
from 400 to 1000. The tissue sections were sublimated with sinapinic
acid (protein-oriented) and 1,5-diaminonaphthalene (lipid-oriented).
The measurements were acquired on a Bruker Autoflex Speed MALDI-TOF
mass spectrometer in the positive linear mode with a laser spot size
of 80 μm on target and at a pitch of 100 μm (protein-oriented)
and in the negative reflector mode with a laser spot size of 30 μm
on target and at a pitch of 80 μm (lipid-oriented), using FlexControl
3.3. Approximately 100 shots/spot were acquired at a 1 kHz repetition
rate using a Smartbeam II Nd:YAG laser. Image acquisition was carried
out using FlexImaging 2.1, and further processing took place in MATLAB.
The spectra were normalized on the basis of their common ion current,
disregarding differential peaks.36 They
were baseline-corrected using a spline approximation of the baseline
at the 10%-quantile of ion intensities and employing window sizes
of 500 and 50 and step sizes of 250 and 25 for the protein and lipid-focused
spectra, respectively. The spectra were also optimally aligned along
the m/z axis to reduce peak drift,
allowing a maximum m/z shift of
12 and 0.5 for protein and lipid-focused spectra, respectively. Both
steps were performed using the Bioinformatics Toolbox of MATLAB (The
Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA).

Registration of Data Sources
Coupling
IMS data to the
atlas requires the two data sources to be registered to each other,
thus transforming them to a common coordinate system, in which their
pixel locations describe the same space and can be directly compared.27,28 The IMS-atlas registration process requires multiple steps and uses
both rigid and nonrigid registration to handle the complexities that
are commonly encountered in tissue (e.g., deformation during extraction
and freezing of the brain, differences between individual mouse brains,
cutting artifacts, etc.). To deal with these complex deformation cases,
nonrigid registration techniques37,38 are essential.

The IMS data is registered to the anatomical atlas via a modality
common to both data sources: stained microscopy (Figure 2). The registration process entails: (1) rigid registration
of IMS data to the experiment histology, (2) rigid registration of
atlas data to the reference histology, and (3) nonrigid registration
of the experiment histology to the reference histology. Although it
is technically possible to register IMS data directly to the atlas,
it is preferable to go through histology since the IMS data and the
atlas data are of a substantially different nature with very differing
spatial resolutions (80–100 and 0.3 μm, respectively).
Using microscopy as an intermediate offers several advantages: (i)
registration is more straightforward within a single modality, certainly
given the complexity involved in nonrigid registration, (ii) the resolutions
are high and comparable, and (iii) histological microscopy is readily
available in most state-of-the-art IMS experiments.

Details
of the registration process can be found in the Supporting Information. To summarize, (1) the
rigid registration between IMS data and experiment histology is performed
in MATLAB through manual selection of fiducial markers, (2) the rigid
registration from atlas to reference histology is provided by the
AMBA, and (3) the nonrigid registration between experiment histology
and reference histology is performed using the Medical Image Registration
Toolbox (MIRT) by Myronenko,29,39 making use of a free
form deformation (FFD) model.

Figure 2 Workflow of the registration process. Spatially
registering IMS
data to anatomical data consists of 3 individual registration steps:
(1) rigid registration of IMS data to experiment histology, (2) rigid
registration of anatomical data to reference histology, and (3) nonrigid
registration of experiment histology to reference histology.

Correlation-Based Querying
Once registration is complete,
it becomes possible to find out which anatomical structures correlate
with a measured ion distribution or which ions correlate with a certain
anatomical zone of interest. To enable this simple form of correlation-based
querying, we create an anatomical structure image for each individual
anatomical structure that is present in the tissue slice. Such an
anatomical structure image (caudoputamen example in Figure 4A, top) represents the spatial location of a single
anatomical annotation and contains ones in locations where the anatomical
structure is present, and zeros elsewhere. To soften the binary assignments
somewhat at the edges of the structure, we apply a Gaussian filter,
which eliminates crisp borders.

Next, the spatial correlation
between an ion image and an anatomical structure image is obtained
by calculating the Pearson correlation coefficient between the intensities
of both images over all IMS measurement locations. To prevent bias,
only pixels for which both types of data are available are part of
the correlation analysis. The analysis is performed by reshaping both
2D images to 1D vectors, removing any rows for which only one type
of information is available, and then calculating the correlations
between the resulting vectors. The correlation coefficient for each
possible anatomical structure/ion image combination is calculated
and collected into a correlation table for easy visualization and
querying.

Automated Anatomical Interpretation
The goal of the
anatomical interpretation method is to examine the pattern in an ion
image, and, without human intervention, determine which anatomical
structures are involved and what their ion intensity contribution
is. In other words, once an ion image is mapped to the atlas (using
the proposed registration pipeline or an automated variant thereof22), the interpretation method takes that ion distribution
pattern as an input and then automatically decomposes it into a combination
of atlas-provided anatomical structures.

At its core, anatomical
interpretation is a problem of approximating the spatial pattern of
an ion with a combination of patterns selected from a provided vocabulary
of anatomical patterns. The model we employ in our algorithm considers
an ion image to be a sum of products, each product multiplying a pattern
from the finite set of anatomical patterns with its contribution coefficient.
Since we know both the ion image and the anatomical patterns and their
relationship is established by the model, the search for the optimal
anatomical contribution coefficients (and thus the optimal anatomical
interpretation) can be approached as a multivariate optimization problem.
The mathematical details of this approach are provided in the Supporting Information.

Our implementation
uses CVX, a package for specifying and solving
convex programs,40,41 to solve the optimization problem
for each ion image we want interpreted. The anatomical patterns are
used as building blocks to construct an approximation of each ion
image, and the coefficients specify how each anatomical structure
contributes to the overall approximation. A nice feature of the method
is that an anatomical contribution coefficient tends to be proportional
to the ion intensity in that anatomical structure, inherently assigning
a notion of importance or weight to each anatomical zone involved.
Anatomical images, and thus structures, corresponding to high absolute
coefficients are important for approximating the ion distribution
of interest and are therefore considered part of the anatomical interpretation
of that ion image. Also, note that in our examples the coefficients
are not constrained to positive values. This allows the anatomical
interpretation to say things like “the ion seems to be present
in zone A plus zone B minus zone C.”

Results and Discussion
We demonstrate the developed methods both in a protein-focused
and a lipid-focused case study of coronal mouse brain sections, illustrating
the potential of incorporating anatomical information into IMS analysis.

Results
on Registration of the Data Sources
A nonrigid
registration algorithm is used to register the experiment histology
(Figure 3A.a) to the atlas reference histology
(Figure 3A.d). Although the experiment histology
is strongly deformed compared to the reference histology, the registration
results (Figure 3A.c) demonstrate that the
nonrigid registration can deal well with these soft-tissue deformations.
The FFD (free form deformation) mesh of control points (Figure 3A.b) that constitutes the transformation between
the two images shows how the experiment histology image is “warped”
to register to the atlas histology. By using a FFD transformation
mesh, we ensure that neighboring IMS pixels remain neighbors and prevent
excessive distortion of the original data.

Figure 3B shows how the transformation established by the nonrigid
registration process is used to transform and project data from one
data source to the other and vice versa. The nonrigid transformation
is reversible (up to a rounding error), and there is a one-to-one
relationship between locations in “IMS space” and locations
in “atlas space”. This means that we are able to project
IMS data onto the reference histology (Figure 3B, top right). Such a projection effectively brings empirical MS
measurements acquired from imperfectly sectioned or deformed tissue
into the reference shape of the mouse brain, and it directly links
these observations to reference atlas annotations. Similarly, we can
project the atlas annotations onto the experiment histology (Figure 3B lower left). This direction of projection draws
annotations that are typically defined in an ideally shaped version
of the mouse brain into the practical tissue sample that was sectioned.
Casting the anatomy information to the experiment histology also enables
quick visual verification of the correctness of the projection since
the neighborhood structure of the different subareas should be retained
regardless of tissue deformation.

Figure 3 Overview of registration results. (A)
Nonrigid registration of
the experiment histology onto the reference histology from the atlas.
(a) Despite the large initial deformation of the experiment histology,
(b) the nonrigid transformation successfully compensates and (c) registers
onto the (d) reference histology. (B) The nonrigid registration enables
traversal from the coordinate system of one data source to the other:
the acquired ion image can be projected onto the reference histology
for direct comparison to the anatomical annotations. Inversely, the
anatomical annotations, provided by the atlas, can be projected onto
the experiment histology, to provide anatomical guidance within the
sectioned tissue.

Results on Querying the
Correlation between Anatomy and Ions
Once registration of
the two data sources is complete, we construct
a correlation table by calculating the spatial correlation between
the anatomical structure images and the ion images of the peak-picked
IMS protein data. The correlation table (available in the Supporting Information) allows two types of queries:
anatomical queries and ion queries.

Anatomical Query
The anatomical query provides an answer
to the question “Which ions are specific to anatomical region
X?”. To demonstrate, we use the caudoputamen as an example
anatomical structure. Figure 4A shows the input, the anatomical structure image of the caudoputamen,
and displays the part of the correlation table that pertains to this
structure, highlighting its spatial correlation to the various ion
images. Ions m/z 12650 (ρ
= 0.77) and m/z 21832 (ρ =
0.70) are two examples of ion images that exhibit high positive correlation
in this case. These ions show a clear spatial overlap with the anatomical
structure image of the caudoputamen and are almost exclusively located
therein.

Figure 4 (A) Example of an anatomical query, finding ions specific to the
caudoputamen. The anatomical structure image of the caudoputamen is
given as an input and the correlation table returns the spatial correlation
to this structure for each ion image. Two examples of ion images that
positively correlate with the target anatomical structure are displayed.
(B) Example of an ion query, finding anatomical regions in which m/z 7841 is highly expressed. The ion image
of m/z 7841 is given as an input,
and the correlation table returns the spatial correlation to this
ion image for all the anatomical regions. Two examples of anatomical
structure images that positively correlate with the target ion image
are displayed.

Ion Query
The
ion query provides an answer to the question
“In which anatomical regions is ion Y located?”. To
demonstrate this query, we use the ion image for m/z 7841 as an example. Figure 4B shows the ion image as input and, analogous to the anatomical query,
it displays the part of the correlation table that pertains to this
ion. The isocortex (ρ = 0.40) and the somatosensory areas (ρ
= 0.36), which are substructures of the isocortex, are two examples
of anatomical structures that exhibit high positive correlation with m/z 7841. Additional examples are provided
in the Supporting Information.

Correlation-based
queries can deliver fast insight into relationships between ions and
anatomical structures but have several disadvantages. First, it is
difficult to define a generic threshold to determine when these correlations
become significant. Second, since several thousands of correlations
are being calculated in parallel, the multiple testing problem needs
to be considered when drawing conclusions from these results. However,
the most important roadblock for using correlation toward automated
anatomical interpretation is the concept of “multimembership”.
Correlation considers only the relationship between a single anatomical
structure and a single ion. An ion that appears in several anatomical
structures simultaneously will exhibit a relatively low correlation
to each of the individual anatomical structures that it is a member
of. Such an ion will not give a strong signal in the correlation table
and could go undetected as a result. In these multimembership situations,
which are quite common in most biological tissue types, correlation-based
querying falls short and is not capable of dealing with the complexities
of the biology. In fact, in such complex cases, any univariate querying
strategy will provide skewed results.

Figure 5 Examples of automated anatomical interpretation.
When an ion image
is given as input (left), the interpretation method provides an optimal
anatomical explanation for the observed ion pattern (right), using
the library of provided anatomical structures. Specifically, the ion
intensity pattern is decomposed without user intervention into an
optimal combination of contributing anatomical structures from the
atlas. The interpretation method provides (i) the closest approximation
of the measured ion image using atlas structures (right, middle) and
(ii) an overview of the contributing anatomical structures, specifying
name, reference location, and contributing intensity or weight in
the interpretation (right, outer ring). This visualization delivers
quick insight into the major anatomical zones associated with an ion
image, while also providing a notion of the relative contributions
of each underlying structure involved. Negative weights indicate a
relative decrease of the ion in those areas. (A) Ion m/z 742.57 is highly expressed in the somatosensory
areas, the fiber tracts, and the pallidum. (B) Ion m/z 723.53 shows a decrease specifically in the somatosensory
areas, as indicated by the negative weight. The empirical ion distributions
show good congruence with the boundaries of the anatomical structures
defined in the atlas, indicating good spatial mapping between the
data sources and strong biological signals in the IMS measurements.

Results on Automated Anatomical
Interpretation
Since
the membership of an ion to multiple anatomical structures cannot
be clearly captured by a univariate strategy, the use of correlation
to drive automated anatomical interpretation of ion images is limited.
Instead, a more advanced approach, using multivariate models to account
for multimembership, is necessary. Methods introduces a linear model, capable of capturing the multimembership
aspect effectively, to tie ion image patterns to anatomical structure
patterns. By applying convex optimization to this model and the given
ion and anatomy patterns, it is possible to obtain an optimal anatomical
explanation for each ion image. Figure 5 shows
the automated anatomical interpretation of several ion images from
the lipid case study, using our method. Each ion image gets interpreted,
automatically and without user-intervention, as an optimal combination
of anatomical zones from the AMBA. The interpretation is optimal in
the sense that it selects the combination of atlas patterns that gives
the closest approximation of the measured ion image. If there are
multiple combinations that come equally close, the combination with
the least amount of anatomical structures (and thus the simplest explanation)
is selected. In short, the automated anatomical interpretation method
provides (i) the closest approximation of the measured ion image using
atlas structures (Figure 5, right, middle)
and (ii) an overview of the contributing anatomical structures, specifying
name, reference location, and contributing intensity or weight in
the interpretation (Figure 5, right, outer
ring). This visualization
delivers quick insight into the major anatomical zones associated
with an ion image, while also providing a notion of the relative contributions
of each underlying structure involved.

The example in panel
A shows a clearly defined expression of the ion m/z 742.57 in the fiber tracts and ventricles (more
specifically the corpus callosum, which is not annotated as a separate
region in the AMBA), the pallidum, and the somatosensory areas. Using
negative contribution coefficients, the algorithm also reports areas
where the ion exhibits reduced presence, such as in the striatum.
Panel B shows the ion m/z 723.53,
which is specifically absent from the somatosensory areas. The strong
congruence between empirically observed patterns in the ion distributions
and anatomical structures extracted from the atlas indicate good spatial
mapping between these data sources and strong biological signals in
the IMS measurements. Additional examples of the in total 1405 ion
images that we applied the automated anatomical interpretation methodology
to are provided in the Supporting Information.

It should be noted that the heads-up-display type visualization
of Figure 5 is meant for human consumption
and is but one of many possible representations of the interpretation
results. In essence, the interpretation algorithm provides for each
ion image a set of contribution coefficients, one for each structure
in the atlas. Each contribution coefficient can be considered to report
a degree of membership of an ion to a particular structure. Custom
visualizations of these coefficients can be developed as demanded
by the application. In the case of a machine-based follow-up, no visualization
will be necessary at all and the anatomical membership coefficients
for each ion image in an IMS experiment can be passed on directly
to the next computational step in the analysis.

The automated
breakdown of an ion image into contributing anatomical
structures is a powerful tool, particularly for the histological nonexpert.
It supplies the researcher directly with the relationships between
an ion and the anatomical structures in which it is expressed. The
interpretation algorithm can substantially aid in unraveling the function
of biomolecular ions. It can incorporate the body of pathological
research that is currently publicly available into the analysis of
an individual IMS experiment and this without much additional effort.
Essentially, the results of the analysis constitute a table of anatomical
membership coefficients, linking each ion image to each anatomical
structure. This table can be queried in the same way as the correlation
table from the correlation-based queries but does away with the disadvantages
of a univariate approach. Most importantly, the multimembership of
ions to different anatomical zones is now taken into account, providing
the user with a much more complete and reliable list of anatomical-structure-to-ion
relationships.

The greatest benefit of an automated anatomical
interpretation
method is the potential for parallelization. A computational interpretation
method can deliver anatomical interpretations for every ion image
in an experiment, even if the number of ion images runs into the hundreds
or thousands. It can provide these interpretations concurrently, without
human intervention, and in a single calculation. This avoids the labor
and time-intensive step of having a histological expert manually interpret
hundreds of ion images and the potential risk for human bias that
comes with it. It also enables the researcher to pursue broad exploratory
measurements, after which the focus can be narrowed to only the most
promising ions that have demonstrated a relationship to a particular
anatomical structure of interest.

A possible downside to using
an anatomical atlas for the interpretation
of IMS data is that zones that have not been previously discovered
in pathological and anatomical research and thus are not present in
the atlas cannot be found in the ion images and cannot be part of
their interpretation. However, examining those ions that cannot be
adequately approximated with an atlas could provide a route to the
automated discovery of new physiological or chemical subdivisions
within tissue areas that are considered to be homogeneous by anatomy.
We elaborate on this in the Supporting Information.

Conclusions
Establishing a link between an IMS experiment
and an anatomical
atlas can serve as an important accelerator both for human and machine-guided
exploration of IMS experiments.

As the number and complexity
of IMS experiments increases and studies
aim to compare a growing number of IMS experiments to each other,
the importance of automated approaches to filter the massive data
sets for patterns of interest will become increasingly important.
The automated anatomical interpretation of ion images can serve as
a formidable catalyst for IMS analysis, due to its speed and ability
to interpret thousands of ion images concurrently without human supervision.

On a less application-specific scale, a mapping between curated
anatomy and IMS data can make a body of anatomical research available
to any IMS-related computational method, to integrate into its analysis
and improve its performance. In the case of multiple IMS experiments
and multiple mappings to the same atlas, one can compare the anatomical
interpretations of multiple experiments to each other by using a common
reference (atlas) space. This would allow, for example, the automated
detection of differences in activities of anatomical structures between
healthy versus diseased tissues. Mapping multiple IMS data sets to
a common reference coordinate system would also enable the creation
of an IMS-based chemical reference atlas for lipidomics, proteomics,
and metabolomics. In the specific case of the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas,
this offers several promising perspectives for the future, since IMS-based
data could then even be combined with non-IMS data sources, such as
gene expression and neuron connectivity measurements, which are currently
being linked to the Allen Brain Atlas by other research initiatives.
The combination of these data sources can serve as a valuable multimodal
resource for systems biology research, bringing together insights
from many different technologies and fields.

Supporting Information Available
Additional information as noted
in text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac502838t_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
The
manuscript
was written through contributions from all authors. All authors have
given approval for the final version of the manuscript.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge Andriy Myronenko for his work on the MIRT toolbox
and making this tool available to us. This research was funded by
a PhD grant of the Agency for Innovation by Science and Technology
(IWT), the Research Council KU Leuven: GOA/10/09 MaNet, GOA/12/24,
Industrial Research fund (IOF): IOF/HB/13/027 Logic Insulin, the Flemish
Government: FWO: projects: G.0871.12N (Neural circuits), IWT: TBM-Logic
Insulin (100793), TBM Rectal Cancer (100783), TBM IETA (130256), PhD
grants, iMinds Medical Information Technologies SBO 2014, VLK Stichting
E. van der Schueren: rectal cancer, Federal Government: FOD: Cancer
Plan 2012-2015 KPC-29-023 (prostate), IAP P7/13, COST: Action BM1104:
Mass Spectrometry Imaging. This work was supported by the U.S. National
Institutes of Health Grants NIH/NIGMS R01 GM058008-14 and NIH/NIGMS
P41 GM103391-03. The scientific responsibility is assumed by its authors.
==== Refs
References
Caprioli R. M. ; Farmer T. B. ; Gile J. 
Anal. Chem. 
1997 , 69 , 4751 –4760 .9406525 
Mcdonnell L. A. ; Heeren R. M. A. 
Mass Spectrom. Rev. 
2007 , 26 , 606 –643 .17471576 
Chughtai K. ; Heeren R. M. A. 
Chem. Rev. 
2010 , 110 , 3237 –3277 .20423155 
Walch A. ; Rauser S. ; Deininger S.-O. ; Höfler H. 
Histochem. Cell Biol. 
2008 , 130 , 421 –434 .18618129 
Takai N. ; Tanaka Y. ; Inazawa K. ; Saji H. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 26 , 1549 –1556 .22638972 
Trim P. J. ; Henson C. M. ; Avery J. L. ; McEwen A. ; Snel M. F. ; Claude E. ; Marshall P. S. ; West A. ; Princivalle A. P. ; Clench M. R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 8628 –8634 .18847214 
Sugiura Y. ; Konishi Y. ; Zaima N. ; Kajihara S. ; Nakanishi H. ; Taguchi R. ; Setou M. 
J. Lipid Res. 
2009 , 50 , 1776 –1788 .19417221 
Stoeckli M. ; Chaurand P. ; Hallahan D. E. ; Caprioli R. M. 
Nat. Med. 
2001 , 7 , 493 –496 .11283679 
Khatib-Shahidi S. ; Andersson M. ; Herman J. L. ; Gillespie T. A. ; Caprioli R. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 6448 –6456 .16970320 
Eberlin L. S. ; Norton I. ; Dill A. L. ; Golby A. J. ; Ligon K. L. ; Santagata S. ; Cooks R. G. ; Agar N. Y. R. 
Cancer Res. 
2012 , 72 , 645 –654 .22139378 
Cazares L. H. ; Troyer D. ; Mendrinos S. ; Lance R. A. ; Nyalwidhe J. O. ; Beydoun H. A. ; Clements M. A. ; Drake R. R. ; Semmes O. J. 
Clin. Cancer Res. 
2009 , 15 , 5541 –5551 .19690195 
Jones E. A. ; Deininger S.-O. ; Hogendoorn P. C. W. ; Deelder A. M. ; Mcdonnell L. A. 
J. Proteomics 
2012 , 75 , 4962 –4989 .22743164 
Bruand J. ; Alexandrov T. ; Sistla S. ; Wisztorski M. ; Meriaux C. ; Becker M. ; Salzet M. ; Fournier I. ; Macagno E. ; Bafna V. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2011 , 10 , 4734 –4743 .21800894 
Fonville J. M. ; Carter C. L. ; Pizarro L. ; Steven R. T. ; Palmer A. D. ; Griffiths R. L. ; Lalor P. F. ; Lindon J. C. ; Nicholson J. K. ; Holmes E. ; Bunch J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 1415 –1423 .23249247 
Alexandrov T. 
BMC Bioinf. 
2012 , 13 Suppl 1 S11 .
Van de Plas R. ; Ojeda F. ; Dewil M. ; Van Den Bosch L. ; De Moor B. ; Waelkens E.   In Proceedings
of the Pacific Symposium
on Biocomputing (PSB) , Maui, Hawaii, 2007 ; pp 458 –469 .
McCombie G. ; Staab D. ; Stoeckli M. ; Knochenmuss R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 6118 –6124 .16194068 
Hanselmann M. ; Kirchner M. ; Renard B. Y. ; Amstalden E. R. ; Glunde K. ; Heeren R. M. A. ; Hamprecht F. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 9649 –9658 .18989936 
Boggio K. J. ; Obasuyi E. ; Sugino K. ; Nelson S. B. ; Agar N. Y. R. ; Agar J. N. 
Expert Rev. Proteomics 
2011 , 8 , 591 –604 .21999830 
Whitehead S. N. ; Chan K. H. N. ; Gangaraju S. ; Slinn J. ; Li J. ; Hou S. T. 
PLoS One 
2011 , 6 , e20808 .21687673 
Alexandrov T. ; Kobarg J. H. 
Bioinformatics 
2011 , 27 , i230 –i238 .21685075 
Abdelmoula W. M. ; Carreira R. J. ; Shyti R. ; Balluff B. ; van Zeijl R. J. M. ; Tolner E. A. ; Lelieveldt B. F. P. ; van den Maagdenberg A. M. J. M. ; McDonnell L. A. ; Dijkstra J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 3947 –3954 .24661141 
Sköld K. ; Svensson M. ; Nilsson A. ; Zhang X. ; Nydahl K. ; Caprioli R. M. ; Svenningsson P. ; Andrén P. E. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2006 , 5 , 262 –269 .16457591 
Lein E. S. ; Hawrylycz M. J. ; Ao N. ; Ayres M. ; Bensinger A. ; Bernard A. ; Boe A. F. ; Boguski M. S. ; Brockway K. S. ; Byrnes E. J. ; Chen L. ; et al. Nature 
2007 , 445 , 168 –176 .17151600 
Jones A. R. ; Overly C. C. ; Sunkin S. M. 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
2009 , 10 , 821 –828 .19826436 
Hanrieder J. ; Phan N. T. N. ; Kurczy M. E. ; Ewing A. G. 
ACS Chem. Neurosci. 
2013 , 4 , 666 –679 .23530951 
Brown L. G. 
ACM Comput. Surv. 
1992 , 24 , 325 –376 .
Crum W. ; Hartkens T. ; Hill D. L. 
Br. J. Radiol. 
2004 , 77 , S140 –S153 .15677356 
Myronenko A.  Non-rigid Image Registration:
Regularization, Algorithms and Applications ; Oregon Health & Science University, Department of Science &
Engineering School of Medicine : Portland,
OR , 2010 ; p 316 .
Bruand J. ; Sistla S. ; Mériaux C. ; Dorrestein P. C. ; Gaasterland T. ; Ghassemian M. ; Wisztorski M. ; Fournier I. ; Salzet M. ; Macagno E. ; Bafna V. 
J.
Proteome Res. 
2011 , 10 , 1915 –1928 .21332220 
Suits F. ; Fehniger T. E. ; Végvári A. ; Marko-Varga G. ; Horvatovich P. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 4398 –4404 .23537055 
Fehniger T. E. ; Suits F. ; Végvári Á. ; Horvatovich P. ; Foster M. ; Marko-Varga G. 
Proteomics 
2014 , 14 , 862 –871 .24478260 
Van de Plas R. ; Pelckmans K. ; De Moor B. ; Waelkens E.   In The NIPS
workshop on Machine Learning in Computational Biology (NIPS MLCB) , Whistler, B.C., 2007 ; pp 1 –4 .
McDonnell L. A. ; van Remoortere A. ; van Zeijl R. J. M. ; Deelder A. M. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2008 , 7 , 3619 –3627 .18570456 
Allen
Institute for Brain Science Allen Brain Atlas. http://mouse.brain-map.org/ (accessed Oct 7, 2013 ).
Van de Plas R.  Tissue Based
Proteomics and Biomarker Discovery: Multivariate Data Mining Strategies
for Mass Spectral Imaging ; KU Leuven, Faculty
of Engineering : Leuven, Belgium , 2010 ; p 245 .
Eastman R. D. ; Le Moigne J. ; Netanyahu N. S.   In 2007 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ; IEEE : Piscataway, NJ , 2007 ; pp 1 –8 .
Rueckert D. ; Sonoda L. I. ; Hayes C. ; Hill D. L. G. ; Leach M. O. ; Hawkes D. J. 
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 
1999 , 18 , 712 –721 .10534053 
Myronenko A.   Medical Image Registration Toolbox:
Andriy Myronenko https://sites.google.com/site/myronenko/research/mirt (accessed Oct 7, 2013 ).
Grant M. ; Boyd S.   In Recent Advances in Learning and
Control ; Blondel V. , Boyd S. , Kimura H.  , Eds.; Springer-Verlag Limited : Heidelberg,
Germany , 2008 ; pp 95 –110 .
Grant M. ; Boyd S.  CVX: Matlab Software
for Disciplined Convex Programming , version 2.0 beta (http://cvxr.com/cvx); CVX Research, Inc. : Stanford, CA , 2012 .
