
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac4030297ArticleNanowell-Based Immunoassays for Measuring Single-Cell
Secretion: Characterization of Transport and Surface Binding Torres Alexis
J. †Hill Abby S. ‡Love J. Christopher *†§†Department of Chemical Engineering, ‡Department of Biological
Engineering, and §Koch Institute for
Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States* Address: Koch Institute for Integrative
Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts
Ave., Bldg. 76-253, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA. Tel.: 617-324-2300. E-mail: clove@mit.edu.27 10 2015 27 10 2014 02 12 2014 86 23 11562 11569 22 09 2013 27 10 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Arrays
of subnanoliter wells (nanowells) provide a useful system
to isolate single cells and analyze their secreted proteins. Two general
approaches have emerged: one that uses open arrays and local capture
of secreted proteins, and a second (called microengraving) that relies
on closed arrays to capture secreted proteins on a solid substrate,
which is subsequently removed from the array. However, the design
and operating parameters for efficient capture from these two approaches
to analyze single-cell secretion have not been extensively considered.
Using numerical simulations, we analyzed the operational envelope
for both open and closed formats, as a function of the spatial distribution
of capture ligands, their affinities for the protein, and the rates
of single-cell secretion. Based on these analyses, we present a modified
approach to capture secreted proteins in-well for highly active secreting
cells. This simple method for in-well detection should facilitate
rapid identification of cell lines with high specific productivities.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac4030297document-id-new-14ac-2013-030297ccc-price
==== Body
The number of techniques for
single-cell analysis that rely on microfabricated systems has expanded
rapidly. Several approaches have been developed to monitor cell–cell
interactions,1,2 cell proliferation and differentiation,3 and protein secretion4−7 with single-cell resolution. In
particular, the use of arrays of subnanoliter wells (nanowells) for
the characterization of cells secreting antibodies or other proteins
have shown great potential for accelerating the discovery of novel
antigen-specific antibodies2,8,910 evaluating immunological responses,11 and selecting clonal cell lines with high specific
productivities.12,13

Conventional methods for
analyzing populations of cells, such as
Enzyme Linked Immunospot (ELISpot) and flow cytometry, provide single-cell
resolution of secreted proteins, but they are often destructive in
nature. Single-cell analysis based on arrays of nanowells offers several
advantages over traditional assays, including control of mechanical
and environmental cues,14,15 the ability to follow
cellular responses over long time scales (days),16 and the ability to recover cells of interest,6,17 among others. To date, two distinct approaches to capture and quantify
proteins secreted from cells isolated on arrays of nanowells have
emerged. Microengraving involves a configuration wherein the wells
are closed (for short intervals, ∼1–3 h) with a glass
slide supporting immobilized capture antibodies (Figure 1A).6−8,14 Other reported approaches
have used open arrays of wells modified with capture antibodies either
on the bottoms of the wells5 or on the
planar surfaces between wells10 to bind
proteins released from cells over hours to days of incubation (see
Figure 1B, as well as Figure
S1 in the Supporting Information). Capture of analytes at or
near the surface of the nanowells relies on principles similar to
ELISpot, with the added advantage that isolating cells in individual
wells allows the analysis of both secreted proteins and cell cytometry,
as well as subsequent recovery of specific cells by microscopy and
manipulation.

Figure 1 Schematic of (A) microengraving and (B) in-well capture
assays
for single-cell analysis of secreted proteins. Arrays of nanowells
allow selective capture of analytes at the surface modified with capture
antibody or ligand. The spatial addresses of the wells allow identification
of specific cells secreting proteins of interest, and their subsequent
recovery. In panel A, microengraving involves a closed configuration
wherein the wells are sealed with a solid substrate such as a glass
slide coated with an affinity ligand that captures secreted protein.
The solid substrate is removed and further processed using fluorescently
labeled antibodies. Panel B illustrates in-well capture of secreted
proteins from single cells. The secreted protein is captured on the
surface of the wells coated with affinity ligands. All steps from
incubation with fluorescent detection antibodies and washing are performed
on the device containing the cells. In panel (C), the scale for the
simulations in this work is expressed in units of pmol/m2, which is convenient to generalize secretion of any protein with
different molecular weights. For convenience, we have included the
scales representing concentrations in units of fg/μg2 for the case of antibodies (∼150 kDa) and cytokines (∼15
kDa).

While both configurations have
demonstrated useful measurements
of secretion from single cells, relatively little consideration has
been given to how the different underlying physical principles for
each may govern their operational range, sensitivity, and suitability
for various applications. We have previously considered the time-dependent
mass transfer of proteins secreted from cells during microengraving,
as well as their accumulation on a substrate by affinity binding,
using numerical simulations.6 Here, we
have expanded our computational analysis to examine further both open
and closed configurations of arrays of nanowells for capturing secreted
proteins. We considered how operating parameters such as incubation
time, ligand affinity, rates of secretion, and spatial geometries
impacted the time required to reach steady-state conditions and the
overall efficiency (defined by the maximum total quantities of proteins
captured). Based on these computational analyses, we demonstrate a
modified approach for improved open-well capture of secreted proteins
that offers improved capture efficiencies. Together, these data and
analyses provide a conceptual framework and predicted theoretical
efficiency for the design and use of arrays of nanowells as a bioanalytical
tool for detecting single-cell protein secretion.

Materials and
Methods
Computational Analysis of Analyte Transport and Binding
Cells were assumed to secrete proteins (e.g., cytokine or antibody)
at a constant rate: 1  where Ntotal is
the total number of molecules, κ is a constant
that describes the rate of secretion, and t is the
time secreted proteins diffuse radially into the media. We note that
the rate of secretion for a live cell likely fluctuates over time,
depending on extrinsic factors, such as the quality of its environment,
as well as intrinsic factors, including its secretory capacity, state
of activation, and stage in the cell cycle.18 Nonetheless, assuming a constant rate in this model is useful for
understanding the relationship between the quantities of protein secreted
and that captured on the surface, and evaluating the upper bounds
of analyte binding over the course of an experiment.

The transport
of analyte in the media was described by a simple diffusion model: 2  where C is the analyte concentration
and D is the diffusion coefficient.

The capture
surface was assumed to be coated uniformly with antibodies
against the analyte (either cytokines or antibodies) and the binding
reaction described by a reversible equilibrium process: 3  where B is the concentration
of free binding sites at the surface and Cs is the concentration of
analyte–antibody complex at the surface. The parameters kon and koff are
the association and dissociation constants, respectively. Nonuniformity
of the capture reagent at the molecular scale could affect these predictions,
although we note that the imaging systems typically employed for assessing
the capture of analytes experimentally average over length scales
many-fold larger (approximately square micrometers). Other gross artifacts
related to the manufacturing and preparation of the devices that could
affect the interfacial uniformity such as bubbles, protein aggregations,
and topographical imperfections are outside the scope of this analysis.

The walls of the device were modeled as impermeable to the proteins
captured. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is permeable to certain gases,
such as oxygen,19 but is impermeable to
proteins and hydrophilic small molecules.20 Permeability is also generally reduced upon plasma treatment used
to create hydroxyl groups, making the exposed surface hydrophilic.19 Nonspecific binding to the surface of the wells
was considered negligible (Kd in the millimolar
range) compared to specific capture (Kd ≈ 10–0.1 nM). Typically, the capture surface is blocked
with BSA before adding the suspension of cells, and the media used
for cell culture contains bovine serum (typically 10%). In this configuration,
the total concentration of proteins (predominantly serum albumin)
greatly exceeds that of specific analytes. Based on their abundance
and expected equilibrium partitioning at the interfaces, these other
proteins would be expected to represent the most prevalent ones adsorbed
nonspecifically on the surfaces of the well.

The reaction and
diffusion at the surface is described by a first-order
Langmuir adsorption model, where the diffusive flux (−n⃗·(−D∇C)) is balanced against the reaction rate. 4  where B0 is the
initial concentration of immobilized capture ligand or antibodies
(i.e., binding sites) and (B0–Cs)
describes the density of available binding sites. Since the capture
antibodies are immobilized on the surface, the diffusion term (Ds)
becomes equal to zero. Thus, the equation describing the boundary
conditions is given by 5  

For these simulations,
we assumed that the binding of antibody
and analyte occurs at a 1:1 stoichiometry. Furthermore, we assumed
that the initial concentration (at t = 0) of free
analyte (C) and bound analyte (Cs) are negligible
(Cs = 0, C = 0). The boundary condition for the edges
of the medium above the wells was C = 0, assuming
that the concentration far from a secreting cell is negligible. All
simulations were performed using COMSOL Multiphysics 4.3. The range
of values for all parameters used for the simulations was taken from
the literature and summarized in Table 1. The
scale used in these simulations to represent the amount of bound proteins
is expressed in units of pmol/m2; however, we have included
a scale comparing the values in terms of pmol/m2 to fg/μm2 in Figure 1C to simplify any conversion
to mass of protein bound to the surface.

Table 1 Values
of Parameters Used in the Finite-Element
Analysis
parameter	value	
cell
diameter	10 μm	
density of total
binding
sites, B0	1 × 10–9 mol/m2 (ref (21))	
dissociation binding constant, Kd = koff/kon	 	
#1	10 nM (kon = 1 × 105 1/(M s), koff = 1 × 10–3 s–1)	
#2	0.1 nM (kon = 1 × 106 1/(M s), koff = 1 × 10–4 s–1)	
diffusion coefficient, D	3 × 10–11 m2/s (ref (22))	
Preparation of Arrays of Nanowells
Arrays of nanowells
were manufactured by injecting polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, Dow Corning)
prepared at a 10:1 base/catalyst weight ratio into a custom-built
mold encasing a silicon master micropatterned with SU-8 by photolithography.
Arrays of nanowells were cured at 70 °C for 4 h. Each array comprised
72 × 24 blocks, each containing a 7 × 7 (50 μm ×
50 μm × 50 μm) subarray of nanowells with a center-to-center
distance of 100 μm, a 12 × 12 (30 μm × 30 μm
× 30 μm) subarray with a center-to-center distance of 60 μm,
or a 24 × 24 (15 μm × 15 μm × 15 μm)
subarray with a center-to-center distance of 30 μm. The elastomeric
arrays adhered directly to a 3 in. × 1 in. glass slide forming
a 1-mm-thick layer. The PDMS device was plasma oxidized for 90–120
s using a plasma cleaner (Harrick Plasma Model PDC-001, 115 V) before
adsorption of the antigen.

Cell Culture
A hybridoma cell line
(No. 099-01, obtained
from the Statens Serum Institut) secreting anti-ovalbumin (anti-OVA)
IgG was cultured in DMEM (10% FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 mg/mL
streptomycin), as described previously.8 Cells were split every 2–3 days under sterile conditions.
The cells were centrifuged at 1500 rpm and resuspended in fresh media
to remove excess secreted antibodies (that accumulate over days in
culture) before each experiment. The devices were placed in a four-well
slide processing dish (Nunc, Thermo Scientific) and rinsed with media.
After aspirating the media, ∼300 μL of the cells (at
106 cells/mL in media) were deposited on the array by slowly
pipetting the volume over the entire area of the device that had been
previously blocked with bovine serum albumin (BSA) (see below). Cells
were allowed to settle for 5 min; excess cells were removed by gently
aspirating and replacing media.

In-Well Capture and Detection
of Secreted Proteins from Single
Cells
Chicken ovalbumin (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) was immobilized
on the surface of the arrays by incubation overnight with a concentration
of 500 μg/mL in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then blocked
with 1 mg/mL PBS/BSA for 30 min before adding cells. After the cells
were seeded into the array and incubated for 2 h, the cells were rinsed
with media and incubated with fluorescently labeled (Alexa Fluor 488)
goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) (Molecular Probes, Life Technologies) at
a concentration of 3 μg/mL and calcein violet (Molecular Probes,
Life Technologies) to label live cells in PBS containing 1 mg/mL BSA
for 30 min at room temperature. The cells were rinsed first with PBS,
then with media, and imaged. The elastomeric substrates were covered
with a No. 2 Lifter slip and imaged using an automated, inverted epifluorescence
microscope (Axio Observer, 10×/0.3 NA objective; Carl Zeiss,
Jena, Germany) with an EM-CCD camera (ImagEM; Hamamatsu Photonics,
Hamamatsu, Japan).

Microengraving
Epoxy-functionalized
glass slides (Super
epoxy 2, Arrayit Corporation) were coated with 100 μg/mL ovalbumin
in PBS overnight at 4 °C and then rinsed with PBS and blocked
with 1 mg/mL BSA/PBS for 30 min. After incubation of the cell-loaded
array, the ovalbumin-coated glass slide was then placed onto the loaded
array for printing. The microarray and glass slide were held together
by compression in a hybridization chamber (Agilent Technologies, G2534A)
and incubated for 2 h at 37 °C with 5% CO2 as described
previously.6 The glass slide was then separated
from the array and placed in PBS. After microengraving, slides were
incubated for 30 min with blocking buffer (PBS, 3% w/v milk powder
and 0.05% (v/v) Tween-20), washed with PBST (PBS + 0.05% v/v Tween-20),
and then incubated with fluorescent antibodies (Alexa Fluor 488 goat
anti-mouse IgG) at 2 μg/mL for 45 min at 25 °C. The slides
were washed with PBST and PBS, rinsed briefly with water, and dried
with a N2 stream. Slides were scanned using a Genepix 4200AL
microarray scanner (Molecular Devices). The median fluorescence intensity
of each element was analyzed using Genepix Pro. Data extracted from
both on-chip cytometry and printed proteins were matched in Microsoft
Excel using unique identifiers assigned to each well within the array.
The dataset was filtered to include wells containing only single cells.

On-Chip Image-Based Cytometry before Microengraving
Before
imaging, cells were stained with calcein violet (Invitrogen).
The cell-loaded arrays of nanowells were mounted face-up on the microscope
with a coverslip placed on top of the array. Images were acquired
on an automated inverted epifluorescence microscope (Carl Zeiss).
Transmitted light and epifluoresence micrographs were collected block
by block. The resulting collection of images was analyzed using a
custom program to determine the number of cells present in each well
and the mean fluorescent intensity of each label. Only viable cells
(with a calcein fluorescent intensity of more than three standard
deviations above background) were considered for the analysis.

Results
Theoretical
Analysis of Surface Capture of Proteins on Open
Arrays of Nanowells
Previous reports for the capture of secreted
proteins in an open-well configuration have established the utility
of this format for detecting single-cell secretions. It remains unclear,
however, how the single-cell rates of secretion, the equilibrium binding
constant of the capture antibody, the dimensions of the wells, and
the spatial distribution of the affinity ligands (capture antibody
or ligand) in the wells affect the total amount of captured analyte
and the time scales required to reach steady state.

We first
simulated the steady-state spatial distribution of antibodies secreted
from cells as a function of the spatial distributions of the capture
ligands based on published configurations.5,8,10 For these analyses, we modeled plasma cells
secreting antibodies; the specific productivities of these cells range
from 500 molecules/s to 2000 molecules/s.8,23 In
the open-well configuration, secreted proteins are free to diffuse
into the surrounding media or adjacent wells as well as bind to the
affinity ligands supported on the substrate. Comparing two reported
configurations for open-well arrays,5,10 we found that
the interfacial concentration of captured proteins at steady state
was higher when the basal surface of the wells was modified with affinity
ligands than when only the planar surfaces between wells were coated
(see Figure S1 in the Supporting Information). The local proximity of the cell to the affinity ligands positioned
in-well and the radial diffusion of the analyte into the bulk media
influence these calculated differences.

Reported approaches
for in-well detection have also used patterned
hydrogels containing polyethylene glycol on the side walls to minimize
nonspecific capture of the secreted proteins.5 Our initial simulations suggested that uniform coating of the capture
ligand on all sides of the wells should enhance the retention of secreted
proteins in the well, in addition to allowing a simple method of fabrication.
We examined this configuration further by calculating the interfacial
concentrations of captured protein when the nanowells were uniformly
coated with affinity ligands. In this model, we tested the effects
of both the size and spacing of wells and the affinity of the binding
interactions (Kd = 10 nM and Kd = 0.1 nM) (see Figure 2). These
simulations showed 4-fold enhanced retention of analytes (on entire
available binding area) and 2-fold for high affinity ligand, compared
to arrays where only the top planar surfaces support moderate affinity
ligands (see Figure S1 in the Supporting Information). The majority of the captured analytes were also spatially confined
to the well, increasing the interfacial concentration. Decreasing
the sizing of the wells from 50 μm to 15 μm in width and
depth only increased the concentration of captured protein in wells
by 2.7-fold. Importantly, the interfacial concentrations of protein
in empty wells adjacent to ones with highly active secreting cells
remained more than an order of magnitude lower than that in the well
with the secreting cell.

Figure 2 Theoretical surface distribution of bound analyte
from single-cell
secretions captured in-well. Finite-element simulations of secreted
proteins captured on the surface of the nanowells as a function of
the volume of wells and affinity of the capture ligand when proteins
are secreted at a rate of 1000 molecules/s.

Comparative Analysis of Efficiency of In-Well Capture and Microengraving
Activated B cells (plasma cells and plasmablasts) as well as optimized
cell lines used in biomanufacturing (e.g., CHO cells) secrete proteins
at high rates, but the range of specific productivities for these
types of cells are typically 1–2 orders of magnitude higher
than that for other proteins secreted by primary cells (such as cytokines
and chemokines, ∼5–50 molecules/s).6 We calculated how the rates of single-cell secretion impacted
the time required to reach steady-state conditions and the total amounts
of secreted product captured in both open-well and closed-well (microengraving)
formats (see Figure 3). These results show
that the open-well arrangement reaches steady state within 1 h, regardless
of the rate of secretion for moderate affinity ligands, and that the
maximum interfacial concentrations of captured protein varies strongly
with the rates of secretion. For higher affinity ligands, however,
the time required to reach steady state increases.

Figure 3 Time-dependent interfacial
concentrations of proteins captured
from a single cell in open and closed configurations. Plots depict
the average surface concentration of secreted analyte bound to the
capture surface for both microengraving and in-well capture, as a
function of the rates of secretion and dimensions of the nanowells.
The equilibrium association-binding constant used for these plots
are (A) Kd = 10 nM and (B) Kd = 0.1 nM.

In contrast, microengraving operates in a nonequilibrium
state.6 The interfacial concentrations
increase linearly
over a somewhat wider range of times (0–4+ h, depending on
the size of the well and rates of secretion), and reach higher values
than those possible for the open-well format. Furthermore, at steady
state, the interfacial concentrations are independent of the rates
of secretion (see Figure S2A in the Supporting
Information), although the time required to reach saturation
does depend on the rate of secretion. However, the differences between
the two configurations (open and closed wells) diminish significantly,
as the rates of secretion increase and the affinity of the capture
reagent increases (from Kd = 10 nM to Kd = 0.1 nM) (see Figure 3, as well as Figure S2B in the Supporting Information).

In these simulations, we have assumed an ideal position
of the
cell at the center of the basal surface of the wells. We had previously
considered how alternate locations of the cell within the well (for
example, a corner) could introduce variation to the captured analytes
by microengraving and found no significant difference.6 Here, we also examined whether or not the positioning of
the cell could introduce variations in captured amounts using in-well
detection (open system). In this configuration, we found there was
also no significant effects on the total average concentration of
captured analyte over the capture surface of the well when a cell
was positioned in the corner of a well (see Figure
S3 in the Supporting Information). However, we note that minute
gradients in concentration can form (for in-well detection) in the
proximity of the cells, forming a minor halo effect (as seen in Figure 4). In addition, the effects of nonspecific binding
have been found to be negligible (see Figure S4
in the Supporting Information).

Figure 4 In-well capture of antigen-specific
antibodies from single cells.
Transmitted light and fluorescent composite micrographs of live cells
(red) labeled with calcein violet and the captured secreted anti-OVA
antibody (green) detected by Alexa 488 anti-mouse IgG in nanowells
uniformly coated with ovalbumin. Scale bar = 30 μm.

Detection of Secreted Antigen-Specific Antibodies
Inside Nanowells
Our numerical simulations indicated that
microengraving offers
enhanced sensitivity to the detection of secreted proteins across
a wide range of single-cell rates, but that in-well detection should
provide biased detection of cells with high rates of secretion. Such
bias would highlight cells with high specific productivities—a
criterion that should facilitate the selection of both hybridomas
producing antigen-specific antibodies and cell lines for bioprocess
development.13 We sought to demonstrate
that a device containing arrays of nanowells is experimentally amenable
for the efficient detection of secreted proteins when the surfaces
of the wells are uniformly coated with capture antibodies (as depicted
in Figure 1B). We used a mouse hybridoma line
(099-01) that produces monoclonal antibodies specific for chicken
ovalbumin. Ovalbumin was first adsorbed onto the surfaces of an array
of nanowells. Then cells were deposited onto the array from a suspension
in a manner that favored single-cell occupancies in the wells. The
loaded array was incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. A fluorescently
labeled anti-mouse IgG antibody was then added and further incubated
with the cells for 30 min at room temperature. The array was rinsed
gently to avoid washing away or repositioning cells. This method allowed
the enumeration of both the number of viable cells in each well and
the detection of captured ovalbumin-specific antibodies by automated
epifluorescence microscopy (EM) (see Figure 4). The cells remained viable during the course of the experiment,
including the labeling and washing steps at room temperature. We found
that the incubation of 2 h yielded detectable quantities of captured
antibodies, consistent with the time predicted from the numerical
simulations to reach equilibrium in the open-well format. Also consistent
with the models, the fluorescent signal predominantly localized to
the bottom surface and sidewalls of the nanowells, even though the
entire surface of the array bore antigen. This localization within
the wells created sharp, clear patterns of fluorescence, which facilitated
simple image analysis to establish the spatial address of wells of
interest. The observed patterns of captured antibodies also matched
those predicted for antibodies with high affinities in the numerical
simulations; the affinity of the anti-OVA antibody is 0.11 nM, as
determined by surface plasmon resonance.11

We then compared the dynamic range of signal for captured
proteins in-well to that determined by microengraving (see Figure 5). Microengraving provided fine resolution of the
variations in the rates of secretion, with a 3-fold greater dynamic
range, compared to in-well detection. Both measures were performed
using 16-bit detectors and imaging parameters individually optimized
to maximize the signals detected. However, we note that, because of
constraints of the thickness of the arrays used, the systems upon
which the data were collected were different—in-well detection
used an EM-CCD and xenon lamp for epifluorescent microscopy while
the microengraved array was imaged with a photomultiplier tube (PMT)
and laser excitation in a microarray scanner. Nevertheless, both methods
demonstrate an ability to enumerate cells with the highest specific
productivities, and the results for each method agree well with the
predictions from the numerical simulations. Together, these results
support the computational framework developed here to facilitate the
design and understanding of the specific configuration of assays in
nanowells for in-well capture and establishes the utility of uniform
coatings of capture ligands for in-well detection of single-cell secreted
proteins.

Figure 5 Experimental comparison of in-well capture and microengraving.
Intensity distribution of Alexa 488 anti-mouse IgG used to detect
secreted ovalbumin specific antibodies from the hybridoma cells. (A)
Intensity distribution from detected surface captured analyte in the
in-well capture configuration. (B) Intensity distribution obtained
by microengraving. The blue histogram represents background florescence
obtained from wells with no cells; the black histogram shows the mean
fluorescent intensities quantified for wells with single cells (total
fluorescence per unit area). Scale bar = 30 μm.

Discussion
In this work, we developed
a set of guidelines to aid in the design
of experiments that involve the use of arrays of nanowells to quantify
and analyze proteins secreted from single cells. We analyzed the transport
and binding dynamics of analytes secreted from single cells, using
an array of nanowells for both in-well capture and microengraving.
Based on these analyses, we presented a modified method for in-well
detection wherein the entire surface of the array is coated with capture
ligands to detect single-cell secretions. As expected, the two most
important parameters influencing the efficiency of detecting secreted
analytes are the dissociation binding constant (Kd) and the rates of secretion for the cells. The affinity
constant is particularly important, because the use of suboptimal
capture antibodies or antigens could lead to false negatives.

On one hand, the use of nanowells for in-well capture with a uniformly
coated surface to detect secreted proteins offers flexibility and
ease of use. This configuration eliminates complex fabrication schemes5,10 and is compatible with a range of molding methods and materials
(e.g., polystyrene) that are more conducive for mass production than
arrays formed with silicone elastomers. In addition, contrary to other
approaches,10 analytes bind to the sidewalls
to create sharp and well-defined spatial patterns that simplify automated
image analysis and concentrate signal to facilitate the detection
of positive wells and high-throughput data extraction. The single
substrate employed for in-well detection further simplifies post-assay
processing and data integration and, thus, reduces the total time
required for the process. One disadvantage evident from the numerical
simulations is that the maximum signal in open-well configurations
is strongly dependent on the rates of secretion, as a result of persistent
diffusion of material out of the wells. The constraints imposed by
thermodynamics and mass transport make the method less useful for
quantitative measures. These features together suggest that the open-well
configuration is best-suited for rapid screening of highly productive
cells (e.g., antibody-secreting cells, manufacturing cell lines),
and biases toward high secretors and high affinity interactions.

On the other hand, microengraving provides a complementary method
for single-cell analysis of secreted proteins. The temporary confinement
of the volume into which proteins are secreted enhances the sensitivity
of the method for low rates of secretion, and makes the measurements
more robust across a range of dissociation constants for the capture
ligand, compared to open-well configurations. Microengraving also
establishes an operating condition that expands the dynamic range
of measurements, facilitating quantification of the amounts of secreted
protein. The increase in sensitivity and quantitative potential compensates
for the additional time required for processing and data integration.
These features make the method well-suited for assessing heterogeneous
populations of secreting cells, such as T cells.86,11,14

One
possible perturbation introduced in a closed system is that
secretions from the cells could be affected by the local concentration
of analyte or other soluble factors. Sealed wells, as in the case
of microengraving, would also retain higher concentrations of secreted
protein relative to open wells. This effect could induce signaling
mechanisms for feedback (such as autocrine signaling) that may change
cellular processes (including secretion) over time, and could, therefore,
affect the total amount of proteins available for capture in open
versus closed wells as a result of biological feedback. Nevertheless,
this phenomena will not likely be a concern for the screening of antibody-secreting
cells or when local concentrations of ligands vastly exceed the numbers
of available receptors on the surface of a single cell.

Conclusions
The computational analyses presented here should aid the design
of bioanalytical assays that rely on arrays of nanowells for measuring
secreted proteins from single cells. The established framework addresses
the thermodynamics and mass transport of the two common configurations
used in practice. Our results should provide practical guidance on
the operating range and limitations of each configuration, their expected
sensitivities and optimal incubation times based on rates of secretion
and affinity of the capture reagent, as well as the costs of materials
and labor required, with respect to the objectives of the assay.

Supporting Information Available
Figure S1
compares the theoretical
surface capture of secreted antibody (from single cells) in the configuration
developed in this report and the configuration previously published.
Figure S2 summarizes the theoretical maximum binding of analytes to
the capture surface in an open system (in-well capture) or closed
system (microengraving) configuration and the half-time to reach steady-state.
Figure S3 analyzes the effects of deviation from centralized positioning
of the cell in the wells. Figure S4 investigates the effects of nonspecific
binding on the capture of analytes. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac4030297_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
The
manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): J.C.L. is a founder and
shareholder of Enumeral Biomedical.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the NIH/NIAID (No. 5P01AI045757)
and by the Koch Institute Support (core) (Grant No. P30-CA14051) from
the National Cancer Institute. The content is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views
of the National Institute of Allergy And Infectious Diseases or the
National Institutes of Health. J.C.L. is a Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar.
The authors dedicate this paper to the memory of Officer Sean Collier,
for his caring service to the MIT community and for his sacrifice.
==== Refs
References
Guldevall K. ; Vanherberghen B. ; Frisk T. ; Hurtig J. ; Christakou A. E. ; Manneberg O. ; Lindström S. ; Andersson-Svahn H. ; Wiklund M. ; Önfelt B. 
PLoS One 
2010 , 5 , e15453.21103395 
Varadarajan N. ; Julg B. ; Yamanaka Y. J. ; Chen H. ; Ogunniyi A. O. ; McAndrew E. ; Porter L. C. ; Piechocka-Trocha A. ; Hill B. J. ; Douek D. C. ; Pereyra F. ; Walker B. D. ; Love J. C. 
J. Clin. Invest. 
2011 , 121 , 4322 –4331 .21965332 
a Lecault V. ; VanInsberghe M. ; Sekulovic S. ; Knapp D. J. H. F. ; Wohrer S. ; Bowden W. ; Viel F. ; McLaughlin T. ; Jarandehei A. ; Miller M. ; Falconnet D. ; White A. K. ; Kent D. G. ; Copley M. R. ; Taghipour F. ; Eaves C. J. ; Humphries R. K. ; Piret J. M. ; Hansen C. L. 
Nat. Methods 
2011 , 8 , 581 –586 .21602799  b Lindström S. ; Eriksson M. ; Vazin T. ; Sandberg J. ; Lundeberg J. ; Frisén J. ; Andersson-Svahn H. 
PLoS One 
2009 , 4 , e6997.19750008 
a Konry T. ; Dominguez-Villar M. ; Baecher-Allan C. ; Hafler D. A. ; Yarmush M. L. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2011 , 26 , 2707 –2710 .20888750  b Ma C. ; Fan R. ; Ahmad H. ; Shi Q. ; Comin-Anduix B. ; Chodon T. ; Koya R. C. ; Liu C.-C. ; Kwong G. A. ; Radu C. G. ; Ribas A. ; Heath J. R. 
Nature Medicine 
2011 , 17 , 738 –743 . c Love K. R. ; Politano T. J. ; Panagiotou V. ; Jiang B. ; Stadheim T. A. ; Love J. C. 
PLoS One 
2012 , 7 , e37915.22685548 
Zhu H. ; Stybayeva G. ; Silangcruz J. ; Yan J. ; Ramanculov E. ; Dandekar S. ; George M. D. ; Revzin A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 8150 –8156 .19739655 
Han Q. ; Bradshaw E. M. ; Nilsson B. ; Hafler D. A. ; Love J. C. 
Lab Chip 
2010 , 10 , 1391 –1400 .20376398 
Ogunniyi A. O. ; Story C. M. ; Papa E. ; Guillen E. ; Love J. C. 
Nat. Protoc. 
2009 , 4 , 767 –782 .19528952 
Love J. C. ; Ronan J. L. ; Grotenbreg G. M. ; van der Veen A. G. ; Ploegh H. L. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2006 , 24 , 703 –707 .16699501 
Bradshaw E. M. ; Kent S. C. ; Tripuraneni V. ; Orban T. ; Ploegh H. L. ; Hafler D. A. ; Love J. C. 
Clin. Immunol. 
2008 , 129 , 10 –18 .18675591 
Jin A. ; Ozawa T. ; Tajiri K. ; Obata T. ; Kondo S. ; Kinoshita K. ; Kadowaki S. ; Takahashi K. ; Sugiyama T. ; Kishi H. ; Muraguchi A. 
Nat. Med. 
2009 , 15 , 1088 –1092 .19684583 
Story C. M. ; Papa E. ; Hu C.-C. A. ; Ronan J. L. ; Herlihy K. ; Ploegh H. L. ; Love J. C. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2008 , 105 , 17902 –17907 .19004776 
a Park S. ; Kim W. ; Kim Y. ; Son Y. D. ; Lee S.-C. ; Kim E. ; Kim S. H. ; Kim J. H. ; Kim H.-S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 5830 –5837 .20550136  b Panagiotou V. ; Love K. R. ; Jiang B. ; Nett J. ; Stadheim T. ; Love J. C. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
2011 , 77 , 3154 –3156 .21378037 
Park S. ; Han J. ; Kim W. ; Lee G. M. ; Kim H.-S. 
J. Biotechnol. 
2011 , 156 , 197 –202 .21925218 
Torres A. J. ; Contento R. L. ; Gordo S. ; Wucherpfennig K. W. ; Love J. C. 
Lab Chip 
2013 , 13 , 90 –99 .23070211 
Andreasson-Ochsner M. ; Romano G. ; Hakanson M. ; Smith M. L. ; Leckband D. E. ; Textor M. ; Reimhult E. 
Lab Chip 
2011 , 11 , 2876 –2883 .21773619 
Zaretsky I. ; Polonsky M. ; Shifrut E. ; Reich-Zeliger S. ; Antebi Y. ; Aidelberg G. ; Waysbort N. ; Friedman N. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 5007 –5015 .23072772 
Choi J. H. ; Ogunniyi A. O. ; Du M. ; Du M. ; Kretschmann M. ; Eberhardt J. ; Love J. C. 
Biotechnol. Prog. 
2010 , 26 , 888 –895 .20063389 
a Love K. R. ; Politano T. J. ; Panagiotou V. ; Jiang B. ; Stadheim T. A. ; Love J. C. 
PLoS One 
2012 , 7 , e37915 .22685548  b Bird J. J. ; Brown D. R. ; Mullen A. C. ; Moskowitz N. H. ; Mahowald M. A. ; Sider J. R. ; Gajewski T. F. ; Wang C.-R. ; Reiner S. L. 
Immunity 
1998 , 9 , 229 –237 .9729043 
Markov D. ; Lillie E. ; Garbett S. ; McCawley L. 
Biomed. Microdevices 
2013 , 1 –6 .22833153 
Wang J. ; Douville N. ; Takayama S. ; El Sayed M. 
Ann. Biomed. Eng. 
2012 , 40 , 1862 –1873 .22484830 
Liao W. ; Wei F. ; Qian M. X. ; Zhao X. S. 
Sens. Actuators, B 
2004 , 101 , 361 –367 .
Pokrić B. ; Pučar Z. 
Anal. Biochem. 
1979 , 93 , 103 –114 .107826 
a Charlet M. ; Kromenaker S. J. ; Srienc F. 
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 
1995 , 47 , 535 –540 .18623432  b Henn A. D. ; Rebhahn J. ; Brown M. A. ; Murphy A. J. ; Coca M. N. ; Hyrien O. ; Pellegrin T. ; Mosmann T. ; Zand M. S. 
J. Immunol. 
2009 , 183 , 3177 –3187 .19675172
