
==== Front
Anal ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac202578xArticleEvaluation of a Droplet
Digital Polymerase Chain Reaction Format for DNA Copy Number Quantification Pinheiro Leonardo B. *†Coleman Victoria
A. †Hindson Christopher M. ‡Herrmann Jan †Hindson Benjamin J. ‡Bhat Somanath †Emslie Kerry R. †† National Measurement Institute, Lindfield,
New South Wales, Australia‡ Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Pleasanton,
California, United States* E-mail: Leonardo.Pinheiro@measurement.gov.au. Phone: +61 2
84673735.28 11 2011 17 01 2012 84 2 1003 1011 29 09 2011 28 11 2011 21 12 2011 17 01 2012 28 11 2011 Copyright © 2011 American
Chemical Society2011American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open-access article distributed under the ACS AuthorChoice Terms & Conditions.  Any use of this article, must conform to the terms of that license which are available at http://pubs.acs.org.

Droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR) is
a new technology that was recently commercialized to enable the precise
quantification of target nucleic acids in a sample. ddPCR measures
absolute quantities by counting nucleic acid molecules encapsulated
in discrete, volumetrically defined, water-in-oil droplet partitions.
This novel ddPCR format offers a simple workflow capable of generating
highly stable partitioning of DNA molecules. In this study, we assessed
key performance parameters of the ddPCR system. A linear ddPCR response
to DNA concentration was obtained from 0.16% through to 99.6% saturation
in a 20,000 droplet assay corresponding to more than 4 orders of magnitude
of target DNA copy number per ddPCR. Analysis of simplex and duplex
assays targeting two distinct loci in the Lambda DNA genome using
the ddPCR platform agreed, within their expanded uncertainties, with
values obtained using a lower density microfluidic chamber based digital
PCR (cdPCR). A relative expanded uncertainty under 5% was achieved
for copy number concentration using ddPCR. This level of uncertainty
is much lower than values typically observed for quantification of
specific DNA target sequences using currently commercially available
real-time and digital cdPCR technologies.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac202578xdocument-id-new-14ac-2011-02578xccc-price
==== Body
The ability to quantify nucleic
acids with accuracy and precision is fundamental to many fields of
basic research, molecular diagnostic tests, and commercial processes.
Although real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has found widespread
utility for nucleic acid quantification, it requires the comparison
of an unknown to a standard to obtain quantitative information. Real-time
PCR is an analogue measurement based on monitoring amplification after
each cycle of PCR using fluorescence probes. The point at which the
reaction fluorescence crosses an intensity threshold is called the
cycle threshold (Ct). As many factors can influence PCR efficiency
and hence the Ct value, the accuracy and precision of real-time PCR
can vary widely.

The principle of digital PCR was first introduced
in the 1990s1,2 and is increasingly being utilized for quantification
of DNA targets.3−5 Digital PCR is an end-point measurement that provides
the ability to quantify nucleic acids without the use of standard
curves. In a typical digital PCR experiment, the sample is randomly
distributed into discrete partitions, such that some contain no nucleic
acid template and others contain one or more template copies. The
partitions are thermally cycled to end-point and then read to determine
the fraction of positive partitions, from which the concentration
is calculated using eq 1. 1  where M is the average number
of target molecules per partition, P is the number
of partitions containing amplified product, and R is the number of partitions or reactions analyzed.6

Two key factors influence the reliability of digital
PCR measurements: the number of reactions analyzed (R) and the number of template molecules in the assay.7 Since concentration is derived by dividing the copy number
estimate by the assay volume, an additional key factor, partition
volume (Vd) (and its associated uncertainty)
needs to be considered when measuring DNA concentration using digital
PCR.

Currently, the commercially available microfluidic chamber
based digital PCR (cdPCR) formats contain up to a few thousand individual
reactions or microfluidic chambers for each technical replicate. Using
these formats, confidence in the estimated copy number can be improved
by increasing the number of technical replicates and hence, the total
number of reactions analyzed. However, there have been practical limitations,
primarily cost, to the number of technical replicates that can be
analyzed by cdPCR. A new dPCR format called Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR)
has recently been commercialized.8 A single
ddPCR is comprised of approximately 20 000 partitioned droplets,
a number which is about 25 times the 765 chambers of a single sample
panel on a microfluidic cdPCR array.

In this study, we evaluated
key factors that can influence the reliability of results obtained
from an early access beta-prototype ddPCR system (Bio-Rad, Pleasanton,
CA). The linearity of the response and the precision over the dynamic
range of the 20 000-droplet assay (referred to as 20 000-ddPCR)
were assessed. Since the droplets are generated from a single-use
eight channel droplet generator cartridge, we examined both the intra-
and intercartridge repeatability of assays. Copy number concentration
and ratio together with their expanded uncertainties were assessed
using both a high density ddPCR technology and a lower density cdPCR
platform.

Experimental Section
Lambda DNA Solution and PCR Assays
Lambda DNA solution
(Fermentas) was analyzed using the primer and probe sequences and
concentrations for assays 2 and 5 as previously described.9 (Table S-1 in the Supporting
Information). Assays 2 and 5 target different regions of the
Lambda DNA genome (5′ base of the amplicon is 16 541
and 44 925, respectively, in the 48 502 base pair Lambda
DNA genome) and produce amplicons of 188 and 76 base pair (bp), respectively.9The Lambda DNA was used as supplied and not physically
or enzymatically treated to reduce fragment length prior to analysis.

Droplet Digital PCR Instrumentation, Workflow, and Data Analysis
All experimental work including ddPCR and droplet volume measurements
was conducted at the National Measurement Institute, Australia. Reaction
mixtures of 20 μL volume comprising 1× ddPCR Master Mix
(Bio-Rad), relevant forward and reverse primers and probe(s) (Table
S-1 in the Supporting Information), and
DNA were prepared using a gravimetric protocol to minimize the uncertainty
due to pipetting. The ddPCR reagents, except DNA, were premixed and
the final reaction mix was prepared gravimetrically by combining the
DNA and PCR components (Supporting Information S-1). Each 20 μL reaction was dispensed into a separate well
of a disposable eight channel droplet generator cartridge (Figure 1A; Bio-Rad). A volume of 60 μL of droplet
generation oil (Bio-Rad) was then loaded into each of the corresponding
oil wells before the consumable chip was loaded into a beta-prototype
droplet generator (Bio-Rad). The droplet generator applies a vacuum
to each of the outlet wells to generate droplets in the eight channels
simultaneously at a rate of ∼1 000 droplets/channel/second
until the complete 20 μL ddPCR mixture has been partitioned
into the monodisperse water-in-oil emulsion format. Each water-in-oil
emulsion was transferred by pipet to a separate well of a 96-well
polypropylene plate (Eppendorf), heat sealed with foil, and amplified
in a conventional calibrated thermal cycler (Eppendorf Mastercycler
ep “S” thermocycler). Thermal cycling conditions consisted
of a 10 min activation period at 95 °C followed by 40 cycles
of a two step thermal profile of 15 s at 94 °C denaturation and
60 s at 60 °C for combined annealing-extension at 100% ramp rate
and a final 10 min inactivation step at 98 °C. After thermal
cycling, plates were transferred to a beta-prototype droplet reader
(Bio-Rad) that employs an integrated autosampler and fluidics to serially
aspirate droplets from each well and stream them single-file,
at a rate of ∼1 500 droplets/second, past a two-color
fluorescence detector sampled at a rate of 100 kHz on both FAM and
VIC fluorescence channels (Figure 1B). Sampling
at 100 kHz affords the ability to gate outliers on a case-by-case
basis using properties of the fluorescence trace (automated by Bio-Rad
Signal Processing Algorithm v0.43). Discrimination between droplets
that did not contain target (negatives) and those which did (positives)
was achieved by applying a global fluorescence amplitude threshold
in QuantaSoft (Bio-Rad), the software package provided with the ddPCR
system for data acquisition and analysis. The droplet reader was calibrated
once upon installation of the ddPCR system at the National Measurement
Institute, Australia. The simple calibration procedure generated an
instrument-specific color compensation matrix that was subsequently
stored on the droplet reader and automatically applied to data to
eliminate cross talk between FAM and VIC labeled probes. The QuantaSoft
software had a factory preset value for droplet volume. QuantaSoft
uses a proprietary signal-processing algorithm to automatically perform
droplet gating within each run. The threshold was set as the midpoint
between the average fluorescence amplitude of positives and negative
droplet clusters on each of the FAM and VIC channels (Figure 1C). Droplets appeared stable through the entire
process including pipet manipulations, thermal cycling, and reading.
Rejection criteria for excluding a well from subsequent analysis during
our dynamic range studies on the prototype droplet reader included
(i) a clog detected by the Bio-Rad Signal Processing Algorithm software
of the droplet reader or (ii) a low number of droplets measured per
20 μL PCR.

Figure 1 Schematic showing the ddPCR workflow. (A) Each 20 μL
sample containing the Master Mix, primers, TaqMan probes, and DNA
target is loaded in the middle wells of a disposable eight channel
droplet generator cartridge (pictured). Droplet generation oil (8
× 60 μL) containing the emulsion stabilizing surfactant
is then loaded into the left-hand wells of the droplet generator cartridge.
A vacuum is automatically applied to the outlet well (right) creating
a pressure difference that, together with the geometry of the microfluidic
circuit, converts the aqueous sample into stable, monodisperse, water-in-oil
droplet emulsions which concentrate due to density differences from
the oil phase and accumulate in the droplet collection wells of the
cartridge. The droplets from each well are then transferred to one
well of a 96-well plate, foil sealed, and thermal-cycled to the end-point. (B) After amplification, the plate is then loaded to a droplet
reader where an autosampler aspirates the droplets and, using a microfluidic
singulator, streams them single file (∼1500 droplets/s) past
a FAM/VIC two color fluorescence detector which samples at a rate
of 100 kHz. (C) The difference in fluorescence amplitudes for droplets
where amplification has or has not occurred (positive and negatives,
respectively) divides the entire droplet population into four discrete clusters for a typical Fam/Vic duplex assay. These four populations are droplets
containing either no target (F–/V−), one of the targets
(F–/V+, F+,V−), or both targets (F+,V+). Setting
a fluorescence threshold for each detection channel affords a digital
method of droplet classification and computing the average number
of copies per droplet based on the fraction of positive droplets and
Poisson modeling.

Digital PCR Instrumentation and Data Analysis
Digital
PCR analysis was performed using 12.765 digital arrays on a BioMark
System (Fluidigm, South San Francisco)(referred to as 765-cdPCR).
The final reaction mix for each digital panel comprised 1000 predicted
copies of Lambda DNA, 1× ABI Taqman FAST PCR Mastermix with no
UNG AmpErase (Applied Biosystems Melbourne, Australia), 1× sample
loading reagent (Fluidigm, South San Francisco), and relevant forward
and reverse primers and probe (Table S-1 in the Supporting Information). To minimize the uncertainty from
pipetting, all PCR components excluding DNA were premixed and then
the final reaction mix was prepared gravimetrically by combining the
DNA and PCR components. A volume of 10 μL of the reaction mix
was aliquoted into each sample inlet on the digital array with approximately
4.6 μL of the reaction mix distributed throughout the partitions
within each panel using an automated MX Integrated Fluidic Circuit
(IFC) Controller (Fluidigm, South San Francisco). The chip setup was
randomized. No Template Controls (NTC) containing 1× TE0.1 buffer (10 mM Tris, 0.1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) in place of DNA or blank
panels containing 1× TE0.1 buffer in place of DNA
and primer/probes were analyzed in one or more alternate panels. Blank
panels were used in order to accommodate the chip-setup (Figure S-1
in the Supporting Information). Digital
array thermal cycling conditions consisted of a 2 min activation period
at 95 °C, followed by 50 cycles of a two-step thermal profile
involving 10 s at 95 °C for denaturation, and 30 s at 60 °C,
for combined annealing and extension. The data was analyzed using
BioMark data analysis software (v3.0.2) using a manually set quality
threshold of 0.01 and target Ct range of 15–50.

Linearity and Precision over Theoretical Dynamic Range of ddPCR
Instrument
Three independent gravimetric serial dilutions
of Lambda DNA were prepared using a standard protocol (Supporting Information S-1) to produce three
sets of seven solutions containing an average 26, 105, 409, 1 630,
6 495, 25 700, and 103 000 predicted copies of
Lambda DNA per 20 μL ddPCR based on absorbance measurements
of the stock Lambda DNA solution at 260 nm (Figure 2). For two of the serial dilution sets (gravimetric dilution
series 2 and 3), eight replicate ddPCRs were prepared from a single
eight-channel droplet generator cartridge for each of the seven solutions.
For gravimetric dilution series 1, 24 replicate ddPCRs were prepared
from three eight-channel droplet generator cartridges for each of
the seven solutions. The ddPCRs were analyzed using assay 2 under
simplex conditions. A complete eight channel cartridge of NTC was prepared by adding 1× TE0.1 buffer
in place of DNA template. NTCs showed a low-level background signal
of approximately three positive droplets per NTC assay, which could
possibly be attributed to low-level template contamination during
the preparation of the reaction mixture. The data generated was used
to assess linearity and precision over the theoretical dynamic range
of the instrument in addition to intracartridge and intercartridge
ddPCR precision.

Figure 2 Schematic diagram of experimental design for assessing
linearity and precision.

Comparison of DNA Concentration and Ratio Measurements Using
Two Different dPCR Formats under Simplex and Duplex Conditions
Three independent gravimetric serial dilutions of Lambda DNA were
prepared. For each gravimetric dilution series, one dilution was selected
for analysis using both 20 000-ddPCR and 765-cdPCR. This dilution
provided a predicted number of 1.3 copies per 6 nL reaction (based
on A260 measurement of NaOH denatured
stock Lambda DNA9) for the microfluidic
765-cdPCR which is close to the optimal 1.5 molecules per reaction for
minimizing the uncertainty of the copy number estimate.10 Since the droplet volume is approximately one-sixth
of the chamber volume, the predicted number of copies per 1 nL droplet
volume was 0.2 copies per droplet which is less thanthe optimal number
for this digital PCR format. For each of the three gravimetric dilutions,
five replicate ddPCR and five replicate microfluidic cdPCR were prepared
and analyzed. The ddPCRs droplets were generated from one eight channel droplet
generator cartridge, and the replicates were transferred to separate
wells within a single column of a 96-well plate for thermal cycling
and droplet reading. A total of 15 NTCs containing 1× TE0.1 in place of DNA template were similarly prepared and transferred
to three individual columns (five replicas assays each) of the 96-well
plate. NTCs showed a low-level background signal of approximately
two positive droplets per NTC assay. The microfluidic cdPCR assays were
prepared and then analyzed across two 12.765 chips (randomly designated
to two panels in one chip and three panels in the other chip). Each
microfluidic cdPCR experiment contained either one or two NTC panels
per chip. All NTC panels were negative. For ddPCR and microfluidic
cdPCR, the replicate assays were analyzed using assay 2 under simplex
conditions. A similar experimental setup was used for analysis with
assay 5 under simplex conditions and for both assays 2 and 5 under
duplex conditions.

Optical Microscope Imaging to Determine Droplet Volume
The average droplet volume was independently measured at the National
Measurement Institute, Australia, to compare with that quoted by the
ddPCR instrument manufacturer (BioRad, personal communication), by measurement
of droplets generated from 16 different channels. Droplets used for
optical imaging to determine droplet volume were prepared using the
same reagents as used for ddPCR estimation of Lambda DNA concentration.
Either three or four wells were randomly selected from each of five
different droplet generator cartridges for this analysis. Between
61 and 77 droplets were measured from each channel providing measurement
of 1 122 droplets in total.

The droplets were transferred
by pipet into 1 μ-Slide VI flat uncoated microscopy chambers
(IBIDI Germany) that had been prefilled with droplet generation oil
(Bio-Rad). After filling, the slides were gently held at an angle
to allow a uniform monolayer of droplets to develop at the upper oil–slide
interface for imaging. An optical microscope (Leica DM6000M) with
a digital CCD camera (Leica DFC490) was used to image the droplets.
Images were recorded under uniform illumination in a bright field,
using a HC PL FLUOTAR 20×/0.50 BD/Coverglass: O/ICT upright:
K2+D (K3+D1)/ICR: D1/D/thread: M32/FWD: 1.27 objective with numerical
aperture 5, to produce images at 200× apparent magnification.
A 12 V 100 W tungsten halogen lamp was used as the illumination source.
Digital images were collected on a computer running the Leica Application
Suite Software v3.5. Images were captured in interlaced large high-quality
format, corresponding to an image size of 3264 × 2448 pixels.

The x and y length scales of
the microscope/camera system were calibrated using a stage micrometer,
model MW-1540. Calibration values indicated the CCD comprised a square
pixel array to within the limits of relative uncertainty of the scale
bar measurement of 0.1%. The calibration was repeated by placing one
1 μ-Slide VI filled with droplet generation oil over the micrometer
features to investigate the impact of refractive index differences
of the slide–oil interface. A change of the calibration of
less than 0.1% was observed which is of the same order as the uncertainty
of the calibration.

ImageJ software v1.4211 was used for analysis of the digital images. Images were
first converted to a bit depth of 8-bit for processing. The edges
of the droplets were identified using the “find edges”
algorithm. The image was then inverted, and the edges of the droplets
were identified by thresholding the images. To enable detection of
the full droplet, a “fill holes” algorithm was run after
noise reduction and despeckling. The image was then thresholded again
to achieve detection of the entire droplet. The watershed algorithm
implemented in the ImageJ software was used to separate touching droplets.
Droplets on the edge of the image were excluded from analysis.

The binary images of the droplets were then analyzed. The major and
minor axis of an elliptical fit to the droplet outline were determined
and used to calculate the area in (pixels)2 of an ellipse of equivalent dimensions. This value was then used
to determine the diameter of a circle of an equivalent area. This
equivalent circular diameter, measured in pixels, was converted to
length units by applying the conversion factor between the length
measured in pixel units and length measured in micrometers determined
from the instrument calibration. Finally, the equivalent spherical
volume of a sphere having the equivalent circular diameter was calculated.

The sensitivity of the droplet size to the focus was investigated
by analyzing images taken at focal planes displaced by up to ±6
μm from ideal focus. The resulting variation of the measured
volume due to minor out of focus variation introduced during image
data collection was found to be less than 1.4% (Figure S-2 in the Supporting Information).

Determination of Stock DNA Copy Number Concentration from ddPCR
and cdPCR Data
The number of accepted droplet reactions in
each ddPCR, R, was between 10 000 and 18 000.
The droplet copy number concentration, Td, was calculated by multiplying M by 1000/Vd, where Vd is the
mean droplet volume (nL) (eq 2). 2  

The template DNA concentration in the
original stock solution, T, can then be calculated
by multiplying Td by the total dilution
factor, D, used to dilute the stock DNA solution
into the final ddPCR solution (eq 3). 3  

To estimate the template copy number
concentration using a 12.765 cdPCR chip, R was substituted
with 765 in the above equations since this is the number of chambers
per panel.

Estimation of Measurement Uncertainty
Measurement uncertainty
was estimated using a top-down approach. Experimental data from independent
sets (such as independent gravimetric dilutions) and replicate measurements
was combined using the pooled relative standard deviation. Equations 4 and 5 were used for precision
data for M and copy number ratio, respectively, where ni is the number of replicates
in the ith data set and CNRi is the ratio of the copy number concentration determined between
assays 5 and 2. Equation 4 captures the precision
of the copy number estimate from Poisson modeling as well as other
Type A components such as any variation in the volume of droplets
generated from different channels of the droplet generator or in the
preparation of the gravimetric dilution series. 4   5  

The relative standard
uncertainty of the precision data was then determined by dividing
the pooled relative standard deviation by the square root of the number
of data sets as shown in eqs 6 and 7, respectively. 6   7  

The relative standard uncertainty of
the droplet volume, (uVd)/(V̅d), is a Type
B uncertainty evaluation (obtained from information such as calibration
certificates and limits deduced from personal experience12) and was determined from the analysis of an
individual droplet image. Factors such as the goodness of the elliptical
fit, operator bias, microscope calibration, and effect of focus were
all considered in the estimation of this uncertainty. The combined
standard uncertainty of the concentration based on the top-down approach, u(T), was calculated by combining the precision
data (Type A uncertainty component evaluated by statistical analysis
of a series of measurements) with a Type B uncertainty component associated
with measurement of the droplet volume using eq 8. A full assessment of bias using this prototype instrument was not
feasible. However, the dynamic range experiment and the comparison
with an independent cdPCR system provided data to make an assessment
of bias from the measurements of M. 8  

The standard uncertainty of the copy
number ratio based on the top-down approach, uCNR, was equivalent to the standard uncertainty of the precision
data, uCNRprec. Since the assays
were run under duplex conditions, the uncertainty associated with
droplet volume is minimized and was not considered in this estimation.

The expanded uncertainty was calculated by multiplying the standard
uncertainty by a coverage factor12 which
provides a level of confidence of 95% that the true value for the
measurand falls within the expanded uncertainty. The coverage factor
varied from 2.05 to 2.18 depending on the effective degrees of freedom
which was derived from the Welch-Satterthwaite formula12 and was influenced by the number of replicates and independent
data sets analyzed in each experiment.

Results and Discussion
Dynamic Range
The theoretical dynamic range in digital
PCR is largely determined by the number of partitions that are analyzed.
A typical ddPCR contains approximately 20 000 individually
partitioned droplet reactions. On the basis of binomial approximation,
99.5% saturation of the droplets (i.e., 100 negative droplets in a
ddPCR containing 20 000 droplets) would indicate between 102 000
and 110 000 copies of target DNA (95% confidence interval)
in the 20 000-droplet reaction. This provides a theoretical
dynamic range of 105 target copies.

We examined the
ddPCR response over concentrations ranging from approximately 37 to
131 000 copies per 20 μL of ddPCR. This resulted in as
little as 0.16% positive droplets through to almost complete saturation
(99.6% positive droplets). The study, which included data from three
independent gravimetric dilution series, comprised a total of 168
ddPCRs. Less than 5% of these assays were excluded from data analysis.
Five assays were excluded because a clog was detected by the droplet
reader software and an additional three assays were excluded because
either no droplets or only 192 droplets were detected by the droplet
reader. The average number of droplets read for each ddPCR was 13,825
with a standard deviation of 1,892 droplets.

The ddPCR
response was linear over this dynamic range, which covered more than
4 orders of magnitude (r2 = 0.9994; Figure 3a). However, as previously described for cdPCR,7 the relative uncertainty in concentration was
not constant across the dynamic range. The stochastic effect associated
with sampling a DNA solution increases as the concentration of the
DNA solution decreases. Consequently, as the copy number concentration
of a sample decreases, the number of target DNA molecules in replicate
ddPCR assays is more variable. This is reflected in the relative expanded
uncertainty of the estimated stock DNA concentration which was 30
and 13% for the assays containing 37 and 142 copies, respectively,
per 20 μL of ddPCR. In comparison, the relative expanded uncertainty
for assays containing between 2 200 and 33 000 copies
was between 4.6 and 6.0% (Figure 3b). When
analyzing low template copies, the relative expanded uncertainty of
the ddPCR system was slightly lower than the values of 30–56%
and 40–60% reported recently for a 765-cdPCR assay containing
either 16 or 128 copies, respectively.3

Figure 3 (a)
Linearity and (b) precision across the dynamic range of ddPCR. (a)
Red, green, and blue error bars denote the standard deviation of the
Lambda DNA copy number per 20 μL of ddPCR for each of three
independent gravimetric dilutions (estimated from n = 7 or 8 replicates in each case). The 95% confidence interval of
the slope of the combined data is as indicated in the equation. (b)
Each symbol denotes the stock Lambda DNA concentration (copies/μL)
(estimated from n = 7 or 8 replicates for each of
three independent gravimetric dilutions). Error bars represent the
expanded uncertainty calculated by multiplying the combined standard
uncertainty (eq 8) with a coverage factor of
between 2.05 and 2.09 depending on the number of replicates in the
independent gravimetric dilutions. This provides a level of confidence
of 95% in the expanded uncertainty.

The Lambda DNA stock concentration was estimated
from seven gravimetrically prepared dilutions of the stock solution
that covered the above range and all results agreed within their expanded
uncertainties. The highest concentration analyzed (131 000
copies per ddPCR) contained, on average, 6.5 copies per droplet which
is 30% greater than the manufacturer’s recommended upper concentration
limit of five copies per droplet, on average (Bio-Rad, personal communication).
For this highly concentrated ddPCR data set, 99.6% of droplets were
positive. While the stock concentration estimation from this data
set was slightly lower than the average, it still agreed within its
expanded uncertainty with the other data sets (Figure 3b).Using ANOVA analysis, there was no significant difference
(p > 0.05) in the estimated concentration of the
Lambda stock when the 20 μL of ddPCR contained between 463 and
28 900 copies (p = 0.685, 0.243, and 0.463
for the three independent gravimetric dilutions).

Accuracy of ddPCR by Comparison with Independent cdPCR Measurement
System
Typically, accuracy of a measurement is assessed by
the closeness of agreement between the measured value and a true quantity
value or an accepted reference value of a measurand.12 In the absence of a DNA reference material certified for
absolute copy number concentration, results obtained from the ddPCR
system were compared with results obtained from a 765-cdPCR platform. Both systems provide a measurement of the absolute copy
number concentration without the need for an external calibrant.

Lambda DNA concentrations (copies/μL) and ratios measured using
the 20 000-ddPCR and 765-cdPCR formats were compared using
two assays that target different regions of the Lambda genome (assays
2 and 5) (Table 1).7 Regardless of the assay used, the Lambda DNA concentration measurements
using the 20 000-ddPCR and the 765-cdPCR agreed within their
expanded uncertainties, which were estimated by multiplying the combined
standard uncertainty (eq 8) with a coverage
factor between 2.05 and 2.13 to provide a level of confidence of 95%.
The relative expanded uncertainties for the 20 000-ddPCR were
3.2% and 4.2% for assay 5 and assay 2, respectively, while for the
765-cdPCR the relative expanded uncertainties were 13% and 15%, respectively.
The combination of a lower uncertainty in partition volume together
with an increase in the number of partitions analyzed has resulted
in a lower uncertainty for copy number concentration using ddPCR compared
to the microfluidic cdPCR even though the concentration analyzed was
most suited to minimizing precision for the chamber microfluidic cdPCR
format (see Experimental Section, Comparison of DNA Concentration and
Ratio Measurements Using Two Different dPCR Formats under Simplex
and Duplex Conditions). For ddPCR using assay 2, measurement
precision contributed 77% of the combined total uncertainty (Figure 4b). Approximately 9% of the Type A precision component
of the total uncertainty could be attributed to the copy number per
droplet measurement, M, which is determined using
Poisson modeling, and 3% was attributed to the gravimetric dilution
steps. The remainder could be mainly attributed to the variation in
volume of droplets generated from different wells of the droplet generator
cartridge (Figure S-3 in the Supporting Information). The major component of the Type B droplet volume uncertainty was
the estimation of the out-of-plane ellipsoid axis. The much larger
uncertainty for the 765-cdPCR was predominantly due to the uncertainty
associated with measurement of the z-axis of the
chamber volume using optical microscopy, as previously described,7 and this would also be the case if multiple panels
on the higher density microfluidic 48.770 chip (Fluidigm) were analyzed
to achieve a similar number of total reactions as for the 20 000-ddPCR.
If the z-axis could be measured using a technique
with lower uncertainty, this may reduce the uncertainty of the chamber
volume and the overall uncertainty of cdPCR measurements using a chamber
format. However, 18 panels on the 48.770 chip would be required to
obtain 13 860 partitions, and this is not a practical approach
for most ddPCR applications.

Table 1 Comparison of Copy Number Concentration, T, and Ratio Measurements Using Two Digital PCR Formatsa
 simplex	
assay	assay 5	assay 2	
digital PCR format	20 000-ddPCR	765-cdPCR	20 000-ddPCR	765-cdPCR	
measured Lambda DNA stock concentration, T, (copies/μL) (eq 3)	1.026 × 1010	1.02 × 1010	1.085 × 1010	9.8 × 109	
relative standard uncertainty of all precision
factors, (uMprec/M̅) (%) (eq 6)	1.2	4.3	1.7	5.7	
relative standard uncertainty (type
B components only) of a single droplet/chamber volume, (uVd)/V̅d (%)	1.0	4.7	1.0	4.7	
expanded uncertainty of U(T), (copies/μL)	0.033 × 1010	0.13 × 1010	0.045 × 1010	1.5 × 109	
relative expanded uncertainty of U(T), (%)	3.2	13	4.2	15	
 duplex	
assay	assay
5/assay 2	
digital PCR format	20 000-ddPCR	765-cdPCR	
copy number ratio for assay 5/assay 2 (copy/copy)	1.051	1.052	
expanded uncertainty
of copy number ratio (copy/copy)	0.030	0.064	
relative expanded uncertainty of copy
number ratio (% U)	2.8	6.1	
a For the ddPCR assays, the droplet reader counted an
average 13 504 gated droplets per well (range from 12 127
to 14 909 droplets per well), while the cdPCR assays contained
765 microfluidic chambers per panel. Each value is derived from five
replicate analyses for each of three independent gravimetric dilutions.
Replicates contained approximately 4 000 Lambda DNA copies
per 20 μL of ddPCR and approximately 1 000 Lambda DNA
copies per 4.65 μL of cdPCR. The Lambda DNA stock concentration
was determined under simplex conditions using both assay 5 and assay
2. The copy number ratio between assay 5 and assay 2 was determined
under duplex conditions. All precision components were captured in
one factor. The only known Type B component which was significant
enough to require input was from the droplet volume measurement. The
expanded uncertainties for the concentration and ratio were determined
by multiplying the combined standard uncertainty (eq 8) and the standard uncertainty,uCNVprec, respectively, by a coverage factor between 2.05
and 2.18, which provides a level of confidence of 95%. It should be
noted the magnitude of the expanded uncertainty values for T vary with concentration.

When the number of reactions
in digital PCR is less than one thousand, the estimated copy number
will tend to be a larger contributor to the uncertainty than the partition
volume (Figure 4a). As the number of reactions
increases, the confidence associated with the predicted copy number
and the copy number concentration improves dramatically. However,
at some point, the reaction volume will become a larger contributor
to the uncertainty than the copy number measurement. When this point
is reached, any additional increase in the number of reactions will
only have a small impact on reducing the total uncertainty (Figure 4a). When the number of reactions is more than 10 000,
as is the case for ddPCR, copy number measurement can be achieved
with a very high level of precision providing there are no other sources
of variability (Figure 4a). To translate this
potential improvement in precision to the concentration estimate,
droplets must be generated consistently from one assay to the next.
The ddPCR droplets are generated using an eight channel injection
molded cartridge. Significant variation in the size of droplets generated
from different wells either within or between cartridges would be
reflected in the variation in concentration estimates following ddPCR.

Figure 4 Factors
contributing to measurement uncertainty. (a) Theoretical relative
expanded uncertainty of concentration considering only two factors:
Type B partition volume component, Vd with
a relative uncertainty of 1.0% (green), and uncertainty of the Poisson
modeling of copy number per droplet, M,7 (mesh blue) calculated for the condition when
80% of the reactions are positive following digital PCR. This is close
to the optimal percentage of positive reactions for minimizing the
uncertainty of the copy number estimate, regardless of the number
of reactions in the assay.10 The relative
standard uncertainties of these two factors were combined (inset)
and then multiplied by two to obtain the relative expanded uncertainty
with a level of confidence of 95%. (b) Contributions to concentration
uncertainty for a ddPCR data set comprising five replicate analyses
from each of three independent gravimetric dilutions analyzed using
assay 2 under simplex conditions (see Table 1 for details). This data set had a relative expanded uncertainty
of only 4.2%, which was determined by multiplying the combined standard
uncertainty (eq 8) by a coverage factor of 2.09
to provide a level of confidence of 95%. The contributions of the
components of droplet volume (Type B components only) are indicated
in green shading and the components of precision are indicated in
blue shading. In this data set, a total of 190 433 droplets
were accepted by the droplet reader and 19.1% of these droplets were
positive.

To investigate the intra- and intercartridge copy
number concentration repeatability, a ddPCR was prepared from each
well in three eight channel cartridges providing a total of 24 replicate
ddPCR assays. This process was undertaken for each of the seven dilutions
of the Lambda DNA which contained an average 26, 105, 409, 1 630,
6 495, 25 700, and 103 000 predicted copies of
Lambda DNA per 20 μL of ddPCR, based on absorbance measurements
of the stock Lambda DNA solution at 260 nm. The eight replicate ddPCR
from one cartridge were dispensed into the wells of one column of
a 96-well plate prior to end-point PCR. For each Lambda DNA dilution,
the assays prepared from three replicate cartridges were analyzed
in adjacent columns on the same 96-well plate to minimize possible
contributions caused by intraplate variability. ANOVA within and between
the ddPCR derived from three replicate cartridges demonstrated no
significant intracartridge effect at any of the Lambda DNA concentrations
analyzed(p-values ranging from 0.124 to 0.716).
There was no significant intercartridge effect for seven of the nine
dilutions analyzed (p-values ranging from 0.153 to
0.698), implying that any intracartridge variability in the size of
droplets generated was similar to that of the intercartridge variability.

To verify the reproducibility of droplet volume, a sample of 1 122
droplets generated from a total of 16 wells located across 5 separate
cartridges were imaged, and each droplet volume was measured using
image processing (Figure S-3 in the Supporting
Information). The mean droplet volume obtained from image processing
measurements was 0.868 nL. A Type B uncertainty evaluation of an individual
droplet volume measurement estimated the relative expanded uncertainty
of this measurement as 2.0% using a coverage factor of 2.04. This
measured droplet volume and associated uncertainty agrees with the
manufacturer’s independently estimated value of 0.89 nL for
droplets generated from the eight channel droplet generator cartridges
(Bio-Rad, personal communication). The relative standard deviation
of the mean interwell droplet volume for the 16 wells was 2.8%. ANOVA
demonstrated no significant intracartridge (p = 0.801)
or intercartridge (p = 0.053) effect on the partition
volume confirming that the observed variation in droplet volume between
wells was independent of the cartridge. Provided sufficient numbers
of replicate wells are analyzed, this well-to-well variation in
droplet volume is likely to be captured within the precision data
of replicate concentration measurements (Figure 4b) and was, therefore, not considered as a separate component in
the top down uncertainty estimation.

Assuming that the Lambda
DNA genome is intact, the copy number ratio between assay 5 and assay
2 should result in a ratio of 1.0. The Lambda DNA copy number ratio
between assays 5 and 2 under duplex conditions using the 20 000-ddPCR
and the 765-cdPCR were 1.051 and 1.052, respectively, and the corresponding
relative expanded uncertainties using a coverage factor of 2.18 were
2.8% and 6.1%, respectively (Table 1). The
lower expanded uncertainty in copy number variation observed using
the 20 000-ddPCR can largely be explained by the more than
20-fold increase in number of partitions analyzed in each ddPCR assay.

Conclusions
In this study we have demonstrated experimentally
that this ddPCR system can achieve a linear dynamic range of more
than 4 orders of magnitude for DNA quantification. The large number
of reactions in this ddPCR system allowed very precise copy number
estimates which resulted in a relative expanded uncertainty of less
than 5% for Lambda DNA copy number concentration. Further improvements
in uncertainty of absolute copy number quantification may be achieved
by increasing the number of replicates analyzed. However, this will
be limited by the partition volume uncertainty when it becomes a larger
contributor to the uncertainty than the precision of copy number estimates
(Figure 4). For duplex copy number ratio measurements,
the contribution from partition volume in the uncertainty estimate
is minimized since both assays are conducted in the same ddPCR. Therefore,
increasing the number of partitions will lead to further improvements
in precision, and this can be readily and practically achieved by
combining the results of replicate wells.

Because of the high
level of precision that can be obtained from ddPCR and other high
density cdPCR formats,13,14 it is particularly important
that the experimental design replicates capture all known sources
of variation, and that components of bias are identified and included
in the uncertainty budget to ensure the measurements are also accurate.15 For the prototype instrument used in this study,
it was difficult to make a full assessment of bias. However, dynamic
range studies did not indicate a concentration-dependent bias, and
concentration measurements were comparable with results obtained using
an independent microfluidic cdPCR. This ddPCR technology should be
fit-for-purpose for a wide range of applications, including the direct
quantification of nucleic acids for gene expression (e.g., miRNAs),
pathogen quantification, rare allele detection, germline and somatic
copy number variation estimation, some of which have recently been
demonstrated.8

Supporting Information Available
Additional
information as noted in text. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac202578x_si_002.pdf

 Acknowledgments
The project described was supported by Grant Number R01EB010106
from the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging And Bioengineering
(C.M.H., B.J.H.), and the National Enabling Technology Strategy (L.B.P.,
V.A.C., J.H., S.B., K.R.E.) provided by the Commonwealth Government
of Australia. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering or the National
Institutes of Health. The National Measurement Institute declares
that it has no competing interests and by conducting this study does
not imply endorsement of the technologies described in the manuscript.
C.M.H. and B.J.H. are full-time employees of Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Inc. We thank P. Armishaw and D. Burke for their critical review of
the manuscript.
==== Refs
References
Sykes P. J. ; Neoh S. H. ; Brisco M. J. ; Hughes E. ; Condon J. ; Morley A. A.  Biotechniques  1992 , 13 , 444–449.1389177 
Vogelstein B. ; Kinzler K. W.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.  1999 , 96 , 9236–9241.10430926 
Sanders R. ; Huggett J. F. ; Bushell C. A. ; Cowen S. ; Scott D. J. ; Foy C. A.  Anal. Chem.  2011 , 83 , 6474–6484.21446772 
Lo Y. M. ; Lun F. M. ; Chan K. C. ; Tsui N. B. ; Chong K. C. ; Lau T. K. ; Leung T. Y. ; Zee B. C. ; Cantor C. R. ; Chiu R. W.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A.  2007 , 104 , 13116–13121.17664418 
Wang J. ; Ramakrishnan R. ; Tang Z. ; Fan W. ; Kluge A. ; Dowlati A. ; Jones R. C. ; Ma P. C.  Clin. Chem.  2010 , 56 , 623–632.20207772 
Dube S. ; Qin J. ; Ramakrishnan R.  PLoS One  2008 , 3 , e2876.18682853 
Bhat S. ; Herrmann J. ; Armishaw P. ; Corbisier P. ; Emslie K. R.  Anal. Bioanal. Chem.  2009 , 394 , 457–467.19288230 
Hindson B. J. ; Ness K. D. ; Masquelier D. A. ; Belgrader P. ; Heredia N. J. ; Makarewicz A. J. ; Bright I. J. ; Lucero M. Y. ; Hiddessen A. L. ; Legler T. C. ; Kitano T. K. ; Hodel M. R. ; Petersen J. F. ; Wyatt P. W. ; Steenblock E. R. ; Shah P. H. ; Bousse L. J. ; Troup C. B. ; Mellen J. C. ; Wittmann D. K. ; Erndt N. G. ; Cauley T. H. ; Koehler R. T. ; So A. P. ; Dube S. ; Rose K. A. ; Montesclaros L. ; Wang S. ; Stumbo D. P. ; Hodges S. P. ; Romine S. ; Milanovich F. P. ; White H. E. ; Regan J. F. ; Karlin-Neumann G. A. ; Hindson C. M. ; Saxonov S. ; Colston B. W.  Anal. Chem.  2011 , 83 , 8604–8610.22035192 
Bhat S. ; Curach N. ; Mostyn T. ; Bains G. S. ; Griffiths K. R. ; Emslie K. R.  Anal. Chem.  2010 , 82 , 7185–7192.20690645 
Weaver S. ; Dube S. ; Mir A. ; Qin J. ; Sun G. ; Ramakrishnan R. ; Jones R. C. ; Livak K. J.  Methods  2010 , 50 , 271–276.20079846 
Abramoff M. D. ; Magalhaes P. J. ; Ram S. J.  Biophoton. Int.  2004 , 11 , 36–42.
Joint Committee for Guides
in Metrology Working Group 2. International Vocabulary of
Metrology - Basic and general concepts and associated terms  (VIM); http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_200_2008.pdf, 3 rd ed.; BIPM : Sèvres Cedex, France , 2008 .
Heyries K. A. ; Tropini C. ; Vaninsberghe M. ; Doolin C. ; Petriv O. I. ; Singhal A. ; Leung K. ; Hughesman C. B. ; Hansen C. L.  Nat. Methods  2011 , 8 , 649–651.21725299 
Pekin D. ; Skhiri Y. ; Baret J. C. ; Le Corre D. ; Mazutis L. ; Salem C. B. ; Millot F. ; El Harrak A. ; Hutchison J. B. ; Larson J. W. ; Link D. R. ; Laurent-Puig P. ; Griffiths A. D. ; Taly V.  Lab Chip  2011 , 11 , 2156–2166.21594292 
Griffiths K. R. ; Burke D. G. ; Emslie K. R.  Anal. Methods  2011 , 3 , 2201–2211.
