
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac403185aArticleCombine and Conquer: Surfactants, Solvents, and Chaotropes
for Robust Mass Spectrometry Based Analyses of Membrane Proteins Waas Matthew †‡§Bhattacharya Subarna ‡§Chuppa Sandra ‡§Wu Xiaogang §Jensen Davin
R. ‡Omasits Ulrich ∥Wollscheid Bernd ∥Volkman Brian F. ‡Noon Kathleen R. §Gundry Rebekah L. *‡§† Milwaukee School of Engineering, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53202, United States‡Department of Biochemistry and §Biotechnology and
Bioengineering Center, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown
Plank Road, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, United States∥ Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 16, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland* E-mail: rgundry@mcw.edu. Phone: 414-955-2825. Fax: 414-955-6568.06 01 2015 06 01 2014 04 02 2014 86 3 1551 1559 23 09 2013 06 01 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical Society

Mass spectrometry
(MS) based proteomic technologies enable the identification and quantification
of membrane proteins as well as their post-translational modifications.
A prerequisite for their quantitative and reliable MS-based bottom-up
analysis is the efficient digestion into peptides by proteases, though
digestion of membrane proteins is typically challenging due to their
inherent properties such as hydrophobicity. Here, we investigated
the effect of eight commercially available MS-compatible surfactants,
two organic solvents, and two chaotropes on the enzymatic digestion
efficiency of membrane protein-enriched complex mixtures in a multiphase
study using a gelfree approach. Multiple parameters, including the
number of peptides and proteins identified, total protein sequence
coverage, and digestion specificity were used to evaluate transmembrane
protein digestion performance. A new open-source software tool was
developed to allow for the specific assessment of transmembrane domain
sequence coverage. Results demonstrate that while Progenta anionic
surfactants outperform other surfactants when tested alone, combinations
of guanidine and acetonitrile improve performance of all surfactants
to near similar levels as well as enhance trypsin specificity to >90%,
which has critical implications for future quantitative and qualitative
proteomic studies.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac403185adocument-id-new-14ac-2013-03185accc-price
==== Body
Membrane
proteins constitute up to 30% of the total human genome and their
critical roles in maintaining cellular structure and inter- and intracellular
communication have been extensively reviewed.1−4 Mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomic
analyses can offer strategies to identify, quantify, and structurally
characterize membrane proteins and their modifications, though these
analyses are often challenging because of the inherent properties
of this protein class. In particular, integral membrane, or transmembrane
(TM), proteins have common structural features that allow for hydrophobic
interactions with the lipid bilayer. This characteristic hydrophobicity
coupled with the relatively low abundance of TM proteins, when compared
to other protein classes,3−5 results in the underrepresentation
of TM proteins in typical global proteomic analyses, which often favor
more soluble, abundant proteins and peptides.3,4,6 Especially in bottom-up proteomic workflows
where the enzymatic or chemical digestion of the protein into peptides
of suitable m/z for routine analysis
by MS is necessary, the efficiency of digestion directly affects the
proteome coverage obtained. Particularly for TM proteins, digestion
efficiency is hampered by the lack of solubility which results in
reduced accessibility of the protein to the protease and sample loss
due to precipitation and aggregation.6

Ideally, sample preparation conditions for the proteomic analysis
of TM proteins should be carefully designed to maximize digestion
efficiency without adversely affecting the protease activity or interfering
with downstream MS analysis. In general, several classes of MS-compatible
reagents are commonly employed to enhance enzymatic digestion of TM
proteins including organic solvents, chaotropic agents, and surfactants.
These additives aid in the separation of the protein from the lipid
content, maintain protein solubility, and assist in protein unfolding
to maximize the availability of protease cleavage sites. Organic solvents
increase protein solubility by stabilizing the hydrophobic stretches
of the proteins, although when used at sufficiently high concentrations,
the organic solvent can affect the structure of the proteases in such
a way that the apparent Km value decreases.4,6 Chaotropes disrupt protein interaction with the lipids in the membrane
and stabilize the unfolded form of the protein allowing for better
cleavage.6 Surfactants, which are typically
amphipathic, dissociate the protein from the lipid and solubilize
the hydrophobic domains in an aqueous environment.6

The incorporation of various surfactants, solvents,
and chaotropes for improving enzymatic digestion of complex protein
mixtures has been the topic of several recent studies. Delipidation
of membrane fractions using surfactants or chloroform extraction has
been shown to increase proteome coverage of crude protein mixtures.7,8 A comparison of the efficiency of digestion of three commercially
available surfactants in aqueous and organic solvents on brain homogenate
found that these solubilization strategies reduced the amount of starting
material required to detect a broad range of proteins and observed
a complementarity among the different conditions.9 The efficiency of organic solvents, surfactants, and chaotropic
agents—including combinations of the three—on the digestion
of tomato microsomal fractions revealed that the various strategies
provided complementary proteome coverage and that the efficiency of
surfactants as compared to organic solvents was partially due to higher
enzymatic activity in the aqueous environment of the surfactants.10 The effect of chaotropes, organic solvents,
and sequential digestion with multiple proteases on the number of
proteins identified from membrane fractions enriched from mammalian
cell culture found that each strategy increased the number of proteins
identified as well as the percentage of membrane proteins identified,
but concluded that a single approach is not applicable to all membrane
studies.6 Finally, the utility of various
organic solvents, surfactants, and buffers on the extraction and digestion
of the mouse brain proteome found that using a detergent-based protocol
allowed for up to 40 times the protein yield as compared to that of
organic solvents and acids.11 However,
this study utilized surfactants that were not MS-compatible, and thus
required additional processing to prevent the surfactants from interfering
with MS analyses. While these previous studies have collectively concluded
that additives such as surfactants, organic solvents, and chaotropes
can enhance the enzymatic digestion of proteins, the current literature
lacks a comprehensive analysis of the effect of these additives specifically
for the digestion of TM proteins, which is notably the most difficult
class of proteins to access in proteomic studies.

The current
study was designed to address this gap by focusing specifically on
the effect of additives on membrane-enriched cellular subfractions
and extends beyond current literature by including more commercially
available surfactants than have been included in previous studies,
examining multiple concentrations of the additives, and examining
combinations of additives that have complementary properties. This
study evaluated eight commercially available MS-compatible surfactants
[Invitrosol, PPS Silent Surfactant, Progenta anionic acid labile surfactant
(AALS) I, Progenta AALS II, Progenta cationic acid labile surfactant
(CALS) I, Progenta CALS II, ProteaseMax, and RapiGest SF], two organic
solvents (acetonitrile and methanol), and two chaotropes (urea and
guanidine HCl) on the enzymatic digestion efficiency of membrane protein-enriched
complex mixtures in a multiphase study using a gelfree MS approach.
Although previous studies have investigated methods for digestion
after solubilizing membrane fractions in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS),11,12 our study aimed to avoid MS-incompatible surfactants like SDS entirely.
First, the effect of various concentrations of individual additives
on digestion efficiency was evaluated. This comparison was then followed
by an evaluation of various combinations of the best performing individual
additives. Multiple parameters, including the number of peptides and
proteins identified, total sequence coverage, sequence coverage of
TM domain, average peptide hydrophobicity, and digestion specificity
(i.e., tryptic termini) were used to evaluate the TM protein digestion
performance. Results have implications for future analyses of membrane
proteins when maximum sequence coverage is required (e.g., mapping
protein–protein interactions, identification of isoforms, and
post-translational modifications), and moreover, for quantitation
of membrane and soluble proteins when reproducible and specific enzymatic
digestion is required.

Experimental Section
Cell Lysis, Membrane Protein
Preparation, and Protein Digestion
The experimental strategy
is summarized in Figure 1 and details are provided
in the Supporting Information. Surfactants
included Invitrosol (Life Technologies), PPS Silent Surfactant (Agilent),
Progenta anionic surfactants (AALS I, AALS II), and cationic surfactants
(CALS I, CALS II) (Protea Biosciences), ProteaseMax (Promega), and
RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters) (details in Table
S1 in the Supporting Information) and samples were brought
to the final concentration of surfactant, chaotrope, or organic solvent
as listed in Table 1. Mixed membrane pellets
were obtained as described in Supporting Information, and 100 mM fresh NH4HCO3 was added to the
mixed membrane pellet in the ultracentrifuge tube and the volume of
NH4HCO3 was adjusted such that all digestion
conditions were performed in the same total volume. Throughout the
remainder of the digestion protocol, the samples were vortexed at
750 rpm in the ultracentrifuge tube using a Thermomixer (Eppendorf).
Subsequently, samples were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
(Sigma) for 20 min at 37 °C and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide
(Sigma). Twenty micrograms of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega)
was added, pH was adjusted to 8.5 when necessary, and samples were
allowed to digest overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptide samples
were brought to a concentration of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo),
incubated for 30 min at 37 °C to degrade the acid-labile surfactants,
and then centrifuged at 13 000 rpm for 10 min to remove lipids,
particulates, and undigested material. After centrifugation, the appearance
of the resulting solution was observed (i.e., clear, cloudy, presence
of particulates, etc.) and recorded in Table 1. Some conditions were not further analyzed by MS due to the large
amount of undigested material and aggregation (noted in Table 1). To avoid any of the undigested material and/or
precipitated lipids from being carried onto the next step, 400 μL
of the supernatant (out of ∼450 μL total) was subsequently
desalted and concentrated using C18 Micro spin columns (Harvard Apparatus)
according to manufacturer’s instructions and dried in vacuo.

Figure 1 Overall
experimental strategy: (A) Workflow of the membrane protein enrichment
strategy and subsequent protein digestion scheme. (B) Summary workflow
of phase I, where single additives were compared, and phase II, where
additive combinations were compared.

Table 1 Summary of the Final Concentrations of Additives Tested,
Measured Critical Micelle Concentration (CMC), and the Resulting Sample
Appearance Postdigestion
 	 	CMC (%)	 	
additive	final concentrations tested	25 °C	37 °C	sample appearance
postdigestion	
Organic Solvent	 	 	 	 	
acetonitrile	20%, 40%	 	 	cloudy, floating
particulate, small pellet	
methanol	60%	 	 	cloudy with particulate, medium
pellet	
chaotropic agent	 	 	 	 	
guanidine-HCl	1 M	 	 	cloudy with particulate, medium
pellet	
urea	1.6 M	 	 	cloudy, medium pellet	
 	 	 	 	 	
Surfactant	 	 	 	 	
Invitrosol	1×, 2×	0.064	0.059	clear, medium
pellet	
PPS Silent Surfactant	0.1%, 0.2%	>0.1	>0.1	cloudy, medium pellet	
AALS I	0.1%, 0.2%	>0.1	>0.1	cloudy, medium pellet	
AALS II	0.1%, 0.2%	>0.1	>0.1	clear, small pellet	
CALS Ia	0.1%, 0.2%	0.002	0.003	cloudy, large chunks of particulate	
CALS IIa	0.1%, 0.2%	0.023	0.025	cloudy, large chunks of particulate	
ProteaseMax	0.05%, 0.1%	>0.1	>0.1	cloudy, small pellet	
RapiGest	0.1%, 0.2%	0.064	0.089	clear, small
pellet	
 	 	 	 	 	
Combinations	 	 	 	 	
Invitrosol+Gc	2× Invitrosol, 1 M guanidine	0.049	0.058	clear, small pellet	
Invitrosol+G/Ac	2× Invitrosol, 1 M
guanidine, 20% acetonitrile	0.191	0.188	clear, medium
pellet	
AALS I+G	0.2% AALS
I, 1 M guanidine	b	b	clear, medium pellet	
AALS I+G/A	0.2% AALS I, 1 M guanidine,
20% acetonitrile	b	b	clear, small pellet	
AALS II+G	0.2% AALS II, 1 M guanidine	b	b	clear, small pellet	
AALS II+G/A	0.2% AALS II, 1 M guanidine, 20%
acetonitrile	b	b	clear, small pellet	
RapiGest+G	0.2% RapiGest, 1 M guanidine	0.015	0.034	clear, small pellet	
RapiGest+G/A	0.2% RapiGest, 1 M guanidine, 20% acetonitrile	0.132	0.162	clear, small pellet	
a These digestion
conditions were not continued to the MS analysis because of their
postdigestion appearance.

b Addition of guanidine resulted in some precipitation, which likely
affects fluorescence detection (i.e., CMC value) at these conditions.

c Abbreviations: G, guanidine;
A, acetonitrile.

Mass Spectrometry
and Data Analysis
Two technical replicates of each sample
were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)
on an LTQ linear ion trap (Thermo) as described in the Supporting Information. For all analyses summarized
in Figure 2–4, the results
were based on the fully tryptic digest search. A separate database
search was conducted as described in Supporting
Information, but against a semitryptic peptide database, and
was used to assess the total number and percentage of spectra matched
to semitryptic peptides (i.e., only a single tryptic terminus), as
summarized in Figure 5. Finally, to assess
the ability for each digestion condition to access peptides that span
the predicted TM domains, a custom software tool was developed to
map identified peptides onto TM topology information curated in UniProt,
which is a combination of experimentally determined information and
predictions, utilizing the predictive tools TMHMM, Memsat, Phobius,
and hydrophobic moment plot method.13 The
mapping software, PeptideEclipse, is open source and can be accessed
at http://ulo.github.io/PeptideEclipse/. Within these studies,
a TM peptide is defined as a peptide that contains at least one amino
acid from the annotated TM domain from UniProt.

Critical Micelle
Concentration (CMC) Measurement
CMC of each surfactant was
determined by a fluorometric method as described,14 using 30 μM 1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic acid
(1,8-ANS) (Sigma 10417-5G-F) for each assay, and measured at 25 and
37 °C in 100 mM NH4HCO3, NH4HCO3/1.0 M guanidine, and NH4HCO3/1.0 M guanidine/20% acetonitrile to accurately mimic each digestion
condition tested. The excitation and emission wavelengths were 388
and 480 nm, respectively, and data were acquired using a FlexStation
3 MicroPlate Reader (Molecular Devices).

Results and Discussion
Phase
I: Comparison of Individual Additives Reveals Benefits of Anionic
Surfactants
Relevant properties of each additive used are
summarized in the Supporting Information and CMC values are included in Table 1. In
general, the addition of guanidine or guanidine/acetonitrile affected
the CMC; values for Invitrosol and RapiGest in the presence of guanidine
are slightly lower than that in NH4HCO3 alone,
but in the presence of guanidine/acetonitrile the CMCs are approximately
2 times higher than that in NH4HCO3 alone. However,
for AALS I, AALS II, and ProteaseMax, the addition of guanidine resulted
in some precipitate that likely affected the fluorescence measurement
used to determine the CMC; thus, the effect of the additives remains
unclear for these surfactants. Overall, no clear trend between surfactant
performance (described below) and CMC value was revealed, which is
consistent with a previous report.15 As
a first step toward assessing differences among digestion conditions,
the postdigestion sample appearance, including the clarity of the
sample, the size of the pellet, and presence of floating particulate
are summarized in Table 1. Although these observations
are a qualitative and crude measure of the completeness of protein
digestion, they are consistent with subsequent quantitative observations
where the clear solutions with smaller visible pellets correlate to
more complete digestion.

Quantitative comparisons of the digestion
conditions are summarized in Figures 2–5 and were carried
out within biological replicates of each tube set such that the total
protein amount for each comparison set was equivalent. When appropriate,
data are grouped according to biological replicates to illustrate
that although total protein among replicates/tube sets may vary slightly,
trends in surfactant performance were consistent among replicates.
Overall, among the surfactants, the anionic Progenta surfactants (AALS
I, AALS II) performed most favorably across all parameters examined
(Figure 2). Of the
solvents, acetonitrile performed more favorably, especially for increasing
the number of total proteins and TM proteins identified (Figure 2A, Figure 1A in the Supporting
Information), and number of hydrophobic peptides (Figure 2D). Of the chaotropes, guanidine was preferable,
especially for increasing the number of hydrophobic peptides and average
sequence coverage of smaller proteins (Figure 2D, Figure 1B in the Supporting Information). In phase IA, it is possible that the total amount of protein varied
among tube sets, and thus assessments regarding the best performing
conditions were only made within each set. Thus, to further evaluate
the most favorable conditions, the top six performing surfactants
from phase IA (referred to as “Selected Conditions”)
were directly compared within a single tube set (in two biological
replicates) in phase IB and included RapiGest 0.2%, Invitrosol 2×,
ProteaseMax 0.05%, Progenta AALS I 0.2%, Progenta AALS II 0.1%, and
Progenta AALS II 0.2%. Results from phase IB were consistent with
those from phase IA, where AALS I and AALS II consistently outperformed
the other surfactants in terms of overall proteome coverage, and more
specifically, the number of transmembrane proteins and hydrophobic
peptides (Figure 2, Figure
1 in the Supporting Information).

Figure 2 Summary of results from
phase I (individual additives). For each tube set, (A) the total number
of proteins identified, (B) number of unique peptide sequences identified,
(C) average sequence coverage, and (D) number of peptides with hydrophobic
GRAVY scores are shown. In (A) and (B), values for each biological
replicate are plotted separately to illustrate consistent overall
trends.

Phase II: Comparison of
Additive Combinations Reveals Benefits of Guanidine and Acetonitrile
On the basis of previous studies,9,10 and the data
from phase I indicating that some additive classes may assist digestion
in several but not all parameters, phase II was conducted to determine
whether combining the surfactants with acetonitrile (best solvent)
and guanidine (best chaotrope) could further enhance the digestion.
These additives were tested in combination with the three top performing
surfactants identified from phase IB (AALS I 0.2%, AALS II 0.2%, and
RapiGest 0.2%) as well as Invitrosol 2×. Invitrosol, though not
a top performer on its own, was selected because of its low cost compared
to those of the other surfactants (Table S1 in
the Supporting Information) and to investigate whether the
vast differences among individual surfactant performances could be
mitigated simply by the inclusion of inexpensive additives like acetonitrile
and guanidine.

Results from phase II are summarized in Figure 3 and Figure 2 in the Supporting Information, and for the remainder
of the study, digestion conditions are abbreviated as follows: NH4HCO3 with 1.0 M guanidine is referred to as “+G”
and NH4HCO3 with 1.0 M guanidine/20% acetonitrile
is referred to as “+G/A”. The effects of guanidine and
acetonitrile on the surfactants varied slightly among the four surfactants
compared in this phase. The +G/A condition generally increased the
total number of proteins and peptides identified for each surfactant,
with the exception of AALS II that showed an increase in total number
of peptides, but a decrease in total proteins. For all surfactants,
average sequence coverage was improved with +G/A, but only for RapiGest,
AALS I, and Invitrosol did the number of hydrophobic peptides increase.
Notably, although AALS I outperformed RapiGest when surfactants alone
were compared, and AALS II outperformed Invitrosol (phases I and II),
RapiGest+G/A was similar to AALS I+G/A, and Invitrosol+G/A was similar
to AALS II+G/A in all categories (Figure 3).

Figure 3 Summary
of results from phase II (additive combinations). For each tube set,
(A) the total number of proteins identified, (B) number of unique
peptide sequences identified, (C) average sequence coverage, and (D)
number of peptides with hydrophobic GRAVY scores are shown. In (A)
and (B), values for each biological replicate are plotted separately
to illustrate consistent overall trends.

Custom Software Reveals Additive Combinations Enhance Transmembrane
Domain Accessibility
The number of peptides with hydrophobic
GRAVY scores (>0.5) and the number of identified TM proteins are
summarized in Figures 2–4 and indicate
that AALS I and AALS II provide optimum accessibility of TM proteins
among surfactants alone. To more directly assess the ability of each
condition to specifically access the TM domain of the protein, the
custom software program PeptideEclipse was developed to map the peptide
sequences observed onto the annotated TM topology provided in the
public database UniProt. For these analyses, the average TM coverage
considered only the proteins for which some of the TM was observed
(i.e., the proteins included in Figure 4A) and was calculated by dividing the number of
observed amino acids from all TM regions by the total number of amino
acids predicted to be from all the TM regions. Overall, the addition
of guanidine and acetonitrile consistently improved the ability of
the surfactants to access the TM domain. First, while the +G/A condition
decreased the total number of proteins that were identified by a peptide
from the TM domain (Figure 4A), it increased
the average coverage of all proteins, and of TM proteins, independent
of the number of predicted TM domains (Figure 4B and Figure 2B in the Supporting Information). Second, the +G/A condition led to an increase in TM domain coverage
(Figure 4C), despite a decrease in the number
of peptides that contained amino acids from within the TM domain for
all surfactants except Invitrosol (Figure 4D). Effectively, although the addition of guanidine and acetonitrile
decreased the number of peptides from the TM domain, when a peptide
from TM domain was observed, higher coverage of the TM domain was
achieved. A detailed analysis of the characteristics of the peptides
from the TM proteins reveals an explanation for this observation;
namely, that the addition of guanidine and acetonitrile resulted in
longer peptides being identified (Figure 4E),
thus explaining how fewer numbers of unique peptide sequences could
give rise to higher TM protein sequence coverage. This trend is consistent
with a previous observation that TM domains are represented by longer
tryptic peptides than soluble regions.16 A closer look at the peptides from the TM spanning regions reveals
that enhanced digestion specificity (described below) may be one cause
of this increase in peptide length because as the fidelity of digestion
is increased in the +G/A condition, longer (i.e., fully tryptic) peptides
result. Moreover, digestion efficiency of the TM peptides was assessed
by combining data from conditions in phase II and considering only
peptides with ≥20 amino acids (length of a TM domain) that
span the annotated TM domain. For these peptides, surfactant alone
yielded 13 peptides with one missed cleavage out of 236 peptide observations
whereas surfactant +G/A had 1 peptide with one missed cleavage out
of 284 peptide observations. Thus, while it is possible that additional
aspects of the analytical technique may affect which peptides are
observed more readily, such as the reduced ability to fragment large
peptides, preferential ionization of hydrophobic TM peptides vs hydrophilic
non-TM peptides, and/or less than optimal handling of higher charge
state peptides by the bioinformatics, these trends suggest that the
addition of guanidine and acetonitrile improve sequence coverage of
TM proteins and specifically the TM domain by improving digestion
efficiency and specificity.

Figure 4 Assessment of TM domain mapping from additive
combinations examined in phase II. Data include (A) the number of
proteins identified by peptides containing at least one amino acid
from the TM domain, (B) the average percent sequence coverage of all
proteins and TM proteins, (C) average percent sequence coverage of
the TM domain for those proteins identified by at least one peptide
with TM coverage, (D) the number of peptides with TM domain coverage,
and (E) the number of peptides from TM proteins, as a distribution
of total peptide length.

Trypsin Specificity Is Enhanced by Acetonitrile—Implications
for Quantitation
The specificity of digestion (i.e., percentage
of fully tryptic vs semitryptic peptides) was evaluated because of
its importance in protein quantitation, which requires predictable
and reproducible digestion.17 Especially
in the case of selected reaction monitoring (SRM) assays, the ability
to reliably obtain fully tryptic peptides is a requirement for accurate
quantitation.17,18 Digestion specificity was determined
by counting the total number of spectra matched to peptides with either
one or two tryptic termini and because the occurrence of peptides
with zero tryptic termini was negligible (<1%), these data were
excluded. Examining surfactants alone, the number of semitryptic peptides
is relatively constant among all surfactants compared in phase IB,
and these analyses reveal that the increase in the total number of
spectra observed in the AALS I and II conditions may be due to more
fully tryptic peptides (Figure 5A). Thus, in addition to identifying more total
peptides and proteins (as shown in Figure 2), inclusion of surfactants should be beneficial for quantitative
studies. Examination of the additive combinations from phase II reveals
an unexpected yet striking trend, where the addition of guanidine
and acetonitrile increases the number of fully tryptic spectra for
each surfactant (Figure 5A) while also reducing
the number of semitryptic spectra, such that the overall specificity
of digestion increases from ∼50% (surfactant alone) to greater
than 90% fully tryptic with the inclusion of guanidine and acetonitrile
(Figure 5B). Although the analysis of tryptic
termini could be better assessed with high mass accuracy data, the
trend is consistent across all investigated surfactants and the implications
are critical for protein quantitation studies, which rely on the ability
to reproducibly generate fully tryptic peptides.

Figure 5 Specificity of enzymatic
digestion: (A) Total number of spectra and (B) percentage of spectra
observed that contain two tryptic termini (fully tryptic) or one tryptic
terminus (semitryptic) for the analyses in phase IB and phase II.

Opportunities for Further
Analyses
This study provides an extensive comparison of commercially
available MS-compatible surfactants for TM protein digestion; however,
opportunities for further analyses remain and may provide additional
insights. Alternative digestion enzymes (e.g., Lys-C and Asp-N) may
respond differently to the additives used in this study, especially
considering the recently described effect that trypsin source (i.e.,
bovine vs porcine) has on digestion specificity.19 Additional surfactants (e.g., β-octylglucoside and
Progenta zwitterionic surfactants) and solvents (e.g., isopropanol)
could also be examined. Moreover, it is expected that when surfactants
are included during the cell lysis stage, heat denaturation of proteins
prior to digestion, deglycosylation (e.g., PNGaseF), and the use of
high mass accuracy instrumentation (which allows for charge state
screening to ignore singly charged lipids in precursor selection for
MS/MS) may affect the overall TM protein coverage for all conditions
tested here. An investigation of the structures and physical properties
of the surfactants can suggest which surfactant moieties are most
critical in aiding TM protein digestion. On the basis of the results
from this study, the anionic surfactants with a sulfate group and
a long acyl chain perform the best across parameters measured here,
but the relationship between CMC and surfactant performance is unclear.
Finally, protein solubilization depends heavily on cosolubilization
of lipids,20 and surfactants not only displace
the lipid from the protein but they also maintain the lipids in solution
(i.e., out of the way of the protein). Thus, while fibroblasts were
analyzed here because they are commonly used for in vitro assays and
the results are expected to be generally applicable to any cell type,
especially other adherent cell types, it is possible that optimum
TM protein digestion conditions will be cell type/tissue specific
and depend largely on the lipid composition, which can vary greatly
among cell types.21 Thus, the combinations
of solubilizing agents should be tailored to the specific needs of
the study and should consider whether maximum digestion specificity
is required (e.g., protein quantitation) and/or maximum transmembrane
protein coverage is desired (e.g., structural biology and protein–protein
interactions).

Conclusions
Using a gelfree approach,
the efficiency and specificity of membrane protein digestion was evaluated
for a wide range of commercially available MS-compatible surfactants,
solvents, and chaotropes. The detailed analyses made possible by the
new software program PeptideEclispe allow for novel insights into
TM domain accessibility and is thus expected to be beneficial to the
broader community for future proteomic analyses. These data demonstrate
that the inclusion of guanidine and acetonitrile in addition to surfactants
maximizes overall digestion specificity, total number of peptides,
average sequence coverage among all proteins, and the sequence coverage
of the TM domain. A major benefit of the additives examined here,
when compared to other detergents (e.g., SDS, Triton-X, NP-40, and
CHAPS), is they do not require complicated or extensive methods for
removal prior to MS analysis, which can result in protein loss. In
addition to membrane-enriched fractions obtained by differential centrifugation,
as described here, these digestion strategies should be more generally
applicable to other strategies that include protein precipitation
(e.g., TCA/acetone, methanol/chloroform) where the subsequent resolubilization
is notoriously difficult. Moreover, the unique observations regarding
the impact of acetonitrile and guanidine on enzyme specificity are
expected to be significant for any quantitative proteomic study, including
both soluble and membrane proteins. In conclusion, MS-compatible surfactants,
solvents, and chaotropes are easy additions to membrane protein digestion
schemes and their benefits for more complete and predictable digestion
outweigh their financial cost.

Supporting Information Available
This material is available free of
charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac403185a_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This
research was supported by a Kern Innovation Center Undergraduate Research
Fellowship at the Medical College of Wisconsin (to M.W.), NIH R00
HL094708-03 (to R.L.G.), the Innovation Center at the Medical College
of Wisconsin (to R.L.G.), SystemsX.ch/InfectX (to B.W.), and NIH R01
AI058072 (to B.F.V.). The funders had no role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript. Special thanks to Ryan Fessler for the custom script to
batch process the peptide tryptic termini analyses.
==== Refs
References
Wallin E. ; von Heijne G. 
Protein Sci. 
1998 , 7 , 1029 –1038 .9568909 
von Heijne G. 
J. Intern. Med. 
2007 , 261 , 543 –557 .17547710 
Cordwell S. J. ; Thingholm T. E. 
Proteomics 
2010 , 10 , 611 –627 .19834916 
Macher B. A. ; Yen T. Y. 
Mol. Biosyst. 
2007 , 3 , 705 –713 .17882332 
Josic D. ; Clifton J. G. 
Proteomics 
2007 , 7 , 3010 –3029 .17654460 
Dormeyer W. ; van Hoof D. ; Mummery C. L. ; Krijgsveld J. ; Heck A. J. 
Proteomics 
2008 , 8 , 4036 –4053 .18763709 
Mirza S. P. ; Halligan B. D. ; Greene A. S. ; Olivier M. 
Physiol. Genomics 
2007 , 30 , 89 –94 .17341690 
Shevchenko G. ; Sjodin M. O. ; Malmstrom D. ; Wetterhall M. ; Bergquist J. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2010 , 9 , 3903 –3911 .20586484 
Chen E. I. ; McClatchy D. ; Park S. K. ; Yates J. R. 3rd
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 8694 –8701 .18937422 
Mbeunkui F. ; Goshe M. B. 
Proteomics 
2011 , 11 , 898 –911 .21280217 
Shevchenko G. ; Musunuri S. ; Wetterhall M. ; Bergquist J. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2012 , 11 , 2441 –2451 .22352882 
Choksawangkarn W. ; Edwards N. ; Wang Y. ; Gutierrez P. ; Fenselau C. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2012 , 11 , 3030 –3034 .22500775 
Eisenberg D. ; Schwarz E. ; Komaromy M. ; Wall R. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
1984 , 179 , 125 –142 .6502707 
De Vendittis E. ; Palumbo G. ; Parlato G. ; Bocchini V. 
Anal. Biochem. 
1981 , 115 , 278 –286 .7304960 
Tsoukas C. D. ; Landgraf B. ; Bentin J. ; Valentine M. ; Lotz M. ; Vaughan J. H. ; Carson D. A. 
J. Immunol. 
1985 , 135 , 1719 –1723 .3926881 
Eichacker L. A. ; Granvogl B. ; Mirus O. ; Muller B. C. ; Miess C. ; Schleiff E. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2004 , 279 , 50915 –50922 .15452135 
Burkhart J. M. ; Schumbrutzki C. ; Wortelkamp S. ; Sickmann A. ; Zahedi R. P. 
J. Proteomics 
2012 , 75 , 1454 –1462 .22166745 
Peng M. ; Taouatas N. ; Cappadona S. ; van Breukelen B. ; Mohammed S. ; Scholten A. ; Heck A. J. 
Nat. Methods 
2012 , 9 , 524 –5 .22669647 
Walmsley S. J. ; Rudnick P. A. ; Liang Y. ; Dong Q. ; Stein S. E. ; Nesvizhskii A. I. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2013 , 12 , 5666 –80 .24116745 
Banerjee P. ; Joo J. B. ; Buse J. T. ; Dawson G. 
Chem. Phys. Lipids 
1995 , 77 , 65 –78 .7586093 
Spector A. A. ; Yorek M. A. 
J. Lipid Res. 
1985 , 26 , 1015 –1035 .3906008
