
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac502124vArticlePolarization-Modulated Second Harmonic Generation
Ellipsometric Microscopy at Video Rate DeWalt Emma L. Sullivan Shane Z. Schmitt Paul D. Muir Ryan D. Simpson Garth J. *Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, 560 Oval Drive, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, United
States* E-mail: gsimpson@purdue.edu.22 07 2015 22 07 2014 19 08 2014 86 16 8448 8456 09 06 2014 22 07 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical SocietyTerms of Use

Fast 8 MHz polarization modulation
coupled with analytical modeling,
fast beam-scanning, and synchronous digitization (SD) have enabled
simultaneous nonlinear optical Stokes ellipsometry (NOSE) and polarized
laser transmittance imaging with image acquisition rates up to video
rate. In contrast to polarimetry, in which the polarization state
of the exiting beam is recorded, NOSE enables recovery of the complex-valued
Jones tensor of the sample that describes all polarization-dependent
observables of the measurement. Every video-rate scan produces a set
of 30 images (10 for each detector with three detectors operating
in parallel), each of which corresponds to a different polarization-dependent
result. Linear fitting of this image set contracts it down to a set
of five parameters for each detector in second harmonic generation
(SHG) and three parameters for the transmittance of the incident beam.
These parameters can in turn be used to recover the Jones tensor elements
of the sample. Following validation of the approach using z-cut quartz,
NOSE microscopy was performed for microcrystals of both naproxen and
glucose isomerase. When weighted by the measurement time, NOSE microscopy
was found to provide a substantial (>7 decades) improvement in
the
signal-to-noise ratio relative to our previous measurements based
on the rotation of optical elements and a 3-fold improvement relative
to previous single-point NOSE approaches.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac502124vdocument-id-new-14ac-2014-02124vccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Polarization-dependent
optical microscopy can provide rich information
on local structure and orientation, with the benefits particularly
pronounced in nonlinear optics (NLO) by nature of the greater number
of photons involved in the light–matter interactions. In the
case of second harmonic generation (SHG), up to six independent parameters
can be recovered from a single measurement, whereas only two are typically
accessible in linear optics. In biological samples, polarization-dependent
SHG microscopy has been used to great effect in the analysis of collagen,1−3 cell membranes,4 and other ordered biological
motifs,5,6 and has been extended to in vivo studies
of cancer, musculoskeletal disorders, cardiovascular disease, and
corneal disorders.5−9 Polarization-dependent SHG imaging has also been used for inorganic
materials characterization,10−12 crystal domain imaging,13 and surface analysis.14,15

Despite these successes, the most common approaches for polarization
imaging are based on rotation of waveplates/polarizers, which suffer
from some significant limitations. First, mechanical methods of polarization
modulation are typically relatively slow, introducing significant
1/f noise into the measurement. In addition, the
sample can change over time from sample motion, which represents a
challenge particularly for in vivo imaging. Bleaching and/or thermal
effects induced by laser exposure can also result in systematic bias
and increased uncertainty in the parameters extracted from the polarization
dependence.

Numerous strategies have been taken to reduce the
time frame for
polarization analysis in SHG microscopy to address these limitations.
In exceptional early studies by Stoller et al.,2 polarization modulation at 4 kHz was performed in sample-scanning
microscopy measurements of rat tail tendon. Detection of the modulation
harmonics was performed using two lock-in amplifiers per detector.
Tanaka et al.16 have included fast polarization
modulation using an electro-optic modulator (EOM) toggling between
two fixed polarization states on a per-pixel basis. Lien et al.17 have performed polarization modulation for SHG
imaging using a liquid crystal modulator, which had a response time
on the order of several milliseconds. With the exception of the work
by Tanaka et al., these techniques have only been demonstrated at
relatively low frame rates (several seconds to hours per frame). Furthermore,
none of the techniques directly recover the χ(2) tensor
elements driving the nonlinear response of the sample, which is a
key step in quantitative modeling to predictively connect local structure
to the observed response.

In the present study, quantitative
polarization analysis in SHG
microscopy is demonstrated based on nonlinear optical Stokes ellipsometry
(NOSE). This effort builds on previous work, in which NOSE has been
shown to provide a substantial (7 decade) improvement in the signal-to-noise
of polarization-dependent SHG measurements compared to approaches
based on the physical rotation of optical elements.14,18 This advantage was found to arise primarily through reduction of
1/f noise from slow changes in the source, detector,
and sample over the time-course of the polarization measurement. However,
previous implementations of NOSE required practical analysis times
of several milliseconds per pixel,14,18 which is a
prohibitively lengthy measurement time per-pixel for reasonable imaging
applications. By combining high speed (8 MHz) polarization modulation
using an EOM with synchronous digitization (SD), the time frame for
NOSE was reduced to as low as 150 ns per pixel, enabling full polarization
analysis at each pixel at up to video-rate frame rates. Under an applied
sinusoidal voltage, the EOM imparts time-varying phase shifts between
the horizontal and vertical components of light that pass through
it, producing a series of elliptical polarizations for the exiting
beam. In the present study, 10 polarization states were sampled with
each period of the EOM and three simultaneous channels of data were
acquired, resulting in a set of 30 raw polarization-dependent images
produced for each frame. A total of 5 independent observables in SHG
per detector and 3 observables in laser transmittance are experimentally
allowed, corresponding to 13 unique degrees of freedom recovered at
each pixel in each frame at video rate.

The ability of this
method to be performed at up to video rate
is expected to reduce artifacts from sample movement, improving compatibility
with in vivo measurements from structural features of collagen in
living specimens. In addition, the sensitivity and speed of video
rate NOSE measurements should also provide a method of rapid polymorph
screening for active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) crystals, where
different polymorphs will generally exhibit different polarization-dependent
NLO responses. Although the primary goal of the present work is to
describe the methodology, instrumentation and validation of video
rate NOSE imaging for recovering model-independent observables, the
aforementioned applications will be the subjects of future studies.

Experimental
Methods
Instrumentation
SHG and laser transmittance measurements
were performed on a custom microscope adapted from an instrument described
previously12,19,20 and shown schematically in Figure 1. Briefly,
an 80 MHz 100 fs MaiTai Ti:sapphire laser (SpectraPhysics) tuned to
800 nm was used as the incident light source for both SHG and laser
transmittance imaging, with average powers between 20 and 220 mW.
The beam was scanned across the sample using a resonant scanning mirror
at 8 kHz (EOPC) synchronized to the laser and a galvanometer mirror
(CambridgeTech) in the fast and slow axes, respectively. The beam
was passed through an EOM rotated 45° from its fast-axis. A Soleil-Babinet
compensator was placed after the EOM to correct for polarization changes
induced by the rest of the beam path and microscope components. The
beam was then directed through a telecentric lens pair and square
aperture to block the turning points of the sinusoidal resonant mirror
trajectory. The scanned beam was focused onto the sample with a 10×,
0.3 NA objective (Nikon). SHG and fundamental light were separated
using a dichroic mirror and collected in the transmitted direction.
The SHG signal was separated into its horizontal and vertical components
with a Glan-Taylor polarizer, which were detected on two photomultiplier
tubes (PMTs) (Hamamatsu H12310-40) with bandpass filters (HQ 400/20m-2p;
Chroma Technology) to further reject the fundamental. The transmitted
fundamental light was detected with a photodiode (Thorlabs DET-10A)
after passing through a Glan-Talyor polarizer set to pass horizontal,
allowing for simultaneous polarized laser transmittance imaging and
SHG imaging.

Data Acquisition
Data acquisition
was performed using
SD.20 A schematic of the synchronous timing
control required for SD is depicted in Figure 1. Two PCIe digitizer cards (AlazarTech ATS-9350) were used to flash
digitize the SHG and laser transmittance on three channels synchronously
with the laser. Custom software was designed to record digitized voltages
as 32-bit numbers. The 80 MHz signal from the laser’s internal
photodiode was used as the master clock. The laser clock was sent
through a custom timing module, where it was amplified, shifted, and
divided by 8, to produce a 10 MHz square wave. The synchronous 10
MHz signal was sent to the onboard 10 MHz phase-locked-loop of the
digitizer card, and the digitizer card was set to digitize at 80 MHz
synchronously with the laser.

Due to the high Q-factor of the resonant mirrors (Q > 250) amplitude
stability was achieved at the sacrifice of phase stability. To correct
for this drift in phase stability, a custom control box was designed
and built to perform real-time active phase correction of the resonant
mirror. The resonant mirror timing box was controlled by an 8-bit
microcontroller (Silicon Laboratories, C8051f120), running at 80 MHz
derived from an external 10 MHz phase-lock loop (PLL) synchronous
with the 80 MHz master clock from the Ti:sapphire laser, allowing
for precise knowledge of the number of laser pulses per resonant mirror
trajectory. The microcontroller ran a custom built operating system
using a combination of hardware and software timers to produce the
mirror drive signal. The feedback of the resonant mirror was analyzed
by the box, and corrections to the driving phase were made to maintain
phase stability of the resonant mirror. Phase corrections were performed
to a precision of 25 ns, or two clock ticks from the master clock.
A monitor output signal from the mirror driver box was sent to the
trigger input on the digitizer card. A synchronous ramp signal generated
by the timing module was used to control the galvanometer mirror by
incrementing the angle of the mirror after every pass of the resonant
mirror.

The signal transients from each individual detector
response from
every laser pulse were digitized synchronously with the laser. A 3–13
ns electronic digital delay stage was added between the master clock
(10 MHz) signal and the PCIe digitizer cards to allow for adjustment
of the phase of digitization relative to the signal generation to
account for the absolute time difference of the clock and the optical
path. The resultant data were then binned following a sine-wave trajectory,
resulting in higher density of sampling near the turning points of
the trajectory (Figure S-1 in the Supporting Information), with the corresponding data analysis accounting for this sampling
density.

Figure 1 Instrument and timing schematic for a SHG and laser transmittance
microscope capable of synchronous polarization modulation. The master
clock for controlling the scanning mirrors and for data acquisition
is provided by the laser, originally an 80 MHz signal, divided by
8 to generate a 10 MHz clock.

Polarization Modulation
Synchronous polarization modulation
was performed using a custom-built extended length EOM (Conoptics).
A third 10 MHz output from the timing module was used as an external
clock source for a function generator, which was used to generate
an 8 MHz sine wave. The 8 MHz signal was amplified using a high voltage
amplifier (AR Worldwide KAW1040) combined with a custom built resonant
tank circuit and used to drive the EOM beyond its half-wave voltage.
The period of the resonant mirror was carefully chosen using its driver
box, so that the number of laser pulses per image was an integer multiplier
of the number of polarizations used to ensure that each frame began
with the same starting polarization. For the described experiments,
the laser frequency was 80 MHz and the EOM was driven at 8 MHz for
a total of 10 unique elliptical polarizations. Custom software (Matlab)
was developed to separate out each laser pulse to generate the 10
polarization-dependent images in real-time. To ensure all 10 polarizations
were sampled in one trajectory of the resonant mirror, pixels were
binned in the fast-axis to generate images that were 300 by 512 pixels.
After acquisition, images were resized to 512 by 512 pixels using
image interpolation (ImageJ).

Sample Preparation and
Imaging
Polarization-dependent
imaging was performed on z-cut quartz (500 μm thickness) at
various rotation angles about the z-axis. Images
of z-cut quartz were acquired with 20 mW average power and signal
averaged for ∼2 s. Polarization-dependent imaging was performed
on naproxen recrystallized in isopropanol with 95 mW average power.
Video rate imaging was performed to generate polarization-dependent
movies of the sample being translated using an automated sample stage
(Prior). Still images of naproxen crystals indexed matched in Type
A immersion oil were acquired with 64 frames averaged. Glucose isomerase
was obtained as a crystalline suspension, and was dialyzed against
10 mM HEPES, 1 mM MgCl2 and 100 mM HEPES, 10 mM MgCl2. The protein solution was concentrated to 26 mg/mL in water
and crystallized in 0.7 M sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate at pH
7 in a 96-well sitting drop crystallization tray (Corning). Polarization-dependent
imaging of glucose isomerase crystals was performed in situ with 225
mW average power. Photon counting was performed with data acquisition
times of ∼2 min. Images were acquired in 3D through the drop
using automated focus control (Prior) with 15 μm steps in the z-direction.

Theoretical Foundation
Nonlinear
optical ellipsometry is defined to be the determination
of the relative Jones tensor elements describing the nonlinear optical
response of the sample.21,22 This definition is
directly analogous to conventional linear ellipsometry for thin film
analysis, in which the relative values of the diagonal elements in
the Jones matrix describing surface reflection (typically) are determined
experimentally.23 NOSE is one specific
method to perform nonlinear optical ellipsometry based on Stokes polarimetry,
in which the polarization state of the exiting nonlinear beam is determined
from the combined intensities measured by several detectors, each
probing different polarization-dependent responses.14,18

The relationship between the detected intensity and a modulated
incident polarization state in NOSE has been described in detail in
previous works14,18,24 and is only briefly summarized herein. In linear optics, the incident
polarization state can be described in terms of well-established Jones
vectors and Jones matrices. Recently, this framework has been extended
to introduce the concept of Jones tensors as polarization transfer
tensors.22,25 By analogy with Jones matrices, knowledge
of the Jones tensor allows one to predict all polarization-dependent
observables of a given measurement as a function of the incident polarization
state or states. In this framework, the Jones matrix for the EOM rotated
an angle γ is given by the following expression. 1  The
time-dependent phase shift of the EOM,
Δ(t), is in turn sinusoidally modulated. 2  In eq 2, A represents the
amplitude of modulation, f0 is the modulation
frequency in cycles/s, δ is the phase shift
between the driving sinusoidal function and the experimental phase
of the EOM, and B is the constant residual phase
shift inherent in the EOM.

We have previously derived expressions
relating the Jones tensor
elements to the intensity of n-polarized SHG where n is either v or h for
vertical or horizontal polarization, respectively.14,18,24 3   4  In the above equation, the χ-terms
indicate
individual elements from the 2 × 2 × 2 χ(2) Jones tensor. From this above equation, it is clear that the measured
intensity can generally recover up to five unique parameters ultimately
dependent on three nonzero tensor elements, which in general are complex-valued.
Since the number of real and imaginary unknowns exceeds the number
of observables by one, only the relative phase between the tensor
elements can be recovered, which is similar to conventional ellipsometry
performed for surface analysis. Far from resonance and in the absence
of birefringence in the sample, B and D are zero-valued, reducing the number of observables down to three,
paired to the number of unique elements within the Jones tensor for
a given polarization state of detection.

In practice, it is
often more convenient to perform the linear
fitting to an alternative set of Fourier functions. Conversion from
the polynomial to Fourier coefficients is performed through simple
matrix multiplication. The use of Fourier coefficients also provides
direct comparison with alternative measurements performed by lock-in
detection.2 In this framework, the detected
intensity is described by the following analytical expression. 5  

Interconversion between the
two sets of coefficients can be achieved
by simple matrix multiplication. 6  

An
analogous framework can be used to describe the polarization-dependent
transmittance of the incident infrared beam, which in turn provides
information on the sample birefringence, and is described in detail
in the Supporting Information. In brief,
the intensity of the transmitted beam under the conditions identical
to those used for the SHG measurements is given by the following expression. 7  From
eqs 5 and 7, it should
be clear that the detected response will
generally exhibit amplitude and phase terms for both the fundamental
and second harmonic in Δ, in addition to a constant term. However,
Δ is itself sinusoidally modulated in time. As a result, direct
recovery of the Fourier coefficients from the Δ-dependent intensity
is straightforward, but analogous quantitative analysis based on the
harmonics of f0 from the time-dependent
intensity with sinusoidal modulation is not trivial. Previous early
efforts have addressed this challenge by using sawtooth modulation
that is linear in time.2 However, this
strategy is challenging to implement at high speeds because of the
much larger bandwidth required to drive sawtooth modulation at MHz
frequencies relative to sinusoidal modulation. In the present case,
the use of a resonant tank circuit significantly increased the amplitude
of modulation (which can be challenging at radio frequencies) and
improved the stability through bandwidth reduction, but was fundamentally
incompatible with sawtooth modulation.

The preceding treatments
are valid within the paraxial approximation
consistent with low numerical aperture lenses and objectives as used
in the present study. However, it is relatively straightforward in
principle to extend this mathematical framework for polarization analysis
to high numerical aperture objectives in which the electric field
has projections along all three spatial coordinates, as detailed explicitly
in previous work.22 In brief, the matrix-notation
for propagation of the electric fields as presented in the present
study allows the influence of tight focusing to be incorporated through
multiplication by an additional “local field” matrix.
This additional matrix relates the incoming and exiting local fields
experienced within the focal volume to the far-field polarization
state detected in the laboratory frame. Consequently, the present
polarization modulation approaches can be easily extended to analogous
measurements performed with high numerical aperture objectives.

Results
and Discussion
Quantitative analysis of the polarization-dependent
nonlinear optical
response was enabled first through characterization of the incident
polarization state of the fundamental beam at each firing of the laser.
Measurement of the transmitted polarized fundamental beam allowed
for evaluation of the time-dependent phase angle of the EOM, which
in turn defines the polarization state of the incident light. Polarized
laser transmittance images are able to be obtained simultaneously
with SHG images, allowing for characterization of the polarization
state while the SHG images were acquired. An additional independent
method was used to evaluate the phase angle of the EOM, through the
detected second harmonic beam. Z-cut quartz has well-established relationships
between the nonzero tensor elements dictated by symmetry, and exhibits
no birefringence for light propagating parallel to the z-axis. The absence of birefringence minimizes the impact of polarization
changes induced in either the incident fundamental or produced second
harmonic beams that are not accounted for by the model. A nonlinear
fit of experimental intensity to the theoretical intensity as a function
EOM modulation (eqs 1 and 2) was performed for both polarized laser transmittance and horizontally
polarized SHG. The results of both approaches are summarized in Figure 2 for representative data acquired with a quartz
rotation angle of 30°.

Figure 2 Nonlinear fitting of (a) horizontally polarized
transmitted fundamental
beam and (b) horizontally polarized SHG for z-cut quartz rotated to
30° and (c) the EOM phase, Δ, as determined from the two
nonlinear fits. The Δ values for horizontal (H), vertical (V),
and left-circularly polarizations are also indicated. The relationship
of Δ as a function of time is demonstrated in (d) for nonlinear
fitting of laser transmittance.

Reasonably good agreement was achieved between the two techniques
despite the substantial differences in the measured time-dependent
intensities used in the fits, as shown in Figure 2c. Although a relatively subtle offset remains between the
two calculated phase angles, the good overall agreement suggests that
the incident polarization state can be reliably recovered from measurements
of the polarized infrared beam. Uncertainties in the parameters A, δ, and B from eq 2 were determined through numerically calculating the second
derivative around the minimum of chi-square space as described elsewhere,
and propagated to determine the standard deviation in the phase values
obtained from the fit.26 The values derived
from the nonlinear fit for A, δ, and B were 1.90 ± 0.04, 1.18 ± 0.02, and 1.10 ±
0.02, respectively, and the standard deviations for Δ are all
∼ ±0.04.

Using the values for Δ recovered
by the nonlinear fitting
process for laser transmittance, the polarization-dependent SHG response
was measured at multiple rotation angles of quartz. Linear fitting
of the data to eq 5 was then performed was then
performed to extract the Fourier coefficients. Figure 3 shows representative results for z-cut quartz, performing
the linear fit on both a per-pixel basis (a, b) and across the average
of 104 pixels (c). Derived Fourier coefficients across
multiple rotation angles of z-cut quartz are summarized in Figure 4. Coefficients a and b are predicted by theory to be nonzero, with coefficients c–e predicted to be zero. Coefficients c–e extracted from the linear fitting
of experimental data were centered about zero and are shown in Figure
S-2 in the Supporting Information. Results
reported in Figure 4 are for the average response
over an area of 100 × 100 pixels. Images were integrated over
32 consecutive frames, corresponding to a minimum single pixel acquisition
time of 4.8 μs. For comparison, the theoretical results are
also included for the anticipated coefficients expected using the
established nonlinear optical properties of quartz27 and the measured Δ.

Figure 3 Linear fitting results of polarization-dependent
SHG image stacks
of z-cut quartz rotated at 30° for the horizontal PMT. Representative
single-pixel fits are shown in (a) and (b), and a fit to the average
response of 1 × 104 pixels is shown in (c).

Figure 4 Experimental and theoretical normalized Fourier
coefficients a and b for the vertical
and horizontal
SHG detectors as a function of rotation angle for z-cut quartz.

The recovered coefficients were
in reasonably good agreement with
those predicted by symmetry for z-cut quartz. Systematic departures
were observed, increasing at quartz rotation angles approaching 30°.
This departure is attributed to a combination of residual uncertainties
in the phase angles (subtle errors can have significant effects),
subtle residual birefringence in the quartz from imperfections in
the cut, and the breakdown of the assumption of plane polarized light
after focusing through the objective. Although the SNR was lower in
measurements obtained in 4.8 μs from single pixels, the recovered
fits and resulting coefficient values were consistent between the
single pixels and the entire field of view. For a given rotation of
z-cut quartz, the five Fourier coefficients extracted from the linear
fitting were converted to polynomial coefficients (eq 6) and subsequently converted into six Jones tensor elements
(taking advantage of the interchangeability of the latter two subscripts
in SHG), as described in the Supporting Information, eq S-6. This process was performed for seven rotation angles of
z-cut quartz (15°, 20°, 25°, 30°, 35°, 40°,
and 45°). The Jones tensors obtained for each of the seven known
rotation angles were converted to the tensor for quartz rotated to
0° using eq S-4 in the Supporting Information, the results of which are summarized in Table 1.

Table 1 Experimental and Theoretical Normalized
Relative Jones Tensor Elements for z-Cut Quartz Oriented at 0°
 	theoretical	experimental
(magnitude)	
χnhh	–0.58	0.52 ± 0.06	
χnvh	–0.58	0.61 ± 0.03	
χnvv	0.58	0.59 ± 0.03	
Evaluation
of the measurement approach was next assessed in polarization-modulated
measurements of naproxen crystals, summarized in Figures 5 and 6. Figure 5a corresponds to overall intensity of the horizontally polarized
SHG channel, generated by integrating the 10 unique polarization-dependent
images. Figure 5b corresponds to those same
results separated out into the 10 unique polarization states sampled
at each pixel during different time-points in the EOM cycle. Figure 5c contains images of the Fourier coefficient values
recovered by linear fitting of the 10 images in Figure 5b to eq 5. These Fourier coefficient
images represent the full native information content available from
the measurements. To concisely represent these images, the five coefficient
images were mapped onto a five color scheme: red, greed, blue cyan
and magenta (RGBCM). The intensity of Fourier coefficient a was displayed on a scale of 0–40 mV, and coefficients b–e were displayed on a scale of
0–20 mV. The relative amplitudes of the native coefficients
could then be recovered simply by separation into the individual color
elements.

A complete set of results for naproxen for all three
detectors
is summarized in Figure 6, with panels (a)–(c)
representing integrated intensity for the horizontal PMT, vertical
PMT, and laser transmittance, respectively. Figure 6d and e corresponds to the coefficient color maps as determined
from the linear fitting to eq 5. for SHG (shown
on the same color scale as Figure 5) and Figure 6f shows the coefficient color map image as determined
form the linear fitting to eq 7 for laser transmittance.
Figure 6f is composed of Fourier coefficients a, b, and c, represented
by the colors red, green and blue, respectively. In order to display
all three coefficients on the same image, coefficient a (red) was
displayed on a scale of 0 to +0.3 V, coefficient b (green) was displayed
on a scale of −0.3 to 0.0 V and coefficient c was displayed
on a scale of −0.15 to +0.15 V. A representative result of
the linear fitting for laser transmittance of a single pixel from
a naproxen crystal is shown in Figure S-3 in the Supporting Information. The images in Figures 5 and 6 were produced using signal averaging
for improved quality, but the analysis can be performed on images
acquired with continuous sampling at video rate. A video frame of
the color-encoded polarization maps for naproxen crystals obtained
at 15 Hz frame rates is shown in Figure 7.
The naproxen crystals shown in the video were not index matched in oil, making edge effects more pronounced
in the laser transmittance color maps when compared to the crystals
in Figure 6f.

Additional measurements
were performed for a multidomain protein
crystal, shown in Figure 8. Polarization-dependent
images were acquired at 11 z-slices through the aqueous drop to generate
a 3D polarization color map of the crystal. Figure 8a corresponds to a laser transmittance image integrated over
all 10 polarizations for a single z-slice, suggesting two crystalline
domains based on crystal habit. Figure 8b shows
a 3D image obtained by performing principal component analysis (PCA)
of the pooled set of 10 different polarization-dependent images for
each z-slice. Previously, multidomain crystals have been identified
using PCA of polarization-dependent SHG images as an assessment of
crystal diffraction quality based on training using measurements obtained
over a large number of similar protein crystals.13 In comparison, Figure 8c shows a
3D Fourier coefficient color map obtained through NOSE analysis of
the 10 polarization dependent images acquired for each z-slice without
the need for training. The coefficient images of glucose isomerase
were treated in the same manner as the naproxen sample with respect
to the scaling of the coefficients.

In this particular case,
NOSE analysis provided significantly higher
contrast for visualization of protein crystal domains compared to
the same polarization-dependent images analyzed with PCA. NOSE has
the additional distinct advantage of requiring no training prior to
domain discrimination. In addition, drift in the EOM response between
samples, or from measurements acquired on different days or on different
instruments typically alter the principal axes, such that PCA requires
routine retraining. In contrast, NOSE analysis acquired on a calibrated
instrument should be consistent, even with different EOM settings
or in the presence of measured drift.

Figure 5 Summary of polarization-modulation SHG
results for naproxen crystals
for the horizontal PMT. An overall intensity image (a) and the same
image separated out into its 10 unique polarization-dependent images
(b) are shown. The five Fourier coefficient images are shown in (c),
with each coefficient representing a unique color (red, green, blue,
cyan and magenta for coefficients a, b, c, d, and e,
respectively). The five coefficient images were then merged into a
single five-color image, shown in (d).

It is interesting to compare the NOSE microscope figures
of merit
to those of previous single-point nonlinear optical ellipsometry instruments.18,21,24,25,28,29 At video rate,
pixels in the central field of view are sampled with as few as 12
consecutive laser pulses, each of which corresponds to one of the
10 possible polarization states produced by the EOM. The value of
12 laser pulses represents a minimum, with a greater number of pulses
sampled per pixel near the edges of the fast scan axis where the resonant
mirror was moving the beam more slowly. Compared to the 12.5 ms acquisition
time used previously, the minimum per-pixel acquisition time for z-cut
was 4.8 μs (32 averaged frames, each 150 ns), representing a
2600-fold reduction in the measurement time. Assuming noise is dominated
by Poisson fluctuations in the detected intensity, this change corresponds
to an anticipated reduction of ∼50 in the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) relative to the previous polarization measurements by NOSE.
In that prior work, quartz tensor elements could be determined in
12.5 ms with a SNR of ∼100. Reducing this value by a factor
of 50 yields a SNR ratio of approximately 2 in 4.8 μs. In practice,
the measured SNR in a single pixel in an integration time of 4.8 μs
in the current NOSE experiments was typically approximately 5–6,
representing approximately a 3-fold increase over previous experiments.
The most likely explanation for the improvement in the SNR in the
present work is the higher signal level achievable using fast scanning
and synchronous digitization for high dynamic range detection rather
than photon counting as was done in the previous work.

Figure 6 Integrated intensity
images of index matched naproxen crystals
for (a) horizontally polarized SHG, (b) vertically polarized SHG,
and (c) polarized laser transmittance, with corresponding Fourier
coefficient color maps in (d)–(f).

Because the data were initially fit to a set of Fourier coefficients,
it may be tempting to suggest that high speed lock-in amplification
(LIA) could serve as an alternative platform for recovery of the coefficients.
However, the expressions in eq 5 and eq 7 represent a Fourier series in the EOM phase shift,
Δ, not in time. While Δ(t) is sinusoidally
modulated in time, the intensity of the SHG given by eq 5 depends nontrivially on trigonometric functions of the sinusoidal
function Δ(t). It is only in the limit of low
amplitude modulation that Δ(t) ≅ A(2πf0t + δ) + B, such that the harmonics in time
correspond to the harmonics in Δ. Lowering the modulation amplitude
to maintain this approximate relationship restricts one to relatively
shallow depths of polarization modulation, which in turn reduces the
confidence in the recovered coefficients. From a practical standpoint,
most LIAs operate at a single frequency, such that two LIAs would
be needed for each detector to access the full set of coefficients
expressed in eq 5. Maintaining careful calibration
between the amplitudes of each LIA together with the zero-frequency
DC response is nontrivial. In addition, the central advantages of
LIA in terms of bandwidth reduction and phase-sensitive detection
become less pronounced as the acquisition times are reduced. The detection
bandwidth scales inversely with the sampling time, which for a minimum
of a 125 ns acquisition time corresponds to 32 MHz of frequency bandwidth
about the center frequency in the underlying electronics. Interestingly,
the LIA’s now commercially available to achieve detection at
MHz modulation frequencies are based on high-speed digitization qualitatively
similar to the oscilloscope cards used in the present study, but without
the advantages of SD15,19 and user-defined data analysis.

Figure 7 Video
frame of color encoded Fourier coefficient color maps for
naproxen crystals being translated in the X/Y plane (also see the video). Polarization data were acquired in real time simultaneously
on all three channels (horizontal-SHG, vertical-SHG, and laser transmittance).
The sample was translated using an automated prior-stage during imaging.

As can be seen from the coefficient
color map images in Figures 5 and 6, the polarization-dependence
of SHG varies significantly for different naproxen crystals depending
on their orientation relative to the image axes. The variation in
polarization-dependence is attributed largely to the differences in
crystal orientation relative to the laboratory frame. The overall
similarity of the color-map hues for different crystals at similar
rotation angles is consistent with this explanation. Indeed, such
good agreement between similarly azimuthally oriented crystals is
somewhat surprising, given that the azimuthal rotation angle is just
one of the three possible rotation angles available to the crystals.
Additional variability in the tilt angle into/out of the focal plane
and the twist angle would generally be expected to introduce greater
diversity in the polarization-dependent responses. This absence of
diversity is tentatively attributed to nonisotropic orientation distributions
due to templating by the glass interface. Heterogeneous nucleation
is quite common, driven by the lower free energy barrier introduced
for clusters at the interface relative to within the bulk. Furthermore,
the interfacial energy at the crystal/glass interface will be dependent
on the particular crystal plane positioned at the interface, such
that thermodynamics will favor a particular tilt and twist angle relative
to the interface. Under these conditions, only the azimuthal rotation
angle is fully unconstrained.

Figure 8 Images of a multidomain glucose isomerase crystal.
A 2D laser transmittance
image of a multidomain glucose isomerase crystal integrated for all
10 polarizations is shown in (a). Corresponding 3D PCA (principal
component 2) and Fourier coefficient false color images are shown
for the horizontal SHG detector in (b) and (c), respectively.

This reduction in orientational
diversity for materials crystallized
on a glass surface is highly advantageous, as it reduces a potentially
complicated relationship between the crystal orientation and the laboratory
frame response. If only azimuthal orientation is unique from crystal
to crystal, the analysis is reduced down to a relatively simple one,
based on relations similar to those described in the Supporting Information for treating the rotated z-cut quartz.
Provided the crystal azimuthal rotation angle is determined independently
in advance (e.g., from image analysis), NOSE should enable recovery
of the crystal tensor in the crystal frame from the Jones tensor elements
measured in the laboratory frame. In this manner, NOSE may potentially
serve as a reliable orientation-independent identifier for crystal
polymorphism in APIs.

Both the naproxen crystals and the two
crystalline domains of glucose
isomerase exhibited large variations in polarization response as a
function of crystallographic orientation. It is also of note that
the net polarization response of naproxen appears to differ from the
net polarization response of glucose isomerase. For the horizontal
SHG channel, the naproxen color-map contains largely red, green, and
purple, whereas the glucose isomerase 3D color map contains crystalline
domains of cyan and magenta. This difference between samples suggests
not only the ability to distinguish between differently oriented crystals,
but also between different types of crystalline materials. This shows
promise in the area of API polymorph screening, in cases where full
orientation mapping and therefore full NOSE analysis is not possible.

The sensitivity to crystal orientation may also potentially be
beneficial in the identification of crystal twinning prior to structure
determination. Twinning is a similar phenomenon to the case of multidomain
crystal formation, as shown for glucose isomerase in Figure 8, but is often impossible to identify with conventional
optical imaging, especially in the case of merohedral twinning.30 Twinning can significantly complicate structure
determination from X-ray diffraction, yet a rapid, nondestructive
and sensitive screening method for twinning is still lacking. The
differences in the polarization-dependent NLO properties of differently
oriented twin domains may in principle provide contrast for the identification
of twinned crystals.

A key long-term goal of this measurement
platform is the recovery
of the local-frame tensor to assess subtle changes in local structure
from the polarization-dependence of SHG, analogous to the measurements
performed for z-cut quartz. For crystals, the polarization-dependence
could be used to sensitively detect changes in crystal polymorphism
for high-throughput API crystal screening applications. In studies
of collagen, subtle local structural changes within the fibers can
serve as indicators for different collagen types. In these applications,
the laboratory frame Jones tensor elements depend on the sample orientation
within the field of view, on the nonlinear optical properties of the
samples, and on the linear properties through sample birefringence.
In z-cut quartz, the absolute orientation of the sample was known
a priori and the sample exhibits no birefringence, considerably simplifying
the analysis. Disentangling the roles of each of these additional
effects using model-dependent analyses of the model-independent measurements
represents an effort beyond the scope of the present study. However,
the simultaneous acquisition of both the polarization-dependent SHG
together with the polarized laser transmittance from that same location
will help inform such analyses. Those efforts are currently in progress
and will likely be the subject of subsequent publications.

Conclusions
The theoretical framework for SHG ellipsometric microscopy has
been presented and experimentally verified. By incorporating fast
polarization modulation with SD, it has been shown to provide a substantial
reduction in acquisition time as compared to previous NOSE techniques
without significant loss in precision, allowing for real-time imaging
applications. Validation of the technique and instrumentation was
performed using z-cut quartz with well characterized NLO properties
as a reference. The experimentally measured Jones tensor elements
for z-cut quartz fell within error of the theoretical predicted values.
The technique was further used to explore naproxen and glucose isomerase
crystals with the resulting Fourier coefficient images showing substantial
differences due to crystal orientation. Furthermore, the Fourier coefficient
maps of naproxen as compared to glucose isomerase crystals demonstrate
an overall net coefficient difference, potentially allowing for not
only differentiation of crystal orientation but also discrimination
of different crystalline material. Lastly, it was demonstrated that
by coupling fast polarization modulation synchronously with detection,
the signal-to-noise of the measurement was sufficient to perform real-time
(15 Hz) polarization-dependent imaging with as little as 150 ns per
pixel integration time and still recover statistically significant
Fourier coefficients directly connected to the tensors defining linear
and nonlinear optical properties of the sample.

Supporting Information Available
Mathematical methods used to
recover the local-frame χ(2) tensor elements for
quartz from the laboratory-frame measurements of the Jones tensor
for the rotated quartz are given. Information describing details regarding
the data acquisition for image construction with nonuniform sampling
from the sinusoidal resonant mirror trace is shown. In addition, independent
plots of all five Fourier coefficients for z-cut quartz are shown
(only two are shown in Figure 4 of the main
article). Representative linear fit is also shown for recovery of
the birefringence coefficient images in Figures 6 and 7, as well as analytical expressions
for recovering parameters related to birefringence from the transmitted
fundamental beam. A video displaying the 30 polarization-dependent
images obtained in a single measurement of naproxen crystals is available.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org/.

Supplementary Material
ac502124v_si_001.pdf

 ac502124v_si_002.avi

 A video of the color-encoded
polarization maps of naproxen crystals obtained at video rate is available
in the HTML version of the paper.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the NIH Grant
Numbers R01GM-103401 and R01GM-106484 from the NIGMS. The authors
also acknowledge Nigel Ferdinand, Muneeb Khalid, and Bing Tom of AlazarTech
for their help in developing software to control the digitizer cards,
supplying new firmware features on request, expanding the clocking
abilities of their digitizers, as well as their general technical
support. The authors would also like to acknowledge Robert Oglesbee
and Mark Carlsen for their support in the development and maintenance
of the data acquisition electronics.
==== Refs
References
Campagnola P. J. ; Millard A. C. ; Terasaki M. ; Hoppe P. E. ; Malone C. J. ; Mohler W. A. 
Biophys. J. 
2002 , 81 , 493 .11751336 
Stoller P. ; Reiser K. M. ; Celliers P. M. ; Rubenchik A. M. 
Biophys. J. 
2002 , 82 , 3330 .12023255 
Gusachenko I. ; Tran V. ; Houssen Y. G. ; Allain J. M. ; Schanne-Klein M. C. 
Biophys. J. 
2012 , 102 , 2220 .22824287 
Moreaux L. ; Sandre O. ; Mertz J. 
J. Opt. Soc. Am.
B 
2000 , 17 , 1685 .
Plotnikov S. ; Millard A. C. ; Campagnola P. J. ; Mohler M. 
Biophys. J. 
2006 , 90 , 693 .16258040 
Brasselet S. 
Adv. Opt. Photonics 
2011 , 3 , 205 .
Lin S. J. ; Jee S. H. ; Kuo C. J. ; Wu R. J. ; Lin W. C. ; Chen J. S. ; Liao Y. H. ; Hsu C. J. ; Tsai T. F. ; Chen Y. F. ; Dong C. Y. 
Opt. Lett. 
2006 , 31 , 2756 .16936882 
Le T. T. ; Langohr I. M. ; Locker M. J. ; Sturek M. ; Cheng J. X. 
J. Biomed Opt. 
2007 , 12 , 054007 .17994895 
Latour G. ; Gusachenko I. ; Kowalczuk L. ; Lamarre I. ; Schanne-Klein M. 
Biomed. Opt. Express 
2012 , 3 , 1 .22254163 
Brasselet S. ; Zyss J. 
C.
R. Phys. 
2007 , 8 , 165 .
Sandeau N. ; Le Xuan L. ; Chauvat D. ; Zhou C. ; Roch J. F. ; Brasselet S. 
Opt. Express 
2007 , 15 , 16051 .19550893 
Chowdhury A. U. ; Dettmar C. M. ; Sullivan Z. S. ; Zhang S. ; Harden S. E. ; Jacobs K. T. ; Ingram N. ; Kissick D. J. ; Wanapun D. ; Maltais T. ; Simpson G. J. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 2404 .24451055 
DeWalt E. L. ; Begue V. J. ; Ronau J. A. ; Sullivan S. Z. ; Das C. ; Simpson G. J. 
Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D 
2013 , 69 , 74 .23275165 
Begue N. J. ; Simpson G. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 559 .20000785 
Anceau C. ; Brasselet S. ; Zyss J. 
Chem.
Phys. Lett. 
2005 , 411 , 98 .
Tanaka Y. ; Hase E. ; Fukushima S. ; Ogura Y. ; Yamashita T. ; Hirao T. ; Araki T. ; Yasui T. 
Biomed.
Opt. Express 
2014 , 5 , 1099 .24761292 
Lien C.-H. ; Tilbury K. ; Chen S.-J. ; Campagnola P. J. 
Biomed. Opt. Express 
2013 , 4 , 1991 .24156059 
Begue N. J. ; Moad A. J. ; Simpson G. J. 
J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2009 , 113 , 10158 .
Kissick D. J. ; Muir R. D. ; Sullivan S. Z. ; Oglesbee R. A. ; Simpson G. J. 
Proc. SPIE 
2013 , 8657 , 86570E .
Muir R. D. ; Sullivan S. Z. ; Oglesbee R. A. ; Simpson G. J. 
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
2014 , 85 , 033703 .24689588 
Polizzi M. A. ; Plocinik R. M. ; Simpson G. J. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 127 , 1058 .
Dettmar C. M. ; Simpson G. J.   In Second Harmonic
Generation Imaging ; Pavone F. S. , Campagnola P. J.  , Eds.; CRC Press : Boca Raton, FL , 2013 ; p 3 .
Azzam R. M. A. ; Bashara N. M.  Ellipsometry and Polarized
Light ; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 1987 .
Begue N. J. ; Everly R. M. ; Hall V. J. ; Haupert L. ; Simpson G. J. 
J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2009 , 113 , 10166 .
Plocinik R. M. ; Everly R. M. ; Moad A. J. ; Simpson G. J. 
Phys. Rev. B 
2005 , 72 , 125409 .
Robinson P. B. D. K.  Data Reduction
and Error Analysis for the Physical Sciences ; 3 rd ed.; McGraw-Hill : New York , 2002 .
Boyd R. W.  Nonlinear Optics , 2 nd ed.; Academic Press : Amsterdam , 2003 .
Plocinik R. M. ; Simpson G. J. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2003 , 496 , 133 .
Dehen C. J. ; Everly R. M. ; Plocinik R. ; Simpson G. J. 
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
2007 , 78 , 013106 .17503906 
Yeates T. O. ; Fam B. C. 
Structure 
1999 , 7 , R25 .10368291
