
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac500084dArticleRobust, Quantitative Analysis of Proteins using Peptide
Immunoreagents, in Vitro Translation, and an Ultrasensitive Acoustic
Resonant Sensor Jalali-Yazdi Farzad Corbin Jasmine M. Takahashi Terry T. Roberts Richard W. *3710 McClintock
Avenue, RTH 507, Los Angeles, California 90089-2905, United States* E-mail: richrob@usc.edu.
Tel: 213-821-4250. Fax: 213-821-4207.21 04 2015 21 04 2014 20 05 2014 86 10 4715 4722 03 10 2013 21 04 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical Society

A major benefit of
proteomic and genomic data is the potential
for developing thousands of novel diagnostic and analytical tests
of cells, tissues, and clinical samples. Monoclonal antibody technologies,
phage display and mRNA display, are methods that could be used to
generate affinity ligands against each member of the proteome. Increasingly,
the challenge is not ligand generation, rather the analysis and affinity
rank-ordering of the many ligands generated by these methods. Here,
we developed a quantitative method to analyze protein interactions
using in vitro translated ligands. In this assay, in vitro translated
ligands generate a signal by simultaneously binding to a target immobilized
on a magnetic bead and to a sensor surface in a commercial acoustic
sensing device. We then normalize the binding of each ligand with
its relative translation efficiency in order to rank-order the different
ligands. We demonstrate the method with peptides directed against
the cancer marker Bcl-xL. Our method has 4- to 10-fold
higher sensitivity, using 100-fold less protein and 5-fold less antibody
per sample, as compared directly with ELISA. Additionally, all analysis
can be conducted in complex mixtures at physiological ionic strength.
Lastly, we demonstrate the ability to use peptides as ultrahigh affinity
reagents that function in complex matrices, as would be needed in
diagnostic applications.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac500084ddocument-id-new-14ac-2014-00084dccc-price
==== Body
Advances
in mass spectrometry1 and microarrays2 have
provided a better perspective of biological systems, but a long-term
goal in proteomics is the development of affinity reagents against
all members of the proteome. Monoclonal antibody methods,3 phage display,4 ribosome
display,5 and mRNA display6 can all generate tens to hundreds of potential polypeptide
ligands against targets of interest. Recent advances combining in
vitro selection with high-throughput sequencing has greatly accelerated
the process of generating a large list of potential ligands.7 Many of these techniques do not use antibodies
as affinity reagents but rather use either small protein scaffolds
or peptides for protein recognition, offering the potential of antibody-free
diagnostics. Peptides are especially attractive as antibody replacements
because they can be chemically synthesized (avoiding issues with expression
and purification), are renewable, and are generally stable without
refrigeration.8 However, in order to generate
a set of proteome-wide affinity reagents, high-throughput methods
will not only be required for initial ligand discovery but also will
be needed for screening and characterization to determine the best
ligand for an application. Current methods (e.g., ELISA) are slow,
laborious, and do not correct for differences in ligand expression
levels.9 While new technologies such as
optical resonators10 and nanowire sensors11 provide the advantage of direct ligand–target
affinity measurements, these methods are challenging to implement
in complex media, at physiological salt, and in a high-throughput
fashion. There is thus a pressing need for high-throughput, robust
methods that are sensitive, utilize little reagent, and function in
complex media.

In vitro translation provides an appealing route
to screen ligands
in a high-throughput fashion, since no cloning is required, allowing
ligands to be generated quickly. Typically, very little material is
synthesized and translation levels are highly variable, requiring
both a highly sensitive assay and the ability to normalize the signal
for expression. Additionally, detection of proteins in crude translation
reactions (a complex media) is essential because purification steps
after translation can be costly, inconsistent, and significantly hinder
the throughput of the method.

Here, we developed a method to
accurately assess the relative affinity
of multiple ligands for a specific protein. To do this, we quantify
the specific activity of a clone (i.e., binding to the protein of
interest) and normalize the binding signal for protein expression.
This approach was implemented in a general way on a commercial acoustic
resonant biosensor platform, the ViBE BioAnalyzer (BioScale, Lexington,
MA.) The ViBE BioAnalyzer uses acoustic membrane micro-particle technology
(AMMP) to detect the presence of the analyte using a sandwich format
assay. The analyte is linked to the surface of the sensor using an
antihapten antibody at one end and to a magnetic bead on the other
end.12 The sensor uses piezoelectric properties
of a vibrating membrane, where the membrane’s in-liquid resonance
frequency shifts when an external mass influences the sensor acoustic
loading.13 The beads act to amplify the
loading, resulting in much higher levels of sensitivity.

An
advantage of our approach, using the acoustic resonant devices,
is that the assays are sensitive enough to be done using in vitro
synthesized proteins, enabling rapid analysis in less than 1 day starting
with synthetic DNA.

Materials and Methods
AMMP Assays
In
vitro translated peptides and proteins
were diluted 1:10, initially using an assay buffer [1× PBS +
1% (w/v) BSA + 0.1% (v/v) Tween-20], and the subsequent dilutions
were performed in a 10% translation solution in assay buffer. A sample
of synthetic Pep1 at 30 nM in 10% translation solution was prepared
and diluted serially to generate the standard curve. All samples and
standards were run in duplicate. Samples and standards were incubated
with magnetic beads and fluorescein-labeled analyte for 4 h. Because
each AMMP assay run time is 10 min, constant incubation time for all
samples was achieved by separating the start of incubation for each
column on the 96 well plates by 10 min. Run buffer was 1× PBS
+ 1% (v/v) Tween-20 + 1% (v/v) heat-treated FBS (Invitrogen; FBS was
heat treated for 15 min at 65 °C and filtered.) BioScale Universal
Detection Cartridges were used in performing all assays. The device
was used per the manufacturer’s instructions.12

For the AMMP HA tag competition assay, 60 μL
of sample was incubated with 30 μL of anti-HA antibody immobilized
on epoxy magnetic beads (6 μg of beads/mL) and 30 μL of
240 pM fluorescein-labeled synthetic Pep1 for 4 h and analyzed using
the ViBE BioAnalyzer. Both anti-HA beads and Pep1 were diluted using
assay buffer.

For the AMMP target-binding assay using in vitro
translated peptides,
60 μL of sample was incubated with 30 μL of biotinylated
Bcl-xL immobilized on streptavidin magnetic beads (8.3
μg of beads/mL) and 30 μL of 10 nM fluorescein-labeled
anti-HA antibody for 4 h. For the AMMP target-binding assay using
mRNA-peptide fusions, 60 μL of sample (diluted in 1× assay
buffer) was added to 30 μL of biotinylated Bcl-xL immobilized on streptavidin magnetic beads and 30 μL of assay
buffer and incubated for 4 h.

The concentration of the HA tag
competition assay samples were
determined using synthetic Pep1 standards and fit to a simple 4-parameter
logistics curve (Figure S-1a of the Supporting
Information).

ELISA Target-Binding Assay
ELISA
plates were incubated
overnight at 4 °C with 1.5 nmol of anti-HA antibody per well.
Plates were washed with wash buffer [1× PBS + 0.1% (v/v) Tween-20]
and blocked with 1× PBS + 5% (w/v) BSA for 2 h. In each well,
100 μL of sample and 100 μL of 33 nM biotinylated Bcl-xL were added and incubated for 4 h. Plates were washed, incubated
with streptavidin horseradish peroxidase conjugate (Strep-HRP, Thermo
Scientific) for 1 h, washed, and incubated with TMB substrate (Thermo
Scientific). Reactions were stopped after approximately 10 min with
2 M sulfuric acid, and the absorbance at 450 nm was measured via a
plate reader (Molecular Devices).

Results and Discussion
Quantitation
of in Vitro Translated Proteins
Overall,
our goal was to develop a general quantitative method to rank-order
protein-binding ligands using in vitro translated polypeptides. This
simple aim is complicated by several factors: (1) the small amount
of protein produced by in vitro translation systems, (2) detection
of binding in complex media, and (3) the fact that most existing methods
(e.g., sandwich ELISA) require two orthogonal affinity reagents to
function.

Our solution was to develop a competition assay that
required only a single affinity tag added to each sequence (described
below). Unfortunately, only modest levels of polypeptides are synthesized
via in vitro translation, and the crude sample matrix (the solution
containing the sample, which includes proteins, surfactants, nucleic
acids, salts, etc.) can interfere with the assay, further reducing
sensitivity.14 The problem with existing
competition assays using immobilized affinity reagents is that they
are insensitive. There, the lack of sensitivity arises from two features
of these assays. First, for the competition to give the maximum signal,
competitor concentrations must be scanned from below the analyte concentration
to significantly above it (>10 fold). Second, in order to deplete
the analyte signal, the competitor must be present at concentrations
significantly in excess of the Kd for
the interaction between the affinity reagent and the analyte.15 Assays with high levels of signal for the analyte
using low concentrations of the affinity reagent are able to achieve
high degrees of sensitivity. ELISA assays require high amounts of
affinity reagents immobilized on the plate in order to achieve high
sensitivity for the analyte. This means a high level of competitor
is necessary to deplete the available binding sites on the immobilized
affinity reagent, leading to a low level of sensitivity. In line with
these views, we were unsuccessful in our attempts to create a competition
ELISA assay sensitive enough to detect translated peptides and proteins
(data not shown). We decided to use AMMP technology, which was ideal
for our analysis due to its high sensitivity, low reagent consumption,
ability to detect analytes in complex matrices, and the potential
for automation.12

The AMMP competition
assay we developed is shown in Figure 1. In
this assay, a synthetic peptide is labeled
with fluorescein, allowing it to bind to an antifluorescein antibody
on the sensor surface. The synthetic peptide also contains an HA tag
(NH2–YPYDVPDYA–COOH) that binds to an anti-HA
antibody on a magnetic bead, thus linking the bead to the sensor surface.
This enables the detection of the fluorescein-HA peptide (Figure 1a). As synthetic or translated HA tagged (nonfluoresceinated)
peptide is added, it competes with the fluorescein-HA peptide for
binding to the anti-HA antibody. This decreases the fraction of antibody
available to bind the fluorescein-HA peptide, thus reducing the signal
in a dose-dependent fashion (Figure 1b).Figure 1 Schematic of
HA tag competition assay. (a) Fluoresceinated HA-tagged
peptides bind to anti-HA antibodies on magnetic beads and antifluorescein
antibodies on sensor surface to generate signal. (b) HA-tagged peptides
or proteins without fluorescein cannot interact with sensor surface
and reduce signal levels by competing with the fluorescein-labeled
peptide for anti-HA antibody.



We chose the HA tag in the competition assay because
it is small,
widely used in biotechnology, and several inexpensive anti-HA antibodies
are commercially available. Since each in vitro translated peptide
or protein in our assay could be designed to include a single HA tag,
each peptide or protein should interact with the anti-HA antibody
with equal affinity. Thus, appending an HA tag to our peptides or
proteins would enable us to quantify in vitro translated polypeptides
independent of the sequence N-terminal to the HA tag using this competition
assay.

In order to test and validate our HA tag competition
assay, we
needed to show that the assay could be used to quantify proteins or
peptides with different sequences N-terminal to the HA tag. We also
needed sequences with different affinities for their target so that
we could test our ability to rank-order ligands by binding affinity.
We chose two peptides from an mRNA display selection against the B-Cell
lymphoma-extra large protein (Bcl-xL) (T.T. Takahashi,
R.W. Roberts, manuscript in preparation). The first peptide, peptide
1 (Pep1), binds to Bcl-xL with high affinity (∼250
pM), while the second peptide, peptide 2 (Pep2), has a lower affinity
for Bcl-xL (∼65 nM). We also used a scrambled version
of peptide 1 (ScPep1) as a negative control in the specific binding
assays to demonstrate the binding selectivity to Bcl-xL. We synthesized the DNA that coded for these peptides followed by
an HA tag on the C-terminus of each peptide. Through the use of a
simple radiolabeled binding experiment, we were able to show that
translated peptides with the C-terminal HA tag interact with equal
affinity to the HA antibody immobilized on beads (Figure S-1 of the Supporting Information).

HA Tag Competition Assay
We first generated the signals
using the synthetic fluoresceinated HA peptide. Using the synthetic
unlabeled peptide as a competitor, we observed significant reduction
of signal for concentrations higher than 1 nM (Figure 2a). We then in vitro translated Pep1, Pep2, and ScPep1 samples,
as well as Pep1 lacking the HA tag (Pep1ΔHA) as a negative control.
We also translated the 10th fibronectin type III domain of human fibronectin16 with a C-terminal HA tag (wt-Fn) to determine
if we could quantify in vitro translated proteins using our HA tag
competition assay as well. All samples were run in duplicate, starting
with a 1:10 dilution followed by four subsequent 1:2 dilutions. We
normalized matrix interference effects by diluting all samples and
standards into the same solution, which contained 10% (v/v) translation
solution. Pep1, Pep2, and ScPep1 all showed a reduction of signal
up to a dilution factor of 40. As expected, the Pep1ΔHA control,
which lacks the HA tag, did not reduce the signal at any tested dilution.
Lastly, wt-Fn containing a C-terminal HA tag also showed a significant
reduction in signal, demonstrating we could also quantify in vitro
translated proteins in complex matrices.Figure 2 Competition assay using HA-tagged peptide.
(a) Reduction of AMMP
signal via competition with translated peptide is dependent on the
absence (Pep1ΔHA) or presence (all other samples) of the HA
tag. (b) Sample concentrations were calculated based on a simple 4-parameter
logistics curve, and the results show dilutional linearity. Pep1ΔHA
concentration cannot be estimated using this method.



Using the unlabeled synthetic HA peptide as
a competitor,
we generated a calibration curve to calculate the concentration of
our translated samples. To do this, we fit the synthetic HA peptide
data to a simple four-parameter logistic curve (Figure 2b and Figure S-2a of the Supporting Information). We then determined the concentration of the translated samples
by interpolation of all four dilutions and took the mean. The concentration
(in nanomolar) and coefficient of variation (CV) for the different
in vitro translated samples are shown in Figure S-2b of the Supporting Information. Wt-Fn had the highest
translation efficiency, with its concentration measured at 327 nM,
followed by ScPep1 (219 nM), Pep1 (136 nM), and Pep2 (62 nM).

Our data demonstrate that the amount of peptide or protein synthesized
using in vitro translation is highly sequence-dependent. The difference
between the lowest (Pep2) and the highest (wt-Fn) concentrations of
in vitro translated polypeptides was a factor of 5. This variability
could drastically skew rank-ordering of potential ligands. Moreover,
the difference in expression level between Pep1 and ScPep1 is approximately
2-fold. This result is somewhat surprising as the sequences use ∼70%
identical codons (Table S-1 of the Supporting
Information). In summary, we demonstrate that different sequences
translate with significantly different efficiencies. Thus, only determining
a clone’s specific binding is not enough for rank-ordering
ligands. Instead, it is necessary to normalize the signal by each
clone’s expression level in order to determine the highest
affinity clones.

To confirm that the signal generated in the
assay was not due to
nonspecific adhering of antibody modified magnetic beads or the unlabeled
peptide to the sensor surface, we first eliminated the peptide analyte
from the complex and observed background levels of signal (∼10%,
Figure S-3a of the Supporting Information). We then added an excess (30 nM) of nonfluoresceinated peptide
to the antibody modified magnetic beads and still observed background
levels of signal.

Design of a Target-Binding Assay
Once we developed
a method to quantify the amount of sample in an in vitro translation
reaction, we then designed an assay to measure each sample’s
relative binding affinity. We used a simple sandwich assay, where
we could test different peptides for binding to their target (here,
Bcl-xL). In the AMMP target-binding assay (Figure 3a), immobilized Bcl-xL on magnetic beads
binds to HA-tagged synthetic peptide. The fluoresceinated anti-HA
antibody binds to the HA-tagged peptide as well as the antifluorescein
antibody on the sensor surface, thus linking the magnetic bead to
the sensor surface.Figure 3 AMMP and ELISA target-binding assays. (a) Schematic of
the AMMP
target-binding assay. An HA-tagged ligand binds to target (Bcl-xL) immobilized on streptavidin magnetic beads. Anti-HA antibody,
labeled with fluorescein, binds to the HA tag and to antifluorescein
antibody on the sensor surface. (b) AMMP signal in the target-binding
assay is a function of dilution factor and ligand affinity. At the
same dilution, Pep1 generates higher signal levels than Pep2, whereas
ScPep1 and Pep1ΔHA show background levels of signal. (c) AMMP
target-binding assay adjusted for peptide concentration as measured
using the HA tag competition assay, demonstrating true relative affinities.
(d) Schematic of the ELISA target-binding assay. An HA-tagged ligand
binds to biotinylated target (Bcl-xL) and anti-HA antibody
on the ELISA plate. Streptavidin-HRP binds to biotin, resulting in
an ELISA signal. (e) Target-binding ELISA assay is much less sensitive
than the AMMP assay [described in (b)], and the respective samples
behave equivalently: Pep1 generates a higher signal level than Pep2
and ScPep1 and Pep1ΔHA generate no signal over the background.
(f) ELISA target-binding assay adjusted for peptide concentration
as measured using the HA tag competition assay.



To demonstrate that our peptides bound to Bcl-xL with different affinities, we used a radiolabeled binding assay,
where we immobilized Bcl-xL on magnetic beads and tested
the binding of 35S-labeled, HA-tagged Pep1, Pep2, and ScPep1
(Figure S-4 of the Supporting Information). Pep1 shows the highest level of binding to immobilized Bcl-xL (∼80%), while Pep2 shows modest binding (∼1%).
Scrambled peptide 1 (ScPep1) shows negligible binding to immobilized
Bcl-xL (<0.1%). No peptide showed any appreciable binding
to magnetic beads without Bcl-xL. These results agree with
experiments that show Pep1 has higher affinity for Bcl-xL than Pep2 (T.T. Takahashi, R.W. Roberts, in preparation). Our data
here also show that the addition of the HA tag (with a six-amino acid
spacer) does not interfere with the binding of the peptides to Bcl-xL.

Measuring Relative Binding Affinity Using the AMMP Target-Binding
Assay
We translated the Bcl-xL binding peptide
(Pep1 and Pep2) as well as the negative control peptides (ScPep1 and
Pep1ΔHA) and analyzed the dilutions of each sample on the AMMP
target-binding assay (Figure 3, panels b and
c). Both Pep1 (the high-affinity binder) and Pep2 (the moderate-affinity
binder) show saturated signal levels for the 1:10 dilution samples.
Dilutions of 1:80 for Pep2 and over 1:1000 for Pep1 give a robust
signal over the background. In vitro translated ScPep1 and Pep1ΔHA
(two negative controls) showed background levels of signal at every
dilution. Omitting various components of the sandwich (synthetic Pep1
or fluoresceinated anti-HA antibody) results in no signal over background
levels, confirming the specificity of the assay (Figure S-3b of the Supporting Information).

In order to accurately
rank the relative affinities of Pep1 and Pep2, we used the concentrations
calculated for each from the HA tag competition assay (Figure 3c). Pep2 provides robust signal over background
at 1 nM, whereas Pep1 gives a robust signal even at 100 pM. ScPep1
has undetectable levels of binding for Bcl-xL at the tested
concentrations. These results are in agreement with the radiolabeled
binding assay and previous observations. The performance characteristics
of Pep1 are comparable to antibody-based ligands, previously analyzed
using this device, in terms of assay range and sensitivity.12

Comparison of AMMP Technology and ELISA
In order to
directly compare AMMP technology to widely used ELISA methods, we
used the same reagents to analyze the same standards and samples from
the AMMP assay on a similarly formatted ELISA assay (Figure 3d). The results show that in vitro translated Pep1
is functional in ELISA and gives a dilution profile similar to what
would be expected of an antibody. In vitro translated Pep2 also gives
significant ELISA signal over background for the lowest two dilutions
(Figure 3e). The highest dilutions for Pep1
and Pep2 are at background levels of signal for ELISA, while they
are significantly above the background level of signal on the AMMP
assay. In this experiment, the difference in sensitivity between the
ELISA and the AMMP assays for the in vitro translated Pep1 is ∼20-fold.
Pep1ΔHA and ScPep1 showed no appreciable binding to Bcl-xL at any dilution.

We also performed several independent
experiments with known concentrations of synthetic Pep1 in order to
confirm the sensitivity difference we observe between AMMP assays
and ELISA (Table 1). In buffer, the AMMP assay
is on average an order of magnitude more sensitive than ELISA. In
10% translation solution, the AMMP assay remains more sensitive than
ELISA by a factor of 4. Perhaps more notable, with regard to high-throughput
ligand analysis, is that the AMMP assay offers this higher sensitivity
with 5-fold less antibody and over 100-fold less target per sample.Table 1 Comparison between ELISA and AMMP
Target-Binding Assaysa
 	ELISA	AMMP	
mean LOD in assay buffer (pM)	51	5	
mean LOD in 10% translation solution (pM)	288	67	
range
(logs of concentration)	2	2	
sample volume (uL)	100	60	
Anti-HA antibody/sample (fmols)	1500	300	
Biotin-labeled Bcl-xL/sample (fmols)	3300	30	
a On average, AMMP assays are ∼10-fold
more sensitive than ELISA in assay buffer and four-fold more sensitive
in a 10% translation solution. Both assays show a similar range of
quantitation, although the AMMP assay uses five-fold less anti-HA
antibody and 110-fold less biotinylated Bcl-xL.



One of the advantages of higher
sensitivity assays is lower sample
consumption and less sample matrix interference, since higher dilutions
in a simple buffer reduces the amount of the interfering matrix. The
decreased amount of antibody required in AMMP assays has the additional
benefit of enabling highly sensitive competition assays. The AMMP
assay, by using significantly lower amounts of ligand than the ELISA,
can attain a level of sensitivity in competition assays that is difficult
to reach, or unreachable, using ELISA.

Comparison of Different
Assays to Determine Translated Peptide
Concentration
We were interested in using the three assay
formats described above (competition assay, target-binding assay,
and ELISA-based assays) to determine the concentration of a translated
sample for comparison. Ideally, each assay would give the same result
for a single sample, but previous comparisons of methods17 have shown biases using different assay formats.
To compare these assays, we calculated the concentration of in vitro
translated Pep1 using synthetic Pep1 standards and a four-parameter
logistic calibration curve for each assay. The concentration of translated
Pep1 was measured at 136 nM using the HA tag competition assay, 300
nM using AMMP target-binding assay, and 1100 nM using the ELISA target-binding
assay (Figure S-5a of the Supporting Information). A value between 100 and 300 nM is more consistent with previous
analyses on this in vitro translation system.18 The bias in concentration measurement was consistent (R2 = 0.92) over three translated samples tested in three
independent trials when comparing the target-binding assays using
AMMP or ELISA (Figure S-5b of the Supporting Information). Though the reason for the bias is unknown, consistent biases of
different methods of concentration measurement are common.17 Lastly, as long as the relative concentrations
that are determined for a set of samples using a single assay format
are consistent, the bias from different assays will not affect our
ability to rank order different ligands. Since we are determining
the relative activity of a set of ligands, normalizing each ligand’s
activity by its relative concentration should not change the overall
rank ordering.

Sample Matrix Effects
For the AMMP
and ELISA assays,
we diluted all samples and standards into an assay buffer containing
10% translation solution to negate matrix effects on the generated
signal. In the competition assay, translation solution present in
samples is reported as artifactual higher concentration while in the
target-binding assay, translation solution is reported as artifactual
lower concentration (Figure S-6 of the Supporting
Information). Thus, assays that do not adjust for matrix effects
can over- or underestimate the level of analyte present in solution,
depending on the assay used.

Binding of Peptide-mRNA Fusion Molecules
One application
of the AMMP sandwich assay we developed is for analysis of mRNA-peptide
fusions used in mRNA display.6 In mRNA
display, an mRNA template is covalently linked to the polypeptide
that it encodes using a puromycin linker. This step is essential in
mRNA display, which is widely used for the generation of high-affinity
ligands by in vitro selection of high-diversity libraries.19

Currently, radioactive binding assays
are used to evaluate the function of mRNA-peptide fusions.18 We were interested in testing if our AMMP assays
were sensitive enough to evaluate mRNA–peptide function, which
would increase throughput and avoid the use of radiation. To do this,
we designed a target–binding assay for the mRNA–peptide
fusion molecule (Figure 4a). We ligated the
mRNA of our peptides to the puromycin-containing DNA linker, where
the DNA linker possessed a fluorescein label. By using the fluorescein-labeled
linker, we could avoid the use of a C-terminal HA tag/antibody to
form the sandwich. In this assay, the fluorescein tag on the mRNA-puromycin
molecule binds to the antifluorescein antibody on the sensor surface.
The peptide of the fusion molecules binds to the biotinylated Bcl-xL
immobilized on streptavidin magnetic beads, thus connecting the magnetic
bead to the sensor surface (Figure 4a).Figure 4 Peptide-mRNA
fusions are easily adapted to a target-binding assay.
(a) Fluorescein on the fusion molecules bind to antifluorescein antibodies
on the sensor surface and fused peptide binds to target (Bcl-xL) immobilized on a magnetic bead, generating an AMMP signal.
(b) Comparison of fused peptide (Pep1 or ScPep1-mRNA fusion) and peptide
alone (Pep1 or ScPep1) shows mRNA fusion to peptide does not perturb
ligand activity in the target-binding assay.



To test this assay, we in vitro translated mRNA or mRNA-puromycin-linked
molecules.20 Samples of in vitro translated
peptide were incubated with fluorescently labeled anti-HA antibody
and Bcl-xL immobilized on the magnetic beads, while samples
of in vitro translated mRNA-peptide fusions were incubated simply
with Bcl-xL magnetic beads. The scrambled ScPep1 negative
control showed low levels of signal as either peptide or fusion (Figure 4b). Interestingly, we observed that the Pep1-mRNA
fusion gives higher signal levels than Pep1 peptide. This is surprising
given that generally less than half of the translated peptides are
fused to their encoding mRNA.18 This result,
which increases the sensitivity of the experiment by 5-fold, is likely
due to eliminating the HA tag/anti-HA antibody interaction necessary
in the peptide format. In the fusion format, every peptide is covalently
joined through puromycin to the fluorescein that immobilizes the construct
on the sensor chip. In addition to the advantage of not needing a
protein tag, this assay can be used in cases where higher sensitivities
are needed either due to poor target-ligand interaction or poor translation
efficiency, to distinguish between ligands’ relative affinities.
However, because we do not use the HA tag/anti-HA antibody in the
sandwich, we cannot calculate the concentration of fusions by competition
with a known standard.

Peptides as Diagnostic Reagents
Peptides as affinity
reagents for immunoassays offer several advantages over antibodies
in terms of stability, storage, cost of production, and purification.8 They have largely been ignored as immunoreagents
due to their instability in the presence of protease and peptidases,
as well as their generally lower affinities for their targets. Recent
advances in display technologies have enabled generation of high-affinity
peptides with the potential of being attractive immunoreagents.21 Previous studies have shown that protecting
the C-terminus of the peptides can greatly increase resistance to
proteolysis.22

We sought to demonstrate
that our assays could be performed in serum, a matrix which would
be encountered frequently in diagnostic settings. To do this, we tested
Pep1 in a solution containing 1% nonheat-treated FBS in assay buffer
for 4 h. FBS is known to contain active proteases that could degrade
linear peptides.23

Both the mRNA-peptide
fusion (C-terminus covalently bound puromycin)
and synthetic peptide (C-terminal amide) show very similar signal
levels in FBS and in the assay buffer (Figure 5, panels a and b). This observation is consistent with the molecules
being stable in FBS over the 4 h incubation time. On the other hand,
in vitro translated Pep1 (natural carboxy C-terminus and therefore
sensitive to carboxypeptidase degradation)24 shows a distinctly lower signal in FBS versus assay buffer, consistent
with peptide degradation. Overall, our results show that C-terminally
blocked peptides (fusions and amidated peptides) show excellent performance
in 1% FBS and argue that these reagents can be used in complex media-containing
proteases and peptidases.Figure 5 Peptides have modification-dependent stability in serum.
(a) Pep1-mRNA
fusions containing C-terminal puromycin show a slightly lower signal
in 1% FBS buffer versus assay buffer. (b) Pep1 modified with a C-terminal
amide shows activity independent of buffer. (c) Pep1 with an unmodified
C-terminus shows much lower activity in 1% FBS, indicating degradation.



Conclusions
We
have demonstrated a robust, sensitive, specific, and scalable
method to assess the relative affinity of ligands for the protein
of interest in a complex matrix, while normalizing for expression
levels. We measured the difference in expression levels of two similar
sequences to be a factor of 2, while different sequences showed a
5-fold difference in expression levels, which can introduce significant
error in relative affinity assessments. Our method is approximately
an order of magnitude more sensitive than ELISA in a similarly formatted
target-binding assay, while using 100-fold less target and 5-fold
less antibody per sample. Lastly, we used AMMP technology to test
mRNA–peptide fusion function without the need for the HA tag/anti-HA
antibody and showed a more general implementation of the method.

The rank-ordering method described above is not limited to in vitro
translated proteins and peptides. We have shown that detection can
occur in complex matrices such as reticulocyte lysate or fetal bovine
serum; therefore, our methods can likely be modified to work in various
cell lysates. Our methods can also likely be adapted to screen antibodies,
for which the HA tag and the anti-HA antibody can be switched with
the Fc region of antibodies and immunoreagents against the Fc region.

As diagnostic reagent candidates, peptides offer several advantages
over antibodies: they are smaller, have a longer shelf life, can be
stored at room temperature while lyophilized, and are much easier
to synthesize and purify. The main disadvantages over antibodies in
diagnostics are peptide instability in complex matrices containing
peptidase and proteases as well as lower affinities. We have demonstrated
that with a simple modification to the C-terminus, our peptides were
able to detect target in a serum solution containing active proteases.
We have also shown that peptides are capable of detecting the target
with very high affinities in complex media and are suitable as high-affinity
diagnostic reagents.

Supporting Information Available
Detailed protocols on peptide
synthesis, hapten labeling, Bcl-xL expression, in vitro
translation, radiolabeled binding assays, DNA sequences, and further
details on HA tag competition and target-binding assays. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac500084d_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Brett Masters, Martin Latterich, Matthew Dickerson,
Michael Miller, and Ed O’Brien (all at BioScale) for discussions
of data and experimental design, and BioScale Inc. for providing access
to the ViBE BioAnalyzer and the universal detection cartridges used
in these experiments. This work was funded in part from NIH 5R01 AI
085583 (R.W.R.), NIH 5R01 CA 170820 (R.W.R.), and the Ming Hsieh Institute
for Research on Engineering-Medicine for Cancer (R.W.R.).
==== Refs
References
Gavin A. C. ; Bosche M. ; Krause R. ; Grandi P. ; Marzioch M. ; Bauer A. ; Schultz J. ; Rick J. M. ; Michon A. M. ; Cruciat C. M. ; Remor M. ; Hofert C. ; Schelder M. ; Brajenovic M. ; Ruffner H. ; Merino A. ; Klein K. ; Hudak M. ; Dickson D. ; Rudi T. ; Gnau V. ; Bauch A. ; Bastuck S. ; Huhse B. ; Leutwein C. ; Heurtier M. A. ; Copley R. R. ; Edelmann A. ; Querfurth E. ; Rybin V. ; Drewes G. ; Raida M. ; Bouwmeester T. ; Bork P. ; Seraphin B. ; Kuster B. ; Neubauer G. ; Superti-Furga G. 
Nature 
2002 , 415 , 141 –147 .11805826 Ho Y. ; Gruhler A. ; Heilbut A. ; Bader G. D. ; Moore L. ; Adams S. L. ; Millar A. ; Taylor P. ; Bennett K. ; Boutilier K. ; Yang L. ; Wolting C. ; Donaldson I. ; Schandorff S. ; Shewnarane J. ; Vo M. ; Taggart J. ; Goudreault M. ; Muskat B. ; Alfarano C. ; Dewar D. ; Lin Z. ; Michalickova K. ; Willems A. R. ; Sassi H. ; Nielsen P. A. ; Rasmussen K. J. ; Andersen J. R. ; Johansen L. E. ; Hansen L. H. ; Jespersen H. ; Podtelejnikov A. ; Nielsen E. ; Crawford J. ; Poulsen V. ; Sorensen B. D. ; Matthiesen J. ; Hendrickson R. C. ; Gleeson F. ; Pawson T. ; Moran M. F. ; Durocher D. ; Mann M. ; Hogue C. W. ; Figeys D. ; Tyers M. 
Nature 
2002 , 415 , 180 –183 .11805837 
Schena M. ; Shalon D. ; Davis R. W. ; Brown P. O. 
Science 
1995 , 270 , 467 –470 .7569999 MacBeath G. ; Schreiber S. L. 
Science 
2000 , 289 , 1760 –1763 .10976071 
Kohler G. ; Milstein C. 
Nature 
1975 , 256 , 495 –497 .1172191 
McCafferty J. ; Griffiths A. D. ; Winter G. ; Chiswell D. J. 
Nature 
1990 , 348 , 552 –4 .2247164 Scott J. K. ; Smith G. P. 
Science 
1990 , 249 , 386 –390 .1696028 
Mattheakis L. C. ; Bhatt R. R. ; Dower W. J. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
1994 , 91 , 9022 –9026 .7522328 
Roberts R.
W. ; Szostak J. W. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
1997 , 94 , 12297 –12302 .9356443 
Olson C. A. ; Nie J. ; Diep J. ; Al-Shyoukh I. ; Takahashi T. T. ; Al-Mawsawi L. Q. ; Bolin J. M. ; Elwell A. L. ; Swanson S. ; Stewart R. ; Thomson J. A. ; Soh H. T. ; Roberts R. W. ; Sun R. 
Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 12449 –12453 .
Meloen R. H. ; Puijk W. C. ; Langeveld J. P. ; Langedijk J. P. ; Timmerman P. 
Current Protein & Peptide Science 
2003 , 4 , 253 –260 .14529532 
Colwill K. ; Graslund S. 
Nat. Methods 
2011 , 8 , 551 –8 .21572409 Pershad K. ; Pavlovic J. D. ; Graslund S. ; Nilsson P. ; Colwill K. ; Karatt-Vellatt A. ; Schofield D. J. ; Dyson M. R. ; Pawson T. ; Kay B. K. ; McCafferty J. 
Protein Engineering,
Design & Selection: PEDS 
2010 , 23 , 279 –288 .
Washburn A. L. ; Gunn L. C. ; Bailey R. C. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 9499 –9506 .19848413 
Ishikawa F. N. ; Curreli M. ; Olson C. A. ; Liao H. I. ; Sun R. ; Roberts R. W. ; Cote R. J. ; Thompson M. E. ; Zhou C. 
ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 6914 –6922 .21028792 
Dickerson M. ; Leong K. ; Sheldon K. ; Madison L. 
Journal of visualized experiments:
JoVE 
2011 , 48 e2493 10.3791/2493 .
Muramatsu H. ; Kajiwara K. ; Tamiya E. ; Karube I. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
1986 , 188 , 257 –261 .
Mutayoba B. M. ; Meyer H. H. ; Schams D. ; Schallenberger E. 
Acta Endocrinol. 
1990 , 122 , 227 –232 .2180243 
Porstmann T. ; Kiessig S. T. 
J. Immunol. Methods 
1992 , 150 , 5 –21 .1613258 
Olson C. A. ; Roberts R. W. 
Protein Science: A Publication of the Protein Society 
2007 , 16 , 476 –484 .17322532 
Cho J. H. ; Han S. M. ; Paek E. H. ; Cho I. H. ; Paek S. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 793 –800 .16448053 Lofgren J. A. ; Dhandapani S. ; Pennucci J. J. ; Abbott C. M. ; Mytych D. T. ; Kaliyaperumal A. ; Swanson S. J. ; Mullenix M. C. 
J. Immunol. 
2007 , 178 , 7467 –72 .17513798 Einav S. ; Itshayek E. ; Kark J. D. ; Ovadia H. ; Weiniger C. F. ; Shoshan Y. 
BMC Clin. Pathol. 
2008 , 8 , 9 .18803814 Pedersen L. ; Pedersen S. M. ; Brasen C. L. ; Rasmussen L. M. 
Clin. Biochem. 
2013 , 46 , 1079 –1083 .23707222 
Liu R. ; Barrick J. E. ; Szostak J. W. ; Roberts R. W. 
Methods Enzymol. 
2000 , 318 , 268 –293 .10889994 
Takahashi T. T. ; Roberts R. W. 
Methods Mol. Biol. 
2009 , 535 , 293 –314 .19377989 
Jackson R. J. ; Hunt T. 
Methods
Enzymol. 
1983 , 96 , 50 –74 .6656641 
Pazgier M. ; Liu M. ; Zou G. ; Yuan W. ; Li C. ; Li J. ; Monbo J. ; Zella D. ; Tarasov S. G. ; Lu W. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2009 , 106 , 4665 –4670 .19255450 
Wettergren A. ; Pridal L. ; Wojdemann M. ; Holst J. J. 
Regul. Pept. 
1998 , 77 , 83 –87 .9809800 Tamamura H. ; Omagari A. ; Hiramatsu K. ; Gotoh K. ; Kanamoto T. ; Xu Y. ; Kodama E. ; Matsuoka M. ; Hattori T. ; Yamamoto N. ; Nakashima H. ; Otaka A. ; Fujii N. 
Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2001 , 11 , 1897 –902 .11459656 Stromstedt A. A. ; Pasupuleti M. ; Schmidtchen A. ; Malmsten M. 
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2009 , 53 , 593 –602 .19029324 
Chen Y. ; Chen C. ; Liu-Chen L. Y. 
Life Sci. 
2007 , 80 , 1439 –1448 .17316701 
Starck S. R. ; Roberts R. W. 
RNA 
2002 , 8 , 890 –903 .12166644
