
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac5019843ArticleA Generalizable, Tunable Microfluidic Platform for Delivering Fast Temporally
Varying Chemical Signals to Probe Single-Cell Response Dynamics Chingozha Loice †Zhan Mei §Zhu Cheng §¶‡Lu Hang *†§† School
of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, United States§ Interdisciplinary
Program in Bioengineering, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, United
States‡ Wallace
H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, United States¶ School
of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, United
States* E-mail: hang.lu@gatech.edu.25 09 2015 25 09 2014 21 10 2014 86 20 10138 10147 23 05 2014 25 09 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyTerms of Use

Understanding how biological systems
transduce dynamic, soluble
chemical cues into physiological processes requires robust experimental
tools for generating diverse temporal chemical patterns. The advent
of microfluidics has seen the development of platforms for rapid fluid
exchange allowing ease of changes in the cellular microenvironment
and precise cell handling. Rapid exchange is important for exposing
systems to temporally varying signals. However, direct coupling of
macroscale fluid flow with microstructures is potentially problematic
due to the high shear stresses that inevitably add confounding mechanical
perturbation effects to the biological system of interest. Here, we
have devised a method of translating fast and precise macroscale flows
to microscale flows using a monolithically integrated perforated membrane.
We integrated a high-density cell trap array for nonadherent cells
that are challenging to handle under flow conditions with a soluble
chemical signal generator module. The platform enables fast and repeatable
switching of stimulus and buffer at low shear stresses for quantitative
live, single-cell fluorescent studies. This modular design allows
facile integration of any cell-handling chip design with any chemical
delivery module. We demonstrate the utility of this device by characterizing
heterogeneity of oscillatory response for cells exposed to alternating
Ca2+ waveforms at various periodicities. This platform
enables the analysis of cell responses to chemical perturbations at
a single-cell resolution that is necessary in understanding signal
transduction pathways.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac5019843document-id-new-14ac-2014-019843ccc-price
==== Body
Cellular
environments are inherently
dynamic and generally involve complex, temporally varying signals;
therefore, there is large interest in studying how dynamic extracellular
signals are transduced into intracellular signals and give rise to
emergent properties.1,2 The influence of temporal dynamic
inputs in biological systems has been demonstrated through observing
cellular response to chemical perturbations in the form of constant
stimulation, step inputs, and waveforms.3−5 Robust tools that can
provide a variety of well-tuned chemical input signals to biological
systems are fundamental to deducing signal transduction pathways.
Importantly, the temporal dynamics of biological system signals span
a large dynamic range (seconds to days) with variable patterns that
necessitates the need to develop devices that can reliably generate
complex chemical signals precisely and repeatedly. These tools together
with the ability to perform real-time fluorescent imaging enable simultaneous
system perturbation while observing system response.

Microfluidic
systems have emerged as tools for ease of fluid handling
due to the predictable laminar flow and incorporation of other microfluidic
components such as valves and off-chip components that facilitate
precise microenvironment control.6 Several
microfluidic devices have been developed for the application of spatiotemporal
chemical gradients using interface shifting in laminar coflow,4 on- and off-chip valves, flow switching,7 diffusion through porous membranes,8,9 and acoustic waves.10 These platforms
that enable precise modulation of dynamic chemical environment have
been developed for small organisms like the nematode,5,11 for unicellular organisms such as bacteria12 and yeast,1 and for mammalian adherent
cells.2,8,13 However, many
of these systems lack the ability to accommodate nonadherent cells
because nonadherent cells need to be secured in place to prevent drifting
during real-time live imaging while applying the soluble stimulus.
Coupling of cell-trapping devices that secure nonadherent cells in
place with a chemical signal generator would enable high-throughout,
single-cell analysis with single cell resolution to an external stimulus.
Therefore, a much more generalizable approach would be useful in integrating
these different chip designs with signal generators. A plethora of
platforms has been developed for handling suspension cells, allowing
precise spatial positioning of individual cells for single-cell analysis
using dielectrophoresis (DEP), hydrodynamic flow and geometric restrictions,14,15 microwells,16 optical tweezers,17 and acoustic waves.18

Here, we have developed a technique to couple arbitrary chip
design
with a chemical signal generator using a perforated PDMS membrane.
The design utilizes precisely controlled small convective transfer
for fast fluid exchanges; this guarantees low shear stresses on the
cells, while ensuring rapid switching of chemicals in a repeatable
manner. We combined a high-density cell trap15 for handling a large array of nonadherent cells with a module for
the delivery of precisely tuned dynamic chemical signals to individual
cells. The high-density cell trap physically confines individual cells
in defined positions in a deterministic manner for robust, time-lapse
imaging without cell displacement. To demonstrate the utility of our
design, we show how oscillating extracellular Ca2+ at various
periods can modulate the intracellular Ca2+ dynamics in
Jurkat T cells.

Experimental Methods and Materials
Device Fabrication
The two-layer devices were fabricated
in PDMS (Dow Corning Sylgard 184, Essex-Brownwell Inc.), and negative
master molds were fabricated in SU8 (Microchem) using the standard
multilayer soft lithography techniques19 as shown in Figure 1. The master mold for
the cell trap module was fabricated in a three-step photolithography
process with heights of 2, 15, and 15 μm, respectively, fabricated
with SU8 2002, SU8 2005, and SU8 2010. The first two layers make the
cell-trapping module, and the third layer is an array of micro posts
for making the pores in PDMS. The mold for the stimulus chamber was
50 μm, fabricated with SU8 2050. The negative molds were exposed
to silane vapor, tridecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrooctyl-1-trichlorosilane
(UCT Special Ties, LLC) in a desiccator to allow release of the PDMS
mold from the SU8 mold. For the PDMS devices, 10:1 PDMS prepolymer
to cross-linking ratio was spun on the cell trap master mold to make
a thin layer (∼10–12 μm) encompassing the cell-trapping
module with the PDMS mold being thinner than the micro posts such
that the posts were still protruding to make pores in the PDMS layer.
The mold was partially cured at 70 °C for 15 min, aligned, and
then thermally bonded to a partially cured PDMS mold of the stimulus
chamber, also made from 10:1 PDMS prepolymer to cross-linker ratio.
The assembled mold was baked for complete curing of the PDMS overnight.
Access holes were punched at the inlets and outlets with a 19-gauge
blunt needle, and the two-layer device assembly was plasma-bonded
to a coverslip.

Figure 1 Multilayer design enables fast exchange of fluids for
dynamic cell
stimulation. (a) Top view depiction of the device showing the cell
trap module (blue) and the stimulus delivery module (red), (b) top
view micrograph of the cell trapping module with an array of 10 μm
cell traps and 10 μm pores (the device array consists of 1000
cell traps on a 1 mm2 footprint, and a micrograph showing
cells trapped in device), (c) 3D rendering of the fluid channels showing
the cell trap channels and the perforated holes in the membrane, and
(d) cross-sectional depiction of the cell trapping and stimuli delivery
modules. Soluble cues are introduced through the second layer using
off-chip pinch valves and into the first layer through the pores.
(e) Fabrication process of the device master molds and the 2-layer
PDMS devices using soft lithography techniques.

Cell Preparation
Jurkat E6-1 human acute T lymphoma
cells (ATCC) were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium with 2 mM l-glutamine and HEPES (ATCC) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(Sigma-Aldrich) and 100 units mL–1 penicillin–streptomycin
(Life Technologies), in a 37 °C, 5% CO2 humidified
incubator. For the cytosolic Ca2+ level measurements, cells
were loaded with 5 μM Fluo3-AM (Life Technologies) calcium indicator
dye in Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS) without calcium
and 0.02% pluronic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) to enhance calcium dye uptake
by cells for 30 min at room temperature and washed with HBSS without
calcium (Cellgro). Cells were then pretreated with 1 μM thapsgargin
(Sigma-Aldrich) in HBSS without calcium for 5 min before being loaded
in the device by gravity-driven flow. Thapsgargin depletes the intracellular
calcium stores,20 which facilitates the
opening of the calcium-activated release channels (CRAC) allowing
entrance or exit of Ca2+ from the cytosol into the extracellular
space. Cells were exposed to oscillatory Ca2+ signals of
varying frequencies while images were acquired every 2 s for 30 min
on a fluorescent inverted microscope.

Device Setup and Operation
The devices were primed
with HBSS with 2% bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich) to prevent
nonspecific cell adhesion to the device surface and remove bubbles
from the device. The stimulus/buffer chamber inlets were connected
to two pressurized reservoirs set at a pressure of 1 psi, one containing
HBSS with 2 mM EGTA and the other HBSS with 1.5 mM Ca2+. Cells were loaded into the cell trap module using gravity-driven
flow (∼4 kPa) corresponding to a flow rate of ∼5 μL/h
as shown in Figure 2a. Figure 2b shows how the device was connected to pressure reservoirs
containing the buffer and stimulus. Once the cells were loaded, alternating
solutions of the 1.5 mM Ca2+ and EGTA buffer were delivered
to the cells using off-chip pinch valves at user-defined durations
with simultaneous fluorescence imaging to track calcium dynamics,
as indicated by the reporter Fluo-3 AM, in individual cells. Valve
control and image acquisition were performed using custom MATLAB-based
scripts (Mathworks Inc.).

Figure 2 Schematics for device setup. (a) Depiction of
the device with access
holes punched, showing the cell trap layer (blue), and the stimulus
layer (red), (b) cell loading (a pipet tip containing the cell suspension
was placed in the cell inlet, and cells were loaded by gravity-driven
flow, while the top chamber inlets and outlets were closed with pinch
valves), (c) schematic of the device connections (the stimulus and
buffer inlets were connected to pressure reservoirs maintained at
a pressure of 1 psi, and flow into the device is controlled by the
opening and closing of the electronic pinch valves), (d) depiction
of the flow control during cell stimulation (valve A and valve B are
in an open or closed confirmation at any given time to allow the flow
of stimulus or buffer for a user-defined period of time in an automated
manner using custom-made software), and (e) illustration of the oscillatory
signals generated in the device.

Signal Delivery Characterization
The flow profiles
and mass transport in the device were characterized using a lumped
resistance analysis model (3-dimensional COMSOL Multiphysics model)
and empirically using a fluorescent dye. The delivery of chemical
cues into the cell trap chamber was characterized using fluorescein
dye with cells loaded in the device. Briefly, alternating solutions
of fluorescein (50 μg/mL) in PBS and PBS in pressurized reservoirs
were delivered to the stimulus chamber at user-defined oscillating
periods (2 s–2 min) using off-chip electronic pinch valves,
while simultaneously acquiring fluorescence images at 10 fps. Fluorescence
intensity of the images was measured at all the rows in the cell trap
chamber to determine the delivery of signal from the stimulus chamber
to the cell trap channel.

Imaging and Data Analysis
Images
were acquired every
2 s for 30 min on a fluorescent microscope using MATLAB interfaced
with Micromanager Software21 for image
acquisition and automated valve control. All of the image processing
and analysis was performed with custom-made scripts in MATLAB. Briefly,
to analyze the calcium dynamics, the average intensity for each cell
was determined and in every frame, the background was subtracted from
the mean intensity for the individual cell being analyzed. The mean
intensity for each cell was then normalized to the initial intensity
to account for the differences in the initial dye loading for each
cell. The average response for the cell population was also computed
at each time point.

Results and Discussion
Design of a Modularized
Device for Cell Stimulation
The measurement of cell response
to temporally varying soluble chemical
cues can provide insights on the signal transduction pathways. Here,
we are interested in evaluating cell response to dynamic stimulation
at single-cell resolution. Therefore, we need cell trap arrays to
handle a large number of cells while simultaneously applying dynamic
chemical cues in a robust manner. To address this challenge, we developed
a two-layer PDMS device consisting of two modules: a cell-trapping
module and stimulus module capable of generating temporal signals
as depicted in Figure 1a. For the cell trap
layer shown in Figure 1b, we interface microstructures
for single-cell immobilization and micropores on a thin PDMS membrane.
The cell trap module consists of an array of 10 μm cell traps
on a thin membrane perforated with holes of 8–10 μm in
diameter, with each device having 1000 cell traps (Figures 1b and S1, Supporting Information). The micropores on the membrane provide a fluid connection between
the cell trap layer and the top stimulus delivery chamber (Figure 1b,c) that facilitate faster switching of stimulus
and buffer. This enables the ability to study cellular response to
a wide range of temporal patterns, by avoiding dead volume effects
of the chip peripherals such as tubing and dead space upstream of
the experimental area.

In our design, we sought to minimize
shear stress experienced by cells in the device during delivery of
chemical stimulation. Flow-based stimulus delivery can inevitably
exert shear stresses on cells, which have been demonstrated to be
capable of altering cell physiology.22,23 It is therefore
important to ensure that the device is operated at low shear stress
to have a controlled effect on cell response. The shear stress experienced
by the cells is proportional to the flow rate q that
goes through the cell trap module (Figures 1c,d and S2, Supporting Information).

The goal is to balance the needs to minimize q,
to have low (<10 dyn/cm2) shear stresses, and to
rapidly deliver a precise soluble chemical stimulus. The design principle
we use here is based on the relative resistances of the stimulus chamber
(Rstimulus chamber) and the cell
trap chamber (Rcell trap) to which
the soluble cues will be delivered. These relative resistances determine
how the input flow rate Q decomposes into the cell
trap flow rate, q, and the stimulus chamber flow
rate, Q – q (Figure S2, Supporting Information). The lateral dimensions
of the stimulus chamber were determined by the overall size of the
cell trap chamber. In our case, the stimulus chamber had a lateral
dimension of 2 mm by 2 mm and a height of 50 μm. The relative
resistances were modulated by changing the dimensions of the cell
trap membrane chamber. Figure S2, Supporting Information, shows the flow-resistance components the system, where the resistance
of the system is contributed by Rstimulus chamber (low resistance), Rcell trap (high
resistance), and the resistance Rpore of
the pores in the membrane (high resistance). The resistance of the
bottom chamber is a combination of Rpore and Rcell trap. The membrane resistance
depends on the underlying chip design of the cell trap and the dimensions
of the pore diameter (Dpore), length (Lpore), and number of pores (Npore). The pore dimensions are user-defined during mask
design (Dpore, Npore) and in the fabrication steps (Lpore) and are subject to printing and lithography resolution
and aspect ratio restrictions. In our studies, we experimentally varied
the pore dimensions (Dpore from ∼10
μm, Lpore from ∼10 μm,
and Npore from 800 pores) and theoretically
determined the flow resistance and average velocity (2.7 mm/s) in
the cell trap chamber. The pore dimensions would affect the resistance
of the membrane and therefore determine the flow rates through the
cell trap. With these designs, we characterized the fidelity of the
signal in the device over a large temporal range. Within the range
of these parameters, we did not observe differences in the performance
of our device.

The optimal designs allowed us to keep the flow
rate in the cell
chamber relatively small and, therefore, shear stress under control
yet still be able to obtain high fidelity in the signal delivery.
The input flow rates into the stimulus chambers were measured to be
∼0.5 mL/min resulting in an exchange time of 6 ms in the stimulus
chamber, which translates to theoretical flow rates of 1–10
μL/h in the cell trap chamber. At these flow rates, the corresponding
wall shear stress was 0.1–5 dyn/cm2, estimated from
the flow rate, q, in the cell trap chamber. In calculating
the wall shear stress, we assume that the device traps are occupied
and therefore the width of the channel is roughly the same as the
width of the main channel in the cell trap chamber. The tunability
of the device design will allow a user to vary the device dimensions
to fit the need. However, there is a trade-off between high temporal
resolution and low shear stresses. In general, in order to achieve
a high temporal resolution while maintaining low shear stress, we
can vary the pore dimensions or the overall size of the device. In
summary, our design has achieved a low shear stress by increasing
the resistance of the cell trap module by changing the parameters
in Figure S2, Supporting Information, and
the adequate time resolution of signals for the system of interest.
We further characterized the device performance using COMSOL. Figure 3a shows the steady-state flow profile of the truncated
version of the devices showing the first three rows. From the simulation,
the average velocity in the cell trap chamber was 2 mm/s, similar
to the average velocity determined from the lumped resistance model
(2.73 mm/s). The flow profile was then used to analyze transient mass
transfer from the stimulus chamber into the cell trap region for a
period of 10 s. The steady concentration in the cell trap region was
reached within 200 ms (Figure 3b).

Figure 3 Fluid and mass
transfer numerical simulation results. (a) Fluid
flow and (b) mass transfer of a solute for a time of 0, 0.1, and 10
s after a solution containing a solute of concentration 0.8 M was
introduced into the device, demonstrating that the concentration profile
at 0.1 s was already very close to steady state distribution.

Generation of Robust Dynamic
Stimulus at a Wide Range of Frequencies
To characterize the
synchrony and the rise-time in the temporal
delivery of chemicals in the device, we pulsed the chamber with alternating
solutions of PBS and fluorescein dye in PBS with cells loaded in the
device at varying periodicities (2 s to 2 min). When stimulating a
large population of cells with soluble chemicals, it is crucial to
ensure synchrony and robust control of temporal signal delivery. We
measured the average fluorescence intensity of a selected region,
at different positions on the device as depicted in Figure 4a. As shown in Figure 4b,c
for a signal of a repeated 20 s period, the waveforms are synchronized
for all 10 rows of the cell trapping chamber assayed within the device
and are of similar amplitudes. In addition, the generation of the
signal is repeatable throughout the duration of the experiment (Figure 4b). This demonstrates that the cells loaded in our
platform experience the same signal simultaneously. Ensuring that
the cells receive the same signal is critical in studying cell-to-cell
variations in a population such that the differences observed between
cells can be attributed to the inherent cell population heterogeneity
rather than an artifact of the experiment. The delivery of spatially
independent stimulus is enabled by the stimulus chamber having a very
low resistance compared to the cross membrane resistance and cell
trap chamber allowing a small amount of the stimulus to bleed through
from the stimulus chamber to the cell trap layer through the pores
in the membrane. In Figure 4d, we show that
the signal is uniform within each row by measuring the signal intensity
at different positions in an individual row, showing that the asymmetric
positioning of the stimulus inlets do not affect the uniformity of
the signal in the cell trap chamber. We further quantified the differences
in the signal between the upstream and downstream traps and found
a negligible difference in the periodicity (<0.01%) between the
upstream and downstream rows (Figure 4e) in
the device. The average rise-time was determined to be ∼154
± 0.1 ms which is consistent with our COMSOL simulations (<200
ms). Similar observations were made at a lower period of 5 s as shown
in Figure S3, Supporting Information.

Figure 4 Spatially
independent waveforms generated over a large temporal
dynamic range with rapid rise and small delay. The signal delivery
in the device was characterized by flowing alternating PBS solutions
with and without fluorescein at different periodicities. (a) Micrograph
for pulse visualization using fluorescence dye. (b) 20 s waveforms
at different rows on the device demonstrating the uniformity of the
pulses throughout the device. At each row, a representative area was
selected (dotted region in (a)) to measure the intensity of the signal.
(c) Zoomed in section of (b) to demonstrate how the signal traces
at different rows in the device overlap. (d) Plot of signal traces
at different positions on the devices on the same row demonstrating
uniformity of the signal within each cell trap row in the device.
(e) Plot of the period (right-hand y axis) and the
rise-time (left-hand y axis) for the 10 rows of traps
in the device, showing there are negligible differences between the
top and the bottom row periodicities and rise-time. The average rise-time
is ∼150 ms, and (f) the lowest period achieved (2 s) without
the need to change the flow rates in the stimulus chamber and with
negligible changes in the flow rates in the cell trap module.

In addition to achieving a spatially
uniform signal, we evaluated
the signal temporal resolution of the device that is crucial for the
versatility in applications of biological systems. Biological processes
span a large dynamic range, from short-time scales in calcium oscillations
to hours in gene transcription, and being able to use the same tool
for probing different processes would be advantageous. Overall, we
achieved a temporal resolution on the order of seconds for the signal
delivery without changing the flow rates in the device, thus maintaining
low shear stress throughout the study. We determined from the flow
rate and shear stress calculations that the lowest achievable period
would be ∼4 s while keeping the shear stress below 10 dyn cm–2. Figure 3f shows that the
device can be used to deliver input signals with periods as short
as 2 s, indicating that, for any pattern of signal, the smallest period
would be 2 s. Furthermore, reducing the volume of the cell trap chamber
can increase the temporal resolution while maintaining low shear stress.
The ability to deliver high frequency chemical signals makes our platform
versatile in applications over a large temporal dynamic range important
for probing biological systems of different time scales.

The
fidelity in the signal delivery is achieved by the key feature
in our design: monolithic integration of a perforated PDMS membrane
with cell-trapping microstructures. The predefined perforations in
the PDMS membrane enable stimulus and buffer delivery from the stimulus
chamber bulk flow into the cell trap area using off-chip pinch valves.
Using vertical flow to exchange fluids in the cell trap allows the
entire cell trapping layer to be exposed to the same concentration
of stimulus at the same time and circumvents diffusion that would
otherwise limit the temporal resolution of the signal delivery. Moreover,
having a monolithically integrated membrane makes this approach generalizable
to existing microfluidic platforms for delivering soluble cues. Furthermore,
using PDMS to make the perforated membrane rather than using commercial
membranes not only enables the integration with cell-handling microstructures
but also enables ease of fabrication of the device using established
soft lithography methods for thermal bonding of PDMS to PDMS and plasma-bonding
the PDMS assembly to glass. Even though our device is a multilayer
PDMS device, which adds to the complexity of the fabrication, the
alignment of the two layers does not require a microscope, and the
cells will be in contact with the coverslip, which also allows for
high-resolution imaging.

Heterogeneous Cellular Response to Oscillatory
External Ca2+ Signal
To demonstrate the utility
of the device
in stimulating a large number of cells and obtaining single-cell data,
we measured changes in cytosolic calcium in Jurkat cells exposed to
alternating solutions of Ca2+ and EGTA, a calcium chelator.
Calcium is a ubiquitous messenger in a number of physiological processes
including immune cell response to antigen stimulation.24,25 In addition, calcium oscillations have been observed in both excitable
and nonexcitable cells, and differential immune response and gene
expression have been attributed to varying calcium oscillation.26,27 In general, the different calcium dynamics would affect cell signaling,
ultimately leading to differences in cellular function. The ability
to experimentally modulate these calcium oscillations with high temporal
resolution would provide an experimental tool in studying the physiological
function of calcium oscillations. As a demonstration of the capabilities
of our device, we measured changes in cytosolic Ca2+ levels
in Jurkat T cells loaded with Fluo3-AM Ca2+ dye (Figure 5a) exposed to Ca2+ solution waveforms.
To induce Ca2+ oscillations in Jurkat cells, the cells
were first treated with thapsgargin to deplete the intracellular calcium
stores, inhibit the calcium ATPases, and open up the CRAC channels
as previously described.26 It has been
reported that the depletion of the intracellular stores (endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic
reticulum) triggers external Ca2+ entry through the activation
of the CRAC channels. The source of Ca2+ oscillations in
immune cells has been attributed to the transport of extracellular
Ca2+ through the CRAC channels; therefore, this experimental
approach offers a relevant platform for studying signaling pathways
driven by calcium oscillations.27

Figure 5 Analysis at
single cell resolution shows heterogeneity in cell
response to extracellular calcium stimulation. Jurkat cells loaded
with cytoplasmic calcium indicator Fluo3-AM and treated with thapsargin
were exposed to an environment with Ca2+ concentration
oscillating between 0 and 1.5 mM at different periodicities. (a) Fluorescence
micrograph of cells loaded with calcium indicator Fluo3-AM in device.
(b) Heat map for individual cell response to extracellular Ca2+ pulses. The colors indicate low (blue) and high (red) cytoplasmic
calcium concentrations. (c) The average of fluorescence intensity
for the cells shown in (b) exhibit an overall oscillatory response.
(d) From the analysis of the cell fluorescence intensity over time,
four distinct calcium response curves were observed: (1) oscillations
that were entrained with the frequency of the Ca2+ input
signal, (2) a peak at first pulse followed by a plateau at a level
higher than the baseline level, (3) a peak at the first exposure followed
by a drop to the baseline level, and (4) no response to the stimulation.
The results are representative of three similar experiments.

We analyzed the dynamic cytosolic
Ca2+ response when
cells were exposed to different extracellular concentrations of Ca2+, achieved by alternating solutions of Ca2+-rich
(HBSS with 2 mM Ca2+) and Ca2+-poor buffer (HBSS
with EGTA) at different periodicities. In Figure 5, we show representative results from at least 3 similar experiments
where cells were exposed to Ca2+ for 20 s and EGTA for
100 s. In Figure 5b, individual calcium traces
are plotted and show differences in the magnitude of the calcium levels
within a population. Each row represents an individual cell, and the
color represents the intensity of the dye with red being high and
blue low. The differences in intensity show the inherent heterogeneity
between cells that might explain functional differences observed in
response to signaling processes dependent on the amplitude of a signal
encoded by cytoplasmic Ca2+. In addition, similar trends
were
observed in independent experiments (n = 3), and
Figure S-2, Supporting Information, shows
another example of the calcium response stimulation. By taking an
average of the cells, the cell populations were shown to exhibit an
oscillatory calcium response that was entrained with the input signal
(Figure 5c). In contrast, analyzing the individual
calcium response behaviors, we observed that the cells exhibited heterogeneity
that can be categorized into four distinctive behavior categories
(Figure 5d): oscillatory (85%), peak then plateau
(7%), peak then drop to basal level (4%), and no response (4%). These
distinct responses demonstrate the diverse cellular response that
would be otherwise masked in cell population data, as indicated in
Figure 5c, where a population average gives
an oscillatory Ca2+ response.

To test the dynamic
Ca2+ oscillations in Jurkat cells
over a range of periodicities, we exposed the cells to Ca2+ pulses at varying periods. In general, the cells are entrained to
the external Ca2+ stimuli when the frequency of the signal
is not too high (Figure 6). Overall, the cells
showed Ca2+ oscillations with diminishing amplitude over
time (Figure 6a–d) in response to Ca2+ pulses. These calcium temporal dynamics (frequency, amplitude,
and duration of oscillation) can influence which intracellular pathways
are activated.27 By modulating the temporal
signal in terms of concentration, pattern, and duration of exposure,
we can study how cells respond to temporally varying environments.
This platform, in combination with live cell imaging and computational
modeling, may be useful in elucidating signal transduction pathways
present on multiple time scales. For example, dynamic input signals
are an important tool in studying system dynamics both in
vitro and in silico when the system in largely
unknown, and systems have been studied and well characterized under
oscillatory input using the frequency response analysis.28

Figure 6 Responses of cells to different periodic stimuli. (a–e)
Average cytoplasmic calcium dynamics to oscillating external Ca2+ concentration. The cells were exposed to dynamic Ca2+ concentration oscillating between 0 and 2 mM at different
periodicities as indicated on the panels. The figure plots the average
fluorescence intensity indicative of changes in cytosolic Ca2+ over time. The gray bars show the periods at which the Ca2+ buffer was applied. Cells showed an increase in fluorescence intensity
within 1 s of exposure to Ca2+ with diminishing amplitude
with subsequent stimulations. By modulating the extracellular Ca2+ concentration, we are able to create temporally varying
cytosolic Ca2+ signals inside the cells. The ability to
generate oscillations at different periodicities in the cells will
enable the study of how the nature of oscillations have an effect
on gene expression patterns and cell behavior. (f) Zoomed in image
of the 10 s period stimulation showing that at this frequency the
cell response signals show a lag compared to the input signal.

To further demonstrate the utility
of the device, we show individual
cell response and average responses to temporal calcium. In Figure 7, individual calcium response curves (blue traces)
and the average calcium response (red trace) for ∼100–150
cells are shown for stimulation at varying periodicities. The range
of stimulation periodicities ranges from short periods of 10 s (Figure 7a–c) to longer periods of 2 min (Figure 7f). Overall, we have shown a device for handling
a large array of cells and delivering repeatable temporal stimulation
in a spatially independent manner.

Figure 7 Individual calcium response curves at
varying stimulation periodicity
of hundreds of cells: (a–f) show the cytoplasmic response of
individual cells (blue traces) and the average (red trace) at different
stimulation durations.

Conclusions
We have developed a generalizable platform
for stimulating a dense
array of cells with spatially independent, temporally diverse chemical
signals, while simultaneously performing fluorescence time-lapse microscopy
for real-time analysis of cell response at single-cell resolution.
The cell-trapping array enables us to observe hundreds of nonadherent
cells simultaneously in the field of view, while the chemical delivery
module allows all the cells to be exposed to the same stimulus at
the same time. With this device, we have demonstrated the acquisition
of the quantitative oscillatory cytoplasmic Ca2+ behavior
of Jurkat cells exposed to Ca2+ pulses, which can be exploited
in future experiments to study gene expression patterns in cells exposed
to varying frequencies of Ca2+. In addition, the stimulus
delivery approach is independent of the nature of the stimulus used
and only depends on the perforated membrane that can be easily modulated
to suit different applications and chip designs. Our approach is generally
applicable to any chip design as it involved adding functional modules
to existing chip designs. The ability to deliver spatially uniform,
temporally synchronized, and dynamic signal patterns over a large
cell array allows us to study a large population of cells at a single
cell level, rendering information on the heterogeneity of subsets
within the population.

Supporting Information Available
A figure depicting the 3-dimensional
rendering of the device showing the layers that make up the multilayer
devices and the positioning of the cells, a cross-sectional view showing
device dimensions and lumped resistance analysis, a figure showing
calcium response represented as a heatmap with each trace representing
individual cell response, and a figure showing the characterization
of the 5 s period signal. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac5019843_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the financial support of NIH R01 AI088023 and
NSF CBET 0954578. H.L. is supported by a DuPont Young Professor Award,
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellowship. M.Z. is supported by an NSF
Graduate Research Fellowship. C.Z. is supported by NIH R01 AI077343
and R01 AI044902. The authors acknowledge the Chemical Engineering
Machine Research Services for help with machining of equipment parts
used in the experiments, Emily Jackson and Ariel Kniss for feedback
on the manuscript, and Ivan Caceres for help with the MATLAB image
acquisition code.
==== Refs
References
Mettetal J. T. ; Muzzey D. ; Gómez-Uribe C. ; van Oudenaarden A. 
Science 
2008 , 319 , 482 –484 .18218902 
Jovic A. ; Wade S. M. ; Miyawaki A. ; Neubig R. R. ; Linderman J. J. ; Takayama S. 
Mol. BioSyst. 
2011 , 7 , 2238 –2244 .21559542 
Hersen P. ; McClean M. N. ; Mahadevan L. ; Ramanathan S. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2008 , 105 , 7165 –7170 .18480263 
Kim Y. ; Joshi S. D. ; Messner W. C. ; LeDuc P. R. ; Davidson L. A. 
Plos One 
2011 , 6 , e14624.21305055 
Tomida T. ; Oda S. ; Takekawa M. ; Iino Y. ; Saito H. 
Sci. Signaling 
2012 , 5 , ra76 .
Velve-Casquillas G. ; Le Berre M. ; Piel M. ; Tran P. T. 
Nano Today 
2010 , 5 , 28 –47 .21152269 
Sun J. ; Wang J. ; Chen P. ; Feng X. ; Du W. ; Liu B. F. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2011 , 400 , 2973 –2981 .21499676 
Kawada J. ; Kimura H. ; Akutsu H. ; Sakai Y. ; Fujii T. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 4508 –4515 .22968416 
VanDersarl J. J. ; Xu A. M. ; Melosh N. A. 
Lab Chip 
2011 , 11 , 3057 –3063 .21805010 
Ahmed D. ; Chan C. Y. ; Lin S.-C. S. ; Muddana H. S. ; Nama N. ; Benkovic S. J. ; Jun Huang T. 
Lab Chip 
2013 , 13 , 328 –331 .23254861 
Chung K. ; Zhan M. ; Srinivasan J. ; Sternberg P. W. ; Gong E. ; Schroeder F. C. ; Lu H. 
Lab Chip 
2011 , 11 , 3689 –3697 .21935539 
Wang C. J. ; Bergmann A. ; Lin B. ; Kim K. ; Levchenko A. 
Sci. Signaling 
2012 , 5 , ra17 .
Awwad Y. ; Geng T. ; Baldwin A. S. ; Lu C. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 1224 –1228 .22263650 
Sochol R.
D. ; Dueck M. E. ; Li S. ; Lee L. P. ; Lin L. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 5051 –5056 .23042508 
Chung K. ; Rivet C. A. ; Kemp M. L. ; Lu H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 7044 –7052 .21809821 
Rettig J. R. ; Folch A. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 5628 –5634 .16131075 
Zhang H. ; Liu K.-K. 
J. R. Soc., Interface 
2008 , 5 , 671 –690 .18381254 
Ding X. ; Lin S.-C. S. ; Kiraly B. ; Yue H. ; Li S. ; Chiang I.-K. ; Shi J. ; Benkovic S. J. ; Huang T. J. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 11105 –11109 .22733731 
Whitesides G. M. ; Ostuni E. ; Takayama S. ; Jiang X. ; Ingber D. E. 
Annu. Rev. Biomed.
Eng. 
2001 , 3 , 335 –373 .11447067 
Thastrup O. ; Cullen P. J. ; Drøbak B. K. ; Hanley M. R. ; Dawson A. P. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
1990 , 87 , 2466 –2470 .2138778 
Edelstein A. ; Amodaj N. ; Hoover K. ; Vale R. ; Stuurman N.  Computer Control of Microscopes Using
μManager ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc. : New York , 2010 .
Garanich J. S. ; Mathura R. A. ; Shi Z. D. ; Tarbell J. M. 
Am. J. Physiol.:
Heart
Circ. Physiol. 
2007 , 292 , H3128 –H3135 .17308005 
Dalous J. ; Burghardt E. ; Muller-Taubenberger A. ; Bruckert F. ; Gerisch G. ; Bretschneider T. 
Biophys. J. 
2008 , 94 , 1063 –1074 .17905847 
Liu B. Y. ; Chen W. ; Evavold B. D. ; Zhu C. 
Cell 
2014 , 157 , 357 –368 .24725404 
Arrol H. P. ; Church L. D. ; Bacon P. A. ; Young S. P. 
Clin. Exp. Immunol. 
2008 , 153 , 86 –95 .18460013 
Dolmetsch R. E. ; Xu K. ; Lewis R. S. 
Nature 
1998 , 392 , 933 –936 .9582075 
Dolmetsch R. E. ; Lewis R. S. ; Goodnow C. C. ; Healy J. I. 
Nature 
1997 , 386 , 855 –858 .9126747 
Geva-Zatorsky N. ; Dekel E. ; Batchelor E. ; Lahav G. ; Alon U. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2010 , 107 , 13550 –13555 .20622152
