
==== Front
Anal ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical Society 10.1021/ac2018124ArticleDeveloping High Performance Lipoprotein Density Profiling
for Use in Clinical Studies Relating to Cardiovascular Disease Larner Craig
D. Henriquez Ronald R. Johnson Jeffrey D. Macfarlane Ronald D. *Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M
University, 3255 TAMU, College Station, Texas 77843-3255,
United States* E-mail: macfarlane@mail.chem.tamu.edu. Phone: (979) 845-2021. Fax: (979) 845-8987.04 10 2011 15 11 2011 83 22 8524 8530 14 07 2011 04 10 2011 18 10 2011 15 11 2011 04 10 2011 Copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society2011American Chemical SocietyThis is an open-access article distributed under the ACS AuthorChoice Terms & Conditions.  Any use of this article, must conform to the terms of that license which are available at http://pubs.acs.org.

Early detection of the beginning stage of cardiovascular disease
(CVD) is an approach to prevention because the process is reversible
at this stage. Consequently, several methods for screening for CVD
have been introduced in recent years incorporating different analytical
methods for characterizing the population of blood-borne lipoprotein
subclasses. The gold standard method for lipoprotein subclassification
is based on lipoprotein density measured by sedimentation equilibrium
using the ultracentrifuge. However, this method has not been adopted
for clinical studies because of difficulties in achieving the precision
required for distinguishing individuals with and without CVD particularly
when statistical classification methods are used. The objective of
this study was to identify and improve the major factors that influence
the precision of measurement of lipoprotein density profile by sedimentation
equilibrium analysis and labeling with a fluorescent probe. The study
has two phases, each contributing to precision. The first phase focuses
on the ultracentrifugation-related variables, and the second phase
addresses those factors involved in converting the fluorescent lipoprotein
density profile to a digital format compatible with statistical analysis.
The overall improvement in precision was on the order of a factor
of 5, sufficient to be effectively applied to ongoing classification
studies relating to CVD risk assessment.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac2018124document-id-new-14ac-2011-018124ccc-price
==== Body
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a leading cause of death in the
world today. The need for a precise and repeatable method for accurately
measuring and quantifying the lipoprotein density profile for studies
dealing with CVD is necessary for screening, prediction of disease,
and possibly monitoring the effectiveness of treatment.1−5 Several years ago, recognizing the contribution that modern methods
of analytical chemistry can contribute to supporting medical research
and new healthcare initiatives, we formed a “laboratory for
cardiovascular chemistry”. We selected capillary electrophoresis,6−8 density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGU),9−12 and mass spectrometry,13−15 as the most information-rich methods and amenable to clinical studies.
Our research has shown that DGU has the potential for providing high
precision lipoprotein density profiles by reducing error in the measurements
through an understanding of how DGU works systematically and in theory
and identifying the areas for which improvements are necessary. This
method will be applied to clinical studies in the area of risk assessment
for CVD using linear discrimination analysis (LDA).(16)

Density gradient ultracentrifugation has long been the gold standard
for separation, identification, and quantification of lipoproteins.17−19 Ultracentrifugal methods separate lipoproteins based on their hydrated
densities. The different forms of this technique include rate zonal
ultracentrifugation and isopycnic separations.20,21 Each of these techniques has specific advantages and disadvantages
including the accuracy of the separation, use in fraction preparation,
and the extent of skill needed to perform these techniques. The need
for a rapid and straightforward method of lipoprotein density profiling
that provides the most precise information possible is therefore necessary
if lipoprotein density profiles are to be used in clinical studies.
Currently, the commercialized method of lipoprotein separation through
density gradient ultracentrifugation is vertical auto profiling (VAP)
run by Atherotech. This method involves the use of potassium bromide
(KBr) as the salt present in the aqueous gradient.22,23 Use of this high ionic strength solution is problematic as it has
been shown to create multicomponent aggregates of the low-density
lipoproteins.(24) VAP results have been applied
to CVD risk assessment; however, the results can vary, and the precision
for an individual patient is questionable.(25)

Because of the inherent labor-intensive features in density-based
lipoprotein separations methods, alternate methods for lipoprotein
characterization have been developed. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),26−28 chromatographic,29,30 and electrophoresis-based methods7,31,32 have been explored in order to
characterize lipoprotein subclasses. In these methods, it is not the
hydrated density that is the defining parameter but rather the size
of the lipoprotein particle or mobility inside the medium. The NMR
lipoprotein profiling method is currently the most widely used in
clinical applications and is able to deconvolute the lipoprotein distribution
into 11 subclasses.(26) Risk assessment analysis
using NMR has shown potential for the application of particle number
instead of a cholesterol measurement for CVD prediction. This application
has not shown any marked improvement over the standard methods currently
in use.33,34 Electrophoretic methods of lipoprotein separation
include gel electrophoresis using agarose and analytical capillary
isotachopheresis (ITP),(31) yet despite the
continuing development and refinement of these techniques, recent
review articles have identified problems in inter-relating the use
of these methods for identifying individuals who have treatable early
stage CVD.(35) Recently, a nomenclature for
the lipoprotein subclasses has been proposed which we have adopted
for our study.(36) This proposal is an important
step toward unifying the lipoprotein classification system for the
different methods that are being used.

The introduction of these analytical chemical screening methods
into the clinical arena coupled with the vigorous interest and desire
of the medical community to have a reliable and accurate method for
screening for CVD has given us the motivation to determine to what
extent the DGU method for lipoprotein characterization can be refined
to provide a protocol that meets the requirements for lipoprotein
testing to be used in the risk assessment of patients (CVD/no CVD).(33) Current research by our group has introduced
the viability of the use of EDTA salts to control the density gradient
formation process under ultracentrifugation conditions.10−12 In particular, use of the NaBiEDTA complex has been shown to generate
a density gradient for profiling the full density distribution of
lipoproteins in 6 h rather than the 48 h required for rate zonal ultracentrifugation.(11) Coupling the lipoprotein density distribution
separation with use of NBD C6-ceramide in order to image
the intensity of the subclasses can give in principle a precise measurement
of a subject’s lipoprotein density profile if the precision
of the measurement can be improved.(12) These
EDTA salt solutions have a low ionic strength. This reduces the risk
of aggregation in the low density lipoproteins mentioned previously.
However, there is some evidence that apolipoprotein A-1 (apo A-1)
loss in the high density lipoproteins could be affected by the low
ionic strength.(37)

The objective of the study described here was to optimize the resolution
and precision of the measurement of the lipoprotein density profile
using the aqueous EDTA salt solution NaBiEDTA. Factors were divided
into two stages. The first stage addresses those factors associated
with the ultracentrifugation phase including spatial distribution
of the density profile, a precise measurement of the density profile,
the inherent density resolution, spin time, and temperature effects.
The second stage is the imaging protocol where the fluorescently labeled
density profile is converted into a digital format. Factors that were
studied included the influence of the meniscus on the density profile,
the stability of the density profile in the postspin time domain,
contribution from light source stability, and influence of tube orientation
in the imaging measurement relative to spin orientation. Through these
enhancements, the goal was to develop a high precision method for
lipoprotein density profiling that will determine whether the density
distribution of a lipoprotein particle is a viable signature for the
development of cardiovascular disease. The results obtained for the
optimization studies and the final optimized method are reported here.

Experimental Section
Materials
NBD C6-ceramide (6-((N-(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazol-4-yl)amino)hexanoyl)sphingosine, catalog
# N1154) and fluorospheres (0.1 μm carboxylate modified red
fluorescent microspheres, catalog # F-8801) were purchased from Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA. Sodium bismuth EDTA (C10H12N2O8NaBi·4H2O) was purchased from
TCI America (Portland, Oregon). Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and hexane
(>95%) were purchased from EM Science (Darmstadt, Germany). Deionized
water used in all experiments was from a Milli-Q water purification
system (Millipore, Bedford, MA). Polycarbonate thick wall ultracentrifugation
tubes (1.5 mL, 34 mm length, catalog # 343778) were purchased from
Beckman-Coulter (Palo Alto, CA).

Serum Collection
The serum used for these studies was
acquired from a multiple donors with informed consent. The serum was
collected in a 9.5 mL Vacutainer treated with polymer gel and silica
activator (366510, Beckton Dickinson Systems, Franklin Lakes, NJ).
The serum was separated from the red blood cells by centrifugation
at 3200 rpm for 30 min at 5 °C and then stored at −86
°C prior to use.

Ultracentrifugation
Ultracentrifugation was carried
out using an Optima TLX ultracentrifuge and a TLA 120.2 fixed-angle
rotor (Beckman-Coulter, Palo Alto, CA). Samples were spun using a
rotor speed of 120 000 rpm. For the TLA120.2 rotor, these speeds
correspond to average relative centrifugal force of 511 000g. A 0.1800 M solution of NaBiEDTA was selected as the initial
concentration to achieve the desired density gradient profile.

Density Gradient Measurement
The density gradient distribution
for the 0.1800 M NaBiEDTA was measured for several different spin
times ranging from 2 to 8 h. The method used follows a procedure and
calibration method developed by Johnson et al. where 10 aliquots (20
μL volumes) are withdrawn from well-defined positions within
the gradient and their densities are measured by refractive index.(11) Gradient curves were then calculated by mapping
the tube coordinate versus density using Origin 7.0.

Fluorescent Labeling of Serum Samples
Serum samples
were stained for imaging as follows: 6 μL of serum was mixed
with 10 μL of NBD C6-ceramide (1 mg/mL in DMSO) and
diluted to 1300 μL using an aqueous solution of the density-forming
solute (NaBiEDTA) followed by incubation for 30 min to achieve saturation.11,12

Fluorescence Imaging
Fluorescence imaging was used
in monitoring the dynamics of the density gradient formation as well
as the measurement of the sedimentation equilibrium density profile.
An image of the tube containing the fluorophore was obtained and analyzed
using a digital Optronics Microfire Camera (S99808, Goleta, CA) with
a Fiber-Lite MH-100 Illuminator, a metal halide lamp, as a light source
(MH100A, Edmund Industrial Optics, Barrington, NJ). A digital color
microscope camera (S99808, Optronics, Goleta, CA) was used to record
the image. The camera and light source were placed orthogonally to
each other on an optical bench to illuminate the ultracentrifuge tube
mounted in a custom-designed holder. Two filters matching the excitation
and emission characteristics of the fluorophore were chosen. Specific
settings for the Microfire camera software were a gain of 1.000 and
a target intensity of 30% to illuminate the tube. The exposure time
was optimized for sensitivity and to achieve linearity.

The
image of the polycarbonate ultracentrifuge tube was then converted
to a density profile following the method described by Johnson et
al.(11) Briefly, the two-dimensional pixel
field generated by the camera software was converted to a digital
matrix of intensity versus tube coordinate (6–33 mm length)
using Origin 7.0 software to generate a graphical representation of
the density profile.

Polar vs Nonpolar Layering
In preliminary studies,
we determined that the meniscus of the solution was interfering with
the imaging of the lowest density lipoproteins. Following the UC spin,
samples were layered with different liquids in order to further separate
lipids or remove the meniscus from the image. Initial layering of
the samples was done with 150 μL of DI H2O layered
using gel loading tips (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, catalog # CLS4853).
Enhanced methods of layering use 240 μL of hexane with gel loading
tips (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Liquid volumes were slowly added
on top of the sample without perturbing the density profile that was
generated in the UC.

Accuracy and Precision of Density Profile Measurement Using
Nanospheres
Using the fluorospheres and following the method
for density gradient measurements, the accuracy and precision of the
density measurement were studied. Briefly, 1 μL of the fluorosphere
solution was mixed with 1299 μL of 0.18 M NaBiEDTA. A volume
of 1150 μL of this mixture was then spun as described above
and imaged using a green excitation filter (VG-6) with a bandwidth
centered at 520 nm and a red emission filter (R-60) with a low cutoff
at 600 nm (Edmund Industrial Optics, Barrington, NJ).

Lipoprotein Profiling
Following the UC spin and layering,
an image of the tube was obtained and analyzed using the method for
fluorescence imaging. Two filters matching the excitation and emission
characteristics of NBD C6-ceramide from Schott Glass (Elmsford,
NY) were chosen. A blue-violet filter (BG-12) with a bandwidth centered
at 455 nm and a yellow emission filter (OG-515) with a bandwidth centered
at 570 nm were used as the excitation and emission filters, respectively.
Specific settings for the Microfire camera software were an exposure
of 53.3 mS with a gain of 1.000 and a target intensity of 30% to illuminate
the tube prior to image capture.

Effect of Spin Temperature on Density Profiles
The
effect of the temperature in the ultracentrifuge chamber on the lipid
profiles was studied when the samples were run using the predescribed
method and varying the temperature at which the samples are run. Specifically,
the samples are run at 278, 288, and 298 K.

Stability of Lipoprotein Profile after UC Spin
Stability
of the lipoprotein profile was studied by taking an initial measurement
as described previously and then recording consecutive measurements
every 30 min for a period of up to 90 min.

Precision of the Lipoprotein Density Profile Measurement
Using serum from the single donor, ten replicate measurements were
made of the lipoprotein density profile. The ten profiles were overlaid
to identify any systematic error in the measurement. A more quantitative
and informative approach to measuring the inherent precision of the
method was introduced that involves determining the integrated fluorescence
intensities of the 11 subclasses based on density ranges as described
in the literature.(38) For each of the subclasses,
the mean value and standard deviation of the intensities of each of
the subclasses was evaluated. While this analysis gives an overall
estimate of the precision of the measurement related to sample preparation,
an additional contribution of error comes from day-to-day variability
in the intensity of the light source. Consequently, we established
two methods for measuring precision. The first method (referred to
as Mode 1) determines the mean value and standard deviation of the
absolute fluorescence intensities of each of the subclasses. The second
method (Mode 2) is a normalization of data where the fluorescence
intensity of each of the subclasses is given as a percent of the total
integrated intensity. This approach eliminates the day-to-day variability
of the light source intensity.

Results and Discussion
The long-term objective of this research is to use the EDTA gradients
previously studied by our group to develop a high precision method
for profiling a patient’s serum using density gradient ultracentrifugation
(DGU) that could be applied to clinical studies. On the basis of the
previous work with EDTA gradient by Johnson et al.,(11) NaBiEDTA was chosen as the desired salt for manipulation
of the density gradient formation because of the ability to create
a gradient encompasses the density range of the lipoproteins with
optimal resolution.(11) The developmental
plan was divided into two stages. The first stage includes all factors
inherent to the ultracentrifugation of the samples to separate the
lipoproteins by density. The second stage focuses on factors inherent
to the imaging and data analysis of the lipoprotein density profile.
The overall objective of the developmental work was to convert the
lipoprotein density distribution to a set of fluorescence intensities
for the lipoprotein subclasses with high precision suitable for accurate
classification analysis.

Density Gradient Formation
Understanding the formation
mechanics of the density gradient allowed for the mapping of a lipoprotein
profile based on density as well as a determination of the inherent
resolution of the density profile. The overall precision of the density
profile measurement is dependent on the precision of the density gradient
that is formed. We chose to use the establishment of the sedimentation
equilibrium condition as the criterion. This condition is identified
by the exponential increase in solution density along the ultracentrifuge
tube axis. In this study, we determined how long it takes for the
solution to achieve sedimentation equilibrium. The initial state was
a homogeneous solution of 0.1800 molar NaBiEDTA. Figure 1A shows the density profile after a 2 h spin at 278 K. Superimposed
on that profile is the best fit to an exponential curve showing a
systematic deviation in the low density region (1.04–1.06 g/mL)
and an overall data correlation R2 value
of 0.955. The evolution of the profile was then extended over a period
of 4–8 h spin time. At 6 h, (Figure 1B), the curve has a better fit to an exponential function with an R2 value of 0.9897. There is little change in
the gradient and R2 if the spin time is extended past 6
h. From this study, we established 6 h as the standard spin time for
our studies and used the equation derived from this profile to convert
tube coordinate to a density coordinate. This is an important finding
because it means that the attainment of sedimentation equilibrium
is much faster than previously used density-forming solutes. We attribute
this improvement to the properties of NaBiEDTA, a compact high molecular
weight structure with low viscosity which translates to more rapid
sedimentation and diffusion kinetics.

Figure 1 Density curve progression. (A) density curve at 2 h spin time;
(B) density curve at 6 h spin time.

Optimization of the Spatial Separation and Precision of the
Lipoprotein Density Profile
The initial method described
previously by Johnson et al. used a 1000 μL, 0.2000 M NaBiEDTA
aqueous solution to form the gradient and deionized water (DI H2O) as a layering medium for separation of the chylomicrometers
and TRLs that are less dense than 1.00 g/mL from the denser VLDL and
TRLs.(11) Three factors were studied to improve
the overall spatial separation and improvement of precision. The spatial
separation was first expanded by increasing the volume of the solution
in the ultracentrifuge tube from 1000 to 1150 μL. In addition,
the concentration of the NaBiEDTA was decreased from 0.2000 to 0.1800
M. An analysis of the precision of the fluorescence intensities of
the lipoprotein subclasses showed that the precision of the low density
subclasses was considerably lower. We postulated that the use of water
layering to separate the meniscus from the low density fractions was
the source of the problem. In the layering step, the water can mix
with the aqueous gradient by convection depending upon the speed of
layering which then perturbs the position of the low density subclasses
in the ultracentrifuge tube. There is also an added factor due to
light scattering from the meniscus at the wavelength for NBD emission
from the LDL and HDL subclasses. To resolve these problems, we incorporated
a nonpolar layering medium that is less dense than the lipoproteins.
For this purpose, hexane was chosen as a layering medium. The volume
of hexane was chosen in order to shift the meniscus away from the
imaging region.

Previous literature has documented the delipidating
effect that hexane can have on lipoproteins. These methods include
long incubation times of 30 min at high temperatures of 60 °C.(39) The layering method applied here limits the
interaction of the hexane and lipoproteins in that the hexane only
interacts with the TRL portion of the lipoprotein profile due to the
density separation and the time of interaction is minimal. Once a
sample has been layered, it is immediately imaged. The polar nature
of the aqueous gradient versus the nonpolar nature of the hexane will
also limit the hexane’s interaction with the lipoproteins.
This limited interaction means that there will be little to no effect
on the lipoprotein profile in the time needed to image.

Figure 2 shows the overlaid lipoprotein
profiles for comparison of the influence of changes in the solution
volume and NaBiEDTA concentration as well as the two layering methods.
The peak at 6 mm for the water-layered profile is mainly the scattered
light from the meniscus. For the hexane-layered profile, the meniscus
is shifted outside of the imaging field. In addition, the convection
problem associated with water layering is eliminated by hexane layering
which does not penetrate into the aqueous phase. The most significant
improvement in the shape of the density profile is in the TRL/LDL
region where the TRL forms a sharp peak at the hexane/aqueous solution
interface (8 mm tube coordinate) and the LDL region between 9 and
18 mm where the precision of the fluorescence intensities is markedly
improved. The shift in tube coordinate for the LDL to a lower value
is due to a change in the density profile as a result of increasing
the volume of solution and decreasing the initial concentration of
NaBiEDTA. The HDL and protein distributions have not been affected
by these changes because they are far removed from the meniscus region.

The change seen in the protein peak of the lipoprotein profile
is of no consequence to this study due to the nature of the imaging
method and the shape of the UC tube. Since the UC tube is curved at
the bottom, the excitation over the area is not equal, and therefore,
the imaging and quantification of this area is not precise. It is
also important to note that the NBD fluorophore only fluoresces in
a nonpolar environment. Any free proteins in this area would not cause
for fluorescence. The fluorescence in this area can be attributed
to the high concentration of human serum albumin (HSA)/lipid aggregates
present.

Figure 2 Comparison of layering methods in lipoprotein density profiles.

Spin Temperature Effect on Density Profiles
Two temperature-dependent
factors are relevant to this study. The most significant relates to
the structural stability of the lipoprotein particles in the sedimentation
equilibrium process. A lower spin temperature promotes thermal stability.
Lipoprotein density profiles were recorded at 278, 288, and 298 K
using serum from the single donor. (Hexane layering was employed for
imaging.) While the general forms of the density profiles were essentially
the same, there was a clearly detectible shift in the density profiles
toward the higher density region. We attribute this shift to the temperature
dependence of the sedimentation equilibrium constant. In the sedimentation
equilibrium equation, temperature is inversely proportional to the
slope of the density gradient.40,41 Conceptually, at the
lower temperature, the diffusion rate is reduced while the sedimentation
rate is not influenced by the lower temperature. The influence of
temperature on the overall precision of the fluorescence intensity
was significant, a factor of 2 higher at 278 K than at 298 K. On the
basis of these findings, we established 278 K as the standard spin
temperature for the high performance lipoprotein density measurement.

Stability of the Lipoprotein Profile after UC Spin
The stability of the lipoprotein density profile after the spin is
completed is an issue that has an influence on the precision of the
measurement. A study was carried out where the time lapse between
the end of the spin and imaging varied from 1 to 90 min. Figure 3 shows how the profile changes over time after a
sample is spun, layered, and imaged. The profiles in Figure 3 have used the density curve mapped in Figure 1 to extrapolate the density relative to tube coordinate
on the x-axis instead of the use of the tube coordinate
scale. The figure shows that it is the high density range of the profile
that is most affected by the time after spin. The protein peak separated
at the high density section of the lipoprotein profile begins to merge
with the HDL3 region after 30 min. The remainder of the lipoprotein
profile is remarkably stable, even after 90 min. The high density
component of the profile is most likely due to the density gradient
starting to diffuse back to the original concentration of the aqueous
solution before the UC spin. Thus, the merging peaks seen in the HDL
and protein region are due to the remixing of the HDL and HSA into
a heterogeneous solution. For repeatability and quality of the lipoprotein
profile, the images are recorded within a few minutes after the UC
spin is completed.

Figure 3 Stability of the lipoprotein density profile over time. Lipoprotein
density profiles are staggered based on the amount of time after the
UC spin that the image was taken.

Study of the Density Resolution in DGU Using a Nanoparticle
Surrogate
The class of lipoproteins covers a range of particle
sizes as well as density. We selected a commercially available fluorescent
nanoparticle (FluoSphere) as a model for a lipoprotein particle and
to study the accuracy of the density measurement. It has a diameter
of 100 nm and a density of 1.05 g/mL, close to the average properties
of an LDL particle. Figure 4 shows the density
distributions of this particle after a 6 h spin in comparison to a
standard lipoprotein density profile. Using the density calibration
equation for the 6 h spin, we determined that the lower limit of the
density resolution (Δρ/ρ × 100) was 0.13% at
6 h. The reported density of the FluoSpheres is 1.05 g/mL.
The density of the FluoSpheres was calculated to be 1.052 g/mL. The
error of the density measurement was calculated at 0.19%. The percent
relative standard deviations (%RSD) of the density measurement ranged
from 0.01 to 0.04% with an average of 0.027%. This accuracy and resolution
shown in measuring the nanoparticle standard is also a measure of
the inherent accuracy and resolution of the lipoprotein density profile.

Figure 4 Six hour spin profiles for serum and fluorescent nanoparticles.

Precision of the Lipoprotein Density Profile Measurement
The rationale for optimizing the precision of the lipoprotein density
profile is based on the premise that a more accurate classification
of individuals with and without coronary artery disease could be achieved.
The platform for our developmental work was the initial method pioneered
by Johnson et al., where the average %RSD was found to be 23.39%.
Applying the enhancements described in this study to create the high
performance lipoprotein density profiling method (HPLDP), the average
%RSD was reduced to 4.42%. The method used to determine the precision
of the subclass measurements is summarized in the Experimental Section. The strategy was to obtain 10 replicate
measurements of the density profile. Figure 5 shows all 10 lipoprotein density profiles overlaid from one of the
volunteer’s serum samples. Again, the x-axis
density scale was extrapolated from the equation found in Figure 1. There are very few differences that can be distinguished
between profiles. The next step was to extract from the profiles the
fluorescence intensities of each of the subclasses. From this data,
the mean value and %RSD for each subclass was calculated. The results
are presented in histogram form shown in Figure 6 along with error bars for each subclass. The errors of the TRL and
low density LDL regions of the profile are the most significantly
reduced. This effect can be related to the change in layering methods.
The polar–nonpolar relationship of the aqueous gradient to
the hexane prevents diffusion of the layering medium and therefore
reduces the error of the profile. The reduction of error in this method
fits the guidelines established by the National Cholesterol Education
Program that measurement of lipoproteins must meet a total error of
less than 12%.(42) The error of the system
was tested for multiple serum samples. The relative error for the
different profiles was similar to the sample presented here with an
average %RSD between samples of 5.28% ± 0.88. This shows that
the error between lipoprotein profiles is due to the method and not
sample bias.

Figure 5 Repeatability of lipoprotein density profile.

Normalization of the Lipoprotein Density Profile
An
additional class of factors influencing precision is linked to the
clinical study involving factors inherent in the processes of sample
preparation and imaging. Examples include variability in volume of
serum used, amount of fluorophore added, intensity of the light source,
and factors influencing the fluorescence intensity of the subclasses.
How much of the 5% overall error is due to these factors? To estimate
this effect, we normalized the fluorescence intensities of each of
the subclasses to the sum of the intensities of each of the subclasses.
For example, the integrated intensity of the LDL-4 subclass is 42 500
(Figure 6). This intensity represents 17.4%
of the total intensity of the profile. The distribution is identical
in form, as expected, but the overall precision as been improved from
4.42% to 3.69%, a small, but significant improvement. Whether classification
is influenced using the original data (Mode 1) or the normalized data
(Mode 2) is a question that will be addressed in the application to
clinical studies.

Figure 6 HPLDP lipoprotein subclass error for total intensity (Mode 1).

Conclusions
We have shown here methods to reduce the error in lipoprotein profiling
through understanding the mechanics of the density gradient and fluorescent
imaging in order to use this technique as a tool for clinical studies
in medical research. Enhanced spin volume allows for better separation
of the lipoprotein profiles. Changing the layering medium reduces
inherent errors present in the lipoprotein density profile. Furthermore,
a proposed new systematic form of data analysis, Mode 2, shows potential
for application to clinical studies. As a result of these and other
techniques described in this study, a high precision method for the
measurement of lipoprotein profiles (HPLDP) has been produced for
application to clinical studies. This method is currently being used
in ongoing clinical studies in our laboratory. Consequently, this
report also serves as a detailed reference for how the lipoprotein
density profile is measured for these clinical studies.

Finally, we have made a concerted effort to address the long-standing
general belief that lipoproteins are unstable when exposed to the
forces of ultracentrifugation. If sedimentation were the only force,
that would be the case, but sedimentation equilibrium provides a balance of sedimentation and diffusion that is so gentle
that it takes 6 h for the lipoprotein particle to move a few millimeters.
Further, the ionic strength of the NaBiEDTA is close to physiological
levels which will allow for the measurement of lipoproteins as close
to their natural state as possible. Coupled with the shorter spin
time compared to the gold standard (6 h vs 48 h) and reduced temperature
(278 K vs room temperature), we are confident that lipoprotein density
profile measured by this method has the precision to determine whether
it can be used to obtain a more accurate classification of subjects
at risk for CVD. This feature is the overall objective for the development
of this method. Other factors besides density could be contributing
to the classification. Subject variability in the uptake and fluorescence
of the NBD ceramide as well as the stability of the lipoproteins under
DGU conditions may actually contribute to the distinction between
subjects and will therefore aid in the classification of risk.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the NIH Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
RO1HL068794.
==== Refs
References
Enriquez J. R. ; De Lemos J. A.  Prev. Cardiol.  2010 , 13 , 152.20860637 
Ikonomidis I. ; Michalakeas C. A. ; Lekakis J. ; Paraskevaidis I. ; Kremastinos D. T.  Dis. Markers  2009 , 26 , 273.19773616 
Kim H. C. ; Greenland P. ; Rossouw J. E. ; Manson J. E. ; Cochrane B. B. ; Lasser N. L. ; Limacher M. C. ; Lloyd-Jones D. M. ; Margolis K. L. ; Robinson J. G.  J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.  2010 , 55 , 2080.20447530 
Lakic D. ; Bogavac-Stanojevic N. ; Jelic-Ivanovic Z. ; Kotur-Stevuljevic J. ; Spasic S. ; Kos M.  Value Health  2010 , 13 , 770.20667056 
Schnabel R. B. ; Schulz A. ; Messow C. M. ; Lubos E. ; Wild P. S. ; Zeller T. ; Sinning C. R. ; Rupprecht H. J. ; Bickel C. ; Peetz D. ; Cambien F. ; Kempf T. ; Wollert K. C. ; Benjamin E. J. ; Lackner K. J. ; Munzel T. F. ; Tiret L. ; Vasan R. S. ; Blankenberg S.  Eur. Heart J.  2010 , 31 , 3024.20852293 
Cruzado I. D. ; Song S. Q. ; Crouse S. F. ; Obrien B. C. ; Macfarlane R. D.  Anal. Biochem.  1996 , 243 , 100.8954531 
Hu A. Z. ; Cruzado I. D. ; Hill J. W. ; McNeal C. J. ; Macfarlane R. D.  J. Chromatogr.,
A  1995 , 717 , 33.8520682 
Macfarlane R. D. ; Bondarenko P. V. ; Cockrill S. L. ; Cruzado I. D. ; Koss W. ; McNeal C. J. ; Spiekerman A. M. ; Watkins L. K.  Electrophoresis  1997 , 18 , 1796.9372272 
Chandra R. ; Macfarlane R. D.  Anal. Chem.  2006 , 78 , 680.16448039 
Hosken B. D. ; Cockrill S. L. ; Macfarlane R. D.  Anal. Chem.  2005 , 77 , 200.15623297 
Johnson J. D. ; Bell N. J. ; Donahoe E. L. ; Macfarlane R. D.  Anal. Chem.  2005 , 77 , 7054.16255609 
Henriquez R. R. ; Chandra R. ; Hosken B. ; Macfarlane R. D.  Atheroscler. Suppl.  2006 , 7 , ThP17428.
Bondarenko R. ; Farwig Z. N. ; McNeal C. J. ; Macfarlane R. D.  Int. J. Mass Spectrom.  2002 , 219 , 671.
Moore D. ; McNeal C. ; Macfarlane R.  Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.  2011 , 404 , 1034.21187063 
Johnson J. D. ; Henriquez R. R. ; Tichy S. E. ; Russell D. H. ; McNeal C. J. ; Macfarlane R. D.  Int. J. Mass Spectrom.  2007 , 268 , 227.19050741 
Lavie C. J. ; Milani R. V.  Prog. Cardiovasc.
Dis. , 53 , 397 .21545925 
Work T. S. , Work E.  , Eds. Laboratory Techniques
in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology ; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 1978 ; Vol. 6 , p 97 .
Hoinacki J. L. ; Nicolosi R. J. ; Hoover G. ; Llansa N. ; Ershow A. G. ; Lozy M. e. ; Hayes K. C.  Anal. Biochem.  1978 , 88 , 485.211876 
Laker M. F. ; Game F. L.  Baillieres Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.  1990 , 4 , 693.2082902 
Johnson C. ; Attridge T. ; Smith H.  Biochim. Biophys. Acta (BBA)-Protein Struct.  1973 , 317 , 219.
Fourcroy P.  Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun.  1978 , 84 , 713.102325 
Archer E. ; Blair S.
N.  Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. , 53 , 387 .21545924 
Vancraeynest D. ; Pasquet A. ; Roelants V. ; Gerber B. L. ; Vanoverschelde J.-L. J.  J. Am. Coll.
Cardiol.  2011 , 57 , 1961.21565634 
Biondi-Zoccai G. ; Romagnoli E. ; Agostoni P. ; Capodanno D. ; Castagno D. ; D’Ascenzo F. ; Sangiorgi G. ; Modena M. G.  Contemp. Clin. Trials  2011 , 32 , 731.21616172 
Lavie C. J. ; Milani R. V. ; O’Keefe J. H. ; Lavie T. J.  Prog. Cardiovasc.
Dis. , 53 , 464 .21545933 
Ala-Korpela M. ; Lankinen N. ; Salminen A. ; Suna T. ; Soininen P. ; Laatikainen R. ; Ingman P. ; Jauhiainen M. ; Taskinen M.-R. ; Héberger K. ; Kaski K.  Atherosclerosis  2007 , 190 , 352.16730730 
Dyrby M. ; Petersen M. ; Whittaker A. K. ; Lambert L. ; Nørgaard L. ; Bro R. ; Engelsen S. B.  Anal. Chim. Acta  2005 , 531 , 209.
Hodge A. M. ; Jenkins A. J. ; English D. R. ; O’Dea K. ; Giles G. G.  Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract.  2009 , 83 , 132.19091436 
Legget M. E. ; Ellis C. J. ; Edwards C. ; Van Pelt N. ; Ormiston J. A. ; Christiansen J. ; Winch H. ; Young R. ; Gamble G.  Heart, Lung Circ.  2011 , 20 , 391.
Ellis C. J. ; Legget M. E. ; Edwards C. ; Van Pelt N. ; Gabriel R. ; Ormiston J. A. ; Christiansen J. ; Winch H. ; Osborne M. ; Gamble G.  Heart, Lung Circ.  2011 , 20 , 383.
Schmitz G. ; Möllers C. ; Richter V.  Electrophoresis  1997 , 18 , 1807.9372273 
Stocks J. ; Miller N. E.  Electrophoresis  1999 , 20 , 2118.10451124 
Bhupathiraju S. N. ; Tucker K. L.  Clin. Chim. Acta  2011 , 412 , 1493.21575619 
Moran A. ; DeGennaro V. ; Ferrante D. ; Coxson P. G. ; Palmas W. ; Mejia R. ; Perez-Stable E. J. ; Goldman L.  Int. J. Cardiol.  2011 , 150 , 332.21550675 
Ensign W. ; Hill N. ; Heward C. B.  Clin. Chem.  2006 , 52 , 1722.16740651 
Rosenson R. S. ; Brewer H. B. Jr.; Chapman M. J. ; Fazio S. ; Hussain M. M. ; Kontush A. ; Krauss R. M. ; Otvos J. D. ; Remaley A. T. ; Schaefer E. J.  Clin. Chem.  2011 , 57 , 392.21266551 
Kulkarni K. R.  Clinics Lab. Med.  2006 , 26 , 787.
Ikeda T. ; Seo M. ; Inoue I. ; Katayama S. ; Matsunaga T. ; Hara A. ; Komoda T. ; Tabuchi M.  Anal. Chem.  2009 , 82 , 1128.20043691 
Okwuosa T. M. ; Greenland P. ; Ning H. ; Liu K. ; Bild D. E. ; Burke G. L. ; Eng J. ; Lloyd-Jones D. M.  J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.  2011 , 57 , 1838.21527159 
Cole J. L. ; Lary J. W. ; Moody P. T. ;Laue T. M.   In Methods
in Cell Biology ; Correia J. J. , Detrich H. W. III , Eds.; Academic
Press : London , 2008 ; Vol. 84 , p 143 .
Milthorpe B. K. ; Jeffrey P. D. ; Nichol L. W.  Biophys. Chem.  1975 , 3 , 169.1148373 
Recommendations on lipoprotein measurement from the Working Group
on Lipoprotein Measurement ; National Institutes
of Health, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute : Bethesda, MD , 1995 .
