
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac5040242ReviewApplications of
Hydrogen/Deuterium Exchange MS from
2012 to 2014 Pirrone Gregory
F. Iacob Roxana E. Engen John R. *Department of Chemistry and
Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115 United States* Fax: +1-617-373-2855. E-mail: j.engen@neu.edu.14 11 2015 14 11 2014 06 01 2015 87 1 Fundamental
and Applied Reviews in Analytical Chemistry
201599 118 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac5040242document-id-new-14ac-2014-040242ccc-price
==== Body
Hydrogen/deuterium exchange
(HDX) detected by mass spectrometry (MS) is extraordinarily useful
in the study of many aspects of proteins, especially the analysis
of protein conformation and dynamics. While once a challenging and
therefore sparingly used method, modern HDX MS is more straightforward,
rapid, and routine than in the past. As a result, the breadth of applications
of the method has expanded. This Review catalogs applications of HDX
MS that have appeared in the literature during the 30 months from
January 2012 to June 2014. As penetration of the method into nonacademic
sectors where confidentiality is necessary is also at an all-time
high, many more applications of this method likely exist that have
not been reported in the literature.

A synopsis of the recent
applications of HDX MS is shown in Figure 1 where classifications have been made in terms of
sector in which the work was performed, geography, and general topic.
We elected to categorize the publications in these ways to emphasize
that the method is used not only in all sectors but also on nearly
every continent. Many different possibilities existed for characterizing
the applications by topic, and this was not a perfect task. Some papers
belong in multiple topics or could arguably be placed in different
categories than we finally decided. An Excel database and an Endnote
library of the 234 articles we surveyed, both of which contain the
topic groupings, are available from the authors.

Figure 1 Synopsis of the published
applications of HDX MS from January 2012
to June 2014. (A) A total of two-hundred thirty-four (234) articles
were published and classified according to the scheme shown, based
on author affiliations. The number of articles in each category is
shown in parentheses; review articles were not included. (B) The global
distribution of the articles in panel A, based on the home institution
of the communicating author of each article. (C) Similar to panel
A, but for the largest source of articles, the United States of America.
(D) Breakdown of the non-USA publications according to country and
to sector. The data are divided roughly by continent going from left
to right. (E) The six topical classifications chosen for the Review
are shown as pie graphs, with the size of each pie equivalent to the
number of articles (shown in parentheses) in each topic. Further subdivision
within topics follows the order of the main text of the article.

Academia is the largest sector
contributing to published HDX MS
applications (Figure 1). Approximately 25%
of the papers surveyed included multiple sectors, which we have classified
as mixed. As mentioned above, such categorization is biased against
work that has not been published. Industrial research and research
from governmental laboratories must/may remain confidential. Therefore,
the results in Figure 1A are to be interpreted
with this in mind. The United States was the primary source of publications
in HDX MS during the January 2012 to June 2014 time period (Figure 1B,C), although significant and important work originated
from 22 other countries (Figure 1D). To illustrate
the HDX MS applications in much greater detail, we have divided the
remainder of the article into six sections that each discuss one of
the topical classifications shown in Figure 1E.

Protein Folding
The study of protein folding is a small
(14% of papers surveyed)
but nonetheless an important application of HDX MS. The creation of
structure during folding slows exchange, particularly in positions
that become hydrogen bonded or solvent protected. Monitoring changes
in deuteration during folding can reveal not only what parts fold
and when but also what factors may affect folding and various folded
states. In addition to HDX MS studies of individual proteins folding
and unfolding, HDX MS can also be used to understand how other proteins
participate in folding or maintaining folded states.

Folding Mechanisms
Work by Tsutsui et al.1 provides a classic
example of the utility of
HDX MS for studying protein folding (Figure 2A). The protein α1-antitrypsin was placed in denaturant;
the denaturant was diluted, and the refolding was allowed to proceed
for various amounts of time. A short pulse of deuterium (10 s) labeled
parts of the protein that were not yet folded at each folding time
and the results were summarized in light of the known crystal structure
of the protein. HDX MS can access rates, energies, and pathways of
protein folding in vitro, as described for a number of other systems
including ubiquitin, staphylococcal nuclease, ribonuclease H, and
maltose binding protein.2−4 Folding and/or unfolding as a
result of pressure,5 chromatography,6 carboxyl-group modification,7 mutation,8 or binding9−11 were also explored in recent publications.

Figure 2 Application to the study
of protein folding and unfolding. (A)
Example of determining the folding order of a protein with HDX MS,
here the order of α1-antitrypsin. Modified with permission from
ref (1). Copyright
2012 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
(B) Example of monitoring protein unfolding via conformational dynamics.
Totally deuterated β2-microglobin (β2m) was incubated
in H2O buffer and intact mass spectra acquired at the times
shown. Exchange through EX1+EX2 kinetics (blue peaks), representing
a very unfolded unprotected form, was observed from which a rate of
EX1 unfolding could be extracted (right graph). (C) The EX1 rate of
β2m unfolding was measured for a host of other conditions, including
mutation and solution additives. Panels B and C modified and used
with permission from ref (12). Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.

Amyloids and Fibrils
Failures in protein folding or
other disruptions in protein structure can lead to aggregation and/or
fibril formation. HDX MS can probe what parts of proteins associate
in fibrils, what regions participate in aggregation, and how various
conditions affect conversion of soluble proteins into insoluble forms.
β2-Microglobulin (β2m) forms amyloid
fibrils in dialysis-related amyloidosis when degradation in the kidney
is compromised. The intrinsic stability of β2m was
studied by HDX MS,12 and it was found that
the protein visited a highly unprotected, globally unfolded conformational
state (Figure 2B). Various conditions were
tested, and the rate of unfolding was remeasured in each set of circumstances
(Figure 2C) with the goal of determining if
global unfolding dictated β2m aggregation and fibril
formation. While the dynamics of β2m were easily
measured by HDX MS, there was poor correlation between the rate of
EX1 unfolding and fibril formation, interpreted as meaning that other
fibril nucleation mechanisms besides global unfolding are at play.
Fibril formation was studied for other proteins/peptides known to
aggregate including amyloid beta (Aβ) peptide,13,14 α-synuclein,15 prions,16−19 tau,20 insulin,21 and the prostatic acidic phosphatase fragment of 39 residues (PAPf39).22 The regions and rates of protection during fibril
formation were interrogated in each case.

Chaperones
Cells
are preprogrammed to deal with many
types of protein folding and misfolding problems through the use of
molecular chaperones. HDX MS is highly useful for studying not only
how protein folding is altered by chaperones but also how molecular
chaperones function. Many of the HDX MS reports on chaperones included
in our analysis were aimed at understanding how the chaperones themselves
function, e.g., in response to binding or ATP. A number of elegant
studies were reported, including those on small heat shock proteins,23 Hsp90,24−26 the Hsp90 cochaperone Sti1,27 Hsp70,26 Hsp104/ClpB,28,29 and GroEL/ES.30 Following the actual
folding of a protein substrate in the presence of a chaperone is a
much more technically challenging HDX MS experiment. A study of the
effects of GroEL/ES on a TIM-barrel substrate was reported by the
laboratory of Hartl and colleagues.31 The
largely 2-state, cooperative folding of the substrate in the absence
of GroEL/ES (Figure 3A) was changed by the
chaperonin to be more than 30-fold faster and stepwise (Figure 3B). The spatial resolution from HDX MS allowed delineation
of what regions of the substrate protein folded at what rates. Comparison
of folding for a related substrate from a species with no GroEL/ES
demonstrated that the pathway GroEL/ES enforced is correlated to folding
in conditions of chaperonin independence. More HDX MS studies of protein
folding and its machinery are certain to come in the future.

Figure 3 HDX MS in the
study of chaperone-assisted protein folding. The
TIM-barrel protein DapA was unfolded with denaturant and, upon dilution
of the denaturant, allowed to fold and assemble into its native tetramer
spontaneously (A) or in the presence of GroEL/ES (B). After various
periods of refolding, pulse labeling, pepsin digestion, and mass analysis
were performed. The protection half-times (colored by the categories
shown: red, yellow, blue) for segments of the protein (left) were
greatly accelerated by the chaperones compared to the spontaneous
folding. The chaperones also changed the order of folding. The locations
of each protection category are shown at the right on the crystal
structure of the assembled tetramer. Reprinted with permission from
ref (31). Copyright
2014 Elsevier.

Protein Structural Characterization
Understanding the structure of a protein is an important contributor
in understanding its function. HDX MS has an important role to play
in this endeavor, as illustrated by this section with nearly 23% of
the articles published during the 30 month period in question. Most
experiments of this type compare at least two conformational forms
and look for differences between the forms, interpreting the data
on the crystal structure of one (or both) of the forms. The perturbations
that may create multiple forms (not including interactions, discussed
in the next section) include things such as outside forces (e.g.,
light, temperature, pressure), mutation, post-translational modifications
(e.g., phosphorylation), multimerization, and intramolecular interactions.
Experiments involving HDX MS data combined with other structural information
from X-ray crystallography, NMR, cryo-EM, small-angle X-ray scattering
(SAXS), and molecular dynamics simulations can draw the most informed
conclusions about the structure of the protein(s). To explore the
many examples of how HDX MS can be used for structural characterization,
this section has been divided into two broad categories of proteins
that are related to viruses and those that are not. Structural characterization
is also found in articles that were classified in other sections because
they contain multiple topics or because structural characterization
was performed during protein interaction(s), performed on biopharmaceuticals,
or performed on membrane proteins.

Nonviral, Nonmembrane Proteins
Protein
structural characterization
has been an increased focus of HDX MS in the past few years. An excellent
example of HDX MS analysis of protein conformation was provided by
Lee et al.32 wherein they describe the
conformational changes of the LOV (light–oxygen–voltage)
domain protein VIVID (VVD) in the absence and presence of the light.
VVD adopts a more protected conformation in the light (Figure 4). The mass spectra (Figure 4A) of an intact protein continuous labeling experiment of the dark
state (VVDD) and the light state (VVDL) revealed
very different time scales of unfolding between the two states. Comparisons
of deuteration at the peptide level (Figure 4B) showed the regions that incorporated more deuterium upon dimer
formation in the dark state (Figure 4C). Light-induced
conformational changes are only one variable that could be studied:
reports of HDX MS analysis of the effects of temperature, wherein
a study of the effects of cold on structure were examined33 or the effects of being in the solid state34 also appeared.

Figure 4 Observing structural changes during function.
It was proposed that
the LOV (light–oxygen–voltage) domain protein VIVID
(VVD) underwent a structural change upon illumination and HDX MS was
used to show that this was the case. (A) Continuous labeling of the
dark state (VVDD) and light state (VVDL) revealed unfolding with EX1
kinetics and very different time scales of unfolding for the two states.
The location of the unfolding was determined with analysis of pepsin
fragments (example spectra shown in panel A inset). (B) Comparison
of deuterium levels in peptides and (C) interpretation of the data
on the structure of the protein and its dimer indicated that all structural
elements of VVDD incorporate more deuterium in nearly all regions
except for the N-cap. See ref (32) for full details. Modified with permission from ref (32). Copyright 2013 Elsevier.

HDX MS is most informative when
used in conjunction with information
generated by other methods such as functional data, binding information,
modeling, activity assays, or other structural tools. The combination
of HDX MS with structural analysis using other tools is incredibly
valuable, as shown by a number of recent examples. Noble et al.35 studied COPII proteins, which participate in
transporting proteins from the ER to the Golgi apparatus, with cryo-EM,
HDX MS, and modeling. Residues that mediate the COPII cage assembly
were identified: HDX data identified four unique contact regions that
interface two proteins Sec13 and Sec31, each of which is involved
in the assembly and flexibility of the COPII cage. One of the peptides
in the hinge region was found to exhibit bimodal isotope distributions.
It was shown that cage assembly leads to a large conformational change
at the interface between Sec13 and Sec31 and that Sec13 plays an important
part in rigidifying the hinge by providing structural integrity. In
another study,36 a combination of cross-linking
and HDX MS was used to map the homodimer interface of the human 14–3–3
protein. Willander et al.37 used a crystal
structure, molecular dynamics, and HDX MS on the BRICHOS domain from
lung surfactant protein C to study the conformation of the wild-type
and a BRICHOS mutant D105N. The dynamics of Family 1 glycoside transferase were studied by HDX
MS in combination with molecular dynamics simulations, and the data
revealed which parts of the enzyme become more solvent exposed despite
the fact that most regions are buried in the crystal structure.38 Using HDX MS, X-ray structures, and SAXS modeling,
detailed studies of heterodimers of the nuclear receptor peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) and retinoid X
receptor (RXR) were completed.39 Solution
NMR and HDX MS were combined to study the Cyclin-depdent kinase 2-associated
protein 1 (CDK2AP1) and showed a region of intrinsic disorder and
a 4-helix bundle.40

HDX MS has seen
multiple uses for analysis of multidomain proteins,
quaternary interactions, and evolutionary relationships in proteins.
For multidomain proteins, two studies we wish to highlight exemplify
the possibilities. In the first study, Tsukamoto et al.41 used HDX MS of the four domain protein PDZK1,
a regulator of an HDL receptor, to show that the PDZ4 domain does
not exert its regulatory influence by modulating the conformation
of the other PDZ domains. In the second study,42 a detailed analysis of the interactions that bridge the
nitric oxide receptor and the catalytic domains of soluble guanylate
cyclase was made to reveal the interdomain interactions that communicate
nitric oxide occupancy from one region of the complex to the active
site. Several other studies of interest include analysis of a two-domain
protein with HDX MS to characterize the domain interface43 and analysis of ATP-induced dimerization.44

The subdomains within a large prodomain
protein, proenkephalin,
were probed.45 Oligomerization of the RAGE
receptor, which has been difficult to investigate with crystallography,
was studied with HDX MS, molecular modeling, and molecular dynamics.46 The conformation of fibrinogen was probed with
HDX MS to gain insights into regions that were not resolved in the
crystal structure, such as the αC region which belongs to the
Aα chain.47 In addition, the fibrinogen
variant Bβ 235 Pro/Leu, which is responsible for abnormal fibrin
structure, was investigated by HDX MS. This variant showed enhanced
deuteration in one region of the protein, immediately preceding the
Bβ 235 mutation.

There were several reports of the HDX
MS analysis of orthologs,
proteins with the same function but from different species. Fang et
al.48 studied the conformation of sliding
clamps which function as DNA polymerase processivity factors. HDX
MS data for a series of clamps from eight different species indicated
that, despite their highly similar three-dimensional structures, clamp
proteins show a large range of dynamic behavior. A conserved pattern
of alternating dynamics was observed in specific regions of the proteins.
In a study of the orthologs of the receptor for activated kinase (RACK1)
from human, yeast, and plant,49 rigid and
dynamic regions in the orthologs were identified and compared to conclusions
based on the crystal structure.

Recent studies of tRNA-synthetases
exemplify how HDX MS analysis
of the effects of mutation is powerful. Analysis of the Y341A mutant
of human tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase, a functional mutant that would not
crystallize, with HDX MS and SAXS revealed conformational changes
essential for activation via uncovering of an internal tripeptide
sequence.50 In the seryl-tRNA synthetase,
HDX MS was used51 to understand why a mutation
(F383V) located ∼100 amino acids upstream of the nuclear localization
signal (NLS) somehow abolished nuclear localization. The NLS was not
resolved in a crystal of the protein, but HDX MS showed that the NLS
was protected from exchange in the F383 V mutant versus the wild-type.
In other mutagenesis analyses, HDX MS was used to show that mutation
E208Q in the SescA translocase, a mutation that alters the active
site, changes the global conformational state.52 Further HDX MS analysis of SecA focused on dimerization
and how mutation would disrupt formation of the dimer.53 Mutagenesis in exchange of a protein activated
by cAMP (EPAC) showed that a single mutation can shift the conformational
dynamics toward the extended active conformation.54

Changes to protein conformation as a result of post-translational
modifications are quite tractable by HDX MS, including analysis of
the effects of S-nitrosation,55 oxidation,56 addition of glutathione,57 modification to metal atoms such as in aquomet-hemoglobin,58 or binding to metal atoms (e.g., Mg2+, Mn2+, or Ca2+).59 Phosphorylation, one of the more recognizable post-translational
modifications, is catalyzed by kinases while the reverse reaction
is carried out by phosphatases. The effects of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation
were studied in many proteins by HDX MS. Examples included interrogation
of structural changes as a result of mutations that mimic phosphorylation
(phosphomimetics S770D/S771D in the plasma membrane pH regulatory
protein NHE1),60 the effects of serine
phosphorylation in phenylalanine hydroxylase,61 mutation that alters the activity of the phosphatase SHP2,62 and conformational changes in an enzyme due
to dephosphorylation.63 In addition, a
number of studies that included HDX MS was performed on the enzymes
that carry out phosphorylation, the kinases.

Knowledge of kinase
structure and kinase regulation is important
because kinases are tied closely to diseases such as cancer through
signaling pathways. Therefore, many groups have studied kinases in
an effort to understand how their conformation might affect their
function. Both receptor and nonreceptor kinases have been studied
by HDX MS. Itk and Btk are nonreceptor tyrosine kinases that belong
to the Tec family kinases. HDX MS analysis of Itk and Btk64 showed that these two kinases have different
dynamic behavior and that the activation loop of Btk is more solvent
accessible than that of Itk thereby affecting activity. Panjarian
et al.65 studied the Abl kinase in the
context of SH3-linker mutations and showed that the there is a remarkable
allosteric network linking the SH3 domain, the myristic acid binding
pocket, and the active site of c-Abl core. Activation of ERK2 occurs
by enhancing hinge flexibility, shown by HDX MS analysis revealing
that hinge mutations increase the flexibility and induce changes in
the nucleotide binding mode.66 For the
receptor-tyrosine kinases category, the kinase domain of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) was recently studied by HDX.67 Wild-type EGFR kinase was compared to an L834R
mutation that causes abnormally high activity by promoting EGFR dimerization.
The HDX data indicated that the monomeric EGFR kinase has higher HDX
rates and is dynamic especially in the C-terminal portion of the αC
helix. In the L834R mutant, HDX was not significantly altered showing
that the disordered state remains predominant. West et al.68 studied Snf1-related kinases (SnRKs) and regulation
via abscisic acid (ABA), a plant hormone important for controlling
growth and stress responses. The structural mechanism of proteins
in the ABA signaling pathway (the ABA receptor PYL2, HAB1 phosphatase,
and two kinases, SnRK2.3 and 2.6) were investigated with HDX MS.

Among other methods, HDX MS has proven very effective in probing
allostery. An allosteric effect may result from any type of ligand
binding, post-translational modifications, or other conformational
changes. Some of the articles already discussed above, and others
not in this section but covered below, include an allosteric component
in addition to their other findings. In a recent book chapter,69 Beckett describes the application of HDX to
investigate an allosteric system focusing on the E. coli biotin repressor/BirA. The effects of phosphorylation and mutagenesis
on the RegA response regulator were studied,70 and an allosteric coupling between the site of phosphorylation and
the activating mutation was described. Winkler et al.71 studied the elements involved in allosteric regulation
of phosphodiesterase activity by comparing different states of the
blue-light-regulated phosphodiesterase 1.

Virus-Related Proteins
The structural characterization
of viruses is an ongoing topic of interest for the HDX MS community,
with 12 papers appearing during January 2012 through June 2014. HDX
MS can be used to understand whole viruses, assembled capsids, or
just a single protein encoded by a viral genome. In an excellent example
of the analysis of viral capsids, Snijder et al.72 characterized the N-terminal fragment of human adenovirus
pVI protein (termed pVIn). As shown in Figure 5A, when pVIn was incubated with purified hexons, there was protection
from the exchange in several regions suggesting how and where pVIn
associated. In another study,73 the procapsid
(prohead-1) of bacteriophage HK97 was analyzed by cryo-EM and HDX
MS to understand how the protease cleavage events of maturation occur.
Given the recent outbreaks of Ebola in Africa, two very timely papers
described the role of HDX MS in studying Ebola virus (a negative-strand
RNA virus). The conformation of the Ebola virus matrix protein VP40
and the role of the N- and C-terminal tails in assembly were investigated.74 Earlier HDX MS results localizing conformational
differences between the only protein on the surface of the Ebola virus,
the membrane-attached glycoprotein GP1,2 protein, and GP1,2 from the related Sudan virus Gulu variant (SUDV-Gul) were
discussed in light of structural data for complexes of GR1,2 with neutralizing antibodies.75 HDX MS
was applied to another negative-strand RNA virus, Toscana virus which
causes pediatric meningitis, and revealed which regions of the hexameric
form of nucleoprotein N were dynamic.76 Hepatitis viruses were studied with HDX MS: hepatitis B capsid protein
conformation was probed as were complexes with antibodies;77,78 a crystal structure of the hepatitis C envelope glycoprotein 2 was
obtained with the aid of HDX MS identification of disordered regions.79

Figure 5 Application of HDX MS to the study of viruses and virus-related
proteins. (A) Analysis of the binding to peripentonal hexons of the
33-residue N-terminal fragment of the precursor VI protein (pVIn)
from human adenovirus. Exchange into purified hexons was compared
with and without pVIn and the affected regions were localized. Modified
with permission from ref (72). Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (B) Binding-induced changes in
HIV Env trimers were determined when complexed with two different
small molecule HIV entry inhibitors (NBD-556 or BMS-806) that block
the CD4 binding site. Changes in exchange were compared to those seen
when Env trimmers were bound to CD4 alone (not shown here). Modified
with permission from ref (81). Copyright 2014 Elsevier.

There were many HDX MS analyses of HIV proteins, including
the
very detailed analyses of the envelope glycoprotein (Env, various
portions of the entire protein, gp 160, are called gp41 or gp120)
by the Lee laboratory at the University of Washington80−83 as well as analysis of HIV viral accessory factors such as Nef.84 One example of the analysis of the Env protein
is shown in Figure 5B where, in the presence
of HIV entry inhibitors (NBD-556 or BMS-806), exchange into trimeric
gp120 was altered in the variable regions V1 and V2 for NBD-556 but
in quite different regions for BMS-806.81 Interactions between gp41 and gp120 were observed for monomers but
not for trimers,82 and key differences
in conformational stability between the gp120 proteins from different
viral isolates were revealed.80

Interactions
The activity and function of proteins is often regulated via binding
to other molecules; understanding these events, therefore, can give
critical insight into protein function and disease related states.
In this section, we will focus on how HDX MS has been utilized (28%
of the articles published during the 30 month period in question)
to study protein interactions. We note that protein interaction studies
are also present in articles that have fallen into other categories,
again because classification is inevitably an imperfect process when
articles cover multiple topics. The applications we will highlight
in this section include antigen/antibody interactions (i.e., epitope
mapping) and will include work on vaccine design, clotting factors,
and allergens. Studies involving proteins in complex with large molecules,
which we define as greater than molecular weight of 800 Da, will be
discussed and include examples involving the effects of binding to
protein subdomains and nucleic acids. Lastly, protein interactions
with small molecules, defined here as smaller than molecular weight
of 800 Da, will be reviewed and will cover topics involving nucleotide
binding proteins and receptor/drug binding as well as the effects
of anticancer drugs on protein targets.

Epitope Mapping
Epitope mapping is a crucial step in
designing therapeutic antibodies and vaccines. HDX MS has been a useful,
some would argue indispensable, technique for this purpose.85 Malito et al.86 probed
the binding between a monoclonal antibody against factor H binding
protein (fHbp), the vaccine antigen of Neisseira meningitidis. The epitope was probed with peptide arrays, phage display, X-ray
crystallography, and HDX-MS; the agreement of the methods is shown
in Figure 6. As the authors point out, HDX
MS was “the most effective method to rapidly supply
near-complete information about epitope structure”. Some other methods for epitope mapping, while suitable for linear
epitopes, struggle with providing full pictures of interactions that
cover discontinuous conformational epitopes,87 a deficiency apparent in the missing regions in panels B and C of
Figure 6. A second study88 by the same group analyzed two broadly cross reactive antibodies
to fHbp with HDX MS to very rapidly characterize the complex, identify
the epitopes, and compare the antibodies. These studies highlight
how HDX MS is becoming an essential methodology for epitope characterization.
While crystal structures still remain the gold-standard for complex
characterization, HDX MS provides a rapid means, either in the absence
of or in conjunction with an X-ray structure, to focus attention on
regions that are involved in interactions and inform other experiments
that test such regions.

Figure 6 HDX MS for epitope mapping of a monoclonal antibody
(mAb) against
factor H binding protein (fHbp), a virulence factor, and vaccine antigen
of the causative agent of bacterial meningitis, Neisseria
meningitidis. Comparisons were made against (A) the known
interface between factor H (fH) and fHbp, interface residues colored
yellow in the structure at the left, and (B–E) epitope mapping
data, colored red on the structure and linear representation, for
mAb 12C1 and fHbp by various methods. HDX MS mapping (panel D) identified
all regions but not with the resolution of the cocrystal structure.
Reprinted with permission from ref (86). Copyright 2013 National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America.

HDX MS can be used not only to characterize therapeutic antibodies
destined to combat diseases but also to study antibodies that appear
as the result of intervention with other therapeutic proteins. As
an example, consider hemophilia A, a disorder characterized by the
functional absence of a critical blood clotting protein, factor VIII
(FVIII). Treatment with recombinant FVIII is hampered by the patient’s
immune system whereupon intravenous infusion of recombinant FVIII
causes many patients to develop antibodies against the clotting factor.
HDX MS was used to characterize antibody binding to FVIII. Bloem et
al.89 used HDX to identify epitopes in
two C1 domain spikes on FVIII when in complex with a human mAb, KM33,
while Sevy et al.90 identified epitopes
of four anti-FVIII mAbs using HDX MS. Other interesting examples of
HDX MS in epitope mapping studies include: analysis of allergens from
almond nuts (pru du 6)91 or cashew nuts
(ana o 2);92 studies of innate immunity
where binding to IgG to ficolin complexes were characterized by HDX
MS;93 generation of an algorithm94 for predicting B cell epitopes using as a model
system the D8 protein of the vaccinia virus, a major target of the
small pox vaccine. The prediction algorithm was validated using a
combination of X-ray crystallography, ELISA, site-directed mutagenesis,
and HDX MS. Lu et al.95 generated and characterized
13 mAbs against GroEL found in Francisella tularensis (FtGroEL) and used HDX to map the target epitopes and compare the
antibodies. The HDX data suggested that the protective effects of
the mAbs are due to stabilization of a structural rearrangement in
FtGroEL. In the final example covered in this section, protein stabilization
by antibody binding was described by Tiyanont et al.96 who monitored protein dynamics during activating- or inactivating-antibody
binding to the regulatory region of human Notch3. Notch3 in complex
with either EDTA or an activating antibody resulted in increased deuteration,
signifying increased dynamics whereas binding of an inhibitory antibody
reduced deuteration. This study points out that, although binding
of an antibody to an antigen can be strong, the biological effects
are not always inhibition of the function of the antigen.

Protein/Large
Molecule Interactions
The previous section
on epitope mapping covered the special case of protein/protein interactions
where one of the partners is an antibody. Many other protein/protein
interactions exist where no antibodies are involved. A multitude of
proteins realize their functional roles through binding with other
large biomolecules, including nucleic acids, peptides, or other proteins.
In recent years, HDX MS has been applied to investigate protein/large
molecule complexes, and here, we define a large molecule as something
with molecular weight in excess of 800 Da, in order to further understand
many biological systems. In general, the dissociation constant of
the complex is known, and this simplifies the experiment because the
mixing ratio of the component proteins can be calculated to maximize
the amount of proteins that are bound. In cases where the dissociation
constant is not known, 5-, 10-, or 20-fold excess of one protein can
be added and the results compared, for example. Complications can
arise in these types of HDX MS experiments when the binding constant
is weak because signals from peptides of a protein that is not of
interest can interfere with the signals of peptides from proteins
that are of interest.

A good example that characterizes a protein/large
molecule HDX MS is shown in Figure 7. Here,
D’Arcy et al.97 investigated interactions
between the histone H2A–H2B heterodimer and the nucleosome
assembly protein Nap1. The authors report that the helices in the
H2A-H2B sample partially disordered conformations at low ionic strength.
Binding of Nap1 reduces these sampling events and competes for histone–DNA
and interhistone interactions within the nucleosome. On the basis
of the results of HDX MS, the authors proposed other mutants that
should block interactions, which were then verified by non-MS methods.
Such experiments highlight the importance of combining HDX MS measurements
of protein/protein interactions with other types of assays.98

Figure 7 Example of mapping protein/protein interactions by HDX
MS. (A)
The effects of binding the nucleosome assembly protein 1 (Nap1) to
the histone H2A–H2B heterodimer were shown by comparing exchange
into the H2B portion of H2A–H2B alone (left) to exchange into
H2B when bound to Nap1 (middle). The regions most affected by binding
were mapped to the crystal structure of H2B (colored blue, right panel).
(B) Analysis by HDX MS suggested regions where mutations might be
made and tested in other assays; mutants 3 and 4 (residues changed
indicated in yellow and red, respectively) later showed reduced binding
to Nap1 in FRET assays. Modified with permission from ref (97). Copyright 2013 Elsevier.

There were many examples of how
HDX MS can be used to study protein/protein
interactions,84,99−113 ranging in application from analysis of identifying contact surfaces
to monitoring structural changes in one or more members of the complex
upon binding. Studies were performed on complexes with only two members
as well as larger systems with multiple proteins; the proteins studied
came from all types of organisms including human, yeast, E.
coli, cyanobacteria, or other microorganisms. HDX MS data
were often combined with other techniques, including methods such
as circular dichroism, homology modeling, X-ray crystallography, and
NMR.

Several reports focused on protein binding to peptides
or small
polypeptides including: analysis of how the conformation of the αβ
T cell receptor (TCR) is influenced by binding to peptides presented
by the class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC-I);114,115 a study of the protection of the plasminogen activator inhibitor-I
(PAI-I) by binding to the small 39-residue somatomedin B domain of
the plasma glycoprotein vitronectin;116 and analysis of the effects of various peptide ligands binding to
thrombin.117

The analysis of protein
binding to nucleic acids, or binding between
proteins involved with nucleic acids, was described in a number of
articles. Choi et al.118 used HDX MS to
study the Notch transcription complex formed between the Notch intracellular
domain (NCID), the DNA-binding factor CSL, and Mastermind Family 1
protein (MAML1). The role of each member of cooperative assembly of
the complex was ascertained. Winkler et al.119 studied the interaction between the light-sensing antirepressor
AppA and the transcriptional repressor PpsR. The HDX data for the
complex showed how light activation of AppA–PpsR2 influences the PpsR effector region, altering how the complex would
interact with DNA. A study120 of the TATA
box-binding protein (TBP) and its interactions with domains of the
progesterone receptor (PR) revealed conformational changes in both
AF1 and AF2 domains of PR upon binding, as well as changes in flexibility
within TBP. Binding between the processivity factor proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in complex with an inhibitory protein
called TIP121 identified regions involved
in binding between TIP and PCNA, and the authors concluded that TIP
binding disrupts the PCNA trimer formation and decreases its activity.
In a study focusing solely on the effects of DNA binding to a protein,
Roberts et al.122 utilized HDX MS and computational
docking to investigate uracil–DNA glycosylase UNG, which is
responsible for identifying and cleaving uracil from DNA, as it binds
to a 30 bp DNA sequence. They reported that the UNG–DNA complex
showed increased protection at the enzyme active site and two areas
surrounding the active site. The effects of protein binding to sequences
of RNA, in the form of aptamers, were investigated for the serpin
plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1).123 RNA aptamer binding resulted in major reduced deuterium incorporation
within PAI-1, and the areas of reduction were mapped.

Protein/Small
Molecule Interactions
We have just discussed
where HDX MS has been used to characterize protein interactions with
large biomolecules. Small molecule (defined here as smaller than a
molecular weight of 800 Da) binding to proteins has also been investigated
extensively with HDX MS. The small molecules in question are often
therapeutic drugs but can also be natural substrates, regulatory molecules,
metal ions, or antibiotics. Other possibilities include lipids, glycans,
aromatic pollutants, metabolites, and the list goes on. One surprising
finding from many HDX MS studies of small molecule binding is how
influential these interactions are on proteins. Given the size differences
between most small molecules and peptic peptides, even high concentrations
of small molecules (i.e., weak dissociation constants) do not generally
interfere with the LC/MS steps or lead to suppression of peptide signals
of interest.

Publications from Patrick Griffin’s laboratory
epitomize analyses of protein/small molecule binding by HDX MS. An
example is shown in Figure 8 where structural
changes in AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) were monitored upon
binding of nucleotides, cyclodextrin, and a small molecule activator.124 AMP binding resulted in conformational changes
principally in the γ subunit of AMPK with other small changes
in the α and β subunits. The synthetic inhibitor exhibited
large changes in the β subunit and the kinase domain of the
α subunit. Other Griffin publications further demonstrate analyses
of this type for the estrogen receptor α (ERα),125 the vitamin D receptor,126,127 peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ),128 and the retinoid X receptor α (RXRα).129

Figure 8 Small molecule interactions with a protein. The AMP-activated
protein
kinase (AMPK) was incubated with various small molecules (A769662,
beta cyclodextrin, and staurosporine), and HDX MS was performed. Changes
in deuteration relative to unbound AMPK were both (A) mapped to the
crystal structure of AMPK and (B) displayed schematically. The percentages
of deuterium differences were mapped according to the key shown. Reprinted
with permission from ref (124). Copyright 2013 Elsevier.

The effects of cyclic AMP, a regulatory molecule for a number
of
proteins, on protein conformation and dynamics were explored in several
publications.130,131 Underbakke et al.132 showed that, in the GMP binding protein guanylate
cyclase, nitric oxide binding produced profound changes in domains
responsible for heterodimerization and signal transmission. HDX MS
was used to study oxygen binding to myoglobin and hemoglobin,133 to understand the binding of several aza-sugar
molecules to a glycanase,134 and to probe
progesterone and propranolol binding to α1-acid glycoprotein
(AGP), a protein in plasma that can bind to a variety of molecules.135 Hernychova et al.136 studied the interactions between a small molecule, Nutlin-3, and
the protein MDM2 and showed that Nutlin-3 binding caused reduced HDX
kinetics in regions surrounding the binding site and the hydrophobic
pocket of the protein. Brier et al.137 investigated
the regulatory effects of 4-hydrophenylacetic acid (4-HPA) on the
DNA-binding protein neisserial adhesion (NadR). The HDX data show
that 4-HPA binds between the two DNA-binding lobes of NadR and stabilizes
this state with little conformational perturbation. These data suggest
that 4-HPA regulates NadR by stabilizing a conformation unable to
bind to DNA. Ghose et al. studied spore photoproduct lyase (SPL),
which repairs UV legion spore photoproducts in a S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) dependent manner.138 SPL in complex with SAM and a synthetic nucleotide
results in a significant decrease in deuterium incorporation, suggesting
stabilization. However, SPL in complex with only the nucleotide produces
no change in deuterium exchange, indicating that SAM is a required
binding partner.

Many small molecule therapeutics that combat
cancer have been discovered.
HDX MS has been applied to better characterize the effects of such
molecules on the target protein. The effects of Taxol on microtubule
associated protein 4 (MAP4) were studied.139 Yu et al.140 investigated the antileukemia
agents that target the SAM binding site in the methyltransferase DOT1L
using a combination of techniques, including HDX MS. It was shown
that a base excision repair enzyme (APE1) tied to cancer can be inhibited
with a small compound, E3330, and in doing so, HDX is modified in
a few key regions.141 A small molecule
compound that suppresses metastasis in several mouse models was shown
by HDX MS to alter the conformational properties of lysyl-tRNA synthetase
(KRS).142 Liang et al.143 investigated the binding effects of inhibitor ML323 on
the human deubiquitinase complex USP1-UAF1 using HDX MS and showed
four moderately protected and two strongly protected peptides located
outside the USP1 catalytic site, supporting the idea that ML323 is
an allosteric inhibitor of USP1-UAF1.

Cisplatin is used to treat
several types of cancer, and its main
chemotherapeutic effects involve cross-linking DNA leading to apoptosis.
Side effects of cisplatin include platination of a number of proteins,
including cytochrome c. The effects of cisplatin on cytochrome c conformation
were recently studied by HDX MS.144 Other
metal-binding events in proteins were investigated by HDX MS including
zinc binding to β-2-microglobulin145 and the related analyses of porphyrin binding to human ferrochelatase.146

In the last example of small molecule
binding to proteins, HDX
MS was utilized to understand the mechanism of a class of antibiotics
called acyldepsipeptides (ADEPs). ClpP protease in E. coli is a tetradecamer regulated by binding of ATP that opens an axial
pore and allows substrates to enter the degradation chamber. HDX MS
analysis147 of the ADEP1 interaction with
ClpP revealed, among other things, that ADEP1 destabilizes the N-terminal
regions of ClpP subunits while stabilizing the equatorial belt, highlighting
the allosteric nature of inhibition.

Biopharmaceuticals
Biopharmaceuticals are proteins that are used as drugs.148 A very important part of the development of
such drugs is characterization of the protein, which occurs at many
stages (e.g., research, development, processing, formulation, etc.).
There are tremendous challenges to manufacturers during characterization
due to the size of proteins, their complexity, and the necessity of
analyzing higher-order structure. This section reviews the published
work in the period that involved biopharmaceutical characterization
by HDX MS. As mentioned near the beginning of this article, it is
almost certain that a large body of HDX MS work on biopharmaceuticals
goes unpublished; as a result, in this category, we are only discussing
a fraction of the applications in this field. We will cover 17 articles
in this section, half of which are related to antibodies. Several
papers related to biopharmaceuticals have been covered in other sections
of the review (e.g., epitope mapping) although we have tried to consolidate
known biopharmaceutical products to the following section. Three subcategories
addressed here are (1) general antibody characterization with a focus
on the effects of post-translational modifications on antibody conformation
and dynamics; (2) antibody aggregation; (3) studies that describe
the conformation and dynamic behavior of nonantibody biopharmaceuticals.

Antibodies
Monoclonal antibodies primarily of the IgG
isotype make up the majority of biopharmaceutical proteins currently
employed for the treatment of diseases. Due to their large size and
complexity (e.g., disulfide bonding, glycosylation, etc.), their structural
characterization has been challenging. HDX MS is playing an important
role in understanding the conformation and dynamics of such complex
molecules.149 Work has been done to understand
the effects of post-translational modifications, such as oxidation
and glycosylation, on antibody structure.150−152 For example, a recent paper150 described
how a single mutation in the CH3-Fc domain of an antibody
dramatically altered the conformation of the antibody by altering
its glycosylation pattern. Antibody–drug conjugates have also
been characterized by HDX MS,153 and the
data indicate that, for the IgG in question, no major structural changes
occurred in the molecule upon addition of the drug conjugates. A comparison
between an originator antibody (Rituximab) and a biosimilar was published,154 highlighting how HDX MS can be used in comparability
analyses of antibodies.

Proteins in vitro may
be susceptible to aggregation induced by the environment. Biopharmaceuticals
undergo many events in their lifetime, from expression and purification
to formulation and storage. There can be a tendency to form aggregates
which are obviously detrimental to the manufacturing process and most
importantly can have a toxic effect on the patients. There are ongoing
efforts to catalog, characterize, and ultimately understand aggregation,
especially what might trigger it and what parts of the molecule are
more prone to aggregation. HDX MS is a valuable method in the quest
to understand aggregation, and several articles on aggregation recently
appeared.155−157 Zhang et al.155 investigated the effects of thermal stress on bevacizumab (Avastin),
a monoclonal antibody that targets the vascular endothelial growth
factor A (VEGF-A) and is used as an anticancer drug. The HDX MS data
indicated that some peptides in the Fab and the CH2-Fc
regions incorporate more deuterium upon aggregation, and others, in
the variable region, incorporate less deuterium upon thermally induced
aggregation. Manikwar et al.157 explored
how excipients influence aggregation, using HDX MS as the readout.
Iacob et al.156 detailed how HDX MS and
other methods in the biopharmaceutical industry can be used in combination
to gain a more complete picture of aggregation for three monoclonal
antibodies that have a propensity for forming dimers.

Other/Nonantibody
Biopharm Proteins
In addition to
antibodies, there were other biopharmaceuticals characterized by HDX.
In an excellent example of the use of HDX MS for comparability studies,
Houde and Berkowitz158 characterized recombinant
coagulation factor IX (rFIX), a fusion protein version in which an
Fc homodimer domain was connected C-terminally. Figure 9 shows the difference index plot for rFIX in the absence and
presence of Ca2+ (calcium binding is required for activation).
Conformational changes are apparent upon Ca2+ binding but
expected due to the influence of calcium on the structure of rFIX.
The same conformational changes were observed for the rFIX-Fc fusion
protein, indicating that it too responds to activation in the same
way as the nonfusion version. Other HDX MS data in the same study
also show that, by all measures, the conformation of rFIX is not altered
by the presence of the Fc domain. Experiments of this type clearly
have implications not only for creation of new entities but also for
demonstrating comparability during process change, upon modification,
or for biosimilars.

Figure 9 Characterization of Fc fusion proteins and how their parts
relate
to naturally occurring versions. HDX MS of recombinant factor IX (rFIX)
was compared to a fusion of rFIX with an Fc of an antibody (termed
rFIX-Fc). The pattern of differences in deuterium levels of rFIX as
a result of calcium binding (A) was the same as that observed when
the fusion form, rFIX-Fc, bound to calcium (B) meaning that the FIX
portion was not impaired in its calcium binding activity by being
attached to the Fc. There were essentially no differences (C, D) between
exchange into rFIX and rFIX-Fc with calcium or without calcium. Reprinted
with permission from ref (158). Copyright 2012 Wiley.

The conformation and dynamics of insulin were characterized
by
HDX MS,159,160 including analyses of various forms/versions
of insulin with different therapeutic properties. The effects of Endo
H trimming of high mannose glycans from α-amylase were studied.161 Several forms of recombinant glucocerebrosidase,
sold as Cerezyme, a treatment for Gaucher’s disease, were investigated
by HDX MS,162 including mutants and ligand-bound
forms. The effects of pegylation on the conformation and dynamics
of granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) were studied.163 Exchange into a new class of therapeutic agents,
“stapled peptides”, was characterized by HDX MS,164 and the authors found that the location of
the staple is important and is linked to both the deuteration kinetics
and the rates of proteolysis of the stapled peptide. Finally, HDX
of lyophilized protein was studied165 with
the goal of understanding what may happen to protein structure during
dehydration. The results of this work have important implications
in formulation of biopharmaceuticals, including on the conditions
during the freeze-drying process and for reconstitution. HDX MS can
be used to probe all such events and inform each level of processing.

Membrane Proteins
The application of HDX MS to the investigation
of membrane proteins
is a growing area of application. Membrane proteins are inherently
difficult to deal with by many biophysical methods. HDX MS has the
advantage of only needing small amounts of material and the ability
to differentiate protein from lipid. Exchange can be performed in
detergent or in membrane mimetics, provided the lipid component of
the membrane mimetic can be removed sufficiently so as to not interfere
with peptide ionization and detection. A great deal of the methodological
challenges of analyzing membrane proteins by HDX MS have been met,
leading to a number of publications in this area and increased understanding
of these proteins. Topics in this section are divided into peripheral
membrane proteins, which are less challenging to study, and transmembrane
proteins.

Peripheral Membrane Proteins
Peripheral membrane proteins
are not completely embedded but rather anchored to the membrane in
some way. Protein conformation and dynamics can be influenced by the
membrane itself, through electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions.
It is therefore important to study peripheral membrane proteins in
the presence of an actual membrane in order to obtain meaningful data.
Several excellent, recent examples of the application of HDX MS to
the analysis of peripheral membrane proteins come from Roger Williams’
lab. They have been investigating phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3K)
which act just downstream of membrane receptors and are in close proximity
to the membrane. There are two classes of PI3Ks: Class 1A includes
isoforms p110α, p110β, and p110δ, which are regulated
primarily by p85 and are activated by receptor tyrosine kinases; Class
1B contains isoform p110γ, is regulated by p101, and is activated
by G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). HDX MS was used to study p110α166 and showed that p110α in complex with
a regulatory subunit (p85α) constitutes a complex catalytic
cycle characterized by distinct conformational steps. There was disruption
of the SH2 domain of p85α with interfacial regions of p110α,
movement of the adapter binding domain in p101α, and interaction
of the kinase domain with lipids. Oncogenic mutants of p110α
were then probed. All mutations changed the way the protein interacted
with the lipid membrane, and selected mutants induced a variety of
conformational changes in both p110α and its interaction p85α.
Some mutants mimicked conformational changes observed in natural activation.
The other isoforms (p110β and p110δ) of Class 1A PI3K
were also investigated113 by HDX MS, and
results for all isoforms were compared. The binding of the regulatory
subunit p85 to each isoform was mapped, and it was shown that each
isoform had unique relationships with p85. Figure 10A summarizes some of the most recent findings wherein HDX
MS probed the class 1B isoform PI3Kγ catalytic subunit (p110γ)
as it interacts with its regulatory subunit (p101), lipid membranes,
and G-protein Gβγ heterodimers. HDX MS analyses, which
involved multiple proteins and liposomes and are a technical challenge
in themselves, showed that the helical domain of p110γ is substantially
protected when in complex with p101, exposed when bound to lipids,
and protected once more when binding to G-protein Gβγ
heterodimers. Then, Walser et al.167 used
HDX MS to investigate how the p110γ catalytic subunit interacted
with the adaptor subunit p84. Not only do all these studies with PI3K
provide essential new information that is very difficult to obtain
by other methods, but also they highlight the extreme utility of HDX
MS for studying membrane proteins in lipid environments.

Figure 10 Membrane
protein investigations with HDX MS. (A) Exchange into
phosphoinositide 3-kinase γ (also termed p110γ) was compared
to exchange during interactions with its regulatory/adaptor subunit
p101 (left). The complex of p110γ/p101 was then labeled with
and without empty liposomes (middle) or liposomes containing G-proteins
(Gβγ) (right) to ascertain the role of the membrane and
effects of binding. See ref (229) for full details. Reprinted with permission from ref (229). Copyright 2013 National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. (B) HDX MS of
BmrA, a bacterial multidrug ABC transporter, was performed while the
protein was in n-dodecyl-β-d-maltoside
(DDM) detergent. HDX results for analysis of an apo form were superimposed
on the 3D model of the open conformation (left), and analysis of a
closed form ATP-Mg-bound mutant were superimposed on a 3D model of
the closed conformation (right). Coloring is based on the percentage
of deuterium after 1 h of labeling, according to the color scale at
the right. Reprinted with permission from ref (181). Copyright 2012 National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.

There were a number of papers in the last 30 months
that described
investigations of human apolipoprotein A-1 (ApoA1), a protein essential
for solubilizing and transporting cholesterol in the blood. ApoA1
is the primary component of high density lipoproteins (HDLs) and plays
a major role in the structure of most HDL particles. HDL particles
start out as discs of lipid molecules with two copies of ApoA1 circling
the hydrophobic lipid tails at the equator. Rearrangements of the
ApoA1 structure and addition of cholesterol can then transform the
disc into spheres. HDX MS was used to obtain conformational information
for ApoA1 in discoidal HDL particles of two sizes,168 to probe the effects of point mutations in ApoA1 that lead
to reduced HDL levels,169 and to compare
the conformation of ApoA1 in discs versus in spherical HDL particles.170 The HDX MS data indicated that several regions
of lipid-free ApoA1 become significantly protected when incorporated
into HDL particles with a 9.6 nm diameter whereas, for particles with
a diameter of 7.6 nm, approximately 20% more ApoA1 residues are forced
out of contact with lipids. EX1 kinetics were observed for ApoA1 indicating
coexisting helical and nonhelical populations. The Iowa (G26R) and
Milano (R173C) mutations of ApoA1 change helix packing, albeit in
different ways and magnitudes, which contributes to proteolysis and
the potential to form amyloids. A combination of methods including
small angle neutron scattering, cross-linking MS, and HDX MS were
used to construct a model of HDLs, including full length ApoA1.171 Both HDX MS and lysine acetylation MS were
implemented to study conformational changes in ApoA1 caused by Apo
A-II in discoidal HDL.172 When both ApoA1
and ApoA-II were incorporated in the same HDL particle, there were
differences in deuterium incorporation in ApoA1 helices 3–4
and 7–9.

Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) was also a topic
of interest. PLA2 is a large protein superfamily, members
of which catalyze the hydrolysis of phospholipids to produce fatty
acids. They are involved in signaling, inflammation, and lipid membrane
maintenance. Group VIIA lipoprotein associated (Lp-PLA2) and its interactions with ApoA1 and HDLs were studied by HDX MS,173 and the identity of three specific regions
in PLA2 with decreased deuteration were found. The authors note that the
same regions in PLA2 do not exhibit the same protection
when associated with ApoA-II. Group VI Ca2+ independent
(iPLA2) was also studied174 as
was an inhibitor binding to iPLA2175 using a combination of MD simulations and HDX MS. It was shown that
inhibitor binding resulted in protection in loop regions surrounding
the active site, with some minor changes in regions distant from the
active site, indicating that the whole enzyme is affected.

Monoacylglycerol
lipase (Mgl) was studied by HDX MS.176,177 Mgl is a
serine hydrolase that associates with lipid membranes and
deactivates cannabinergic signaling in the central nervous system
by hydrolyzing the lipid signaling molecule 2-arachidoylglycerol.
Karageorgos et al.176 used HDX MS to monitor
changes to Mgl when bound to small several molecule inhibitors. Reaction
with a covalent inhibitor AM6580 that carbamylates Ser122 in Mgl resulted
in HDX protection of helices 6α and 8α. Decreases in deuterium
incorporation were also noted for another inhibitor AM6701 that was
reversible; however, the decreased protection was not as pronounced.
In a second publication, Nasr et al.177 used HDX MS to compare the conformation of Mgl free in solution
versus bound to phospholipid nanodiscs to delineate the region of
lipid association. Membrane anchoring was found to proceed through
helix α4 in the lid domain and neighboring helix α6, and
this positions Mgl into an open conformation to facilitate ligand
binding. Using the AM6580 inhibitor, it was shown that Mgl remains
membrane bound, even when inactivated.

Other peripheral membrane
proteins were investigated. HDX MS aided
in understanding how an enzyme required for synthesis of phosphatidylcholine
is activated via a lipid-induced amphipathic helix.178 Koshy et al.179 studied the
cytoplasmic fragment of CheW and CheA proteins, which are bacterial
chemotaxis receptors. Global HDX data show that CF exhibits much slower
exchange when in complex with CheW and CheA compared to when in solution.
Lee et al.180 monitored the structural
transitions of α-synuclein as it bound to phospholipid vesicles.

Transmembrane Proteins
Transmembrane proteins, or those
that span the membrane, are even more challenging than peripheral
membrane proteins. The highly hydrophobic regions that span the membrane
can be difficult to digest and separate from the lipid component.
Nevertheless, some success has been realized, including the example
of this type of HDX MS shown in Figure 10B.
In the work shown in Figure 10B,181 the bacterial ABC transporter, BmrA, was investigated.
BmrA is a multidrug transporter that normally protects healthy cells
by binding and expelling foreign organic compounds but must shift
between open and closed conformations for this function. HDX MS revealed
regions located in the intercellular domain with very different exchange
kinetics depending on the conformational state. Another carrier, the
bovine mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier, has also been studied by HDX
MS.182 Similar to BmrA, mitochondrial ADP/ATP
shifts between two distinct conformations to function and HDX revealed
differences between these states were localized to the loop regions
within the mitochondrial matrix. The glycerol facilitator (GF), a
transmembrane protein responsible for transporting water and glycerol,
was probed with HDX MS.183 One of the transmembrane
helices, TM7, displayed much faster exchange kinetics relative to
the other helices suggesting that TM7 is less stable than the other
helices in order to aid transport of molecules across the membrane.

Methodological developments are key to the analysis of transmembrane
proteins. The proteins must be in the lipid to be in their native
state for deuteration, but then the lipid must be removed. Various
methods are described in these articles for accomplishing this. The
folding of membrane proteins and ways to study it are also interesting.
Bacteriorhodopsin, the prototypical GPCR, was studied by pulse-labeling
HDX MS184 to monitor refolding induced
by dilution from sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). The protein obtained
structure rather slowly as it refolded from SDS. The methodology explored
could be applied to other membrane proteins. The transmembrane enzyme
gamma-glutamyl carboxylase (GGCX), for which there is no solved structure,
was studied with HDX MS.185 GGCX converts
select glutamic acid to γ-carboxy glutamic acid in vitamin K-dependent
(VKD) proteins, and GGCX mutations have been linked to clotting disorders.
GGCX in nanodiscs was labeled when free or bound to an 18 residue
consensus propeptide from VKD substrates. Major differences in hydrogen
exchange were observed for sites involved in propeptide and glutamate
binding. The authors also noted other regions within GGCX exhibiting
minor differences when in complex with the propeptide. Overall, HDX
MS work on transmembrane proteins is progressing slowly but is expected
to increase once the methods become more tractable.

Methods
In the course of applying a method to problems, better ways of
addressing the problems invariably appear. It is through a wide variety
of applications that methods refinement and development can truly
become efficient. During the past 30 months of applications, there
have been a number of developments in the methodology that have made
the applications possible. Nineteen percent of the articles surveyed
had something to do with methods development. We have divided their
classification into pre-LC, LC-MS, software, and other.

Improvements
to the Pre-LC steps were reported and include work
describing the enzymatic digestion step,186−188 disulfilde bond reduction using electrochemical cells,189,190 affinity capture,191 methodological consideration
for reducing back-exchange in MALDI192 and
electrospray,193 and offline fast mixing
for HDX labeling.194 Reports of methods
improvements in the LC-MS portions of the experiment included subzero
cooling to minimize back exchange during LC/MS,195,196 descriptions of top-down HDX MS studies using ECD or ETD fragmentation197−203 where the goal is the elimination of proteolytic digestion and/or
improvement to the spatial resolution of the exchange information,
microfluidic systems for exchange, LC and MS,204,205 work related to improving separation and understanding LC column
parameters,206−209 comparison of various platforms for HDX MS,210 and description of fine isotope structure in HDX MS.211 A number of software improvements was made
including new software packages or updates to existing software,83,212−215 studies of how to process data,216,217 software
approaches to improve spatial resolution,218,219 and other work on computational and processing improvements.220−222 Several other interesting studies, including methods descriptions,
histidine exchange, and useful tools, were published.223−228

Concluding Remarks
Methods developments and refinements
in HDX MS technology have
placed this tool in the hands of nonspecialists. There will no doubt
be additional future improvements in the methodology, but even at
the current stage, a great deal of studies are now possible by more
people than ever before. The applications of the method are therefore
expected to continue to be strong and even increase in coming years.
When one considers the vast number of possible forms of proteins,
some known but many unknown, perhaps HDX MS will never run out of
proteins to study. It is imperative that those active in the field
continue to expand the reach of the method, apply the method to more
and more types of proteins, systems, and purposes, train new investigators,
and push forward with more improvements. There are still many things
that remain to be studied.

The authors declare
the
following competing financial interest(s): J.R.E. is a consultant
of the Waters Corporation.

Gregory F. Pirrone is a Ph.D. student
at Northeastern University in Boston. He received his BS degree in
Chemistry in 2010 from Fairleigh Dickinson University. He has attended
Northeastern University since 2011 where he has been under the guidance
of Prof. John R. Engen. His research is focused on studying membrane
associated proteins using HDX MS and neutron reflection methods.

Roxana E. Iacob is a Research Assistant
Professor at Northeastern University in Boston. She studied Chemistry
at the University “Al. I. Cuza” of Iasi (Romania), where
she received her Bachelor Degree in 1998 and MS degree in 2000. She
obtained her Ph.D. in Chemistry in 2004 at Konstanz University, Germany,
under Michael Przybylski. She completed a postdoctoral fellowship
(2005–2007) at the National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences with Kenneth Tomer in the Structural Biology group, where
she studied protein/protein interactions by mass spectrometry. Then,
she did a second postdoctoral at Northeastern University in Boston
with John R. Engen from 2007–2009 focusing amongst other topics
on the conformation and dynamics of Abl kinase. Her current research
activities include the development and application of mass spectrometric
techniques for biological applications, including understanding protein
conformation and dynamics by HDX MS with an emphasis on proteins such
as, EGFR, HIV-neutralizing antibodies, transforming growth factors,
therapeutic antibodies, and interleukins.

John R. Engen is a Professor
of Bioanalytical
Chemistry at Northeastern University in Boston. He obtained his Ph.D.
in Chemistry from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln in 1999 under
the watchful eye of one of the pioneers of HDX MS, Prof. David L.
Smith. He completed postdoctoral studies at the European Molecular
Biology Laboratory in Heidelberg, Germany, studying kinases and at
the Los Alamos National Laboratory studying isotopes in proteins.
He was Assistant Professor of Chemistry at the University of New Mexico
from 2002–2006 before moving to Northeastern University. His
laboratory (www.hxms.neu.edu) is focused on HDX MS and
how it can be used to understand proteins of relevance to human disease.
Over 75 proteins have been studied in his laboratory with HDX MS,
and he engages in many research collaborations, methods development
efforts, and training courses related to HDX MS. Current areas of
research focus include membrane proteins, large proteins and protein
complexes, improving the analytical aspects of the technology including
resolving power, and commercial availability.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by NIH grant R01-GM101135
and a research collaboration with the Waters Corporation. The authors
thank and acknowledge the valued colleagues that provided high-quality
figures for the article and the many HDX MS researchers whose original
research work, both before and during the period covered by the article,
could not be discussed in great detail due to space limitations.
==== Refs
References
Tsutsui Y. ; Dela Cruz R. ; Wintrode P. L. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 4467 –4472 .22392975 
Hu W. ; Walters B. T. ; Kan Z. Y. ; Mayne L. ; Rosen L. E. ; Marqusee S. ; Englander S. W. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2013 , 110 , 7684 –7689 .23603271 
Walters B. T. ; Mayne L. ; Hinshaw J. R. ; Sosnick T. R. ; Englander S. W. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2013 , 110 , 18898 –18903 .24191053 
Liyanage R. ; Devarapalli N. ; Pyland D. B. ; Puckett L. M. ; Phan N. H. ; Starch J. A. ; Okimoto M. R. ; Gidden J. ; Stites W. E. ; Lay J. O. Jr.
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 330–332 , 63 –70 .
Jankowska E. ; Stefanowicz P. ; Sosnowska M. ; Karpowicz P. ; Radziszewska K. ; Szewczuk Z. ; Szymanska A. 
Proteins 
2012 , 80 , 2417 –2425 .22674847 
Guo J. ; Carta G. 
J.
Chromatogr., A 
2014 , 10.1016/j.chroma.2014.06.038 .
Zhang H. ; Wen J. ; Huang R. Y. ; Blankenship R. E. ; Gross M. L. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 312 , 78 –86 .22408386 
Dembinski H. ; Wismer K. ; Balasubramaniam D. ; Gonzalez H. A. ; Alverdi V. ; Iakoucheva L. M. ; Komives E. A. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 16 , 6480 –6485 .24605363 
DeNizio J. E. ; Elsasser S. J. ; Black B. E. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , 4318 –4331 .24493739 
Kumar R. ; Moure C. M. ; Khan S. H. ; Callaway C. ; Grimm S. L. ; Goswami D. ; Griffin P. R. ; Edwards D. P. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 30285 –30299 .23995840 
Okiyoneda T. ; Veit G. ; Dekkers J. F. ; Bagdany M. ; Soya N. ; Xu H. ; Roldan A. ; Verkman A. S. ; Kurth M. ; Simon A. ; Hegedus T. ; Beekman J. M. ; Lukacs G. L. 
Nat. Chem. Biol. 
2013 , 9 , 444 –454 .23666117 
Hodkinson J. P. ; Radford S. E. ; Ashcroft A. E. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 26 , 1783 –1792 .22777780 
Zhang Y. ; Rempel D. L. ; Zhang J. ; Sharma A. K. ; Mirica L. M. ; Gross M. L. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 
2013 , 110 , 14604 –14609 .23959898 
Pan J. ; Han J. ; Borchers C. H. ; Konermann L. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2012 , 51 , 3694 –3703 .
Mysling S. ; Betzer C. ; Jensen P. H. ; Jorgensen T. J. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2013 , 52 , 9097 –9103 .
Miller M. B. ; Wang D. W. ; Wang F. ; Noble G. P. ; Ma J. ; Woods V. L. Jr.; Li S. ; Supattapone S. 
Structure 
2013 , 21 , 2061 –2068 .24120764 
Singh J. ; Udgaonkar J. B. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2013 , 425 , 3510 –3521 .23811055 
Skora L. ; Fonseca-Ornelas L. ; Hofele R. V. ; Riedel D. ; Giller K. ; Watzlawik J. ; Schulz-Schaeffer W. J. ; Urlaub H. ; Becker S. ; Zweckstetter M. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 2994 –3002 .23209282 
Singh J. ; Sabareesan A. T. ; Mathew M. K. ; Udgaonkar J. B. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2012 , 423 , 217 –231 .22789566 
Ramachandran G. ; Udgaonkar J. B. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2013 , 52 , 8787 –8789 .
Landreh M. ; Stukenborg J. B. ; Willander H. ; Soder O. ; Johansson J. ; Jornvall H. 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
2012 , 418 , 489 –493 .22281499 
French K. C. ; Makhatadze G. I. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2012 , 51 , 10127 –10136 .
Basha E. ; Jones C. ; Blackwell A. E. ; Cheng G. ; Waters E. R. ; Samsel K. A. ; Siddique M. ; Pett V. ; Wysocki V. ; Vierling E. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2013 , 425 , 1683 –1696 .23416558 
da
Silva V. C. ; Cagliari T. C. ; Lima T. B. ; Gozzo F. C. ; Ramos C. H. 
Plant Physiol. Biochem. 
2013 , 68 , 16 –22 .23619240 
Graf C. ; Lee C.
T. ; Meier-Andrejszki E. L. ; Nguyen M. T. N. ; Mayer M. P.  Front. Mol. Biosci. 2014 , 1 , 4, DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2014.00004 .
Kirschke E. ; Goswami D. ; Southworth D. ; Griffin P. R. ; Agard D. A. 
Cell 
2014 , 157 , 1685 –1697 .24949977 
Lee C. T. ; Graf C. ; Mayer F. J. ; Richter S. M. ; Mayer M. P. 
EMBO J. 
2012 , 31 , 1518 –1528 .22354036 
Oguchi Y. ; Kummer E. ; Seyffer F. ; Berynskyy M. ; Anstett B. ; Zahn R. ; Wade R. C. ; Mogk A. ; Bukau B. 
Nat.
Struct. Mol. Biol. 
2012 , 19 , 1338 –1346 .23160353 
Kummer E. ; Oguchi Y. ; Seyffer F. ; Bukau B. ; Mogk A. 
FEBS Lett. 
2013 , 587 , 810 –817 .23416293 
Zhang Q. ; Chen J. ; Kuwajima K. ; Zhang H. M. ; Xian F. ; Young N. L. ; Marshall A. G. 
Sci. Rep. 
2013 , 3 , 1247 .23409238 
Georgescauld F. ; Popova K. ; Gupta A. J. ; Bracher A. ; Engen J. R. ; Hayer-Hartl M. ; Hartl F. U. 
Cell 
2014 , 157 , 922 –934 .24813614 
Lee C. T. ; Malzahn E. ; Brunner M. ; Mayer M. P. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2014 , 426 , 601 –610 .24189053 
Ramirez-Sarmiento C.
A. ; Baez M. ; Wilson C. A. ; Babul J. ; Komives E. A. ; Guixe V. 
Biophys.
J. 
2013 , 104 , 2254 –2263 .23708365 
Sophocleous A. M. ; Topp E. M. 
Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2012 , 9 , 727 –733 .
Noble A. J. ; Zhang Q. ; O’Donnell J. ; Hariri H. ; Bhattacharya N. ; Marshall A. G. ; Stagg S. M. 
Nat. Struct. Mol.
Biol. 
2013 , 20 , 167 –173 .23262493 
Haladova K. ; Mrazek H. ; Jecmen T. ; Halada P. ; Man P. ; Novak P. ; Chmelik J. ; Obsil T. ; Sulc M. 
J. Struct. Biol. 
2012 , 179 , 10 –17 .22580067 
Willander H. ; Askarieh G. ; Landreh M. ; Westermark P. ; Nordling K. ; Keranen H. ; Hermansson E. ; Hamvas A. ; Nogee L. M. ; Bergman T. ; Saenz A. ; Casals C. ; Aqvistg J. ; Jornvall H. ; Berglund H. ; Presto J. ; Knight S. D. ; Johansson J. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 2325 –2329 .22308375 
Teze D. ; Hendrickx J. ; Dion M. ; Tellier C. ; Woods V. L. Jr.; Tran V. ; Sanejouand Y. H. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2013 , 52 , 5900 –5910 .
Bernardes A. ; Batista F. A. ; de Oliveira
Neto M. ; Figueira A. C. ; Webb P. ; Saidemberg D. ; Palma M. S. ; Polikarpov I. 
PLoS One 
2012 , 7 , e31852.22363753 
Ertekin A. ; Aramini J. M. ; Rossi P. ; Leonard P. G. ; Janjua H. ; Xiao R. ; Maglaqui M. ; Lee H. W. ; Prestegard J. H. ; Montelione G. T. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 16541 –16549 .22427660 
Tsukamoto K. ; Wales T. E. ; Daniels K. ; Pal R. ; Sheng R. ; Cho W. ; Stafford W. ; Engen J. R. ; Krieger M. ; Kocher O. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 19845 –19860 .23720744 
Underbakke E. S. ; Iavarone A. T. ; Marletta M. A. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2013 , 110 , 6777 –6782 .23572573 
Lu H. R. ; Gu M. G. ; Huang Q. ; Huang J. J. ; Lu W. Y. ; Lu H. ; Huang Q. S. 
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2013 , 57 , 1872 –1881 .23380729 
Rodriguez A. D. ; Dunn S. D. ; Konermann L. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2014 , 10.1021/bi5004684 .
Lu W. D. ; Liu T. ; Li S. ; Woods V. L. Jr.; Hook V. 
Protein Sci. 
2012 , 21 , 178 –187 .22102294 
Sitkiewicz E. ; Tarnowski K. ; Poznanski J. ; Kulma M. ; Dadlez M. 
PLoS One 
2013 , 8 , e76353.24098480 
Marsh J. J. ; Guan H. S. ; Li S. ; Chiles P. G. ; Tran D. ; Morris T. A. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2013 , 52 , 5491 –5502 .
Fang J. ; Nevin P. ; Kairys V. ; Venclovas C. ; Engen J. R. ; Beuning P. J. 
Structure 
2014 , 22 , 572 –581 .24613485 
Tarnowski K. ; Fituch K. ; Szczepanowski R. H. ; Dadlez M. ; Kaus-Drobek M. 
Protein Sci. 
2014 , 23 , 639 –651 .24591271 
Lee P. S. ; Zhang H. M. ; Marshall A. G. ; Yang X. L. ; Schimmel P. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 20504 –20508 .22549774 
Xu X. L. ; Shi Y. ; Zhang H. M. ; Swindell E. C. ; Marshall A. G. ; Guo M. ; Kishi S. ; Yang X. L. 
Nat. Commun. 
2012 , 3 , 681 .22353712 
Kim D. M. ; Zheng H. ; Huang Y. J. ; Montelione G. T. ; Hunt J. F. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 2999 –3010 .23167435 
Wowor A. J. ; Yan Y. ; Auclair S. M. ; Yu D. ; Zhang J. ; May E. R. ; Gross M. L. ; Kendall D. A. ; Cole J. L. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2014 , 53 , 3248 –3260 .
White M. A. ; Li S. ; Tsalkova T. ; Mei F. C. ; Liu T. ; Woods V. L. Jr.; Cheng X. 
PLoS One 
2012 , 7 , e49932.23189173 
Balchin D. ; Stoychev S. H. ; Dirr H. W. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2013 , 52 , 9394 –9402 .
Kim M. S. ; Jeong J. ; Shin D. H. ; Lee K. J. 
Acta Crystallogr.,
Sect.
D: Biol. Crystallogr. 
2013 , 69 , 669 –680 .23519676 
Mitra G. ; Muralidharan M. ; Narayanan S. ; Pinto J. ; Srinivasan K. ; Mandal A. K. 
Bioconjugate Chem. 
2012 , 23 , 2344 –2353 .
Sowole M. A. ; Konermann L. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 997 –1005 .23666601 
Weinreb P. H. ; Li S. ; Gao S. X. ; Liu T. ; Pepinsky R. B. ; Caravella J. A. ; Lee J. H. ; Woods V. L. Jr.
J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 32897 –32912 .22847004 
Li X. ; Khan M. F. ; Schriemer D. C. ; Fliegel L. 
J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 
2013 , 61 , 153 –163 .23602949 
Li J. ; Fitzpatrick P. F. 
Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 
2013 , 535 , 115 –119 .23537590 
Yu Z. H. ; Zhang R. Y. ; Walls C. D. ; Chen L. ; Zhang S. ; Wu L. ; Liu S. ; Zhang Z. Y. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2014 , 53 , 4136 –4151 .
Lee Y. ; Villar M. T. ; Artigues A. ; Beamer L. J. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2014 , 289 , 4674 –4682 .24403075 
Joseph R. E. ; Kleino I. ; Wales T. E. ; Xie Q. ; Fulton D. B. ; Engen J. R. ; Berg L. J. ; Andreotti A. H. 
Sci. Signaling 
2013 , 6 , ra76 .
Panjarian S. ; Iacob R. E. ; Chen S. ; Wales T. E. ; Engen J. R. ; Smithgall T. E. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 6116 –6129 .23303187 
Sours K. M. ; Xiao Y. ; Ahn N. G. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2014 , 426 , 1925 –1935 .24534729 
Shan Y. ; Eastwood M. P. ; Zhang X. ; Kim E. T. ; Arkhipov A. ; Dror R. O. ; Jumper J. ; Kuriyan J. ; Shaw D. E. 
Cell 
2012 , 149 , 860 –870 .22579287 
West G. M. ; Pascal B. D. ; Ng L. M. ; Soon F. F. ; Melcher K. ; Xu H. E. ; Chalmers M. J. ; Griffin P. R. 
Structure 
2013 , 21 , 229 –235 .23290725 
Beckett D.  Hydrogen-deuterium
exchange study of an allosteric
energy cycle . In Methods in Molecular Biology ; Springer : New York , 2012 ; Vol. 796 , pp 261 –278 .22052495 
Moorthy B. S. ; Anand G. S. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2012 , 417 , 468 –487 .22326871 
Winkler A. ; Udvarhelyi A. ; Hartmann E. ; Reinstein J. ; Menzel A. ; Shoeman R. L. ; Schlichting I. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2014 , 426 , 853 –868 .24291457 
Snijder J. ; Benevento M. ; Moyer C. L. ; Reddy V. ; Nemerow G. R. ; Heck A. J. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2014 , 426 , 1971 –1979 .24613303 
Veesler D. ; Khayat R. ; Krishnamurthy S. ; Snijder J. ; Huang R. K. ; Heck A. J. ; Anand G. S. ; Johnson J. E. 
Structure 
2014 , 22 , 230 –237 .24361271 
Silva L. P. ; Vanzile M. ; Bavari S. ; Aman J. M. ; Schriemer D. C. 
PLoS One 
2012 , 7 , e39978.22792204 
Bale S. ; Dias J. M. ; Fusco M. L. ; Hashiguchi T. ; Wong A. C. ; Liu T. ; Keuhne A. I. ; Li S. ; Woods V. L. Jr.; Chandran K. ; Dye J. M. ; Saphire E. O. 
Viruses 
2012 , 4 , 447 –470 .22590681 
Olal D. ; Dick A. ; Woods V. L. Jr.; Liu T. ; Li S. ; Devignot S. ; Weber F. ; Saphire E. O. ; Daumke O. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , 6025 –6037 .24688060 
Bereszczak J. Z. ; Watts N. R. ; Wingfield P. T. ; Steven A. C. ; Heck A. J. 
Protein Sci. 
2014 , 10.1002/pro.2470 .
Bereszczak J. Z. ; Rose R. J. ; van Duijn E. ; Watts N. R. ; Wingfield P. T. ; Steven A. C. ; Heck A. J. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 6504 –6512 .23597076 
Khan A. G. ; Whidby J. ; Miller M. T. ; Scarborough H. ; Zatorski A. V. ; Cygan A. ; Price A. A. ; Yost S. A. ; Bohannon C. D. ; Jacob J. ; Grakoui A. ; Marcotrigiano J. 
Nature 
2014 , 509 , 381 –384 .24553139 
Davenport T. M. ; Guttman M. ; Guo W. ; Cleveland B. ; Kahn M. ; Hu S. L. ; Lee K. K. 
J. Virol. 
2013 , 87 , 10855 –10873 .23903848 
Guttman M. ; Garcia N. K. ; Cupo A. ; Matsui T. ; Julien J. P. ; Sanders R. W. ; Wilson I. A. ; Moore J. P. ; Lee K. K. 
Structure 
2014 , 22 , 974 –984 .24931470 
Guttman M. ; Lee K. K. 
J. Virol. 
2013 , 87 , 11462 –11475 .23966389 
Guttman M. ; Weis D. D. ; Engen J. R. ; Lee K. K. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 1906 –1912 .24018862 
Pene-Dumitrescu T. ; Shu S. T. ; Wales T. E. ; Alvarado J. J. ; Shi H. ; Narute P. ; Moroco J. A. ; Yeh J. I. ; Engen J. R. ; Smithgall T. E. 
BMC Chem. Biol. 
2012 , 12 , 1 .22420777 
Obungu V. H. ; Gelfanova V. ; Huang L. 
Methods
Mol. Biol. 
2013 , 988 , 291 –302 .23475727 
Malito E. ; Faleri A. ; Lo Surdo P. ; Veggi D. ; Maruggi G. ; Grassi E. ; Cartocci E. ; Bertoldi I. ; Genovese A. ; Santini L. ; Romagnoli G. ; Borgogni E. ; Brier S. ; Lo Passo C. ; Domina M. ; Castellino F. ; Felici F. ; van der Veen S. ; Johnson S. ; Lea S. M. ; Tang C. M. ; Pizza M. ; Savino S. ; Norais N. ; Rappuoli R. ; Bottomley M. J. ; Masignani V. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2013 , 110 , 3304 –3309 .23396847 
Pandit D. ; Tuske S. J. ; Coales S. J. ; E S.
Y. ; Liu A. ; Lee J. E. ; Morrow J. A. ; Nemeth J. F. ; Hamuro Y. 
J. Mol. Recognit. 
2012 , 25 , 114 –124 .22407975 
Faleri A. ; Santini L. ; Brier S. ; Pansegrau W. ; Lo Surdo P. ; Scarselli M. ; Buricchi F. ; Volpini G. ; Genovese A. ; van der
Veen S. ; Lea S. ; Tang C. M. ; Savino S. ; Pizza M. ; Finco O. ; Norais N. ; Masignani V. 
FASEB J. 
2014 , 28 , 1644 –1653 .24371123 
Bloem E. ; van den Biggelaar M. ; Wroblewska A. ; Voorberg J. ; Faber J. H. ; Kjalke M. ; Stennicke H. R. ; Mertens K. ; Meijer A. B. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 29670 –29679 .24009077 
Sevy A. M. ; Healey J. F. ; Deng W. ; Spiegel P. C. ; Meeks S. L. ; Li R. 
J. Thromb.
Haemostasis 
2013 , 11 , 2128 –2136 .24152306 
Willison L.
N. ; Zhang Q. ; Su M. ; Teuber S. S. ; Sathe S. K. ; Roux K. H. 
Mol. Immunol. 
2013 , 55 , 253 –263 .23498967 
Zhang Q. ; Noble K. A. ; Mao Y. ; Young N. L. ; Sathe S. K. ; Roux K. H. ; Marshall A. G. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 1016 –1025 .23681851 
Panda S. ; Zhang J. ; Yang L. ; Anand G. S. ; Ding J. L. 
Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 3675 .24419227 
Sela-Culang I. ; Benhnia M. R. E. ; Matho M. H. ; Kaever T. ; Maybeno M. ; Schlossman A. ; Nimrod G. ; Li S. ; Xiang Y. ; Zajonc D. ; Crotty S. ; Ofran Y. ; Peters B. 
Structure 
2014 , 22 , 646 –657 .24631463 
Lu Z. ; Rynkiewicz M. J. ; Madico G. ; Li S. ; Yang C. Y. ; Perkins H. M. ; Sompuram S. R. ; Kodela V. ; Liu T. ; Morris T. ; Wang D. ; Roche M. I. ; Seaton B. A. ; Sharon J. 
PLoS One 
2014 , 9 , e99847.24968190 
Tiyanont K. ; Wales T. E. ; Siebel C. W. ; Engen J. R. ; Blacklow S. C. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2013 , 425 , 3192 –3204 .23747483 
D’Arcy S. ; Martin K. W. ; Panchenko T. ; Chen X. ; Bergeron S. ; Stargell L. A. ; Black B. E. ; Luger K. 
Mol.
Cell 
2013 , 51 , 662 –677 .23973327 
Ahn J. ; Engen J. R. 
Chim. Oggi 
2013 , 31 , 25 –28 .
Smith B. C. ; Underbakke E. S. ; Kulp D. W. ; Schief W. R. ; Marletta M. A. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2013 , 110 , E3577 –3586 .24003111 
Jiang L. ; Stanevich V. ; Satyshur K. A. ; Kong M. ; Watkins G. R. ; Wadzinski B. E. ; Sengupta R. ; Xing Y. 
Nat. Commun. 
2013 , 4 , 1699 .23591866 
Macakova E. ; Kopecka M. ; Kukacka Z. ; Veisova D. ; Novak P. ; Man P. ; Obsil T. ; Obsilova V. 
Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 
2013 , 1830 , 4491 –4499 .23726992 
Chandrasekhar K. ; Wang J. ; Arjunan P. ; Sax M. ; Park Y. H. ; Nemeria N. S. ; Kumaran S. ; Song J. ; Jordan F. ; Furey W. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 15402 –15417 .23580650 
Wang J. ; Nemeria N. S. ; Chandrasekhar K. ; Kumaran S. ; Arjunan P. ; Reynolds S. ; Calero G. ; Brukh R. ; Kakalis L. ; Furey W. ; Jordan F. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2014 , 289 , 15215 –15230 .24742683 
Kumar S. ; Badireddy S. ; Pal K. ; Sharma S. ; Arora C. ; Garg S. K. ; Alam M. S. ; Agrawal P. ; Anand G. S. ; Swaminathan K. 
PLoS One 
2012 , 7 , e43676.22937074 
Singh H. ; Dai Y. ; Outten F. W. ; Busenlehner L. S. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 36189 –36200 .24196966 
Snijder J. ; Burnley R. J. ; Wiegard A. ; Melquiond A. S. ; Bonvin A. M. ; Axmann I. M. ; Heck A. J. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 
2014 , 111 , 1379 –1384 .24474762 
Ling J. M. ; Silva L. ; Schriemer D. C. ; Schryvers A. B. 
Methods Mol. Biol. 
2012 , 799 , 237 –252 .21993650 
Lampi K. J. ; Fox C. B. ; David L. L. 
Exp. Eye Res. 
2012 , 104 , 48 –58 .22982024 
Huang R. Y. ; Wen J. ; Blankenship R. E. ; Gross M. L. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2012 , 51 , 187 –193 .
MacDonald J. A. ; Ishida H. ; Butler E. I. ; Ulke-Lemee A. ; Chappellaz M. ; Tulk S. E. ; Chik J. K. ; Vogel H. J. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2012 , 51 , 2694 –2705 .
Snyder G. A. ; Deredge D. ; Waldhuber A. ; Fresquez T. ; Wilkins D. Z. ; Smith P. T. ; Durr S. ; Cirl C. ; Jiang J. ; Jennings W. ; Luchetti T. ; Snyder N. ; Sundberg E. J. ; Wintrode P. ; Miethke T. ; Xiao T. S. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2014 , 289 , 669 –679 .24275656 
Tamir S. ; Rotem-Bamberger S. ; Katz C. ; Morcos F. ; Hailey K. L. ; Zuris J. A. ; Wang C. ; Conlan A. R. ; Lipper C. H. ; Paddock M. L. ; Mittler R. ; Onuchic J. N. ; Jennings P. A. ; Friedler A. ; Nechushtai R. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2014 , 111 , 5177 –5182 .24706857 
Burke J. E. ; Williams R. L. 
Adv. Biol. Regul. 
2013 , 53 , 97 –110 .23194976 
Hawse W. F. ; Champion M. M. ; Joyce M. V. ; Hellman L. M. ; Hossain M. ; Ryan V. ; Pierce B. G. ; Weng Z. ; Baker B. M. 
J. Immunol. 
2012 , 188 , 5819 –5823 .22611242 
Hawse W. F. ; Gloor B. E. ; Ayres C. M. ; Kho K. ; Nuter E. ; Baker B. M. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 24372 –24381 .23836912 
Trelle M. B. ; Hirschberg D. ; Jansson A. ; Ploug M. ; Roepstorff P. ; Andreasen P. A. ; Jorgensen T. J. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2012 , 51 , 8256 –8266 .
Malovichko M. V. ; Sabo T. M. ; Maurer M. C. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 8667 –8678 .23378535 
Choi S. H. ; Wales T. E. ; Nam Y. ; O’Donovan D. J. ; Sliz P. ; Engen J. R. ; Blacklow S. C. 
Structure 
2012 , 20 , 340 –349 .22325781 
Winkler A. ; Heintz U. ; Lindner R. ; Reinstein J. ; Shoeman R. L. ; Schlichting I. 
Nat. Struct. Mol.
Biol. 
2013 , 20 , 859 –867 .23728293 
Goswami D. ; Callaway C. ; Pascal B. D. ; Kumar R. ; Edwards D. P. ; Griffin P. R. 
Structure 
2014 , 22 , 961 –973 .24909783 
Li Z. ; Huang R. Y. ; Yopp D. C. ; Hileman T. H. ; Santangelo T. J. ; Hurwitz J. ; Hudgens J. W. ; Kelman Z. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , 5776 –5789 .24728986 
Roberts V. A. ; Pique M. E. ; Hsu S. ; Li S. ; Slupphaug G. ; Rambo R. P. ; Jamison J. W. ; Liu T. ; Lee J. H. ; Tainer J. A. ; Ten Eyck L. F. ; Woods V. L. Jr.
Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2012 , 40 , 6070 –6081 .22492624 
Trelle M.
B. ; Dupont D. M. ; Madsen J. B. ; Andreasen P. A. ; Jorgensen T. J. 
ACS Chem. Biol. 
2014 , 9 , 174 –182 .24138169 
Landgraf R. R. ; Goswami D. ; Rajamohan F. ; Harris M. S. ; Calabrese M. F. ; Hoth L. R. ; Magyar R. ; Pascal B. D. ; Chalmers M. J. ; Busby S. A. ; Kurumbail R. G. ; Griffin P. R. 
Structure 
2013 , 21 , 1942 –1953 .24076403 
Chalmers M. J. ; Wang Y. ; Novick S. ; Sato M. ; Bryant H. U. ; Montrose-Rafizdeh C. ; Griffin P. R. ; Dodge J. A. 
ACS Med. Chem.
Lett. 
2012 , 3 , 207 –210 .22582136 
Carson M.
W. ; Zhang J. ; Chalmers M. J. ; Bocchinfuso W. P. ; Holifield K. D. ; Masquelin T. ; Stites R. E. ; Stayrook K. R. ; Griffin P. R. ; Dodge J. A. 
Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2014 , 10.1016/j.bmcl.2014.05.070 .
Mizwicki M. T. ; Menegaz D. ; Zhang J. ; Barrientos-Duran A. ; Tse S. ; Cashman J. R. ; Griffin P. R. ; Fiala M. 
J.
Alzheimer's Dis. 
2012 , 29 , 51 –62 .22207005 
Hughes T. S. ; Giri P. K. ; de Vera I. M. ; Marciano D. P. ; Kuruvilla D. S. ; Shin Y. ; Blayo A. L. ; Kamenecka T. M. ; Burris T. P. ; Griffin P. R. ; Kojetin D. J. 
Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 3571 .24705063 
Boerma L. J. ; Xia G. ; Qui C. ; Cox B. D. ; Chalmers M. J. ; Smith C. D. ; Lobo-Ruppert S. ; Griffin P. R. ; Muccio D. D. ; Renfrow M. B. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2014 , 289 , 814 –826 .24187139 
Nambi S. ; Badireddy S. ; Visweswariah S. S. ; Anand G. S. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 18115 –18129 .22447926 
Krishnamurthy S. ; Moorthy B. S. ; Liqin L. ; Anand G. S. 
Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 
2013 , 1834 , 1215 –1221 .23501673 
Underbakke E. S. ; Iavarone A. T. ; Chalmers M. J. ; Pascal B. D. ; Novick S. ; Griffin P. R. ; Marletta M. A. 
Structure 
2014 , 22 , 602 –611 .24560804 
Sowole M.
A. ; Konermann L. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 6715 –6722 .24904985 
Kang Y. ; Terrier P. ; Ding C. ; Douglas D. J. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 57 –67 .22006406 
Huang R.
Y. ; Hudgens J. W. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2013 , 52 , 7127 –7136 .
Hernychova L. ; Man P. ; Verma C. ; Nicholson J. ; Sharma C. A. ; Ruckova E. ; Teo J. Y. ; Ball K. ; Vojtesek B. ; Hupp T. R. 
Proteomics 
2013 , 13 , 2512 –2525 .23776060 
Brier S. ; Fagnocchi L. ; Donnarumma D. ; Scarselli M. ; Rappuoli R. ; Nissum M. ; Delany I. ; Norais N. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2012 , 51 , 6738 –6752 .
Ghose S. ; Hilmer J. K. ; Bothner B. ; Broderick J. B. 
FEBS Lett. 
2014 , 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.06.011 .
Xiao H. ; Wang H. ; Zhang X. ; Tu Z. ; Bulinski C. ; Khrapunovich-Baine M. ; Hogue Angeletti R. ; Horwitz S. B. 
ACS Chem. Biol. 
2012 , 7 , 744 –752 .22270553 
Yu W. ; Chory E. J. ; Wernimont A. K. ; Tempel W. ; Scopton A. ; Federation A. ; Marineau J. J. ; Qi J. ; Barsyte-Lovejoy D. ; Yi J. ; Marcellus R. ; Iacob R. E. ; Engen J. R. ; Griffin C. ; Aman A. ; Wienholds E. ; Li F. ; Pineda J. ; Estiu G. ; Shatseva T. ; Hajian T. ; Al-Awar R. ; Dick J. E. ; Vedadi M. ; Brown P. J. ; Arrowsmith C. H. ; Bradner J. E. ; Schapira M. 
Nat. Commun. 
2012 , 3 , 1288 .23250418 
Zhang J. ; Luo M. ; Marasco D. ; Logsdon D. ; LaFavers K. A. ; Chen Q. ; Reed A. ; Kelley M. R. ; Gross M. L. ; Georgiadis M. M. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2013 , 52 , 2955 –2966 .
Kim D. G. ; Lee J. Y. ; Kwon N. H. ; Fang P. ; Zhang Q. ; Wang J. ; Young N. L. ; Guo M. ; Cho H. Y. ; Mushtaq A. U. ; Jeon Y. H. ; Choi J. W. ; Han J. M. ; Kang H. W. ; Joo J. E. ; Hur Y. ; Kang W. ; Yang H. ; Nam D. H. ; Lee M. S. ; Lee J. W. ; Kim E. S. ; Moon A. ; Kim K. ; Kim D. ; Kang E. J. ; Moon Y. ; Rhee K. H. ; Han B. W. ; Yang J. S. ; Han G. ; Yang W. S. ; Lee C. ; Wang M. W. ; Kim S. 
Nat. Chem. Biol. 
2014 , 10 , 29 –34 .24212136 
Liang Q. ; Dexheimer T. S. ; Zhang P. ; Rosenthal A. S. ; Villamil M. A. ; You C. ; Zhang Q. ; Chen J. ; Ott C. A. ; Sun H. ; Luci D. K. ; Yuan B. ; Simeonov A. ; Jadhav A. ; Xiao H. ; Wang Y. ; Maloney D. J. ; Zhuang Z. 
Nat. Chem. Biol. 
2014 , 10 , 298 –304 .24531842 
Zhang N. ; Du Y. ; Cui M. ; Xing J. ; Liu Z. ; Liu S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 6206 –6212 .22746312 
Dong J. ; Callahan K. L. ; Borotto N. B. ; Vachet R. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 766 –773 .24313328 
Asuru A.
P. ; An M. ; Busenlehner L. S. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2012 , 51 , 7116 –7127 .
Sowole M. A. ; Alexopoulos J. A. ; Cheng Y. Q. ; Ortega J. ; Konermann L. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2013 , 425 , 4508 –4519 .23948506 
Walsh G. 
Nat.
Biotechnol. 
2014 , 32 , 992 –1000 .25299917 
Houde D. ; Engen J. R. 
Methods Mol. Biol. 
2013 , 988 , 269 –289 .23475726 
Rose R. J. ; van Berkel P. H. ; van den Bremer E. T. ; Labrijn A. F. ; Vink T. ; Schuurman J. ; Heck A. J. ; Parren P. W. 
MAbs 
2013 , 5 , 219 –228 .23406897 
Tang L. ; Sundaram S. ; Zhang J. ; Carlson P. ; Matathia A. ; Parekh B. ; Zhou Q. ; Hsieh M. C. 
MAbs 
2013 , 5 , 114 –125 .23222183 
Zhang A. ; Hu P. ; MacGregor P. ; Xue Y. ; Fan H. ; Suchecki P. ; Olszewski L. ; Liu A. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 3468 –3475 .24597564 
Pan L. Y. ; Salas-Solano O. ; Valliere-Douglass J. F. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 2657 –2664 .24512515 
Visser J. ; Feuerstein I. ; Stangler T. ; Schmiederer T. ; Fritsch C. ; Schiestl M. 
BioDrugs 
2013 , 27 , 495 –507 .23649935 
Zhang A. ; Singh S. K. ; Shirts M. R. ; Kumar S. ; Fernandez E. J. 
Pharm. Res. 
2012 , 29 , 236 –250 .21805212 
Iacob R. E. ; Bou-Assaf G. M. ; Makowski L. ; Engen J. R. ; Berkowitz S. A. ; Houde D. 
J.
Pharm. Sci. 
2013 , 102 , 4315 –4329 .24136070 
Manikwar P. ; Majumdar R. ; Hickey J. M. ; Thakkar S. V. ; Samra H. S. ; Sathish H. A. ; Bishop S. M. ; Middaugh C. R. ; Weis D. D. ; Volkin D. B. 
J. Pharm. Sci. 
2013 , 102 , 2136 –2151 .23620222 
Houde D. ; Berkowitz S. A. 
J. Pharm. Sci. 
2012 , 101 , 1688 –1700 .22271461 
Nakazawa S. ; Hashii N. ; Harazono A. ; Kawasaki N. 
Anal. Biochem. 
2012 , 420 , 61 –67 .21951784 
Nakazawa S. ; Ahn J. ; Hashii N. ; Hirose K. ; Kawasaki N. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
2013 , 1834 , 1210 –1214 .23220415 
Ji C. ; Wei G. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 27 , 2625 –2630 .24591023 
Tang L. ; Coales S. J. ; Morrow J. A. ; Edmunds T. ; Hamuro Y. 
ChemBioChem 
2012 , 13 , 2243 –2250 .22961873 
Wei H. ; Ahn J. ; Yu Y. Q. ; Tymiak A. ; Engen J. R. ; Chen G. 
J.
Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 498 –504 .22227798 
Shi X. E. ; Wales T. E. ; Elkin C. ; Kawahata N. ; Engen J. R. ; Annis D. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 11185 –11188 .24215480 
Sophocleous A. M. ; Zhang J. ; Topp E. M. 
Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2012 , 9 , 718 –726 .
Burke J. E. ; Perisic O. ; Masson G. R. ; Vadas O. ; Williams R. L. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 15259 –15264 .22949682 
Walser R. ; Burke J. E. ; Gogvadze E. ; Bohnacker T. ; Zhang X. ; Hess D. ; Kuenzi P. ; Leitges M. ; Hirsch E. ; Williams R. L. ; Laffargue M. ; Wymann M. P. 
PLoS Biol. 
2013 , 11 , e1001587.23824069 
Chetty P.
S. ; Mayne L. ; Kan Z. Y. ; Lund-Katz S. ; Englander S. W. ; Phillips M. C. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 11687 –11692 .22745166 
Chetty P. S. ; Ohshiro M. ; Saito H. ; Dhanasekaran P. ; Lund-Katz S. ; Mayne L. ; Englander W. ; Phillips M. C. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2012 , 51 , 8993 –9001 .
Chetty P. S. ; Nguyen D. ; Nickel M. ; Lund-Katz S. ; Mayne L. ; Englander S. W. ; Phillips M. C. 
J. Lipid Res. 
2013 , 54 , 1589 –1597 .23580759 
Gogonea V. ; Gerstenecker G. S. ; Wu Z. ; Lee X. ; Topbas C. ; Wagner M. A. ; Tallant T. C. ; Smith J. D. ; Callow P. ; Pipich V. ; Malet H. ; Schoehn G. ; DiDonato J. A. ; Hazen S. L. 
J. Lipid Res. 
2013 , 54 , 966 –983 .23349207 
Gauthamadasa K. ; Vaitinadin N. S. ; Dressman J. L. ; Macha S. ; Homan R. ; Greis K. D. ; Silva R. A. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 7615 –7625 .22235130 
Cao J. ; Hsu Y. H. ; Li S. ; Woods V. L. Jr.; Dennis E. A. 
J. Lipid Res. 
2013 , 54 , 127 –133 .23089916 
Bucher D. ; Hsu Y. H. ; Mouchlis V. D. ; Dennis E. A. ; McCammon J. A. 
PLoS Comput. Biol. 
2013 , 9 , e1003156.23935474 
Hsu Y. H. ; Bucher D. ; Cao J. ; Li S. ; Yang S. W. ; Kokotos G. ; Woods V. L. Jr.; McCammon J. A. ; Dennis E. A. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 1330 –1337 .23256506 
Karageorgos I. ; Wales T. E. ; Janero D. R. ; Zvonok N. ; Vemuri V. K. ; Engen J. R. ; Makriyannis A. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2013 , 52 , 5016 –5026 .
Nasr M. L. ; Shi X. ; Bowman A. L. ; Johnson M. ; Zvonok N. ; Janero D. R. ; Vemuri V. K. ; Wales T. E. ; Engen J. R. ; Makriyannis A. 
Protein Sci. 
2013 , 22 , 774 –787 .23553709 
Huang H. K. ; Taneva S. G. ; Lee J. ; Silva L. P. ; Schriemer D. C. ; Cornell R. B. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2013 , 425 , 1546 –1564 .23238251 
Koshy S. S. ; Eyles S. J. ; Weis R. M. ; Thompson L. K. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2013 , 52 , 8833 –8842 .
Lee S. J. ; Lee J. W. ; Choi T. S. ; Jin K. S. ; Lee S. ; Ban C. ; Kim H. I. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 1909 –1916 .24383916 
Mehmood S. ; Domene C. ; Forest E. ; Jault J. M. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 10832 –10836 .22711831 
Rey M. ; Forest E. ; Pelosi L. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2012 , 51 , 9727 –9735 .
Pan Y. ; Piyadasa H. ; O’Neil J. D. ; Konermann L. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2012 , 416 , 400 –413 .22227391 
Khanal A. ; Pan Y. ; Brown L. S. ; Konermann L. 
J. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 47 , 1620 –1626 .23280751 
Parker C. H. ; Morgan C. R. ; Rand K. D. ; Engen J. R. ; Jorgenson J. W. ; Stafford D. W. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2014 , 53 , 1511 –1520 .
Ahn J. ; Cao M. J. ; Yu Y. Q. ; Engen J. R. 
Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 
2013 , 1834 , 1222 –1229 .23063535 
Ahn J. ; Jung M. C. ; Wyndham K. ; Yu Y. Q. ; Engen J. R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 7256 –7262 .22856522 
Rey M. ; Yang M. ; Burns K. M. ; Yu Y. ; Lees-Miller S. P. ; Schriemer D. C. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2013 , 12 , 464 –472 .23197791 
Kraj A. ; Brouwer H. J. ; Reinhoud N. ; Chervet J. P. 
Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 
2013 , 405 , 9311 –9320 .24077854 
Mysling S. ; Salbo R. ; Ploug M. ; Jorgensen T. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 340 –345 .24251601 
Jensen P.
F. ; Jorgensen T. J. ; Koefoed K. ; Nygaard F. ; Sen J. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 7052 –7059 .23534402 
Lemaire P. ; Debois D. ; Smargiasso N. ; Quinton L. ; Gabelica V. ; De Pauw E. A. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 27 , 1837 –1846 .23857929 
Walters B. T. ; Ricciuti A. ; Mayne L. ; Englander S. W. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 2132 –2139 .22965280 
Keppel T.
R. ; Weis D. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 5161 –5168 .23586525 
Amon S. ; Trelle M. B. ; Jensen O. N. ; Jorgensen T. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 4467 –4473 .22536891 
Venable J.
D. ; Okach L. ; Agarwalla S. ; Brock A. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 9601 –9608 .23025328 
Abzalimov R. R. ; Bobst C. E. ; Kaltashov I. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 9173 –9180 .23978257 
Bobst C.
E. ; Kaltashov I. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 5225 –5231 .24820935 
Yu H. D. ; Ahn S. ; Kim B. 
Bull. Korean Chem.
Soc. 
2013 , 34 , 1401 –1406 .
Wang G. ; Abzalimov R. R. ; Bobst C. E. ; Kaltashov I. A. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2013 , 110 , 20087 –20092 .24277803 
Rand K. D. ; Pringle S. D. ; Morris M. ; Brown J. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 1931 –1940 .22235835 
Pan J. ; Borchers C. H. 
Proteomics 
2013 , 13 , 974 –981 .23319428 
Landgraf R. R. ; Chalmers M. J. ; Griffin P. R. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 301 –309 .22131230 
Rob T. ; Gill P. K. ; Golemi-Kotra D. ; Wilson D. J. 
Lab Chip 
2013 , 13 , 2528 –2532 .23426018 
Rob T. ; Liuni P. ; Gill P. K. ; Zhu S. L. ; Balachandran N. ; Berti P. J. ; Wilson D. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 3771 –3779 .22458633 
Gospodarek A. M. ; Hiser D. E. ; O’Connell J. P. ; Fernandez E. J. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
2014 , 10.1016/j.chroma.2014.06.024 .
Majumdar R. ; Manikwar P. ; Hickey J. M. ; Arora J. ; Middaugh C. R. ; Volkin D. B. ; Weis D. D. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 2140 –2148 .22993047 
Sheff J.
G. ; Rey M. ; Schriemer D. C. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 1006 –1015 .23649779 
Valeja S.
G. ; Emmett M. R. ; Marshall A. G. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 699 –707 .22298288 
Burns K. M. ; Rey M. ; Baker C. A. ; Schriemer D. C. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2013 , 12 , 539 –548 .23197788 
Liu Q. ; Easterling M. L. ; Agar J. N. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 820 –825 .24328359 
Lindner R. ; Lou X. ; Reinstein J. ; Shoeman R. L. ; Hamprecht F. A. ; Winkler A. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 1018 –1028 .24676893 
Miller D. E. ; Prasannan C. B. ; Villar M. T. ; Fenton A. W. ; Artigues A. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 425 –429 .22083588 
Pascal B. D. ; Willis S. ; Lauer J. L. ; Landgraf R. R. ; West G. M. ; Marciano D. ; Novick S. ; Goswami D. ; Chalmers M. J. ; Griffin P. R. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 1512 –1521 .22692830 
Zhang Z. ; Zhang A. ; Xiao G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 4942 –4949 .22571272 
Zhang J. ; Ramachandran P. ; Kumar R. ; Gross M. L. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 450 –453 .23397137 
Wales T.
E. ; Eggertson M. J. ; Engen J. R. 
Methods Mol. Biol. 
2013 , 1007 , 263 –288 .23666730 
Fajer P. G. ; Bou-Assaf G. M. ; Marshall A. G. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 1202 –1208 .22528203 
Kan Z. Y. ; Walters B. T. ; Mayne L. ; Englander S. W. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2013 , 110 , 16438 –16443 .24019478 
Liu T. ; Pantazatos D. ; Li S. ; Hamuro Y. ; Hilser V. J. ; Woods V. L. Jr.
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 43 –56 .22012689 
Lobanov M. Y. ; Suvorina M. Y. ; Dovidchenko N. V. ; Sokolovskiy I. V. ; Surin A. K. ; Galzitskaya O. V. 
Bioinformatics 
2013 , 29 , 1375 –1381 .23620358 
Venable J. D. ; Scuba W. ; Brock A. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 642 –645 .23430702 
Bobst C.
E. ; Kaltashov I. A. 
Methods Mol. Biol. 
2012 , 896 , 375 –385 .22821538 
Hayashi N. ; Kuyama H. ; Nakajima C. ; Kawahara K. ; Miyagi M. ; Nishimura O. ; Matsuo H. ; Nakazawa T. 
Biochemistry (U.S.A.) 
2014 , 53 , 1818 –1826 .
Rozbesky D. ; Man P. ; Kavan D. ; Chmelik J. ; Cerny J. ; Bezouska K. ; Novak P. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 867 –870 .22196380 
Singh H. ; Busenlehner L. S. 
Methods Mol. Biol. 
2014 , 1084 , 81 –99 .24061917 
Suvorina M. Y. ; Surin A. K. ; Dovidchenko N. V. ; Lobanov M. Y. ; Galzitskaya O. V. 
Biochemistry (Moscow) 
2012 , 77 , 616 –623 .22817461 
Tran D. T. ; Banerjee S. ; Alayash A. I. ; Crumbliss A. L. ; Fitzgerald M. C. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 1653 –1660 .22185579 
Vadas O. ; Dbouk H. A. ; Shymanets A. ; Perisic O. ; Burke J. E. ; Abi Saab W. F. ; Khalil B. D. ; Harteneck C. ; Bresnick A. R. ; Nurnberg B. ; Backer J. M. ; Williams R. L. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2013 , 110 , 18862 –18867 .24190998
