
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac402748jArticleContact-Free Scanning and Imaging with the Scanning
Ion Conductance Microscope Del Linz Samantha ⊥†Willman Eero §∥Caldwell Matthew ⊥†∥Klenerman David ‡Fernández Anibal §Moss Guy *⊥†⊥ Department
of Neuroscience, Physiology and Pharmacology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E
6BT, United Kingdom† Centre
for Mathematics and Physics in the Life Sciences and Experimental
Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, United
Kingdom§ Department
of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University College London, Torrington Place, London WC1E 7JE, United Kingdom‡ Department
of Chemistry, Cambridge University, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, United
Kingdom* E-mail: g.moss@ucl.ac.uk.12 02 2014 04 03 2014 86 5 2353 2360 29 08 2013 23 01 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyTerms of Use CC-BY

Scanning ion conductance microscopy
(SICM) offers the ability to
obtain very high-resolution topographical images of living cells.
One of the great advantages of SICM lies in its ability to perform
contact-free scanning. However, it is not yet clear when the requirements
for this scan mode are met. We have used finite element modeling (FEM)
to examine the conditions for contact-free scanning. Our findings
provide a framework for understanding the contact-free mode of SICM
and also extend previous findings with regard to SICM resolution.
Finally, we demonstrate the importance of our findings for accurate
biological imaging.

document-id-old-9ac402748jdocument-id-new-14ac-2013-02748jccc-price
==== Body
Scanning ion conductance microscopy
(SICM) can provide very high-resolution topographical imaging without
contacting the sample, a major advantage for biological imaging.1,2 However, the precise requirements for contact-free scanning are
currently unknown. Here, we address this issue using 3D finite element
modeling (FEM). We show that FEM predictions agree closely with both
theoretical calculations (in analytically tractable situations) and
experimental measurements. Our results shed light on the conditions
that are required to maintain contact-free scanning and extend previous
work on SICM image formation and microscope resolution. Finally, by
scanning red cells, we demonstrate the practical importance of these
findings for accurate biological imaging.

Materials and Methods
Scanning
Ion Conductance Microscopy
SICM experiments
were performed using an Ionscope scanning ion conductance microscope
(Ionscope Ltd., Melbourn, U.K.), mounted on top of a Nikon TE2000
optical microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan). Pipettes were pulled from
borosilicate capillaries of 1.0 mm outside diameter (o.d.) ×
0.50 mm inside diameter (i.d.) (Sutter Instrument, Novato, CA) using
a P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instrument). For measuring the approach
to a flat surface and for the profile across a square step, probe
total resistances (series + access; Rs + Ra) were 29 and 30 MΩ, respectively,
whereas for the topographical imaging of erythrocytes, the probe resistance
was 125 MΩ. All pipettes were filled with saline solution (140
mM NaCl, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.2 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM CaCl2, 5 mM HEPES, 11 mM d-glucose, titrated to pH 7.4 with NaOH,
(all reagents purchased from VWR International, Leicestershire, U.K.)),
which also contained 20 μM Alexa Fluor 568 (Life Technologies,
Paisley, U.K.) for measuring the approach to a flat surface and for
the profile across a square step. The same saline solution (without
fluorescent dye) was used in the bath for all the experiments. Scans
were recorded using an applied potential in the range of 20–200
mV. Data were acquired in hopping mode using a range of set points
from 0.3 to 1.0%. Optical images of pipettes were obtained using a
Nikon 60×/0.85 NA objective and an Andor iXon3 888 EMCCD camera
(Andor Technology, Belfast, U.K.). To examine the scan profile across
a square step, PDMS casts of an AFM target (HS-500MG, BudgetSensors,
Innovative Solutions Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria) were used. To examine
changes in red cell images following changes in the scan set point,
a small drop (∼ 50 μL) of blood was obtained by pin prick
and diluted in 3 mL of saline solution. The erythrocytes were adhered
to uncoated grade 0 glass coverslips (VWR) by incubating this solution
for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were then washed three times
in saline solution before SICM imaging. Scan images were rendered
and analyzed using “Ionview”, in-house software written
for Mac OS X and available at http://walkytalky.net/ionview/.

Modeling Approach
Solutions for the electric potential
distribution over the entire three-dimensional geometry were sought
using a variational approach implemented by the finite element method.
The current density was then found from the potential distribution.

The finite element method requires that the volume be divided into
a mesh of small elements. For this, we used the commercial mesh generation
program GiD (http://gid.cimne.upc.es/) driven by a batch
file created in MATLAB (The MathWorks, Natick, MA). Unstructured meshes
of tetrahedral elements were generated, with elements of variable
size. Fine meshing was used in regions such as that around the pipet
tip, where rapid changes in potential can occur. Mesh size was varied
to confirm that the solutions were not mesh-dependent. For example,
the maximum spacing of mesh elements in the finer regions was varied
between 0.01–0.2 units with no observed change in solution.
The simulation volume was also varied to ensure that solutions in
larger volumes were, again, identical within expected error margins.
Units of distance were expressed in multiples of the pipet inner radius
(ri) such that results were independent
of an assumed pipet size.

The potential distribution φ
was found by seeking a stationary
solution to the following variational functional J, a quantity proportional to the stored electric energy and derived
from the Laplace equation: 1  where dV is the differential volume
, and
ε is the permittivity. The finite element program and the visualization
program were adapted from in-house software designed for liquid crystal
modeling in the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering,
UCL, London, U.K. (http://www.ee.ucl.ac.uk/LCmodelling).

The wire electrode inside the pipet was simulated as a disc positioned
at a fixed distance from the pipet mouth where a Dirichlet boundary
condition was imposed (i.e., a fixed potential φ = φo was assigned to it). The ground electrode was simulated as
a ring around the perimeter of the simulation volume to allow a smaller
total simulation volume to be used and to avoid biasing any particular
direction. The ground electrode was given the fixed potential of 0.
The walls of the pipet were treated as a dielectric with the permittivity
of borosilicate glass of (4.7 ε0, where ε0 is the permittivity of free space). The inside of the pipet
and the bath were treated as a conducting solution of conductivity
1.25 Ω–1 m–1 (calculated
as the inverse of the resistivity of Ringer’s solution3 of 80 Ω·cm, or occasionally of conductivity
1.56 Ω–1 m–1 (for comparison
with experimental data obtained using a solution of resistivity 64
Ω·cm). At the dielectric-liquid boundaries, the rate of
change of φ with respect to the surface normal n, ∂φ/∂n, was allowed to be discontinuous, setting
it to zero on the liquid side and leaving it free on the dielectric
side to satisfy the correct boundary condition for the current.

The current density J⃗ flowing through
the pipet was then calculated from the electric potential as: J⃗ = σ∇φ where σ is the
electric conductivity of the solution. The total current arriving
at a surface was then found as the integral of the normal component
of the current density. In our calculations, we only include the tip
of the pipet in the simulation volume and not its entire length, so
the pipet series resistance (Rs) was adjusted
to compensate for the truncated pipet length used, and the current
was rescaled based on this new resistance.

Except where noted,
our simulations employed a half-cone angle
of 3° (Figure 1B), an angle consistent
with estimates for SICM pipettes made by Ying et al. using electron
microscopy.4 Further, most simulations
were restricted to capillary glass o.d./i.d. ratios that represent commercially
available capillaries likely
to be used in SICM experiments (i.e., ratios of ∼1.28 to 2.0).
We assumed these ratios were unchanged during probe manufacture.5 The major exception to this was in simulations
to examine the probe access resistance, where o.d./i.d. ratios of
1.1–15 were simulated.

Figure 1 SICM simulations
agree with theory and experiment. (A) Schematic
showing the principle of SICM imaging. (B) Important SICM parameters
are the probe tip’s inner and outer radii, ri and ro, and the half-cone
angle θ. The inner radius at the wide end, r1, is ≫ ri and can
be neglected in many calculations. (C) Schematic of series resistance Rs and access resistance Ra. (D) The potential drop inside the probe calculated by FEM
(solid markers) and analytically (solid lines). (E) FEM calculations
of access resistance (solid markers) and the value predicted analytically
for a circular pore in an infinite plane (dotted line9). (F) Approach curve simulations for half-cone angles of
3° (black line) and 9° (gray line), both with i.d./o.d.
ratio of 0.58. (G) Approach curve simulations for glass i.d./o.d.
ratios of 0.78 (black line) and 0.5 (gray line), both with half-cone
angle of 1.8°. (H) Image of the pipet used to measure approach
curves. Tip radius was determined from the half-cone angle using eq 5. (I) Experimental data (open circles, average of
67 approach curves) and predicted approach curve (solid line) from
simulated data (solid circles). The x-axis was rescaled
in units of ri (measured as 166 nm).

All approach curve simulations
were carried out by first calculating
the electric potential at fixed probe positions and then calculating
the current flow at each of these positions. SICM does not operate
by measuring current at fixed positions but instead uses a fixed current
reduction (the set point current) to estimate the specimen height
(Figure 1A). Therefore, in order to extract
height predictions from the discrete simulated approach curves, the
data were fitted to a continuous function (Figure S-1 in the Supporting
Information) of the following form: 2  Where I is the normalized
pipet current (i.e., normalized to the current flow when the pipet
is far from the surface), A1 to A5 are constants, and z is the
height of the probe above the surface. We found empirically that for
most surface geometries a curve of this form is able to fit the data
without showing any systematic deviation in the residuals. Indeed
in simple cases, for example the approach to a flat surface, the term
containing A4 and A5 was not needed and was set to zero. However, in a very few
cases, complex surface geometries produced fits that showed systematic
deviations, even when all terms were allowed to vary and thus could
not be relied upon for set point calculations. For these approach
curves, we changed our procedure to fit this function only to a fraction
of the full approach curve data such that the remaining residuals
again showed no trend. These fits to the first part of the approach
curve data were always sufficient to extract the requisite height
at the set points analyzed, without extrapolation.

Results
FEM Accurately
Predicts Series Resistance, Access Resistance,
and the Approach Curve to a Flat Surface
SICM probe sensitivity
to the sample surface is determined by the ratio of probe series resistance
(the resistance to ion flow inside the probe capillary) to probe access
resistance (the resistance along all the convergent paths from the
bulk medium to the mouth of the pipet)6 (Figure 1C). We therefore began by testing
our FEM calculations for these key resistances in a simple situation,
where the probe does not interact with a surface. In this condition,
both access resistance and series resistance can be calculated analytically.
Series resistance causes a drop of potential along the shaft of the
probe which is easily calculated4,7,8 (Figure S-2) as: 3  where φ(z) is the potential
at vertical position z (between the tip and wire
electrode), φo is the potential of the wire electrode
inside the probe, Rs is the series resistance
of the entire probe between the internal wire and tip, Ra is the probe access resistance, and R(z) is the resistance of the pipet from the tip
to position z (Figure S-2). R(z) is given by: 4  where ρ is the resistivity
of the solution
filling the probe, ri is the inner radius
at the probe tip, and θ is the pipet half-cone angle. For this
resistance, FEM simulations agree nearly perfectly with the analytical
solution (Figure 1D). We next examined probe
access resistance. Access resistance will vary with the glass o.d./i.d.
ratio. We therefore calculated this resistance over a range of capillary
dimensions (Figure 1E). We found that in open
solution, the access resistance varies by only ∼10% over o.d./i.d.
glass ratios that are likely to be of interest to experimenters (ratios
of ∼1.28–2.0). Furthermore, the value of access resistance
plateaus beyond glass o.d./i.d. values of ∼5 and can be compared
to the analytical value calculated for a small circular pore in an
infinite plane9 (Figure 1E, dotted line). Agreement between our simulations and the
analytical solution is excellent.

Approach Curve to a Flat
Surface
Series and access
resistance both affect the SICM approach curve to a flat surface (Figure 1F,G). Thus, as a further test of our FEM work, we
simulated this type of approach curve and compared our results to
those obtained experimentally. For experiments, we determined the
pipet half-cone angle and inner radius by using comparatively large
diameter pipettes filled with fluorescent dye so that they could be
imaged optically (Figure 1I, inset). We also
measured the resistivity of our pipet solution and the combined access
resistance and pipet resistance when the pipet was far from the surface.
Using Hall’s solution to approximate access resistance9 and simplifying eq 4 at
large z, the inner pipet radius can be calculated
using the half-cone angle, solution resistivity, and combined resistance
(Supporting Material) as: 5  

The comparison of experimentally measured
and simulated approach curves to a flat surface is shown in Figure 1I. To compare the two data sets, we fitted our simulated
approach curve to a simplified version of eq 2 (setting A4 and A5 to zero). We then superimposed this curve, the simulated
data, and our experimental data (recalibrating distances by the radius
of the pipet used in our experiments, Figure 1H). Because both the half-cone angle and probe radius are measured
experimentally, and we know the glass o.d./i.d. ratio, this makes
for an exact comparison between simulation and experiment and allows
no free parameters. As can be seen from Figure 1I, experiment agrees very well with simulation. Having validated
our approach, we went on to examine the requirements for contact-free
scanning.

Conditions for Contact-Free Scanning
Contact-free scanning
is a challenge for biological imaging, because at the edge of cells,
the slope can become very high, essentially vertical (Figure 2A). We therefore simulated the pipet approaching
an angled planar surface (Figure 2B, inset)
and then examined the maximum slope that can be scanned without contact
at a given scan set point. Figure 2B shows
summary data for two glass o.d./i.d. ratios and two different half-cone
angles (3° and 9°). Taking a 2.5% set point as an example,
the maximum slope that can be scanned with a probe half-cone angle
of 3° is approximately 22°, whereas a half-cone angle of
9° allows slopes of ∼53–69° (depending on
the glass o.d./i.d. ratio). Thus, probe series resistance can have
a major impact on the ability to scan slopes. As is also evident from
these numbers, thinner glass is helpful at low set points, because
it allows the probe to get closer to a sloping surface and the associated
reduction in access resistance (and hence the loss of probe sensitivity)
is less important than the change in geometry.

Figure 2 Ability of SICM to maintain
contact-free scanning. (A) Schematic
illustrating the difficulty in scanning a cell surface as the slope
(α) varies. (B) FEM simulations of the pipet approaching a planar
surface (slope α, inset). The highest contact-free gradient
for each set point is plotted for two half-cone angles and two glass
i.d./o.d. ratios. (C) Scan over a square step of 1ri (1% set point) with the profile fit to eq 6. (D) Scan over 5ri and 10ri (E) steps (i.d./o.d. ratio of 0.58) at set
points of 0.5% and 0.4%. The solid line fit in (C) is to eq 6. Bars in the x-direction indicate
the outer edges of the pipet tip. (F) Experimental scan of a 500 nm
square step with solid line fit to eq 6.

Interestingly, although the pipet
half-cone angle limits the steepest
planar slopes that can be simulated (Figure 2B, inset), it is clear that the curves of Figure 2B become increasingly shallow as the set point is decreased,
suggesting that it is possible to scan over a 90° step without
contact.

Scanning a Vertical Step
We simulated a range of steps
that were larger than the pipet radius in both the x direction (width = 50ri) and the y direction (breadth =30ri).
Figure 2C–E shows simulations for steps
of this type of height 1ri, 5ri, and 10ri. These steps can
be scanned without contact, but larger steps require lower set points.
Thus, a step 1ri high is comfortably scanned
at a 1% set point (Figure 2C), although at
5ri and 10ri, the maximum contact-free set points are ∼0.5% and ∼0.4%,
respectively. Because most reports in the literature use set points
in the range of 1.0–0.4%, a step of 10ri provides an upper estimate of the vertical drop that could
be scanned contact-free in these experiments. Of course the absolute
figure depends on the precise sensitivity and geometry of the probe
(Figure 2B). Caldwell et al. introduced a calibration
technique for measuring SICM probe tip radius and half-cone angle
in nanopipettes and estimated half-cone angles of ∼2°
or less.10 For this value, our data can
be used to calculate that a set point of just ∼0.2% (depending
on glass thickness) would be needed to ensure contact-free scanning
over a step of 10ri (Figure S-3). Set
points of 0.2% are below the limit of those currently reported for
scanning and represent a considerable technical challenge. Thus, given
current probe technology, 10ri seems to
be a reasonable upper estimate for the ability to scan contact-free
at a vertical face.

We next compared our simulations to experiment.
In order to make this comparison, we fitted the SICM step profiles
predicted from simulations to a logistic function of the following
form: 6  where b1, b2, X1/2, and p are constants,
and x is the lateral distance.
This equation fitted the simulated data reasonably well at our chosen
set points and thus provided a useful comparison with the general
form of the profile obtained from comparable experiments. Further,
by fitting this equation (Figure 2C), we were
able to quantify the lateral response by the distance required for
a probe to go from 25% to 75% of the maximal step response. For a
step 1ri in height, the 25–75%
response required 2.2 ± 0.1ri (1%
set point), and for steps of height 5ri, (0.5% set point) and 10ri (0.4% set
point), the values obtained were 1.8 ± 0.2ri and 2.3 ± 0.1ri, respectively.
To attempt to make a suitable experimental comparison, we scanned
a 500 nm square step calibration target (see Methods) using a 1% set point (Figure 2F). We then
examined the scan profile at right angles to the step and fitted it
to eq 6. The fit is very good, demonstrating
that at this set point, the general form of the profile is very similar
to that predicted by simulation. Further, assuming the experimentally
measured 25–75% response is ∼2ri, then this predicts a pipet inner radius of 166 ± 2
nm. By using a large pipet filled with dye as described earlier, we
could independently estimate the tip radius. The figure obtained was
161 ± 16 nm, so there is again both qualitative and quantitative
agreement between theory and experiment.

Image Resolution
For tall objects, the requirement
to scan contact-free will affect the choice of set point and this,
in turn, will affect image resolution. In previous estimates of resolution,
relatively small (low) objects have been examined of height ≤1ri. We therefore extended our simulations to
look at the implications of contact-free scanning for image resolution,
defining resolution as the ability to separate two nearby objects.
Because these objects have finite width, we defined their separation
by the distance between the closest edges of the objects at their
nearest points. We considered the objects as being resolved when the
“dip” in height between them was ≥0.05ri. (The z resolution of SICM
is excellent but depends on many factors that generate electrical
noise in the system. If a typical SICM pipet is assumed to be of radius
∼100 nm, a vertical resolution of ∼5 nm (0.05ri) is probably close to the limit of what is
readily achievable in routine scans).

We began by examining
elongated square steps of height 5ri and,
for comparison,1ri. Our results are shown
in Figure 3A,B. Objects of height 1ri (scanned at a 1% set point) appear as a single
peak at separations of 0.5–1.0ri. However, at a separation of 2ri the
“dip” between objects is 0.07ri, whereas at 3ri, it is 0.2ri. Thus, defining resolution as a “dip”
of 0.05ri or greater, objects of height
1ri would just be resolvable at separations
of approximately 2ri when using a 1% set
point. The taller objects (5ri high) must
be scanned at a reduced set point, and we simulated 0.49%. Importantly,
we found that the effect of a reduced set point is compensated for
by taller objects and again they were separable at ∼2ri (Figure 3B).

Figure 3 Contact-free
scanning is consistent with a resolution of ∼2ri. (A) Scan profiles (filled squares, 1% set
point) calculated across two square steps of height 1ri, separated by1ri, 2ri, or 3ri. (A cross-sectional
view is shown.) (B) Profiles as in (A) but for a step 5ri high and a set point of 0.49% (filled squares). (C)
Scan profiles (filled squares,1% set point) as in (A) but for cylinders
1.85ri tall. Spacing refers to the inner
edges of these objects. (D) Simulated groove of depth 5ri and width 0.2ri (left panel)
shown with the resulting image (at 5% set point, middle panel). The
right-hand panel shows a summary of simulated profiles for grooves
of different widths with vertical dashed and dotted lines indicating
pipet inner and outer radii as measured from zero.

We next simulated scans across a pair of horizontal
cylinder-like
structures with an omega profile (Figure 3C),
because in many biological samples, it is the separation of fine,
horizontal “cylinders”, such as nearby axons and dendrites,
that is important in terms of resolution. Our objects had omega profiles
of height 1.85ri and width 2ri. We again calculated image profiles at a 1% set point
where contact-free scanning is possible. Interestingly, these objects
were also just separable at a distance of approximately 2ri (Figure 3C), with the dip between
objects being 0.05ri. Thus, by many measures,
a resolution estimate of 2ri seems realistic
for SICM, even when maintaining contact-free scanning. However, it
is important to keep in mind that if a lower set point is needed to
avoid contact with taller features, then the resolution of smaller
objects is not as good (Figure S-4).

As a final test of SICM
resolution, we investigated scanning over
narrow square grooves, where the separation is smaller than, or comparable
to, the pipet radius. We simulated grooves of width ≤1ri but of length ≫3ri and depth 5ri. We found that
these features would be hard to detect at a 1% set point, so we calculated
image profiles using an increased set point of 5%, which again can
be done contact-free for this particular target geometry. The results
from the simulations are shown in Figure 3D.
Narrow separations between objects can be detected and appear broadened
and rounded in the SICM image such that their width appears to be
∼2ri, regardless of their underlying
feature width (in the range 0.2ri–1ri). In other words, these features become broadened
by convolution with what is effectively a rounded point spread function
of the probe. Further, when the grooves are made deeper, progressively
smaller increases in apparent depth appear in the image, so depth
fidelity is poor (data not shown). Looking at these narrow separations
as another measure of image resolution, we can see that SICM detection
can be very good, although image fidelity is poor and caution must
be exercised when interpreting such images.

Red Cell Images Illustrate
the Framework for Contact-Free Scanning
We next examined
the practical implications of our simulations
by imaging red cells at a variety of set points. To compare experiment
with theory, we first scanned at a very low set point (0.3%, Figure 4A, first image), producing an estimate of the true
topography of the upper surface. The images at this set point show
parameters that are those of a typical red cell as measured by other
techniques,11 with a width of ∼7.7
μm and a volume of ∼96 fl. (It should be noted, however,
that SICM, like other scanning probe techniques, cannot visualize
the underneath side of protruding objects. For this reason, the very
edges of cells can appear, as in this case, to be vertical.) We then
used our simulation results (Figure 4B) and
the 0.3% scan image to identify regions of the cell where we would
expect collisions to occur at set points above 0.3% (specifically,
0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, and 0.9%), Figure 4C (upper left panel). (Note there is a slight asymmetry in the predicted
areas of collision, because the imaged cell is not lying entirely
flat on its substrate.) We then scanned the cell at these set points,
finally returning to a scan using a 0.3% set point to make sure that
apparent changes in the cell geometry were the result of probe contact
rather than an unprompted series of movements by the cell in these
regions. The scans are shown in Figure 4A.
As the set point is increased, the maximum slope the scan can cope
with decreases. At the edge of the cell, where the steepest angles
occur, the apparent changes in cell radius match the predicted regions
of collision closely (Figure 4C). When the
set point is returned to 0.3%, the cell image is restored. Thus, the
effect of not operating in contact-free conditions is to give a false
impression of improved resolution and to produce large changes in
apparent cell volume and area, all showing a trend that can be anticipated
by examining the slopes of the sample in relation to the pipet geometry
and set point (Figure 4C, D).

Figure 4 Impact of set point slope
detection threshold when scanning biological
samples. (A) Time series of scans of the same red blood cell at different
set points (SP) from 0.3% to 0.8%, returning to a 0.3% set point in
the final scan. (B) Variation of maximum scan gradient [α] with
set point, as predicted by FEM for a pipet of the geometry used for
imaging in (A). (C) Left: regions of the initial 0.3% scan whose gradient
is within the detection threshold for different set points, as indicated
in the key. Gradients within the interior hollow region are excluded
for simplicity. Right: horizontal and vertical cross sections through
the actual scans obtained at each set point show a similar reduction.
Scale bars: 2 μm. (D) Comparison of the changes in cell geometry
(horizontal slice area, vertical slice area, and volume) at set points
seen in panels (A) and (C). All changes are normalized to the initial
value at 0.3%.

Discussion
A number
of reports have used finite element analysis to understand
the behavior of the SICM-like probes,6,7,12,13 but contact-free scanning
has not been examined to date. This is particularly important for
biological imaging, because cell responses to contact (e.g., via the
mechano-sensitive ion channels) are widely prevalent, playing central
roles in regulating cell volume and function.13 Indeed, when imaging cellular dynamics, provided that the images
have the necessary resolution to identify the structures of interest,
the ability to maintain contact-free scanning (and thereby to avoid
interactions with the sample) may well be more important than the
precise determination of feature sizes.

We have found that the
ratio of access to series resistance plays
a critical role in contact-free scanning. Also important is the o.d./i.d.
ratio of the glass, which limits the probe’s physical access
to a sloping surface. For low set points, substantially higher slopes
can be scanned contact-free with a low o.d./i.d. ratio. This is because
for experimentally realistic parameter values, the influence of glass
thickness in changing the critical ratio between probe access and
series resistance is limited at these set points.

We also investigated
the implications of contact-free scanning
for SICM resolution. For small steps (1ri high), that are simple to scan contact-free, Edwards et al. have
previously pointed out that the total influence of the pipet, convolved
with the step (i.e., the 0–100% response of the pipet) was
apparent over approximately four tip radii.6 Their result, for a low step, is thus in good agreement with our
figure for the 25–75% response (∼2ri) for both small and large steps. In another study, Rheinlaender
and Schäffer7 looked at the ability
to separate two nearby vertical cylinders of height 1ri or less. They defined the lateral resolution as the
point at which a “dip” between objects vanishes making
them inseparable, regardless of the set point. They found that this
occurred at a separation of 3ri which
was defined by the distance between object centers. These objects
were 1ri in diameter, so this equates to inner edges separated
by 2ri. If this result could be generalized
to any geometry, it would be theoretically impossible to distinguish
the objects shown in Figure 4. Thus, one advance
that emerges from our simulations is that resolution depends on the
object geometry. For the objects we considered, the dip does not vanish
at a separation of 2ri, and indeed, it
is likely to be experimentally observable with realistic pipet geometries.
This is true even at 1ri high and probably
results from the reduced interactions of height and width for our
steps versus the cylinders considered by Rheinlaender and Schäffer
(Figure S-5). When taller objects are scanned, lower set points are
needed, but the resolution of tall objects is ∼2ri. However, there is a loss of resolution for small objects.
Further, to visualize either tall or large features as completely
separate objects would, of course, require a much larger separation,
∼6–10ri.7 (Alternatively, it may be possible to use deconvolution
techniques to recover an image of separate objects in simple cases
(see, for example, the point spread function approach of Rheinlaender
and Schäffer7). Nonetheless, interactions
between x, y, and z geometry discussed above make it much more difficult (perhaps impossible)
to find unique solutions in more complicated cases.) Importantly,
for biological imaging, having a set point that is too high can give
an artificial impression of high resolution, probably because recently
discovered intrinsic forces maintain pipet–membrane separation
and substantially distort the cell.15 (Of
course, contact-free scanning is necessary, not sufficient to ensure
force-free scanning.15,16) Finally, in a special case,
our results show that a separation between objects in the form of
a very narrow groove can appear as a detectable dip at high set points
even for a groove of 0.2ri.

Clearly
the interaction between contact-free scan conditions (via
set point) and image resolution is important. In the future, it should
be possible to use information about the conditions for contact-free
scanning to optimize resolution and thus to create better scan protocols.
For example, following a preliminary contact-free scan using a very
low set point, the slopes and heights in the image can be analyzed
to identify regions where it is possible to scan contact-free at higher
set points and hence to obtain better resolution in these regions
while still operating in contact-free mode.

Conclusion
We
have examined the conditions for contact-free SICM imaging,
characterizing the range of slopes and probe set points for which
it is possible to scan contact-free. We have also shown it is possible
to scan over a vertical step, provided its height is less than ∼10
times the internal radius of the pipet. For taller objects, or when
using higher set points, contact-free scanning is likely to become
technically difficult given the geometry of pipettes currently in
use as reported in the literature.

We have also found that the
precise resolution of SICM depends
on the geometry of the objects being imaged. We estimate that for
many biological samples, imaged under experimentally realistic conditions,
objects separated by ∼2ri will
be resolvable. Finally, we have demonstrated the importance of contact-free
scanning for accurate biological imaging in relation to feature size
and volume. These findings should thus aid the development of scan
protocols designed to obtain the optimal combination of contact-free
scanning and image resolution in the future.

Supporting Information Available
Additional information as noted
in the text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac402748j_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
∥ These
authors contributed equally.

The authors declare
the
following competing financial interest(s): D.K. is a shareholder in
Ionscope Ltd, who sell SICM systems, and he is also a consultant to
the company. G.M. and A.F. have a CASE studentship award supported
by Ionscope Ltd.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council and by the Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council. We thank Adam Orchard and Guillaume Charras for
PDMS casting.
==== Refs
References
Hansma P. K. ; Drake B. ; Marti O. ; Gould S. A. ; Prater C. B. 
Science 
1989 , 243 , 641 –643 .2464851 
Korchev Y. E. ; Bashford C. L. ; Milovanovic M. ; Vodyanoy I. ; Lab M. J. 
Biophys. J. 
1997 , 73 , 653 –658 .9251784 
Hille B.  Ionic Channels of Excitable
Membranes ; Sinauer Associates, Inc. : Sunderland, MA , 1984 ; p 8 .
Ying L. ; White S. S. ; Bruckbauer A. ; Meadows L. ; Korchev Y. E ; Klenerman D. 
Biophys. J. 
2004 , 86 , 1018 –1027 .14747337 
Corey D. P. ; Stevens C. F.   In Single Channel
Recording ; Sakmann B. , Neher E.  , Eds.; Plenum Press : New York , 1983 ; pp 53 –68 .
Edwards M.
A. ; Williams C. G. ; Whitworth A. L. ; Unwin P. R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 4482 –4492 .19405486 
Rheinlaender J. ; Schäffer T. E. 
J. Appl. Phys. 
2009 , 105 .
Snell F. M.   In Glass Microelectrodes ; Lavallée M. , Schanne O. F. , Hébert N. C.  , Eds.; Wiley : New York , 1969 ; pp 111 –123 .
Hall J. E. 
J. Gen. Physiol. 
1975 , 66 , 531 –532 .1181379 
Caldwell M. ; Del Linz S. J. L. ; Smart T. G. ; Moss G. W. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 8980 –8984 .23082744 
Tomaiuolo G. ; Rossi D. ; Caserta S. ; Cesarelli M. ; Guido S. 
Cytometry,
Part A 
2012 , 81 , 1040 –1047 .
Bae C. ; Butler P. J. 
Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 
2008 , 7 , 379 –386 .17657517 
Chen C. C. ; Baker L. A. 
Analyst 
2011 , 136 , 90 –97 .21103593 
Sachs F. 
Physiology 
2010 , 25 , 50 –56 .20134028 
Clarke R. W. ; Zhukov A. ; Richards O. ; Johnson N. ; Ostanin V. ; Klenerman D. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 322 –329 .23210472 
Pellegrino M. ; Orsini P. ; Pellegrini M. ; Baschieri P. ; Dinelli F. ; Petracchi D. ; Tognoni E. ; Ascoli C. 
Neurosci. Res. 
2011 , 69 , 234 –240 .21146567
