
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac300019mArticleFT-IR Spectroscopic Imaging
of Reactions in Multiphase
Flow in Microfluidic Channels Chan K. L.
Andrew Kazarian Sergei G. *Department of Chemical
Engineering, Imperial
College London, South Kensington Campus, SW7 2AZ, U.K.* E-mail: s.kazarian@imperial.ac.uk.02 04 2012 01 05 2012 84 9 4052 4056 03 01 2012 02 04 2012 Copyright © 2012 American Chemical Society2012American Chemical SocietyThis is an open-access article distributed under the ACS AuthorChoice Terms & Conditions. Any use of this article, must conform to the terms of that license which are available at http://pubs.acs.org.

Rapid, in situ, and label-free chemical analysis in microfluidic
devices is highly desirable. FT-IR spectroscopic imaging has previously
been shown to be a powerful tool to visualize the distribution of
different chemicals in flows in a microfluidic device at near video
rate imaging speed without tracers or dyes. This paper demonstrates
the possibility of using this imaging technology to capture the chemical
information of all reactants and products at different points in time
and space in a two-phase system. Differences in the rates of chemical
reactions in laminar flow and segmented flow systems are also compared.
Neutralization of benzoic acid in decanol with disodium phosphate
in water has been used as the model reaction. Quantitative information,
such as concentration profiles of reactant and products, can be extracted
from the imaging data. The same feed flow rate was used in both the
laminar flow and segmented flow systems. The laminar flow pattern
was achieved using a plain wide T-junction, whereas the segmented
flow was achieved by introducing a narrowed section and a nozzle at
the T-junction. The results show that the reaction rate is limited
by diffusion and is much slower with the laminar flow pattern, whereas
the reaction is completed more quickly in the segmented flow due to
better mixing.

document-id-old-9ac300019mdocument-id-new-14ac-2012-00019mccc-price
==== Body
Reactions in microfabricated
devices have shown many advantages over traditional process systems.1 The rapid development of microprocesses involving
micromixers and microreactors requires more complex microdevices.2−4 Although optimization of the process systems often uses numerical
simulated models, validation of these models requires experimental
measurements of concentration of present chemicals at various points
in time and space within the system.5 Therefore,
the development of suitable characterization tools is important. To
date, fluorescence imaging has been the method of choice for small-volume
detection due to its exceptional sensitivity.6 The use of a dye for visible detection is also proven to be a popular
method due to ease of use. However, label-free detection methods remain
an attractive alternative as there is no disturbance to the system
studied. Furthermore, unlike methods that use labeling or dyes, label-free
detection methods are not restricted to studies of reactions that
produce a color change, such as acid–base reactions or reactions
that yield colored species, because the detection principles are based
on the structure of the chemicals. These methods such as NMR,7 Raman,8,9 including coherence
anti-Stoke Raman10 and surface-enhanced
Raman,11 and infrared spectroscopy12 are some of the methods that have shown to be
promising tools for chemical analysis in microfabricated devices.

Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopic imaging is a label-free
imaging tool that can detect multiple components simultaneously. The
chemical specificity of this technique arises from the intrinsic molecular
vibrations which result in the measured spectrum. The low energy of
infrared radiation also eliminates issues such as photodegradation
or photobleaching. The focal plane array (FPA) detector, which consists
of up to 16 384 pixels, enables the collection of thousands
of spatially resolved infrared spectra for the generation of various
chemical maps representing the spatial distribution of the particular
components in the system. These maps are often referred as “chemical
images” which can be used to study a wide range of samples,
including microfluidic flows.13 We have
recently demonstrated that FT-IR imaging can be applied to image mixing
of H2O and D2O with consecutive isotope exchange
in laminar flow in a single-phase flow using a Y-junction microfluidic
device14 and to capture “chemical
movies” in segmented flow using a T-junction microfluidic device.15 The FPA detector has also been used, although
not for imaging, to extract spatially resolved infrared spectra from
a microreactor in a model catalyst system.16 In this paper, we demonstrate that FT-IR imaging
can be used to study chemical reactions in a two-phase system in both
laminar and segmented flow microfluidics. Neutralization of benzoic
acid dissolved in decanol with disodium phosphate (Na2HPO4) in water (see Scheme 1) has been
used as the model reaction.

Scheme 1 Neutralization of Benzoic Acid with
Disodium Phosphate at the Interface
between Decanol and Water
Experimental Section
Reagents
The 6.2 wt % Na2HPO4 (Sigma-Aldrich) solution is made by stirring weighted Na2HPO4 powder in deionized water until all solids are dissolved.
The 15 wt % benzoic acid in decanol solution is made by stirring weighted
benzoic acid powder in decanol (Sigma-Aldrich) until all solid are
dissolved. All reagents are used as received.

FT-IR Spectroscopic Imaging
An infrared spectrometer
(IFS66s, Bruker Optics, Germany) equipped with a macrochamber attachment
(IMAC, Bruker Optics) and a horizontal macrotransmission accessory
was used to allow the microfluidic device to be imaged in a horizontal
position. Further details about this accessory can be found elsewhere.17 A 96 × 96 focal plane array detector (40
μm per pixel) was used to generate an imaging area of 3.84 mm
× 3.84 mm with a lateral spatial resolution of 40 μm. The
data were collected using OPUS 5.5 (Bruker Optics, Germany), which
has a kinetic imaging mode for fast image capture of the segmented
flow system.15 Spectra were measured at
8 cm–1 for the laminar flow system and 16 cm–1 resolution for the segmented flow system. The number
of coadded frames used in laminar flow measurements was 10, which
gives a total scanning time of ∼5 s. Single scan (kinetic mode)
was used for the segmented flow experiment. With the 96 × 96
FPA and a spectral range of 1950–988 cm–1 the scanning time per image was ∼93 ms.

Microfluidic Device Fabrication
There are many methods
to create microfluidic devices.18 The devices
used here were fabricated in a similar manner as described by us previously.19 In brief, a droplet-on-demand microdroplet printing
system (AutoDrop, MicroDrop) consisting of a heated dispensing nozzle
head and an xyz position robotic arm was used. Molten
paraffin (mp 58–62 °C, Sigma-Aldrich) was directly printed
by the system to create the microfluidic device on a CaF2 infrared transparent window which is then sandwiched with another
CaF2 window to form sealed channels. Further details concerning
the fabrication process can be found elsewhere.19

Laminar Flow Microfluidics
Laminar flows was generated
by introducing the Na2HPO4 solution in water
through a narrower channel from the right (380 μm wide, 25 μm
height) and oil phase (decanol) via a wider channel from the top (450
μm wide, 25 μm height) where they join at a “T-junction”.
The joint stream then enters a serpentine region (450 μm wide,
25 μm height) with two 90° and three 180° turns before
exiting the device.

Segmented Flow Microfluidics
Segmented flow was generated
by introducing the Na2HPO4 solution through
a nozzle (50 μm wide, 25 μm height) and a continuous oil
phase (decanol) via a narrow channel (100 μm wide, 25 μm
height). The joint stream then enters a wide serpentine region (480
μm wide, 25 μm height) with two 90° and three 180°
turns before exiting the device. The speed and size of individual
droplets can be controlled by the volumetric flow rates of both streams.

A liquid cell with CaF2 windows (Omni Cell, Specac Ltd.,
U.K.) and 25 μm spacers was used as the substrate. The surface
of CaF2 windows was coated with a thin layer of polystyrene
by casting 0.5 wt % polystyrene from toluene to provide hydrophobic
surfaces inside channels. The film thickness was approximately 680
nm. In all cases, the device was connected to polyethylene tubing
for injection of liquids into the device. Precision syringe pumps
(PHD 2000, Harvard Apparatus) were used to deliver the fluids into
the channel with the flow rate of 0.5 and 1 μL/min for benzoic
acid in decanol and Na2HPO4 solution, respectively.

Results and Discussion
The reaction chosen in this
work is the formation of sodium benzoate
from benzoic acid with Na2HPO4 following Scheme 1. Benzoic acid is only slightly soluble in water,
whereas its sodium salt form is highly soluble (∼200 times
more soluble). Decanol was therefore used as the carrier of benzoic
acids, whereas deionized water was used as the carrier for Na2HPO4. Decanol and water are not miscible, meaning
the reaction between benzoic acid and Na2HPO4 can only happen at the interface. The two fluids are brought into
contact in the microfluidic channel in a controlled manner where the
product sodium benzoate dissolves in the aqueous phase.

Since
the microfluidic channels were created by wax printing, decanol
was used as the oil phase such that the paraffin wall would not disintegrate
during the experiment. Na2HPO4 was used rather
than NaOH to prevent the attack of NaOH on the paraffin wall. Other
more chemically resistant materials for the channel walls may be investigated
for use in the future such as “liquid Teflon” as introduced
by Rolland et al.20

The flow rate
of benzoic acid in decanol was 0.5 μL/min,
while the Na2HPO4 solution flow rate was 1 μL/min.
Two designs of microfluidic devices were created to generate the laminar
and segmented flows. We used the design of the microfluidic channels
to change the flow pattern rather than changing the flow rate of the
two streams such that the reaction in a different flow pattern can
be compared more directly at the same flow rate.

The schematic
diagrams of these devices are shown in Figure 1. Laminar microfluidics flows were created by joining
the two streams at a wide T-junction. Preliminary tests had shown
laminar flow can be achieved at a wide range of flow rates (tested
from 1 to 10 μL/min). Segmented flow microfluidics was created
by joining the two streams at a narrow T-junction where the Na2HPO4 solution is introduced through a nozzle. The
pressure drop through the narrower channel and the nozzle was large
enough that the section of wax wall before the nozzle often yields
even at low flow rates (e.g., 2 μL/min). A double wall or even
triple wall was therefore applied to the section before the nozzle,
and the device was found to be stable throughout the experiment. The
surfaces of the CaF2 windows that form the top and bottom
parts of the channels were coated with a thin layer of polystyrene
to provide a hydrophobic environment for the creation of segmented
flow. Polystyrene was used because it has weak spectral bands and
it can be cast into thin-film coating with relative ease. The thickness
of the polystyrene was estimated from the absorbance of the polystyrene
band at 1453 cm–1, and the film thickness was found
to be 680 nm. Thinner films delaminate easily with fluid flows and
therefore are not suitable.

Figure 1 Schematic diagrams showing the design of the
microfluidic devices
employed in this study. A wider plain T-junction is used to generate
a laminar flow profile, whereas a narrow T-junction with a nozzle
is used to generate segmented flow profile. The white area inside
the channel shows the oil phase which contains benzoic acid while
blue area shows the aqueous phase which contains Na2HPO4.

The results for the laminar flow experiment are
shown in Figure 2. Benzoic acid and sodium
benzoate can be characterized
using the spectral bands at 1316 or 1274 cm–1 and
1545 or 1383 cm–1, respectively. These bands are
selected because they do not overlap with spectral bands of other
materials. The integrated absorbances of specific bands are converted
into concentrations using calibration curves which can be obtained
by measuring the absorbance of solutions with known concentrations
using the same spacer of the transmission cell (same path length).
The solute concentrations are represented by the color scale of each
figure. Figure 2A demonstrates that, away from
the interface between the two fluids, the concentration of benzoic
acid remains the same, whereas the concentration decreases at the
interface. The concentration of sodium benzoate increases from the
upstream to the downstream of the channel as the benzoic acid is being
neutralized.

Figure 2 FT-IR imaging results from the device with a wide plain
T-junction.
(A) FT-IR image showing the concentration (wt %) distribution of benzoic
acid in the channel. (B) FT-IR image showing the concentration (wt
%) distribution of sodium benzoate in the channel. (C) FT-IR image
showing the distribution of water in the channel. Color represents
the local concentrations according to the scale shown on the right
of the images except the water image which has an arbitrary color
scale. (D) An RGB image showing the overlapped images of panels A–C.
Benzoic acid is presented in green, sodium benzoate is presented in
red, and water is presented in blue.

Figure 2D is the combined
figure of Figure 2A–C such that the
three images are overlapped
in the form of an RGB map for direct comparisons purpose. Benzoic
acid is shown as green, sodium benzoate is shown as red, and water
is shown as blue. Figure 2D shows that benzoic
acid in decanol (oil phase) did not overlap with water in space while
sodium benzoate was formed at the interface between the oil and water
and is carried in the aqueous phase rather than the oil phase. Figure 2D also clearly shows the depletion of benzoic acid
at the interface downstream which is represented as a dark region
between the green region and the red/blue region. This is shown more
clearly in the two sets of extracted concentration profiles of benzoic
acid and sodium benzoate across the channel width in Figure 3. Data points extracted along lines A and B in Figure 2D, respectively, represent the upstream and downstream
concentration profiles of benzoate acid and sodium benzoate. The extracted
profiles are an average of five adjacent lines, and the standard deviations
between the individual lines are shown as error bars. When the profile
extracted along line A to that of line B is compared, it is noted
that the concentration of sodium benzoate increased while the concentration
of benzoic acid depleted at the interface (starting from left to right),
which is consistence with the color figures shown in Figure 2. The depleted region of benzoic acid highlights
the lack of mixing across the channel in laminar flow where the rate
of the reaction is limited by diffusion. This also demonstrates the
power of the presented chemical imaging approach for studies of such
flows. The profiles in Figure 3 also show that
the concentration decreases near the channel walls. This is due to
the scattering effect caused by the difference in refractive index
between the wall and the fluids and the roughness of the wax wall
resulting in an apparent decrease in concentration.

Figure 3 Extracted concentration
profiles (average of five adjacent lines)
along the lines indicated in Figure 2D.

Better mixing in both oil and aqueous phases is
expected in segmented
flows.21 Figure 4 shows the imaging results of the reaction between the two streams
in segmented flow. As mentioned previously, the same flow rates that
were used in the laminar flow experiment have been applied in the
segmented flow experiment. The segmented flow was generated by the
design of the microfluidic device. Images were generated based on
the specific absorption band of each the component, and the sodium
benzoate and benzoic acid data have been calibrated such that the
color represents their concentrations. The formation of droplets can
be clearly seen immediately after the nozzle in Figure 4A. Since the channel used in this device is relatively wide
compared to the size of the droplet, most of the droplets flow along
one side of the channel (e.g., more droplets flow along the top side
of the section after the first 90° turn and before the first
180° turn). In the first 180° turn, the droplets slowed
and start joining together forming slugs which progress further downstream
until the end of the microfluidic device. Further refinement of the
device such as using narrower channels could have prevented the formation
of slugs. However, this is outside the main focus of this work. The
image of benzoic acid distribution (Figure 4B) shows that the concentration decreases rapidly after the first
90° turn from 15 wt % to a constant value of approximately 6
wt % after the first 180° turn. Unlike the laminar flow experiment,
where the reaction continues until near the end of the device, the
result shows that the concentration of benzoic acid has reached a
constant level after the first 180° turn reflecting the fact
that the reaction is completed well before the end of the microfluidic
device. The reaction did not consume all benzoic acid because benzoic
acid was in excess in comparison to Na2HPO4.

Figure 4 FT-IR
imaging results from the device consisting of a narrow T-junction
with a nozzle. (A) FT-IR image showing the distribution of water.
(B) FT-IR image showing the concentration (wt %) distribution of benzoic
acid. (C) FT-IR image showing the concentration (wt %) distribution
of sodium benzoate. (D) RGB image showing the overlapped images of
panels A–C. Benzoic acid is presented in green, sodium benzoate
is presented in red, water is presented in blue.

In the channel after the first 90° turn and
before the first
180° turn, the side of the channel with a higher density of Na2HPO4 solution droplets has shown a lower benzoic
acid concentration than the side that has fewer Na2HPO4 droplets. The lack of changes in concentration after the
first 180° turn can also be seen in the sodium benzoate image
(Figure 4C) which shows a constant concentration
of 5–6 wt %. Averaged spectra (average of 4–9 pixels,
depending on the size of the drop) showing the sodium benzoate band
were extracted from different water droplets along the channel indicated
in Figure 4C and shown in Figure 5. The extracted spectra did not show significant absorbance
of the oil indicating the presented data has minimal spectral contamination
from the oil phase, which could be possible when the size of the drop
is smaller than the spatial resolution of the system. The absorbance
of the sodium benzoate band at 1383 cm–1 increases
as a function of distance traveled in the channel. Together with the
speed of the droplet in the channel, which has been estimated to be
2 mm/s (based on the flow rate of the fluids), one can extract the
kinetics of the reaction in the system. Note that the concentration
of sodium benzoate already reached ∼50% of the maximum concentration
(concentration in the slugs) in the first droplet measured. This result
indicates that despite the short amount of contact time with the oil
phase, ∼50% of the reaction has happened during the formation
of the droplet at the nozzle. An RGB image (Figure 4D) is created to overlap three images for comparison purpose.
Sodium benzoate is represented in red, benzoic acid is represented
in green, while water is represented in blue. The RGB figure clearly
shows that sodium benzoate is carried in the aqueous stream (totally
overlapped with the water image). Compared to the RGB image in Figure 2D, there is no depleted region of benzoic acid in
the oil phase, which also indicates better mixing is achieved in the
segmented flow. This also shows the unique power of the chemical imaging
approach applied here to study reactions and mixing in segmented flows
in microfluidic devices.

Figure 5 Extracted FT-IR spectra from the indicated points
on the image
in Figure 4C showing the that concentration
of sodium benzoate increases as the Na2HPO4 solution
droplet progress downstream in the channel.

Conclusions
FT-IR spectroscopic imaging has been shown
to be applicable to
capture chemical reactions in both laminar flow and segmented flow
in microfluidics devices with a two-phase (oil and water) system in
a label-free and quantitative manner. Neutralization of benzoate acid
in decanol with disodium phosphate in water has been used as the model
reaction. The concentrations of both reactant and product can be monitored
at any location in the channel of the microfluidic device within the
imaged area while concentration profiles can be readily extracted.
The reaction rates have been compared between laminar flow microfluidics
and segmented flow microfluidics without changing the flow rates of
the feed streams. This is achieved by the different design of the
microfluidic devices to obtain laminar flow and segmented flow. The
reaction is shown to be diffusion-limited in the laminar flow device
and the reaction rate is shown to be much higher in segmented flow
due to much better mixing. This work demonstrates that FT-IR spectroscopic
imaging can be a powerful approach to study reactions in microfluidic
devices or microstructured reactors in situ.

Supporting Information Available
Reference
spectra of the reactants
and products and spectra of the polystyrene film on CaF2 substrate and the reference standard polystyrene film. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac300019m_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
S.G.K. acknowledges research funding from the European
Research Council under the European Community’s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013)/ERC advanced grant agreement no. [227950].
We also thank Dr. Xize Niu and Professor Andrew J. deMello for help
and advice.
==== Refs
References
Jahnisch K. ; Hessel V. ; Lowe H. ; Baerns M. 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2004 , 43 , 406 –446 .
Song H. ; Chen D. L. ; Ismagilov R. F. 
Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2006 , 45 , 7336 –7356 .
Teh S. Y. ; Lin R. ; Hung L. H. ; Lee A. P. 
Lab Chip 
2008 , 8 , 198 –220 .18231657 
deMello A. J. 
Nature 
2006 , 442 , 394 –402 .16871207 
Aubin J. ; Ferrando M. ; Jiricny V. 
Chem. Eng. Sci. 
2010 , 65 , 2065 –2093 .
Hill E. K. ; de Mello A. J. 
Analyst 
2000 , 125 , 1033 –1036 .
Bouchard L. S. ; Burt S. R. ; Anwar M. S. ; Kovtunov K. V. ; Koptyug I. V. ; Pines A. 
Science 
2008 , 319 , 442 –445 .18218891 
Leung S. A. ; Winkle R. F. ; Wootton R. C. R. ; deMello A. J. 
Analyst 
2005 , 130 , 46 –51 .15614352 
Salmon J. B. ; Ajdari A. ; Tabeling P. ; Servant L. ; Talaga D. ; Joanicot M. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2005 , 86 , 094106 .
Schafer D. ; Squier J. A. ; van Maarseveen J. ; Bonn D. ; Bonn M. ; Muller M. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 11592 –11593 .18686959 
Liu G. L. ; Lee L. P. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2005 , 87 , 074101 .
Xiao Y. ; Yu X. D. ; Wang K. ; Xu J. J. ; Huang J. ; Chen H. Y. 
Talanta 
2007 , 71 , 2048 –2055 .19071562 
Kazarian S. G. 
Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 
2007 , 388 , 529 –532 .17333141 
Chan K. L.
A. ; Gulati S. ; Edel J. B. ; de Mello A. J. ; Kazarian S. G. 
Lab Chip 
2009 , 9 , 2909 –2913 .19789743 
Chan K. L. A. ; Niu X. ; deMello A. J. ; Kazarian S. G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 3606 –3609 .21438630 
Tan C. K.
C. ; Delgass W. N. ; Baertsch C. D. 
Appl. Catal., B 
2009 , 93 , 66 –74 .
Chan K. L. A. ; Kazarian S. G. 
Vib. Spectrosc. 
2006 , 42 , 130 –134 .
Waldbaur A. ; Rapp H. ; Lange K. ; Rapp B. E. 
Anal. Methods 
2011 , 3 , 2681 –2716 .
Chan K. L. A. ; Niu X. Z. ; de Mello A. J. ; Kazarian S. G. 
Lab Chip 
2010 , 10 , 2170 –2174 .20532270 
Rolland J.
P. ; Van Dam R. M. ; Schorzman D. A. ; Quake S. R. ; DeSimone J. M. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 2322 –2323 .14982433 
Song H. ; Bringer M. R. ; Tice J. D. ; Gerdts C. J. ; Ismagilov R. F. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2003 , 83 , 4664 –4666 .17940580
