
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac500567gArticlePolyion Selective Polymeric Membrane-Based Pulstrode
as a Detector in Flow-Injection Analysis Bell-Vlasov Andrea
K. †∥Zajda Joanna ‡∥Eldourghamy Ayman §Malinowska Elzbieta ‡Meyerhoff Mark E. *†† Department
of Chemistry, University of Michigan, 930 N. University, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1055, United States‡ Faculty of Chemistry, Warsaw University of Technology, Noakowskiego 3, 00-664 Warsaw, Poland§ Faculty
of Environmental Biotechnology Department, University of Minufiya, P.O. Box 79, Sadat City, Egypt* E-mail: mmeyerho@umich.edu. Tel: 734-763-5916. Fax: 734-647-4865.20 03 2015 20 03 2014 15 04 2014 86 8 4041 4046 10 02 2014 20 03 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
Society

A method for the detection of polyions
using fully reversible polyion
selective polymeric membrane type pulstrodes as detectors in a flow-injection
analysis (FIA) system is examined. The detection electrode consists
of a plasticized polymeric membrane doped with 10 wt % of tridodecylmethylammonium-dinonylnaphthalene
sulfonate (TDMA/DNNS) ion-exchanger salt. The pulse sequence used
involves a short (1 s) galvanostatic pulse, an open-circuit pulse
(0.5 s) during which the EMF of the cell is measured, and a longer
(15 s) potentiostatic pulse to return the membrane to its original
chemical composition. It is shown that total pulse sequence times
can be optimized to yield reproducible real-time detection of injected
samples of protamine and heparin at up to 20 samples/h. Further, it
is shown that the same membrane detector can be employed for FIA detection
of both polycations at levels ≥10 μg/mL and polyanions
at levels of ≥40 μg/mL by changing the direction of the
galvanostatic pulse. The methodology described may also be applicable
in the detection of polyionic species at low levels in other flowing
configurations, such as in liquid chromatography and capillary electrophoresis.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac500567gdocument-id-new-14ac-2014-00567gccc-price
==== Body
Polyanions
such as glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs) (e.g., the anticoagulant heparin and the anti-inflammatory
agent chondroitin sulfate), sulfated polysaccharides (e.g., fucoidan,
pentosan polysulfate, and carageenans), and polyphosphates, as well
as many important polycationic species [e.g., arginine-rich polypeptides
including protamine (the antidote of heparin), polymers of quaternary
ammonium species, etc.] are difficult analytical targets for direct
detection, owing to their lack of strong absorbance at wavelengths >
260 nm and no presence of electrochemically active domains. To address
this problem, nonequilibrium polyion selective polymeric membrane
electrodes for heparin and protamine (as representative biomedically
important polyions) were first introduced by our group in the early
90s.1−6 Such devices have been demonstrated to have many potential practical
applications, including the measurement of heparin in whole blood,2 the quantitation of carrageen in food products,7 and the detection of enzyme activities that cleave
polyions into smaller fragments not sensed by the electrodes and the
detection of high charge density contaminants in commercially available
heparins.8,9 These sensors are prepared by doping polymeric
membranes (e.g., plasticized PVC) with lipophilic anion-exchangers
[tridodecylmethylammonium chloride (TDMAC)] for polyanions or lipophilic
cation exchangers [e.g., dinonylnaphthalene sulfonic acid (DNNSH)]
for polycations that can form strong cooperative ion pairs with the
target polyion, causing polyion extraction into the organic membrane
phase and, hence, a change in the phase boundary potential of the
membrane.3 Although such sensors are inexpensive
and robust, they are irreversible and, hence, they are usually employed
as single-use devices and are not adaptable to higher throughput flow-through
analysis methods [e.g., flow-injection analysis (FIA)], where fully
reversible potentiometric responses are required.

The Bakker
group first pioneered a reversible polyion-selective
sensor in the early 2000s and termed the device a pulstrode.10,11 Since then, these pulstrodes have been used to detect both polyanions
and polycations.11,12 The pulstrode is a three-electrode
system involving working, counter, and reference electrodes, where
the polymeric membrane within the working electrode is doped with
a lipophilic ion-exchanger salt with no intrinsic ion-exchange properties.
Although the membrane does not have ion-exchange properties initially,
a galvanostatic pulse between the working and counter electrode for
a short time period (1 s) can polarize the lipophilic salt species
in the membrane phase and induce localized ion-exchange at the membrane/sample
interface, which provides the basis for subsequent potentiometric
measurement during a period when no current pulse is applied. A typical
measurement consists of a three-pulse sequence: the galvanostatic
pulse, an open-circuit period, and then a potentiostatic pulse at
a given applied potential. The principles of this method and the function
of each of these steps have been provided in prior work reported by
Bakker and co-workers10,11 with respect to polycation sensing
and by Gemene et al.12 for polyanion sensing.

In principle, the pulstrode sensor, unlike the earlier single-use
polyion selective membrane electrodes, should be useful as a detector
in flow-through analytical systems. Herein, we explore for the first
time this avenue by demonstrating the utility of a plasticized PVC
membrane-based electrode containing the lipophilic salt of (TDMA/DNNS),
as both a polycation and polyanion sensitive detector in a simple
flow-injection analysis (FIA) arrangement. Both protamine and heparin
are used as model analytes, and it is shown that the pulse sequence
for detection can be optimized to achieve sample throughputs of up
to 20 samples/h with detection limits of 10 μg/mL protamine
and 40 μg/mL heparin, respectively, when a 200 μL injection
loop is employed.

Experimental Section
Reagents
High
molecular weight poly(vinyl chloride)
(PVC), 2-nitrophenyloctyl ether (o-NPOE), tridodecylmethylammonium
chloride (TDMAC), tetrahydrofuran (THF), heparin sodium salt, protamine
sulfate salt from salmon, and all buffer salts were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Dinonylnaphthalene sulfonic acid (DNNSH)
as a 49% solution in xylenes was a gift from King Industries (Norwalk,
CT).

Preparation of Ion-Exchanger Salt
The lipophilic ion-exchanger
salt was prepared by metathesis in benzene in a 1:1 molar ratio of
DNNSH and TDMAC. The benzene-salt solution was washed several times
with deionized water until the aqueous solution was neutral. The benzene
phase was then dried, and the residual salt was redissolved in THF
and then dried again for use in preparation of the polyion selective
membranes.

Membrane Preparation
All polyion
selective membrane
films contained 10 wt % of TDMA/DNNS salt and were ∼200 μm
thick. The sensing membranes were all formulated to contain a 1:2
by weight ratio of PVC and o-NPOE plasticizer. All
membrane components were dissolved in THF, and the membrane was prepared
by solvent casting this solution into glass rings on glass plates
and letting the solutions dry overnight (in fume hood).

Electrodes
Membranes were cut with a cork borer (8
mm diameter) from the parent membrane and placed into an electrode
body (Oesch Sensor Technology, Sargans, Switzerland). The actual membrane
area was 20 mm2. All sensors were conditioned overnight
in a 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, with 10 mM NaCl added, and the
inner-filling solution in contact with the inner Ag/AgCl reference
was the same as the outer conditioning solution. The external reference
electrode was a double-junction Ag/AgCl electrode with 3 M KCl as
the inner filling solution and 1 M LiOAc as a bridge electrolyte.
A coiled Pt-wire was used as a counter electrode for all pulsed chronopotentiometric
measurements (see Figure 1).

Measurements
A conventional three-electrode setup was
used for the pulstrode measurements with the TDMA/DNNS-based polymeric
membrane electrode serving as the working electrode with the flowing
sample passing over the outer surface of the membrane in a wall-jet
configuration (see Figure 1). The solution
outlet holes of the plastic syringe that provided the housing for
the wall-jet assembly entered into a small beaker into which the reference
and counter electrodes were placed. The electrochemical measurements
were conducted with an AFCBI bipotentiostat (Pine Instruments, Grove
City, PA) controlled by a NI-DAQPad 6015 interface board and LabVIEW
8.6 data acquisition software (National Instruments, Austin, TX) on
a PC computer. Initially, an uptake (galvanostatic pulse) time of
1 s (magnitude and direction changed depending on the target analyte),
a zero-current pulse of 0.5 s, and a potentiostatic pulse of 0 V vs
Ag/AgCl (stripping potential) of 15 s were used. Eventually, to enhance
throughput, the potentiostatic pulse period was varied to examine
the shortest period that still provided a full return to baseline
potential. For measurements involving heparin, a 20 μA current
was employed during the galvanostatic pulse, and for protamine, a
−12 μA current pulse was applied. These current magnitudes
have been previously optimized for largest EMF responses during the
zero current pulse period under static conditions (in absence of flow)
for heparin12 and protamine.11 The potentials were sampled as the averaged
data during the last 10% time period of the 0.5 s zero current pulse.
To assess the composition changes in the membranes of the working
electrode as a function of use time in the FIA system, classical potentiometric
measurements were conducted with the working electrodes using a 16-channel,
high-impedance interface (Lawson Laboratories Inc., Malvern, PA) vs
the same double junction reference electrode used in the pulsed chronopotentiometric
FIA measurements. All experiments were carried out at room temperature
(21–23 °C).

FIA System
A schematic representation
of the flow injection
analysis system used throughout the experiments reported here is shown
in Figure 1. A peristaltic pump (MINIPULS3,
Gilson, Middleton, WI) was used to induce carrier stream (buffer)
flow and a 6-port manual injection valve (VICI, Houston, TX), equipped
with a 750 μL sample loop (or 200 μL sample loop for higher
throughput rate only), was employed to introduce samples into the
system. A polyion selective membrane electrode, serving as a detector,
was mounted in a wall-jet mode using a custom-made adapter (plastic
syringe housing). The entire flow-through system was assembled using
Teflon tubing (0.8 mm i.d.).

Figure 1 Schematic diagram of the flow-injection system
coupled with polyion
selective polymeric membrane-based pulstrode used for the experiments
reported.

Results and Discussion
In this work, a polyion selective pulstrode is employed as a universal
polyion detector in a FIA system to detect both polycations and polyanions
with the same membrane composition. Initial preliminary experiments
were conducted using a carrier stream of 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH
7.4, with 10 mM NaCl at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min and a 750 μL
sample loop. The large sample volume employed was to ensure that an
adequate number of data points (EMF measurements) could be obtained
in the presence of the sample to define a full sample peak, given
that a voltage signal is only recorded every 16.5 s (see parameters
for pulses in Experimental Section). The polymer
membrane of the working electrode is doped with a 1:1 molar ratio
of tridodecylmethylammonium (TDMA+) and dinonylnaphthalene
sulfonate (DNNS–), where TDMA+ provides
selectivity to polyanions (heparin)12 and
DNNS– to polycations (protamine)11 when the membrane is polarized. During a typical pulse
sequence, the galvanostatic pulse is applied through the working sensor
and counter electrode, during which the membrane is polarized, with
a concomitant ion-flux of complementarily charged ions migrating from
the sample toward the polymeric membrane (see Figure 2). Under an anodic current pulse, the lipophilic ion-exchanger
salt ions are redistributed in the membrane, with TDMA+ migrating toward the sample/membrane interface and DNNS– moving toward the inner interface in contact with the fixed internal
electrolyte solution. Thus, the outer interface becomes an anion-exchange
interface and the inner solution/membrane a cation-exchange interface
(see Figure 2). An analogous process occurs
when an initial cathodic current pulse is applied, with DNNS– moving toward the sample/membrane interface for selective detection
of polycations. During the subsequent open circuit portion of the
sequence, the previously extracted background ions are exchanged with
the target polyions from the sample to provide a phase boundary potential
change that relates to the concentration of polyions present. The
measured EMF during this period is void of undesired iR drop, making it analogous to classical zero current potentiometric
measurements. During the potentiostatic pulse, the membrane is depolarized,
and all ions that are initially extracted are stripped out to restore
the membrane to its original composition, making the sensor fully
reversible and suitable for FIA measurements.

Figure 2 Movement of salt and
ions within a membrane and at interfaces during
pulse sequence employed for detection of polyanions using anodic current
pulse in FIA arrangement. The polyion is represented by Pz–, the interfering ions by I+ and A–,
and R+ and R– are the TMDA+ and DNNS– ions of the lipophilic ion-exchanger
salt within the membrane phase. It should be noted that smaller anions
(A–) also enter the outer surface of the sensing
membrane during pulse 1 period but are eventually outcompeted for
serving as the counteranions to R+ sites by the polyanions
(Pz–).

The typical dynamic potentiometric responses of the pulstrode
detector
in the FIA mode (using preliminary pulse parameters) toward injected
samples of protamine and heparin samples are shown in Figure 3. All signals, obtained for differing concentrations
of both protamine and heparin, exhibit good reproducibility for duplicate
injections and reversibility. However, it should be noted that these
measurements are only used to demonstrate the detectable concentration
range and not employed to demonstrate true precision and stability
of the sensors (see Figures 5 and 6, below, for precision data). In the polyanion sensing
mode that employs an anodic current pulse (i.e., heparin as the target
analyte), a slight negative baseline shift is observed, which may
be due to very small amounts of higher MW heparin remaining inside
the membrane during the potentiostatic pulse due to the very strong
cooperative ion pair it makes with TDMA+.4 However, the overall potential changes from baseline for
a given concentration of heparin remain relatively constant and reproducible.
The linear response range for protamine injections is 10–100
μg/mL, whereas for heparin, the range is from 40 to 200 μg/mL
(equivalent to 7–36 units/mL).

Figure 3 Dynamic potentiometric response of polyion
pulstrode to (A) protamine;
duplicate sequential injections of standards in the range of 10–100
μg/mL; and (B) heparin; duplicate sequential injections of standards
in the range of 40–200 μg/mL in 10 mM phosphate buffer,
pH 7.4, with 10 mM NaCl present. The diluent stream was the same buffer
solution, and flow rates were set at 0.6 mL/min. Numbers above and
below peaks represent concentrations in micrograms per milliliters.
Every 100 pulses is ∼30 min.

Since the measurements are conducted under flowing conditions,
it is essential to determine the stability of the sensors. Two different
pulstrode sensors with the same membrane composition were used for
calibrations toward protamine and heparin, respectively. Each sensor
was calibrated twice a day and placed in a stagnant conditioning buffer
solution between measurements. The FIA response toward protamine was
found to be stable for 3 d, while responses toward heparin were stable
over a 5 d period, with stability defined as potential change values
of less than 5% in peak heights when compared to those on day 1 of
operation for a particular sensor. After these times, the overall
EMF responses decreased significantly. The reason for the longer stability
toward heparin may be related to the lipophilicities of each portion
of the ion-exchanger salt within the membrane phase. Values of organic-aqueous
phase partition coefficients for DNNS– and TDMA+ were determined using Virtual Computational Chemistry Laboratory.14 The results show that DNNS– has ca. 2 orders of magnitude smaller partition coefficient compared
to that of TDMA+ (log Kpart = 7.71 vs 9.75).

To confirm that DNNS– was more quickly washed
out from the membrane phase, studies were conducted using classical
potentiometry using KBr as the analyte species. For freshly prepared
membranes, the ion-exchanger salt in the membrane has no intrinsic
ion-exchange properties and, therefore, does not respond to any ions
present in the sample solution in classical zero-current potentiometry
(see Figure 4A). However, when sensors are
placed in a continuous flow arrangement (exposed to flowing 10 mM
phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, with 10 mM NaCl) without pulsing for 3 days
and then tested on the bench using conventional potentiometry, they
exhibit a more significant negative voltage response toward additions
of standard 1 mM KBr compared to freshly made working electrodes that
were not exposed to flowing conditions for 3 d (see Figure 4C). This anionic response to the bromide ion suggests
that some excess TDMA+ was present in the polymeric membrane
phase following the extended exposure to the flowing buffer.

Figure 4 Open circuit
potentiometric response of polymeric membrane electrode
to 1 mM KBr (A) before pulstrode measurements, (B) after 500 pulse
sequences in flow mode, where anodic current was applied during galvanostatic
pulse, (C) after 3 d in the flow system with no galvanostatic pulsing,
and (D) after 500 pulse sequences in the flow mode with cathodic current
applied during the galvanostatic pulse. All measurements were conducted
in a 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, containing 10 mM NaCl.

When a fresh sensor is placed
under flowing conditions with the
polyanion pulse sequence but only for 500 pulses (during the first
day), only a very small negative potential change is observed in the
presence of KBr, similar to the sensor that has not been exposed to
flowing conditions. However, when the sensor is polarized in the flow
mode for 3 d using a cathodic current pulse (as would be employed
for polycation detection), it exhibits a much larger negative potential
change of approximately −30 mV in response to 1 mM KBr in the
static potentiometric beaker experiment (see Figure 4D). This is likely because as the cathodic current is applied
during the galvanostatic pulse, DNNS– moves toward
the sample/membrane interface and concentrates in this region, allowing
it to be more efficiently washed out from the membrane phase owing
to its decreased lipophilicity. In contrast, when the anodic current
pulse is applied for polyanion sensing, the DNNS– moves toward the membrane/inner filling solution interface, where
the solution is stagnant and DNNS– can partition
back into the membrane, while TDMA+ ions move to the front
side of the membrane. Since TDMA+ is more lipophilic than
DNNS–, much less DNNS– is washed
out from the membrane by the flowing conditions. Therefore, the 1:1
molar ratio of DNNS– to TDMA+ within
the sensing membrane remains constant for a longer period of time
when using the polyanion sensing mode of operation. As expected, this
“extraction” effect is much less pronounced in static
measurements with polyion sensors and likely also with pulstrodes
used in similar nonflowing conditions.

The most widely used
polyions in pharmaceutical applications are
heparin and protamine.15−20 Protamine is an arginine-rich polypeptide used as an antidote to
the anticoagulant heparin in medical procedures where it binds strongly
to heparin forming a neutral complex.17 Since large heparin doses can lead to bleeding complications, and
protamine overdose is known to cause complement activation and other
toxic effects in patients, monitoring of their concentration in blood
is potentially quite useful.16−20 In consideration that the pulstrode response is also governed by
the presence of sodium or chloride ions, experiments were carried
out to determine both heparin and protamine in a FIA mode in which
a physiological level of NaCl background is present. Experiments using
samples made in a 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, with 100 mM NaCl
and using this same buffer as the carrier stream were therefore performed.
Significant potentiometric response to protamine is still observed
(Figure 5A) when
sensing polycations, while indiscernible FIA signals for different
heparin concentrations are observed in the polyanion sensing mode
(data not shown). This is consistent with the low responses toward
heparin obtained in static (no flow) measurements using the pulstrode
method under similar high NaCl conditions12 and may relate to much slower kinetics of ion-exchange at the membrane/sample
interface for heparin compared to protamine, given that the average
MW of heparin is in the range of 15000 Da (compared to protamine with
MW = 5100).21 Since the period where heparin
can effectively be extracted into the membrane is only during the
galvanostatic and open circuit periods (1.5 s), it is likely that
significantly more protamine can be extracted during this short period
than heparin and, thus, the ability to outcompete the smaller counterions
in the sample and membrane phases during and after the polarization
period (Na+ in polycation sensing mode and Cl– in the polyanion sensing mode) is greater in the case of protamine
sensing.

To detect heparin under physiological conditions in
the FIA mode,
a constant concentration of protamine (60 μg/mL) was then mixed
with standard amounts of heparin and the resulting mixture was injected
into the FIA system operated in the polycation-sensing mode. As shown
in Figure 5B, as the concentration of heparin
increases, a decrease in the EMF response to protamine is observed.
The linear range of heparin concentrations that can be detected is
from 10–35 μg/mL, which corresponds to 2–6 units/mL,
lying within the range of heparin concentrations used in certain clinical
procedures, like open-heart surgery, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation,
etc.16−19

Figure 5 (A)
Calibration of ΔEMF response (peak voltage – baseline
voltage) to protamine in the flow-injection mode in 10 mM phosphate
buffer, pH 7.4, containing 100 mM NaCl. It should be noted that the
standard deviation for n = 3 injections at each concentration
is so small that it cannot be observed for some data points. (B) Response
to increasing concentrations of heparin with a constant concentration
of 60 μg/mL protamine present in the test sample in the 10 mM
phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, containing 100 mM NaCl. Data in (B) represents
testing with three different sensors with the same membrane composition
in the FIA system, where standard deviation was calculated using data
from all three sensors. Flow rates for both A and B were set at 0.6
mL/min.

It should also be noted that preliminary
experiments using protamine
spiked into blood plasma were also attempted with the new FIA arrangement.
Such experiments showed much larger positive EMF responses than for
the same concentration of protamine alone in the buffer. This data
is at odds with what was previously reported by Bakker and co-workers,11 using pulstrode type protamine sensors in the
static mode, where the presence of blood components did not perturb
the ability to detect protamine. The only difference in the sensor
employed in that earlier work versus the present device was the anion
exchanger species of the lipophilic salt used within the membrane,
which was a tetradodecylammonium species, compared to tridodecylmethylammonium
employed in this work. However, the cationic species is moved toward
the inner interface during the cathodic current pulse for polycation
detection and, hence, more research is needed to understand why some
components in the blood that was tested in this work led to such a
larger positive interference in detection of protamine.

Flow-injection
analysis normally allows for high sample throughput,
and therefore, flow rate and potentiostatic pulse duration times were
further optimized to increase the number of samples analyzed per hour
via the arrangement shown in Figure 1. To achieve
higher throughput, we examined shortening the potentiostatic pulse
segment of the sequence. Experiments were carried out to determine
how short the potentiostatic pulse could be without compromising reproducibility
and maintaining a stable baseline. In prior studies with pulstrodes,
it was recommended to apply a 10–30 times longer potentiostatic
pulse than galvanostatic one to restore the membrane to its initial
state.11 However, in the optimized polyion
sensing FIA system, it was found that decreasing the pulse to 6 s
and thereby collecting data points every 8 s could be implemented
without decreasing reproducibility. In order to further improve the
number of samples measured per hour, experiments were carried out
to optimize sample loop size and flow rate. Ultimately, a much smaller
sample loop volume of 200 μL (vs 750 μL originally) and
increased flow rate up to 0.93 mL/min were employed. Under these conditions,
a sampling rate of 20 samples/h can be achieved with a relative standard
deviation of ±4.2% for the ΔEMF peak values when 60 μg/mL
protamine is monitored (see Figure 6).

Figure 6 Dynamic potentiometric response to repeated injections
(n = 20) of 60 μg/mL protamine in 10 mM phosphate
buffer,
pH 7.4, containing 100 mM NaCl. A sampling rate of approximately 20
samples per hour has been achieved. For data shown, the average ΔEMF
= 33.7 mV ± 1.42 mV (n = 20). Flow rate was
set at 0.93 mL/min.

Typically, 30–300
samples per hour can be handled in modern
FIA systems, and even up to 1000 have been reported in specially designed
microsystems with optical detection.13 Thus,
the obtained sample throughput in this work may not appear to be significant.
However, given the high molecular weights of the species detected
and considering that use of the traditional pulstrode method in a
static mode requires manually changing sample and background solutions
as well as the further manual rinsing of all electrodes between samples,
detecting polyions at low levels with a throughput of 20 samples per
hour is still a step forward. By using more highly plasticized membranes
in the working electrode, or even fully organic liquid membranes,
it may be possible to increase the rate of polyion extraction during
and after the galvanic pulse. This might also lead to faster membrane
recovery times during the potentiostatic pulse. Taken together, this
approach might enable the use of smaller sample volumes and shorter
pulse sequences that may lead to even higher throughputs.

Conclusion
We have demonstrated, for the first time, that polyion selective
pulstrodes can be used as detectors in an FIA measurement configuration.
Within such a flow-through system, this sensing mode provides relatively
stable and reproducible signals that are proportional to both polycation
and polyanion concentrations using a single working membrane electrode.
While demonstrated here for use in detecting heparin and protamine
as model analytes, it is envisioned that this method could prove useful
for quality control monitoring of a wide range of products/supplements
that utilize polyions as active ingredients. Further, the methodology
described here should also be applicable in developing flow-through
methods to detect specific enzyme activities that cleave polyions
into smaller fragments that are not sensed by the pulstrode. Finally,
the use of polyion selective pulstrodes as universal detectors in
preparative LC separation methods employed to isolate or fractionate
polyion species, as well as their use as detectors in modern microfluidic
devices, should also be possible.

Author Contributions
∥ A.K.B.-V. and J.Z. contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank the National Institutes of Health (Grant EB-000784)
and the European Union in the framework of the Regional Development
Fund through the Joint UW and WUT International PhD Program of Foundation
for Polish Science (Grant MPD/2010/4) for funding this research.
==== Refs
References
Ma S. ; Meyerhoff M. E. ; Yang V. C. 
Anal. Chem. 
1992 , 64 , 694 –697 .1580363 
Ma S. ; Yang V. C. ; Fu B. ; Meyerhoff M. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
1993 , 65 , 2078 –2084 .8372971 
Fu B. ; Bakker E. ; Yun J. H. ; Yang V. C. ; Meyerhoff M. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
1994 , 66 , 2250 –2259 .8080104 
Fu B. ; Bakker E. ; Yang V. C. ; Meyerhoff M. E. 
Macromolecules 
1995 , 28 , 5834 –5840 .
Ye Q. ; Meyerhoff M. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2001 , 73 , 332 –336 .11199986 
Yun J. H. ; Meyerhoff M. E. ; Yang V. C. 
Anal. Biochem. 
1995 , 224 , 212 –220 .7710074 
Hassan S. S. M. ; Meyerhoff M. E. ; Badr I. H. A. ; Abd-Rabboh H. S. M. 
Electroanalysis 
2002 , 14 , 439 –444 .
Wang L. ; Buchanan S. ; Meyerhoff M. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 9845 –9847 .19007240 
Wang L. ; Meyerhoff M. E. 
Electroanalysis 
2010 , 22 , 26 –30 .21151739 
Shvarev A. ; Bakker E. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125 , 11192 –11193 .16220929 
Shvarev A. ; Bakker E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 5221 –5228 .16097762 
Gemene K. ; Meyerhoff M. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 1612 –1615 .20121058 
Du W. ; Fang Q. ; He Q. H. ; Fang Z. L. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 1330 –1337 .15732915 
VCCLAB , Virtual
Computational Chemistry Laboratory, http://www.vcclab.org (accessed Aug 15, 2013).
Despotis G. J. ; Joist J. H. ; Goodnough L. T. 
Clin. Chem. 
1997 , 43 , 1684 –1696 .9299961 
FitzGerald D. J. ; Patel A. ; Body S. C. ; Garvin S. 
Perfusion 
2009 , 24 , 93 –96 .19654150 
Gautam N. K. ; Schmitz M. L. ; Harrison D. ; Zabala L. M. ; Killebrew P. ; Belcher R. H. ; Prodhan P. ; Mckamie W. ; Norvell D. C. 
Pediatr. Anesth. 
2013 , 23 , 233 –241 .
Koster A. ; Fischer T. ; Praus M. ; Haberzetti H. ; Kuebler W. M. ; Hetzer R. ; Kuppe H. 
Anesthesiology 
2002 , 97 , 837 –841 .12357148 
Despotis G. J. ; Joist J. H. ; Hogue C. W. ; Alsoufiev A. ; Kater K. ; Goodnough L. T. ; Santoro S. A. ; Spitznagel E. ; Rosenblum M. ; Lappas D. G. 
J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg. 
1995 , 110 , 46 –54 .7609568 
Bhaskar U. ; Sterner E. ; Hickey A. M. ; Onishi A. ; Zhang F. M. ; Dordick J. S. ; Linhardt R. J. 
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
2012 , 93 , 1 –16 .22048616 
Ando T. ; Watanabe S. 
Int. J. Protein Res. 
1969 , 3 , 221 –224 .4953052
