
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac402303gArticleQuantitative Chemical Imaging and Unsupervised Analysis
Using Hyperspectral Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering Microscopy Masia Francesco *†Glen Adam ‡Stephens Phil ‡Borri Paola §Langbein Wolfgang †† School
of Physics and Astronomy, Cardiff University, CF24 3AA Cardiff, U.K.,‡ Institute
of Tissue Engineering and Repair, School
of Dentistry, Cardiff University, CF14 4XY Cardiff, U.K., and§ School
of Biosciences, Cardiff University, CF10 3AX Cardiff, U.K.* E-mail: masiaf@cf.ac.uk.06 10 2013 19 11 2013 85 22 10820 10828 15 07 2013 05 10 2013 Copyright © 2013 American Chemical
Society2013American Chemical
SocietyTerms of Use CC-BY

In this work, we report a method
to acquire and analyze hyperspectral
coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) microscopy images of
organic materials and biological samples resulting in an unbiased
quantitative chemical analysis. The method employs singular value
decomposition on the square root of the CARS intensity, providing
an automatic determination of the components above noise, which are
retained. Complex CARS susceptibility spectra, which are linear in
the chemical composition, are retrieved from the CARS intensity spectra
using the causality of the susceptibility by two methods, and their
performance is evaluated by comparison with Raman spectra. We use
non-negative matrix factorization applied to the imaginary part and
the nonresonant real part of the susceptibility with an additional
concentration constraint to obtain absolute susceptibility spectra
of independently varying chemical components and their absolute concentration.
We demonstrate the ability of the method to provide quantitative chemical
analysis on known lipid mixtures. We then show the relevance of the
method by imaging lipid-rich stem-cell-derived mouse adipocytes as
well as differentiated embryonic stem cells with a low density of
lipids. We retrieve and visualize the most significant chemical components
with spectra given by water, lipid, and proteins segmenting the image
into the cell surrounding, lipid droplets, cytosol, and the nucleus,
and we reveal the chemical structure of the cells, with details visualized
by the projection of the chemical contrast into a few relevant channels.

document-id-old-9ac402303gdocument-id-new-14ac-2013-02303gccc-price
==== Body
Coherent
anti-Stokes Raman scattering
microscopy has emerged in the past decade as a powerful multiphoton
microscopy technique for rapid label-free imaging of organic materials
and biological samples with submicrometer spatial resolution in three-dimensions
and high chemical specificity.1,2 CARS is a third-order
nonlinear process in which molecular vibrations are coherently driven
by the interference between two optical fields (pump and Stokes),
and the optical field (the pump in two-pulse CARS) is anti-Stokes
Raman scattered by the driven vibrations. Owing to the coherence of
the driving process, CARS benefits, unlike spontaneous Raman, from
the constructive interference of light scattered by spectrally overlapping
vibrational modes within the focal volume, enabling fast acquisition
at moderate powers compatible with live cell imaging.

Among
the various technical implementations of CARS microscopy
reported to date, hyperspectral CARS imaging is receiving increasing
attention due to its superior chemical specificity over single-frequency
CARS. In hyperspectral CARS, a CARS spectrum is measured at each spatial
position either by taking a series of spatially resolved images at
different vibrational frequencies3 or by
acquiring a spectrum at each spatial point following simultaneous
excitation of several vibrations.1 Analyzing
the resulting multidimensional data set in order to provide an efficient
image visualization and a useful chemical interpretation is nontrivial.
Simple approaches to reduce the dimensionality by studying spectra
acquired at a few specific positions of the image or by considering
images acquired at a few vibrational frequencies fail to make full
use of the available information. Moreover, for a quantitative chemical
analysis of CARS microspectroscopy images, one has to consider that
the quantity which is linear in the chemical composition is the complex
third-order susceptibility in the nonlinear process.1 The CARS intensity is instead proportional to the absolute
square of this susceptibility, which contains the interference between
the resonant and nonresonant terms resulting in a nontrivial line
shape. To overcome this complication, more advanced technical implementations
have been developed such as heterodyne coherent anti-Stokes Raman
scattering (HCARS),4,5 which measures amplitude and phase
and in turn the complex susceptibility, and stimulated Raman scattering
(SRS),6−8 which measures only the imaginary part of the susceptibility.
On the other hand, the complex susceptibility can also be determined
from the more commonly measured CARS intensity by phase retrieval9,10 if a spectrum over a sufficiently large spectral range is acquired.
Two types of phase-retrieval methods have been discussed recently
in the literature, including the modified Kramers–Kronig transform
(MKK)10 and the maximum entropy method
(MEM).11 Both methods have been shown to
be able to retrieve the complex susceptibility with similar accuracy.12 They show an error of the retrieved phase of
the complex susceptibility, which was partially corrected by subtracting
a slowly varying function from the retrieved phase, determined by
a procedure which was, however, not well documented. To subsequently
represent from the retrieved complex susceptibility a spatially resolved
map of spectral components, methods that have been proposed so far
in the literature use principal component analysis (PCA)13 or hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA)14 as known from Raman imaging, independent component
analysis (ICA) for SRS,15 classical least-squares
(CLS) analysis for CARS,16 and multivariate
curve resolution (MCR) analysis for SRS.8 However, although these methods provide a way to sort the spectral
information into significant components, they are not able to make
an unsupervised decomposition into individual chemical species with
quantitative absolute concentration determination, which is ultimately
the most meaningful quantitative representation. Among the mentioned
methods, MCR can provide a quantitative determination of the chemical
composition but needs an initial guess of the spectra17 and is thus not unsupervised.

Here we present a method
of quantitative chemical imaging going
from data acquisition using hyperspectral CARS to unsupervised analysis
and visualization of the spatially resolved absolute concentrations
of chemical components. We use a single source multimodal CARS microscope3 to rapidly acquire hyperspectral CARS images
over a large vibrational range from 1200 to 3800 cm–1. The data are de-noised by singular value decomposition (SVD), and
we develop and use two methods for the retrieval of the complex susceptibility
based on the causality of the response, where the phase error is corrected
as demanded by causality. For the final step, the decomposition into
spectra of independently varying chemical components and quantification
of their absolute concentrations, we apply a fast variant of non-negative
matrix factorization (NMF) with an additional concentration constraint
using the imaginary part and the spectrally averaged real part of
the susceptibility.

Materials and Methods
CARS Microspectroscopy
CARS hyperspectral images have
been acquired on a home-built multimodal laser-scanning microscope
based on an inverted Nikon Ti–U with simultaneous acquisition
of CARS, two-photon fluorescence (TPF), and second harmonic generation
(SHG) using a single 5 fs Ti:Sa broadband (660–970 nm) laser
source. A detailed description of the setup can be found in ref (3). In brief, pump and Stokes
beams for CARS excitation are given by the laser wavelength ranges
of 660–730 nm and 730–900 nm, respectively. We use spectral
focusing18,19 by applying an equal linear chirp to pump
and Stokes pulses through glass dispersion. This provides a tunable
vibrational excitation covering the 1200–3800 cm–1 range with a spectral resolution of 10 cm–1 by
varying the time delay between pump and Stokes with a 10 ms step response.
The data discussed in this paper were taken with a 20× 0.75 NA
dry objective (Nikon CFI Plan Apochromat λ series) and a 0.72
NA dry condenser for signal collection in the forward direction, with
a resulting spatial resolution for the material susceptibility (full-width
at half-maximum of the coherent point-spread function amplitude) of
0.9 (3.5) μm in the lateral (axial) direction. The CARS signal
is discriminated by a pair of Semrock band-pass filters FF01-562/40
for acquisition in the 2400–3800 cm–1 range,
or a Semrock low-pass filter SP01-633RS and a band-pass filter FF01-609/54
for acquisition in the 1200–2500 cm–1 range,
and then detected by a Hamamatsu H7422-40 photomultiplier.

Phase
Retrieval
Two methods for the retrieval of the
CARS susceptibility in the spectral domain χ̃(ω)
were developed and used. They start from the CARS intensity given
by IC(ω) =  with the instrument response . The instrument
response contains two main
effects, the spectrally dependent sensitivity and the finite spectral
resolution, limited, for example, by the finite duration of the laser
pulses. The instrument response is consequently approximated as the
absolute square of the convolution of the susceptibility with a spectral
instrument response s, multiplied with a spectrally
dependent transduction coefficient T(ω): 1  

s determines the spectral resolution
of the instrument and is assumed to be independent of the center frequency.
We do not explicitly consider s in the following mathematical
treatment, such that the retrieved χ̃ will have a spectral
resolution limited by s, which in the present experiments
is approximately 20 cm–1. Separating χ̃
= χ̃e+ χ̃v into a nonresonant,
frequency-independent real electronic contribution χ̃e and a complex resonant vibrational contribution χ̃v, we arrive at 2  

To determine T(ω), we use the CARS intensity Iref(ω) acquired under otherwise identical
conditions in a nonresonant medium with susceptibility χ̃ref (for example, glass for the spectral range of our instrument),
yielding T = Iref/|χ̃ref|2. The CARS ratio is then defined as I̅C = IC/Iref = |χ̃/χ̃ref|2, and we define the normalized susceptibility  = χ̃/|χ̃ref|, which will be used in the following calculations. Making
this
normalization is an important advantage of the present work, as will
be further discussed later. Note also that this simple way of referencing
the signal to a known response using glass is an advantage of CARS
compared to SRS because SRS is not sensitive to the nonresonant susceptibility.
Glass thus provides an ubiquitous calibration standard, typically
part of the microscope sample.

Iterative Kramers–Kronig Method (IKK)
In this
method, we use the causality of . To do this, we note that from
eq 2 we find 3  

The inverse Fourier transform of the
real part of the susceptibility is related to the susceptibility in
time domain χ̅v(t) = –1(v) 4  

where  is the Fourier
transform operator. The
causality of the susceptibility implies that χ̅v(t) = 0 for negative times, t <
0. We can therefore retrieve χ̅v by multiplying
both terms of eq 4 with the Heaviside function
θ(t) and apply a forward Fourier transform, 5  

In order to determine v, we have
to know e and |v|2. Both
are determined
by iteration for self-consistency. e is determined
from the average
value of I̅C – |v|2 over
the spectrum, 6  noting that
the spectral average of  is zero. The iteration
repeats the sequence
eq 3 - eq 5 - eq 6 until sufficient convergence is achieved. During
the iteration, we can self-consistently determine  outside of the measured frequency
range.
More details on initialization and convergence control of the iteration
are given in the Supporting Information. We introduce a Gaussian time filter by replacing θ(t) in eq 5 with θ̃(t) = θ(t) exp (−(t/τ0)2/2), which suppresses noise beyond
the coherence time of the susceptibility and the wrap-around effects
in the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm that was used. For the
data shown in this work, we used τ0 = 3 ps given
by the experimental spectral resolution.

Phase-Corrected Kramers–Kronig
Method (PCKK)
The causality of  results in Kramers–Kronig
(KK) relationships
between the real and imaginary parts of . However, only || is known from a CARS measurement,
necessitating
the above-described iterative procedure. To alleviate this, one can
use the fact that also ln() obeys KK relationships20 and causality. This provides a relationship
between (ln()) = ln((I̅C)1/2) which we measure, and (ln()), which is the phase ϕ
of  = ||exp(iϕ). Therefore,
no iterative procedure is required, and we can directly retrieve the
phase ϕ(ω) by 7  

Equation 7 uses
the causality principle as in eq 5, but applied
to ln() rather than to v. We note that I̅C is not measured over an infinite spectral
range, such
that the values outside of the measured spectral range have to be
estimated before applying eq 7. We use here
a constant continuation of the measured values, as described in the Supporting Information. This approximation is
reasonable for measured ranges with limits in regions without resonances.
In order to correct to some extent for the resulting error in the
phase, we introduce a rigid phase shift ϕ0 given
by the minimum of ϕ over the measured frequency interval [ω1,ωu], such that the corrected phase ϕc = ϕ – ϕ0 is larger or equal
than zero over [ω1,ωu]. Having retrieved
the phase, the real and imaginary part of the susceptibility are determined
by 8  

The numerical complexity of PCKK is thus given by the calculation
of the logarithm and the root, as well as the FFT forward and backward
transform. We employ the time-domain filtering described in the IKK
method also here, replacing θ(t) with θ̃(t) in eq 7. The time-filtering results
in a spectral smoothing reducing the noise and not systematically
influencing the phase outside spectral resonances. Noise in the data
shifts ϕ0 to lower values as it is the minimum of
ϕ. To suppress this effect, we determine ϕ0 from ϕ retrieved with a τ0, which is smaller
than the one used to retrieve ϕ to determine ϕc. In the data presented here, we used τ0 = 0.4 ps
for ϕ0 and τ0 = 3 ps for ϕc. We note that a similar field retrieval method (MKK) based
on a modified Kramers–Kronig transform was previously reported.10 In this method, Iref was not used to normalize IC, but as
negative time component in a phase retrieval similar to eq 7. Using the analytical properties of the method,
we found that this is equivalent to a correction of the phase error
created by T(ω). However,  was then retrieved using  = sin(ϕc)(IC)1/2, which is not corrected
for the amplitude
factor 1/(T(ω))1/2, and also not normalized with
respect to a known material (see Figure S1 of the Supporting Information for a comparison between the MKK and
PCKK methods).

In ref (12), the
retrieved phase was corrected by subtracting a spectrally slowly varying
baseline. In other previous work using MKK,16,21 the retrieved spectra are corrected by determining a polynomial
baseline and subtracting the baseline on a pixel by pixel basis.

Singular Value Decomposition for Noise Filtering and Spectral
Encoding
The compact singular value decomposition is a factorization
of a S × P matrix D into 9  

In the present
application, the P elements are the spatial points
of the image, the S elements are the measured spectral
points, and we assume P > S. U is a S × S unitary
matrix containing a
new spectral basis (called the left singular vectors), Σ is
a S × S diagonal matrix containing
the average contributions (singular values) of the new spectral basis
vectors in D, and VT (transpose of V) is a S × P matrix containing the normalized right
singular vectors, which are the spatial distributions in the new spectral
basis. Importantly, the new basis is chosen such that the cross-correlation
between the new spatial distributions vanishes. The SVD thus finds
a new spectral basis with uncorrelated spatial distributions and sorts
them according to their average contributions.

Noise Filtering
The noise in IC is given by the photon
shot noise multiplied by the excess
noise factor of the photomultiplier used in the detection. The noise
is therefore at large photon numbers proportional to (IC)1/2, such that IC/(IC)1/2 = (IC)1/2 has a intensity independent (also called
whitened) Gaussian noise. To remove spectral components which are
dominated by this spatially and spectrally uncorrelated noise, we
calculate the SVD for the data D, given by (IC)1/2 for each point. The singular
values of white Gaussian noise are well described by a linear decrease
versus index as shown in the Supporting Information Figure S6. Assuming that at least half of the singular vectors are
dominated by noise, we can determine this dependence by fitting a
linear slope to the singular values with indices larger than S/2. We then classify singular values as being noise-dominated
when they are less than a factor (2)1/2 larger than the
fit (i.e., when their root-mean-square (RMS) signal is estimated to
be less than the RMS noise), resulting in an index cutoff of imax. We remove these noise-dominated components
by setting their singular values to zero, resulting in the matrix
Σnf, and the noise-filtered data 10  

The noise-filtered CARS data
is then
used for the field retrieval algorithms. In previous work, this filtering
was done directly in IC, which is less
effective in separating the signal from the noise, as shown in Figure 3, and the filter cutoff was determined using a subjective
analysis of the spatial distributions of the singular components.16

Spectral Encoding
The number of
independent channels
recognizable in an image is limited to three, given by the number
of color channels in human vision. However, the number of spectral
channels in vibrational spectra is typically significantly larger
than three, so that we need a method to distill the most significant
information of an image into these three channels. SVD is suited for
this, as it calculates a new basis of ordered importance, allowing
us to show the most important three singular vectors which are capturing
the largest part of information, typically creating more than 90%
of the total variance in the data.

Blind Factorization into
Susceptibilities and Concentrations
of Chemical Components
We assume that the CARS susceptibility p measured
at
any voxel p of the image is given by the weighted
sum of the susceptibilities {k} of chemical
components numbered by k with non-negative relative
volume concentrations cp{k},
such that 11  where K is the number of
relevant components. Furthermore, each component has a susceptibility
with a non-negative imaginary part,  ≥ 0, and a positive nonresonant
background, e. The resonant contribution
to , which is , is fully determined by  =  and thus does not contain additional information.
It is therefore adequate to use non-negative matrix factorization
(NMF) of  over the measured spectral points and an
additional point for e. We determine the
value χ̂e of this additional point by the spectral
average of  weighted with the root of the number of
points to provide the same RMS error as each spectral point of , 12  

The P × (S + 1) matrix of data D = {{},χ̂ep} is then factorized into the non-negative P × K matrix of concentrations C = {cp{k}} and a non-negative (S + 1) × K matrix of spectra S = {{},χ̂e{k}} of the components,
such that 13  where E is the residual of
Frobenius norm ||E||, which is minimized by the NMF.
We employ the iterative fast block principal pivoting algorithm22 to perform this minimization. NMF determines
the product of concentrations and spectra, with an arbitrary scaling
between them, such that the resulting concentrations, as well as the
spectra, are in arbitrary units. If we assume that the voxel volume
is completely filled with components which are measured in CARS, we
can use the physical constraint that the sum of the volume concentrations
at each voxel is equal to one, which determines the scaling and thus
determines the factorization into susceptibilities and concentrations
of the chemical components (FSC3) in absolute units. To
implement this constraint, we modified the algorithm in ref (22) by adding to each iteration
step (which consists of a minimization of ||E|| over S, followed by a minimization of ||E||
over C) a minimization of the concentration error
|EC|, where EC = {1–∑k = 1Kcp{k}}, over a position-independent scaling of the concentration
of each component, using the same minimization algorithm.

Results
and Discussion
Phase Retrieval of Simulated Spectra
To verify the
validity of the phase-retrieval methods IKK and PCKK and to compare
their performance with the methods MKK and MEM reported in the literature,
we first use simulated spectra exactly adhering to the assumptions
of the methods, as discussed in the Supporting
Information Figure S2. In essence, all methods lead to an acceptable
result for this simulation, with the MEM and PCKK showing the smallest
errors. The fastest method is PCKK because it uses only a double Fourier
transform operation.

Phase Retrieval of Measured Spectra
We apply now the
phase retrieval to data measured with our single-source CARS microscope.
The spectra of I̅C for bulk PS and
GTO samples are shown in Figure 1 (a,c). The
sample preparation is described in the Supporting
Information. The CARS intensity spectra of the samples and
of glass have been acquired in the spectral ranges of 1200–2400
and 2200–3900 cm–1 using appropriate filters
and dispersion settings,3 and I̅C was generated from this data in the range of 1200–3900
cm–1 for the PCKK, IKK, and MEM methods. For the
MKK method, which uses IC,  was retrieved separately
in the two spectral
ranges. The retrieved  values are shown in Figure 1 (b,d), together with  of the MKK method in arbitrary units. All
major features observed in the Raman spectra (details of the confocal
Raman microspectrometer can be found in the Supporting
Information) acquired on the same samples (dashed lines) are
reproduced in the retrieved , including the weak resonances at (2980,
3003, 3164, 3203) in the PS spectrum and the peak at 1744 cm–1 from the C=O stretch of the ester bonds between glycerol
and the oleic acid23 in the GTO spectrum.
The IKK and MEM methods produce almost identical imaginary parts of
the susceptibility, while the MKK result differs mainly because of
the only partially corrected transduction T(ω).  , retrieved by IKK, MEM, and MKK, shows
a negative offset. In the PCKK method, which includes phase correction,
a positive  is obtained. We note that correcting , as done in ref (16), instead of correcting the phase, leads according
to eq 8 to an inconsistency of retrieved and
measured I̅C. In the inset of Figure 1, the RMS error in the iterative method is shown
as a function of the iteration steps (see the Supporting Information for details). The minimum RMS error
is obtained within 20 iterations. A further example, the spectrum
of a lipid droplet in a 3T3L1-derived adipocyte, is shown in Supporting Information Figure S7.

Figure 1 CARS intensity ratio I̅C measured
on bulk samples of PS in (a) and GTO in (c) and the corresponding
retrieved  in (b,d) for different methods as labeled.
Normalized Raman spectra measured on the same samples are shown as
dashed lines. The RMS error in I̅C of the IKK method versus iteration number is shown in the inset
of (b).

Determination of Spectra
and Absolute Concentrations of a Lipid
Mixture Using FSC3
Hyperspectral CARS images and
Raman spectra of the octanoic acid/α-linolenic acid mixtures
were acquired in the frequency region of 2400–3800 cm–1. The sample preparation is described in the Supporting Information. The CARS images cover an area of 10
× 10 μm2, and a spectral step of 3 cm–1 size has been used. After SVD de-noising with imax = 20,  has been retrieved using PCKK. FSC3 with K = 2 was then applied to the ensemble
of  (Raman) spectra of the different mixtures,
resulting in the spectra and concentrations shown in Figure 2a,b, respectively. The FSC3 spectra quantitatively
reproduce the spectra of the pure substances with deviations in the
few percent range, showing that FSC3 is able to determine
the component spectra without supervision. The resulting absolute
concentrations of the FSC3 components are shown in the
inset versus the nominal concentration, showing an error of a few
percent. Interestingly, the performance of FSC3 on Raman
and CARS data is similar, implying that hyperspectral CARS can provide
similar chemical specificity as Raman. We note that the two components
that were used differ only by 24% in their Raman spectra (given by
the norm of the difference). Concentrations of components with larger
differences are expected to be retrieved with a smaller error. We
have compared the performance of the MCR factorization method used
in ref (8) with FSC3 (details given in Figure S8 of the Supporting
Information). We find that apart from being about 2 orders
of magnitude slower, the MCR method fails to deterministically reproduce
the spectra and concentration of the chemical components if a random
initial guess for the spectra is used, as used in FSC3 and
required for an unsupervised and unbiased determination of the absolute
chemical composition of the sample.

Figure 2 a) FSC3 spectra s{k} (solid lines) of mixtures of octanoic
and α-linolenic
acid, compared with the spectra of the pure compounds (dashed lines).
Inset: FSC3 concentrations (v/v) c{k} versus nominal concentration. (b) as (a)
for Raman spectra.

Analysis of Hyperspectral
CARS Images of Cells
Hyperspectral
CARS images of fixed 3T3L1-derived adipocytes were acquired with a
pixel size of 0.3 × 0.3 μm2 and 3 cm–1 spectral steps in the two frequency ranges, 1200–2400 and
2200–3900 cm–1. The sample preparation is
described in the Supporting Information. To show the difference between using (IC)1/2 or IC in the SVD noise
filtering, we show in Figure 3 the singular values Σi,i for both cases, normalized to the respective largest
value Σ1,1. The singular values of (IC)1/2 are decaying faster, and they show a
linear decay with index for the higher indices, as expected for white
Gaussian noise. The linear fit to the upper half of the values (i > 240) and the resulting cutoff (imax = 30) is also shown. The singular values of IC instead do not show the linear behavior and
are not
suited for the unsupervised noise filtering. Using the noise-filtered I̅C, we retrieve  with PCKK. For visualization,
we use SVD
on  and show images of the first five singular
components in Figure 4. The first component
is dominant outside the cells and can be associated to water, in agreement
with the spectrum having a dominant band around 3350 cm–1 that is related to the O–H stretch modes. The second component
shows the lipid droplets in the cells with a spectrum peaked at 2850
cm–1, corresponding to the CH2 stretching
mode. The third component is present in the other regions of the cell,
including the cytosol, nuclear membrane, and nucleoli. Its spectrum
shows a peak around 2930 cm–1 which is typical for
proteins/nucleic acids.8 The fourth component
relates to inhomogeneities in the chemical composition of the lipid
droplets. The fifth component is a modification of the water spectrum
and fluctuates within the cytosol and the nucleus. SVD decomposition
results for IKK-derived  are shown in the Supporting
Information Figure S9.

Figure 3 Singular values of the SVD noise-filtering procedure.
Squares and
circles show singular values of (IC)1/2 and IC, respectively, and the
red line is a linear fit to the singular values of (IC)1/2 for i > 240.
The
gray area indicates the values set to zero for noise filtering.

Figure 4 Results of a SVD on hyperspectral images of  measured on 3T3L1-derived adipocytes in
the 2400–3800 cm–1 range and retrieved with
PCKK. Top: Spatial distribution of ΣVT of the first
five singular components on a linear grayscale with black (white)
corresponding to the minimum (maximum) value, respectively. Scale
bar indicates 5 μm. Bottom: two images with color encodings
labeled by the singular component number after each color letter.
Graphs: (a) first five singular spectra, vertically displaced for
clarity, (b) singular values, (c)  spectra at the positions indicated
by the
symbols in the R1G2B3 image.

The spatial distribution of up to three singular components
can
be shown in color images. This is illustrated in Figure 4 which shows a RGB image encoding the first component as red,
the second as green, and the third as blue. Using alternative encodings
can vary the contrast, as shown in the RGB image created with the
fourth, fifth, and sixth component as red, green, and blue channels,
respectively.

In the SVD images of (IC)1/2, shown in the Supporting Information Figure
S10, the lipid droplets are surrounded by a thin layer of a different
component. This is a result of the interference between χ̃e and χ̃v in (IC)1/2. In the corresponding images of  (see Figure 4 for
PCKK and Supporting Information Figure
S9 for IKK), the lipid droplets are homogeneous in color, indicating
a homogeneity in the chemical composition.

The SVD spectra of  do not correspond to individual chemical
components but rather to differences between chemical components fluctuating
independently. The SVD analysis helps to determine regions of the
samples which present the same color and that can be identified as
a single substance. Once a substance is identified, one can rotate
the basis by manually defining regions which are assumed to be pure
substances, as detailed in the Supporting Information Figure S11. However, this is a subjective procedure and does not
apply the physical constraints which are used in the FSC3 method of blind factorization into susceptibilities and concentrations
of chemical components.

The results of FSC3 on  are shown in Figure 5 for K = 4 chemical components.
Both the spatial
distribution of the components concentration and their spectra can
be attributed to expected chemical components. Component 1 has the
largest volume fraction (53%) within the image, and both the spectrum
and spatial distribution are consistent with its attribution to water.
Component 4 has a volume fraction of 9%, has a spectrum similar to
GTO (compare Figure 1), and is highly concentrated
in the droplet structures. This shows that these structures are lipid
droplets. Component 2 has a volume fraction of 26%, is spatially located
in the cytosolic regions and in the nucleus, and has a spectrum peaked
around 2930 cm–1. This component is attributed to
proteins and nucleic acids .8 Interestingly,
it shows not only the CH3 resonance around 2930 cm–1 but also comes with a water component which has a
slightly modified spectrum compared to the bulk water spectrum of
component 1. From the comparison between the area of the water peak
in components 1 and 2, we can estimate a 57% relative volume fraction
of water in this component. This can be interpreted as the volume
of a solvation layer around the proteins and nucleic acids. Assuming
a 1 nm thick solvation layer,24 the relative
volume fraction is expected for core sizes of 4(6) nm for a cylindrical
(spherical) geometry, respectively. These sizes are within a factor
of 2, consistent with protein/nucleic acid sizes, supporting the attribution
of the modified water component to a solvation layer. Finally, component
3 is mostly present at the membrane of the lipid droplets, characterized
by a small peak at ∼2750 cm–1 and a deformed
water spectrum, but it has a relative concentration much smaller than
the other substances. This is the weakest component and is attributed
to a mixture of components of lower concentration not captured by
the other components. By increasing the number of components, K, the spectra of component 2 and 4 split into more components
with slightly different water/protein/lipid spectral features. This
is expected because there are many different lipids/proteins and solvation
layers in the complex cell machinery. A color image encoding the concentrations
of components 1 in blue, 4 in green, and 2 in red gives a good rendering
of the chemical structure, as shown in Figure 5. The error of the factorization is quantified by the relative spectral
error, Es = (P∑s = 1SEs,p2)1/2/ ||D||, and
is shown in Figure 5. The maximum relative
error is 31% and is localized at large lipid droplets. The average
spectral error is 3.5%. The relative concentration error EC is also shown in Figure 5 and
has a maximum of about 25%. Distortions of the excitation fields by
the spatial refractive index structure lead to a modulation of the
CARS intensity and thus the retrieved concentration. Furthermore,
component spectra might change if chemical substances are interacting
with each other, which is not captured by the factorization into independent
components. The spatial distribution of EC shown in Figure 5 indicates that EC is dominated by the refractive index structure,
having minima at the edges and maxima at the center of the droplets.
The spatial distribution of ES gives complementary
information to EC, indicating regions which contain spectral
features and thus chemical compositions which are not captured by
the FSC3 components. The sensitivity of FSC3 can be enhanced by selecting regions of interest in the spatial
and spectral domain. To resolve chemical differences between cytosol,
nucleus, and nucleoli, we have analyzed only the corresponding spatial
region, and we have reduced the spectra range to 2500–3100
cm–1 to reject the contribution of the water spectrum.
The result (bottom row of Figure 5) reveals
that nucleoli and the nuclear membrane contain mostly proteins/nucleic
acids (component 2), while the cell cytosol shows a mixed protein–lipid
composition (component 4). Water (component 1) is the dominant component
of the nucleoplasm.

Figure 5 Results of FSC3 with K = 4
on  described in Figure 4. Top: spatial distributions of the volume concentration C. Grayscale ranges from 0 (black) to 1.1 (white). The corresponding
component spectra  are displayed in (a) together with the
spectrally averaged  (dashed lines). Middle: color concentration
image using the first component as blue, the second as red, and the
fourth as green, scaled to saturate at the concentration maximum.
The spatial distribution of the concentration error EC is shown on a grayscale from −0.28 to 0.16, and
the spatial distribution of the spectral error ES is shown on a grayscale from 0.005 to 0.31. Bottom: Results
of FSC3 using a restricted spatial range as shown and spectral
range 2500–3100 cm–1. Grayscale ranges from
0 (black) to 0.74 (white). Corresponding component spectra are displayed
in (b). Scale bars indicate 5 μm.

The inclusion of the nonresonant susceptibility in the factorization,
afforded by the use of CARS as opposed to SRS, is specifically important
for samples containing components without significant vibrational
resonances in the measured spectral range. This is the case for water
in the characteristic region. As an example, we have performed FSC3 of the same cells as Figure 5 in the
characteristic region, as discussed in the Supporting
Information Figure S12. We find that the resulting concentration
error EC is in the order of 100% when
not including the nonresonant susceptibility. The FSC3 analysis
is also suited for samples with a weak resonant susceptibility. As
an example of this case, we have imaged differentiated mouse embryonic
stem cells (ESc), as discussed in the Supporting
Information Figure S15.

Summary
In summary,
we have demonstrated a new method which we call FSC3 to
quantitatively analyze and visualize effectively the spectral
information contained in hyperspectral CARS microscopy images. The
method employs de-noising by singular value decomposition on whitened
CARS intensity data with an autonomous identification of noise components.
The subsequent phase retrieval is done using a fast noniterative algorithm
(PCKK) based on the causality of the response, yielding the susceptibility,
which is linear in the concentration of the chemical components. We
then use the physical constraint of positive concentrations, the positive
imaginary part of the susceptibility as well as the positive nonresonant
real susceptibility, to determine the susceptibilities and absolute
concentrations of individual chemical components from the hyperspectral
images. The validity and effectiveness of the PCKK method in comparison
to other methods in the literature is demonstrated using simulated
spectra as well as measured CARS and Raman spectra of polystyrene
and lipids. The ability of FSC3 to quantify absolute concentrations
is demonstrated using lipid mixtures. Finally, the efficacy of the
method to provide an unsupervised analysis and visualization of the
spatially resolved absolute concentrations of chemical components
is shown in adipocytes and differentiated mouse embryonic stem cells.
In conclusion, FSC3 can be used in a wide range of applications
requiring fast and quantitative volumetric chemical imaging, from
live cell microscopy to material science applications, providing an
unsupervised technique to identify unknown chemical differences within
and between samples.

Supporting Information Available
Additional information as noted
in the text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org/.

Supplementary Material
ac402303g_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded
by the U.K. EPSRC Research Council (Grant
No. EP/H45848/1). The CARS microscope development was funded by the
U.K. BBSRC Research Council (Grant No. BB/H006575/1). F.M. acknowledges
financial support from the European Union (Marie Curie Grant Agreement
No. PERG08-GA-2010-276807). P.B. acknowledges the U.K. EPSRC Research
Council for her Leadership Fellowship Award (Grant No. EP/I005072/1).
We thank Marion Ludgate (Cardiff University) for providing the 3T3-L1
cells. The authors acknowledge the European Union COST action MP1102 “Chemical
Imaging by Coherent Raman Microscopy–MicroCoR” for supporting
scientific exchange and discussions.
==== Refs
References
Muller M. ; Zumbusch A. 
ChemPhysChem 
2007 , 8 , 2156 –2170 .17768730 
Pezacki J. P. ; Blake J. A. ; Danielson D. C. ; Kennedy D. C. ; Lyn R. K. ; Singaravelu R. 
Nat. Chem. Biol. 
2011 , 7 , 137 –145 .21321552 
Pope I. ; Langbein W. ; Watson P. ; Borri P. 
Opt.
Express 
2013 , 21 , 7096 –7106 .23546091 
Potma E. O. ; Evans C. L. ; Xie X. S. 
Opt. Lett. 
2006 , 31 , 241 –243 .16441043 
Jurna M. ; Korterik J. P. ; Otto C. ; Herek J. L. ; Offerhaus H. L. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2009 , 103 , 043905 .19659356 
Freudiger C. W. ; Min W. ; Saar B. G. ; Lu S. ; Holtom G. R. ; He C. ; Tsai J. C. ; Kang J. X. ; Xie X. S. 
Science 
2008 , 322 , 1857 .19095943 
Ozeki Y. ; Dake F. ; Kajiyama S. ; Fukui K. ; Itoh K. 
Opt. Express 
2009 , 17 , 3651 –3658 .19259205 
Zhang D. ; Wang P. ; Slipchenko M. N. ; Ben-Amotz D. ; Weiner A. M. ; Cheng J.-X. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 98 –106 .23198914 
Rinia H. A. ; Bonn M. ; Müller M. ; Vartiainen E. M. 
ChemPhysChem 
2007 , 8 , 279 –287 .17177224 
Liu Y. ; Lee Y. J. ; Cicerone M. T. 
Opt. Lett. 
2009 , 34 , 1363 .19412273 
Vartiainen E. M. ; Rinia H. A. ; Müller M. ; Bonn M. 
Opt.
Express 
2006 , 14 , 3622 –3630 .19516509 
Cicerone M.
T. ; Aamer K. A. ; Lee Y. J. ; Vartiainen E. 
J. Raman Spectrosc. 
2012 , 43 , 637 –643 .
Miljkovic M. ; Chernenko T. ; Romeo M. J. ; Bird B. ; Matthaus C. ; Diem M. 
Analyst 
2010 , 135 , 2002 –2013 .20526496 
van
Manen H.-J. ; Kraan Y. M. ; Roos D. ; Otto C. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2005 , 102 , 10159 –10164 .16002471 
Ozeki Y. ; Umemura W. ; Otsuka Y. ; Satoh S. ; Hashimoto H. ; Sumimura K. ; Nishizawa N. ; Fukui K. ; Itoh K. 
Nat. Photonics 
2012 , 6 , 845 –851 .
Lee Y. J. ; Moon D. ; Migler K. B. ; Cicerone M. T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 2733 –2739 .21395296 
Huang C.-K. ; Ando M. ; Hamaguchi H.-O. ; Shigeto S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 5661 –5668 .22686107 
Hellerer T. ; Enejder A. M. ; Zumbusch A. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2004 , 85 , 25 –27 .
Rocha-Mendoza I. ; Langbein W. ; Borri P. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2008 , 93 , 201103 .
Smith D. Y. 
J. Opt. Soc. Am. 
1977 , 67 , 570 –571 .
Parekh S. H. ; Lee Y. J. ; Aamer K. A. ; Cicerone M. T. 
Biophys. J. 
2010 , 99 , 2695 –2704 .20959111 
Kim J. ; Park H. 
SIAM
J. Sci. Comput. 
2011 , 33 , 3261 –3281 .
Di
Napoli C. ; Masia F. ; Pope I. ; Otto C. ; Langbein W. ; Borri P. 
J. Biophotonics 
2012 , 10.1002/jbio.201200197 .
Ebbinghaus S. ; Kim S. J. ; Heyden M. ; Yu X. ; Heugen U. ; Gruebele M. ; Leitner D. M. ; Havenith M. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2007 , 104 , 20749 –20752 .18093918
