
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac5039225ReviewMolecular Approaches to Chromatography Using Single
Molecule Spectroscopy Kisley Lydia †Landes Christy F. *†‡†Department of Chemistry and ‡Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering,
Rice Quantum Institute, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, MS-60, Houston, Texas 77005, United States* E-mail: cflandes@rice.edu.14 11 2015 14 11 2014 06 01 2015 87 1 Fundamental and Applied Reviews in Analytical
Chemistry
201583 98 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac5039225document-id-new-14ac-2014-039225ccc-price
==== Body
Chromatography is an important
analytical technique for the separation of molecules in environmental,
pharmaceutical, medicinal, natural product synthesis research, and
industrial production. Despite chromatography’s extensive use,
the selection of appropriate column conditions is driven by empirical
methods and phenomenological theories. Single molecule spectroscopy
(SMS) offers the possibility to extract molecular-scale data, with
the overall goals of obtaining a mechanistic understanding of chromatography
and providing a framework for intelligent chromatographic optimization,
neither of which is achievable through traditional ensemble-averaged
methods. Here we review both the spectroscopic techniques and the
new insights that SMS has provided on interfacial liquid chromatographic
separations. The experimental studies include reverse phase, normal
phase (silica based), and ion-exchange chromatography. We discuss
how single molecule results can inform theory and predict column performance
and a perspective of future directions in the field is given. Overall,
this review demonstrates the value of collaborations between the separations
and single molecule spectroscopy communities and hopefully will inspire
future efforts to achieve a molecular-scale understanding of the crucial
analytical technique of chromatography.

Chromatographic separation
of molecules from complex mixtures is
an important analytical technique. In the pharmaceutical industry,
chromatography is used to isolate therapeutic biomolecules produced
by recombinant-engineered bacteria for safe products to be consumed
by patients.1 Similarly, in the natural
food product industry, chromatography can quantify the amount of antioxidants
or beneficial lipid products in fortified food used for maintaining
health.2 Chromatographic methods are crucial
in these two industries that combined accounted for over $120 billion
dollars to the economy in 2009.3,4 Chromatography also
has important roles in the oil and gas industry,5 environmental analysis,6 and
natural product synthesis. Thus, as one of the most commonly used
analysis techniques spanning many applications,7 understanding and improving chromatography has important
scientific and economic implications.

Recent advancements in
chromatography address the needs of these
diverse applications. Liquid chromatography column stationary phases
improved by decreasing the particle size to <2 μm,8 using solid core-porous shell particle geometries,9 utilizing slip-flow properties of the mobile
phase along the stationary phase column walls,10−12 combining hydrophilic
bonded phases and ionic ligands for mixed-mode capabilities,13 and using monolithic materials14 to decrease data acquisition times, pressure requirements,
and column lengths.7,15 In improving data analysis, multidimensional
methods improved quantification of analytes from nonuniform peaks
due to background contributions, retention time shifts, and peak shape
changes.16 Theoretically, numerical and
molecular mechanical modeling of analyte adsorption are used to understand
plate- and mass-transfer descriptions of column performance.17,18

Despite the importance of and advancements in chromatography,
an
experimental molecular-scale understanding is lacking. In industry,
selection of appropriate mobile and stationary phase conditions is
often empirically determined through a time-intensive, costly process
of testing numerous combinations of variables such as stationary phase
packing density, ligand loading, and particle size; mobile phase ionic
strength, hydrophobicity, and pH; and column length, diameter, and
flow rate. Current explanations of chromatographic performance through
theoretical models have relied heavily on phenomenological descriptions
that use either variables that have no clear physical parallel within
the experiment or broad definitions of diffusion, packing, and kinetics
comprised of many complicated molecular processes contributing in
sum. One cause of the lack of mechanistic information in both chromatographic
experiment and theory is ensemble averaging. The ensemble averaged
information obtained from classical analysis of a vast number of molecules
inherently averages out any underlying analyte and/or process heterogeneity.19 Ensemble methods therefore make it difficult
to resolve a fundamental, molecular viewpoint of the potentially heterogeneous
processes that occur in practical chromatographic separations.

SMS is a technique that can fill this gap. By observing one molecule
at a time, heterogeneity that is hidden in ensemble-averaged studies
can be revealed. For example, non-Gaussian peaks due to fronting or
tailing are a challenge in chromatography (Figure 1, solid line) and arise from multiple sub-populations of dynamic
interactions between the analyte and stationary phase. SMS can resolve
individual events that correlate and distinguish the subpopulations
(Figure 1, dashed lines), revealing the causes
of peak broadening and asymmetry in chromatography from a mechanistic
perspective not possible through traditional techniques. Therefore,
SMS represents a promising path to a genuinely predictive, molecular
understanding of the chromatography processes.

Figure 1 Illustration of asymmetric
chromatography peak that at the ensemble
level (solid line) cannot resolve the heterogeneous, multiple populations
present (dashed lines) that SMS can reveal.

We will review the recent work in relevant SMS techniques
with
applications to chromatography. Work from the first reports on SMS
chromatography in 1998 to the present are included but recent advancements
from 2014 that use super-resolution imaging, particle tracking, and
relating experimental results to theory will be highlighted. First,
the underlying principles of the applicable SMS instrumentation will
be summarized. Next, we will highlight specific examples of the application
of SMS in providing mechanistic insight into separation methods. Throughout,
we will discuss techniques and problems that have been addressed and
identify scientific questions that still remain for future collaborations
between the separations and SMS fields.

Principles of Single Molecule
Spectroscopy and Instrumental
Techniques
SMS allows for the detection of an individual
molecule, the fundamental
concentration detection limit, allowing access to molecular parameters
and statistical distributions not available to the ensemble. SMS was
first introduced with the foundational work from Moerner20 and Orrit21 detecting
single molecules at cryogenic temperatures. During the quarter of
a century since the technique was first demonstrated, capabilities
at room temperature,22−27 in biological systems,28,29 and improved temporal30,31 and spatial32,33 resolutions have been developed.
This section serves as a general introduction to the SMS techniques
that have been applied to interfacial studies of liquid chromatography.
More detailed reviews of the spectroscopic instrumentation and analysis
are available by Moerner and Fromm19 and
Orrit et al.,34 to name a few. Reviews
regarding the specific instrumentation and analysis discussed in this
section are also provided.

General Considerations and Sample Requirements
Appropriate
sample conditions in fluorescent microscopy allows for single molecule
detection. Compared to alternative spectroscopic phenomena such as
adsorption, Raman, or Rayleigh scattering, fluorescence with appropriate
high quantum yield fluorophores can achieve high signals (∼105 photons/s). The emitted photons are red-shifted from the
laser excitation, allowing the emission to be separated from the excitation
for detection. A low probe concentration, usually in the picomolar
to nanomolar range, is required to ensure only one molecule is detected
at a time. The sample must also be as free as possible from contamination
and defects, as Raman scattering and fluorescence from impurities
decrease the signal-to-background ratio. The chemistry of the fluorescent
probe must be appropriate to the system of interest. For example,
for the separation of small, charged, organic molecules, the fluorophores
themselves can serve as appropriate model molecules. Rhodamine 6G,
BODIPY, or Alexa dyes can act as cationic, neutral, or anionic model
analytes, respectively.35 Alternatively,
for the separation of biomolecules, natural or modified fluorescent
proteins, such as green fluorescent protein,36,37 are used. For each method, it is important to reduce as much as
possible the perturbations to both probe and biomolecular function
that are associated with labeling. Proteins can be labeled on native
amino acids or mutated to contain a site-specific amino acid. Typically,
lysine or cysteine residues are labeled through amine- or thiol-specific
chemistry, respectively.38 Because of the
popularity of the SMS and prevalence of fluorescence in biology, a
large library of labeling probes is available through companies such
as Invitrogen. For further discussion of labeling biological molecules,
see Weiss.39

Creative solutions to
improve or exploit the photophysical drawbacks of fluorescence imaging
have been presented in both sample and instrument forms. Single molecule
fluorescence is inherently limited by photoblinking and photobleaching
when a fluorophore enters a temporary or permanent dark state, respectively,
either of which renders the probe useless for observation. Photophysics
can limit the amount of data collected or lead to false analysis results;
therefore, it is desirable to increase the single molecule fluorescent
lifetime. Solution-based approaches have prevented photodynamic reactions
where a combination of light and oxygen interact with the fluorophore
and cause oxidative damage. Chemical methods have removed oxygen that
either reacts as a free radical with the fluorophore or quenches excited
fluorophores from solution, commonly using enzymatic-based scavenging
solutions.40 A myriad of different solution
cocktails41−46 and protective strategies47,48 have been offered and
compared.49 When using chemical approaches,
it is important to consider how the requisite pH and/or ionic conditions
of the oxygen scavenging solution are compatible with the sample.
Alternatively, hardware approaches can be used to reduce adverse photophysics.
The excitation intensity can simply be decreased, as the number of
emitted photons per second increases linearly with incident intensity
before reaching a saturating value.50,51 Reduced excitation
intensity will indeed extend the observation time but with the sacrifice
of decreasing the signal-to-noise ratio. Therefore, excitation power
should be selected to balance between reducing photophysical effects
and obtaining adequate signal-to-noise ratio. Other hardware-based
approaches that prevent unnecessary excitation of single moleucle
fluorophores have been presented through modulating the excitation
in sync with the time-gated data acquisition and inherent data conversion
time of the detector.52,53 The signal-to-background ratio
can also be improved by modulation of the dark and light state populations
of a fluorophore using a modulated secondary laser to resolve signal
from the autofluorescent background.54−56 Finally, synthetic development
of new fluorophores, both organic57−59 and biological,60 offers improved lifetimes as another route toward
better fluorophores.

Confocal Microscopy
In the study
of chromatography
at the single molecule level, two different fluorescence microscopy
geometries have been applied (Figure 2): confocal
microscopy and wide field total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF).
In confocal microscopy, the excitation overfills the back of a high
numerical aperture objective, leading to the focal volume being focused
to the diffraction limit (Figure 2A) with a
beam radius of ∼200 nm and femtoliter volume. The focal volume
can be held stationary and molecules detected as they diffuse through
or the objective/sample stage can be scanned to obtain spatial information.
Emitted photons are detected on a single-element detector, usually
a semiconductor-based avalanche photodiode (APD), though photomultiplier
tubes have also been used historically.61 The resulting signal can be the number of photons detected over
time (Figure 2B) or single photons and their
arrival time detected in a time-correlated single-photon counting
(TCSPC) setup.62

Figure 2 Summary of SMS instrumentation,
data, and analysis. (A–C)
Representation of confocal microscopy. (A) Excitation geometry at
an ion-exchange interface where fluorescently-labeled proteins are
being detected. (B) Example intensity trace from 1D detection of photons
with an APD detector. (C) Example of FCS analysis where slower diffusion
is observed by increasing the probe size (red < blue < green).
(D–F) Representation of wide field TIRF microscopy. (D) Through-the-objective
TIRF excitation geometry where excitation at a high angle (θ)
creates an evanescent wave that only excites fluorophores (red) near
the interface, while out of focus fluorophores (yellow) do not contribute
to background signal. (E) Example 2D image of single molecules detected
on an EMCCD. (F) Analysis of data by super-resolution imaging, improving
the spatial resolution from ∼250 nm to ∼30 nm.

The intensity transient signal
(Figure 2B) detected in confocal microscopy
reveals single molecule dynamics
through several routes of analysis. In the scanning geometry, discussed
above, the resulting output from the single channel detector can be
reconstructed into an image based on the location of the objective
on the sample at a given time. The areas of the image with bright
spots reveal the spatial locations of adsorbed molecules. The frequency
at which an image can be obtained is limited by the scan rate. Typical
acquisition rates can be ∼30 mHz for a 15 μm × 15
μm image. Alternatively, when the focal volume is in a fixed
location, blip analysis can reveal the frequency of events. Blip analysis
simply counts the number of events where increases in intensity, or
“blips”, indicate that a molecule has passed through
the focal volume. The total number of blips can reveal information
about the affinity and intermolecular forces at work between the probe
molecule and the interface.

Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy
(FCS) analysis quantifies
diffusion properties of molecules using confocal microscopy. Through
not truly a single molecule technique, the correlation of the signal
of many single molecule events over time can be related to the time
scale of motion of the probes. The results provide a bridge between
the classical ensemble averaged and single molecule levels.63 From the transient signal, F(t), the fluctuations of the signal, δF(t) are calculated by subtracting the
average signal, ⟨F⟩, from all points: 1  The self-similarity
of the signal is then
calculated through autocorrelation analysis: 2  where the resulting response, G(τ), is a result
of the overlay of the original signal, δF(t), with its shifted self, δF(t + τ), for a given lag time, τ.
The resulting autocorrelation decay curve calculated in eq 2 can then be related to the diffusion dynamics of
the molecules by fitting to 3  where Veff is
the size of the effective focal volume, ⟨C⟩ is the concentration of fluorescent probe used, τ
is the correlation lag time, τD is the characteristic
diffusion time, and r0 and z0 are the focal beam radius and height, respectively.
Equation 3, derived by Elson and Madge, is based
on the Stokes–Einstein relationship for Brownian diffusion,64−66 and τD can be related to the diffusion coefficient, D, by 4  

Other fitting equations for additional
types of diffusion have
also been derived.67,68 If various types of diffusion
are present, a multiple component fit can be used to resolve heterogeneous
behavior. Representative experimental results of G(τ) for different size probes ranging from 2 to 100 nm in size
are shown in Figure 2C, demonstrating how FCS
can reveal diffusion dynamic information based on the decay of the
curve.

Advanced confocal microscopy and FCS techniques have
been developed
to circumvent limitations in traditional setups such as slow diffusion
and signal from noncorrelated background. When transport is too slow,
the diffusion coefficient cannot be accurately extracted due to long
acquisition time required; the maximum lag time must be on the order
of 5 000 times the longest characteristic diffusion time before
the observed diffusion constant converges to the expected value.69 Movement of the focal volume to parallelize
the acquisition over the spatial dimension and reduce time points
between data has been performed to analyze slower diffusion in techniques
such as raster scan image correlation spectroscopy,70−72 line scan FCS,73,74 and circular scanning FCS.75,76 Alternatively, multiple
focal volumes separated by a set distance have been used in dual focus
FCS to quantify the diffusion time from one focal volume to the other,
obtaining information on a longer time scale in addition to the typical
diffusion within each individual focal volume.77−80 Methods such as two-photon excitation81,82 or stimulated emission depletion (STED) geometry83,84 improve analysis by reducing nonspecific excitation of the background
and photobleaching for systems with high amounts of autofluorescence
or optical aberrations causing noncorrealated background signal that
obscures traditional autocorrelation analysis. Finally, alternatives
for sample preparation have also allowed for nonfluorescent, unlabeled
analyte to be observed by exploiting fluctuations in the fluorescent
medium surrounding the particles in a technique called inverse FCS.85−89 For further information on confocal microscopy techniques, specifically
FCS, readers should refer to Elson,63 Ries
and Schwille,90 and two reviews by Haustein
and Schwille.61,91

Total Internal Reflectance
Fluorescence Wide Field Imaging and
Analysis
TIRF microscopy images single molecules over a wide
field of view. TIRF limits the focal volume to be within ∼100
nm of the support/sample interface by using an exponentially decaying
evanescent wave for excitation. The formation of the evanescent excitation
wave is achieved by passing the excitation light at a high angle,
θ, relative to the critical angle, θc, as defined
by Snell’s law, to allow for total internal reflection to occur
at an interface: 5  where
η1 and η2 represent the refractive
index of the substrate and sample,
respectively. This high angle can be achieved through two possible
geometries, either using a prism or passing the excitation at the
edge of a high numerical aperture objective (Figure 2D). The totally internally reflected beam creates an evanescent
wave that passes normal to the interface, and its penetration depth, dp, decays exponentially according to 6  where λ is the wavelength of the incident
excitation. In typical TIRF measurements, dp ∼ 100 nm. The lateral size of the excitation in TIRF occurs
over a wide field, typically ∼50 μm × 50 μm,
allowing for a large area to be excited simultaneously. The resulting
wide field of excitation can be detected on a 2D array detector, such
as an electron multiplying charge coupled device (EMCCD), though newer
scientific complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) detectors
are being used more often.31 The resulting
output, a movie comprised of a series of 2D images can be obtained
at much faster time scales (∼10 Hz) than scanning confocal
images and can resolve the dynamics of many molecules simultaneously.
For further information on the instrumental details and applications
on TIRF microscopy, readers should refer to Wazawa and Ueda92 and Axelrod.93

Particle tracking analysis of TIRF data quantifies the diffusion
dynamics of individual molecules. In particle tracking, molecules
are identified in each frame, their locations are found and recorded,
and the trajectories of the motion of the molecules from frame-to-frame
are constructed by connecting molecule locations between frames. The
single molecule trajectories can be further analyzed to understand
the rate, nature, and distribution of diffusion (Brownian, anomalous,
etc.) through mean square displacement analysis,94−98 van Hove distributions,99−101 radius of gyration,102 and 3D spatial
projections for curved interfaces.103,104 Compared
to FCS, the diffusion dynamics can be found for each individual molecule
instead of requiring many individual events to calculate quantitative
information. Further information on single molecule particle tracking
methods can be found in reviews by Shuang et al.,105 Saxton and Jacobson,106 and
Chenouard et al.107

Super-resolution
imaging analysis of TIRF data can obtain spatial
resolutions as small as ∼10 nm (Figure 2F). Since the general principles were introduced,32,33,83,108,109 super-resolution methods have primarily been used
to image biological structure but are finding increased application
to synthetic materials and to understand dynamics. Fluorophores stochastically
turn on and off through the image series either through photophysical
control or adsorption/desorption110 such
that only a few fluorophores are “on” at a time within
a single frame. This allows the centers of the isolated probes that
appear as a diffraction limited spot (∼250 nm in size) to be
localized with ∼10–20 nm precision by fitting to a 2D
Gaussian or related point spread function model;111,112 a statistical buildup of the locations of multiple “on”
events leads to an image below the diffraction limit. Many reviews
of super-resolution imaging have been reported recently and the impact
and versatility of the technique was recognized by the Nobel Prize400 in Chemistry in 2014.40,113−115

Progress in determining the orientation,
three-dimensional location,
and removal of photophysical events of single molecules has been realized
in improvements to wide field TIRF microscopy. By defocusing the objective,
the orientation of single molecules can be determined. First reported
by Dickson et al.116−119 with advances in analysis by Enderlein et al.,120−122 defocusing changes the emission pattern of the fluorophores from
an in-focus Airy disk to a defocused pattern indicative of the orientation
of the emission dipole. Orientational imaging has addressed important
questions in biological environments, such as molecular motors123 and membranes,124−128 and has advanced to incorporate super-resolution
position129 and chirality130 information. Super-resolution imaging and tracking in the
axial dimension, in addition to the lateral direction, has been achieved
using phase masks131−133 and multiplane collection geometries.134−138 Phase masks introduce an optical astigmatism that, similar to defocusing,
aberrates the emission pattern that indicates the z-location of single molecules. A simple cylindrical lens placed in
the detection path will lead to resolvable axial information to ∼50
nm,131,132 but the double-helix point spread function
has been especially popular,133,139,140 due to the ability to determine both 3D molecular orientation and
position. Finally, alternating laser excitation (ALEX)141,142 can perform “photophysical sorting” to discern dynamics
from photophysics when two-color systems are being used. Two dye labels
can be used to perform single molecule Förster resonance energy
transfer (FRET), where the nonradiative transfer from one fluorophore
(“donor”) to the other (“acceptor”) can
be used to determine the distance between the dyes at 1–10
nm resolution.143 Yet, blinking and bleaching
of the donor and acceptor can lead to false artifacts and data assignments.
In ALEX, two lasers are alternated, identifying and removing photophysical
effects. When performed on a TIRF microscope with millisecond temporal
resolution, dynamic information such as macromolecule-ligand adsorption
can be resolved.144

Overall, SMS
techniques reveal temporal and spatial information
hidden in traditional ensemble techniques. Confocal and wide field
TIRF microscopies resolve single molecules with a high signal-to-noise
ratio using fluorescence to determine location, kinetic, diffusion,
and orientation information. SMS has matured into a developed field
with routine instrumentation and analysis that can be applied to understand
chromatography at the fundamental concentration limit of a single
molecule.

Chromatography Methods Studied by Single
Molecule Spectroscopy
Interfacial liquid chromatography systems,
including reverse phase,145−156 normal phase (silica based),150,157−161 and ion-exchange162−164 chromatography have been studied using SMS
techniques (Figure 3). Chromatography can be
classified based on the forces dominating the mobile/stationary phases
interaction that in turn result in separation, e.g., hydrophobic/hydrophilic,
electrostatic, steric, etc. In the following sections, each form of
chromatography is introduced and the relevant SMS studies are reviewed.

Reverse
Phase Liquid Chromatography
Reverse phase liquid
chromatography (RPLC) utilizes a hydrophobic stationary phase to retain
nonpolar analytes from a more hydrophilic mobile phase, usually consisting
of a combination of water and acetonitrile. It is commonly applied
to the separation of large hydrocarbon molecules not volatile enough
to be separated by gas chromatography, making RPLC especially relevant
to oil analysis. The preparation of the stationary phase is commonly
performed through modification of silanol groups on a silica surface
with an organosilane compound containing a hydrophobic moiety. The
characteristics of the stationary phase are determined by the hydrophobic
group, a long hydrocarbon such as C18 (Figure 3A). The ease of modifying silica microscopy coverslips
with low amounts of autofluorescent contamination and the availability
of nonpolar fluorescent molecules to use as probes has made RPLC very
attractive for SMS studies.

Figure 3 Illustration of different chromatographic interfaces
studied by
SMS. (A) C18 RPLC stationary phase with silanol defect
present. In the articles reviewed, the single molecule fluorophore
probes (represented by red burst) were observed to interact for long
periods of time at defect sites but not at areas properly modified
with octadecylorganosilane. (B, C) Silica-based stationary phases
in (B) NPC/CLC and (C) CE where electro-osmosis of the surplus of
cations in the double layer drives the mobile phase through the capillary
to the cathode instead of hydrodynamic flow. (D) Anion-exchange IEX
stationary phase with porous agarose support functionalized with clustered-charge
cationic ligands. The chemical structure of agarose is included.

The contribution of exposed RPLC
stationary phase silanols to retention
heterogeneity was studied using SMS. It has been known through ensemble
studies that silanols can lead to complex energy distributions165,166 within the stationary phase with an end result of tailing in the
elution profile.167,168 Wirth et al. was one of the
first groups to apply single-molecule spectroscopy to RPLC to investigate
surface heterogeneity.145 On the basis
of their early ensemble findings on the highly acidic and strong hydrogen-bonding
properties of silanols that lead to tailing,169 single molecule imaging and FCS were applied to the dynamics of
the lipophilic cationic fluorescent probe, DiI, at a C18-modified silica interface. In their first report,145 two populations of diffusion were observed; a majority
(99%) underwent fast diffusion (D = 1.3 × 10–6 cm2/s) (Figure 4A), while a small population exhibited longer adsorptions with dwell
times as long as 3.3 s (Figure 4B). These rare
but long-lasting interactions were concluded to be the cause of tailing
commonly observed in RPLC. Further work correlated atomic force microscopy
(Figure 4C) with fluorescent imaging (Figure 4D).146 Longer adsorption
sites were located at defects in the C18-modified silica,
implying exposed silanol groups were the source of the long events
(Figure 3A).

Figure 4 Identification of defect silanol sites
leading to long-lived adsorption.
(A) Fast diffusion was observed at nondefect sites through the FCS
autocorrelation decay curve, while (B) strong, long-lasting adsorption
was observed at suspected defect sites.145 Correlated (C) AFM and (D) DiI fluorescent imaging at the C18 surface, showing strong adsorption takes place at defects.146 Adapted and reprinted from refs (145) and (146). Copyright 1998 and 1999,
respectively, American Chemical Society.

The ability to tune the activity of these strong adsorption
sites
was studied through changing mobile phase conditions of acetonitrile147 or methanol148 content
and pH.146 Ludes and Wirth147 varied the common RPLC variable of acetonitrile
percentage while observing adsorption to the C18 interface.
At increased acetonitrile concentration, the relative population of
strong interactions of the analyte with characteristic desorption
times of 0.07 s and 2.6 s, as quantified by confocal blip analysis,
increased from 11% and 4% in water to 11% and 17%, respectively, in
60% acetonitrile. The 4-fold increase in the population of the longer
2.6 s desorption time is significant, as it contributes more to kinetic
tailing under elution conditions. Mechanistic investigations through
wide field fluorescent imaging confirmed adsorption was occurring
at spatially distinguishable specific sites where polishing pits were
present. By introducing propanol, it was found that the acetonitrile
promotes adsorption by reducing the wetting of the specific adsorption
sites.

In other early work, Harris et al. extracted adsorption
kinetics
in RPLC of cations with variable mobile phase methanol content.148 Equations to analyze adsorption and desorption
rate constants from FCS data collected in a total internal reflection
excitation geometry were derived. Observing the adsorption of a cationic
dye, rhodamine 6 G, to acidic silanols under increasing methanol concentrations
up to 40%, it was found that the desorption rate decreases while the
adsorption rate increases. One important conclusion from this work
is that changes in the adsorption equilibrium constant with methanol
cannot be explained by desorption rates only, and thus changes in
the energy barrier to adsorption must be considered.

The RPLC
separation of more complex analytes in the form of nucleic
acids149,150 using SMS showed heterogeneity due to interactions
with exposed silanols that could be varied with pH. Oligonucleotides
are known to hydrogen-bond, making RPLC the preferred purification
technique. In Wirth and Swinton,149 the
transport of a fluorescently labeled 24-mer over C18 functionalized
silica was investigated by confocal microscopy. FCS analysis showed
bimodal diffusion where the diffusion coefficients differed by 2 orders
of magnitude (D1 = 2 × 10–8 and D2 = 2 × 10–6 cm2/s); the two populations were attributed to free diffusion
and a distorted slow diffusion value due to adsorption events. Further
investigation through blip analysis showed rare strong adsorption
events up to 800 ms long. Again, strong adsorption was hypothesized
to be due to hydrogen bonding of either the phosphate backbone or
one or more of the oligomer bases to exposed surface silanols, leading
to the peak tailing observed in bulk chromatography. In addition,
fluctuations of the fluorescent signal of adsorbed oligonucleotides
that could not be attributed to shot noise were observed, suggesting
more rotational or partially adsorbed conformations were possible
that were not observed in studies of DiI. Yeung et al. examined the
adsorption of lambda-DNA to C18 surfaces and compared the
results directly to commercial RPLC capillaries;150 the single molecule observations of the total number of
molecules adsorbed to the C18 interface and fraction of
adsorbed molecules correlated with ensemble peak shapes under different
pH conditions.

More recently, SMS studies of RPLC expanded to
commercial materials151,152 and used more complex analysis
techniques.153,154 Geng et al. were the first to
look at a commercial support particle
and observed rhodamine 6 G diffusion within C18 modified
silica beads through FCS.151 The diffusion
properties were correlated to the spatial location within the bead
(Figure 5A), showing the spatial heterogeneity
of diffusion and adsorption dynamics, corresponding to the random
distribution of silanol groups, consistent with the Wirth group findings.145−147,149 Harris et al. used single particle
tracking of the hydrophobic probe octadecylrhodamine B in C18 particles.152 Single particle tracking
offers diffusion information from a single molecule, compared to the
many events required in FCS. The resulting trajectories (Figure 5B) showed that transport is not homogeneous; both
diffusing and stuck molecules were observed and distinguished statistically.
The analysis of diffusing molecules quantified the intraparticle diffusion
coefficient to be D = 3.1 ± 0.1 × 10–9 cm2/s. For stuck molecules, the desorption
times were correlated with the spatial location (Figure 5C). Importantly, it was found that there were statistically
anomalous sites within the particle (Figure 5C, arrow) that exhibited both an increase in number of adsorption
events and longer-lived desorption times, suggesting a positive correlation
for a molecule to visit a site and fall into an energetically deep
trap. Harris et al. also used FCS on images acquired on an EMCCD detector
at rapid frame rates, combining the benefits of both spatial information
on μm2 scales from TIRF and temporal rates on millisecond
time scales from FCS to study the heterogeneous diffusion rates of
a hydrophobic probe at C18 and C1 interfaces154 and commercial particles.300 Finally, Schwartz et al. have localized adsorption of BODIPY
C12 fatty acids to anomalous defects at the trimethylsilyl
stationary phase interface at ∼50 nm resolutions using super-resolution
imaging (Figure 5D) and were able to quantify
an average coverage of 10–20 adsorption sites per square micrometer
which would be otherwise unachievable by diffraction limited imaging.153

Figure 5 SMS performed in commercial RPLC particles. (A) Distribution
of
values for integrated autocorrelation curve of rhodamine 6 G diffusion
at different locations within a commercial C18 stationary
phase particle. A total of 200 trials per location were collected.
The heterogeneity within the bead and over time are illustrated by
the large spikes, indicating strong adsorption to an exposed silanol
group.151 (B,C) Spatially correlated tracking
of diffusing and stuck single octadecylrhodamine B molecules in a
commercial RPLC C18 particle. (B) Example trajectory (red
dots/line) of diffusing molecule obtained by single molecule tracking
shown at different frame times obtained through the measurement. (C)
Histogram of octadecylrhodamine B adsorption dwell times for stuck
molecules and (inset) the mapped spatial distribution of the total
number of stuck events within the particle. An anomalously strong
adsorption site indicated by a yellow arrow.152 (D) Super-resolution map of single BODIPY C12 fatty acid
adsorption to randomly dispersed defects at the trimethylsilyl interface.153 Adapted and reprinted from refs (151), (152), and (153). Copyright 2005, 2013,
and 2014, respectively, American Chemical Society.

Overall, RPLC has been the most thoroughly studied
chromatographic
system using SMS due to the ease of preparing stationary phase with
high purity required for SMS techniques and the importance of RPLC.
SMS has been able to provide the universal observation that defect
sites of available silanols leads to rare, long-lived adsorption for
various analytes (DiI, rhoadamine 6G, nucleic acids, octadecylrhodamine
B, C12 fatty acid) that can be spatially and temporally
distinguishable from dominant faster, free diffusion and that prevention
and tuning of these sites is critical to column performance in RPLC.
The results have inspired further work modifying stationary phases
by synthetic means170,172 and simulations171 to reduce and understand silanol prevalence.
For further description of this foundational work, including kinetic
results, see perspectives in Wirth, Swinton, and Ludes155 and Wirth and Legg.156

Future work in RPLC could elucidate the role of the chemistry
of
the hydrophobic moiety (other than C18) by using alternative
groups, such as phenyls. Alternatives to silica, such as polymeric
matrixes, that can perform RPLC at a wider range of pH values (silica
is limited to pH 2–8) would also be of interest. Work on commercial
particles in the spirit of Geng151 and
Harris152,300 are especially promising to compare the
performance of different suppliers at a molecular level. For example,
if one particle performs better than another, is it due to the distribution
of diffusion/displacement steps within pores or due to the number
of exposed, active silanols? Advances in RPLC through SMS findings
see much potential in the future.

Silica Surfaces: Normal
Phase Chromatography and Capillary Methods
Silica interfaces
play an important role in chromatography in separating
polar organic and biomolecules. The acidic silica groups (Figure 3B) are used to retain polar molecules through hydrogen
bonding from a less polar mobile phase, such as water-free n-hexane, chloroform, or ethyl acetate.173 Silica interfaces are used in many forms of separations,
most notably normal phase chromatography (NPC), capillary liquid chromatography
(CLC), and the electrophoretic counterpart to the later, capillary
electrophoresis (CE).

NPC, also called adsorptive chromatography,
was one of the first forms of chromatography and was used most often
in the first several decades of the technology, leading to the terminology
“normal” (Figure 3B). In its
most common form, the stationary phase is silica particles due to
their desirable properties such as ease of manufacturing, uniform
size, ability to increase and control the surface area by using porous
(with varying pore sizes) vs nonporous fused silica, and reasonable
cost.173 The silica can be further modified
with polar chemical groups such as amino-, cyano-, or -diol phases.174 Alternative, less commonly used stationary
phase materials include alumina and carbon.

The methods of CLC
(Figure 3B) and CE (Figure 3C) use the silica walls of a capillary for the stationary
phase. The use of the capillary and/or electrophoretic force decrease
the size and time-scale of separations. Though not a truly chromatographic
process, CE is a very important technique used in the biotechnology
and pharmaceutical industries to separate proteins, peptides, and
nucleic acids. The electric field present in CE at the silica surface
allows for electro-osmosis, moving the mobile phase toward the cathode
based on the predominance of cations in the double layer (Figure 3C). Molecules are separated based on their electrophoretic
mobility due to the interactions with the silica surface.

Silica
surfaces can be easily modified for SMS as glass coverslips
are abundantly used as substrates in microscopy. Silanization of the
slides can easily be prepared through plasma cleaning or submersion
in acidic, basic, or organic solutions based on the method employed.175 Single molecule spectroscopists have been interested
in silica surfaces from a foundational, interfacial science perspective,176−180 yet only limited work has been performed on relating single molecule
interfacial results to the application of chromatography.

Interfacial
SMS studies of biomolecules at silica surfaces have
been directly related to ensemble capillary techniques by Yeung et
al. to demonstrate for the first time that SMS could predict experimental
chromatographic elution peaks.150,157−160 In their first studies, reported concurrently with the first SMS
studies of RPLC, single protein adsorption to a fused silica surface
was studied using wide field TIRF microscopy and the single molecule
results were directly compared to ensemble CE results collected under
similar conditions.157 The pH and ionic
strength were varied, and a mechanism for the observed single molecule
results and ensemble CE peak broadening was presented based on the
pI of the protein, silanol groups, and the electrical
double layer. In the SMS results, as shown in Figure 6A, the number of adsorbed single concanavaline A proteins
increased at decreased pH and decreased ionic strength. The results
at pH 3.0 and 7.0 (boxed, Figure 6A) were further
investigated. The size of the fluorescent spots recorded (Figure 6B,C), indicative of the diffusion of the protein
near the interface, was also larger (hence, diffusion slower) at decreased
pH and decreased ionic strength. The distribution of the fluorescent
spot size corresponded well with the ensemble electropherograms (Figure 6D–F), where the peak symmetry decreased under
decreased pH and ionic strength conditions. Correlating the results
with the pI of the silanol groups and the protein
and the predicted size of the electric double layer, it was concluded
that long-range trapping of the protein beyond the electric double
layer thickness occurs below the isoelectric point.

Figure 6 Single molecule and ensemble
CE of protein adsorption to silica
surface under different pH and ionic strength conditions. (A) Number
of single molecules identified under varied pH at 8.3 and 50 mM buffer
concentrations. pH values of 3.0 and 7.0 boxed for emphasis due to
further study in parts B–F. (B, C) Spot size of single molecules
observed at (B) pH 7.0 and (C) pH 3.0 and (blue) 8.3 and (red) 50
mM buffer concentration. The spot size is indicative of the diffusion
properties of the protein near the surface. (D–F) Electropherograms
at (E) pH 7.0, 8.3 mM; (E) pH 3.2, 8.3 mM; and (F) pH 3.2, 50 mM.
The shapes of the electropherograms compared to the corresponding
spot sizes in parts B and C are similar. Adapted with permission from
Xu, X.-H. N.; Yeung, E. S. Science1998, 281, 1650–1653 (ref (157)). Copyright 1998 Science/AAAS.

Yeung et al. further expanded
their technique to understand other
proteins158 and DNA150,159,160 (Figure 7A), revealing the importance of hydrophobic interactions between
the analyte and stationary phase. In their initial studies of olglionucleuotides,
λ-DNA with 12 unpaired bases at each end of the strand was studied
under different pH and mobile phase solvent conditions.150 The pH results offered important findings about
the role of hydrophobicity in chromatography at polar silica interfaces.
At decreased pH, hydrophobic properties of the unpaired bases dominated
the separation over the traditionally viewed role of polarity and
electrostatics. This was further studied by varying the number of
unpaired bases where the λ-DNA was compared to PSP3 (19-unpaired
bases) and double stranded DNA (0 unpaired bases).159 As the number of bases increased, the ends became “stickier”
under acidic conditions (Figure 7B), while
no difference was observed under basic conditions (Figure 7C). This was explained based on the electrostatic,
hydrophobic, and hydrogen-bonding properties of the analyte and silanols.
Under basic conditions, both DNA and silanols are negative and the
DNA is electrostatically repelled. However, below the silanol pKa (∼pH 6), the protonated silanols reduce
the electrostatic repulsion of the DNA to the surface and the unpaired
purine and pyrimidine bases adsorb the DNA to the surface through
hydrophobic interactions. Similar to their results with concanavaline
A, single molecule results of the distribution of adsorption times
of the λ-DNA also correlated well with CLC chromatograms.157

Figure 7 SMS studies of DNA at the water-silica interface. (A)
Example single
molecule image of immobilized and stretched DNA molecule (from 0.4
to 0.6 s). (B, C) Distribution of residence times of single DNA molecules
with variable sticky end length (number of base pairs listed in legend
after DNA name) under (B) acidic and (C) basic conditions. Adapted
with permission from Isailovic, S.; Li, H.-W.; Yeung, E. S. J. Chromatogr., A2007, 1150, 259–266 (ref (159)). Copyright 2007 Elsevier.

Protein adsorption to silica was studied in Cuppet et al.161 where TRITC-labeled lysozyme was observed under
varying pH, ionic strength, and quality of silica polish to understand
the importance of topography. Wide-field fluorescence and optical
imaging and AFM were used to visualize adsorption and quantify the
surface polishing defects. It was found that the lysozyme was reversibly
bound at the heterogeneously distributed polishing marks. Reducing
pH and increasing ionic strength caused the protein to desorb, suggesting
short-range interactions, such as van der Waals, hydrogen bonding,
acid–base, or conformation changes were the cause. Adsorption
decreased when using superpolished silica, indicating topography was
also a factor in adsorption and nonspecific adsorption could be prevented
using these materials.161

The work
on silica-based stationary phases shows that SMS can elucidate
intermolecular interactions between the analyte and stationary phase
and that single molecule results can be predictive of the expected
ensemble behavior by comparing SMS results to CLC and CE collected
under similar conditions. The results have addressed questions such
as whether electrostatic or hydrophobic interactions are stronger
and how external factors influence the behavior of biomolecules at
the surface.158 The findings have revealed
that quality of the silica polishing and considerations on biomolecule
structure are important.

SMS studies of polar-based stationary
phases have thus far been
limited to fused silica surfaces. There is much potential knowledge
to be gained about modified silica with chemically grafted polar phases
or porous silica where steric contributions will come into play. Sterics
will also be significant in using multiple silica beads in packed
NPC columns as opposed to the capillary methods studied by Yeung et
al.,150,157−160 so more advanced work correlating
SMS results to NPC is needed. Potential studies of single molecules
at the single or even multiparticle level, similar to what has been
performed in RPLC,151,152 could add insight. In regards
to CE, SMS studies could be performed under applied potentials. The
construction of electrochemical cells for single molecule181 and single nanoparticle182,183 systems have recently been reported in the literature and could
be applied to understanding separations at silica interfaces driven
by electro-osmosis.

Ion-Exchange Chromatography
Ion-exchange
chromatography
(IEX) separates molecules based on electrostatic affinity of the charged
analyte to specific ionic functional groups in the stationary phase
(Figure 3D). The stationary phase can be described
as either anion-exchange (the anionic analyte exchanges with anions
bound to positively charge ligands) or cation-exchange (the opposite).
Common anion-exchange functional groups include triethylaminoethyl,
polyethylenimine, p-aminobenzyl, or quaternary ammonium
groups, and for cation-exchange, carboxymethyl, sufopropyl, phosphate,
and sulfonate groups.174,184 The functional ligands are typically
supported on agarose (Figure 3D) or other cellulose
derived matrixes due to their superior performance in protein separations,
but silica or cross-linked polymers are also used in the high-pressure,
high-performance liquid chromatography systems due to their low compressibility.174 The porosity of the support matrix can be tuned
to change the functional surface area available. Mobile phases are
typically aqueous due to the ionization properties and solubility
of salts and buffers in water. The ionic strength and pH of the mobile
phase are critical to the exchange properties in IEX, since both affect
the electrostatic distribution of charges on both the analyte and
ligand.

IEX poses unique challenges to SMS sample preparation
in comparison to silica modification in RPLC and NPC. Because agarose
is biologically derived, autofluorescent impurities are difficult
to eliminate. Selection of appropriate, high-purity materials must
be performed to avoid false detection due to contamination or inability
to resolve single molecules due to high background. Functionalization
of the agarose support with the ligands also requires a more extensive
chemical method of immobilization; for example, in Daniels et al.,162 ion-exchange ligands were immobilized through
first selectively activating aldehyde groups with periodate.185 The amine-based ligands could then react with
the activated aldehyde groups and are immobilized with the addition
of cyanoborohydride. Finally, unreacted aldehyde sites are reduced
with borohydride.

IEX at the single molecule level, studied
by Landes et al., reveals
the importance of the spatial distribution of ligand charge and the
role of support matrix sterics.162−164 Confocal microscopy
and FCS were applied162 in the tradition
of Wirth et al.155,156 as well as the first application
of super-resolution microscopy to chromatography,164 to obtain subdiffraction spatial details. The spatial distribution
of anion-exchange ligand charge in the stationary phase was compared
between engineered, clustered-charge ligands in the form of penta-argininamide
(Figure 8A) and traditional, single-charge
ligands, in the form of monoargininamide (Figure 8B). The unfunctionalized agarose support served as a control
and fluorescently labeled alpha-lacatalbumin, a model globular protein,
was used as a probe. Using the super-resolution imaging technique
motion blur points accumulation for imaging nanoscale topography (mbPAINT),110 Kisley et al. localized the specific interactions
of the protein to the ligands. Only the engineered, clustered-charge
penta-argininamide stationary phase induced detectable specific protein
adsorption (Figure 8D), while the isolated,
single-charge monoargininamide (Figure 8E)
was indistinguishable from the agarose control (Figure 8F). The onset of specific clustered-charge capabilities of
both the engineered, clustered-charged ligands and stochastic-clustered
single-charged ligands at increased concentration was studied, showing
that relying on stochastic clustering requires a 1 000-fold
increase in charge density compared to engineered ligands with a charge-cluster
greater than two. Further investigation into the kinetics demonstrated
heterogeneity was reduced using the engineered clustered-charged ligands
compared to stochastic-clustering of single charges that could possibly
lead to a 5-fold increase in plate height.164

Figure 8 Super-resolution
imaging demonstrates the importance of ligand
charge distribution in ion-exchange chromatography. (A–C) Schemes
and (D–F) super-resolution images of Alexa 555-labeled alpha-lactalbumin
at (A, D) clustered-charge penta-argininamide functionalized agarose,
(B, E) single-charged monoargininamide functionalized agarose, and
(C, F) agarose control. Used with permission from Kisley, L.; Chen,
J.; Mansur, A. P.; Shuang, B.; Kourentzi, K.; Poongavanam, M.-V.;
Chen, W.-H.; Dhamane, S.; Willson, R. C.; Landes, C. F. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.2014, 111, 2075–2080 (ref (164)). Copyright 2014 National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America.

Super-resolution mbPAINT
was then applied to the same system to
obtain mechanistic insight into the relationship between increased
ionic strength and a reduction in adsorption heterogeneity in IEX
systems.163 The kinetic results suggest
that increased ionic strength both decreases the electrostatic interaction
between the protein and ligand, as would be expected in an ion-exchange
process, but also surprisingly revealed an additional steric contribution.
Increased ionic strength decreases the swelling of the porous stationary
phase support, leading to steric narrowing of ligand availability
within the pores.163

The importance
of the steric contribution of the agarose support
in IEX was further supported by confocal microscopy studies in Daniels
et al.162 FCS and blip analysis were used
to quantify the diffusion dynamics and affinity, respectively, of
alpha-lactalbumin at glass, agarose, and penta-argininamide functionalized
agarose interfaces. FCS showed a decrease in the diffusion coefficient
of the protein near the surface of the agarose support compared to
glass (Figure 9A,B) due to steric interactions.
The presence of the ligand further slowed diffusion due to the additional
electrostatic contribution (Figure 9C), and
the spatial heterogeneity of ligand locations and steric availability
with respect to the focal volume led to wide variability in diffusion
dynamics (Figure 9C,D).

Figure 9 FCS results of protein
dynamics at control and IEX interfaces with
(A, inset) the focal volume located axially both in the bulk solution
(blue) and near the surface (red). Diffusion over (A) glass substrate
was identical to (B) bulk diffusion over agarose, but steric contributions
are introduced near the surface. (C, D) Both electrostatics and sterics
contribute to slowing diffusion of ligand-functionalized (in the form
of clustered-charge cationic penta-argininamide) agarose and heterogeneity
is observed at different locations of the sample due to spatial variation
of peptides immobilized on the substrate. Adapted with permission
from Daniels, C. R.; Kisley, L.; Kim, H.; Chen, W.-H.; Poongavanam,
M.-V.; Reznik, C.; Kourentzi, K.; Willson, R. C.; Landes, C. F. J. Mol. Recognit.2012, 25, 435–442 (ref (162)). Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

The work by Landes et al. has revealed the importance
of the spatial
distribution of charge for ligands and contributions of porosity and
sterics in IEX. The onset of clustering and adsorption is consistent
with previous ensemble studies at and above the studied threshold
by Wu and Walters186 and similar concepts
on the importance of spatial distribution and onset concentration
in bioadsorption of proteins and membranes to heterogeneous patchy
polymer brushes have been observed.187−189 The observed steric
contribution is hypothesized to be one reason why affinity chromatography
supports often utilize a “spacer arm” between the ligand
and matrix.190−192 The results by Landes et al. suggest that
for real columns with multiple species in solution, not all proteins
favor the same sites. Steric factors and the random charge-arrangement
of an adsorption site would make different sites best suited for different
proteins, as opposed to the most-favored sites for a given protein
also being most-favored for all other proteins. Overall, the results
help interpret a large body of previous results at the ensemble level
by adsorption isotherms studying the heterogeneity and ligand structure
in chromatography.193−198

Many future possibilities exist in SMS studies of IEX through
advanced
instrumentation and additional ligands and proteins. Unlike RPLC and
NPC, IEX utilizes ligands on the stationary phase that could be fluorescently
labeled in addition to the analyte. By expanding to a two-dye system,
colocalization of both the stationary phase ligand and analyte could
be performed. Applying single molecule FRET199 and ALEX141,142 techniques could elucidate distance
and photophysical dynamics of the adsorbed analyte–ligand complex.
Similarly, two-color studies could investigate the competition and
variation in affinity between two different analytes for the same
ligands. Application of SMS to different cation exchange ligands,
IEX of nucleotides, and commercial particles are potential future
avenues to study.

Connecting Single Molecule Data to the Ensemble:
Theoretical
Insight and Application of Single Molecule Spectroscopy Data
Although SMS experiments offer insight on the molecular mechanisms
occurring during chromatography, there is still the challenge of relating
the data to actual chromatographic elution peaks and observables.
Pasti et al.200 have shown how to unify
the stochastic theory of chromatography with single molecule and ensemble
chromatography.153,164,200,201 Experimental observables from
SMS can now be used to inform, quantify, and predict the performance
of chromatography via the theory. Likewise, SMS experiments can be
used to improve and expand the theory itself.

While plate theory
is the most common model used in separations
science and provides a successful measure to compare column performance,
it fails to relate the extracted theoretical variables of plate height
(H) and number of plates (N) to
any physical aspects of chromatography and is inexact in its use of
the random walk model.202 Also commonly
used, the van Deemter equation203 considers
measurable quantities of molecular and Eddy diffusion and mass transfer
kinetics. However, the equation is derived from a macroscopic perspective
and is regularly either empirically or theoretically adjusted to account
for individual conditions or more complex physical phenomena.204,205 Alternatively, the stochastic theory of chromatography developed
by Giddings and Eyring206 is founded on
a molecular basis and relates the dispersion of peaks in chromatography
to molecular adsorption interactions. The theory is derived from a
probabilistic approach of one solute molecule adsorbing to a single
type of adsorption site based on the following equilibrium: 7  where A represents the analyte,
I the interfacial stationary phase, and [A–I] the immobilized
analyte interacting with the interface where the adsorption- and desorption-rates
are described by ka and kd, respectively. Giddings and Eyring proposed that a Poisson
distribution can represent the probability of a single analyte molecule
associating with an adsorption site rm times (r number of stochastic adsorption events
for a given time, t, in the mobile phase, m):206 8  On the basis
of eq 8, the stochastic theory has further been
expanded for two-site and
n-site adsorptions207 but becomes increasingly
complex as more sites are added, proving to be difficult to evaluate.

During the time when stochastic theory was being developed, the
available ensemble experimental methods were an “n-site”
problem,207 making it impossible to relate
ensemble experimental observables to theory. The advent of single
molecule approaches revived the stochastic theory, as the conditions
and observations are exactly what the theory is based on: single solute
molecules adsorbing and desorbing at a single site. Experimental conditions
also almost ideally meet the assumptions made in the theory where
(1) adsorption–desorption kinetics dominate over diffusion
(i.e., there is no Eddy diffusion) and (2) the adsorption/desorption
rates are time-independent and independent of one another. Kisley
et al. first confirmed the theory experimentally for a single-adsorption
site, single-analyte system using super-resolution imaging.164 Protein adsorption to individual anion-exchange
ligands were observed and the kinetics were extracted from each ligand
localized to ∼30 nm (Figure 10A). Each
ligand exhibited single-exponential decay kinetics, validating that
a nonvarying rate constant can describe each individual adsorption
site and supports the stochastic model as a Poisson-distributed process.
We are therefore at a point where SMS has made it possible to fill
the gap noted by Giddings in his 1965 seminal work Dynamics
of Chromatography that “empirical work has not yet
offered the type of precise, discriminatory data needed [to synthesize
a whole picture of chromatography down to the molecular world itself]”.202

To relate single molecule data to the
ensemble, Pasti et al. expanded
the stochastic theory to use SMS results to model expected elution
profiles.200 The stochastic theory was
modified to account for discontiuous distributions of adsorption times
that are observed in SMS by incorporating the canonical Levy representation
and relating it to the observed distribution of desorption times.208 The Poisson distribution in eq 8 is first converted to the frequency domain to express the
stochastic process in the characteristic function formalism (ϕ)
notation:209 9  where ts is the
overall time the analyte spends in the stationary phase, τs is the desorption time of each individual analyte adsorption
event, and μ is the frequency of events. The Lévy formalism
is then applied to accommodate the discontinuous single molecule distribution
of τs:208 10  where k is the index of the
discrete set of desorption times given by ΔF(τs,,i) that are observed
in the single molecule experimental desorption time distributions.
An inverse Fourier transform of eq 10 to the
time domain is then used to extract f(ts), the simulated chromatographic peak: 11  Therefore,
the single molecule observations,
ΔF(τs,,i), are unified to chromatographic peak distribution, f(ts). The resulting chromatograms
obtained from single molecule experiment and analysis through the
Levy-modified stochastic theory of chromatography can be evaluated
in terms of the standard deviation of the peak to relate to plate
theory if so desired. For a more thorough history and derivation of
the mathematics used in this modeling, readers should refer to the
review by Felinger.201

Application
of Pasti et al.’s unifying elution curve modeling
to findings in IEX, RPLC, and CLC chromatographic systems has been
performed. In IEX, the kinetic results from individual ligands, as
discussed above, have been used to model the expected elution curves
given a single type of site (Figure 10B).164 This further demonstrates the interligand heterogeneity
that was caused by agarose sterics. Elution curve modeling has also
been applied to IEX to demonstrate that engineered-clustering of ligands164 and increased ionic strength163 can be used to reduce heterogeneity and improve efficiency.
In RPLC, elution profile modeling demonstrated the impact of specific
and nonspecific binding to silanol defect sites.145,153,200 Two separate populations of
retention were observed of DiI adsorbed to different areas of a C18 interface (Figure 10C), attributed
to sites of different specific and nonspecific retention capabilities.145 When modeling the expected elution curves (Figure 10D),200 the two components
were separated to reveal the contribution to the resulting combined
profile. Nonspecific, long-lived interactions, though less frequently
occurring, were shown to dominant the retention of the molecules,
extending the elution time by approximately a factor of 4. Similar
results were observed for BODIPY C12 fatty acid molecules
at a trimethylsilyl interface.153 The fraction
and time spent by molecules at nonspecific and specific sites lead
to simulated peak asymmetry from SMS results that were comparable
to experimental chromatograms. Finally, modeling CLC separation of
λ-DNA molecules at a silica interface showed the importance
of capillary inner diameter in reducing the presence of tailing and
elution time.150,200 From the single molecule desorption
time data (Figure 10E), the capillary diameter
was varied in elution curve modeling by changing rm in eq 10. As the capillary diameter
was increased, the sorption rate from the mobile phase to the surface
decreased, but tailing was more significant (Figure 10F). A comparison between the results shown in Figure 10 and the proposed capabilities in Figure 1 demonstrate the utility of SMS in resolving mechanistic
heterogeneity and its contribution to the final peak shape and position
through the stochastic theory of chromatography.

Figure 10 Applications of the
stochastic theory of chromatography to use
(A, C, E) single molecule kinetics to model (B, D, F) elution curves
for (A, B) IEX, (C, D) RPLC, and (E, F) CLC. (A) Cumulative distribution
of dissociation times of alpha-lactalbumin from individual penta-argininamide
ligands shown with (B) respective modeled elution curves demonstrating
interligand heterogeneity. (C) Histogram of dissociation times of
DiI molecules at C18 with two populations of adsorption
to specific (S) and nonspecific (NS) sites. (D) The resulting curves
can separate the heterogeneous behaviors to show the contributions
of the multicomponent behavior. (E) Histogram of dissociation times
of λ-DNA molecules at the silica interface and (F) respective
modeled curves with varying theoretical capillary diameter listed
by varying rm in eq 10. Images adapted from refs (145), (150),
and (200) Copyright
1998, 2001, and 2005, respectively, American Chemical Society. Images
adapted with permission from Kisley, L.; Chen, J.; Mansur, A. P.;
Shuang, B.; Kourentzi, K.; Poongavanam, M.-V.; Chen, W.-H.; Dhamane,
S.; Willson, R. C.; Landes, C. F. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.2014, 111, 2075–2080 (ref (164)). Copyright 2014 National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.

Conclusions and Future Direction
SMS represents a unique method to understand chromatography from
a molecular, mechanistic perspective. SMS techniques utilizing confocal
and wide field TIRF microscopies have been developed and applied to
RPLC, silica-based stationary phases, and IEX interfacial liquid chromatography
systems. Results obtained by SMS have shown the importance of preventing
stationary phase defects to reduce tailing in RPLC, the role of hydrophobic
interactions in CLC/CE, the significance of the spatial distribution
of charge for ligands and contributions of porosity in IEX, and that
SMS results can adequately predict and model ensemble elution results.

There remain many unexplored systems in chromatography that could
be investigated by SMS. Hydrophilic interaction,210,211 size exclusion,212 solid phase extraction,213 supercritical fluid,214 metal ion affinity,215 counter-current,216 and high temperature liquid217−219 forms of chromatography/separation have yet to be studied by SMS.
Future directions in modern chromatography include miniaturization
of column technology with nanoparticle10,220 and monolithic14 columns and the use of membrane interfaces for
separations.221 SMS is ideal to study these
systems due to the nanoscale spatial information that can be obtained
through super-resolution imaging and demonstration of SMS analysis
of molecular dynamics within polymers222−225 that have been implemented in
ensemble membrane separations.226−228

In future work, advanced
SMS microscopy setups for multiple focal
volume or two photon FCS, FRET,199 defocusing,120−122,130 3D position, and ALEX,141,142 could be applied to elucidate distance, conformation, orientation,
or photophysical dynamics. Two-color excitation setups could investigate
competitive interaction between multiple analytes at the stationary
phase interface.

Overall, collaborations between the separation
and SMS communities
should continue, as to increase the understanding of chromatography
from a molecular standpoint. Those in the separations field can identify
unanswered questions plaguing chromatographic methods that cannot
be understood through standard ensemble techniques, while single molecule
spectroscopists can offer unique, advanced instrumentation and analysis.
Interesting partnerships between single molecule spectroscopists and
industry could reduce the time and cost of empirically determining
column conditions. Many questions remain unanswered for future work
in SMS of chromatography.

Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Lydia Kisley received her B.S. degree
in Chemistry from Wittenberg University (Springfield, OH) in 2010,
graduating summa cum laude with departmental honors.
While at Wittenberg, she participated in two NSF Research Experiences
for Undergraduates under Professor George Chumanov at Clemson University
and Professor Bart Van Zeghbroeck at the University of Colorado at
Boulder. She joined Professor Christy F. Landes’ research group
at Rice University to pursue her Ph.D degree in chemistry in the fall
of 2010. She is a fellow of the National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship Program as of spring 2012. Her research interests
include single molecule spectroscopy, biomolecule–interface
interactions, and molecular separations and diagnostics.

Christy F. Landes received
her B.S.
in Chemistry from George Mason University in 1998. She studied physical
chemistry under the direction of Professor Mostafa El-Sayed at the
Georgia Institute of Technology, earning her Ph.D. in 2003. After
a postdoctoral position at the lab of Professor Geraldine Richmond
at the University of Oregon, she was a National Institutes of Health
Ruth L. Kirtschtein Postdoctoral Fellow under the direction of Professor
Paul Barbara at the University of Texas at Austin. She joined the
University of Houston as an Assistant Professor in 2006, later moving
to Rice University. As of 2014, she is an Associate Professor of Chemistry
and Electrical and Computer Engineering.

Acknowledgments
C.F.L. thanks the NSF (Grants CBET-1134417 and CHE-1151647),
the Welch Foundation (Grant C-1787), and the NIH (Grant GM94246-01A1)
for support of this work. L.K. thanks the NSF for Graduate Research
Fellowship 0940902. We thank L. J. Tauzin, C. Daniels, C. P. Byers,
the Landes group members, and the S. Link and R. C. Willson research
groups for collaboration and discussion.
==== Refs
References
Shire S. J. 
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 
2009 , 20 , 708 –714 .19880308 
Henry M. C. ; Yonker C. R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 3909 –3916 .16771531 
Walsh G. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2010 , 28 , 917 –924 .20829826 
Dimitri C. ; Oberholtzer L.  Marketing US Organic
Foods: Recent Trends From Farms to Consumers ; Economic Research
Service, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 2009 .
Blomberg J. ; Schoenmakers P. J. ; Brinkman U. A. T. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
2002 , 972 , 137 –173 .12416874 
Santos F. ; Galceran M. 
TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 
2002 , 21 , 672 –685 .
Chester T. L. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 85 , 579 –589 .23121288 
Patel K. D. ; Jerkovich A. D. ; Link J. C. ; Jorgenson J. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2004 , 76 , 5777 –5786 .15456298 
Gritti F. ; Leonardis I. ; Abia J. ; Guiochon G. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
2010 , 1217 , 3819 –3843 .20447642 
Wei B. ; Rogers B. J. ; Wirth M. J. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 10780 –10782 .22708746 
Wu Z. ; Wei B. ; Zhang X. ; Wirth M. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 1592 –1598 .24383398 
Rogers B. J. ; Wirth M. J. 
ACS Nano 
2012 , 7 , 725 –731 .23237590 
Yang Y. ; Geng X. 
J.
Chromatogr., A 
2011 , 1218 , 8813 –8825 .22033107 
Guiochon G. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
2007 , 1168 , 101 –168 .17640660 
Desmet G. ; Eeltink S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 85 , 543 –556 .23157411 
Parastar H. ; Tauler R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 86 , 286 –297 .24251834 
Hlushkou D. ; Gritti F. ; Daneyko A. ; Guiochon G. ; Tallarek U. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 22974 –22985 .
Tsai C. W. ; Chen W. Y. ; Ruaan R. C. 
Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 13601 –13608 .22946847 
Moerner W. E. ; Fromm D. P. 
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
2003 , 74 , 3597 –3619 .
Moerner W. ; Kador L. 
Phys.
Rev. Lett. 
1989 , 62 , 2535 –2538 .10040013 
Orrit M. ; Bernard J. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1990 , 65 , 2716 –2719 .10042674 
Betzig E. ; Chichester R. J. 
Science 
1993 , 262 , 1422 –1425 .17736823 
Xie X. S. ; Dunn R. C. 
Science 
1994 , 265 , 361 –364 .17838036 
Macklin J. ; Trautman J. ; Harris T. ; Brus L. 
Science 
1996 , 272 , 255 –258 .
Xie X. S. ; Trautman J. K. 
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 
1998 , 49 , 441 –480 .15012434 
Brooks
Shera E. ; Seitzinger N. K. ; Davis L. M. ; Keller R. A. ; Soper S. A. 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 
1990 , 174 , 553 –557 .
Whitten W. B. ; Ramsey J. M. ; Arnold S. ; Bronk B. V. 
Anal. Chem. 
1991 , 63 , 1027 –1031 .
Funatsu T. ; Harada Y. ; Tokunaga M. ; Saito K. ; Yanagida T. 
Nature 
1995 , 374 , 555 –559 .7700383 
Vale R. D. ; Funatsu T. ; Pierce D. W. ; Romberg L. ; Harada Y. ; Yanagida T. 
Nature 
1996 , 380 , 451 .8602245 
Schmidt T. ; Schütz G. ; Baumgartner W. ; Gruber H. ; Schindler H. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
1996 , 93 , 2926 –2929 .8610144 
Michalet X. ; Colyer R. A. ; Scalia G. ; Ingargiola A. ; Lin R. ; Millaud J. E. ; Weiss S. ; Siegmund O. H. W. ; Tremsin A. S. ; Vallerga J. V. ; Cheng A. ; Levi M. ; Aharoni D. ; Arisaka K. ; Villa F. ; Guerrieri F. ; Panzeri F. ; Rech I. ; Gulinatti A. ; Zappa F. ; Ghioni M. ; Cova S. 
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 
2013 , 368 , 20120035 .
Rust M. J. ; Bates M. ; Zhuang X. 
Nat. Meth. 
2006 , 3 , 793 –796 .
Betzig E. ; Patterson G. H. ; Sougrat R. ; Lindwasser O. W. ; Olenych S. ; Bonifacino J. S. ; Davidson M. W. ; Lippincott-Schwartz J. ; Hess H. F. 
Science 
2006 , 313 , 1642 –1645 .16902090 
Tamarat P. ; Maali A. ; Lounis B. ; Orrit M. 
J. Phys. Chem. A 
1999 , 104 , 1 –16 .
Daniels C. R. ; Reznik C. ; Landes C. F. 
Langmuir 
2010 , 26 , 4807 –4812 .20163084 
Dickson R. M. ; Cubitt A. B. ; Tsien R. Y. ; Moerner W. 
Nature 
1997 , 388 , 355 –358 .9237752 
Wu B. ; Piatkevich K. D. ; Lionnet T. ; Singer R. H. ; Verkhusha V. V. 
Curr. Opin. Cell
Biol. 
2011 , 23 , 310 –317 .21242078 
Chen I. ; Ting A. Y. 
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 
2005 , 16 , 35 –40 .15722013 
Weiss S. 
Science 
1999 , 283 , 1676 –1683 .10073925 
Ha T. ; Tinnefeld P. 
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 
2012 , 63 , 595 –617 .22404588 
Vogelsang J. ; Kasper R. ; Steinhauer C. ; Person B. ; Heilemann M. ; Sauer M. ; Tinnefeld P. 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 5465 –5469 .
Aitken C. E. ; Marshall R. A. ; Puglisi J. D. 
Biophys. J. 
2008 , 94 , 1826 –1835 .17921203 
Shi X. ; Lim J. ; Ha T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 6132 –6138 .20583766 
Dave R. ; Terry D. S. ; Munro J. B. ; Blanchard S. C. 
Biophys. J. 
2009 , 96 , 2371 –2381 .19289062 
Campos L.
A. ; Liu J. ; Wang X. ; Ramanathan R. ; English D. S. ; Munoz V. 
Nat. Methods 
2011 , 8 , 143 –146 .21217750 
Rasnik I. ; McKinney S. A. ; Ha T. 
Nat. Methods 
2006 , 3 , 891 –893 .17013382 
Altman R. B. ; Terry D. S. ; Zhou Z. ; Zheng Q. ; Geggier P. ; Kolster R. A. ; Zhao Y. ; Javitch J. A. ; Warren J. D. ; Blanchard S. C. 
Nat. Methods 
2012 , 9 , 68 –71 .22081126 
Altman R. B. ; Zheng Q. ; Zhou Z. ; Terry D. S. ; Warren J. D. ; Blanchard S. C. 
Nat. Methods 
2012 , 9 , 428 –429 .22543373 
Cooper D. ; Uhm H. ; Tauzin L. J. ; Poddar N. ; Landes C. F. 
ChemBioChem 
2013 , 14 , 1075 –1080 .23733413 
Lakowicz J. R.  Principles of Fluorescence
Spectroscopy ; Springer : New York , 2006 .
Schmidt T. ; Schuetz G. J. ; Baumgartner W. ; Gruber H. J. ; Schindler H. 
J. Phys. Chem. 
1995 , 99 , 17662 –17668 .
Kisley L. ; Chang W.-S. ; Cooper D. ; Mansur A. P. ; Landes C. F. 
Methods Appl.
Fluoresc. 
2013 , 1 , 037001 .24587894 
Pal R. ; Beeby A. 
Methods
Appl. Fluoresc. 
2014 , 2 , 037001 .
Hsiang J.-C. ; Jablonski A. E. ; Dickson R. M. 
Acc. Chem. Res. 
2014 , 47 , 1545 –1554 .24725021 
Jablonski A. E. ; Hsiang J.-C. ; Bagchi P. ; Hull N. ; Richards C. I. ; Fahrni C. J. ; Dickson R. M. 
J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2012 , 3 , 3585 –3591 .23419973 
Richards C. I. ; Hsiang J.-C. ; Senapati D. ; Patel S. ; Yu J. ; Vosch T. ; Dickson R. M. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 4619 –4621 .19284790 
Willets K. A. ; Ostroverkhova O. ; He M. ; Twieg R. J. ; Moerner W. E. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125 , 1174 –1175 .12553812 
Bouffard J. ; Kim Y. ; Swager T. M. ; Weissleder R. ; Hilderbrand S. A. 
Org. Lett. 
2007 , 10 , 37 –40 .18062694 
Butler R. N. ; Fahy A. M. ; Fox A. ; Stephens J. C. ; McArdle P. ; Cunningham D. ; Ryder A. G. 
Tetrahedron Lett. 
2006 , 47 , 1721 –1724 .
Paige J. S. ; Wu K. Y. ; Jaffrey S. R. 
Science 
2011 , 333 , 642 –646 .21798953 
Haustein E. ; Schwille P. 
Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 
2007 , 36 , 151 –169 .17477838 
Duncan R. ; Bergmann A. ; Cousin M. ; Apps D. ; Shipston M. 
J. Microsc. 
2004 , 215 , 1 –12 .15230870 
Elson Elliot L. 
Biophys. J. 
2011 , 101 , 2855 –2870 .22208184 
Elson E. L. ; Madge D. 
Biopolymers 
1974 , 13 , 1 –27 .
Aragón S. R. ; Pecora R. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1976 , 64 , 1791 –1803 .
Rigler R. ; Mets Ü. ; Widengren J. ; Kask P. 
Eur.
Biophys. J. 
1993 , 22 , 169 –175 .
Schwille P. ; Korlach J. ; Webb W. W. 
Cytometry 
1999 , 36 , 176 –182 .10404965 
Piskorz T. K. ; Ochab-Marcinek A. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2014 , 118 , 4906 –4912 .24738620 
Tcherniak A. ; Reznik C. ; Link S. ; Landes C. F. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 81 , 746 –754 .19093758 
Digman M.
A. ; Brown C. M. ; Sengupta P. ; Wiseman P. W. ; Horwitz A. R. ; Gratton E. 
Biophys. J. 
2005 , 89 , 1317 –1327 .15908582 
Digman M. A. ; Gratton E. 
BioEssays 
2012 , 34 , 377 –385 .22415853 
Rossow M. J. ; Sasaki J. M. ; Digman M. A. ; Gratton E. 
Nat. Protoc. 
2010 , 5 , 1761 –1774 .21030952 
Ries J. ; Chiantia S. ; Schwille P. 
Biophys. J. 
2009 , 96 , 1999 –2008 .19254560 
Daniels C. R. ; Tauzin L. J. ; Foster E. ; Advincula R. C. ; Landes C. F. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2012 , 117 , 4284 –4290 .23092304 
Petrášek Z. ; Schwille P. 
Biophys. J. 
2008 , 94 , 1437 –1448 .17933881 
Ruan Q. ; Cheng M. A. ; Levi M. ; Gratton E. ; Mantulin W. W. 
Biophys. J. 
2004 , 87 , 1260 –1267 .15298928 
Dertinger T. ; Pacheco V. ; von der Hocht I. ; Hartmann R. ; Gregor I. ; Enderlein J. 
ChemPhysChem 
2007 , 8 , 433 –443 .17269116 
Chiantia S. ; Ries J. ; Kahya N. ; Schwille P. 
ChemPhysChem 
2006 , 7 , 2409 –2418 .17051578 
Didier P. ; Godet J. ; Mély Y. 
J. Fluoresc. 
2009 , 19 , 561 –565 .18923813 
Brinkmeier M. ; Dörre K. ; Stephan J. ; Eigen M. 
Anal. Chem. 
1999 , 71 , 609 –616 .21662718 
Berland K. M. ; So P. ; Gratton E. 
Biophys. J. 
1995 , 68 , 694 –701 .7696520 
Schwille P. ; Haupts U. ; Maiti S. ; Webb W. W. 
Biophys. J. 
1999 , 77 , 2251 –2265 .10512844 
Hell S. W. ; Wichmann J. 
Opt. Lett. 
1994 , 19 , 780 –782 .19844443 
Eggeling C. ; Ringemann C. ; Medda R. ; Schwarzmann G. ; Sandhoff K. ; Polyakova S. ; Belov V. N. ; Hein B. ; von Middendorff C. ; Schönle A. 
Nature 
2009 , 457 , 1159 –1162 .19098897 
Wennmalm S. ; Thyberg P. ; Xu L. ; Widengren J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 9209 –9215 .19860428 
Wennmalm S. ; Widengren J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 5646 –5651 .20527736 
Sandén T. ; Wyss R. ; Santschi C. ; Hassaïne G. r. ; Deluz C. d. ; Martin O. J. ; Wennmalm S. ; Vogel H. 
Nano
Lett. 
2011 , 12 , 370 –375 .22149182 
Pal N. ; Verma S. D. ; Singh M. K. ; Sen S. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 7736 –7744 .21899251 
Wennmalm S. ; Widengren J. 
Front. Biosci. 
2011 , 53 , 385 –392 .
Ries J. ; Schwille P. 
BioEssays 
2012 , 34 , 361 –368 .22415816 
Haustein E. ; Schwille P. 
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
2004 , 14 , 531 –540 .15465312 
Wazawa T. ; Ueda M.   In Advances in Biochemical Engineering/Biotechnology ; Rietdorf J.  , Ed.; Springer : Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany , 2005 ; Vol. 95 , pp 77 –107 .
Axelrod D. 
Traffic 
2001 , 2 , 764 –774 .11733042 
Michalet X. 
Phys. Rev. E 
2010 , 82 , 041914 .
Michalet X. ; Berglund A. J. 
Phys. Rev. E 
2012 , 85 , 061916 .
Berglund A. J. 
Phys. Rev. E 
2010 , 82 , 011917 .
Shuang B. ; Byers C. P. ; Kisley L. ; Wang L.-Y. ; Zhao J. ; Morimura H. ; Link S. ; Landes C. F. 
Langmuir 
2013 , 29 , 228 –234 .23215347 
Haiden C. ; Wopelka T. ; Jech M. ; Keplinger F. ; Vellekoop M. J. 
Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 9607 –9615 .25036522 
Wang B. ; Anthony S. M. ; Bae S. C. ; Granick S. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2009 , 106 , 15160 –15164 .19666495 
Wang B. ; Kuo J. ; Bae S. C. ; Granick S. 
Nat. Mater. 
2012 , 11 , 481 –485 .22614505 
Skaug M.
J. ; Mabry J. ; Schwartz D. K. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2013 , 110 , 256101 .23829747 
Elliott L.
C. ; Barhoum M. ; Harris J. M. ; Bohn P. W. 
Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2011 , 13 , 4326 –4334 .21258684 
Oswald F. ; L. M. Bank E. ; Bollen Y. J. M. ; Peterman E. J. G. 
Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 16 , 12625 –12634 .24760126 
Haas B. L. ; Matson J. S. ; DiRita V. J. ; Biteen J. S. 
Molecules 
2014 , 19 , 12116 –12149 .25123183 
Shuang B. ; Chen J. ; Kisley L. ; Landes C. F. 
Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2014 , 16 , 624 –634 .24263676 
Saxton M.
J. ; Jacobson K. 
Annu. Rev. Biophys.
Biomol. Struct. 
1997 , 26 , 373 –399 .9241424 
Chenouard N. ; Smal I. ; De Chaumont F. ; Maška M. ; Sbalzarini I. F. ; Gong Y. ; Cardinale J. ; Carthel C. ; Coraluppi S. ; Winter M. 
Nat. Methods 
2014 , 11 , 281 –289 .24441936 
Hess S. T. ; Girirajan T. P. K. ; Mason M. D. 
Biophys. J. 
2006 , 91 , 4258 –4272 .16980368 
Sharonov A. ; Hochstrasser R. M. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2006 , 103 , 18911 –18916 .17142314 
Chen J. ; Bremauntz A. ; Kisley L. ; Shuang B. ; Landes C. F. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 9338 –9343 .24073628 
Parthasarathy R. 
Nat. Methods 
2012 , 9 , 724 –726 .22688415 
Small A. ; Stahlheber S. 
Nat. Methods 
2014 , 11 , 267 –279 .24577277 
“The
Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2014”. Nobelprize.org. Nobel Media AB 2014. Web. 2 Dec 2014 http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/2014/


Oddone A. ; Vilanova I. V. ; Tam J. ; Lakadamyali M. 
Microsc. Res. Tech. 
2014 , 77 , 502 –509 .24616244 
Lippincott-Schwartz J. ; Manley S. 
Nat. Methods 
2009 , 6 , 21 –23 .19116610 
Patterson G. ; Davidson M. ; Manley S. ; Lippincott-Schwartz J. 
Annu. Rev. Phys.
Chem. 
2010 , 61 , 345 –367 .20055680 
Bartko A.
P. ; Dickson R. M. 
J. Phys. Chem.
B 
1999 , 103 , 11237 –11241 .
Bartko A.
P. ; Dickson R. M. 
J. Phys. Chem.
B 
1999 , 103 , 3053 –3056 .
Bartko A.
P. ; Xu K. ; Dickson R. M. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2002 , 89 , 026101 .12097008 
Dickson R.
M. ; Norris D. J. ; Moerner W. E. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1998 , 81 , 5322 –5325 .
Böhmer M. ; Enderlein J. 
J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 
2003 , 20 , 554 –559 .
Dedecker P. ; Muls B. ; Deres A. ; Uji-i H. ; Hotta J.-i. ; Sliwa M. ; Soumillion J.-P. ; Müllen K. ; Enderlein J. ; Hofkens J. 
Adv. Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 1079 –1090 .
Patra D. ; Gregor I. ; Enderlein J. 
J. Phys. Chem. A 
2004 , 108 , 6836 –6841 .
Toprak E. ; Enderlein J. ; Syed S. ; McKinney S. A. ; Petschek R. G. ; Ha T. ; Goldman Y. E. ; Selvin P. R. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2006 , 103 , 6495 –6499 .16614073 
Huckabay H. A. ; Dunn R. C. 
Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 2658 –2666 .21319764 
Livanec P. W. ; Huckabay H. A. ; Dunn R. C. 
J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2009 , 113 , 10240 –10248 .19572622 
Armendariz K. P. ; Huckabay H. A. ; Livanec P. W. ; Dunn R. C. 
Analyst 
2012 , 137 , 1402 –1408 .22322157 
Marchuk K. ; Ha J. W. ; Fang N. 
Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 1245 –1250 .23384297 
Gu Y. ; Ha J. W. ; Augspurger A. E. ; Chen K. ; Zhu S. ; Fang N. 
Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 10753 –10764 .23963363 
Aguet F. ; GeissbŘhler S. ; Mńrki I. ; Lasser T. ; Unser M. 
Opt. Express 
2009 , 17 , 6829 –6848 .19365511 
Cyphersmith A. ; Maksov A. ; Hassey-Paradise R. ; McCarthy K. D. ; Barnes M. D. 
J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2011 , 2 , 661 –665 .
Huang B. ; Wang W. ; Bates M. ; Zhuang X. 
Science 
2008 , 319 , 810 –813 .18174397 
Jones S. A. ; Shim S.-H. ; He J. ; Zhuang X. 
Nat. Methods 
2011 , 8 , 499 –505 .21552254 
Backlund M. P. ; Lew M. D. ; Backer A. S. ; Sahl S. J. ; Grover G. ; Agrawal A. ; Piestun R. ; Moerner W. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2012 , 109 , 19087 –19092 .23129640 
Prabhat P. ; Ram S. ; Ward E. S. ; Ober R. J. 
IEEE Trans. Nanobiosci. 
2004 , 3 , 237 –242 .
Prabhat P. ; Ram S. ; Ward E. S. ; Ober R. J.   In Proceedings of SPIE on Three-Dimensional
and Multidimensional Microscopy: Image Acquisition and Processing
XIII ; SPIE : Bellingham, WA , 2006 ; p 60900L .
Ram S. ; Chao J. ; Prabhat P. ; Ward E. S. ; Ober R. J.   In Proceedings of
SPIE on Three-Dimensional
and Multidimensional Microscopy: Image Acquisition and Processing
XIV ; SPIE : Bellingham, WA , 2007 ; p 64430D .
Ram S. ; Kim D. ; Ober R. J. ; Ward E. S. 
Biophys. J. 
2012 , 103 , 1594 –1603 .23062352 
Ram S. ; Prabhat P. ; Chao J. ; Ward E. S. ; Ober R. J. 
Biophys. J. 
2008 , 95 , 6025 –6043 .18835896 
Lew M. D. ; Backlund M. P. ; Moerner W. 
Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 3967 –3972 .23360306 
Thompson M. A. ; Lew M. D. ; Badieirostami M. ; Moerner W. E. 
Nano Lett. 
2009 , 10 , 211 –218 .20000821 
Kapanidis A. N. ; Laurence T. A. ; Lee N. K. ; Margeat E. ; Kong X. ; Weiss S. 
Acc. Chem. Res. 
2005 , 38 , 523 –533 .16028886 
Kapanidis A. N. ; Lee N. K. ; Laurence T. A. ; Doose S. ; Margeat E. ; Weiss S. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2004 , 101 , 8936 –8941 .15175430 
Selvin P. R. 
Nat. Struct. Biol. 
2000 , 7 , 730 –734 .10966639 
Margeat E. ; Kapanidis A. N. ; Tinnefeld P. ; Wang Y. ; Mukhopadhyay J. ; Ebright R. H. ; Weiss S. 
Biophys. J. 
2006 , 90 , 1419 –1431 .16299085 
Wirth M. J. ; Swinton D. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
1998 , 70 , 5264 –5271 .
Wirth M. J. ; Ludes M. D. ; Swinton D. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
1999 , 71 , 3911 –3917 .
Ludes M. D. ; Wirth M. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2001 , 74 , 386 –393 .11811413 
Hansen R. L. ; Harris J. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
1998 , 70 , 4247 –4256 .
Wirth M. J. ; Swinton D. J. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 1472 –1477 .
Kang S. H. ; Shortreed M. R. ; Yeung E. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2001 , 73 , 1091 –1099 .11305636 
Zhong Z. ; Lowry M. ; Wang G. ; Geng L. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 2303 –2310 .15828761 
Cooper J.
T. ; Peterson E. M. ; Harris J. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 9363 –9370 .23998479 
Mabry J.
N. ; Skaug M. J. ; Schwartz D. K. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 9451 –9458 .25188676 
Cooper J.
T. ; Harris J. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 7618 –7626 .24975169 
Cooper J. ; Harris J. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 10.1021/ac503250a .
Wirth M.
J. ; Swinton D. J. ; Ludes M. D. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2003 , 107 , 6258 –6268 .
Wirth M. J. ; Legg M. A. 
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 
2007 , 58 , 489 –510 .17105411 
Xu X.-H. N. ; Yeung E. S. 
Science 
1998 , 281 , 1650 –1653 .9733506 
Kang S. H. ; Yeung E. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2002 , 74 , 6334 –6339 .12510756 
Isailovic S. ; Li H.-W. ; Yeung E. S. 
J. Chromatogr.,
A 
2007 , 1150 , 259 –266 .17054967 
He Y. ; Li H.-W. ; Yeung E. S. 
J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2005 , 109 , 8820 –8832 .16852048 
Cuppett C.
M. ; Doneski L. J. ; Wirth M. J. 
Langmuir 
2000 , 16 , 7279 –7284 .
Daniels C.
R. ; Kisley L. ; Kim H. ; Chen W.-H. ; Poongavanam M.-V. ; Reznik C. ; Kourentzi K. ; Willson R. C. ; Landes C. F. 
J. Mol. Recognit. 
2012 , 25 , 435 –442 .22811068 
Kisley L. ; Chen J. ; Mansur A. P. ; Dominguez-Medina S. ; Kulla E. ; Kang M. ; Shuang B. ; Kourentzi K. ; Poongavanam M.-V. ; Dhamane S. ; Willson R. C. ; Landes C. F. 
J. Chromatogr.,
A 
2014 , 1343 , 135 –142 .24751557 
Kisley L. ; Chen J. ; Mansur A. P. ; Shuang B. ; Kourentzi K. ; Poongavanam M.-V. ; Chen W.-H. ; Dhamane S. ; Willson R. C. ; Landes C. F. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2014 , 111 , 2075 –2080 .24459184 
Bandosz T.
J. 
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
1997 , 193 , 127 –131 .9299097 
Pyda M. ; Stanley B. J. ; Xie M. ; Guiochon G. 
Langmuir 
1994 , 10 , 1573 –1579 .
Nawrocki J. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
1997 , 779 , 29 –71 .
Nahum A. ; Horváth C. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
1981 , 203 , 53 –63 .
Wirth M. J. ; Fairbank R. P. ; Fatunmbi H. O. 
Science 
1997 , 275 , 44 –47 .8974384 
Newby J. J. ; Legg M. A. ; Rogers B. ; Wirth M. J. 
J. Chromatogr.,
A 
2011 , 1218 , 5131 –5135 .21705003 
Smith E.
A. ; Wirth M. J. 
J. Chromatogr.,
A 
2004 , 1060 , 127 –134 .15628155 
Moitra N. ; Ichii S. ; Kamei T. ; Kanamori K. ; Zhu Y. ; Takeda K. ; Nakanishi K. ; Shimada T. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 11570 –11573 .25101719 
Snyder L. R. ; Kirkland J. J. ; Dolan J. W.  Introduction to Modern
Liquid Chromatography ; John Wiley & Sons : Hoboken, NJ , 2011 .
Cazes J.  , Ed. Encyclopedia
of
Chromatography ; Marcel Dekker : New York , 2001 .
Cras J. J. ; Rowe-Taitt C. A. ; Nivens D. A. ; Ligler F. S. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 
1999 , 14 , 683 –688 .
Kwok K. C. ; Yeung K. M. ; Cheung N. H. 
Langmuir 
2007 , 23 , 1948 –1952 .17279679 
Kian Zareh S. ; Desantis M. ; Kessler J. ; Li J.-L. ; Wang Y. M. 
Biophys. J. 
2011 , 102 , 1685 –1691 .
Kastantin M. ; Walder R. ; Schwartz D. K. 
Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 12443 –12456 .22716995 
Walder R. ; Kastantin M. ; Schwartz D. K. 
Analyst 
2012 , 137 , 2987 –2996 .22617120 
Langdon B.
B. ; Kastantin M. ; Schwartz D. K. 
Biophys. J. 
2012 , 102 , 2625 –2633 .22713578 
Peterson E. M. ; Harris J. M. 
Langmuir 
2013 , 29 , 8292 –8301 .23741971 
Peterson E. M. ; Harris J. M. 
Langmuir 
2013 , 29 , 11941 –11949 .23971867 
Byers C. P. ; Hoener B. S. ; Chang W.-S. ; Yorulmaz M. ; Link S. ; Landes C. F. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2014 , 10.1021/jp504454y .
Harris D. C.  Quantitative Chemical
Analysis ; W. H. Freeman and Company : New York , 2007 .
Afanassiev V. ; Hanemann V. ; Wölfl S. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2000 , 28 , e66 .10871389 
Wu D. ; Walters R. R. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
1992 , 598 , 7 –13 .
Gon S. ; Santore M. M. 
Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 1487 –1493 .21207949 
Gon S. ; Santore M. M. 
Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 15083 –15091 .22040182 
Gon S. ; Kumar K.-N. ; Nüsslein K. ; Santore M. M. 
Macromolecules 
2012 , 45 , 8373 –8381 .23148127 
Cuatrecasas P. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
1970 , 245 , 3059 –3065 .5432796 
Cuatrecasas P. ; Wilchek M. ; Anfinsen C. B. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci.
U.S.A. 
1968 , 61 , 636 .4971842 
Rasmussen J. K. ; Gleason R. M. ; Milbrath D. S. ; Rasmussen R. L. 
Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res. 
2005 , 44 , 8554 –8559 .
Asish Xavier K. ; Willson R. C. 
Biophys. J. 
1998 , 74 , 2036 –2045 .9545062 
Fu J. Y. ; Balan S. ; Potty A. ; Nguyen V. ; Willson R. C. 
Anal. Chem. 
2007 , 79 , 9060 –9065 .17973458 
Gill D. S. ; Roush D. J. ; Shick K. A. ; Willson R. C. 
J. Chromatogr.,
A 
1995 , 715 , 81 –93 .8520668 
Gill D. S. ; Roush D. J. ; Willson R. C. 
J. Chromatogr.,
A 
1994 , 684 , 55 –63 .7987477 
Gill D. S. ; Roush D. J. ; Willson R. C. 
J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
1994 , 1 , 1 –7 .
Xavier A. K. ; Willson R. C. 
Biophys. J. 
1998 , 74 , 2036 –2045 .9545062 
Roy R. ; Hohng S. ; Ha T. 
Nat. Methods 
2008 , 5 , 507 –516 .18511918 
Pasti L. ; Cavazzini A. ; Felinger A. ; Martin M. ; Dondi F. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 2524 –2535 .15828789 
Felinger A. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
2008 , 1184 , 20 –41 .18199443 
Giddings J. C.  Dynamics of Chromatography ; Marcel
Dekker, Inc. : New York , 1965 ; Vol. 1 .
Van
Deemter J. J. ; Zuiderweg F. ; Klinkenberg A. v. 
Chem. Eng. Sci. 
1956 , 5 , 271 –289 .
Gritti F. ; Guiochon G. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
2013 , 1302 , 1 –13 .23838304 
Usher K. M. ; Simmons C. R. ; Dorsey J. G. 
J. Chromatogr.,
A 
2008 , 1200 , 122 –128 .18565532 
Giddings J. C. ; Eyring H. 
J. Phys. Chem. 
1955 , 59 , 416 –421 .
McQuarrie D. A. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1963 , 38 , 437 –445 .
Dondi F. ; Cavazzini A. ; Pasti L. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
2006 , 1126 , 257 –267 .16815427 
Dondi F. ; Remelli M. 
J. Phys. Chem. 
1986 , 90 , 1885 –1891 .
Yoshida T. 
J. Biochem. Biophys. Methods 
2004 , 60 , 265 –280 .15345295 
Jandera P. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2011 , 692 , 1 –25 .21501708 
Barth H. G. ; Boyes B. E. ; Jackson C. 
Anal. Chem. 
1996 , 68 , 445 –466 .
Poole C. F. 
TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 
2003 , 22 , 362 –373 .
Taylor L. T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 4925 –4935 .20465290 
Porath J. 
Protein Express.
Purif. 
1992 , 3 , 263 –281 .
Foucault A. ; Chevolot L. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
1998 , 808 , 3 –22 .
Yan B. ; Zhao J. ; Brown J. S. ; Blackwell J. ; Carr P. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2000 , 72 , 1253 –1262 .10740867 
Thompson J. D. ; Carr P. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2002 , 74 , 1017 –1023 .11924958 
Greibrokk T. ; Andersen T. 
J. Chromatogr., A 
2003 , 1000 , 743 –755 .12877198 
Zhang Z. ; Wang Z. ; Liao Y. ; Liu H. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2006 , 29 , 1872 –1878 .16970189 
Wixom R. L. G C.
W.  Chromatography: A Science
of Discovery ; Wiley : Hoboken, NJ , 2010 .
Reznik C. ; Landes C. F. 
Acc. Chem. Res. 
2012 , 45 , 1927 –1935 .23013103 
Wöll D. ; Braeken E. ; Deres A. ; De Schryver F. C. ; Uji-i H. ; Hofkens J. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2009 , 38 , 313 –328 .19169450 
Wang S. ; Jing B. ; Zhu Y. 
J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Phys. 
2014 , 52 , 85 –103 .
Cherdhirankorn T. ; Best A. ; Koynov K. ; Peneva K. ; Muellen K. ; Fytas G. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2009 , 113 , 3355 –3359 .19228045 
Rmaile H. H. ; Schlenoff J. B. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125 , 6602 –6603 .12769548 
Hong S. U. ; Bruening M. L. 
J. Membr. Sci. 
2006 , 280 , 1 –5 .
Ouyang L. ; Malaisamy R. ; Bruening M. L. 
J. Membr. Sci. 
2008 , 310 , 76 –84 .
