
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac403843jArticleHigh Sensitivity Detection and Quantitation of DNA
Copy Number and Single Nucleotide Variants with Single Color Droplet
Digital PCR Miotke Laura ‡†Lau Billy T. ‡§†Rumma Rowza T. ‡†Ji Hanlee P. *‡§‡ Division
of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford
University School of Medicine, CCSR 1115, 269 Campus Drive, Stanford, California, 94305 United States§ Stanford Genome Technology Center, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California, 94304 United States* E-mail: genomics_ji@stanford.edu. Phone: 650-721-1503. Fax: 650-725-1420.31 01 2015 31 01 2014 04 03 2014 86 5 2618 2624 26 11 2013 31 01 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical Society

In
this study, we present a highly customizable method for quantifying
copy number and point mutations utilizing a single-color, droplet
digital PCR platform. Droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR)
is rapidly replacing real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) as an efficient
method of independent DNA quantification. Compared to quantative PCR,
ddPCR eliminates the needs for traditional standards; instead, it
measures target and reference DNA within the same well. The applications
for ddPCR are widespread including targeted quantitation of genetic
aberrations, which is commonly achieved with a two-color fluorescent
oligonucleotide probe (TaqMan) design. However, the overall cost and
need for optimization can be greatly reduced with an alternative method
of distinguishing between target and reference products using the
nonspecific DNA binding properties of EvaGreen (EG) dye. By manipulating
the length of the target and reference amplicons, we can distinguish
between their fluorescent signals and quantify each independently.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of this method by examining copy
number in the proto-oncogene FLT3 and the common
V600E point mutation in BRAF. Using a series of well-characterized
control samples and cancer cell lines, we confirmed the accuracy of
our method in quantifying mutation percentage and integer value copy
number changes. As another novel feature, our assay was able to detect
a mutation comprising less than 1% of an otherwise wild-type sample,
as well as copy number changes from cancers even in the context of
significant dilution with normal DNA. This flexible and cost-effective
method of independent DNA quantification proves to be a robust alternative
to the commercialized TaqMan assay.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac403843jdocument-id-new-14ac-2013-03843jccc-price
==== Body
Digital PCR is a nucleic acid
amplification and detection method that is based on the dilution of
template DNA into independent noninteracting partitions.1 Following Poisson statistics with high dilutions
of DNA template, each reaction is independently interrogated for the
presence of a nucleic acid at single molecule sensitivity. Digital
PCR was first implemented on high dilutions of template DNA into microtiter
plates2 but has recently matured through
the use of microfabricated platforms.3−9 In recent years, several companies have produced commercially accessible
ways to automate and expand the range of partitioning. This includes
droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR) systems (e.g., Bio-Rad
QX200) that disperse template DNA randomly into emulsion droplets
of equal volume.9

Recently, digital
PCR has seen wider use as an analytical tool for research and clinical
applications. For example, digital PCR can be used to detect mutations,
to analyze copy number variations seen in the amplifications or deletions
of specific genes, and to quantify specific nucleic acids species.
Digital PCR can be useful for identifying cancer genetic variation
from tumors, especially in clinical samples that are mixtures between
normal and tumor DNA.

Commonly, digital PCR platforms rely upon
the use of fluorescently quenched oligonucleotide probes to hybridize
to a region of interest. Upon PCR amplification, the 5′ exonuclease
activity of the polymerase separates the fluorophore from the quencher
and generates a fluorescent signal specific to the target. The fluorescence
of these partitions can be individually measured after amplification
in order to determine the presence or absence of template molecules.
The use of different fluorescent dyes allows for the simultaneous
normalization of one genomic DNA region of interest (ROI) against
a reference amplicon in a single reaction.9 However, the major limitation of using fluorescent oligonucleotide
probes in digital copy number analysis is the scalability of synthesis
and optimization for a large number of genes.

Recent studies
have explored the application of DNA binding dyes such as EvaGreen
(EG) for the quantitation of single amplicons in a digital PCR format.8,10 The EG fluorophore is a nonspecific double-stranded DNA (dsDNA)
binding dye. When no DNA is present, EG assumes an inactive low-background
configuration; it only emits a strong fluorescent signal when DNA
template is bound. The method of binding allows for the use of a higher
concentration without inhibiting PCR and thus maintaining a higher
resolution signal compared to SYBR dye.11 The EG-DNA complex produces a maximum amplitude fluorescent signal
at an excitation wavelength of 500 nm and an emission wavelength of
530 nm.12 In comparison, digital PCR systems
utilizing fluorescent oligonucleotide probes commonly consist of multiple
spectrally distinct fluorophores for the detection of different targets.
As only one wavelength can be used to detect both the reference and
ROI in an EG-based digital PCR format, new multiplexing strategies
independent of spectral context are required.

To achieve a multiplexed
format in a single-color system, we took advantage of the varying
amplitudes of EG signal for different amplicons using a Bio-Rad QX-200
system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Our assay utilizes differences in
amplicon length for quantitative measurement of multiplexed copy number
variation (CNV) or single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in a single well.
Namely, we designed the ROI variant specific amplicon to be slightly
longer that the reference nonvariant sequence. The increase in length
of the amplicon results in an increase in the base pairs of double-stranded
DNA present in a positive droplet. Since the fluorescent amplitude
of the EG dye is proportional to the amount of dsDNA present, a droplet
with a longer amplicon will fluoresce more brightly than a droplet
with a shorter amplicon (Figure 1).

Figure 1 Schematic of
droplet-digital PCR with EvaGreen dye. Droplets are formed pre-PCR
by randomly sequestering fragmented template DNA into equal volume
partitions. The first population of droplets corresponding with the
lowest fluorescent amplitude has only the unamplified background template
DNA (gray). The second population represents the droplets containing
only the short amplicon template (black). For CNV analysis, this is
UC1 (60bp), and for SNV analysis, this is the short-tail amplicon
(71bp). The third population represents droplets with only the long
amplicon template (red). For CNV analysis, this is the ROI (66bp),
and for SNV analysis, this is the long-tail amplicon (104bp). The
population with the highest amplitude represents droplets containing
both amplified targets.

A correlation between amplified template length and droplet
fluorescence amplitude has previously been reported in the context
of TaqMan probe-based next-generation sequencing library characterization
but not in the context of a single-color binding dye.13 Recently, a study was published that demonstrated an EG-based
droplet digital PCR platform as well as a proof-of-concept multiplexing
approach based on amplicon length with the QX200 system.14 In this work, we further expand this strategy
to robustly detect and quantify CNVs across a wide range of targets
and sample sources. We not only show that EvaGreen fluorescence amplitude
varies based on amplicon length (Figure 2)
but go on to manipulate this feature to multiplex two targets in one
well. In addition, we extend this technique by direct manipulation
of amplicon length in order to detect SNVs from cancer cell lines
and patient samples. In both of our demonstrated CNV and SNV quantification
strategies, we achieve high sensitivity and specificity, even in the
context of genetic mixtures where the genetic variant of interest
is represented only by a small fraction of the overall DNA.

Figure 2 Correlated
increase in amplicon length and EvaGreen fluorescence amplitude. (A)
Reverse primers were designed to flank increasing length regions of FLT3 with a common forward primer. All primers were approximately
20 bp. (B) Each column represents individual wells of ∼20,000
droplets with a single set of FLT3 primers. Amplicons
>500 bp were allowed to anneal/extend for two minutes instead of
one.

Experimental Section
Ethics Statement
Sample DNA was collected from the Stanford Tissue Bank and approved
by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Stanford University School
of Medicine.

DNA Samples and Processing
We used
human genomic DNA as the template in all digital PCR assays in this
study. The control DNA was sourced from a Yoruban individual (NA18507;
Coriell Institute, Camden, NJ). We obtained genomic DNA (NA18507,
NA04626, NA06061) with varying degrees of X-chromosome aneuploidy
from the Coriell Institute. Patient samples were sourced from colorectal
tumor-normal pairs from the Stanford Cancer Institute Tissue Bank.
We processed these tumor samples with the E.Z.N.A DNA/RNA/Protein
extraction kit (Omega Bio-Tek, Norcross, GA) and treated post extraction
samples with RNase A for 1 h at 37 °C. All FLT3-amplified colorectal cell lines were extracted from culture using
the DNeasy Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer’s
protocols. Cancer cell line DNA (LS411N, NCIH716, HT29) was obtained
from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and Dr. Walter Bodmer (Cambridge, UK).

Primer Design and Optimization
For all copy number assays,
we designed primers to be around 20 bps in length using Primer3, verified
their specificity with UCSC Genome Browser Primer BLAT, and purchased
them from IDT (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA). Primer
sequences are listed in Table 1. For each,
we performed simplex PCR using human genomic control DNA, NA18507
(Coriell), and confirmed the presence of the correct products with
electrophoresis on a nondenaturing TBE acrylamide gel (Figure 3A). For all mutation quantification assays, we designed
primers and verified specificity using IDT’s PrimerQuest (http://www.idtdna.com/Primerquest/Home/Index). We designed
the region of primers to be around 20 bps in length with the SNP as
the last base pair on the 3′ end and melting temperatures within
3 °C of each other. Using NA18507 and LS411N (ATCC), we confirmed
the presence of specific bands on a 2% agarose gel and then designed
noncomplementary tail sequences of varying lengths to be added to
the 5′ end. Short tails had high GC content, while long tails
were AT rich to maintain melting temperatures within 3 °C of
each other.

Figure 3 Primer optimization for CNV assay. (A) NA18507 normal diploid genomic
DNA served as template for simplex PCR amplification of FLT3 (66bp), UC1 (60bp), and a multiplexed reaction for both targets.
Amplicons were run on a nondenaturing TBE acrylamide gel. (B) Each
column represents a single well of ∼20,000 droplets containing
NA18507 template with multiplexed UC1 and FLT3.

Table 1 Primer Sequences
gene	length (bp)	forward	reverse	
UC1	60	TGAGGGATTCGGCAGATGTTG	CTGAAAGGCTGGACTTGACAGA	
FLT3	66	GGGATAGGACTCCTGGGTTT	GTGAGCAGCCTGCATTACCT	
FLT3a	66	TCAGTGGCAAGAAACGACAC	AGCTGATTGACTGGGATGCT	
FLT3	100	TCAGTGGCAAGAAACGACAC	GTGAGCAGCCTGCATTACCT	
FLT3	277	TCAGTGGCAAGAAACGACAC	ATTCAAGCGAGCCTGGTTTA	
FLT3	482	TCAGTGGCAAGAAACGACAC	CAGTGCTCACTGCCCTAACA	
FLT3	592	TCAGTGGCAAGAAACGACAC	CATTATGGCTGAACGCTGTG	
FLT3	740	TCAGTGGCAAGAAACGACAC	CAGCACCACTCTTCCATTGAT	
FLT3	903	TCAGTGGCAAGAAACGACAC	CTGCAGGTCAGGTTGGATAAT	
G6PD	64	GCCAGTGGCAGAGTAAGGAG	TCTCCTGGGTCTCAGGCTTA	
BRAF-WT	65	CATGAAGACCTCACAGTAAA	CCACTCCATCGAGATTTCA	
BRAF-MUT	65	CATGAAGACCTCACAGTAAA	CCACTCCATCGAGATTTCT	
long tail	39	 	AAATAAATAAATAAATAAATAAATAAATAAATAAATAAA	
short tail	6	 	GGGGGG	
forward tail	6	GGGGGG	 	
a Used for amplicon length experiment.

ddPCR Assay Conditions
and Optimization
As the initial step, we treated all of the
genomic DNA samples with the restriction enzyme EcoRI for 1–2 h at 37 °C, with subsequent heat-kill at 65
°C for 20 min. This restriction enzyme digest ensured that all
potentially linked tandem gene copies in our high-quality DNA would
be randomly and independently distributed into the droplets.

For all assembled 20 μL PCR reaction mixtures, we included
2× EvaGreen ddPCR Supermix (Bio-Rad) and primers at a final concentration
of 0.1 μM. We loaded 20 ng of NA18507 template DNA into all
reactions with the exception of assays examining fluorescence intensity
as a function of the amount of template DNA. We partitioned each reaction
mixture into approximately 20,000 droplets with a droplet generator
(Bio-Rad QX-200) and then cycled with the following conditions: 95
°C for 5 min (1 cycle); 95 °C for 30 s and 52–62
°C for 1 min (40 cycles); 4 °C for 5 min, 90 °C for
5 min (1 cycle), 4 °C hold. Cycled droplets were read individually
with the QX200 droplet-reader (Bio-Rad).

For optimization of
new primer sets, we used an annealing temperature gradient for PCR.
On the basis of this assessment, we chose an annealing temperature
of 60 °C for the FLT3 primers and 61 °C
for G6PD primers in the CNV assays. For SNV primers,
we first ran one annealing temperature gradient for tailless primers.
Subsequently, we employed a temperature gradient for primers with
tails using a segmented annealing step as follows: 95 °C for
30 s and the optimal annealing temperature for tailless primers for
1 min (4 cycles); 95 °C for 30 s and 52–62 °C for
1 min (41 cycles). For the BRAF V600E primers, we
used an annealing temperature of 55 °C for 4 cycles and then
ramped up to an annealing temperature of 60 °C for 41 cycles.

Clustering Analysis of Droplet PCR
We exported the fluorescence
amplitude of each droplet from the QuantaSoft droplet reader software
(Bio-Rad) and, briefly, clustered the droplets into distinct groups
using a distance-based minimum-variance linkage algorithm in MATLAB
(Mathworks, Natick, MA). We eliminated droplets with extreme outlying
amplitudes (<0.01% of the total droplets) from the analysis pipeline.
We computed the number of negative droplets as if all droplets from
three replicate wells were pooled together into one well. The concentration
of each target was calculated as follows: 1  

Droplets intermediate
between two cluster populations did not significantly alter the calculated
concentration.

For copy number reactions run without replicates,
we clustered the droplets and calculated copy number using the QuantaSoft
software. The error reported for a single well was the Poisson 95%
confidence interval. We used the automated clustering analysis for
both FLT3 and G6PD. We calculated
copy number as 2× the ratio of ROI concentration versus reference
concentration. We calculated the average and standard deviation across
triplicates as weighted by the number of detected droplets in each
well.

We used the automated clustering analysis for BRAF mutation quantification as described above. Percent
mutant was calculated as follows: 2  

We calculated the average and standard deviation across triplicates
as weighted by the number of detected droplets in each well.

Amplicon
Length Experiment
We used the cycling protocol described
above; except for longer amplicons (>500 bp), we extended the annealing/extension
step to 2 min. For this assay we ran only one well per template amount
and generated copy numbers and 95% Poisson confidence intervals with
the QuantaSoft platform.

Amplified DNA Spike-in Experiments
We used the cycling protocol for CNV as described above. We reported
the copy number for NCIH716 from Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia microarray
data15 and from Coriell Institute for NA18507.
Dilutions of 1:5, 2:3, 3:2, and 5:1 of NCIH716 to 18507 DNA were made
by volume using DNA samples that were equimolar.

Quantitative
SNV Measurements on Controls and Spike-in Experiments
All
expected mutation concentrations from cancer cell lines and control
human DNA were derived from ddPCR with the PrimePCR BRAF V600E TaqMan assay (Bio-Rad). For these TaqMan control assays, we
cycled with a single annealing temperature of 55 °C as per manufacturer
recommendation. Concentration of mutant was calculated from triplicate
using the Bio-Rad QuantaSoft platform. Subsequently, we used the concentrations
(copies/ul) derived from the TaqMan assay to create dilutions of LS411N
DNA into wild-type Human Male Control (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
We analyzed dilutions of 40%, 30%, 20%, 5%, 1%, and 0.5% of mutant
copies into wild-type. This assay relied on the same cycling protocol
for EG mutation quantification as described previously.

Results
and Discussion
We developed single color ddPCR assays to
measure two classes of genetic variation: (1) copy number variations
and (2) SNVs. As a proof-of-principle, we designed assays to quantify
the copy number amplification of the oncogene FLT3 and the BRAF V600E mutation, frequent in colon
cancer and melanoma. To develop these assays, we conducted a number
of pilot optimization experiments.

The ability to multiplex
two genes in a single-color ddPCR system is contingent on the ability
to distinguish between double negative, single positive, and double
positive droplet clusters (Figure 1). Differences
in the fluorescence amplitude, determined by the amount of EG dye
bound, can be used to distinguish these droplet populations. We show
that, in a singleplex ddPCR reaction, the amplicon length can be used
to manipulate the fluorescence of a particular droplet.

When
we increased the amplified length of a FLT3 region,
we saw a correlation in increasing fluorescence amplitude with increasing
amplicon size up to 500 bp (Figure 2). With
amplicons longer than 500 bp, there was a decrease in positive-droplet
fluorescence and an increase in the number of droplets with intermediate
fluorescence. This phenomenon implies that amplification of these
long regions may be incomplete.

Copy Number Determination
On the
basis of this assessment, we designed a reference target and ROI with
differing amplicon lengths in order to assess copy number. We verified
the presence of the two correctly sized PCR products by electrophoresis
on a nondenaturing acrylamide gel (Figure 3A). Additionally, we were able to identify four distinct droplet
populations corresponding to the presence of one or both of the amplicons
(Figure 3B). We found that across a range of
annealing temperatures, 60 °C produced the most distinct droplet
population separation for the FLT3-UC1 gene pair.
The disparity in droplet population across temperatures indicates
that the multiplexed nature of this assay is largely dependent upon
the amplification efficiency of the ddPCR reaction. This aspect must
be considered when designing primers to multiplex in an EG ddPCR system.

The amount of starting template DNA added per reaction can also
affect the degree of droplet population separation. Due to the nonspecific
binding fluorescence of the EG dye, the background signal of the unamplified
product in the negative droplets increases with the amount of template
DNA loaded. Also, the difference in fluorescence between negative
and positive droplets accordingly shrinks. With starting template
concentrations ranging from 0.25 to 2.5 ng/μL, we found that
there was a clear amplitude separation between the droplet clusters
(Figure S-1, Supporting Information). Although
the populations were significantly condensed at higher concentrations,
we were still able to accurately cluster droplets with a final DNA
template concentration up to 10 ng/μL. Because the ROI and reference
amplicons make up an extremely small fraction of the total human genome
size, we are still in the Poisson dilution threshold for digital PCR.
Additionally, we found that as little as 1 ng of high-quality DNA
(NA18507) in a 20 μL reaction was required to yield an expected
copy number close to two (Table S-1, Supporting
Information).

Regardless of the concentration of initial
template, our human control DNA sample had a FLT3 copy number reproducibly close to two. This is the expected result
for a normal diploid genome, reflective of a one-to-one ratio between
the number of FLT3 positive droplets and UC1 positive
droplets (Figure S-1, Supporting Information). When choosing a reference gene, we wanted to confirm that disparities
in primer efficiency between UC1 and FLT3 did not
significantly contribute to fluorescent amplitude. If the primer efficiency
is not the same, we might expect that a less efficient primer pair
would produce lower amplitude droplets (Figure S-2, Supporting Information). In that case, we would also expect
the number of positive droplets in the lower amplitude population
to be less. However, because there was no difference in the number
of UC1 positive droplets versus FLT3 positive droplets,
we are confident that primer efficiency does not play a major role
in determining fluorescent amplitude in our assay.

We explored
the accuracy of our assay in detecting integer level CNV by analyzing
the number of copies of the X-linked gene, G6PD,
in DNA samples from patients with known X-chromosome aneuploidy. We
accurately distinguished between G6PD copy numbers
ranging from 1 to 4 at close to integer values (Figure 4A). This indicates the ability of the assay to not only evaluate
copy number amplification but also offer an accurate metric for detecting
gene deletions. The standard deviations of copy numbers detected varied
in the one hundredth to thousandth of a copy, indicating a highly
reproducible method with research and diagnostic potential to detect
germline CNV.

Figure 4 Sensitivity testing of EvaGreen CNV assay on control DNA.
(A) G6PD copy number measured in four human X-chromosome disorder
DNA samples (Coriell). The expected one-to-one line (orange) is based
on the copy numbers provided by the Coriell Institute. (B) FLT3 copy
number as measured in a serial dilution of NCIH716 colorectal cancer
cell line into a normal diploid human control, NA18507 (Coriell).
The expected copy number (green) was calculated from the Cancer Cell
Line Encyclopedia (Broad) data on copy number derived from microarray
analysis.

While all of our DNA samples yielded
near integer copy number values, this is not always the case in cancer
samples (Table S-2, Supporting Information). Most clinical tumor samples are a mixture of normal and tumor
cells at varying percentages, as well as genetically dissimilar subclones
of cancer cells. To assess the sensitivity of our system in detecting
heterogeneous tumor samples, we measure FLT3 copy
number in an amplified cell line (NCIH716) diluted into normal diploid
DNA (NA18507). NCIH716 has a tumor cell line, a FLT3 amplified copy number of around 3.5 copies per genome. We found
that our method had the sensitivity to detect a tumor sample diluted
1:4 in normal template (Figure 4B). The performance
of the assay on mixed samples indicates robust copy number evaluation
in cancer samples that are tumor and normal cell mixtures.

Quantitative
Detection of Single Nucleotide Variants
In addition to copy
number assessment, we designed an assay for the BRAF V600E point mutation using the same concept of amplicon length variation
to separate droplet populations. The design incorporated a long, noncomplementary
tail onto the 5′ end of the BRAF wild-type
primer and a short tail onto the BRAF mutant primer. The longer amplicon
produced higher amplitude positive droplets than the shorter amplicon;
thus, the population of wild-type positive droplets and mutant positive
droplets were distinctly clustered and quantified similar to the CNV
assay (Figure 5A).

Figure 5 One-color SNV quantification.
(A) Primers are designed with the single nucleotide variant at the
3′ end of the complementary region. Noncomplementary tails
of varying lengths are then added to the 5′ end and amplified
with a universal reverse primer. (B) 1:4 mixture of MUT/WT BRAF template amplified with mutant primers with the short
tail and wild-type primers with the long tail. (C) Swap: 1:4 mixture
of MUT/WT BRAF template amplified with wild-type
primers with the short tail and mutant primers with the long tail.
(D) Serial dilution of mutant BRAF template (LS411N)
into wild-type (Human male control). Theoretical % mutant was calculated
from TaqMan measured concentrations of mutant and wild-type template.
The assay was performed with the EvaGreen primer mix from (B). (E)
The red border regions provide a magnified view of three data points
on the lower end of the dilution series from (D).

We tested this primer mix on a series of diploid control
DNA, cancer cell lines, and a colorectal patient sample for which
next-generation sequencing had verified the presence of the targeted
mutation. In all cases, we compared our method of multiplexing with
EG to BioRad’s commercially available PrimePCR BRAF V600E assay, which utilizes TaqMan chemistry. In BioRad’s
assay, a FAM probe hybridizes to the mutant sequence and a HEX probe
hybridizes to the wild-type sequence, so each are read as separate
clusters on two distinct channels. The EG reported values were similar
to the values generated from Bio-Rad’s commercially available
PrimePCR BRAF V600E assay, which utilizes TaqMan
chemistry. The concentrations (copies/μL) of mutant and wild-type
measured with PrimePCR for each of the control samples were used as
a reference throughout our study. The EG measured values for the controls
were universally similar to these reference values (Table 2).

Table 2 Comparison between
EvaGreen and TaqMan Mutation Quantification Methods on Control Template
DNA
 	 	% mutant	
template	source	Evagreen	TaqMan	
18507	normal diploid DNA	0.01	0.00	
Human Male Control	normal diploid DNA	0.00	0.00	
HT29	cancer cell line	25.38	25.68	
LS411N	cancer
cell line	67.48	66.36	
168B	patient-benign	0.00	0.00	
168M	patient-malignant	25.30	27.13	
To further test the accuracy of our assay in comparison
to its TaqMan counterpart, we used our BRAF tail
assay to amplify a known template mixture (80% wild-type template
and 20% mutant template). Three populations were easily distinguishable
and we measured the ratio of mutant to wild-type as 0.24 (Figure 5B). Next, we engineered a “swap” so
that the wild-type primer was designed with the short tail and the
mutant primer with the long tail. Using the same template mixture
(4:1), we measured the ratio of wild-type template to mutant as 0.26
(Figure 5C). The close correspondence of these
results to the genotype representation indicates amplicon length as
the primary factor in determining population amplitude.

Finally,
we measured the sensitivity of our mutation detection assay by performing
a dilution of mutation template into increasing amounts of wild-type
genomic DNA lacking the mutation (Figure 5D).
Even at an expected mutation concentration of less than 1%, the single
color assay could accurately quantify the mutant (Figure 5E). This has implications for the use of this method
in detecting rare nucleotide variants, as well as mutation detection
in low concentration samples such as circulating nucleic acids.

Conclusion
We demonstrated the multiplexed quantification
of nucleic acids in a one-color digital PCR format by exploiting the
shift in fluorescence amplitude due to varying amplicon size. This
method retains the accuracy found in TaqMan-based droplet digital
PCR platforms while eliminating the need for optimization of the probe
oligonucleotide. Sampling error is minimized because both the ROI
and the reference gene are measured from the same template. We showed
that this single-color ddPCR strategy is robust in analyzing germline
copy number variations, as well as quantifying copy number variation
in admixtures between tumor and normal DNA. Through the direct manipulation
of amplicon size using 5′ primer tails, we were also able to
detect and quantify single nucleotide mutations at very low concentrations.

Since a third oligonucleotide is unnecessary in this system, it
is possible to use shorter amplicons, which is preferable in the context
of degraded DNA. Whereas TaqMan-based assays are limited by the efficiency
of the oligonucleotide probe and dependent on the neighboring nucleotide
context, our single-color digital PCR strategy is a highly flexible
platform that can be used to interrogate a wide range of genetic targets.

Supporting Information Available
Figures
and tables describing the optimization of starting genomic DNA per
reaction, the effect of primer efficiency on fluorescent amplitude,
and colorectal cancer patient FLT3 copy numbers.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac403843j_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
† L.M., B.T.L., and R.T.R. contributed equally
to this work.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by
the following National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants: NHGRI P01
HG000205 (B.T.L., H.P.J.) and Digestive Disease Center DK56339 (H.P.J.).
H.P.J. and L.M. were supported by a Research Scholar Grant, RSG-13-297-01-TBG
from the American Cancer Society. H.P.J. was also supported by the
Doris Duke Clinical Foundation Clinical Scientist Development Award,
a Howard Hughes Medical Institute Early Career Grant, the Clayville
Foundation, and the Don and Ruth Seiler Fund.
==== Refs
References
Sykes P. J. ; Neoh S. H. ; Brisco M. J. ; Hughes E. ; Condon J. ; Morley A. A. 
BioTechniques 
1992 , 13 , 444 .1389177 
Vogelstein B. ; Kinzler K. W. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
1999 , 96 , 9236 .10430926 
Ottesen E. a. ; Hong J. W. ; Quake S. R. ; Leadbetter J. R. 
Science (New York, N.Y.) 
2006 , 314 , 1464 .
Warren L. ; Bryder D. ; Weissman I. L. ; Quake S. R. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
2006 , 103 , 17807 .17098862 
Heyries K. A. ; Tropini C. ; VanInsberghe M. ; Doolin C. 
Nat. Methods 
2011 , 8 , 6 .
Kiss M. M. ; Ortoleva-Donnelly L. ; Beer N. R. ; Warner J. ; Bailey C. G. ; Colston B. W. ; Rothberg J. M. ; Link D. R. ; Leamon J. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 8975 .19551929 
Beer N. R. ; Wheeler E. K. ; Lee-Houghton L. ; Watkins N. ; Nasarabadi S. ; Hebert N. ; Leung P. ; Arnold D. W. ; Bailey C. G. ; Colston B. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 1854 .18278951 
Shen F. ; Du W. ; Kreutz J. E. ; Fok A. ; Ismagilov R. F. 
Lab Chip 
2010 , 10 , 2666 .20596567 
Hindson B. J. ; Ness K. D. ; Masquelier D. a. ; Belgrader P. ; Heredia N. J. ; Makarewicz A. J. ; Bright I. J. ; Lucero M. Y. ; Hiddessen A. L. ; Legler T. C. ; Kitano T. K. ; Hodel M. R. ; Petersen J. F. ; Wyatt P. W. ; Steenblock E. R. ; Shah P. H. ; Bousse L. J. ; Troup C. B. ; Mellen J. C. ; Wittmann D. K. ; Erndt N. G. ; Cauley T. H. ; Koehler R. T. ; So A. P. ; Dube S. ; Rose K. a. ; Montesclaros L. ; Wang S. ; Stumbo D. P. ; Hodges S. P. ; Romine S. ; Milanovich F. P. ; White H. E. ; Regan J. F. ; Karlin-Neumann G. a. ; Hindson C. M. ; Saxonov S. ; Colston B. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 8604 .22035192 
Shen F. ; Sun B. ; Kreutz J. E. ; Davydova E. K. ; Du W. ; Reddy P. L. ; Joseph L. J. ; Ismagilov R. F. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 17705 .21995644 
Eischeid A. C. 
BMC Res. Notes 
2011 , 4 , 263 .21798028 
Mao F. ; Leung W.-Y. ; Xin X. 
BMC Biotechnol. 
2007 , 7 , 76 .17996102 
Laurie M. T. ; Bertout J. A. ; Taylor S. D. ; Burton J. N. ; Shendure J. A. ; Bielas J. H. 
BioTechniques 
2013 , 55 , 61 .23931593 
McDermott G. P. ; Do D. ; Litterst C. M. ; Maar D. ; Hindson C. M. ; Steenblock E. R. ; Legler T. C. ; Jouvenot Y. ; Marrs S. H. ; Bemis A. ; Shah P. ; Wong J. ; Wang S. ; Sally D. ; Javier L. ; Dinio T. A. ; Han C. ; Brackbill T. P. ; Hodges S. P. ; Ling Y. ; Klitgord N. ; Carman G. J. ; Berman J. R. ; Koehler R. T. ; Hiddessen A. L. ; Walse P. ; Bousse L. J. ; Tzonev S. ; Hefner E. ; Hindson B. J. ; Cauly T. H. ; Hamby K. ; Patel V. P. ; Regan J. F. ; Wyatt P. W. ; Karlin-Neumann G. A. ; Stumbo D. P. ; Lowe A. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 11619 –11627 .24180464 
Barretina J. ; Caponigro G. ; Stransky N. ; Venkatesan K. ; Margolin A. A. ; Kim S. ; Wilson C. J. ; Lehar J. ; Kryukov G. V. ; Sonkin D. ; Reddy A. ; Liu M. ; Murray L. ; Berger M. F. ; Monahan J. E. ; Morais P. ; Meltzer J. ; Korejwa A. ; Jane-Valbuena J. ; Mapa F. A. ; Thibault J. ; Bric-Furlong E. ; Raman P. ; Shipway A. ; Engels I. H. ; Cheng J. ; Yu G. K. ; Yu J. ; Aspesi P. Jr.; de Silva M. ; Jagtap K. ; Jones M. D. ; Wang L. ; Hatton C. ; Palescandolo E. ; Gupta S. ; Mahan S. ; Sougnez C. ; Onofrio R. C. ; Liefeld T. ; MacConaill L. ; Winckler W. ; Reich M. ; Li N. ; Mesirov J. P. ; Gabriel S. B. ; Getz G. ; Ardlie K. ; Chan V. ; Myer V. E. ; Weber B. L. ; Porter J. ; Warmuth M. ; Finan P. ; Harris J. L. ; Meyerson M. ; Golub T. R. ; Morrissey M. P. ; Sellers W. R. ; Schlegel R. ; Garraway L. A. 
Nature 
2012 , 483 , 603 .22460905
