
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac504330xArticleA Barcode-Free Combinatorial Screening Platform for
Matrix Metalloproteinase Screening Rane Tushar
D. †§Zec Helena C. †Wang Tza-Huei *†‡†Department of Biomedical Engineering and ‡Department of Mechanical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, United States* E-mail: thwang@jhu.edu.28 12 2015 28 12 2014 03 02 2015 87 3 1950 1956 16 11 2014 28 12 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Application
of droplet microfluidics to combinatorial screening
applications remains elusive because of the need for composition-identifying
unique barcodes. Here we propose a barcode-free continuous flow droplet
microfluidic platform to suit the requirements of combinatorial screening
applications. We demonstrate robust and repeatable functioning of
this platform with matrix metalloproteinase activity screening as
a sample application.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac504330xdocument-id-new-14ac-2014-04330xccc-price
==== Body
Matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs)
make up a family of enzymes involved in a plethora of biological functions.
Through their interactions with biological molecules like proteinases,
latent growth factors, cell-surface receptors, growth factor binding
proteins, etc., they are able to regulate a number of biological processes.1 Furthermore, this family also plays an important
role in pathological conditions like cancer, arthritis, psoriasis,
pulmonary emphysema, and endometriosis.2 It is critical to infer the presence of particular subtypes of the
MMP family in biological samples to improve our understanding of their
role in pathological processes. Short FRET peptide substrates can
be used to sense MMPs through their cleavage activity. However, their
relative nonspecificity demands sophisticated mathematical techniques
like proteolytic activity matrix analysis (PrAMA)3 to infer the presence of a specific set of MMPs based on
the cleavage signature of an unknown biological sample against a panel
of FRET peptide substrates. Techniques like this require large data
sets of individual purified MMP cleavage signatures against a large
panel of peptide substrates, which can be extremely costly and time-consuming.
For instance, screening 10 different MMPs against 10 different substrates
at 10 different concentrations of MMPs and substrates each requires
testing of 10000 MMP–substrate compositions. Assuming screening
in a 96-well plate format and a conservative estimate of 5 h per plate
for reaction assembly and data collection, testing 10000 MMP–substrate
combinations will require approximately 22 days of continuous processing.

Droplet microfluidics holds tremendous promise for high-throughput
biochemical analysis and screening. The power of droplet microfluidics
is evident from the scientific literature harnessing this versatile
platform for a variety of applications like single-cell analysis,4−7 single-molecule analysis,8−11 particle generation,12 and enzyme kinetics analysis.13 This
technology has really matured in digital analysis of individual biological
samples at the single-molecule level.8,9,14 However, the potential of this technology to address
the needs of combinatorial screening applications by replacing standard
biochemical assays conducted in a multiwell plate format (microliter
regime) to the droplet format (nanoliter to picoliter regime) remains
restricted.

A variety of droplet-based schemes for combinatorial
screening
applications have been proposed. One of the proposed schemes utilizes
high-speed electrocoalescence of a reagent droplet library with sample
droplets for high-throughput screening of single cells.4 Despite high-speed operation, this scheme is
practically restricted to a small number of reagent–sample
combinations (eight combinations reported here) because of the need
for a composition-identifying barcode and the limited capability of
the barcoding techniques that can be applied to the droplet platform.
Furthermore, the reagent and sample droplet volumes are fixed, resulting
in a fixed sample:reagent ratio in each droplet. This restriction
implies that the reagent droplet library needs to include a population
of reagent droplets corresponding to every single discrete reagent
concentration to be tested. Another scheme provides an alternative
through picoinjection technology. This technology is capable of injecting
small quantities of individual reagents into droplets at high speeds.
However, picoinjector technology is also limited by the need for droplet
barcodes.15 Picoinjector technology has
been applied to MMP screening against FRET substrates.16 However, because of the limitations discussed
above, the multiplexing capacity of these demonstrations is limited
to a small number of unique MMP–substrate combinations (nine
unique compositions reported here), albeit with large number of repeats
of each condition.

In this work, we develop a device addressing
the issues with the
existing droplet-based schemes for combinatorial screening applications.
This device is capable of high-throughput matrix metalloproteinase
screening without the need for droplet barcodes. This device is based
on valve-based droplet generation technology,17−21 which combines the control offered by microfluidic
valves with the high-throughput capacity of droplets. Barcode-free,
continuous flow operation of this strategy implies unlimited potential
screening capacity on a single device with precise composition control
over each individual droplet.

Figure 1 MMP screening platform. In step 1, droplet assembly
through a microfluidic
valve (thin black channels) controlled injection of desired MMP(s)
and substrate(s) in a buffer droplet. Step 2 is incubation of assembled
MMP–substrate droplets in the incubation channel on the device.
Step 3 is serial interrogation of droplets through confocal fluorescence
spectroscopy while preserving the order of generation, precluding
the need for a barcode to identify the composition of each droplet
(Press Rel, pressure relief channels; Surf Oil, surfactant oil input
described in the text). The image at the bottom shows the droplet
assembly region on an actual microfluidic device.

Experimental Section
Materials
We used a “MMP
Substrate Sampler kit”
(Anaspec, Inc., catalog no. 71170) as a source of MMP substrates for
our experiments. This kit consists of 16 substrates (SB1–SB16),
all of which consist of short peptide sequences labeled with the fluorophore
5-FAM and quencher QXL 520. The exact sequences of peptides from this
kit included in our experiments are listed in section 2 of the Supporting Information. The kit also included
a fluorescence reference standard (5-FAM-Pro-Leu-OH), which was used
to generate standard curves correlating fluorescence intensity with
substrate concentration. A “Matrix Metalloproteinase (MMP)
Multipack-1” (Enzo Life Sciences, catalog no. BML-AK013-0001)
was used as a source of MMPs for our experiments. This kit consists
of active recombinant MMP catalytic domains. We used the fluorescent
dyes Alexa Fluor 350, Alexa Fluor 488, and Alexa Fluor 647 (Life Technologies)
as indicator dyes for the experimental results shown in Figure 2. The input concentrations of these three dyes used
for experimental results in Figure 2 were 25,
10, and 10 μM, respectively. Alexa Fluor 546 was used in the
form of an oligo labeled with the dye as an indicator dye for our
experiments including this dye. All the reagents including fluorescent
dyes were diluted to the required concentrations with the reaction
buffer included with the MMP substrate sampler kit. BSA (10 μg/mL)
was added to the reaction buffer to prevent adsorption of reagents
to the device and tubing walls. The oil phase for our experiments
consisted of FC-40 (3M) and 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluoro-1-octanol (Sigma-Aldrich)
[4:1 (v/v)]. The surfactant oil phase consisted of FC-40 with 2% fluorosurfactant
(RAN Biotechnologies) by weight.

Figure 2 Series of fluorescent droplets generated
on a single device. Each
white square contains three images of a single droplet collected using
DAPI, FITC, and Cy5 filter sets on a fluorescence microscope from
the bottom to top, respectively. The droplets represent all possible
combinations of four different intensities of three different fluorescent
dyes (Alexa Fluor 350, Alexa Fluor 488, and Alexa Fluor 647) generated
on the device.

Input Reagent Concentrations
for Various Experiments
(1) The input dye concentrations
used for the image in Figure 2 were 25 μM
Alexa Fluor 350, 10 μM Alexa
Fluor 488, and 10 μM Alexa Fluor 647. Four different concentrations
of these dyes generated in droplets from each of these inputs were
0X, 0.1X, 0.2X,
and 0.3X, where X is the original
input concentration of each dye.

(2) The input dye concentrations
used for data in Figure 3 were 50 nM Alexa
Fluor 488 and 50 nM Alexa Fluor 546. Five different concentrations
of each dye apparent in droplet format from Figure 3 were 0X, 0.1X, 0.2X, 0.3X, and 0.4X, where X is the original input concentration of each dye.

(3) For the experimental results in Figures 4 and 5, the input concentration of all MMPs
was 5 ng/μL while the concentration of all substrates was 5
μM. The 1X MMP concentration in droplets for
these figures refers to 1 ng/μL, while the 1X substrate concentration refers to 1 μM.

(4) For the
experimental results in section 5 of the Supporting
Information, the input concentration
of all MMPs was 7.5 ng/μL while the concentration of all substrates
was 7.5 μM. The 1X MMP concentration in droplets
for these results refers to 1 ng/μL, while the 1X substrate concentration refers to 1 μM.

(5) For the
experimental results in Figure 6, the input
concentration of all MMPs was 7.5 ng/μL while the
concentration of all substrates was 7.5 μM. The 1X MMP concentration in droplets for these results refers to 0.5 ng/μL,
while the 1X substrate concentration refers to 0.5
μM. For each reagent (i.e., MMP and substrate), five different
concentrations (1X, 2X, 3X, 4X, and 5X) were generated
on the device.

Experimental Protocol
On-Chip Experiments
A set of solenoid valves was used
to control the on/off status of the valves on the device. Initially,
all the reagent inputs on the device were primed with the respective
reagent. Any residual reagents in the central channel following this
process were flushed out using the oil phase. Following this, the
valve actuation sequence corresponding to the reagent combinations
to be generated on the device was executed by a computer. The valve
actuation sequence for each droplet consisted of the following steps:
(1) buffer droplet generation, (2) droplet displacement in front of
other reagent inputs for reagent injection, (3) droplet displacement
to the incubation region through injection of the oil phase in the
central channel, (4) further displacement of the droplet in the incubation
channel through injection of a surfactant oil phase in the central
channel, and (5) closing all valves on the device for dissipation
of pressure in the central channel. After the proper operation of
the device on a microscope had been ensured, the device was moved
to a fluorescence detection setup. The fluorescence detection setup
we used for our experiments is capable of dual-channel excitation
(488 and 552 nm) as well as dual-band detection (506–534 and
608–648 nm). The detection volume of the fluorescence detection
setup was placed at the detection region of the device for continuous
sensing of fluorescence from droplets passing through that region.
The device was maintained at room temperature for all the experiments.

Off-Chip Experiments
For off-chip experimental results
used in Figure 5 and Figure S3 of the Supporting Information, MMP and substrate concentrations
identical to those being compared in the droplet format were generated
in 20 μL reaction mixtures in a 96-well plate format. The fluorescence
from the 96-well plate with these reaction mixtures was then monitored
on a CFX96 real-time PCR detection system (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.).

Data Analysis of On-Chip Experiments
Fluorescence data
obtained from droplet sequences generated on chip were further processed
through custom software written in Matlab. This software identified
various droplets in a data trace and generated various statistics
obtained from the data collected from each droplet. The average droplet
fluorescence intensity identified by this software for each droplet
was then used to estimate MMP activity rates shown in Figure 5 and Figure S3 of the Supporting
Information. Each repeat of a droplet sequence consisted of
a substrate-only control for each substrate type and concentration.
The average fluorescence intensity of a substrate-only control droplet
was subtracted from the average fluorescence intensity of a MMP–substrate
combination droplet (with the same substrate concentration), and this
intensity difference was converted to a substrate concentration difference
using the standard curve in section 4 of the Supporting
Information. The substrate concentration difference thus obtained
was then divided by the droplet transit time on the device (∼12
min) to estimate MMP activity rates for that particular MMP–substrate
combination.

Data Analysis of Off-Chip Experiments
For a fair comparison
between on-chip and off-chip experiments, the MMP activity rate was
estimated from off-chip experiments in a manner similar to that of
on-chip experiments. The fluorescence intensity reading from a substrate-only
control sample was subtracted from that of a MMP–substrate
combination reaction for the same substrate concentration at the same
time point (12 min after injection of the enzyme into the reaction
mixture). The difference in fluorescence intensities was again converted
to the substrate concentration difference, using the standard curve
for off-chip experiments in section 4 of the Supporting
Information. This substrate concentration difference was then
divided by the time for which the enzyme was added to the reaction
mixture (12 min) to estimate the MMP activity rate for that particular
MMP–substrate combination.

Figure 3 Droplet composition control and serial
droplet fluorescence detection
on the device. The two data traces show two repeats of a sequence
of 24 droplets generated on the device. The green trace indicates
fluorescence from the Alexa Fluor 488 channel (506–534 nm),
while the orange trace indicates fluorescence from the Alexa Fluor
546 channel (608–648 nm). The fluorescence data indicate the
capability of the device to independently control the concentration
of different reagents in individual droplets. The bar plot on the
bottom indicates the average fluorescence intensity of droplets with
both dyes in the sequence. The error bars indicate the standard deviations
in average fluorescence intensity over 10 repeats of the sequence.

Results and Discussion
A schematic of the device we designed for this application is illustrated
in Figure 1. The
device features a central channel with an oil phase input at the upstream
end, followed by a reagent injection region, an incubation region,
and a fluorescence detection region as one moves downstream. The device
also has 12 individual reagent inputs. We also included “pressure
relief” channels on this device, to decouple the dependence
of droplet size generated on the device from the changing flow resistance
of the incubation region. The valves corresponding to the pressure
relief channels are opened during reagent injection and droplet displacement
operations on the device.

Figure 4 MMP–substrate assay on the device. The
two data traces indicate
fluorescence obtained from two repeats of a sequence of droplets containing
different MMP–substrate combinations. The FAM channel indicates
fluorescence from the FRET peptide substrates cleaved by different
MMPs. Alexa Fluor 546 dye is used to insert a few “beacon”
droplets (green peaks in the Alexa Fluor 546 channel) into the droplet
sequence without interfering with the assay channel. The presence
of beacon droplets in the sequence at predetermined positions with
respect to other droplets can be used as an indicator of the proper
operation of the device without any unwanted droplet merging or splitting.
The fluorescence from the nonbeacon droplets in the Alexa Fluor 546
channel is due to bleeding of some fluorescence from the FAM channel
into the Alexa Fluor 546 channel.

The device operation sequence is illustrated in Figure 1. The most upstream reagent input is dedicated to
dispensing reaction buffer into droplets. For every droplet generated
on the device, initially a buffer droplet is dispensed in the central
channel. As all reagents are constantly maintained under pressure,
opening the valve for a particular reagent results in release of a
reagent droplet into the central channel. The valve opening time as
well as the pressure magnitude applied to the reagents can be used
to control the volume of the reagent dispensed into the central channel.
After this mechanism is used to dispense a buffer droplet, this droplet
is moved in front of the input corresponding to the next reagent to
be injected, using a flow of the oil phase from the oil input to the
central channel, and the injection of the next reagent is completed.
This sequence of steps can be repeated as many times as desired to
inject up to 12 reagents in each droplet using this device. After
a complete reaction mixture droplet is assembled, this droplet is
moved to the downstream incubation region. The length of the incubation
region can be modified to achieve the desired incubation time of the
droplets on the device. Following incubation, the droplets move to
a fluorescence detection region where they are interrogated by a confocal
fluorescence spectroscopy system for the reaction outcome. Figure 1 also shows an image of the droplet generation region
on an actual device. All three steps of device operation can be seen
in movies in the Supporting Information. This scheme of combinatorial droplet generation has a few salient
features that set it apart from other droplet microfluidic platforms
described above. Under this scheme, up to 12 different reagents can
be injected into a reagent droplet at various independently controlled
proportions. The device can operate in a completely automated manner
through execution of a predetermined valve actuation sequence. This
automation also implies that various reaction mixtures can be generated
in a predetermined order as desired. This feature also provides the
device with the ability to generate exactly as many repeats of a reaction
mixture as desired. Simultaneous operation of all three steps, i.e.,
droplet generation, incubation, and fluorescence detection, implies
that this device has virtually unlimited screening capacity. Even
at a very conservative estimate of 10 different reagent concentrations
for each reagent in a droplet, a single device is capable of producing
1 trillion different droplet compositions. Most importantly, because
the order of droplets is maintained throughout the device, droplets
are automatically spatially coded, precluding the need for composition-identifying
unique barcodes.

We designed a microfluidic device to execute
the workflow proposed
in Figure 1. The details of device fabrication
can be found in section 1 of the Supporting Information. The device was then tested for its capability to generate various
combinations of input reagents in a predetermined sequence using fluorescent
dyes as reagents. In our first test, we generated all possible combinations
of four different concentrations of three different fluorescent dyes
on our microfluidic device (Figure 2). Each white square in the collage in Figure 2 includes three images of a droplet taken with red,
green, and blue filters from top to bottom, respectively (details
in the Experimental Section). A progressive
sequence of changing droplet compositions can be seen as one moves
from left to right in each row, beginning with increasing concentrations
of individual dyes followed by all combinations of pairs of dyes followed
by all combinations of triplets of dyes.

An important characteristic
of the combinatorial reaction generation
system is the reagent concentration dynamic range of the system. The
upper end of this range is fixed by the input reagent concentration.
The response time of the valves used in our scheme as well as the
minimal pressure that can be applied to a reagent for reliable injection
puts a lower limit on the smallest reagent volume that can be injected
into a droplet. However, this limitation theoretically does not limit
the lower end of the reagent concentration dynamic range as the buffer
droplet size can always be made as large as necessary to achieve the
required concentration. Practically, however, we observed that large
volume droplets because of their large lengths tend to break up during
transit through the incubation region on the device. Given these constraints,
we were able to achieve a maximal dilution of 6 parts per 1000 on
our device (details in section 3 of the Supporting
Information). This number, however, is limited to our current
device design as well as the oil–surfactant system used in
our experiments. An increase in channel height in the incubation region,
to decrease droplet length, as well as the choice of a modified oil–surfactant
system for better droplet stability may further reduce the dilution
limit we were able to achieve without causing droplet breakup on our
device. Furthermore, as indicated in Figure S1 of the Supporting Information, the fluorescence intensity
of a reagent (and hence the reagent injection volume) in a droplet
varies linearly with valve opening time. This allows for precise reagent
injection control in each individual droplet through simple predetermined
valve opening time calculation. Figure 3 demonstrates this capability of the device through
independent control of the concentration of two different fluorescent
dyes in droplets via automated execution of a predetermined valve
actuation sequence. We then tested the applicability of our droplet
system for screening of MMPs against a variety of peptide substrates
on our device for their specificity and activity. The peptide substrates
used are short peptide sequences labeled with a fluorophore (5-FAM)
and a quencher (QXL 520) on either end. In the presence of an MMP,
the peptide sequence is cleaved, resulting in separation of the fluorophore
from the quencher and a consequent increase in the fluorophore’s
fluorescence. The rate of increase in fluorescence of an MMP–substrate
sample can then serve as a proxy for the activity of the MMP against
the peptide substrate.

Figure 5 MMP activity comparison between on- and off-chip experiments.
The
cleavage rates of different MMP types against different substrates
estimated from corresponding droplets on the device are compared to
cleavage rates estimated for the same reaction conditions from off-chip
experiments: MMP1_1, MMP1 at a 1X concentration;
SB9_2_chip, substrate SB9 at a 2X concentration on-chip;
SB12_1_bulk, substrate SB12 at a 1X concentration
off-chip.

Figure 6 Average measured droplet fluorescence intensities
from three repeats
of 650 unique MMP–substrate combinations. The labels indicate
the corresponding reagent (e.g., SB3, MMP1, etc.). For each reagent,
five different concentrations were tested. For each MMP, the concentration
increases from top to bottom, whereas for each substrate, the concentration
increases from left to right. The top row in each repeat indicates
results from a substrate-only control in which no MMPs were used.

Figure 4 shows
data traces obtained from two repeats of a droplet sequence containing
various combinations of MMPs and substrates. The data trace in the
top panel indicates the fluorescence emitted by the fluorophore on
the peptide substrates. However, for a droplet sequence with an unknown
outcome (as opposed to a fluorescent dye dilution series), it can
be difficult to estimate the position of each droplet in the whole
long sequence and to ensure that the device is operating robustly
without any unwanted merging or breakup of droplets. Therefore, we
also included some “beacon” droplets in the droplet
sequence, generated through different dilutions of a fluorescent dye
different from the fluorescent dye on the MMP substrates. These droplets
are indicated in the data trace from the Alexa Fluor 546 channel.
The known repeating pattern of these droplets allows us to easily
discern repeats of a droplet sequence from the data. Furthermore,
their predetermined location in the droplet sequence allows us to
ensure that the device is operating in a robust manner without any
unwanted merging or breakup of droplets as any unwanted merging or
breakup would result in a change in the position of a beacon droplet
in the whole sequence. It should be noted that these beacon droplets
are not limited by different fluorescence intensities that can be
easily distinguished by the detection system similar to fluorescence
intensity-based barcodes used in other droplet-based combinatorial
schemes described earlier. The possibility of varying intensities,
varying counts, and varying spacing between beacon droplets provides
for virtually unlimited possible beacon droplets marking different
positions in an extremely long droplet sequence.

We then compared
the substrate cleavage rates for various MMP–substrate
combinations we observed on our device against cleavage rates we observed
in off-chip experiments. Some representative results are shown in
Figure 5, while
others are included in section 5 of the Supporting
Information. Our comparison indicates that the cleavage rates
of enzymes MMP1, MMP2, and MMP9 matched across platforms fairly well
for various substrates. However, the substrate cleavage rates for
MMP8 and MMP13 were consistently low on the device when compared with
cleavage rates in off-chip experiments. Interaction of proteins with
the oil–surfactant system used in droplet devices has been
reported in the literature.22,23 Our results indicate
that the oil–surfactant system we used interacts with MMP8
and MMP13, reducing their activity. Some solutions have been proposed
in the literature to engineer better surfactants with substantially
weakened interaction with proteins.22,23 These solutions
can potentially make this platform suitable for a broad range of enzymatic
screening. As a proof of principle of screening a large number of
enzyme–substrate combinations on a single device, we generated
a droplet train consisting of 650 unique droplet compositions (Figure 6, details in the Experimental Section and section 6 of the Supporting Information). The activity patterns
from three repeats of this sequence show excellent similarity. We,
however, did observe that following long-term operation of the device
the hydrophobic treatment wears off, resulting in more sticking of
droplet contents to the channel surface. Superhydrophobic treatments
have been proposed in the literature to fabricate antifouling surfaces.
Integration of these surfaces with our device design can potentially
increase the time span for which a device can function without significant
channel surface fouling.

Conclusion
In summary, we demonstrated
a droplet device for combinatorial
screening applications without the need for composition-identifying
unique barcodes. We expect this format of droplet devices to increase
the applicability of droplet microfluidics to applications requiring
the capability of rapid heterogeneous reaction generation.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental details
and videos
demonstrating functioning of the microfluidic device. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac504330x_si_001.avi

 ac504330x_si_002.avi

 ac504330x_si_003.avi

 ac504330x_si_004.pdf

 Author Present Address
§ T.D.R.: Mork Family Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials
Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-1211.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank our funding agencies, including the National
Institutes
of Health (R01CA155305 and R21CA173390) and the National Science Foundation
(1159771).
==== Refs
References
Sternlicht M. D. ; Werb Z. 
Annu.
Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 
2001 , 17 , 463 –516 .11687497 
Amalinei C. ; Caruntu I. D. ; Giusca S. E. ; Balan R. A. 
Rom. J. Morphol. Embryol. 
2010 , 51 , 215 –228 .20495735 
Miller M. A. ; Barkal L. ; Jeng K. ; Herrlich A. ; Moss M. ; Griffith L. G. ; Lauffenburger D. A. 
Integr. Biol. 
2011 , 3 , 422 –438 .
Brouzes E. ; Medkova M. ; Savenelli N. ; Marran D. ; Twardowski M. ; Hutchison J. B. ; Rothberg J. M. ; Link D. R. ; Perrimon N. ; Samuels M. L. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2009 , 106 , 14195 –14200 .19617544 
Rane T. D. ; Zec H. C. ; Puleo C. ; Lee A. P. ; Wang T. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 3341 –3347 .22842841 
Baret J. C. ; Miller O. J. ; Taly V. ; Ryckelynck M. ; El-Harrak A. ; Frenz L. ; Rick C. ; Samuels M. L. ; Hutchison J. B. ; Agresti J. J. ; Link D. R. ; Weitz D. A. ; Griffiths A. D. 
Lab Chip 
2009 , 9 , 1850 –1858 .19532959 
Zeng Y. ; Novak R. ; Shuga J. ; Smith M. T. ; Mathies R. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 3183 –3190 .20192178 
Hindson B. J. ; Ness K. D. ; Masquelier D. A. ; Belgrader P. ; Heredia N. J. ; Makarewicz A. J. ; Bright I. J. ; Lucero M. Y. ; Hiddessen A. L. ; Legler T. C. ; Kitano T. K. ; Hodel M. R. ; Petersen J. F. ; Wyatt P. W. ; Steenblock E. R. ; Shah P. H. ; Bousse L. J. ; Troup C. B. ; Mellen J. C. ; Wittmann D. K. ; Erndt N. G. ; Cauley T. H. ; Koehler R. T. ; So A. P. ; Dube S. ; Rose K. A. ; Montesclaros L. ; Wang S. ; Stumbo D. P. ; Hodges S. P. ; Romine S. ; Milanovich F. P. ; White H. E. ; Regan J. F. ; Karlin-Neumann G. A. ; Hindson C. M. ; Saxonov S. ; Colston B. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 8604 –8610 .22035192 
Zhong Q. ; Bhattacharya S. ; Kotsopoulos S. ; Olson J. ; Taly V. ; Griffiths A. D. ; Link D. R. ; Larson J. W. 
Lab Chip 
2011 , 11 , 2167 –2174 .21584334 
Rane T. D. ; Puleo C. M. ; Liu K. J. ; Zhang Y. ; Lee A. P. ; Wang T. H. 
Lab Chip 
2010 , 10 , 161 –164 .20066242 
Kumaresan P. ; Yang C. J. ; Cronier S. A. ; Blazej R. G. ; Mathies R. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 3522 –3529 .18410131 
Song H. ; Chen D. L. ; Ismagilov R. F. 
Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2006 , 45 , 7336 –7356 .
Song H. ; Ismagilov R. F. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125 , 14613 –14619 .14624612 
Baker M. 
Nat. Methods 
2012 , 9 , 541 –544 .
Abate A. R. ; Hung T. ; Mary P. ; Agresti J. J. ; Weitz D. A. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2010 , 107 , 19163 –19166 .20962271 
Chen C. H. ; Miller M. A. ; Sarkar A. ; Beste M. T. ; Isaacson K. B. ; Lauffenburger D. A. ; Griffith L. G. ; Han J. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 1645 –1648 .23157326 
Guo F. ; Liu K. ; Ji X. ; Ding H. ; Zhang M. ; Zeng Q. ; Liu W. ; Guo S. ; Zhao X. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2010 , 97 , 233701-3 .
Zeng S. ; Li B. ; Su X. ; Qin J. ; Lin B. 
Lab
Chip 
2009 , 9 , 1340 –1343 .19417898 
Zec H. ; Rane T. D. ; Wang T. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 3055 –3062 .22810353 
Jambovane S. ; Kim D. J. ; Duin E. C. ; Kim S. K. ; Hong J. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 3358 –3364 .21456571 
Unger M. A. ; Chou H. P. ; Thorsen T. ; Scherer A. ; Quake S. R. 
Science 
2000 , 288 , 113 –116 .10753110 
Holtze C. ; Rowat A. C. ; Agresti J. J. ; Hutchison J. B. ; Angile F. E. ; Schmitz C. H. ; Koster S. ; Duan H. ; Humphry K. J. ; Scanga R. A. ; Johnson J. S. ; Pisignano D. ; Weitz D. A. 
Lab Chip 
2008 , 8 , 1632 –1639 .18813384 
Roach L. S. ; Song H. ; Ismagilov R. F. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 785 –796 .15679345
