
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac4037679ArticleProteomic Identification of Monoclonal Antibodies from Serum Boutz Daniel
R. #†‡Horton Andrew
P. #⊥‡Wine Yariv †§‡Lavinder Jason J. †§Georgiou George *†⊥§∥Marcotte Edward M. *#†∥#Center for Systems & Synthetic Biology, †Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, ⊥Department of Biomedical Engineering, §Department of Chemical Engineering, and ∥Department of
Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas
at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, United
States* E-mail: marcotte@icmb.utexas.edu.* E-mail: gg@che.utexas.edu.31 03 2015 31 03 2014 20 05 2014 86 10 4758 4766 19 11 2013 31 03 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical Society

Characterizing the in vivo dynamics of the polyclonal
antibody repertoire in serum, such as that which might arise in response
to stimulation with an antigen, is difficult due to the presence of
many highly similar immunoglobulin proteins, each specified by distinct
B lymphocytes. These challenges have precluded the use of conventional
mass spectrometry for antibody identification based on peptide mass
spectral matches to a genomic reference database. Recently, progress
has been made using bottom-up analysis of serum antibodies by nanoflow
liquid chromatography/high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry combined
with a sample-specific antibody sequence database generated by high-throughput
sequencing of individual B cell immunoglobulin variable domains (V
genes). Here, we describe how intrinsic features of antibody primary
structure, most notably the interspersed segments of variable and
conserved amino acid sequences, generate recurring patterns in the
corresponding peptide mass spectra of V gene peptides, greatly complicating
the assignment of correct sequences to mass spectral data. We show
that the standard method of decoy-based error modeling fails to account
for the error introduced by these highly similar sequences, leading
to a significant underestimation of the false discovery rate. Because
of these effects, antibody-derived peptide mass spectra require increased
stringency in their interpretation. The use of filters based on the
mean precursor ion mass accuracy of peptide-spectrum matches is shown
to be particularly effective in distinguishing between “true”
and “false” identifications. These findings highlight
important caveats associated with the use of standard database search
and error-modeling methods with nonstandard data sets and custom sequence
databases.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac4037679document-id-new-14ac-2013-037679ccc-price
==== Body
The ability
of the humoral immune
system to provide broad protection against a diverse and constantly
changing population of invasive pathogens stems largely from the antigen-binding
capabilities of the antibody (immunoglobulin, Ig) repertoire. Antibodies
recognize foreign molecules (antigens) through epitope-binding sites
in the variable domains of the antigen binding fragment (Fab) and
alert immune cells to putative threats through interaction sites in
the constant domain of the tail region. Individual antibodies will
preferentially bind a particular antigenic epitope, with specificity
largely determined by the antigen-binding site sequences in the variable
domains of immunoglobulin heavy chain (VH) and light chain
(VL) genes. In order to provide coverage against a large
variety of potential antigens, the B cell-encoded antibody repertoire
is incredibly diverse, estimated to comprise >108 immunoglobulins
with distinct variable domain sequences in human serum,1,2 resulting in an antibody population capable of binding a broad range
of antigens with high affinity and specificity.

This massive
diversification of sequence is the product of two
processes: V(D)J recombination during B cell maturation and somatic
hypermutation during B cell affinity maturation.3 In the heavy chain specifically, the variable domain is
generated by recombination of V, D, and J gene segments, with a single
subgene of each segment selected from multiple variants encoded in
the germline genome (Figure 1). Two of the
three hypervariable loops responsible for antigen-binding (CDR-H1
and CDR-H2) are encoded within the V gene segment, while the third
(CDR-H3) is largely nontemplated and is constructed by the addition
of random nucleotides (N-nucleotides) between the recombination joints
of the V, D, and J segments.3,4 V(D)J recombination
generates a single pair of VH and VL genes per
B cell, such that every B cell expresses only one antibody variant.
Somatic hypermutation during humoral immune response fine-tunes affinity
for antigen by introducing additional mutations in the variable domain,
further increasing the sequence variation and in turn expanding the
sequence diversity within a clonotype.5 Consequently, antibodies that originate from the same B cell precursor
lineage are designated as belonging to the same clonotype and generally
exhibit specificity for the same antigen.

Figure 1 A schematic of the structure
and representative sequences of the
immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chain variable domain (VH). The
VH sequence is created by recombination of V, D, and J
subgenes and encodes epitope binding sites for antigen-recognition.
Complementarity determining regions (CDRs) represent uniquely nondegenerate
fingerprints, interspersed between constant framework sequences (FRs),
and manifest as hypervariable and conserved sequences, respectively,
in the multiple sequence alignment. Antigen binding specificity is
primarily dictated by the CDR-H3 region. Hence, the challenge of antibody
repertoire proteomics can be largely reduced to the problem of successfully
identifying CDR-H3-containing peptides.

The process of Ig diversification has been elucidated, and
methods
for the identification and expression of monoclonal antibodies, including
creation of hybridomas, immortalization of B lymphocytes, and cloning
of antibody genes from primary lymphocytes, have revolutionized diagnostics
and expanded our understanding of how immune responses induce the
production of circulating antibodies that help clear a pathogen. Recently,
next-generation (NextGen) sequencing has made possible investigations
of the scope and sequence composition of the antibody repertoire,
as represented in the population of B cells sequenced.6,7 With technical and financial barriers to personalized sequencing
substantially dropping with advances in NextGen technologies, immune-related
repertoire sequencing is becoming more commonplace.8,9 However,
the B cell repertoire includes many sequences which are not represented
in the circulating pool of serum immunoglobulins. Characterization
of the polyclonal serum response thus requires direct observation
of the constituent monoclonal antibodies present at functionally relevant
concentrations.

Unfortunately, the proteomic analysis of serum
immunoglobulins
by mass spectrometry (MS) presents several challenges. One such challenge
arises from the fact that antibody genes are not encoded in the germline
but are assembled via DNA recombination and diversified within individual
B cells. As a result, the typical strategy of constructing a reference
database from the genome sequence is not useful for interpreting antibody-derived
mass spectra.10,11 The use of de novo peptide sequencing for mass spectral interpretation does not require
a reference database,12 thus offering a
promising solution to this problem; however, current methods are not
yet capable of handling the complexity of peptide sequence diversity
present in serum.

A strategy has recently emerged which largely
overcomes these barriers
by utilizing high-throughput sequencing of the immunoglobulin variable
domain (V gene) from an individual’s B cell population to construct
a sample-specific antibody sequence database for the interpretation
of antibody-derived mass spectral data.13,14 With the ability
to generate a personalized reference database, it is now possible
to apply shotgun-style MS proteomics to the analysis of serum antibodies,
as demonstrated by recent studies identifying antigen-specific monoclonal
antibodies directly from serum,13−16 yet even with the availability of such a database,
confident identification of monoclonal antibodies is not trivial.
The high degree of sequence identity shared across antibodies introduces
additional complications in sequence-to-spectrum assignments and protein
inference, making proteomic analysis of the repertoire particularly
challenging.

The complexity of the V gene repertoire can best
be understood
as a massively expanded set of homologous proteins, each sharing regions
of highly conserved (or identical) sequences with short intervening
hypervariable sequences. From a proteomics perspective, this creates
a large pool of potential peptide sequences with at least partial
sequence identity. Proteolytic digestion of antibodies for shotgun
proteomics yields many peptides that map to multiple clonotypes and
are therefore noninformative for monoclonal antibody identification
or that share partial sequence identity with many other candidate
peptides, resulting in highly similar mass spectra that are difficult
to interpret unambiguously, even with the high resolution and mass
accuracy of current mass spectrometers.

In this paper, we detail
how these interspersed segments of variable
and conserved amino acid sequences create unusual features in the
corresponding antibody peptide mass spectra. We demonstrate the importance
of using high mass accuracy liquid chromatography mass spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS) and describe how antibody proteomics requires a particularly
high stringency in the interpretation of the peptide mass spectra
for reasons that are intrinsic to antibody gene structure. Finally,
we offer specific guidelines for the interpretation of antibody peptide
mass spectra focusing on correctly distinguishing CDR-H3 peptides
with shared subsequences.

Experimental Methods
Materials and Reagents
Concholepas concholepas hemocyanin (CCH), Protein
A agarose, Protein G Plus agarose, N-hydroxysuccinimide
(NHS)-activated agarose, immobilized
pepsin resin, and Zeba spin columns were acquired from Pierce (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Incomplete Freund’s Adjuvant
(IFA), TRIS hydrocholoride (Tris-HCl), ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE), dithiothrietol
(DTT), triethylphosphine (TEP), iodoacetamide (IAM), and iodoethanol
(IE) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Urea and AG-5Ol-X8
resin were purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA). Microcon 10 kDa
MWCO (Microcon-10) centrifugal filter columns from Millipore (Bedford,
MA) and Hypersep SpinTip C18 columns (C18-SpinTips) from Thermo Scientific
(Rockford, IL) were used in LC-MS/MS sample preparation along with
LC-MS grade water, acetonitrile (ACN), and formic acid from EMD (Billerica,
MA).

Rabbit Immunization, V Gene Sequencing, and Preparation of Serum
Antibodies
Methods for immunization, V gene sequencing, and
preparation of antibodies for this study were previously described
in Wine et al.13 Briefly, a New Zealand
white rabbit was immunized with 100 μg of CCH protein. Booster
immunization with antigen in IFA was administered at days 14 and 28.
The animal was sacrificed at day 35. Total RNA was isolated from femoral
bone marrow cells (BM), peripheral B cells (PBCs), and CD138+ bone
marrow plasma cells (BM-PCs), and cDNA libraries were generated from
poly(A)+ RNA. V gene cDNA was amplified by 5′RACE
with primers complementary to rabbit IgG CH1 and sequenced
using the Roche 454 GS FLX Titanium platform (Roche Diagnostics GmbH,
Mannheim, Germany). Sequencing data was processed using sequence quality
and signal filters in the 454 Roche analysis pipeline, followed by
identification of conserved framework regions and V germline gene
identification using the IMGT/HighV-Quest Tool. Additional filters
were applied to remove truncations (sequence length <70 amino acids,
misalignment of framework regions FR1 and FR4) and sequences containing
stop codons or ambiguous reads. In total, >1.5 × 105 reads were obtained, resulting in 107 672 unique full-length,
in-frame VH genes. For reference sequence database construction,
single read sequences were excluded to reduce the impact of sequencing
errors (18 593 VH genes ≥2 reads).

Serum IgG was purified by protein A agarose affinity chromatography,
and F(ab′)2 fragments were generated by digestion
with immobilized pepsin. Antigen-specific IgG-derived F(ab′)2 was isolated by affinity chromatography against CCH protein
coupled to NHS-activated agarose and eluted in 100 mM glycine, pH
2.7. Immediately following elution, the pH was neutralized with 1
M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. Protein concentrations were measured using an
ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Nanodrop, DE, USA).

Alternative Cysteine Alkylation
and Trypsin Digestion
Protein samples were concentrated on
Microcon-10 columns and split
into aliquots for alternative cysteine modification. For IAM alkylation,
aliquots were resuspended in 50% (v/v) TFE, 50 mM NH4HCO3, and 2.5 mM DTT and incubated at 37 °C for 60 min. Reduced
samples were then alkylated with 32 mM IAM at room temperature, in
the dark, for 60 min. Alkylation was quenched by addition of 7.7 mM
DTT. Samples were diluted to 5% TFE and digested with trypsin at a
ratio of 1:75 trypsin/protein at 37 °C for 5 h. Digestion was
halted by addition of formic acid to 1% (v/v) concentration.

For IE alkylation, trypsin digestion in the presence of urea was
carried out as previously described17 with
the following modifications: Samples were resuspended in 8 M urea
and then diluted to a final reaction solution consisting of 2.4 M
urea, 200 mM NH4HCO3, pH 11.0, 49% (v/v) ACN,
8.5 mM TEP, and 65 mM IE. pH was adjusted to 10, and samples were
incubated at 37 °C for 60 min. Samples were concentrated by SpeedVac
(Eppendorf, NY, USA) and resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, to
reach a final urea concentration of 1.6 M prior to trypsin digestion.
Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:75 trypsin/protein at 37 °C
for 5 h. The digestion was quenched with 1% formic acid.

Human Raw Spectral
Data and VH Sequence Database
All human data used
in this study corresponds to the donor HD1
data set previously described in Lavinder et al.15 In summary, a healthy human subject (HD1) was administered
the tetanus toxoid/diphtheria toxoid vaccine (Sanofi Pasteur MSD GmbH,
Leimen, Germany) for booster immunization 7 years after the previous
booster. VH and VL gene sequences from plasmablasts
and memory B cells isolated at 7 days and 3 months postboost were
determined by Roche 454 sequencing. Sequence data was processed and
filtered as described for rabbit sequencing. In total, 70 326
VH gene sequences were used in construction of the human
HD1 reference sequence database.

IgG was purified by affinity
chromatography with Protein G Plus agarose from serum samples collected
at prevaccination (day 0), 7 days, 3 months, and 9 months postvaccination
and digested with immobilized pepsin resin to generate F(ab′)2 fragments. Antigen-specific F(ab′)2 was
isolated by affinity chromatography against vaccine-grade tetanus
toxoid protein (Statens Serum Institut) coupled to NHS-activated agarose
and eluted with 20 mM HCl (pH 1.7). Eluted samples were neutralized
with 1 M NaOH, 10 mM Tris-HCl and desalted on a 2 mL Zeba spin column
prior to denaturation with 50% TFE, reduction with 10 mM DTT, and
alkylation with 32 mM IAM. Samples were diluted 10-fold with 50 mM
NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (1:35 trypsin/protein)
overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was quenched with 1% formic acid.

Sample Preparation and LC-MS/MS Analysis
Digested IAM
(human, rabbit) and IE (rabbit) samples were concentrated by SpeedVac,
resuspended in Buffer C (5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid), and loaded and
washed on C18-SpinTips according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Bound peptides were eluted in 60% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, concentrated
by SpeedVac, resuspended in Buffer C, and filtered through Microcon-10
columns prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

Peptides were separated
by reverse phase chromatography on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano
system (Thermo Scientific) using a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18
column (Thermo Scientific), with eluting peptides analyzed on-line
by nano-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap
Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific). Parent ion (MS1) scans were collected
in the orbitrap at 60,000 resolution. Ions >+1 charge were selected
for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation, with up to 20
fragmentation spectra (MS2) collected per MS1. Monoisotopic precursor
selection and dynamic exclusion were enabled, with 45-s exclusion
time for ions selected more than twice in a 30-s window.

Construction
of Target and Decoy Databases
Sample-specific
target protein sequence databases were constructed for SEQUEST searches
of rabbit and human mass spectral data. The CCH rabbit database consisted
of VH and VL gene sequences (≥2 reads),
Ensembl rabbit protein-coding sequences (OryCun2.0), and common contaminants
(from MaxQuant Web site, http://maxquant.org/downloads.htm). The human HD1 database included
VH and VL gene sequences, Ensemble human protein-coding
sequences (release 64, longest sequence variant/gene), and MaxQuant
common contaminants.

Decoy databases were constructed for rabbit
and human analyses to evaluate the effects of decoy variants on error
modeling of V-gene peptides. Reversed and shuffled databases were
generated for each database at the protein level. Additionally, conserved-J
region shuffled decoys were generated by preserving the conserved
J-segment sequence (which directly follows the CDR-H3) of VH gene sequences. For the remaining V gene sequence, amino acids between
arginine and lysine residues were shuffled, with Arg/Lys residues
fixed to preserve peptide length and precursor mass distributions.

Computational Interpretation of Peptide Mass Spectra
Spectra
were searched against the protein sequence and decoy databases
described above using SEQUEST (Proteome Discoverer 1.3, Thermo Scientific).
Fully tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavages were considered.
Mass tolerance filters of 5 ppm (MS1) and 0.5 Da (MS2) were applied.
Static cysteine modifications of either carbamidomethylation (IAM-alkylation,
+57.0215 Da) or ethanolyl (IE-alkylation, +44.0262 Da) were included
on the basis of which modifying reagent was used. Oxidation of methionine
(+15.9949 Da) was allowed as a dynamic modification. PSMs were filtered
using Percolator (implemented in Proteome Discoverer) to control false
discovery rates (FDR) to <1% as determined using a reverse-sequence
decoy database.18 All observed precursor
masses were recalibrated according to the methods of Cox et al.,19 and the average mass deviation (AMD) was calculated
for all high-confidence PSMs (Percolator FDR <1%) matching the
same reference peptide, as the mean difference between the observed
precursor masses and the expected mass of that reference peptide in
units of ppm. Due to the high frequency of isobaric peptides with
isoleucine–leucine substitutions in V-gene sequences, we considered
all Iso/Leu sequence variants as a single group and mapped the group
to all CDR-H3 peptides associated with any of the group members. For
other isobaric pairings (e.g., Asp/Gly-Gly, Gln/Gly-Ala) and ambiguous
identifications where MS/MS spectral differences can distinguish between
pairings, we considered only the top-ranked PSM determined by the
SEQUEST-Percolator pipeline.

Survey of Covalent Peptide Modifications
In order to
confirm the specificity of cysteine modifications and to assess the
general overall presence of covalent post-translational modifications
(PTMs) among antibody peptides, raw peptide mass spectra from the
rabbit samples were computationally searched for the dominant, differentially
observed PTMs as follows: Tandem mass spectral sets were first reduced
in size and complexity through spectral clustering, in which merged
spectra were represented by a single consensus spectrum. For each
sample, spectra were initially grouped based on precursor mass so
that all the members within a group were within 25 ppm of at least
1 other member. Hierarchical clustering was performed on the tandem
mass spectra of each weight group using a fuzzy cosine similarity
metric and weighted linkage criteria with a distance cutoff of 0.25.
The fuzzy cosine similarity, or correlation, between two spectra A
and B is defined as  where Ac is the
convolution of spectrum A with a Gaussian 1 Da in
width. This serves to influence the correlation by both the intensity
of each peak pair and the closeness of the peaks in m/z. Spectra composing each cluster were then reduced
into a single consensus spectrum. An average parent ion mass was then
assigned to each cluster.

All pairs of spectral clusters between
IAM- and IE-labeled samples were compiled with the constraint that
the parent ion mass difference between pair members fell within ±60.5
Da. Similarity measures were calculated for each pair, the sum of
which was a composite metric for judging spectral correlation. Pairs
were then binned in 2D arrays by mass offset and composite correlation
score. Because clusters had varying numbers of members, all cluster
pairs were not equal and were therefore weighted by 0.5 plus the log
of the product of the two membership counts. The sum of these weights
gave a single summary statistic for each bin, and the data was visualized
as a stacked bar graph consisting of 121 offset bins of width 0.02
Da that are centered at an integer value.

Differential Analysis of
Cysteine Modifications
PTM
analysis (described above) was used to identify pairs of spectral
clusters exhibiting an observed parent mass difference of 12.995 ±
0.005 Da (or 25.99 ± 0.005 Da for two Cys) between IAM- and IE-treated
samples. Paired clusters with similar elution times and fragmentation
patterns were flagged as originating from cysteine-containing peptides.
The top-ranked SEQUEST peptide identification for each cluster was
then considered. If the same sequence was identified in both treatments
(inherently requiring the presence of cysteine to match), the peptide
sequence was flagged as a likely correct, or “true positive”,
identification. If the peptide identification differed between treatment
sets (precluding the presence of cysteine in the sequence), the corresponding
peptide sequences were flagged as definitely incorrect, or “false
positive”, identifications.

Results and Discussion
The goal of serum antibody proteomics is to systematically identify
the distinct antibodies present in a serum sample, as assayed through
the use of shotgun proteomics mass spectrometry. To achieve this,
our approach relies on the integration of two main experimental pipelines:
(1) high-throughput sequencing of B lymphocyte cDNAs to generate a
database of class-switched antibody variable domain sequences in a
particular individual; (2) a protein biochemistry and mass spectrometry-based
proteomics pipeline for the identification of peptides derived from
antigen-specific antibodies.

A personalized reference sequence
database generated by the high-throughput
sequencing pipeline is used to interpret antibody-derived peptide
mass spectra obtained through the proteomics pipeline. Identified
peptides can be mapped back onto the antibody sequence database to
determine the distribution of specific clonotypes comprising the antigen-specific
repertoire. However, the frequency of degenerate peptides mapping
to multiple clonotypes complicates this analysis. Given that the CDR-H3
is the most hypervariable region in immunoglobulins and is overwhelmingly
responsible for antigen specificity, as well as being the primary
determinant of clonality, this problem can be largely simplified to
that of the quantitation and sequence determination of CDR-H3 peptides.
The remaining sequence of each antibody can then be retrieved from
the V gene reference database.

For this study, we largely focused
on analysis of serum samples
from a New Zealand white rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) immunized with Concholepas concholepas hemocyanin
(CCH). Sequencing data for this rabbit was previously described13 and is summarized in the Experimental
Methods. We focus here only on the VH sequences;
while the partner VL chain contributes to antibody stability
and binding characteristics, native VH-VL pairing
information cannot be determined by proteomic analysis but can be
derived by other methods once VH chains are known.13,20

From this rabbit, we prepared antigen-specific F(ab′)2 fragments, proteolytically digested them with trypsin, and
analyzed the resulting peptides by quantitative shotgun proteomics,
employing nanoflow LC-MS/MS (see Experimental Methods). A conventional analysis of the peptide mass spectra would involve
comparing the spectra against the rabbit’s VH gene
database in order to identify those antibodies actually present in
the serum. However, as we next discuss, the conventional proteomics
database search process is insufficient for the analysis of antibody
peptide mass spectra due to intrinsic properties of the antibody sequences.

Limitations
of Standard Peptide-Spectrum Assignments and Decoy-Based
Error Modeling
While the general process of identifying the
best peptide-spectrum match (PSM) is well established for conventional
data sets searched against normal proteomic sequence databases,21,22 V-gene databases contain unique sequence characteristics which pose
challenges to this standard method of data interpretation.

Under
the standard target-decoy approach, candidate peptides within a specified
mass range of the parent ion are initially scored based on cross-correlation
to the observed fragmentation spectrum (XCorr), subjected to additional
quality filters, and ultimately assigned confidence scores by reference
to the score distributions of decoy sequences. For a conventional
proteome, the occurrence of multiple peptides sharing partial sequence
identity and mass is extremely rare, as can be seen for proteins sampled
from the human proteome (Figure 2A). Thus,
while multiple theoretical peptides may fall close in mass to a given
precursor ion, the correct peptide sequence will almost always match
the MS2 spectrum with a significantly higher score than competing,
incorrect peptides. This is reflected by the positive correlation
between XCorr and the normalized difference in XCorr between the top
two PSMs of a given spectrum (ΔCN) (Figure 3A).

Figure 2 In contrast to the proteome in general, antibody peptide sequences
resemble each other in both mass and expected fragmentation patterns.
The peptide sequence search space is thus strongly dependent on mass
accuracy, as seen by plotting the extent of theoretical peptide-spectral
match ambiguity, for (A) human proteome peptide sequences, (B) rabbit
CCH antibody VH peptides, and (C) human tetanus toxoid
antibody VH peptides. Reducing precursor mass tolerance
thus more strongly affects the potential for false identifications
in VH peptides than for a typical proteome. Here, an in silico digest of the rabbit CCH VH antibody
sequences generated 505 790 unique peptide sequences (constrained
to fully tryptic peptides of ≥8 amino acids, ≤6000 Da
theoretical mass, and ≤2 missed cleavages). Each peptide sequence
contributes to a y-axis bin defined by the self-inclusive
count of all theoretical peptides within a specified mass tolerance
(x-axis) and sharing at least 60% predicted fragmentation
ion similarity. For comparison, the human proteome (A) and human TT
VH (C) sequence databases were processed likewise and subsampled
to include the same number of peptide sequences as (B). The intersequence
similarity evident in the antibody sets is negligible in this size-matched
human proteome control.

Figure 3 Confidently identified spectra from most proteomics samples generally
score well against only one database sequence. In contrast, the interspersal
of conserved (framework) and variable regions in antibody F(ab′)2
sequences often leads to multiple high-scoring PSMs for a single IgG-VH peptide spectrum. Plotting the primary PSM score (XCorr)
vs the normalized difference in XCorr scores between the two top-scoring
matches (ΔCN) from proteomic analysis of (A) human HeLa cell
lysate compared to (B) rabbit and (C) human IgG-VH peptide
spectra reveals a substantial proportion of high XCorr/low ΔCN
PSMs (denoted by black boxes) in the IgG-VH data sets.
Standard false discovery rate (FDR) calculations fail for these PSMs,
as illustrated by high (blue), medium (green), and low (red) Percolator
confidence scores: many high XCorr/low ΔCN PSMs are erroneously
assigned high confidence in spite of high-scoring second hits implicit
in the low ΔCN values. Filtering out low ΔCN PSMs inadvertently
removes many true hits. Comparison of PSM XCorr distributions between
target (blue) and decoy (red) databases reveals that standard decoys
do not adequately model the nonrandom structure of IgG-VH peptides [(D) human proteome, (E) rabbit IgG-VH, (F)
human IgG-VH]. This is attributable to high-scoring, incorrect
matches to IgG framework region-derived sequences. By constructing
an alternate decoy database for which variable residues were shuffled
but J-region framework regions were preserved (“Conserved-J
Decoy”), ambiguity of CDR-H3,J peptide assignment can be modeled
(green). These peptides acount for the majority of high-XCorr PSMs
in rabbit (E), while additional framework-derived peptides add to
the complexity of the human IG-VH sample (F, inset).

For the case of immunoglobulin
variable genes, however, large numbers
of peptide sequences overlap in both mass and partial sequence identity
(as plotted for our VH data sets in Figure 2B,C), yielding sets of highly similar theoretical MS2 spectra.
This confounds proteomics analysis and often results in, for a single
spectrum, multiple ambiguous peptide-spectral matches sharing similarly
high PSM correlation scores (observed as high-XCorr/low-ΔCN,
i.e., high scoring-second rank hits) (Figure 3B,C). In some cases, incorrect sequences out-score the correct PSMs.
Even when applying an extremely strict mass accuracy filter, requiring
a peptide mass to fall within 5 ppm of the observed precursor ion
mass to be considered, false identifications are still prevalent.

V-gene sequence similarity also effects decoy-based error-modeling.
Standard errors in PSM assignment normally arise from poor quality
spectra, which contain significant noise and/or additional peaks due
to unaccounted for contaminating peptide fragments following ion isolation.
In order to assign PSM confidence and calculate a false identification
rate, a decoy reference database of either reversed or shuffled protein
sequences is generally used to model this standard error, allowing
for confidence-filtering based on discernible differences in the distributions
of true and false positive PSMs (Figure 3D).22,23 Software programs such as Percolator18 analyze multiple parameters of target and decoy results (including
XCorr, ΔCN, and others) in order to determine a set of high-confidence
PSMs at a given FDR (Figure 3A–C). For
the case of Ig V genes, reversing or shuffling sequences did not replicate
the high incidence of high scoring-second rank hits observed in the
forward search, demonstrating that a standard decoy database fails
to model this aspect of IgG sequences (Figure 3E,F).

Immunoglobulin PSM Ambiguity Arises from Ig Peptides Containing
Highly Immutable Framework Regions
To further investigate
this trend, we focused on the partial sequence identity of CDR-H3-containing
peptides. Most such peptides also contained the entirety of the J-region
subsequence in both the rabbit and human samples, generally a series
of 12 or more residues sharing exceptional self-similarity within
each species. Hence, peptides containing the J-region shared a significant
fraction of identical peaks within their fragmentation spectra, in
addition to peaks contributed by the variable CDR-H3 sequence (Figure 4).

Figure 4 High-scoring PSMs for antibody CDR-H3 peptide mass spectra
are
dominated by matches to peptides sharing identical C-terminal J region
FR4 framework sequences. This is illustrated by two top-scoring peptide
sequences mapped to a single observed rabbit spectrum, with shared
(orange) and unique in silico predicted MS2 fragmentation
peaks associated with APYGDGDPYNLWGPGTLVTVSSGQPK
(blue) and DAGTSGYHFNLWGPGTLVTVSSGQPK
(green). Both sequences exhibit PSMs with XCorr >4.7 with a normalized
difference in XCorr scores (ΔCN) of 0.006. A similar trend accounts
for a large proportion of the high-scoring matches in Figure 3B,C,E,F.

In order to assess the magnitude of this effect on the resulting
PSM scores, we generated sample-specific shuffled decoy databases
in which the J-region residues were explicitly preserved (“Conserved-J
Decoy”). Importantly, the Conserved-J Decoy database reproduced
the incidence of high scoring-second rank hits observed in the J-region
peptides and evident in the VH forward peptide database
(Figure 3E,F[inset]). A significant portion
of high scoring-second rank hits can therefore be attributed to CDR-H3-containing
peptides partially matching other CDR-H3-containing peptides by their
conserved J region sequences. More generally, Ig peptides containing
an antibody framework region at one terminus are subject to this kind
of ambiguous PSM assignment. Consequently, standard decoy-based error
modeling significantly underestimates false identifications for this
class of peptides.

Construction of a High-Confidence Set of
Rabbit VH Identifications
In order to determine
the prevalence of
incorrect identifications and find characteristics by which to discriminate
between true and false matches, we employed differential labeling
of cysteine residues to create a set of higher confidence identifications
consistent with the cysteine labeling data and to flag a subset of
definitively incorrect identifications as high-scoring false positives
(Figure 5A). Rabbit F(ab′)2 fragments were divided into two aliquots. One aliquot was alkylated
with iodoacetamide (IAM), while the second was alkylated with iodoethanol
(IE). This created equivalent samples with the exception of a 13 Da
mass difference between modified cysteine residues in the two samples.

Figure 5 A limited
set of higher-confidence identifications can be created
using differential covalent modification to flag cysteine-containing
peptides. (A) Comparison of rabbit CCH spectra from samples treated
with iodoacetamide (Cys +57 Da) vs iodoethanol (Cys +44 Da) results
in a 13 Da mass difference per cysteine. PSMs for paired spectra exhibiting
a mass shift but no cysteine residues in the corresponding matched
sequences can be flagged as false identifications. (B) Comparison
of precursor mass offsets between differentially labeled rabbit CCH
samples confirms alkylation and oxidation account for the most abundant
modifications.

Following LC-MS/MS analysis,
data sets corresponding to IAM- and
IE-treated samples were compared to identify parent ion pairs across
the two data sets exhibiting the signature 13 Da mass difference,
similar chromatographic elution times, and correlated MS2 fragmentation
spectra. Qualifying ion pairs were considered cysteine-containing;
upon peptide-spectrum sequence assignment, ion pairs with identical
sequences containing cysteine residues and displaying the 13 Da difference
in the two aliquots were flagged as more likely to be correct and
considered for these purposes to be “true positive”
identifications. In contrast, those spectra shifted by 13 Da but lacking
a cysteine residue in their assigned sequences were considered definitely
incorrect, or “false positive”. By flagging peptides
in this manner, we defined a set of 53 “true positive”
and 40 “false positive” peptide identifications comprising
11 077 and 425 PSMs, respectively. This set was used both to
diagnose PSM assignment error and to define filtering criteria appropriate
for more general application across all PSMs, not just those containing
cysteine residues.

To further assess these samples, we examined
the frequency of all
potential precursor ion mass offsets between the differentially treated
samples so as to survey the most common covalent modifications, thus
confirming the cysteine modifications and testing for other potential
modifications (Figure 5B). Besides modified
cysteine, only one other prevalent modification was found, occurring
in both samples at a mass offset of 15.99 Da and consistent with oxidation.
Detailed manual analysis of fragmentation spectra confirmed oxidized
methionine as the main contributor to this offset peak.

A Stringent
Average Mass Accuracy Filter Successfully Removes
False Identifications
Using the high confidence true and
false identification sets, we searched for mass spectral properties
that distinguished these cases. We observed a robust difference in
mass accuracy distributions (defined as the difference between observed
precursor mass and expected peptide mass, in units of parts per million
(ppm)), with the “true positive” PSMs centered around
0.127 ppm with a standard deviation of 0.637 ppm (following mass recalibration),
while “false positive” PSMs were more evenly distributed
throughout the mass range. This signal, while clear, was not suitable
for direct use as a mass accuracy filter at the level of PSMs, since
many individual “true positive” PSMs still deviated
from expected mass by several ppm. Application of a strict mass accuracy
filter to remove false PSMs would therefore inevitably remove many
true PSMs as well (Figure 6A).

Figure 6 Correctly matched PSMs
exhibit a systematically smaller average
mass deviation (AMD) compared to incorrect identifications. (A) Plotting
the difference in precursor ion mass from expected peptide mass (Precursor
Mass Accuracy) vs XCorr scores of individual rabbit CCH PSMs reveals
overlapping mass accuracy distributions for PSMs matched to the same
peptide sequence for correct (blue) and incorrect (red) identifications.
While individual incorrect PSMs may achieve higher XCorr scores than
correct matches, the average precursor mass accuracy across all PSMs
for a given peptide (AMD) discriminates well between correct and incorrect
identifications. (B) For the set of high-confidence rabbit CCH PSMs
derived from cysteine-labeling, true identifications exhibit low AMD
scores while false identifications are more uniformly distributed.
Thus, filtering by AMD strongly controls misidentifications. Here,
controlling AMD to within 1.5 ppm provides 100% recall of true identifications
and increases precision from near 50% (background rate) to 79%. Requiring
AMD < 1 ppm further increases precision to 87% with no loss of
recall.

However, the average mass deviation
(AMD) of a peptide identification,
calculated as the average mass accuracy of all high-confidence PSMs
associated with a given peptide, showed an extremely narrow distribution
for the “true positive” set (mean 0.141 ppm, stdev 0.238
ppm). In contrast, the “false positive” set exhibited
a roughly uniform AMD distribution across the mass range. Consequently,
filtering hits by applying a strict AMD filter was feasible without
substantial loss of true identifications. Requiring AMD < 1.5 ppm
in this data set improved the precision from a prior rate of approximately
50% to 79%, with no loss of true identifications. Applying an even
stricter AMD threshold of 1 ppm further improved the precision to
87%, again with no loss of true identifications (Figure 6B). High mass accuracy LC-MS/MS is therefore sufficient to
identify antibody CDR-H3 peptides from serum at relatively high precision
when combined with a stringent AMD filter beyond the conventional
proteomics analytical pipeline.

Conclusions
Proteomic
analysis of serum immunoglobulins has only recently become
feasible with the ability to generate appropriate mass spectrometry
reference databases via next-generation sequencing of personal B cell
antibody repertoires. Even with an appropriate custom database in
hand, however, antibody sequences still present significant challenges
for mass spectral interpretation due to the frequency of interspersed
variable and conserved amino acid sequences within the same peptides.
We have shown how these sequence properties lead to certain systematic
trends in the fragmentation spectra of antibody-derived peptides,
which introduce additional errors in peptide-spectrum correlation
scoring not accounted for by standard decoy-based error modeling.
The observation of similar sequence properties in rabbit and human
data sets indicates that these are intrinsic features of immunoglobulin
primary structure which should be accounted for in any proteomic analysis
of antibody repertoire, regardless of species. To this end, we have
demonstrated a strategy to reduce false discovery and improve the
accuracy of antibody identification by shotgun proteomics through
the use of high mass accuracy LC-MS/MS and high stringency filters
applied to groups of peptide-spectral matches, rather than individual
PSMs.

These findings highlight the importance of evaluating
methods of
data analysis when applied to nonstandard data sets. While we specifically
addressed complications encountered in the analysis of antibodies,
we would expect similar trends for any protein samples where many
close variant sequences might be present, such as in samples assaying
human genetic variants or large protein families with related sequences.

Author Contributions
‡ D.R.B., A.P.H., and Y.W. contributed equally.

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): A patent application on
this work has been filed. No other competing interests exist.

Notes
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been
deposited
to the ProteomeXchange Consortium24 via
the PRIDE partner repository, with dataset identifiers PXD000916 (Rabbit)
and PXD000917 (Human).

Acknowledgments
Funding for this work was provided by the Clayton
Foundation
(G.G.), Welch Foundation Grant F1515 (to E.M.M.), Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (G.G.), Defense Threat Reduction Agency (G.G.
and E.M.M.), and National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grants 5 RC1DA028779
(to G.G. via a subcontract from University of Chicago) and GM 076536
and DP1 OD009572 (to E.M.M.). J.J.L. was supported by a postdoctoral
fellowship by Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas. The
Linear Trap Quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos MS was purchased with
generous support by the NIH Western Research Center of Excellence
in Biodefense (NIH Grant 5U54AI057156) and the Texas Institute for
Drug and Diagnostics Development (TI-3D).
==== Refs
References
Poulsen T. R. ; Meijer P. J. ; Jensen A. ; Nielsen L. S. ; Andersen P. S. 
J. Immunol 
2007 , 179 , 3841 –3850 .17785821 
Glanville J. ; Zhai W. ; Berka J. ; Telman D. ; Huerta G. ; Mehta G. R. ; Ni I. ; Mei L. ; Sundar P. D. ; Day G. M. ; Cox D. ; Rajpal A. ; Pons J. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2009 , 106 , 20216 –20221 .19875695 
Briney B. S. ; Crowe J. E. Jr.
Front.
Immunol. 
2013 , 4 , 42 .23483107 
Murphy K. ; Travers P. ; Walport M. ; Janeway C.  Janeway′s immunobiology , 8 th ed.; Garland Science : New York , 2012 ; p xix, 868  p.
Tarlinton D. ; Good-Jacobson K. 
Science 
2013 , 341 , 1205 –1211 .24031013 
Weinstein J. A. ; Jiang N. ; White R. A. 3rd; Fisher D. S. ; Quake S. R. 
Science 
2009 , 324 , 807 –810 .19423829 
Reddy S. T. ; Ge X. ; Miklos A. E. ; Hughes R. A. ; Kang S. H. ; Hoi K. H. ; Chrysostomou C. ; Hunicke-Smith S. P. ; Iverson B. L. ; Tucker P. W. ; Ellington A. D. ; Georgiou G. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2010 , 28 , 965 –969 .20802495 
Vollmers C. ; Sit R. V. ; Weinstein J. A. ; Dekker C. L. ; Quake S. R. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2013 , 110 , 13463 –13468 .23898164 
Britanova O.
V. ; Putintseva E. V. ; Shugay M. ; Merzlyak E. M. ; Turchaninova M. A. ; Staroverov D. B. ; Bolotin D. A. ; Lukyanov S. ; Bogdanova E. A. ; Mamedov I. Z. ; Lebedev Y. B. ; Chudakov D. M. 
J. Immunol. 
2014 , 192 , 2689 –2698 .24510963 
de
Costa D. ; Broodman I. ; VanDuijn M. M. ; Stingl C. ; Dekker L. J. M. ; Burgers P. C. ; Hoogsteden H. C. ; Smitt P. A. E. S. ; van Klaveren R. J. ; Luider T. M. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2010 , 9 , 2937 –2945 .20387908 
Dekker L. J. M. ; Zeneyedpour L. ; Brouwer E. ; van Duijn M. M. ; Smitt P. A. E. S. ; Luider T. M. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2011 , 399 , 1081 –1091 .21107826 
Bandeira N. ; Pham V. ; Pevzner P. ; Arnott D. ; Lill J. R. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2008 , 26 , 1336 –1338 .19060866 
Wine Y. ; Boutz D. R. ; Lavinder J. J. ; Miklos A. E. ; Hughes R. A. ; Hoi K. H. ; Jung S. T. ; Horton A. P. ; Murrin E. M. ; Ellington A. D. ; Marcotte E. M. ; Georgiou G. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2013 , 110 , 2993 –2998 .23382245 
Cheung W. C. ; Beausoleil S. A. ; Zhang X. ; Sato S. ; Schieferl S. M. ; Wieler J. S. ; Beaudet J. G. ; Ramenani R. K. ; Popova L. ; Comb M. J. ; Rush J. ; Polakiewicz R. D. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2012 , 30 , 447 –452 .22446692 
Lavinder J. J. ; Wine Y. ; Giesecke C. ; Ippolito G. C. ; Horton A. P. ; Lungu O. I. ; Hoi K. H. ; Dekosky B. J. ; Murrin E. M. ; Wirth M. M. ; Ellington A. D. ; Dorner T. ; Marcotte E. M. ; Boutz D. R. ; Georgiou G. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2014 , 111 , 2259 –2264 .24469811 
Sato S. ; Beausoleil S. A. ; Popova L. ; Beaudet J. G. ; Ramenani R. K. ; Zhang X. ; Wieler J. S. ; Schieferl S. M. ; Cheung W. C. ; Polakiewicz R. D. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2012 , 30 , 1039 –1043 .23138294 
Hale J. E. ; Butler J. P. ; Gelfanova V. ; You J. S. ; Knierman M. D. 
Anal. Biochem. 
2004 , 333 , 174 –181 .15351294 
Kall L. ; Canterbury J. D. ; Weston J. ; Noble W. S. ; MacCoss M. J. 
Nat. Methods 
2007 , 4 , 923 –925 .17952086 
Cox J. ; Michalski A. ; Mann M. 
J.
Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2011 , 22 , 1373 –1380 .21953191 
DeKosky B. J. ; Ippolito G. C. ; Deschner R. P. ; Lavinder J. J. ; Wine Y. ; Rawlings B. M. ; Varadarajan N. ; Giesecke C. ; Dorner T. ; Andrews S. F. ; Wilson P. C. ; Hunicke-Smith S. P. ; Willson C. G. ; Ellington A. D. ; Georgiou G. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2013 , 31 , 166 –169 .23334449 
Marcotte E. M. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2007 , 25 , 755 –757 .17621303 
Nesvizhskii A. I. 
J. Proteomics 
2010 , 73 , 2092 –2123 .20816881 
Elias J. E. ; Gygi S. P. 
Nat. Methods 
2007 , 4 , 207 –214 .17327847 
Vizcaíno J. A. ; Deutsch E. W. ; Wang R. ; Csordas A. ; Reisinger F. ; Ríos D. ; Dianes J. A. ; Sun Z. ; Farrah T. ; Bandeira N. ; Binz P. A. ; Xenarios I. ; Eisenacher M. ; Mayer G. ; Gatto L. ; Campos A. ; Chalkley R. J. ; Kraus H. J. ; Albar J. P. ; Martinez-Bartolomé S. ; Apweiler R. ; Omenn G. S. ; Martens L. ; Jones A. R. ; Hermjakob H. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2014 , 30 , 223 –226 .
