
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b01381PerspectiveDemocratization of Nanoscale Imaging and Sensing Tools
Using Photonics McLeod Euan †‡∥Wei Qingshan †‡∥Ozcan Aydogan *†‡§† Department
of Electrical Engineering, University of
California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, California 90095, United States‡ Department
of Bioengineering, University of California
Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, California 90095, United States§ California
NanoSystems Institute (CNSI), University
of California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, California 90095, United States* E-mail: ozcan@ucla.edu. Phone: 1 (310) 825 0915. Web: http://www.innovate.ee.ucla.edu.12 06 2015 07 07 2015 87 13 6434 6445 14 04 2015 12 06 2015 Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society2015American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Providing
means for researchers and citizen scientists in the developing
world to perform advanced measurements with nanoscale precision can
help to accelerate the rate of discovery and invention as well as
improve higher education and the training of the next generation of
scientists and engineers worldwide. Here, we review some of the recent
progress toward making optical nanoscale measurement tools more cost-effective,
field-portable, and accessible to a significantly larger group of
researchers and educators. We divide our review into two main sections:
label-based nanoscale imaging and sensing tools, which primarily involve
fluorescent approaches, and label-free nanoscale measurement tools,
which include light scattering sensors, interferometric methods, photonic
crystal sensors, and plasmonic sensors. For each of these areas, we
have primarily focused on approaches that have either demonstrated
operation outside of a traditional laboratory setting, including for
example integration with mobile phones, or exhibited the potential
for such operation in the near future.

document-id-old-9ac5b01381document-id-new-14ac-2015-013812ccc-price
==== Body
The democratization
of science
and technology refers to the increased involvement in these fields
for those who would not normally have the opportunity or inclination
due to their socioeconomic status, local environment, upbringing,
or background.1 This involvement can take
the form of enhanced understanding of, appreciation of, benefit from,
and contribution to science and technology. The impact of this increased
participation is expected to include significantly improved education
and training and an accelerated rate of discovery and invention in
various fields. The development of cost-effective, field-portable,
and easy-to-use, yet advanced, scientific tools can help to engender
all of these impacts. Education can be strengthened through earlier
and more universal exposure of students to such tools or instruments,
allowing students to actively perform advanced experiments instead
of just reading about them. As another potential broad impact, personal
healthcare can be improved via consumer-level health monitoring and
diagnostics technologies and especially by new tools that are not
prohibitively expensive for use in the developing world.2,3 Furthermore, the acceleration of scientific discovery and invention
can occur both through the direct involvement of laypeople in crowd-sourced
research (e.g., SETI at home,4 bird population
counting,5,6 protein folding,7,8 and
malaria diagnostics9−12) or simply as a consequence of the general population being more
willing to allocate public funds to research after having gained a
better understanding of what scientific research is, how it is done,
and why it is important. Accelerated discovery and innovation will
also be a long-term consequence of the increased democratization of
scientific instrumentation and toolsets, where placing the entire
world on an equal educational footing will expand the number of scientists,
engineers, and researchers at the forefronts of their fields. A common
feature of all of these expected impacts is increased self-reliance.
However, while the increased confidence from being able to make one’s
own scientific experiments and direct observations is laudable, the
role of the expert must not be eliminated. Especially in medicine,
while personal monitoring, sensing, and diagnostic tools can help
to provide early warnings and more frequent biomedical testing to
individuals, it should not be used as a complete substitute for professional
medical evaluation and care.

One opportune area for increased
democratization is that of nanoscience and nanotechnology tools, which
in general have been rather costly and bulky, limiting their use to
well-resourced institutions. For many laypeople, nanoscience and nanotechnology
can elicit awe or trepidation, partially due to media hype about the
partially unknown effects of nanomaterials in the body as well as
the environment. The development and wide-scale use of tools that
make measurements at the nanoscale can help to better inform and educate
people about nanocience and
nanotechnology. Such tools will also make it possible for untrained
individuals to conduct experiments in the field or even at their homes
that would have previously required advanced laboratory equipment
and/or infrastructure. They can also help to further expand crowd-sourced
research from what has previously been primarily an online computer-based
endeavor to an in-person active experimental endeavor as people conduct
some experiments and research in their own buildings and/or neighborhoods.

Here, we review some of the recent progress on translating conventional
laboratory-based optical nanoscale measurement techniques into tools
that can help to democratize scientific measurements by virtue of
their compact, cost-effective, and easy-to-use designs. The conventional
laboratory-based nanoscale measurement tools that are beginning to
be translated in such ways include sensing and imaging tools that
allow people to determine the sizes, concentrations, and/or compositions
of nanoparticles in a given sample of interest. Some of the gold standard
techniques for nanoscale measurement tools include electron microscopy
and atomic force microscopy. These approaches have excellent resolving
power; however, they rely on expensive and bulky equipment in addition
to a well-established infrastructure and can be relatively slow with
low throughput. Other types of nanoscale measurement approaches include
mechanical means such as oscillating microscopic cantilevers13 as well as electrical means such as conductivity
measurements across a nanopore that permits the flow of, e.g., nanoparticles.14 These mechanical and electrical approaches can
also be implemented in compact and cost-effective forms;15,16 however, an extended discussion of them is beyond the scope of this
review, which is focused on photonics-enabled tools.

By sacrificing
some resolving power for reduced cost and increased
throughput, it is possible to use optical measurement tools to gain
much of the same types of information (nanomaterial size, concentration,
composition, etc.) as provided by electron microscopy. Optical methods
are also much easier to implement on portable devices compared to
electron microscopy approaches. While several cost-effective microscopy
approaches have been recently developed that are capable of making microscale measurements, including, e.g., imagers that are
integrated with mobile phones1 or are folded
out of paper,17 in this manuscript, we
will focus on the optical designs that enable nanoscale measurements
and sensing.18 Examples of conventional
microscopy-based optical nanoscale measurement tools include interferometry,19 which is capable of measuring displacements
as small as ∼10–18 m,20 and super-resolution microscopy such as photoactivated
localization microscopy,21 stochastic optical
reconstruction microscopy,22 or stimulated
emission depletion microscopy.23 Examples
of sensing-based optical nanoscale measurement tools include dynamic
light scattering,24 nanoparticle tracking
analysis,25 laser scattering,26,27 surface plasmon resonance biosensors,28 optical microcavity sensors,29 and fiber-optic
or waveguide-based sensors,30,31 among others. While
many of these techniques are bound to laboratory settings due to their
dependence on expensive and bulky equipment, some can be implemented
in “democratization-friendly” platforms, which we review
below along with “democratic” implementations of other
optical measurement schemes. We divide these democratic approaches
into two categories: (i) label-based approaches that use fluorescent
tags to provide specificity and increased signal from nanoscale objects
and (ii) label-free approaches.

Many of the approaches that
we focus on below are based around mobile phones and
in particular smartphones. Mobile phones
are one of the most readily available technology platforms that can
help democratize science and technology tools globally and provide
the foundation for advanced nanoscale measurements. They are undergoing
a Moore’s-law-like growth in their capabilities while simultaneously
taking advantage of the benefits of mass production and economies
of scale.1,32 For example, since the introduction of the
first camera phone in around 2000,33 the
pixel count of the image sensors embedded in mobile phones has, on
average, doubled every two years by following Moore’s law and
reached >40 megapixels up to date.33 In
the meantime, the pixel size of the mobile phone image sensor has
decreased down to ∼1.1 μm,34 providing higher and higher spatial resolution even under modest
magnification factors. In addition to these, the number of mobile
phone subscriptions has increased to ∼7 billion,35 where 78% of these mobile phones are being used
in developing countries.35 Although much
of the developing world has not yet adopted smartphones, cell phone
use is ubiquitous, and as the early adopters of new technology frequently
upgrade their smartphones, more and more of these used smartphones
will be available, forming an expanding market for second-hand smartphones,
which might further accelerate the penetration of smartphones into
resource-limited settings.1

Democratization
of Label-Based Nanoscale Measurement Tools
Mobile Phone-Based Wide-Field
Fluorescence Imaging
Fluorescence imaging is one of the predominant
label-based methods
for nanoscale measurements and characterization such as nanoparticle
sizing in biological media,36 virus imaging,37 and many others.38−41 Fluorescence microscopy is especially
attractive due to its specificity and contrast. However, conventional
fluorescence microscopes are bulky and expensive and therefore not
widely available for use in the field or in remote areas. Recently,
mobile phone-based microscopy platforms are emerging to provide alternatives
to conventional benchtop microscopes; translation of mobile phone
devices into hand-held microscopy platforms relies on the creation
of lightweight, compact, and mechanically robust imaging attachments
that can be added onto the existing camera module of the mobile phone.
These imaging attachments include optical components such as light-emitting-diodes
(LEDs), lasers, lenses, and thin-film filters, all tailored depending
on the application of interest. Disposable glass slides or microfluidic
chips can be inserted into this opto-mechanical attachment, and in
contrast to conventional imaging tools that require a desktop computer
for image processing and/or visualization, the mobile phone imaging
platform is able to rapidly analyze and display the captured images
on a standalone and compact device, which is desired for point-of-care
and field applications.

Fluorescence-based imaging modalities
have been adopted on mobile phones by different optical configurations,
such as Köhler illumination,42 waveguide
coupling,43−45 orthogonal illumination,46 or epifluorescence detection.47 However,
the detection sensitivity of the earlier mobile phone microscopy devices
has been limited to microscale specimens, such as single bacilli,42 cells,44,48 or microspheres.43,44 Detection of nanoscale objects with mobile phone-based imaging tools
has remained a significant challenge due to the limited signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) of these previous optical designs.

We have recently
demonstrated a new mobile phone-based fluorescence
microscope design with substantially improved imaging sensitivity
through suppressing background noise created by excitation leakage.49 In this optical design, the specimen is illuminated
by an oblique excitation beam delivered at an angle (e.g., 75°)
that is much larger than the light collection angle of the imaging
attachment of the mobile phone device (Figure 1a–c).49 Therefore, blocking of
the excitation leakage relies on the prevention of the direct excitation
beam from entering the low numerical aperture (NA) imaging system.
This lightweight (∼186 g) opto-mechanical attachment includes
an external lens (also taken from a mobile phone camera), a mini focusing
stage, and a sample chamber, in addition to a laser diode and thin-film
interference filter (Figure 1a,b). Using this
cost-effective and hand-held fluorescence microscope, single 100 nm
fluorescent nanoparticles were imaged on the mobile phone, and their
sizes were independently verified by scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) of the same samples.49

Figure 1 Mobile phone-based
fluorescence microscopy. (a) Photograph of hand-held
mobile imaging device. (b) Schematic illustration of high-angle illumination
(∼75°). (c) Optical ray tracing simulation of the mobile
phone imaging device. (d) Cell phone fluorescence image of single
CMV. (e–g) SEM comparison images confirm the detection of single
virus particles on the mobile phone. (h) Virus particle intensity
distribution measured from the cell phone image. (i) Cell phone-based
viral load measurement. (j) Large field of view (∼2 mm2) cell phone fluorescence image of single λ DNA molecules
that are linearly stretched. (k, m, o) Zoomed-in cell phone images.
(l, n, p) Corresponding images obtained by a conventional benchtop
microscope equipped with a 100× objective (NA = 1.3). (q) DNA
length measured by the cell phone device vs conventional fluorescence
microscope. (r) Sizing of 5 different length DNA fragments with the
mobile phone device, showing a length measurement accuracy of <1
kbp for DNA strands that are longer than 10 kbp. Panels a–i
are reproduced from Wei, Q.; Qi, H.; Luo, W.; Tseng, D.; Ki, S. J.;
Wan, Z.; Göröcs, Z.; Bentolila, L. A.; Wu, T.-T.; Sun,
R.; Ozcan, A. ACS Nano2013, 7, 9147–9155 (ref (49)). Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.
Panels j–r are reproduced from Wei, Q.; Luo, W.; Chiang, S.;
Kappel, T.; Mejia, C.; Tseng, D.; Chan, R. Y. L.; Yan, E.; Qi, H.;
Shabbir, F.; Ozkan, H.; Feng, S.; Ozcan, A. ACS Nano2014, 8, 12725–12733 (ref (50)). Copyright 2014 American
Chemical Society.

This simple, low-cost,
and field-portable fluorescence microscopy
platform installed on a mobile phone can also be used to detect various
nonfluorescent biological objects or molecules via fluorescent labeling.
In this context, we demonstrated the detection and counting of individual
human cytomegalovirus (CMV) by using this handheld mobile phone fluorescence
microscope after specific fluorescence labeling of the sample.49 CMV can cause a fatal infection to immunocompromised
patients such as HIV+ patients and newborn babies. Purified CMVs were
labeled with primary glycoprotein B antibodies followed by Alexa 488-conjugated
secondary antibodies and imaged by our mobile phone imaging device,
achieving single-virus sensitivity as independently confirmed by SEM
imaging of the same sample (Figure 1d–g).49 Mobile phone-based virus density measurement
has also been demonstrated by counting the number of CMVs captured
on the coverslips from various concentrations of virus solutions ranging
from 103 to 107 plaque forming units per mL
(PFU/mL) (see Figure 1h,i). As desired, the
virus density measured by the mobile phone microscope shows a strong
correlation with the virus concentration of the initial solution stock.

With a similar mobile phone-based fluorescent imaging design, we
have also demonstrated the imaging and sizing of single DNA molecules
that are fluorescently labeled.50 As a
proof of concept, λ bacteriophage DNA (48 kilobase pairs, kbp)
was stained with an intercalating dye (YOYO-1) and linearly stretched
on a planar glass coverslip by using a simple droplet compression
method. Figure 1j shows a large field-of-view
(FOV) cell phone fluorescence image of stretched λ DNA molecules
over ∼2 mm2 area, which is about 2 orders of magnitude
larger than the FOV of a conventional fluorescence microscope equipped
with a 100× objective (NA 1.3).50 The
zoomed-in regions of interest (ROI) suggest that the contrast of the
mobile phone fluorescence image of single DNA molecules is comparable
to that of conventional fluorescence microscopy (Figure 1k–p). The FOV advantage of the mobile phone fluorescence
device allows us to measure the length of thousands of single DNA
molecules in a single frame.

The length measurement of each
linearly stretched DNA strand is
based on a custom-developed algorithm, which estimates the length
of the DNA molecules by fitting each DNA segment in the cell phone
image with the point spread function (PSF) of the mobile phone device.
A Windows-based mobile phone application has also been created to
transfer the captured fluorescence images to a remote server, which
can complete the length quantification in seconds and transmit the
results back to the mobile phone. Using this cost-effective mobile
microscopy platform, we demonstrated our DNA length sizing accuracy
to be <∼0.96 kbp by imaging various lengths of DNA fragments
including 10, 20, 40 (T7 DNA) and 48 kbp (λ DNA); see Figure 1q,r.50 Such measurement
capability and the accuracy of our mobile phone-based fluorescent
imaging device can potentially enable us to map structural variations
in DNA, including, e.g., detection of copy-number variations (CNVs)
or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the point-of-care or
even in field settings.

One of the promising directions for
facilitating point-of-care
applications of label-based approaches is to further simplify sample
preparation and labeling steps for low infrastructure settings. The
majority of current labeling approaches rely on antibody targeting
or other specific biochemical recognition mechanisms whose labeling
efficiency is typically diffusion rate limited. In this regard, many
lab-on-a-chip techniques have recently been developed to accelerate
this process in a reduced volume or by enhancing mixing with controlled
microfluidics. Indeed, various sample preparation protocols have been
demonstrated on a chip such as cell lysis,51 DNA extraction,52 and amplification.53 Meanwhile, novel cost-effective surface functionalization
methods have been emerging such as aptamer-based ligands54,55 to replace antibody binding. All of these make label-based approaches
very promising for point-of-care applications in poor resource settings.

Fluorescence-Based Nanoparticle Detection on a Chip
Microfluidic
chips are cost-effective and compact and thus well-suited
for deployment in resource-limited settings for sensing, diagnostics,
and measurement applications. Microfluidic devices are frequently
employed for detection,56 sizing,57 and separation56 of
nanoscale objects in conjugation with optical methods. Using a fluorescence-based
labeling strategy, microfluidic platforms have been demonstrated to
trap single viruses such as vaccinia virus particles dielectrophoretically
and visualize the capture process by staining the viral surface lipid
membrane and nucleic acids with lipophilic carbocyanine dyes (e.g.,
DiOC63) and DNA staining dyes (e.g., Hoechst 33342), respectively.58 A dual-mode electrical and optical nanoparticle
sensing platform has also been developed for multiparameter analysis
of single nanoscale objects (Figure 2a–c).59 This method is based on an optofluidic chip
integrated with a nanopore that allows the translocation of individual
nanoparticles into the imaging zone (Figure 2a). This device measures both the transient current decrease when
a single nanoparticle crosses the nanopore and a fluorescence spike
subsequently.59 These two parameters together
with the time lag (Δt) between the two signals
provide a multidimensional feature index for each type of nanoparticle
(Figure 2b). Using this device, a nanobead
mixture (100 and 200 nm) or a fluorescently labeled influenza A H1N1
virus and nanobead (100 nm) mixture have been successfully classified
(Figure 2c).59

Figure 2 On-chip
fluorescence-based nanoparticle sizing and characterization
methods. (a) Dual-mode electrical and optical single-nanoparticle
sensing platform. (b) Electrical (top) and optical fluorescence signals
from viruses (center; red fluorescence) and nanobeads (bottom; blue).
(c) Classification of H1N1 viruses against 100 nm fluorescent beads
with the optofluidic device. (d) Microfluidic spectrometer. (e) Fluorescence
spectra of Alexa633 recorded with conventional (black) and on-chip
(red) spectrometer. Panels a–c are reproduced from Liu, S.;
Zhao, Y.; Parks, J. W.; Deamer, D. W.; Hawkins, A. R.; Schmidt, H. Nano Lett.2014, 14, 4816–4820
(ref (59)). Copyright
2014 American Chemical Society. Panels d and e are reprinted by permission
of The Royal Society of Chemistry from Schmidt, O.; Bassler, M.; Kiesel,
P.; Knollenberg, C.; Johnson, N. Lab Chip2007, 7, 626–629 (ref (60)). Copyright 2007 the Royal Society of Chemistry.

Microfluidic platforms have also
been converted into chip-size
spectrometers for spectroscopic analysis of nanoscale objects. These
microfluidic devices were integrated with dispersive optical elements
such as linear variable filters (LVFs)60 and discrete bandpass filters61 along
the channel. When the nano-objects traversed along the microfluidic
channel, the spectral information on the nano-objects was dispersed
into spatial signals (Figure 2d). Continuous
spectra were obtained in the case of LVF60 (Figure 2e), while multispectral intensities
were recorded by using a discrete set of bandpass filters.61 The latter has been demonstrated to classify
different fluorescent nano-objects and molecules based on the ratiometric
intensities at different spectral bands. For example, using only three
bandpass filters, the on-chip spectroscopic device can accurately
differentiate as many as 11 commonly used fluorophores including fluorescent
quantum dot 545 (QD545) and QD565.61

Democratization of Label-Free Nanoscale Measurement Tools
Label-free imaging and sensing tools are important for making universal
measurements of unknown samples, of previously purified samples, or
of nonbiological samples where specific labels do not exist. Whereas
label-based sensing often relies on fluorescence emission, label-free
nanoscale measurements typically involve measurements of scattered
light or of small modulations of the transmitted or reflected light.
Label-free measurements can be particularly challenging because nanoscale
particles tend to scatter light very weakly, proportional to the sixth
power of the particle size, according to the Rayleigh scattering intensity,62 1  where S is the complex amplitude
of the scattered electric field, I0 is
the incident intensity, λ is the optical wavelength, d is the diameter of the nanoparticle, and m = np/n0 is
the relative refractive index of the particle compared to the surrounding
medium.

Sensors Based on Light Scattering
For particles with
sizes at the upper range of the Rayleigh regime and even into the
Mie scattering regime (particle sizes comparable to the wavelength),63 sensors based on light scattering form a viable
option for nanoparticle detection, characterization, and sizing. The
most prevalent conventional scattering-based particle sizing methods
fall into two categories: (1) dynamic light scattering (DLS), which
calculates the hydrodynamic radius of the particles from their diffusion
coefficient measured by the time-dependent scattering intensity fluctuation
of the sample,24 and (2) nanoparticle tracking
analysis (NTA), which quantifies particle size and size distribution
by measuring the rate of Brownian motion of single nanoparticles in
solution.25,64,65 Both technologies
however require fairly bulky benchtop instruments.

A particle
sizing method with nanometer accuracy has recently been demonstrated
by making Mie scattering measurements using a mobile phone camera
that is integrated into a benchtop system (Figure 3a–c).66 In this case, the
cell phone camera records the angularly dependent scattering patterns
of the particle suspensions by imaging the Fourier plane of the sample
onto the cell phone image sensor (Figure 3a).
The one-dimensional radial scattering profile was then fitted with
Mie theory to estimate the particle size (Figure 3b,c). An average size measurement error of 8 nm was demonstrated
for 4, 6, and 8 μm diameter spheres.66

Figure 3 Light
scattering based nanocharacterization tools. (a–c)
Sizing particles with nanometer accuracy by scattering measurements
using a mobile phone camera integrated into a benchtop system. (a)
Schematic illustration of the optical setup and a representative angular
scattering pattern recorded on the cell phone. (b) Measured (black)
and Mie theory fitted (red) angle-dependent scattering intensities.
(c) Expected (black) and predicted (red) particle size distributions
as determined from scattering data. Panels (a–c) are reprinted
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License from Smith,
Z. J.; Chu, K.; Wachsmann-Hogiu, S. PLoS One2012, 7, e46030 (ref (66)).

Sensors Based on Interferometry
For nanoparticles in
the Rayleigh regime (eq 1), the scattered light
intensity can be so weak that it is quite challenging to detect it
relative to background noise without an additional signal enhancement
mechanism. One class of strategies to enhance scattered signal strength
is to employ detection mechanisms that have better scaling for small
particles, i.e., mechanisms where the scaling exponent on particle
size, d, is less than 6. Measuring the interference
between the scattered signal and a known reference is one way of reducing
the scaling exponent. In such interferometric systems, the directly
measured quantity is of the form, 2  where R and S represent
the spatially varying complex fields of the reference
wave and scattered wave, respectively. It can often be assumed that
the reference wave amplitude and phase are constant and that |S| ≪ |R|, such that the measured
signal is essentially, 3  

Note that
here R is
a known (i.e., reference) complex constant and that both S and S* are proportional to (Iintens)1/2, and therefore, the scaling
of the signal on particle size d is reduced from
6 to 3. In practice, the presence of the (S*R) (twin image or conjugate) term can cause difficulties
and potentially corrupt measurements, but its influence can be mitigated
through appropriate system design, followed by computation or reconstruction
steps.67−69 The obstacle in implementing interferometric sensing
methods in a “democratic” platform often lies in the
combination of the reference and scattered beams in a compact, cost-effective,
and robust system. This can be challenging for interferometric methods
due to their sensitivity to very small changes in optical path lengths,
which can result in measurement artifacts due to small vibrations
or strains on, e.g., mechanical housings, among other factors.

An interferometric sensing approach that has successfully mitigated
these challenges is the single particle interferometric reflectance
imaging sensor (SP-IRIS) developed by Selim Ünlü’s
group at Boston University.70,71 SP-IRIS sensors are
based on common-path interferometry generated by a substrate comprising
a ∼100 nm thick silica layer deposited on a silicon wafer.
In this geometry, the reference beam is generated due to the reflection
at the silica–silicon interface while the scattered signal
is generated from a particle sitting at the top of the silica layer
(Figure 4a). The small path length difference
in this design minimizes the influence of external vibrations or strains
on the measured signal. SP-IRIS sensing has been implemented in a
simple and easy-to-operate device based on LED illumination and a
custom-built microscope using a 0.8 NA microscope objective, which
can be used at the point-of-care for viral assays such as Ebola testing
(Figure 4b).72,73 Here, vesicular
stomatitis virus particles with sizes of 60–160 nm were specifically
captured on the sensor surface (after appropriate surface chemistry
steps) and individually detected using SP-IRIS. In addition to virus
detection, this approach has also been used to detect aggregates of
DNA and protein.74,75

Figure 4 Interferometric imaging and sizing of
nanoparticles. (a) Single
particle interferometric reflectance imaging sensing (SP-IRIS) scheme.
The signal is generated from the interference between the scattered
light from the particle and the light reflected from the SiO2–Si interface. (b) Portable prototype capable of SP-IRIS sensing
at the point of care. (c–j) Imaging and sizing of nanoparticles
using lensfree holographic on-chip imaging. (c) The condensation of
polyethylene glycol (PEG) vapor can be used to form nanolenses that
increase the scattering signatures from embedded nanoparticles and
enable their detection. (d) Nanoparticles smaller than 40 nm are visible
after PEG condensation. (e) Scanning electron microscopy gold-standard
comparisons for the particles in (d). (f, g) Line drawing and schematic
of a “democratic” nanoscale measurement tool incorporating
nanolens formation and imaging. Note that the optical fibers in this
design are multimode and rather easy to couple light
through simple butt coupling. (h–j) Nanoparticle sizing histograms
obtained using the device shown in (g). Panel (a) reproduced from
Daaboul, G. G.; Yurt, A.; Zhang, X.; Hwang, G. M.; Goldberg, B. B.;
Ünlü, M. S. Nano Lett.2010, 10, 4727–4731 (ref (70)). Copyright 2010 American
Chemical Society. Panel (b) is reprinted with permission from Reddington,
A. P.; Trueb, J. T.; Freedman, D. S.; Tuysuzoglu, A.; Daaboul, G.
G.; Lopez, C. A.; Karl, W. C.; Connor, J. H.; Fawcett, H.; Unlu, M.
S. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.2013, 60, 3276–3283 (ref (72)). Copyright 2013 Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers. Panels (c–e) reproduced from McLeod,
E.; Nguyen, C.; Huang, P.; Luo, W.; Veli, M.; Ozcan, A. ACS
Nano2014, 8, 7340–7349
(ref (84)). Copyright
2014 American Chemical Society. Panels (g–j) reproduced from
McLeod, E.; Dincer, T. U.; Veli, M.; Ertas, Y. N.; Nguyen, C.; Luo,
W.; Greenbaum, A.; Feizi, A.; Ozcan, A. ACS Nano2015, 9, 3265–3273 (ref (69)). Copyright 2015 American
Chemical Society.

Another interferometric approach, developed in our lab, harnesses
partially coherent digital in-line holography. We have used lensfree
digital holography in cost-effective and robust devices for a range
of applications to capture images with a high space-bandwidth product,
i.e., images that simultaneously have a very large field of view (>20–30
mm2) and a high resolution (equivalent to microscope objectives
with NA as high as 1.4).68,76−80 These approaches are highly suited to the democratization of imaging
and sensing science because their components can be quite inexpensive.
The image sensor chip cost has benefited from the economy of scale
for mass production in cell phone cameras, while the light sources
rely on standard low-cost LEDs. Furthermore, no expensive microscope
objectives are necessary. The rise of the 3D printing industry has
also enabled the relatively inexpensive production of device housings
even for small quantities that would be requested for use as scientific
tools.81 Despite the high resolution of
these lensfree holographic imaging platforms, their ability to detect
and measure nanoscale particles can be a challenge, depending on the
choice of the optoelectronic sensor chip; for example, the holographic
scattering signatures of particles smaller than ∼200–250
nm are typically lost within the background noise of the on-chip imaging
system, unless a cooling system is utilized to increase the detection
SNR of the imager chip.

To address this challenge and increase
the sensitivity of on-chip
holographic imaging, we have developed several methods of forming
self-assembled on-chip nanolenses that increase the scattering signatures
of nanoparticles, enabling their unequivocal detection relative to
background noise (Figure 4). These methods
include flow-based formation,82 solvent
evaporation,83 and film-wise condensation
of thin polymer films that are stable at room temperatures.84 Of these approaches, the film-wise condensation
of liquid polymers (Figure 4c) has been proven
capable of detecting the smallest particles, demonstrating the detection
of spherical particles smaller than 40 nm (Figure 4d,e) and rod-shaped particles with diameters smaller than
20 nm using LED illumination with a peak wavelength of ∼510
nm.84 The enhancement provided by these
nanolenses is quantitatively well-understood, as the experimental
measurements closely match the predictions of our theory and simulations.69,84 Furthermore, the signal enhancement and formation of these nanolenses
have proved to be highly repeatable, without false positives. All
the spots identified using lensfree imaging that are strong enough
to indicate particles larger than ∼40–50 nm correspond
to real objects on the sample when imaged using SEM. Only when the
substrate pretreatment was poorly performed, without being sufficiently
hydrophilic, are there any anomalies; however, such cases are easy
to identify due to an abnormally extremely dense and contiguous array
of spots. Furthermore, as shown in Figure 4f,g, the fabrication and imaging of these nanolenses have been demonstrated
in an integrated, field-portable, and cost-effective platform consisting
of a resistive heater, a liquid polyethylene glycol chamber, an LED
light source, a CMOS image sensor, and a 3D-printed housing.69 Using this field-portable and “democratic”
lensfree imaging platform, tens of thousands of nanoparticles can
be sized individually with an accuracy of ±11 nm (Figure 4h–j).

Yet another interferometric approach
for the imaging and detection
of nanoscale objects is based on a Young interferometer design, where
multiple closely spaced parallel coherent beams interfere as they
diffract and propagate in free space, reminiscent of Young’s
famous double-slit experiment.85,86 In this design, the
parallel beams are generated from on-chip waveguides. Light from an
external source is first coupled to an on-chip single-mode waveguide.
While efficient coupling to single mode waveguides can be time-consuming
and dependent on relatively expensive equipment, it is possible to
mitigate this challenge through inefficient coupling approaches. As
long as the light source provides significantly more power than required
by the detector, low-cost focusing lenses and coarse positioning tools
can be used to couple light to the waveguides. After coupling, the
input waveguide is split into four parallel waveguides using cascaded
on-chip splitters, where one of the waveguides is used as a reference
wave and the other three are used as sensors, providing the potential
for multiplexing. The three parallel measurement waveguides can be
functionalized with antibodies for specific analytes such as biomarkers
or viruses, whose influence is felt through evanescent coupling with
the guided waves. The four waveguides are then cleaved to allow emission
into free space. Theoretical performance using multiple wavelengths
indicates that concentrations as low as 50 virus particles per milliliter
should be detectible.87 In a compact, field
portable device, a similar approach has also been used to detect avian
influenza virus with concentrations as low as 5 × 10–4 hemagglutination units per milliliter, where the correspondence
between hemagglutination and individual virus particles can vary between
104 and 107 viruses per hemagglutination unit.88

The interference between two beams can
also occur entirely within
waveguides without the need for free-space propagation. This can further
reduce the size of devices providing the potential for extreme miniaturization
and field-portability. For especially high sensitivity, optical microcavities
can be used as sensing elements. In these approaches, an input waveguide
evanescently delivers light to the microcavity, and when the wavelength
of this light equals one of the resonances of the microcavity, destructive
interference occurs between the light transmitted through the waveguide
and the light leaking from the microcavity back into the waveguide.
As an analyte binds to the surface of the microcavity, it alters the
local refractive index of the material within the evanescent field
of the cavity, which causes the resonant wavelength to shift. These
shifts in resonance are tracked by monitoring the relative transmission
through the delivery waveguide. High sensitivities are possible because
light circulating within the microcavity can interact with each bound
analyte molecule millions of times or more.89 Optical microcavities can include microspheres,90 microtoroids,89 glass capillary
walls,91 or microrings,92 among others. Of these approaches, microrings have thus
far found the widest application due to their potential for lithographic
mass fabrication and integration with microfluidics due to their planarity.
Genalyte has commercialized these sensors; however, they are still
at the laboratory scale and not yet at a truly cost-effective or field-portable
stage.93

Photonic Crystal Sensors
Another resonant sensing approach
is based on two-dimensional photonic crystals. These sensors make
use of a surface that is structured to have a narrowband (resonant)
reflection and/or transmission. At the resonant wavelength, light
is coupled from normal incidence into light that propagates transversely
along the photonic crystal and is then ultimately reflected and/or
transmitted with high efficiency. The most strongly reflected/transmitted
wavelength can be altered by the refractive index of the material
adsorbed on the surface of the sensor, which interacts evanescently
with the light propagating in the photonic crystal. In one transmission-based
design, the detection of single particles as small as 150 nm in diameter
was observed.94 While this experiment was
performed in a conventional microscope with a 40× microscope
objective, monitoring of the photonic crystal could presumably be
performed using some of the other field-portable and cost-effective
computational imaging approaches presented in this review.

In
a reflection-based design,95 nanoparticles
and layers of analyte with nanoscale thickness can be sensed by tracking
the modulation of the peak wavelength of the reflected beam (Figure 5a). Conducive to democratization, these photonic
crystal-based sensors can be mass-produced out of relatively inexpensive
polymer materials using soft-lithography.96 Furthermore, these devices can be incorporated with a grating-based
spectrometer inside a smartphone attachment that correctly aligns
the smartphone camera, encapsulating the entire analysis in a field-portable
platform (Figure 5b,c).97 This approach is sensitive enough to detect single 65 nm
× 30 nm metal nanoparticles when combined with a microscope system.98 It has also been used to detect and measure
HIV particle concentrations.99 In an alternative
geometry, one-dimensional photonic crystals placed parallel to a waveguide
have been used as biosensors that modulate the transmission through
the waveguide upon binding of an analyte to the photonic crystal sensor
(Figure 5d).100,101

Figure 5 Photonic crystal
sensors. (a) Appropriately designed planar photonic
crystals generate a narrowband reflection whose peak wavelength shifts
upon binding of an analyte such as HIV viral particles. (b, c) Photonic
crystal sensing can be implemented in a cost-effective smartphone
platform. (c) A photonic crystal oriented in the longitudinal direction
parallel to a waveguide can also be used as a narrowband reflector
that produces wavelength shift upon binding of an analyte. Panel (a)
is reprinted with permission from Shafiee, H.; Lidstone, E. A.; Jahangir,
M.; Inci, F.; Hanhauser, E.; Henrich, T. J.; Kuritzkes, D. R.; Cunningham,
B. T.; Demirci, U. Sci. Rep.2014, 4, 4116 (ref (99)). Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. Panels (b) and (c) are
reprinted by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry from Gallegos,
D.; Long, K. D.; Yu, H.; Clark, P. P.; Lin, Y.; George, S.; Nath,
P.; Cunningham, B. T. Lab Chip2013,
13, 2124–2132 (ref (97)). Copyright 2013 the Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel
(d) is reprinted by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry from
Mandal, S.; Goddard, J. M.; Erickson, D. Lab Chip2009, 9, 2924–2932
(ref (100)). Copyright
2009 the Royal Society of Chemistry.

Plasmonic Sensors
Plasmonic sensors form another successful
class of nanoscale measurement tools. For many years, the gold standard
in biosensing has been surface plasmon resonance (SPR); however, it
has been traditionally limited to rather expensive and bulky instruments.28 In plasmonic sensors, there is a plasmonic resonance
wavelength where light in free space couples very efficiently into
plasmonic waves that travel along a metal–dielectric interface.
In a similar way to some of the previously discussed sensing approaches,
this resonance condition shifts upon specific binding of an analyte
due to modulation of the local effective refractive index with which
the plasmonic fields interact. The diversity in plasmonic sensors
comes from the 3D geometry and nanostructuring, if any, of the metal–dielectric
interface.

A promising nanostructured format for plasmonic sensors
is a nanohole array, which consists of a very thin metallic substrate
with an array of small apertures.102−104 These substrates exhibit
extraordinary optical transmission in that the light transmitted through
the array of holes, under appropriate illumination conditions and
array design, is greater than the number of holes times the power
of light that would be transmitted through a single isolated hole.
This extraordinary transmission occurs at specific resonant wavelengths
determined by the coupling between free-space waves and surface plasmons
confined to the structured substrate. When binding of an analyte occurs
on the substrate or within the holes, the spectral resonances of the
plasmon mode and the transmitted light shift. Monitoring the transmission
of these nanoaperture arrays provides compatibility with lensfree
holographic on-chip microscopy platforms similar to those discussed
above, and field-portable and cost-effective plasmonic reader devices
have already been demonstrated (Figure 6a–f).105 In the work reported in ref (105), the analyte was not
discrete nanoparticles but instead layers of proteins with an effective
thickness as small as 3 nm. In another assay, the measurement of the
refractive index of bulk liquids, the minimum detectible refractive
index change was of the order 10–3 refractive index
units (RIU).104−106 The detection is performed by monitoring
the loss in transmission of an LED initially tuned to the peak transmission
wavelength of the nanohole array. To improve the sensitivity by approximately
a factor of 2, ratiometric measurements of two color channels with
wavelengths located on either side of the initial resonance can be
used in parallel to interrogate the nanohole arrays.106 Earlier, virus detection experiments had also been shown
on a similar plasmonic platform at concentrations in the range of
106–109 plaque forming units (PFU) per
mL.107 In addition to the imaging/sensing
device being cost-effective,68 the plasmonic
substrate/chip can also be cost-effectively fabricated in parallel
using high-throughput UV lithography.106

We should also note that plasmonic sensors need not be structured
in a regular array or uniform fashion. Nonperiodically structured
arrays can be used to provide multicolor information in multiplexed
assays108 and to increase spatial resolution
or to perform pixel super-resolution.109 These irregular structures produce diffraction patterns that are
specific to both the location of the object (e.g., a fluorescent emitter)
and the illumination wavelength. Through a one-time calibration procedure
where a narrow beam is scanned across the nanostructured substrate,
the correspondence between diffraction patterns and object location
(lateral) and wavelength can be determined. Then, when an unknown
sample is placed on the same substrate, individual particles or emitters
can be computationally imaged/reconstructed and localized with subpixel
level resolution on a chip through, e.g., a compressive-sampling approach,
even though the raw diffraction patterns of point-emitters are quite
large and overlap significantly.109

Figure 6 Plasmonic nanosensors.
(a, b) Hand-held nanosensor device that
includes a light source, plasmonic nanohole array chip, and image
sensor chip. (c) Close-up of a nanohole array. (d) Simulation of electric
field hot-spots and transmission through the chip. (e) Transmission
spectrum before and after the binding of an analyte. (f) Measured
response from a single nanohole array before and after analyte binding.
(g) Nanostructured plasmonic grating sensor with an embedded quantum
well light source. (h) Lensfree imaging of CD4 cells labeled with
gold nanoparticles. This technique works as an imaging cytometer by
modulating/altering the diffraction patterns of cells that are specifically
labeled with particles. (i) Spectra of CD4 cells before and after
labeling with gold nanoparticles. The gold plasmon resonance can be
seen as a peak around 600 nm. Panels (a–f) are reprinted with
permission from Cetin, A. E.; Coskun, A. F.; Galarreta, B. C.; Huang,
M.; Herman, D.; Ozcan, A.; Altug, H. Light Sci. Appl.2014, 3, e122 (ref (105)). Copyright 2014 Nature
Publishing Group. Panel (g) is reprinted with permission from Lepage,
D.; Jiménez, A.; Beauvais, J.; Dubowski, J. J. Light
Sci. Appl.2013, 2, e62 (ref (110)). Copyright 2013 Nature
Publishing Group. Panels (h) and (i) are reprinted with permission
from Wei, Q.; McLeod, E.; Qi, H.; Wan, Z.; Sun, R.; Ozcan, A. Sci. Rep.2013, 3, 1699 (ref (113)). Copyright 2013 Nature
Publishing Group.

It is also possible to
embed light sources within a plasmonic sensing
chip for further miniaturization and democratization potential. Jan
Dubowski’s lab has done this by fabricating quantum well nanostructures
underneath a nanostructured metal layer (Figure 6g).110−112 The quantum wells are excited either through
electroluminescence or photoluminescence, and the emitted light is
coupled into surface plasmons on the metal layer. Due to nanostructuring
on the surface, these surface plasmons can couple into free-space
radiation that can be used to make measurements. Similar to other
plasmonic devices described earlier, the spectral characteristic of
this free-space radiation is highly dependent on the effective refractive
index of the material within the evanescent field of the substrate.
The sensitivity of these devices has been shown to be quite high with
a limit of detection of 1.5 × 10–6 RIU.110

Another way in which plasmonic effects
can be harnessed is through
optical coupling to individual metallic nanoparticles in solution,
which can now be obtained commercially at relatively low cost. In
this approach, light is coupled to localized surface plasmon modes
instead of the propagating surface plasmon polariton modes that were
the underlying phenomenon in the previously discussed plasmonic sensors.
Nonetheless, metallic nanoparticles also exhibit optical resonances
in absorption and scattering, whose wavelengths depend on the size
and material composition of the nanoparticles. When nanoparticles
aggregate, the effective size of the nanoparticle becomes larger,
shifting the resonance wavelength. Wei et al. have utilized this effect
using wide-field lensfree holographic on-chip microscopy to differentiate
between CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells on a chip (Figure 6h,i).113 The relative counts of these
subpopulations of white blood cells are important in diagnosing AIDS
and determining the efficacy of antiretroviral therapy (ART). By using
different nanoparticles functionalized for each cell type, it is possible
to distinguish such cells, whereas without labeling, these cells are
optically indistinguishable, regardless of the spatial resolution
of the optical microscope that is being used. Furthermore, the clustering
of nanoparticles bound to specific receptors on the cell membrane
shifts the plasmon resonance such that these clusters are readily
discernible from dispersed/unbound nanoparticles in the solution,
even when those dispersed nanoparticles are at relatively high concentrations
in the background. Machine learning was also used in this work113 to further improve the CD4/CD8 classification
accuracy, achieving an average accuracy of ∼95% using Au and
Ag nanoparticle labeling of CD4+ and CD8+ cells, respectively. Overall,
this on-chip technique is equivalent to imaging cytometry as it modulates
and accordingly changes the diffraction patterns of different cells
that are specifically labeled with particles.

Conclusions
Here, we have reviewed some of the recent developments in the democratization
of optical nanoscale measurement tools based on fluorescence imaging,
light scattering, interferometry, photonic crystals, and plasmonics.
These emerging devices and techniques are becoming more cost-effective,
portable, and user-friendly, providing new opportunities for researchers
and citizen scientists, especially in the developing world, to perform
advanced measurements and experiments that can globally help to accelerate
the rate of discovery and invention and also improve higher education
and training of the next generation of scientists and engineers. As
we are just at the cusp of these new technologies, the widespread
adoption and distribution of devices have thus far been limited; however,
we expect rapid growth in the near future. One of the enabling components
of rapid expansion in the distribution and adoption of many of these
technologies will be the cost reduction involved in fabrication. Soft
lithography approaches such as nanoimprint lithography114 are particularly attractive as they provide
a route to scalable, cost-efficient, and “democratic”
mass fabrication of structures with nanoscale precision such as those
required to make the sensors based on photonic crystals or nanohole
arrays. Furthermore, we expect that, as the technologies surrounding
mobile phones, image sensors, and 3D printing continue to mature,
there will be further reduction in cost and fabrication complexities
of these newly emerging nanoscale measurement tools. As Richard P.
Feynman once noted:115 “There is plenty of room at the bottom”, especially
for democratization of nanoscale imaging and sensing tools.

Author Contributions
∥ E.M. and Q.W. contributed equally.

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): A.O. is the founder of
a company that commercializes computational imaging and sensing technologies
licensed from UCLA.

Acknowledgments
The Ozcan Research Group at UCLA gratefully acknowledges the
support of the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and
Engineers (PECASE), the Army Research Office (ARO; W911NF-13-1-0419
and W911NF-13-1-0197), the ARO Life Sciences Division, the ARO Young
Investigator Award, the National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER Award,
the NSF CBET Division Biophotonics Program, the NSF Emerging Frontiers
in Research and Innovation (EFRI) Award, the NSF EAGER Award, Office
of Naval Research (ONR), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI),
and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Director’s New
Innovator Award DP2OD006427 from the Office of the Director, National
Institutes of Health. This work is based upon research performed in
a laboratory renovated by the National Science Foundation under Grant
No. 0963183, which is an award funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA).
==== Refs
References
Ozcan A. 
Lab Chip 
2014 , 14 , 3187 –3194 .24647550 
Coskun A. F. ; Wong J. ; Khodadadi D. ; Nagi R. ; Tey A. ; Ozcan A. 
Lab
Chip 
2013 , 13 , 636 –640 .23254910 
Coskun A. F. ; Ozcan A. 
Curr.
Opin. Biotechnol. 
2014 , 25 , 8 –16 .24484875 
Korpela E. J. ; Anderson D. P. ; Bankay R. ; Cobb J. ; Howard A. ; Lebofsky M. ; Siemion A. P. V. ; von Korff J. ; Werthimer D.  Proc. SPIE 2011 , 8152 , DOI: 10.1117/12.894066 .
Cooper C. B. ; Dickinson J. ; Phillips T. ; Bonney R. 
Ecol. Soc. 
2007 , 12 , 11 .
Robbins J.  Crowdsourcing
for the Birds . New York Times , August
19, 2013 .
Khatib F. ; DiMaio F. ; Group F. C. ; Group F. V. C. ; Cooper S. ; Kazmierczyk M. ; Gilski M. ; Krzywda S. ; Zabranska H. ; Pichova I. ; Thompson J. ; Popovic Z. ; Jaskolski M. ; Baker D. 
Nat.
Struct. Mol. Biol. 
2011 , 18 , 1175 –1177 .21926992 
Beberg A. L. ; Ensign D. L. ; Jayachandran G. ; Khaliq S. ; Pande V.
S.   In Parallel and Distributed
Processing Symposium, International ; IEEE
Computer Society : Los Alamitos, CA,
USA , 2009 ; Vol. 0 , pp 1 –8 .
Mavandadi S. ; Dimitrov S. ; Feng S. ; Yu F. ; Sikora U. ; Yaglidere O. ; Padmanabhan S. ; Nielsen K. ; Ozcan A. 
PLoS One 
2012 , 7 , e37245.22606353 
Mavandadi S. ; Dimitrov S. ; Feng S. ; Yu F. ; Yu R. ; Sikora U. ; Ozcan A. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 4102 –4106 .22918378 
Mavandadi S. ; Feng S. ; Yu F. ; Dimitrov S. ; Yu R. ; Ozcan A. 
Games
Health J. 
2012 , 1 , 373 –376 .23724363 
Ozcan A. 
Sci. Transl. Med. 
2014 , 6 , 233ed9 .
Hanay M. S. ; Kelber S. ; Naik A. K. ; Chi D. ; Hentz S. ; Bullard E. C. ; Colinet E. ; Duraffourg L. ; Roukes M. L. 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 , 602 –608 .22922541 
Fraikin J.-L. ; Teesalu T. ; McKenney C. M. ; Ruoslahti E. ; Cleland A. N. 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 6 , 308 –313 .21378975 
Wasisto H. S. ; Merzsch S. ; Waag A. ; Uhde E. ; Salthammer T. ; Peiner E. 
Sens. Actuators, B: Chem. 
2013 , 187 , 118 –127 .
Garza-Licudine E. ; Deo D. ; Yu S. ; Uz-Zaman A. ; Dunbar W. B.   In 2010 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) , Buenos Aires, Argentina,
Aug 31 to Sept 4, 2010 ; pp 5736 –5739 .
Cybulski J. S. ; Clements J. ; Prakash M. 
PLoS One 
2014 , 9 , e98781.24940755 
Erickson D. ; Mandal S. ; Yang A. H. J. ; Cordovez B. 
Microfluid. Nanofluid. 
2007 , 4 , 33 –52 .18806888 
De
Groot P. ; Deck L. 
J. Mod. Opt. 
1995 , 42 , 389 –401 .
Aasi J. ; Abadie J. ; Abbott B. P. ; Abbott R. ; Abbott T. D. ; Abernathy M. R. ; Adams C. ; Adams T. ; Addesso P. ; Adhikari R. X. ; et al. Nat. Photonics 
2013 , 7 , 613 –619 .
Betzig E. ; Patterson G. H. ; Sougrat R. ; Lindwasser O. W. ; Olenych S. ; Bonifacino J. S. ; Davidson M. W. ; Lippincott-Schwartz J. ; Hess H. F. 
Science 
2006 , 313 , 1642 –1645 .16902090 
Rust M. J. ; Bates M. ; Zhuang X. 
Nat. Methods 
2006 , 3 , 793 –796 .16896339 
Hell S. W. 
Science 
2007 , 316 , 1153 –1158 .17525330 
Berne B. J. ; Pecora R.  Dynamic Light Scattering:
With Applications to Chemistry, Biology, and Physics ; Courier Dover Publications : Mineola,
NY , 2000 .
Filipe V. ; Hawe A. ; Jiskoot W. 
Pharm. Res. 
2010 , 27 , 796 –810 .20204471 
Kulkarni P. ; Baron P.
A. ; Willeke K.  Aerosol Measurement:
Principles, Techniques, and Applications ; John Wiley & Sons : Hoboken, N.J. , 2011 .
Iida K. ; Stolzenburg M. R. ; McMurry P. H. 
Aerosol Sci. Technol. 
2009 , 43 , 81 –96 .
Liedberg B. ; Nylander C. ; Lunström I. 
Sens. Actuators 
1983 , 4 , 299 –304 .
Fan X. ; White I. M. ; Shopova S. I. ; Zhu H. ; Suter J. D. ; Sun Y. 
Anal.
Chim. Acta 
2008 , 620 , 8 –26 .18558119 
Ligler F.
S. ; Breimer M. ; Golden J. P. ; Nivens D. A. ; Dodson J. P. ; Green T. M. ; Haders D. P. ; Sadik O. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2002 , 74 , 713 –719 .11838701 
Tempelman L. A. ; King K. D. ; Anderson G. P. ; Ligler F. S. 
Anal. Biochem. 
1996 , 233 , 50 –57 .8789146 
Vashist S. K. ; Mudanyali O. ; Schneider E. M. ; Zengerle R. ; Ozcan A. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2013 , 406 , 3263 –3277 .24287630 
A Complete
History of the Camera Phone | Digital Trends; http://www.digitaltrends.com/mobile/camera-phone-history/ (accessed Apr 1, 2015 ).
Koifman V.   Nokia Lumia 1020 Features 1.1
μm BSI Pixel 41MP Sensor. Image Sensors World , July 12, 2013 .
The World
in 2014: ICT Facts and Figures; http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/facts/default.aspx (accessed Mar 27, 2015 ).
Braeckmans K. ; Buyens K. ; Bouquet W. ; Vervaet C. ; Joye P. ; Vos F. D. ; Plawinski L. ; Doeuvre L. ; Angles-Cano E. ; Sanders N. N. ; Demeester J. ; De Smedt S. C. 
Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 4435 –4442 .20923181 
Lakadamyali M. ; Rust M. J. ; Babcock H. P. ; Zhuang X. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.
S. A. 
2003 , 100 , 9280 –9285 .12883000 
Rowe C. A. ; Tender L. M. ; Feldstein M. J. ; Golden J. P. ; Scruggs S. B. ; MacCraith B. D. ; Cras J. J. ; Ligler F. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
1999 , 71 , 3846 –3852 .10489530 
Rowe-Taitt C. A. ; Hazzard J. W. ; Hoffman K. E. ; Cras J. J. ; Golden J. P. ; Ligler F. S. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2000 , 15 , 579 –589 .11213218 
Ligler F. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 519 –526 .19140774 
Ligler F. S. ; Sapsford K. E. ; Golden J. P. ; Shriver-Lake L. C. ; Taitt C. R. ; Dyer M. A. ; Barone S. ; Myatt C. J. 
Anal. Sci. 
2007 , 23 , 5 –10 .17213615 
Breslauer D. N. ; Maamari R. N. ; Switz N. A. ; Lam W. A. ; Fletcher D. A. 
PLoS One 
2009 , 4 , e6320.19623251 
Zhu H. ; Yaglidere O. ; Su T.-W. ; Tseng D. ; Ozcan A. 
Lab Chip 
2011 , 11 , 315 –322 .21063582 
Zhu H. ; Mavandadi S. ; Coskun A. F. ; Yaglidere O. ; Ozcan A. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 6641 –6647 .21774454 
Zhu H. ; Sikora U. ; Ozcan A. 
Analyst 
2012 , 137 , 2541 –2544 .22396952 
Coskun A. F. ; Nagi R. ; Sadeghi K. ; Phillips S. ; Ozcan A. 
Lab Chip 
2013 , 13 , 4231 –4238 .23995895 
Rajendran V. K. ; Bakthavathsalam P. ; Ali B. M. J. 
Microchim. Acta 
2014 , 181 , 1815 –1821 .
Zhu H. ; Sencan I. ; Wong J. ; Dimitrov S. ; Tseng D. ; Nagashima K. ; Ozcan A. 
Lab Chip 
2013 , 13 , 1282 –1288 .23392286 
Wei Q. ; Qi H. ; Luo W. ; Tseng D. ; Ki S. J. ; Wan Z. ; Göröcs Z. ; Bentolila L. A. ; Wu T.-T. ; Sun R. ; Ozcan A. 
ACS
Nano 
2013 , 7 , 9147 –9155 .24016065 
Wei Q. ; Luo W. ; Chiang S. ; Kappel T. ; Mejia C. ; Tseng D. ; Chan R. Y. L. ; Yan E. ; Qi H. ; Shabbir F. ; Ozkan H. ; Feng S. ; Ozcan A. 
ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 12725 –12733 .25494442 
Kim J. ; Johnson M. ; Hill P. ; Gale B. K. 
Integr. Biol. 
2009 , 1 , 574 –586 .
Rasmussen K. H. ; Marie R. ; Lange J. M. ; Svendsen W. E. ; Kristensen A. ; Mir K. U. 
Lab Chip 
2011 , 11 , 1431 –1433 .21350789 
Lagally E. T. ; Medintz I. ; Mathies R. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2001 , 73 , 565 –570 .11217764 
Famulok M. ; Hartig J. S. ; Mayer G. 
Chem. Rev. 
2007 , 107 , 3715 –3743 .17715981 
Polonschii C. ; David S. ; Tombelli S. ; Mascini M. ; Gheorghiu M. 
Talanta 
2010 , 80 , 2157 –2164 .20152466 
Blom M. T. ; Chmela E. ; Oosterbroek R. E. ; Tijssen R. ; van den
Berg A. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2003 , 75 , 6761 –6768 .14670033 
Kuyper C.
L. ; Budzinski K. L. ; Lorenz R. M. ; Chiu D. T. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 730 –731 .16417357 
Akin D. ; Li H. ; Bashir R. 
Nano Lett. 
2004 , 4 , 257 –259 .
Liu S. ; Zhao Y. ; Parks J. W. ; Deamer D. W. ; Hawkins A. R. ; Schmidt H. 
Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 4816 –4820 .25006747 
Schmidt O. ; Bassler M. ; Kiesel P. ; Knollenberg C. ; Johnson N. 
Lab Chip 
2007 , 7 , 626 –629 .17476382 
Cho S. H. ; Qiao W. ; Tsai F. S. ; Yamashita K. ; Lo Y.-H. 
Appl.
Phys. Lett. 
2010 , 97 , 093704 .20877655 
Rayleigh L. 
Philos. Mag. Ser.
5 
1899 , 47 , 375 –384 .
Mie G. 
Ann. Phys. 
1908 , 330 , 377 –445 .
Xu C. S. ; Cang H. ; Montiel D. ; Yang H. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 
2007 , 111 , 32 –35 .
Malloy A. 
Mater. Today 
2011 , 14 , 170 –173 .
Smith Z. J. ; Chu K. ; Wachsmann-Hogiu S. 
PLoS One 
2012 , 7 , e46030.23056228 
Gorocs Z. ; Ozcan A. 
Biomed.
Eng. IEEE Rev. 
2013 , 6 , 29 –46 .
Mudanyali O. ; Tseng D. ; Oh C. ; Isikman S. O. ; Sencan I. ; Bishara W. ; Oztoprak C. ; Seo S. ; Khademhosseini B. ; Ozcan A. 
Lab.
Chip 
2010 , 10 , 1417 –1428 .20401422 
McLeod E. ; Dincer T. U. ; Veli M. ; Ertas Y. N. ; Nguyen C. ; Luo W. ; Greenbaum A. ; Feizi A. ; Ozcan A. 
ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 3265 –3273 .25688665 
Daaboul G. G. ; Yurt A. ; Zhang X. ; Hwang G. M. ; Goldberg B. B. ; Ünlü M. S. 
Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 4727 –4731 .20964282 
Monroe M. R. ; Daaboul G. G. ; Tuysuzoglu A. ; Lopez C. A. ; Little F. F. ; Ünlü M. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 3698 –3706 .23469929 
Reddington A. P. ; Trueb J. T. ; Freedman D. S. ; Tuysuzoglu A. ; Daaboul G. G. ; Lopez C. A. ; Karl W. C. ; Connor J. H. ; Fawcett H. ; Unlu M. S. 
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 
2013 , 60 , 3276 –3283 .24271115 
Daaboul G. G. ; Lopez C. A. ; Chinnala J. ; Goldberg B. B. ; Connor J. H. ; Ünlü M.
S. 
ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 6047 –6055 .24840765 
Cheng X. R. ; Daaboul G. G. ; Ünlü M.
S. ; Kerman K. 
Analyst 
2014 , 139 , 59 –65 .24195102 
Ozkumur E. ; Ahn S. ; Yalçin A. ; Lopez C. A. ; Cevik E. ; Irani R. J. ; DeLisi C. ; Chiari M. ; Unlü M. S. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2010 , 25 , 1789 –1795 .20097056 
Greenbaum A. ; Luo W. ; Su T.-W. ; Göröcs Z. ; Xue L. ; Isikman S. O. ; Coskun A. F. ; Mudanyali O. ; Ozcan A. 
Nat.
Methods 
2012 , 9 , 889 –895 .22936170 
Greenbaum A. ; Luo W. ; Khademhosseinieh B. ; Su T.-W. ; Coskun A. F. ; Ozcan A. 
Sci.
Rep. 
2013 , 3 , 1717 .
Greenbaum A. ; Akbari N. ; Feizi A. ; Luo W. ; Ozcan A. 
PLoS One 
2013 , 8 , e76475.24086742 
McLeod E. ; Luo W. ; Mudanyali O. ; Greenbaum A. ; Ozcan A. 
Lab Chip 
2013 , 13 , 2028 –2035 .23592185 
Luo W. ; Greenbaum A. ; Zhang Y. ; Ozcan A. 
Light Sci. Appl. 
2015 , 4 , e261.
The road
ahead for 3-D printers; http://www.pwc.com/us/en/technology-forecast/2014/3d-printing/features/future-3d-printing.jhtml (accessed Mar 28, 2015 ).
Mudanyali O. ; McLeod E. ; Luo W. ; Greenbaum A. ; Coskun A. F. ; Hennequin Y. ; Allier C. P. ; Ozcan A. 
Nat. Photonics 
2013 , 7 , 247 –254 .
Hennequin Y. ; Allier C. P. ; McLeod E. ; Mudanyali O. ; Migliozzi D. ; Ozcan A. ; Dinten J.-M. 
ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 7601 –7609 .23889001 
McLeod E. ; Nguyen C. ; Huang P. ; Luo W. ; Veli M. ; Ozcan A. 
ACS
Nano 
2014 , 8 , 7340 –7349 .24979060 
Ymeti A. ; Greve J. ; Lambeck P. V. ; Wink T. ; van Hövell S.
W. F. M. ; Beumer T. A. M. ; Wijn R. R. ; Heideman R. G. ; Subramaniam V. ; Kanger J. S. 
Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 394 –397 .17298006 
Ymeti A. ; Subramaniam V. ; Beumer T. A. ; Kanger J. S. 
Expert Rev. Med. Devices 
2007 , 4 , 447 –454 .17605680 
Mulder H. K. P. ; Ymeti A. ; Subramaniam V. ; Kanger J. S. 
Opt. Express 
2012 , 20 , 20934 –20950 .23037217 
Xu J. ; Suarez D. ; Gottfried D. S. 
Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 
2007 , 389 , 1193 –1199 .17710386 
Armani D.
K. ; Kippenberg T. J. ; Spillane S. M. ; Vahala K. J. 
Nature 
2003 , 421 , 925 –928 .12606995 
Vollmer F. ; Arnold S. ; Keng D. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2008 , 105 , 20701 –20704 .19075225 
Zhu H. ; White I. M. ; Suter J. D. ; Dale P. S. ; Fan X. 
Opt. Express 
2007 , 15 , 9139 –9146 .19547254 
Washburn A. L. ; Luchansky M. S. ; Bowman A. L. ; Bailey R. C. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 69 –72 .20000326 
Genalyte
- Next Generation Multiplexing-Maverick Detection System 858-956-1200; http://genalyte.com/maverick/ (accessed Apr 1, 2015 ).
Grepstad J. O. ; Kaspar P. ; Solgaard O. ; Johansen I.-R. ; Sudbø A. S. 
Opt. Express 
2012 , 20 , 7954 .22453468 
Cunningham B. ; Li P. ; Lin B. ; Pepper J. 
Sens. Actuators, B: Chem. 
2002 , 81 , 316 –328 .
Choi C. J. ; Cunningham B. T. 
Lab Chip 
2006 , 6 , 1373 –1380 .17102852 
Gallegos D. ; Long K. D. ; Yu H. ; Clark P. P. ; Lin Y. ; George S. ; Nath P. ; Cunningham B. T. 
Lab Chip 
2013 , 13 , 2124 –2132 .23609514 
Zhuo Y. ; Hu H. ; Chen W. ; Lu M. ; Tian L. ; Yu H. ; Long K. D. ; Chow E. ; King W. P. ; Singamaneni S. ; Cunningham B. T. 
Analyst 
2014 , 139 , 1007 –1015 .24432353 
Shafiee H. ; Lidstone E. A. ; Jahangir M. ; Inci F. ; Hanhauser E. ; Henrich T. J. ; Kuritzkes D. R. ; Cunningham B. T. ; Demirci U. 
Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 4116 .24576941 
Mandal S. ; Goddard J. M. ; Erickson D. 
Lab Chip 
2009 , 9 , 2924 –2932 .19789745 
Mandal S. ; Erickson D. 
Opt. Express 
2008 , 16 , 1623 –1631 .18542241 
Ebbesen T. W. ; Lezec H. J. ; Ghaemi H. F. ; Thio T. ; Wolff P. A. 
Nature 
1998 , 391 , 667 –669 .
Rindzevicius T. ; Alaverdyan Y. ; Dahlin A. ; Höök F. ; Sutherland D. S. ; Käll M. 
Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 , 2335 –2339 .16277479 
Khademhosseinieh B. ; Biener G. ; Sencan I. ; Su T.-W. ; Coskun A. F. ; Ozcan A. 
Appl.
Phys. Lett. 
2010 , 97 , 221107 .21203381 
Cetin A. E. ; Coskun A. F. ; Galarreta B. C. ; Huang M. ; Herman D. ; Ozcan A. ; Altug H. 
Light Sci. Appl. 
2014 , 3 , e122.
Coskun A. F. ; Cetin A. E. ; Galarreta B. C. ; Alvarez D. A. ; Altug H. ; Ozcan A. 
Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 6789 .25346102 
Yanik A. A. ; Huang M. ; Kamohara O. ; Artar A. ; Geisbert T. W. ; Connor J. H. ; Altug H. 
Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 4962 –4969 .21053965 
Khademhosseinieh B. ; Biener G. ; Sencan I. ; Ozcan A. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2010 , 97 , 211112 .21173866 
Khademhosseinieh B. ; Sencan I. ; Biener G. ; Su T.-W. ; Coskun A. F. ; Tseng D. ; Ozcan A. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2010 , 96 , 171106 .20502644 
Lepage D. ; Jiménez A. ; Beauvais J. ; Dubowski J. J. 
Light Sci. Appl. 
2013 , 2 , e62.
Jimenez A. ; Lepage D. ; Beauvais J. ; Dubowski J. J. 
Microelectron.
Eng. 
2012 , 93 , 91 –94 .
Lepage D. ; Dubowski J. J. 
Biosensors 
2013 , 3 , 201 –210 .25586127 
Wei Q. ; McLeod E. ; Qi H. ; Wan Z. ; Sun R. ; Ozcan A. 
Sci.
Rep. 
2013 , 3 , 1699 .23608952 
Guo L. J. 
Adv. Mater. 
2007 , 19 , 495 –513 .
Feynman R. P. 
Eng. Sci. 
1960 , 23 , 22 –36 .
