
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac5010794ArticlePhenotypic Mapping of Metabolic Profiles Using Self-Organizing
Maps of High-Dimensional Mass Spectrometry Data Goodwin Cody R. †‡Sherrod Stacy D. ‡§Marasco Christina
C. ‡∇Bachmann Brian O. †Schramm-Sapyta Nicole °Wikswo John P. *‡§∇⊥McLean John A. *†‡†Department
of Chemistry and Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology, ‡Vanderbilt Institute
for Integrative Biosystems Research and Education, §Department of Physics and Astronomy, ∇Department of Biomedical
Engineering, and ⊥Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37235, United States° Department
of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, United States* Address: Dept. of Physics &
Astronomy, Vanderbilt University, 6301 Stevenson Center, Nashville,
TN 37235. Tel.: 615-343-4124. Fax: 615-322-4977. E-mail: john.p.wikswo@vanderbilt.edu.* Address: Dept. of Chemistry, Vanderbilt
University, 7300 Stevenson Center, Nashville, TN 37235. Tel.: 615-322-1195. Fax: 615-343-1234. E-mail: john.a.mclean@vanderbilt.edu.23 05 2015 23 05 2014 01 07 2014 86 13 6563 6571 25 03 2014 23 05 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyTerms of Use

A metabolic
system is composed of inherently interconnected metabolic
precursors, intermediates, and products. The analysis of untargeted
metabolomics data has conventionally been performed through the use
of comparative statistics or multivariate statistical analysis-based
approaches; however, each falls short in representing the related
nature of metabolic perturbations. Herein, we describe a complementary
method for the analysis of large metabolite inventories using a data-driven
approach based upon a self-organizing map algorithm. This workflow
allows for the unsupervised clustering, and subsequent prioritization
of, correlated features through Gestalt comparisons of metabolic heat
maps. We describe this methodology in detail, including a comparison
to conventional metabolomics approaches, and demonstrate the application
of this method to the analysis of the metabolic repercussions of prolonged
cocaine exposure in rat sera profiles.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac5010794document-id-new-14ac-2014-010794ccc-price
==== Body
Genomic and transcriptomic measurements
provide information that describes the capacity of a biological system
to support specific phenotypes and functions, or the biological potential.
Complementary, comprehensive end point molecular analyses, e.g., metabolomics
and proteomics, provide information regarding the actual phenotype
or functions of the system.1 Both classes
of measurements can reveal the underlying complex nonlinear and time-dependent
interactions upon which biological systems depend. Accepted multivariate
statistical techniques such as principal component analysis (PCA)
and orthogonal partial least-squares-discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA)
can be used to identify statistical correlations in data, but they
are as yet inadequate to elucidate complex interactions in high-dimensional
data sets. We demonstrate here the utility of self-organizing maps
(SOM) when applied to untargeted metabolomics studies, and how these
maps relate to other common analysis techniques. The strength of SOM
strategies is the ability to “[convert] complex, nonlinear
statistical relationships between high-dimensional data into simple
geometric relationships...”.2 Essentially,
these techniques distill multivariate data into an accessible, visually
interpretable format, while capturing inherent relationships among
variables. Self-organizing maps have been used in diverse fields;
these include the analysis of meteorological climate change,3 document text clustering,4 cattle management,5 crowd dynamics,6 and gene expression dynamics.7

Research endeavors in metabolomics seek to interrogate
the global
metabolite profile of a biological system of interest, with the intent
of gaining insight into the system phenotype, or alternatively, how
the system is interacting with the surrounding environment.8 In metabolomics studies, the complexity of metabolic
profiles is often simplified to a fundamental comparison of large
inventories of key, phenotypically descriptive small molecules that
distinguish between differing physiological states of interest at
a single time point (e.g., “normal” vs “diseased”).
Differences in the relative concentrations in these metabolite inventories
are then used to infer metabolic perturbations. Multivariate statistical
analysis (MVSA) methods are used frequently to reduce large dimensional
datasets which commonly result from mass spectrometry (MS)-based metabolomics
experiments into relevant features (i.e., up- and down-regulated metabolites),9 with a feature defined as any detected monoisotopic
molecular species with a discrete retention time and mass-to-charge
ratio.10 The widespread application of
MVSA to metabolomic studies provides a means of visualizing sample
groupings and determining significant metabolite contributions through
loadings plot interpretation. Clustering-based approaches deliver
data organization based upon internal correlations, though interpretability
of large cluster trees is time-consuming. Other metabolomic-based
workflows utilize a univariate statistical approach and consider fold-change
differences in molecular features.11 Thus,
the interrelated nature of the metabolic fluctuations and underlying
feature patterns arising from differing physiological states are often
difficult to discern or are ignored in conventional feature prioritization
workflows.

In this report, we demonstrate a SOM workflow to
visualize metabolic
phenotype and feature patterns in sera from rat models of cocaine
addiction. This advances conventional metabolomics approaches by using
SOM techniques, previously developed for gene expression analyses,7 and adapts them for untargeted metabolic profiling.
The present workflow uses SOM-based methods to cluster and prioritize
analytes of interest by similar expression profiles, in addition to
data visualization as previously demonstrated.12,13 Our SOM approach groups features that are annotated by both retention
time and mass-to-charge ratio based upon similarities in signal intensity
profiles across biological sample sets. The grouping procedure is
performed in an iterative manner for a defined training period and
metabolites are clustered based upon underlying trends in the metabolic
inventories to create the SOM. These maps are then averaged across
experimental groups and compared to provide a heat map of up- and
down-regulated metabolites as a function of experimental group. This
added dimension of feature–feature correlation provides valuable
insight into recognizing experimental subpopulations and relevant
biomolecules, as well as allowing for the removal of biologically
insignificant background features.

We have termed this workflow,
which consists of studying MS-based
metabolic profiles using SOMs, Molecular Expression Dynamics Investigator
(MEDI). This manuscript describes the MEDI workflow method in detail,
and subsequently applies MEDI to determine the effects of long-term
cocaine exposure upon the serum metabolic profile of rat populations.
Currently, we display the application of SOMs to a mass spectrometry-based
metabolomic analysis of sera samples from cocaine-naïve
rats and behaviorally distinct cocaine-exposed rat models (behaviorally
“nonaddicted” and “addicted”).14 Although cocaine and cocaine metabolites are
cleared from the animal in 2–4 days, the present workflow using
MEDI can distinguish between the metabolite inventories from sera
harvested from cocaine-naïve and cocaine-experienced
rats two weeks after the last administration of cocaine.

Experimental
Section
An overview of the rat cocaine addiction behavioral
protocol, data
acquisition, and processing methods can be found in Figure 1, with representative data shown in Figure 2. These will be described in greater detail in the Results and Discussion section.

Figure 1 Self-administration experimental
design and data acquisition, processing,
and interpretation workflow. (a) The experimental design for self-administration
is shown. All rats are first subjected to a behavioral conditioning
phase, during which they are trained to self-administer cocaine through
operant conditioning. An extinction phase follows, with the intent
of extinguishing cocaine-seeking behavior. Subsequently a reinstatement
injection is given, and the drug-seeking behavior of the rat then
classifies the level of addiction. Time scales are shown below. (b)
The complete analytical process for data acquisition, processing,
and interrogation is shown. Each step is described in detail in the
text.

Figure 2 Representative MEDI heat maps indicating relative
analyte intensity.
For each of the two behavioral groups of cocaine use (addicted and
nonaddicted) and cocaine-naïve rat sera metabolomes,
corresponding average MEDI heat maps are presented. The static metabolite
phenotypes displayed through self-organizing maps indicate gross differences
between each group. (Maps represent averages of technical triplicates
for three naïve biological samples, four nonaddicted
biological samples, and two addicted biological samples, respectively.)

Rat Cocaine Addiction Behavioral Model
Addiction models
were prepared using a long-access self-administration protocol.14−16 Briefly, rats were trained to press a lever to receive an infusion
of cocaine (0.8 mg/kg/infusion), receiving one drug infusion for each
lever press. They were placed in the operant chambers and allowed
to self-administer cocaine for 6 h per day, or until they received
50 infusions per day, whichever came first. This behavior was subsequently
extinguished through the replacement of cocaine injections with saline
injections. Extinction was performed for 8 days, at which point the
animals performed minimal lever presses. Addiction classification
was determined using a drug-induced reinstatement test. Briefly, a
priming injection of 10 mg/kg cocaine was delivered intraperitoneally,
and the rats were allowed to again lever press for saline. Rats that
obtained 50 saline injections after the cocaine injection were labeled
“addicted,” while those that performed less than 50
injections (most of which performed less than 20 injections) were
labeled “nonaddicted.” Upon completion of the behavioral
study, rats were sacrificed and their blood frozen at −80 °C
before being used for analyses. Aliquots were transported on dry ice
from Duke University (Durham, NC) to Vanderbilt University (Nashville,
TN) and subsequently stored at −80 °C prior to mass spectrometry
analysis. In total, three naïve biological samples, four
nonaddicted biological samples, and two addicted biological samples
were produced for subsequent analyses.

Rat Serum Sample Preparation
for Analysis
Frozen whole
blood samples from addicted, nonaddicted, and naïve rats
were thawed at 4 °C, and then centrifuged at 14 000 rpm
for 2 min. 60 μL of serum was removed and metabolites were isolated
by precipitating the proteins with 3:1 v:v cold methanol kept on dry
ice. Samples were vortexed for 10 s and centrifuged at 14 000
rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. 150 uL of supernatant was extracted and
dried down in a SpeedVac, after which the samples were reconstituted
in 100 uL of mobile phase A.

Liquid Chromatography-Ion Mobility-Mass Spectrometry
Analysis
UPLC-IM-MS and UPLC-IM-MSE analyses were
performed on
a SYNAPT G2 HDMS (Waters, Milford, MA) mass spectrometer equipped
with a nanoAcquity UPLC and autosampler (Waters, Milford, MA). Metabolites
were separated on a 75 μm × 100 mm HSS C18 (1.7
μm particle size) column and 180 μm × 20 mm HSS C18 (5 μm particle size) trap column. Column temperature
was maintained at 45 °C to minimize chromatographic drift, and
the autoinjector sample tray held at 4 °C to minimize sample
degradation. A double-loop injection volume of 10 μL was injected
in a 5 μL loop. Chromatographic separations were performed by
using a 20 min method at a flow rate of 450 nL/min using a gradient
mixer of 0.1% formic acid in H2O (mobile phase A) and 0.1%
formic acid in ACN (mobile phase B). Briefly, a 3 min wash period
at a flow rate of 15 μL/min was performed, during which the
eluent was diverted to waste prior to analytical separation. Following
removal of residual salts and trapping of analytes on the trap column,
flow was redirected to flow through the analytical column with an
initial 99% mobile phase A for 0.5 min. Mobile phase B was increased
to 60% over 6.5 min and up to 99% in 4 min, and then held at 99% for
3 min. The column was re-equilibrated to 99% mobile phase A over 0.5
min and held for 5.5 min after each run. All analytes were analyzed
using positive mode nanoelectrospray ionization. Typical parameters
include a capillary voltage of 3.5 kV, sampling cone setting of 25.0
and extraction cone setting of 4.0, source temperature of 80 °C,
desolvation gas (N2) flow of 600 L/h, and a cone gas flow
of 20 L/h. Data were acquired in MSE mode, which acquires
both a low-energy spectrum and a high-energy spectrum. Collision-induced
dissociation (CID) was performed post mobility separation with a ramped
energy profile from 20 V to 60 V in the high CID acquisition. Traveling
wave velocity was held constant at 550 m/s and a height of 40.0 V.
Data were acquired at a sampling rate of 2 Hz over the mass range
50–1400 m/z. Sodium formate (10 μg/mL)
in 90:10 propan-2-ol:water (v:v) was used to calibrate over this range
with <1 ppm mass accuracy. Leucine enkephalin in 50:50 H2O:ACN with 0.1% formic acid (v:v) was used as a lock mass compound
(accurate mass 556.2771 Da) at a flow rate of 0.6 μL/min and
a concentration of 2 ng/mL every 10 s. Data acquisition was performed
from 0 to 20 min of the liquid chromatography separation. Triplicate
technical analysis was performed in a randomized fashion, with quality
control samples analyzed every five injections. Quality control samples
contained equal volume aliquots of each sample mixed together.

Data Processing
and Multivariate Statistical Analysis
Data were mass-corrected
post-acquisition and centroided. Peaks were
deisotoped and normalized using MarkerLynx data processing software
(Waters, Milford, MA). Peak-picking using chromatographic profiles
was also performed using MarkerLynx. Peak detection was performed
on low-energy data across the mass range of 50–2000 Da with
retention times between 1 min and 20 min with peak widths ≤30
s (no applied smoothing), intensity threshold of 1000, mass window
of 0.03 Da and retention time window of 0.1 min. Data were deisotoped
and areas normalized to 10 000 counts per sample.

Multivariate
statistical analyses were performed using Umetrics extended statistics
software EZinfo version 2.0.0.0 (Waters, Milford, MA). Principal component
analysis (PCA) and orthogonal partial least-squares-discriminate analysis
(OPLS-DA) were performed on all data acquired and pareto scaled.

Molecular Expression Dynamics Investigator Parameters
After
initial peak filtering, detecting, aligning, and normalizing,
features were exported in a tab-delimited file congruent with GEDI
(format may be found at http://apps.childrenshospital.org/clinical/research/ingber/GEDI/gedihome.htm). The minimum system requirements necessary include a video display
capable of displaying at least 1024 × 768 pixels and the latest
version of Java (Sun Microsystems, Inc.). A 50 × 51 grid was
defined and trained using 80 first-phase and 160 second-phase iterations.
A neighborhood radius of 4.0 was used during the first phase, and
1.0 during the second phase. The learning factor was 0.5 for the first
phase and 0.05 for the second phase. The neighborhood block sizes
applied for the first and second phases were 4 and 2, respectively.
A conscience of 3.0 was used for both phases. A random seed value of 1 was used, and Euclidean distance was applied
for the distance metric. A linear initialization method was applied.
Samples were averaged across technical and biological replicates,
and subtracted across experimental groups within the Gene Expression
Dynamics Inspector (GEDI) software. GEDI maps were exported through
the software, in addition to “Gene Assignment Lists,”
which indicate node location of features, and “Map Centroids,”
which were used for the generation of intensity values for regions
of interest.

Statistical Analysis of Regions in Molecular
Expression Dynamics
Investigator Heat Maps
The cocaine-experienced MEDI self-organized
heat map (Figure 3c) shows the summed ion signal
intensities for specific regions across sample types (cocaine-naïve,
cocaine-addicted, and cocaine-nonaddicted). This MEDI heat map has
allowed us to quantify and determine the statistically significant
regions, labeled a-f, using a one-way ANOVA test among sample types.
A one-way ANOVA compares the effect of cocaine use using the grouped
“neighborhoods” of signal ion intensities for nonaddicted,
addicted, experienced (average of nonaddicted and addicted samples)
and naïve rats.
We observed a significant effect (p < 0.01) based
on cocaine exposure for all regions, and for those regions with unequal
variance between groups, a Kruskal–Wallis one-way ANOVA was
conducted (regions a, d, e, and f) [a: H(3,37 ) = 22.03, p < 0.0001; b: F(3,37) = 4.99, p = 0.0052; c:
H(3,37) = 21.83, p < 0.0001; d: F(3, 37) = 7.24, p = 0.0006; e: H(3,37) = 18.9, p = 0.0003;
f: H(3,37) = 25.6, p < 0.0001], indicating that post hoc comparisons were appropriate. Post hoc comparisons using a Bonferroni–Holm’s test show statistically
significant differences (p ≤ 0.01) for all
regions (a–f) when comparing cocaine-experienced, cocaine-addicted,
cocaine-nonaddicted, and cocaine-naïve sample types.
In addition, region f showed a statistically significant difference
(p < 0.01) between addicted and nonaddicted rat
models (see f in Figure 4). Region c, however,
does not show a statistically significant difference (p = 0.06) between nonaddicted and addicted sample groups, which indicates
that there are neighborhoods that further discriminate cocaine-nonaddicted
and cocaine-addicted models.

Figure 3 Rat sera metabolome depictions for cocaine-experienced
versus naïve
classes. (a) Principal component analysis (PCA) of cocaine-experienced
(block markers) rat sera metabolomes plotted with cocaine-naïve
(diamond markers). Behavioral subclasses are indicated by color. (b)
S-plot comparing cocaine-experienced (−1) to cocaine-naïve
(+1) metabolomes. (Marker color corresponds to the boxes in panel
c (inset shows a magnified subimage).) (c) Differential MEDI heat
map of average cocaine-experienced metabolic profiles with average
cocaine-naïve profiles subtracted. Boxed-in regions are
then delineated in panel (d), which is an annotated representative
UPLC-MS heat map marking feature location on the cocaine-experienced
UPLC-MS plot. The colored dots correspond to the different feature
islands in panel c [Box dimensions: a (39,38:50,51); b (46,33:50,37);
c (28,34:38,46); d (39,28:45,36); e (36,20:42,27); f (46,20:50,32)].
(Analysis contains technical triplicates for three naïve
biological samples, two addicted biological samples, and four nonaddicted
biological samples.)

Feature Identification
Putative identifications were
performed using the monoisotopic accurate mass and raw data to determine
molecular ion type. Monoisotopic masses were searched against the
Human Metabolome Database (HMDB),17,18 METLIN,19 and LIPID MAPS20 databases
for putative identifications, with a mass tolerance of 0.01 Da. When
possible, fragmentation data were used to support identifications,
utilizing mobility separation prior to fragmentation to isolate parent
ions in separations space. Data may be found in the Supporting Information regarding the putative identification
assignments for prioritized metabolites.

Results and Discussion
Overview
of the Data Analysis Approach, Molecular Expression
Dynamics Inspection
For mass spectrometry-based metabolomic
data analysis, MEDI incorporates Gene Expression Dynamics Inspector
(GEDI) software. Figure 1b outlines the general
workflow for the analysis of metabolomics data using a self-organizing
map algorithm to sort detected features in an unsupervised, data-driven
manner. This workflow facilitates the identification of unique expression
profiles across samples based on feature patterns detected in the
metabolomic analysis. Briefly, this workflow consist of six steps:
(1) data acquisition, (2) data preprocessing which incorporates peak
detection, alignment, and normalization, (3) generation of self-organizing
maps, (4) differential analysis intensity maps generated in step (3)
to determine relevant feature clusters, (5) interrogation of metabolite
feature assignment maps to determine unique features/analytes of interest,
and finally (6) identification of peaks of interest. The MEDI workflow
is applicable across platforms, with the exception of peak identification,
which will be technique/detector-dependent. The generalized MEDI workflow
is now described in greater detail.

Data Acquisition and Preprocessing
(MEDI Workflow: Steps 1 and
2)
The first step in the proposed workflow is the initial
data acquisition. It is important to note that no one sample preparation
or mass spectrometry analysis technique will give a global metabolomic
view simply based on the chemical diversity associated with metabolites.
It is therefore essential to plan experiments, extractions, and analysis
techniques accordingly. It is beyond the scope of this report to discuss
all metabolite extraction and analysis protocols, but it is important
to understand the limitations of each sample preparation and analytical
method. We suggest a few relevant reviews on this topic.9,21,22

After data acquisition,
raw data must be described as discrete features. This involves centroiding
and aligning retention time and mass spectral profiles, in addition
to deisotoping data to ensure monoisotopic peak comparison. Subsequent
normalization scales data to reduce the impact of technical variation.
Publically available software (e.g., XCMS) can be used to filter,
detect, and align peaks; therefore, this workflow is compatible across
numerous mass spectrometry platforms (e.g., LC-MS/MS, LC-IM-MS/MS,
GC-MS).11 Normalized metabolomics data
are then appropriate for feature organization through the self-organizing
map algorithm.

Feature Organization and Analysis (MEDI Workflow:
Steps 3 and
4)
In these MEDI workflow steps, a SOM algorithm is used
to assign detected features to a grid of user-defined dimensions.
Specifically, the algorithm arranges features in an iterative manner
based on similarity in intensity profiles across samples. Initially,
the grid is populated with randomly generated intensity profiles.
Randomly selected features from the input data are placed in the grid
location, or node, which best matches the intensity profile of that
feature. The profile of this node is then adjusted to more closely
resemble the profile of the matched feature. Surrounding nodes are
also adjusted to more closely resemble the matched feature, but to
a lesser extent. This process is then performed again with a different,
randomly selected input feature. Features that behave similarly across
samples are assigned to a particular neighborhood, or in nodes adjacent
to like features. The assignment of features to specific nodes is
then iterated as node profiles evolve. After features are assigned
to specific node coordinates, intensity maps are generated for each
sample using the summed intensity for each node. These profile the
metabolic phenotype for each sample, displaying all detected features
in a heat map. The relative number of features that contribute to
a neighborhood is shown in the feature density map. Subsequently,
samples can be averaged and subtracted based on sample group and experimental
specifics. Differential profile maps show clusters/regions of up-
or down-regulated features, which are potential metabolites of interest.
This specific analysis reveals regions (boxed regions), which should
be prioritized and compared across samples. Importantly, the feature
density map indicates that many of these regions of interest are resultant
of a small number of metabolites.

Cluster Decryption (MEDI
Workflow: Step 5)
To extract
which metabolomic features contribute to neighborhoods of interest,
clusters must be decrypted into constituent features. Each node has
a finite number of associated features, which determine the resultant
heat maps. Multiple features can contribute to a single coordinate
intensity, thus images need to be “decrypted” by determining
which features contribute to specific neighborhoods. The descriptive
data for a feature indicate the chemical properties of the feature
and the location in the raw data.

Feature Identification
(MEDI Workflow: Step 6)
The
final step in the proposed workflow includes the identification of
significant features. These identifications will be platform-specific,
thus the tools used for analyte identification will also be platform-specific.
There are several tools available for fragmentation prediction and
matching of spectra for metabolomic-based studies, as well as databases
(e.g., Human Metabolome Database, Lipid Maps Structure Database, METLIN,
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes).17−20,23,24 The metabolites detected provide the basis
for inferences on metabolic perturbations between sample groups. Guidelines
for metabolite identification confidence have been outlined by the
Metabolomics Standards Initiative.25

Applying MEDI to Explore the Effects of Long-Term Cocaine Exposure
To display the utility of this workflow, we applied the MEDI process
to liquid chromatography–mass spectral (LC-MS) sera profiles
from cocaine-naïve rats and behaviorally distinct cocaine-addicted
and cocaine-nonaddicted rats. In these data, ∼2266 unique features
(RT – m/z pairs) were detected
across all samples after peak picking, alignment, and normalization
using MarkerLynx software (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Detected
features were self-organized using the GEDI software, and average
group heat maps are seen in Figure 2. This
function simply averages node intensities across a selected group
of samples, which, in this case, is determined by behavioral class.
For comparison of the generalized effects of cocaine exposure, the
two behavioral classes were pooled and are classified “cocaine-experienced.”
These individual self-organizing heat maps clearly show distinct differences
among groups. The density of metabolites for given nodes can be seen
in Figure S1 in the Supporting Information.

Visual inspection of the metabolite heat maps demonstrates
that the sera profiles for the three groups have both shared and distinct
characteristics. This displays a significant advantage to using MEDI
for metabolic phenotype investigation. By virtue of the feature organization
process, the groupings that result from the self-organizing algorithm
are driven by hierarchical specificity. As a result, if experimental
groups have significant differences, groups will emerge that concentrate
these differences. In addition, background signals will be organized
together and essentially eliminated from the analysis. Features that
are specific to a particular sample will then occupy separate regions.
To gain perspective on how the MEDI process compares to multivariate
statistical analysis methods, we performed principal component analysis
and orthogonal partial least squares-discriminant analysis on detected
features.

Multivariate Statistical Analysis
The use of multivariate
statistical analysis methods is a common informatics approach for
metabolomics data. This enables researchers to determine significant
features in complex datasets, interrogate sample grouping, investigate
data acquisition reproducibility, and classify unknown samples based
on example training sets. Figure 3a is a principal
component analysis (PCA) of the three sample groups analyzed. In PCA,
the intensity of each feature (considered a dimension) is used to
describe a given sample. Briefly, PCA determines the largest eigenvalue
eigenvector of the covariance matrix of the data, which is the first
principal component. This eigenvector describes the largest differences
in the samples. The second principal component is orthogonal to the
first principal component and describes the next largest differences
in the data. The result is sample grouping based on similarity, and
separation based on the largest global feature differences in the
first principal component, and the next largest differences in the
second principal component. The first and second principal components
are plotted in Figure 3a as the abscissa and
ordinate, respectively. This displays the samples in maximally distinguishing
two-dimensional space, based on feature intensity. Subsequent principal
components are all orthogonal and describe progressively less variation
(i.e., lower eigenvalue eigenvectors of the covariance matrix). The
PCA plot in Figure 3a illustrates the ability
for MS-based metabolic profiles from cocaine-naïve and
cocaine-experienced rat sera to separate in the first principal component
(see x-axis in Figure 3a).
This also shows a separation in the second principal component (see y-axis); cocaine-experienced rats further separate into
two main groups. The top group (quadrant I) consists of data from
both behaviorally addicted (black) and nonaddicted rats (red), while
the other group (quadrant IV) comprises data generated from biological
duplicates of behaviorally nonaddicted rats (multiple points due to
technical replicates). The grouping consistency in the biological
duplicates indicates biological variation from the other cocaine-exposed
rats. It is unclear if this secondary separation is a result of behavioral
class, or simply specific to the rats. Importantly, the first principal
component separates metabolomic profiles based on cocaine history,
independent of behavioral class. In these experiments, rat serum was
obtained two weeks after cocaine administration; therefore, cocaine
and its metabolites were not detected in these analyses. Although
the PCA plot indicates separation based on exposure, it describes
only 24% of the variation with the first two principal components.
For the purposes of subsequent binary comparisons, the samples are
grouped as either cocaine-naïve or cocaine-experienced.

Orthogonal partial least-squares-discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA)
can also be used to compare cocaine-naïve to cocaine-experienced
rat sera profiles (see Figure S2 in the Supporting
Information).26 OPLS-DA, in this
case, finds the relationship between the UPLC-MS data and cocaine
history as a supervised method. OPLS-DA orients the model such that
the abscissa is the predictive component, or between-group variation.
The orthogonal ordinate then describes intragroup variation. Specifically,
this model explains 98% of the data variation between groups. Figure 3b shows a corresponding S-plot used to determine
metabolites of significance. This S-plot graphs features based on
group specificity or correlation (ordinate) and covariance (abscissa).
Features with a high group correlation, or specific to either cocaine-exposed
or cocaine-naïve condition, in this case, have a large
magnitude in the y-dimension. Features with a large
loadings contribution to the predictive component possess large magnitudes
in the x-dimension. In this manner, we are able to
determine the features that are specific to long-term cocaine exposure.

MEDI Heat Map Interpretation
The SOM approach to feature
organization places features with similar sample intensity profiles
proximal in the coordinate grid, as mentioned above. This generates
regions of features that are up- and down-regulated (e.g., Figure 3c, red and blue, respectively) consistently across
samples, in addition to regions that are specific to a subset of samples.
This provides additional flexibility to data organization beyond the
conventional dimensions of loadings analyses of MVSA methods. Shown
in Figure 3c is an average MEDI heat map of
cocaine-experienced serum profiles (i.e., both behavioral classes)
with the average naïve heat map subtracted to display
metabolites that are either up-regulated (yellow to red), or down-regulated
(blue to dark blue) as a general result of prolonged cocaine exposure.
This differential analysis subtracts the average node intensities
of cocaine-naïve rat sera profiles from the averaged
experimental group. Although many islands exist, the more intense
regions of up-regulation are outlined for comparative purposes. These
regions are both annotated and outlined with a colored box in Figures 3c. The colored boxes are present for comparative
purposes and indicate the feature location in other data representations
(Figures 3b and 3c)
[Box coordinates: a (39,38:50,51); b (46,33:50,37); c (28,34:38,46);
d (39,28:45,36); e (36,20:42,27); f (46,20:50,32)]. It should be noted
that these boxes are consistent across sample groups and determined
by group perimeter. Thresholding and feature recognition software
is being implemented for future applications.

Correlating the
regions of interest in Figure 3c with a raw
LC-MS plot (Figure 3d) illustrates the concept
that grouped features display a large range of chemical properties,
as they occupy different regions of separations space. The marker
color in Figure 3d corresponds to the location
in the heat map in Figure 3c. The S-plot in
Figure 3b, described above as a common method
to extract meaningful features from OPLS-DA binary analyses, has been
modified so the color of the markers corresponds to the regions of
interest in Figure 3c. All the features that
would be prioritized through OPLS-DA are encapsuled in the regions
of interest. These features occupy dispersed regions of the S-plot.

Loadings Contributions of MEDI Coordinates
Correlations
between the MEDI feature assignment location and the loadings contributions
to PCA are seen in Figures 4a and 4b. The loadings contribution
of a feature to a particular principal component indicates the weight
of that feature regarding sample magnitude in that dimension. In other
words, a feature with a large negative loading value in the first
principal component will influence a sample containing that feature
to have a negative value in that component. Representing the loadings
in this medium provides insight into neighborhood formation. The static
nature of these samples means any clustering that occurs is sample-group-specific,
assuming technical reproducibility. As such, what occurs in all cocaine-experienced
sera profiles will group, and subsequent neighborhoods will form based
on sample specificity. Figures 4a and 4b should
be considered with both Figures 3a and 3c, as the loadings contributions link the MEDI heat
map to the PCA scores plot. The largest trends are resultant of cocaine
experience and have been organized into two main regions of the map
accordingly. The upper portion of the map corresponds to features
that are down-regulated, generally, in the cocaine-experienced. This
is indicated by the dominantly red upper portion. Features initially
partition based on the global group differences. Considering the second
principal component loadings, there is very little contribution from
the features that are found in elevated intensities in the cocaine-naïve
samples, which is seen by the relatively small contribution of the
red region in Figure 4a. The second principal
component loadings map offers more insight into the formation of feature
islands in the cocaine-experienced group. The significant feature
loadings are those describing intraexperienced separations, which
are indicated by the scores plot. The nodes that contribute greatly
to the second principal component form regions in the MEDI plot. This
demonstrates the finer clustering effects of the feature sorting algorithm.
Subpopulations of samples, such as the biologically distinct cocaine-exposed
rats, produce regions representing features that are unique to that
subgroup. The grouping in principal component analysis, in addition
to individual sample MEDI heat map investigation, provides insight
into the interpretation of these underlying features.

Figure 4 Loadings contribution
of nodes to PCA. The contributions of each
node to (a) the first principal component and (b) the second principal
component are indicated by color intensity. Red indicates a negative
contribution and blue indicates a positive contribution.

Specifically, coordinate (50,51), or the extreme
bottom right node,
has the greatest contribution to a positive loading in the first and
second principal components. This feature group, consisting of putatively
identified deoxyuridine, and three other features, contains the most
distinguishing features to cocaine experience in PCA. This group is
also prioritized during the MEDI process. Other contributing signals
are listed based on their group occupation, feature descriptors, and,
when applicable, a putative identification in Table 1. The greatest negative contributors to principal component
two are found within region “c,” in addition to more
peripheral regions. These features are up-regulated in the distinct
cocaine-exposed rat sera. As a result, these features provide insight
into the difference between this rat and other cocaine-exposed models.
In addition, region “f” has a positive contribution
to the second principal component, and thus is up-regulated in most
cocaine-exposed rats. As a result, this region may provide alternative
insight into the intragroup separation.

Region Interpretation and
Comparison
Further heat map
interpretation prioritizes regions of interest, which consist of grouped
features. Figure 5 compares the summed node
intensities for outlined regions of the MEDI heat map. This provides
insight into the significance of regions, in addition to the intragroup
differences that occur. The summed intensities corroborate the loadings
analysis, as the regions selected have significant differences in
intensities between cocaine-experienced and cocaine-naïve
groups, and each have positive contributions to the first principal
component. The regions that show differences within the experienced
group (i.e., regions c and f) have varied intensities between behavioral
classes, and also hold negative and positive contributions to the
second principal component, respectively. The significance of the
displayed differences was subsequently determined.

Figure 5 Histogram depicting the
intensity integrated over six of the enclosed
regions of MEDI heat map in Figure 3b. Rats
with a history of cocaine exposure (white) had mean intensities significantly
higher than cocaine-naïve rats (blue) in all regions
tested (p < 0.05). In addition, the mean intensity
of region “f” was significantly higher in cocaine-addicted
rats (black) than nonaddicted (red) (p < 0.01).

Determination of Contributing
Features
Extracting relevant
biological information is paramount in metabolomic experiments. Following
regional analysis of MEDI heat maps, the extraction of contributing
features is performed through the interface of GEDI by selecting a
node, or through an exported “Gene Assignments List.”
Table 1 lists relevant feature identifiers,
region located, and, when available, putative identifications. The
organization of features is a function of whether the feature is present
in the same permutation of samples at relatively similar intensities.
As a result, the subpopulations that arise indicate biological subtleties
that exist among groups. The putatively identified features in disparate
regions provide insight into these biological differences.

Table 1 Putative Metabolite Identificationa
retention time (min)	m/z	MEDI region	putative
identification	
11.76	130.066	a	3-methylene-indolenine	
9.92	182.192	a	no database match	
10.82	185.080	a	(3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl)
ethylene glycol	
11.78	190.048	a	kynurenic acid	
9.85	229.091	a	deoxyuridine	
10.53	229.142	a	no database match	
10.77	243.095	a	thymidine	
10.34	273.175	a	estradiol	
10.19	308.091	a	glutathione	
9.49	338.087	a	3-indole carboxylic acid glucuronide	
9.74	340.104	a	5-hydroxy-6-methoxyindole glucuronide	
10.55	361.138	a	dityrosine	
14.09	500.277	a	LPE(20:5)	
9.72	520.336	a	LPC(18:2)	
9.09	201.068	b	bilirubin oxidation product	
12.62	225.088	c	3-hydroxykynurenine	
9.22	305.159	c	sodiated steroid-like molecule	
12.18	430.296	c	glycocholic acid −2H2O	
12.18	448.306	c	glycocholic
acid-H2O	
12.19	466.318	c	glycocholic acid	
10.19	162.056	d	4,6-dihydroxyquinoline	
9.55	269.132	d	3-carboxy-4-methyl-5-pentyl-2-furanpropionic acid	
9.48	371.227	d	6-keto-prostaglandin F1a	
9.54	399.625	e	[M+2H]2+	
1.20	203.054	f	succinyl acetoacetate	
11.94	223.066	f	no database match	
14.11	542.327	f	LPC(20:5)	
a Metabolites
were given preliminary
identifications based upon accurate mass, ion type, and database searching.

Regions a–f all show
distinct up-regulation as a result
of prolonged cocaine exposure, as seen in both Figure 5 and the loadings representation in Figure 4a. Region “a” contains metabolites that occur
in a majority of the cocaine-exposed group. These include metabolites
indicative of compensatory mechanisms of the biochemical effects of
prolonged cocaine exposure. A largely up-regulated metabolite found
in this region is (3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl)ethylene glycol, which
is the primary serum metabolite of norepinephrine and has been found
to be dysregulated following cocaine withdrawal.27 This metabolite is downstream of dopamine (and more generally
catecholamine) synthesis.28 Kynurenic acid
is a naturally occurring metabolite resulting from tryptophan metabolism,
and it has displayed protective effects against cocaine toxicity.29 The inhibitory effects of cocaine exposure on
glial cell growth have also been shown, significantly decreasing incorporation
of thymidine in DNA synthesis, which inhibits growth.30 The marked increase in serum thymidine concentrations is
perhaps a compensatory result of cocaine exposure, or perhaps a result
of metabolite pooling resulting from lack of incorporation. This could
be the reason for up-regulation of deoxyuridine as well. Alterations
in estradiol concentrations have been seen in response to cocaine
exposure, although why up-regulation occurs in male rats following
cocaine extinction is unclear. The presence of 3-carboxy-4-methyl-5-pentyl-2-furanpropionic
acid could speak to renal health as a result of the prolonged cocaine
exposure.31,32

Region “c” concentrates
the biological differences
that exist within the cocaine-exposed group. The increased 3-hydroxykynurenine
that appears to exist implicates further tryptophan perturbations
and is indicative of neural inflammation.33 This metabolite has been associated with oxidative stress and neuronal
cell death. Unidentified features that exist in this region may ultimately
provide more insight into the biological variation that exists.

The other distinct region of difference within the cocaine-experienced
group is region “f.” The presence of succinylacetoacetate
is a unique metabolite resulting from tyrosinemia, which has been
shown to result from long-term cocaine exposure.34 The differences in lysophosphocholines observed should
also be noted.

The current study focuses entirely on the up-regulated
features
found in the cocaine-experienced group. There is a wealth of information
that is present in the regions of down-regulation. However, considering
the pedagogical nature of this data set, we have chosen to demonstrate
the relevance of the MEDI method using a subset of the prioritized
features. For definitive assignments, putative identifications should
be validated against standards with retention time and MS/MS matching.

Conclusions
We have described the MEDI workflow and applied
this method to
a static set of sera samples from behaviorally conditioned cocaine
addiction rat models. We have demonstrated the utility of SOM to distinguish
underlying feature motifs. Features that contributed to these regions
were putatively identified and metabolic connections that have been
well-described as consequential of cocaine exposure were established.

Although this method was applied to data acquired using mass spectrometry-based
detection, it is easily applied to other metabolomics platforms (e.g.,
NMR), or to additional dimensions of separation combined with MS.
We have also indicated the application of the MEDI workflow only on
static samples, although the GEDI core software is ideal to determine
underlying temporal dynamics. MEDI is a method that provides a medium
to express metabolic phenotype and prioritize features based upon
underlying sample patterns.

It should be noted that the dataset
investigated in this study
was for proof of principle, and caution should be observed in interpreting
these results regarding cocaine classification, as a small sample
set was investigated and absolute identification of analytes necessitates
further studies. To enhance confidence in metabolites indicative of
behavioral classification, a larger cohort is required. However, for
the purposes of this report, we consider these data to be an instructive
application of the MEDI process.

Although we apply this method
to end point analyses, this method
is also well-suited for comparison of temporal dynamic samples, as
the name implies. For the purpose of this work, however, we endeavor
to describe this method on temporally pooled samples. Specifically,
the MEDI workflow begins with data acquisition and ends with the identification
of biologically significant up- and down-regulated mass spectrometry
signals.

Supporting Information Available
Additional information as noted
in the text is presented in the Supporting Information, including
molecular species information. This material is available free of
charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac5010794_si_001.pdf

 ac5010794_si_002.xls

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Dr. Amina S. Woods (National Institutes of Health-National
Institute on Drug Abuse, Baltimore, MD) for initial discussions on
the cocaine model investigated. This work was supported in part by
the National Institutes of Health (NIH Grant RC2DA028981), the U.S.
Defense Threat Reduction Agency (Grant HDTRA1-09-1-0013), the Vanderbilt
Institute for Integrative Biosystems Research and Education, the Vanderbilt
Institute of Chemical Biology, and the Systems Biology and Bioengineering
Undergraduate Research Experience (funded by Gideon Searle at Vanderbilt
University). We thank Nolan Smith for his technical assistance, and
Allison Price for her editorial assistance.
==== Refs
References
Patti G. J. ; Yanes O. ; Siuzdak G. 
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
2012 , 13 , 263 –269 .22436749 
Kohonen T. ; Oja E. ; Simula O. ; Visa A. ; Kangas J. 
Proc. IEEE 
1996 , 84 , 1358 –1384 .
Skific N. ; Francis J. A. ; Cassano J. J. 
J. Climate 
2009 , 22 , 4135 –4153 .
Kohonen T. ; Niklasson L. ; Bodén M. ; Ziemke T.   In Proceedings of ICANN98,
The 8th International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks ; Springer , 1998 ; Vol. 1 , pp 65 –74 .
Correia Baptista Soares de Mello J. C. ; Goncalves Gomes E. ; Angulo Meza L. ; Biondi Neto L. ; Gomes Pinto de Abreu U. ; de Carvalho T. B. ; de Zen S.   In Applications
of Self-Organizing Maps , 1st  Edition; Johnsson M. , Ed.; InTech Publishers : Midlothian, TX , 2012 ; Chapter 4, pp 67 –88 .
Owens J. ; Hunter A.   In Proceedings of IEEE
International Workshop on Visual Surveillance , Dublin, Ireland,
July 1, 2000 ; pp 77 –83 .
Eichler G. S. ; Huang S. ; Ingber D. E. 
Bioinformatics 
2003 , 19 , 2321 –2322 .14630665 
Rochfort S. 
J. Nat. Prod. 
2005 , 68 , 1813 –1820 .16378385 
Goodacre R. ; Vaidyanathan S. ; Dunn W. B. ; Harrigan G. G. ; Kell D. B. 
Trends Biotechnol. 
2004 , 22 , 245 –252 .15109811 
Nordstrom A. ; O’Maille G. ; Qin C. ; Siuzdak G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 3289 –3295 .16689529 
Smith C. A. ; Elizabeth J. ; O’Maille G. ; Abagyan R. ; Siuzdak G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 779 –787 .16448051 
Patterson A. D. ; Li H. ; Eichler G. S. ; Krausz K. W. ; Weinstein J. N. ; Fornace A. J. Jr; Gonzalez F. J. ; Jeffrey R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 665 –674 .18173289 
Tyburski J. B. ; Patterson A. D. ; Krausz K. W. ; Slavik J. ; Fornace A. J. Jr; Gonzalez F. J. ; Idle J. R. 
Radiat. Res. 
2008 , 170 , 1 –14 .18582157 
Schramm-Sapyta N. L. ; Olsen C. M. ; Winder D. G. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 
2005 , 31 , 1444 –1451 .16205778 
Schramm-Sapyta N. L. ; Cauley M. C. ; Stangl D. K. ; Glowacz S. ; Stepp K. A. ; Levin E. D. ; Kuhn C. M. 
Psychopharmacology 
2011 , 215 , 493 –504 .21347641 
Dalley J. W. ; Fryer T. D. ; Brichard L. ; Robinson E. S. J. ; Theobald D. E. H. ; Laane K. ; Pena Y. ; Murphy E. R. ; Shah Y. ; Probst K. 
Science 
2007 , 315 , 1267 .17332411 
Wishart D. S. ; Knox C. ; Guo A. C. ; Eisner R. ; Young N. ; Gautam B. ; Hau D. D. ; Psychogios N. ; Dong E. ; Bouatra S. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2009 , 37 , D603 –D610 .18953024 
Wishart D. S. ; Tzur D. ; Knox C. ; Eisner R. ; Guo A. C. ; Young N. ; Cheng D. ; Jewell K. ; Arndt D. ; Sawhney S. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2007 , 35 , D521 –D526 .17202168 
Smith C. A. ; Maille G. O. ; Want E. J. ; Qin C. ; Trauger S. A. ; Brandon T. R. ; Custodio D. E. ; Abagyan R. ; Siuzdak G. 
Ther. Drug Monit. 
2005 , 27 , 747 .16404815 
Sud M. ; Fahy E. ; Cotter D. ; Brown A. ; Dennis E. A. ; Glass C. K. ; Merrill A. H. Jr; Murphy R. C. ; Raetz C. R. H. ; Russell D. W. 
Nucleic Acids
Res. 
2007 , 35 , D527 –D532 .17098933 
Novakova L. ; Vlckova H. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2009 , 656 , 8 –35 .19932811 
Alvarez-Sanchez B. ; Priego-Capote F. ; Luque de Castro M. D. 
TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 29 , 111 –119 .
Ogata H. ; Goto S. ; Sato K. ; Fujibuchi W. ; Bono H. ; Kanehisa M. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
1999 , 27 , 29 –34 .9847135 
Kanehisa M. ; Goto S. ; Hattori M. ; Aoki-Kinoshita K. F. ; Itoh M. ; Kawashima S. ; Katayama T. ; Araki M. ; Hirakawa M. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2006 , 34 , D354 –D357 .16381885 
Sumner L. W. ; Amberg A. ; Barrett D. ; Beale M. H. ; Beger R. ; Daykin C. A. ; Fan T. W. M. ; Fiehn O. ; Goodacre R. ; Griffin J. L. 
Metabolomics 
2007 , 3 , 211 –221 .24039616 
Wiklund S. ; Johansson E. ; Sjstrm L. ; Mellerowicz E. J. ; Edlund U. ; Shockcor J. P. ; Gottfries J. ; Moritz T. ; Trygg J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 115 –122 .18027910 
McDougle C. J. ; Black J. E. ; Malison R. T. ; Zimmerman R. C. ; Kosten T. R. ; Heninger G. R. ; Price L. R. 
Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 
1994 , 51 , 713 –719 .8080348 
Lovenberg W. ; Bruckwick E. A. ; Hanbauer I. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
1975 , 72 , 2955 .241999 
Rockhold R.
W. ; Oden G. ; Ho I. K. ; Andrew M. ; Farley J. M. 
Brain Res. Bull. 
1991 , 27 , 721 –723 .1684527 
Garg U. C. ; Turndorf H. ; Bansinath M. 
Neuroscience 
1993 , 57 , 467 –472 .7509470 
Niwa T. ; Takeda N. ; Maeda K. ; Shibata M. ; Tatematsu A. 
Clin. Chim. Acta 
1988 , 173 , 127 –138 .3378354 
Costigan M. G. ; Yaqoob M. ; Lindup W. E. 
Nephrol. Dial. Transplant. 
1996 , 11 , 803 –807 .8671898 
Okuda S. ; Nishiyama N. ; Saito H. ; Katsuki H. 
J. Neurochem. 
1998 , 70 , 299 –307 .9422375 
Fallstrom S.-P. ; Lindblad B. ; Steen G. 
Acta Paediatr. (Stockholm) 
1981 , 70 , 315 –320 .
