
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac504720mReviewIon Mobility-Mass Spectrometry: Time-Dispersive Instrumentation May Jody C. McLean John A. *Department
of Chemistry,
Center for Innovative Technology, Vanderbilt Institute for Chemical
Biology, Vanderbilt Institute for Integrative Biosystems Research
and Education , Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37235, United States* E-mail: john.a.mclean@vanderbilt.edu.19 12 2015 19 12 2014 03 02 2015 87 3 1422 1436 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac504720mdocument-id-new-14ac-2014-04720mccc-price
==== Body
The field of ion mobility-mass
spectrometry (IM-MS) has grown with significant momentum in recent
years in both fundamental advances and pioneering applications. A
search of the terms “ion mobility” and “mass
spectrometry” returns more than 2 000 papers, with over
half of these being published in the past 4 years (Figure 1, left). This increased interest has been motivated
in large part by improved technologies which have enabled contemporary
IM-MS to be amendable to a variety of samples in biology and medicine
with high sensitivity, resolving power, and sample throughput.

Figure 1 (Left) Histogram
of the number of publications published per year
in ion mobility and ion mobility-mass spectrometry. Note that the
scale is truncated at 300 to highlight the number of publications
specifically utilizing IM-MS. Further distinction is made to discriminate
the frequency of publication for both time and space-dispersive IM-MS
publications. (Right) Historical milestones in the development of
ion mobility and IM-MS instrumentation.

Highlights of the historical development of the field are
presented
in Figure 1, right. Ion mobility and mass spectrometry
trace their foundations to the X-ray experiments of Thomson and Rutherford
in the late 1800s,1 with Tyndall making
significant improvements in the analytical capabilities of ion mobility
around the 1930s.2,3 During this early era of discovery,
a variety of ion mobility experimental parameters were explored, including
differences in pressure,4,5 temperature,6,7 electric field,8 and the ion residence
time (age) in the drift region.9 Hybrid
IM-MS instruments of various configurations were developed by several
groups in the 1960s to study gas-phase ion chemistry.10−12 Ion mobility measurements were used by Dole in the earliest development
of electrospray ionization (ESI).13,14 Following
commercialization,15 ion mobility instrumentation
was used for structure-based characterization16 and differentiation of chemical isomers.17,18 In 1982, laser ionization was demonstrated with ion mobility as
a means of generating simplified mobility spectra based on protonated
species.19 The features which define modern
IM-MS, namely, high resolution, high sensitivity, and broad sample
compatibility, were developed in the 1990s and coincided with the
rapid development of MS in response to the introduction of ESI and
MALDI sample ionization.20−22 The last 2 decades saw significant
improvements made in the coupling of IM to MS, notably the use of
electrodynamic fields to confine, transfer, and focus ions across
disparate pressure regions into high vacuum. An interesting observation
to be made in this historical analysis is that many of the features
we associate with contemporary ion mobility technology were key aspects
of early ion mobility instrument design.

Several noteworthy
reviews of IM-MS have been published, which
cover many aspects of the IM-MS technique and range of applications.23−28 A number of influential books covering various aspects of the ion
mobility field are also available.29−34 Of particular relevance is Mason and McDaniel’s Transport
Properties of Ions in Gases,35 which was recently republished by the American Society for Mass
Spectrometry in their classic books series. Though last revised in
1988, this book is still widely considered the seminal treatment of
the motion of ions in gases.

The technologies and application
areas which IM-MS now encompasses
has expanded to such a breadth that new reviews covering IM-MS and
related areas now appear every few years in the literature. A comprehensive
and critical review of the field as a whole is no longer appropriate
nor tractable, and as such it is the intent of this review to focus
primarily on recent developments made with regard to temporally dispersive
ion mobility techniques (drift tubes and traveling wave separators),
with an emphasis on their use specifically in IM-MS instrumentation
and methods. This focus is selected because of the recent commercial
offerings in this regard that have become widely used in many research
environments. The present review is not intended to be comprehensive
of the ion mobility advances but rather focuses on time-dispersive
IM-MS instrumentation over the past few years.

Basic Ion Mobility Concepts
Electrostatic
and Electrodynamic Fields
Electrostatic
fields refer to the direct current (dc) potentials applied to one
or more components of the ion mobility separator, as in the case of
drift tube ion mobility spectrometry (DTIMS) or the differential mobility
analyzer (DMA). In this context, the electrostatic potential is the
primary separation field component driving the ion mobility dispersion.
An electrostatic field need not be uniform, such as the nonuniform
dc fields utilized in some ion mobility spectrometers for ion focusing.36−38 Additionally, many contemporary electrostatic field ion mobility
spectrometers also incorporate electrodynamic fields for ion containment
and focusing but which do not serve as a mobility-selective component
of the separation. In the context of the IM-MS community, electrodynamic
fields refer to the use of nonuniform potentials for the ion mobility
separation, including radio frequency (rf) voltages used in asymmetric
high-field IMS (FAIMS) and differential mobility spectrometry (DMS)31 and the stepped-waveforms used in traveling
wave IMS (TWIMS).39

Resolving
Power
The commonly accepted metric for quantifying
the efficiency of the ion mobility separation is resolving power,
which is based on a single peak definition of the peak centroid divided
by the width of the peak at half height. This resolving power definition
is borrowed from mass spectrometry, where mass resolving power represents
the upper mass value for which two ions differing by 1 Da can be resolved
at half their peak height.40,41 Thus, a mass spectrometer
possessing a resolving power of 100 would be able to separate at half
height two ions with masses 100 and 101 Da. The elegance of this definition
originates from the fact that mass is an intrinsic and exact physical
parameter of the analyte, and as such the mass measurement will converge
to a single value due to mass-energy quantization.

This convenience
does not translate to ion mobility resolving power because the separation
parameters differ from one ion mobility method to another, as gas-phase
mobility is an extrinsic physical property. For example, DTIMS uses
temporal terms (t/Δt) to define
resolving power,42,43 whereas TWIMS has reported resolving
power in terms of the ion collision cross section (CCS/ΔCCS),44 and in FAIMS and DMS, the compensation field-based
resolving power (Ec/ΔEc) is commonly used.45 Whereas
a universal definition of ion mobility resolving power based on either
the collision cross section or reduced mobility would be desirable,
deriving such parameters from mobility measurements required a correction
or calibration procedure that introduces additional error and complexity.
Ultimately, direct comparisons of resolving power values across different
ion mobility techniques is problematic and should be avoided unless
a common frame of comparison is used.

Ion Mobility
Techniques
As with mass spectrometry, ion mobility techniques
can be described
by one of three separation concepts (Figure 2). These are (1) time-dispersive, (2) space-dispersive, and (3) ion
confinement (trapping) and selective release. Temporally dispersive
ion mobility methods generate an arrival time spectrum, with all ions
drifting along a similar path. Spatially dispersive ion mobility methods
separate ions along different drift paths based on differences in
their mobility but imparts no significant dispersion in time. One
key feature of spatially dispersive ion mobility techniques is that
a voltage is scanned in order to obtain a broad-band ion mobility
spectrum. These include modulated high-low field ion mobility techniques
(FAIMS and DMS),46−49 uniform-field differential mobility analyzers (DMA),50,51 and a newly developed scanned-frequency ion mobility filter termed
transverse modulation ion mobility spectrometry.52 Ion confinement and release methods trap ions within a
pressurized region and selectively eject these ions based upon differences
in mobility. These ion trap-based mobility methods are a recent addition
to the ion mobility field, as the capabilities necessary to control
the position of ions under elevated pressure conditions, namely, precisely
tunable electrodynamic fields, have only recently been mastered.

Figure 2 Conceptual
diagram illustrating the three main types of ion mobility
experiments: (top) time-dispersive, (middle) space-dispersive, and
(bottom) ion confinement with selective release.

Ion mobility separation techniques which have received recent
attention
are summarized in Table 1 according to the
classification scheme of Figure 2. The associated
vector descriptions and mass spectrometry analogues provide a basis
for understanding the fundamental principles which govern the underlying
mobility separations. The observation that each ion mobility method
has an analogous mass spectrometry strategy underscores the close
relationship that these two analytical techniques share. Specific
time-dispersive technologies are elaborated more in the following
sections, with discussion focused on innovations reported in the literature
over the past 2 years. An overview of confinement and mobility-selective
release techniques is also covered, as these technologies retain many
of the same characteristics as time-dispersive ion mobility, namely,
mobility-separation of ions along the same transmission path. A broader
historical context is also provided where relevant to appreciate the
context of these contemporary advances.

Table 1 Comparison
of Ion Mobility Separation
Techniques for Time-, Space-, and Confinement Arrangementsa
 	vector
description of separation fields	 	
ion mobility
separation technique	ion motion	electric field	gas flow	analogous mass spectrometry
technology	
Temporally-Dispersive	
drift tube ion mobility spectrometry (DTIMS)/“Plasma
Chromatography”	→	→	0	time-of-flight mass spectrometer	
traveling wave IMS (TWIMS)	→	→→→	0	traveling
wave mass separator (Solitron)	
overtone mobility
spectrometry (OMS)/Tyndall “four gauze”
drift tube filter	→	→ →	0	radio-frequency (Bennett) mass filter	
Spatially-Dispersive	
high-field
asymmetric IMS (FAIMS)/differential mobility spectrometry
(DMS)	→	↑↓	→	quadrupole mass filter	
transverse modulation IMS (TMIMS)	→	→ and ↑↓	0	rf-attenuated mass filter (Farvitron)	
differential
mobility analyzer (DMA)/electrical aerosol analyzer
(EAA)	→	→	↑	magnetic sector mass dispersion	
Confinement and
Selective Release	
segmented quadrupole-gas
counterflow IMS	→	→	←	ion trap with mass-selective
ejection	
trapped ion mobility spectrometry
(TIMS)	→	←	→	
multi-pass cyclic traveling wave
IMS	→	→→→	0	multi-pass/turn TOF mass spectrometer	
ion cyclotron mobility spectrometry	→	→ →	0	
a The vector descriptions indicate
the directionality of motion or field in the particular arrangement
with multiple arrows indicating dynamics. Analogous MS strategies
to each technique are indicated.

Temporally-Dispersive
Ion Mobility
Time-dispersive
separations are an integral part of contemporary IM-MS and untargeted
approaches whereby analysis is conducted with no prior hypothesis
or specific molecular targets.53 This is
due to the fact that time dispersion is inherently a comprehensive
survey of all signals present within the observation period. This
broadband analysis has a drawback in that the sensitivity associated
with a single time dispersion event is low, requiring many (10–100)
events to be summed in order to obtain statistically significant ion
mobility measurements. Such techniques include DTIMS and TWIMS, for
which the time-of-flight mass spectrometer54 and the traveling wave “Solitron”55 are the analogous MS techniques, respectively. Also included
is the overtone mobility spectrometer (OMS) which operates in a similar
manner as the radio frequency mass spectrometer described by Bennett.56

Multidimensional coupling of different
separation techniques requires that the resolution obtained from each
prior separation is largely retained as analytes are passed to subsequent
dimensions.57 This is particularly challenging
when all analytes travel the same path during the analysis, as is
the case for time-dispersed separations. The solution is to progressively
increase the sampling frequency of each subsequent time dispersion
dimension such that multiple measurements are obtained within a fixed
temporal bin. In this way, the arrival time of each previous dimension
can be reassembled based on the integrated signal of subsequent dimensions.
This strategy is commonly utilized when coupling condensed phase separations
such as GC or LC to MS58 and has been referred
to as time scale nesting in the context of IM-MS.59,60 Figure 3 illustrates the analytical power
of nesting different separation dimensions which are offset by one
or more orders of magnitude in time. The total number of spectra depicted
for each postionization separation dimension represents a complete
analysis such that, in this example, a complete mass-resolved IM-MS
spectrum would be obtained for every time point within the chromatographic
run.

Figure 3 Nesting of analytical time scales based on speed of separation
is shown for the analytical strategies on the left combined with the
total number of potential spectra obtained through nesting the subsequent
analytical separation dimensions shown to the right.

Drift Tube Ion Mobility Spectrometry (DTIMS)
The ion
drift technique has origins in early parallel-plate drift cells which
were used extensively during the early development of the field.61−63 The familiar stacked ring electrode design (guard rings) was included
in drift tubes as early as the 1930s in order to maintain the uniform
field as the distance between the end plates was increased.64,65 The first commercial drift tube instrument was an ambient pressure
ion mobility spectrometer introduced in the 1970s as a stand-alone
instrument (IM) or coupled to a quadrupole mass filter (IM-MS).15 Following the lapse of the relevant patents,
drift tubes were commercialized by several vendors in the 1990s as
stand-alone devices which have since found widespread use as chemical
detectors in security applications. More recent developments in IM-MS
are highlighted in Figure 1.

Noteworthy
innovations to the basic drift tube design have included the use of
electrostatic36 and electrodynamic66 focusing fields across the length of the drift
region and electrodynamic focusing utilized at the exit of the drift
region to reposition radially diffuse ions along the transmission
axis of the instrument.67−69 The presence of nonuniform fields
within the ion mobility separation region has been found to have only
a minor effect on peak broadening. From a casual observation, this
is somewhat counterintuitive since focusing fields inherently perturb
the path length of the ions, but indeed the evidence indicates that
nonuniform field band broadening is only a small contribution of the
total diffusional broadening that the ions experience in the DTIMS
experiment. Recent innovations in the fabrication of resistive glass
tubes have made monolithic drift tubes an option for improving the
mechanical complexity and field uniformity of DTIMS. An early implementation
of a resistively coated ceramic drift tube demonstrated the feasibility
of this approach,70 and studies conducted
over the past few years have indicated the performance of resistive
glass to be comparable to conventional stacked ring designs.71,72 Currently, monolithic glass drift tubes have found use in an atmospheric
pressure IM-MS instrument, where they perform with favorable resolving
powers (85 t/Δt) on scale
with stacked-ring designs.73

Confining-rf
fields were initially used in ion mobility by Thomson
and co-workers in 1997 for a segmented quadrupole operated as an ion
mobility spectrometer.74,75 A recent high transmission DTIMS,
the confining-rf drift tube described by Bush and co-workers is incorporated
into a modified TWIMS platform (Synapt HDMS), with the switched waveform
circuit replaced by a uniform field voltage dividing network.66 The confining-rf drift region is 18 cm and consists
of small inner diameter rings (7 mm), while ion mobility separations
are conducted at ∼2.5 Torr of helium or nitrogen gas. This
instrument has recently been used to measure absolute collision cross
section values in helium and nitrogen,76,77 which are
important for generating molecular class-specific calibrations for
TWIMS studies.78

A recent drift tube
IM-MS instrument reported by Smith and co-workers
incorporates several innovative technologies in its design, including
electrodynamic ion funnels, printed circuit board ion optics, and
temporal multiplexing. This instrument utilizes a long drift region
(∼80 cm) operated under reduced pressure nitrogen (∼4
Torr) and subsequently performs with an ion mobility resolving power
of ∼70, which is close to the theoretical peak-broadened diffusion
limit.79 Of note is the integration of
postmobility ion activation via a segmented quadrupole interface (IM/MS),
which provides a means of obtaining mobility-correlated fragmentation
data in an untargeted mode.80 This instrument
has recently been utilized with online liquid chromatography for rapid
proteomics profiling of blood serum derived from clinical liver fibrosis
patients.81

In 2014, a high performance
drift tube IM-MS was released as a
commercial offering by Agilent Technologies (6560 ion mobility-QTOF).
A conceptual schematic of this instrument is contained in Figure 4A. This instrument combines the innovations of the
Smith IM-MS described above with a high-resolution QTOF instrument
(m/Δm up to 40 000)
and is integrated with liquid chromatography for high-throughput LC–IM-MS
experiments. Notable is that the precise control of gas pressures
and electronics in this instrument allows for the measurement of absolute
collision cross sections to a precision of better than half a percent
(0.5%). The high-throughput and high precision associated with this
instrument has facilitated the development of a large nitrogen-based
collision cross-section database.82 Complementary
with existing collision cross-section databases reporting uniform-field
measurements in helium83−89 and nitrogen gas,66,76,90 the combined result of these efforts will facilitate the use of
ion mobility measurement toward analyte classification and identification
purposes.

Figure 4 Two representative schematic diagrams for contemporary time-dispersive
IM-MS instrumentation. (A) An electrostatic drift tube (DTIMS) arrangement
similar to that described by Smith and co-workers. (B) An electrodynamic
drift tube (TWIMS) arrangement similar to that described by Giles
and co-workers. In both arrangements, hypothetical time courses are
shown to illustrate the temporal separation of smaller and larger
collision cross section ions.

While the above IM-MS instruments utilize TOFMS for mass
analysis,
Clemmer and Valentine have recently demonstrated the utility of coupling
DTIMS to an ion trap mass spectrometer.91,92 In this configuration,
the DTIMS is operated as a mobility-selective filter using timed-depletion
grids (Tyndall gates) in a manner similar to early dual-gate DTIMS
designs.2 The novel aspect of this configuration
is the capability for performing mobility-selected experiments downstream,
such as vacuum ultraviolet photodissociation,91 collision-induced dissociation (CID),93 and electron transfer dissociation.92

Traveling Wave Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TWIMS)
The
traveling wave ion mobility technique (Figure 4B) was first reported by Giles and co-workers in 200439 and released as a commercial platform in 2006
(Synapt HDMS).94 The TWIMS technology underwent
a major design revision in 2009 (Synapt G2) which included changes
to the traveling potential waveform and a 6-fold increase in the drift
region operational pressure by incorporating a helium-filled ion introduction
region prior to the TWIMS. This allowed the ion mobility separations
to be conducted at higher electric fields and gas number densities,
increasing the accessible resolving power of TWIMS by about a factor
of 4.44,95 Two additional revisions to the instrument
were released in 2011 and 2013 (Synapt G2-S and G2-Si), which retained
the same TWIMS configuration but altered the source and ion transfer
optics to improve ion transmission through the IM-MS.

Recent
technological advances made in TWIMS instrumentation have focused
on developing additional ion source and ion activation capabilities.
With TWIMS, a variety of ionization sources are now commercially accessible
for IM-MS analysis, including ESI, nanoESI, MALDI,96,97 gas-chromatography chemical ionization, and thermal-desorption corona
discharge.98,99 Collision-induced dissociation
(CID) is a standard capability on the TWIMS instrument, with options
of conducting ion activation both before (MS/IM-MS) and after (MS-IM/MS
and MS/IM/MS) the ion mobility analysis.100,101 Electron transfer dissociation (ETD) has been demonstrated in TWIMS
using dual-polarity ion reactions within the premobility ion trap
of a Synapt G2,102,103 which enables top-down experiments
to be conducted on an IM-MS instrument.104 Another novel ion activation method, surface induced dissociation
(SID), has recently been demonstrated on TWIMS by Wysocki and co-workers.105 SID replaces the multiple gas collisions of
CID with a surface, which significantly increases the accessible activation
energy as well as the efficiency of energy transfer to dissociative
fragmentation pathways.106 The SID module
developed by Wysocki and co-workers incorporates a pass-through design
such that ions can be transmitted or selectively introduced to a collision
surface for ion activation, while retaining the conventional operation
of the instrumentation in which it is integrated, including CID.107,108 Recent efforts have demonstrated selected and combined CID and SID
on a TWIMS instrument, which has revealed important structural information
regarding protein–ligand binding and noncovalently linked protein
complexes approaching the MDa mass range, which otherwise cannot be
efficiently activated using CID alone.109−113

Several efforts have been directed
at refining the data acquisition
and processing strategies necessary for operating the TWIMS analysis
in an untargeted, data-independent mode.114−116 While the majority of applications of TWIMS has utilized the ion
mobility as an analytical separation, some efforts have been made
on developing TWIMS-derived collision cross section databases to facilitate
the use of ion mobility measurements for identification and characterization
purposes. One such study details the development of a TWIMS calibration
protocol for peptides using polyalanine, which enabled the measurement
of several thousand peptide collision cross section values to be curated
with an estimated accuracy of 3–4%.117 Another study compiled 125 TWIMS collision cross section values
for metabolites and demonstrated the reproducibility across different
laboratories to be better than 5%.118 The
same group recently reported a similar cross section database of ∼200
lipids measured via TWIMS, exhibiting better than 3% interlaboratory
reproducibility for over 98% of the database composition.119 The accuracy of TWIMS calibration procedures
will continue to improve as methods are further refined in light of
new cross section data.

Overtone Mobility Spectrometry (OMS)
In 2008, Clemmer
described the development of an ion mobility spectrometer which utilized
a stepped waveform applied across a segmented drift tube (Figure 5A).120,121 The waveform produced a linear
uniform field within each drift segment, with different segments separated
using wire grids. For a continuous stream of ions introduced to the
instrument, only ions possessing a specific mobility would be synchronized
with the stepping frequency of the spectrometer, and thus the instrument
served as an ion mobility-specific filter. Because the instrument
also transmitted ions at higher order frequencies (harmonics),122 the technique was termed overtone mobility
spectrometry. As OMS operates as a mobility filter, the waveform frequency
must be scanned in order to generate a broadband mobility spectrum.
One important observation made was that the higher-order overtone
frequencies exhibited higher resolution of closely spaced peak features
but lower peak intensity due to increased ion losses as ions were
subjected to more filtering cycles. The methods necessary to obtain
structural information in the form of ion collision cross sections
and mobility-selected data from the OMS experiment was also demonstrated
in subsequent studies.123,124

Figure 5 Schematic diagrams illustrating
four emerging IM strategies: (A)
overtone ion mobility spectrometry, (B) trapped-ion mobility spectrometry,
(C) cyclic drift tube ion mobility spectrometry, and (D) cyclic traveling
wave ion mobility spectrometry. Note that these illustrations are
conceptual and do not reflect specific technical details of the actual
implementation of the technology. Refer to the text for descriptions
of each strategy.

Recent innovations in
OMS have focused on developing the fundamental
theory of the technique125 as well as the
implementation of a gridless OMS which operates with higher ion transmission.
The gridless OMS instrument replaces the 2-grid ion elimination optic
of the original design with a single pulsed ring electrode, placed
between each OMS drift segment. Additionally, a confining-rf waveform
was added across the length of the device to help mitigate diffusional
ion losses. These design considerations resulted in a significant
decrease in the size of the drift region, from ∼130 cm in the
original design to less than 30 cm in the current implementation.
Whereas the gridless OMS demonstrated attomole limits of detection,
the use of nonuniform fields significantly reduces the accuracy of
the measured collision cross section.126 The increase in sensitivity combined with the reduction in size
represents a favorable platform for portable applications, where the
decreased accuracy is not of primary concern.

Confinement
and Mobility-Selective Release
The capabilities
to trap and release ions in a mobility-selective manner parallels
the concept of mass-selective ion ejection from an ion trap. Here
we describe a novel ion mobility experiment using countering potentials
and gas flow fields as well as two cyclic ion confinement methods
which operate in a mobility-selective manner. The analogous mass spectrometers
for these techniques are the mass-selective ion trap,127 and multipass/multiturn TOF,128,129 respectively. The modular ion mobility approach detailed by Smith
and co-workers known as SLIM are also discussed, which broadly resembles
the technological development of hybrid mass spectrometers, such as
contemporary commercial ion trap instrumentation utilizing multiple
MS and ion activation stages.

Trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS)
An ion mobility
spectrometer based on mobility-selective release of ions against a
gas flow was initially described by Loboda in 2006 for an IM-QTOF
configuration. In this design, a segmented quadrupole was used as
an ion trap and ions were confined against a counterflow of gas. Mobility-selective
transmission from the trap was achieved by scanning the axial voltage
of the trap to force ions against the gas stream, generating an arrival
time spectrum. While operating under modestly low pressures (∼10
mTorr), this device was capable of achieving a resolving power of
∼40 (t/Δt).130 A similar counterflow ion mobility instrument
incorporating a high-flow wind tunnel but operated in a nontrapping
mode was also described by Agbonkonkon and Lee.131 Park and co-workers recently described the use of a stacked
ring ion trap in a mobility-selective mode, in a technique they named
trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS). TIMS utilizes opposite field-flow
vectors as the techniques described above, namely, TIMS operates using
gas-entrained ions trapped against a stopping potential. A conceptual
schematic of TIMS is contained in Figure 5B.
TIMS consists of a stack of ring electrodes, named the analyzer, whereby
each ring is divided into quadrants. A longitudinal dc field is applied
across the rings, while a quadrupolar confining-rf is applied on each
of the four quadrants of the ring stack. A steady-state flow of gas
from the ion source forces ions into the stacked ring analyzer, where
they are trapped against a counter-potential. As the longitudinal
dc potential across the analyzer is decreased, ions exit the trap
in a mobility-selective mode.132 To facilitate
ion transfer to and from the trap, the TIMS analyzer is bracketed
by electrodynamic ion funnels operated in the conventional manner.133,134 Recent results have demonstrated that TIMS performs with high resolving
power (up to 250, V/ΔV) and
can be calibrated to generate collision cross section values within
∼2% of those obtained from DTIMS.135 A novel aspect of TIMS is the capability of operation of the trap
in either a mobility-selective or conventional pass-through mode,
effectively allowing the ion mobility separations to be switched on
or off.

Cyclic DTIMS
Practical limitations in scaling the length
and electric fields associated with increasing higher resolving power
drift tube instruments has motivated the development of a cyclic drift
tube instrument.136 In its current configuration,
the cyclic DTIMS developed by Clemmer and co-workers consists of four
curved quadrants coupled together with an electrodynamic ion funnel,
which are used to continually refocus ions axially as they progress
around the ring (Figure 5C). While the cyclic
drift tube has aspects of DTIMS, the multipass nature of the technology
requires that ions be shuttled through the device using a series of
pulses which serve to “lift” ions back to a potential
energy sufficient for ion drift under gas collisions. Thus, the cyclic
DTIMS operates in the same manner as a four-segment overtone mobility
spectrometer, requiring four switching cycles for ions to make a complete
transit about the ring. Ions are introduced and released from the
ring portion of the instrument using one of two “Y”
shaped segments incorporating split lens steering. As with OMS, the
stepped nature of this technique results in a narrow mobility window
for which ions will be stable through the device. Recent optimization
aimed at synchronizing the duty cycle of the front ion trap with the
cyclic drift tube has significantly improved the sensitivity of the
instrument. As a result, the instrument has demonstrated ion trapping
for ∼100 cycles with a corresponding drift length of over 180
m and resolving powers in excess of 1000 (f/Δf).137 This extraordinarily high
resolving power does not come without analytical trade-off, as an
ion undergoing 100 transits in the device will have a residence time
on the order of several seconds, during which time no additional ions
are mobility-resolved. These throughput and band-pass limitations
are inherent to any ion trap instrument operated as a single-stage
ion separator.

Cyclic TWIMS
One of the technical
challenges of a cyclic
DTIMS is the requirement of a continually decreasing electric potential
(uniform electric field) required for the ion to drift in the presence
of gas collisions. As the ion makes a complete cycle, there is an
inherent mismatch between the start and end potential energy, necessitating
the use of pulsed sequences for a DTIMS implementation. This practical
limitation is not present in TWIMS, where ions are conveyed and separated
by a transient pulse that results in the ion entering and exiting
the drift region at the same potential. In 2014, Giles and co-workers
demonstrated the proof-of-concept for a cyclic TWIMS device which
uses a novel orthogonal ion loading configuration in its design (Figure 5D). The prototype was implemented on a commercial
TWIMS platform (Synapt G2-S), and preliminary results suggest at least
a 2-fold improvement in resolving power over conventional TWIMS. One
noteworthy feature incorporated in the reported design was the use
of a transit ring which was placed orthogonally to the primary beam
path of the instrument. In this way, a conventional TWIMS separation
could still be utilized in-line, with access to the higher resolving
power cyclic TWIMS through orthogonal ion extraction. Giles described
several novel experiments accessible using this configuration: (1)
ions bypass the cyclic device to generate a conventional TWIMS spectrum,
(2) ions transferred to the cyclic TWIMS to generate a high-resolution
broadband ion mobility spectrum, (3) mobility-selected ions released
from the cyclic TWIMS, activated or reacted, then relayed back to
the cycle for second-stage mobility analysis of the product ions.
Instead of radially symmetric ring electrodes, the orthogonal ion
separation region as well as the cyclic TWIMS spectrometer incorporate
a two-dimensional printed circuit board design which uses flat electrode
pads configured in a planar mirrored symmetry about the ion transit
region.138 This design concept bears similarities
to the structures for lossless ion manipulation described by Smith
and co-workers, which are discussed in the following section.

Structures
for Lossless Ion Manipulations (SLIM)
The
utility of tailoring electrodynamic fields which are capable of directing
ion mobility under elevated (∼1–60 Torr) gas pressures
has motivated Smith and co-workers to develop generalized and scalable
ion manipulation devices based on a modular design concept. These
devices, termed structures for lossless ion manipulations (SLIM),
utilize a novel planar electrode design consisting of linear arrays
of rectangular pads which serve to confine and transfer ions using
a combination of static and dynamic potentials (Figure 6). The development of this technology on printed circuit boards
allows rapid and low-cost prototyping of new designs. The basic component
of SLIM is a linear track comprised of an array of parallel “rung”
electrodes upon which is applied a linear dc field with a superimposed
rf to confine ions between the boards. A second array of larger guard
electrodes bracket the central track and maintain dc-only potentials
used for lateral ion confinement. The dc potential between the rung
and the guard electrodes are offset such that ions are confined within
a low energy potential well maintained in both lateral dimensions.139 The current SLIM literature describes the linear
geometry as well as two orthogonal ion turning geometries in an “elbow”
and “tee” configuration (Figure 6B–D). With a uniform dc field applied across the length of
the tracks, SLIM devices can operate as a DTIMS. Experimental resolving
powers on scale with contemporary DTIMS have been reported (∼55, t/Δt) with similar analytical performance
being observed for both linear and turn configurations.140 A noteworthy capability of the tee SLIM configuration
was mobility-selective ion extraction from the linear channel into
the turn, which enables tandem IM/IM experiments to be conducted.141,142 A rectangular ion funnel has also been demonstrated, which enables
more conventional spectrometer components to be coupled to the planar
SLIM devices.143 The SLIM design concept
is general, such that any number of ion mobility techniques (TWIMS,
FAIMS) and operational modes (tandem IM/IM, ion shuttling for reaction
chemistry, etc.) can be implemented on a SLIM-based architecture,
as with the cyclic TWIMS device described above.

Figure 6 Conceptual arrangement
for structures for lossless ion manipulations
(SLIM): (A) layout showing the guard electrodes for ion confinement
and the rung electrodes for ion separation, (B) hypothetical arrangement
for a linear SLIM device, (C) hypothetical arrangement for an elbow
or turn SLIM device, and (D) hypothetical arrangement integrating
functionality of both parts B and C or that may be used as a switch.

Broad Innovations in Ion
Mobility Methodologies
Unconventional Gases and Temperatures
As with the early
discovery era of ion mobility research (discussed in the introduction), recent efforts from several laboratories
have explored the analytical utility of conducting ion mobility separations
under varied drift gas compositions and temperatures. Some important
and recent studies are noted below.

Whereas the vast majority
of time-dispersive ion mobility experiments are conducted using helium,
nitrogen, or ambient air (which is mostly nitrogen), there is motivation
for conducting ion mobility separations with other, less conventional
drift gases to improve separation selectivity. Work by Hill and co-workers
demonstrated the analytical benefits of various drift gases on separating
select classes of small molecules with DTIMS. Of the four drift gases
investigated (helium, nitrogen, argon, and carbon dioxide), carbon
dioxide demonstrated the highest resolving powers and generally gave
the best separation resolution for the small molecules investigated,
but results were dependent on the chemical class of molecules. In
an extreme example, the ion mobility spectra of chloroaniline and
iodoaniline exhibited inverted drift time orders upon changing the
drift gas from helium to carbon dioxide, underscoring both the power
of drift gas selectivity but also the need to tailor the use of drift
gases to the specific system being studied.144,145 Hill has also demonstrated the only known ion mobility-based separation
of chiral molecules by doping the drift gas of an ambient pressure
DTIMS with a chiral gas modifier, 2-butanol.146 This experiment is likely specific to atmospheric pressure DTIMS
due to the high number of ion–gas interactions which are expected
to be needed to satisfy the chiral-interaction orientation necessary
to achieve ion mobility separation, via the “Pirkle Rule”.
Russell and co-workers investigated the utility of various drift gases
(helium, nitrogen, argon, and methane) for separating tryptic peptides
in reduced pressure DTIMS. Their results demonstrated selectivity
played less of a role for separating ions within the same biomolecular
class (peptides) but also suggested that the extended interactions
afforded by higher drift gas polarizability (in this case, nitrogen
vs helium) benefitted the peak capacity of the separation.147 More recent work by Barran and co-workers explored
the use of neon and argon in addition to helium and nitrogen for separating
the conformations of the protein, myoglobin. Their work utilized both
DTIMS and TWIMS and demonstrated the impact of the drift gas on the
measured collision cross-section as well as provided some initial
evidence for different protein gas-phase conformations existing under
alterative drift gas conditions. Also noteworthy in this work is the
similarities of the separations observed between DTIMS and TWIMS.148 Whereas the separation mechanism between DTIMS
and TWIMS are distinct, both ion mobility techniques are subject to
similar influences of the analyte gas-phase mobility, and so comparable
separations under various drift gases are expected.149 The gas composition’s influence on separation in
TWIMS was initially investigated by Creaser and co-workers for both
pure and binary mixed gases (helium, nitrogen, argon, and carbon dioxide).
Higher resolutions were observed for the more polarizable gases, specifically
argon and carbon dioxide, suggesting a reliance on the mobility of
the ion on accessible resolving power, as observed in DTIMS. An interesting
observation was the highest resolutions were accessed in an argon/nitrogen
mixture (85/15%), suggesting a previously unappreciated balancing
of mass-transfer terms in the TWIMS separation mechanism.150 Recent results from Eberlin and co-workers
have demonstrated the use of carbon dioxide in TWIMS to separate disaccharide
isomers which cannot be separated using conventional nitrogen gas.151 This work was extended to petroleomics studies,
where carbon dioxide exhibited enhanced selectivity for separating
the polar constituents of crude petroleum.152 Additional studies by Eberlin, Campuzano, and co-workers describe
the most comprehensive evaluation of alternative TWIMS drift gases
reported to date, which included helium, nitrogen, carbon dioxide,
nitrous oxide, and ethene. For isomers which exhibited large differences
in calculated electron densities, the use of the more polar drift
gases (carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide) resulted in substantial improvements
in TWIMS separation. Drift time inversion in TWIMS was also observed
for two isomeric forms of imidazolium (monomer and dimer), upon conducting
separations in helium, nitrogen, and nitrous oxide.153 These studies represent only a small fraction of potential
drift gases and gas mixtures (binary and beyond) which can be explored
through currently accessible ion mobility instrumentation.

The
vast majority of time-dispersive ion mobility experiments are
conducted under ambient (room) temperature conditions; however, there
are important motivations for conducting ion mobility at various drift
gas temperatures. These include intrinsic changes to the ion structure
induced under high temperature conditions as well as practical analytical
benefits associated with analyte selectivity and decreased band-broadening
observed at subambient temperatures. Pioneering experiments by Jarrold
and Bowers developed the analytical foundations of variable-temperature
ion mobility for resolving isomeric silicon clusters and electronic
state populations of transition metals.154−156 The electronic state separations are notable in that ion mobility
separations are facilitated strictly by long-range ion-neutral interactions
at low temperature, which were accessed through liquid-nitrogen cooling
of the drift cell to temperatures as low as 77 K. This electronic
state selectivity of transition metals by low temperature ion mobility
has been subsequently studied by several laboratories157,158 and has been utilized in the study of state-specific ion-neutral
reaction chemistry in the ion mobility experiment.159,160 Russell and co-workers extended low-temperature ion mobility studies
to differentiating the electronic state configurations of atomic and
organic ions.161 Several noteworthy ion
mobility experiments have also been conducted under liquid helium
temperature.162−164 In addition to low-temperature, Jarrold
also developed methods to study the unfolding of proteins induced
in an elevated temperature drift tube, utilizing drift gas temperatures
as high as ∼900 K.165−168 Recent work by Russell and May describe
a variable-temperature drift tube with mass-selective capabilities
which demonstrated improved resolving power and separation selectivity
when operated at subambient temperatures approaching 80 K.169,170 A modified version of this instrument was recently utilized in the
analysis of protein ions where the low temperature facilitates the
isolation of specific gas-phase hydrated171,172 and structural populations.173 Barran
and co-workers have recently utilized a variable-temperature DTIMS
based on the design of Kemper and Bowers174 to study temperature-resolved changes in protein conformation in
response to various extents of salt adduction.175 All of the variable-temperature ion mobility instruments
reported in the literature thus far have concerned DTIMS and utilized
helium as the drift gas. In the context of the breadth of ion mobility
technologies and innovations now being reported, the potential for
variable-temperature ion mobility studies is just now beginning to
be realized.

Spectral Deconvolution Strategies
A contemporary focus
area for IM-MS research has been the development of acquisition strategies
and data deconvolution procedures which extract additional information
from partially resolved ion mobility data using the orthogonal information
obtained from postmobility ion fragmentation. The basic premise of
such strategies is that isomeric molecules which are not adequately
resolved in the ion mobility analysis can exhibit isomeric-specific
differences in their fragmentation spectra. Thus, diagnostic fragment
ions which appear either at different dissociation energy thresholds
or different temporal locations along the ion mobility distribution
can be used to identify the presence of unresolved isomers. In one
such approach, Pagel and co-workers progressively increased the CID
energy (2 V lab frame) following ion mobility analysis in a technique
they termed “energy-resolved ion mobility”. For a series
of isomeric carbohydrates, the dissociation energy thresholds varied
for different diagnostic fragment ions such that the total number
of isomers contained within the unresolved mobility could be determined.176 In a series of other studies, Solouki and co-workers
used information obtained from postmobility CID to deconvolute isomers
present in unresolved ion mobility profiles. By mapping differences
in the fragmentation profiles across the ion mobility ATD, it was
demonstrated that the ion mobility spectrum of each individual isomer
could be reconstructed. Noteworthy in this work was that data could
be acquired for a fixed collision energy in a data-independent fragmentation
mode.177−179 A similar chemometric strategy reported
by Berrueta and co-workers was developed and utilized in an untargeted
fragmentation analysis of flavonoids.180 Clemmer and co-workers demonstrated a similar fragmentation-correlated
approach using a mobility-selective DTIMS coupled to an ion trap instrument.
Here, discrete mobility windows are fragmented using resonant CID
to generate the mobility-correlated fragmentation data, which is then
used for isomer differentiation.93,181

Multiplexing
Multiplexing in the context of ion mobility
refers to strategies which yield multiple, analytically useful mobility
dispersions within a single instrument acquisition cycle. Practically,
this improves the analytical throughput, requiring less analysis time
in order to arrive at the same signal intensity. Additionally, multiplexing
improves the sensitivity of the analysis if the same observation time
is used, since the increased number of measurements leads to an improvement
in the signal-to-noise ratio. Multiplexing strategies can be divided
into one of two categories: (1) temporal and (2) spatial multiplexing.

Temporal Multiplexing
Temporal multiplexing is a form
of oversampling whereby a pulsed ion mobility technique, such as DTIMS
or TWIMS, is operated using multiple, or the equivalent of multiple,
time-dispersive pulses within a single acquisition cycle. Because
each mobility measurement cycle is scaled only for a single time-dispersion
spectrum, temporal multiplexing results in spectral overlap. Thus,
temporal multiplexing requires that the initial ion pulse sequence
be known in order to deconvolute the overlapped mobility spectrum.
Fourier, Hadamard, and more general pseudorandom sequences are the
most commonly used deconvolution algorithms for time-multiplexing
ion mobility.

Ion mobility multiplexing was first reported by
Hill and co-workers in 1985 using Fourier transform on a dual-gate
atmospheric pressure drift tube instrument (ap-DTIMS).182 Subsequent work was reported using Hadamard
transform,183 which is less prone to peak
distortion (rippling artifacts) which occurs during the FT processing.184 More recent work by Hill has reported the performance
of an ap-DTIMS-MS instrument utilizing Hadamard multiplexing. Their
latest results demonstrated about an order of magnitude improvement
in signal-to-noise, with a corresponding 1–2 order increase
in the limits of detection for a blood plasma standard. Additionally
in this work, the multiplexing resulted in higher resolving power
values due to peak narrowing following Hadamard deconvolution.185 This instrument utilized a resistive glass
drift tube (discussed previously), and compliments several noteworthy
multiplexing studies conducted by Fernandez and co-workers using stand-alone
DTIMS.186,187

Several reports from Smith and co-workers
detail the implementation
of temporal multiplexing on a high performance DTIMS-MS instrument.
A novel aspect of this instrument is the use of an ion funnel trap
prior to the drift tube,188 which allows
ion accumulation to be conducted as opposed to ion depletion which
occurs in more conventional (Bradbury–Nielsen and Tyndall-type)
ion gates. Another important feature of the Smith implementation of
ion mobility multiplexing is the use of extended pseudorandom binary
sequences which account for practical diffusion limits imposed by
the ion mobility dispersion event.189,190 Recent efforts
have focused on developing algorithms to detect and remove the signal
artifacts created during multiplex deconvolution,191 which is one of the fundamental limitations imposed by
time-multiplexing deconvolution strategies.

Spatial Multiplexing
In spatial multiplexing, several
discrete analysis channels are used in parallel in order to increase
sample throughput. This is the conventional mode of operation for
a magnetic sector mass spectrometer utilizing an array detector.192 Spatial multiplexing has been demonstrated
for spatially dispersive ion mobility techniques such as DMA193 and FAIMS.194 In
the authors’ laboratory, a spatially multiplexed DTIMS based
on eight discrete analysis channels is under development in order
to improve several analytical figures-of-merit for temporally dispersed
ion mobility, including throughput and sensitivity.195 This 8-channel prototype incorporates a uniform field drift
tube array bracketed by electrodynamic ion funnels, and the ion optics
share common electronic connections within a single vacuum system,
as depicted in Figure 7. While still in its
early stage of development, this instrument represents the first implementation
of spatial multiplexing for DTIMS.

Figure 7 Schematic diagram illustrating a spatial
multiplexing strategy
for DTIMS through combining eight individual IM channels: (A) diagram
showing ion simulations through the interfacing ion funnels and the
drift tube array and (B) cutaway showing component details of the
spatially multiplexed instrument.

Tandem Ion Mobility Analysis
The coupling of multiple
stages of ion mobility dispersion provides a means of conducting mobility-selected
experiments. Such experiments were suggested as early as Blanchard
in 1989,38 but the more recent work by
Clemmer and co-workers has developed the analytical foundations for
the technique and brought tandem IM/IM to the forefront of the field.
The tandem instrumentation used in these studies utilized two or three
discrete drift tubes and time-depletion ion gates in order to conduct
mobility-selective experiments. Each drift region was ∼100
cm and utilized electrodynamic ion funnels between stages to improve
sensitivity. Ion activation could be accomplished in the interface
regions of the spectrometers, enabling several novel modes of operation.
For a two-tandem drift tube configuration, experiments include (1)
high resolution IM-MS analysis by combining both drift tubes into
a single IM stage, (2) IM-MS analysis of mobility-selected ions (IM-IM-MS),
(3) IM-MS analysis of fragment ions originating from mobility-selected
precursor populations (IM/IM-MS), and (4) mobility-resolved fragmentation
of mobility-selected fragment ions (IM/IM/MS).196 Tandem ion mobility experiments utilizing a third drift
tube stage were also demonstrated similar versatility, but with the
distinct ability to combine multiple drift lengths improved the resolving
power and subsequent temporal resolution for mobility-selection.197 In addition to ion fragmentation, a novel aspect
of tandem IM experiments is the capability for inducing structural
changes to mobility-resolved ion populations, by imparting energy
below the threshold for dissociation. In addition to providing practical
analytical benefits by shifting signal to regions of unoccupied space,198,199 the low-energy activation experiment have provided insight into
the structural heterogeneity of gas-phase proteins.200−202 In a broader scope, the experimental versatility and practical improvements
in peak capacity afforded by these tandem ion mobility strategies
have found utility for the analysis of complex samples, such as blood
plasma,203,204 lipids,205 and
petroleum.206

Hill and co-workers
have previously reported the combination of a drift tube to an FTICR
instrument207 and more recently demonstrated
a novel tandem arrangement of an atmospheric pressure drift tube coupled
to a TWIMS instrument (DTIMS-TWIMS-MS).208 As with the Clemmer implementation, mobility selection is achieved
through a timed-ion depletion method using two ion gates such that
a narrow population of ions is transmitted through the first IM stage.209,210 One novel aspect of this current drift tube/traveling wave integration
was the capability of operating either ion mobility stage as a pass-through
device, allowing the platform to operate as a conventional DTIMS-MS
or TWIMS-MS and enabling direct comparisons to be made between the
two techniques. Their results demonstrated that while the DTIMS separation
exhibited higher resolving power as compared with TWIMS, the spectral
features and corresponding relative intensities between the two IM
techniques were similar. Another benefit of this design was the inclusion
of the first MS stage in TWIMS enables simultaneous mobility and mass-selective
experiments to be conducted, such as IM-MS analysis of two-stage fragmentation
of mobility and mass-selected ions (IM/MS/IM-MS). This instrument
was capable of distinguishing different carbohydrate isomers in a
mixture based on selecting specific regions of the mixed ion mobility
arrival time distribution, underscoring the unique information which
can be obtained through mobility-selective experiments.208

In 2005, Smith and co-workers demonstrated
a novel coupling of
differential mobility (cylindrical FAIMS) with DTIMS. Unlike the tandem
experiments described previously, differential mobility and DTIMS
exhibits orthogonality between separation dimensions as a result of
different parameters driving each separation (field-dependent differences
in mobility vs intrinsic low-field mobility, respectively). Initial
results demonstrated high orthogonality between FAIMS and DTIMS, with
a combined peak capacity of ∼500 for tryptic peptides.211 Implementation of ion activation between the
FAIMS and DTIMS enabled mobility-resolved structural unfolding studies
to be conducted on proteins. Reduced orthogonality due to correlation
of the two separation dimensions was observed in these studies; however,
the higher resolutions accessed by FAIMS was combined with the measurement
precision of DTIMS in order to characterize separated protein conformers
by collision cross section.212,213 More recently, Hill
and Yost demonstrated the combination of DTIMS with cylindrical FAIMS
and an ion trap MS. In this arrangement, the DTIMS was placed in front
of the FAIMS-MS instrument such that FAIMS-MS could be performed on
low-field, mobility-selected ions. Whereas the throughput was not
optimal in this arrangement, initial results demonstrated additional
mobility-resolved isomers could be accessed with FAIMS.214 To date, the literature reporting the coupling
of differential mobility to DTIMS utilized relatively low resolving-power
FAIMS devices (<20 Ec/ΔEc). Significant improvements in the resolving
power of planar chip-based differential mobility now being reported
by Shvartsburg and Smith are expected to have high analytical value
in the future development of hybrid ion mobility instrumentation.45,215−218

Concluding Remarks
The present review
has focused on instrumentation and strategies
for time-dispersive IM-MS measurements. Historical milestones leading
to the conceptualization, design, and construction of these contemporary
IM-MS platforms are provided for context in the emerging technologies
that are now readily available to the broad research community. It
should be underscored that the ion mobility spectrometry and IM-MS
field has reached a point that it is insufficient to describe an experiment
as simply utilizing ion mobility, but rather specific implementation
of instrumentation is required to understand how it is utilized, similar
to the broad field of mass spectrometry itself. Against this landscape,
the analogous mass spectrometry strategies for each implementation
were presented to better illustrate the general concepts of how each
of the ion mobility techniques is performed. The application space
for ion mobility is vast, not only as a means for extraordinarily
high throughput separations integrated with MS detection but also
as a means for measuring ion structure and physical properties thereof.
Although many of these applications are beyond the scope of this review,
the richness of these measurements in many research fields is demonstrated
by the rapidly expanding literature using IM-MS over recent years.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Jody C. May, Associate
Director of
the Center for Innovative Technology and Research Assistant Professor,
completed his B.S. degree in Chemistry at the University of Central
Arkansas and his Ph.D. in analytical chemistry from Texas A&M
University. His research interests focus on the development of next
generation ion mobility-mass spectrometry instrumentation and allied
developments, for which he has over 15 years of experience.

John A. McLean, Director
of the Center
for Innovative Technology and Stevenson Professor of Chemistry, completed
his B.S. Chemistry degree at the University of Michigan, his Ph.D.
at the George Washington University, and completed postdoctoral training
at Texas A&M University prior to joining the faculty at Vanderbilt
University. His research focuses on the intersection of instrumentation
and bioinformatics in support of systems, synthetic, and chemical
biology.

Acknowledgments
The authors are not aware
of influences that would affect
the objectivity of this review but do acknowledge collaborative arrangements
with Agilent Technologies (Santa Clara, CA) and Waters Corporation
(Milford, MA). The Center for Innovative Technology acknowledges an
Agilent Thought Leader Award. The Center for Innovative Technology
is a Waters Center of Innovation. The authors thank Katrina L. Leaptrot
for assistance in the preparation of figures. J.C.M. thanks Stacy
D. Sherrod for help in developing time-multiplexing strategies pertaining
to the preparation of this manuscript. Financial support for this
work was provided by the National Institutes of Health National Center
for Advancing Translational Sciences (NIH-NCATS Grant 4UH3TR000491-3),
the National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation program
(NSF/MRI Grant CHE-1229341), the Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical
Biology, the Vanderbilt Institute for Integrative Biosystems Research
and Education, and Vanderbilt University.
==== Refs
References
Thomson J. J. ; Rutherford E. 
Philos. Mag. 
1896 , 42 , 392 –407 .
Tyndall A.
M. ; Starr L. H. ; Powell C. F. 
Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 
1928 , 121 , 172 –184 .
Tyndall A. M. ; Powell C. F. 
Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 
1930 , 129 , 162 –180 .
Dempster A. 
Phys. Rev. (Ser.
I) 
1912 , 34 , 53 –57 .
Haselfoot C. E. 
Proc. R. Soc.
London, Ser. A 
1912 , 87 , 350 –357 .
Phillips P. 
Proc. R. Soc. London,
Ser. A 
1906 , 78 , 167 –191 .
Erikson H.
A. 
Phys. Rev. 
1914 , 3 , 151 .
Loeb L. B. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
1916 , 2 , 345 –350 .16576162 
Tyndall A.
M. ; Grindley G. C. 
Proc. R. Soc.
London, Ser. A 
1926 , 110 , 358 –364 .
Barnes W. S. ; Martin D. W. ; McDaniel E. W. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1961 , 6 , 110 –111 .
McAfee K. B. Jr.; Edelson D. 
Proc. Phys. Soc. 
1963 , 81 , 382 .
Bloomfield C. H. ; Hasted J. B. 
Discuss. Faraday Soc. 
1964 , 37 , 176 –184 .
Dole M. ; Hines R. L. ; Mack L. L. ; Mobley R. C. ; Ferguson L. D. ; Alice M. B. 
Macromolecules 
1968 , 1 , 96 –97 .
Dole M. ; Mack L. L. ; Hines R. L. ; Mobley R. C. ; Ferguson L. D. ; Alice M. B. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1968 , 49 , 2240 –2249 .
Cohen M. J. ; Karasek F. W. 
J. Chromatogr. Sci. 
1970 , 8 , 330 –337 .
Lin S. N. ; Griffin G. W. ; Horning E. C. ; Wentworth W. E. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1974 , 60 , 4994 –4999 .
Carr T. W. 
J. Chromatogr.
Sci. 
1977 , 15 , 85 –88 .
Hagen D. F. 
Anal. Chem. 
1979 , 51 , 870 –874 .
Lubman D. M. ; Kronick M. N. 
Anal. Chem. 
1982 , 54 , 1546 –1551 .
von
Helden G. ; Wyttenbach T. ; Bowers M. T. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom.
Ion Processes 
1995 , 146–147 , 349 –364 .
Smith R. D. ; Loo J. A. ; Loo R. R. O. ; Busman M. ; Udseth H. R. 
Mass Spectrom.
Rev. 
1991 , 10 , 359 –452 .
Wittmer D. ; Chen Y. H. ; Luckenbill B. K. ; Hill H. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
1994 , 66 , 2348 –2355 .
Kliman M. ; May J. C. ; McLean J. A. 
Biochim. Biophys.
Acta: Mol. Cell Biol.
Lipids 
2011 , 1811 , 935 –945 .
Zhong Y. ; Hyung S.-J. ; Ruotolo B. T. 
Expert Rev. Proteomics 
2012 , 9 , 47 –58 .22292823 
Lanucara F. ; Holman S. W. ; Gray C. J. ; Eyers C. E. 
Nat. Chem. 
2014 , 6 , 281 –294 .24651194 
Wyttenbach T. ; Pierson N. A. ; Clemmer D. E. ; Bowers M. T. 
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 
2014 , 65 , 175 –96 .24328447 
Bohrer B. C. ; Merenbloom S. I. ; Koeniger S. L. ; Hilderbrand A. E. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 1 , 293 –327 .
Lapthorn C. ; Pullen F. ; Chowdhry B. Z. 
Mass Spectrom. Rev. 
2012 , 32 , 43 –71 .22941854 
Ion Mobility Spectrometry-Mass Spectrometry: Theory and Applications ; Wilkins C. L. , Trimpin S.  , Eds.; CRC Press : Boca Raton, FL , 2010 .
Eiceman G. A. ; Karpas Z. ; Hill H. H. Jr Ion Mobility
Spectrometry , 3 rd ed.; CRC Press : Boca Raton, FL , 2013 ; p 444 .
Shvartsburg A. A.  Differential
Mobility Spectrometry: Nonlinear Ion Transport and Fundamentals of
FAIMS ; CRC Press : Boca Raton, FL , 2009 .
Carr T. W.  Plasma Chromatography ; Plenum Press : New
York , 1984 ; p 259 .
Mason E. A. ; McDaniel E. W.  The Mobility and Diffusion
of Ions in Gases ; Wiley : New York , 1973 ; p 372 .
McDaniel E. W.  Collision Phenomena
in Ionized Gases ; Wiley : New York , 1964 .
Mason E. A. ; McDaniel E. W.  Transport Properties
of Ions in Gases ; John Wiley & Sons : New York , 1988 ; p 560 .
Gillig K. J. ; Ruotolo B. T. ; Stone E. G. ; Russell D. H. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2004 , 239 , 43 –49 .
Blase R. C. ; Silveira J. A. ; Gillig K. J. ; Gamage C. M. ; Russell D. H. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2011 , 301 , 166 –173 .
Blanchard W. C. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom.
Ion Processes 
1989 , 95 , 199 –210 .
Giles K. ; Pringle S. D. ; Worthington K. R. ; Little D. ; Wildgoose J. L. ; Bateman R. H. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2004 , 18 , 2401 –2414 .15386629 
Marshall A. G. ; Hendrickson C. L. 
Annu. Rev. Anal.
Chem. 
2008 , 1 , 579 –599 .
Xian F. ; Hendrickson C. L. ; Marshall A. G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 708 –719 .22263633 
Rokushika S. ; Hatano H. ; Baim M. A. ; Hill H. H. Jr.
Anal.
Chem. 
1985 , 57 , 1902 –1907 .
Siems W. F. ; Wu C. ; Tarver E. E. ; Hill H. H. Jr.; Larsen P. R. ; McMinn D. G. 
Anal. Chem. 
1994 , 66 , 4195 –4201 .
Giles K. ; Williams J. P. ; Campuzano I. 
Rapid Commun. Mass
Spectrom. 
2011 , 25 , 1559 –1566 .21594930 
Shvartsburg A. A. ; Seim T. A. ; Danielson W. F. ; Norheim R. ; Moore R. J. ; Anderson G. A. ; Smith R. D. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 109 –114 .23345059 
Buryakov I. A. ; Krylov E. V. ; Nazarov E. G. ; Rasulev U. K. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom.
Ion Processes 
1991 , 128 , 143 –148 .
Kolakowski B. M. ; Mester Z. 
Analyst 
2007 , 132 , 842 –864 .17710259 
Purves R.
W. ; Guevremont R. ; Day S. ; Pipich C. W. ; Matyjaszczyk M. S. 
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
1998 , 69 , 4094 –4105 .
Lambertus G. R. ; Fix C. S. ; Reidy S. M. ; Miller R. A. ; Wheeler D. ; Nazarov E. ; Sacks R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 7563 –7571 .16316163 
de
la Mora J. F. ; Ude S. ; Thomson B. A. 
Biotechnol. J. 
2006 , 1 , 988 –997 .16941442 
Hogan C. J. ; Ruotolo B. T. ; Robinson C. V. ; Fernandez de la Mora J. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2011 , 115 , 3614 –3621 .21395304 
Vidal-de-Miguel G. ; Macía M. ; Cuevas J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 7831 –7837 .22924856 
May J. C. ; Goodwin C. R. ; McLean J. A. 
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 
2015 , 31 , 117 –121 .25462629 
Cotter R. J.  Time-of-Flight Mass
Spectrometry: Instrumentation and Applications in Biological Research ; American Chemical Society : Washington, DC , 1997 ; p 350 .
Tung L. S. ; Barr W. L. ; Lowder R. S. ; Post R. F. 
J. Appl. Phys. 
1996 , 80 , 3646 –3655 .
Bennett W. H. 
J. Appl. Phys. 
1950 , 21 , 143 –149 .
Giddings J. C. 
J. High Resolut.
Chromatogr. 
1987 , 10 , 319 –323 .
Enke C. G. ; Stults J. T. ; Holland J. F. ; Pinkston J. D. ; Allison J. ; Watson J. T. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom.
Ion Phys. 
1983 , 46 , 229 –232 .
Liu X. ; Plasencia M. ; Ragg S. ; Valentine S. J. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Brief. Funct. Genomics
Proteomics 
2004 , 3 , 177 –186 .
Valentine S. J. ; Kulchania M. ; Barnes C. A. S. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2001 , 212 , 97 –109 .
Zeleny J. 
Philos. Mag. 
1898 , 46 , 120 –154 .
Langevin P. 
Ann. Chim. Phys. 
1903 , 28 , 289 –384 .
Loeb L. 
Phys.
Rev. 
1921 , 17 , 89 –115 .
Tyndall A.
M. ; Powell C. F. 
Proc. R. Soc.
London, Ser. A 
1931 , 134 , 125 –136 .
Bradbury N. 
Phys. Rev. 
1933 , 44 , 883 –890 .
Bush M. F. ; Hall Z. ; Giles K. ; Hoyes J. ; Robinson C. V. ; Ruotolo B. T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 9557 –9565 .20979392 
Wyttenbach T. ; Kemper P. R. ; Bowers M. T. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2001 , 212 , 13 –23 .
Kemper P. R. ; Dupuis N. F. ; Bowers M. T. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2009 , 287 , 46 –57 .
Tang K. ; Shvartsburg A. A. ; Lee H. N. ; Prior D. C. ; Buschbach M. A. ; Li F. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Anderson G. A. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 3330 –3339 .15889926 
Carrico J. P. ; Sickenberger D. W. ; Spangler G. E. ; Vora K. N. 
J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum. 
1983 , 16 , 1058 –1062 .
Kwasnik M. ; Fuhrer K. ; Gonin M. ; Barbeau K. ; Fernández F. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2007 , 79 , 7782 –7791 .17854161 
Kwasnik M. ; Fernández F. M. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2010 , 24 , 1911 –1918 .20533321 
Kaplan K. ; Graf S. ; Tanner C. ; Gonin M. ; Fuhrer K. ; Knochenmuss R. ; Dwivedi P. ; Hill H. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 9336 –9343 .20964441 
Javahery G. ; Thomson B. A. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
1997 , 8 , 697 –702 .
Guo Y. ; Wang J. ; Javahery G. ; Thomson B. A. ; Siu K. W. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 266 –275 .15623305 
Campuzano I. ; Bush M. F. ; Robinson C. V. ; Beaumont C. ; Richardson K. ; Kim H. ; Kim H. I. 
Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 84 , 1026 –1033 .22141445 
Salbo R. ; Bush M. F. ; Naver H. ; Campuzano I. ; Robinson C. V. ; Pettersson I. ; Jorgensen T. J. ; Haselmann K. F. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 26 , 1181 –1193 .22499193 
Bush M. F. ; Campuzano I. D. G. ; Robinson C. V. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 7124 –7130 .22845859 
Ibrahim Y. M. ; Baker E. S. ; Danielson W. F. III; Norheim R. V. ; Prior D. C. ; Anderson G. A. ; Belov M. E. ; Smith R. D. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2014 , 10.1016/j.ijms.2014.07.034 .
Ibrahim Y. M. ; Prior D. C. ; Baker E. S. ; Smith R. D. ; Belov M. E. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2010 , 293 , 34 –44 .20596241 
Baker E. S. ; Burnum-Johnson K. E. ; Jacobs J. M. ; Diamond D. L. ; Brown R. N. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Orton D. J. ; Piehowski P. D. ; Purdy D. E. ; Moore R. J. ; Danielson W. F. ; Monroe M. E. ; Crowell K. L. ; Slysz G. W. ; Gritsenko M. A. ; Sandoval J. D. ; LaMarche B. L. ; Matzke M. M. ; Webb-Robertson B.-J. M. ; Simons B. C. ; McMahon B. J. ; Bhattacharya R. ; Perkins J. D. ; Carithers R. L. ; Strom S. ; Self S. G. ; Katze M. G. ; Anderson G. A. ; Smith R. D. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2014 , 13 , 1119 –1127 .24403597 
May J. C. ; Goodwin C. R. ; Lareau N. M. ; Leaptrot K. L. ; Morris C. B. ; Kurulugama R. T. ; Mordehai A. ; Klein C. ; Barry W. ; Darland E. ; Overney G. ; Imatani K. ; Stafford G. C. ; Fjeldsted J. C. ; McLean J. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 2107 –2116 .24446877 
Valentine S. J. ; Ewing M. A. ; Dilger J. M. ; Glover M. S. ; Geromanos S. ; Hughes C. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2011 , 10 , 2318 –2329 .21417239 
Dilger J. M. ; Valentine S. J. ; Glover M. S. ; Ewing M. A. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 330–332 , 35 –45 .
Dilger J. M. ; Valentine S. J. ; Glover M. S. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 768 –779 .23512423 
Hilderbrand A. E. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 11802 –11809 .16852449 
Valentine S. J. ; Counterman A. E. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
1999 , 10 , 1188 –1211 .10536822 
Tao L. ; McLean J. R. ; McLean J. A. ; Russell D. H. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2007 , 18 , 1727 –1728 .
Fenn L. S. ; Kliman M. ; Mahsut A. ; Zhao S. R. ; McLean J. A. 
Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 
2009 , 394 , 235 –244 .19247641 
Shah A. R. ; Agarwal K. ; Baker E. S. ; Singhal M. ; Mayampurath A. M. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Kangas L. J. ; Monroe M. E. ; Zhao R. ; Belov M. E. ; Anderson G. A. ; Smith R. D. 
Bioinformatics 
2010 , 26 , 1601 –1607 .20495001 
Zucker S. M. ; Lee S. ; Webber N. ; Valentine S. J. ; Reilly J. P. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2011 , 22 , 1477 –1485 .21953250 
Donohoe G.
C. ; Maleki H. ; Arndt J. R. ; Khakinejad M. ; Yi J. ; McBride C. ; Nurkiewicz T. R. ; Valentine S. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 8121 –8128 .25068446 
Lee S. ; Li Z. ; Valentine S. J. ; Zucker S. M. ; Webber N. ; Reilly J. P. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 309 , 154 –160 .22518092 
Pringle S. D. ; Giles K. ; Wildgoose J. L. ; Williams J. P. ; Slade S. E. ; Thalassinos K. ; Bateman R. H. ; Bowers M. T. ; Scrivens J. H. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2007 , 261 , 1 –12 .
Zhong Y. ; Hyung S.-J. ; Ruotolo B. T. 
Analyst 
2011 , 136 , 3534 –3541 .21445388 
Ridenour W. B. ; Kliman M. ; McLean J. A. ; Caprioli R. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 1881 –1889 .20146447 
Matusch A. ; Fenn L. S. ; Depboylu C. ; Klietz M. ; Strohmer S. ; McLean J. A. ; Becker J. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 3170 –3178 .22413784 
McEwen C. N. ; McKay R. G. ; Larsen B. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 7826 –7831 .16316194 
Barrère C. ; Maire F. ; Afonso C. ; Giusti P. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 9349 –9354 .23043679 
El-Hawiet A. ; Kitova E. N. ; Klassen J. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 7637 –7644 .23895586 
Rathore D. ; Dodds E. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 1600 –1609 .25001382 
Williams J. P. ; Brown J. M. ; Campuzano I. ; Sadler P. J. 
Chem. Commun. 
2010 , 46 , 5458 –5460 .
Rand K. D. ; Pringle S. D. ; Morris M. ; Engen J. R. ; Brown J. M. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2011 , 22 , 1784 –1793 .21952892 
Lermyte F. ; Konijnenberg A. ; Williams J. P. ; Brown J. M. ; Valkenborg D. ; Sobott F. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 343 –350 .24408179 
Zhou M. ; Dagan S. ; Wysocki V. H. 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 4336 –4339 .
Cooks R. G. ; Terwilliger D. T. ; Ast T. ; Beynon J. H. ; Keough T. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1975 , 97 , 1583 –1585 .
Galhena A. S. ; Dagan S. ; Jones C. M. ; Beardsley R. L. ; Wysocki V. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 1425 –1436 .18247517 
Zhou M. ; Huang C. ; Wysocki V. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 6016 –6023 .22747517 
Zhou M. ; Wysocki V. H. 
Acc. Chem. Res. 
2014 , 47 , 1010 –1018 .24524650 
Zhou M. ; Jones C. M. ; Wysocki V. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 8262 –8267 .23855733 
Quintyn R. S. ; Zhou M. ; Dagan S. ; Finke J. ; Wysocki V. H. 
Int. J. Ion Mobility Spectrom. 
2013 , 16 , 133 –143 .
Zhou M. ; Dagan S. ; Wysocki V. H. 
Analyst 
2013 , 138 , 1353 –1362 .23324896 
Ma X. ; Lai L. B. ; Lai S. M. ; Tanimoto A. ; Foster M. P. ; Wysocki V. H. ; Gopalan V. 
Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2014 , 53 , 11483 –11487 .
Law K. P. ; Lim Y. P. 
Expert Rev. Proteomic 
2013 , 10 , 551 –566 .
Shah V. ; Castro-Perez J. M. ; McLaren D. G. ; Herath K. B. ; Previs S. F. ; Roddy T. P. 
Rapid Commun.
Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 27 , 2195 –2200 .23996393 
Shliaha P. V. ; Bond N. J. ; Gatto L. ; Lilley K. S. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2013 , 12 , 2323 –2339 .23514362 
Lietz C. B. ; Yu Q. ; Li L. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 2009 –2019 .24845359 
Paglia G. ; Williams J. P. ; Menikarachchi L. ; Thompson J. W. ; Tyldesley-Worster R. ; Halldórsson S. ; Rolfsson O. ; Moseley A. ; Grant D. ; Langridge J. ; Palsson B. O. ; Astarita G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 3985 –3993 .24640936 
Paglia G. ; Angel P. M. ; Williams J. P. ; Richardson K. ; Olivos H. J. ; Thompson J. W. ; Menikarachchi L. C. ; Lai S. ; Walsh C. ; Moseley M. A. ; Plumb R. S. ; Grant D. F. ; Palsson B. Ø. ; Langridge J. I. ; Geromanos S. J. ; Astarita G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 10.1021/ac503715v .
Kurulugama R. ; Nachtigall F. M. ; Lee S. ; Valentine S. J. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2009 , 20 , 729 –737 .19195909 
Valentine S. J. ; Stokes S. T. ; Kurulugama R. ; Nachtigall F. M. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2008 , 20 , 738 –750 .19230705 
Valentine S. ; Kurulugama R. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2011 , 22 , 804 –816 .21472515 
Lee S. ; Ewing M. A. ; Nachtigall F. M. ; Kurulugama R. T. ; Valentine S. J. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2010 , 114 , 12406 –12415 .20822127 
Kurulugama R. T. ; Nachtigall F. M. ; Valentine S. J. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2011 , 22 , 2049 –2060 .21952760 
Ewing M. A. ; Zucker S. M. ; Valentine S. J. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 615 –621 .23468094 
Zucker S. M. ; Ewing M. A. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 10174 –10179 .24125033 
March R. E. ; Todd J. F.  Quadrupole Ion Trap
Mass Spectrometry , 2 nd ed.; Wiley : New York , 2005 .
Wollnik H. ; Przewloka M. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom.
Ion Processes 
1990 , 96 , 267 –274 .
Toyoda M. ; Okumura D. ; Ishihara M. ; Katakuse I. 
J. Mass Spectrom. 
2003 , 38 , 1125 –1142 .14648820 
Loboda A. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2006 , 17 , 691 –699 .16529942 
Agbonkonkon N.  Counter-Flow
Ion Mobility Analysis: Design, Instrumentation and Characterization . Dissertation, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, 2007 .
Michelmann K. ; Silveira J. A. ; Ridgeway M. E. ; Park M. A. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2015 , 14 –24 .25331153 
Hernandez D. R. ; DeBord J. D. ; Ridgeway M. E. ; Kaplan D. A. ; Park M. A. ; Fernandez-Lima F. 
Analyst 
2014 , 139 , 1913 –1921 .24571000 
Fernandez-Lima F. A. ; Kaplan D. A. ; Suetering J. ; Park M. A. 
Int. J. Ion Mobility Spectrom. 
2011 , 14 , 93 –98 .
Silveira J. A. ; Ridgeway M. E. ; Park M. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 5624 –5627 .24862843 
Merenbloom S. I. ; Glaskin R. S. ; Henson Z. B. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 1482 –1487 .19143495 
Glaskin R. S. ; Ewing M. A. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 7003 –7008 .23855480 
Giles K. ; Wildgoose J. L. ; Pringle S. ; Garside J. ; Carney P. ; Nixon P. ; Langridge D. J.   In 62nd Annual ASMS
Conference on
Mass Spectrometry and Allied Topics , Baltimore, MD, June
15–19, 2014 .
Tolmachev A. V. ; Webb I. K. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Garimella S. V. B. ; Zhang X. ; Anderson G. A. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 9162 –9168 .25152178 
Webb I. K. ; Garimella S. V. B. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Chen T.-C. ; Zhang X. ; Norheim R. V. ; Prost S. A. ; LaMarche B. ; Anderson G. A. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 9169 –9176 .25152066 
Webb I. K. ; Garimella S. V. B. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Chen T.-C. ; Zhang X. ; Cox J. T. ; Norheim R. V. ; Prost S. A. ; LaMarche B. ; Anderson G. A. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 9632 –9637 .25222548 
Garimella S. V. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Webb I. K. ; Tolmachev A. V. ; Zhang X. ; Prost S. A. ; Anderson G. A. ; Smith R. D. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 1890 –1896 .25257188 
Chen T.-C. ; Webb I. K. ; Prost S. A. ; Harrer M. B. ; Norheim R. V. ; Tang K. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 10.1021/ac503564c .
Asbury G. R. ; Hill H. H. Jr.
Anal.
Chem. 
2000 , 72 , 580 –584 .10695145 
Matz L. M. ; Hill H. H. ; Beegle L. W. ; Kanik I. 
J.
Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2002 , 13 , 300 –307 .11951967 
Dwivedi P. ; Wu C. ; Matz L. ; Clowers B. H. ; Siems W. F. ; Hill H. H. Jr.
Anal.
Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 8200 –8206 .17165808 
Ruotolo B.
T. ; McLean J. A. ; Gillig K. J. ; Russell D. H. 
J. Mass Spectrom. 
2004 , 39 , 361 –367 .15103649 
Jurneczko E. ; Kalapothakis J. ; Campuzano I. D. G. ; Morris M. ; Barran P. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 8524 –8531 .22974196 
May J. C. ; McLean J. A. 
Int. J. Ion Mobility Spectrom. 
2013 , 16 , 85 –94 .
Howdle M. D. ; Eckers C. ; Laures A. M. F. ; Creaser C. S. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2010 , 298 , 72 –77 .
Fasciotti M. ; Sanvido G. B. ; Santos V. G. ; Lalli P. M. ; McCullagh M. ; de Sá G. F. ; Daroda R. J. ; Peter M. G. ; Eberlin M. N. 
J. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 47 , 1643 –1647 .23280753 
Fasciotti M. ; Lalli P. M. ; Klitzke C. F. ; Corilo Y. E. ; Pudenzi M. A. ; Pereira R. C. L. ; Bastos W. ; Daroda R. J. ; Eberlin M. N. 
Energy Fuels 
2013 , 27 , 7277 –7286 .
Lalli P. M. ; Corilo Y. E. ; Fasciotti M. ; Riccio M. F. ; de Sa G. F. ; Daroda R. J. ; Souza G. H. M. F. ; McCullagh M. ; Bartberger M. D. ; Eberlin M. N. ; Campuzano I. D. G. 
J. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 48 , 989 –997 .24078238 
Jarrold M. F. ; Bower J. E. ; Creegan K. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1989 , 90 , 3615 –3628 .
Kemper P. R. ; Bowers M. T. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
1990 , 1 , 197 –207 .
Kemper P. R. ; Bowers M. T. 
J. Phys. Chem. 
1991 , 95 , 5134 –5146 .
Iceman C. ; Rue C. ; Moision R. M. ; Chatterjee B. K. ; Armentrout P. B. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2007 , 18 , 1196 –1205 .17379536 
Ibrahim Y. ; Alsharaeh E. ; Mabrouki R. ; Momoh P. ; Xie E. ; El-Shall M. S. 
J. Phys. Chem.
A 
2008 , 112 , 1112 –1124 .18205338 
Taylor W.
S. ; May J. C. ; Lasater A. S. 
J. Phys. Chem. A 
2003 , 107 , 2209 –2215 .
Taylor W. S. ; Matthews C. C. ; Hicks A. J. ; Fancher K. G. ; Chen L. C. 
J. Phys. Chem.
A 
2012 , 116 , 943 –951 .22257138 
Verbeck G. F. ; Gillig K. J. ; Russell D. H. 
Eur. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2003 , 9 , 579 –587 .
Bohringer H. ; Arnold F. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1982 , 77 , 5534 –5541 .
Kobayashi N. ; Kojima T. ; Kaneko Y. 
J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 
1988 , 57 , 1528 –1531 .
Sanderson J. ; Tanuma H. ; Kobayashi N. ; Kaneko Y. 
J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 
1993 , 26 , L465 –L470 .
Kinnear B. S. ; Hartings M. R. ; Jarrold M. F. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2001 , 123 , 5660 –5667 .11403597 
Kaleta D. T. ; Jarrold M. F. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2003 , 107 , 14529 –14536 .
Sudha R. ; Kohtani M. ; Jarrold M. F. 
J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2005 , 109 , 6442 –6447 .16851718 
Jarrold M.
F. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2007 , 9 , 1659 –1671 .17396176 
May J. C. ; Russell D. H.   In Ion Mobility-Mass
Spectrometry: Theory and Applications ; Wilkins C. L. , Trimpin S.  , Eds.; CRC Press : Boca Raton, FL , 2010 ; pp 137 –151 .
May J. C. ; Russell D. H. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2011 , 22 , 1134 –1145 .21953095 
Silveira J. A. ; Servage K. A. ; Gamage C. M. ; Russell D. H. 
J. Phys. Chem.
A 
2013 , 117 , 953 –961 .23323891 
Servage K. A. ; Silveira J. A. ; Fort K. L. ; Russell D. H. 
J. Phys. Chem.
Lett. 
2014 , 5 , 1825 –1830 .
Fort K. L. ; Silveira J. A. ; Pierson N. A. ; Servage K. A. ; Clemmer D. E. ; Russell D. H. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2014 , 118 , 14336 –14344 .25402008 
McCullough B. J. ; Kalapothakis J. ; Eastwood H. ; Kemper P. ; MacMillan D. ; Taylor K. ; Dorin J. ; Barran P. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 6336 –6344 .18627133 
Berezovskaya Y. ; Porrini M. ; Barran P. E. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 345–347 , 8 –18 .
Hoffmann W. ; Hofmann J. ; Pagel K. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 471 –479 .24385395 
Zekavat B. ; Solouki T. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 1873 –1884 .22948903 
Zekavat B. ; Miladi M. ; Becker C. ; Munisamy S. ; Solouki T. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 1355 –1365 .23836377 
Brantley M. ; Zekavat B. ; Harper B. ; Mason R. ; Solouki T. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 1810 –1819 .25096279 
Garmón-Lobato S. ; Abad-García B. ; Sánchez-Ilárduya M. B. ; Romera-Fernández M. ; Berrueta L. A. ; Gallo B. ; Vicente F. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2013 , 771 , 56 –64 .23522113 
Zhu F. ; Lee S. ; Valentine S. J. ; Reilly J. P. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 2158 –2166 .23055077 
Knorr F.
J. ; Eatherton R. L. ; Siems W. F. ; Hill H. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
1985 , 57 , 402 –406 .3977072 
Clowers B. H. ; Siems W. F. ; Hill H. H. Jr.; Massick S. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 44 –51 .16383309 
St. Louis R. H. ; Siems W. F. ; Hill H. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
1992 , 64 , 171 –177 .
Zhang X. ; Knochenmuss R. ; Siems W. F. ; Liu W. ; Graf S. ; Hill H. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 86 , 1661 –1670 .24364754 
Harris G. A. ; Kwasnik M. ; Fernández F. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 1908 –1915 .21319810 
Kwasnik M. ; Caramore J. ; Fernández F. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 1587 –1594 .19133785 
Clowers B. H. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Prior D. C. ; Danielson W. F. ; Belov M. E. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 612 –623 .18166021 
Belov M. E. ; Clowers B. H. ; Prior D. C. ; Danielson W. F. III; Liyu A. V. ; Petritis B. O. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 5873 –5883 .18582088 
Clowers B.
H. ; Belov M. E. ; Prior D. C. ; Danielson W. F. ; Ibrahim Y. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 2464 –2473 .18311942 
Prost S. A. ; Crowell K. L. ; Baker E. S. ; Ibrahim Y. M. ; Clowers B. H. ; Monroe M. E. ; Anderson G. A. ; Smith R. D. ; Payne S. H. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 2020 –2027 .24796262 
Cody R. B. ; Tamura J. ; Finch J. W. ; Musselman B. D. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
1994 , 5 , 194 –200 .24222549 
Zimmermann S. ; Abel N. ; Baether W. ; Barth S. 
Sens. Actuators,
B 
2007 , 125 , 428 –434 .
Tang F. ; Wang X. ; Zhang L. ; Yan Z. 
Sci.
China Technol.
Sci. 
2010 , 53 , 3225 –3231 .
May J. C. ; Leaptrot K. L. ; Sundarapandian S. ; McLean J. A.   In 60th Annual ASMS
Conference on Mass Spectrometry and Allied Topics , Vancouver,
BC, May 20–24, 2012 .
Koeniger S. L. ; Merenbloom S. I. ; Valentine S. J. ; Jarrold M. F. ; Udseth H. R. ; Smith R. D. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 4161 –4174 .16771547 
Merenbloom S. I. ; Koeniger S. L. ; Valentine S. J. ; Plasencia M. D. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 2802 –2809 .16615796 
Merenbloom S. I. ; Bohrer B. C. ; Koeniger S. L. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 79 , 515 –522 .17222015 
Koeniger S. L. ; Bohrer B. C. ; Valentine S. J. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 1918 –1927 .18290667 
Pierson N.
A. ; Valentine S. J. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2010 , 114 , 7777 –7783 .20469905 
Bohrer B. C. ; Atlasevich N. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2011 , 115 , 4509 –4515 .21449553 
Pierson N. A. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2014 , 10.1016/j.ijms.2014.07.012 .
Kurulugama R. T. ; Valentine S. J. ; Sowell R. A. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Proteomics 
2008 , 71 , 318 –331 .18590839 
Valentine S. J. ; Kurulugama R. T. ; Bohrer B. C. ; Merenbloom S. I. ; Sowell R. A. ; Mechref Y. ; Clemmer D. E. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2009 , 283 , 149 –160 .
Trimpin S. ; Tan B. ; Bohrer B. C. ; O’Dell D. K. ; Merenbloom S. I. ; Pazos M. X. ; Clemmer D. E. ; Walker J. M. 
Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2009 , 287 , 58 –69 .
Li Z. ; Valentine S. J. ; Clemmer D. E. 
J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2011 , 22 , 817 –827 .21472516 
Tang X. ; Bruce J. E. ; Hill H. H. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2007 , 21 , 1115 –1122 .17318922 
Li H. ; Bendiak B. ; Siems W. F. ; Gang D. R. ; Hill H. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 2760 –2769 .23330948 
Clowers B. H. ; Hill H. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 5877 –5885 .16159117 
Clowers B. H. ; Hill H. H. 
J. Mass Spectrom. 
2006 , 41 , 339 –351 .16498610 
Tang K. ; Li F. ; Shvartsburg A. A. ; Strittmatter E. F. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 6381 –6388 .16194103 
Shvartsburg A. A. ; Li F. ; Tang K. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 3304 –3315 .16689531 
Shvartsburg A. A. ; Tang K. ; Smith R. D.   In Mass
Spectrometry
of Proteins and Peptides: Methods and Protocols ; Methods in Molecular Biology , Vol. 492 ; Lipton M. S. , Pasa-Tolic L.  , Eds.; Humana
Press : Totowa, NJ , 2008 ; pp 417 –445 .
Pollard M. J. ; Hilton C. K. ; Li H. ; Kaplan K. ; Yost R. A. ; Hill H. H. Jr.
Int. J. Ion Mobility
Spectrom. 
2011 , 14 , 15 –22 .
Shvartsburg A. A. ; Li F. ; Tang K. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 3706 –3714 .16737227 
Shvartsburg A. A. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 83 , 23 –29 .21117630 
Shvartsburg A. A. ; Danielson W. F. ; Smith R. D. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 2456 –2462 .20151640 
Shvartsburg A. A. ; Smith R. D. ; Wilks A. ; Koehl A. ; Ruiz-Alonso D. ; Boyle B. 
Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 6489 –6495 .19583243
