
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical Society 10.1021/ac4024318Technical NoteSimultaneous
Light-Directed Synthesis of Mirror-Image
Microarrays in a Photochemical Reaction Cell with Flare Suppression Sack Matej †Kretschy Nicole †Rohm Barbara ‡§Somoza Veronika ‡§Somoza Mark M. *†† Institute of Inorganic
Chemistry, University of Vienna, Währinger Strasse 42, A-1090 Vienna, Austria‡ Department
of Nutritional and Physiological Chemistry, University of Vienna, Althanstraße 14 (UZA II), A-1090 Vienna, Austria§ Christian Doppler
Laboratory for Bioactive Aroma Compounds, University
of Vienna, Althanstraße
14, A-1090 Vienna, Austria* E-mail: mark.somoza@univie.ac.at.22 08 2013 17 09 2013 85 18 8513 8517 02 08 2013 22 08 2013 Copyright © 2013 American
Chemical Society2013American
Chemical SocietyTerms of Use

The use of photolabile protecting
groups is a versatile and well-established
means of synthesizing high complexity microarrays of biopolymers,
such as nucleic acids and peptides, for high-throughput analysis.
The synthesis takes place in a photochemical reaction cell which positions
the microarray substrate at the focus of the optical system delivering
the light and which can be connected to a fluidics system which delivers
appropriate reagents to the surface in synchrony with the light exposure.
Here we describe a novel photochemical reaction cell which allows
for the simultaneous synthesis of microarrays on two substrates. The
reaction cell positions both substrates within the limited depth-of-focus
of the optical system while maintaining the necessary reagent flow
conditions. The resulting microarrays are mirror images of each other
but otherwise essentially identical. The new reaction cell doubles
the throughput of microarray synthesis without increasing the consumption
of reagents. In addition, a secondary flow chamber behind the reaction
cell can be filled with an absorbent and index-matching fluid to eliminate
reflections from light exiting the reaction cell assembly, greatly
reducing unintended light exposure that reduces the sequence fidelity
of the microarray probes.

document-id-old-9ac4024318document-id-new-14ac-2013-024318ccc-price
==== Body
Microarrays
are versatile and
widely used analytical tools with the capacity to simultaneously detect
several hundred thousand to millions of different biomolecules simultaneously.
Microarrays can be made by presynthesizing the probe molecule and
spotting it on a surface using appropriate tethering chemistry, but
modern microarrays are made with in situ methods
in which the biomolecules are synthesized directly on the substrate
from their monomer components, which allows for high probe densities,
high uniformity, and high reproducibility.

Light-directed in situ synthesis of microarrays
derives from the photolithographic technology used in the semiconductor
industry in combination with combinatorial chemistry based on the
selective removal of photolabile protecting groups. The technology
was first commercialized by Affymetrix, which used the photolabile
MeNPOC group on the 5′ end of DNA phosphoramidites to synthesize
high-density DNA microarrays for genomics applications.1 The synthesis technology was improved with the
use of optical systems incorporating digital micromirror devices (DMD)
to replace physical masks in the patterning of light on the microarray
substrate, as well as by the use of the NPPOC photolabile group, which
has significantly improved photodeprotection yield.2−7 This maskless array synthesis (MAS) technology, originally used
for DNA microarray synthesis has also been extended for the synthesis
of RNA, aptamer,8 and peptide microarrays.9−13

In situ microarray synthesis is robust and
efficient
in comparison with spotted synthesis; however, the total synthesis
time and the consumption of solvents and reagents are still a significant
economic constraint. In addition, the light-directed chemistry is
sensitive to stray light in the system, which leads to unintended
photodeprotection which degrades the sequence fidelity of the microarray
probes.7,14 Here we present an improved microfluidic
photochemical reaction cell for use in light-directed synthesis that
addresses both of these concerns. This reaction cell places two microarray
substrates within the depth-of-focus plane of the optical system,
so that two microarrays are synthesized simultaneously using the same
reagents. The microarrays thus synthesized are mirror images of each
other but otherwise essentially identical. The microarrays can be
used independently but may have additional utility as matched pairs
for experiments that would benefit from very close data comparisons;
the quality of in situ synthesized microarrays, however,
is very high and in most common applications, variations in quality
between microarrays synthesized at different times are not experimentally
relevant. In addition, the reaction cell assembly has a secondary
chamber that can be filled with a light-absorbing and index-matching
fluid to eliminate reflections that are a primary source of sequence
error in light-directed synthesis.

Materials and Methods
Photochemical
Reaction Cell Concept and Assembly
The
reaction cell needs to position the two microarray substrates at the
focal plane of the optical system. There is some tolerance to this
positioning: the depth of focus of the imaging optics. The imaging
optics are a 1:1 Offner relay system,15,16 an off-axis
conjugate system composed of two spherical concentric mirrors, primary
and secondary. The system was designed with a numerical aperture (NA)
of 0.08 to result in a resolving power of 2.7 μm. This resolving
power is sufficient since it is significantly smaller than the size
of individual mirrors of the digital micromirror device (DMD), 13
μm × 13 μm, separated by a 0.7 μm gap and is
similar or better than those of most available microarray scanners.
A low value of numerical aperture lowers the cost of the primary mirror
but, more importantly, reduces the amount of scattered light originating
from dust and imperfections in the optical system, which is proportional
to NA2. Unintended photodeprotection, from scattering,
diffraction, and local flare, is the largest source of sequence error
in light-directed microarray synthesis.7 The depth of focus is intrinsically limited by diffraction to <∼λ/NA2, ∼60 μm, but in practice, the positioning of
the microarray substrates in the focal plane is somewhat less restricted
due to limited resolution of microarray scanners. Therefore, the primary
optical constraint in the simultaneous light-directed synthesis of
microarray pairs is that the two substrates must be within ∼60–100
μm of each other, depending on the scanner resolution.

A secondary constraint is imposed by reagent delivery. A larger reaction
cell volume requires larger flow rates of solvents and reagents, the
consumption of which scales with cell volume. Since our original reaction
cell (for synthesizing microarrays on a single surface) had a depth
of 70 μm and worked well with a standard oligonucleotide synthesizer
(Expedite 8909), we took this value as a starting point. Thus, the
reaction cell should consist of two standard microarray substrates
(75 mm × 25 mm × 1 mm) separated by a uniform gap of ∼70
μm. The microarray substrates form the entrance and exit windows
for the ultraviolet light used in the synthesis. Reagents need to
be introduced into this gap and to uniformly flow across the surface
before exiting. We used these criteria to design and built the reaction
cell shown in Figure 1. The reaction cell assembly
consists of a black anodized aluminum support block, a quartz block,
the two microarray substrates, two gaskets, and a clamping frame and
screws to hold the parts together. Reagent delivery tubes attach to
the underside of the quartz block and connect to the oligonucleotide
synthesizer.

Figure 1 Exploded and section view of reaction cell assembly. The
reaction
cell is formed by two microarray substrates (75 mm × 25 mm ×
1 mm) separated by a 50 μm PTFE gasket. Reagents enter and exit
the cell via two 0.9 mm holes through the lower substrate. These holes
are coupled to the inlets/outlets via an additional 250 μm thick
FFKM gasket separating the lower substrate from the quartz block.
The lower gasket forms a chamber that can be independently filled
with a light-absorbing and index-matching fluid to reduce reflections
from both quartz surfaces and from the back surface of the lower substrate.
The thickness of the upper and lower gaskets in the section view have
been exaggerated by a factor of 2 for visual clarity.

The support block forms the rigid structure for
the assembly of
the reaction cell and allows for the reaction cell to be precisely
positioned in the focal plane. Three alignment points make contact
with ball-tipped, high-precision adjustment screws (Newport AJS127-0.5H)
in the optical system. After initial adjustment of the screws, the
reaction cell assembly can be quickly and reproducibly positioned.
The support blocks hold a quartz block. The quartz block has four
0.8 mm through-holes (two inlets, two outlets) that are countersunk
on the back side to accommodate microfluidics ports. The microfluidics
ports (IDEX 6-32 Coned NanoPort Assemblies) were turned on a lathe
to reduce their diameter to 6.4 mm and attached within each countersunk
hole with common cyanoacrylate adhesive. The front and back surfaces
of the quartz block were machined to a surface parallelism error of
<30 arc sec and polished to an optical flatness of λ/4 (Mindrum
Precision). During reaction cell assembly, the lower gasket is placed
on the quartz surface. This gasket forms the lower chamber, which
can be filled via two of the fluidics ports. Prior to microarray synthesis,
this chamber can be filled with an index-matching and light absorbing
fluid to prevent light reflections from light exiting the reaction
chamber. In the legacy reaction cell design, an antireflective coating
on the back surface of the quartz block can reduce the back reflection
to a minimum of about 0.25% when new, but this value is typically
larger, ∼1%, due to the presence of dust, chemical films, and
scratches. This 0.25–1% value is sufficient to make this unintended
light exposure the largest source of error after diffraction, but
unlike diffraction, the error is not confined primarily to the gaps
between microarray features.7 An alternative
strategy to reduce back reflections is to fill the lower chamber with
an index-matching fluid with dissolved chromophores which absorb the
light exiting the reaction chamber and which either convert the light
to heat or Stokes shift it beyond the absorption band of the light-labile
group.

The lower gasket has two holes that align with two of
holes in
the quartz block. These holes couple the corresponding fluidics ports
to the microarray synthesis cell. This gasket is made from 250 μm
thick Chemraz 584 perfluoroelastomer (FFKM), cut to shape with a laser
cutter (Spirit GX). The microarray synthesis cell is a chamber consisting
of two glass substrates separated by a very thin gasket. This chamber
is accessed via two 1 mm holes, in the lower substrates, which align
with the holes in the lower gasket.

The thickness of the upper
gasket determines the depth of the photochemical
reaction cell and therefore needs to be ∼70 μm thick,
chemically resistant and sufficiently elastic to form a seal for the
duration of the synthesis, up to ∼12 h for an array of 70mers.
These requirements are quite exceptional and we were unable to find
any references to such thin gaskets in the scientific or engineering
literature. A perfluoroelastomer, such as Chemraz, would likely work,
but the manufacturer is unable to make them thinner than 250 μm.
We tried expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE), which is commonly
used in gasket applications due to its chemical resistance and ability
to compress to form a seal, but found seepage through the gasket,
presumably due to its porous nature. In the end we found that the
common PTFE tape used for plumbing applications works well. This tape
is made from unsintered PTFE and is therefore sufficiently compressible
to form a seal but not porous. PTFE tape is made in many thicknesses
and densities, which allowed for some experimentation. We initially
used ∼100 μm (120 μm uncompressed) PTFE with a
density of ∼1.4 g/cm3 (Gasoila yellow tape), sintered
PTFE has a density of about 2 g/cm3, but found some loss
of focus when microarrays were scanned at a resolution of 2.5 μm.
Another problem with the 100 μm gap were indications that reagents
were flowing in a channel through the center of the reaction cell
rather than sweeping the whole surface. This was particularly apparent
with the helium drying step, which was not capable of fully removing
solvent from the corners of the reaction cell. Switching to thinner
and lower density PTFE tape (Gasoila Industrial Strength SD, ∼0.7
g/cm3) gave a thickness of ∼50 μm under compression.
With this thickness, both of the paired arrays produce sharp scans
with resolution limited only by the 2.5 μm pixel size of the
scanner and both reagent and helium flow sweep uniformly across the
entire surface of both substrates. The 50 μm PTFE gaskets are
also formed with a laser cutter. Because of their thinness, they are
too delicate to be reusable but can be made quickly and inexpensively.

Microarray Synthesis and Hybridization
Schott Nexterion
Glass D slides functionalized with N-(3-triethoxysilylpropyl)-4-hydroxybutryamide
(Gelest SIT8189.5). The arrays with holes were drilled with a 0.9
mm diamond bit and washed and rinsed in an ultrasonic bath prior to
functionalization. The slides were loaded in a metal staining rack
and completely covered with a 500 mL of a solution of 10 g of the
silane in 95:5 (v/v) ethanol–water and 1 mL of acetic acid.
The slides were gently agitated for 4 h and then rinsed twice for
20 min with gentle agitation in the same solution but without the
silane. The slides were then drained and cured overnight in a preheated
vacuum oven (120 °C). After cooling to room temperature, the
slides were stored in a desiccator cabinet until use. Microarrays
were synthesized directly on the slides using a maskless array synthesizer,
which consists of an optical imaging system that used a digital micromirror
device to deliver patterned ultraviolet light near 365 nm to the synthesis
surface. Microarray layout and oligonucleotide sequences are determined
by selective removal of the NPPOC photocleavable 5′-OH protecting
group. Reagent delivery and light exposures are synchronized and controlled
by a computer. The chemistry is similar to that used in conventional
solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis. The primary modification is
the use of NPPOC phosphoramidites. Upon absorption of a UV photon,
and in the presence of a weak organic base, e.g., 1% (m/v) imidazole
in DMSO, the NPPOC group comes off, leaving a 5′-terminal hydroxyl
which is able to react with an activated phosphoramidite in the next
cycle. The DNA sequences on the microarrays in this project were synthesized
with a light exposure dose of 4.5 J/cm2, with coupling
time of 40 s at monomer concentrations of 30 mM. After synthesis,
the microarrays were deprotected in 1:1 (v/v) ethylenediamine in ethanol
for 2 h at room temperature, washed twice with distilled water, dried
with argon, and stored in a desiccator until hybridization.

Microarrays were hybridized in an adhesive chamber (SecureSeal SA200,
Grace Biolabs) with a solution consisting of 0.3 pmol of 5′-Cy5-labeled
probe and 200 μg of acetylated BSA in 400 μL of MES buffer
(100 mM MES, 1 M NaCl, 20 mM EDTA, 0.01% Tween-20). After 2 h of rotation
at 42 °C, the chamber was removed and the microarrays were vigorously
washed in a 50 mL centrifuge tube with 30 mL of nonstringent wash
buffer (SSPE; 0.9 M NaCl, 0.06 M phosphate, 6 mM EDTA, 0.01% Tween-20)
for 2 min and then with stringent wash buffer (100 mM MES, 0.1 M NaCl,
0.01% Tween-20) for 1 min. The microarrays were then dipped for a
few seconds in a final wash buffer (0.1× SSC) and then dried
with a microarray centrifuge. Arrays were scanned with a Molecular
Devices GenePix 4400A at a resolution of 2.5 μm.

Detection and
Suppression of Reflected Light
To test
the possibility of eliminating reflected light reaching the synthesis
area, a small piece of radiochromic film (Far West Technology, FWT-60-20f),
with a 2 mm punched hole, was placed in the reaction cell. A 9.5 mm
metal disk with a 1 mm pinhole (Edmund Optics, 39730) was aligned
over the hole in the film to serve as a physical mask. The entire
reaction cell assembly was tilted by ∼7° to move the reflection
spot away from the mask hole. The lower chamber was filled with either
DMSO (control) or UV absorbers dissolved in DMSO or dichloromethane.
The UV absorbers (beta carotene, 9-methylanthracene, and riboflavin)
were chosen for high extinction coefficients near 365 nm, high Stokes
shift, low fluorescence quantum yield, and solubility in DMSO. The
synthesis cell was exposed using all mirrors, with an exposure of
60 J/cm2 (80 mW/cm2 for 750 s).

Results
and Discussion
Synthesis of Mirror-Image Microarrays
Simultaneous
synthesis of mirror-image microarrays in this microfluidic photochemical
reaction chamber produces high-quality microarrays with little additional
cost or effort beyond those of the single microarray synthesis of
the legacy method. The primary concern with this method is that both
arrays are in focus. To test the image quality of paired microarrays,
we initially synthesized simple microarrays of 30mers (GTC ATC ATC
ATG AAC CAC CCT GGT CTT TTT), hybridized them with labeled complementary
oligonucleotides and scanned them at high resolution. The results
of one such experiment is shown in Figure 2. The top row shows pixel-level close-ups from both of the arrays.
Each white square corresponds to a microarray feature synthesized
with a single DMD mirror. In both close-ups, the features are individually
resolved, and the 0.7 μm gap between features are also clearly
visible. The middle row shows plots of the scan image intensity along
a horizontal line through the center of each of the pixel-level close-ups.
The intensity drops by ∼1000-fold between the center of hybridized
pixels and unhybridized pixels, which is a typical signal/background
for this type of microarray. The gap between immediately adjacent
hybridized pixels is visible as a drop in intensity of about 20%.
This interstitial intensity is due to the limited resolution of the
scanner (2.5 μm), which leads to image pixels that derive most
of their intensity from the adjacent bright microarray features. Diffraction
also contributes significantly to intensity in gaps between microarray
features, about 40% of the intensity of adjacent features when both
features are exposed, and about 20% of the intensity of an adjacent
feature when only one of the features is exposed.7 The vertical sawtooth pattern probably originates from
signal latency during rastering by the scanner. The microarrays are
fully resolved within the constraints of scanner resolution and diffraction.
The bottom row of Figure 2 shows 3-D surface
intensity plots of the same close-ups. From the perspective of common
microarray use, the each of the mirror image microarrays from the
pair can be used as an individual microarray, but in some experimental
contexts requiring close comparisons, matched pairs might be used
to increase confidence in the comparison.

Figure 2 Scanned images and pixel
intensities from two mirror-image microarrays
synthesized simultaneously. Figures on the left are from the lower
substrate (closest to quartz block in Figure 1), and those on the right are from the upper substrate. Top row:
3 × 6 array of features from the center of a 1024 × 768
array, scanned at 2.5 μm. Each features measures 13 μm
× 13 μm and are separated by a 0.7 μm gap. Middle
row: Intensity profiles of lines drawn horizontally through the close-ups
above. Lower row: 3D surface intensity plots of the same close-ups.

Blocking Reflections
The use of a light-absorbing fluid
in the lower chamber resulted in the complete blockage of reflected
light. Initial trials with 9-methylanthracence and riboflavin in DMSO
were only partially successful due to incomplete absorption of violet
light from the mercury lamp. Most of the photodeprotection of NPPOC
results from the 365 nm line, but the mercury lines at 405 and 436
nm are also transmitted through the optical system and result in measurable
deprotection. Beta carotene was able to completely absorb the incident
light and prevent any reflection. Beta carotene is insufficiently
soluble in DMSO but is highly soluble in dichloromethane,17 which also has an index of refraction similar
to that of glass. Figure 3 shows the effect
of 5.5 mM beta carotene in dichloromethane. The control experiment
(left film) has DMSO in the lower chamber and clearly shows the reflection
from the light transmitted through the 1 mm pinhole as a round exposed
spot on the lower right-hand side. Another reflection is also apparent
on the left side of the circle; this originates from transmission
outside the pinhole disk that is not entirely absorbed by the radiochromic
film. The film on the right shows that the beta carotene solution
completely suppresses the reflections.

Figure 3 Visualization of light
reflected into the synthesis chamber from
the back surface of the quartz block and the complete suppression
thereof using a light-absorbing fluid in the lower chamber. A 9.5
mm metal disk with a 1 mm diameter pinhole was used to mask radiochromic
film in the synthesis chamber. The pinhole was aligned with a 2 mm
hole in the film to allow the passage of light (60 J/cm2), and the reaction cell assembly was tilted 7° to direct the
reflection away from the hole. With the secondary chamber filled with
a nonabsorbent fluid (left), there is a clear reflection to the lower
right of the hole. When the secondary chamber is filled with a light-absorbing
fluid, the reflection is completely suppressed (right).

There are four principle sources of unintended
photodeprotection:
(1) global scattering, (2) edge scattering, (3) local flare (which
includes reflections), and (4) diffraction.7 Global scattering from imperfections and dust in the optical system
is relatively small and results in a contrast ratio of better than
1/2500. Edge scattering originates primarily from the edges of the
micromirrors and has a similar magnitude as global scattering. Diffraction
is an intrinsic limitation of all imaging systems and results in partial
exposure (∼20%) of the area of the synthesis surface corresponding
to the gaps between mirrors. Local scattering is primarily due to
reflections of light exiting the reaction block but also includes
scattering from bubbles in the exposure solvent. Bubbles can be eliminated
by using appropriate fluidics protocols, primarily the use of helium
as the blanket gas and adequate flushing of the reaction cell with
exposure solvent before exposure. Reflection and diffraction remain
alone as the largest sources of unintended exposure, each contributing
approximately 1–2% of incident light. The use of an effective
light absorber in the lower chamber, as demonstrated here, therefore
reduces unintended exposure by approximately 50%. Diffraction remains
as a large source of unintended exposure, but because the intensity
is mostly confined to the gaps between microarray features (“spots”),
it does not strongly affect the sequence fidelity within the features.

Conclusions
We have presented a method for doubling the
efficiency of in situ, light directed microarray
synthesis by assembling
a reaction cell from two very closely spaced substrates. The method
is straightforward, and we have adopted the method for routine synthesis
of both DNA and RNA microarrays and for applications including gene
expression and miRNA expression studies.18,19 For microarray applications requiring high sequence fidelity, the
reaction cell assembly provides a chamber that can be used to completely
suppress reflections.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Funding by the
University of Vienna, the Faculty of Chemistry
of the University of Vienna, the Austrian Science Fund (Grant FWF
P23797), the Austrian Federal Ministry of Economy, Family and Youth,
and the Austrian National Foundation for Research, Technology and
Development is gratefully acknowledged. We thank John Wallace and
Kurt Heinrich for providing assistance with material sourcing, specifications,
and mechanical drawings from the original reaction cell and Walter
Leuthner for machining the support block and prototypes of various
components.
==== Refs
References
Fodor S. P. ; Read J. L. ; Pirrung M. C. ; Stryer L. ; Lu A. T. ; Solas D. 
Science 
1991 , 251 , 767 –773 .1990438 
Singh-Gasson S. ; Green R. ; Yue Y. ; Nelson C. ; Blattner F. ; Sussman M. ; Cerrina F. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
1999 , 17 , 974 –978 .10504697 
Beier M. ; Hoheisel J. D. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2000 , 28 , e11 .10648799 
Hasan A. ; Stengele K. ; Giegrich H. ; Cornwell P. ; Isham K. ; Sachleben R. ; Pfleiderer W. ; Foote R. 
Tetrahedron 
1997 , 53 , 4247 –4264 .
Pirrung M. C. ; Wang L. ; Montague-Smith M. P. 
Org. Lett. 
2001 , 3 , 1105 –1108 .11348170 
Agbavwe C. ; Somoza M. M. 
PLoS ONE 
2011 , 6 , e22177 .21799789 
Agbavwe C. ; Kim C. ; Hong D. G. ; Heinrich K. ; Wang T. ; Somoza M. M. 
J. Nanobiotechnol. 
2011 , 9 , 57 .
Franssen-van
Hal N. L. W. ; van der Putte P. ; Hellmuth K. ; Matysiak S. ; Kretschy N. ; Somoza M. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 5950 –5957 .23672295 
Bhushan K. R. 
Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2006 , 4 , 1857 –1859 .16688328 
Shin D.-S. ; Lee K.-N. ; Yoo B.-W. ; Kim J. ; Kim M. ; Kim Y.-K. ; Lee Y.-S. 
J. Comb. Chem. 
2010 , 12 , 463 –471 .20666398 
Lackey J. G. ; Mitra D. ; Somoza M. M. ; Cerrina F. ; Damha M. J. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 8496 –8502 .19485360 
Wang T. ; Oehrlein S. ; Somoza M. M. ; Perez J. R. S. ; Kershner R. ; Cerrina F. 
Lab Chip 
2011 , 11 , 1629 –1637 .21445444 
Lackey J. G. ; Somoza M. M. ; Mitra D. ; Cerrina F. ; Damha M. J. 
Chim. Oggi 
2009 , 27 , 30 –33 .
Garland P. B. ; Serafinowski P. J. 
Nucleic Acids
Res. 
2002 , 30 , e99 .12364616 
Offner A. 
Opt. Eng. 
1975 , 14 , 130 –132 .
Offner A. 
Photogr. Sci. Eng. 
1979 , 23 , 374 .
Craft N. E. ; Soares J. H. 
J. Agric. Food Chem. 
1992 , 40 , 431 –434 .
Holik A.-K. ; Rohm B. ; Somoza M. M. ; Somoza V. 
Food Funct. 
2013 , 4 , 1111 –1120 .23759926 
Rohm B. ; Holik A.-K. ; Somoza M. M. ; Pignitter M. ; Zaunschirm M. ; Ley J. P. ; Krammer G. E. ; Somoza V. 
Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 
2013 , 10.1002/mnfr.201200846 .
