
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/ac500897tArticleElectrical Detection of Nucleic Acid Amplification
Using an On-Chip Quasi-Reference Electrode and a PVC REFET Salm Eric †‡Zhong Yu ‡§Reddy Bobby Jr.‡§Duarte-Guevara Carlos ‡§Swaminathan Vikhram ‡∥Liu Yi-Shao ⊥Bashir Rashid *†‡§† Department
of Bioengineering, University of Illinois
at Urbana−Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States‡ Micro
and Nanotechnology Laboratory, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States§ Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana−Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States∥ Department
of Mechanical Science and Engineering, University
of Illinois at Urbana−Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States⊥ Taiwan
Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, Hsinchu, Taiwan* Address: 1270 Digital
Computer
Laboratory, Urbana, Illinois, USA, 61801. Tel: +01-217-333-1867. E-mail: rbashir@illinois.edu.18 06 2015 18 06 2014 15 07 2014 86 14 6968 6975 10 03 2014 18 06 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyTerms of Use

Electrical
detection of nucleic acid amplification through pH changes
associated with nucleotide addition enables miniaturization, greater
portability of testing apparatus, and reduced costs. However, current
ion-sensitive field effect transistor methods for sensing nucleic
acid amplification rely on establishing the fluid gate potential with
a bulky, difficult to microfabricate reference electrode that limits
the potential for massively parallel reaction detection. Here we demonstrate
a novel method of utilizing a microfabricated solid-state quasi-reference
electrode (QRE) paired with a pH-insensitive reference field effect
transistor (REFET) for detection of real-time pH changes. The end
result is a 0.18 μm, silicon-on-insulator, foundry-fabricated
sensor that utilizes a platinum QRE to establish a pH-sensitive fluid
gate potential and a PVC membrane REFET to enable pH detection of
loop mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP). This technique is highly
amendable to commercial scale-up, reduces the packaging and fabrication
requirements for ISFET pH detection, and enables massively parallel
droplet interrogation for applications, such as monitoring reaction
progression in digital PCR.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9ac500897tdocument-id-new-14ac-2014-00897tccc-price
==== Body
Since the
invention of polymerase
chain reaction (PCR)-based amplification of nucleic acids by Kary
Mullis in 1983,1 researchers have spent
significant efforts to improve the sensitivity and selectivity of
PCR assays and have dramatically enhanced its application. PCR is
now an integral tool of modern biotechnology processes and biological
identification. Because of the growing demands of on-site diagnosis
in medicine, realization of point-of-care polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) strategies has garnered much attention.2 Beyond traditional PCR, digital PCR for absolute quantification,
increased robustness, and higher sensitivity is highly desirable.3 Such a strategy would ideally be portable, simple,
rapid, have a low cost per test, high accuracy, and reproducibility,
require minimal sample volumes and concentrations, and be capable
of multiplexed interrogation for many relevant species. Much effort,
both academic and commercial, has focused on addressing these challenges,
though typically not all at once. In terms of speed, Xxpress4 offers a qPCR thermal cycler that can achieve
40 cycles of qPCR in less than 10 min, but with a bulky and expensive
tabletop system without automation. RainDance5 and BioRad6 offer extremely high throughput
digital PCR machines utilizing millions of droplets to enable quantification
of the initial copy number of the target nucleic acids, but the process
takes well over an hour and requires a large table-top system for
droplet generation and interrogation. Beyond thermocycling times and
droplet technologies, the cost and complexity from fluorescence-based
detection limits point-of-care PCR. From a reagent perspective, optical
detection requires often proprietary PCR product markers such as SYBR
Green or Taqman probes, which can induce inhibitory effects on PCR
and increase the per assay cost of each PCR reaction.7 From an equipment standpoint, optical techniques require
bulky components for fluorescence excitation and emission detection.
Efforts have focused on miniaturizing these components to bring costs
down, but few examples for portable, inexpensive nucleic acid amplification
exist.8,9

Electrical detection avoids most of
these disadvantages by eliminating
the need for fluorophores and optical detection equipment entirely.
To date, systems utilizing ion sensitive field effect transistors(ISFETs),10,11 MOS-capacitors,12 and interdigitated
electrodes13,14 have demonstrated successful
detection of nucleic acid amplification. Of these methods, FET arrays
offer benefits of fabrication scalability and row-column addressing
for interrogation of millions of individual devices. The ion-sensitive
FET (ISFET) sensor system replaces the metal gate of a traditional
metal-on-silicon FET with a fluidic interface and a fluid gate electrode.
A potential is applied through the fluid via the electrode to operate
the device and modulate the FET’s source-drain current. Changes
in device surface potential through solution pH changes or charged
biomolecule addition also cause modulations in the ISFET source-drain
current. In traditional operation, a pH-insensitive reference electrode
holds the fluid gate constant while the source-drain current is monitored
to provide real-time monitoring of solution pH changes. In this paper’s
design, the changes in surface potential at the ISFET are blocked
via a passivating membrane (polyvinyl chloride). Source-drain current
modulation occurs via changes in the fluid gate potential by utilizing
a pH-sensitive solid-state electrode (see Figure 1a and Supporting Information Figure
S-2). Additionally, usage of FETs as biosensors allows scientists
to leverage decades of research and billions of dollars in investment
in computer chip processing/fabrication to expedite the development
process. Sophisticated semiconductor fabrication foundries offered
by companies such as Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC)
can manufacture devices with high yield, near-ideal and highly repeatable
device characteristics with huge amenability for scale-up. For an
excellent overview of ISFET operation, sensing modes, and important
experimental design factors, the reader is referred to a review by
P. Bergveld.15

Recent years have
seen advancements in use of ISFETs in commercial
applications for detection of biological reaction byproducts, such
as hydrogen ions, for detection of nucleic acid amplification.11,16 Although first introduced in the early 1990s,17 DNA Electronics has come to the forefront of developing
and commercializing this technique. In 2001, Toumazou et al. demonstrated
detection of nucleotide incorporation events through detection of
hydrogen ions in up to 5 simultaneous reactions.10,11,18 This work has extended to sequencing applications
and is currently utilized by Ion Torrent owned by Life Technologies.
To date, commercial ISFET applications have required the use of a
macroscale Ag/AgCl reference electrode to apply the necessary fluid
gate biasing for FET operation. Although Rothberg et al. demonstrated
a FET-based DNA sequencing system utilizing massively parallel nucleotide
incorporation detection with millions of reaction wells using a single
reference electrode,19 this assay is limited
to reactions that occur in pulses through sequential addition of nucleotides.
Nucleic acid amplification techniques, such as PCR or loop mediated
isothermal amplification (LAMP), require much longer time courses
during which diffusion of hydrogen ions away from a noncompartmentalized
reaction would limit parallel detection. Use of an on-chip microfabricated
electrode with encapsulation of each reaction volume can enable the
parallel detection of many individual reactions, completely eliminating
crosstalk between reaction chambers by physically isolating them from
one another.

Here we detail the steps required to realize a
methodology toward
this goal. Because of the pH-sensitivity of solid-state electrodes,20,21 a REFET design was used. An ISFET with a pH-passivating membrane
monitored the pH response of the electrode. Previous techniques have
demonstrated the use of pH-insensitive layers over ISFETs, such as
silanes, buffered hydrogels, parylene, and polyACE.22 However, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) offers an attractive
alternative because of its previously demonstrated simple fabrication
process, robust pH insensitivity, and known compatibility with PCR
with added BSA.23−26 Together, the combined system of a pH-sensitive electrode and a
pH-insensitive REFET offers an opportunity for on-chip electrical
detection of biological reactions, such as LAMP, targeting a variety
of pathogens.

Experimental Section
Device Fabrication
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing
Company (Hsinchu, Taiwan) used a standard foundry process to manufacture
0.18 μm node extended-gate field effect transistors on silicon-on-insulator
as seen in Figure 1b. Metal 1 was deposited
to make contact to the source,drain, and to serve as the extended
gate area connected to the polygate region. Next, an interlayer dielectric
(ILD1) was deposited. Vias in ILD1 were etched to form 40 μm
by 40 μm openings over the extended gate structure and exterior
source/drain electrode pads for probing. A layer of hafnium oxide
was then deposited over the entire chip to form the oxide sensing
membrane on the extended gate structure. At UIUC, 200 Å titanium/800
Å platinum electrodes that were used as the fluid gate contact
were patterned on top of the hafnium oxide dielectric layer using
standard photolithography, evaporation, and lift-off steps. For the
on-chip REFET, the chip was first silanized using HMDS for 1 h at
140 °C. The chip was then cleaned of any excess HMDS using consecutive
rinses of acetone, methanol, DI water, and isopropanol. A mixture
of 60% PVC, 40% dinonylphtalate (DNP), suspended in 3 mL of tetrahydrofuran
(THF) was used for passivating the REFET.24 One microliter of PVC/DNP suspended in THF was then spotted on half
the devices and baked at 80 °C for 1 h (see Figure 1c). Before chips were measured, a final, 1 min oxygen plasma
step was used to standardize the chip surface and prime the platinum.

Experimental Setup for FET Measurements
Current measurements
and applied biases were controlled using a Keithley 4200 semiconductor
characterization system. Contact to the chip electrode pads was established
using micromanipulators from The Micromanipulator Company. For fluid
gate measurements, a 400 μL, 10:1 PDMS well was placed on the
chip. For reference measurements, fluid gate biases were applied with
a Ag/AgCl reference electrode (RE) (Warner Instruments). For quasi-reference
measurements, a micromanipulator was used to contact the on-chip platinum
electrode (QRE). For pH titration experiments, 2 mM Tris buffer at
pH 7.06 was used. Subsequent additions of 0.1 M NaOH or HCl were used
to vary the pH. Baseline measurements were taken with the reference
electrode to characterize the TSMC chips with and without PVC (see
Figure 1d and f)). Separate calibration experiments
using an In-Lab Ultra Micro pH Probe from Mettler Toledo were completed
to quantify the pH response from a given NaOH or HCl addition event
(see Supporting Information Figure S-1).

Figure 1 Device
schematic and characterization (a) A FET/REFET device schematic
is shown. Two fluid gate methods are included: A pH-insensitive reference
electrode and a pH-sensitive on-chip platinum electrode. PVC covers
the left ISFET, rendering it insensitive to pH changes. The right
ISFET is left uncovered and is sensitive to pH. The inset plot shows
theoretical device response to a hydrogen addition event. The Pt vs
FET and RE vs REFET show no overall response to pH changes. Whereas
the Pt vs REFET and RE vs FET show opposite responses. Further details
are found in Supporting Information Figure
S2. (b) An extended gate ISFET is shown. The sensing region consists
of a layer of hafnium oxide on a metal extended gate. (c) One microliter
of PVC is spotted on some of the devices to render them pH insensitive,
but still functional. (d) A real-time pH response curve of two untreated
ISFETs comprising four additions of NaOH followed by four additions
of HCl. The response closely matches the Nernstian response for ISFET
gate dielectrics with an average pH response of 54 mV/pH and R2 linearity of 0.995. (e) Quantification of
the HCl addition steps for multiple devices is shown (n = 16). (f) Real-time response curve for a RE vs FET (black) and
a RE vs PVC REFET (red). The PVC-treated device shows minimal pH response
over the duration of the test.

FET Testing and Surface Potential Measurements
Initial ID–VG curves
measuring drain current, while sweeping the fluid gate were extracted
with first the reference electrode and then with the quasi-reference
platinum electrode. For pH titrations, current vs time measurements
were taken with the FET set in the linear regime. To standardize measurements
for different devices, the measured current was compared to the baseline ID–VG curve
to extract the extended gate surface potential (see Figure 1d and f and Figure 2).

Figure 2 FET response
with platinum fluid gate. (a) A real-time pH response
curve of a PVC and non-PVC device with 4 subsequent HCl additions
is shown. The non-PVC ISFET shows almost zero response when operated
by the platinum electrode. (b) The pH response is quantified for many
devices across multiple chips (n = 3). The PVC REFET
sensor shows an apparent opposite trend than expected with hydrogen
addition. This is due to the charge at the platinum electrode being
mirrored into the REFET response. (c) A real-time pH response curve
with four subsequent NaOH additions is shown. (d) The pH response
is quantified across multiple devices (n = 3). The
non-PVC ISFET shows minimal pH response compared to the PVC-REFET.

To quantify the pH sensitivity
of the platinum QRE, the surface
potential of the QRE versus the RE was measured using the Keithley
4200. The open circuit potential between the pH-insensitive RE and
the QRE was measured with two separate Source Measuring Units (SMUs).
Without a final oxygen plasma treatment step, the pH response was
unstable as shown in Supporting Information Figure S-3.

LAMP Optimization and On-Chip Detection
Initial proof-of-concept
LAMP experiments were completed with the EIKEN kit for Escherichia
coli O157:H7. Further experiments that required modification
of the LAMP solution were based on LAMP formulations from New England
BioLabs’ recommendations for LAMP. Primers used for E. coli O26 are found here.27 25 μL of reaction mix consisted of 0.05×–2×
Isothermal Amplification Buffer from New England BioLabs, 800 mM Betaine
from Sigma-Aldrich, 50 mM KCl, 1.9 μM FIP and BIP primers, 0.24
μM F3 and B3, 0.96 μM Loop-F and Loop-B primers, 1×
EvaGreen from Biotium, 6 units of Warmstart Bst 2.0 polymerase from
New England BioLabs, 1.3 mM dNTPs from New England BioLabs, 5 mM MgSO4 from Sigma-Aldrich, and template of our targeted E. coli O26 template.

Optimization of the reaction
centered around three major areas: (1) Tris-HCl buffer concentration,
(2) starting pH value, and (3) reaction temperature. Electrical detection
of LAMP was carried out by first running part of the solution in an
Eppendorf RealPlex qPCR system. After completion, the portion of solution
that was not amplified was measured on the FET with either the RE
or the QRE, followed immediately by the amplified solution. Importantly,
to minimize electrostatic discharge effects when exchanging solutions,
the micromanipulator tips were lifted off the device pads in between
measurements. Electrostatic discharge events have been shown to cause
large shifts in the device threshold voltage and should be minimized
through personal and system grounding whenever possible.28

Results and Discussion
Characterization of TSMC
Chip
Utilizing a semiconductor
foundry for fabrication of ISFETs offers several distinct advantages.
With the fabrication control afforded by the semiconductor foundry,
charge trapped in the hafnium dielectric was controlled through anneals
to minimally affect device stability. Threshold voltage uniformity
across devices was excellent and the standard deviation of the threshold
voltage of each individual device over 5 sweeps from cutoff to saturation
was on the order of 0.1–1 mV. Assuming a Nernstian pH response,
this noise level should enable a pH resolution on the order of 0.005–0.05
pH units. Hafnium oxide, a high-k dielectric, that
increases the coupling capacitance to the device for a given thickness,
has been shown to provide near Nernstian pH response.29 This was evident in the baseline pH testing shown in Figure 1e. The pH titration in real-time method over a relatively
small pH range (pH 7–8), showed some instability likely due
to inaccuracy while pipetting. However, simultaneous measurement of
two devices as shown in Figure 1d demonstrates
sensor response uniformity and stability even when testing across
the 5 mm sensing region of the chip.

Characterization of PVC-REFET
and Platinum Response
Researchers have explored the use of
REFETs for pH sensing applications
starting shortly after the first ISFET was introduced in the 1970s.15 REFET enables the user to normalize for unexpected
changes in electrode potential or device response that can originate
from factors other than pH changes, such as temperature instabilities.
Typically, a pH insensitive REFET is paired with an ISFET in a differential
setup. Extensive work has focused on a reliable method for properly
rendering the REFET pH insensitive. Early examples focused on minimizing
the number of available protonation/deprotonation groups at the device
surface via the introduction of a silane layer that covalently reacted
with hydroxyl groups on the dielectric surface. This method has seen
limited practice due to difficulty in occupying a high enough percentage
of available groups. Bergveld et al. showed a reduction of pH response
of the ISFET to form a pH-insensitive REFET required a 99.99% reduction
of hydroxyl groups.30 As shown by Tarasov
et al., this requires a silanization procedure that takes up to 7
days in a vacuum oven.31

Other early
methods, such as ion-blocking layers of photoresist or other polymers
like parylene or PVC, have also been demonstrated.32−34 These methods
primarily rely on a macroscale Ag/AgCl reference electrode for the
fluid gate, which is bulky, expensive, and difficult to fabricate.
Microfabricated Ag/AgCl electrodes also suffer from potential instability
and reduced lifetime when submerged in solutions less than 3 M chloride.35 Many examples have utilized a solid-state electrode
as the fluid gate, but each used a differential signal between the
ISFET and a REFET for pH sensing.15,36 By elucidating
the platinum pH response in Tris buffer, as seen in Figure 3, this work eliminated the need for a differential
signal with an ISFET. By blocking the ISFET’s pH response with
spotted PVC, the resulting current trace from the ISFET shows the
pH response of the platinum. When using the same surface potential
extraction method as the baseline case, the sensor shows the opposite
signal to the addition of NaOH or HCl (Figure 2). This overall pH sensitive system (∼34–36 mV/pH)
responds to the change in potential at the platinum fluid electrode
and not the gate dielectric surface potential (see Supporting Information Figure S2). Each case demonstrated
a linear relationship between the pH and the REFET response. Future
steps will focus on metals with demonstrated higher pH sensitivity
and more stable response, such as iridium or ruthenium.37 When the QRE platinum electrode is used in conjunction
with a device without PVC, the surface potential response of the platinum
and the gate dielectric mirror each other. This results in a lack
of pH sensitivity in the system for this case.

Figure 3 Platinum surface potential
response. (a) A schematic of the open
circuit potential method is shown. A PDMS well is placed on a platinum
surface and Tris-HCl is added. The on-chip platinum (SMU1) vs the
reference electrode (SMU2) is measured using the Keithley 4200 semiconductor
characterization system. The current for both electrodes is held at
zero and the resulting potential between the two nodes was measured.
(b) A real-time plot of four HCl additions is shown. (c) The surface
potential from the platinum response is extracted and quantified.
The pH response shows high linearity and sensitivity that closely
resembles those stated previously.37

Additionally, we have shown that the PVC membrane and solid-state
electrode can be used for pH detection in droplets-in-mineral oil
(see Supporting Information Figure S-4).
It was noticed that PVC would delaminate from the chip surface upon
submersion in mineral oil. This issue was accelerated at elevated
temperatures; however, by baking the PVC at 80 °C before submersion,
the PVC is able to maintain integrity for over 3 h at room temperature
and over 1 h at 65 °C (Supporting Information Figure S-5). Prior work has also demonstrated PVC’s compatibility
in PCR applications;26 however, this technique
is most advantageous when used to determine the pH change associated
with very high yield, lower temperature isothermal processes, such
as LAMP. Nevertheless, the addition of additives39 or in this case, baking the PVC to increase its thermostability
in mineral oil adds the potential for droplet applications, such as
digital PCR, that have gained popularity in recent years.3

LAMP versus PCR
Loop-mediated isothermal
amplification
(LAMP) was developed in the early 2000s as an isothermal alternative
to PCR.40,41 LAMP utilizes four distinct primers recognizing
six regions of a targeted gene. This method offers high sensitivity
(shown in Figure 4a) and superior specificity
to PCR, which enables an inherently nonspecific method of amplification
detection, such as an intercalating dye or, in this case, pH detection.
Additionally, LAMP provides a yield of >500 μg/mL of DNA.
PCR,
on the other hand, only offers a maximum yield of around 40 μg/mL.41 The level of DNA generation in LAMP results
in a higher potential pH change for a given buffer concentration.
Theoretically, in standard buffered amplification solution of 20 mM
Tris-HCl, LAMP will yield a pH change of ∼−0.136 units,
whereas PCR will only produce a pH change of ∼-0.01 units.
(See Supporting Information for a description
of the pH change calculations.) As shown in Figure 4b, using the Eiken kit for E. coli O157:H7,
the LAMP reaction generates a pH change ranging from −0.15
to −0.20 pH units. This change is consistent across the entire
range of starting template concentration since each reaction was allowed
to run to completion.

Figure 4 pH-LAMP optimization. (a) The detection limit of a commercially
available E. coli O157:H7 kit is shown. LAMP allows
for detection of 100–1000 CFU/reaction in less than 30 min.
The inset graph provides the normalized real-time amplification data.
(b) The pH-LAMP detection limit is shown. Regardless of starting E. coli concentration, the resulting pH change is consistent
at around −0.2 pH units. (c) Reducing the Tris-HCl buffer concentration
in the reaction mix increases the pH change associated with amplification.
The maximum pH change observed in these tests was −1.2 pH units.
(d) Decreasing the isothermal amplification buffer concentration also
reduced the ionic strength of the solution. This requires the reaction
temperature to be reduced to achieve consistent threshold times. Threshold
times were consistent down to 8–12 mM Tris-HCl before significant
increases in threshold time are observed.

Optimization of LAMP Reaction Conditions
The LAMP optimization
process with respect to pH changes focused on three major areas: (1)
Tris-HCl concentration, (2) starting pH value, and (3) reaction temperature.
In a traditional amplification reaction, a highly buffered solution
maintains a consistent pH in order to maximize polymerase activity.
For a pH-based amplification reaction, the buffering capacity must
be reduced, ideally without hindering polymerase activity. Figure 4c shows the pH change from LAMP versus a range of
Tris-HCl concentrations, revealing the yield and pH change is consistent
with expectations from 40 to 8 mM. The 4 mM reduced yield of the LAMP
reaction slightly diminished the pH change. This behavior may be explained
by the reduction in initial pH associated with diluting the buffer
with DI water. When the starting pH was increased to around pH 8,
the yield increased and followed expectations more closely.

Dilution of the isothermal amplification buffer also reduced the
ionic strength of the solution. Without replacing the missing salts,
the melting temperature of the dsDNA in solution decreases. As shown
in Figure 4d, lower buffered solutions required
a lower reaction temperature to see threshold times similar to higher
buffered solutions. In the case of the 4 mM solution, the addition
of 50 mM KCl increased the ionic strength of the solution and improved
the threshold times observed. (data not shown).

End-Point Detection
of LAMP On-Chip
Toumazou et al.
previously demonstrated the potential for pH-based detection of nucleic
acid amplification using an ISFET.10,11,18 However, their system requires a reference electrode
to establish the fluid gate potential and operate the ISFET. This
technique is demonstrated in end-point measurement form in Supporting Information Figure S-6. This method
advances the potential for portable nucleic acid amplification detection;
however, on-chip reference electrodes are still fairly large and difficult
to integrate with a microchip, making it nearly impossible to achieve
massively parallel, portable amplification detection. By utilizing
a solid-state electrode, patterned with standard photolithography
and evaporated onto the chip, we added the potential for massively
parallel amplification detection.

Figure 5 End point detection of LAMP on-chip. (a) I–V curves of a PVC-REFET device
are shown. The differences
between the negative control before and after amplification are not
significant. The positive control shows a shift to a higher threshold
voltage, which is consistent with a decrease in pH. The pH change
was measured to be −1.2 units with a commercial meter. (b)
Measurements were taken simultaneously with a non-PVC ISFET. The positive
and negative amplification solutions show insignificant differences.
(c) The change in threshold voltage was quantified for multiple devices.
The change for positive amplification was statistically significant
(n = 3, p-value < 0.01) when
compared to the negative control for the PVC-REFET. The non-PVC ISFET
showed no significant changes.

To demonstrate this potential, we have shown detection of
a LAMP
reaction using end-point pH measurements with a solid-state electrode
and an ISFET passivated with PVC. Macroscale pH measurements with
the In-Lab Ultra Micro pH meter showed a pH change of −1.24
units for the complete full reaction. As shown in Figure 5b and c, without the PVC membrane, the positive
and negative amplification reactions are indistinguishable (two-tailed p-value = 0.7745). Compared to the negative reaction, the
PVC REFET shows strong results that are statistically significant
(p-value < 0.01). The PVC-REFET responds to the
change in the electrode potential, which is sensitive to the pH of
the solution. Supporting Information Figure
S-7 shows the stability of the device threshold voltage with repeated
solution exchanges. The LAMP end-point data was statistically significant
compared to variations in the threshold voltage associated with solution
exchange (p-value < 0.0001).

Conclusions
Here, we present a novel technique for electrical detection of
nucleic acid amplification. Utilizing a field effect transistor in
conjunction with a solid-state electrode simplifies ISFET pH-based
detection of biological processes, such as macroscale LAMP. By incorporating
simple to fabricate solid-state microelectrodes on the surface of
a chip, droplets can be individually interrogated and their changing
properties mapped. Disciplines that could see significant benefit
from this methodology include digital PCR or digital LAMP, as well
as assays enabled by electrowetting-on-dielectric droplet manipulations.
Researchers could use this to perform high throughput analysis of
enzyme activity, detect the presence of a targeted nucleic acid sequence,
or detect the presence of a targeted biomolecule through monitoring
an enzymatic reaction’s rate and progress through hydrogen
generation. This methodology enables droplet interrogation and simplifies
macro-scale solution interrogation through the use of common metal
patterning techniques and a pH-insensitive REFET.

Supporting Information Available
Additional material as described
in the text. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
ac500897t_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
E.S. and
Y.Z. performed the experiments. E.S. and R.B. wrote the manuscript.
E.S., B.R., and R.B. planned the experiments. V.S. and C.D. prepared
devices at UIUC. Y.-S.L. planned and fabricated devices at TSMC.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Lauren Yang for editing
the
manuscript. We would also like to thank Dr. Arun Bhunia, Dr. Titiksha
Dikshit, and Dr. Atul Kumar Singh for helping prepare the biological
samples and Koshin Hamasaki for helpful discussions. R.B. also acknowledges
funding support from a cooperative agreement with Purdue University
and the Agricultural Research Service of the United States Department
of Agriculture, project number 1935-42000-035, and a subcontract to
the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. We also acknowledge
support from NIH Grant R01-CA20003 and NSF I/IUCRC CABPN (Center for
Agricultural, Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology) Grant
at UIUC. We also acknowledge Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company
for providing the ISFET chips and funding this work through project
2012-06536.
==== Refs
References
Saiki R. K. ; Gelfand D. H. ; Stoffel S. ; Scharf S. J. ; Higuchi R. ; Horn G. T. ; Mullis K. B. ; Erlich H. A. 
Science 
1988 , 239 , 487 –491 .2448875 
Zhang C. ; Xu J. ; Ma W. ; Zheng W. 
Biotechnol.
Adv. 
2006 , 24 , 243 –284 .16326063 
Baker M. 
Nat. Methods 
2012 , 9 , 541 –544 .
Xxpress PCR ; BJS Biotechnologies : Greenford, Middlesex, U.K. , 2014 .
RainDance
Technologies, 2014 . http://raindancetech.com/.
Bio-Rad, 2014 . http://www.bio-rad.com/.
Gudnason H. ; Dufva M. ; Bang D. D. ; Wolff A. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2007 , 35 19 e12710.1093/nar/gkm671 .17897966 
Xiang Q. ; Xu B. ; Li D. 
Biomed. Microdevices 
2007 , 9 , 443 –449 .17265146 
Chin C. D. ; Linder V. ; Sia S. K. 
Lab. Chip 
2012 , 12 , 2118 –2134 .22344520 
Kalofonou M. ; Toumazou C. 
Sens. Actuators,
B 
2013 , 178 , 572 –580 .
Toumazou C. ; Shepherd L. M. ; Reed S. C. ; Chen G. I. ; Patel A. ; Garner D. M. ; Wang C. J. A. ; Ou C. P. ; Amin-Desai K. ; Athanasiou P. ; Bai H. ; Brizido I. M. Q. ; Caldwell B. ; Coomber-Alford D. ; Georgiou P. ; Jordan K. S. ; Joyce J. C. ; La Mura M. ; Morley D. ; Sathyavruthan S. ; Temelso S. ; Thomas R. E. ; Zhang L. 
Nat.
Methods 
2013 , 10 , 641 –646 .23749303 
Veigas B. ; Branquinho R. ; Pinto J. V. ; Wojcik P. J. ; Martins R. ; Fortunato E. ; Baptista P. V. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2014 , 52 , 50 –55 .24021655 
Salm E. ; Liu Y.-S. ; Marchwiany D. ; Morisette D. ; He Y. ; K. Bhunia A. ; Bashir R. 
Biomed. Microdevices 
2011 , 13 , 973 –982 .21789549 
Ghindilis A. L. ; Smith M. W. ; Schwarzkopf K. R. ; Zhan C. ; Evans D. R. ; Baptista A. M. ; Simon H. M. 
Electroanalysis 
2009 , 21 , 1459 –1468 .
Bergveld P. 
Sens. Actuators,
B 
2003 , 88 , 1 –20 .
Credo G. M. ; Su X. ; Wu K. ; Elibol O. H. ; Liu D. J. ; Reddy B. ; Tsai T. W. ; Dorvel B. R. ; Daniels J. S. ; Bashir R. ; Varma M. 
Analyst 
2012 , 137 , 1351 –1362 .22262038 
Sakurai T. ; Husimi Y. 
Anal. Chem. 
1992 , 64 , 1996 –1997 .1416046 
Purushothaman S. ; Toumazou C. ; Georgiou J. 
IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits
Syst. 
2002 , 4 , 169 –172 .
Rothberg J. M. ; Hinz W. ; Rearick T. M. ; Schultz J. ; Mileski W. ; Davey M. ; Leamon J. H. ; Johnson K. ; Milgrew M. J. ; Edwards M. ; Hoon J. ; Simons J. F. ; Marran D. ; Myers J. W. ; Davidson J. F. ; Branting A. ; Nobile J. R. ; Puc B. P. ; Light D. ; Clark T. A. ; Huber M. ; Branciforte J. T. ; Stoner I. B. ; Cawley S. E. ; Lyons M. ; Fu Y. ; Homer N. ; Sedova M. ; Miao X. ; Reed B. ; Sabina J. ; Feierstein E. ; Schorn M. ; Alanjary M. ; Dimalanta E. ; Dressman D. ; Kasinskas R. ; Sokolsky T. ; Fidanza J. A. ; Namsaraev E. ; McKernan K. J. ; Williams A. ; Roth G. T. ; Bustillo J. 
Nature 
2011 , 475 , 348 –352 .21776081 
Fog A. ; Buck R. P. 
Sens. Actuators 
1984 , 5 , 137 –146 .
Kurzweil P. 
Sensors (Switzerland) 
2009 , 9 , 4955 –4985 .
Bergveld P. ; Van Den Berg A. ; Van Der Wal P. D. ; Skowronska-Ptasinska M. ; Sudhölter E. J.
R. ; Reinhoudt D. N. 
Sens. Actuators 
1989 , 18 , 309 –327 .
Lee Y. C. ; Sohn B. K. 
J. Korean Phys. Soc. 
2002 , 40 , 601 –604 .
Lai C. S. ; Lue C. E. ; Yang C. M. ; Dawgul M. ; Pijanowska D. G. 
Sensors 
2009 , 9 , 2076 –2087 .22574001 
Errachid A. ; Bausells J. ; Jaffrezic-Renault N. 
Sens. Actuators, B 
1999 , 60 , 43 –48 .
Kodzius R. ; Xiao K. ; Wu J. ; Yi X. ; Gong X. ; Foulds I. G. ; Wen W. 
Sens. Actuators, B 
2012 , 161 , 349 –358 .
Wang F. ; Jiang L. ; Yang Q. ; Prinyawiwatkul W. ; Ge B. 
Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 
2012 , 78 , 2727 –2736 .22327594 
Baldi A. ; Bratov A. ; Mas R. ; Domínguez C. 
Sens. Actuators,
B 
2001 , 80 , 255 –260 .
Dorvel B. R. ; Reddy B. ; Go J. ; Duarte Guevara C. ; Salm E. ; Alam M. A. ; Bashir R. 
ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 6150 –6164 .22695179 
van
den Berg A. ; Bergveld P. ; Reinhoudt D. N. ; Sudhölter E. J. 
Sens. Actuators 
1985 , 8 , 129 –148 .
Tarasov A. ; Wipf M. ; Bedner K. ; Kurz J. ; Fu W. ; Guzenko V. A. ; Knopfmacher O. ; Stoop R. L. ; Calame M. ; Schönenberger C. 
Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 9899 –9905 .22631046 
Fujihira M. ; Fukui M. ; Osa T. 
J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1980 , 106 , 413 –418 .
Skowronska-Ptasinska M. ; Van der Wal P. D. ; Van den Berg Bergveld A. P. ; Sudholter E. J. R. ; Reinhoudt D. N. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
1990 , 230 , 67 –73 .
Chang K. M. ; Chang C. T. ; Chao K. Y. ; Chen J. L. 
J. Electrochem.
Soc. 
2010 , 157 , J143 –J148 .
Waleed
Shinwari M. ; Zhitomirsky D. ; Deen I. A. ; Selvaganapathy P. R. ; Jamal Deen M. ; Landheer D. 
Sensors 
2010 , 10 , 1679 –1715 .22294894 
Wong H.-S. ; White M. H. 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 
1989 , 36 , 479 –487 .
Kreider K. G. ; Tarlov M. J. ; Cline J. P. 
Sens. Actuators, B 
1995 , 28 , 167 –172 .
Wypych G.  PVC Degradation &
Stabilization ; ChemTec Publishing : Toronto, Canada , 2008 .
Notomi T. ; Okayama H. ; Masubuchi H. ; Yonekawa T. ; Watanabe K. ; Amino N. ; Hase T. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2000 , 28 12 e6310.1093/nar/28.12.e63 .10871386 
Nagamine K. ; Watanabe K. ; Ohtsuka K. ; Hase T. ; Notomi T. 
Clin. Chem. 
2001 , 47 , 1742 –1743 .11514425
