
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b00419ArticleCharacterization
of α-Synuclein Multimer
Stoichiometry in Complex Biological Samples by Electrophoresis Killinger Bryan A. *Moszczynska Anna Department
of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Wayne State University, 259 Mack Avenue, Detroit, Michigan 48201, United States* E-mail: Cr6970@wayne.edu. Phone: 1(269) 598-5451.03 03 2016 05 04 2016 88 7 4071 4084 31 01 2016 02 03 2016 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society2016American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
aberrant aggregation of α-synuclein in the brain is a
hallmark of Parkinson’s disease (PD). In vivo soluble α-synuclein
occurs as a monomer and several multimers, the latter of which may
be important for the biological function of α-synuclein. Currently,
there is a lack of reproducible methods to compare α-synuclein
multimer abundance between complex biological samples. Here we developed
a method, termed “multimer-PAGE,” that combines in-gel
chemical cross-linking with several common electrophoretic techniques
to measure the stoichiometry of soluble α-synuclein multimers
in brain tissue lysates. Results show that soluble α-synuclein
from the rat brain exists as several high molecular weight species
of approximately 56 kDa (αS56), 80 kDa (αS80), and 100
kDa (αS100) that comigrate with endogenous lipids, detergents,
and/or micelles during blue native gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE).
Co-extraction of endogenous lipids with α-synuclein was essential
for the detection of soluble α-synuclein multimers. Homogenization
of brain tissue in small buffer volumes (>50 mg tissue per 1 mL
buffer)
increased relative lipid extraction and subsequently resulted in abundant
soluble multimer detection via multimer-PAGE. α-Synuclein multimers
captured by directly cross-linking soluble lysates resembled those
observed following multimer-PAGE. The ratio of multimer (αS80)
to monomer (αS17) increased linearly with protein input into
multimer-PAGE, suggesting to some extent, multimers were also formed
during electrophoresis. Overall, soluble α-synuclein maintains
lipid interactions following tissue disruption and readily forms multimers
when this lipid–protein complex is preserved. Once the multimer-PAGE
technique was validated, relative stoichiometric comparisons could
be conducted simultaneously between 14 biological samples. Multimer-PAGE
provides a simple inexpensive biochemical technique to study the molecular
factors influencing α-synuclein multimerization.

document-id-old-9ac6b00419document-id-new-14ac-2016-004193ccc-price
==== Body
Parkinson’s disease (PD)
is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by the formation of proteinaceous
inclusions, termed “Lewy bodies” that contain large
amounts of α-synuclein, a small cytosolic protein for which
the biological function is still unclear.1,2 In
vivo α-synuclein occurs as a variety of multimers including
a dimer, tetramer, and octomer which appear to be biologically important
and possibly resistant to toxic aggregation.3−5 New therapeutic
strategies for treating PD may involve the use of drugs to stabilize
soluble multimeric α-synuclein to prevent the formation of higher
order soluble toxic multimers.6

Soluble
monomeric α-synuclein is an intrinsically disordered
protein and behaves like a larger protein of ∼50–60
kDa when assessed using a number of techniques including size-exclusion
chromatography and blue native gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE).4 The unusual behavior of α-synuclein makes
the separation of native multimers from the monomer, according to
mass, particularly challenging. Chemical cross-linking can be used
to preserve α-synuclein multimers allowing their separation
from the monomer by traditional sodium dodecylsulfate polyacrylamide
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).3,6,7 α-Synuclein multimerizes upon binding to phospholipid membranes,
but it remains unclear whether free soluble α-synuclein can
form stable soluble multimers. Upon binding to phospholipid membranes
α-synuclein adopts defined secondary structure and subsequently
multimerize.2,8 Although the interaction between
α-synuclein with phospholipid membranes is intimately involved
in the multimerization process and biological function of α-synuclein,
the molecular details of this interaction remain unclear.

Here,
we developed a new technique, termed “multimer-PAGE,”
to quantify the multimerization of α-synuclein in complex biological
samples. Using this technique it is possible to compare the ratio
of α-synuclein multimers between 14 brain tissue samples without
the need for specialized equipment.

Methods
Animals
Twenty adult male Sprague–Dawley (SD)
rats (250–350g) were pair housed in polycarbonate cages at
approximately 70 °F. Rats were euthanized via live decapitation.
Following euthanasia, the brain was removed and dissected on ice.
All collected brain tissue was placed on dry ice and frozen at −80
°C until assayed. All procedures were conducted in accordance
with the Wayne State University institutional care and use committee
approved protocol no. A3310-01.

Sample Preparation
All procedures were conducted on
ice and in a cold room. Frozen brain tissue samples weighing approximately
25–200 mg were homogenized in 1 mL of 1× BN-PAGE sample
buffer (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA) for native separation or phosphate
buffered saline pH 7.4 (PBS) for in-solution cross-linking experiments.
All solutions contained EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO). Tissue was disrupted using 30 strokes in a 7 mL dounce
homogenizer. Following homogenization, samples were briefly vortexed
and incubated on ice for 30 min. For some experiments, 0.5% m/vol
NP40 (Boston Bioproducts, St. Ashland, MA) or 1% m/vol digitonin (Sigma)
was added to the lysate prior to the 30 min incubation on ice. The
sample was then centrifuged at 18 000g for
30 min. Following centrifugation the supernatant (S1) was carefully
transferred to a prechilled 1.5 mL eppendorf tube. To determine protein
concentration of the sample, 8 μL of the S1 was transferred
to a separate eppendorf tube containing 2 μL of 10% m/vol SDS,
mixed well, and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. This delipidated
sample was then used to determine the protein content using a bicinchoninic
acid assay (BCA assay, Thermofisher, Waltham, MA). Samples were diluted
to a final concentration of 0.1–4 mg protein/mL, depending
on the experiment. The insoluble pellet (P1) was resuspended in 1.5
mL of RIPA buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1% vol/vol Triton X-100,
0.1% m/vol sodium dodecyl sulfate, and 140 mM NaCl), mixed thoroughly,
and incubated on ice for 1 h. The P1 sample was then centrifuged at
18 000g for 30 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant
retained (S2). The S2 was then processed for lipid and protein quantification.
α-Synuclein was purified as previously described.9 Relative purity of α-synuclein was determined
by SDS-PAGE and subsequent Coomassie Blue G-250 staining. The lyophilized
purified α-synuclein was dissolved in 1× BN-PAGE sample
buffer for native separation or PBS for in-sample cross-linking experiments
to a final concentration of 5 mg protein/mL.

Lipid and Protein Isolation
Bulk lipid extraction was
performed essentially as previously described.10 Briefly, 20 mL of a chloroform and methanol mixture (2:1)
was added to 1 g of rat brain tissue. The tissue was homogenized via
sonication for 2 min. The homogenate was vortexed well, 4 mL of PBS
added, and the sample vortexed again. The sample was then allowed
to sit for 5 min to allow the solution to separate into two phases.
The organic phase containing the purified lipids at the bottom of
the tube was carefully removed and dried under vacuum using a Centrivap
DNA Concentrator (Labconco, Kansas City, MO). The purified lipids
were then resuspended in 200 μL of 1× BN-PAGE sample buffer
containing 10% vol/vol NP40, bath sonicated for 30 min, and centrifuged
at 18 000g to remove any insoluble lipids
not incorporated into the NP40 micelles. Isolated lipids were used
within 24 h to avoid excessive lipid oxidation. Extracted brain lipids
were used for generating a lipid standard for total lipid determination
and to generate mixed micelles only (Figure 2A,D).

To extract lipid and proteins
from individual lysates we first diluted the samples to 2 mg protein/mL
using the appropriate buffer in a 1.5 mL eppendorf tube. The dilution
was conducted to yield a final sample volume of 150 μL. Then
600 μL of methanol and 150 μL of chloroform were added
to each sample. Samples were mixed well, 450 μL of dH20 added
to each sample, and mixed well again. Samples were then centrifuged
at 14 000g for 5 min. The upper aqueous phase
was then carefully discarded, making sure not to disturb the precipitated
proteins between the lower and upper phase. A volume of 450 μL
of methanol was then added to each sample, vortexed, and centrifuged
at 14 000g for 5 min. The methanol–chloroform
mixture contained the lipids and precipitated proteins were found
in the pellet. The extracted lipids from individual samples were used
to quantify the amount of soluble lipids (Figure 2D). The precipitated proteins from individual
samples were used for mixed micelles experiments (Figure 2A).

The precipitated
proteins (300 μg) were dissolved in 100
μL of 1× BN-PAGE sample buffer containing either 0.5% NP40
or 0.5% NP40 brain lipid mixture. Samples were mixed thoroughly, allowed
to sit on ice for 30 min, and mixed thoroughly again. All samples
were then centrifuged 18 000g for 30 min to
remove any remaining insoluble lipids or proteins. Protein content
of each mixture was then determined using BCA assay.

BN-PAGE
Procedures were conducted as previously described.11 Briefly, linear gradient 2.8–13%T and
nongradient 6%T gels were used for all BN-PAGE separations. All gradient
gels were poured by hand using a linear gradient former built as previously
described.12 A 2.8%T gel was used for the
sample wells. The 0–0.5% m/v Coomassie Blue G-250 (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO) was added to all samples immediately prior to electrophoresis
and 4–50 μg of brain tissue lysate protein or 50–200
ng of purified α-synuclein were loaded into each sample well
of the BN-PAGE gel. Either native page marker (Invitrogen) or 1 μg
of bovine serum albumin (BSA, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX)
diluted in 1× BN-PAGE buffer was used as a protein standard.
Electrophoresis was conducted using running buffer (100 mM bis-tris,
100 mM tricine) containing either 0.001% (for nondetergent samples)
or 0.01% (for detergent samples) G-250 at 100 V until the samples
entered the gel and then 180 V for approximately 3 h (until the dye
front reached the end of the gel) at 4 °C. When detergent samples
were resolved, the running buffer containing 0.01% G-250 was replaced
by the running buffer containing 0.001% G-250, approximately halfway
through the run. 6%T BN-PAGE gels were run under the same conditions
but stopped once samples had migrated about 2 cm into the resolving
gel. Once electrophoresis was complete the lanes of the gel were either
excised for 2D electrophoresis or electroblotted onto methanol activated
polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. Electroblotting of BN-PAGE
gels was performed at 20 V for 3 h at 4 °C using the BN-PAGE
running buffer. Following electroblotting, PVDF membranes were fixed
for 20 min in 10% acetic acid, rinsed with ultrapure water, and then
dried.

In-Gel Cross-Linking
Excised gel pieces were washed
with PBS three times for 10 min at 4 °C to remove excess bis-tris
and 6-aminocaproic acid because could compete with cross-linking reactions.
Gel lanes were then incubated for 5–30 min at 4 °C in
PBS containing either 1% paraformaldehyde (PFA), 1% glutaradehyde,
0.1–2 mM Dithiobis (succinimidylpropionate) (DSP, ThermoFisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA), 0.1–2 mM 3,3′-dithiobis (sulfosuccinimidyl
propionate) (DTSSP, Thermofisher Scientific), or 0.1–2 mM disuccinimidyl
glutarate (DSG, ThermoFisher Scientific). DSP, DTSSP, and DSG must
first be dissolved in DMSO to a concentration of 25 mM before adding
dropwise to the PBS. Gels were then incubated in 375 mM Tris-HCl pH
8.8 buffer (when resolving by SDS-PAGE gradient gel) or 125 mM Tris-HCl
pH 6.8 (when resolving by nongradient SDS-PAGE gel), both containing
2% SDS for 1 h at room temperature.

2D-SDS-PAGE
Excised
gel strips were placed in-between
Mini PROTEAN system glass plates with a 1 mm spacer (Biorad, Hercules,
CA). Each gel strip was positioned with the lowest percentage gel
facing down (to ensure proteins leave the gel strip during electrophoresis).
When 6%T BN-PAGE gel was used the orientation of the gel strip was
not crucial. Approximately 30 mm space is needed on the end of the
gel strip for comb placement to form two wells. The glass plates containing
the gel strip were then locked into the Bio-Rad gel stand and checked
for leaks. Then a 3–16%T linear gradient or 12%T gel was poured
between the glass plates leaving approximately 10 mm space under the
excised gel piece for the sample gel. For 12%T gel, a 1 cm space was
left for the stacking gel to ensure sufficient band focusing. Butanol
was gently layered over the top of the gradient, and the gel was allowed
to polymerize at room temperature for ∼1 h. Once the gel was
polymerized, the butanol was removed and a sample gel of 3%T was poured
around the gel strip. Tilting the gel stand slightly prevented bubbles
from forming under the gel strip bubbles. The two-well comb was placed
in between the glass plates and 30 min was allowed for polymerization.
Alternatively, 2D-SDS-PAGE gels can also be precast (without the excised
gel strip). However, this requires custom well comb, which can be
fashioned out of polystyrene sheets purchased from most hobby stores.
Reduction in band resolution, due to uneven migration of the sample
out of excised gel, was observed when using precast gels and therefore
the method should generally be avoided. Gels were then run at 125
V until the dye front reached the end and gels were then transferred
to PVDF membrane in Towbin transfer buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 192 mM
glycine, and 20% methanol) using the constant of 20 V for ∼16
h at 4 °C.

Immunodetection
Dried membranes
were reactivated in
100% methanol for 1 min and then rinsed with ultrapure water. To confirm
even transfer, all membranes were stained using Ponceau S (Sigma-Aldrich).
Membranes were incubated in blocking buffer which consisted of 5%
m/vol milk diluted in TBST (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween-80,
pH 8.0) for 1 h at room temperature. Then membranes were incubated
in blocking buffer containing either monoclonal (BD Biosciences) or
polyclonal (Santa-Cruz) anti-α-synuclein antibodies diluted
1:1000, overnight at 4 °C. Parkin monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies
were diluted 1:1 000 in blocking buffer and incubated with
membranes overnight at 4 °C. Membranes were then washed 2 ×
10 min with TBST before incubating in the appropriate HRP conjugated
antibody diluted 1:5 000 in blocking buffer for 1 h at RT.
Membranes were then washed 2 × 10 min with TBST, incubated 5
min in enhanced chemiluminescence substrate (ThermoFisher Scientific),
and imaged using GE Imagequant LAS 4000 (GE Health Care, Little Chalfont,
United Kingdom).

In-Sample Cross-Linking
Brain tissue
lysates in PBS
(see Sample Preparation) were diluted to
concentrations ranging between 0.1 and 4 mg protein/mL. DSP or DSG
(1 mM) were added to each sample and incubated at 4 °C for 10
min. The reaction was quenched with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 for 15 min.
The 1× SDS-PAGE sample buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 2% SDS,
10% glycerol, and 0.1% bromophenol blue) was then added to each sample,
mixed well, and heated at 90 °C for 5 min. Protein (10 μg)
from each sample was added to each well. DSP cross-linker arm was
cleaved by adding 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) prior to heating the sample.
Purified α-synuclein was dissolved in PBS to a concentration
of 4 mg/mL and cross-linked with 2 mM DSP for 10 min at 4 °C.
The reaction was quenched with 50 mM Tris-HCL pH 8.0 for 15 min.

Determination of Total Lipid Content
Total sample lipid
content was determined essentially as previously described.13 Specifically, lipids isolated from the samples
were dissolved in 100 μL of chloroform. The chloroform solution
was then placed into a disposable 12 mm × 75 mm borosilicate
glass tube (Corning Inc., Corning, NY) and allowed to dry completely.
Standards were generated by dissolving a known mass of isolated rat
brain lipids (see BN-PAGE) or canola oil
(local grocery store) in chloroform. Standard solutions were then
pipetted into six glass tubes to yield 5–400 μg of total
lipid and dried completely. Then, 100 μL of concentrated sulfuric
acid (Sigma-Aldrich) was placed in each tube and incubated at 90 °C
for 20 min. The tubes are then cooled immediately using an ice water
bath, and solutions are transferred to a clear polystyrene 96-well
plate (Thermofisher). Light absorbance was measured at the wavelength
540 nm, then 50 μL of phosphor-vanillin solution (0.2 mg of
vanillin dissolved in 1 mL of 17% phosphoric acid) was added, and
the plate was incubated at room temperature for 10 min. The plate
was then read at 540 nm again, and the background (i.e., first absorbance
measurement) was subtracted from sulfo-phospho-vanillin absorbance
(i.e., second absorbance measurement). The detection limit was determined
to be approximately 5 μg of lipid.

Polyacrylamide Gel-Solutions
All gels were formed using
two stock polyacrylamide solutions. The first 40%T acrylamide stock
solution that can be purchased (Biorad) was used for all SDS-PAGE
gels. The second 40%T acrylamide stock solution is made by mixing
48 g of acrylamide (Fisher Scientific) and 1.5 g of N,N-methylenebis(acrylamide) (Fisher Scientific)
in 100 mL of ultrapure water (heating to 40 °C required to dissolve
completely). This second acrylamide solution was used only for BN-PAGE
gels. BN-PAGE gel buffers were prepared as previously described.14 Stacking gel buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8,
0.1% m/vol SDS) and resolving gel buffer (375 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8,
0.1% m/vol SDS) were used for all SDS-PAGE gels. The 0.1% m/vol ammonium
persulfate (Sigma) and 0.05% vol/vol N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethylenediamine
(Sigma) were used to the initiate polymerization of SDS-PAGE polyacrylamide
gels.

Blot Quantification
Densitometry analysis was conducted
on all images using Imagej software (National Institutes of Health).
Linear regression analysis and t-tests were conducted
using Graphpad Prism software (La Jolla, CA). All images are uncut
(unless depicted by a black line) and representative of each experiment
conducted. Several overexposed images are presented to display banding
pattern, but these images were not used for any quantification.

Results/Discussion
Electrophoretic Mobility of α-Synuclein
during BN-PAGE
Is Dependent on Sample Preparation
To develop the multimer-PAGE
protocol we first needed to describe, in detail, the migration pattern
of α-synuclein during BN-PAGE (Figure 1). Extraction of proteins from rat brain
tissue using 0.5% NP40, 1% digitonin, or in the absence of detergent
under typical lysis concentrations (25 mg tissue/mL buffer) showed
efficient tissue solubilization, an absence of abundant high molecular
weight (>150 kDa) α-synuclein interactions and allowed for
the
separation of soluble α-synuclein via BN-PAGE (Figure 1A). Monoclonal and polyclonal
antibodies against the C-terminus of α-synuclein produced similar
band patterns for tissue lysates. α-Synulcein migrated to the
gel position of approximately 50–146 kDa on the 2.8–13%T
BN-PAGE gel. The addition of up to 50 μg lysate protein still
produced one major band at 50 kDa. A mass shift to approximately ∼100
kDa was observed following the extraction with digitonin and NP40.
The overall protein distribution on BN-PAGE appeared similar between
extraction conditions, with the exception of an increased abundance
of observable protein complexes with digitonin and NP40 (Figure 1A, Ponseau S stain).
Together, these results show that under typical BN-PAGE conditions
soluble α-synuclein from rat brain tissue was separated as a
single species, predominantly migrating between the 50–146
kDa position on BN-PAGE, in agreement with several reports.4,15

Figure 1 Electrophoretic
mobility α-synuclein during BN-PAGE is determined
by sample preparation. (A) Rat brain tissue lysates were resolved
under typical blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE)
conditions. A total of 25 mg of rat brain tissue was homogenized in
1 mL of blue native page (BN-PAGE) sample buffer (50 mM BisTris, 6
N HCl, 50 mM NaCl, 10% vol/vol glycerol, 0.001% m/vol Ponceau S, pH
∼ 7.2). Then either 1% m/vol digitonin (Dig.) or 0.5% vol/vol
NP40 was added to the sample and incubated at 4 °C for 30 min.
Samples were then centrifuged at 18 000g for
30 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant (S1) was retained. Protein
concentration of the S1 was determined using bicinchoninic acid (BCA)
assay (ThermoFisher). In total, 10 μg and 50 μg of brain
tissue lysate protein were resolved using BN-PAGE. Proteins were then
immunoblotted onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes and blue
dye removed by washing the membrane with 100% methanol. PVDF membranes
were then stained with ponseau S, imaged, and subsequently probed
with both polyclonal and monoclonal anti-α-synuclein antibodies.
(B) Rat brain tissue was then disrupted under high tissue to buffer
ratio (m/vol) and separated by BN-PAGE. To do this, 200 mg rat brain
tissue was homogenized, as described above, in 1 mL of BN-PAGE sample
buffer in the absence of detergents. A total of 5–50 μg
of total protein input of the undiluted S1 fraction was loaded into
the first six wells of BN-PAGE gel. The S1 sample was then serial
diluted from 0.8 to 4 mg protein/mL and 30 μg of protein loaded
into the remaining wells (last six lanes). (C) Rat brain tissue lysates
separated by BN-PAGE in two dimensions. A total of 200 mg of rat brain
tissue was homogenized as described above. In total, 30 μg of
the lysate was then resolved on a 2.8–13%T BN-PAGE gel. The
gel lane was then excised and cast into a 2.8–13%T BN-PAGE
gel perpendicular to the first dimension direction of migration. The
sample was separated again via 2.8–13%T BN-PAGE. Top panel
represents the immunoblot of first dimension BN-PAGE and the middle
panel depicts immunoblot following the second dimension BN-PAGE. Bottom
panel depicts ponseau S staining of the blotted proteins from the
second dimension BN-PAGE. All membranes were probed with anti-α-synuclein
antibodies and the appropriate HRP conjugated secondary antibodies.
All separations shown were conducted using 2.8–13%T linear
gradient BN-PAGE gels. Blue arrows indicate the direction of migration
during BN-PAGE electrophoresis. All data representative of 3–10
experiments.

Previous reports demonstrate
high lysis concentrations preserve
α-synuclein multimers.7 Therefore,
we then resolved high concentration rat brain tissue lysates (200
mg tissue/1 mL buffer) in the absence of detergents and observed several
α-synuclein species migrating to 50 kDa, ∼100 kDa, 600
kDa, and 1048 kDa following BN-PAGE (Figure 1B). The mass shift of α-synuclein was
sensitive to both total protein input, and to some extent, sample
dilution. Under conditions of high sample concentration and/or high
total protein input α-synuclein preferentially migrates to the
100 kDa BN-PAGE gel position. At the highest total protein input (50
μg protein) the predominant species of α-synuclein had
an apparent mass of 100 kDa and two other massive species, at 600
kDa and 1048 kDa, could clearly be observed, albeit far less abundant
than the 100 kDa position. The mass shift of α-synuclein during
BN-PAGE was not completely lost following dilution of the sample,
suggesting that the sample concentration at initial tissue lysis was
also a crucial factor for the observed BN-PAGE mass shift. Interestingly,
once the majority of α-synuclein had shifted to 100 kDa, several
minor bands remained at the original position (more clearly seen in Figure 2B, bottom panel) suggesting the original band may be comprised
of several species with distinct masses. Together, these results show
that α-synuclein migrates to several positions on BN-PAGE depending
on how the sample is prepared and that an unknown dilution sensitive
factor was responsible for this apparent mass shift.

Figure 2 Sample lipid content
determines the migration of α-synuclein
during BN-PAGE. (A) 200 mg rat brain tissue was homogenized in 1 mL
of blue native page (BN-PAGE) sample buffer (50 mM BisTris, 6 N HCl,
50 mM NaCl, 10% vol/vol glycerol, 0.001% m/vol Ponceau S, pH ∼
7.2) and incubated on ice for 30 min. The sample was centrifuged then
at 18 000g for 30 min, S1 retained, and protein
content determined using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Samples were
then adjusted to a final concentration of 2 mg protein/mL. A volume
of 150 μL of the samples were mixed with 600 μL of methanol
and 150 μL of chloroform. A volume of 450 μL of ultrapure
water was then added to the sample and mixed thoroughly. Following
centrifugation at 18 000g for 5 min, the upper
aqueous phase was discarded and the lower phase resuspended in 600
μL of methanol. The sample was centrifuged at 18 000g for 5 min. The liquid was discarded and precipitate (proteins)
retained. Separately, bulk lipids were isolated by homogenizing 1
g of rat brain tissue in a mixture of chloroform and methanol (2:1).
Following sonication for 2 min, the homogenate was vortexed well,
4 mL of PBS added, and vortexed again. The sample was then allowed
to sit for 5 min to allow the solution to separate into two phases.
The organic phase containing the purified lipids was removed and dried
under vacuum. The lipid pellet was then completely dissolved in 200 μL
of 10% NP40. The precipitated lipid free proteins were dissolved in
BN-PAGE sample buffer, BN-PAGE sample buffer containing 0.5% w/v NP40,
or BN-PAGE sample buffer containing 0.5% w/v NP40 mixed lipid micelles.
Samples were mixed thoroughly, incubated on ice for 30 min, and mixed
thoroughly again. All samples were then centrifuged at 18 000g and the resulting 10 μg of protein of the soluble
fraction resolved by BN-PAGE. Top panel depicts immunobloting of samples
with anti-α-synuclein antibody. Middle panel depicts the white
light image of polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane immediately
following transfer of the BN-PAGE gel. Bottom panel depicts ponseau
S staining of PVDF membrane following the removal of G250 from the
membrane by washing in 100% methanol for ∼5 min. (B) 25, 50,
100, and 200 mg of rat brain tissue was homogenized in 1 mL of BN-PAGE
sample buffer as described above and resolved via BN-PAGE. A total
of 30 μg of total proteins were resolved in each lane without
sample dilution (left column panels) and following dilution of samples
to 2 mg protein/mL (right column panels). Top row depicts white light
image of PVDF membrane immediately following transfer. Middle row
depicts subsequent ponseau S staining of the PVDF membrane following
removal of G-250. Bottom row depicts the immunoreactivity of α-
synuclein. (C) Increasing concentrations of G-250 (0–2%) was
added to rat brain tissue lyates from high concentration homogenization
conditions (200 μg tissue/mL buffer). A total of 30 μg
of protein was then resolved via BN-PAGE. Top panel depicts white
light image of PVDF membrane. Middle row depicts ponseau S staining
of PVDF membrane following removal of G-250. Bottom row dipicts the
immunoreactivity of alpha-synuclein. (D) Lipid to protein content
of insoluble fraction following tissue homogenization at different
tissue to buffer ratios.

Next, we tested whether the observed α-synuclein mass-shift
was a progressive process (i.e., a product of electrophoresis) by
separating tissue lysates via BN-PAGE in two dimensions. Following
the first dimension separation of 30 μg of brain lysate by BN-PAGE
one main band at 50 kDa and a minor band just above ∼100 kDa,
were observed (Figure 1C, top panel), as was shown previously in Figure 1B. When we subsequently separated the BN-PAGE
gel lane by BN-PAGE perpendicular to the original migration direction,
we again observed two distinct α-synuclein species at 50 kDa
and ∼100 kDa (1C, middle panel), both at the original positions
of the 1D-BN-PAGE. This suggests that the mass shift of α-synuclein
during BN-PAGE was either due to a saturable process (i.e., nonprogressive)
or the observed massive species existed in the original sample. The
lack of a progressive mass shift during the second dimension BN-PAGE
makes it highly unlikely that buffer components (i.e., coomassie blue
g-250, Bis-Tris, aminocaporic acid, and tricine) were responsible
for the observed mass shift.

Endogenous Lipids Determine α-Synuclein
Migration Distance
during BN-PAGE
An unknown biological factor or factors, lost
upon dilution of the lysate and influenced the initial lysis concentration,
were causing a mass shift of α-synuclein during BN-PAGE. Endogenous
phospholipids are nearly insoluble amphiphiles that have the potential
to form small soluble aggregates, termed micelles. Micelles form at
threshold concentrations and are sensitive to dilution.16 Since α-synuclein is known to multimerize
upon phospholipid membrane binding,5 endogenous
lipid micelle-α-synuclein complex could be responsible for the
α-synuclein mass shift during BN-PAGE. To test whether endogenous
lipids were responsible for the apparent mass shift of α-synuclein,
we removed lipids from the brain tissue lysates and then resolved
the lipid free proteins by BN-PAGE. We found α-synuclein formed
one distinct 50 kDa species in the absence of endogenous lipids (Figure 2A) similar to what
was observed in low-lysis concentration detergent free samples (See Figure 1A). When 0.5% NP40
was added to lipid free proteins we observed a mass shift too approximately
of ∼100 kDa with only a small amount of the 50 kDa α-synuclein
species remaining (visualized a small spots toward the perimeter of
the lane). The mass shift was similar to that observed with BN-PAGE
of NP40 tissue extracts (Figure 1A). NP40/brain-lipid mixed micelles were then added
to the lipid free proteins and another mass shift was observed, with
α-synuclein now running at ∼50, ∼100, and ∼200
kDa, similar to that observed in the detergent free high concentration
samples (refer to Figure 1B). Therefore, lipid and detergent micelles alone could produce
a substantial apparent mass shift (+400% mass) during 1D-BNP. Interestingly,
the micelles and endogenous lipids could be observed on the back of
PVDF blots of the BN-PAGE following transfer, mostly stacked at the
bottom of the membrane (Figure 2A, middle panel). Strikingly, the α-synuclein migration
pattern was identical to the observed micelle migration pattern on
the PVDF membrane. Ponceau S staining confirmed that the observed
micelle positions were not highly proteinaceous (i.e., below ponseau
S detection threshold, ∼10 μg of protein per lane). Taken
together this data demonstrates that α-synuclein was migrating
with endogenous lipids and/or detergent micelles during BN-PAGE, and
this effect was likely responsible for mass shifts observed when tissue
was disrupted at high concentrations.

When we resolved brain
lipid/detergent mixed micelles by BN-PAGE, we noticed that they could
be clearly visualized following transfer to PVDF membranes (Figure 2A, middle panel).
Next we asked whether a similar pattern could be observed when tissue
was lysed at high concentrations. Such a pattern would presumably
confirm the hypothesis of endogenous lipid micelles being responsible
for the observed mass shift during BN-PAGE. Results show that indeed
the same type of pattern was observable most noticeably when tissue
was lysed at high concentrations (Figure 2B, top panel). As with the lipid/detergent
micelles, α-synuclein migration patterned mirrored the apparent
endogenous lipid structures (Figure 2B, bottom panel) following BN-PAGE. Dilution of the
samples did not abolish the visualization of the lipids but instead
resulted in their shift to lower, discrete bands. Again, α-synuclein
migration mirrored the position shift of the endogenous lipid micelles
upon sample dilution. Gross protein distribution was relatively unaffected
by the lipid structures migrating on BN-PAGE (Figure 2B, middle panel). Together, these observations
demonstrate that α-synuclein was comigrating with soluble endogenous
lipid structures.

Coomassie G-250 incorporates into detergent
micelles,17 imparting a net negative charge,
carrying them
to the dye front during BN-PAGE, ultimately preventing distortion
of protein separation.18 We wanted to determine
whether G-250 could alter the distribution of the apparent endogenous
lipid micelles and produce a corresponding mass shift in α-synuclein.
When 0.01–1% G250 was added directly to samples from high concentration
lysis conditions, the original lipid smear on the PVDF membrane was
no longer observable (Figure 2C, top panel). Gross protein migration appeared unaffected
by G-250 treatments (Figure 2C, middle panel), but α-synuclein migration became more
focused to a position of 50 kDa as the G-250 concentration increased
(Figure 2C, bottom
panel). Therefore, excess G-250 added directly to the sample prevents
the lipid mediated mass shift during BN-PAGE.

Lipids extracted
under high concentration lysis conditions determined
the electrophoretic mobility of α-synuclein during BN-PAGE;
however, it was unclear whether high concentration tissue lysis resulted
in increased lipid extraction from tissue. To directly address this,
we measured the lipid and protein content in the remaining insoluble
pellet (P1) at several lysis concentrations (Figure 2D). Results showed a sharp decrease in the
lipid/protein ratio in the insoluble pellet when tissue was disrupted
at high concentrations (i.e., 50–200 mg tissue/mL buffer).
Interestingly, all lysis conditions above 50 mg tissue/mL buffer had
similar lipid extraction efficacy. We attempted to directly measure
the lipid content in S1 fractions, but the lipid concentration was
near the assay’s threshold for detection (∼5 μg
of lipid) and we were unable to obtain quantitative results. Even
without the S1 lipid concentration it was clear that high lysis concentrations
were increasing ratio of lipid to protein extracted from tissue.

Mass shift of a protein during BN-PAGE electrophoresis is commonly
interpreted as a formation of protein complexes. However, as we have
demonstrated here, the electrophoretic mobility of α-synuclein
during BN-PAGE can vary drastically depending on sample preparation
(specifically sample lipid content). A previous report demonstrated
a similar effect for the mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier protein AAC3.19 Therefore, BN-PAGE alone is insufficient to
accurately detect and describe soluble α-synuclein multimers.

α-Synuclein Multimers Can Be Resolved via SDS-PAGE Following
In-Gel Chemical Cross-Linking
Chemical cross-linking methods
can be used to selectively capture protein–protein interactions.
Once protein–protein interactions are captured the samples
can be separated in the presence of SDS micelles via traditional SDS-PAGE.
SDS solubilizes lipids20 and denatures
proteins,21 thereby avoiding complications
involved with BN-PAGE when separating lipid binding proteins, in this
case α-synuclein. Therefore, following separation of tissue
lysates via BN-PAGE, we incubated BN-PAGE gel lanes in several cross-linking
solutions and then resolved them using 2D-SDS-PAGE (Figure 3A). Results showed that cross-linking
with 0.1 mM DSP, 0.1 mM DTSSP (not shown), 1% glutaraldehyde, 0.1
mM DSG, but not 1% PFA produced several high molecular weight α-synuclein
products in addition to the monomer detected following 2D-SDS-PAGE.
We also observed two massive α-synuclein species of low abundance
that were only captured and detectable with DSG or DSP. These elute
from the BN-PAGE positions corresponding to the two high molecular
weight species (∼600 kDa and ∼1048 kDa) clearly seen
following BN-PAGE in Figure 1B. Both species were far less massive on the SDS-PAGE (∼80
kDa, and 170 kDa, respectively). Because DSP and DSG cross-linking
is relatively specific for protein–protein interactions, the
600 kDa and 1048 kDa apparent masses on BN-PAGE were like due to processes
other than true multimerization (e.g., lipid/detergent binding), as
opposed to true multimers of 600 and 1048 kDa. PFA was ineffective
at capturing α-synuclein multimers most likely because the spacer-arm
length of PFA is relatively short (2 Å) while the effective cross-linkers
had much longer spacer arm length (≥7 Å).7 Several other reports have also demonstrated the successful
capture of α-synuclein multimers using cross-linkers with similar
spacer-arm length.4−6

Figure 3 In-gel chemical cross-linking reveals several soluble
α-synuclein
multimers following BN-PAGE. Rat brain tissue was homogenized in blue
native page (BN-PAGE) sample buffer (50 mM Bis-Tris, 6N HCl, 50 mM
NaCl, 10% vol/vol glycerol, 0.001% m/vol Ponceau S, pH ∼7.2)
at a ratio of 200 mg of wet tissue to 1 mL of buffer. Following centrifugation
at 18 000g for 30 min at 4 °C, the protein
content of the S1 fraction was determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA)
assay. (A) 30 μg protein per lane was resolved via BN-PAGE.
Individual lanes were then excised, washed with phosphate buffered
saline pH 7.4 (PBS), and incubated in PBS solutions containing 0.1
mM dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate) (DSP), 0.1 mM disuccinimidyl
glutarate (DSG), 1% glutaraldehyde (GLUT), or 1% paraformaldehyde
(PFA) for 30 min at 4 °C. The excised gel pieces were then cast
into SDS-PAGE and run perpendicular to the original migration direction.
(B) Rat brain tissue was homogenized in PBS at a ratio of 200 mg wet
tissue/1 mL buffer. Samples were centrifuged at 18 000g for 30 min at 4 °C. The sample was then diluted from
4 to 1 mg protein/mL. Following dilution, 1 mM DSG or 1 mM DSP was
added to the samples and incubated for 10 min at 4 °C. The reaction
was then quenched with 100 mM Tris- HCl pH 8.0 for 15 min at 4 °C.
The 5× SDS-PAGE sample buffer was added to each sample, mixed
well, and 10 μg of protein loaded into each lane of a 3–16%T
SDS-PAGE gel. The 5 mM DTT was added to the 4 mg protein/mL DSP cross-linked
sample to cleave the cross-linker (lane 1). (C) Increasing concentrations
of total soluble protein were resolved via BN-PAGE (from the left;
4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36, and 40 μg of protein). BN-PAGE
gel was cut above and below the 66 kDa molecular weight marker (red
dotted box), washed with PBS, incubated with 0.1 mM DSP, and cast
into a SDS-PAGE gel. Left panel depicts white light image of gel following
BN-PAGE. Right panel depicts immunoblotting of the second dimension
SDS-PAGE. All blots probed with rabbit polyclonal anti-α-synuclein
antibody and appropriate horse radish peroxidase (HRP) conjugated
secondary antibody. Images are representative of 3–5 separate
experiments.

It remained unclear whether
any α-synuclein multimers existed
in solution prior to electrophoresis or were products of BN-PAGE.
To address this, we directly cross-linked the soluble brain extracts
using 1 mM DSP or DSG and resolved them via 4–16% SDS-PAGE
(Figure 3B). Results
show that α-synuclein multimers could be detected in lystates
using both DSP and DSG cross-linkers. These multimers ranged from
34 kDa to >170 kDa and appeared to be formed predominantly by diffusion
mediated cross-linking. Serial dilution of the sample prior to cross-linking
prevented the capture of multimeric species, and for unclear reasons,
also resulted in reduced immunodetection of the monomer (i.e., 17
kDa). Because directly cross-linking the sample did not produce α-synuclein
multimers comparable to the in-gel crossslinking of BN-PAGE, the α-synuclein
multimers observed following BN-PAGE were most likely, to some extent,
products of electrophoresis.

Once we had determined that several
multimers were found at the
50–100 kDa positions of the BN-PAGE gel, we then “scaled
up” and optimized the procedure to make comparisons of many
samples more reliable and less time-consuming. To do this we exploited
the observation that under most sample conditions nearly all native
α-synuclein migrated to the ∼50–100 kDa position
on the BN-PAGE gel, and simply cut the gel just below the 66 kDa marker
and just at the 146 kDa marker and ran the 2D-SDS-PAGE parallel to
the BN-PAGE lanes (Figure 3C). The excised gel should encompass the 40–146 kDa
positions, to ensure all α-synuclein is resolved by 2D-SDS-PAGE.
This technique allowed the experimental conditions to be nearly identical
between samples. Using this “scaled up” procedure would
allow the cross-linked α-synuclein products to form more discrete
bands when separated by 2D-SDS-PAGE, as opposed to smeared blebs observed
with running the entire excised lanes, making them easier to visualize
and compare. Several experimental conditions could now be run on a
single gel making comparisons between the extracts simple and reproducible.
Furthermore, several multimers at the gel position could be quantified
simultaneously, as opposed to only the typically two α-synuclein
species observed following BN-PAGE. For simplicity, we termed the
entire process as “multimer-PAGE,” with the presented
blots representing the blotted 2D-SDS-PAGE of cross-linked native
complexes.

Optimization of In-Gel Chemical Cross-Linking
Diffusion
based chemical cross-linking can randomly covalently bind proteins
forming progressively massive products only limited by the diffusion
of the protein in solution. Protocols using chemical cross-linking
of proteins should be carefully validated to avoid diffusion based
products, unless the product is desired, as was later exploited here
to produce the α-synuclein multimer molecular weight “standard”
(see Figure 4E). Generally,
cross-linker concentration, time of cross-linking, and the molecular
structure of the cross-linker are manipulated to determine true products
(i.e., those that existed prior to cross-linking) vs diffusion based
(i.e., those that formed during cross-linking). Here we tested two
cross-linking molecules DSP and DSG, both of which have been used
in tissue and solution to stabilize α-synuclein multimers.6 Cross-linking the excised BN-PAGE gel with as
little as 0.1 mM DSP (Figure 4A) or DSG (Figure 4B) was sufficient to capture α-synuclein multimers.
For reasons that are unclear, increasing DSG concentrations appeared
to reduce the detection of both multimeric and monomeric α-synuclein.
Because of the unusual behavior of DSG during in-gel cross-linking,
we chose to use 0.1 mM DSP for the remaining studies. The main α-synuclein
species observed following in-gel cross-linking was smeared between
34 and 130 kDa on the SDS-PAGE. Next we tested what cross-linker incubation
time was optimal to capture the multimers (Figure 4C). Gels incubated with 0.1 mM DSP for 5
min preferentially capture αS80. The cross-linking time to capture
multimers was so rapid it strongly suggested that diffusion based
cross-linking was not a main driving factor of α-synuclein multimers
detection following multimer-PAGE protocol. Cross-linking produced
nearly equal multimer abundance at 30 and 45 min, and therefore 30
min was chosen for the remaining studies.

Figure 4 Optimization of in-gel
chemical cross-linking and multimer-PAGE
gel format. 10, 20, and 40 μg of rat soluble brain tissue lysate
were resolved by blue native polyacrylamide electrophoresis (BN-PAGE).
2.8–13% linear BN-PAGE gels were cut just above and below the
66 kDa molecular weight marker following electrophoresis. The excised
gel pieces were washed in phosphate buffered saline pH 7.4 (PBS) for
30 min at 4 °C. Excised BN-PAGE gel pieces were incubated with
cross-linking solution and cast directly to SDS-PAGE gels. The cross-linked
proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE perpendicular to the original direction
of sample migration. SDS-PAGE gels were then immunoblotted. Excised
gel pieces incubated with either (A) 0.1–2 mM dithiobis(succinimidyl
propionate) (DSP) (B) or 0.1–2 mM disuccinimidyl glutarate
(DSG). (C) Excised gel pieces incubated with 0.1 mM DSP for 5–45
min. (D) 30 μg of rat brain tissue lysate separated by BN-PAGE,
blotted, and probed for parkin (Left panel). 10, 20, 30, and 40 μg
of lysate protein resolved by BN-PAGE. BN-PAGE gel was excised between
40 and 242 kDa positions, incubated with 0.1 mM DSP for 30 min at
4 °C, and resolved via SDS-PAGE. Immunoblotting for parkin and
α-synuclein shown (Right panels). (E) Purified α-synuclein
was dissolved in PBS and diluted to a concentration of 5 mg protein/mL.
The 2 mM DSP was added to the sample and incubated for 10 min at 4
°C. The reaction was quenched with 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. 200
ng of α-synuclein resolved on 12%T SDS-PAGE. (F) Increasing
protein input resolved by 2.8–13%T BN-PAGE and 6%T BN-PAGE.
Samples were allowed to migrate the length of the 2.8–13%T
BN-PAGE and the 66 kDa gel position excised as before. In contrast,
samples were allowed to migrate on approximately 2 cm into the resolving
gel on the 6%T BN-PAGE, and this 2 cm gel piece excised. In-gel cross-linking
was performed and both excised gel pieces resolved via SDS-PAGE. Bands
are labeled with their apparent corresponding species according the
standard (E). Dotted red lines indicate position of gel excision.
All blots probed with rabbit polyclonal anti-α-synuclein antibody
and appropriate horse radish peroxidase (HRP) conjugated secondary
antibody. Images are representative of three separate experiments.

During validation of the multimer-PAGE
protocol, we observed that
optimal resolution of cross-linked products during SDS-PAGE requires
that excised gel pieces be cast directly into the SDS-PAGE gel as
described in the methods. Alternatively, when gel pieces were placed
directly on top of a preformed SDS-PAGE gel (also mentioned in methods)
lane distortion became evident (see Figure 4C) but did not appear to effect quantification.
Therefore, this method can be used when sample processing speed is
crucial, as it is more time intensive to cast excised gels directly
into SDS-PAGE gels. We also observed that using a 12%T SDS-PAGE with
a stacking layer ultimately provided superior band resolution to 3–16%T
SDS-PAGE gels.

Next we tested the specificity of multimer-PAGE
for α-synuclein.
To do this we ran the multimer-PAGE protocol and probed for the E3
ligase parkin, a small globular soluble protein not known to interact
with lipids or form progressively massive multimers. We found that
parkin also migrates to approximately the same BN-PAGE gel position
as α-synuclein (Figure 4D), making it a good internal control. Following multimer-PAGE
we observed no detectable cross-linked parkin multimers following
multimer-PAGE protocol. Instead we saw one species located at ∼43
kDa. This position is slightly below the 50 kDa position where parkin
is normally found. The slight discrepancy in molecular weight of parkin
is likely due to the stabilization of a compact tertiary structure
of parkin by chemical cross-linking, which can increase proteins mobility
on SDS-PAGE.22,23 The migration of parkin during
multimer-PAGE was in stark contrast to α-synuclein, which under
the same experimental conditions produced abundant multimers. This
finding demonstrates that multimer-PAGE is relatively specific for
α-synuclein and gross diffusion based protein cross-linking
was not a key factor.

To determine stoichiometry of α-synuclein
multimers following
multimer-PAGE we generated a molecular weight “standard”
by cross-linking concentrated purified α-synuclein (5 mg purified
α-synuclein/1 mL) with 2 mM DSP and separated the resulting
products by SDS-PAGE (Figure 4E). Results show five species at gel positions corresponding
to the molecular weights of 17 (αS17), 35 (αS35), 56 (αS56),
80 (αS80), and 100 kDa (αS100). α-Synuclein was
detected above 130 kDa position but was poorly resolved by SDS-PAGE
and therefore was disregarded as a defined α-synuclein multimers
species. The observed multimers were likely captured primarily via
diffusion controlled cross-linking because there was an inverse relationship
between multimers abundance and the observed molecular weight, which
likely occurs if multimers were cross-linked in a stepwise fashion.

We next wanted to determine the optimal polyacrylamide gel format
for multimer-PAGE (Figure 4F). We found that 6%T BN-PAGE gel followed by 12%T SDS-PAGE
gel provided the greatest resolution of α-synuclein multimers
with the least effort. We simply ran the 6%T BN-PAGE gel (with 2.8%T
well gel) at 100 V until all soluble proteins had migrated ∼2
cm into the resolving gel. The gel was excised as before and cast
into the 12%T SDS-PAGE. The new gel format had several key advantages:
(1) avoided hand pouring linear gradient polyacrylamide gels which
can be time-consuming and have poor reproducibility, (2) ensured all α-synuclein
(and other proteins) in the sample was resolved by multimer-PAGE,
(3) cross-linked products migrated out of a single 6%T BN-PAGE gel
to the SDS-PAGE gel more consistently allowing for increased band
resolution, (4) allowed for investigation of protein complexes other
that α-synuclein without extensive validation of BN-PAGE migration
(i.e., do not need to know a BN-PAGE migration pattern), and (5) faster
BN-PAGE run times (∼30 min at 100 V).

Optimization of Brain Tissue
Sample Preparation and Separation
Once in-gel cross-linking
and electrophoresis conditions were optimized,
we then tested the influence of sample preparation on multimer-PAGE
output. First, we investigated whether lipid content of the sample
would alter the observed multimer pattern. We had already observed
that α-synuclein migrated with endogenous brain lipids during
BN-PAGE (Figure 2A–C);
however, when we assessed these samples using multimer-PAGE we found
little evidence of any multimeric α-synuclein species in any
of the samples (Figure 5A). Neither proteins alone nor proteins reconstituted into lipid/detergent
micelles produced detectable multimers. This suggests that although
α-synuclein was strongly interacting with lipid/detergent mixed
micelles the binding to these micelles alone was insufficient to produce
multimers. Furthermore, multimers observed following multimer-PAGE
of tissue lysates were likely not due to protein–lipid cross-linking,
as these products would then be predicted to be in abundance in the
presence of excess brain lipids. However, phosphatidalserine and phosphatidylethanolamine
both contain primary amines so protein–lipid cross-linked products
cannot be conclusively ruled out.

Figure 5 Sample preparation determines observed
multimer abudance and pattern.
Rat brain tissue was homogenized in blue native page (BN-PAGE) sample
buffer (50 mM BisTris, 6 N HCL, 50 mM NaCl, 10% vol/vol glycerol,
0.001% m/vol Ponseau S, pH ∼7.2) at a ratio of 200 mg wet tissue/1
mL buffer. Following centrifugation at 18 000g for 30 min at 4 °C, the protein content of the S1 fraction
was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. (A) 300 μg
proteins from the sample was precipitated and resusupended in either
BN-PAGE sample buffer containing either 0.5% NP40 or 0.5% NP40 mixed
lipid micelles. Protein (10 μg) was resolved by multimer-PAGE.
(B) 50–200 ng of purified α-synuclein and 30 μg
of brain tissue lysate were resolved via multimer-PAGE. (C) 0–1%
G250 directly added to S1 samples. 30 μg of these samples was
separated by multimer-PAGE. (D) Rat brain tissue was disrupted in
BN-PAGE sample buffer at a tissue mass to buffer ratio of 25, 50,
100, and 200. A total of 30 μg of protein from each lysis condition
was resolved via multimer-PAGE. SDS-PAGE of S1 and P1 found in the
bottom two panels. (E) Rat brain tissue was homogenized in a tissue
mass to a buffer ratio of 25 and 100. Increasing total protein input
was then resolved via multimer-PAGE. (From the left: 5, 10, 20, 30,
and 40 μg protein). All samples were centrifuged at 18 000g for 30 min prior to BN-PAGE. All blots probed with rabbit
polyclonal anti-α-synuclein antibody and appropriate horse radish
peroxidase (HRP) conjugated secondary antibody. Images are representative
of 2–4 separate experiments.

Since recombining separated components (i.e., lipids and
proteins)
of complex biological samples did not produce detectable multimers
by BN-PAGE, we wanted to determine whether α-synuclein alone
could assemble into multimers during multimer-PAGE. To test this we
resolved increasing α-synuclein input (50–200 ng) by
multimer-PAGE and found multimers, to a limited extent, could be detected
(Figure 5B). However,
multimers from purified α-synuclein required excess protein
input and were qualitatively distinct from those found in tissue lysates.
High molecular weight α-synuclein multimers (i.e., αS56,
αS80, and αS100) are preferentially detected in lysates
while αS35 is the primary multimer detected when using purified
α-synuclein. The multimer pattern when using purified α-synuclein
was indicative of diffusion based cross-linking and distinct from
multimers from lysates, as previously reported.7 Therefore, α-synuclein was insufficient to produce
multimers observed in complex biological samples.

G-250 incorporates
into micelles and can form micelle like structures
in water, and therefore we wanted to know whether G-250 could affect
multimer detection (Figure 5C). G250 added directly to the sample produced an increased
multimer abundance only when G-250 concentrations were relatively
high (0.5% and 1%). G-250 concentrations below 0.5% (first three lanes)
were similar in multimer abundance and distribution. Because samples
are not typically exposed to G-250 concentrations above 0.5% during
multimer-PAGE protocol, this effect is likely minimal.

Previously
we demonstrated that disruption of brain tissue at high
concentrations increased relative lipid extraction and altered the
migration of α-synuclein during BN-PAGE (see Figure 2D, B), so we explored whether
the ratio of tissue to lysis buffer influenced the abundance of observed
multimers. Results showed that when tissue was disrupted at increasing
concentrations, multimers in the S1 fraction were in greater abundance
but the pattern was relatively unchanged (Figure 5D). αS80 and αS100 appeared to
be particularly abundant with αS56 being lower in abundance.
Interestingly, the total amount of α-synuclein extracted (i.e.,
S1 fraction) per protein was similar when 50 mg tissue per mL buffer
or greater was used for tissue lysis. Despite the similar extraction
efficacy, multimers were clearly more abundant with increasing ratio
of tissue to buffer. Both the 100 and 200 mg tissue per mL buffer
showed nearly the same multimer abundance, and therefore the 100 mg
tissue per mL buffer condition was selected for multimer quantification.

Few multimers were detected at typical tissue lysis concentration
(i.e., 25 mg tissue/mL buffer) when 20 μg of total protein was
input into multimer-PAGE (see Figure 5D). However, our previous data suggested that, to some
extent, α-synuclein multimers were being formed during electrophoresis
(see Figure 3C,B).
Therefore, we next asked whether increasing sample input from low
and high lysis concentrations would produce observable multimers.
Results show that as sample input increased, multimers became more
abundant in both the low and high concentration tissue lysis samples
(Figure 5E). α-Synuclein
multimers were detectable with 10 μg of protein in the high
concentration lysis but required 15 μg following low concentration
tissue lysis. Multimer-abundance increased disproportionally to monomer
abundance following both lysis concentrations. This observation, as
seen previously (Figure 3C), seems to support the idea that multimers were forming during
multimer-PAGE and do not exist in the original sample. Therefore,
although lysis at high concentration allows for ease of multimer detection,
it does not seem absolutely necessary to produce multimers given sample
input into the multimer-PAGE is sufficiently high.

Using Multimer-PAGE
to Measure the Stoichiometry of α-Synuclein
Multimers in Biological Samples
Next we wanted to determine
a standardized method to analyze the data produced by multimer-PAGE.
To do this we exploited the observation that the ratio of αS80
to αS17 increases linearly with increasing protein input into
multimer-PAGE (see Figure 6C). This phenomenon allowed the assessment of multimerization
while avoiding variability from factors such as relative α-synuclein
abundance in the sample.

Figure 6 Multimer-PAGE can be used to compare many complex
biological samples.
Brain tissue from 4 male Sprague–Dawley rats was weighed and
homogenized in BN-PAGE sample buffer (100 mg tissue/mL buffer). Samples
were centrifuged at 18 000g for 30 min at
4 °C. The supernatant was retained and 10, 20, and 30 μg
of protein separated by multimer-PAGE. Multimer-PAGE of samples from
the hypothalamus (A) and cortex (B). Top panels depict immunoblotting
for α-synuclein. Bottom panels depict ponseau S stain of multimer-PAGE
blots prior to immunoprobe. (C) The ratio of 17 kDa (αS17) to
80 kDa (αS80) α-synuclein was calculated using ImageJ
software and values are plotted for each protein input. The R2 for each line is depicted on the graph. (D)
Bar graph comparing the multimer curve slopes between the two brain
regions. (“Rate of multimer formation” = slope of multimer
curves. *students t test, t (6)
= 11.29, p < 0.0001, n = 4).

We generated a multimer curve
by separating 10, 20, and 30 μg
protein of lysates from the rat hypothalamus (Figure 6A) and frontal cortex (Figure 6B) via multimer-PAGE. Care was taken to ensure
tissue was disrupted in 1 mL of BN-PAGE sample buffer per 100 mg of
tissue. Once the multimer curve was generated (Figure 6C) we could plot the ratio of αS80
to αS17 at each protein input. The corresponding slope of the
multimer curve could then be calculated and compared. We refer to
the calculated slope as the rate of multimer formation because the
line likely represents the propensity of α-synuclein to form
multimers during multimer-PAGE. We then compared multimer formation
between two distict brain regions (Figure 6D). Results show, that within each brain
region, animals had similar rate of multimer formation, resulting
in very little variability. However, when we compared the two brain
regions there was significant (Students t test, t (6) = 11.29, p < 0.0001, n = 4) reduction in the rate of multimer formation in the hypothalamus
when compared to the frontal cortex. The significance the regional
difference in multimer formation is not realized here, but the method
appears to provide reproducible and accurate measurement of the α-synuclein
multimer abundance between different biological samples.

Final Optimized
Protocol for α-Synuclein Multimer-PAGE
The final optimized
protocol for α-synuclein multimer-PAGE
involves four key steps and takes approximately 1 day to complete
(Figure 7). With this
protocol we could routinely measure and compare several high molecular
weight α-synuclein species across complex biological samples.
Effort was taken to ensure the process was not overly complicated
and could be conducted using common lab equipment. Although this protocol
was optimized for α-synuclein detection, it should be emphasized
that experimentation with protein separation, cross-linking, and sample
handing conditions could potentially help answer questions about numerous
other protein complexes. This technique likely has broad applicability
to the study of the stoichiometry of numerous other protein-complexes.
Although the current protocol is limited to measuring “low-n” multimers consisting of ∼10 or less α-synuclein
molecules, the SDS-PAGE gel format could be easily adjusted to study
ever more massive multimeric species.

Figure 7 Final optimized protocol for α-synuclein
multimer-PAGE. First,
rat brain tissue was homogenized in blue native page electrophoresis
(BN-PAGE) sample buffer (50 mM BisTris, 6 N HCl, 50 mM NaCl, 10% vol/vol
glycerol, 0.001% m/vol Ponseau S, pH ∼7.2 ) at a specific buffer
to tissue ratio (100 mg of wet tissue per 1 mL of buffer) (top panel).
Homogenization was conducted on ice and consisted of 30 gentle strokes
in a 7 mL glass dounce homogenizer. Samples were then centrifuged
for 30 min at 18 000g, and the supernatant
(S1) containing the soluble biological molecules was retained. Samples
were then prepared to load into a BN-PAGE gel (see Step II). To do
this, protein content of this sample was then determined using bicinchoninic
acid (BCA) assay and the S1 diluted to 2 mg protein/mL using BN-PAGE
sample buffer. In order to compare samples, 10, 20, and 30 μg
of each sample was loaded into a 6%T BN-PAGE gel. A 100 V potential
was applied to the gel until the sample had migrated to approximately
2 cm into the resolving layer of the 6%T BN-PAGE gel. The gel was
then removed, well gel discarded, and the 2 cm section of gel containing
the samples was excised. The excised gel piece was then washed in
phosphate buffered saline pH 7.4 (PBS) for approximately 30 min at
4 °C (see step III). The PBS solution should be changed at least
3 times during the washing. Then the gel piece is placed in 10 mL
of PBS and 40 μL of 25 mM dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate)
(DSP) dissolved in DMSO added to the PBS. The gel is incubated in
this cross-linking solution for 30 min at 4 °C, then the solution
is discarded and replaced with quenching solution (125 mM Tris-HCL
pH 6.8, 2% SDS) and incubated for 60 min at room temperature. The
excised gel piece is then placed between glass plates and cast into
12%T SDS-PAGE gel. A constant voltage of 100 V is then applied to
the gel using SDS-PAGE running buffer until coomassie dye has left
the end of the gel. The 12%T SDS-PAGE gel was then electroblotted
onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes and probed with several
α-synuclein antibodies (see Step IV). Densitometry analysis
can then be conducted on the observed bands using imageJ software.
The slope of the lines plotting multimer abundance and total protein
input could be used to compare samples. (“ST” = well
for molecular weight standard)

Conclusions
α-Synuclein formed several soluble
multimers during BN-PAGE
provided that lipid interactions were preserved during tissue lysis.
Preservation of lipid interactions likely stabilized α-synuclein
secondary structure8,24 subsequently “seeding”
multimer formation3 and/or stabilizing
existing multimers. We found that a practical method to preserve lipid
interactions involved disrupting the tissue in small buffer volumes
(i.e., 50–200 mg tissue/mL buffer) in the absence of detergents.
The high ratio of tissue to buffer increased the extraction of lipids
from tissue. Extracted lipids behaved like endogenous micelles. Although
we did not provide a direct description of these micelles, they are
logically consistent with the fact that free phospholipids are almost
completely insoluble in water and the lipid structures migrated on
BN-PAGE as complexes (i.e., above the dye front) and not monomers
(i.e., with the dye front). The α-synuclein species observed
following the multimer-PAGE, once optimized, were in general agreement
with the previously reported α-synuclein multimers,2,5−7 and distinct from those produced by diffusion mediated
protein cross-linking.

Future studies are needed to explore
the applicability of the multimer-PAGE
technique. Studies that may be fruitful should focus on the possible
heterogeneity (e.g., differences in protein folding, post-translational
modification etc.) of the observed α-synuclein multimers and
how this may confer/abolish stability. Liquid chromatography–mass
spectrometry (LC–MS) would be particularly useful in identifying
possible heterogeneity post-translational modifications between multimers;
although mass adjustments to account for the cross-linker would need
to be applied, as has been done numerous reports.25 LC–MS may also allow for the identification of the
specific lipid(s) interacting with α-synuclein.26 It is also important to further validate multimer-PAGE
across several PD models to determine its usefulness in describing
the pathology of the disease.

Multimer-PAGE provides several
unique advantages over in-solution
cross-linking or native-PAGE alone. Kinetics of the chemical cross-linking
reaction could be controlled precisely making the comparison between
many samples easily reproducible. The preseparation of proteins appeared
to reduce diffusion based cross-linking, probably because the movement
of complexes in the sample was restricted to the immediate vicinity
of their position in the polyacrylamide gel, making chance interactions
with other proteins unlikely. Multimer-PAGE seemed useful in detecting
stable protein complexes other that α-synuclein multimers. In
this regard, multimer-PAGE may be a particularly valuable supplemental
technique for BN-PAGE, to verify true protein complexes, as protein
mobility on BN-PAGE alone clearly is not sufficient.19 For example, multimer-PAGE detected parkin as a monomer
(50 kDa) in contrast to a previous report that found parkin to be
exclusively a tetramer, based on BN-PAGE experiments.27 Multimer-PAGE format also allows the simultaneous comparison
of many biological samples, so that relative protein complex abundance
can be compared on a single blot. Although not reported here, gels
could also be incubated with solutions containing experimental molecules
to assess their influence on complex stability.

Lipid–protein
cross-linking could occur between α-synuclein
and phosphatidalserine or phosphatidylethanolamine. This interpretation
of the data has the advantage of explaining the seemingly anomalous
behavior of α-synuclein following sample dilution prior to chemical
cross-linking (seen in Figure 3B). DSP treatment enhances α-synuclein detection on
PVDF membranes as described previously.28 The enhancement is lost upon sample dilution. Because we observed
that α-synuclein association with endogenous lipids was sensitive
to dilution, it could be that upon dilution α-synuclein disassociates
from endogenous lipids, reverting to an unstable intrinsically dynamic
protein in solution. Cross-linking of free α-synuclein would
then likely form a more compact structure as adjacent lysine residues
of α-synuclein cross-link to each other. In contrast, if lipid–protein
cross-linking occurred between α-synuclein and several phospholipids,
α-synuclein would not only have a larger molecular radius but
would presumably be more hydrophobic, allowing for enhanced PVDF binding.
Data provided here is insufficient to conclusively affirm or reject
this interpretation and future studies should aim to address this
potentially important molecular behavior of soluble α-synuclein.

Overall, multimer-page is a useful technique to study protein complexes
in great detail. Multimer-PAGE was used successfully to describe and
compare soluble α-synuclein multimers across complex biological
samples. Future studies should focus on the applicability of this
technique to studying PD pathogenesis.

This work was
funded by National Institutes of Health Grant DA034783.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the laboratory of Dr. Aloke Dutta for
providing purified α-synuclein.
==== Refs
References
Bendor J. T. ; Logan T. P. ; Edwards R. H. 
Neuron 
2013 , 79 , 1044 –1066 . 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.09.004 .24050397 
Goedert M. ; Spillantini M. G. ; Del Tredici K. ; Braak H. 
Nat. Rev. Neurol. 
2012 , 9 , 13 –24 . 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.242 .23183883 
Burre J. ; Sharma M. ; Sudhof T. C. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2014 , 111 , E4274 –4283 . 10.1073/pnas.1416598111 .25246573 
Bartels T. ; Choi J. G. ; Selkoe D. J. 
Nature 
2011 , 477 , 107 –110 . 10.1038/nature10324 .21841800 
Burre J. ; Sharma M. ; Sudhof T. C. 
J. Neurosci. 
2015 , 35 , 5221 –5232 . 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4650-14.2015 .25834048 
Dettmer U. ; Newman A. J. ; Soldner F. ; Luth E. S. ; Kim N. C. ; von Saucken V. E. ; Sanderson J. B. ; Jaenisch R. ; Bartels T. ; Selkoe D. 
Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 7314 10.1038/ncomms8314 .26076669 
Dettmer U. ; Newman A. J. ; Luth E. S. ; Bartels T. ; Selkoe D. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 6371 –6385 . 10.1074/jbc.M112.403311 .23319586 
Uversky V. N. ; Lee H. J. ; Li J. ; Fink A. L. ; Lee S. J. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2001 , 276 , 43495 –43498 . 10.1074/jbc.C100551200 .11590163 
Huang C. ; Ren G. ; Zhou H. ; Wang C. C. 
Protein Expression Purif. 
2005 , 42 , 173 –177 . 10.1016/j.pep.2005.02.014 .
Folch J. ; Lees M. ; Sloane Stanley G. H. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
1957 , 226 , 497 –509 .13428781 
Wittig I. ; Braun H. P. ; Schagger H. 
Nat. Protoc. 
2006 , 1 , 418 –428 . 10.1038/nprot.2006.62 .17406264 
Shearer G. Jr.
Anal. Biochem. 
1994 , 221 , 397 –400 . 10.1006/abio.1994.1432 .7810884 
McMahon A. ; Lu H. ; Butovich I. A. 
Lipids 
2013 , 48 , 513 –525 . 10.1007/s11745-013-3755-9 .23345137 
Wittig I. ; Schagger H. 
Proteomics 
2009 , 9 , 5214 –5223 . 10.1002/pmic.200900151 .19834896 
Engelender S. ; Kaminsky Z. ; Guo X. ; Sharp A. H. ; Amaravi R. K. ; Kleiderlein J. J. ; Margolis R. L. ; Troncoso J. C. ; Lanahan A. A. ; Worley P. F. ; Dawson V. L. ; Dawson T. M. ; Ross C. A. 
Nat. Genet. 
1999 , 22 , 110 –114 . 10.1038/8820 .10319874 
Seddon A. M. ; Curnow P. ; Booth P. J. 
Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, Biomembr. 
2004 , 1666 , 105 –117 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2004.04.011 .
Samsonoff C. ; Daily J. ; Almog R. ; Berns D. S. 
J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
1986 , 109 , 325 –329 . 10.1016/0021-9797(86)90310-3 .
Wittig I. ; Schagger H. 
Proteomics 
2008 , 8 , 3974 –3990 . 10.1002/pmic.200800017 .18763698 
Crichton P. G. ; Harding M. ; Ruprecht J. J. ; Lee Y. ; Kunji E. R. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 22163 –22173 . 10.1074/jbc.M113.484329 .23744064 
Banerjee P. ; Joo J. B. ; Buse J. T. ; Dawson G. 
Chem. Phys. Lipids 
1995 , 77 , 65 –78 . 10.1016/0009-3084(95)02455-R .7586093 
Bhuyan A. K. 
Biopolymers 
2010 , 93 , 186 –199 . 10.1002/bip.21318 .19802818 
Therien A.
G. ; Grant F. E. ; Deber C. M. 
Nat. Struct. Biol. 
2001 , 8 , 597 –601 . 10.1038/89631 .11427889 
Rath A. ; Glibowicka M. ; Nadeau V. G. ; Chen G. ; Deber C. M. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2009 , 106 , 1760 –1765 . 10.1073/pnas.0813167106 .19181854 
Davidson W. S. ; Jonas A. ; Clayton D. F. ; George J. M. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
1998 , 273 , 9443 –9449 . 10.1074/jbc.273.16.9443 .9545270 
Leitner A. ; Walzthoeni T. ; Kahraman A. ; Herzog F. ; Rinner O. ; Beck M. ; Aebersold R. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2010 , 9 , 1634 –1649 . 10.1074/mcp.R000001-MCP201 .20360032 
Gubbens J. ; Ruijter E. ; de Fays L. E. ; Damen J. M. ; de Kruijff B. ; Slijper M. ; Rijkers D. T. ; Liskamp R. M. ; de Kroon A. I. 
Chem. Biol. (Oxford,
U. K.) 
2009 , 16 , 3 –14 . 10.1016/j.chembiol.2008.11.009 .
Van
Humbeeck C. ; Waelkens E. ; Corti O. ; Brice A. ; Vandenberghe W. 
Eur. J. Neurosci. 
2008 , 27 , 284 –293 . 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2007.06000.x .18190519 
Newman A. J. ; Selkoe D. ; Dettmer U. 
PLoS One 
2013 , 8 , e81314 10.1371/journal.pone.0081314 .24278419

