
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b00015ReviewCapillary Electrophoresis: Trends and Recent Advances Voeten Robert L. C. †‡Ventouri Iro K. ‡§Haselberg Rob *†Somsen Govert W. †† Division of BioAnalytical
Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, de Boelelaan 1085, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands‡ TI-COAST, Science Park
904, 1098 XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands§ Analytical Chemistry Group, van’t
Hoff Institute for Molecular Sciences, University
of Amsterdam, Science
Park 904, 1098 XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands* E-mail: r.haselberg@vu.nl.03 01 2018 06 02 2018 90 3 1464 1481 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.document-id-old-9ac8b00015document-id-new-14ac-2018-000153ccc-price
==== Body
Since the introduction of modern capillary electrophoresis
(CE) by Jorgenson and Lukacs in 1981, CE has evolved into a highly
mature and versatile separation technique. After a first decade of
development studies and instrument commercialization, CE took its
place among established analytical techniques and, for instance, became
the method of choice for fast high-resolution DNA sequencing in the
nineties of the last century. Although with a considerably smaller
footprint than liquid and gas chromatography, CE remains to play an
essential role in contemporary analytics. For example, with the strong
advent of biopharmaceuticals, CE has shown to be particularly useful
for routine quality control of therapeutic proteins, such as monoclonal
antibodies. Current CE applications range from determination of small
inorganic ions to characterization of high-molecular-weight biomolecules,
and even particles and intact cells. The research field of CE remains
very active, as exhibited by a steady and significant flow of scientific
reports on theory, separation modes, new instrumentation, and applications
of CE techniques in various areas.

The present review provides
a brief cross section of new developments in the broad field of CE,
covering the period between September 2015 and September 2017. An
initial search on Web of Science, considering keywords related to
all modes of CE including their acronyms, yielded about 7000 articles.
A first screening in which reviews and irrelevant references were
omitted, provided 1200 papers of significance. From these a selection
of about 200 was made based on originality, interesting developments
and relevance. Notably, studies utilizing electrophoretic principles
in microfluidic devices were not included in the present review.

Techniques
and Methods
Preconcentration
Injected sample amounts in CE are
inherently small. Moreover, when using optical detectors, the optical
pathway is limited. Consequently, the concentration sensitivity of
CE methods can be poor. Improvement of concentration detection limits
by sample preconcentration, either online or offline, remains a topic
of research activity.

Electrophoretic Preconcentration
Electrophoretic sample preconcentration in CE often relies on an
abrupt and temporary reduction of the migration velocity of analytes.
This is clear in commonly applied methods like field-amplified sample
stacking (FASS),1 large-volume sample stacking/injection
(LVSS/LVSI),2 field-enhanced sample injection
(FESI),3,4 sweeping,5 and
electrokinetic supercharging (EKS).6 The
fundamentals of electrokinetic processes occurring during FASS were
studied experimentally and with computer simulation by Sestak and
Thormann.7 The authors investigated the
effect of injected plug lengths, buffer concentration, sample composition,
and linear velocity for the analysis of cationic compounds.

Another study described the use of a free liquid membrane (FLM) to
further enhance stacking efficiency of a EKS-CE-UV method.8 The FLM presents a water-immiscible organic solvent
interface facilitating the electrically induced transfer of charged
analytes, such as paraquat and diquat. The sensitivity gain was almost
2000-fold. Similar improvements in sensitivity were achieved by Cheng
et al., who combined LVSI, anion selective exhaustive injection, and
sweeping for the online preconcentration of tetrahydrocannabinol and
metabolites.9 The resulting CE method allowed
direct detection of target analytes in urine.

Multiple isotachophoresis
(M-ITP) injections were explored to enhance sensitivity.10 In M-ITP, the ITP sample preconcentration procedure
is repeated several times allowing injection of up to 300 times the
normal volume. With 6 M-ITP cycles, quantification of the Aβ
1-40 amyloid peptide down to 50 nM was achieved using UV detection.

Chromatographic Preconcentration
Solid-phase extraction
(SPE) remains a popular chromatographic preconcentration technique
for CE. Zhao et al. demonstrated the effectiveness of offline C5 reversed-phase
liquid chromatography (RPLC) prior to top-down capillary zone electrophoresis
coupled to electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (CZE-ESI-MS)
analysis of a yeast proteome.11 In total,
580 proteoforms and 180 protein groups were identified from 23 proteome
fractions analyzed. Another study used C8 SPE cartridges for reduction
of sample complexity and preconcentration.12 Melatonin and indole compounds in plant extracts could be detected
down to low ppb levels. Rodriguez et al. performed SPE based on synthesized
Fe3O4–fullerene–activated carbon
magnetic adsorbents for analysis of azo dyes in wastewater in the
low mg/L range.13

In online SPE-CE
a small trapping column is introduced just before or in the initial
part of the separation capillary. Tascon et al. proposed an online
SPE-CE-MS method for sensitive alkaloid analysis.14 A micro-C18-column ensured sample cleanup and simultaneous
preconcentration, providing limits of detection (LODs) in the 2–77
pg/mL range for algal extracts. Espina-Benitez et al. used a short
segment of silica-based monolith with a locally functionalized acrylamide
derivative of phenylboronic acid to isolate and preconcentrate diols
from 2 μL of complex matrixes (Figure 1).15 Column elution
with a small plug of acidic solution allowed FASS of the analytes
prior to their CE separation, ensuring LODs in the ng/mL range. This
inline coupling was subsequently successfully used for the fully automated
analysis of catecholamines (neurotransmitters) in urine samples.

Figure 1 Schematic
illustration of the different steps of cis-diols compounds analysis.
A miniaturized boronate affinity monolithic column (μBAMC) at
the inlet of an open fused silica capillary is used to preconcentrate
and purify cis-diol containing molecules. After their capture under
alkaline conditions, catecholamines are eluted in a short acidic plug
before their subsequent inline CE separation and UV detection. Reprinted
from J. Chromatogr. A, Vol. 1494, Espina-Benitez, M. B.; Randon, J.; Demesmay, C.; Dugas, V., Development
and application of a new in-line coupling of a miniaturized boronate
affinity monolithic column with capillary zone electrophoresis for
the selective enrichment and analysis of cis-diol-containing compounds,
pp. 65–76 (ref (15)). Copyright 2017, with permission from Elsevier.

Miscellaneous
An online sample preconcentration
method was developed exclusively for catecholamines that were fluorogenically
derivatized with naphthalene-2,3-dicarboxaldehyde.16 It takes advantage of diol-borate complexation, through
which one negative charge is added to the analytes. The sample was
electrokinetically introduced via flow-gated injection. The analytes
were selectively focused to a narrow zone by reversible complexation,
leading to 100-fold preconcentration for catecholamines in artificial
cerebrospinal fluid.

Shimura and Nagai combined immunoaffinity
chromatography (IAC) with isoelectric focusing (IEF) in a single capillary.17 IAC was ensured by immobilizing an anti-E-tag
antibody at the inlet of the capillary. The remainder of the capillary
was coated with neutral polydimethylacrylamide to ensure efficient
IEF separations. Fluorescently labeled recombinant Fab with an E-tag
spiked at 16 pM to 10 nM in 50% serum was separated and detected with
high precision.

An online high-throughput microdialysis-capillary
electrophoresis (MD-CE) assay was designed to investigate branched-chain
amino acids as possible biomarkers.18 Analytes
were sampled using microdialysis, fluorescently labeled in an online
reaction, separated using CE and detected using laser-induced fluorescence
(LIF) in a sheath flow cuvette. CE separations were performed in less
than 30 s, and the temporal resolution of the online MD-CE assay was
within 60 s. In a next study, the MD-CE assay was used to monitor in vivo dynamics, achieving a temporal resolution of 22
s for small bioamines.19

Coatings
When conventional bare fused-silica capillaries are used in CE,
resolution and peak widths and shapes may be compromised by adverse
interactions of the analytes with the inner capillary surface. Furthermore,
adsorption of sample matrix components, e.g., proteins, may cause
uncontrollable changes of the electroosmotic flow (EOF) and poor migration-time
reproducibility. In order to avoid unwanted adsorptions, coating of
the capillary wall is a common strategy which remains the subject
of research.

Poulsen et al. posed new capillary coating procedures
using polyethylene glycol (PEG).20 These
include in-capillary surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization
ensuring covalent binding to the capillary wall and an electrostatic
adsorption process. Coating procedures were followed by monitoring
adsorption of 2-propylisochinolinium bromide and Sunset Yellow as
a positive and negative marker, respectively. Multiple injections
of high concentrations of proteins covering a pI range
of 3.4–8.4 could be performed without depletion of capillary
performance, indicating coating stability of at least 100 days.

A capillary coating procedure allowing regulation of the magnitude
and direction of the EOF was proposed by Fu and co-workers.21 This was achieved by coadsorption of polydopamine
and polyethylenimine of different molecular weights in variable mass
ratios. The polymer chains were stabilized by complexation with Fe3+. The obtained coatings were further characterized by field
emission scanning electron microscopy and attenuated total reflection
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy analysis.

Moreno-Gordaliza
et al. used pretreated surface layer protein A from Lactobacillus
acidophilus bacteria as a capillary coating,22 which was characterized by contact angle, fluorescence,
and atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis. The new coatings were
used for analysis of lipoproteins from human serum with capillary
ITP (cITP). The coating could be used for over 100 injections without
loss of separation performance with coefficients of variation of 3%
for protein migration times over a period of 7 days.

AFM with
an adhesive tip was used by Stock et al. to assess topographic and
charge-induced features on capillary coatings.23 The charge distribution of different successive multiple
ionic polymer layer (SMIL) coatings was assessed with nanometer resolution
employing avidin as a single molecule sensor. The acquired surface
properties of a four-layer SMIL with poly(acrylamide-co-2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propansulfonate) as the terminal layer were
related to the observed EOF and CE performance for model proteins
and peptides on the same capillary.24

Optimization of capillary coating procedures and their tuning toward
specific applications commonly is time-consuming and a trial-and-error
process. Monteferrante et al. proposed a method to describe the EOF
behavior of a polymer coating as a function of pH, allowing predictive
analysis of electroosmosis under different polymeric coating conditions.25 By means of a theoretical argument and numerical
simulations involving the linearized Poisson–Boltzmann equation
and the Lattice Boltzmann scheme, the experimental curve for the EOF
of an acrylamide/methacrylate coating is assessed.

Separation
Media
Pseudostationary Phases
Pseudostationary phases (PSP)
enable separations not achievable with regular CZE. Micellar electrokinetic
chromatography (MEKC) was used for the resolution of insulin and closely
related peptides.26 The use of neutral
surfactants such as Thesit and Tween20 increased selectivity by reducing
adverse interactions with the capillary wall,26 avoiding the use of a capillary coating while using an aqueous background
electrolyte (BGE). For separation of different insulins, negatively
charged surfactants were required,27 from
which perfluorooctanoic acid was found to provide the best resolution.

The new chiral ionic ligand 1-ethyl-3-methyl imidazole L-tartrate
([EMIM][L-Tar]) was introduced for the separation of tryptophan, tyrosine,
and phenylalanine enantiomers by chiral-ligand-exchange CE. A comparison
with L-tartaric and [EMIM]l-proline indicated the potential
of [EMIM][L-Tar] for the enantioseparation of amino acids (AAs).28 Liu et al. synthesized and used the sugar-based
surfactant poly(sodium N-alkenyl-α-d-glucopyranoside) with various size and headgroup functionalities
for chiral separation of ephedrine alkaloids and β-blockers
by MEKC analysis.29 Polymers as compared
to monomers showed to strongly enhance separation, while sulfate groups
gave less resolution enhancement than phosphate head groups.

Capillary
Electrochromatography
Capillary electrochromatography (CEC)
offers a dual separation mechanism based on analyte partitioning between
a stationary and mobile phase as well as analyte electrophoretic mobility.
Over the years, routine CEC has proven difficult, partly due to robustness
issues related to bubble formation in frits of microparticulate columns
at higher electric fields. These problems may be circumvented by use
of open-tubular (OT) or monolithic columns. Sepehrifar et al. used
pH-responsive poly(2-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate)-block-poly(-acrylic acid) as stationary phase in an OT column for efficient
CEC analysis of acidic and basic compounds.30 Selectivity could be manipulated via differential contributions
from chromatographic and electrophoretic mechanisms by changing the
pH or the ionic strength of the BGE.31 The
established packing was used to analyze egg white samples containing
β-lactoglobulin and ovalbumin resulting in the separation of,
respectively, two and eight variants thereof.

Zhao et al. designed
glutathione-, somatostatin acetate-, and ovomucoid-functionalized
silica-monolithic stationary phases achieving hydrophilic interaction
and chiral selectivity in CEC.32 The phases
showed EOF tunability by pH control of the mobile phase. Enantioseparation
capabilities were enhanced by incorporating gold nanoparticles (NPs)
in the glutathione-silica monolithic column. Application to dl-AAs and drug enantiomers was demonstrated.

Stationary phases
for CEC based on metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) were introduced
by Pan et al. by in situ rapid synthesis of the homochiral
MOF [Zn(s-nip)2]n accompanied
by zinc oxide nucleating agents.33 Monoamine
neurotransmitter enantiomers, nitrophenol isomers, and bisphenols
analogues were separated by the new CEC method, showing similar performance
as layer-by-layer assembled stationary phases but having the advantage
of a significantly reduced preparation and analysis time.

In
an attempt to enhance the separation of chiral compounds, Kulsing
et al. used peak sharpening effects in CEC by employing molecularly
imprinted porous layer OT.34 Enantioseparation
required overloading and introduction of an acetonitrile-enriched
sharpening zone.

Chiral Media
Enantioseparation can
be achieved by CE using chiral selectors in the BGE. CE has the advantages
of high peak efficiency and resolution, relatively fast separation,
and low sample and reagent consumption. Still, chiral selectors can
be expensive and their selection time-consuming. Therefore, the group
of Escuder-Gilabert presented a modeling approach to predict enantioresolution
for a given selector.35 The model is based
on trial runs of selected compounds, correlating mobility to their
physicochemical and topological characteristics. Principal component
analysis and partial least-squares discriminant analysis models were
used to determine the most essential parameters.

Cyclodextrins
(CDs) are still the most common chiral selectors used in CE,36−38 but alternative selectors have been studied. Zhang et al. investigated
the performance of the spirocyclic chiral ionic liquids (CILs) BMIm+BLHvB–
and BMIm+BSMB– for the enantioseparation of five racemic drugs.39 The CILs did not provide chiral separation on
their own, but in combination with the CDs, superior enantioseparation
was achieved. Molecular dynamics were used to predict interaction
configurations and chiral resolution.

Microemulsion electrokinetic
chromatography employing sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and potassium
sodium tartrate (PST) as a chiral selector was used to separate caffeoylquinic
acid (CQA) isomers.40 The PST concentration
as well as the pH of the BGE was essential for analyte resolution,
which was based on differences in chiral carbon positions. The method
was successfully applied to determine individual CQA isomers in honeysuckle
and its preparations.

Multidimensional Separations
For
the analysis of complex samples, two-dimensional separations are increasingly
applied. CE in principle encompasses an interesting separation dimension
as it may provide an orthogonal mechanism and favorable separation
efficiency at high speed. However, coupling of CE to other separation
principles is not straightforward due to voltage handling and the
very small volumes involved and therefore demands ingenuity to be
established.

Johnson and Bowser described the first coupling
of CE to continuous free flow electrophoresis (FFE), circumventing
voltage and sampling issues.41 The CE separation
capillary was directly inserted into the FFE separation channel (Figure 2). Proof-of-principle
measurements involved CE × FFE analysis of fluorescently labeled
peptides and bioamines. Taking into to account that these analytes
covered only 20–30% of the available separation space, corrected
peak capacities of 778 (in 7.6 min) and 377 (in 1.8 min) were obtained
for peptides and bioamines, respectively.

Figure 2 Schematic representation
of the CE × FFE-LIF system. (A) CE peaks migrate into the FFE
separation channel where a lateral deflection ensures a second dimension
separation based on mobility. (B) Visualization of the 2D separation
based on CE migration time and the FFE deflection distance. (C) CE
× μFFE separation of a fluorescently labeled BSA tryptic
digest. Reproduced from Johnson, A. C.; Bowser, M. T. Anal.
Chem.2017, 89, 1665–1673
(ref (41)). Copyright
2017 American Chemical Society.

Kohl and co-workers developed a heart-cut two-dimensional
CE system (CE-CE) employing a fully insulated mechanical valve with
an internal loop of 20 nL, in order to overcome compatibility issues
frequently encountered in CE-ESI-MS.42 A
portion of interest in the first CE dimension is cut by the loop of
the valve and reintroduced to the second CE dimension where interfering
compounds are removed, followed by ESI-MS detection. The valve accommodates
different CE modes. Capillary isoelectric focusing (cIEF), employing
MS-incompatible ampholytes and buffers, was combined with CE-MS method
allowing selective distinction of charge variants of a monoclonal
antibody (mAb) as well.43

Detection
Mass
Spectrometry
The high identification power of MS has driven
development of new CE-MS interfaces and optimization/application of
existing CE-MS interfaces, achieving better sensitivity and/or ease
of use. Wenz et al. reported a collaborative study on the robustness
of CE-MS for peptide analysis involving 13 laboratories.44 The equipment used varied in brand, type, and
software engaged, while using the same batch of samples, reagents,
and capillaries. Relative migration time and peak area reproducibility
were below 1.4% relative standard deviation (RSD) and 30% RSD, respectively,
indicating that CE-MS performance allows method transfer across multiple
laboratories.

CE-MS interfacing remains a field of development.
An ideal interface is easy to assemble and use, while achieving efficient
analyte ionization and minimize peak dispersion. Gonzalez-Ruiz et
al. proposed a low sheath-flow interface operating in the nanospray
regime without using nebulizer gas.45 Sensitivity
and separation efficiency were somewhat improved as compared to conventional
sheath liquid interfacing. Guo et al. posed a new interface based
on an integrated metal-coated ESI emitter46 (Figure 3). Employing
a 30-μm capillary inner diameter with a similarly sized tapered
outer diameter emitter, clogging was avoided. ITP/CZE-MS quantification
of peptides using single-reaction monitoring indicated limits of quantification
down to 5 amol. A new commercialized system, developed by the lab
of Dovichi, was extensively evaluated for proteomics applications
over the past few years.47 In this interface,
the outlet of the separation capillary is connected to a borosilicate
glass spray emitter tip through a tee providing sheath liquid. According
to the authors, the ESI voltage generates a steady electroosmotic
flow providing a nanoflow of sheath liquid which aids analyte ionization.

Figure 3 Schematic
of the sheathless CITP/CZE-nanoESI-MS setup. After CITP/CZE separation,
the CE effluent passes through an integrated metal-coated ESI emitter.
An electrically conductive liquid that is in contact with the outer
surface of the emitter ensures the electrical connection required
for CE prior to single reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (SRM-MS).
Reproduced from Guo, X. J.; Fillmore, T. L.; Gao, Y. Q.; Tang, K.
Q. Anal. Chem.2016, 88, 4418–4425 (ref (46)). Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.

With the development of nanospray interfaces for
CE-MS, strategies to enhance both ionization efficiency and spray
stability have also surfaced. For example, nitrogen gas enriched with
an organic dopant in combination with sheathless CE-MS was evaluated
for glycopeptide analysis.48 In combination
with online preconcentration, this technique yielded higher sensitivity
than nano-LC-ESI-MS and sheath-liquid CE-ESI-MS.

Optical Spectroscopy
Fluorescence provides one of the most sensitive means of detection
in CE. Two fluorescently labeled mirror image aptamers (Spiegelmers)
were developed and used as affinity probes in noncompetitive affinity
CE assays with fluorescence detection for the analysis of glucagon
and amylin in picomolar concentrations.49 The Spiegelmers specifically bind to the target compounds and offer
good stability in biological matricxs as opposed to the conventional
aptamers.

Boutonnet et al. evaluated the differences between
pulsed and continuous light sources in CE with fluorescence detection
studying the compounds 7-hydroxycoumarin, Tamra, and tryptophan.50 Pulsed high energy lasers showed to induce photodegradation
of compounds, which could be observed using a dual fluorescence detector
setup. ESI-MS was used for structural elucidation of the degradation
products. The authors propose the use of continuous LED light sources
for the excitation of the analytes.

Gogiashvili et al. developed
a cITP-nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) method employing a microslot
probe.51 cITP ensures sample preconcentration,
whereas the microslot eliminates spectral broadening due to the magnetic
field induced by the separation current, thereby allowing continuous-flow
measurements. High-resolution NMR spectra of charged analytes were
obtained, but changes in chemical shift were observed at currents
above 20 μA. The potential of the microslot probe for hyphenated
electrophoretic separations was demonstrated by performing cITP focusing
and online 1H NMR detection of a system containing spermine
and aniline.

Capacitively Coupled Contactless Conductivity
Detection
Capacitively coupled contactless conductivity detection
(C4Ds) allows simple and contactless detection in CE, without relying
on electrochemical reactions and electrode surfaces (as amperometric
and potentiometric detection do). Nyugen et al. developed an in-house
built portable CE-C4D system and used it for the separation and detection
of 14 rare earth elements within 12 min.52 Achieved LODs were comparable to inductively coupled plasma (ICP)
MS detection.

C4Ds were also used to study the fundamental dynamics
of CE separation in various modes. Caslavska et al. placed eight C4Ds
along a 70 cm capillary to attain temporal insights during CE separation
and compared that with theoretical simulations.53 The authors focused their study on the dynamics regarding
electroosmosis and hydrodynamic flow, CZE, discontinuous buffer systems,
and ITP.

Miscellaneous
Adelantado et al.
used an online triple-tube based CE evaporative light scattering detector
(ELSD) for the concentration and size determination of silicon dioxide
NPs in aqueous solution.54 The coupling
thereof is straightforward and bypasses conventional sensitivity discrepancies
related to spectroscopic characteristics. ELSD can be used for various
analytes provided that the analyte is less volatile than the buffer
solution. The method showed to be applicable toward 20–100
nm NPs and resulted in ng/mL LODs.

Cao et al. developed a highly
sensitive, in situ real-time imaging of individual
metal NPs flowing inside a capillary by using light-sheet scattering
microscopy with a supercontinuum55 (Figure 4). The method was
applied to measure single plasmonic gold NPs with different sizes
or chemical modifications, where separation was achieved in a few
minutes based on their different electrophoretic mobility. The fast
movement of small NPs with scattering cross-section equivalent to
a ∼20 nm gold NP or less was successfully captured. The main
issue of Rayleigh scattering background interference from the glass
capillary wall was reduced with either a narrow slit or orthogonal
polarization detection leading to high S/N imaging of the NPs inside
the capillary.

Figure 4 Schematic of the supercontinuum laser
light-sheet plasmonic imaging system for CE detection. The combination
of the apochromatic (cylindrical) lenses ensure a laterally compressed
beam shaped into a planar sheet which forms a detection volume of
∼0.02 nL. Abbreviations: S, shutter; SP, short pass filter;
AL1, AL2, ACl1, ACl2, ACl3, apochromatic (cylindrical) lens; M, reflection
mirror; P1, P2, polarizer; IL, illumination lens; OL, objective lens;
RL, relay lens system. Reproduced from Cao, X.; Feng, J. J.; Pan,
Q.; Xiong, B.; He, Y.; Yeung, E. S. Anal. Chem.2017, 89, 2692–2697 (ref (55)). Copyright 2017 American
Chemical Society.

Applications
Inorganic
Compounds
The analysis of inorganic materials remains a field
of interest in which CE has been applied for either quantitative,56 complexation,57 or
kinetic analysis.58 Such analyses were
predominantly performed using (indirect) UV–vis absorbance
detection,59,60 but C4D is increasingly applied.
Saiz et al. utilized CE-C4D for the analysis of common cations and
compared the performance of the conductivity detection-compatible
BGEs (MES/HIS, Lac/His, and Lac/β-Ala) and emphasized that addition
of 18-crown-6 and hydroxyisobutyric acid were essential for increasing
the detection sensitivity.61 CE-C4D was
also used for the determination of bromate in water.62 Utilizing electromembrane extraction as a sample pretreatment,
LODs were in the subng/mL range.

Double opposite end injection
(DOEI) was shown to allow detection of both metal cations and anions
in a single analysis. DOEI-CE-C4D enabled Durc et al. to detect Cl–, Na+, and K+ simultaneously
from skin-wipe sweat samples in order to diagnose cystic fybrosis.63 Their approach proved more robust and reliable
by monitoring the Cl–/K+ ratio rather
than the Cl– concentration only. A similar DOEI-CE-C4D
approach was used to monitor four cations and eight anions in saliva
of wrestlers that were attempting rapid weight loss.64 Correlations were established between cortisol concentrations
and those of several salivary ions. Another option for speeding up
analysis is the use of multiple capillaries. Mai et al. developed
a portable CE-C4D instrument with three capillary channels employing
different BGEs allowing the determination of three different categories
of charged analytes65 (Figure 5). The system was used for
the concurrent separation of cations and anions in various beverage
and food matrixes. Kuban and Bocek developed a dual microelectromembrane
extraction approach that enables simultaneous extraction of anions
and cations which could subsequently be quantified by CE-C4D.66

Figure 5 CE-C4D electropherograms for the concurrent separations
of inorganic cations, inorganic anions or artificial sweeteners, and
organic anions. Channel 1, inorganic cations. Channel 2, option 1,
inorganic anions; option 2, artificial sweeteners, aspartame (Asp),
cyclamate (Cyc), saccharine (Sac), and acesulfame-K (Ace). Channel
3, organic anions (1) oxalate, (2) formate, (3) tartrate, (4) malate,
(5) succinate, (6) citrate, (7) pyruvate, (8) acetate, (9) lactate,
and (10) ascorbate. Reprinted from Anal. Chim. Acta, Vol. 911, Mai, T. D., Le, M. D., Sáiz J.,
Duong, H. A., Koenka, I. J., Pham, H. V., Hauser, P. C., Triple-channel
portable capillary electrophoresis instrument with individual background
electrolytes for the concurrent separations of anionic and cationic
species, pp. 121–128 (ref (65)). Copyright 2016, with permission from Elsevier.

For rare earth elements and actinide
analysis, different approaches have been described. Optical detection
in combination with either analyte complextion67 or sample stacking68 provided
the required sensitivity. However, ICP-optical emission spectroscopy
or ICPMS remain the preferred detection techniques, as demonstrated
by Bonin et al. and Matczuk and co-workers. They successfully established
complexation parameters for tetravalent actinide-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic
acid systems,69 respectively, and studied
the interaction of quantum dots (QDs) with biologically relevant proteins.70

Nanoparticles
CE has seen significant
applied in the still expanding field of NPs, such as QDs and gold
NPs, which exhibit high stability, ease of chemical synthesis, and
low toxicity. CE was mainly used for obtaining information on the
size and surface characteristics of NPs and their interaction with
biomolecules. Efficient CE separations of NPs often require addition
of stabilizers to the BGE. For example, poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS)
was studied as an alternative to SDS for improved separation and size
determination of AuNPs.71 The addition
of PSS along with a stepwise field gradient significantly improved
the resolution for AuNPs with diameters ranging from 5 to 20 nm. Similar
observations were made for stabilizers such as Pluronic F-127, citrate,
and cetyltrimethylammonium allowing differences in AuNP surface chemistry
and size to be revealed.72 In order to
establish selective UV detection of titanium dioxide nanoparticles,
they were bound to single stranded (ss)DNA followed by coating with
PEG,73 whereas detection of zinc oxide
NPs was achieved by their interaction with dithiothreitol in phosphate
buffer.74 These approaches led to 13–27-fold
enhanced UV absorbance signal intensities, respectively.

Qu
et al. studied the use of CE for NP size determinations and evaluated
the effect of surface chemistry on the electrophoretic mobility of
NPs.75 For referencing, surface coated
gold NPs in complex matrixes (natural organic matters and fetal bovine
serum) were analyzed by CE-ICPMS. Even after addition of surfactants
to the BGE, it was not possible to eliminate matrix effects on NP
mobility, highlighting the necessity of size calibration using surface
coating and matrix-matched standards.

Fichtner et al. studied
aqueous dispersions of amorphous silica NPs of various sizes by CE.76 The method allowed the determination of the
mean, dispersion width, and skewness of monomodal or multimodal NP
size distributions. There was no need for calibration or additional
microscopic techniques, under the assumption that the investigated
NPs had a constant, size-invariant zeta potential.

CE was also
used for the investigation of interactions between proteins and NPs
used for biological applications. CE-ICPMS of functionalized Au nanorods
interacting with serum proteins revealed metal-specific protein profiles
for the differently functionalized AuNPs.77 However, identification of the proteins was not always possible
due to the large number of possible candidates.

The development
and assessment of new ligands for QDs has developed into a popular
field of interest.78 CE with fluorescence
detection was extensively applied in order to explore the binding
of QDs and polypeptide ligands.78−82 For example, based on meta-affinity driven assembly, the CdSe/ZnS-QDs
were functionalized using polyhistidine peptide tags. Longer polyhistidine
tags (n = 6) provided optimal self-assembly efficiency.80 New His-peptide ligands were synthesized providing
CE-LIF assays for the analysis of the interaction between QDs and
functionally important biomolecules.82

Affinity
CE has shown particular useful for the study of
(bio)molecular interactions, providing short analysis times, low sample
size requirements, high separation efficiencies, and ability to cover
a large range of affinities. Li et al. employed affinity CE (ACE)
in order to study the binding of sulfated β-CD to uranyl compounds
in aqueous solutions.83 ACE was also employed
for establishing apparent binding constants of complexes between enantiomers
of acyclic nucleoside phosphonates (ANPs) and β-CD in aqueous
alkaline medium.84 Estimation of the equilibrium
dissociation constants by nonlinear regression and linearized plots
showed that the ANP-β-CD complexes are relatively weak. Limitations
of ACE for quantification of the supramolecular interactions between
the CD cavity and ionic liquids and their effect on the stability
of the inclusion complexes were investigated as well.85

The effect of surface oxidation state on the intensity
and mode of particle–protein conjugation was quantitatively
evaluated by CZE and ACE methods.86 Partial
filling (PF) ACE was combined with adsorption energy distribution
to determine the heterogeneity of interaction of apoB-100 containing
lipoproteins and their antibodies.87 The
interaction proved homogeneous and PF-ACE results were in alignment
with quartz crystal microbalance experiments.

The use of CE
for studying enzymatic activity and inhibition gained attention. The
inhibition of human neutrophil elastase was studied using both transverse
diffusion of laminar flow profiles (TDLFP) and microscale thermophoresis
with LIF detection88 (Figure 6). Two natural pentacyclic
triterpenes, ursolic and oleanolic acid, were used to validate the
developed CE assay. The method enabled estimation of the IC50 and Ki values of these interactions,
which were in agreement with those reported in the literature. In
a similar work, cIEF-LIF was compared to CZE for its ability to simultaneously
study composition and inhibition of multiple protein kinases.89 The method was successful regardless of structure
and charge of the substrate peptides. The use of nanogels to physically
constrain an enzyme in a separation capillary while performing electrophoretically
mediated microanalysis (EMMA) was proposed for improving sensitivity
and separation specificity.90 As immobilization
of enzymes is not required, more precise estimation of the Michaelis–Menten
constants was achieved. Moreover, it enabled the study of different
degrees of stereo specificity in the presence of substrates with different
linkages. A comparison between EMMA, pressure-mediated microanalysis,
and a spectrophotometric assay was reported for probing the enzyme
kinetics of tyrosinase and its inhibition by kojic acid.91

Figure 6 Inhibition assay of human neutrophil elastase (HNE) using
transverse diffusion of laminar flow profiles and CZE-LIF. (A) Online
CE assay steps: (a) injection sequence of inhibition buffer (IB),
enzyme (E), inhibitor (I), and substrate (S); (b) mixing and incubation
by transverse diffusion; (c) separation of product (P), I, S, and
E. (B) Examples of electropherograms obtained by CZE-LIF for HNE inhibition
by increasing concentrations ursolic acid. Blank assays were conducted
by injecting the IB instead of E (0% enzymatic activity) or instead
of I (100% enzymatic activity). Reprinted (adapted) from J.
Chromatogr. A, Vol. 1431, Syntia, F., Nehmé,
R., Claude, B., Morin, P., Human neutrophil elastase inhibition studied
by capillary electrophoresis with laser-induced fluorescence detection
and microscale thermophoresis, pp. 215–223 (ref (88)). Copyright 2016, with
permission from Elsevier.

MS detection has been introduced in ACE in order to assess
the interaction of heterogeneous proteins with a target protein.92 This approach allowed multiple parameters to
be established in a single run: (i) molecular weight of the separate
protein components, (ii) determination of protein–protein dissociation
constants, and (iii) determination of the protein complex stoichiometry.
Similarly, CE-MS with preincubation was used to estimate the kinetic
constants of the degradation of hyaluronic acid by hyaluronidase93 and for the screening of β-secretase inhibitors
as potential Alzheimer’s disease therapeutics.94

Nucleic Acids
Kanoatov and Krylov
pointed out that an ACE experiment under physiological relevant conditions
for the study of DNA–ligand interactions is feasible. With
DNA molecules in phosphate buffered saline, they used a pressure-facilitated
nonequilibrium CE of equilibrium mixtures approach to attain insights
in DNA-ligand kinetics.95 Similarly, Tohala
et al. used native separation conditions to study the interaction
between homopolymeric sequences and weak DNA binding enantiomers.96

Studies focusing on the CE analysis of
microRNA (miRNA) remain scarce. Recent advances in separation performances
for long noncoding RNA may alter this.97 Direct separation of miRNA with CE is not always trivial and often
requires an additive to the buffer for enhanced performance. ssDNA
can be used for such purposes as was shown by Wegman et al., using
a hybridization assay with miRNA-specific DNA probes labeled with
a fluorophore for LIF detection.98 To separate
the miRNA-DNA hybrids from each other and from the probe excess, an
ssDNA binding protein as well a different sizes of probes were incorporated
in the workflow. The developed approach was sufficiently robust to
allow its integration with sample preconcentration by ITP to achieve
an LOD below 10 pM

A CE-LIF method for the analysis of the nucleosides
adenosine (Ado) and inosine (Ino) in brain samples was developed.99 Interestingly, the fluorescently labeled analytes
exhibited about 25-fold fluorescence enhancement upon the formation
of inclusion complexes with γ-CD. Ado and Ino were simultaneously
quantified in homogenized rat forebrain samples, which were desalted
by ultrafiltration in the presence γ-CD, concentrated on-capillary
by LVSS to achieve detection limits of 32 and 38 nM for Ado and Ino,
respectively.

Although often the identification of nucleic acids
is done by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, or PAGE, and polymerase
chain reaction, or PCR, analysis, the capability of attaining insights
in post-transcriptional modifications is limited.100 Recently, CE-MS was used to identify and quantify these
modifications.101 The authors could detect
two endogenous human circulating miRNAs isolated from B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia serum. The CE separation and following MS analysis
provided label-free quantitation and revealed 5′-phosphorylation
and 3′-uridylation as modifications of miRNAs.

Viruses and
Bacteria
Van Tricht et al.102 developed
a capillary gel electrophoresis (CGE) method for fast and selective
characterization and quantification of viral proteins in influenza
vaccines. Dilution of the gel buffer allowed higher separation voltages
which led to shorter run times and improved efficiencies. The CGE
method allowed analysis of 100 samples in 4 days making it very suitable
for quality control purposes. In order to enable characterization
of low quantities of adeno-associated virus capsid proteins, Zhang
et al. developed a head-column FASS method as an online sample preconcentration
technique compatible with CGE103 (Figure 7). The effects of
a short water plug, SDS concentration both in sample matrix and in
the matrix exchanging solution, as well as the effect of sample injection
time were investigated. With LODs in the low-picomolar range, the
new method provided 3 orders of magnitude sensitivity enhancement
as compared to conventional CGE.

Figure 7 Comparison of sample stacking to conventional
CGE. Top trace: conventional CGE analysis of three capsid proteins
(i.e., VP3, VP2, and VP1). Middle trace: Sample stacking analysis
of the same three capsid proteins. Bottom trace: Sample stacking analysis
of SDS-MW Size Standards (10–225 kDa). Indicated concentrations
are total protein concentration. Reproduced from Zhang, C. X.; Meagher,
M. M. Anal. Chem.2017, 89, 3285–3292 (ref (103)). Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.

CZE was used for the quantitative analysis of intact
adenovirus types Ad26 and Ad35, both in the upstream and downstream
processing.104 Because of the complex matrix
and the adverse effects of adsorptions in the bare-fused silica capillaries,
charged and neutral capillary coatings were tested. Best results were
obtained with neutrally coated capillaries in combination with the
use of polysorbate-20 in the BGE, low capillary temperatures, and
pre- and in-between-run flushing with phosphoric acid. A study by
Betonville et al. showed similar results in terms of method requirements
for intact virus-like particles of human papillomavirus.105 Moreover, the presence of polysorbate in the
sample was indicated to avoid viral particle adsorption to the sample
container.

CE has also been evaluated as a tool for the separation
and characterization of living bacterial cells. Phung et al. used
a dual-stage ITP method for the inline fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and subsequent quantitation of bacteria.106 ITP was recommended as it seems to enhance
hybridization kinetics. With an LOD (6.0 × 104 cells/mL)
comparable to the CE analysis of a sample processed using an offline
FISH protocol, the total analysis time was reduced from 2.5 h to 30
min. With the selection of the appropriate hybridization probe, this
approach could be used for specific detection of bacterial cells in
aqueous samples.

The characterization of intact phytopathogen
bacteria was investigated using cIEF, CZE, and matrix-assisted laser-desorption
ionization-time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF).107 In total, 43 strains of the Dickeya and Pectobacterium species were
selected among of which some that could not be classified with the
traditional methods. In the case of cIEF, the major challenge was
the similarity on the pI values of some subspecies.
On the other hand, most of these species could be discriminated unambiguously
by CZE. Most discriminatory power was obtained with MALDI-TOF-MS as
unique mass spectral profiles were obtained for all respective species
or subspecies.

Metabolites
One of the major applications
of CE relates to the determination of metabolites in various types
of biologically relevant samples. MS detection plays an important
role since many metabolites cannot be optically detected without prior
derivatization, and it provides opportunities for the identification
of unknowns. To aid in the latter, a chemoinformatics approach for
ranking candidate structures of unidentified peaks was developed.108 The approach uses information about the known
metabolites detected in samples containing unidentified peaks and
was successfully applied to identify two unknown compounds observed
in a CE-MS urinary metabolite profile. Another study focused more
on big-data handling in a SPE-CE-MS for identifying biomarkers (in
mice) related to Huntington’s disease.109 The workflow ensured significant data reduction prior to
multivariate curve resolution asymmetric least-squares analysis.

Cationic metabolite profiling by CE-MS is routinely applied, however,
profiling of anions proves more problematic. Yamamoto et al. showed
that alkaline ammonia-based buffers (pH > 9) often used for these
analyses react with polyimide outer coatings of fused-silica capillaries
resulting in frequent capillary fractures and poor long-term performance.110 By making minor adaptations to the BGE, robust
high-throughput profiling of anionic metabolites was achieved. In
an alternative approach, Gulersonmez et al. show that anions can also
be analyzed using a method normally applied for cationic profiling.111 By applying a reversed polarity separation
with additional pressure, migration of the anions toward the mass
spectrometer was ensured.

A targeted CE-TOF-MS method was established
that enables identification of potential biomarkers for hepatocellular
carcinoma based on the creatine/betaine ratio.112 In a similar targeted approach, the metabolic changes in
the polyamine-pathway produced in colon cancer HT-29 cells by difluoromethylornithine
were investigated.113 More global profiles
were used to look into metabolic changes related to, for example,
type 2 diabetes mellitus evolution114 and
the effect of exercising.115 Single-cell
CE-MS analysis with multisolvent extraction was used to identify metabolic
differences between left and right blastomeres in 8-cell frog embryos.116 To quantify metabolite production between left
and right cells, they analyzed 24 different cells in technical duplicate–triplicate
measurements. Statistical and multivariate analysis revealed 10 distinct
metabolites that were significantly differentially accumulated in
the left or right cells. Other fields of CE-MS activity over the last
years included pharmaceutical,117 food,118 and plant metabolism.119

Notably, in many metabolomics studies CE-MS was used next
to other analytical platforms. CE-MS often is used to target highly
polar analytes, like amino acids, organic acids, and carnitines,120,121 although in untargeted approaches also often a significant overlap
with other platforms is observed.122

Amino Acids
The sensitivity of a CE-based method for AA
analysis and characterization is highly associated with their derivatization,
a process that can be laborious, time-consuming, and difficult to
standardize.123 Two optimized methods were
developed using EMMA123 and TDLFP124 with simultaneous on-capillary derivatization
of standard AAs by naphthalene-2,3-dicarboxaldehyde allowing LIF detection.
Optimal reactant mixing was achieved by TDLFP, leading to a more generic
and robust methodology. However, the optimized EMMA approach proved
to be most suitable for human plasma analysis. AAs from Dunaliella
salina green algae were analyzed by CE-LIF after labeling with fluorescein
isothiocyanate using microwave-assisted derivatization at 80 °C
(680 W) minimizing the derivatization time to 150 s.125

A new CE-ESI-MS method was proposed for separation
and quantitation of nonstandard AAs.126 After optimization, separation of 27 AAs, including the isomers l-leucine, l-isoleucine, and l-alloisoleucine,
was achieved in less than 30 min. The applicability of the method
was demonstrated for urine samples from children with vesicoureteral
reflux and was proposed as a potentially useful diagnostic tool to
inspect these samples.

An alternative approach for detection
of low or non-UV absorbing compounds like AAs in CE was developed.
It is based on a photochemical reaction of the AAs in the detection
window of the separation capillary under strong alkaline conditions,
introducing a chromophoric group.127 A
systematic study was conducted focusing on the reaction mechanism,
the influence of BGE concentration, and the irradiation time of analytes
in the detection window. The method was successfully applied to the
determination of seven essential AAs.

The use of proteases for
generation of AAs for C-terminal sequencing of peptides was reported
by Tian et al.128 (Figure 8). The described method involved carboxypeptidase
Y (CPY) digestion in combination with rapid online derivatization
using OPA/β-ME and optically gated CE with LIF detection. Gaining
temporal resolutions of 50 s and the possibility to measure AA release
in a time-dependent manner were some of the method’s advantages.

Figure 8 (A) Serial
monitoring of the hydrolysis of the peptide AC-Gln-Arg-Glu-Trp-Phe-Met-Asn-Ser-Tyr
by carboxypepsidase Y using optically gated CE with LIF detection.
(B) Evolution of the concentrations of released amino acids from the
C-terminus of the peptide. Reprinted (adapted) from J. Chromatogr.
A, Vol. 1459, Tian, M., Zhang, N., Liu,
X., Guo, L., Yanh, L., Sequential online C-terminal sequencing of
peptides based on carboxypeptidase Y digestion and optically gated
capillary electrophoresis with laser-induced fluorescence detection,
pp. 152–159 (ref (128)). Copyright 2016, with permission from Elsevier.

Chiral separation of AAs is an
active field of study due to the importance of d-AAs for
living organisms. More recent approaches focus on the development
of chiral ligands28 and different derivatization
agents,129 as well as the coupling of these
approaches with MS. Prior et al. developed chiral CE-MS methods for
enantioselective analysis of proteinogenic AAs in biological samples.130,131 One method employed β-CD as chiral selector and fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl
chloride as derivatization agent yielding improved AA enantiomer separation
and ESI efficiency. In the other method the use of involatile chiral
selectors is circumvented by employing (+)-1-(9-fluorenyl)ethyl chloroformate
as a chiral AA derivatizing agent and ammonium perfluorooctanoate
as a volatile pseudostationary phase for separation of the formed
AA diastereomers. d-AA detection in cerebrospinal fluid was
shown for both methods. A similar, fully automatized CE-MS method
using in-capillary derivatization enabled the successful separation
of the diastereomeric derivatives of 14 AAs.132 A different approach was followed in order to distinguish between
AAs formed by abiotic versus biotic processes using their chemical
distributions.133 AAs were labeled with
5-carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester and two separation methods
ensured fingerprinting of all 17 relevant AAs.

Peptides
CE-MS
of peptides has become quite a routine technique and is applied frequently
in untargeted proteomics and peptidomics fields. For example, urine
samples were screened for peptides134−137 as suitable biomarkers of disease,
revealing specific biomarkers related to heart failure,134 deep vein thrombosis, and pulmonary embolism.135 Related to this, the suitability of mice as
models for human aging was investigated by investigating the urinary
proteome of the mice.137 Advanced CE-ESI-MS
was used for quantitative analysis of diverse proteins in single embryonic
cells using untargeted bottom-up proteomics.138,139 The identification of 500–800 protein groups was achieved
from single blastomeres isolated from 16-cells of frog embryos, with
minimum derivatization steps and label-free quantification for single
cells.139

As LC-MS is the predominant
proteomics technology, several studies focused on benchmarking CE-MS
against LC-MS. For example, a systematic comparison between UPLC-MS/MS
and CZE-MS/MS for analysis of an enriched phosphoproteome from the
MCF-10A cell line showed that, when the same sample loading amounts
(2–200 ng) are used, CZE-MS/MS consistently outperformed UPLC-MS/MS
in terms of phosphorylated peptide and total peptide identifications.140 For Xenopus laevis fertilized
egg digests, which were prefractionated by RPLC,141 4134 and 5787 proteins could be identified by CE-MS and
LC-MS, respectively. The combination of orthogonal separation technologies
as RPLC and CE can significantly improve protein coverage, as also
shown for the complex proteome of a yeast mitochondrial extract.142

CZE-MS has shown to be very powerful
for the characterization of post-translational modifications (PTMs)
on the peptide level. A sheathless CZE-ESI-MS/MS method was developed
for separation of asparagine deamidation (deaN) and aspartic acid
isomerization (isoD).143 CZE could separate
the unmodified peptide from modified homologous exhibiting deaN, isoD,
or both with a resolution above 1.29. The CE-MS method was successfully
applied for the characterization of PTMs on monoclonal antibodies
and complex protein mixture. In a similar study, CE-MS with a sheathless
interface was used to analyze challenging modifications, such as asparagine
deamidation, aspartate isomerization, arginine citrullination, and
phosphorylation.144 High resolution was
achieved for asparagine, aspartic acid, and isoaspartic acid containing
peptides. Applying the CE-MS method for fast and sensitive analysis
of intact and enzymatically digested histone H4 revealed a variety
of citrullinated proteoforms.

Surfactants often present a source
of undesirable interferences during (glyco)proteomics studies. Whereas
the surfactants are required to ensure full digestion, their elimination
at low pH (when using RapiGest) has shown to lead to loss of sialic
acid residues on glycan structures of transferrin and distortion of
glycopeptide peaks in general.145 Changing
the type of acid and sample desalting helped minimizing desialylation
and excellent peak shapes were obtained. CE enabled fast and efficient
separation of the sialylated glycopeptides improving detection sensitivity
due to decreased ion suppression. Differences in transferrin glycoforms
serum from a healthy control and patients with congenital disorders
of glycosylation could be observed.

Proteins
CE holds
very strong potential for intact protein analysis and methodological
improvements remain the subject of research. Double injection capillary
zone electrophoresis was used for identification of human chorionic
gonadotropin.146 Samples of unknown content
were analyzed together with a reference standard and identification
was based on the closeness of agreement between the observed migration
times of the two peaks. Fu et al. used velocity gap CE to separate
groups of reference protein mixtures, obtaining increasing separation
efficiency, especially for low-abundance protein species.147

A CE-TOF-MS method was developed for
the characterization of intact Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) antigens TB10.4 and Ag85B and their chemically produced glycoconjugates,
which are glycovaccine candidates against TB.148 A SMIL coating of Polybrene-dextran sulfate-Polybrene was
used in combination with acetic acid as BGE in order to prevent protein
adsorption and allow the efficient separation of different antigen
proteoforms and degradation products. The presence of several closely
related degradation products, including truncated, oxidized, deamidated,
and conformational variants, were revealed next to the glycoform composition
of the neo-glycoproteins.

CE allows protein analysis under near-physiological
conditions, allowing detection of the different conformers.149−151 For example, the unfolding of wild-type β2-microglobulin under
nondenaturing conditions was investigated with CE-UV149 and CE-ESI-MS.150 In the latter
study, several interfaces and mass spectrometers were compared. With
CE-ESI-TOF MS proteoforms differing by 1 Da only could be assigned
and sheathless interfacing appeared best suited to preserve protein
structure integrity. A CE-MS method developed to separate the conformers
and dimers of the drug antithrombin employed a neutral poly(vinyl
alcohol)-coated capillary.151 The protein
conformation was preserved by using a BGE at physiological pH. The
developed method allowed the detection of the native, latent, and
heterodimer conformers in formulation.

Iwabuchi et al. developed
a CGE method for α-synuclein using nonlinear laser wave-mixing
detection, which has a quadratic dependence on analyte concentration,
allowing small changes in concentration to be monitored.152 Various fluorescently labeled protein oligomers
could be separated and detected down to sub-pM concentrations, making
the method potentially suitable for Parkinson’s Disease diagnostics.
In another method, prostate specific antigen (PSA) was isolated from
serum in a way that is compatible for further analysis with CZE.153 The protocol employs an anti-PSA column for
isolation. SDS-PAGE followed by Western blotting, circular dichroism,
and CZE were used to check for possible protein alterations during
the procedure. A CZE method for the characterization of human serum
protein components like immunoglobulins and albumins was described
by Christians et al.154 As all requirements
of the ICH guidelines on validation were met, the developed method
could replace conventional CGE methods used to characterize these
proteins.

Carbohydrates
CE methods remain
of particular interest for identification and quantification of carbohydrates
(CHs). CHs are typically UV inactive and require additional consideration
or treatment to achieve their detection. These involve indirect UV,155 complexation with a ligand for direct UV analysis,156 or derivatization with, e.g., the fluorescent
label APTS for subsequent LIF detection.157

CGE-LIF is commonly used for the analysis of released glycans.
For identification purposes, a software tool was developed that correlates
the relative migration of a glycan to a glucose size ladder and expresses
this in so-called glucose unit (GU) values.158 A database with known structures and correlated GU values aids in
identifying structures. GU values strongly depend on temperature,
making temperature control essential.159 Interestingly, by using a temperature gradient during the CGE separation,
the separation selectivity for branched glycans can be incresed.159,160 This method was demonstrated for mixtures of complex N-glycans (afucosylated,
fucosylated, and high mannose oligosaccharides) of biopharmaceutical
and biomedical importance. In order to overcome the problem of migration-time
shifts, a triple-internal standard approach was proposed.161 Glucose α-1-4-linked oligomers with a
degree of polymerization of 2, 3, and 15 were employed. The method
provided small errors and showed to be in good agreement with available
reference data. Another study looked into determination of activation
energies of migration regarding maltooligosaccharides with and without
the presence of a monomeric viscosity modifier (ethylene glycol) and
a polymeric additive (linear polyacrylamide) in correlation with the
GU.162 This study provided an insight in
molecular conformation changes of the labeled glycans and possible
matrix interaction effects.

Normally, glycans are released from
protein in solution. However, within biobanks there are many formalin
fixated and paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue samples of which glycan
profiling could be of interest. CGE-LIF was used to identify possible
protein N-glycosylation alterations due to FFPE.163 The N-linked sugars of FFPE treated samples were released
using PNGase F digestion. No significant changes were revealed in
the N-glycome profile upon FFPE, indicating that global N-glycome
analysis on the FFPE samples might be feasible.

Hennig et al.
performed a longitudinal sampling for biomarker discovery164 (Figure 9). For this complex study, the analysis of the plasma N-glycome
was performed by multiplexed CGE-LIF. The results proved a long-term
stability of the plasma N-glycome over the examined period of seven
years and minor longitudinal changes are more correlated with lifestyle
and environmental factors. This work can be considered a step forward
for personalized diagnostics.

Figure 9 (A) CGE-LIF generated human plasma N-glycan
fingerprints. Signal intensity in relative fluorescence units [RFU]
is plotted over the normalized migration time [MTU″]. The fingerprint
is of a native (sialylated) frozen normal control plasma-derived N-glycome,
labeled with APTS. (B) Evaluation of the intraindividual and interindividual
variability of the plasma N-glycome, by plotting three peaks (high,
middle, and low abundance) over the sampling time points (volunteer
3, blue circles; volunteer 5, red squares) and making box plots of
the relative peak height over the whole time period per volunteer
and total population. Reprinted (adapted) from Biochim. Biophys.
Acta Gen. Subj., Vol. 1860, Hennig, R.,
Cajic, S., Borowiak, M., Hoffmann, M., Kottler, R., Reichl, U., Rapp,
E., Toward personalized diagnostics via longitudinal study of the
human plasma N-glycome, pp. 1728–1738, DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2016.03.035, under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY) (ref (164)).

Guan et al. developed a CE method for the precise and accurate
determination of glucose levels in blood.165 The first part of the capillary is used as a microreactor for the
coupled enzymatic assay of glucose oxidase and horseradish peroxidase.
These enzymes are separately injected and govern two sequential reactions,
where through peroxide formation a fluorogenic reagent is converted
into fluorescein. The latter is subsequently separated via CE analysis
from the other reagents and detected with LIF. LODs were down to 10
nM and the method showed potential toward additional peroxide generating
systems.

In the work of Bucsella et al., a CE-UV method utilizing
dynamic coating for the separation and quantification of structurally
very similar nucleotides and nucleotide sugars was developed.166 A total of 11 nucleotides and 6 nucleotide
sugars were analyzed. The addition of PEG was indicated to enhance
the separation efficiency. The method was tested for Chinese hamster
ovarian cell extracts where 3 sugar nucleotides and 7 nucleotides
were identified and quantified.

Pharmaceutics
Biopharmaceuticals
CE has emerged as an essential tool for the characterization of
biopharmaceuticals, including mAbs, using both intact and middle-up
approaches. A useful protocol based on a two-phase-four-step mode
was proposed for rapid CZE method development for top-down and middle-up
analysis of mAbs.167 This approach focused
on the screening of the effect and subsequent optimization of the
pH and ionic strength of the BGE, the percentage of organic additive,
and viscosity enhancer. The protocol was tested using commercially
available mAbs.

The dose determination of a newly developed
recombinant subunit envelope protein-based vaccine against all four
serotypes produced in Drosophila S2 cells was performed in a comparative
study comprising LC and CE methods.168 CZE
appeared more suitable as a concentration assay for the tetravalent
dengue subunit-based vaccine as separation of all four units was achieved.

Francois et al. described the use of offline CZE-UV/ESI-MS for
the middle-up characterization of Fc/2 variants of cetuximab.169 Obtained mass spectral information was cross-validated
with CZE-UV/MALDI-MS. In a subsequent publication, a top-down characterization
after sample enrichment using CE-UV/MALDI-MS was used for the middle-down
characterization of Fc/2 cetuximab variants.170 About 9% sequence coverage of Fc/2 cetuximab fragments was achieved,
showing the feasibility of the strategy for middle-down characterization.
CZE separation was mainly based on Fc/2 fragments with and without
C-terminal truncation.

A sheathless CZE-MS method for middle
up analysis of the antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) brentuximab vedotin
was developed.171 Native MS was achieved
using a nanoESI infusion apparatus, which allowed accurate mass determination
with parallel estimation of the average drug to antibody ratio and
drug load distribution. In a further step, middle up CZE-ESI-MS/MS
analysis was performed after proteolysis with IdeS. This method increased
the level of characterization, as complete amino acid sequence identification
was achieved alongside glycosylation and drug-loaded-peptides. A similar
approach was used for the analysis of the ADC trastuzumab emtansine.172 Here, various analytical techniques including
MS, imaging cIEF, and CGE were used for structural characterization
and probing protein interactions.

The charge heterogeneity of
mAbs is an important quality attribute. An improved method for the
characterization of the acidic and basic variants of an IgG1 antibody
utilized preparative immobilized pH gradient isoelectric focusing
fractionation.173 The fractions were further
characterized by CGE and Lys-C peptide mapping via LC-MS/MS. Deamidation,
sialylation, glycation, and fragmentation were identified as the main
modifications contributing to acidic variants of the mAb, whereas
C-terminal lysine, C-terminal proline amidation, and uncyclized N-terminal
glutamine were the major species contributing to the basic variants.
Another approach for isolation of mAb charge variants was based on
FFE.174 Both acidic and basic variants
were successfully identified and related back to the cIEF charge profile.
SEC, CGE, reduced and intact LC-MS, and LC-MS/MS tryptic peptide mapping
were subsequently used to characterize the collected fractions.

In many studies CGE is employed to characterize mAbs. The United
States Pharmacopeia (USP) has released a protocol for this method.
However, it was shown that the USP method run under nonreducing conditions
induced fragmentation for three different mAbs.175 An in-house developed method did not show this extent of
fragmentation for the same samples. The findings support the conclusion
that molecule-specific methods are still essential to minimize method
induced artifacts and address molecule specific behavior.

Incompatibility
of the separation medium components is one of the greatest limitations
in hyphenation of separation technologies with MS detection. A CE-MS
method was recently developed for the analysis of mAbs in SDS-complex
matrixes.176 This in-capillary approach
incorporates the coinjection of cationic surfactants (CTAB or ADBAC)
in the presence of methanol. Successful removal of the SDS was achieved
in neutral coated capillaries as well as positively charged coated
ones with simultaneous application of reversed polarity. This method
allows direct MS analysis of SDS denatured antibodies and protein
samples without extensive sample pretreatment. The same authors also
presented a heart-cut CZE-CZE-MS setup with an implemented mechanical
four-port valve that used a generic ε-aminocaproic acid based
BGE in the first dimension and acetic acid in the second dimension177 (Figure 10). Interference-free, highly precise mass data (deviation
less than 1 Da) of charge variants of trastuzumab were obtained.

Figure 10 (A)
Complete two-dimensional CE-CE-MS setup. During the separation in
the first dimension, the mechanical valve is kept in the loading position
(top), where the sample loop is connected to channels S and W. When
the desired analyte is located in the sample loop, the valve is switched
to the inject position (bottom), transferring the analyte from the
first dimension to the second dimension. (B) CZE-UV electropherogram
of deglycosylated trastuzumab. Separation was performed with the CE-CE-MS
setup. The raw and deconvoluted mass spectra obtained after the second
dimension separation of the main variant (M, 10-nL cut), acidic variant
A2 (20-nL cut), and acidic variant A3 (20-nL cut) show the presence
of deamidated antibody variants. Adapted by permission from Springer, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., Two-dimensional capillary zone electrophoresis–mass
spectrometry for the characterization of intact monoclonal antibody
charge variants, including deamidation products, Jooß, K., Hühner,
J., Kiessig, S., Moritz, B., Neusüß, C., Vol. 409, pp. 6057–6067, Copyright 2017 (ref (177)).

In order to facilitate large scale N-glycosylation analysis,
multiplexed CGE-LIF has sparked interest. The technique was used to
evaluate the purification of rhEPO glycoforms when using serotonin
as affinity ligand for preparative chromatography by monitoring changes
in the N-glycan fingerprint.178 An automated
sample preparation workflow based on a magnetic bead protocol for
N-glycosylation analysis of antibodies was proposed.179 The protocol comprised the endoglycosidase digestion, fluorophore
labeling, and cleanup, with CGE-LIF separations of less than 3 min,
leading to the entire analysis of the 96-well plate format in a couple
of hours. Along the same lines, a multiple injection approach for
rapid large scale CE analysis followed by multicomponent optical detection
with LIF was proposed.180 As a proof of
principle, the protocol was applied for rapid and large scale analysis
of major monoclonal antibody (IgG) N-glycans. Nearly 100 samples were
introduced in a single capillary, leading to a full analysis time
of 4 h rather than 12 h when the conventional approach was applied.
For the analysis of even more complex samples, the potential of multidimensional
systems were explored. A multiplexing CE mapping method was introduced
for the identification of N-glycans of two human IgG samples that
gave similar electropherograms, in both CZE and MEKC modes.181 Different orthogonal CE separation mechanisms
were combined in parallel applications of CZE, MEKC, and CGE all providing
acceptable detection limits, repeatability, and linearity. The combination
of CZE and MEKC mechanisms showed optimal orthogonality allowing a
larger space for glycan analysis.

A CZE-ESI-MS/MS method was
developed for the intact analysis of recombinant human interferon-β1
(rhIFN-β1), a biopharmaceutical with complex glycosylation at
a single N-linked site.182 Top-down MS/MS
and exoglycosidase digestion were applied in order to elucidate the
complex structures. Charged species due to deamidation and sialylation
were sufficiently separated by CZE, and high resolution MS and MS/MS
along with the enzymatic treatments proved essential for characterization.

Low-Molecular-Weight Drugs
CE in all of its variants is
well-established in analysis of small drug analysis. Recent work focused
on sensitivity improvement by including sample-stacking approaches183,184 and probing drug chirality.185,186

A fast CZE method
for the simultaneous analysis of glibenclamide and its impurities
(IA and IB) in pharmaceutical dosage forms was fully developed within a quality
by design framework.187 Critical quality
attributes were represented by IA peak
efficiency, critical resolution between glibenclamide and IB, and analysis time. After optimized conditions
were selected, the full separation of the analytes was obtained in
less than 2 min. The method was fully validated and was applied to
real samples of glibenclamide tablets.

Malá et al. describe
the combination of electrophoretic focusing on inverse electromigration
dispersion (EMD) gradient with ESI-MS detection.188 The separation of analytes along the electromigrating EMD
profile proceeds so that each analyte is at a particular position
governed by its pKa and ionic mobility.
The focused zones are transported to the capillary end by electromigration,
electroosmotic flow, and ESI suction. The system allowed sensitive
analyses of trace amounts of weak acids in the pKa range between 6 and 9. The analysis of several sulfonamides
at the nanomolar-level in waters was reported.

A new method
for screening tyrosinase inhibitors from traditional Chinese medicines
utilizing immobilized enzyme reactor technology was described.189 Parallel molecular docking was used to investigate
the interaction between the enzyme and inhibitors. Aiming for high-throughput
and shorten analysis time, a short-end injection in CE was implemented,
leading to a successful method with which four compounds were determined
as tyrosinase active inhibitors.

Interactions between the consumed
drug and HSA and other serum proteins play a major role in drug distribution
and pharmacokinetics. Fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis
was used for the evaluation of the affinity and drug–protein
interactions between HSA or its equivalent glycated form and the first
generation of sulfonylurea antidiabetics.190 The binding constants vary between the different drugs for normal
and glycated human serum albumins, with glycated giving lower values.

Polymers
CE finds increasing application for the characterization
of complex (bio)polymers. CE under critical conditions has shown to
be a suitable approach to separate both natural and synthetic charged
polymers.191 Composition distributions
heterogeneity of branching could be probed by the obtained separation
distributions. The dispersity was quantified, including monitoring
of grafting on polymers. Using peak dispersity values, a numerical
representation of the mobility and composition distributions was calculated
allowing comparisons between samples.

Nitrocelluloses (NCs)
and glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) have also been analyzed by CE. Alinat
et al. provided a method for the characterization of nonexplosive
NCs.192 The CE instrument was used as a
viscometer rather than for separation. The viscosity of NC samples
was successfully correlated to molecular weight and nitrogen content.
A CE-MS method to characterize the GAG heparin was developed by Lin
et al.,193 based on a method proposed earlier.194 Reverse polarity CE separation and negative-mode
electrospray ionization were optimized using a volatile methanolic
ammonium acetate BGE and sheath liquid. An Orbitrap mass spectrometer
appeared useful in disaccharide compositional analysis and bottom-up
and top-down analysis of low molecular weight heparin.

A CE-UV
method was developed for the qualitative and quantitative determination
of oligosaccharides.195 Reference compounds
consisting of five xylo-, three manno-, and five cello-oligosaccharides
were concurrently measured in a highly alkaline solution without derivatization.
The method was applied for the determination oligosaccharides from
hot-water extracts of a bleached birch and pine kraft pulp in order
to study the degradation of hemicelluloses into oligosaccharides as
functions of time and temperature.

Binding characteristics of
oppositely charged poly(l-lysine) (PLL) and copolymers of
acrylamide and 2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonate (PAMAMPS)
were determined by frontal analysis continuous CE at different ionic
strengths.196 PAMAMPS charge densities
between 15% and 100% were investigated showing that the chain stoichiometry
decreases with increasing PAMAMPS charge density, while the charge
stoichiometry was in good agreement with a general predicting rule.
Modeling of binding constants was used to predict the interaction
binding constant between PLL and PAMAMPS of different charge densities
at a given ionic strength.

Author Contributions
R.L.C.V. and I.K.V. contributed
equally to this work. The manuscript was written through contributions
of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version
of the manuscript.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Robert L. C. Voeten is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the Division of Bioanalytical
Chemistry at the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam (VUA). He focuses on
the fundamental and applied aspects of separation methods hyphenated
to trapped ion mobility mass spectrometry for intact protein and synthetic
polymer characterization. He obtained his Master’s degree at
the VUA focussing on the kinetic aspects of a Diels–Alder reaction
in microreactors probed by gas chromatography- and direct infusion-mass
spectrometry.

Iro K. Ventouri obtained her Master’s degree from the University of
Amsterdam in 2017. Her thesis research centered on native protein
analysis. Currently she is a Ph.D. candidate in the research group
of Prof. Peter Schoenmakers at the Analytical Chemistry group of Van’t
Hoff Institute for Molecular Sciences at University of Amsterdam.
There she focuses on the optimization and combination of liquid separation
(SEC, HDC, FFF) and detection (MALS, MS) for the establishment of
nondestructive separation, with the ultimate goal the development
of an integrated platform for higher order structural analysis.

Rob Haselberg obtained his Ph.D. degree in 2010 at Utrecht University on the development
and application of capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry (CE-MS)
technologies for the analysis of biopharmaceuticals. Subsequent postdoctoral
research at Utrecht University and Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam (VUA)
focused on the evaluation of CE-MS for protein characterization as
well as setting up affinity CE-MS methods to study protein–protein
interactions. In 2013, Haselberg joined the BioMolecular Analysis
group of Prof. Govert W. Somsen at VUA, where his research focuses
on the characterization of (intact) biomacromolecular compounds using
a variety of analytical platforms.

Govert W. Somsen is Professor of Biomolecular
Analysis/Analytical Chemistry at Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam. He
obtained his Doctorate in Amsterdam and subsequently was Assistant
and Associate Professor at the University of Groningen and at Utrecht
University in The Netherlands. His current research interests include
compositional and conformational characterization of intact biomacromolecules,
bioactivity screening of compounds in complex samples, and metabolite
analysis with particular attention for compound chirality. His group
built an internationally recognized expertise in the hyphenation of
capillary electrophoresis and liquid chromatography with mass spectrometry
and optical spectroscopy for the detailed profiling of pharmaceutical
proteins. Somsen is (co)author of over 150 peer-reviewed papers and
is editor of Journal of Chromatography B.

Acknowledgments
Robert L. C. Voeten and Iro K. Ventouri
acknowledge the HOSAna Project, which is funded by The Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) in the framework of the
Programmatic Technology Area PTA-COAST4 of the Fund New Chemical Innovations
(Project No. 053.21.117)
==== Refs
References
Cao K. ; Xu Y. ; Mu X. N. ; Zhang Q. ; Wang R. J. ; Lv J. J. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2016 , 39 , 4243 –4250 10.1002/jssc.201600762 .27673325 
Liu J. ; Tian J. ; Li J. ; Azietaku J. T. ; Zhang B. L. ; Gao X. M. ; Chang Y. X. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 1632 –1639 10.1002/elps.201500426 .26955793 
Guo L. ; Wang Y. ; Zheng Y. L. ; Huang Z. P. ; Cheng Y. Y. ; Ye J. N. ; Chu Q. C. ; Huang D. P. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 
2016 , 1014 , 70 –74 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.01.052 .
Chen Y. L. ; Huang Y. C. ; Wang C. C. 
Talanta 
2015 , 143 , 27 –34 10.1016/j.talanta.2015.04.086 .26078124 
Kubalczyk P. ; Chwatko G. ; Glowacki R. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 1155 –1160 10.1002/elps.201500411 .26468053 
Thang L. Y. ; Breadmore M. C. ; See H. H. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1461 , 185 –191 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.07.067 .27485148 
Sestak J. ; Thormann W. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1502 , 51 –61 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.04.041 .28460869 
Chui M. Q. ; Thang L. Y. ; See H. H. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2017 , 1481 , 145 –151 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.12.042 .28017568 
Cheng H. L. ; Tsai Y. H. ; Hsu W. L. ; Lin Y. H. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2015 , 1426 , 226 –232 10.1016/j.chroma.2015.11.032 .26643722 
Mai T. D. ; Oukacine F. ; Taverna M. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1453 , 116 –123 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.05.048 .27236482 
Zhao Y. M. ; Sun L. L. ; Zhu G. J. ; Dovichi N. J. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2016 , 15 , 3679 –3685 10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00493 .27490796 
Gomez F. J. V. ; Hernandez I. G. ; Cerutti S. ; Silva M. F. 
Microchem. J. 
2015 , 123 , 22 –27 10.1016/j.microc.2015.05.013 .
Rodriguez J. A. ; Ibarra I. S. ; Miranda J. M. ; Barrado E. ; Santos E. M. 
Anal. Methods 
2016 , 8 , 8466 –8473 10.1039/C6AY02631A .
Tascon M. ; Gagliardi L. G. ; Benavente F. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2017 , 954 , 60 –67 10.1016/j.aca.2016.12.012 .28081815 
Espina-Benitez M. B. ; Randon J. ; Demesmay C. ; Dugas V. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1494 , 65 –76 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.03.014 .28325490 
Zhang Q. Y. ; Gong M. J. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1450 , 112 –120 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.04.080 .27156734 
Shimura K. ; Nagai T. 
Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 39221 10.1038/srep39221 .27976690 
Harstad R. K. ; Bowser M. T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 8115 –8122 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b01846 .27398773 
Weisenberger M. M. ; Bowser M. T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 1009 –1014 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b04516 .27977140 
Poulsen N. N. ; Ostergaard J. ; Petersen N. J. ; Daasbjerg K. ; Iruthayaraj J. ; Dedinaite A. ; Makuska R. ; Jensen H. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2017 , 40 , 779 –788 10.1002/jssc.201600878 .27868374 
Fu Q. F. ; Li X. J. ; Zhang Q. H. ; Yang F. Q. ; Wei W. L. ; Xia Z. N. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2015 , 1416 , 94 –102 10.1016/j.chroma.2015.09.014 .26365910 
Moreno-Gordaliza E. ; Stigter E. C. A. ; Lindenburg P. W. ; Hankemeier T. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 923 , 89 –100 10.1016/j.aca.2016.04.005 .27155306 
Leitner M. ; Stock L. G. ; Traxler L. ; Leclercq L. ; Bonazza K. ; Friedbacher G. ; Cottet H. ; Stutz H. ; Ebner A. 
Anal.
Chim. Acta 
2016 , 930 , 39 –48 10.1016/j.aca.2016.05.002 .27265903 
Stock L. G. ; Leitner M. ; Traxler L. ; Bonazza K. ; Leclercq L. ; Cottet H. ; Friedbacher G. ; Ebner A. ; Stutz H. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2017 , 951 , 1 –15 10.1016/j.aca.2016.10.030 .27998477 
Monteferrante M. ; Sola L. ; Cretich M. ; Chiari M. ; Marconi U. M. B. ; Melchionna S. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 143 , 184907 10.1063/1.4934998 .26567684 
Lamalle C. ; Servais A. C. ; Demelenne A. ; Crommen J. ; Fillet M. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2016 , 39 , 1189 –1194 10.1002/jssc.201501093 .26829340 
Lamalle C. ; Roland D. ; Crommen J. ; Servais A. C. ; Fillet M. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 2504 –2506 10.1002/elps.201500178 .26095856 
Huang L. ; Yu L. S. ; Chen Y. T. ; Li Y. X. 
LC
GC Eur. 
2016 , 29 , 618 –623 .
Liu Y. J. ; Wu B. L. ; Wang P. ; Shamsi S. A. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 913 –923 10.1002/elps.201500434 .26763089 
Sepehrifar R. ; Boysen R. I. ; Danylec B. ; Yang Y. Z. ; Saito K. ; Hearn M. T. W. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 917 , 117 –125 10.1016/j.aca.2016.02.045 .27026608 
Zhang Y. M. ; Wang W. T. ; Ma X. D. ; Jia L. 
Anal. Biochem. 
2016 , 512 , 103 –109 10.1016/j.ab.2016.08.015 .27555440 
Zhao L. C. ; Yang L. M. ; Wang Q. Q. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2016 , 1446 , 125 –133 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.04.014 .27083263 
Pan C. J. ; Wang W. F. ; Chen X. G. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1427 , 125 –133 10.1016/j.chroma.2015.12.020 .26702592 
Kulsing C. ; Yang Y. Z. ; Chowdhury J. M. ; Boysen R. I. ; Hearn M. T. W. 
Electrophoresis 
2017 , 38 , 1179 –1187 10.1002/elps.201600532 .28211061 
Escuder-Gilabert L. ; Martin-Biosca Y. ; Medina-Hernandez M. J. ; Sagrado S. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1467 , 391 –399 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.06.028 .27334416 
Sanchez-Lopez E. ; Marcos A. ; Ambrosio E. ; Marina M. L. ; Crego A. L. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1467 , 372 –382 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.06.053 .27371023 
Baciu T. ; Borrull F. ; Calull M. ; Aguilar C. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 2352 –2362 10.1002/elps.201600149 .27465234 
Theurillat R. ; Sandbaumhuter F. A. ; Bettschart-Wolfensberger R. ; Thormann W. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 1129 –1138 10.1002/elps.201500468 .26626946 
Zhang Y. J. ; Du S. J. ; Feng Z. J. ; Du Y. X. ; Yan Z. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2016 , 408 , 2543 –2555 10.1007/s00216-016-9356-8 .26894758 
Tang B. ; Guo D. ; Li Y. P. ; Yang H. Q. ; Huang Y. M. ; Li H. 
Anal. Methods 
2016 , 8 , 189 –196 10.1039/C5AY02313K .
Johnson A. C. ; Bowser M. T. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 1665 –1673 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03768 .27989118 
Kohl F. J. ; Montealegre C. ; Neususs C. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 954 –958 10.1002/elps.201500579 .26799982 
Huhner J. ; Jooss K. ; Neusubb C. 
Electrophoresis 
2017 , 38 , 914 –921 10.1002/elps.201600457 .27885684 
Wenz C. ; Barbas C. ; Lopez-Gonzalvez A. ; Garcia A. ; Benavente F. ; Sanz-Nebot V. ; Blanc T. ; Freckleton G. ; Britz-McKibbin P. ; Shanmuganathan M. ; de l’Escaille F. ; Far J. ; Haselberg R. ; Huang S. ; Huhn C. ; Pattky M. ; Michels D. ; Mou S. ; Yang F. ; Neusuess C. ; Tromsdorf N. ; Baidoo E. E. K. ; Keasling J. D. ; Park S. S. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2015 , 38 , 3262 –3270 10.1002/jssc.201500551 .
Gonzalez-Ruiz V. ; Codesido S. ; Far J. ; Rudaz S. ; Schappler J. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 936 –946 10.1002/elps.201500523 .26846463 
Guo X. J. ; Fillmore T. L. ; Gao Y. Q. ; Tang K. Q. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 4418 –4425 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04912 .27028594 
Han M. ; Rock B. M. ; Pearson J. T. ; Rock D. A. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed.
Life Sci. 
2016 , 1011 , 24 –32 10.1016/j.jchromb.2015.12.045 .
Kammeijer G. S. M. ; Kohler I. ; Jansen B. C. ; Hensbergen P. J. ; Mayboroda O. A. ; Falck D. ; Wuhrer M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 5849 –5856 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b00479 .27119460 
Yi L. ; Wang X. ; Bethge L. ; Klussmann S. ; Roper M. G. 
Analyst 
2016 , 141 , 1939 –1946 10.1039/C5AN02468D .26881276 
Boutonnet A. ; Morin A. ; Petit P. ; Vicendo P. ; Poinsot V. ; Couderc F. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 912 , 146 –155 10.1016/j.aca.2016.01.036 .26920784 
Gogiashvili M. ; Telfah A. ; Lambert J. ; Hergenroder R. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2017 , 409 , 2471 –2475 10.1007/s00216-017-0196-y .28175935 
Nguyen T. A. H. ; Nguyen V. R. ; Le D. D. ; Nguyen T. T. B. ; Cao V. H. ; Nguyen T. K. D. ; Saiz J. ; Hauser P. C. ; Mai T. D. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1457 , 151 –158 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.06.050 .27363736 
Caslavska J. ; Koenka I. J. ; Hauser P. C. ; Thormann W. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 699 –710 10.1002/elps.201500424 .26799858 
Adelantado C. ; Rodriguez-Farinas N. ; Martin-Doimeadios R. C. R. ; Zougagh M. ; Rios A. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 923 , 82 –88 10.1016/j.aca.2016.03.055 .27155305 
Cao X. ; Feng J. J. ; Pan Q. ; Xiong B. ; He Y. ; Yeung E. S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 2692 –2697 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03844 .28194956 
Vortmann-Westhoven B. ; Lurenbaum C. ; Winter M. ; Nowak S. 
Electrophoresis 
2017 , 38 , 540 –546 10.1002/elps.201600445 .27868209 
Kautenburger R. ; Sander J. M. ; Hein C. 
Electrophoresis 
2017 , 38 , 930 –937 10.1002/elps.201600488 .27922184 
Sato Y. ; Hoshino H. ; Iki N. 
J. Inorg. Biochem. 
2016 , 161 , 122 –127 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2016.05.013 .27235274 
Sursyakova V. V. ; Burmakina G. V. ; Rubaylo A. I. 
J. Coord. Chem. 
2017 , 70 , 431 –440 10.1080/00958972.2016.1270450 .
Peng L. Q. ; Ye L. H. ; Cao J. ; Du L. J. ; Xu J. J. ; Zhang Q. D. 
Microchim. Acta 
2017 , 184 , 1747 –1754 10.1007/s00604-017-2172-9 .
Saiz J. ; Martin-Alberca C. ; Mai T. D. ; Garcia-Ruiz C. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 2896 –2902 10.1002/elps.201600220 .27494348 
Zhang X. L. ; Guo L. ; Zhang D. X. ; Ge X. X. ; Ye J. N. ; Chu Q. C. 
Food Anal. Meth. 
2016 , 9 , 393 –400 10.1007/s12161-015-0208-5 .
Durc P. ; Foret F. ; Pokojova E. ; Homola L. ; Skrickova J. ; Herout V. ; Dastych M. ; Vinohradska H. ; Kuban P. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2017 , 409 , 3507 –3514 10.1007/s00216-017-0318-6 .28357484 
Mori M. ; Ishikawara F. ; Tomoda T. ; Yamada S. ; Okamoto M. ; Itabashi H. ; Seki Y. ; Matsumoto R. ; Shoho Y. ; Martha L. ; Sumino H. ; Murakami M. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed.
Life Sci. 
2016 , 1012 , 178 –185 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.01.037 .
Mai T. D. ; Le M. D. ; Saiz J. ; Duong H. A. ; Koenka I. J. ; Pham H. V. ; Hauser P. C. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 911 , 121 –128 10.1016/j.aca.2016.01.029 .26893094 
Kuban P. ; Bocek P. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 908 , 113 –120 10.1016/j.aca.2016.01.007 .26826693 
Deblonde G. J. P. ; Chagnes A. ; Cote G. ; Vial J. ; Rivals I. ; Delaunay N. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1437 , 210 –218 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.01.075 .26868447 
Kratii E. ; Nikonorov V. ; Nikitina T. 
Microchem. J. 
2017 , 130 , 198 –204 10.1016/j.microc.2016.09.008 .
Bonin L. ; Aupiais J. ; Kerbaa M. ; Moisy P. ; Topin S. ; Siberchicot B. 
RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 62729 –62741 10.1039/C6RA08121E .
Matczuk M. ; Legat J. ; Timerbaev A. R. ; Jarosz M. 
Analyst 
2016 , 141 , 2574 –2580 10.1039/C6AN00276E .27032066 
Ciriello R. ; Iallorenzi P. T. ; Laurita A. ; Guerrieri A. 
Electrophoresis 
2017 , 38 , 922 –929 10.1002/elps.201600478 .27935082 
Pallotta A. ; Boudier A. ; Leroy P. ; Clarot I. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1461 , 179 –184 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.07.031 .27435685 
Alsudir S. ; Lai E. P. C. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2017 , 409 , 1857 –1868 10.1007/s00216-016-0130-8 .27981342 
Alsudir S. ; Lai E. P. C. 
Talanta 
2017 , 169 , 115 –122 10.1016/j.talanta.2017.03.019 .28411799 
Qu H. ; Linder S. W. ; Mudalige T. K. 
Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 
2017 , 409 , 979 –988 10.1007/s00216-016-0012-0 .27783123 
Fichtner A. ; Jalil A. ; Pyell U. 
Langmuir 
2017 , 33 , 2325 –2339 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b04543 .28194970 
Matczuk M. ; Legat J. ; Scaletti F. ; Messori L. ; Timerbaev A. R. ; Jarosz M. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1499 , 222 –225 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.03.081 .28390666 
Liu F. F. ; Wang J. H. ; Yang L. ; Liu L. ; Ding S. M. ; Fu M. L. ; Deng L. H. ; Gao L. Q. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 2170 –2174 10.1002/elps.201600165 .27159348 
Wang J. H. ; Fan J. ; Li J. C. ; Liu L. ; Wang J. P. ; Jiang P. J. ; Liu X. Q. ; Qiu L. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2017 , 40 , 933 –939 10.1002/jssc.201600937 .27935249 
Wang J. H. ; Li J. Y. ; Chen Y. ; Teng Y. W. ; Wang C. L. ; Li J. C. ; Liu L. ; Dong B. Y. ; Qiu L. ; Jiang P. J. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 2419 –2424 10.1002/elps.201500205 .26084876 
Wang J. H. ; Li J. Y. ; Li J. C. ; Qin Y. Q. ; Wang C. L. ; Qiu L. ; Jiang P. J. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 1523 –1528 10.1002/elps.201500073 .25809142 
Wang J. H. ; Zhang C. C. ; Liu L. ; Kalesh K. A. ; Qiu L. ; Ding S. M. ; Fu M. L. ; Gao L. Q. ; Jiang P. J. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 2156 –2162 10.1002/elps.201600164 .27334251 
Li L. N. ; Zhang Y. D. ; Li X. J. ; Shen S. S. ; Huang H. X. ; Bai Y. ; Liu H. W. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 2567 –2573 10.1002/elps.201600074 .27311371 
Solinova V. ; Mikyskova H. ; Kaiser M. M. ; Janeba Z. ; Holy A. ; Kasicka V. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 239 –247 10.1002/elps.201500337 .26426398 
Mofaddel N. ; Fourmentin S. ; Guillen F. ; Landy D. ; Gouhier G. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2016 , 408 , 8211 –8220 10.1007/s00216-016-9931-z .27709240 
Liu Z. ; Li P. ; Bian W. W. ; Yu J. K. ; Zhan J. H. 
Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 25909 10.1038/srep25909 .27181651 
Multia E. ; Siren H. ; Andersson K. ; Samuelsson J. ; Forssen P. ; Fornstedt T. ; Oorni K. ; Jauhiainen M. ; Riekkola M. L. 
Anal. Biochem. 
2017 , 518 , 25 –34 10.1016/j.ab.2016.10.024 .27984014 
Syntia F. ; Nehme R. ; Claude B. ; Morin P. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1431 , 215 –223 10.1016/j.chroma.2015.12.079 .26777089 
Xiao L. X. ; Liu S. Q. ; Lin L. H. ; Yao S. Z. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 2075 –2082 10.1002/elps.201600090 .27120680 
Gattu S. ; Crihfield C. L. ; Holland L. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 929 –936 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b04074 .27936604 
Liu D. M. ; Yang J. L. ; Ha W. ; Chen J. ; Shi Y. P. 
Anal. Biochem. 
2017 , 525 , 54 –59 10.1016/j.ab.2017.02.020 .28257907 
Dominguez-Vega E. ; Haselberg R. ; Somsen G. W. ; de Jong G. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 , 8781 –8788 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b01701 .26214104 
Fayad S. ; Nehme R. ; Langmajerova M. ; Ayela B. ; Colas C. ; Maunit B. ; Jacquinet J. C. ; Vibert A. ; Lopin-Bon C. ; Glatz Z. ; Morin P. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2017 , 951 , 140 –150 10.1016/j.aca.2016.11.036 .27998482 
Schejbal J. ; Slezackova L. ; Reminek R. ; Glatz Z. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1487 , 235 –241 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.01.057 .28153449 
Kanoatov M. ; Krylov S. N. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 7421 –7428 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b02117 .27340729 
Tohala L. ; Oukacine F. ; Ravelet C. ; Peyrin E. 
Electrophoresis 
2017 , 38 , 1383 –1390 10.1002/elps.201600516 .28256731 
Li Z. Q. ; Liu C. C. ; Zhang D. W. ; Luo S. P. ; Yamaguchi Y. 
J. Chromatogr. B:
Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 
2016 , 1011 , 114 –120 10.1016/j.jchromb.2015.12.057 .
Wegman D. W. ; Ghasemi F. ; Stasheuski A. S. ; Khorshidi A. ; Yang B. B. ; Liu S. K. ; Yousef G. M. ; Krylov S. N. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 2472 –2477 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04682 .26756139 
Stephen T. K. L. ; Guillemette K. L. ; Green T. K. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 7777 –7785 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b01796 .27314490 
Goedecke S. ; Muhlisch J. ; Hempel G. ; Fruhwald M. C. ; Wunsch B. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 2939 –2950 10.1002/elps.201500242 .26331436 
Khan N. ; Mironov G. ; Berezovski M. V. 
Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 
2016 , 408 , 2891 –2899 10.1007/s00216-015-9277-y .26769131 
van Tricht E. ; Geurink L. ; Pajic B. ; Nijenhuis J. ; Backus H. ; Germano M. ; Somsen G. W. ; Sanger-van
de Griend C. E. 
Talanta 
2015 , 144 , 1030 –1035 10.1016/j.talanta.2015.07.047 .26452923 
Zhang C. X. ; Meagher M. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 3285 –3292 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b02933 .28277648 
van Tricht E. ; Geurink L. ; Backus H. ; Germano M. ; Somsen G. W. ; Sanger-van de Griend C. E. 
Talanta 
2017 , 166 , 8 –14 10.1016/j.talanta.2017.01.013 .28213262 
Bettonville V. ; Nicol J. T. J. ; Thelen N. ; Thiry M. ; Fillet M. ; Jacobs N. ; Servais A. C. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 579 –586 10.1002/elps.201500431 .26634429 
Phung S. C. ; Cabot J. M. ; Macka M. ; Powell S. M. ; Guijt R. M. ; Breadmore M. C. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 6513 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b00598 .28528550 
Salplachta J. ; Kubesova A. ; Horky J. ; Matouskova H. ; Tesarova M. ; Horka M. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2015 , 407 , 7625 –7635 10.1007/s00216-015-8920-y .26229029 
Yamamoto H. ; Sasaki K. 
Electrophoresis 
2017 , 38 , 1053 –1059 10.1002/elps.201600328 .27943356 
Pont L. ; Benavente F. ; Jaumot J. ; Tauler R. ; Alberch J. ; Gines S. ; Barbosa J. ; Sanz-Nebot V. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 795 –808 10.1002/elps.201500378 .26685060 
Yamamoto M. ; Ly R. ; Gill B. ; Zhu Y. J. ; Moran-Mirabal J. ; Britz-McKibbin P. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 10710 –10719 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03269 .27677202 
Gulersonmez M. C. ; Lock S. ; Hankemeier T. ; Ramautar R. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 1007 –1014 10.1002/elps.201500435 .26593113 
Zeng J. ; Huang X. ; Zhou L. N. ; Tan Y. X. ; Hu C. X. ; Wang X. M. ; Niu J. Q. ; Wang H. Y. ; Lin X. H. ; Yin P. Y. 
Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 16101 10.1038/srep16101 .26526930 
Ibanez C. ; Simo C. ; Valdes A. ; Campone L. ; Piccinelli A. L. ; Garcia-Canas V. ; Cifuentes A. 
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2015 , 110 , 83 –92 10.1016/j.jpba.2015.03.001 .25818703 
Ciborowski M. ; Adamska E. ; Rusak M. ; Godzien J. ; Wilk J. ; Citko A. ; Bauer W. ; Gorska M. ; Kretowski A. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 2286 –2293 10.1002/elps.201500021 .
Kuehnbaum N. L. ; Gillen J. B. ; Kormendi A. ; Lam K. P. ; DiBattista A. ; Gibala M. J. ; Britz-McKibbin P. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 2226 –2236 10.1002/elps.201400604 .
Onjiko R. M. ; Morris S. E. ; Moody S. A. ; Nemes P. 
Analyst 
2016 , 141 , 3648 –3656 10.1039/C6AN00200E .27004603 
Bocato M. Z. ; Moreira F. D. ; de Albuquerque N. C. P. ; de Gaitani C. M. ; de Oliveira A. R. M. 
J. Pharm. Biomed.
Anal. 
2016 , 128 , 528 –537 10.1016/j.jpba.2016.06.028 .27381871 
Gonzalez-Pena D. ; Dudzik D. ; Colina-Coca C. ; de Ancos B. ; Garcia A. ; Barbas C. ; Sanchez-Moreno C. 
J. Funct. Foods 
2015 , 19 , 363 –375 10.1016/j.jff.2015.09.033 .
Dobrecky C. B. ; Flor S. A. ; Lopez P. G. ; Wagner M. L. ; Lucangioli S. E. 
Electrophoresis 
2017 , 38 , 1292 –1300 10.1002/elps.201600533 .28090664 
Andreas N. J. ; Hyde M. J. ; Gomez-Romero M. ; Lopez-Gonzalvez M. A. ; Villasenor A. ; Wijeyesekera A. ; Barbas C. ; Modi N. ; Holmes E. ; Garcia-Perez I. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 2269 –2285 10.1002/elps.201500011 .
Naz S. ; Calderon A. A. ; Garcia A. ; Gallafrio J. ; Mestre R. T. ; Gonzalez E. G. ; de Cabo C. M. ; Delgado M. C. M. ; Balanza J. A. L. ; Simionato A. V. C. ; Vaeza N. N. ; Barbas C. ; Ruperez F. J. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 2303 –2313 10.1002/elps.201500169 .
Zhao Y. N. ; Zhao J. Y. ; Zhao C. X. ; Zhou H. N. ; Li Y. L. ; Zhang J. J. ; Li L. L. ; Hu C. X. ; Li W. Z. ; Peng X. J. ; Lu X. ; Lin F. C. ; Xu G. W. 
Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 16346 10.1038/srep16346 .26549189 
Cela A. ; Madr A. ; Glatz Z. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1499 , 203 –210 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.03.080 .28396085 
Cela A. ; Madr A. ; Dedova T. ; Pelcova M. ; Jeseta M. ; Zakova J. ; Crha I. ; Glatz Z. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 2305 –2312 10.1002/elps.201500587 .27060204 
Nehme R. ; Atieh C. ; Fayad S. ; Claude B. ; Chartier A. ; Tannoury M. ; Elleuch F. ; Abdelkafi S. ; Pichon C. ; Morin P. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2017 , 40 , 558 –566 10.1002/jssc.201601005 .27813309 
Rodrigues K. T. ; Mekahli D. ; Tavares M. F. M. ; Van Schepdael A. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 1039 –1047 10.1002/elps.201500534 .26826549 
Xie X. ; Chang F. X. ; Li X. ; Li M. X. ; Zhu Z. W. 
Talanta 
2017 , 162 , 362 –367 10.1016/j.talanta.2016.10.046 .27837841 
Tian M. M. ; Zhang N. ; Liu X. X. ; Guo L. P. ; Yang L. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1459 , 152 –159 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.07.001 .27425760 
Kuhnreich R. ; Holzgrabe U. 
Chromatographia 
2016 , 79 , 1013 –1022 10.1007/s10337-016-3122-0 .
Prior A. ; Sanchez-Hernandez L. ; Sastre-Torano J. ; Marina M. L. ; de Jong G. J. ; Somsen G. W. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 2410 –2419 10.1002/elps.201600015 .27465690 
Prior A. ; Moldovan R. C. ; Crommen J. ; Servais A. C. ; Fillet M. ; de Jong G. J. ; Somsen G. W. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 940 , 150 –158 10.1016/j.aca.2016.08.040 .27662770 
Moldovan R. C. ; Bodoki E. ; Kacso T. ; Servais A. C. ; Crommen J. ; Oprean R. ; Fillet M. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1467 , 400 –408 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.08.035 .27554025 
Creamer J. S. ; Mora M. F. ; Willis P. A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 1329 –1337 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b04338 .28194989 
Rossing K. ; Bosselmann H. S. ; Gustafsson F. ; Zhang Z. Y. ; Gu Y. M. ; Kuznetsova T. ; Nkuipou-Kenfack E. ; Mischak H. ; Staessen J. A. ; Koeck T. ; Schou M. 
PLoS
One 
2016 , 11 , e0157167 10.1371/journal.pone.0157167 .27308822 
von zur Muhlen C. ; Koeck T. ; Schiffer E. ; Sackmann C. ; Zurbig P. ; Hilgendorf I. ; Reinohl J. ; Rivera J. ; Zirlik A. ; Hehrlein C. ; Mischak H. ; Bode C. ; Peter K. 
Proteomics: Clin. Appl. 
2016 , 10 , 574 –584 10.1002/prca.201500105 .26898369 
Martin-Pozuelo G. ; Gonzalez-Barrio R. ; Barbera G. G. ; Albalat A. ; Garcia-Alonso J. ; Mullen W. ; Mischak H. ; Periago M. J. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2016 , 17 , 1789 10.3390/ijms17111789 .
Nkuipou-Kenfack E. ; Schanstra J. P. ; Bajwa S. ; Pejchinovski M. ; Vinel C. ; Dray C. ; Valet P. ; Bascands J. L. ; Vlahou A. ; Koeck T. ; Borries M. ; Busch H. ; Bechtel-Walz W. ; Huber T. B. ; Rudolph K. L. ; Pich A. ; Mischak H. ; Zurbig P. 
PLoS One 
2017 , 12 , e0166875 10.1371/journal.pone.0166875 .28199320 
Lombard-Banek C. ; Moody S. A. ; Nemes P. 
Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 2454 –2458 10.1002/anie.201510411 .
Lombard-Banek C. ; Reddy S. ; Moody S. A. ; Nemes P. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2016 , 15 , 2756 –2768 10.1074/mcp.M115.057760 .27317400 
Ludwig K. R. ; Sun L. L. ; Zhu G. J. ; Dovichi N. J. ; Hummon A. B. 
Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 , 9532 –9537 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b02457 .26399161 
Yan X. J. ; Sun L. L. ; Zhu G. J. ; Cox O. F. ; Dovichi N. J. 
Proteomics 
2016 , 16 , 2945 –2952 10.1002/pmic.201600262 .27723263 
Ibrahim M. ; Gahoual R. ; Enkler L. ; Becker H. D. ; Chicher J. ; Hammann P. ; Francois Y. N. ; Kuhn L. ; Leize-Wagner E. 
J. Chromatogr. Sci. 
2016 , 54 , 653 –663 10.1093/chromsci/bmw005 .26860395 
Gahoual R. ; Beck A. ; Francois Y. N. ; Leize-Wagner E. 
J. Mass Spectrom. 
2016 , 51 , 150 –158 10.1002/jms.3735 .26889931 
Faserl K. ; Sarg B. ; Maurer V. ; Lindner H. H. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1498 , 215 –223 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.01.086 .28179079 
Barroso A. ; Gimenez E. ; Benavente F. ; Barbosa J. ; Sanz-Nebot V. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 987 –997 10.1002/elps.201500255 .26331950 
Durgaryan A. ; Rundlof T. ; Laven M. ; Amini A. 
Anal.
Methods 
2016 , 8 , 4188 –4196 10.1039/C6AY01078D .
Fu X. ; Xiao H. T. ; Liang S. ; Bao J. J. ; Li T. X. ; Zhang Y. 
Analyst 
2016 , 141 , 305 –310 10.1039/C5AN01680K .26609548 
Tengattini S. ; Dominguez-Vega E. ; Temporini C. ; Terreni M. ; Somsen G. W. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2016 , 408 , 6123 –6132 10.1007/s00216-016-9723-5 .27372716 
Bertoletti L. ; Bisceglia F. ; Colombo R. ; Giorgetti S. ; Raimondi S. ; Mangione P. P. ; De Lorenzi E. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 2465 –2472 10.1002/elps.201500148 .26084573 
Bertoletti L. ; Schappler J. ; Colombo R. ; Rudaz S. ; Haselberg R. ; Dominguez-Vega E. ; Raimondi S. ; Somsen G. W. ; De Lorenzi E. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 945 , 102 –109 10.1016/j.aca.2016.10.010 .27968711 
Marie A. L. ; Dominguez-Vega E. ; Saller F. ; Plantier J. L. ; Urbain R. ; Borgel D. ; Tran N. T. ; Somsen G. W. ; Taverna M. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 947 , 58 –65 10.1016/j.aca.2016.10.016 .27846990 
Iwabuchi M. F. ; Hetu M. M. ; Tong W. G. 
Anal. Biochem. 
2016 , 500 , 51 –59 10.1016/j.ab.2016.01.010 .26874019 
Farina-Gomez N. ; Barrabes S. ; Gomez-Lopez J. E. ; Gonzalez M. ; Puerta A. ; Navarro-Calderon D. ; Albers-Acosta E. ; Olivier C. ; Diez-Masa J. C. ; Peracaula R. ; de Frutos M. 
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2017 , 134 , 220 –227 10.1016/j.jpba.2016.11.045 .27918991 
Christians S. ; van Treel N. D. ; Bieniara G. ; Eulig-Wien A. ; Hanschmann K. M. ; Giess S. 
Biologicals 
2016 , 44 , 234 –241 10.1016/j.biologicals.2016.04.001 .27156142 
Aid T. ; Paist L. ; Lopp M. ; Kaljurand M. ; Vaher M. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1447 , 141 –147 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.04.027 .27095128 
Yu J. H. ; Aboshora W. ; Zhang S. Q. ; Zhang L. F. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2016 , 408 , 1657 –1666 10.1007/s00216-015-9276-z .26790873 
Goetz S. ; Rejzek M. ; Nepogodiev S. A. ; Field R. A. 
Carbohydr. Res. 
2016 , 433 , 97 –105 10.1016/j.carres.2016.07.017 .27479753 
Jarvas G. ; Szigeti M. ; Guttman A. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 3094 –3096 10.1002/elps.201500397 .26383616 
Guttman A. ; Kerekgyarto M. ; Jarvas G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 , 11630 –11634 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b03727 .26544759 
Szigeti M. ; Guttman A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 2201 –2204 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b00016 .28192904 
Jarvas G. ; Szigeti M. ; Chapman J. ; Guttman A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 11364 –11367 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03596 .27813405 
Kerekgyarto M. ; Jarvas G. ; Novak L. ; Guttman A. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 573 –578 10.1002/elps.201500394 .26881883 
Donczo B. ; Szigeti M. ; Ostoros G. ; Gacs A. ; Tovari J. ; Guttman A. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 2292 –2296 10.1002/elps.201500446 .26572920 
Hennig R. ; Cajic S. ; Borowiak M. ; Hoffmann M. ; Kottler R. ; Reichl U. ; Rapp E. 
Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, Gen. Subj. 
2016 , 1860 , 1728 –1738 10.1016/j.bbagen.2016.03.035 .
Guan Y. Q. ; Zhou G. B. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 834 –840 10.1002/elps.201500395 .26668076 
Bucsella B. ; Fornage A. ; Le Denmat C. ; Kalman F. 
Chimia 
2016 , 70 , 732 –735 10.2533/chimia.2016.732 .27779934 
Suba D. ; Urbanyi Z. ; Salgo A. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed.
Life Sci. 
2016 , 1032 , 224 –229 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.07.026 .
Hamm M. ; Wang F. ; Rustandi R. R. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 2687 –2694 10.1002/elps.201500186 .26335452 
Francois Y. N. ; Biacchi M. ; Said N. ; Renard C. ; Beck A. ; Gahoual R. ; Leize-Wagner E. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 908 , 168 –176 10.1016/j.aca.2015.12.033 .26826699 
Biacchi M. ; Said N. ; Beck A. ; Leize-Wagner E. ; Francois Y. N. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1498 , 120 –127 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.02.064 .28259456 
Said N. ; Gahoual R. ; Kuhn L. ; Beck A. ; Francois Y. N. ; Leize-Wagner E. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 918 , 50 –59 10.1016/j.aca.2016.03.006 .27046210 
Chen Y. ; Kim M. T. ; Zheng L. ; Deperalta G. ; Jacobson F. 
Bioconjugate Chem. 
2016 , 27 , 2037 –2047 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.6b00316 .
Dada O. O. ; Jaya N. ; Valliere-Douglass J. ; Salas-Solano O. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 2695 –2702 10.1002/elps.201500219 .26289680 
Hosken B. D. ; Li C. ; Mullappally B. ; Co C. ; Zhang B. Y. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 5662 –5669 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b03946 .27157266 
Esterman A. L. ; Katiyar A. ; Krishnamurthy G. 
J. Pharm. Biomed.
Anal. 
2016 , 128 , 447 –454 10.1016/j.jpba.2016.06.006 .27344634 
Sanchez-Hernandez L. ; Montealegre C. ; Kiessig S. ; Moritz B. ; Neususs C. 
Electrophoresis 
2017 , 38 , 1044 –1052 10.1002/elps.201600464 .28008632 
Jooß K. ; Hühner J. ; Kiessig S. ; Moritz B. ; Neusüß C. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2017 , 409 , 6057 –6067 10.1007/s00216-017-0542-0 .28801824 
Meininger M. ; Stepath M. ; Hennig R. ; Cajic S. ; Rapp E. ; Rotering H. ; Wolff M. W. ; Reichl U. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 
2016 , 1012 , 193 –203 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.01.005 .
Szigeti M. ; Lew C. ; Roby K. ; Guttman A. 
Jala 
2016 , 21 , 281 –286 10.1177/2211068215608767 .26429557 
Kovacs Z. ; Szarka M. ; Szigeti M. ; Guttman A. 
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2016 , 128 , 367 –370 10.1016/j.jpba.2016.06.002 .27337190 
Feng H. T. ; Su M. ; Rifai F. N. ; Li P. J. ; Li S. F. Y. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2017 , 953 , 79 –86 10.1016/j.aca.2016.11.043 .28010746 
Bush D. R. ; Zang L. ; Belov A. M. ; Ivanov A. R. ; Kargert B. L. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 1138 –1146 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b03218 .26641950 
Wu X. Y. ; Xu Z. Q. ; Huang Z. ; Shao C. Y. 
Electrophoresis 
2016 , 37 , 2963 –2969 10.1002/elps.201600189 .27494422 
Hernandez-Mesa M. ; Airado-Rodriguez D. ; Garcia-Campana A. M. ; Cruces-Blanco C. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 2538 –2541 10.1002/elps.201500193 .26174089 
An N. ; Wang L. J. ; Zhao J. J. ; Lv L. L. ; Wang N. ; Guo H. Z. 
Anal. Methods 
2016 , 8 , 1127 –1134 10.1039/C5AY02686E .
Feng Y. ; Wang T. T. ; Jiang Z. J. ; Chankvetadze B. ; Crommen J. 
Electrophoresis 
2015 , 36 , 1358 –1364 10.1002/elps.201400462 .25401523 
Furlanetto S. ; Orlandini S. ; Pasquini B. ; Caprini C. ; Mura P. ; Pinzauti S. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2015 , 407 , 7637 –7646 10.1007/s00216-015-8921-x .26297454 
Mala Z. ; Gebauer P. ; Bocek P. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 935 , 249 –257 10.1016/j.aca.2016.06.016 .27543034 
Cheng M. X. ; Chen Z. L. 
Electrophoresis 
2017 , 38 , 486 –493 10.1002/elps.201600367 .27862041 
Michalcova L. ; Glatz Z. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2016 , 39 , 3631 –3637 10.1002/jssc.201600713 .27449705 
Thevarajah J. J. ; Sutton A. T. ; Maniego A. R. ; Whitty E. G. ; Harrisson S. ; Cottet H. ; Castignolles P. ; Gaborieau M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 1674 –1681 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b03672 .26674535 
Alinat E. ; Delaunay N. ; Archer X. ; Gareil P. 
Carbohydr. Polym. 
2015 , 128 , 99 –104 10.1016/j.carbpol.2015.04.013 .26005144 
Lin L. ; Liu X. Y. ; Zhang F. M. ; Chi L. L. ; Amster I. J. ; Leach F. E. ; Xia Q. W. ; Linhardt R. J. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2017 , 409 , 411 –420 10.1007/s00216-016-9662-1 .27325464 
Sun X. J. ; Lin L. ; Liu X. Y. ; Zhang F. M. ; Chi L. L. ; Xia Q. W. ; Linhardt R. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 1937 –1943 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04405 .26714061 
Hiltunen S. ; Siren H. ; Heiskanen I. ; Backfolk K. 
Cellulose 
2016 , 23 , 3331 –3340 10.1007/s10570-016-1011-1 .
Lounis F. M. ; Chamieh J. ; Leclercq L. ; Gonzalez P. ; Cottet H. 
Soft Matter 
2016 , 12 , 9728 –9737 10.1039/C6SM01811D .27858039

