
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b04043ArticleHow Actuated Particles
Effectively Capture Biomolecular
Targets van Reenen Alexander †‡∥de Jong Arthur M. †‡Prins Menno W. J. *†‡§†Department
of Applied Physics, ‡Institute for Complex Molecular Systems, §Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands* E-mail: m.w.j.prins@tue.nl.13 02 2017 21 03 2017 89 6 3402 3410 14 10 2016 13 02 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Because
of their high surface-to-volume ratio and adaptable surface
functionalization, particles are widely used in bioanalytical methods
to capture molecular targets. In this article, a comprehensive study
is reported of the effectiveness of protein capture by actuated magnetic
particles. Association rate constants are quantified in experiments
as well as in Brownian dynamics simulations for different particle
actuation configurations. The data reveal how the association rate
depends on the particle velocity, particle density, and particle assembly
characteristics. Interestingly, single particles appear to exhibit
target depletion zones near their surface, caused by the high density
of capture molecules. The depletion effects are even more limiting
in cases with high particle densities. The depletion effects are overcome
and protein capture rates are enhanced by applying dynamic particle
actuation, resulting in an increase in the association rate constants
by up to 2 orders of magnitude.

document-id-old-9ac6b04043document-id-new-14ac-2016-04043qccc-price
==== Body
Particle-based
techniques are
widely exploited in bioanalysis1 and clinical
diagnostics2 for extracting target substances
from a biological matrix based on either generic physicochemical capture
principles3,4 or biologically specific capture. The binding
of biomolecular targets to a single particle or a single cell has
been a topic of study for several decades due to its relevance for
bioanalysis and cellular processes. Pickard5 published an extensive overview of existing theories and models
for molecular transport to or from a particle. The transition from
target transport dominated by diffusion to transport dominated by
advection is described by the dimensionless Péclet number, Pe = L·v/D, where L is a characteristic length scale
of the system, v is the velocity of the particle,
and D is the diffusion constant of the target molecules.
Pickard concluded that almost all reported studies involved theoretical
considerations and that no relevant experimental studies were reported
in the biologically interesting region of Péclet numbers between
0.1 and 10.

Magnetic particles have the advantage that their
velocities can
be carefully controlled by magnetic fields.6,7 Furthermore,
their actuation properties can be used to effectuate series of processing
steps in a diagnostic assay,7 such as buffer
exchange, washing, concentration, transportation and dispersion,8 and labeling. By combining various steps, complete
assays can be integrated in a lab-on-chip testing device. These processes
exploit the high surface-to-volume ratio and adaptable surface functionalization
of particles. For a given surface functionalization, the effectiveness
and rate of target capture critically depend on the way the particles
and fluid are brought into contact with each other and on the amount
of particles used. The capture rate scales with the amount of particles,
but it saturates when the particles themselves start to hinder the
target capturing process. Magnetic actuation has been frequently presented
as a means to speed up biochemical reactions,7 but the exact influence of actuation on the capture processes has
not been clearly reported.

In this article, we investigate in
detail the effectiveness of
biomolecular target capture by single particles and by ensembles of
particles, with the aim to understand and resolve the key limiting
factors. The effectiveness of capture was studied in a model assay
with protein G-coated magnetic particles and fluorescently labeled
antibodies as targets (Figure 1). We find that even single particles have a target depletion
zone near their surface, which leads to a reduced capture rate. The
depletion effects become even more limiting for high particle densities.
We demonstrate that the depletion effects can be overcome by actuating
the particles through the fluid, using gravitational or magnetic forces.
We summarize the findings in terms of actuation principles and dimensionless
numbers that will help in the design of efficient and rapid particle-based
capture processes for the generation of novel, highly sensitive, and
miniaturized lab-on-chip biosensing systems.

Figure 1 Experiment for studying
particle-based target capture by actuated
magnetic particles. (a) Magnetic fields were generated by a five-pole
electromagnet containing soft iron parts to concentrate field lines
at its center (b) where the disk-shaped 38 μL incubation chamber
was located. (c) Microscope top-view images of rotating chains of
magnetic particles. (d) The experimental model system to study the
capture process. (e) Fluorescence microscopy images of particles before
and after target capture. The average fluorescence of the particles
was compared to the background to quantify the capture of targets.
Due to autofluorescence, the particles are already visible at t = 0.

Materials and Methods
Model System for Particle-Based Target Capture
Magnetic
particles (⌀2.8 μm, carboxylated M270, Dynal Biotech)
were coated covalently with recombinant protein G (Thermo Scientific)
using standard EDC-NHS coupling chemistry. As targets, we used goat
anti-mouse IgG antibodies labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 dye (Invitrogen).
Both the particles and target antibodies were diluted in assay buffer,
i.e., phosphate buffered saline containing 0.1% bovine serum albumin
(BSA; Merck) and 0.02% Tween-20 (Thermo Scientific).

To quantify
the maximum binding capacity of the magnetic particles, we performed
a supernatant assay in which magnetic particles (∼9 ×
106 particles/μL) were incubated with ∼60
nM antibodies for 3 h. After a magnetic washing step, we measured
the fluorescence of the supernatant using a Fluoroskan Ascent FL.
Compared to a control in which no magnetic particles were incubated,
a 4.4 ± 0.3% decrease was found in the fluorescence signal, from
which we calculate that a single magnetic particle can bind (1.8 ±
0.2) × 105 antibodies.

Preparation and Filling
of the Incubation Chamber
Microfluidic
incubation chambers were shaped as a flat cylinder (Figure 2b). The chambers were made
by attaching adhesive Secure-Seal hybridization chambers (⌀9
mm, height = 0.6 mm; Electron Microscopy Sciences) to a glass coverslip
(VWR) that was cleaned beforehand using isopropanol. On the nonadhesive
side, the hybridization chambers had a 0.25 mm thick polycarbonate
sheet containing two inlets to fill the 38 μL incubation chamber.
The sheet was transparent to allow imaging from this side using a
microscope (Leica DM6000). Prior to an experiment, the incubation
chamber was filled with assay buffer (containing no particles or targets)
in order to block the chamber with BSA and thereby minimize nonspecific
adhesion.

In experiments, a 4 μL magnetic particle suspension
(2 × 105 particles/μL; unless stated otherwise)
was dispensed in the incubation chamber. After 1 min (to allow the
particles to sediment to the bottom surface), the incubation chamber
was filled with the target solution (∼34 μL with a concentration
of 110 pM; unless stated otherwise). To prevent evaporation losses,
the chamber was sealed using adhesive port seals as supplied together
with the hybridization chambers.

Magnetic Field Generation
To generate time-dependent
magnetic fields in the incubation chamber, an electromagnet setup
was designed and built consisting of five electromagnets (Figure 1a,b). The setup consists
of a quadrupole electromagnet (800 windings with ⌀0.25 mm copper
wires) to generate magnetic fields, oriented in-plane with respect
to the bottom surface of the incubation chamber. A separate electromagnet
(1600 windings with ⌀0.25 mm copper wires) was positioned below
the center of the quadrupole electromagnet to allow for the generation
of fields oriented out-of-plane. With the quadrupole electromagnet,
magnetic fields can be generated that rotate in-plane with respect
to the incubation chamber (Figure 1c), whereas by combining the bottom electromagnet with
two opposite electromagnets of the quadrupole, magnetic fields can
be generated that rotate out-of-plane. To guide field lines to the
incubation chamber, soft iron parts were implemented in the setup.

The electromagnets were powered using a controller that was steered
using LabView software to allow for the application of actuation protocols
to each coil separately, which can vary in time in terms of the amplitude,
frequency, and waveform (i.e., sinusoidal) of the current. The calibration
of the magnetic field was performed using a Gauss meter (5100 series
F.W. Bell); the data can be found in Supporting Information S1.

Magnetic Redispersion of Particles after
Actuation
After the application of each actuation sequence,
particles were
actively disaggregated and redistributed over the bottom surface by
means of a method called magnetic interfacial rotaphoresis (see Supporting Information S2 and ref (8)). Interfacial rotaphoresis
allowed us to microscopically evaluate all particles because they
were evenly spread over the surface.

Quantification of Target
Capture
To quantify target
capture for different types of actuation, we monitored the fluorescence
intensity of the particles. Before actuation and after the application
of a single actuation protocol, the incubation chamber was placed
under a microscope (Leica DM6000). Using a water immersion objective
lens (63×), the bottom surface with particles was imaged at a
final magnification of 630×. The redistributed particles stayed
on the bottom surface by gravitational forces. Excitation light (λ
= 480 ± 20 nm) was generated by an external light source (Leica
EL6000) combined with a L5 (Leica) filter cube. Fluorescence (within
the range of λ = 527 ± 15 nm) was recorded using an EMCCD
camera (Andor Luca S). For each measurement, images were taken from
three random locations (with a field of view of 142 × 107 μm2). After a measurement, the incubation chamber was placed
back into the electromagnet setup to start the next actuation sequence.

Images (Figure 1e) were processed using ImageJ software (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/)
and Matlab (Mathworks) to determine the average fluorescence intensity
of the particles with respect to the background intensity. The method
is discussed in more detail in Supporting Information S3. We verified that antibody capture was specific, as presented
in Supporting Information S4.

Results
and Discussion
First, we present two brief theoretical considerations
to illustrate
how particle actuation can increase the target capture rate. The first
consideration treats advective replenishment in absence of diffusion.
The second consideration deals with diffusive transport. Basically,
magnetic actuation causes particles to move through the fluid and
thereby displace fluid volume elements. Let us assume a single magnetic
particle with diameter d that translates linearly
with velocity v through a static fluid. Due to its
cross-section, the particle displaces a fluid volume V per unit time that can be approximated by 1  

This gives a number of displaced target
molecules Ndispl per unit time 2  with Ctarget being
the concentration of targets in the fluid. The target capture rate
is related to the number of capture molecules immobilized on the particle
(NCM), the association rate constant of
the individual capture molecules (kon),
and the local concentration of targets at the particle surface. When
there is no depletion of targets, the capture rate onto a single particle
is given by 3  with σ being the areal
density of capture
molecules on the particle surface. We assume that target capture is
effectuated without depletion limitation when the number of targets
displaced per unit of time is larger than the number of targets captured
per unit time, i.e., dNdispl/dt > dNcapt/dt. Using eqs 2 and 3, we find the following expression for the minimum
velocity to avoid depletion 4  

Using this relation, we can estimate
whether a reaction is limited
by local depletion of targets near the particles or not. The velocity
minimum to avoid depletion limitation scales with the reaction rate
constant and the areal density of capture molecules on the particle
surface. This is expected as both these factors determine the rate
at which targets are captured. Interestingly, the limit is independent
of the particle size as both the target displacement and capture processes
scale with the particle size. We can now estimate the particle velocity
necessary for particle-based target capture without depletion limitation.
Using a relatively low surface density of capture molecules [σ
= 1/(100 nm)2 = 1014 m–2]
and a common value for the association rate per capture molecule [kon = 105 M–1 s–1 = 1/6 × 10–21 m3/s],9 we find a velocity of vno-depl > 100 μm/s. This velocity is relatively
high, so from these estimations, we can expect that depletion effects
should indeed be visible in particle-based capture experiments without
actuation.

When target depletion occurs near a linearly translating
capture
particle, then the depletion zone is nonspherical, with the strongest
depletion being present at the wake-side of the particle. At low particle
velocities, the transport of targets across the local concentration
gradient is dominated by diffusion, and at high velocities, the transport
is dominated by advection. Advective transport dominates over diffusive
transport when Pe > 1, i.e. 5  

Using this relation,
a particle velocity can be estimated to allow
advective transport to dominate over diffusive transport. We use a
particle diameter of 2.8 μm, and we compute the diffusion constant
using the Stokes–Einstein relation (T = 293
K) with a target hydrodynamic radius of ∼5.5 nm, corresponding
to IgG.10 On the basis of this input, we
find a velocity of vadv>diff ∼
10 μm/s.

Pickard5 made a mathematical
analysis
on the flux enhancement due to convective flow of reactant to an ideally
absorbing sphere. He derived relations for the flux enhancement relative
to the flux expected from pure diffusion as a function of Péclet
number. The above-mentioned velocity of 10 μm/s corresponds
to a Péclet number equal to 1. According to Pickard, the relative
flux enhancement relative to a nonmoving sphere is in the range of
100% for conditions in the vicinity of Pe ≈
1.

From the above theoretical estimations, we conclude that
depletion
effects may indeed appear in particle-based capture experiments without
actuation and that advective transport due to particle actuation may
resolve the limitations imposed by diffusion.

Target Capture by Actuated
and Nonactuated Single Particles
First, we discuss target
capture and depletion effects in the limit
of single particles. We studied the capture rate of magnetic particles
at very low particle concentrations (100 particles/μL). The
amount of captured targets on the particle surface was quantified
by measuring the average particle fluorescence signal during the incubation
process (see Figure 1e and Supporting Information S3 and S4). We compared the capture of targets on the one hand for particles
lying on a surface and on the other hand for particles linearly translating
through a fluid due to gravitational forces by repeatedly turning
the fluid cell upside down. In Figure 2a, the measured fluorescence
intensity is shown for both experiments. The induced particle velocity
of vMP = 5.1 μm/s was estimated
by balancing the Stokes drag with the gravitational force on a single
particle: 6πηRMPvMP = 4πRMP3(ρMP – ρmedium)g. Comparing both cases, it is found
that the capture rate is increased by a factor of 1.9 ± 0.1 when
particles translate through the fluid compared to static particles.

Figure 2 Experiment
and simulations on target capture by linear translation
of single particles. (a) Capture of fluorescently labeled antibodies
(110 pM). The particles were moved through the incubation chamber
by gravitational forces (see inset illustration) by reversing the
chamber every 2 min, leading to an estimated particle sedimentation
velocity of 5.1 μm/s. The inset shows fluorescence microscope
images of particles at different incubation times. The number of bound
antibodies per magnetic particle is indicated on the right axis. The
solid lines correspond to least-squares linear fits to the data. (b)
Schematic overview of the system simulated by Brownian dynamics, showing
the magnetic capture particle (brown) and the target particles (orange).
(c) Simulated capture of antibodies for varying binding range α
of the targets (values for α are shown on the right). The target
concentration was 0.1 pM. (d) Association rate constants as determined
from linear fits to the data in panel c. (e) Simulated capture for
different particle velocities and for α = 10°. The inset
shows that particles start at the bottom and then move up and down
through the fluid. (f) Association rate constants as a function of
the particle velocity, determined from linear fits to the data in
panel e.

Using these results as a reference,
we numerically modeled the
capture process using Brownian dynamics. The specific details of the
method are described in Supporting Information S8. Basically, as sketched in Figure 2b, we simulated a magnetic particle at different
translational velocities within a rectangular fluid cell with a height
equal to the incubation chamber. The width of the fluid cell was set
at 100 μm, and periodic boundary conditions were used at the
sides. This corresponds to the average particle distance in the experiment.
Target antibodies were modeled as spherical particles with a hydrodynamic
radius of ∼5.5 nm.13 Initially,
target particles are randomly distributed, and we compute their random
displacement and rotation due to Brownian motion as well as hydrodynamic
interactions due to the movement of the magnetic particle through
the fluid. Interactions between the target particles were neglected
because the target concentrations were very low. The capture process
is modeled by treating the boundary of the magnetic particle as being
partially absorbing. Specifically, binding is assumed only for angular
differences smaller than a predefined angle α ∈ [0, π]
between (i) the orientation vector of the target and (ii) the relative
position vector between the particle and the target. In other words,
the target needs to orient its binding site toward the magnetic particle
in order to bind. Targets bind only for a limited range of orientations
and otherwise reflect from the surface (0 < α < π).
For α = π, targets always bind independent of their orientation.
A numerical time step of 3 μs was chosen, which was found to
be small enough to keep propagation errors negligible (see Supporting Information S8).

First, we simulated
target capture by nonactuated magnetic particles
(i.e., sedimented onto the surface) for different values for the binding
range α. As shown in Figure 2c,d, the binding rate strongly depends on α,
especially at low values. For a binding range of α ≅
10°, similar association rate constants are found as in experiments
(Figure 2a), i.e.,
5 ×1010 M–1 s–1 (see Supporting Information S5). Note
that the target concentrations are much lower in the simulations than
in the experiments, by a factor of 1.1 × 103. An experiment
at 0.1 pM would give approximately 12 targets bound to a single particle
after 50 min. Compared to completely absorbing spheres, i.e., α
= π, the association rate constant for α ≅ 10°
is reduced by a factor of 7 ± 1. In the literature, it has been
reported9 that binding ranges of α
≅ 5° lead to association rate constants similar to those
found for free antibody–antigen association. The larger binding
range that we find is possibly caused by the presence of multiple
binding sites within close proximity on the surface of the magnetic
particles. During an encounter with a particle, a target protein can
interact with multiple binding sites, which is much less probable
for a protein free in solution. The interaction with multiple binding
sites effectively increases the allowed binding range for which the
target can react.

Next, taking a binding range of α =
10°, we simulated
the effect of active particle translation through the sample volume.
As shown in Figure 2e,f, we find that increased translation velocities enhance the capture
rate. For a velocity as generated by gravitation, the obtained increase
is a factor of 1.4 ± 0.2. These conditions for the translating
particles correspond to Pe ≈ 0.4. According
to Pickard,5 relative enhancements of up
to 100% (factor 2) can be expected.

In the experiments, we even
find an increase of 1.9 ± 0.3
(Figure 2a). Compared
to the simulations, the experimental system exhibits (i) nonspherical
targets, namely, antibodies that have a flexible structure allowing
a dynamic configuration; (ii) magnetic particles with a surface roughness
of about 101–102 nm in size (see Supporting Information S9); and (iii) specific
interactions that may act on a longer range than hard-sphere collisions.
These factors may influence the near-surface alignment process during
the encounter between target and particle. Still, the increase of
the motion-induced capture rate calculated from the simulation is
close to the experimental values, showing that the enhancement in
the capture rate can be at least partially understood from the physical
transport processes of the particles and the targets in the fluid.
We conclude that the particle motion generates more encounters between
targets and particles and that, indeed, target depletion occurs near
the particle’s surface.

In the following sections, the
capture process is studied for ensembles
of capture particles rather than for isolated particles. In particle
ensembles, the proximity of particles can lead to overlapping depletion
zones and therefore a further reduction in capture rates.

Target Capture
by Magnetically Actuated Ensembles of Particles
In Figure 3, data
is shown for different magnetic actuation protocols as well as a control
without magnetic actuation. In the control experiment, particles are
distributed randomly over the bottom of the incubation chamber due
to sedimentation. In the case of magnetic actuation, we used gradients
in the magnetic field to translate particles up and down repeatedly
through the incubation chamber (Bgrad,z), as sketched in Figure 3a. During this actuation, particles formed
into chain-like structures oriented in the direction of the (static)
magnetic field, which was in-plane with respect to the bottom surface
of the incubation chamber. In addition to the translation, magnetic
fields were rotated in-plane (Brot,h)
or out-of-plane (Brot,v) to rotate the
chains of particles within the local fluid.

Figure 3 Experimental data on
target capture by magnetically actuated ensembles
of particles. Target capture was measured for different types of magnetic
actuation: no actuation; only translation (Bgrad,z); and translation combined with rotation in-plane (Brot,h), out-of-plane (Brot,v), or alternating in both directions (Brot,h+v). Particles (2 × 105 particles/μL)
were actuated (B = 20 mT; ω = 0.2 Hz) in a
36 μL fluid volume. (a) Sketch of the actuation process. Initially,
particles are distributed over the bottom surface of the incubation
chamber. By magnetic actuation, the particles are moved in a layer-like
fashion upward and downward through the fluid, and during this process
they form (rotating) chains. After actuation, the particles are redistributed
over the surface, and the fluorescence due to the captured targets
on the particle surface was measured. (b) Time dependence of the particle
fluorescence relative to the background. The lines are fits based
on eq 6 to determine ka and kd. From the
fit parameters, the particle fluorescence is related to the number
of bound antibodies per magnetic particle, as shown on the right axis.
(c) Fitted association and dissociation rate constants for the data
shown in panel b.

Magnetic actuation of
magnetic particles has a strong effect on
the capture rate, as shown in Figure 3b. In the case of actuation, the measured curves show
an initial kinetic regime and a saturation of the particle fluorescence
after several tens of minutes. To fit the data, we used the following
equation describing the time-dependent binding of antibodies [Ab]
to a magnetic particle [MP] (see Supporting Information S5): 6  in which ka and kd are, respectively, the forward
and backward
rate constants, or the rate constants for association and dissociation,
calculated per magnetic particle. Using eq 6, we determined the association and dissociation
rate constants for the different cases (Figure 3c). For the dissociation rate constant, similar
values are found for the different actuation methods, with an average
value of kd = 1.5 ± 0.7 × 10–4 s–1. This value is consistent with
the dissociation rate constant of goat IgG and protein G of kd ≈ 1 × 10–4 s–1, as has been measured by localized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR).11 The association rate
constants, on the other hand, show a significant variation for the
different types of actuation. Compared to no actuation, a field gradient
of ∼4 T/m (which corresponds to a single particle moving at
a velocity of 12 μm/s) resulted in an increase in ka by a factor of 8 ± 4. Combined with a rotating
magnetic field, the ka increased further.
We find that out-of-plane rotating fields, with an increase in ka of 36 ± 7 times, are more effective than
in-plane rotating fields. Overall, these results clearly show that
particle movement through the sample volume yields a substantial increase
in the rate at which target antibodies are captured.

We attribute
the observed increase in the association rate constant
to the fact that local depletion zones in the target concentration
are present near the particles. Such concentration gradients near
the particles are generated by a transport limitation in the capture
process and hence can explain why enhanced particle–fluid interaction
increases capture rates. In the following paragraphs, we will discuss
the underlying processes in more detail to provide further evidence
for our explanation.

According to the literature, the bimolecular
association of proteins
(e.g., see ref (9))
to antibodies is known to be generally limited by diffusive transport
and not by the physicochemical reaction that finally binds the proteins.
This diffusive limitation in antibody–protein association is,
however, not primarily caused by the relative translational diffusion
but by the relative rotational diffusion to orient the binding site
of the antibody to the binding site of the protein. For example, it
has been shown by Schmitz and Schurr12 that
moderate angular constraints to the relative binding site orientation
decrease diffusion-controlled association rate constants by several
orders of magnitude.9 Rate constants for
antibody–protein association are typically on the order of ka = 104–106 M–1 s–1.9,11 This is small
compared to the expected diffusive encounter rate based on relative
translational diffusion alone, which is on the order of 109–1010 M–1 s–1 and follows from the Smoluchowski equation13 7  with D and R being, respectively, the combined diffusivity
and the encounter
radius of the reacting proteins. Therefore, these low values of ka, as typically found for antibody–protein
association, will not lead to target depletion.

For the particle-based
association of proteins, we find values
of ka (Figure 3c) that are much closer to the diffusive
encounter rate, which we estimate at kdiff = 4π(DMP + DIgG)(RMP + RIgG) = 4.1 × 1011 M–1 s–1, where a hydrodynamic radius of ∼5.5 nm was
used for goat IgG.10 This constant is only
a factor 6.9 ± 0.7 larger than the maximum association rate constant
that we find in experiments, namely, ka = 6.0 ± 0.6 × 1010 M–1 s–1. Clearly, for particle-based protein capture, the
relative difference is much smaller as compared to antibody–protein
association; consequently, a limitation by translational diffusion
cannot be neglected for the association of protein targets to particles
(see Supporting Information S6 for a discussion
about particle-based capture versus planar capture). This is consistent
with a previous study that we performed on the process of particle-based
target capture. In that study, we used a model system with 200 nm
particles as targets14 and we found that
the capture process is limited by both the translational and rotational
diffusion of the reacting species.

The large difference between
the ka for particle-based protein association
and antibody–protein
association can be attributed to (i) the larger encounter radius caused
by the large size of the magnetic particle and (ii) the high number
of binding sites on the magnetic particle compared to a single antibody.
When the surface of the magnetic particle is completely filled with
binding sites, the magnetic particle can bind a target protein in
almost any orientation, and during a collision with a target protein,
the target protein can interact with multiple binding sites. In this
way, the probability to bind is much higher for a protein encountering
a magnetic particle than for a protein encountering an antibody free
in solution. Thus, in the particle-based association of proteins,
angular constraints for binding are weakened to such an extent that
the number of encounters also becomes a limitation for the association
rate.

On the basis of these arguments, we conclude that depletion
layers
form around the magnetic particles due to the slow translational diffusion
of targets in case the magnetic particles are immobile at the bottom
of the incubation chamber (see Figure 3). The depletion layers grow over time and thereby
increasingly reduce the capture rate. Moving the particles through
the fluid, e.g., by magnetic actuation, enhances the interaction of
the particles with the fluid and thereby reduces the depletion layers
around the particles. As concentration gradients are mainly developed
orthogonal to the layer of particles (compare Figure 3a), both translation along the surface normal
and out-of-plane rotation of magnetic particle chains are the most
effective ways to reduce the concentration gradients caused by depletion.15

Influence of the Concentration of Magnetic
Particles
Figure 4 shows how
the association rate constant depends on the concentration of magnetic
particles in the fluid. We applied particle concentrations below a
full coverage of the surface of the incubation chamber (Figure 4a). As shown in Figure 4b, without magnetic actuation,
the association rate constant ka does
not change at low particle concentrations. Above a threshold, ka becomes smaller with increasing particle concentration.
This behavior has been observed before14 for a different experimental model system comprising 200 nm diameter
fluorescent particles as targets. For low particle concentrations,
it was found that the reaction reached steady state in which the concentration
gradient or depletion zone around each particle is constant in time.
As long as particles are sufficiently separated, i.e., at low particle
concentrations, the concentration gradients or depletion zones do
not overlap and ka remains unaffected
by the particle concentration. When the depletion zones overlap, i.e.,
at higher particle concentrations, they expand, thereby reducing ka, until either a new steady state is obtained
or until the volume is depleted of targets. From Figure 4b, we find that ka drops starting from a concentration of ∼2 ×
103 particles/μL. For a sample volume of 36 μL,
sedimented particles are, on average, separated by about 20 μm.
As follows from the steady-state solution of the diffusion equation
for an absorbing particle,14 at half this
distance the target concentration is ∼86%. Particles that are
separated by less than 20 μm, therefore, show partial overlap
of their depletion zones and have a reduced association rate constant.

Figure 4 Experimental
data on target capture by magnetically actuated ensembles
of magnetic particles for varying magnetic particle concentrations.
(a) Fluorescence microscopy images of magnetic particles after 30
min of incubation without actuation. (b) Experimentally determined
association rate constant with and without actuation (B = 20 mT; ω = 0.6 Hz; alternated in-plane and out-of-plane
rotation). Using this data, we computed (c) the antibody capture rate
per μL at short times for an antibody concentration of 110 pM.
The corresponding total binding capacity is plotted on the top x-axis. The dashed lines are guides to the eye.

This effect is also observed in cases where particles
are magnetically
actuated (see Figure 4b). Compared to no actuation, an elevated ka is found for all particle concentrations. Furthermore, the
threshold in particle concentration above which the ka starts to decrease is found to be the same for both
cases, but the decrease is less strong in the case of magnetic actuation.
The effect of magnetic actuation becomes clearer when considering
the antibody capture rate at short incubation times (see Figure 4c). For low particle
concentrations, the capture rate is found to increase with increasing
particle concentration. As soon as the depletion zones start to overlap,
no actuation leads to constant capture rates, whereas magnetic actuation
enhances the capture rate with increasing particle concentration.
Interestingly, the results in Figure 4c demonstrate that magnetic particle actuation achieves
similar or even higher capture rates with less particles as compared
to capture without actuation.

From the values of ka in Figure 4, we quantified the increase
in the target capture rate, as shown in Figure 5a. Magnetic actuation has the highest impact
at high particle concentrations, when depletion is the strongest.
In this regime, the capture rate can be improved by 1 to 2 orders
of magnitude. For low particle concentrations, we find an increase
in the capture rate of 3 ± 1 by actuating the particles, showing
that movement through the fluid enhances the encounter rate also for
isolated particles. Part of this increase can be attributed to the
presence of a nearby surface in case of no actuation.14 Yet the steady-state solution of the diffusion equation13 clearly shows that individual particles form
a depletion zone near their surface. In cases where the target binding
probability is equal to unity during an encounter, the target concentration c(r) depends on the radial distance r ∈ [R, ∞) from the particle
center as c(r) = c(∞)·(1 – R/r), with R being the encounter radius of the target
and the particle. For the system studied here, the binding probability
is less than unity, since ka < kdiff (see eq 7). Consequently, depletion zones are expected to be
smaller in amplitude, but enhanced particle–fluid interactions
will still have a reducing effect on the depletion zones and thereby
improve the capture rate.

Figure 5 Relative actuation-induced increase in capture
rate as found (a)
in experiments on magnetically actuated ensembles of particles as
shown in Figure 4,
and (b) in simulations on the linear translation of single particles
through the sample volume (for two different field gradients). The
dashed lines are guides to the eye.

To quantitatively analyze the experimental data, target capture
was simulated for different particle concentrations by varying the
width of the simulated fluid cell (see Supporting Information S8). From the defined periodic boundary conditions,
particles are distributed in a square lattice. Actuation of the particles
consisted of a linear translation of particles upward and downward
through the fluid volume, corresponding to the application of a field
gradient, but without magnetic dipole–dipole interactions between
the particles. As shown in Figure 5b, a similar threshold behavior is obtained in simulations
as in the experimental data shown in Figure 5a. The increases in the capture rate obtained
from the simulations are less than those in the experiments, as was
also observed for actuation by particle translation only (see Figure 2 and related discussion).
Comparing the ka determined for (i) translation
and (ii) combined translation and rotation in Figure 3c, it is found that the ka of the combined actuation is higher by a factor of 4
± 2. A similar difference is obtained when comparing the data
in panels a and b of Figure 5. We therefore conclude that the numerical simulations confirm
the increase in the capture rate by magnetic actuation.

Difference
between Global and Local Mixing
It is insightful
to apply the results from this work to previous work where we used
magnetic fields to induce global fluid flows within a microfluidic
chamber.16 To induce such flows, no field
gradients were used, but a magnetic field rotating out-of-plane with
respect to the surface at a relatively high frequency (∼30
Hz) was used. Such actuation applied to a high concentration of magnetic
particles induces particle movement along the chamber walls, leading
to a vortex type of flow within the fluid chamber. In that work, the
overall reaction rate constant (i.e., k = ka[MP] + kd; see eq 6) was quantified using
the same biological system as used in this work but with a larger
magnetic particle diameter, namely, 10 μm. Using the findings
from this work, we unravelled the association rate constant (i) for
the case of induced vortical flows, ka = 23 ± 4 × 1010 M–1 s–1, and (ii) for the case of no actuation, ka = 9.5 ± 1 × 1010 M–1 s–1. Note that due to the larger particle diameter
the diffusion rate constant is ∼4 times larger, i.e., kdiff = 1.5 × 1012 M–1 s–1, as compared to the system studied in this
work.

Compared to no actuation, induced vortical flows improve ka by a factor of 2.4, which is relatively low
as compared to the improvements obtained using the actuation methods
applied in this work. Part of this small improvement might be explained
by the relatively low particle concentration (∼4000 particles
per μL), but in the experiments, the particles were locally
concentrated, which would cause larger depletion layers to be formed
around the particles. Another factor that affects the size of the
depletion layers is the rate at which targets encounter the capture
particles. Without actuation, this is controlled solely by diffusion
processes. By magnetic actuation, particle–fluid interactions
can be enhanced. In the induced vortical flows, the particles bring
the fluid in motion and then move along with the fluid through the
fluid chamber. Although global fluid mixing is achieved effectively,
target capture is not effectively enhanced because encounters with
the targets are still governed mainly by diffusion within the flowing
fluid. The magnetic actuation methods, as studied in this work, moved
particles through the fluid without inducing global fluid flows. In
this way, the fluid near the particles is refreshed rapidly, which
allows targets to be brought in close proximity to the particle, reducing
the depletion zones and thereby improving the capture rate.

This analysis shows that methods using (magnetic) particles that
effectively induce fluid mixing are not necessarily optimal to speed
up target capture. For efficient target capture, the local particle–fluid
interactions need to be enhanced due to the target depletion zones
that exist around capture particles.

Conclusions
The
actuation of particles was investigated to achieve rapid affinity-based
capture of biological targets from a fluid. Target capture is very
efficient when particles are functionalized with a high density of
specific binding sites on their surface. We have shown that the high
density of binding sites generates depletion zones near the particles,
especially at elevated particle concentrations. To maintain high capture
rates, depletion can be reduced by actuating the particles, thereby
enhancing particle–fluid interactions. We have shown that magnetic
actuation is very effective when magnetic field gradients and rotating
fields are combined in order to translate and rotate magnetic particle
chains in the fluid. From experiments, we determined that magnetic
actuation can increase association rate constants by up to 1 or 2
orders of magnitude. Using numerical Brownian dynamics simulations,
we confirmed experimental observations and showed that detailed information
can be obtained on the binding process, such as the relative orientation
that is required to bind. We have also shown that optimal target capture
is achieved for low Mason numbers (see Supporting Information S7) as long as the Péclet number is sufficiently
high (Pe > 1). Lastly, for higher particle concentrations,
magnetic actuation becomes increasingly more effective, as local depletion
of targets plays a larger role.

Both experiments and numerical
calculations show that magnetic
actuation most effectively enhances target capture at high particle
concentrations. However, high concentrations of particles can hinder
further processing steps in an assay, like detection of the targets
on the particles, for example by the formation of target-induced bonds
at a sensor surface.7 By balancing high
capture kinetics with minimal hindrance of further processing steps,
we assume that particle concentrations are optimal when they are not
far below a full coverage of the detection surface. For such concentrations,
we have shown that magnetic actuation can improve the capture kinetics
by almost 2 orders of magnitude. In many reported assays based on
magnetic particles,16−18 particle concentrations are larger by at least 2
orders of magnitude compared to the highest concentration we studied
here (i.e., ∼4 × 104 particles/μL). The
application of magnetic actuation for target capture should make it
possible to lower the particle concentration and reduce its negative
effects while maintaining or even increasing the capture efficiency.
As a result, assay performance can potentially be significantly improved.

In this study, the capture kinetics were quantified by determining
association rate constants. To enable close comparison with other
techniques, we believe that quantifying rate constants is the most
reliable method as it allows for deep insight in the capture process.
In addition, different actuation methodologies would be directly comparable
if a standard assay would be used. The model system used in this study
is suitable for that, as the protein G–IgG complex is well-studied
and commonly used.11,19,20 If the target molecule is already labeled, target capture can be
measured in a direct way and further fluid handling steps are avoided.

Dynamic particle actuation for target capture is of particular
interest for improving miniaturized bioanalytical tools. The methods
can be applied not only for the capture of proteins but also for small
molecules, nucleic acids, or cells. Compared to other microfluidic
capture methods that require the generation of fluid flow21−23 or mechanical movement of magnets24 to
enhance particle–fluid interactions, the magnetic actuation
used in this article requires only stationary electromagnets and a
current controller. In this way, an instrument–cartridge system
is possible in which the instrument contains the actuation technology
while the disposable cartridge can be relatively simple. We expect
that the insights presented in this article on the dependence of the
particle-based molecular association rate on particle velocity, density,
and particle assembly characteristics will aid in the design of future
bioanalytical methods and devices.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b04043.(1) Field calibration
of the five-pole electromagnet,
(2) rotaphoresis to redistribute particles, (3) image processing to
determine particle fluorescence, (4) control experiments to verify
binding specificity, (5) determination of rate constants for association
and dissociation, (6) comparison of particle-based capture with planar
surface assays, (7) influence of field rotation parameters, (8) numerical
Brownian dynamics simulations of target capture, and (9) SEM picture
of M270 magnetic particles (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ac6b04043_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
∥ Alexander
van Reenen: Philips BG Emerging Businesses, Handheld
Diagnostics, HTC29, 5656 AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands.

Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
the mechanical and electronic workshops of the department
of Applied Physics at Eindhoven University of Technology for manufacturing
the five-pole electromagnet and the controller for the setup. This
work was supported by Technology Foundation STW under Grant No. 10458.
==== Refs
References
Wild D.  The Immunoassay Handbook ; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 2005 .
Howes P. D. ; Chandrawati R. ; Stevens M. M. 
Science 
2014 , 346 , 1247390 10.1126/science.1247390 .25278614 
Vogelstein B. ; Gillespie D. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
1979 , 76 , 615 –619 10.1073/pnas.76.2.615 .284385 
Boom R. ; Sol C. J. ; Salimans M. M. ; Jansen C. L. ; Wertheim-van
Dillen P. M. ; van der Noordaa J. 
J. Clin. Microbiol. 
1990 , 28 , 495 –503 .1691208 
Pickard W. F. 
J. Theor. Biol. 
2006 , 240 , 288 –301 10.1016/j.jtbi.2005.09.008 .16310218 
Gijs M. A. M. ; Lehmann U. ; Lacharme F. 
Chem. Rev. 
2010 , 110 , 1518 –1563 10.1021/cr9001929 .19961177 
Van
Reenen A. ; de Jong A. M. ; den Toonder J. M. J. ; Prins M. W. J. 
Lab Chip 
2014 , 14 , 1966 –1986 10.1039/c3lc51454d .24806093 
Van
Reenen A. ; de Jong A. M. ; Prins M. W. J. 
Lab Chip 
2015 , 15 , 2864 –2871 10.1039/C5LC00294J .26023744 
Schreiber G. ; Haran G. ; Zhou H. X. 
Chem. Rev. 
2009 , 109 , 839 –860 10.1021/cr800373w .19196002 
Weiss M. ; Elsner M. ; Kartberg F. ; Nilsson T. 
Biophys. J. 
2004 , 87 , 3518 –3524 10.1529/biophysj.104.044263 .15339818 
Read T. ; Olkhov R. V. ; Shaw A. M. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 6122 –6127 10.1039/c3cp50758k .23503322 
Schmitz K. S. ; Schurr J. M. 
J. Phys. Chem. 
1972 , 76 , 534 –545 10.1021/j100648a015 .
Von
Smoluchowski M. 
Z. Phys. Chem. 
1917 , 92 , 129 –168 .
Van
Reenen A. ; de Jong A. M. ; Prins M. W. J. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2013 , 117 , 1210 –1218 10.1021/jp307862h .23297682 
Gao Y. ; van Reenen A. ; Hulsen M. A. ; de Jong A. M. ; Prins M. W. J. ; den
Toonder J. M. J. 
Microfluid. Nanofluid. 
2014 , 16 , 265 –274 10.1007/s10404-013-1209-6 .
Nam J.-M. ; Thaxton C. S. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Science 
2003 , 301 , 1884 –1886 10.1126/science.1088755 .14512622 
Todd J. ; Freese B. ; Lu A. ; Held D. ; Morey J. ; Livingston R. ; Goix P. 
Clin.
Chem. 
2007 , 53 , 1990 –1995 10.1373/clinchem.2007.091181 .17890441 
De
Palma R. ; Reekmans G. ; Laureyn W. ; Borghs G. ; Maes G. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2007 , 79 , 7540 –7548 10.1021/ac0713407 .17713969 
Akerstrom B. ; Bjorck L. A. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
1986 , 261 , 10240 –10247 .3733709 
Allauzen S. ; Mani J. C. ; Granier C. ; Pau B. ; Bouanani M. 
J. Immunol. Methods 
1995 , 183 , 27 –32 10.1016/0022-1759(95)00020-B .7541430 
Lacharme F. ; Vandevyver C. ; Gijs M. A. M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 2905 –2910 10.1021/ac7020739 .18348542 
Moser Y. ; Lehnert T. ; Gijs M. A. M. 
Lab Chip 
2009 , 9 , 3261 –3267 10.1039/b907724c .19865734 
Kan C. W. ; Rivnak A. J. ; Campbell T. G. ; Piech T. ; Rissin D. M. ; Mösl M. ; Peterça A. ; Niederberger H. P. ; Minnehan K. A. ; Patel P. P. ; Ferrell E. P. ; Meyer R. E. ; Chang L. ; Wilson D. H. ; Fournier D. R. ; Duffy D. C. 
Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 977 –985 10.1039/C2LC20744C .22179487 
Ng A. H. ; Choi K. ; Luoma R. P. ; Robinson J. M. ; Wheeler A. R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 8805 –8812 10.1021/ac3020627 .23013543

