
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b02676ArticleSmartphone Analytics: Mobilizing the Lab into the
Cloud for Omic-Scale Analyses Montenegro-Burke J. Rafael †Phommavongsay Thiery †Aisporna Aries E. †Huan Tao †Rinehart Duane †Forsberg Erica †Poole Farris
L. ‡Thorgersen Michael P. ‡Adams Michael W. W. ‡Krantz Gregory §Fields Matthew W. §Northen Trent R. ∥Robbins Paul D. ⊥Niedernhofer Laura
J. ⊥Lairson Luke #Benton H. Paul †Siuzdak Gary *†⊥†Scripps
Center for Metabolomics, #Department of Chemistry, and ⊥Departments of Chemistry, Molecular,
and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research
Institute, 10550 North
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, United States‡ Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University
of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602, United
States§ Department
of Microbiology and Immunology and Center for Biofilm Engineering, Montana State University, 109 Lewis Hall, Bozeman, Montana 59717, United States∥ Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, California 94720, United States⊥ Departments
of Metabolism and Aging, The Scripps Research
Institute—Florida, Jupiter, Florida 33458, United States* Phone: 858-784-9415. E-mail: siuzdak@scripps.edu.25 08 2016 04 10 2016 25 08 2017 88 19 9753 9758 13 07 2016 25 08 2016 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical
Society2016American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Active data screening is an integral
part of many scientific activities,
and mobile technologies have greatly facilitated this process by minimizing
the reliance on large hardware instrumentation. In order to meet with
the increasingly growing field of metabolomics and heavy workload
of data processing, we designed the first remote metabolomic data
screening platform for mobile devices. Two mobile applications (apps),
XCMS Mobile and METLIN Mobile, facilitate access to XCMS and METLIN,
which are the most important components in the computer-based XCMS
Online platforms. These mobile apps allow for the visualization and
analysis of metabolic data throughout the entire analytical process.
Specifically, XCMS Mobile and METLIN Mobile provide the capabilities
for remote monitoring of data processing, real time notifications
for the data processing, visualization and interactive analysis of
processed data (e.g., cloud plots, principle component analysis, box-plots,
extracted ion chromatograms, and hierarchical cluster analysis), and
database searching for metabolite identification. These apps, available
on Apple iOS and Google Android operating systems, allow for the migration
of metabolomic research onto mobile devices for better accessibility
beyond direct instrument operation. The utility of XCMS Mobile and
METLIN Mobile functionalities was developed and is demonstrated here
through the metabolomic LC-MS analyses of stem cells, colon cancer,
aging, and bacterial metabolism.

document-id-old-9ac6b02676document-id-new-14ac-2016-026762ccc-price
==== Body
Metabolomics
has become a powerful
technology for the comprehensive analysis of metabolites, identifying
biomarkers and deciphering the mechanistic underpinnings of biological
phenomena.1 Among the different analytical
platforms, MS-based metabolomics methodologies coupled to preionization
separation techniques such as LC-MS and GC/MS are widely used due
to their wide metabolome coverage.2 Aside
from advances in instrumentation, development in informatic resources
for data processing and interpretation has significantly progressed
in the past decade, increasing the productivity in many laboratories.
Our metabolic data processing platform, XCMS,3 has benefited from numerous updates and developments on the cloud
based infrastructure of XCMS Online.4,5

XCMS
Online enables the performance of metabolic feature picking,
retention-time alignment, and data visualization for thousands of
users entirely from one central hardware platform, housed at the Scripps
Center for Metabolomics (La Jolla, CA). XCMS Online is regularly visited
by ∼500 IP address daily and performs ∼60 jobs a day.
One major advantage of XCMS Online is the centralization of resources,
removing the need for redundant software and individual powerful computing
capabilities. Additionally, taking metabolomic data into the cloud
provides the advantage of sharing metabolomic data among XCMS Online
users, making it readily available for publication. Another advantage
of the Web-based platform is the integration of XCMS with METLIN,6 a database of over 240,000 metabolites and 14,000
metabolites with high resolution MS/MS spectra in both positive and
negative ion-mode at 4 different collision energies, which facilitates
the metabolite identification to around 11,000 users.7

One major disadvantage of most bioinformatic tools
is their typical
limitation to personal computers (PCs) usage, and once outside of
the laboratory, data and instrument access is typically limited to
a Virtual Private Network (VPN) based connection. Furthermore, in
the past few decades, research has become more data-intensive and
specialized equipment is often shared between different groups. These
changes have not only caused an increase in the amount of time necessary
for analysis but also instrument access can be limited to only nontraditional
working hours.8 Mobile devices, particularly
smartphones, offer the advantage of accessibility to a wide range
of operations and functionalities at relatively economic prices. Moreover,
the use of smartphones has widely spread across the United States
to 185 million devices.9 In addition, frequent
personal use of these devices has been reported to around 85 ±
55 times per day.10 To take advantage of
the rapidly evolving mobile hardware and software technologies, we
have developed two mobile apps: XCMS Mobile and METLIN Mobile to facilitate
data monitoring beyond the laboratory. XCMS Mobile allows for monitoring,
controlling data processing, and analysis in the cloud from common
cellular devices using iOS and Android operating systems (OS) such
as Apple and Android devices, respectively. METLIN Mobile auto select
Web design (beta version) allows metabolite identification using the
METLIN metabolite database. These apps allow XCMS users to make progress
in the metabolomics study workflow independently of the location through
hand-held mobile devices. The two mobile apps are now available from
app stores linked via https://xcmsonline.scripps.edu/.
Depending on the type of the mobile device (Apple or Android), XCMS
Mobile can also be directly installed from App Store or Google Play;
METLIN Mobile can be accessed via https://metlin.scripps.edu using Firefox or Chrome Web browsers.

Herein, we describe
the functionalities of XCMS Mobile and METLIN
Mobile presented in the context of microbial biofilms metabolic influence
on colon tissue and cancer occurrence in a LC-MS based metabolomics
study.11 The functions available in these
platforms are processing status monitoring, results viewing, progress
notification metabolic feature checking, and metabolite identification
(Figure 1). Our integration
of mobile apps with metabolomics study shows considerable benefits,
including high accessibility and mobility without compromising user-friendliness,
resulting in improved research productivity.

Figure 1 Flowchart and functions
of XCMS Mobile (A) and METLIN Mobile (B)
applications.

Experimental Section
Development
of XCMS Mobile and METLIN Mobile Applications
XCMS Mobile
and METLIN Mobile were developed using the programming
languages JavaScript, HTML5, and CSS3 and the mobile framework jQuery
Mobile to be compatible across Android and iPhone platforms. The platforms
iPhone/iPhone 3G, iPhone 3GS, and newer (Apple Inc., Cupertino, CA)
as well as Android 1.0–4.4 (Google Inc., Mountain View, CA)
are all supported in the current version. Backend database management
and functionality of the mobile application was developed using a
REST API provided by the DreamFactory REST framework. The client side
of the application was developed to make calls to the REST API, which
returns data back in JSON format. This data was manipulated using
JavaScript, to allow for user-friendly visualization and interaction
with the data. jQuery Mobile framework and CSS3 were used in the creation
of the front end look and feel of the mobile apps.

Sample Preparation
and LC-MS Analysis
Samples were
analyzed by reverse-phase liquid chromatography-quadrupole time-of-flight
mass spectrometry (RPLC-QTOF) as previously described.11,12 Full data sets are available as a public shares on XCMS Online.

Data Streaming with XCMS Mobile and METLIN Mobile
Data
streaming strategy13 was applied to upload
LC-MS data onto XCMS Online upon acquisition completion. Data processing
was actively monitored using an iPhone 6 (Apple Inc., Cupertino, CA)
with XCMS Mobile and METLIN Mobile installed. Notification frequency
was set to a default of 10 min.

Workflow
XCMS Mobile
XCMS Mobile allows for remote monitoring
and interpretation of the metabolomic data processed on XCMS Online.
The current version of XCMS Mobile has four modules (Figure 1A): data processing status
monitoring, progress notification, results viewing, and metabolic
feature checking. Examples of these 4 modules with their respective
tabs are shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2 XCMS Mobile menu and visualization functions. “Job List”
displays all jobs submitted to XCMS online with their respective progress.
In “Details”, further information regarding each job
can be accessed. Data analysis visualization graphs such as cloud
plots are available under “Graphs”. “Notification”
settings can be enabled and set to different frequencies. Lastly,
“Hot or Not” displays EIC of the different metabolic
features allowing the user to mark features of interest for further
analysis.

Data Processing Status
Monitoring
The data processing
status monitoring function allows for the tracking of the processing
status of the submitted jobs to XCMS Online on mobile devices. An
overview of all the job status submitted or an in-depth view of individual
job status is available in this function. The overview of all the
job status is presented on the home page upon user log in to XCMS
Mobile using the user corresponding XCMS Online login information.
On the overview page, each job listed has a unique job ID, job name,
and progress indicator. The data processing progress is displayed
by a percentage value overlaid on a blue progress box indicating that
the data processing steps are in progress. While a green progress
box indicates completion of the data processing steps. On the other
hand, a red progress bar indicates an error during data processing
steps. Further detailed job status information, such as submission
date, completion date, status note, log (errors), and warnings can
be accessed under the “Details” tab.

Results Viewing
The results viewing function can be
accessed under the “Graphs” tab, and it allows for a
quick graphical glance of the processed metabolomic data. These data
visualization graphs have the capabilities of providing relevant information
about the performance of the analysis and the quality of the data
before advancing onto more detailed data interpretation. Currently,
the data visualization graphs include the original TIC of all the
samples, retention time deviation plots, nonmetric multidimensional
scaling, PCA score plots, box-plots, and cloud plots.

Progress Notification
Progress notification, an important
function in XCMS Mobile, is accessed through the “Notifications”
tab and allows the remote monitoring of ongoing data processing by
notifications in mobile devices. These notifications can be activated
and deactivated by the user, and the display rate of the current data
processing progress can be set at a user defined frequency (e.g.,
10 min).

Metabolic Feature Checking
Metabolic feature checking
in XCMS Mobile allows the user to manually confirm the metabolic features
that will be used for further identification and interpretation through
a binary selection system found under the “Hot or Not”
tab. Usually, such metabolic feature checking is a time-consuming
process, taking researchers hours to days in front of the computer
examining metabolic features. On the contrary, the mobile metabolic
feature checking function allows users to inspect and filter metabolic
features on hand-held devices independently of the location. After
examining each extracted ion chromatogram (EIC) of individual metabolic
features presented on the screen of the mobile device, the different
features can be selected or discarded by “swiping” right
or left, respectively (Figure 3). Additionally, other metabolic information, such as fold
change, m/z, and retention time
to name a few, can be displayed by pressing the blue “i”
button. Lastly, upon metabolic feature checking the results are sent
to the cloud-based XCMS Online server, providing subsequent PC accessibility.

Figure 3 Metabolic
feature checking (Hot or Not). Individual features EIC
can be analyzed and marked for future analysis by swiping to the right
(green arrow) or by pressing the green button. Conversely, uninteresting
features can be swiped to the left (red arrow) or by pressing the
red button. The blue “i” button displays information
about each feature such as fold change, m/z, retention time, etc.

METLIN Mobile
METLIN Mobile (beta version) is an auto
select Web design, which provides rapid and accessible metabolite
identification and information using mobile devices (Figure 1B). In its current version,
METLIN Mobile allows users to perform simple and advanced metabolite
searches (Figures S1 and S2, respectively)
based on single or multiple metabolic searching criteria such as METLIN
ID (MID), molecular mass, m/z, metabolite
name, chemical formula, and CAS or KEGG number. Furthermore, fragmentation
data (MS/MS) can be accessed, both directly and indirectly through
metabolite name and links in the search results, respectively (Figures S3 and S4). It is worth mentioning that
the search graphical user interface is optimized so that all information
can be easily displayed on the mobile device, minimizing the necessary
screen manipulation and is currently being beta tested in an ongoing
aging study (Figure 4).

Figure 4 METLIN Mobile provides access to the METLIN database and allows
for different search types. In “Simple Search”, a particular m/z value, in this case 207.9897 found
to be dysregulated in an ongoing aging study, can be searched for
matches with several filter options such as mass tolerance, charge,
adducts, and type of molecules. The matching metabolites are displayed
in ‘Results”, where information such as molecular formula
and structure are shown for the pertaining compound.

Applications
To demonstrate the
performance of XCMS
Mobile and METLIN Mobile through the data analysis workflow, a LC-MS
metabolomic study comparing the metabolomic differences between paired
colon cancer tissues and normal tissues in association with microbial
biofilms from 30 individuals was selected. During the data processing,
progress notifications every 10 min were received over the entire
data processing time of 24 h. Subsequently, results were examined
on the mobile device, with TIC, PCA, and other plots highlighting
their differences. 150 metabolic features were statistically significant
(p < 0.01) with fold changes in the range of >1.5
or <0.67. Metabolic feature checking was performed on XCMS Mobile,
where 135 metabolic features were correctly extracted by XCMS. Finally,
METLIN Mobile was used to putatively identify these 135 metabolites
by mass matching against METLIN with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm. Among
them, 80 metabolic features got positive putative identifications,
available for further validation and interpretation.

In this
work, we described the functionalities of two developed mobile apps,
XCMS Mobile and METLIN Mobile, to actively and remotely screen and
interpret metabolomic data as well as perform metabolite identification.
The current version of XCMS Mobile provides four important modules
(Figure 1): processing
status monitoring, progress notification, results viewing, and metabolic
feature checking. Additionally, METLIN Mobile provides one module,
remote metabolite identification by accessing METLIN database information.
Compared to conventional metabolomic bioinformatic tools,14,15 which are typically restricted to be used on PCs, XCMS Mobile and
METLIN Mobile are designed to access and display metabolomic data
from mobile devices in the cloud, improving researchers’ productivity.
Regardless of conventional metabolomic tools designed to implement
more comprehensive functions, the functions provided by the mobile
apps are more suitable for quick and convenient data screening and
data visualization, particularly outside laboratory settings. Most
importantly, these two mobile apps are designed for the robust and
widely used metabolomic platform: XCMS Online server and METLIN spectra
library platform, which will benefit over 10,000 metabolomics researchers
worldwide.

The different functions available for these mobile
apps for metabolomics
studies were exemplified using a colon cancer study. Overall, three
major advantages are clearly determined in terms of improving research
productivity by using XCMS Mobile and METLIN Mobile. First, data processing
can be monitored remotely and independently from the location. Considering
the automatic data processing of 60 individual samples on XCMS Online
took 24 h, the processing status monitoring and progress notification
function allows for the supervision of data processing status remotely
with fast response capability while performing other tasks. For example,
upon a progress error notification during data processing, we immediately
were able to correct the error and continue to process, minimizing
delays in the study. Second, following data processing completion
notification, processed data can be visualized in graphs, such as
TIC, retention time correction, PCA, cloud plot to name a few, and
provide an assessment of instrumental performance as well as differences
in metabolic signatures between the different sample groups. These
preliminary results allowed for the planning of follow-up experiments
for validation and quantitation in advance. Third, data interpretation
and metabolite identification can be performed under more flexible
time conditions away from the laboratory or office PC. In this particular
work, the manual feature confirmation of 150 metabolic features and
metabolite identification was performed remotely during nontraditional
working hours. It is worth mentioning that for this metabolic study
only about 20 min of regular office hours were used over a 3 day period
without accounting for data acquisition. This demonstrates the potential
of taking the lab into the cloud and pursuing several metabolomic
studies simultaneously.

Conclusion
In summary, we have developed
two mobile apps, XCMS Mobile and
METLIN Mobile, with the goal of reducing the reliance on personal
computers for metabolomic data monitoring and interpretation. Each
application was designed to improve research productivity and minimize
resources for remote data processing. We demonstrated the advantage
and capabilities of using mobile apps in metabolomics on typical metabolomic
studies including colon cancer, aging, and bacterial metabolism. To
the best of our knowledge, XCMS Mobile and METLIN Mobile are the first
mobile apps in the field of metabolomics, and we expect the use of
mobile apps in metabolomics could be implemented to other bioinformatic
tools, streamlining data analysis by providing greater flexibility
to metabolomics researchers. We believe that these mobile applications
will greatly increase the accessibility of metabolomics data analysis,
enabling students around the world to gain first-hand experience analyzing
metabolomic data.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b02676.Supplemental Figures
1–4 (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ac6b02676_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
J.R.M.-B.
and T.P. contributed equally.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the following for funding assistance:
Ecosystems
and Networks Integrated with Genes and Molecular Assemblies (http://enigma.lbl.gov), a Scientific Focus Area Program at
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory for the U.S. Department of Energy,
Office of Science, Office of Biological and Environmental Research
under contract number DE-AC02-05CH11231, and the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) grants R01 GMH4368 and PO1 A1043376-02S1.
==== Refs
References
Patti G. J. ; Yanes O. ; Siuzdak G. 
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 
2012 , 13 , 263 –269 . 10.1038/nrm3314 .22436749 
Dunn W. B. ; Ellis D. I. 
TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 24 , 285 –294 . 10.1016/j.trac.2004.11.021 .
Smith C. A. ; Want E. J. ; O’Maille G. ; Abagyan R. ; Siuzdak G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 779 –787 . 10.1021/ac051437y .16448051 
Tautenhahn R. ; Patti G. J. ; Rinehart D. ; Siuzdak G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 5035 –5039 . 10.1021/ac300698c .22533540 
Gowda H. ; Ivanisevic J. ; Johnson C. H. ; Kurczy M. E. ; Benton H. P. ; Rinehart D. ; Nguyen T. ; Ray J. ; Kuehl J. ; Arevalo B. ; Westenskow P. D. ; Wang J. ; Arkin A. P. ; Deutschbauer A. M. ; Patti G. J. ; Siuzdak G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 6931 –6939 . 10.1021/ac500734c .24934772 
Smith C. A. ; O’Maille G. ; Want E. J. ; Qin C. ; Trauger S. A. ; Brandon T. R. ; Custodio D. E. ; Abagyan R. ; Siuzdak G. 
Ther. Drug Monit. 
2005 , 27 , 747 –751 . 10.1097/01.ftd.0000179845.53213.39 .16404815 
Kurczy M. E. ; Ivanisevic J. ; Johnson C. H. ; Uritboonthai W. ; Hoang L. ; Fang M. ; Hicks M. ; Aldebot A. ; Rinehart D. ; Mellander L. J. ; Tautenhahn R. ; Patti G. J. ; Spilker M. E. ; Benton H. P. ; Siuzdak G. 
Bioinformatics 
2015 , 31 , 3721 –3724 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv475 .26275895 
Schiermeier Q. 
Nature 
2012 , 492 , 299 –300 . 10.1038/nj7428-299a .23243677 
Eadicicco L.  Americans Check
Their Phones 8 Billion Times a Day . In Time : New York, New York , Dec 15, 2015 .
Andrews S. ; Ellis D. A. ; Shaw H. ; Piwek L. 
PLoS
One 
2015 , 10 , e0139004 10.1371/journal.pone.0139004 .26509895 
Johnson C. H. ; Dejea C. M. ; Edler D. ; Hoang L. T. ; Santidrian A. F. ; Felding B. H. ; Ivanisevic J. ; Cho K. ; Wick E. C. ; Hechenbleikner E. M. ; Uritboonthai W. ; Goetz L. ; Casero R. A. Jr.; Pardoll D. M. ; White J. R. ; Patti G. J. ; Sears C. L. ; Siuzdak G. 
Cell Metab. 
2015 , 21 , 891 –897 . 10.1016/j.cmet.2015.04.011 .25959674 
Ivanisevic J. ; Zhu Z.-J. ; Plate L. ; Tautenhahn R. ; Chen S. ; O’Brien P. J. ; Johnson C. H. ; Marletta M. A. ; Patti G. J. ; Siuzdak G. 
Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 6876 –6884 . 10.1021/ac401140h .23781873 
Rinehart D. ; Johnson C. H. ; Nguyen T. ; Ivanisevic J. ; Benton H. P. ; Lloyd J. ; Arkin A. P. ; Deutschbauer A. M. ; Patti G. J. ; Siuzdak G. 
Nat. Biotechnol. 
2014 , 32 , 524 –527 . 10.1038/nbt.2927 .24911492 
Pluskal T. ; Castillo S. ; Villar-Briones A. ; Orešič M. 
BMC Bioinf. 
2010 , 11 , 395 10.1186/1471-2105-11-395 .
Xia J. ; Sinelnikov I. V. ; Han B. ; Wishart D. S. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2015 , 43 , W251 –w257 . 10.1093/nar/gkv380 .25897128

