
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b04841ReviewRecent Developments in Two-Dimensional Liquid Chromatography:
Fundamental Improvements for Practical Applications Pirok Bob W. J. *†‡Stoll Dwight R. §Schoenmakers Peter J. †† University
of Amsterdam, van ’t Hoff
Institute for Molecular Sciences, Analytical-Chemistry Group, Science Park 904, 1098 XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands‡ TI-COAST, Science Park 904, 1098 XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands§ Department
of Chemistry, Gustavus Adolphus College, Saint Peter, Minnesota 56082, United States* E-mail: B.W.J.Pirok@uva.nl.01 11 2018 02 01 2019 91 1 Fundamental and Applied Reviews
in Analytical Chemistry
2019240 263 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.document-id-old-9ac8b04841document-id-new-14ac-2018-04841eccc-price
==== Body
Liquid chromatography
(LC) is
an incredibly successful analytical separation tool. Its versatility
is unprecedented because of the many different separation modes (reversed-phase
LC, ion-exchange chromatography, size-exclusion chromatography, etc.)
and because almost all samples can be dissolved in some kind of solvent,
ranging from water to organic solvents to strong acids or bases. Conditions
(mobile and stationary phases, additives, pH, temperatures, etc.)
can be found to separate almost all pairs of analytes. For example,
LC is immensely successful in the separation of enantiomers. Good
selectivities can be accompanied by high efficiencies in a very short
time, using contemporary ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography
(UHPLC) instrumentation and (short) columns packed with sub-2-μm
particles. However, LC cannot deliver very high efficiencies in a
short time. Unlike other techniques, such as gas chromatography (GC)
or capillary electrophoresis (CE), plate counts exceeding 100 000
are not routinely obtained in LC. As a result, LC cannot easily deal
with complex mixtures that contain more than a few dozen analytes.
While the selectivity between any pair of analytes can be maximized,
these peaks may then start to overlap with other relevant analytes
or with matrix compounds. There simply is not enough room in LC chromatograms
to separate very many compounds that behave “statistically”,1 and the attainable peak capacity does not suffice
to separate complex samples. As a rule of thumb, LC offers a high
probability of success for separating samples containing 10 or 20
components in 1 or 2 h or up to 50 components in about 10 h.2,3

When dealing with complex samples, comprehensive two-dimensional
liquid chromatography (LC × LC) is an attractive approach (Figure 1). Peak capacities
of several thousands4−7 can be achieved, and 10 000 is within reasonable reach.8 For high-resolution separations, LC × LC
is also much faster, with a peak-production rate (peak capacity divided
by the analysis time) of about 1 peak per second, as compared to 1
peak per minute for typical high-resolution one-dimensional LC (1D-LC).
The “room” in the chromatogram created by the much-enhanced
peak capacity creates the possibility to fully employ two different
selectivities. Groups (or “classes”) of analytes can
be very efficiently separated from each other,9−11 provided that
the selectivities (retention mechanisms) employed in the two dimensions
are very different. In the most favorable case, in which the retention
times in the two dimensions are completely independent, we speak of
orthogonal separations. When separation is obtained using two very
different retention mechanisms, the uncertainty of peak assignment12 can be dramatically reduced. Because of the
diverse selectivities, high degrees of orthogonality can be achieved
in combination with mass spectrometry (LC × LC-MS). In comparison,
the combination of ion-mobility spectrometry (IMS) and MS is very
fast but very much less orthogonal.13

Figure 1 Examples
of separations by 2D-LC. Top-left, HILIC × RPLC of
polyphenols in apple extract;6 top-middle,
RPLC × RPLC of tryptic digest of three proteins;14 top-right, HILIC × RPLC of polyether polyols;9 bottom-left, HILIC × RPLC of therapeutic
antibodies subunits;15 bottom-middle, SAX
× IP-RPLC of aged, synthetic dyes;5 bottom-right, RPLC × RPLC of TCM Dengzhan Shengmai.16 See respective papers for details. Top-left
figure reproduced from Development of an improved online comprehensive
hydrophilic interaction chromatography × reversed-phase ultrahigh-pressure
liquid chromatography platform for complex multiclass polyphenolic
sample analysis, Sommella, E.; Ismail, O. H.; Pagano, F.; Pepe, G.;
Ostacolo, C.; Mazzoccanti, G.; Russo, M.; Novellino, E.; Gasparrini,
F.; Campiglia, P. J. Sep. Sci., Vol. 40, Issue 10 (ref (6)). Copyright 2017 Wiley. Top-middle figure reprinted from J. Chromatogr. A, 1498, Sarrut, M.; Rouvière,
F.; Heinisch, S., Theoretical and Experimental Comparison of One Dimensional
versus Online Comprehensive Two Dimensional Liquid Chromatography
for Optimized Sub-Hour Separations of Complex Peptide Samples, pp.
183–195 (ref (14)). Copyright (2017), with permission from Elsevier. Top-right figure
reprinted from J. Chromatogr. A, 1569, Groeneveld, G.; Dunkle, M.N.; Rinken, M.; Gargano, A.F.G.; de Niet,
A.; Pursch, M.; Mes, E.P.C.; Schoenmakers, P.J., Characterization
of complex polyether polyols using comprehensive two-dimensional liquid
chromatography hyphenated to high-resolution mass spectrometry, pp.
128–138 (ref (9)). Copyright (2018), with permission from Elsevier. Bottom-left figure
reproduced from Stoll, D. R.; Harmes, D. C.; Staples, G. O.; Potter,
O. G.; Dammann, C. T.; Guillarme, D.; Beck, A. Anal. Chem.2018, 90 (9), 5923–5929 (ref (15)). Copyright 2018 American
Chemical Society. Bottom-middle figure reprinted from J. Chromatogr.
A, 1436, Pirok, B. W. J.; Knip, J.; van
Bommel, M. R.; Schoenmakers, P. J., Characterization of synthetic
dyes by comprehensive two-dimensional liquid chromatography combining
ion-exchange chromatography and fast ion-pair reversed-phase chromatography,
pp. 141–146 (ref (5)). Copyright (2016), with permission from Elsevier. Bottom-right
figure reprinted from J. Chromatogr. A, 1517, Sheng, N.; Zheng, H.; Xiao, Y.; Wang, Z.; Li, M.; Zhang, J., Chiral
Separation and Chemical Profile of Dengzhan Shengmai by Integrating
Comprehensive with Multiple Heart-Cutting Two-Dimensional Liquid Chromatography
Coupled with Quadrupole Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry, pp. 97–107
(ref (16)). Copyright
(2017), with permission from Elsevier.

Of course, there are some caveats. LC × LC separations
typically
take longer than 1D-LC separations (analysis times of 30 min to several
hours are common). Successive dilution of the sample during two separations
may result in decreased detection sensitivity and compatibility issues
may arise, because without further intervention (e.g., “active
modulation”, see section Modulation below) the first-dimension (1D) effluent is the second-dimension
(2D) injection solvent. Also, dedicated data-analysis and
visualization software is needed. Finally, method development is arguably
more complex and potentially (much) more time-consuming in LC ×
LC than in 1D-LC. These obstacles to successful implementation and
application of LC × LC techniques and possible remedies have
been discussed in detail elsewhere.17

To separate a single peak from a complex matrix or to reduce assignment
uncertainty for a specific peak the separation of a single fraction
of the 1D effluent in a second dimension suffices. Indeed,
such “heart-cut” two-dimensional LC approaches (which
we denote with a hyphen, LC-LC) are very powerful tools for obtaining
single, pure peaks or for establishing the purity of a specific compound.18−20 In LC × LC all fractions are subjected to two different separations
to obtain a comprehensive characterization of the sample. The middle
ground is occupied by multiple-heart-cut techniques, in which a number
of fractions from across the chromatogram are subjected to the second
dimension, and “selective-comprehensive” two-dimensional
LC, in which one or more bunches of successive 1D fractions
are subjected to the second dimension. The main strengths and weaknesses
of heart-cut LC-LC are summarized in the SWOT analysis presented as Table 1. The corresponding
analysis for LC × LC is presented as Table 2.

Table 1 SWOT Analysis of
Heart-Cut Two-Dimensional
Liquid Chromatography (LC-LC)
strengths	weaknesses	
• Very high resolving power	• Somewhat
increased conceptual and instrumental complexity	
• Added selectivity from second (“orthogonal”)
dimension	• Analysis time is increased (especially
when multiple
fractions are selected for analysis in the second dimension)	
• Choice from many different retention mechanisms	• Possibly reduced detection sensitivitya	
• Enhanced purification or
purity assessment of target
analytes	• Phase-system incompatibility issuesa	
• Preparative
separations possible	• Method development is
relatively straightforward	
• Greatly
reduced uncertainty of peak assignments (in
comparison with 1D-LC)	 	
•
Readily combined with MS and MS/MS techniques	 	
opportunities	threats	
• Rigorous assessment of peak purity is tantamount in
(bio-) pharmaceutical industries	• For qualitative
analysis high-resolution hyphenated
techniques (LC-MS or LC-MS/MS) are usually preferred	
• “Spatial” comprehensive two-dimensional
(and three-dimensional) LC21	 	
a These issues may (largely) be addressed
by incorporating active-modulation techniques (see section Modulation below).

Table 2 SWOT Analysis of Comprehensive Two-Dimensional
Liquid Chromatography (LC × LC)
strengths	weaknesses	
• High peak capacities (1 000–10 000)
routinely possible	• Added conceptual and instrumental
complexity	
• High peak-production
rates (typically 1 peak per second)	• Rather
long analysis times (typically 30 min–2
h)	
• Choice from many different retention
mechanisms	• Possibly reduced detection sensitivityb	
• Added selectivity
from second (“orthogonal”)
dimension	• Phase-system incompatibility issuesb	
• Structured,
readily interpretable chromatogramsa	• Data-analysis software needed	
• “Group-type” separations of classes
of analytes	• Difficult and time-consuming method
developmentc	
•
Readily combined with MS and MS/MS techniques	 	
• Greatly reduced uncertainty of peak assignments
(in
comparison with 1D-LC)	 	
opportunities	threats	
• Increased need for detailed
characterization of complex
samples from many fieldsd	•
High-resolution hyphenated techniques (LC-MS, LC-IMS-MS,
IMS-MS) may compete for certain applicationse	
• “Spatial” comprehensive
two-dimensional
(and three-dimensional) LC21	 	
a In the case of low sample dimensionality.22

b These
issues may (largely) be addressed
by incorporating active-modulation techniques (see section Modulation below).

c This may be overcome by using advanced
method-development software.

d See Table 3 for an
overview of these.

e IMS =
ion-mobility spectrometry.

The astounding separation power offered by LC-LC and LC ×
LC entices chromatographers to overcome the challenges mentioned above,
and 2D-LC methods are increasingly being implemented in a variety
of application areas traditionally served by 1D-LC.

In this
review, we consider some 160 applications of two-dimensional
LC (2D-LC) techniques that have been published in 2016, 2017, or 2018.
Progress in methodology in the same period is discussed in detail.
Older publications are cited when needed to provide a foundation for
the discussion. While an inventory is made of all applications, we
will focus on online application of 2D-LC in our discussions. Much
technical progress has been focused on the interface (modulator) between
the two separation dimensions. These smart modulation techniques,
such as stationary-phase assisted modulation and active solvent modulation,
are discussed in detail in the Modulation section.
Finally, significant attention will be paid to emerging strategies
for developing 2D-LC methods in the Method Development
and Optimization Strategies section. For a detailed treatment
of the fundamental principles and successful implementation of 2D-LC
techniques, readers are referred to useful guides published elsewhere.2,23,24 Following the accepted nomenclature
for comprehensive two-dimensional separations,25 we refer to the respective dimensions with a prefix, i.e., 1D refers to the first dimension and 2D to the second
dimension.

Modulation
Incompatibility
At the heart of
any 2D-LC setup is
the modulation interface, which has the function of transferring fractions
of the first-dimension (1D) effluent to the second-dimension
(2D) column. The most common tool for fraction transfer
is a 2-position 8- or 10-port valve equipped with two identical storage
loops, which “passively” (see below) sample the 1D separation. Alternatingly, one loop samples the 1D effluent, while the contents of the other loop are injected into
the 2D column.

Using the setup of Figure 2, the 1D effluent
is the injection solvent of the second dimension. This may give rise
to “incompatibility issues”. Regardless of the mode
of 2D-LC operation (LC-LC or LC × LC), the order in which the
two separation methods are combined is extremely important. The pursuit
of maximal orthogonality between two separation dimensions with respect
to the sample dimensions often culminates in a challenge to combine
two incompatible solvent systems, with the 1D effluent
detrimentally affecting the 2D separation.

Figure 2 Generic scheme of a loop-based,
passive-modulation interface for
use in 2D-LC. As the 1D effluent is sampled by one loop,
the contents of the other loop are, without any further modification,
injected into the second dimension. In the configuration shown, the
loops are filled and emptied in opposite directions (“backflush”
mode). The scheme shows an 8-port valve, but a 10-port valve can also
be used.26,27 In (multiple) heart-cut 2D-LC, the loops
can be replaced by “decks” each containing an array
of sampling loops to allow storage of more than one fraction.

An extreme case arises when the
two mobile phases are completely
immiscible, but more-subtle incompatibilities often occur. For example,
a significant difference in viscosity between the two solvent systems
may result in flow instabilities. At the interface of the two solvents,
a low viscosity 2D mobile phase can penetrate a high-viscosity
injection plug in finger-shaped cones as it percolates through the
porous medium of the 2D column. This effect is known as
viscous fingering and potentially results in peak deformation and
even peak splitting.28,29 However, it seems that this is
really only a serious issue in cases of extreme viscosity contrast
between the mobile phases used in the two dimensions.30 In our experience, other factors such as a solvent strength
mismatch between the two dimensions can be far more problematic in
most applications.31

A significant
difference in solvent strength may also result in
peak deformation or peak splitting. If the 1D effluent
is a relatively strong injection solvent in comparison with the 2D eluent, the intended retention mechanism may be disturbed
as the analytes are not strongly retained by the stationary phase
in the strong injection solvent. A classic example of this problem
is the combination of organic size-exclusion chromatography (SEC)
and reversed-phase LC (RPLC), where the fully organic 1D effluent can prevent hydrophobic analytes from being retained by
the hydrophobic stationary phase. Within the injection plug, size-exclusion
conditions prevail, and larger analytes will move faster than the
average velocity of mobile-phase molecules. Ahead of the plug, the
eluent is weak, causing analytes to slow down and be caught up by
the strong-solvent plug. Conversely, analytes at the rear of the plug
will disperse in the weak 2D eluent and be retained by
adsorption effects in the SEC separation. This effect is known as
breakthrough, with an unretained (“breakthrough”) peak
eluting with the dead volume and a typically much smaller “real”
peak at the normal location.32 However,
the potential combination of RPLC and SEC in reverse order may also
lead to problems because the aqueous RPLC effluent may induce undesired
adsorption effects.33 Components of the 1D effluent matrix may potentially complicate detection after
the second dimension as well. One example of such detector incompatibility
is the use of salts in the 1D separation with MS or ELSD
detection of the 2D, where the salt from the 1D elutes as a concentrated band into the detector. Finally, the 1D effluent may lead to column degradation in the second dimension.
For example, an ion-chromatography 1D separation with a
sodium-hydroxide mobile phase may not be combined with a conventional 2D reversed-phase separation because silica-based ODS columns
usually degrade rapidly in basic eluents. The frequent switching of
the modulation valve may also affect the lifetime of the 2D column. The modulation valve may be constructed so as to minimize
the pressure pulses that accompany valve switching.34

It is not surprising that much research in the 2D-LC
community
is devoted to overcoming these incompatibility issues. Generally,
this is addressed by making modifications to the modulation process.
When some type of action is taken between the two dimensions, other
than just “passively” collecting fractions of the 1D effluent as shown in Figure 2, we speak of active modulation. Chromatographers
attempt to adjust the 1D effluent matrix to prevent incompatibility
issues. In some cases, the application of active-modulation techniques
offers opportunities to significantly improve the 2D separation,
rather than affecting it negatively. Importantly, active modulation
may also result in a concentration of the analyte band prior to injection
in the second dimension, thus enhancing the detection sensitivity.

Active-Solvent Modulation (ASM)
In 2017, Stoll and
co-workers introduced an active-modulation approach, which they refer
to as Active Solvent Modulation (ASM).35 The concept behind this approach is illustrated schematically in Figure 3. In this case, two
ports are added to a typical valve used for 2D-LC (see Figure 2), along with a bypass capillary.
Also, two rotational positions are added to the two normally used
with a conventional valve. Two of the positions (A and C) resemble
those shown in Figure 2, where all of the 1D effluent passes through one of the
loops and all of the 2D mobile phase passes through the
other loop, displacing previously collected 1D effluent
into the 2D column. In the two additional positions (B
and D), the flow from the 2D pump is split into two parts,
one that goes through the loop and one that bypasses the loop, such
that the 2D eluent acts as a diluent for the fraction of 1D effluent. The benefit of this approach is best appreciated
through chromatographic examples. In some of their most recent work,
Stoll and co-workers15 have used ASM to
effectively couple HILIC and RP separations of proteins in an online
LC × LC format, which is otherwise quite difficult because of
the solvent-strength mismatch between the conditions typically used
for these two separation modes. Figure 4 shows a comparison of 2D and 2D chromatograms
obtained for a partially digested monoclonal-antibody sample, with
and without implementation of ASM. The left two panels (A and B) show
the 2D chromatograms that are obtained with and without the use of
ASM. In panel A the peaks circled in red are due to breakthrough of
protein analytes. These proteins elute around the dead time of each 2D separation because of the solvent-strength mismatch. On
the other hand, when ASM is used, as shown in panel B, no breakthrough
is observed at all, even though the same volume of 1D effluent
is ultimately injected into the 2D column in the two cases.
This is because in the case of ASM the 1D effluent fraction
is diluted 1:2 with water-rich diluent, which lowers the sample concentration
of ACN to about 23%, below the starting point in the 2D
RP gradient (about 25%). Panel C offers a more focused view of the
quality of 2D separations in the two cases.

Figure 3 Illustration of the function
of Active Solvent Modulation (ASM)
for coupling the two dimensions of separation in a 2D-LC system. This
valve has eight ports and four positions. Postions A and C are functionally
identical to those of a conventional 8- or 10-port two position valve
(e.g., see Figure 2). In positions B and D, however, part of the flow from the 2D pump is split and travels through the bypass capillary.
This portion of the flow joins the stream of fluid exiting the sample
loop before the mixture leaves the valve and enters the 2D column. In this way, this split part of the 2D flow
acts as a diluent for the 1D effluent fraction injected
into the 2D column.

Figure 4 Comparison of two 2D and 2D chromatograms for LC ×
LC separations of mAb fragments with (B) and without ASM (A). First
dimension separations are in the HILIC mode with about 70% ACN in
the eluting mobile phase for the peaks of interest, and 2D separations are in the RP mode with about 25% ACN in the starting
mobile phase. In each case, 40 μL of 1D effluent
is ultimately transferred to the 2D separation. In case
B, the sample is diluted 1:2 with water-rich diluent, such that the
total volume injected in each 2D cycle is 120 μL.
The 2D chromatograms in panel C are extracted from the
2D chromatograms on the left at the position of the gray dashed line.
Reproduced from Stoll, D. R.; Harmes, D. C.; Staples, G. O.; Potter,
O. G.; Dammann, C. T.; Guillarme, D.; Beck, A. Anal. Chem.2018, 90 (9), 5923–5929 (ref15). Copyright 2018 American
Chemical Society.

In addition to the HILIC
× RP separation of proteins described
above, ASM has been implemented for separations of peptides by mLC-LC
with RP separations in both dimensions,35 quantitative determination of target molecules in polymer matrixes,36 and the separation of water- and fat-soluble
vitamins by sLC × LC using HILIC and RP separations.37

As ASM is a relatively new approach, a
lot remains to be learned
about how to efficiently optimize 2D-LC separations. Some of the early
papers contain guidance about the effects of different method parameters
relevant to ASM. Additionally, Stoll and co-workers have developed
numerical simulation methods that can be used to both make predictions
of the effects of different ASM-related method parameters, such as
dilution factor and injection volume, on retention and peak width
and to visualize what happens inside the 2D column under
these conditions.31,38

Stationary-Phase-Assisted
Modulation (SPAM)
Another
increasingly popular active-modulation strategy relies on the use
of low-volume trapping (or “enrichment”) columns, often
referred to simply as “traps”, rather than large storage
loops (Figure 5). Demonstrated
first in LC × LC by Vonk et al.,39 this technique has been referred to as stationary-phase-assisted
modulation (SPAM)39 or as focusing modulation.40 Typically, guard columns containing a stationary
phase similar to that of the2D column are
used as trapping columns.

Figure 5 Schematic of the two positions of a stationary-phase-assisted
modulation
(SPAM) interface. Rather than using large storage loops, analytes
are effectively filtered out of the 1D effluent using low-volume
trapping columns. Optionally, the 1D column effluent may
be diluted using a weak eluent to facilitate retention on the traps.
Moreover, the waste line may be equipped with a detector to monitor
premature elution from the traps during method development. (Multiple)
heart-cut 2D-LC setups are possible as long as the multiple traps
are identical.

As the 1D
effluent is sampled by the modulator (Figure 5), it is envisaged
that the analytes are retained by the stationary phase in the traps,
whereas the 1D solvent system passes unretained and leaves
the chromatographic system. Upon switching of the valve, the 2D mobile phase (gradient program) elutes the trapped analytes
as sharp, concentrated bands and introduces these into the second-dimension
column. To facilitate sufficient retention on the traps, the 1D effluent flow may be diluted (optionally inserting a mixer)
to significantly lower the elution strength of the 1D effluent
prior to entering the trap.

The advantages of SPAM include (i)
reducing solvent incompatibility
issues, thanks to removal of most of the 1D mobile phase,2,40 (ii) improvement of detection sensitivity as a result of analyte
focusing on the trapping cartridges,4,41,42 (iii) a decrease in 2D injection volumes
which allows the use of short 2D columns without a loss
in efficiency, significantly reducing the total analysis time.4,42

However, the use of SPAM is not without disadvantages. It
is imperative
that all analytes from the 1D fraction are sufficiently
retained (i.e., during the full duration of the modulation) to avoid
loss of analytes (incomplete recovery) and to prevent discrimination
effects. This can be challenging if the various analytes have vastly
different chemical properties and a dilution solvent may not always
ensure complete trapping of all analytes. In addition, the trapping
columns themselves potentially reduce the overall robustness of the
system. It is imperative that both traps are identical (and share
the same history) to avoid different (“asymmetric”)
performance of alternating modulations.43

After struggling with the low loadability of nanoscale 1D and microscale 2D separations, Vonk et al. first
implemented
SPAM in an LC × LC workflow for the SCX × RPLC–HRMS
characterization of peptides.39 The use
of the active-modulation technique allowed the authors to use a high-loadability 1D column in combination with a nanoscale 2D column
and splitless hyphenation with a high-resolution MS instrument. The
authors noted that these developments opened the possibility of online
SCX × RPLC–HRMS separations to replace the currently dominant
off-line SCX prefractionation followed by LC-MS. Gargano and co-workers
recently developed a nanoflow LC × LC system for the separation
of intact proteins.44 The combination of
silica-based weak cation exchanger run in HILIC mode and RPLC through
a SPAM interface followed by HR-MS yielded a highly orthogonal system,
targeting a separation based on charge and hydrophilicity in the first
dimension and hydrophobicity in the second-dimension. The method allowed
the authors to identify twice as many histone proteoforms compared
to previous methods.

Recently, Sommella et al. combined HILIC
and RPLC for the separation
of polyphenols using trapping columns.6 The authors compared the performance of the SPAM approach with passive
modulation and concluded that with SPAM higher peak capacities and
sensitivities could be obtained. In addition, the use of trapping
columns allowed the authors to circumvent the requirement to use microbore
columns in the first dimension. Toro-Uribe and co-workers used SPAM
in their HILIC × RPLC separation of procyanidins from green cocoa
beans.40 The authors diluted the 1D effluent (20 μL min–1) with 100 μL
min–1 of weak 2D eluent and observed
improved resolving power and less solvent-mismatch issues as the 1D effluent was removed by the SPAM process. That the enhancement
of peak intensies can be significant is visible from the comparison
shown in Figure 6.
This work, by Baglai and co-workers,41 utilized
two identical cyano trap columns for improvement of the RPLC ×
RPLC-MS separation of steroids in bovine urine. As is also visible
in Figure 6, a strong
enhancement of peak intensities and signal-to-noise ratios was obtained
by using SPAM relative to passive modulation. The authors reported
an increase in S/N ratio by a factor of 7 and were able to detect
76 compounds using SPAM, relative to 36 for passive modulation.

Figure 6 RPLC ×
RPLC-MS separation of steroids in bovine urine using
(A) passive modulation and (B) stationary-phase assisted modulation
(SPAM). 76 analytes could be detected using SPAM due to the improvement
in S/N, relative to 36 using passive modulation.41 Reprinted from Anal. Chem. Acta, 1013, Baglai, A.; Blokland, M.H.; Mol, H.G.J.; Gargano,
A.F.G.; van der Wal, Sj.; Schoenmakers, P.J., Enhancing detectability
of anabolic-steroid residues in bovine urine by actively modulated
online comprehensive two-dimensional liquid chromatography–high-resolution
mass spectrometry, pp. 87–97 (ref (41)). Copyright (2018), with permission from Elsevier.

Jakobsen et al. combined trapping-based
active modulation with
pulsed-elution of the 1D to increase the flexibility of
the 2D-LC separation.42 Pulsed elution
utilizes pulses of strong eluent rather than a continuous linear gradient
with increasing levels of strong eluent. Using this elution technique,
the authors reported the ability to control the elution of analytes
in a sufficient number of modulations to prevent loss of 1D peak capacity as a result of undersampling. As the time between
pulses could be increased from 1 up to at least 10 min, the 2D analysis was not time-constrained and could be tailored toward
increasing the 2D peak capacity (2nc). By combining this strategy with SPAM, the authors furthermore
reported a reduction of the additional band broadening that would
occur in the 2D separation in case of poor refocusing.
The concept was demonstrated in practice by a separation of a fraction
of vacuum gas oil.

The potential of actively modulating the 1D effluent
is not necessarily restricted to overcoming solvent-compatibility
issues. Modulation may also target the analytes. Pirok and co-workers
combined an aqueous hydrodynamic chromatography (HDC) separation of
a polymeric nanoparticle dispersion with a separation of the constituent
polymers using organic SEC.43 The authors
first achieved online sample transformation by diluting the aqueous 1D effluent with tetrahydrofuran in an Agilent Jet Weaver V35
mixer. The composition of THF and aqueous buffer was fine-tuned to
destabilize the particles so as to obtain the constituting polymers,
while preserving a sufficiently large fraction of buffer to facilitate
retention on the trapping columns in the modulator. The THF used in
the 2D SEC separation finally eluted the polymers for analysis.
A second diode-array detector was used to monitor the modulation effluent
for eventual premature elution of trapped polymers.

SPAM is
also frequently applied in heart-cut 2D-LC separations.45−48 Chen et al. used SPAM in their heart-cut SCX-RPLC-MS/MS separation
of tobacco-specific N-nitrosamines in cigarette smoke.46 Trapping was facilitated by diluting the 1D effluent with a weak-eluent and by adjusting the pH.

The implementation of SPAM in 2D-LC is far from optimized, and
its effectiveness can be further improved by miniaturizing the trap
volumes,39 enhancing the robustness of
the traps,43 and by developing micromixers
to combine two solvent systems rapidly and effectively.49

Other modulation strategies
Aside
from ASM and SPAM,
other active-modulation techniques have also been introduced, although
none of these is currently widely applied. Recent examples are evaporative
membrane modulation50 and longitudinal
on-column thermal modulation.51 A completely
different approach that was recently proposed is fractionized stacking
and sampling, where the 1D effluent is split in a number
of segments prior to introduction to the second-dimension column.52 The last approach that we will discuss is vacuum-evaporation
modulation (VEM), which was developed by the group of Guan.53 The setup is illustrated in Figure 7. It was mainly devised to
overcome incompatibility problems encountered during the combination
of normal-phase LC (NPLC) and RPLC separations. Briefly, the 1D effluent is passed through a heated loop (Figure 7, left, blue) which in turn
is routed to a vacuum outlet. The strong NPLC solvents are envisaged
to evaporate rapidly as a result of the increased temperature and
reduced pressure and the (nonvolatile) analytes are thought to be
deposited on the wall of the loop. Upon switching (Figure 7, right, red) the 2D eluent is introduced, which, with the help of the heat, quickly
redissolves the analytes so that they are introduced into the 2D column. Since its introduction, the VEM interface was used
in a number of applications in noncomprehensive mode, including the
analysis of Traditional Chinese Medicines (TCM)54 and, more recently, the analysis of lipid species in human
plasma55 and mouse serum.56 While the potential of VEM has been clearly demonstrated,
studies in its fundamental principles and limitations are required,
including (i) the required volatility of the to-be-evaporated solvent,
(ii) the extent of accidental loss of volatile analytes, and (iii)
the rate of dissolution for large analytes that are difficult to dissolve.
Data demonstrating to what degree different analytes are deposited
on the loops during vacuum evaporation is needed to provide insight
in these above fundamental limitations.

Figure 7 Schematic of a vacuum-evaporation
modulation (VEM) interface. 1D column effluent is thought
to be rapidly evaporated due
to the combination of supplied heat and applied vacuum, so that the
analytes are deposited in the loop. Upon switching, the 2D eluent redissolves the analytes for introduction into the 2D column. Based on the work of ref (54).

Method Development and Optimization Strategies
Since
the introduction of single heart-cut (LC-LC)57 and comprehensive (LC × LC)58 2D-LC
separations in the late 1970s as online, automated methods,
these two modes of 2D separation have been the dominant implementation
of the method. However, in the past 10 years or so we have seen the
development of hybrid modes of 2D separation that combine features
of both heart-cutting and comprehensive 2D separations. Figure 8 illustrates the differences
between the conventional single heart-cut and comprehensive modes,
and the two hybrid modes multiple heart-cutting (mLC-LC)59 and selective comprehensive (sLC × LC)60 2D separation.

Figure 8 Illustration of four different modes of
2D-LC separation. For a
more thorough explanation of the similarities and differences between
these different modes of 2D separation see ref61.

A thorough discussion of the similarities and differences
between
these different modes of 2D separation was presented recently by Stoll
and co-workers61 and will not be repeated
here. One of the most practically important virtues of the mLC-LC
implementation as it is drawn in Figure 8B relative to the traditional single heart-cut
approach is that the processes of sampling the 1D separation
and separating previously collected fractions of 1D effluent
in the second dimension are executed in parallel. This provides tremendous
flexibility to the user during method development, particularly with
respect to increasing 2D analysis times in the interest
of improving the resolving power that each 2D separation
contributes to the overall 2D separation. Nevertheless, one of the
disadvantages of the heart-cutting approach, whether single or multiple
heart-cuts are made, is that analytes that had been resolved by the 1D separation can be mixed back together if the fractions collected
are larger (in time or volume) than the volume of the peaks as they
exit the 1D column. This problem is referred to as “undersampling”.62 Readers interested in more detail on this issue
are referred to a number of previous articles that address the problem
thoroughly.24,63 The desire to avoid or at least
minimize the effect of this problem gives rise to sLC × LC, as
illustrated in Figure 8C. Here, regions of interest in the 1D separation are
first finely sampled to avoid remixing of previously separated analytes.
These fractions are temporarily stored in an array of sampling loops
or traps prior to subsequent further separation in the second dimension.
The best answer to the question, which mode of 2D separation should
I use?, is entirely application dependent but depends strongly on
the number of target analytes of interest in a particular assay. Methods
with a small number of targets are well served by single heart-cut
methods, whereas applications in which the entire sample is of interest,
such as “-omics” types of applications, benefit most
from fully comprehensive 2D separations. The mLC-LC and sLC ×
LC modes are typically most suitable for applications involving some
10–30 target compounds.

Method Development for Noncomprehensive Modes
When
developing a single heart-cut application (i.e., Figure 8A), two very important questions
encountered in method development are (1) What volume of 1D effluent will be transferred to the second dimension? and (2) What
will be the dimensions of and operating conditions for the 2D column? In applications where the analyte of interest is abundant
and detection sensitivity is not a primary concern, the user has a
lot of flexibility. In these cases, one should minimize the volume
of 1D effluent transferred to minimize the risk of undersampling
the first-dimension separation and to avoid compromising the separation
performance of the 2D column. However, when the analyte
of interest is present at a low concentration, we must consider ways
to transfer large volumes of 1D effluent to the 2D column, while minimizing the elution peak volume of the analyte
from the 2D column. In this context, the active modulation
strategies discussed above may be very useful because they enable
transfer of relatively large volumes of 1D effluent without
compromising the performance of the 2D separation.

In addition to avoiding undersampling, as already discussed above,
one of the attractive aspects of the sLC × LC mode of separation
is that it enables a kind of piecewise transfer of the entire volume
of a 1D peak that would otherwise be too large to transfer
in a single fraction. For example, suppose one wants to study an unknown
peak that suddenly appears in an existing 1D separation that is carried
out using a 4.6 mm i.d. column at 1 mL/min. If the peak of interest
is 10-s wide at the base (i.e., 6σ level), then transferring
“all” of the peak would require a sample loop of about
200 μL. However, in the sLC × LC mode the peak can be split
up into a number of fractions with volumes that are more convenient.
For example, the peak may be sampled five times, each time using a
40-μL loop. This kind of flexibility is valuable from a method-development
point of view and enables precise quantitation, even for 1D peaks with large volumes.64 However,
this line of thinking quickly leads to the question, what is the “right”
number of fractions to transfer per 1D peak to use as a
starting point during method development? In a series of two recent
papers, Davis and Stoll3,65 addressed this question using
simulations to study the effect of the number of transfers of each 1D peak on the probability of fully resolving sample mixtures
of increasing complexity by mLC-LC/sLC × LC. Interestingly, they
found that, from a probabilistic point of view, making a single transfer
of each 1D peak maximizes the probability that the resulting
2D separation will fully resolve a random mixture of analytes. This
outcome is observed even after undersampling is accounted for. Nevertheless,
here are two important caveats to keep in mind here. First, the simulations
used in this work did not take into account the volume of 1D peaks, and therefore splitting the 1D peak into multiple
fractions may still be warranted for practical reasons, even if this
is not optimal from the point of view of resolving power. Second,
the conclusions of these studies are based on the outcomes of tens
of thousands of simulations of 2D separations of random mixtures.
Even if the simulations suggest the use of a single transfer of each 1D peak as a starting point, there undoubtedly will be specific
separation scenarios where transferring multiple fractions of a 1D peak is needed to avoid undersampling and the concomitant
loss of 1D resolution.

Comprehensive Mode
The step toward comprehensive 2D-LC
(LC × LC) is accompanied by a number of additional constraints
on the method. For the method to be truly comprehensive, it is required
that all of the analytes are transferred completely from the 1D effluent to the 2D column. In the case of passive
modulation, this requires that the 1D flow rate is adjusted
to match the size of the loop.

One focus within the chromatographic
community has been the development of faster 2D separations.
Shorter modulation times imply that more fractions can be collected
and transferred, thus decreasing the likelihood of undersampling of
the 1D separation and/or reducing the total analysis time.
In this context it is not surprising that RPLC proves to be the most
popular mechanism in LC × LC (see Table 3 below). Indeed, RPLC
offers many advantages when used as 2D separation mechanism2, including very fast gradient-elution separations, thanks
to the swift column equilibration.66 The
use of an ion-pairing reagent does not necessarily lead to impractically
long gradient times. For the separation of synthetic dyes by SAX ×
IP-RPLC,5 Pirok and co-workers combined
a programmed increase of the fraction of organic modifier in the 2D mobile phase with a proportional decrease in the ion-pair
concentration.

Table 3 Overview of 2D-LC Applications from
2016 until October 2018a
application	mode	1D	2D	detection	remarks	ref	
Biopharma	
Antibody-drug conjugates	N	-	P	SEC	RPLC	UV–vis	 	(93)	
Antibody-drug conjugates	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	UV–vis	 	(94)	
Antibody-drug conjugates	N	-	P	SEC	RPLC	UV–vis	 	(95)	
Antibody-drug conjugates	N	-	P	HIC	RPLC	MS	 	(96)	
Antibody-drug conjugates	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(97)	
N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	
Antibody-drug conjugates	N	×	P	HIC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(98,99)	
Antibody-drug conjugates	N	×	P	HIC	SEC	MS	 	(100)	
Antibody-drug conjugates (free species)	N	-	P	SEC	RPLC	UV–vis	 	(93)	
Antibody-drug conjugate (free species)	N	-	P	MM	RPLC	MS	 	(101)	
Biopharmaceuticals
(impurities)	N	-	N	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(102)	
Bovine insulin (degradants)	N	-	A	RPLC	RPLC	UV–vis	 	(35)	
Monoclonal antibodies	N	-	P	Affinity	SEC	UV–vis	 	(103)	
Monoclonal antibodies	N	-	P	WCX	SEC	UV–vis	mLC-LC	(104)	
Monoclonal antibodies	N	×	P	SCX	RPLC	MS	 	(105)	
Monoclonal antibodies	N	-	P	SCX	RPLC	MS	 	(106)	
Oligonucleotides
(impurities)	N	-	S	SEC	IP-RPLC	MS	Utilized a 50 mm × 4.6 mm C18 trap.	(47)	
N	×	S	RPLC	IP-RPLC	
N	-	S	SAX	IP-RPLC	
N	×	S	IP-RPLC	IP-RPLC	
Therapeutic antibodies	N	-	P	IEX	RPLC	MS	 	(107)	
Therapeutic antibodies	N	×	A	HILIC	RPLC	MS	 	(15)	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Environmental	
AChE inhib. in wastewater effluent	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	2D effluent fractionated and studied.	(108)	
Emerging contaminants	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	Column selection by orthogonality metrics.	(84)	
Polycyclic aromatics	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	UV–vis	Theoretical gradient optimization.	(109)	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Food	
Black chokeberries pomace	N	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(110)	
Overripe fruits (carotenoids)	N	×	P	NPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(111,112)	
Hop cones, pellet extracts	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(113)	
N	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	
Soybean (Kunitz
Trypsin Inhibitor)	F	-	M	WAX	SEC	MS	 	(114)	
Corn oil (Triacylglycerols)	N	×	P	AgLC	RPLC	MS	Compared data-analysis techniques.	(115)	
Tea, Grape seed, red wine (extracts)	N	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	IMS-MS	Optimized LC ×
LC × IMS-MS separation.	(80)	
Wine (polyphenols and
contaminants)	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(116)	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Metabolites	
Acyl-Coenzyme A (mouse liver)	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	Two parallel 2D columns.	(117)	
Amino acids (of gramicidin, bacitracin)	N	×	P	Chiral	Chiral	UV–vis	Amino acids were derivatized.	(118)	
Amino acids (tea, amino acids)	F	-	M	RPLC	Chiral	UV–vis	 	(119)	
Antioxidants (Malus hupehensis)	F	-	M	HILIC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(120)	
Breast milk (fluoxetine, norfluoxetine)	N	-	P	SEC	Chiral	MS	 	(121,122)	
N	-	P	SEC	RPLC	
Flavonoids	F	-	M	HILIC	RPLC	MS	 	(123)	
Flavonoids	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	UV–vis	Microprep. to investigate recovery.	(124)	
Flavonoids from licorice	F	-	M	NPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	Preparative scale.	(125)	
Furanocoumarins	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	UV–vis	Compared multivariate
curve-resolution strategies in LC ×
LC.	(85)	
Lipidomics (brain tissue)	N	-	S	HILIC	RPLC	MS	 	(126)	
Lipidomics (human plasma)	N	-	V	NPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(55,127)	
Lipidomics (mice serum)	N	-	V	NPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(56,128)	
Lipidomics (rat
plasma)	F	-	M	MM	RPLC	MS	 	(129)	
Lipidomics (cyanobacteria)	N	-	V	NPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(130)	
Lipidomics (human plasma)	N	×	P	RPLC	HILIC	MS	Comparison with LC-TIMS-MS.	(13)	
Lipids (rice)	N	×	P	RPLC	HILIC	MS	 	(131)	
Metabolites (Escherichia coli)	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(132)	
Metabolites (green cocoa beans)	N	×	S	HILIC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(40)	
Metabolites (licorice)	N	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	MS,
UV–vis	ZIC-HILIC	(133)	
Metabolites (microbial)	N	×	S	RPLC	RPLC	UV–vis	 	(134)	
Metabolites (Panax notoginseng leaves)	F	×	M	HILIC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(135)	
Metabolites (rice plant)	N	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	MS	 	(136)	
Metabolites (Vitamin D, human serum)	N	-	S	RPLC	RPLC	MS	PFP in 1D, C18 in 2D	(137)	
Metabolites and lipids (human plasma)	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	Online prefractionation before 1D	(138)	
Metabolomics (Glycyrrhiza
glabra)	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	Multisegment shifting gradients.	(139)	
Phenolic acids	N	×	E	RPLC	RPLC	UV–vis	Evaporative membrane modulation.	(50)	
Phenolic acids and flavonoids	N	×	P	MM	RPLC	UV–vis	Simultaneous HILIC and RP in 1D	(140)	
Phenolic compounds (Grapevine canes)	N	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	Compared a number of selectivities.	(141)	
Plant extracts and coffee	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	Special concept of LC+LC.	(142)	
Polyphenols	N	×	S	HILIC	RPLC	MS	 	(6)	
Polyphenols in red raspberry fruits shoots	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(143)	
Procyanidins (cocoa)	N	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	UV–vis	Reported kinetic optimization tool.	(79)	
Proteinogenic amino acids	N	-	P	RPLC	Chiral	UV–vis	 	(144)	
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	1D at pH = 3, 2D at pH = 10	(145)	
Steroids	N	×	P	TRLC	RPLC	UV–vis	TRLC as 1D facilitates 2D focusing.	(77)	
Testosterone (human serum)	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(146)	
Urine (bovine)	N	×	S	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(41)	
Urine (Steroids, Sulphonamides)	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	CN, BEH and Phenyl studied for 1D	(147)	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Miscellaneous	
Bioactives
in plant extracts	N	×	S	RPLC	RPLC	ELSD	Fractionation system	(148)	
Heavy-oil fractions	N	×	P	NA-RPLC	NA-RPLC	CAD, UV–vis	CN,
PFP and BiPh studied for 1D	(149)	
Household dust and dryer lint	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(150)	
Lignin phenols	N	×	S	RPLC	SFC	UV–vis	 	(151)	
Synthetic cannabinoids	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(152)	
Synthetic dyes	N	×	P	SAX	IP-RPLC	UV–vis	 	(5)	
Tobacco	N	-	S	SCX	RPLC	MS	 	(46,153)	
Tobacco (snus)	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(154)	
Vacuum-gas oil fraction	N	×	S	RPLC	RPLC	MS	Pulsed elution in 1D	(42)	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Natural Medicines	
Phlorotannins
in brown algae	N	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	Use of Hansen solubility parameter to study extraction selectivity.	(155)	
Brown seaweed	N	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	MS,
UV–vis	 	(156)	
TCM (Additives)	N	-	S	Affinity	RPLC	UV–vis	 	(157,158)	
TCM (Dracocephalum heterophyllium)	F	-	M	RPLC	HILIC	MS, NMR	 	(159)	
TCM (U. rhynchophylla)	F	-	M	MM	MM	UV–vis	 	(160)	
TCM (Curcuma kwangsiensis)	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(161)	
TCM (Flos Carthami,
dried flowers)	N	×	S	MM	RPLC	UV–vis	1D: SEC-RPLC	(162)	
TCM (Gardenia jasminoides Ellis)	F	×	M	RPLC	HILIC	MS	 	(163)	
TCM (Gegen-Qinlian
Decoction)	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(164)	
TCM (Notoginseng total saponins)	F	×	M	HILIC	RPLC	MS	 	(165)	
TCM (Oxytropis
falcata)	F	-	M	RPLC	RPLC	UV–vis	Preparative scale	(166)	
TCM (Salvia miltiorrhiza)	F	×	M	HILIC	RPLC	MS	 	(167)	
TCM (Salvia miltiorrhiza)	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(168)	
TCM (sapinins and alkaloids)	F	-	M	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(169)	
TCM (saponins in Gleditsia sinensis)	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(170)	
TCM (Sphaerophysa salsula)	F	-	M	RPLC	HILIC	NMR,UV–vis	Preparative scale	(171)	
TCM (toad skin)	F	×	M	NPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(172)	
TCM (Tropane alkaloids)	N	-	P	RPLC	SCX	UV–vis	 	(173)	
TCM (Xuebijing)	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(174)	
TCM (Zhibai Dihuang Granule)	F	×	M	SCX	RPLC	MS	 	(175)	
TCM (Denzhan Shenmai)	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	Integrated data from LC
× LC with that from
heart-cut 2D-LC.	(16)	
N	-	P	RPLC	Chiral	
TCM (Ginseng powder)	N	-	P	HILIC	RPLC	UV–vis	 	(52)	
TCM (Ginkgo biloba)	F	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	MS	 	(176)	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Peptides	
Peptide biomarkers (rat urine)	F	-	M	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(177)	
Peptic digests	N	-	S	RPLC	MM	MS	 	(178)	
Peptides	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(14)	
Protein digests (plasma)	F	-	M	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(179)	
Tryptic peptides	N	-	S	SCX	RPLC	MS	DCM instead
of Gradient	(180)	
Tryptic peptides (Cortical neurons)	N	×	S	SCX	RPLC	MS	 	(181)	
Tryptic peptides (Elaeis Guineensis Jacq)	N	-	S	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(182)	
Tryptic peptides (Flammulina velutipes)	F	-	M	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(183)	
Tryptic peptides (human tissue, cancer)	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(184)	
Tryptic peptides (mitochondrial
proteins)	F	-	M	SCX	RPLC	MS	 	(185)	
Tryptic peptides (lung adenocarcinoma)	F	-	M	SCX	RPLC	MS	 	(186)	
Tryptic peptides (Proteus mirabilis)	F	-	M	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(187)	
Tryptic peptides (Salmonella bacteria)	F	-	M	SCX	RPLC	MS	 	(188)	
Tryptic peptides (serum)	F	-	M	SCX	RPLC	MS	 	(189)	
Tryptic peptides (serum)	F	-	M	SCX	RPLC	MS	 	(190)	
Peptides	N	×	P	RPLC	SEC	UV–vis	Studied stop-flow effects in 1D	(191)	
Peptides	N	-	P	Chiral	RPLC	FLD, MS	 	(192)	
N	-	P	Chiral	Affinity	
Peptides	N	×	P	SEC	RPLC	UV–vis	1D: Stop-flow; 1D dispersion studied.	(193)	
Peptides	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	2D-LC used as desalting tool.	(194)	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Pharmaceuticals	
Antibiotic drug (cefonicid sodium)	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(195)	
Antibiotic residues in dairy products	N	-	P	HILIC	RPLC	MS	 	(196)	
Antibiotics	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	 	(197)	
Beta-blockers in human plasma	N	-	P	SEC	RPLC	FLD	RAM as 1D for prefractionation.	(198)	
Desonide cream	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS	Strong
salt buffer in 1D	(199)	
Parental drug microdosing
vehicle	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(200)	
Pharmaceutical materials	N	-	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	 	(201)	
Pharmaceuticals	N	-	P	RPLC	SFC	UV–vis	sLC × SFC	(202)	
Pharmaceuticals	N	×	P	Chiral	Chiral	UV–vis	 	(203)	
N	-	P	RPLC	Chiral	
Pharmaceuticals	N	-	S	RPLC	SFC	MS, UV–vis	 	(18)	
Pharmaceuticals	N	×	P	RPLC	RPLC	MS, UV–vis	Applied theoretical optimization.	(204)	
Pharmaceuticals, Metabolites	N	-	S	RPLC	Chiral	MS	Chiral at SFC conditions.	(45)	
Therapeutic drug (in human plasma)	N	-	S	RPLC	RPLC	UV–vis	SCX as trapping column.	(205)	
Vidarabine monophosphate	N	-	S	RPLC	MM	MS	 	(206)	
Vitamins	N	-	A	HILIC	RPLC	UV–vis	sLC × LC	(37)	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Polymers	
Oligomers (Oxidzed waxes)	N	×	P	NPLC	SEC	ELSD	1D and 2D at high temperature.	(207,208)	
Polyether
polyols	N	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	MS	 	(9)	
Polymeric nanoparticles	N	×	S	HDC	SEC	UV–vis	 	(43)	
Synthetic polymers (Polystyrene/Polybutadiene
Block Copolymers)	N	×	S	NA-TGIC	SEC	UV–vis	 	(209)	
N	×	S	RP-TGIC	LCCC	
Synthetic polymers (novolac)	N	×	A	SEC	RPLC	UV–vis	 	(36)	
Synthetic polymers (branched poly (bisphenol A-carbonate))	N	×	P	LCCC	SEC	LS, RID, UV–vis, VI	MALDI used off-line. LC × LC Correlated with Monte Carlo
simulations.	(210,211)	
Synthetic polymers (HEUR)	N	×	P	SEC	RPLC	ELSD	 	(212)	
Synthetic polymers (nonlinear)	N	×	P	NPLC	SEC	LS, RID,
VI	 	(213)	
Synthetic polymers
(poloxamers)	N	×	P	LCCC	LCCC	ELSD	Use
two 2D columns.	(214)	
Synthetic polymers
(polystyrene)	N	×	P	NA-RPLC	SEC	UV–vis	2D-col with longitudinal porosity gradient.	(215)	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
(Intact) Proteins	
Intact histone proteoforms	N	×	S	MM	RPLC	MS	Nanoflow LC × LC; 1D WCX-HILIC	(44)	
Intact proteins	N	×	P	SCX	RPLC	UV–vis	Application of multichannel detector216	(216−218)	
Intact proteins and protein digests	N	×	P	SCX	IP-RPLC	MS, UV–vis	Photografted monolith for SCX.
Optimized various parameters.	(219)	
Metaproteomics (soil)	N	-	S	SCX	RPLC	MS	 	(48)	
Proteins in human plasma	N	×	S	SAX	RPLC	None	Array (8) of 2D
columns, Fractionation	(220)	
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
Surfactants	
Ethoxylate phosphate surfactants	N	×	S	HILIC	RPLC	UV–vis	 	(4)	
Ionic surfactants	N	×	P	MM	RPLC	CAD	1D: WCX-RPLC	(2)	
Nonionic surfactants
in pharmaceuticals	N	×	P	HILIC	RPLC	ELSD, MS	 	(221)	
Polymeric dispersants in detergents	N	-	P	SEC	RPLC	ELSD	 	(222)	
a N = Online, F = Offline, ×
= Comprehensive, - = Heart-cut, P = Passive modulation (empty loops),
A = Active-Solvent Modulation (ASM), E = Evaporation membrane, S =
Active stationary-phase assisted modulation (SPAM), V = Vacuum-evaporation
modulation (VEM), M = Manual/No modulation. CAD = charged-aerosol
detection, ELSD = evaporative light-scattering detection, FLD = fluorescence
detection, LS = light scattering, MS = mass spectrometry, RID = refractive-index
detection, VI = viscometry. LS, RID, and VI are typically combined
to obtain “triple detection”. See Modulation section for a detailed discussion of the different modulation techniques.

The acceleration of size-exclusion
chromatography (SEC) for 2D separations has recently also
received attention. Separation
in SEC is thought to be promoted by the largest possible pore volume,67 and as a result the polymer-separation community
has largely ignored the introduction of core–shell (or superficially
porous) particles, which are now routinely applied in LC due to their
superior efficiency.68,69 Recent studies suggest that,
despite the decrease in pore volume, the increase in efficiency yields
similar or better resolution in a shorter time.70,71 This type of stationary phase was applied in a second-dimension
separation of acrylate polymers. The authors exploited the possibility
of overlapping injections, as no separation is expected to occur outside
the SEC range of the column.43

In
this context, the demonstration of subsecond (isocratic) HILIC,
chiral, and achiral separations by Wahab et al. represent an attractive
concept.72 The authors packed superficially
porous particles in 5 mm-long columns. While the results were promising,
it was noted that modified UHPLC hardware with minimized extra-column
dispersion was required to successfully realize subsecond separations.
In addition, sufficiently high detection sampling frequencies are
required to accurately describe the shape of elution bands.

A completely different approach to LC × LC is based on spatial
separations. In a spatial separation, analytes are not eluted from
a column but separated “spatially” because they reach
different locations. In a second step they may be eluted from a flat
bed or a series of channels in an orthogonal direction. In the latter
case there is the potential for a third dimension. The fundamental
advantage of using a spatial separation in the first dimension is
that all 2D separations can be performed simultaneously,
rather than sequentially. As a result, spatial 2D (and 3D) separations
are fundamentally very attractive, up to a point that a peak capacity
approaching one million has been predicted for a spatial 3D-LC.73 However, spatial separations at elevated pressures
have hardly been developed yet. Early studies illustrate that some
serious obstacles need to be overcome.74,75 Most importantly,
to realize successful LC × LC with a spatial 1D separation
we need to find ways to confine the flow to the 1D separation
channel.

Very recently Adamopoulou et al. described a potentially
revolutionary
two-dimensional insertable separation tool (TWIST).76 The 1D spatial separation can take place in
the TWIST channel. After turning the TWIST, a series of fractions
can be sent simultaneously from different locations along the 1D channel to a series of 2D channels. This approach
has potential advantages, due to its simplicity and the potential
for highly selective (and ultimately high-resolution) separations
in a relatively short time. However, the concept is quite new and
still highly immature.

Other technological advancements include
the introduction of new
modulation strategies to help overcome incompatibility and undersampling
issues, as discussed in the previous section. Baert et al. recently
advocated the use of temperature-responsive LC (TRLC) in purely aqueous
environments as 1D separation, in combination with RPLC
in the second dimension.77 Their concept
relied on the use of temperature-responsive stationary phases, which
exhibit strong changes in retention behavior upon small changes in
temperature. The purely aqueous 1D mobile phases were ideally
compatible with a 2D RPLC separation. Using a sample containing
neutral organic analytes the authors demonstrated that undersampling
constraints could be relaxed and complete analyte refocusing could
be achieved.

Optimization
There are a variety
of useful studies
that provide general guidelines for developing LC × LC methods.2,23,78 However, genuine optimization
of methods is much more complex.2,239 This is reflected
in different interpretations of the word “optimization”.
Chromatographers may have specific objectives, such as improving peak
shapes or enhancing resolution in targeted sections of the separation
space. Specific adjustments based on a trial-and-error approach may
suffice to answer the analytical question at hand. In untargeted optimization,
the most-efficient route toward optimal conditions is less-clearly
defined. In the absence of a specific question, this type of optimization
encompasses maximizing or minimizing quality descriptors (e.g., peak
capacity and analysis time, respectively).

Quality descriptors
are objective parameters that quantify specific performance properties,
such as orthogonality, peak capacity, dilution factors, resolution,
etc. Readers seeking to learn more about these and other quality descriptors
are referred elsewhere.2 Often a known
(theoretical) relationship exists between a method parameter and a
quality descriptor. For example, increasing the particle diameter
of the packing material of either dimension (while keeping all other
parameters constant) results in a reduced pressure drop but also in
a decreased efficiency and peak capacity. Changing one parameter typically
also affects other parameters. In the case of passive modulation,
changing the 1D flow rate affects the required loop volume,
which in turn affects the suitable 2D column dimensions
and, consequently, the 2D flow rate. Sarrut et al. tried
to create a network diagram to visualize the relations between a large
number of parameters.7 They certainly succeeded
in illustrating the complexity of LC × LC method development.
The number of possible method parameters is much larger in 2D-LC than
in 1D-LC, where method development is already thought to be challenging.
This sheer complexity greatly encumbers the method development, increasing
the time, effort, and knowledge required to arrive at an acceptable
solution. When developing a method “manually”, using
a trial-and-error process as a solution is unlikely to be truly optimal.
Therefore, several groups work on computer-aided method-development
tools, which aim to significantly accelerate method development using
multiobjective algorithms.

Vivó-Truyols et al. proposed
the use of Pareto optimization
for sample-independent optimization of two-dimensional chromatographic
separations.8 In this approach, multiple
method parameters (e.g., gradient slope, column dimensions, flow rates)
are varied and, using theoretical relations, their impact on objective
parameters is assessed. The Pareto-optimization strategy involves
defining two or more of such objective parameters. A point is considered
Pareto optimal if no other point exists that has superior values for
all objective parameters. All other points are suboptimal. The collection
of Pareto-optimal points forms the Pareto-optimal front. Vivó-Truyols
and co-workers argued that this approach was eminently suited to deal
with the trade-offs between different objectives, such as peak capacity,
analysis time, and dilution factors.8 They
took the loss of peak capacity due to undersampling the 1D separation and due to large injection volumes in the 2D into account. The method yielded optimal values for a large number
of parameters including the 1D and 2D column
particle sizes and diameters and the modulation time. Sarrut et al.
applied a systematic optimization approach to a real RPLC × RPLC
separation of peptides.7 More recently,
Muller et al. reported a predictive kinetic optimization program to
derive the optimum column combinations and chromatographic conditions
for a HILIC × RPLC separation of procyanidins.79 The method was also applied in a different study where
a phenolic extract of red wine was separated using the Pareto-optimized
chromatographic method but now hyphenated with IMS-MS (Figure 9).80

Figure 9 HILIC
× RP-LC × IMS-MS TIC separation of a phenolic extract
of red wine. The chromatographic method was optimized using predictive
Pareto optimization.79 Reproduced from
Venter, P.; Muller, M.; Vestner, J.; Stander, M.A.; Tredoux, A.G.J.;
Pasch, H.; de Villiers, A. Anal. Chem.2018, 90, 11643–11650 (ref (80)). Copyright 2018 American
Chemical Society.

The optimization of physical
properties, as described above, is
pivotal for the design of efficient 2D-LC separation systems. Sample-independent
optimization procedures typically aim to maximize quality descriptors
that are largely independent of the sample, such as the peak capacity.
Resolution in chromatography is known to depend on three factors,
viz., selectivity, retention, and efficiency. In sample-independent
optimization, the focus is on efficiency, maximizing the plate counts
in the two dimensions and ultimately the overall peak capacity. As
we discussed in the introduction, the peak capacity must be very high
relative to the number of analytes in the mixture if the analytes
follow Poison statistics. However, very large gains are possible if
the retention and selectivity are optimized. If we understand the
properties of the sample, conditions can be selected such that all
components are eluted with optimal k values. In LC
this is often achieved by establishing suitable gradient parameters.
If the number of analytes is manageable or if (group-type) selectivity
is sought for a limited number of component classes, the selectivity
of the LC × LC separation may be optimized.

Such sample
dependent optimization is being pursued by Pirok and
co-workers.81 Their PIOTR program is based
on the realization that a linear relationship between a retention
parameter (such as k or log k) and
a composition parameter (such as the volume fraction of modifier in
RPLC) can be accurately described based on two (gradient-elution or
isocratic) measurements. Furthermore, Pirok et al. realized that a
single LC × LC experiment in principle provides retention data
in two dimensions for all analytes. They demonstrated the principle
for a separation of a complex mixtures of dyes with gradient-elution
IEC (where log k is expected to vary linearly with
the log of the counterion concentration) and gradient-elution ion-pair
LC. An approach like this, based on modeling the retention of large
numbers of analytes, in principle allows a great acceleration and
improvement of LC × LC method development. To achieve this, accurate
retention models are needed for all popular mechanisms. While a (log-)
linear model for RPLC usually suffices, models for, for example, HILIC
are still under study and not necessarily linear.82,83 The principle of a program like PIOTR is hardly affected, provided
that it allows establishing nonlinear retention models based on three
or four experiments. To obtain correct input data for retention modeling,
“peak matching” is a critical requirement.240 While it is not necessary to identify all peaks
in the input (LC × LC) chromatograms, it is vital to know which
peaks refer to the same analytes. Given the large numbers of analytes
typically encountered in the complex samples subjected to LC ×
LC, another requirement is a high degree of automation of the entire
optimization process.

Work has also been invested in studying
some of the quality descriptors
themselves. Leonhardt and co-workers investigated the performance
of different orthogonality metrics.84 They
noted that the convex hull and bin-counting methods do not provide
information on the peak distribution, whereas the asterisk method
does not work optimally when only a limited number of components are
used for method development. The authors therefore introduced a new
concept for peak distribution assessment across the separation space
of two-dimensional separation systems in combination with clustering
detection.

While, LC × LC separations typically deal less
with coelution
relative to 1D-LC, overlapping peaks often still occur in LC ×
LC data sets. Indeed, for quantification it is imperative to be able
to deconvolute overlapping peaks. One frequently applied tool is multivariate
curve-resolution alternating least-squares (MCR-ALS). Cook et al.
recently compared several MCR-ALS strategies.85

Automated optimization programs typically need to revert to
data
analysis strategies. One interesting example is the work of Navarro-Reig
et al., where the authors proposed an untargeted protocol that used
MCR-ALS on region-of-interest (ROI) compressed data to find relevant
information from the increasingly highly complex LC × LC-MS data
sets. The authors applied this protocol on HILIC × RPLC-MS/MS
data from separations of arsenic-exposed rice samples and found that
arsenic exposure had significant effects on the rice lipidome.

Applications
Table 3 provides
a comprehensive overview of recent applications of 2D-LC. We made
an effort to include every relevant paper from early 2016 until now.
Two-dimensional combinations of electrophoresis with liquid chromatography
are not included but have been reviewed recently.86 Applications where a solid-phase extraction cartridge was
used as “first-dimension separation” were considered
to fall in the category online sample preparation and were not considered
here. Yang and Pursch87 recently provided
an overview of a number of interesting applications of 2D-LC.

The applications in Table 3 are grouped in a number of categories. Some application fields
(chiral separation, biopharmaceuticals, and synthetic polymers) are
discussed in more detail in later sections of this review. For each
application a distinction is made between online (N) or offline (F)
2D-LC. Comprehensive two-dimensional separations are denoted with
“×”; all other modes (heart-cut LC-LC, mLC-LC,
multiple heart-cut and selective comprehensive, sLC × LC) are
grouped under “noncomprehensive” methods and are denoted
with “-”. Finally, the separation modes are classified
through the type of modulation used, being either passive (P), active
solvent modulation (A), evaporation-membrane modulation (E), stationary-phase
assisted modulation (S), vacuum-evaporation modulation (V), and manual
(M). The latter mode is typically associated with the offline mode.
The retention mechanisms used, and the detection method are listed
in the table for each application. In some cases, two applications
are described in one publication or vice versa.

The popularity
of different separation mechanisms is illustrated
in the pie charts shown as Figure 10. RPLC is popular as first dimension technique, but
it is used in less than 50% of all applications. Due to the pursuit
of orthogonal mechanisms, other mechanisms are of considerable interest
in 2D-LC and most of these are more suitable as 1D separations
than as 2D separations.2 In
a significant number of cases (some 35% of all online applications)
RPLC is used in both dimensions, with very different mobile phases
or different stationary phases. Other popular 1D techniques
include HILIC, ion-exchange methods (grouped under IEX) and SEC. IEX
and SEC using aqueous solvents are highly compatible with a 2D RPLC separation, thanks to inherent analyte focusing at the inlet
of the 2D column. HILIC is popular as 1D technique,
especially in comprehensive 2D-LC. When combining 1D HILIC
with 2D RPLC some form of active modulation is highly desirable.

Figure 10 (A)
Overview of applied retention mechanisms in the first (left)
and second (right) dimensions. (B) Use of modulation strategies in
noncomprehensive (left) and comprehensive (right) applications (see Modulation section for a technical clarification).
(C) Overview of applied detection techniques. Note that one application
may use more than one detection technique so that a pie chart is less
appropriate in this case. Total number of applications: 161 (online
noncomprehensive, 58; online comprehensive, 76; offline, 27. CAD =
charged-aerosol detection, ELSD = evaporative light-scattering detection,
FLD = fluorescence detection, LS = light scattering, MS = mass spectrometry,
RID = refractive-index detection, VI = viscometry. Data covers all
online applications from Table 3.

RPLC is the dominant technique
used in the second dimension. This
is easily explained by the advantageous behavior of RPLC systems under
gradient conditions. Column equilibration is much faster than in other
modes of LC and gradients from high to low percentages of water allow
analytes with a very broad range of polarities to be eluted under
optimal conditions. One the other hand, NPLC, HIC, IEX, and HILIC
are almost exclusively used as 1D techniques, because of
slow equilibration and more-limited applicability. Other popular 2D techniques include SEC, which is an isocratic method, allowing
simpler instrumentation and a wider selection of detectors to be used.
Ion-pair (RP)LC is used as 2D separation in a substantial
number of cases, probably because of the greatly different selectivity
it offers for ionic analytes in comparison with RPLC. Chiral separations
are used as 1D and, especially, 2D separations,
mainly in heart-cut 2D-LC.

Figure 10B summarizes
the use of different types of modulation systems. Passive modulation
is still dominant, which may at least in part be explained by the
recent emergence of some active-modulation strategies. Stationary-phase
assisted modulation (SPAM) is by far the most popular active-modulation
technique. Vacuum evaporation modulation has been used in some noncomprehensive
applications. It may at present still be too slow to be used in LC
× LC applications, while analyte recovery may also be an issue.
Membrane evaporation modulation has been used in one LC × LC
application. Active solvent modulation may be used more often in forthcoming
years.

The dominant detection techniques in 2D-LC applications
are UV
spectrometry and, especially, mass spectrometry (Figure 10C). Various types of MS analyzers
(quadrupole, time-of-flight, Orbitrap, and ion-trap) and hybrid systems
(such as Q-TOF) are all frequently used.

In the following sections,
we will discuss a number of application
fields from Table 3 in more detail. Readers interested in other application areas are
referred to the recent reviews on herbal medicines,88,89 food,90,91 and pharmaceuticals.92

Chiral Separations
The use of 2D-LC for pharmaceutical
applications was reviewed recently by Iguiniz and co-workers,223 including the development of 2D-LC separations
involving chiral separations in one or both dimensions. Here, we are
focusing our discussion on developments in this area to the most recent
years. Recent developments have been focused on two primary areas
of research, separations of chiral amino acids, and separations of
pharmaceutical materials having at least some components of the sample
that are chiral.

Although the use of 2D-LC for separations of
amino acids actually has a considerable history,224 the recent developments in this area are particularly exciting,
because they reflect and leverage recent developments in 2D-LC technology
to produce some impressive separations. Chen and Liao have demonstrated
the utility of LC-LC separations, with chiral columns in one or both
dimensions, for bottom-up sequencing of short peptides that yields
not only the sequence but also knowledge of the enantiomeric composition
of each amino acid in the peptide.192 In
a different study, Wang and co-workers used offline LC × LC separations
to characterize the enantiomeric composition of free amino acids in
tea.119 Amino acids were derivatized with
9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl (FMOC) chloride prior to 2D-LC using the
RP mode in the first dimension followed by the chiral mode in the
second dimension. Woiwode et al. describe what they refer to as “two-dimensional
correlation liquid chromatography” for characterizing the chirality
of peptides and proteins by chiral × chiral separations of their
constituent amino acids.118 In this work
they deployed stationary phases for the 1D and 2D separations that were very similar except for the configuration
of the chiral selector bonded to the stationary phase. In this way
they refer to “R columns and S columns”. This is quite
clever in that this particular configuration makes interpretation
of the resulting 2D chromatograms quite straightforward. Molecules
that are achiral all elute along a diagonal line in the 2D plot because
the selectivities of the R and S columns are nominally identical for
these molecules. On the other hand, all d-amino acids elute
one side of this diagonal line, while the l-amino acids elute
on the other side of the line. According to the authors, this clear
separation of the enantiomers makes it possible to quantify the enantiomeric
composition of each amino acid present in the peptide or protein that
it came from. Finally, in a different paper from the same group, the
authors demonstrate the ability to resolve and quantify both the d- and l-forms of all 20 proteinogenic amino acids
(plus five others) using a fully automated,144 online 2D-LC separation operated in multiple heartcutting and selective
comprehensive modes. In this case, the amino acids were derivatized
prior to analysis using 2,4-dinitrobenzene, and the 1D
and 2D columns were RP and chiral, respectively. Figure 11 is a representative
chromatogram from this work that shows where each cut is made over
the course of the 2D separation, and the corresponding 2D separations of the d- and l-amino acids.

Figure 11 Online 2D-LC
separation of 2,4-dinitrobenzene (DNP) derivatives
of all 20 proteinogenic amino acids (plus allo-threonine, allo-isoleucine,
homoserine, ornithing, and β-alanine). The d-enantiomer
always elutes after l-, except for glutamine and ornithine.
The 1D separation is carried out in the RP mode and the 2D separation in the chiral mode. Figure based on ref (144) and kindly provided by
M. Lämmerhofer.

In the pharmaceutical domain, Barhate and co-workers have
demonstrated
a variety of 2D separations of chiral small pharmaceutical molecules
that leverage very fast 2D chiral separations (e.g., 30–60
s per 2D cycle).203 These fast 2D chiral separations enable a number of possibilities for online
2D separations, including the use of chiral separations in one or
both dimensions, and different 2D separation modes, ranging from simple
single heart-cut all the way up to fully comprehensive separations.
Furthermore, the fast 2D separations render the overall
analysis time for these 2D separations much shorter than what has
been possible historically.

The last three papers we will discuss
here involve 2D separations
with achiral RP-LC separations in the first dimension, followed by
chiral SFC separations in the second dimension. Although the feasibility
of LC-SFC separation was demonstrated in 1992 by Cortes co-workers,225 there has been little development in this area
until recently. Venkatramani and co-workers made a significant step
forward through the development of a simpler interface for the two
separations that involves the use of trapping devices between the
two dimensions to address the solvent incompatibility inherent to
this coupling of separation modes.226 Using
a multiple heart-cutting approach, they demonstrated a fast (18 min)
and efficient separation of a mixture of eight stereoisomers of a
single drug substance. Whereas most work involving trapping columns
in the interface has used just two traps, in this work they also demonstrated
the use of an array of five traps for more flexibility in the multiple
heart-cutting mode.

In a follow-up study,45 the same group
discussed the results of experiments aimed at systematically studying
the variables that affect detection sensitivity in LC-SFC systems.
Parameters studied included column diameters in both dimensions (2.1,
3.0, and 4.6 mm i.d.), volume of 1D RP effluent transferred
to the 2D SFC separation, chemistry of the trapping stationary
phase, dimensions of connecting tubing in the system, and detection
techniques. By choosing optimal values of these variables, they established
a detection limit of 10 ng/mL for the drug metabolites studied and
applied the resulting system to the study of in vivo interconversion of a chiral drug.

Finally, Iguiniz and co-workers227 have
described the development of 2D separations involving 1D achiral RP-LC separation and 2D chiral SFC separation
that is significantly different from the work of Venkatramani et al.
First, these separations were carried out in the selective comprehensive
mode (sLC × SFC), which makes the simultaneous optimization of
method variables more challenging. Second, they explored conditions
that do not involve trapping columns in the interface. Although relatively
small transfer volumes of 10 μL were used along with large 2D columns, the authors report a detection limit of 0.5% of
a minor enantiomer of a drug substance relative to the major enantiomer.
These are interesting developments that should promote more studies
comparing the advantages and disadvantages of 2D separations coupling
LC to either LC or SFC for achiral–chiral analyses.

Separations
of Biopharmaceuticals
Biopharmaceuticals
include therapeutic peptides, oligonucleotides, monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs), antibody drug conjugates (ADCs), and other therapeutic proteins.
Protein biopharmaceuticals present significant challenges to analytical
techniques because of their large size and the presence of many variants
that result from small changes in structure (isomers, glycosylation,
etc.). Increasingly, analysts are turning to 2D separation methods,
often coupled with MS detection, to help characterize these complex
materials. Work in this area has been reviewed many times in recent
years. In some cases the focus of the review is on biopharmaceuticals,
and 2D-LC is discussed among an array of other techniques.228,229 In other reviews, the articles are organized around different 2D-LC
techniques with a focus on application to biopharmaceutical problems.61,230−232 Since these reviews are pretty recent and
thorough, we will not reiterate a detailed discussion of recent work
in this area here. Rather, we provide an overview of recent trends
in this area, with an emphasis on the most recent publications.

Over the past few years most work in this area has been focused on
mAbs and ADCs. Arguably, the single most compelling demonstration
of the value of 2D-LC separations for the analysis of mAbs was published
recently by Sandra and co-workers.233 In
this work they demonstrated multiple modes of 2D separation, ranging
from single heart-cut to fully comprehensive separations. They showed
examples of separations involving multiple combinations of different
separation modes including Protein-A affinity chromatography (ProA)
combined with SEC, IEX, or RP separation and RP combined with RP for
LC × LC separations of peptide mixtures (in this case very different
pH buffers are used in the two dimensions). Other groups have been
exploring the potential of these new applications as well. Williams
and co-workers discussed the development of an online ProA-SEC system
for automated determination of mAb titer and degree of aggregation
in a single 2D-LC analysis.103 Gstöttner
and co-workers have described the development of a complex but powerful
mLC-LC approach for characterization of mAb charge variants.106 In this work fractions from a 1D
cation-exchange (CEX) separation were first reduced online with dithiothreitol
(DTT) and then digested online with trypsin prior to separation and
identification of the resulting peptides in a 2D RP-LC-MS
analysis. The entire workflow is automated, which eliminates many
of the manual sample manipulations associated with the characterization
of mAb charge variants. In a very different study, Yan and co-workers
used ion-exchange coupled with SEC separations in a mLC-LC system
to study the degradants produced in a forced degradation of a mAb.104 Whereas all prior 2D-LC separations of mAbs
at the intact or subunit level have been noncomprehensive, Stoll and
co-workers demonstrated both WCX × RP-MS105 and HILIC × RP-MS15 separations
of mAbs after partial digestion with the IdeS enzyme.
The HILIC × RP separation is particularly interesting for heavily
glycosylated mAbs, because of the exquisite selectivity of the HILIC
separation mode for separating forms of the proteins with subtly different
glycans.

In recent years, the most active area of development
for 2D-LC
separations of biopharmaceuticals has involved ADCs, perhaps because
an additional level of complexity is added to the already complex
mAbs when small-molecule cytotoxic drugs are conjugated to the protein.
This conjugation step gives rise to a number of important questions
that must be answered in the course of developing an ADC as a therapeutic
agent. These include questions about how much free small-molecule
drug is present in the drug formulation and the extent and localization
of the small molecule conjugation to cysteine or lysine residues in
the protein. To quantify the level of unconjugated (free) drug present
in the protein sample, several groups have used LC-LC or mLC-LC separations.93,95,101 In the first dimension, free
drug molecules are separated from protein by SEC. The fraction containing
the free drug is transferred to a 2D RP separation for
desalting, further separation, and eventual detection by UV or MS.
In the work of Goyon and co-workers, the authors report excellent
quantitative accuracy, precision, and recovery for the SEC-RP method,
consistent with our expectations of conventional 1D-LC around these
performance metrics.95 Since the conjugation
of the small-molecule drug to the protein involves a “linker”
molecule, this is an additional potential source of impurities and
variation in the drug product. Venkatramani and co-workers have demonstrated
the use of sLC × LC with RP separations in both dimensions to
efficiently study the effect of process conditions on the impurity
profile of these linker-drug intermediate molecules.94

Understanding the extent and localization of conjugated
small-molecule
drugs on an ADC is a challenging task. Although hydrophobic-interaction
chromatography (HIC) is a powerful tool for separating ADCs according
to the number of small molecule drugs that are attached (i.e., drug-to-antibody
ratio, DAR), these separations typically require very high eluent
concentrations of nonvolatile salts (often exceeding 1 M) and thus
are not directly compatible with MS detection.234 Adding a second dimension of separation by RPLC both substantially
increases the resolving power of the HIC method and provides an easy
and effective desalting step to enable direct MS detection. Sarrut
and co-workers have demonstrated the utility of such a HIC-RP-MS system
for online, automated, and thorough mapping of the extent and localization
of small-molecule drug conjugation in cysteine-linked ADCs.99,235 Ehkirch and co-workers100 have coupled
HIC and SEC separations with the SEC separation carried out under
nondenaturing conditions to enable determine DAR and molecular mass
of ADCs in their native state. In this work they further coupled the
HIC × SEC separation to IM-MS detection, thus enabling confirmation
of conformational homogeneity of each detected protein. Gilroy and
Eakin studied a family of related heart-cutting approaches to assemble
a detailed picture of conjugation in a cysteine-linked ADC.96 This included HIC-SEC-MS, where the SEC conditions
were nondenaturing, thus allowing the determination of the intact
mass of each species observed in the HIC separation. They also used
HIC-RP-MS separations under nonreducing or reducing conditions. In
case of reducing conditions, an online reduction step (using DTT)
was implemented after the HIC separation but before injection into
the 2D RP column. Whereas most conjugation-mapping work
has been demonstrated using cysteine-linked ADCs, Sandra and co-workers
have used mLC-LC and LC × LC separations to study the conjugation
of the lysine-linked ADC ado-trastuzumab emtansine.97 This is an even more challenging problem, because there
are many more potential lysine conjugation sites in a typical mAb
than there are cysteine conjugation sites. CEX and RP separations
were used in the first and second dimensions of the mLC-LC system,
respectively, to study intact and partially digested forms of the
molecule, again with MS detection. Also, RP × RP-MS was used
to localize sites of conjugation, following digestion of the molecule
with trypsin.

To date there have not been many published reports
on 2D-LC applied
to the characterization of therapeutic peptides or oligonucleotides,
although we expect this to change going forward. Petersson et al.
have demonstrated how mLC-LC can be used to rapidly identify unknown
impurities observed in 1D-RPLC separations of peptides that rely on
high eluent-salt concentrations to obtain good peak shapes.102 Adding a second dimension of RP separation
with a MS-friendly eluent not only enables direct MS detection, but
also provides additional selectivity that is useful in cases of coelution
in the 1D separation that would otherwise complicate interpretation
of MS spectra. Finally, Roussis et al. have demonstrated the use of
mLC-LC and LC × LC separations involving different combinations
of AEX, RP, and IP-RP separation modes to identify impurities present
in synthetic oligonucleotides as well as degradants observed in stability
studies.47 This work provides a compelling
example of the ability of 2D-LC to achieve separations “...not
currently possible by mass spectrometry alone or 1D-LC”.

Separations of Synthetic Polymers
LC × LC is particularly
relevant for the characterization of polymers for several reasons.
The dimensionality of the sample236 is
relatively low. In case of homopolymers there may just be one parameter,
molecular weight, that describes the nature of each molecule. In case
the same homopolymer molecules have variable end groups, two parameters
suffice and the dimensionality of the sample is two. Two-dimensional
samples, or samples with two dominant dimensions, may yield structured
and readily interpretable chromatograms in LC × LC. The dimensions
of the sample may reflect key properties. For example, if a polymer
is to be used to form a network in a reacting formulation, both the
functional (reactive) groups and the molecular weight (length of the
cross-link) reflect essential properties of the polymer. A second
reason why LC × LC is attractive for characterizing polymers
is that LC-MS is usually not a good alternative. In most cases online
LC-(ESI-)MS is not a viable alternative. Only for relatively small
and relatively polar polymers can MS be used successfully, at least
for qualitative analysis. Quantitative LC-MS is always difficult,
because the response depends on the exact structure (e.g., end groups)
and on the molecular weight of the molecules. For the above reasons,
the characterization of polymers was one of the first domains in which
LC × LC started to be regularly applied and as a result a number
of applications are relatively mature and routinely performed in industry.
Routine applications of LC × LC for polymer characterization
often involve RPLC × SEC or NPLC × SEC separations, and
these are barely published anymore.237,238 Recent publications
often focus on unique (combinations of) selectivities to solve difficult
problems in polymer science and industry.

Groeneveld et al.
describe the separation of complex polyether polyols (polymers of
ethylene oxide, EO, and propylene oxide, PO) by HILIC × RPLC.9 One of their chromatograms is shown in Figure 12. This is a good
example of highly structured 2D chromatograms of samples that are
complex but have a low sample dimensionality. The relatively small
and relatively polar polymers allowed the use of online high-resolution
MS to characterize samples in great detail. Vanhoenacker et al. demonstrated
HILIC × RPLC-separations of nonionic surfactant used in pharmaceutical
formulations, using mass-spectrometric detection.221 Malik et al. achieved impressive separations of triblock
copolymers of EO and PO using an isocratic first-dimension with an
acetonitrile/water mixture on a silica column,214 corresponding to the critical conditions (no retention)
for the PO block and a RPLC separation with a methanol/water mixture
that corresponded to critical conditions for the EO block.

Figure 12 HILIC ×
RPLC-(+)HRMS separation of the castor oil ethoxylates.
The 1D HILIC dimension (horizontal) indicates the degree
of ethoxylation, while the 2D RPLC column (vertical) separates
the ethoxylated species according to hydrophobicity. Various ethoxylated
fatty acids as well as glycerol ethoxylated mono-, di-, tri-, tetra-,
and penta-esters were identified using the obtained accurate mass
and isotope distributions. Reprinted from J. Chromatogr. A, 1569, Groeneveld, G.; Dunkle, M.N.; Rinken, M.;
Gargano, A.F.G.; de Niet, A.; Pursch, M.; Mes, E.P.C.; Schoenmakers,
P.J., Characterization of complex polyether polyols using comprehensive
two-dimensional liquid chromatography hyphenated to high-resolution
mass spectrometry, pp. 128–138 (ref (9)). Copyright (2018), with permission from Elsevier.

Lee et al. described the separation
of a series of polystyrene-polybutadiene
block copolymers with temperature-gradient interaction chromatography
(TGIC) in the first dimension.209 Normal-phase
TGIC was combined with either SEC or NPLC at the critical conditions
in the second dimension. Likewise, RP-TGIC was combined with either
SEC or RPLC at the critical conditions.

One example of newly
charted territory are high-temperature LC
× LC separations. High temperatures are typically required to
resolve poly olefins (including ubiquitous polymers, such as poly
ethene, PE, and polypropene, PP). Ndiripo and Pasch used high-temperature
LC × SEC to characterize oxidized waxes at 140 °C.207 A porous-graphitic-carbon column and a gradient
from n-decane to o-dichlorobenzene
were used in the first dimension. The latter solvent was also used
for the second-dimension SEC separation. In a separate study, interaction
LC on a silica column with a gradient from n-decane
to c-hexanone was used in the first dimension,208 either with a composition gradient at a constant
temperature (110 °C) or in TGIC mode, increasing the temperature
at a constant mobile-phase composition.

Apel et al. performed
RPLC in the first dimension with a very shallow
gradient close to the critical conditions,210 followed by SEC in the second dimension to characterize branched
poly (bisphenol A carbonate) structures. They combined this RPLC ×
SEC method with a triple-detector system (concentration detector,
light scattering, and viscometry) and they tried to correlate the
results with the outcome of Monte Carlo simulations.211 Yang et al. used SEC × RPLC to determine the number
of hydrophobic end groups in modified ethylene-oxide-urethane polymers.212 They used an ultrahigh-performance column packed
with sub-2-μm particles and a mobile phase containing 100 mM
ammonium acetate in methanol in the first dimension and a gradient
RPLC method in the second dimension. The authors developed a multistep
second-dimension water–acetonitrile gradient to avoid breakthrough.
The same group used a similar system for the separation of polymeric
dispersants in detergents.222 A very wide
(8 mm i.d.) 1D SEC column was used with an aqueous mobile
phase and up to 60% of the effluent was diverted to waste.

Lee
et al. exploited the unique selectivity of LC × LC to
separate polystyrenes with interesting configurations (“figure-eight-shaped”
and “cage-shaped” cyclic molecules) from branched polystyrenes
using NPLC × SEC with a bare silica column (NPLC) and a n-hexane/THF gradient in the first dimension and SEC with
THF as eluent in the second dimension.213 Separation is based on the fact that molecules with different conformations
but the same molecular weight have a different size in solution (hydrodynamic
radius) and thus different elution times in SEC, whereas the extent
of interaction with the silica column is not strictly related to the
hydrodynamic radius.

Pursch et al. used the full capabilities
of contemporary LC ×
LC instrumentation, including the use of ultrahigh pressures to realize
SEC × RPLC separations of Novolac-type polymers within 20 min.36 Active solvent modulation was used to successfully
avoid breakthrough in the second dimension.

A unique application
of LC × LC for the analysis of polymeric
nanoparticles was described by Pirok et al.43 They first separated the nanoparticles by packed column hydrodynamic
chromatography (HDC) using an aqueous mobile phase. At the modulation
stage, the particles were dissolved in THF to yield a solution of
the constituting polymer molecules. After concentrating these on a
trap column, the molecular-weight distribution was determined by organic
SEC in THF.

Summary and Outlook
The popularity
of two-dimensional liquid chromatography (2D-LC)
is on the rise, due to a range of successful applications. When two
very different selectivities (retention mechanisms) are selected,
heart-cut LC-LC allows target peaks to be rigorously purified and
the purity of target analytes to be assessed. This is, for example,
of significant interest in the emerging field of biopharmaceuticals.
LC-LC also provides additional certainty of peak identification, which
is relevant, for example, in forensics. Comprehensive two-dimensional
liquid chromatography (LC × LC) is of general interest for analyzing
complex samples that contain nonvolatile analytes or matrix compounds.
Resolution for such samples can be much improved, thanks to the much
higher peak capacities in comparison with conventional 1D-LC and thanks
to the additional selectivity. As a result, LC × LC is potentially
a much better “sample-preparation” method prior to analysis
by MS or MS/MS. LC × LC-MS may thus be advantageous for the analysis
of, for example, complex mixtures of peptides. When the two separation
dimensions are selected judiciously, LC × LC may provide reliable
fingerprints that allow rapid (often visual) and efficient comparison
of samples, for example, in the field of natural medicines. For complex
samples with a low dimensionality, such as synthetic polymers, LC
× LC may provide highly structured, readily interpretable two-dimensional
chromatograms.

The applications discussed in this review provide
plenty of motivation
to accelerate the development of LC-LC and LC × LC techniques.
Research may be focused on a number of aspects. First and foremost,
2D-LC will thrive if the techniques (instruments, columns, modulators)
are robust and reliable. Arguably, 2D-LC is a complex technique. This
creates high demands on user interfaces for applications and, especially,
for method development. Third-party method development (by instrument
manufacturers or research groups) may accelerate the proliferation
of 2D-LC techniques, provided that methods can be transferred reliably
and efficiently. Technical issues that must be addressed include generic
approaches to overcome compatibility issues that arise from the selection
of two very different (“orthogonal”) retention mechanisms.
If the first-dimension effluent is not suitable as second-dimension
injection solvent active-modulation techniques must be applied. These
may have additional advantages. If the analyte bands are effectively
focused by the modulator detection sensitivity may be enhanced, and
the second-dimension separation may be performed more efficiently
and on narrower columns, reducing the amounts of solvent required.
Generally, 2D-LC can benefit from any progress in LC. In this century
better columns (sub-2-μm particles, core–shell particles)
and ultrahigh-performance instruments have emerged. Two developments
are especially relevant for 2D-LC. Very fast analysis are desirable,
especially in the second dimension of LC × LC methods. All 2D-LC
methods can be improved by minimizing extra-column dispersion.

In the short period covered by this review (2016–2018) we
have seen great activity in the development and application of 2D-LC
techniques. Both heart-cut (LC-LC) and comprehensive (LC × LC)
techniques appear to have a bright future.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Bob W. J. Pirok worked at Shell after
obtaining his M.Sc. degree in 2014. He now is a Ph.D. student in the
MANIAC (Making ANalytically Incompatible Approaches Compatible) project
at the University of Amsterdam since 2015. He developed the (LC ×
)LC optimization tool Program for Interpretive Optimization (PIOTR)
and has published on fast size-exclusion chromatography using core–shell
particles, comprehensive integrated analysis of nanoparticles and
the constituting macromolecules by HDC × SEC, and the application
and optimization of LC × LC separations. Bob W. J. Pirok was
decorated with a Shimadzu Young-Scientist Award at HPLC2015 Beijing,
the Young-Scientist-Award Lecture during the SCM-8 meeting in Amsterdam
in 2017, and the Csaba Horváth Young-Scientist Award at HPLC2017
Prague.

Dwight R. Stoll is Professor and
Co-Chair of Chemistry at Gustavus Adolphus College in St. Peter, MN.
He has authored or coauthored 57 peer-reviewed publications, four
book chapters in separation science, and over 100 conference presentations.
His primary research focus is on the development of two-dimensional
liquid chromatography (2D-LC) for both targeted and untargeted analyses.
Within this area he has made contributions on many aspects of the
technique including stationary phase characterization, biopharmaceutical
analysis, new 2D-LC methodologies and instrumentation, and fundamental
aspects including re-equilibration in gradient elution reversed-phase
liquid chromatography and analyte focusing. He is the 2011 recipient
of LCGC’s Emerging Leader in Chromatography Award, the 2015
recipient of the American Chemical Society Division of Analytical
Chemistry Award for Young Investigators in Separation Science, and
was named to The Analytical Scientist’s list of Top Ten Separation
Scientists in 2017.

Peter
J. Schoenmakers is Professor
of Analytical Chemistry at the University of Amsterdam. He investigates
analytical separations, focussing on multidimensional liquid chromatography.
He studied in Delft, The Netherlands (with Professor Leo de Galan)
and in Boston, MA (with Professor Barry Karger). Thereafter, he worked
for Philips in Eindhoven (The Netherlands) and for Shell in Amsterdam
and in Houston, TX. He was awarded the AJP Martin Medal in 2011, the
John Knox Medal in 2014, and the Csaba Horváth Award and the
CASSS Award in 2015. In 2016 he obtained an Advanced Grant for Excellent
Research from the European Research Council.

Acknowledgments
Bob W. J. Pirok acknowledges the MANIAC project,
which is funded by The Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research
(NWO) in the framework of the Programmatic Technology Area PTA-COAST3
of the Fund New Chemical Innovations (Project 053.21.113). Dwight
R. Stoll acknowledges financial support from the National Science
Foundation (Grant CHE-1508159). Prof. Dr. Michael Lämmerhofer
(University of Tübingen, Germany) is kindly acknowledged for
providing Figure 11.
==== Refs
References
Davis J. M. ; Giddings J. C. 
Anal. Chem. 
1983 , 55 3 418 –424 10.1021/ac00254a003 .
Pirok B. W. J. ; Gargano A. F. G. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2018 , 41 1 68 –98 10.1002/jssc.201700863 .29027363 
Davis J. M. ; Stoll D. R. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2014 , 1360 , 128 –142 10.1016/j.chroma.2014.07.066 .25108764 
Gargano A. F. G. ; Duffin M. ; Navarro P. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 1785 –1793 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04051 .26709410 
Pirok B. W. J. ; Knip J. ; van Bommel M. R. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2016 , 1436 , 141 –146 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.01.070 .26868445 
Sommella E. ; Ismail O. H. ; Pagano F. ; Pepe G. ; Ostacolo C. ; Mazzoccanti G. ; Russo M. ; Novellino E. ; Gasparrini F. ; Campiglia P. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2017 , 40 10 2188 –2197 10.1002/jssc.201700134 .28349602 
Sarrut M. ; D’Attoma A. ; Heinisch S. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2015 , 1421 , 48 –59 10.1016/j.chroma.2015.08.052 .26362808 
Vivó-Truyols G. ; van der Wal S. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 20 8525 –8536 10.1021/ac101420f .20863086 
Groeneveld G. ; Dunkle M. N. ; Rinken M. ; Gargano A. F. G. ; de
Niet A. ; Pursch M. ; Mes E. P. C. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2018 , 1569 , 128 –138 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.07.054 .30056974 
Mondello L. ; Tranchida P. Q. ; Stanek V. ; Jandera P. ; Dugo G. ; Dugo P. 
J.
Chromatogr. A 
2005 , 1086 1–2 91 –98 10.1016/j.chroma.2005.06.017 .16130659 
Elsner V. ; Laun S. ; Melchior D. ; Köhler M. ; Schmitz O. J. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2012 , 1268 , 22 –28 10.1016/j.chroma.2012.09.072 .23116798 
Ochoa C. M. ; Shoenmakers P. ; Mallet C. R. ; Lurie I. S. 
Anal. Methods 
2018 , 10 26 3178 –3187 10.1039/C8AY00565F .
Baglai A. ; Gargano A. F. G. ; Jordens J. ; Mengerink Y. ; Honing M. ; van der Wal S. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2017 , 1530 , 90 –103 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.11.014 .29146423 
Sarrut M. ; Rouvière F. ; Heinisch S. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1498 , 183 –195 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.01.054 .28132733 
Stoll D. R. ; Harmes D. C. ; Staples G. O. ; Potter O. G. ; Dammann C. T. ; Guillarme D. ; Beck A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2018 , 90 9 5923 –5929 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b00776 .29614857 
Sheng N. ; Zheng H. ; Xiao Y. ; Wang Z. ; Li M. ; Zhang J. 
J.
Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1517 , 97 –107 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.08.037 .28847584 
Pirok B. W. J. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
LC-GC Eur. 
2018 , 31 5 242 –249 .
Venkatramani C. J. ; Al-Sayah M. ; Li G. ; Goel M. ; Girotti J. ; Zang L. ; Wigman L. ; Yehl P. ; Chetwyn N. 
Talanta 
2016 , 148 , 548 –555 10.1016/j.talanta.2015.10.054 .26653484 
Stoll D. R. ; Venkatramani C. J. ; Rutan S. C. 
LC-GC N. Am. 
2018 , 36 6 356 –361 .
Simpkins S. W. ; Bedard J. W. ; Groskreutz S. R. ; Swenson M. M. ; Liskutin T. E. ; Stoll D. R. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2010 , 1217 49 7648 –7660 10.1016/j.chroma.2010.09.023 .21047638 
Wouters B. ; Davydova E. ; Wouters S. ; Vivo-Truyols G. ; Schoenmakers P. J. ; Eeltink S. 
Lab Chip 
2015 , 15 23 4415 –4422 10.1039/C5LC01169H .26495444 
Giddings J. C. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
1995 , 703 1–2 3 –15 10.1016/0021-9673(95)00249-M .7599743 
Stoll D. R. ; Carr P. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 1 519 –531 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03506 .27935671 
Stoll D. R.   In Handbook of Advanced
Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry Techniques ; Elsevier , 2017 ; pp 227 –286 .
Marriott P. J. ; Wu Z.-Y. ; Schoenmakers P. 
LC-GC Eur. 
2012 , 25 5 266 –275 .
François I. ; Sandra K. ; Sandra P. ; Dugo P. ; Mondello L. ; Cacciola F. ; Donato P.  Comprehensive Chromatography
in Combination with Mass Spectrometry ; Mondello L.  , Ed.; John Wiley
& Sons, Inc. : Hoboken, NJ , 2011 .
Dugo P. ; Cacciola F. ; Kumm T. ; Dugo G. ; Mondello L. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2008 , 1184 1–2 353 –368 10.1016/j.chroma.2007.06.074 .17655853 
Mayfield K. J. ; Shalliker R. A. ; Catchpoole H. J. ; Sweeney A. P. ; Wong V. ; Guiochon G. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2005 , 1080 2 124 –131 10.1016/j.chroma.2005.04.093 .16008050 
Samuelsson J. ; Shalliker R. A. ; Fornstedt T. 
Microchem. J. 
2017 , 130 , 102 –107 10.1016/j.microc.2016.08.007 .
Shalliker R. A. ; Guiochon G. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2009 , 1216 5 787 –793 10.1016/j.chroma.2008.11.067 .19095236 
Stoll D. R. ; Sajulga R. W. ; Voigt B. N. ; Larson E. J. ; Jeong L. N. ; Rutan S. C. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1523 , 162 –172 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.07.041 .28747254 
Jiang X. ; Van Der Horst A. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2002 , 982 1 55 –68 10.1016/S0021-9673(02)01483-8 .12489856 
Reingruber E. ; Jansen J. J. ; Buchberger W. ; Schoenmakers P. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2011 , 1218 8 1147 –1152 10.1016/j.chroma.2010.12.080 .21227427 
Talus E. S. ; Witt K. E. ; Stoll D. R. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2015 , 1378 , 50 –57 10.1016/j.chroma.2014.12.019 .25553909 
Stoll D. R. ; Shoykhet K. ; Petersson P. ; Buckenmaier S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 17 9260 –9267 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b02046 .28724287 
Pursch M. ; Wegener A. ; Buckenmaier S. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1562 , 78 –86 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.05.059 .29861307 
Bäurer S. ; Guo W. ; Polnick S. ; Lämmerhofer M. 
Chromatographia 
2018 , 10.1007/s10337-018-3615-0 .
Jeong L. N. ; Sajulga R. ; Forte S. G. ; Stoll D. R. ; Rutan S. C. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2016 , 1457 , 41 –49 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.06.016 .27345210 
Vonk R. J. ; Gargano A. F. G. ; Davydova E. ; Dekker H. L. ; Eeltink S. ; de Koning L. J. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 10 5387 –5394 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b00708 .25894977 
Toro-Uribe S. ; Montero L. ; López-Giraldo L. ; Ibáñez E. ; Herrero M. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2018 , 1036 , 204 –213 10.1016/j.aca.2018.06.068 .30253833 
Baglai A. ; Blokland M. H. ; Mol H. G. J. ; Gargano A. F. G. ; van
der Wal S. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2018 , 1013 , 87 –97 10.1016/j.aca.2017.12.043 .29501096 
Jakobsen S. S. ; Christensen J. H. ; Verdier S. ; Mallet C. R. ; Nielsen N. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 17 8723 –8730 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b00758 .28758730 
Pirok B. W. J. ; Abdulhussain N. ; Aalbers T. ; Wouters B. ; Peters R. A. H. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 17 9167 –9174 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b01906 .28745485 
Gargano A. F. G. ; Shaw J. B. ; Zhou M. ; Wilkins C. S. ; Fillmore T. L. ; Moore R. J. ; Somsen G. W. ; Paša-Tolić L. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2018 , 17 , 3791 –3800 10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00458 .30226781 
Goel M. ; Larson E. ; Venkatramani C. J. ; Al-Sayah M. A. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal.
Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 
2018 , 1084 , 89 –95 10.1016/j.jchromb.2018.03.029 .
Chen M. ; Wang L. ; Dong H. ; Shao X. ; Wu D. ; Liu B. ; Zhang X. ; Chen C. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2017 , 40 9 1920 –1927 10.1002/jssc.201601367 .28266176 
Roussis S. G. ; Cedillo I. ; Rentel C. 
Anal. Biochem. 
2018 , 556 , 45 –52 10.1016/j.ab.2018.06.019 .29936097 
Callister S. J. ; Fillmore T. L. ; Nicora C. D. ; Shaw J. B. ; Purvine S. O. ; Orton D. J. ; White R. A. ; Moore R. J. ; Burnet M. C. ; Nakayasu E. S. ; Payne S. H. ; Jansson J. K. ; Paša-Tolić L. 
Soil Biol. Biochem. 
2018 , 125 , 290 –299 10.1016/j.soilbio.2018.07.018 .
Ianovska M. A. ; Mulder P. P. M. F. A. ; Verpoorte E. 
RSC Adv. 
2017 , 7 15 9090 –9099 10.1039/C6RA28626G .
Fornells E. ; Barnett B. ; Bailey M. ; Hilder E. F. ; Shellie R. A. ; Breadmore M. C. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2018 , 1000 , 303 –309 10.1016/j.aca.2017.11.053 .29289323 
Creese M. E. ; Creese M. J. ; Foley J. P. ; Cortes H. J. ; Hilder E. F. ; Shellie R. A. ; Breadmore M. C. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 2 1123 –1130 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03279 .28194983 
Ji B. ; Xia B. ; Liu J. ; Gao Y. ; Ding L. ; Zhou Y. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1466 , 199 –204 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.09.014 .27629479 
Tian H. ; Xu J. ; Xu Y. ; Guan Y. 
J.
Chromatogr. A 
2006 , 1137 1 42 –48 10.1016/j.chroma.2006.10.005 .17084846 
Tian H. ; Xu J. ; Guan Y. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2008 , 31 10 1677 –1685 10.1002/jssc.200700559 .18481322 
Shen S. ; Yang L. ; Li L. ; Bai Y. ; Cai C. ; Liu H. 
J.
Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 
2017 , 1068–1069 , 41 –48 10.1016/j.jchromb.2017.10.004 .
Weng R. ; Shen S. ; Burton C. ; Yang L. ; Nie H. ; Tian Y. ; Bai Y. ; Liu H. 
Anal.
Bioanal. Chem. 
2016 , 408 11 2963 –2973 10.1007/s00216-015-9256-3 .26780709 
Johnson E. L. ; Gloor R. ; Majors R. E. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
1978 , 149 , 571 –585 10.1016/S0021-9673(00)81012-2 .
Erni F. ; Frei R. W. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
1978 , 149 , 561 –569 10.1016/S0021-9673(00)81011-0 .
Zhang K. ; Li Y. ; Tsang M. ; Chetwyn N. P. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2013 , 36 18 2986 –2992 10.1002/jssc.201300493 .23821312 
Groskreutz S. R. ; Swenson M. M. ; Secor L. B. ; Stoll D. R. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2012 , 1228 , 31 –40 10.1016/j.chroma.2011.06.035 .21802089 
Stoll D. R. ; Zhang K. ; Staples G. O. ; Beck A.  Advances
in Chromatography CRC Press : Boca
Raton, FL , 2018 , Vol. 56 .
Murphy R. E. ; Schure M. R. ; Foley J. P. 
Anal. Chem. 
1998 , 70 8 1585 –1594 10.1021/ac971184b .
Davis J. M. ; Stoll D. R. ; Carr P. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 2 461 –473 10.1021/ac071504j .18076145 
Pursch M. ; Buckenmaier S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 10 5310 –5317 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b00492 .25897943 
Davis J. M. ; Stoll D. R. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1537 , 43 –57 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.12.035 .29338871 
Schellinger A. P. ; Stoll D. R. ; Carr P. W. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2005 , 1064 2 143 –156 10.1016/j.chroma.2004.12.017 .15739882 
Striegel A. M. ; Yau W. W. ; Kirkland J. J. ; Bly D. D.  Modern Size-Exclusion
Liquid Chromatography , 2 nd ed.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc. : Hoboken,
NJ , 2009 .
Vanderheyden Y. ; Cabooter D. ; Desmet G. ; Broeckhoven K. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2013 , 1312 , 80 –86 10.1016/j.chroma.2013.09.009 .24041512 
Gritti F. ; Leonardis I. ; Abia J. ; Guiochon G. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2010 , 1217 24 3819 –3843 10.1016/j.chroma.2010.04.026 .20447642 
Pirok B. W. J. ; Breuer P. ; Hoppe S. J. M. ; Chitty M. ; Welch E. ; Farkas T. ; van der
Wal S. ; Peters R. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2017 , 1486 , 96 –102 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.12.015 .27993396 
Schure M. R. ; Moran R. E. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1480 , 11 –19 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.12.016 .28007299 
Wahab M. F. ; Wimalasinghe R. M. ; Wang Y. ; Barhate C. L. ; Patel D. C. ; Armstrong D. W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 17 8821 –8826 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b02260 .27529503 
Davydova E. ; Schoenmakers P. J. ; Vivó-Truyols G. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2013 , 1271 1 137 –143 10.1016/j.chroma.2012.11.043 .23237713 
Wouters B. ; Davydova E. ; Wouters S. ; Vivo-Truyols G. ; Schoenmakers P. J. ; Eeltink S. 
Lab Chip 
2015 , 15 23 4415 –4422 10.1039/C5LC01169H .26495444 
Davydova E. ; Wouters S. ; Deridder S. ; Desmet G. ; Eeltink S. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2016 , 1434 , 127 –135 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.01.003 .26810803 
Adamopoulou T. ; Deridder S. ; Desmet G. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2018 , 1577 , 120 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.09.054 .30316614 
Baert M. ; Martens S. ; Desmet G. ; de Villiers A. ; Du Prez F. ; Lynen F. 
Anal. Chem. 
2018 , 90 8 4961 –4967 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04914 .29551061 
Schoenmakers P. J. ; Vivó-Truyols G. ; Decrop W. M. C. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2006 , 1120 1–2 282 –290 10.1016/j.chroma.2005.11.039 .16376907 
Bedani F. ; Schoenmakers P. J. ; Janssen H.-G. 
Theories to Support
Method Development in Comprehensive Two-Dimensional Liquid Chromatography
- A Review . J. Sep. Sci. 
2012 , 35 14 1697 –1711 10.1002/jssc.201200070 .22807354 
Muller M. ; Tredoux A. G. J. ; de
Villiers A. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1571 , 107 –120 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.08.004 .30100525 
Venter P. ; Muller M. ; Vestner J. ; Stander M. A. ; Tredoux A. G. J. ; Pasch H. ; de Villiers A. 
Anal. Chem. 
2018 , 90 19 11643 –11650 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b03234 .30193064 
Pirok B. W. J. ; Pous-Torres S. ; Ortiz-Bolsico C. ; Vivó-Truyols G. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1450 , 29 –37 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.04.061 .27178151 
Pirok B. W. J. ; Molenaar S. R. A. ; van Outersterp R. E. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1530 , 104 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.11.017 .29146427 
Česla P. ; Vaňková N. ; Křenková J. ; Fischer J. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1438 , 179 –188 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.02.032 .26905882 
Pirok B. W. J. ; Molenaar S. R. A. ; Roca L. S. ; Schoenmakers P. J.  Peak-Tracking
Algorithm for
Use in Automated Interpretive Method-Development Tools in Liquid Chromatography . Anal. Chem. 2018 , 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b03929 .
Leonhardt J. ; Teutenberg T. ; Buschmann G. ; Gassner O. ; Schmidt T. C. 
Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 
2016 , 408 28 8079 –8088 10.1007/s00216-016-9911-3 .27624763 
Cook D. W. ; Burnham M. L. ; Harmes D. C. ; Stoll D. R. ; Rutan S. C. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2017 , 961 , 49 –58 10.1016/j.aca.2017.01.047 .28224908 
Ranjbar L. ; Foley J. P. ; Breadmore M. C. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2017 , 950 , 7 –31 10.1016/j.aca.2016.10.025 .27916132 
Yang P. ; Pursch M. 
Chromatogr. Today 
2018 , 10 4 24 –29 .
Ji S. ; Wang S. ; Xu H. ; Su Z. ; Tang D. ; Qiao X. ; Ye M. 
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2018 , 160 , 301 –313 10.1016/j.jpba.2018.08.014 .30114608 
Li Z. ; Chen K. ; Guo M. ; Tang D. 
J.
Sep. Sci. 
2016 , 39 1 21 –37 10.1002/jssc.201500634 .26347023 
Cacciola F. ; Farnetti S. ; Dugo P. ; Marriott P. J. ; Mondello L. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2017 , 40 1 7 –24 10.1002/jssc.201600704 .27509864 
Cacciola F. ; Dugo P. ; Mondello L. 
TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 96 , 116 –123 10.1016/j.trac.2017.06.009 .
Iguiniz M. ; Heinisch S. 
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2017 , 145 , 482 –503 10.1016/j.jpba.2017.07.009 .28746908 
Li Y. ; Stella C. ; Zheng L. ; Bechtel C. ; Gruenhagen J. ; Jacobson F. ; Medley C. D. 
J. Chromatogr.
B: Anal. Technol. Biomed.
Life Sci. 
2016 , 1032 , 112 –118 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.05.011 .
Venkatramani C. J. ; Huang S. R. ; Al-Sayah M. ; Patel I. ; Wigman L. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1521 , 63 –72 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.09.022 .28942996 
Goyon A. ; Sciascera L. ; Clarke A. ; Guillarme D. ; Pell R. 
J.
Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1539 , 19 –29 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.01.039 .29397979 
Gilroy J. J. ; Eakin C. M. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed.
Life Sci. 
2017 , 1060 , 182 –189 10.1016/j.jchromb.2017.06.005 .
Sandra K. ; Vanhoenacker G. ; Vandenheede I. ; Steenbeke M. ; Joseph M. ; Sandra P. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed.
Life Sci. 
2016 , 1032 , 119 –130 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.04.040 .
Sarrut M. ; Corgier A. ; Fekete S. ; Guillarme D. ; Lascoux D. ; Janin-Bussat M.-C. ; Beck A. ; Heinisch S. 
J. Chromatogr. B:
Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 
2016 , 1032 , 103 –111 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.06.048 .
Sarrut M. ; Fekete S. ; Janin-Bussat M. C. ; Colas O. ; Guillarme D. ; Beck A. ; Heinisch S. 
J. Chromatogr. B:
Anal. Technol. Biomed.
Life Sci. 
2016 , 1032 , 91 –102 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.06.049 .
Ehkirch A. ; D’Atri V. ; Rouviere F. ; Hernandez-Alba O. ; Goyon A. ; Colas O. ; Sarrut M. ; Beck A. ; Guillarme D. ; Heinisch S. ; Cianferani S. 
Anal. Chem. 
2018 , 90 3 1578 –1586 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b02110 .29260862 
Birdsall R. E. ; McCarthy S. M. ; Janin-Bussat M. C. ; Perez M. ; Haeuw J.-F. ; Chen W. ; Beck A. 
MAbs 
2016 , 8 2 306 –317 10.1080/19420862.2015.1116659 .26651262 
Petersson P. ; Haselmann K. ; Buckenmaier S. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1468 , 95 –101 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.09.023 .27667648 
Williams A. ; Read E. K. ; Agarabi C. D. ; Lute S. ; Brorson K. A. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 
2017 , 1046 , 122 –130 10.1016/j.jchromb.2017.01.021 .
An Y. ; Verma S. ; Chen Y. ; Yu S. ; Zhang Y. ; Kelner S. ; Mengisen S. ; Richardson D. ; Chen Z. 
J.
Chromatogr. Sep. Tech. 
2017 , 8 , 365 10.4172/2157-7064.1000365 .
Sorensen M. ; Harmes D. C. ; Stoll D. R. ; Staples G. O. ; Fekete S. ; Guillarme D. ; Beck A. 
MAbs 
2016 , 8 7 1224 –1234 10.1080/19420862.2016.1203497 .27362833 
Gstöttner C. ; Klemm D. ; Haberger M. ; Bathke A. ; Wegele H. ; Bell C. ; Kopf R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2018 , 90 3 2119 –2125 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04372 .29264912 
Bathke A. ; Klemm D. ; Gstöttner C. ; Bell C. ; Kopf R. 
LC-GC Eur. 
2018 , 31 1 10 –21 .
Ouyang X. ; Leonards P. E. G. ; Tousova Z. ; Slobodnik J. ; de Boer J. ; Lamoree M. H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 4 2353 –2360 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04311 .26754356 
Graesbøll R. ; Janssen H.-G. ; Christensen J. H. ; Nielsen N. J. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2017 , 40 18 3612 –3620 10.1002/jssc.201700239 .28771945 
Brazdauskas T. ; Montero L. ; Venskutonis P. R. ; Ibañez E. ; Herrero M. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1468 , 126 –135 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.09.033 .27658379 
Cacciola F. ; Giuffrida D. ; Utczas M. ; Mangraviti D. ; Beccaria M. ; Donato P. ; Bonaccorsi I. ; Dugo P. ; Mondello L. 
LC-GC Eur. 
2016 , 29 5 252 –257 .
Cacciola F. ; Giuffrida D. ; Utczas M. ; Mangraviti D. ; Dugo P. ; Menchaca D. ; Murillo E. ; Mondello L. 
Food Anal. Methods 
2016 , 9 8 2335 –2341 10.1007/s12161-016-0416-7 .
Sommella E. ; Pagano F. ; Salviati E. ; Chieppa M. ; Bertamino A. ; Manfra M. ; Sala M. ; Novellino E. ; Campiglia P. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2018 , 41 7 1548 –1557 10.1002/jssc.201701242 .29282870 
Zhou T. ; Han S. ; Li Z. ; He P. 
Food
Anal. Methods 
2017 , 10 10 3350 –3360 10.1007/s12161-017-0902-6 .
Navarro-Reig M. ; Jaumot J. ; van Beek T. A. ; Vivó-Truyols G. ; Tauler R. 
Talanta 
2016 , 160 , 624 –635 10.1016/j.talanta.2016.08.005 .27591659 
Donato P. ; Rigano F. ; Cacciola F. ; Schure M. ; Farnetti S. ; Russo M. ; Dugo P. ; Mondello L. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1458 , 54 –62 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.06.042 .27372414 
Wang S. ; Wang Z. ; Zhou L. ; Shi X. ; Xu G. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2017 , 89 23 12902 –12908 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b03659 .29098853 
Woiwode U. ; Reischl R. J. ; Buckenmaier S. ; Lindner W. ; Lämmerhofer M. 
Anal. Chem. 
2018 , 90 13 7963 –7971 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b00676 .29871488 
Wang X. ; Wu H. ; Luo R. ; Xia D. ; Jiang Z. ; Han H. 
Anal. Methods 
2017 , 9 43 6131 –6138 10.1039/C7AY01569K .
Liu M. ; Huang X. ; Liu Q. ; Chen M. ; Liao S. ; Zhu F. ; Shi S. ; Yang H. ; Chen X. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2018 , 41 12 2536 –2543 10.1002/jssc.201800007 .29667362 
Lopes B. R. ; Cassiano N. M. ; Carvalho D. M. ; Moisés E. C. D. ; Cass Q. B. 
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2018 , 150 , 362 –367 10.1016/j.jpba.2017.12.041 .29287263 
Alvim J. Jr.; Lopes B. R. ; Cass Q. B. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2016 , 1451 , 120 –126 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.05.022 .27208983 
Yao C.-l. ; Yang W.-z. ; Si W. ; Shen Y. ; Zhang N.-x. ; Chen H.-l. ; Pan H.-q. ; Yang M. ; Wu W.-y. ; Guo D. an 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1491 , 87 –97 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.02.041 .28256254 
Corgier A. ; Sarrut M. ; Crétier G. ; Heinisch S. 
Chromatographia 
2016 , 79 3–4 255 –260 10.1007/s10337-015-3012-x .
Fan Y. ; Fu Y. ; Fu Q. ; Cai J. ; Xin H. ; Dai M. ; Jin Y. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2016 , 39 14 2710 –2719 10.1002/jssc.201501393 .27214649 
Berkecz R. ; Tömösi F. ; Körmöczi T. ; Szegedi V. ; Horváth J. ; Janáky T. 
J. Pharm. Biomed.
Anal. 
2018 , 149 , 308 –317 10.1016/j.jpba.2017.10.043 .29132110 
Yang L. ; Lv P. ; Ai W. ; Li L. ; Shen S. ; Nie H. ; Shan Y. ; Bai Y. ; Huang Y. ; Liu H. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2017 , 409 12 3211 –3222 10.1007/s00216-017-0261-6 .28251292 
Shen S. ; Yang L. ; Li L. ; Bai Y. ; Liu H. 
Anal.
Chim. Acta 
2018 , 1037 , 75 –86 10.1016/j.aca.2017.11.005 .30292317 
Narváez-Rivas M. ; Vu N. ; Chen G.-Y. ; Zhang Q. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2017 , 954 , 140 –150 10.1016/j.aca.2016.12.003 .28081809 
Shan Y. ; Liu Y. ; Yang L. ; Nie H. ; Shen S. ; Dong C. ; Bai Y. ; Sun Q. ; Zhao J. ; Liu H. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2016 , 39 19 3745 –3753 10.1002/jssc.201600315 .27510466 
Navarro-Reig M. ; Jaumot J. ; Tauler R. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1568 , 80 –90 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.07.017 .30001900 
Cacciola F. ; Mangraviti D. ; Rigano F. ; Donato P. ; Dugo P. ; Mondello L. ; Cortes H. J. 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2018 , 410 15 3473 –3482 10.1007/s00216-017-0744-5 .29167937 
Montero L. ; Ibáñez E. ; Russo M. ; di Sanzo R. ; Rastrelli L. ; Piccinelli A. L. ; Celano R. ; Cifuentes A. ; Herrero M. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2016 , 913 , 145 –159 10.1016/j.aca.2016.01.040 .26944999 
Yan X. ; Wang L.-J. ; Wu Z. ; Wu Y.-L. ; Liu X.-X. ; Chang F.-R. ; Fang M.-J. ; Qiu Y.-K. 
J. Chromatogr.
B: Anal.
Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 
2016 , 1033–1034 , 1 –8 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.07.053 .
Yao C. ; Pan H. ; Wang H. ; Yao S. ; Yang W. ; Hou J. ; Jin Q. ; Wu W. ; Guo D. 
J.
Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1538 , 34 –44 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.01.040 .29395157 
Navarro-Reig M. ; Jaumot J. ; Baglai A. ; Vivó-Truyols G. ; Schoenmakers P. J. ; Tauler R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 14 7675 –7683 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b01648 .28643516 
Mena-Bravo A. ; Priego-Capote F. ; Luque de Castro M. D. 
J. Chromatogr.
A 
2016 , 1451 , 50 –57 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.05.006 .27180887 
Wang S. ; Zhou L. ; Wang Z. ; Shi X. ; Xu G. 
Anal.
Chim. Acta 
2017 , 966 , 34 –40 10.1016/j.aca.2017.03.004 .28372724 
Wong Y. F. ; Cacciola F. ; Fermas S. ; Riga S. ; James D. ; Manzin V. ; Bonnet B. ; Marriott P. J. ; Dugo P. ; Mondello L. 
Electrophoresis 
2018 , 39 15 1993 –2000 10.1002/elps.201700469 .
Hájek T. ; Jandera P. ; Staňková M. ; Česla P. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1446 , 91 –102 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.04.007 .27083260 
Montero L. ; Sáez V. ; von Baer D. ; Cifuentes A. ; Herrero M. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1536 , 205 –215 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.06.013 .28625677 
Stephan S. ; Jakob C. ; Hippler J. ; Schmitz O. J. 
Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 
2016 , 408 14 3751 –3759 10.1007/s00216-016-9460-9 .27038056 
Kula M. ; Głód D. ; Krauze-Baranowska M. 
J. Pharm. Biomed.
Anal. 
2016 , 121 , 99 –106 10.1016/j.jpba.2015.12.047 .26799975 
Woiwode U. ; Neubauer S. ; Lindner W. ; Buckenmaier S. ; Lämmerhofer M. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1562 , 69 –77 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.05.062 .29859685 
van de Schans M. G. M. ; Blokland M. H. ; Zoontjes P. W. ; Mulder P. P. J. ; Nielen M. W. F. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1503 , 38 –48 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.04.059 .28487121 
Vamathevan V. ; Murby E. J. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal.
Technol. Biomed.
Life Sci. 
2016 , 1038 , 49 –56 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.10.004 .
Blokland M. H. ; Zoontjes P. W. ; Van Ginkel L. A. ; Van De Schans M. G. M. ; Sterk S. S. ; Bovee T. F. H. 
Food Addit. Contam.,
Part A 
2018 , 35 9 1703 –1715 10.1080/19440049.2018.1506160 .
Coulerie P. ; Ratinaud Y. ; Moco S. ; Merminod L. ; Naranjo Pinta M. ; Boccard J. ; Bultot L. ; Deak M. ; Sakamoto K. ; Queiroz E. F. ; Wolfender J.-L. ; Barron D. 
J. Nat. Prod. 
2016 , 79 11 2856 –2864 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.6b00628 .27792327 
van Beek F. T. ; Edam R. ; Pirok B. W. J. ; Genuit W. J. L. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1564 , 110 –119 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.06.001 .29914660 
Ouyang X. ; Weiss J. M. ; de Boer J. ; Lamoree M. H. ; Leonards P. E. G. 
Chemosphere 
2017 , 166 , 431 –437 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2016.09.107 .27705830 
Sun M. ; Sandahl M. ; Turner C. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1541 , 21 –30 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.02.008 .29452928 
Eckberg M. N. ; Arroyo-Mora L. E. ; Stoll D. R. ; DeCaprio A. P. 
J. Anal. Toxicol. 
2018 , bky081 10.1093/jat/bky081 .
Shao X. ; Chen M. ; Wu D. ; Liu B. ; Zhang X. ; Chen C. 
Anal.
Methods 
2017 , 9 5 761 –767 10.1039/C6AY02762H .
Qi D. ; Fei T. ; Liu H. ; Yao H. ; Wu D. ; Liu B. 
J.
Agric. Food Chem. 
2017 , 65 45 9923 –9929 10.1021/acs.jafc.7b04329 .29065690 
Sánchez-Camargo A. P. ; Montero L. ; Cifuentes A. ; Herrero M. ; Ibáñez E. 
RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 97 94884 –94895 10.1039/C6RA16862K .
Montero L. ; Sánchez-Camargo A. P. ; García-Cañas V. ; Tanniou A. ; Stiger-Pouvreau V. ; Russo M. ; Rastrelli L. ; Cifuentes A. ; Herrero M. ; Ibáñez E. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1428 , 115 –125 10.1016/j.chroma.2015.07.053 .26210109 
Guo P. ; Xu X. ; Chen G. ; Bashir K. ; Shu H. ; Ge Y. ; Jing W. ; Luo Z. ; Chang C. ; Fu Q. 
J. Pharm. Biomed.
Anal. 
2017 , 146 , 292 –301 10.1016/j.jpba.2017.09.008 .28903088 
Guo P. ; Xu X. ; Xian L. ; Ge Y. ; Luo Z. ; Du W. ; Jing W. ; Zeng A. ; Chang C. ; Fu Q. 
Talanta 
2016 , 161 , 830 –837 10.1016/j.talanta.2016.09.041 .27769490 
Dang J. ; Zhang L. ; Shao Y. ; Mei L. ; Liu Z. ; Yue H. ; Wang Q. ; Tao Y. 
J. Chromatogr. B:
Anal. Technol.
Biomed. Life Sci. 
2018 , 1095 , 267 –274 10.1016/j.jchromb.2018.08.005 .
Wei Z. ; Fu Q. ; Cai J. ; Huan L. ; Zhao J. ; Shi H. ; Jin Y. ; Liang X. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2016 , 39 12 2221 –2228 10.1002/jssc.201600134 .27159545 
Zhou W. ; Guo Z. ; Yu L. ; Zhou H. ; Shen A. ; Jin Y. ; Jin G. ; Yan J. ; Yang F. ; Liu Y. ; Wang C. ; Feng J. ; Liu Y. ; Liang X. 
Talanta 
2018 , 186 , 73 –79 10.1016/j.talanta.2018.04.014 .29784421 
Wang Y. Q. ; Tang X. ; Li J. F. ; Wu Y. L. ; Sun Y. Y. ; Fang M. J. ; Wu Z. ; Wang X. M. ; Qiu Y. K. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1519 , 145 –151 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.08.053 .28886939 
Zhou X. ; Chen C. ; Ye X. ; Song F. ; Fan G. ; Wu F. 
J. Chromatogr. Sci. 
2017 , 55 1 75 –81 10.1093/chromsci/bmw154 .27737927 
Qiao X. ; Wang Q. ; Song W. ; Qian Y. ; Xiao Y. ; An R. ; Guo D. ; Ye M. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1438 , 198 –204 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.02.034 .26905883 
Yang W. ; Zhang J. ; Yao C. ; Qiu S. ; Chen M. ; Pan H. ; Shi X. ; Wu W. ; Guo D. 
J.
Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2016 , 128 , 322 –332 10.1016/j.jpba.2016.05.035 .27318082 
Wang W. ; Tao Y. ; Jiao L. ; Fan M. ; Shao Y. ; Wang Q. ; Mei L. ; Dang J. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2017 , 40 18 3593 –3601 10.1002/jssc.201700449 .28719037 
Sun W. ; Tong L. ; Miao J. ; Huang J. ; Li D. ; Li Y. ; Xiao H. ; Sun H. ; Bi K. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1431 , 79 –88 10.1016/j.chroma.2015.12.038 .26792448 
Cao J.-L. ; Wei J.-C. ; Hu Y.-J. ; He C.-W. ; Chen M.-W. ; Wan J.-B. ; Li P. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1427 , 79 –89 10.1016/j.chroma.2015.11.078 .26687169 
Jin G. ; Liu Y. ; Yang F. ; Yu D. ; Yan J. ; Zhou W. ; Guo Z. ; Zhu J. ; Liang X. 
J.
Sep. Sci. 
2018 , 41 4 856 –867 10.1002/jssc.201701125 .29178357 
Wang S. ; Wang Q. ; Qiao X. ; Song W. ; Zhong L. ; Guo D. ; Ye M. 
Planta Med. 
2016 , 82 18 1558 –1567 10.1055/s-0042-110206 .27352387 
Jiao L. ; Tao Y. ; Wang W. ; Shao Y. ; Mei L. ; Wang Q. ; Dang J. 
J.
Sep. Sci. 
2017 , 40 19 3808 –3816 10.1002/jssc.201700675 .28758348 
Zhang Y. ; Jin H. ; Li X. ; Zhao J. ; Guo X. ; Wang J. ; Guo Z. ; Zhang X. ; Tao Y. ; Liu Y. ; Chen D. ; Liang X. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol. Biomed.
Life Sci. 
2016 , 1026 , 67 –74 10.1016/j.jchromb.2015.11.015 .
Long Z. ; Zhang Y. ; Gamache P. ; Guo Z. ; Steiner F. ; Du N. ; Liu X. ; Jin Y. ; Liu X. ; Liu L. 
J. Chromatogr. B:
Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 
2018 , 1072 , 70 –77 10.1016/j.jchromb.2017.10.064 .
Lin Y. ; Wang C. ; Shao X. ; Yang L. ; Hou Y. ; He H. ; Sun M. 
Curr. Pharm. Anal. 
2018 , 14 5 496 –500 10.2174/1573412913666170613085815 .
Liu C.-M. ; Chen J. ; Yang S. ; Mao L.-G. ; Jiang T.-T. ; Tu H.-H. ; Chen Z.-L. ; Hu Y.-T. ; Gan L. ; Li Z.-J. ; Li J.-C. 
J. Ethnopharmacol. 
2018 , 225 , 271 –278 10.1016/j.jep.2018.05.001 .29729385 
Ji S. ; He D. ; Wang T. ; Han J. ; Li Z. ; Du Y. ; Zou J. ; Guo M. ; Tang D. 
J.
Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2017 , 146 , 68 –78 10.1016/j.jpba.2017.07.057 .28854404 
Zhang F. ; Ni Y. ; Yuan Y. ; Yin W. ; Gao Y. 
Sci.
China: Life Sci. 
2018 , 10.1007/s11427-017-9268-y .
Saleh A. ; Edlund P.-O. ; Gustafsson T. N. ; Sahlin M. ; Sjöberg B.-M. ; Granelli I. 
Chromatographia 
2016 , 79 7–8 383 –393 10.1007/s10337-016-3048-6 .
Yang L. ; Zou Q.-H. ; Zhang Y. ; Shi Y. ; Hu C.-R. ; Hui C.-X. ; Liu X.-F. ; Fang Y.-F. 
Clin. Rheumatol. 
2018 , 37 7 1773 –1782 10.1007/s10067-017-3974-1 .29525843 
Kwiatkowski M. ; Krösser D. ; Wurlitzer M. ; Steffen P. ; Barcaru A. ; Krisp C. ; Horvatovich P. ; Bischoff R. ; Schlüter H. 
Anal. Chem. 
2018 , 90 16 9951 –9958 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b02189 .30014690 
Chuang C.-F. ; King C.-E. ; Ho B.-W. ; Chien K.-Y. ; Chang Y.-C. 
J. Proteome Res. 
2018 , 17 5 1953 –1966 10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00069 .29634903 
Nascimento S. V. do ; Magalhães M. M. ; Cunha R. L. ; Costa P. H. de O. ; Alves R. C. de O. ; Oliveira G. C. de ; Valadares R. B. da S. 
PLoS One 
2018 , 13 4 e0195538 10.1371/journal.pone.0195538 .29621343 
Fang D. ; Yang W. ; Deng Z. ; An X. ; Zhao L. ; Hu Q. 
J. Agric. Food Chem. 
2017 , 65 47 10368 –10381 10.1021/acs.jafc.7b04393 .29111700 
Lee H. ; Mun D.-G. ; So J. E. ; Bae J. ; Kim H. ; Masselon C. ; Lee S.-W. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 23 11734 –11741 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03366 .27801565 
Li W. ; Zhang W. ; Deng W. ; Zhong Y. ; Zhang Y. ; Peng Z. ; Chen H. ; Sun R. ; Zhang X. ; Yang S. 
Thorac.
Cancer 
2018 , 9 , 1366 10.1111/1759-7714.12839 .30198174 
Li W. ; Zheng H. ; Qin H. ; Liu G. ; Ke L. ; Li Y. ; Li N. ; Zhong X. 
Clin. Respir. J. 
2018 , 12 6 2036 –2045 10.1111/crj.12771 .29363881 
Dong H. ; Guo Z. ; Feng W. ; Zhang T. ; Zhai G. ; Palusiak A. ; Rozalski A. ; Tian S. ; Bai X. ; Shen L. ; Chen P. ; Wang Q. ; Fan E. ; Cheng Z. ; Zhang K. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2018 , 17 3 482 –494 10.1074/mcp.RA117.000430 .29298837 
Sun Y. ; Cai X. ; Cao J. ; Wu Z. ; Pan D. 
Front. Microbiol. 
2018 , 9 , 1078 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01078 .29910778 
Sun Y. X. ; Gao C. Y. ; Wang X. Q. ; Yuan Y. Q. ; Liu Y. H. ; Jia J. G. 
J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 
2017 , 44 , 331 –338 10.1016/j.jtemb.2017.09.012 .28965596 
Ye F. ; Wang J. ; Meng W. ; Qian J. ; Jin M. 
Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 17981 10.1038/s41598-017-18069-4 .29269856 
Xu J. ; Zheng L. ; Lin L. ; Sun B. ; Su G. ; Zhao M. 
Anal.
Chim. Acta 
2018 , 1018 381 119 –126 10.1016/j.aca.2018.02.025 .29605129 
Cheng C. ; Liao C.-F. 
J. Chin. Chem. Soc. 
2018 , 65 6 714 –725 10.1002/jccs.201700380 .
Xu J. ; Sun-Waterhouse D. ; Qiu C. ; Zhao M. ; Sun B. ; Lin L. ; Su G. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1521 , 80 –89 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.09.025 .28951053 
Luo H. ; Zhong W. ; Yang J. ; Zhuang P. ; Meng F. ; Caldwell J. ; Mao B. ; Welch C. J. 
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2017 , 137 , 139 –145 10.1016/j.jpba.2016.11.012 .28113090 
Wang J. ; Xu Y. ; Zhang Y. ; Wang H. ; Zhong W. 
Rapid
Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2017 , 31 18 1541 –1550 10.1002/rcm.7934 .28688234 
Wang L. ; Yang B. ; Zhang X. ; Zheng H. 
Food
Anal. Methods 
2017 , 10 6 2001 –2010 10.1007/s12161-016-0763-4 .
Wang J. ; Xu Y. ; Wen C. ; Wang Z. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 
2017 , 992 , 42 –54 10.1016/j.aca.2017.08.028 .29054149 
Gonçalves V. M.
F. ; Rodrigues P. ; Ribeiro C. ; Tiritan M. E. 
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2017 , 141 , 1 –8 10.1016/j.jpba.2017.03.064 .28412606 
Wang J. ; Zheng S. ; Xu Y. ; Hu H. ; Shen M. ; Tang L. 
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2018 , 161 , 399 –406 10.1016/j.jpba.2018.08.055 .30205304 
Dai L. ; Yeh G. K. ; Ran Y. ; Yehl P. ; Zhang K. 
J. Pharm. Biomed.
Anal. 
2017 , 137 , 182 –188 10.1016/j.jpba.2017.01.036 .28131057 
Yang S. H. ; Wang J. ; Zhang K. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1492 , 89 –97 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.02.074 .28284763 
Iguiniz M. ; Corbel E. ; Roques N. ; Heinisch S. 
J. Pharm. Biomed.
Anal. 
2018 , 159 , 237 –244 10.1016/j.jpba.2018.06.058 .29990891 
Barhate C. L. ; Regalado E. L. ; Contrella N. D. ; Lee J. ; Jo J. ; Makarov A. A. ; Armstrong D. W. ; Welch C. J. 
Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 6 3545 –3553 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b04834 .28192943 
Iguiniz M. ; Rouvière F. ; Corbel E. ; Roques N. ; Heinisch S. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1536 , 195 –204 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.08.070 .28899555 
Sheng Y. ; Zhou B. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1499 , 48 –56 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.02.061 .28420531 
Wang H. ; Xu T. ; Yuan J. 
J. Sep. Sci. 
2017 , 40 8 1674 –1685 10.1002/jssc.201601320 .28211639 
Ndiripo A. ; Pasch H. 
Anal.
Chim. Acta 
2018 , 1027 , 137 –148 10.1016/j.aca.2018.03.007 .29866263 
Ndiripo A. ; Pasch H. 
Anal.
Chem. 
2018 , 90 12 7626 –7634 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b01480 .29807432 
Lee S. ; Choi H. ; Chang T. ; Staal B. 
Anal. Chem. 
2018 , 90 10 6259 –6266 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b00913 .29678109 
Apel N. ; Uliyanchenko E. ; Moyses S. ; Rommens S. ; Wold C. ; Macko T. ; Brüll R. 
Anal. Chem. 
2018 , 90 8 5422 –5429 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b00618 .29600700 
Apel N. ; Ramakrishnan V. ; Uliyanchenko E. ; Moyses S. ; Wold C. ; Macko T. ; Brüll R. 
Macromolecules 
2018 , 51 13 4829 –4839 10.1021/acs.macromol.8b00667 .
Yang P. ; Bai L. ; Wang W. ; Rabasco J. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1560 , 55 –62 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.05.033 .29778447 
Lee T. ; Oh J. ; Jeong J. ; Jung H. ; Huh J. ; Chang T. ; Paik H. 
Macromolecules 
2016 , 49 10 3672 –3680 10.1021/acs.macromol.6b00093 .
Malik M. I. ; Lee S. ; Chang T. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2016 , 1442 , 33 –41 10.1016/j.chroma.2016.03.008 .26994923 
Urban J. ; Hájek T. ; Svec F. 
J.
Sep. Sci. 
2017 , 40 8 1703 –1709 10.1002/jssc.201700048 .28225173 
Lynch K. B. ; Yang Y. ; Ren J. ; Liu S. 
Talanta 
2018 , 181 , 416 –421 10.1016/j.talanta.2018.01.045 .29426534 
Zhu Z. ; Chen H. ; Ren J. ; Lu J. J. ; Gu C. ; Lynch K. B. ; Wu S. ; Wang Z. ; Cao C. ; Liu S. 
Talanta 
2018 , 179 , 588 –593 10.1016/j.talanta.2017.11.060 .29310280 
Ren J. ; Beckner M. A. ; Lynch K. B. ; Chen H. ; Zhu Z. ; Yang Y. ; Chen A. ; Qiao Z. ; Liu S. ; Lu J. J. 
Talanta 
2018 , 182 , 225 –229 10.1016/j.talanta.2018.01.072 .29501145 
Vonk R. J. ; Wouters S. ; Barcaru A. ; Vivó-Truyols G. ; Eeltink S. ; de Koning L. J. ; Schoenmakers P. J. 
Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 
2015 , 407 13 3817 –3829 10.1007/s00216-015-8615-4 .25801383 
Huang Z. ; Yan G. ; Gao M. ; Zhang X. 
Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 4 2440 –2445 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04553 .26784923 
Vanhoenacker G. ; Steenbeke M. ; Sandra K. ; Sandra P. 
LC-GC Eur. 
2018 , 31 7 360 –370 .
Yang P. ; Gao W. ; Shulman J. E. ; Chen Y. 
J.
Chromatogr. A 
2018 , 1566 , 111 –117 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.06.063 .29960735 
Iguiniz M. ; Heinisch S. 
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2017 , 145 , 482 –503 10.1016/j.jpba.2017.07.009 .28746908 
Hamase K. ; Morikawa A. ; Ohgusu T. ; Lindner W. ; Zaitsu K. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2007 , 1143 1–2 105 –111 10.1016/j.chroma.2006.12.078 .17223114 
Cortes H. J. ; Campbell R. M. ; Himes R. P. ; Pfeiffer C. D. 
J. Microcolumn
Sep. 
1992 , 4 3 239 –244 10.1002/mcs.1220040310 .
Venkatramani C. J. ; Al-Sayah M. ; Li G. ; Goel M. ; Girotti J. ; Zang L. ; Wigman L. ; Yehl P. ; Chetwyn N. 
Talanta 
2016 , 148 , 548 –555 10.1016/j.talanta.2015.10.054 .26653484 
Iguiniz M. ; Corbel E. ; Roques N. ; Heinisch S. 
J. Pharm. Biomed.
Anal. 
2018 , 159 , 237 –244 10.1016/j.jpba.2018.06.058 .29990891 
Beck A. ; Terral G. ; Debaene F. ; Wagner-Rousset E. ; Marcoux J. ; Janin-Bussat M.-C. ; Colas O. ; Van Dorsselaer A. ; Cianférani S. 
Expert Rev. Proteomics 
2016 , 13 2 157 –183 10.1586/14789450.2016.1132167 .26653789 
Chen T. ; Chen Y. ; Stella C. ; Medley C. D. ; Gruenhagen J. A. ; Zhang K. 
J. Chromatogr. B: Anal. Technol.
Biomed.
Life Sci. 
2016 , 1032 , 39 –50 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.07.023 .
Stoll D. R. ; Maloney T. D. 
LC-GC N. Am. 
2017 , 35 9 680 –687 .
Wang X. ; Buckenmaier S. ; Stoll D. 
J. Appl. Bioanal. 
2017 , 3 5 120 –126 10.17145/jab.17.015 .
Stoll D. ; Danforth J. ; Zhang K. ; Beck A. 
J.
Chromatogr. B:
Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 
2016 , 1032 , 51 –60 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.05.029 .
Sandra K. ; Steenbeke M. ; Vandenheede I. ; Vanhoenacker G. ; Sandra P. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
2017 , 1523 , 283 –292 10.1016/j.chroma.2017.06.052 .28668371 
Rodriguez-Aller M. ; Guillarme D. ; Beck A. ; Fekete S. 
J. Pharm. Biomed.
Anal. 
2016 , 118 , 393 –403 10.1016/j.jpba.2015.11.011 .26609679 
Sarrut M. ; Corgier A. ; Fekete S. ; Guillarme D. ; Lascoux D. ; Janin-Bussat M.-C. ; Beck A. ; Heinisch S. 
J. Chromatogr. B:
Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 
2016 , 1032 , 103 –111 10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.06.048 .
Giddings J. C. C. 
J. Chromatogr. A 
1995 , 703 1–2 3 –15 10.1016/0021-9673(95)00249-M .7599743 
Uliyanchenko E. 
Chromatographia 
2017 , 80 5 731 –750 10.1007/s10337-016-3193-y .
Schoenmakers P. ; Aarnoutse P. 
Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 13 6172 –6179 10.1021/ac301162b .24749669

