
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American
Chemical
Society 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b02284Technical NoteShim-on-Chip Design for Microfluidic NMR Detectors van Meerten S. G.
J. van Bentum P. J. M. Kentgens A. P. M. *Solid State NMR, Radboud University, Heyendaalseweg 135, Nijmegen, The Netherlands 6525 AJ* E-mail: a.kentgens@nmr.ru.nl.06 08 2018 04 09 2018 90 17 10134 10138 22 05 2018 06 08 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

In this contribution
we present a novel system for shimming capillary
samples such as used in microfluidic NMR probe heads. Due to the small
sample size, shimming microliter samples using regular shim coils
is complicated. Here we demonstrate the use of a series of parallel
wires placed perpendicular to B0 as a
Shim-on-Chip shim system. This is achieved by placing a ribbon flat
cable horizontally over the NMR detector, in our case a stripline.
The current through each wire of the ribbon cable can be controlled
independently employing a 16 channel DAC. This makes for a simple,
cheap, and easy to construct alternative to regular shim systems.
The Shim-on-Chip is, nevertheless, quite flexible in creating a magnetic
field which matches the inhomogeneity of the magnet in one dimension.
The capillary sample geometry is well suited for this type of shimming
since its length  is much larger than its width. With this Shim-on-Chip
system we have reached line widths of 2.2 Hz (at 50%) and 27 Hz (at
0.55%) on a 144 MHz NMR spectrometer without any other room temperature
shims. Unlike regular shims, the Shim-on-Chip is located inside the
NMR probe. It is always centered on the NMR sample, because of this
the shims have an intuitive effect on the line shape. Therefore, the
manual shimming is simpler when compared to a regular shim system,
as it is difficult to position a microliter sample in the exact center
of the shim coils. We furthermore demonstrate the use of a Shim-on-Chip
method in a 400 MHz Rapid-Melt DNP system. Decent line widths were
achieved even for a sample which is located off-center inside the
NMR magnet.

document-id-old-9ac8b02284document-id-new-14ac-2018-02284mccc-price
==== Body
Inhomogeneity in the magnetic
field of an NMR magnet broadens lineshapes and decreases their amplitude.
This reduces both the resolution and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
of the NMR spectrum. The success of NMR is largely determined by both
the homogeneity and the stability of the magnetic field. To obtain
the required resolution in the NMR spectrum, the magnetic field has
to homogenized. This process of homogenizing a magnetic field is called
shimming. Shimming of an NMR magnet is performed by applying currents
to various shim coils.1 These shim coils
are generally located in the space between the NMR probe and the magnet.
Each shim coil generates a magnetic field which resembles a specific
spherical harmonic function.2−4 Any field profile can be decomposed
into an infinite series of spherical harmonics, the multipole expansion.
So the shim coils can be used to correct the field up to certain order
depending on the number of shim coils present. For regular NMR samples
(NMR tubes), this is a convenient method to homogenize the magnetic
field over the NMR sample. However, for small samples used in microcoil
detectors, these type of shim coils are located too far away from
the sample. The small structures used in microcoils for microfluidic
NMR5 generally cause relatively large gradients
in the magnetic field, which means high electrical power is required
for proper shimming. Also it is more difficult to position a microcoil
sample in the exact center of the shim coils. This complicates the
shimming process due to “mixing” of the shim profiles.6 Because of these effects, the regular NMR shim
coils are less suitable for shimming capillary samples, particularly
for microfluidic probes with microcoil detectors as is discussed here.

In our lab a stripline microcoil NMR detector has been developed.7 In this setup, the sample is contained in a fused
silica capillary with an outer diameter of 360 μm and an inner
diameter between 100 and 250 μm. The active region of the employed
stripline detector has a length of 8 mm. Since the length of sample
is much larger than the width the shimming of a capillary sample is
a nearly 1-dimensional problem. In this manuscript, we demonstrate
the use of a Shim-on-Chip for shimming capillary samples.

When
a current is passed through a wire it creates a magnetic field
which decreases with the inverse of the distance r from the wire. When multiples of these wires are placed parallel,
an almost arbitrary field profile can be created in one dimension
by controlling the current through each wire independently. These
parallel wires can be placed close to the detector, as shown in Figure 1. This reduces the
amount of current required for the shimming of microliter samples.
Since a single Shim-on-Chip can generate a large number of different
field profiles, only one simple “coil” geometry is required.
This simplifies construction and reduces the amount of space required
for the shim coils.

Figure 1 Schematics of the Shim-on-Chip setup. (Left) Side view
of the stripline,
capillary, ground plate, and shim-wires. (Middle) Front view without
the ground plate. The current through each wire can be controlled
independently.

Experimental Section
A stripline NMR probe consists of a stripline chip which is covered
by a ground plate as shown in Figure 1. For the shim setup, a flat ribbon cable is placed
on top of the ground plate, at the side where the sample is located.
We employed a flat ribbon cable (BKL electronic) consisting of 40
wires of no. 30 AWG with a spacing of 0.635 mm. An electrical diagram
of the setup is given in the Supporting Information (Figure S1). On one end, all the wires of the ribbon cable
are soldered together. On the other end the wires are connected through
220 Ω resistances to a 16 channel, 16-bit DAC (Measurement Computing
USB-3114) with a bipolar range of ±10 V. The wires are connected
together in pairs where the current from one resistor is divided over
two adjacent wires of the ribbon cable. The four outer wires on either
side of the ribbon are connected to ground as a return path for the
current. The ground wires are far away from the sensitive region,
so their effect on the shimming is relatively small. Pictures of the Shim-on-Chip
and the DAC are given in Figure S2 of the
Supporting Information.

Shim Profiles
The current through
the wires can be optimized sequentially, but
for manual shimming this is not ideal. In optimizing the spectral
line shape, there is a strong dependence between the parameters (the
current through the individual wires). This complicates the “error
landscape” and makes it difficult to find the global optimum.
To simplify the optimization, the separate line currents can be combined
into a more orthogonal basis set. A suitable basis set would be the
polynomial functions (z0, z1, z2, etc.). This is because
these functions change the line shape in a more intuitive way (similar
to the spherical harmonics). Even though the polynomial functions
are not completely orthogonal functions.

In Figure 2, the z-component
of the magnetic field created by the Shim-on-Chip
is shown in the xz-plane. The field of the NMR magnet
is oriented along the z-direction as well. The current
through the wire pairs are distributed linearly between −40
mA and 40 mA from the bottom to the top, respectively. The magnetic
field profile was calculated using the Biot–Savart law. For
an infinitely long wire in the magnetostatic case, this gives a total
magnet field of , where Bshim is the magnetic field at position r from the wire,
μ0 is the permeability of vacuum, and I is the current running through the wire. Using this equation the
magnetic field (Bshim) inside the capillary
can be calculated. The field of the main magnet (B0) is orders of magnitude larger than the magnetic field
generated by the shims. This means the vector components of Bshim perpendicular to B0 have a negligible contribution to the total field and can
be dropped. The resulting Bz generated by the wires as a function of position is shown in Figure 2 (right) for a linear
current profile.

Figure 2 (Left) Calculated strength of Bz in the plane perpendicular to the parallel wires.
The current
profile is linear over the wire pairs ranging from 40 mA through the
top wire pair and −40 mA through the bottom wire pair. The
red dashed line shows the location of the capillary. (Right) Calculated
field strength (Bz) in
the capillary.

As can be seen from this
curve, the magnetic field created does
not follow the desired polynomial function (linear in z). For higher order polynomials, this deviation is even worse. It
is more convenient to use a basis set where not the current but the
actual magnetic field profile is described by the polynomial function zn. To create these basis functions, an optimization
procedure was performed. The current through each wire pair was used
as a parameter. The squared difference between the simulated field
and the desired zn profile was minimized
in the active (sensitive) region (8 mm) of the detector. The currents
were constrained to be symmetric or antisymmetric over the ribbon
for even or odd values of n, respectively. With this
constraint, the currents through the second half of the wire pairs
can be determined from the first half, due to the even/odd symmetry.
This leaves eight free parameters for the minimization (seven if normalization
is included).

The relative currents to obtain the desired shim
profiles are given
in the Supporting Information for wire
pairs 0 to 7. To obtain the values for the pairs 8 to 15, the list
should be reversed and the values multiplied by (−1)n. In Figure 3, the optimized z1 shim
profile is shown. The shim profiles of the first six polynomials are
given in Figure S3 with the actual currents
tabulated in Table S1 of the Supporting
Information. These optimized basis sets reduce the number of iterations
needed to find the optimal shim settings, because of the reduced overlap
of the profiles.

Figure 3 Field profile created by the optimized z1 current profile. The top plot shows the currents through
the wires.
The bottom plot shows the position dependent shift in resonance frequency
caused by these currents.

Automated Shimming
The Shim-on-Chip can be used in combination
with automated shimming
methods. The shim parameters can be optimized using a Nelder–Mead
algorithm (simplex).8,9 In each iteration, the shims are
set according to the algorithm. Then an FID is recorded and the negative
of the FID surface is used as the cost-value of the minimization.
The Nelder–Mead is a local optimization algorithm, which means
the choice of a basis set is important to prevent algorithm from getting
stuck in a local minimum. For this reason, the currents cannot be
used directly as parameters for such a minimization procedure. It
is possible to use a global optimizer such as a differential evolution
algorithm to prevent the local minimum problem, but the number of
iterations required is much larger.10 This
type of global optimization takes a couple of hours to complete, whereas
the Nelder–Mead algorithm only takes 30 min. Thus, the global
optimizer is only suitable for the initial shimming, whereas a local
optimization can be used to adjust the shims on a more regular basis.

In principle, it should also be possible to combine the Shim-on-Chip
with pulsed field gradient shimming.11 In
pulsed field gradient shimming, an “image” is made of
the magnetic field profile.12 When the
magnetic field profile is known, it is easy to determine the currents
required for the Shim-on-Chip to cancel out the inhomogeneity. Since
the Shim-on-Chip is a one-dimensional shimming method, only a pulsed z-gradient is required for pulsed field gradient shimming.

Results
To test the Shim-on-Chip, experiments were performed on a 144 MHz
extra wide bore Infinity plus NMR spectrometer. The magnet is fitted
with an 18 channel Oxford shim tube. So the performance of the Shim-on-Chip
can be compared with that of regular shims. A sample of water was
put in a capillary with an inner diameter of 100 μm. First the
magnet was manually shimmed using the regular shims. Multiple spectra
were recorded to also determine the stability of the shims. The resulting
20 spectra are shown in Figure 4a. The signal is modulated by the 50 Hz from the main power
line passing through the shim power supply. This results in sidebands
around the resonance at ±50 Hz (≈0.35 ppm). The full width
half maximum (fwhm) after shimming is approximately 2.4 Hz. It should
be noted that for shimming this sample the Z2 shim had to be turned
to its maximum value. This is caused by the relative short length
of the sample, which requires large gradients and thus large currents
through the coils located far away from the sample.

Figure 4 1H spectra of water shimmed using the regular shims
(a) and using the Shim-on-Chip (b).

In a follow-up experiment, the regular shims were turned
off and
the sample was shimmed using the Shim-on-Chip. The resulting spectra
are shown in Figure 4b. With the Shim-on-Chip, a similar line width can be obtained
as with the regular shims (fwhm of 2.2 Hz). The Shim-on-Chip gives
no visible 50 Hz modulation. This demonstrates the performance of
the DAC in isolating the channels from the main power line.

Experiments were performed with and without the ribbon flat cable
present. This showed that the presence of the ribbon cable itself
gives no detectable disturbance in the local magnetic field in the
capillary.

To demonstrate the use of the automated shimming
a spectrum of
pure ethanol was acquired in a capillary with an inner diameter of
100 μm. In Figure 5a, the spectrum of ethanol is shown without any shimming. The Shim-on-Chip
was optimized using the global optimizer directly on the ethanol sample.
After optimization of the Shim-on-Chip, the spectrum of Figure 5b was obtained. The fwhm is
2.5 Hz, which is enough to resolve all of the multiplet structure
of the peaks. This shows that the automated optimization of the shims
works well even on spectra with multiple resonances.

Figure 5 1H spectra
of ethanol with the Shim-on-Chip off (a)
and on (b).

The stripline NMR detector
is well suited for performing experiments
using in-line or stopped-flow systems, since the sample is contained
inside a capillary. In the next experiment, the NMR probe was connected
to a stopped-flow system. First the Shim-on-Chip was optimized on
a sample of water using an evolutionary algorithm. This resulted in
a line width of 2.2 Hz at 50% and 27 Hz at 0.55%. Then the water in
the capillary was replaced by 5-hexen-2-one by flow. After stopping
the flow, the spectrum in Figure 6 was recorded without any further shimming. The spectrum
of 5-hexen-2-one has the same line width and line shape as the water.
This shows that the susceptibility of the sample has a limited effect
on the shimming, which is also due to the geometry of the sample
in the capillary. Compared to the sensitive region, the sample has
the geometry of an infinitely long rod. This means a change in the
magnetic susceptibility of the sample will only cause an overall shift
in the resonances, but no distortion of the lineshapes.

Figure 6 1H spectrum of 5-hexen-2-one.

The Shim-on-Chip does not improve the line width at half-maximum
when compared to conventional shim systems13 with results varying for stripline probes fabricated using different
procedures.5 However, it does show an improvement
in the line shape of the resonances. In many applications, microcoil
detectors have the issue of a large “foot” at the base
of the resonances. This reduces the sensitivity that can be achieved
with this type of detector. With the Shim-on-Chip, the lineshapes
have a Lorentzian/Gaussian shape.

Additional experiments were
performed on a 400 NMR spectrometer
detecting off-center samples. The probe used in these experiments
is designed for Rapid-Melt DNP NMR experiments.14 This means the NMR detector is located off-center with
respect to the main magnet (still within the homogeneous region).
The magnet does not contain any regular room temperature shims due
to space requirements. In this probe, a 1H spectrum of 13C labeled methanol was acquired in a capillary with an inner
diameter of 250 μm. The stripline and the Shim-on-Chip have
similar dimensions as those of the 144 MHz probe.

In Figure 7, the
proton spectra are shown for both a shimmed and unshimmed magnet.
A decent resolution can be obtained even though the sample is located
at the edge of the homogeneous region of the NMR magnet. With a fwhm
of 14 Hz, the resolution is not as good as on the 144 MHz spectrometer.
This seems to be mainly due to the additional construction parts required
for Rapid-Melt experiments. In particular a transfer line for cryogenic
liquids made of stainless steel and brass.

Figure 7 1H spectrum
of carbon labeled methanol with and without
shims.

The advantage of the Shim-on-Chip
is that the shim profiles are
always centered on the sample. This means the shims can always create
the desired polynomial shim profiles over the detected volume. These
profiles have an intuitive effect on the line shape, which simplifies
the shimming process on off-center NMR detectors.

Conclusions
A new method of shimming microliter NMR samples has been developed.
The Shim-on-Chip is particularly suited for long and thin samples,
e.g., contained in capillaries. Shimming a microliter sample using
regular shim coils can be troublesome. Because of the small size of
the sample, the gradients are generally larger, which requires large
currents through the shim coils. In this manuscript we have demonstrated
the use of the Shim-on-Chip on a stripline detector, but it can be
used in any system where the sample has a near 1D geometry. This is particularly
relevant for microfluidic applications where samples are generally
long and thin.

Another advantage of the Shim-on-Chip is that
it is always centered
on the active sample region. This is unlike regular shims where it
is often difficult to position the microliter sample at the exact
center of the shim coils. Shimming is more complicated with a sample
located off-center in the shim coils, because of mixing of the basis
functions.6

With the Shim-on-Chip
system we have reached line widths of just
over 2 Hz at 50% and 27 Hz at 0.55% on a 144 MHz NMR spectrometer.
In particular the line shape has been improved with the Shim-on-Chip
when compared to previous experiments.13 The top and bottom connecting planes of the stripline give rise
a large “foot” and makes the line shape asymmetrical.
These effects can be compensated using the Shim-on-Chip.

The
Shim-on-Chip requires far less space in the magnet compared
to regular shims. This is advantageous for complicated setups that
require the entire bore space of the magnet, as is the case in the
Rapid-Melt DNP experiments. However, the Shim-on-Chip approach may
also be useful in reducing the bore size of the magnet. One could
think of using this system in combination with a permanent NMR magnet.

It can even be possible to create a pulsed field gradient using
a flat ribbon cable. The 16 channel DAC could be replaced by resistors
which are inversely proportional to the n = 1 values
in Table S1 in the Supporting Information.
All lines could then be driven by a single pulsed dc source. The low
inductance of the parallel wires could be useful in decreasing the
time needed to switch the field gradient on or off.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b02284.Schematics of
the Shim-on-Chip, photographs of the probe
head equipped with shim and the shimbox, and currents and field profiles
of optimized zn shim profiles (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ac8b02284_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This project is part of the TA-COAST Project
053.21.115
(SFC-NMR). The authors would like to acknowledge Gerrit Janssen and
Hans Janssen for constructing the probes used in this project.
==== Refs
References
Konzbul P. ; Sveda K. 
Shim coils for NMR
and MRI solenoid magnets . Meas. Sci. Technol. 
1995 , 6 , 1116 –1123 10.1088/0957-0233/6/8/005 .
Golay M. J. E. 
Field
Homogenizing Coils for Nuclear Spin Resonance Instrumentation . Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
1958 , 29 , 313 –315 10.1063/1.1716184 .
Anderson W. A. 
Electrical
current shims for correcting magnetic felds . Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
1961 , 32 , 241 –250 10.1063/1.1717338 .
Roméo F. ; Hoult D. I. 
Magnet field profiling: Analysis and correcting coil
design . Magn. Reson. Med. 
1984 , 1 , 44 –65 10.1002/mrm.1910010107 .6571436 
Oosthoek-de
Vries A. J. ; Bart J. ; Tiggelaar R. M. ; Janssen J. W. G. ; van Bentum P. J. M. ; Gardeniers H. J. G. E. ; Kentgens A. P. M. 
Continuous Flow 1 H and 13 C NMR
Spectroscopy in Microfluidic Stripline NMR Chips . Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 2296 –2303 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03784 .28194934 
Hoult D. 
Shimming”
on spatially localized signals . J. Magn. Reson.
(1969-1992) 
1987 , 73 , 174 –177 10.1016/0022-2364(87)90238-1 .
van
Bentum P. J. M. ; Janssen J. W. G. ; Kentgens a. P. M. ; Bart J. ; Gardeniers J. G. E. 
Stripline probes for nuclear magnetic resonance . J. Magn. Reson. 
2007 , 189 , 104 –13 10.1016/j.jmr.2007.08.019 .17890116 
Nelder J. A. ; Mead R. 
A Simplex Method for Function Minimization . Computer Journal 
1965 , 7 , 308 –313 10.1093/comjnl/7.4.308 .
Ernst R. R. 
Measurement
and Control of Magnetic Field Homogeneity . Rev.
Sci. Instrum. 
1968 , 39 , 998 –1012 10.1063/1.1683586 .
Storn R. ; Price K. 
Differential Evolution
– A Simple and Efficient Heuristic
for global Optimization over Continuous Spaces . Journal of Global Optimization 
1997 , 11 , 341 –359 10.1023/A:1008202821328 .
Prammer M. G. ; Haselgrove J. C. ; Shinnar M. ; Leigh J. S. 
A new approach to
automatic shimming . J. Magn. Reson. (1969-1992) 
1988 , 77 , 40 –52 10.1016/0022-2364(88)90030-3 .
Weiger M. ; Speck T.  Encyclopedia of Magnetic Resonance ; John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd. : Chichester,
U.K. , 2011 .
Bart J. ; Janssen J. W. G. ; van Bentum P. J. M. ; Kentgens a. P. M. ; Gardeniers J. G. E. 
Optimization
of stripline-based microfuidic chips for high-resolution NMR . J. Magn. Reson. 
2009 , 201 , 175 –85 10.1016/j.jmr.2009.09.007 .19786359 
Sharma M. ; Janssen G. ; Leggett J. ; Kentgens A. ; van Bentum P. 
Rapid-melt
Dynamic Nuclear Polarization . J. Magn. Reson. 
2015 , 258 , 40 –48 10.1016/j.jmr.2015.06.007 .26225439

