
==== Front
Anal ChemAnal. ChemacanchamAnalytical Chemistry0003-27001520-6882American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b04746ReviewPhosphopeptide Fragmentation and Site Localization
by Mass Spectrometry: An Update Potel Clement
M. †‡Lemeer Simone †‡Heck Albert J. R. *†‡† Biomolecular
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular
Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584
CH Utrecht, The Netherlands‡ Netherlands
Proteomics Centre, Padualaan
8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands* E-mail: a.j.r.heck@uu.nl.20 11 2018 02 01 2019 91 1 Fundamental and Applied Reviews in Analytical Chemistry
2019126 141 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.document-id-old-9ac8b04746document-id-new-14ac-2018-04746pccc-price
==== Body
Pioneering
work by, among others,
the groups of Hunt and Mann at the start of this century opened up
the era of mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics.1−3 Through advances in sample preparation, phosphopeptide enrichment,
mass spectrometric detection, peptide sequencing, and dedicated database
search algorithms, this field has matured and it is nowadays possible
to monitor thousands of protein phosphorylation events qualitatively
and quantitatively.4−8 Such phosphoproteomics studies are important, as reversible protein
phosphorylation is regulating nearly all biological processes and
the deregulation of phosphorylation has been associated with the onset
of various pathologies.9−15 Notwithstanding this maturation and broad acceptance of mass spectrometry
based phosphoproteomics by the research community, the mass spectrometric
analysis of phosphorylation remains demanding, mainly due to the often
severe substoichiometric levels of protein phosphorylation and the
intrinsic lability of the phosphate group, hampering both enrichment
and unambiguous sequencing analysis of phosphopeptides. Here we review
the increasing knowledge gathered about the mechanisms behind the
fragmentation of phosphopeptide ions and describe additionally recent
advances made to improve and facilitate the identification and site
localization of phosphorylated peptides. Since our earlier related
review in 2009,16 several fragmentation
methods have been introduced and successfully applied to phosphopeptides
sequencing, such as electron capture (ECD), electron transfer induced
dissociation (ETD), and hybrid fragmentation techniques such as EThcD
(a combination of ETD and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD))
and AI-ETD (a combination of ETD with infrared photoactivation). A
plethora of data has been gathered on endogenous Ser, Thr, Tyr phosphorylation
but also on large synthetic phosphopeptide libraries, providing new
insight into the mechanisms behind phosphopeptide fragmentation. Moreover,
data on phosphopeptides harboring phosphorylated histidine, arginine,
or lysine have become available, showing some distinct fragmentation
behaviors. Through all this acquired knowledge on phosphopeptide fragmentation
and site localization, MS-based phosphoproteomics has developed into
a respectable and valuable tool for the broader life science research
community.

Sequencing Phosphopeptides Using Collision Induced Dissociation
Basic
Principles of Collision Induced Dissociation Applied to
Peptide Ions
During collision induced dissociation (CID),
gas-phase peptide ions are subjected to collisions with inert gas
atoms or molecules, leading to the incremental increase of the peptide
ions internal energies and ultimately to their unimolecular dissociation
into fragment neutrals and ions, whereby the ions are used to elucidate
the peptide sequence or to pinpoint the modification sites following
data analysis. CID methods are the most prominent ion activation methods
in the field of bottom-up proteomics, due to their high efficiency
and ease of implementation. However, this ease of implementation cannot
conceal the complexity of energy transfer and dissociation mechanisms
involved, discussed in detail in various recent reviews.17−19 When considering applications of CID to (phospho)proteomics, one
refers almost exclusively to the so-called low-energy CID, during
which collision energies in the range of 1–200 eV are used.
Nonelastic collisions with the inert gas molecules lead to the transfer
of translational into internal energy, mainly in the form of vibrational
energy. Low-energy CID is a stepwise process and multiple collisions
(tens to hundreds) are necessary to accumulate sufficient internal
energy to reach a threshold energy necessary to overcome for the gas-phase
unimolecular dissociation reaction to happen.20,21 For this reason, CID presents relatively long activation times in
comparison with alternative dissociation techniques discussed later.
During this process, the internal energy is quickly (<10–12 s) equilibrated through the vibrational degrees of freedom of the
peptide ions. This statistical redistribution of internal energy implies
that following CID, low-energy dissociation pathways are preferably
accessed.

The main dissociation pathways occurring during CID
are charge-directed. In positive ion mode, the mobile proton model,
introduced by Gaskell, Wysocki, and co-workers,22−27 provides a generally accepted model to explain CID fragmentation
behavior of protonated peptides. Peptide gas-phase ions formed by
soft ionization techniques (i.e., electrospray ionization) are characterized
by their relatively low level of internal energy: ionizing protons
are thus localized at the energetically favored positions, mainly
at basic residues side chains (histidine, lysine, and arginine) and/or
at the N-terminal amine. Increase of the internal energy of the peptide
upon CID facilitates the mobilization of the protons to alternative,
less favored sites along the backbone. Protonation of the nitrogen
atom of the peptide backbone amide bond results in the weakening of
the amide bond, and the subsequent oxazolone pathway results preferentially
in the formation of the well-known complementary b and y fragment
ions17 (Figure 1).

Figure 1 Peptide ion fragmentation ladder with the complementary
a/x, b/y,
and c/z ion series displayed. Upon CID, the oxazolone pathway, resulting
in the preferential formation of the b/y ion series is energetically
favored after protonation of the nitrogen atom of the amide bond.

Neutral Losses of Serine
and Threonine Phosphorylated Peptides
Particular for phosphorylated
peptides, low-energy relaxation pathways
can additionally lead to the loss of the rather labile phosphate group,
either as neutral phosphoric (H3PO4) or meta-phosphoric
(HPO3) acids, competing with the above-described backbone
fragmentation.6,16 We will first focus on the mechanisms
of neutral losses, while the impacts of such neutral losses on phosphopeptides
identification and phosphosites localization are discussed later.
As CID dissociation pathways are mainly charge-directed, the mobility
of the ionizing protons bears a crucial importance in the type of
gas-phase reactions involved. Three major classes of proton mobility
conditions have been defined,28 depending
on the number of ionizing protons (i.e., the peptide’s charge
state) and the number of basic residues present in the peptide sequence.
If the number of charges is higher to the number of basic residues,
the conditions are considered as mobile. Limited mobility corresponds
to cases, wherein the number of basic residues is higher than or equal
to the number of protons. Because of the very high gas-phase basicity
of arginine residues, large amounts of energy are necessary to mobilize
a proton initially sequestered at such an arginine side-chain. Conditions
are thus considered as nonmobile if the number of arginine residues
is higher than or equal to the number of charges carried by the peptide.

It is well established that upon CID fragmentation, phosphoserine
and phosphothreonine (pST) peptides mainly fragment through elimination
of H3PO4.6,16 This phosphoric acid
loss can originate from a direct loss of H3PO4 or combined losses of HPO3 and a water molecule from
a residue’s side chain containing a hydroxyl group. It was
also observed that the propensity of pST phosphopeptides to undergo
neutral loss is inversely correlated with the proton mobility (i.e.,
neutral loss is more likely to occur under limited proton mobility
conditions).29 Over the years, several
alternative mechanisms have been proposed for the observed phosphate
neutral losses, including β-elimination, E2 eliminations, and
nucleophilic substitutions involving diverse nucleophiles displacing
the phosphate group. Gronert et al. originally obtained similar activation
barriers for the different dissociation mechanisms, implying that
neutral loss could occur via multiple pathways.30 Based on computational and experimental evidence, it is
now accepted that under mobile proton conditions, H3PO4 neutral loss via a SN2 mechanism is favored, initiated
by the mobilization of a proton to one of the oxygen atoms of the
phospho-group.29,31,32 This protonation makes the β-carbon linked to the charged
phospho-group electrophilic and thus suitable for a subsequent nucleophilic
attack from a neighboring nucleophile group. Neutral loss then preferably
occurs via formation of a five-membered oxazoline ion after nucleophilic
attack from the N-terminal carbonyl oxygen, expelling the phospho-group
(Figure 2).

Figure 2 Neutral H3PO4 elimination from phosphopeptides
under high (A) and low (B) proton mobility conditions. Note that alternative
SN2 mechanisms have been proposed, depending on the nature
of the nucleophilic attacking group. Here, the energetically favored
formation of the five-membered oxazoline ion is displayed. The energetically
favored HPO3 neutral loss mechanism is displayed in part
C. Reproduced from Modeling of the gas-phase phosphate group loss
and rearrangement in phosphorylated peptides, Rožman, M., J. Mass Spectrom.2011, Vol. 46, pp. 949–955 (ref (31)). Copyright 2011 Wiley.

It was initially hypothesized that neutral losses via charge-remote
mechanisms were favored in case of nonmobile or limited mobility conditions,
with a β-elimination reaction leading to the formation of dehydroalanine
or dehydrobutyrine in the case of phosphoserine or phosphothreonine
peptides, respectively.33 However, Palumbo
et al. showed that charge-directed mechanisms were favored even under
nonmobile conditions.29 This observation
was rationalized by the formation of a hydrogen bond between the arginine
guanidinium group and the phosphate group. By withdrawing electrons,
this interaction creates an electrophilic group suitable for the SN2 reaction, can assist the phosphate leaving group,
and the basic group can act as a charge neutralizer by transferring
its proton to the phosphate group to form H3PO4. Rožman confirmed by a combination of quantum mechanics and
RRKM modeling that neutral loss via charge-directed mechanisms are
indeed also energetically favored in limited proton mobility conditions,
through interaction of positively charged guanidinium with the phospho-group
(Figure 2).31

This indicates that the proton mobility
conditions do not significantly
influence the neutral loss mechanism but rather affect the competition
between the neutral loss and backbone fragmentation channels. Under
high mobile proton conditions, energetic and kinetic properties of
the neutral loss pathway match those of the classical oxazolone pathway.
Backbone fragmentation mechanisms, which are primarily charge-directed,
necessitate a larger amount of activation energy when the proton mobility
is limited, while Rožman calculated that activation barriers
for neutral loss mechanisms under both high and low mobile proton
conditions (displayed in Figure 2A,B) were somewhat similar.31 Hence, under limited proton mobility conditions, the neutral loss
reaction can become energetically and kinetically favored in comparison
with peptide backbone fragmentation. To illustrate this point, Lanucara
et al. were able to reduce the extent of neutral loss and thus increase
backbone fragmentation by increasing the proton mobility of phosphopeptides
via enzymatic removal of the basic C-term residue.34

Laskin et al. recently showed that the phosphoric
acid neutral
loss is likely a two-step process under limited proton mobility conditions,
whereby the phosphate abstraction is followed by the dissociation
of the ion–molecule complex, the phosphopeptide sequence influencing
the overall observed reaction kinetics.35 They concluded that phosphate neutral loss under mobile conditions
exhibited a relatively high dissociation barrier with a loose transition
state, while neutral loss under nonmobile conditions is characterized
by a lower dissociation barrier with a tight transition state.

A bias toward higher neutral loss abundance during CID of serine
phosphorylated peptides in comparison with threonine phosphorylated
peptides has been documented, especially under high mobile proton
conditions, and can be explained by a difference in fragmentation
dynamics.29,31 Meta-phosphoric (HPO3) neutral
loss can also occur (Figure 2C), albeit much less frequently than the phosphoric acid neutral
loss, potentially leading to the gas-phase rearrangement of the phosphate
group. This meta-phosphate loss can be accompanied by a water loss
from residues containing a hydroxyl moiety (in particular, nonmodified
serine and threonine residues) or carboxyl groups, cumulatively resulting
in an apparent phosphoric acid loss.36,37 This implies
that the dehydration site is not indicative of the position of the
phosphorylation site.

Cui et al. showed that the proton mobility
conditions also influence
the competition between the direct loss (i.e., SN2 mechanism)
and the combined loss, the probabilities of the latter increasing
under limited proton mobility and nonmobile proton conditions.36 This is in accordance with the calculations
made by Rožman, revealing that HPO3 loss can compete
with H3PO4 loss under limited proton mobility
conditions.31 In an effort to limit the
neutral loss extent, a chemical derivatization strategy mitigating
charge-directed mechanisms leading to phosphate neutral loss was developed,38 while addition of a dinuclear gallium complex
improved the stability of the phospho-ester bond during CID.39

In an extensive study, factors influencing
the occurrence and abundance
of neutral losses under CID conditions were analyzed by Brown et al.40 They verified that the extent of neutral loss
is highly sequence-dependent, whereby the proton mobility alone cannot
explain the differences observed from peptide to peptide sequence.
For this study, they compiled more than 30 000 ion trap based
CID fragmentation spectra originating from tryptic phosphopeptides.
They confirmed the correlation between neutral losses and proton mobility
(Figure 3A) and showed
that neutral loss was on average 3-fold higher for b-ions in comparison
with y-ions, indicating that proper phosphosite localization should
rely more on y-ions series.

Figure 3 Fraction of signal attributable to neutral loss
observed in spectra
derived from 5749 monophosphorylated pS and pT tryptic peptides using
ion trap CID fragmentation (A). The extent of neutral loss correlates
with proton mobility but does not fully explain the observed behavior.
The observed fraction of signal intensity attributable to H3PO4 neutral loss, as a function of the proximity of the
phosphorylation site to both peptide termini, is displayed in part
B. Reprinted by permission from Springer. J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom., Large-Scale Examination of Factors Influencing
Phosphopeptide Neutral Loss during Collision Induced Dissociation.
Brown, R., Stuart, S. S., Houel, S., Ahn, N. G., Old, W. M. Vol. 26, 2015, pp. 1128–1142 (ref (40)). Copyright 2015.

The study of Brown et al. also
elucidated that the phosphosite
proximity to the predominantly protonated N-terminus enhances the
magnitude of the neutral loss (Figure 3B) in mobile conditions. To explain this behavior,
the authors proposed a mechanism in which the formation of a hydrogen
bond between the N-terminus, which is the least basic group protonated
with high occupancy, and the phospho-group is favoring the SN2 reaction leading to neutral loss. Such effect is not observed in
limited conditions as the N-terminus is less likely to be protonated.

Surprisingly, basic residues, which are supplying the protons under
mobile conditions and promoting neutral loss reaction in limited and
nonmobile proton conditions, suppress neutral loss when directly adjacent
to the phosphosite, which the authors explained by steric hindrance
due to the formation of a strong hydrogen bond preventing the formation
of the oxazoline ring. More generally, under mobile conditions, strong
hydrogen bonds between the phospho-group and proximal basic residues
impede the phospho-group protonation or interaction with the less
stable charge donor protonated N-terminus, which, in fine, favors
backbone fragmentation following the mobile proton model. Additionally,
Brown et al. determined that neutral water and ammonia loss can compete
with phosphate neutral loss and that the presence of aspartic and
glutamic acids promote neutral loss, while proline, by reducing the
backbone flexibility, can hamper neutral loss by limiting distal interaction
between the phospho-group and basic residues.

Neutral Losses of Tyrosine
Phosphorylated Peptides
Tyrosine phosphorylated peptides
exhibit some specific fragmentation
characteristics. Upon CID, tyrosine phosphorylated (pY) peptide ions
can occasionally exhibit a meta-phosphoric (HPO3) neutral
loss but to a markedly lower extent when compared to neutral losses
observed during CID of serine and threonine phosphorylated peptides.6,16 The SN2 reaction resulting in the H3PO4 elimination is hampered due to steric hindrance from the
aromatic group, which also stabilizes the C–O bond cleaved
during H3PO4 loss via resonance. HPO3 loss occurs via a charge-remote mechanism, while only limited H3PO4 loss is observed, which can only result from
a concomitant loss of HPO3 and water. In accordance with
an early report that neutral loss of the phosphate moiety from pY
peptides is charge dependent,41 Everley
et al. recently reported that phosphate neutral loss from tyrosine
phosphorylated peptides drastically increases after isobaric labeling
(Figure 4), during
which a primary amine is replaced by a tertiary amine of high gas-phase
basicity, thus substantially affecting the proton mobility.42 In fact, 97% of peptides for which the neutral
loss was observed were of low proton mobility, highlighting the fact
that phosphotyrosine neutral loss should be seriously considered during
database searches of iTRAQ- and TMT-labeled phosphotyrosine peptides.
While intense neutral losses after CID of labeled pST peptides have
also been reported,43,44 as far as we know the impact
of isobaric labeling on the extent of neutral loss during CID fragmentation
of pST peptides has yet to be quantified, but a similar trend can
be expected.

Figure 4 Isobaric labeling enhances neutral loss in phosphotyrosine
peptides.
Tyrosine phosphorylated peptides were reported as exhibiting neutral
loss when the neutral loss intensity was >33% of the base peak.
A
substantial increase in neutral loss is observed upon isobaric labeling,
which is caused by the lowering of the proton mobility. Note that
under ETD conditions (purple) no neutral loss was observed. Reproduced
from Everley, R. A.; Huttlin, E. L.; Erickson, A. R.; Beausoleil,
S. A.; Gygi, S. P. J. Proteome Res.2017, 16, 1069–1076 (ref (42)). Copyright 2017 American
Chemical Society.

Resonance Excitation versus
Beam-Type CID
Low-energy
CID is achieved through either resonance excitation or beam-type collisional
dissociation.20 While basically the same
fragmentation rules apply and both techniques are well suited for
the analysis of nonmodified peptides, several factors make beam-type
CID superior to resonance excitation in the analysis of phosphopeptides.45 Ion trap CID (IT-CID) corresponds to the resonance
excitation of trapped peptide ions by applying a supplemental voltage
matching the precursor secular frequency. The depth of the trapping
potential well is such that, to prevent the ejection of ions, the
precursor can only be excited to a few electron volts of kinetic energy.
Hence, hundreds of low-energy collisions, over long activation times
(>10 ms), are necessary to build up enough internal energy to enable
fragmentation. Because of these long activation times, IT-CID is considered
as a slow-heating technique, during which extensive gas-phase rearrangements
can occur prior to dissociation. In the case of the fragmentation
of phosphorylated peptides, evidence for gas-phase rearrangement of
a phosphate moiety to another nonmodified serine or threonine residue
has been reported,46 albeit with limited
impact on the phosphosite localization.47,48 Activation
times in beam-type CID (including higher energy collisional dissociation,
HCD49) are shorter, as precursor ions are
not excited by resonance but instead are accelerated into the neutral
gas bath of a collision cell. The high focusing power of radiofrequency
(rf) multipole collision cells enables higher energy collisions with
the neutral gas without significant ion loss, decreasing the activation
time to approximately 0.1 ms. This reduces potential gas-phase rearrangement
of the phosphate moiety,50 for which the
fastest reaction occurs on a millisecond time-scale.31 More importantly, if neutral losses are common upon beam-type
CID, HCD has been shown to generate less phosphate neutral loss in
comparison with IT-CID and is thus better suited to pinpoint more
accurately phosphorylation sites.36 In
addition, Diedrich et al. demonstrated that the use of a stepped HCD
collision energy (fragmentation at multiple collision energies) can
result in an increase of identified phosphopeptides and phosphosites
localization confidence.51

During
IT-CID, only precursor ions are excited by resonance while fragments
fall off-resonance. For phosphopeptides this can result in the generation
of high abundant noninformative ions corresponding to the phosphate
neutral loss(es) from the precursor ion without further backbone fragmentation.
To address this issue, multistage activation (MSA) has been applied
to increase phosphopeptide identification through subsequent activation
of the neutral loss product ions.52 In
contrast, during beam-type CID, all ions are activated and fragments
can undergo multiple sequential fragmentation events, resulting in
the generation of richer fragmentation spectra.53 Fragments resulting from neutral loss can thus be subsequently
dissociated into sequence-informative b and y-ions, facilitating phosphopeptide
identification. As such, HCD fragmentation of phosphopeptides has
been reported to yield in general better identification scores than
IT-CID based fragmentation.45,54,55 In some cases, the generation of an x-ion resulting from the fragmentation
of an ion that underwent phosphoric neutral loss (Figure 5) can aid the phosphosite localization.50 Similarly, even if neutral loss via elimination
mechanisms is a minor dissociation channel, Pilo et al. recently showed
that CID fragmentation of a dehydroalanine-containing product yields
atypical c/z ions after cleavage of the N–Cα bond of
the dehydroalanine residue. These low abundance c/z ions were used
to pinpoint the phosphosite within a serine phosphorylated peptide56 but do not constitute absolute diagnostic ions
as dehydroalanine can also originate from serine dehydration.

Figure 5 Formation of
the atypical 4,5-dihydrooxazolyl x ion, resulting
from the fragmentation of an ion that underwent a phosphoric acid
loss via the SN2 mechanism but cannot fragment following
the classic oxazolone pathway. Note that the formation of an x-ion
of the same mass is possible (albeit infrequent) during beam type
fragmentation of nonphosphorylated peptides, but a quality filtering
based on the higher intensity of the x-ions over y-ions enables one
to filter out nonphosphorylated peptides. According to two studies,
the x-ion was present in 24 and 36% of spectra deriving from HCD fragmentation
of pST peptides.50,53 Reproduced from Kelstrup, C.
D.; Hekmat, O.; Francavilla, C.; Olsen, J. V. J. Proteome
Res.2011, 10, 2937–2948
(ref (50)). Copyright
2011 American Chemical Society.

Beam-type CID (e.g., HCD) spectra are also characterized
by the
presence of abundant informative immonium ions in the low-mass region.53,57,58 Immonium ions result from two
sequential cleavages and are particularly abundant in the case of
residues presenting both a heteroatom and an aromatic ring that can
provide charge stabilization. While commonly observed after beam-type
CID, such ions are usually difficult to detect after IT-CID due to
the lack of sequential fragmentation and low-mass cutoff applied,
which is inherent to the use of the rf trapping field. Immonium ions
bear a particular importance in phosphoproteomics, as the phosphotyrosine
immonium ion possesses a unique m/z value and can thus serve as a diagnostic tool. Diedrich et al. showed
that the pY immonium ion abundances scale up with the HCD normalized
energy,51 and in addition to serve diagnostic
purposes, such ions have been used in analytical strategies to scan
for phosphotyrosine precursors.59 The chance
to observe the diagnostic pY immonium ion is also directly correlated
with the abundance of the tyrosine phosphorylated peptides. In our
laboratory, at normal HCD collision energy, the immonium ion is observed
for ∼90% of the pY phosphopeptides after pY immunoprecipitation,
while only for ∼20% of the low abundant pY phosphopeptides
present in samples in which pSTY are coenriched. Everley et al. also
recently showed that the low proton mobility resulting of isobaric
labeling alters the probability of observing the pY diagnostic immonium
ion,42 which is in line with the fact that
the immonium ion is only observed at high collision energy in the
case of iTRAQ labeled pY peptides.43

Another significant difference between the two techniques lies
in the fact that beam-type dissociation processes are usually coupled
with high-resolution detection of fragments by time-of-flight (TOF)
or Fourier transform (FT) Orbitrap mass analyzers, where IT-CID is
often coupled with low-resolution ion trap detection. While ion traps
exhibit higher sensitivity and often faster duty cycles, measuring
the fragment ions with high mass accuracy and high signal-to-noise
ratio is essential to achieve confident phosphosite localization.
In the early days of HCD, CID-IT was reported to outperform beam-type
CID in term of identification numbers (but not in terms of scoring),
which was imputed to the slower duty cycle time of HCD.54 Today, thanks to instrumental progress over
the past decade, beam-type CID (and more particularly HCD) outperforms
CID-IT for the identification of phosphopeptides and subsequent phosphosite
localization.45

Electron Transfer/Capture
Dissociation of Phosphopeptides
Principles of Electron Transfer/Capture Dissociation
In MS-based proteomics, electron capture/transfer induced dissociation
(ExD) techniques have become viable alternatives to the collisional
activation techniques discussed above.60 Introduced in 1998, electron capture dissociation (ECD) for peptide
and protein sequencing relies on the capture of a low-energy electron
(generally below 1 eV) by a multicharged gas-phase cation.61 Electron capture forms an electronically excited
charge-reduced radical cation, initiating radical-ion dissociation
reactions. Quadrupole ion traps cannot efficiently trap electrons
due to the low mass cutoff of the rf field, and for this reason, ECD
was initially performed in FT ion cyclotron resonance (FTICR) instruments,
as the strong magnetic fields applied enable simultaneous trapping
of analytes and electrons. Introduced in 2004, electron transfer dissociation
(ETD) is an alike technique involving an ion/ion reaction during which
an anion reagent with low electron affinity (usually fluoranthene)
transfer an electron to a polycharged peptide cation.62 By applying unbalanced rf in an ion trap, it is possible
to obtain charge-sign independent trapping, i.e., it is possible to
efficiently trap both anionic reagent and cationic peptides. The widespread
availability, low cost, and robustness of ion trap instruments as
well as its compatibility with chromatographic time scales largely
helped to popularize ETD, making it nowadays the preferred ExD technique
in the field of bottom-up proteomics. Notably, a compact ECD cell
that can be implemented on Orbitrap and Q-TOF platforms may rejuvenate
ECD in the near future.63,64

Besides the differences
in electron capture/transfer, ECD and ETD hold much in common from
a mechanistic point of view. Different dissociation mechanisms have
been proposed and are discussed in several recent reviews.65−67 Very briefly, the two well-accepted mechanisms (named Cornell61 and Utah–Washington68 mechanisms) result in the formation of an unstable aminoketyl
radical, leading ultimately to the cleavage of the peptide backbone
bond between the amide nitrogen atom and the Cα atom of the
neighboring residue (N–Cα bond). This preferred fragmentation
pathway involves random cleavage along the peptide backbone and produces
complementary even-electron c-type and odd-electron z•-type ions series. When considering its application to phosphoproteomics,
ExD-based fragmentations possess several advantageous features. First,
the phosphate group does not possess bound anionic states and exhibits
negative electron and hydrogen affinity;69 hence, phosphorylation of side chain residues are virtually nonreactive
upon ExD. ExD also enables, in theory, to achieve better sequence
coverage through the generation of more complete ion series, which
is an important factor for confident phosphorylation site localization,
as discussed later. Finally, after electron capture/transfer, backbone
cleavages occur faster than the rate of internal vibrational energy
redistribution, diminishing the undesired neutral losses of the phosphate
moieties. This ability of cleaving strong backbone bonds while preserving
weak phosphoester bonds, which are labile upon vibrational activation,
was reported early on and still constitutes one of the major advantages
of ExD dissociation over CID-based methods, especially for phosphopeptides
fragmentation.70−73

However, ExD techniques are hampered by two major bottlenecks.
The first one is the strong dependency of the ExD efficiency on the
precursor charge density, as inter alia electron
capture cross sections and ion/ion reaction rates are highly dependent
on the peptide charge state.74,75 As a result, ExD of
doubly protonated peptides generally suffers from lower fragmentation
efficiency when compared to CID/HCD.76 During
ETD, the competition between undesirable proton transfer from the
peptide to the anion reagent and electron transfer is also influenced
by the peptide charge state, the detrimental proton transfer being
more prominent in the case of doubly charged peptides.77 The second major bottleneck is that ExD necessitates
longer reaction times in comparison with CID activation times, especially
when considering beam-type CID. Indeed, while ExD are fast processes,
they suffer from low fragmentation frequency and require long reaction
times to achieve extensive precursor ion dissociation. For example,
ETD reaction times to reach optimal fragmentation are in the order
of 100 ms for doubly charged precursor and less than 50 ms for triply
charged peptides.78 These longer cycle
times (compared to CID) have an important impact on the number of
identifiable (phospho)peptides, as discussed later, and as such limits
the dynamic range and depth of ETD experiments.

The capture
or transfer of low-energy electrons does not always
disrupt noncovalent interactions, which can result in the product
ions staying together, termed nondissociative ExD. The prevalence
of these phenomena, termed sometimes ECnoD/ETnoD, during which such
complexes appear as nondissociated charge reduced precursor ions,
is also directly related to the precursor charge density.79 Indeed, Coulombic repulsion between positively
charged side chains favors dissociation, and for the same charge state,
a higher m/z increases the chance
of noncovalent interactions. Remarkably, detected tryptic phosphopeptides
have been reported to present a higher average charge state when compared
to nonmodified tryptic peptides,80,81 which would
favor dissociation of ExD products. However, this increase of average
charge state is caused by an increase of trypsin miscleavages due
to strong in-solution interactions between arginine/lysine side chains
and phosphate groups,82,83 and in reality phosphopeptides
exhibit on average lower charge density than nonmodified tryptic peptides.80 Because the ETD reaction is performed in a linear
ion trap at relatively high pressure (∼10–3 Torr) in comparison with ECD (∼10–10 Torr),
internal energies of the ETD fragment ions are reduced through collisional
cooling, which further hampers their subsequent dissociation. Phosphopeptide
chemical derivatization, or the addition of a dinuclear zinc complex,
which selectively binds to the phosphate group thus increasing the
phosphopeptide charge state, notably led to improved ExD.84−86

Moreover, ECnoD/ETnoD is notably problematic for phosphorylated
peptides because of the strong intramolecular noncovalent interactions
in the gas phase between the phospho-group and the side chains of
basic amino acid residues, which have been reported to be able to
survive ExD87 and even low-energy CID.88 Cooper and co-workers showed that such gas-phase
interactions, identified as being salt bridges and ionic hydrogen
bonds, influence the observed fragmentation patterns as well as fragment
abundances and overall have deleterious effects on ECD, which can
be mitigated by performing ECD on precursors of higher charge state.89,90 Using synthetic model phosphopeptides, they later demonstrated that
the structures of phosphopeptides, and not only their sequences influence
ECD fragmentation behaviors.91 Moss et
al. reported an unusual ECD behavior resulting in the preferred neutral
loss of phosphoric acid after ECD (but not ETD) of a phosphorylated
pentapeptide, which the authors explained by a dipole-guided electron
capture at the arginine side chain.69 While
the presence of a phosphate group can influence ExD fragmentation
of phosphopeptides, Chen et al. demonstrated that it has little effect
on the ECD behavior of phosphoproteins, as fragmentation patterns
of phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated proteins were highly similar.92

ExD with Supplemental Activation to Extend
Sequence Coverage
In ExD, supplemental activation enables
to circumvent some of the
above-described issues through the introduction of additional energy
to the precursor ions, increasing the efficiency of ExD-based techniques,
especially for the fragmentation of lower charge peptides. This extra
energy is mainly supplied as vibrational energy via collisional activation
or infrared photoexcitation. In contrast with ECD, the collisional
cooling occurring during the ETD reaction mitigates the effects of
preactivation. CID activation during ECD is nearly impossible due
to the high vacuum restrictions of FTICR instruments, while resonance
excitation during the ETD reaction has undesirable effects, as it
would increase the precursor velocity and impair good spatial overlap
between the two ion clouds, thus negatively impacting the ion/ion
reaction rate. For this reason, CID activation can either occur before
or after ECD or after ETD. ETcaD, during which the charge-reduced
precursor is activated by resonance to disrupt noncovalent interactions
was introduced in 2007 and greatly alleviated ETnoD issues.93

In 2012, the Heck lab introduced EThcD
fragmentation, which corresponds to an all-ions dual fragmentation,
i.e., both unreacted species and product ions resulting from ETD are
subjected to subsequent HCD fragmentation.94 This resulted in extensive backbone fragmentation via the concomitant
generation of both c/z and b/y ion series. EThcD was later applied
to phosphoproteomics (Figure 6), leading to significant increases in sequence coverage when
compared to HCD or ETD alone, along with an increase in confidence
for site localization.95 In addition, EThcD
proved to be less time-consuming than ETcaD, due to the shorter activation
times of beam-type CID.

Figure 6 EThcD fragmentation spectrum of a doubly phosphorylated
peptide.
Complete sequence coverage is achieved while neutral losses are minimal,
enabling unambiguous localization of both phosphosites. Reproduced
from Frese, C. K.; Zhou, H.; Taus, T.; Altelaar, A. F. M.; Mechtler,
K.; Heck, A. J. R.; Mohammed, S. J. Proteome Res.2013, 12, 1520–1525 (ref (95)). Copyright 2013 American
Chemical Society.

The Coon lab recently
introduced activated ion ETD (AI-ETD) for
phosphoproteomics (Figure 7A).80 During AI-ETD, peptides are
activated during the ETD reaction by infrared photoactivation, as
photon irradiation does not impede the ETD process. Therefore, in
contrast with ETcaD and EThcD, the application of supplemental energy
does not lead to an increase in duty cycle time. During infrared multiphoton
dissociation (IRMPD), analytes are irradiated by low energy photons
(λ = 10.6 μm; corresponding to an energy of ∼0.1
eV per photon). Absorption of hundreds of photons over long activation
times is necessary to trigger dissociation, thus enabling intramolecular
vibrational energy redistribution. For that reason, the stepwise activation
process can be compared to the one of slow-heating CID and preferably
induces the formation of b/y ions series. Notably, the P–O
stretch presents a remarkably high infrared absorption cross-section,
making IRMPD of phosphopeptides a particularly efficient process.96,97 As a consequence, AI-ETD of phosphopeptides resulted in the generation
of more b/y ions when compared with the dissociation of nonmodified
peptides.98

Figure 7 Comparison of ETD and
AI-ETD of a singly phosphorylated, doubly
protonated peptide (A). AI-ETD enables complete sequence coverage
and confident phosphosite localization. In contrast, during ETD, the
ETnoD process is preventing the achievement of full sequence coverage
and site localization. The extent of neutral phosphate moiety loss
observed upon ETD, ETcaD, EThcD, AI-ETD (at 12 W and 15 W laser power),
AI-ETD+ (AI-ETD at 15 W followed by additional IRMPD) and HCD is displayed
in parts B and C. Reproduced from Riley, N. M.; Hebert, A. S.; Dürnberger,
G.; Stanek, F.; Mechtler, K.; Westphall, M. S.; Coon, J. J. Anal. Chem.2017, 89, 6367–6376
(ref (80)). Copyright
2017 American Chemical Society.

Extent of Neutral Losses Following ETD-Based Activation
Naturally, supplying additional activation energy deposited as vibrational
energy can lead to the neutral losses of the phosphate moiety, which
could mitigate the benefits of ETD fragmentation. Riley et al. recently
investigated neutral loss extent upon fragmentation of endogenous
phosphopeptides using different ETD-based techniques.80 As expected, ETD fragmentation did not induce significant
neutral losses (Figure 7B,C). ETcaD and EThcD exhibited low phosphate neutral losses, to
a similar extent. Observed neutral losses mainly resulted from phosphate
loss of b-ions (which is consistent with previous report that b-ions
are more prone to neutral losses40). AI-ETD
exhibited the highest magnitude of neutral losses among all ETD-based
techniques, which can be explained by the slow-heating of all ions
and high efficiency of infrared photons absorption by phosphopeptides.
These neutral losses however did not impede phosphopeptide identification
and localization, as AI-ETD led to the identification of the highest
number of localized phosphopeptides.

Noncanonical Phosphorylations
Besides the well-studied
pSTY phosphorylations, it is established that phosphorylation can
also occur on six other residues (i.e., His, Arg, Lys, Cys, Asp, and
Glu).99 The amount of information on the
gas-phase fragmentation behavior of these less common phosphorylation
events is however still limited in comparison with the STY phosphorylation.
Because histidine phosphorylation occurs on the aromatic imidazole
side-chain, direct H3PO4 neutral loss via SN2 or elimination mechanisms is impossible and can thus only
occur via combined losses of HPO3 and a water molecule.
Still, in contrast with CID of tyrosine phosphorylated peptides, a
prominent H3PO4 loss is observed upon IT-CID,100,101 alongside less abundant HPO3 and H5PO5 ancillary neutral losses (Figure 8A).102 The high
magnitude of neutral losses can be attributed to the lower energy
required to break the N–P bond in comparison with the activation
threshold of the O–P bond.103 Oslund
et al. investigated the source of the water molecules in the combined
neutral loss pathway and deduced that the water loss mainly originated
from the carboxylic moieties at the C-terminal residue and from aspartate/glutamate
side chains.102 When comparing the fragmentation
behavior of pHis peptides with those of pSTY peptides, they concluded
that the neutral loss triplet was preferentially observed during fragmentation
of pHis peptides (∼40% of pHis peptides against less than 5%
for pSTY peptides) and used the presence of this specific neutral
loss to trigger additional subsequent fragmentation.

Figure 8 (A) IT-CID fragmentation
spectra of phosphopeptides of sequence
TSHYSIMAR, phosphorylated at the histidine (top) or adjacent tyrosine
residue (bottom). Reproduced from Oslund, R. C.; Kee, J.-M.; Couvillon,
A. D.; Bhatia, V. N.; Perlman, D. H.; Muir, T. W. J. Am. Chem.
Soc.2014, 136, 12899–12911
(ref (102)). Copyright
2014 American Chemical Society. (B) HCD spectra of a pHis peptide.
The phosphosite is unambiguously localized and the neutral loss triplet
as well as the low mass diagnostic phosphohistidine immonium ion are
observed. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.:
NATURE. Widespread bacterial protein histidine phosphorylation revealed
by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Potel, C. M., Lin, M.-H., Heck,
A. J. R., Lemeer, S. Nat. Methods2018, Vol. 15, pp. 187–190 (ref (107)). Copyright 2018.

Arginine phosphorylated peptides
also exhibited intense H3PO4 neutral loss from
the precursor ions upon CID,104,105 sometimes accompanied
by H5PO5 loss but not
HPO3. Notably, a pArg peptide exhibited the same neutral
loss pattern as a pHis peptide.104 As for
pHis peptides, the additional water loss originates from the C-terminus
or residue side chains containing carboxyl and hydroxyl functions,
the extent of observed neutral loss(es) is dependent on the proton
mobility and size of the pArg peptide.104

The extent of the phosphate group neutral loss, combined with
the
fact that it involves losses from at least two distinct functional
groups within the peptide complicates accurate localization of N-phosphosites.
Moreover, gas-phase rearrangements of N-phosphorylation to the C-terminus
or other acceptors upon CID fragmentation have been reported.100,104,106 Low resolution IT-CID and HCD
fragmentation of synthetic pArg peptides led to a false localization
rate of 10–20%.104 It however has
to be noted that such false localization constituted false negative
identification of N-phosphorylation (i.e., mislocalization of the
N-phosphosite at another residue). Several groups have compared the
fragmentation patterns of synthetic pHis peptides with those of identified
endogenous pHis peptides to achieve confident identification/localization
of pHis peptides,101,102,107 while a pArg spectral library was built to study arginine phosphorylation
in a bacterium.108 ETD was also reported
to improve confident phosphosite localization of both pArg104,105 and pHis,100 and it was demonstrated
that the pHis immonium ion of specific m/z 190.0367 can be used as a diagnostic ion107 (Figure 8B).

Lysine phosphorylation is the least studied of the three
possible
N-phosphorylations, and its analysis by mass spectrometry is somehow
more delicate. While CID was successfully used for the study of pHis/pArg,
CID of pLys peptides resulted in the complete loss of the phosphate
group, mainly as phosphoric acid.109,110 ECD and ETD
enabled the identification of lysine phosphorylated peptides,109,110 but in contrast with pArg, gas-phase scrambling of the phosphate
group was observed even upon ETD.111 Concerning
cysteine phosphorylation, intense H3PO4 and
HPO3 neutral losses were reported upon vibrational activation.112,113 Bertran-Vicente et al. reported that while HCD resulted in complete
loss of the phosphate group for some pCys peptides, EThcD permitted
the unambiguous localization of cysteine phosphosites.113

We could not find any information concerning
the fragmentation
behavior of pAsp and pGlu peptides, which can be explained by the
fact that no chemical approach to synthesize pAsp and pGlu peptides
exists as well as no tailored enrichment method.114 Finally, pyrophosphorylations of Ser and Thr were confidently
identified and localized by EthcD fragmentation, following a triggering
approach when a diagnostic neutral loss doublet of 98 and 178 Da was
observed upon CID fragmentation.115

Identification
of Phosphopeptides
Different peptide sequence matching search
engines and algorithms
coexist, such as Mascot,116 Sequest,117 Andromeda,118 MSAmanda,119 and MS-GF+,120 that
all can be used to match experimental tandem mass spectra to peptide
sequences contained in a database. In addition to computing a score
reflecting the reliability of peptide identification, all these search
engines utilize a target-decoy strategy to estimate the false discovery
rate (FDR).121 During the decoy search,
MS2 spectra are searched against decoy sequences derived
from the randomization or reversal of the original target database’s
sequences, enabling an estimation of the number of random matches
(false positives) in the target search and to control the number of
false discoveries, which constitutes a second reliability measure
for peptide identification. It could be logical to think that unambiguous
identification of phosphopeptides by CID is more difficult than identification
of their nonphosphorylated counterparts. Indeed, the fact that neutral
losses compete with backbone fragmentation (i.e., there are less b
and y ions susceptible to match theoretical fragment masses) combined
with the increase of the number of fragments obtainable due to the
increase of accessible dissociation channels could hinder the identification
of phosphopeptides by standard search engines and give rise to more
spurious matches. This would be particularly true in the case of low-resolution
ion trap CID, during which substantial nonsequence informative neutral
loss from the precursor ion can occur. However, by producing richer
spectra due to the possibility of sequential fragmentation events
at higher energies, combined mostly with high-resolution determination
of fragment masses, beam-type CID/HCD largely circumvents these issues.
This was clearly illustrated in the analysis of two large libraries
of synthetic phosphopeptides and their nonphosphorylated counterparts
(>100 000 peptides each) by HCD fragmentation, which surprisingly
revealed that phosphopeptides were in fact easier to identify122 (i.e., the FDR values were significantly lower
in comparison with their nonphosphorylated peptides and this at any
score value, Figure 9).

Figure 9 Identification of phosphopeptides using HCD fragmentation seems
to be simpler than the identification of their nonphosphorylated counterparts.
Here, the false discovery rate (FDR) is plotted as a function of the
Andromeda score. Similar trends were observed when the Mascot search
engine was used. Reprinted by permission from A large synthetic peptide
and phosphopeptide reference library for mass spectrometry-based proteomics.
Marx, H., Lemeer, S., Schliep, J. E., Matheron, L., Mohammed, S.,
Cox, J., Mann, M., Heck, A. J. R., Kuster, B. Nat. Biotechnol.2013, Vol. 31, pp. 557–564
(ref (122)). Copyright
Springer Nature, Nature Biotechnology 2013.

Moreover, no significant biases in favor of identification
of pS,
pT, or pY peptides as well as any biases toward amino acids sequence
motifs were observed. The latter has some important implications,
as it signifies that observed statistically enriched phosphorylation
motifs derive from specific kinase activities and not from enhanced
CID fragmentation due to the presence of proline and aspartic acid
residues.17 This study, also revealed that
in terms of number of identified phosphopeptides, HCD outperformed
ETD fragmentation, once again underpinning that neutral losses observed
during HCD fragmentation do not significantly impair the identification
of phosphopeptides. Surprisingly, in this study, ETD did not surpass
HCD fragmentation in identifying highly charged precursors. If the
overlap between phosphopeptides identified by both techniques is relatively
high (∼70%), it however appears that HCD and ETD remain complementary
dissociation methods. It should be noted that the synthetic library
was made by sequential permutation of amino acids around well-known
phospho-motifs, generating many in sequence (and chemical nature)
alike monophosphorylated peptides, which may not fully represent the
authentic phosphoproteome.

ETD accompanied by supplemental activation
usually gives rise to
a higher confidence in phosphopeptide identification, notably through
the generation of dual ion series, resulting in higher scores. Riley
et al. reported that EThcD and AI-ETD both resulted in an ∼15%
increase of the median identification score in comparison with HCD,
while ETcaD yields significantly lower scores (∼17% decrease
of the median score when compared to HCD).80 In the original EThcD paper, Frese et al. reported an ∼28%
increase of the average score using EThcD fragmentation in comparison
with HCD.95 Still, as extracted from different
available studies comparing different fragmentation techniques, it
appears that as of today, HCD remains the gold standard dissociation
technique in phosphoproteomics, due to its higher speed and efficiency.80,95,122,123 Alternative dissociation techniques can yield more confident identification
scores but come often at the expense of the total number of identified
phosphopeptides (Figure 10). Possibly in the future, ExD methods could compete with
HCD, if the activation times could be diminished, giving similar duty
cycles.

Figure 10 Comparison and overlap of the number of phosphopeptides identified
by using different fragmentation methods. Due to its shorter cycle
time, HCD outperforms all ETD-based techniques. Between the ETD-based
techniques, AI-ETD yields the highest number of phosphopeptide identifications,
followed by EThcD, ETcaD, and finally ETD. Reproduced from Riley,
N. M.; Hebert, A. S.; Dürnberger, G.; Stanek, F.; Mechtler,
K.; Westphall, M. S.; Coon, J. J. Anal. Chem.2017, 89, pp 6367–6376 (ref (80)). Copyright 2017 American
Chemical Society.

Phosphorylation Sites Localization
Although the identification
of phosphopeptides by MS-based proteomics has become more facile,
a serious challenge in today’s phosphoproteomics remains the
unambiguous localization of the phosphosites(s) within the identified
phosphopeptides, which is essential to understand the roles of phosphorylation
events. While as described above, neutral losses do not impair phosphopeptide
identification, it can seriously hamper the correct identification
of the localization of the phosphosite, as fragments resulting from
a neutral loss and nonmodified fragments (or nonmodified fragments
associated with commonly observed water loss in the case of phosphoric
acid loss) have the same mass and are thus undistinguishable. Moreover,
confident phosphosite localization often requires achieving complete
peptide sequence coverage, as several candidate phosphorylation sites
(i.e., Ser, Thr, Tyr, His, etc.) are often present within the same
peptide. The assessment of phosphosite localization confidence usually
requires dedicated additional computational approaches, as phosphosite
localizations reported by commonly used search engines can be quite
unreliable. To do so, two main paradigms exist: (i) computing the
probability of an incorrect match for each phosphopeptide isoforms
or (ii) using the difference between scores of the different phosphopeptide
isoforms. The former category regroups algorithms such as A-score,124 PhosphoRS (or PtmRS),125 the PTM-score of Andromeda,118 Slomo,126 while the latter corresponds to the Mascot
delta score,127 the SLIP score in Protein
Prospector,128 and Luciphor.129 Most of these approaches are relatively similar
in term of basic principles (the score calculation of most search
engines being also probability based), but several factors could explain
the reported discrepancies between localization strategies. For example,
(i) the type of fragments considered, (ii) the peak depth, (iii) whether
the phosphate group neutral losses are used (iv) whether the algorithm
was designed for low or high mass resolution and accuracy measurements,
(v) how the localization probability is derived from the calculated
probabilities of a random match for each candidate.

The pioneering
A-score method124 will, for example, only
consider site-determining fragments (i.e., only ions enabling to discriminate
two candidates), while other algorithms consider all fragments in
the localization probability calculation. For the PTM-score, neutral
loss fragments will be automatically considered if they result in
an increase of the score while in phosphoRS, the user can choose to
use such fragments. In the case of fragmentation techniques inducing
substantial neutral losses, considering such peaks is resulting in
a significant increase of the number of localized phosphosites.80 Nevertheless, one has to keep in mind that such
fragments possess the same mass than nonmodified fragments that suffered
water loss, which is commonly observed upon collisional activation
and as such it has been demonstrated that considering phosphate neutral
losses can lead to an increase of the false localization rate.130

In the following, we will focus on two
of the most commonly used
algorithms, phosphoRS and the PTM-score of Andromeda to demonstrate
how localization probabilities are calculated and to illustrate potential
differences between localization algorithms. The peak depth, i.e.,
how many of the most intense peaks per m/z windows are considered for score calculation influences
the probability calculation, as the more peaks are considered, the
more the probability for a match to be random match increases. Peak
picking enables to eliminate low intensity peaks that can originate
from electric or chemical noise or coisolation of other precursor
ions, both of which can interfere with correct localization. The way
of determining the peak depth for each spectrum is different between
the two algorithms: it will be determined as the peak depth value
yielding the higher score for the PTM-score or as the higher score
difference between the different phosphopeptide isoforms if site-determining
fragments are present in phosphoRS. For the calculation of the PTM-score,
the peak depth is uniform across all m/z windows, while it is individually determined for each m/z window in phosphoRS. After peak picking, a value
of n matching theoretical fragments out of the N total number of peaks contained in the spectra is obtained.
The probability of each phosphopeptide isoform match to be random
is then determined by calculation of the probability of n matched peaks out of a total of N peaks to be random
(in other words, the smaller the probability, the more confident the
match), by applying a cumulative binomial distribution:  The calculation of the probability p of a random peak to be matched is also different between
the two algorithms. For the PTM-score calculation, p is equal to the peak depth divided by the m/z window (100 m/z). This
derives from the fact that the PTM-score was first introduced for
ion trap detection, for which a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da is common
(i.e., there is 4% of chance of a peak to be a random match if 4 peaks
are picked in a 100 m/z window).
The PTM-score is thus using a conservative way of calculating p and significantly overestimates its value in the case
of high-resolution data. In phosphoRS, p is defined
as  N corresponds to
the total
number of picked peaks, d to the fragment mass tolerance,
and w to the full mass range of the spectrum. Hence,
the value of p is adapted to the mass accuracy of
the mass analyzer. Finally, in both cases localization probabilities
are inferred from the differences of the values of P calculated for the different isoforms (Figure 11).

Figure 11 Workflows for the calculation of phosphosite
localization probabilities
by phosphoRS (left), and MaxQuant/Andromeda (PTM-score, right). Reproduced
from Taus, T.; Köcher, T.; Pichler, P.; Paschke, C.; Schmidt,
A.; Henrich, C.; Mechtler, K.J. Proteome Res.2011, 10, 5354–5362 (ref (125)). Copyright 2011 American
Chemical Society. Reproduced from Cox, J.; Neuhauser, N.; Michalski,
A.; Scheltema, R. A.; Olsen, J. V.; Mann, M. J. Proteome Res.2011, 10, 1794–1805 (ref (118)). Copyright 2011 American
Chemical Society. Reprinted from Cell Rep., Vol. 8, Sharma, K., D’Souza, R. C. J., Tyanova, S., Schaab,
C., Wiśniewski, J. R., Cox, J., Mann, M. Ultradeep Human Phosphoproteome
Reveals a Distinct Regulatory Nature of Tyr and Ser/Thr-Based Signaling.
pp. 1583–1594. (ref (131)). Copyright 2014, with permission from Elsevier.

False Localization Rate
Estimation
Most of the localization
algorithms score the confidence of the localization but do not estimate
the false localization rate (FLR), and instead arbitrary score cut-offs
are used, such as the 0.75 cutoff recommended for the Andromeda-PTMscore,
corresponding to so-called class I phosphosites.1 Indeed, the estimation of the FLR is less straightforward
than the FDR estimation as a similar target-decoy approach is no longer
valid, as for an identified phosphopeptide with a given sequence an
incorrect localization of a phosphosite does not correspond to a random
match as many fragments will match both correct and incorrect localizations.132 Therefore, reversal/randomization of sequences
contained in the database will not provide an accurate estimation
of false localizations. However, the addition of noncanonical phosphorylations
into the equation, combined with the continuous increase in the number
of MS2 spectra generated per experiment obviously increases
the risk of false localization, making FLR control more and more essential,
as it enables the user to make an informed decision about localization
score cutoff. One elegant strategy, used in the SLIP approach,128 is to perform searches during which decoy phosphorylations
on glutamic acid (E) and proline (P) residues are allowed. There are
two rationales behind the choice of these two amino acids: the combined
occurrence of E and P matches the one of S and T (∼16%), and
E and P residues are present in some of the most dominant phosphorylation
motifs, ensuring the presence of decoy sites in the vicinity of the
real phosphosites. Luciphor also uses a target decoy approach to estimate
the FLR, in which decoy phosphopeptides are generated by placing the
phosphorylation on each residue present in the sequence.129 As the number of decoy sites is usually higher
than the number of target sites, this constitutes a more conservative
approach.

Performance Comparison between Different Phosphosite Localization
Tools
While all localization tools perform adequately (i.e.,
present a low FLR), comparing their performance can be complicated
by the fact that most localization tools are tied to specific search
engines. This is for example the case for two of the most popular
localization tools, ptmRS and the PTM-score.133 It is thus difficult to determine if observed discrepancies in confidently
localized phosphosites originate from the difference between search
engines or from the localization tools. Such differences between the
different search engines will not be discussed here. Analyzing synthetic
phosphopeptide libraries, for which the correct phosphorylation sites
are known is the only situation in which the true FLR can be determined.
However, one has to keep in mind that analyzing synthetic peptides
often does not reflect the complexity of real biological samples,
which present higher dynamic range and/or coisolation of peptides,
both resulting in the potential generation of lower quality spectra.

Marx et al. compared the PTM-score, phosphoRS, and the Mascot delta
score performances on correctly localizing phosphosites from a large
phosphopeptides library.122 Keeping both
the FDR and FLR at 1%, the Andromeda-PTM-score and Mascot-phosphoRS
score proved to be significantly more sensitive than the Mascot delta
score and exhibited similar numbers of correctly identified and localized
phosphopeptides. However, phosphosites localized by the two search
engine/localization tools presented a low overlap of around 50% after
analysis of both the synthetic phosphopeptides libraries and a biological
sample. Similarly, phosphoRS, A-score, and MD-score only presented
an overlap of 50% when considering unique unambiguously localized
phosphosites from a biological sample after database search with the
same search algorithm,125 indicating that
there is still much room for improvement in computational strategies
for confident phosphosite localization. Notably, all localization
tools slightly underestimated the false localization rate at high
localization probability scores. In contrast, at a 1% FDR at the phosphopeptides
level, false discovery rates were significantly overestimated at lower
localization probability,125,134 illustrating that
this discussion is still not closed. Finally, to our knowledge, the
robustness of these search algorithms has not been tested against
large libraries of multiple phosphorylated peptides.

Besides
peak-probability based approaches, simulating HCD spectra
of phosphopeptides of enzymatically dephosphorylated peptides, while
laborious, enabled accurate phosphosite localization and presented
a lower FLR than A-score and ptmRS.130 Recently,
Yang et al. developed a semi supervised learning algorithm to assess
the confidence of each amino acids obtained by de novo sequencing.135 Interestingly, this algorithm
was used to calculate localization probabilities of phosphorylation
sites within phosphopeptides identified by either de novo sequencing or database search and significantly outperformed the
peak-probability based algorithms A-score and ptmRS both in terms
of number of identifications and localization accuracy after a database
search of synthetic phosphopeptides libraries.

Comparison of Different
Fragmentation Techniques
While
we concluded that HCD performs very well in term of identification
of phosphopeptides, it has been demonstrated that confident localization
of a phosphosite becomes increasingly difficult when the number of
putative phosphosites increase, and the closer another phosphorylation
site candidate is from the actual phosphosite.122,134 Interestingly, this issue is much less observed with ETD fragmentation,
underlining that both the lack of neutral loss during ETD and the
more comprehensive coverage achieved via ETD random cleavages are
beneficial for correct phosphosite localization.122 More generally, localization probability cutoff to reach
a 1% FLR is significantly higher in the case of HCD when compared
to ETD-based fragmentation methods.122,125 By using
the Marx et al. data set, Wiese et al. demonstrated that in the case
of ETD fragmentation, a localization probability cutoff of 0.55 (lowest
reported localization probability threshold) was sufficient to fall
below 1% FLR after analyzing the data with the combination the Andromeda-PTM-score
at a 1% FDR.134 In contrast, the authors
reported that a cutoff of 1 (maximum localization probability) was
necessary to reach a FLR below 1% in the case of HCD fragmentation.
Ferries et al. recently reported similar results with a different,
albeit significantly smaller synthetic phosphopeptide library.123 They showed that with EThcD fragmentation,
the lowest localization probabilities calculated correspond to a FLR
below 1% (Figure 12). This is in agreement with the initial report on EThcD of Frese
et al., who reported that EThcD fragmentation led to a significant
increase of the proportion of correct phosphosite localizations when
compared to HCD.95

Figure 12 False localization rate
determination in four different analytical
peptide fragmentation strategies: HCD and EThcD fragmentation with
high-resolution (Orbitrap, OT) or low-resolution (Ion trap, IT) fragment
ion detection. Reproduced from Ferries, S.; Perkins, S.; Brownridge,
P. J.; Campbell, A.; Eyers, P. A.; Jones, A. R.; Eyers, C. E. J. Proteome Res.2017, Vol. 16, pp 3448–3459 (ref (123)). Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.

In addition, Ferries et al. also reported that
high-resolution
measurements of fragments (i.e., within the Orbitrap) strongly aids
to reduce false localizations. The Olsen group showed that increasing
Orbitrap resolution to 60k after HCD fragmentation as well as the
maximum injection time resulted in an increase in localization probabilities
through the increase of spectra quality (at the cost of longer cycle
times).136 Both Marx et al. and Wiese et
al. concluded that tyrosine phosphorylation is easier to localize
by HCD than serine and threonine phosphorylation.122,134 This can be explained by the low tendency of pY peptides to undergo
neutral loss. Wiese et al. reported that a PTM-score localization
probability cutoff of 0.86 was sufficient to reach a FLR value below
1%, indicating that in the case of pY peptides, HCD is the preferred
fragmentation technique. Finally, Ferries et al. showed that localization
confidence logically decreases with the number of phosphorylation
present on a peptide, ETD-based techniques being more suited for the
accurate localization of multiple phosphorylation.123 This is of importance as multiphosphorylated peptides represented
between 20 and 40% of identified phosphopeptides in recent phosphoproteomics
studies on mammalian cells.81,137

Concluding
Remarks
The field of MS-based phosphoproteomics
has seriously matured over the past decade and has been adopted by
dozens of research groups worldwide. Notwithstanding the achieved
successes and wide adaptation by the community, one should not forget
key remaining challenges, which can only be tackled by introducing
new technologies. To make such further advances in MS-based phosphoproteomics,
a deep understanding of peptide fragmentation mechanisms is essential,
whereby we hope that this review provides the interested researcher
a good starting point by summarizing the current knowledge. With new
peptide activation methods in mass spectrometry also come new search
algorithms and more advanced algorithms to determine with higher accuracy
the exact amino-acid being modified by the phosphorylation. Such information
is critical for the understanding of the role of that particular event.
Our review of the literature clearly illustrates that especially confident
site localization is a remaining challenge, whereby current approaches
still disagree with each other too much.

Several new technologies
are on the horizon for MS-based phosphoproteomics that we intently,
and due to space limitations, did not discuss here. Alternative radical-induced
dissociation techniques presenting different fragmentation patterns
when compared to classic ExD have recently shown interesting preliminary
results when applied to the fragmentation of phosphopeptides,138−140 but it remains unsure if they will be compatible with high-throughput
phosphoproteomics. Among the different photoactivation-based dissociation
methods applied to phosphopeptides sequencing,141−144 UV-photodissociation (UV-PD) has emerged as a credible alternative
to CID/ExD. UV-PD has been exploited to phosphopeptides to identify
and site-localize the phosphate moiety. Early results indicate that
UV-PD is compatible with the high-throughput identification of phosphopeptides
while the propensity of the phosphate group to remain bound to the
peptide during fragmentation increases when compared to HCD.145−147 Top-down and middle-down phosphoproteomics approaches, which have
greatly benefited from recent technological advances in alternative
fragmentation techniques may improve the identification and site localization
of protein phosphorylations and be ideally suited to not only map
multiple modifications on a peptide or protein at once but also determine
phospho-isoform abundance, reaction kinetics and to study functional
cross-talk between post-translational modifications.80,148−155

While ionization in negative ion mode still suffers from a
lack
of efficiency when compared with the positive ion mode, negative ETD,
UVPD, and AI-ETD showed some promising results and could help to study
acid-labile phosphorylation events.146,156−158 Ion mobility separation coupled to MS can provide and additional
layer of separation, allowing potentially the separation of phosphopeptide
isomers.159−161 The availability of such synthetic phosphopeptide
isomers can also be used in targeted MS approaches, whereby the retention
time of the peptide and the comparison with the isotopically labeled
standard aid the confidence in identification, site localization,
and quantification.162,163 In short, a lot of effort is
made by the proteomics research community to tackle important persisting
issues in MS based phosphoproteomics. It will be interesting to see
in a decade from now what the field will have further achieved. For
sure a lot of novel biological new insights, hopefully based on well-reproducible
and confident phosphoproteomics data.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Clement M. Potel (1987) is currently
a postdoctoral researcher at the EMBL (Heidelberg, Germany). He obtained
his Master’s degree in analytical chemistry from the University
of Strasbourg, France, and his Ph.D. from the University of Utrecht,
The Netherlands, in 2018. His research focuses on the development
of new analytical strategies in the field of phosphoproteomics, with
a focus on the study of the elusive histidine phosphorylation and
bacterial signaling.

Simone
Lemeer (1978) received her
Ph.D. in 2008 from Utrecht University, The Netherlands. Until 2014,
she worked as a postdoctoral researcher and later junior group leader
at the Chair of Bioanalytics at the Technical University Munich, Germany.
In 2014 she became Associate Professor in Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry
and Proteomics at Utrecht University, The Netherlands. Her research
focuses on the development of methods for the enrichment and analysis
of phosphopeptides and the correct site localization. In addition,
she uses this technology to study phosphorylation mediated signaling
in health and disease.

Albert
J. R. Heck (1964) received
his Ph.D. in 1993 from the University of Amsterdam. He worked until
1996 as a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Chemistry at
Stanford University and Sandia National Laboratories (USA). In 1996,
he became senior research fellow and later lecturer at the University
of Warwick (U.K.). Since 1998 he is professor in Biomolecular Mass
Spectrometry and Proteomics at Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
Heck is recipient of the ACS Frank H. Field and Joe L. Franklin Award
and the NWO Spinoza Prize. He is member of EMBO and the Royal Netherlands
Academy of Sciences and Arts. His research focuses on the development
and applications of mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Heck introduced
technologies for phospho-enrichment and the use of alternative proteases
and hybrid peptide fragmentation techniques. Besides, Heck is also
known for his expertise in structural biology and a pioneer in native
mass spectrometry and cross-linking mass spectrometry.

Acknowledgments
We thank all group members for their helpful contributions.
We acknowledge financial support by the large-scale proteomics facility
Proteins@Work (Project 184.032.201) embedded in The Netherlands Proteomics
Centre and supported by The Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO). Additional support came through the European Union
Horizon 2020 program FET-OPEN Project MSmed (Project 686547), and
the European Union Horizon 2020 Program INFRAIA Project Epic-XS (Project
823839). S.L. acknowledges support from The Netherlands Organization
for Scientific Research (NWO) through a VIDI Grant (Project 723.013.008)
and A.J.R.H. through the Spinoza Award SPI.2017.028.
==== Refs
References
Olsen J. V. ; et al. Global, In Vivo, and
Site-Specific Phosphorylation Dynamics in Signaling
Networks . Cell 
2006 , 127 , 635 –648 10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.026 .17081983 
Ficarro S. B. ; et al. Phosphoproteome analysis
by mass spectrometry and its application
to Saccharomyces cerevisiae. . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2002 , 20 , 301 –305 10.1038/nbt0302-301 .11875433 
Chi A. ; et al. Analysis of phosphorylation sites on proteins from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae by electron transfer dissociation (ETD) mass spectrometry . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2007 , 104 , 2193 –2198 10.1073/pnas.0607084104 .17287358 
Olsen J. V. ; Mann M. 
Status of Large-scale
Analysis of Post-translational Modifications
by Mass Spectrometry . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2013 , 12 , 3444 –3452 10.1074/mcp.O113.034181 .24187339 
Riley N. M. ; Coon J. J. 
Phosphoproteomics
in the Age of Rapid and Deep Proteome
Profiling . Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 74 –94 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04123 .26539879 
Palumbo A. M. ; et al. Tandem mass spectrometry
strategies for phosphoproteome analysis . Mass
Spectrom. Rev. 
2011 , 30 , 600 –625 10.1002/mas.20310 .21294150 
White F. M. ; Wolf-Yadlin A. 
Methods for the Analysis of Protein Phosphorylation–Mediated
Cellular Signaling Networks . Annu. Rev. Anal.
Chem. 
2016 , 9 , 295 –315 10.1146/annurev-anchem-071015-041542 .
Lemeer S. ; Heck A. J. 
The phosphoproteomics data explosion . Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 
2009 , 13 , 414 –420 10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.06.022 .19620020 
Deribe Y. L. ; Pawson T. ; Dikic I. 
Post-translational
modifications
in signal integration . Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
2010 , 17 , 666 –672 10.1038/nsmb.1842 .20495563 
Lemmon M. A. ; Schlessinger J. 
Cell Signaling
by Receptor Tyrosine Kinases . Cell 
2010 , 141 , 1117 –1134 10.1016/j.cell.2010.06.011 .20602996 
Nishi H. ; Hashimoto K. ; Panchenko A. R. 
Phosphorylation in Protein-Protein
Binding: Effect on Stability and Function . Structure 
2011 , 19 , 1807 –1815 10.1016/j.str.2011.09.021 .22153503 
Kholodenko B. N. 
Cell-signalling
dynamics in time and space . Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 
2006 , 7 , 165 –176 10.1038/nrm1838 .16482094 
Cohen P. 
The role of
protein phosphorylation in human health and disease. The Sir Hans
Krebs Medal Lecture . Eur. J. Biochem. 
2001 , 268 , 5001 –5010 10.1046/j.0014-2956.2001.02473.x .11589691 
Blume-Jensen P. ; Hunter T. 
Oncogenic kinase signalling . Nature 
2001 , 411 , 355 10.1038/35077225 .11357143 
Brognard J. ; Hunter T. 
Protein kinase signaling
networks in cancer . Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 
2011 , 21 , 4 –11 10.1016/j.gde.2010.10.012 .21123047 
Boersema P. J. ; Mohammed S. ; Heck A. J. R. 
Phosphopeptide
fragmentation and
analysis by mass spectrometry . J. Mass Spectrom. 
2009 , 44 , 861 –878 10.1002/jms.1599 .19504542 
Paizs B. ; Suhai S. 
Fragmentation pathways
of protonated peptides . Mass Spectrom. Rev. 
2005 , 24 , 508 –548 10.1002/mas.20024 .15389847 
Mayer P. M. ; Poon C. 
The mechanisms of collisional
activation of ions in mass spectrometry . Mass
Spectrom. Rev. 
2009 , 28 , 608 –639 10.1002/mas.20225 .19326436 
Shukla A. K. ; Futrell J. H. 
Tandem mass spectrometry: dissociation of ions by collisional
activation . J. Mass Spectrom. 
2000 , 35 , 1069 –1090 10.1002/1096-9888(200009)35:9<1069::AID-JMS54>3.0.CO;2-C .11006601 
Mitchell Wells J. ; McLuckey S. A.   Collision-Induced
Dissociation (CID) of Peptides and Proteins. In Methods in
Enzymology ; Academic Press , 2005 ; Vol. 402 , pp 148 –185 .16401509 
McLuckey S. A. ; Goeringer D. E. 
SPECIAL FEATURE: TUTORIAL Slow Heating Methods in Tandem
Mass Spectrometry . J. Mass Spectrom. 
1997 , 32 , 461 –474 10.1002/(SICI)1096-9888(199705)32:5<461::AID-JMS515>3.0.CO;2-H .
Dongré A. R. ; Jones J. L. ; Somogyi Á. ; Wysocki V. H. 
Influence of Peptide
Composition, Gas-Phase Basicity, and Chemical Modification on Fragmentation
Efficiency: Evidence for the Mobile Proton Model . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1996 , 118 , 8365 –8374 10.1021/ja9542193 .
Wysocki V. H. ; Tsaprailis G. ; Smith L. L. ; Breci L. A. 
Mobile and localized
protons: a framework for understanding peptide dissociation . J. Mass Spectrom. 
2000 , 35 , 1399 –1406 10.1002/1096-9888(200012)35:12<1399::AID-JMS86>3.0.CO;2-R .11180630 
Jones J. L. ; Dongre A. R. ; Somogyi A. ; Wysocki V. H. 
Sequence Dependence
of Peptide Fragmentation Efficiency Curves Determined by Electrospray
Ionization/Surface-Induced Dissociation Mass Spectrometry . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1994 , 116 , 8368 –8369 10.1021/ja00097a055 .
Tsaprailis G. ; et al. Influence of Secondary Structure on the Fragmentation of Protonated
Peptides . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1999 , 121 , 5142 –5154 10.1021/ja982980h .
Cox K. A. ; Gaskell S. J. ; Morris M. ; Whiting A. 
Role of the site of
protonation in the low-energy decompositions of gas-phase peptide
ions . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
1996 , 7 , 522 –531 10.1016/1044-0305(96)00019-0 .24203424 
Summerfield S. G. ; Whiting A. ; Gaskell S. J. 
Intra-ionic
interactions in electrosprayed
peptide ions . Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Processes 
1997 , 162 , 149 –161 10.1016/S0168-1176(96)04512-0 .
Kapp E. A. ; et al. Mining a Tandem Mass
Spectrometry Database To Determine the Trends
and Global Factors Influencing Peptide Fragmentation . Anal. Chem. 
2003 , 75 , 6251 –6264 10.1021/ac034616t .14616009 
Palumbo A. M. ; Tepe J. J. ; Reid G. E. 
Mechanistic Insights into the Multistage
Gas-Phase Fragmentation Behavior of Phosphoserine- and Phosphothreonine-Containing
Peptides . J. Proteome Res. 
2008 , 7 , 771 –779 10.1021/pr0705136 .18181561 
Gronert S. ; Li K. H. ; Horiuchi M. 
Manipulating
the fragmentation patterns
of phosphopeptides via gas-phase boron derivatization: Determining
phosphorylation sites in peptides with multiple serines . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2005 , 16 , 1905 –1914 10.1016/j.jasms.2005.07.018 .16242953 
Rožman M. 
Modelling
of the gas-phase phosphate group loss and rearrangement in phosphorylated
peptides . J. Mass Spectrom. 
2011 , 46 , 949 –955 10.1002/jms.1974 .21915960 
Lanucara F. ; et al. Kinetic control in the
CID-induced elimination of H3PO4 from phosphorylated
serine probed using IRMPD spectroscopy . Chem.
Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 3845 –3848 10.1039/C4CC00877D .
Tholey A. ; Reed J. ; Lehmann W. D. 
Electrospray
tandem mass spectrometric
studies of phosphopeptides and phosphopeptide analogues . J. Mass Spectrom. 
1999 , 34 , 117 –123 10.1002/(SICI)1096-9888(199902)34:2<117::AID-JMS769>3.0.CO;2-V .12440389 
Lanucara F. ; Lee D. C.H. ; Eyers C. E. 
Unblocking
the Sink: Improved CID-Based
Analysis of Phosphorylated Peptides by Enzymatic Removal of the Basic
C-Terminal Residue . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 214 –225 10.1007/s13361-013-0770-2 .24297471 
Laskin J. ; Kong R. P. W. ; Song T. ; Chu I. K. 
Effect of the basic
residue on the energetics and dynamics of dissociation of phosphopeptides . Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 330–332 , 295 –301 10.1016/j.ijms.2012.09.013 .
Cui L. ; Yapici I. ; Borhan B. ; Reid G. E. 
Quantification of
Competing H3PO4 Versus HPO3 + H2O Neutral Losses from Regioselective
18O-Labeled Phosphopeptides . J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 141 –148 10.1007/s13361-013-0744-4 .24249041 
Cui L. ; Reid G. E. 
Examining
factors that influence erroneous phosphorylation
site localization via competing fragmentation and rearrangement reactions
during ion trap CID-MS/MS and -MS3 . Proteomics 
2013 , 13 , 964 –973 10.1002/pmic.201200384 .23335301 
Cotham V. C. ; McGee W. M. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
Modulation
of Phosphopeptide Fragmentation
via Dual Spray Ion/Ion Reactions Using a Sulfonate-Incorporating Reagent . Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 8158 –8165 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b01901 .27467576 
Svane S. ; Kryuchkov F. ; Lennartson A. ; McKenzie C. J. ; Kjeldsen F. 
Overcoming
the Instability of Gaseous Peptide Phosphate Ester Groups by Dimetal
Protection . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 3216 –3219 10.1002/anie.201108481 .
Brown R. ; Stuart S. S. ; Houel S. ; Ahn N. G. ; Old W. M. 
Large-Scale
Examination of Factors Influencing Phosphopeptide Neutral Loss during
Collision Induced Dissociation . J. Am. Soc.
Mass Spectrom. 
2015 , 26 , 1128 –1142 10.1007/s13361-015-1109-y .25851653 
DeGnore J. ; Qin J. 
Fragmentation of phosphopeptides
in an ion trap mass spectrometer . J. Am. Soc.
Mass Spectrom. 
1998 , 9 , 1175 –1188 10.1016/S1044-0305(98)00088-9 .9794085 
Everley R. A. ; Huttlin E. L. ; Erickson A. R. ; Beausoleil S. A. ; Gygi S. P. 
Neutral Loss Is a Very Common Occurrence in Phosphotyrosine-Containing
Peptides Labeled with Isobaric Tags . J. Proteome
Res. 
2017 , 16 , 1069 –1076 10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00487 .27978624 
Linke D. ; Hung C.-W. ; Cassidy L. ; Tholey A. 
Optimized Fragmentation
Conditions for iTRAQ-labeled Phosphopeptides . J. Proteome Res. 
2013 , 12 , 2755 –2763 10.1021/pr400113n .23668714 
Erickson B. K. ; et al. Evaluating Multiplexed Quantitative Phosphopeptide Analysis on a
Hybrid Quadrupole Mass Filter/Linear Ion Trap/Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer . Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 , 1241 –1249 10.1021/ac503934f .25521595 
Nagaraj N. ; D’Souza R. C. J. ; Cox J. ; Olsen J. V. ; Mann M. 
Feasibility
of Large-Scale Phosphoproteomics with Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation
Fragmentation . J. Proteome Res. 
2010 , 9 , 6786 –6794 10.1021/pr100637q .20873877 
Palumbo A. M. ; Reid G. E. 
Evaluation of Gas-Phase
Rearrangement and Competing
Fragmentation Reactions on Protein Phosphorylation Site Assignment
Using Collision Induced Dissociation-MS/MS and MS3 . Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 9735 –9747 10.1021/ac801768s .19012417 
Aguiar M. ; Haas W. ; Beausoleil S. A. ; Rush J. ; Gygi S. P. 
Gas-Phase
Rearrangements Do Not Affect Site Localization Reliability in Phosphoproteomics
Data Sets . J. Proteome Res. 
2010 , 9 , 3103 –3107 10.1021/pr1000225 .20377248 
Mischerikow N. ; Altelaar A. F. M. ; Navarro J. D. ; Mohammed S. ; Heck A. J. R. 
Comparative
Assessment of Site Assignments in CID and Electron Transfer Dissociation
Spectra of Phosphopeptides Discloses Limited Relocation of Phosphate
Groups . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2010 , 9 , 2140 –2148 10.1074/mcp.M900619-MCP200 .20233845 
Olsen J. V. ; et al. Higher-energy C-trap
dissociation for peptide modification analysis . Nat. Methods 
2007 , 4 , 709 –712 10.1038/nmeth1060 .17721543 
Kelstrup C.
D. ; Hekmat O. ; Francavilla C. ; Olsen J. V. 
Pinpointing Phosphorylation
Sites: Quantitative Filtering and a Novel Site-specific x-Ion Fragment . J. Proteome Res. 
2011 , 10 , 2937 –2948 10.1021/pr200154t .21526838 
Diedrich J. K. ; Pinto A. F.M. ; Yates J. R. 
Energy dependence of HCD on peptide
fragmentation: stepped collisional energy finds the sweet spot . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 24 , 1690 –1699 10.1007/s13361-013-0709-7 .23963813 
Schroeder M. J. ; Shabanowitz J. ; Schwartz J. C. ; Hunt D. F. ; Coon J. J. 
A Neutral
Loss Activation Method for Improved Phosphopeptide Sequence Analysis
by Quadrupole Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry . Anal.
Chem. 
2004 , 76 , 3590 –3598 10.1021/ac0497104 .15228329 
Michalski A. ; Neuhauser N. ; Cox J. ; Mann M. 
A Systematic Investigation
into the Nature of Tryptic HCD Spectra . J. Proteome
Res. 
2012 , 11 , 5479 –5491 10.1021/pr3007045 .22998608 
Jedrychowski M. P. 
Evaluation
of HCD- and CID-type Fragmentation Within Their Respective Detection
Platforms For Murine Phosphoproteomics . Mol.
Cell. Proteomics 
2011 , 10 , M111.009910 10.1074/mcp.M111.009910 .
Frese C. K. ; et al. Improved Peptide Identification by Targeted Fragmentation Using CID,
HCD and ETD on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos . J. Proteome
Res. 
2011 , 10 , 2377 –2388 10.1021/pr1011729 .21413819 
Pilo A. L. ; Peng Z. ; McLuckey S. A. 
The dehydroalanine
effect in the
fragmentation of ions derived from polypeptides . J. Mass Spectrom. 
2016 , 51 , 857 –866 10.1002/jms.3831 .27484024 
Papayannopoulos I. A. 
The interpretation
of collision-induced dissociation tandem mass spectra of peptides . Mass Spectrom. Rev. 
1995 , 14 , 49 –73 10.1002/mas.1280140104 .
Medzihradszky K. F. ; Chalkley R. J. 
Lessons in de novo peptide sequencing by tandem mass
spectrometry . Mass Spectrom. Rev. 
2015 , 34 , 43 –63 10.1002/mas.21406 .25667941 
Steen H. ; Küster B. ; Fernandez M. ; Pandey A. ; Mann M. 
Detection
of Tyrosine Phosphorylated Peptides by Precursor Ion Scanning Quadrupole
TOF Mass Spectrometry in Positive Ion Mode . Anal. Chem. 
2001 , 73 , 1440 –1448 10.1021/ac001318c .11321292 
Sleno L. ; Volmer D. A. 
Ion activation methods
for tandem mass spectrometry . J. Mass Spectrom. 
2004 , 39 , 1091 –1112 10.1002/jms.703 .15481084 
Zubarev R. A. ; Kelleher N. L. ; McLafferty F. W. 
Electron
Capture Dissociation of
Multiply Charged Protein Cations. A Nonergodic Process . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1998 , 120 , 3265 –3266 10.1021/ja973478k .
Syka J. E. P. ; Coon J. J. ; Schroeder M. J. ; Shabanowitz J. ; Hunt D. F. 
Peptide and protein sequence analysis by electron transfer
dissociation mass spectrometry . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2004 , 101 , 9528 –9533 10.1073/pnas.0402700101 .15210983 
Voinov V. G. ; Bennett S. E. ; Beckman J. S. ; Barofsky D. F. 
ECD of tyrosine
phosphorylation in a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer with a radio-frequency-free
electromagnetostatic cell . J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2014 , 25 , 1730 –1738 10.1007/s13361-014-0956-2 .25037842 
Fort K. L. ; et al. Exploring ECD on a Benchtop Q Exactive Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer . J. Proteome Res. 
2018 , 17 , 926 –933 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00622 .29249155 
Tureček F. ; Julian R. R. 
Peptide Radicals and Cation Radicals
in the Gas Phase . Chem. Rev. 
2013 , 113 , 6691 –6733 10.1021/cr400043s .23651325 
Zhurov K. O. ; Fornelli L. ; Wodrich M. D. ; Laskay Ü. A. ; Tsybin Y. O. 
Principles of electron capture and
transfer dissociation
mass spectrometry applied to peptide and protein structure analysis . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 5014 –5030 10.1039/c3cs35477f .23450212 
Qi Y. ; Volmer D. A. 
Electron-based fragmentation methods in mass spectrometry:
An overview . Mass Spectrom. Rev. 
2017 , 36 , 4 –15 10.1002/mas.21482 .26445267 
Anusiewicz I. ; Skurski P. ; Simons J. 
Refinements
to the Utah–Washington
Mechanism of Electron Capture Dissociation . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2014 , 118 , 7892 –7901 10.1021/jp5004819 .24605784 
Moss C. L. ; et al. Dipole-Guided Electron Capture Causes Abnormal Dissociations of Phosphorylated
Pentapeptides . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2011 , 22 , 731 –751 10.1007/s13361-011-0083-2 .21472611 
Shi S. D.-H. ; et al. Phosphopeptide/Phosphoprotein
Mapping by Electron Capture
Dissociation Mass Spectrometry . Anal. Chem. 
2001 , 73 , 19 –22 10.1021/ac000703z .11195502 
Stensballe A. ; Jensen O. N. ; Olsen J. V. ; Haselmann K. F. ; Zubarev R. A. 
Electron capture dissociation of
singly and multiply
phosphorylated peptides . Rapid Commun. Mass
Spectrom. 
2000 , 14 , 1793 –1800 10.1002/1097-0231(20001015)14:19<1793::AID-RCM95>3.0.CO;2-Q .11006587 
Molina H. ; Horn D. M. ; Tang N. ; Mathivanan S. ; Pandey A. 
Global proteomic profiling of phosphopeptides
using
electron transfer dissociation tandem mass spectrometry . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2007 , 104 , 2199 –2204 10.1073/pnas.0611217104 .17287340 
Sweet S. M. M. ; Bailey C. M. ; Cunningham D. L. ; Heath J. K. ; Cooper H. J. 
Large Scale
Localization of Protein Phosphorylation by Use of Electron Capture
Dissociation Mass Spectrometry . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2009 , 8 , 904 –912 10.1074/mcp.M800451-MCP200 .19131326 
Zubarev R. A. ; et al. Electron Capture Dissociation
for Structural Characterization of
Multiply Charged Protein Cations . Anal. Chem. 
2000 , 72 , 563 –573 10.1021/ac990811p .10695143 
McLuckey S. A. ; Stephenson J. L. 
Ion/ion
chemistry of high-mass multiply charged ions . Mass Spectrom. Rev. 
1998 , 17 , 369 –407 10.1002/(SICI)1098-2787(1998)17:6<369::AID-MAS1>3.0.CO;2-J .10360331 
Good D. M. ; Wirtala M. ; McAlister G. C. ; Coon J. J. 
Performance Characteristics
of Electron Transfer Dissociation Mass Spectrometry . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2007 , 6 , 1942 –1951 10.1074/mcp.M700073-MCP200 .17673454 
Liu J. ; McLuckey S. A. 
Electron transfer dissociation: Effects of cation charge
state on product partitioning in ion/ion electron transfer to multiply
protonated polypeptides . Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 330–332 , 174 –181 10.1016/j.ijms.2012.07.013 .
Rose C. M. ; et al. A Calibration Routine for Efficient ETD in Large-Scale Proteomics . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2015 , 26 , 1848 –1857 10.1007/s13361-015-1183-1 .26111518 
Pitteri S. J. ; Chrisman P. A. ; McLuckey S. A. 
Electron-Transfer
Ion/Ion Reactions
of Doubly Protonated Peptides: Effect of Elevated Bath Gas Temperature . Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 5662 –5669 10.1021/ac050666h .16131079 
Riley N. M. ; et al. Phosphoproteomics with Activated Ion Electron Transfer Dissociation . Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 6367 –6376 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b00212 .28383256 
Batth T. S. ; Francavilla C. ; Olsen J. V. 
Off-Line High-pH
Reversed-Phase Fractionation
for In-Depth Phosphoproteomics . J. Proteome
Res. 
2014 , 13 , 6176 –6186 10.1021/pr500893m .25338131 
Dickhut C. ; Feldmann I. ; Lambert J. ; Zahedi R. P. 
Impact of Digestion
Conditions on Phosphoproteomics . J. Proteome
Res. 
2014 , 13 , 2761 –2770 10.1021/pr401181y .24724590 
Woods A. S. ; Ferré S. 
Amazing Stability
of the Arginine–Phosphate
Electrostatic Interaction . J. Proteome Res. 
2005 , 4 , 1397 –1402 10.1021/pr050077s .16083292 
Asakawa D. ; Osaka I. 
High-Confidence Sequencing
of Phosphopeptides by Electron Transfer
Dissociation Mass Spectrometry Using Dinuclear Zinc(II) Complex . Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 12393 –12402 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b03645 .28193068 
Chamot-Rooke J. ; van der Rest G. ; Dalleu A. ; Bay S. ; Lemoine J. 
The Combination
of Electron Capture Dissociation and Fixed Charge Derivatization Increases
Sequence Coverage for O-Glycosylated and O-Phosphorylated Peptides . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2007 , 18 , 1405 –1413 10.1016/j.jasms.2007.04.008 .17560119 
Lu Y. ; Zhou X. ; Stemmer P. M. ; Reid G. E. 
Sulfonium ion derivatization,
isobaric stable isotope labeling and data dependent CID- and ETD-MS/MS
for enhanced phosphopeptide quantitation, identification and phosphorylation
site characterization . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 23 , 577 –593 10.1007/s13361-011-0190-0 .21952753 
Jackson S. N. ; Dutta S. ; Woods A. S. 
The use
of ECD/ETD to identify the
site of electrostatic interaction in noncovalent complexes . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2009 , 20 , 176 –179 10.1016/j.jasms.2008.08.021 .18835725 
Jackson S. N. ; Wang H.-Y. J. ; Yergey A. ; Woods A. S. 
Phosphate Stabilization
of Intermolecular Interactions . J. Proteome
Res. 
2006 , 5 , 122 –126 10.1021/pr0503578 .16396502 
Creese A. ; Cooper H. 
The Effect of Phosphorylation
on the Electron Capture
Dissociation of Peptide Ions . J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom. 
2008 , 19 , 1263 –1274 10.1016/j.jasms.2008.05.015 .18585055 
Kim D. ; et al. Probing
the Electron Capture Dissociation Mass Spectrometry of Phosphopeptides
with Traveling Wave Ion Mobility Spectrometry and Molecular Dynamics
Simulations . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2015 , 26 , 1004 –1013 10.1007/s13361-015-1094-1 .25832028 
Lopez-Clavijo A. F. ; Duque-Daza C. A. ; Creese A. J. ; Cooper H. J. 
Electron capture
dissociation mass spectrometry of phosphopeptides: Arginine and phosphoserine . Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2015 , 390 , 63 –70 10.1016/j.ijms.2015.07.024 .
Chen B. ; et al. The Impact of Phosphorylation on Electron Capture Dissociation
of
Proteins: A Top-Down Perspective . J. Am. Soc.
Mass Spectrom. 
2017 , 28 , 1805 –1814 10.1007/s13361-017-1710-3 .28685494 
Swaney D. L. ; et al. Supplemental Activation Method for High-Efficiency
Electron-Transfer
Dissociation of Doubly Protonated Peptide Precursors . Anal. Chem. 
2007 , 79 , 477 –485 10.1021/ac061457f .17222010 
Frese C. K. ; et al. Toward Full Peptide Sequence Coverage by Dual Fragmentation Combining
Electron-Transfer and Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation Tandem
Mass Spectrometry . Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 9668 –9673 10.1021/ac3025366 .23106539 
Frese C. K. ; et al. Unambiguous phosphosite
localization using electron-transfer/higher-energy
collision dissociation (EThcD) . J. Proteome
Res. 
2013 , 12 , 1520 –1525 10.1021/pr301130k .23347405 
Flora J. W. ; Muddiman D. C. 
Gas-Phase Ion Unimolecular
Dissociation for Rapid Phosphopeptide
Mapping by IRMPD in a Penning Ion Trap: An Energetically Favored Process . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2002 , 124 , 6546 –6547 10.1021/ja0261170 .12047170 
Crowe M. C. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
Infrared multiphoton dissociation (IRMPD) and collisionally
activated dissociationof peptides in a quadrupole ion trapwith selective
IRMPD of phosphopeptides . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2004 , 15 , 1581 –1592 10.1016/j.jasms.2004.07.016 .15519225 
Riley N. M. ; Westphall M. S. ; Hebert A. S. ; Coon J. J. 
Implementation of
Activated Ion Electron Transfer Dissociation on a Quadrupole-Orbitrap-Linear
Ion Trap Hybrid Mass Spectrometer . Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 6358 –6366 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b00213 .28383247 
Hunter T. 
Why nature
chose phosphate to modify proteins . Philos.
Trans. R. Soc., B 
2012 , 367 , 2513 –2516 10.1098/rstb.2012.0013 .
Kleinnijenhuis A. J. ; Kjeldsen F. ; Kallipolitis B. ; Haselmann K. F. ; Jensen O. N. 
Analysis of Histidine Phosphorylation
Using Tandem MS and Ion–Electron Reactions . Anal. Chem. 
2007 , 79 , 7450 –7456 10.1021/ac0707838 .17822303 
Kee J.-M. ; Oslund R. C. ; Perlman D. H. ; Muir T. W. 
A pan-specific
antibody for direct detection of protein histidine phosphorylation . Nat. Chem. Biol. 
2013 , 9 , 416 –421 10.1038/nchembio.1259 .23708076 
Oslund R. C. ; et al. A phosphohistidine proteomics strategy based
on elucidation of a unique gas-phase phosphopeptide fragmentation
mechanism . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 12899 –12911 10.1021/ja507614f .25156620 
Kee J.-M. ; Muir T. W. 
Chasing Phosphohistidine,
an Elusive
Sibling in the Phosphoamino Acid Family . ACS
Chem. Biol. 
2012 , 7 , 44 –51 10.1021/cb200445w .22148577 
Schmidt A. ; Ammerer G. ; Mechtler K. 
Studying the
fragmentation
behavior of peptides with arginine phosphorylation and its influence
on phospho-site localization . Proteomics 
2013 , 13 , 945 –954 10.1002/pmic.201200240 .23172725 
Fuhrmann J. ; et al. McsB is a protein arginine
kinase that phosphorylates
and inhibits the heat-shock regulator CtsR . Science 
2009 , 324 , 1323 –1327 10.1126/science.1170088 .19498169 
Gonzalez-Sanchez M.-B. ; Lanucara F. ; Hardman G. E. ; Eyers C. E. 
Gas-phase
intermolecular phosphate transfer within a phosphohistidine phosphopeptide
dimer . Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
2014 , 367 , 28 –34 10.1016/j.ijms.2014.04.015 .25844054 
Potel C. M. ; Lin M.-H. ; Heck A. J.R. ; Lemeer S. 
Widespread
bacterial protein histidine phosphorylation revealed by mass spectrometry-based
proteomics . Nat. Methods 
2018 , 15 , 187 –190 10.1038/nmeth.4580 .29377012 
Junker S. ; et al. Spectral Library Based
Analysis of Arginine Phosphorylations
in Staphylococcus aureus . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2018 , 17 , 335 –348 10.1074/mcp.RA117.000378 .29183913 
Bertran-Vicente J. ; et al. Site-Specifically Phosphorylated
Lysine
Peptides . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 13622 –13628 10.1021/ja507886s .25196693 
Kowalewska K. ; et al. Electron capture dissociation
mass spectrometric
analysis of lysine-phosphorylated peptides . Biosci. Rep. 
2010 , 30 , 433 –443 10.1042/BSR20090167 .20144148 
Bertran-Vicente J. ; Schümann M. ; Hackenberger C. P.R. ; Krause E. 
Gas-Phase Rearrangement
in Lysine Phosphorylated Peptides
During Electron-Transfer Dissociation Tandem Mass Spectrometry . Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 , 6990 –6994 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b01389 .26110354 
Sun F. ; et al. Protein cysteine phosphorylation of SarA/MgrA
family
transcriptional regulators mediates bacterial virulence and antibiotic
resistance . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 15461 –15466 10.1073/pnas.1205952109 .22927394 
Bertran-Vicente J. ; et al. Chemoselective synthesis
and analysis
of naturally occurring phosphorylated cysteine peptides . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 12703 10.1038/ncomms12703 .27586301 
Hauser A. ; Penkert M. ; Hackenberger C. P. R. 
Chemical
Approaches to Investigate Labile Peptide and Protein Phosphorylation . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2017 , 50 , 1883 –1893 10.1021/acs.accounts.7b00170 .28723107 
Penkert M. ; et al. Unambiguous Identification of Serine and
Threonine
Pyrophosphorylation Using Neutral-Loss-Triggered Electron-Transfer/Higher-Energy
Collision Dissociation . Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 3672 –3680 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b05095 .28218834 
Perkins D. N. ; Pappin D. J. C. ; Creasy D. M. ; Cottrell J. S. 
Probability-based
protein identification by searching sequence databases using mass
spectrometry data . Electrophoresis 
1999 , 20 , 3551 –3567 10.1002/(SICI)1522-2683(19991201)20:18<3551::AID-ELPS3551>3.0.CO;2-2 .10612281 
Eng J. K. ; McCormack A. L. ; Yates J. R. 
An approach to correlate
tandem mass spectral data of peptides with amino acid sequences in
a protein database . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
1994 , 5 , 976 –989 10.1016/1044-0305(94)80016-2 .24226387 
Cox J. ; et al. Andromeda: A Peptide
Search Engine Integrated into
the MaxQuant Environment . J. Proteome Res. 
2011 , 10 , 1794 –1805 10.1021/pr101065j .21254760 
Dorfer V. ; et al. MS Amanda, a Universal
Identification Algorithm Optimized
for High Accuracy Tandem Mass Spectra . J. Proteome
Res. 
2014 , 13 , 3679 –3684 10.1021/pr500202e .24909410 
Kim S. ; Pevzner P. A. 
MS-GF+ makes progress
towards a universal database
search tool for proteomics . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 5277 10.1038/ncomms6277 .25358478 
Jeong K. ; Kim S. ; Bandeira N. 
False discovery
rates
in spectral identification . BMC Bioinf. 
2012 , 13 , S2 10.1186/1471-2105-13-S16-S2 .
Marx H. ; et al. A large synthetic peptide
and phosphopeptide reference
library for mass spectrometry-based proteomics . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2013 , 31 , 557 –564 10.1038/nbt.2585 .23685481 
Ferries S. ; et al. Evaluation of Parameters for Confident Phosphorylation
Site Localization Using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer . J. Proteome Res. 
2017 , 16 , 3448 –3459 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00337 .28741359 
Beausoleil S. A. ; Villén J. ; Gerber S. A. ; Rush J. ; Gygi S. P. 
A probability-based
approach for high-throughput protein
phosphorylation analysis and site localization . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2006 , 24 , 1285 –1292 10.1038/nbt1240 .16964243 
Taus T. ; et al. Universal and Confident Phosphorylation Site Localization
Using phosphoRS . J. Proteome Res. 
2011 , 10 , 5354 –5362 10.1021/pr200611n .22073976 
Bailey C. M. ; et al. SLoMo: Automated Site
Localization of Modifications
from ETD/ECD Mass Spectra . J. Proteome Res. 
2009 , 8 , 1965 –1971 10.1021/pr800917p .19275241 
Savitski M. M. ; et al. Confident Phosphorylation
Site Localization
Using the Mascot Delta Score . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2011 , 10 , M110.003830 10.1074/mcp.M110.003830 .
Baker P. R. ; Trinidad J. C. ; Chalkley R. J. 
Modification
Site
Localization Scoring Integrated into a Search Engine . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2011 , 10 , M111.008078 10.1074/mcp.M111.008078 .
Fermin D. ; Walmsley S. J. ; Gingras A.-C. ; Choi H. ; Nesvizhskii A. I. 
LuciPHOr: Algorithm for Phosphorylation Site Localization
with False Localization Rate Estimation Using Modified Target-Decoy
Approach . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2013 , 12 , 3409 –3419 10.1074/mcp.M113.028928 .23918812 
Suni V. ; Imanishi S. Y. ; Maiolica A. ; Aebersold R. ; Corthals G. L. 
Confident Site Localization Using
a Simulated Phosphopeptide
Spectral Library . J. Proteome Res. 
2015 , 14 , 2348 –2359 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00050 .25774671 
Sharma K. ; et al. Ultradeep Human Phosphoproteome
Reveals a Distinct
Regulatory Nature of Tyr and Ser/Thr-Based Signaling . Cell Rep. 
2014 , 8 , 1583 –1594 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.036 .25159151 
Chalkley R. J. ; Clauser K. R. 
Modification Site Localization Scoring:
Strategies and Performance . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2012 , 11 , 3 –14 10.1074/mcp.R111.015305 .22328712 
Chalkley R. J.   Modification Site Localization
in Peptides. In Modern Proteomics–Sample Preparation,
Analysis and Practical Applications ; Springer : Cham, Switzerland , 2016 ; pp 243 –247 , 10.1007/978-3-319-41448-5_13 .
Wiese H. ; et al. Comparison of Alternative
MS/MS and Bioinformatics
Approaches for Confident Phosphorylation Site Localization . J. Proteome Res. 
2014 , 13 , 1128 –1137 10.1021/pr400402s .24364495 
Yang H. ; et al. pSite: Amino Acid Confidence Evaluation for Quality
Control of De Novo Peptide Sequencing and Modification Site Localization . J. Proteome Res. 
2018 , 17 , 119 –128 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00428 .29130300 
Kelstrup C. D. ; et al. Rapid and Deep Proteomes by Faster Sequencing
on a Benchtop Quadrupole Ultra-High-Field Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer . J. Proteome Res. 
2014 , 13 , 6187 –6195 10.1021/pr500985w .25349961 
Potel C. M. ; Lin M.-H. ; Heck A. J.R. ; Lemeer S. 
Defeating
Major Contaminants in Fe3+- Immobilized Metal Ion Affinity Chromatography
(IMAC) Phosphopeptide Enrichment . Mol. Cell.
Proteomics 
2018 , 17 , 1028 –1034 10.1074/mcp.TIR117.000518 .29449344 
Cook S. L. ; et al. Comparison of CID, ETD and metastable atom-activated
dissociation (MAD) of doubly and triply charged phosphorylated tau
peptides . J. Mass Spectrom. 
2012 , 47 , 786 –794 10.1002/jms.3023 .22707171 
Takahashi H. ; et al. Hydrogen Attachment/Abstraction
Dissociation
(HAD) of Gas-Phase Peptide Ions for Tandem Mass Spectrometry . Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 3810 –3816 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04888 .27002918 
Borotto N. B. ; Ileka K. M. ; Tom C. A.T.M.B. ; Martin B. R. ; Håkansson K. 
Free Radical Initiated Peptide Sequencing
for Direct Site Localization of Sulfation and Phosphorylation with
Negative Ion Mode Mass Spectrometry . Anal. Chem. 
2018 , 90 , 9682 –9686 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b02707 .30063332 
Brodbelt J. S. 
Photodissociation mass spectrometry:
New tools for
characterization of biological molecules . Chem.
Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 2757 –2783 10.1039/C3CS60444F .24481009 
Halim M. A. ; et al. Ultraviolet, Infrared, and High-Low Energy
Photodissociation of Post-Translationally Modified Peptides . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2018 , 29 , 270 –283 10.1007/s13361-017-1794-9 .28980177 
Smith S. A. ; et al. Enhanced Characterization
of Singly Protonated
Phosphopeptide Ions by Femtosecond Laser-induced Ionization/Dissociation
Tandem Mass Spectrometry (fs-LID-MS/MS) . J.
Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2010 , 21 , 2031 –2040 10.1016/j.jasms.2010.08.016 .20888783 
Shaffer C. J. ; Slováková K. ; Tureček F. 
Near-UV photodissociation
of phosphopeptide cation-radicals . Int. J. Mass
Spectrom. 
2015 , 390 , 71 –80 10.1016/j.ijms.2015.05.009 .
Fort K. L. ; et al. Implementation of Ultraviolet Photodissociation on
a Benchtop Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer and Its Application to Phosphoproteomics . Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 2303 –2310 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04162 .26760441 
Robinson M. R. ; Taliaferro J. M. ; Dalby K. N. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
193 nm
Ultraviolet Photodissociation Mass Spectrometry for Phosphopeptide
Characterization in the Positive and Negative Ion Modes . J. Proteome Res. 
2016 , 15 , 2739 –2748 10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00289 .27425180 
Mayfield J. E. ; et al. Mapping the Phosphorylation Pattern of
Drosophila
melanogaster RNA Polymerase II Carboxyl-Terminal Domain Using Ultraviolet
Photodissociation Mass Spectrometry . ACS Chem.
Biol. 
2017 , 12 , 153 –162 10.1021/acschembio.6b00729 .28103682 
Peng Y. ; et al. Top-down Proteomics Reveals Concerted Reductions in
Myofilament and Z-disc Protein Phosphorylation after Acute Myocardial
Infarction . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2014 , 13 , 2752 –2764 10.1074/mcp.M114.040675 .24969035 
Zabrouskov V. ; Ge Y. ; Schwartz J. ; Walker J. W. 
Unraveling
Molecular Complexity of Phosphorylated Human Cardiac Troponin I by
Top Down Electron Capture Dissociation/Electron Transfer Dissociation
Mass Spectrometry . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2008 , 7 , 1838 –1849 10.1074/mcp.M700524-MCP200 .18445579 
Brunner A. M. ; et al. Benchmarking Multiple
Fragmentation Methods
on an Orbitrap Fusion for Top-down Phospho-Proteoform Characterization . Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 , 4152 –4158 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b00162 .25803405 
Tamara S. ; Scheltema R. A. ; Heck A. J.R. ; Leney A. C. 
Phosphate
Transfer in Activated Protein Complexes Reveals Interaction Sites . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2017 , 56 , 13641 –13644 10.1002/anie.201706749 .
Chen Y. ; et al. Quantitative Mass Spectrometry Reveals that Intact
Histone H1 Phosphorylations are Variant Specific and Exhibit Single
Molecule Hierarchical Dependence . Mol. Cell.
Proteomics 
2016 , 15 , 818 –833 10.1074/mcp.M114.046441 .26209608 
Cleland T. P. ; et al. High-throughput analysis of intact human proteins
using UVPD and HCD on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer . J. Proteome Res. 
2017 , 16 , 2072 –2079 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00043 .28412815 
Lössl P. ; et al. Deciphering the Interplay among Multisite
Phosphorylation,
Interaction Dynamics, and Conformational Transitions in a Tripartite
Protein System . ACS Cent. Sci. 
2016 , 2 , 445 –455 10.1021/acscentsci.6b00053 .27504491 
Chen B. ; et al. Coupling functionalized
cobalt ferrite nanoparticle
enrichment with online LC/MS/MS for top-down phosphoproteomics . Chem. Sci. 
2017 , 8 , 4306 –4311 10.1039/C6SC05435H .28660060 
Madsen J. A. ; Kaoud T. S. ; Dalby K. N. ; Brodbelt J. S. 
193-nm
photodissociation of singly and multiply charged peptide anions for
acidic proteome characterization . Proteomics 
2011 , 11 , 1329 –1334 10.1002/pmic.201000565 .21365762 
Riley N. M. ; et al. The Negative Mode Proteome
with Activated Ion
Negative Electron Transfer Dissociation (AI-NETD) . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2015 , 14 , 2644 –2660 10.1074/mcp.M115.049726 .26193884 
McAlister G. C. ; et al. Analysis of the Acidic Proteome with Negative
Electron-Transfer Dissociation Mass Spectrometry . Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 2875 –2882 10.1021/ac203430u .22335612 
Shvartsburg A. A. ; Creese A. J. ; Smith R. D. ; Cooper H. J. 
Separation
of peptide isomers with variant modified sites by high-resolution
differential ion mobility spectrometry . Anal.
Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 8327 –8334 10.1021/ac101878a .20843012 
Shvartsburg A. A. ; Singer D. ; Smith R. D. ; Hoffmann R. 
Ion Mobility
Separation of Isomeric Phosphopeptides from a Protein with Variant
Modification of Adjacent Residues . Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 5078 –5085 10.1021/ac200985s .21667994 
Xuan Y. ; Creese A. J. ; Horner J. A. ; Cooper H. J. 
High-field
asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) coupled with
high-resolution electron transfer dissociation mass spectrometry for
the analysis of isobaric phosphopeptides . Rapid
Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2009 , 23 , 1963 –1969 10.1002/rcm.4101 .19504484 
Schmidlin T. ; et al. Assessment of SRM, MRM3, and DIA for the targeted
analysis of phosphorylation dynamics in non-small cell lung cancer . Proteomics 
2016 , 16 , 2193 –2205 10.1002/pmic.201500453 .27219855 
Kennedy J. J. ; et al. Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography Coupled
to Multiple Reaction Monitoring Enables Reproducible Quantification
of Phospho-signaling . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2016 , 15 , 726 –739 10.1074/mcp.O115.054940 .26621847

