
==== Front
BBA ClinBBA ClinBBA Clinical2214-6474Elsevier S2214-6474(13)00002-010.1016/j.bbacli.2013.10.001EditorialLaunch of BBA Clinical: Translating molecular insights to clinical research Keller Jeffrey N. Executive EditorJeffrey.Keller@pbrc.eduPennington Biomedical Research Center/Louisiana State University System, Baton Rouge, LA, USA07 12 2013 6 2014 07 12 2013 1 1 1 © 2013 Published by Elsevier B.V.2013This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).
==== Body
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) began publication in 1947. It was the first international journal dedicated to the publication of new findings from the emerging and synergistic fields of biochemistry and biophysics. Since that time, the titles within the BBA series have expanded to meet the needs of scientists focused on understanding the physics, molecular mechanisms, and biochemical underpinnings in diverse fields, including bioenergetics, proteomics, and lipid biology.

Today, we announce the newest title in the BBA collection, BBA Clinical, which is dedicated solely to human research studies. BBA Clinical will provide an important new forum for clinical researchers who use observational and clinical trial studies to understand the molecular and biochemical processes involved in human disease. The mission of BBA Clinical is to meet the needs of these researchers, as well as to provide a new resource for investigators who target biochemical pathways and processes in clinical trials and observational studies.

Our new BBA title is designed to build upon the history and prominence of this journal. Articles published in BBA Clinical will provide new insights concerning the biochemical mechanisms related to the diagnosis, progression, and treatment of a wide range of human diseases. Studies in the areas of aging, cardiovascular disease, hepatic disease, kidney disease, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, immune disorders, and cancer are particularly encouraged. Studies that incorporate cutting-edge imaging studies or other mechanistic approaches in clinical research are also invited. BBA Clinical has several key features to help ensure the impact of its content. Among these are timely and constructive manuscript evaluation by highly qualified reviewers, and an Editorial Board that includes Chief Editors for Clinical Research (Dr. Russell Swerdlow) and for Statistics (Dr. Ralph D'Agostino Jr.).

We live in the most exciting time in the history of clinical research. The scope and novelty of clinical research today, with new technological advances and intradisciplinary studies of human physiology and pathology, are unprecedented. Such efforts have provided numerous breakthroughs in the detection, management, treatment, and, most importantly, the prevention of many human diseases; and they have initiated starting points for the future of clinical research. BBA Clinical is intended to provide a new platform for the dissemination and furtherance of the novel and important clinical research that arises from each of these advances. Importantly, BBA Clinical will provide not just a useful forum for clinical research today: It is designed to be a prominent contributor to the larger overall body of clinical advancements far into the future, much as the original BBA journal has successfully done in the fields of biochemistry and biophysics over the past sixty-six years.

November 2013
