
==== Front
BioscienceBiosciencebioscienceBioscience0006-35681525-3244Oxford University Press 10.1093/biosci/biw111biw111Overview ArticlesAccelerating Tropicalization and the Transformation of Temperate Seagrass
Meadows Hyndes Glenn A. Heck Kenneth L. Jr.Vergés Adriana Harvey Euan S. Kendrick Gary A. Lavery Paul S. McMahon Kathryn Orth Robert J. Pearce Alan Vanderklift Mathew Wernberg Thomas Whiting Scott Wilson Shaun Glenn Hyndes (g.hyndes@ecu.edu.au) is an
associate professor, Paul Lavery is a professor, and Kathryn MacMahon is a senior lecturer
at the Centre for Marine Ecosystems Research of the School of Natural Sciences at Edith
Cowan University, in Western Australia. Kenneth L. Heck Jr. is a professor at the Dauphin
Island Sea Lab and at the University of South Alabama. Euan Harvey is a professor in the
Department of Environment and Agriculture at Curtin University, in Western Australia. Gary
Kendrick is a professor and Thomas Wernberg is an associate professor at the Oceans
Institute and School of Plant Biology at the University of Western Australia. Robert Orth is
a professor in the Virginia Institute of Marine Science at the College of William &
Mary, in Gloucester Point, Virginia. The late Alan Pearce was a principal research scientist
at the Western Australian Department of Fisheries. Mathew Vanderklift is a research
scientist at CSIRO Wealth Oceans Flagship, in Western Australia. Adriana Vergés is a senior
lecturer at the School of Biological, Earth, and Environmental Sciences and the Evolution
and Ecology Research Centre at the University of New South Wales, in Australia. Scott
Whiting and Shaun Wilson are principal research scientists at the Department of Parks and
Wildlife, in Western Australia. We dedicate this article to Alan Pearce, who passed away in
the late stages of this article's development.14 9 2016 01 11 2016 14 9 2016 66 11 938 948 © The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
the American Institute of Biological Sciences.2016This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial
re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.Abstract
Climate-driven changes are altering production and functioning of biotic assemblages in
terrestrial and aquatic environments. In temperate coastal waters, rising sea
temperatures, warm water anomalies and poleward shifts in the distribution of tropical
herbivores have had a detrimental effect on algal forests. We develop generalized
scenarios of this form of tropicalization and its potential effects on the structure and
functioning of globally significant and threatened seagrass ecosystems, through poleward
shifts in tropical seagrasses and herbivores. Initially, we expect tropical herbivorous
fishes to establish in temperate seagrass meadows, followed later by megafauna. Tropical
seagrasses are likely to establish later, delayed by more limited dispersal abilities.
Ultimately, food webs are likely to shift from primarily seagrass-detritus to more
direct-consumption-based systems, thereby affecting a range of important ecosystem
services that seagrasses provide, including their nursery habitat role for fishery
species, carbon sequestration, and the provision of organic matter to other ecosystems in
temperate regions.

Tropicalizationecosystem functionmegagrazersherbivoresfishinvertebratesARC Linkage fundsLP130100155
==== Body
Climate-driven changes in species composition and the novel ecological
interactions that follow can alter the production and functioning of biotic assemblages in
terrestrial and aquatic environments. A growing body of literature has documented range
shifts in plants and animals, changes in body size, and altered behavioral and ecological
interactions such as competition and predation (Poloczanska et al. 2013, Vergés et al. 2014).

Dramatic changes have occurred where the poleward expansion of herbivore populations has
led to the consumption of major habitat-forming plants, resulting in rapid shifts in
ecosystem states. Clear examples are transitions from complex, highly productive algal
forests to simple turf or barren substrates as tropical and warm-temperate herbivores have
immigrated to higher latitudes (Vergés et al. 2014
and references therein). This has been documented in the Mediterranean, Japan and Australia
(Vergés et al. 2014), with widespread loss of
extremely productive macroalgal forests through either direct overgrazing by tropical fishes
or heat stress followed by intense grazing by tropical herbivores. Collectively, such
changes have been termed tropicalization, which has been defined as an
increase in the ratio of tropical to temperate taxa in a given region (cf. Wernberg et al.
2013) or the entire suite of changes in species
composition, abundances, and interactions (Vergés et al. 2014).

Shallow coastal waters contain numerous and exceptionally rich and productive habitats,
including mangrove forests, salt marshes, coral, rocky, oyster and mussel reefs, and
seagrass meadows. Of special concern here—but comparatively less well known and appreciated
by the public (Duarte et al. 2013)—are the
extraordinarily productive, biologically diverse and economically valuable seagrass meadows
that are abundant in coastal areas of all continents except Antarctica. These habitats
provide valuable ecosystem services, including serving as important habitats for a range of
iconic species (figure 1) and nursery grounds for
numerous economically important finfish and shellfish, sequestering carbon, improving water
quality by intercepting the nutrients and organic matter carried by land runoff, stabilizing
sediments and preventing erosion (Barbier et al. 2011), and exporting seagrass detritus that supports productivity in other
ecosystems (Hyndes et al. 2014). Despite providing
these important services, seagrass meadows are among the planet's most threatened habitats,
with their known global areal extent declining by 29% since the late 1800s and losses
rapidly accelerating in the last two decades (Waycott et al. 2009). This has significant economic ramifications, because on a global
scale, seagrass meadows (combined with algal beds) have been estimated to provide ecosystem
services for nutrient cycling alone valued at approximately US$29,000 per ha per year
(Costanza et al. 2014). Although substantial, this
value is far lower than the valuation of AU$230,000 per ha per for enhanced fishery
production in southern Australia (Blandon and zu Ermgassen 2014). Regardless of the precise monetary value, the potential economic impact of
seagrass loss is significant.

Figure 1. Examples of seagrass species (a, b; photos by K. McMahon) and iconic fauna (c, d, e, f;
photos from NOAA) found in seagrass meadows.

These globally significant undersea meadows are highly susceptible to human-induced
perturbations that reduce the quantity and quality of light (Orth et al. 2006). Temperature changes also affect seagrasses
profoundly (Fraser et al. 2014). Recent worldwide
increases in sea temperature, along with the predicted rises during the coming decades (IPCC
2013), raise concern for the long-term
persistence of seagrasses in many areas. If temperate seagrass meadows of the world, most of
which are already stressed and in decline (Waycott et al. 2009), are further reduced by warming, major reductions in the quality and
quantity of ecosystem services they provide may be expected to take place. There is
therefore a clear and compelling need to evaluate and predict the consequences of these
changes.

Declining populations of seagrasses are expected as temperatures rise beyond their thermal
tolerances. This is already happening to some extent in Chesapeake Bay in the United States,
where the temperate eelgrass Zostera marina is experiencing losses caused
by summer temperatures exceeding its thermal limits (Moore et al. 2012). But many other indirect effects are likely to influence
temperate seagrass meadows if poleward migration by tropical seagrasses, algae, herbivores
and other taxa takes place. For example, tropical herbivores can shift food-web structure
from one based on detritivory to one based on direct plant consumption (Kelkar et al. 2013). Indeed, Heck and colleagues (2015) suggested that the continuing influx of
tropically associated herbivores into the northern, warm temperate Gulf of Mexico would
likely result in seagrass meadows that are cropped down to the height of closely mowed
lawns, greatly reducing their value as nursery grounds for many economically important
finfish and shellfish species (Heck et al. 2015).

In this article, we begin by synthesizing existing knowledge to develop generalized
scenarios of the most likely effects of tropicalization on the structure and functioning of
seagrass-dominated ecosystems. We then apply the lessons learned from this synthesis and,
when possible, make specific predictions about the expected changes that are likely to occur
to the expansive and globally significant temperate seagrass meadows along the west coast of
Australia. We focus on this region because it is (a) a biodiversity hotspot (Hopper 2009) with high numbers of endemic species and (b) an
ocean warming hotspot that is likely to be a sentinel of subsequent change elsewhere (Hobday
and Pecl 2014). Furthermore, seagrass meadows in
southwestern Australia form one of the most extensive, productive and species rich temperate
seagrass assemblages in the world (Carruthers et al. 2007), and they have recently experienced temperature increases previously
unrecorded, leading to defoliation and loss of meadows (Fraser et al. 2014). Therefore, there is a compelling reason to develop predictions
of the most likely future effects of tropicalization on these significant Australian
seagrass meadows and their many inhabitants (figures 2a and 2b). These predictions will be
particularly important to coastal zone managers worldwide, because seagrasses underpin the
support system of many coastal systems in the world.

Figure 2. A conceptual diagram representing the current features and processes in tropical (a)
and temperate (b) seagrass systems, as well as predicted features and processes in two
scenarios (c and d) of tropicalization along the west coast of Australia.

Mechanisms facilitating seagrass range expansion and contraction
Seagrasses have two principal mechanisms for colonizing new habitats: the dispersal of
propagules (seeds, fruits, and reproductive shoots) and clonal growth (Kendrick et al. 2012, McMahon et al. 2014). However, the usually slow rate of meadow expansion by clonal growth
dictates that rapid expansion of tropical species into temperate waters will occur mainly
through the recruitment and establishment of sexually derived propagules. Scales and rates
of expansion will depend primarily on the buoyancy of those propagules, with floating fruit
or reproductive shoots dispersing tens to hundreds of kilometers over days to weeks and
negatively buoyant seeds dispersing locally (McMahon et al. 2014). Long-distance dispersal can also occur via biological vectors
such as mammals, turtles, and waterbirds (McMahon et al. 2014), but range expansions are likely to be more often influenced by coastal
oceanography, prevailing winds, the availability of habitat for colonization, temperature
tolerances, and light and nutrient requirements (Kendrick et al. 2012).

Range expansion of tropical or subtropical Halophila species into
temperate regions has already been observed along the east coast of Florida in the United
States (Halophila johnsonii and H. decipiens; Virnstein
and Hall 2009) and Korea (H.
nipponica; Kim et al. 2009), with warmer
winters and increased water clarity suggested as potential environmental drivers. In
comparison, range contractions are more difficult to demonstrate and require greater
sampling effort (Bates et al. 2014). However, it is
likely that range contractions will occur and be associated with temperature stress. For
example, increased shoot mortality in Posidonia oceanica in the
Mediterranean Sea has been associated with increased temperature (Diaz-Almela et al. 2007). Temperature increases of 1–2 degrees Celsius
(°C) have, on several occasions, coincided with increased flowering intensity by P.
oceanica across a large portion of the Mediterranean, although this was combined
with high levels of seed abortion (Diaz-Almela et al. 2007). Similarly, 100% seed abortion was reported from Posidonia
australis meadows in Shark Bay during and after a heatwave in 2011 (Sinclair et
al. 2016).

Temperatures for optimal growth of temperate seagrasses (11.5–26°C; Lee et al. 2007) are lower than those of tropical species (e.g.,
32–35°C; Pedersen et al. 2016). Furthermore,
temperate seagrasses are typically exposed to greater annual temperature ranges, and they
commonly show large seasonality in growth and photosynthetic parameters that are controlled
in large part by water temperature (Bulthuis 1987).
Extreme changes in temperature can result in dramatic declines in photosynthesis,
productivity and survival of seagrasses (Marba and Duarte 2010). Temperature can affect a host of other plant functions, such as nutrient
uptake, nutrient partitioning, and respiration, with the result that the optima for growth
are often lower than those for photosynthesis (Lee et al. 2007) and can interact with other factors such as light intensity (Lee et al.
2007). We therefore predict reduced
photosynthesis, growth, and survival for at least some temperate seagrass species with
warming water temperatures. However, when predicting future distribution shifts of seagrass
species, it is important to recognize that range expansions will not only be determined by
the ability of species to successfully recruit and survive in new locations but also by
interspecific interactions such as competition (Bando 2006) and herbivory (Fourqurean et al. 2010).

Herbivory on seagrasses
A diverse array of herbivores, ranging from larger manatees and dugongs to small fish and
invertebrates, can occur in seagrass meadows and remove large amounts of seagrass biomass
(Heck and Valentine 2006). Although manatees and
dugongs target seagrass, herbivorous fishes and green turtles can feed on macroalgae as well
as seagrass (Heck and Valentine 2006), and
omnivorous fishes may supplement their diet with small amounts of seagrass or may remove
seagrass incidentally when targeting epiphytic flora and fauna (cf. Heck et al. 2015). Invertebrates such as urchins may target
seagrass leaves (Heck and Valentine 2006), whereas
others, including crabs and amphipods, can target seagrass reproductive tissue, compromising
sexual reproductive potential.

Species and functional diversity of many herbivores are typically higher in the tropics
(Floeter et al. 2005). Megagrazers—including
manatees (figure 1f; Trichechus
manatus and Trichechus senegalensis), dugongs (Dugong
dugon), and green turtles (figure 1e;
Chelonia mydas)—are often abundant in the tropics, where they have not
been overharvested, and can consume very large quantities of seagrass (Fourqurean et al.
2010). Dugongs (and sometimes manatees) can feed
in large herds comprising 100s of animals, removing 30%–67% of above- and belowground
biomass of seagrass (Marsh et al. 2011). In
comparison, green turtles (Chelonia mydas) aggregate in tropical,
subtropical and temperate seagrass meadows (Marquez-Guzman 1990). Although they are omnivorous, their diet is dominated by either algae or
the aboveground portion of seagrass (Bjorndal 1997).
Green turtles have a primary functional role in seagrass ecosystems (Bjorndal 1997), similar to manatees and dugongs, by modifying the
species composition, structure, and nutritional value and by short-circuiting the detritus
cycle (Lal et al. 2010). Bjorndal and Jackson
(2003) estimated that green turtles would have
consumed half the total annual Caribbean seagrass biomass of 1.2 × 1010 kilograms
prior to European settlement.

The diversity and abundance of herbivorous fishes in the tropics is also high (figure 1c; Floeter et al. 2005). On the basis of Cheung and colleagues (2012), the centers of distribution of tropical species are expected to shift
poleward by up to 245 kilometers (km) over 100 years, suggesting that they will affect
temperate seagrass meadows over that timeframe. Unvegetated “haloes” surrounding coral reefs
and experiments demonstrate intense grazing on tropical seagrass by reef-associated
parrotfish and other fish (Ogden 1977, Unsworth et
al. 2007). Feeding and consumption rates of
seagrass may, however, vary among herbivorous species, seasons, locations, as well as the
seagrass species and condition. For example, seagrass only becomes a major part of the diet
of some tropical fish species once they are mature adults (Nakamura et al. 2003). Therefore, tropical grazers recruiting to
temperate seagrass meadows may need to survive several winters before they significantly
affect local seagrass communities. In addition, because increased grazing rates on seagrass
leaves can result from previous grazing (Holzer et al. 2013) or high nitrogen content (Goecker et al. 2005), those meadows under stress from other types of grazers or eutrophication
may be more susceptible to grazing by herbivorous fishes.

Sea urchins form another important herbivorous group in the tropics, where they can consume
large amounts of both living and detrital seagrass (Alcoverro and Mariani 2002). In some instances, urchin-grazing rates can
exceed local rates of production and lead to overgrazing (Eklof et al. 2008). Because the abundance of urchins can fluctuate dramatically, the
relative importance of urchin grazing on seagrass biomass and productivity can vary greatly
from year to year and range from trivial to massive (Heck and Valentine 2006).

Temperate seagrass herbivores include only a handful of waterfowl, turtles, fish and
invertebrates (Heck and Valentine 2006). Marine
waterfowl—including ducks (e.g., the red-head duck, Aythya americana),
coots (Fulica atra), geese (e.g., the brant goose, Branta
bernicla), and swans (e.g., the black swan, Cygnus atratus)—are
all known to graze significantly on seagrass (Heck and Valentine 2006). Waterfowl feed by removing both above- and belowground material;
for example, black swans can remove over 90% of shoots and rhizomes (Dos Santos et al. 2012). Although the diversity of herbivorous fish in
temperate systems is relatively low (Floeter et al. 2005), their abundances can be high (Vergés et al. 2009). However, few species target seagrass as a primary food source
(Heck and Valentine 2006). Large invertebrates,
including sea urchins, can also be major herbivores in temperate systems (Ling et al. 2009), but similar to fish, few species appear to
solely feed on seagrasses.

From the above, there appears to be a strong tropical to temperate gradient in herbivore
diversity and, in some instances, in grazing rates. The net impact of herbivores on seagrass
biomass, however, does not currently vary consistently across latitude (Poore et al. 2012), probably because higher levels of production in
warmer latitudes compensate for greater losses to herbivores. The overall interpretation of
these patterns is complicated by the historical overharvesting of turtles and manatees in
the tropics, which suggests natural levels of herbivory in warmer latitudes were much higher
100–200 years ago (Jackson et al. 2001). Indeed,
large impacts on species composition and standing stock of seagrass meadows have been
recorded in regions where green turtle numbers have increased through conservation efforts
(Fourqurean et al. 2010, Lal et al. 2010). If these megagrazers continue to increase their
numbers and expand their ranges, both diversity and grazing rates are likely to increase in
temperate waters, and this will have a significant impact on seagrass meadows if plant
growth is not enhanced at a compensatory rate. This should be of particular concern in the
winter months, when temperate seagrass growth is strongly limited by light availability
(Fourqurean et al. 2010) and herbivory levels are
generally low (close to nil; Prado et al. 2007).

Trends and predictions along the west coast of Australia
The west coast of Australia, in the southeastern Indian Ocean, is strongly influenced by
the Leeuwin Current (LC), a warm poleward flowing current forming in northwest Australia
from water flowing through the Indonesian Archipelago. The LC is unusual for Eastern
Boundary Currents, which normally flow toward the equator, and is thought to have influenced
the west coast of Australia for over 16 million years (Wyrwoll et al. 2009) and to be responsible for the presence of corals and other
tropical fauna in the southern, temperate region of this coast. The strength of the LC is
related to the Southern Oscillation Index, making its influence on more southern waters
highly variable (Pearce and Feng 2007).

Rising water temperatures
Underlying the variability in the Leeuwin Current, there has been a gradual rise in sea
surface temperature (SST) over the last 100 years. For example, SST on the midwest coast
of Australia rose by over 1°C at a mean rate of approximately 0.1°C per decade between
1900 and 2013, although the rate of warming has been variable (figure 3). Similar rates of change along the northwest coast between 1950 and
2007 are considered equivalent to a southward isotherm shift of more than 100 km (Lough
2008). The southeastern Indian Ocean has, in
fact, been identified as one of a number of global “hot spots” experiencing enhanced
warming rates (Pearce and Feng 2007, Hobday and
Pecl 2014).

Figure 3. The annual mean surface temperatures (red line) at the Houtman Abrolhos Islands
(28°–29°S) off the midwest coast of Western Australia between 1900 and 2013, from the
HadISST data set (http://apdrc.soest.hawaii.edu/datadoc/hadisst1.php), and the 11-year
moving average to approximate decadal variability (blue line). The straight dotted
line is the linear trend for the individual annual mean temperatures. The mean
temperature rise was about 0.1°C per decade.

These larger-scale SST patterns may not be representative of the nearshore waters,
especially during winter months when heat loss to the atmosphere leads to a sharp cooling
of the shallow coastal zone (Pearce et al. 2006),
and there can be a temperature differences of approximately 4°C between the coast and the
shelf break. However, water temperatures near Perth (approximately 31.5°S) rose
approximately 0.13°C per decade between 1951 and 2002 (Pearce and Feng 2007) and approximately 0.3°C per decade from 1985 to
2004. On this basis, Lough (2008) predicted a
rise of up to 2°C in southwestern Australian waters by 2100. Superimposed on these trends
are intermittent warming events such as the 2011 heat wave (Pearce and Feng 2013), which produced record high sea temperatures
off southwestern Australia (figure 3), with
devastating consequences for marine life (Wernberg et al. 2013). Daily water temperatures along the midwest coast reached as
much as 5°C above the normal February–March mean as a result of strong (and seasonally
early) southward transport of warm tropical water by the LC, supplemented by anomalously
high air–sea heat flux into the ocean surface (Pearce and Feng 2013). Such extreme events are forecast to increase in frequency (and
possibly in intensity) into the future, continuing to drive poleward shifts in marine
communities (Wernberg et al. 2013).

Predicted seagrass response to rising temperatures
The west coast of Australia supports both tropical Indowest Pacific (IWP) and
Australasian temperate species of seagrasses. We predict that IWP species will likely
extend their ranges under elevated temperatures, whereas temperate species will likely
contract southward by 2100. We have taken a long-term multigenerational view of range
extension for tropical species because colonization rates may vary with the individual
species characteristics of the propagule (e.g., seeds, floating fruits, floating
reproductive fragments with viable seeds) dispersal (Kendrick et al. 2012) and movement ecology (McMahon et al. 2014). Range extensions have already been observed for mobile fish
and molluscs, corals, kelp, and seaweed communities along Australia's west coast (Wernberg
et al. 2016). To predict range expansions and
contractions by the end of the twenty-first century, we have estimated the annual mean
temperature at the southern limit of species’ current distribution and where that annual
mean temperature is expected to be in 2100 (see supplemental material for details). These
potential southern distributional limits of IWP species are based on temperature as the
sole determinant of their southern distributional limit, although we recognize that other
factors such as connectivity and life-history traits, substrate limitation, competition,
or herbivory can and will also influence distributions (as we discussed above).
Furthermore, because our focus is on tropicalization of temperate seagrass meadows, we
have not considered the contraction of distributions in the tropics.

We expect that several IWP species—including Cymodocea rotundata,
Enhalus acoroides, and Thalassodendron ciliatum—will
extend their southern limit by over 500 km by 2100 and therefore occur in a much larger
area than at present (figure 4). Species known to
be important forage habitats for a range of herbivores (e.g., Halophila
spinulosa and Halodule uninervis) will likely extend
approximately 200 km southward. In comparison, the range of Syringodium
isoetifolium, which already occurs in temperate waters in Western Australia, is
predicted to expand slightly and be similar to that of H. ovalis, which
ranges across the spectrum of latitudes in Australia (figure 4). Because the temperature shift could allow S.
isoetifolium to round the southwest corner of the continent, the large
east–west expanse of the south coast potentially becomes available for colonization.
Therefore, for these species, the range expansion is potentially very large.

Figure 4. The current (blue) and predicted end-of-century (orange) distributions of seagrasses
(top) and herbivores (bottom) along the west coast of Western Australia. See the
supplemental material for methods to determine distributions and their shifts.

For the major habitat-forming temperate species Amphibolis antarctica,
Posidonia australis, and P. sinuosa, photosynthesis
generally increases with increasing temperature across a 13–23°C temperature range (Masini
and Manning 1997). The optimum temperatures for
these species are south of their northern limit, suggesting that increasing water
temperatures should result in a southward contraction of their distributions. We predict
that the northern limit of A. antarctica and Posidonia
species will contract approximately 200–400 km by 2100 (figure 4). Supporting this prediction are studies showing that A.
antarctica shoot density was dramatically reduced following extreme
temperatures in 2011, as was the reproductive effort of P. australis
(Fraser et al. 2014, Thomson et al. 2015). We therefore predict that although the species
will continue to be present along the lower west coast, shoot density and production will
likely be reduced near their new northern distribution limits, potentially compromising
their abilities to compete with tropical species expanding southward and reducing their
tolerance to multiple disturbances. Over decades to centuries, they most likely will
contract southward, which could result in their disappearance from the Shark Bay Marine
Park and World Heritage Area.

Zostera nigricaulis and Z. polyclamys are already
limited in distribution to the lower southwest coast of Australia, with a further
contraction of half their latitudinal range likely by 2100 (figure 4). If correct, this would restrict these species to the south coast
(figure 4). Similarly, the temperate species
Thalassodendron pachyrhizum, which is endemic to the southwest of
Australia, is likely to be restricted to deeper waters and the south coast.

Herbivore responses to rising temperature
Dugongs currently graze on a variety of seagrass species across northern Australia, where
herds can remove 60%–99% of the aboveground biomass and 31%–75% of belowground biomass in
a single grazing trail (Marsh et al. 2011). In
Shark Bay, their southern limit along the west coast of Australia (Preen et al. 1997), dugongs forage preferentially on tropical
species (Burkholder et al. 2012) and can remove
50% of production in Halodule uninervis meadows (Masini et al. 2001). On the basis of the assumption that there will
be no geographic barrier preventing a southward migration, we predict that dugongs will
extend over 300 km southward into the warming water (water temp above 16°C) by 2100
(figure 4; see supplemental material for methods),
perhaps initially making southward forays during warmer months. Because dugongs can feed
extensively on Amphibolis antarctica during winter in Shark Bay, they
have the ability to consume this and possibly other temperate seagrass species.

Similar to dugongs, green turtles (Chelonia mydas) currently form
aggregations in waters north of Shark Bay (Preen et al. 1997), although resident green turtles can occur in waters as far south as Perth
(32°S). Although no grazing data exist for the west coast of Australia, green turtles can
consume up to approximately 200 grams dry weight per square meter per day of
Thalassia testudinum, resulting in significant impacts on the seagrass
canopy in the Caribbean Sea (Bjorndal and Jackson 2003). Although green turtles occur across a wide temperature and latitudinal
range (Marquez-Guzman 1990), cooler temperate
waters support lower numbers of turtles, often with nonreproductive individuals
(Marquez-Guzman 1990). We predict that warmer
temperate waters will likely lead to increased turtle abundances extending nearly 400 km
into southwestern Australia over the next century (figure 4), most likely leading to significant grazing on seagrasses in the region
(figures 2c and 2d).

The black swan (Cygnus atratus) has a broad distribution throughout
Australia but is common and the main macrograzer on seagrasses in estuaries of temperate
Western Australia. It is a significant grazer in the Swan River Estuary near Perth, where
it can remove 23% of production of Halophila ovalis (Choney et al. 2014). A range shift in black swans seems unlikely
(figure 4) because of their current broad
distribution. However, a habitat shift from wetlands to estuaries is possible, because the
black swan occurs in greater abundances in estuaries in summer and autumn, when freshwater
wetlands often dry out (Choney et al. 2014) and
declining rainfall due to climate change is likely to further reduce the habitat value of
wetlands. In this scenario, we suggest that estuaries will provide permanent water and
habitat for swans, possibly leading to increased grazing pressure on estuarine seagrasses.
Halophila ovalis is able to cope with high levels of swan grazing via
compensatory growth, but only in the summer (Choney et al. 2014); therefore, any increases in grazing through the winter are
likely to have a deleterious effect.

Of the suite of herbivorous fish species in northwest Australia, the marbled parrotfish
Leptoscarus vaigiensis is among the most likely species to have an
impact on seagrasses. It is common in the region (Lim et al. 2016) and is capable of consuming up to 10 times the rate of local
seagrass growth in the Indo-Pacific (Unsworth et al. 2007). We predict its distribution to expand poleward approximately 500 km over
the next century (figure 4; see supplemental
material for methods), leading to a likely impact on seagrasses in southwest Australia.
Similarly, the forktail rabbitfish Siganus argenteus is predicted to
expand to at least Shark Bay over the next century (figure 4). However, these predictions already underestimate the expansion rates of some
species, because viable breeding populations of Siganus spp. are now
established in the temperate coastal waters near Perth, possibly because of the 2011
heatwave described above (Nic Caputi, Department of Fisheries, Western Australia, personal
communication, 2014), and anecdotal evidence shows they have already started targeting
temperate seagrasses such as Posidonia australis as food (Michael
Tropiano, School of Plant Biology, University of Western Australia, personal
communication, 12 October, 2015). Similarly, the tropical range-shifting Siganus
luridus has been seen decimating temperate Posidonia oceanica
meadows in the eastern Mediterranean (Ozvarol et al. 2011).

Fishes grazing predominantly on seagrass in temperate and subtropical seagrass meadows
are rare, whereas the species diversity and abundances of omnivores, which feed
predominantly on epiphytes, not seagrasses, are high (Edgar and Shaw 1995). However, we predict that the distribution of some temperate
omnivore species, such as the blue weed whiting Haletta semifasciata,
will become restricted to the southwest corner of Australia (figure 4). Furthermore, with the possibility of more extreme range shifts for
seagrass-associated fishes than those predicted by Cheung and colleagues (2012), some species endemic to temperate regions may
become extinct, especially if they have specific habitat requirements or are co-dependent
on other species. Increasing temperatures are therefore likely to decrease the diversity
of temperate species, as well as promote the poleward expansion of tropical herbivorous
fish (as we described above), which is likely to alter the number and identity of
herbivorous species in temperate systems and increase consumption rates and lower the
standing biomass of temperate seagrasses (figures 2c and 2d).

Although sea urchins consume significant proportions of seagrass production in some
temperate ecosystems such as the Mediterranean (Alcoverro and Mariani 2002), they are not abundant in temperate Western
Australian seagrass meadows (less than 1 individual per square meter), although there have
been occasional reports of elevated abundances in small localized areas.
Tripneustes gratilla, which has caused several overgrazing events in
tropical Indo-Pacific (reviewed by Eklof et al. 2008), is present but in low abundances in tropical Western Australian seagrass
meadows. However, “boom and bust” population cycles demonstrated by sea urchins (Eklof et
al. 2008) might promote rapid expansion of
populations of warm-adapted species in temperate regions, similar to the successful
poleward range extension of the sea urchin Centrostephanus rodgersii on
the east coast of Australia (Ling et al. 2009).
This may lead to increased grazing rates on temperate seagrasses (figure 2c), but this is likely to occur sporadically because
of those cycles.

Conclusions
Tropicalization implies a shift in species distributions and/or relative species
abundances. There are likely to be winners and losers, with the likelihood of some, but
certainly not all, existing species being replaced with new ones. This reconfiguration of
ecosystem structure implies a potential for shifts in species interactions and/or the likely
appearance of novel ecosystem configurations. For tropicalized seagrass meadows, we predict
there will be changes both among the seagrasses themselves and among their associated
communities, including herbivores. Although changes in climate have disrupted ecosystems and
trophic interactions in the past over time scales ranging from years to millennia, the
changes we are observing now are much more rapid than in previous eras (Marcott et al. 2013). These changes are particularly fast in
southwestern Australia (Hobday and Pecl 2014),
creating a natural experiment and an opportunity to test our predictions for seagrass
systems more generally. We hypothesize that in temperate regions, the new configuration of
species will not initially resemble the original temperate or tropical assemblages, and the
biodiversity of seagrass meadows may increase substantially until a new equilibrium in the
number of species of plants and animals is reached. We also predict that tropicalization
will lead to an increase in herbivory because of the range expansion of plant-eating fishes
and megafauna (figure 2c), something already observed
as a result of a recent marine heatwave on the west coast of Australia and elsewhere around
the world (Vergés et al. 2014). Green turtles
already occur in small numbers in the temperate west coast of Australia, but their numbers
will likely increase as water temperature increases. With their narrower thermal tolerance,
dugongs should take longer to make their initial seasonal forays over the 200 km of coast
that lacks seagrasses between Shark Bay and the next meadows to the south, creating
uncertainty regarding their rate of expansion southward.

We predict that the establishment of tropical seagrasses will likely form the next, later
phase of expansion from tropicalization (figure 2d)
because of the more limited dispersal abilities of seagrass seeds and fruits. Once
established, clonal growth should allow meadows to gradually expand within temperate
regions. The direct physiological effects of increasing temperatures may be more positive
for tropical than temperate seagrass species, but temperature-related increases in plant
productivity may be counteracted by increased grazing rates on seagrasses. This effect is
likely to be greatest in winter months, when reduced solar radiation in temperate regions
limits seagrass growth.

Currently, the food web of seagrass meadows in southwest Australia is largely based on
detritus and epiphytic algae (Smit et al. 2005),
with large biomass of seagrass exported to adjacent ecosystems (Hyndes et al. 2014). Ultimately, we expect this detrital-based food
web to shift to one that is based more on direct consumption of seagrass. This has been
shown in tropical seagrass meadows of the Indo-Pacific, where turtle populations have
greatly increased, overgrazing and reducing the stature of seagrasses (Kelkar et al. 2013), which is likely to have flow-on impacts for
seagrass-associated fish and invertebrates and, importantly, the juveniles of economically
important fish and invertebrate species that rely on seagrasses as habitat (Lal et al. 2010). For example, reduced food availability for
subadult western rock lobster Panulirus cygnus, which forage in temperate
seagrass meadows in southwest Australia (MacArthur et al. 2011), could reduce harvests in a commercial fishery valued at approximately
AU$200 million. Also, increased consumption of seagrasses will likely result in less
detrital material flowing into other coastal ecosystems (e.g., beaches) that rely on that
material as a habitat and/or food and nutrient source (Hyndes et al. 2014). This predicted reduced detrital outflow would, have flow on
effects on coastal systems well beyond the boundaries of seagrass meadows.

If our predictions for the west coast of Australia are accurate, there are likely to be
far-reaching consequences of the tropicalization of temperate seagrasses there and elsewhere
that will affect the many valuable ecosystem services they provide. There is clearly a need
to evaluate the accuracy of these predictions as the symptoms of tropicalization become more
visible and to experimentally test a range of scenarios to inform management of how to adapt
to the impacts of tropicalization on the functioning of temperate seagrass meadows, not only
in Australia but also in seagrass meadows around the world.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Data Click here for additional data file.

 Acknowledgments
The workshop bringing the authors together was funded by Edith Cowan University. GAK and
RJO were partly funded by ARC Linkage funds (LP130100155). We thank Alan Kendrick and the
two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on the manuscript. This is contribution
no. 3569 of the Virginia Institute of Marine Science at the College of William and Mary.

Supplemental material
The supplemental material is available online at http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1093/biosci/biw111/-/DC1.
==== Refs
References cited

Alcoverro T , Mariani S  
2002 
Effects of sea urchin grazing on seagrass
(Thalassodendron ciliatum) beds of a Kenyan lagoon .
Marine Ecology Progress Series .
226 :255 –263 .

Bando KJBI.  
2006 
The roles of competition and
disturbance in a marine invasion . Biological Invasions .
8 :755 –763 .

Barbier EB , Hacker SD , Kennedy C , Koch EW , Stier AC , Silliman BR  
2011 
The value of estuarine and coastal ecosystem
services . Ecological Monographs .
81 :169 –193 .

Bates AE  
2014 
Defining and observing stages of
climate-mediated range shifts in marine systems . Global
Environmental Change .
26 :27 –38 .

Bjorndal KA.  
1997 
Foraging ecology and nutrition of sea
turtles . 199 –231 , Lutz P , Musick JA  
The Biology of Sea Turtles . 1 , CRC
Press .

Bjorndal KA , Jackson JBC  
2003 
Roles of sea turtles in marine ecosystems:
Reconstructing the past . 259 –273 ,
Lutz P , Musick JA , Wyneken J  
The Biology of Sea Turtles . 2 , CRC
Press .

Blandon A , zu
Ermgassen PSE  
2014 
Quantitative estimate of commercial fish enhancement
by seagrass habitat in southern Australia . Estuarine, Coastal
and Shelf Science .
141 :1 –8 .

Bulthuis DA.  
1987 
Effects on temperature on the
photosynthsis and growth of seagrasses . Aquatic Botany .
27 :27 –40 .

Burkholder DA , Heithaus MR ,
Fourqurean JW  
2012 
Feeding preferences of herbivores in a relatively
pristine subtropical seagrass ecosystem . Marine and Freshwater
Research .
63 :1051 –1058 .

Carruthers TJB , Dennison WC ,
Kendrick GA ,
Waycott M , Walker DI , Cambridge ML  
2007 
Seagrasses of south-west Australia: A conceptual
synthesis of the world's most diverse and extensive seagrass meadows .
Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology .
350 :21 –45 .

Cheung WWL , Meeuwig JJ , Feng M , Harvey E , Lam VWY , Langlois T , Slawinski D , Sun CJ , Pauly D  
2012 
Climate-change induced tropicalisation of marine
communities in Western Australia . Marine and Freshwater
Research .
63 :415 –427 .

Choney GE , McMahon K , Lavery PS , Collier N  
2014 
Swan grazing on seagrass: Abundance but not grazing
pressure varies over an annual cycle in a temperate estuary .
Marine and Freshwater Research .
65 :738 –749 .

Costanza R , de
Groot R , Sutton P , van der
Ploeg S , Anderson SJ , Kubiszewski I ,
Farber S , Turner RK  
2014 
Changes in the global value of ecosystem
services . Global Environmental Change .
152 :152 –158 .

Diaz-Almela E , N MarbÀ , Duarte CM  
2007 
Consequences of Mediterranean warming events in
seagrass (Posidonia oceanica) flowering records .
Global Change Biology .
13 :224 –235 .

Dos Santos VM , Matheson FE ,
Pilditch CA ,
Elger A  
2012 
Is black swan grazing a threat to seagrass?
Indications from an observational study in New Zealand . Aquatic
Botany .
100 :41 –50 .

Duarte CM , Losada IJ , Hendriks IE , Mazarrasa I , Marba N  
2013 
The role of coastal plant communities for climate
change mitigation and adaptation . Nature Climate
Change .
3 :961 –968 .

Edgar GJ , Shaw C  
1995 
The production and trophic ecology of shallow-water
fish assemblages in southern Australia, II: Diets of fishes and trophic relationships
between fishes and benthos at Western Port, Victoria . Journal of
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology .
194 :83 –106 .

Eklof JS , de la
Torre-Castro M , Gullstrom M , Uku J ,
Muthiga N , Lyimo T , Bandeira SO  
2008 
Sea urchin overgrazing of seagrasses: A review of
current knowledge on causes, consequences, and management .
Estuarine Coastal and Shelf Science .
79 :569 –580 .

Floeter SR , Behrens MD , Ferreira CEL , Paddack MJ , Horn MH  
2005 
Geographical gradients of marine herbivorous fishes:
Patterns and processes . Marine Biology .
147 :1435 –1447 .

Fourqurean JW , Manuel S , Coates KA , Kenworthy WJ , Smith SR  
2010 
Effects of excluding sea turtle herbivores from a
seagrass bed: Overgrazing may have led to loss of seagrass meadows in
Bermuda . Marine Ecology Progress Series .
419 :223 –232 .

Fraser MW , Kendrick GA ,
Statton J , Hovey RK , Zavala-Perez A ,
Walker DI  
2014 
Extreme climate events lower resilience of foundation
seagrass at edge of biogeographical range . Journal of
Ecology .
102 :1528 –1536 .

Goecker M , Heck K , Valentine J  
2005 
Effects of nitrogen concentrations in turtlegrass
Thalassia testudinum on consumption by the bucktooth parrotfish
Sparisoma radians . Marine Ecology Progress
Series .
286 :239 –248 .

Heck KL , Valentine JF  
2006 
Plant–herbivore interactions in seagrass
meadows . Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and
Ecology .
330 :420 –436 .

Heck KL , Fodrie FJ , Madsen S , Baillie CJ , Byron DA  
2015 
Seagrass consumption by native and a tropically
associated fish species: Potential impacts of the tropicalization of the northern Gulf
of Mexico . Marine Ecology Progress Series .
520 :165 –173 .

Hobday A , Pecl G  
2014 
Identification of global marine hotspots: Sentinels
for change and vanguards for adaptation action . Reviews in Fish
Biology and Fisheries .
24 :415 –425 .

Holzer KK , Seekell DA , McGlathery KJ  
2013 
Bucktooth parrotfish Sparisoma
radians grazing on Thalassia in Bermuda varies seasonally
and with background nitrogen content . Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology .
443 :27 –32 .

Hopper SD.  
2009 
OCBIL theory: Towards an integrated
understanding of the evolution, ecology and conservation of biodiversity on old,
climatically buffered, infertile landscapes . Plant and
Soil .
322 :49 –86 .

Hyndes GA , Nagelkerken I ,
McLeod RJ , Connolly RM , Lavery PS , Vanderklift MA  
2014 
Mechanisms and ecological role of carbon transfer
within coastal seascapes . Biological Reviews of the Cambridge
Philosophical Society .
89 :232 –254 .23980752 

[IPCC] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
2013 
Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . Cambridge University
Press .

Jackson JBC  
2001 
Historical overfishing and the recent
collapse of coastal ecosystems . Science .
293 :629 –638 .11474098 

Kelkar N , Arthur R , Marba N , Alcoverro T  
2013 
Green turtle herbivory dominates the fate of seagrass
primary production in the Lakshadweep islands (Indian Ocean) .
Marine Ecology Progress Series .
485 :235 –243 .

Kendrick GA  
2012 
The central role of dispersal in the
maintenance and persistence of seagrass populations .
BioScience .
62 :56 –65 .

Kim JB , Park JI , Jung CS , Lee PY , Lee KS  
2009 
Distributional range extension of the seagrass
Halophila nipponica into coastal waters off the Korean
peninsula . Aquatic Botany .
90 :269 –272 .

Lal A , Arthur R , Marba N , Lill AWT , Alcoverro T  
2010 
Implications of conserving an ecosystem modifier:
Increasing green turtle (Chelonia mydas) densities substantially alters
seagrass meadows . Biological Conservation .
143 :2730 –2738 .

Lee KS , Park SR , Kim YK  
2007 
Effects of irradiance, temperature, and nutrients on
growth dynamics of seagrasses: A review . Journal of Experimental
Marine Biology and Ecology .
350 :144 –175 .

Lim IE , Wilson SK , Holmes TH , Noble MM , Fulton CJ  
2016 
Specialization within a shifting habitat mosaic
underpins the seasonal abundance of a tropical fish .
Ecosphere . 7 , (art.
e01212) .

Ling SD , Johnson CR , Frusher SD , Ridgway KR  
2009 
Overfishing reduces resilience of kelp beds to
climate-driven catastrophic phase shift . Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences .
106 :22341 –22345 .

Lough JM.  
2008 
Shifting climate zones for Australia's
tropical marine ecosystems . Geophysical Research
Letters . 35 , (art.
L14708) .

MacArthur LD , Phillips D , Hyndes G , Hanson C  
2011 
Habitat surrounding patch reefs influences the diet,
nutrition and trophic linkages of western rock lobsters, Panulirus
cygnus . Marine Ecology Progress Series .
436 :191 –205 .

Marba N , Duarte CM  
2010 
Mediterranean warming triggers seagrass
(Posidonia oceanica) shoot mortality . Global
Change Biology .
16 :2366 –2375 .

Marcott SA , Shakun JD , Clark PU , Mix AC  
2013 
A reconstruction of regional and global temperature
for the past 11,300 years . Science .
339 :1198 –1201 .23471405 

Marquez-Guzman J.  
1990 
Sea Turtles of the World: An Annotated
and Illustrated Catalogue of Sea Turtle Species Known to Date .
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) Species
Catalogue . vol. 11. FAO Fisheries Synopsis no. 125, vol. 11.
FAO .

Marsh H , O·Shea T , Reynolds JEI  
2011 Ecology and Conservation of the Sirenia: Dugongs and
Manatees . Cambridge University
Press .

Masini RJ , Manning CR  
1997 
The photosynthetic responses to irradiance and
temperature of four meadow-forming seagrasses . Aquatic
Botany .
58 :21 –36 .

Masini RJ , Anderson PK ,
McComb AJ  
2001 
A Halodule-dominated community in a
subtropical embayment: Physical environment, productivity, biomass, and impact of dugong
grazing . Aquatic Botany .
71 :179 –197 .

McMahon K  
2014 
The movement ecology of
seagrasses . Proceedings of the Royal Society B .
281 , (art. 20140878) .

Moore KA , Shields EC , Parrish DB , Orth RJ  
2012 
Eelgrass survival in two contrasting systems: Role of
turbidity and summer water temperatures . Marine Ecology Progress
Series .
448 :247 –258 .

Nakamura Y , Horinouchi M ,
Nakai T , Sano M  
2003 
Food habits of fishes in a seagrass bed on a fringing
coral reef at Iriomote Island, southern Japan . Ichthyological
Research .
50 :15 –22 .

Ogden JC.  
1977 
Carbonate-Sediment Production by Parrot
Fish and Sea Urchins on Caribbean Reefs .
281 –288 , Frost SH , Weiss MP , Saunders JB  
Reefs and Related Carbonates: Ecology and Sedimentology. American Association of
Petroleum Geologists (AAPG) Studies in Geology . 4 ,
AAPG .

Orth RJ , Carruthers TJB ,
Dennison WC ,
Duarte CM , Fourqurean JW ,
Heck KL Jr,
Hughes AR , Kendrick GA , Kenworthy WJ , Olyarnik S , Short FT , Waycott M , Williams SL  
2006 
A global crisis for seagrass
ecosystems . BioScience .
56 :987 –996 .

Ozvarol Y , Ertan OO , Turna II  
2011 
The grazing effect of Siganus luridus
Ruppell, 1828 on Posidonia oceanica (L.) Delile, 1813 meadows in
Turkish Mediterranean coast (Gazipasa/Antalya) . Journal of Food
Agriculture and Environment .
9 :531 –533 .

Pearce AF , Feng M  
2007 
Observations of warming on the Western Australian
continental shelf . Marine and Freshwater Research .
58 :914 –920 .

Pearce AF , Feng M  
2013 
The rise and fall of the “marine heat wave” off
Western Australia during the summer of 2010/2011 . Journal of
Marine Systems .
111 :139 –156 .

Pearce AF , Faskel F , Hyndes GA  
2006 
Nearshore sea temperature variability off Rottnest
Island (Western Australia) derived from satellite data .
International Journal of Remote Sensing .
27 :2503 –2518 .

Pedersen O , Colmer TD , Borum J , Zavala
Perez A , Kendrick GA  
2016 
Heat stress of two tropical seagrass species during
low tides: Impact on underwater net photosynthesis, dark respiration and diel in
situ internal aeration . New Phytologist .
210 :1207 –1218 doi:10.1111/nph.13900 .26914396 

Poloczanska ES  
2013 
Global imprint of climate change on
marine life . Nature Climate Change .
3 :919 –925 .

Poore A  
2012 
Global patterns in the impact of marine
herbivores on benthic primary producers . Ecology
Letters .
15 :912 –922 .22639820 

Prado P , Tomas F , Alcoverro T , Romero J  
2007 
Extensive direct measurements of Posidonia
oceanica defoliation confirm the importance of herbivory in temperate
seagrass meadows . Marine Ecology Progress Series .
340 :63 –71 .

Preen AR , Marsh H , Lawler IR , Prince RIT , Shepherd R  
1997 
Distribution and abundance of dugongs, turtles,
dolphins, and other megafauna in Shark Bay, Ningaloo Reef and Exmouth Gulf, Western
Australia . Wildlife Research .
24 :185 –208 .

Sinclair EA , Statton J , Hovey R , Anthony J , Dixon KW , Kendrick GA  
2016 
Reproduction at the extremes: Pseudovivipary,
hybridization, and genetic mosaicism in Posidonia australis
(Posidoniaceae) . Annals of Botany .
117 :237 –247 .26578720 

Smit AJ , Brearley A , Hyndes GA , Lavery PS , Walker DI  
2005 
Carbon and nitrogen stable isotope analysis of an
Amphibolis griffithii seagrass bed .
Estuarine, Coastal, and Shelf Science .
65 :545 –556 .

Thomson JA , Burkholder DA ,
Heithaus MR ,
Fourqurean JW ,
Fraser MW , Statton J , Kendrick GA  
2015 
Extreme temperatures, foundation species, and abrupt
ecosystem change: An example from an iconic seagrass ecosystem .
Global Change Biology .
21 :1463 –1474 .25145694 

Unsworth RKF , Taylor JD , Powell A , Bell JJ , Smith DJ  
2007 
The contribution of scarid herbivory to seagrass
ecosystem dynamics in the Indo-Pacific . Estuarine, Coastal, and
Shelf Science .
74 :53 –62 .

Vergés A , Alcoverro T ,
Ballesteros E  
2009 
Role of fish herbivory in structuring the vertical
distribution of canopy algae Cystoseira spp. in the Mediterranean Sea .
Marine Ecology Progress Series .
375 :1 –11 .

Vergés A  
2014 
The tropicalization of temperate marine
ecosystems: Climate-mediated changes in herbivory and community phase
shifts . Proceedings of the Royal Society B .
281 , (art. 20140846) .

Virnstein RW , Hall LM  
2009 
Northern range extension of the seagrasses
Halophila johnsonii and Halophila decipienis along
the east coast of Florida, USA . Aquatic Botany .
90 :89 –92 .

Waycott M  
2009 
Accelerating loss of seagrasses across
the globe threatens coastal ecosystems . Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences .
106 :12377 –12381 .

Wernberg T , Smale DA , Tuya F , Thomsen MS , Langlois TJ , de
Bettignies T , Bennett S , Rousseaux CS  
2013 
An extreme climatic event alters marine ecosystem
structure in a global biodiversity hotspot . Nature Climate
Change .
3 :78 –82 .

Wernberg T  
2016 
Climate driven phase shift of a
temperate marine ecosystem . Science .
353 :169 –172 .27387951 

Wyrwoll K-H , Greenstein BJ ,
Kendrick GW ,
Chen G-S  
2009 
The palaeoceonography of the Leeuwin Current:
Implications for a future world . Journal of the Royal Society of
Western Australia .
92 :37 –51 .
