
==== Front
BioscienceBiosciencebiosciencebioscienceBioscience0006-35681525-3244Oxford University Press 10.1093/biosci/biw092ViewpointSaving the World's Terrestrial Megafauna Ripple William J. Chapron Guillaume López-Bao José Vicente Durant Sarah M. Macdonald David W. Lindsey Peter A. Bennett Elizabeth L. Beschta Robert L. Bruskotter Jeremy T. Campos-Arceiz Ahimsa Corlett Richard T. Darimont Chris T. Dickman Amy J. Dirzo Rodolfo Dublin Holly T. Estes James A. Everatt Kristoffer T. Galetti Mauro Goswami Varun R. Hayward Matt W. Hedges Simon Hoffmann Michael Hunter Luke T. B. Kerley Graham I. H. Letnic Mike Levi Taal Maisels Fiona Morrison John C. Nelson Michael Paul Newsome Thomas M. Painter Luke Pringle Robert M. Sandom Christopher J. Terborgh John Treves Adrian Van Valkenburgh Blaire Vucetich John A. Wirsing Aaron J. Wallach Arian D. Wolf Christopher Woodroffe Rosie Young Hillary Zhang Li William J. Ripple (bill.ripple@oregonstate.edu),
Robert L. Beschta, Michael Paul Nelson, Luke Painter Christopher Wolf, and Thomas M.
Newsome are affiliated with the Global Trophic Cascades Program of the Department of
Forest Ecosystems and Society at Oregon State University, in Corvallis; TMN is also
with the Desert Ecology Research Group of the School of Biological Sciences at the
University of Sydney, in Australia; the Centre for Integrative Ecology at the School
of Life and Environmental Sciences at Deakin University, in Geelong, Australia; and
the School of Environmental and Forest Sciences, at the University of Washington, in
Seattle. Guillaume Chapron is affiliated with the Department of Ecology at the
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, in Riddarhyttan. José Vicente López-Bao
is with the Research Unit of Biodiversity at Oviedo University, in Mieres, Spain.
Sarah M. Durant and Rosie Woodroffe are with the Institute of Zoology at the
Zoological Society of London, Regents Park. David W. Macdonald and Amy J. Dickman
are with the Wildlife Conservation Research Unit of the Department of Zoology at the
University of Oxford and the Recanati-Kaplan Centre, in Abingdon, United Kingdom.
Peter A. Lindsey and Luke T. B. Hunter are affiliated with Panthera, in New York.
PAL is also affiliated with the Mammal Research Institute of the Department of
Zoology and Entomology at the University of Pretoria, in Gauteng, South Africa; and
LTBH is also affiliated with the School of Life Sciences at the University of
KwaZulu-Natal in Durban, South Africa. Elizabeth L. Bennett, Simon Hedges, and Fiona
Maisels are affiliated with the Wildlife Conservation Society, in New York; FM is
also with the School of Natural Sciences at the University of Stirling, in the
United Kingdom. Holly T. Dublin is affiliated with IUCN Species Survival
Commission's African Elephant Specialist Group at the IUCN Eastern and Southern
African Regional Office in Nairobi, Kenya. Jeremy T. Bruskotter is affiliated with
the School of Environment and Natural Resources at The Ohio State University, in
Columbus. Ahimsa Campos-Arceiz is with the School of Geography at the University of
Nottingham Malaysia Campus. Richard T. Corlett is affiliated with the Center for
Integrative Conservation of the Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden at the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, in Menglun, Yunnan, China. Chris T. Darimont is with
the Department of Geography at the University of Victoria and the Raincoast
Conservation Foundation, in British Columbia, Canada. Rodolfo Dirzo is affiliated
with the Department of Biology at Stanford University, in California. James A. Estes
is with the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology at the University of
California, in Santa Cruz. Kristoffer T. Everatt, Matt W. Hayward, and Graham I. H.
Kerley are affiliated with the Centre for African Conservation Ecology at Nelson
Mandela University, in Port Elizabeth, South Africa; MWH is also with the School of
Biological Science and the School of Environment, Natural Resources, and Geography
at Bangor University, in Gwynedd, United Kingdom, and the Centre for Wildlife
Management at the University of Pretoria, in South Africa. Mauro Galetti is
affiliated with the Departamento de Ecologia at the Universidade Estadual Paulista,
in Rio Claro, Brazil. Varun R. Goswami is with the Wildlife Conservation Society,
India Program, in Bangalore, India. Michael Hoffmann is with the International Union
for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Species Survival Commission, in Gland,
Switzerland. Mike Letnic is affiliated with the Centre for Ecosystem Science at the
University of New South Wales, in Sydney, Australia. Taal Levi is affiliated with
the Department of Fisheries and Wildlife at Oregon State University, in Corvallis.
John C. Morrison is affiliated with the World Wildlife Fund–US, in Hope, Maine.
Robert M. Pringle is affiliated with the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary
Biology at Princeton University, in New Jersey. Christopher J. Sandom is with the
School of Life Sciences at the University of Sussex, in Brighton, United Kingdom.
John Terborgh is affiliated with the Nicholas School of the Environment and Earth
Sciences at Duke University, in Durham, North Carolina. Adrian Treves is with the
Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies at the University of Wisconsin, in
Madison. Blaire Van Valkenburgh is affiliated with the Department of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology at the University of California, Los Angeles. John A. Vucetich
is with the School of Forest Resources and Environmental Science at Michigan
Technological University, in Houghton. Aaron J. Wirsing is with the School of
Environmental and Forest Sciences at the University of Washington, in Seattle. Arian
D. Wallach is with the Centre for Compassionate Conservation in the School of Life
Sciences at the University of Technology, in Sydney, Australia. Hillary Young is
affiliated with the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology at the University
of California, Santa Barbara. Li Zhang is affiliated with the Institute of Ecology
at the Beijing Normal University, in PR China.01 10 2016 27 7 2016 27 7 2016 66 10 807 812 © The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of the American Institute of Biological Sciences.2016This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which
permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please
contact journals.permissions@oup.com
==== Body
From the late Pleistocene to the Holocene and now the so-called
Anthropocene, humans have been driving an ongoing series of species declines and
extinctions (Dirzo et al. 2014).
Large-bodied mammals are typically at a higher risk of extinction than smaller ones
(Cardillo et al. 2005). However, in some
circumstances, terrestrial megafauna populations have been able to recover some of
their lost numbers because of strong conservation and political commitment, as well
as human cultural changes (Chapron et al. 2014). Indeed, many would be in considerably worse predicaments in the
absence of conservation action (Hoffmann et al. 2015). Nevertheless, most mammalian megafauna face dramatic range
contractions and population declines. In fact, 59% of the world's largest carnivores
(more than or equal to 15 kilograms, n = 27) and 60% of the world's
largest herbivores (more than or equal to 100 kilograms, n = 74)
are classified as threatened with extinction on the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List (supplemental tables S1 and S2). This
situation is particularly dire in sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia, home to the
greatest diversity of extant megafauna (figure 1). Species at risk of extinction include some of the world's most
iconic animals—such as gorillas, rhinos, and big cats (figure 2 top row)—and, unfortunately, they are vanishing just as
science is discovering their essential ecological roles (Estes et al. 2011). Here, our objectives are to raise
awareness of how these megafauna are imperiled (species in tables S1 and S2) and to
stimulate broad interest in developing specific recommendations and concerted action
to conserve them.

Figure 1. A richness map of (a) the number of megafaunal species, (b) the number of
declining megafauna species, and (c) the number of threatened megafaunal
species in their native ranges. Megafauna are defined as terrestrial large
carnivores (more than 15 kilograms) and large herbivores (more than 100
kilograms). Threatened includes all species categorized as Vulnerable,
Endangered, or Critically Endangered on the IUCN Red List (see supplemental
tables).

Figure 2. Photographic examples of threatened megafauna. Top row left to right: photos
of well-known species, including the Western gorilla (Gorilla gorilla) (CR),
black rhino (Diceros bicornis) (CR), and Bengal tiger, (Panthera tigris
tigris) (EN). Bottom row left to right: photos of lesser-known species,
including the African wild ass (Equus africanus) (CR), Visayan warty pig
(Sus cebifrons) (CR), and banteng (Bos javanicus) (EN). Photo credits: Julio
Yeste, Four Oaks, Dave M. Hunt, Mikhail Blajenov, KMW Photography, and
Kajornyot.

Megafauna provide a range of distinct ecosystem services through top-down biotic and
knock-on abiotic processes (Estes et al. 2011). Many megafauna function as keystone species and ecological
engineers, generating strong cascading effects in the ecosystems in which they
occur. These species also provide important economic and social services. For
example, ecotourism is the fastest growing subsector of tourism in developing
countries (UNEP 2013), and megafauna are a
major draw for these tourists. Besides contributing considerable revenue to
conservation, wildlife-based tourism can contribute significantly to education,
economies, job creation, and human livelihoods.

Many of the surviving mammalian megafauna remain beset by long-standing and generally
escalating threats of habitat loss, persecution, and exploitation (Ripple et al.
2014, 2015). Large mammals are extremely vulnerable to these threats because
of their large area requirements, low densities (particularly for carnivores), and
relatively “slow” life-history traits (Wallach et al. 2015). Various anthropogenic forces such as deforestation,
agricultural expansion, increasing livestock numbers, and other forms of human
encroachment have severely degraded critical habitat for megafauna by increased
fragmentation or reduced resource availability. Although some species show
resilience by adapting to new scenarios under certain conditions (Chapron et al.
2014), livestock production, human
population growth, and cumulative land-use impacts can trigger new conflicts or
exacerbate existing ones, leading to additional declines. According to the Food and
Agriculture Organization, as of 2014, there were an estimated 3.9 billion ruminant
livestock on Earth compared with approximately 8.5 million individuals of 51 of the
74 species of wild megaherbivores for which population estimates are available
within their native ranges (table S2), a magnitude difference of approximately 400
times.

The current depletion of megafauna is also due to overhunting and persecution:
shooting, snaring, and poisoning by humans ranging from individuals to governments,
as well as by organized criminals and terrorists (Darimont et al. 2015). Megafauna are killed for meat and body
parts for traditional medicine and ornaments or because of actual or perceived
threats to humans, their crops, or livestock. Meat and body parts are sold locally,
sold to urban markets, or traded regionally and internationally. Striking instances
include the slaughter of thousands of megafauna, such as African elephants
(Loxodonta africana) for their ivory, rhinoceroses for their
horns, and tigers (Panthera tigris) for their body parts. In
addition, many lesser-known megafauna species (figure 2, bottom row) are now imperiled (tables S1 and S2). Most of
the world's megaherbivores remain poorly studied, and this knowledge gap makes
conserving them even more difficult (Ripple et al. 2015).

Under a business-as-usual scenario, conservation scientists will soon be busy writing
obituaries for species and subspecies of megafauna as they vanish from the planet.
In fact, this process is already underway: eulogies have been written for Africa's
western black rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis longipes) and the
Vietnamese subspecies of the Javan rhinoceros (Rhinoceros sondaicus
annamiticus, IUCN 2015).
Epitaphs will probably soon be needed for the kouprey (Bos
sauveli), last seen in 1988; and the northern white rhinoceros
(Ceratotherium simum cottoni), which now numbers three
individuals (IUCN 2015). The Sumatran rhino
(Dicerorhinus sumatrensis) is already extinct in the wild in
Malaysia and is very close to extinction in Indonesia, with the population
collapsing during the last 30 years from over 800 to fewer than 100 (table S2). The
Javan rhino (Rhinoceros sondaicus) is down to a single population
of approximately 58 in a single reserve (table S2). The Critically Endangered
Bactrian camel (Camelus ferus) and African wild ass (Equus
africanus) are not far behind. Even in protected areas, megafauna are
increasingly under assault. For example, in West and Central Africa, several large
carnivores (including lions, Panthera leo; African wild dogs,
Lycaon pictus; and cheetahs, Acinonyx jubatus)
have experienced recent severe range contractions and have declined markedly in many
protected areas (IUCN 2015).

Although many of the general causes and mechanisms of declines are well identified
and recognized, this understanding has not translated into adequate conservation
action. Some of the existing mammal-prioritization schemes could be incorporated
into a comprehensive global strategy for conserving the largest mammals (Rondinini
et al. 2011). Increasing prioritization and
political will to conserve megafauna—and actions to restore or reintroduce them in
areas where they have declined or been extirpated (such as plans to reintroduce
scimitar-horned oryx into Chad and to rehabilitate the entire Gorongosa ecosystem in
Mozambique)—are urgently needed. We suggest that the problem has two parts: (1) a
need to further and more effectively implement, expand, and refine current
interventions at relevant scales and (2) a need for large-scale policy shifts and
global increases in funding for conservation to alter the framework and ways in
which people interact with wildlife.

In order to save declining species, there is a need to increase global conservation
funding by at least an order of magnitude (McCarthy et al. 2012). Without such a transformation, there is a risk that
many of the world's most iconic species may not survive to the twenty-second
century. We must not go quietly into this impoverished future. Rather, we believe it
is our collective responsibility as scientists who study megafauna to act to prevent
their decline. We therefore present a call to the broader international community to
join together in conserving the remaining terrestrial megafauna (see declaration in
box 1).

Box 1. A declaration to save the world's terrestrial megafauna.
We conservation scientists 


Acknowledge that most of the terrestrial
megafauna species are threatened with extinction and have declining
populations. Some megafauna species that are not globally threatened
nonetheless face local extinctions or have Critically Endangered
subspecies.


Appreciate that “business as usual” will
result in the loss of many of the Earth's most iconic species.


Understand that megafauna have ecological
roles that directly and indirectly affect ecosystem processes and
other species throughout the food web; failure to reverse megafaunal
declines will disrupt species interactions, with negative
consequences for ecosystem function; biological diversity; and the
ecological, economic, and social services that these species
provide.


Realize that megafauna are epitomized as a
symbol of the wilderness, exemplifying the public's engagement in
nature, and that this is a driving force behind efforts to maintain
the ecosystem services they can provide.


Recognize the importance of integrating and
better aligning human development and biodiversity conservation
needs through the engagement and support of local communities in
developing countries.


Propose that funding agencies and scientists
increase conservation research efforts in developing countries,
where most threatened megafauna occur. Specifically, there is a need
to increase the amount of research directed at finding solutions for
the conservation of megafauna, especially for lesser-known
species.


Request the help of individuals, governments,
corporations, and nongovernmental organizations to stop practices
that are harmful to these species and to actively engage in helping
to reverse declines in megafauna.


Strive for increased awareness among the
global public of the current megafauna crisis using traditional
media as well as social media and other networking approaches.


Seek a new and comprehensive global commitment
and framework for conserving megafauna. The international community
should take necessary action to prevent mass extinction of the
world's megafauna and other species.


Urge the development of new funding mechanisms
to transfer the current benefits accrued through the existence
values of megafauna into tangible payments to support research,
conservation actions, and local people who bear the cost of living
with wildlife in the places where highly valued megafauna must be
preserved.


Advocate for interdisciplinary scientific
interchange between nations to improve the social and ecological
understanding of the drivers of the decline of megafauna and to
increase the capacity for megafauna science and conservation.


Recommend the reintroduction and
rehabilitation, following accepted IUCN guidelines, of degraded
megafauna populations whenever possible, the ecological and economic
importance of which is evidenced by a growing number of success
stories, from Yellowstone's wolves (Canis lupus)
and the Père David's deer (Elaphurus davidianus) in
China to the various megafauna species of Gorongosa National Park in
Mozambique.


Affirm an abiding moral obligation to protect
the Earth's megafauna.

From declaration to action
Social and political commitment to provide sufficient protection across the vast
landscapes needed for the conservation of the world's megafauna is increasingly
required. International frameworks and conventions such as the Convention on
Biological Diversity (CBD), the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species
of Wild Animals (CMS), and the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) have had some success in safeguarding
species. However, the decisions of these conventions are not always binding, and
they will require substantially increased political will and financial support if
they are to be effective in the critical task of securing the survival of the
world's megafauna. Some regional instruments such as the CMS Gorilla Agreement and
the Global Tiger Initiative incorporate environmental or biodiversity commitments
and are playing a growing role in protecting biodiversity. International agreements
are often well placed for enforcing regional frameworks for megafauna; examples
include the African Elephant Action Plan and the regional conservation strategy for
cheetahs and African wild dogs. However, the implementation of such initiatives
requires financial resources and capacity that are seldom available at those
locations where the highest diversity of megafauna remains (figure 1). Therefore, the onus is on developed
countries, which have long ago lost most of their megafauna, to not only embark on
conservation and restoration programs on their own lands but also support
conservation initiatives in those nations where diverse megafauna still persist. For
conservation efforts to be successful, actions should be taken at all levels by
authorities who have the public interest in mind and who work to secure the
continued existence of these species.

Successfully conserving megafauna requires bold social, political, and financial
commitments from nations around the world. Through understanding the value and
importance of local human needs and by combining international financial support
with a coordinated multilateral approach to conservation, it may be possible to
rescue megafauna from the brink of extinction. As biologists, ecologists, and
conservation scientists, we are mindful that none of our arguments are new and that
our prescriptions are far easier to write out than to accomplish. However, our
objective in presenting them together here is to demonstrate a consensus of opinion
amongst the global community of scientists who study and conserve these animals,
thereby emphasizing to the wider world the gravity of the problem. Our hope is that
this declaration, with the proposed actions and list of signatories, will attract
the public and media attention that this issue requires to galvanize opinion,
catalyze action, and establish new funding mechanisms. Comprehensive actions to save
these iconic wildlife species will help to curb an extinction process that appears
to have begun with our ancestors in the late Pleistocene.

In the supplemental material for this article, this entire paper is available in six
other languages: Spanish, Chinese, French, Portuguese, Malay (Bahasa Malaysia), and
Thai.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Data Click here for additional data file.

 We thank L. West for work on the estimated population sizes in the supplemental
appendices.

Supplemental material
The supplemental material is available online at https://academic.oup.com/bioscience.
==== Refs
References cited
Cardillo RN  Mace GM  Jones KE  Bielby J  Bininda-Emonds ORP  Sechrest W  Orme DL  Purvis A   2005 Multiple causes of high extinction risk in large mammal
species Science 309 1239 1241 16037416 
Chapron G    2014 Recovery of large carnivores in Europe's modern human-dominated
landscapes Science 346 1518 1519 
Darimont CT  Fox CH  Bryan HM  Reimchen TE   2015 The unique ecology of human predators Science 349 858 860 26293961 
Dirzo R  Young HS  Galetti M  Ceballos G  Isaac NJB  Collen B   2014 Defaunation in the Anthropocene Science 345 401 406 25061202 
Estes JA    2011 Trophic downgrading of planet Earth Science 333 301 306 21764740 
Hoffmann M  Duckworth JW  Holmes K  Mallon DP  Rodrigues ASL  Stuart SN   2015 The difference conservation makes to extinction risk of the
world's ungulates Conservation Biology 29 1303 1313 25917114 
[IUCN] International Union for Conservation of Nature  2015 The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species IUCN (17 March 2016; www.iucnRedList.org  ) 
McCarthy DP    2012 Financial costs of meeting global biodiversity conservation
targets: Current spending and unmet needs Science 338 946 949 23065904 
Ripple WJ    2014 Status and ecological effects of the world's largest
carnivores Science 343 (art. 1241484) 
Ripple WJ    2015 Collapse of the world's largest herbivores Science Advances 1 (art. e1400103) 
Rondinini C    2011 Reconciling global mammal prioritization schemes into a
strategy Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 2722 2728 
UNEP [United Nations Environment Programme]  2013 Green Economy and Trade: Trends, Challenges, and Opportunities UNEP (17 March 2016; http://web.unep.org/greeneconomy/sites/unep.org.greeneconomy/files/field/image/fullreport.pdf  ) 
Wallach AD  Izhaki I  Toms JD  Ripple WJ  Shanas U   2015 What is an apex predator? Oikos 124 1453 1461
