
==== Front
Adm Sci QAdm Sci QASQspasqAdministrative Science Quarterly0001-8392SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/000183921774787610.1177_0001839217747876ArticlesDismantling Knowledge Boundaries at NASA: The Critical Role of
Professional Identity in Open Innovation Lifshitz-Assaf Hila 11 Stern School of Business, New York
UniversityH@nyu.edu14 12 2017 12 2018 63 4 746 782 © The Author(s) 20172017Johnson Graduate School, Cornell
UniversityThis article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access page (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).Using a longitudinal in-depth field study at NASA, I investigate how the open, or
peer-production, innovation model affects R&D professionals, their work, and
the locus of innovation. R&D professionals are known for keeping their
knowledge work within clearly defined boundaries, protecting it from individuals
outside those boundaries, and rejecting meritorious innovation that is created
outside disciplinary boundaries. The open innovation model challenges these
boundaries and opens the knowledge work to be conducted by anyone who chooses to
contribute. At NASA, the open model led to a scientific breakthrough at
unprecedented speed using unusually limited resources; yet it challenged not
only the knowledge-work boundaries but also the professional identity of the
R&D professionals. This led to divergent reactions from R&D
professionals, as adopting the open model required them to go through a
multifaceted transformation. Only R&D professionals who underwent identity
refocusing work dismantled their boundaries, truly adopting the knowledge from
outside and sharing their internal knowledge. Others who did not go through that
identity work failed to incorporate the solutions the open model produced.
Adopting open innovation without a change in R&D professionals’ identity
resulted in no real change in the R&D process. This paper reveals how such
processes unfold and illustrates the critical role of professional identity work
in changing knowledge-work boundaries and shifting the locus of innovation.

innovationknowledge boundariesboundary workprofessional identityopen innovationidentity worktechnologywork and organizations
==== Body
The digital age has been changing knowledge work and the permeability of professional,
organizational, and work boundaries in theoretically unexplored ways (Jasanoff, 2004; Leonardi and Bailey, 2008;
Benner and Tushman,
2015). R&D professionals, their knowledge work, and its boundaries have been
the focus of extensive studies investigating how they produce scientific and
technological innovation (e.g., Tushman, 1977; Dougherty, 1992; Hargadon, 2003; Owen-Smith and Powell, 2004). Scholars have found that knowledge work
boundaries play an important and contested role in collaborative R&D work, often
hindering recombinant innovation (Szulanski, 1996; Carlile, 2002, 2004; Bechky,
2003a, 2003b).
Professionals establish these knowledge boundaries to gain legitimacy and help
distinguish experts from laypeople, as well as to distinguish between experts from
different disciplines (Abbott,
1988; Lamont and Molnar,
2002). This results in the rejection of innovations proposed by individuals
outside these knowledge boundaries (Barber, 1961; Campanario, 2009).

A new model of knowledge work suggests transcending these boundaries to produce
innovation, an approach known as “open,” “peer-production,” or “distributed” innovation
(Von Hippel, 1988, 2005; Chesbrough, 2003; Benkler, 2006). Opening up scientific and
technological problems beyond organizational and professional boundaries holds great
potential for producing recombinant innovation across disciplines (Hargadon and Sutton, 1997; Jeppesen and Lakhani, 2010;
Davis, 2016). Yet prior
literature has suggested that professionals would fiercely reject a model that invites
outsiders to solve their scientific and technological challenges.

The history of science and technology is filled with cases of rejected innovations coming
from outside the knowledge boundaries of a given professional community: from germ
theory by Pasteur (a chemist, not a medical professional) to the theory of energy
conservation by Helmholtz (a physician, not a physicist) to principles of inheritance
from Mendel (an amateur biologist who relied on mathematics) (Barber, 1961; Campanario, 2009). Knowledge is embedded and
invested in R&D professionals’ work processes and practices and therefore is “at
stake” for those actors who have developed it (Carlile, 2002). Moreover, open innovation
platforms attract individuals on the margins of knowledge boundaries either socially or
knowledge-wise (Jeppesen and
Lakhani, 2010), posing a threat to specialized knowledge developed in an
organization or a discipline. Therefore, beyond the notorious not-invented-here syndrome
(Allen, 1977; Katz and Allen, 1982), R&D
professionals have unique reasons for rejecting knowledge from open innovation
platforms.

A growing number of organizations and professionals in various industries are
experimenting with the open innovation model (Laursen and Salter, 2006, 2014; Murray and O’Mahony, 2007; Lakhani, Lifshitz-Assaf, and Tushman,
2013; Powell,
2016), but we still know very little about its use and impact. Most studies
have focused on the model’s platforms and communities, as well as their participants
(West, 2003; O’Mahony and Ferraro, 2007;
Dushnitsky and Klueter,
2010; Jeppesen and
Lakhani, 2010; Arazy et
al., 2016). Few studies have explored the relationship between organizations
and these online platforms and communities (West and O’Mahony, 2005; Dahlander and Wallin, 2006; Henkel, 2006). The open
innovation model’s effect on R&D professionals and work inside organizations in
particular remains puzzling and underexplored (Chesbrough, Vanhaverbeke, and West, 2014; Benner and Tushman, 2015). This
study aims to help us better understand the micro foundations and forces affecting
professionals and their work boundaries as they are challenged by this new model.

Theoretical Perspectives
R&D Professionals’ Knowledge Work
Many studies have investigated how R&D professionals’ knowledge work is
organized to produce scientific and technological innovation and have
illustrated how the knowledge boundaries of innovation processes are important
and contested (Dougherty,
1992; Carlile,
2002, 2004; Orlikowski,
2002). These boundaries can impede collaborative knowledge work and
innovation (Bechky,
2003a, 2003b; Levina
and Vaast, 2005, 2013; Kellogg,
Orlikowski, and Yates, 2006), often leading to the rejection of
innovation developed beyond them (Szulanski, 1996). The recent “open” or
“distributed” innovation model has suggested that knowledge and innovation can
be produced without clear knowledge boundaries; anyone can participate and bring
any kind of knowledge into the process (Von Hippel, 1988, 2005; Chesbrough, 2003; Benkler, 2006). This
approach was inspired by the open source software movement, which demonstrated
the possibility of innovating successfully outside of traditional organizational
boundaries (O’Mahony and
Lakhani, 2011; O’Mahony and Ferraro, 2012). The model has since spilled over from
software into a wide array of fields, with many professionals and organizations
experimenting with it (Piezunka and Dahlander, 2015; Fayard, Gkeredakis, and Levina,
2016).

The sociological literature on boundary work and professions predicts that
R&D professionals will reject open innovation. Ample research has described
professions that establish knowledge boundaries to help distinguish a layperson
from an expert (Abbott,
1988; Zerubavel,
1993; Pachucki,
Pendergrass, and Lamont, 2007). Gieryn (1983), who developed the
boundary-work construct, stressed that expanding, monopolizing, and protecting
boundaries are at the heart of professionalization. The concept of
“knowledge-boundary work” captures R&D professionals’ actions and efforts to
preserve or expand their knowledge-work boundaries (Gieryn, 1983, 1999; Lamont and Molnar, 2002; Bechky, 2003a; Carlile, 2004). In this
study, I focus on the permeability of those boundaries, examining knowledge
flows in and out of R&D work and how using open innovation changes these
flows.

Unlike “hiving off” practices (Hughes, 1958), which professionals use
to allocate their more-routine duties and “dirty work” to others (DiBenigno and Kellogg,
2014; Huising,
2015), the open innovation model threatens to deprive the profession
of its most prestigious task. Individuals often enter various science and
engineering professions for the challenge and prestige that come from solving
difficult scientific and technological problems. Therefore, as Van Maanen and Barley
(1984: 90) explained, “Innovations which are interpreted as
potentially deskilling or which might disrupt the social structure and prestige
of the community as it is currently organized will be resisted and, if possible,
sabotaged.”

R&D Professionals’ Identity and Innovation
Studies of knowledge and innovation processes have rarely investigated the role
that identity plays in innovation. Notable exceptions have included studies on
the impact of organizational-level identity on those resisting technological
change (Kaplan, Murray, and
Henderson, 2003; Tripsas, 2009; Benner and Tripsas, 2012), which illustrated how managers resist
change and innovation when it contradicts their existing organizational
identity. This study illustrates that professional identity can play a critical
role in adopting innovation, or not. Opening work boundaries challenges
professionals’ identity, and the ability to reconstruct and refocus that
identity becomes a critical mechanism for knowledge-boundary work and shifting
the locus of innovation. Without “identity work,” there may be no true change in
the knowledge work of professionals who might otherwise appear to adopt the open
model.

Change in identity has been a recent focus of the identity literature as it has
moved from viewing identity as a relatively stable and enduring construct to one
that is more dynamic (Gioia,
Schultz, and Corley, 2000; Pratt, 2012; Anteby and Wrzesniewski, 2014). Identity
scholars have developed the concept of identity work to explain the “range of
activities that individuals engage in to create, present, and sustain personal
identities that are congruent with and supportive of the self-concept” (Snow and Anderson,
1987: 1348). Professional identity work has been studied as a
mechanism for resolving various types of tensions related to work processes
(Wrzesniewski and
Dutton, 2001; Kreiner, Hollensbe, and Sheep, 2006; Elsbach, 2009). For instance, Pratt, Rockmann, and Kaufmann
(2006) proposed various tactics of identity customization through
which professionals construct alternative identities in response to perceived
violations of their “work-identity integrity.” In the current study, I
investigate the effects of the open innovation model on the work-identity
integrity of R&D professionals as it challenges their work boundaries. Thus
I bring the literature on identity threats (Elsbach, 2003; Petriglieri, 2011) and identity work
(Pratt, Rockmann, and
Kaufmann, 2006; Ibarra and Barbulescu, 2010) to the literature on knowledge work and
innovation in this in-depth investigation of the “being” and “doing” of
professionals (Wrzesniewski
and Dutton, 2001; Kaplan and Tripsas, 2008).

Methods
Research Setting
To study the influence of open innovation on R&D professionals and their
work, I conducted an in-depth longitudinal study at the U.S. National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), specifically at its Space Life
Science Directorate (SLSD) and related units, between 2009 and 2012. The SLSD
focuses on research and development in the life sciences. Its mission is to
optimize human health and performance throughout all phases of spaceflight in
response to risks such as radiation, bone loss, and vision impairment. My
research was designed as an inductive study in a large organization across
different individuals and units—similar to most studies that have looked at the
impact of new technology on professionals and their work—following one
organization in depth throughout the introduction of new technologies (e.g.,
Barley, 1986;
Zuboff, 1988;
Orlikowski,
2000).

I chose NASA as a field site for several reasons. First, NASA conducted a
significant experiment with open innovation in 2009 by introducing its strategic
R&D challenges to outsiders. Because these challenges were the key problems
that R&D professionals were working on at the time, they were deeply engaged
in the experiment. They formulated the challenges for the open innovation online
platforms, evaluated the proposed solutions, and chose whether to implement
them. Their involvement was critical and contrasts with many organizations’ open
innovation initiatives, which are marketing oriented and include no interaction
with or impact on the organization’s core R&D process. Second, investigating
R&D professionals within the same organization enabled greater control over
the field and organizational environment, yielding insight into the varying
experiences of open innovation. Third, various scholars (Vaughan, 1996, 2006; Majchrzak, Neece, and Cooper, 2004;
Szajnfarber and Weigel,
2013; Rottner
and Beckman, 2015) have studied NASA and its innovation process,
enabling this study to focus on the novel change triggered by the open
innovation model. Finally, the population of interest—scientists and engineers
from diverse life science fields and training (physiology, toxicology,
microbiology, biomedical engineering, and medicine, among others)—is similar to
that of other life sciences R&D organizations, making the findings
applicable elsewhere.

Data Collection
During the three-year study period (2009–2012), I collected data and conducted
iterative cycles of analysis and collection, both before and after the open
innovation experiment; table A1 in the Online Appendix (http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/suppl/10.1177/0001839217747876)
illustrates my data collection efforts. I collected data on 98 R&D
professionals—see table
1—across 28 organizational units, relying on three main sources:
observations, interviews, and project work documents. My data collection was
aimed at gaining a deep understanding of the day-to-day work experience of
R&D professionals at NASA as a means to understanding their open innovation
experience in context. Therefore, for each of the data sources detailed below, I
started by collecting data on the R&D professionals’ daily work and then
focused on the open innovation experiment and its impact.

Table 1. Demographics of R&D Professionals at NASA SLSD (N = 98)

Educational background	
 Science	37 (37.8%)	
 Biomedical engineering	8 (8.2%)	
 Engineering	30 (30.6%)	
 Medicine	9 (9.2%)	
 Other	14 (14.3%)	
Male	62 (63.3%)	
Female	36 (36.7%)	
Average age	41 (S.D. 8)	
Average tenure (in years)	13 (S.D. 8)	
Observation
To gain an in-depth understanding of the R&D work of professionals in the
organization, I collected data during visits to the NASA SLSD located at
Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, for an average of one week every
other month for two years. I participated in summer training sessions for
interns, observed R&D units and labs, and shadowed their members. I also
joined R&D professionals at work events—such as the annual Humans in
Space conference and the last shuttle flight astronauts’ return
debriefing—to understand and relate to their work environment. I
complemented these physical observation data with remote participation in
their meetings on a regular basis. To explore the influence of the open
innovation experiment on their work specifically, I observed R&D
meetings, attended project demonstrations, and joined off-site meetings with
potential collaborators (General Electric) and contractors (Wyle
Laboratories). I observed all the open innovation workshops and meetings and
attended NASA’s first open innovation workshop with the White House Office
of Science and Technology. I received permission to record my observations
(later transcribed) and also took handwritten notes, resulting in
approximately 1,000 pages of field notes.

Interviews
I conducted semi-structured interviews with R&D professionals who varied
in their level of participation in open innovation processes and in their
professional backgrounds. Overall, I conducted 104 interviews: 87 formal
interviews with 70 individuals and 17 informal interviews with 12
individuals; I interviewed key interviewees at multiple points across time.
Initially, I followed a broad interview guideline aimed at understanding
interviewees’ work. After a year, I built more-focused protocols around
their open innovation experience (Spradley, 1979). I promised them
confidentiality and received permission to digitally record the interviews.
All interviews were transcribed. The interviews averaged 90 minutes each,
resulting in approximately 500 pages of interview transcripts and notes.

Project work documents
Throughout the study, I gained access to relevant project work documents
written and presented by the R&D professionals. I collected 94 project
documents from the study period and 25 presentations from meetings and
workshops, resulting in approximately 1,100 pages of material. I subscribed
to and collected data from the internal e-mail list pertaining to the open
innovation initiative (approximately 150 internal e-mails) and the NASA
daily newsfeed that R&D professionals received (approximately 1,000
e-mails). I also collected the R&D professionals’ public publications
and patents. These work documents were crucial to my analysis of the change
in knowledge work that took place in response to the open innovation
experiment. They enabled me to analyze both whether and how external
knowledge flows gained through open innovation were integrated into the
R&D work, as well as the degree to which internal knowledge flows were
shared with people outside the organization. In addition, I had access to
internal surveys on the open innovation initiative that the NASA innovation
team had conducted with 25–30 of its key professionals, which allowed me to
triangulate and enrich my interview and observational data.

Secondary data sources
To gain a comprehensive understanding of the open innovation experiment, I
also collected data from the three open innovation platforms on which NASA
posted its R&D challenges; an overview of each platform is given in
table B1 in the Online Appendix. I collected both qualitative and
quantitative data on the individuals who shared solutions through the
platforms, including their professional backgrounds, geographical location,
proposed solutions, and awards.

Data Analysis
I conducted an iterative process of data collection and analysis to generate a
theory grounded in data (Glaser and Strauss, 1967; Miles and Huberman, 1994). This field
study generated an immense amount of data, both in depth at each point in time
and in breadth over time. I describe below the major building blocks of the
analysis conducted throughout the study.

Comparing the open and traditional innovation models
As data were collected before and during the open innovation experiment
(2009–2010), I conducted the first exploratory analysis (Charmaz, 2006): a
comparative analysis between the open innovation model and the traditional
model that had been employed at NASA up until the experiment. The focus was
on the process—on how the two R&D work models produced knowledge
differently. I elicited the main dimensions that distinguish these two
models by open coding the data (Golden-Biddle and Locke, 1997) and
then aggregating first-order codes into groups.

Analyzing the impact of open innovation on R&D professionals and
their work
After the open innovation experiment was completed in 2010, and for the
following two years, I conducted the second exploratory analysis (Charmaz, 2006),
focusing on how the open innovation model affected the R&D professionals
and their work. The experiment’s success attracted much attention, opposing
opinions, and tensions. The following year, some R&D professionals
created dramatic changes in their work process to adopt the open innovation
model, while others dismissed it completely.

To study the impact of the open innovation model on their R&D work, I
conducted an in-depth investigation of the professionals’ project work
(Barley and Kunda,
2001; Cohen,
2013), analyzing how scientific and technological innovation in
each project was produced during this period. I focused on the knowledge
flows into and out of R&D project work, which involved studying each
project’s documents, work, and meetings from 2010 to 2012. Using axial
coding (Strauss,
1987), the analysis transitioned from a highly personalized
account that consisted primarily of thick descriptions to one that was more
abstract and analytical (Langley, 1999). This fine-grained analysis produced a rich
categorization of the R&D professionals’ divergent reactions to open
innovation and their impact on the locus of innovation. This analysis also
illustrated the strengths of collecting in-depth data over time; what
initially seemed like adoption of open innovation by multiple R&D
professionals was later revealed as feigned adoption.

To study the divergent reactions and unearth the underlying forces (Hernes, 2014), I
analyzed the sources of tensions and fragmentation among the R&D
professionals. I conducted a thematic analysis (Lofland and Lofland, 1995; Charmaz, 2006)
using ATLAS.ti (a qualitative data-analysis program) to code each incident
or expression of tensions and arguments regarding open innovation. This
analysis revealed that most tensions revolved around the role of the R&D
professionals—and deeper, around their professional identity.

Before the experiment, the R&D professionals did not talk explicitly
about their identity but instead spoke extensively about R&D work and
innovation. But once it was challenged and for some, threatened, it became
an explicitly discussed topic. This dynamic is akin to Pratt’s (2012) analogy of identity
being like a car’s air bag: as long as everything works well, it is taken
for granted and unnoticeable until an “accident” happens. To analyze that
taken-for-granted identity before the open innovation experiment, I
conducted an analysis of what they discussed daily: innovation. I analyzed
the innovation narratives through their innovation stories (Bartel and Garud,
2009), organizational ceremonies, and work environment artifacts
(Czarniawska-Joerges, 1998; Lieblich, Zilber, and Tuval-Mashiach,
2008). This analysis revealed a clear hero figure: the
“innovator,” whose professional identity was that of a problem solver. Some
R&D professionals saw the open innovation model as a threat to this
identity, while others discussed the need to change their identity in
response to the potential of the open innovation model from being problem
solvers to being solution seekers. I analyzed these conversations,
documents, and interviews, coding these efforts as “identity work” and
tracking them for the next two years. The critical role of identity work in
explaining the divergent reactions to open innovation became clear, as I
discuss in the Findings section.

I then conducted a cross-groups analysis of the behavior types to look for,
differentiating characteristics that the literature indicated might explain
the variance in reactions to the open innovation model. I explored a wide
range of suggested explanations from the prior literature, such as
demographic characteristics (age, gender), professional characteristics
(type of profession, professional education, level of education),
organizational characteristics (tenure, role in the organization,
hierarchy), R&D unit, patents and publications, and the level of success
in finding solutions through the open innovation model. None of these
factors explained the variation in responses that I observed. But
investigating the professionals’ work history revealed that those who had
changed their roles over the years—horizontally (across projects, units, and
disciplines) and not vertically (within the same units, projects, and
disciplines)—were more likely to respond positively to open innovation.
Finally, I conducted a confirmatory within-group analysis of each of the
reaction types, sharpening my understanding of each type of response.

Findings
Before the Open Innovation Experiment
On July 20, 1969, NASA did the impossible: put a man on the moon. Doing so pushed
the frontiers of science and engineering. Since then, top engineers and
scientists from around the world have been drawn to work for NASA to be at the
locus of new knowledge creation and innovation in space exploration. These
R&D professionals led the production of innovation at NASA. This work
required a high level of educational specialization and professional expertise,
leading to clear knowledge boundaries between R&D professionals according to
their domain expertise. Due to NASA’s long tradition of collaboration and
contractual relationships with a network of public and private organizations,
these professionals did not work strictly within the walls of their
organization. But they chose the professionals from outside organizations with
whom to share their knowledge, as well as which knowledge to bring into their
R&D process from the outside. The relationship among the multiple
participants in the R&D processes was clearly predefined through agreements
and, often, contracts. For instance, the development of the medical devices used
in space missions was a collaborative effort with well-known academics and
contractors, with clear agreements detailing the type of knowledge exchanged.
Before the open innovation experiment, knowledge work was produced within
predefined and selectively permeable boundaries.

During the Open Innovation Experiment, 2009–2010
The open innovation experiment was initiated by the director of SLSD in 2009; he
and his strategy team had focused over the previous few years on enhancing their
innovative capabilities through external collaborations. When they learned about
the open innovation model through executive education, they decided to
experiment with it. They perceived the environment at NASA in this period to be
open to such experimentation and viewed the model as a great fit with the
existing strategic focus on enhancing collaboration.1 They introduced the model to the lead scientists and engineers of their
R&D groups in one of their directorate meetings, and together they decided
that for one year, their existing innovation model and the open innovation model
would simultaneously attack their technological and scientific R&D
challenges. They chose three of the four leading global open innovation
platforms: Innocentive, Yet2.com, and Topcoder (hereafter,
“the platforms”; see details in Online Appendix table B1). These platforms broadcast R&D
challenges to individuals with diverse professional backgrounds and are open to
anyone who wishes to join.2 In total, NASA posted 14 R&D problems on the three innovation
platforms from 11 R&D units from a variety of scientific and technological
fields, including microbiology, heliophysics, mechanical engineering, radiation,
material science, and medical devices; table 2 provides a detailed list. These
were the most important R&D challenges for that year. NASA offered awards
for winning solutions ranging from $15,000 to $30,000, which were small relative
to these projects’ R&D budgets.

Table 2. The Open Innovation Experiment

R&D problem (as posted online)	Solution	Open innovation platform	
1. Improved barrier layers keeping food fresh in space	Partially solved	Innocentive, Yet2.com
	
2. Mechanism for a compact aerobic and resistive exercise
device	Solved	Innocentive	
3. Data-driven forecasting of solar events	Solved	Innocentive	
4. Coordination of sensor swarms for extraterrestrial
research	Partially solved	Innocentive	
5. Medical consumables tracking	Partially solved	Innocentive	
6. Simple microgravity laundry system	Partially solved	Innocentive	
7. Augmenting the exercise experience with audiovisual
inputs	Not solved	Innocentive	
8. Bone imaging to assess the microstructure of “spongy”
bone that is found in the marrow cavities of whole
bones	Partially solved	
Yet2.com
	
9. Preventing growth of and removing micro-organisms and
bio-films from a potable water system	Partially solved	
Yet2.com
	
10. Real-time analysis and reporting of water-borne
micro-organisms	Not solved	
Yet2.com
	
11. Radio protectants for humans exposed to chronic and
acute radiation	Not solved	
Yet2.com
	
12. Life on Mars: seeking ideas and protocols that can
differentiate terrestrial life from indigenous exobiological
life	Not solved	
Yet2.com
	
13. Miniaturized & portable diagnostic scanning systems
for remote environments	Not solved	
Yet2.com
	
14. Medical kit optimization algorithm	Solved	Topcoder	
At the same time that these challenges were posted online, NASA’s professionals
worked on these problems internally, as well as contracting and collaborating
with domain experts from other organizations, using the traditional R&D
model’s best practices. A comparative analysis illuminates how these two
processes were fundamentally different. The traditional process holds that only
domain experts can solve challenging R&D programs, while the open model is
based on the premise that anyone, including individuals working outside the
field, can solve challenging problems. From a boundary perspective, the
boundaries of the traditional knowledge work in R&D projects are very clear
and impermeable unless the professionals involved choose to selectively permeate
them through contracts and collaborations. The open model is based on permeable
boundaries, with no choice or control over who attempts to solve the problem or
how (using what type of knowledge).

The nature of the two work processes is entirely different. At NASA, the standard
R&D process was organizational and based on negotiations and repeated
interactions among various professionals and NASA’s organizational groups over
several years: the average R&D life cycle was three to five years. The open
innovation model is a distributed global and virtual process of short,
fast-paced cycles—three to six months, on average—with very light involvement
and interaction. The costs of standard R&D projects are typically very high
and induce risk-averse approaches, whereas open innovation model costs are low
and lead to an experimental approach. As NASA’s professionals expressed several
times at the open innovation meetings and workshops: “[The open model is] a
whole different way of doing business.” Table 3 presents a
summary of the comparative analysis of the two processes.

Table 3. Comparative Summary of the Open vs. Traditional Innovation Model

Process characteristics	Traditional innovation model	Open innovation model	
Knowledge-work boundaries	Predefined and selectively permeable boundaries	Undefined and permeable boundaries	
Process participants	Domain experts (from inside and outside the
organization)	Anyone (can be anonymous)	
Type of process	Organizational process, negotiation-based	Distributed virtual process, with “light” communication and
interaction	
Resources	Heavy	Relatively light	
Spatial dimension	Geographically concentrated in one or few locations	Widely geographically distributed	
Temporal dimension	Long R&D cycles (3–5 years)	Short R&D cycles (3–6 months)	
Three months after the experiment began, approximately 100 of NASA’s
professionals were at work on these 14 strategic challenges with their
collaborators and contractors, while more than 3,000 individuals from 80
countries and various industries self-selected to work on these same problems
through the open innovation platforms. Figure B1 in the Online Appendix shows the geographic spread of these
participants. More than 300 solutions were submitted on these platforms for
evaluation by NASA SLSD’s R&D professionals. Each challenge had clear
evaluation criteria and scientific and technological requirements that had been
posted online. The proposed solutions exceeded expectations, and NASA’s R&D
professionals were surprised by their quality. After evaluating the solutions,
R&D decided that three problems had been fully solved and six partially
solved, as noted in table
2. All solutions were generated within astonishingly short
timeframes, and a few even surpassed the posted criteria. As a lead scientist
said, “In general, it is known that to receive a solution for that cost [the
open innovation award] would not be possible otherwise. Turnaround time for a
solution like this could take years [under the standard R&D
model].” During the same period, the traditional processes yielded no major
advances in any of the 14 R&D challenges. The speed of the open process was
astounding.

One solution, in particular, became known as the “home run” of the open
innovation experiment. The prediction of solar particle events—popularly known
as solar storms—was a well-known and well-researched problem at NASA and in the
global heliophysics community. Solar storms are extremely dangerous to space
missions; a severe solar storm could lead to what is known as “the ultimate
blackout,” a disruption of the earth’s magnetic field that could disable
satellites and the Internet, ground all aviation, silence telecommunications,
and damage the electric grid. Heliophysics experts at NASA and worldwide have
invested significant financial and intellectual resources in developing better
solar-events forecasts. At the time, the best algorithms could predict a flare
just one to two hours in advance, with 50-percent accuracy and a two-sigma
confidence interval. The open innovation challenge sought an algorithm that
could predict an event from four to 24 hours in advance. This problem was posted
in December 2009, with an award amount of $30,000. Within three months, more
than 500 individuals expressed interest in this problem, and 11 submitted
solutions.

The winning submission came from a semiretired radio engineer from rural New
Hampshire. His solution challenged the boundaries of the knowledge work in this
field, using an approach that was completely outside the heliophysics discipline
and tradition. Using ground radio–based equipment instead of the traditional
satellite-based data, he created an algorithm that could forecast solar flares
eight hours in advance, with 75-percent accuracy and a three-sigma confidence
level—well beyond the expected result by an order of magnitude. When the
heliophysicists at NASA tested his solution, they achieved even better results:
80- to 85-percent accuracy. The head of the R&D unit that worked on this
problem was stunned: “This has spun up so fast here, and that’s what has caught
everyone off guard.”

These successful results of the open innovation experiment triggered a wave of
excitement and positive responses—from the innovation team and SLSD management
to NASA’s headquarters and the White House Office of Science and Technology. The
press, blogs, internal memos, and reports all extolled the “spectacular results”
of the open innovation experiment. SLSD management and the innovation team were
excited and moved forward to integrate open innovation, planning to turn the
experiment into a day-to-day reality. But the challenge of integration proved
far bigger than they expected.

After the Open Innovation Experiment, 2010–2012
Following the successful results of the open innovation initiative, the
management and innovation team assembled a “next steps” workshop for all of the
SLSD labs to discuss the strategic R&D challenges for 2011 and how the open
innovation model could be used to solve them. But reactions to the proposed
integration were far from unanimously positive. The tensions, debates, and
forces unleashed that day were out of the ordinary and led to a very different
trajectory than had been planned. The innovation lead described the sense of
fear and discomfort in the room that day:When you asked [whether you have an R&D problem to share], they’d
say, “You want me to tell you what I can’t solve?” It
was very much like they would be exposing some kind of incompetency if
they told us what they can’t do. . . . They thought, “You are actually
asking others [on open innovation platforms] to solve it for us.” You
can see people physically uncomfortable with it in their body
language.



Some explicitly expressed being deeply professionally offended by the suggestion
to adopt open innovation. Alex, a leading scientist, explained:Open innovation?! [Sigh] . . . a lot of the people come
to work here certainly not because they couldn’t make money elsewhere.
Perhaps [they could make] even more money elsewhere and have a
successful career. It’s because they want the opportunity to be
innovative. They want the opportunity to contribute to something that
nobody’s ever done before. And so this [open innovation] becomes quite a
slap in the face!



In sharp contrast to these negative reactions, other R&D professionals
enthusiastically praised the results of the experiment and criticized colleagues
for their resistance: “All I hear is ‘I am afraid of this and afraid of that.’”
These arguments were often between scientists and engineers of the same R&D
lab or group or among colleagues with similar professional training, roles, and
tenure in the organization. The disagreements and tension created an extremely
unpleasant environment in the room. By the end of the daylong workshop, some
R&D professionals stated that they wanted to continue to use the open
innovation platforms for their new R&D challenges for 2011, while their
colleagues either refused to discuss any of their challenges or offered marginal
ones so their strategic ones would not be “opened.”

The management and innovation team members were stunned, confused, and frustrated
by the rising tensions, emotions, and fragmentation. As the strategy lead said,
“What amazed me was that even within the same group, it seems like there isn’t a
middle ground. Either you’re with it or you don’t get it at all.” These
reactions were so strong and surprising that the strategy and innovation team
decided to take a step back and conduct one-on-one meetings with the lead
scientists and engineers. In these conversations, R&D professionals voiced
mostly technical concerns over procurement processes and legal and technical
issues. Although management quickly and easily solved these problems, that did
not change the divergent reactions or resistance to open innovation. The
managers were puzzled and decided to keep improving the open process to make it
as smooth as possible for the R&D professionals to use.

Meanwhile, in lab meetings and conversations between scientists and engineers in
the months following the workshop, reactions became more explicit and clearly
articulated. It became clear that the open model raised deeper issues about
R&D professionals’ self-perception: why they chose their profession and who
they are. During this period, when I interviewed R&D professionals about the
open innovation model, many responded by explaining why they joined NASA and
what kept them motivated. A common response was, “You have to understand. I came
to NASA to innovate. We could have gone somewhere else and get better paid.” The
open innovation model challenged their core identity motives. This was
poignantly expressed by Benjamin, a senior scientist, who described how adopting
open innovation went against his professional reason for being: “I’ve been
attracted to places that allow you to access a problem, come up with a plan, and
execute the solution . . . to be able to think and solve greater problems. If I
can’t do it at NASA, what is keeping me from going somewhere else?”

Before the open innovation experiment, the professional identity of scientists
and engineers at NASA was not explicitly discussed in meetings or conversations.
Conducting a narrative analysis of these professionals’ innovation stories, work
artifacts, and organizational ceremonies painted a clear picture of a heroic
problem solver who attacks a challenging scientific or technological problem in
an innovative way. When R&D professionals shared stories of innovation, they
would always glorify and credit the specific problem solver. On the bulletin
boards outside the labs and offices, research papers were posted with the names
of the NASA authors highlighted. The main hall at Johnson Space Center displayed
a series of “I am an innovator” posters with R&D professionals who had won
an internal innovation contest, and scientists and engineers often proudly wore
“I am an innovator” T-shirts to work.

This identity was rooted in the education and professional training of both
scientists and engineers. Even though engineers and scientists had different
approaches to solving problems, both perceived themselves as problem solvers and
aspired to be great ones. That identity remained intact even when a project was
conducted in collaboration or through contractors. In contrast, the open
innovation model clearly demarcated their role: they posed the R&D problems,
while people outside NASA worked on solving them. As Leslie, a senior life
scientist, explained, “People are more than willing to take other people’s
information through reading papers and going to conferences and collaborating.
But in terms of making yourself vulnerable and identifying what problems you
cannot solve in your lab, it [open innovation] is such an
anathema to what they were trained to do and what was modeled to
do.”

Though it was clear that open innovation deeply challenged the R&D
professionals’ identity, the fact that it yielded such successful results
quickly prompted many scientists and engineers to question the current identity
perception so tightly wed to the traditional R&D model. In one debate over
open innovation, an engineer commented, “But it’s working. Isn’t that what we
want?” These professionals began to explicitly discuss the need to stop
identifying themselves by the methods of their work—stop focusing on how they do
it but focus on why and on the drive to discover and find solutions. The shift
from how to why—a refocusing of professional identity—was a very significant
change. Identity refocusing entailed discarding specific professional activities
and/or adopting new ones to better serve the profession’s fundamental goals. The
R&D professionals who began to change their identity called on others to
also refocus on the “why”—the original and broader professional goal of
scientists and engineers, or what they called “the big agenda.” As Erik, a lead
scientist, passionately contended, “At the end of the day, it’s about the
big agenda versus the personal one. . . . Science is about
finding the truth!”

A pivotal moment in the refocusing process took place in an internal SLSD work
meeting, when the refocused identity was named and explicitly explained for the
first time. In a discussion about the next strategic R&D challenge, a highly
regarded lead scientist became frustrated with the tensions and conflicting
approaches around open innovation. She intervened in the discussion and told her
colleagues, “Your main responsibility is to seek for solutions. They may come
from the lab, from open innovation, or from collaboration. You should not care!
You are the solution seeker!” From that meeting on, many of her colleagues took
on the identity of solution seeker. Naming the refocused identity was helpful in
mobilizing the change and sparking conversations between colleagues. In meetings
and workshops, they began to discuss how a solution seeker’s main role is to
find a solution and not necessarily be the one solving the problem. As Chris, a
leading biomedical engineer, explained, it required a deep “mindset shift” among
his colleagues who defined themselves through their work:It’s going to take . . . a change in their heads on how they do their
jobs [to adopt open innovation]. . . . Knowing how they are, they truly
look at themselves as . . . the brains behind the vehicles. And they are
the ones. I mean, there isn’t anyone that’s going to know better what
they need to go do. They are the ones. That’s what they do . . . and
they make the best ones [vehicles].



During the next two years, two opposing and active movements arose at NASA and
became evident in project meetings, collegial chats in labs, and interviews. One
group strove to refocus and change the R&D professionals’ identity, while
the other worked to preserve and defend it. Over time, these groups argued less
among themselves and simply started initiating changes in their own labs and
organizational units. The scientists and engineers who sought to adopt open
innovation initiated dramatic changes to the knowledge-work process. It was not
clear, however, whether the successful solutions found through open innovation
were being integrated into NASA’s R&D work. Therefore I analyzed each of the
R&D projects and the change in flows of knowledge in and out of them, which
helped me identify the professionals’ knowledge-boundary work: whether or not
they integrated external knowledge and opened up internal knowledge. Below, I
detail the various types of knowledge-boundary work I observed and whether each
led to a shift in the locus of innovation and knowledge production at NASA SLSD.
In particular, I focus on the process of change in boundaries and shifts in the
locus of innovation, because the prior literature would predict boundary
protection. Moreover, I found that over this two-year period more R&D
professionals (43 percent) were dismantling their knowledge-work boundaries than
were protecting them (33 percent); the rest were not significantly involved with
or influenced by the open innovation experiment.3
Table 4 presents a
summary of the boundary work types that I detail below.

Table 4. Knowledge-boundary Work Types and Implications

Type of knowledge-boundary
work 	Internal knowledge flows	External knowledge flows	Resulting knowledge boundaries	Boundaries illustration	Resulting locus of innovation	
Dismantling knowledge boundaries (43%) 	 Full dismantling (13%)	Mostly open	Fully integrated	Undefined & permeable	

	External	
 Perforating (30%)	Significantly open	Fully integrated	Semi-permeable	

	Distributed	
Protecting knowledge boundaries (33%)	 Feigned perforating (22%)	Significantly kept inside	Isolated	Feigned semi-permeable	

		
 Fencing (11%)	Kept inside	Kept outside	Clearly predefined & selectively permeable	

	Internal	
Boundary Dismantling Work
Deliberately dismantling boundaries is an attempt to destroy knowledge-work
boundaries to enhance the integration of external knowledge found through open
innovation, thus shifting the locus of innovation from inside the organization
and its traditional boundaries to outside. At NASA, this resulted in a deep
change in the way that the scientists and engineers worked. Ada, an R&D
professional, described the transformation: “It is a shift from thinking ‘The
lab is my world’ to ‘The world is my
lab.’” Before this change, the lab conceptually represented her entire work
world; afterward, she included the outside world as the lab within which she
could conduct her R&D work. The boundary dismantling work changed external
and internal knowledge flows, which shifted the locus of innovation. There were
two major types of knowledge-boundary dismantling work, distinguished by their
intensity: “full boundary dismantling work,” in which professionals made an
effort to completely destroy the boundaries of the R&D process; and
“boundary perforating,” in which professionals dismantled selective parts of
these boundaries.

Full boundary dismantling work
The most extreme change in response to the open innovation experiment
involved an attempt to destroy all the knowledge boundaries of the standard
R&D process, resulting in a complete shift of the locus of innovation
from inside to outside the boundaries of NASA and its experts. Scientists
and engineers engaged in this work believed that the R&D model should
fully shift into an open model, replacing the internal R&D model. This
boundary work was very effort- and resource-intensive. Some professionals
tried to change the project work processes within their current R&D
units, while others left their units to create a new unit named “open NASA,”
completely devoting their time and resources to making this change a
reality.

Internal knowledge flows
In full boundary dismantling work, R&D professionals opened up their
strategic R&D challenges, inviting external solvers to tackle them.
They also adopted the principles of the open source model, seeking
openness and transparency throughout the full R&D process. They
started by dismantling the boundaries around the data used in the
R&D process, a task that required a significant amount of work. As
one engineer explained, “People say they open the data, but if no one
can understand it, it’s not really open data!” Despite the work
involved, these professionals insisted on opening as much data as
possible. Even when encountering medical privacy issues, they found ways
to open most of it in such a way that external researchers could
investigate and collaborate as soon as data collection began. As Daniel,
a bioengineer, explained, “So we’re opening up the evidence phase. . . .
We’re going to put that [evidence data] up as a wiki, so if medical
students, for instance, are interested in looking at [the] heart attack
incidence rate, they can give us information on what’s on the outside
and see the research that is going on, on all of our conditions.”
External researchers started using these data sources and reported back
enthusiastically: “I am a devoted consumer of NASA data. . . . These are
the primary data sets behind my previous project, which just won the Go
Big Data Challenge. Someone at NASA deserves credit for this win.”

Another telling decision in several projects was to turn the internal
software development process into an open source one. This decision made
the software developed by NASA’s R&D professionals both open to
others (allowing internal knowledge to flow out) and open to external
contributions (allowing external knowledge to flow in). This was a
significant shift in process. Software development at NASA had
predefined process boundaries, while open source software is constantly
evolving, as its contributors are often unknown and changing. Liam, a
leading engineer working on a strategic project, explained, “At NASA you
cannot even proceed unless you have a requirements document listing
exactly how you’re going to do [your work] . . . and it doesn’t make any
sense in the open source software development world.” Taking advantage
of open source software meant that new procurement and legal processes
had to be created to enable software work with unknown online and often
anonymous contributors.

External knowledge flows
As part of full boundary dismantling work, R&D professionals
destroyed the boundaries and barriers against the integration of
external knowledge. They fully utilized and integrated the knowledge
found through open innovation platforms. They dedicated special
attention to thinking about the day after the open innovation challenge:
what to do with the solution found, how to evaluate and test it, and
then how to integrate it. This led to the decision to open even the
selection process of the external knowledge and not restrict it to
NASA’s experts; as one scientist said, “If we only open one end of the
process [i.e., seeking solutions], we will still have our bias on the
other end [i.e., evaluating solutions].”

Moreover, these professionals initiated new R&D projects that were
all conducted in the “open,” requiring them to fully orchestrate
external knowledge work; these efforts came at the expense of conducting
internal initiatives. Such was the development of the first
international Space Apps hackathon. Hackathons, a popular format in open
source communities, foster excitement and engagement around creative
problem solving in a very short timeframe (usually one to two days). In
line with the full boundary dismantling approach, the Space Apps
hackathon had no disciplinary or geographic boundaries. One of the
engineers who organized it described how difficult it was for his
colleagues to grasp this approach: “One of the most frequent questions
we get for Space Apps is, ‘Where will it be held?’ The answer is:
everywhere! There will be 50 local events and extensive virtual
participation.” This hackathon required massive preparation and
orchestration. It dismantled boundaries around the development of
software applications based on NASA’s data, attracting more than 2,000
participants from around the world. More than 100 unique open source
solutions were developed in less than 48 hours, and many continued after
the event. Ever since, it has become one of the largest global
hackathons, orchestrating over 25,000 people in 187 locations in 69
countries in 2017.

Resulting locus of knowledge and innovation production
The boundary dismantling work of these R&D professionals completely
shifted the locus of knowledge and innovation from within NASA and its
collaborators’ circle to an external circle. Knowledge was produced
within undefined and permeable boundaries and regularly flowed both in
and out. This significant shift required new processes and knowledge
infrastructures that both opened up internal knowledge processes and
enabled external knowledge integration. One such infrastructure was an
open wiki that several engineers built as a tool to share internal
knowledge and to bring in external knowledge on a regular basis. Every
member of the R&D group updated new and relevant knowledge around
the strategic projects to the wiki instead of using the traditional
internal documents. This wiki was automatically shared with members in
three different space centers and with anyone external to NASA. As Ada,
who led this initiative, explained:We do open innovation to say, “Here’s our knowledge-gap questions
[the strategic R&D challenges for that year].” . . . We have
this wiki database where you put all your information in. . . .
We go to universities, medical centers, conferences, and we’ll
take our gap questions, and we’ll tell people about them and
make contacts and collaborations, and then we put that into our
wiki as well.



Finally, the shifting locus of innovation even received a physical
expression in the work environment. Many of these professionals
supported working from physical collaborative innovation open spaces,
and some even created a new creative “sandbox” space for developing and
testing technologies. These spaces had no boundary restrictions; anyone
could work there.

Boundary perforating work
In this boundary work, R&D professionals selectively dismantled parts of
their R&D process; they created multiple “holes” in the boundaries of
the R&D process for knowledge flows, mostly at a project’s outset and
before important milestones, as well as when external solutions were
generated. They created a hybrid R&D process between the traditional
R&D model and the open one, turning the locus of innovation to a
distributed one. These professionals did not see the need to make a discrete
choice between the standard or open R&D models, as they believed that
doing both was possible. They claimed that no single perfect R&D model
fits all R&D problems and concluded that their colleagues’ debate over
the best model was misguided: “So one barrier [to adopting open innovation]
. . . might be assuming that one size fits all!” This boundary work took
substantial effort. Most of these professionals worked to change the project
work processes within their current R&D units, while some joined the
innovation and strategy unit and devoted all their resources to making this
change a reality.

Internal knowledge flows
The open innovation experiment made many R&D professionals see their
familiar work boundaries as a bubble that needed to be burst, and they
opened their strategic projects to the outside world. Tom, a discipline
scientist, explained, “I always go to the right conferences and call the
same three professors to see what the new technology is. [Open
innovation] is a good way of getting out of that bubble and getting in a
different way of thinking.” They decided that instead of their
traditional approach of starting from within NASA and going
progressively outside, they should reverse the direction and start the
project by opening it first. Only if an external solution were not found
would they then begin an internal development process. This major shift
meant that several important projects never made it to NASA’s internal
development process, as the solution was found outside first. Moreover,
over time, these professionals explored other venues and created their
own platforms beyond the accepted open innovation ones because they
believed that no single R&D process was right for all R&D
problems. Alan, an engineer, explained the importance of such a wide
external focus:So that’s something interesting. You put this R&D problem out
there, and it can give a lot of people a false sense of, “OK,
there’s nothing else out there.” People would say, “No. We did
it on Innocentive and we didn’t find anything, so it’s not out
there.” But Innocentive isn’t the whole world. Yet2.com isn’t the whole world. . . . GE, for
instance, does not look at Innocentive. So people have to
realize that it’s not a silver bullet.



Boundary perforating work was not easy, in particular when working on
strategic R&D projects that involved power struggles and internal
politics. It required repeated persuasion and communication efforts.
This became very clear when a new strategic and urgent R&D challenge
emerged. The initial approach was to treat it as a “top secret,”
experts-led project. But the lead scientist, Catherine, then decided to
open it for external involvement. As she described it, “Trying to engage
other folks to do that [open the strategic R&D problem] is a lot of
time and is labor intensive, constantly providing the rationale. . . .
Without me talking it out constantly, it is a dead fish in the
water.”

External knowledge flows
R&D professionals who perforated boundaries fully utilized and
integrated all the knowledge found through open innovation platforms.
For instance, the open innovation experiment resulted in a new flexible
graphite material that could serve as a food packaging material on
long-term space missions; this material was shipped from the solver in
Europe and tested at NASA’s food lab. These professionals stressed the
importance of treating outside knowledge with the same diligence during
the quality testing process that internally developed solutions
received. The blind application of quality evaluation was often their
response to criticism from colleagues who rejected the open innovation
model. Jennifer, an engineer, explained:There has to be a good reason and a good use for [open
innovation]. I’ll give you an example: this little “rest”
device. It’s a neat gadget, but that’s all it is. . . . It
didn’t meet my [technological] need. However, the “sleep” device
would meet a specific need right now. That’s why it’s useful,
and that’s why I am interested in doing it [using open
innovation] and not just for the sake of [using] it.



These professionals believed that innovative ideas should be encouraged
whether they originated inside or outside the organizational boundaries.
As Chris, a leading biomedical engineer, explained, “In the information
age, I have to look for the best ideas regardless of where they come
from and find ways to apply them in my context.” Another engineer said,
“Without openness, this multidirectional flow of ideas is all but
impossible.” In this spirit, they developed an internal open innovation
platform to increase knowledge flows among NASA’s ten different space
centers. They stressed that it was important to “open [the organization]
from within” in order to get used to an open and distributed model. Over
the next two years, more than 20 R&D projects’ challenges across
NASA were shared and solved through this platform.

Resulting locus of knowledge and innovation production
Boundary perforation work led to R&D project work with distributed
loci of innovation, both inside and outside traditional NASA boundaries,
sometimes even shifting between different phases of the same project.
New project management tools were required to manage this dynamic and
permeable R&D process. For instance, project managers developed a
new decision support tool for choosing the right degree of openness for
each stage of the project life cycle. They mapped the degrees of
openness, ranging from closed models (in-house) and strategic
partnerships (such as small business innovation research and NASA
research announcements) to facilitated collaboration (such as Yet2.com), crowdsourcing (such as Innocentive), and
crowd-managed processes (such as open source communities). This
thoughtful hybrid approach to change was very nuanced and took over a
year to fully develop and implement.

Boundary Protection Work
On the other end of the reaction spectrum, as the literature has predicted, some
R&D professionals rejected the open innovation model and protected their
knowledge boundaries both from external knowledge and from exposing their
internal knowledge. Two major types of boundary protection work emerged: feigned
boundary perforating and boundary fencing. Feigned boundary perforating was a
defensive form of protection work, while boundary fencing was an offensive form
because it was always accompanied by a direct attack on the open innovation
model.

Feigned boundary perforating work
Feigned boundary perforating initially seemed similar to boundary
perforation, but a closer investigation suggested that it was actually
boundary protection. Although these R&D professionals seemed very
receptive to the promise of open innovation, the solutions and knowledge
that they received through open challenges were discarded and never
integrated. This boundary work was easy to overlook because the
professionals participated in open innovation challenges and outwardly
adopted the model. But a careful examination of their knowledge work
revealed that there was no real change in their R&D work; in fact, they
constructed an additional boundary that isolated the external knowledge
gained through open innovation platforms from being incorporated and tested,
segregating it from the knowledge used in their R&D work.

Internal knowledge flows
Internal knowledge was shared very sparingly. These R&D professionals
chose no strategic projects for open innovation; rather, they either
chose existing peripheral projects or created new peripheral ones and
then shared only the minimum knowledge required. In one group, the
engineer Liam was frustrated by how the scientists and engineers around
him extolled open innovation publicly but in fact opposed it. In an
interview, he said, “I thought that my objective there was to try and
open source what I was working on, but ultimately that’s what they
said—that they want to do it—but they really did not want to.” This
decoupling of words and actions frustrated Liam. When such professionals
were asked why they did not use the open innovation model to solve
serious R&D challenges, they replied that open innovation was not a
serious R&D process. Ian, a lead scientist, explained that using
open innovation was not part of the “real” R&D work, and therefore
he did not devote any serious thought to it:So, you know, we gotta do this [open] innovation thing. We only
have so much time to devote to it. So we try and get something
going, you know. . . . It’s not like we had a big think tank to
sit around and go through the various options. We quickly picked
something . . . and went back to address the 12 other things
we’re working on.



External knowledge flows
These professionals blocked the external knowledge coming through the
open innovation platforms from the experiment period in 2009 and
afterward, keeping the external knowledge isolated and never integrating
it into their R&D work. In their labs, they completely disregarded
the open innovation solutions—the ostensible goal of their most
strategic work. In one such lab, it went as far as withholding the fact
that the lab was actually participating in open innovation. When other
members of this lab were interviewed, they did not know about the open
innovation model, even though their lab’s lead scientists were
participating in it and finding relevant solutions through it. In
another lab, when I asked the lead scientist about a solution found
through open innovation, he responded that he simply could not find it
or remember where he had placed it.

Resulting locus of knowledge and innovation production
Despite the perceived adoption of the open innovation model, the locus of
innovation did not shift. Nothing had changed after the open experiment:
knowledge was still produced, evaluated, and implemented inside
predefined boundaries, a process that was shared only with specific
collaborators and contractors.

Boundary fencing work
Some R&D professionals took an offensive stance to protect their
boundaries. Beyond fencing off the knowledge gained through open innovation
and not opening up internal knowledge, they explicitly rejected the open
model in words and actions.

Internal knowledge flows
These professionals actively rejected any attempt to allow knowledge
flows in or out of their predefined and selectively permeable
boundaries. While their colleagues, feigning perforation, pretended to
embrace open innovation, they made no such pretense. When asked about
the successful results of the open innovation experiment, they dismissed
it as unrelated to their field: “That’s a heliophysics-specific thing.”
They avoided open innovation–related work activities (e.g., workshops,
meetings, and lectures) and dissuaded their colleagues from
participating. One vivid example was a “reply-all” e-mail in which a
member asked to be removed from the open innovation e-mail list,
referring to it as spam: “To whoever owns this e-mail list, Kindly
remove my name from any/all lists so that I no longer receive any of
this. Thank you. Sincerely, Paul. PS: To everyone else, sorry for
creating even more SPAM.”

External knowledge flows
These R&D professionals intentionally blocked all external knowledge
gained through open innovation, despite the fact that some solutions had
substantial scientific and technological potential for their work and
the space mission. This knowledge remained untouched; they did not test
or implement the solutions found. Their unwillingness to integrate
outside knowledge was strategic. This was apparent in an interview with
Peter, a lead scientist, who in meetings gave the cost rationale for not
using open innovation but in an interview expressed his worry that all
his knowledge work would become open:I think having open source, it’s kind of like a needle in a
haystack. You are going to get some people who are maybe
thinking about this problem somewhere else in the world, but
you’re going to have to separate . . . the wheat from the chaff,
right? There’s going to be a lot of crap floating around . . .
which could be overwhelming. [Interviewer: I see. How many
solutions did you evaluate?] Six or seven. [Interviewer: But six
or seven, that’s not a haystack, right?] Yes, but you know, I
think they eventually want to have all the problems just out
there in the open, you know.



Resulting locus of knowledge and innovation production
The locus of knowledge and innovation did not shift for these R&D
professionals. Knowledge work was conducted within predefined boundaries
and shared only with collaborators and contractors, as in the
traditional model. This was memorably expressed by Thomas, a scientist,
when I asked, “What is innovation?” He replied with fervor, “You see
this [pointing to a big pile of scientific articles written by his group
and collaborators]? Read this. This is innovation. This is research and
not gimmicks [referring to open innovation].”

The Critical Role of Professional Identity Work
Identity work is key to understanding the forces behind the knowledge-boundary
work and the adoption (or not) of the open innovation model. R&D
professionals who adopted the open innovation model not only changed their
knowledge-work processes and boundaries but also went through a dramatic change
in their professional identity. When there was no identity work, no true change
occurred in the knowledge work. Throughout the two years following the open
innovation experiment, R&D professionals at one end of the reaction spectrum
refocused and reconstructed their identity into that of solution seekers and
abandoned any attempt to solve R&D problems on their own or with colleagues.
These professionals fully dismantled their knowledge-work boundaries and adopted
the open innovation model. They focused solely on searching for solutions,
orchestrating the search and evaluation, and integrating the different pieces of
knowledge. Laura, a lead scientist in one of the SLSD groups, in an internal
presentation to colleagues, described the significance of the shift that this
identity change entailed: “A shift in fundamental assumptions. A standing
fundamental assumption was that the lead researcher has direct, hands-on
involvement with all aspects of the R&D activities. Instead, the new
assumption is: ‘The lead researcher becomes much more of an integrator, piecing
the results from a wide variety of sources together.’”

This process of identity refocusing enabled the boundary-dismantling work. In the
traditional R&D model, the professional identity of problem solvers created
very clear group boundaries between “us” and “them,” and only a bounded group of
experts generated solutions. In becoming solution seekers, NASA’s R&D
professionals opened these boundaries and invited everyone to generate
solutions, to be problem solvers. In refocusing their point of view, they were
no longer attached to the identity of problem solver or to the use of only their
own knowledge base. Their knowledge boundaries now encompassed the knowledge of
outsiders. This refocusing work led them to shift their attention to the
potential solvers outside of their traditional boundaries. Albert, a scientist,
described this shift in a blog post, calling “you” (i.e., anyone) to become the
next rocket scientist. He explained that the big R&D challenges no longer
needed to be solved only by “lab-coat-wearing scientists”:For over half a century, NASA has inspired people across the world to
look to the heavens and wonder what secrets are hidden within the
cosmos. Solving those mysteries has long been the domain of
lab-coat-wearing scientists in government agencies and universities.
However, with the advent of the Internet, social web and open source
data, it has become possible for anyone to make scientific discoveries
about our universe. Find out how you can actively contribute to space
exploration and how the collective power of the Internet is enabling the
future of scientific research.



At the other end of the reaction spectrum, R&D professionals preserved and
defended their identity. They viewed open innovation as a professional insult:
“When we see opportunities like Innocentive [one of the open innovation
platforms], it’s extremely frustrating . . . a feeling of ‘what value am I?’”
Their identity as problem solvers was inseparable from their professional
training and work processes, and the open innovation model fundamentally
contradicted that identity. As Robert, a leading scientist and biomedical
engineer, stated:The history of the scientific method goes against it. . . . In our
training, trying to solve problems in the scientific method was: I take
in all this information. I synthesize it. I do analysis and I come to
some conclusion. And so to reach out to other people [through open
innovation platforms] to solve it, it’s like cheating!



These professionals protected their knowledge-work boundaries, rejected the open
innovation model, and stressed the need to focus on the status quo. They asked
management to increase internal innovation initiatives and capabilities, to
dedicate more time and budget for the innovative ideas of NASA’s scientists and
engineers. As Matthew, a biomedical engineer, explained, “I mean, we have to
look inside, and that’s a difficult thing to do . . . but the right thing to do,
not just to put on paper. To truly value your internal resources and to
recognize that you have plenty of innovative ideas on the inside.”

Challenging existing knowledge-work boundaries sheds light on the unexplored
relationship between such boundaries and professional identity and how changing
one leads to changing the other. Figure 1 summarizes the processes of
professional identity work and knowledge-boundary work and their impact on the
locus of innovation.4

Figure 1. The role of professional identity refocusing work on knowledge boundaries
and locus of innovation.

These identity work and boundary work processes were mutually reinforcing over
time; they fed and strengthened each other. R&D professionals who refocused
their identity from problem solvers to solution seekers dismantled their
knowledge boundaries. The more boundary dismantling that took place, the more
meaning, substance, and legitimacy were infused in the new role of a solution
seeker, as this led to the creation of new processes and capabilities. It
required building capabilities in formulating problems, searching for solutions,
and evaluating and integrating knowledge. This process of change represented a
deep transformation for these R&D professionals, as it went against their
professional training in many ways. Marie, a bioengineer, explained the mindset
shift involved: “Changing from being a problem solver to a solution seeker is a
deep philosophy change . . . It is not only about the organizations [in which we
work]. This is how we have been trained ever since we [were] kids—to solve
problems! To be the experts of a field and solve!”

On many projects, this two-year period of boundary dismantling and identity
refocusing led to a shift in the locus of innovation that manifested in aspects
of the organization beyond the project work itself. At NASA’s innovation day in
2012, scientists and engineers initiated humorous games poking fun at old
approaches such as “Knowledge is Power” and “Not Invented Here.” This was quite
a change from 2009, when the T-shirts read, “I Am an Innovator.” One R&D
professional explained that attitudes were changing: “The open source mindset
transfers us from the innovation-resistant ‘Not Invented Here’ attitude to
‘Proudly Found Elsewhere.’ The ‘Invent-It-Ourselves’ model is generally not
sustainable, and it is inarguably true that the best ideas for any organization
are often found outside of it.”

A remarkable example of this shift occurred in 2012 when an urgent health risk
arose for the astronauts in the International Space Station. A specific medical
device was needed at the station to track their health condition. Elizabeth, the
medical engineer responsible for this project, spent her weekend searching for
solutions, starting with general online searches, not specifically on open
innovation platforms. She found a physician on YouTube who had developed such a
device in his garage in a small town in the northeastern U.S. She contacted him,
got the device shipped, tested it, and found it to be a creative and suitable
solution for the space station. This saved significant time and development
costs and quickly became a story often repeated in meetings and hallway
conversations. From a narrative perspective, in contrast to the traditional
innovation narratives at NASA before open innovation whereby the problem solver
was the hero, now Elizabeth, a solution seeker, was the hero. She was praised
for her creative and resourceful searching capabilities rather than for her raw,
creative problem-solving prowess. A new narrative for innovation was born.

Discussion
This study investigated the impact of the open innovation model on R&D
professionals and their work. The previous literature predicted that professionals
would reject external innovation and the open innovation model because they threaten
the work boundaries of R&D professionals or domain experts. In contrast, this
study finds divergent reactions, as open innovation challenged not only the
knowledge-work boundaries of R&D professionals but also, to a great extent,
their professional identity. Only the R&D professionals who refocused their
identity truly adopted the open innovation model and, in turn, changed their work
processes, shifting the locus of innovation outside their traditional work
boundaries. These professionals dismantled their knowledge boundaries, integrated
the innovation found externally, and opened their knowledge work to the outside. In
contrast, R&D professionals who did not go through identity change either
feigned adoption of or explicitly rejected open innovation, reinforcing the
boundaries surrounding their knowledge work and protecting their professional
identities.

Knowledge-boundary Dismantling Work and the Locus of Innovation
This study sheds light on the broader question of how to organize for scientific
and technological innovation (see Baldwin and Von Hippel, 2011; Benner and Tushman,
2015). The open innovation model has been proposed as a potential
path to elevating innovation performance (Jeppesen and Lakhani, 2010). The
results of this study suggest that the web-enabled open innovation model does
introduce a real option for advancing scientific and technological knowledge. It
can lead to the production of scientific and technological breakthroughs under
unusually tight time and resource constraints. At the same time, open innovation
poses a significant and underexplored challenge to both the knowledge-work
processes and identity of R&D professionals. Adopting such a model requires
a shift in both work processes and the associated professional identity.
Identity is central here, as adopting open innovation methods without doing
identity work resulted in no real change in the R&D process and related
knowledge flows.

The shift in knowledge work found in this study—namely, boundary dismantling
work—is new for R&D professionals and contradicts predictions in the
literature. In Abbott’s
(1988) theory of professions, professionals try to gain legitimacy
over tasks and problems by protecting and expanding their professional
jurisdiction. As Abbott
(1988: 285) explained, “The history of professions is a biography of
the relationship between problems and the tasks that seek to resolve them.”
Professionals and experts build themselves up by legitimizing the types of
problems they solve and keeping them within the boundaries of their
jurisdiction. Opening up such tasks and problems to essentially anyone puts both
professional jurisdiction and legitimacy at risk, contradicting the very
foundations of the reigning theories of professions. Numerous studies—in
particular, those on the history of scientific and technological innovation—have
illustrated how professionals protect, monopolize, and strengthen their work
boundaries (Sarfatti-Larson, 1979; Lamont and Molnar, 2002). For instance,
Pasteur met with vehement resistance from the medical professionals of his time
when he advanced his germ theory as he was a “mere” chemist (Barber, 1961). The
concept of knowledge-boundary work first emerged as a description of how
scientists created the first encyclopedia, deciding what qualifies as
“knowledge” and should be included versus what does not and should be left out
(Gieryn,
1983).

In this study, I found evidence for the persistence of such well-known protective
knowledge-boundary work. I even found that such reactions are often disguised
and hard to identify. Yet this study also illustrates the opposite process:
scientists and engineers dismantling their knowledge-work boundaries either
fully or partially to allow internal knowledge to flow out and external
knowledge to flow in, creating a path for integrating innovation derived from
outside experts’ domains. Unlike the historical barrage of resistance to such
innovations, in this case we see a new behavior that enables their inclusion.
Moreover, this study offers an important extension to previous studies that
assume the permeability of boundaries to be stable and spanned only by a
relatively few boundary spanners (Tushman, 1977; Heracleous, 2004; Levina and Vaast, 2005; Kellogg, Orlikowski, and
Yates, 2006). I show how professionals can not only enable boundary
spanning to bring external knowledge to the R&D process but also change the
very nature and permeability of those work boundaries.

Studies of R&D professionals have illustrated how difficult it can be to work
across such boundaries (e.g., Carlile, 2004; Levina and Orlikowski, 2009), yet
crossing boundaries offers substantial potential for innovative output (Tushman and Scanlan,
1981; Rosenkopf
and Nerkar, 2001; Obstfeld, 2005; O’Mahony and Bechky, 2008). This study builds on the construct of
the boundary to illuminate the significance of the changes that the Internet has
triggered in the nature of organizations’ knowledge work (e.g., Hinds and Kiesler,
2002; Levina and
Vaast, 2008; Altman, Nagle, and Tushman, 2015). It illustrates that boundaries
can be dismantled and that external knowledge and innovation can be integrated
into internal knowledge work, thus shifting the locus of innovation outside the
traditional work boundaries of R&D organizations.

Professional Identity Work and Boundary Dismantling
The driving force behind the divergence in professionals’ reactions to open
innovation, explaining why some dismantle boundaries and others protect them, is
identity refocusing. My findings show that professional identity work plays a
critical role in cases of transformation, as professionals who reconstructed
their identity were able to shift work boundaries and adopt process changes. The
findings stress the importance of professionals’ meaning-making activities
(Weick, 1995;
Wrzesniewski, Dutton,
and Debebe, 2003) to their R&D work and consequently to
innovation. Therefore this study contributes to the literatures on both
innovation and knowledge work, which rarely investigate the role of professional
identity, and to the literature on professional identity, which seldom captures
the impact of identity work on professionals’ work boundaries and innovation
(Glynn, 2000;
Elsbach and Flynn,
2013; Hatch,
Schultz, and Skov, 2015).

Conceptualizing the work of professional identity refocusing contributes to our
understanding of technology’s impact on professionals (Abbott, 1988). Many professions arise
around satisfying and solving a specific set of problems and needs, but they are
often defined by the activities and tasks of the work itself rather than by the
original needs. Professional identity then becomes attached to the work (Wrzesniewski and Dutton,
2001). Professional identity refocusing work decouples this
attachment and brings the original need back to the center. This shift then
enables boundary dismantling, allowing outsiders to perform some of the
professionals’ work tasks.

In this study, the R&D professionals on the two ends of the reaction spectrum
were professionally and demographically similar in terms of their gender,
education, and tenure. But examining their professional development histories
revealed that those who changed their roles over the years—horizontally (across
projects, units, and disciplines) and not vertically (within the same projects,
units, and disciplines)—were more likely to refocus their professional identity
and dismantle their knowledge boundaries. This difference could explain their
ability to be less attached to the how of their work and more
able to focus on the why, as their how had
changed multiple times as they shifted disciplines and projects. Further
research on the ability to relax the attachment to the how of
work and refocus on the why would be relevant to many
professions.

Understanding professional identity refocusing work can shed light on how other
professional arenas are being transformed in response to web-based work models.
For instance, the professions of education and journalism are currently
challenged to open their boundaries via web-based models. As professors are
challenged by open education (Friedman, 2013), based on this study we
can predict that professors who refocus and reconstruct their identity and
capabilities will dismantle their boundaries and let external knowledge (from
other professors) influence their knowledge work with their students and open
their internal knowledge work (their teaching notes) to others. Such findings
may not hold when professionals are working in new professions that have no
notion of expertise or have not developed one yet.

This study also illustrates how professionals’ identity can play a critical role
in the adoption of change and innovation, expanding the existing innovation
studies on organizational-level identity that have found identity to be a source
of resistance to change (Kaplan, Murray, and Henderson, 2003; Kaplan and Tripsas, 2008; Tripsas, 2009; Benner and Tripsas,
2012). This study’s findings support the dynamic view of identity
(Gioia, Schultz, and
Corley, 2000; Kreiner, Hollensbe, and Sheep, 2006; Pratt, Rockmann, and Kaufmann, 2006).
It also answers the recent call to enhance our understanding of the impact of
identity work and of the interplay among multiple work processes in
organizations (Nelson and
Lawrence, 2012; Pratt, 2012). Identity work can be an important driving force for
change, and professionals can initiate and mobilize it. Furthermore, this change
can have important implications beyond the involved individuals. Most of the
identity work studies illustrate how it acts either as a barrier to change or as
a coping mechanism to accommodate change on the individual level (see Kreiner, Hollensbe, and Sheep,
2006; Pratt,
Rockmann, and Kaufmann, 2006). But professional identity work can
significantly affect an outcome that exceeds the professional’s scope: the
production of scientific and technological innovation, with accompanying
societal implications. In this sense, this study supports the proposal that
identity conflict, tension, and threat can actually yield positive outcomes
(Roberts, Dutton, and
Bednar, 2009). It also enhances our understanding of the relationship
between identity and boundaries, which so far has been conceptualized only on
the organizational identity level (see Santos and Eisenhardt, 2005).

History has witnessed several shifts in the role of scientists and engineers in
organizations (Merton,
1973; Bailyn and
Schein, 1980; Mokyr, 2002; Shapin, 2008). This study illustrates the potential directions in
which those roles may evolve in the context of open, distributed, or peer
production models of innovation. It illustrates how many NASA scientists and
engineers were able to mobilize a professional identity reconstruction work
process across their units and within their organization in less than three
years. This transformation was reflected in the change in their innovation
narrative (Ibarra and
Barbulescu, 2010) from a problem solver being the only hero of the
innovation story to including a solution seeker as a hero figure as well. As
specialization proliferates and innovation growth suffers (Jones, 2009; Gittelman, 2016), developing a
solution-seeker role can be an important alternative for increasing innovative
performance. Future research is warranted to understand the new capabilities
that the solution-seeker role might encompass, such as formulating problems in
ways that attract solvers from distant disciplines (Baer, Dirks, and Nickerson, 2013; Lifshitz-Assaf, 2018)
and being able to integrate these external and distant solutions (Katila and Ahuja, 2002;
Dahlander, O’Mahony, and
Gann, 2014). These questions are important as part of our need to
revisit and better comprehend the role of expertise in the digital age (Collins and Evans,
2007; Eyal,
2013; Lifshitz-Assaf and Szajnfarber, 2017).

The shift in the R&D professionals’ role found in this study also offers
important implications for innovation policy, as existing training for R&D
professionals emphasizes problem solving and not solution seeking (Owen-Smith, 2001;
Stern, 2004;
Jones, 2010).
Furthermore, current resource allocation, incentives, attribution, and award
systems are aimed only at problem solvers (Jasanoff, 2004; Evans and Reimer, 2009; Murray et al., 2012).
In this study, none of these systems changed. Managerial, organizational, and
field pressures were similar across the units. Future research could investigate
the impact of such interventions on the adoption of new innovation models. As we
know that the attribution of scientific and technological innovation is at the
core of R&D professionals’ work (Latour and Woolgar, 1979), we must ask
who gets credit (and how much) among solution seekers and external problem
solvers. For instance, in 2012, Yale astronomy professors coauthored a
scientific paper with the citizen scientists who had found a new planet (named
PH1 after the online community of citizen scientists, Planet Hunters) based on
NASA’s open data. This example illustrates the rise of new attribution models to
accommodate the shift in both the knowledge-production model and the role of the
scientist.

Finally, this study contributes to our understanding of technology’s impact on
professionals and their boundaries. It demonstrates that the same
technology-based intervention can be enacted differently by different
individuals within a profession, thus debunking the deterministic treatment of
technology as an external force and a determinant of social change (Bijker, Hughes, and Pinch,
1987). This study suggests that technology’s implications for social
change are best understood in how it is enacted, thus shedding light on the
equivocal nature of technology (Weick, 1990). There has always been a
fine line in scientific and technological knowledge between being elitist or
democratic, belonging to a privileged few or empowering the masses. Technology
has dramatically altered this tension and enables the democratization of
knowledge. Professional, sociological, and organizational forces must now
determine the direction and nature of this change.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary material
 I thank the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), in particular
its Space Life Science Directorate (SLSD), whose members shared their daily work
life, experiences, and thoughts with me and welcomed me to their workshops,
meetings, and labs. I am especially grateful to my dissertation chair and mentor,
Michael Lee Tushman, whose endless support, great insight, and inspiring
intellectual curiosity have both fueled and focused me throughout this study. I
thank devoted Karim R. Lakhani and Michel Anteby for their extensive feedback on
several versions of this paper, as well as Leslie Perlow, Beth Bechky, Natalia
Levina, Carliss Baldwin, Michael Pratt, and Anne Laure Fayard. This research
benefited from the insightful feedback and guidance of Mary Benner and three
anonymous reviewers who helped improve and strengthen the paper. I also appreciate
the enthusiastic support and constructive comments of participants in Harvard’s
Craft of Qualitative Inductive Research seminar, Organization Science Winter
Conference, the National Science Foundation Knowledge Conference, Wharton People and
Organization Conference, UC Davis Qualitative Conference, and the EGOS Grigor
McClelland dissertation competition. This research was funded by Harvard Business
School’s Division of Research and Faculty Development.

Supplemental Material: Supplemental material for this article can be found in the Online Appendix at
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/suppl/10.1177/0001839217747876.

1 In 2009, R&D professionals across NASA worked on reinvigorating and
demonstrating their innovative capabilities, their efforts doubled in light
of the Augustine Committee’s claim that NASA’s spaceflight program was on an
unsustainable trajectory. Various “innovation initiatives” sprouted to
demonstrate existing R&D capabilities. Management also encouraged
bottom-up and collaborative innovation, creating “innovation days” and
“innovation fairs.”

2 Individuals participate in open innovation platforms for a mix of
motivations, including intrinsic motivations such as enjoyment-based
intellectual stimulation and community contribution (see Franke and Shah,
2003; Boudreau, Lacetera, and Lakhani, 2011; Arazy et al., 2017) and extrinsic
motivations such as reputation effects (see Lerner and Tirole, 2002; Terwiesch and Xu,
2008). For further details on each of the platforms used by NASA,
see the following studies: Jeppesen and Lakhani, 2010
(Innocentive), Dushnitsky and Klueter, 2016 (Yet2.com), and Boudreau and Lakhani,
2015 (Topcoder).

3 For example, in one of the labs, the lead scientist and project manager were
affected by the open innovation experiment, while the system analyst and two
lab technicians were not involved or affected by it during the period of
this study.

4 This figure was created thanks to the constructive and insightful suggestions
of an anonymous reviewer.

Author’s Biography
Hila Lifshitz-Assaf is an assistant professor at the Stern School of Business, New
York University, Kaufman Management Center, 44 West Fourth Street, 8-89, New York,
NY 10012 (e-mail: H@nyu.edu). Her current research interests include
new ways of organizing for scientific and technological innovation, and the role of
expertise in the digital age. She earned a doctorate degree in management from
Harvard Business School and MBA and LLB degrees from Tel Aviv University.
==== Refs
References

Abbott A.  
1988 
The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of Expert
Labor . Chicago :
University of Chicago
Press .

Allen T. J.  
1977 
Managing the Flow of Technology .
Cambridge, MA : MIT
Press .

Altman E. J. Nagle F. Tushman M. L.  
2015  “Innovating without information constraints:
Organization, communities, and innovation when information costs approach
zero .” The Oxford Handbook of Creativity,
Innovation, and Entrepreneurship :
353 –379 .
Oxford : Oxford University
Press .

Anteby M. Wrzesniewski A.  
2014  “In search of the self at work: Young adults’
experiences of a dual identity organization .” In
Greve H. R. Seidel M.-D.   (eds.), Research in the Sociology of Work ,
25 : 13 –50 .
Bingley, UK : Emerald
Insight .

Arazy O. Daxenberger J. Lifshitz-Assaf H. Nov O. Gurevych I.  
2016  “Turbulent stability of emergent roles: The
dualistic nature of self-organizing knowledge
coproduction .” Information Systems
Research , 27 :
792 –812 .

Arazy O. Lifshitz-Assaf H. Nov O. Daxenberger J. Balestra M. Cheshire C.  
2017  “On the ‘how’ and ‘why’ of emergent role
behaviors in Wikipedia .” Proceedings of the ACM
20th Conference on Computer-supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing:
2039–2051 
New York : ACM
Press .

Baer M. Dirks K. Nickerson J. A.  
2013  “Microfoundations of strategic problem
formulation .” Strategic Management Journal ,
34 : 197 –214 .

Bailyn L. Schein E. H.  
1980 
Living with Technology: Issues at Mid-career .
Cambridge, MA : MIT
Press .

Baldwin C. Y. Von Hippel E.  
2011  “Modeling a paradigm shift: From producer
innovation to user and open collaborative
innovation .” Organization Science ,
22 :
1399 –1417 .

Barber B.  
1961  “Resistance by scientists to scientific
discovery .” Science , 134 
(1 ): 596 –602 .13686762 

Barley S. R.  
1986  “Technology as an occasion for structuring:
Evidence from observation of CT scanners and the social order of radiology
departments .” Administrative Science
Quarterly , 31 :
78 –108 .10281188 

Barley S. R. Kunda G.  
2001  “Bringing work back in .”
Organization Science , 12 :
76 –95 .

Bartel C. Garud R.  
2009  “The role of narratives in sustaining
organizational innovation .” Organization
Science , 20 :
107 –117 .

Bechky B. A.  
2003 a “Object lessons: Workplace artifacts as
representations of occupational jurisdiction .”
American Journal of Sociology , 109 :
720 –752 .

Bechky B. A.  
2003 b “Sharing meaning across occupational
communities: The transformation of knowledge on a production
floor .” Organization Science ,
14 : 312 –330 .

Benkler Y.  
2006 
The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets
and Freedom . New Haven, CT :
Yale University Press .

Benner M. Tripsas M.  
2012  “Prior industry affiliation and framing in
nascent industries: The evolution of digital cameras .”
Strategic Management Journal , 33 :
277 –302 .

Benner M. Tushman M. L.  
2015  “Reflections on the 2013 decade award:
‘Exploitation, exploration, and process management: The productivity
dilemma’ revisited ten years later .” Academy of
Management Journal , 40 :
497 –514 .

Bijker W. E. Hughes T. P. Pinch T. J.  
1987 
The Social Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions
in the Sociology and History of Technology .
Cambridge, MA : MIT
Press .

Boudreau K. J. Lacetera N. Lakhani K. R.  
2011  “Incentives and problem uncertainty in
innovation contests: An empirical analysis .”
Management Science , 57 :
843 –863 .

Boudreau K. J. Lakhani K. R.  
2015  “Open disclosure of innovations, incentives and
follow on reuse: Theory on processes of cumulative innovation and a field
experiment in computational biology .” Research
Policy , 44 :
4 –19 .

Campanario J. M.  
2009  “Rejecting and resisting Nobel class
discoveries: Accounts by Nobel laureates .”
Scientometrics , 81 :
549 –565 .

Carlile P.  
2002  “A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries:
Boundary objects in new product development .”
Organization Science , 13 :
442 –455 .

Carlile P.  
2004  “Transferring, translating, and transforming:
An integrative framework for managing knowledge across
boundaries .” Organization Science ,
15 : 555 –568 .

Charmaz C.  
2006 
Constructing Grounded Theory .
Thousand Oaks, CA :
Sage .

Chesbrough H.  
2003 
Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting
from Technology . Boston :
Harvard Business School
Press .

Chesbrough H. Vanhaverbeke W. West J.  
2014 
New Frontiers in Open Innovation .
Oxford : Oxford University
Press .

Cohen L. E.  
2013  “Assembling jobs: A model of how tasks are
bundled into and across jobs .” Organization
Science , 24 :
432 –454 .

Collins H. M. Evans R.  
2007 
Rethinking Expertise .
Chicago : University of
Chicago Press .

Czarniawska-Joerges B.  
1998 
Narrative Approach in Organization Studies .
Thousand Oaks, CA :
Sage .

Dahlander L. O’Mahony S. Gann D. M.  
2014  “One foot in, one foot out: How does
individuals’ external search breadth affect innovation
outcomes? ” Strategic Management Journal ,
37 : 280 –302 .

Dahlander L. Wallin M. W.  
2006  “A man on the inside: Unlocking communities as
complementary assets .” Research Policy ,
35 :
1243 –1259 .

Davis J. P.  
2016  “The group dynamics of interorganizational
relationships: Collaborating with multiple partners in innovation
ecosystems .” Administrative Science
Quarterly , 61 :
621 –661 .

DiBenigno J. Kellogg K. C.  
2014  “Beyond occupational differences: The
importance of cross-cutting demographics and dyadic toolkits for
collaboration in a U.S. hospital .” Administrative
Science Quarterly , 59 :
375 –408 .

Dougherty D.  
1992  “Interpretive barriers to successful product
innovation in large firms .” Organization
Science , 3 :
179 –202 .

Dushnitsky G. Klueter T.  
2010  “Is there an eBay for ideas? Insights from
online knowledge marketplaces .” European Management
Review , 8 :
17 –32 .

Dushnitsky G. Klueter T.  
2016  “Linking technologies to applications—Insights
from online markets for technology .” In Folta T. B. Helfat C. E. Karim S.   (eds.), Advances in Strategic Management, 35:
285–317 . Bingley, UK :
Emerald Insight .

Elsbach K. D.  
2003  “Relating physical environment to
self-categorizations: Identity threat and affirmation in a nonterritorial
office space .” Administrative Science
Quarterly , 48 :
622 –654 .

Elsbach K. D.  
2009  “Identity affirmation through ‘signature
style’: A study of toy car designers .” Human
Relations , 62 :
1041 –1072 .

Elsbach K. D. Flynn F. J.  
2013  “Creative collaboration and the self-concept: A
study of toy designers .” Journal of Management
Studies , 50 :
515 –544 .

Evans J. A. Reimer J  
2009  “Open access and global
participation in science .” Science ,
323 : 1025 .19229029 

Eyal G.  
2013  “For a sociology of expertise: The social
origins of the autism epidemic .” American Journal of
Sociology , 118 :
863 –907 .

Fayard A. Gkeredakis E. Levina N.  
2016  “Framing innovation opportunities while staying
committed to an organizational epistemic stance .”
Information Systems Research , 27 :
302 –323 .

Franke N. Shah S.  
2003  “How communities support innovative activities:
An exploration of assistance and sharing among end-users .”
Research Policy , 32 :
157 –178 .

Friedman T.  
2013  “The professors’ big stage .”
New York Times , 3 
5 .

Gieryn T. F.  
1983  “Boundary work and the demarcation of science
from non-science in professional ideologies of scientists .”
American Sociological Review , 48 :
781 –795 .

Gieryn T. F.  
1999 
Cultural Boundaries of Science: Credibility on the
Line . Chicago :
University of Chicago
Press .

Gioia D. A. Schultz M. Corley K. G.  
2000  “Organizational identity, image, and adaptive
instability .” Academy of Management Review ,
25 : 63 –81 .

Gittelman M.  
2016  “The revolution re-visited: Clinical and
genetics research paradigms and the productivity paradox in drug
discovery .” Research Policy ,
45 :
1570 –1585 .

Glaser B. Strauss A. L.  
1967 
The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative
Research . London :
Weidenfeld and Nicolson .

Glynn M. A.  
2000  “When cymbals become symbols: Conflict over
organizational identity within a symphony orchestra .”
Organization Science , 11 :
285 –298 .

Golden-Biddle K. Locke K. D.  
1997 
Composing Qualitative Research .
Thousand Oaks, CA :
Sage .

Hargadon A. B.  
2003 
How Breakthroughs Happen: The Surprising Truth about How
Companies Innovate . Cambridge,
MA : Harvard Business School
Press .

Hargadon A. B. Sutton R. I.  
1997  “Technology brokering in a product development
firm .” Administrative Science Quarterly ,
42 : 716 –749 .

Hatch M. J. Schultz M. Skov A. M.  
2015  “Organizational identity and culture in the
context of managed change: Transformation in the Carlsberg Group,
2009–2013 .” Academy of Management
Discoveries , 1  (1 ):
58 –90 .

Henkel J.  
2006  “Selective revealing in open innovation
processes: The case of embedded Linux .” Research
Policy , 35 :
953 –969 .

Heracleous L.  
2004  “Boundaries in the study of
organization .” Human Relations ,
57 : 95 –103 .

Hernes T.  
2014 
A Process Theory of Organization .
Oxford : Oxford University
Press .

Hinds P. Kiesler S.  
2002 
Distributed Work . Cambridge,
MA : MIT
Press .

Hughes E. C.  
1958 
Men and Their Work .
London : Free Press of
Glencoe, Collier-MacMillan .

Huising R.  
2015  “To hive or to hold? Producing relational
authority through scut work .” Administrative Science
Quarterly , 60 :
263 –299 .

Ibarra H. Barbulescu R.  
2010  “Identity as narrative: A process model of
narrative identity work in macro work role transition .”
Academy of Management Review , 35 :
135 –154 .

Jasanoff S.  
2004  “Science and citizenship: A new
synergy .” Science and Public Policy ,
31 : 90 –94 .

Jeppesen L. B. Lakhani K. R.  
2010  “Marginality and problem-solving effectiveness
in broadcast search .” Organization Science ,
21 :
1016 –1033 .

Jones B. F.  
2009  “The burden of knowledge and the `death of the
Renaissance man’: Is innovation getting harder? ”
Review of Economic Studies , 76 :
283 –317 .

Jones B. F.  
2010  “As science evolves, how can science
policy? ” In Lerner J. Stern S.   (eds.), National Bureau of Economic Research Book
Series, Innovation Policy and the Economy , 11 :
103 –131 .
Chicago : University of
Chicago Press .

Kaplan S. Murray F. Henderson R.  
2003  “Discontinuities and senior management:
Assessing the role of recognition in pharmaceutical firm response to
biotechnology .” Industrial and Corporate
Change , 12 :
203 –233 .

Kaplan S. Tripsas M.  
2008  “Thinking about technology: Applying a
cognitive lens to technical change .” Research
Policy , 37 :
790 –805 .

Katila R. Ahuja G.  
2002  “Something old, something new: A longitudinal
study of search behavior and new product introduction .”
Academy of Management Journal , 45 :
1183 –1194 .

Katz R. Allen T.  
1982  “Investigating the not invented here (NIH)
syndrome: A look at the performance, tenure, and communication patterns of
50 R&D project groups .” R&D
Management , 12 :
7 –20 .

Kellogg K. C. Orlikowski W. J. Yates J.  
2006  “Life in the trading zone: Structuring
coordination across boundaries in postbureaucratic
organizations .” Organization Science ,
17 : 22 –44 .

Kreiner G. E. Hollensbe E. C. Sheep M. L.  
2006  “Where is the ‘me’ among the ‘we’? Identity
work and the search for optimal balance .” Academy of
Management Journal , 49 :
1031 –1057 .

Lakhani K. Lifshitz-Assaf H. Tushman M. L.  
2013  “Open innovation and firm boundaries: Task
decomposition, knowledge distribution and the locus of
innovation .” In Grandori A.   (ed.), Handbook of Economic Organization: Integrating
Economic and Organization Theory :
355 –382 . Northampton,
MA : Edward
Elgar .

Lamont M. Molnar V.  
2002  “The study of boundaries across the social
sciences .” Annual Review of Sociology ,
28 : 167 –195 .

Langley A.  
1999  “Strategies for theorizing from process
data .” Academy of Management Review ,
24 : 691 –710 .

Latour B. Woolgar S.  
1979 
Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of Scientific
Facts . Beverly Hills, CA :
Sage .

Laursen K. Salter A.  
2006  “Open for innovation: The role of openness in
explaining innovative performance among UK manufacturing
firms .” Strategic Management Journal ,
27 : 131 –150 .

Laursen K. Salter A.  
2014  “The paradox of openness: Appropriability,
external search and collaboration .” Research
Policy , 43 :
867 –878 .

Leonardi P. M. Bailey D. E.  
2008  “Transformational technologies and the creation
of new work practices: Making implicit knowledge explicit in task-based
offshoring .” Management Information Systems
Quarterly , 32 :
411 –436 .

Lerner J. Tirole J.  
2002  “Some simple economics of open
source .” Journal of Industrial Economics ,
50 : 197 –234 .

Levina N. Orlikowski W. J.  
2009  “Understanding shifting power relations within
and across organizations: A critical genre analysis .”
Academy Management Journal , 52 :
672 –703 .

Levina N. Vaast E.  
2005  “The emergence of boundary spanning competence
in practice: Implications for information systems’ implementation and
use .” Management Information Systems
Quarterly , 29  (2 ):
1 –29 .

Levina N. Vaast E.  
2008  “Innovating or doing as told? Status
differences and overlapping boundaries in offshore
collaboration .” Management Information Systems
Quarterly , 32  (2 ):
307 –332 .

Levina N. Vaast E.  
2013  “A field-of-practice view on boundary spanning
in and across organizations: Transactive and transformative
boundary-spanning practices .” In Langan-Fox J. Cooper C.   (eds.), Boundary Spanning in Organizations :
285 –307 . New
York : Routledge, Taylor & Francis
Group .

Lieblich A. Zilber T. B. Tuval-Mashiach R.  
2008  “Narrating human actions: The subjective
experience of agency, structure, communion, and
serendipity .” Qualitative Inquiry ,
14 : 613 –631 .

Lifshitz-Assaf H.  
2018  “Towering over Babel: Decoupling problem
formulation from problem solving and opening the solution
space .”  Working paper,
Stern School of Business, New York
University .

Lifshitz-Assaf H. Szajnfarber Z.  
2017  “Revisiting the expertise assumption: Breaking
and reconfiguring the boundaries between domain experts and
crowds .”  Working paper,
Stern School of Business, New York
University .

Lofland J. Lofland L. H.  
1995 
Analyzing Social Settings: A Guide to Qualitative Observation and
Analysis . Belmont, CA :
Wadsworth .

Majchrzak A. Neece O. E. Cooper L. P.  
2004  “Knowledge reuse for
innovation .” Management Science ,
50 : 174 –188 .

Merton R. K.  
1973  “The normative structure of
science .” In The Sociology of Science :
267 –278 .
Chicago : University of
Chicago Press .

Miles M. B. Huberman A. M.  
1994 
Qualitative Data Analysis .
Thousand Oaks, CA :
Sage .

Mokyr J.  
2002 
The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge
Economy . Princeton, NJ :
Princeton University
Press .

Murray F. O’Mahony S.  
2007  “Exploring the foundations of cumulative
innovation: Implications for organization science .”
Organization Science , 18 :
1006 –1021 .

Murray F. Stern S. Campbell G. MacCormack A.  
2012  “Grand innovation prizes: A theoretical,
normative and empirical evaluation .” Research
Policy , 41 :
1779 –1792 .

Nelson P. Lawrence T. B.  
2012  “The turn to work in organization and
management theory: Some implications for strategic
organization .” Strategic Organization ,
10 : 223 –230 .

Obstfeld D.  
2005  “Social networks, the tertius iungens
orientation, and involvement in innovation .”
Administrative Science Quarterly , 50 :
100 –130 .

O’Mahony S. Bechky B. A.  
2008  “Boundary organizations: Enabling collaboration
among unexpected allies .” Administrative Science
Quarterly , 53 :
422 –459 .

O’Mahony S. Ferraro F.  
2007  “The emergence of governance in an open source
community .” Academy of Management Journal ,
50 :
1079 –1106 .

O’Mahony S. Ferraro F.  
2012  “Managing the boundary of an open
project .” In Powell W. W. Padgett J. F.   (eds.), Market Emergence and Transformation:
545–565 . Princeton, NJ :
Princeton University
Press .

O’Mahony S. Lakhani K. R.  
2011  “Organizations in the shadow of
communities .” In Marquis C. Lounsbury M. Greenwood R.   (eds.), Research in the Sociology of
Organizations , 33 :
3 –35 . Bingley,
UK : Emerald
Group .

Orlikowski W. J.  
2000  “Using technology and constituting structures:
A practice lens for studying technology in organizations .”
Organization Science , 11 :
404 –428 .

Orlikowski W. J.  
2002  “Knowing in practice: Enacting a collective
capability in distributed organizing .” Organization
Science , 13 :
249 –273 .

Owen-Smith J.  
2001  “Managing laboratory work through skepticism:
Processes of evaluation and control .” American
Sociological Review , 66 :
427 –452 .

Owen-Smith J. Powell W. W.  
2004  “Knowledge networks as channels and conduits:
The effects of spillovers in the Boston biotechnology
community .” Organization Science ,
15 : 5 –21 .

Pachucki M. Pendergrass S. Lamont M.  
2007  “Boundary processes: Recent theoretical
developments and new contributions .”
Poetics , 35 :
331 –351 .

Petriglieri J. L.  
2011  “Under threat: Responses to and the
consequences of threats to individuals’ identities .”
Academy of Management Review , 36 :
641 –662 .

Piezunka H. Dahlander L.  
2015  “Distant search, narrow attention: How
competition for attention alters organizations’ filtering of suggestions in
crowdsourcing .” Academy of Management
Journal , 58 :
856 –880 .

Powell W. W.  
2016  “A sociologist looks at crowds: Innovation or
invention? ” Strategic Organization ,
15 : 289 –297 .

Pratt M. G.  
2012  “Rethinking identity construction processes in
organizations: Three questions to consider .” In
Schultz M. Maguire S. Langley A. Tsoukas H.   (eds.), Perspectives on Process Organization Studies:
Constructing Identity In and Around Organizations :
21 –49 . London :
Oxford University Press .

Pratt M. G. Rockmann K. Kaufmann J.  
2006  “Constructing professional identity: The role
of work and identity learning cycles in the customization of identity among
medical residents .” Academy of Management
Journal , 49 :
235 –262 .

Roberts L. M. Dutton J. E. Bednar J.  
2009  “Forging ahead: Positive identities and
organizations as a research frontier .” In Roberts L. M. Dutton J. E.   (eds.), Exploring Positive Identities and Organizations:
Building a Theoretical and Research Foundation :
497 –515 . New
York : Psychological
Press .

Rosenkopf L. Nerkar A.  
2001  “Beyond local research: Boundary-spanning,
exploration, and impact in the optical disk industry .”
Strategic Management Journal , 22 :
287 –306 .

Rottner R. Beckman C.  
2015  “Making the invisible visible: A history of the
Spitzer infrared telescope facility (1971–2003) .”
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Monographs in
Aerospace History , No. 47 .

Santos F. M. Eisenhardt K.  
2005  “Organizational boundaries and theories of
organization .” Organization Science ,
16 : 491 –508 .

Sarfatti-Larson M.  
1979 
The Rise of Professionalism .
Berkeley, CA : University of
California Press .

Shapin S.  
2008 
The Scientific Life: A Moral History of a Late Modern
Vocation . Chicago :
University of Chicago
Press .

Snow D. A. Anderson L.  
1987  “Identity work among the homeless: The verbal
construction and avowal of personal identities .”
American Journal of Sociology , 92 :
1336 –1371 .

Spradley J.  
1979 
The Ethnographic Interview . New
York : Holt, Rinehart and
Winston .

Stern S.  
2004  “Do scientists pay to be
scientists? ” Management Science ,
50 : 835 –853 .

Strauss A.  
1987 
Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists .
Cambridge : Cambridge
University Press .

Szajnfarber Z. Weigel A. L.  
2013  “A process model of technology innovation in
governmental agencies: Insights from NASA’s science
directorate .” Acta Astronautica ,
84  (3–4 ):
56 –68 .

Szulanski G.  
1996  “Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to
the transfer of best practice within the firm .”
Strategic Management Journal , 17 :
27 –43 .

Terwiesch C. Xu Y.  
2008  “Innovation contests, open innovation, and
multi-agent problem solving .” Management
Science , 54 :
1529 –1543 .

Tripsas M.  
2009  “Technology, identity, and inertia: Through the
lens of ‘the digital photography company .’”
Organization Science , 20 :
441 –460 .

Tushman M. L.  
1977  “Special boundary roles in the innovation
process .” Administrative Science Quarterly ,
22 : 587 –605 .

Tushman M. L. Scanlan T. J.  
1981  “Boundary spanning individuals: Their role in
information transfer and their antecedents .” Academy
of Management Journal , 24 :
289 –305 .

Van Maanen J. Barley S. R.  
1984  “Occupational communities: Culture and control
in organizations .” In Staw B. M. Cummings L. L.   (eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior ,
6 : 287 –365 .
Greenwich, CT : JAI
Press .

Vaughan D.  
1996 
The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture, and
Deviance at NASA . Chicago :
University of Chicago
Press .

Vaughan D.  
2006  “NASA revisited: Theory, analogy, and public
sociology .” American Journal of Sociology ,
112 :
353 –393 .

Von Hippel E  
1988 
Sources of Innovation .
Oxford : Oxford University
Press .

Von Hippel E  
2005 
Democratizing Innovation .
Cambridge, MA : MIT
Press .

Weick K. E.  
1990  “Technology as equivoque .” In
Goodman P. S. Sproull L. S.   (eds.), Technology and Organizations :
1 –44 . San
Francisco :
Jossey-Bass .

Weick K. E.  
1995 
Sensemaking in Organizations .
London :
Sage .

West J.  
2003  “How open is open enough? Melding proprietary
and open source platform strategies .” Research
Policy , 32 :
1259 –1285 .

West J. O’Mahony S  
2005  “Contrasting community
building in sponsored and community founded open source
projects .” In Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ,
IEEE Computer Society .

Wrzesniewski A. Dutton J. E.  
2001  “Crafting a job: Revisioning employees as
active crafters of their work .” Academy of
Management Review , 26 :
179 –201 .

Wrzesniewski A. Dutton J. E. Debebe G.  
2003  “Interpersonal sensemaking and the meaning of
work .” In Kramer R. M. Staw B. M.   (eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior, 25:
93–135 . New York :
Elsevier .

Zerubavel E.  
1993 
The Fine Line .
Chicago : University of
Chicago Press .

Zuboff S.  
1988 
In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of Work and
Power . New York :
Basic Books .

