
==== Front
AnimalAnimalANMAnimal1751-73111751-732XCambridge University Press Cambridge, UK 10.1017/S1751731114002614S175173111400261400261Breeding and GeneticsInvited review: overview of new traits and phenotyping strategies in dairy
cattle with a focus on functional traits Egger-Danner, Cole, Pryce, Gengler, Heringstad,
Bradley and StockNew traits in dairy cattleEgger-Danner C. 1Cole J. B. 2Pryce J. E. 3Gengler N. 4Heringstad B. 5Bradley A. 67Stock K. F. 81 ZuchtData EDV-Dienstleistungen GmbH, Dresdner Str.
89/19, A-1200 Vienna, Austria2 Animal Genomics and Improvement Laboratory,
ARS, USDA, 10300 Baltimore
Avenue, Beltsville, MD 20705-2350,
USA3 Department of Environment and Primary Industries, La
Trobe University, Agribio, 5 Ring
Road, Bundoora, Victoria 3083,
Australia4 University of Liège, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech
(GxABT), Animal Science Unit, Passage des
Déportés 2, B-5030 Gembloux, Belgium5 Department of Animal and Aquacultural Sciences,
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, PO Box
5003, N-1432 Ås, Norway6 Quality Milk Management Services Ltd, Cedar
Barn, Easton Hill, Easton,
Wells, Somerset, BA5
1EY, UK7 University of Nottingham, School of Veterinary
Medicine and Science, Sutton Bonington Campus,
Sutton Bonington, Leicestershire,
LE12 5RD, UK8 Vereinigte Informationssysteme Tierhaltung w.V. (vit),
Heideweg 1, D-27283 Verden,
Germany †  E-mail: egger-danner@zuchtdata.at12 11 2014 2 2015 9 2 191 207 02 4 2014 11 9 2014 © The Animal Consortium 20142014The Animal ConsortiumThis is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence (http://creativecommons. org/licenses/by/3.0/), which
permits unrestricted re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original work is properly cited.For several decades, breeding goals in dairy cattle focussed on increased milk
production. However, many functional traits have negative genetic correlations with milk
yield, and reductions in genetic merit for health and fitness have been observed. Herd
management has been challenged to compensate for these effects and to balance fertility,
udder health and metabolic diseases against increased production to maximize profit
without compromising welfare. Functional traits, such as direct information on cow health,
have also become more important because of growing concern about animal well-being and
consumer demands for healthy and natural products. There are major concerns about the
impact of drugs used in veterinary medicine on the spread of antibiotic-resistant strains
of bacteria that can negatively impact human health. Sustainability and efficiency are
also increasingly important because of the growing competition for high-quality,
plant-based sources of energy and protein. Disruptions to global environments because of
climate change may encourage yet more emphasis on these traits. To be successful, it is
vital that there be a balance between the effort required for data recording and
subsequent benefits. The motivation of farmers and other stakeholders involved in
documentation and recording is essential to ensure good data quality. To keep labour costs
reasonable, existing data sources should be used as much as possible. Examples include the
use of milk composition data to provide additional information about the metabolic status
or energy balance of the animals. Recent advances in the use of mid-infrared spectroscopy
to measure milk have shown considerable promise, and may provide cost-effective
alternative phenotypes for difficult or expensive-to-measure traits, such as feed
efficiency. There are other valuable data sources in countries that have compulsory
documentation of veterinary treatments and drug use. Additional sources of data outside of
the farm include, for example, slaughter houses (meat composition and quality) and
veterinary labs (specific pathogens, viral loads). At the farm level, many data are
available from automated and semi-automated milking and management systems. Electronic
devices measuring physiological status or activity parameters can be used to predict
events such as oestrus, and also behavioural traits. Challenges concerning the predictive
biology of indicator traits or standardization need to be solved. To develop effective
selection programmes for new traits, the development of large databases is necessary so
that high-reliability breeding values can be estimated. For expensive-to-record traits,
extensive phenotyping in combination with genotyping of females is a possibility.

Keywords
phenotypesnovel traitsdairy cowsfunctional traitsgenomics
==== Body
Implications
The advances that have been made in breeding goals have been based on the needs of
breeders; however, they are also influenced by consumers and societal needs related to food
safety and efficient and environmentally sound production systems. New functional traits are
growing in importance because of recent declines in animal health and fitness. There is also
growing competition for high-quality, plant-based sources of energy and protein; thus, it is
important to use those resources very efficiently in animal production. Successful
programmes for animal improvement will require a balance between the effort needed to record
data and the resulting benefits to farmers.

Introduction
As a consequence of negative genetic correlations between milk yield and fitness traits, a
decline in many functional traits has been observed (e.g. Jones et al.,
1994; Lucy, 2001). In recent years, there has been a stabilization or even increase in genetic
trends of functional traits (e.g. Miglior et al., 2012; ZuchtData, 2014). An
example for the increase in genetic trend for longevity is shown for Holstein Friesian in
Figure 1 (Fuerst C., 2014, personal communication).
Herd management has been challenged to compensate for antagonistic effects and to balance
selection for production while maintaining fertility, udder health and resistance to
metabolic diseases in order to maximize profit without compromising welfare. As a result,
there is increasing demand around the world for novel traits that can be used for herd
management and genetic improvement, as well as for monitoring parameters of public
interest.Figure 1 Average estimated breeding value for longevity by birth year and country for Holstein
Friesian (Fuerst, 2014).




The work needed to record additional data must provide immediate benefits to the producer
in order to motivate the extra effort required. Individual producers place particular value
on tools that can help them better manage their herds. If other stakeholders, such as
veterinarians, are to be encouraged to record, for example, treatments and diagnoses, they
also need to accrue benefits from the effort that they put in. As it is more and more
challenging to balance high levels of production with reproduction and health, there is a
growing need for data that can be used to detect problems at an early stage so that early
interventions can be made.

The inclusion of functional traits in genetic improvement programmes is important for the
long-term development of dairy populations. Genetic gains are cumulative, and small
improvements that build up over time will provide ongoing savings to all farmers,
particularly those using selection indices to combine information from many different
traits. In response to these needs, there has been a worldwide shift towards more emphasis
on functional traits in selection programmes over the past 15 years. Complex breeding goals
that include up to 43 functional traits/country are encompassed by total merit indices (TMI)
according to a survey carried out by ICAR in 2012 (Stock et al., 2012), and the responses from 23 countries showed that
genetic evaluations for calving ease, fertility, longevity, feet and legs and indirect
health traits are very common. However, a wider range of health traits are actually being
recorded, and there are plans in a number of countries to further expand their recording
programmes to include additional reproduction, metabolic and efficiency traits. Public
interest in the use of parameters for monitoring food safety, tracking disease outbreaks and
documenting animal welfare is increasing. National monitoring programmes may therefore be
developed to meet the demands of producers, consumers and regulators. The objectives of this
paper are to give an overview of expected developments and challenges related to the
availability of novel traits, with emphasis on new health and fitness traits in the near
future, and to suggest strategies for phenotyping of new traits.

Background
The world population is estimated to reach 9 billion people in 2050 according to the latest
demographic reports from the United Nations (2014), which will require a big increase in food production. Demand for limited
resources will increase and prices for energy and concentrates will rise. Disruptions in
global environments due to climate change (see, e.g. Walthall et al., 2012) may also drive a greater emphasis on novel
traits, especially those that optimize resource use efficiency. Cattle producers will be
challenged to find ways to reduce greenhouse gas emissions throughout the production cycle,
either by increasing production efficiency and reducing wastage or by using new technologies
to decrease pollution. In this context, there is need for novel traits that can be used in
herd management and breeding. Functional traits, such as direct information of cow health,
have also increased in importance because of growing concerns about animal welfare and
consumer demands for healthy and natural products. Consumers are also concerned about the
impact of drugs used in veterinary medicine on the spread of antibiotic-resistant strains of
bacteria that can negatively impact human health. These requirements are also a part of
legal regulations in the European Union (Pavon, 2013).

According to a scientific report on the effects of farming systems on dairy cow welfare and
disease (EFSA-Q-2006-113, 2009), the major diseases
associated with poor welfare in dairy cows were leg disorders, mastitis and reproductive
disorders. Pavon (2013) stated that genetic
selection of dairy cattle over many years is considered by the European Commission to be a
major factor leading to poor welfare in dairy cows, which has driven a need for welfare
indicators. However, only healthy cows can perform at high levels of production for a long
time, and it is important to ensure that consumers and policy makers understand this.

A key requirement for the recording of data is the motivation of the stakeholders involved.
Several countries have conducted surveys with farmers to understand their needs (Steininger
et al., 2012; Roessler
et al., 2013; Schwarzenbacher,
2013). A consistent observation in these surveys
has been that farmers place priority on the genetic progress of functional traits, aiming at
robust cows that are easy to handle. Increasing milk yield is no longer ranked among the
most important traits to select for, but it is quite possible that survey respondents are
indicating a desire for healthy, long-lived cows that are also highly productive. Growing
emphasis on functional traits indicates that they are perceived as being more important than
in the past – for example, because herd sizes and labour costs are increasing – but that
does not necessarily mean that production is unimportant.

According to Bo (2009), a breeding goal should
include the following aspects: increased income (higher production of milk/beef); reduced
costs (better fertility, fewer diseases, reduced culling rates); ease of management
(temperament, milking speed); and advantages regarding the sale of products (animal welfare,
ethics, consumer concerns). Complex breeding goals also require information on a wide range
of relevant traits that can be measured economically. In dairy cattle, these traits include
efficiency, health, fertility and functional conformation. Many countries now use a diverse
group of economically important traits in the TMI to rank cattle for genetic selection
(Figure 2). However, recording has to have benefits
beyond genetic improvement programmes, and the additional effort required for documentation
must result in added value. Electronic systems that make data capture easy are a key to
long-term success.Figure 2 Traits included in the total merit indices of 17 countries. The data used to
construct this figure were provided by F. Miglior of the Canadian Dairy Network.




Advances in technology will have an impact on the future definition and availability of
phenotypes. The growing use of SNP-based genotyping may lead to routine genomic evaluations
of new traits with relatively few daughter records, particularly if producers are willing to
use breeding values with lower reliabilities than they are accustomed to. Phenotypes that
are expensive to measure, such as direct feed intake, may be handled by establishing small
reference populations with very thorough data recording. Those data could be used to develop
predictors for the broader population based on traits that are recorded in most herds (e.g.
Cole et al., 2014). Recent
technological developments will provide more knowledge about the biological background and
genetic architecture of traits (RNAseq, genome sequencing, genomics, proteomics,
metabolomics, etc.). Sequencing technologies can be used to identify causal mutations,
rather than SNP in linkage disequilibrium with causal mutations, which should lead to
increased accuracies of genomic prediction (Meuwissen et al., 2013). Metabolomics (the study of cellular metabolites
present within an organism) and proteomics (the study of protein structure, function and
patterns of expression within an organism) should lead to a better description of
phenotypes, which could enhance selection opportunities.

Novel functional traits
Direct health traits
Several studies show that the use of direct health traits (e.g. mastitis diagnoses) is
more effective than indicator traits alone in breeding programmes (Heringstad et
al., 2007; Egger-Danner et
al., 2012a; Parker Gaddis et
al., 2014). The Nordic countries have a
well-established history of health recording in dairy cows. In Norway, each case of
veterinary treatment has been registered on an individual cow basis since 1975 (Heringstad
and Østerås, 2013; ICAR, 2013). Similar recording systems were established in Finland, Sweden
and Denmark during the 1980s. Routine genetic evaluations for direct health traits have
been in place in Austria and Germany since 2010, in France since 2012 and in Canada since
December 2013. Systems for recording of diagnoses are presently being established in other
countries as well and will be more widely available in the near future. Some countries
will use veterinary diagnoses, whereas others will focus on producer-recorded data.
Developments towards integrated use of health data require standardization of diagnoses to
ensure that phenotypes are comparable. Gernand et al. (2012), Govignon-Gion et al. (2012), Parker Gaddis et al. (2012) and Pryce et al. (1998) have shown that, for use in genetic
evaluations, common health disorders recorded by farmers are of a similar quality as those
documented by veterinarians. Combined use of health data from farmers and diagnosis
documented by veterinarians may be an option to improve coverage of direct health data. In
2012, ICAR approved guidelines for Recording, Evaluation and Genetic Improvement of Health
Traits (ICAR, 2012). A hierarchical system with a
very comprehensive key of diagnoses (>900 entries), a reduced key of diagnoses (60
to 100 entries) and a simple key with about 10 diagnoses was described, enabling
multidisciplinary use ranging from detailed information for veterinarians to simple
recording of health-related observations by farmers (Table 1). International co-operation for comparability of results across
countries is important.Table 1 Example of use of the hierarchical health key published by ICAR (2012)

	Comprehensive key of diagnoses	Reduced key of diagnoses	Simple key of diagnoses	
Number of diagnosis	>900	60–100	10–15	
Source	Veterinarian	Veterinarian	Producer	
Recording	Electronic submission (veterinarian)	Veterinarian, performance record,
producer	Producer	
Example	Central key for health data recording:
mastitis catarrhalis acuta, mastitis catarrhalis chronica, mastitis
apostematosa	e.g. AUT: acute mastitis chronic
mastitis	Mastitis	



Udder health
Mastitis is the most common trait related to udder health. In most countries, somatic
cell count (SCC) is obtained from samples processed in milk-recording programmes and used
as an indirect measure of mastitis; the genetic correlation between mastitis and SCC is
much lower than 1 (e.g. Heringstad et al., 2006; Negussie et al., 2008). Heritability and genetic correlation estimates are presented
in Table 2. Recent research has focussed on
alternative definitions of SCC, such as prolonged elevated SCC (e.g. de Haas et
al., 2008; Koeck et
al., 2010a; Urioste et
al., 2010). These novel definitions
showed higher correlations with mastitis and demonstrated that temporal changes in SCC
provide additional information about mastitis resistance. However, such analyses may
require more frequent collection of samples than is common in many milk-recording
programmes. Genetic evaluations for clinical mastitis (CM) have been computed in the
Nordic countries for >35 years, followed by Austria, and are now common in other
countries as well (see the ‘Direct health traits’ section). Udder health indices combining
SCC and CM (and udder conformation traits) are published in some countries.Table 2 Heritabilities for novel traits

Traits	Breed	Heritability	Sources	Remarks	
Udder health					
Clinical mastitis (CM)	HF	0.07–0.08	Urioste et al. (2012)	Genetic correlations between CM and SCC
0.62–0.74	
	FL	0.02–0.06	Koeck et al. (2010a and 2010b)		
	NR	0.05–0.09	Heringstad et al.
(2004)		
	HF	0.05–0.09	Stock et al. (2013)		
Improved SCC – definitions (e.g.
prolonged elevated SCC)	HF	0.12–0.17	Urioste et al. (2012)	Genetic correlations between CM and
improved SCC 0.67–0.82	
	FL	0.09–0.13	Koeck et al. (2010a)	Genetic correlations between CM and
improved SCC 0.64–0.77	
	HF	0.01–0.13	De Haas et al. (2008)	Genetic correlations between CM and
improved SCC 0.55–0.93	
Electrical conductivity (EC)	BS	0.23	Povinelli et al.
(2005)		
	HF	0.12–0.36	Norberg (2005)	Genetic correlations between EC and CM
0.65–0.89	
Pathogen information	NR	0.04–0.14	Haugaard et al.
(2012);		
	HF	0.04–0.09	Sorensen et al. (2009)		
			De Haas et al. (2002)		
Near IR spectroscopy, PCR and IR
thermography for detection of mastitis		0.02–0.10	Polat et al. (2010); Haussermann and Hartung (2012)	Information on specificity and
sensitivity of methods	
Lactoferrin		0.22	Arnould et al. (2009); Soyeurt et al.
(2012a)	Lactoferrin predicted from Mid IR (MIR)
spectroscopy	
Minerals		0.50 (Ca)	Soyeurt et al. (2009)	Minerals predicted from MIR
spectroscopy	
		0.34 (Na)	Soyeurt et al. (2012c)		
		0.52 (Mg)			
		0.48 (K) 0.55 (P)			
Reproduction					
 Fertility-related diseases (cystic
ovaries, retained placenta, metritis, silent heat, etc.)		0.01–0.07	Heringstad (2010)	Genetic correlation of early
reproductive disorders to NR56 0.396	
		0.01–0.14	Koeck et al. (2010b)		
 Multiple ovulation, ovarian cysts,
retained placenta, metritits, silent heat		0.006–0.26	Berry et al. (2014)	Review	
 Interval from calving to commencement
of luteal activity	HF	0.13–0.21	Berry et al. (2014)		
 Retained placenta, ovary cycle
disturbances	HF	0.04	Stock et al. (2013)		
Metabolism					
 Ketosis, milk fever	FL	0.01, 0.03	Fuerst-Waltl et al.
(2014)		
 Ketosis, displaced abomasum	HF	0.02, 0.04	Koeck et al. (2013)		
 Milk fever, ketosis	NR	0.09–0.13, 0.14–0.16	Heringstad et al.
(2005)		
 Ratio fat and protein content (first 2
test days)	FL	0.16	Fuerst-Waltl et al.
(2014)	Genetic correlation to ketosis
0.38	
Feet and legs					
 Lameness	HF	0.04	Berry et al. (2010)	Low genetic correlation to claw
health	
	HF	0.02	Koeck et al. (2014)		
 Disorders based on veterinarian
diagnoses	FV	0.02	Fuerst-Waltl et al.
(2012)	Lower frequency (only severe
cases)	
 Disorders based on data from hoof
trimming data	HF	0.02–0.13	Häggmann and Juga (2013)		
	HF	0.01–0.09	Chapinal et al. (2013)		
	NR	0.04–0.23	Ødegård et al. (2013
and 2014)		
Other novel traits					
 Temperament (general temperament,
milking temperament)	BS	0.12–0.20	Kramer et al. (2013)		
 General temperament, aggressiveness,
milking temperament	HF	0.38, 0.12, 0.04	Gautam and Nakao (2009)		
 Suckling behaviour (allowing suckling)	FL	0.04	Fuerst-Waltl et al.
(2010)		
 Milkability from AMS (average flow
rate)	HF and SR	0.38–0.42	Carlström et al.
(2013a and 2013b)	Genetic correlation of 0.93 and 1
between milkability between conventional systems and AMS	
	NR	0.11–0.30	Heringstad and Bugten (2014)		
 Behaviour traits from AMS	HF	0.06–0.31	Rinell (2013)		
 Activity data	HF	0.03–0.27	Schöpke und and Weigel (2014)		
 Fatty acids		0.18–0.44	Bastin et al. (2011a)		
Feed efficiency and methane					
 Residual Feed Intake	HF	0–0.32	Pryce et al. (2014a)	Cows	
	HF	0.40	De Haas et al. (2011)		
 Residual Feed Intake (RFI)	HF	0.22–0.38	Pryce et al. (2014a)	Heifers	
 Methane predicted from RFI	HF	0.35	De Haas et al. (2011)		
 Methane predicted from MIR	HF	0.09–0.12	Kandel et al. (2013)	Daily heritability unit: g/day	
 Methane intensity predicted from MIR	HF	0.12–018	Kandel et al. (2013)	Daily heritability unit: g/kg of
FPCM	
SSS=somatic cell count; AMS=automated milking systems; FPCM=fat and protein
corrected milk.




Several new methods for the detection of mastitis have been proposed. Electrical
conductivity (EC) is available from some automated milking systems (AMS) and can be used
as an indicator of mastitis. Collecting and implementing EC information in a breeding
programme may be a challenge (Norberg, 2005),
and recent literature on that topic is limited. Haeusermann and Hartung (2012) analysed data from near IR spectroscopy,
real-time PCR and IR thermography to determine whether they are useful indicators of
mastitis. They concluded that the development and testing of new detection methods for
mastitis will require further work. On-farm or in-line utilization of the data is not
applicable for all of the techniques examined, and there is the challenge of defining a
‘gold standard’ for the prevention of mastitis. Recent advances in the capacity of
large-scale prediction of lactoferrin (Soyeurt et al., 2012a) and mineral content indicator traits (Soyeurt
et al., 2009), both known to
be associated with mastitis, could also offer new opportunities to select for improved
mastitis resistance (Soyeurt et al., 2012a and 2012b). Research has also
been carried out on the use of pathogen-specific information in the genetic evaluation of
mastitis (de Haas et al., 2002;
Sorenson et al., 2009; Haugaard
et al., 2012). Different
bacteria may cause different immune responses, and the severity of infection and response
to therapeutics can differ between pathogens. It has been shown that prevention programmes
for heifer mastitis can be more efficient when information about pathogens is known (De
Vliegher et al., 2012). The most
significant challenge is in obtaining microbial cultures for a large number of animals
because the data are expensive to collect relative to SCC or producer-reported diagnoses
of CM.

Reproduction
Reproduction consists of several different traits. To establish a recording scheme for
female fertility, the following data are desirable: (1) calving dates; (2) all artificial
insemination dates as well as natural mating dates wherever possible; (3) information on
fertility disorders; (4) pregnancy test results; (5) body condition score (BCS); and (6)
hormone assays (ICAR, 2014). Routinely used
fertility traits are mainly based on calving and insemination data. However, the use of
fertility-related diagnoses is increasing, which envisions improved selection for
reproductive health. Physical activity increases during oestrus. In addition, there are
other behavioural changes, such as standing heat and mounting behaviour. These signs can
be used to detect oestrus and can be used to calculate traits such as interval between
calving and resumption of oestrus. It is probably unrealistic to routinely collect such
data without automating heat detection. For example, pedometers and more sophisticated
activity monitors are now being used routinely on many farms as part of a herd management
package. The pedometer information needs to be compared with a baseline for the same cow,
and algorithms have been developed to interpret the data collected. The efficiency of the
oestrus detection rate has been reported to range between 50% and 100% depending on the
criteria of success (At-Taras and Spahr, 2001).
The ‘gold standard’ for oestrus detection is serum progesterone, and comparisons of
pedometer – with progesterone-determined oestrus – has shown that activity monitors cannot
detect silent behavioural oestrus (Lovendahl and Chagunda, 2010). However, an advantage of both progesterone- and
activity-determined oestrus is that they do not require direct observations by farm
workers. Novel predictors of fertility, such as pedometers and BCS, are growing in
popularity (Fogh et al., 2013).
Several researchers have shown that BCS has a favourable relationship with fertility (e.g.
Pryce et al., 2001; Berry
et al., 2003). Research on
the use of mid-infrared (MIR) predicted fatty acids as indicator traits for fertility
(Bastin et al., 2012) and of MIR
for pregnancy status testing is also underway (Gengler et al., 2013).

Labial position is associated with urovagina, a condition in which urine accumulates in
the cranial portion of the vagina, which has harmful effects on fertility (Gautam and
Nakao, 2009).

Genomics offers new possibilities for the discovery of harmful recessive effects on
fertility based on the absence of homozygous haplotypes (VanRaden et al.,
2011). A number of causative mutations have
been identified using SNP genotypes and whole-genome sequence data (Adams et
al., 2012; Fritz et al.,
2013; Sonstegard et al., 2013; McClure et al., 2014), and a deletion with positive effects on milk
yield and negative effects on fertility has recently been identified in Nordic Red cattle
(Kadri et al., 2014). In
Fleckvieh (Simmental) and Brown Swiss, deleterious mutations compromising reproductive and
rearing success in cattle have been discovered (Pausch et al., 2014a and 2014
b; Schwarzenbacher et al.,
2012).

These methods are amenable to automation, and in the United States and several other
countries the process of searching for new recessives is now a part of the genomic
evaluation system.

Feet and legs
Foot and leg conditions rank among the three most frequent reasons for culling after
reproduction and udder health. The conformation of feet and legs is recorded routinely by
linear-type classification systems that are often part of the services offered by breed
societies. Feet and leg conformation traits may be useful indicator traits for claw
health. They cannot replace direct measures of claw health because their genetic
correlations with claw disorders are low, but they can be used to increase the reliability
of EBVs (Häggmann and Juga, 2013; Chapinal
et al., 2013). Koenig
et al. (2005 and 2006), Koenig and Swalve (2006) and Linde et al. (2010) showed that the efficiency of breeding for improved claw
health increases considerably when claw health data are included. Routine electronic
recording systems for claw health at the time of trimming exist in the Nordic countries
(Johansson et al., 2011;
Häggmann et al., 2013; Ødegård
et al., 2013), and have been introduced in other countries as well
(Kofler, 2013). Ødegård et al.
(2013) showed, based on Norwegian data, that breeding for claw health is possible, and
genetic evaluations based on data from claw trimming will be implemented in the breeding
programme for Norwegian Red cattle in 2014.

The most frequently available information is locomotion scoring (http://www.zinpro.com/lameness/dairy/locomotion-scoring). Weber et
al. (2013) suggest that lameness might
be a useful indicator for claw and leg health. Automated lameness detection based on
activity sensors that measure lying time, number of lying bouts combined with milking and
feeding data based on a cow-specific model could be a useful tool for dairy management,
according to De Mol et al. (2013). Giuliana et al. (2014) showed that lameness results in behavioural changes in dairy cows in AMS.
Lame cows had less feeding time and visited the robot less frequently compared with sound
cows. In the Nordic countries, Austria and Southern Germany, veterinary diagnosis of feet
and leg traits is recorded routinely. Several studies found that genetic evaluations based
on veterinary diagnoses are valuable (e.g. Fuerst-Waltl et al., 2012). As veterinarians are typically consulted only
in the most severe cases, incidence rates based on veterinary diagnoses are much lower
than those based on hoof trimming information. For effective improvement of the feet and
legs complex, it is important to establish systems that allow the collection of data from
hoof trimmers.

Metabolic status
To date, direct traits for metabolic disorders are only rarely used in genetic
evaluation. Germany and Austria publish EBVs for milk fever for Fleckvieh (Simmental) and
Brown Swiss. The Nordic countries include this information in the EBV for general health.
In herd management, milk content traits such as fat and protein percentage, fat : protein
ratio, and milk urea nitrogen are used for early detection of problems associated with
metabolism. Recent research has focussed on using this information for genetic improvement
as well (Koeck et al., 2013;
Negussie et al., 2013). One of
the limitations with this approach is that if the intervals between milk recording are too
long, the predictive ability is limited. Automated milk-recording systems could fill this
gap by providing more frequent observations (Nicolazzi et al., 2012). Subclinical metabolic disorders like ketosis
are thought to account for substantial economic losses; thus it may be important to detect
subclinical signs at an early stage. These could be based on serum parameters like
non-esterified fatty acids or ß-hydroxybutyric acid (BHBA) concentration
(Robert et al., 2012; Van der
Drift et al., 2012). BHBA is
the ‘gold standard’ of many cowside tests. The availability of such subclinical
information will depend on the specificity and sensitivity of the tests as well as on ease
and costs of implementation on-farm. Other potential indicator traits include MIR
spectroscopy-based traits (Bastin et al., 2011b; McParland et al., 2011) or rumen activity, and BW change (Fogh et
al., 2013). Melzer et
al. (2013) showed that there might be
potential in the identification of important metabolites that can help monitor the
metabolic profile of a cow. Roche et al. (2010) have shown a relationship between BCS and metabolic disorders.
The risk of metabolic disorders is higher when BCS is below 2.5 or above 3.5.

Calving traits
Breeding values related to calving ease and stillbirth are commonly available (Interbull,
2013). Genetic evaluations usually
differentiate between direct and maternal and first- and later calvings, and there is
substantial variation among countries in the models used for evaluations. Although most
countries use single-trait models (summarized in Cole et al., 2007, Table
1), Eaglen et al. (2012)
showed that multiple-trait models may be better than single-trait models, and suggest that
aggregate breeding values may be an effective way of ensuring that producers place
emphasis on both direct and maternal traits. Breeds differ with respect to rates of
dystocia and stillbirth, and evaluations are sometimes available only for some of the
breeds in a country (e.g. Cole et al., 2005; Yao et al., 2014). Health disorders related to calving difficulties are recorded in some
countries.

Recent studies showed the potential of decreasing losses during the rearing period.
Fuerst-Waltl and Fuerst (2010) and Fuerst-Waltl
and Sorensen (2010) investigated the genetic
background of postnatal mortality in calves and replacement heifers in different age
groups until first calving in Danish Holsteins and Austrian Simmentals. Genetic and
phenotypic variation seems to be sufficiently high to genetically improve the trait of
calf and heifer mortality. Some research also has been conducted on the health traits of
Holstein calves in the United States (Mousa et al., 2013), but heritability estimates were low, ranging from 0.01 to
0.06. In a genetic analysis of respiratory disease in Norwegian Red calves, Heringstad
et al. (2008) found that
reasonably precise genetic evaluations of sires for calf diseases could be calculated,
despite the low frequency of those diseases.

In this context, information about raising stock is important. Heifers that cycle and do
not get pregnant or heifers that are inseminated but are culled before calving are of
interest. Reasons also may include conformational or behavioural issues (Bethard, 2008). The trait longevity is included in the total
merit index in most of the countries. However, losses during rearing are generally not
considered, or are included in a very simple manner. Mortality in dairy cattle is relevant
not only with regard to economic losses but also with regard to animal health and welfare.
McCorquodale et al. (2013)
showed the potential of using calfhood diseases and survival in future dairy cattle
breeding programmes.

Feed efficiency
An expected increase in prices for concentrates and energy will increase the focus on
feed efficiency. Efficiency can be defined as output per input unit at the farm level, as
well as for individual animals. Residual feed intake (RFI), also known as net feed
efficiency, is growing in popularity as a measure of feed efficiency. RFI is generally
calculated as the difference between actual and predicted dry matter intake (DMI).
Efficient animals have lower DMI at the same level of milk production and the same weight.
The greatest obstacle in the widespread use of feed intake and feed efficiency measures in
breeding objectives is the availability of large quantities of feed intake data on
individual animals (Berry and Crowley, 2013).
There are two promising options for enabling selection for RFI: (1) predictor traits (Fogh
et al., 2013) and (2) genomic
prediction (Pryce and Berry, 2014; Pryce
et al., 2014a and 2014b).

Rumen activity might be a future indicator trait for feed efficiency. Other measures in
feed, faeces and urine samples are being developed – for example, metagenomic predictions
using the rumen microbiome (symbiotic microorganisms) of enteric methane in cattle and
body mass index in humans are showing promise (Ross et al., 2013) and could possibly also be used for predicting
RFI (De Marchi et al., 2014). In
a recent review by Pryce et al. (2014a), which included seven studies of beef and dairy cattle, the accuracy of
genomic predictions of RFI, energy balance and DMI ranged between 0.20 and 0.43. In
theory, a genomic reference population can be assembled using a sub-population of animals
with genotypes and phenotypes used to generate a genomic prediction equation (Berry
et al., 2014; Pryce et
al., 2014a and 2014b). The genomic prediction equation can then be applied to the
rest of the population. However, farmers are unlikely to accept accuracies in the range
currently estimated (<16%). This means that much larger populations need to be
assembled. An international collaboration is endeavouring to build a data set of
>6000 individuals with genotypes and phenotypes (from nine contributing partners)
(Berry et al., 2014; Pryce and
Berry, 2014; Pryce et al.,
2014a and 2014b). Selection for RFI, or RFI, has been reported to lead to
reductions in methane emissions of ~13.45 g CH4/kg RFI (Hegarty et
al., 2007) and 18.2 g CH4/kg RFI (Nkrumah et al., 2006). A similar potential for abatement has been
observed in Holstein dairy cattle, 17.5 g CH4/kg RFI (Pryce et
al., unpublished data). Reducing RFI by 1 kg could lead to between 4% and 8%
reduction in methane emissions. If RFI was to be included in the Australian national
breeding objective, the Australian Profit Ranking, then it is predicted that RFI would
reduce by 1.76 kg/cow per year (Gonzalez-Recio et al., 2014a). Direct measurement of methane is expensive
and is unlikely to be available in sufficient numbers for breeding in the near future,
unless novel ways of measuring methane on large numbers of animals that are currently
being tested prove to be successful. Chagunda et al. (2009) reported that a laser methane detector can be
used to accurately estimate enteric methane output in dairy cows without affecting their
normal activity. Dehareng et al. (2012) and McParland et al. (2014) reported the potential capacity to provide MIR spectra-based methane
indicators. Such systems may be an attractive way to collect many phenotypes if they are
cost-effective and durable.

Other novel traits
Behavioural traits
Other traits, such as temperament, are of growing interest because farmers want cows that
are easy to handle. From the aspect of animal welfare, these traits are gaining interest
as well. So far, little information about heritabilities of behavioural traits is
available, but commercial dairymen cull animals because of poor temperament (Berry
et al., 2005). Temperament or
behaviour is often subjectively scored. According to Kramer et al. (2013), heritabilities based on phenotypes scored by
independent people were lower than when scored by farmers (0.12 v. 0.20).
Kramer et al. (2013) analysed
traits including general temperament, milking temperament, aggressiveness, rank order in
herd, milking speed and position of labia for Brown Swiss. General temperament was scored
by farmers using a 5-point scale (1=very nervous and 5=very calm) as described by Juga
(1996). The heritability for general
temperament was 0.38, that for aggressiveness was 0.12 and that for milking temperament
was 0.04.

Traits out of data from AMS
AMS offer the possibility to record traits related to workability, which are described by
Rinell (2013). Temperament or behaviour, ease of
handling and milkability are examples of traits that could be derived from measures
routinely recorded in AMS. A measure of temperament from the AMS system could be teat cup
attachment failures. Rinell (2013) estimated
genetic correlations of r=−0.38 and r=−0.50 between two
teat cup attachment failure traits and temperament. Different approaches concerning
milking speed are used. Data from AMS offer new possibilities to record such traits
automatically (Byskov et al., 2012; Carlström et al., 2013a and 2013b). Carlström et al. (2013b) compared milkability from conventional milking parlours with
AMS systems. They showed genetic correlations of 0.93 and 1.00 between the two systems and
concluded that the inclusion of only one trait in breeding programmes is sufficient.
Lovendahl et al. (2012) also
discuss milking efficiency, in addition to milking speed. Milking efficiency describes the
yield of ECM per minute in the milking box and is of interest for automated milking. This
includes time for entry, cleaning, attachment, milking, exit and unit cleaning.

Adaptation to climate change
Exposure of animals to extreme weather conditions can be used as proxy for future climate
change. Such exposure will trigger autonomous adaptations by the animals, but these
adaptations are not perfect and therefore residual impacts or vulnerabilities will remain
(Smit et al., 1999). By
quantifying these non-adaptations, novel traits can be defined to assess the degree of
resilience of an animal to climate change. Resilience can be defined in many ways, the
simplest of which may be the individual response of an animal to a stressor variable
linked to the weather. A commonly used stressor variable is the temperature heat index,
initially developed by Thom (1959) as a heat
index for human comfort, and is commonly used as indicator of heat stress. Reported
research in this field addressed individual responses in both production and functional
traits and reported clear trait differences, fertility and intake being often considered
the most strongly affected (e.g. Kadzere et al., 2002; De Rensis and Scaramuzzi, 2003; West, 2003). Recent research
also reported responses in some novel traits having a direct biological meaning. Gengler
(2014) reported, in this context, the reaction
of MIR-predicted fatty acid C18:1-cis9 content in milk to heat stress.
Several authors have shown that this trait reflects very well the equilibrium between
mobilization and intake – heat-stressed animals eating less and mobilizing more (e.g. De
Rensis and Scaramuzzi, 2003). This element is of
large importance when considering both adaptation to and mitigation of climate change in
climate conscious breeding objectives. More detailed physiologically based adaptation
traits such as heat shock proteins have been proposed (Lewis et al.,
1999), but large-scale phenotyping is
obviously more difficult to organize and these traits are therefore less useful for
practical breeding.

Currently, despite promising research results, in cattle, no large-scale breeding
programme directly includes adaptation traits. However, current breeding objectives are
indirectly affecting adaptation given the unfavourable correlations between resilience and
production traits (e.g. West, 2003). Although
profound scientific knowledge about the detailed relationships of resilience traits with
other traits might still be missing, it can be hypothesized that more resilient animals
are also more robust animals (i.e. more fertile) in general.

Sucking traits
Another trait of interest is suckling behaviour. Cross-suckling and inter-suckling are
considered abnormal behaviours in cattle and constitute a common problem in dairy farming
(Fuerst-Waltl et al., 2010). De
Passillé (2001) noted that deprivation of the
opportunity to suck may interfere with digestive processes and used an artificial feeding
system to examine the effects of milk flow rate on calf behaviour. In a review of dairy
cow behaviour, Von Keyserlingk et al. (2009) concluded that calf feeding systems that allow the expression of normal
behaviours, such as sucking on a teat, are best for the animals. Studies of oral
behaviours in calves are typically based on direct observations, and the general
consistency of independent studies suggests that the methodology used to record those
behaviours is adequately standardized (e.g. Margerison et al., 2003).

Milk fatty acids
Fine milk composition traits, and in particular fatty acid profiles, can be considered
another group of traits of interest (Gengler and Soyeurt, 2010). The importance of this type of traits is double: first,
directly as indicators of milk quality (Bauman et al., 2006) and, second, also as indicators of the
physiological and health status of the animals (e.g. Bastin et al., 2011b). Some studies established a link between milk
composition and the environmental footprint of cows for nitrogen (Jonker et
al., 1998) and for methane (Mohammed
et al., 2011), these
emissions being linked to fatty acid profiles. Unfortunately, measuring fine milk
composition, and especially fatty acid composition, is not feasible on a large scale in an
economical fashion as reference chemical analyses are very expensive and time-consuming.
Recently, through the use of MIR spectroscopy, the prediction of most major fatty acids
has become feasible on a large scale (Soyeurt et al., 2011), creating new opportunities for the recording
and use of novel fine milk composition traits, in particular fatty acids.

Milk coagulation properties
Several physical characteristics of milk that are of importance in cheese manufacture
have been described in the literature, including rennet coagulation time, curd firmness 30
min after rennet addition, and curd-firming time (Bittante et al., 2012). These traits are largely genetically
independent of milk yield (Ikonen et al., 2004), and there is interest in improving those traits in many breeds
(Ikonen et al., 1999; Cecchinato
et al., 2011). One limiting
factor in providing such evaluations is the time and expense involved in collecting the
phenotypes, but recent research suggests that MIR spectroscopy may provide reasonable
predictors that can be measured on many samples affordably (Cecchinato et
al., 2009).

Beef traits
Carcass traits are routinely recorded at slaughter houses and are available for genetic
evaluation. This includes traits like dressing percentage, trading score and information
about net daily gain. According to a survey carried out by Gene2Farm, tenderness is
another trait that is more widely recorded for beef breeds. The availability of beef
quality traits is still limited and under research (e.g. Gene2Farm). As the collection of
beef quality traits is very expensive, genomics offers the chance to set up registration
of these traits for a limited number of genotyped animals. A detailed review of this topic
is outside the scope of this study.

Recording systems and sources of data for novel traits
For accurate breeding values there are two major possibilities: either cost-effective
phenotypes are required on a large scale or investment must be made in the genotyping and
collection of high-cost phenotypes for a limited number of females. Owing to advances in
technologies, new traits based on lab data or automation are offering new possibilities.
Many precision dairy farming technologies, including daily milk yield recording, milk
component monitoring (e.g. fat, protein and SCC), pedometers, automatic temperature
recording devices, milk conductivity indicators, automatic oestrus detection monitors and
daily BW measurements, are already being utilized by dairy producers (Bewley, 2010). To invest in this equipment is expensive and
will only pay for large farms. According to the review by Rutten et al.
(2013), sensor systems for mastitis and
reproduction are brought to a high level of development, but still need to improve detection
performance.

Laboratory data include indirect health data with a spectrum of traits according to
sampling protocols and testing requests (e.g. microbiological testing, metabolite analyses,
hormone tests, virus/bacteria DNA, IR-based measurements) (Soyeurt et al.,
2009). The advantage of lab data is that, in
general, they are automated or semi-automated recording systems that produce objective
measurements, and many data can be obtained at low cost. The disadvantage might be that, for
example, for bacteriological findings or hormonal assays – data might be only from
preselected animals.

To use synergies and enlarge the range of possible phenotypes for genetic collaboration
with other organizations and institutions is an option (Figure 3). Data security issues have to be considered, and standardized protocols
for ensuring security are necessary. Slaughter houses, dairy plants, health organizations
and other entities are routinely recording data for their own purposes. The monitoring of
welfare is gaining increasing importance. The central role of dairy cattle health in the
context of animal welfare and consumer protection implies that farmers and veterinarians are
obligated to maintain high-quality records, emphasizing the particular sensitivity of health
data. The legal requirement to monitor the development of different indicator traits offers
the possibility of synergies for recording of traits. One example is direct health data,
which are partly recorded based on legal documentation requirements (Stege et
al., 2003; Østerås et
al., 2007; Egger-Danner et
al., 2012b).Figure 3 Pooled database with potential data sources and examples of use of data.
grey=commonly used data; light grey=partly used data; white=data sources of
interest.




Genotyping females in research herds
As several novel traits currently under investigation are expensive to record, using
research herds for phenotyping in combination with genomics are an attractive source of
data, as are herds that engage in intensive data collection. These farms are of particular
interest for feed efficiency, methane emission and high-cost health traits. As several
thousand phenotypes are required to accurately determine the characteristics of traits in
terms of heritability and correlations to other traits of interest in the breeding goal
(Calus et al., 2013a), there is
a clear need to invest in phenotyping of many animals for the new traits, as well as
possible indicator traits (Gonzalez-Recio et al., 2014b).

In breeding programmes worldwide, more and more young bulls with genomic expected
breeding values (GEBVs) are used. The reliability of the GEBVs depends to a very high
extent on the size of the reference population. To achieve genetic response for the novel
trait, the reliability of the trait is crucial. The limitation for novel traits where
phenotyping has only recently started is that it will be very difficult or impossible to
establish a large reference population based on bulls, as the number of bulls used within
breeding programmes has been reduced because of genomic selection. Methods to increase the
accuracy of genomic predictions are as follows: enlarging the reference population, using
chips of higher density, imputing from lower densities to higher densities and the
inclusion of ungenotyped cows in the reference population (Pszcola et
al., 2013).

Enlarging the reference population by adding females is also a possibility. Simulation
studies (e.g. Buch, 2011; Pszcola et
al., 2013; Gonzalez-Recio et
al., 2014b) show that for novel traits
and limited resources it is more effective to genotype females than only males. The impact
of the cow reference population also depends on the sampling strategy. Including only
elite dams will only result in minor increases of reliabilities and may lead to biased
estimates. Exploring the variation of the trait by sampling extreme cows (top tails and
bottom tails of distribution) will increase the benefit (Jimenez-Montero et
al., 2012). However, it is desirable to
either randomly select cows or select those that will contribute the most data, which is
the strategy being applied in the Australian genomic information nucleus known as Ginfo
(Australia’s genomic information nucleus). Traits with medium to high heritability gain
more from genotyping cows than direct health traits with low heritability (Egger-Danner
et al., 2014). Bolignon
et al. (2012) showed that
reference population animals with extreme yield deviations are the most informative for
genomic selection. De Haas et al. (2012) have shown that it is possible to increase the number of genotypes and
phenotypes by merging data from various research herds worldwide. Validation of equations
in completely independent populations showed promising results (Pryce et
al., 2014b). Different studies stress the optimum design of female reference
populations to use resources efficiently (Buch, 2011; Pszczola et al., 2012; Thomasen et al., 2014). It is important that the variance of the trait can be explored and that the
relationship within the reference population is low but closely related to the evaluated
population. Therefore, it is important to update the reference population continuously.

Experiences from the United States showed that there is some gain from the inclusion of
cows in the predictor population (Wiggans et al., 2011), but adjustments to their records may be needed to avoid
potential biases (Dassonneville et al., 2012; Wiggans et al., 2012). The use of cows in predictor populations for novel traits that lack a large
group of bulls with high-reliability evaluations will be necessary. Table 3 gives an overview of gEBV reliabilities for novel traits. So
far, experience is limited with real data. However, it is unclear whether or when
low-reliability cow data should be removed from the predictor population as the
reliability of sire EBV increases.Table 3 Reliabilities of genomic EBVs for novel traits

Traits	Novel traits	Size of calibration group	Reliability/accuracy*	Sources	Remarks	
Udder health	CM	2563 bulls	0.26	Heringstad et al.
(2011)		
		7800 bulls+10 000 cows	0.17/0.23	NAV Routine Evaluation (2014)	Increase related to pedigree index
(RDC) (bulls/bulls+cows in reference)	
Reproduction	Fertility-related disorders	3363 bulls	0.17–0.65*	Haugaard et al. (2014)	Correlation GEBV and EBV	
Feet and legs	Claw health	967 bulls	0.29--0.35*	Ødegård et al. (2014)	Correlation GEBV and DYD	
		7800 bulls+10 000 cows	0.24/0.33	NAV Routine Evaluation (2014)	Increase related to pedigree index
(RDC) (bulls/bulls+cows in reference)	
Feed efficiency	RFI	Various	0.40–0.43*	Pryce et al. (2014a)		
	Energy balance		0.29*	Pryce et al. (2014a)		
	Dry matter intake		0.20–0.35*	Pryce et al. (2014a)		
Other diseases	Other diseases	7800 bulls+10 000 cows	0.17/0.17	NAV Routine Evaluation (2014)	Increase related to pedigree index
(RDC) (bulls/bulls+cows in reference)	
GEVB=genomic estimated breeding value; RDC=red dairy cattle; DYD=daugher yield
deviation; RFI=residual feed intake; *=accuracy.




Cost efficiency is an important criterion for the success and sustainability of breeding
programmes. Therefore, it might be too expensive to continuously record data extensively
on research herds. Indictor traits with known genetic correlation to the direct trait of
interest may be used instead. According to Pszcola et al. (2013), easily recorded predictor traits could be
used to increase the reliability of scarcely recorded traits – for example, fat- and
protein-corrected milk yield and live weight for DMI – and the bias of genomic breeding
values of scarcely recorded traits could be reduced. As described under the various trait
complexes, this approach could be applicable also for metabolism, feet and legs and other
traits (Axelsson et al., 2013). Genomic selection programmes for
indicator traits also benefit from the inclusion of cows in the reference population
(Calus et al., 2013a and 2013b).

Challenges
Predictive biology
Biomarkers, such as metabolites or milk components, may be rich sources of information
about novel phenotypes (Gengler et al., 2013). Standard analyses undertaken by milk-recording laboratories, such as by
MIR spectroscopy, generate spectral data that reflect many characteristics of milk.
Research is currently underway to investigate the use of this data for prediction of
indicator traits (RobustMilk, OptiMIR, PhenoFinlait, GplusE, etc.). The main challenge
posed by these data is the lack of reference data for the detection of disease, such as
mastitis. A reliable pool of ‘healthy’ and ‘sick’ animals is required. For traits with low
heritability and limited reliability and repeatability, this is even more difficult. The
reference data set has to account for different production circumstances. There is the
need for comparability of spectra from different instrument manufacturers (Foss, Bentley,
Delta, etc.), models within brands, and stability over time. The repeatability of results
across different breeds and production environments, as well as logistical challenges
related to data collection and transfer, must be considered. This includes extracting data
from spectrometers and storing of MIR spectra, standardizing spectra, complex computation
of indicators and finally the implementation into routine milk-recording work flow
(Soyeurt et al., 2012b and
2012c; Gengler et al., 2013).

Predictive biology is also a topic for other sensor techniques. According to a review by
Rutten et al. (2013), research
is still needed. In the future, genomic data could be integrated to improve the
prediction. Different environmental effects, such as feeding and management, can influence
the prediction equations. Therefore, there is also a need for calibration across breeds
and countries (De Marchi et al., 2014). Prediction equations are derived using reliable phenotypes from a large
sample of animals, with the ultimate goal of predicting phenotypes directly from the MIR
spectra. In Figure 4, the system of prediction is
described. The prediction equation is derived based on reliable phenotypes for novel
traits (e.g. mastitis) from a larger sample of animals. The ultimate goal is to predict
phenotypes directly from, for example, MIR spectra. Advances could be that these equations
are improved by taking the genomic information into account.Figure 4 Overview about the system of predictive biology to determine traits based on
prediction equations.




Standardization and integration of relevant data sources
There are many mechanical and electronic systems on dairies that can be used as sources
of new phenotypes (Figure 5). Automatic milking and
feeding systems, for example, routinely generate many observations. Among them, which data
are actually stored is again different. There is a need for harmonization in trait
definitions across systems and devices. An additional challenge is the availability of
data. Many systems use process computers that do not communicate with external databases.
This results in data that are ‘stranded’ in different systems that cannot easily be
integrated into a single database for analysis. When such data are available in a central
database, they can also be used for benchmarking, which offers an opportunity to compare
performance both between and within farms over time. A single parameter does not provide
an appropriate benchmark, and indices based on a basket of parameters may provide a better
marker of overall performance (Bradley et al., 2013). Benchmarks also provide farmers with rapid feedback about the
effect of management changes on farm performance, and may encourage ongoing participation
in data collection programmes.Figure 5 Sources of on-farm information that can be used to collect health and fitness
phenotypes (source: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amish_dairy_farm_3.jpg).




Simplicity and ease-of-use for farmers
The future availability of phenotypic data will depend heavily on the motivation of the
farmers. It is expected that the traits and data available will further increase. The
challenge is to present those data in a way that does not overwhelm farmers when providing
useful tools. Easy handling and simple access to data is essential because time is a
limiting factor on most farms.

Conclusions
Conditions of production, as well as consumer demands, will have an impact on the future
availability of phenotypes. Traits connected with animal health, animal welfare, food safety
and efficiency will become more important. Advances in technology will enable more precise
trait definitions, with phenotypes closer to the genotype. Technological advances will
permit the closer integration of existing data sources. New technologies are expected to
provide better indicator traits for fertility, mastitis, metabolism and energy efficiency.
There are still challenges to solve before some technologies can be widely applied on a
routine basis, including the predictive biology of indicator traits, the harmonization of
data from automated systems, the motivation of farmers to record high-quality phenotypes and
the genomic gap for novel traits. To overcome the phenomic gap between traditional traits
and novel traits, expanded genotyping of cows should be considered. International
co-operation will ensure that trait definitions are consistent across countries and will
support the research necessary to deliver new management and selection tools to farmers.

Acknowledgements
This review is based on an invited presentation at the 64th Annual Meeting of the European
Association for Animal Production held in Nantes, France, August 2013. Excellent cooperation
within ICAR Working Group Functional Traits. Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry,
Environment and Water Management (BMLFUW) in Austria and the Federation of Austrian Cattle
Breeders for the support within the projects ‘Efficient cow’ and ‘OptiGene’. Gene2Farm
(EU-FP7-KBBE-2011-5-PNr.: 289592) for provision of information. J. B. Cole was supported by
appropriated project 1265-31000-096-00, ‘Improving Genetic Predictions in Dairy Animals
Using Phenotypic and Genomic Information’, of the Agricultural Research Service of the
United States Department of Agriculture. N. Gengler was supported by the INTERREG IVB NWE
Project 190G OptiMIR: new tools for a more sustainable dairy sector and the Ministry of
Agriculture of the Walloon Region of Belgium (Service Public de Wallonie, Direction générale
opérationnelle ‘Agriculture, Ressources naturelles et Environnement’ - DGARNE) for the
support within the project ‘MethaMilk’ (D31-1248 and D31-1304). J. E. Pryce acknowledges
financial support from the Department of Environment and Primary Industries (Melbourne,
Australia).
==== Refs
References

Adams HA , Sonstegard T , VanRaden PM , Null DJ , Van Tassell CP  and Lewin H 
2012 . Identification of a nonsense mutation in APAF1 that is causal for a
decrease in reproductive efficiency in dairy cattle. Proceedings of the Plant &
Animal Genome XX Conference, 14–18 January 2014, San Diego, CA, USA, abstract.
P0555.

Arnould VMR , Soyeurt H , Gengler N , Colinet FG , Georges MV , Bertozzi G , Portelle D  and Renaville R 
2009 
Genetic analysis of lactoferrin content in bovine
milk . Journal of Dairy Science 
92 , 2151 –2158 .19389973 

At-Taras EE  and Spahr SL 
2001 
Detection and characterization of estrus in dairy cattle
with an electronic heatmount detector and an electronic activity tag .
Journal of Dairy Science 
84 , 792 –798 .11352154 

Axelsson H , Fikse WF , Kargo M , Sorensen AC , Johansson K  and Rydhmer L 
2013 
Genomic selection using indicator traits to reduce the
environmental impact of milk production . Journal of Dairy
Science 
96 , 5306 –5314 .23726422 

Bastin C , Gengler N  and Soyeurt H 
2011a 
Phenotypic and genetic variability of production traits
and milk fatty acid contents across days in milk for Walloon Holstein first-parity
cows . Journal of Dairy Science 
94 , 4152 –4163 .21787950 

Bastin C , Soyeurt H , Vanderick S  and Gengler N 
2011b 
Genetic relationship between milk fatty acids and
fertility of dairy cows . Interbull Bulletin 
44 , 195 –199 .

Bastin C , Berry DP , Soyeurt H  and Gengler N 
2012 
Genetic correlations of days open with production traits
and contents in milk of major fatty acids predicted by mid-infrared
spectrometry . Journal of Dairy Science 
95 , 6113 –6121 .22863102 

Bauman DE , Mather IH , Wall RJ  and Lock AL 
2006 
Major advances associated with the biosynthesis of
milk . Journal of Dairy Science 
89 , 1235 –1243 .16537956 

Berry DP  and Crowley JJ 
2013 
Cell biology symposium: genetics of feed efficiency in
dairy and beef cattle . Journal of Animal Science 
91 , 1594 –1613 .23345557 

Berry DP , Wall E  and Pryce JE 
2014 
Genetics and genomics of reproductive performance in
dairy and breed cattle . Animal 
8  (suppl. 1 ),
105 –121 .24703258 

Berry DP , Harris BL , Winkelman AM  and Montgomerie W 
2005 
Phenotypic associations between traits other than
production and longevity in New Zealand dairy cattle . Journal of
Dairy Science 
88 , 2962 –2974 .16027210 

Berry DP , Buckley F , Dillon P , Evans RD , Rath M  and Veerkamp RF 
2003 
Genetic relationships among body condition score, body
weight, milk yield, and fertility in dairy cows . Journal of
Dairy Science 
88 , 2193 –2204 .12836956 

Bethard G 
2008  Quantifying a heifer culling decision. Dairy Calf and Heifer
Association Conference, 1–3 April. Rochester, MN, USA. Retrieved 20 March 2014, from http://sroc.cfans.umn.edu/prod/groups/cfans/@pub/@cfans/@sroc/@outreach/documents/article/cfans_article_117790.pdf


Bewley J 
2010  Precision dairy farming: advanced analysis solutions for future
profitability. Retrieved 28 March 2014, from http://www.precisiondairy2010.com/proceedings/s1bewley.pdf


Bittante G , Penasa M  and Cecchinato A 
2012 
Invited review: genetics and modeling of milk
coagulation properties . Journal of Dairy Science 
95 , 6843 –6870 .23021752 

Bo N 
2009  Practical cattle breeding in the future – commercialised or
co-operative, across borderlines between countries and organisations. Retrieved 28 March
2014, from https://journal.interbull.org/index.php/ib/article/viewFile/1122/1113


Bolignon AA , Long N , Albuquerque LG , Weigel KA , Gianola D  and Rosa GJ 
2012 
Comparison of selective genotyping strategies for
prediction of breeding values in a population undergoing selection .
Journal of Animal Science 
90 , 4716 –4722 .23372045 

Bradley AJ , Breen JA , Hudson CD  and Green MJ 
2013 . Benchmarking for health from the perspective of consultants. Challenges
and benefits of health data recording in the context of food chain quality, management and
breeding. Proceedings of the ICAR Health Data Conference, 30–31 May 2013, Aarhus, Denmark,
ICAR Technical Series no. 17, 159–166.

Buch LH 
2011 . Genetic improvement of functional traits in dairy cattle breeding
schemes with genomic selection. PhD, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

Byskov K , Buch LH  and Aamand GP 
2012 
Possibilities of implementing measures from automatic
milking systems in routine evaluations of udder conformation and milking
speed . Interbull Bulletin 
46 , 28 –32 .

Calus MPL , de Haas Y , Pszczola M  and Veerkamp RF 
2013a 
Predicted accuracy of and response to genomic selection
for new traits in dairy cattle . Animal 
7 , 183 –191 .23031684 

Calus MPL , Bijma P , van Arendonk J  and Veerkamp RF 
2013b . Economics of using genomic selection at the farm level. Book of
Abstracts of the 64th Annual Meeting of the European Association for Animal Science. 26
August 2013, Nantes, France, 184pp.

Carlström C , Petterson G , Johansson K , Strandberg E , Stålhammar H  and Philipsson J 
2013a 
Feasibility of using automatic milking system data from
commercial herds for genetic analysis of milkability . Journal of
Dairy Science 
96 , 5324 –5332 .23706483 

Carlström C , Strandberg E , Johansson K , Pettersson G , Stålhammar H  and Philipsson J 
2013b 
Genetic evaluation of in-line recorded milkability from
milking parlors and automatic milking systems . Journal of Dairy
Science 
97 , 497 –506 .24268405 

Cecchinato A , De Marchi M , Gallo L , Bittante G  and Carnier P 
2009 
Mid-infrared spectroscopy predictions as indicator
traits in breeding programs for enhanced coagulation properties of milk .
Journal of Dairy Science 
92 , 5304 –5313 .19762848 

Cecchinato A , Penasa M , De Marchi M , Gallo L , Bittante G  and Carnier P 
2011 
Genetic parameters of coagulation properties, milk
yield, quality, and acidity estimated using coagulating and noncoagulating milk
information in Brown Swiss and Holstein-Friesian cows . Journal
of Dairy Science 
94 , 4205 –4213 .21787956 

Chagunda MGG , Ross D  and Roberts DJ 
2009 
On the use of a laser methane detector in dairy
cows . Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 
68 , 157 –160 .

Chapinal N , Koeck A , Sewalem A , Kelton DF , Mason S , Cramer G  and Miglior F 
2013 
Genetic parameters for hoof lesions and their
relationship with feet and leg traits in Canadian Holstein cows .
Journal of Dairy Science 
96 , 2596 –2604 .23415531 

Cole JB , Wiggans GR  and VanRaden PM 
2007 
Genetic evaluation of stillbirth in United States
Holsteins using a sire-maternal grandsire threshold model .
Journal of Dairy Science 
90 , 2480 –2488 .17430952 

Cole JB , Goodling RC Jr, Wiggans GR  and VanRaden PM 
2005 
Genetic evaluation of calving ease for Brown Swiss and
Jersey bulls from purebred and crossbred calvings . Journal of
Dairy Science 
88 , 1529 –1539 .15778323 

Cole JB , Waurich B , Wensch-Dorendorf M , Bickhart DM  and Swalve HH 
2014 
A genome-wide association study of calf birth weight in
Holstein cattle using single nucleotide polymorphisms and phenotypes predicted from
auxiliary traits . Journal of Dairy Science 
97 , 3156 –3172 .24612794 

Dassonneville R , Baur A , Fritz S , Boichard D  and Ducrocq V 
2012 
Inclusion of cow records in genomic evaluations and
impact on bias due to preferential treatment . Genetics Selection
Evolution 
44 , 40 .

De Haas Y , Barkema HW  and Veerkamp RF 
2002 
Genetic parameters of pathogen-specific incidence of
clinical mastitis in dairy cows . Animal Science 
74 , 233 –242 .

De Haas Y , Ouweltjes W , ten Napel J , Windig JJ  and de Jong G 
2008 
Alternative somatic cell count traits as mastitis
indicators for genetic selection . Journal Dairy Science 
91 , 2501 –2511 .

De Haas Y , Windig JJ , Calus MPL , Dijkstra J , de Haan M , Bannink A  and Veerkamp RF 
2011 
Genetic parameters for predicted methane production and
potential for reducing enteric emissions through genomic selection .
Journal of Dairy Science 
94 , 6122 –6134 .22118100 

De Haas Y , Calus MP , Veerkamp RF , Wall E , Coffey MP , Daetwyler HD , Hayes BJ  and Pryce JE 
2012 
Improved accuracy of genomic prediction for dry matter
intake of dairy cattle from combined European and Australian data sets .
Journal Dairy Science 
95 , 6103 –6112 .

De Marchi MD , Toffanin V , Cassandro M  and Penasa M 
2014 
Invited review: mid-infrared spectroscopy as phenotyping
tool for milk traits . Journal Dairy Science 
97 , 1 –16 .

De Mol RM , Andre G , Bleumer JB , van der Werf JTN , de Haas Y  and Reenen CG 
2013 
Applicability of day-to-day variation in behavior for
the automated detection of lameness in dairy cows . Journal Dairy
Science 
96 , 3703 –3712 .

De Passillé AM 
2001 
Sucking motivation and related problems in
calves . Applied Animal Behaviour Science 
72 , 175 –187 .11311412 

De Rensis F  and Scaramuzzi RJ 
2003 
Heat stress and seasonal effects on reproduction in the
dairy cow – a review . Theriogenology 
60 , 1139 –1151 .12935853 

De Vliegher S , Fox LK , Piepers S , McDougall S  and Barkema HW 
2012 
Invited review: mastitis in dairy heifers: nature of the
disease, potential impact, prevention, and control . Journal
Dairy Science 
95 , 1025 –1040 .

Dehareng F , Delfosse C , Froidmont E , Soyeurt H , Martin C , Gengler N , Vanlierde A  and Dardenne P 
2012 
Potential use of milk mid-infrared spectra to predict
individual methane emission of dairy cows . Animal 
6 , 1694 –1701 .23031566 

Eaglen S , Coffey MP , Wooliams JA  and Wall E 
2012 
Evaluating alternate models to estimate genetic
parameters of calving traits in United Kingdom Holstein-Friesian dairy
cattle . Genetics Selection Evolution 
44 , 2  Retrieved 28 March 2014, from http://www.gsejournal.org/content/44/1/23


EFSA-Q-2006-113 
2009  Scientific report on the effects of farming systems on dairy cow
welfare and disease. European Food Safety Authority. Scientific Report of EFSA Question
number:EFSA-Q-2006-113. Retrieved 28 March 2014, from http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/efsajournal/pub/1143r.htm


Egger-Danner C , Schwarzenbacher H  and Willam A 
2014 
Short communication: genotyping of cows to speed up
availability of GEBV for direct health traits in Austrian Fleckvieh (Simmental)cattle –
genetic and economic aspects . Journal of Dairy Science 
97 , 4552 –4556 .24835973 

Egger-Danner C , Willam A , Fuerst C , Schwarzenbacher H  and Fuerst-Waltl B 
2012a 
Effect of breeding strategies using genomic information
on fitness and health . Journal of Dairy Science 
95 , 4600 –4609 .22818475 

Egger-Danner C , Fuerst-Waltl B , Obritzhauser W , Fuerst C , Schwarzenbacher H , Grassauer B , Mayerhofer M  and Koeck A 
2012b 
Recording of direct health traits in Austria-experience
report with emphasis on aspects of availability for breeding purposes .
Journal of Dairy Science 
95 , 2765 –2777 .22541507 

Fogh A , Aamand GP , Hjorto L  and Lauritsen U 
2013  Recording of data and identification issues. ICAR Conference, Aarhus,
Denmark. Retrieved 28 March 2014, from http://www.icar.org/documents/aarhus_2013/Manuscripts/Fogh.pdf


Fritz S , Capitan A , Djari A , Rodriguez SC , Barbat A , Baur A , Grohs C , Weiss B , Boussaha M , Esquerré D , Klopp C , Rocha D  and Boichard D 
2013 
Detection of haplotypes associated with prenatal death
in dairy cattle and identification of deleterious mutations in GART, SHBG and
SLC37A2 . PLoS One 
8 , e65550 .23762392 

Fuerst-Waltl B  and Fuerst C 
2010 
Mortality in Austrian dual purpose Fleckvieh calves and
heifers . Livestock Science 
132 , 80 –86 .

Fuerst-Waltl B  and Sorensen MK 
2010 
Genetic analysis of calf and heifer losses in Danish
Holstein . Journal of Dairy Science 
93 , 5436 –5442 .20965359 

Fuerst-Waltl B , Fuerst C  and Egger-Danner C 
2012  Claw health diagnoses in the routine health monitoring system of
Austrian Fleckvieh cattle. 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association of European Animal
Production, 27 August, Bratislava, Slovakia. Retrieved 28 March 2014, from http://www.eaap.org/Previous_Annual_Meetings/2012Bratislava/Papers/Published/07_Fuerst-Waltl.pdf


Fuerst-Waltl B , Rinnhofer B , Fuerst C  and Winckler C 
2010 
Genetic parameters for abnormal sucking traits in
Austria Fleckvieh heifers . Journal of Animal Breeding and
Genetics 
127 , 113 –118 .20433519 

Fuerst-Waltl B , Egger-Danner C , Zollitsch W  and Fuerst-Waltl B 
2014  Metabolic disorders and their relationships to milk production traits
in Austrian Fleckvieh. Retrieved 9 August, from http://www.icar.org/Documents/Berlin_2014/PPTs/Presented/Fuerst_Waltl.pdf


Gautam G  and Nakao T 
2009 
Prevalence of urovagina and its effects on reproductive
performance in Holstein cows . Theriogenology 
71 , 1451 –1461 .19286246 

Gengler N 
2014  Mitigation strategies versus adaptation strategies. Invited
presentation at the ASGGN Workshop. Retrieved 17 August, from http://orbi.ulg.ac.be/bitstream/2268/171555/1/NGENGLER_VF.pdf


Gengler N  and Soyeurt H 
2010 . Interest, recording and possible use of new phenotypes from fine milk
composition. Proceedings 9th World Congress of Genetics Applied to Livestock Production,
Leipzig, Germany.

Gengler N , Berry DP  and Bastin C 
2013 . Use of automated systems for recording of direct and indirect data with
special emphasis on the use of MIR milk spectra (OptiMIR project). Challenges and benefits
of health data recording in the context of food chain quality, management and breeding.
Proceedings of the ICAR Health Data Conference, 30–31 May 2013, Aarhus, Denmark. ICAR
Technical Series no. 17, pp. 55–61.

Gernand E , Rehbaein P , von Borstel UU  and König S 
2012 
Incidences of and genetic parameters for mastitis, claw
disorders, and common health traits recorded in dairy cattle contract
herds . Journal of Dairy Science 
95 , 2144 –2156 .22459859 

Giuliana GM-P , Kaler J , Remnant J , Cheyne L , Abbott C , French AP , Pridmore TP  and Huxley JN 
2014 
Behavioural changes in dairy cows with lameness in an
automatic milking system . Applied Animal Behavioural Science 
150 , 1 –8 .

Gonzalez-Recio O , Pryce JE , Haile-Mariam M  and Hayes BJ 
2014a 
Incorporating heifer feed efficiency in the Australian
selection index using genomic selection . Journal of Dairy
Science 
97 , 3883 –3893 .24679937 

Gonzalez-Recio O , Coffey MP  and Pryce JE 
2014b 
On the value of phenotypes in the genomic
era . Journal of Dairy Science  (in
press).

Govignon-Gion A , Dassonneville R , Baloche G  and Ducrocq V 
2012 
Genetic evaluation of mastitis in dairy cattle in
France . Interbull Bulletin 
46 , Retrieved 28 March 2014, from https://journal.interbull.org/index.php/ib/article/view/1276


Häggmann J  and Juga J 
2013 
Genetic parameters for hoof disorders and feet and leg
conformation traits in Finnish Holstein cows . Journal of Dairy
Science 
96 , 3319 –3325 .23498009 

Haugaard K , Heringstad B  and Whist AC 
2012 
Genetic analysis of pathogen-specific clinical mastitis
in Norwegian Red cows . Journal of Dairy Science 
95 , 1545 –1551 .22365234 

Haugaard K , Svendsen M  and Heringstad B 
2014 . Genomic predictions of fertility related disorders in Norwegian Red
using 30 years of data. Proceedings 10th World Congress of Genetics Applied to Livestock
Production, Vancouver, Canada.

Haussermann A  and Hartung E 
2012  Detection of mastitis during milking – current solutions and
prospective ideas. 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association of European Animal Production,
27 August, Bratislava, Slovakia. Retrieved 28 March 2014, from http://www.eaap.org/Previous_Annual_Meetings/2012Bratislava/Papers/Published/07_Haeussermann.pdf


Hegarty RS , Goopy JP , Herd RM  and McCorkell B 
2007 
Cattle selected for lower residual feed intake have
reduced daily methan production . Journal of Animal Science 
85 , 1479 –1486 .17296777 

Heringstad B , 2010 
Genetic analysis of fertility related diseases
and disorders in Norwegian Red cows . Journal of Dairy Science 
93 , 2751 –2756 .20494184 

Heringstad B  and Østerås O 
2013 . More than 30 years of health recording in Norway. ICAR 2013 Health Data
Conference: challenges and benefits of health data recording in the context of food chain
quality, management and breeding. 30–31 May 2013, Århus, Denmark.

Heringstad B  and Bugten HK 
2014 . Genetic evaluations of milkability in Norwegian Red based on data from
Automatic Milking Systems. Proceedings 10th World Congress of Genetics Applied to
Livestock Production, Vancouver, Canada.

Heringstad B , Klemetsdal G  and Steine T 
2007 
Selection responses for disease resistance in two
selection experiments with Norwegian red cows . Journal of Dairy
Science 
90 , 2419 –2426 .17430946 

Heringstad B , Chang YM , Gianola D  and Klemetsdal G 
2004 
Multivariate threshold model analysis of clinical
mastitis in multiparous Norwegian dairy cattle . Journal of Dairy
Science 
87 , 3038 –3046 .15375066 

Heringstad B , Chang YM , Gianola D  and Klemetsdal G 
2005 
Genetic analysis of clinical mastitis, milk fever,
ketosis, and retained placenta in three lactations of norwegian red
cows . Journal of Dairy Science 
88 , 3273 –3281 .16107417 

Heringstad B , Chang YM , Gianola D  and Østerås O 
2008 
Short communication:genetic analysis of respiratory
disease in Norwegian Red calves . Journal of Dairy Science 
91 , 367 –370 .18096960 

Heringstad B , Gianola D , Chang YM , Ødegård J  and Klemetsdal G 
2006 
Genetic associations between clinical mastitis and
somatic cell score in early first-lactation cows . Journal of
Dairy Science 
89 , 2236 –2244 .16702291 

Heringstad B , Su G , Solberg TR , Guldbrandtsen B , Svendsen M  and Lund MS 
2011  Genomic predictions based on a joint reference population for
Scandinavian red breeds. 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association of European Animal
Production, 29 August. Retrieved 6 September 2014, from http://www.eaap.org/Previous_Annual_Meetings/2011Stavanger/Papers/Published/S04_Heringstad.pdf


ICAR 
2012  ICAR guidelines for recording, evaluation and genetic improvement of
health traits. Retrieved 10 December 2013, from http://www.icar.org/Documents/Rules%20and%20regulations/Amendments%202012/Recording,%20Evaluation%20and%20Genetic%20Improvement%20of%20health%20traits.pdf


ICAR 
2013  Challenges and benefits of health data recording in the context of food
chain quality, management and breeding. ICAR Technical Series no. 17. Retrieved 25 March
2014, from http://www.icar.org/Documents/technical_series/tec_series_17_Aarhus.pdf


ICAR 
2014  ICAR guidelines for recording, evaluation and genetic improvement of
female fertility in dairy cattle. Retrieved 24 January 2014, from http://www.icar.org/Documents/Rules%20and%20regulations/Guidelines/Guidelines_Female_Fertility_for_approval.pdf


Ikonen T , Ahlfors K , Kempe R , Ojala M  and Ruottinen O 
1999 
Genetic parameters for the milk coagulation properties
and prevalence of noncoagulating milk in Finnish dairy cows .
Journal of Dairy Science 
82 , 205 –214 .10022022 

Ikonen T , Morri S , Tyrisevä A-M , Ruottinen O  and Ojala M 
2004 
Genetic and phenotypic correlations between milk
coagulation properties, milk production traits, somatic cell count, casein content, and
pH of milk . Journal of Dairy Science 
87 , 458 –467 .14762089 

Interbull 
2013  National genetic evaluation forms provided by country. http://www.interbull.org/ib/geforms


Jimenez-Montero JA , Gonzales-Rezio O  and Alenda R 
2012 
Genotyping strategies for genomic selection in small
dairy cattle populations . Animal 
6 , 1216 –1224 .23217224 

Johansson K , Eriksson J-Å , Nielsen US , Pösö J  and Aamand GP 
2011 
Genetic evaluation of claw health in Denmark, Finland
and Sweden . Interbull Bulletin 
44 , 224 –228 .

Jones WP , Hansen LB  and Chester-Jones H 
1994 
Response of health care to selection for milk yield of
dairy cattle . Journal of Dairy Science 
77 , 3137 –3152 .7836603 

Jonker JS , Kohn RA  and Erdman RA 
1998 
Using milk urea nitrogen to predict nitrogen excretion
and utilization efficiency in lactating dairy cows . Journal of
Dairy Science 
81 , 2681 –2692 .9812273 

Juga J 
1996 
Evaluation methods of subjectively scored functional
traits in Finland . Interbull Bulletin 
14 , 155 –160 .

Kadri NK , Sahana G , Charlier C , Iso-Touru T , Guldbrandtsen B , Karim L , Nielsen US , Panitz F , Aamand GP , Schulman N , Georges M , Vilkki J , Lund MS  and Druet T 
2014 
A 660-Kb deletion with antagonistic effects on fertility
and milk production segregates at high frequency in Nordic Red cattle: additional
evidence for the common occurrence of balancing selection in livestock .
PLoS Genetics 
10 , e1004049 .24391517 

Kadzere CT , Murphy MR , Silanikove N  and Maltz E 
2002 
Heat stress in lactating dairy cows: a
review . Livestock Production Science 
77 , 59 –91 .

Kandel PB , Vanrobays ML , Vanlierde A , Dehareng F , Froidmont E , Dardenne P , Lewis E , Buckley F , Deighton MH , McParland S , Gengler N  and Soyeurt H 
2013 
Genetic parameters for methane emission predicted from
milk mid-infrared spectra in dairy cows . Advances in Animal
Biosciences 
4 , 279 .

Koeck A , Miglior F , Jamrozik J , Kelton DF  and Schenkel FS 
2013 
Genetic associations of ketosis and displaced abomasum
with milk production traits in early first lactation of Canadian
Holsteins . Journal of Dairy Science 
96 , 4688 –4696 .23664350 

Koeck A , Heringstad B , Egger-Danner C , Fuerst C , Winter P  and Fuerst-Waltl B 
2010a 
Genetic analysis of clinical mastitis and somatic cell
count traits in Austrian Fleckvieh cows . Journal of Dairy
Science 
93 , 5987 –5995 .21094773 

Koeck A , Egger-Danner C , Fuerst W , Obritzhauser W  and Fuerst-Waltl B 
2010b 
Genetic analyses of reproductive disorders and their
relationship to fertility and milk yield in Austrian Fleckvieh dual-purpose
cows . Journal of Dairy Science 
93 , 2185 –2194 .20412934 

Koeck A , Loker S , Miglior F , Kelton DF , Jamrozik J  and Schenkel FS 
2014 
Genetic relationships of clinical mastitis, cystic
ovaries, and lamness with milk yield and somatic cell score in first-lactation Canadian
Holsteins . Journal of Dairy Science 
97 , 1 –8 .24183685 

Koenig S  and Swalve HH 
2006 
Modelkalkulationen zu zuechterischen moeglichkeiten auf
klauengesundheit beim milchrind . Züchtungskunde 
78 , 345 –356 .

Koenig S , Köhn F , Kuwan K , Simianer H  and Gauly M 
2006 
Use of repeated measures analysis for evaluation of
genetic background of dairy cattle behavior in automatic milking
systems . Journal of Dairy Science 
89 , 3636 –3644 .16899699 

Koenig S , Scharifi AR , Wentrot H , Landmann D , Eise M  and Simianer H 
2005 
Genetic parameters of claw and foot disorders estimated
with logistic models . Journal of Dairy Science 
88 , 3316 –3325 .16107422 

Kofler J 
2013 
Computerised claw trimming database programs as the
basis for monitoring hoof health in dairy herds . Veterinary
Journal 
198 , 358 –361 .

Kramer M , Erbe M , Bapst B , Bieber A  and Simianer H 
2013 
Estimation of genetic parameters for novel functional
traits in Brown Swiss cattle . Journal of Dairy Science 
96 , 1 –11 .23141821 

Lewis S , Handy RD , Cordi B , Billinghurst Z  and Depledge MH 
1999 
Stress proteins (HSP’s): methods of detection and their
use as an environmental biomarker . Ecotoxicology 
8 , 351 –368 .

Linde C , de Jong G , Koenen DPC , Eding H 
2010 
Claw health index for Dutch dairy cattle based on claw
trimming and conformation data . Journal Dairy Science 
93 , 4883 –4891 .

Lovendahl P  and Chagunda MG 
2010 
On the use of physical activity monitoring for estrus
detection in dairy cows . Journal of Dairy Science 
93 , 249 –259 .20059923 

Lovendahl P , Lassen J  and Chagunda MG 
2012  Genetic variation in milking efficiency: a novel trait for milkability
in automatic milking systems. 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association of European Animal
Production, 27 August, Bratislava, Slovakia. Retrieved 28 January 2014, from http://www.eaap.org/Previous_AnnualMeetings/2012Bratislava/Papers/Published/22Lovendahl.pdf


Lucy MC 
2001 
Reproductive loss in high-producing dairy cattle: where
will it end? 
Journal of Dairy Science 
84 , 1277 –1293 .11417685 

Margerison JK , Preston TR , Berry N  and Phillips CJC 
2003 
Cross-sucking and other oral behaviours in calves, and
their relation to cow suckling and food provision . Applied
Animal Behaviour Science 
80 , 277 –286 .

McClure MC , Bickhart D , Null D , VanRaden P , Xu L , Wiggans G , Liu G , Schroeder S , Glasscock J , Armstrong J , Cole JB , Van Tassell CP  and Sonstegard TS 
2014 
Bovine exome sequence analysis and targeted SNP
genotyping of recessive fertility defects BH1, HH2, and HH3 reveal a putative causative
mutation in SMC2 for HH3 . PLoS One 
9 (3 ), e92769 
10.1371/journal.pone.0092769 .24667746 

McCorquodale CE , Sewalem A , Miglior F , Kelton DF , Robinson A , Koeck A  and Leslie KE 
2013 
Analysis of health and survival in a population of
Ontario Holstein heifer calves . Journal of Dairy Science 
96 , 1880 –1885 .23438685 

McParland S , Banos G , Wall E , Coffey MP , Soyeurt H , Veerkamp RF  and Berry DP 
2011 
The use of mid-infrared spectrometry to predict body
energy status of Holstein cows . Journal of Dairy Science 
94 , 3651 –3661 .21700055 

McParland S , Lewis E , Kennedy E , Moore S , McCarthy B , O’Donovan M , Butler S , Pryce JE  and Berry D 
2014 
Mid-infrared spectrometry of milk as a predictor of
energy intake and efficiency in lactating dairy cows . Journal of
Dairy Science 
97 , 5863 –5871 .24997658 

Melzer N , Wittenburg D , Harwig S , Jakubwoski S , Kesting U , Willmitzer L , Lisec J , Reinsch N  and Repsilber D 
2013 
Investigating associations between milk metabolite
profiles and milk traits of Holstein cows . Journal of Dairy
Science 
96 , 1521 –1534 .23438684 

Meuwissen THE , Hayes BJ  and Goddard ME 
2013 
Accelerating improvement of livestock with genomic
selection . Annual Review of Animal Biosciences 
1 , 221 –237 .25387018 

Miglior F , Chesnais J  and Van Doormaal BJ 
2012  Genetic improvement: a major component of increased dairy farm
profitability. Retrieved March 28, 2014, from http://www.icar.org/cork_2012/Manuscripts/Published/Miglior%20A1.pdf


Mohammed R , McGinn SM  and Beauchemin KA 
2011 
Prediction of enteric methane output from milk fatty
acid concentrations and rumen fermentation parameters in dairy cows fed sunflower, flax,
or canola seeds . Journal of Dairy Science 
94 , 6057 –6068 .22118093 

Mousa MS , Seykora AJ , Chester-Jones H , Ziegler DM  and Cole JB 
2013 
Heritability estimates of performance and health traits
of Holstein calves . Journal of Dairy Science 
96  (suppl. 2 ), 291 . (abstract
W194).

NAV Routine Evaluation 
2014  Nordic cattle genetic evaluation. Retrieved 18 August 2014, from http://www.nordicebv.info/News/NewsNAVRoutineEvaluationAugust12th2014.htm?wbc_purpose=Basic&WBCMODE=PresentationUnpublished?Mode=Print&Site=DLINavSkin1


Negussie E , Strandén I  and Mäntysaari EA 
2008 
Genetic association of clinical mastitis with test-day
somatic cell score and milk yield during first lactation of Finnish Ayrshire
cows . Journal of Dairy Science 
91 , 1189 –1197 .18292275 

Negussie E , Stranden I  and Mäntysaari EA 
2013 
Genetic associations of test-day fat:protein ratio with
milk yield, fertility, and udder health traits in Nordic Red cattle .
Journal of Dairy Science 
96 , 1237 –1250 .23260017 

Nicolazzi E , Biscarini F  and Stella A  and ProZoo team 
2012  Automated milk-recording systems: an experience in Italian dairy cattle
farms. 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association of European Animal Production, August,
Bratislava, Slovakia. Retrieved 20 December 2014, from http://www.eaap.org/Previous_Annual_Meetings/2012Bratislava/Papers/Published/12_Biscarini.pdf


Nkrumah JD , Okine EK , Mathison GW , Schmid K , Li C , Basarab JA , Price MA , Wang Z  and Moore SS 
2006 
Relationships of feedlot feed efficiency, performance,
and feeding behavior with metabolic rate, methane production, and energy partitioning in
beef cattle . Journal of Animal Science 
84 , 145 –153 .16361501 

Norberg E 
2005 
Electrical conductivity of milk as a phenotypic and
genetic indicator of bovine mastitis: a review . Livestock
Production Science 
96 , 129 –139 .

Ødegård C , Svendsen M  and Heringstad B 
2013 
Genetic correlations between claw health and feet and
leg conformation in Norwegian Red cows . Journal of Dairy Science 
97 , 4522 –4529 .24767887 

Ødegård C , Svendsen M  and Heringstad B 
2014 . Accuracy of genomic breeding values for corkscrew claw in Norwegian
Red. Proceedings 10th World Congress of Genetics Applied to Livestock Production,
Vancouver, Canada.

Østerås O , Solbu H , Refsdal AO , Roalkvan T , Filseth O  and Minsaas A 
2007 
Results and evaluation of thirty years of health
recordings in the Norwegian dairy cattle population . Journal of
Dairy Science 
90 , 4483 –4497 .17699070 

Parker Gaddis KL , Cole JB , Clay JS  and Maltecca C 
2012 
Incidence validation and causal relationship analysis of
producer-recorded health event data from on-farm computer systems in the
U.S . Journal of Dairy Science 
95 , 5422 –5435 .22916949 

Parker Gaddis KL , Cole JB , Clay JS  and Maltecca C 
2014 
Genomic selection for producer-recorded health event
data in US dairy cattle . Journal of Dairy Science 
97 , 3190 –3199 .24612803 

Pausch H , Schwarzenbacher H , Burgstaller J , Flisikowski K , Wurmser C , Jansen S , Schnieke A , Wittek T  and Fries R 
2014a . Homozygous haplotype deficiency reveals deleterious mutations
compromising reproductive and rearing success in cattle. Submitted in September
2014.

Pausch H , Kölle S , Wurmser C , Schwarzenbacher H , Emmerling R , Jansen S , Trottmann M , Fuerst C , Götz K  and Fries R 
2014b 
A nonsense mutation in TMEM95 endcoding a nondscript
transmembrane protein causes idiophathic male subfertility in cattle .
PLoS Genetics  (submitted).

Pavon S 
2013  Future challenges concerning animal breeding and consumer protection
(regulations of interest for this topics and expected developments). ICAR 2013 Health Data
Conference, 30–31 May, Århus, Denmark. Retrieved 20 March 2014, from http://www.icar.org/documents/aarhus_2013/powerpoint/HealthConference/Session1/Pavon.pdf


Polat B , Colak A , Gengiz M , Yanmaz LE , Oral H , Bastan A , Kaya S  and Hayirli A 
2010 
Sensitivity and specificity of infrared thermography in
detection of sublinical mastitis in dairy cows . Journal of Dairy
Science 
93 , 3525 –3532 .20655420 

Povinelli M , Gallo L , Carnier P , Marcomin D , Zotto RD  and Cassandro M 
2005 
Genetic aspects of milk electrical conductivity in
Italian Brown cattle . Italian Journal of Animal Science 
4  (suppl. 3 ),
169 –171 .

Pryce JE  and Berry DP 
2014 . Genomic breeding values for novel traits such as feed efficiency
through female only reference populations. ICAR Conference Berlin, 19–23 May, Berlin,
Germany.

Pryce JE , Coffey MP  and Simm G 
2001 
The relationship between body condition score and
reproductive performance . Journal of Dairy Science 
84 , 1508 –1515 .11417711 

Pryce JE , Wales WJ , de Haas Y , Veerkamp RF  and Hayes BJ 
2014a 
Genomic selection for feed efficiency in dairy
cattle . Animal 
8 , 1 –10 .24128704 

Pryce JE , Gonzalez-Recio O , Thornhill JB , Marett LC , Wales WJ , Coffey MP , de Haas Y , Veerkamp RF , Hayes BJ 
2014b 
Short communication: validation of genomic breeding
value predictions for feed intake and feed efficiency traits .
Journal of Dairy Science 
97 , 537 –542 .24239085 

Pryce JE , Esslemont RJ , Thompson R , Veerkamp RF , Kossaibati MA  and Simm G 
1998 
Estimation of genetic parameters using data from a
health and fertility management recording system . Animal Science 
66 , 577 –584 .

Pszczola M , Strabel T , Mulder HA  and Calus M 
2012 
Reliability of direct genomic values for animals with
different relationships within and to the reference population .
Journal of Dairy Science 
95 , 389 –400 .22192218 

Pszczola M , Veerkamp RF , de Haas Y , Wall E , Strabel T  and Calus M 
2013 
Effect of predictor traits on accuracy of genomic
breeding values for feed intake based on a limited cow reference
population . Animal 
7 , 1759 –1768 .23915541 

Rinell E 
2013 . A genetic analysis of traits recorded by automatic milking systems –
the possibility for a new method to evaluate temperament of dairy cows. Master’s Thesis,
30 HEC. Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Department of Animal Breeding and
Genetics, Uppsala, 420pp.

Roberts T , Chapinal N , LeBlanc SJ , Kelton DF , Dubuc J  and Duffield TF 
2012 
Metabolic parameters in transition cows as indicators
for early-lactation culling risk . Journal of Dairy Science 
95 , 3057 –3063 .22612941 

Roche JR , Friggens NC , Kay JK , Fischer MW , Stafford KJ  and Berry DP 
2010 
Invited review: body condition score and its association
with dairy cow productivity, health and welfare . Journal of
Dairy Science 
92 , 5769 –5801 .19923585 

Roessler R , Herold P , Weidele A  and Zarate AV 
2013 
Definition nutzerspezifischer Zuchtziele für Braunvieh
und Hinterwälder Rind in Baden-Württemberg . Züchtungskunde 
3 , 173 –187 .

Ross EM , Moate PJ , Marett LC , Cocks BG  and Hayes BJ 
2013 
Metagenomic predictions: from microbiome to complex
health and environmental phenotypes in humans and cattle . PLoS
One 
9 , e92769 .

Rutten CJ , Velthuis AGJ , Steeneveld W  and Hogeveen H 
2013 
Invited review: sensors to support health management on
dairy farms . Journal of Dairy Science 
96 , 1928 –1952 .23462176 

Schöpke K  and Weigel K 
2014  Use of accelerometer data for genetic evaluation in dairy cattle.
Interbull Open Meeting Berlin. Retrieved on 21 August 2014, from http://www.interbull.org/web/static/presentations/Berlin/Tuesday/12_18_Schoepke.pdf


Schwarzenbacher H 
2013  Survey within Gene2Farm.Gene2Farm 2014. Next generation European system
for cattle improvement and management (EU-FP7-KBBE-2011-5-PNr.:289592). Project from the
7th Framework Program. Retrieved 28 March 2014, from http://www.gene2farm.eu


Schwarzenbacher H , Fuerst C , Fuerst-Waltl B  and Dolezal M 
2012  A genome-wide search for harmful recessive haplotypes in Brown Swiss
and Fleckvieh cattle. 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association of European Animal
Production, 27 August, Bratislava, Slovakia. Retrieved 6 September 2014, from http://www.eaap.org/Previous_Annual_Meetings/2012Bratislava/Papers/Published/22_Schwarzenbacher.pdf


Smit B , Burton I , Klein RJT  and Street R 
1999 
The science of adaptation: a framework for
assessment . Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 
4 , 199 –213 .

Sonstegard TS , Cole JB , VanRaden PM , Van Tassell CP , Null DJ , Schroeder SG , Bickhart D  and McClure MC 
2013 
Identification of a nonsense mutation in CWC15
associated with decreased reproductive efficiency in Jersey cattle .
PLoS One 
8 , e54872 .23349982 

Sorenson LP , Madsen P , Mark T  and Lund MS 
2009 
Genetic parameters for pathogen-specific mastitis
resistance in Danish Holstein Cattle . Animal 
3 , 647 –656 .22444442 

Soyeurt H , Bruwier D , Romnee JM , Gengler N , Bertozzi C , Veselko D  and Dardenne P 
2009 
Potential estimation of major mineral contents in cow
milk using mid-infrared spectrometry . Journal of Dairy Science 
92 , 2444 –2454 .19447976 

Soyeurt H , Dehareng F , Gengler N , McParland S , Wall E , Berry DP , Coffey M  and Dardenne P 
2011 
Mid-infrared prediction of bovine milk fatty acids
across multiple breeds, production systems, and countries .
Journal of Dairy Science 
94 , 1657 –1667 .21426953 

Soyeurt H , Bastin C , Colinet FG , Arnould VMR , Berry DP , Wall E , Dehareng F , Nguyen HN , Dardenne P , Schefers J , Vandenplas J , Weigel K , Coffey M , Théron L , Detilleux J , Reding E , Gengler N  and McParland S 
2012a 
Mid-infrared prediction of lactoferrin content in
bovine milk: potential indicator of mastitis . Animal 
6 , 1830 –1838 .22717388 

Soyeurt H , Dehareng F , Gengler N  and Dardenne P 
2012b  Capitalizing on mid‐infrared to improve nutritional and environmental
quality of milk. World Holstein Conference, Toronto, Canada. Retrieved 20 February 2014,
from http://www.whff.info/info/documents/17_NicolasGengler.pdf


Soyeurt H , Dehareng F , Romnée JM , Gengler N  and Dardenne P 
2012c  Genetics of the mineral contents in bovine milk predicted by
mid-infrared spectrometry. 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association of European Animal
Production, 27 August, Bratislava, Slovakia. Retrieved 28 March 2014, from http://www.eaap.org/Previous_Annual_Meetings/2012Bratislava/Papers/Published/03_Soyeurt.pdf


Stege H , Bager F , Jacobsen E  and Thougaard A 
2003 
VETSTAT – the Danish system for surveillance of the
veterinary use of drugs for production animals . Preventive
Veterinary Medicine 
57 , 105 –115 .12581594 

Steininger F , Fuerst-Waltl B , Pfeiffer C , Fuerst C , Schwarzenbacher H  and Egger-Danner C 
2012 
Participatory development of breeding goals in Austrian
dairy cattle . Acta Agriculturae Slovenica  01/2012
(suppl. 3 ), 143 –147 .

Stock KF , Agena D , Schafberg R  and Reinhardt F 
2013 . Health monitoring concepts for long-term improvement of dairy health.
64th Annual Meeting of the Association of European Animal Production, 26–30 August,
Nantes, France. Abstract 17060.

Stock KF , Cole J , Pryce J , Gengler N , Bradley A , Andrews L  and Egger-Danner C 
2012 . Survey on the recording and use of functional traits in dairy
management and breeding. Proceedings ICAR Annual Meeting, 30 May,
Cork/Ireland.

Thom EC 
1959 
The discomfort index .
Weatherwise 
12 , 57 –60 .

Thomasen JR , Sorensen AC , Lund MS  and Guldbrandtsen B 
2014 
Adding cows to the reference population makes a small
dairy population competitive . Journal of Dairy Science 
97 , 1 –11 .24183685 

United Nations 
2014  World population projected to reach 9.6 billion by 2050 – UN report.
Retrieved 13 March 2014, from http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=45165


Urioste JI , Franzen J  and Strandberg E 
2010 
Phenotypic and genetic characterization of novel somatic
cell count traits from weekly and monthly observations . Journal
of Dairy Science 
93 , 5930 –5941 .21094767 

Urioste JI , Franzen J , Windig JJ  and Strandberg E 
2012 
Genetic relationships among mastitis and alternative
somatic cell count traits in the first 3 lactations of Swedish Hosteins .
Journal of Dairy Science 
95 , 3428 –3434 .22612977 

Van der Drift SGA , Jorritsma R , Schonewille JT , Kmnijn HM  and Stegeman JA 
2012 
Routine detection of hyperketonemia in dairy cows using
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy analysis of ß-hydroxybutyrate and acetone in
milk in combination with test-day information . Journal of Dairy
Science 
95 , 4886 –4898 .22916893 

VanRaden PM , Olson KM , Null DJ  and Hutchison JL 
2011 
Harmful recessive effects on fertility detected by
absence of homozygous haplotypes . Journal of Dairy Science 
94 , 6153 –6161 .22118103 

Von Keyserlingk MAG , Rushen J , de Passillé AM  and Weary DM 
2009 
Invited review: the welfare of dairy cattle – key
concepts and the role of science . Journal of Dairy Science 
92 , 4101 –4111 .19700671 

Walthall CL , Hatfield J , Backlund P , Lengnick L , Marshall E , Walsh M , Adkins S , Aillery M , Ainsworth EA , Ammann C , Anderson CJ , Bartomeus I , Baumgard LH , Booker F , Bradley B , Blumenthal DM , Bunce J , Burkey K , Dabney SM , Delgado JA , Dukes J , Funk A , Garrett K , Glenn M , Grantz DA , Goodrich D , Hu S , Izaurralde RC , Jones RAC , Kim S-H , Leaky ADB , Lewers K , Mader TA , McClung A , Morgan J , Muth DJ , Nearing M , Oosterhuis DM , Ort D , Parmesan C , Pettigrew WT , Polley W , Rader R , Rice C , Rivington M , Rosskopf E , Salas WA , Sollenberger LE , Srygley R , Stöckle C , Takle ES , Timlin D , White JW , Winfree R , Wright-Morton L , Ziska LH 
2012  Climate change and agriculture in the United States: effects and
adaptation. USDA Technical Bulletin 1935, Washington, DC. Retrieved 28 March 2014, from
http://www.usda.gov/oce/climate_change/effects.htm


Weber A , Stamer E , Junge W  and Thaller G 
2013 
Genetic parameters for lameness and claw and leg
diseases in dairy cows . Journal of Dairy Science 
96 , 3310 –3318 .23477816 

West JW 
2003 
Effects of heat-stress on production in dairy
cattle . Journal of Dairy Science 
86 , 2131 –2144 .12836950 

Wiggans GR , VanRaden PM  and Cooper TA 
2012 
Technical note: adjustment of all cow evaluations for
yield traits to be comparable with bull evaluations . Journal of
Dairy Science 
95 , 3444 –3447 .22612979 

Wiggans GR , Cooper TA , VanRaden PM  and Cole JB 
2011 
Technical note: adjustment of traditional cow
evaluations to improve accuracy of genomic predictions . Journal
of Dairy Science 
94 , 6188 –6193 .22118107 

Yao C , Weigel KA  and Cole JB 
2014 
Short communication: genetic evaluation of stillbirth in
US Brown Swiss and Jersey cattle . Journal of Dairy Science 
97 , 2474 –2480 .24508434 

ZuchtData 
2014  Yearly report 2013, Vienna, Austria. Retrieved 9 August 2014, from http://zar.at/Downloads/Jahresberichte/ZuchtData-Jahresberichte.html
