
==== Front
Ann MedAnn. MedANNAnnals of Medicine0785-38901365-2060Informa Healthcare 10.3109/07853890.2014.932618Review ArticleSystematic reviews and meta-analyses for more profitable strategies in peripheral artery disease Di Minno Giovanni 1Spadarella Gaia 1Cafaro Giovanni 1Petitto Maurizio 1Lupoli Roberta 1Di Minno Alessandro 2de Gaetano Giovanni 3Tremoli Elena 451Department of Clinical Mediine and Surgery, Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy2Departement of Pharmacy, Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy3IRCCS Neuromed, Department of Epidemiology and Prevention, Pozzilli (IS), Italy4Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy5Centro Cardiologico Monzino IRCCS, Milan, ItalyCorrespondence: Professor Elena Tremoli, Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy. E-mail: elena.tremoli@unimi.it, elena.tremoli@ccfm.it11 2014 21 7 2014 46 7 475 489 25 3 2014 03 6 2014 © 2014 Informa UK, Ltd.2014Informa UK, Ltd.This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 3.0 License which permits users to download and share the article for non-commercial purposes, so long as the article is reproduced in the whole without changes, and provided the original source is credited.In the peripheral arteries, a thrombus superimposed on atherosclerosis contributes to the progression of peripheral artery disease (PAD), producing intermittent claudication (IC), ischemic necrosis, and, potentially, loss of the limb. PAD with IC is often undiagnosed and, in turn, undertreated. The low percentage of diagnosis (∼30%) in this setting of PAD is of particular concern because of the potential worsening of PAD (amputation) and the high risk of adverse vascular outcomes (vascular death, coronary artery disease, stroke). A Medline literature search of the highest-quality systematic reviews and meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials documents that, due to risk of bias, imprecision, and indirectness, the overall quality of the evidence concerning diagnostic tools and antithrombotic interventions in PAD is generally low. Areas of research emerge from the information collected. Appropriate treatments for PAD patients will only derive from ad-hoc studies. Innovative imaging techniques are needed to identify PAD subjects at the highest vascular risk. Whether IC unresponsive to physical exercise and smoking cessation identifies those with a heritable predisposition to more severe vascular events deserves to be addressed. Devising ways to improve prevention of vascular events in patients with PAD implies a co-ordinated approach in vascular medicine.

Absolute benefitsantithrombotic treatmentsareas of researchdiagnostic toolsharmslimitationsopen issuesquality of the evidence
==== Body
Key messages
The overall quality of the evidence concerning diagnostic tools and antithrombotic interventions in PAD is low in most cases.

New antithrombotic treatment is a major target to improve prevention of vascular events in patients with PAD.

Innovative imaging techniques should be explored to identify PAD subjects at the highest vascular risk.

Introduction
Atherothrombosis (thrombus formation superimposed upon atherosclerosis) is an unpredictable, sudden disruption (rupture or erosion/fissure) of an atherosclerotic plaque, which leads to platelet activation and thrombus formation (1). Rupture/fissure of a plaque acts as a stimulus for atherothrombosis (2). From a clinical point of view, atherothrombosis is a progressive, generalized disorder with manifestations—either acute or chronic and often multiple in any single patient—affecting the coronary, cerebral, and peripheral circulation (3). In the case of a non-occlusive thrombus, ischemic symptoms are temporary and thrombosis can contribute to plaque growth through formation and resolution of subclinical platelet thrombi (thrombus formation is a dynamic process in which platelets aggregate but also spontaneously disaggregate, eventually leading to embolization of platelet aggregates from an evolving thrombus) (4). In the case of an occlusive thrombus, there will be an acute ischemic syndrome in the coronary, cerebral, or peripheral vascular territory depending on the localization of the atherosclerotic plaque, potentially leading to permanent tissue damage. Because of the generalized and progressive nature of atherothrombosis, symptoms of the disease in one vascular bed are highly predictive of the risk of further ischemic events elsewhere. Cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events and peripheral artery disease (PAD) are thus part of a continuum of disease with the common underlying pathophysiology of atherothrombosis (5).

In the peripheral arteries, a thrombus superimposed on atherosclerosis contributes to the progression of PAD, producing intermittent claudication (leg pain on walking that is relieved by rest), ischemic necrosis, and, potentially, loss of the limb. PAD affects about 8–10 million Americans, and every year it causes 500,000 hospitalizations and 100,000 angiograms in the US (6). Significant coronary artery disease (in at least one coronary artery) has been documented in 60%–80% of patients with PAD, and hemodynamically significant carotid artery stenosis (by duplex ultrasound) has been found in 12%–25% (7). Accordingly, the annual overall major vascular event rate (acute myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke and vascular death) is ∼5%–7% in PAD patients. The risk of AMI is increased by 20%–60%, whereas the risk of coronary death is increased 2–6-fold. PAD is associated with a 40% increase in the risk of stroke, and PAD severity is positively associated with the incidence of transient ischemic attacks (TIA) and stroke (6).

The clinical spectrum of PAD is widely variable: patients may either be asymptomatic or, because of an impaired equilibrium between oxygen demand and supply, have pain as a result of a minimal exercise (e.g. walking) (8). ACC/AHA recommendations for the diagnosis of PAD are reported in Table I. Most asymptomatic patients with PAD will be identified through ankle-brachial index (ABI) screening (9). The ABI is the ratio of the highest systolic blood pressure in the lower limb to that of the arm. The TASC-II (10) guidelines also indicate the ABI as an easy, reliable means for the evaluation of PAD severity (Table II). Resting ABI should be measured in both legs in all new patients with PAD of any severity to confirm the diagnosis and establish a baseline.

Table I. ACC/AHA 2013 recommendations for the diagnosis of PAD by non-invasive tools.

Diagnostic modality	Class of recommendation	Indications	
Pulse volume recording	Class 2a; level B	To establish the initial PAD diagnosis, assess localization and severity, follow the status of lower-extremity revascularization procedures	
Continuous-wave Doppler ultrasound	Class 1; level B	To provide an accurate assessment of PAD location and severity, to follow PAD progression, to provide quantitative follow-up after revascularization procedures	
Treadmill exercise testing with and without ABI assessments and 6-min walk testa	Class 1; level B	To provide objective evidence of the magnitude of the functional limitation of claudication and to measure the response to therapy	
		To differentiate arterial claudication from non-arterial claudication (‘pseudoclaudication’)b	
		To determine functional capacity, assess non-vascular exercise limitations, and demonstrate the safety of exercisec	
a Standardized exercise protocol (either fixed or graded) with a motorized treadmill should be used to ensure reproducibility of measurements of pain-free walking distance and maximal walking distance (level of evidence: B).

b Exercise treadmill tests with measurement of pre-exercise and post-exercise ABI values are recommended to this end.

c Exercise treadmill tests to be performed in individuals with claudication who are to undergo exercise training (lower extremity PAD rehabilitation). A 6-min walk test may be reasonable to provide an objective assessment of the functional limitation of claudication and response to therapy in elderly individuals or others not amenable to treadmill testing (Class IIb, level of evidence: B).

Table II. TASC II guidelines for ABI interpretation.

ABI value	Interpretation	
> 0.9	Normal	
< 0.9	Atherosclerotic disease	
0.4–0.9	PAD (IC)	
< 0.4	PAD (CLI)	
Data from: J Vasc Surg. 2007;45(Suppl S):S5–67; modified.

ABI = ankle-brachial index; CLI = critical limb ischemia; IC = intermittent claudication; PAD = peripheral artery disease.

PAD (ABI < 0.9) with intermittent claudication (IC) is often undiagnosed and, in turn, undertreated. In 5298 Italian patients at moderate vascular risk, with no overt vascular diseases nor diabetes mellitus (DM) (11), 0.02% had an ABI ≤ 0.4; 22.85% had an ABI ranging from 0.4 to 0.9; 23.9% had an ABI ranging from 0.91 to 0.99; 52.35% had an ABI ranging from 1.0 to 1.29; and 0.88% had an ABI ≥ 1.30. In 2027 Italian patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation (AF), 21% had an ABI ≤ 0.9; 69% had an ABI ranging from 0.91 to 1.40; and ∼10% had an ABI ≥ 1.40 (12). The low percentage of diagnosis (∼30%) among those with an ABI < 0.9 is of particular concern because of the high risk of adverse outcomes related to the worsening of PAD. Moreover, a low ABI (< 0.90) is a predictor of AMI, stroke, and vascular mortality independently of established vascular risk factors (13–15). Among those with ABI < 0.9, ∼25% will experience worsening claudication necessitating surgical repair or amputation. During 5 years of follow-up (16), 10%–20% of patients with IC would be expected to experience non-fatal AMI or stroke. In addition, death from coronary artery disease, other vascular diseases, and non-cardiovascular causes would be expected in 30%. In a longer (10-y) follow-up (17), about 55% of PAD (ABI < 0.9) patients died of cardiovascular disease, 10% of cerebrovascular disease, and 25% of non-vascular reasons. Less than 10% died of other vascular events (mostly, aortic aneurysms in the abdomen). In another follow-up (18), 10-y mortality was 61.8% in males with symptomatic PAD (ABI < 0.9); in comparison, in males without PAD (ABI < 0.9) mortality was 16.9%. Mortality rates in females were 33.3% and 11.6%, respectively. Less than 25% of patients with PAD (ABI < 0.9) survived for 10 y, vascular mortality being the dominant cause of death in that setting. After correction for established risk factors, PAD was an independent predictor of death. In the latter report, the subjects were classified as normal (no evidence of PAD), asymptomatic (no claudication), symptomatic (with claudication), and as subjects with severe PAD (claudication+ abnormal diagnostic tests). The risk of death was related to the severity of PAD and was as strong as that for cancer. The latter has emerged from 744 patients with PAD (19): in a 5-y follow-up, those with severe PAD (ABI < 0.4) had 56% probability of surviving. Based on data collected in parallel (1986–1993), this figure was comparable with the 5-y survival curves (52%) in Caucasian patients with non-Hodgkin lymphomas.

These data set the stage for an extraordinary high morbidity and mortality in patients with PAD. As a matter of fact, over the last decades, while no currently available specific treatment for PAD is associated with a significant reduction in morbidity and mortality rates, screening programs for primary prevention of coronary artery disease and use of statins, ACE and platelet inhibitors, β-blockers, etc. have dramatically decreased the risk of major cardiovascular events (and of progression in arterial occlusion) in the PAD setting (20).

Critical limb ischemia (CLI; ABI < 0.4), is observed in 12% of the PAD population (21). In most cases, CLI is an advanced thrombotic complication of PAD, due to inadequate resting blood flow to the lower limbs, and marked by rest pain, ulceration, and eventually gangrene and loss of the limb (22). The limb typically has developed a collateral blood supply, and the final occlusion of the vessel often is not immediately limb threatening with slow progression of disease (23). CLI is seldom the result of an acute event (e.g. embolism, thrombosis, or trauma). Approximately 80% of emboli originate in the heart (e.g. left atrial appendage, left ventricular apex, cardiac valves) (24). In the remaining cases, they originate from the aorta or peripheral vessels or from the veins (with migration through patent foramen ovale and atrial septal defects). Patients with CLI are candidates for prompt revascularization. CLI increases mortality: in the first year after the diagnosis 25% of patients (45% with amputation) will die, and 30% of them will have amputations, whereas only 45% will survive with both legs. After 5 years more than 60% of patients have died (25).

Literature search method
In an attempt to identify potential reasons why PAD with IC is underdiagnosed and undertreated, the following questions have been raised: 1) Is the overall quality of the evidence concerning diagnostic tools for PAD as good as that for other atherothrombotic conditions? And 2) Is the overall quality of the evidence concerning antithrombotic interventions for PAD as good as that for other atherothrombotic conditions?

To estimate absolute benefits, harms, and limitations associated with a given treatment/diagnostic tool, a Medline literature search of the highest-quality published systematic reviews and meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials in the area was performed using the key words ‘diagnostic tools AND PAD’ and ‘treatments AND PAD’, and references of relevance were selected manually. Other references were either provided by the authors or obtained from the reference lists within the relevant selected articles. Databases were updated to August 2013.

Non-invasive and invasive tools for the diagnosis of PAD
Non-invasive imaging is mandatory to detect the anatomy, morphology (e.g. subclinical non-obstructive), and characteristics (e.g. instability) of the plaque in PAD.

By combining B-mode ultrasound and color Doppler ultrasound, duplex ultrasound (DUS) identifies the anatomical location and the degree of a stenosis. Peak systolic velocity (PSV) ratios (as determined within and beyond the obstruction and as compared with the adjacent upstream segment) are useful to estimate the rate of stenosis: a PSV ratio > 2:1 argues for > 50% stenosis, a PSV ratio > 4:1 for a > 75% stenosis, and a PSV ratio > 7:1 for a > 90% stenosis (26). DUS helps identify patients with the need for endoluminal revascularization (27,28) and is currently employed to follow-up venous grafts (29–36). The high sensitivity, specificity, diagnostic accuracy, and cost-effectiveness of DUS has been documented (37–39).

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) very carefully defines the borders of the arterial wall (40–42) and identifies the unstable fibrous cup of an atherosclerotic plaque (43). Moreover, by allowing the identification of size, composition (i.e. the lipid-enriched necrotic core, hemorrhages, calcifications, etc.), and ulcerative components, MRA contributes to the morphological characterization of a plaque (44–46). The morphological characterization of the plaque is improved by gadolinium contrast media that help differentiate the necrotic core from the surrounding fibrous tissue (47,48) and document neo-angiogenesis and the inflammatory burden (49,50). Meta-analysis and systematic reviews argue for the diagnostic accuracy of MRA in the PAD setting (51–53). However, these studies also claim that MRA tends to overestimate the degree of stenosis. This is mostly due to turbulence and metal clips that, by mimicking vessel occlusions, can cause artifacts. Likewise, some metal stents may obscure vascular flow and, in turn, cause artifacts (54).

Short acquisition time, very thin slices, high spatial resolution, and improved multi-detector computed tomography scanners enable scanning of the entire vascular tree in a limited period of time by computed tomography angiography (CTA), with a low amount of contrast medium employed and radiation burden (55). These recent technical developments have made CTA one of the most important imaging techniques in PAD. A recent meta-analysis (56) showed its high diagnostic accuracy in the PAD setting. The pooled sensitivity to detect a > 50% stenosis or occlusion was 95% (92%–97%) and the pooled specificity 96% (93%–97%). CTA correctly identified occlusions in 94% of segments, the presence of > 50% stenosis in 87% of segments, and absence of significant stenosis in 96% of segments. Nevertheless, similarly to MRA, CTA tends to overestimate the degree of stenosis (see above for details) (54).

In spite of the current availability of less invasive imaging techniques, catheter angiography (CA) with or without digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is the gold-standard first-line imaging investigation for patients with PAD and the reference method for guiding percutaneous peripheral interventional procedures (54). However, due to the need for contrast media (that may cause renal toxicity, arterial wall dissection, emboli, fistulae, pseudoaneurysms, and access site complications) and to its inherent limitations (no careful hemodynamic study of the stenotic segment nor of its length (overestimated) is possible), the clinical use of DSA is currently limited (57).

Indications, limitations, and contraindications of each imaging technique are reported in Tables III and IV.

Table III. Recommendations for different imaging techniques to be employed in the diagnosis of PAD and of CLI.

Imaging technique	Indications	PAD
Class of recommendation	CLI
Class of recommendation	
DUS	Diagnosis of anatomic location and degree of stenosis	Class 1; level A	Class 1, level A	
	Routine surveillance after femoral-popliteal or femoral-tibial-pedal bypass with a venous conduita	Class 1; level A	Class 1; level A	
	Selection of patients as candidates for endovascular intervention	Class 2a; level B	Class 2a; level B	
	Selection of patients as candidates for surgical bypass and selection of the sites of surgical anastomosis	Class 2a; level B	Class 2a; level B	
	Assessment of long-term patency of PTA	Class 2b; level B	Class 2b; level B	
	Routine surveillance after femoral-popliteal bypass with a synthetic conduit	Class 2b; level B	Class 2b; level B	
CV-DUS	Assessment of PAD location and severity, to follow-up PAD progression, and to provide quantitative follow-up after revascularization procedures	Class 1; level B		
CTAe	Anatomic location and presence of significant stenosis	Class 2b; level B	Class 2b; level B	
	Substitute for MRA for patients with contraindications to MRA	Class 2b; level B	Class 2b; level B	
MRA	Anatomic location and degree of stenosis of PAD	Class 1; level A	Class 1; level A	
	Anatomical location with use of gadolinium enhancement	Class 1; level B	Class 1; level B	
	Selection of patients as candidates for endovascular intervention	Class 1; level A	Class 1 ; level A	
	Selection of patients as candidates for surgical bypass and selection of the sites of surgical anastomosis	Class 2b; level B	Class 2b; level B	
	Post-revascularization (endovascular and surgical bypass) surveillance	Class 2b; level B	Class 2b; level B	
CA, DSAf	Arterial anatomyb	Class 1; level B	Class 1; level B	
	Complete anatomic assessment of the affected arterial territory, including imaging of the occlusive lesion, as well as arterial inflow and outflow in patients who may be treated with invasive therapeutic interventions (percutaneous or surgical)	Class 1; level B	Class 1; level B	
	Digital subtraction angiography recommended for contrast angiographic studies (enhanced imaging capabilities compared with conventional un-subtracted contrast angiography)	Class 1; level A	Class 1 ; level B	
	Complete vascular examination before performing CAc	Class 1; level C	Class 1; level A	
	Selective/super-selective catheter placement during lower-extremity angiography to enhance imaging, reduce contrast dose, and improve sensitivity and specificity of the procedure	Class 1; level C	Class 1; level C	
	To image the iliac, femoral, and tibial bifurcations in profile without vessel overlap	Class 1; level B	Class 1; level B	
	To develop individualized diagnostic strategic plan, including assistance in selection of access sites, identification of significant lesions, and determination of the need for invasive evaluationd	Class 2a; level B	Class 2a; level B	
Data from: J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;6:1555–70, modified.

a Minimum surveillance intervals are approximately 3, 6, and 12 months, and then yearly after graft placement for PAD and for CLI.

b Recommended for evaluation of patients when revascularization is contemplated.

c To optimize decisions on the access site, and to minimize contrast dose and catheter manipulation.

d As other non-invasive imaging modalities including MRA, CTA, and color flow duplex imaging, to be used in advance of invasive imaging procedures.

e Patients with baseline renal insufficiency should receive hydration before undergoing CTA (Grade A, level 2b).

f A documented history of contrast reaction before the performance of contrast angiography implies that an appropriate pre-treatment should be administered before contrast is given (Class 1; level B). When conducting a diagnostic lower-extremity arteriogram in which the significance of an obstructive lesion is ambiguous, trans-stenotic pressure gradients and supplementary angulated views should be obtained (Class 1; level B); hydration is needed before undergoing contrast angiography in patients with baseline renal insufficiency (Class 1; level B); treatment with n-acetylcysteine in advance of contrast angiography is suggested for patients with baseline renal insufficiency (creatinine > 2.0 mg per dL) (Class 2a; level B); follow-up clinical evaluation, including a physical examination and measurement of renal function is recommended within 2 weeks after contrast angiography to detect potential delayed adverse effects, such as atheroembolism, deterioration in renal function, or access site injury (e.g. pseudoaneurysm or arteriovenous fistula) (Class 1; level C).

CV-DUS = continuous wave Doppler ultrasound; PTA = percutaneous trans-luminal angioplasty.

Table IV. Comparison of different imaging techniques for patients with PAD: additional data.a

Parameters	Comparisons (over)	Comments	
General:			
Time employed	CTA> MRA or DSA> DUS	15 min for CTA, 30 min for MRA and DSA, > 40 min for DUS (both legs)	
Operator expertise	DUS> MRA or DSA> CTA	Expert operators needed especially for DUS	
Arteriographic mapb	MRA = DSA = CTA = DUS	Immediately available with MRA or DSA; post-processing needed for CTA, expert operators for DUS	
Availability	DUS or DSA> CTA or MRA		
Equipment cost	MRA or DSA> CTA> DUS		
Diagnostic accuracy:			
Plaque compositionc	CTA> MRA> DSA> DUS	Plaques: lipid-enriched necrotic core, hemorrhages, calcifications, surrounding fibrous tissue, neo-angiogenesis best seen with CTA	
Stent assessment	DUS> DSA> CTA> MRA	MRA: poor assessment in those with steel stents, fair in those with nitinol stents	
Aortoiliac	CTA, MRA or DSA> DUS		
Femoropopliteal	MRA = DSA = CTA = DUS		
Tibial	DSA> MRA> DUS or CTA		
Limitations by vascular calcification	MRA> DSA> DUS or CTA		
Complications and risks:			
Contraindicationsc	DUS> MRA> CTA or DSA	DUS: none; MRA: claustrophobia, cerebrovascular clips, electronic implants (infusion or monitoring devices, pace-makers, neurostimulatory devices, cardioverters, defibrillators); DSA: severe renal impairment	
Radiation exposure	DUS or MRA> CTA> DSA	CTA: 7.5–13.7 mSv	
Contrast-enhanced nephropathy	DUS> MRA> CTA or DSA		
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis avoidance	DUS, CTA, or DSA> MRA		
Allergic reaction	DUS> MRA> CTA or DSA		
Access site	DUS, CTA, or MRA> DSA		
a Data from: Eur J Vascular Endovasc Surg. 2011;42(S2):S13–S32; modified.

b With CTA, scanning of the entire vascular tree is achieved in a limited time, and the amount of contrast medium and radiation burden is low.

c Known allergy to contrast media for both MRA and DSA.

Antithrombotic treatment in asymptomatic and symptomatic PAD
Pharmacology of major antithrombotic agents
Antiplatelet agents in PAD
Following atherosclerotic plaque disruption/endothelial cell detachment, circulating platelets, exposed to a highly thrombogenic environment, become activated (58). A series of soluble agonists (ADP, thromboxane A2 (T× A2), serotonin (5-HT), and thrombin) recruit and activate additional platelets. Upon activation, glycoprotein (Gp) IIb/IIIa (αIIbβ3 integrin) mediates platelet aggregation and spreading by means of fibrinogen bridges, which, once converted to fibrin, ultimately contribute to thrombus stabilization. This leads to the formation of platelet-rich thrombi that, occluding the arterial lumen and impairing blood-flow and oxygen supply, cause acute ischemia. The efficacy of aspirin lies in its ability irreversibly to inhibit platelet COX-1 (by acetylating a serine located near the active site of the enzyme) and, in turn, T× A2 formation (59). The transduction of the ADP signal involves its interaction with two platelet receptors belonging to the P2 purinergic family, the Gαq-coupled receptor P2Y1 and the Gαi-coupled receptor P2Y12 (60). The concomitant activation of both the Gαq and Gαi pathways by ADP is needed for platelet aggregation to occur. Signaling from the P2Y1 receptor causes platelet shape change and rapid transient aggregation, whereas the signaling from the P2Y12 receptor facilitates sustained irreversible aggregation and stimulates surface expression of the pro-inflammatory P-selectin. In addition, the P2Y12 receptor plays a critical role in the amplification of platelet aggregation induced by agents other than ADP, including 5-HT, T× A2, and thrombin. Together, these contribute to thrombus growth and stability. Two main classes of antiplatelet agents are licensed and widely used chronically in PAD: acetyl salicylic acid (aspirin) and P2Y12 inhibitors (ticlopidine, clopidogrel, prasugrel, cangrelor, ticagrelor) (61).

Aspirin
Owing to its efficacy and favorable cost-effectiveness, aspirin is the mainstay treatment for all atherothrombotic conditions. A recent meta-analysis (60) has assessed the role of aspirin in primary (95,000 subjects at low cardiovascular risk) and secondary (17,000 patients at medium/high risk) vascular prevention. While in high-risk conditions the advantage of aspirin outweigh the inherent bleeding hazard, in primary prevention aspirin is associated with an absolute benefit of 0.06%/year, too exiguous when compared to the 0.03% increase in major bleedings.

Ticlopidine
Ticlopidine was the first agent of the thienopyridine class shown both to prevent the interaction of ADP with its platelet purinergic receptor and to cause inhibition of fibrinogen binding to the αIIbβ3 integrin (62). In subjects with a history of cerebrovascular events, ticlopidine was superior to placebo and to aspirin in the reduction of stroke, AMI, or vascular death (63). In addition, the combination of ticlopidine with aspirin was successful in acute coronary syndrome (ACS) patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with stent implantation (64). Diarrhea, aplastic anemia, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, and neutropenia are the main limitations for a widespread use of ticlopidine.

Clopidogrel
The thienopyridine prodrug clopidogrel irreversibly binds the P2Y12 platelet receptor after a two-step activation by cytochrome P450 (CYP) liver isoenzymes. A variety of polymorphisms in the CYP2C19 gene (most often the CYP2C19*2), associated with a 20%–25% production of inactive metabolite, diminish the response to clopidogrel. Among subjects under treatment with clopidogrel for a previous vascular event, carriers of these polymorphisms have a 50% higher risk of cardiovascular death, AMI, or stroke (58). Among clopidogrel-treated patients, carriers of at least one allele associated with the loss of or a reduced function in the CYP2C19 gene had a higher than normal occurrence of fatal and non-fatal coronary thrombotic events, as well as of stent thrombosis (58). In the same study population, polymorphic alleles of a gene modulating clopidogrel absorption (ABCB1) have been associated with a higher rate of cardiovascular events at 1-year follow-up as compared to wild-type subjects.

Ticagrelor
Ticagrelor, an orally active cyclopentyl-triazolo-pyrimidine, binds to domains of the P2Y12 receptor other than those recognized by ADP (the 1, 2, and 7 transmembrane domains, the extracellular loop 2, and the N-terminal domain), determining a potent and rapid non-persistent receptor conformational change. After the occupancy of P2Y12, ADP-catalyzed conversion of cAMP from ATP, dephosphorylation of phosphorylated VASP, and activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase are blocked. The net result is a reduced exposure of fibrinogen-binding sites on the αIIbβ3 integrin receptor and, in turn, the inhibition of platelet aggregation. Inhibition of ADP-mediated constriction of vascular smooth muscle and enhancement of adenosine-induced coronary blood-flow are also reported. After oral administration, ticagrelor is rapidly absorbed and does not require hepatic biotransformation to be pharmacologically active. However, ticagrelor is also metabolized to an equipotent, active metabolite (AR-C124910XX) by CYP3A4 enzymes. As both ticagrelor and AR-C124910XX are excreted by the intestinal route, no dose adjustment is needed in kidney failure. On the other hand, the concomitant use of CYP3A4 inhibitors/inducers as well as a significant liver dysfunction may be of concern for its use. After pharmacodynamic evaluations (65,66), a 90-mg twice-daily dose of ticagrelor has been chosen to optimize its efficacy, safety, and tolerability. A loading dose of 180–270 mg may minimize intersubject variability as to initial inhibition in platelet aggregation and may be appropriate in ticagrelor-naive patients with ACS or in preparation for PCI. In 174 subjects with a recent coronary artery disease receiving 75–100 mg/day aspirin (92 also under ticagrelor 180-mg load and 90 mg twice-daily maintenance dose, and 82 also under clopidogrel 600-mg load and 75 mg/d maintenance dose) the genotyping of the cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C19 (*1,*2,*3,*4,*5,*6,*7,*8,*17) was performed. In addition, platelet function was measured (by aggregometry, VerifyNow P2Y12 assay, and VASP assay at pre-dose, 8 hours post-loading, and during maintenance). There was no significant effect of the genotype on platelet function during aspirin therapy alone. On the other hand, irrespective of the 2C19 genotype, of the metabolizer status, and of the assays employed, subjects on ticagrelor showed a lower platelet reactivity than did those on clopidogrel (P < 0.01). This is consistent with a genotype-independent better pharmacodynamic effect of ticagrelor as compared to clopidogrel (67).

Cilostazol
Cilostazol, selectively targeting phosphodiesterase type 3 (PDE3) and, then, determining intracellular cAMP accumulation, inhibits platelet aggregation (68). In diabetic patients on standard dual antiplatelet therapy, adjunctive treatment with cilostazol enhances inhibition of platelet P2Y12 signaling (69). A Cochrane review (70), in which two randomized studies on stroke prevention were summarized, documented that, compared with aspirin, cilostazol was associated with a significantly lower risk of vascular events (6.77% versus 9.39%; RR 0.72; 95% CI 0.57–0.91, composite outcome) and a lower risk of hemorrhagic stroke (0.53% versus 2.01%; RR 0.26; 95% CI 0.13–0.55). In terms of outcome of safety, cilostazol was associated with significantly fewer adverse events (8.22% versus 4.95%; RR 1.66; 95% CI 1.51–1.83) than aspirin. In the SILOAM phase IV study (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01261832), a triple antiplatelet therapy (cilostazol plus aspirin and clopidogrel) is compared (at 1 month and at 6 months) with the standard dual antiplatelet treatment (ASA and clopidogrel) in 951 ACS subjects (expected number) undergoing PCI and drug-eluting stent implantation. The primary efficacy end-point is the occurrence of major cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events (total death, non-fatal myocardial infarction, repeat revascularization, stroke). The end of the study is expected by July 2014.

Primary prevention of cardiovascular events in asymptomatic PAD (Table V)
On the basis of an individual participant data meta-analysis for primary and secondary prevention of coronary artery disease (60) and of data from a meta-analysis on cancer (71), aspirin is expected to reduce total mortality and to increase major bleedings (72). Since this is especially true in subjects taking more than one drug daily (most PAD patients), and since similar benefits are seen in patients with IC and those who had undergone peripheral vascular grafting or angioplasty, the use of aspirin over a prolonged time period should be encouraged on an individual basis. Regardless of this decision, intensive treatment for cardiovascular risk factor modifications (73) is mandatory for primary prevention of cardiovascular events in patients with PAD. Tobacco cessation should be encouraged, eventually by behavior modification or pharmacologic strategies (74). Cessation of tobacco use significantly reduces lower-extremity symptoms and progression of PAD, thus helping improve the maximal walking distance achieved by structured exercise programs (75). As in other patients with high cardiovascular risk, LDL cholesterol levels should be lowered to < 70 mg/dL in PAD patients (76). A sub-analysis of 6748 patients with PAD in the Heart Protection Study showed significant reductions in total mortality, vascular mortality, coronary heart disease events, strokes, and non-coronary revascularization in those treated with simvastatin (77). There was no threshold cholesterol value below which statin therapy was not associated with benefit (78–80). Statins improve the pain-free walking distance (81) and reduce the progression of PAD, the overall cardiovascular risk, and the occurrence of complications needing invasive procedures (82). The goal for blood pressure control in PAD is < 140/90 mmHg; in those with PAD and DM or with chronic kidney disease, it should be < 130/80 mmHg (83). In a subgroup of 4046 patients with PAD, the Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation study showed that those randomly assigned to the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor ramipril had a 22% reduction in risk, compared with the placebo group, that was independent of lowering of blood pressure (84). Because of the additional cardio-protective effects, the use of β-blockers is important in patients with coexisting coronary artery disease. Although no trials have been designed or powered to examine glycemic control, a tight plasma glucose control reduces PAD progression in diabetic patients with PAD (85–90) and improves the clinical outcome of percutaneous revascularization (91). To this end, the reduction of the A1c hemoglobin levels < 7% should be associated with the control of all risk factors, proper foot care (e.g. cleansing of skin lesions), and appropriate footwear (92).

Table V. Antithrombotic drugs for PAD: different strategies for different objectives.

Patients with	Drug	Over	Grade of recommendation	Objectives, comments	
Asymptomatic PADa	Aspirind	No therapy	2B	In 60-year-old men, aspirin use would result in six fewer deaths (12 fewer to 0 fewer) per 1000 patients treated (16 and 22 major extracranial bleeding events per 1000 moderate- and high-risk patients treated) if taken over 10 years and an increase in major bleeding events	
Symptomatic PADb	Aspirind

Clopidogrele

Aspirind + clopidogrele

Aspirind + warfarin	No therapy
Aspirin
Aspirin or clopidogrel
Aspirin	1A
1A
2B
1B	In a high-risk (8.2%/year) population for serious events, aspirin significantly reduces total mortality, and the recurrence of non-fatal MI and non-fatal stroke. The number of vascular events and total deaths prevented is greater than the number of resulting bleeding events (mostly, non-fatal extracranial bleeding events) The primary efficacy analysis of CAPRIE was conducted in 19,185 patients on an intent-to-treat basis. After a mean follow-up of 1.9 years, a total of 939 patients in the clopidogrel group and 1021 patients in the aspirin group experienced one of the following events: ischemic stroke, AMI, or vascular death. The relative risk reduction (RRR) with clopidogrel versus aspirin was 8.7% (clopidogrel only marginally superior to aspirin: RRR 8.7; P < 0.043). As to the pre-specified RRR by qualifying entry criteria, the following was found: Stroke: Clopidogrel better vs Aspirin better, 7.3%; AMI: Aspirin better vs Clopidogrel better, –3.7%; PAD: Aspirin better vs Clopidogrel better, 23.8 In the CHARISMA trial, the long-term (28-mo follow-up, mean) efficacy of clopidogrel+ aspirin was evaluated versus aspirin alone in 15,603 patients with established vascular disease, PAD, or multiple risk factors. Dual therapy was associated with a reduction in non-fatal stroke and an increase in non-fatal extracranial bleeding with no effect on total mortality or non-fatal AMI Warfarin (PT-INR 2-3)+ aspirin versus aspirin in patients with asymptomatic coronary artery disease has been tested in the setting of a recent ACS. Together with a significant increase in major extracranial non-fatal bleeding events (from 20 more to 112 more), there was no detectable effect on mortality (from 25 fewer to 66 more), and non-fatal AMI/non-fatal stroke (from 28 fewer to 32 more), in those receiving warfarin+ aspirin	
Claudication unresponsive to physical exercise and smoking cessationc	Cilostazol (100 mg b.i.d.)h	Pentoxifylline or placebo	2C	In 1374 participants randomized to 100 mg b.i.d. cilostazol (475 patient-years exposure) and 973 randomized to placebo (357 patient-years exposure), no difference in rates of AMI (1.0% vs 0.8%), stroke (0.5% vs 0.5%), or death (0.6% vs 0.5%) was found. Nor was a significant effect of cilostazol detected on major or minor bleeding rates (in a systematic review in 2809 patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention in which aspirin+ clopidogrel was compared with aspirin+ clopidogrel+ cilostazol)	
Chronic CLI/rest pain in patients who are not candidates for vascular interventions	E.v. Prostanoidsh

S.c. Heparin (therapeutic doses)
Surgery	Placebo
No therapy
Intra-arterial thrombolysisg	2C
2C
1B
2C	Prostanoids improve rest pain and ulcer healing (77 and 136 patients per 1000 treated, respectively) but do not significantly prevent amputations (from 75 fewer to 12 more) or mortality (from 42 fewer to 90 more)
There are no formal studies demonstrating improved outcomes with short-term anticoagulation treatment (therapeutic doses of heparin) in acute limb ischemia	
Acute CLI due to arterial emboli or thrombosis	Intra-arterial thrombolysisg	E.v. Streptokinase		In 1180 patients. Intra-arterial thrombolysis has been compared with surgery for ALI. While there was no effect on amputation, limb salvage, or death, compared to surgery, thrombolysis was associated with a high risk of stroke (10 per 1000 treated) and major bleeding (16 per 1000 treated) at 30 days	
Peripheral artery PTA with/without stentingf,h

Peripheral arterial bypass with/without stentingf	Aspirind

Clopidogrele

Aspirin + dipyridamole
Aspirind + clopidogrele

Aspirind Clopidogrele	No therapy
No therapy
No therapy
No therapy
No therapy
No therapy	1A
1A
1B
2C
1A
1A	Compared with placebo, pooled data from 356 PTA patients without stent placement showed a reduction in reocclusion at 6 months in those taking aspirin+ dipyridamole (OR 0.69; 95% CI 0.44–1.10). Following PTA (pelvic or lower extremity), in 179 patients complicated by extensive dissection to i.v. unfractionated heparin vs subcutaneous nadroparin was administered for 1 week post-procedure (followed by 6 months of aspirin in each arm). Nadroparin was associated with a reduction in vessel restenosis/occlusion at 6 months (OR 0.35; 95% CI 0.19–0.65) but not in the amputation rate (OR 1.0; 95% CI 0.20–5.10). However, the overall quality of the evidence is low due to risk of bias, imprecision, and indirectness. Thus, aspirin or clopidogrel should be preferred as in symptomatic PAD. In patients undergoing PTA with stent placement, the practice of a loading dose of clopidogrel in addition to aspirin pre-procedure and then continuing dual antiplatelet therapy for 1–3 months post-PTA, particularly if a stent is placed in a small peripheral vessel, is based on the results from coronary artery stenting trials. However, dual antiplatelet therapy is associated with a high risk of major bleeding compared with single antiplatelet therapy. Thus, aspirin or clopidogrel alone should be preferred
In 966 patients receiving post-infrainguinal (venous or prosthetic) bypass graft surgery (for refractory claudication and limb salvage), aspirin+ dipyridamole resulted in 22 fewer graft occlusions per 1000 patients (32 fewer to 12 fewer) treated for 12 months (placebo as a comparator). The relative effects of aspirin plus dipyridamole vs aspirin alone have not been evaluated (Cochrane Systematic Review) In one study of that Cochrane Systematic Review, compared with placebo, aspirin plus dipyridamole for 12 months was associated with a reduction in amputations rates (34 fewer amputations per 1000 patients treated (51 fewer to one more)) Pooled data from three studies of that review suggested that treatment with aspirin plus dipyridamole was associated with a possible reduction in non-fatal AMI but not in non-fatal stroke. However, aspirin plus dipyridamole was associated with an increase in bleeding (eight more major bleeding events per 1000 treated (one fewer to 30 more)). However, the overall quality of the evidence is low due to risk of bias, imprecision, and indirectness. Thus, aspirin or clopidogrel alone should be preferred	
Below-knee bypass graft surgery with prosthetic grafts	Aspirind + clopidogrele for at least 1 year	Aspirin	2C	The CASPAR study randomized 851 patients undergoing unilateral below-knee bypass graft surgery for PAD to clopidogrel (75 mg/d) plus aspirin (75–100 mg/d) vs placebo plus aspirin. In the (pre-specified) subgroup of patients undergoing venous graft bypass (n = 598), there was no difference in the rates of amputation, major bleeding, or death between the two treatment arms. In the subgroup of patients undergoing prosthetic graft bypass (n = 253), there was a significant decrease in amputations in those on clopidogrel+ aspirin (24 per 1000 treated; 95% CI, 35 fewer to three fewer)). No difference was found in total mortality or major extracranial bleeding	
	High-intensity oral anticoagulation (target PT-INR 3-4.5)	Or aspirin	2C	The BOA study randomized 2650 patients who had undergone infrainguinal bypass grafting to either high-intensity oral anticoagulation (target PT-INR 3-4.5) or aspirin. Together with a reduction in non-fatal AMI, there was no effect of oral anticoagulation versus aspirin on all-cause mortality, non-fatal stroke, or limb loss, while there was a significant increase in extracranial major bleeding events (17 more per 1000, from 6 more to 32 more) in the oral anticoagulation group	
a Patients > 50 y of age. The overall quality of evidence is moderate (imprecision in the estimates).

b Similar to patients with PTA with/without stenting.

c Available results in this clinical setting exclude benefits/harm as to quality of life related to the use of pentoxifylline, heparins (including low-molecular-weight heparins) or prostanoids.

d Long-term aspirin: 75–100 mg/d. Limited evidence (Grade 2B) of aspirin+ clopidogrel or aspirin+ warfarin over aspirin alone.

e Long-term clopidogrel: 75 mg/d. To be avoided in association with aspirin or warfarin (also in patients undergoing stent application).

f Dual antiplatelet treatment to be avoided for the inherent bleeding risk. Other studies failed to demonstrate or exclude an effect of aspirin and dipyridamole vs warfarin in reocclusion at 6 months following PTA or an effect on 12-month reocclusion in patients taking ticlopidine compared with warfarin.

g Urokinase bolus or t-PA 100 mg bolus. Compared to surgery, thrombolysis has a significantly higher 30-d risk of bleeding and stroke. Initially, streptokinase was the most widely used agent, but because of safety concerns (e.g. allergic reactions), it has largely been replaced by urokinase and rt-PA.

h Long-term aspirind or clopidogrele to be added for prevention of vascular events.

Secondary prevention of cardiovascular events in symptomatic PAD
Main findings from the meta-analysis of aspirin therapy for primary and secondary prevention of coronary artery disease (60) also show that, in a population at high risk for a serious vascular event (i.e. 8.2%/ year), the risk/benefit ratio between bleedings and prevention of total mortality, non-fatal MI, and non-fatal stroke is in favor of the prolonged use of aspirin. Clopidogrel, when administered alone in about 20,000 patients (all with a history of AMI, stroke, or PAD) in the randomized CAPRIE trial (Clopidogrel versus Aspirin in Patients at Risk for Ischemic Events) (93), was only marginally superior to aspirin (relative risk reduction (RRR) 8.7; P =  0.043) in preventing non-fatal AMI and non-fatal extracranial bleeding with little or no effect on total mortality. This was the overall outcome in patients with a recent stroke and in patients with a recent AMI. However, when the chronic ‘PAD subset’ was analyzed alone (over 8000 patients), a 24% risk reduction in major adverse ischemic events was found. This was a pre-specified (pre-randomization) stratification, and the validity of such a conclusion in PAD patients led to the positive study outcome and FDA approval.

A significantly high efficacy of clopidogrel has also been shown when this drug was employed for the ‘dual antiplatelet therapy’. The CURE (94) and the CREDO (95) studies established the superiority of clopidogrel in combination with aspirin versus aspirin alone in ACS and in ACS with PCI, respectively. In high vascular risk patients with atherothrombosis (manifested as a recent stroke, recent MI, or symptomatic PAD), a meta-analysis of 10 studies examining the effects of thienopyridines (clopidogrel and ticlopidine) versus aspirin achieved results similar to those of the CAPRIE trial (96). A reduction in non-fatal stroke and an increase in non-fatal extracranial bleeding with no effect on total mortality or non-fatal AMI was found in the long-term efficacy of clopidogrel+ aspirin versus aspirin alone in the randomized Clopidogrel for High Atherothrombotic Risk and Ischemic Stabilization, Management, and Avoidance (CHARISMA) trial (97). A Cochrane systematic review that evaluated short- and long-term dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with established coronary artery disease reached similar conclusions (98). Finally, in a meta-analysis of three studies there was no effect on mortality, non-fatal AMI, or non-fatal stroke, and a significant raise in major bleeding events in patients receiving warfarin (PT-INR 2-3)+ aspirin versus aspirin alone (73).

Cilostazol, pentoxifylline, and prostanoids are used to improve the quality of life in patients with symptomatic PAD and with claudication. Since claudication itself is responsive to smoking cessation and exercise therapy, drugs for improving the quality of life should be considered only in patients who have limitations after smoking cessation and exercise therapy. Two systematic reviews have shown that patients with symptomatic PAD receiving cilostazol are more likely to experience important benefits as to physical health sub-scale (but not to health-related quality of life) than those receiving placebo (99,100) or pentoxifylline (101). No difference in rates of AMI, stroke, or death was found in another review on 1374 participants randomized to cilostazol and 973 randomized to placebo (102). Nor has a significant effect of cilostazol on major or minor bleeding rates been detected in another systematic review (103).

In a meta-analysis (seven randomized studies) (104), 643 patients were analyzed as to the use of prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) in the treatment of advanced PAD. At the end of treatment, PGE1 showed a significantly better response (ulcer healing and/or pain reduction) as compared to placebo (47.8% for PGE1 versus 25.2% for placebo, P = 0.0294). After a 6-month follow-up, a slight although still significant difference in favor of PGE1 was seen for the combined end-point ‘major amputation or death’ (22.6% for PGE1 versus 36.2% for placebo, P = 0.0150). That the benefit of PGE1 is apparent in the short term but decreases over time had been previously reported in a multicenter trial on 1560 patients with chronic critical leg ischemia (105). The response rate (ulcer healing and/or pain relief) of the pooled treatment groups was 60.2% for PGE1, 25.2% for placebo, and 53.6% for iloprost, in that report. The adverse events rate of the pooled treatment groups showed a good tolerability for PGE1 with a rate of 39.6% in comparison to 73.9% for iloprost and 15.4% for placebo. In a recent Cochrane systematic review on 13 studies (106), > 75% of subjects with critical limb ischemia without chance of rescue or reconstructive intervention that received prostanoids experienced at least one drug-related adverse event (i.e. headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and facial flushing) in addition to improved rest for pain and ulcer healing.

By preventing clot propagation and further embolism, short-term anticoagulation treatment is routinely used to reduce the extent of ischemia in acute limb ischemia. There are no formal studies demonstrating improved outcomes with such strategy. To restore flow to the occluded artery, either surgery or catheter-directed intra-arterial thrombolysis is employed. There are no data to support reperfusion therapy over anticoagulation alone in this setting. In a meta-analysis (107) that has compared benefits and harms of intra-arterial thrombolysis versus surgery, only the risk of stroke and of major bleeding at 30 days was higher for thrombolysis as compared with surgery, no effect being found on amputation, death, or limb salvage.

However, we believe that caution is needed when commenting this conclusion. Among those analyzed, the only randomized comparative study which was designed and performed by investigators was the STILE trial (108). In patients with true acute limb ischemia (1–14 days) the study reported a significant benefit of catheter-directed thrombolysis in terms of reducing amputation and improving amputation-free survival up to 1 year. These results were not reproduced in commercially written and performed studies.

In the past, thrombolysis for acute limb ischemia was administered i.v.; this strategy has been now replaced by catheter-directed thrombolysis. In a Cochrane systematic review on the management of acute lower-limb ischemia (109), compared to thrombolysis by recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rt-PA) or urokinase, i.v. streptokinase was associated with a high rate of amputation at 30 days (7/20 versus 1/20; RR 7.0; 95% CI 0.95–51.80) and no effect on limb salvage, major hemorrhage, or death.

Surgical revascularization in patients with CLI (Table VI)
When antiplatelet drugs and the control of DM, of dyslipidemia, of cigarette smoking, and of hypertension are not sufficient in the treatment of CLI, surgery (110) or percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) with or without stenting (111) are needed. The objective of revascularization is to establish adequate inflow to the distal vessels. Balloon devices are used to this end, either in the contralateral retrograde common femoral artery (CFA) access or in the ipsilateral anterograde CFA access. This intervention is aimed at establishing straight line flow in at least one tibial vessel, to supply the area of the foot with rest ischemia (typically, the forefoot) or with tissue loss. This treatment shows a very high immediate limb salvage rates (> 90%), with < 2% intervention-related mortality and < 5% risk of complications. In the first 12–24 months, the limb salvage rates are above 80%, and, when the therapeutic goal is achieved, the patency of treated arteries leads to resolution of ischemic lesions. The efficacy of angioplasty has been confirmed by several studies (112,113). A recent meta-analysis has shown that the efficacy and safety of endovascular techniques are comparable to surgical interventions (114). By releasing anti-proliferative drugs such as paclitaxel, drug-eluting balloons efficiently maintain arterial patency after PTA and reduce the risk of restenosis (115–117). A possible side effect of this procedure is wall dissection and restenosis. The use of stents is thought to reduce such risk (118–120). However, presently it is unclear whether PTA with stent placement is superior to PTA alone with respect to patient-important outcomes. Compared with PTA without routine stenting, PTA plus routine stenting for superficial femoropopliteal arterial disease was associated with a reduction in restenosis (RR 0.85; 95% CI 0.69–1.06) but with no effect on the need for target vessel revascularization (RR 0.98; 95% CI 0.78–1.23) (121). Among strategies regarding surgical revascularization and endovascular revascularization, great attention is currently paid to benefits of drug-eluting stents. In the prospective, multinational randomized controlled Zilver PTX trial, the 2-year safety and efficacy of a paclitaxel-coated drug-eluting stent (DES) was compared with PTA in patients with superficial femoral artery lesions. In patients who received the paclitaxel-coated DES, 2-year outcomes showed statistically significant differences in terms of event-free survival, primary patency, and clinical benefits (122).

Table VI. TASC II classification of aortoiliac lesions.



Type A lesions	• Unilateral or bilateral stenosis of common iliac artery • Unilateral or bilateral single short (< 3 cm) stenosis of external iliac artery	
Type B lesions	• Short (< 3 cm) stenosis of infrarenal aorta • Unilateral occlusion of common iliac artery • Single or multiple stenoses totaling 3–10 cm involving the external iliac artery not extending into the common femoral artery • Unilateral occlusion of the external iliac artery not involving the origins of the internal iliac or common femoral arteries	
Type C lesions	• Bilateral occlusions of the common iliac arteries • Bilateral stenoses of the external iliac artery 3–10 cm long not extending into the common femoral artery • Unilateral stenosis of the external iliac artery extending into the common femoral artery • Unilateral occlusion of the external iliac artery involving the internal iliac and/or common femoral artery • Heavily calcified unilateral external iliac artery occlusion with or without involvement of the origins of internal iliac or common femoral artery	
Type D lesions	• Infrarenal aortic occlusion • Diffuse disease involving the aorta and both iliac arteries requiring treatment • Diffuse multiple stenoses involving the unilateral common iliac artery, external iliac artery, and common femoral artery • Unilateral occlusion of both common iliac and external iliac artery • Bilateral occlusion of external iliac arteries • Iliac stenosis in patients with AAA requiring treatment and not amenable to endograft placement or other lesions requiring open aortic or iliac surgery	
Data from: Vasa. 2011;40:359–67; modified.

The TASC-II classification of ischemic lesions is used to decide between PTA or surgical interventions—TASC A and B lesions being best treated with PTA, TASC C and D lesions being usually treated with surgical strategies. The prosthetic material used is dacron or ePTFE, autologous materials (e.g. femoral veins or cryoconserved allogenic veins or arteries) being used in cases with infections of the original graft (123,124). After 5 years, the primary patency rate of all surgical procedures is > 80%, significant differences being found when comparing claudicants with patients with CLI (125). Such rates of success progressively decrease in patients with local co-morbidities. In a retrospective review (126), there was a significant difference in primary patency after 36 months (better for surgery). However, it was severely diminished in patients with diabetes and distal PAD, and, compared with patients undergoing PTA, surgical patients needed more often additional interventions of reconstruction. Debulking procedures are taken into account in selected patients (i.e. those at a high risk of PTA-related complications) (127). They include the excimer laser (to perform photoablation of occlusive material), the Rotablator (for the treatment of calcified plaques), and new techniques such as the Silverhawk system (designed for eccentric and not severely calcified infrainguinal lesions), the Rochawk system (for calcified plaques), and the newer Jetstream system (with an aspiration device to perform simultaneous thrombectomy and atherectomy).

Antithrombotic treatments in patients undergoing revascularization procedures (Table V)
A Cochrane review (128) on patients undergoing lower-extremity PTA without stent placement reported a reduction in reocclusion in patients taking aspirin+ dipyridamole compared with placebo. Another study randomized patients to i.v. unfractionated heparin versus subcutaneous nadroparin administered for 1 week post-procedure (129). Nadroparin was associated with a reduction in the rate of vessel restenosis/occlusion but not in amputation. However, the overall quality of the evidence in these studies is low. Similarly poor is the evidence from studies on antithrombotic treatments in patients undergoing PTA with stent placement.

In a Cochrane systematic review in patients receiving post-infrainguinal bypass graft surgery compared to placebo, aspirin+ dipyridamole resulted in fewer graft occlusions (130). In one study of that systematic review, compared with placebo, aspirin+ dipyridamole was associated with a reduction in amputations rates. Also in this case, the overall quality of the evidence is low. Thus, aspirin or clopidogrel are suggested as the treatment of choice in symptomatic PAD.

The Clopidogrel and Acetylsalicyclate Acid in Bypass Surgery for Peripheral Arterial Disease (CASPAR) study randomized patients undergoing unilateral below-knee bypass graft surgery for PAD to clopidogrel+ aspirin versus placebo+ aspirin (131). There was a significant decrease in amputations in patients treated with clopidogrel+ aspirin, but only in the subgroup of patients undergoing prosthetic graft bypass. Finally, together with a reduction in non-fatal AMI and a significant increase in extracranial major bleedings, there was no advantage over aspirin of a high-intensity oral anticoagulation (target PT-INR 3-4.5) on all-cause mortality and non-fatal stroke in patients who had undergone infrainguinal bypass grafting (132).

Open issues and areas of research
Due to imprecision, indirectness, and risk of bias, the overall quality of the evidence summarized above is low in most cases, and open issues and areas of research emerge.

Because of the paucity of studies regarding type and duration of antithrombotic therapy, in patients undergoing PTA with stent placement, the rationale for the current practice (aspirin and loading dose of clopidogrel pre-procedure; dual antiplatelet therapy for 1–3 months thereafter, particularly if a stent is placed in a small peripheral vessel) is largely based on indirect evidence from data in patients undergoing coronary stenting trials (133). However, the risk of stent thrombosis is conceivably lower in stenting larger-caliber peripheral arteries than in smaller coronary arteries. Differences in stent types and differing outcomes should be also considered in PAD.

A meta-analysis (134) has shown that, compared with those showing an optimal response to the drug, patients with persistent platelet reactivity despite clopidogrel treatment (∼30% of total) have a significantly higher risk of death and/or ischemic recurrence (58). The same risk has been reported for aspirin (‘aspirin resistance’) (135). The possibility has been documented that genetic variations in gut/liver enzymes that control biotransformation (and in turn the pharmacological activity) play a role in the low response to clopidogrel (136). After oral administration, ticagrelor is rapidly absorbed and does not require hepatic biotransformation to be pharmacologically active. Compared to clopidogrel, a 16% RRR in major adverse cardiovascular events following acute coronary syndrome, a 21% RRR in cardiovascular mortality, and a numerical 22% RRR in all-cause mortality has been documented in 18,000 NSTEMI or STEMI patients in the multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy phase III PLATO trial (ticagrelor 90 mg b.i.d. versus clopidogrel 75 mg/d) (137). In ∼11,500 male and female patients (> 50 years of age) with established PAD, the EUCLID (Examining Use of tiCagreLor In paD) study protocol (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01732822) is now comparing 90 mg b.i.d. oral ticagrelor with 75 mg/d oral clopidogrel and the corresponding placebo on the risk of cardiovascular death, AMI, ischemic stroke, and TIMI major (primary safety objective) and major or minor bleeding events. October 2015 is the estimated primary completion date for the EUCLID study protocol.

By preventing clot propagation and further embolism, short-term anticoagulation treatment with therapeutic doses of heparin is commonly used to reduce the extent of ischemic injury in the management of acute limb ischemia. No formal studies demonstrating improved outcomes with anticoagulation (nor side effects of heparin versus other anticoagulant agents) are available. Although effective, vitamin K antagonists have numerous limitations, which complicate their use. These limitations have prompted the introduction of new oral anticoagulants that overcome many of the problems associated with vitamin K antagonists. The new oral direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) fall into two main classes: direct thrombin inhibitors (factor IIa inhibitors, dabigatran etexilate) and direct FXa inhibitors (rivaroxaban, apixaban, edoxaban) (138). Although agents in the two classes have distinct mechanisms of action, targeting distinct enzymes in the coagulation pathway, all of the new drugs attenuate fibrin formation and have features in common that distinguish them from vitamin K antagonists, such as warfarin. These common features include a rapid onset of action, few drug–drug interactions, and a predictable anticoagulant response that enables fixed dosing for several indications and across a diverse range of patients with no need for routine coagulation monitoring. Major issues concerning the pharmacology including the efficacy/safety of DOACs in clinical trials on prevention and treatment of thromboembolism (in medical and surgical patients), as well as in AF have been recently reviewed (139). Moreover, in a 14-mo follow-up in the everyday practice, 3.5 gastrointestinal bleedings and 2.4 intracranial hemorrhages/100,000 days at risk occurred in new users of warfarin, compared to 1.6 gastrointestinal bleedings and 0.8 intracranial hemorrhages/100,000 days at risk among new users of the DOAC dabigatran (140). A randomized trial of DOACs versus low-molecular-weight heparin in ALI should be considered.

Claudication unresponsive to physical exercise and smoking cessation is present in a relevant group of patients with IC. Data argue for this phenotype as identifying those with a heritable predisposition to more severe vascular events (i.e. with unfavorable combination(s) of genes modulating lipid metabolism, arterial pressure, vascular function, inflammation, hemostasis, and/or leukocytes and endothelial cell function) (141–144). This issue deserves to be thoroughly addressed.

Reports call attention to the occurrence of PAD in patients with AF (145) or with chronic renal failure (CRF) (146), a higher than normal risk of ischemic events and mortality being documented in both these settings (147–149). The prevalence of PAD is higher in patients with DM than in the general population (150–152); a distal location with an involvement of the infrapopliteal vessels is more common in DM (153,154), and the severity and outcome of PAD is worse in DM and is strongly related to duration and severity of the metabolic disorder (155–157). In a meta-analysis of ∼48,000 healthy men and women, an ABI < 0.90 at baseline was associated with an approximate doubling of the 10-year mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and major coronary event rate after adjusting for the Framingham risk score (158). When evaluating patients for primary prevention with aspirin, it has been suggested (81) to use a risk stratification tool (e.g. the Framingham risk score) which provides estimates of low (< 10%), moderate (10%–20%), and high risk (> 20%) of cardiovascular events over 10 years, doubling the patient’s risk score (from a low to moderate or a moderate to high category) when his/her ABI is < 0.90. Whether this is the case is unknown so far, and deserves to be addressed.

In the ICAI (Ischemia Critica degli Arti Inferiori) trial (159), of 1560 patients enrolled, 298 died within 1 year, 187 were amputees at 6 months, and 746 continued to suffer from CLI. Prior major vascular events doubled the risk of dying within 1 year. Previous revascularization was associated with a lower mortality and a higher probability of amputation. Among cardiovascular risk factors, diabetes increased mortality and lowered the probability of recovery from CLI. Patients with tissue loss had a higher amputation rate and less probability of recovery. Ankle pressure was predictive of mortality and amputation only when it was not measurable. Compared to those in whom surgery was deemed unnecessary, patients requiring revascularization had better chances of recovering from CLI, but not of longer-term survival or limb salvage. Antiplatelet drugs caused resolution of CLI and decreased the amputation rate by about one-third, while the advantage of the test treatment with alprostadil-α-cyclodextrine was confined to CLI resolution only. Together, these data provide the rationale for defining stratification criteria for a severity score to estimate reliably the achievable benefit in routine practice and/or identify PAD subjects at the highest risk of amputation/vascular death.

By allowing the identification of size and ulcerative components and by differentiating the necrotic core from the surrounding fibrous tissue, neo-angiogenesis, and the inflammatory burden composition, MRA contributes to the morphological characterization of a plaque (see above). Whether and the extent to which early and more aggressive strategies in PAD patients at the highest risk of ischemic events should be based, at least in part, on non-invasive and invasive tools for the diagnosis of PAD is poorly understood.

Innovative treatments with growth factors or blood progenitor transfer (160) are under evaluation to reduce pain and the rate of amputation in patients who have severe PAD and do not respond to PTA or surgery (e.g. those with DM) (161). In addition to the obvious pathophysiological and therapeutic implications, information from these model systems should help clarify whether conditions (e.g. CLI) other than an acute coronary syndrome argue for a ‘pan-vascular destabilization’ status (162).

Acknowledgements
Portions of this review have been presented at the Pavia Spring Meeting on Thrombosis, 21–22 June 2012.

Declaration of interest G.D.M. has served on advisory boards for and has received fees as a speaker at meetings organized by Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer, and Daiichi Sankyo. E.T. has served on advisory boards for and has received fees as a speaker at meetings organized by Bristol-Myers Squibb. All the other authors have nothing to declare.
==== Refs
References
1. Falk E  Shah PK  Fuster V   Coronary plaque disruption Circulation 1995 92 657 71 7634481 
2. Arbustini E  Dal Bello B  Morbini P  Burke AP  Bocciarelli M  Specchia G  et al  Plaque erosion is a major substrate for coronary thrombosis in acute myocardial infarction Heart 1999 82 269 72 10455073 
3. Drouet L   Atherothrombosis as a systemic disease Cerebrovasc Dis 2002 13 S1 6 
4. Badimon L  Vilahur G   Platelets, arterial thrombosis and cerebral ischemia Cerebrovasc Dis 2007 24 S30 9 
5. Ogren M  Hedblad B  Isacsson SO  Janzon L  Jungquist G  Lindell SE   Non-invasively detected carotid stenosis and ischaemic heart disease in men with leg arteriosclerosis Lancet 1993 342 1138 41 7901475 
6. Davies MG   Critical limb ischemia: epidemiology Methodist Debakey Cardiovasc J 2012 8 10 14 23342182 
7. Lambert MA  Belch JJ   Medical management of critical limb ischaemia: where do we stand today? J Intern Med 2013 274 295 307 23795817 
8. Meru AV  Mittra S  Thyagarajan B  Chugh A   Intermittent claudication: an overview Atherosclerosis 2006 187 221 37 16386260 
9. Leng GC  Fowkes FG  Lee AJ  Dunbar J  Housley E  Ruckley CV   Use of ankle brachial pressure index to predict cardiovascular events and death: a cohort study BMJ 1996 313 1440 4 8973232 
10. Norgren L  Hiatt WR  Dormandy JA  Nehler MR  Harris KA  Fowkes FG  et al  Inter-society consensus for the management of peripheral arterial disease (TASC-II) J Vasc Surg 2007 45 S5 67 17223489 
11. Sanna G  Alesso D  Mediati M  Cimminiello C  Borghi C  Fazzari AL  et al  Prevalence of peripheral arterial disease in subjects with moderate cardiovascular risk: Italian results from the PANDORA study Data from PANDORA (Prevalence of peripheral Arterial disease in subjects with moderate CVD risk, with No overt vascular Diseases nor Diabetes mellitus) BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2011 11 59 21981988 
12. Violi F  Davi G  Hiatt W  Lip GY  Corazza GR  Perticone F  et al  Prevalence of peripheral artery disease by abnormal ankle-brachial index in atrial fibrillation: implications for risk and therapy J Am Coll Cardiol 2013 62 2255 6 23954332 
13. Newman AB  Shemanski L  Manolio TA  Cushman M  Mittelmark M  Polak J  et al The Cardiovascular Health Study Group  Ankle-arm index as a predictor of cardiovascular disease and mortality in the Cardiovascular Health Study Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 1999 19 538 45 10073955 
14. Resnick HE  Lindsay RS  McDermott MM  Devereux RB  Jones KL  Fabsitz RR  et al  Relationship of high and low ankle brachial index to all-cause and cardiovascular disease mortality: the Strong Heart Study Circulation 2004 109 733 9 14970108 
15. Van der Meer IM  Bots ML  Hofman A  Sol AI  van der Kuip DA  Witteman JC   Predictive value of noninvasive measures of atherosclerosis for incident myocardial infarction: the Rotterdam Study Circulation 2004 109 1089 94 14993130 
16. Dormandy JA   Natural history of intermittent claudication Hospital Update 1991 4 314 18 
17. Ouriel K   Peripheral arterial disease Lancet 2001 358 1257 64 11675083 
18. Criqui MH   Peripheral arterial disease: epidemiological aspects Vasc Med 2001 6 S3 7 
19. McKenna M  Wolfson S  Kuller L   The ratio of ankle and arm arterial pressure as an indipendent predictor of mortality Atherosclerosis 1991 87 119 28 1854359 
20. Beckera F  Robert-Ebadia H  Riccob JB  Setaccic C  Cao P  de Donato G  et al  Chapter I: definitions, epidemiology, clinical presentation and prognosis Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2011 42 S4 12 
21. Street TK   What the primary care provider needs to know for limb salvage Methodist Debakey Cardiovasc J 2012 8 57 9 23342193 
22. O’Connell JB  Quiñones-Baldrich WJ   Proper evaluation and management of acute embolic versus thrombotic limb ischemia Semin Vasc Surg 2009 22 10 16 19298930 
23. Walker TG   Acute limb ischemia Tech Vasc Interv Radiol 2009 12 117 29 19853229 
24. Lawall H  Zemmrich C  Bramlage P  Amann B   Health related quality of life in patients with critical limb ischemia Vasa 2012 41 78 88 22403125 
25. Huppert P  Tacke J  Lawall H   Deutschen Gesellschaft für Angiologie/Gefässmedizin. [S3 guidelines for diagnostics and treatment of peripheral arterial occlusive disease] Radiologe 2010 50 7 15 [In German] 20084498 
26. Edwards JM  Coldwell DM  Goldman ML  Strandness DE Jr   The role of duplex scanning in the selection of patients for transluminal angioplasty J Vasc Surg 1991 13 69 74 1824789 
27. Van der Heijden FH  Legemate DA  van Leeuwen MS  Mali WP  Eikelboom BC   Value of duplex scanning in the selection of patients for percutaneous transluminal angioplasty Eur J Vasc Surg 1993  7 71 6 8454083 
28. Mattos MA  van Bemmelen PS  Hodgson KJ  Ramsey DE  Barkmeier LD  Sumner DS   Does correction of stenoses identified with color duplex scanning improve infrainguinal graft patency? J Vasc Surg 1993 17 54 64 8421342 
29. Bandyk DF  Schmitt DD  Seabrook GR  Adams MB  Towne JB   Monitoring functional patency of in situ saphenous vein bypasses: the impact of a surveillance protocol and elective revision J Vasc Surg 1989 9 286 96 2521907 
30. Mills JL  Harris EJ  Taylor LM Jr  Beckett WC  Porter JM   The importance of routine surveillance of distal bypass grafts with duplex scanning: a study of 379 reversed vein grafts J Vasc Surg 1990 12 379 86 2214034 
31. Laborde AL  Synn AY  Worsey MJ  Bower TR  Hoballah JJ  Sharp WJ  et al  A prospective comparison of ankle/brachial indices and color duplex imaging in surveillance of the in situ saphenous vein bypass J Cardiovasc Surg 1992 33 420 5 1527144 
32. Taylor PR  Tyrrell MR  Crofton M  Bassan B  Grigg M  Wolfe JH  et al  Colour flow imaging in the detection of femoro-distal graft and native artery stenosis: improved criteria Eur J Vasc Surg 1992 6 232 6 1592124 
33. Golledge J  Beattie DK  Greenhalgh RM  Davies AH   Have the results of infrainguinal bypass improved with the widespread utilisation of postoperative surveillance? Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 1996 11 388 92 8846169 
34. Gerhard-Herman M  Gardin JM  Jaff M  Mohler E  Roman M  Naqvi TZ   Guidelines for noninvasive vascular laboratory testing: a report from the American Society of Echocardiography and the Society for Vascular Medicine and Biology Vasc Med 2006 11 183 200 17288127 
35. Bandyk DF  Cato RF  Towne JB   A low flow velocity predicts failure of femoropopliteal and femorotibial bypass grafts Surgery 1985 98 799 809 3901378 
36. Collins R  Burch J  Cranny G  Aguiar-Ibanez R  Craig D  Wright K  et al  Duplex ultrasonography, magnetic resonance angiography, and computed tomography angiography for diagnosis and assessment of symptomatic, lower limb peripheral arterial disease: systematic review BMJ 2007 334 1257 17548364 
37. Collins R  Cranny G  Burch J  Aguiar-Ibanez R  Craig D  Wright K  et al  A systematic review of duplex ultrasound, magnetic resonance angiography and computed tomography angiography for the diagnosis and assessment of symptomatic, lower limb peripheral arterial disease Health Technol Assess 2007 11 1 184 
38. Visser K  Hunink MG   Peripheral arterial disease: gadolinium enhanced MR angiography versus color-guided duplex US –a meta-analysis Radiology 2000 216 67 77 10887229 
39. Blum A  Nahir M   Future non-invasive imaging to detect vascular plaque instability and subclinical non-obstructive atherosclerosis J Geriatr Cardiol 2013 10 178 85 23888178 
40. Yuan C  Beach KW  Smith LH  Hatsukami TS   Measurement of atherosclerotic carotid plaque size in vivo using high resolution magnetic resonance imaging Circulation 1998 98 2666 71 9851951 
41. Zhang S  Hatsukami TS  Polissar NL  Han C  Yuan C   Comparison of vessel wall area measurement differences among three black blood contrast weighting images Magn Reson Imaging 2001 19 795 892 11551719 
42. Hatsukami TS  Ross R  Polissar NL  Yuan C   Identification of fibrous cap thickness and cap rupture in human atherosclerotic carotid plaque in-vivo with high resolution magnetic resonance imaging Circulation 2000 102 959 64 10961958 
43. Mitsumori LM  Hatsukami TS  Ferguson MS  Kervin WS  Cai J  Yuan C   In vivo accuracy of multisequence MR imaging for identifying unstable fibrous caps in advanced human carotid plaques J Magn Reson Imaging 2003 17 410 20 12655579 
44. Yuan C  Zhang SX  Polissar NL  Echelard D  Ortiz G  Dawis JW  et al  Identification of fibrous cap rupture with magnetic resonance imaging is highly associated with recent TIA or stroke Circulation 2002 105 2051 6 
45. Yuan C  Mitsumori LM  Ferguson MS  Polissar NL  Echelard D  Ortiz G  et al  In vivo accuracy of multispectral magnetic resonance imaging for identifying lipid-rich necrotic cores and intraplaque hemorrhage in advanced human carotid plaques Circulation 2001 104 2051 6 11673345 
46. Yuan C  Kerwin WS  Ferguson MS  Polissar N  Zhang S  Cai J  et al  Contrast enhanced high resolution MRI for atherosclerotic carotid artery tissue characterization J Magn Reson Imaging 2002 15 62 7 11793458 
47. Wasserman BA  Smith WI  Trout HH  Cannon RO  Balaban RS  Arai AE   Carotid artery atherosclerosis: in vivo morphologic characterization with gadolinium-enhanced double-oblique MR imaging initial results Radiology 2002 223 566 73 11997569 
48. Fayad ZA  Fuster V  Fallon JT  Jayasundera T  Worthley SG  Helft G  et al  Noninvasive in vivo human coronary artery lumen and wall imaging using black-blood magnetic resonance imaging Circulation 2000 102 506 10 10920061 
49. Botnar RM  Stuber M  Kim WY  Danias PG  Manning WJ   Magnetic resonance coronary lumen and vessel wall imaging Rays 2001 26 291 303 12696283 
50. Lowery AJ  Hynes N  Manning BJ  Mahendran M  Tawfik S  Sultan S   A prospective feasibility study of duplex ultrasound arterial mapping, digital-subtraction angiography, and magnetic resonance angiography in management of critical lower limb ischemia by endovascular revascularization Ann Vasc Surg 2007 21 443 51 17628263 
51. Koelemay MJ  Lijmer JG  Stoker J  Legemate DA  Bossuyt PM   Magnetic resonance angiography for the evaluation of lower extremity arterial disease: a meta-analysis JAMA 2001 285 1338 45 11255390 
52. Nelemans PJ  Leiner T  de Vet HC  van Engelshoven JM   Peripheral arterial disease: meta-analysis of the diagnostic performance of MR angiography Radiology 2000 217 105 14 11012430 
53. Cao P  Ecksteinb HH  De Rangoc P  Setaccid C  Riccoe JB  de Donato G  et al  Chapter II: diagnostic methods Eur J Vascular Endovasc Surg 2011 42 S13 32 
54. Duran C  Bismuth J   Advanced imaging in limb salvage Methodist Debakey Cardiovasc J 2012 8 28 32 23342185 
55. Met R  Bipat S  Legemate DA  Reekers JA  Koelemay MJW   Diagnostic performance of computed tomography angiography in peripheral arterial disease: a systematic review and metaanalysis JAMA 2009 301 415 24 19176443 
56. Hessel SJ  Adams DF  Abrams HL   Complications of angiography Radiology 1981 138 273 81 7455105 
57. Di Minno MN  Guida A  Camera M  Colli S  Minno GD  Tremoli E   Overcoming limitations of current antiplatelet drugs: a concerted effort for more profitable strategies of intervention Ann Med 2011 43 531 44 21815879 
58. Davi G  Patrono C   Platelet activation and atherothrombosis N Engl J Med 2007 357 2482 94 18077812 
59. Baigent C  Blackwell L  Collins R  Emberson J  Godwin J  Peto R  et al Antithrombotic Trialists’ (ATT) Collaboration  Aspirin in the primary and secondary prevention of vascular disease: collaborative meta-analysis of individual participant data from randomised trials Lancet 2009 373 1849 60 19482214 
60. Jennings LK   Role of platelets in atherothrombosis Am J Cardiol 2009 103 (suppl) 4A 10A 
61. Di Minno G  Cerbone AM  Mattioli PL  Turco S  Iovine C  Mancini M   Functionally thrombasthenic state in normal platelets following the administration of ticlopidine J Clin Invest 1985 75 328 38 3156146 
62. Hass WK  Easton JD  Adams HP Jr  Pryse-Phillips W  Molony BA  Anderson S  et al  A randomized trial comparing ticlopidine hydrochloride with aspirin for the prevention of stroke in high-risk patients: Ticlopidine Aspirin Stroke Study Group N Engl J Med 1989 321 501 7 2761587 
63. Urban P  Macaya C  Rupprecht HJ  Kiemeneij F  Emanuelsson H  Fontanelli A  et al  Randomized evaluation of anticoagulation versus antiplatelet therapy after coronary stent implantation in high-risk patients: the Multicenter Aspirin and Ticlopidine Trial after Intracoronary Stenting (MATTIS) Circulation 1998 98 2126 32 9815866 
64. Storey RF  Husted S  Harrington RA  Heptinstall S  Wilcox RG  Peters G  et al  Inhibition of platelet aggregation by AZD6140, a reversible oral P2Y12 receptor antagonist, compared with clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes J Am Coll Cardiol 2007  50 1852 6 17980251 
65. Husted S  Emanuelsson H  Heptinstall S  Sandset PM  Wickens M  Peters G   Pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and safety of the oral reversible P2Y12 antagonist AZD6140 with aspirin in patients with atherosclerosis: a double-blind comparison to clopidogrel with aspirin Eur Heart J 2006 27 1038 7 16476694 
66. Tantry US  Bliden KP  Wei C  Storey RF  Armstrong M  Butler K  et al  First analysis of the relation between CYP2C19 genotype and pharmacodynamics in patients treated with ticagrelor versus clopidogrel: the ONSET/ OFFSET and RESPOND genotype studies Circ Cardiovasc Genet 2010 3 556 66 21079055 
67. Goto S   Cilostazol: potential mechanism of action for antithrombotic effects accompanied by a low rate of bleeding Atheroscler Suppl 2005 6 3 11 16275169 
68. Angiolillo DJ  Capranzano P  Goto S  Aslam M  Desai B  Charlton RK  et al  A randomized study assessing the impact of cilostazol on platelet function profiles in patients with diabetes mellitus and coronary artery disease on dual antiplatelet therapy: results of the OPTIMUS-2 study Eur Heart J 2008 29 2202 11 18567918 
69. Kamal AK  Naqvi I  Husain MR  Khealani BA   Cilostazol versus aspirin for secondary prevention of vascular events after stroke of arterial origin Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011 (1) D008076 
70. Raju NC  Sobieraj-Teague M  Hirsh J  O’Donnell M  Eikelboom J   Effect of aspirin mortality in primary prevention of cardiovascular disease Am J Med 2011 124 621 9 21592450 
71. Alonso-Coello P  Bellmunt S  McGorrian C  Anand SS  Guzman R  Criqui MH  et al  Antithrombotic therapy in peripheral artery disease: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevetion of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-based clinical practice Guidelines Chest 2012 141 (2 Suppl) e669S 90S 22315275 
72. Gandhi S  Weinberg I  Margey R  Jaff MR   Comprehensive medical management of peripheral arterial disease Prog Cardiovasc Dis 2011 54 2 13 21722781 
73. Hirsch AT  Haskal ZJ  Hertzer NR  Bakal CW  Creager MA  Halperin JL  et al  Practice guidelines for the management of patients with peripheral arterial disease (lower extremity, renal, mesenteric, and abdominal aortic): a collaborative report from the American Association for Vascular Surgery/Society for Vascular Surgery, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vascular Medicine and Biology, Society of Interventional Radiology, and the ACC/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Peripheral Arterial Disease): endorsed by the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; Society for Vascular Nursing; TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus; and Vascular Disease Foundation Circulation 2006 113 e463 e654 16549646 
74. Girolami B  Bernardi E  Prins MH  Ten Cate JW  Hettiarachchi R  Prandoni P  et al  Treatment of intermittent claudication with physical training, smoking cessation, pentoxifylline, or nafronyl: a meta- analysis Arch Intern Med 1999 159 337 45 10030306 
75. Anderson JL  Halperin JL  Albert NM  Bozkurt B  Brindis RG  Curtis LH  et al  Management of patients with peripheral artery disease (compilation of 2005 and 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline recommendations): a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines J Am Coll Cardiol 2013 61 1555 70 23473760 
76. Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group Randomized trial of the effects of cholesterol-lowering with simvastatin on peripheral vascular and other major vascular outcomes in 20,536 people with peripheral arterial disease and other high-risk conditions J Vasc Surg 2007 45 645 54 17398372 
77. McDermott MM  Guralnik JM  Greenland P  Pearce WH  Criqui MH  Liu K  et al  Statin use and leg functioning in patients with and without lower-extremity peripheral arterial disease Circulation 2003 107 757 61 12578881 
78. Mohler ER 3rd  Hiatt WR  Creager MA   Cholesterol reduction with atorvastatin improves walking distance in patients with peripheral arterial disease Circulation 2003 108 1481 6 12952839 
79. Pedersen TR  Kjekshus J  Pyorala K  Olsson AG  Cook TJ  Musliner TA  et al  Effect of simvastatin on ischemic signs and symptoms in the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S) Am J Cardiol 1998 81 333 5 9468077 
80. Beckman JA  Creager MA   The non-lipid effects of statins on endothelial function Trends Cardiovasc Med 2006 16 156 62 16781949 
81. Grundy SM  Cleeman JI  Merz CN  Brewer HB Jr  Clark LT  Hunninghake DB  et al  Implications of recent clinical trials for the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III guidelines Circulation 2004 110 227 39 15249516 
82. Mancia G  De Backer G  Dominiczak A  Cifkova R  Fagard R  Germano G  et al  2007 Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: The Task Force for the Management of Arterial Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Eur Heart J 2007 28 1462 536 17562668 
83. Yusuf S  Sleight P  Pogue J  Bosch J  Davies R  Dagenais G   Effects of an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular events in high-risk patients The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators. N Engl J Med 2000 342 145 53 
84. Adler AI  Stratton IM  Neil HA  Yudkin JS  Matthews DR  Cull CA  et al  Association of systolic blood pressure with macrovascular and microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 36): prospective observational study BMJ 2000 321 412 19 10938049 
85. Intensive blood glucose control with sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment and risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33) UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group Lancet 1998 352 837 53 9742976 
86. ADVANCE Collaborative Group Patel A  MacMahon S  Chalmers J  Neal B  Billot L  Woodward M  et al  Intensive blood glucose control and vascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes N Engl J Med 2008 358 2560 72 18539916 
87. Duckworth W  Abraira C  Moritz T  Reda D  Emanuele N  Reaven PD  et al  Glucose control and vascular complications in veterans with type 2 diabetes N Engl J Med 2009 360 129 39 19092145 
88. Nathan DM  Cleary PA  Backlund JY  Genuth SM  Lachin JM  Orchard TJ  et al  Intensive diabetes treatment and cardiovascular disease in patients with type 1 diabetes N Engl J Med 2005 353 2643 53 16371630 
89. Carter RE  Lackland DT  Cleary PA  Yim E  Lopes-Virella MF  Gilbert GE  et al  Intensive treatment of diabetes is associated with a reduced rate of peripheral arterial calcification in the diabetes control and complications trial Diabetes Care 2007 30 2646 8 17623823 
90. De Rubertis BG  Pierce M  Ryer EJ  Trocciola S  Kent KC  Faries PL   Reduced primary patency rate in diabetic patients after percutaneous intervention results from more frequent presentation with limb-threatening ischemia J Vasc Surg 2008 47 101 8 18178459 
91. American Diabetes Association Standards of medical care in diabetes— 2010 Diabetes Care 33 S11 61 20042772 
92. CAPRIE Steering Committee A randomized, blinded trial of clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients at risk of ischaemic events (CAPRIE) Lancet 1996 348 1329 39 8918275 
93. Peters RJ  Mehta SR  Fox KA  Zhao F  Lewis BS  Kopecky SL  et al  Effects of aspirin dose when used alone or in combination with clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes: observations from the Clopidogrel in Unstable angina to prevent Recurrent Events (CURE) study Circulation 2003 108 1682 7 14504182 
94. Aronow HD  Steinhubl SR  Brennan DM  Berger PB  Topol EJ  CREDO Investigators  Bleeding risk associated with 1 year of dual antiplatelet therapy after percutaneous coronary intervention: insights from the Clopidogrel for the Reduction of Events During Observation (CREDO) trial Am Heart J 2009 157 369 74 19185647 
95. Sudlow CL  Mason G  Maurice JB  Wedderburn CJ  Hankey GJ   Thienopyridine derivatives versus aspirin for preventing stroke and other serious vascular events in high vascular risk patients Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009 (4) D001246 
96. Bhatt DL  Fox KA  Hacke W  Berger PB  Black HR  Boden WE  et al  Clopidogrel and aspirin versus aspirin alone for the prevention of atherothrombotic events N Engl J Med 2006 354 1706 17 16531616 
97. Keller TT  Squizzato A  Middeldorp S   Clopidogrel plus aspirin versus aspirin alone for preventing cardiovascular disease Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007 (3) D005158 
98. Robless P  Mikhailidis DP  Stansby GP   Cilostazol for peripheral arterial disease Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008 (1) CD003748 18254032 
99. Squires H  Simpson E  Meng Y  Harnan S  Stevens J  Wong R   Cilostazol, naftidrofuryl oxalate, pentoxifylline, and inositol nicotinate for intermittent claudication in people with peripheral arterial disease London, UK National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence 2011 1 252 
100. Dawson DL  Cutler BS  Hiatt WR  Hobson RW 2nd  Martin JD  Bortey EB  et al  A comparison of cilostazol and pentoxifylline for treating intermittent claudication Am J Med 2000 109 523 30 11063952 
101. Pratt CM   Analysis of the cilostazol safety database Am J Cardiol 2001 87 28D 33D 11137829 
102. Tamhane U  Meier P  Chetcuti S  Chen KY  Rha SW  Grossman MP  et al  Efficacy of cilostazol in reducing restenosis in patients undergoing contemporary stent based PCI: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials EuroIntervention 2009 5 384 93 19736165 
103. Creutzig A  Lehmacher W  Elze M   Meta-analysis of randomised controlled prostaglandin E1 studies in peripheral arterial occlusive disease stages III and IV Vasa 2004 33 137 44 15461065 
104. Prostanoids for chronic critical leg ischemia: a randomized, controlled, open-label trial with prostaglandin E1. The ICAI Study Group Ann Intern Med 1999 130 412 21 10068415 
105. Ruffolo AJ  Romano M  Ciapponi A   Prostanoids for critical limb ischaemia Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010 (1) D006544 
106. Berridge DC  Kessel D  Robertson I   Surgery versus thrombolysis for acute limb ischaemia: initial management Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002 (3) D002784 
107. Results of a prospective randomized trial evaluating surgery versus thrombolysis for ischemia of the lower extremity The STILE trial Ann Surg 1994 220 251 66 discussion 266–8 8092895 
108. Robertson I  Kessel DO  Berridge DC   Fibrinolytic agents for peripheral arterial occlusion Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010 (3) D001099 
109. Balzer KM  Weis-Müller BT   Results of open vascular surgical therapy in chronic peripheral arterial disease Vasa 2011 40 359 67 21948778 
110. Dattiloa PB  Casserly IP   Critical limb ischemia: endovascular strategies for limb salvage Prog Cardiovasc Dis 2011 54 47 60 21722787 
111. Safian RD  Niazi K  Runyon JP  Dulas D  Weinstock B  Ramaiah V  et al  Orbital atherectomy for infrapopliteal disease: device concept and outcome data for the oasis trial Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 2009 73 406 12 19213094 
112. Adam DJ  Beard JD  Cleveland T  Bell J  Bradbury AW  Forbes JF  et al  Bypass versus angioplasty in severe ischaemia of the leg (basil): multicentre, randomized controlled trial Lancet 2005 366 1925 34 16325694 
113. Romiti M  Albers M  Brochado-Neto FC  Durazzo AE  Pereira CA  De Luccia N   Meta-analysis of infrapopliteal angioplasty for chronic critical limb ischemia J Vasc Surg 2008 47 975 81 18372148 
114. De Vries JP  Karimi A  Fioole B  Van Leersum M  Werson DA  Van Den Heuvel DA   First- and second-generation drug-eluting balloons for femoro-popliteal arterial obstructions: update of technique and results J Cardiovasc Surg 2013 54 327 32 23640355 
115. Seedial SM  Ghosh S  Saunders RS  Suwanabol PA  Shi X  Liu B  et al  Local drug delivery to prevent restenosis J Vasc Surg 2013  57 1403 14 23601595 
116. Minar E   Femoral stenting: what do the guidelines tell us J Cardiovasc Surg 2013 54 211 15 23558656 
117. Commeau P  Barragan P  Roquebert PO   Sirolimus for below the knee lesions: mid-term results of SiroBTK study Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 2006 68 793 8 17039538 
118. Feiring AJ  Krahn M  Nelson L  Wesolowski A  Eastwood D  Szabo A   Preventing leg amputations in critical limb ischemia with below- the-knee drug-eluting stents: the paradise (preventing amputations using drug eluting stents) trial J Am Coll Cardiol 2010 55 1580 9 20378075 
119. Martens JM  Knippenberg B  Vos JA  de Vries JP  Hansen BE  van Overhagen H  PADI Trial Group  Update on PADI trial: percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and drug-eluting stents for infrapopliteal lesions in critical limb ischemia J Vasc Surg 2009 50 687 9 19700099 
120. Kasapis C  Henke PK  Chetcuti SJ  Koenig GC  Rectenwald JE  Krishnamurthy VN  et al  Routine stent implantation vs. percutaneous transluminal angioplasty in femoropopliteal artery disease: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials Eur Heart J 2009 30 44 55 19028778 
121. Dake MD  Ansel GM  Jaff MR  Ohki T  Saxon RR  Smouse HB  et al Zilver PTX trial Investigators  Sustained safety and effectiveness of paclitaxel-eluting stents for femoropopliteal lesions: 2-year follow-up from the Zilver PTX randomized and single-arm clinical studies J Am Coll Cardiol 2013 61 2417 27 23583245 
122. Balzer KM  Sandmann W   Das biologische Verhalten von Homograft s zum arteriellen Gefäßersatz Gefässchirurgie 2010 15 101 7 
123. Clagett GP  Valentine RJ  Hagino RT   Autogenous aortoiliac/femoral reconstruction from superficial femoral-popliteal veins: feasibility and durability J Vasc Surg 1997 25 255 70 9052560 
124. Chiu KWH  Davies RSM  Nightingale PG  Bradbury AW  Adam DJ   Review of direct anatomical open surgical management of atherosclerotic aorto-iliac occlusive disease Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2010  39 460 71 20303805 
125. Kashyap VS  Pavkov ML  Bena JF  Sarac TP  O‘Hara PJ  Lyden SP  et al  The management of severe aortoiliac occlusive disease: endovascular therapy rivals open reconstruction J Vasc Surg 2008 48 1451 7 18804943 
126. Schwarzwälder U  Zeller T   Debulking procedures: potential device specific indications Tech Vasc Interv Radiol 2010 13 43 53 20123432 
127. Dörffler-Melly J  Koopman MM  Prins MH  Büller HR   Antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs for prevention of restenosis/reocclusion following peripheral endovascular treatment Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005 (1) D002071 
128. Schweizer J  Müller A  Forkmann L  Hellner G  Kirch W   Potential use of a low-molecular-weight heparin to prevent restenosis in patients with extensive wall damage following peripheral angioplasty Angiology 2001 52 659 69 11666130 
129. Brown J  Lethaby A  Maxwell H  Wawrzyniak AJ  Prins MH   Antiplatelet agents for preventing thrombosis after peripheral arterial bypass surgery Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008 (4) D000535 
130. Belch JJ  Dormandy J  CASPAR Writing Committee Biasi GM  Cairols M  Diehm C  et al  Results of the randomized, placebo-controlled clopidogrel and acetylsalicylic acid in bypass surgery for peripheral arterial disease (CASPAR) trial J Vasc Surg 2010 52 825 33 20678878 
131. Efficacy of oral anticoagulants compared with aspirin after infrainguinal bypass surgery (The Dutch Bypass Oral Anticoagulants or Aspirin Study): a randomised trial Lancet 2000 355 346 51 10665553 
132. Vandvik PO  Lincoff AM  Gore JM  Gutterman DD  Sonnenberg FA  Alonso-Coello P  et al  Primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines Chest 2011 141 e637S 68S 22315274 
133. Sofi F  Marcucci R  Gori AM  Giusti B  Abbate R  Gensini GF   Clopidogrel non-responsiveness and risk of cardiovascular morbidity An updated meta-analysis. Thromb Haemost 2010 103 841 8 
134. Di Minno G   Aspirin resistance and platelet turnover: a 25-year old issue Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2011 21 542 5 21745731 
135. Simon T  Verstuyft C  Mary-Krause M  Quteineh L  Drouet E  Méneveau N  et al  Genetic determinants of response to clopidogrel and cardiovascular events N Engl J Med 2009 360 363 75 19106083 
136. Wallentin L  Becker RC  Budaj A  Cannon CP  Emanuelsson H  Held C  et al  Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes N Engl J Med 2009 361 1045 57 19717846 
137. Di Minno G  Russolillo A  Gambacorta C  Di Minno A  Prisco D   Improving the use of direct oral anticoagulants in atrial fibrillation Eur J Intern Med 2013 24 288 94 23579170 
138. De Caterina R  Husted S  Wallentin L  Andreotti F  Arnesen H  Bachmann F  et al  New oral anticoagulants in atrial fibrillation and acute coronary syndromes: ESC Working Group on Thrombosis-Task Force on Anticoagulants in Heart Disease position paper J Am Coll Cardiol 2012 59 1413 25 22497820 
139. Southworth MR  Reichman ME  Unger EF   Dabigatran and postmarketing reports of bleeding New Engl J Med 2013 368 1272 4 23484796 
140. Knowles JW  Assimes TL  Li J  Quertermous T  Cooke JP   Genetic susceptibility to peripheral arterial disease: a dark corner in vascular biology Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2007 27 2068 78 17656669 
141. Katwal AB  Dokun AO   Peripheral arterial disease in diabetes: is there a role for genetics? Curr Diab Rep 2011 11 218 25 21424681 
142. Zintzaras E  Zdoukopoulos N   A field synopsis and meta-analysis of genetic association studies in peripheral arterial disease: the CUMAGAS-PAD database Am J Epidemiol 2009 170 1 11 19435865 
143. Leeper NJ  Kullo IJ  Cooke JP   Genetics of peripheral artery disease Circulation 2012 125 3220 8 22733336 
144. Violi F  Lip GYH  Basili S   Peripheral artery disease and atrial fibrillation: a potentially dangerous combination Intern Emerg Med 2012 7 213 18 21667071 
145. Garimella PS  Hart PD  O’Hare A  DeLoach S  Herzog CA  Hirsch AT   Peripheral artery disease and CKD: a focus on peripheral artery disease as a critical component of CKD care Am J Kidney Dis 2012  60 641 54 22560831 
146. O’Hare A  Johansen K   Lower-extremity peripheral arterial disease among patients with end-stage renal disease J Am Soc Nephrol 2001 12 2838 47 11729255 
147. Violi F  Criqui M  Longoni A  Castiglioni C   Relation between risk factors and cardiovascular complications in patients with peripheral vascular disease Results from the A.D.E.P. study. Atherosclerosis 1996 120 25 35 
148. Sarnak M  Levey AS  Schoolwerth AC  Coresh J  Culleton B  Hamm LL  et al  Kidney disease as a risk factor for development of cardiovascular disease: a statement from the American Heart Association Councils on Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease, High Blood Pressure Research, Clinical Cardiology, and Epidemiology and Prevention Circulation 2003 108 2154 69 14581387 
149. Marso SP  Hiatt WR   Peripheral arterial disease in patients with diabetes J Am Coll Cardiol 2006 47 921 9 16516072 
150. Selvin E  Erlinger TP   Prevalence of and risk factors for peripheral arterial disease in the United States: results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999- 2000 Circulation 110 738 43 15262830 
151. Kannel WB  McGee DL   Update on some epidemiologic features of intermittent claudication: the Framingham Study J Am Geriatr Soc 1985 33 13 18 3965550 
152. Mackaay AJ  Beks PJ  Dur AH  Bischoff M  Scholma J  Heine RJ  et al  The distribution of peripheral vascular disease in a Dutch Caucasian population: comparison of type II diabetic and non-diabetic subjects Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 1995 9 170 5 7627650 
153. Dosluoglu HH  Lall P  Nader ND  Harris LM  Dryjski ML   Insulin use is associated with poor limb salvage and survival in diabetic patients with chronic limb ischemia J Vasc Surg 2010 51 1178 89 20304581 
154. Jude EB  Oyibo SO  Chalmers N  Boulton AJ   Peripheral arterial disease in diabetic and nondiabetic patients: a comparison of severity and outcome Diabetes Care 2001 24 1433 7 11473082 
155. Bild DE  Selby JV  Sinnock P  Browner WS  Braveman P  Showstack JA   Lower-extremity amputation in people with diabetes Epidemiology and prevention. Diabetes Care 1989 12 24 31 
156. Wattanakit K  Folsom AR  Selvin E  Weatherley BD  Pankow JS  Brancati FL  et al  Risk factors for peripheral arterial disease incidence in persons with diabetes: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study Atherosclerosis 2006 180 389 97 15910867 
157. Ankle Brachial Index Collaboration Fowkes FG  Murray GD  Butcher I  Heald CL  Lee RJ  Chambless LE  et al  Ankle brachial index combined with Framingham Risk Score to predict cardiovascular events and mortality: a meta-analysis JAMA 2008 300 197 208 18612117 
158. Bertelè V  Roncaglioni MC  Pangrazzi J  Terzian E  Tognoni EG   Clinical outcome and its predictors in 1560 patients with critical leg ischaemia Chronic Critical Leg Ischaemia Group. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 1999 401 10 
159. Berger JS  Hiatt WR   Medical therapy in peripheral artery disease Circulation 2012 126 491 500 22825411 
160. Davies MG   Critical limb ischemia: cell and molecular therapies for limb salvage Methodist Debakey Cardiovasc J 2012 8 20 7 23342184 
161. Rioufol G  Finet G  Ginon I  André-Fouët X  Rossi R  Vialle E  et al  Multiple atherosclerotic plaque rupture in acute coronary syndrome: a three-vessel intravascular ultrasound study Circulation 2002 106 804 8 12176951
