
==== Front
ACS CatalACS CatalcsaccacsACS Catalysis2155-5435American Chemical Society 10.1021/acscatal.8b00288ReviewSupramolecular Approaches To Control Activity and
Selectivity in Hydroformylation Catalysis Nurttila Sandra
S. Linnebank Pim R. Krachko Tetiana Reek Joost N. H. *Van ’t Hoff Institute
for Molecular Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, Amsterdam 1098 XH, The Netherlands* E-mail: j.n.h.reek@uva.nl.09 03 2018 06 04 2018 8 4 3469 3488 23 01 2018 02 03 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

The
hydroformylation reaction is one of the most intensively explored
reactions in the field of homogeneous transition metal catalysis,
and many industrial applications are known. However, this atom economical
reaction has not been used to its full potential, as many selectivity
issues have not been solved. Traditionally, the selectivity is controlled
by the ligand that is coordinated to the active metal center. Recently,
supramolecular strategies have been demonstrated to provide powerful
complementary tools to control activity and selectivity in hydroformylation
reactions. In this review, we will highlight these supramolecular
strategies. We have organized this paper in sections in which we describe
the use of supramolecular bidentate ligands, substrate preorganization
by interactions between the substrate and functional groups of the
ligands, and hydroformylation catalysis in molecular cages.

hydroformylationsupramolecular chemistryhomogeneous catalysisrhodiumphosphorus
ligandsselectivitydocument-id-old-9cs8b00288document-id-new-14cs-2018-00288mccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The
hydroformylation reaction is the formal addition of a formyl
group to an alkene functional group, which in practice involves a
metal-catalyzed addition of CO and H2 to the alkene. The
reaction was serendipitously found by Roelen during work on a Fischer–Tropsch
process in 1938.1 In the 20 years after
this discovery, the hydroformylation reaction did not receive much
attention, which changed in the mid-1950s. In the 60 years that followed,
the hydroformylation reaction was subject to intensive investigations,
leading to many industrial applications. The first catalyst was a
cobalt complex, and as a consequence, the first bulk processes also
applied cobalt complexes. Later it was found that rhodium forms far
more active catalysts for this reaction, and as such, the next generation
of industrial processes applied rhodium catalysts, despite the fact
that rhodium is more expensive. Other metals that can catalyze this
reaction include palladium, platinum, ruthenium, and iridium, but
no commercial applications based on these metals are known. So far,
rhodium complexes remain a favorite because of their superior activity,
allowing processes at lower temperatures and pressures, and the ability
to control the selectivity of the reaction to a large extent by ligand
variation. In volume, hydroformylation is still the largest industrial
process in homogeneous catalysis, and several large companies have
plants, including SHELL, BASF, Eastman, BP, DOW, and Evonik. The aldehyde
products generally also have a characteristic smell, and as such,
the hydroformylation reaction is also popular in the fragrance industry.
Asymmetric hydroformylation leads to chiral compounds with an interesting
aldehyde function that can be used for further functionalization,
and as such, it is also a potentially interesting reaction for the
fine chemical and pharmaceutical industry; however, it is so far a
bit underexplored. The application of hydroformylation has recently
been summarized by Börner in a review on applied hydroformylation2 and a beautiful review on hydroformylation of
the flavor, fragrance, and food industry.3

The hydroformylation reaction is also an important reaction
for
educational purposes, not only because it has a rich history and plethora
of applications but also because it is well understood despite its
complexity.4 Next to the aldehyde products
that are generally desired, there are several byproducts that can
form (Scheme 1). Under
hydroformylation reaction conditions, hydrogen is always present,
and as such, both the substrate and the products can be hydrogenated,
leading to alkanes and alcohols. In fact, alkene hydrogenation is
thermodynamically more favorable, and therefore, the reaction should
proceed under kinetic control. Next to this, the substrate can also
isomerize under catalytic conditions, leading to a mixture of terminal
and internal alkenes, which in turn can be hydroformylated. This isomerization
can also be used as an advantage in cases in which isomerization–hydroformylation
tandem reactions lead directly to the desired product, for example,
the production of linear aldehydes from internal alkenes.5 All these side reactions depend on the catalyst
properties and the conditions that are applied and can be qualitatively
understood.

Scheme 1 General Reaction Scheme of the Hydroformylation Reaction,
Converting
Alkenes into Aldehydes, and Potential Side Products
The mechanism originally proposed by Heck and
Breslow6 is generally still valid, although
more detailed
insight has been obtained ever since.7 The
general mechanism, displayed in Scheme 2, starts with rhodium(I)hydrido complex 1, and for this example, we use the bisphosphine biscarbonyl analogue.
After decoordination of a CO ligand to create a vacant site, the alkene
can coordinate to give common intermediate 3. In the
next step, migration of the hydride to the carbon atom leads to the
rhodium alkyl species. Depending on the orientation of the alkene,
the migration is to either C2 or C1, leading to the linear (4) or the branched alkyl species (8), respectively.
These two enter separate but identical catalytic cycles. After CO
coordination and subsequent migration of the alkyl group to the CO,
the rhodium acyl species (6 and 10) are
formed. These four-coordinate species can directly coordinate CO to
form 7 or 11 or directly react with molecular
hydrogen to give the product and intermediate 2. Species 1, 7, and 11 are most often drawn
as a part of the catalytic cycle, but recently, Landis showed that
part of the reaction can go directly from acyl intermediate 6 to 2 without forming 7.8 As such, it is more accurate to draw these intermediates
as off-cycle species. It is important to realize that all the steps
except for the final hydrogenolysis are equilibria. As a consequence,
the regio- and enantioselectivity could be determined by the hydride
migration step from intermediate 3, but under certain
conditions, it could also be that intermediates 6 and 10 are in fast equilibrium and the relative rate of the final
hydrogenolysis of these species is determining the selectivity.

Scheme 2 Mechanism of Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation
The reversibility of the hydride migration is
the basis for the
isomerization reaction, which can result in the formation of unwanted
side products. For some applications, for example, when a mixture
of alkenes is offered as the feed, an isomerization–hydroformylation
sequence is required.5

Over the years,
many different ligands have been explored for rhodium-catalyzed
hydroformylation, of which some are displayed in Figure 1. Triphenylphosphine (TPP)
has without a doubt been studied the most, as it is a cheap and readily
available ligand, and several large-scale processes started in the
1970s using TPP. Also, water-soluble analogues have been developed,
including monosulfonated TPP (TPPMS), and these have been used for
aqueous phase hydroformylation. For these types of phosphine ligands,
the rate-limiting step is early in the catalytic cycle (1–4), often termed type I kinetics,4a and
the use of more electron-donating ligands such as alkyl phosphines
results in very low activity. The use of more electron poor (or π-accepting)
ligands such as phosphites results in much higher activities as CO
dissociation is generally fast. As a consequence, the rate-determining
step can be later in the cycle, typically the hydrogenolysis step,
in which case one generally refers to type II kinetics.4a As the CO ligands are much more weakly coordinated
on these electron poor complexes, the hydride migration reaction becomes
more reversible, resulting in the formation of more isomerization
side products. If the phosphite ligands are very bulky, there is only
space for one ligand to coordinate to rhodium, and this leads to the
most active catalysts.9

Figure 1 Some typical ligands
that have been used in the rhodium-catalyzed
hydroformylation.

A lot of attention has
been devoted to control the regioselectivity
of the reaction, with the main target being the linear aldehyde. It
was found that the use of a large excess of TPP can already provide
reasonably high selectivity for the linear product, albeit at the
expense of the activity of the catalyst.7b Many bidentate ligands have been explored, and it was found that
ligands with a large bite angle, i.e., P–Rh–P angle
around 110–120°, give rhodium complexes that produce the
linear aldehyde in very high selectivity.10 BISBI and Xantphos are the most illustrative examples of such ligands
(Figure 1). Catalysts
that give very high selectivity for the branched aldehyde for aliphatic
alkenes have not yet been found. For substrates such as styrene and
vinyl acetate, the formation of a stabilizing allyl intermediate directs
the hydroformylation toward the branched product.2

The field of enantioselective hydroformylation is
far from mature,
which is strange if one considers the potential impact for the fine
chemical and pharmaceutical industry. The main reason must be the
challenges associated with asymmetric hydroformylation processes.
Whereas many asymmetric hydrogenation processes were reported between
the 1970s and 1990s, the contributions in that period to asymmetric
hydroformylation reported modest to good enantiomeric excess (ee)
at best. This changed with the seminal work of Nozaki11 and later Landis,12 who reported
BINAPHOS and diazaphospholanes, respectively, as novel bidentate ligands
that gave high enantioselectivity in asymmetric hydroformylation.
Substrates that have been mostly studied are those that typically
give high branched selectivity, such as styrene derivatives and vinyl
acetate. More recently, BOBphos was reported as a bidentate ligand
that also gave relatively high branched selectivity and enantioselectivity
in the hydroformylation of unfunctionalized 1-alkenes (Figure 2).13

Figure 2 Some
typical ligands that have successfully been used in asymmetric
hydroformylation, typically of styrene derivatives.

It is clear that the hydroformylation reaction
is a very powerful
transformation for both the bulk, the fragrance, fine chemical, and
pharmaceutical industry. Although many selectivity and activity issues
have been solved, there are still many challenges left that would,
when solved, really expand the scope of possibilities of this reaction.
These challenges mainly involve selectivity issues, including the
branched selective hydroformylation, the selective hydroformylation
of internal alkenes, and the selective hydroformylation of tri- and
tetrasubstituted alkenes. Also, the asymmetric hydroformylation of
terminal disubstituted alkenes is a largely unsolved issue. In this
light, the development of novel concepts to control selectivity in
hydroformylation catalysis is of utmost importance. In this review,
we will elaborate on the use of novel supramolecular strategies in
hydroformylation. In the first part, we will discuss the use of supramolecular
bidentate ligands in hydroformylation; then we highlight the supramolecular
substrate orientation strategy, and we end with hydroformylation catalysis
in cages.

2 Supramolecular Bidentate Ligands in Hydroformylation
Supramolecular bidentate ligands make up a recently introduced
class of ligands that has the advantage of the synthetic accessibility
of monodentate ligands but behaves as chelating bidentate. In such
a supramolecular approach, two monodentate ligand building blocks
are brought together by a self-assembly process using noncovalent
interactions such as hydrogen bonds, ionic interactions, or dynamic
metal–ligand coordination. As the number of supramolecular
bidentate ligands that become accessible grows exponentially with
the number of ligand building blocks available, this approach is well
suited to the generation of large libraries of ligands. In addition,
supramolecular bidentate ligands show clear chelating behavior. The
application of such supramolecular ligands in catalysis has been a
subject of earlier reviews.14 Two strategies
to arrive at self-assembled ligands that have been successfully employed
for hydroformylation are (I) metal-templated assembly and (II) direct
interaction between functionalized ligand building blocks (Figure 3), and these will
be discussed in this section.

Figure 3 Schematic representation of supramolecular bidentates
formed via
a template (I) or via direct interactions between functionalized ligand
building blocks (II). M = metal center. FG = functional group. Do
= donor center.

Metal-Templated Assembly
(I)
This strategy consists
of the construction of chelating bidentate ligands using a template
that contains binding sites for the selective assembly of two monodentate
ligands (Figure 3,
I). The first example of this strategy was based on the use of a bis-zinc(II)-porphyrin
template (Scheme 3).15 The assembly process is based on selective coordination
of the nitrogen-donor atoms of pyridylphosphorus building blocks a–c to the zinc atoms of the porphyrin template 13. The composition of the supramolecular ligand 13(a)2 in solution is confirmed by various
spectroscopic techniques. In the presence of Rh(acac)(CO)2, high-pressure nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy under
20 bar of syngas reveals the formation of [HRh(13(a)2(CO)2)], the active species for hydroformylation
catalysis (Scheme 3, bottom).

Scheme 3 Bis-Zinc(II) and Bis-Tin(IV) Porphyrin Templates (top)
and Phosphorus
Monodentate Ligands (middle) Used for Supramolecular Assemblies
Synthesis of the rhodium hydroformylation
catalyst based on the self-assembly of template 13 and
ligand a.

The assemblies 12(a), 13(a)2, 12(b), and 13(b)2 are evaluated as catalysts
in the rhodium-catalyzed hydroformylation of 1-octene. Although the
chelating bidentate assemblies 13(a)2 and 13(b)2 exhibit activity
that is lower than that of the corresponding monodentate analogues,
they display slightly higher selectivity for the linear aldehyde [77:23
(13(a)2) vs 74:26 (12(a)) and 96:4 (13(b)2) vs 83:17 (12(b)) at 25 °C]. The
chiral supramolecular catalysts containing 13(b)2 and 13(c)2 are
also applied in the asymmetric rhodium-catalyzed hydroformylation
of styrene, showing enantioselectivity (33%) that is higher than that
of monodentate analogues (∼7%) and an increase in activity.15,16

After the initial results based on zinc(II), also bis-tin(IV)
porphyrin-templated
assemblies have been studied. The tin–oxygen interaction (Scheme 3) is stronger and
gives rise to less dynamic bonds. The mixture of bis-tin(IV) porphyrin
template 15 and carboxylic phosphorus ligands d–f results in novel supramolecular assemblies upon loss of water. The
assemblies are active in the rhodium-catalyzed hydroformylation of
1-octene. While the rhodium complexes in which carboxylate-phosphines
are coordinated to dihydroxotin(IV) porphyrin 15 lead
to enhanced catalytic activity (≤40-fold) compared to that
of complexes of 14 with d–f, the
assemblies based on bis-zinc porphyrin templates are still more active
in hydroformylation catalysis.16

The rigid bis-zinc(II) salphen building block has also been explored
as a template for the assembly of ligands. The coordination of two
identical monodentate pyridylphosphorus ligands on the zinc(II) salphen
results in self-assembled bidentate ligands that in the rhodium-catalyzed
hydroformylation of styrene and 1-octene outperform their nontemplated
analogues. However, in comparison with those of the bis-zinc(II) porphyrin
template, the regio- and enantioselectivities are not improved by
using the more rigid template.17 Interestingly,
the coordination of two different monodentate pyridylphosphorus ligands
on the bis-zinc(II) salphen template provides an efficient supramolecular
approach to form heterobidentate ligands (e.g., Figure 4). Remarkably, templated heterobidentate
ligands are selectively formed, which is attributed to steric effects;
two bulky ligands just do not fit on the rigid template. In the asymmetric
hydroformylation of styrene, these supramolecular heterobidentate
ligands are characterized by higher enantioselectivities (≤72%
ee) compared to those of the nontemplated mixed ligand combinations
(≤13% ee).18 The bis-zinc(II) salphen
template has been also utilized in combination with a chiral 3-pyridyl-substituted
monodentate phosphoramidite to prepare a supramolecular “box” 78,19 which will be discussed in
more detail in section 4.

Figure 4 Bis-zinc(II) salphen templated heterobidentate complex 16.

The self-assembly of bidentate
ligands can be extended to multicomponent
structures. Employing an N-donor ditopic ligand, such as 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octate
(DABCO), in combination with tris(zinc(II) porphyrin)phosphite 17 leads to a five-component self-assembled bidentate ligand
(Scheme 4). The bidentate
ligand system is assembled by three bridging ditopically coordinated
DABCO molecules, if precisely 1.5 equiv of DABCO is used, and in the
presence of Rh(I), the chelating rhodium complex 18 is
formed. Complex 18 displays high selectivity in the rhodium-catalyzed
hydroformylation of 1-octene for the linear aldehyde (96:4) and a
reduced activity in comparison to that of the rhodium catalyst based
on monomeric ligand 17. This demonstrates that the multicomponent
self-assembled ligand shows bidentate coordination behavior under
catalytic conditions. Importantly, in the presence of a small excess
of DABCO, the selectivity drops, suggesting that all ditopic ligands
must be present to achieve sufficient stability to induce the high
selectivity.20

Scheme 4 Synthesis of a Multicomponent
Assembly from Ligand 17 and DABCO (as templates) and
the Rhodium(I) Complex
Self-Assembly of Functionalized Ligand Building Blocks To Form
Bidentate Ligands (II)
In the previous part,
we showed that one can form bidentate ligands by preorganization of
ligand building blocks on a template, and in this part, we discuss
the examples in which two functionalized ligand building blocks self-assemble
to form a bidentate ligand (Figure 3). The assembly process can be based on selective metal–ligand
interactions or hydrogen bonding.

Reek and co-workers explored
the construction of bidentate ligands using coordination of axial
nitrogen to zinc(II) porphyrins. A set of six phosphite-functionalized
porphyrins (19–24) and eight monodentate phosphorus-donor
ligands (a–h) equipped with N-donor functions
generates a library of 48 chelating bidentates, coined SUPRAPhos (Figure 5).21 This library of bidentate ligand assemblies is evaluated
in the rhodium-catalyzed hydroformylation of styrene. An increase
in selectivity for the branched product (b:l of 10.4 for 19a and 9.3 for 20a) and a decrease in activity compared
to those of monodentate phosphorus ligands 19 and 20 are observed when bidentate 19a and 20a are used, which is in agreement with the formation of
chelating bidentate ligand assemblies.22

Figure 5 Building
blocks used to generate bidentate SUPRAPhos ligands via
self-assembly.

In 2008, the library
was extended to 450 SUPRAPhos bidentate ligands,
based on 15 different porphyrin phosphite and phosphoramidite and
30 pyridyl-appended phosphoramidite, phosphite, and chiral phosphine
ligands. The introduction of the building blocks with stereogenic
centers at the phosphorus atom allowed the application of these assemblies
in the asymmetric hydroformylation of styrene.23 Generally, high activity is observed for the catalysts
formed from phosphine-containing or bulky phosphite ligands, which
unfortunately displayed low enantioselectivities. In contrast, ligands
based on phosphoramidite ligands show relatively high enantioselectivities
(≤76% ee) but at low conversion.24 Also, the regioselectivity was strongly influenced by the supramolecular
bidentate ligand used, giving rise to high selectivity for either
the branched or the linear aldehyde (b:l ratio between 0.5 and 8.9).

The first self-assembled bidentate ligands based on hydrogen bonding
used in hydroformylation were reported by Breit and Seiche.25 The 2-pyridone 25A/2-hydroxypyridine 25B tautomer system is used as a self-complementary hydrogen
bonding motif. Introduction of donor groups (PPh2) capable
of binding to a metal center is straightforward. Importantly, the
equilibrium shifts toward the mixed hydroxypyridine/pyridone dimer 27 in the presence of a coordinating metal, compared to symmetrical
pyridone dimer 28 formed in apolar solvents in the absence
of the metal or the donor groups (Scheme 5). The formation of the hydrogen-bond pattern
in 27 is evidenced from the X-ray structure of the cis-[PtCl2(26)2] complex,
and the structure also reveals the presence of the ligand 26 (6-DPPon = 6-diphenylphosphanylpyridone) in two different tautomeric
forms.26

Scheme 5 Self-Assembly of
the 2-Pyridone/2-Hydroxypyridine System via Hydrogen
Bonding
The chelating behavior
of the hydrogen-bonded ligand in rhodium
complex 27 is clear from the results in the hydroformylation
of 1-octene as a high selectivity for the linear aldehyde is obtained
(l:b ratio of 32), comparable to the well-established bidentate ligand
Xantphos (l:b ratio of 49). The Rh-based catalyst also hydroformylates
amide-, alcohol-, and ester-functionalized terminal alkenes and produces
the corresponding linear aldehydes in high yields and regioselectivities.
The Rh-based catalyst 27 even converts terminal alkenes
at room temperature and ambient pressure (RTAP), with low catalyst
loading (Scheme 6).27 Addition of a surfactant such as tocopherol
derivative polyoxyethanyl α-tocopheryl sebacate (PTS) also makes
it possible to conduct the RTAP hydroformylation experiments in aqueous
media, while excellent regioselectivity for the linear aldehyde confirms
the stability of the hydrogen bonding motif.28

Scheme 6 Room-Temperature, Ambient-Pressure Hydroformylation of Functionalized
Terminal Alkenes with the Rhodium/6-DPPon Catalyst (FG = functional
group)
The efficiency of the rhodium/6-DPPon
catalyst at room temperature
and ambient pressure has enabled the development of tandem processes
such as a domino hydroformylation/enantioselective organocatalytic
cross-aldol reaction sequence.29 The application
of ligand 26 also allowed the development of highly selective
tandem hydroformylation/hydrogenation processes,30 and tandem regio-, diastereo-, and enantioselective hydroformylation–organocatalytic anti-Mannich reaction.31 The
6-DPPon ligand and its derivatives are also utilized in the tandem
rhodium-catalyzed hydroformylation–Wittig olefination reaction
of homoallylic alcohols.32 Moreover, the
6-DPPon ligand and its derivative (29) form excellent
catalysts in rhodium-catalyzed hydroformylation of 1,1-disubstituted
allenes,33 as well as dialkyl- and diaryl-substituted
alkynes,34 demonstrating excellent chemo-,
regio-, and stereoselectivities for the formation of β,γ-unsaturated
aldehydes and enals, respectively (Scheme 7).

Scheme 7 Application of Rhodium/6-DPPon and
Rhodium/29 Catalysts
in Tandem Hydroformylation Reactions and Hydroformylation of Allenes
and Alkynes
To gain a deeper insight
into the mechanism of the rhodium-catalyzed
hydroformylation of terminal alkenes using self-assembled 6-DPPon
ligands, detailed experimental (including kinetic studies35 as well as in situ ESI-MS,36 IR, and NMR investigations) and computational
studies37,38 have been performed. The existence of the
hydrogen bonding motif during catalysis is verified by in
situ IR and NMR studies of a catalytically competent intermediate
(acyl complex [(COR)Rh(26)2(CO)2]) and confirmed by density functional theory (DFT) calculations.
DFT calculations also show that hydrogen bonding is present not only
in the resting state but also throughout the catalytic cycle. By calculation
of the free energy surface of the prolinear and probranched catalytic
cycle (propene is used as a model substrate for DFT calculations),
hydrometalation was shown to be a selectivity-determining step. The
rate-determining transition state is stabilized by hydrogen bonding
by at least 7 kcal mol–1. In line with this, O-
and N-methylated derivatives of the 6-DPPon catalyst, possessing no
hydrogen bonding, are synthesized and applied in the hydroformylation
under identical conditions. These complexes lead to selectivities
(l:b ratios of 76:24 and 74:26) and activities typically observed
for complexes based on monodentate PPh3, once again showing
the importance of the hydrogen bonds between the ligands for catalyst
activity and selectivity.37

The 6-DPPon
ligand can form only homobidentate ligands, and to
generate a heterobidentate ligand by self-assembly, the Breit group
extended their chemistry to the aminopyridine 30/isoquinolone 31 hydrogen bond motif. These building blocks consist of a
donor/acceptor and acceptor/donor combination, akin to A-T base pairs
in DNA, and therefore, these units bind selectively to each other;
on the other hand, self-aggregation leads to systems in which the
donor atoms are pointing in the opposite directions (Scheme 8).39,40 When the ligand building blocks 30a and 31a are mixed with [PtCl2(1,5-cod)], the heterodimeric 32aa–PtCl2 complex is formed exclusively.
The hydrogen bonding between the building blocks is confirmed by X-ray
crystal structure determination as well as by NMR studies. From eight
phosphine ligand building blocks, a set of 16 (4 × 4) heterobidentate
ligand assemblies can be formed. Evaluation of this library in rhodium-catalyzed
hydroformylation of terminal alkenes shows a variation in activity
and selectivity. Generally, phosphine-substituent modification of
the aminopyridines 30a–d has the strongest influence
on the catalyst; in particular, electron-donating groups decrease
the catalyst activity, while electron-withdrawing groups lead to its
increase. The best catalyst is competitive with the best traditional
bidentate ligands in terms of activity and selectivity for the linear
aldehydes (≤96:4).

Scheme 8 Self-Assembly of the Aminopyridine/Isoquinolone
System To Generate
Heterodimeric Bidentate Ligands (Do = donor center)
Other acceptor/donor donor/acceptor hydrogen
bond pairs based on
heterocyclic scaffolds have been explored for the purpose of generating
self-assembled ligands. A new 5 × 2 self-assembled ligand library
is generated and explored in rhodium-catalyzed hydroformylation of
1-octene (Figure 6).41 All the ligand combinations demonstrate high
regioselectivities (89:11 to >99:1) consistent with bidentate ligand
catalysts that are operative in the catalytic cycle. Interestingly,
the highest selectivities for the linear aldehyde (>99:1) are obtained
for the catalysts formed by thiazole/isoquinolone (37/38) and thiazole/7-azaindole (37/39) combinations. This is explained by formation of stronger
hydrogen bonds between the self-assembled building blocks and, hence,
a more rigid or stable ligand system. Remarkably, the strength of
hydrogen bonding is such that it also allows the hydroformylation
reactions in protic solvents such as methanol. While the aminopyridine/isoquinolone
system (33/38) shows a significant drop
in regioselectivity with a change in the solvent from toluene (94:6)
to methanol (82:18), the thiazole/isoquinolone combinations (36/38 and 37/38) keep
their high selectivities observed in toluene (98:2 and 99:1) when
the solvent is changed to methanol (97:3 and 96:4, respectively).41 In the search for selective asymmetric hydrogenation
catalysts, such a ligand library was evaluated using a combinatorial
iterative deconvolution strategy, which allowed identification of
the best catalyst in a limited number of experiments.42 For finding the most selective hydroformylation catalysts,
similar strategies can be envisioned; however, reports that describe
these are lacking at this stage.

Figure 6 Self-assembly of heterocyclic systems
to generate methanol-stable
heterodimeric bidentate ligands. D = hydrogen-bond donor. A = hydrogen-bond
acceptor. Do = donor center.

Subsequent development of the self-assembly approach by hydrogen
bonding afforded new bidentate β-sheet-like P-ligands based
on peptidic structures (Figure 7). Rhodium catalysts, generated in situ upon
mixing Rh(acac)(CO)2 with C-linked phosphine-functionalized
peptidyl ligands (LC) and complementary
N-linked peptidic systems (LN), are applied in the asymmetric hydroformylation of styrene. While
homocombinations of the ligands display low enantioselectivities (5–8%
ee), the heterobidentate ligand combinations give significant levels
of enantioselectivities (≤38% ee) despite a remote position
of the stereocenters in relation to the catalytically active centers.43

Figure 7 Metal-templated self-assembly of peptide-based P-ligands.

Finally, Reek and co-workers have
developed a novel type of phosphinourea
ligand that forms supramolecular homo- and heterobidentate ligands
via self-assembly in the presence of rhodium(I) precursor Rh(acac)(CO)2 (Scheme 9).44 The rhodium complexes based on six phosphinoureas
(40–45) are evaluated in the asymmetric hydroformylation
of styrene. All the catalysts exhibit good conversions (64–100%)
and high selectivities (86–97%) for the branched product and
moderate enantioselectivities (≤46% ee for the 43/43 homocombination). It has been proposed that these
functionalized ligands operate via a slightly different mechanism,
involving ligand cooperativity leading to an intermediate unknown
for traditional ligands (see Scheme 9).44

Scheme 9 Phosphinourea Ligands
and Synthesis of Supramolecular Rhodium Complexes
Thereof
The Rh complex is also suggested
as one of the intermediates of the hydroformylation cycle.

3 Selective Hydroformylation
by Substrate Preorganization
Another recently introduced
strategy for achieving selectivity
in transition metal catalysis is through preorganization of the substrate
with respect to the metal center. A commonly explored way to achieve
preorganization is through ditopic binding of the substrate to the
metal center, in which a second functional group controls the orientation
of the substrate (Figure 8, I).45,46 Such a directing group can already
be present on the substrate or alternatively needs to be introduced
temporarily to the substrate before it is subjected to the catalytic
conversion. These strategies have been demonstrated to be very powerful
in C–H activation and asymmetric hydrogenation; however, there
are some limitations and drawbacks. For example, the strategies are
limited to substrates that have a specific directing group close to
the reactive bond, or additional synthesis steps are required for
the introduction and removal of the directing group. Moreover, an
additional vacant coordination site has to be present on the metal
center for the coordination of the directing group. Using supramolecular
chemistry, some of these issues can be resolved as substrate orientation
no longer has to be established via the catalytically active metal.
Recently, several groups have focused on ditopic binding of the substrate
as a way to preorganize the substrate with respect to the metal center
via a recognition site installed on the ligand (Figure 8, II). The structure of the bifunctional
ligand can be adjusted to the structure of the substrate. This can
allow for remote selectivity control as well as catalyst design in
a predictable fashion when combined with in-depth mechanistic knowledge.
This is far more challenging using traditional approaches. Through
supramolecular substrate preorganization, highly selective reactions
have been engineered, and this strategy was highlighted specifically
in recent perspectives by Phipps et al.47 and Reek et al.48

Figure 8 Schematic representation
of substrate preorganization via traditional
approaches (I) or via supramolecular strategies (II). M = metal center.
DG = directing group. RG = reactive group. RS = recognition site.
Do = donor center.

In rhodium-catalyzed
hydroformylation, the selectivity is typically
determined during the hydride migration step. Generally, the alkene
substrate can coordinate in various manners, and upon migration of
the hydride, the alkene rotates. As such, substrate orientation via
supramolecular interactions should be a viable strategy for controlling
the selectivity, and indeed, this approach has been shown to be very
powerful; in this section, we will discuss the relevant examples reported
so far.

Hydrogen-bonded systems have been exceptionally effective
in the
context of hydroformylation combined with supramolecular substrate
preorganization. The neutral Rh(I) complex often observed as a resting
state has a strong affinity for CO and the phosphorus ligands, and
as such, the functional groups required for substrate orientation
generally do not coordinate. Breit et al. reported a guanidinium-functionalized
phosphine ligand that acts as a receptor for unsaturated carboxylic
acids (Figure 9).49

Figure 9 Guanidinium-functionalized phosphine ligands.

Hydrogen bonds between the guanidinium group of
the ligand and
the carboxylic acid moiety of the substrate preorganize the alkene
with respect to the metal center. When 3-butenoic acid is converted
by a rhodium catalyst based on this ligand, a very high selectivity
is achieved for the linear product (l:b ratio of 41) (Scheme 10, 49a). This
catalyst is also active for internal alkenes, which are generally
less reactive. When 3-pentenoic acid is hydroformylated with this
catalyst system, the product is formed in which the aldehyde is introduced
at the unsaturated carbon atom farthest from the carboxylic acid [o:i
ratio of 18:1; o = outermost, and i = innermost (Scheme 10, 49b)]. The
selectivity was found to be highly dependent on the distance between
the acid moiety and the alkene function. 4-Pentenoic acid hydroformylation
with the supramolecular system gave selectivity to levels typically
found for triphenyl phosphine-based catalysts, indicating that substrate
preorganization does not play a role. This clearly shows that for
this catalyst system the alkene–acid distance has to be precise
to control the selectivity by supramolecular preorganization. This
can be exploited for substrates containing two alkenes at different
distances from the carboxylate (Scheme 11, 50). The alkene with the
proper carboxylic acid–olefin distance is converted at a higher
rate (8.8:1) and with a higher selectivity for the linear aldehyde
(l:b ratio of 32), compared to the alkene moiety that is farther from
the carboxylic acid (l:b ratio of 3).50

Scheme 10 Regioselective Hydroformylation of Unsaturated Carboxylic Acids
(o
= outermost; i = innermost)
Scheme 11 Hydroformylation of a Substrate Containing Multiple Olefinic
Sites
DFT calculations show that
the lowest energy is obtained when two
ligands are coordinated to the metal center and the carboxylic acid
moiety of the substrate forms four hydrogen bonds with the two guanidine
groups of the ligands (Figure 10). No substrate–ligand interaction can be observed
when only one ligand coordinates to the metal center, and as such,
the biscoordinated species is proposed to be the most likely intermediate
responsible for the high selectivity.50 Analysis of the calculated structures indicates that preceding the
hydride migration step the alkene is rotated toward the hydride through
the hydrogen bonds between the guanidinium moieties and the carboxylic
acid moiety of the substrate. In experiments in which competitive
guests (with carboxylic acid functional groups) are present, the substrates
are converted with lower selectivity and activity in line with the
substrate preorganization model.

Figure 10 Substrate orientation in the selectivity-determining
hydride migration
step (DFT study).

46 is also
effective in a decarboxylative hydroformylation
of α,β-unsaturated carboxylic acids (Scheme 12).51 In this cascade reaction, the formyl group is introduced on the
substrate, after which the carboxylate leaves the substrate as CO2. Under similar conditions, but using triphenylphosphine as
the ligand, the double bond is reduced instead of hydroformylated,
which exemplifies the need for supramolecular interactions between
the substrate and the catalyst to yield the terminal aldehyde product.

Scheme 12 Decarboxylative Hydroformylation of α,β-Unsaturated Carboxylic
Acids
When the pyridine moiety of
the previously discussed ligand (Figure 9, 46) is replaced with a benzene
moiety or a pyrrole moiety, aldehyde
hydrogenation is observed (Figure 9, 47 and 48).52 As such, these ligands can be used in the context
of a tandem hydroformylation–hydrogenation sequence converting
1-octene into 1-nonanol. The selectivity for the linear alcohol can
be enhanced by combining the pyrrole (48) analogue of
the guanidinium catalyst with the 2-pyridone/2-hydroxypyridine supramolecular
bidentate (6-DPPon) to yield a highly selective hydroformylation–hydrogenation
reaction of 1-octene to 1-nonanol (Scheme 13).30

Scheme 13 Tandem
Processes Using Supramolecular Substrate Preorganization Ligands
Combining the decarboxylative
hydroformylation approach of α,β-unsaturated
acids with a supramolecular aldehyde hydrogenation catalyst yields
a tandem decarboxylative hydroformylation–hydrogenation catalytic
system (Scheme 13).53 The system works most effectively when a mixture
of the most active ligand in decarboxylative (46) hydroformylation
is used in combination with an analogue effective in the hydrogenation
of aldehydes (47).

Regioselective hydroformylation
of unsaturated acids can also be
achieved with a series of bidentate phosphines and phosphite ligands,
coined DIMPhos, functionalized with a highly selective anion receptor,
7,7-diamido-2,2-diindolylmethane (Figure 11).54

Figure 11 Anion receptor-functionalized
bisphosphines (DIMPhos).

Terminal unsaturated carboxylates can be hydroformylated
with a
phosphine analogue (Figure 11, 52) of the ligand. 4-Pentenoate to 10-undecenoate
are converted to the aldehyde with high selectivities for the linear
product (Scheme 14, 54). 3-Butenoate is not converted selectively because
the substrate is too short to bind to the receptor moiety and the
metal center simultaneously. Unsaturated phosphate analogues are also
converted with high selectivities. Upon protonation or methylation
of the substrate, the selectivity is lost and the conversion is significantly
lower. It is interesting to note that, contrary to the monodentate
guanidinium ligands (Figure 9, 46) reported by Breit et al., the high selectivity
for the linear product is obtained for a variety of substrates with
different distances between the alkene and the carboxylate group.49

Scheme 14 Regioselective Hydroformylation of ω-Unsaturated
Carboxylic
Acids (DIPEA = N,N-diisopropylethylamine)
In situ spectroscopy, kinetic
data, and DFT calculations show that
the hydride migration step is selectivity-determining. As seen for
the guanidinium phosphine systems, DFT data show that due to the binding
of the substrate in the DIM pocket, the alkene is properly preorganized
with respect to the Rh–H bond for the hydride migration step
leading to the linear rhodium alkyl species (Figure 12). The hydride migration to form the branched
alkyl species cannot proceed without the carboxylate leaving the pocket,
and also other competitive pathways leading to the branched product
are significantly higher in energy.54

Figure 12 Substrate
preorganization in the selectivity-determining hydride
migration step (DFT study).

Phosphite analogues of the DIMPhos ligands (Figure 11, 53) give rhodium
catalysts
that are sufficiently active to hydroformylate internal aliphatic
alkenes under mild conditions, which is not possible with the phosphine-based
systems.55 The CO inserts farthest from
the carboxylate, and exceptionally high selectivities are observed
for internal alkenes (i.e., o:i ratio of ≤78) using the substrate
orientation strategy with 53 as the ligand (Scheme 15). Again, a series
of substrates with different distances between the alkene and the
carboxylate were selectively converted with the highest selectivity
obtained for the internal alkene at position 4.

Scheme 15 Regioselective Hydroformylation
of Internal Unsaturated Carboxylic
Acids
Also, carboxy-vinylarenes are
hydroformylated with the same system
to form the linear product with the highest selectivities reported
to date (>98%) (Scheme 16, 56a). The branched aldehyde is not detected,
whereas this is usually the dominant product. Electronic factors dictate
that these aromatic substrates mainly form branched aldehydes (Scheme 16, 56b).56 Remarkably, the methyl-substituted
and cyclic analogues were also converted with very high selectivity
(Scheme 16, 57).

Scheme 16 Regioselective Hydroformylation of 2-Carboxyvinylarenes
and Cyclic
Analogues
When the phosphite-based
DIMPhos hydroformylation system is combined
with a palladium isomerization catalyst, terminal alkenes are converted
into α-branched methyl aldehydes (Scheme 13).57 The advantage
is that branched aldehydes can be synthesized from inexpensive terminal
alkenes with selectivities surpassing those of direct branched selective
hydroformylation catalysts.

A related strategy for selective
hydroformylation catalysis relies
on dynamic covalent chemistry. Instead of supramolecular interactions,
the substrate is temporarily bound to a scaffolding ligand by reversible
bond formation between the substrate and such a ligand.58 Via the scaffolding ligand, the substrate binds
in a ditopic fashion to the metal complex. The exchange of the substrate
with the scaffolding ligand should be compatible with the hydroformylation
reaction.59,60

One scaffolding ligand that can be
used in the context of regioselective
hydroformylation is 58 that has a hemilabile C–O
bond (Figure 13).
Through reversible cleavage of the C–O bond, the hydroxy group
of the substrate can bind to the ligand.59 Preorganization reverses the regioselectivity of several substituted
homoallylic alcohols to form the branched/innermost product in excess.
After hydroformylation, an oxidation reaction yields five-membered
ring lactones in good selectivities of ≤98:2 (Scheme 17, 62). The strategy
is feasible for both internal and terminal alkenes. A control reaction
using PPh3 yields the six-membered ring lactone in excess
(six-membered:five-membered ratio of 3:1). The same ligand is also
successfully applied in the hydroformylation of substrates containing
a sulfonamide as a directing group instead of an alcohol group.61

Figure 13 Catalytic scaffolding ligands (reversible bond colored
red).

Scheme 17 Regioselective Hydroformylation Employing
Catalytic Scaffolding Ligands
(PCC = pyridinium chlorochromate)
In a similar approach, methyl diphenylphosphinite has
been used
as a scaffolding ligand (Figure 13, 59).60 This
ligand has a labile P–O bond, and the methoxy moiety can exchange
with hydroxy groups on the substrate. A catalytic amount of the ligand
can be combined with homoallylic alcohols to yield the branched product
(innermost for internal alkenes) in near perfect selectivities of
<99%. A lactone is formed after oxidation of the formed lactol
in this reaction (Scheme 18, 63). This ligand can also be applied in the
regioselective hydroformylation of bishomoallylic alcohols to selectively
yield six-membered lactones as a product (Scheme 18, 64).62

Scheme 18 Regioselective Hydroformylation of Homoallylic and Bishomoallylic
Alcohols Employing Catalytic Scaffolding Catalysts
The same strategy can also be applied to form
quaternary carbon
centers via a hydroformylation reaction, which is considered as one
of the most challenging reactions in hydroformylation.63,64 Hydroformylation to form quaternary carbon centers was achieved
when α,α-disubstituted olefins were used with the previously
discussed scaffolding ligands 58 and 59.
As the aldehyde inserts on the carbon center closest to the alcohol
group, the “Keulemans’ rule”, which dictates
that addition of a formyl group never occurs at the tertiary position
of the olefin in hydroformylation, is overruled (Scheme 19, 65 and 66).65

Scheme 19 Hydroformylation
of α,α-Disubstituted Alcohols To Form
Quaternary Carbon Centers
When amine-based substrates are hydroformylated in combination
with an enantioenriched version (60) of the previously
discussed scaffolding ligand (58), high enantioselectivities
of ≤92% are obtained (Scheme 20, 67).66 Directed
hydroformylation of 2,5-cyclohexadienyl-1-carbinols with diphenylphosphite
as a ligand allowed excellent regio- and diastereocontrol (Scheme 21, 68).67

Scheme 20 Enantioselective Hydroformylation
of Amine-Based Substrates
Scheme 21 Directed Hydroformylation of 2,5-Cyclohexadienyl-1-carbinols
Remarkably, placement of the
binding moiety of the scaffolding
ligand farther from the phosphorus atom (Figure 13, 61) reverses the selectivity
completely. This leads to the insertion at the outermost carbon providing
the product with selectivities of o:i ≤ 19:1 (Scheme 22, 69).68

Scheme 22 Divergent Selectivity upon Variation of
the Scaffolding Ligand
Altering the distance between the alcohol and the olefinic
moiety
reveals that the homoallylic alcohols reacted with the highest selectivity
using this system to form six-membered lactols and lactones. The reaction
proceeds most selectively when the R-based enantiomer
of the substrate is reacted with the enantiopure l-valine-based
catalyst.

4 Hydroformylation Catalysis in Confined Spaces
In the previous section, selective hydroformylation by controlling
the substrate orientation was discussed. For this approach, the substrate
needs to have functional groups to establish the proper interaction
with the functional groups of the catalyst system. Many substrates
of interest for hydroformylation do not have functional groups. To
achieve selective hydroformylation for this class of substrates, the
hydride migration step must be controlled in an alternative manner.
One strategy that has been explored is the application of catalysts
in confined spaces, and this will be discussed in this section.

For the sake of brevity, in this section solely the modulation
of the activity and/or selectivity of rhodium-based hydroformylation
catalysts as a result of confinement in a synthetic, molecular cage-like
structure will be discussed. Organic transformations and other metal-catalyzed
reactions have recently been described elsewhere; excellent reviews
on using molecular containers in multistep reaction cascades and tandem
enzymatic reactions,69 in reactivity modulation,70 and in the context of enzyme mimics based upon
supramolecular coordination chemistry,71 along with transition metal and organocatalysis in functional molecular
flasks,72 have already been published.

In pioneering work by Monflier and co-workers, cyclodextrins have
been applied in combination with water-soluble rhodium phosphine-based
catalysts for biphasic hydroformylation of higher olefins.73 The cyclodextrin cavity is essentially hydrophobic
and can therefore host various organic molecules in water (Figure 14). Generally, the
cyclodextrin host forms a water-soluble host–guest complex
with the substrate, thereby increasing the water solubility of the
alkene. As such, it brings it into closer contact with the catalyst
residing in the aqueous layer, typically resulting in increased catalytic
rates (Scheme 23).
In this regard, the cyclodextrin acts as a phase-transfer catalyst
by facilitating the migration of a reactant from one phase into the
phase where the reaction occurs. Furthermore, in most examples, the
regioselectivity is also affected as a direct consequence of confinement.
Examples of cyclodextrin acting exclusively as a phase-transfer catalyst
will not be discussed in this review.

Figure 14 Schematic representation
of the α-, β-, and γ-cyclodextrins
that have a hydrophobic cavity that can host organic guest molecules.

Scheme 23 Phase-Transfer Catalysis Mediated
by Cyclodextrins
The first example reported along these lines was the application
of partially methylated β-cyclodextrins in the biphasic rhodium
3,3′,3″-phosphinetriyltris(benzenesulfonate) (TPPTS)-catalyzed
hydroformylation of various water-insoluble terminal and internal
alkenes, enabling efficient biphasic hydroformylation of higher alkenes.73a In the absence of cyclodextrins, only substrates
with sufficient water solubility, and hence shorter carbon chain lengths,
are efficiently converted under biphasic hydroformylation conditions.
Different substrates ranging from terminal and internal aliphatic
alkenes to aromatic styrene derivatives can be converted with the
novel catalytic system. A significant increase in the catalytic rate
was observed in the presence of the methylated β-cyclodextrins,
especially for the insoluble alkenes. For example, for 1-decene the
conversion after 6 h was 10-fold, and the increase in reaction rate
is estimated to be 25-fold. The effect of confinement is also clear
in the hydroformylation of internal alkenes, although the overall
conversions are rather low. This low reactivity is attributed to the
lack of accessibility of the double bond of the substrate, which most
likely resides too deep inside the hydrophobic cavity of the cyclodextrin
host. The presence of the cyclodextrin also has an influence on the
regioselectivity in the hydroformylation of 1-alkenes. For all substrates,
the selectivity for the linear aldehyde decreases in the presence
of the cyclodextrin. This is explained by the fact that not only the
alkene but also the water-soluble phosphine ligand interacts with
the cavity.73b By encapsulation of the
phosphine ligand, the equilibria between different rhodium species
are shifted to low-coordinate complexes that are generally more active
and less selective, explaining the decrease in selectivity.

The group of Monflier extended the cyclodextrin-based catalytic
system to fully solvent free conditions.74 Substrate molecules and a rhodium phosphine-based catalyst were
dispersed in a mixture of acyclic saccharides and cyclodextrins, resulting
in a heterogeneous mixture. The saccharides ensure complete dispersion
of the substrates in the solid mixture, leading to increased catalytic
rates. Exposure of this mixture to syngas in a mixing planetary ball
mill results in the hydroformylation of a variety of styrene derivatives,
always with 100% chemoselectivity to provide the corresponding aldehydes.
In the absence of cyclodextrins, the branched aldehyde is predominantly
formed, which is typical for styrene derivatives. However, the presence
of cyclodextrins results in a 5-fold increase in the selectivity for
the linear aldehyde product. This altered selectivity is due to the
binding of the aromatic alkene within the hydrophobic cavity of the
cyclodextrin, favoring hydroformylation at the less-hindered position
of the vinyl function (Scheme 24). The substrate displays a stronger inclusion in the
larger cyclodextrin (n = 7), which results in steric
hindrance between the alkene functionality and the host. As a consequence,
the formyl group will be transferred to the least hindered carbon
atom that yields the linear aldehyde as the main product. For the
smaller cyclodextrin (n = 6), the binding does not
result in shielding as it is shallower in the pocket, and as a result,
the selectivity is solely determined by the electronics of the substrate
itself.

Scheme 24 Representation of the Effect of the Depth of Inclusion
of the Substrate
in the Cyclodextrin Cavity on the Observed Aldehyde Product Selectivity
To prevent the earlier discussed
inclusion of the phosphine ligand
within the cavity of the cyclodextrin, bulkier mono- and bidentate
ligands were subsequently applied in the search for catalytic systems
that display a higher selectivity for the linear aldehyde product.73c Indeed, bulky water-soluble phosphine ligands
such as 1,3,5-triaza-7-phosphaadamantane-based ligands73d (71) (Figure 15, middle) and 2-naphthylphosphines73e (72a–72c) (Figure 15, right) do not form strong
inclusion complexes with cyclodextrins compared to those formed with
TPPTS; thus, a smaller decrease in regioselectivity is observed in
the hydroformylation of 1-decene, and at the same time, the conversions
are much higher. The bidentate sulfonated 4,5-bis(diphenylphosphino)-9,9-dimethylxanthene
ligand (70) is of particular interest as it forms strong
complexes with rhodium, preventing the formation of monoligated complexes,
and because of its large bite angle, it already favors the formation
of the linear product (Figure 15, left). Furthermore, because it is larger than the
previously employed TPPTS ligand, it does not form a strong inclusion
complex with the cyclodextrin host, allowing more efficient substrate
transportation. In the presence of β-cyclodextrin, the catalytic
system displays a 5-fold increase in the conversion of 1-octene to
nonanal under standard hydroformylation conditions. Interestingly,
the selectivity for the linear aldehyde increased (l:b ratio from
14 to 33) when cyclodextrin was present in the catalytic mixture.
This enhanced selectivity is proposed to be due to the steric bulk
around the coordination sphere of rhodium, forcing the hydride to
preferentially migrate to C2 over C1.

Figure 15 Structures of the water-soluble
ligands 70, 71, and 72a–72c.

As an alternative to the approach
described above, systems relying
on the direct covalent functionalization of the β-cyclodextrin
with phosphine ligands have been reported.75,76 The group of Reetz reported on the application of rhodium complexes
of various β-cyclodextrin-modified diphosphine ligands in the
biphasic hydroformylation of 1-octene. Interestingly, this catalytic
system converts not only terminal alkenes but also relatively unreactive
internal olefins. A proposed mode of action for the diphosphine-based
catalyst is displayed in Scheme 25. The modified cyclodextrin-based catalysts display
a 150-fold increase in activity at 80 °C compared to systems
without cyclodextrin at 120 °C in the conversion of 1-octene
to nonanal. The catalyst converts the substrate with a selectivity
for the linear product of 76%, which is typical for rhodium complexes
based on small bite angle ligands.

Scheme 25 Proposed Mode of
Action of the β-Cyclodextrin-Modified Diphosphine-Based
Catalytic System
A similar approach to the cyclodextrin system relies on
the use
of hemispherical rhodium calixarene-based phosphite and phosphine
complexes. These systems have been shown to promote the formation
of linear aldehyde products over branched ones in hydroformylation
catalysis. While it has been postulated that the confined space around
the catalytically active site plays a role in the product selectivity,
more detailed mechanistic studies are needed to confirm this.77,78

Recently, Matt and co-workers described the use of rhodium
monophosphine
complexes for the hydroformylation of styrene.76 By covalent confinement of the phosphine ligand inside
a chiral cyclodextrin cavity, exclusive formation of rhodium monophosphine
complex 73b is observed, even in the presence of excess
ligand (Scheme 26).
This is a clear example in which the second coordination sphere around
the catalytically active site controls the coordination mode of the
metal. Remarkably, the catalyst converts styrene with both a high
branched selectivity (98%) and enantioselectivity (≤95%). It
is interesting to note that the cyclodextrin is the only source of
chirality, and as such, the enantioselectivity is controlled by the
chiral second coordination sphere around the metal complex.

Scheme 26 Formation
of the Active Species 73b from the Monophosphine
Rhodium Complex 73a
Reek and co-workers introduced a general strategy for
encapsulating
transition metal complexes in an efficient way that involves a ligand-template
approach.79 In this strategy, the ligand
serves a dual role as it operates as a template for the self-assembly
of the capsule and coordinates to the catalytically active metal center;
hence, it was coined ligand-template approach. The first example reported
using this strategy was structure 74 (Figure 16), formed by the self-assembly
of three zinc meso-tetraphenylporphyrin (ZnTPP) units around the ligand-template
tris(m-pyridyl)phosphine [P(m-py)3], relying on the selective N–Zn coordination. The
phosphine atom of the ligand-template is coordinated to rhodium and
forms the active species [HRhP(CO)3] under syngas. The
overall formed encapsulated complex is an efficient hydroformylation
catalyst that converts various terminal alkene substrates with enhanced
activity and selectivity for the branched aldehyde. Importantly, because
of the steric bulk imposed by the porphyrin moieties, monoligation
of the formed rhodium complexes is enforced. Via the variation of
the structure of the template and the surrounding zinc building blocks,
the effect of variations in the second coordination sphere on the
activity and selectivity of the encapsulated rhodium catalyst has
been further explored.

Figure 16 Structure of HRh(CO)3 coordinated
to the central phosphine
of the first-generation assembly. Molecular structure (top) and modeled
structure (bottom) of the encapsulated catalyst.

Application of 74 in 1-octene hydroformylation
at
room temperature leads to a 10-fold increase in the catalytic activity
as compared to that with the rhodium complex in the absence of porphyrin
under otherwise identical conditions.79a,79b This rate
enhancement can, at least partly, be explained by the higher reactivity
of monophosphine complexes. Indeed, DFT calculations show that the
catalytic pathway of the rhodium monophosphine catalyst has a free
energy barrier that is lower than that of the bisphosphine analogue,
leading to an inherently more active catalyst.80 Remarkably, the encapsulated catalyst dominantly forms
the branched aldehyde product (l:b ratio of 0.6), which is highly
unusual for aliphatic, terminal alkenes. Upon generation of the encapsulated
catalysts based on ruthenium porphyrin building blocks instead of
zinc, less dynamic capsules that display even higher regioselectivity
are formed (l:b ratio of 0.4), but at the cost of the catalytic activity.
The orientation of the porphyrin with respect to the phosphine is
crucial; the use of tris(p-pyridyl)phosphine [P(p-py)3] ligand-templates instead of the meta analogue results in a catalyst that displays the selectivity
typical for rhodium bisphosphine complexes.81 Indeed, a more open structure is formed, allowing the formation
of a bisphosphine-coordinated rhodium complex that is encapsulated
by six porphyrins. In the solid state, an unusual supramolecular structure
is formed according to X-ray analysis, in which one zinc porphyrin
unit acts as a bridging moiety between two capsules via an unusual
hexacoordinate zinc (Figure 17).

Figure 17 Highly unusual supramolecular structure containing a mixture
of
penta- and hexacoordinate zinc porphyrins.

The generality of the ligand-template approach is demonstrated
by the application of a variety of building blocks. The ligand-template
can be combined with zinc salphens (75a–75d) and
zinc bis(thiosemicarbazonato) complexes (76) (Figure 18),82 which both display a supramolecular binding with pyridine
that is stronger than that of zinc porphyrins. As these building blocks
are significantly smaller, the exclusive formation of encapsulated
catalysts cannot be enforced. The smaller size allows considerable
conformational flexibility in the self-assembled structures, resulting
in a mixture of mono- and bisligated complexes. The catalysts encapsulated
by 75a–75d display some selectivity for the branched
aldehyde product when applied in 1-octene hydroformylation, but the
selectivity is much lower than for the first-generation capsule 74. Moreover, these systems also show an increase in undesired
isomerization. Similar results have been obtained for the capsules
based on 76.

Figure 18 Molecular structures of the smaller building
blocks 75a–75d and 76.

Following the publication of the promising results
obtained with
terminal alkene substrates, the more challenging internal alkenes
were subjected to capsule-controlled hydroformylation.83,84 Regioselective hydroformylation of internal alkenes is challenging
as the two carbon atoms of the double bond are electronically identical
and sterically similar. In addition, the reactivity of internal alkenes
is lower, and the application of harsher conditions leads in general
to more side reactions as isomerization. The rhodium complex of the
first-generation capsule 74 converts trans-2-octene and trans-3-octene with very high regioselectivity
(o:i of 1:9 for 2 octene and 1:4 for 3-octene), where the formyl group
is installed on the innermost carbon atom, and also the activity is
higher compared to that displayed by the unencapsulated catalyst.
This selectivity is in line with the results obtained for 1-octene
where a preference for the branched aldehyde is observed. Interestingly,
a rather high selectivity could still be retained at 40 °C, whereas
at 80 °C, isomerization side products lead to a loss of regioselectivity.
A combination of DFT calculations and detailed kinetic and mechanistic
studies demonstrate that the selectivity is determined in the hydride
migration step (Figure 19).84 The path to the 3-alkylrhodium
intermediate has an energy considerably lower than that of the 2-alkylrhodium
intermediate. Significant structural rearrangements of the capsule
would be necessary to arrive at the 2-alkylrhodium intermediate, resulting
in a high energy penalty. Consequently, the 3-alkylrhodium intermediate
is favored leading to a high selectivity toward the C3-aldehyde. This
is related to the mechanism in which the selectivity is controlled
by substrate orientation, the difference being that the rotation of
the alkene associated with the hydride migration step is not controlled
by hydrogen bonds, but by the sterics of the cage.

Figure 19 Energy profile for the
hydride migration step leading to the two
possible intermediates b and c. Reprinted with permission from ref (84).

All these hydroformylation reactions were performed at room
temperature
or at slightly elevated temperatures, as the supramolecular N–Zn
coordinate bond was expected to weaken at elevated temperatures. To
expand the application of the capsule to more industrially relevant
conditions, catalytic experiments were conducted at 75 °C.85 To retain the unusual branched selectivity in
the hydroformylation of 1-octene at this temperature, a higher partial
pressure of CO is required. Remarkably, when the reaction is performed
at 75 °C and 80 bar of CO/H2 (2:1), a selectivity
(l:b ratio of 0.7) nearly identical to that at room temperature is
obtained. At these elevated temperatures, the reaction is highly dependent
on the partial CO pressure; at 20 bar, the selectivity for the branched
aldehyde was lost. In line with that, high-pressure infrared measurements
show the formation of bisphosphine-coordinated rhodium complexes under
these low-pressure conditions.

Next to temperature, the solvent
scope was also investigated. As
the zinc–pyridine interaction is strongest in apolar and noncoordinating
solvents, these solvents were preferably applied in the initial experiments.
As expected, upon using more polar solvents, the zinc–pyridine
binding constant decreases, and as a result, the equilibrium shifts
to the non-encapsulated catalyst, resulting in a loss of activity
and selectivity. Interestingly, the oxidized analogues of zinc TPP,
zinc porpholactones, bind more strongly to pyridine by nearly an order
of magnitude.86 Consequently, the application
window of the ligand-template approach can be extended to industrially
relevant more polar and coordinating solvents, such as dioctyl terephthalate,
while retaining the typical branched selectivity in 1-octene hydroformylation.
Furthermore, as the capsule 77 has a slightly smaller
size and a different shape, it also allows the branched selective
hydroformylation of propene, which is inherently challenging (l:b
ratio of 0.84) (Figure 20).

Figure 20 Comparison of the crystal structures of assemblies 74 and 77, formed by the self-assembly of 3 equiv
of Zn(II)
meso-tetraphenylporpholactone and tris(m-pyridyl)phosphine
in toluene (letop) and a molecular structure of assembly 77 (bottom). Reprinted with permission from ref (86). Copyright 2017 Creative
Commons.

While the regioselectivity is
now controlled, these branched aldehydes
are formed in racemic form as the catalyst is not chiral. Next, the
ligand-template approach was extended to the enantioselective hydroformylation
of internal alkenes and styrene derivatives.19,87 Replacing the ligand-template with a chiral pyridine-functionalized
phosphoramidite ligand, while maintaining the original zinc porphyrin
building blocks, results in novel chiral capsules. Interestingly,
addition of the zinc porphyrin building blocks to the activated rhodium–phosphoramidite
hydride complex enforces a change from an equatorial to axial coordination
mode for the ligand. This change in the coordination mode also changes
the properties of the catalyst in the hydroformylation of trans-2-octene. Both the conversion (56%) and the enantioselectivity
(45%) increase in the presence of porphyrin, leading to the capsule,
yet a preference for the addition of the formyl group to the innermost
carbon atom was again seen. The modest increase in enantioselectivity
can be attributed to the dynamic nature of the capsule, and therefore,
a more rigid capsule with less rotational freedom was explored.19 The same chiral ligand was also encapsulated
in a metal–organic coordination cage containing two zinc porphyrins.88 The supramolecular complex does not result in
significant enantioselective induction in the asymmetric hydroformylation
of 1-octene; however, it gives rise to a high chiral induction (ee
of ≤74%) in the hydroformylation of styrene compared to that
of the non-encapsulated catalyst (ee of <10%).

The mixing
of two bis-[ZnII(salphen)] building blocks
with two chiral pyridine-functionalized phosphoramidite templates
results in the formation of a supramolecular “box” 78 with the ligands functioning as pillars (Figure 21).19 Modeling of the complex shows that the rhodium complex indeed is
embedded in a cage defined by the bis-[ZnII(salphen)] building
blocks. The application of this supramolecular box in the hydroformylation
of internal alkenes such as trans- and cis-2-octene results in the formation of the aldehyde product with high
regioselectivity and enantioselectivity (ee of ≤86%). This
demonstrates that both the regioselectivity and the enantioselectivity
can be controlled by spatially confining the catalytically active
site in a tight pocket.

Figure 21 Bis-zinc(II) salphen-templated supramolecular
“box” 78.

5 Conclusion and Outlook
In this review, we
have discussed various supramolecular strategies
for generating selective hydroformylation catalysts, which are in
many examples far more selective than the traditional catalysts. In
the first section, we show that you can generate supramolecular bidentate
ligands by self-assembly of ligand building blocks. The main advantage
of this strategy is that the ligand library you generate grows exponentially
with the number of building blocks you can use. It has been demonstrated
that rhodium catalysts that are very selective for the linear product
can be generated. The strategy has also been applied for asymmetric
hydroformylation, and although the proof of principle has been demonstrated,
catalysts based on supramolecular bidentate ligands that are more
enantioselective in styrene hydroformylation have yet to be discovered.
The second approach that has been discussed involves substrate orientation
via interactions between the functional groups of the substrate and
those of the ligand. Typically, the hydride migration step of the
catalytic cycle, often the selectivity-determining step, is controlled
by this substrate preorganization. This has resulted in many examples
of hydroformylation reaction in which the product is formed with an
unusually high selectivity. As such, this is a very promising strategy
for solving selectivity problems in hydroformylation catalysis that
cannot be solved by simple ligand design. As a final approach, we
discussed hydroformylation catalysis in molecular cages. Using this
strategy, selectivities can also be achieved that are beyond those
displayed by traditional catalysts, and importantly, it also works
for unfunctionalized substrates.

We are just at the beginning
of exploring these new supramolecular
concepts in hydroformylation catalysis, and we are convinced that
upon expanding the number of systems we will be able to solve many
selectivity problems in hydroformylation catalysis.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank all the co-workers that contributed
to our
work over the past decades whose names appear in the references and
all the institutes that financed our research programs, including
support for the authors of the current paper [(NWO) Dutch National
Science Foundation, ERC advanced grant (N° 339786-NAT-CAT), Eastman,
and IncatT BV].
==== Refs
References
Roelen O.   (to Chemische Verwertungsgesellschaft
Oberhausen m.b.H.) German Patent DE 849548, 1938/1952 ; U.S. Patent 2327066 , 1943 ; Chem. Abstr.1944, 38, 3631 .
Franke R. ; Selent D. ; Börner A. 
Applied Hydroformylation . Chem. Rev. 
2012 , 112 , 5675 –5732 10.1021/cr3001803 .22937803 
Gusevskaya E. V. ; Jiménez-Pinto J. ; Börner A. 
Hydroformylation in the Realm of
Scents . ChemCatChem 
2014 , 6 , 382 –411 10.1002/cctc.201300474 .
a van Leeuwen P. W. N. M.   In Homogeneous catalysis: Understanding
the art ; Kluwer Academic Publishers : Dordrecht,
The Netherlands , 2004 ; pp 125 –174 .b Cornils B. ; Herrmann W.   In Applied Homogeneous Catalysis with Organometallic Compounds:
A Comprehensive Handbook in Three Volumes ; Wiley-VCH : Weinheim, Germany , 2002 ; Vol. 1 , pp 31 –194 .
Vilches-Herrera M. ; Domke L. ; Börner A. 
Isomerization–Hydroformylation
Tandem Reactions . ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4 , 1706 –1724 10.1021/cs500273d .
a Heck R. F. ; Breslow D. S. 
The Reaction of
Cobalt Hydrotetracarbonyl
with Olefins . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1961 , 83 , 4023 –4027 10.1021/ja01480a017 . b Heck R. F. 
Addition Reactions of Transition Metal Compounds . Acc. Chem. Res. 
1969 , 2 , 10 –16 10.1021/ar50013a002 .
a Agbossou F. ; Carpentier J.-F. ; Mortreux A. 
Asymmetric Hydroformylation . Chem. Rev. 
1995 , 95 , 2485 –2506 10.1021/cr00039a008 .b van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Claver C.   In Rhodium
Catalyzed Hydroformylation ; Kluwer Academic
Publishers : Dordrecht, The Netherlands , 2000 .c Wiese K.-D. ; Obst D.   In Catalytic Carbonylation Reactions ; Beller M.  , Ed.; Springer : Berlin , 2006 ; pp 1 –33 . d Kubis C. ; Baumann W. ; Barsch E. ; Selent D. ; Sawall M. ; Ludwig R. ; Neymeyr K. ; Hess D. ; Franke R. ; Börner A. 
Investigation
into the Equilibrium of Iridium Catalysts for the Hydroformylation
of Olefins by Combining In Situ High-Pressure FTIR and NMR Spectroscopy . ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4 , 2097 –2108 10.1021/cs500368z . e Kubis C. ; Sawall M. ; Block A. ; Neymeyr K. ; Ludwig R. ; Börner A. ; Selent D. 
An Operando FTIR Spectroscopic and
Kinetic Study of Carbon Monoxide Pressure Influence on Rhodium-Catalyzed
Olefin Hydroformylation . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2014 , 20 , 11921 –11931 10.1002/chem.201402515 .25081298  f Kubis C. ; Ludwig R. ; Sawall M. ; Neymeyr K. ; Börner A. ; Wiese K.-D. ; Hess D. ; Franke R. ; Selent D. 
A Comparative In Situ HP-FTIR Spectroscopic Study of
Bi- and Monodentate Phosphite-Modified Hydroformylation . ChemCatChem 
2010 , 2 , 287 –295 10.1002/cctc.200900292 . g Kubis C. ; Selent D. ; Sawall M. ; Ludwig R. ; Neymeyr K. ; Baumann W. ; Franke R. ; Börner A. 
Exploring
Between the Extremes: Conversion-Dependent Kinetics of Phosphite-Modified
Hydroformylation Catalysis . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2012 , 18 , 8780 –8794 10.1002/chem.201200603 .22689302  h Casey C. P. ; Petrovich L. M. 
(Chelating diphosphine)rhodium-Catalyzed
Deuterioformylation of 1-Hexene: Control of Regiochemistry by the
Kinetic Ratio of Alkylrhodium Species Formed by Hydride Addition to
Complexed Alkene . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1995 , 117 , 6007 –6014 10.1021/ja00127a014 . i Lazzaroni R. ; Uccello-Barretta G. ; Scamuzzi S. ; Settambolo R. ; Caiazzo A. 
2H NMR Investigation of the Rhodium-Catalyzed
Deuterioformylation of 1,1-Diphenylethene: Evidence for the Formation
of a Tertiary Alkyl–Metal Intermediate . Organometallics 
1996 , 15 , 4657 –4659 10.1021/om960462e . j Horiuchi T. ; Shirakawa E. ; Nozaki K. ; Takaya H. 
Mechanistic Aspects
of Asymmetric Hydroformylation of Olefins Catalyzed by Chiral Phosphine–Phosphite–Rhodium(I)
Complexes . Organometallics 
1997 , 16 , 2981 –2986 10.1021/om970134u . k Lazzaroni R. ; Settambolo R. ; Uccello-Barretta G. ; Caiazzo A. ; Scamuzzi S. 
Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation
of Vinylidenic Olefins: the Different Behaviors of the Isomeric Alkyl–Metal
Intermediates as the Origin of the β-Regioselectivity . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
1999 , 143 , 123 –130 10.1016/S1381-1169(98)00374-4 . l van
der Slot S. C. ; Duran J. ; Luten J. ; Kamer P. C. J. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. 
Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation
and Deuterioformylation with Pyrrolyl-Based Phosphorus Amidite Ligands:
Influence of Electronic Ligand Properties . Organometallics 
2002 , 21 , 3873 –3883 10.1021/om010760y . m Watkins A. L. ; Landis C. R. 
Origin of Pressure Effects on Regioselectivity
and Enantioselectivity in the Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation of
Styrene with (S, S, S)-BisDiazaphos . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 10306 –10317 10.1021/ja909619a .20662513 
Brezny A. C. ; Landis C. R. 
Unexpected CO Dependencies,
Catalyst Speciation, and
Single Turnover Hydrogenolysis Studies of Hydroformylation via High
Pressure NMR Spectroscopy . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 2778 –2785 10.1021/jacs.6b12533 .28125782 
a van Rooy A. ; de Bruijn J. N. H. ; Roobeek K. F. ; Kamer P. C. J. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. 
Rhodium-Catalysed
Hydroformylation
of Branched 1-Alkenes; Bulky Phosphite vs. Triphenylphosphine as Modifying
Ligand . J. Organomet. Chem. 
1996 , 507 , 69 –73 10.1016/0022-328X(95)05748-E . b Kamer P. C. J. ; van Rooy A. ; Schoemaker G. C. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. 
In Situ Mechanistic Studies in Rhodium Catalyzed Hydroformylation
of Alkenes . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2004 , 248 , 2409 –2424 10.1016/j.ccr.2004.06.006 .
a Casey C. P. ; Whiteker G. T. ; Melville M. G. ; Petrovich L. M. ; Gavney J. A. ; Powell D. R. 
Diphosphines with
Natural Bite Angles near 120° Increase Selectivity for n-Aldehyde Formation in Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1992 , 114 , 5535 –5543 10.1021/ja00040a008 . b Kranenburg M. ; van der Burgt Y. E. M. ; Kamer P. C. J. ; van
Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Goubitz K. ; Fraanje J. 
New Diphosphine Ligands
Based on Heterocyclic Aromatics Inducing Very High Regioselectivity
in Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation: Effect of the Bite Angle . Organometallics 
1995 , 14 , 3081 –3089 10.1021/om00006a057 . c van der Veen L. A. ; Boele M. D. K. ; Bregman F. R. ; Kamer P. C. J. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Goubitz K. ; Fraanje J. ; Schenk H. ; Bo C. 
Electronic Effect on Rhodium Diphosphine
Catalyzed Hydroformylation: The Bite Angle Effect Reconsidered . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1998 , 120 , 11616 –11626 10.1021/ja981969e . d van der Veen L. A. ; Keeven P. H. ; Schoemaker G. C. ; Reek J. N. H. ; Kamer P. C. J. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Lutz M. ; Spek A. L. 
Origin
of the Bite Angle Effect on Rhodium Diphosphine Catalyzed Hydroformylation . Organometallics 
2000 , 19 , 872 –883 10.1021/om990734o . e Carbó J. J. ; Maseras F. ; Bo C. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. 
Unraveling
the Origin of Regioselectivity in Rhodium Diphosphine Catalyzed Hydroformylation.
A DFT QM/MM Study . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2001 , 123 , 7630 –7637 10.1021/ja0101678 .11480985  f Kumar M. ; Chaudhari R. V. ; Subramaniam B. ; Jackson T. A. 
Importance of Long-Range Noncovalent Interactions in
the Regioselectivity of Rhodium-Xantphos-Catalyzed Hydroformylation . Organometallics 
2015 , 34 , 1062 –1073 10.1021/om5012775 .
a Sakai N. ; Mano S. ; Nozaki K. ; Takaya H. 
Highly Enantioselective
Hydroformylation of Olefins
Catalyzed by New Phosphine Phosphite-Rhodium(I) Complexes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1993 , 115 , 7033 –7034 10.1021/ja00068a095 . b Nozaki K. ; Sakai N. ; Nanno T. ; Higashijima T. ; Mano S. ; Horiuchi T. ; Takaya H. 
Highly Enantioselective
Hydroformylation of Olefins Catalyzed by Rhodium(I) Complexes of New
Chiral Phosphine–Phosphite Ligands . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
1997 , 119 , 4413 –4423 10.1021/ja970049d . c Horiuchi T. ; Shirakawa E. ; Nozaki K. ; Takaya H. 
Mechanistic Aspects
of Asymmetric Hydroformylation of Olefins Catalyzed by Chiral Phosphine–Phosphite–Rhodium(I)
Complexes . Organometallics 
1997 , 16 , 2981 –2986 10.1021/om970134u .For a related ligand, see:

 d Yan Y. ; Zhang X. 
A Hybrid Phosphorus Ligand for Highly Enantioselective Asymmetric
Hydroformylation . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 7198 –7202 10.1021/ja057065s .16734472 
a Landis C. R. ; Jin W. ; Owen J. S. ; Clark T. P. 
Rapid Access to Diverse Arrays of Chiral 3,4-Diazaphospholanes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2001 , 40 , 3432 –3434 10.1002/1521-3773(20010917)40:18<3432::AID-ANIE3432>3.0.CO;2-3 . b Clark T. P. ; Landis C. R. ; Freed S. L. ; Klosin J. ; Abboud K. A. 
Highly Active, Regioselective, and Enantioselective
Hydroformylation with Rh Catalysts Ligated by Bis-3,4-diazaphospholanes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 127 , 5040 –5042 10.1021/ja050148o .15810837  c Klosin J. ; Landis C. R. 
Ligands for Practical Rhodium-Catalyzed Asymmetric
Hydroformylation . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2007 , 40 , 1251 –1259 10.1021/ar7001039 .17997526 
a Noonan G. M. ; Fuentes J. A. ; Cobley C. J. ; Clarke M. L. 
An Asymmetric Hydroformylation Catalyst that Delivers
Branched Aldehydes from Alkyl Alkenes . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 2477 –2480 10.1002/anie.201108203 . b Dingwall P. ; Fuentes J. A. ; Crawford L. ; Slawin A. M. Z. ; Bühl M. ; Clarke M. L. 
Understanding a Hydroformylation
Catalyst that Produces Branched Aldehydes from Alkyl Alkenes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 15921 –15932 10.1021/jacs.7b09164 .29068679 
A Wilkinson M. J. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
New Directions in Supramolecular Transition Metal Catalysis . Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2005 , 3 , 2371 –2383 10.1039/b503407h .15976851  b Breit B. 
Supramolecular
Approaches to Generate Libraries of Chelating Bidentate Ligands for
Homogeneous Catalysis . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2005 , 44 , 6816 –6825 10.1002/anie.200501798 . c Sandee A. J. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Bidentate Ligands by Supramolecular
Chemistry—the Future for Catalysis? . Dalton Trans. 
2006 , 3385 –3391 10.1039/B606045P .16832485  d Bellini R. ; van der Vlugt J. I. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Supramolecular
Self-Assembled Ligands in Asymmetric Transition Metal Catalysis . Isr. J. Chem. 
2012 , 52 , 613 –629 10.1002/ijch.201200002 .
Slagt V. F. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Bidentate Ligands Formed by Self-Assembly . Chem. Commun. 
2003 , 2 , 2474 –2475 10.1039/b306683e .
Slagt V. F. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Supramolecular Bidentate Phosphorus
Ligands Based on Bis-zinc(II) and Bis-tin(IV) Porphyrin Building Blocks . Dalton Trans. 
2007 , 2302 –2310 10.1039/b702462m .17534491 
Kuil M. ; Goudriaan P. E. ; Kleij A. W. ; Tooke D. M. ; Spek A. L. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Rigid Bis-zinc(II) Salphen Building
Blocks for the Formation of Template-Assisted Bidentate Ligands and
Their Application in Catalysis . Dalton Trans. 
2007 , 2311 –2320 10.1039/b702375h .17534492 
Kuil M. ; Goudriaan P. E. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N.
M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Template-Induced
Formation of Heterobidentate Ligands and Their Application in the
Asymmetric Hydroformylation of Styrene . Chem.
Commun. 
2006 , 4679 –4681 10.1039/b609321c .
Gadzikwa T. ; Bellini R. ; Dekker H. L. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Self-Assembly
of a Confined Rhodium Catalyst for Asymmetric Hydroformylation of
Unfunctionalized Internal Alkenes . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 2860 –2863 10.1021/ja211455j .22280096 
Slagt V. F. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Multicomponent Porphyrin Assemblies
as Functional Bidentate Phosphite Ligands for Regioselective Rhodium-Catalyzed
Hydroformylation . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2003 , 42 , 5619 –5623 10.1002/anie.200352525 .
Slagt V. F. ; Röder M. ; Kamer P. C. J. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N.
M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Supraphos:
A Supramolecular Strategy to Prepare Bidentate
Ligands . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 4056 –4057 10.1021/ja038955f .15053565 
Reek J. N. H. ; Röder M. ; Goudriaan P. E. ; Kamer P. C. J. ; van
Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Slagt V. F. 
Supraphos: A Supramolecular strategy
to Prepare Bidentate Ligands . J. Organomet.
Chem. 
2005 , 690 , 4505 –4516 10.1016/j.jorganchem.2005.02.026 .
Goudriaan P. E. ; Jang X.-B. ; Kuil M. ; Lemmens R. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Synthesis of Building Blocks for the Development of
the SUPRAPhos Ligand Library and Examples of Their Application in
Catalysis . Eur. J. Org. Chem. 
2008 , 2008 , 6079 –6092 10.1002/ejoc.200800499 .
Goudriaan P. E. ; Kuil M. ; Jiang X.-B. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
SUPRAPhos Ligands for the Regioselective
Rhodium Catalyzed
Hydroformylation of Styrene Forming the Linear Aldehyde . Dalton Trans. 
2009 , 1801 –1805 10.1039/b818665k .19240914 
Breit B. ; Seiche W. 
Hydrogen Bonding as
a Construction Element for Bidentate
Donor Ligands in Homogeneous Catalysis: Regioselective Hydroformylation
of Terminal Alkenes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125 , 6608 –6609 10.1021/ja0348997 .12769551 
Gellrich U. ; Huang J. ; Seiche W. ; Keller M. ; Meuwly M. ; Breit B. 
Ligand Self-Assembling
through Complementary Hydrogen-Bonding in
the Coordination Sphere of a Transition Metal Center: The 6-Diphenylphosphanylpyridin-2(1H)-one System . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 964 –975 10.1021/ja108639e .21142007 
Seiche W. ; Schuschkowski A. ; Breit B. 
Bidentate Ligands by Self-Assembly
through Hydrogen Bonding: A General Room Temperature/Ambient Pressure
Regioselective Hydroformylation of Terminal Alkenes . Adv. Synth. Catal. 
2005 , 347 , 1488 –1494 10.1002/adsc.200505174 .
Straub A. T. ; Otto M. ; Usui I. ; Breit B. 
Room Temperature Ambient
Pressure (RTAP)-Hydroformylation in Water Using a Self-Assembling
Ligand . Adv. Synth. Catal. 
2013 , 355 , 2071 –2075 10.1002/adsc.201300258 .
Abillard O. ; Breit B. 
Domino Hydroformylation/Enantioselective
Cross-Aldol Addition . Adv. Synth. Catal. 
2007 , 349 , 1891 –1895 10.1002/adsc.200700216 .
Fuchs D. ; Rousseau G. ; Diab L. ; Gellrich U. ; Breit B. 
Tandem Rhodium-Catalyzed
Hydroformylation-Hydrogenation of Alkenes by Employing a Cooperative
Ligand System . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 2178 –2182 10.1002/anie.201108946 .
Diezel S. ; Breit B. 
Tandem Regioselective
Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation–Enantioselective
Aminocatalytic anti-Mannich Reaction . Synthesis 
2014 , 46 , 1311 –1320 10.1055/s-0033-1338602 .
Ruan Q. ; Zhou L. ; Breit B. 
New Phosphorus
Self-Assembling Ligands
for the Tandem Hydroformylation–Wittig Olefination Reaction
of Homoallylic Alcohols — A Key Step for Stereoselective Pyran
Synthesis . Catal. Commun. 
2014 , 53 , 87 –90 10.1016/j.catcom.2014.04.022 .
Köpfer A. ; Breit B. 
Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation
of 1,1-Disubstituted Allenes Employing
the Self-Assembling 6-DPPon System . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 6913 –6917 10.1002/anie.201502086 .
Agabekov V. ; Seiche W. ; Breit B. 
Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation
of Alkynes Employing a Self-Assembling Ligand System . Chem. Sci. 
2013 , 4 , 2418 –2422 10.1039/c3sc50725d .
Gellrich U. ; Koslowski T. ; Breit B. 
Full Kinetic Analysis of a Rhodium-Catalyzed
Hydroformylation: Beyond the Rate-Limiting Step Picture . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2015 , 5 , 129 –133 10.1039/C4CY01209G .
Beierlein C. H. ; Breit B. ; Paz Schmidt R. A. ; Plattner D. A. 
Online Monitoring
of Hydroformylation Intermediates by ESI-MS . Organometallics 
2010 , 29 , 2521 –2532 10.1021/om100131t .
Gellrich U. ; Seiche W. ; Keller M. ; Breit B. 
Mechanistic Insights
into a Supramolecular Self-Assembling Catalyst System: Evidence for
Hydrogen Bonding during Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 11033 –11038 10.1002/anie.201203768 .
Gellrich U. ; Himmel D. ; Meuwly M. ; Breit B. 
Realistic Energy Surfaces
for Real-World Systems: An IMOMO CCSD(T):DFT Scheme for Rhodium-Catalyzed
Hydroformylation with the 6-DPPon Ligand . Chem.
- Eur. J. 
2013 , 19 , 16272 –16281 10.1002/chem.201302132 .24127405 
Breit B. ; Seiche W. 
Self-Assembly of Bidentate Ligands for Combinatorial
Homogeneous Catalysis Based on an A-T Base-Pair Model . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2005 , 44 , 1640 –1643 10.1002/anie.200462499 .
Breit B. ; Seiche W. 
Self-Assembly of Bidentate Ligands for Combinatorial
Homogeneous Catalysis Based on an A-T Base Pair Model . Pure Appl. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 249 –256 10.1351/pac200678020249 .
Waloch C. ; Wieland J. ; Keller M. ; Breit B. 
Self-Assembly of Bidentate
Ligands for Combinatorial Homogeneous Catalysis: Methanol-Stable Platforms
Analogous to the Adenine–Thymine Base Pair . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2007 , 46 , 3037 –3039 10.1002/anie.200605202 .
Wieland J. ; Breit B. 
A Combinatorial Approach to the Identification of Self-Assembled
Ligands for Rhodium-Catalysed Asymmetric Hydrogenation . Nat. Chem. 
2010 , 2 , 832 –837 10.1038/nchem.800 .20861898 
Laungani A. C. ; Slattery J. M. ; Krossing I. ; Breit B. 
Supramolecular Bidentate
Ligands by Metal-Directed in situ Formation of Antiparallel β-Sheet
Structures and Application in Asymmetric Catalysis . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2008 , 14 , 4488 –4502 10.1002/chem.200800359 .18449870 
Meeuwissen J. ; Sandee A. J. ; de Bruin B. ; Siegler M. A. ; Spek A. L. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Phosphinoureas: Cooperative Ligands in Rhodium-Catalyzed
Hydroformylation? On the Possibility of a Ligand-Assisted Reductive
Elimination of the Aldehyde . Organometallics 
2010 , 29 , 2413 –2421 10.1021/om901028z .
Hoveyda A. H. ; Evans D. A. ; Fu G. C. 
Substrate-Directable
Chemical Reactions . Chem. Rev. 
1993 , 93 , 1307 –1370 10.1021/cr00020a002 .
Rousseau G. ; Breit B. 
Removable Directing
Groups in Organic Synthesis and Catalysis . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 2450 –2494 10.1002/anie.201006139 .
Davis H. ; Phipps R. J. 
Harnessing Non-Covalent Interactions to Exert Control
over Regioselectivity and Site-Selectivity in Catalytic Reactions . Chem. Sci. 
2017 , 8 , 864 –877 10.1039/C6SC04157D .28572898 
Dydio P. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Supramolecular Control of Selectivity in Transition-Metal
Catalysis through Substrate Preorganization . Chem. Sci. 
2014 , 5 , 2135 –2145 10.1039/C3SC53505C .
Šmejkal T. ; Breit B. 
A Supramolecular
Catalyst for Regioselective Hydroformylation of
Unsaturated Carboxylic Acids . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 311 –315 10.1002/anie.200703192 .
Šmejkal T. ; Gribkov D. ; Geier J. ; Keller M. ; Breit B. 
Transition-State
Stabilization by a Secondary Substrate-Ligand Interaction: A New Design
Principle for Highly Efficient Transition-Metal Catalysis . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2010 , 16 , 2470 –2478 10.1002/chem.200902553 .20077538 
Šmejkal T. ; Breit B. 
A Supramolecular Catalyst for the Decarboxylative Hydroformylation
of α,β-Unsaturated Carboxylic Acids . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 3946 –3949 10.1002/anie.200800956 .
Diab L. ; Šmejkal T. ; Geier J. ; Breit B. 
Supramolecular Catalyst
for Aldehyde hydrogenation and Tandem Hydroformylation-Hydrogenation . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 8022 –8026 10.1002/anie.200903620 .
Diab L. ; Gellrich U. ; Breit B. 
Tandem Decarboxylative Hydroformylation–Hydrogenation
Reaction of α,β-Unsaturated Carboxylic Acids toward Aliphatic
Alcohols under Mild Conditions Employing a Supramolecular Catalyst
System . Chem. Commun. 
2013 , 49 , 9737 –9739 10.1039/c3cc45547e .
Dydio P. ; Dzik W. I. ; Lutz M. ; de Bruin B. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Remote
Supramolecular Control of Catalyst Selectivity in the Hydroformylation
of Alkenes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 396 –400 10.1002/anie.201005173 .
Dydio P. ; Detz R. J. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Precise
Supramolecular Control of
Selectivity in the Rh-Catalyzed Hydroformylation of Terminal and Internal
Alkenes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 10817 –10828 10.1021/ja4046235 .23802682 
a Dydio P. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Supramolecular
Control of Selectivity in Hydroformylation of Vinyl Arenes: Easy Access
to Valuable β-Aldehyde Intermediates . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 3878 –3882 10.1002/anie.201209582 . b Dydio P. ; Detz R. J. ; de Bruin B. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Beyond
Classical Reactivity Patterns: Hydroformylation of Vinyl and Allyl
Arenes to Valuable β- and γ-Aldehyde Intermediates using
Supramolecular Catalysis . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 8418 –8429 10.1021/ja503033q .24841256  c Dydio P. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Scalable and Chromatography-Free
Synthesis of 2-(2-Formylalkyl)Arenecarboxylic Acid Derivatives through
the Supramolecularly Controlled Hydroformylation of Vinylarene-2-Carboxylic
Acids . Nat. Protoc. 
2014 , 9 , 1183 –1191 10.1038/nprot.2014.077 .24762785 
Dydio P. ; Ploeger M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Selective
Isomerization-Hydroformylation
Sequence: A Strategy to Valuable α-Methyl-Branched Aldehydes
from Terminal Olefins . ACS Catal. 
2013 , 3 , 2939 –2942 10.1021/cs400872a .
a Tan K. L. 
Induced Intramolecularity: An Effective
Strategy in Catalysis . ACS Catal. 
2011 , 1 , 877 –886 10.1021/cs2002302 . b Tan K. L. ; Sun X. ; Worthy A. D. 
Scaffolding Catalysis:
Expanding the Repertoire of Bifunctional Catalysts . Synlett 
2012 , 23 , 321 –325 10.1055/s-0031-1290321 . c Yeung C. S. ; Dong V. M. 
A new Direction in Enantioselective
Catalysis: Scaffolding Ligands in Olefin Hydroformylation . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 809 –812 10.1002/anie.201006489 .
Lightburn T. E. ; Dombrowski M. T. ; Tan K. L. 
Catalytic Scaffolding Ligands: An
Efficient Strategy for Directing Reactions . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 9210 –9211 10.1021/ja803011d .18576619 
Grünanger C. U. ; Breit B. 
Branched-Regioselective Hydroformylation with Catalytic Amounts of
a Reversibly Bound Directing Group . Angew. Chem. 
2008 , 120 , 7456 –7459 10.1002/ange.200802296 .
Worthy A. D. ; Gagnon M. M. ; Dombrowski M. T. ; Tan K. L. 
Regioselective Hydroformylation
of Sulfonamides Using a Scaffolding Ligand . Org. Lett. 
2009 , 11 , 2764 –2767 10.1021/ol900921e .19489593 
Grünanger C. U. ; Breit B. 
Remote Control of Regio- and Diastereoselectivity in the Hydroformylation
of Bishomoallylic Alcohols with Catalytic Amounts of a Reversibly
Bound Directing Group . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2010 , 49 , 967 –970 10.1002/anie.200905949 .
Sun X. ; Frimpong K. ; Tan K. L. 
Synthesis
of Quaternary Carbon Centers
via Hydroformylation . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 11841 –11843 10.1021/ja1036226 .20687551 
Ueki Y. ; Ito H. ; Usui I. ; Breit B. 
Formation of Quaternary Carbon Centers
by Highly Regioselective Hydroformylation with Catalytic Amounts of
a Reversibly Bound Directing Group . Chem. -
Eur. J. 
2011 , 17 , 8555 –8558 10.1002/chem.201101186 .21728199 
Keulemans A. I. M. ; Kwantes A. ; van Bavel T. 
The Structure of the Formylation
(OXO) Products Obtained from Olefines and Watergas . Recl. des Trav. Chim. Pays-Bas 
1948 , 67 , 298 –308 10.1002/recl.19480670406 .
Worthy A. D. ; Joe C. L. ; Lightburn T. E. ; Tan K. L. 
Application of a
Chiral Scaffolding Ligand in Catalytic Enantioselective Hydroformylation . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 14757 –14759 10.1021/ja107433h .20882977 
Usui I. ; Nomura K. ; Breit B. 
Diastereoselective Hydroformylation
of 2,5-Cyclohexadienyl-1-Carbinols with Catalytic Amounts of a Reversibly
Bound Directing Group . Org. Lett. 
2011 , 13 , 612 –615 10.1021/ol1028546 .21229981 
Joe C. L. ; Blaisdell T. P. ; Geoghan A. F. ; Tan K. L. 
Distal-Selective
Hydroformylation Using Scaffolding Catalysis . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 8556 –8559 10.1021/ja504247g .24902624 
Zarra S. ; Wood D. M. ; Roberts D. A. ; Nitschke J. R. 
Molecular Containers
in Complex Chemical systems . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 419 –432 10.1039/C4CS00165F .25029235 
Breiner B. ; Clegg J. K. ; Nitschke J. R. 
Reactivity
Modulation in Container
Molecules . Chem. Sci. 
2011 , 2 , 51 –56 10.1039/C0SC00329H .
Wiester M. J. ; Ulmann P. A. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Enzyme
Mimics Based upon Supramolecular
Coordination Chemistry . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 114 –137 10.1002/anie.201000380 .
a Leenders S.
H. A. M. ; Gramage-Doria R. ; de Bruin B. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Transition Metal Catalysis in Confined
Spaces . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 433 –448 10.1039/C4CS00192C .25340992  b Brown C. J. ; Toste F. D. ; Bergman R. G. ; Raymond K. N. 
Supramolecular
Catalysis in Metal–Ligand Cluster Hosts . Chem. Rev. 
2015 , 115 , 3012 –3035 10.1021/cr4001226 .25898212  c Vriezema D.
M. ; Comellas
Aragonès M. ; Elemans J. A. A. W. ; Cornelissen J. J. L. M. ; Rowan A. E. ; Nolte R. J. M. 
Self-Assembled Nanoreactors . Chem. Rev. 
2005 , 105 , 1445 –1490 10.1021/cr0300688 .15826017  d Yoshizawa M. ; Klosterman J. K. ; Fujita M. 
Functional Molecular Flasks: New
Properties and Reactions within Discrete, Self-Assembled Hosts . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 3418 –3438 10.1002/anie.200805340 . e Hooley R. J. ; Rebek J. 
Chemistry and Catalysis in Functional
Cavitands . Chem. Biol. 
2009 , 16 , 255 –264 10.1016/j.chembiol.2008.09.015 .19318207 
a Monflier E. ; Tilloy S. ; Fremy G. ; Castanet Y. ; Mortreux A. 
A Further Breakthrough in Biphasic,
Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation: the Use of Per(2,6-di-O-methyl)-β-Cyclodextrin
as Inverse Phase Transfer Catalyst . Tetrahedron
Lett. 
1995 , 36 , 9481 –9484 10.1016/0040-4039(95)02073-X . b Mathivet T. ; Méliet C. ; Castanet Y. ; Mortreux A. ; Caron L. ; Tilloy S. ; Monflier E. 
Rhodium Catalyzed Hydroformylation of Water Insoluble
Olefins in the Presence of Chemically Modified β-Cyclodextrins:
Evidence for Ligand-Cyclodextrin Interactions and Effect of Various
Parameters on the Activity and the Aldehydes Selectivity . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2001 , 176 , 105 –116 10.1016/S1381-1169(01)00229-1 . c Leclercq L. ; Hapiot F. ; Tilloy S. ; Ramkisoensing K. ; Reek J. N. H. ; Van Leeuwen P. W. N.
M. ; Monflier E. 
Sulfonated
Xantphos Ligand and Methylated Cyclodextrin: A Winning Combination
for Rhodium-Catalyzed Hydroformylation of Higher Olefins in Aqueous
Medium . Organometallics 
2005 , 24 , 2070 –2075 10.1021/om048994f . d Legrand F.-X. ; Hapiot F. ; Tilloy S. ; Guerriero A. ; Peruzzini M. ; Gonsalvi L. ; Monflier E. 
Aqueous Rhodium-Catalyzed
Hydroformylation of 1-Decene in the Presence of Randomly Methylated
β-cyclodextrin and 1,3,5-Triaza-7-phosphaadamantane Derivatives . Appl. Catal., A 
2009 , 362 , 62 –66 10.1016/j.apcata.2009.04.017 . e Elard M. ; Denis J. ; Ferreira M. ; Bricout H. ; Landy D. ; Tilloy S. ; Monflier E. 
Rhodium Catalyzed Hydroformylation
Assisted by Cyclodextrins in Biphasic Medium: Can Sulfonated Naphthylphosphanes
Lead to Active, Selective and Recyclable Catalytic Species? . Catal. Today 
2015 , 247 , 47 –54 10.1016/j.cattod.2014.06.002 . f Vanbésien T. ; Sayede A. ; Monflier E. ; Hapiot F. 
A Self-Emulsifying
Catalytic System for the Aqueous Biphasic Hydroformylation of Triglycerides . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2016 , 6 , 3064 –3073 10.1039/C5CY01758K .
Cousin K. ; Menuel S. ; Monflier E. ; Hapiot F. 
Hydroformylation of
Alkenes in a Planetary Ball Mill: From Additive-Controlled Reactivity
to Supramolecular Control of Regioselectivity . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2017 , 56 , 10564 –10568 10.1002/anie.201705467 .
Reetz M. T. ; Waldvogel S. R. 
β-Cyclodextrin-Modified Diphosphanes as Ligands
for Supramolecular Rhodium Catalysts . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 
1997 , 36 , 865 –867 10.1002/anie.199708651 .
Jouffroy M. ; Gramage-Doria R. ; Armspach D. ; Sémeril D. ; Oberhauser W. ; Matt D. ; Toupet L. 
Confining Phosphanes
Derived from Cyclodextrins for Efficient Regio- and Enantioselective
Hydroformylation . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2014 , 53 , 3937 –3940 10.1002/anie.201311291 .
van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Kamer P. C. J.  Phosphorus(III)
Ligands in Homogeneous Catalysis Design and Synthesis ; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. : New
York , 2012 ; pp 405 –426 .
Sémeril D. ; Matt D. 
Synthesis and Catalytic
Relevance of P(III) and P(V)-Functionalised
Calixarenes and Resorcinarenes . Coord. Chem.
Rev. 
2014 , 279 , 58 –95 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.06.019 .
a Slagt V. F. ; Reek J. N. H. ; Kamer P. C. J. ; van
Leeuwen P. W. N. M. 
Assembly of Encapsulated Transition
Metal Catalysts . Angew. Chem. 
2001 , 113 , 4401 –4404 10.1002/1521-3757(20011119)113:22<4401::AID-ANGE4401>3.0.CO;2-T . b Slagt V. F. ; Kamer P. C. J. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Encapsulation of Transition Metal Catalysts by Ligand-Template
Directed Assembly . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 1526 –1536 10.1021/ja0386795 .14759211  c Kleij A. W. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Ligand-Template Directed Assembly:
An Efficient Approach for the Supramolecular Encapsulation of Transition-Metal
Catalysts . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2006 , 12 , 4218 –4227 10.1002/chem.200500875 .16493698 
Jacobs I. ; de Bruin B. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Comparison
of the Full Catalytic
Cycle of Hydroformylation Mediated by Mono- and Bis-Ligated Triphenylphosphine-Rhodium
Complexes by Using DFT Calculations . ChemCatChem 
2015 , 7 , 1708 –1718 10.1002/cctc.201500087 .
Kleij A. W. ; Kuil M. ; Tooke D. M. ; Spek A. L. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Template-Assisted
Ligand Encapsulation; the Impact of an Unusual Coordination Geometry
on a Supramolecular Pyridylphosphine–Zn(II)porphyrin Assembly . Inorg. Chem. 
2005 , 44 , 7696 –7698 10.1021/ic050858v .16241114 
a Kleij A. W. ; Lutz M. ; Spek A. L. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N. M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Encapsulated Transition Metal Catalysts
Comprising Peripheral Zn(ii)salen Building Blocks: Template-Controlled
Reactivity and Selectivity in Hydroformylation Catalysis . Chem. Commun. 
2005 , 3661 –3663 10.1039/b503708e . b Jacobs I. ; van Duin A. C. T. ; Kleij A. W. ; Kuil M. ; Tooke D. M. ; Spek A. L. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Conformational
Studies of Ligand-Template Assemblies and the Consequences for Encapsulation
of Rhodium Complexes and Hydroformylation Catalysis . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2013 , 3 , 1955 10.1039/c3cy20665c . c Bocokić V. ; Lutz M. ; Spek A. L. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Bis-(thiosemicarbazonato) Zn(II)
Complexes as Building Blocks for Construction of Supramolecular Catalysts . Dalton Trans. 
2012 , 41 , 3740 –3750 10.1039/c2dt12096h .22334043 
Kuil M. ; Soltner T. ; van Leeuwen P. W. N.
M. ; Reek J. N. H. 
High-Precision
Catalysts: Regioselective Hydroformylation of Internal Alkenes by
Encapsulated Rhodium Complexes . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 11344 –11345 10.1021/ja063294i .16939244 
Bocokić V. ; Kalkan A. ; Lutz M. ; Spek A. L. ; Gryko D. T. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Capsule-Controlled
Selectivity of a Rhodium Hydroformylation
Catalyst . Nat. Commun. 
2013 , 4 , 2670 10.1038/ncomms3670 .24150228 
Besset T. ; Norman D. W. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Supramolecular Encapsulated Rhodium
Catalysts for Branched Selective Hydroformylation of Alkenes at High
Temperature . Adv. Synth. Catal. 
2013 , 355 , 348 –352 10.1002/adsc.201200790 .
Wang X. ; Nurttila S. S. ; Dzik W. I. ; Becker R. ; Rodgers J. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Tuning the Porphyrin
Building Block in Self-Assembled
Cages for Branched-Selective Hydroformylation of Propene . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2017 , 23 , 14769 –14777 10.1002/chem.201702113 .28608592 
a Bellini R. ; Chikkali S. H. ; Berthon-Gelloz G. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Supramolecular Control of Ligand Coordination and Implications
in Hydroformylation Reactions . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 7342 –7345 10.1002/anie.201101653 . b Bellini R. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Coordination
Studies on Supramolecular Chiral Ligands and Application in Asymmetric
Hydroformylation . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2012 , 18 , 7091 –7099 10.1002/chem.201200225 .22532382  c Bellini R. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Application of Supramolecular Bidentate
Hybrid Ligands in Asymmetric Hydroformylation . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2012 , 18 , 13510 –13519 10.1002/chem.201202044 .22968918 
García-Simón C. ; Gramage-Doria R. ; Raoufmoghaddam S. ; Parella T. ; Costas M. ; Ribas X. ; Reek J. N. H. 
Enantioselective Hydroformylation
by a Rh-Catalyst Entrapped in a Supramolecular Metallocage . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 2680 –2687 10.1021/ja512637k .25632976

