
==== Front
ACS CatalACS CatalcsaccacsACS Catalysis2155-5435American Chemical Society 10.1021/acscatal.7b02877Research ArticleHydride Transfer versus Deprotonation Kinetics in
the Isobutane–Propene Alkylation Reaction: A Computational
Study Liu Chong †⊥van Santen Rutger A. *†‡Poursaeidesfahani Ali §Vlugt Thijs J. H. §Pidko Evgeny A. *†‡∥⊥Hensen Emiel J. M. ††Inorganic
Materials Chemistry Group, Schuit Institute of Catalysis, and ‡Institute for
Complex Molecular Systems, Eindhoven University
of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands§ Process
& Energy Department, Delft University
of Technology, Leeghwaterstraat 39, 2628CB Delft, The Netherlands∥ TheoMAT
group, International Laboratory “Solution Chemistry of Advanced
Materials and Technologies”, ITMO
University, Lomonosova
9, St. Petersburg 191002, Russia* E-mail for R.A.v.S.: r.a.v.santen@tue.nl.* E-mail for E.A.P.: e.a.pidko@tue.nl; e.a.pidko@tudelft.nl.09 11 2017 01 12 2017 7 12 8613 8627 25 08 2017 01 11 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

The
alkylation of isobutane with light alkenes plays an essential
role in modern petrochemical processes for the production of high-octane
gasoline. In this study we have employed periodic DFT calculations
combined with microkinetic simulations to investigate the complex
reaction mechanism of isobutane–propene alkylation catalyzed
by zeolitic solid acids. Particular emphasis was given to addressing
the selectivity of the alkylate formation versus alkene formation,
which requires a high rate of hydride transfer in comparison to the
competitive oligomerization and deprotonation reactions resulting
in catalyst deactivation. Our calculations reveal that hydride transfer
from isobutane to a carbenium ion occurs via a concerted C–C
bond formation between a tert-butyl fragment and
an additional olefin, or via deprotonation of the tert-butyl fragment to generate isobutene. A combination of high isobutane
concentration and low propene concentration at the reaction center
favor the selective alkylation. The key reaction step that has to
be suppressed to increase the catalyst lifetime is the deprotonation
of carbenium intermediates that are part of the hydride transfer reaction
cycle.

hydride transferalkylationdeactivationfaujasiteperiodic DFTmicrokineticsdocument-id-old-9cs7b02877document-id-new-14cs-2017-028779ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Catalysis
by solid acids is a powerful tool for the conversion
of relatively unreactive molecules such as alkanes or methanol into
a wide range of useful products.1 In most
cases, the practical applicability of these systems is limited by
the fast catalyst deactivation that is commonly addressed by combining
the catalytic reaction system with catalyst regeneration systems,
which increases the complexity of the overall process and introduces
severe constraints on the potential catalyst materials.2

Acid-catalyzed alkylation of isobutane
with light alkenes is one
of the cornerstone technologies to produce high-octane gasoline in
petroleum refineries.3,4 The main challenge to the alkylation
chemistry is to develop a solid acid catalyst for this process, which
can compete with current highly optimized technologies based on liquid
mineral acids such as HF and H2SO4. A wide range
of solid acids has been investigated, including supported Brønsted
and Lewis acids, exchange resins, zeolites, sulfated transition-metal
oxides, and heteropolyacids and their derivatives.5,6 Ionic
liquids, although not true solid acids, have also been explored for
the development of greener alkylation processes.7 Zeolite-type solid acids have been in the spotlight of
academic and industrial research as the most promising catalysts for
heterogeneous alkylation. The common fundamental challenge of solid
acid catalyzed reactions is catalyst stability, which in most processes
requires periodic catalyst rejuvenation and reactivation steps. A
main cause of such deactivation reactions is the oligomerization of
alkene intermediates, implying that their formation should be suppressed
for efficient catalysis.8 For the catalytic
cracking process, the hydride transfer processes were found to be
essential to suppress such reactions.9,10 Hydride transfer
reactions in the methanol to hydrocarbon (MTH) process largely control
the steady-state concentration of alkenes and arenes in zeolite pores
and therefore the relationship between the catalytic alkene and arene
cycles (dual-cycle mechanism), which affects the final MTH product
distribution.11 Recently, Lercher et al.12 have identified that such hydride transfer reactions
involve both Lewis and Brønsted acid sites. The competition between
the hydride transfer and alkene formation is also fundamental to catalyst
deactivation of the alkylation reaction catalyzed by solid acids.13 The understanding that reactive olefinic intermediates
are the precursors of catalyst deactivation forms the basis of the
hydrogenation regeneration cycle applied in AlkyClean technology,14 which was jointly developed by CB&I, Albemarle
Catalysts and Neste Oil. It is the world’s first solid acid
catalyst alkylation unit and was recently commissioned in China.15 Understanding the complex mechanisms underlying
the alkylation chemistry and competitive deactivation path is a crucial
step toward further development and optimization of more sustainable
and environmentally benign alkylation processes.

Alkylation
reactions over solid acid catalysts usually give product
distributions similar to those for the liquid acids, and there is
a consensus that isobutane–alkene alkylation proceeds via intermediate
carbenium ion formation in both homogeneous and heterogeneous applications.16,17 Extensive studies on heterogeneously catalyzed alkylation processes
over solid acids carried out during the last 25 years allowed formulation
of the basic mechanisms of the formation of the desirable alkylate
product and of the competing oligomerization reactions resulting in
catalyst deactivation.13,18−24 The alkylation process involves a complex network of catalytic reaction
cycles with several feedback loops, where the initiation, propagation,
and deactivation paths can be clearly distinguished (Scheme 1).5,6,17,25−27 These reaction paths are intimately coupled. The catalytic process
is initiated by the formation of tert-butyl cations
via alkene protonation followed by a hydride transfer reaction with
isobutane. This initiation process is taken over by propagation reactions.
The acidic protons do not directly participate in the alkylation process,
and the propagation cycle involves a continuous regeneration of carbocationic
intermediates (e.g., tert-butyl or heptyl cations)
acting as the confined organocatalysts. The key elementary reactions
of the alkylation process are the hydride transfer reactions between
isobutane and carbenium ion intermediate and the C–C bond formation
between a tert-butyl cation and alkene. Deprotonation
of these confined carbocations disrupts the propagation cycle and
yields alkene byproducts contributing to the deactivating oligomerization
paths. These result in a buildup of heavier compounds in zeolite nanopores,
which can also undergo further transformations via hydride or proton
transfer, cracking, or cyclization.5 On
the basis of experimental observations it has been suggested that
the hydride transfer reaction has to be fast in comparison to the
deactivating oligomerization paths to obtain a high alkylation yield.3 The direct proton catalyzed C–H and C–C
bond cleavage via carbonium ion intermediates does not contribute
significantly to the overall performance28,29 and will not be considered in this study. It will be shown computationally
that the onset of the oligomerization can be postponed by suppressing
the deprotonation of the carbenium ion intermediate.

Scheme 1 Reaction
Network of the Catalytic Isobutane–Propene Alkylation
The tert-butyl
cations are indicated in green.

Whereas protonation
or deprotonation reactions of olefins and their
oligomerization catalyzed by zeolites have been extensively studied
before and the mechanistic details of these processes are well understood,
this is not the case for the hydride transfer reactions.30−32 Early computational studies on the mechanism of the hydride transfer
were carried out by the groups of Kazansky, van Santen, and Corma
in the late 90s.33−37 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations by Kazansky et al.33,34 on minimalistic cluster models considered the hydride transfer as
the reverse reaction of the C–C bond cleavage, which occurs
via a carbonium ion type high-energy transition state. Later DFT studies
by Boronat et al.35−37 based on the embedded cluster models of the zeolite
acid sites provided a much reduced activation barrier for the hydride
transfer between isobutane and tert-butyl cation
with respect to the zeolite-bound alkoxy intermediate, bringing the
computed values closer to the estimated barrier of 120 kJ/mol deduced
from the experimental kinetics modeling.38 Later, Neurock and co-workers39,40 revisited the mechanism
of the isobutane–butene alkylation on a phosphotungstic solid
acid and the H-form of mordenite zeolite. Periodic DFT calculations
revealed that the hydride transfer reaction from isobutane to the
adsorbed alkoxy intermediate proceeds via a hydride-sharing cationic
species that has to undergo a rotation, so that the positive charge
which shifts in the complex by the hydride transfer reaction remains
stabilized by the negative charge left on the deprotonated sold acid
site. The essential contribution to the overall barrier for the hydride
transfer step is the energy required to convert the adsorbed alkoxy
species into a carbenium ion. The shift from the oversimplified cluster
models to much more realistic and chemically representative periodic
models reduced substantially the predicted barriers for the hydride
transfer reactions.

In this work, we significantly extend our
understanding of the
isobutane–alkene alkylation mechanism on the basis of a detailed
periodic DFT study using realistic zeolite models complemented by
extended microkinetic modeling and Configuration-al-Bias Monte Carlo
(CBMC)41−43 simulations. In particular, the role of the difference
in proton reactivity on the selectivity of the reaction is investigated.
We select the alkylation of isobutane with propene rather than 2-butene
as a model catalytic process to facilitate the product and reaction
path analysis, as it reduces the number of involved reaction intermediates.

The DFT analysis of the reaction paths reveals two different hydride
transfer reaction mechanisms (Figure 1). In the later microkinetic simulations we have included
the two mechanistic paths for all hydride transfer reactions, as illustrated
in Scheme 1. In path
I the hydride transfer occurs in a three-molecule complex of “carbenium–isobutane–alkene”.
In case the carbocation is a heptyl cation and the alkene molecule
is propene, the complex decomposes to product heptane and another
heptyl cation. As we will see later, this has important consequences
for the relative rates of the alkylate formation and carbocation deprotonation
path. The other hydride transfer reaction mechanism (path II) does
not involve a third molecule but requires a nearby Lewis basic site
that can accept a proton. For this mechanism, the reaction of heptyl
cation with isobutane yields heptane and an isobutene molecule. DFT
calculations show that in this case the hydride transfer and the isobutene
formation occur simultaneously. This is in line with the experimental
observation by Lercher et al.18 that, for
the self-alkylation, the hydride transfer and the short alkane production
are parallel. Microkinetic simulations indicate that path I dominates
the hydride transfer mechanism under the catalytic conditions. Furthermore,
these simulations show that, by varying the proton reactivity and
the reaction conditions, the relative rates of the competitive reaction
paths can be changed with large consequences for the selectivity and
productivity of the overall alkylation process. Consistent with earlier
experimental observations,10,24,44 we will consider the ratio of alkylate production versus alkene
production as a measure of catalyst alkylation productivity.

Figure 1 Schematic presentation
of the two competitive hydride transfer
reaction paths: hydride transfer synchronous with C–C bond
formation (path I) versus isobutane dehydrogenation (path II).

The manuscript is organized as
follows. First, in Quantum Chemical Calculations
on the Reaction Paths we discuss
the computational models and results of the quantum chemical calculations
on the reaction mechanisms with a particular focus on the hydride
transfer reactions and other important relevant elementary steps.
A complete list of quantum chemical results on which the microkinetic
simulations are based is summarized in the Supporting Information. A comparison of the reactivity of zeolite catalysts
with varying framework compositions is made to reveal the role of
the density of Brønsted acid sites (BAS) and La promotion on
changes in reaction paths and corresponding energies. The mechanistic
discussion is followed by Microkinetic Simulations, which presents the results of microkinetic simulations based on
the DFT-computed reaction energetics. The paper is concluded with Discussion and Conclusions. Details of DFT calculations,
computational models, and microkinetic simulations can be found in Methods at the end of the paper.

2 Quantum Chemical Calculations on the Reaction
Paths
2.1 Zeolite Models
Zeolites with medium
or small pores are not suitable as alkylation catalysts because of
the steric hindrance in the formation and diffusion of the bulky alkylates.
High catalytic activity and sufficient stability in isobutane−alkene
alkylation can only be achieved with large-pore zeolites (Figure 2a).45,46 In particular, La-exchanged faujasites have been identified by the
Lercher group as highly active alkylation catalysts because of their
slower deactivation rate.24,47−51 The main catalytic material to be investigated here is such a highly
acidic La-promoted zeolite of the faujasite structure, which will
be compared with zeolite models of the same topology but different
chemical composition resulting in a lower proton reactivity. Prior
physicochemical characterization and DFT calculations have demonstrated
that La3+ ions in the La-promoted faujasites are predominantly
stabilized within the sodalite cages in the form of multinuclear OH-bridged
La clusters (Figure 2b,c) or as isolated La3+ at SI sites in the
hexagonal prisms.50 The high alkylation
activity of La-exchanged faujasite associated with the La clusters
located in the sodalite cages will be shown to be due to its high
proton reactivity so that the deprotonation of carbenium ions is suppressed.

Figure 2 (a) Topology
and channel connectivity of the faujasite-type zeolite
structure and (b) atomistic model of the La-FAU zeolite containing
the catalytic Brønsted acid sites (BAS) and exchangeable La cations
in the form of (c) cationic La clusters ([La3O4H3]4+) confined inside the small sodalite cage.

Figure 2a shows
the structure of a faujasite-type zeolite represented by large supercages
connected through 12 ring channels. The periodic model used in our
studies has a Si/Al ratio equal to 7. In the pure hydrogen FAU it
contains six accessible Brønsted acid sites (BAS) within the
supercage. The La-promoted La-FAU model contains a trinuclear hydroxylated
La cluster ([La3O4H3]4+) inside the sodalite cage (Figure 2b,c) and has only two accessible BAS in the supercage.
To understand better the promoting role of La, we extend our computational
analysis with one additional structure, namely, the Na-FAU zeolite
(Figure S1 in the Supporting Information).
Similar to the case for La-FAU, the reactive supercage environment
of the Na-FAU model contains only two BAS, while the La cluster is
replaced by four Na+ ions inside the sodalite cages.

From the basic kinetic considerations based on the reaction mechanism
of Scheme 1 outlined
in the previous section, an ideal alkylation system would be such
that the rate of C–C bond formation betweena tert-butyl cation and propene (rC+-C) is higher than the rates of the carbenium ion deprotonation steps
(rdeprotonation). Furthermore, the hydride
transfer reaction should be faster than (i) the homologation of the
C7+ intermediates that is the C–C bond
formation between C7+ and alkene and (ii) the
C7+ deprotonation. Because alkene oligomerization
is the main deactivating path, its rate (roligomerization) should be the lowest for the whole catalytic network. Thus, the
order of the relative reaction rates in the ideal alkylation system
should be rhydride transfer > rC+-C > rdeprotonation > roligomerization.

The relative
rates depend strongly on the nature of the catalyst
system and the reaction conditions, which as we will see later are
usually far from the ideal trend. The chemical composition of the
solid acid catalysts defines their acid–base characteristics.
In general, a decreased proton reactivity/acidity results in the stabilization
of the grafted alkoxy species and in an overall decrease of the catalytic
reaction rates. Because of the concomitant increase in the zeolite
lattice basicity, the relative rate for the deprotonation increases
with respect to other steps of the catalytic process. The other factor
that directly influences these relative rates is the nature of the
carbenium ion intermediates. Protonation of small alkenes such as
propene and butene gives primary or secondary alkoxy species as the
stable intermediates with carbenium cations being the transition states.
In contrast, tertiary carbenim ions are present at finite temperatures
in the zeolites as the separated ion pairs so that they can relatively
freely move inside the zeolite cavity.52,53 The resulting
entropy gain compensates for the enthalpic losses due to the absence
of a covalent bond between the cationic carbon and the anionic zeolite
lattice site.54−57 In this study, such entropy effects are accounted for indirectly
in the microkinetic modeling. In view of the complexity of the mechanistic
paths considered here and given the expected similarities of the activation
entropies for the elementary steps of similar nature, the pre-exponential
factors were estimated on the basis of the available literature data
as outlined in Methods.

2.2 Hydride Transfer
Figure 3 presents the DFT-optimized
structures and computed energetics of the two hydride transfer paths
(as illustrated in Figure 1) inside the micropores of La-FAU and FAU zeolites. In line
with the earlier mechanistic proposal of Neurock et al.,39 our results show that the formation of the shared-hydride
cationic complex is accompanied by its reorientation inside the zeolite
void that allows optimization of its interaction with the negative
charge on the zeolite framework. The C7+ carbenium
ions can be part of transition states but can also be found as the
local minima. The relative energies of these different states in Figure 3 are given with reference
to the zeolite-grafted C7 alkoxy intermediate. Under the
catalytic conditions, the C7+ carbenium ion
is formed by the reaction of tert-butyl cation and
propene (elementary steps are indicated in Scheme S2 in the Supporting Information). The cationic center on C7+ is directed away from the anionic site on the
deprotonated zeolite lattice so that it can directly react with other
substrates along the alkylation cycle. A side path toward the grafted
C7 alkoxy species requires a prior rotation of the carbocation
inside the zeolite void.

Figure 3 Reaction intermediates and transition states
of the two hydride
transfer reaction paths and comparison of the energetics on La-FAU
and FAU: (a) propene-assisted hydride transfer synchronous with C–C
bond formation (path I); (b) hydride transfer with isobutene formation
(path II). The relative energies of reaction intermediates and transition
states are with respect to the C7 alkoxy species and the
reactants adsorbed in the siliceous part of the zeolite framework.
Illustration of the reaction intermediates and transition states:
Si, yellow; Al, blue; O, red; H, white; C, gray. The transferred hydride
is indicated in green.

The DFT results for the propene-assisted path (path I) are
given
in Figure 3a (Figure S2 in the Supporting Information). Path
I is a subcycle that starts with a C7+ intermediate
that forms a complex with isobutane and propene substrates. The interaction
of isobutane with C7+ species forms the hydride-sharing
complex C7+C4, which after propene
adsorption gives a precursor (C7+C4C3) for the hydride transfer process. Hydride transfer
resulting in the decomposition of this complex closes the cycle, yielding
the C7 alkylate product and a new C7+ intermediate, which acts effectively as a confined organocatalyst.
This cycle does not involve the formation of alkoxy intermediates.
The stabilizing effect of the coadsorbed isobutane and propene on
the C7+ intermediate is much stronger in FAU
than in La-FAU (−107 vs −66 kJ/mol), evidencing an intrinsically
lower stability of the C7+-containing ion pair
formed inside the lanthanum-free FAU model. The subsequent hydride
transfer step to give the C7 alkane (2,2-dimethylpentane)
proceeds with barriers of 15 and 38 kJ/mol for FAU and La-FAU catalysts,
respectively. The main contribution to the energy barriers arises
from the energy losses encountered upon the decomposition of the C7C7+ complex, which is easier for the
La-promoted system. This effect will be discussed in more detail in
the next section. We will show that in comparison with FAU, the La-FAU
supercage has a more efficient stabilization environment for the C7+ fragment that is left behind after the decomposition
of the C7C7+ complex.

The reaction
intermediates and computed energy diagrams for the
alternative bimolecular hydride transfer reaction (path II) simultaneously
occurring with the deprotonation of tert-butyl cation
are presented in Figure 3b (Figure S2 in the Supporting Information).
The reaction starts with the rotation of the hydride-sharing C7+C4 intermediate inside the supercage
with estimated rotation barriers of 13 and 17 kJ/mol for La-FAU and
FAU, respectively (Scheme S4 in the Supporting
Information). These rotations stabilize the C7+C4 cationic complex as it brings the C4 fragment
closer to the deprotonated lattice site, which provides better charge
compensation. The hydride transfers partially to the C7 moiety already upon the rotation, and it is completed upon further
deprotonation of the C4 fragment, resulting in a simultaneous
formation of C7 alkylate and isobutene coproduct. The deprotonation
readily occurs when the methyl group of the tert-butyl
fragment closely approaches the basic oxygens of the zeolite framework.
The computed barriers for this step are negligible for both models,
although the reaction in FAU is much more exothermic, evidencing the
higher basicity of the unmodified faujasite lattice. Importantly,
although in the La-FAU model the overall barriers for the two competing
hydride transfer paths are very similar, the concerted bimolecular
mechanism over La-free FAU proceeds with a barrier about half of that
for the alternative propene-assisted hydride transfer reaction.

The C7+ cations are relatively large carbenium
ions, so that the cumulative effect of the dispersion interactions
with the zeolite walls is sufficient to make even the secondary carbocations
stable in the geometries, when the cationic carbon is distantly situated
from the localized negative framework charges of the deprotonated
BAS. The transition states between C7+ and isobutane
are more bulky and fill nearly completely the available space of the
faujasite supercage. Hence, the alkylation reaction requires large
cavities for space-unconstrained reactivity.

2.3 Deprotonation
For the deprotonation
of C7+ cation, the hydrogen atom of the carbocation
that is donated to the solid has to be close to the negatively charged
oxygen atom associated with the deprotonated BAS. This geometrical
constraint implies that prior to the deprotonation step a zeolite-bound
alkoxy intermediate is formed, from which the proton is transferred
to the zeolite lattice with a concomitant formation of the C7= alkene product. The deprotonation energetics of the
C7+ intermediates are illustrated in Figure 4. Counterintuitively,
the activation energy for the deprotonation of the alkoxy intermediates
is lower in the La-FAU with a higher proton reactivity than in FAU.
This observation can be explained by the higher stability of the alkoxy
intermediate bound to the more basic lattice of the La-free model,
as is evidenced by the much lower exothermicity of the formation of
the grafted C7 alkoxy species from C7+ in La-FAU (−57 kJ/mol) than in FAU (−175 kJ/mol),
in line with our previous proposal on the lower basicity of the deprotonated
lattice of La-FAU in comparison with FAU.

Figure 4 Reaction intermediates
and transition states of C7+ deprotonation and
comparison of the energetics on La-FAU
and FAU. The relative energies of reaction intermediates and transition
states are with respect to the C7 alkoxy species in zeolites.
Illustration of the reaction intermediates and transition states:
Si, yellow; Al, blue; O, red; H, white; C, gray.

Under the actual catalytic conditions, this deprotonation
reaction
has to compete with the hydride transfer and oligomerization paths.
Only when the local isobutane concentration is sufficiently high will
it bias the hydride transfer. As we will see from the microkinetic
simulations, such conditions will effectively prevent the approach
of C7+ cation to the localized negatively charged
site of the zeolite framework. A similar effect is expected for the
coupling reaction of C7+ with another propene
molecule that will be the onset of the deactivation. The activation
energy for such a reaction (Figure S3 in
the Supporting Information) is slightly higher than that predicted
for the deprotonation, suggesting the dominant role of the latter
in the deactivation process.

Protonation of isobutene on a BAS
of the zeolite regenerates the tert-butyl cation
and brings the system back into the propagation
cycle (Figure S4). There is a fast equilibrium
between these two species in La-FAU zeolite. The estimated activation
barrier for isobutene protonation to form tert-butyl
cation is only 9 kJ/mol. The tert-butyl cation can
be further transformed into a tert-butoxy intermediate
with an activation barrier of 16 kJ/mol. When the transformation of
adsorbed isobutene in La-free FAU zeolite is considered, the tert-butyl cation is more adequately described as a transition
state on the potential energy surface formed with an activation barrier
of 53 kJ/mol. The difference in the natures of the tert-butyl cation in La-FAU and FAU is the direct result of the difference
in intrinsic zeolite acidity. The stronger acidity of La-FAU allows
more effective stabilization of the tert-butyl state
from a transition state into an intermediate, which is realized via
a partial compensation of the excess lattice negative charge by the
interaction with the cationic La complex. A similar lattice stabilization
effect has also been observed for the H/D exchange reaction of benzene
in extraframework Al-containing zeolites.58 The protonation of isobutene to tert-butyl cation
is much easier in more acidic La-FAU in comparison with FAU, and the
weak acidity of zeolite only favors the formation of the π complex
between BAS and isobutene.

2.4 C–C Bond Formation
The concerted
hydride transfer and deprotonation of isobutane gives the byproduct
isobutene, which can react with propene on BAS to form C7+ cations and produce C7 alkylates via subsequent
hydride transfer reactions. Depending on which alkene is protonated
first, different C7 isomers could be produced. The reaction
of protonated isobutene with propene forms a secondary C7+ similar to the propene-assisted hydride transfer path
discussed above, with 2,2-dimethylpentane alkylate formed after the
hydride transfer reaction. When isobutene reacts with the adsorbed
propene that is the grafted propyl species, a tertiary C7+′ is produced, from which another C7 isomer, namely 2,4-dimethylpentane, is formed after the hydride
transfer. The reaction of isobutene and propene can proceed via concerted
and stepwise mechanisms (Figure 5). The formation of secondary C7+ via the initial protonation of isobutene over La-FAU has activation
barriers of 10 and 6 kJ/mol for concerted and stepwise mechanisms,
respectively. The formation of tertiary C7+′
from protonated propene requires higher barriers of 31 and 65 kJ/mol
for the concerted and stepwise mechanisms, respectively. These reactivity
differences are attributed to the fact that the formation of secondary
C7+ takes place via a transition state of the
tertiary carbenium ion that is the protonated isobutene, which is
more energetically favorable than the secondary carbenium ion (protonated
propene) transition state involved in the formation of the tertiary
C7+′. Thus, our calculations indicate
that the formation of secondary C7+ corresponding
to the product of 2,2-dimethylpentane is favored for the reaction
of isobutene and propene over the alternative reaction channels. As
the above stability considerations of carbocations are independent
of the zeolite acid strength, the conclusion on the isomer selectivity
holds for both La-FAU and FAU systems considered here.

Figure 5 Reaction of isobutene
and propene on BAS on La-FAU: (a) formation
of secondary C7+ via protonated isobutene (corresponding
product, 2,2-dimethylpentane); (b) formation of tertiary C7+′ via protonated propene (corresponding product,
2,4-dimethylpentane). The relative energies of reaction intermediates
and transition states are with respect to the initially adsorbed π
complexes of isobutene or propene and the reactants adsorbed in the
siliceous part of the zeolite framework. Illustration of the transition
states: Si, yellow; Al, blue; O, red; H, white; C, gray.

Previous experimental studies identified 2,3-dimethylpentane
as
the main product of propene–isobutane alkylation59−61 rather than the 2,2-dimethylpentane product which could be expected
from the computational data presented thus far. This apparent inconsistency
is related to the fast isomerization of the initially produced secondary
C7+ (Figure S5 in
the Supporting Information). This process starts with an intramolecular
hydride shift, i.e. migration of a hydride ion from an adjacent carbon
atom to the positive carbon center resulting in a metastable 2,2-dimethylpentyl(3)
cation, which then undergoes an intramolecular methyl shift to produce
a 2,3-dimethylpentyl(2) cation. This isomerization reaction is very
fast and thermodynamically favorable, as it yields a very stable tertiary
carbenium ion. For the La-FAU catalyst, DFT calculations predict the
reaction to be exothermic by −68 kJ/mol and to proceed with
a barrier of only 3 kJ/mol. The hydride transfer from isobutane to
2,3-dimethylpentyl(2) cation at the next step gives 2,3-dimethylpentane,
in agreement with the experimental observations.

When isobutene
acts as the alkylation reagent, the C8 alkylate can be
produced via the self-alkylation (path 2c, Scheme 1). The reactions
of isobutene toward C8+ on the BAS in La-FAU
show activation barriers of 8 and 6 kJ/mol for concerted and stepwise
mechanisms, respectively (Scheme S8 in
the Supporting Information). The hydride transfer between C8+ and isobutane yields the C8 product, which
is 2,2,4-trimethylpentane. As C8+ and tertiary
C7+′ are structurally analogous, they
show similar reactivity toward hydride transfer. Hydride transfer
via the deprotonation path requires an activation barrier of 24 kJ/mol,
and the alternative path accompanied by the formation of C–C
bond between tert-butyl and propene has a barrier
of 61 kJ/mol.

Several carbenium species are produced during
the alkylation process,
which upon the hydride transfer from isobutane produce the corresponding
alkane products. We compare the reactivity of different carbenium
ions toward hydride transfer as well as the reactivity of propene
and isobutene as the alkylation reagents (Figure S6 in the Supporting Information). The interaction of a free
carbenium with isobutane leads to the formation of the hydride-sharing
complex, which could release the corresponding alkane via a concerted
deprotonation/hydride transfer mechanism or via a path involving the
assistance of another alkylation reagent molecule. The hydride transfer
accompanied by C–C bond formation yields a secondary C7+ or a tertiary C8+ when
propene or isobutene is used as the alkylation reagent. The C6+ and C7+sec show
similar reactivity for hydride transfer, as they are both secondary
carbeniums. Similar reactivity was also observed for the tertiary
carbenium C7+tert and C8+. In general, the intrinsic activation barriers for hydride
transfer with the secondary carbenium ions are lower than those with
the tertiary ions for both propene and isobutene used as the alkylation
reagents, implying higher reactivity of the secondary carbenium ions
in comparison to that of the tertiary ions. Furthermore, for all of
the carbenium ions, similar barriers of hydride transfer are predicted
for both propene and isobutene alkylation reagents. However, the self-alkylation
paths are generally more thermodynamically favorable because of the
higher stability of the produced tertiary C8+ carbenium ions.

For a summary of the energetics of the complete
reaction schemes
of propene–isobutane alkylation we refer to the Supporting Information.

2.5 Proton
Activity as a Function of Zeolite Composition
In this subsection
we will discuss the change in the proton activity
of different faujasite zeolites with varied chemical composition. Table 1 summarizes the computed
energy parameters for the key competing reaction steps as well as
the computed results of acidity probing for the selected zeolite models.
Adsorptions of CO and NH3 were used here as the acidity
probes. The increased stretching frequency of CO and increased adsorption
energy of ammonia indicates that La-FAU contains the most reactive
protons. The DFT results show that the zeolite composition, and accordingly
the reactivity of its BAS, affects the relative preference of the
hydride transfer reaction paths I and II. For the models FAU, La-FAU,
and Na-FAU, all of the reaction barriers decrease with increasing
acidity. For all of these aluminosilicate models DFT predicts higher
activation energies for the elementary hydride transfer reaction steps
than for the deprotonation reaction. However, mechanistic conclusions
based on a direct comparison of activation barriers of elementary
reactions has to be made with a certain amount of care, because of
the strong dependence of the reaction conditions and resulting surface
coverages expected for the apparent overall reaction rates. The catalytic
cycles of hydride transfer and deprotonation involve several elementary
reaction steps. In addition, all reaction steps are considered to
be reversible so that they also become partially equilibrated. These
effects are accounted for in the microkinetics simulations that are
presented in the next section.

Table 1 Comparison of Proton
Activity as a
Function of Faujasite Compositiona
model	no. of protons
per unit cell	Δν(OH)COads (cm–1)	ΔENH3	ΔE1 hydride transfer (path I)	ΔE2 hydride transfer (path II)	ΔEact,3 deprotonation	ΔEact,4 oligomerization	ΔEact,5 dimerization	
FAU	6	409	–125	140 (83)	72 (120)	82	110	124	
Na-FAU	2	518	–139	69	68	50	62	86	
La-FAU	2	625	–156	56 (29)	66 (33)	23	28	67	
a ΔE1 is the energy barrier required for the decomposition
of the C7C7+ complex in the hydride
transfer
path I as indicated in Figure 3a. ΔEact,2 is the energy
barrier required for the desorption of C7 alkane in the
hydride transfer path II as indicated in Figure 3b. Values in parentheses are the energy barriers
of hydride transfer with respect to the alkoxy species. ΔEact,3 is the activation barrier of C7+ deprotonation with respect to the C7 alkoxy
species as indicated in Figure 4. ΔEact,4 is the activation
barrier of the oligomerization reaction between C7+ and propene with respect to the C7 alkoxy species
as indicated in Figure S3 in the Supporting
Information. ΔEact,5 is the activation
barrier for propene dimerization (reaction step of surface propoxy
and propene). Energies are given in kJ/mol.

3 Microkinetic Simulations
To substantiate the above discussion and to get an insight into
the effect of the reaction conditions on the catalytic networks discussed
so far, we further constructed a microkinetic model based on the results
of DFT calculations. Microkinetics simulations are necessary because
product distributions illustrate that rate-controlling steps may change
with zeolite composition as well as reaction conditions. The values
of the activation energies in Table 1 already indicated differences in relative rates when
zeolite composition varies. This becomes enhanced and sometimes altered
when the effect of differences in local concentration at the reactive
center are compared. The results of the microkinetics simulations
that we present here have been obtained by solving the 107/77 ordinary
differential equations (ODE) for La-FAU/FAU without assuming a rate-controlling
step. For the extended details of the definition of the microkinetic
model, including the key assumptions and the list of elementary reaction
steps considered, we refer to Methods and
the Supporting Information.

In the
microkinetic simulations the adsorption of isobutane and
propene is considered to occur on two types of sites: i.e., the siliceous
wall and the Brønsted acidic protons. The propene and isobutane
molecules are initially adsorbed from the gas phase to the siliceous
zeolite walls and then readsorbed on the zeolite Brønsted acid
sites (BAS). In the simulations the relative energies of adsorption
on the proton sites are calculated with respect to the energy changes
from the siliceous site to BAS. The adsorption of propene and isobutane
at proton-free siliceous sites is approximated by the adsorption state
in all-silica FAU. For each reactant, the calculated adsorption energies
at the siliceous wall are similar for La-FAU, FAU, and all-silica
FAU models, with ΔE(pore-C3=) of −31 to −28 kJ/mol and ΔE(pore-C4) of −39 to −36 kJ/mol (Figure S7 and Table S1 in the Supporting Information).
These values are in agreement with the experimental data of alkane
adsorption on siliceous FAU, with a measured adsorption heat of 27
kJ/mol for propane and 33 kJ/mol for isobutane.62 The adsorption of reactants to the BAS is stronger. The
adsorption energies of isobutane from the siliceous wall to BAS change
by −17 kJ/mol for both La-FAU and FAU, and the energy changes
of adsorbed propene on BAS are more significant, with calculated values
of −48 and −34 kJ/mol for La-FAU and FAU, respectively.

Figure 6 summarizes
the most important results of microkinetics simulations for the La-FAU
and FAU systems. For La-FAU (Figure 6a), at high pressure and low temperature, the C7 alkylate is dominated by 2,2-dimethylpentane (which will
rapidly isomerize to 2,3-dimethylpentane by a secondary reaction that
is not included in the model) produced by the reaction of tert-butyl cation and propene. The negligible formation
of 2,5-dimethylpentane from the reaction of isobutene and propyl cation
is due to the lower stability of the sec-propyl cation
in comparison to that of the tert-butyl cation. The
second main products are C8 and propane.

Figure 6 Microkinetics simulated
production rates of the alkylation reaction
at different value of total pressure as a function of temperature.
(a) Predicated reaction rates on La-FAU model with corresponding surface
coverages of intermediates below, using DFT-calculated adsorption
energies of reactants in the proton-ree zeolite nanopores with values
of ΔEads(pore-C3=) = 28 kJ mol–1, and ΔEads(pore-C4) = 38 kJ mol–1 (C4/C3= = 7). (b) Microkinetic
simulations on La-FAU model with ΔEads(pore-C3=) = 28 kJ mol–1 and
ΔEads(pore-C4) = 28 kJ
mol–1 (C4/C3= =
7). (c) Microkinetic simulations on La-FAU model with ΔEads(pore-C3=) = 28 kJ
mol–1 and ΔEads(pore-C4) = 38 kJ mol–1 (C4/C3= = 700). (d) Microkinetic simulations on
La-FAU model with CBMC-calculated pore occupancy of propene and isobutane
(C4/C3= = 7). (e) Microkinetic simulations
on defect-free FAU model with ΔEads(pore-C3=) = 28 kJ mol–1 and
ΔEads(pore-C4) = 38 kJ
mol–1 (C4/C3= =
7). In the plots of surface coverages, P(*) and P(C4) indicate
the pore occupancies of vacancy and isobutane and Ads(C3=), Ads(C7=), Ads(C11=), and Ads(C3=C4) indicate
the adsorption complexes of propene, heptene, undecene, and coadsorbed
propene and isobutane on the BAS.

At higher temperatures the relative concentration of the
alkenes
increases. For the simulations carried out at a lower pressure, the
product distributions change dramatically, resulting in the increase
of the relative concentration of the alkene products. The main effect
of elevated pressure is the reduction of the local concentration of
propene, so that the deprotonation of C7+ carbenium
ions and C6 production become suppressed. This results
in less alkene and more alkylated product, because isobutane suppresses
propene adsorption. The minimum temperature of the reaction is determined
by the desorption temperature of the C7= molecules,
which at a low temperature block the reaction site due to adsorption
on the BAS. Self-alkylation is only found at elevated temperatures
because of the further depletion of propene due to its increased consumption
by the oligomerization reaction. The reaction of tert-butyl cation with isobutene then takes over and hydride transfer
generates the C8 self-alkylated product. Self-alkylation
with C8 coproduction occurs in parallel with undesirable
C3 and C6 alkane formation, as predicted according
to the Lercher mechanism.18

We next
explored the effect of the varying adsorption energies
of isobutane and propene on the results of the microkinetic modeling.
The adsorption energy of isobutane (ΔEads(pore-C4)) was decreased from 38 to 28 kJ/mol
(Figure 6b). In this
case, the pore occupancy of isobutane is much lower in comparison
to the previous case. For both pressure conditions, the C6= and C7= alkene products are the
dominant products, with much less observed C7 alkylate
product. As the pore occupancy of isobutane is low, the hydride transfer
is slow, resulting in very low C7 alkylate production.

The production selectivity is also strongly affected by the substrate
ratio in the hydrocarbon feed. When the ratio of isobutane and propene
is increased from 7 to 700 at a total pressure of 32 bar, which resembles
the state of minimized olefin concentration, the self-alkylated C8 product becomes dominating with the coproduced propane (Figure 6c). As the production
of C7 and C6 species requires propene, the formation
of the related C7 alkylate and alkene becomes strongly
suppressed. In addition, negligible production of C6 species
was observed in this case. This agrees with the experimental observation18 that self-alkylation takes over from production
of C7 species, when propene concentration becomes very
low.

To more accurately account for the relative concentrations
of reactants
at the reaction center, we also simulated the adsorption isotherms
of isobutane and propene in siliceous faujasite by the Configurational-Bias
Monte Carlo (CBMC) method41−43 (details in the Figure S8 and discussion in the Supporting Information). The
deduced adsorption heats (Figure S9 in
the Supporting Information) are in reasonable agreement with DFT-calculated
values. The CBMC adsorption simulations of isobutane and propene mixture
with a ratio of 7 (Figure S10 in the Supporting
Information), the usually used experimental ratio, indicate that at
high pressure there is strong competitive adsorption of isobutane
and propene in the siliceous zeolite that suppresses propene adsorption
(Figure S11 in the Supporting Information).
In comparison with the results based on adsorption equilibria (Figure 6a, ptotal = 32 bar), the reactant concentrations deduced from
CBMC were also used in the microkinetic simulations (Table S2 in the Supporting Information), and the production
rates in this case are qualitatively the same but with a predominance
of production rate of C7 alkylate (Figure 6d). This is due to the much higher pore occupancy
of isobutane and suppression of propene adsorption (Figure S11a). This is one of the main reasons that alkylation
by microporous zeolites has a high selectivity versus deactivating
intermediates.

For FAU, only negligible C7 alkylate
production is observed
(Figure 6e). At low
temperature the main products are the self-alkylated C8 molecule, hexane, and propane. At slightly higher temperatures alkene
formation takes over. The main reason for C8 instead of
C7 formation is depletion of propene due to rapid competing
dimerization and rapid deprotonation of tert-butyl
cation to give isobutene. The lower acidity makes the relative rate
of deprotonation faster than in La-FAU, so that selectivity to alkene
is larger. The strong acidity of zeolite catalyst is desired for the
high C7 alkylation activity, so that a high tert-butyl cation concentration is maintained during the catalytic propagation
to produce alkylates.

The effect of the two hydride transfer
reaction paths on the alkylation
kinetics was studied by excluding one specific elementary step (Figure 7). One notes that
omission of the elementary reactions that correspond to reaction path
II has only a minor effect on the selectivity of the La-FAU system
and no effect on that of the FAU zeolite. However, excluding the elementary
reactions of hydride transfer path I leads to substantial losses of
C7 alkylate for La-FAU as well as C6 production
in FAU, which proves that path I is the dominant reaction for hydride
transfer. The difference in kinetics of the La-FAU system versus that
of the FAU system can be expressed as a difference in relative rates.
In La-FAU one finds the relation rC+-C > rhydride transfer > rdeprotonation > rdimerization, whereas in FAU this relation is rdimerization > rhydride transfer ≈ rdeprotonation > rC+-C. The inversion of the relative rates rC+-C and rdimerization is related to the
increased instability of the carbenium ion versus its rate of deprotonation
when proton reactivity decreases.

Figure 7 Dependence of microkinetics simulated
production rates of the alkylation
reaction on the two reaction paths of hydride transfer (HT). (a) Predicated
reaction rates on La-FAU model excluding HT path I or path II for
C7+. (b) Predicated reaction rates on FAU model
excluding HT path I or path II for C6+.

The difference in product distribution
of La-FAU and FAU clearly
indicates higher rates of oligomerization and deprotonation than hydride
transfer in FAU in comparison to that in La-FAU. The self-alkylation
reaction gives hexane as a coproduct for FAU while propane is the
main coproduct for La-FAU. Hexane is generated by hydride transfer
from an intermediate hexyl cation, formed by oligomerization of propene.
This increased rate of propene oligomerization is the reason that
propene is depleted and self-alkylation dominates for FAU. Experimentally,
the oligomerization reaction leads to catalyst deactivation. The FAU
result agrees with the experimental observation that self-alkylation
increases with the onset of catalyst deactivation,18 and the initially higher C8 alkane concentration
in comparison to that of C8= alkene implies
that hydride transfer is faster than the alkane deprotonation but
less fast in comparison to La-FAU.

4 Discussion
and Conclusions
The main chemical difference between La-FAU
and FAU is the higher
proton reactivity and higher negative zeolite framework charge of
the former. It is generally found experimentally13 that catalysts with strong Brønsted sites are most
productive for the alkylation reaction versus oligomerization. Whereas
our simulations do not explicitly consider the deactivation reactions,
we observe a substantially increased relative propene dimerization
rate and rate of alkene production for the model material with weaker
BAS protons. An increased relative rate of oligomerization and alkene
formation is experimentally found to be related to an increased rate
of deactivation. We ascribe our model findings to the increased rate
of deprotonation of the tert-butyl carbenium that
is essential to maintain the alkylate-producing propagation cycle
through C–C bond formation. This is not compensated by a relative
increase in the rate of the hydride transfer reaction.

An important
new result of the DFT calculations on chemically representative
periodic models63 is the finding of two
types of hydride transfer reactions. We identified path I with a carbenium–isobutane–alkene
complex intermediate. Hydride transfer is synchronous with C–C
bond formation. Hydride transfer path II is a reaction between carbenium
ion and isobutane. In this case proton back-donation to the zeolite
occurs synchronously with hydride transfer. Then alkylate product
and isobutene are primary products of this hydride transfer reaction.
We find that hydride transfer reaction path I is the dominating path
of the hydride transfer reaction.

In the deactivation reaction
we did not explicitly study the formation
of the final bulky carbocation products proposed by Lercher24 and others64 that
consume protons by the pairing reaction and block zeolite micropore
space. An estimate of the rate of deactivation can be made on the
basis of the relative rates of propene oligomerization versus C7 and C8 product formation. A difference in rates
of the factor 10 to 100 implies that deactivation will take place
after ca. 10–1000 turnovers, which gives a deactivation rate
estimate comparable to the values reported by Lercher and co-workers.24 The exponential decrease in rate and the dominance
of olefin oligomerization that they report imply that the hydride
transfer becomes suppressed. This may be because site occupation by
deactivating molecules in the same cavity leads to steric inhibition
of the large reaction intermediates for hydride transfer. Indeed,
the activation barriers of the hydride transfer reaction increase,
as is confirmed by the results summarized in Figure 8. This increases the relative rate of the
competing reactions of oligomerization and deprotonation. Deactivation
effectively becomes an autocatalytic process. The loss of protons,
due to deactivating proton consumption reactions,65 will also increase the negative charge of the zeolite framework,
contributing to an increase in the rate of the deprotonation reaction.

Figure 8 Effect
of deactivating (model) carbonaceous deposits inside the
zeolite cage on the activation barrier of the hydride transfer.

The current mechanistic findings
impose conflicting requirements
on the geometrical demands to the micropore structure that would give
the optimum alkylation rates. Due to the size of the hydride transfer
complex of isobutane and carbenium ions, a zeolite structure with
large pore size should be beneficial. This also decreases the probability
of the carbenium ion to approach the zeolite negative framework site
necessary for proton back-donation and the generation of deactivating
alkenes. The microkinetic simulations indicate the importance of high
isobutane occupation of the zeolite micropores and the importance
of competitive adsorption of olefin. In order to bias the relative
rate of the hydride transfer reaction, a high isobutane concentration
near the reaction center is needed. This requirement would be optimally
realized for the small-pore zeolites, in which the local isobutane
concentration would be increased through strong physical adsorption
due to confinement. These conflicting requirements on pore size dimension
suggest that a bimodal channel structure should be looked for in an
optimal catalyst. An indication that alternative channel structure
structures provide a better performance is the report that zeolite
beta is a more stable catalyst for the alkylation reaction.22

The strong intrinsic acidity of zeolitic
protons is essential for
a good alkylation catalyst. A stable catalytic subcycle of alkylate
formation requires stabilization of the carbenium ion intermediates.
A low proton site concentration but a relatively high as well as delocalized
negative charge as present in La-FAU is favorable. These help to stabilize
the positive charge on the carbenium ion away from the proton acceptance
site. Ways to alter the negative charge on the framework and to increase
its negative polarity could be investigated by substitution of part
of the Al in the aluminosilicate framework by Ga or Fe or partial
replacement of Si by Ge.

In summary, we have employed theoretical
approaches to carry out
a comprehensive study of the complex reaction networks underlying
the alkylation process by zeolite solid acid catalysts. The complex
reaction mechanism of the isobutane–propene alkylation is discussed
in full detail, on the basis of a complete analysis of computed reaction
intermediates and extended microkinetic simulations without an a priori
choice of rate-limiting elementary reaction steps. It is shown that
when the hydride ion is transferred to a carbenium ion it requires
a complex of three molecules: isobutane, carbenium ion, and additional
olefin, and bond cleavage and bond formation reactions occur simultaneously.
Alternatively, hydride transfer between isobutane and carbenium ion
occurs in concert with proton back-donation to the zeolite framework,
by which the isobutane is converted into isobutene. A high selectivity
of alkylated product requires strong competition of the hydride transfer
reactions versus deprotonation of the carbenium ion intermediates.
Oligomerization of alkenes is the main reaction that deactivates the
catalysts. The deprotonation reaction is suppressed by solid acids
with strongly acidic protons and delocalized framework negative charge
that stabilize the large intermediate carbenium ions. The role of
the zeolite nanopores is also essential because they increase the
local concentration of adsorbed isobutane, necessary for efficient
hydride transfer, which counteracts the undesirable deprotonation
reaction of the carbenium intermediates.

5 Methods
5.1 DFT Calculations
All periodic DFT
calculations were performed using VASP with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof
(PBE) functional.66−70 The projected augmented waves (PAW) method was used to describe
the electron–ion interactions.71,72 The cutoff
energy of the plane waves was set to 500 eV. Brillouin zone sampling
was restricted to the Γ point.73 Convergence
was assumed to be reached when the forces on each atom were below
0.05 eV/Å. A modest Gaussian smearing of 0.05 eV was applied
to band occupations around the Fermi level, and the total energies
were extrapolated to σ → 0. van der Waals interactions
were described by the dispersion-corrected DFT-D3 method with Becke–Jonson
damping.74 The climbing image nudged elastic
band (CI-NEB) method was used to determine the minimum energy path
and to locate the transition state structures.75 The maximum energy geometries along the reaction path obtained
with the CI-NEB method were further optimized using a quasi-Newton
algorithm. The highest energy structures located along the reaction
coordinate were referred to as transition states, although their nature
was not confirmed through vibrational analysis. The reaction coordinate
for hydride transfer over zeolites is known to be extremely flat,
making it difficult to isolate the true transition state. These aspects
have been fully discussed by Neurock et al. in ref (39). The energetics of the
reaction intermediates and transition states were directly obtained
from DFT-D3 calculations without further thermal corrections.

5.2 Computational Models
The rhombohedral
faujasite unit cell with periodic boundary condition was used as a
computational model.76 The cell parameters
were optimized for the defect-free faujasite model (FAU) with an Si/Al
ratio of 7. The FAU model contains six framework Al atoms in the unit
cell with charge-compensating protons at O1 positions. The optimized
lattice parameters are a = b = c = 17.44 Å and α = β = γ = 60°.
The La-containing faujasite (La-FAU) contains [La3O4H3]4+ in a sodalite cage with vicinal
supercage BAS (Figure 2).50 The positive charge of the La cluster
was compensated by substituting four protons in the FAU model, and
the zeolite models were always kept neutral. Full geometry optimizations
with [La3O4H3]4+ and adsorbates
were performed with fixed cell parameters. The Na-FAU model was built
by replacement of the La cluster with four Na cations, located in
the sodalite cage’s 6 rings facing the hexagonal prisms which
connect sodalite cages (Figure S1 in the
Supporting Information).

5.3 Microkinetic Simulations
The corresponding
ordinary differential equations for the alkylation reaction rates
have been solved under steady-state conditions by employing the in-house-developed
C++ program MKMCXX.77 The reaction rate
for the forward and backward elementary step is expressed using the
Arrhenius equation:  where A stands for
the pre-exponent
and Ea, R, and T refer to the activation barrier, gas constant, and temperature,
respectively. The pre-exponents of propene and isobutane adsorption/desorption
were estimated from the calculated adsorption entropies by De Moor
et al.78,79 (Table S3 in
the Supporting Information), with values of 1010/1016 s–1 for adsorption/desorption. To take
account of a small diffusion constant barrier, an activation barrier
of 10 kJ/mol was used for the adsorption from the gas phase to zeolite
micropores.80 As the entropy losses are
higher for products with greater carbon numbers, the (re)adsorption
and desorption of these products were considered with estimated pre-exponents
of 109/1017 s–1, to correct
for respective entropy loss and gain. For surface reactions, we have
used the rule that formation of an alkoxy species decreases the activation
entropies further by the same amount (pre-exponents of 109/1017 s–1) and that activation entropies
do not vary between the physically adsorbed and transition states
(pre-exponents of 1013/1013 s–1) except for association and dissociation reactions that are chosen
to have the same pre-exponent differences as those between adsorption
and desorption (109/1017 s–1). These are reasonable approximations that are of the same order
of magnitude as found in the literature. These approximations imply
that we ignore differences in the pre-exponents that arise due to
size or shape differences of the reaction.55,56,81,82 With these
assumptions we take account of the change in degrees of freedom in
the respective reactions considered but assume the pores to be wide
enough that there is no steric inhibition to their movement.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.7b02877.Full reaction
network of propene–isobutane alkylation,
details of CBMC simulations, and additional supporting data (PDF)



Supplementary Material
cs7b02877_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
⊥ Inorganic
Systems Engineering group, Department of Chemical Engineering,
Delft University of Technology, Van der Maasweg 9, 2629 HZ Delft,
The Netherlands.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
C.L. thanks China Scholarship Council (CSC) for financial
support. The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO)
is acknowledged for providing access to the supercomputer facilities.
T.J.H.V acknowledges NWO–CW for a VICI grant. E.A.P. acknowledges
support from the Ministry of Education and Science of Russian Federation
(Project 11.1706.2017/4.6). The authors thank Mr. Bart Zijlstra and
dr. Ivo Filot for technical assistance with the microkinetics simulations.
The authors acknowledge the support from The Netherlands Center for
Multiscale Catalytic Energy Conversion (MCEC). R.A.v.S acknowledges
discussion with J. A. Lercher during his stay at TUM as advanced institute
scholar.
==== Refs
References
Corma A. 
Chem. Rev. 
1995 , 95 , 559 –614 10.1021/cr00035a006 .
Bibby D. M. ; Howe R. F. ; McLellan G. D. 
Appl. Catal.,
A 
1992 , 93 , 1 –34 10.1016/0926-860X(92)80291-J .
Corma A. ; Martínez A. 
Catal. Rev.: Sci.
Eng. 
1993 , 35 , 483 –570 10.1080/01614949308013916 .
Martínez A. ; Corma A. ; Prieto G. ; Arribas M. A.   In Encyclopedia of
Catalysis ; Wiley : Hoboken, NJ , 2002 .
Feller A. ; Lercher J. A. 
Adv. Catal. 
2004 , 48 , 229 10.1016/S0360-0564(04)48003-1 .
Traa Y. ; Weitkamp J.   In Handbook
of Heterogeneous
Catalysis ; Wiley-VCH : Weinheim, Germany , 2008 .
Wang H. ; Meng X. ; Zhao G. ; Zhang S. 
Green Chem. 
2017 , 19 , 1462 –1489 10.1039/C6GC02791A .
Ono Y. 
Catal. Today 
2003 , 81 , 3 –16 10.1016/S0920-5861(03)00097-X .
Sanchez-Castillo M. A. ; Madon R. J. ; Dumesic J. A. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 2164 –2175 10.1021/jp0489875 .16851208 
Corma A. ; Miguel P. J. ; Orchillés A. V. 
Appl. Catal.,
A 
1996 , 138 , 57 –73 10.1016/0926-860X(95)00245-6 .
Martínez-Espín J. S. ; De Wispelaere K. ; Janssens T. V. W. ; Svelle S. ; Lillerud K. P. ; Beato P. ; Van Speybroeck V. ; Olsbye U. 
ACS Catal. 
2017 , 7 , 5773 –5780 10.1021/acscatal.7b01643 .
Müller S. ; Liu Y. ; Kirchberger F. M. ; Tonigold M. ; Sanchez-Sanchez M. ; Lercher J. A. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 15994 –16003 10.1021/jacs.6b09605 .27960343 
Corma A. ; Martinez A. ; Martinez C. 
J. Catal. 
1994 , 146 , 185 –192 10.1016/0021-9517(94)90021-3 .
D’Amico V. J. ; van Broekhoven E. H. ; Nat P. J. ; Nousiainen E. H. ; Jakkula J.   NPRA Annual refining
meeting, San Antonio, TX, Mar 17, 2002 .
http://www.hydrocarbonprocessing.com/news/2015/12/china-s-wonfull-starts-up-world-s-first-solid-acid-catalyst-alkylation-unit (accessed May 19, 2017 ).
Kazansky V. B. 
Catal. Today 
1999 , 51 , 419 –434 10.1016/S0920-5861(99)00031-0 .
Schmerling L. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1945 , 67 , 1778 –1783 10.1021/ja01226a048 .
Feller A. ; Guzman A. ; Zuazo I. ; Lercher J. A. 
J. Catal. 
2004 , 224 , 80 –93 10.1016/j.jcat.2004.02.019 .
Corma A. ; Juanrajadell M. I. ; Lopeznieto J. M. ; Martinez A. ; Martinez C. 
Appl. Catal., A 
1994 , 111 , 175 –189 10.1016/0926-860X(94)85050-X .
Platon A. ; Thomson W. J. 
Appl. Catal., A 
2005 , 282 , 93 –100 10.1016/j.apcata.2004.12.005 .
Simpson M. F. ; Wei J. ; Sundaresan S. 
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
1996 , 35 , 3861 –3873 10.1021/ie960172y .
de
Jong K. P. ; Mesters C. M. A. M. ; Peferoen D. G. R. ; van
Brugge P. T. M. ; de Groot C. 
Chem. Eng. Sci. 
1996 , 51 , 2053 –2060 10.1016/0009-2509(96)00062-0 .
Weitkamp J. ; Traa Y. 
Catal.
Today 
1999 , 49 , 193 –199 10.1016/S0920-5861(98)00424-6 .
Feller A. ; Barth J.-O. ; Guzman A. ; Zuazo I. ; Lercher J. A. 
J. Catal. 
2003 , 220 , 192 –206 10.1016/S0021-9517(03)00251-3 .
Schmerling L. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1946 , 68 , 275 –281 10.1021/ja01206a038 .
Otvos J. W. ; Stevenson D. P. ; Wagner C. D. ; Beeck O. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1951 , 73 , 5741 –5746 10.1021/ja01156a075 .
Gates B. C. ; Katzer J. R. ; Schuit G. C. A.  Chemistry of Catalytic
Processes ; McGraw-Hill : New York , 1979 .
Weitkamp J. ; Jacobs P. A. ; Martens J. A. 
Appl. Catal. 
1983 , 8 , 123 –141 10.1016/0166-9834(83)80058-X .
Narbeshuber T. F. ; Vinek H. ; Lercher J. A. 
J. Catal. 
1995 , 157 , 388 –395 10.1006/jcat.1995.1304 .
Bell A. T. ; Head-Gordon M. 
Annu. Rev. Chem.
Biomol. Eng. 
2011 , 2 , 453 –477 10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-061010-114108 .22432627 
Van
Speybroeck V. ; Hemelsoet K. ; Joos L. ; Waroquier M. ; Bell R. G. ; Catlow C. R. A. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 7044 –7111 10.1039/C5CS00029G .25976164 
van Santen R. A.   In Modern
Heterogeneous Catalysis ; Wiley-VCH : Weinheim, Germany , 2017 ; p 345 .
Kazansky V.
B. ; Frash M. V. ; van Santen R. A. 
Catal. Lett. 
1997 , 48 , 61 –67 10.1023/A:1019066718512 .
Frash M. V. ; Solkan V. N. ; Kazansky V. B. 
J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 
1997 , 93 , 515 –520 10.1039/a606280f .
Boronat M. ; Viruela P. ; Corma A. 
J. Phys. Chem. A 
1998 , 102 , 9863 –9868 10.1021/jp981484c .
Boronat M. ; Viruela P. ; Corma A. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
1999 , 103 , 7809 –7821 10.1021/jp990987v .
Boronat M. ; Viruela P. ; Corma A. 
Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2000 , 2 , 3327 –3333 10.1039/b002013n .
Yaluris G. ; Rekoske J. E. ; Aparicio L. M. ; Madon R. J. ; Dumesic J. A. 
J. Catal. 
1995 , 153 , 54 –64 10.1006/jcat.1995.1107 .
Janik M. J. ; Davis R. J. ; Neurock M. 
J. Catal. 
2006 , 244 , 65 –77 10.1016/j.jcat.2006.08.013 .
Mullen G. M. ; Janik M. J. 
ACS Catal. 
2011 , 1 , 105 –115 10.1021/cs1000619 .
Vlugt T. J. H. ; Krishna R. ; Smit B. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
1999 , 103 , 1102 –1118 10.1021/jp982736c .
Dubbeldam D. ; Calero S. ; Vlugt T. J. H. ; Krishna R. ; Maesen T. L. M. ; Smit B. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2004 , 108 , 12301 –12313 10.1021/jp0376727 .
Vlugt T. J. H. ; García-Pérez E. ; Dubbeldam D. ; Ban S. ; Calero S. 
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2008 , 4 , 1107 –1118 10.1021/ct700342k .26636364 
Weitkamp J. ; Maixner S. 
Zeolites 
1987 , 7 , 6 –8 10.1016/0144-2449(87)90109-6 .
Chu Y. F. ; Chester A. W. 
Zeolites 
1986 , 6 , 195 –200 10.1016/0144-2449(86)90047-3 .
Corma A. ; Martinez A. ; Martinez C. 
Catal. Lett. 
1994 , 28 , 187 –201 10.1007/BF00806048 .
Guzman A. ; Zuazo I. ; Feller A. ; Olindo R. ; Sievers C. ; Lercher J. A. 
Microporous Mesoporous
Mater. 
2005 , 83 , 309 –318 10.1016/j.micromeso.2005.04.024 .
Lercher J. A. ; Feller A. ; Gaab S.   U.S. Patent 7,459,412 , 2008 .
Sievers C. ; Liebert J. S. ; Stratmann M. M. ; Olindo R. ; Lercher J. A. 
Appl. Catal.,
A 
2008 , 336 , 89 –100 10.1016/j.apcata.2007.09.039 .
Schüßler F. ; Pidko E. A. ; Kolvenbach R. ; Sievers C. ; Hensen E. J. M. ; van
Santen R. A. ; Lercher J. A. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 21763 –21776 10.1021/jp205771e .
Schüßler F. ; Schallmoser S. ; Shi H. ; Haller G. L. ; Ember E. ; Lercher J. A. 
ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4 , 1743 –1752 10.1021/cs500200k .
Tuma C. ; Sauer J. 
Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2006 , 8 , 3955 –3965 10.1039/B608262A .17028686 
Piccini G. ; Alessio M. ; Sauer J. 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 5235 –5237 10.1002/anie.201601534 .
Tuma C. ; Sauer J. 
Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2005 , 44 , 4769 –4771 10.1002/anie.200501002 .
Gounder R. ; Iglesia E. 
Acc. Chem. Res. 
2012 , 45 , 229 –238 10.1021/ar200138n .21870839 
Van
der Mynsbrugge J. ; De Ridder J. ; Hemelsoet K. ; Waroquier M. ; Van Speybroeck V. 
Chem. - Eur. J. 
2013 , 19 , 11568 –11576 10.1002/chem.201301272 .23897717 
Sarazen M. L. ; Iglesia E. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.
S. A. 
2017 , 114 , E3900 –E3908 10.1073/pnas.1619557114 .28461504 
Liu C. ; Li G. ; Hensen E. J. M. ; Pidko E. A. 
J. Catal. 
2016 , 344 , 570 –577 10.1016/j.jcat.2016.10.027 .
Cardona F. ; Gnep N. S. ; Guisnet M. ; Szabo G. ; Nascimento P. 
Appl. Catal., A 
1995 , 128 , 243 –257 10.1016/0926-860X(95)00079-8 .
Guisnet M. ; Gnep N. S. 
Appl. Catal., A 
1996 , 146 , 33 –64 10.1016/0926-860X(96)00282-7 .
Nivarthy G. S. ; Feller A. ; Seshan K. ; Lercher J. A. 
Microporous Mesoporous
Mater. 
2000 , 35–36 , 75 –87 10.1016/S1387-1811(99)00209-7 .
Eder F. ; Lercher J. A. 
Zeolites 
1997 , 18 , 75 –81 10.1016/S0144-2449(96)00127-3 .
Pidko E. A. 
ACS Catal. 
2017 , 7 , 4230 –4234 10.1021/acscatal.7b00290 .
Yarulina I. ; Goetze J. ; Gucuyener C. ; van Thiel L. ; Dikhtiarenko A. ; Ruiz-Martinez J. ; Weckhuysen B. M. ; Gascon J. ; Kapteijn F. 
Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2016 , 6 , 2663 –2678 10.1039/C5CY02140E .
Haw J. F. ; Song W. ; Marcus D. M. ; Nicholas J. B. 
Acc. Chem. Res. 
2003 , 36 , 317 –326 10.1021/ar020006o .12755641 
Kresse G. ; Hafner J. 
Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1993 , 48 , 13115 –13118 10.1103/PhysRevB.48.13115 .
Kresse G. ; Hafner J. 
Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys. 
1994 , 49 , 14251 –14269 10.1103/PhysRevB.49.14251 .
Kresse G. ; Furthmüller J. 
Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1996 , 54 , 11169 –11186 10.1103/PhysRevB.54.11169 .
Kresse G. ; Furthmüller J. 
Comput. Mater. Sci. 
1996 , 6 , 15 –50 10.1016/0927-0256(96)00008-0 .
Perdew J. P. ; Burke K. ; Ernzerhof M. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1996 , 77 , 3865 –3868 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865 .10062328 
Blöchl P. E. 
Phys. Rev. B:
Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1994 , 50 , 17953 –17979 10.1103/PhysRevB.50.17953 .
Kresse G. ; Joubert D. 
Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1999 , 59 , 1758 –1775 10.1103/PhysRevB.59.1758 .
Monkhorst H. J. ; Pack J. D. 
Phys. Rev. B 
1976 , 13 , 5188 –5192 10.1103/PhysRevB.13.5188 .
Grimme S. ; Ehrlich S. ; Goerigk L. 
J. Comput. Chem. 
2011 , 32 , 1456 –1465 10.1002/jcc.21759 .21370243 
Henkelman G. ; Jónsson H. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
2000 , 113 , 9978 –9985 10.1063/1.1323224 .
Hriljac J. A. ; Eddy M. M. ; Cheetham A. K. ; Donohue J. A. ; Ray G. J. 
J. Solid State
Chem. 
1993 , 106 , 66 –72 10.1006/jssc.1993.1265 .
Filot I. A. W. ; Zijlstra B. ; Hensen E. J. M.   MKMCXX program; http://www.mkmcxx.nl.
De
Moor B. A. ; Reyniers M.-F. ; Marin G. B. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 11 , 2939 –2958 10.1039/b819435c .19421509 
De
Moor B. A. ; Ghysels A. ; Reyniers M.-F. ; Van Speybroeck V. ; Waroquier M. ; Marin G. B. 
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2011 , 7 , 1090 –1101 10.1021/ct1005505 .26606357 
van
de Runstraat A. ; van Grondelle J. ; van Santen R. A. 
Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res. 
1997 , 36 , 3116 –3125 10.1021/ie960661y .
van Santen R. A. ; Niemantsverdriet J. W.   In Chemical
Kinetics and Catalysis ; Springer US : Boston, MA , 1995 ; p 153 .
Campbell C. T. ; Sellers J. R. V. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 18109 –18115 10.1021/ja3080117 .23033909

