
==== Front
ACS CatalACS CatalcsaccacsACS Catalysis2155-5435American
Chemical Society 10.1021/acscatal.8b01779Research ArticleHow Chain Length and Branching Influence the Alkene
Cracking Reactivity on H-ZSM-5 Cnudde Pieter De Wispelaere Kristof Vanduyfhuys Louis Demuynck Ruben Van der Mynsbrugge Jeroen ‡Waroquier Michel Van Speybroeck Veronique *Center for Molecular Modeling, Ghent University, Technologiepark 903, B-9052, Zwijnaarde, Belgium* E-mail: Veronique.VanSpeybroeck@ugent.be.05 09 2018 05 10 2018 8 10 9579 9595 07 05 2018 09 07 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Catalytic alkene
cracking on H-ZSM-5 involves a complex reaction
network with many possible reaction routes and often elusive intermediates.
Herein, advanced molecular dynamics simulations at 773 K, a typical
cracking temperature, are performed to clarify the nature of the intermediates
and to elucidate dominant cracking pathways at operating conditions.
A series of C4–C8 alkene intermediates
are investigated to evaluate the influence of chain length and degree
of branching on their stability. Our simulations reveal that linear,
secondary carbenium ions are relatively unstable, although their lifetime
increases with carbon number. Tertiary carbenium ions, on the other
hand, are shown to be very stable, irrespective of the chain length.
Highly branched carbenium ions, though, tend to rapidly rearrange
into more stable cationic species, either via cracking or isomerization
reactions. Dominant cracking pathways were determined by combining
these insights on carbenium ion stability with intrinsic free energy
barriers for various octene β-scission reactions, determined
via umbrella sampling simulations at operating temperature (773 K).
Cracking modes A (3° → 3°) and B2 (3°
→ 2°) are expected to be dominant at operating conditions,
whereas modes B1 (2° → 3°), C (2°
→ 2°), D2 (2° → 1°), and E2 (3° → 1°) are expected to be less important.
All β-scission modes in which a transition state with primary
carbocation character is involved have high intrinsic free energy
barriers. Reactions starting from secondary carbenium ions will contribute
less as these intermediates are short living at the high cracking
temperature. Our results show the importance of simulations at operating
conditions to properly evaluate the carbenium ion stability for β-scission
reactions and to assess the mobility of all species in the pores of
the zeolite.

alkene crackingchain lengthH-ZSM-5carbenium ionβ-scissionmolecular
dynamicsumbrella samplingfree energydocument-id-old-9cs8b01779document-id-new-14cs-2018-01779hccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Zeolite-catalyzed alkene cracking is omnipresent in many petrochemical
processes for the production of fuels and light olefins.1−4 Recently, the increase in shale gas recovery and interest in renewable
feedstocks have reinforced the search for new technologies to fulfill
the rising propene demand. As a result, propene on-purpose processes
have become an economically viable alternative for the conventional
steam cracking technology.5−9 In this context, catalytic alkene cracking has gained importance
(e.g., to increase light olefin yields in product streams with a high
content of less valuable C4–C8 alkenes).9,10 Despite the wide application of alkene cracking, the nature of the
reactive intermediates remains unclear.3,11,12 Experimentally tracking individual reactions at the
high operating temperatures (773–833 K) is a difficult task
due to the occurrence of elusive intermediates and many side reactions.13−18 Nowadays, molecular modeling techniques have matured to a level
where zeolite catalyzed reactions can be modeled at true operating
conditions, using advanced sampling techniques which allow to reconstruct
the free energy surface.18

Herein,
we unravel the stability and reactivity of typical alkene
cracking intermediates at operating conditions with first-principle-based
molecular dynamics methods. We show that static methods relying on
a limited number of points on the potential energy surface inadequately
account for the conformational mobility and temperature effects, hence
giving a limited view on the zeolite catalyzed transformations under
study. For alkane cracking, some molecular dynamics-based modeling
studies clearly showed the importance of accounting for true operating
conditions to unravel the nature of reactive intermediates and predict
accurate product selectivities.16 Buc̆ko
et al. studied propane cracking in H–CHA and found that alkanes
move rather freely in the zeolite pores at elevated temperature.19 Later, this was also confirmed by Jiang et al.,
who studied the effect of temperature on the adsorption of short alkanes
in SSZ-13.20 Bell and co-workers showed
for n-pentane and n-hexane cracking
in H-ZSM-5 that more realistic product selectivities were obtained
by means of innovative quasiclassical trajectory simulations.21,22

Upon alkene adsorption at the Brønsted acid site (BAS)
of
the catalyst, four different intermediates can be identified, as depicted
in Scheme 1. A physisorbed
van der Waals complex (1) is characterized by only dispersion interactions
between the alkene and the zeolite walls. If the alkene double bond
interacts with the acid proton, a physisorbed π-complex (2)
is formed. Two chemisorbed intermediates can occur upon protonation
of the double bond, either a carbenium ion (3) or a framework bound
alkoxide (4). Especially the nature of the chemisorbed intermediates
is strongly debated.16,23−26 Despite the availability of many
studies on the stability of carbenium ions and their impact on β-scission
reactions, only a limited number of modeling studies are available
on carbenium ion chemistry at operating conditions.27,28

Scheme 1 Four Possible Adsorption States of a 2-Alkene
1: van der Waals complex,
2: π-complex, 3: carbenium ion, 4: alkoxide.

The high reactivity of alkenes hampers the experimental characterization
of the often short-lived intermediates.16,18 Aside from
a series of NMR29−35 and FT-IR26,36−41 studies, the nature of chemisorbed alkenes has mainly been studied
theoretically. Early computational studies were carried out on small
zeolite cluster models, consisting of only a few T atoms.42−49 These spectroscopy experiments and cluster calculations both identified
alkoxides as stable intermediates. Recently, Sarazen and Iglesia addressed
the stability of bound species during alkene reactions on solid acids
by a combined in situ infrared and density functional theory (DFT)
study.50,51 Carbenium ions, on the other hand, were
suggested to act as transition-state species rather than cracking
intermediates.25,52,53 However, spectroscopy studies are typically carried out at relatively
low temperatures. Since entropy effects disfavor the formation of
framework-bound alkoxides,27 different
conclusions may arise at cracking temperatures. Furthermore, small
cluster calculations lack a proper description of the zeolite confinement
which may complicate alkoxide and facilitate carbenium ion formation.16,17,54−57

The existence of stable
carbenium ions was proposed in a number
of computational studies on extended cluster models or periodically
repeated unit cells.24,27,28,58−61 Fang et al. concluded that the
accommodation of the hydrocarbons inside the zeolite framework is
a crucial factor in determining carbenium ion stability.61 The accommodation of carbenium ions is in addition
influenced by the length of the adsorbed olefin.62,63 Upon comparison with small cluster models, it was indicated that
steric constraints destabilize bulky alkoxides relative to carbenium
ions. Boronat et al. also stated that alkoxide stability is sensitive
to the framework type as well as the position and local environment
of the acid site.24,55 Next to the zeolite topology,
the stability of the intermediates and the cracking activity are also
influenced by the acid strength of the zeolite.64−67 Chu et al. demonstrated that
the reactivity of dimerization and cracking reactions can be significantly
enhanced by increasing the acid strength. The sensitivity to acid
strength is especially important for intermediates with ionic character.64

The adsorption states of isobutene have
received considerable interest.
Upon isobutene protonation, either a tertiary butyl carbenium or a
tertiary butoxide is formed.24,68−72 Tuma and Sauer were the first to include entropy effects to periodic
PBE calculations on H-FER.68 They assessed
the importance of the entropy effect in comparing stability differences
at finite temperatures. At temperatures of 120 K or higher, the tert-butyl carbenium ion was shown to be more stable than
the tert-butoxide.68,69 This observation
was later confirmed for a set of different zeolites by Nguyen et al.70 Dai et al. obtained evidence for the existence
of a tert-butyl carbenium ion in a combined computational
and spectroscopy study.72

Recently,
we investigated the nature of linear and branched C4 and
C5 intermediates in H-ZSM-5 at reaction conditions
using a combination of static DFT calculations and molecular dynamics
simulations.27,28 For the linear species, alkoxides
and π-complexes were shown to be stable intermediates at low
temperature (323 K). At a higher temperature of 773 K, though, alkoxides
are very unstable and become short-lived inside the zeolite pores.
Most modeling studies performed so far presumed the existence of alkoxide
species even at high cracking temperatures,50,58,73−75 whereas our modeling
efforts point toward the importance of carbenium ions at operating
conditions for catalytic cracking.27,28 For the branched
species, the tert-butyl carbenium ion was identified
as the most stable intermediate, at both low and high temperature.
Tertiary alkoxides were shown to be unstable, even at low temperature.27,28

Alkene cracking occurs through a complex network of oligomerization,
isomerization, H-transfer, and cracking reactions. β-Scission
of carbenium ions is generally accepted as the olefin cracking mechanism
on solid catalysts.3,11,56,76−78 Upon β-scission,
a free alkene and a smaller chemisorbed carbenium ion are formed.
These primary products can also be subject to further alkylations
and subsequent cracking.12 Fast isomerizations
prior to the cracking reactions allow the formation of several carbenium
ion types (primary, secondary, and tertiary) with different relative
stabilities.12,56,76 β-Scission reactions are therefore often classified according
to the carbocation type involved in the reactant and product state
(vide infra).

Several experimental studies focused on characterizing
and predicting
the olefin cracking product distribution.75,79−88 Standl et al. developed a single-event kinetic model capable of
correctly estimating olefin cracking selectivities.85,86,89 Rate coefficients for each β-scission
mode were considered to be independent of the chain length.89 Nevertheless, Buchanan et al.12 showed that C5–C8 olefin cracking
rates over H-ZSM-5 at 783 K increase with carbon number. For longer
olefins, the number of available isomers becomes larger; hence, more
energetically favorable β-scission modes, involving branched,
tertiary carbocations, are accessible.12 However, pore size restrictions in H-ZSM-5 may prevent the formation
of highly branched isomers.12,75−77,90−95

In previous modeling studies,45,58,73,74,96 alkene cracking pathways have mainly been investigated with static
DFT calculations. For C6–C8 olefin cracking
in H-ZSM-5, Bhan and co-workers found that activation energies are
determined primarily by the substitution order of the transition state
and to a lesser extent by the substitution order of the reactant.74 The highest activation energies were observed
for β-scission modes involving a transition to a primary carbocation,
while the lowest are found for β-scissions with a transition
to a tertiary carbocation. However, the static modeling approach,
considers only a single adsorbate configuration on the potential energy
surface, while the energy surface for alkene adsorption is quite flat
and contains many nearly isoenergetic local minima.28 Also, at high temperature, entropy contributions may be
underestimated considerably.16,19,97,98 Many studies a priori postulated
stable alkoxide intermediates as cracking reactants58,96,73,74 and deduced
the governing cracking modes based on the stability of alkoxides and
intrinsic β-scission barriers determined from static DFT calculations.

In this work, we aim at gaining insight into the alkene cracking
mechanism in H-ZSM-5 at operating conditions by using advanced molecular
dynamics simulations. We investigate how the stability of carbenium
ions in the reactant, transition and product states affect crucial
β-scission rates at 773 K, a typical cracking temperature. To
obtain a proper understanding of the stability of the intermediates
formed upon C4–C8 alkene adsorption at
the Brønsted acid sites, a selection of linear, mono-, di-, and
tribranched alkenes with varying chain length are investigated as
depicted in Scheme 2. Primary carbenium ions are not retained due to their highly unstable
nature.12,74,85,86 Ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, which inherently
account for entropy effects and adsorbate mobility, are carried out
to determine the lifetime of the various intermediates. In a next
step, this knowledge is used to study the reactivity of linear and
branched C8 intermediates toward monomolecular alkene cracking.
Starting from the previously identified stable intermediates we estimate
the reaction kinetics at operating conditions for five specific β-scission
modes (Scheme 3). Herein,
we adopt the nomenclature, introduced by Weitkamp et al.99 to distinguish between the elementary β-scission
modes. Our approach relies on enhanced sampling molecular dynamics
techniques to reconstruct the free energy profile at cracking conditions.
A critical comparative assessment is made with activation energies
at 0 K, predicted by static DFT calculations. Overall, the study yields
new insights into the nature and reactivity of plausible intermediates
and the impact of carbenium ion stability on the cracking pathways
at operating temperatures.

Scheme 2 Adsorbed π-Complex and Carbenium Ion
Intermediates of the Linear,
Monobranched, and Multibranched C4–C8 Alkenes
Scheme 3 Five Possible β-Scission Modes for Monomolecular C8 Alkene Cracking Pathways
2 Computational Methods
2.1 Zeolite
Model
All calculations are
performed on a fully periodic model of H-ZSM-5, containing 289 atoms
and a single acid site per unit cell. This way, the confinement of
the zeolite pores can be properly accounted for. H-ZSM-5 exhibits
the MFI topology, characterized by perpendicularly intersecting straight
and sinusoidal 10-ring channels, forming a three-dimensional medium-sized
pore system. A Brønsted acid site is created by substituting
a Si atom at the T12 position by an Al atom and a charge-compensating
proton. The active site is located at the intersection of the straight
and sinusoidal channel, allowing maximal space for the adsorbed guest
molecules. The time-averaged dimensions of the orthorhombic unit cell
are obtained from a preliminary 5 ps molecular dynamics run in the
NpT ensemble at 773 K and 1 bar (cf. Table S1).

2.2 Static Calculations
To evaluate activation
barriers and reaction energies for a set of β-scission reactions,
static DFT calculations are employed using the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation
Package (VASP 5.4.1).100−103 First, transition states for the β-scission reactions were
searched by the improved dimer method.104 To localize the reactant and product states corresponding to the
identified transition state, the atoms were slightly displaced along
the imaginary normal mode corresponding to the transition state motion.
Then, the reactant and product ions were relaxed into the ground state
with the conjugate gradient method. For all calculations, the Γ-point
approximation for the sampling of the Brillouin zone was applied.
Each stationary state has been optimized using the gradient corrected
PBE functional105 with additional Grimme
D3 dispersion corrections106 and the projected
augmented wave method (PAW).107,108 The plane wave kinetic
energy cutoff was set to 600 eV while the self-consistent field (SCF)
convergence criterion was fixed at 10–5 eV. The
unit cell volume was kept fixed during the geometry optimization to
eliminate the effect of lattice strain and to ensure the same truncated
basis set is used. Energies are reported at the PBE-D3 level to allow
proper comparison with the molecular dynamics simulations. The nature
of the optimized local minima and transition states was verified by
a normal-mode analysis. To obtain the normal modes, the partial Hessian
vibrational analysis (PHVA)109−111 was applied on the adsorbate
and an 8T cluster of the framework, centered around the acid. Thermal
corrections were estimated on the basis of the harmonic oscillator
(HO) approximation. Ultimately, we determined the reaction enthalpies,
entropies, and Gibbs free energies at the cracking temperature of
773 K using the in-house developed TAMkin software.112

2.3 Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics
Simulations
Molecular dynamics simulations were performed
to assess the nature
and lifetime of alkene cracking intermediates. The dynamic behavior
of some intermediates may depend on the reaction conditions such as
temperature and pressure. In contrast to static calculations, framework
flexibility and entropy effects can be inherently accounted for. All
ab initio MD simulations have been carried out with the CP2K software
package (CP2K 3.0),113 using the revPBE114 level of theory with additional Grimme D3 dispersion
corrections,106 a DZVP basis set and GTH
pseudopotentials.115 A combination of Gaussian
and plane waves (GPW)116,117 basis functions with a cutoff
energy of 320 Ry are used. The self-consistent field (SCF) convergence
criterion was set at 10–6 eV. The time step for
integrating the equations of motion was set at 0.5 fs. The simulations
were performed in the NVT ensemble at a temperature of 773 K, controlled
by a chain of five Nosé–Hoover thermostats.118,119

After an equilibration run of 5 ps, a production run of 100
ps was performed to obtain a sufficient sampling of the phase space.
When isomerizations or other rearrangements occurred in the equilibration
run or at the beginning of the production run, the simulation was
repeated thrice with reinitialized starting conditions. This will
ensure that the observed transition is not merely a rare event, caused
by the random choice of initial velocities.

The identification
of the various possible intermediates that are
sampled in the MD simulation was computed on the basis of a distance
criterion. The adsorbate is classified as a physisorbed π-complex
if the distances between the acid proton and the double bond carbon
atoms are both smaller than 2.85 Å; otherwise, it is considered
as a van der Waals complex. The sampled state is considered a chemisorbed
carbenium ion if all distances between a hydrogen and an acid site
oxygen (Oz) are larger than 1.25 Å.
To track the position of the positive charge in the carbenium ion
state, the trivalent carbon atom is identified by assigning each hydrogen
to the closest carbon. An alkoxide is sampled if a covalent C–Oz bond with the framework smaller than 1.9
Å is formed.

2.4 Metadynamics Simulations
The probability
of sampling rare events, like isomerization or cracking reactions
in regular MD is typically very low. To enhance the sampling of these
activated transitions, accelerated sampling techniques are required.
Metadynamics simulations (MTD) are applied to assess the free energy
difference between the elusive intermediates.120,121 We applied the same procedure as described in ref (27). The sampling of specific
reaction paths on the free energy surface requires the definition
of a collective variable (CV), uniquely describing the reaction coordinate.120−122 MTD simulations are run with the same settings as for the MD simulations,
i.e., in the NVT ensemble at actual cracking conditions (773 K). At
regular instants during the simulation, Gaussian hills are spawned
along the collective variable which is defined based on coordination
numbers (CN):  in which the sum
runs over two sets of atoms i and j with rij the interatomic distance between
atoms i and j and r0 a reference distance.
The parameters nn and nd are set
at 6 and 12, respectively. All simulations in this work use a single
CV (1D MTD): CN(Ch-Hh) – CN(Hh-Oz) to describe the proton transfer
from the zeolite (z) to the hydrocarbon (h), shown in Scheme 4. A reference distance of 1.25
Å is selected which is close to typical transition state bond
distances for (de)protonation reactions.

Scheme 4 Collective Variable
(Difference of Coordination Numbers) Used in
the Metadynamics Simulations of the Protonation of a 2-Alkene into
a 2-Alkyl or 3-Alkyl Carbenium Ion
To ensure a clear distinction between reactant, product,
and transition
state, isomerizations were prevented; hence, the same carbon atom
would get protonated each time. To this end, the simulation is constrained
to the particular area of interest by applying quadratic walls. Hills
with a height of 2 kJ/mol and a width of 0.035 are added every 100
time steps. Upon each recrossing of the barrier, the hill height was
reduced by half to improve the convergence of the free energy profile.
The latter is reconstructed on the basis of the sum of all spawned
Gaussian hills along the reaction coordinate. The simulations were
continued until the addition of extra hills no longer changed the
resulting free energy profile. Finally, activation free energy barriers
ΔG‡ were computed as the
difference between the maximal free energy in the transition state
(TS) region and the minimal free energy in the reactant (R) or product
(P) valley.    

Additional technical details on the MTD simulations can be
found
in Section S2 of the SI.

2.5 Umbrella Sampling
In metadynamics
simulations, the reaction profile is obtained through multiple crossings
of the activated transition state, separating the reactant and product
valley. Accordingly, this requires the existence of clearly defined,
stable minima to allow the forward and backward reactions to be properly
sampled. However, in the case of β-scission reactions the formed
reaction products are often unstable and prone to rapid rearrangements.
Since these reorganizations are not uniquely described by the selected
collective variables, the sampling of the backward reaction may be
hindered. Therefore, the more robust umbrella sampling (US) method123,124 is used to determine the free energy profiles for the selected alkene
cracking reactions. With this technique, the conformational space
is subdivided into a number of windows along the reaction coordinate
that are sampled individually during the free energy simulations.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first application of umbrella
sampling to study zeolite-catalyzed reactions.

All umbrella
sampling simulations have been performed with CP2K as MD engine, interfaced
with the PLUMED module.125 The protonation
of a linear alkene into a carbenium ion is sampled using a coordination
number between the acid site oxygen atoms and the hydrocarbon hydrogen
atoms, CN(Oz-Hh) as collective
variable (Scheme 5a).
To properly describe the cracking reaction, a coordination number
between all atoms involved in the β-scission; e.g., the carbon
atoms in α and β position of the positive charge, CN(Cα-Cβ), is defined as collective variable
(Scheme 5b). The total
range of the collective variable, q, is divided into
a number of windows. For each window, biased MD simulations are run
in parallel. The initial configuration for each window is randomly
selected from a moving bias potential simulation, describing the entire
collective variable range of the reaction. To ensure a sufficient
sampling along the entire reaction coordinate, harmonic bias potentials,
centered around the equilibrium value q0, are employed.  

Scheme 5 Collective Variables
(Coordination Numbers) Used during the Umbrella
Sampling Simulations of (a) the Protonation of 2-Alkenes and (b) the
β-Scission of a Carbenium Ion
The free energy difference in each window can be obtained
from
the sampling distribution along the specified collective variable.
The weighted histogram analysis method (WHAM),126,127 implemented by the Grossfield Laboratory,128 is applied to reconstruct the free
energy profiles by combining the results of each window. An overview
of the used collective variables, the umbrella positions and bias
strengths in the US simulations can be found in Table S2 of the SI.

3 Results
and Discussion
3.1 Influence of Chain Length
on Carbenium Ion
Stability
The stability of adsorbed alkene intermediates
is—next to temperature and branching—influenced by the
chain length of the adsorbate. Longer alkyl chains are expected to
adsorb more strongly due to the increased contribution of dispersion
interactions. Entropy is also expected to become more important for
longer chains.50 To assess the impact of
the chain length effect, we investigated the dynamic behavior of a
series of linear and branched C4–C8 alkene
intermediates (see Scheme 2) with MD simulations at 773 K. In our previous work, we showed
that both linear and branched pentoxides are unstable inside the zeolite
pores at elevated temperature. Instead, they immediately transform
into carbenium ions.27,28 Based on these observations,
we can safely assume that longer alkoxides will not exist either.
Therefore, we only performed MD simulations starting from the physisorbed
alkene π-complex and the chemisorbed carbenium ion.

3.1.1 Linear Alkenes
For the linear alkenes,
we considered the homologous series of 2-alkenes, ranging from 2-butene
to 2-octene. In the course of the simulations, spontaneous alkene
protonation and deprotonation reactions are occasionally observed.
Since the transitions between neutral alkene and carbenium ion species
are sampled in regular MD simulations, we can evaluate their relative
stability by comparing the lifetime of these intermediates. Figure 1 summarizes the resulting
time fractions during which the alkene π-complex, the alkene
van der Waals complex, and the carbenium ion are sampled in the various
MD simulations. Starting from the carbenium ion configuration, two
independent simulations (A and B) are conducted.

Figure 1 Fractions of the sampled
intermediates during the 100 ps MD simulations
on the linear C4–C8 species at 773 K,
with either the π-complex or carbenium ion as starting configuration.
Two independent carbenium ion simulations are denoted as A and B (*data
taken from ref (27)).

Figure 1 reveals
some trends which are specific for the linear alkenes. First, the
combined fractions of the physisorbed states (π-complex and
van der Waals complex) range from 86 to 100% in every simulation,
showing that the neutral alkene is significantly more stable than
the carbenium ion for the entire C4–C8 range. The van der Waals complex is slightly favored over the π-complex,
but frequent transitions (500–1000 per simulation) take place
between the two physisorbed states. No clear trend with increasing
chain length can be identified for the ratio of π-complex to
van der Waals complex. Despite the additional stabilization from the
π-H interaction in the π-complex, the more loosely bound
van der Waals complex is entropically favored at high temperature.
To study the mobility and the entropic contributions of the various
species in the zeolite pores in depth, we postprocessed our MD data
to determine for each adsorbate the translational part to the entropy
in the zeolite pore system and to construct 2D scatter plots visualizing
the mobility of the various species and 1D probability distributions
along the x, y, and z directions. The y direction corresponds to the
direction of the straight channel, whereas the direction of the sinusoidal
channel lies in the xz plane. More details are given
in Section S5 of the SI. Furthermore, for
2-butene and 2-octene, we disentangled the contributions from the
π-complex and van der Waals complex. The resulting mobility
plots for 2-butene are shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2 Scatter plot of the center of mass of (a) the 2-butene
π-complex
and (b) the 2-butene van der Waals complex inside the channel system
of H-ZSM-5, projected on the xy plane. The purple
sphere represents the location of the acid site.

It is immediately clear that the van der Waals complex has
a much
larger mobility compared with the π-complex and travels along
relatively long paths in the straight channel of the zeolite during
the ca. 70 ps in which the van der Waals complex is sampled. The entropic
stabilization of the van der Waals complex due to translational movements
in the straight channel is about 7 kJ/mol higher than the entropic
stabilization of the π-complex. The translational entropy contributions
for all species are summarized in Table S5. Similar mobility plots for 2-butene, 2-octene, isobutene, and 2,3,4-trimethyl-2-pentene
are shown in Figure 3. The distinction between the various adsorbed states has not been
made anymore, as the latter exist for the majority of time in their
carbenium ion state (vide infra). The mobility of 2-butene and 2-octene
are substantially different. 2-butene enters more deeply into the
sinusoidal channel, whereas the longer 2-octene chain prevents the
adsorbate to enter the sinusoidal channel efficiently in a simulation
time span of 90 ps. Instead, 2-octene travels further along the straight
channel of the zeolite, which yields an additional entropic stabilization
of about 14 kJ/mol for the 2-octene van der Waals complex compared
to the π-complex.

Figure 3 Scatter plot of the center of mass of (a) 2-butene,
(b) 2-octene,
(c) isobutene, and (d) 2,3,4-trimethyl-2-pentene inside the channel
system of H-ZSM-5, projected on the xy plane. The
purple sphere represents the location of the acid site.

Second, (de)protonation reactions occasionally
occur during the
course of the simulations. The probability of sampling a protonated
alkene is small but not negligible at higher chain lengths. Approximate
lifetimes for the various carbocations are shown in Figure S5. For longer alkenes, the maximum carbenium ion lifetime
increases due to inductive and hyperconjugative stabilization which
allow for a better accommodation of the positive charge. During the
sampling of the cationic state, low-barrier hydride shifts are frequently
observed. This effect also contributes to the enhanced stabilization
of longer alkyl cations. While only two carbon atoms can bear the
positive charge in a n-butyl carbenium ion, the charge
can effectively be delocalized over six carbon atoms in an octyl carbenium
ion. Isomerization occurs either via a 1,2-hydride shift, a 1,3-hydride
shift, or a 1,5-hydride shift for the longer alkyl chains. The positive
charge distribution among the carbon atoms of each alkyl carbenium
ion is visualized in Figure 4. Owing to the short sampling times of the cationic state,
the reported distributions do not represent the equilibrium. Nevertheless,
they clearly show that the positive charge preferably resides on the
central carbon atoms of the chain.

Figure 4 Delocalization of the positive charge
(%) along the alkyl chain
during the carbocation sampling of the 2-alkyl carbenium ion simulations
(simulation A and B combined).

The transformation of a physisorbed complex into a carbenium
ion
is an activated process, even at higher temperatures. Cracking modes
starting from linear carbenium ions (D2 mode, see Scheme 3) would first have
to overcome the barrier for carbenium ion formation. To quantify the
free energy difference between the carbenium ion and the physisorbed
alkene more accurately and to determine free energies of activation
for their interconversion, metadynamics simulations are carried out
for the protonation of 2-alkenes.

The uncertainty on free energy
barriers from a single metadynamics
simulation can be quite large.27 Therefore,
to obtain reliable free energy estimates, each simulation was repeated
5 times and the average and spread on the resulting activation barriers
and reaction free energies are reported in Table 1. The 2-alkene protonation barrier (ΔG‡fwd) has a constant value
of 50 kJ/mol approximately, regardless of the chain length. The free
energy barrier for deprotonation (ΔG‡bwd) is systematically lower than the protonation barrier.
The relatively low deprotonation barriers, combined with the overall
higher stability of the alkenes are in line with the relatively small
fraction of the time in which carbenium ions are sampled in the MD
simulations. The free energy differences (ΔGr) corroborate the observation that the positive charge
is better accommodated at central chain positions. Both the C4 and C5 carbenium ions are around 25 kJ/mol higher
in free energy than the corresponding alkenes. For the C7 and C8 species, a clear distinction can be made between
the 2-alkyl and 3-alkyl carbenium ion. While the 2-alkyl carbenium
ions are about 21 kJ/mol higher in free energy than the corresponding
2-alkenes, the 3-alkyl carbenium ions are only 10 kJ/mol less stable
than the 2-alkenes.

Table 1 Average Free Energy
Activation Barriers
and Reaction Free Energies at 773 K for the Protonation of the Linear
C4–C8 Alkenes into the Corresponding
Carbenium Ions from Metadynamics Simulationsa
 	 	ΔG‡fwd (kJ/mol)	ΔG‡bwd (kJ/mol)	ΔGr (kJ/mol)	
C4	2-butene
→ 2-butyl
cation*	52 ± 4	23 ± 2	26 ± 5	
C5	2-pentene → 2-pentyl cation*	49 ± 4	26 ± 2	23 ± 4	
2-pentene → 3-pentyl cation*	49 ± 4	22 ± 6	27 ± 5	
C6	2-hexene → 2-hexyl
cation	48 ± 3	30 ± 4	18 ± 1	
2-hexene → 3-hexyl
cation	46 ± 3	30 ± 4	17 ± 7	
C7	2-heptene → 2-heptyl
cation	47 ± 3	23 ± 4	24 ± 2	
2-heptene → 3-heptyl
cation	47 ± 3	38 ± 3	9 ± 4	
C8	2-octene → 2-octyl
cation	50 ± 3	26 ± 5	23 ± 7	
2-octene → 3-octyl
cation	48 ± 3	38 ± 3	10 ± 3	
a The symbol *
indicates data taken
from ref (27).

In principle, free energy differences
between the various adsorbed
states can also be roughly deduced from regular MD simulations provided
that sufficient transitions are sampled. The free energy differences
between the linear alkenes and carbenium ions from the regular MD
simulations are presented in Table S8 in
SI. Although the carbenium ion sampling time is rather short, the
ΔG estimates from regular MD and MTD simulations
are in good agreement. For all C5 to C8 MD simulations
with a sufficiently large carbenium ion sampling time, the alkene/carbenium
ion free energy differences lie in the same range as those predicted
by the MTD simulations.

3.1.2 Branched Alkenes
Branched alkenes
contain tertiary carbon atoms which may significantly impact the stability
order of the intermediates. In earlier work, we have shown that the
tertiary carbenium formed upon isobutene and 2-methyl-2-butene adsorption
is a stable intermediate at 773 K.27 In
this section, we evaluate the influence of chain length on C4–C8 alkenes with one or more methyl branches.

Figure 5 shows the
fractions of the states sampled in MD simulations at 773 K for the
monobranched 2-methyl-2-alkenes (cf. Scheme 2). Irrespective of chain length, carbenium
ions from branched alkenes are clearly much more stable than from
linear alkenes. In contrast to the linear alkenes, no clear trend
with higher carbon number can be discerned. Throughout the largest
part of the simulations, tertiary carbenium ions are sampled. Hydride
shifts to secondary carbenium ions are rarely observed. The positive
charge resides almost exclusively on the tertiary carbon atom, reflecting
the higher stability of tertiary carbenium ions. This is also evidenced
by the lifetime of these carbenium ions across the different simulations,
depicted in Figure S6. The observed maximum
lifetime of the tertiary carbenium ions is much larger than for any
of the linear, secondary carbenium ions.

Figure 5 Fractions of the intermediates
sampled during the 100 ps MD simulations
on the monobranched C4–C8 species at
773 K, either with the π-complex or carbenium ion as starting
configuration (*data taken from ref (27)).

All branched 2-methyl-2-alkenes are also stable, although
the physisorbed
alkene fraction is much smaller compared to linear alkenes. The π-complex
comprises only a very small fraction, indicating that the van der
Waals complex is by far the most stable physisorbed state. Clearly,
the bulkier branched alkenes are sterically more hindered making it
more difficult to approach the acid site to form the π-complex.

Similar observations can be made for C6–C8 alkene isomers with multiple side chains. Figure 6 displays the fractions of
the sampled intermediates in MD simulations on a set of di- and tribranched
alkenes at 773 K. Carbenium ions are again the dominating intermediates
due to the presence of tertiary carbon atoms. The smallest tribranched
2,3,4-trimethyl-2-pentyl species exists solely as carbenium ion, regardless
of the starting configuration. Immediate protonation takes place at
the beginning of the alkene simulation. Despite the presence of neighboring
tertiary carbon atoms, almost no H-shift isomerizations are observed
for the multiple branched chains. The barrier for isomerization between
different tertiary carbenium ions appears to be much higher than for
secondary carbenium ions. In contrast to the linear chains, for which
isomerization partly provided stabilization, tertiary carbenium ions
are stable, regardless of the positive charge position along the chain.
All carbenium ions for the branched species remain positioned at the
intersection of the straight and sinusoidal channel as is clear from
the mobility plots for isobutene and 2,3,4-trimethyl-2-pentene, shown
in Figure 3c,d respectively.
Due to the cationic nature, these species remain relatively close
to the positive acid site to avoid excessive charge separation.

Figure 6 Fractions of
the sampled intermediates during the 100 ps MD simulations
on the multiple branched C6–C8 species
at 773 K, either with the π-complex or carbenium ion as starting
configuration.

For C6+ alkenes,
geminal methyl substituted intermediates,
i.e., with a quaternary carbon atom, can also be formed. However,
our MD simulations indicate that these species are extremely unstable.
In all simulations of the homologous series of 2,2-dimethyl-3-alkyl
secondary carbenium ions (Scheme 2), immediate rearrangements are observed. The 2,2-dimethyl-3-butyl
carbenium ion instantly isomerizes via a methyl shift into the 2,3-dimethyl-2-butyl
carbenium ion. The larger 2,2-dimethyl-3-pentyl and 2,2-dimethyl-3-hexyl
carbenium ions both stabilize through a rapid H-shift, followed by
a β-scission reaction, forming the tert-butyl
carbenium ion and propene/butene. Opposed to these extremely reactive
secondary carbenium ions, the tertiary and highly branched 2,4,4-trimethyl-2-pentyl
carbenium ion remains stable for the entire simulation time. However,
previous studies have reported that the formation of species with
geminal methyl substitutions or more than two methyl substitutions
is prohibited by the pore dimensions.76,85,93−95

In conclusion, at typical
cracking temperatures, linear alkenes
are predominantly found as π-complex or van der Waals complex
in the zeolite pores. Linear carbenium ions are short-living, although
their lifetime increases with chain length, since the positive charge
can be delocalized over more carbon atoms. Alkenes with one or multiple
branches occur almost exclusively as carbenium ions with a relatively
low mobility compared to linear alkenes.

3.2 Reactivity
of C8 Cracking Intermediates
β-scission
of carbenium ions is widely accepted as the predominant
mechanism for alkene cracking in zeolites. Next to the stability of
the cationic reactants, the stability of the product cations, formed
in the transition state, is a key factor determining the reactivity.74,75 From the MD analysis, physisorbed alkenes and tertiary carbenium
ions were identified as the most stable species for linear and branched
alkenes respectively. In this section, the reactivity of the governing
C8 intermediates toward catalytic cracking of different
β-scission modes is assessed. Three possible cracking modes
for the highly stable tertiary carbenium ion reactants are considered,
as shown in Scheme 3: a transition from a tertiary carbenium to a primary carbenium ion
(mode E2), to a secondary carbenium ion (mode B2) or to a tertiary carbenium ion (mode A). For linear alkenes, only
a secondary to primary carbenium ion transition (mode D2) can occur. Transitions from a secondary carbenium ion to a secondary
carbenium ion (mode C) or to a tertiary carbenium ion (mode B1) are not explicitly considered as our MD simulations indicate
that these cracking precursors tend to immediately isomerize to more
stable tertiary carbenium ions. We therefore assume that isomerization
occurs much faster than cracking and that the contribution of these
β-scission modes will be minimal. For the B2-1 reaction,
both static and molecular dynamics simulations are performed to evaluate
the impact of true operating conditions on the cracking activity.
For this particular reaction, this was possible since tertiary carbenium
ions are still relatively stable at low temperature,27 and hence, they can be localized with static calculations.

3.2.1 Cracking Barriers from Static Calculations
First, static
DFT calculations were performed at the PBE-D3 level
of theory to quantify the intrinsic activation barrier for the cracking
of a tertiary 2,4-dimethyl-2-hexyl carbenium ion (reaction B2-1). This tertiary, dibranched cation was found to be a very stable
intermediate, and hence, it can be considered as a probable cracking
reactant. Upon β-scission, isobutene and a 2-butyl cation are
formed. This reaction is an example of the B2 cracking
mode in which a transition of a tertiary into a secondary carbenium
ion takes place. To illustrate that a multitude of transition states
exist and that the zeolite environment plays a crucial role in the
stabilization of the transition state, four differently oriented transition
state geometries around the BAS were localized, as shown in Figure 7. More information
on the particular transition states and their geometrical characteristics
is given in Section S10 of the SI.

Figure 7 Sinusoidal
channel view of the static geometries for the four B2-1
transition state structures.

In the optimized transition states, the 2-butyl cation interacts
with both the isobutene C=C bond and the nearest basic zeolite
oxygen. In the product state, the 2-butyl cation immediately binds
to the nearest framework oxygen, thus forming a 2-butoxide. Indeed,
static calculations previously showed that 2-butoxide is substantially
more stable than a 2-butyl carbenium ion.27 However, at cracking temperatures, entropy contributions disfavor
the formation of stable alkoxides, which is confirmed by the MD simulations
on C4 species (Figure 1), where the 2-butyl carbenium ion stabilizes by transforming
into a π-complex.

The four different cracking reactions
also show large energetic
variations. Table 2 lists the enthalpy and free energy barriers at 773 K. We notice
large variations of almost 80 kJ/mol on the forward activation barriers.
This trend originates mainly from an enthalpy effect, but is enhanced
by the entropy contributions. Upon studying the same B2-1 reaction, Mazar et al. also found a large variation (82 kJ/mol)
in activation energy between two distinct reaction configurations.74

Table 2 Enthaply, Entropy,
and Free Energy
Barriers at 773 K for the Four Conformations of 2,4-Dimethyl-2-hexyl
Carbenium Ion Cracking (Reaction B2-1)
structure	ΔH‡fwd (kJ/mol)	ΔS‡fwd (J/mol/K)	ΔG‡fwd (kJ/mol)	
1	151	–20	167	
2	120	–15	132	
3	104	–25	124	
4	94	5	90	
These results show that many different pathways
connect the reactant
carbenium ion and cracked products, characterized by largely different
activation barriers. The same feature has been reported for propane
cracking in chabazite by Buc̆ko et al.19 Alkene cracking reactions taking place at high temperature have
a complex nature, where a restricted number of configurations on the
PES are insufficient to capture the complexity of the transformation.
In static calculations, only a single configuration of the adsorbed
transition state is considered. Furthermore, the 0 K energy surface
may differ from the free energy surface at cracking temperatures.21,28,98 The latter is evidenced by the
2-butoxide formation in the product state. Additionally, the harmonic
oscillator (HO) approximation underestimates the mobility of the adsorbates
and entropy of the stationary states.129,130 Consequently,
relying solely on static calculations seems insufficient to correctly
describe the high-temperature cracking chemistry. Hereafter a more
realistic study of the reactivity is performed based on molecular
dynamics simulations at operating conditions.

3.2.2 Free-Energy Profiles for Cracking Reactions
at Operating Conditions
To properly account for all possible
reaction paths as well as finite temperature and entropy effects,
the umbrella sampling technique is applied for determining cracking
barriers. We first simulated both the β-scission of the 2,4-dimethyl-2-hexyl
carbenium ion, reaction B2-1, and the 2,4-dimethyl-4-hexyl
carbenium ion, reaction B2-2 (Scheme 3). A broad range of transition states exists
for these cracking reactions as indicated by the mobility plots shown
in Figure 8a. The red
and blue dots represent the position of the center of mass of the
two C4 fragments. During the umbrella sampling simulation,
a large variety in the relative orientation of the two C4 fragments in the transition state region is sampled. The most visited
configurations are localized in the straight channel or in the intersection
of the straight and sinusoidal channel and resemble on average mostly
the most stable static transition states (3 and 4). Figure 8c displays a superposition
of transition state structures (corresponding to a collective variable
value of 0.25) to show the conformational freedom in the activated
complex region. Also the orientation of the breaking C–C bond,
indicated by the green bars, significantly fluctuates throughout the
simulation.

Figure 8 (a) Scatter plot of the center of mass of the transition state
window configurations for the B2-1 cracking reaction in
the channel system of H-ZSM-5, projected on the xy plane. The dots
connected by green bars indicate the static transition state configurations.
(b) Scheme of the B2-1 transition state with the isobutene
fragment in red, the n-butyl fragment in blue and
the breaking C–C bond in green. (c) Superimposed snapshots
of four different transition state window configurations. The purple
sphere represents the location of the acid site.

The resulting free energy profiles are shown in Figure 9. For the two B2 type β-scissions, cracking barriers of 69 and 73 kJ/mol
are
obtained, respectively. These barriers are significantly lower than
the lowest estimate predicted by static calculations (90 kJ/mol).
At 773 K, the adsorbed species have a high mobility, allowing them
to access many different configurations. On average, the sampled transition
state configurations are mainly situated in the straight channel or
at the intersection, but at longer distances from the framework compared
to static calculations (see Figure S23).
By considering just a single transition state and reactant configuration,
static calculations clearly give an incomplete picture of the cracking
barriers.

Figure 9 One-dimensional umbrella sampling free energy profiles at 773 K
for the β-scission reactions B2-1 (a), B2-2 (b), E2-1 (c), A-1 (d).

Furthermore, the height of the cracking barrier seems almost
independent
of the cracking products (isobutene/2-butyl cation or 2-methyl-1-butene/2-propyl
cation). These findings indicate that the activation barrier is mainly
determined by the type of β-scission mode—in this case
a tertiary to secondary carbenium ion transition—rather than
the type of alkene products formed in the reaction. The observation
that reactions of the same cracking mode have similar free energy
barriers is supported by von Aretin et al.131 They established a microkinetic model capable of correctly estimating
alkene cracking product distributions with the assumption that cracking
reactions of the same mode have the same rate coefficient.

Upon
cracking, unstable secondary carbenium ion products are formed.
As evidenced in earlier work,27,28 the n-propyl and n-butyl cations are unstable and will
immediately rearrange. For these cracking products, two different
transitions can be identified. The cation can either deprotonate to
the framework or transfer a proton to the branched alkene product,
thus forming two neutral alkenes or an alkene and tertiary carbenium
ion as stable products. The latter rearrangement seems to be preferred
as it was spontaneously observed in the US simulations. Static calculations
on the two product states also confirmed that the alkene/tert-butyl cation products are about 12 kJ/mol more stable than the alkene/alkene
products. Once the cracking barrier is crossed, stabilizing isomerization
reactions occur and the produced product fragments quickly diffuse
away from each other, resulting in a sharp free energy drop (Figure 9a). Because of the
large configurational space of the separate cracked fragments, the
product state is insufficiently sampled to yield physically meaningful
backward reaction barriers, hence these are not reported.

Second,
we simulated the cracking of a 2-methyl-2-heptyl carbenium
ion into isobutene and a 1-butyl carbenium ion (reaction E2-1). This cracking mode has a much higher activation barrier of 112
kJ/mol (Figure 9c)
which can be explained by the formation of an unstable primary cation
in the transition state. After cracking, the unstable 1-butyl carbenium
ion product instantly rearranges via a rapid hydride shift to a more
stable secondary 2-butyl carbenium ion. The latter again undergoes
a hydride shift with the formation of n-butene and a tert-butyl carbenium ion. This cracking mode is expected to be less important
due to the primary carbenium ion character of the transition state.
However, monobranched cracking precursors will exhibit less steric
repulsion with the framework compared to highly branched alkenes and
will therefore be more probable to occur.

Next, we simulated
the cracking of the tribranched 2,4,4-trimethyl-2-pentyl
carbenium ion into isobutene and the tert-butyl carbenium
ion (reaction A-1), the only possible A-mode cracking for C8 species. In Section 3.1.2, we showed
that geminal substituted carbenium ions were more reactive than monobranched
carbenium ions. Nevertheless, the 2,4,4-trimethyl-2-pentyl cation
was still observed as a stable intermediate. Since two stable products
are formed upon cracking, also no product rearrangements are observed.
As confirmed from the MD simulations, both states are long-living
and coexist inside the zeolite pores. For this cracking mode, a relatively
low barrier of 53 kJ/mol (Figure 9d) is obtained which can be attributed to both the
high reactivity of the cracking reactant and the formation of a stable tert-butyl cation in the transition state. However, the
formation of highly branched cracking precursors may be prohibited
due to steric constraints on ZSM-5.85,93,95 Indeed, the umbrella sampling simulations show a
limited mobility for the 2,4,4-trimethyl-2-pentyl cation, which is
mainly situated at the channel intersection.

Finally, we consider
the cracking of a linear C8 carbenium
ion (D2 mode). Since secondary carbenium ions were shown
to be relatively unstable cracking precursors with short lifetimes,
the neutral alkene should rather be considered as cracking reactant.
Therefore, two-dimensional umbrella sampling is performed with a first
CV describing the protonation of 2-octene and a second CV describing
the β-scission of the resulting 3-octyl carbenium ion (reaction
D2-1). The free energy profile for this cracking pathway
is shown in Figure 10. For the protonation, an activation barrier of 55 kJ/mol and a reaction
free energy of 10 kJ/mol are obtained, which is in good agreement
with our MTD simulations (Table 1). For the cracking, a relatively high intrinsic barrier
of 103 kJ/mol is obtained, which can again be explained by the combination
of a relatively unstable reactant cation and an unstable product cation.
The formation of a primary carbenium ion in the transition state is
clearly unfavorable, yet unavoidable for linear chains. In the product
state, the primary carbenium ion immediately isomerizes to a secondary
carbenium ion. The latter is also expected to quickly stabilize by
deprotonating to the framework, although this part of the reaction
falls beyond the scope of the current study.

Figure 10 Two-dimensional umbrella
sampling free energy profile at 773 K
for the protonation of 2-octene and reaction D2-1, β-scission
of the 3-octyl carbenium ion.

Our results allow an assessment of the importance of various
alkene
cracking modes from a theoretical perspective. Cracking mode A is by far the fastest, as it concerns
a transition between tertiary carbenium ions. Such a cracking mode
is only possible for alkenes with at least eight carbon atoms and
three branches. Once formed, these precursors were found to have a
reasonable lifetime at 773 K within ZSM-5, but their formation rate
might be limited due to steric constraints. Type B2 cracking
modes are expected to be very important cracking modes at operating
conditions, given the fact that they start from stable carbenium ions
and have relatively low intrinsic activation barriers. Cracking modes
B1 which start from a secondary carbenium ion and yield
a tertiary carbenium ion are expected to be less important because
we found that the geminal methyl substituted cracking precursors (with
a quaternary carbon atom) are extremely unstable. Cracking mode C,
a transition between secondary carbenium ions, is also predicted to
be less important as the reactants will quickly rearrange into more
stable tertiary carbenium ions. Cracking modes D2 and E2 both require the formation of a transition state with primary
carbenium ion character, thus resulting in substantially higher intrinsic
barriers. For cracking mode D2, the linear alkene reactant
resides freely in the zeolite pores at the high temperature. In order
to be reactive for β-scission, it first has to transform into
a carbenium ion, which yields an additional contribution to the activation
barrier for the D2 mode. The conclusions drawn here are
in line with the experimental findings in the seminal papers of Weitkamp.95,99

4 Conclusions
Using
advanced molecular dynamics simulations, catalytic alkene
cracking pathways in H-ZSM-5 were studied at actual operating temperatures
of 773 K. Alkene cracking is known to proceed via a complex reaction
network with many possible reaction routes and often elusive intermediates.
At first instance the nature and stability of C4–C8 alkene cracking intermediates were determined. Over the course
of the simulations, regular transitions were observed between a physisorbed
van der Waals complex, a physisorbed π-complex, and a chemisorbed
carbenium ion. Alkoxides, on the other hand, were not sampled and
appear to be unstable at cracking conditions due to high entropic
penalty for forming a covalent bond with the framework. Linear alkenes
preferentially occur as a physisorbed π-complex or van der Waals
complex. The latter is stabilized due to a higher mobility in the
zeolite pore system. The stability of linear, secondary carbenium
ions increases with carbon number, as the positive charge can be better
delocalized over the carbon atoms along the chain. Linear alkenes
first need to overcome the barrier for protonation before cracking
reactions can occur. Free energies of activation for interconversion
between a physisorbed alkene and a carbenium ion were determined using
the metadynamics approach and amount to ca. 50 kJ/mol. For branched
alkenes, carbenium ion intermediates were found to be more stable
than physisorbed alkenes at cracking temperatures. No clear influence
of the chain length could be observed. In contrast to linear carbenium
ions, tertiary carbenium ions are undoubtedly very stable, long-living
intermediates, which can act as cracking reactants. Secondary carbenium
ions with geminal methyl branches though were shown to undergo rapid
isomerization or β-scission into more stable carbenium ions.

In a next step, intrinsic barriers for β-scission reactions
of mode A, B2, D2, and E2 were determined
using the umbrella sampling molecular dynamics technique. Overall,
the importance of the various cracking modes was found to be determined
by the interplay between the reactant carbocation stability and the
transition state (or product) carbocation stability. Regardless of
the formed products, similar cracking barriers are expected for reactions
of the same β-scission mode (i.e., reactions with the same carbocation
transition). Cracking modes A (3° → 3°) and B2 (3° → 2°) were found to be dominant at 773
K, given the higher stability of branched cracking precursors and
the lower free energy barriers for β-scission. Cracking modes
B1 (2° → 3°), C (2° → 2°),
D2 (2° → 1°), and E2 (3°
→ 1°) are expected to be less important. Mode D2 and E2 involve a transition state in which a unstable
primary carbenium ion would be formed. Modes B1, C, and
D2 start from metastable, secondary carbenium ion reactants,
which will typically undergo rapid isomerizations to more stable tertiary
carbenium ions. While cracking mode A has a very low intrinsic barrier,
the highly branched cracking precursors are very reactive and their
formation may be sterically hindered in the zeolite pores.

The
B2 cracking mode, starting from a very stable tertiary
carbenium ion, was also studied with static DFT calculations–the
standard procedure to determine reactivity differences in current
literature. Static cracking barriers were highly dependent on the
particular orientation of the reactants and transition states in the
zeolite channels. Furthermore, static calculations pointed to the
formation of alkoxide products, which were proven to be nonexistent
at high temperature. Standard DFT calculations are not capable of
correctly predicting the stability of various cracking intermediates
and do not account for the conformational freedom along the alkene
cracking reaction profile. In contrast, consistent free energy barriers
were obtained from umbrella sampling simulations which account for
the full conformational mobility of all species at cracking temperatures.
Our results clearly demonstrate the importance of simulations at operating
conditions to assess the nature and reactivity of alkene cracking
intermediates.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.8b01779.Overview of static
calculations, XYZ coordinates of
static calculations, overview of MD simulations, computational details
of MTD simulations, overview of MTD simulations, computational details
of US simulations, XYZ coordinates of initial geometries of US simulations
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
cs8b01779_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
‡ Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University
of California, Berkeley, California 94720, United States

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
acknowledge the Fund for Scientific
Research–Flanders (FWO), the Research Board of Ghent University
(BOF) and the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (consolidator ERC Grant Agreement No. 647755–DYNPOR
(2015-2020)) for financial support. The computational resources and
services used in this work were provided by VSC (Flemish Supercomputer
Center), funded by the Hercules foundation and the Flemish Government–department
EWI.
==== Refs
References
Guisnet M. ; Gilson J.-P.  Zeolites for Cleaner
Technologies ; Imperial College Press : London , 2002 .
Vermeiren W. ; Gilson J.-P. 
Impact of Zeolites on the Petroleum
and Petrochemical
Industry . Top. Catal. 
2009 , 52 , 1131 –1161 10.1007/s11244-009-9271-8 .
Rahimi N. ; Karimzadeh R. 
Catalytic
Cracking of Hydrocarbons over Modified ZSM-5
Zeolites to Produce Light Olefins: A Review . Appl. Catal., A 
2011 , 398 , 1 –17 10.1016/j.apcata.2011.03.009 .
Hemelsoet K. ; Van der Mynsbrugge J. ; De Wispelaere K. ; Waroquier M. ; Van Speybroeck V. 
Unraveling the Reaction Mechanisms
Governing Methanol-to-Olefins
Catalysis by Theory and Experiment . ChemPhysChem 
2013 , 14 , 1526 –1545 10.1002/cphc.201201023 .23595911 
Tallman M. J. ; Eng C. 
Consider New Catalytic
Routes for Olefins Production - Innovative
Catalyst Systems Enable Higher Propylene Make from Liquid Feedstocks . Hydrocarb. Process. 
2008 , 87 , 95 –101 .
Chen J. Q. ; Bozzano A. ; Glover B. ; Fuglerud T. ; Kvisle S. 
Recent Advancements
in Ethylene and Propylene Production Using the UOP/Hydro MTO Process . Catal. Today 
2005 , 106 , 103 –107 10.1016/j.cattod.2005.07.178 .
Plotkin J. S. 
The Changing
Dynamics of Olefin Supply/Demand . Catal. Today 
2005 , 106 , 10 –14 10.1016/j.cattod.2005.07.174 .
Bruijnincx P. C. A. ; Weckhuysen B. M. 
Shale Gas
Revolution: An Opportunity
for the Production of Biobased Chemicals? . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 11980 –11987 10.1002/anie.201305058 .
Amghizar I. ; Vandewalle L. A. ; Van Geem K. M. ; Marin G. B. 
New Trends in Olefin
Production . Engineering 
2017 , 3 , 171 –178 10.1016/J.ENG.2017.02.006 .
Vogt E. T. C. ; Weckhuysen B. M. 
Fluid Catalytic
Cracking: Recent
Developments on the Grand Old Lady of Zeolite Catalysis . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 7342 –7370 10.1039/C5CS00376H .26382875 
Kissin Y. V. 
Chemical
Mechanisms of Catalytic Cracking Over Solid Acidic Catalysts: Alkanes
and Alkenes . Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng. 
2001 , 43 , 85 –146 10.1081/CR-100104387 .
Buchanan J. S. ; Santiesteban J. G. ; Haag W. O. 
Mechanistic Considerations in Acid-Catalyzed
Cracking of Olefins . J. Catal. 
1996 , 158 , 279 –287 10.1006/jcat.1996.0027 .
Buurmans I. L. C. ; Weckhuysen B. M. 
Heterogeneities
of Individual Catalyst
Particles in Space and Time as Monitored by Spectroscopy . Nat. Chem. 
2012 , 4 , 873 –886 10.1038/nchem.1478 .23089861 
Weckhuysen B. M. 
Chemical
Imaging of Spatial Heterogeneities in Catalytic Solids at Different
Length and Time Scales . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 4910 –4943 10.1002/anie.200900339 .
Roeffaers M. B. J. ; De Cremer G. ; Libeert J. ; Ameloot R. ; Dedecker P. ; Bons A.-J. ; Bückins M. ; Martens J. A. ; Sels B. F. ; De Vos D. E. ; Hofkens J. 
Super-Resolution Reactivity Mapping
of Nanostructured Catalyst Particles . Angew.
Chem. 
2009 , 121 , 9449 –9453 10.1002/ange.200904944 .
Van
Speybroeck V. ; Hemelsoet K. ; Joos L. ; Waroquier M. ; Bell R. G. ; Catlow C. R. A. 
Advances in Theory and Their Application
within the Field of Zeolite Chemistry . Chem.
Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 7044 –7111 10.1039/C5CS00029G .25976164 
Van
Speybroeck V. ; De Wispelaere K. ; Van der Mynsbrugge J. ; Vandichel M. ; Hemelsoet K. ; Waroquier M. 
First Principle
Chemical Kinetics in Zeolites: The Methanol-to-Olefin Process as a
Case Study . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 7326 –7357 10.1039/C4CS00146J .25054453 
De
Wispelaere K. ; Bailleul S. ; Van Speybroeck V. 
Towards Molecular
Control of Elementary Reactions in Zeolite Catalysis by Advanced Molecular
Simulations Mimicking Operating Conditions . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2016 , 6 , 2686 –2705 10.1039/C5CY02073E .
Buc̆ko T. ; Benco L. ; Hafner J. ; Ángyán J. G. 
Monomolecular
Cracking of Propane over Acidic Chabazite: An Ab Initio Molecular
Dynamics and Transition Path Sampling Study . J. Catal. 
2011 , 279 , 220 –228 10.1016/j.jcat.2011.01.022 .
Jiang T. ; Göltl F. ; Bulo R. E. ; Sautet P. 
Effect of Temperature
on the Adsorption of Short Alkanes in the Zeolite SSZ-13 –
Adapting Adsorption Isotherms to Microporous Materials . ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4 , 2351 –2358 10.1021/cs500189v .
Zimmerman P. M. ; Tranca D. C. ; Gomes J. ; Lambrecht D. S. ; Head-Gordon M. ; Bell A. T. 
Ab Initio Simulations Reveal That
Reaction Dynamics Strongly Affect Product Selectivity for the Cracking
of Alkanes over H-MFI . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 19468 –19476 10.1021/ja3089372 .23072346 
Tranca D. C. ; Zimmerman P. M. ; Gomes J. ; Lambrecht D. ; Keil F. J. ; Head-Gordon M. ; Bell A. T. 
Hexane Cracking
on ZSM-5 and Faujasite Zeolites: A QM/MM/QCT Study . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 28836 –28853 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b07457 .
Nieminen V. ; Sierka M. ; Murzin D. Y. ; Sauer J. 
Stabilities
of C3–C5
Alkoxide Species inside H-FER Zeolite: A Hybrid QM/MM Study . J. Catal. 
2005 , 231 , 393 –404 10.1016/j.jcat.2005.01.035 .
Boronat M. ; Viruela P. M. ; Corma A. 
Reaction Intermediates
in Acid Catalysis
by Zeolites: Prediction of the Relative Tendency To Form Alkoxides
or Carbocations as a Function of Hydrocarbon Nature and Active Site
Structure . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 3300 –3309 10.1021/ja039432a .15012161 
Bhan A. ; Joshi Y. V. ; Delgass W. N. ; Thomson K. T. 
DFT Investigation
of Alkoxide Formation from Olefins in H-ZSM-5 . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2003 , 107 , 10476 –10487 10.1021/jp034382h .
Ishikawa H. ; Yoda E. ; Kondo J. N. ; Wakabayashi F. ; Domen K. 
Stable Dimerized Alkoxy Species of 2-Methylpropene on Mordenite Zeolite
Studied by FT-IR . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1999 , 103 , 5681 –5686 10.1021/jp990444l .
Cnudde P. ; De Wispelaere K. ; Van der Mynsbrugge J. ; Waroquier M. ; Van Speybroeck V. 
Effect of
Temperature and Branching on the Nature and
Stability of Alkene Cracking Intermediates in H-ZSM-5 . J. Catal. 
2017 , 345 , 53 –69 10.1016/j.jcat.2016.11.010 .
Hajek J. ; Van der Mynsbrugge J. ; De Wispelaere K. ; Cnudde P. ; Vanduyfhuys L. ; Waroquier M. ; Van Speybroeck V. 
On the Stability and Nature of Adsorbed
Pentene in Brønsted Acid Zeolite H-ZSM-5 at 323 K . J. Catal. 
2016 , 340 , 227 –235 10.1016/j.jcat.2016.05.018 .
Haw J. F. ; Richardson B. R. ; Oshiro I. S. ; Lazo N. D. ; Speed J. A. 
Reactions
of Propene on Zeolite HY Catalyst Studied by in Situ Variable Temperature
Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1989 , 111 , 2052 –2058 10.1021/ja00188a016 .
Lazo N. D. ; Richardson B. R. ; Schettler P. D. ; White J. L. ; Munson E. J. ; Haw J. F. 
In Situ Variable-Temperature MAS Carbon-13 NMR Study
of the Reactions of Isobutylene in Zeolites HY and HZSM-5 . J. Phys. Chem. 
1991 , 95 , 9420 –9425 10.1021/j100176a071 .
Mal’kin V. G. ; Chesnokov V. V. ; Paukstis E. ; Zhidomirov G. M. 
Quantum-Chemical
Calculations of Carbon-13 Chemical Shifts of the Alkoxide Form in
Zeolites . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1990 , 112 , 666 –669 10.1021/ja00158a026 .
Haw J. F. ; Nicholas J. B. ; Xu T. ; Beck L. W. ; Ferguson D. B. 
Physical
Organic Chemistry of Solid Acids: Lessons from in Situ NMR and Theoretical
Chemistry . Acc. Chem. Res. 
1996 , 29 , 259 –267 10.1021/ar950105k .
Stepanov A. G. ; Zamaraev K. I. 
13C Solid
State NMR Evidence for the Existence
of Isobutyl Carbenium Ion in the Reaction of Isobutyl Alcohol Dehydration
in H-ZSM-5 Zeolite . Catal. Lett. 
1993 , 19 , 153 –158 10.1007/BF00771750 .
Stepanov A. G. ; Luzgin M. V. ; Arzumanov S. S. ; Ernst H. ; Freude D. 
N-Butene Conversion
on H-Ferrierite Studied by 13C MAS NMR . J. Catal. 
2002 , 211 , 165 –172 10.1006/jcat.2002.3726 .
Stepanov A. G. ; Arzumanov S. S. ; Luzgin M. V. ; Ernst H. ; Freude D. 
In Situ Monitoring
of N-Butene Conversion on H-Ferrierite by 1H, 2H, and 13C MAS NMR: Kinetics of a Double-Bond-Shift Reaction,
Hydrogen Exchange, and the 13C-Label Scrambling . J. Catal. 
2005 , 229 , 243 –251 10.1016/j.jcat.2004.10.021 .
Geobaldo F. ; Spoto G. ; Bordiga S. ; Lamberti C. ; Zecchina A. 
Propene Oligomerization
on H-Mordenite: Hydrogen-Bonding interaction, Chain Initiation, Propagation
and Hydrogen Transfer studied by Temperature-Programmed FTIR and UV–VIS
spectroscopies . J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 
1997 , 93 , 1243 –1249 10.1039/a607052c .
Kondo J. N. ; Liqun S. ; Wakabayashi F. ; Domen K. 
IR Study of Adsorption
and Reaction of 1-Butene on H-ZSM-5 . Catal.
Lett. 
1997 , 47 , 129 –133 10.1023/A:1019096703066 .
Kondo J. N. ; Wakabayashi F. ; Domen K. 
IR Study of Reaction of 2-butene
Adsorbed on Deuterated ZSM-5 and Mordenite . Catal. Lett. 
1998 , 53 , 215 –220 10.1023/A:1019086712887 .
Kondo J. N. ; Domen K. ; Wakabayashi F. 
Double Bond Migration of 1-Butene
without Protonated Intermediate on D-ZSM-5 . Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 
1998 , 21 , 429 –437 10.1016/S1387-1811(98)00004-3 .
Kondo J. N. ; Wakabayashi F. ; Domen K. 
IR Study of Adsorption
of Olefins
on Deuterated ZSM-5 . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1998 , 102 , 2259 –2262 10.1021/jp9800416 .
Kondo J. N. ; Ishikawa H. ; Yoda E. ; Wakabayashi F. ; Domen K. 
Structure of Dimerized Alkoxy Species
of 2-Methylpropene on Zeolites
and Silica–Alumina Studied by FT-IR . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1999 , 103 , 8538 –8543 10.1021/jp991395f .
Rigby A. M. ; Kramer G. J. ; van Santen R. A. 
Mechanisms of Hydrocarbon Conversion
in Zeolites: A Quantum Mechanical Study . J.
Catal. 
1997 , 170 , 1 –10 10.1006/jcat.1997.1574 .
Boronat M. ; Viruela P. ; Corma A. 
Theoretical Study of the Mechanism
of Zeolite-Catalyzed Isomerization Reactions of Linear Butenes . J. Phys. Chem. A 
1998 , 102 , 982 –989 10.1021/jp972672q .
Kazanskii V. B. 
The Nature
of Adsorbed Carbenium Ions as Active Intermediates in Catalysis by
Solid Acids . Acc. Chem. Res. 
1991 , 24 , 379 –383 10.1021/ar00012a004 .
Jeffrey
Hay P. ; Redondo A. ; Guo Y. 
Theoretical Studies of Pentene Cracking
on Zeolites: C–C β-Scission Processes . Catal. Today 
1999 , 50 , 517 –523 10.1016/S0920-5861(98)00486-6 .
Rigby A. M. ; Frash M. V. 
Ab Initio Calculations on the Mechanisms
of Hydrocarbon
Conversion in Zeolites: Skeletal Isomerisation and Olefin Chemisorption . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
1997 , 126 , 61 –72 10.1016/S1381-1169(97)00095-2 .
Frash M. V. ; van Santen R. A. 
Quantum-Chemical Modeling of the
Hydrocarbon Transformations
in Acid Zeolite Catalysts . Top. Catal. 
1999 , 9 , 191 –205 10.1023/A:1019183110705 .
Frash M. V. ; Kazansky V. B. ; Rigby A. M. ; van Santen R. A. 
Cracking
of Hydrocarbons on Zeolite Catalysts: Density Functional and Hartree–Fock
Calculations on the Mechanism of the β-Scission Reaction . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1998 , 102 , 2232 –2238 10.1021/jp973203r .
Blaszkowski S. R. ; Nascimento M. A. C. ; van Santen R. A. 
Activation of C–H and C–C
Bonds by an Acidic Zeolite: A Density Functional Study . J. Phys. Chem. 
1996 , 100 , 3463 –3472 10.1021/jp9523231 .
Sarazen M. L. ; Doskocil E. ; Iglesia E. 
Catalysis on Solid Acids: Mechanism
and Catalyst Descriptors in Oligomerization Reactions of Light Alkenes . J. Catal. 
2016 , 344 , 553 –569 10.1016/j.jcat.2016.10.010 .
Sarazen M. L. ; Iglesia E. 
Stability of Bound Species during
Alkene Reactions
on Solid Acids . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.
A. 
2017 , 114 , E3900 –E3908 10.1073/pnas.1619557114 .28461504 
Svelle S. ; Kolboe S. ; Swang O. 
Theoretical Investigation of the
Dimerization of Linear Alkenes Catalyzed by Acidic Zeolites . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2004 , 108 , 2953 –2962 10.1021/jp0371985 .
Wang W. ; Hunger M. 
Reactivity of Surface Alkoxy Species on Acidic Zeolite
Catalysts . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2008 , 41 , 895 –904 10.1021/ar700210f .18605741 
Natal-Santiago M. A. ; Alcalá R. ; Dumesic J. A. 
DFT Study of the Isomerization of
Hexyl Species Involved in the Acid-Catalyzed Conversion of 2-Methyl-Pentene-2 . J. Catal. 
1999 , 181 , 124 –144 10.1006/jcat.1998.2293 .
Boronat M. ; Zicovich-Wilson C. M. ; Viruela P. ; Corma A. 
Influence of the Local
Geometry of Zeolite Active Sites and Olefin Size on the Stability
of Alkoxide Intermediates . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 11169 –11177 10.1021/jp011481r .
Corma A. ; Orchillés A. V. 
Current
Views on the Mechanism of Catalytic Cracking . Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 
2000 , 35–36 , 21 –30 10.1016/S1387-1811(99)00205-X .
Swisher J. A. ; Hansen N. ; Maesen T. ; Keil F. J. ; Smit B. ; Bell A. T. 
Theoretical Simulation of N-Alkane
Cracking on Zeolites . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 10229 –10239 10.1021/jp101262y .
Guo Y.-H. ; Pu M. ; Chen B.-H. ; Cao F. 
Theoretical Study on the Cracking
Reaction Catalyzed by a Solid Acid with Zeolitic Structure: The Catalytic
Cracking of 1-Hexene on the Surface of H-ZSM-5 . Appl. Catal., A 
2013 , 455 , 65 –70 10.1016/j.apcata.2013.01.013 .
East A. L. L. ; Buc̆ko T. ; Hafner J. 
On the Structure and
Dynamics of
Secondary N-Alkyl Cations . J. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 131 , 104314 10.1063/1.3230603 .
Fang H. ; Zheng A. ; Li S. ; Xu J. ; Chen L. ; Deng F. 
New Insights into the Effects of
Acid Strength on the Solid Acid-Catalyzed
Reaction: Theoretical Calculation Study of Olefinic Hydrocarbon Protonation
Reaction . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 10254 –10264 10.1021/jp103247f .
Fang H. ; Zheng A. ; Xu J. ; Li S. ; Chu Y. ; Chen L. ; Deng F. 
Theoretical Investigation
of the
Effects of the Zeolite Framework on the Stability of Carbenium Ions . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 7429 –7439 10.1021/jp1097316 .
Benco L. ; Hafner J. ; Hutschka F. ; Toulhoat H. 
Physisorption and Chemisorption
of Some N-Hydrocarbons at the Brønsted Acid Site in Zeolites
12-Membered Ring Main Channels: Ab Initio Study of the Gmelinite Structure . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2003 , 107 , 9756 –9762 10.1021/jp027625z .
Benco L. ; Demuth T. ; Hafner J. ; Hutschka F. ; Toulhoat H. 
Linear Hydrocarbons
Adsorbed in the Acid Zeolite Gmelinite at 700 K Ab Initio Molecular
Dynamics Simulation of Hexane and Hexene . J.
Catal. 
2002 , 205 , 147 –156 10.1006/jcat.2001.3408 .
Chu Y. ; Han B. ; Zheng A. ; Deng F. 
Influence of Acid Strength and Confinement
Effect on the Ethylene Dimerization Reaction over Solid Acid Catalysts:
A Theoretical Calculation Study . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2012 , 116 , 12687 –12695 10.1021/jp302960w .
Lin L. ; Qiu C. ; Zhuo Z. ; Zhang D. ; Zhao S. ; Wu H. ; Liu Y. ; He M. 
Acid Strength Controlled Reaction Pathways for the
Catalytic Cracking of 1-Butene to Propene over ZSM-5 . J. Catal. 
2014 , 309 , 136 –145 10.1016/j.jcat.2013.09.011 .
Lin L. F. ; Zhao S. F. ; Zhang D. W. ; Fan H. ; Liu Y. M. ; He M. Y. 
Acid Strength Controlled Reaction
Pathways for the Catalytic Cracking
of 1-Pentene to Propene over ZSM-5 . ACS Catal. 
2015 , 5 , 4048 –4059 10.1021/cs501967r .
Wang C.-M. ; Brogaard R. Y. ; Weckhuysen B. M. ; Nørskov J. K. ; Studt F. 
Reactivity Descriptor in Solid Acid
Catalysis: Predicting Turnover
Frequencies for Propene Methylation in Zeotypes . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2014 , 5 , 1516 –1521 10.1021/jz500482z .26270089 
Tuma C. ; Sauer J. 
Protonated Isobutene in Zeolites: Tert-Butyl Cation or Alkoxide? . Angew. Chem. 
2005 , 117 , 4847 –4849 10.1002/ange.200501002 .
Tuma C. ; Kerber T. ; Sauer J. 
The Tert-Butyl Cation in H-Zeolites:
Deprotonation to Isobutene and Conversion into Surface Alkoxides . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2010 , 49 , 4678 –4680 10.1002/anie.200907015 .
Nguyen C. M. ; De Moor B. A. ; Reyniers M.-F. ; Marin G. B. 
Isobutene Protonation
in H-FAU, H-MOR, H-ZSM-5, and H-ZSM-22 . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 18236 –18249 10.1021/jp304081k .
Rosenbach N. Jr.; dos Santos A. P. A. ; Franco M. ; Mota C. J. A. 
The
Tert-Butyl Cation on Zeolite Y: A Theoretical and Experimental Study . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2010 , 485 , 124 –128 10.1016/j.cplett.2009.12.003 .
Dai W. ; Wang C. ; Yi X. ; Zheng A. ; Li L. ; Wu G. ; Guan N. ; Xie Z. ; Dyballa M. ; Hunger M. 
Identification
of Tert-Butyl Cations in Zeolite H-ZSM-5: Evidence from NMR Spectroscopy
and DFT Calculations . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 8783 –8786 10.1002/anie.201502748 .
Sun Y.-X. ; Yang J. ; Zhao L.-F. ; Dai J.-X. ; Sun H. 
A Two-Layer
ONIOM Study on Initial Reactions of Catalytic Cracking of 1-Butene
to Produce Propene and Ethene over HZSM-5 and HFAU Zeolites . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 5975 –5984 10.1021/jp910617m .
Mazar M. N. ; Al-Hashimi S. ; Cococcioni M. ; Bhan A. 
β-Scission of
Olefins on Acidic Zeolites: A Periodic PBE-D Study in H-ZSM-5 . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 23609 –23620 10.1021/jp403504n .
Chen C.-J. ; Rangarajan S. ; Hill I. M. ; Bhan A. 
Kinetics and Thermochemistry
of C4–C6 Olefin Cracking on H-ZSM-5 . ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4 , 2319 –2327 10.1021/cs500119n .
Abbot J. ; Wojciechowski B. 
The Mechanism of Catalytic Cracking of Normal-Alkenes
on ZSM-5 Zeolite . Can. J. Chem. Eng. 
1985 , 63 , 462 –469 10.1002/cjce.5450630315 .
Buchanan J. S. 
Reactions
of Model Compounds over Steamed ZSM-5 at Simulated FCC Reaction Conditions . Appl. Catal. 
1991 , 74 , 83 –94 10.1016/0166-9834(91)90010-6 .
Bortnovsky O. ; Sazama P. ; Wichterlova B. 
Cracking of
Pentenes to C2–C4 Light Olefins over
Zeolites and Zeotypes: Role
of Topology and Acid Site Strength and Concentration . Appl. Catal., A 
2005 , 287 , 203 –213 10.1016/j.apcata.2005.03.037 .
Borges P. ; Pinto R. R. ; Lemos M. A. N. D. A. ; Lemos F. ; Védrine J. C. ; Derouane E. G. ; Ribeiro F. R. 
Light Olefin
Transformation over
ZSM-5 Zeolites: A Kinetic Model for Olefin Consumption . Appl. Catal., A 
2007 , 324 , 20 –29 10.1016/j.apcata.2007.02.051 .
Oliveira P. ; Borges P. ; Pinto R. R. ; Lemos M. A. N. D. A. ; Lemos F. ; Védrine J. C. ; Ribeiro F. R. 
Light Olefin Transformation
over ZSM-5 Zeolites with Different Acid Strengths – A Kinetic
Model . Appl. Catal., A 
2010 , 384 , 177 –185 10.1016/j.apcata.2010.06.032 .
Meng X. ; Xu C. ; Li L. ; Gao J. 
Kinetic Study of Catalytic Pyrolysis
of C4 Hydrocarbons on a Modified ZSM-5 Zeolite Catalyst . Energy Fuels 
2010 , 24 , 6233 –6238 10.1021/ef100943u .
Zhu X. ; Liu S. ; Song Y. ; Xie S. ; Xu L. 
Catalytic Cracking
of 1-Butene to Propene and Ethene on MCM-22 Zeolite . Appl. Catal., A 
2005 , 290 , 191 –199 10.1016/j.apcata.2005.05.028 .
Miyaji A. ; Sakamoto Y. ; Iwase Y. ; Yashima T. ; Koide R. ; Motokura K. ; Baba T. 
Selective Production
of Ethylene
and Propylene via Monomolecular Cracking of Pentene over Proton-Exchanged
Zeolites: Pentene Cracking Mechanism Determined by Spatial Volume
of Zeolite Cavity . J. Catal. 
2013 , 302 , 101 –114 10.1016/j.jcat.2013.02.013 .
Huang X. ; Aihemaitijiang D. ; Xiao W.-D. 
Reaction Pathway and Kinetics of
C3–C7 Olefin Transformation over High-Silicon
HZSM-5 Zeolite at 400–490°C . Chem.
Eng. J. 
2015 , 280 , 222 –232 10.1016/j.cej.2015.05.124 .
von
Aretin T. ; Hinrichsen O. 
Single-Event Kinetic Model for Cracking
and Isomerization of 1-Hexene on ZSM-5 . Ind.
Eng. Chem. Res. 
2014 , 53 , 19460 –19470 10.1021/ie503628p .
von
Aretin T. ; Schallmoser S. ; Standl S. ; Tonigold M. ; Lercher J. A. ; Hinrichsen O. 
Single-Event Kinetic Model for 1-Pentene
Cracking on ZSM-5 . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2015 , 54 , 11792 –11803 10.1021/acs.iecr.5b02629 .
Ying L. ; Zhu J. ; Cheng Y. ; Wang L. ; Li X. 
Kinetic Modeling of
C2–C7 Olefins Interconversion over ZSM-5
Catalyst . J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 
2016 , 33 , 80 –90 10.1016/j.jiec.2015.09.021 .
Epelde E. ; Aguayo A. T. ; Olazar M. ; Bilbao J. ; Gayubo A. G. 
Kinetic
Model for the Transformation of 1-Butene on a K-Modified HZSM-5 Catalyst . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2014 , 53 , 10599 –10607 10.1021/ie501533j .
Standl S. ; Tonigold M. ; Hinrichsen O. 
Single-Event Kinetic Modeling of
Olefin Cracking on ZSM-5: Proof of Feed Independence . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2017 , 56 , 13096 –13108 10.1021/acs.iecr.7b01344 .
Quann R. J. ; Green L. A. ; Tabak S. A. ; Krambeck F. J. 
Chemistry
of Olefin
Oligomerization over ZSM-5 Catalyst . Ind. Eng.
Chem. Res. 
1988 , 27 , 565 –570 10.1021/ie00076a006 .
Koyama T. ; Hayashi Y. ; Horie H. ; Kawauchi S. ; Matsumoto A. ; Iwase Y. ; Sakamoto Y. ; Miyaji A. ; Motokura K. ; Baba T. 
Key Role of the Pore Volume of Zeolite for Selective Production of
Propylene from Olefins . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2010 , 12 , 2541 –2554 10.1039/b921927g .20200730 
Iwase Y. ; Sakamoto Y. ; Shiga A. ; Miyaji A. ; Motokura K. ; Koyama T. ; Baba T. 
Shape-Selective
Catalysis Determined
by the Volume of a Zeolite Cavity and the Reaction Mechanism for Propylene
Production by the Conversion of Butene Using a Proton-Exchanged Zeolite . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 5182 –5196 10.1021/jp212549j .
Abbot J. ; Wojciechowski B. W. 
Catalytic Cracking and Skeletal Isomerization of N-Hexene
on ZSM-5 Zeolite . Can. J. Chem. Eng. 
1985 , 63 , 451 –461 10.1002/cjce.5450630314 .
Tabak S. A. ; Krambeck F. J. ; Garwood W. E. 
Conversion
of Propylene and Butylene
over ZSM-5 Catalyst . AIChE J. 
1986 , 32 , 1526 –1531 10.1002/aic.690320913 .
Weitkamp J. 
Catalytic
Hydrocracking – Mechanisms and Versatility of the Process . ChemCatChem 
2012 , 4 , 292 –306 10.1002/cctc.201100315 .
Lesthaeghe D. ; Van der Mynsbrugge J. ; Vandichel M. ; Waroquier M. ; Van Speybroeck V. 
Full Theoretical Cycle for Both Ethene and Propene
Formation during Methanol-to-Olefin Conversion in H-ZSM-5 . ChemCatChem 
2011 , 3 , 208 –212 10.1002/cctc.201000286 .
Buc̆ko T. ; Benco L. ; Dubay O. ; Dellago C. ; Hafner J. 
Mechanism
of Alkane Dehydrogenation Catalyzed by Acidic Zeolites: Ab Initio
Transition Path Sampling . J. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 131 , 214508 10.1063/1.3265715 .19968352 
Göltl F. ; Hafner J. 
Modelling the Adsorption
of Short Alkanes in Protonated
Chabazite: The Impact of Dispersion Forces and Temperature . Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 
2013 , 166 , 176 –184 10.1016/j.micromeso.2012.04.052 .25540604 
Weitkamp J. ; Jacobs P. A. ; Martens J. A. 
Isomerization
and Hydrocracking of
C9 through C16 N-Alkanes on Pt/HZSM-5 Zeolite . Appl. Catal. 
1983 , 8 , 123 –141 10.1016/0166-9834(83)80058-X .
Kresse G. ; Hafner J. 
Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics for
Liquid Metals . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys. 
1993 , 47 , 558 –561 10.1103/PhysRevB.47.558 .
Kresse G. ; Hafner J. 
Ab Initio Molecular-Dynamics Simulation
of the Liquid-Metal Amorphous-Semiconductor Transition in Germanium . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1994 , 49 , 14251 –14269 10.1103/PhysRevB.49.14251 .
Kresse G. ; Furthmüller J. 
Efficiency
of Ab-Initio Total Energy
Calculations for Metals and Semiconductors Using a Plane-Wave Basis
Set . Comput. Mater. Sci. 
1996 , 6 , 15 –50 10.1016/0927-0256(96)00008-0 .
Kresse G. ; Furthmüller J. 
Efficient
Iterative Schemes for Ab
Initio Total-Energy Calculations Using a Plane-Wave Basis Set . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1996 , 54 , 11169 –11186 10.1103/PhysRevB.54.11169 .
Heyden A. ; Bell A. T. ; Keil F. J. 
Efficient
Methods
for Finding Transition States in Chemical Reactions: Comparison of
Improved Dimer Method and Partitioned Rational Function Optimization
Method . J. Chem. Phys. 
2005 , 123 , 224101 10.1063/1.2104507 .16375464 
Perdew J. P. ; Burke K. ; Ernzerhof M. 
Generalized
Gradient Approximation Made Simple . Phys. Rev.
Lett. 
1996 , 77 , 3865 –3868 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865 .10062328 
Grimme S. ; Antony J. ; Ehrlich S. ; Krieg H. 
A Consistent
and Accurate Ab Initio Parametrization of Density Functional Dispersion
Correction (DFT-D) for the 94 Elements H-Pu . J. Chem. Phys. 
2010 , 132 , 154104 10.1063/1.3382344 .20423165 
Kresse G. ; Joubert D. 
From Ultrasoft Pseudopotentials
to
the Projector Augmented-Wave Method . Phys. Rev.
B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1999 , 59 , 1758 –1775 10.1103/PhysRevB.59.1758 .
Blöchl P. E. 
Projector Augmented-Wave Method . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1994 , 50 , 17953 –17979 10.1103/PhysRevB.50.17953 .
Ghysels A. ; Van Neck D. ; Waroquier M. 
Cartesian
Formulation of the Mobile Block Hessian Approach to Vibrational Analysis
in Partially Optimized Systems . J. Chem. Phys. 
2007 , 127 , 164108 10.1063/1.2789429 .17979320 
Reetz M. T. ; Meiswinkel A. ; Mehler G. ; Angermund K. ; Graf M. ; Thiel W. ; Mynott R. ; Blackmond D. G. 
Why Are
BINOL-Based Monophosphites Such Efficient Ligands in Rh-Catalyzed
Asymmetric Olefin Hydrogenation? . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2005 , 127 , 10305 –10313 10.1021/ja052025+ .16028942 
Donoghue P. J. ; Helquist P. ; Norrby P.-O. ; Wiest O. 
Development
of a Q2MM Force Field for the Asymmetric Rhodium Catalyzed Hydrogenation
of Enamides . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2008 , 4 , 1313 –1323 10.1021/ct800132a .26631706 
Ghysels A. ; Verstraelen T. ; Hemelsoet K. ; Waroquier M. ; Van Speybroeck V. 
TAMkin: A
Versatile Package for Vibrational
Analysis and Chemical Kinetics . J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 
2010 , 50 , 1736 –1750 10.1021/ci100099g .20738140 
VandeVondele J. ; Krack M. ; Mohamed F. ; Parrinello M. ; Chassaing T. ; Hutter J. 
QUICKSTEP: Fast and Accurate Density
Functional Calculations Using a Mixed Gaussian and Plane Waves Approach . Comput. Phys. Commun. 
2005 , 167 , 103 –128 10.1016/j.cpc.2004.12.014 .
Yang K. ; Zheng J. ; Zhao Y. ; Truhlar D. G. 
Tests of
the RPBE, RevPBE, τ-HCTHhyb, ΩB97X-D, and MOHLYP Density
Functional Approximations and 29 Others against Representative Databases
for Diverse Bond Energies and Barrier Heights in Catalysis . J. Chem. Phys. 
2010 , 132 , 164117 10.1063/1.3382342 .20441268 
Goedecker S. ; Teter M. ; Hutter J. 
Separable Dual-Space
Gaussian Pseudopotentials . Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys. 
1996 , 54 , 1703 –1710 10.1103/PhysRevB.54.1703 .
Lippert G. ; Hutter J. ; Parrinello M. 
The Gaussian
and Augmented-Plane-Wave Density Functional Method for Ab Initio Molecular
Dynamics Simulations . Theor. Chem. Acc. 
1999 , 103 , 124 –140 10.1007/s002140050523 .
Lippert G. ; Hutter J. ; Parrinello M. 
A Hybrid Gaussian
and Plane Wave Density Functional Scheme . Mol.
Phys. 
1997 , 92 , 477 –488 10.1080/00268979709482119 .
Nosé S. 
A Molecular
Dynamics Method for Simulations in the
Canonical Ensemble . Mol. Phys. 
1984 , 52 , 255 –268 10.1080/00268978400101201 .
Martyna G. J. ; Klein M. L. ; Tuckerman M. 
Nosé–Hoover
Chains: The Canonical Ensemble via Continuous Dynamics . J. Chem. Phys. 
1992 , 97 , 2635 –2643 10.1063/1.463940 .
Laio A. ; Parrinello M. 
Escaping Free-Energy Minima . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2002 , 99 , 12562 –12566 10.1073/pnas.202427399 .12271136 
Laio A. ; Gervasio F. L. 
Metadynamics: A
Method to Simulate
Rare Events and Reconstruct the Free Energy in Biophysics, Chemistry
and Material Science . Rep. Prog. Phys. 
2008 , 71 , 126601 10.1088/0034-4885/71/12/126601 .
Bussi G. ; Laio A. ; Parrinello M. 
Equilibrium
Free Energies from Nonequilibrium Metadynamics . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2006 , 96 , 090601 10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.090601 .16606249 
Torrie G. M. ; Valleau J. P. 
Monte Carlo Free
Energy Estimates
Using Non-Boltzmann Sampling: Application to the Sub-Critical Lennard-Jones
Fluid . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
1974 , 28 , 578 –581 10.1016/0009-2614(74)80109-0 .
Torrie G. M. ; Valleau J. P. 
Nonphysical Sampling
Distributions
in Monte Carlo Free-Energy Estimation: Umbrella Sampling . J. Comput. Phys. 
1977 , 23 , 187 –199 10.1016/0021-9991(77)90121-8 .
Tribello G. A. ; Bonomi M. ; Branduardi D. ; Camilloni C. ; Bussi G. 
PLUMED 2: New Feathers for an Old
Bird . Comput. Phys. Commun. 
2014 , 185 , 604 –613 10.1016/j.cpc.2013.09.018 .
Kumar S. ; Rosenberg J. M. ; Bouzida D. ; Swendsen R. H. ; Kollman P. A. 
THE Weighted Histogram
Analysis Method for Free-Energy
Calculations on Biomolecules. I. The Method . J. Comput. Chem. 
1992 , 13 , 1011 –1021 10.1002/jcc.540130812 .
Souaille M. ; Roux B. 
Extension to the Weighted Histogram
Analysis Method: Combining Umbrella Sampling with Free Energy Calculations . Comput. Phys. Commun. 
2001 , 135 , 40 –57 10.1016/S0010-4655(00)00215-0 .
Grossfield A.  WHAM: The
Weighted Histogram Analysis Method , Version 2.0.9. See the
following: http://Membrane.Urmc.Rochester.Edu/Content/Wham.
De Moor B. A. ; Ghysels A. ; Reyniers M.-F. ; Van Speybroeck V. ; Waroquier M. ; Marin G. B. 
Normal Mode Analysis in Zeolites:
Toward an Efficient Calculation of Adsorption Entropies . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2011 , 7 , 1090 –1101 10.1021/ct1005505 .26606357 
Van
der Mynsbrugge J. ; Janda A. ; Mallikarjun Sharada S. ; Lin L.-C. ; Van Speybroeck V. ; Head-Gordon M. ; Bell A. T. 
Theoretical Analysis of the Influence of Pore Geometry
on Monomolecular Cracking and Dehydrogenation of N-Butane in Brønsted
Acidic Zeolites . ACS Catal. 
2017 , 7 , 2685 –2697 10.1021/acscatal.6b03646 .
von Aretin T. ; Standl S. ; Tonigold M. ; Hinrichsen O. 
Optimization
of the Product Spectrum for 1-Pentene Cracking on ZSM-5 Using Single-Event
Methodology. Part 2: Recycle Reactor . Chem.
Eng. J. 
2017 , 309 , 873 –885 10.1016/j.cej.2016.10.103 .

