
==== Front
ACS CatalACS CatalcsaccacsACS Catalysis2155-5435American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acscatal.8b01511Research ArticleDeactivation Kinetics of Solid Acid Catalyst with
Laterally Interacting Protons Sengar Aditya †van Santen Rutger A. *†‡Steur Erik ‡§Kuipers Johannes A. M. †Padding Johan ∥† Department of Chemical
Engineering and Chemistry, Eindhoven University
of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands‡ Institute for Complex Molecular Systems, Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands§ Delft Center for Systems and Control, Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg 2, 2628
CD Delft, The Netherlands∥ Process and Energy Department, Delft University
of Technology, Leeghwaterstraat
39, 2628 CB Delft, The Netherlands* E-mail for R.A.v.S.: r.a.v.santen@tue.nl.16 08 2018 05 10 2018 8 10 9016 9033 17 04 2018 10 08 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Differences in catalyst
deactivation kinetics in solid acid catalysis are studied with catalyst
models that allow for lateral interaction between protons. Deactivation
of a solid acid catalyst with laterally interacting protons induces
inhomogeneity of proton reactivity that develops with time. As a consequence,
product selectivity changes and deactivation will accelerate. This
is demonstrated by simulations of the deactivation kinetics of the
alkylation reaction of propylene with isobutane. The effect of lateral
interactions between protons arises because initial catalyst deactivation
is not caused by pore blocking or coke deposition but by a molecular
mechanism where protons are consumed due to the formation of stable
nonreactive carbenium ions. High selectivity to alkylate requires
a catalyst with protons of high reactivity. When protons become consumed
by formation of stable deactivating carbenium ions, initially reactive
protons are converted into protons of lower reactivity. The latter
only catalyze deactivating oligomerization reactions. Simulations
that compare the deactivation kinetics of a catalyst model with laterally
interacting protons and a catalyst model that contains protons of
similar but different reactivity, but that do not laterally interact,
are compared. These simulations demonstrate that the lateral interaction
catalyst model is initially more selective but also has a lower stability.
Catalyst deactivation of the alkylation reaction occurs through two
reaction channels. One reaction channel is due to oligomerization
of reactant propylene. The other deactivation reaction channel is
initiated by deprotonation of intermediate carbenium ions that increase
alkene concentration. By consecutive reactions, this also leads to
deactivation. The hydride transfer reaction competes with oligomerization
reactions. It is favored by strongly acid sites that also suppress
the deprotonation reaction. Within the laterally interacting proton
catalyst model, when reactive protons become deactivated, weakly reactive
protons are generated that only catalyze the deactivating alkene oligomerization
and consecutive reactions. This rapid formation of the weakly reactive
protons is the cause of decreasing selectivity with reaction time
and increased rate of deactivation. Solutions of the mean field kinetic
equations as well as stochastic simulations are presented. Comparative
simulations with a reduced number of neighbors of the protons illustrate
decreased deactivation rates when the proton density decreases. Island
formation of adsorbed reaction intermediates on the catalyst surface
is observed in stochastic kinetics simulations. When alkylation selectivity
is high, this island formation increases the rate of catalyst deactivation
in comparison to the rate of deactivation according to the mean field
studies. A nonlinear dynamics model of proton dynamics is provided,
which shows that the differences between stochastic and mean field
simulations are due to frustrated proton state percolation.

alkylation
catalysissolid acid catalysiscatalyst deactivationlaterally interacting protonskinetics simulationsnonlinear dynamicssite percolationdocument-id-old-9cs8b01511document-id-new-14cs-2018-01511jccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Surface chemical reactivity is strongly affected by lateral interactions
between chemisorbed reaction intermediates. Then, for a catalytically
reactive surface, sites of activity cannot be considered to behave
independently. On transition metals, it may lead to collective phenomena
such as surface island overlayer formation or dynamic phenomena such
as time-dependent oscillatory reaction kinetics.1

The physical chemistry of lateral interactions of
protons in solid acid catalysis has been much less investigated. However,
it has become understood that the close presence of protons near each
other tends to enhance their reactivity.

Classical ion exchange
experiments demonstrate a reduction in intrinsic proton reactivity
when protons become exchanged by cations. It induces a strengthening
of the proton bond zeolite framework mainly caused by the negative
charge that is generated on the zeolite framework.2 This was also demonstrated by early quantum-chemical calculations
with cluster models of the zeolite framework.3 A recent experimental study on methanol activation shows enhanced
reactivity with high proton concentration.4 Enhanced catalyst deactivation when the proton concentration is
greater is found in a model study of the methanol to olefin (MTO)
reaction.5

For the alkylation reaction
of propylene and isobutane that is catalyzed by solid acid catalysts,
we will computationally study catalyst deactivation as a function
of proton concentration. Proton reactivity differences can be caused
by changes in framework composition or structure of the zeolite. Instead,
in the simulations that we present, zeolite framework composition
is not altered and proton reactivity differences are due to a proton-removing
reaction caused by a nonselective deactivating reaction.

Whereas
often pore or site blocking, which may cause mass transfer limitations,
are the cause of accelerated deactivation,6 for the low-temperature alkylation reaction such deactivation is
initially not dominant. A molecular mechanism then initiates catalyst
deactivation.

Alkylation of propylene or n-butene
with isobutane is a widely used refinery process, based on neat sulfuric
acid or hydrogen fluoride as catalyst. In this low-temperature reaction,
branched C7 or C8 alkanes (the alkylate) are
formed as useful high-octane fuel. Replacement of this homogeneous
process by a heterogeneous process is highly desirable.7 The main drawback of the use of a heterogeneous
solid acid catalyst is its short catalyst lifetime of approximately
10 h.8,9

Experimental studies of deactivation
kinetics of this reaction show, after an initial period of selective
alkylate formation, accelerated deactivation and a delayed production
of oligomerization product.10,11 Research on the recently
developed Alkyl Clean process12,13 has demonstrated that
the initial deactivation is due to the formation of deactivating hydrocarbons
that can be readily removed in a successive low-temperature hydrogenation
reaction step.

The delayed production of alkene oligomers and
high reactivity of deactivating adsorbed coproduct molecules indicate
that the deactivation mechanism has a molecular chemical origin. When
pore blocking and mass transfer limitations would cause deactivation,
oligomerization would not continue after alkylate production has decayed.
We will present model deactivation kinetics simulations that show
such an accelerated decline of alkylate production and overshoot of
oligomer production.

The low-temperature deactivation of the
alkylation reaction is different from the deactivation kinetics of
high-temperature solid acid catalytic reactions such as catalytic
cracking and the MTO reaction, where deactivation is dominated by
pore or site blocking of the zeolite catalyst micropores by deposition
of a carbonaceous residue of low reactivity, which has to be oxidatively
removed.14−16 An additional reason for accelerated decay is the
often inhomogeneous reactant and product distribution in catalytic
plug flow reactors.17 This is critical
to alkylation deactivation kinetics where alkene concentration has
to be kept low. It is this reason that the alkylation reaction is
preferentially performed in a slurry reactor or continuously stirred
tank reactor (CSTR). Comparison of plug flow reactor data with CSTR
data shows an increase in lifetime from 30 min to 15 h.18

The fundamental reason that in many solid
acid catalyzed reactions catalyst deactivation is rapid is the usual
presence of alkenes as rthe eactant, reaction intermediate, or product.
Even when saturated molecules are converted as, for example, alkanes
in the catalytic cracking reaction or methanol in the MTO reaction,
alkenes will be formed as reaction intermediates.19,20

Alkenes are highly reactive and will readily oligomerize.
They are often desirable reaction intermediates, but apart from leading
to formation of desired product, they will, through successive reactions,
also produce deactivating carbonaceous residue or coke.20 In the alkylation reaction, this problem is
even more severe since propylene or n-butene is used
as a reactant.

Different from high-temperature catalysis, where
catalyst deactivation is mainly due to coke deposition, catalyst deactivation
of the alkylation reaction is initially dominated by proton consumption.
It is the result of a competitive chain of reactions of unsaturated
reaction intermediate molecules that is related to the paring reaction.11,21−23 Proton consumption then is due to the formation of
stable substituted cyclopentadienyl positively charged carbenium ions.
This happens when the Lewis basicity of the deprotonated zeolite framework
reaction center is less than the reaction intermediate that becomes
protonated. Not only will the proton consumption reduce the surface
concentration of the protons that are left but also these protons
will also have reduced intrinsic reactivity. This is, among other
things, due to the previously mentioned negative charge that proton
removal generates on the zeolite lattice.

We will conclude this
introductory section with a short summary of the current understanding
of the molecular mechanism of the alkylation reaction. It will provide
an opportunity to introduce the two reaction channels that are the
main cause of catalyst deactivation. We will, at the close of this
section, also introduce the laterally interacting proton model that
is the core topic of the paper.

Several catalytic reaction cycles
combine to convert alkene and isobutane into alkylate. The complex
network of the alkylation reaction is reasonably well understood.
We will base our model on the catalytic mechanism of the reaction
previously presented13,24 and the earlier founding work
by Schmerling.25

In a previous paper,
we have extensively studied the full reaction mechanism of the alkylation
reaction of propylene and isobutane to give C7 and C8 isomers using quantum chemically calculated elementary reaction
rate constants of the many elementary reaction steps that constitute
the corresponding catalytic cycles.26 These
elementary reaction rate constants then have been applied in microkinetic
simulations of the complete reaction system. The information deduced
from these microkinetic simulations will be used here as input to
the lumped kinetics simulations. In order to make the analysis of
the deactivation kinetics tractable, the kinetic simulations will
be based on a simplified, but useful, version of the alkylation reaction
cycle.

A schematic representation of this cycle is shown in Figure 1, which is useful
to discuss the kinetic conditions that determine high alkylate selectivity
and slow catalyst deactivation.

Figure 1 Scheme of the alkylation reaction cycle
including deactivation reaction paths. Desirable rate relations are
indicated for high selectivity of alkylate and slow deactivation rate.

The reaction consists of an initiation
cycle and a propagation cycle. As we will see, no deactivation will
occur when the propagation cycle has no feed-forward loop connection
with the reaction initiation cycle.

The alkylation reaction
starts with adsorption of propylene to a proton. This results in a
propyl carbenium cation that becomes adsorbed to the surface as an
alkoxy intermediate. The propyl carbenium ion initiates the alkylation
reaction by consecutive reaction with isobutane that gives (undesirable)
propane as a product and the desirable isobutyl cation as reaction
intermediate. It will depend on the specific zeolite whether this
carbenium ion will remain adsorbed to the surface or will be a carbenium
ion intermediate that nearly freely rotates and weakly interacts with
the surface.27,28

In the initiation reaction,
the reaction of the propyl cation with another propylene molecule
that gives a protonated oligomer competes with the formation of the
isobutyl cation by reaction of isobutane. The oligomerization reaction
will initiate consecutive reactions that deactivate the catalyst.

The reaction of isobutane with the propyl cation is an example of
a hydride transfer reaction. Transfer of the hydride ion converts
the propyl cation into propane. The isobutyl cation intermediate that
is cogenerated from isobutane now carries a positive charge. As long
as the rates of the respective hydride transfer reactions are fast,
deactivation will be suppressed and alkylate selectivity will be high.

The hydride transfer reaction has been quantum chemically well
investigated.26,29,30 Especially when larger carbenium ions are involved, the corresponding
reaction intermediates can be considered as nearly freely moving.
Their formation has relatively low activation barriers when proton
reactivity is large.19 Transition states
of the alkene oligomerization reaction have more constrained mobility
and a stronger interaction with the proton reaction center and are
hence less proton reactivity demanding.19,31 Therefore,
competition between hydride transfer and oligomerization reactions
is in favor of the hydride transfer reaction when it is catalyzed
by highly reactive proton sites.10,26

Once
isobutyl cations are formed, the propagation reaction cycle begins.
The isobutyl cation reacts with a propylene molecule to give a C7+ cation. In the next reaction step, hydride transfer
with isobutane will produce the C7 alkylate molecule and
the isobutyl cation will be regenerated. The propagation cycle continues
by a following reaction of the isobutyl cation with another propylene
molecule etc.

The isobutyl cation can be considered the organo-catalyst
of the propagation reaction cycle. In this propagation reaction cycle,
the proton does not play an explicit role.

The role of the proton
becomes different when parasitic deprotonation reactions occur that
convert the iC4+ cation and C7+ cation to their respective olefins. Then a proton is back-donated
to the solid. The rate of deprotonation reactions becomes suppressed
by competitive hydride transfer reactions of the C7+ or iC4+ cations with isobutane.

The occurrence of the deprotonation reactions opens a second deactivation
channel next to that propylene oligomerization. The olefins produced
by deprotonation will also initiate consecutive oligomerization reaction
that deactivate the catalyst.

Additionally, a feed-forward loop
with the reaction initiation cycle opens due to regeneration of protons.
This will reinitiate the initiation reaction channel that competes
with the deactivating propylene oligomerization.

Theoretically,
the alkylation catalyst will be infinitely stable as long as deprotonation
of intermediate carbenium ions does not occur, since then the initiation
reaction cycle will not be reactivated.

In the following sections,
detailed kinetic simulations will be presented on the basis of the
mechanistic principles discussed here and illustrated in Figure 1. Catalyst models
will be compared with laterally interacting and noninteracting protons.
For further comparison we will also present kinetics simulations as
a function of proton concentration.

The laterally interacting
proton catalyst model that we will use is illustrated in Figures 2. This dual interacting
proton catalyst model simplifies differences in reactivity between
protons to only two kinds: a strongly reactive and a weakly reactive
proton. Within the interacting proton model, three different proton
site states are defined: the strongly reactive proton state H1+, a deactivated proton state H2+, and the weakly reactive proton state H3+. The strongly reactive proton state H1+ catalyzes
alkylate formation as well as olefin oligomerization. It deactivates,
by deactivating side reactions of the alkylation reaction cycle, to
the state H2+. Once a proton in the state H1+ has a nonreactive H2+ proton
state as a neighbor, due to the now present negative charge on the
zeolite framework in comparison to the deactivation time of the protons,
it will nearly instantaneously (faster than a picosecond) convert
to a proton state of lower reactivity, H3+,
that cannot catalyze alkylate formation. Protons in the H3+ state will only catalyze alkene oligomerization. They
will also deactivate to proton state H2+.

Figure 2 Schematic illustration
of the laterally interacting two proton reactivity catalyst model:
the dual interacting proton catalyst model. (a) Illustration of the
three proton states: reactive state H1+ that
catalyzes alkylate production, deactivated state H2+ with no reactivity, and the state H3+, where the proton has lower reactivity and will only catalyze alkene
oligomerization. (b) Dynamics of proton deactivation in the dual interacting
proton catalyst model. Deactivation of the reactive H1+ proton state by catalytic reactions is slow, but once a deactivated
proton state H2+ is a neighbor, a proton in
its H1+ state is rapidly converted into a proton
in the less reactive H3+ state. The latter also
deactivates slowly by catalysis but only catalyzes oligomerization
and consecutive deactivating reactions.

Experimental evidence of protons of different reactivity
that give only selective alkylation versus alkene oligomerization
is taken from the reports of Lercher et al.10,11 For zeolites of the faujasite structure, they demonstrated that
differences in alkylation selectivity between La-promoted X and Y
zeolites are related to the location of the reactive proton near La
positions in cavities of the zeolite framework.32,33 Microkinetics simulations of La-containing and non-La-containing
zeolites confirm the large selectivity difference of such protons,
which can be distinguished by their large difference in ammonia adsorption
energy.26

In the next section, for
later reference, we will present kinetics simulations of deactivation
of the alkylation reaction for a single alkylation reactive proton
state catalyst model. This will be followed by analogous simulations
of the dual interacting proton catalyst model of Figure 2. In the course of deactivation,
it generates next to a reactive proton also the less reactive proton.
Results will be compared with kinetic simulations of a catalyst model
that also contains two kinds of protons with different reactivity,
but in this case they do not laterally interact and both are present
at the start of the reaction. The highly reactive proton is alkylation
selective, and the weakly reactive proton only catalyzes oligomerization.

In the discussion section that follows, we will analyze the nonlinear
dynamics of the dual interacting proton model by comparing mean field
and stochastic simulations. It will appear that the high coverage
of the proton sites with reaction intermediates leads to deviations
from the mean field kinetics simulations. Surface percolation of proton
dynamics affects the dependence of deactivation on proton concentration.
A simple three proton state model, which is not explicitly coupled
with kinetics that we introduced previously,34 will not suffice. The paper is concluded with a short summarizing
conclusion section.

2 Deactivation Kinetics of
the Alkylation Reaction
The alkylation reaction network model
of the kinetics simulations in this section is shown in Figure 3. The catalyst model contains
only protons of the same reactivity that do not laterally interact.
Kinetics of the laterally interacting proton model based on an analogous
catalytic cycle will follow in the next section.

Figure 3 Catalytic reaction cycle
of the alkylation reaction including deactivation reaction paths:
catalysis by a single reactivity, nonlaterally interacting proton
catalyst model. H1+ is the reactive proton state,
and H0+ is the deactivated proton state. The
summation of respective concentrations of H1+, H0+, C3+, iC4+, and C7+ is constant.

The purpose of this section is
to show, by modeling deactivation kinetics, the effect of the two
deactivation channels on alkylation selectivity. One deactivation
channel is the oligomerization of propylene and consecutive deactivation
(k10 and k11, Figure 3). The other
deactivation channel is caused by the deprotonation reactions of carbenium
ions iC4+ (k3) and
C7+ (k5) and their
respective consecutive deactivation reactions (k6, k7). In the deprotonation reactions
(k3 and k5), a proton is regenerated that will reinitiate the initiation reaction
cycle by protonation of propylene (k9).

We will also illustrate in this section the feed-forward relation
between the carbenium ion deprotonation reactions (k3, k5) and catalyst deactivation
through the propylene oligomerization channel (k10).

Another important aspect is the deactivation rate
as a function of proton concentration. We will show that, even when
protons do not laterally interact, the deactivation rate increases
with catalyst surface proton concentration. This happens because surface
proton concentration influences the partial iC4=, C7=, and Cn= intermediate
product concentrations in the reaction medium.

The reaction
starts with all protons in state H1+ and stops
when protons in state H1+ are completely converted
into deactivated state H0+.

Rate expressions
of surface concentrations H1+, H0+, C3+, iC4+, and C7+ and of reaction intermediates iC4= and C7= and oligomers Cn= have been formulated in section SI 1. In the Supporting Information,
the details of the solution of the corresponding lumped kinetic equations
are discussed where we followed the approach as outlined in ref (35). The lumped elementary
reaction rate constants depend implicitly on reagent concentrations.
Kinetics simulations correspond to differential conditions, where
changes in reactant concentration by reactions can be ignored. The
product accumulates as in a batch CSTR reactor, the preferred reactor
for alkylation.10,18 Proton concentration dependence
is calculated through definition of dimensionless reaction rate constants
as discussed in section SI 2.

Since,
as we will see for the dual interacting and noninteracting proton
catalyst models, deactivation times of the respective products will
be different, accumulated product cannot be used as a measure of product
selectivity. A steady-state alkylate selectivity that measures the
fraction of propylene incorporation into alkylate can be defined in
the intermediate reaction time regime where surface intermediate concentrations
are finite and stationary. It is calculated from the expression S(C7) = Ċ̇˙7/ (Ċ̇˙̇7 + Ċ̇˙̇3 + Ċ̇˙̇7= + xĊ̇n=) × 100%. Since
we do not consider the oligomer length explicitly, x is set equal to 1. The rates of production, Ċ̇i, are deduced from the slopes
of the Ci(t) vs t curves. In alkylation catalysis, next to
the selectivity, catalyst lifetime is usually the measure by which
the activities of different catalysts are compared. The catalyst lifetime
is defined as the time when the rate of production starts to decline
exponentially. The catalyst decline rate is defined as the inverse
slope of the logarithmic plot of Ċ̇(t) vs t when the atalyst deactivation rate
has become exponential. The unit of time is k1–1, which is maintained the same in the
simulations. In the respective figures (or legends), we mention alkylation
selectivites as well as lifetimes and deactivation rates.

We
will compare kinetics simulations when alkylate is the major product
and when instead oligomerization of alkenes dominates. The differences
are defined by respective default elementary reaction rate parameters
that remain the same throughout the paper, unless mentioned specifically.

First-principles microkinetics simulations based on quantum chemically
calculated elementary reaction rate data representative for these
two cases are available.26 In these simulations,
faujasite zeolites with reactive and less reactive protons were compared.
The default reaction rate parameters selected in the kinetics simulations
of this paper have been chosen to give approximate agreement with
the data of the microkinetics simulations. The default reaction rate
constant of the initiating hydride transfer reaction k1 (Figure 3), which is scaled to 1, has been chosen to be equal to the rates
of the reactions of the propagation cycle (k1 = k2 = k4 = 1). Reaction rate constants of deprotonation of iC4+ and C7+ are chosen 1 order
of magnitude less (k3 = k5 = 0.1). Reaction rate constants of proton deactivation
by alkenes or alkene oligomers again are chosen 1 order of magnitude
smaller (k6 = k7 = k11 = 0.01). The reaction rate of
propylene protonation to form intermediate carbenium ion is fast (k9 = 10). k10, the
lumped elementary reaction rate constant of reactant alkene oligomerization,
has been chosen to vary. For high alkylation selectivity, k10 is chosen equal to k1, the elementary reaction rate constant of hydride transfer.
For the low alkylation selectivity case, k10 is chosen as 10 times k1. This increased
reaction rate constant can be considered to be due to an increased
reactant concentration of propylene. There is no k8. This is reserved for the elementary reaction rate constant
of proton dynamics in the dual site interacting proton catalyst model
to be discussed in section 3.

2.1 Deactivation Kinetics for High and Low Alkylation
Selectivity
We will compare deactivation kinetics when alkylation
selectivity is relatively high and low. It will mainly depend on the
reaction rate ratios of hydride transfer reactions (k1 and k4) versus the reaction
rates of propylene oligomerization (k10) and deprotonation (k3, k5), respectively. We will also consider the effect of
proton concentration on selectivity and deactivation rate of the reaction.

In Figure 4, we
consider the case where alkylate production dominates. We select the
rate of reaction initiation by hydride transfer to the C3+ cation to be comparable to the rate of olefin addition
(k1 = k10 =
1). For this case, Figure 5 compares deactivation rate as a function of proton concentration. Figure 6 gives the results
of kinetics simulations where the elementary reaction rate of olefin
oligomerization is much faster (k1 = 1, k10 = 10).

Figure 4 Deactivation kinetics: the case when alkylate
production dominates (k1 = k10 = 1, k2 = k4 = 1, k3 = k5 = 0.1, k6 = k7 = k11 = 0.01, k9 = 10). For kinetic symbols, refer to Figure 3. The rate of hydride transfer
is comparable to that of propylene oligomerization. (a) Change in
reactant surface concentration at short time scale. (b–d) Longer
time scales for the change in surface concentration, product formation,
and rate of product formation, respectively, as a function of time.
The output concentrations of C3 and Cn= and their rates of formation are the same (overlap
of green and brown curves in (c) and (d)). In addition, the output
concentrations iC4= and C7= are the same (overlap of black and blue curves (c) and (d)).

Figure 5 Effect of proton surface concentration on catalyst
deactivation. The same reaction rate parameters are used as in Figure 4, the case of dominant
alkylate production. A comparison of deactivation rates is made with
a proton density reduced by half (broken curves). (a) Change in reactant
surface concentration with time. (b, c) Product formation and rate
of product formation normalized per proton with time. (d) Initial
H1+ and C3+ surface concentrations
as a function of time.

Figure 6 Deactivation kinetics: the case of low alkylation selectivity. The
rate of propylene oligomerization is fast in comparison to that of
hydride transfer (k1 = 1, k10 = 10, k2 = k4 = 1, k3 = k5 = 0.1, k6 = k7 = k11 = 0.01, k9 = 10). (a) Rate of proton consumption and change in
surface concentration on a short time scale. (b–d) Longer time
scales for the change in surface concentrations, product formation
per unit proton, and rate of product formation per unit proton, respectively,
as a function of time.

For high alkylation selectivity, the relative concentration
of reactant propylene has to be low in comparison to that of isobutane. Figure 4a,b shows surface
coverage in the initiation and deactivation time regimes, respectively.
Product distributions and their respective rates of deactivation are
shown in Figure 4c,d.

In Figure 4 and
later figures, we will plot the surface concentrations of reaction
intermediates, θni, the amount of
product produced per unit proton, C(t), and the rate of change of product produced also normalized per
unit proton, Ċ̇(t). Figure 4a shows rapid initial
proton consumption and overshoot of C3+ formation.
After a relatively short time, C3+ intermediate
formation is overtaken by iC4+ and C7+ formation and a steady-state situation evolves. The
steady-state alkylate selectivity is mentioned in the legend and equals
62%. Figure 4c illustrates
the accumulation of reaction products with time. As the catalyst starts
to deactivate, the accumulated product reaches its maximum. In this
case, steady-state selectivity and accumulated product selectivity
are similar. In the dual interacting and noninteracting proton catalyst
models that we will discuss in the section 3, this will not be the case, since the deactivation
times of the different products will be different.

Figure 4b,d illustrates the
rate of catalyst deactivation that starts at time 40 in the simulations.
Then the deactivated proton state H0+ starts
to appear in Figure 4b. The main reaction product is C7 alkylate. The next
coproducts are propane C3 and propylene oligomer Cn=, followed by iC4= and C7= formation.

The lifetime
of the catalyst is 200 time units as deduced from the logarithmic
plots of product rates of formation, when the slope starts to deviate
from zero (see Figure S1a in section SI 1). When the deactivation rate has become exponential, the catalyst
deactivation rate becomes equal to 0.0075 time–1. In alkylation kinetics, differences in steady-state selectivity
multiplied by catalyst lifetime are the determinants that define their
productivity.

Whereas the elementary reaction rate constant
of propylene oligomerization is 10 times larger than the deprotonation
reaction rate constants, in the simulations the respective apparent
reaction rates are nearly the same (the factor of 2 difference observed
in Figure 4c,d is derived
because protons are generated by the two deprotonation reaction iC4+ and C7+). The reduced relative
rate of the oligomerization reaction is because oligomerization has
to compete with hydride transfer in the initiation reaction.

Experiments of the alkylation reaction of n-butene
and isobutane36 show, in the regime of
high alkylation selectivity, coreaction products due to addition of
butenes to the C8 olefins. They can be considered signatures
of the deprotonation reaction of the intermediate carbenium ions.

It is interesting to compare the variation in decay time with initial
concentrations of protons. Although the protons do not laterally interact,
proton concentration affects the selectivity and deactivation rate
of the reaction, because reaction intermediates will have different
concentrations in the reaction medium. This is illustrated in Figure 5.

In the steady-state
regime, respective selectivities are the same but deactivation times
are different. This makes the selectivity of accumulated products
different. In Figure 5a, the delay of deactivation when surface concentration is reduced
is illustrated from the different time dependences of the surface
intermediate. As shown in Figure S1b in section SI 1, a reduction in proton density by half increases the catalyst
lifetime time from 200 time steps to 260 time steps. The rate of decline
(see Figure 5c) decreases
by a factor of 30% (the alkylation deactivation rate is 0.005 time–1). When the proton density was reduced by half (Figure 5b) a higher product
formation rate per proton occurs. This happens because in the initiation
cycle at reduced proton density there is less deactivating propylene
oligomerization. In Figure 5d, this is reflected in the increased C3+ surface concentration when the proton density is reduced.

When the proton density is decreased, two competing phenomena occur.
First, the product formation per unit surface area becomes reduced
because of less reactive sites. Then the deactivation of H1+ by readsorption of oligomers (k6, k7, k11) produced via the reaction steps k3, k5, and k10 also
becomes less.

Figure 6 shows the results of kinetic simulations when the reaction
rate of propylene oligomerization is large in comparison to that of
the hydride transfer reaction rate (k1/k10 = 0.1). Now the rate of propylene
oligomer formation, Cn=, is
high in comparison to that of alkylate C7 production and
the rate of deactivation has become substantially faster. Steady-state
alkylate selectivity is calculated where the surface coverage of the
reaction intermediate is maximum. It has dropped to 12.3%. The catalyst
lifetime equals 50 time steps, and the deactivation rate becomes 0.03
time–1.

The kinetics simulations apply to
a batch reactor and differential conditions where the reactant concentration
does not change during the reaction. Experimentally, the preferred
reactor for the alkylation reaction is a CSTR, because the reactant
concentration in it is uniform and the reactant alkene concentration
can be kept low. When the reaction is executed with initial excess
isobutane and 100% conversion of reactant alkene,18 the alkylation selectivity is high and the rate of catalyst
deactivation is relatively slow. The catalyst lifetime can be on the
order of 10 h or more. Then the reaction rate of hydride transfer
is large in comparison to the apparent reaction rate of alkene oligomerization
and intermediate carbenium ion deprotonation. The kinetics can be
considered similar to that shown in Figure 4.

Of course then, as long as in the
experiment conversion of propylene remains 100%, no change in propylene
conversion is observed. However, the rates of alkylate and light alkane
production decrease gradually and there is a gradual increase of oligomers
due to the deprotonation reaction.8,10,11 Once alkene conversion drops below 100%, then due
to the suddenly increased alkene concentration, the relative rate
of alkene oligomerization increases sharply, alkylate selectivity
drops sharply, and the rate of catalyst deactivation increases.10,18 Now the kinetic simulations of Figure 6, with the increased rate constant of propylene
oligomerization (k10), apply.

2.2 Feed-Forward Relation between the Deprotonation and Oligomerization
Reactions
As illustrated in Figure 1, catalyst deactivation goes through two
deactivation channels. One deactivation channel competes with the
initiation reaction cycle. Then propylene oligomerization competes
with the hydride transfer reaction of isobutane with propyl cation.
The other deactivation channel results from the deprotonation reactions
of iC4+ and C7+. This
reaction is a parasite on the propagation reaction cycle. At the same
time, it reinitiates the initiation reaction cycle. This can be demonstrated
by a simulation where the elementary reaction rate constants of deprotonation k6 and k7 are put
equal to zero (see Figure 7a).

Figure 7 Feed-forward relation between rates of carbenium ion deprotonation
and propylene oligomerization with default parameters for dominant
alkylate production (k1 = k2 = k4 = 1, k3 = k5 = 0.1 k11 = 0.01, k9 = 10). (a) Time
dependence of rate of change of products when reaction rates of deprotonation
of carbenium ions in the propagation reaction cycle are zero (k6 = k7 = 0, k10 = 1; steady state S(C7)= 100%) (b) Comparison of two cases. The solid lines show
the rate of product formation similar to that in Figure 4, where both deactivation channels
contribute to catalyst deactivation. The dashed lines show the rate
of product deactivation when the deactivation channel through propylene
oligomerization is closed (k6 = k7 = 0.01, k10 =
0; steady state S(C7) = 75%).

Figure 7a shows a short transient period of initial propylene oligomer
formation, which is rapidly taken over by constant production of alkylate
with 100% selectivity. After the initial transient period, the initiation
reaction cycle is taken over by the propagation reaction cycle that
cannot deactivate because of the absence of the deprotonation reactions.

The feed-forward relation between deprotonation and propylene oligomerization
is illustrated in Figure 7b. In this figure, a comparison is made between the two deactivation
channels by suppression of the propylene oligomerization reaction.This
case is compared with both deactivation channels being operational
(default case). This illustrates that when alkylation selectivity
is high the dominant deactivation channel is carbenium ion deprotonation.
The catalyst lifetime is not significantly affected. It is only reduced
by half and the rate of catalyst deactivation is increased by a factor
of 2 when both deactivation channels contribute. Alkylation selectivity
is slightly higher when propylene oligomerization is suppressed.

3 Dual Interacting Proton Catalyst Model
Here
we will compare deactivation kinetics according to the dual interacting
proton catalyst model of Figure 2 with catalyst deactivation by a dual noninteracting
proton catalyst model. This dual noninteracting proton catalyst model
contains two kinds of protons of different reactivities as the dual
interacting proton model, but these protons have no lateral interaction.
They are permanently present during the reaction.

In the dual
interacting proton catalyst model, the three proton states H1+, H2+, and H3+ are defined. Proton states H1+ and H3+ are strongly reactive and weakly reactive, respectively,
and proton state H2+ is the deactivated proton
state. Proton state H1+ is converted to proton
state H3+ when a proton is present on a neighboring
site in the deactivated proton state H2+. Protons
H1+ produce alkylate as well as alkene oligomers.
Protons H3+ only catalyze propylene oligomer
formation. In the dual interacting proton model, at the start of the
reactions only protons in the state H1+ are
present.

In contrast to the dual noninteracting proton catalyst
model, protons in the reactive proton state H1+ are not converted into protons of the weakly reactive proton state
H3+. Protons in respective proton states H1+ and H3+ are present from
the start of the reaction. Different from the dual interacting proton
catalyst model, their deactivated states will not affect the reactivity
of protons in either proton state H1+ or H3+.

The comparison of the two catalyst models
is relevant, since it has been suggested10,11 that the experimentally observed delayed production of alkene oligomerization
is due to the additional presence of weakly reactive protons that
only catalyze alkene oligomerization.This continues after the decline
of alkylate production, which is catalyzed by strongly reactive protons.

Here we will show that an increase in oligomer production once
alkylate production has declined is only consistent with a laterally
interacting proton catalyst model. We will also see that alkylate
production has a reduced lifetime when it is catalyzed by the dual
interacting proton catalyst model in comparison with the lifetime
when isolated protons catalyze the reaction. This is due to a decrease
in neighbor deactivated proton sites next to it. In section 4, the effect of surface vacant
proton sites on catalyst lifetime will be discussed in more detail.

Figure 8 shows the
catalytic reaction cycle of the dual interacting proton catalyst model.
Parts of the elementary reactions are similar to those in Figure 3, the catalytic reaction
cycle of the single proton case, except that proton state H1+ is converted to the less reactive state H3+, when a deactivated proton state H2+ becomes a neighboring site. Since this conversion has an electronic
cause, the corresponding rate constant k8 is fast in comparison to chemical reaction rates. Its default value
is chosen as fast such that the kinetics is not affected by its further
increase. The proton state H3+ will not initiate
the alkylation reaction but only catalyze the oligomerization reaction
of propylene. Default parameters of the reaction rate constants of
oligomerization by protons in the state H3+ are
chosen the same as those of oligomerization by the protons in the
state H1+.

Figure 8 Catalytic reaction cycle of the alkylation
reaction of propylene and isobutane according to the dual interacting
proton catalyst model. Conservation of surface species: H1+ + H2+ + H3+ + C3+ + C3+′
+ iC4+ + C7+ = 1.

The ordinary differential equations
that calculate the time dependence of the dual interacting proton
catalyst model are solved in a fashion analogous to that for the kinetics
equations that correspond to the reaction cycle of the single proton
reactivity model of Figure 3. Details are given in section SI 3.

Figure 9 shows
the reaction cycles that correspond to the dual noninteracting proton
catalyst model. It shows two independent reaction cycles. One reaction
cycle is the same as in Figure 3, and the other concerns the oligomerization of propylene
only and the corresponding proton deactivation. The solutions of the
corresponding kinetics equations are given in section SI 4.

Figure 9 Dual noninteracting proton catalyst model mechanism. Protons
of the two catalyst cycles are not shared, but oligomer production
Cn= interacts with both reaction
cycles. Protons in the state H1+ catalyze alkylation
and oligomerization, and protons in the state H3+ only catalyze oligomerization. Conservation of surface species:
H1+ + H2+ + iC4+ + C7+ + C3+ = 1/2, H2+ + H3+ + C3+′ = 1/2.

In Figure 10, the deactivation patterns of the dual interacting proton catalyst
model and the noninteracting proton catalyst model are given. For
the dual interacting proton catalyst model, in Figure 10a,b changes in production formation and
rate of product deactivation are shown with time. Default kinetic
parameters have been chosen that, for the single proton catalyst model,
give high alkylate selectivity.

Figure 10 Comparison of deactivation kinetics of
the dual interacting proton catalyst model with that of the dual noninteracting
proton catalyst model. Default kinetics model parameters are the same
as those for high alkylate selectivity in the single proton catalyst
model (k1 = 1, k2 = k4 = 1, k3 = k5 = 0.1, k6 = k7 = 0.01, k8 = 10, k9 = k9′ = 10, k10 = 1, k10′ = 1, k11 = k11′ = 0.01). (a, b) Kinetics
of dual interacting proton catalyst model: (a) product formation normalized
per proton; (b) rate of product deactivation normalized per proton
as a function of time. (c–f) Kinetics of dual noninteracting
proton catalyst model (the concentrations of iC4= (black line) and C7= (blue line) always overlap):
(c) product formation normalized per proton as a function of time;
(d) rate of product formation normalized per proton as a function
of time; (e, f) product formation per proton and rate of product formation
per proton with protons H3+ less reactive (k10′ = 0.5; k11′ = 0.005). The C3 formation rate overlaps with
iC4= and C7= rates of
formation after an initial spike. (g) Comparison of deactivation rates
of alkylate production of the single reactivity proton catalyst model
and those of the dual noninteracting proton catalyst model (comparison
is done normalizing the data of dual interacting proton model on the
density of highly reactive protons, with the same default parameters).

Different from the single proton
catalyst model, now deactivation times of reaction products are different.
The selective alkylate production lifetime is now 100 time steps,
0.5 times shorter, and the decline rate of alkylate production 0.065
time–1, 8.33 times faster, in comparison to those
of the single proton catalyst model. After the decline of selective
alkylate production, there is an overshoot of oligomer production.
This overshoot of oligomer production is also apparent from Figure 10b, which shows
the time dependence of production rates of products.

Similar
to the case in alkylation batch experiments, this catalyst model will
only show high alkylate selectivity when the reaction is stopped in
time before oligomer overshoot production sets in. Steady-state selectivities
are mentioned in the legends. The steady-state alkylate selectivity
is now 56%, which is, as expected, slightly less than that for the
single proton catalyst model.

As we will explain in detail in section 4, enhanced deactivation of alkylate production
and overshoot of oligomer production derive from the rapid conversion
of proton state H1+ to the less reactive proton
state H3+ once a deactivated proton state H2+ appears next to it. Protons in proton state H3+ are initially absent in the dual interacting
proton catalyst model. Their later formation is the reason for the
overshoot in oligomerization production after alkylation decline.
In Figure S3, complementary to Figure 10, the time evolution
of surface intermediates is shown. The product evolution closely follows
the occupation of H1+and H3+ protons.

Figure 10c,d shows, for the same elementary reaction rate default parameters,
comparable data for the dual noninteracting proton catalyst model.
In comparison to the proton concentration in the dual site interacting
proton catalyst model, in this figure, the concentrations of respective
proton states H1+ and H3+ have been initialized to cover half the surface each.

As we
have explained in section 2, this reduction
in proton density causes the deactivation of alkylate production to
be delayed by a factor of 1.3 in comparison to the single proton case
(Figure 5c).

The now high initial relative rate of oligomer production is dramatic
in comparison to that in the other two proton catalyst models. It
is due to the high oligomerization rate of the H3+ protons. In the dual noninteracting proton catalyst model, different
from the other catalyst models, oligomerization by the H3+ protons does not compete with the hydride transfer reaction.
The lifetime of alkylate production is 250 time steps, which is slightly
longer than that of the single proton catalyst model of 200 time steps
but the lifetime of oligomer production has decreased to 130 time
steps. Now, after a decline of oligomerization, alkylate production
dominates. In comparison to the single proton catalyst model, the
steady-state alkylate selectivity has decreased by 61%. Because of
its longer lifetime, accumulated alkylate production is higher than
that of oligomer production.

Kinetics as shown in Figures 10c,d will sensitively
depend on the rate of deactivation of the H3+ protons by the oligomer molecules. The oligomerization catalysis
by the weakly reactive protons in the proton state H3+, which are not able to catalyze alkylation, should be slower
than that of the H1+ protons that are able to
catalyze this reaction. Such a decreased rate of deactivation of the
less reactive protons H3+ is consistent with
their known lower rate of propylene oligomerization. Sarazen et al.37 indicate a decrease by at least a factor of
10 in oligomerization rate when the reactivity of highly reactive
and less reactive protons in faujasite zeolite are compared.

Figure 10e,f presents
oligomer product formation and deactivation rates of deactivation,
when accordingly their respective reaction rate constants catalyzed
by protons in proton state H3+ (k10’, k11’) are
reduced by half. In comparison to Figure 10c,d, now steady-state alkylate selectivity
increases, but oligomer production also dominates at longer times.
The lifetime of oligomer production is 260 time steps, and its deactivation
rate of 0.01 time–1 is now close to that of alkylation
(0.009 time–1). Importantly, different from the
dual interacting proton catalyst model, beyond deactivation of alkylation,
the slope of oligomerization rate change is always negative.

In the dual noninteracting proton catalyst model, the reactivity
of proton states H1+ and H3+ is coupled through deactivation by oligomers that are produced by
both proton states. When it is normalized to the same initial H1+ proton concentration, the alkylation lifeitme
of the dual noninteracting proton catalyst model is reduced by 5%
in comparison to the single proton catalyst model.

In this section,
we presented simulations with default elementary reaction rate constants
that give, for the single proton catalyst model, relatively high alkylate
selectivity. In section 4, for the dual interacting
proton catalyst model, we will also analyze simulations when alkylate
selectivity is low.

This section has provided evidence that
alkylate production lifetime is longest when only reactive protons
H1+ are initially present and these protons
are isolated. The deactivation rate increases by 1 order of magnitude
when lateral interactions between protons H1+ are present. Because of the generation of weakly reactive protons
H3+, later in time, delayed production of oligomers
occurs after a decline of alkylate production.

Different from
the dual interacting proton catalyst model, the dual noninteracting
proton catalyst model has a lower initial selectivity of alkylate
production in comparison to that of oligomer formation. As previously
mentioned, this selectivity difference is due to the apparent higher
rate of oligomer formation by the also initially present protons H3+ that cannot catalyze alkylate formation.

In the next section, we will analyze the proton dynamics that is
fundamental to the kinetic differences induced by the lateral interactions
of the protons. The rate of alkylate production follows the dynamics
of protons H1+, and the rate of oligomer production
follows the dynamics of protons H3+.

4 Discussion of Deactivation Kinetics
Kinetics modeling,
discussed in section 3, has demonstrated that
deactivation kinetics changes nonlinearly when protons interact laterally.
In the section 4.1, we will analyze the dynamics of a three proton state model that
shows deactivation dynamics similar to that discussed above for the
dual site interacting proton catalyst model, but without coupling
to the full reaction kinetics scheme of Figure 3. The advantage of this three proton state
model is that analytical solutions of its dynamics can be found. We
will use nonlinear dynamics to deduce the relation between the rates
of deactivation of protons in respective H1+ and H3+ states and their rate of interconversion.

In section 4.2, we will return to the
full dual interacting proton catalyst model. We will compare stochastic
simulations with solutions of the corresponding mean field equations.
The stochastic simulations will be used to study deactivation kinetics
of laterally interacting protons as a function of proton coordination.

4.1 Dynamics of the Three Proton State Model
In the first
part of this section, we will present a mean field analysis of a three
proton state dynamics model that simulates deactivation without explicit
consideration of the full kinetics of the alkylation reaction. The
section will be concluded with a comparison of mean field and stochastic
results that includes an analysis of the dependence on proton coordination
to other protons.

The mean field ordinary differential equations
that describe the time evolution of probabilities ni of the respective proton states Hi+ are given by eqs 1a–1c: 1a   1b   1c  

The rate constants k12 and k32 refer to the respective
proton deactivation rates of proton states H1+ and H3+. As in the dual site interacting proton
catalyst model, proton state H1+ represents
the reactive proton state that catalyzes the alkylation reaction and
proton state H3+ represents the proton state
that only catalyzes propylene oligomerization. The rate constant k13 is the rate of conversion of proton state
H1+ to proton state H3+ when it gets as a neighbor the deactivated H2+ proton state. Since the rates of local surface atom rearrangement
and electronic changes will be several orders of magnitude faster
than the deactivation rates of proton states H1+ and H3+, respectively, one expects k13 to be large in comparison to k12 and k32. m in eq 1a is the number
of neighbors of a proton.

If in eq 1ak13 is set equal
to zero, eqs 1a and 1c decouple and the probabilities ni correspond to that of the dual noninteracting
proton catalyst model. Each proton will decay exponentially with decay
constants 1/k12 and 1/k32, respectively.

In the simulations of the dual
interacting proton catalyst model shown in Figure 10a,b, we observe a delayed oligomer production
after alkylation production has declined. Since this reflects the
respective dynamics of protons H1+ and H3+, we are interested to know for which relationship
of the rate constants in eq 1a, deactivation of protons in state H1+, that catalyze alkylation, occurs quickly and protons in state H3+ that only catalyze oligomerization remain active
after deactivation of the H1+ protons.

The condition for this to happen is that proton state probability n3 crosses state probability n1. (see Figure 11). One can deduce an approximate condition that is given in eq 2 (for the proof, refer
to section SI 5.2): 2  

Figure 11 Dynamics
of the three proton state model. Rate parameter values: k12 = 0.01, k32 = 1.0. Comparison
of time evolution of proton state probabilities ni of protons Hi+, respectively, with strong coupling of the protons
(k13 = 10.0, solid lines) and absence
of coupling of the protons (k13 = 0, dashed
lines). The time evolution of respective proton states H1+, H2+, and H3+ are simulated with rate constants such that state probability n3 crosses state probability n1. This is, within dual interacting proton catalyst model,
the condition of delayed oligomer production (see Figure 10b).

According to this relation, when the conversion rate of proton
state H1+ to proton state H3+ is fast, after decay of alkylation, oligomer formation still
increases and it decays later. This delay becomes independent of k13 when it exceeds a maximum value.

When
the intrinsic rate of deactivation of proton in state H1+ (k12) is small, a high rate
of conversion of proton state H1+ to proton
state H3+ (strong coupling between the protons; 2mk13) is necessary to overcome the rate of deactivation
of the protons in state H3+ (k32). A low rate of proton state H1+ deactivation implies dynamics that corresponds to high initial alkylate
selectivity. As Figure 10c illustrates, when proton states are decoupled, the rate
of deactivation of proton H3+ (reflected in
the deactivation rate of oligomerization) is greater than the deactivation
rate of proton state H1+ (reflected in the deactivation
rate of alkylation). The proton dynamics that corresponds to the kinetics
of dual interacting proton catalyst model kinetics of Figure 10b and dual noninteracting
proton catalyst model of Figure 10d, both calculated with the same default parameters,
is shown in Figure 11.

Figure 11 shows the proton dynamics of the interacting three proton catalyst
model, where the condition of eq 2 is satisfied. A comparison is made with the independent proton
dynamics.

The rate constant of proton state H1+ deactivation has been chosen to be slower than that of proton
state H3+. The strong coupling between proton
states causes, in the coupled system, deactivation of proton state
H1+ to be faster than that of proton state H3+. Slow exponential decay of proton state H1+ is converted into fast nonexponential accelerated
decay. This is even the case when the deactivation rate constant of
reactive proton state H1+ (k12 = 0.01) is initially slower than that of the less reactive
proton state H3+ (k32 = 1).

For a detailed nonlinear dynamics analysis38 of eqs 1a, where four different deactivation rate regimes are identified,
we refer to section SI 5. It appears that
only one deactivation rate regime shows dynamics as found in Figure 11.

Before
returning to the full kinetics of the alkylation reaction, we present
stochastic simulations39−41 of the dynamics of the three proton state model and
compare these with the mean field solutions.

4.1.1 Stochastic
Solution of the Three Proton State Model: Proton Coordination Dependence
In the stochastic simulations, the protons are considered to be
located on a lattice as indicated in Figure 12. A proton can have as a neighbor another
proton in the same state. In addition, we will consider also the possibility
of inert site vacancies that will have state probability n4. Method details on the stochastic simulations are provided
in section SI 5.3.

Figure 12 2D lattice representation
of the laterally interacting three proton catalyst model.

Stochastic simulations and mean field equations
give very similar results except for the chemically relevant case
of Figure 11 (see section SI 5). We will limit the discussion here
to this case, where proton state H3+ deactivation
is delayed beyond deactivation of proton state H1+. As we will see, the difference between the mean field and stochastic
simulations is due to pattern formation of the respective proton states
in the latter. When the mean field approximation is used, as in section 4.1, the implicit assumption is made that
the distribution of proton states is uniform. Stochastic simulations
make the conversion of proton states H1+ to
proton states H3+ faster. The decay of proton
state probability n1 is faster, and there
is more delay of proton state probability n3.

Here, we will show this for the three proton state model.
In section 4.2, the
consequences of this pattern formation will be investigated. Then,
in simulations, proton dynamics and kinetics are coupled.

Mean
field and stochastic simulations of the respective proton states are
shown in Figure 13. The dashed lines show the time evolution for the stochastic case.
The solid lines give the corresponding mean field calculated values.
We compare a surface without vacancies (n4 = 0) with two surface configurations in which vacancies are present
(n4 = 0.3, n4 = 0.7).

Figure 13 (a) Comparison of mean field (solid lines) and stochastic simulations
(dotted lines) with no vacancies: m = 6; k12 = 0.01, k13 =
10; k32 = 1. (b, c) Comparison of normalized
time-evolution curves for mean-field and stochastic simulations when
vacancies in proton concentrations are present: (b) n4 = 0.3, k13′ = k13(1 – n4) = 7; (c) n = 0.7, k13′ = k13(1 – n4) = 3. n4 is the state probability
that the proton site is a vacancy. The deactivation times increase
by factors of 2 and 3, respectively, when n4 = 0.3 and n4 = 0.7.

Significant differences between mean field solutions and
stochastic simulations can be observed in the simulations of Figure 13. For convenience
of comparison, they have been done with same parameter values as used
in Figure 11. Stochastic
simulations slow the rates of deactivation. The differences in the
fast decay time of proton state H1+ and the
delayed deactivation time of proton state H3+ decrease.

When vacancy concentration n4 increases, the decreased coupling of proton states H1+ and H3+ causes the decay
rate of proton states H1+ and deactivation delay
of proton states H3+ to become less. This confirms
the previous conclusion that the alkylation deactivation rate becomes
less when protons become isolated. According to the stochastic simulations,
H1+ sites already behave as if they are completely
isolated when the vacancy concentration n4 equals 0.5 (see Figure S13 and section SI 5.3 for more details).

Pattern formations of the respective proton
states are responsible for this isolated site behavior. As Figure 14 illustrates, the
distribution of proton state probability n1 is no longer homogeneous around proton state probability n2. Proton state H3+ regions
grow around deactivated proton state H2+ regions.
Since the deactivation rate of proton state H1+ is slower than that of proton state H3+, the
system has to wait for the transient proton state H3+ layer that surrounds the deactivated proton state H2+ regions to decay. After decay, the proton state H3+ generation process is restarted. Due to island
formation, percolation of state probabilities H2+ has become reduced. This occurs when n4 is 0.5, since this is near the percolation threshold42 of a hexagonal lattice.

Figure 14 Distribution of proton
state coverages in the stochastic simulations at different simulation
times: (a) n4 = 0.3 at time t = 5; (b) n4 = 0.7 at time t = 15. Comparison of mode of propagation of deactivated proton state
H2+ regions surrounded by proton state H3+ in a hexagonal lattice with k12 = 0.01, k13 = 10, and k32 = 1.

4.2 Stochastic Simulations of the Dual Interacting
Proton Catalyst Model
Here we extend the analysis of section 4.1 with simulations
for the dual interacting proton catalyst model as a function of surface
vacancy concentration. The full kinetics according to the reaction
cycle of Figure 8 is
coupled to stochastic dynamics of the protons (for method details
see section SI 5.4).

Stochastic simulations
differ again from mean field simulations. However, remarkably, when
the alkylation selectivity is high (Figure 15), in contrast to the three proton state
model stochastic simulations show now enhanced rates of deactivation
and short catalyst lifetimes. Analogous to the three proton state
model, delay of deactivation of oligomerization when alkylate production
has deactivated becomes less.

Figure 15 Mean field (solid lines) and stochastic
simulations (dotted lines) of the dual interacting proton catalyst
model for default parameters. Default kinetics parameters are the
same as Figure 10,
for a single proton case giving high alkylate production. (a, c, e)
Product formation normalized and (b, d, f) rates of product formation
with time and proton vacancy concentrations n4 = 0, 0.3, 0.7, respectively. Product formation is plotted
per initial density of H1+ sites. The rate of
deactivation decreases subsequently as n4 increases. For n4 = 0.7, the alkylate
deactivation rate is reduced in the stochastic simulations for longer
times. For (b, d, f)the mean field steady state S(C7) = 63% and stochastic steady state S(C7) = 60%.

When alkylation selectivity is low (Figure 17), one finds that the deactivation rate
is decreased in comparison to the mean field simulation with longer
catalyst lifetimes.

The differences between mean field and stochastic
simulations relate to proton mobility limitations caused by surface
overlayer patterns of adsorbed reaction intermediates.

In the
figure legends, alkylation catalysis and oligomerization lifetimes
are mentioned. Selectivities are mentioned in the respective captions
to the figures.

The stochastic simulations of Figure 15a,b show a shorter catalyst
lifetime of alkylate and oligomerization production in comparison
to the mean field simulations. As was mentioned, this is due to pattern
formation of reaction intermediates adsorbed on the surface lattice.
Differently from the three proton state model, the surface becomes
now also occupied by C3+, iC4+, and C7+ cations (see Figure 16a). Once a deactivated proton
state H2+ is generated, it will have a reduced
probability to meet a proton in state H1+. This
will reduce the initial rate of proton state H3+ generation. Because proton state H3+ dominates
the oligomer removal rate, oligomer production now is increased. This
intermediate oligomer concentration then causes quicker deactivation
of state H1+. A similar phenomenon happened
in the dual noninteracting proton catalyst model, where the presence
of slowly deactivating H3+ protons increased
the deactivation rete of the H1+ protons (compare Figure 10d with Figure 10f).

Figure 16 Plots of
the site concentration on the lattice for (a) high alkylation selectivity
and (b) low alkylation selectivity at times t = 70
and t = 15, respectively (n4 = 0).

With an increase in
surface vacancies (Figure 15c–f), the mean field and stochastic simulations show
an increasingly longer alkylation lifetime and slower deactivation
time. In the stochastic simulations, the relative lifetime of alkylation
increases more than in the mean field simulations, but the relative
increase in lifetime of oligomerization is less, as is the case for
the respective deactivation rates. The initial steady state selectivity
of alkylation does not change. When n4 = 0.7, protons in stochastic simulations start to behave as isolated
protons. This is due to the loss of H2+ percolation,
as also discussed in section 4.1.1 (for
more details, refer to section SI 6). Then
in the mean-field simulation, the delay in peak oligomer formation
is still 40 time steps.

Figure 17 shows that, when
steady state alkylate selectivity is fast, oligomerization product
formation always dominates. A double peak in oligomer production is
observed. The first peak is due to the H1+ protons
that rapidly deactivate, and the latter maximum is from oligomer production
by the proton in the H3+ state.

Figure 17 Single proton catalyst
model: the case of low selectivity to alkylate formation. Comparison
of mean field (solid line) and stochastic simulation (dotted lines)
for the reaction network given in Figure 3. (a–c) Surface concentration, product
formation, and rate of product formation as a function of time. k10 = k10′
= 10 (k1 = k2 = k4 = 1, k3 = k5 = 0.1, k6 = k7 = 0.01, k8 = 10, k9 = k9′ = 10, k11 = k11′ = 0.01; steady state S(C7) = 19% for mean field simulations and S(C7) = 31% for stochastic simulations).

Different from what was observed in Figure 15, the stochastic simulations
in Figure 17 now show
a delay in the rate of deactivation of oligomer production by the
H3+ proton states. The deactivation rate of
proton state H1+ by Cn= is so rapid that the meeting probability with
proton state H2+ dominates. A representative
surface overlayer intermediate pattern is shown is Figure 16b. Because oligomer concentration
is already high, a further change in oligomer concentration will have
no significant effect. In the stochastic simulations, delayed formation
of proton state H3+ is now the cause of the
slower rate of decay.

5 Conclusion
In this
paper, we have presented kinetic simulations of deactivation rates
of the alkylation reaction of propylene with isobutane catalyzed by
a variety of surface models of the solid acid catalyst. The question
is addressed of how lateral interactions between protons will change
catalyst stability and product distribution as a function of time.

Catalyst deactivation by protons that laterally interact has been
computationally studied with a dual interacting proton catalyst model.
In the dual interacting proton catalyst model initially only reactive
protons are present that selectively produce alkylate. In time, they
become deactivated. This induces still present reactive protons to
convert to less reactive protons that now only catalyze propylene
oligomerization. The latter reaction also deactivates in time.

The existence of protons selective to alkylation, different from
protons that only oligomerize alkene oligomerization, is consistent
with experiments7,8,10,43−45 and theory.26 Strongly acidic protons promote alkylate production
over alkene oligomerization. This is because reactive protons favor
the hydride transfer reaction between isobutane and carbenium ion
versus the propylene oligomerization reaction. Catalyst deactivation
occurs through two deactivation reaction channels that do not operate
independently of each other.

Deprotonation of reaction intermediate
carbenium ions will initiate catalyst deactivation by generation of
alkenes. This leads to deactivation because of consecutive deactivating
oligomerization reactions. This deactivation reaction channel is mainly
operational at high alkylate selectivity.

This second deactivation
reaction channel, which dominates when alkylate selectivity is low,
is reactant alkene oligomerization. This reaction competes with the
hydride transfer reaction that initiates the alkylation reaction.

The presence of these two deactivation channels is consistent with
the two experimental selectivity regimes of high and low alkylate
selectivity observed in the CSTR experiment.10 Selective alkylation catalyzed by solid acid catalysts has to be
done with high isobutane to alkene ratio under integral conditions
in a CSTR that enables initially 100% conversion of reactant alkenes.
This minimizes alkene concentration and provides a uniform distribution
of reactant and product in the reactor. Then alkylate selectivity
is high.18 There is initially no observable
catalyst deactivation. Catalyst deactivation becomes observable once
catalyst protons have become deactivated such that the conversion
of reactant alkene drops below 100%.

Experimentally the change
in product selectivity as a function of reaction time can be followed
also in the 100% propylene conversion regime. In this reaction regime
where alkylation selectivity is high, a gradual decline in alkylate
and alkane production rate is observed.10 In addition, a steady production rate increase of oligomer molecules
happens that is derived from deprotonated carbenium ions. This shows
that when alkylate selectivity is high the main deactivation is due
to the deprotonation reactions of intermediate carbenium ions.

Because of ongoing deactivation in the experiment, conversion of
alkene will at some point decrease to less than 100%. Due to the increased
propylene reactant concentration, the rate of the propylene oligomerization
reaction increases and the hydride transfer reaction rate will no
longer be able to compete with it. Then, selective alkylate production
decreases sharply and reactant alkene oligomers become the main product.10

These observations agree with kinetics
simulations of the deactivation of the alkylation reaction. When alkylate
selectivity is high, the main deactivation is due to disruption of
the propagation reaction cycle through deprotonation of intermediate
carbenium ions. When oligomer production dominates, the deprotonation
reaction becomes replaced by deactivating alkene oligomerization as
the main cause of catalyst deactivation.

Kinetics simulations
with the dual interacting proton catalyst model show that lateral
interactions strongly and negatively affect the lifetime of the alkylation
catalyst. Additionally, it is found that, due to the increased rate
of alkylate deactivation, oligomer production continues after deactivation
of alkylate production.

Whereas, as a function of time, the
CSTR experiment shows initially high alkylation activity and delayed
oligomer production when alkylate selectivity declines, this is no
indication that lateral interactions as discussed in this paper play
a role. In the experiment that initially converts alkene 100%, the
decline of alkylate production followed by an increase of oligomer
production is the result of the sudden increase in alkene concentration.
This happens when alkene conversion decreases to less than 100% due
to gradual loss of reactive protons.

In the simulations, we
have compared kinetics of the dual interacting proton catalyst model
with two other catalyst models: a single proton catalyst model and
a dual catalyst noninteracting proton catalyst model. In the absence
of lateral interactions, it is found that an increased local proton
concentration will also increase catalyst deactivation rate. It increases
locally the concentration of alkene intermediates that rapidly deactivate
the catalyst. Therefore, a reduced surface concentration of protons
is beneficial to catalyst lifetime. Experiments by Mores et al.5 on the deactivation of the MTO reaction report
a related proton concentration effect that extends catalyst lifetime.
In reference to a study by Schüßler et al.,45 which deals with the alkylation reaction, it
is also reported that a decreased proton concentration enhances the
lifetime of the catalyst.

A comparison of the dual interacting
proton catalyst model and a dual catalyst noninteracting catalyst
model shows that, even in the absence of lateral interactions, the
additional presence of protons that only catalyze propylene oligomerization
has a large negative effect on catalyst selectivity and also reduces
catalyst life. When alkylation is ongoing, oligomer production by
protons that are not selective to alkylate production is much faster
than that by the alkylate-producing protons. Experimental results10 confirm the conclusion that the additional presence
of weakly reactive sites decreases catalyst life.

Nonlinear
dynamics analysis suggests that the deactivation kinetics of laterally
interacting protons as simulated with the dual interacting proton
catalyst model is not necessarily specific to the alkylation reaction.
It may occur in reactions catalyzed by laterally interacting protons
that require highly reactive protons for selective production of a
desirable product. Examples of such reactions in addition to the alkylation
reaction are the MTO reaction or the catalytic cracking reaction.46 Interestingly, this implies that the effect
is expected to be absent in hydrocracking or hydroisomerisation reactions,
which are less sensitive to proton reactivity since conversions of
intermediate olefins are then reaction rate controlling.20

Stochastic simulations have been compared
with mean field simulations. Stochastic simulations find differences
with mean field simulations since adsorbed reaction intermediates
are not homogeneously distributed on the working catalyst. When these
simulations are applied to the dual interacting proton catalyst model,
one finds that coverage of the surface by reaction intermediates inhibits
additional conversion of reactive protons into weakly reactive protons.
Because of the large difference in overall oligomer production rates
between reactive protons, which catalyze alkylation, and weakly reactive
protons, which only catalyze oligomerization, this affects a selective
alkylation catalyst differently from a catalyst that dominantly produces
oligomers. In comparison to mean field simulations, it reduces the
lifetime of a selective alkylation catalyst but makes it slightly
longer when alkylation selectivity is low. The stochastic simulations
show that laterally interacting protons behave kinetically as isolated
protons, when on a hexagonal lattice the proton vacancy concentration
is in excess of 50%.

Supporting Information Available
The
Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at
DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.8b01511.Mean-field solutions
of kinetic equations for single reactivity and dual interacting and
dual noninteracting proton catalyst models, three proton state model
with mean-field analysis with phase portraits and comparison with
stochastic simulations, and stochastic simulations of the dual interacting
proton catalyst model (PDF)



Supplementary Material
cs8b01511_si_001.pdf

 The
authors declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The work
is part of The Netherlands Center for Multiscale Catalytic Energy
Conversion (MCEC), funded by The Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research, NWO.
==== Refs
References
Ertl G.  Reactions at Solid Surfaces ; Wiley : Hoboken,
NJ, USA , 2009 .
Derouane E. G. ; Védrine J. C. ; Pinto R. R. ; Borges P. M. ; Costa L. ; Lemos M. A. N. D. A. ; Lemos F. ; Ribeiro F. R. 
The Acidity of Zeolites:
Concepts, Measurements and Relation to Catalysis: A Review on Experimental
and Theoretical Methods for the Study of Zeolite Acidity . Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng. 
2013 , 55 , 454 –515 10.1080/01614940.2013.822266 .
van Santen R. A. ; Kramer G. J. 
Reactivity Theory of Zeolitic Broensted
Acidic Sites . Chem. Rev. 
1995 , 95 , 637 –660 10.1021/cr00035a008 .
Di Iorio J. R. ; Nimlos C. T. ; Gounder R. 
Introducing
Catalytic Diversity into Single-Site Chabazite Zeolites of Fixed Composition
via Synthetic Control of Active Site Proximity . ACS Catal. 
2017 , 7 , 6663 –6674 10.1021/acscatal.7b01273 .
Mores D. ; Kornatowski J. ; Olsbye U. ; Weckhuysen B. M. 
Coke Formation
during the Methanol-to-Olefin Conversion: In Situ Microspectroscopy
on Individual H-ZSM-5 Crystals with Different Brønsted Acidity . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2011 , 17 , 2874 –2884 10.1002/chem.201002624 .21305622 
Bartholomew C. H. ; Farrauto R. J.  Catalyst Deactivation: Causes, Mechanisms, and Treatment . In Fundamentals of Industrial Catalytic Processes ; Wiley : Hoboken,
NJ, USA , 2010 ; pp 260 –336 .
Corma A. ; Martínez A. 
Chemistry,
Catalysts, and Processes for Isoparaffin–Olefin Alkylation:
Actual Situation and Future Trends . Catal. Rev.:
Sci. Eng. 
1993 , 35 , 483 –570 10.1080/01614949308013916 .
Feller A. ; Lercher J. A. 
Chemistry and Technology of Isobutane/Alkene Alkylation
Catalyzed by Liquid and Solid Acids . Adv. Catal. 
2004 , 48 , 229 –295 10.1016/S0360-0564(04)48003-1 .
Weitkamp J. ; Traa Y. 
Isobutane/butene Alkylation
on Solid Catalysts. Where Do We Stand? . Catal.
Today 
1999 , 49 , 193 –199 10.1016/S0920-5861(98)00424-6 .
Feller A. ; Guzman A. ; Zuazo I. ; Lercher J. A. 
On the Mechanism
of Catalyzed Isobutane/butene Alkylation by Zeolites . J. Catal. 
2004 , 224 , 80 –93 10.1016/j.jcat.2004.02.019 .
Feller A. ; Barth J.-O. ; Guzman A. ; Zuazo I. ; Lercher J. A. 
Deactivation Pathways in Zeolite-Catalyzed Isobutane/butene
Alkylation . J. Catal. 
2003 , 220 , 192 –206 10.1016/S0021-9517(03)00251-3 .
D’Amico V. ; Gieseman J. ; Nousiainen H. ; van Broekhoven E. ; van Rooijen E. 
Consider New Methods to Debottleneck
Clean Alkylate Production . Hydrocarb. Process. 
2006 , 65 –70 .
Broekhoven E. H. ; van Rooijen E. 
Alkylation with Solid Acid Catalyst . Pet. Technol. Q. 
2008 , 13 , 87 –93 .
Olsbye U. ; Svelle S. ; Lillerud K. P. ; Wei Z. H. ; Chen Y. Y. ; Li J. F. ; Wang J. G. ; Fan W. B. 
The Formation and
Degradation of Active Species during Methanol Conversion over Protonated
Zeotype Catalysts . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 7155 –7176 10.1039/C5CS00304K .26185806 
Brillis A. A. ; Manos G. 
Catalyst Deactivation
during Catalytic Cracking of N-Octane, Isooctane and 1-Octene over
USHY Zeolite at Mild Conditions and Short Times on Stream . Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal. 
2001 , 139 , 255 –262 10.1016/S0167-2991(01)80205-6 .
Wojciechowski B. W. ; Corma A.  Catalytic
Cracking: Catalysts, Chemistry, and Kinetics , 1 st ed.; M. Dekker : New York , 1986 .
Janssens T. V. W. ; Svelle S. ; Olsbye U. 
Kinetic Modeling of Deactivation
Profiles in the Methanol-to-Hydrocarbons (MTH) Reaction: A Combined
Autocatalytic–hydrocarbon Pool Approach . J. Catal. 
2013 , 308 , 122 –130 10.1016/j.jcat.2013.05.035 .
De Jong K. P. ; Mesters C. M. A. M. ; Peferoen D. G. R. ; Van Brugge P. T. M. ; De Groot C. 
Paraffin Alkylation Using Zeolite Catalysts in a Slurry
Reactor: Chemical Engineering Principles to Extend Catalyst Lifetime . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
1996 , 51 , 2053 –2060 10.1016/0009-2509(96)00062-0 .
van Santen R. A. ; Liu C.  Theory
of Zeolite Catalysis . In Modelling and Simulation
in the Science of Micro- and Meso-Porous Materials ; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 2018 ; pp 151 –188 .
van Santen R. A.  Solid Acid Catalysis, Theory and Reaction Mechanisms . In Modern heterogeneous catalysis: an Introduction ; Wiley-VCH : Weinheim,
Germany , 2017 ; p 592 .
Haw J. F. ; Song W. ; Marcus D. M. ; Nicholas J. B. 
The Mechanism
of Methanol to Hydrocarbon Catalysis . Acc. Chem.
Res. 
2003 , 36 , 317 –326 10.1021/ar020006o .12755641 
Olsbye U. ; Svelle S. ; Bjørgen M. ; Beato P. ; Janssens T. V. W. ; Joensen F. ; Bordiga S. ; Lillerud K. P. 
Conversion of Methanol to Hydrocarbons: How Zeolite
Cavity and Pore Size Controls Product Selectivity . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 5810 –5831 10.1002/anie.201103657 .
Weitkamp J. 
Catalytic
Hydrocracking-Mechanisms and Versatility of the Process . ChemCatChem 
2012 , 4 , 292 –306 10.1002/cctc.201100315 .
Bibby D. M. ; Howe R. F. ; Mclellan G. D. 
Coke Formation in High-Silica Zeolites . Appl. Catal., A 
1992 , 93 , 1 –34 10.1016/0926-860X(92)80291-J .
Schmerling L. 
The Mechanism of the Alkylation of Paraffins . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1945 , 67 , 1778 –1783 10.1021/ja01226a048 .
Liu C. ; van Santen R. A. ; Poursaeidesfahani A. ; Vlugt T. J. H. ; Pidko E. A. ; Hensen E. J. M. 
Hydride Transfer versus Deprotonation Kinetics in the
Isobutane–Propene Alkylation Reaction: A Computational Study . ACS Catal. 
2017 , 7 , 8613 –8627 10.1021/acscatal.7b02877 .29226012 
Tuma C. ; Kerber T. ; Sauer J. 
The Tert-Butyl Cation
in H-Zeolites: Deprotonation to Isobutene and Conversion into Surface
Alkoxides . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2010 , 49 , 4678 –4680 10.1002/anie.200907015 .
Rozanska X. ; van Santen R. A. ; Demuth T. ; Hutschka F. ; Hafner J. 
A Periodic DFT Study
of Isobutene Chemisorption in Proton-Exchanged Zeolites: Dependence
of Reactivity on the Zeolite Framework Structure . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2003 , 107 , 1309 –1315 10.1021/jp021646b .
Janik M. J. ; Davis R. J. ; Neurock M. 
A Density Functional Theory Study
of the Alkylation of Isobutane with Butene over Phosphotungstic Acid . J. Catal. 
2006 , 244 , 65 –77 10.1016/j.jcat.2006.08.013 .
Kazansky V. B. ; Frash M. V. ; van Santen R. A. 
A Quantum-Chemical
Study of Hydride Transfer in Catalytic Transformations of Paraffins
on Zeolites. Pathways through Adsorbed Nonclassical Carbonium Ions . Catal. Lett. 
1997 , 48 , 61 –67 10.1023/A:1019066718512 .
Liu C. ; Tranca I. ; van Santen R. A. ; Hensen E. J. M. ; Pidko E. A. 
Scaling
Relations for Acidity and Reactivity of Zeolites . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2017 , 121 , 23520 –23530 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b08176 .
Sievers C. ; Liebert J. S. ; Stratmann M. M. ; Olindo R. ; Lercher J. A. 
Comparison of Zeolites LaX and LaY
as Catalysts for isobutane/2-Butene Alkylation . Appl. Catal., A 
2008 , 336 , 89 –100 10.1016/j.apcata.2007.09.039 .
Schüßler F. ; Pidko E. A. ; Kolvenbach R. ; Sievers C. ; Hensen E. J. M. ; van Santen R. A. ; Lercher J. A. 
Nature and Location of Cationic Lanthanum Species in
High Alumina Containing Faujasite Type Zeolites . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 21763 –21776 10.1021/jp205771e .
Van Santen R. A. ; Sengar A. ; Steur E. 
The Challenge of Catalyst Prediction . Faraday Discuss. 
2018 , 10.1039/C7FD00208D .
Marin G. B. ; Yablonsky G. S.  Kinetics of Chemical Reactions ; Wiley-VCH : Weinheim, Germany , 2011 .
Feller A. ; Zuazo I. ; Guzman A. ; Barth J. O. ; Lercher J. A. 
Common Mechanistic Aspects of Liquid
and Solid Acid Catalyzed Alkylation of Isobutane with N-Butene . J. Catal. 
2003 , 216 , 313 –323 10.1016/S0021-9517(02)00068-4 .
Sarazen M. L. ; Doskocil E. ; Iglesia E. 
Catalysis on Solid
Acids: Mechanism and Catalyst Descriptors in Oligomerization Reactions
of Light Alkenes . J. Catal. 
2016 , 344 , 553 –569 10.1016/j.jcat.2016.10.010 .
Strogatz S. H.  Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applications to Physics,
Biology, Chemistry, and Engineering , 2 nd ed.; Westview Press : Boulder, CO, USA , 2015 .
Dean P. ; Bird N. F. 
Monte Carlo Estimates of Critical Percolation Probabilities . Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 
1967 , 63 , 477 10.1017/S0305004100041438 .
Jacobsen J. L. 
High-Precision Percolation Thresholds and Potts-Model
Critical Manifolds from Graph Polynomials . J.
Phys. A: Math. Theor. 
2014 , 47 , 135001 10.1088/1751-8113/47/13/135001 .
Suding P. N. ; Ziff R. M. 
Site Percolation Thresholds for Archimedean Lattices . Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip.
Top. 
1999 , 60 , 275 –283 10.1103/PhysRevE.60.275 .
Sykes M. F. ; Essam J. W. 
Exact Critical Percolation Probabilities for Site and
Bond Problems in Two Dimensions . J. Math. Phys. 
1964 , 5 , 1117 –1127 10.1063/1.1704215 .
Mostad H. B. ; Stöcker M. ; Karlsson A. ; Rørvik T. 
Comparison of the iso-structural
H-SAPO-37 and H-faujasite as catalysts for the isobutane/2-butene
alkylation . Appl. Catal., A 
1996 , 144 , 305 –317 10.1016/0926-860X(96)00113-5 .
Corma A. ; Martínez A. ; Martínez C. 
Isobutane/2-butene alkylation on ultrastable Y zeolites:
Influence of zeolite unit cell size . J. Catal. 
1994 , 146 , 185 –192 10.1016/0021-9517(94)90021-3 .
Schüßler F. ; Schallmoser S. ; Shi H. ; Haller G. L. ; Ember E. ; Lercher J. A. 
Enhancement of Dehydrogenation
and Hydride Transfer by La+3 Cations in Zeolites during
Acid Catalyzed Alkane Reactions . ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4 , 1743 –1752 10.1021/cs500200k .
Corma A. ; Orchillés A. V. 
Current
views on the mechanism of catalytic cracking . Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 
2000 , 35–36 , 21 –30 10.1016/S1387-1811(99)00205-X .

