
==== Front
ACS CatalACS CatalcsaccacsACS Catalysis2155-5435American Chemical Society 10.1021/acscatal.8b04068ReviewPhotocatalysis
with Reduced TiO2: From
Black TiO2 to Cocatalyst-Free Hydrogen Production Naldoni Alberto *†Altomare Marco ‡Zoppellaro Giorgio †Liu Ning ‡Kment Štěpán †Zbořil Radek †Schmuki Patrik *†‡† Regional
Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Faculty of Science, Palacký University Olomouc, Šlechtitelů 27, 78371 Olomouc, Czech Republic‡ Department
of Materials Science and Engineering, University
of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Martensstrasse 7, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany* E-mail: alberto.naldoni@upol.cz.* E-mail: schmuki@ww.uni-erlangen.de.30 11 2018 04 01 2019 9 1 345 364 09 10 2018 26 11 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Black
TiO2 nanomaterials have recently emerged as promising
candidates for solar-driven photocatalytic hydrogen production. Despite
the great efforts to synthesize highly reduced TiO2, it
is apparent that intermediate degree of reduction (namely, gray titania)
brings about the formation of peculiar defective catalytic sites enabling
cocatalyst-free hydrogen generation. A precise understanding of the
structural and electronic nature of these catalytically active sites
is still elusive, as well as the fundamental structure–activity
relationships that govern formation of crystal defects, increased
light absorption, charge separation, and photocatalytic activity.
In this Review, we discuss the basic concepts that underlie an effective
design of reduced TiO2 photocatalysts for hydrogen production
such as (i) defects formation in reduced TiO2, (ii) analysis
of structure deformation and presence of unpaired electrons through
electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, (iii) insights from
surface science on electronic singularities due to defects, and (iv)
the key differences between black and gray titania, that is, photocatalysts
that require Pt-modification and cocatalyst-free photocatalytic hydrogen
generation. Finally, future directions to improve the performance
of reduced TiO2 photocatalysts are outlined.

black TiO2H2 productionphotocatalysishydrogenationcocatalystdefect engineeringwater splittingdocument-id-old-9cs8b04068document-id-new-14cs-2018-04068rccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Solar energy storage in
the form of chemical bonds is of paramount
relevance in the modern energy economy to increase the share of renewable
energy utilization at zero-carbon emission.

The ideal energy
vector envisioned to store solar energy is molecular
H2. It has high energy density and can be obtained from
water splitting, a very well-known chemical reaction that has inspired
the development of several technologies such as electrolyzers, photoelectrochemical
(PEC) cells, and photocatalytic reactors for powdered catalysts in
aqueous suspensions.1−7

In particular, photocatalysis with powdered semiconductor
catalysts
has been greatly developed in the last 50 years finding application
in pollutants removal,8−10 CO2 photoreduction,11,12 N2 fixation,13 and indeed
in H2 production from water splitting or photoreforming
of H2O/alcohol (i.e., methanol and ethanol) mixtures.14

Photocatalytic chemical transformations
consist of several consecutive
steps, thus limiting the overall photoconversion efficiency. A typical
photocatalytic process starts with the generation of electron–hole
pairs in the semiconductor bulk following light irradiation, and their
subsequent migration toward the surface where reaction with molecular
substrates occurs.

TiO2 is the most diffuse photocatalyst
providing a set
of material properties such as an outstanding stability toward photocorrosion,
nontoxicity, low cost, and conduction and valence band edges (CB and
VB, respectively) straddling the redox potentials of many sustainable
chemical transformations (Figure 1). However, TiO2 efficiency has been hampered
by its wide bandgap of ∼3.2 eV that limits light absorption
to the UV region of the solar spectrum (∼4% of the total solar
irradiance).

Figure 1 Schematic representation of photocatalysis with TiO2: red arrow - bandgap energy (Eg) of
TiO2 ∼ 3.0–3.2 eV depending on the crystalline
structure; blue arrow - photon absorption having energy equal or greater
than Eg and consequent excitation of electrons
(e–) to the CB leaving positively charged vacancies,
holes (h+), in the VB. Electrons act as reduction agent,
while holes promote oxidation reactions. EF is the Fermi level of TiO2. The orange energy states
within the TiO2 bandgap and close to the CB minimum may
be created due to the presence of oxygen vacancies (VOs),
Ti3+, and 3d metal dopants (M); purple states close to
the VB maximum may be created upon doping with nonmetal impurities
(e.g., N, S, C). The relative energetic positions of water splitting
redox potentials at pH = 0 (red dashed lines) and CO2 reduction
products (orange dashed lines) are displayed versus the reversible
hydrogen electrode (RHE) and the vacuum level.

Furthermore, TiO2 shows high recombination of
photogenerated
charge carriers. To mitigate this limit, different approaches have
been explored for the material’s assembly such as engineering
of nanocrystals’ shape and facets, formation of heterojunctions
with other semiconductors, and the deposition of noble metal (Au or
Pt) cocatalysts to enhance charge separation through the formation
of an interfacial Schottky barrier.15,16

Historically,
the limited light absorption has been tackled, instead,
by doping TiO2 nanomaterials with foreign atoms. Doping
of TiO2 nanomaterials produces colored TiO2,
which are materials with modified electronic structure due to the
introduction of suitable “intra-bandgap” electronic
states that modify TiO2 light absorption and optical properties.

Early work on doped TiO2 employed transition metals
(e.g., V, Cr, Mn, Fe, and Cu) introduced as substitutional atoms inside
the crystalline habit to generate 3d electronic states lying in the
range 0.5–1.5 eV below the CB of TiO2 and thus providing
visible light absorption and photocatalytic efficiency (Figure 1). However, metal doping showed
an unfavorable trade-off between absorption and photocatalytic activity,
being often responsible for increased charge recombination via newly
formed deep electronic levels.16

In contrast, nonmetal (e.g., N, C, and S) doping has shown great
potential in forming efficient visible light active TiO2 photocatalysts, typically due to the formation of 2p electronic
states above the VB capable of producing efficient charge transfer
electronic transition to the 3d CB of TiO2 and thus providing
high photocatalytic activities (Figure 1).

For example, N-doping was reported to yield
yellow TiO2 powders exhibiting a red shift of the optical
absorption onset up
to ∼500 nm.17 However, in some cases,
N or C species induce only a surface modification18 of TiO2 rather than bulk doping.

TiO2 powders of various other colors have also been
reported. Liu et al.19 developed an alternative
version of nitrogen doping to produce red TiO2 anatase
microspheres; the reported methodology relied on predoping TiO2 with interstitial boron atoms. The predoping process improved
the solubility of substitutional N atoms in the lattice of anatase
TiO2 and limited at the same time the formation of Ti3+ centers as extra electron from B atoms compensating the
charge difference between lattice O2– and substitutional
N3–. Red TiO2 was found to absorb the
full visible light spectrum and exhibited an optical Eg that varied from ∼1.9 eV on the surface to 3.2
eV in the core, as a consequence of the introduced boron concentration
gradient.19,20 Interestingly, the finding did not generate
follow-up work in photocatalysis.

Tian et al.21 reported the preparation
of green TiO2. The green color originated from a charge-transfer
complex involving hydrazine groups linked to surface Ti4+ centers; green anatase powders showed a broadband light absorption
in the visible region that extended also to the near-infrared (NIR)
range (∼1100 nm), with an optical band gap of 1.05 eV. These
examples are based on doping (or codoping) of TiO2 with
extrinsic donor or acceptor species.

However, colored TiO2 can also be formed by intrinsic
doping, namely by the introduction of oxygen vacancies (VOs) and formation of Ti3+ centers in the TiO2 lattice.

The synthesis of these materials is usually carried
out by a high-temperature
treatment of TiO2 in various reducing atmospheres (e.g.,
vacuum, Ar, H2/Ar, and pure H2).22−24 TiO2 can be obtained with a gray, blue, brown, or black
color depending on the utilized conditions. The resulting color is
ascribed to the formation of various amounts of Ti3+ and
VOs. Increasing the “level” of reduction
leads, in general, to a higher density of defects (e.g., Ti3+ and VO concentration) and consequently to “darker”
TiO2 powders.

In 2011, Chen et al. reported the first
black TiO2 nanomaterial
for photocatalysis.25 Upon a thermal treatment
at 200 °C under high pressure of H2, stoichiometric
anatase TiO2 was converted in defective nanocrystals with
high visible light absorption (Figure 2a) and high photocatalytic activity for H2 generation during photoreforming of water/methanol mixture if a
Pt cocatalyst was used. The enhanced performance of black TiO2 was related to the increased light absorption due to introduction
of lattice disorder and H-doping, which consequently narrowed the
optical bandgap of black TiO2 to 1.54 eV by introducing
electronic states forming significant VB and CB tailing (Figure 2b). An interesting
feature of this type of core–shell black nanocrystals was the
sharp optical absorption band edge shown at ∼1000 nm.

Figure 2 (a) Pictures
and absorption spectra of white and black TiO2 powders
synthesized through high-pressure hydrogenation.
(b) High-resolution transmission electron micrograph and schematics
showing the disordered shell of black TiO2 and its electronic
density of states (DOS). Reproduced with permission from ref (25). Copyright 2011 American
Association for the Advancement of Science.

A myriad of material designs, from H-doping to defect engineering,
have appeared since 2011 and have produced reduced TiO2 nanomaterials with enhanced (or not) photocatalytic performance
and having various colors from green, yellow, blue, and back to black,26−28 as well as an important “gray” version.29,30

Despite early studies on reduced TiO2 that started
in
the 50s31−33 and significantly progressed with the advent of scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM) and surface science,34 the renewed interest in the past decade on defective oxides
for photocatalysis has enabled the discovery of new materials and
phenomena, holding great promise to further boost the advances toward
solar fuel generation.

Recently, the synthesis of gray TiO2 nanomaterials showing
high photocatalytic H2 production by operating under cocatalyst-free
conditions has been reported, opening new opportunities in the design
of catalytic sites for photocatalysis.29,35−37

In particular, Liu et al. introduced several preparation methods
to reduce TiO2 nanopowders29,30,38 and nanotubes35,39 to form partially reduced
materials with stable and very high photocatalytic hydrogen production
without the use of any noble metal cocatalyst. The high-temperature,
high-pressure (500 °C, 20 bar) hydrogenation of anatase or mixed
anatase/rutile TiO2 produced unique catalytic sites that
enabled cocatalyst-free hydrogen production rate that were 2 orders
of magnitude higher than those observed for stoichiometric powders,
reaching values of more than 200 μmol g–1 h–1. Later on, other synthetic procedures, such as high
energy ion implantation,39 hydride ball
milling,38 and partial oxidation of TiN
powders,40 have been shown to produce similar
reduced TiO2 varieties producing hydrogen without any addition
of noble metals.

The use of various forms and structures of
hydrogenated TiO2, black TiO2, or more generally
reduced TiO2 have meanwhile also shown superior activity
when used as
photoanodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting.41−49 Recent findings have unveiled that a major contribution to the working
mechanism of reduced titania electrodes is given by the enhanced conductivity,50 while others argue a higher donor density of
black TiO2, resulting in higher band bending and therefore
charge separation at the electrode/electrolyte interface.51 Further studies are needed and might reveal
specific roles of defects in addressing photoelectrochemical selectivity
during water splitting (i.e., two-electron vs four-electron oxidation).
These aspects have been recently reviewed and thus they will not be
covered in this Review.52

Nevertheless,
the common line that underlies black TiO2 research is the
mismatch among the amount of increased absorption
or band gap narrowing and the corresponding photocatalytic activity;
although light in the visible range may be absorbed, no visible light
reaction activity may be observed.

Relevant questions that emerge
from a literature survey are the
following: (i) Where are visible photons lost during the photocatalytic
process? (ii) What is the best material design to increase both absorption
and photocatalytic activity? (iii) What is the subtle connection among
crystal defects, structural and electronic singularities, light absorption,
charge separation, and photocatalysis?

In this Review, we provide
some answers to these questions with
the aid of current knowledge and give a brief overview on defective
TiO2 nanomaterials for photocatalysis, drawing relationships
that interlink structural and electronic features in TiO2 to photoconversion efficiency.

In particular, we will cover
the type of crystal defects in TiO2 and the consequences
that they bring on lattice geometry
as well as on electronic DOS. We present electron paramagnetic resonance
spectroscopy (EPR) as a useful technique that provides plenty of information
both on crystal structure and extra electrons hosted in TiO2 due to creation of crystal defects.

With this in mind, we
will discuss several surface science studies
on TiO2 photocatalysis that are, in our opinion, fundamental
to tackle a rational design of defective black TiO2 for
photocatalysis.

We will describe the different types of defects
formed in various
black TiO2 nanocrystals and review how they influence the
photocatalytic hydrogen production by using water splitting or photoreforming
of alcohols. This last section is dedicated to photocatalysis with
black TiO2 and covers with a critical view the development
of photocatalysts from core–shell nanocrystals and phase nanojunctions
to cocatalyst-free black TiO2.

2 Defects
in Metal Oxides: The Case of TiO2
2.1 Types
of Crystal Defects and Relation with
Photocatalysis
A large variety of physical properties of
crystalline material is regulated by the presence of different types
of defects and imperfections. Defects engineering indeed plays a prominent
role in tailoring electronic, magnetic, optical, mechanical, and quantum
properties as well as it is crucial for activation of heterogeneous
(photo)catalytic processes.53

The
classification of crystal defects is generally made according to the
dimensionality of the defect.54,55 Zero-dimensional (0D)
defects are related to a single or a few atomic positions and hence
are called point defects (Figure 3a). In any TiO2 nanocrystal, we
may find therefore several point defects such as Ti vacancy TiV (rare), Ti interstitial Tii (common and important
for photocatalysis), O vacancy VO (often observed in reduced
TiO2), and interstitial (e.g., hydrogen or nonmetal dopants)
or substitutional impurity (e.g., metal or nonmetal dopants).

Figure 3 (a) Schematics
of possible crystal defects in TiO2.
(b) Generic representation of linear defects (dislocations) in an
inorganic nanocrystal. (c) Upper figure: unrelaxed anatase TiO2 (001) and (101) surface. Lower figure: a rutile inclusion
grown inside an anatase crystal. (d) Upper figure: scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM) image of triple linear surface oxygen vacancies on
CeO2 (111) surface and corresponding structural model.
Lower figure: schematic representation of defect clustering shown
in STM of upper figure. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref (54). Copyright 2014 Springer.
(c) Upper figure: reproduced with permission from ref (59). Copyright 2008 Nature
Publishing Group. Lower figure: reproduced with permission from ref (60). Copyright 1999 mineralogical
Society of America. (d) Reproduced with permission from refs (61,62). Copyright 2005 American Association for the Advancement of Science.

The introduction of point defects
produces structural rearrangements
that may create significant distortions in the local symmetry of Ti
octahedra, thus influencing the charge transport and recombination
during photocatalysis. This topic will be discussed in more detail
in Section 2.2.

Similarly, the direct consequence of the introduction of 0D defects
on electronic DOS of TiO2 depends on their specific nature,
and several excellent reviews provide in depth discussion on this
aspect.10,15

Substitutional metal dopants generally
contribute to DOS through
additional 3d states forming below the CB of TiO2 (Figure 1). A similar electronic
effect is found when a significant amount of VOs is generated,
with the mutual formation of Ti3+ charged sites producing
electronic states 0.8–1.2 eV below the CB.56 Otherwise, nonmetal dopants (e.g., N, C, S) and interstitials
(e.g., H or Ti) present electronic features that populate the DOS
of defective TiO2 in the region above the VB, providing
a more effective strategy than metal doping to modify TiO2 electronic structure (Figure 1 and 2b).25,26,56,57 Electronic
transitions from 2p states due to nonmetal dopants to CB are usually
very efficient and produce a positive trade-off between optical absorption
and photocatalytic efficiency. Otherwise, metal centers producing
excess of electronic states below the CB, once exceeding a specific
threshold, behave like recombination centers for photogenerated charges,
thus being detrimental for photocatalytic reactions.58

The physical location of point defects is another
important feature,
which has great influence in the electronic DOS of TiO2 and its photoreactivity. Point defects can be positioned at three
different locations: (i) at the surface, defined as the first atomic
layer of a nanocrystal; (ii) at the subsurface, defined as the crystal
slab contained between the second layer from the surface and including
few nanometers in depth; and (ii) in the bulk of the nanocrystal.

Linear or 1D defects are generally called dislocations and produce lattice strain (Figure 3b), which has been reported to be beneficial for photocatalytic
activity with TiO2. Dislocations are the result of plastic
deformation of crystal lattice and identify the area where the crystallographic
registry is lost.55 The 2D defects that
appear in crystals can be usefully classified into three groups: free surfaces exposing uncoordinated atoms (see Figure 3c), interphases within
a crystal such as stacking faults and antiphase
boundaries, and other various types of boundaries, for instance,
grain boundaries and two-phase boundaries (interphases). For TiO2 photocatalysts, 2D defects are especially important and dictate
surface reactivity as well as charge transport and separation in the
bulk, for example by creating anatase/rutile nanojunctions (Figure 3c).60

Volume defects (3D) mainly cover inclusions, crack,
voids, and
pores. Here, we consider more relevant to our purpose the discussion
on voids created by the clustering of VOs and their effects
on reactivity of TiO2. Many reports have shown that clustering
of vacancies is a prominent phenomenon observed in a wide range of
metal oxides ranging from CeO261,62 and simple perovskites (i.e., SrTiO3)63,64 to double perovskites, where it is responsible for a large change
in magnetoresistance response.65,66 A relevant case is
CeO2 that is considered a prototypical reducible oxide
due to its high “oxygen storage capacity”. This property makes CeO2 a fundamental component of
modern automotive exhaust treatment, with VOs and their
linear clustering, determining reactivity of CeO2 catalysts
(Figure 3d).61,62 Ensembles of VOs have been also observed at the interface
of SrTiO3 and LaAlO3 thin films, being responsible
for the formation of electron gas at the interface between these two
perovskites.67 Although there is no clear
evidence so far for the formation of such 3D defects in reduced TiO2, all these examples suggest that they may play prominent
role in the physics and chemical reactivity of TiO2.

Finally, an interesting case study is the situation when more than
one type of defects forms at the same time. This particular “defects pairing” is often overlooked in photocatalysis,
mostly due to the challenge behind its structural and electronic characterization.
A seminal contribution from Diebold et al. provided evidence for such defect pairing through STM images and density functional
theory (DFT) calculations.68 A reduced
anatase (101) crystal showed ordered subsurface VOs in
STM, consistent with DFT results predicting that VOs at
subsurface and in bulk have a lower formation energy than those on
the surface; here it is noteworthy that defects on rutile remain on
the surface.68 Therefore, defective polymorphs
may behave entirely differently in photocatalysis. The formation of
ordered subsurface defects invokes a Frenkel hop mechanism (Figure 4). It relies on the
formation of VOs that induces the migration of a neighboring
Ti atom to an interstitial site (Ti), leaving behind a
TiV. This process is repeated producing a series of Tii-TiV pairs.68 In photocatalysis
with reduced TiO2, VOs are usually considered,
but defect pairing should be also taken into account,
and more efforts should be put to elucidate the connection between
different types of defects to shine light on important aspects of
photocatalytic processes.

Figure 4 (a), (b) Models of anatase TiO2 (101)
in side (left)
and top (right) view (red balls: O; light blue balls: Ti) illustrating the formation of clustering of subsurface defects
along open channels parallel to the crystallographic (a) [010] and
(b) [111] directions. Formation of a subsurface O vacancy (VO) (yellow) initiates the migration of a neighboring Ti atom to an
interstitial site (Tii, black), leaving behind a Ti vacancy
(VTi, black square). Reproduced from ref (68). Copyright 2009 American
Physical Society.

2.2 Defects
in Reduced TiO2: An Atomistic
View from Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) Spectroscopy
Continuous wave (CW) X-band EPR spectroscopy has been used extensively
to address nature and stability of the spin centers present in the
TiO2 photocatalyst, before, during, and after light irradiation
experiments. The most common paramagnetic centers encountered in various
TiO2 preparations, from nanoparticles to nanotubes, are
those associated with the presence of Ti3+ sites (3d1, S = 1/2) from the diamagnetic Ti4+ sites and oxygen-based radicals (S = 1/2, –
O–•, – O2•–). These “spin-active defects” can be embedded in the
lattice or formed on the material’s surface. The most studied
polymorphs of TiO2 for the water splitting processes are
anatase and rutile. Both systems have tetragonal crystal structures.
However, anatase shows space group I41/amd (unit cell, a = 3.7845, c =
9.5143 Å), while rutile expresses the space group P42/mnm (unit cell a = 4.5937, c = 2.9587 Å). The magnetic moments arising from formation
of the spin-containing centers, Ti3+ and oxygen-based radicals,
are very sensitive probes that screen even minor alterations of their
surroundings (ligand-field). The contribution of orbital angular momentum
to the spin angular momentum shifts their geff values away from the free electron value, ge = 2.0023. The extent of the shift from ge is proportional to the spin–orbit
coupling constant, and anisotropic resonances (gx,y,z) arise from distortions in the crystal-field symmetries,
which lift the frontier orbitals degeneracies. Therefore, in TiO2 materials the geff values observed
for the spin-defects can be grouped into two categories; (i) spin-containing
centers that feature larger g-values than the free-electron
in the vacuum and (ii) those with smaller g-values.
This implies that from EPR measurements a rich set of information
regarding both the structural deformation and the electronic features
introduced by formation of defects is obtained. Formation of Ti3+ sites in TiO2 gives geff < 2.0023, with resonance signals that are most often described
in term of S = 1/2 center embedded in a tetragonal-field
(D4h). The g-value observed
for oxygen-based radical in TiO2 falls at geff > 2.0023, and the observed g-tensor
components are consistent with axial or rhombic S = 1/2 systems. Figure 5 collects a series of simulated CW X-band EPR spectra obtained in
the spin-Hamiltonian framework by perturbation theory (SimFonia software
V.1.25) showing the most common fingerprints expressed by defective
centers in TiO2.

Figure 5 Simulation of X-band EPR spectra arising from
the spin containing
centers usually formed in TiO2 materials from synthesis.
The spectra (a) to (c) are associated with Ti3+ sites (S = 1/2), spectrum (e) is associated with oxygen-based radical
(S = 1/2, -O•– radical),
and (d) to defects, termed F-centers, that are either directly associated
with Ti3+ sites or to the oxygen-based radical sites. Spectrum
(f) shows a rendering of the signature obtained on the single crystal
rutile along the [001] direction, due to exchange coupled Ti3+–Ti3+ centers (S = 1). The simulations
were obtained by perturbation theory, using g-values
(a–e) that are given along the EPR traces. The frequency used
to generate the spectra was 9.1500 GHz, the line-width tensor used
(LWx,y,z in Gauss) were 10,10,10 in (a),
(b); 60,60,60 in (c); 8,8,8 in (d) and (e), 4,4,4 in (f). All the
spectra were obtained using a Lorentzian/Gaussian ratio of 0.63 and
spherical integration with theta, phi of 200, 200. The drawings shown
on the right illustrate the probable positions in the lattice of the
spin containing defects, by looking at the crystal packing along the x,y plane.

The g-tensor values used in the simulated
spectra
have been taken from literature data. Figure 5a illustrates the EPR envelope of Ti3+ sites in regular lattice position found for anatase single
crystal,69 and Figure 5b the EPR resonance for trapped electrons
in the rutile phase (Ti3+ in regular sites).70 EPR study of interstitial Ti3+ centers
have been analyzed using single crystal rutile phase by Aono and co-workers
(termed A-spectrum)71 and have been observed
earlier by Chester (termed C-spectrum).70 The authors69 showed that when exchange
interactions are negligible, that is, when the interstitial Ti3+ centers are separated far away from each other (d ≫ 3.25 Å), the g-tensor components
observed are similar to those seen for Ti3+ sites located
in the regular lattice position (see Figure 5b, right panels for details). When two Ti3+ sites become close to each other in space (d ≤ 3.25 Å), effective exchange coupling occurs and the
emerging S = 1 spin-state produces triplet-signals
(termed X-spectrum) with gx = 1.9846, gy =
1.9802, and gz = 1.9509.72

Recently, Chiesa and coauthors reported
the observation of another
type of high-spin EPR signal, best seen at Q-band frequency, which
was obtained during the controlled oxidation of a Ti precursor in
the synthesis of TiO2 (anatase). They observed formation
of an isotropic signal (giso = 1.973)
that pointed toward formation of four magnetically coupled Ti3+ centers (S = 2) showing small zero-field-splitting
parameters (zsf), with estimated |D|= 76 MHz and
|E|= 4 MHz), thus large interspin-distances, in the range of 5–10
Å.73

Larger zero-field-splitting
(zfs) spin-triplets
associated with Ti3+ sites residing in the regular lattice
position have also been reported to form upon photoexcitation in rutile
crystals (λ = 442 nm).74 Here, neutral
VOs were generated, with two trapped electrons that were
localized on two of the three cations adjacent to the VO, forming a pair of exchange-coupled Ti3+ ions with a
ground state formed by close lying singlet (S = 0)
and triplet (S = 1) states. Figure 5f shows a rendering of the literature data
from Brant and co-workers in which two equally intense and widely
separated lines (∼538 G) have been recorded along the [001]
direction, and visible at cryogenic temperatures (T = 25 K, with g-tensor, g1 = 1.9582, g2 = 1.9138, g3 = 1.8262).74

In contrast, Figure 5c shows the broad
EPR resonance signal characteristic of surface
exposed Ti3+ sites, where an isotropic resonance line is
mainly expected, due to the surface disorder.75 In particular, this type of signal appears to be very sensitive
to the specific TiO2 synthesis employed, especially when
heavily reduced TiO2 materials are aimed. For example,
in some “pale gray-blue” anatase, the signal addressable
to the surface exposed Ti3+ becomes not only very broad
but also characterized by an anisotropic g-tensor
(gx= 1.9452, gy = 1.918, and gz = 1.875), hence having geff as small as 1.913.76

Figure 5d shows
the sharp signal featuring isotropic g-value close
to the free electron in the vacuum that has been analyzed in the literature
as electrons trapped in VO (called in literature F or F+ center).77−79 However, it should be mentioned that excess electrons
are preferentially trapped by the Ti4+ ions in TiO2-based materials, and therefore, the physical origin of such
signal remains in the literature as a matter of controversy. Sun and
coauthors77 reported the preparation of
titania nanoparticles by hot wall low pressure MOCVD method in which
the resonance attributed from F-centers was observed even at high
temperature (T = 473 K). Although the EPR intensity I(T,t) changed with temperature T and time t, the g factor
of such signal remained constant, at 2.0034. A similar signal was
reported earlier by Nakamura and coauthors (F, F+ centers)
from plasma-treated TiO2 powders, which was characterized
by comparable giso value (giso = 2.004 at T = 77 K).78 Other groups have addressed such defects in
terms of medium polarized electrons ubiquitously present in reduced
TiO2 and have been associated with the CB or have been
described as defect state at the particle–particle interfaces.80 In the latter case, the EPR resonance displayed
nearly identical isotropic envelopes, similar to Sun and Nakamura’s
works, but were characterized by lower g-values,
falling in between 2.0011–2.0025. A note of caution should
thus be given when such sharp EPR signal is observed, because it can
arise from carbon centered impurities being adventitiously present
in many TiO2 materials. For example, Minnekhavov and coauthors
demonstrated that similar EPR signals and g-values
as those attributed to arise from F/F+ centers emerge clearly
in carbon-doped TiO2 materials and these types of resonances
and g-values are associated with electrons being
trapped on the carbon-sites (C content of 0.46–1.05% w, giso values of 2.0030 ± 0.0005).81 Spin centers associated with positive holes
(h+) are formed in TiO2 upon light exposure/irradiation
and are known to be located on oxygen sites, directly on the surface,
although they can also be formed in the subsurface regions.82−84

Figure 5e shows
the simulated EPR spectrum for the -O•– radical
ion observed in a rutile single crystal.85 Similar g-tensor parameters have also been observed
for the -O•– radical sites in synthetic anatase
single crystals (gx =
2.0029, gy = 2.0140,
and gz = 2.0265) by Grunin
and coauthors.86 Other oxygen-based radical
centers, such as superoxide radical anions (O2•–) obtained under UV–vis irradiation, express similar spin-Hamiltonian
parameters and resonance envelopes likewise -O•–, with gx = 2.0026–20019, gy = 2.011–2.0014, and gz = 2.007–2.001, in
both anatase and mixed (anatase/rutile) phases.87−89 Larger g-anisotropy is found for surface-exposed Ti4+-O2H• radicals, photogenerated from
TiO2 material containing preadsorbed oxygen (g1 = 2.034, g2 = 2.008–2.009,
and g3= 2.002). These species usually
exhibit broader EPR signals compared to -O•– radicals.90,91

Figure 6 shows the
X-band EPR spectra (T = 80 K) obtained for anatase
powder as delivered (commercial anatase powder, 25 nm, 99.7% purity)
and upon thermal hydrogenation at temperatures of 500 °C, coded
as H500 (gray anatase) and 700 °C, coded as H700 (black anatase),
as recently reported by Liu and coauthors.29 The pristine anatase sample (Figure 6, red trace) shows only a weak paramagnetic signal,
arising from the presence of both Ti3+ sites (geff<ge) and h+ holes (geff > ge). The gray anatase sample (H500) and the black anatase (H700)
show drastic changes in the resonance envelope. The gray anatase (H500)
gives a strong paramagnetic signature that has been interpreted by
the authors with the response of two species (gx = 1.90, gy = 1.92, gz =
1.985 for one species and gx = 1.998, gy =
1.998, gz = 1.99 for
the other). The black anatase sample (H700) shows the appearance of
a very strong signal, well in line with other reports on “black”
TiO2.25,56,92,93 The EPR signature of H700 gives g-tensor values of gx = 1.975, gy =
1.940, gz = 1.895, and
these paramagnetic signals were attributed by the authors to formation
of Ti3+/VO centers introduced into the TiO2 lattice by the thermal reductive treatment.

Figure 6 X-band (8.960 GHz, T = 80 K) EPR spectra of commercial
anatase powder (red trace), gray anatase (reduced at 500 °C,
H500, blue trace) and black anatase (reduced at 700 °C in H2, H700, black trace). Experimental parameters: modulation
frequency 100 kHz, modulation width of 2.0 mT and time constant 0.1
s. The different microwave powers employed during signal acquisition
are reported next to each resonance signal for easier comparison.
Adapted from ref (29). Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.

Therefore, the number and signature of spin active Ti3+ sites compared to commercial anatase is one of the contributing
factors underneath the different catalytic performance of “black”
TiO2 and gray anatase. While gray anatase shows significant
photocatalytic H2 activity, black TiO2 does
not if no Pt cocatalyst is applied.29 The
example illustrates that the simple increase of the number of spin
containing defects should not be considered as the universal synthetic
strategy to pursue in the material design, namely the only way to
improve catalysis. Clearly the gray (H500) material contains less
paramagnetic species than the black material, but is active for an
H2 evolution process (75 μmol h–1 g–1). In other words, concentration and nature
of defects play a role in designing desired effects. As recently discussed
by several groups,58,94,95 the introduction of VOs does, on one hand, improve the
UV and visible-light photocatalytic activity but leads as well to
trapping of electrons below the CB, an effect that does reduce the
lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers, and points toward a reduction
in the catalytic performance.

3 Surface
Reactivity in Reduced TiO2 Single Crystals
In
this section, we discuss significant investigations performed
with ultrahigh vacuum techniques that, combining atomically resolved
STM to electronic spectroscopies, have provided key advancements in
the understanding of (photo)reactivity in reduced TiO2 single
crystal surfaces. More details can be found in excellent reviews dedicated
to the subject.96−98

The results from surface science studies are
often overlooked in
photocatalysis with black (and partly reduced) TiO2, although
these ideal examples have demonstrated fundamental properties of reduced
TiO2 that may be still valid under operational conditions,
thus providing important guidelines for understanding structure–activity
relationships in black TiO2.

For instance, a crucial
structural feature of TiO2 is
the formation of surface VO upon thermal reduction. The
most general mis-assignment in black TiO2 research is the
presence of surface VOs in anatase TiO2. Many
groups have reported indeed STM proofs and DFT calculations showing
that surface VOs are stabilized only in rutile TiO2, while for anatase VOs have too low rearrangement
energy to migrate toward subsurface layers (Figure 7a,b).68,99−101 The difference in topology of the defective site in anatase and
rutile is responsible for the different nature of electronic states.
In particular, two O atoms surround the anatase VO, both
bonded to two Ti neighbors; whereas in rutile, three O atoms surround
the VO, with two of them having same symmetry as for anatase,
while the third O is bonded only to one Ti (Figure 7c). As a consequence, VOs in rutile
induce only deep localized electronic levels. In anatase, instead,
VOs can induce shallow electronic levels, high in energy
and strongly delocalized, together with deep and localized levels.101 These aspects have been also experimentally
pointed out by EPR measurements by comparing the 17O hyperfine
coupling typical of oxygen ions surrounding paramagnetic Ti3+ centers in anatase and rutile75,102 with those of a well-defined
molecular system where electron density is confined in the limits
of the molecule.103 These shallow electronic
levels in anatase may account for the superior electron transport
in anatase,104,105 electron diffusion to the surface
as well as a reduced electron–hole recombination.

Figure 7 Atomic slab
models of (a) anatase (101) and (b) rutile (110) surface.
The slabs on the left represent perfect crystals without defects,
and the slabs on the right are the surface structure with an oxygen
vacancy after geometry relaxation. (c) Spin density distributions
of defect states induced by an oxygen vacancy for both rutile and
anatase. (a,b) Reproduced from ref (99). Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c)
Reproduced from ref (101). Copyright 2008 American Physical Society.

These properties crucially improve the photocatalytic activity
of reduced anatase TiO2, which is often reported to be
orders of magnitude higher than reduced rutile.

Figure 8a shows
the reduced rutile r–TiO2 (110)
surface (i.e., the most studied in STM), which consists of alternating
rows of 5-fold-coordinated Ti5c atoms (bright rows) and
2-fold-coordinated Obr atoms (dark troughs).98 The faint protrusions observed between T5c and Obr rows represent VOs (see square
in Figure 8a) formed
upon ion bombardment. Upon hydration, H2O molecules dissociate
in VO sites and the resulting STM image (Figure 8b, h–TiO2) shows the consequent formation of OH groups.106 In contrast, H2O molecules have
been observed to form local ordered superstructures due to charge
rearrangement at anatase surface.107 Otherwise,
the interaction of O2 with rutile r–TiO2 (110) surface produces the healing of VOs and the formation of O adatoms located on the top of T5c (Figure 8b, see circle
and ellipse). Starting from h–TiO2 (Figure 8c) and exposing
it to increasing amount of O2, a characteristic electronic
signature was discovered. The VB spectra were also retrieved accordingly
from photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) experiments.106 The pristine h–TiO2 (Figure 8g) showed additional
electronic states due to (i) OH 3σ at ∼10.8 eV and (ii)
Ti 3d at 0.85 eV below the Fermi level. Increasing amount of O2 completely quenched the OH electronic states much faster
that those related to Ti 3d (Figure 8c–f STM images; g and h PES spectra and PES
normalized area corresponding to OH and Ti 3d states). Interestingly,
at 4 Langmuirs (L) of O2 exposure the rutile surface (Figure 8d) was completely
recovered from OH (or H capping atoms) and VOs, while it
was still showing elongated bright spots and significant Ti 3d states.
Subsequently, experiments carried out at different temperature under
O2 exposure revealed the nature of this protrusion and
of electronic states below Fermi level. This set of experiments is
particularly important since it provided strong evidence that the
nature of intragap electronic states above VB was due neither to VOs nor to H capping atoms (OH groups), but was related to the
formation of interstitial Ti atoms (Ti) present on the
subsurface.106 Importantly, other reports
have also shown that subsurface Tii, either in rutile or
anatase single crystals, may stabilize molecular adsorbate such as
H2O, O2, methanol, and ethanol through charge
transfer interactions, thus providing an additional pathway for their
activation/dissociation both under dark and illumination conditions.98,108−115

Figure 8 (a)
Structure model of rutile (110)-(1 × 1) (r-TiO2(110)-(1 × 1)). Red and gray balls stand for
O and Ti ions, respectively. (b) STM images (105 by 105 Å) recorded
at temperatures between 100 and 130 K of reduced r-TiO2(110), hydrated h-TiO2(110), and a room temperature (RT) O2-saturated TiO2(110) reduced surface. Symbols indicate Obr vacancies
(square), capping H atoms (hexagon) in the Obr rows, and
Oot adatoms (circle), as well as pairs of next-nearest
Oot adatoms (ellipse) in the Ti troughs. (c–f) STM
images (105 by 105 Å) of a reduced h-TiO2(110) surface that was exposed to increasing amounts of O2 at RT. (g) Selected VB-PES spectra recorded on a reduced h-TiO2(110) surface that was exposed to O2 at RT. Arrows indicate the representative STM images. (h)
Normalized integrated intensities of the OH3s (red) and
Ti3d (blue) features for O2 exposures up to
420 L from PES spectra; circles indicate intensity values that were
obtained from the spectra shown in (g). (a) Reproduced with permission
from ref (98). Copyright
2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b–h) Reproduced with
permission from ref (106). Copyright 2008 American Association for the Advancement of Science.

4 Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production
with Reduced
Colored TiO2
4.1 Pt-Modified Black TiO2
Tremendous interest in black, or more generally
colored, TiO2 has been attracted by the pioneering work
of Chen et al.,25 who used mesoporous anatase
TiO2 nanocrystals
that were exposed to a treatment at 200 °C in pure H2 at high pressure (20 bar). Such powders, when kept under these conditions
for 5 days, turned black, and, when decorated with Pt nanoparticles
(NPs), showed a remarkably high (and stable) photocatalytic H2 generation activity (Figure 9a). A H2 production rate of 10 mmol h–1 gcat–1 was observed
under solar illumination, while untreated (white) Pt-TiO2 powders resulted inactive. Similar results were observed in methylene
blue photocatalytic oxidation tests (Figure 9b). Upon hydrogenation, crystallographic
disorder was introduced at the surface of TiO2 nanocrystals,
forming crystalline–amorphous core–shell black TiO2 with intense light absorption in the visible and NIR spectral
range, originating from the narrowing of TiO2 bandgap from
3.30 to 1.54 eV (see Figure 2).

Figure 9 (a) Cycling measurements of H2 generation through direct
photocatalytic water splitting with disorder-engineered black TiO2 nanocrystals under simulated solar light; (b) Comparison
of the solar-driven photocatalytic activity of black TiO2 nanocrystals with that of white TiO2 nanocrystals under
the same experimental conditions (y axis: optical
density of the methylene blue solution); (c) Calculated density of
states (DOS) of black TiO2 in the form of a disorder-engineered
nanocrystal, a stoichiometric nanocrystal (nano), and a bulk crystal.
The energy of the valence band maximum of the bulk phase was taken
to be zero. Reproduced from ref (25). Copyright 2011 American Association for the
Advancement of Science.

The stark variation of the optical properties was assigned,
by
VB XPS analysis and first-principle DFT calculations, to a “tailing”
(broadening) of VB and CB (Figure 9c), ascribed to the formation of a disorder shell containing
Ti–H and −OH bonds resulting from the high-pressure
treatment.25,116,117 The authors ascribed the high photocatalytic activity of black powders
to the enhanced charge separation of electrons and holes. The former
localize into the disordered shell, and close to the surface to reduce
H+ to H2, while the latter are formed in the
crystalline core.116 Therefore, the absorption
of visible and NIR photons may induce transitions between midgap states
and the CB tail, which correspond to charge transfer from the O 2p
to Ti 3d orbitals (similarly to the efficient transitions leveraged
in nonmetal doped TiO2). Such separation of photoexcited
electrons and holes prevents fast recombination, and the visible-NIR
light absorption led thus to charge carriers that can efficiently
contribute to the photocatalytic process.

However, in this work,
high-pressure hydrogenated black TiO2 powders exhibited
a relatively poor H2 evolution
activity of ∼0.1 mmol h–1 gcat–1 under, visible/NIR illumination (λ >
400
nm), which was 2 orders of magnitude lower than that measured under
solar irradiation (10 mmol h–1 gcat–1).25 In spite of the poor
visible light performance, these findings triggered a considerable
amount of follow-up work, and various reduction strategies and hydrogenation
approaches to produce more active black TiO2 materials
have meanwhile been explored.118−122

Zheng et al.118 hydrogenated protonated
TiO2 (H-TiO2) nanotubes (NTs) into dark brown
single crystalline rutile TiO2 nanowires with a diameter
of 8 nm. The treatment was carried out at 500 °C in a H2/N2 atmosphere. Such dark brown TiO2 nanowires
were also reported to exhibit strong visible light absorption and,
upon Pt decoration, showed a more than three times higher H2 evolution rate (2.15 mmol h–1 gcat–1) compared to untreated structures. The authors claim
that such black nanowires can preserve their one-dimensional morphology
due to the ability of protonated TiO2 nanotubes (precursor)
to “store” molecular hydrogen: it is suggested that
ion exchangeable −OH groups in the titanate lattice can stabilize
H2 molecules via weak van der Waals interactions. Upon
annealing, dehydration of nanotubes (removal of crystallographic water)
takes place, which leaves behind surface dangling terminations that,
from intercalated H2 molecules, form Ti–H bonds.
In other words, the authors proposed that the nanotube surface is
by this approach reactive to adsorbed H2 under relatively
mild conditions, and the formation of Ti–H terminations is
crucial to stabilize the surface disorder induced by hydrogenation,
so that the nanowires can preserve their one-dimensional (1D) morphology.118 It should be however pointed out that the stability
(at room temperature) of such Ti–H terminations was not discussed,
and that the authors based their interpretation only on minor differences
in the IR and XPS spectra of air- and H2-treated structures.

Common preparation “protocols” for black TiO2 photocatalysts mostly involve a preliminary hydrogenation
step to blacken TiO2, which is then surface loaded with
Pt nanoparticles by various methods (common metal nanoparticle deposition
methods are deposition precipitation, impregnation, photoreduction,
and chemical reduction, e.g., with H2 or NaBH4).123−125

Zhu et al.119 revisited such hydrogenation–Pt
decoration sequence, and developed an original approach to introduce
surface disorder in TiO2 powders based on a “H2 spillover mechanism”. For this, Pt NPs were first
deposited on TiO2 P25 via a conventional impregnation–reduction
method, and the resulting composite was hydrogenated in a H2/N2 flow under ambient atmosphere, at various temperatures
(200–700 °C). The authors found that TiO2 reduction
and blackening occurred during annealing via “spillover”,
that is, H2 gas dissociates at the Pt NP surface into H
atoms that diffused, at a suitable temperature, into the TiO2 lattice. This generated localized Ti–O(H)-Ti species that,
upon dehydration of the oxide nanocrystals, converted into a substoichiometric
form of TiO2, that is, Ti3O5, which
showed markedly higher H2 generation rate (7.7 mmol h–1 gcat–1) compared with
powders first hydrogenated and then loaded with Pt NPs.

The
authors ascribed the photocatalytic enhancement to the strong
visible light absorption of Ti3O5 powders. This
widely reported assumption, particularly in the context of this study,
appears however as a point of contradiction: among powders prepared
under different experimental conditions (e.g., various temperatures
or sequence of Pt deposition and hydrogenation), some samples showed
virtually identical optical features (enhanced light absorption in
the 400–800 nm range) but significantly different photocatalytic
performances.126

Is then the improvement
of visible light absorption crucial toward
efficient solar photocatalysis? A picture of data in the literature
reveals that often black TiO2 presents a clear mismatch
between enhanced optical properties and photocatalytic activity under
visible-NIR illumination. Factors other than band gap narrowing and
optical feature enhancement should therefore be taken into account
to identify the origins of the activity improvement. This discrepancy
was highlighted in follow-up works.30,35,39,56,127

Naldoni and co-workers24 investigated
the localization of defects of different nature within or at the surface
of black TiO2 nanocrystals. In their work, a high-surface-area
(≥500 m2 g–1) amorphous white
TiO2 powder was chosen as a precursor. Black TiO2 was produced by annealing the amorphous powder at 500 °C under
a pure H2 stream at ambient pressure, followed by a fast
cooling step to room temperature in an inert environment.

When
treated under these conditions, the black TiO2 nanocrystals
featured a core–shell morphology with a ∼ 1.5 nm thick
disordered surface layer characterized by a relatively high density
of VOs. VB-XPS data showed that the main absorption onset
was located at 0.6 eV, whereas the maximum energy associated with
the VB tail was reported to blue-shift toward the vacuum level at
about −0.3 eV (Figure 10a). The estimated Eg was 1.85 eV. Electron energy loss spectrum (EELS) analysis
of the Ti L2,3-edge was used to compare white and black
TiO2: the results revealed a ∼ 20% decrease of the
t2g-eg splitting for the L2 peak
of black TiO2 compared to white anatase (Figure 10b). This has been correlated
to the formation in the crystal lattice of Ti3+ sites,
which were also observed by EPR spectroscopy (Figure 10c).114

Figure 10 (a) VB-XPS
spectra of P25 Degussa (black line) and black TiO2 (red
line). Thin black lines show the linear extrapolation
of the curves used for deriving the band edge position of TiO2 samples; (b) EELS spectra of the Ti L2,3-edge
for white (black line) and black (red line) TiO2; (c) EPR
spectra of black TiO2 measured at 100 K. The strong EPR
signal at about g = 1.957 is characteristic of paramagnetic
Ti3+ centers. Reproduced from ref (56). Copyright 2012 American
Chemical Society.

However, the absence
of the superoxide radical (O2–) signal
in the EPR spectra suggested that such Ti3+ centers are
only present in the bulk (core) of the crystals
and not at their surface. Therefore, the authors proposed the rapid
cooling after hydrogenation to be a crucial step to “freeze”
the metastable defective phase in the core of the nanocrystals; the
Ti3+ rich core was responsible for the black coloration
of the powders (i.e., Ti3+ are the color centers). So-formed
black TiO2 powders, however, showed activity for solar
H2 evolution only upon noble metal modification (with Pt
or Au, reaching performances of 1.4–1.9 mmolH2 h–1 gcat–1), and the photocatalytic efficiency
became negligible under visible light illumination (<10 μmolH2 h–1 gcat–1 with λ > 420 nm).25 This work highlighted that a high number of
bulk lattice defects is detrimental for the photocatalytic activity.
Besides, Kong et al.128 demonstrated, through
positron annihilation experiments in reduced TiO2, that
a decrease of the ratio of bulk defects to surface defects could significantly
improve the separation efficiency of photogenerated electrons and
holes, which significantly enhanced the photocatalytic efficiency.

The reasons behind the inactivity of black TiO2 are
still under lively debate; however, plausible explanations are that
(i) VOs can introduce bandgap electronic states localized
at 0.75–1.18 eV below the CB edge (i.e., below the redox potential
for hydrogen evolution), which means that electrons photopromoted
to such states are inactive for H2 evolution;120,129,130 and that (ii) defects in TiO2 lattice can, when present in high concentration, act as recombination
centers for photogenerated charge carriers.121,122,130,131 These aspects will be discussed in detail below.

In contrast
to “drastic” hydrogenation treatments
(that typically form highly defective TiO2 with strong
visible light absorption), more refined hydrogenation approaches have
been meanwhile developed.115,116 In this context, research
focus has shifted from the “mere” optical properties
of TiO2 to aspects such as the engineering of defects at
the TiO2 (sub)surface, the resulting electronic properties
and stability, and the location and role of Ti3+ sites
in photocatalysis.

Yang et al.115 outlined an approach
to produce rutile TiO2 core–shell nanocrystals with
a sulfided, disordered surface, having different colors from brown
to black depending on the preparation conditions. The preparation
implied a first step to reduce crystalline TiO2 (anatase
or rutile phase) with molten aluminum: Al powders and pristine TiO2 were heated in vacuum in two distinct zones of a tubular
furnace (Figure 11a). The Al zone was kept at 800 °C (i.e., molten Al), while
TiO2 was heated up to 500 °C. The pretreated TiO2 nanopowders were then sulfided at 600 °C in a H2S stream. The duration of the H2S treatment was
varied to introduce different S doping levels in TiO2 and
different light absorption properties (Figure 11b). By this approach, no Al impurities were
introduced in the TiO2 powders. The authors reported that
regardless of the initial crystallinity of the TiO2 precursor,
the product was in any case composed of rutile TiO2 phase;
hence, it was proposed that in the presence of H2S, the
anatase-into-rutile phase transition may take place at temperature
as low as 600 °C.132

Figure 11 (a) Schematic synthetic
routes to reduced rutile TiO2 with sulfided disordered
surface. (b) Diffuse reflectance spectra
of reduced TiO2 (R-TiO2), reduced-sulfided rutile
TiO2 (R-TiO2–S), and reduced-sulfided
anatase TiO2 (R′-TiO2–S) with
different sulfidation time. (c) VB XPS of representative samples.
(d) Solar-driven water splitting for H2 generation by investigated
samples. Reproduced from ref (121). Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.

The authors discussed also the morphological and
crystallographic
evolution observed when anatase powders were reduced and sulfided.
They observed that upon reduction (Al-treatment), the entire core
of the anatase nanocrystals was converted into rutile phase and the
disordered surface layer became crystalline upon sulfidation. By contrast,
only a minor surface reconstruction took place in rutile crystals,
which after reduction-sulfidation still exhibited the “disordered”
shell. The authors reported that reduction and sulfidation (S-doping)
induced a strong tailing of the anatase VB edge (as observed by VB
XPS measurements), with consequent band gap narrowing (Figure 11c). On the basis of DFT calculations,
it was suggested that surface defects and lattice reconstruction can
introduce localized Ti3+ states below the CB minimum. The
authors also claimed that Ti3+ paramagnetic signals (assigned
to O2–• radicals ascribed to surface
Ti3+ centers)120,133 decreased in intensity
with increasing the sulfidation time, and that sulfur accumulated
at the particle surface (this is in our view not supported by the
provided results), that is, the decrease of Ti3+ concentration
is claimed to be caused by surface S2– incorporation
(substitution).

Compared with powders that were only Al-reduced,
reduced-sulfided
anatase was found to be significantly more active, leading to a H2 evolution rate of ∼260 μmol h–1 gcat–1 (Figure 11d); it is not clear however if such activity
was measured under solar light or visible light illumination only.
Besides, no evaluation of the stability of the photocatalytic performance
was provided in this work, while photoanodes fabricated from such
reduced-sulfided anatase were found in photoelectrochemical experiments
to degrade under acidic and neutral pH conditions, and to deliver
a clearly unstable photocurrent signal in alkaline electrolytes.

Also, it was suggested that Ti3+ centers were responsible
for the photocatalytic enhancement, but detailed reasons to support
this assumption were not provided. Besides, the authors proposed that
the concentration of surface Ti3+ centers is key to enable
visible light activity, and the introduction of S2– species in the highly defective surface of Al-treated TiO2 allows to stabilize Ti3+ centers and to “adjust”
their concentration.

Progresses in visible light photocatalytic
performance were reported
by Sinhamahapatra et al.,122 who developed
a TiO2 reduction approach inspired by the Kroll process134 (i.e., the reduction of TiCl4 in
the presence of Mg at high temperature to produce metallic Ti). Anatase
TiO2 was mixed with Mg powder and then treated in a tubular
furnace at 650 °C in a H2/Ar flow. After annealing,
the reduced powders were washed in HCl to remove traces of Mg. “Differently
reduced” TiO2 samples were obtained by a stepwise
increase of Mg loading, and the reduced anatase powders exhibited
a gradually darker color (light gray, gray, pale blue, dark blue,
black). The authors found that the concentration of VOs
and Ti3+ centers and the visible light absorbance of the
powders were correlated, and both increased with darkening of the
powders.

When testing these photocatalysts (after surface decoration
with
Pt NPs), the H2 generation increased accordingly to the
amount of Mg up to a certain Mg loading and then dramatically decreased,
reaching performances comparable to those of untreated samples; that
is, the most active photocatalyst was “only mildly reduced”,
appeared pale blue in color (not black!), and delivered a H2 generation rate under visible light of ∼440 μmol h–1 gcat–1, which was even
higher than that of reduced-sulfided black rutile powders.115 Such pale blue powders, compared to samples
reduced to either lower or higher degrees, exhibited the lowest photoluminescence
intensity, corresponding to a limited radiative charge recombination.
The authors proposed that controlled “doses” of Ti3+ surface centers can on the one side enable visible light
absorbance and on the other side provide a more efficient charge separation,
thereby enhancing the overall photocatalytic performance under solar
light.116

A similar interpretation
was provided by Zhang et al.131 In their
work, black TiO2 nanotubes
with a mesoporous nanosheet architecture of the walls were synthesized
by a solvothermal method, combined with an ethylene diamine surface
modification step to protect the mesoporous framework from collapsing
during hydrogenation (ethylene diamine is also reported to prevent
the anatase-into-rutile phase transition). After synthesis, the powders
were annealed at 600 °C in hydrogen and then loaded with Pt NPs.
A combination of different techniques was used to characterize the
powders and the results overall fit to previous literature:24,90 as commonly reported, the blackened samples absorb visible light,
owing to a tailing of the CB and consequent band gap narrowing; the
CB tailing is ascribed to the formation of VOs and Ti3+ centers upon hydrogenation.

In the photocatalytic
tests, the Pt-modified black nanotubes were
more active for H2 generation compared with white structures,
both under UV and visible light illumination, and their H2 generation rate was ∼200 μmol h–1 gcat–1 for λ > 420 nm. Scanning
Kelvin probe (SKP) microscopy (Figure 12a) revealed that for hydrogenated TiO2 NTs, the work function decreases from ∼5.71 eV to
∼5.54 eV; that is, TiO2 reduction led to an upward
shift of the oxide Fermi level. Surface photovoltage spectroscopy
(SPS) featured for both black and white NTs a peak at around 350 nm
that could be attributed to the electron transitions from the VB to
the CB (band-to-band transitions, O2p-Ti3d)
associated with UV light absorption, but the built-in photovoltage
was significantly higher for black NTs, which also featured a red-shifted
photovoltage onset at ∼500 nm (Figure 12b).

Figure 12 (a) Scanning Kelvin probe microscopy
(SKPM) maps; (b) surface photovoltage
spectroscopy (SPS) and (c) fluorescence spectra of white and black
(hydrogenated) TiO2 NTs. (d) O K-edge and (e) Ti K-edge
XANES spectra (inset shows an enlarged view in the range from 4982.0
to 4983.5 eV) of untreated and hydrogenated anatase TiO2 powders. (f) Schematic diagram of the changes in the electronic
and band structure that occur upon hydrogenation. (a–c) Reproduced
from ref (131). Copyright
2017 American Chemical Society; (d–f) Reproduced from ref (130). Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.

The fluorescence intensity of
black NTs was found to be lower than
that of white powders (Figure 12c), hence corroborating the enhanced separation efficiency
of photogenerated charge carriers. Based on their results, the author
interpretation was that for black TiO2 NTs the presence
of defects (VOs and Ti3+) and the consequently
higher density of free charge carriers can modify the built-in electric
field: the upward shift of the Fermi level was addressed as a main
cause for the photocatalytic enhancement, as it could lead to a more
pronounced surface band bending that enables a kinetically favored
(accelerated) transfer of photogenerated electrons to the Pt cocatalyst
for H2 evolution.

More recently, Xue et al.130 explored
the nature of CB tailing in hydrogenated TiO2 and proposed
a plausible interpretation of the origin of visible light activity.
In this study, reduced TiO2 NPs were obtained by heating
hydrothermal anatase TiO2 nanoparticles in a H2 flow at 200 °C for periods of time ranging from 2 to 8 days.
Then, Pt was loaded as cocatalyst prior to the photocatalytic tests.
Depending on the duration of the H2-treatment, the white
TiO2 precursor was found to turn into powders of gradually
darker colors. The authors aimed at investigating the nature of the
defects introduced in the oxide with the aid of surface sensitive
soft X-ray techniques, hard X-ray techniques, and EPR spectroscopy;
the distortion of the TiO2 lattice consequent to hydrogenation
was modeled by means of EXAFS results and DFT calculations.

Powders hydrogenated up to 4 days were characterized by an EPR
signal that can be associated with surface Ti3+ states,
while a different EPR signature, which is typical of bulk Ti3+, appeared for longer hydrogenation treatments.130 Besides, the authors claimed that surface sensitive XANES
analysis revealed that the O K-edge signal varies only at the beginning
of the hydrogenation process (Figure 12d), while bulk measurements evidenced that the Ti K-edge
was different only for long H2 treatment (>4 days, Figure 12e)—in our
view, these data seem not to be fully convincing as one can hardly
appreciate any trend aside from for hydrogenation times ≥6
days). However, the authors reported that EXAFS analysis of the radial
structure functions (RSFs) showed that distortions of the lattice
(i.e., the variation of the interatomic distances with respect to
the regular TiO2 octahedral symmetry) occurred only at
the surface or both at the surface and in the bulk of the structure
with short or long hydrogenation treatments, respectively.

These
changes appeared to correlate to the photocatalytic performance,
as gray TiO2 powders produced by an “intermediate”
reduction treatment showed the highest visible light activity. Thus,
the authors inferred that an explanation to these findings (Figure 12f) could be derived
from DFT calculations based on XANES and EXAFS results, in relation
to the density and location of VOs, and their consequences
on the extent of tailing of TiO2 CB. In their interpretation,
the authors proposed that at the beginning of hydrogenation, VOs are generated at the surface of TiO2, which leads
to a small tail of the CB owing to a relatively low VO density.
The energy level of such VOs is still above the H+/H2 redox potential; the induced modified electronic structure
enables visible light absorption that generates electron with adequate
thermodynamic driving force to contribute to H2 evolution
even for λ > 420 nm. Upon increasing the hydrogenation time,
the CB tailing tends to further extend toward the H+/H2 redox potential because of the increase of VO states.
The light absorption onset meanwhile shifts to longer wavelength,
and electrons photopromoted to these VO states still have
a sufficiently high potential to generate H2. This could
explain the enhancement of visible light activity. On the contrary,
at a high “degree” of hydrogenation, a high density
of VOs may be generated, which locate not only at the surface
but also in the bulk of the TiO2 crystals. As a consequence,
the tail of the CB can extend below the H+/H2 redox potential. In this situation, the absorption of visible light
is enhanced, and under solar illumination more electrons can be excited
to the CB, but a substantial part of them cannot contribute to H2 evolution. This would explain why an excessive enhancement
in the visible light absorption has more likely a negative effect
on the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of black TiO2 nanomaterials.

4.2 Cocatalyst-Free TiO2 Photocatalysts
Greatest challenges in using TiO2 for photocatalysis
are the large bandgap (allowing only for UV light activation) and
the significant charge carrier recombination.

As discussed above,
different reduction approaches have been explored to form “colored”
TiO2 by shifting its absorption onset toward the visible
range. On the other hand, charge recombination and therefore the sluggish
kinetics of charge carrier transfer is usually tackled by decorating
TiO2 with noble metal cocatalysts such as Pt, Pd, Au, nanoparticles,135,136 or, more recently, with non-noble elements or element combinations
(e.g., alloys).137 Metal cocatalyst NPs
enable significant H2 evolution rates by efficiently separate
electrons and hole through a Schottky barrier formation at the interface
with TiO2, and by acting as catalytic centers for hydrogen
production.135,136,138

Noble metals (particularly Pt) are typically more active than
their
non-noble counterparts; indeed, by contrast, their adoption questions
the economic benefit of using low-cost TiO2-based photocatalysts.
Thus, remarkable is in this context another property of hydrogenated
TiO2 that has been reported by Liu et al. and others,35,37,132 that is, hydrogenated or reduced
TiO2 in different morphologies (e.g., anodic nanotubes,39,127,139 powders,89,132 single crystals140) is able to photocatalytically
generate H2 in the absence of any noble metal cocatalyst,
owing to the formation of intrinsic cocatalytic sites. It is worth
mentioning that this feature has been overlooked in previous works
as the enhanced photocatalytic activity of black TiO2 has
been in almost every report solely ascribed to optical properties
and to the formation of an amorphous shell encapsulating the TiO2 particles and by using cocatalysts.

This unique cocatalytic
effect has been observed for example for
TiO2 anatase NPs treated with H2 under high
pressure; the treatment can activate a strong and stable photocatalytic
H2 evolution in commercial anatase or in mixed anatase/rutile
nanoparticles. However, no significant activation was found when conventional
reduction processes, for example, annealing in Ar, were used for treating
various TiO2 polymorphs (Figure 13a). Also, this activation was not observed
when pure rutile powders were hydrogenated.132

Figure 13 (a) Photocatalytic H2 production measured under open
circuit conditions in methanol/water (50/50 vol %) under AM1.5 (100
mW cm–2) illumination with anodic TiO2 nanotubes treated in different atmospheres; Air: heat treatment
in air at 450 °C; Ar: heat treatment in pure argon at 500 °C;
Ar/H2: heat treatment in H2/Ar (5 vol %) at
500 °C; HP-H2: heat treatment in H2 at
20 bar and 500 °C; (b) Optical images of anatase nanopowders
untreated (“anatase”) and treated (“H500”
and “H700”) under different hydrogenation conditions
(“H500” and “H700” stand for heat treatment
in H2 at 20 bar at 500 and 700 °C, respectively),
and relative integrated light reflectance spectra; (c) Photocatalytic
hydrogen evolution rate under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm–2) for TiO2 nanoparticles after different hydrogenation
treatments, a reference treated in argon gas at 500 °C, and the
most active sample if UV light is blocked (visible light only). (a)
Reproduced from ref (139). Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b,c) Reproduced from
ref (29). Copyright
2016 Wiley-VCH.

Typically, the activation
can be enabled for TiO2 powders
(anatase or mixed anatase–rutile phase) via hydrogenation in
pure H2, at, for example, 500 °C, at 20 bar, for durations
of the treatment between few hours to some days, reaching solar H2 evolution rates of >200 μmol h–1 gcat–1.132 Also
TiO2 nanotubes were active for H2 generation
in the absence of a cocatalyst when treated under similar conditions,
enabling solar H2 evolution with rates of ∼6 μmol
h–1 cm–2.35 Liu et al. demonstrated that hydrogenated anatase TiO2 powders or nanotubes did not undergo substantial morphological changes,
for example, “amorphization” effects forming crystalline–amorphous
core–shell structures, and the hydrogenated structures generally
maintained their crystalline nature. However, some minor modifications
were observed (by TEM analysis), i.e., voids that form inside the
particles (or in the nanocrystals composing the polycrystalline NT
walls). This has been explained in terms of either internal formation
of gas bubbles, or more likely, due to vacancy clustering.30,141,142

A crucial finding in the
work of Liu et al. is that, in view of
noble metal-free H2 evolution on anatase TiO2 powders, the activity showed a maximum efficiency at intermediate
reduction treatments, that is, highly reduced black TiO2 showed (in the absence of cocatalyst) a suboptimum efficiency, which
is in stark opposition to earlier reports.89

Liu and co-workers116 reported
that
for anatase powders subjected to different “degrees”
of hydrogenation (Figure 13b), gray specimens were significantly more active than fully
blackened counterparts (Figure 13c). Strikingly, the illumination of any of these samples
with visible light (λ ∼ 420 nm) did not produce measurable
amounts of H2; also, when doctor-blading these powders
on FTO slides to be used as photoanodes in a photoelectrochemical
(PEC) setup, no photocurrent could be registered under visible light
illumination, and photocurrent spectra revealed in any case a band
gap Eg ∼ 3.2 eV,
corresponding to the typical Eg of TiO2 anatase phase. It was proposed, in other
words, that the materials’ intrinsic activity for photocatalytic
hydrogen evolution was not coupled with their visible light absorption
behavior, but was rather ascribed to an optimized formation of a “specific”
type of defect.

In this regard, hydrogenated cocatalyst-free
active TiO2 powders and NTs, because of their specific
electronic properties,
exhibit some common “fingerprints” in EPR and PL spectroscopy
that can be considered key indicators for their activity. For example,
compared with EPR results for untreated TiO2, or treated
by conventional reduction processes (Ar), the characteristic EPR signature
of high-temperature high-pressure hydrogenated TiO2 NTs
featured (at 4K) a strong signal corresponding to Ti3+,143 while the signal assigned to the VOs was comparably small. Even more marked differences have been observed
in spectra recorded at room temperature as the high-pressure treated
material still exhibited a distinct signature of Ti3+,
apparent as separated lines and indicating the presence of isolated
surface Ti3+ centers,144 whereas
that of Ar-annealed nanotubes typically fades off.35 On the other hand, black TiO2, which shows no
(or comparably lower) cocatalyst-free H2 generation activity,
exhibited very strong paramagnetic signals typical of Ti3+/VO centers introduced in high concentration into the
TiO2 lattice.29,145,146

Characteristic electronic features of H2-treated
anatase
can also be distinguished by PL; typical for the gray powders is the
appearance of a peak at ∼400–450 nm that can be associated
with transitions from a sub-bandgap defect state to the CB. Based
on PL results, it was derived that defects would have to be located
energetically close to the CB, that is, at ΔE ∼ 0.2–0.5 eV, which is significantly closer than ΔE ∼ 0.8–1.2 eV below the CB reported for typical
Ti3+ states formed by conventional reduction approaches.145,147,148

On the basis of these
findings and the results of various other
complementary physicochemical characterization techniques, it has
been inferred that the cocatalyst-free photocatalytic H2 evolution activity of hydrogenated TiO2 originated from
stabilized Ti3+ states that are energetically close to
the CB of TiO2. Such intrinsic Ti3+ active centers
were undetectable by XPS.35,132 In contrast, inactive
(and unstable) Ti3+ species generated by Ar ion bombardment
typically produce a clear Ti3+ XPS signal (when generated
under vacuum conditions and directly detected without exposure to
the environment).35,149 The difference in the nature
of these defects lies on the one hand in their different energetic
level within the bandgap of TiO2 (this explains their intrinsic
activity or inactivity), and on the other hand in their different
location and configuration, as observed, for example, in single crystals
of different TiO2 polymorphs. For instance, in anatase
single crystals, photocatalytically active Ti3+ centers
may be generated and stabilized in a subsurface configuration. However,
this cocatalytic activation, in order to translate into an observable
cocatalyst-free H2 evolution activity, was found to require
the presence of defects (high index places), which do not occur on
single crystal low index planes of anatase, but could nevertheless
be artificially introduced by simple scratching (with a diamond scriber)
or by ion implantation damage.140 Differently,
comparable hydrogenation treatments applied to rutile single crystals
generated VOs that tend to remain segregated at the surface,34,99 and this difference has been found to substantially alter the defect
reactivity for the two polymorphs. This may also explain why activation
through hydrogen treatment was not observed for pure rutile powders.89,147

Follow-up work demonstrated that similarly active cocatalytic
centers
can be introduced by alternative approaches.36,39,40,51,150,151 For example, high-energy
proton ion-implantation was used to modify TiO2 nanotubes
selectively at their tops, and in the proton-implanted region, the
creation of such intrinsic cocatalytic sites was observed, which were
active for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Proton implantation
can induce specific defects and a characteristic modification of the
electronic properties not only in nanotubes but also in anatase single
crystal (001) surfaces (reaching cocatalyst-free solar H2 evolution rates of ∼15 and ∼0.2 μmol h–1 cm–2, respectively). The extent of activation
(relative increase of H2 evolution rate) was found to be
much higher for the nanotubes; this result was explained by proposing
a synergetic effect between the implanted region (that behaves as
the catalytic zone) and the implant-free tube segment underneath (that
acts as light absorber and charge carrier generator).39,151

Milling TiO2 with TiH2 powders was also
found
to provide a strong enhancement of the photocatalytic H2 generation in the absence of cocatalyst. A systematic parameter
screening revealed that both ball milling duration as well as TiH2 loading strongly affected the photocatalytic H2 generation, and both led at a lower magnitude to a beneficial effect
but become detrimental at a higher magnitude.

Interestingly,
powders milled under optimize conditions show H2 evolution
rates (∼220 μmol h–1 g–1) that were comparable with the activation
reached by high pressure hydrogenation treatments and/or H-ion implantation.132,134

In this sense, Zhang et al.37 reported,
to the best of our knowledge, the highest solar H2 evolution
efficiency for TiO2 under cocatalyst-free conditions. In
their work, Degussa P25 TiO2 nanoparticles were treated
at room temperature in a reducing medium prepared by dissolving Li
in ethylene diamine (EDA). The treatment selectively attacks (i.e.,
reduces) the rutile phase, this because of a large difference in the
protonation constants between rutile and anatase, while anatase domains
were left unaltered. The result was a blue TiO2 powder
composed of particles that feature nanosized, adjacent domains (junctions)
of crystalline anatase and amorphous (protonated) rutile (Figure 14a–e). Such
powders led, in the absence of any cocatalyst, to a H2 evolution
rate of ∼3.5 mmol h–1 gcat–1, which is at least 1 order of magnitude higher than
most of the data in the literature. Band diagrams, drawn according
to optical and VB XPS measurements, and corroborated by DFT simulations,
suggested that for treated P25 the energetic situation at the junction
between crystalline anatase and amorphous rutile domains deviated
substantially from that of as-purchased P25,152 that is, the Li-treatment generated a “type II” semiconductor
heterojunction, due to Ti3+ and VOs formation
in the rutile phase and consequent changes in its electronic structure
(see Figure 14f).
On the basis of these considerations and of the results of time-correlated
single-photon counting (TCSPC) and low-temperature PL measurements,
the authors proposed that a main reason for the highly improved cocatalyst-free
H2 evolution activity is the charge separation across the
crystalline anatase/disordered rutile interface, which can substantially
suppress the electron–hole recombination. As an additional
reason, the authors also inferred that, in this configuration, the
photocatalytic “cathodic” and “anodic”
reactions (H2 generation and methanol mineralization) are
spatially confined at the surface of the crystalline anatase and disordered
rutile domains, respectively, and both domains are exposed to the
water phase (Figure 14e,f). This means that charge transfer to the environment is not hampered,
whereas it is, in principle, in “ordered-disordered”
core–shell structures typically formed by hydrogenation treatments,
where charges formed in the crystalline bulk must diffuse across the
amorphous shell to reach the environment (this would explain the higher
activity of Li-treated P25 compared to hydrogenated counterparts).
It is also worthwhile to mention that the apparent quantum efficiency
measured for blue P25 under visible light illumination (λ >
420 nm) was negligible, and the authors concluded that the intense,
broad background absorption seen at wavelengths longer than 400 nm
(associated with the blue-shifted band tail) cannot be the origin
of the photoactivity.

Figure 14 (a) Photographs of anatase TiO2 (A-TiO2,
left), rutile TiO2 (R-TiO2, middle) and blue
P25 (right) suspensions (0.05 g L–1) after Li-EDA
treatment for 6 days; (b) XRD patterns of the Li-EDA-treated P25 crystals
with different treatment times; A = anatase phase and the R = rutile
phase; (c) HR-TEM images and SAED patterns of P25; scale bar = 10
nm; (d) HR-TEM images and SAED pattern of blue P25; scale bar = 10
nm. Insets: enlarged TEM images taken on the junction area (red squares:
P25, and green squares: blue P25); (e) Schematic of the P25 (left)
and blue P25 crystals (right). The black color corresponds to the
visual color of the reduced R-TiO2; (f) Calculated bandgap
diagrams created by combining UV–vis absorption and VB XPS
spectra. Reproduced from ref (37). Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.

5 Conclusions and Outlook
In this Review, we have provided an overview of the progress made
in photocatalytic hydrogen generation with reduced TiO2, bringing to the attention many aspects of defective oxides that
are usually overlooked and should be explored more thoroughly to further
develop hydrogenated TiO2 performance.

Hydrogenation
treatments (carried out under various conditions)
have been demonstrated to lead to colored forms of TiO2 that exhibit strong visible and NIR light absorption.

As a
“rule of thumb”, the darker is the color, the
higher is the light absorption ability, with “black TiO2” showing the most intense visible light absorbance.
Hydrogenation (and other means of reduction) can also create, under
optimized conditions, variations of “gray TiO2”
that feature intrinsic cocatalytic active centers similar to the cocatalytic
effect obtained by noble metal cocatalyst decoration. Most of the
reports on hydrogenated TiO2 for photocatalytic H2 generation, and particularly those on “black” TiO2, have however used noble metal cocatalysts when measuring
the solar H2 evolution activity. Thus, despite the seeming
connection of the two effects (visible light absorption vs intrinsic
cocatalytic activation), it still remains questionable whether the
enhanced visible-light absorption is indeed mechanistically coupled
to the photocatalytic activity in cocatalyst-free hydrogen evolution.

The intense research in the field has meanwhile led to a tremendous
progress in solar photocatalytic efficiencies. A picture of such progress
becomes clear if one takes into account that solar H2 evolution
rates of benchmark Pt-TiO2 photocatalysts are typically
∼41 mmol h–1 gcat–1,153 that of Pt-decorated reduced TiO2 (with a comparable Pt cocatalyst loading) has reached ∼43
mmol h–1 gcat–1,122 and that of cocatalyst-free hydrogenated TiO2 has been pushed up to ∼3.5 mmol h–1 gcat–1.37 Solar-active cocatalyst-free TiO2 photocatalysts, however,
seem to still suffer from a substantial visible-light inactivity (or
suboptimum activity); that is, hydrogenation and reduction treatments
apparently aid mainly to a more efficient use of UV light photons,
while effective and reliable means to boost TiO2 activity
driven purely by visible light have yet to be developed. Hence, in
view of a sustainable, noble-metal-free solar photocatalytic H2 generation the gap to fill to reach “reasonable”
efficiencies is still wide.

To reach cocatalyst-free efficiency
comparable to noble-metal modified
TiO2, several research questions must be answered, and
fundamental studies must be undertaken to unveil the elusive understanding
that we still have on reduced TiO2 nanomaterials.

First, a precise description of the structure and electronic signatures
of defective cocatalytic sites forming upon reduction must be provided,
taking advantage from previous surface science and model studies on
TiO2 single crystals. In particular, an effective strategy
to distinguish the presence of defects pairing and clustering of defects
is still elusive, while it might bring exciting results both in terms
of light absorption capabilities (i.e., selective light absorption)
and chemical activation toward common substrates used in photocatalytic
water splitting and photoreforming of alcohols. In this regard, high
resolution X-ray spectroscopies may provide valuable information on
defective sites, while mapping techniques such as atom probe tomography
and aberration-corrected high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
may provide hints on structural organization of reduced TiO2.

In contrast, operando experiments (i.e., in liquids under
light
illumination) with EPR, infrared, and X-ray spectroscopies are foreseen
to provide crucial information on the behavior and reactivity of unpaired
electrons during photocatalytic hydrogen generation.

The development
of new materials for cocatalyst-free hydrogen evolution
is also strictly related to the development of alternative methodologies
for synthesizing mildly reduced TiO2, as opposed to the
harsh synthesis conditions that are currently mostly utilized.

Another leap toward higher efficiencies might be provided if photocatalysis
with reduced TiO2 would be treated at the same way as heterogeneous
catalytic systems, that is, following general precepts that constitute
the foundations of heterogeneous catalysis. For instance, the reactivity
of subsurface defects toward the activation of rate determining photocatalytic
steps should be taken into account. In addition, the specific number
of cocatalytic sites formed in partly reduced TiO2 must
be retrieved, making the computing of turnover frequency and turnover
number possible. This would allow benchmarking the photocatalytic
activity of different reduced TiO2 nanomaterials reported
in the literature and rationalize their structure–activity
relationships.

Finally, another possible approach to increase
the cocatalyst-free
activity of reduced TiO2 might come from the usage of different
polymorphs rather than anatase and rutile. This might be obtained
by engineering precise nanojunctions of reduced TiO2 and
exploring the reduction of brookite, the TiO2 polymorph
featuring the highest conduction band energy levels and holding great
potential for hydrogen evolution. The challenge here is envisioned
to stand in the poor stability of brookite when subjected to drastic
hydrogenation or reduction treatments.

This entire set of tools,
comprising defect engineering, design
of nanojunctions, and use of advanced characterization techniques,
will provide inspiration for finding new strategies to increase the
understanding on the role of defects in TiO2 to finally
reach high photocatalytic activities for hydrogen production without
the use of critical raw materials. Eventually, it may enable development
of new clean energy technologies that might see light in future years.

Author Contributions
The
manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge
the support by
the Operational Programme Research, Development and Education—European
Regional Development Fund, projects no. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000416
and CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_019/0000754 of the Ministry of Education,
Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic. M.A., N.L., and P.S. acknowledge
ERC, DFG, and the DFG cluster of excellence EAM for financial support.
==== Refs
References
Lewis N. S. 
Toward
Cost-Effective Solar Energy Use . Science 
2007 , 315 , 798 –801 10.1126/science.1137014 .17289986 
Lewis N. S. ; Nocera D. G. 
Powering the Planet:
Chemical Challenges in Solar Energy
Utilization . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2006 , 103 , 15729 –15735 10.1073/pnas.0603395103 .17043226 
Shaner M. R. ; Atwater H. A. ; Lewis N. S. ; McFarland E. W. 
A Comparative
Technoeconomic Analysis of Renewable Hydrogen Production Using Solar
Energy . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2016 , 9 , 2354 –2371 10.1039/C5EE02573G .
Esposito D. V. 
Membraneless
Electrolyzers for Low-cost Hydrogen Production in a Renewable Energy
Future . Joule 
2017 , 1 , 651 –658 10.1016/j.joule.2017.07.003 .
Goto Y. ; Hisatomi T. ; Wang Q. ; Higashi T. ; Ishikiriyama K. ; Maeda T. ; Sakata Y. ; Okunaka S. ; Tokudome H. ; Katayama M. ; Akiyama S. ; Nishiyama H. ; Inoue Y. ; Takewaki T. ; Setoyama T. ; Minegishi T. ; Takata T. ; Yamada T. ; Domen K. 
A Particulate
Photocatalyst
Water-splitting Panel for Large-scale Solar Hydrogen Generation . Joule 
2018 , 2 , 509 –520 10.1016/j.joule.2017.12.009 .
Hisatomi T. ; Kubota J. ; Domen K. 
Recent Advances in Semiconductors
for Photocatalytic and Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 7520 –7535 10.1039/C3CS60378D .24413305 
Christoforidis K. C. ; Fornasiero P. 
Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production: A Rift into the
Future Energy Supply . ChemCatChem 
2017 , 9 , 1523 –1544 10.1002/cctc.201601659 .
Fujishima A. ; Zhang X. ; Tryk D. A. 
TiO2 Photocatalysis and
Related Surface Phenomena . Surf. Sci. Rep. 
2008 , 63 , 515 –582 10.1016/j.surfrep.2008.10.001 .
Linsebigler A. L. ; Lu G. ; Yates J. T. 
Photocatalysis
on TiO2 Surfaces: Principles,
Mechanisms, and Selected Results . Chem. Rev. 
1995 , 95 , 735 –758 10.1021/cr00035a013 .
Schneider J. ; Matsuoka M. ; Takeuchi M. ; Zhang J. ; Horiuchi Y. ; Anpo M. ; Bahnemann D. W. 
Understanding
TiO2 Photocatalysis:
Mechanisms and Materials . Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 9919 –9986 10.1021/cr5001892 .25234429 
Nakanishi H. ; Iizuka K. ; Takayama T. ; Iwase A. ; Kudo A. 
Highly Active
NaTaO3-Based Photocatalysts for CO2 Reduction
to Form CO Using Water as the Electron Donor . ChemSusChem 
2017 , 10 , 112 –118 10.1002/cssc.201601360 .27874269 
Kuehnel M. F. ; Orchard K. L. ; Dalle K. E. ; Reisner E. 
Selective Photocatalytic
CO2 Reduction in Water through Anchoring of a Molecular
Ni Catalyst on CdS Nanocrystals . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 7217 –7223 10.1021/jacs.7b00369 .28467076 
Chen X. ; Li N. ; Kong Z. ; Ong W.-J. ; Zhao X. 
Photocatalytic Fixation
of Nitrogen to Ammonia: State-of-the-art Advancements and Future Prospects . Mater. Horiz. 
2018 , 5 , 9 –27 10.1039/C7MH00557A .
Cargnello M. ; Montini T. ; Smolin S. Y. ; Priebe J. B. ; Jaén J. J. D. ; Doan-Nguyen V. V. T. ; McKay I. S. ; Schwalbe J. A. ; Pohl M.-M. ; Gordon T. R. ; Lu Y. ; Baxter J. B. ; Brückner A. ; Fornasiero P. ; Murray C. B. 
Engineering Titania
Nanostructure to Tune and Improve Its Photocatalytic Activity . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2016 , 113 , 3966 –3971 10.1073/pnas.1524806113 .27035977 
Chen X. ; Shen S. ; Guo L. ; Mao S. S. 
Semiconductor-based
Photocatalytic Hydrogen Generation . Chem. Rev. 
2010 , 110 , 6503 –6570 10.1021/cr1001645 .21062099 
Chen X. ; Mao S. S. 
Titanium Dioxide
Nanomaterials:  Synthesis,
Properties, Modifications, and Applications . Chem. Rev. 
2007 , 107 , 2891 –2959 10.1021/cr0500535 .17590053 
Asahi R. ; Morikawa T. ; Ohwaki T. ; Aoki K. ; Taga Y. 
Visible-light
Photocatalysis in Nitrogen-doped Titanium Oxides . Science 
2001 , 293 , 269 –271 10.1126/science.1061051 .11452117 
Murphy A. B. 
Does Carbon
Doping of TiO2 Allow Water Splitting in Visible Light?
Comments on “Nanotube Enhanced Photoresponse of Carbon Modified
(CM)-n-TiO2 for Efficient Water Splitting . Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
2008 , 92 , 363 –367 10.1016/j.solmat.2007.10.007 .
Liu G. ; Yin L.-C. ; Wang J. ; Niu P. ; Zhen C. ; Xie Y. ; Cheng H.-M. 
A Red Anatase TiO2 Photocatalyst for Solar
Energy Conversion . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2012 , 5 , 9603 –9610 10.1039/c2ee22930g .
Zhao J. ; Zhang L. ; Xing W. ; Lu K. 
A Novel Method to Prepare
B/N Codoped Anatase TiO2 . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 7732 –7737 10.1021/jp512837n .
Tian L. ; Xu J. ; Alnafisah A. ; Wang R. ; Tan X. ; Oyler N. A. ; Liu L. ; Chen X. 
A Novel Green TiO2 Photocatalyst with a
Surface Charge-transfer Complex of Ti and Hydrazine Groups . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2017 , 23 , 5345 –5351 10.1002/chem.201606027 .28133843 
Chen X. ; Liu L. ; Huang F. 
Black Titanium Dioxide (TiO2) Nanomaterials . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 1861 –1885 10.1039/C4CS00330F .25590565 
Cronemeyer D. C. 
Electrical
and Optical Properties of Rutile Single Crystals . Phys. Rev. 
1952 , 87 , 876 –886 10.1103/PhysRev.87.876 .
Cronemeyer D. C. ; Gilleo M. A. 
The Optical Absorption and Photoconductivity of Rutile . Phys. Rev. 
1951 , 82 , 975 –976 10.1103/PhysRev.82.975 .
Chen X. ; Liu L. ; Yu P. Y. ; Mao S. S. 
Increasing Solar Absorption for Photocatalysis
with Black Hydrogenated Titanium Dioxide Nanocrystals . Science 
2011 , 331 , 746 –750 10.1126/science.1200448 .21252313 
Wang B. ; Shen S. ; Mao S. S. 
Black TiO2 for Solar Hydrogen
Conversion . J. Materiomics 
2017 , 3 , 96 –111 10.1016/j.jmat.2017.02.001 .
Liu X. ; Zhu G. ; Wang X. ; Yuan X. ; Lin T. ; Huang F. 
Progress in
Black Titania: A New Material for Advanced Photocatalysis . Adv. Energy Mater. 
2016 , 6 , 1600452 10.1002/aenm.201600452 .
Fang W. ; Xing M. ; Zhang J. 
Modifications on Reduced Titanium
Dioxide Photocatalysts: A Review . J. Photochem.
Photobiol., C 
2017 , 32 , 21 –39 10.1016/j.jphotochemrev.2017.05.003 .
Liu N. ; Zhou X. ; Nguyen N. T. ; Peters K. ; Zoller F. ; Hwang I. ; Schneider C. ; Miehlich M. E. ; Freitag D. ; Meyer K. ; Fattakhova-Rohlfing D. ; Schmuki P. 
Black Magic in Gray
Titania: Noble-metal-free Photocatalytic H2 Evolution from
Hydrogenated Anatase . ChemSusChem 
2017 , 10 , 62 –67 10.1002/cssc.201601264 .27933749 
Liu N. ; Schneider C. ; Freitag D. ; Venkatesan U. ; Marthala V. R. R. ; Hartmann M. ; Winter B. ; Spiecker E. ; Osvet A. ; Zolnhofer E. M. ; Meyer K. ; Nakajima T. ; Zhou X. ; Schmuki P. 
Hydrogenated
Anatase: Strong Photocatalytic
Dihydrogen Evolution without the Use of a Co-Catalyst . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2014 , 53 , 14201 –14205 10.1002/anie.201408493 .
Breckenridge R. G. ; Hosler W. R. 
Titanium Dioxide Rectifiers . J. Res. Natl. Bur. Stand. 
1952 , 49 , 65 10.6028/jres.049.009 .
Cronemeyer D. C. 
Infrared
Absorption of Reduced Rutile TiO2 Single Crystals . Phys. Rev. 
1959 , 113 , 1222 –1226 10.1103/PhysRev.113.1222 .
Hollander L. E. Jr.
Piezoresistivity in Reduced Single-Crystal
Rutile (TiO2) . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1958 , 1 , 370 –371 10.1103/PhysRevLett.1.370 .
Diebold U. 
The Surface
Science of Titanium Dioxide . Surf. Sci. Rep. 
2003 , 48 , 53 –229 10.1016/S0167-5729(02)00100-0 .
Liu N. ; Schneider C. ; Freitag D. ; Hartmann M. ; Venkatesan U. ; Müller J. ; Spiecker E. ; Schmuki P. 
Black TiO2 Nanotubes: Cocatalyst-Free Open-Circuit Hydrogen Generation . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 3309 –3313 10.1021/nl500710j .24797919 
Wu Q. ; Huang F. ; Zhao M. ; Xu J. ; Zhou J. ; Wang Y. 
Ultra-small Yellow Defective TiO2 Nanoparticles for Co-catalyst
Free Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production . Nano
Energy 
2016 , 24 , 63 –71 10.1016/j.nanoen.2016.04.004 .
Zhang K. ; Wang L. ; Kim J. K. ; Ma M. ; Veerappan G. ; Lee C.-L. ; Kong K.-j. ; Lee H. ; Park J. H. 
An Order/Disorder/Water
Junction System for Highly Efficient Co-catalyst-free Photocatalytic
Hydrogen Generation . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2016 , 9 , 499 –503 10.1039/C5EE03100A .
Zhou X. ; Liu N. ; Schmidt J. ; Kahnt A. ; Osvet A. ; Romeis S. ; Zolnhofer E. M. ; Marthala V. R. R. ; Guldi D. M. ; Peukert W. ; Hartmann M. ; Meyer K. ; Schmuki P. 
Noble-metal-free Photocatalytic
Hydrogen Evolution Activity: The Impact of Ball Milling Anatase Nanopowders
with TiH2 . Adv. Mater. 
2017 , 29 , 1604747 10.1002/adma.201604747 .
Liu N. ; Häublein V. ; Zhou X. ; Venkatesan U. ; Hartmann M. ; Mačković M. ; Nakajima T. ; Spiecker E. ; Osvet A. ; Frey L. ; Schmuki P. 
Black”
TiO2 Nanotubes Formed by High-energy Proton Implantation
Show Noble-metal-co-catalyst Free Photocatalytic
H2-Evolution . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 6815 –6820 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b02663 .26340509 
Zhou X. ; Zolnhofer E. M. ; Nguyen N. T. ; Liu N. ; Meyer K. ; Schmuki P. 
Stable Co-catalyst-free
Photocatalytic H2 Evolution From Oxidized Titanium Nitride
Nanopowders . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 13385 –13389 10.1002/anie.201506797 .
Cui H. ; Zhao W. ; Yang C. ; Yin H. ; Lin T. ; Shan Y. ; Xie Y. ; Gu H. ; Huang F. 
Black TiO2 Nanotube Arrays for High-efficiency Photoelectrochemical
Water-splitting . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2014 , 2 , 8612 –8616 10.1039/C4TA00176A .
Zhou X. ; Liu N. ; Schmuki P. 
Photocatalysis
with TiO2 Nanotubes: “Colorful”
Reactivity and Designing Site-specific Photocatalytic Centers into
TiO2 Nanotubes . ACS Catal. 
2017 , 7 , 3210 –3235 10.1021/acscatal.6b03709 .
Xu J. ; Tian Z. ; Yin G. ; Lin T. ; Huang F. 
Controllable
Reduced Black Titania with Enhanced Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting
Performance . Dalton Trans 
2017 , 46 , 1047 –1051 10.1039/C6DT04060H .28009899 
Mascaretti L. ; Ferrulli S. ; Mazzolini P. ; Casari C. S. ; Russo V. ; Matarrese R. ; Nova I. ; Terraneo G. ; Liu N. ; Schmuki P. ; Li Bassi A. 
Hydrogen-treated Hierarchical Titanium
Oxide Nanostructures for Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting . Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
2017 , 169 , 19 –27 10.1016/j.solmat.2017.04.045 .
Cho I. S. ; Logar M. ; Lee C. H. ; Cai L. ; Prinz F. B. ; Zheng X. 
Rapid and Controllable Flame Reduction
of TiO2 Nanowires
for Enhanced Solar Water-splitting . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 24 –31 10.1021/nl4026902 .24295287 
Wang G. ; Wang H. ; Ling Y. ; Tang Y. ; Yang X. ; Fitzmorris R. C. ; Wang C. ; Zhang J. Z. ; Li Y. 
Hydrogen-treated
TiO2 Nanowire Arrays for Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting . Nano Lett. 
2011 , 11 , 3026 –3033 10.1021/nl201766h .21710974 
Zhu G. ; Yin H. ; Yang C. ; Cui H. ; Wang Z. ; Xu J. ; Lin T. ; Huang F. 
Black Titania for Superior Photocatalytic Hydrogen
Production and Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting . ChemCatChem 
2015 , 7 , 2614 –2619 10.1002/cctc.201500488 .
Nakajima T. ; Nakamura T. ; Shinoda K. ; Tsuchiya T. 
Rapid Formation of
Black Titania Photoanodes: Pulsed Laser-induced Oxygen Release and
Enhanced Solar Water Splitting Efficiency . J.
Mater. Chem. A 
2014 , 2 , 6762 –6771 10.1039/C4TA00557K .
Wang Z. ; Yang C. ; Lin T. ; Yin H. ; Chen P. ; Wan D. ; Xu F. ; Huang F. ; Lin J. ; Xie X. ; Jiang M. 
Visible-light Photocatalytic, Solar
Thermal and Photoelectrochemical
Properties of Aluminium-reduced Black Titania . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2013 , 6 , 3007 –3014 10.1039/c3ee41817k .
Mohajernia S. ; Hejazi S. ; Mazare A. ; Nguyen N. T. ; Schmuki P. 
Photoelectrochemical
H2 Generation from Suboxide TiO2 Nanotubes:
Visible-light Absorption versus Conductivity . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2017 , 23 , 12406 –12411 10.1002/chem.201702245 .28654181 
Zhang K. ; Ravishankar S. ; Ma M. ; Veerappan G. ; Bisquert J. ; Fabregat-Santiago F. ; Park J. H. 
Overcoming Charge
Collection Limitation at Solid/Liquid Interface by a Controllable
Crystal Deficient Overlayer . Adv. Energy Mater. 
2017 , 7 , 1600923 10.1002/aenm.201600923 .
Zhang K. ; Park J. H. 
Surface Localization
of Defects in Black TiO2: Enhancing Photoactivity or Reactivity . J.
Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2017 , 8 , 199 –207 10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b02289 .27991794 
Li G. ; Blake G. R. ; Palstra T. T. M. 
Vacancies in Functional Materials
for Clean Energy Storage and Harvesting: The Perfect Imperfection . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2017 , 46 , 1693 –1706 10.1039/C6CS00571C .28098299 
Paul A. ; Laurila T. ; Vuorinen V. ; Divinski S. V.  Thermodynamics, Diffusion
and the Kirkendall Effect in Solids ; Springer
International Publishing Switzerland : Basel, Switzerland , 2014 ; p 530 .
Callister W. D. Jr.; Rethwisch D. G.  Materials
Science and Engineering: An Introduction , 9 th ed.; John Wiley and Sons, Inc. : Hoboken, NJ , 2013 ;
p 992 .
Naldoni A. ; Allieta M. ; Santangelo S. ; Marelli M. ; Fabbri F. ; Cappelli S. ; Bianchi C. L. ; Psaro R. ; Dal Santo V. 
Effect of
Nature and Location of Defects on Bandgap Narrowing in Black TiO2 Nanoparticles . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 7600 –7603 10.1021/ja3012676 .22519668 
Chen X. ; Burda C. 
The Electronic Origin
of the Visible-light Absorption Properties
of C-, N- and S-doped TiO2 Nanomaterials . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 5018 –5019 10.1021/ja711023z .18361492 
Naldoni A. ; Fabbri F. ; Altomare M. ; Marelli M. ; Psaro R. ; Selli E. ; Salviati G. ; Dal Santo V. 
The Critical
Role of Intragap States in the Energy Transfer from Gold Nanoparticles
to TiO2 . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 17 , 4864 –4869 10.1039/C4CP05775A .25607570 
Yang H. G. ; Sun C. H. ; Qiao S. Z. ; Zou J. ; Liu G. ; Smith S. C. ; Cheng H. M. ; Lu G. Q. 
Anatase
TiO2 Single Crystals with a Large Percentage of Reactive
Facets . Nature 
2008 , 453 , 638 –641 10.1038/nature06964 .18509440 
Penn R. L. ; Banfield J. F. 
Formation of Rutile
Nuclei at Anatase {112} Twin Interfaces
and the Phase Transformation Mechanism in Nanocrystalline Titania . Am. Mineral. 
1999 , 84 , 871 –876 10.2138/am-1999-5-621 .
Esch F. ; Fabris S. ; Zhou L. ; Montini T. ; Africh C. ; Fornasiero P. ; Comelli G. ; Rosei R. 
Electron Localization
Determines Defect Formation on Ceria Substrates . Science 
2005 , 309 , 752 –755 10.1126/science.1111568 .16051791 
Campbell C. T. ; Peden C. H. F. 
Oxygen Vacancies and Catalysis on Ceria Surfaces . Science 
2005 , 309 , 713 –714 10.1126/science.1113955 .16051777 
Cordero F. 
Hopping and
Clustering of Oxygen Vacancies in SrTiO3 by Anelastic Relaxation . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2007 , 76 , 172106 10.1103/PhysRevB.76.172106 .
Eom K. ; Choi E. ; Choi M. ; Han S. ; Zhou H. ; Lee J. 
Oxygen Vacancy Linear Clustering in a Perovskite Oxide . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2017 , 8 , 3500 –3505 10.1021/acs.jpclett.7b01348 .28707469 
Uberuaga B. P. ; Pilania G. 
Effect of Cation Ordering on Oxygen
Vacancy Diffusion
Pathways in Double Perovskites . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 5020 –5026 10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b01474 .
Viola M. C. ; Martínez-Lope M. J. ; Alonso J. A. ; Velasco P. ; Martínez J. L. ; Pedregosa J. C. ; Carbonio R. E. ; Fernández-Díaz M. T. 
Induction
of Colossal Magnetoresistance in the Double Perovskite Sr2CoMoO6 . Chem. Mater. 
2002 , 14 , 812 –818 10.1021/cm011186j .
Pavlenko N. ; Kopp T. ; Tsymbal E. Y. ; Mannhart J. ; Sawatzky G. A. 
Oxygen
Vacancies at Titanate Interfaces: Two-dimensional Magnetism and Orbital
Reconstruction . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys. 
2012 , 86 , 064431 10.1103/PhysRevB.86.064431 .
He Y. ; Dulub O. ; Cheng H. ; Selloni A. ; Diebold U. 
Evidence for
the Predominance of Subsurface Defects on Reduced Anatase TiO2(101) . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2009 , 102 , 106105 10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.106105 .19392132 
Sekiya T. ; Takeda H. ; Kamiya N. ; Kurita S. ; Kodaira T. 
EPR of Anatase
Titanium Dioxide under UV Light Irradiation . Phys. Status Solidi C 
2006 , 3 , 3603 –3606 10.1002/pssc.200672152 .
Chester P. F. 
Electron
Spin Resonance in Semiconducting Rutile . J.
Appl. Phys. 
1961 , 32 , 2233 –2236 10.1063/1.1777049 .
Aono M. ; Hasiguti R. R. 
Interaction and
Ordering of Lattice Defects in Oxygen-deficient
Rutile TiO2–x . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1993 , 48 , 12406 –12414 10.1103/PhysRevB.48.12406 .
Hasiguti R. R. ; Yagi E. ; Aono M. 
Electrical
Conductivity of Slightly
Reduced Rutile between 2 and 370 K . Radiat.
Eff. 
1970 , 4 , 137 –140 10.1080/00337577008234980 .
Chiesa M. ; Livraghi S. ; Giamello E. ; Albanese E. ; Pacchioni G. 
Ferromagnetic
Interactions in Highly Stable, Partially Reduced TiO2:
The S = 2 State in Anatase . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2017 , 56 , 2604 –2607 10.1002/anie.201610973 .
Brant A. T. ; Golden E. M. ; Giles N. C. ; Yang S. ; Sarker M. A. R. ; Watauchi S. ; Nagao M. ; Tanaka I. ; Tryk D. A. ; Manivannan A. ; Halliburton L. E. 
Triplet Ground State of the Neutral
Oxygen-vacancy Donor in Rutile TiO2 . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2014 , 89 , 115206 10.1103/PhysRevB.89.115206 .
Chiesa M. ; Paganini M. C. ; Livraghi S. ; Giamello E. 
Charge Trapping
in
TiO2 Polymorphs as Seen by Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 9435 –9447 10.1039/c3cp50658d .23695705 
Livraghi S. ; Chiesa M. ; Paganini M. C. ; Giamello E. 
On the Nature of Reduced
States in Titanium Dioxide as Monitored by Electron Paramagnetic Resonance.
I: The Anatase Case . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 25413 –25421 10.1021/jp209075m .
Sun Y. ; Egawa T. ; Shao C. ; Zhang L. ; Yao X. 
Quantitative
Study of F Center in High-surface-area Anatase Titania Nanoparticles
Prepared by MOCVD . J. Phys. Chem. Solids 
2004 , 65 , 1793 –1797 10.1016/j.jpcs.2004.05.006 .
Nakamura I. ; Negishi N. ; Kutsuna S. ; Ihara T. ; Sugihara S. ; Takeuchi K. 
Role of Oxygen Vacancy
in the Plasma-treated TiO2 Photocatalyst with Visible Light
Activity for NO Removal . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2000 , 161 , 205 –212 10.1016/S1381-1169(00)00362-9 .
Misra S. K. ; Andronenko S. I. ; Tipikin D. ; Freed J. H. ; Somani V. ; Prakash O. 
Study of Paramagnetic
Defect Centers in As-grown and
Annealed TiO2 Anatase and Rutile Nanoparticles by a Variable-temperature
X-band and High-frequency (236 GHz) EPR . J.
Magn. Magn. Mater. 
2016 , 401 , 495 –505 10.1016/j.jmmm.2015.10.072 .27041794 
Baumann S. O. ; Elser M. J. ; Auer M. ; Bernardi J. ; Hüsing N. ; Diwald O. 
Solid–Solid Interface Formation
in TiO2 Nanoparticle Networks . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 1946 –1953 10.1021/la104213d .21265546 
Minnekhanov A. A. ; Deygen D. M. ; Konstantinova E. A. ; Vorontsov A. S. ; Kashkarov P. K. 
Paramagnetic Properties of Carbon-doped
Titanium Dioxide . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2012 , 7 , 333 10.1186/1556-276X-7-333 .22720786 
Kuznetsov V. N. ; Serpone N. 
On the Origin of the
Spectral Bands in the Visible
Absorption Spectra of Visible-light-active TiO2 Specimens
Analysis and Assignments . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2009 , 113 , 15110 –15123 10.1021/jp901034t .
Panarelli E. G. ; Livraghi S. ; Maurelli S. ; Polliotto V. ; Chiesa M. ; Giamello E. 
Role of Surface Water
Molecules in
Stabilizing Trapped Hole Centres in Titanium Dioxide (Anatase) as
Monitored by Electron Paramagnetic Resonance . J. Photochem. Photobiol., A 
2016 , 322–323 , 27 –34 10.1016/j.jphotochem.2016.02.015 .
Kumar C. P. ; Gopal N. O. ; Wang T. C. ; Wong M.-S. ; Ke S. C. 
EPR Investigation
of TiO2 Nanoparticles with Temperature-dependent Properties . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 5223 –5229 10.1021/jp057053t .16539451 
Yang S. ; Brant A. T. ; Halliburton L. E. 
Photoinduced Self-trapped Hole Center
in TiO2 Crystals . Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys. 
2010 , 82 , 035209 10.1103/PhysRevB.82.035209 .
Grunin V. S. ; Davtyan G. D. ; Ioffe V. A. ; Patrina I. B. 
EPR of Cu2+ and Radiation Centres in Anatase
(TiO2) . Phys. Status Solidi B 
1976 , 77 , 85 –92 10.1002/pssb.2220770107 .
Carter E. ; Carley A. F. ; Murphy D. M. 
Evidence
for O2– Radical Stabilization at Surface
Oxygen Vacancies on Polycrystalline
TiO2 . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2007 , 111 , 10630 –10638 10.1021/jp0729516 .
Hurum D. C. ; Agrios A. G. ; Gray K. A. ; Rajh T. ; Thurnauer M. C. 
Explaining
the Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity of Degussa P25 Mixed-Phase TiO2 Using EPR . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2003 , 107 , 4545 –4549 10.1021/jp0273934 .
Coronado J. M. ; Maira A. J. ; Conesa J. C. ; Yeung K. L. ; Augugliaro V. ; Soria J. 
EPR Study of the Surface
Characteristics of Nanostructured TiO2 under UV Irradiation . Langmuir 
2001 , 17 , 5368 –5374 10.1021/la010153f .
López-Muñoz M. J. ; Soria J. ; Conesa J. C. ; Augugliaro V. 
ESR Study
of Photo-oxidation of Phenol at Low Temperature on Polycrystalline
Titanium Dioxide . Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal. 
1994 , 82 , 693 –701 10.1016/S0167-2991(08)63465-5 .
McCain D. C. ; Palke W. E. 
Theory of Electron
Spin g-values for
Peroxy Radicals . J. Magn. Reson. (1969-1992) 
1975 , 20 , 52 –66 10.1016/0022-2364(75)90149-3 .
Chen X. ; Liu L. ; Huang F. 
Black Titanium
Dioxide (TiO2) Nanomaterials . Chem.
Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 1861 –1885 10.1039/C4CS00330F .25590565 
Wajid
Shah M. ; Zhu Y. ; Fan X. ; Zhao J. ; Li Y. ; Asim S. ; Wang C. 
Facile Synthesis of Defective TiO2–x Nanocrystals with High Surface Area and Tailoring
Bandgap for Visible-light Photocatalysis . Sci.
Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 15804 10.1038/srep15804 .26515503 
Montoya A. T. ; Gillan E. G. 
Enhanced Photocatalytic
Hydrogen Evolution from Transition-metal
Surface-modified TiO2 . ACS Omega 
2018 , 3 , 2947 –2955 10.1021/acsomega.7b02021 .
Cushing S. K. ; Meng F. ; Zhang J. ; Ding B. ; Chen C. K. ; Chen C.-J. ; Liu R.-S. ; Bristow A. D. ; Bright J. ; Zheng P. ; Wu N. 
Effects of
Defects on Photocatalytic
Activity of Hydrogen-treated Titanium Oxide Nanobelts . ACS Catal. 
2017 , 7 , 1742 –1748 10.1021/acscatal.6b02177 .
Henderson M. A. ; Lyubinetsky I. 
Molecular-level Insights into Photocatalysis
from Scanning
Probe Microscopy Studies on TiO2(110) . Chem. Rev. 
2013 , 113 , 4428 –4455 10.1021/cr300315m .23488875 
Vohs J. M. 
Site Requirements
for the Adsorption and Reaction of Oxygenates on Metal Oxide Surfaces . Chem. Rev. 
2013 , 113 , 4136 –4163 10.1021/cr300328u .23181433 
Guo Q. ; Zhou C. ; Ma Z. ; Ren Z. ; Fan H. ; Yang X. 
Elementary Photocatalytic Chemistry on TiO2 Surfaces . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2016 , 45 , 3701 –3730 10.1039/C5CS00448A .26335268 
Li H. ; Guo Y. ; Robertson J. 
Calculation of TiO2 Surface and Subsurface
Oxygen Vacancy by the Screened Exchange Functional . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 18160 –18166 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b02430 .
Malashevich A. ; Jain M. ; Louie S. G. 
First-principles
DFT + GW Study of Oxygen Vacancies in Rutile TiO2 . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys. 
2014 , 89 , 075205 10.1103/PhysRevB.89.075205 .
Mattioli G. ; Filippone F. ; Alippi P. ; Amore Bonapasta A. 
Ab
Initio Study of the Electronic States Induced by Oxygen Vacancies
in Rutile and Anatase TiO2 . Phys.
Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2008 , 78 , 241201 10.1103/PhysRevB.78.241201 .
Livraghi S. ; Maurelli S. ; Paganini M. C. ; Chiesa M. ; Giamello E. 
Probing the Local Environment of Ti3+ Ions
in TiO2 (Rutile) by 17O HYSCORE . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 8038 –8040 10.1002/anie.201100531 .
Maurelli S. ; Livraghi S. ; Chiesa M. ; Giamello E. ; Van Doorslaer S. ; Di Valentin C. ; Pacchioni G. 
Hydration
Structure of the Ti(III) Cation as Revealed by Pulse EPR and DFT Studies:
New Insights into a Textbook Case . Inorg. Chem. 
2011 , 50 , 2385 –2394 10.1021/ic1021802 .21314144 
Bilmes S. A. ; Mandelbaum P. ; Alvarez F. ; Victoria N. M. 
Surface
and Electronic Structure of Titanium Dioxide Photocatalysts . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2000 , 104 , 9851 –9858 10.1021/jp0010132 .
Justicia I. ; Ordejón P. ; Canto G. ; Mozos J. L. ; Fraxedas J. ; Battiston G. A. ; Gerbasi R. ; Figueras A. 
Designed Self-doped
Titanium Oxide Thin Films for Efficient Visible-light Photocatalysis . Adv. Mater. 
2002 , 14 , 1399 –1402 10.1002/1521-4095(20021002)14:19<1399::AID-ADMA1399>3.0.CO;2-C .
Wendt S. ; Sprunger P. T. ; Lira E. ; Madsen G. K. H. ; Li Z. ; Hansen J. Ø. ; Matthiesen J. ; Blekinge-Rasmussen A. ; Lægsgaard E. ; Hammer B. ; Besenbacher F. 
The Role of
Interstitial Sites in the Ti3d Defect State in the
Band Gap of Titania . Science 
2008 , 320 , 1755 –1759 10.1126/science.1159846 .18535207 
He Y. ; Tilocca A. ; Dulub O. ; Selloni A. ; Diebold U. 
Local Ordering
and Electronic Signatures of Submonolayer Water on Anatase TiO2(101) . Nat. Mater. 
2009 , 8 , 585 –589 10.1038/nmat2466 .19465917 
Lira E. ; Wendt S. ; Huo P. ; Hansen J. Ø. ; Streber R. ; Porsgaard S. ; Wei Y. ; Bechstein R. ; Lægsgaard E. ; Besenbacher F. 
The Importance
of Bulk Ti3+ Defects in the Oxygen Chemistry on Titania
Surfaces . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 6529 –6532 10.1021/ja200884w .21480608 
Gong X.-Q. ; Selloni A. ; Batzill M. ; Diebold U. 
Steps on Anatase
TiO2(101) . Nat. Mater. 
2006 , 5 , 665 –670 10.1038/nmat1695 .16845415 
Li J. ; Lazzari R. ; Chenot S. ; Jupille J. 
Contributions of Oxygen
Vacancies and Titanium Interstitials to Band-gap States of Reduced
Titania . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys. 
2018 , 97 , 041403 10.1103/PhysRevB.97.041403 .
Huygh S. ; Bogaerts A. ; Neyts E. C. 
How Oxygen
Vacancies
Activate CO2 Dissociation on TiO2 Anatase (001) . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 21659 –21669 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b07459 .
Lang X. ; Liang Y. ; Sun L. ; Zhou S. ; Lau W.-M. 
Interplay between Methanol and Anatase TiO2(101) Surface: The Effect of Subsurface Oxygen Vacancy . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2017 , 121 , 6072 –6080 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b11356 .
Martinez U. ; Hansen J. Ø. ; Lira E. ; Kristoffersen H. H. ; Huo P. ; Bechstein R. ; Lægsgaard E. ; Besenbacher F. ; Hammer B. ; Wendt S. 
Reduced Step Edges on Rutile TiO2(110) as Competing Defects to Oxygen Vacancies on the Terraces
and Reactive Sites for Ethanol Dissociation . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2012 , 109 , 155501 10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.155501 .23102329 
Guo Q. ; Xu C. ; Ren Z. ; Yang W. ; Ma Z. ; Dai D. ; Fan H. ; Minton T. K. ; Yang X. 
Stepwise Photocatalytic
Dissociation of Methanol and Water on TiO2(110) . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 13366 –13373 10.1021/ja304049x .22794088 
Zhou C. ; Ren Z. ; Tan S. ; Ma Z. ; Mao X. ; Dai D. ; Fan H. ; Yang X. ; LaRue J. ; Cooper R. ; Wodtke A. M. ; Wang Z. ; Li Z. ; Wang B. ; Yang J. ; Hou J. 
Site-specific Photocatalytic
Splitting of Methanol on TiO2(110) . Chem. Sci. 
2010 , 1 , 575 –580 10.1039/c0sc00316f .
Liu L. ; Yu P. Y. ; Chen X. ; Mao S. S. ; Shen D. Z. 
Hydrogenation
and Disorder in Engineered Black TiO2 . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2013 , 111 , 065505 10.1103/PhysRevLett.111.065505 .23971586 
Xia T. ; Chen X. 
Revealing the Structural
Properties of Hydrogenated
Black TiO2 Nanocrystals . J. Mater.
Chem. A 
2013 , 1 , 2983 –2989 10.1039/c3ta01589k .
Zheng Z. ; Huang B. ; Lu J. ; Wang Z. ; Qin X. ; Zhang X. ; Dai Y. ; Whangbo M.-H. 
Hydrogenated Titania:
Synergy of Surface Modification and Morphology Improvement for Enhanced
Photocatalytic Activity . Chem. Commun. 
2012 , 48 , 5733 –5735 10.1039/c2cc32220j .
Zhu Y. ; Liu D. ; Meng M. 
H2 Spillover Enhanced
Hydrogenation Capability of TiO2 Used for Photocatalytic
Splitting of Water: a Traditional Phenomenon for New Applications . Chem. Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 6049 –6051 10.1039/C4CC01667J .
Zuo F. ; Wang L. ; Wu T. ; Zhang Z. ; Borchardt D. ; Feng P. 
Self-doped Ti3+ Enhanced Photocatalyst for Hydrogen Production
under Visible Light . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 11856 –11857 10.1021/ja103843d .20687606 
Yang C. ; Wang Z. ; Lin T. ; Yin H. ; Lü X. ; Wan D. ; Xu T. ; Zheng C. ; Lin J. ; Huang F. ; Xie X. ; Jiang M. 
Core-shell Nanostructured
“Black” Rutile Titania as Excellent Catalyst for Hydrogen
Production Enhanced by Sulfur Doping . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 17831 –17838 10.1021/ja4076748 .24164550 
Sinhamahapatra A. ; Jeon J.-P. ; Yu J.-S. 
A New Approach to
Prepare Highly Active and Stable Black Titania for Visible Light-assisted
Hydrogen Production . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2015 , 8 , 3539 –3544 10.1039/C5EE02443A .
Zanella R. ; Giorgio S. ; Henry C. R. ; Louis C. 
Alternative
Methods for the Preparation of Gold Nanoparticles Supported on TiO2 . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2002 , 106 , 7634 –7642 10.1021/jp0144810 .
Corma A. ; Garcia H. 
Supported Gold Nanoparticles
as Catalysts
for Organic Reactions . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2008 , 37 , 2096 –2126 10.1039/b707314n .18762848 
Cushing B. L. ; Kolesnichenko V. L. ; O’Connor C. J. 
Recent
Advances in the Liquid-phase Syntheses of Inorganic Nanoparticles . Chem. Rev. 
2004 , 104 , 3893 –3946 10.1021/cr030027b .15352782 
Zhu Y. ; Liu D. ; Meng M. 
H2 Spillover Enhanced
Hydrogenation Capability of TiO2 Used for Photocatalytic
Splitting of Water: A Traditional Phenomenon for New Applications . Chem. Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 6049 –6051 10.1039/C4CC01667J .
Liu N. ; Schneider C. ; Freitag D. ; Zolnhofer E. M. ; Meyer K. ; Schmuki P. 
Noble-metal-free Photocatalytic H2 Generation: Active and Inactive ‘Black’ TiO2 Nanotubes and Synergistic Effects . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2016 , 22 , 13810 –13814 10.1002/chem.201602714 .27380617 
Kong M. ; Li Y. ; Chen X. ; Tian T. ; Fang P. ; Zheng F. ; Zhao X. 
Tuning the Relative
Concentration Ratio of Bulk Defects to Surface Defects in TiO2 Nanocrystals Leads to High Photocatalytic Efficiency . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 16414 –16417 10.1021/ja207826q .21923140 
Cronemeyer D. C. 
Infrared
Absorption of Reduced Rutile TiO2 Single Crystals . Phys. Rev. 
1959 , 113 , 1222 –1226 10.1103/PhysRev.113.1222 .
Xue J. ; Zhu X. ; Zhang Y. ; Wang W. ; Xie W. ; Zhou J. ; Bao J. ; Luo Y. ; Gao X. ; Wang Y. ; Jang L.-y. ; Sun S. ; Gao C. 
Nature of
Conduction Band Tailing in Hydrogenated Titanium Dioxide for Photocatalytic
Hydrogen Evolution . ChemCatChem 
2016 , 8 , 2010 –2014 10.1002/cctc.201600237 .
Zhang X. ; Hu W. ; Zhang K. ; Wang J. ; Sun B. ; Li H. ; Qiao P. ; Wang L. ; Zhou W. 
Ti3+ Self-Doped Black
TiO2 Nanotubes with Mesoporous Nanosheet
Architecture as Efficient Solar-driven Hydrogen Evolution Photocatalysts . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2017 , 5 , 6894 –6901 10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b01114 .
Pore V. ; Ritala M. ; Leskelä M. ; Areva S. ; Järn M. ; Järnström J. 
H2S Modified Atomic Layer Deposition Process for Photocatalytic TiO2 Thin Films . J. Mater. Chem. 
2007 , 17 , 1361 –1371 10.1039/B617307A .
Prokes S. M. ; Gole J. L. ; Chen X. ; Burda C. ; Carlos W. E. 
Defect-related Optical Behavior in
Surface Modified
TiO2 Nanostructures . Adv. Funct.
Mater. 
2005 , 15 , 161 –167 10.1002/adfm.200305109 .
Kroll W. 
The Production
of Ductile Titanium . Trans.
Electrochem. Soc. 
1940 , 78 , 35 –47 10.1149/1.3071290 .
Bamwenda G. R. ; Tsubota S. ; Kobayashi T. ; Haruta M. 
Photoinduced Hydrogen
Production from an Aqueous Solution
of Ethylene Glycol over Ultrafine Gold Supported on TiO2 . J. Photochem. Photobiol., A 
1994 , 77 , 59 –67 10.1016/1010-6030(94)80009-X .
Bamwenda G. R. ; Tsubota S. ; Nakamura T. ; Haruta M. 
Photoassisted
Hydrogen Production from a Water-ethanol Solution: A Comparison of
Activities of Au–TiO2 and Pt–TiO2 . J. Photochem. Photobiol., A 
1995 , 89 , 177 –189 10.1016/1010-6030(95)04039-I .
Spanu D. ; Recchia S. ; Mohajernia S. ; Tomanec O. ; Kment Š. ; Zboril R. ; Schmuki P. ; Altomare M. 
Templated Dewetting–Alloying of NiCu Bilayers
on TiO2 Nanotubes Enables Efficient Noble Metal-free Photocatalytic
H2 Evolution . ACS Catal. 
2018 , 8 , 5298 –5305 10.1021/acscatal.8b01190 .
Naldoni A. ; D’Arienzo M. ; Altomare M. ; Marelli M. ; Scotti R. ; Morazzoni F. ; Selli E. ; Dal Santo V. 
Pt and Au/TiO2 Photocatalysts
for Methanol Reforming: Role of Metal Nanoparticles
in Tuning Charge Trapping Properties and Photoefficiency . Appl. Catal., B 
2013 , 130–131 , 239 –248 10.1016/j.apcatb.2012.11.006 .
Liu N. ; Schneider C. ; Freitag D. ; Hartmann M. ; Venkatesan U. ; Müller J. ; Spiecker E. ; Schmuki P. 
Black TiO2 Nanotubes: Cocatalyst-free Open-circuit Hydrogen Generation . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 3309 –3313 10.1021/nl500710j .24797919 
Liu N. ; Steinrück H.-G. ; Osvet A. ; Yang Y. ; Schmuki P. 
Noble Metal
Free Photocatalytic H2 Generation
on Black TiO2: On the Influence of Crystal Facets vs. Crystal
Damage . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2017 , 110 , 072102 10.1063/1.4976010 .
Abbaschian R. ; Reed-Hill R. E.  Physical
Metallurgy Principles ; Cengage Learning : Boston, MA , 2010 ; p 750 .
Makin M. J.  The Nature of Small
Defect Clusters : Report of a Consultants Symposium Held at
A. E. R. E., Harwell, on July 4–6th, 1966; H.M. Stationery Office : London , 1966 ; p 592 .
Wei L. H. ; Wu S. Y. ; Zhang Z. H. ; Wang X. F. ; Hu Y. X. 
Investigations
on the Local Structure and g Factors
for the Interstitial Ti3+ in TiO2 . Pramana 
2008 , 71 , 167 –173 10.1007/s12043-008-0149-2 .
Kumar C. P. ; Gopal N. O. ; Wang T. C. ; Wong M.-S. ; Ke S. C. 
EPR Investigation of TiO2 Nanoparticles with Temperature-dependent
Properties . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 5223 –5229 10.1021/jp057053t .16539451 
Pan X. ; Yang M.-Q. ; Fu X. ; Zhang N. ; Xu Y.-J. 
Defective
TiO2 with Oxygen Vacancies: Synthesis, Properties and Photocatalytic
Applications . Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 3601 –3614 10.1039/c3nr00476g .23532413 
Brückner A. 
In Situ Electron
Paramagnetic Resonance:
A Unique Tool for Analyzing Structure–reactivity Relationships
in Heterogeneous Catalysis . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2010 , 39 , 4673 –4684 10.1039/b919541f .20886170 
Deskins N. A. ; Rousseau R. ; Dupuis M. 
Distribution
of Ti3+ Surface Sites in Reduced TiO2 . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 7562 –7572 10.1021/jp2001139 .
Justicia I. ; Ordejón P. ; Canto G. ; Mozos J. L. ; Fraxedas J. ; Battiston G. A. ; Gerbasi R. ; Figueras A. 
Designed Self-doped
Titanium Oxide Thin Films for Efficient Visible-light Photocatalysis . Adv. Mater. 
2002 , 14 , 1399 –1402 10.1002/1521-4095(20021002)14:19<1399::AID-ADMA1399>3.0.CO;2-C .
Zhou X. ; Liu N. ; Schmuki P. 
Ar+-ion
Bombardment of TiO2 Nanotubes Creates Co-catalytic Effect
for Photocatalytic Open Circuit Hydrogen Evolution . Electrochem. Commun. 
2014 , 49 , 60 –64 10.1016/j.elecom.2014.09.013 .
AlSalka Y. ; Hakki A. ; Schneider J. ; Bahnemann D. W. 
Co-catalyst-free Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution
on TiO2: Synthesis of Optimized Photocatalyst through Statistical
Material Science . Appl. Catal., B 
2018 , 238 , 422 –433 10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.07.045 .
Zhou X. ; Häublein V. ; Liu N. ; Nguyen N. T. ; Zolnhofer E. M. ; Tsuchiya H. ; Killian M. S. ; Meyer K. ; Frey L. ; Schmuki P. 
TiO2 Nanotubes:
Nitrogen-ion
Implantation at Low Dose Provides Noble-metal-free Photocatalytic
H2-evolution Activity . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 3763 –3767 10.1002/anie.201511580 .
Scanlon D. O. ; Dunnill C. W. ; Buckeridge J. ; Shevlin S. A. ; Logsdail A. J. ; Woodley S. M. ; Catlow C. R. A. ; Powell M. J. ; Palgrave R. G. ; Parkin I. P. ; Watson G. W. ; Keal T. W. ; Sherwood P. ; Walsh A. ; Sokol A. A. 
Band Alignment
of Rutile and Anatase TiO2 . Nat.
Mater. 
2013 , 12 , 798 –801 10.1038/nmat3697 .23832124 
Hernández S. ; Hidalgo D. ; Sacco A. ; Chiodoni A. ; Lamberti A. ; Cauda V. ; Tresso E. ; Saracco G. 
Comparison
of Photocatalytic and Transport Properties of TiO2 and
ZnO Nanostructures for Solar-driven Water Splitting . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 17 , 7775 –7786 10.1039/C4CP05857G .25715190

