
==== Front
AssessmentAssessmentASMspasmAssessment1073-19111552-3489SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/107319111774512610.1177_1073191117745126ArticlesA Psychometric Evaluation of the DSM-IV Criteria for
Antisocial Personality Disorder: Dimensionality, Local Reliability, and Differential Item
Functioning Across Gender Paap Muirne C. S. 1Braeken Johan 2Pedersen Geir 34Urnes Øyvind 4Karterud Sigmund 4Wilberg Theresa 4Hummelen Benjamin 41 University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands2 Centre for Educational Measurement (CEMO),
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway3 Norwegian Centre for Mental Disorders Research
(NORMENT), University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway4 Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, NorwayMuirne C. S. Paap, Department of Special Needs,
Education, and Youth Care, Faculty of Behavioural and Social Sciences, University of
Groningen, Grote Rozenstraat 38, 9712 TJ Groningen, The Netherlands. Email:
m.c.s.paap@rug.nl28 12 2017 1 2020 27 1 89 101 © The Author(s) 20172017SAGE PublicationsThis article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further permission
provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages
(https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).This study aims at evaluating the psychometric properties of the antisocial personality
disorder (ASPD) criteria in a large sample of patients, most of whom had one or more
personality disorders (PD). PD diagnoses were assessed by experienced clinicians using the
Structured Clinical Interview for Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 4th edition, Axis II PDs. Analyses were performed within an item
response theory framework. Results of the analyses indicated that ASPD is a unidimensional
construct that can be measured reliably at the upper range of the latent trait scale.
Differential item functioning across gender was restricted to two criteria and had little
impact on the latent ASPD trait level. Patients fulfilling both the adult ASPD criteria
and the conduct disorder criteria had similar latent trait distributions as patients
fulfilling only the adult ASPD criteria. Overall, the ASPD items fit the purpose of a
diagnostic instrument well, that is, distinguishing patients with moderate from those with
high antisocial personality scores.

antisocial personality disorderpsychopathyitem response theoryconduct disordergender biastypesetterts1
==== Body
Antisocial personality disorder (ASPD), as described by the fifth edition of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-5; American
Psychiatric Association [APA], 2013), is defined by a set of seven criteria of which
at least three must be fulfilled in order to establish the diagnosis. In addition, there
should be evidence of conduct disorder (CD) with onset before age 15 years. The term
antisocial personality was introduced in the DSM system in
1968 with the publication of the second edition (DSM-II; APA, 1968). According to this manual, a
person with antisocial personality is grossly selfish, callous, irresponsible, impulsive,
unable to feel guilt or to learn from experience and punishment, and has low frustration
tolerance. In the third edition of DSM and its revision (APA, 1980, 1987), more emphasis was placed on overt behavior in
defining the ASPD criteria, with the intention to obtain greater diagnostic reliability (Widiger et al., 1996). In
DSM-IV (APA,
1994), ASPD is conceptualized using a “hybrid approach,” including criteria that are
more personality-oriented and criteria that are more behavior-focused (Widiger et al., 1996; see also Table 1). From DSM-IV to
DSM-5 (APA,
2013), the ASPD criteria have not been changed.

Table 1. ASPD Criteria According to DSM-IV and DSM-5.

1. Failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviors as
indicated by repeatedly performing acts that are grounds for arrest	
2. Deception, as indicated by repeatedly lying, use of aliases, or conning others
for personal profit or pleasure	
3. Impulsivity or failure to plan ahead	
4. Irritability and aggressiveness, as indicated by repeated physical fights or
assaults	
5. Reckless disregard for safety of self or others	
6. Consistent irresponsibility, as indicated by repeated failure to sustain
consistent work behavior or honor financial obligations	
7. Lack of remorse, as indicated by being indifferent to or rationalizing having
hurt, mistreated, or stolen from another	
Note. ASPD = antisocial personality disorder. At least three criteria
are required for an ASPD diagnosis, in addition to evidence of childhood conduct
disorder.

Prevalence rates for ASPD in community samples range from 0.2% to 3.6% (Grant et al., 2005; Torgersen, Kringlen, & Cramer, 2001). This broad
range in prevalence rates may partly be due to differences in assessment procedures. For
instance, Trull, Jahng, Tomko, Wood, and
Sher (2010) demonstrated significant reductions of personality disorder (PD)
prevalence rates in the study of Grant et
al. (2005) by requiring that each PD criterion be associated with significant
distress or impairment. In clinical situations, prevalence rates are highly influenced by
sample characteristics. For instance, Zimmerman, Rothschild, and Chelminski (2005) found a prevalence of 3.1% in a general
clinical outpatient practice, whereas Mariani et al. (2008) found a prevalence of 17.3% in a sample of treatment-seeking
cocaine- and cannabis-dependent individuals.

Although the frequency might be relatively low in general outpatient clinics, it is important
to assess ASPD reliably and effectively as the presence of ASPD may have important
consequences for clinical decision making. ASPD is typically assessed using a subscale of a
broader instrument encompassing multiple PDs, like the Structured Clinical Interview for
DSM-IV Axis II PDs (SCID-II; First,
1994). It is of yet unclear whether the SCID-II ASPD subscale, which is explicitly
based on the DSM-IV ASPD criteria, taps into one or multiple underlying
factors (e.g., a personality-oriented factor and a behavior-oriented factor). Studies focusing
on ASPD or psychopathy (which is a construct closely related to ASPD) have not been consistent
with respect to the factorial structure: while some studies found evidence for a
one-dimensional structure (Harford et al.,
2013; Jane, Oltmanns, South,
& Turkheimer, 2007; Rosenström et al., 2017), others found support for two or more factors (Hare & Neumann, 2008; Kendler, Aggen, & Patrick, 2012;
Marcus, Lilienfeld, Edens, &
Poythress, 2006).

In the assessment of ASPD, another important point of discussion has been whether ASPD should
be scored along a continuum or as a categorical diagnosis. Early taxometric studies mostly
suggested that ASPD has a latent categorical structure (Haslam, 2003). However, most subsequent taxometric
studies found support for a continuum approach (Edens, Marcus, Lilienfeld, & Poythress, 2006; Guay, Ruscio, Knight, & Hare, 2007;
Marcus et al., 2006). Such a
continuum approach may be helpful from a clinical point of view. Some treatment programs for
PDs may tolerate patients with low-grade ASPD but not those who are severely disturbed (Bateman, O’Connell, Lorenzini, Gardner, &
Fonagy, 2016). In the PD field, the overall number of PD criteria is often taken as a
measure of the general PD severity (Hopwood et al., 2011). This is, however, not an optimal approach since certain
criteria may be stronger indicators of PD severity than others. The same would apply to
obtaining a score reflecting ASPD severity. An alternative, more suitable approach, would be
to estimate latent ASPD severity scores using item response theory models (IRT; Reise & Revicki, 2014); these
models have the advantage that they can be used to evaluate item (criterion) properties, and
take these properties into account when estimating a latent severity score.

Several authors have suggested that measurement bias across gender might be present in items
measuring ASPD, as some items seem to describe more male-specific behavior, for example,
“Irritability and aggressiveness, as indicated by repeated physical fights or assaults” (Dolan & Vollm, 2009; Widiger, 1998). Measurement bias across
gender can be investigated by testing whether items show differential item functioning (DIF;
e.g., Holland & Wainer, 1993)
for gender. DIF is present if the item parameters in one group differ from those in the other
group (discrimination parameter and/or threshold parameter). In other words, gender-based DIF
would imply that men would be more likely (or less likely) to obtain a given item score
compared with women who exhibit a similar trait level. Jane et al. (2007) conducted a DIF analysis on the
Structured Interview for DSM-IV Personality items (Pfohl, Blum, & Zimmerman, 1997), using a
nonclinical sample (United States Air Force recruits and undergraduate college students). The
respondents were assessed by doctoral-level clinical psychologists and graduate students in
clinical psychology. Jane et al.
(2007) found DIF for three ASPD items, all focused on behavior: Item 1 (failure to
conform), Item 4 (aggressiveness), and Item 5 (reckless disregard). These items were more
likely to be endorsed by men than by women with comparable trait levels. The authors concluded
that their results “reinforce the possibility that the current ASPD criteria do not adequately
reflect how the construct is expressed in women.” DIF for behavioral items was also found in a
study using the Psychopathy Checklist–Revised, conducted by Bolt, Hare, Vitale, and Newman (2004). In this study,
items that belonged to the antisocial/lifestyle domain (Factor 2) were more prone to display
DIF than the affective/interpersonal items (Factor 1). This study was based on a sample of
criminal offenders, in which female participants may exhibit more male-like antisocial
behavior. The generalizability of the results obtained by Jane et al. (2007) and Bolt et al. (2004) has not been sufficiently tested. In
this study we aim to extend the literature by carefully assessing whether gender-related DIF
is found in the SCID-II ASPD subscale in a large clinical sample; in contrast to the study by
Jane et al. (2007), the ASPD
criteria were assessed by experienced clinicians.

Among the specific PDs in DSM-IV and DSM-5, ASPD is the
only one that requires the presence of childhood precursors, that is, CD, with onset before
age 15 years. Although there seems to be good empirical evidence for the continuity between CD
and ASPD (Gelhorn, Sakai, Price, &
Crowley, 2007; Moffitt et al.,
2008; Robins, 1978), a
substantial number of individuals fulfilling the adult ASPD criteria do not meet criteria for
a prior CD diagnosis (Kim-Cohen et al.,
2003) and most comparison studies so far have not found clinically significant
differences between antisocial individuals with CD and antisocial individuals without CD
(Black & Braun, 1998; Perdikouri, Rathbone, Huband, & Duggan,
2007). However, in a study of 327 male prisoners who were assessed by the SCID-II,
Walters and Knight (2010)
reported that antisocial individuals with evidence of prior CD, showed more severe adult
antisocial features, that is, higher levels of criminal thinking, antisocial attitudes, and
behavioral adjustment difficulties. Moreover, CD symptom count appeared to have moderate
utility in forecasting institutional misconduct in a study of 353 inmates, of whom 185 had
ASPD (Edens, Kelley, Lilienfeld, Skeem,
& Douglas, 2015). Since the severity of antisocial features is relevant in
clinical decision making, it is of special importance to know whether assessing CD symptoms
retrospectively may help in determining the severity of ASPD. Since this question appears to
be as yet unresolved, more studies are needed, preferably using large clinical samples and a
modern psychometric approach.

Aims of the Study
The aim of this study is to perform a psychometric evaluation of the adult
DSM-IV ASPD diagnostic criteria, as assessed by experienced clinicians
using the SCID-II (First, 1994),
in a large sample of personality-disordered patients. More specifically, we will examine
whether the SCID-II ASPD items are tapping into a common underlying trait, whether the
SCID-II ASPD items can be used for reliable measurement, and whether the items are free of
measurement bias across gender. Moreover, we will investigate the diagnostic relevance of CD
by comparing latent ASPD severity levels obtained by IRT across four diagnostic groups: (1)
patients with ASPD according to DSM-IV (i.e., ASPD with CD), (2) patients
with three or more ASPD criteria without CD (late-onset ASPD), (3) patients without ASPD but
with evidence of prior CD, and (4) patients without ASPD and without evidence of prior
CD.

IRT (Embretson & Reise,
2000) provides a great framework and toolbox for psychometric evaluation. IRT
encompasses a family of measurement models that focuses on explaining the dependencies
between item responses within a person and between persons. IRT models are especially
suitable for dichotomous or polytomous (e.g., Likert-type scale) item response data, where
the items are expected to measure a common latent trait. The reliability of a measurement
instrument is usually represented by a single fixed number such as Cronbach’s alpha; yet,
this in conflict with the fact that a test cannot be expected to measure each person equally
efficiently along the latent trait dimension. In IRT, this problem is solved by using
(Fisher) information as an estimate of measurement precision/reliability conditional on the
latent trait value. This function, showing information for different latent trait values, is
known as the test information function. Since the goal of the instrument
under study is diagnosis, we are interested in having sufficient information for relatively
high latent trait values: the focus is on distinguishing patients with moderate levels of
antisocial personality from those with high levels (i.e., fulfilling the criteria). Since
there has been some debate as to whether the ASPD criteria may focus on behavior more
typical for men, we also wanted to check for gender-related item bias or—in IRT
terminology—differential item functioning. DIF can potentially lead to
measurement artefacts by masking or even inflating group differences, because the
relationship between an item showing DIF and the latent trait is not identical for
individuals belonging to different subgroups.

Method
Sample
The original sample consisted of 3,391 patients from the Norwegian Network of Personality
Focused Treatments Programs (Karterud
et al., 2003), admitted to treatment from 1996 to 2008 and diagnosed according to
DSM-IV. Among these patients, 75 had missing criteria sets for the
adult ASPD criteria (i.e., the ASPD criteria were not assessed or registered), and two
patients had missing criteria sets for childhood CD. Moreover, one patient had a mismatch
between ASPD diagnosis and the number of ASPD criteria. All these patients (N
= 78) were excluded from the analyses, resulting in a sample of 3,313
individuals, of whom 924 were men (28%) and 2,389 were women (72%). Mean age was 37
(SD = 9.3) and 35 (SD = 9.3) years for men and women,
respectively.

All units in the network adhered to the same treatment model, consisting of short-term
day treatment followed by long-term outpatient group therapy. All patients in the sample
were admitted to day treatment, including those with ASPD. Most patients had a PD
diagnosis (77%, N = 2,595). Fifty-six percent had one PD diagnosis, 15%
had two PD diagnoses, and 6.5% had three or more PD diagnoses. Avoidant PD was the most
frequent PD (37%), followed by borderline PD (22%) and PD not otherwise specified (17%).
The majority (97%) of patients had one or more symptom diagnoses, mostly an affective
disorder (74%) or an anxiety disorder (64%). Other frequent symptom disorders were eating
disorder (12%) and substance use disorder (9%).

Chi-square analyses revealed that ASPD was significantly associated with schizotypal PD
(ϕ = .079, p < .001), paranoid PD (ϕ = .088, p <
.001), narcissistic PD (ϕ = .122, p < .001), and borderline PD (ϕ =
.171, p < .001). The prevalence of these disorders in the subgroup of
patients with ASPD was 7% for schizotypal PD, 29% for paranoid PD, 9% for narcissistic PD,
and 76% for borderline PD.

Measures
The SCID-II (First, 1994) is a
semistructured clinical interview that covers the 11 DSM-IV Personality
Disorders, including Personality Disorder not otherwise specified. The SCID-II follows a
modular approach, where PDs are assessed one at a time. The initial question for each
SCID-II item closely follows the content of the corresponding DSM-IV
criterion. The SCID-II items are accompanied by open-ended prompts that can be used to
encourage patients to elaborate freely about their symptoms. At times, open-ended prompts
can be followed by closed-ended questions to further clarify a specific PD symptom. In the
current study, the focus is on the ASPD subscale, which consists of 7 items. The SCID-II
items are rated within one of three response categories: 1 = absent or
false; 2 = subthreshold (i.e., the threshold for the criterion
is almost but not quite, met); and 3 = threshold or true. In order to
establish a DSM-IV ASPD diagnosis, it is required that the patient is
also (retrospectively) diagnosed with childhood CD. The diagnosis of CD was made when at
least three CD criteria were met. The SCID-II does not require that these criteria are
confirmed by early caregivers or other sources of information. Interrater reliability
studies have shown that adequate interrater reliability can be obtained by using the
SCID-II (Maffei et al., 1997;
Weertman, Arntz, Dreessen, van
Velzen, & Vertommen, 2003).

Procedures
All units in this study complied with the diagnostic and data collection procedures
required for membership of the Norwegian Network. The SCID-II was administered by
experienced clinicians, that is, health care professionals (mental health nurses,
psychologists, or medical doctors) working at clinical units specialized in the assessment
and treatment of PDs. Clinicians were trained in PD diagnostics through attendance at
local courses and Network conferences. Final PD diagnoses were established by way of the
longitudinal expert evaluation using all data (LEAD) standard (Spitzer, 1983). Tentative diagnoses
were made at the time of admission, on the basis of referral letters, self-reported
history and complaints, as well as two structured clinical diagnostic interviews: (1)
Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview for Axis I diagnoses (Sheehan et al., 1994) and (2) SCID-II for PDs
(First, 1994). During the 18
weeks of day treatment, therapists could affirm or review diagnoses based on information
gathered in a variety of clinical situations. A final PD diagnosis required that the
criteria from the original SCID-II protocol were confirmed by clinical observations. It is
assumed that the LEAD procedure resulted in more valid diagnoses (Pedersen, Karterud, Hummelen, & Wilberg,
2013).

Psychometric Analyses
Dimensionality Analyses
To ascertain whether the SCID-II ASPD items form a scale and thus measure one
underlying trait, we assessed the dimensionality of the SCID-II ASPD items using two
complementary methods: confirmatory Mokken Scale Analysis (MSA), which is a
nonparametric method; and the Empirical Kaiser Criterion (EKC), which is an
eigenvalue-based method. The dimensionality analyses were run for the total sample
first, followed by separate analyses by gender.

In recent years, MSA has increased in popularity in the fields of psychological and
health assessment (e.g., Chou, Lee,
Liu, & Hung, 2017; Lenferink et al., 2016; Murray, McKenzie, Murray, & Richelieu, 2014; Stewart, Allison, Baron-Cohen, & Watson,
2015; van den Berg, Paap,
& Derks, 2013; Watson
et al., 2012). MSA identifies scales that allow an ordering of individuals on
an underlying scale using unweighted sum scores. In order to ascertain which items
covary and form a scale, scalability coefficients are calculated on three levels:
item-pairs (Hij), items (Hi),
and scale (H). H is based on
Hi and reflects the degree to which the scale can be used
to reliably order persons on the latent trait using their sum score. A scale is
considered acceptable if 0.3 ≤ H < 0.4, good if 0.4 ≤
H < 0.5, and strong if H ≥ 0.5 (Mokken, 1971; Sijtsma & Molenaar,
2002).

Eigenvalue-based methods are among the most popular and common methods for
dimensionality assessment. Unfortunately, possibly due to historical and/or
ease-of-access reasons, many applied researchers still rely on flawed criteria. In
particular, the eigenvalue-greater-than-1 rule, also known as the Kaiser criterion
(Kaiser, 1960), has
repeatedly been shown to have low accuracy (observe that this is not a recent finding;
see, e.g., Velicer, Eaton, &
Fava, 2000; Zwick &
Velicer, 1986). Braeken and
van Assen (2017) clarify that the reason why the Kaiser criterion fails is that
it does not account for sampling variation in eigenvalues. To remedy this shortcoming,
they proposed a modification based on the asymptotical sampling distribution of
eigenvalues. Instead of comparing the observed sample eigenvalues to a fixed reference
value of 1, the EKC establishes reference eigenvalues that can be expected for a data
set of specified size (i.e., persons by items), if no factor structure would be present.
The number of dimensions to retain then corresponds to the length of the series of
first-ranked eigenvalues that are all greater than these null-reference eigenvalues.
Graphically, this simply means finding the point where the line formed by the reference
eigenvalues crosses the screeplot of observed sample eigenvalues (for an easy-to-use
webapplet, see https://cemo.shinyapps.io/EKCapp). The EKC is a non–simulation-based
relative of parallel analysis (which simulates null reference eigenvalues), the current
gold standard in the field (Garrido,
Abad, & Ponsoda, 2013; Timmerman & Lorenzo-Seva, 2011). Simulation studies show that the EKC
performs at par with parallel analysis for uncorrelated scales, and even better than
parallel analysis for short correlated scales.

IRT Model
The graded response model (GRM; Samejima, 1996) was used to scale and evaluate the seven SCID-II ASPD items.
The GRM applies to ordered categorical item scores. Let the variable Ypi represent the score of a patient p on an item
i, where the observed response Ypi can
range from j = 1 over 2 to 3. The GRM directly models the cumulative
conditional probability of scoring greater than or equal to each of the response
options


 Pr(Ypi≥j|θp)=11+exp(−ai[θp−bij]) 


where θp is the position of the person on the latent trait scale and where
ai and bij are item parameters
describing how the item is linked to the latent trait scale. The item parameter
ai is a discrimination parameter expressing the degree
to which the item i can differentiate between patients on the latent
trait scale (i.e., higher values for ai indicate that small
differences in position on the latent trait can lead to large changes in probability).
Item parameter bij is a threshold parameter for item
i indicating the position on the latent trait scale for which a
patient would have 50% probability of being assigned a score greater than or equal to
j on the item i. The regular response probabilities
can then simply be derived by taking differences between the cumulative
probabilities:


 Pr(Ypi=j|θp)=Pr(Ypi≥j|θp)−Pr(Ypi≥j+1|θp) 


Written out in full, this implies the following set of three category response
curves:


 Pr(Ypi=1|θp)=1−Pr(Ypi≥2|θp) 



 Pr(Ypi=2|θp)=Pr(Ypi≥2|θp)−Pr(Ypi≥3|θp) 



 Pr(Ypi=3|θp)=Pr(Ypi≥3|θp)−0 


Note that Pr(Ypi≥1|θp)=1, because everyone will at least get j = 1, which is
the lowest score that can be assigned to a patient. Hence, similar to the dummy coding
principle for a categorical predictor, the number of threshold parameters for an item is
always one less than the item’s number of response categories. The item score range
stops at 3, so by definition Pr(Ypi≥3+1|θp)=0.

Local Reliability: Test Information Function and Targeting
In IRT, measurement error is conceptualized in terms of information: More information
means more precision, meaning less error of measurement. The information a test provides
on the scale-position of a patient varies across the latent trait scale and is a direct
function of the psychometric properties and scale-position of the items in the test.
Given that the squared standard error of measurement SE(θp)2 is equal to the reciprocal of the test information Ι(θp), an estimate of local reliability can be computed as


 r(θp)=1−SE(θp)2VAR(θp)=1−1Ι(θp) 


The first equality stems from the traditional formulation of reliability as a ratio of
variances, true variance divided by total variance, or equivalently, 1 minus error
variance divided by total variance. The second equality stems from the reciprocal
information-error relation and the fact that our scale metric in a GRM is standardized
such that VAR(θp)=1.

Measurement Bias Across Gender: Differential Item Functioning
We used a DIF model comparison approach1 to screen for gender-related item bias in the seven SCID-II ASPD items. For more
detailed information about this procedure as well as other ways to assess DIF, we refer
the reader to Thissen, Steinberg,
and Wainer (1993) and Millsap (2011). Two reference models were estimated: a gender equivalent model
and a gender nonequivalent model. The gender-equivalent model allows for scale-level
differences in means and standard deviations of the latent trait between male and female
patients, while constraining the item parameters to be equal across groups; in contrast,
the gender-nonequivalent model allows for differences in both item discrimination and
item thresholds for all items between male and female patients, while constraining the
means and standard deviations to be equal across groups. If the gender-equivalent model
shows better fit compared with the nonequivalent model, this would imply that there are
only overall scale-level group differences between males and females, whereas if the
opposite is true, it would imply that the scales for males and females are to some
extent incomparable and that ASPD criteria may function differently for males and
females. If the gender-nonequivalent model shows better fit, a set of model comparisons
are performed with the goal to establish which items cause the nonequivalence. This is
done by taking the gender-equivalent model as a starting point, and relaxing the
equivalence constraints, one item at a time. When DIF items have been identified in this
manner, Wald tests are used to assess whether the DIF is uniform across the scale (i.e.,
whether it only affects the thresholds) or also varies across the scale (i.e., also
affects the discrimination parameters; nonuniform DIF).

Software
All statistical analyses were coded and performed in the open source software program R
version 3.2.3 (R Development Core
Team, 2012). The GRM was estimated using a full information maximum likelihood
approach in the R package mirt version 1.16 (Chalmers, 2012).

Results
Descriptive Statistics: Sample Prevalence and Gender Distribution of ASPD
Of the total sample of 3,313 patients (72% women), 108 patients scored a “3” on three or
more ASPD items (48% women). Fifty-four of these patients (42% women) also fulfilled the
criteria for childhood CD and were therefore diagnosed as having ASPD according to the
DSM-IV (labeled as “ASPD-DSM-IV”). The 54 patients
(55% women) who did not fulfill the CD criteria were tentatively labeled as
ASPD-late onset.

Since there were 3 answering categories per item and 7 items, the total number of
possible scoring patterns equaled 37 = 2,187. There were only 415 unique ASPD
symptom endorsement patterns (19% of 2,187), which is typical when studying a clinical
diagnosis. One pattern had the highest frequency of occurrence by far: the pattern 1111111
(i.e., absence of all ASPD-related symptoms) occurred 1,845 times. This indicates that
SCID-II ASPD items are not too commonly endorsed and can be expected to differentiate well
between patients with and without ASPD. Furthermore, among the 108 patients scoring “3” on
three or more ASPD items, 90 different endorsement patterns occurred of which 74 were
reported by a single patient only. Hence, there is no prototypical ASPD endorsement
pattern.

Dimensionality of the SCID-II ASPD Items
The H values exceeded the threshold of .3 for all MSA analyses (.371 and
.336 for women and men, respectively, and .303 for the total sample). For the total
sample, all but one Hi value exceeded .3; for the remaining
item an Hi value of .295 was found. Taken together, these
findings provide support for a weak to acceptable unidimensional scale.

Figure 1 shows the screeplot
accompanying the EKC results for the total sample. A sharp drop can be observed between
the first and second component. Furthermore, the observed eigenvalue λ was higher than the
reference value only for the first component (total sample: λ1 = 2.71 >
EKC1 = 1.03, λ2 = .88 <
EKC2 = 1.00; men: λ1 = 2.84 >
EKC1 = 1.18, λ2 = .96 <
EKC2 = 1.00; women: λ1 = 2.55 >
EKC1 = 1.11, λ2 = .86 <
EKC2 = 1.00). The EKC findings show very clear support for a
unidimensional solution.

Figure 1. Scree plot of eigenvalues. Empirical Kaiser criterion reference line depicted in
gray.

Since both the MSA and EKC results provided support for a unidimensional scale, the IRT
analyses were performed using the unidimensional GRM, which showed good model fit (root
mean square error of approximation = .04; Tucker-Lewis index = .98; comparative fit index
= .99).

Item Parameters and Local Reliability
The item parameters estimated with the GRM are reported in Table 2. Characteristic of clinical settings (Reise & Waller, 2009), the
discrimination parameters are fairly high, and so are the threshold values; in other
words, the items discriminate well but mostly at the upper range of the latent trait
scale. This finding is also illustrated by the test information function, which shows that
the highest information (local reliability) is found for latent trait values between 1 and
3 (see Figure 2). Hence, this is
the zone best targeted by the test where we can differentiate between patients with a high
degree of precision. This matches well with the purpose of a diagnostic instrument:
distinguishing patients with moderate from those with high antisocial personality
scores.

Table 2. Item Parameters Based on the Graded Response Model for the SCID-II ASPD Items.

Item i	Item content	
a
	
bi
2
	
bi
3
	
#1	Failure to conform	2.33	1.22	1.77	
#2	Deceitfulness	2.06	1.83	2.59	
#3	Impulsivity	1.87	1.35	2.14	
#4	Aggressiveness	1.53	1.50	2.62	
#5	Reckless disregard	1.60	1.13	1.95	
#6	Irresponsibility	1.82	1.65	2.64	
#7	Lack of remorse	2.35	1.92	2.62	
Note. SCID-II = Structured Clinical Interview for
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th
Edition, Axis II PD; ASPD = antisocial personality disorder. a =
estimated discrimination parameter; bij = estimated
threshold parameter for item i indicating the position on the
latent trait scale for which a patient would have 50% probability of being assigned
a score greater than or equal to j. Following the SCID-II manual,
responses were coded as 1, 2, or 3. Since the probability of scoring in Category 1
or higher equals 1, only bi2 and
bi3 are reported.

Figure 2. Test information function based on the graded response model, with estimated latent
trait values (θp) on the x-axis, and information conditional on
θpon the y-axis. Four lines have been drawn
horizontally to indicate which information scores correspond to a reliability estimate
of 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, and 0.9, respectively.

The category response curves, which depict the probability of choosing a particular
response category as a function of the latent trait (here: antisocial personality),
clearly indicate that the middle category (Category 2) does not get endorsed often; it
hardly ever has a higher probability of being chosen compared with Category 1 or 3. This
is the case for all items. Figure
3 contrasts one of the empirical category response curve sets from our study to a
hypothetical ideal set where all categories contribute information. The corresponding item
information curves in Figure 4
illustrate that hypothetically, polytomous items have the potential to provide information
across a wider range of the latent trait (i.e., multiple thresholds imply multiple peaks)
when compared with dichotomous items (i.e., only one threshold = maximally one peak). Our
data illustrate, however, that polytomous items where one of the categories is hardly ever
the dominant category may not have much added value as compared with dichotomous items in
estimating a patient’s position on the latent trait scale.

Figure 3. Category characteristic curves for (1) a hypothetical item where all categories
contribute information (Left) and (2) Item 2 (deceitfulness), which shows that
Category 2 hardly contributes any information (Right). In the left plot, each category
is the most dominant one (highest probability of being selected) for a range of latent
trait values; in the right plot Categories 1 and 3 clearly dominate Category 2.

Figure 4. Item information functions for (1) Item #2 (deceitfulness) using all three categories
(solid line), (2) the same item but now ignoring Category 2 (gray dotted line), and
(3) a hypothetical item where all categories contribute information (dashed black
line).

To compare the DSM-IV scoring rule with IRT-based scoring, we calculated
the latent trait score distributions for patients scoring below and above the
DSM-IV ASPD cutoff rule (a “3” on at least three items). Figure 5 shows the latent trait
distributions for all possible number of 3s: from zero to seven. As expected, the means of
the latent trait increase as the number of items on which a “3” is scored increases.
However, the figure also indicates that there is still some variability in IRT-based
scores within most of the groups. If we focus on the groups near the
DSM-IV cutoff, it can be seen that there is still quite some overlap in
score distributions. More specifically, for persons with exactly three 3s, the specific
items on which they score these 3s matter when it comes to calculating their IRT-based
scores. Looking at Table 2, we
can see that the bi3 -values for Items 1, 5, and 3 are
markedly lower than those for Items 4, 6, and 7; this means that scoring a “3” on Items 1,
5 and 3 would result in a substantially lower latent trait score than scoring a “3” on
Items 4, 6, and 7.

Figure 5. Boxplots showing the distribution of latent trait values (θp) for seven subgroups in the sample; patients were assigned to these
subgroups on the basis of the number of criteria they scored a “3” on. Note that at
least three 3s are needed in order to qualify for a diagnosis of antisocial
personality disorder (cutoff). To facilitate interpretation, the boxplots for patients
scoring above the cut-off are printed in gray.

Differential Item Functioning Across Gender
The first step in examining whether there was DIF for any of the items was comparing the
gender-equivalent model (item parameters constrained to be equal) with the
gender-nonequivalent model (unconstrained item parameters, equal means and standard
deviations). Table 3 shows all
the models that were estimated, and which model comparisons were made. The
gender-equivalent model is used as the reference model in most cases and was therefore
labeled as Model 0. The gender-nonequivalent model showed a significantly better fit
compared with the equivalent model. Further model comparisons indicated that models in
which the item parameters of Items 3 (impulsivity) and 5 (reckless disregard) were
unconstrained (free to vary over groups) showed a significantly better fit than the
equivalent model. This indicates that there was DIF for these items. The model where the
item parameters of both these items were free to vary across groups was not significantly
different from the nonequivalent model. This indicates that it was sufficient to relax the
equivalence constraints on the item parameters for these two items (and constrain the
other item parameters to be equal across groups).

Table 3. Overview of the Differential Item Functioning Model Comparison Results.

	Model	LL	Reference model used for comparison	
df
	χ	
p
	
0	
Equivalent
	H-					
1	
Nonequivalent
	−9,818	Equivalent	19	97.39	<.001	
2	DIF: Item #1	−9,866	Equivalent	3	1.80	.615	
3	DIF: Item #2	−9,866	Equivalent	3	.98	.807	
4	DIF: Item #3	−9,843	Equivalent	3	47.82	<.001	
5	DIF: Item #4	−9,864	Equivalent	3	4.88	.181	
6	DIF: Item #5	−9,837	Equivalent	3	59.20	<.001	
7	DIF: Item #6	−9,866	Equivalent	3	.99	.803	
8	DIF: Item #7	−9,866	Equivalent	3	.95	.812	
9	DIF: Items #3 and #5	−9,822	Equivalent	6	89.38	<.001	
Nonequivalent	13	8.02	.843	
The Wald tests showed that there was no evidence for nonuniform but only for uniform DIF.
In other words, the DIF only affected the thresholds and not the discrimination parameters
(Item 3: Δa = .24, p = .189; Item 5: Δa
= .13, p = .246). The thresholds for Item 3 were higher for male patients
(Δb = .33/.16, p = <.001/.006), whereas the
thresholds for Item 5 were lower for male patients (Δb = −.53/−.55,
p = <.001/<.001). To facilitate understanding of the effect size
of these parameter differences we calculated them in terms of response probabilities as
well (the difference between the category response curves). Females had on average a
probability that was .07 higher than that of males (with similar
θp scores) to score in Category 3 on Item 3, with a maximum
probability difference of .17. DIF on Item 5 was associated with an average probability
difference in favor of males of .14 to score in Category 3, with a maximum probability
difference of .21. Summarizing, for a given latent trait level, female patients were more
likely to be perceived as being impulsive (Item 3), while male patients were more likely
to be perceived as being reckless (Item 5).

Using an IRT model that ignored DIF (constraining the item parameters to be equal across
groups), resulted in a lower mean θp for females compared with
males (Δ = −.56, p < .001). After having corrected for DIF, the group
difference was somewhat smaller but still significantly different from zero (Δ = −.52,
p < .001). No difference was found in variance.

Diagnostic Relevance of Conduct Disorder
Finally, we compared latent trait distributions for four diagnostic groups: (1) patients
with three or more ASPD criteria and CD (ASPD-CD), (2) patients with
three or more ASPD criteria without CD (ASPD-late onset), (3) patients
with fewer than three ASPD criteria with CD (CD-only), and (4) patients
with fewer than three ASPD criteria and absence of CD (noASPD-noCD). The
results are displayed in Figure 6.
Using the noASPD-noCD as a reference group, the following 95% confidence
intervals were found: [1.2, 1.6] for CD-only; [2.5, 3.8] for
ASPD-late onset; and [2.8, 3.9] for ASPD-CD. If the
confidence interval contains the value 0, this means that they do not
significantly differ from the reference group with respect to average latent trait score.
If the confidence intervals overlap, this indicates that the groups in question are
not significantly different from each other. In this case, the only
confidence intervals overlapping were those of ASPD-late onset and ASPD-CD. This can also
be seen in Figure 6: the score
distributions of the two ASPD groups are both clearly situated at the high end of the
latent trait continuum, followed by the CD-only group and finally the
noASDP-noCD group which was placed around the midpoint of the scale.
Notice that the location of the peak of the TIF matches well with the location on the
trait scale of the two ASPD groups.

Figure 6. Boxplots showing the distribution of latent trait values (θp) for four diagnostic subgroups in the sample.

Discussion
This study of a large clinical sample sought to examine the psychometric properties of the
ASPD criteria as defined by DSM-IV and assessed by the SCID-II (First, 1994). The results of the
analyses indicate that ASPD is a unidimensional construct that can be measured reliably at
the upper range of the latent trait scale. There was some DIF across gender, but this had
little impact on the latent ASPD trait level and was restricted to two items, that is, Items
3 (impulsivity) and 5 (reckless disregard). Patients with three or more ASPD criteria
without CD (ASPD-late onset) had similar levels of the underlying
antisocial dimension as ASPD according to DSM-IV
(ASPD-CD).

Our IRT analyses showed that the SCID-II ASPD items had good item discrimination and
covered the upper range of the latent trait scale, from 1 SD above the mean
to 2.5 SDs above the mean. This fits the purpose of the
DSM criteria well: differentiating among people with and without the
disorder. If the aim would be to differentiate along the entire scale (low from average
severity, average from high, etc.), new items would have to be added with lower item
threshold values.

In accordance with previous studies (Bolt et al., 2004; Cooke &
Michie, 1997; Jane et al.,
2007), items that revealed DIF were more behavior focused. More specifically,
female patients were more likely to be considered as impulsive compared with male patients
with similar ASPD scores. Male patients, on the other hand, were more likely to be
considered as reckless compared with female patients with similar ASPD scores. Importantly,
the effect of the DIF we found did not have a substantial effect on latent trait scores at
the group level. This is in line with the statement made by Reise and Waller (2009, p. 38): “ . . . the presence
of item-level DIF does not necessarily lead to bias at the level of scale scores.”
Nevertheless, we concur with Reise and
Waller (2009) and Orlando and
Marshall (2002) that it is important to test for and detect DIF rather than to
ignore potential DIF-related problems, even if DIF does not always lead to bias at the
scale/group level. In our sample, there was a marked gender imbalance (72% women). Ideally,
from a statistical viewpoint, one would prefer to have equal group sizes when studying DIF.
However, if both groups are sufficiently large, the group imbalance has much less impact
than it would have in smaller samples. In our study, the smallest group was still quite
large (N = 924), so we are confident that we had sufficient power to detect
DIF.

As mentioned in the introduction, Jane
et al. (2007) found DIF for three of the seven adult ASPD criteria. Of these three
items, only one showed DIF in our sample: recklessness. In contrast to Jane and colleagues,
we also found DIF for impulsivity (where they found none). Another difference is that the
DIF found by Jane and colleagues all went in the same direction: men were more likely to
endorse the DIF items than women (for similar trait levels). However, in our study the two
DIF items had opposite directionality. DIF of the recklessness item could be explained by
the operationalization of the ASPD items in the SCID-II, that is, the recklessness questions
in the SCID-II are focused on driving behavior and unsafe sex, which might be considered as
examples of male-like behavior. DIF of the impulsivity item might be explained by the fact
that our study concerns a clinical sample with a high prevalence of borderline PD. High
comorbidity rates between ASPD and borderline PD is a common phenomenon in clinical samples
of patients with severe personality pathology (Bateman et al., 2016). Overall, our results do not
support the assertion of Jane et al.
(2007) that the current ASPD criteria do not adequately reflect how the construct
is expressed in women. In clinical populations, measurement bias across gender may be less
prominent, at least when assessed by experienced clinicians using a structured clinical
interview.

For patients with high latent antisocial trait values, being diagnosed with CD did not lead
to a further increase in trait levels. This finding corroborates earlier reports from
clinical samples that did not find clinically significant differences between antisocial
patients with and without CD (Black &
Braun, 1998; Perdikouri et al.,
2007). However, this finding is at odds with the study of Walters and Knight (2010), who found that the
presence of CD was associated with more severe antisociality. This discrepancy might be
explained by methodological differences, since Walters and Knight included a more
comprehensive assessment of antisocial features, for example, criminal thinking style and
egocentricity. It might also be due to sample differences, that is, a forensic sample with
only male individuals versus a clinical sample with predominantly female patients of whom
most had a PD.

In our sample, the CD-only patients (patients with childhood CD but
without ASPD) had higher levels of the latent ASPD trait than the
noASPD-noCD patients. These results suggest that even though the majority
of children with CD may not develop a “full-blown” ASPD (Robins, 1978), they are still at risk for developing
antisocial traits. Moreover, the ASPD-related traits and behavior of what we labeled the
ASPD-late onset group may not be adequately addressed/recognized since
these patients did not receive a formal diagnosis (in spite of their high latent scores). It
should be kept in mind, however, that the CD criteria were assessed retrospectively. It is
uncertain to what degree a retrospective CD diagnosis accurately reflects the presence of CD
during childhood. Furthermore, the CD criteria were assessed in concordance with the SCID-II
interview, which requires the presence of at least three CD criteria. In
DSM-IV and DSM-5, however, the required number of CD
criteria is not explicitly specified.

It is an implicit assumption, supported by empirical research, that personality traits lie
along a continuum (Widiger &
Simonsen, 2005). Accordingly, in the SCID-II (First, 1994), personality traits are rated within one
of three response categories: 1 = not present/do not fulfill; 2 = partly true/subthreshold;
and 3 = personality trait present. IRT provides a means of analyzing how subthreshold scores
may be helpful in assessing ASPD. By using the graded response model, we found that the
scoring of subthreshold criteria did not result in additional/richer information compared
with using Categories 1 and 3 only. Since the current version of the SCID-II is not
accompanied by guidelines as to how subthreshold diagnostic values should be scored, the use
of subthreshold values might have been confounded by how the diagnostic rules were used by
the clinicians participating in this study. For example, it may be that clinicians assessed
the middle category less carefully, since clear guidelines are lacking. Another possibility
is that subthreshold scores may have been used intentionally at times, to avoid setting an
ASPD diagnosis. We suggest that in future versions of the SCID-II, items should either be
rated dichotomously, or there should be clear rules regarding the use of a middle category
(i.e., they should be taken into account in the diagnostic process). A recent study (Huprich, Paggeot, & Samuel, 2015)
used IRT analyses to compare the SCID-II borderline personality disorder scale to the
corresponding scale in the Personality Disorder Interview for DSM-IV
(PDI-IV; Widiger, Mangine, Corbitt,
Ellis, & Thomas, 1995). For both interviews, items are scored on a 3-point
Likert-type scale; but in contrast to the SCID-II, the PDI-IV is accompanied by explicit
scoring guidelines also for the middle category. The middle category takes on a different
meaning in the PDI-IV as compared with how it is treated in the SCID-II, however. The middle
response options from the PDI-IV are verbally most similar to the highest response option
for the SCID-II: They indicate the presence of a criterion, as does the highest response
category of the SCID-II. This was also reflected by the IRT parameters that were found for
the two measures: SCID-II items allowed for higher precision in the subthreshold range,
whereas the PDI-IV items covered a broader range of latent trait values (and thus provided
more information about individuals scoring above the diagnostic threshold as compared with
the SCID-II). Although these findings are highly interesting, and show that the choice of
diagnostic interview can influence how disorders are diagnosed, it is important to keep in
mind that the middle category may not be used in a consistent manner for the SCID-II; which
may have influenced the results.

In the past decades, increased recognition of the limitations of the categorical approach
paired with an increasing body of empirical evidence supporting the continuum approach has
resulted in a call for abandoning the categorical model in favor of a continuous one (Hopwood et al., 2011; Tyrer et al., 2011; Widiger & Simonsen, 2005). In the
alternative DSM-5 model for PDs (APA, 2013), continuous scores are reported in addition
to categorical ones (Skodol, Morey,
Bender, & Oldham, 2015). This approach can be supported by IRT analysis. Taking
our results as an example, one would have information about whether or not the formal
criteria for ASPD were fulfilled as well as to what degree a patient scored relatively high
or low on an antisocial trait/behavior continuum.

In sum, the results of our study suggest that ASPD can be measured with minimal measurement
bias across gender in clinical samples—at least when assessed by experienced clinicians
using the SCID-II. Overall, the SCID-II ASPD items appear to fit the purpose of the
DSM well, that is, differentiating among persons in the upper ranges of
the latent trait continuum (ASPD). If the aim would be to differentiate among individuals
with less severe antisocial personality features, items would have to be added with lower
item threshold values. Finally, we did not find differences in score distributions between
ASPD-CD and ASPD-late onset groups. In other words,
these two groups show similarly high levels of antisocial behavior and antisocial traits,
irrespective of childhood diagnosis of CD.

We wish to thank the patients and staff from the Norwegian Network of Personality-Focused
Treatment Programs for their contribution to this study.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

1. We preferred a fully modeled based approach to DIF assessment over for instance
Mantel–Haenszel tests or logistic regression, as it avoids having to use a proxy
variable for the latent trait scores. Furthermore, the IRT modelling approach to DIF is
generally better understood and studied, and potential DIF findings can be directly
related to the underlying latent dimension(s).
==== Refs
References

American Psychiatric Association . (1968 ). Diagnostic
and statistical manual of mental disorders  (2nd ed. ).
Washington, DC :
Author .

American Psychiatric Association . (1980 ). Diagnostic
and statistical manual of mental disorders  (3rd ed. ).
Washington, DC :
Author .

American Psychiatric Association . (1987 ). Diagnostic
and statistical manual of mental disorders  (3rd rev. ed. ).
Washington, DC :
Author .

American Psychiatric Association . (1994 ). Diagnostic
and statistical manual of mental disorders  (4th ed. ).
Washington, DC :
Author .

American Psychiatric Association . (2013 ). Diagnostic
and statistical manual of mental disorders  (5th ed. ).
Washington, DC :
Author .

Bateman A. O’Connell J. Lorenzini N. Gardner T. Fonagy P.   (2016 ). A randomised controlled trial of
mentalization-based treatment versus structured clinical management for patients with
comorbid borderline personality disorder and antisocial personality
disorder . BMC Psychiatry ,
16 (1 ), 304 .27577562 

Black D. W. Braun D.   (1998 ). Antisocial patients: A comparison of
those with and those without childhood conduct disorder . Annals
of Clinical Psychiatry , 10 (2 ),
53 -57 .9669536 

Bolt D. M. Hare R. D. Vitale J. E. Newman J. P.   (2004 ). A multigroup item response theory
analysis of the Psychopathy Checklist–Revised . Psychological
Assessment , 16 ,
155 -168 .15222812 

Braeken J. van Assen M. A.   (2017 ). An empirical Kaiser
criterion . Psychological Methods , 22 ,
450 -466 . doi:10.1037/met0000074 27031883 

Chalmers R. P.   (2012 ). Mirt: A multidimensional item response
theory package for the R environment . Journal of Statistical
Software , 48 (6 ),
1 -29 .

Chou Y. H. Lee C. P. Liu C. Y. Hung C. I.   (2017 ). Construct validity of the Depression
and Somatic Symptoms Scale: Evaluation by Mokken scale analysis .
Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment , 13 ,
205 -211 . doi:10.2147/ndt.s118825 28182138 

Cooke D. J. Michie C.   (1997 ). An item response theory analysis of
the Hare Psychopathy Checklist–Revised . Psychological
Assessment , 9 (1 ),
3 -14 .

Dolan M. Vollm B.   (2009 ). Antisocial personality disorder and
psychopathy in women: A literature review on the reliability and validity of assessment
instruments . International Journal of Law &
Psychiatry , 32 (1 ),
2 -9 .19042020 

Edens J. F. Kelley S. E. Lilienfeld S. O. Skeem J. L. Douglas K. S.   (2015 ). DSM-5 antisocial personality disorder:
Predictive validity in a prison sample . Law and Human
Behavior , 39 ,
123 -129 .25180763 

Edens J. F. Marcus D. K. Lilienfeld S. O. Poythress N. G. Jr.  (2006 ). Psychopathic, not psychopath:
Taxometric evidence for the dimensional structure of psychopathy .
Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 115 (1 ),
131 -144 .16492104 

Embretson S. E. Reise S.   (2000 ). Item response theory for
psychologists . Mahwah, NJ :
Erlbaum .

First M. B.   (1994 ). Structured clinical interview for DSM-IV Axis
II personality disorders (SCID II) . New York :
New York State Psychiatric Institute .

Garrido L. E. Abad F. J. Ponsoda V.   (2013 ). A new look at Horn’s parallel analysis
with ordinal variables . Psychological Methods ,
18 , 454 -474 . doi:10.1037/a0030005 23046000 

Gelhorn H. L. Sakai J. T. Price R. K. Crowley T. J.   (2007 ). DSM-IV conduct disorder criteria as
predictors of antisocial personality disorder . Comprehensive
Psychiatry , 48 ,
529 -538 .17954138 

Grant B. F. Hasin D. S. Stinson F. S. Dawson D. A. Chou S. P. Ruan W. J. Huang B.   (2005 ). Co-occurrence of 12-month mood and
anxiety disorders and personality disorders in the US: Results from the national
epidemiologic survey on alcohol and related conditions . Journal
of Psychiatric Research , 39 (1 ),
1 -9 .15504418 

Guay J. P. Ruscio J. Knight R. A. Hare R. D.   (2007 ). A taxometric analysis of the latent
structure of psychopathy: Evidence for dimensionality . Journal
of Abnormal Psychology , 116 ,
701 -716 .18020717 

Hare R. D. Neumann C. S.   (2008 ). Psychopathy as a clinical and
empirical construct . Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology , 4 , 217 -246 .
doi:10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.3.022806.091452 

Harford T. C. Chen C. M. Saha T. D. Smith S. M. Hasin D. S. Grant B. F.   (2013 ). An item response theory analysis of
DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for personality disorders: Findings from the national
epidemiologic survey on alcohol and related conditions .
Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, & Treatment ,
4 (1 ),
43 -54 .

Haslam N.   (2003 ). The dimensional view of personality
disorders: A review of the taxometric evidence . Clinical
Psychology Review , 23 (1 ),
75 -93 .12559995 

Holland P. W. Wainer H.   (1993 ). Differential item functioning .
Hillsdale, NJ :
Erlbaum .

Hopwood C. J. Malone J. C. Ansell E. B. Sanislow C. A. Grilo C. M. McGlashan T. H. . . . Morey L. C.   (2011 ). Personality assessment in DSM-5:
Empirical support for rating severity, style, and traits .
Journal of Personality Disorders , 25 ,
305 -320 .21699393 

Huprich S. K. Paggeot A. V. Samuel D. B.   (2015 ). Comparing the Personality Disorder
Interview for DSM-IV (PDI-IV) and SCID-II borderline personality disorder scales: An
item-response theory analysis . Journal of Personality
Assessment , 97 (1 ),
13 -21 . doi:10.1080/00223891.2014.946606 25203418 

Jane J. S. Oltmanns T. F. South S. C. Turkheimer E.   (2007 ). Gender bias in diagnostic criteria for
personality disorders: An item response theory analysis . Journal
of Abnormal Psychology , 116 ,
166 -175 .17324027 

Kaiser H. F.   (1960 ). The application of electronic
computers to factor analysis . Educational and Psychological
Measurement , 20 , 141 -151 .
doi:10.1177/001316446002000116 

Karterud S. Pedersen G. Bjordal E. Brabrand J. Friis S. Haaseth Ø. Haavaldsen G. Irion T. Leirvåg H. Tørum E. Urnes Ø.   (2003 ). Day hospital treatment of patients
with personality disorders. Experiences from a Norwegian treatment research
network . Journal of Personality Disorders ,
17 , 173 –193 . doi:10.1521/pedi.17.3.243.22151 12839098 

Kendler K. S. Aggen S. H. Patrick C. J.   (2012 ). A multivariate twin study of the
DSM-IV criteria for antisocial personality disorder . Biological
Psychiatry , 71 , 247 -253 .
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.05.019 21762879 

Kim-Cohen J. Caspi A. Moffitt T. E. Harrington H. Milne B. J. Poulton R.   (2003 ). Prior juvenile diagnoses in adults
with mental disorder: Developmental follow-back of a prospective-longitudinal
cohort . Archives of General Psychiatry ,
60 , 709 -717 .12860775 

Lenferink A. Effing T. Harvey P. Battersby M. Frith P. van Beurden W. . . . Paap M. C. S.   (2016 ). Construct validity of the Dutch
version of the 12-item Partners in Health Scale: Measuring patient self-management
behaviour and knowledge in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease . PLoS One ,
11 (8 ), e0161595 . doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0161595 27564410 

Maffei C. Fossati A. Agostoni I. Barraco A. Bagnato M. Deborah D. . . . Petrachi M.   (1997 ). Interrater reliability and internal
consistency of the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Personality
Disorders (SCID-II), version 2.0 . Journal of Personality
Disorders , 11 ,
279 -284 .9348491 

Marcus D. K. Lilienfeld S. O. Edens J. F. Poythress N. G.   (2006 ). Is antisocial personality disorder
continuous or categorical? A taxometric analysis . Psychological
Medicine , 36 ,
1571 -1581 .16836795 

Mariani J. J. Horey J. Bisaga A. Aharonovich E. Raby W. Cheng W. Y. . . . Levin F. R.   (2008 ). Antisocial behavioral syndromes in
cocaine and cannabis dependence . American journal of Drug and
Alcohol Abuse , 34 ,
405 -414 .18584570 

Millsap R. E.   (2011 ). Statistical approaches to measurement
invariance . New York, NY :
Routledge .

Moffitt T. E. Arseneault L. Jaffee S. R. Kim-Cohen J. Koenen K. C. Odgers C. L. . . . Viding E.   (2008 ). Research review: DSM-V conduct
disorder: Research needs for an evidence base . Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry , 49 (1 ),
3 -33 .18181878 

Mokken R. J.   (1971 ). A theory and procedure of scale
analysis . The Hague, Netherlands :
Mouton .

Murray A. L. McKenzie K. Murray K. R. Richelieu M.   (2014 ). Mokken scales for testing both pre-
and postintervention: An analysis of the Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation-Outcome
Measure (CORE-OM) before and after counseling . Psychological
Assessment , 26 , 1196 -1204 .
doi:10.1037/pas0000015 25068914 

Orlando M. Marshall G. N.   (2002 ). Differential item functioning in a
Spanish translation of the PTSD checklist: Detection and evaluation of
impact . Psychological Assessment ,
14 (1 ),
50 -59 .11911049 

Pedersen G. Karterud S. Hummelen B. Wilberg T.   (2013 ). The impact of extended longitudinal
observation on the assessment of personality disorders .
Personality and Mental Health , 7 ,
277 -287 . doi:10.1002/pmh.1234 24343977 

Perdikouri M. Rathbone G. Huband N. Duggan C.   (2007 ). A comparison of adults with antisocial
personality traits with and without childhood conduct disorder .
Annals of Clinical Psychiatry , 19 (1 ),
17 -23 .17453657 

Pfohl B. Blum N. Zimmerman M.   (1997 ). Structured Interview for DSM-IV Personality:
SIDP-IV . Washington, DC :
American Psychiatric Press .

R Development Core Team . (2012 ). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing . Vienna,
Austria : R Foundation for Statistical
Computing .

Reise S. P. Revicki D. A.   (2014 ). Handbook of item response theory modeling:
Applications to typical performance assessment . New York,
NY : Routledge .

Reise S. P. Waller N. G.   (2009 ). Item response theory and clinical
measurement . Annual Review of Clinical Psychology ,
5 (1 ), 27 -48 . doi:10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.032408.153553 

Robins L. N.   (1978 ). Sturdy childhood predictors of adult
antisocial behaviour: Replications from longitudinal studies .
Psychological Medicine , 8 ,
611 -622 .724874 

Rosenström T. Ystrom E. Torvik F. A. Czajkowski N. O. Gillespie N. A. Aggen S. H. . . . Reichborn-Kjennerud T.   (2017 ). Genetic and environmental structure of
DSM-IV criteria for antisocial personality disorder: A twin study .
Behavior Genetics , 47 ,
265 -277 .28108863 

Samejima F.   (1996 ). The graded response
model . In van der Linden W. J. Hambleton R. K.   (Eds.), Handbook of modern item response theory  (pp.
85 -100 ). New York, NY :
Springer .

Sheehan D. V. Lecrubier Y. Janavs J. Knapp E. Weiller E. Bonora L. I.   (1994 ). Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview
(MINI) . Tampa : University of
South Florida Institute for Research in Psychiatry and INSERM-Hôpital de la
Salpétrière .

Sijtsma K. Molenaar I. W.   (2002 ). Introduction to nonparametric item response
theory . Thousand Oaks, CA :
Sage .

Skodol A. E. Morey L. C. Bender D. S. Oldham J. M.   (2015 ). The alternative DSM-5 model for
personality disorders: A clinical application . American Journal
of Psychiatry , 172 ,
606 -613 .26130200 

Spitzer R. L.   (1983 ). Psychiatric diagnosis: Are clinicians
still necessary? 
Comprehensive Psychiatry , 24 ,
399 -411 .6354575 

Stewart M. E. Allison C. Baron-Cohen S. Watson R.   (2015 ). Investigating the structure of the
autism-spectrum quotient using Mokken scaling . Psychological
Assessment , 27 , 596 -604 .
doi:10.1037/pas0000058 25664635 

Thissen D. Steinberg L. Wainer H.   (1993 ). Detection of differential item
functioning using the parameters of item response models . In
Holland P. W. Wainer H.   (Eds.), Differential item functioning  (pp.
67 -113 ). Hillsdale, NJ :
Lawrence Erlbaum .

Timmerman M. E. Lorenzo-Seva U.   (2011 ). Dimensionality assessment of ordered
polytomous items with parallel analysis . Psychological
Methods , 16 , 209 -220 . doi:
10.1037/a0023353 21500916 

Torgersen S. Kringlen E. Cramer V.   (2001 ). The prevalence of personality
disorders in a community sample . Archives of General
Psychiatry , 58 ,
590 -596 .11386989 

Trull T. J. Jahng S. Tomko R. L. Wood P. K. Sher K. J.   (2010 ). Revised NESARC personality disorder
diagnoses: Gender, prevalence, and comorbidity with substance dependence
disorders . Journal of Personality Disorders ,
24 , 412 -426 .20695803 

Tyrer P. Crawford M. Mulder R. T. Blashfield R. K. Farnam A. Fossati A. . . . Reed G. M.   (2011 ). The rationale of the reclassificaiton
of personality disorder in the 11th revision of the International Classification of
Disease (ICD-11) . Personality and Mental Health ,
4 , 246 -259 . doi:10.1002/pmh.190 

van den Berg S. M. Paap M. C. S. Derks E. M.   (2013 ). Using multidimensional modeling to
combine self-report symptoms with clinical judgment of schizotypy .
Psychiatry Research , 206 (1 ),
75 -80 .23021911 

Velicer W. F. Eaton C. A. Fava J. L.   (2000 ). Construct explication through factor
or component analysis: A review and evaluation of alternative procedures for determining
the number of factors or components . In Goffin R. D. Helmes E.   (Eds.), Problems and solutions in human assessment: Honoring
Douglas N. Jackson at seventy  (pp. 41 -71 ).
Boston, MA :
Springer .

Walters G. D. Knight R. A.   (2010 ). Antisocial personality disorder with
and without antecedent childhood conduct disorder: Does it make a
difference? 
Journal of Personality Disorders , 24 ,
258 -271 .20420479 

Watson R. van der Ark L. A. Lin L. C. Fieo R. Deary I. J. Meijer R. R.   (2012 ). Item response theory: How Mokken
scaling can be used in clinical practice . Journal of Clinical
Nursing , 21 , 2736 -2746 .
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2702.2011.03893.x 21883577 

Weertman A. Arntz A. Dreessen L. van Velzen C. Vertommen S.   (2003 ). Short-interval test-retest interrater
reliability of the Dutch version of the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV
personality disorders (SCID-II) . Journal of Personality
Disorders , 17 ,
562 -567 .14744081 

Widiger T. A.   (1998 ). Invited essay: Sex biases in the
diagnosis of personality disorders . Journal of Personality
Disorders , 12 ,
95 -118 .9661097 

Widiger T. A. Cadoret R. Hare R. Robins L. Rutherford M. Zanarini M. . . . Frances A.   (1996 ). DSM-IV antisocial personality disorder
field trial . Journal of Abnormal Psychology ,
105 (1 ),
3 -16 .8666708 

Widiger T. A. Mangine S. Corbitt E. M. Ellis C. R. Thomas G. V.   (1995 ). Personality Disorder Interview-IV: A
semi-structured interview for the assessment of personality disorder .
Odessa, FL : Psychological assessment
resources .

Widiger T. A. Simonsen E.   (2005 ). Alternative dimensional models of
personality disorder: Finding a common ground . Journal of
Personality Disorders , 19 ,
110 -130 .15899712 

Zimmerman M. Rothschild L. Chelminski I.   (2005 ). The prevalence of DSM-IV personality
disorders in psychiatric outpatients . American Journal of
Psychiatry , 162 ,
1911 -1918 .16199838 

Zwick W. R. Velicer W. F.   (1986 ). Comparison of five rules for
determining the number of components to retain . Psychological
Bulletin , 99 ,
432 -442 .

