
==== Front
Acad MedAcad MedACMAcademic Medicine1040-24461938-808XPublished for the Association of American Medical Colleges by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 0000710.1097/ACM.0000000000000195Letters to the EditorIn Reply to Drain and Rhatigan: Thompson Darcy A. MD, MPHAssistant professor, Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado; Darcy.Thompson@ucdenver.edu.Hernandez Raquel G. MD, MPHAssistant professor, Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.Cowden John D. MD, MPHAssociate professor, Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Mercy Hospitals and Clinics, Kansas City, Missouri.4 2014 25 2 2014 89 4 531 531 Copyright © 2014 by the Association of American Medical Colleges2014
==== Body
We appreciate the insightful comments from Drs. Drain and Rhatigan regarding our article. Their observation that our findings may overestimate residents’ proficiency with interpreters reemphasizes our study’s central conclusion: that the low rate of education and evaluation on interpreter use, even among residency programs where exposure to individuals with limited English proficiency (LEP) is relatively high, suggests that broad action in this area is needed. We believe that as the population with LEP increases and the striking demand for global health experiences grows,1 the need to uniformly train physicians in interpreter use is substantiated regardless of a program’s local population demographics. Supporting this call for action is our finding that educational sessions on interpreter use during residency are associated with increased resident self-efficacy in this domain. Equally important is a finding reported by Hernandez et al2 that self-efficacy in the overall care of families with LEP is associated with increased resident satisfaction in the care of such families.

We agree with Drain and Rhatigan that training in global health is important and add that interpreter training relates to both the care of individuals with LEP in the United States and to experiences with international populations. Given that training in cross-cultural care is now a residency program expectation,3 we propose that training in the areas of global health and caring for individuals with LEP may have a greater impact when combined in scope. They also may be better accepted and more effective when introduced earlier in training, such as throughout the medical school curriculum.

Darcy A. Thompson, MD, MPH
Assistant professor, Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado; Darcy.Thompson@ucdenver.edu.Raquel G. Hernandez, MD, MPH
Assistant professor, Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.John D. Cowden, MD, MPH
Associate professor, Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Mercy Hospitals and Clinics, Kansas City, Missouri.Disclosures: None reported.
==== Refs
References
1 Association of American Medical Colleges GQ Program Evaluation Survey. All Schools Summary Report. 2013 Washington, DC Association of American Medical Colleges https://www.aamc.org/data/gq/allschoolsreports/ . Accessed December 27, 2013 
2 Hernandez RG  Cowden JD  Moon M  Brands CK  Sisson SD  Thompson DA   Predictors of resident satisfaction in caring for LEP families: A multi-site study. Acad Pediatr 
3 Pediatrics Milestone Project Working Group The Pediatrics Milestone Project. https://www.abp.org/abpwebsite/publicat/milestones.pdf . Accessed December 27, 2013
