
==== Front
Acad MedAcad MedACMAcademic Medicine1040-24461938-808XPublished for the Association of American Medical Colleges by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 0000510.1097/ACM.0000000000000197Letters to the EditorIn Reply to Loh and Lin: Vaduganathan Muthiah MD, MPHSecond-year resident, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.Rassiwala Jasmine Fourth-year medical student, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.Evert Jessica MDExecutive director, Child Family Health International and Clinical Faculty, University of California in San Francisco, Department of Family and Community Medicine, San Francisco, California; jevert@fcm.ucsf.edu.4 2014 25 2 2014 89 4 530 530 Copyright © 2014 by the Association of American Medical Colleges2014
==== Body
We agree with Drs. Loh and Lin regarding reframing current global health experiences and programs to balance the interests of the sending institutions, learners, and the receiving communities. Drs. Loh and Lin reflect upon a pilot program utilizing a “crowdsourcing” model to help coordinate multiple short-term volunteer and educational activities into more cohesive longitudinal efforts. Crowdsourcing may offer a number of potential benefits, including (1) eliminating redundancies and improving efficiency, (2) developing consistent program goals, (3) bridging discontinuity in the provision of local care, and (4) improving innovation with diverse sets of eyes and perspectives. In fact, crowdsourcing has been used effectively across medical fields, especially with the advent of online-based collaboration platforms.1

However, a few pragmatic issues must be considered with this model. Despite common project goals, multiple handoffs between short-term cohorts may fragment attempts at establishing continuity. Even with online-based support, full-time staff from an intermediary organization may still be required to optimize care transitions. Another hurdle is that program evaluation becomes more challenging with increasing numbers of participants and groups. Attempts to create uniform programs may restrict individual sending institutions’ preferences and tailored learning and clinical focus.

Ideally, the integration of historically fragmented efforts by outsiders would not only be coordinated amongst the external actors but also coordinated with the existing health system, even if the system is or appears to be limited in nature. This approach has further benefits by aligning the goals of visitors with local systems’ priorities, workforce realities, and capacities. Likewise, integrating previously disjointed activities into the existing local health system may facilitate local capacity building, helping to ensure that impacts of global health activities endure beyond the duration of short-term outsider presence.2 Regardless of potential limitations, as we attempt to develop contemporary impact-driven global health education and engagement, novel collaborative approaches provide important avenues to harnessing the collective strengths of medical professionals, institutions, and trainees.

Muthiah Vaduganathan, MD, MPH
Second-year resident, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.Jasmine Rassiwala
Fourth-year medical student, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.Jessica Evert, MD
Executive director, Child Family Health International and Clinical Faculty, University of California in San Francisco, Department of Family and Community Medicine, San Francisco, California; jevert@fcm.ucsf.edu.Disclosures: Dr. Jessica Evert is executive director of Child Family Health International (CFHI). As such, she is not independent of one of the organizations discussed in the original article that is subject of these letters. CFHI and other third-party organizations were not directly involved in the reflection sessions detailed in the cited program evaluation.
==== Refs
References
1 Ranard BL  Ha YP  Meisel ZF    Crowdsourcing—harnessing the masses to advance health and medicine, a systematic review. J Gen Intern Med 2014 29 187 203 23843021 
2 Lough BJ  McBride AM  Sherraden MS   Capacity Building Contributions of Short-Term International Volunteers 2010 St. Louis, Mo Washington University, Center for Social Development CSD working paper 10-26
