
==== Front
ASN NeuroASN NeuroASNspasnASN NEURO1759-0914SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 3181812010.1177/175909141988621210.1177_1759091419886212Special Collection on Neurodegenerative DiseasesOriginal PaperAbnormalities in the Motor Unit of a Fast-Twitch Lower Limb
Skeletal Muscle in Huntington’s Disease Valadão Priscila Aparecida Costa 1de Aragão Bárbara Campos 1Andrade Jéssica Neves 1Magalhães-Gomes Matheus Proença S. 1Foureaux Giselle 1Joviano-Santos Julliane Vasconcelos 1Nogueira José Carlos 1Machado Thatiane Cristina Gonçalves 1de Jesus Itamar Couto Guedes 2Nogueira Julia Meireles 1de Paula Rayan Silva 1Peixoto Luisa 1https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7042-9433Ribeiro Fabíola Mara 3Tapia Juan Carlos 4Jorge ÉriKa Cristina 1Guatimosim Silvia 2https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5392-1266Guatimosim Cristina 1
1 Departamento de Morfologia, Universidade Federal de
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
2 Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofísica, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
3 Departamento de Bioquímica e Imunologia, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
4 Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Talca, ChileCristina Guatimosim, Departamento de
Morfologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de
Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais
31270-901, Brazil. Email: cguati@icb.ufmg.br10 12 2019 Jan-Dec 2019 11 17590914198862124 7 2019 8 8 2019 17 8 2019 © The Author(s) 20192019SAGE PublicationsCreative Commons Non Commercial CC BY-NC: This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)
which permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution
of the work without further permission provided the original
work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access
pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).Huntington’s disease (HD) is a disorder characterized by chronic
involuntary movements, dementia, and psychiatric symptoms. It is
caused by a mutation in the gene that encodes for huntingtin protein
(HTT), leading to the formation of mutant proteins expressed in
various tissues. Although brain pathology has become the hallmark for
HD, recent studies suggest that damage of peripheral structures also
contributes to HD progression. We previously identified severe
alterations in the motor units that innervate cervical muscles in
12-month-old BACHD (Bacterial Artificial Chromosome Huntington’s
Disease) mice, a well-established mouse model for HD. Here, we studied
lumbar motoneurons and their projections onto hind limb fast-twitch
skeletal muscles (tibialis anterior), which control balance and gait
in HD patients. We found that lumbar motoneurons were altered in the
HD mouse model; the number and size of lumbar motoneurons were reduced
in BACHD. Structural alterations were also present in the sciatic
nerve and neuromuscular junctions. Acetylcholine receptors were
organized in several small patches (acetylcholine receptor
fragmentation), many of which were partially innervated. In BACHD
mice, we observed atrophy of tibialis anterior muscles, decreased
expression of glycolytic fast Type IIB fibers, and at the
ultrastructural level, alterations of sarcomeres and mitochondria.
Corroborating all these findings, BACHD animals performed worse on
motor behavior tests. Our results provide additional evidences that
nerve–muscle communication is impaired in HD and that motoneurons from
distinct spinal cord locations are similarly affected in the
disease.

BACHD micelumbar spinal cordmotoneuronstibialis anteriorFundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de
Minas Geraishttps://doi.org/10.13039/501100004901APQ-00801-16Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo Científico y
Tecnológicohttps://doi.org/10.13039/5011000028501160888, 1161014cover-dateJanuary-December 2019
==== Body
Introduction
Skeletal muscle loss and dysfunction are found in Huntington’s disease (HD),
which is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder caused by an autosomal
dominant condition leading to motor, cognitive, and psychiatric impairment.
In 1993, the Huntington’s Disease Collaborative Research Group identified a
mutation in the short arm of Chromosome 4, an unstable expansion in the
number of CAG repeats in the huntingtin (HTT) protein (MacDonald et al.,
1993). Historically, HD has been studied in the central nervous system
(CNS), mainly in neurons from the basal ganglia and cerebral cortex (Reiner et al.,
1988; Novak
and Tabrizi, 2010; Reinius et al., 2015).

The discovery of HTT gene mutation opened a new scenario for scientific
research enabling the generation of numerous animal models for the disease
(L. B. Menalled and
Chesselet, 2002; Heng et al.,
2008; L. Menalled et al., 2009; Yang and Gray, 2011). Experiments
performed in these animal models allowed the identification of mutant
huntingtin protein (mHTT) not only in the CNS but also in peripheral
structures, such as skeletal muscles (van der Burg et al., 2009;
Zielonka et al., 2014; Mielcarek et al., 2017). In fact, mouse HD models
exhibited pronounced skeletal muscle atrophy, a pathophysiological finding
that could be due to accumulation of mHTT in skeletal muscles, motoneurons,
or both (Khedraki et al., 2017). This prompted the question of whether a
primary defect in the neuromuscular system contributes to the motor
deterioration observed in patients with HD, independently of the striatal
degeneration (van der
Burg et al., 2009). Consistent with this hypothesis, Ribchester et al.
(2004), using the R6/2 mouse model, identified physiological
and morphological alterations on neuromuscular junctions (NMJs), a result
that suggested a progressive disruption of the communication between
motoneurons and skeletal muscles. However, it is important to note that
these authors did not investigate whether there is denervation in the NMJs
of R6/2 mice.

Recently, using a different mouse model for HD (BACHD), which expresses the
full-length human mHTT in a Bacterial Artificial Chromosome vector, we
reported alterations in cervical motor units (MUs), such as the reduction in
the number and size of motoneurons, axonal degeneration, and fragmentation
of NMJs. Furthermore, marked muscle atrophy and fiber-type switching were
observed in BACHD-sternomastoid (STM) muscles (Valadão et al., 2017). In
addition, we also described abnormal NMJs in the diaphragm of BACHD mice
(Valadão et al., 2018). Nonetheless, the hypothesis that HD may have a more
direct connection with progressive disruption of communication between
motoneurons and skeletal muscles remains poorly explored.

Following the trail initiated in our previous studies, we investigated whether
mHTT-mediated alterations were restricted to cervical motoneurons or spread
over other spinal cord segments like the lumbar segment. This comparison has
clinical importance, because in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, which is a
disease that affects the motoneurons, there are evidences that upper and
lower motor neurons are differently affected during the course of the
disease (Eisen et al.,
1992; Fischer et al., 2004, reviewed by Van den Bos et al.,
2019). Thus, studying two different segments of the spinal cord in the BACHD
animal model, which shows clear loss of motoneurons, is an important study
in the sense of identifying possible differences in these two regions
(cervical and lumbar segments) in this HD model. To this end, we chose to
look at the lumbar spinal cord segment and the MU of the lower hind limb
muscle tibialis anterior (TA). This muscle controls movement and balance
that are severely impaired in HD such as decreased walking speed,
difficulties in starting the steps, and variable pattern of step. In
addition, motor neurons of the lumbar spinal cord segment and TA muscle are
also involved in gait, which is considered to be one of the main factors of
disability in patients with HD (Piira et al., 2013). It is
noteworthy that, with the progression of the disease, the mobility is
affected, increasing the risk of falls and directly impacting the
functionality of the patients who end up needing constant help in their
daily living activities (Koller and Trimble, 1985; Thaut et al., 1999; Wheelock et al.,
2003; Bilney
et al., 2005; Carroll et al., 2015; T. M. Cruickshank et al.,
2015).

In this way, this study adds to our previous work, because the focus now is to
examine another segment of the spinal cord, with motoneurons that are
involved in the innervation of muscle groups with function (TA is
dorsiflexion and inversion of the foot) and composition (predominantly a
fast contraction muscle) different from the STM muscle previously studied by
us.

Materials and Methods
BACHD Mice
All experiments were performed according to the rules established by the
local animal care committee (Ethics Committee on Animal Experiments of
the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG)); approved protocol
#036/2013. All efforts were made to minimize animal suffering and to
reduce the number of animals used. This study was not
preregistered.

The FVB/NJ (wild type [WT]) and FVB/N-Tg (HTT*97Q)IXwy/J (BACHD)
transgenic mice (male) were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Barl
Harbor, ME, USA; JAX stock #008197) and used to establish a new
colony. Mice were held in a place with controlled temperature (23°C)
in a 12–12 hr light–dark cycle. Food and water were provided
ad libitum in an animal care facility of the
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, UFMG. All animals used in
this study were genotyped 10 days after birth using multiplex
polymerase chain reaction (PCR; HTT-forward:
CCGCTCAGGTTCTGCTTTTA/HTT-reverse: GGTCGGTGCAGCGGCTCCTC; actin-forward:
TGGAATCGTGTGGCATCCATCA/actin-reverse: AATGCCTGGGTACATGGGGTA).

The BACHD mouse model, unlike the R6/2 model, expresses the total length
of human mHTT inserted into the Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (Gray
et al., 2018). Compared with the R6/2 model, BACHD has an expressive
vantage, because in addition to presenting behavioral and pathological
characteristics of the disease, it also has the polyglutamine sequence
CAA/CAG in a more stable form, thus the length
of the CAA/CAG repeat in BACHD mice is stable in 97 replicates over
several generations (Yang et al., 1997). In this
way, this model is reliability for the study of long-term phenotypic
characteristics as we did in 12-month-old animals (Yang et al.,
1997; Kazantsev et al., 1999). In addition to these
characteristics, this model has a normal life span with slow disease
progression, allowing more detailed longitudinal studies when compared
with other rapid progression models, such as R6/2, for example (Yang and Gray,
2011).

Animals were identified by numbers according to their genotype (WT or
BACHD). They were separated into mini-isolator cages with a maximum of
four animals per cage. In this study, we used WT and BACHD mice
(weight average for WT = 27.55 g and BACHD = 41.06 g). Using a table
of random numbers, animals were randomly divided into two groups. Our
experiments were performed on 12-month-old WT and BACHD animals, as
previous studies using this model demonstrated pronounced
neurodegeneration in the cerebral cortex and deficits in motor
behavior in mice of this age (Gray et al., 2008; for
review, see Yang
and Gray, 2011). Also, this age corresponds to middle age
in humans, when it is supposed to appear HD symptoms. In addition,
previous work from our research group have shown that 12-month-old
BACHD mice present alterations in cardiac cells and other muscles such
as STM and diaphragm (Valadão et al., 2017, 2018;
Joviano-Santos et al., 2019).

For all experiments involving morphology and immunofluorescence
techniques, mice from both genotypes (WT and BACHD) were deeply
anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine (0.1 mL/20 g) in accordance with
the Ethics Committee on Animal Experiments of the UFMG protocol. All
surgical procedures were described in the appropriated sections. The
experimental procedures were performed in the afternoon and, by the
end of each surgical procedure, the animals were euthanized by an
overdose of anesthetics.

The experimental procedures were performed in the Departments of
Morphology and Pharmacology at the UFMG. The experimental groups
remained constant from the beginning to the end of the study, and the
exact numbers for all experiments are provided in the figure
captions/“Results” section.

Lumbar Spinal Cord Immunofluorescence
All immunofluorescence experiments were performed according to the
protocol described by Valadão et al. (2017). For the
identification of alpha-motoneurons, lumbar spinal cords slices were
stained with choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) antibody (1:100, Cat
#AB1582 RRID: AB_11211009) and with osteopontin (OPN; 1:100,
R&D Systems Cat #MAB14331 RRID: AB_2194980). Lumbar spinal cords (L1–L5
segments) were removed and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 48
hr. Next, the spinal cord segments were kept in 30% sucrose for 24 hr.
Samples were then frozen in isopentane (Sigma-Aldrich), cooled with
liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C. The lumbar spinal cords
cross-sections (30 µm) were cut on a cryostat (Leica CM3050S) and
collected on gelatin-coated slides. The sections were blocked (60 min,
room temperature [RT]) in solution containing 3% bovine serum albumin
(BSA), 5% donkey serum, and 0.1% Triton X-100. Samples were then
incubated overnight at 4°C with the following primary antibodies
diluted in 3% BSA, 5% donkey serum, 5% goat serum: goat anti-ChAT and
mouse anti-OPN. Slides were washed 3 times with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) 1×, and incubated for 2 hr at RT with the secondary
antibodies Alexa 488 donkey antigoat IgG1 for anti-CHAT (1:800,
Molecular Probes Cat.#A-11055 RRID:
AB_142672) and Alexa 488 goat antimouse for anti-OPN
(1: 1,000; Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat. #A-21042 RRID: AB_2535711). Samples were washed 3 times with
PBS 1× and mounted using ProLong® Gold antifade (Thermo Scientific
Invitrogen™). Images were acquired using a 63× oil immersion
(numerical aperture [NA] 1.4) objective attached to a laser-scanning
confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM 510 Meta; Zeiss GmbH, Jena, Germany).
An Argon (488 nm) laser was used for excitation of lumbar spinal cord
slides marked with anti-ChAT and anti-OPN. The Z
series of optical sections were collected at 2.0 µm intervals. All
digital images were quantitatively analyzed using Image J software
(Wayne Rasband, National Institutes of Health [NIH], USA).

Caspase-3 staining in BACHD mice spinal cords lumbar segments (L1–L5) was
performed by immersing the spinal cord in neutral-buffered formalin
for 24 hr. The samples were then dehydrated in ethanol (70%, 80%, 90%,
95%, and 100%), cleared in xylene, embedded in paraffin, and cut (thin
sections—5 μm) using a microtome (model HM335E; Microm, Inc.,
Minneapolis, MN, USA). Nonspecific blockade was performed by
incubation of the samples in a solution containing 2% BSA, 0.1%
Tween-20 for 1 hr in a moist chamber. Samples were incubated with the
primary antibody (1:100 polyclonal rabbit anticaspase-3;
Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) diluted in blocking solution
(overnight at 4°C in a moist chamber) and then washed 3 times with PBS
following incubation with the secondary antibody (1:1,000, Alexa Fluor
488 goat antirabbit; Invitrogen, Eugene, OR, USA) for 1 hr. To allow
nuclei identification, sections were washed 3 times with PBS and
stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (1:1,000; Invitrogen). The
stained sections were imaged using a NIKON ECLIPSE Ti microscope (100×
objective, NA: 1.49). All digital images were quantitatively analyzed
using Image J software (Wayne Rasband, NIH, USA).

To perform the counting of motoneurons marked with CHAT, OPN, and
caspase-3, only those with evident nuclei were measured. As the
motoneurons are variable and not perfect circles, we chose to use the
Feret diameter present in the Image J software
(Feret diameter) to measure the diameter of these cells. This tool
uses mathematical calculations to correct the diameter of figures that
are not totally spherical. In general, it can be defined as the common
base of a group of diameters derived from the distance of two tangents
to the particle contour in a well-defined orientation (Yap et al.,
2013).

NMJ Immunofluorescence and Confocal Microscopy Analysis
Six mice were anesthetized (three per genotype) as previously described
with ketamine/xylazine (0.1 mL/20 g) and transcardially perfused with
ice-cold 4% PFA in 0.1M PBS (PBS; pH 7.4). The TA muscles were
dissected, blocked in 3% BSA + 5% goat serum + 0.5% Triton X-100 for
30 min at RT, and stained with antisynaptotagmin antibody (1:250,
antisynaptotagmin, antimouse, IgG2A, Developmental Studies Hybridoma
Bank [DSHB]; Cat #3H2 2D7 RRID:
AB_528483) in the blocking solution. The samples were
then incubated overnight at 4°C, washed 3 times with PBS, and
incubated for 1 hr at RT with Alexa 555-α-bungarotoxin (α-btx;
1:1,000; Cat# T1175 Molecular Probes; Invitrogen; T1175 RRID: AB_2313931) together with secondary antibody
(1:1,000, Alexa-488 goat antimouse IgG2A; Invitrogen; Cat #A-21141
also A21141 RRID:
AB_141626). The muscles were washed 3 times with PBS
and whole-mounted using Vectashield (Vector Laboratories, Eching,
Germany). Images of NMJs were acquired using a 63× oil immersion (NA:
1.4) objective attached to a laser-scanning confocal microscope (Zeiss
LSM 510 Meta; Zeiss GmbH, Jena, Germany). We used an argon (488 nm)
and helium–neon (He–Ne, 543 nm) lasers to excite the samples. The
Z series optical sections were collected at 2.0
µm intervals, and the whole TA muscle samples were scanned. The nerve
terminals were identified considering their colocalization near the
acetylcholine receptor (AChR) clusters. Images were converted to a
grayscale format (eight bits), and each synaptic element was
individually evaluated. The fragmentation index of the NMJs was
obtained using the particles analysis method described in Valadão
et al. (2017). Briefly, the images were converted into a binary
image pattern and were skeletonized. Next, to describe the
connectivity for each pixel in the image, a histogram was generated
using the BinaryConnectivityClass plugin from ImageJ (Pratt et al.,
2013). We analyzed the degree of fragmentation in pre-
and postsynaptic elements comparing the muscle samples from WT and
BACHD mice. The parameters adopted for fragmentation were defined
according to the evaluation criteria described by Valdez et al.
(2010), which establishes fragmentation by five or more
islands both in the presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes. We
analyzed 50 NMJs for each animal.

Gene Expression Analysis
The TA muscles of five WT and five BACHD mice were frozen in nitrogen,
macerated, and added to 1 mL of TRI Reagent (Sigma) for total RNA
extraction. Posteriorly, 1 μg of RNA was used, following
manufacturer’s recommendations, for cDNA synthesis using the M-MLV
Reverse Transcriptase Kit (Invitrogen). To check for changes in muscle
gene expression that are characteristic of denervation, we studied the
expression level of several genes known to change during denervation.
Measurement of mRNA levels was performed by quantitative PCR
containing 5 μL of iTAq™ Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad), 0.4
μM of each of the primers, 1 μL cDNA diluted 1:10 in water and final
volume adjustment to 10 μL with nuclease-free water. Reactions
occurred at 50°C for 2 min, 95°C for 2 min, and 40 cycles of 94°C for
15 s, 60°C for 15 s, and 72°C for 20 s in the Rotor GeneTM 3000
machine. Target genes (Table S1) tested in this work were as follows:
Cholinergic Receptor Nicotinic Alpha 1 Subunit
(Chrna1), Cholinergic Receptor Nicotinic Gamma
Subunit (Chrng), Growth Differentiation Factor 5
(Gdf5), and RUNX Family Transcription Factor 1
(Runx1). Gene expression was normalized to the
geometric mean of the following selected reference genes: Actin-Beta
(ACTB) and Ribosomal Protein L39 (Rpl39).

Western Blot
To detect synaptotagmin protein in TA muscle nerve endings, 50 mg protein
were separated by SDS-PAGE. The antibody used and its sources are
follows: antisynaptotagmin, antimouse, IgG2A, DSHB, 1: 2,000; Cat #
3H2 2D7 RRID:
AB_528483. The validation data for each antibody were
obtained from the data sheet provided by the company. For
immunodetection, we use improved chemiluminescence (Amersham
Biosciences). Protein levels were expressed as a ratio of optical
densities. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase was used as a
protein loading control.

Morphology and Morphometric Analysis of Sciatic Nerve and TA Muscle
Fibers
The TA muscle was dissected-out and fixed in 4% glutaraldehyde diluted in
PBS (0.2M) for 24 hr at RT. After dehydration in an ascending series
of alcohols (70%, 80%, 90%, 95% 2×), samples were embedded in
glycolmethacrylate resin (Leica) and sectioned (5 μm) in a microtome
(Reichert Jung). Sections from the TA muscle were stained with
toluidine blue Electron Microscopy Sciences(EMS), and the
cross-sectional area (CSA) of individual myofibers imaged using a
light microscope (10× oil objective-Leica DM2500) coupled to a
charge-coupled device (CCD) camera (Leica DFC345FX).

Samples containing the sciatic nerve were histologically analyzed.
Semi-thin cross-sections (300 nm) were obtained and stained with
toluidine blue. Images of whole sciatic nerve cross-sections from WT
and BACHD mice were captured using a 20× objective in a ZEISS Axio
Lab.A1 microscope. The total CSA of the nerve was measured using
ImageJ plugins (NIH), and the total number of axons was counted. Like
the motoneurons, the axons are not perfect circles and we also used
the Feret diameter (described earlier) for the calculation of the
total diameter (axon diameter). To quantify axonal myelination, we
used the G ratio, which was calculated measuring the
axonal inner diameter and dividing it by the outer diameter following
the formula:
G = d/D,
where G is the G ratio,
d is the inner diameter, and D
is the outer diameter (Chau et al., 2000).

TA Muscle Fiber Typing
TA muscle fiber typing was performed according to the protocol described
by Valdez et al.
(2012). TA samples were put in freezing molds covered
with optimum cutting temperature freezing medium
(Easy Path), and fresh frozen in isopentane (Sigma-Aldrich) cooled
with liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C. The mid-belly region of the
TA muscle was cut on a cryostat (Leica CM3050S), and the
cross-sections (10 µm) collected on gelatin-coated slides. Slides
containing muscle sections were then blocked for 30 min at RT with 3%
BSA (Sigma-Aldrich), 5% goat serum (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.1% Triton
X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in PBS 1×. Muscle sections were
incubated overnight at 4°C with the following primary antibodies: Type
1 (1:250, Leica Microsystems Cat# NCL-MHCs RRID:
AB_563898), Type 2A (1:100, DSHB Cat# SC-71 RRID:AB_2147165), Type 2X (1:100, DSHB Cat# BF-35
RRID:AB_2274680, which recognizes all types of
muscles fibers except 2X), and Type 2B (1:100, DSHB Cat# BF-F3
RRID:AB_2266724). All antibodies were diluted in 3%
BSA, 5% goat serum prepared in PBS 1×. Slides were washed 3 times with
PBS 1× and incubated for 1 hr at RT with secondary antibodies Alexa
488 goat antimouse IgG1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat # A-21121
RRID: AB_2535764; it recognizes Type 1, Type 2A, and
Type 2X antibodies) and Alexa 488 goat antimouse IgM (Thermo Fisher
Scientific Cat #A-21042 RRID: AB_2535711 It recognizes Type 2B antibody).
The samples were washed 3 times with PBS 1× and mounted using
VectaShield antifade solution (Vector Laboratories Cat #H-1000
RRID: AB_2336789). Images were acquired using an air
objective (10×, 0.25 NA) in an epi-fluorescence microscope (Leica
DM2500) equipped with a Leica DFC345FX camera and visualized in a
computer. The excitation light came from a 100 W Hg lamp, and an
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) filter cube was used to collect the
emitted light. Whole muscle cross-sections were imaged for analysis.
Each fiber type was expressed as a percentage of the total number of
fibers. Validation for each antibody was obtained from the datasheets
provided by the company. The CSA of individual myofibers from each
fiber type was measured.

Transmission Electron Microscopy
For the ultrastructural studies, we used the protocol previously
described by us (Rodrigues et al., 2013). Briefly, mice were anesthetized
with ketamine/xylazine (0.1 mL/20 g), and the heart left ventricle
perfused with ice-cold modified Karnovsky fixative (4% PFA and 2.5%
glutaraldehyde in 0.1M sodium cacodylate buffer at 4°C) and maintained
in the solution for at least 24 hr at 4°C. Lumbar spinal cord segments
(L1–L5) and TA muscles from WT and BACHD transgenic mice were then
collected. After fixation, samples were washed with cacodylate buffer
(0.1M), cut into several fragments (300 nm), postfixed in reduced
osmium (1% osmium tetroxide containing 1.6% potassium ferrocyanide),
contrasted en bloc with uranyl acetate (2% in
deionized water), dehydrated through an ascending series of ethanol
solutions, and embedded in EPON (epoxy resin). After several days in
the oven at 60°C, the resin blocks were sectioned (50 nm), and the
ultra-thin sections collected on 200 or 300 mesh copper grids and
contrasted with lead citrate. The ultra-thin sections were viewed with
a Tecnai-G2-Spirit FEI/Quanta electron microscope (120 kV
Philips).

To quantify the lipofuscin granules in the motoneurons, we used 30
electron micrographs of the lumbar spinal cord motoneurons for each
genotype (WT, BACHD). The counting was performed using the ImageJ
software plugins (NIH). Data were presented as granules/area using the
GraphPad Prism 6.

Motor Behavioral Tests
We used the test paw print test to examine the pattern of steps of mice
hind limbs during the locomotion (adapted from de Lagrán et al., 2004).
Briefly, the apparatus consisted of a narrow wooden tunnel
(10 × 10 × 70 cm), lined with white paper, containing a dark box at
one of its ends (positive reinforcement) and positioned in an
illuminated room (aversive stimulus). Rodents naturally seek to be
lodged in safer and dimly lit environments, so when the animal were
placed at the end of the corridor opposite the box, they naturally
tended to walk toward it. The hind legs of the animals were previously
painted with nontoxic black ink, so that when walking on paper, the
footprints of their legs were printed/recorded. This procedure was
repeated at least 3 times (three trials) for each animal.

The gait pattern of each animal was recorded through four gait cycles for
each trial and data were expressed as the mean of at least three
trials. A complete gait cycle was previously defined by de Lagrán et al.
(2004), as the distance from one pair of hind legs to the
next pair of hind legs. Three parameters were evaluated: the length
and the width of the step and the size of the step (right and left).
The length of the pitch was measured as the average distance of
locomotion between one leg and the next immediately ahead. The width
was measured as the mean distance between the right and left hind
legs. The length of the stride was considered as the distance between
each cycle (right and left). These variables were expressed in
centimeters.

The data obtained through the behavioral tests were plotted in Microsoft
Excel® and converted to graphical representations through the program
GraphPad Prism 7.0 (San Diego, CA, USA).

Spontaneous locomotor activity was evaluated by means of an automatic
open field (LE 8811 IR Motor Activity Monitors Panlab/Harvard
Apparatus), with acrylic box dimensions 450 × 450 × 200 mm
(width × depth × height; Pereira et al., 2014). The
WT and BACHD animals were habituated in the behavioral testing room
for the minimum time of 60 min. The activities detected in the
horizontal plane (distance traveled and mean velocity) were measured
for 60 min. The measure of activity total was calculated using the
ACTITRACK program, and the statistical analyses were performed using
GraphPad Prism 6 software.

The wire hang test is a measure of the force muscle (fore and hind limbs)
analysis in rodents, and the experiments were conducted according to
protocol described by Sango et al. (1996) and
Prado et al.
(2006). The animals were accustomed to the experimental
room and manipulated by the researcher at least 2 hr before of the
test. The apparatus used consisted of a metal grid with spacing of 1
cm between the 0.8 mm diameter bars. The test was conducted in a
single session in which the animal was individually placed on the grid
until the hold. The grid was then inverted and maintained at 20 cm
above a foam. It is important to note that this height is sufficient
for the animal to remain attached to the grid; however, it is unable
to injure it in the event of fall. The latency, which is the time
until the animal disengaged and fell off the inverted grid for 60 s
observation, was measured, and three observations per animal were
considered. It is important to emphasize that we use time/weight (time
corrected for weight), because the BACHD mice presented weight gain,
and for this reason, we corrected the time spent in the apparatus by
the weight of the animal. The time was counted in seconds and the
weight in grams.

The grip strength test was performed according to Fowler et al. (2002). To
this end, the power transducer was connected to a small metal bracket
that could be grasped by the mouse. The force transducer was coupled
to a computer that recorded the maximum grip force in fore limbs
exerted by the mouse. The animals were used to the test room and
handled by only one researcher.

During the test, the experimenter gently manipulated the animals by the
tail to allow adhesion of the animal with the front legs to the
apparatus maintaining the body of the animal parallel to the surface.
After holding for 2 s in this position, the experimenter continuously
increased the force until the animals lost their grip. The peak of the
force automatically recorded at the time the animals lost their
adhesion was recorded and expressed in grams/force (g/f). The test was
performed 3 times for each animal for a maximum period of 60 s. The
mean values of three trials were calculated for each animal and used
for further analysis.

Statistical Analysis
We used Microsoft Excel for analyses and all data were plotted using the
program GraphPad Prism 6. For data with normal distribution, values
were represented as the standard error of the mean. Statistical
significance was evaluated using the unpaired Student’s
t test. As described earlier, when data were
not normally distributed, values were represented as the median, and
the Mann–Whitney test was used to evaluate statistical significance.
Values of p < .05 were considered statistically
significant. Exact p values were provided in the
figure captions. During analysis, the investigators were blinded for
both animal genotype and experimental group. A specific number was
assigned to each of the genotyped animals, and the identifier was
announced to the researchers only all the analyses were completed.

In this work, we used a minimum of three animals per genotype for each
data set to obtain statistical difference with 95% of confidence
(a = 0.05) and 0.8 power. The exact
n for each experimental procedure is described
in the figures’ captions.

Results
Lumbar Spinal Cord Motoneurons Are Reduced in Size and Number and Are
Caspase Positive in BACHD Mice
Reduced lower limb muscle strength has been described in HD patients and
this contributes significantly to mobility and balance problems in HD
(Busse
et al., 2008; T. Cruickshank et al., 2014).
Herein, we investigated whether the lumbar spinal cord motoneurons
that innervate lower limb muscles are affected in 12-month-old BACHD
mouse model for HD.

We began by investigating the number, size, and morphology of the
motoneurons from the ventral spinal cord lumbar segments (L1–L5).
Figure 1(a) and
(b) shows representative images of ChAT-positive (a
motoneuron marker) neurons located in the ventral portion of the
lumbar segments of the spinal cord of WT and BACHD animals,
respectively. Quantitative analysis of ChAT-positive neurons showed a
significant decrease in the total number of ChAT-positive cells in the
lumbar segments of BACHD animals when compared with WT animals (BACHD:
142.0 ± 8.0 number; WT: 178.0 ± 17.6 number, mean ± standard deviation
[SD]; T4 = 3.3;
*p < .02; Figure 1(e)). We also noticed
a significant decrease in the diameter of these neurons, with
ChAT-positive-BACHD neurons being smaller than WT (BACHD: 23.7 ± 2.0
µm; WT: 28.3 ± 1.4 µm [mean ± SD];
T4 = 3.1;
*p < .03; Figure 1(f)). A similar trend
in number and size was observed when the antibody against OPN (a
specific marker for alpha motoneuron type) was used in the lumbar
spinal cord segments. A statistically significant decrease in the
number (BACHD: 80.5 ± 25.3 number; WT: 131.0 ± 31.4 number
[mean ± SD];
T6 = 2.5; *p < .02)
and diameter (BACHD: 30.2 ± 2.3 µm; WT: 35.1 ± 0.6 µm;
T4 = 3.5;
*p < .02) of OPN-positive neurons was observed in
BACHD mice compared with WT (Figure 1(g) and (h)).

Figure 1. Atrophy in BACHD lumbar motoneurons. Representative images of
motoneurons from lumbar spinal cord sections stained with
ChAT from 12-month-old WT (a) and BACHD (b) animals. Scale
bar: 50 µm. Fluorescence images of putative motoneurons
stained with caspase-3 in WT (c) and BACHD (d—white
arrows). Nuclei were stained with
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. Insert: putative
motoneurons positive for caspase-3 in BACHD. Scale bar: 50
µm. (e) and (g) Quantification of ChAT- and OPN-positive
motoneurons profiles in WT and BACHD lumbar spinal cords
(∼150 neurons analyzed per genotype). Feret diameter for
CHAT (f) and for OPN (h) (unpaired Student’s
t test;
*p < .05; n = 3
animals per genotype). Ultrastructure images showing a
motoneuron with more lipofuscin granules (red arrows) in
BACHD (j) compared with WT (i). (k and l) Representative
images normal and vacuolated mitochondria in WT and BACHD,
respectively. Scale bar: 500 nm. (m) Graphical
quantification of motoneurons stained positively for
caspase-3 in WT and BACHD (∼150 neurons analyzed per
genotype; unpaired Student’s t test;
**p < .002;
n = 3 animals per genotype).
N: Quantification of the number of
lipofuscin granules/area in WT and BACHD motoneurons
(total from 30 motoneurons per genotype; unpaired
Student’s t test;
p = .4; n = 3 animals
per genotype). All results described here are from
n = 3 individual animals per
genotype and were expressed as mean ± SD.
ChAT = choline acetyltransferase; WT = wild type.

It is possible that BACHD ChAT/OPN-positive neurons were dying at 12
months old. Thus, we immunostained lumbar spinal cord sections (40 µm)
of BACHD and WT animals for caspase-3 to investigate whether these
motoneurons were undergoing apoptosis. Figure 1(c) shows
representative images of WT lumbar segments incubated with the
antibody anticaspase-3. Very little caspase staining was observed in
all WT lumbar sections. On the other hand, lumbar spinal cord sections
of BACHD animals showed a clear presence of caspase-3 labeling with
the majority was in ventral horn neurons, mostly in motoneurons (white
arrows; Figure
1(d)). These observations were confirmed by quantitative
analyses of several lumbar spinal cord sections for both genotypes
(BACHD: 65.6 ± 8.3 number; WT: 27.0 ± 4.3 number
[mean ± SD];
T4 = 7.1; **p < .002;
Figure
1(m)). Overall, these results indicate that the
activation of the apoptotic cascade can be part of the degenerative
changes seen in motoneurons of BACHD animals.

We next asked if motoneurons from BACHD lumbar spinal cord presented any
abnormal feature at the ultrastructure level. Qualitative analysis of
electron micrographs showed that typical motoneurons in WT animals
were large in size (Figure 1(i)), whereas motoneurons from BACHD animals
looked significantly smaller (Figure 1(j), compare with
Figure
1(i)). At the subcellular level, we observed
abnormalities in the mitochondria from BACHD lumbar spinal cord
motoneurons, such as cristae disruption and presence of vacuoles
(Figure
1(l), yellow arrows), whereas in WT animals, this
organelle was well preserved (Figure 1(k)). We also
identified the presence of lipofuscin granules in motoneurons from
BACHD (Figure
1(j)) and WT (Figure 1(i)) animals (red
arrows). However, the number of these granules was not significantly
different between the genotypes (BACHD: 0.17 ± 0.05 µm2;
WT: 0.17 ± 0.03 µm2 [mean ± SD];
T4 = 0.08; p = .4;
Figure
1(n)).

Abnormalities in Sciatic Nerve and NMJs From BACHD Mice
We next performed histological analysis of the sciatic nerve, which
projects to the lower hind limb TA muscle (Figure 2(a) and (b)). We
found statistically significant differences in the following
morphological parameters between BACHD and WT mice: (i) axon diameter
(BACHD: 10.9 ± 3.5 µm; WT: 11.4 ± 4.02 µm [median];
**p < .001) (e); (ii) axoplasm diameter
(BACHD: 6.8 ± 2.6 µm; WT: 7.5 ± 2.8 µm [median];
***p < .0001) (f), and (iii) G
ratio (BACHD: 0.65 ± 0.06; WT: 0.61 ± 0.07 [median];
****p < .0001) (h). However, no significant
differences were observed between WT and BACHD sciatic nerves in terms
of nerve area (c), number of axons per area (d), and myelin thickness
(g).

Figure 2. BACHD mice present alterations in sciatic nerve morphology.
(a and b) Representative images of transversal sections of
the sciatic nerve from 12-month-old WT and BACHD mice,
respectively. Note the difference between the size of the
axons on inserts in (a; WT) and (b; BACHD). Scale bar: 10
μm. Quantification of nerve area (c), number of axons per
nerve area (d), axon’s diameter (e;
**p < .001; Mann–Whitney test),
axoplasm diameter (***p < .0001;
Mann–Whitney test; f), myelin thickness (g),
G ratio
(G = d/D,
where G is the G ratio,
d is the inner diameter, and
D is the outer diameter;
****p < .0001; Mann–Whitney
test; h). n = 3 animals per group. We
analyzed 2.874 axons in WT and 2.573 in BACHD. Unpaired
Student’s t test,
p > .05 (c and d). WT = wild type.

To determine whether the sciatic nerve abnormalities described earlier
were accompanied by changes in the innervation of the TA muscle, the
NMJs of both genotypes were pre- and postsynaptically stained with
synaptotagmin and α-btx, respectively. Figure 3(a) and (b) shows
representative images of presynaptic nerve terminals stained with
Alexa 488 antisynaptotagmin antibodies from WT and BACHD TA muscles,
respectively. Figure
3(a’) (WT) and (b’) (BACHD) shows the postsynaptic AChRs
stained with Alexa 555 α-btx. Figure 3(a’’) (WT) and (b’’)
(BACHD) shows the merge of both green and red signals. Figure 3(c) and
(d) shows the graphic representation of the particle
analysis for NMJs fragmentation. Figure 3(c’) and (d’) shows
the skeletonization process of the NMJs.

Figure 3. NMJs from TA muscles are partially denervated and fragmented
in BACHD mice. (a and b) Representative images of TA NMJs
obtained from 12-month-old WT and BACHD mice. (a and b)
Presynaptic terminals labeled with an Alexa-488
antisynaptotagmin antibody (green). (a’ and b’)
Postsynaptic AChRs labeled with Alexa-555 α-btx (red).
(a’’ and b’’): merged images. Scale bar: 50 μm. (c and d):
representation of particle analysis for both genotypes
(red numbers). (c’ and d’): skeletonization rendering of
fragmentation in endplates from WT and BACHD. Graphs
showing the degree of colocalization (e)
(*p = .02; unpaired Student’s
t test); partial denervation (f)
(***p = .0007 unpaired Student’s
t test); presynaptic area (g)
(***p = .0002; Mann–Whitney test);
postsynaptic area (h) (p > .05;
Mann–Whitney test); and fragmentation of the endplates (i)
(**p = 0.001; unpaired Student’s
t test). The results represent the
mean ± SD from 50 NMJs per
genotype; n = 3 individual animals per
genotype. (j) Graphs showing higher expression of
synaptotagmin in the TA muscle of BACHD mice. GAPDH was
used as a control for protein loading. Densitogram
analysis shows the normalized expression of synaptotagmin
(Synt2a/GADPH) from WT and BACHD mice. The results
described here are from n = 5 animals per
genotype and expressed as mean ± SD.
Unpaired Student’s t test,
*p = .04. Quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction showing the expression of
chrna1 (k), chrng
(l), Gdf5 (m), and runx1
(n) from TA muscle of WT and BACHD mice
(n = 5 per genotype group).
Unpaired Student’s t test,
p > .05. Gene expression was
normalized to the geometric mean of the following selected
reference genes: β-actin and Rpl39. GAPDH = glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase; WT = wild type.

We found abnormal features in BACHD TA such as (i) loss of colocalization
between pre- and postsynaptic elements (BACHD: 87.5 ± 0.8%; WT:
93.1 ± 1.2% [mean ± SD];
T4 = 3.6; *p = .02;
Figure
3(e)); (ii) NMJs partial denervation were identified
considering their colocalization with nAChR clusters (BACHD:
27.6 ± 2.0%: WT: 5.6 ± 1.2% [mean ± SD];
T4 = 9.3;
***p = .0007; Figure 3(f)); (iii) decreased
presynaptic terminal area (BACHD: 1,231 ± 886 µm2; WT:
1,761 ± 964 µm2 [median]; ***p = .0002),
but not in postsynaptic area (Figure 3(g) and (h)); and
(iv) pronounced fragmentation of AChRs (BACHD: 85.6 ± 7.6
µm2; WT: 47.6 ± 3.5 µm2
[mean ± SD];
T4 = 7.8; **p = .001;
Figure
3(i)). We examined by western blot the expression of
synaptotagmin (a presynaptic marker) in WT and BACHD to confirm that
the partial denervation seen was not due to decrease in synaptotagmin
expression and BACHD animals at 12 months of age. We observed that the
expression of synaptotagmin is even higher in the BACHD TA muscle than
in the TA muscle of the WT animals (BACHD: 1.5 ± 0.4: WT: 1.0 ± 0.2
[mean ± SD];
T8 = 2.4; *p = .04; Figure 3(j)).
We also study the expression level of several genes known to change
during denervation like Chrna1 (Yu and Hall, 1991; Ibebunjo et al.,
2013), chrng, Gdf5 (Sartori et al.,
2013) and Runx1(Zhu et al., 1994).
Interestingly, we observed that there was no difference in any of the
genes tested (Figure
3(k) to (n)).

All abnormalities described earlier were augmented in BACHD NMJs but were
absent or present only in few cases in WT NMJs. All these analyses
provided evidence of the degenerative process that is taking place at
the NMJs of TA muscles from BACHD animals.

BACHD TA Muscle Fibers Are Atrophic, With Fiber-Type Switching and
Show Signs of Degeneration at the Ultrastructure Level
We investigated whether TA muscles, innervated by motoneurons from lumbar
spinal cord segments, were affected in BACHD mice. To address this,
cross-sections of TA muscles were stained with toluidine blue. Figure 4(a) and
(b) shows representative images of TA muscle fibers from
WT and BACHD animals, respectively. Quantitative analysis showed that
the CSA of TA muscle fibers was smaller in BACHD mice compared with WT
(Figure
4(k); BACHD: 1,535 ± 820.4 µm2; WT:
1,965 ± 7,794 µm2 [median];
****p < .0001). Ultrastructural analyses showed
that WT-TA muscle fibers presented normal looking organelles such as
mitochondria, well-preserved sarcomeres, triads, and myofibrils
(yellow rectangle, Figure 4(e)). However, the BACHD-TA muscle fibers were
different in structure, showing severely disorganized sarcomeres
(Figure
4(f)—dotted area). Figure 4(g) shows an enlarged
view of the dotted area indicated in Figure 4(f). Here, we
observed atypical amounts of intermyofibrillar glycogen (red arrow),
loss of alignment among the sarcomeres (blue arrows), and invasion of
the sarcoplasmic reticulum onto the myofibrils region (yellow
asterisk). In addition, large vacuoles within the mitochondrial matrix
were observed in the mitochondria of BACHD muscle fibers, a feature
typically present in mitochondria enrolled in degeneration (Figure 4(h) to
(j)).

Figure 4. Muscle atrophy, muscle fiber switching and ultrastructural
abnormalities in BACHD. (a and b) Representative images of
TA skeletal muscle fibers from 12-month-old WT and BACHD
mice. Scale bar: 50 μm. (c to c’’’) and (d to d’’’)
Representative images of TA fiber typing from 12-month-old
WT and BACHD mice. Scale bar: 50 μm. (e to j)
Representative electron micrographs of TA fibers from WT
and BACHD animals. Observe a normal triad in WT (e, yellow
box). (g) High-magnification view of the area in (f)
showing marked glycogen accumulation in the
intermyofibrillar spaces (red arrows), sarcoplasmic
reticulum enlargement (yellow asterisk) and Z-line
discontinuity (blue arrows) in BACHD animals. (h to j)
Observe profound mitochondrial changes (green arrows).
Scale bar: 500 nm. We analyzed 90 images per genotype from
six individual animals (three per genotype). (k)
Quantitative analysis shows the CSA mean values for WT and
BACHD TA muscle fibers. These results represent the
mean ± SD of more than 4.000 muscle
fibers per genotype (*p < .04;
unpaired Student’s t test;
n = 3 animals per genotype). (l)
Quantitative analysis of the fiber typing showing
decreased number of IIB isoform and increase of IIX in
BACHD TA muscle fibers compared with WT
(*p = .01 and
*p = .02; unpaired Student’s
t test; n = 3
animals per genotype). (m) Quantitative analysis of the
CSA from fiber typing (*p = .03; unpaired
Student’s t test; n = 3
animals per genotype). The results represent the
mean ± SD (unpaired Student’s
t test,
*p < .05; n = 3
animals per genotype). CSA = cross-sectional area;
WT = wild type.

Next, we investigated whether the BACHD muscle atrophy could be
associated to changes in myosin heavy chain (MyHC) isoforms
expression. To evaluate this, we used immunostaining for different
fiber types through specific monoclonal antibodies against various
MyHC isoforms. The top panel represents staining for Type I (Figure 4(c)),
Type IIA (Figure
4(c’)), Type IIX (Figure 4(c’’)), and Type IIB
(Figure
4(c’’’)) isoforms of muscle fibers from WT animals. The
bottom panel shows the same staining but in this case for muscle
fibers from BACHD animals (Figure 4(d’) to (d’’’)).
Quantitative analysis from individual animals showed a statistically
significant decrease in the number of Type IIB fibers (BACHD:
35.4 ± 5.1%; WT: 46.8 ± 4.0% [mean ± SD];
T6 = 3.4;
*p < .01) and an increase in the number of Type
IIX muscle fibers (BACHD: 48.3 ± 8.3%; WT: 32.5 ± 5.9%
[mean ± SD];
T4 = 3.0; *p < .02) in
BACHD TA muscles (Figure 4(l)). Figure 4(m) shows that muscle
fibers positive for Type IIX and Type IIB isoforms presented a
decrease in fiber size (IIX: BACHD: 381.5 ± 171.9 µm2; WT:
414.5 ± 173.3 µm2 [mean ± SD];
T61 = 2.3;
*p < .03; IIB: BACHD: 634.3 ± 238.6
µm2; WT: 672.3 ± 243.7 µm2
[mean ± SD];
T70 = 2.0;
*p < .03).

Impaired Motor Behavior in BACHD Mice
Based on the nerve–muscle alterations described earlier, we examined if
BACHD mice indeed showed motor impairment. To assess the motor
performance, mice from both genotypes were subjected to the following
tests: paw print, wire hanging, grip strength, and open field.
Regarding the paw print test data, we did not find significant
differences between WT and BACHD for any of the evaluated standards:
step length, step width, and right/left pass (Figure 5(a) to (d)). In the
open-field test, BACHD mice showed a significant decrease in
exploratory behavior. For example, the average distance traveled by
BACHD mice was significantly shorter than the distance traveled by the
WT mice (BACHD: 133.1 ± 59.8 cm; WT: 276.4 ± 94.6 cm
[mean ± SD];
T26 = 4.92; p < .001;
Figure
5(a)). In addition, the BACHD mice scored worse than WT
regarding the mean velocity traveled (BACHD: 0.10 ± 0.30 cm/s; WT:
0.22 ± 0.07 cm/s [mean ± SD];
T26 = 5.52;
p < .001; Figure 5(b)). The wire
hanging task revealed that BACHD mice presented more difficulty in
sustaining their weight, while most WT mice kept hold of the grid over
the entire duration of the test (60 s; BACHD: 0.4 ± 0.09 s; WT:
1.4 ± 0.09 s [mean ± SD];
T27 = 7.2;
p < .0001; Figure 5(c)). However, we did
not observe significant differences in the grip strength test between
the two genotypes BACHD and WT mice (i.e., test to compare maximum
strength; Figure
5(d)).

Figure 5. Motor behavior alterations in BACHD. (a to d) Graphical
quantification of pattern of gait of WT and BACHD mice.
(a) Length of the step (p = .54; unpaired
Student’s t test). (b) Step width
(p = .51; unpaired Student’s
t test). (c) Length of the rigth
(p = .07; unpaired Student’s
t test). (d) Length of the left
(p =.70; unpaired Student’s
t test). (e) Graphical
quantification of the total distance traveled by WT and
BACHD mice, showing hypoactivity in transgenic animals
(time/weigth = time corrected for weight)
(***p < .01; unpaired Student’s
t test). (f) Graphical
quantification of the average speed traveled by both
genotypes with a decrease in BACHD animals
(time/weigth = time corrected for weight)
(**p < .001; unpaired Student’s
t test). (g) Graphical
quantification of the total time the animals kept holding
their own weight in the test apparatus (time/weigth = time
corrected for weight) (***p = .0001;
unpaired Student’s t test). (h) Maximum
force quantification in the test of grip strength exerted
by WT animals and BACHD when a constant and opposite force
is applied (p = .39; unpaired Student’s
t test). The results express the
mean ± SD from 11 WT and 17 BACHD
animals. GAPDH = glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase;
WT = wild type.

Discussion
Although HD is mostly described as a neurological disorder, there is growing
evidence that a peripheral pathology participates in disease progression
(Ribchester
et al., 2004; van der Burg et al., 2009;
Mielcarek, 2015). Indeed, HTT is normally expressed at high levels in a wide
variety of mammalian tissues (Li et al., 1993) and pathological aggregates
of high-molecular weight HTT have been found in many non-CNS tissues
including skeletal muscle (Moffitt et al., 2009). Recently,
we have showed that MUs of a neck muscle (STM) from BACHD mice presented
morphological alterations in all its components, that is, motoneurons,
axons, NMJs, and muscle fibers (Valadão et al., 2017).
Nevertheless, the connection between HD and the progressive disruption of
communication between motoneurons and skeletal muscles remains poorly
explored. Thus, in this study, we investigated whether similar changes were
also present in MUs of the hind limb muscles such as the TA, which is
controlled by lumbar spinal cord segments and afflicted by many degenerative
disorders, including HD.

Previous works from other groups reported changes in NMJs and muscles in R6/2
mouse model for HD that could be related to motoneurons degeneration (Ribchester et al.,
2004; Mielcarek and Isalan, 2015; Khedraki et al., 2017). However,
these authors did not look at the spinal cords to address whether
motoneurons were indeed affected in R6/2 mice. In our previous work using
the BACHD mouse model for HD, we examined this hypothesis. We observed that
CHAT-positive neurons from BACHD cervical spinal cord segments were
significantly fewer (∼20%) and smaller in size than those in WT mice (Valadão et al.,
2017). In the current work, we showed, in another segment of
the spinal cord (lumbar, L1–L5), that ChAT-positive neurons from BACHD
lumbar segments were also fewer (motoneurons number) and smaller (cell soma
diameter) compared with WT mice. Comparatively, these results show similar
pathological changes among cervical and lumbar spinal cord segments in BACHD
mice of the same age, suggesting that both spinal cord segments (cervical
and lumbar) undergo the same degree of impairment.

As in the cervical spinal cord segments (Valadão et al., 2017), here we
observed that BACHD lumbar spinal cords present approximately 3 times more
motoneurons positive for caspase-3 when compared with equivalent WT spinal
segments. Although it is not completely clear whether the neuronal death
seen in HD is due solely to apoptotic process, several lines of evidence
indicate that the activation of specific pathways can lead to neuronal death
(Hickey and
Chesselet, 2003). In fact, Gervais et al. (2002),
demonstrated that one of the neuronal death pathways in HD occurs through
the interaction of mHTT with specific molecules that activate caspase-8,
which in turns lead to mitochondrial alterations with consequent activation
of caspase-3, culminating in cell death by apoptosis.

The qualitative analysis of electron micrographs of putative motoneurons (large
ventral horn neurons) from BACHD animals presented herein revealed
mitochondria with changes such as destruction of mitochondrial cristae and
vacuoles. These subcellular changes were similar to those identified in
BACHD cervical motoneurons (Valadão et al., 2017). In
addition, we observed lipofuscin granules in both lumbar genotypes WT and
BACHD. However, this observation was different from the cervical segments
where we detected almost 3 times more lipofuscin granules in BACHD compared
with WT (Valadão et al.,
2017). Studies using transmission electron microscopy to
evaluate damages in the brain of HD patients have pointed out morphological
alterations such as mitochondria with damaged cristae, occasionally
containing crystalline fibrillar structures within the matrix and increase
in lipofuscin granules (Tellez-Nagel et al., 1974; Goebel et al., 1978). Moreover,
it has been shown that the relationship of mHTT with mitochondrial
components leads to changes in its structure (Bossy-Wetzel et al.,
2008; Song
et al., 2011; Shirendeb et al., 2012).

Although we observed a decrease in the number of motoneurons, interestingly,
the number of axons is not altered in BACHD animals. However, we have shown
changes in both the axon and axoplasm diameter, which leads us to believe
that these changes might be an earlier step in the process of total axonal
degeneration.

Our results also showed changes in the NMJs of TA muscles at 12 months old in
the BACHD animals. In this muscle, we identified a significant decrease in
presynaptic element area, but not in the postsynaptic element, which may be
explained by an initial denervation process, as we also observed locations
where there was a lack of overlap between the presynaptic terminal and
nAChR.

Furthermore, we identified significant fragmentation of NMJs of BACHD animals
but little in control animals. Although recent data show that the
age-fragmentation process is not directly related to function (Willadt et al.,
2016), we believe that our data may indicate that structural
changes such as fragmentation are due to the genotype and not just related
to age because the animals evaluated were of the same age. It is known that
mHTT interacts with cytoskeletal synaptic vesicles proteins that are
essential for the structure of NMJs and for exocytosis and endocytosis of
synaptic vesicles at the nerve terminals (Li and Li, 2004; see review by
Zuccato et al.,
2010). Except for postsynaptic area size, which was not
statistically different for the TA muscle, all these morphological changes
were also observed in NMJs of STM muscle from 12-month-old BACHD animals.
This comparison is useful because we are dealing with NMJs of two
distinctive muscle groups that are affected differently in animals of the
same age in the BACHD murine model for HD.

We do not observe changes in the number of axons in the sciatic nerve, despite
the significant changes in the axons diameter. This result seems contrary to
the loss of motoneurons (∼20%) observed in the lumbar segments of the BACHD
mice. There are several plausible explanations for this difference. It is
possible that axonal degeneration is a much slower process than the caspase
labeling observed at the spinal cord. This possibility finds support in the
fact that axons stay for much longer than motoneurons, a phenomenon
previously observed in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis disease, which is
consistent with the lower number of partial denervation observed (10%).
Another possibility is that the remaining motoneurons, the caspase negative,
are able to produce new branches, which should travel within the nerve.
These extra branches should account for a higher number of axons at the
sciatic nerve level. As they are ramifications from the main axonal branch,
most of the new branches should be smaller in size. This is consistent with
the variability in axonal diameter observed in our sciatic nerve
analysis.

Overall, our results do not show significant differences in terms of expression
for any of the genes examined. It is possible that the level of partial
denervation observed in BACHD mice, which accounts for about ∼10% of the
junctions of the TA muscle, is not enough to induce significant changes in
the expression of the genes selected. It may also be possible that diverse
signaling pathways are still in place controlling the expression of these
genes. Whatever the case, these questions do not fall within the scope of
our work. Our results also show that there is no decrease in synaptptagmin
protein in NMJs of BACHD mice; on the contrary, this protein is
overexpressed in these animals. These results reinforce that our denervation
data were not due to possible alterations in the expression of the
synptotagmin protein.

Another interesting finding is the change observed in skeletal muscle fibers of
the TA muscle from BACHD mice. First, we observed a decrease in CSA in
muscle fibers of BACHD animals suggesting muscle atrophy. A reduction in the
total number of fibers could also have contributed to muscle fiber atrophy
in the BACHD mouse. Indeed, it is well described that muscle atrophy is a
common factor in HD (Farrer and Meaney, 1985; Ribchester et al., 2004; Farrer, 2008).
Another point to be considered is the deleterious effects of mHTT in muscle
fibers of R6/2 mice (Sathasivam et al., 1999; Moffitt et al., 2009). The
BACHD-STM muscle also showed atrophy of muscle fibers (Valadão et al., 2017). However,
the atrophy seen in the BACHD-TA muscle was smaller compared with BACHD-STM
muscle. However, the STM muscle has higher variability in fiber size mainly
because it has mixed features of contractility, consisting of fast and slow
fibers. In contrast, the TA muscle is a fast-twitch muscle, usually
presenting about 87% of fast fiber Type IIB muscle fibers (Bloemberg and
Quadrilatero, 2012).

Previous studies revealed that muscle atrophy could be accompanied by changes
in expression of MyHC (Brown and Hasser, 1996; Carvalho et al., 2003; Rice et al.,
2005; Valadão
et al., 2017). Here, we show that the number of Type IIB muscle
fibers was reduced in BACHD mice, indicating that the general atrophy seen
in this muscle relates to a change in MyHC isoform because in TA muscle,
Type IIB fibers are predominant (Bloemberg and Quadrilatero, 2012).
These data are in agreement with the work of Miranda et al. (2017) in which
they showed the same pattern of transition of the type of fiber in the TA
muscle of animals R6/2; however, these authors did not investigate the
protein expression of MyHC, showing these changes only at the mRNA level
through the quantitative PCR technique. Besides that, we had already
identified changes in the expression pattern of MyHC in the STM muscle with
changes of Type IIX muscle fibers was reduced in BACHD mice (Valadão et al.,
2017). Together, these results indicate that the atrophy seen
in both muscles was accompanied by alterations in the expression of MyHC,
differing only in the affected fast fiber type. The MyHC shift from Type IIB
to Type IIX seen in BACHD TA muscle might be explained by the observation
that, in denervated muscles, there is a change in the expression pattern of
the faster isoforms for the slower isoforms (d’Albis et al., 1995). We
speculate that this fiber type may be related to the NMJs denervation
observed in the TA muscles from BACHD mice. Data from the literature
indicate that motoneurons and their NMJs differ drastically in size, with
biggest ones innervating fast muscle fibers with largest NMJs (Burke et al.,
1971; Mantilla
et al., 2007). We hypothesize that the changes in the
motoneurons described herein, such as decrease in presynaptic area and size
of motoneurons in BACHD, cause a reduction in the number of IIB muscle
fibers in TA muscles from BACHD mice. However, we cannot rule out the
possibility that mHTT directly or indirectly alters muscle fiber-type
profile as this has been described in R6/2 HD mice model and also in humans
(Strand et al.,
2005; for a review, see Zielonka et al., 2014). Further
research will be needed to clarify this matter.

Interestingly, we noted that the BACHD-TA muscles have greater accumulation of
glycogen in the intermyofibrillar spaces and more mitochondrial damage than
the observed in STM muscles (Valadão et al., 2017). Moreover,
in the BACHD transgenic animals, the Z line did not follow
a straight pattern as observed in the control animals. Indeed, studies of
denervated TA muscles of transgenic rabbits also revealed
Z-line misalignment and mitochondrial changes (Ashley et al.,
2007). In light of the information provided by these studies
and because we found greater changes in the mitochondria of BACHD TA
muscles, it is possible that these changes could be related to energy
imbalance caused by mitochondrial damage. However, it is important to
mention that although the transmission electron microscopy analysis
revealing mitochondrial abnormalities is informative, caution should be
taken in the interpretation of the present data because our analysis was
only qualitative and not quantitative.

We evaluated the motor function of BACHD and WT mice to verify the possible
relationship between the morphological changes observed in TA MUs and the
alterations in motor behavior of BACHD animals. In the catwalk test, we did
not detect statically significant differences between WT and BACHD mice in
any of the gait patterns evaluated: step length, step width, and right/left
pass. Interestingly, our results are in accordance with the data of Mantovani et al.
(2016), who showed no significant differences in walking test
between BACHD animals and controls at 12 months old, even using another
measuring device (Noldus® Cat Walk apparatus [Wageningen, the Netherlands]).
These observations may be related to the fact that the mice are quadruped
animals, which gives them greater stability. Interestingly, L. Menalled et al.
(2009) using the same method used by us, observed that
18-month-old BACHD mice presented statistical differences as a larger
extension and broader base. These changes differ from the gait deficit found
in humans, as the steps become shorter in patients with HD (Koller and Trimble,
1985). However, even without presenting significant changes in
the gait, the 12-month-old BACHD mice showed a robust phenotype in several
behavioral tests that replicate and extend the published results to date
(Gray et al.,
2008; L. Menalled et al., 2009; Mantovani et al., 2016).

The open-field test revealed significant hypoactivity of BACHD mice, with a
significant reduction in locomotion, total distance traveled, and mean
velocity. However, the number of rearing events was not significantly
different when compared with control mice. These findings are in accordance
with the results reported by L. Menalled et al. (2009), which
showed that at 7 months of age, BACHD mice presented locomotor hypoactivity.
The same results (in 7-month-old BACHD) were previously observed by Gray et al.
(2008). In the wire hanging test, we observed that BACHD mice
performed significantly worse than the WT mice, similar to what Heng et al.
(2007) and Brooks et al. (2012) noticed in 12-month-old
Hdh
(CAG) 150 mice. In the wire hanging test, we observed that BACHD
mice performed worse than the WT mice even after normalizing the weight of
the animals to the time they were kept holding to the apparatus. It is known
that BACHD FVB/N-Tg (HTT*97Q) IXwy/J mice have increased body weight with
age (Gray et al.,
2008). According to Mantovani et al. (2016), female
and male BACHD C57BL/6J mice gain significantly more weight over time,
whereas females show a 35% increase in body weight and males have a 15%
increase when compared with their WTs. For this reason, we normalized the
weight of the animals to the time they were kept holding to the apparatus.
Regarding the open-field test, we did not make this correction, because
although body weight may influence this test, literature data show that
after food restriction, WT and BACHD animals at 95 weeks of age present
significant differences between the genotypes in the distance traveled, even
after food restriction (Kudwa et al., 2013). In fact, the animals became more active
after food restriction; however, these results may have been influenced by
the fact that dietary restriction may alter the level of anxiety in mice by
making them more active in the open-field test, which generates a false
impression that weight loss can improve the motor performance of these
animals (Wable et al.,
2015).

In sum, the results obtained showed that the BACHD mice has major motor
alterations, which directly influence their behavior. The grip strength test
did not show significant changes in the maximum strength between BACHD and
WT mice. L. Menalled
et al. (2009) observed that mice containing only a fragment of
mutant HTT (R6/2) showed deficits in the same motor test. However, animals
expressing the full-length mHTT, including BACHD, showed no significant
differences in grip strength test. Accordingly, Mantovani et al. (2016) showed
that BACHD animals generated in a C57BL/6J background (12 months old) did
not present deficits in grip strength test, which corroborate our results.
It is also possible that the deficiencies in movement and balance observed
are due to aberrant connectivity or function in motor systems of the brain,
rather than brain stem or spinal motor neurons. Besides that, this test is
also open to interpretation as motivational rather than NMJ/muscle
physiological. Therefore, the case for NMJ involvement in motoneuron/muscle
atrophy would be better made from isometric force measurements and
intracellular measurements of synaptic function.

Although the findings described herein are suggestive of axonal or NMJ
morphological differences in the BACHD mouse model, future research
involving corroborative nerve conduction measurements, muscle/MU tension
data, or electrophysiological analysis of NMJ function are necessary to
establish whether the abnormalities described at NMJs are biologically
significant or whether they are primary consequences of CAG repeat
expression or a secondary change in response to, for example, muscle
atrophy.

It is important to note that all these results were obtained from 12-month-old
WT and BACHD males. However, we judge that a study using females would be
valuable, as HD is a disease that affects both sexes and it has already been
shown that this disease has slightly faster progression in females than in
males (Zielonka et al.,
2013). In addition, in a recent study, Zielonka et al. (2018), showed
that women with HD have a declining motor function affecting, more severely,
on functionality and independence than in men. On the other hand, an elegant
study was conducted using the HdhQ350/+ HD mice line, demonstrating that
expanded polyglutamine repeats influence the pathogenesis of HD in a
sex-dependent manner in these mice (Cao et al., 2018). The results
show that only HdhQ350/+ males have impaired motor coordination and gait,
while females show no impairment in motor coordination (Cao et al.,
2018).

Therefore, in the face of these evidences in humans and the animal model for
HD, we reiterate that it is in our interest, in future research, to analyze
the entire MU in females WT and BACHD at 12 months of age, because in
addition to the issues previously mentioned in relation to gender, females
present the issue of the estrous cycle, a hormonal wildcard that might or
might not bring other perspectives to our study. However, for reasons of
creation, maintenance, conduction of experiments, equipment expenses,
reagents and, finally, all the costs that a research of this level demands,
we opted to carry out, first, a complete work in males.

In summary, here we show that that motoneurons from BACHD lumbar spinal cord
are atrophic, reduced in size, and undergo apoptosis. The MUs associated
with the TA muscle from BACHD mice present signs of degeneration such as
sciatic nerve reduced axon and axoplasm diameters, NMJs’ fragmentation and
partial denervation, skeletal muscle fibers atrophy, and fiber-type
switching (Type 2B–Type 2X). Moreover, this study provides evidence that
different MUs have similar degrees of impairment in this animal model for
HD. That is, regardless of innervation or muscle composition, it appears
that mHTT may be performing the same degree of degeneration of these MUs
investigated by us in the two studies. In addition, the changes seen in
different spinal cord segments indicate that, our results are in accordance
with neuronal death in the brain. Therefore, the discovery that motoneurons
at the lumbar spinal cord can be affected in HD, make room for further
studies to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the motoneuron cell
death. Overall, our findings are important, and add further support to the
hypothesis that cellular alterations occurring in peripheral tissues, in
this case skeletal muscles, occur independently of the progression of brain
dysfunction (van der
Burg et al., 2009). Thus, this work expands the perspectives
about the role of the MU in motor alterations seen in HD and the possibility
that clinical interventions targeting the MU could help treating signs of
disease in patients with HD.

Summary
This study evaluates the morphology of the motor unit of the tibilais anterior
muscle. The main finding is that Huntington’s disease can affect the motor
unit in all its components, from the motoneuron to the skeletal muscle.

Supplemental Material
ASN886212 Supplemental Table - Supplemental material for
Abnormalities in the Motor Unit of a Fast-Twitch Lower Limb
Skeletal Muscle in Huntington’s Disease
Click here for additional data file.

Supplemental material, ASN886212 Supplemental Table for Abnormalities in
the Motor Unit of a Fast-Twitch Lower Limb Skeletal Muscle in
Huntington’s Disease by Priscila Aparecida Costa Valadão, Bárbara
Campos de Aragão, Jéssica Neves Andrade, Matheus Proença S.
Magalhães-Gomes, Giselle Foureaux, Julliane Vasconcelos
Joviano-Santos, José Carlos Nogueira, Thatiane Cristina Gonçalves
Machado, Itamar Couto Guedes de Jesus, Julia Meireles Nogueira, Rayan
Silva de Paula, Luisa Peixoto, Fabíola Mara Ribeiro, Juan Carlos
Tapia, ÉriKa Cristina Jorge, Silvia Guatimosim and Cristina Guatimosim
in ASN Neuro

 Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the Center of Acquisition and Processing
of Images at Instituto de Ciências Biológicas-Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais and Microscopy Center at Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais for
providing the equipment and technical support for experiments involving
electron microscopy. The authors would like to thank Dr. Dawit Gonçalves for
advice on denervation genes.

Author Contributions
P. A. C. V. was responsible for experimentation, data interpretation, and
writing of the article. B. C. A., M. P. S. M.-G., J. N. A., G. F., I. C. G.
J., J. M. N., R. S. P., E. C. J., S. G. and J. V. J.-S. were responsible for
experimentation and data interpretation. T. C. G. M and L. P. were
responsible for data analysis. J. C. N, F. M. R., and J. C. T. were
scientific consultant in all the stages. C. G. was responsible for the
conceptualization of the study data interpretation and writing the
article.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was
supported by grants from Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Fundação de
Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Minas Gerais, Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas
(CNPq) and Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (to
C. G.) and FONDECYTS (1160888 and 1161014; to J. C. T.). C. G. is Bolsista
de Produtividade em Pesquisa (CNPq).

ORCID iDs
Fabíola Mara Ribeiro https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7042-9433

Cristina Guatimosim https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5392-1266
==== Refs
References
Ashley Z. Salmons S. Boncompagni S. Protasi F. Russold M. Lanmuller H. Mayr W. Sutherland H. Jarvis J. C.   (2007 ). Effects of chronic
electrical stimulation on long-term denervated muscles of the
rabbit hind limb. 
J Muscle Res Cell Motil , 28 ,
203 –217 .
doi:10.1007/s10974-007-9119-417906933 
Bilney B. Morris M. E. Churchyard A. Chiu E. Georgiou-Karistianis N.   (2005 ). Evidence for a
disorder of locomotor timing in Huntington’s
disease. 
Mov Disord , 20 ,
51 –57 .
doi:10.1002/mds.2029415390128 
Bloemberg D. Quadrilatero J.   (2012 ). Rapid
determination of myosin heavy chain expression in rat, mouse,
and human skeletal muscle using multicolor immunofluorescence
analysis. 
PLoS One , 7 , e35273 .
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.003527322530000 
Bossy-Wetzel E. Petrilli A. Knott A. B.   (2008 ). Mutant huntingtin
and mitochondrial dysfunction. 
Trends Neurosci , 31 ,
609 –616 .
doi:10.1016/j.tins.2008.09.00418951640 
Brooks S. Higgs G. Jones L. Dunnett S. B.   (2012 ). Longitudinal
analysis of the behavioural phenotype in Hdh(CAG)150
Huntington’s disease knock-in mice. 
Brain Res Bull , 88 ,
182 –188 .
doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2010.05.00420457230 
Brown M. Hasser E. M.   (1996 ). Complexity of
age-related change in skeletal muscle. 
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci , 51 ,
B117 –B123 .
doi:10.1093/gerona/51a.2.b1178612095 
Burke R. E. Levine D. N. Zajac F. E.   (1971 ). Mammalian motor
units: Physiological-histochemical correlation in three types in
cat gastrocnemius. 
Science , 174 ,
709 –12 .4107849 
Busse M. E. Khalil H. Quinn L. Rosser A. E.   (2008 ). Physical therapy
intervention for people with Huntington disease. 
Phys Ther , 88 ,
820 –831 .
doi:10.2522/ptj.2007034618467429 
Cao J. K. Detloff P. J. Gardner R. G. Stella N.   (2018 ). Sex-dependent
behavioral impairments in the HdhQ350/+ mouse
line. 
Behav Brain Res , 337 ,
34 –45 .
doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2017.09.02628927719 
Carroll J. B. Bates G. P. Steffan J. Saft C. Tabrizi S. J.   (2015 ). Treating the whole
body in Huntington’s disease. 
Lancet Neurol , 14 ,
1135 –1142 .
doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00177-526466780 
Carvalho R. F. Cicogna A. C. Campos G. E. R. De Assis J. M. F. Padovani C. R. Okoshi M. P. Pai-Silva M. D.   (2003 ). Myosin heavy chain
expression and atrophy in rat skeletal muscle during transition
from cardiac hypertrophy to heart failure. 
Int J Exp Pathol , 84 ,
201 –206 .
doi:10.1046/j.1365-2613.2003.00351.x14632634 
Chau W. K. So K.-F. Tay D. Dockery P.   (2000 ). A morphometric
study of optic axons regenerated in a sciatic nerve graft of
adult rats. 
Restor Neurol Neurosci , 16 ,
105 –116 .12671213 
Cruickshank T. Reyes A. Peñailillo L. Thompson J. Ziman M.   (2014 ). Factors that
contribute to balance and mobility impairments in individuals
with Huntington’s disease. 
Basal Ganglia , 4 ,
67 –70 .
doi:10.1016/j.baga.2014.04.002
Cruickshank T. M. Thompson J. A. Domínguez D J. F. Reyes A. P. Bynevelt M. Georgiou-Karistianis N. Barker R. A. Ziman M. R.   (2015 ). The effect of
multidisciplinary rehabilitation on brain structure and
cognition in Huntington’s disease: An exploratory
study. 
Brain Behav , 5 ,
e00312 . doi:10.1002/brb3.31225642394 
d’Albis A. Couteaux R. Goubel F. Janmot C. Mira J. C.   (1995 ). Relationship
between muscle myosin isoforms and contractile features in
rabbit fast-twitch denervated muscle. 
FEBS Lett , 375 ,
67 –68 .7498483 
de Lagrán M. M. Altafaj X. Gallego X. Martı E. Estivill X. Sahun I. Fillat C. Dierssen M.   (2004 ). Motor phenotypic
alterations in TgDyrk1a transgenic mice implicate DYRK1A in Down
syndrome motor dysfunction . Neurobiol
Dis , 15 ,
132 –142 .14751778 
Eisen A. Kim S. Pant B.   (1992 ). Amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS): A phylogenetic disease of the
corticomotoneuron? 
Muscle Nerve , 15 ,
219 –224 .
doi:10.1002/mus.8801502151549143 
Farrer L. A.   (2008 ). Diabetes mellitus
in Huntington disease. 
Clin Genet , 27 ,
62 –67 .
doi:10.1111/j.1399-0004.1985.tb00185.x
Farrer L. A. Meaney F. J.   (1985 ). An anthropometric
assessment of Huntington’s disease patients and
families. 
Am J Phys Anthropol , 67 ,
185 –194 .
doi:10.1002/ajpa.13306703042932916 
Fischer, L. R., Culver, D. G.,
Tennant, P., Davis, A. A., Wang, M., Castellano-Sanchez, A., Khan, J.,
Polak, M. A., & Glass, J. D. (2004). Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
is a distal axonopathy: evidence in mice and man. Experimental
neurology, 185, 232–240.
Fowler S. C. Zarcone T. J. Chen R. Taylor M. D. Wright D. E.   (2002 ). Low grip strength,
impaired tongue force and hyperactivity induced by
overexpression of neurotrophin-3 in mouse skeletal
muscle. 
Int J Dev Neurosci , 20 ,
303 –308 .12175867 
Gervais F. G. Singaraja R. Xanthoudakis S. Gutekunst C.-A. Leavitt B. R. Metzler M. Hackam A. S. Tam J. Vaillancourt J. P. Houtzager V. Rasper D. M. Roy S. Hayden M. R. Nicholson D. W.   (2002 ). Recruitment and
activation of caspase-8 by the Huntingtin-interacting protein
Hip-1 and a novel partner Hippi. 
Nat Cell Biol , 4 ,
95 –105 .
doi:10.1038/ncb73511788820 
Goebel H. H. Heipertz R. Scholz W. Iqbal K. Tellez-Nagel I.   (1978 ). Juvenile
Huntington chorea: Clinical, ultrastructural, and biochemical
studies. 
Neurology , 28 ,
23 –31 .145549 
Gray M. Shirasaki D. I. Cepeda C. Andre V. M. Wilburn B. Lu X.-H. Tao J. Yamazaki I. Li S.-H. Sun Y. E. Li X.-J. Levine M. S. Yang X. W.   (2008 ). Full-length human
mutant huntingtin with a stable polyglutamine repeat can elicit
progressive and selective neuropathogenesis in BACHD
mice. 
J Neurosci , 28 ,
6182 –6195 .
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0857-08.200818550760 
Heng M. Y. Detloff P. J. Albin R. L.   (2008 ). Rodent genetic
models of Huntington disease. 
Neurobiol Dis , 32 (1 ),
1 –9 .
doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2008.06.00518638556 
Heng M. Y. Tallaksen-Greene S. J. Detloff P. J. Albin R. L.   (2007 ). Longitudinal
evaluation of the Hdh(CAG)150 knock-in murine model of
Huntington’s disease. 
J Neurosci , 27 ,
8989 –8998 .
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1830-07.200717715336 
Hickey M. A. Chesselet M.-F.   (2003 ). Apoptosis in
Huntington’s disease. 
Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry ,
27 , 255 –265 .
doi:10.1016/S0278-5846(03)00021-612657365 
Ibebunjo C.  Chick, J. M., Kendall, T., Eash, J. K., Li, C., Zhang,
Y., Vickers, C., Wu, Z., Clarke, B. A., Shi, J., Cruz, J., Fournier,
B., Brachat, S., Gutzwiller, S., Ma Q., Markovits, J., Broome, M.,
Steinkrauss, M., Skuba, E., Galarneau, J. R., Gygi, S. P., &
Glass, D. J. (2013 ). Genomic and proteomic
profiling reveals reduced mitochondrial function and disruption
of the neuromuscular junction driving rat
sarcopenia. 
Mol Cell Biol , 33 ,
194 –212 .
doi:10.1128/MCB.01036-1223109432 
Joviano-Santos J. V. Santos-Miranda A. Botelho A. F. M. de Jesus I. C. G. Andrade J. N. de Oliveira Barreto T. Magalhães-Gomes M. P. S. Valadão P. A. C. Cruz J. dos S. Melo M. M. Guatimosim S. Guatimosim C.   (2019 ). Increased
oxidative stress and CaMKII activity contribute to
electro-mechanical defects in cardiomyocytes from a murine model
of Huntington’s disease. 
FEBS J , 286 ,
110 –123 .
doi:10.1111/febs.1470630451379 
Kazantsev A. Preisinger E. Dranovsky A. Goldgaber D. Housman D.   (1999 ). Insoluble
detergent-resistant aggregates form between pathological and
nonpathological lengths of polyglutamine in mammalian
cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci ,
96 ,
11404 –11409 .10500189 
Khedraki A. Reed E. Romer S. H. Wang Q. Romine W. Rich M. M. Talmadge R. J. Voss A. A.   (2017 ). Depressed synaptic
transmission and reduced vesicle release sites in Huntington’s
disease neuromuscular junctions . J
Neurosci , 37 ,
8077 –8091 .28724748 
Koller W. C. Trimble J.   (1985 ). The gait
abnormality of Huntington’s disease. 
Neurology , 35 ,
1450 –1454 .
doi:10.1212/wnl.35.10.14503162109 
Kudwa A. E. Menalled L. B. Oakeshott S. Murphy C. Mushlin R. Fitzpatrick J. Miller S. F. McConnell K. Port R. Torello J. Howland D. Ramboz S. Brunner D.   (2013 ). Increased body
weight of the BAC HD transgenic mouse model of huntington’s
disease accounts for some but not all of the observed HD-like
motor deficits . PLoS Curr ,
5 , 1 –14 .
doi:10.1371/currents.hd.0ab4f3645aff523c56ecc8ccbe41a198
Li, S.-H., Schilling, G., Young,
W. S., Li, X. J., Margolis, R. L., Stine, O. C., Wagster, M. V.,
Abbott, M. H., Franz, M. L., & Ranen, N. G. (1993). Huntington’s
disease gene (IT15) is widely expressed in human and rat tissues.
Neuron, 11, 985–993.
Li S.-H. Li X.-J.   (2004 ). Huntingtin–protein
interactions and the pathogenesis of Huntington’s
disease. 
Trends Genet , 20 ,
146 –154 .
doi:10.1016/j.tig.2004.01.00815036808 
MacDonald, M. E., Ambrose, C. M.,
Duyao, M. P., Myers, R. H., Lin, C., Srinidhi, L., Barnes, G., Taylor,
S. A., James, M., Groot, N., MacFarlane, H., Jenkins, B., Anderson, M.
A., Wexler, N. S., Gusella, J. F., Bates, G. P., Baxendale, S.,
Hummerich, H., Kirby, S., North, M., Youngman, S., Mott, R., Zehetner,
G., Sedlacek, Z., Poustka, A., Frischauf, A-M., Lehrach, H., Buckler,
A. J., Church, D., Doucette-Stamm, L., O'Donovan, M. C., Riba-Ramirez,
L., Shah, M., Stanton, V. P., Strobel, S. A., Draths, K. M., Wales, J.
L., Dervan, P., Housman, D. E., Altherr, M., Shiang, R., Thompson, L.,
Fielder, T., Wasmuth, J. J., Tagle, D., Valdes, J., Elmer, L., Allard,
M., Castilla, L., Swaroop, M., Blanchard, K., Collins, F. S., Snell,
R., Holloway, T., Gillespie, K., Datson, N., Shaw, D., & Harper,
P. S. (1993). A novel gene containing a trinucleotide repeat that is
expanded and unstable on Huntington's disease chromosomes.
Cell, 72,
971--983.
Mantilla C. B. Rowley K. L. Zhan W.-Z. Fahim M. A. Sieck G. C.   (2007 ). Synaptic vesicle
pools at diaphragm neuromuscular junctions vary with motoneuron
soma, not axon terminal, inactivity. 
Neuroscience , 146 ,
178 –189 .
doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.01.04817346898 
Mantovani S. Gordon R. Li R. Christie D. C. Kumar V. Woodruff T. M.   (2016 ). Motor deficits
associated with Huntington’s disease occur in the absence of
striatal degeneration in BACHD transgenic mice. 
Hum Mol Genet , 25 ,
1780 –1791 .
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddw05026908618 
Menalled L. El-Khodor B. F. Patry M. Suárez-Fariñas M. Orenstein S. J. Zahasky B. Leahy C. Wheeler V. Yang X. W. MacDonald M. Morton A. J. Bates G. Leeds J. Park L. Howland D. Signer E. Tobin A. Brunner D.   (2009 ). Systematic
behavioral evaluation of Huntington’s disease transgenic and
knock-in mouse models. 
Neurobiol Dis , 35 ,
319 –336 .
doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2009.05.00719464370 
Menalled L. B. Chesselet M.-F.   (2002 ). Mouse models of
Huntington’s disease. 
Trends Pharmacol Sci , 23 ,
32 –9 .11804649 
Mielcarek, M. (2015).
Huntington's disease is a multi-system disorder. Rare
Diseases, 3,
e1058464.
Mielcarek M. Isalan M.   (2015 ). A shared mechanism
of muscle wasting in cancer and Huntington’s
disease. 
Clin Transl Med , 4 ,
34 .
doi:10.1186/s40169-015-0076-z26668061 
Mielcarek, M., Smolenski, R. T.,
& Isalan, M. (2017). Transcriptional Signature of an Altered
Purine Metabolism in the Skeletal Muscle of a Huntington’s Disease
Mouse Model. Frontiers in Physiology, 8,
127.
Miranda D. R. Wong M. Romer S. H. McKee C. Garza-Vasquez G. Medina A. C. Bahn V. Steele A. D. Talmadge R. J. Voss A. A.   (2017 ). Progressive
Cl− channel defects reveal disrupted skeletal
muscle maturation in R6/2 Huntington’s mice. 
J Gen Physiol , 149 ,
55 –74 .
doi:10.1085/jgp.20161160327899419 
Moffitt H. McPhail G. D. Woodman B. Hobbs C. Bates G. P.   (2009 ). Formation of
polyglutamine inclusions in a wide range of non-CNS tissues in
the HdhQ150 knock-in mouse model of Huntington’s
disease. 
PLoS One , 4 , e8025 .
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.000802519956633 
Novak M. J. U. Tabrizi S. J.   (2010 ). Huntington’s
disease. 
BMJ , 340 ,
c3109 –c3109 .
doi:10.1136/bmj.c310920591965 
Pereira L. M. Bastos C. P. de Souza J. M. Ribeiro F. M. Pereira G. S.   (2014 ). Estradiol enhances
object recognition memory in Swiss female mice by activating
hippocampal estrogen receptor α. 
Neurobiol Learn Mem , 114 ,
1 –9 .
doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2014.04.00124726465 
Piira A. van Walsem M. R. Mikalsen G. Nilsen K. H. Knutsen S. Frich J. C.   (2013 ). Effects of a one
year intensive multidisciplinary rehabilitation program for
patients with Huntington’s disease: A prospective intervention
study . PLoS Curr ,
5 , 1 –24 .
doi:10.1371/currents.hd.9504af71e0d1f87830c25c394be47027
Prado V. F.  , et al (2006 ).
Mice deficient for the vesicular acetylcholine
transporter are myasthenic and have deficits in object and
social recognition. 
Neuron , 51 ,
601 –612 .
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2006.08.00516950158 
Pratt S. J. P. Shah S. B. Ward C. W. Inacio M. P. Stains J. P. Lovering R. M.   (2013 ). Effects of
in vivo injury on the neuromuscular
junction in healthy and dystrophic muscles. 
J Physiol , 591 ,
559 –570 .
doi:10.1113/jphysiol.2012.24167923109110 
Reiner A. Albin R. L. Anderson K. D. D’amato C. J. Penneyt J. B. Youngt A. B.   (1988 ). Differential loss
of striatal projection neurons in Huntington
disease. 
Neurobiology , 85 ,
5733 –5737 .
doi:10.1073/pnas.85.15.5733
Reinius B. Blunder M. Brett F. M. Eriksson A. Patra K. Jonsson J. Jazin E. Kullander K.   (2015 ). Conditional
targeting of medium spiny neurons in the striatal
matrix. 
Front Behav Neurosci , 9 ,
71 . doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2015.0007125870547 
Ribchester R. R. Thomson D. Wood N. I. Hinks T. Gillingwater T. H. Wishart T. M. Court F. A. Morton A. J.   (2004 ). Progressive
abnormalities in skeletal muscle and neuromuscular junctions of
transgenic mice expressing the Huntington’s disease
mutation. 
Eur J Neurosci , 20 ,
3092 –3114 .
doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2004.03783.x15579164 
Rice K. M. Linderman J. K. Kinnard R. S. Blough E. R.   (2005 ). The Fischer
344/NNiaHSd X Brown Norway/BiNia is a better model of sarcopenia
than the Fischer 344/NNiaHSd: A comparative analysis of muscle
mass and contractile properties in aging male rat
models. 
Biogerontology , 6 ,
335 –343 .
doi:10.1007/s10522-005-4808-016463110 
Rodrigues H. A. Fonseca M. D. C. Camargo W. L. Lima P. M. A. Martinelli P. M. Naves L. A. Prado V. F. Prado M. A. M. Guatimosim C.   (2013 ). Reduced expression
of the vesicular acetylcholine transporter and neurotransmitter
content affects synaptic vesicle distribution and shape in mouse
neuromuscular junction. 
PLoS One , 8 , e78342 .
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.007834224260111 
Sango K. McDonald M. P. Crawley J. N. Mack M. L. Tifft C. J. Skop E. Starr C. M. Hoffmann A. Sandhoff K. Suzuki K. Proia R. L.   (1996 ). Mice lacking both
subunits of lysosomal β-hexosaminidase display gangliosidosis
and mucopolysaccharidosis. 
Nat Genet , 14 ,
348 –352 .
doi:10.1038/ng1196-3488896570 
Sartori R. Schirwis E. Blaauw B. Bortolanza S. Zhao J. Enzo E. Stantzou A. Mouisel E. Toniolo L. Ferry A. Stricker S. Goldberg A. L. Dupont S. Piccolo S. Amthor H. Sandri M.   (2013 ). BMP signaling
controls muscle mass. 
Nat Genet , 45 ,
1309 –1318 .
doi:10.1038/ng.277224076600 
Sathasivam K. Hobbs C. Mangiarini L. Mahal A. Turmaine M. Doherty P. Davies S. W. Bates G. P.   (1999 ). Transgenic models
of Huntington’s disease. 
Philos Trans R Soc London B Biol Sci ,
354 ,
963 –969 .10434294 
Shirendeb U. P. Calkins M. J. Manczak M. Anekonda V. Dufour B. McBride J. L. Mao P. Reddy P. H.   (2012 ). Mutant
huntingtin’s interaction with mitochondrial protein Drp1 impairs
mitochondrial biogenesis and causes defective axonal transport
and synaptic degeneration in Huntington’s
disease. 
Hum Mol Genet , 21 ,
406 –420 .
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddr47521997870 
Song W. Chen J. Petrilli A. Liot G. Klinglmayr E. Zhou Y. Poquiz P. Tjong J. Pouladi M. A. Hayden M. R. Masliah E. Ellisman M. Rouiller I. Schwarzenbacher R. Bossy B. Perkins G. Bossy-Wetzel E.   (2011 ). Mutant huntingtin
binds the mitochondrial fission GTPase dynamin-related protein-1
and increases its enzymatic activity. 
Nat Med , 17 ,
377 –382 .
doi:10.1038/nm.231321336284 
Strand A. D. Aragaki A. K. Shaw D. Bird T. Holton J. Turner C. Tapscott S. J. Tabrizi S. J. Schapira A. H. Kooperberg C. Olson J. M.   (2005 ). Gene expression in
Huntington’s disease skeletal muscle: A potential
biomarker. 
Hum Mol Genet , 14 ,
1863 –1876 .
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddi19215888475 
Tellez-Nagel I. Johnson A. B. Terry R. D.   (1974 ). Studies on brain
biopsies of patients with Huntington’s chorea. 
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol , 33 ,
308 –332 .4150800 
Thaut M. H. Miltner R. Lange H. W. Hurt C. P. Hoemberg V.   (1999 ). Velocity
modulation and rhythmic synchronization of gait in Huntington’s
disease. 
Mov Disord , 14 ,
808 –819 .10495043 
Valadão P. A. C. de Aragão B. C. Andrade J. N. Magalhães-Gomes M. P. S. Foureaux G. Joviano-Santos J. V. Nogueira J. C. Ribeiro F. M. Tapia J. C. Guatimosim C.   (2017 ). Muscle atrophy is
associated with cervical spinal motoneuron loss in BACHD mouse
model for Huntington’s disease. 
Eur J Neurosci , 45 ,
785 –796 .
doi:10.1111/ejn.1351027992085 
Valadão P. A. C. Gomes M. P. Aragão B. C. Rodrigues H. A. Andrade J. N. Garcias R. Joviano-Santos J. V. Luiz M. A. Camargo W. L. Naves L. A. Kushmerick C.  , Cavalcante, W. L. G., Galacci, M. G., de Jesus, C.
G., Guatimosim, S., & Guatimosim, S. (2018 ).
Neuromuscular synapse degeneration without muscle
function loss in the diaphragm of a murine model for
Huntington’s disease . Neurochem
Int , 116 ,
30 –42 .29530757 
Valdez G. Tapia J. C. Kang H. Clemenson G. D. Gage F. H. Lichtman J. W. Sanes J. R.   (2010 ). Attenuation of
age-related changes in mouse neuromuscular synapses by caloric
restriction and exercise. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci , 107 ,
14863 –14868 .
doi:10.1073/pnas.100222010720679195 
Valdez G. Tapia J. C. Lichtman J. W. Fox M. A. Sanes J. R.   (2012 ). Shared resistance
to aging and ALS in neuromuscular junctions of specific
muscles. 
PLoS One , 7 , e34640 .
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.003464022485182 
van den Bos, M. A., Geevasinga,
N., Higashihara, M., Menon, P., & Vucic, S. (2019).
Pathophysiology and diagnosis of ALS: Insights from advances in
neurophysiological techniques. International Journal of
Molecular Sciences, 20, 2818.
van der Burg J. M. Björkqvist M. Brundin P.   (2009 ). Beyond the brain:
Widespread pathology in Huntington’s disease. 
Lancet Neurol , 8 ,
765 –774 .
doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(09)70178-419608102 
Wable G. S. Min J.-Y. Chen Y.-W. Aoki C.   (2015 ). Anxiety is
correlated with running in adolescent female mice undergoing
activity-based anorexia. 
Behav Neurosci , 129 ,
170 –182 .
doi:10.1037/bne000004025730124 
Wheelock V. L. Tempkin T. Marder K. Nance M. Myers R. H. Zhao H. Kayson E. Orme C. Shoulson I.  , & Huntington Study Group. 
(2003 ). Predictors of nursing home
placement in Huntington disease. 
Neurology , 60 ,
998 –1001 .
doi:10.1212/01.wnl.0000052992.58107.6712654967 
Willadt S. Nash M. Slater C. R.   (2016 ). Age-related
fragmentation of the motor endplate is not associated with
impaired neuromuscular transmission in the mouse
diaphragm . Sci Rep ,
6 , 24849 .
doi:10.1038/srep2484927094316 
Yang X. W. Gray M.   (2011 ). Mouse models for
validating preclinical candidates for Huntington’s disease,
neurobiology of Huntington’s disease: Applications to drug
discovery . Boca Raton,
FL : CRC
Press .
Yang X. W. Model P. Heintz N.   (1997 ). Homologous
recombination based modification in Esherichia
coli and germline transmission in transgenic mice
of a bacterial artificial chromosome. 
Nat Biotechnol , 15 ,
859 –865 .
doi:10.1038/nbt0997-8599306400 
Yap F. Y. Bui J. T Knuttinen M. G. Walzer N. M. Cotler S. J. Owens C. A. Berkes J. L. Gaba R. C.   (2013 ). Quantitative
morphometric analysis of hepatocellular carcinoma: Development
of a programmed algorithm and preliminary
application . Diagn Interv
Radiol , 19 ,
97 –105 .23233403 
Yu X. M. Hall Z. W.   (1991 ). Extracellular
domains mediating epsilon subunit interactions of muscle
acetylcholine receptor. 
Nature , 352 ,
64 –67 .
doi:10.1038/352064a01712080 
Zhu X. Yeadon J. E. Burden S. J.   (1994 ). AML1 is expressed
in skeletal muscle and is regulated by
innervation. 
Mol Cell Biol , 14 ,
8051 –8057 .
doi:10.1128/mcb.14.12.80517969143 
Zielonka D. Marinus J. Roos R. A. C. De Michele G. Di Donato S. Putter H. Marcinkowski J. Squitieri F. Bentivoglio A. R. Landwehrmeyer G. B.   (2013 ). The influence of
gender on phenotype and disease progression in patients with
Huntington’s disease. 
Parkinsonism Relat Disord , 19 ,
192 –197 .
doi:10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.09.01223102616 
Zielonka, D., Piotrowska, I.,
Marcinkowski, J. T., & Mielcarek, M. (2014). Skeletal muscle
pathology in Huntington’s disease. Frontiers in physiology,
5, 380.
Zielonka D. Ren M. De Michele G. Roos R. A. C. Squitieri F. Bentivoglio A. R. Marcinkowski J. T. Landwehrmeyer G. B.   (2018 ). The contribution
of gender differences in motor, behavioral and cognitive
features to functional capacity, independence and quality of
life in patients with Huntington’s disease. 
Parkinsonism Relat Disord , 49 ,
42 –47 .
doi:10.1016/j.parkreldis.2018.01.00629326033 
Zuccato C. Valenza M. Cattaneo E.   (2010 ). Molecular
mechanisms and potential therapeutical targets in Huntington’s
disease. 
Physiol Rev , 90 ,
905 –981 .
doi:10.1152/physrev.00041.200920664076

