
==== Front
Biochem JBiochem. JppbiochemjBJBiochemical Journal0264-60211470-8728Portland Press Ltd. 27234585BCJ-2016012410.1042/BCJ20160124Review ArticlesReview ArticleInsulin signalling and glucose transport in the ovary and ovarian function during the ovarian cycle Insulin and ovarian functionJ. Dupont and R.J. ScaramuzziDupont Joëlle *Scaramuzzi Rex J. *†1* UMR 7247 Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements, CNRS, INRA, Université de Tours, Institut Français du Cheval et de l’Équitation, 37380 Nouzilly, France† Department of Comparative Biological Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, Hawkshead Lane, South Mimms, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, U.K.1 To whom correspondence should be addressed (email rex.scaramuzzi@orange.fr).27 5 2016 1 6 2016 473 11 111483 1501 3 12 2015 29 2 2016 3 3 2016 © 2016 The Author(s). published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the Biochemical Society2016Data derived principally from peripheral tissues (fat, muscle and liver) show that insulin signals via diverse interconnecting intracellular pathways and that some of the major intersecting points (known as critical nodes) are the IRSs (insulin receptor substrates), PI3K (phosphoinositide kinase)/Akt and MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase). Most of these insulin pathways are probably also active in the ovary and their ability to interact with each other and also with follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) signalling pathways enables insulin to exert direct modulating influences on ovarian function. The present paper reviews the intracellular actions of insulin and the uptake of glucose by ovarian tissues (granulosa, theca and oocyte) during the oestrous/menstrual cycle of some rodent, primate and ruminant species. Insulin signals through diverse pathways and these are discussed with specific reference to follicular cell types (granulosa, theca and oocyte). The signalling pathways for FSH in granulosa cells and LH in granulosa and theca cells are summarized. The roles of glucose and of insulin-mediated uptake of glucose in folliculogenesis are discussed. It is suggested that glucose in addition to its well-established role of providing energy for cellular function may also have insulin-mediated signalling functions in ovarian cells, involving AMPK (AMP-dependent protein kinase) and/or hexosamine. Potential interactions of insulin signalling with FSH or LH signalling at critical nodes are identified and the available evidence for such interactions in ovarian cells is discussed. Finally the action of the insulin-sensitizing drugs metformin and the thiazolidinedione rosiglitazone on follicular cells is reviewed.

Aktcorpus luteumfollicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)granulosainsulin receptor substrate (IRS)luteinizing hormone (LH)MAPKmetforminoestradioloocyteprogesteronethecathiazolidinedione
==== Body
INTRODUCTION
An effect of diet on human reproduction was first commented on over 2000 years ago by Hippocrates as cited by Franks et al. [1] in an earlier review. Hippocrates noted that hard-working slim servant women were more fertile than their overfed and sedentary Roman employers. In more recent times, during the 19th and 20th Centuries, many authors have observed relationships between nutritional status and/or diet and fertility/infertility in sheep, cattle, rodents and primates. In human medicine, a link between insulin and ovarian pathology was established by demonstrating associations between insulin resistance and polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS). PCOS is a set of reproductive and metabolic symptoms associated with an imbalance of reproductive hormones in women. In cattle selected for high milk production, low concentrations of insulin in the post-partum period are associated with reduced fertility [2], and in sheep an increased availability of energy-yielding substrates is associated with increased prolificacy [3]. These and many other observations have stimulated research into the physiological and biochemical basis of these relationships with a view to either improving the fertility of farm animals or curing those forms of human infertility associated with diet and metabolism. The dietary components implicated include protein, lipid and carbohydrate, especially glucose. In the present review we focus on the role of insulin and glucose.

Polycystic ovarian syndrome
In women, PCOS is a common anovulatory syndrome which is associated with a number of metabolic disorders, such as insulin resistance [4] and the metabolic syndrome [5]. Approximately 50% of women with PCOS are insulin-resistant, and approximately 10% of these are severely insulin-resistant [6]. In addition, women with PCOS appear to have multiple lipid abnormalities including elevated levels of non-esterified fatty acids (NEFAs) and cholesterol [7], problems which are also frequently associated with reduced post-partum fertility in the high-yielding dairy cow [8]. In the ovary, PCOS is characterized by increased numbers of pre-antral follicles, arrested follicular maturation and a disruption to the selection of the ovulatory follicle. These are due to either a reduced sensitivity to follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) or enhanced follicular activity of luteinizing hormone (LH). Patients with PCOS show abnormal secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and excessive LH release that stimulates theca cells to over-produce androgens. The peripheral conversion of circulating androgens in adipose tissue, stroma and skin to oestrogens results in increased oestrogen production in women with PCOS.

Bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa
These two human pathologies have secondary reproductive consequences linked to the dietary and metabolic changes associated with the conditions. Bulimia nervosa is a psychiatric disorder, and among its reported side effects are menstrual irregularities and infertility [9]. The infertility is not associated with weight loss as such, and it is probably a consequence of the extremes in glycaemic flux associated with cycles of binge eating and purging and/or periodic starvation on the ovary. Anorexia nervosa is a condition in women suffering starvation-induced chronic malnutrition where the effect of the consequent hypoglycaemia is exerted primarily at a hypothalamic level. It is clearly established in human as well as in animal models that starvation-induced chronic malnutrition reduces the secretion of hypothalamic GnRH and leads to anovulation. With anorexia nervosa, the primary reproductive effect is not ovarian, although direct ovarian effects of hypoglycaemia may be present [10]. The prolonged energy deficit of elite athletes and dancers has the same or very similar reproductive consequences as starvation-induced anorexia.

Cystic ovaries in high producing dairy cattle
The modern dairy cow has been genetically selected for very high milk production and they can produce up to three times the quantity of milk compared with unselected cows. During early lactation, these cows are physically incapable of eating enough to meet the demand for nutrients especially glucose, required to support the extremely high levels of milk production. Consequently the cows are in a state of chronic negative energy balance (NEB) and must mobilize adipose tissue to provide glucose for milk production. This NEB is a risk factor for ovarian dysfunction [11], apparently because of the hormonal and metabolic adaptations that occur in response to NEB. Consequently, these cows have very poor fertility [2] characterized among other things by prolonged post-partum anoestrus, anovulation and the development of cystic ovarian follicles (COFs). The common occurrence of COF in high yielding dairy cows, and the phenotypic [12,13] and genotypic [14] links with the yields of milk, milk fat and milk protein clearly link COFs with the high level of milk production.

The changes in the circulating concentrations of reproductive and metabolic hormones in response to post-partum NEB, disrupts follicular development principally by acting on the hypothalamic–pituitary axis to inhibit the neuro-secretion of GnRH. There is considerable evidence from studies in several species that show that hypoglycaemia and NEB inhibit the reproductive system at a hypothalamic level [15,16]. In most cases, there is a complete cessation of follicular growth beyond the gonadotropin-independent stage of development. The presence of COF in high yielding cows suggests a direct ovarian action of NEB as well [17,18]. A recent study shows that the reduced gene and protein expression of some downstream effectors in the early stages of the insulin signalling pathway may contribute to follicle persistence [19].

Energy-yielding substrates in sheep
In the ewe a short-term increase in the availability of dietary energy during the last few days of the luteal phase is capable of stimulating the final stages of folliculogenesis, leading to an increased ovulation rate and thus an increase in the rate of twinning [20]. This effect is observed initially as an increase in the number of ovulatory follicles without accompanying changes in the circulating concentrations of FSH and LH [21], suggesting an action at an ovarian level. These effects are associated with a short-term increase in the availability of energy-yielding substrates derived from the diet [3], especially glucose [22,23]. Insulin has also been implicated in this physiological response to diet both as a mediator of the uptake of glucose and as insulin [24]. Similarly insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-I) has also been implicated; the infusion of glucose into ewes reduced follicular expression of IGF-IR (IGF-I receptor) and IGFBP2 (IGF-binding protein 2) mRNAs [25]. Both insulin and IGF-I increased the sensitivity of follicles to the action of FSH in the terminal stages of growth and development [26]. Several mechanisms of action of insulin and IGF-I at an ovarian level are possible, in particular by the direct activation of their receptors or by an increase in the bioavailability of IGF-I through a nutritionally mediated effect on intra-follicular IGFBPs [27].

GENERAL OVERVIEW OF INTRACELLULAR INSULIN SIGNALLING
The transduction of the insulin signal has been intensively studied principally using muscle, liver and adipose tissue, and these findings are summarized in Figure 1. Some, if not all, of these pathways appear to be functional in ovarian cells. Insulin exerts its pleiotropic effects after binding to the insulin receptor (IR), a member of the tyrosine kinase receptor family. Upon ligand binding, the IR undergoes conformational changes, which allow auto-phosphorylation of tyrosine residues located on the β subunits. Phosphorylated tyrosine residues serve as docking sites for various cellular substrates. In mammals, at least 11 intracellular substrates of the IR have been identified (reviewed in [28]). These include the family of IRS (insulin receptor substrate) and Shc (Src homology collagen) proteins. Four different IRSs have been reported in various mammals and two additional IRSs have been detected in humans (IRS-5/DOK4 (docking protein 4) and IRS-6/DOK5 (docking protein 5)). These additional IRSs are involved in insulin signalling but are not involved in phosphoinositide kinase (PI3K) activation [29] and both are poor substrates for the IR [30]. The IRSs have different molecular masses (60–180 kDa) and show differential tissue distribution [31]. In mammals, Shc is also an IRS. There are 46, 52 and 66 kDa isoforms that arise from alternative splicing of the primary Shc transcript [32]. The 52 kDa and, to a lesser extent, the 46 kDa Shc isoforms are tyrosine phosphorylated in response to insulin. Most reports suggest that, in mammals, IRS-1 is the major substrate leading to stimulation of glucose transport in muscle and adipose tissue, whereas, in liver, IRS-1 and IRS-2 have complementary roles in insulin signalling and metabolism. In contrast, Shc does not appear to be directly involved in the metabolic signalling of insulin, but has a critical role in insulin-induced mitogenesis [33]. In mammals, tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS and Shc makes these proteins docking sites for various signalling proteins containing an SH2 (Src homology 2) domain. These intracellular interactions lead to the activation of the two main IR signalling pathways: PI3K/Akt and MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) [34,35].

Figure 1 Following insulin binding, the IR auto-phosphorylates and then phosphorylates its substrates including the IRSs and Shc
Following phosphorylation, specific domains in these substrates interact with other proteins. One of the major complexes interacting with IRSs is PI3K, which is formed of two interacting proteins: a regulatory subunit (p85) and a catalytic subunit (p110). There are several isoforms of both subunits: p85α, p55α, p50α, p85β and p55γ for the regulatory subunit and p110α, β and δ for the catalytic subunit. The binding of the regulatory subunit to IRS forms an active heterodimer which phosphorylates membrane phosphatidylinositol residues in the 3′ position of PIP3 to form PDK1/2 (shown in blue). In turn, PDK1 phosphorylates (on threonine and serine residues) and thereby activates Akt/PKB (a serine/threonine kinase, with three isoforms). Downstream (orange boxes), Akt phosphorylates several kinases or transcription factors (some examples are shown) involved in most of the major metabolic effects of insulin: (i) glycogen synthesis through GSK3, which is inactivated by phosphorylation. The inactivation of GSK3 leads to the de-phosphorylation and activation of GS and hence to an acceleration of glycogen synthesis, (ii) inhibition of gluconeogenesis by turning off the PEPCK gene through inhibition of FOXO1 function (mainly in liver and adipose tissue), (iii) protein synthesis through mTOR and subsequent activation of p70S6K and 4EBP1 (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1), (iv) the Akt pathway also stimulates cell growth and differentiation (not shown in the figure) and (v) exerts anti-apoptotic effects by phosphorylating the anti-apoptotic protein, Bad. The kinase, PI3K also activates aPKCs (atypical PKCs) (yellow boxes), which in concert with Akt (via AS160) exerts different effects according to the tissue: in muscle and adipocytes they initiate the translocation of intracellular GLUT4 on to the membrane and thereby stimulate glucose transport into the cell. Another important and well-documented signalling pathway is the Ras/ERK pathway (green boxes). The binding of Grb2 (growth factor receptor-bound protein 2) and Sos (son of sevenless) to tyrosine-phosphorylated IRS or Shc can also activate the small GTPase Ras cascade, Raf and ultimately ERK1 and ERK2 (green boxes). When activated, these serine kinases simulate protein synthesis through the activation of p90S6K and activate transcription factors and ultimately cell multiplication and differentiation. Some lipid phosphatases including PTEN and SHIP2 act on PIP3 to decrease or extinguish the insulin signal. Some of the insulin-stimulated serine kinases (aPKC, JNKs, p90RSK, ERKs and S6 kinase) may also exert negative effects on insulin sensitivity. Stimulatory connections are shown in black and inhibitory ones are shown in red.

Mammalian PI3K is a heterodimer [36] composed of a catalytic subunit of 110 kDa (p110) and a SH2-domain-containing regulatory subunit of approximately 85 kDa (p85) the two are associated non-covalently. In mammals, PI3K has five isoforms of the regulatory subunit (in three sizes) and three of the catalytic subunit. All four IRSs interact with all the regulatory subunits of PI3K, and thereby activate the catalytic subunit. Once docked to IRS, PI3K phosphorylates the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), thereby producing phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3), which in turn acts as a second messenger to activate PDK1 (phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1). The biological effects of the PI3K pathway can be negatively regulated at the level of PIP3 by phospholipid phosphatases, including PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog and SHIP2 (SH2-domain-containing inositolphosphatase-2, which inactivate PIP3 by de-phosphorylation [37,38]. Activated PDK1 can then phosphorylate Akt/PKB (protein kinase B). Akt comprises three isoforms each encoded by a separate gene and it is a key branching point (critical node) for insulin signalling. Activated Akt directly phosphorylates and inactivates TSC2 (tuberous sclerosis complex 2) and GSK3 (glycogen synthase kinase-3), whereas it directly phosphorylates and activates Bad (Bcl-2-associated death promoter) and the forkhead transcription factor FOXO1 (forkhead box O1). Phosphorylation of FOXO1 results in down-regulation of transcriptional activity and TSC2 is a direct upstream negative regulator of mTORC1 that is involved in the regulation of protein synthesis. Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a highly conserved protein kinase that is found in two structurally and functionally distinct protein complexes: mTOR complex-1 (mTORC1) and mTOR complex-2 (mTORC2). In the first, mTOR is associated with raptor (regulatory associated protein of mTOR) and is a key regulator of cell growth, cell proliferation and mRNA translation, whereas in the second, mTOR is associated with rictor (rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR) and promotes actin cytoskeletal rearrangement, cell survival and cell cycle progression. The two best characterized downstream targets of mTORC1, 4E-BP1 (eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1) and S6K1 (p70 ribosomal S6 kinase 1), regulate protein synthesis. Phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 by mTORC1 induces the release of eIF4E (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E) from 4E-BP1 and the subsequent formation of eIF4F (translation initiation factor 4F) complex. Activation of S6K1 also contributes to increased translation elongation via the phosphorylation of the eEF2 (eukaryotic elongation factor 2). In addition, phosphorylation of S6k1 negatively regulates insulin signalling by phosphorylating IRS-1 on serine residues. The inactivation of GSK3 leads to the de-phosphorylation and activation of glycogen synthase (GS) and hence to an acceleration of glycogen synthesis. The phosphorylation of FOXO1 by Akt in response to insulin leads to the exclusion of FOXO1 from the nucleus and consequently prevents the positive effect of FOXO1 on phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene transcription. Akt also exerts anti-apoptotic effects by phosphorylating Bad. In mammals, inhibition of the PI3K/Akt pathway blocks almost all of insulin's metabolic actions, including stimulation of glucose transport, glycogen synthesis and lipid synthesis [39]. Thus, this pathway has a pivotal role in the metabolic actions of insulin.

Thirteen glucose transporter (GLUT)-like proteins have been identified and characterized [40] in mammals. One of them GLUT4, is a member of the facilitative GLUT family, characterized by preferential expression in muscle and adipose tissue, and it is responsible for insulin-stimulated glucose uptake (reviewed in [41]). The insulin-derived signalling pathways regulating the net gain in surface GLUT4 include activation of PI3K, PDK1/2, atypical PKC (protein kinase C) [42], Akt and AS160 (Akt substrate of 160 kDa) and a pathway (Cbl/CAP) that is independent of the PI3K/Akt pathway [43].

In mammals, the MAPK/extracellular-signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) pathway is activated by insulin through IRSs or Shc tyrosine phosphorylation [28]. This pathway is composed of a set of three sequentially acting kinases. The activation of a MAPKKK (MAPK kinase kinase) (Raf) leads to the phosphorylation and activation of a MAPKK (MAPK kinase) called MEK1/2 (MAPK/ERK kinase 1/2), which then stimulates ERK1/2 MAPK activity through dual phosphorylation on threonine and tyrosine residues of ERK1/2 MAPK to regulate the expression of genes including some in the PI3K pathway, controlling cell growth and differentiation [44]. It also positively controls S6K1 phosphorylation [45] and this pathway can be blocked at Shc, by cytokines acting through the JAK (Janus kinase)/STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) pathway (Figure 1).

GLUCOSE
From a physiological viewpoint, glucose is an enigmatic molecule. On one hand, it is a critical source of metabolic energy for cellular metabolism and therefore for life itself, and on the other hand it is potentially extremely harmful to protein function. Hypoglycaemia will quickly become life-threatening, whereas prolonged hyperglycaemia will lead to protein malfunction through the process of non-enzymic glycation of proteins and the formation of advanced glycation end-products (AGEs), thus altering their functional properties [46]. Consequently, mammals have evolved homoeostatic mechanisms that maintain blood and tissue concentrations of glucose within very narrow physiological limits. The AGEs have been implicated in reproductive conditions such as ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome and PCOS [47], and glycated proteins have been implicated in the fetal malformations that can accompany diabetic pregnancy [48,49].

Sources of glucose in ruminants and monogastric species
In monogastric species, glucose is derived principally from the diet. Gluconeogenesis does occur, but it is secondary to diet as a source of glucose. In contrast, ruminants absorb very little glucose from the diet. The anaerobic conditions of the rumen reduce most carbohydrates and lipids to a series of volatile fatty acids (VFAs) and these provide over 70% of the energy supply. In the ruminant, although most dietary glucose is reduced in the rumen and absorbed as VFAs (propionic, lactic and butyric acids), some glucose can survive the reducing conditions of the rumen to be absorbed from the small intestine. Although gluconeogenesis occurs in all mammals, ruminants are particularly dependent upon it for the generation of glucose. Propionate is the major VFA produced by rumen fermentation of carbohydrates and 45–60% of glucose in ruminants is synthesized in the liver from propionic acid. Other sources of precursor carbon for synthesis of glucose via gluconeogenesis can be derived from the metabolism of glucogenic amino acids and include most except for leucine.

Uptake of glucose by ovarian tissues and the role of the GLUTs
Glucose is a hydrophilic molecule and cannot permeate the plasma membrane. Consequently, its uptake is mediated by a number of facilitative sugar transporters that exhibit different substrate specificities, kinetic properties and patterns of tissue distribution [50]. Published data show that various GLUTs are present in ovarian tissues, but with considerable species and tissue differences in the pattern of expression. GLUTs 1 and 4 are expressed in follicles from sheep [51] and GLUTs 1, 3 and 4 mRNAs were all expressed in bovine corpora lutea and follicles [52]. In the rat, GLUTs1, 3 and 4 and their mRNAs are expressed in ovaries [53]. In a recent study [54], mRNAs for GLUTs 1, 3, 5, 8 and 13 were constitutively expressed, whereas GLUTs, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11 and 12 were differentially expressed, but GLUTs 2 and 7 were not expressed in human granulosa cells from patients with PCOS. The authors of some of these reports have also demonstrated that the expression of these GLUTs can be regulated by intra-ovarian factors involved in follicular development, maturation and ovulation, such as E2, IGF-I and interleukin-1β [55] as well as the classic regulators of ovarian function, gonadotropins [53].

In the ovary of the rat the mRNA for GLUT3 was increased following an ovulatory stimulus using human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) [56] and in bovine follicles, highly significant negative correlations were observed between the concentrations of glucose in follicular fluid and the levels of GLUTs1 and 3 mRNAs in granulosa cells [52]. These data imply that the hormonal environment of the follicle can affect glucose uptake and that the ovary has reproductive mechanisms to regulate glucose uptake by ovarian cells.

Role of glucose in the ovary
There is considerable published data reporting that glucose is present in follicular fluid from humans [57], macaques [58], buffalos [59], sheep [60], cattle [61], pigs [62], camels [63] and horses [64], and follicular fluid is the presumed source of glucose for the avascular membrana granulosa. Most authors report that the concentration of glucose in follicular fluid is lower than the concomitant concentration in serum or plasma and furthermore most report significant differences in the concentrations of glucose in follicular fluid of different follicles from the same animal, implying some local (hormonal) regulation of the movement of glucose into or its utilization by follicles. The concentration of glucose in follicular fluid was higher in larger follicles [60,65,66] and highest in pre-ovulatory follicles. Although intra-follicular glucose was increased following an ovulatory stimulus in the macaque, the mural granulosa cells were not able to utilize it, sparing the glucose for the cumulus–oocyte complex [58]. Thus, the intra-follicular concentration of glucose appears to be modulated to some extent by the hormonal environment of the follicle [60,65,66], and it is correlated positively with in vitro fertilization (IVF) outcome [67]. However, the existing data do not reveal a completely clear picture, with numerous contradictory reports describing the relationships between intra-follicular glucose, follicle size and follicle status. Further research is required to establish how the intra-follicular concentration of glucose is regulated during folliculogenesis and its significance to fertility, especially in relation to the hyperinsulinaemia and hyperglycaemia associated with metabolic disorders [68].

Glucose is an important energy substrate for the generation of ATP for the metabolic and physiological functions of the ovary, one of the most dynamic of the endocrine organs. It simultaneously nurtures the cyclic development of several follicles, the maturation and ovulation of the selected follicle(s) and subsequent formation and maintenance of a functional corpus luteum. There is a significant positive difference in the arterio-venous concentration of glucose in the blood flowing to and from the ovary [69], indicating the uptake of glucose by the ovary. In the bovine ovary, the predominant energy substrate appears to be glucose, and the whole ovarian respiratory exchange ratio was calculated as 0.95 [69]. Glucose can be metabolized along multiple pathways, including glycolysis, the pathway of glycogen synthesis, the hexosamine pathway and the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). Regardless of the pathway, the first step is the metabolism of glucose to glucose 6-phosphate, a step mediated by hexokinase and glucose-6-phosphatase. Glucose 6-phosphate can enter glycolysis through the action of phosphohexose isomerase or PPP via glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. The outcomes of these two pathways are ATP and NADPH and ribose sugars respectively.

Early studies using the rat indicated that LH increased glucose uptake and lactate output, along with increased hexokinase activity [70,71], although relatively little subsequent work has been done on the metabolic fate of ovarian glucose. The exception to this is the cumulus–oocyte complex, where glucose metabolism by the cumulus cells has been shown to provide essential metabolites to the oocyte [72–74]. In sheep granulosa cells, glucose, metabolized under anaerobic conditions to lactate, is the preferred energy substrate to support the gonadotropin-induced differentiation of granulosa cells [75] and theca cells [76] cultured in vitro, and that fructose and pyruvate, but not galactose, are alternative energy substrates despite marked differences in the way that these substrates are metabolized.

The existence of well-characterized energy-sensing mechanisms in cells raises the possibility that glucose, in addition to being a source of energy, may also function as a signalling molecule. The two glucose- or energy- sensing mechanisms that could potentially act as signalling mechanisms in follicular cells are via AMPK (AMP-dependent protein kinase) and the hexosamine pathway. These have been discussed in previous reviews [77,78]. Briefly, the serine/threonine kinase AMPK is an energy sensor that is activated by nutritional stress. It is present in the ovary and its activation leads to alterations in ovarian function. There is inhibition of P4 and E2 production [79] and of FSH-stimulated cell proliferation [80]. Glucose can enter the hexosamine nutrient-sensing pathway which allows glucose to directly mediate gene expression [81,82]. The end-product of this pathway is UDP-N-acetylglucosamine which, in addition to being an important substrate for glycosylation, can also increase the expression of the genes for some growth factors such as fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) [82] and TGFα [83] that have reproductive effects, in particular TGFα suppressed E2 secretion from the ovary in a sheep ovarian auto-transplant model [84]. Glucose inhibited KATP channels in hypothalamic neurons, thus increasing cell excitability [85]. Glucose starvation stimulated AMPK in many cell types, including hypothalamic neurons [86]. In ovarian cells, on one hand, glucose deprivation activates AMPK and induces cell death though modulation of Akt [87], and, on the other hand, the infusion of glucose into sheep reduced the phosphorylation of AMPK in granulosa cell lysates [22,23].

ACTIONS OF INSULIN IN GRANULOSA, THECAL CELLS, LUTEAL CELLS AND OOCYTES
Critical cross-talk nodes
Earlier, it had been suggested that insulin had gonadotrophic actions in the ovary [88]. It now appears much more likely that the gonadotropin-like actions of insulin are mediated via interactions between their respective signalling pathways at critical nodes such as Akt or MAPK [28]. In the follicle, there are several lines of evidence strongly suggesting that insulin–FSH, insulin–LH and FSH–LH cross-talk takes place and that it has biochemical and physiological consequences in the follicle.

Insulin receptors in ovarian cells
The IR is found in granulosa and thecal cells of different species [89,90] and insulin receptor transcripts have been described in human, bovine and rat oocytes [91,92]. The IR has two isoforms, IRA and IRB, which differ by the presence of 12 amino acids at the C-terminus of the α subunit [93]. Both isoforms can hybridize with each other as well as with the closely related IGF-IR (70% homology). The expression of IRA mRNA greater than that of IRB in normal mural granulosa and cumulus cells [94]. In the oocyte, IR is not required for oocyte growth, differentiation and maturation. Indeed, when the IR is ablated in oocytes, the female mice are fertile and exhibit normal oestrous cyclicity, oocyte development and maturation, parturition frequency and litter size [95]. Although GLUTs have been reported in the oocyte [56], it seems that they are non-functional. The oocyte obtains glucose via gap junctions from cumulus cells which take up glucose via GLUT-mediated mechanisms [96].

The in vivo effects of insulin on the ovary
The published in vitro data suggest that insulin affects follicular development in vivo. However, although most of the published in vivo data agree with this broad generalization there are numerous contradictions between data derived from in vitro and in vivo experimental approaches [97]. Data from the two models are not directly comparable, but there should be broad agreement. The main difference between these two experimental methodologies is that in vitro insulin appears to stimulate E2 production by granulosa cells, whereas, in vivo, insulin appears to inhibit the ovarian secretion of E2. Using immature rat ovaries in a perfusion system, Peluso et al. [98] demonstrated that insulin was able to stimulate mitogenic activity and simultaneously to suppress oestradiol secretion. Although the infusion of glucose or the feeding on glucogenic diets, all treatments which increased plasma glucose concentrations, increased the number of follicles and stimulated insulin secretion [20], it reduced the concentration of E2 and the follicular levels of CYP19a1 (cytochrome P450 19a1) [20,22,23]. Using an ovarian auto-transplant sheep model [99] in which the ovary was perfused in vivo with insulin without increasing the peripheral concentration of glucose, thus separating out the actions of insulin and glucose, insulin did not affect follicular steroidogene-sis, and, when glucose was included in the perfusate, follicular steroidogenesis was inhibited [99]. Thus the in vivo effect of insulin on steroidogenesis appears to require the uptake of glucose and is associated with decreased phosphorylation of Akt, ERK and AMPK [22]. Finally, in the post-partum dairy cow, glucogenic diets that stimulated the secretion of insulin enhanced follicular development and advanced the resumption of ovarian cyclicity but, they had detrimental effects on embryo survival [100–102].

The in vitro action of insulin in ovarian cells
In most in vitro systems, insulin stimulates both cell proliferation and steroidogenesis in cultured granulosa and theca calls. Insulin stimulated basal and FSH or LH-induced secretion of P4 and E2 and it was also able to stimulate basal and FSH-induced aromatase activity [103,104]. However, in bovine granulosa cells high doses of insulin did not stimulate aromatase activity [105], thus suggesting that a high concentration of insulin favours the secretion of P4 and androgen secretion over the secretion of E2. Insulin can also directly stimulate granulosa cell proliferation [106]. Finally, insulin increased glucose transport [107], GS activity [108], the intracellular accumulation of free fatty acids [109] and the expression of LH-induced low-density lipoprotein receptors [110]. Insulin-stimulated androgen secretion by human and animal theca cells [111–113] that provides substrates for the synthesis of E2 in granulosa cells [114,115]. In rat thecal cells, insulin-stimulated cell proliferation and the expression of the cell cycle regulatory proteins CDK4 (cyclin-dependent kinase 4), cyclin D3 and PCNA (proliferating-cell nuclear antigen) were all blocked by rapamycin implicating the mTORC1 signalling pathway in these actions of insulin [116]. Landau et al. [100] suggested that insulin may affect oocyte maturation in vivo because there were increased levels of insulin in pre-ovulatory follicles compared with subordinate follicles. Insulin in supra-physiological concentrations had a stimulatory effect on the cleavage and maturation of oocytes in vitro [101], but prolonged hyperinsulinemia in vivo had a negative impact on the developmental competence of oocytes [117,118]. In addition, it was reported that hyperinsulinemia was associated with impaired oocyte quality in cattle [119].

INSULIN SIGNALLING PATHWAYS IN THE OVARY
The various insulin signalling pathways (Figure 1) in ovarian cells can function independently of FSH and LH to, for example, promote glucose transport, cell proliferation, cell differentiation and fatty acid synthesis and to inhibit apoptosis in gonadotropin-independent follicles. In gonadotropin-responsive and gonadotropin-dependent follicles, insulin can also interact with the gonadotropins to modulate hormone secretion and perhaps other differentiated functions. Studies of insulin signalling pathways in ovarian cells have been largely confined to granulosa cells and oocytes, with limited data available for the other cell types in the ovary.

The PI3/Akt pathway
Among the various signalling pathways involved in the regulation of folliculogenesis and oogenesis [120,121], the PI3K/Akt signalling pathway with its many branches appears to be the main non-gonadotropic, regulator of the differentiation, growth and survival of follicles. The observations showing that the deletion of various genes in this pathway can cause premature ovarian failure (POF) and infertility (Tables 1 and 2) points to an essential role in ovarian function.

Table 1 The physiological and biochemical consequences of targeted disruption or overexpression of components of insulin signalling pathways in ovarian cells
Component modified	Targeted ovarian cell	Genetic transformation	Physiological and biochemical consequences	Reference	
IR or IGF-IR	Developing oocytes	Knockout	Fertile and with normal oestrous cycles, oocyte development and maturation, frequency of littering and litter size	[71]	
IR	Theca-interstitial cells	Knockout	No changes in reproductive development or function in lean mice but when fed on a high-fat diet causing obesity, wild-type (WT) mice were infertile and had increased circulating testosterone levels, whereas knockout mice were fertile and had testosterone concentrations comparable to those found in lean mice	[203]	
PTEN	Granulosa	Knockout	Did not affect initiation of follicle growth but increased granulosa cell proliferation, extended the lifespan of luteal cells and enhanced ovulation	[148]	
PTEN	Oocyte (of primordial follicles)	Knockout	Pan-ovarian follicle activation and premature oocyte depletion, primary ovarian insufficiency	[123]	
PTEN	Oocyte (of primary and developed follicles)	Knockout	Unaltered follicular development, ovulation, oocyte maturation and fertility	[111]	
PI3K	Immature oocyte	Constitutively active overexpression	Anovulation, enlarged ovaries, increased survival of immature follicles, formation of follicles containing multiple oocytes	[204]	
TSC1	Oocyte	Knockout	Primary ovarian insufficiency	[205]	
TSC1	Granulosa	Knockout	Infertile with pleiotropic effects on follicle recruitment	[141]	
TSC2	Oocyte	Knockout	Over-activation of the entire pool of primordial follicles, primary ovarian insufficiency	[206]	
PDK1	Oocyte (of primordial follicles)	Knockout	Gradual loss of ovarian follicles of all classes, but this phenotype can be reversed by simultaneous null mutation of PTEN	[122]	
rpS6 (the only known ribosomal substrate protein of S6K1)	Oocyte (of primordial follicles)	Knockout	Primary ovarian insufficiency	[122]	
Raptor (regulatory-associated protein of mTORC1)	Oocyte (of primordial follicles)	Knockout	Follicular development and fertility not affected, loss of mTORC1 signalling in oocytes triggered compensatory activation of the PI3K signalling, thus maintaining normal follicular development and fertility	[207]	
Rictor (rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR, a key component of mTORC2)	Oocyte (of primordial follicles)	Knockout	POF phenotype, massive follicular death, excessive loss of functional ovarian follicles, abnormal gonadal hormone secretion	[208]	
MAPK, also known as ERK	Granulosa and cumulus cells	Knockout	Failed to ovulate and are completely infertile. Necessary for LH-induced oocyte resumption of meiosis, ovulation and luteinization	[209]	
Table 2 The physiological and biochemical consequences of targeted disruption or overexpression of components of insulin signalling pathways in other (non-ovarian) cells
Note: knockout of insulin is lethal 2 days after birth [202] and knockout of the IR is lethal 1 week after birth [199].

Component	Tissue/cell type	Effect on fertility	Ovarian consequences	Reference	
IR	Brain neurons	Impaired fertility (50%)	Fewer antral follicles and corpora lutea due to reduced release of LH	[210]	
IRS-1	All	70% pregnancy rate	Mildly defective reproductive function	[211]	
IRS-2	All	Infertile	Reduced LH levels and gonadotropin number, show reduced gonadotropin-stimulated ovulation and markedly reduced numbers of ovarian follicles and corpora lutea	[212]	
IRS-2	All	Infertile	Reduced follicle size, increased numbers of atretic follicles, as well as impaired oocyte growth and antral cavity development, granulosa cell proliferation defective	[213]	
IRS-2	CNS and hypothalamus	Fertile	Minimal defects in pituitary and ovarian hormone concentrations, ovarian anatomy and function	[213]	
IRS-3	All	Fertile	No effects on fertility or embryonic viability	[214]	
IRS-4	All	50% pregnancy rate	Null females are less nurturing of their pups	[215]	
FOXO3a	All	A marked age-dependent decline in reproductive fitness and were sterile by 15 weeks of age	Global follicular activation, oocyte death, early depletion of functional follicles and secondary infertility	[216]	
SHB (3Src homology 2 domain-containing adapter protein B)	All	Fertile. Shb−/− embryos cannot be created on a C57Bl/6 background but only on a mixed genetic background. Heterozygotes (Shb+/−) are viable	Defective meiosis I and early embryo development	[217]	
p110δ (pik3cd)	All	Sub-fertile	Defects in ovarian follicle maturation	[218]	
Akt1	All	Reduced fertility	Abnormal oestrous cycles, POF, no compensation was observed by Akt2 or Akt3	[219]	
Akt2	All	Reduced fertility in aged mice	Aged mice have testosterone concentrations and ovarian cysts with increased numbers of thecal-interstitial cells	[220]	
Akt2	All	Normal fertility for young mice			
GSK3 isoforms		Fertile	GSK3α or GSK3β did not induce a lethal phenotype. Individual loss of oocyte but no effect on fertility	[221]	
IGFBP1	Overexpression in liver	Reduced fertility	Impaired fertilization or implantation, interrupted or prolonged pregnancies with fetal and neonatal death	[222]	
The kinase PDK1 is expressed in the oocyte, and appears to be indispensable for the survival of primordial follicles because mice deficient in PDK1 are infertile with accelerated ovarian aging and POF [122]. At a molecular level, the absence of this kinase from oocytes leads to the suppression of Akt/S6K1/rpS6 (ribosomal protein S6) signalling (Table 1). The low activity of rpS6 leads to accelerated loss of primordial follicles; in contrast, its over-activity enhances follicular activation and survival [122,123]. In the mouse ovary, PTEN is specifically expressed by oocytes and contributes to the maintenance of the pool of quiescent primordial follicles [122]. Its deletion causes Akt hyper-activation, thereby inducing the rapid depletion of the primordial follicle pool and POF [123]. It is noteworthy that, whereas the loss of PTEN in oocytes leads to POF due to excessive follicular activation and degeneration, PDK1 deficiency causes POF as a result of abnormal recruitment of primordial follicles [122,123]. Both mutations have been implicated in the onset of POF in humans [122,124].

The role of Akt in the mammalian ovary has been mainly assessed by analysing null mice (Tables 1 and 2). Female mice deficient in Akt1 have reduced fertility, the onset of oestrus cyclicity is delayed by approximately 5 days, increased maternal age at first litter and a reduction in average litter size and a delay in the onset of puberty. The oocytes of primary follicles of Akt1-deficient females are larger than wild-type animals, and sometimes follicles contain multiple oocytes. The consequences of the deletion of Akt2 on fertility are still unclear, but Akt3-deficient females are reported to have normal fertility. In the porcine ovary, Akt1 has been localized in granulosa cells of primordial follicles and in the basal layers of the granulosa cells of pre-antral and antral follicles, but not in atretic follicles or corpora lutea. In the human ovary, Akt1 is expressed in oocytes, in granulosa cells and in the thecal cells of primordial follic-les, in follicles at each growing stage and in the luteal cells [125]. In rodents, Akt1 has been found in both granulosa cells and oocytes [122]. The presence of Akt has been reported in both sheep and cattle [126], and in sheep, the infusion of glucose reduced the level of phosphorylated Akt in sheep granulosa cells [22,23].

The ERK pathway
The MAPK/ERK1/2-dependent pathway appears to be involved in several key processes induced by the LH surge, in pre-ovulatory follicles. These processes include the resumption of meiosis in the oocyte [127–129], the expansion of the cumulus [127], gene expression in the follicle [30,34,35] and the disruption of gap junctions within the follicle [129]. The MAPK/ERK1/2-dependent pathway also has been reported as being involved in the regulation of steroidogenesis in granulosa cells; however, its precise role in this process is controversial. Some studies suggest that activation of MAPK is required for promoting steroidogenesis and steroidogenic gene expression in granulosa cells [130,131], whereas other studies indicate that activation of MAPK3/1 suppresses these [132,133]. Most of these studies use either luteinizing granulosa cells derived from patients undergoing IVF or rat granulosa cells isolated from early antral follicles. Therefore, species-specific variations, as well as other factors, such as the stage of development of the cultured granulosa cells, may account for these discrepancies.

GONADOTROPIN SIGNALLING PATHWAYS IN THE OVARY
Both FSH and LH signalling pathways in ovarian cells have been extensively studied [134–137]. The first reported, and probably the primary pathway, for both gonadotropins is the cAMP/PKA (protein kinase A) pathway. However, subsequently, several other signalling pathways that respond to gonadotropin stimulation have been reported in granulosa, thecal and luteal cells. These include the PI3K/PDK1/Akt pathway, the MAPK pathways and the PKC pathway.

Follicle-stimulating hormone in granulosa cells
Granulosa cells contain FSH receptors and, on ligand binding, adenylate cyclase produces cAMP which then phosphorylates PKA which then phosphorylates multiple downstream substrates along diverse pathways leading to gene transcription. Over 100 FSH-inducible genes have been identified in granulosa cells [134]. Additional FSH signalling pathways that have been identified in granulosa cells include the cAMP-independent pathways PI3K/Akt and PKC that result in cAMP-independent responses to FSH in granulosa cells. The MAPK pathways ERK, JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) and p38MAPK can also be activated in granulosa cells by FSH via cAMP/PKA or independently. This array of FSH signalling networks has considerable overlap with the array of insulin signalling networks providing opportunities for cross-talk between insulin and FSH signalling pathways.

LH in granulosa and thecal cells
Thecal and luteal cells contain LH receptors and, similarly to FSH, ligand binding leads to the production of cAMP and phosphorylation of PKA. The signalling pathways for LH are very similar to those for FSH. Indeed, in the selected ovulatory follicle(s), LH can substitute for FSH to protect the selected follicle during the follicular phase from the damaging influence of the E2-driven decline in the circulating concentrations of FSH [77]. This action of LH providing an alternative to FSH to protect the follicle from atresia is probably mediated by the LH receptor. The principal pathway is the cAMP/PKA/CREB (cAMP-response-element-binding protein) pathway and other known pathways include the PI3K and ERK pathways.

INSULIN OOGENESIS AND FOLLICULOGENESIS
Primordial follicles
The formation of primordial follicles occurs during the latter half of pregnancy in humans and ruminants, but immediately after birth in rodents. The postnatal mouse ovary is mainly populated by primordial follicle each composed of a meiotically arrested primary oocyte surrounded by flattened pre-granulosa cells. Several lines of evidence suggest a close relationship between KIT ligand (KL) and the PI3K/Akt pathway, and that both are necessary for oogenesis and the early stages of folliculogenesis [138]. Because of its chemoattractant action, KL is fundamental in the control of the migration of primordial germ cells (PGCs) into the genital ridges. In purified mouse PGCs isolated 11.5–12.5 days post-coitum, KL stimulates the phosphorylation of Akt by either PI3K or Src kinases. The crucial role of Akt in promoting the survival and proliferation of PGCs has been confirmed by Kimura et al. [139] who found that apoptosis of PGCs was decreased and proliferation increased with the induction of Akt.

The primordial to primary follicle transition is also controlled by KL signalling through induction of the PI3K/Akt pathway. The interaction between KL, which is expressed primarily by granulosa cells and KIT receptor, which is present in oocytes [140], stimulates the recruitment of PI3K from the cytoplasm to the cell membrane through the binding of the SH2 domain of the p85 subunit of PI3K to the phosphorylated tyrosine on KIT [138]. This binding promotes the activation of Akt and the subsequent phosphorylation of downstream target proteins. Activated Akt controls the phosphorylation of TSC2 that, in association with hamartin (TSC1), controls mTOR. In oocytes and granulosa cells, TSC1 is active and helps to regulate the pool of primordial follicles [141]. However, despite this evidence suggesting the importance of Akt for the survival and proliferation of PGCs, the effects of hyperinsulinemia on the formation of PGCs is not known.

Oocytes
The transformation of diploid oogonia into haploid oocytes involves many of the downstream targets of insulin signalling and thus is potentially influenced by insulin. Phosphorylated Akt controls the activity of the serine/threonine kinase, GSK3 and some of the FOXO family of transcription factors (FOXO1, FOXO3a and FOXO4). In mouse oocytes, granulosa cell-derived KL regulates the PI3K/Akt pathway, because the specific PI3Kinhibitor LY294002 inhibits this process. The Akt1-mediated phosphorylation of GSK3α at Ser21 or GSK3β at Ser9 results in the inactivation of GSK3. In the bovine ovary, GSK3β is localized to cytoplasm of granulosa cells and oocytes throughout folliculogenesis. In MII (metaphase-II) oocytes, the kinase is present in a region between the oocyte and the first polar body. The use of specific inhibitors has suggested a role for GSK3β in the regulation of the MI to MII transition, probably participating in the activation of Aurora A kinase [142]. Also mouse oocytes contain GSK3 mRNA and protein, and its pharmacological inhibition causes an abnormal configuration and function of the meiotic spindle, chromatin organization and bivalent chromatin segregation. On the other hand, phosphorylated PKCζ inactivates GSK3β by phosphorylation on Ser9 to help maintain spindle stability during meiotic metaphase arrest [143].

The transcription factors FOXO1, FOXO3a and FOXO4 are also involved in the control of folliculogenesis [144]. One of them, FOXO3a, has been detected in the nucleus of oocytes in primordial and early primary follicles, and its expression is dramatically down-regulated in oocytes of primary and growing follicles [120,145]. Although FOXO1 mRNA is expressed in mouse oocytes [120] and can regulate different functions, it is not expressed in sufficient quantities to substitute for FOXO3a. When oocytes are treated with KL, FOXO3 is phosphorylated and inactivated. In the oocyte, FOXO3a inhibits the production of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP-15) and possibly the activation of SMAD (homolog of Drosophila and C. elgans proteins) pathways that control the proliferation and differentiation of surrounding granulosa cells. It has been suggested that the only role of oocyte PI3K is to regulate FOXO3a activity [146].

Gonadotropin-independent follicles
In the mammalian ovary, FOXO3a controls follicular activation and early follicle development. In fact, it suppresses the initiation of follicular growth and controls the rate of activation of primordial follicles. Knockout experiments in mice (Tables 1 and 2) have demonstrated the importance of FOXO3a but not GSK3 for the growth and development of gonadotropin-independent follicles. The functional consequences of FOXO3a inactivation is a rapid decline in fertility, an increased number of atretic follicle and a depletion of the primordial follicle pool. In these knockout mice, POF and infertility are established by 15 weeks of age [146]. The absence of oocyte-specific FOXO3 induces global activation of primordial follicles, as does deletion of PTEN [123]. However, in the absence of PTEN, PI3K is capable of directly stimulating Akt-dependent phosphorylation and nuclear export of FOXO3a, thereby triggering uncontrolled primordial follicle activation and POF. In contrast, overexpression of FOXO3a leads to female infertility due to impaired follicle development. In fact, in neonatal rat ovaries, the overexpression of FOXO3a and its downstream factors, Bim (B-cell lymphoma-2), FasL (Fas ligand) and the cell cycle inhibitor p27 (CDK inhibitor p27) stimulated apoptosis in naked oocytes. In addition, constitutively active FOXO3a dramatically affects BMP-15, connexin37 and connexin43, thereby inhibiting the growth of oocytes and follicles. Other specific target genes regulated by FOXO3 are p27 and the enzyme galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT), both involved in the control of follicular activation. In particular, FOXO3a enhances p27 expression and prevents its transfer from nucleus to ooplasm, thereby maintaining the growth-inhibitory function of this protein [147].

FSH-responsive and FSH-dependent follicles
Granulosa cells
In granulosa cells, FSH regulates ovarian atresia via the PI3K/Akt/FOXO3a pathway (Figure 2). Indeed, in the porcine ovary, FSH inactivated FOXO3a and prevented its binding to the pro-apoptotic Bim promoter [148]. Thus, in granulosa cells, FSH-dependent activation of Akt regulates apoptosis [148] and cell differentiation [149]. In contrast, in cumulus cells, FSH-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt and MAPK participate in the maintenance of cell survival (Figure 2) and the synthesis and retention of hyaluronic acid [150].

Figure 2 Some possible sites of cross-talk (critical nodes) between the insulin and FSH signalling pathways in granulosa cells
Insulin signalling through Akt1 and FOXO1 can enhance FSH-stimulated steroidogenesis and, similarly, FSH acting through Akt1 can enhance insulin-stimulated glucose transport leading to increased flux through the hexosamine pathway and to the inhibition of aromatase. Thus insulin can interact with FSH to stimulate P4 and inhibit E2 production. Likewise, FSH acting via mTOR and/or ERK can enhance cell proliferation and protein synthesis, cell proliferation and, acting via Akt1 and FOXO3a, it can inhibit apoptosis. The FSH-stimulated FOXO1 pathway appears to have stage -specific effects in follicles; in small follicles granulosa cell proliferation is stimulated, in antral follicles it is steroidogenesis that is stimulated and, at ovulation, atresia is stimulated in non-ovulatory follicles. Stimulatory connections are shown in black and inhibitory ones are shown in red.

The expression and activity of FOXO1 are modulated by FSH and LH through the PI3K/Akt pathway [151] and FOXO1 expression is elevated in granulosa cells of growing follicles. Expression of a constitutively active nuclear form of FOXO1 in granulosa cells reduces cyclin D2, aromatase P450 (CYP19a1), FSH receptor, LH receptor and enzymes of the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway [147]. Following ovulation and luteinization, FOXO1 expression is reduced, and the most intensive FOXO1 staining is seen in the nucleus of granulosa cells of atretic follicles. This finding suggests a causal relationship between follicular atresia and increased nuclear FOXO1. In addition, FOXO1 is negatively regulated by Wnt signalling [152]. Unlike other FOXO members, FOXO4-null mice are viable and have no developmental defects or histological abnormalities suggesting functional redundancy in this subfamily. The PI3K/Akt pathway in the mammalian ovary is subject to regulation by the TGFβ superfamily which includes factors derived from granulosa (activin, BMP-2, -5 and -6) and theca cells (BMP-2, -4 and -7) that are involved in the regulation of granulosa cell proliferation and follicle survival and apoptosis [120]. Recent data support a link between BMP signalling, PI3K/Akt and the small GTPase (Ras)/ERK pathways in the regulation of cell survival. In particular, it has been found that BMP-4 suppresses the apoptosis of granulosa cells by maintaining CAD protein (a ‘fusion’ protein encoding four enzymes of the pyrimidine pathway [152]) in the cytosol instead of the nuclei, where the protein triggers DNA digestion.

Theca cells
Because LH and insulin act physiologically via distinct intracellular signalling mechanisms, their synergistic enhancement of theca-cell steroidogenesis likely entails important interactions between these two respective pathways (Figure 3). Indeed, it has been shown that insulin significantly increased LH-stimulated cAMP accumulation in cultured porcine theca cells [153]. The insulin-stimulated increase in cAMP is probably induced through PI3K because the activation of adenylate cyclase by insulin was blocked with the use of non-specific inhibitors of PI3K in rat muscle. In addition, LH induced rapid activation of JAK2 in the rat ovary that then activated, through IRS-1, both the PI3K and the MAPK pathways [154]. Simultaneous stimulation with LH and insulin induced higher phosphorylation levels of these proteins compared with each hormone alone. Therefore, important cross-talk exists between the insulin and LH signalling pathways, such that increased activity of one pathway might also increase the responsiveness of the other pathway (Figure 3).

Figure 3 Some possible sites of cross-talk (critical nodes) between the insulin and LH signalling pathways in theca cells
Insulin signalling through Akt1 can stimulate PDE to inhibit the degradation of cAMP and so enhance LH-stimulated androgen production; similarly, insulin acting via Akt1 and FOXO1 can enhance LH-stimulated steroidogenesis. Acting via mTOR and/or ERK, LH can enhance cell proliferation and protein synthesis and it can inhibit apoptosis. LH acting directly or via cAMP can enhance insulin stimulation of ERK, whereas, at the same time, LH can stimulate JAK2 which inhibits Shc activation of ERK. The balance of these opposing actions can modulate insulin-stimulated cell proliferation and protein synthesis. Stimulatory connections are shown in black and inhibitory ones are shown in red.

A study on normal human theca cells demonstrated that specific blockade of PI3K, but not of MEK, inhibited the stimulating effect of insulin and LH on ovarian cytochrome P450, 17α-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase (CYP C17-lyase) [155]. Another study confirmed these results in theca cells from normal and PCOS women and also constitutively reduced levels of phosphorylated MEK and ERK in PCOS cells. These constitutive defects were correlated with increased androgen production, irrespective of the presence of insulin [156]. Infection with dominant-negative MEK1 increased CYP C17-lyase mRNA, whereas constitutively active MEK1 reduced CYP C17-lyase mRNA. This suggests that alteration of the MAPK pathway can induce androgen hyper-responsiveness to insulin in PCOS ovaries.

Oocyte maturation
In rodents and humans, elevated levels of cAMP are necessary to maintain oocytes in meiotic arrest, and phosphorylated Akt and the mRNA for Akt have been detected in GV (germinal vesicle) stage oocytes [157]. The processes of ovulation, luteinization and oocyte maturation are triggered by the LH surge when this gonadotropin induces some elaborate signalling cascades that activate specific intracellular substrates. The LH surge stimulates PI3K/Akt [158–160]. High activity of Akt is necessary to phosphorylate PDE3A (cAMP-phosphodiesterase 3A) that specifically degrades cAMP [161] during the early stages of oocyte maturation to activate either PDE3A [158] or the downstream mTOR pathway, which phosphorylates factors promoting protein synthesis [162]. Suppression of Akt decreased CDK1 and delayed the resumption of meiosis in mouse oocytes [162].

Following germinal vesicle breakdown, phosphorylated kinases are associated with microtubules of the first meiotic spindle [157,162]. In vitro experiments clearly indicated that inhibition of Akt inhibits MI itself, and, at MII, Akt controls the extrusion of polar body 2 and normal chromosomal alignment on microtubules [159]. This role was confirmed by treatment with LY294002 that decreased phosphorylated Akt-Thr308, altered localization of phosphorylated Akt-Ser473 during oocyte maturation and impaired extrusion of the polar body [159]. In cattle oocytes, Akt was involved in the regulation of meiotic MI–MII transition [160] and furthermore spindle migration and the asymmetric division during meiotic maturation are controlled also by mTOR [163]. Comparison of the levels of mRNA for Akt1 during in vivo maturation showed a significant decrease in Akt1 mRNA from GV to MII and the level of expression can be differentially modulated by FSH [157]. At MII, phosphorylated Akt is still expressed and its role may be to support oocyte survival, at least during the fertilization window. The findings that Akt 1, 2 and 3 mRNA levels are very low in oocytes retrieved from ampullae 29 h post hCG and that protein content was dramatically decreased by 33 h post hCG confirm this hypothesis [164]. These data confirm the importance of PI3K/Akt pathway in oocyte maturation and indicate key roles for FSH and IGF-I, but, apart from being theoretically possible, tell us little of the involvement of insulin in oocyte maturation.

THE EFFECTS OF INSULIN-SENSITIZING DRUGS ON OVARIAN FUNCTION
At an ovarian level, it is thought that hyperinsulinemia has direct and indirect actions on folliculogenesis and intra-ovarian gonadotropin-driven granulosa and thecal cell steroidogenesis [165]. The biguanide metformin and the thiazolidinediones troglitazone (no longer available), pioglitazone and rosiglitazone are all antidiabetic drugs that act by improving the sensitivity of peripheral tissues to insulin, which results in decreased circulating insulin levels [166].

Metformin
Metformin is an oral anti-hyperglycaemic drug that acts as an insulin-sensitizing agent that reduces hyperinsulinaemia and suppresses the excessive ovarian production of androgens in women with PCOS. It improves systemic hyperglycaemia by reducing hepatic glucose production and enhancing peripheral insulin sensitivity [167]. It stimulates the oxidation of fat and reduces the synthesis and storage of fat. The molecular mechanism of this drug is thought to be secondary to its actions on the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Metformin has been identified as a substrate of organic cation transporters (OCTs). Metformin uptake in the liver is mediated by OCT1 [168,169]. Consistent with these data, the knockout of OCT1 reduces metformin uptake in hepatocytes, and humans carrying reduced function polymorphisms of the OCT1 gene display an impaired effect of metformin in lowering blood glucose levels [170]. In the human ovary, a strong expression of OCT1 has been detected suggesting a direct effect of metformin on ovarian cells [171]. One mechanism for these pleiotropic actions is the activation of AMPK, mediated by the proximal kinase, serine/threonine protein kinase 11 (previously termed LKB1) [172]. Although the efficacy of metformin for improving systemic metabolism in PCOS patients has been confirmed, its effect on reproduction remains controversial. Some investigators showed that metformin can improve conception rates following ovulation induction prior to IVF [173,174]. In contrast, other studies demonstrated that metformin has no clinical benefit in terms of ovulation rate or pregnancy outcome [175,176]. In women with PCOS, metformin treatment before or during assisted reproductive technology increased pregnancy rates and decreased the risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. However, there is no conclusive evidence of a benefit in live birth rates [177].

Although the positive effects of metformin on reproductive parameters such as decreasing hyperandrogenism and inducing ovulation [178] are attributed to its insulin-sensitizing actions, there is accumulating evidence of a direct effect of metformin on ovarian steroidogenesis [179,180]; this is summarized in Table 3. In human granulosa cells, metformin interacted with the IR to activate IRS-1 and -2, leading to an increased insulin-stimulated translocation of GLUT4 to the plasma membrane via PI3K activation of Akt. Metformin directly increased the mRNA expression for IR and IGF-IR [181], whereas it reduced that of aromatase through the MAPK ERK1/2 pathway [182]. These findings may have implications for the treatment of PCOS with metformin [183]. In primary human granulosa, metformin increased visfatin mRNA in a dose-dependent manner after treatment for 24 h, whereas it was reduced after 48 h of incubation [184]. Thus, metformin could increase insulin sensitivity through visfatin, an adipokine that has an important role in regulating insulin sensitivity. During oocyte maturation, the oocyte obtains most of its energy from cumulus cells, which metabolize glucose to produce pyruvate and lactate the preferred substrates of the oocyte [185] and metformin stimulated the production of lactate by human granulosa cells [186]. Lipids are another energy source for oocyte maturation, and metformin increased β-oxidation of fatty acids, which is essential for developmental competence of mouse oocytes [187,188].

Table 3 Effects of insulin sensitizers (metformin, rosiglitazone and pioglitazone) in ovarian cells of different species
Insulin sensitizer	Ovarian cells	Species or cell line	Biological effects	Reference	
Metformin	Granulosa	Human	Inhibition of basal and insulin-stimulated E2 and aromatase via an ERK-mediated pathway	[182]	
Metformin	Granulosa	Human	Enhancement of insulin-stimulated lactate production at sub-optimal concentrations of insulin	[186]	
Metformin	Granulosa	HGL5 (human)	Improvement of basal cell viability and Akt phosphorylation	[223]	
Metformin	Granulosa	Rat	Reduction in progesterone and oestradiol production	[224]	
Metformin	Granulosa	Cattle	Inhibition of steroidogenesis and MAPK ERK1/2 phosphorylation through AMPK activation	[79]	
			Inhibition of IGF-I-stimulated cell growth, protein synthesis, MAPK ERK1/2 and p90RSK phosphorylation through an AMPK-dependent mechanism	[225]	
Metformin	Granulosa	Pig	Improved activation of insulin signalling	[226]	
Metformin	Theca-interstitial	Rat	Inhibition of proliferation via an AMPK-dependent mechanism	[227]	
Metformin	Theca	Human	Inhibition of androgen production	[179]	
Metformin	Cumulus oocyte complex	Cattle	Blockage of meiotic progression at the germinal vesicle stage through an activation of AMPK and inhibition of MAPK ERK1/2	[79]	
Metformin	Follicle	Knockout	Gradual loss of ovarian follicles of all classes, but this phenotype can be reversed by simultaneous null mutation of PTEN	[122]	
Rosiglitazone	Granulosa cells	Sheep	Inhibited granulosa cell proliferation and increased the secretion of P4 in vitro	[194]	
Rosiglitazone	Granulosa lutein cells	Human	Stimulated StAR but had no effect on steroidogenic enzymes E2 or P4	[228]	
Rosiglitazone	Mixed granulosa, theca and stroma cells	Human	Stimulated P4 and IGFBP-1, inhibited E2 and testosterone, abolished insulin-induced stimulation of testosterone and insulin-dependent stimulation of E2 in the presence of FSH and enhanced insulin-induced inhibition of IGFBP-1	[199]	
Rosiglitazone	Ovarian cells	Pig	Increased P4 secretion and PPARγ expression and 3βHSD activity. Decreased androstendione and testosterone by reducing the expression and activity of CYP17-lyase and 17βHSD (17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase), but no change in E2 secretion and CYP19a1	[229]	
Rosiglitazone	Oocytes	Mouse	Stimulated AMPK and enhanced resumption of meiosis in oocytes	[230]	
Rosiglitazone and pioglitazone		Diabetic women with PCOS	Improved insulin resistance and hyperandrogenism by an unknown mechanism	[231]	
Pioglitazone	NCI-H295R cells	Human cell line	Inhibited androgen production by regulating expression of CYP17 and 3βHSD (3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase)	[231]	
Rosiglitazone
Contrary to metformin that primarily reduces hepatic glucose output, the thiazolidinedione rosiglitazone increases insulin sensitivity. Thiazolidinediones are a class of oral insulin-sensitizing agents that exert their action as ligands of peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor (PPARγ). The PPARs are a family of transcriptional nuclear factors with three isoforms (α, β and γ) belonging to the nuclear receptor superfamily of transcription factors [189]. Upon stimulation, PPARγ heterodimerizes with the retinoid X receptor (RXR) to bind to ‘PPAR-responsive’ elements, and thereby activating the transcription of specific genes. The activation of PPARγ regulates the synthesis of steroid hormones in granulosa cells and the disruption of PPARγ in the ovary leads to female sub-fertility [190,191]. However the cardiovascular safety of rosiglitazone is questionable [192] and therefore its use in human medicine is limited.

Expression of PPARγ has been reported in granulosa cells from rats [193], mice [191], sheep [194], humans [195], pigs [196] and cattle [197], and in human oocytes [198]. In follicles, PPARγ is detected in primary, secondary and pre-ovulatory follicles and its expression increases as follicles develop, but after the LH surge, PPARγ mRNA expression is reduced [193]. Insulin and the thiazolidinediones can independently stimulate the expression of PPARγ, IR, IRS-1 and StAR (steroidogenic acute regulatory protein) in human ovarian cells. Thus, PPARγ, IR with its signalling pathways and StAR constitute, in humans, a novel ovarian regulatory system with complex interactions among its components [199,200]. Moreover, PPARγ has been defined as a critical regulator of ovulation because granulosa cell-specific deletion of PPARγ results in defective follicular rupture in mice [190]. In sheep granulosa cells, rosiglitazone inhibited cellular proliferation and increased the secretion of progesterone in vitro [194]. In contrast, it had no effect on LH, FSH, prolactin and growth hormone secretion by cultured ovine pituitary cells. Overall, these data suggest that PPARγ ligands stimulate follicular differentiation in vivo most likely through a direct action on granulosa cells rather than by modulating pituitary hormone secretion [194]. The ovarian actions of rosiglitazone are summarized in Table 3.

Various endogenous factors, such as eicosanoids, fatty acids and prostaglandins metabolites, known to regulate ovarian function, are natural ligands of PPARγ (for a review, see [193]). Among these, the lipoxygenase-derived and the epoxygenase-derived metabolites of AA (arachidonic acid) enhanced the transcription of StAR. It has been demonstrated that thiazolidinediones, synthetic ligands of PPARγ, modulate steroid production in reproductive tissues. For example, the activation of PPARγ by thiazolidinediones in porcine theca cells [196], in rat [201] and ovine granulosa [194] cells, and in bovine luteal cells [197] leads to increased progesterone production. Somewhat different effects are observed in cultured human granulosa cells where activators of PPARγ decreased the activity of aromatase by blocking nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) signalling [202]. Previously, the expression of StAR was increased in response to thiazolidinediones in both a mixed human ovarian tissue culture containing granulosa, theca and stroma cells, as well as purified human granulosa cells [199]. Furthermore, in mice, PPARγ is regulated by P4 in the pre-ovulatory mouse follicles [190]. In addition, PPARγ may be indirectly involved in oocyte maturation via the granulosa cells. Indeed, disruption of PPARγ gene in the ovary using Cre-LoxP recombination technology led to female sub-fertility [191].

CONCLUSIONS
The action of insulin and insulin-mediated uptake of glucose on ovarian cells is of importance for animal production (dairy cattle, small ruminants and pigs) as well as to some fields of human reproductive medicine. It is evident from the available literature that the function of the ovary is subject to some form of local or direct modulation by the insulin and insulin/glucose systems. Although the gonadotropins, LH and FSH, are the primary regulators of terminal folliculogenesis, early folliculogenesis can proceed in the absence of the gonadotropins. Furthermore, in the later gonadotropin-dependent stages of development, this process can be modulated by numerous external influences, insulin being one of them. Likewise, the converse is also possible, that is, the gonadotropins can also modulate the action of insulin in follicular cells. Thus in granulosa cells, insulin signalling through Akt1 and FOXO1 can enhance FSH-stimulated steroidogenesis, and similarly, FSH acting through Akt1 can enhance insulin-stimulated glucose transport leading to increased flux through the hexosamine pathway and to the inhibition of aromatase. Likewise, FSH acting via mTOR and/or ERK can enhance cell proliferation and protein synthesis, and FSH acting via Akt1 and FOXO3a can inhibit apoptosis.

In theca cells, insulin signalling through Akt1 can stimulate PDE to inhibit the degradation of cAMP and so enhance LH-stimulated androgen production, similarly insulin acting via Akt1 and FOXO1 can enhance LH-stimulated steroidogenesis. Acting via mTOR and/or ERK, LH can enhance cell proliferation and protein synthesis and can inhibit apoptosis. LH acting directly or via cAMP can enhance insulin stimulation of ERK, while, at the same time, LH can stimulate JAK2 which inhibits Shc activation of ERK. The balance of these opposing actions of LH could modulate insulin-stimulated cell proliferation and protein synthesis in ovarian cells.

Folliculogenesis is a dynamic process, and the effects of the gonadotropins on folliculogenesis are stage-dependent and this stage-dependence is likely to also apply to the actions of insulin and to the efficacy of insulin-sensitizing treatments. For example, the FSH-stimulated FOXO1 pathway appears to have stage-specific effects in follicles: in small follicles, granulosa cell proliferation is stimulated; in medium-sized antral follicles, it is steroidogenesis that is stimulated; whereas, at ovulation, atresia is stimulated in the atretic non-ovulatory follicles. However, the FOXO1 pathway is but one example and the picture is far from complete, and we neither know nor understand all of the regulatory mechanism involved in the stage-specific effects of insulin during the continuum of folliculogenesis. Clearly, further research is indicated to understand more fully the mechanisms of action of insulin and the role of glucose in the follicle.

We thank Dr Hannah Brown of the University of Adelaide for her helpful comments.

FUNDING
This work was supported by the Région Centre [grant numbers DURAREP; 2008 00030333 and DURAREP 2; 2011 00064290]; the European Union Framework 6 funding programme [grant number MEXC-CT-2006-042499]; and the European Union Marie Curie Chair of Excellence [grant number MEXC-CT-2006-042499 (to R.J.S.)].

Abbreviations
AGEadvanced glycation end-product

AMPKAMP-dependent protein kinase

AS160Akt substrate of 160 kDa

BadBcl-2-associated death promoter

BMPbone morphogenetic protein

CDKcyclin-dependent kinase

COFcystic ovarian follicle

CYPcytochrome P450

4E-BP1eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1

ERKextracellular-signal-regulated protein kinase

FOXOforkhead box O

FSHfollicle-stimulating hormone

GLUTglucose transporter

GnRHgonadotropin-releasing hormone

GSglycogen synthase

GSK3glycogen synthase kinase-3

GVgerminal vesicle

hCGhuman chorionic gonadotropin

IGFinsulin-like growth factor

IGFBPIGF-binding protein

IGF-IRIGF-I receptor

IRinsulin receptor

IRSinsulin receptor substrate

IVFin vitro fertilization

JAK2Janus kinase 2

JNKc-Jun N-terminal kinase

KLKIT ligand

LHluteinizing hormone

MAPKmitogen-activated protein kinase

MEKMAPK/ERK kinase

MIImetaphase-II

mTORmammalian target of rapamycin

mTORCmTOR complex

NEBnegative energy balance

OCTorganic cation transporter

PCOSpolycystic ovarian syndrome

PDE3AcAMP-phosphodiesterase 3A

PDKphosphoinositide-dependent kinase

PEPCKphosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase

PGCprimordial germ cell

PKAprotein kinase A

PKBprotein kinase B

PKCprotein kinase C

PI3Kphosphoinositide kinase

PIP3phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate

POFpremature ovarian failure

PPARperoxisome-proliferator-activated receptor

PPPpentose phosphate pathway

PTENphosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10

rpS6ribosomal protein S6

SH2Src homology 2

ShcSrc homology collagen

SHIP2SH2-domain-containing inositol phosphatase-2

S6K1p70 ribosomal S6 kinase 1

StARsteroidogenic acute regulatory protein

TGFtransforming growth factor

TSC2tuberous sclerosis complex 2, VFA, volatile fatty acid
==== Refs
1 Franks S.  Robinson S.  Willis D.S.   Nutrition, insulin and polycystic ovary syndrome Rev. Reprod. 1996 1 47 53 10.1530/ror.0.0010047 9414438 
2 Wathes D.C.  Fenwick M.  Cheng Z.  Bourne N.  Llewellyn S.  Morris D.G.  Kenny D.  Murphy J.  Fitzpatrick R.   Influence of negative energy balance on cyclicity and fertility in the high producing dairy cow Theriogenology 2007 68 Suppl. 1 S232 S241 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2007.04.006 17475319 
3 Teleni E.  Rowe J.B.  Croker K.P.  Murray P.J.  King W.R.   Lupins and energy-yielding nutrients in ewes. II. Responses in ovulation rate in ewes to increased availability of glucose, acetate and amino acids Reprod. Fertil. Dev. 1989 1 117 125 10.1071/RD9890117 2798941 
4 Gambineri A.  Pelusi C.  Vicennati V.  Pagotto U.  Pasquali R.   Obesity and the polycystic ovary syndrome Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 2002 26 883 896 10.1038/sj.ijo.0801994 12080440 
5 Carmina E.   Metabolic syndrome in polycystic ovary syndrome Minerva Ginecol. 2006 58 109 114 16582867 
6 Dunaif A.   Insulin resistance and the polycystic ovary syndrome: mechanism and implications for pathogenesis Endocr. Rev. 1997 18 774 800 9408743 
7 Wild R.A.  Rizzo M.  Clifton S.  Carmina E.   Lipid levels in polycystic ovary syndrome: systematic review and meta-analysis Fertil. Steril. 2011 95 1073 1079 e1071–e1011 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.12.027 21247558 
8 Grummer R.R.   Etiology of lipid-related metabolic disorders in periparturient dairy cows J. Dairy Sci. 1993 76 3882 3896 10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(93)77729-2 8132893 
9 Poyastro Pinheiro A.  Thornton L.M.  Plotonicov K.H.  Tozzi F.  Klump K.L.  Berrettini W.H.  Brandt H.  Crawford S.  Crow S.  Fichter M.M.    Patterns of menstrual disturbance in eating disorders Int. J. Eat. Disord. 2007 40 424 434 10.1002/eat.20388 17497704 
10 Chen M.D.  O'Byrne K.T.  Chiappini S.E.  Hotchkiss J.  Knobil E.   Hypoglycemic ‘stress’ and gonadotropin-releasing hormone pulse generator activity in the rhesus monkey: role of the ovary Neuroendocrinology 1992 56 666 673 10.1159/000126291 1488100 
11 Leroy J.L.  Opsomer G.  Van Soom A.  Goovaerts I.G.  Bols P.E.   Reduced fertility in high-yielding dairy cows: are the oocyte and embryo in danger? Part I. The importance of negative energy balance and altered corpus luteum function to the reduction of oocyte and embryo quality in high-yielding dairy cows Reprod. Domest. Anim. 2008 43 612 622 10.1111/j.1439-0531.2007.00960.x 18384499 
12 Ortega H.H.  Marelli B.E.  Rey F.  Amweg A.N.  Diaz P.U.  Stangaferro M.L.  Salvetti N.R.   Molecular aspects of bovine cystic ovarian disease pathogenesis Reproduction 2015 149 R251 R264 10.1530/REP-14-0618 25767139 
13 Vanholder T.  Opsomer G.  de Kruif A.   Aetiology and pathogenesis of cystic ovarian follicles in dairy cattle: a review Reprod. Nutr. Dev. 2006 46 105 119 10.1051/rnd:2006003 16597418 
14 Hooijer G.A.  Lubbers R.B.  Ducro B.J.  van Arendonk J.A.  Kaal-Lansbergen L.M.  van der Lende T.   Genetic parameters for cystic ovarian disease in Dutch black and white dairy cattle J. Dairy Sci. 2001 84 286 291 10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(01)74478-5 11210043 
15 Furman M.  Wade G.N.   Animal models in the study of nutritional infertility Curr. Opin. Endocrinol. Diabetes Obes. 2007 14 475 481 10.1097/MED.0b013e3282f1cb7e 17982355 
16 Katz M.G.  Vollenhoven B.   The reproductive endocrine consequences of anorexia nervosa BJOG 2000 107 707 713 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2000.tb13329.x 10847224 
17 Lucy M.C.   Mechanisms linking nutrition and reproduction in postpartum cows Reprod. Suppl. 2003 61 415 427 14635952 
18 Diskin M.G.  Mackey D.R.  Roche J.F.  Sreenan J.M.   Effects of nutrition and metabolic status on circulating hormones and ovarian follicle development in cattle Anim. Reprod. Sci. 2003 78 345 370 10.1016/S0378-4320(03)00099-X 12818653 
19 Hein G.J.  Panzani C.G.  Rodriguez F.M.  Salvetti N.R.  Diaz P.U.  Gareis N.C.  Benitez G.A.  Ortega H.H.  Rey F.   Impaired insulin signaling pathway in ovarian follicles of cows with cystic ovarian disease Anim. Reprod. Sci. 2015 156 64 74 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2015.02.010 25813700 
20 Scaramuzzi R.J.  Campbell B.K.  Downing J.A.  Kendall N.R.  Khalid M.  Munoz-Gutierrez M.  Somchit A.   A review of the effects of supplementary nutrition in the ewe on the concentrations of reproductive and metabolic hormones and the mechanisms that regulate folliculogenesis and ovulation rate Reprod. Nutr. Dev. 2006 46 339 354 10.1051/rnd:2006016 16824444 
21 Downing J.A.  Scaramuzzi R.J.   Nutrient effects on ovulation rate, ovarian function and the secretion of gonadotrophic and metabolic hormones in sheep J. Reprod. Fertil. Suppl. 1991 43 209 227 1843341 
22 Scaramuzzi R.J.  Zouaidi N.  Menassol J.B.  Dupont J.   The effects of intravenous, glucose versus saline on ovarian follicles and their levels of some mediators of insulin signalling Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 2015 13 6 10.1186/1477-7827-13-6 25604903 
23 Gallet C.  Dupont J.  Campbell B.K.  Monniaux D.  Guillaume D.  Scaramuzzi R.J.   The infusion of glucose in ewes during the luteal phase increases the number of follicles but reduces oestradiol production and some correlates of metabolic function in the large follicles Anim. Reprod. Sci. 2011 127 154 163 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2011.07.017 21943503 
24 Scaramuzzi R.J.  Brown H.M.  Dupont J.   Nutritional and metabolic mechanisms in the ovary and their role in mediating the effects of diet on folliculogenesis: a perspective Reprod. Domest. Anim. 2010 45 Suppl. 3 32 41 10.1111/j.1439-0531.2010.01662.x 24417197 
25 Munoz-Gutierrez M.  Blache D.  Martin G.B.  Scaramuzzi R.J.   Ovarian follicular expression of mRNA encoding the type I IGF receptor and IGF-binding protein-2 in sheep following five days of nutritional supplementation with glucose, glucosamine or lupins Reproduction 2004 128 747 756 10.1530/rep.1.00439 15579592 
26 Mazerbourg S.  Bondy C.A.  Zhou J.  Monget P.   The insulin-like growth factor system: a key determinant role in the growth and selection of ovarian follicles? A comparative species study Reprod. Domest. Anim. 2003 38 247 258 10.1046/j.1439-0531.2003.00440.x 12887564 
27 Armstrong D.G.  Gong J.G.  Webb R.   Interactions between nutrition and ovarian activity in cattle: physiological, cellular and molecular mechanisms Reprod. Suppl. 2003 61 403 414 14635951 
28 Taniguchi C.M.  Emanuelli B.  Kahn C.R.   Critical nodes in signalling pathways: insights into insulin action Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2006 7 85 96 10.1038/nrm1837 16493415 
29 Cai D.  Dhe-Paganon S.  Melendez P.A.  Lee J.  Shoelson S.E.   Two new substrates in insulin signaling, IRS5/DOK4 and IRS6/DOK5 J. Biol. Chem. 2003 278 25323 25330 10.1074/jbc.M212430200 12730241 
30 Versteyhe S.  Blanquart C.  Hampe C.  Mahmood S.  Christeff N.  De Meyts P.  Gray S.G.  Issad T.   Insulin receptor substrates-5 and -6 are poor substrates for the insulin receptor Mol. Med. Rep. 2010 3 189 193 21472221 
31 Sun X.J.  Pons S.  Wang L.M.  Zhang Y.  Yenush L.  Burks D.  Myers M.G. Jr  Glasheen E.  Copeland N.G.  Jenkins N.A.    The IRS-2 gene on murine chromosome 8 encodes a unique signaling adapter for insulin and cytokine action Mol. Endocrinol. 1997 11 251 262 10.1210/mend.11.2.9885 9013772 
32 Pelicci G.  Lanfrancone L.  Grignani F.  McGlade J.  Cavallo F.  Forni G.  Nicoletti I.  Pawson T.  Pelicci P.G.   A novel transforming protein (SHC) with an SH2 domain is implicated in mitogenic signal transduction Cell 1992 70 93 104 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90536-L 1623525 
33 Sasaoka T.  Kobayashi M.   The functional significance of Shc in insulin signaling as a substrate of the insulin receptor Endocr. J. 2000 47 373 381 10.1507/endocrj.47.373 11075717 
34 Diamanti-Kandarakis E.  Papavassiliou A.G.   Molecular mechanisms of insulin resistance in polycystic ovary syndrome Trends Mol. Med. 2006 12 324 332 10.1016/j.molmed.2006.05.006 16769248 
35 Myers M.G. Jr  White M.F.   The new elements of insulin signaling. Insulin receptor substrate-1 and proteins with SH2 domains Diabetes 1993 42 643 650 10.2337/diab.42.5.643 8387037 
36 Ghigo A.  Morello F.  Perino A.  Hirsch E.   Phosphoinositide 3-kinases in health and disease Subcell. Biochem. 2012 58 183 213 10.1007/978-94-007-3012-0 22403077 
37 Wijesekara N.  Konrad D.  Eweida M.  Jefferies C.  Liadis N.  Giacca A.  Crackower M.  Suzuki A.  Mak T.W.  Kahn C.R.    Muscle-specific Pten deletion protects against insulin resistance and diabetes Mol. Cell. Biol. 2005 25 1135 1145 10.1128/MCB.25.3.1135-1145.2005 15657439 
38 Sleeman M.W.  Wortley K.E.  Lai K.M.  Gowen L.C.  Kintner J.  Kline W.O.  Garcia K.  Stitt T.N.  Yancopoulos G.D.  Wiegand S.J.  Glass D.J.   Absence of the lipid phosphatase SHIP2 confers resistance to dietary obesity Nat. Med. 2005 11 199 205 10.1038/nm1178 15654325 
39 Cheatham B.  Vlahos C.J.  Cheatham L.  Wang L.  Blenis J.  Kahn C.R.   Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activation is required for insulin stimulation of pp70 S6 kinase, DNA synthesis, and glucose transporter translocation Mol. Cell. Biol. 1994 14 4902 4911 10.1128/MCB.14.7.4902 8007986 
40 Joost H.G.  Thorens B.   The extended GLUT-family of sugar/polyol transport facilitators: nomenclature, sequence characteristics, and potential function of its novel members (review) Mol. Membr. Biol. 2001 18 247 256 10.1080/09687680110090456 11780753 
41 Shisheva A.   Phosphoinositides in insulin action on GLUT4 dynamics: not just PtdIns(3,4,5)P3  Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2008 295 E536 E544 10.1152/ajpendo.90353.2008 18492765 
42 Farese R.V.  Sajan M.P.  Yang H.  Li P.  Mastorides S.  Gower W.R. Jr  Nimal S.  Choi C.S.  Kim S.  Shulman G.I.    Muscle-specific knockout of PKC-lambda impairs glucose transport and induces metabolic and diabetic syndromes J. Clin. Invest. 2007 117 2289 2301 10.1172/JCI31408 17641777 
43 Baumann C.A.  Ribon V.  Kanzaki M.  Thurmond D.C.  Mora S.  Shigematsu S.  Bickel P.E.  Pessin J.E.  Saltiel A.R.   CAP defines a second signalling pathway required for insulin-stimulated glucose transport Nature 2000 407 202 207 10.1038/35025089 11001060 
44 Avruch J.   Insulin signal transduction through protein kinase cascades Mol. Cell. Biochem. 1998 182 31 48 10.1023/A:1006823109415 9609112 
45 Duchene S.  Audouin E.  Berri C.  Dupont J.  Tesseraud S.   Tissue-specific regulation of S6K1 by insulin in chickens divergently selected for growth Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 2008 156 190 198 10.1016/j.ygcen.2007.12.008 18237733 
46 Wautier J.L.  Schmidt A.M.   Protein glycation: a firm link to endothelial cell dysfunction Circ. Res. 2004 95 233 238 10.1161/01.RES.0000137876.28454.64 15297385 
47 Merhi Z.  McGee E.A.  Buyuk E.   Role of advanced glycation end-products in obesity-related ovarian dysfunction Minerva Endocrinol. 2014 39 167 174 25068304 
48 Guosheng L.  Hongmei S.  Chuan N.  Haiying L.  Xiaopeng Z.  Xianqiong L.   The relationship of serum AGE levels in diabetic mothers with adverse fetal outcome J. Perinatol. 2009 29 483 488 10.1038/jp.2009.12 19279648 
49 Li R.  Yang P.  Chen X.  Wang L.   Maternal serum AGEs levels in pregnancies associated with neural tube defects Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 2014 33 57 61 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.12.002 24345611 
50 Wood I.S.  Trayhurn P.   Glucose transporters (GLUT and SGLT): expanded families of sugar transport proteins Br. J. Nutr. 2003 89 3 9 10.1079/BJN2002763 12568659 
51 Williams S.A.  Blache D.  Martin G.B.  Foot R.  Blackberry M.A.  Scaramuzzi R.J.   Effect of nutritional supplementation on quantities of glucose transporters 1 and 4 in sheep granulosa and theca cells Reproduction 2001 122 947 956 10.1530/rep.0.1220947 11732990 
52 Nishimoto H.  Matsutani R.  Yamamoto S.  Takahashi T.  Hayashi K.G.  Miyamoto A.  Hamano S.  Tetsuka M.   Gene expression of glucose transporter (GLUT) 1, 3 and 4 in bovine follicle and corpus luteum J. Endocrinol. 2006 188 111 119 10.1677/joe.1.06210 16394180 
53 Kodaman P.H.  Behrman H.R.   Hormone-regulated and glucose-sensitive transport of dehydroascorbic acid in immature rat granulosa cells Endocrinology 1999 140 3659 3665 10433224 
54 Kim E.  Seok H.H.  Lee S.Y.  Lee D.R.  Moon J.  Yoon T.K.  Lee W.S.  Lee K.A.   Correlation between expression of glucose transporters in granulosa cells and oocyte quality in women with polycystic ovary syndrome Endocrinol. Metab. (Seoul) 2014 29 40 47 10.3803/EnM.2014.29.1.40 24741453 
55 Kol S.  Ben-Shlomo I.  Ruutiainen K.  Ando M.  Davies-Hill T.M.  Rohan R.M.  Simpson I.A.  Adashi E.Y.   The midcycle increase in ovarian glucose uptake is associated with enhanced expression of glucose transporter 3. Possible role for interleukin-1, a putative intermediary in the ovulatory process J. Clin. Invest. 1997 99 2274 2283 10.1172/JCI119403 9151802 
56 Zhang C.  Niu W.  Wang Z.  Wang X.  Xia G.   The effect of gonadotropin on glucose transport and apoptosis in rat ovary PLoS One 2012 7 e42406 10.1371/journal.pone.0042406 22870326 
57 Jozwik M.  Teng C.  Battaglia F.C.   Concentrations of monosaccharides and their amino and alcohol derivatives in human preovulatory follicular fluid Mol. Hum. Reprod. 2007 13 791 796 10.1093/molehr/gam060 17766681 
58 Brogan R.S.  MacGibeny M.  Mix S.  Thompson C.  Puttabyatappa M.  VandeVoort C.A.  Chaffin C.L.   Dynamics of intra-follicular glucose during luteinization of macaque ovarian follicles Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 2011 332 189 195 10.1016/j.mce.2010.10.011 20969917 
59 Khan F.A.  Das G.K.  Pande M.  Mir R.A.  Shankar U.   Changes in biochemical composition of follicular fluid during reproductive acyclicity in water buffalo (Bubalus bubalis ) Anim. Reprod. Sci. 2011 127 38 42 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2011.07.013 21840653 
60 Nandi S.  Girish Kumar V.  Manjunatha B.M.  Ramesh H.S.  Gupta P.S.   Follicular fluid concentrations of glucose, lactate and pyruvate in buffalo and sheep, and their effects on cultured oocytes, granulosa and cumulus cells Theriogenology 2008 69 186 196 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2007.08.036 17950822 
61 Nishimoto H.  Hamano S.  Hill G.A.  Miyamoto A.  Tetsuka M.   Classification of bovine follicles based on the concentrations of steroids, glucose and lactate in follicular fluid and the status of accompanying follicles J. Reprod. Dev. 2009 55 219 224 10.1262/jrd.20114 19194065 
62 Bertoldo M.J.  Nadal-Desbarats L.  Gerard N.  Dubois A.  Holyoake P.K.  Grupen C.G.   Differences in the metabolomic signatures of porcine follicular fluid collected from environments associated with good and poor oocyte quality Reproduction 2013 146 221 231 10.1530/REP-13-0142 23801780 
63 El-Bahr S.M.  Ghoneim I.M.  Waheed M.M.   Biochemical and hormonal analysis of follicular fluid and serum of female dromedary camels (Camelus dromedarius ) with different sized ovarian follicles Anim. Reprod. Sci. 2015 159 98 103 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2015.06.002 26077770 
64 Salazar-Ortiz J.  Monget P.  Guillaume D.   The influence of nutrition on the insulin-like growth factor system and the concentrations of growth hormone, glucose, insulin, gonadotropins and progesterone in ovarian follicular fluid and plasma from adult female horses (Equus caballus ) Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 2014 12 72 10.1186/1477-7827-12-72 25078409 
65 Nandi S.  Kumar V.G.  Manjunatha B.M.  Gupta P.S.   Biochemical composition of ovine follicular fluid in relation to follicle size Dev. Growth Differ. 2007 49 61 66 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2007.00901.x 17227345 
66 Shabankareh H.K.  Kor N.M.  Hajarian H.   The influence of the corpus luteum on metabolites composition of follicular fluid from different sized follicles and their relationship to serum concentrations in dairy cows Anim. Reprod. Sci. 2013 140 109 114 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2013.06.018 23890803 
67 Anifandis G.M.  Dafopoulos K.  Messini C.I.  Chalvatzas N.  Liakos N.  Pournaras S.  Messinis I.E.   Prognostic value of follicular fluid 25-OH vitamin D and glucose levels in the IVF outcome Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 2010 8 91 10.1186/1477-7827-8-91 20667111 
68 Foong S.C.  Abbott D.H.  Zschunke M.A.  Lesnick T.G.  Phy J.L.  Dumesic D.A.   Follicle luteinization in hyperandrogenic follicles of polycystic ovary syndrome patients undergoing gonadotropin therapy for in vitro  fertilization J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2006 91 2327 2333 10.1210/jc.2005-2142 16551732 
69 Rabiee A.R.  Lean I.J.  Gooden J.M.  Miller B.G.  Scaramuzzi R.J.   An evaluation of transovarian uptake of metabolites using arterio-venous difference methods in dairy cattle Anim. Reprod. Sci. 1997 48 9 25 10.1016/S0378-4320(97)00032-8 9412729 
70 Seamark R.F.  Amato F.  Hendrickson S.  Moor R.M.   Oxygen uptake, glucose utilization, lactate release and adenine nucleotide content of sheep ovarian follicles in culture: effect of human chorionic gonadotrophin Aust. J. Biol. Sci. 1976 29 557 563 1023868 
71 Armstrong D.T.  Greep R.O.   Effect of gonadotrophic hormones on glucose metabolism by luteinized rat ovaries Endocrinology 1962 70 701 710 10.1210/endo-70-5-701 13862367 
72 Downs S.M.  Humpherson P.G.  Leese H.J.   Pyruvate utilization by mouse oocytes is influenced by meiotic status and the cumulus oophorus Mol. Reprod. Dev. 2002 62 113 123 10.1002/mrd.10067 11933168 
73 Sutton-McDowall M.L.  Gilchrist R.B.  Thompson J.G.   Cumulus expansion and glucose utilisation by bovine cumulus–oocyte complexes during in vitro  maturation: the influence of glucosamine and follicle-stimulating hormone Reproduction 2004 128 313 319 10.1530/rep.1.00225 15333782 
74 Ratchford A.M.  Esguerra C.R.  Moley K.H.   Decreased oocyte-granulosa cell gap junction communication and connexin expression in a type 1 diabetic mouse model Mol. Endocrinol. 2008 22 2643 2654 10.1210/me.2007-0495 18829945 
75 Campbell B.K.  Onions V.  Kendall N.R.  Guo L.  Scaramuzzi R.J.   The effect of monosaccharide sugars and pyruvate on the differentiation and metabolism of sheep granulosa cells in vitro  Reproduction 2010 140 541 550 10.1530/REP-10-0146 20634389 
76 Campbell B.K.  Kendall N.R.  Onions V.  Guo L.  Scaramuzzi R.J.   Effect of monosaccharide sugars on LH-induced differentiation and sugar transport facilitator (SLC2A) expression in sheep theca cells in vitro  Reprod. Fertil. Dev. 2014 26 453 461 10.1071/RD12064 23711112 
77 Scaramuzzi R.J.  Baird D.T.  Campbell B.K.  Driancourt M.A.  Dupont J.  Fortune J.E.  Gilchrist R.B.  Martin G.B.  McNatty K.P.  McNeilly A.S.    Regulation of folliculogenesis and the determination of ovulation rate in ruminants Reprod. Fertil. Dev. 2011 23 444 467 10.1071/RD09161 21426863 
78 Dupont J.  Reverchon M.  Bertoldo M.J.  Froment P.   Nutritional signals and reproduction Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 2014 382 527 537 10.1016/j.mce.2013.09.028 24084162 
79 Tosca L.  Chabrolle C.  Uzbekova S.  Dupont J.   Effects of metformin on bovine granulosa cells steroidogenesis: possible involvement of adenosine 5′ monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) Biol. Reprod. 2007 76 368 378 10.1095/biolreprod.106.055749 17123942 
80 Kayampilly P.P.  Menon K.M.   Follicle-stimulating hormone inhibits adenosine 5′-monophosphate-activated protein kinase activation and promotes cell proliferation of primary granulosa cells in culture through an Akt-dependent pathway Endocrinology 2009 150 929 935 10.1210/en.2008-1032 18927218 
81 Wang T.T.  Wu X.H.  Zhang S.L.  Chan J.S.   Effect of glucose on the expression of the angiotensinogen gene in opossum kidney cells Kidney Int. 1998 53 312 319 10.1046/j.1523-1755.1998.00775.x 9461091 
82 McClain D.A.  Paterson A.J.  Roos M.D.  Wei X.  Kudlow J.E.   Glucose and glucosamine regulate growth factor gene expression in vascular smooth muscle cells Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1992 89 8150 8154 10.1073/pnas.89.17.8150 1518840 
83 Wang J.  Liu R.  Hawkins M.  Barzilai N.  Rossetti L.   A nutrient-sensing pathway regulates leptin gene expression in muscle and fat Nature 1998 393 684 688 10.1038/31474 9641678 
84 Campbell B.K.  Gordon B.M.  Scaramuzzi R.J.   The effect of ovarian arterial infusion of transforming growth factor alpha on ovarian follicle populations and ovarian hormone secretion in ewes with an autotransplanted ovary J. Endocrinol. 1994 143 13 24 10.1677/joe.0.1430013 7964312 
85 Lam T.K.  Gutierrez-Juarez R.  Pocai A.  Bhanot S.  Tso P.  Schwartz G.J.  Rossetti L.   Brain glucose metabolism controls the hepatic secretion of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins Nat. Med. 2007 13 171 180 10.1038/nm1540 17273170 
86 Kahn B.B.  Alquier T.  Carling D.  Hardie D.G.   AMP-activated protein kinase: ancient energy gauge provides clues to modern understanding of metabolism Cell Metab. 2005 1 15 25 10.1016/j.cmet.2004.12.003 16054041 
87 Priebe A.  Tan L.  Wahl H.  Kueck A.  He G.  Kwok R.  Opipari A.  Liu J.R.   Glucose deprivation activates AMPK and induces cell death through modulation of Akt in ovarian cancer cells Gynecol. Oncol. 2011 122 389 395 10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.04.024 21570709 
88 Poretsky L.  Kalin M.F.   The gonadotropic function of insulin Endocr. Rev. 1987 8 132 141 10.1210/edrv-8-2-132 3301317 
89 Samoto T.  Maruo T.  Ladines-Llave C.A.  Matsuo H.  Deguchi J.  Barnea E.R.  Mochizuki M.   Insulin receptor expression in follicular and stromal compartments of the human ovary over the course of follicular growth, regression and atresia Endocr. J. 1993 40 715 726 10.1507/endocrj.40.715 7951542 
90 el-Roeiy A.  Chen X.  Roberts V.J.  Shimasakai S.  Ling N.  LeRoith D.  Roberts C.T. Jr  Yen S.S.   Expression of the genes encoding the insulin-like growth factors (IGF-I and II), the IGF and insulin receptors, and IGF-binding proteins-1-6 and the localization of their gene products in normal and polycystic ovary syndrome ovaries J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 1994 78 1488 1496 7515389 
91 Lighten A.D.  Hardy K.  Winston R.M.  Moore G.E.   Expression of mRNA for the insulin-like growth factors and their receptors in human preimplantation embryos Mol. Reprod. Dev. 1997 47 134 139 10.1002/(SICI)1098-2795(199706)47:2<134::AID-MRD2>3.0.CO;2-N 9136113 
92 Schultz G.A.  Hogan A.  Watson A.J.  Smith R.M.  Heyner S.   Insulin, insulin-like growth factors and glucose transporters: temporal patterns of gene expression in early murine and bovine embryos Reprod. Fertil. Dev. 1992 4 361 371 10.1071/RD9920361 1461988 
93 Siddle K.   Signalling by insulin and IGF receptors: supporting acts and new players J. Mol. Endocrinol. 2011 47 R1 R10 10.1530/JME-11-0022 21498522 
94 Phy J.L.  Conover C.A.  Abbott D.H.  Zschunke M.A.  Walker D.L.  Session D.R.  Tummon I.S.  Thornhill A.R.  Lesnick T.G.  Dumesic D.A.   Insulin and messenger ribonucleic acid expression of insulin receptor isoforms in ovarian follicles from nonhirsute ovulatory women and polycystic ovary syndrome patients J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2004 89 3561 3566 10.1210/jc.2003-031888 15240646 
95 Pitetti J.L.  Torre D.  Conne B.  Papaioannou M.D.  Cederroth C.R.  Xuan S.  Kahn R.  Parada L.F.  Vassalli J.D.  Efstratiadis A.  Nef S.   Insulin receptor and IGF1R are not required for oocyte growth, differentiation, and maturation in mice Sex Dev. 2009 3 264 272 10.1159/000252813 19851056 
96 Wang Q.  Chi M.M.  Moley K.H.   Live imaging reveals the link between decreased glucose uptake in ovarian cumulus cells and impaired oocyte quality in female diabetic mice Endocrinology 2012 153 1984 1989 10.1210/en.2011-1815 22294751 
97 Poretsky L.  Cataldo N.A.  Rosenwaks Z.  Giudice L.C.   The insulin-related ovarian regulatory system in health and disease Endocr. Rev. 1999 20 535 582 10.1210/edrv.20.4.0374 10453357 
98 Peluso J.J.  Delidow B.C.  Lynch J.  White B.A.   Follicle-stimulating hormone and insulin regulation of 17 beta-estradiol secretion and granulosa cell proliferation within immature rat ovaries maintained in perifusion culture Endocrinology 1991 128 191 196 10.1210/endo-128-1-191 1898880 
99 Downing J.A.  Joss J.  Scaramuzzi R.J.   The effect of a direct arterial infusion of insulin and glucose on the ovarian secretion rates of androstenedione and oestradiol in ewes with an autotransplanted ovary J. Endocrinol. 1999 163 531 541 10.1677/joe.0.1630531 10588827 
100 Landau S.  Braw-Tal R.  Kaim M.  Bor A.  Bruckental I.   Preovulatory follicular status and diet affect the insulin and glucose content of follicles in high-yielding dairy cows Anim. Reprod. Sci. 2000 64 181 197 10.1016/S0378-4320(00)00212-8 11121895 
101 Gong J.G.  Lee W.J.  Garnsworthy P.C.  Webb R.   Effect of dietary-induced increases in circulating insulin concentrations during the early postpartum period on reproductive function in dairy cows Reproduction 2002 123 419 427 10.1530/rep.0.1230419 11882019 
102 Garnsworthy P.C.  Fouladi-Nashta A.A.  Mann G.E.  Sinclair K.D.  Webb R.   Effect of dietary-induced changes in plasma insulin concentrations during the early post partum period on pregnancy rate in dairy cows Reproduction 2009 137 759 768 10.1530/REP-08-0488 19129370 
103 Campbell B.K.  Scaramuzzi R.J.  Webb R.   Control of antral follicle development and selection in sheep and cattle J. Reprod. Fertil. Suppl. 1995 49 335 350 7623325 
104 Maruthini D.  Harris S.E.  Barth J.H.  Balen A.H.  Campbell B.K.  Picton H.M.   The effect of metformin treatment in vivo  on acute and long-term energy metabolism and progesterone production in vitro  by granulosa cells from women with polycystic ovary syndrome Hum. Reprod. 2014 29 2302 2316 10.1093/humrep/deu187 25139174 
105 Bhatia B.  Price C.A.   Insulin alters the effects of follicle stimulating hormone on aromatase in bovine granulosa cells in vitro  Steroids 2001 66 511 519 10.1016/S0039-128X(00)00218-X 11182140 
106 Gutierrez C.G.  Campbell B.K.  Webb R.   Development of a long-term bovine granulosa cell culture system: induction and maintenance of estradiol production, response to follicle-stimulating hormone, and morphological characteristics Biol. Reprod. 1997 56 608 616 10.1095/biolreprod56.3.608 9047004 
107 Diamanti-Kandarakis E.  Chatzigeorgiou A.  Papageorgiou E.  Koundouras D.  Koutsilieris M.   Advanced glycation end-products and insulin signaling in granulosa cells Exp. Biol. Med. (Maywood) 2015 10.1177/1535370215584937 25956684 
108 Chen Y.  Qiao J.  Yan L.Y.  Huang S.  Zhao P.L.  Yan J.   Selective impairment in glycogen synthase kinase-3 and mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation: comparisons with the hyperandrogenic and the hyperinsulinemic rats Fertil. Steril. 2009 92 1447 1455 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2008.08.073 19027112 
109 Richardson M.C.  Cameron I.T.  Simonis C.D.  Das M.C.  Hodge T.E.  Zhang J.  Byrne C.D.   Insulin and human chorionic gonadotropin cause a shift in the balance of sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP) isoforms toward the SREBP-1c isoform in cultures of human granulosa cells J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2005 90 3738 3746 10.1210/jc.2004-2057 15769984 
110 Sekar N.  Garmey J.C.  Veldhuis J.D.   Mechanisms underlying the steroidogenic synergy of insulin and luteinizing hormone in porcine granulosa cells: joint amplification of pivotal sterol-regulatory genes encoding the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor, steroidogenic acute regulatory (stAR) protein and cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage (P450scc) enzyme Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 2000 159 25 35 10.1016/S0303-7207(99)00203-8 10687849 
111 Dunaif A.  Graf M.   Insulin administration alters gonadal steroid metabolism independent of changes in gonadotropin secretion in insulin-resistant women with the polycystic ovary syndrome J. Clin. Invest. 1989 83 23 29 10.1172/JCI113864 2642919 
112 Bergh C.  Carlsson B.  Olsson J.H.  Selleskog U.  Hillensjo T.   Regulation of androgen production in cultured human thecal cells by insulin-like growth factor I and insulin Fertil. Steril. 1993 59 323 331 8425626 
113 Nestler J.E.  Jakubowicz D.J.  de Vargas A.F.  Brik C.  Quintero N.  Medina F.   Insulin stimulates testosterone biosynthesis by human thecal cells from women with polycystic ovary syndrome by activating its own receptor and using inositolglycan mediators as the signal transduction system J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 1998 83 2001 2005 9626131 
114 Magoffin D.A.   Ovarian theca cell Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2005 37 1344 1349 10.1016/j.biocel.2005.01.016 15833266 
115 Young J.M.  McNeilly A.S.   Theca: the forgotten cell of the ovarian follicle Reproduction 2010 140 489 504 10.1530/REP-10-0094 20628033 
116 Palaniappan M.  Menon B.  Menon K.M.   Stimulatory effect of insulin on theca-interstitial cell proliferation and cell cycle regulatory proteins through MTORC1 dependent pathway Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 2013 366 81 89 10.1016/j.mce.2012.12.004 23261705 
117 Eppig J.J.  O'Brien M.J.   Comparison of preimplantation developmental competence after mouse oocyte growth and development in vitro  and in vivo  Theriogenology 1998 49 415 422 10.1016/S0093-691X(97)00413-5 10732022 
118 Dumesic D.A.  Schramm R.D.  Peterson E.  Paprocki A.M.  Zhou R.  Abbott D.H.   Impaired developmental competence of oocytes in adult prenatally androgenized female rhesus monkeys undergoing gonadotropin stimulation for in vitro  fertilization J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2002 87 1111 1119 10.1210/jcem.87.3.8287 11889174 
119 Adamiak S.J.  Mackie K.  Watt R.G.  Webb R.  Sinclair K.D.   Impact of nutrition on oocyte quality: cumulative effects of body composition and diet leading to hyperinsulinemia in cattle Biol. Reprod. 2005 73 918 926 10.1095/biolreprod.105.041483 15972884 
120 Edson M.A.  Nagaraja A.K.  Matzuk M.M.   The mammalian ovary from genesis to revelation Endocr. Rev. 2009 30 624 712 10.1210/er.2009-0012 19776209 
121 Canipari R.  Cellini V.  Cecconi S.   The ovary feels fine when paracrine and autocrine networks cooperate with gonadotropins in the regulation of folliculogenesis Curr. Pharm. Des. 2012 18 245 255 10.2174/138161212799040411 22229553 
122 Reddy P.  Adhikari D.  Zheng W.  Liang S.  Hamalainen T.  Tohonen V.  Ogawa W.  Noda T.  Volarevic S.  Huhtaniemi I.  Liu K.   PDK1 signaling in oocytes controls reproductive aging and lifespan by manipulating the survival of primordial follicles Hum. Mol. Genet. 2009 18 2813 2824 10.1093/hmg/ddp217 19423553 
123 Reddy P.  Liu L.  Adhikari D.  Jagarlamudi K.  Rajareddy S.  Shen Y.  Du C.  Tang W.  Hamalainen T.  Peng S.L.    Oocyte-specific deletion of Pten causes premature activation of the primordial follicle pool Science 2008 319 611 613 10.1126/science.1152257 18239123 
124 Shimizu Y.  Kimura F.  Takebayashi K.  Fujiwara M.  Takakura K.  Takahashi K.   Mutational analysis of the PTEN gene in women with premature ovarian failure Acta Obstet. Gynecol. Scand. 2009 88 824 825 10.1080/00016340902971458 19449221 
125 Goto M.  Iwase A.  Ando H.  Kurotsuchi S.  Harata T.  Kikkawa F.   PTEN and Akt expression during growth of human ovarian follicles J. Assist. Reprod. Genet. 2007 24 541 546 10.1007/s10815-007-9156-3 17999178 
126 Evans A.C.  Martin F.   Kinase pathways in dominant and subordinate ovarian follicles during the first wave of follicular development in sheep Anim. Reprod. Sci. 2000 64 221 231 10.1016/S0378-4320(00)00210-4 11121898 
127 Su Y.Q.  Wigglesworth K.  Pendola F.L.  O'Brien M.J.  Eppig J.J.   Mitogen-activated protein kinase activity in cumulus cells is essential for gonadotropin-induced oocyte meiotic resumption and cumulus expansion in the mouse Endocrinology 2002 143 2221 2232 10.1210/endo.143.6.8845 12021186 
128 Su Y.Q.  Denegre J.M.  Wigglesworth K.  Pendola F.L.  O'Brien M.J.  Eppig J.J.   Oocyte-dependent activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (ERK1/2) in cumulus cells is required for the maturation of the mouse oocyte-cumulus cell complex Dev. Biol. 2003 263 126 138 10.1016/S0012-1606(03)00437-8 14568551 
129 Sela-Abramovich S.  Chorev E.  Galiani D.  Dekel N.   Mitogen-activated protein kinase mediates luteinizing hormone-induced breakdown of communication and oocyte maturation in rat ovarian follicles Endocrinology 2005 146 1236 1244 10.1210/en.2004-1006 15576461 
130 Dewi D.A.  Abayasekara D.R.  Wheeler-Jones C.P.   Requirement for ERK1/2 activation in the regulation of progesterone production in human granulosa-lutein cells is stimulus specific Endocrinology 2002 143 877 888 10.1210/endo.143.3.8677 11861509 
131 Tosca L.  Froment P.  Solnais P.  Ferre P.  Foufelle F.  Dupont J.   Adenosine 5′-monophosphate-activated protein kinase regulates progesterone secretion in rat granulosa cells Endocrinology 2005 146 4500 4513 10.1210/en.2005-0301 16020477 
132 Moore R.K.  Otsuka F.  Shimasaki S.   Role of ERK1/2 in the differential synthesis of progesterone and estradiol by granulosa cells Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2001 289 796 800 10.1006/bbrc.2001.6052 11735115 
133 Seger R.  Hanoch T.  Rosenberg R.  Dantes A.  Merz W.E.  Strauss, 3rd J.F.  Amsterdam A.   The ERK signaling cascade inhibits gonadotropin-stimulated steroidogenesis J. Biol. Chem. 2001 276 13957 13964 10.1074/jbc.M003766200 11278318 
134 Hunzicker-Dunn M.  Maizels E.T.   FSH signaling pathways in immature granulosa cells that regulate target gene expression: branching out from protein kinase A Cell. Signal. 2006 18 1351 1359 10.1016/j.cellsig.2006.02.011 16616457 
135 Richards J.S.   New signaling pathways for hormones and cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate action in endocrine cells Mol. Endocrinol. 2001 15 209 218 11158328 
136 Richards J.S.  Fitzpatrick S.L.  Clemens J.W.  Morris J.K.  Alliston T.  Sirois J.   Ovarian cell differentiation: a cascade of multiple hormones, cellular signals, and regulated genes Recent Prog. Horm. Res. 1995 50 223 254 7740159 
137 Richards J.S.  Russell D.L.  Ochsner S.  Hsieh M.  Doyle K.H.  Falender A.E.  Lo Y.K.  Sharma S.C.   Novel signaling pathways that control ovarian follicular development, ovulation, and luteinization Recent Prog. Horm. Res. 2002 57 195 220 10.1210/rp.57.1.195 12017544 
138 Liu K.   Stem cell factor (SCF)-kit mediated phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI3) kinase signaling during mammalian oocyte growth and early follicular development Front. Biosci. 2006 11 126 135 10.2741/1785 16146719 
139 Kimura T.  Tomooka M.  Yamano N.  Murayama K.  Matoba S.  Umehara H.  Kanai Y.  Nakano T.   Akt signaling promotes derivation of embryonic germ cells from primordial germ cells Development 2008 135 869 879 10.1242/dev.013474 18216173 
140 Cecconi S.  Ciccarelli C.  Barberi M.  Macchiarelli G.  Canipari R.   Granulosa cell–oocyte interactions Eur. J. Obstet. Gynecol. Reprod. Biol. 2004 115 Suppl. 1 S19 S22 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2004.01.010 15196711 
141 Tanaka Y.  Park J.H.  Tanwar P.S.  Kaneko-Tarui T.  Mittal S.  Lee H.J.  Teixeira J.M.   Deletion of tuberous sclerosis 1 in somatic cells of the murine reproductive tract causes female infertility Endocrinology 2012 153 404 416 10.1210/en.2011-1191 22128018 
142 Uzbekova S.  Salhab M.  Perreau C.  Mermillod P.  Dupont J.   Glycogen synthase kinase 3B in bovine oocytes and granulosa cells: possible involvement in meiosis during in vitro  maturation Reproduction 2009 138 235 246 10.1530/REP-09-0136 19470708 
143 Baluch D.P.  Capco D.G.   GSK3 beta mediates acentromeric spindle stabilization by activated PKC zeta Dev. Biol. 2008 317 46 58 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.01.044 18353303 
144 Uhlenhaut N.H.  Treier M.   Forkhead transcription factors in ovarian function Reproduction 2011 142 489 495 10.1530/REP-11-0092 21810859 
145 Liu Y.  Lehmann M.   FOXO-independent suppression of programmed cell death by the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway in Drosophila  Dev. Genes Evol. 2006 216 531 535 10.1007/s00427-006-0063-x 16520939 
146 John G.B.  Gallardo T.D.  Shirley L.J.  Castrillon D.H.   Foxo3 is a PI3K-dependent molecular switch controlling the initiation of oocyte growth Dev. Biol. 2008 321 197 204 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.06.017 18601916 
147 Richards J.S.  Pangas S.A.   The ovary: basic biology and clinical implications J. Clin. Invest. 2010 120 963 972 10.1172/JCI41350 20364094 
148 Fan H.Y.  Liu Z.  Cahill N.  Richards J.S.   Targeted disruption of Pten in ovarian granulosa cells enhances ovulation and extends the life span of luteal cells Mol. Endocrinol. 2008 22 2128 2140 10.1210/me.2008-0095 18606860 
149 Wayne C.M.  Fan H.Y.  Cheng X.  Richards J.S.   Follicle-stimulating hormone induces multiple signaling cascades: evidence that activation of Rous sarcoma oncogene, RAS, and the epidermal growth factor receptor are critical for granulosa cell differentiation Mol. Endocrinol. 2007 21 1940 1957 10.1210/me.2007-0020 17536007 
150 Nemcova L.  Nagyova E.  Petlach M.  Tomanek M.  Prochazka R.   Molecular mechanisms of insulin-like growth factor 1 promoted synthesis and retention of hyaluronic acid in porcine oocyte-cumulus complexes Biol. Reprod. 2007 76 1016 1024 10.1095/biolreprod.106.057927 17329596 
151 Liu Z.  Rudd M.D.  Hernandez-Gonzalez I.  Gonzalez-Robayna I.  Fan H.Y.  Zeleznik A.J.  Richards J.S.   FSH and FOXO1 regulate genes in the sterol/steroid and lipid biosynthetic pathways in granulosa cells Mol. Endocrinol. 2009 23 649 661 10.1210/me.2008-0412 19196834 
152 Fan H.Y.  O'Connor A.  Shitanaka M.  Shimada M.  Liu Z.  Richards J.S.   Beta-catenin (CTNNB1) promotes preovulatory follicular development but represses LH-mediated ovulation and luteinization Mol. Endocrinol. 2010 24 1529 1542 10.1210/me.2010-0141 20610534 
153 Zhang G.  Garmey J.C.  Veldhuis J.D.   Interactive stimulation by luteinizing hormone and insulin of the steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein and 17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17) genes in porcine theca cells Endocrinology 2000 141 2735 2742 10919257 
154 Carvalho C.R.  Carvalheira J.B.  Lima M.H.  Zimmerman S.F.  Caperuto L.C.  Amanso A.  Gasparetti A.L.  Meneghetti V.  Zimmerman L.F.  Velloso L.A.  Saad M.J.   Novel signal transduction pathway for luteinizing hormone and its interaction with insulin: activation of Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription and phosphoinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathways Endocrinology 2003 144 638 647 10.1210/en.2002-220706 12538627 
155 Huang X.  Jin J.  Shen S.  Xia Y.  Xu P.  Zou X.  Wang H.  Yi L.  Wang Y.  Gao Q.   Modulation of expression of 17-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase (CYP17) and P450 aromatase (CYP19) by inhibition of MEK1 in a human ovarian granulosa-like tumor cell line Gynecol. Endocrinol. 2016 32 201 205 10.3109/09513590.2015.1106470 26526982 
156 Nelson-Degrave V.L.  Wickenheisser J.K.  Hendricks K.L.  Asano T.  Fujishiro M.  Legro R.S.  Kimball S.R.  Strauss, 3rd J.F.  McAllister J.M.   Alterations in mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase and extracellular regulated kinase signaling in theca cells contribute to excessive androgen production in polycystic ovary syndrome Mol. Endocrinol. 2005 19 379 390 10.1210/me.2004-0178 15514033 
157 Cecconi S.  Rossi G.  Santilli A.  Stefano L.D.  Hoshino Y.  Sato E.  Palmerini M.G.  Macchiarelli G.   Akt expression in mouse oocytes matured in vivo  and in vitro  Reprod. Biomed. Online 2010 20 35 41 10.1016/j.rbmo.2009.10.011 20158985 
158 Han S.J.  Vaccari S.  Nedachi T.  Andersen C.B.  Kovacina K.S.  Roth R.A.  Conti M.   Protein kinase B/Akt phosphorylation of PDE3A and its role in mammalian oocyte maturation EMBO J. 2006 25 5716 5725 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601431 17124499 
159 Hoshino Y.  Sato E.   Protein kinase B (PKB/Akt) is required for the completion of meiosis in mouse oocytes Dev. Biol. 2008 314 215 223 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.12.005 18177853 
160 Tomek W.  Smiljakovic T.   Activation of Akt (protein kinase B) stimulates metaphase I to metaphase II transition in bovine oocytes Reproduction 2005 130 423 430 10.1530/rep.1.00754 16183860 
161 Zhang M.  Xia G.   Hormonal control of mammalian oocyte meiosis at diplotene stage Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2011 69 1279 1288 10.1007/s00018-011-0867-3 22045555 
162 Kalous J.  Kubelka M.  Solc P.  Susor A.  Motlik J.   Akt (protein kinase B) is implicated in meiotic maturation of porcine oocytes Reproduction 2009 138 645 654 10.1530/REP-08-0461 19633130 
163 Lee S.E.  Sun S.C.  Choi H.Y.  Uhm S.J.  Kim N.H.   mTOR is required for asymmetric division through small GTPases in mouse oocytes Mol. Reprod. Dev. 2012 79 356 366 10.1002/mrd.22035 22407942 
164 Cecconi S.  Mauro A.  Cellini V.  Patacchiola F.   The role of Akt signalling in the mammalian ovary Int. J. Dev. Biol. 2012 56 809 817 10.1387/ijdb.120146sc 23417403 
165 Franks S.  Stark J.  Hardy K.   Follicle dynamics and anovulation in polycystic ovary syndrome Hum. Reprod. Update 2008 14 367 378 10.1093/humupd/dmn015 18499708 
166 Yki-Jarvinen H.   Thiazolidinediones N. Engl. J. Med. 2004 351 1106 1118 10.1056/NEJMra041001 15356308 
167 Kirpichnikov D.  McFarlane S.I.  Sowers J.R.   Metformin: an update Ann. Intern. Med. 2002 137 25 33 10.7326/0003-4819-137-1-200207020-00009 12093242 
168 Wang D.S.  Jonker J.W.  Kato Y.  Kusuhara H.  Schinkel A.H.  Sugiyama Y.   Involvement of organic cation transporter 1 in hepatic and intestinal distribution of metformin J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 2002 302 510 515 10.1124/jpet.102.034140 12130709 
169 Chen L.  Shu Y.  Liang X.  Chen E.C.  Yee S.W.  Zur A.A.  Li S.  Xu L.  Keshari K.R.  Lin M.J.    OCT1 is a high-capacity thiamine transporter that regulates hepatic steatosis and is a target of metformin Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2014 111 9983 9988 10.1073/pnas.1314939111 24961373 
170 Shu Y.  Sheardown S.A.  Brown C.  Owen R.P.  Zhang S.  Castro R.A.  Ianculescu A.G.  Yue L.  Lo J.C.  Burchard E.G.    Effect of genetic variation in the organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1) on metformin action J. Clin. Invest. 2007 117 1422 1431 10.1172/JCI30558 17476361 
171 Jung N.  Lehmann C.  Rubbert A.  Knispel M.  Hartmann P.  van Lunzen J.  Stellbrink H.J.  Faetkenheuer G.  Taubert D.   Relevance of the organic cation transporters 1 and 2 for antiretroviral drug therapy in human immunodeficiency virus infection Drug Metab. Dispos. 2008 36 1616 1623 10.1124/dmd.108.020826 18490433 
172 Zhou G.  Myers R.  Li Y.  Chen Y.  Shen X.  Fenyk-Melody J.  Wu M.  Ventre J.  Doebber T.  Fujii N.    Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action J. Clin. Invest. 2001 108 1167 1174 10.1172/JCI13505 11602624 
173 Lord J.M.  Flight I.H.  Norman R.J.   Metformin in polycystic ovary syndrome: systematic review and meta-analysis BMJ 2003 327 951 953 10.1136/bmj.327.7421.951 14576245 
174 Velazquez E.M.  Mendoza S.  Hamer T.  Sosa F.  Glueck C.J.   Metformin therapy in polycystic ovary syndrome reduces hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance, hyperandrogenemia, and systolic blood pressure, while facilitating normal menses and pregnancy Metabolism 1994 43 647 654 10.1016/0026-0495(94)90209-7 8177055 
175 Creanga A.A.  Bradley H.M.  McCormick C.  Witkop C.T.   Use of metformin in polycystic ovary syndrome: a meta-analysis Obstet. Gynecol. 2008 111 959 968 10.1097/AOG.0b013e31816a4ed4 18378757 
176 Legro R.S.  Barnhart H.X.  Schlaff W.D.  Carr B.R.  Diamond M.P.  Carson S.A.  Steinkampf M.P.  Coutifaris C.  McGovern P.G.  Cataldo N.A.    Clomiphene, metformin, or both for infertility in the polycystic ovary syndrome N. Engl. J. Med. 2007 356 551 566 10.1056/NEJMoa063971 17287476 
177 Tso L.O.  Costello M.F.  Albuquerque L.E.  Andriolo R.B.  Marjoribanks J.  Macedo C.R.   Metformin treatment before and during in vitro  fertilization or intracytoplasmic sperm injection in women with polycystic ovary syndrome: summary of a Cochrane review Fertil. Steril. 2015 104 542 544 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.05.038 26070519 
178 Dunaif A.   Drug insight: insulin-sensitizing drugs in the treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome–a reappraisal Nat. Clin. Pract. Endocrinol. Metab. 2008 4 272 283 10.1038/ncpendmet0787 18364705 
179 Attia G.R.  Rainey W.E.  Carr B.R.   Metformin directly inhibits androgen production in human thecal cells Fertil. Steril. 2001 76 517 524 10.1016/S0015-0282(01)01975-6 11532475 
180 Palomba S.  Falbo A.  Giallauria F.  Russo T.  Tolino A.  Zullo F.  Colao A.  Orio F.   Effects of metformin with or without supplementation with folate on homocysteine levels and vascular endothelium of women with polycystic ovary syndrome Diabetes Care 2010 33 246 251 10.2337/dc09-1516 19933994 
181 Fuhrmeister I.P.  Branchini G.  Pimentel A.M.  Ferreira G.D.  Capp E.  Brum I.S.  von Eye Corleta H.   Human granulosa cells: insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 receptors and aromatase expression modulation by metformin Gynecol. Obstet. Invest. 2008 77 156 162 10.1159/000358829 24603137 
182 Rice S.  Pellatt L.  Ramanathan K.  Whitehead S.A.  Mason H.D.   Metformin inhibits aromatase via an extracellular signal-regulated kinase-mediated pathway Endocrinology 2009 150 4794 4801 10.1210/en.2009-0540 19574398 
183 Kai Y.  Kawano Y.  Yamamoto H.  Narahara H.   A possible role for AMP-activated protein kinase activated by metformin and AICAR in human granulosa cells Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 2015 13 27 10.1186/s12958-015-0023-2 25889494 
184 Reverchon M.  Cornuau M.  Cloix L.  Rame C.  Guerif F.  Royere D.  Dupont J.   Visfatin is expressed in human granulosa cells: regulation by metformin through AMPK/SIRT1 pathways and its role in steroidogenesis Mol. Hum. Reprod. 2013 19 313 326 10.1093/molehr/gat002 23315983 
185 Sutton-McDowall M.L.  Gilchrist R.B.  Thompson J.G.   The pivotal role of glucose metabolism in determining oocyte developmental competence Reproduction 2010 139 685 695 10.1530/REP-09-0345 20089664 
186 Richardson M.C.  Ingamells S.  Simonis C.D.  Cameron I.T.  Sreekumar R.  Vijendren A.  Sellahewa L.  Coakley S.  Byrne C.D.   Stimulation of lactate production in human granulosa cells by metformin and potential involvement of adenosine 5′ monophosphate-activated protein kinase J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2009 94 670 677 10.1210/jc.2008-2025 19001513 
187 Martin-Montalvo A.  Mercken E.M.  Mitchell S.J.  Palacios H.H.  Mote P.L.  Scheibye-Knudsen M.  Gomes A.P.  Ward T.M.  Minor R.K.  Blouin M.J.    Metformin improves healthspan and lifespan in mice Nat. Commun. 2013 4 2192 10.1038/ncomms3192 23900241 
188 Dunning K.R.  Cashman K.  Russell D.L.  Thompson J.G.  Norman R.J.  Robker R.L.   Beta-oxidation is essential for mouse oocyte developmental competence and early embryo development Biol. Reprod. 2010 83 909 918 10.1095/biolreprod.110.084145 20686180 
189 Lehmann J.M.  Moore L.B.  Smith-Oliver T.A.  Wilkison W.O.  Willson T.M.  Kliewer S.A.   An antidiabetic thiazolidinedione is a high affinity ligand for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR gamma) J. Biol. Chem. 1995 270 12953 12956 10.1074/jbc.270.22.12953 7768881 
190 Kim J.  Sato M.  Li Q.  Lydon J.P.  Demayo F.J.  Bagchi I.C.  Bagchi M.K.   Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma is a target of progesterone regulation in the preovulatory follicles and controls ovulation in mice Mol. Cell. Biol. 2008 28 1770 1782 10.1128/MCB.01556-07 18172011 
191 Cui Y.  Miyoshi K.  Claudio E.  Siebenlist U.K.  Gonzalez F.J.  Flaws J.  Wagner K.U.  Hennighausen L.   Loss of the peroxisome proliferation-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) does not affect mammary development and propensity for tumor formation but leads to reduced fertility J. Biol. Chem. 2002 277 17830 17835 10.1074/jbc.M200186200 11884400 
192 Nissen S.E.  Wolski K.   Rosiglitazone revisited: an updated meta-analysis of risk for myocardial infarction and cardiovascular mortality Arch. Intern. Med. 2010 170 1191 1201 10.1001/archinternmed.2010.207 20656674 
193 Komar C.M.   Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) and ovarian function–implications for regulating steroidogenesis, differentiation, and tissue remodeling Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 2005 3 41 10.1186/1477-7827-3-41 16131403 
194 Froment P.  Fabre S.  Dupont J.  Pisselet C.  Chesneau D.  Staels B.  Monget P.   Expression and functional role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma in ovarian folliculogenesis in the sheep Biol. Reprod. 2003 69 1665 1674 10.1095/biolreprod.103.017244 12890736 
195 Lambe K.G.  Tugwood J.D.   A human peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-gamma is activated by inducers of adipogenesis, including thiazolidinedione drugs Eur. J. Biochem. 1996 239 1 7 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0001u.x 8706692 
196 Schoppee P.D.  Garmey J.C.  Veldhuis J.D.   Putative activation of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma impairs androgen and enhances progesterone biosynthesis in primary cultures of porcine theca cells Biol. Reprod. 2002 66 190 198 10.1095/biolreprod66.1.190 11751282 
197 Lohrke B.  Viergutz T.  Shahi S.K.  Pohland R.  Wollenhaupt K.  Goldammer T.  Walzel H.  Kanitz W.   Detection and functional characterisation of the transcription factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma in lutein cells J. Endocrinol. 1998 159 429 439 10.1677/joe.0.1590429 9834460 
198 Wood J.R.  Dumesic D.A.  Abbott D.H.  Strauss, 3rd J.F.   Molecular abnormalities in oocytes from women with polycystic ovary syndrome revealed by microarray analysis J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2007 92 705 713 10.1210/jc.2006-2123 17148555 
199 Seto-Young D.  Avtanski D.  Strizhevsky M.  Parikh G.  Patel P.  Kaplun J.  Holcomb K.  Rosenwaks Z.  Poretsky L.   Interactions among peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-gamma, insulin signaling pathways, and steroidogenic acute regulatory protein in human ovarian cells J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2007 92 2232 2239 10.1210/jc.2006-1935 17374711 
200 Seto-Young D.  Paliou M.  Schlosser J.  Avtanski D.  Park A.  Patel P.  Holcomb K.  Chang P.  Poretsky L.   Direct thiazolidinedione action in the human ovary: insulin-independent and insulin-sensitizing effects on steroidogenesis and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 production J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2005 90 6099 6105 10.1210/jc.2005-0469 16131582 
201 Komar C.M.  Braissant O.  Wahli W.  Curry T.E. Jr   Expression and localization of PPARs in the rat ovary during follicular development and the periovulatory period Endocrinology 2001 142 4831 4838 10.1210/endo.142.11.8429 11606451 
202 Fan W.  Yanase T.  Morinaga H.  Mu Y.M.  Nomura M.  Okabe T.  Goto K.  Harada N.  Nawata H.   Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma and retinoid X receptor inhibits aromatase transcription via nuclear factor-kappaB Endocrinology 2005 146 85 92 10.1210/en.2004-1046 15459115 
203 Wu S.  Divall S.  Nwaopara A.  Radovick S.  Wondisford F.  Ko C.  Wolfe A.   Obesity-induced infertility and hyperandrogenism are corrected by deletion of the insulin receptor in the ovarian theca cell Diabetes 2014 63 1270 1282 10.2337/db13-1514 24379345 
204 Kim S.Y.  Ebbert K.  Cordeiro M.H.  Romero M.  Zhu J.  Serna V.A.  Whelan K.A.  Woodruff T.K.  Kurita T.   Cell autonomous phosphoinositide 3-kinase activation in oocytes disrupts normal ovarian function through promoting survival and overgrowth of ovarian follicles Endocrinology 2015 156 1464 1476 10.1210/en.2014-1926 25594701 
205 Adhikari D.  Zheng W.  Shen Y.  Gorre N.  Hamalainen T.  Cooney A.J.  Huhtaniemi I.  Lan Z.J.  Liu K.   Tsc/mTORC1 signaling in oocytes governs the quiescence and activation of primordial follicles Hum. Mol. Genet. 2010 19 397 410 10.1093/hmg/ddp483 19843540 
206 Adhikari D.  Flohr G.  Gorre N.  Shen Y.  Yang H.  Lundin E.  Lan Z.  Gambello M.J.  Liu K.   Disruption of Tsc2 in oocytes leads to overactivation of the entire pool of primordial follicles Mol. Hum. Reprod. 2009 15 765 770 10.1093/molehr/gap092 19843635 
207 Gorre N.  Adhikari D.  Lindkvist R.  Brannstrom M.  Liu K.  Shen Y.   mTORC1 Signaling in oocytes is dispensable for the survival of primordial follicles and for female fertility PLoS One 2014 9 e110491 10.1371/journal.pone.0110491 25338086 
208 Chen Z.  Kang X.  Wang L.  Dong H.  Wang C.  Xiong Z.  Zhao W.  Jia C.  Lin J.  Zhang W.    Rictor/mTORC2 pathway in oocytes regulates folliculogenesis, and its inactivation causes premature ovarian failure J. Biol. Chem. 2015 290 6387 6396 10.1074/jbc.M114.605261 25564616 
209 Fan H.Y.  Liu Z.  Shimada M.  Sterneck E.  Johnson P.F.  Hedrick S.M.  Richards J.S.   MAPK3/1 (ERK1/2) in ovarian granulosa cells are essential for female fertility Science 2009 324 938 941 10.1126/science.1171396 19443782 
210 Bruning J.C.  Gautam D.  Burks D.J.  Gillette J.  Schubert M.  Orban P.C.  Klein R.  Krone W.  Muller-Wieland D.  Kahn C.R.   Role of brain insulin receptor in control of body weight and reproduction Science 2000 289 2122 2125 10.1126/science.289.5487.2122 11000114 
211 Tamemoto H.  Kadowaki T.  Tobe K.  Yagi T.  Sakura H.  Hayakawa T.  Terauchi Y.  Ueki K.  Kaburagi Y.  Satoh S.    Insulin resistance and growth retardation in mice lacking insulin receptor substrate-1 Nature 1994 372 182 186 10.1038/372182a0 7969452 
212 Burks D.J.  Font de Mora J.  Schubert M.  Withers D.J.  Myers M.G.  Towery H.H.  Altamuro S.L.  Flint C.L.  White M.F.   IRS-2 pathways integrate female reproduction and energy homeostasis Nature 2000 407 377 382 10.1038/35030105 11014193 
213 Neganova I.  Al-Qassab H.  Heffron H.  Selman C.  Choudhury A.I.  Lingard S.J.  Diakonov I.  Patterson M.  Ghatei M.  Bloom S.R.    Role of central nervous system and ovarian insulin receptor substrate 2 signaling in female reproductive function in the mouse Biol. Reprod. 2007 76 1045 1053 10.1095/biolreprod.106.059360 17329594 
214 Liu S.C.  Wang Q.  Lienhard G.E.  Keller S.R.   Insulin receptor substrate 3 is not essential for growth or glucose homeostasis J. Biol. Chem. 1999 274 18093 18099 10.1074/jbc.274.25.18093 10364263 
215 Fantin V.R.  Wang Q.  Lienhard G.E.  Keller S.R.   Mice lacking insulin receptor substrate 4 exhibit mild defects in growth, reproduction, and glucose homeostasis Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2000 278 E127 E133 10644546 
216 Castrillon D.H.  Miao L.  Kollipara R.  Horner J.W.  DePinho R.A.   Suppression of ovarian follicle activation in mice by the transcription factor Foxo3a Science 2003 301 215 218 10.1126/science.1086336 12855809 
217 Calounova G.  Livera G.  Zhang X.Q.  Liu K.  Gosden R.G.  Welsh M.   The Src homology 2 domain-containing adapter protein B (SHB) regulates mouse oocyte maturation PLoS One 2010 5 e11155 10.1371/journal.pone.0011155 20585392 
218 Li Q.  He H.  Zhang Y.L.  Li X.M.  Guo X.  Huo R.  Bi Y.  Li J.  Fan H.Y.  Sha J.   Phosphoinositide 3-kinase p110delta mediates estrogen- and FSH-stimulated ovarian follicle growth Mol. Endocrinol. 2013 27 1468 1482 10.1210/me.2013-1082 23820902 
219 Brown C.  LaRocca J.  Pietruska J.  Ota M.  Anderson L.  Smith S.D.  Weston P.  Rasoulpour T.  Hixon M.L.   Subfertility caused by altered follicular development and oocyte growth in female mice lacking PKB alpha/Akt1 Biol. Reprod. 2010 82 246 256 10.1095/biolreprod.109.077925 19794155 
220 Restuccia D.F.  Hynx D.  Hemmings B.A.   Loss of PKBbeta/Akt2 predisposes mice to ovarian cyst formation and increases the severity of polycystic ovary formation in vivo  Dis. Model Mech. 2012 5 403 411 10.1242/dmm.008136 22275470 
221 Monteiro da Rocha A.  Ding J.  Slawny N.  Wolf A.M.  Smith G.D.   Loss of glycogen synthase kinase 3 isoforms during murine oocyte growth induces offspring cardiac dysfunction Biol. Reprod. 2015 92 127 10.1095/biolreprod.115.128181 25833158 
222 Gay E.  Seurin D.  Babajko S.  Doublier S.  Cazillis M.  Binoux M.   Liver-specific expression of human insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 in transgenic mice: repercussions on reproduction, ante- and perinatal mortality and postnatal growth Endocrinology 1997 138 2937 2947 9202238 
223 Sonntag B.  Gotte M.  Wulfing P.  Schuring A.N.  Kiesel L.  Greb R.R.   Metformin alters insulin signaling and viability of human granulosa cells Fertil. Steril. 2005 84 Suppl. 2 1173 1179 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2005.04.043 16210009 
224 Tosca L.  Solnais P.  Ferre P.  Foufelle F.  Dupont J.   Metformin-induced stimulation of adenosine 5′ monophosphate-activated protein kinase (PRKA) impairs progesterone secretion in rat granulosa cells Biol. Reprod. 2006 75 342 351 10.1095/biolreprod.106.050831 16760380 
225 Tosca L.  Rame C.  Chabrolle C.  Tesseraud S.  Dupont J.   Metformin decreases IGF1-induced cell proliferation and protein synthesis through AMP-activated protein kinase in cultured bovine granulosa cells Reproduction 2010 139 409 418 10.1530/REP-09-0351 19906888 
226 Lee M.S.  Kim S.H.  Kim D.S.  Min K.S.  Yoon J.T.   Metformin enhances the action of insulin on porcine granulosa-lutein cells in vitro  Anim. Reprod. Sci. 2012 136 100 107 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.10.001 23141431 
227 Will M.A.  Palaniappan M.  Peegel H.  Kayampilly P.  Menon K.M.   Metformin: direct inhibition of rat ovarian theca-interstitial cell proliferation Fertil. Steril. 2012 98 207 214 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2012.04.010 22608319 
228 Chen Q.  Sun X.  Chen J.  Cheng L.  Wang J.  Wang Y.  Sun Z.   Direct rosiglitazone action on steroidogenesis and proinflammatory factor production in human granulosa-lutein cells Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 2009 7 147 10.1186/1477-7827-7-147 20003221 
229 Rak-Mardyla A.  Karpeta A.   Rosiglitazone stimulates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma expression and directly affects in vitro  steroidogenesis in porcine ovarian follicles Theriogenology 2014 82 1 9 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2014.02.016 24681211 
230 Chen J.  Hudson E.  Chi M.M.  Chang A.S.  Moley K.H.  Hardie D.G.  Downs S.M.   AMPK regulation of mouse oocyte meiotic resumption in vitro  Dev. Biol. 2006 291 227 238 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.11.039 16443210 
231 Kempna P.  Hofer G.  Mullis P.E.  Fluck C.E.   Pioglitazone inhibits androgen production in NCI-H295R cells by regulating gene expression of CYP17 and HSD3B2 Mol. Pharmacol. 2007 71 787 798 10.1124/mol.106.028902 17138841
