
==== Front
ACS SensACS SensseascefjACS Sensors2379-3694American Chemical Society 10.1021/acssensors.7b00382ReviewSingle-Molecule Plasmon Sensing: Current Status and
Future Prospects Taylor Adam B. Zijlstra Peter *Molecular Biosensing for
Medical Diagnostics, Faculty of Applied Physics, & Institute for
Complex Molecular Systems, Eindhoven University
of Technology, PO Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands* E-mail: p.zijlstra@tue.nl.01 08 2017 25 08 2017 2 8 1103 1122 06 06 2017 01 08 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Single-molecule detection
has long relied on fluorescent labeling
with high quantum-yield fluorophores. Plasmon-enhanced detection circumvents
the need for labeling by allowing direct optical detection of weakly
emitting and completely nonfluorescent species. This review focuses
on recent advances in single molecule detection using plasmonic metal
nanostructures as a sensing platform, particularly using a single
particle–single molecule approach. In the past decade two mechanisms
for plasmon-enhanced single-molecule detection have been demonstrated:
(1) by plasmonically enhancing the emission of weakly fluorescent
biomolecules, or (2) by monitoring shifts of the plasmon resonance
induced by single-molecule interactions. We begin with a motivation
regarding the importance of single molecule detection, and advantages
plasmonic detection offers. We describe both detection mechanisms
and discuss challenges and potential solutions. We finalize by highlighting
the exciting possibilities in analytical chemistry and medical diagnostics.

plasmon sensingsingle-molecule
detectionfluorescencelabel-freenanoparticlesmicroscopyfunctionalizationbiosensingdocument-id-old-9se7b00382document-id-new-14se-2017-00382eccc-priceThis paper was originally published
on August 8, 2017, with errors in the citations of the Figure 3b and
Figure 5b captions. The corrected version was reposted on August 15,
2017.
==== Body
Most single-molecule sensors
exploit single-molecule fluorescence,1 which
was first reported in the early 1990s.2,3 In the past
decade several fluorescence-based technologies appeared on the market
that exploit single-molecule sensitivity for, e.g., DNA sequencing4,5 and immunoassays based on single enzymes6,7 and
single-molecule counting.8,9 The success of single-molecule
fluorescence methods is due to the background-free nature of the signal
resulting in a high signal-to-noise ratio. With modern optics the
detection of single fluorophores has become routine in fields like
materials science, biophysics, and sensing. Although widely employed,
single-molecule fluorescence is fundamentally restricted to species
that exhibit a sizable quantum yield (typically >0.1). Detection
of
weakly and nonemitting species is often done by fluorescently labeling
the molecule of interest with a high quantum-yield fluorophore or
quantum dot to generate the signal.10,11 However, such
labeling is not feasible in applications like sensing where measurements
are ideally conducted directly in a biological fluid with no washing
steps.

This has sparked efforts to achieve so-called “label-free”
sensors that do not require high-quantum-yield fluorescent labels
to generate a signal. Solid-state and biological nanopores12 exploit changes in the current through a nanometer-sized
pore when a molecule passes through it13,14 or binds to
receptors near the pore.15 Carbon nanotubes
have been employed as transducing elements that generate stepwise
changes in conductance16,17 or exciton fluorescence18,19 upon interaction with single molecules. Whispering gallery modes
in microresonators report local changes in refractive index or temperature
induced by binding of analyte.20,21 Recently, plasmonic
sensors based on individual gold nanoparticles have also been employed
as sensors for single molecules, which is the focus of this review.

Biomolecular detection enhanced by plasmons was first achieved
with a planar sensor, whereby prism coupling launches a propagating
surface plasmon into a metallic film.22 On binding of biomolecules to the gold film, the local refractive
index and thus the conditions for plasmon excitation are modified,
causing changes in the intensity reflected from the film.23 Film based sensors are now commercially available
and are used in many analytical laboratories to determine molecular
interaction parameters and affinity. One of the drawbacks of planar
plasmon sensors is their extended surface area that requires relatively
large sample volumes and large numbers of molecular interactions to
generate a detectable signal. A logical approach to overcome these
limitations is the use of plasmonic nanoparticles, which exhibit a
strongly reduced surface area compared to a metallic film.

Plasmonic
nanoparticles exhibit localized plasmon resonances due
to the collective oscillation modes of the conduction electrons in
the particle, which have to meet boundary conditions at the particle’s
surface. The frequency of the plasmon resonance then depends on the
shape, size, material, and environment of the particle. Localized
plasmons in gold and silver particles occur at visible-NIR wavelengths
(400–1000 nm) and are therefore compatible with standard optical
microscopes (see Figure 1). Readout with far field optics enables sensing with low invasiveness,
which is particularly advantageous in biological media, e.g., cells
and tissue samples. Also, far-field optical microscopy systems are
simple in design and can even be operated on a mobile-phone platform
or an optical fiber.24

Figure 1 Principle of plasmon-enhanced
single-molecule sensing using nanoparticles.
(left) The sensor is typically probed in a far-field optical microscope,
where single particles are interrogated. (middle) The plasmon resonance
induces a strongly enhanced and tightly confined local field around
the particles. The field shown here is for a gold nanorod that is
excited on resonance (calculated using the boundary element method).
(right) This local field mediates plasmon–molecule interactions,
enabling enhanced single-molecule detection by monitoring plasmon-induced
changes of the molecule (resulting in, e.g., fluorescence enhancement)
or by monitoring molecule-induced changes of the plasmon (resulting
in frequency-shifts of the plasmon).

The ability to detect and study biomolecules using particle
plasmons
is facilitated by the electric field associated with the plasmon resonance
(Figure 1b). This field
penetrates the medium around the particle and enhances the interaction
between a molecule and the particle’s plasmon. This plasmon–molecule
interaction provides two pathways for sensing (Figure 1c): first, by exploiting the effect of the
plasmon on the molecule leading to enhancement (or quenching) of the
molecule’s fluorescence; or alternatively by exploiting the
effect of the molecule on the plasmon leading to frequency shifts
of the plasmon resonance.

A major advantage of plasmon-mediated
sensors is their compatibility
with the highly concentrated molecular environment in cells and bodily
fluids. Blood serum, for example, contains a total protein content
of 60–80 g per liter, mainly consisting of albumin and globular
proteins.25 Many clinically relevant biomarkers
are present at concentrations ranging from several nanomolars to hundreds
of micromolars (see Figure 2). An optical single-molecule sensor for these analytes thus
needs a probe volume compatible with these high concentrations, ensuring
that only a single protein is ever in the probe volume at once. The
probe volume of a far-field microscope is typically 1 fL, restricting
single-molecule detection to at most the low nanomolar range. In contrast,
the probe volume of a plasmonic particle is determined by the extent
of the locally enhanced field. This field typically extents over a
few zeptoliters, 105 times smaller than the diffraction
limit of light. This has already enabled single-molecule detection
at concentrations as high as tens of micromolars.26,27

Figure 2 Typical
concentration range of clinically relevant biomarkers in
blood serum.28 The green bars indicate
reference values for healthy persons, whereas the red extension to
the right indicates elevated values associated with disease. LDH:
lactate dehydrogenase, CRP: c-reactive protein, NGAL: neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin, PSA: prostate specific antigen, BNP: B-type natriuretic
peptide, PCT: pro-calcitonin.

In this review we outline the recent progress in single-molecule
sensing mediated by localized surface plasmons in metallic nanoparticles.
We focus on approaches that are suitable to detect and characterize
biomolecular interactions at the single-molecule level. We first summarize
the available strategies to synthesize metal nanoparticles and their
assemblies commonly used for sensing. Naturally, single-molecule sensing
can only be achieved when individual plasmonic particles are resolved
in the microscope, so we outline common strategies for optical single-particle
detection. We then describe the detection of single weakly fluorescent
molecules by plasmon-enhanced fluorescence, followed by the detection
of completely nonfluorescent species by monitoring frequency shifts
of the plasmon resonance. We conclude by outlining the current challenges
in the field, and describe future applications.

Synthesis, Assembly, and
Functionalization of Plasmon Sensors
Colloidal gold has been
used since ancient Roman times to color
glass with bright shades of yellow or red. The
first scientific report on the synthesis of gold nanostructures dates
from 1857 when Michael Faraday prepared gold colloids by reducing
an aqueous solution of gold chloride with phosphorus.29 However, only in the past two decades have these methods
been refined to generate high-quality colloidal samples with good
control over the ensemble average size and shape. Moreover, the rapid
development of nanofabrication facilities has led to new methods to
fabricate nanosized metal structures using lithographic techniques.
We will not describe all the available methods for preparation of
metal particles, but rather highlight some of the methods and discuss
their advantages in relation to sensing.

Wet-chemical synthesis
of metal particles relies on the reduction
of metal ions in solution. When a particular shape of metal particles
is required, often chemicals are added that act as “shape directing”
agents.30 The mechanisms underpinning these
protocols have been developed empirically and there is no clear picture
yet of how shape control works. The field has however developed rapidly
in the past two decades and myriad shapes of metal particles can be
synthesized with excellent yields.

Nanospheres, nanorods, and
nanobipyramids are the most commonly
used geometries for plasmonic sensing because of their relatively
narrow size distribution after synthesis, see Figure 3. This results in homogeneous plasmon line
widths and near-field enhancements, which are crucial to reliable
single-nanoparticle and single-molecule plasmon sensors. First synthesized
by Turkevich in 195131 and later optimized
by Brust in 197432 and others,33 gold nanospheres are straightforward to synthesize
with near-unity yield and good size and shape homogeneity. Gold spheres,
however, possess a plasmon resonance around 530 nm, close to the interband
transitions in gold.34 This introduces
significant losses that result in line broadening and a reduced local
field enhancement, both detrimental if the particles are to be used
as a sensor. For silver, the interband transitions are further away
from a sphere’s plasmon resonance (around 400 nm), but silver
is less commonly used due to its sensitivity to oxidation.35,36

Figure 3 Particle
shapes most commonly used for single-molecule plasmon-enhanced
sensing. (a) Gold nanospheres. Figure adapted with permission from
ref (33). Copyright
2013 American Chemical Society. (b) Gold nanorods synthesized by one
of us following the protocol of El-Sayed.37 (c) Gold bipyramids. Figure adapted with permission from ref (38). Copyright 2015 John Wiley
and Sons.

A red-shifted plasmon resonance
away from the interband transitions
in gold can be achieved by employing elongated particle shapes such
as nanorods and nanobipyramids.39,40 Their longitudinal
plasmon resonance lies conveniently in the visible to near-infrared
wavelength range, making them ideal objects for biosensors.41−45 A purely wet-chemical method to synthesize nanorods was discovered
by Murphy and co-workers,46 which was later
modified by the group of El-Sayed.37 Gold
nanorods with aspect ratios ranging from 2 to 5 can be routinely synthesized
with nearly 100% yield, and the aspect ratio can be controlled by
varying chemical conditions.

Liu and co-workers later showed47 that
bipyramidal-shaped particles are formed with the same method when
penta-twinned seeds stabilized by citrate are used instead of single-crystal
seeds stabilized by amphiphilic surfactant. The yield of this protocol
was later improved by Wang et al.,38 who
employed shape-separation based on depletion forces to achieve near
unity yield of bipyramids. These bipyramids are strikingly monodisperse
in aspect ratio with a dispersion of only 5% (compared to 20% for
nanorods), which results in a significantly narrower distribution
of single-particle plasmon resonance wavelengths.45 Moreover, their sharp tips (typical tip radius of 3–5
nm) result in a higher field enhancement compared to their nanorod
counterparts.40

Wet-chemical synthesis
yields large quantities of well-dispersed
particles with sizes down to several nanometers. Their crystalline
nature47 ensures minimal losses of the
plasmon due to scattering of electrons on surfaces and defects, resulting
in narrow plasmon line widths and high field-enhancements.40 However, it is well-known that even higher field
enhancements occur in nanometer-sized gaps between plasmonic particles
or between a particle and a surface.50 This
requires a post-synthesis, liquid-phase assembly protocol that usually
employs molecular linkers such as DNA,51,52 zwitterions,53,54 or proteins.55,56

These assembly processes
can create well-defined constructs of
two or more metal particles. However, polydispersity is still present
in the final colloidal solution; therefore the most used method to
achieve well-controlled and reproducible assemblies of metallic particles
is based on lithography. Lithographic methods employ a particle-beam
(e.g., electrons or ions) to directly write nanostructures on a surface.57 Such methods have been employed to form nanostructures
such as bow-tie48,58 and Yagi-Uda antennas,59 dimers of gold disks,49,60 and arrays of gold nanorods,48,61 with a few examples
shown in Figure 4.
Lithography gives control over the size, spacing and relative orientation
of complex structures. The resolution of lithographic methods is determined
by the quality of the particle-beam and the resist, but gaps <10
nm are usually difficult to realize.57 Importantly,
lithographic structures typically exhibit broadened plasmon resonances
and reduced near-field enhancements due to the amorphous crystal structure
and the presence of adhesion layers.48

Figure 4 Examples
of nanoparticle pairs fabricated using lithographic techniques.
(a) A bow-tie antenna. Figure adapted with permission from ref (48). Copyright 2010, Nature
Publishing Group. (b) Gold-particle pairs. Figure adapted with permission
from ref (49). Copyright
2009 American Chemical Society. (c) End-aligned gold nanorods. Figure
adapted with permission from ref (48). Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group. All
scale bars 200 nm.

An exciting development
is the use of DNA origami structures to
assemble colloidal particles on a scaffold of DNA.62−66 The scaffold can be designed to expose, e.g., thiolated
strands of DNA that bind and immobilize gold particles at defined
locations. This approach combines the unique optical properties of
crystalline colloidal particles with the ability to assemble them
with a controlled spacing and orientation. In such systems the average
gap size is determined by the thickness of the DNA origami spacer,
which can be controlled with nanometer accuracy. DNA origami has already
been employed to assemble dimers of gold spheres (Figure 5a),63,65 chiral chains,63 and linear chains (Figure 5b),67 and to control the spacing and relative orientation of
gold nanorods (Figure 5c).64,68

Figure 5 Examples of nanoparticle assemblies created
on DNA-origami using
thiolated docking strands. (a) Gold sphere dimers. Figure adapted
with permission from ref (62). Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Gold sphere
chains. Figure adapted with permission from ref (67). Copyright 2016 American
Chemical Society. (c) Gold nanorod trimers. Figure adapted with permission
from ref (64). Copyright
2017 American Chemical Society. All scale bars 100 nm.

The detection of a specific biomolecule in a mixture
typically
requires functional groups on the surface of the sensor that exhibit
a certain affinity for the analyte. Receptors can be attached to the
surface of plasmonic particles using covalent thiol–chemistry.
Commonly employed receptors include antibodies, oligonucleotides,
aptamers, and peptides. Especially small receptor molecules such as
aptamers and peptides are attractive because the sensitivity of a
plasmon sensor scales with the local electric field intensity that
rapidly decays away from the particle surface (see, e.g., Figure 14). Directing the
analyte to bind close to the particle surface thus ensures maximum
sensitivity. In addition, the local electric field intensity is inhomogeneously
distributed on the particle surface, imparting regions with greater
sensitivity compared to others. Often, sharp features and protrusions
exhibit the highest field enhancements, such as the tips of a nanorod
or the gap-region of a nanoparticle dimer. For that reason, functionalization
protocols have been developed that specifically target the surface
areas with high local field enhancement.

Several strategies
have been reported to achieve such site-specific
functionalization. Introducing polymeric blocking agents to inhibit
the rate of receptor functionalization on “flat” facets
results in selective functionalization of highly curved facets, such
as the tips of a nanorod,69 the edges of
a nanoplate,70 or the corners of a nanocube.71 Alternatively, the locally enhanced intensity
can be employed directly for a photochemical reaction to achieve site-selective
functionalization.72 If applicable, a clever
combination of different substrate materials that offer orthogonal
functionalization protocols has been employed to selectively functionalize
the gap region in a gold particle dimer.73 Finally, the anistropic distribution of hot electrons in a nanoparticle
can be employed to functionalize the gap region in a plasmonic dimer.74

Clearly many complementary strategies
exist to synthesize and assemble
plasmonic particles to be used as sensors. Most approaches result
in a dispersion of particle sizes and assembly geometries, highlighting
the need to correctly identify the geometry of the sensor to predict
its sensing characteristics. This is often done by optical spectroscopy,
which is the topic of the following section.

Optical Spectroscopy of
Single Plasmonic Particles
The presence of plasmonic nanoparticles
in the solution phase is
easily identified by vivid solution colors, originating from the plasmonic
extinction of a section of the visible spectrum. The extinction spectrum
of these nanoparticles is inhomogeneously broadened due to geometric
polydispersity inherent to any synthesis protocol.37 Naturally, single-molecule sensing requires the ability
to resolve individual particles and their assemblies in a microscope,
as probing a large ensemble of particles results in averaging of the
asynchronous single-molecule events.75 The
sensor output such as amplitude of the signal and binding kinetics
strongly depend on the nanoscale geometry of the sensor.69,76−78 Therefore, a precise characterization of the optical
and geometrical properties of the sensing nanoparticle is vital to
the reliability of a plasmon sensor.

Here we describe the general
optics required for single-particle
detection and spectroscopy. Optical spectroscopy of single nanoparticles
is usually done by immobilizing the particles on a substrate at a
low density and isolating the particle’s signal from the orders
of magnitude stronger fundamental excitation. Extensive reviews on
the topic exist,41,81−83 so here we
only summarize the aspects that are crucial to single-molecule plasmon
sensing, i.e., how to unambiguously characterize the optical properties
and geometry of the single-particle sensor.

Dark-field microscopy
is the most commonly used method for single-particle
detection, whereby scattering from immobilized nanoparticles is collected
by an objective, while the fundamental excitation is prevented from
entering the objective acceptance cone.84 Usually a dark-field condenser excites the sample with a cone of
light (Figure 6a),
while nanoparticle scattering is collected on the opposite side of
the sample by a lower numerical aperture objective. If possible, background
scatter and reflection from interfaces can be suppressed under index-matched
conditions. Alternatively, total internal reflection excitation through
an objective or an opposing prism (Figure 6b) can be used to set up a nonpropagating
evanescent field that is scattered into the far field by a nanoparticle.
The scattered photons are collected by the imaging objective, resulting
in signals from single objects on a dark background (Figure 6c). By directing the signal
from a single particle to a spectrometer, the scattering spectrum
of individual particles can be recorded (Figure 6d).

Figure 6 Dark-field excitation of nanoparticles (a) using
a dark-field condenser
and (b) by prism-style total internal reflection. (c) Dark-field scattering
image of gold nanorods excited at 780 nm. Scale bar is 5 μm.
Figure adapted with permission from ref (79). Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (d)
Dark-field scattering spectra of differently shaped individual metallic
nanoparticles. Figure adapted with permission from ref (80). Copyright 2014 American
Chemical Society.

The scattering cross
section scales with the square of the particle
volume (for small enough particles), making scattering-based techniques
less suitable for particles with an effective radius below 10 nm.81 The absorption cross section on the other hand
scales as the volume of the particle, which has been exploited for
detection of small particles that are difficult to image using scattering-based
techniques.77,85 Photothermal detection exploits
the fact that absorption of incident light results in photothermal
heating of the nanoparticle, which induces a slight change of the
refractive index around the particle that can be detected with a probe
beam.85 Even though these refractive index
changes are small, photothermal microscopy offers a high signal-to-noise
ratio by employing an intense probe beam that is not resonant with
the plasmon absorption. The ability of photothermal detection to resolve
very small, individual metallic particles has been exploited for one
of the first demonstrations of label-free single-molecule sensing,
which we will describe later on.

Photoluminescence detection
of single nanoparticles has been demonstrated
using both one-86,87 and two-photon excitation.88,89 In contrast to scattering-based methods, here the fundamental excitation
can be separated from the wavelength-shifted emission by optical filters.
One-photon photoluminescence is induced by the absorption of a photon
that promotes sub-Fermi-level electrons above the Fermi level.90 Two-photon excited photoluminescence (TPPL)
is generated by two sequential single-photon absorption events exciting
a single electron–hole pair.91 These
excitations rapidly decay via electron–electron and electron–phonon
scattering, with a very low probability of radiative decay in bulk
gold (quantum yield 10–1090). In plasmonic nanoparticles, the radiative decay rate can be strongly
enhanced by coupling to the plasmon resonance, boosting the quantum
yield to 10–5–10–6.92,93 Despite the low quantum yield, the large absorption cross section
of a single metallic particle results in photoluminescence signals
that exceed those of single fluorophores.88

Other approaches to detect single metallic nanoparticles are
by
interferometric scattering microscopy,94 second and third harmonic generation,95 transient absorption spectroscopy,96 or
four-wave mixing.97 In biosensing applications,
however, dark-field scattering is the most commonly used method for
single-particle detection due to its high signal-to-background ratio
and straightforward implementation on commercial microscope platforms.41,81

In the described techniques, nanoparticles are imaged as diffraction
limited spots distributed sparsely on a substrate. While the sparse
arrangement suggests isolated nanoparticles or assemblies, some spots
may correspond to multiparticle clusters with a physical dimension
below the diffraction limit. These clusters can, for example, originate
from the sample preparation that may involve deposition from solution
and solvent evaporation. If clustered, the plasmons of the particles
may hybridize,50 or if the interparticle
spacing is larger than the diameter of the particles, the spectral
response may be a superposition of multiple single-particle spectra.98,99 Uncontrolled clustering may also modulate near-field enhancements
and field confinement.100 These clusters
therefore lead to aberrant sensor responses and signal heterogeneity.
It is therefore vital that the underlying particle geometry is identified
somehow, which is often done using (1) spectroscopy or (2) correlative
microscopy.

First, spectroscopy is often performed by sending
the emitted light
to a spectrometer.101 For example, in scattering
spectroscopy the scattered signal is diffracted by a grating in the
spectrometer and imaged on a camera. However, obtaining spectra is
relatively slow because they are recorded particle-by-particle, complicating
the acquisition of many spectra for statistical analysis. Acquisition
rates can be improved by using an imaging spectrograph, which enables
the acquisition of several spectra simultaneously.101 Highly parallelized spectroscopy has been achieved with
several methods. Wide-field detection of the scattered light using
a color camera enabled spectra of all nanoparticles in the field of
view to be approximated algorithmically using RGB pixel values.102 Employing instead a tunable wavelength source,
nanoparticle spectra have been reconstructed from multiple wide-field
images recorded over a range of excitation wavelengths.103 Conversely in hyperspectral imaging, broadband
excitation is used, but the scattering signal is passed through a
tunable narrowband wavelength filter, and imaged on a camera.76,104 Capturing a series of images over a range of filter wavelengths
enables the extraction of the spectra of all nanoparticles in the
field of view in parallel. Tunable filtering can be implemented by
either a continuously tunable acousto-optical device,104 or discretely by a filter wheel containing
a range of narrow band-pass wavelength filters.76 Fitting extracted photon energy dependent scattering signals
with a Lorentzian function then reliably extracts single particle
line width and peak LSPR wavelength.76

By using spectroscopy the underlying geometry can be identifed
to some degree by establishing, e.g., deviations in expected plasmon
line width, peak wavelength, or signal intensity.81 For example, clustering of two or more nanospheres consistently
leads to strongly red-shifted plasmon resonances compared to isolated
spheres105 and integer distributions of
signal intensity depending on the number of particles present.106 Identification of single gold nanorods is often
done based on their well-defined plasmon line width,98 with greater line widths often indicating a cluster of
nanoparticles. In some cases polarization dependent excitation or
emission profiles can also reveal the presence of clusters.99

If optical spectroscopy alone proves insufficient
to verify the
underlying particle geometry, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and electron
microscopy enable the nanoparticles to be imaged directly. This advantage
comes at the cost of experimental complexity, given that electron
microscopy images and optical properties of single nanoparticles must
be correlated unambiguously.107 This correlation
can be achieved using fiducial markers, such as large gold spheres,
or by employing lithographic techniques based on templated evaporation,108 focused ion beam milling,109 or electron beam lithography.110 These techniques are used to fabricate alignment markers that can
be used to compare the same sample-region in both modalities. An example
is shown in Figure 7, where correlated optical and electron microscopy enabled silver
nanospheres in single, dimer, or trimer configurations to be compared
unambiguously.105 Such correlations have
also been used to study dependencies of photothermal stability on
nanoparticle geometry111 and to correlate
the underlying geometry to two-photon luminescence signals.112

Figure 7 (a) Dark-field scattering image of single or clustered
silver nanospheres.
(b) A correlated scanning electron microscopy image revealing the
underlying geometry and configuration of the nanospheres. Figure adapted
with permission from ref (105). Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.

In addition to electron microscopy, AFM has also
been employed
to establish particle geometries.87,113,114 The advantage of AFM is that it can be more easily
integrated into an optical setup, although tip-convolution limits
the accuracy with which nanoparticle dimensions can be extracted.
AFM has also been used to manipulate individual particles to create
particle clusters, e.g., dimers of nanospheres115 and orientation-controlled dimers of bipyramids.116 After manipulation with a high force, the resulting
geometry can be imaged with a lower force.

Many methods are
available to optically detect plasmonic nanoparticle
sensors, alongside methods to reveal the underlying sensor geometry
and stoichiometry. It will become clear in the following two sections
that a precise knowledge of the underlying geometry is crucial in
designing a sensor with the desired sensitivity and kinetic response.

Single-Molecule
Sensing by Fluorescence Enhancement
Plasmon resonances in
a metallic nanoparticle can be used to enhance
and redirect the emission of biomolecules, which has enabled the detection
of weakly emitting species and single-molecule Raman scattering signals.117 Without enhancement these processes are too
inefficient to reach the single-molecule level. The investigations
of plasmon-enhanced emission began in the 1960s when Drexhage found
that a fluorescent molecule close to a metallic film exhibits modified
decay times and angular distribution of fluorescence. Plasmon-enhanced
fluorescence is widely employed in ensemble-averaged biosensors for
the detection of RNA, DNA, and proteins,118,119 and has recently been extended to the single-molecule regime. Here
we focus on single-molecule sensing applications only, and refer to
recent reviews for ensemble-averaged biosensors.118−120 Since the early 2000s much effort has been spent to characterize
the achievable enhancements in varying combinations of nanoparticles
and emitters, down to the single-emitter and single-photon level.
These efforts have been reviewed extensively, see, e.g., refs (117 and 121−123), so here we only summarize the mechanisms that determine the enhancement
factors. We then redirect our focus to applications of plasmon-enhanced
emission for single-molecule sensing.

The emission of a biomolecule
is a function of the properties of
the molecule and its interaction with the environment. Modification
of the environment by, e.g., dielectric interfaces or metallic nanostructures
can alter the local electric field, which directly affects the excitation
rate and the emission properties. Overall, this can result in fluorescence
quenching or enhancement, depending on the geometry and the orientation
of the biomolecule with respect to the excitation polarization. Enhancement
of the emission intensity of biomolecules in the near-field of a plasmonic
particle is dominated by two factors, namely, (1) an increased excitation
rate caused by the enhanced local electric field and (2) a modified
quantum yield due to changes of the radiative and nonradiative decay-rate
by coupling of the emitter to the particle. Basic theoretical treatment
of these mechanisms has been published.124 Recently, charge transfer of hot carriers to nearby molecules has
also shown to result in modifications of signal strength in select
molecular compounds.125

The increased
excitation rate of a fluorophore close to a metal
structure is a direct consequence of the enhanced local electric field.
Analytical and numerical calculations have shown that the resonant
local field enhancement ranges from 5 (15) for a gold (silver) sphere
to ∼50 for a gold nanorod and up to 150 for a gold bipyramid.40,126 The field enhancement in the gap of a dimer of gold spheres increases
for smaller gap sizes and can reach values >100,127 whereas higher order aggregates of spheres128 and dimers of gold nanorods129 warrant even higher field enhancements. This field enhancement
cannot be increased arbitrarily, however, with quantum mechanical
effects and electron tunneling across small gaps posing intrinsic
limits.127,130

The modified quantum yield is a consequence
of coupling between
the plasmon and the fluorophore that alters both the radiative and
nonradiative rate of the complex. This can lead to enhancement of
the quantum yield for intermediate distances from the particle, and
quenching for distances smaller than a few nanometers due to coupling
to so-called “dark modes” in the metal structure.131 The exact enhancement strongly depends on the
spectral overlap between the plasmon and the spectrum of the fluorophore
and the “unenhanced” quantum yield of the fluorophore.131 Direct measurement of the quantum yield enhancement
is far from trivial and requires independent measurements of the excitation
and emission rates.92,117,132

It is worthwhile to note that the excitation and emission
enhancements
are governed by the wavelength dependence of the plasmonic near-field,
which is spectrally red-shifted from the far-field spectrum (i.e.,
the scattering and extinction spectrum observed in a spectrometer).
This detuning can be understood by approximating the plasmon resonance
as a driven damped harmonic oscillator. When damping is present the
maximum displacement amplitudes occur at a lower energy than the resonance
frequency, with a red shift that depends on the degree of damping.133 For plasmons this damping is caused by, e.g.,
the metal’s bulk absorption or radiative decay.133,134 In Figure 8 we show
the calculated detuning between the near- and far-field spectra for
a 150 nm gold sphere.133 The spectral shifts
between near- and far-fields have later been experimentally confirmed
by, e.g., surface-enhanced Raman scattering134 and near-field optical microscopy.135 This detuning should be considered when choosing the particles and
laser wavelength for maximum fluorescence enhancement and detection
sensitivity.

Figure 8 Calculated spectral profile of the near-field enhancement
(NFE)
and far-field extinction for a 150 nm gold sphere. The vertical black
and blue lines denote the peak positions in the near-field and far-field
spectra, respectively. Figure adapted with permission from ref (133). Copyright 2008 American
Chemical Society.

The fluorescence enhancements
are mediated by the near-field that
is strongly confined compared to the diffraction limit of a conventional
far-field microscope. Here the plasmon effectively converts freely
propagating optical radiation into highly localized energy. The effective
probe volume is on the order of a few zeptoliters, which is over 5
orders of magnitude smaller than that of a conventional microscope.
This allows for single-molecule detection at concentrations of tens
of micromolars and possibly higher. These concentrations approach
the conditions inside a cell, where biomolecular concentrations of
hundreds of micromolars are common. Plasmonic nanoparticles may therefore
provide an opportunity to detect and study single biomolecules intracellularly,
without requiring a high quantum yield.

Much effort has been
spent characterizing the fluorescence enhancements
and probe volume,117,121,123,132 particularly using fluorescence
correlation spectroscopy (FCS) experiments. Herein a fluorophore or
labeled biomolecule (DNA, protein) freely diffuses through the near-field
around a plasmonic particle or particle dimer. The resulting fluorescence
bursts are recorded on a camera or photon counter, which allows one
to extract the overall enhancement factor by analyzing the amplitude
of the bursts compared to the background emission from unenhanced
molecules. The autocorrelation function contains information on the
concentration of analyte and the diffusion time through the near-field.
The latter can be used to estimate the probe volume using FCS theory,
although accurate values are hard to obtain because the probe volume
does not exhibit a Gaussian intensity profile anymore.

Orrit’s
group found enhancements exceeding 1000-fold for
single fluorophores with a quantum yield of 2% diffusing near single
gold nanorods immobilized on a substrate.124,136 These studies showed that the overall enhancement factor strongly
depends on the spectral overlap between the dye excitation and emission
spectra, and the excitation-laser wavelength with respect to the plasmon
resonance (see Figure 9). The autocorrelation functions displayed two characteristic times
associated with free diffusion of the dye through the near-field of
the particle, and a slower time constant due to dyes that stick to
the particle or the glass and subsequently bleach. This highlights
the need for coatings that suppress nonspecific interactions with
the sensor, which we will discuss in more detail under Challenges.

Figure 9 Single-molecule fluorescence enhancements of crystal violet
(quantum-yield
2%) by a single gold nanorod. (a) Numerical calculation of the enhanced
intensity around a single gold nanorod excited on resonance with its
longitudinal plasmon. (b) Time trace of dye fluorescence with (green)
and without (red) the presence of a gold nanorod. The nanorod is immobilized
on a substrate while crystal violet diffuses freely in solution, causing
spikes in intensity when it enters the particle's near-field.
(c)
Measured fluorescence enhancements for several individual gold nanorods,
each with a different plasmon wavelength. The blue squares indicate
an excitation wavelength of 594 nm, the red squares 633 nm. The open
circles and dashed lines indicate the numerically calculated enhancement.
Figure adapted with permission from ref (124). Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.

Moerner’s group employed
bowtie nanoantennas fabricated
by e-beam lithography that consist of two triangular particles spaced
by a 10 nm gap. These antennas yielded fluorescence enhancements in
excess of 1000 for a dye with a quantum yield of 2.5%, and their near-field
volume of several tens of zeptoliters.58 Recently, Wenger’s group introduced an “antenna-in-box”
platform that consists of a dimer of plasmonic spheres surrounded
by a square aperture milled in a gold film137 (see Figure 10).
This aperture further suppressed the background from surrounding molecules
and yielded a fluorescence intensity enhancement of over 1000-fold
for a dye with a quantum yield of 8%.137 Also, this platform exhibited a zeptoliter probe volume, which allowed
for single-molecule detection at 30 μM concentrations.

Figure 10 Single-molecule
fluorescence enhancement of Alexa647 (quantum yield
8% in the presence of a quencher) by an antenna-in-box platform. (a)
The experimental layout showing a particle dimer milled in a gold
film. Alexa647 diffuses freely in solution. (b) Numerical calculation
of the enhanced intensity around a nanostructure excited at 633 nm.
(c) Measured fluorescence enhancements and probe-volume reduction
(compared to a diffraction-limited microscope) for several structures
with different gap sizes, compared to the structure in which the dimer
is absent (box only). Figure adapted with permission from ref (137). Copyright 2013 Nature
Publishing Group.

These characterization
studies have revealed that fluorescence
enhancements in excess of 1000 combined with probe volumes of several
tens of zeptoliters are routinely achieved. Progress has been rapid
in the past decade, and the field is now shifting from characterization
of molecule-plasmon coupling to its applications. Here we focus on
applications in single-molecule sensing of weakly fluorescent species.

In 2012 Acuna et al. employed DNA origami structures66 to precisely space two colloidal gold spheres
at a distance of approximately 20 nm (see Figure 11a). This relatively large gap provided a
compromise between fluorescence enhancement and sufficient space for
a biomolecular assay in the gap.

Figure 11 Colloidal gold-nanosphere dimers assembled
by DNA origami for single-molecule
sensing of association and dissociation. (a) The gold dimers are assembled
around a DNA origami scaffold with an interparticle spacing of 20
nm. In the gap region 4 binding sites for ssDNA are incorporated (dark
blue spheres in inset). (b) Upon transient binding of complementary
ssDNA fluorescence bursts are observed, originating from the emission
of single att0655 labels enhanced by the dimer antenna. This allowed
for single-molecule binding kinetics to be measured at concentrations
of several tens of micromolars. Figure adapted with permission from
ref (66). Copyright
2012 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.

They found a fluorescence enhancement
of >100 for a high-quantum-yield
dye (Atto647N) which was primarily attributed to excitation enhancement
due to the high local intensity in the gap. They then attached ssDNA
strands to the DNA origami in the gap of the dimer, which were used
to bind complementary ssDNA (labeled with Atto655) in solution. They
observed transient binding and unbinding in the gap, demonstrating
that biomolecular assays can be performed in the dimer-gap (see Figure 11b). This assay
was performed at analyte concentrations of 100 nM,66 and after optimizations at concentrations of 25 μM,26 well beyond the capabilities of conventional
far-field optics.

In contrast to a single metallic particle,
the inverted structures
(holes in a metal film) have also been used for single-molecule sensing.
Pioneered by the groups of Craighead and Webb in 2004, these so-called
zero-mode waveguides (ZMW) act as a subwavelength pinhole that confines
the incoming light in an evanescent mode.138 Later anisotropic holes139 and double
nanohole apertures140 have also been explored.
The evanescent nature of the near-field in holes with a diameter of
30–200 nm gives access to probe volumes of ∼10 zeptoliter
(see Figure 10). Such
ZMWs have subsequently been used to study single-molecule interactions
at concentrations inaccessible to diffraction-limited optics.

In most studies single receptors are stochastically immobilized
in the apertures at low concentration to obtain a large fraction of
apertures with a single receptor at a random location. Recently, DNA
origami141 and atomic force microscopy142 have been employed to deterministically place
a single receptor at a well-defined location in the aperture. In 2008
Miyake et al. demonstrated the sensing of single-molecule protein
interactions of GroEL with fluorescently labeled GroEs proteins.143 Transient association and dissociation events
of fluorescently labeled GroES resulted in intensity bursts that gave
access to single-molecule distributions of waiting times between subsequent
association and dissociation events (see Figure 12b). These waiting-time distributions revealed
that two rate constants dominate the interaction, something that was
not yet observed at such high concentrations.143 Later ZMWs were used to study DNA–protein and protein–protein
interactions with T4 replisomal proteins,144 and interactions between nucleotides and GTPases.145 To avoid the need to fluorescently label the analyte, the
assay can also be reversed: the medium solution is mixed with fluorophores
that are present in the apertures at a high concentration. Unlabeled
analyte that diffuses into the aperture displaces the fluorophores
resulting in a transient drop in fluorescence.146

Figure 12 ZMW as single-molecule sensors. (a) Schematic of a far-field
optical
microscope with a zero-mode waveguide fabricated in an aluminum film.
The right cartoon shows the local field around the nanohole (logarithmic
scale). Figure adapted with permission from ref (138). Copyright 2013 The American
Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) ZMWs used to detect
single-molecule interactions between GroEL and GroES. The waiting-time
distribution exhibits two populations with a different dissociation
rate, indicating multiple dissociation pathways. Figure adapted with
permission from ref (143). Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (c) ZMWs used for single-molecule
DNA sequencing. Each nucleic acid is labeled with a distinct color
fluorophore. The sequence of fluorescence bursts associated with incorporation
of a nucleic acid by DNA polymerase reveals the sequence of the DNA
template. Figure adapted with permission from ref (4). Copyright 2009 The American
Association for the Advancement of Science.

In 2009, Eid et al. demonstrated the probing of enzyme–substrate
interactions in ZMWs at micromolar substrate concentrations.4 They immobilized a DNA polymerase in a nanoaperture,
and monitored fluorescence bursts due to incorporation of the four
nucleotides each labeled with a different fluorophore (see Figure 12c). The order in
which differently colored bursts are observed then corresponds to
the sequence of the DNA template bound to the DNA polymerase. Each
incorporation takes a few milliseconds, and several thousand nanopartures
can be observed in real time allowing for parallelization and error-correction.
The data also contained the kinetics of single DNA polymerases and
revealed a temporally heterogeneous reaction rate that was attributed
to DNA polymerase pausing due to the secondary structure of the DNA
template.4 Single-molecule sequencing platforms
based on ZMWs are a third-generation sequencing technology that is
now commercially available. Recently, it has been shown that this
commercial platform can also be applied to single-molecule sensing
of DNA147,148 and biomolecular composition.149

Despite the enhancement of the emission
of weakly emitting species,
the above approaches cannot be applied to the majority of biomolecules
because they do not emit at all at visible wavelengths. To tackle
the challenge of detecting these nonfluorescent molecules, several
label-free approaches based on plasmonics have been developed in the
past decade, which are the topic of the next section.

Single-Molecule
Sensing by Plasmon Shifts
The first reports on label-free
plasmon sensing using single metallic
particles stem from the early 2000s. Single silver and gold particles
were used to detect the adsorption kinetics of thiols to bare particles150 and the interactions between avidin and a biotin-functionalized
particle.151 Time-dependent measurements
of the plasmon spectrum of the individual particles revealed the kinetics
of binding (see Figure 13). The particles used were typically spherical with diameters
of 40 nm or more to allow for detection in a dark-field microscope.
It was later realized that other structures such as nanoshells,152 triangular particles,153 nanorods,42,154 nanocubes,155 and bipyramids43 exhibit higher
sensitivities to molecular binding than spherical particles. Of these
shapes, gold nanorods are now most employed as plasmon sensors42,44,79 due to their ease of synthesis,
single-crystalline nature, and narrow plasmon resonance (limited by
bulk absorption of gold).

Figure 13 Plasmon sensing using individual gold nanospheres.
(a) The nanospheres
are functionalized with biotinylated bovine serum albumin (BSA) to
allow for the detection of streptavidin. (b) Upon molecular binding
the plasmon of individual particles was observed to shift to lower
energy. Black line: before functionalization, red line: after functionalization
with biotinylated BSA, green line: after incubation in streptavidin.
Figure adapted with permission from ref (151). Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society.

Nusz et al. employed individual
gold nanorods to monitor streptavidin
binding to biotin functionalized particles.79 They detected plasmon shifts by recording single-particle scattering
spectra using a dark-field microscope and found concentration-dependent
shifts of several nanometers.79 Kinetics
can also be monitored with subsecond time resolution by recording
spectra over time. Multiplexed detection with single gold nanorods
was demonstrated by Rosman et al.156 They
employed aptamer functionalized particles that were flown into a flow-cell
resulting in deposition in the sample chamber. By imaging the location
of deposition in an optical microscope, they obtained a map of particle
locations. This process was repeated for four different populations
of nanorods, each functionalized with an aptamer against a different
target. This allowed them to perform multiplexed detection of four
different analytes: fibronectin, streptavidin, IgE, and thrombin.156 An alternative approach to multiplexed detection
is to use different aspect ratios each with their own distinct plasmon
resonance wavelength.157

Single particle
sensing offers advantages in sensitivity over ensembles
of particles because inhomogeneous broadening of the plasmon resonance
is eliminated. However, it is essentially still an ensemble measurement,
averaging the binding of many molecules to a single nanoparticle,
and transducing it into an optical signal. As discussed before, molecular
ensemble measurements cannot resolve events such as binding of rare
molecular species or aberrant binding behaviors, which are averaged
out in ensemble measurements.75 In order
to resolve these heterogeneities among molecular populations, and
to examine stochastic processes governing molecular interactions,
single molecule sensing is essential.

Before describing experimental
demonstrations of single-molecule
plasmon sensing it is informative to estimate the plasmon shift induced
by the binding of an individual molecule. Traditionally, the sensitivity
of a plasmon sensor is expressed by dλ/dn that
describes the shift of the resonance per refractive index unit.158 Although appropriate for bulk index sensing,
the sensitivity to single-molecule events is far more complex. The
plasmon shift induced by the binding of a single molecule is proportional
to the local field intensity integrated over the volume of the molecule.159−161 The local field around a metallic particle is often strongly enhanced
around tips and protrusions and quickly decays away from the particle
surface (see Figure 14a). This means that the resulting plasmon
shift is a function of the size of the particle and the molecule,
the location of the molecule, and the distance of the molecule to
the particle surface.

Figure 14 Local electric field intensity around a silver sphere
(a) and a
silver nanorod (b) immersed in water, simulated using the boundary
element method. (c) Position dependent plasmon peak shifts for a dielectric
nanosphere (radius 3 nm) binding to the surface of the particle in
water. Figure adapted with permission from ref (78). Copyright 2016 American
Chemical Society.

Theoretical estimates
of the plasmon shift have been obtained using
the electrostatic approximation,159 perturbation
theory,160,161 and numerical simulations.159,162,163 Davis et al. modeled the shifts
for gold nanorods using electrostatic coupling theory, modeling the
molecule as a dipole contained within a dielectric sphere.161 In close proximity, the polarizable dielectric
screens part of the charge on the nanoparticle leading to a red-shift
of the plasmon.161 The largest plasmon
shifts were found when the molecule rested directly on the nanorod
surface in a regions with maximum electric field strength. Antosiewicz
and Käll78 used numerical models
to estimate the plasmon shift induced by the binding of a 3-nm-radius
dielectric sphere to silver nanoparticles of different dimensions.
They reported plasmon shifts that strongly varied with both nanoparticle
geometry and binding position, as depicted in Figure 14. Typical plasmon shifts induced by single
proteins are smaller than 0.5 nm (∼1% of the line width), and
therefore require sensitive optical microscopy to be detectable.

Experimentally, in 2010 Mayer et al. demonstrated label-free detection
of the unbinding of single IgG antibodies from gold bipyramids.164 However, measurement noise required averaging
over tens of events to reveal a detectable binding signal. Discrete
molecular binding and unbinding of single proteins without statistical
averaging was demonstrated in 2012 simultaneously by Ament et al.165 and by Zijlstra et al.77

Ament et al. used dark-field spectroscopy of single gold nanorods
to detect the nonspecific interaction of single proteins with the
bare nanoparticle surface.165 As shown
in Figure 15, discrete
red-shifts of the peak wavelength were observed due to nonspecific
attachment of single fibronectin proteins to the gold surface. Typical
single-molecule plasmon shifts were found to be 0.3 nm (with measurement
noise of 0.07 nm) with a waiting time between events of 50 s. The
authors employed an intense white-light laser for dark-field illumination
to achieve sufficient signal-to-noise ratio to resolve discrete shifts
of the plasmon spectrum.165 This also allowed
them to record the full spectrum of a single particle with millisecond
time-resolution (see Figure 15c). Upon close inspection of the time-dependence of the plasmon
shift it was found that the plasmon shifts on time scales of ∼2
s, which was attributed to a slow denaturing of the protein due to
direct contact with the gold surface.

Figure 15 (a) Experimental setup
for the detection of plasmon shifts induced
by single-molecule binding to individual gold nanorods. (b) Typical
time-dependence of the plasmon wavelength. The triangles indicate
discrete (stepwise) shifts of the plasmon attributed to single-molecule
events. (c) Temporal evolution of a single binding event, illustrating
a red-shift over time, attributed to the slow denaturing of the protein
on the gold surface (inset). Figure adapted with permission from ref (165). Copyright 2012 American
Chemical Society.

The absence of a particle
coating resulted in large plasmon shifts
due to the close proximity of the protein to the particle surface,
but does not allow for the study of specific ligand–receptor
interactions. Also in 2012, Zijlstra et al. reported the detection
of single-molecule binding events to receptor-functionalized gold
nanorods.77 They employed short thiolated
receptors (linker length 1.5 nm) to ensure that the proteins interact
in close proximity to the nanoparticle surface. To resolve plasmon
shifts with high signal-to-noise ratio the authors employed photothermal
microscopy instead of scattering spectroscopy.

In contrast to
the scattered intensity, the photothermal signal
scales with the volume of the particle enabling the detection of smaller
particles with high signal-to-noise ratio.166 Upon protein binding, the plasmon peak wavelength red-shifts yielding
discrete changes in the absorption cross section at the photothermal
probe wavelength (see Figure 16). Knowing the nanorod’s plasmon line width, peak shifts
could be inferred from detected discrete changes in nanorod absorption
at the pump wavelength. Mean peak shifts of 0.5 nm for streptavidin
(53 kDa), 1.2 nm for antibiotin (150 kDa), and 1.6 nm for streptavidin-RPE
(300 kDa) were observed. The plasmon shifts did not scale linearly
with molecular weight, which was attributed to a reduced overlap between
the molecule and near-fields for larger molecules.

Figure 16 (a) Experimental setup
for photothermal detection of plasmon shifts
of single gold nanoparticles (nanorods sized 31 nm × 9 nm). (b)
Time traces for different molecular concentrations showing discrete
steps in the photothermal signal strength, indicating single-molecule
interactions. (c) Measured shifts together with simulated shifts obtained
from the discrete dipole approximation (DDA). Figure adapted with
permission from ref (77). Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.

In the work of both groups, single molecule interactions
are monitored
on one single nanorod, with wait times between binding events on the
order of seconds to tens of seconds.77,165 While these
techniques demonstrate single molecule detection, quantitative analysis
of single molecule interactions is not possible because the acquisition
of statistics is time-consuming. This can be overcome by measuring
over long time scales or by making nanoparticle detection massively
parallel.75 The latter approach was demonstrated
by Beuwer et al., who imaged individual receptor-functionalized nanorods
in parallel on a camera using a narrowband light-source. Upon addition
of analyte discrete shifts of the plasmon resonance were observed
as stepwise changes in the scattered intensity (see Figure 17). Positive and negative signals
were observed, depending on the plasmon wavelength relative to the
probe wavelength of 785 nm.

Figure 17 Wide-field monitoring of hundreds of single
nanorods for single-molecule
plasmon sensing. Each dot represents a single-molecule sensor. Multiplexing
across many sensors in parallel allowed for the statistical analysis
of single-molecule signals. Figure adapted with permission from ref (76). Copyright 2015 American
Chemical Society.

By monitoring antibody
interactions on hundreds of particles in
parallel, the stochastic nature of the binding process could be examined.
It was found that inverse wait times for molecule binding follow a
first-order power law dependence on concentration. From these measurements, kon rates for the nanorod antibiotin system was
calculated to be 8.3 × 105 M–1 s–1, in line with ensemble measurements for other
antibody–antigen pairs. The low sensing volume of each nanorod,
combined with the large number of sensors, theoretically allows concentration
measurements with a 7 decade dynamic range. In this case, the high
affinity between biotin and antibiotin precludes measurement of unbinding
events, and thus measurement of equilibrium kinetics.

Challenges
Despite rapid progress in the past decade, several challenges remain
before plasmon-enhanced sensing will be mature enough to be incorporated
into real-life applications. Here we describe three of those challenges:

Low Signals
from Small Molecules
Although sensing by
plasmon-enhanced fluorescence allows for the detection of small molecules,
labeling is not always practical. A drawback of the label-free approaches
discussed above is that they rely on small changes in the local refractive
index induced by molecular binding. These refractive index changes
result in a plasmon shift which can currently be detected with a sensitivity
of ∼0.5 nm (equivalent to ∼1% of the line width) on
a single nanoparticle. This detection limit is the result of a trade-off:
on one hand larger particles result in a higher signal-to-noise ratio
for single-particle detection, but simultaneously in a reduced plasmon
shift per molecule due to the larger extent of the locally enhanced
field. An exception is the single molecule detection achieved with
gold bipyramids.45 Although larger than
nanorods, bipyramids exhibit high field-enhancements due to their
sharp tips, and may be of interest in future single molecule detection.

This trade-off between noise and sensitivity currently results
in a shot-noise limited detection limit for single molecules of ∼50
kDa,77 thus excluding many relevant biological
targets such as brain natriuretic peptide (MW 4 kDa) and procalcitonin
(MW 15 kDa). The signal-to-noise ratio in the shot-noise limited regime
scales as √N, where N is
the number of detected photons. This suggests that this detection
limit is easily improved by increasing the excitation power. However,
increasing power leads to additional plasmonic heating of the nanoparticle
and its immediate surroundings.77 The 50
kDa detection limit was achieved while limiting heating to <2 °C,
far below the temperature at which a protein denatures (ranging from
40 to 80 °C for globular proteins167). A second trade-off thus exists, where the shot-noise detection
limit must be balanced against localized heating, which may perturb
the interaction being studied.

A promising strategy to amplify
the plasmon shift per molecule
is to further increase the field-confinement by employing dimers of
particles or particles coupled to a gold film. Theoretical studies
confirmed that dimers of gold spheres49 or gold nanorods160 exhibit substantially
larger plasmon shifts for molecular binding in the gap region compared
to their monomer counterpart. A numerical study by Yang et al. showed
that the sensitivity is nearly doubled for a dimer of gold nanorods
spaced by 15 nm when a protein binds in the gap region.160 The difficulty in the implementation lies in
the realization of controllable gaps that should be only slightly
larger than the analyte to be detected. In addition, after assembly
the gap should be accessible for the analyte and not be blocked by
the linkers used for assembly. DNA origami scaffolds as outlined before
may provide an attractive solution because they offer control over
the spacing and orientation of the particles while leaving the gap
region free for an immunoassay.68,129

Further field
confinement on subnanometer length scales was demonstrated
by Taylor et al., who employed cucurbiturils as linkers to immmoblize
a gold sphere on top of a metallic film.168 Cucurbiturils are barrel-shaped macrocyclic molecules that form
a well-defined 0.9 nm spacer between the gold particle and the film.
Interestingly, the barrel shape of the cucurbituril allows for the
binding of specific “guest” molecules that slightly
deform the cucurbituril and modulate its SERS signal, thus providing
a read-out mechanism for molecular binding.169 Recently, Benz et al. found that individual atomic features inside
the gap of such a plasmonic assembly can localize light to volumes
well below 1 cubic nanometer (therefore dubbed “picocavities”).170 These picocavities are formed by a single gold
atom protruding from a much larger nanoparticle toward the underlying
metallic film, and may in the future enable optical sensing on the
atomic scale.

An alternative approach for the label-free detection
of low-molecular-weight
analyte may lie in the use of conformational changes. Lee et al. recently
demonstrated the use of gold nanosphere dimers linked by an aptamer
to monitor single-molecule aptamer–analyte interactions.171 Aptamers are single-stranded DNA oligonucleotides
that fold into a well-defined tertiary structure. Their capability
to bind a specific analyte is derived from key molecular interactions
such as shape complementarity, hydrogen bonding, and electrostatic
interactions.172 Aptamers undergo a large
conformational change upon analyte binding, resulting in detectable
plasmonic shifts dictated by the proximity of the two nanospheres.
Approaches to assemble well-defined dimers linked with a single aptamer
are available as described in the section on synthesis and assembly,
making this a promising strategy to enable label-free detection of
single small molecules.

Nonspecific Interactions in Biological Media
The application
of single-molecule sensing in a biological environment requires robust
resistivity of the particles against nonspecific interactions. The
total macromolecular concentration in, for example, blood exceeds
100 μM, whereas biomarkers such as listed in Figure 2 are present at concentrations
that are several orders of magnitude lower. This large concentration
difference implies that even weak nonspecific interactions can dominate
the response of a sensor, as they effectively compete with specific
interactions. In biological environments this can even lead to the
formation of a so-called protein-corona around a nanoparticle,173 which may shield its surface-bound receptors
and inhibit its sensitivity.

Antifouling coatings are often
employed to minimize nonspecific interactions with the exposed sensor
surface. Polyethylene glycols (PEGs) are widely used because they
are easily synthesized and commercially available. They are usually
coupled to metallic particles using reactive thiol groups because
the covalent bond ensures a stable conjugation.175 Although the thermodynamic and molecular mechanisms that
determine the antifouling properties of PEGs are not completely understood,
it is believed that chain length, surface density, conformation, and
hydrophilicity of the polymer play important roles in resisting protein
adhesion. An alternative class of antifouling materials are zwitterionic
polymers that maintain electric neutrality with an equivalent number
of positively and negatively charged groups. It is proposed that the
superior antifouling properties of zwitterions is related to their
stronger hydration induced by electrostatic interactions instead of
hydrogen bonding.176 Zwitterionic polymers
however still have limited commercial availability, which makes their
use less widespread than PEGs.

In ensemble-averaged biosensors
the detrimental effects of nonspecific
interactions are partially countered by employing capture probes (antibodies,
aptamers, peptides) with a high affinity and specificity for the analyte.
This ensures that a sizable fraction of receptors is occupied by the
analyte and dominates the sensor response. Sensing at the single-molecule
level has the advantage that the kinetic parameters (i.e., time between
binding events and residence time) are also available for each event.
This extra information can be exploited to further enhance the specificity
of the sensor by analyzing distributions of residence times.75,174 Nonspecific interactions are ideally weak, whereas specific interactions
exhibit a well-defined and longer residence time due to their molecularly
determined interaction potential. This principle is referred to as
kinetic fingerprinting and was already exploited by Johnson-Buck et
al. to distinguish on-target DNA-microRNA interactions from single
base-pair mismatches by statistical analysis of residence times (see Figure 18).174

Figure 18 Distinguishing specific from nonspecific interactions
by single-molecule
analysis of kinetic parameters. (a) A surface coated with biotin-labeled
LNA capture molecules is functionalized with microRNA. Incubation
with fluorescent probes induces kinetic binding and unbinding with
the microRNA. (b) This kinetic binding and unbinding is observed as
a digital signal in a single-molecule fluorescence assay. Clear differences
exist in the residence times for complementary interactions and single
base-pair mismatches. (c) Correlation between residence time and time
between events. Two populations are observed of which the one with
short residence time corresponds to nonspecific interactions. Figure
adapted with permission from ref (174). Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.

The ability of kinetic fingerprinting
has the interesting consequence
that the optimum capture probe is not necessarily the one with the
highest affinity. Instead it is the probe that exhibits a distribution
of residence times that (a) can be measured with good statistics in
a reasonable time and (b) can be easily distinguished from the nonspecific
background. Choosing the right capture probe therefore requires detailed
understanding of nonspecific interactions with functionalized nanoparticles
at the single-molecule level. There are no studies yet that address
nonspecific interactions with nanoparticles at the single-molecule
level, but it is clear that these will be crucial to optimize the
sensor for operation in biological media.

Statistics and Multiplexing
The main motivation to
expend the effort to develop single-molecule sensors lies in the ability
to reveal populations of molecular interaction parameters and identify
rare species in a sample volume. The reliability with which these
properties can be measured depends on the amount of statistics that
can be gathered in a reasonable time. Single-molecule waiting-time
distributions exhibit Poisson statistics, and the error in determining
the mean of a distribution thus scales as 1/√N. This implies that the ability to distinguish different populations
depends on the amount of statistics gathered.

For the single
and very small sensors described here, the number of molecular interactions
detected per unit time depends on the sensor size and the diffusion
coefficient of the analyte.78,177−179 For analyte present at high concentrations (>nM), the frequency
of detection is typically more than several Hz for a hemispherical
sensor with a radius of 50 nm.177 This
implies that a distribution can typically be clearly resolved within
minutes. However, at 1 fM it takes nearly a day for the first molecule
to diffuse to the single-particle sensor.177 In a sensing device these mass-transport limitations result in unrealistically
long waiting times between events and thus a slow response and limited
accuracy in determining concentrations and populations.

Several
solutions have been proposed in the literature to tackle
mass-transport limitations and improve statistics. The first solution
is to enhance the concentration of analyte in proximity to the sensor.
De Angelis et al. exploited superhydrophobic surfaces made of silicon
micropillar arrays for the evaporation and local enrichment of analyte
(see Figure 19a and
ref (180)). Barik et
al. on the other hand employed dielectrophoretic forces on charged
analyte to enhance its concentration near a gold nanohole film.181 Both approaches result in an increased analyte
concentration near the sensor surface, which is then detected by fluorescence,
transmission, or surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy on embedded plasmonic
structures. These approaches allow for the molecular detection of
a range of analytes at atto- to picomolar concentrations, equivalent
to a few molecules per drop only.

Figure 19 Approaches to increase the event frequency
to allow for acquisition
of relevant statistics. (a) Evaporation of a drop of analyte on a
superhydrophobic surface results in local enrichment of biomarkers.
Figure adapted with permission from ref (180). Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (b)
Parallel detection of many single-molecule sensors in a wide-field
microscope. Figure adapted with permission from ref (76). Copyright 2015 American
Chemical Society. (c) Array of nanoparticles in nanometer-sized fluidic
channels. Figure adapted with permission from ref (182). Copyright 2016 American
Chemical Society.

An alternative solution
that would enable the detection at low
analyte concentrations was proposed by Beuwer et al. (see Figure 19b and ref (76)). They probed hundreds
of single-molecule sensors simultaneously in a wide-field optical
microscope to increase the number of detected events. Highly parallel
detection is enabled here by modern high-resolution cameras used in
combination with a low-magnification microscope objective. The lowest
concentrations that can then be probed are limited by the number of
sensors that can be imaged simultaneously. Assuming that approximately
100 events are required to establish a concentration, they estimated
that concentrations <1 pM would be measurable within 10 min by
simultaneous probing of 105 single-molecule sensors.

Instead of waiting for diffusion to transport the analyte to a
nanoscale sensor, Fritzsche et al. employed nanofluidic sensors with
dimensions similar to the plasmonic sensors (see Figure 19c and ref (182)). The nanochannels were
fabricated with a combination of electron beam lithography and reactive
ion etching, resulting in channels with a width of 130 to 280 nm.
They incorporated reference channels to correct for baseline drift
and showed the detection of analyte binding to the gold structures.
Herein, analyte was actively pumped past the nanosensors by a large
pressure difference between the inlet and the outlet. The proximity
of the analyte to the sensor increases the probability of detection,
reducing the wait time between detection events, and lowering the
concentration limits that be probed.

The challenges defined
here, namely, sensitivity, specificity,
and statistics, are all highly active fields of research, and we hypothesize
that many of these challenges will be soon overcome with novel developments.

Outlook
Quantification of biomolecular interactions at the
single-molecule
level has greatly expanded the scope of biosensors and analytical
technologies. In contrast to ensemble-averaged approaches, single-molecule
sensitivity gives access to the underlying heterogeneity of molecular
properties. This heterogeneity could originate from, e.g., the presence
of different species within a sample, or the presence of different
conformations of the same species. Recent experiments demonstrated
the power of single-molecule sensing by identifying multiple protein-homologues
within a mixture,15,183 distinguishing specific interactions
from nonspecific background signals,174 and characterizing a small population of partially unfolded proteins
in a population of properly folded molecules.184 Single-molecule sensitivity also gives access to equilibrium
dynamics that are averaged out in ensemble measurements because they
are usually not synchronized in time. This has allowed for the study
of, e.g., the conformational dynamics of a protein185 and measurement of molecular interactions at equilibrium.174

These single-molecule studies have so
far largely been conducted
using fluorescence microscopy. With the advent of label-free techniques
the range of biomolecules that can be studied is greatly expanded
because fluorescent labeling is not needed. Furthermore, the biomolecule
can be studied in its native state without chemical modifications,
potentially enabling real-time sensing in biological fluids. Plasmonic
approaches have an additional advantage in their small probe volume
(determined by the extent of the near-field) that allows for the detection
of single molecules in highly concentrated solutions. This may extend
single-molecule biophysical experiments to concentrated matrices that
mimic intracellular conditions. It is known that molecular interactions
and function are affected by high concentrations of macromolecules
that induce excluded volume effects,186 but the effects at the single-molecule level remain elusive.

A method for measuring heterogeneity by single-molecule sensing
may not only benefit academic research into the fundamentals of protein-interactions
and function, but may also find application in pharmaceutical companies.
A major challenge for the next generation of therapeutics is to, e.g.,
improve the homogeneity of therapeutic antibodies to yield more efficient
and potent drugs.187 Moreover, characterization
of small populations of partially unfolded proteins involved in diseases188 may be possible because these partially unfolded
proteins exhibit a distinct kinetic fingerprint that is revealed uniquely
at the single-molecule level.183 This may
yield novel and more detailed insight into interactions of drugs with
their target.

Beyond applications in analytical laboratories
we also foresee
exciting developments in biosensors worn in or on the body that continuously
report on biomarker concentrations.189,190 A well-known
example is the continuous monitoring of glucose that allows for accurate
dosing of insulin.191 A drawback of current
ensemble-averaged sensors is that they require regular calibration
due to baseline drift induced by, e.g., nonspecific interactions.192 In contrast, single-molecule sensors report
association and dissociation events at equilibrium, and may allow
one to distinguish between nonspecific (short-lived) interactions
and specific (long-lived) interactions on a molecule-by-molecule basis.174 Such kinetic fingerprinting alleviates the
requirements of an antifouling coating because a certain level of
nonspecific interactions can be tolerated in the sensor. In addition,
different homologues of analyte can be discriminated based on their
kinetic fingerprint.

These applications will depend on the ability
to miniaturize the
device. Currently, single-molecule plasmon sensors employ an optical
microscope such as found in many laboratories, consisting of a laser
as the excitation source, a high-quality objective lens, interference
filters, and a sensitive detector, either an avalanche photodiode
(APD) or a CCD camera for parallel imaging of many objects in a wide
field of view. Recently, several developments have allowed for the
miniaturization of optical microscopes to platforms as small as a
smartphone.24,193,194 Laser sources can be replaced by light-emitting diodes, which are
no bigger than a few millimeters and generate multiple watts of output
power. Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) cameras have
rapidly evolved over the past years and allow for sensitive detection
down to single fluorophores without the need for amplification as
is done in an electron-multiplying charge coupled device (EMCCD).
CMOS cameras in mobile phones already have sufficient sensitivity
to detect single metal particles and small fluorescent beads.24,193,194 Improving sensitivity and resolution
of the device would give access to fluorescence or scattering images
of even smaller individual objects, perhaps down to single fluorophores.

The required research to achieve practical applications is highly
multidisciplinary and spans the fields of physics, chemistry, biology,
mathematics, and electrical engineering. Therefore, not only is fundamental
research needed, but also multidisciplinary and strategic collaborations
are crucial to achieve this goal. Ultimately, the prospect of fully
integrated biosensors that continuously monitors biomarker levels
in vivo is a tempting one that may revolutionize personalized healthcare.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Menno Prins for critical
reading of the
manuscript. P.Z. acknowledges financial support from The Netherlands
Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO VIDI). This work is part
of the research programme of the Foundation for Fundamental Research
on Matter (FOM), which is financially supported by The Netherlands
Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO).

Vocabulary
surface plasmon resonancethe resonant
oscillation of conduction electrons stimulated by incident light

plasmonic nanoparticlesnanosized particles whose conduction electrons couple with electromagnetic
radiation (light)

near-fieldthe electromagnetic field around the nanoparticle at distances
shorter than the wavelength

radiative
decaythe loss of energy due to photon emission

nonradiative decayany other
loss mechanism wherein no photons are emitted

biosensingthe use of transducers incorporating
biologically active capture molecules to detect the presence of particular
biomolecules
==== Refs
References
Ma F. ; Li Y. ; Tang B. ; Zhang C. Y. 
Fluorescent Biosensors Based on Single-Molecule
Counting . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2016 , 49 9 1722 –1730 10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00237 .27583695 
Orrit M. ; Bernard J. 
Single Pentacene Molecules
Detected by Fluorescence
Excitation in a P-Terphenyl Crystal . Phys. Rev.
Lett. 
1990 , 65 21 2716 –2719 10.1103/PhysRevLett.65.2716 .10042674 
Moerner W. E. ; Kador L. 
Optical Detection and Spectroscopy
of Single Molecules in a Solid . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1989 , 62 21 2535 –2538 10.1103/PhysRevLett.62.2535 .10040013 
Eid J. ; Fehr A. ; Gray J. ; Luong K. ; Lyle J. ; Otto G. ; Peluso P. ; Rank D. ; Baybayan P. ; Bettman B. ; Bibillo A. ; Bjornson K. ; Chaudhuri B. ; Christians F. ; Cicero R. ; Clark S. ; Dalal R. ; deWinter A. ; Dixon J. ; Foquet M. ; Gaertner A. ; Hardenbol P. ; Heiner C. ; Hester K. ; Holden D. ; Kearns G. ; Kong X. ; Kuse R. ; Lacroix Y. ; Lin S. ; Lundquist P. ; Ma C. ; Marks P. ; Maxham M. ; Murphy D. ; Park I. ; Pham T. ; Phillips M. ; Roy J. ; Sebra R. ; Shen G. ; Sorenson J. ; Tomaney A. ; Travers K. ; Trulson M. ; Vieceli J. ; Wegener J. ; Wu D. ; Yang A. ; Zaccarin D. ; Zhao P. ; Zhong F. ; Korlach J. ; Turner S. 
Real-Time DNA Sequencing from Single
Polymerase Molecules . Science 
2009 , 323 5910 133 –138 10.1126/science.1162986 .19023044 
Pacific
Biosciences; www.pacb.com, (accessed
19-5-2017).
Rissin D. M. ; Kan C. W. ; Campbell T. G. ; Howes S. C. ; Fournier D. R. ; Song L. ; Piech T. ; Patel P. P. ; Chang L. ; Rivnak A. J. ; Ferrell E. P. ; Randall J. D. ; Provuncher G. K. ; Walt D. R. ; Duffy D. C. 
Single-Molecule
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent
Assay Detects Serum Proteins at Subfemtomolar Concentrations . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2010 , 28 6 595 –599 10.1038/nbt.1641 .20495550 
Quanterix; www.quanterix.com, accessed
19-5-2017 .
Todd J. ; Freese B. ; Lu A. ; Held D. ; Morey J. ; Livingston R. ; Goix P. 
Ultrasensitive Flow-Based Immunoassays
Using Single-Molecule Counting . Clin. Chem. 
2007 , 53 11 1990 –1995 10.1373/clinchem.2007.091181 .17890441 
Singulex; www.singulex.com, accessed 19-5-2017 .
Giepmans B. N. G. ; Adams S. R. ; Ellisman M. H. ; Tsien R. Y. 
The Fluorescent
Toolbox for Assessing Protein Location and Function . Science 
2006 , 312 5771 217 –224 10.1126/science.1124618 .16614209 
Medintz I. L. ; Uyeda H. T. ; Goldman E. R. ; Mattoussi H. 
Quantum Dot
Bioconjugates for Imaging, Labelling and Sensing . Nat. Mater. 
2005 , 4 , 435 –446 10.1038/nmat1390 .15928695 
Miles B. N. ; Ivanov A. P. ; Wilson K. A. ; Doğan F. ; Japrung D. ; Edel J. B. 
Single Molecule
Sensing with Solid-State
Nanopores: Novel Materials, Methods, and Applications . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 1 15 –28 10.1039/C2CS35286A .22990878 
Cherf G. M. ; Lieberman K. R. ; Rashid H. ; Lam C. E. ; Karplus K. ; Akeson M. 
Automated
Forward and Reverse Ratcheting of DNA in
a Nanopore at 5-Å Precision . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2012 , 30 4 344 –348 10.1038/nbt.2147 .22334048 
Manrao E.
A. ; Derrington I. M. ; Laszlo A. H. ; Langford K. W. ; Hopper M. K. ; Gillgren N. ; Pavlenok M. ; Niederweis M. ; Gundlach J. H. 
Reading DNA at Single-Nucleotide
Resolution with a
Mutant MspA Nanopore and phi29 DNA Polymerase . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2012 , 30 4 349 –353 10.1038/nbt.2171 .22446694 
Wei R. ; Gatterdam V. ; Wieneke R. ; Tampé R. ; Rant U. 
Stochastic Sensing of Proteins with Receptor-Modified Solid-State
Nanopores . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 4 257 –263 10.1038/nnano.2012.24 .22406921 
Guo X. 
Single-Molecule
Electrical Biosensors Based on Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Adv. Mater. 
2013 , 25 25 3397 –3408 10.1002/adma.201301219 .23696446 
Goldsmith B. R. ; Coroneus J. G. ; Khalap V. R. ; Kane A. A. ; Weiss G. A. ; Collins P. G. 
Conductance-Controlled
Point Functionalization of Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes . Science 
2007 , 315 5808 77 –81 10.1126/science.1135303 .17204645 
Cognet L. ; Tsyboulski D. A. ; Rocha J.-D. R. ; Doyle C. D. ; Tour J. M. ; Weisman R. B. 
Stepwise
Quenching of Exciton Fluorescence in Carbon
Nanotubes by Single-Molecule Reactions . Science 
2007 , 316 5830 1465 –1468 10.1126/science.1141316 .17556581 
Jin H. ; Heller D. A. ; Kim J. H. ; Strano M. S. 
Stochastic Analysis
of Stepwise Fluorescence Quenching Reactions on Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotubes: Single Molecule Sensors . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 12 4299 –4304 10.1021/nl802010z .19367966 
Baaske M.
D. ; Foreman M. R. ; Vollmer F. 
Single-Molecule Nucleic Acid Interactions
Monitored on a Label-Free Microcavity Biosensor Platform . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2014 , 9 11 933 –939 10.1038/nnano.2014.180 .25173831 
Dantham V. R. ; Holler S. ; Barbre C. ; Keng D. ; Kolchenko V. ; Arnold S. 
Label-Free Detection
of Single Protein Using a Nanoplasmonic-Photonic
Hybrid Microcavity . Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 7 3347 –3351 10.1021/nl401633y .23777440 
Pockrand I. ; Swalen J. D. ; Gordon J. G. ; Philpott M. R. 
Surface Plasmon
Spectroscopy of Organic Monolayer Assemblies . Surf. Sci. 
1978 , 74 1 237 –244 10.1016/0039-6028(78)90283-2 .
Kretschmann E. ; Raether H. 
Radiative Decay of Non Radiative
Surface Plasmons Excited
by Light . Z. Naturforsch., A: Phys. Sci. 
1968 , 23 12 2135 –2136 10.1515/zna-1968-1247 .
Wei Q. ; Qi H. ; Luo W. ; Tseng D. ; Ki S. J. ; Wan Z. ; Göröcs Z. ; Bentolila L. A. ; Wu T. T. ; Sun R. ; Ozcan A. 
Fluorescent
Imaging of Single Nanoparticles and Viruses on a Smart
Phone . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 10 9147 –9155 10.1021/nn4037706 .24016065 
Anderson N. L. ; Anderson N. G. 
The Human Plasma
Proteome: History, Character, and
Diagnostic Prospects . Mol. Cell. Proteomics 
2002 , 1 11 845 –867 10.1074/mcp.R200007-MCP200 .12488461 
Puchkova A. ; Vietz C. ; Pibiri E. ; Wünsch B. ; Sanz Paz M. ; Acuna G. P. ; Tinnefeld P. 
DNA Origami
Nanoantennas with over 5000-Fold Fluorescence Enhancement and Single-Molecule
Detection at 25 μM . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 12 8354 –8359 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b04045 .26523768 
Khatua S. ; Yuan H. ; Orrit M. 
Enhanced-Fluorescence Correlation
Spectroscopy at Micro-Molar Dye Concentration around a Single Gold
Nanorod . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 17 33 21127 –21132 10.1039/C4CP03057E .25201467 
Mayo
Medical Laboratories; www.mayomedicallaboratories.com, accessed 19-5-2017 .
Faraday M. 
The Bakerian
Lecture: Experimental Relations of Gold (and Other Metals) to Light . Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London 
1857 , 147 , 145 –181 10.1098/rstl.1857.0011 .
Grzelczak M. ; Pérez-Juste J. ; Mulvaney P. ; Liz-Marzán L.
M. 
Shape Control
in Gold Nanoparticle Synthesis . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2008 , 37 9 1783 –1791 10.1039/b711490g .18762828 
Turkevich J. ; Cooper Stevenson P. ; Hillier J. 
A Study of the Nucleation and Growth
Processes In the Synthesis of Colloidal Gold . Discuss. Faraday Soc. 
1951 , 11 , 55 –57 10.1039/df9511100055 .
Brust M. ; Walker M. ; Bethell D. ; Schiffrin D. J. ; Whyman R. 
Synthesis of Thiol-Derivatised Gold Nanoparticles . J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun. 
1994 , 801 –802 10.1039/C39940000801 .
Lee Y. J. ; Schade N. B. ; Sun L. ; Fan J. A. ; Bae D. R. ; Mariscal M. M. ; Lee G. ; Capasso F. ; Sacanna S. ; Manoharan V. N. ; Yi G. R. 
Ultrasmooth, Highly Spherical Monocrystalline
Gold Particles for Precision Plasmonics . ACS
Nano 
2013 , 7 12 11064 –11070 10.1021/nn404765w .24219591 
Johnson P. B. ; Christy R. W. 
Optical Constants of the Noble Metals . Phys. Rev. B 
1972 , 6 , 4370 –4379 10.1103/PhysRevB.6.4370 .
Yu K. ; Sader J. E. ; Zijlstra P. ; Hong M. ; Xu Q. H. ; Orrit M. 
Probing Silver Deposition on Single Gold Nanorods by Their Acoustic
Vibrations . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 2 915 –922 10.1021/nl404304h .24422602 
Gallardo O. A. D. ; Moiraghi R. ; Macchione M. A. ; Godoy J. A. ; Pérez M. A. ; Coronado E. A. ; Macagno V. A. 
Silver
Oxide Particles/silver Nanoparticles
Interconversion: Susceptibility of Forward/backward Reactions to the
Chemical Environment at Room Temperature . RSC
Adv. 
2012 , 2 7 2923 –2929 10.1039/c2ra01044e .
Nikoobakht B. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Preparation and Growth Mechanism of Gold Nanorods (NRs)
Using Seed - Mediated Growth Method . Chem. Mater. 
2003 , 15 16 1957 –1962 10.1021/cm020732l .
Li Q. ; Zhuo X. ; Li S. ; Ruan Q. ; Xu Q. H. ; Wang J. F. 
Production of Monodisperse
Gold Nanobipyramids with
Number Percentages Approaching 100% and Evaluation of Their Plasmonic
Properties . Adv. Opt. Mater. 
2015 , 3 6 801 –812 10.1002/adom.201400505 .
Sönnichsen C. ; Franzl T. ; Wilk T. ; von Plessen G. ; Feldmann J. ; Wilson O. ; Mulvaney P. 
Drastic Reduction
of
Plasmon Damping in Gold Nanorods . Phys. Rev.
Lett. 
2002 , 88 7 077402 10.1103/PhysRevLett.88.077402 .11863939 
Liu M. ; Guyot-Sionnest P. ; Lee T. W. ; Gray S. K. 
Optical Properties
of Rodlike and Bipyramidal Gold Nanoparticles from Three-Dimensional
Computations . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys. 
2007 , 76 23 235428 10.1103/PhysRevB.76.235428 .
Sriram M. ; Zong K. ; Vivekchand S. R. C. ; Gooding J. 
Single Nanoparticle
Plasmonic Sensors . Sensors 
2015 , 15 10 25774 –25792 10.3390/s151025774 .26473866 
Nusz G. J. ; Curry A. C. ; Marinakos S. M. ; Wax A. ; Chilkoti A. 
Rational Selection
of Gold Nanorod Geometry for Label-Free Plasmonic Biosensors . ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 4 795 –806 10.1021/nn8006465 .19296619 
Lee S. ; Mayer K. M. ; Hafner J. H. 
Improved Localized Surface Plasmon
Resonance Immunoassay with Gold Bipyramid Substrates . Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 11 4450 –4455 10.1021/ac900276n .19415896 
Becker J. ; Trügler A. ; Jakab A. ; Hohenester U. ; Sönnichsen C. 
The Optimal
Aspect Ratio of Gold Nanorods for Plasmonic
Bio-Sensing . Plasmonics 
2010 , 5 2 161 –167 10.1007/s11468-010-9130-2 .
Peters S. M. E. ; Prins M. W. J. ; Zijlstra P. 
Strong Reduction
of Spectral Heterogeneity
of Gold Bipyramids for Single-Particle and Single-Molecule Plasmon
Sensing . Nanotechnology 
2016 , 27 , 024001 10.1088/0957-4484/27/2/024001 .26618240 
Jana N. R. ; Gearheart L. ; Murphy C. J. 
Wet Chemical Synthesis
of High Aspect
Ratio Cylindrical Gold Nanorods . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2001 , 105 19 4065 –4067 10.1021/jp0107964 .
Liu M. ; Guyot-Sionnest P. 
Mechanism of silver(I)-Assisted Growth of Gold Nanorods
and Bipyramids . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 47 22192 –22200 10.1021/jp054808n .16853888 
Huang J.-S. ; Callegari V. ; Geisler P. ; Brüning C. ; Kern J. ; Prangsma J. C. ; Wu X. ; Feichtner T. ; Ziegler J. ; Weinmann P. ; Kamp M. ; Forchel A. ; Biagioni P. ; Sennhauser U. ; Hecht B. 
Atomically Flat Single-Crystalline
Gold Nanostructures for Plasmonic Nanocircuitry . Nat. Commun. 
2010 , 1 9 150 10.1038/ncomms1143 .21267000 
Aćimović S. S. ; Kreuzer M. P. ; González M. U. ; Quidant R. 
Plasmon near-Field
Coupling in Metal Dimers as a Step toward Single-Molecule Sensing . ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 5 1231 –1237 10.1021/nn900102j .19385661 
Halas N. J. ; Lal S. ; Chang W. S. ; Link S. ; Nordlander P. 
Plasmons in
Strongly Coupled Metallic Nanostructures . Chem.
Rev. 
2011 , 111 6 3913 –3961 10.1021/cr200061k .21542636 
Mirkin C. A. ; Letsinger R. L. ; Mucic R. C. ; Storhoff J. J. 
A DNA-Based Method
for Rationally Assembling Nanoparticles into Macroscopic Materials . Nature 
1996 , 382 , 607 –609 10.1038/382607a0 .8757129 
Alivisatos A. P. ; Johnsson K. P. ; Peng X. ; Wilson T. E. ; Loweth C. J. ; Bruchez M. P. ; Schultz P. G. 
Organization of “Nanocrystal
Molecules” Using DNA . Nature 
1996 , 382 , 609 –611 10.1038/382609a0 .8757130 
Zhang S. Z. ; Kou X. S. ; Yang Z. ; Shi Q. H. ; Stucky G. D. ; Sun L. D. ; Wang J. F. ; Yan C. H. 
Nanonecklaces Assembled
from Gold Rods, Spheres, and Bipyramids . Chem.
Commun. 
2007 , 1816 –1818 10.1039/b618818d .
Sun Z. ; Ni W. ; Yang Z. ; Kou X. ; Li L. ; Wang J. 
pH-Controlled
Reversible Assembly and Disassembly of Gold Nanorods . Small 
2008 , 4 9 1287 –1292 10.1002/smll.200800099 .18686276 
Nikitin M. P. ; Zdobnova T. A. ; Lukash S. V. ; Stremovskiy O. A. ; Deyev S. M. 
Protein-Assisted Self-Assembly of Multifunctional Nanoparticles . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2010 , 107 13 5827 –5832 10.1073/pnas.1001142107 .20231484 
Zhen S. J. ; Huang C. Z. ; Wang J. ; Li Y. F. 
End-to-End Assembly
of Gold Nanorods on the Basis of Aptamer-Protein Recognition . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2009 , 113 52 21543 –21547 10.1021/jp905084e .
Gates B. D. ; Xu Q. ; Stewart M. ; Ryan D. ; Willson C. G. ; Whitesides G. M. 
New Approaches
to Nanofabrication: Molding, Printing, and Other Techniques . Chem. Rev. 
2005 , 105 4 1171 –1196 10.1021/cr030076o .15826012 
Kinkhabwala A. ; Yu Z. ; Fan S. ; Avlasevich Y. ; Müllen K. ; Moerner W. E. 
Large Single-Molecule
Fluorescence Enhancements Produced
by a Bowtie Nanoantenna . Nat. Photonics 
2009 , 3 11 654 –657 10.1038/nphoton.2009.187 .
Curto A. G. ; Volpe G. ; Taminiau T. H. ; Kreuzer M. P. ; Quidant R. ; van Hulst N. F. 
Unidirectional Emission of a Quantum Dot Coupled to
a Nanoantenna . Science 
2010 , 329 5994 930 –933 10.1126/science.1191922 .20724630 
Rechberger W. ; Hohenau A. ; Leitner A. ; Krenn J. R. ; Lamprecht B. ; Aussenegg F. R. 
Optical
Properties of Two Interacting Gold Nanoparticles . Opt. Commun. 
2003 , 220 , 137 –141 10.1016/S0030-4018(03)01357-9 .
Ueno K. ; Mizeikis V. ; Juodkazis S. ; Sasaki K. ; Misawa H. 
Optical Properties
of Nanoengineered Gold Blocks . Opt. Lett. 
2005 , 30 16 2158 –2160 10.1364/OL.30.002158 .16127942 
Thacker V. V. ; Herrmann L. O. ; Sigle D. O. ; Zhang T. ; Liedl T. ; Baumberg J. J. ; Keyser U. F. 
DNA Origami Based Assembly of Gold
Nanoparticle Dimers for Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 3448 10.1038/ncomms4448 .24622339 
Schreiber R. ; Luong N. ; Fan Z. ; Kuzyk A. ; Nickels P. C. ; Zhang T. ; Smith D. M. ; Yurke B. ; Kuang W. ; Govorov A. O. ; Liedl T. 
Chiral Plasmonic
DNA Nanostructures
with Switchable Circular Dichroism . Nat. Commun. 
2013 , 4 , 2948 10.1038/ncomms3948 .24336125 
Zhan P. ; Dutta P. K. ; Wang P. ; Song G. ; Dai M. ; Zhao S. ; Wang Z.-G. ; Yin P. ; Zhang W. ; Ding B. ; Ke Y. 
Reconfigurable Three-Dimensional
Gold Nanorod Plasmonic Nanostructures Organized on DNA Origami Tripod . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 1172 –1179 10.1021/acsnano.6b06861 .28056172 
Hung A. M. ; Micheel C. M. ; Bozano L. D. ; Osterbur L. W. ; Wallraff G. M. ; Cha J. N. 
Large-Area Spatially Ordered Arrays of Gold Nanoparticles
Directed by Lithographically Confined DNA Origami . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2010 , 5 2 121 –126 10.1038/nnano.2009.450 .20023644 
Acuna G. P. ; Möller F. M. ; Holzmeister P. ; Beater S. ; Lalkens B. ; Tinnefeld P. 
Fluorescence
Enhancement at Docking Sites of DNA-Directed
Self-Assembled Nanoantennas . Science 
2012 , 338 6106 506 –510 10.1126/science.1228638 .23112329 
Gür F. N. ; Schwarz F. W. ; Ye J. ; Diez S. ; Schmidt T. L. 
Toward
Self-Assembled Plasmonic Devices: High-Yield Arrangement of Gold Nanoparticles
on DNA Origami Templates . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 5 5374 –5382 10.1021/acsnano.6b01537 .27159647 
Dai G. ; Lu X. ; Chen Z. ; Meng C. ; Ni W. ; Wang Q. 
DNA Origami-Directed,
Discrete Three-Dimensional Plasmonic Tetrahedron Nanoarchitectures
with Tailored Optical Chirality . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2014 , 6 8 5388 –5392 10.1021/am501599f .24716524 
Zijlstra P. ; Paulo P. M. R. ; Yu K. ; Xu Q. H. ; Orrit M. 
Chemical Interface
Damping in Single Gold Nanorods and Its near Elimination by Tip-Specific
Functionalization . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 33 8352 –8355 10.1002/anie.201202318 .
Beeram S. R. ; Zamborini F. P. 
Selective Attachment of Antibodies to the Edges of
Gold Nanostructures for Enhanced Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance
Biosensing . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 11689 –11691 10.1021/ja904387j .19650650 
Rycenga M. ; Langille M. R. ; Personick M. L. ; Ozel T. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Chemically
Isolating Hot Spots on Concave Nanocubes . Nano
Lett. 
2012 , 12 12 6218 –6222 10.1021/nl3032235 .23136925 
Zhou X. ; Soppera O. ; Plain J. ; Jradi S. ; Wei Sun X. ; Volkan Demir H. ; Yang X. ; Deeb C. ; Gray S. K. ; Wiederrecht G. P. ; Bachelot R. 
Plasmon-Based Photopolymerization:
Near-Field Probing, Advanced Photonic Nanostructures and Nanophotochemistry . J. Opt. 
2014 , 16 11 114002 10.1088/2040-8978/16/11/114002 .
Feuz L. ; Jonsson M. P. ; Höök F. 
Material-Selective
Surface Chemistry
for Nanoplasmonic Sensors: Optimizing Sensitivity and Controlling
Binding to Local Hot Spots . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 873 –879 10.1021/nl203917e .22257106 
Cortés E. ; Xie W. ; Cambiasso J. ; Jermyn A. S. ; Sundararaman R. ; Narang P. ; Schlücker S. ; Maier S. A. 
Plasmonic Hot Electron
Transport Drives Nano-Localized Chemistry . Nat.
Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 14880 10.1038/ncomms14880 .28348402 
Gooding J. J. ; Gaus K. 
Single-Molecule Sensors:
Challenges and Opportunities for Quantitative
Analysis . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 11354 –11366 10.1002/anie.201600495 .
Beuwer M. A. ; Prins M. W. J. ; Zijlstra P. 
Stochastic
Protein Interactions Monitored
by Hundreds of Single-Molecule Plasmonic Biosensors . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 5 3507 –3511 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b00872 .25833294 
Zijlstra P. ; Paulo P. M. R. ; Orrit M. 
Optical Detection
of Single Non-Absorbing
Molecules Using the Surface Plasmon Resonance of a Gold Nanorod . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 6 379 –382 10.1038/nnano.2012.51 .22504707 
Antosiewicz T. J. ; Käll M. 
A Multiscale
Approach to Modeling Plasmonic Nanorod
Biosensors . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 20692 –20701 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b01897 .
Nusz G. J. ; Marinakos S. M. ; Curry A. C. ; Dahlin A. ; Hook F. ; Wax A. ; Chilkoti A. 
Label-Free Plasmonic Detection of Biomolecular Binding
by a Single Gold Nanorod . Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 4 984 –989 10.1021/ac7017348 .18197636 
Gao N. ; Chen Y. ; Li L. ; Guan Z. ; Zhao T. ; Zhou N. ; Yuan P. ; Yao S. Q. ; Xu Q. H. 
Shape-Dependent
Two-Photon Photoluminescence of Single Gold Nanoparticles . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 25 13904 –13911 10.1021/jp502038v .
Zijlstra P. ; Orrit M. 
Single Metal Nanoparticles:
Optical Detection, Spectroscopy and Applications . Rep. Prog. Phys. 
2011 , 74 10 106401 10.1088/0034-4885/74/10/106401 .
Olson J. ; Dominguez-Medina S. ; Hoggard A. ; Wang L.-Y. ; Chang W.-S. ; Link S. 
Optical Characterization
of Single Plasmonic Nanoparticles . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2015 , 44 1 40 –57 10.1039/C4CS00131A .24979351 
Crut A. ; Maioli P. ; Del Fatti N. ; Vallée F. 
Optical Absorption
and Scattering Spectroscopies of Single Nano-Objects . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 11 3921 –3956 10.1039/c3cs60367a .24724158 
Hu M. ; Novo C. ; Funston A. ; Wang H. ; Staleva H. ; Zou S. ; Mulvaney P. ; Xia Y. ; Hartland G. V. 
Dark-Field Microscopy
Studies of Single Metal Nanoparticles: Understanding the Factors That
Influence the Linewidth of the Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance . J. Mater. Chem. 
2008 , 18 17 1949 –1960 10.1039/b714759g .18846243 
Boyer D. ; Tamarat P. ; Maali A. ; Lounis B. ; Orrit M. 
Photothermal
Imaging of Nanometer-Sized Metal Particles Among Scatterers . Science 
2002 , 297 5584 1160 –1163 10.1126/science.1073765 .12183624 
Tcherniak A. ; Dominguez-Medina S. ; Chang W. S. ; Swanglap P. ; Slaughter L. S. ; Landes C. F. ; Link S. 
One-Photon Plasmon Luminescence and
Its Application to Correlation Spectroscopy as a Probe for Rotational
and Translational Dynamics of Gold Nanorods . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 32 15938 –15949 10.1021/jp206203s .
Gaiduk A. ; Yorulmaz M. ; Orrit M. 
Correlated
Absorption and Photoluminescence
of Single Gold Nanoparticles . ChemPhysChem 
2011 , 12 8 1536 –1541 10.1002/cphc.201100167 .21500336 
Wang H. ; Huff T. B. ; Zweifel D. A. ; He W. ; Low P. S. ; Wei A. ; Cheng J. X. 
In Vitro and in Vivo Two-Photon Luminescence Imaging
of Single Gold Nanorods . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 
2005 , 102 , 15752 –15756 10.1073/pnas.0504892102 .16239346 
Imura K. ; Nagahara T. ; Okamoto H. 
Near-Field Two-Photon-Induced Photoluminescence
from Single Gold Nanorods and Imaging of Plasmon Modes . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 27 13214 –13220 10.1021/jp051631o .16852648 
Mooradian A. 
Photoluminescence
of Metals . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1969 , 22 5 185 –187 10.1103/PhysRevLett.22.185 .
Jiang X. ; Pan Y. ; Jiang C. ; Zhao T. ; Yuan P. ; Venkatesan T. ; Xu Q. 
Excitation Nature of Two-Photon Photoluminescence of Gold Nanorods
and Coupled Gold Nanoparticles Studied by Two-Pulse Emission Modulation
Spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2013 , 4 , 1634 –1638 10.1021/jz400582h .26282970 
Yorulmaz M. ; Khatua S. ; Zijlstra P. ; Gaiduk A. ; Orrit M. 
Luminescence
Quantum Yield of Single Gold Nanorods . Nano
Lett. 
2012 , 12 8 4385 –4391 10.1021/nl302196a .22775068 
Dulkeith E. ; Niedereichholz T. ; Klar T. A. ; Feldmann J. ; Von Plessen G. ; Gittins D. I. ; Mayya K. S. ; Caruso F. 
Plasmon Emission in
Photoexcited Gold Nanoparticles . Phys. Rev.
B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2004 , 70 20 205424 10.1103/PhysRevB.70.205424 .
Ortega-Arroyo J. ; Kukura P. 
Interferometric Scattering Microscopy
(iSCAT): New
Frontiers in Ultrafast and Ultrasensitive Optical Microscopy . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 14 45 15625 –15636 10.1039/c2cp41013c .22996289 
Lippitz M. ; van Dijk M. A. ; Orrit M. 
Third-Harmonic
Generation from Single
Gold Nanoparticles . Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 4 799 –802 10.1021/nl0502571 .15826131 
Hartland G. V. 
Ultrafast
Studies of Single Semiconductor and Metal Nanostructures through Transient
Absorption Microscopy . Chem. Sci. 
2010 , 1 3 303 –309 10.1039/c0sc00243g .
Jung Y. ; Chen H. ; Tong L. ; Cheng J. 
Imaging Gold Nanorods
by Plasmon-Resonance-Enhanced Four Wave Mixing Imaging Gold Nanorods
by Plasmon-Resonance-Enhanced Four Wave Mixing . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2009 , 113 , 2657 –2663 10.1021/jp810852c .
Ruijgrok P. V. ; Verhart N. R. ; Zijlstra P. ; Tchebotareva A. L. ; Orrit M. 
Brownian Fluctuations and Heating of an Optically Aligned Gold Nanorod . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2011 , 107 3 037401 10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.037401 .21838403 
Kumar J. ; Wei X. ; Barrow S. ; Funston A. M. ; Thomas K. G. ; Mulvaney P. 
Surface Plasmon
Coupling in End-to-End Linked Gold Nanorod Dimers and Trimers . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 15 12 4258 –4264 10.1039/c3cp44657c .23439989 
Willets K. A. ; Wilson A. J. ; Sundaresan V. ; Joshi P. B. 
Super-Resolution Imaging and Plasmonics . Chem. Rev. 
2017 , 117 , 7538 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00547 .28084729 
Sönnichsen C. ; Geier S. ; Hecker N. E. ; von Plessen G. ; Feldmann J. ; Ditlbacher H. ; Lamprecht B. ; Krenn J. R. ; Aussenegg F. R. ; Chan V. Z.-H. ; Spatz J. P. ; Möller M. 
Spectroscopy
of Single Metallic Nanoparticles Using
Total Internal Reflection Microscopy . Appl.
Phys. Lett. 
2000 , 77 19 2949 –2951 10.1063/1.1323553 .
Gu Z. ; Jing C. ; Ying Y. L. ; He P. ; Long Y. T. 
In Situ
High Throughput Scattering Light Analysis of Single Plasmonic Nanoparticles
in Living Cells . Theranostics 
2015 , 5 2 188 –195 10.7150/thno.10302 .25553107 
Cao J. 
Michaelis-Menten Equation and Detailed
Balance in Enzymatic Networks . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2011 , 115 18 5493 –5498 10.1021/jp110924w .21466190 
Bingham J. M. ; Willets K. A. ; Shah N. C. ; Andrews D. Q. ; Van Duyne R. P. 
LSPR Imaging:
Simultaneous Single Nanoparticle Spectroscopy
and Diffusional Dynamics . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2009 , 113 39 16839 –16842 10.1021/jp907377h .
Tian X. ; Zhou Y. ; Thota S. ; Zou S. ; Zhao J. 
Plasmonic Coupling in Single Silver Nanosphere Assemblies
by Polarization-Dependent
Dark-Field Scattering Spectroscopy . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2014 , 118 25 13801 –13808 10.1021/jp503505x .
Schopf C. ; Noonan E. ; Quinn A. ; Iacopino D. 
Self-Assembly
of Gold Nanocrystals into Discrete Coupled Plasmonic Structures . Crystals 
2016 , 6 9 117 10.3390/cryst6090117 .
Olson J. ; Dominguez-Medina S. ; Hoggard A. ; Wang L.-Y. ; Chang W.-S. ; Link S. 
Optical Characterization of Single
Plasmonic Nanoparticles . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 1 40 –57 10.1039/C4CS00131A .24979351 
Nehl C. L. ; Grady N. K. ; Goodrich G. P. ; Tam F. ; Halas N. J. ; Hafner J. H. 
Scattering Spectra of Single Gold
Nanoshells . Nano Lett. 
2004 , 4 , 2355 –2359 10.1021/nl048610a .
Novo C. ; Funston A. M. ; Pastoriza-Santos I. ; Liz-Marzán L. M. ; Mulvaney P. 
Spectroscopy and High-Resolution
Microscopy of Single Nanocrystals by a Focused Ion Beam Registration
Method . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2007 , 46 19 3517 –3520 10.1002/anie.200700033 .
Jin R. ; Jureller J. E. ; Kim H. Y. ; Scherer N. F. 
Correlating Second
Harmonic Optical Responses of Single Ag Nanoparticles with Morphology . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 127 36 12482 –12483 10.1021/ja0537169 .16144383 
Taylor A. B. ; Siddiquee A. M. ; Chon J. W. M. 
Below Melting
Point Photothermal Reshaping of Single Gold Nanorods Driven by Surface
Diffusion . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 12 12071 –12079 10.1021/nn5055283 .25405517 
Siddiquee A. M. ; Taylor A. B. ; Syed S. ; Lim G. H. ; Lim B. ; Chon J. W. M. 
Measurement of
Plasmon-Mediated Two-Photon Luminescence
Action Cross Sections of Single Gold Bipyramids, Dumbbells, and Hemispherically
Capped Cylindrical Nanorods . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2015 , 119 51 28536 –28543 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b08214 .
Stiles R. L. ; Willets K. A. ; Sherry L. J. ; Roden J. M. ; Van Duyne R. P. 
Investigating Tip-Nanoparticle Interactions in Spatially
Correlated Total Internal Reflection Plasmon Spectroscopy and Atomic
Force Microscopy . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2008 , 112 31 11696 –11701 10.1021/jp802066b .
Song Y. ; Nallathamby P. D. ; Huang T. ; Elsayed-ali H. E. ; Xu X. N. 
Correlation and
Characterization of Three-Dimensional Morphologically
Dependent Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance Spectra of Single Silver
Nanoparticles Using Dark-Field Optical Microscopy and Spectroscopy
and Atomic Force Microscopy . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2010 , 114 , 74 –81 10.1021/jp9083019 .
Bek A. ; Jansen R. ; Ringler M. ; Mayilo S. ; Klar T. A. ; Feldmann J. 
Fluorescence Enhancement
in Hot Spots of AFM-Designed
Gold Nanoparticle Sandwiches . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 2 485 –490 10.1021/nl072602n .18173294 
Sivun D. ; Vidal C. ; Munkhbat B. ; Arnold N. ; Klar T. A. ; Hrelescu C. 
Anticorrelation of
Photoluminescence
from Gold Nanoparticle Dimers with Hot-Spot Intensity . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 11 7203 –7209 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03562 .27700125 
Koenderink A. F. 
Single-Photon Nanoantennas . ACS
Photonics 
2017 , 4 4 710 –722 10.1021/acsphotonics.7b00061 .
Bauch M. ; Toma K. ; Toma M. ; Zhang Q. ; Dostalek J. 
Plasmon-Enhanced Fluorescence Biosensors: A Review . Plasmonics 
2014 , 9 , 781 –799 10.1007/s11468-013-9660-5 .27330521 
Li M. ; Cushing S. K. ; Wu N. 
Plasmon-Enhanced Optical
Sensors:
A Review . Analyst 
2015 , 140 2 386 –406 10.1039/C4AN01079E .25365823 
Darvill D. ; Centeno A. ; Xie F. 
Plasmonic
Fluorescence
Enhancement by Metal Nanostructures: Shaping the Future of Bionanotechnology . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 15709 –15726 10.1039/c3cp50415h .23579473 
Kern A. M. ; Zhang D. ; Brecht M. ; Chizhik A. I. ; Failla A. V. ; Wackenhut F. ; Meixner A. J. 
Enhanced Single-Molecule
Spectroscopy in Highly Confined Optical Fields: From λ/2-Fabry-Pérot
Resonators to Plasmonic Nano-Antennas . Chem.
Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 4 1263 –1286 10.1039/C3CS60357A .24365864 
Holzmeister P. ; Acuna G. P. ; Grohmann D. ; Tinnefeld P. 
Breaking the
Concentration Limit of Optical Single-Molecule Detection . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 4 1014 –1028 10.1039/C3CS60207A .24019005 
Punj D. ; Ghenuche P. ; Moparthi S. B. ; de Torres J. ; Grigoriev V. ; Rigneault H. ; Wenger J. 
Plasmonic Antennas
and Zero-Mode Waveguides to Enhance Single Molecule Fluorescence Detection
and Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy toward Physiological Concentrations . Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 
2014 , 6 3 268 –282 10.1002/wnan.1261 .24616447 
Khatua S. ; Paulo P. M. R. ; Yuan H. ; Gupta A. ; Zijlstra P. ; Orrit M. 
Resonant Plasmonic
Enhancement of
Single-Molecule Fluorescence by Individual Gold Nanorods . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 5 4440 –4449 10.1021/nn406434y .24684549 
Boerigter C. ; Aslam U. ; Linic S. 
Mechanism
of Charge
Transfer from Plasmonic Nanostructures to Chemically Attached Materials . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 6 6108 –6115 10.1021/acsnano.6b01846 .27268233 
Hao E. ; Schatz G. C. 
Electromagnetic
Fields around Silver Nanoparticles
and Dimers . J. Chem. Phys. 
2004 , 120 1 357 –366 10.1063/1.1629280 .15267296 
Zhu W. ; Esteban R. ; Borisov A. G. ; Baumberg J. J. ; Nordlander P. ; Lezec H. J. ; Aizpurua J. ; Crozier K. B. 
Quantum Mechanical
Effects in Plasmonic Structures with Subnanometre Gaps . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 11495 10.1038/ncomms11495 .27255556 
Punj D. ; Regmi R. ; Devilez A. ; Plauchu R. ; Moparthi S. B. ; Stout B. ; Bonod N. ; Rigneault H. ; Wenger J. 
Self-Assembled Nanoparticle Dimer
Antennas for Plasmonic-Enhanced
Single-Molecule Fluorescence Detection at Micromolar Concentrations . ACS Photonics 
2015 , 2 8 1099 –1107 10.1021/acsphotonics.5b00152 .
Zhang T. ; Gao N. ; Li S. ; Lang M. J. ; Xu Q. H. 
Single-Particle Spectroscopic Study
on Fluorescence Enhancement by
Plasmon Coupled Gold Nanorod Dimers Assembled on DNA Origami . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2015 , 6 11 2043 –2049 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b00747 .26266500 
Garcia De Abajo F. J. 
Nonlocal Effects in the Plasmons
of Strongly Interacting
Nanoparticles, Dimers, and Waveguides . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2008 , 112 46 17983 –17987 10.1021/jp807345h .
Mertens H. ; Polman A. 
Strong Luminescence Quantum-Efficiency
Enhancement near Prolate Metal Nanoparticles: Dipolar versus Higher-Order
Modes . J. Appl. Phys. 
2009 , 105 4 044302 10.1063/1.3078108 .
Holzmeister P. ; Pibiri E. ; Schmied J. J. ; Sen T. ; Acuna G. P. ; Tinnefeld P. 
Quantum Yield and Excitation Rate
of Single Molecules close to Metallic Nanostructures . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 5356 10.1038/ncomms6356 .25370834 
Zuloaga J. ; Nordlander P. 
On the Energy
Shift between near-Field
and Far-Field Peak Intensities in Localized Plasmon Systems . Nano Lett. 
2011 , 11 3 1280 –1283 10.1021/nl1043242 .21319841 
Zhao J. ; Dieringer J. a ; Zhang X. ; Schatz G. C. ; Van Duyne R. P. 
Wavelength-Scanned
Surface-Enhanced Resonance Raman
Excitation Spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2008 , 112 49 19302 –19310 10.1021/jp807837t .
Alonso-González P. ; Albella P. ; Neubrech F. ; Huck C. ; Chen J. ; Golmar F. ; Casanova F. ; Hueso L. E. ; Pucci A. ; Aizpurua J. ; Hillenbrand R. 
Experimental
Verification of the Spectral Shift between near- and Far-Field Peak
Intensities of Plasmonic Infrared Nanoantennas . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2013 , 110 20 203902 10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.203902 .25167410 
Yuan H. ; Khatua S. ; Zijlstra P. ; Yorulmaz M. ; Orrit M. 
Thousand-Fold Enhancement of Single-Molecule
Fluorescence near a
Single Gold Nanorod . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 4 1217 –1221 10.1002/anie.201208125 .
Punj D. ; Mivelle M. ; Moparthi S. B. ; van Zanten T. S. ; Rigneault H. ; van Hulst N. F. ; García-Parajó M. F. ; Wenger J. 
A Plasmonic “Antenna-in-Box” Platform
for Enhanced Single-Molecule Analysis at Micromolar Concentrations . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 8 June 512 –516 10.1038/nnano.2013.98 .23748196 
Levene M. J. ; Korlach J. ; Turner S. W. ; Foquet M. ; Craighead H. G. ; Webb W. W. 
Zero-Mode Waveguides
for Single-Molecule
Analysis at High Concentrations . Science 
2003 , 299 5607 682 –686 10.1126/science.1079700 .12560545 
Alam M. S. ; Karim F. ; Zhao C. 
Single-Molecule Detection
at High Concentrations with Optical Aperture Nanoantennas . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 9480 –9487 10.1039/C6NR01645F .27120086 
Regmi R. ; Al Balushi A. A. ; Rigneault H. ; Gordon R. ; Wenger J. 
Nanoscale
Volume Confinement and
Fluorescence Enhancement with Double Nanohole Aperture . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 15852 10.1038/srep15852 .26511149 
Pibiri E. ; Holzmeister P. ; Lalkens B. ; Acuna G. P. ; Tinnefeld P. 
Single-Molecule
Positioning in Zeromode Waveguides
by DNA Origami Nanoadapters . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 3499 –3503 10.1021/nl501064b .24773477 
Heucke S. F. ; Baumann F. ; Acuna G. P. ; Severin P. M. D. ; Stahl S. W. ; Strackharn M. ; Stein I. H. ; Altpeter P. ; Tinnefeld P. ; Gaub H. E. 
Placing Individual Molecules in the
Center of Nanoapertures . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 391 –395 10.1021/nl401517a .23742166 
Miyake T. ; Tanii T. ; Sonobe H. ; Akahori R. ; Ueno T. ; Funatsu T. ; Ohdomari I. ; Shimamoto N. 
Real-Time
Imaging of Single-Molecule Fluorescence with a Zero-Mode Waveguide
for the Analysis of Protein-Protein Interactions . Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 15 6018 –6022 10.1021/ac800726g .18563914 
Zhao Y. ; Chen D. ; Yue H. ; Spiering M. M. ; Zhao C. ; Benkovic S. J. ; Huang T. J. 
Dark-Field Illumination
on Zero-Mode Waveguide/microfluidic Hybrid Chip Reveals T4 Replisomal
Protein Interactions . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 4 1952 –1960 10.1021/nl404802f .24628474 
Christensen S. M. ; Triplet M. G. ; Rhodes C. ; Iwig S. ; Tu H. ; Stamou D. ; Groves J. T. 
Monitoring the Waiting Time Sequence
of Single Ras GTPase Activation Events Using Liposome Functionalized
Zero-Mode Waveguides . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 , 2890 –2895 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b00969 .27013033 
Sandén T. ; Wyss R. ; Santschi C. ; Hassaïne G. ; Deluz C. ; Martin O. J. F. ; Wennmalm S. ; Vogel H. 
A Zeptoliter
Volume Meter for Analysis of Single Protein Molecules . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 1 370 –375 10.1021/nl2036468 .22149182 
Sobek J. ; Rehrauer H. ; Schauer S. ; Fischer D. ; Patrignani A. ; Landgraf S. 
Single-Molecule DNA Hybridisation
Studied by Using a Modified DNA Sequencer: A Comparison with Surface
Plasmon Resonance Data . Methods Appl. Fluoresc. 
2016 , 4 , a015002 10.1088/2050-6120/4/1/015002 .
Flusberg B. A. ; Webster D. R. ; Lee J. H. ; Travers K. J. ; Olivares E. C. ; Clark T. A. ; Korlach J. ; Turner S. W. 
Direct
Detection of DNA Methylation during Single-Molecule, Real-Time Sequencing . Nat. Methods 
2010 , 7 6 461 –465 10.1038/nmeth.1459 .20453866 
Chen J. ; Dalal R. V. ; Petrov A. N. ; Tsai A. ; O’Leary S. E. ; Chapin K. ; Cheng J. ; Ewan M. ; Hsiung P.-L. ; Lundquist P. ; Turner S. W. ; Hsu D. R. ; Puglisi J. D. 
High-Throughput
Platform for Real-Time Monitoring of
Biological Processes by Multicolor Single-Molecule Fluorescence . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2014 , 111 2 664 –669 10.1073/pnas.1315735111 .24379388 
McFarland A. D. ; Van Duyne R. P. 
Single
Silver Nanoparticles as Real-Time
Optical Sensors with Zeptomole Sensitivity . Nano Lett. 
2003 , 3 8 1057 –1062 10.1021/nl034372s .
Raschke G. ; Kowarik S. ; Franzl T. ; Sonnichsen C. ; Klar T. A. ; Feldmann J. ; Nichtl A. ; Kurzinger K. 
Biomolecular
Recognition Based on Single Gold Nanoparticle Light Scattering . Nano Lett. 
2003 , 3 7 935 –938 10.1021/nl034223+ .
Raschke G. ; Brogl S. ; Susha A. S. ; Rogach A. L. ; Klar T. A. ; Feldmann J. ; Fieres B. ; Petkov N. ; Bein T. ; Nichtl A. ; Kürzinger K. 
Gold Nanoshells
Improve Single Nanoparticle Molecular Sensors . Nano Lett. 
2004 , 4 10 1853 –1857 10.1021/nl049038q .
Schatz G. C. ; Sherry L. J. ; Jin R. C. ; Mirkin C. A. ; Van Duyne R. P. 
Localized
Surface Plasmon Resonance Spectroscopy of
Single Silver Triangular Nanoprisms . Nano Lett. 
2006 , 6 , 2060 –2065 10.1021/nl061286u .16968025 
Baciu C. L. ; Becker J. ; Janshoff A. ; Sönnichsen C. 
Protein-Membrane
Interaction Probed by Single Plasmonic Nanoparticles . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 6 1724 –1728 10.1021/nl080805l .18459744 
Galush W. J. ; Shelby S. A. ; Mulvihill M. J. ; Tao A. ; Yang P. ; Groves J. T. 
A Nanocube Plasmonic Sensor for Molecular
Binding on Membrane Surfaces . Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 5 2077 –2082 10.1021/nl900513k .19385625 
Rosman C. ; Prasad J. ; Neiser A. ; Henkel A. ; Edgar J. ; Sönnichsen C. 
Multiplexed
Plasmon Sensor for Rapid
Label-Free Analyte Detection . Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 3243 –3247 10.1021/nl401354f .23789876 
Yu C. ; Irudayaraj J. 
Multiplex
Biosensor Using Gold Nanorods . Anal. Chem. 
2007 , 79 2 572 –579 10.1021/ac061730d .17222022 
Miller M.
M. ; Lazarides A. A. 
Sensitivity
of Metal Nanoparticle
Surface Plasmon Resonance to the Dielectric Environment . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 46 21556 –21565 10.1021/jp054227y .16853799 
Antosiewicz T. J. ; Apell S. P. ; Claudio V. ; Käll M. 
A Simple Model
for the Resonance Shift of Localized Plasmons due to Dielectric Particle
Adhesion . Opt. Express 
2012 , 20 1 524 –533 10.1364/OE.20.000524 .22274374 
Yang J. ; Giessen H. ; Lalanne P. 
Simple Analytical
Expression
for the Peak-Frequency Shifts of Plasmonic Resonances for Sensing . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 3439 –3444 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b00771 .25844813 
Davis T. J. ; Gómez D. E. ; Vernon K. C. 
Interaction of Molecules
with Localized Surface Plasmons in Metallic Nanoparticles . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2010 , 81 4 045432 10.1103/PhysRevB.81.045432 .
Lu G. ; Hou L. ; Zhang T. ; Li W. ; Liu J. ; Perriat P. ; Gong Q. 
Anisotropic Plasmonic
Sensing of
Individual or Coupled Gold Nanorods . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2011 , 115 46 22877 –22885 10.1021/jp2081066 .
Claudio V. ; Dahlin A. B. ; Antosiewicz T. J. 
Single-Particle
Plasmon Sensing of Discrete Molecular Events: Binding Position versus
Signal Variations for Different Sensor Geometries . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 13 6980 –6988 10.1021/jp412219v .
Mayer K. M. ; Hao F. ; Lee S. ; Nordlander P. ; Hafner J. H. 
A Single Molecule Immunoassay by
Localized Surface
Plasmon Resonance . Nanotechnology 
2010 , 21 25 255503 10.1088/0957-4484/21/25/255503 .20516579 
Ament I. ; Prasad J. ; Henkel A. ; Schmachtel S. ; Sönnichsen C. 
Single Unlabeled Protein Detection
on Individual Plasmonic
Nanoparticles . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 2 1092 –1095 10.1021/nl204496g .22268768 
Gaiduk A. ; Ruijgrok P. V. ; Yorulmaz M. ; Orrit M. 
Detection
Limits in Photothermal Microscopy . Chem. Sci. 
2010 , 1 , 343 10.1039/c0sc00210k .
Robertson A. D. ; Murphy K. P. 
Protein Structure
and the Energetics
of Protein Stability . Chem. Rev. 
1997 , 97 5 1251 –1268 10.1021/cr960383c .11851450 
Taylor R.
W. ; Lee T. ; Scherman O. A. ; Esteban R. ; Aizpurua J. ; Huang F. M. ; Baumberg J. J. ; Mahajan S. 
Precise Subnanometer
Plasmonic Junctions for SERS within Gold Nanoparticle Assemblies Using
Cucurbit [N] Uril “ Glue. . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 3878 –3887 10.1021/nn200250v .21488693 
Sigle D. O. ; Kasera S. ; Herrmann L. O. ; Palma A. ; Benz F. ; Mahajan S. ; Baumberg J. J. ; Scherman O. 
Observing
Single Molecules Complexing with Cucurbit [7] Uril through Nanogap-SERS . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 7 , 704 –710 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02535 .26766205 
Benz F. ; Schmidt M. K. ; Dreismann A. ; Chikkaraddy R. ; Zhang Y. ; Demetriadou A. ; Carnegie C. ; Ohadi H. ; de Nijs B. ; Esteban R. ; Aizpurua J. ; Baumberg J. J. 
Single-Molecule Optomechanics in
“picocavities. . Science 
2016 , 354 6313 726 –729 10.1126/science.aah5243 .27846600 
Lee S. E. ; Chen Q. ; Bhat R. ; Petkiewicz S. ; Smith J. M. ; Ferry V. E. ; Correia A. L. ; Alivisatos A. P. ; Bissell M. J. 
Reversible Aptamer-Au Plasmon Rulers for Secreted Single
Molecules . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 7 4564 –4570 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b01161 .26039492 
Hermann T. ; Patel D. J. 
Adaptive Recognition
by Nucleic Acid
Aptamers . Science 
2000 , 287 5454 820 –825 10.1126/science.287.5454.820 .10657289 
del Pino P. ; Pelaz B. ; Zhang Q. ; Maffre P. ; Nienhaus G. U. ; Parak W. J. 
Protein Corona Formation
around Nanoparticles
– from the Past to the Future . Mater.
Horiz. 
2014 , 1 3 301 –313 10.1039/C3MH00106G .
Johnson-Buck A. ; Su X. ; Giraldez M. D. ; Zhao M. ; Tewari M. ; Walter N. G. 
Kinetic
Fingerprinting to Identify
and Count Single Nucleic Acids . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2015 , 33 , 730 –732 10.1038/nbt.3246 .26098451 
Xue Y. ; Li X. ; Li H. ; Zhang W. 
Quantifying Thiol–gold
Interactions towards the Efficient Strength Control . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 4348 10.1038/ncomms5348 .25000336 
Chen S. ; Zheng J. ; Li L. ; Jiang S. 
Strong Resistance
of Phosphorylcholine Self-Assembled Monolayers to Protein Adsorption:
Insights into Nonfouling Properties of Zwitterionic Materials . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 127 41 14473 –14478 10.1021/ja054169u .16218643 
Sheehan P. E. ; Whitman L. J. 
Detection Limits
for Nanoscale Biosensors . Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 4 803 –807 10.1021/nl050298x .15826132 
Nair P. R. ; Alam M. A. 
Performance Limits
of Nanobiosensors . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2006 , 88 23 233120 10.1063/1.2211310 .
Squires T. M. ; Messinger R. J. ; Manalis S. R. 
Making It Stick:
Convection, Reaction and Diffusion in Surface-Based Biosensors . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2008 , 26 4 417 –426 10.1038/nbt1388 .18392027 
De Angelis F. ; Gentile F. ; Mecarini F. ; Das G. ; Moretti M. ; Candeloro P. ; Coluccio M. L. ; Cojoc G. ; Accardo A. ; Liberale C. ; Zaccaria R. P. ; Perozziello G. ; Tirinato L. ; Toma A. ; Cuda G. ; Cingolani R. ; Di Fabrizio E. 
Breaking the Diffusion Limit with Super-Hydrophobic
Delivery of Molecules to Plasmonic Nanofocusing SERS Structures . Nat. Photonics 
2011 , 5 11 682 –687 10.1038/nphoton.2011.222 .
Barik A. ; Otto L. M. ; Yoo D. ; Jose J. ; Johnson T. W. ; Oh S.-H. 
Dielectrophoresis-Enhanced
Plasmonic
Sensing with Gold Nanohole Arrays . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 2006 –2012 10.1021/nl500149h .24646075 
Fritzsche J. ; Albinsson D. ; Fritzsche M. ; Antosiewicz T. J. ; Westerlund F. ; Langhammer C. 
Single Particle
Nanoplasmonic Sensing in Individual Nanofluidic Channels . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 12 7857 –7864 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b04124 .27960495 
Fahie M. ; Chisholm C. ; Chen M. 
Resolved Single-Molecule
Detection of Individual Species within a Mixture of Anti-Biotin Antibodies
Using an Engineered Monomeric Nanopore . ACS
Nano 
2015 , 9 2 1089 –1098 10.1021/nn506606e .25575121 
Borgia M. B. ; Borgia A. ; Best R. B. ; Steward A. ; Nettels D. ; Wunderlich B. ; Schuler B. ; Clarke J. 
Single-Molecule
Fluorescence Reveals Sequence-Specific Misfolding in Multidomain Proteins . Nature 
2011 , 474 7353 662 –665 10.1038/nature10099 .21623368 
Schuler B. ; Eaton W. A. 
Protein Folding
Studied by Single-Molecule
FRET . Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
2008 , 18 1 16 –26 10.1016/j.sbi.2007.12.003 .18221865 
Zhou H.-X. ; Rivas G. ; Minton A. P. 
Macromolecular
Crowding
and Confinement: Biochemical, Biophysical, and Potential Physiological
Consequences . Annu. Rev. Biophys. 
2008 , 37 1 375 –397 10.1146/annurev.biophys.37.032807.125817 .18573087 
Beck A. ; Wurch T. ; Bailly C. ; Corvaia N. 
Strategies
and Challenges for the next Generation of Therapeutic Antibodies . Nat. Rev. Immunol. 
2010 , 10 5 345 –352 10.1038/nri2747 .20414207 
Dobson C. M. 
Protein Folding and Misfolding . Nature 
2003 , 426 , 884 –890 10.1038/nature02261 .14685248 
Steinmetz L. M. ; Jones A. 
Sensing a Revolution . Mol. Syst. Biol. 
2016 , 12 4 867 10.15252/msb.20166873 .27118815 
Rong G. ; Corrie S. R. ; Clark H. A. 
In Vivo Biosensing:
Progress and Perspectives . ACS Sensors 
2017 , 2 , 327 10.1021/acssensors.6b00834 .28723197 
Vashist S. 
Continuous Glucose Monitoring Systems:
A Review . Diagnostics 
2013 , 3 4 385 –412 10.3390/diagnostics3040385 .26824930 
Rogers M. L. ; Boutelle M. G. 
Real-Time Clinical
Monitoring of
Biomolecules . Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 6 1 427 –453 10.1146/annurev.anchem.111808.073648 .
Khatua S. ; Orrit M. 
Toward Single-Molecule Microscopy
on a Smart Phone . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 10 8340 –8343 10.1021/nn405167q .24112048 
Kühnemund M. ; Wei Q. ; Darai E. ; Wang Y. ; Hernández-Neuta I. ; Yang Z. ; Tseng D. ; Ahlford A. ; Mathot L. ; Sjöblom T. ; Ozcan A. ; Nilsson M. 
Targeted DNA Sequencing and in Situ
Mutation Analysis Using Mobile Phone Microscopy . Nat. Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 537 –540 10.1038/ncomms13913 .

