
==== Front
ACS SensACS SensseascefjACS Sensors2379-3694American Chemical Society 10.1021/acssensors.8b00446EditorialMaking Intracellular Sensors Count Merkx Maarten Technische Universiteit
Eindhoven, Eindhoven, Netherlands22 06 2018 22 06 2018 3 6 1056 1057 01 06 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.document-id-old-9se8b00446document-id-new-14se-2018-004465ccc-price
==== Body
One of the first editorials
of ACS Sensors was provocatively titled “Should ACS Sensors Publish Papers on Fluorescent Sensors for Metal
Ions at All?” (DOI:10.1021/acssensors.6b00213). The answer to that question was yes, but it depends on whether
the sensor is fit-for-purpose, and whether there is a need for that
sensor. In the case of metal ion sensors, the need to develop yet
another metal ion sensor for environmental monitoring is often hard
to justify, whereas fluorescent sensors that can be used intracellularly
(in situ) can provide unique tools to answer key
biological questions. The same editorial also identified some important
requirements for a useful intracellular fluorescent sensor, such as
water solubility, physiologically relevant affinity and specificity,
and reversible binding.

The most important goal of any sensor,
whether it is applied intracellularly
or elsewhere, is to obtain quantitative information. We receive too
many papers on intracellular sensors that only report the ability
of the probe to respond to the analyte of interest when added exogenously.
One step further is to show that the fluorescent signal responds to
a biological trigger that is known to increase or decrease the concentration
of the target analyte in the anticipated manner. For certain biological
questions, being able to determine relative changes in concentration
is sufficient—e.g., measuring the kinetics of signaling processes
such as calcium signaling. However, relatively few studies try to
determine the concentration of the analyte. Ultimately, it is concentrations
that matter in order to understand and quantitatively describe the
cell.

Intracellular quantification is not an easy task, in particular
because calibration inside a cell can be challenging. A first prerequisite
for quantitative measurements is control over the intracellular localization,
and preferably also the concentration of a sensor. Control over intracellular
localization is important not only because the concentrations of the
analyte can vary widely in different compartments, but also because
different compartments can represent a very different environment.
Although functional groups that promote specific organelle targeting
are known, control over intracellular localization remains particularly
challenging for synthetic fluorescent sensors, requiring verification
using an established intracellular marker.

Whether a fluorescent
sensor is suitable for quantitative measurements
is also determined by the sensor’s mode of action. Intensiometric
sensors are inherently difficult to use for quantification in cells,
because the fluorescent signal depends on the concentration of both
the analyte and the sensor. In contrast, ratiometric sensors are more
suitable for quantitative measurements, as ratiometric signals are
independent of sensor concentration and less dependent on background
fluorescence. In fact, one of the early and most popular Ca2+ fluorescent sensors, Fura-2, was developed as a ratiometric sensor.1 Another aspect that is important is whether the
sensor’s mode of action is reversible. Reversibility is relatively
straightforward for metal ion and pH sensors, but many other fluorescent
sensors undergo irreversible transformations—e.g., sensors
that probe enzymatic activity or probes that target biological thiols.
The fact that the signal of these sensors is time dependent makes
the extraction of quantitative information using these sensors even
more challenging. Developing intracellular sensors that respond reversibly
is therefore an important goal in the area of intracellular sensing
(see, for example, the recent work of Jin Wang and co-workers who
developed a reversible reaction-based fluorescent sensor for glutathione
(DOI:10.1021/acssensors.7b00425)).

Even for ratiometric sensors, reliable intracellular quantification
requires careful experimentation and proper control experiments. One
of the key questions is whether the sensor behaves similarly in the
test tube and in the crowded and complex environment of the cell.
Ideally, this means that the sensor is calibrated in situ. If this is not possible the sensor should at least be characterized
under conditions that mimic the intracellular milieu (pH, redox state)
as closely as possible. An example is the effect of pH on metal ion
sensors, which not only can affect fluorescent properties, but typically
also have a large influence on metal affinity. Another caveat is that
the sensor interacts with endogenous proteins, which has been documented
for several protein-based sensors, and could be expected to be
at least as big of an issue for small molecule fluorescent dyes. Some
of these issues can be addressed in the design of a new sensor—for
example, by mutating known protein interaction sites in protein-based
sensors2—but nonanticipated effects
are hard to address. A practical solution is to compare the performance
of sensors with different affinities, or based on a different type
of sensing mechanism. If different sensors yield the same numbers,
this provides confidence that the numbers are probably correct, and
the sensors work as anticipated. For example, using this approach,
a consensus was reached in the field of zinc biology on the amount
of free Zn2+ present in the cytosol, which was found to
be between 0.10 and 1 nM in a wide variety of different cell types.
However, comparing different sensors that target the endoplasmic reticulum
reported very different concentrations, suggesting that one or more
of the sensors were not functioning as anticipated.3

At ACS Sensors, we believe that
these kinds of
comparisons are very valuable, as they help the field to understand
the validity of sensors and identify remaining issues. So, in addition
to the development of new sensors that are designed to provide quantitative
information, we also very much welcome studies that rigorously compare
the performance of previously developed sensors, or provide new methods/strategies
for intracellular calibration. Establishing rigorous sensor procedures
for intracellular quantification at the single cell level is also
important to allow quantitative intracellular measurements in vivo, which adds another level of complexity. We are
fully aware that addressing all these issues in a single study may
be unrealistic, but in making intracellular sensing more quantitative,
every (small) step counts.

Views expressed
in this editorial are those of the author and not necessarily the
views of the ACS.
==== Refs
References
Grynkiewicz G. ; Poenie M. ; Tsien R. Y. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
1985 , 260 , 3440 –3450 .3838314 
Palmer A. E. ; Giacomello M. ; Kortemme T. ; Hires S. A. ; Lev-Ram V. ; Baker D. ; Tsien R. Y. 
Chem. Biol. 
2006 , 13 , 521 –530 10.1016/j.chembiol.2006.03.007 .16720273 
Hessels A. M. ; Merkx M. 
Metallomics 
2015 , 7 , 258 –266 10.1039/C4MT00179F .25156481

