
==== Front
Brain LangBrain LangBrain and Language0093-934X1090-2155Academic Press S0093-934X(14)00103-510.1016/j.bandl.2014.07.006ArticlePhoneme-free prosodic representations are involved in pre-lexical and lexical neurobiological mechanisms underlying spoken word processing Schild Ulrike ulrike.schild@uni-tuebingen.dea⁎Becker Angelika B.C. bFriedrich Claudia K. aa University of Tübingen, Developmental Psychology, Germanyb University of Hamburg, Biological Psychology and Neuropsychology, Germany⁎ Corresponding author. Address: University of Tübingen, Developmental Psychology, Schleichstraße 4, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany. Fax: +49 (0)7071 29 5219. ulrike.schild@uni-tuebingen.de1 9 2014 9 2014 136 100 31 43 21 7 2014 © 2014 The Authors2014 This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).Highlights
• We hypothesize that prosody and phoneme information is processed independently.

• We tested this by applying word onset priming and analyzing event-related potentials.

• ERPs for prosody and phoneme overlap differed in timing and distribution.

• Both effects did not interact, suggesting that both cues are used independently.

• Our results are evidence for phoneme-free prosodic processing in speech recognition.



Recently we reported that spoken stressed and unstressed primes differently modulate Event Related Potentials (ERPs) of spoken initially stressed targets. ERP stress priming was independent of prime–target phoneme overlap. Here we test whether phoneme-free ERP stress priming involves the lexicon. We used German target words with the same onset phonemes but different onset stress, such as MANdel (“almond”) and manDAT (“mandate”; capital letters indicate stress). First syllables of those words served as primes. We orthogonally varied prime–target overlap in stress and phonemes. ERP stress priming did neither interact with phoneme priming nor with the stress pattern of the targets. However, polarity of ERP stress priming was reversed to that previously obtained. The present results are evidence for phoneme-free prosodic processing at the lexical level. Together with the previous results they reveal that phoneme-free prosodic representations at the pre-lexical and lexical level are recruited by neurobiological spoken word recognition.

Keywords
Spoken word recognitionLexical accessLexical stressERPsWord fragment primingLexical decision
==== Body
1 Introduction
Current modelling of spoken word recognition is largely determined by phonemes and their establishing features. Classical models converge in the assumptions that individual speech sounds are mapped onto pre-lexical phoneme representations and that word recognition is a function of the amount of overlapping representations at the pre-lexical phoneme level and the lexical word form level (e.g., Marslen-Wilson, 1987; McClelland & Elman, 1986; Norris, 1994). How phonological characteristics beyond phoneme-relevant information, such as the words’ syllables with their specific stress pattern, contribute to spoken word recognition remains unspecified in those models. Here we propose that prosodic characteristics of the speech signal have their own phoneme-free representations, which are independent from phoneme representations. We base this assumption on our previous work on the role of syllable stress in German listeners’ spoken word recognition.

In stress-timed languages like German or English, typically a single syllable of a multisyllabic word is perceived to be more prominent than the remaining syllable or syllables. The prominent syllable is said to be stressed. For example, the first syllables of the words FAther or MARket, and the second syllables of the words neON and musEUM are stressed (capital letters indicate stress). Stressed syllables typically are longer, louder and marked by higher pitch than unstressed syllables (e.g., Fry, 1958). Next to those prosodic features, vowel identity might vary between stressed and unstressed syllables. While stressed syllables always contain a full vowel, unstressed syllables either contain a full vowel, such as the first syllable of neON, or they contain a reduced vowel, such as the second syllable of FAther. A confound results when stressed syllables and reduced unstressed syllables are compared. Those syllables do not only differ in their prosodic features, but also in the identity of their vowels. Therefore, we use stressed syllables and unstressed syllables with full vowels in the present experiment and focus on studies using stressed and unstressed syllables with full vowels when we review the literature on processing syllable prosody in the following paragraphs.

Previous behavioral research on the role of syllable stress in spoken word recognition focused on its function in differentiating phonemically ambiguous words such as FORbear and forBEAR (henceforth referred to as minimal word pairs), or in differentiating words with phonemically ambiguous word onsets such MUsic and muSEUM (henceforth referred to as minimal word onset pairs). Basically, this work reveals that syllable stress is used immediately to disambiguate phonemically ambiguous strings. Auditory repetition priming showed that minimal word pairs do not facilitate recognition of one-another (Cutler & van Donselaar, 2001; but see Cutler, 1986). Forced choice word completion indicated that listeners can correctly judge the respective carrier word given the onset of a minimal word onset pair member (Cooper, Cutler, & Wales, 2002; Mattys, 2000). Cross-modal visual–auditory priming revealed stronger facilitation exerted by the carrier word onset (MUs-music) as compared to the onset of a minimal word onset pair member (muS-music; Cooper et al., 2002; Soto-Faraco, Sebastián-Gallés, & Cutler, 2001; van Donselaar, Koster, & Cutler, 2005). Finally, eye tracking showed that Dutch listeners fixate the printed version of the word that a speaker intended to say (OCtopus), more frequently than they fixate the minimal word onset pair member already before they heard the end of the first syllable of the respective word (ocTOber; Reinisch, Jesse, & McQueen, 2010, 2011).

In the framework of pre-lexical phonological representations and lexical word form representations sketched by classical models of spoken word recognition, the facilitation effect exerted by syllable prosody might have at least two origins. Firstly, syllable stress might be tightly linked to phonemes both at the pre-lexical level and at the lexical level of representation. For example, the relatively long duration of /u/ in the initial syllable of MUsic might be mapped onto a pre-lexical representation coding for a long /u/. In turn, this pre-lexical representation is a better match for lexical representations with a long /u/ in the first syllable, such as MUsic, than for lexical representations with a short /u/ in the first syllable, such as muSEUM. Combined phoneme-prosody representations would not modulate the activation of word forms that are phonemically unrelated. Alternatively, syllable stress might be coded by phoneme-free prosodic representations. For example, the relatively long duration of the /u/ in the initial syllable of MUSic as well as the relatively long duration of the /o/ in the initial syllable of OCtopus might be mapped onto a pre-lexical representation coding for long vowels regardless of vowel identity. In turn, those abstract prosodic representations might be mapped onto lexical representations coding for a long vowel in their first syllable.

The architecture of neural auditory processing suggests that syllable prosody might not be that tightly linked with phonemes. Crucially, the different temporal availability of both types of information in the acoustic input is associated with specialized auditory processing networks respectively. Information that characterizes phonemes varies at a fast rate. Typically, rapid transitions ranging between 20 and 100 ms establish distinctive features, such as the voice onset time difference between /b/ and /p/. Information that characterizes syllable varies somewhat slower. Typically, features of pitch, loudness and duration ranging between 100 and 300 ms are relevant to distinguish between stressed and unstressed syllables such as MUS and mus. There is some neurocognitive evidence for lateralized specialization of auditory cortices to different temporal integration windows. Fast acoustic variation in the range of phoneme-relevant information appears to be pre-dominantly processed in the left hemisphere, slower acoustic variation in the range of syllable-relevant information appears to be pre-dominantly processed in the right hemisphere (e.g., Boemio, Fromm, Braun, & Poeppel, 2005; Giraud & Poeppel, 2012; Giraud et al., 2007; Luo & Poeppel, 2012; Zatorre & Belin, 2001). Yet, whether the initial separation of both types of information is maintained at higher language-specific processing levels has to be figured out.

Previous behavioral evidence for independent processing of syllable prosody along the spoken word recognition pathway is weak. In four auditory priming experiments, Slowiaczek, Soltano, and Bernstein (2006) failed to show pure stress priming. Neither lexical decision latencies nor shadowing differed for spoken target words that either were preceded by spoken words with the same stress pattern (RAting – LIFEtime) or by spoken words with a different stress pattern (RAting – ciGAR). That is, if there are some types of abstract prosodic representations, their activation might not be obligatorily reflected in response latencies obtained in auditory priming tasks.

Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) recorded in word onset priming previously revealed some evidence for independent processing of syllable prosody and phonemes. In a former study of us, we were selectively interested in the processing of pitch contours (Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Alter, 2004). We extracted the first syllables of initially stressed German words, such as KObold (Engl. goblin), and of initially unstressed German words, such as faSAN (Engl. pheasant). We calculated the mean pitch contours of the stressed word onset syllables, such as KO-, and of the unstressed word onset syllables, such as fa-, and applied them to each individual syllable. This resulted in one version of each syllable with a stressed pitch contour and another version of the same syllable with an unstressed pitch contour. We used those syllables as primes. Primes were followed by written versions of the carrier words. Prime–target pairs varied in phoneme overlap, such as KO-KObold vs. fa-Kobold. Furthermore, primes varied in stress overlap. A stressed pitch contour preceding the written version of an initially stressed word as well as an unstressed pitch contour preceding the written version of an initially unstressed word were considered a stress match. The reversed pairings were considered a stress mismatch. ERPs reflected enhanced posterior negativity for stress mismatch compared to stress match. ERP stress priming did not interact with prime–target overlap in phonemes. This is evidence for abstract prosodic processing.

In a recently published study on literacy acquisition we found further evidence for independent processing of syllable stress and phonemes (Schild, Becker, & Friedrich, 2014). We presented spoken stressed and unstressed prime syllables followed by spoken German disyllabic target words. In order to make the words accessible for pre-schoolers, we presented only targets with stress on the first syllable, such as MONster (Engl. monster). We did not present words with stress on the second syllable, because they are not only less frequent in German, but they also are usually acquired later than initially stressed words. Spoken prime syllables were (i) the target words’ first syllables, such as MON-MONster; (ii) unstressed versions of the target words’ first syllables, such as mon-MONster; (iii) phonemically unrelated stressed syllables, such as TEP-MONster; or (iv) phonemically unrelated unstressed syllables, such as tep-MONster. Across pre-schoolers, beginning readers and adults we found comparable indices for independent processing of prosody and phonemes in the ERPs. However, in contrast to our former study (Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Gunter, 2004; Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Alter, 2004), stress match (conditions [i] and [iii]), elicited enhanced posterior negativity as compared to stress mismatch (conditions [ii] and [iv]). In addition there was enhanced frontal negativity for stress mismatch.

Although, both former priming studies revealed that prosodic processing is somewhat independent from phoneme processing, ERP stress priming remarkably differed in polarity between both studies. While there was enhanced posterior negativity for stress mismatch in the auditory–visual paradigm (Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Alter, 2004; Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Gunter, 2004), there was enhanced posterior negativity for stress match in the unimodal paradigm (Schild et al., 2014). Methodological differences between both studies might exert their influences here. On the one hand, targets were presented in different modalities. We used written target words in the auditory–visual study, but spoken target words in the unimodal study. Different target word modality might have modulated the ERP results. For example, the specific role that implicit prosody might play in visual word recognition (e.g., Ashby & Clifton, 2004; Ashby & Martin, 2008) might have driven the ERP stress priming effect in the cross-modal study.

On the other hand, the quick succession of spoken syllables together with the restriction to initially stressed target words might have elicited a unique response in the unimodal study (Schild et al., 2014). Two confounds could not be dissociated in the formerly realized design. First, stress match was always linked to close temporal proximity of two stressed syllables. The stressed prime syllable was directly followed by the stressed first syllable of the target word. Close proximity of two stressed syllables, so-called stress clash is avoided by speakers (Liberman & Prince, 1977; Tomlinson, Liu, & Fox Tree, 2013). Thus, stress clashes are highly irregular in natural speech. Indeed, enhanced processing effort for prosodic irregularity is associated with enhanced ERP negativity (Bohn, Knaus, Wiese, & Domahs, 2013; Magne et al., 2007; McCauley, Hestvik, & Vogel, 2013; Rothermich, Schmidt-Kassow, Schwartze, & Kotz, 2010). Second, the probability that a stressed syllable was followed by an unstressed syllable was high across the experiment (see Table 1A). Participants might have been biased to generalize this prosodic pattern. According to this view, enhanced posterior negativity for stress match might be interpreted as reflecting that the task-specific expectancy of an unstressed syllable following a stressed syllable was violated in the stress match condition in which two stressed syllables followed one another.

The present study was set out to follow the independent processing of prosody-relevant information and phoneme-relevant information in unimodal auditory priming with balanced stress pattern of the target words. We used German minimal word onset pairs like MANdel (Engl. almond) and manDAT (Engl. mandate). The first syllables of those minimal word onset pairs were presented as primes (MAN- and man- respectively). The carrier words were used as targets. As in our former studies on prosodic priming, we orthogonally varied (i) prime–target overlap in phonemes, and (ii) prime–target overlap in syllable stress. Primes and targets were combined in four different combinations. This was realized for initially stressed targets and for initially unstressed targets, respectively (see Table 1B). Outcomes of this carefully balanced design cannot be reduced to task-specific prosodic regularities.

We attempt to relate ERP stress priming to ERP deflections elicited in word onset priming formerly characterized for phoneme priming. Between 100 and 300 ms, ERPs for phoneme match and mismatch differed in the N100–P200 complex in unimodal auditory word onset priming (Friedrich, Schild, & Röder, 2009; Schild, Röder, & Friedrich, 2012; Schild et al., 2014). This effect has not been obtained in cross-modal audio–visual word onset priming (e.g., Friedrich, 2005; Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Alter, 2004; Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Gunter, 2004). Commonly, N100 effects are related to basic auditory processing (e.g., Näätanen & Picton, 1987; O’Rourke and Holcomb, 2002) and attention modulation in spoken language processing (Sanders & Neville, 2003; Sanders, Newport, & Neville, 2002). Enhanced N100 and reduced P200 amplitudes for phoneme match might reflect enhanced attention drawn to immediate syllable repetition and repeated activation of the very same abstract speech sound representations once by the prime syllable and once by the target word onset.

Between 300 and 400 ms, a so-called P350 effect has been obtained in both unimodal and cross-modal word onset priming (e.g., Friedrich, 2005; Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Alter, 2004; Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Gunter, 2004; Friedrich et al., 2009; Schild et al., 2012). We formerly related the P350 to accessing modality independent word form representations tapped by both spoken and written target words. This interpretation is backed-up by a comparable MEG deflection, named the M350, which is elicited in response to visual words and has been associated with aspects of lexical access (Pylkkänen & Marantz, 2003). Both the N100–P200 complex and the P350 were characterized by left-lateralized topography in our former studies.

Between 200 and 300 ms, we found a central negativity, with bilateral distribution in unimodal word onset priming (e.g., Friedrich et al., 2009; Schild et al., 2012). A comparable effect started at around 400 ms in cross-modal word onset priming (e.g., Friedrich, 2005; Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Alter, 2004; Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Gunter, 2004). Central negativity was reduced for phoneme match compared to phoneme mismatch and therewith relates to N400-like effects. It is still a matter of debate whether the N400 in auditory speech recognition starts earlier than in visual language processing (Van Petten, Coulson, Rubin, Plante, & Parks, 1999) or whether a different ERP deflection than the N400 is elicited by phonological aspects of auditory stimuli (e.g., Hagoort & Brown, 2000; van den Brink, Brown, & Hagoort, 2001). Reduced negativity in spoken word processing has been related to phonological expectancy mechanisms (e.g., the phonological mismatch negativity [PMN] for expected words in sentences or lists: Connolly & Phillips, 1994; Connolly, Service, D’Arcy, Kujala, & Alho, 2001; Diaz & Swaab, 2007; Schiller, Horemans, Ganushchak, & Koester, 2009; or the phonological N400 for rhyme priming: Praamstra, Meyer, & Levelt, 1994; Praamstra & Stegeman, 1993). Based on this interpretation we argued that the central negativity observed in word onset priming reflects neurobiological mechanisms that take the auditory information of the prime syllable to roughly predict the upcoming target word (Friedrich et al., 2009). Therewith, aspects of the processing system underlying the central negativity do not necessarily need to involve lexical representations.

In the present study we target possible causes of the unique polarity of posterior ERP stress priming obtained in a unimodal paradigm (Schild et al., 2014). We have argued that the difference to ERP stress priming obtained in a cross-modal design (Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Alter, 2004) might be related either to the modality of the target words or to metrical biases elicited by the consecutively presented spoken syllables in the unimodal paradigm. If target modality drives the difference between both studies, we should replicate enhanced posterior negativity for stress match regardless of the target words stress pattern. If stress match might have evoked enhanced processing effort due to a stress clash, the formerly obtained enhanced negativity for stress match should be restricted to initially stressed target words. If the restriction to initially stressed targets in our former study might have elicited predictive prosodic coding that was violated in the stress match condition, we should not replicate enhanced negativity for stress match at all, because the stress pattern of the targets is balanced in the present experiment. Rather the ERP stress priming might be comparable to that obtained in our former cross-modal study.

2 Methods
2.1 Participants
Eighteen volunteers (11 females, 7 males, mean age 28.8 years, range 20–51 years, mostly students from the University of Hamburg) participated in the study. They all were right-handed native speakers of German with no reported hearing or neurological problems. All gave informed consent prior to their inclusion in the study.

2.2 Materials
We selected 48 monomorphemic disyllabic German pairs of nouns (see Appendix A). Words in each pair shared the phonemes of the first syllable and the onset of the second syllable. One pair member was stressed on the first syllable, the other on the second syllable. All word onset syllables contained full vowels. For each initially stressed word and each initially unstressed word a pseudoword was generated by changing the last one or two phonemes (e.g., ALter – ALtopp) following the phonotactic rules of German. Word and pseudoword targets were spoken by a male professional native speaker of German. Primes were the first syllables taken from the words produced by a female native speaker of German. Stimuli were edited with Adobe Audition software (sampling rate 44 kHz, volume equalized).

The prime syllables and target words are characterized by pitch and intensity contours that are typical for their given stress (see Fig. 1). Amplitude and pitch measures were obtained by using the software package PRAAT 5.3.17 (Boersma & Weenink, 2014). We analyzed the whole time window of the prime syllables, of the first syllables of the targets and of the second syllables of the targets, respectively.

2.2.1 Primes
The stressed prime syllables (mean duration 263 ms) were longer than the unstressed prime syllables (175 ms), t(47) = 15.67, p < .001. Similarly, vowels of the stressed prime syllables (mean duration 153 ms) were longer than vowels of the unstressed prime syllables (80 ms), t(47) = 10.80, p < .001. The maximum intensity as well as the maximum pitch was reached earlier for unstressed primes than for stressed primes, both t(47) > 3.74, p < .001, see Fig. 1).

2.2.2 Targets
The first syllables of the initially stressed targets were longer (mean duration: 243 ms) than the first syllables of the initially unstressed words (159 ms), t(47) = 15.89, p < .001. Similarly, the first vowels of the initially stressed targets (mean length 142 ms) were longer than the first vowels of the initially unstressed targets (63 ms), t(47) = 12.42, p < .001. Maximum pitch and maximum intensity was reached earlier for stressed target word onset syllables (initially stressed targets) than for the unstressed target word onset syllables (initially unstressed targets), both t(47) = 3.35, p ⩽ .002. In addition, initially stressed and unstressed syllables also differed in mean intensity, which was higher for stressed compared to unstressed word onset syllables, t(47) = 3.37, p = .002. Driven by the second syllables, initially stressed target words (mean duration 479 ms) were shorter than initially unstressed target words (520 ms), t(47) = 4.23, p < .001.

2.3 Design and procedure
Each participant heard 768 trials (384 target words, 384 target pseudowords). The experiment consisted of four blocks. In each block 192 trials were presented. All 96 words, that is 48 initially stressed words and 48 initially unstressed words, and all 96 pseudowords, that is 48 initially stressed pseudowords and 48 initially unstressed pseudowords, were combined with a prime in one of the eight conditions respectively (see Table 1B). Within and across blocks, the order of trials was randomized. Block order was permuted across participants following Latin square logic.

Participants were comfortably seated in an electrically shielded and sound attenuated room. An experimental trial started with the presentation of a white fixation cross (font size: 25) at the center of a computer screen in front of the participants (distance: 70 cm). Participants were instructed to fixate this cross whenever it appeared. A syllable prime was presented via loudspeakers 500 ms after the onset of the fixation cross. The target was delivered 250 ms after offset of the prime. Half of the participants were instructed to press the left mouse button to words and the right mouse button to pseudowords (reversed response mapping for remaining participants). Participants were asked to respond as quickly and as accurately as possible. After pressing the mouse button the next trial started with a delay of 1500 ms. If no response occurred the next trial started after a 3500 ms delay. The fixation picture remained on the screen until a response button was pressed or until the critical time window of 3500 ms was over. The loudspeakers were placed at the left side and the right side of the screen. Auditory stimuli were presented at approximately 70 db.

2.4 EEG-recording and analysis
The continuous EEG was recorded at a 500 Hz sampling rate (bandpass filter 0.01–100 Hz, BrainAmp Standard, Brain Products, Gilching, Germany) from 74 nose-referenced active Ag/AgCl electrodes (Brain Products) mounted in an elastic cap (Electro Cap International, Inc.) according to the international 10–20 system (two additional electrodes were placed below the eyes, ground electrode was placed at the right cheek). Analyses of the EEG data were performed with Brain Electrical Source Analysis Software (BESA, MEGIS Software GmbH; Version 5.3). After re-referencing the continuous EEG to an average reference, blinks were corrected using surrogate Multiple Source Eye Correction (MSEC) by Berg and Scherg (1994) implemented in BESA. Individual electrodes showing artifacts that were not reflected in the remaining electrodes in more than two trials were interpolated for all trials (mean/standard error for the four ROIs: anterior left: 0.8/0.3, anterior right: 0.6/0.2, posterior left: 1.3/0.3, posterior right: 0.8/0.2). The method implemented in BESA for interpolating bad channels is based on spherical splines (see Perrin, Pernier, Bertrand, & Echallier, 1989). Interpolated electrodes were included in the ROI analyses because they were evenly distributed among the four ROIs as indicated by an ANOVA including the factors Region and Hemisphere, all F(1, 17) < 3.2, n.s. (not significant). Visual inspection guided elimination of remaining artifacts (e.g., drifts or movement artifacts). The data was filtered offline with a 0.3 Hz high-pass filter. ERPs were computed for the legal target words with correct responses starting from the beginning of the speech signal up to 1000 ms poststimulus onset, with a 200 ms prestimulus baseline. All data sets included at least 30 segments in each condition.

2.5 Data analysis
Responses shorter than 200 ms and longer than 2000 ms, which is approximately in the 2-standard-deviation margin, were removed from behavioral analyses. Reaction times calculated from the onset of the words to the participants’ responses were subjected to a repeated measures ANOVA with the two-level factors Target (Initially Stressed Target vs. Initially Unstressed Target), Stress Priming (Stress Match vs. Stress Mismatch) and Phoneme Priming (Phoneme Match vs. Phoneme Mismatch). In line with our former unimodal auditory word onset priming studies (Friedrich et al., 2009; Schild et al., 2012), we analyzed the ERP effects by hand of two additional factors: Hemisphere (Left vs. Right electrode sites) and Region (Anterior vs. Posterior electrode sites). This resulted in four lateral Regions Of Interest (ROIs, see Fig. 2), each containing 16 electrodes. In case of significant interactions, t-tests were computed to evaluate differences among conditions. Only main effects of the factors Target, Stress Priming and Phoneme Priming and interactions including these factors and leading to significant post hoc comparisons are reported.

3 Results
3.1 Behavioral data
3.1.1 All trials
Mean reaction times are shown in Table 2 and Fig. 3. The analysis of mean reaction times revealed a main effect of Target, F(1, 17) = 4.53, p < .05. Response latencies for Initially Stressed Targets were 16.3 ms longer than response times for Initially Unstressed Targets. There was no interaction including the factor Target. A main effect of the factor Phoneme Priming was found, F(1, 17) = 9.65, p < .01. Response times were faster for Phoneme Match compared to Phoneme Mismatch. This replicates robust behavioral phoneme priming found in unimodal auditory word fragment priming (e.g., Friedrich et al., 2009; Schild et al., 2012). There was no main effect of the factor Stress Priming, F = .06. None of both interactions including the factors Stress Priming and Phoneme Priming did approach significance, F ⩽ 2.10, p ⩾ 17.

3.1.2 First block
In order to make the analysis more compatible with a classical psycholinguistic design, in which target repetition within participants is avoided, we analyzed only the first block in addition to the overall analysis of all trials. Similar to studies with a classical behavioral design, conditions and sequence effects were counterbalanced across participants. Mean reaction times are shown in Table 2. There were two marginal main effects, one for the factor Phoneme Priming, F(1, 17) = 4.11; p = .06, the other for the factor Stress Priming, F(1, 17) = 3.2; p = .09. Responses to Phoneme Match were faster (950 ms) than responses Phoneme Mismatch (987 ms). The same holds for Stress Match (960 ms) compared to Stress Mismatch (977 ms). In line with the assumption of independent phoneme and stress processing, we found no interaction between the factors Phoneme Priming and Stress Priming, F(1, 17) < 1, n.s., for the first block. There was neither a main effect for the factor Target nor an interaction with this factor. Note, that no effect of primes was evident as should have been seen in an interaction of Target and Stress Priming, which was not significant, F(1, 17) = 2.75, n.s.

3.2 Event-related potentials
ERP differences between conditions were identified by consecutive 50 ms time windows analyses (see Table 3) starting from target onset (0 ms) up to the behavioral response at approximately 900 ms. Based on those analyses, three larger time windows were analyzed in detail: 100–250 ms for earlier Phoneme Priming, 300–600 ms for the Stress Priming and 600–900 ms for later Phoneme Priming and a late Target effect. Basically, there were no interactions of Phoneme Priming or Stress Priming with the factor Type of Target. Therefore, mean ERPs for the four experimental conditions for each ROI respectively are collapsed across initially stressed and initially unstressed targets in Fig. 4.

3.2.1 100–250 ms
The overall ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of the factor Phoneme Priming (F(1, 17) = 18.14, p < .001), and an interaction of the factors Phoneme Priming and Hemisphere, F(1, 17) = 7.88, p = .01. Over the left hemisphere, Phoneme Match elicited more negative amplitudes than Phoneme Mismatch, t(17) = 3.92, p = .001 (Fig. 5). There was no difference between both conditions over the right hemisphere, t(17) = 1.52, n.s. (this replicates Friedrich et al., 2009; Schild et al., 2012). There was neither a main effect of the factor Stress Priming nor any interaction with that factor. Mean ERPs and topographical voltage maps for the main effect of Phoneme Priming are illustrated in Fig. 5.

3.2.2 300–600 ms
We found differences between initially stressed and initially unstressed target words in this time window. Those were indicated by an interaction of the factors Target, Region and Hemisphere (F(1, 17) = 6.34, p < .05). Over posterior left regions, amplitudes to initially stressed targets were more negative than ERP amplitudes to initially unstressed targets, t(17) = 8.61, p = .01 (see Fig. 7). It appears that this effect reflects delayed word processing of initially stressed targets compared to initially unstressed targets. Indeed, analysis of the latency of the negative peak between 300 and 600 ms over posterior left electrodes indicates a significant difference between both conditions, t(17) = 4.09, p < .001. The peak occurred approximately 20 ms later for initially stressed targets compared to initially unstressed targets (see Fig. 7).

Crucially with respect to our hypotheses, there was an interaction of the factors Stress Priming and Region (F(1, 17) = 9.06, p < .01). Over anterior regions, amplitudes for Stress Match were more negative compared to amplitudes for Stress Mismatch, t(17) = 2.88, p = .01. Over posterior regions, the opposite pattern was observed, t(17) = 3.07, p < .01, Fig. 6. Mean ERPs and topographical voltage maps for the main effect of Stress Priming are illustrated in Fig. 6. None of the interactions including the factors Stress Priming and Target did approach significance, F ⩽ 1.08, p ⩾ 0.3. This indicates similar ERP stress priming for initially stressed target words and initially unstressed target words.

3.2.3 600–900 ms
The overall ANOVA revealed a significant interaction of the factors Phoneme Priming and Region, F(1, 17) = 7.68, p = .01. Over anterior electrode leads, Phoneme Match elicited more positive amplitudes than Phoneme Mismatch, t(17) = 2.85, p = .01. Over posterior regions, the opposite pattern was observed, t(17) = 2.56, p = .02. There was neither a main effect of the factor Stress Priming or Target, nor any interaction including one or both of these factors.

In sum, there was robust phoneme priming in the behavioral data and in the ERPs. Phoneme match facilitated lexical decisions. Between 100 and 300 ms, phoneme match elicited enhanced N100 amplitudes and reduced P200 amplitudes in the ERPs. Between 600 and 900 ms, phoneme match elicited reduced posterior negativity paralleled by enhanced frontal negativity. Only a single time window in the consecutive 50 ms analyses (350–400 ms) was indicative for phoneme priming in the P350 and central negativity time window. We did not find reliable stress priming in the behavioral data, but there was robust ERP stress priming. Stress match elicited reduced posterior negativity paralleled by enhanced frontal positivity between 300 and 600 ms. Phoneme priming and Stress priming did not interact.

We could not ensure that initially stressed and initially unstressed target words were exactly comparable. Because we were restricted to a limited number of minimal word onset pairs in German, linguistic characteristics such as frequency, neighbors, word length, recognition points and so on were not matched for initially stressed and initially unstressed targets. This might have driven the different responses to both types of targets, namely the slower responses and delayed ERPs to initially stressed target words. Crucially, however, type of target did not interact with ERP priming effects. Due to this, stress match and stress mismatch included the very same primes and target words, though in different combinations: Stress Match included stressed primes followed by initially stressed targets AND unstressed primes followed by initially unstressed targets. Stress Mismatch included unstressed primes followed by initially stressed targets AND stressed primes followed by initially unstressed targets (see Table 1B). Thus, ERP stress priming cannot be deduced to inherent timing or linguistic differences between initially stressed and initially unstressed target words.

4 Discussion
We used unimodal auditory word onset priming to characterize the function of prosody-relevant information in spoken word processing. In line with our former studies (Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Alter, 2004; Schild et al., 2014), ERPs are indicative for processing of syllable stress that is independent from the processing of phoneme-relevant information. We found independent ERP stress priming and ERP phoneme priming. This is strong evidence for phoneme-free prosodic processing across the complex stream of spoken word recognition. Differential ERP stress priming effects across our studies suggest that phoneme-free prosodic processing serves several functions in the complex speech recognition stream. In the light of absent stress priming in the reaction time data, the ERPs reveal that lexical decision latencies obtained in word onset priming do not track those aspects of spoken word processing.

The present ERP stress priming effect is partly comparable with that obtained in our previous cross-modal auditory–visual study (Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Alter, 2004; Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Gunter, 2004). We found enhanced posterior negativity for stress mismatch compared to stress match, though in addition to this effect we found frontal stress priming with opposite polarity to the posterior one. Thus it appears that spoken primes modulate more aspects of the processing of spoken targets (present study) than they modulate aspects of the processing of written targets (previous cross-modal study). However, based on comparably enhanced posterior negativity for stress mismatch in the present unimodal study and the former cross-modal study, we conclude that target modality does not alter the polarity of the posterior negativity related to stress priming. Thus the unique stress priming effect obtained in our previous unimodal auditory study (Schild et al., 2014) has to be linked to other differences between studies. We might conclude that the unbalanced sequence of stressed and unstressed syllables has driven the stress priming effect in our former unimodal auditory study. We were formerly restricted to the use of initially stressed target words because we ran that experiment with pre-reading children and beginning readers.

We hypothesized two types of metrical biases that might be evoked when only initially stressed targets are presented as was the case in our former unimodal priming study (Schild et al., 2014). First, stress clashes might enhance processing effort in the stress match condition only for initially stressed targets. The present results do not support this notion because the target words’ stress pattern did not significantly modulate the ERP stress priming effect, and the previously obtained polarity of ERP stress priming was not replicated. Second, systematic prosodic regularity resulting from the restriction to initially stressed targets (see Table 1A) might be taken into account by some aspects of neurobiological target word processing, and those aspects might dominate the ERPs. Indeed, by avoiding systematic prosodic regularity in the present unimodal auditory study we did not find the same stress priming effect as in our former unimodal auditory study. We can conclude that our previous results show that prosodic expectancies established within a given study have an impact on ERP outcomes.

In our former unimodal experiment (Schild et al., 2014), participants might have taken into account prosodic regularities established by the materials. Across the experiment, the probability that a stressed syllable was followed by an unstressed syllable was high due to the initially stressed target words with their stressed-unstressed pattern (see Table 1A). Stress match deviated from this systematic prosodic pattern. A single stress match trial was characterized by a stressed syllable (the prime) followed by a further stressed syllable (first syllable of the initially stressed target). Hence, enhanced negativity for stress match might be linked to deviation from the highly probably stressed–unstressed pattern of the targets. In line with this interpretation are several studies reporting enhanced negativity for prosodic irregularity (Bohn et al., 2013; Magne et al., 2007; McCauley et al., 2013; Rothermich et al., 2010).

Phoneme-free prosodic word form representations appear to be involved in ERP stress priming obtained in the present and in our previous cross-modal study (Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Alter, 2004). The very same target words were presented in stress match trials and in stress mismatch trials. It was only the combination of the stress of the primes and the stress pattern of the target words that elicited ERP stress priming in both studies. In the present unimodal study, this effect might be deduced to the immediate repetition of two stressed (or unstressed) syllables in stress match conditions. However, this interpretation does not apply to the former cross-modal study with written targets. Furthermore, we did not obtain a similar ERP priming effect in our former unimodal study, where two stressed syllables followed each other in the stress match condition as well.

In the light of the former interpretation of ERP deflections elicited in word onset priming, we might conclude that phoneme-free prosodic word form representations are used for spoken word identification as well as for predictive coding. On the one hand, enhanced frontal negativity for stress match resembles the P350 effect for phoneme match in unimodal word onset priming (Friedrich et al., 2009; Schild et al., 2012, 2014). In accordance with the interpretation of the P350, we might conclude that the prime syllable activates words that start with the same stress. That is, stressed primes activate initially stressed target words and, vice versa, unstressed primes activate initially unstressed target words. On the other hand, enhanced posterior negativity for stress mismatch resembles the central negativity for phoneme mismatch. Thus, it might reflect phoneme-free prosodic predictions based on the stress information of the prime. That is, the stressed prime is taken to predict an initially stressed target word, and vice versa, an unstressed prime is taken to predict an initially unstressed target word. However, no clear P350 and central negativity for phoneme priming were obtained in the present study. This complicates linking of the presently obtained ERP stress and phoneme priming effects. Whether contextual effects, such as the prosodic variation in the present study, modulate ERP phoneme priming has to be followed up in future research.

Similar to our previous unimodal priming study (Schild et al., 2014), ERP phoneme priming started earlier than ERP stress priming. This finds a parallel in the acoustic signal, where phoneme-relevant information is characterized by rapid transitions in the range of single speech sounds, whereas prosody-relevant information is characterized by slower acoustic variation in the range of syllables. For example, the spoken syllables man and DOK differ already in the acoustic onset in phoneme-relevant information. By contrast, the prosodic difference in stress becomes apparent only later within the syllable (at least after the initial plosive of DOK). Together, the delayed onset of ERP stress priming across studies is in accordance with the immediacy principle stating that information in the speech signal is exploited as soon as it becomes available (Hagoort, 2008; Reinisch et al., 2010). The relatively late availability of prosody-relevant information might bias the processing system to value phoneme representations higher than phoneme-free prosodic representations in speeded lexical decision tasks.

ERP stress priming in the present unimodal study started at 300 ms and, therewith, 100 ms later than in our previous unimodal study (Schild et al., 2014). This difference integrates into the interpretation of stress priming in both studies. Predictive prosodic processing which appeared to be involved in the ERP stress priming effect obtained in the former design does not necessarily need word form representations, but might be accomplished by pre-lexical prosodic representations. Indeed, we have formerly related ERP phoneme priming before 300 ms to pre-lexical speech sound processing of spoken targets (Friedrich et al., 2009; Schild et al., 2012). As argued above, ERP stress priming in the present experiment appeared to involve lexical representations, where predictive coding at a pre-lexical level was excluded. That is, we might have tapped later lexical processing in the present study compared to earlier pre-lexical processing in our former study.

Topographic differences between ERP phoneme priming and ERP stress priming point to separate representational systems underlying both effects. In line with previous research on word onset priming, left-lateralized priming for phoneme overlap was obtained in the N100–P200 effect (Friedrich et al., 2009; Schild et al., 2012). This also fits with neuroimaging findings showing that the left hemisphere is more strongly involved in processing phoneme-relevant information than the right hemisphere (e.g., Obleser, Eisner, & Kotz, 2008; Specht, Osnes, & Hugdahl, 2009; Wolmetz, Poeppel, & Rapp, 2011).

So far, we did not obtain right-lateralization for stress priming in our studies. This integrates into an overall unclear pattern of outcomes regarding hemispheric lateralization of prosodic processing. Although the right hemisphere was traditionally assumed to be more sensitive to syllable-relevant information (Abrams, Nicol, Zecker, & Kraus, 2008; Boemio et al., 2005; for review see Zatorre & Gandour, 2008), some studies showed more left hemispheric activity for linguistically relevant word stress or tone perception (e.g., Arcuili & Slowiaczek, 2007; Klein, Zatorre, Milner, & Zhao, 2001; Zatorre & Gandour, 2008). Recently it has been argued that a more complex pattern of hemispheric lateralization involving both low-level auditory processing and higher-order language specific processing in addition to task-demands might be most realistic (McGettigan & Scott, 2012; Zatorre & Gandour, 2008). In line with this, a meta-analysis of lesion studies has been shown that prosodic processing takes place in both hemispheres (Witteman, van Ijzendoorn, van de Velde, van Heuven, & Schiller, 2011).

Apparently, neurophysiological stress priming did not find a correlate in the behavioral responses. Even though incorrectly stressed words (e.g., anGRY) appeared to delay lexical decision responses compared to correctly stressed words (e.g., ANgry, Slowiaczek, 1990), facilitation due to stress overlap in priming context is not obligatorily found (Slowiaczek et al., 2006). So far, robust stress priming effects are restricted to cross-modal auditory–visual paradigms (Cooper et al., 2002; Cutler & van Donselaar, 2001; Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Alter, 2004; Friedrich, Kotz, Friederici, & Gunter, 2004; Soto-Faraco et al., 2001; van Donselaar et al., 2005). They reveal that amodal lexical processing takes prosody-relevant information into account. However, the present study as well as a previous study with auditory targets (Slowiaczek et al., 2006) did not show behavioral facilitation for stress overlap between primes and targets. There is a substantial difference between spoken and written targets. While visual target words are directly accessible as a whole, spoken target words unfold in time. Thus, pre-activation of word form representations exerted by the primes is directly used for recognizing written targets (Ashby & Martin, 2008). By contrast, spoken words are initially compatible with several alternatives and initial stress of the targets is available later than initial phonemes are available (see above). Thus, stress overlap between prime and target might be a less promising cue for guiding the lexical decision responses than is phoneme overlap between primes and targets in unimodal auditory priming experiments.

Here we argue that over the course of the experiment participants adopted a phoneme-based strategy to guide their lexical decision responses. In order to make the present procedure appropriate for the recording of ERPs, we repeated each target word four times (once in each condition), across four blocks. If only the first block with no repetition of the targets is considered, comparable trends for phoneme priming and stress priming were obtained. Over the whole experiment, robust phoneme priming emerges, but stress priming does not survive. Hence, phoneme priming might be modulated by strategic mechanisms related to the repetition of the target words. Given our materials, target words start to differ from their minimal onset pair members as well as from their respective pseudowords(*) at the position of the second syllables’ vowels (second nucleus, e.g., Alter  [Engl. age], Altar [Engl. altar], *Alti, *Altopp). Mainly due to their shorter initial syllables, the second nucleus of the initially unstressed targets is available earlier than that of the initially stressed targets (see Section 2). Following initial familiarization with the materials in the first block, participants might have focused more strongly on phonemes in order to detect the uniqueness and deviation points inherent to the repeatedly presented materials than they have focused on syllable stress.

Most intriguingly, we replicate independence of ERP phoneme priming and ERP stress priming. This is support for our assumption that phoneme-relevant information, on the one hand, and prosody-relevant information, on the other hand, are not only separately extracted as sketched by the asymmetric sampling in time hypothesis (Poeppel, 2003), but also follow separate routes in the complex recognition process. The present ERP results are evidence for phoneme-free prosodic representations coding for syllable stress, but not for phonemes. Further research has to explore how much detail those prosodic representations at the syllable level code for. For example, the number of syllables within a word or the position of the syllable within a word might be represented at this abstract prosodic level. ERPs recorded in word onset priming appear to be a promising means for this endeavor.

Appendix A
These disyllabic German words [English translation in brackets] were presented in the experiment.Initial stress	Final stress	
Alter [age]	Altar [altar]	
Ampel [traffic light]	Ampère [ampere]	
Arche [ark]	Archiv [archive]	
Armut [poverty]	Armee [army]	
Atem [breath]	Atom [atom]	
Auge [eye]	August [august]	
Balken [bar]	Balkon [balcony]	
Basis [base]	Basalt [basalt]	
Chronik [chronicle]	Chronist [chronicler]	
Datum [date]	Datei [file]	
Doktor [doctor]	Doktrin [doctrine]	
Extra [extra]	Extrem [extreme]	
Ethik [ethics]	Etat [budget]	
Fabel [tale]	Fabrik [factory]	
Flora [flora]	Florett [floret]	
Friese [frisian]	Frisur [hearstyle]	
Kanon [canon]	Kanal [canal]	
Kanzler [chancellor]	Kanzlei [chambers]	
Karte [map]	Kartei [register]	
Kosten [costs]	Kostüm [costume]	
Konter [counterattack]	Kontrast [contrast]	
Konto [account]	Kontrakt [contract]	
Magen [stomach]	Magie [magic]	
Mandel [almond]	Mandat [mandate]	
Mode [fashion]	Modell [model]	
Monat [month]	Monarch [monarch]	
Motor [engine]	Motiv [motive]	
Muse [muse]	Musik [music]	
Muskel [muscle]	Muskat [nutmeg]	
Note [note]	Notiz [notice]	
Orgel [organ]	Organ [organ]	
Pappe [board]	Papier [paper]	
Parka [parka]	Parkett [parquet]	
Party [party]	Partei [party]	
Pate [godfather]	Patent [patent]	
Perser [persian]	Person [person]	
Planung [planning]	Planet [planet]	
Poker [poker]	Pokal [cup]	
Porto [postage]	Portal [portal]	
Probe [rehearsal]	Problem [problem]	
Profi [professional]	Profil [profil]	
Regel [rule]	Regent [regent]	
Solo [solo]	Solist [soloist]	
Status [status]	Statut [statute]	
Taler [thaler]	Talent [talent]	
Torte [cake]	Tortur [ordeal]	
Tresen [bar]	Tresor [safe]	
Wagen [car]	Waggon [waggon]	


Acknowledgments
The work was supported by a grant of the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG, FR 2591/1-2) awarded to CF and Brigitte Röder, and a Starting Independent Investigators Grant of the European Research Council (ERC, 209656 Neurodevelopment) awarded to CF. We are grateful to Bianca Hein for assistance in selecting, recording and editing the stimuli and to Axel Wingerath for collecting the data.

Fig. 1 The figure illustrates pitch and intensity of the primes and targets. Intensity contours (first, maximum and last value, with standard errors; top panel) and mean fundamental frequency contours (first, maximum and last value, with standard errors; lower panel) of the stressed primes and the unstressed primes (left) and the first and second syllable of the initially stressed target words and the initially unstressed target words (right). The averaged values are given at the averaged time point they were identified in the signals. Target words were minimal word onset pairs. Therefore, the same segments contributed to the pitch contours in the stressed and unstressed primes and in the stressed and unstressed target word onset syllables. Error-bars indicate standard errors. Exemplary waveforms of a stressed prime and an unstressed prime are given for further illustration (DOK taken from DOKtor, Engl. doctor; dok taken from dokTRIN, Engl. doctrine).

Fig. 2 All 74 recorded electrode positions on the scalp. Electrode positions that entered the Regions Of Interest (ROIs) for statistical analyses of the ERP effects are shown in gray (left and right anterior ROIs – dark gray; left and right posterior ROIs – light gray).

Fig. 3 Lexical decision latencies in all four experimental conditions collapsed across initially stressed and initially unstressed target words. The abbreviations of the four conditions are as follows: “S+P+” for stress match, phoneme match; “S+P−” for stress match, phoneme mismatch; “S−P+” for stress mismatch, phoneme match; and “S−P−” for stress mismatch, phoneme mismatch. There was only a main effect of the factor Phoneme Overlap (see Section 3). For illustration purposes we displayed all four conditions.

Fig. 4 Mean ERPs over the lateral (left and right) and over the anterior and posterior ROIs. Target onset was at 0 ms. The vertical gray line indicates the mean reaction time across all conditions. For illustration purpose, ERPs were filtered with a 20 Hz low-pass filter. Electrode positions entering the ROI analysis are illustrated in the head schemes by black dots respectively. The abbreviations of the four conditions are as follows: “S+P+” for stress match, phoneme match; “S+P−” for stress match, phoneme mismatch; “S−P+” for stress mismatch, phoneme match; and “S−P−” for stress mismatch, phoneme mismatch.

Fig. 5 Illustration of the main effect of the factor Phoneme Priming over the left hemisphere in the time window ranging from 100 to 250 ms. Left: Mean ERP waveforms are shown for phoneme match (black solid line) and phoneme mismatch (gray dashed line) collapsed across all recording sites over the left hemisphere. Target onset was at 0 ms. The vertical gray line indicates the mean reaction time across all conditions. The time window ranging from 100 to 250 ms is highlighted in gray. For illustration purpose ERPs were filtered with a 20 Hz low-pass filter. Right: Topographical distribution of voltage differences (phoneme mismatch–phoneme match) averaged for the 100–250 ms time window. Black dots in the voltage map indicate all electrode positions over the left hemisphere.

Fig. 6 Illustration of the main effect of the factor Stress Priming over anterior and posterior regions in the time window ranging from 300 to 600 ms. Left: Mean ERP waveforms are shown for stress match (black solid line) and stress mismatch (gray dashed line) collapsed across anterior left and right recording sites (above) and over posterior left and right recording sites (below). Target onset was at 0 ms. The vertical gray line indicates the mean reaction time across all conditions. The time window ranging from 300 to 600 ms is highlighted in gray. For illustration purpose ERPs were filtered with a 20 Hz low-pass filter. Right: Topographical distribution of voltage differences (stress mismatch–stress match) averaged for the 300–600 ms time window. Black dots in the voltage map indicate all anterior left and right electrode positions, gray dots indicate all posterior left and right electrode positions.

Fig. 7 Illustration of ERP peak latency differences for initially stressed versus initially unstressed targets leading to main effects of the factor Target over lateral ROIs in the 300–600 ms time window. Mean ERP waveforms are shown for the four ROIs (anterior and posterior, left and right) for initially stressed target words (solid lines) and for initially unstressed target words (dashed lines). Mean peak amplitudes between 300 and 600 ms are given for initially stressed targets (solid arrows) and initially unstressed targets (dashed arrows), respectively. Target onset was at 0 ms. The vertical gray line indicates the mean reaction time across all conditions. For illustration purpose ERPs were filtered with a 20 Hz low-pass filter.

Table 1 Each trial in unimodal auditory word onset priming is characterized by a specific sequence of stressed and unstressed syllables.

Condition	Prime	Target	
1st Syllable	2nd Syllable	
(A)Schild et al. (2014)		Initially stressed	
 Stress Match, Phoneme Match	MON	MON	ster	
 Stress Mismatch, Phoneme Match	mon	MON	ster	
 Stress Match, Phoneme Mismatch	TEP	MON	ster	
 Stress Mismatch, Phoneme Mismatch	tep	MON	ster	


	
(B) Present study		Initially stressed	
 Stress Match, Phoneme Match	MAN	MAN	del	
 Stress Mismatch, Phoneme Match	man	MAN	del	
 Stress Match, Phoneme Mismatch	DOK	MAN	del	
 Stress Mismatch, Phoneme Mismatch	dok	MAN	del	


	
		Initially unstressed	
 Stress Match, Phoneme Match	man	man	DAT	
 Stress Mismatch, Phoneme Match	MAN	man	DAT	
 Stress Match, Phoneme Mismatch	dok	man	DAT	
 Stress Mismatch, Phoneme Mismatch	DOK	man	DAT	
Examples of resulting syllable sequences for single trials are given. Stressed syllables are indicated by capital letters. (A) In our previous study we presented only initially stressed German target words, such as MONster (Engl. monster; Schild et al., 2014). The probability of a stressed syllable immediately preceding an unstressed syllable was 50%. By contrast, the probability of an unstressed syllable immediately preceding a stressed syllable was only 25%. (B) In the current study we presented initially stressed and initially unstressed German target words, such as MANdel (“almond”) and manDAT (“mandate”). The probability of a stressed syllable preceding an unstressed syllable equals the probability of an unstressed syllable preceding a stressed syllable (both 37.5%).

Table 2 Mean reaction times in milliseconds (and standard error of mean) are given for initially stressed and initially unstressed targets, respectively.

	First block (no target repetition)	All trials (four target repetitions)	
S+P+	S+P−	S−P+	S−P−	S+P+	S+P−	S−P+	S−P−	
Initially stressed targets	951 (25)	985 (33)	967 (28)	977 (25)	887 (24)	925 (31)	900 (25)	911 (25)	
Initially unstressed targets	933 (32)	947 (28)	962 (33)	999 (42)	875 (25)	901 (34)	881 (29)	900 (32)	
The results for the first target presentation (without target repetition) are shown in the left columns. The results for all trials (with four target repetitions) are shown in the right columns. Abbreviations for the four conditions are as follows: “S+P+” for stress match, phoneme match (e.g., MAN–MANdel); “S+P−” for stress match, phoneme mismatch (e.g., DOK–MANdel); “S−P+” for stress mismatch, phoneme match (e.g., man–MANdel); and “S−P−” for stress mismatch, phoneme mismatch (e.g., dok–MANdel).

Table 3 Results of 50 ms time window analyses for the ERPs from target onset up to 900 ms. Only main effects of the factors Phoneme Priming, Stress Priming and Target, or interactions including at least one of these factors are reported.

	
Significance of F-values is marked by asterisks (*** < .001, ** < .01, * < .05). Significance is only given if two or more consecutive time windows yielded significant main effects or interactions with a given factor. The time windows that were combined for analyzing the Phoneme Priming effect (100–250 ms), the Stress Priming effect (300–600 ms) and the time before the response took place (600–900 ms) are highlighted in gray.
==== Refs
References
Abrams D.A.  Nicol T.  Zecker S.  Kraus N.   Right-hemisphere auditory cortex is dominant for coding syllable patterns in speech Journal of Neuroscience 28 15 2008 3958 3965 18400895 
Arcuili J.  Slowiaczek L.M.   The where and when of linguistic word-level prosody Neuropsychologia 45 2007 2638 2642 17475291 
Ashby J.  Clifton C.C.   The prosodic property of lexical stress affects eye movements during silent reading Cognition 96 3 2004 B89 B100 15913592 
Ashby J.  Martin A.E.   Prosodic phonological representations early in visual word recognition Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 34 1 2008 224 236 18248150 
Berg P.  Scherg M.   A multiple source approach to the correction of eye artifacts Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 90 3 1994 229 241 7511504 
Boemio A.  Fromm S.  Braun A.  Poeppel D.   Hierarchical and asymmetric temporal sensitivity in human auditory cortices Nature Neuroscience 8 3 2005 389 395 
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2014). Praat: Doing phonetics by computer [computer program]. Version 5.3.63. <http://www.praat.org/> Accessed 24.01.14.
Bohn K.  Knaus J.  Wiese R.  Domahs U.   The influence of rhythmic (ir)regularities on speech processing: Evidence from an ERP study on German phrases Neuropsychologia 51 4 2013 760 771 23333869 
Connolly J.F.  Phillips N.A.   Event-related potential components reflect phonological and semantic processing of the terminal word of spoken sentences Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 6 3 1994 256 266 23964975 
Connolly J.F.  Service E.  D’Arcy R.C.  Kujala A.  Alho K.   Phonological aspects of word recognition as revealed by high-resolution spatio-temporal brain mapping Neuroreport 12 2 2001 237 243 11209927 
Cooper N.  Cutler A.  Wales R.   Constraints of lexical stress on lexical access in English: Evidence from native and non-native listeners Language and Speech 45 Pt 3 2002 207 228 12693685 
Cutler A.   Forbear is a homophone: Lexical prosody does not constrain lexical access Language and Speech 29 3 1986 201 220 
Cutler A.  van Donselaar W.   Voornaam is not (really) a homophone: Lexical prosody and lexical access in Dutch Language and Speech 44 Pt 2 2001 171 195 11575903 
Diaz M.T.  Swaab T.Y.   Electrophysiological differentiation of phonological and semantic integration in word and sentence contexts Brain Research 1146 2007 85 100 16952338 
Friedrich C.K.   Neurophysiological correlates of mismatch in lexical access BMC Neuroscience 6 2005 64 16283934 
Friedrich C.K.  Kotz S.A.  Friederici A.D.  Alter K.   Pitch modulates lexical identification in spoken word recognition: ERP and behavioral evidence Cognitive Brain Research 20 2 2004 300 308 15183401 
Friedrich C.K.  Kotz S.A.  Friederici A.D.  Gunter T.C.   ERPs reflect lexical identification in word fragment priming Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 16 4 2004 541 552 15165347 
Friedrich C.K.  Schild U.  Röder B.   Electrophysiological indices of word fragment priming allow characterizing neural stages of speech recognition Biological Psychology 80 1 2009 105 113 18547709 
Fry D.B.   Experiments in the perception of stress Language and Speech 1 2 1958 126 152 
Giraud A.L.  Kleinschmidt A.  Poeppel D.  Lund T.E.  Frackowiak R.S.  Laufs H.   Endogenous cortical rhythms determine cerebral specialization for speech perception and production Neuron 56 6 2007 1127 1134 18093532 
Giraud A.L.  Poeppel D.   Cortical oscillations and speech processing: Emerging computational principles and operations Nature Neuroscience 15 4 2012 511 517 
Hagoort P.   The fractionation of spoken language understanding by measuring electrical and magnetic brain signals Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 363 1493 2008 1055 1069 
Hagoort P.  Brown C.M.   ERP effects of listening to speech: Semantic ERP effects Neuropsychologia 38 11 2000 1518 1530 10906377 
Klein D.  Zatorre R.J.  Milner B.  Zhao V.   A cross-linguistic PET study of tone perception in Mandarin Chinese and English speakers NeuroImage 13 4 2001 646 653 11305893 
Liberman M.  Prince A.   On stress and linguistic rhythm Linguistic Inquiry 8 2 1977 249 336 
Luo H.  Poeppel D.   Cortical oscillations in auditory perception and speech: Evidence for two temporal windows in human auditory cortex Frontiers in Psychology 3 2012 170 22666214 
Magne C.  Astesano C.  Aramaki M.  Ystad S.  Kronland-Martinet R.  Besson M.   Influence of syllabic lengthening on semantic processing in spoken French: Behavioral and electrophysiological evidence Cerebral Cortex 17 11 2007 2659 2668 17264253 
Marslen-Wilson W.D.   Functional parallelism in spoken word-recognition Cognition 25 1–2 1987 71 102 3581730 
Mattys S.L.   The perception of primary and secondary stress in English Perception & Psychophysics 62 2 2000 253 265 10723206 
McCauley S.M.  Hestvik A.  Vogel I.   Perception and bias in the processing of compound versus phrasal stress: Evidence from event-related brain potentials Language and Speech 56 Pt 1 2013 23 44 23654115 
McClelland J.L.  Elman J.L.   The TRACE model of speech perception Cognitive Psychology 18 1 1986 1 86 3753912 
McGettigan C.  Scott S.K.   Cortical asymmetries in speech perception: What’s wrong, what’s right and what’s left? Trends in Cognitive Sciences 16 5 2012 269 276 22521208 
Näätanen R.  Picton T.   The N1 wave of the human electric and magnetic response to sound: A review and an analysis of the component structure Psychophysiology 24 4 1987 375 425 3615753 
Norris D.   Shortlist: A connectionist model of continuous speech recognition Cognition 52 1994 189 234 
Obleser J.  Eisner F.  Kotz S.A.   Bilateral speech comprehension reflects differential sensitivity to spectral and temporal features Journal of Neuroscience 28 32 2008 8116 8123 18685036 
O’Rourke T.B.  Holcomb P.J.   Electrophysiological evidence for the efficiency of spoken word processing Biological Psychology 60 2–3 2002 121 150 12270588 
Perrin F.  Pernier J.  Bertrand O.  Echallier J.F.   Spherical splines for scalp potential and current density mapping Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 72 1989 184 187 2464490 
Poeppel D.   The analysis of speech in different temporal integration windows: Cerebral lateralization as ‘asymmetric sampling in time’ Speech Communication 41 2003 245 255 
Praamstra P.  Meyer A.S.  Levelt W.J.M.   Neurophysiological manifestations of phonological processing: Latency variation of a negative ERP component timelocked to phonological mismatch Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 6 3 1994 204 219 23964972 
Praamstra P.  Stegeman D.F.   Phonological effects on the auditory N400 event-related brain potential Cognitive Brain Research 1 2 1993 73 86 8513242 
Pylkkänen L.  Marantz A.   Tracking the time course of word recognition with MEG Trends in Cognitive Science 7 5 2003 187 189 
Reinisch E.  Jesse A.  McQueen J.M.   Early use of phonetic information in spoken word recognition: Lexical stress drives eye movements immediately Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 63 4 2010 772 783 
Reinisch E.  Jesse A.  McQueen J.M.   Speaking rate affects the perception of duration as a suprasegmental lexical-stress cue Language and Speech 54 Pt 2 2011 147 165 21848077 
Rothermich K.  Schmidt-Kassow M.  Schwartze M.  Kotz S.A.   Event-related potential responses to metric violations: Rules versus meaning Neuroreport 21 8 2010 580 584 20431495 
Sanders L.D.  Neville H.J.   An ERP study of continuous speech processing. I. Segmentation, semantics, and syntax in native speakers Cognitive Brain Research 15 3 2003 228 240 12527097 
Sanders L.D.  Newport E.L.  Neville H.J.   Segmenting nonsense: An event-related potential index of perceived onsets in continuous speech Nature Neuroscience 5 7 2002 700 703 
Schild U.  Becker A.B.C.  Friedrich C.K.   Processing of syllable stress is functionally different from phoneme processing and does not profit from literacy acquisition Frontiers in Psychology 5 2014 
Schild U.  Röder B.  Friedrich C.K.   Neuronal spoken word recognition: The time course of processing variation in the speech signal Language and Cognitive Processes 27 2 2012 159 183 
Schiller N.O.  Horemans I.  Ganushchak L.  Koester D.   Event-related brain potentials during the monitoring of speech errors NeuroImage 44 2 2009 520 530 doi: S1053-8119(08)00997-X 18930155 
Slowiaczek L.M.   Effects of lexical stress in auditory word recognition Language and Speech 33 Pt 1 1990 47 68 2283920 
Slowiaczek L.M.  Soltano E.G.  Bernstein H.L.   Lexical and metrical stress in word recognition: Lexical or pre-lexical influences? Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 35 6 2006 491 512 17072756 
Soto-Faraco S.  Sebastián-Gallés N.  Cutler A.   Segmental and suprasegmental mismatch in lexical access Journal of Memory and Language 45 2001 412 432 
Specht K.  Osnes B.  Hugdahl K.   Detection of differential speech-specific processes in the temporal lobe using fMRI and a dynamic ‘sound morphing’ technique Human Brain Mapping 30 10 2009 3436 3444 19347876 
Tomlinson J.M.  Liu Q.  Fox Tree J.E.   The perceptual nature of stress shifts Language and Cognitive Processes 10 2013 1 13 
van den Brink D.  Brown C.M.  Hagoort P.   Electrophysiological evidence for early contextual influences during spoken-word recognition: N200 versus N400 effects Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 13 7 2001 967 985 11595099 
van Donselaar W.  Koster M.  Cutler A.   Exploring the role of lexical stress in lexical recognition Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology A 58 2 2005 251 273 
Van Petten C.  Coulson S.  Rubin S.  Plante E.  Parks M.   Time course of word identification and semantic integration in spoken language Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 25 2 1999 394 417 
Witteman J.  van Ijzendoorn M.H.  van de Velde D.  van Heuven V.J.J.P.  Schiller N.O.   The nature of hemispheric specialization for linguistic and emotional prosodic perception: A meta-analysis of the lesion literature Neuropsychologia 49 13 2011 3722 3738 21964199 
Wolmetz M.  Poeppel D.  Rapp B.   What does the right hemisphere know about phoneme categories? Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 23 3 2011 552 569 20350179 
Zatorre R.J.  Belin P.   Spectral and temporal processing in human auditory cortex Cerebral Cortex 11 10 2001 946 953 11549617 
Zatorre R.J.  Gandour J.T.   Neural specializations for speech and pitch: Moving beyond the dichotomies Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 363 1493 2008 1087 1104
