
==== Front
Biol TherBiol TherBiologics in Therapy2195-58402190-9164Springer Healthcare Communications Heidelberg 210.1007/s13554-011-0002-xLetter from the EditorLetter from the Editor Yazici Yusuf yusuf.yazici@nyumc.org NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York, NY USA 23 9 2011 23 9 2011 9 2011 1 1 2© Springer Healthcare 2011issue-copyright-statement© Springer Healthcare 2011
==== Body
The last decade has seen a major surge in new therapies developed based on understanding the immune system and how each component interacts with another to lead to disease. The targeted biologic therapies based on these insights made a significant impact on how we treat our patients, and the expectations we as clinicians and patients have from our therapies.

Biologics currently in use and being developed show increasing growth, and from monoclonal agents against cytokines to cell modifiers to vaccines, they are here to stay.

Along with this increasing presence of biologics in our every day treatment of our patients, the need to learn about them and follow the development of new agents has intensified. In this climate, a journal focused on biologics and their role in disease management is a welcome sight.

Biologics in Therapy is a fully open access, internationally peer-reviewed, rapid publication journal with an emphasis on the publication of high-quality original research and review articles covering preclinical, clinical (phase I–IV), and post-marketing studies on new and existing therapies using biological products including vaccines, blood and blood components, allergenics, somatic cells, gene therapy, tissues, and recombinant therapeutic proteins. The target is the broad audience of pharmaceutical and healthcare professionals caring for patients, and thinking about how to improve what we provide as healthcare professionals every day.

Open access is possibly the way of the future in publishing; it has been growing, and funders and institutions have recognized that the funding models that support scholarly communication need to evolve to keep pace. There are now several institutions that are leading the way and have already set up central funds for their authors to use when publishing in open access journals.

Open access provides everything we are used to getting from journals and more by making access anon-problem, helping disseminate important information as easily as possible to as wide an audience as possible.

Biologics in Therapy will be a welcome addition to our armamentarium in educating ourselves and our patients on the latest biologic therapies available.
