
==== Front
BioimpactsBioimpactsBioImpactsBioImpacts : BI2228-56522228-56602228-5652Tabriz University of Medical Sciences 10.15171/bi.2016.07Review ArticleAdvanced drug delivery and targeting technologies for the ocular diseases Barar Jaleh Aghanejad Ayuob Fathi Marziyeh Omidi Yadollah *Research Centre for Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran
* Corresponding authors: Yadollah Omidi, Email: yomidi@yahoo.com; yomidi@tbzmed.ac.ir2016 30 3 2016 6 1 49 67 05 12 2015 13 2 2016 18 3 2016 © 2016 The Author(s)2016
This work is published by BioImpacts as an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/). Non-commercial uses of the work are permitted, provided the original work is properly cited.
http://bi.tbzmed.ac.ir




Introduction: Ocular targeted therapy has enormously been advanced by implementation of new methods of drug delivery and targeting using implantable drug delivery systems (DDSs) or devices (DDDs), stimuli-responsive advanced biomaterials, multimodal nanomedicines, cell therapy modalities and medical bioMEMs. These technologies tackle several ocular diseases such as inflammation-based diseases (e.g., scleritis, keratitis, uveitis, iritis, conjunctivitis, chorioretinitis, choroiditis, retinitis, retinochoroiditis), ocular hypertension and neuropathy, age-related macular degeneration and mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) due to accumulation of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Such therapies appear to provide ultimate treatments, even though much more effective, yet biocompatible, noninvasive therapies are needed to control some disabling ocular diseases/disorders.



Methods: In the current study, we have reviewed and discussed recent advancements on ocular targeted therapies.



Results: On the ground that the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic analyses of ophthalmic drugs need special techniques, most of ocular DDSs/devices developments have been designed to localized therapy within the eye. Application of advanced DDSs such as Subconjunctival insert/implants (e.g., latanoprost implant, Gamunex-C), episcleral implant (e.g., LX201), cationic emulsions (e.g., Cationorm™, Vekacia™, Cyclokat™), intac/punctal plug DDSs (latanoprost punctal plug delivery system, L-PPDS), and intravitreal implants (I-vitaion™, NT-501, NT- 503, MicroPump, Thethadur, IB-20089 Verisome™, Cortiject, DE-102, Retisert™, Iluvein™ and Ozurdex™) have significantly improved the treatment of ocular diseases. However, most of these DDSs/devices are applied invasively and even need surgical procedures. Of these, use of de novo technologies such as advanced stimuli-responsive nanomaterials, multimodal nanosystems (NSs)/nanoconjugates (NCs), biomacromolecualr scaffolds, and bioengineered cell therapies need to be further advanced to get better compliance and higher clinical impacts.



Conclusion: Despite mankind successful battle on ocular diseases, our challenge will continue to battle the ocular disease that happen with aging. Yet, we need to understand the molecular aspects of eye diseases in a holistic way and develop ultimate treatment protocols preferably as non-invasive systems.


Eye diseasesIntraocular drug deliveryOcular barriersOcular pharmacotherapyOphthalmic implantsOcular drug targetingOphthalmologyTargeted therapy
==== Body
Introduction

In the human eye, like all other mammals, non-image-forming photosensitive ganglion cells within the retina function to receive the light signals and react accordingly towards translation of the signals and visualization. The human eye functions perfectly by harmonized co-operation of the related bio-micro-machineries of the eye (e.g., reflection of the pupil, function of eye muscles and lacrimal gland secretory processes), with responsiveness of the related neural centers of the brain (i.e., cortical and subcortical brain regions), functions of the hormonal system (e.g., regulation and suppression of melatonin) and even the regulation of body clock.



Anatomically, the eye globe is divided into anterior and posterior segments, respectively occupying one-third and two-third of ocular tissues. The anterior segment contains the cornea, conjunctiva, iris, ciliary body, tear film, and aqueous humor, and the posterior segment encompasses the sclera, choroid, Bruch’s membrane, retina and vitreous humor.1



Impeccable functionality of the visual cells is largely dependent upon integrity of the cells/tissues in posterior and anterior segments of the eye, where selective restrictiveness of the ocular tissues membranes and barriers control the shuttling of solutes to maintain the ocular homeostasis through perfect functions of ocular biological barriers. These impediments include (a) corneal epithelial barrier, (b) iris blood vessel endothelium, (c) ciliary body epithelium (CEB), (d) inner barrier of retina formed by retinal capillary endothelial cells, and (e) retinal barrier formed by retinal-pigmented epithelial cells. Up until now, different cell models have been used to examine the functions of various barriers of the eye and to address their impacts on topical and/or intraocular delivery of ophthalmic drugs.2



As a general principle in the ocular pharmacotherapy, treatment of the ophthalmic diseases often necessitate advanced drug delivery systems (DDSs) and devices (DDDs) ideally for programmed/long-term liberation of drug into the anterior or posterior segments of the eye to enhance the patient adherence to the treatment regimen and hence success of the therapy. However, the currently used conventional therapies often associate with low bioavailability because of physiobiologic barriers of the eye while the systemic DDSs must cross the retinal barriers.



The dry eye syndrome (DES), inflammation, allergies and infections of the eye, macular degeneration, cataracts, dia­betic retinopathy and glaucoma are primarily largely age-and/or lifestyle-related diseases.3



To address the clinical relevance of ocular barriers in targeted therapy of the ophthalmic diseases, in the current article, we will discuss the recent advancements in crossing and/or circumventing ocular barriers through implementing noninvasive sustained-/controlled release injectable or implantable DDSs.


Ocular pharmacokinetics

Drug pharmacokinetic (PK) analyses in human subjects are prerequisite for any new pharmaceutical. For the ocular drug products, however, the PK studies in human subjects are waved because the serial sampling from the aqueous humor or the vitreous humor is not applicable for PK assessments. As a substitute, animal models (e.g., rabbit, dog, monkey and pig) whose eye sizes are similar to the human eye are used to conduct ophthalmic experiments, even though there exist some differences between human and these models. Despite all these shortcomings, still the rabbits are most commonly used for PK studies.4 It should be stated that the serial sampling of target tissues of the eye is extremely challenging in terms of sampling procedure and volume, as a result the ocular PK experiments demand a large number of animals to attain reliable PK data such as area under the curve (AUC), time to maximum tissue concentration (Tmax) and peak tissue concentration (Cmax) – necessary for the approval of any new drug application. Taken all, ocular PK studies are very laborious, time consuming and expensive, which require implementation of different techniques such as microdialysis assessment that is based on a capillary dialysis probe for continuous sampling of aqueous and/or vitreous humors from the same eye.5 In the case of sustained-release DDSs when drug liberation needs to be assessed for a long-period of time, the microdialysis technique cannot be applied and periodic sampling with a designated number of animals can provide adequate data. Further, this approach is not suitable for the con­tinuous drug level assessment in tissues such as the iris-ciliary body and the retina.



Using suitable animal models and drug analyses techniques, drug liberation and distribution can be assessed. PK parameters such as AUC, Tmax and Cmax are normally the ones that are used for the relative bioavailability (the so-called “relative amount of absorption”) comparison among formulations, while the absolute bioavailability (the so-called “actual fraction of the dose absorbed”) can only be calculated upon direct drug dosing in the target tissue.



In 2004, Tojo developed a PK model for the ocular drug delivery based on Fick’s second law of diffusion, assuming a modified cylindrical eye with three routes of drug transportation including the anterior aqueous chamber, the posterior aqueous chamber and the retina/choroids/scleral membrane. In this model, parameters such as the diffusion coefficient (DC) and the partition coefficient (PC) were assessed from the in vitro membrane penetration experiments by means of a side-by-side diffusion cell system for various eye tissues, and the DC for a drug can be estimated through the effect of the molecular weight of the model compound. This PK model was proposed to predict the biodistribution in the various fluids or tissues of the eye. The model was claimed to be able to simulate the effects of binding and metabolism in the eye.6



Based on a homogeneous biodistribution of drugs within the ocular tissue, as one of the best experiments, Jones and Maurice proposed a method for determining the rate of loss of fluorescein from the aqueous humor in human eye by introducing dye into the cornea using iontophoresis and following the distribution of the dye in the eye.7 This model was further developed by Maurice and Mishima who capitalized on an assumption that the PK of ophthalmic drugs can be assessed by compartmental models,8 even though the compartmental analyses may associate with some limitations such as weakness in providing accurate PK data because of lack of detailed information upon the local drug distribution in the eye. Further, drug elimination via various routes of the eye as discussed previously may affect the local tissue concentration, hence the concentration of administered drugs in the aqueous chamber and in the vitreous body will explicitly be inhomogeneous showing a complex distribution pattern. As a result, in vivo data obtained by means of simple compartmental analysis may fail to fully correlate the pharmacological response that might directly be related with the local target concentration and distribution of drug. Taken all, as shown in Fig. 1, two-compartment model can be used to analyze the drug exchanges that can occur in the eye after the topical administration. In this model, the primary assumptions are (i) negligible loss of drug via tears, (ii) insignificant entry into the aqueous humor from the tears other than the cornea, (iii) trivial exchanges between the cornea and blood at the limbus, and (iv) negligible exchanges of the aqueous humor with the posterior reservoir.8



Fig. 1
 
Schematic representation of two-compartment model for topical use of ocular drugs. The kc and kca represents transfer coefficients between the cornea (c) and aqueous humor (a), and k0 is the loss coefficient from the aqueous to the plasma (p). The model was adapted from previously published works.8



Based on a two-compartment open system of conventional pharmacokinetics,7,8 one may consider following kinetic equation (Eq.) 1 for the mass transfer aqueous humor to the blood after topical application:



 Eq. 1 dCadt=k0(Cprap−Ca) 



Where, k0 is the transfer coefficient from the aqueous humor to the blood; Ca and Cp are the concentrations in the aqueous humor and blood plasma, respectively; and rap is the value of the ratio Ca/Cp at steady state.



The administered drug to the cornea can penetrate to the anterior segment, hence the transfer coefficient kc may define the exchange of the used drug between the cornea and the aqueous humor and is referred to the volume of the cornea, which can be defined by Eq. 2.



 Eq. 2 dCcdt=kc(Carca−Cc) 



Where, Cc is the corneal concentration defined as the mass of drug in the entire cornea divided by the total volume of the tissue, Vc.



It should be noted that the transfer coefficient kca shows the drug exchange between the cornea and aqueous humor and is referred to the volume of the aqueous humor, which can be defined by Eq. 3:



 Eq. 3 kcakc=VcVarca 



Where, Va represents the volume of the anterior chamber. The equilibrium ratio rca is the value of the ratio Cc/Ca when dCc/dt is zero. The expression Vcrca can be termed the apparent volume of the cornea. It should be highlighted that since Vc and Va are determined, only two of the parameters kca, kc, and rca are independent.



Based on Fick’s second law, Tojo hypothesized that the concentration of a designated drug in the eye can be given by the following pharmacokinetic model shown as Eq. 4:



 Eq. 4 {1+B(x,y,t)}∂C∂t=1x∂∂(xD∂C∂x)+∂∂y(D∂C∂y)−R(x,y,t)+S(x,y,t) 



Where, D is the diffusion coefficient in the eye, B(x, y, t) is the binding term, R(x, y, t) is the metabolism and degradation rate and S(x, y, t) is the release rate of drug from the DDS implanted or injected into the target site. It should be noted that in this equation D is not considered as constant and varies in the ocular tissues.6



All together, the simple compartmental analyses seem to provide satisfactory data for the kinetics of hydrophilic substances. However, such models may not provide accurate outcome because drugs can penetrate into different tissues rather than the assumed compartments and show complex distribution patterns in large part due to solubility tendency of drugs in aqueous humor and lipid membranes of different segments of the eye such as the corneal epithelium, the lens, and the uveal tissue that are neglected. Besides, there may be nonlinear relationships between the magnitude of the reservoirs and barriers formed by these tissues and the concentration of the drug.8 It seems that, in addition to fluorescein used for elucidating the kinetics of hydrophilic drugs, we need to capitalize on some other lipid-soluble fluorescent tracers to be able to interpret the complex pattern of drug distribution in the eye. The PK studies in the eye need further advancements using not only the experimental models but also computer-based simulation and modeling.


Ocular barriers

All the biological membranes and barriers selectively regulate traverse of locally and/or systemically administered drugs and blood-borne molecules to the anterior and posterior compartments of the eye.9
Fig. 2 schematically represents the perfect function of the ocular biological membranes and barriers. The cornea as an avascular transparent multilayered epithelial cells represent a primary sensitive tissue that can block the translocation of topically administered pharmaceuticals (e.g., eye drops, ointments, gels, or emulsions) into the cul-de-sac. The ocular biological membranes and barriers are considered as the most robust controlling machineries of harmonized group of cells and tissue in an organ.10 In fact, the consistency of such harmonized functions of the eye is utterly dependent upon the (a) static barriers (e.g., different layers of cornea, sclera, iris/ciliary body through blood-aqueous barrier and retina through blood-retinal barriers), (b) dynamic barriers (e.g., tear dilution, choroidal and conjunctival blood flow, lymphatic clearance), and (c) efflux pumps such as multidrug resistance (MDR) known as P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and multidrug resistance proteins (MRPs). Most of these functions within the ocular capillary are similar to the blood-brain barrier (BBB) functions that controls the inward and/or outward traverse of molecules into brain.10-13 It should be noted that, similar to any other biological barriers,10 the blockade function of the ocular barriers vary significantly. The bio-physiologic nature and barrier functions of the ocular barriers such as blood aqueous barrier (BAB) formed by the endothelial cells in the iris and the blood-retinal barrier (BRB) formed by the retinal inner capillary endothelial cells show different pattern and degree of impediments. This assumption can be proven by the systemic administration of ocular drugs, after which the concentration of drug in the aqueous humor is significantly higher than the vitreous humor. This clearly indicates that the BRB represents much more restrictive barrier functions to drug penetration in comparison with the BAB. While the endothelia of choroid is largely fenestrated, the retinal capillary endothelia (RCE) represent an inner tight barrier which together with the outer barrier formed by the retinal pigmented epithelia (RPE) control the traverse of blood-borne molecules into the posterior segment of the eye.



Fig. 2
  Schematic demonstration of the anatomy and the biological membranes and barriers of the eye. Panels A, B, C and D represent the corneal epithelial barrier (CEB), the blood aqueous barrier (BAB), the biostructures of retina, and the blood-retinal barriers (BRB) both inner endothelial and outer pigmented epithelial barriers. The hemostasis of eye is performed by several static and dynamic barriers. Tear film is the first physiologic impediment against installed topical pharmaceuticals (0). The cornea forms an excellent obstacle preventing topical drugs to reach the anterior chamber of the eye (1). The conjunctival/scleral route is the most permeable path to the hydrophilic drugs and macromolecules (2). The systemically administered small compounds are able to penetrate from the iris blood vessels into the anterior chamber (3). The administered drugs reached to anterior chamber are subjected to aqueous humor outflow (4). These drugs can be carried away from anterior chamber by venous blood flow (BAB function) after diffusing across the iris surface (5). The systemically administered drugs must cross the BRBs. These drugs must cross the outer retinal barrier, “retinal pigment epithelia (RPE)” and the inner retinal barrier, “retinal capillary endothelia (RCE)” (6). For intravitreal delivery, drugs can directly be injected into the vitreous (7). Drugs can be removed from the vitreous away by the retinal blood vessels (8). Drugs within the vitreous can be diffused into the anterior chamber (9).


Similar to the BBB that represents a tight barrier as coop with pericytes and astrocytes,14,15 in the retina pericytes and Müller cells interact with the RCE and also contribute to the establishment of the BRB through production of biofactors such as angiopoietin-1 that promote a well-developed junctional complex and endothelial barrier formation. These endothelial cells secrete platelet-derived growth factor beta (PDGF-B) to harness and maintain pericytes by activating Akt, whose activity is the basis of the cell survival.16 Perhaps, the perfect barrier functions of BRB is based on dual functions of both inner and outer barriers of retina. All these complex biological systems create the anatomical architectural hallmarks of the eye.



Technically, as the mostly used ocular pharmaceuticals, the topical dosage forms usually in the forms of solutions and semisolids are routinely locally administered. However, given that most of these medications can be easily washed away from the ocular surface, their administrations result in markedly low bioavailability failing to reach the posterior segments and hence the intended pharmacological effects do not occur. Further, the systemic delivery of ocular drugs into posterior segment of the eye often fails because of the excellent barrier function of BRB. Since the current strategies upon efficiently delivery of the ocular drugs to the site of action within the eye and treat the ocular diseases provide limited successes, intraocular drug delivery and targeted therapy of the ophthalmic diseases appear to be very challenging. At the moment, the intravitreal injection is the main treatment modality of the disabling ocular diseases such as the age-related macular degeneration (AMD) that is basically treated by anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapies including pegaptanib (Macugen), ranibizumab (Lucentis) and bevacizumab (Avastin).17-20 Nevertheless, such strategy is an invasive treatment modality that may be inevitably associated with some serious adverse consequences. Systemic administrations are also considered as suitable methods for a number of pharmaceuticals that possess deisred physicochemical and biopharmaceutical characteristics. The ocular diseases pharmacotherapy via subconjunctival and periocular (sub-Tenon’s and peribulbar) routes are deemed to provide prolonged pharmacologic impacts with low toxicity. The uses of conventional dosage forms in the ocular diseases, despite showing some benefits, have some pitfalls including (a) necessity for the repetitive use of medicament that results in a poor patient compliance, (b) difficulty of insertion in the case of ocular inserts, and (c) being considered as an invasive approach when injected/implanted that is also associated with some tissue damages too. Fig. 3 represents the currently codified routes of drug administration for the ophthalmic diseases.



Fig. 3
 Main routes for the administration of ophthalmologic medicaments. Administered ophthalmologic drugs face with several important physiologic and anatomic modulation and hindrance that make the eye exceedingly impermeable to exogenous substances, including the corneal epithelial barrier against topical dosage forms, non-corneal structures inability in absorption of foreign compounds, lacrimation, effective drainage through the nasolacrimal system and the excellent function of inner endothelial and outer epithelial barriers of retina. Drug administration to the eye is accomplished through non-invasive or invasive methods codified by the US FDA.

Challenges to reach the anterior segment of the eye

To reach the desired target sites of the eye either locally or systemically, the ocular drugs must cross the ocular static, dynamic and metabolic functions. For instance, DuraSite system can be customized to deliver a wide variety of potential drug agents, which has been developed by InSitVision Inc. DuraSite™ is a drug delivery vehicle that enables stabilization of small molecules in a polymeric mucoadhesive matrix that has been used as a carrier for several ophthalmic drugs including azithromycin (AzaSite PlusTM; ISV-502), dexamethasone (DexaSiteTM; ISV-305), bromfenac (BromSiteTM; ISV-303), tetracycline (ISV-102) and prostaglandin (ISV-620; ISV-215). Likewise, Table 1 represents some of the recently developed ophthalmic medicines used for treatment of ocular diseases in the anterior segment of the eye.



Table 1
 
The recently developed ophthalmic medicines for the anterior segment of the eye


Drug, dosage form
	
Brand, manufacturer or stage of development
	
Clinical indication
	
Main excipient(s)
	
Ref
	

Azithromycin
Topical ophthalmic solution
	AzaSite™, Inspire Pharmaceuticals Inc.	Bacterial conjunctivitis 	DuraSite® drug delivery technology, Polycarbophil	
21,22
	
Azithromycin/Dexamethasone, Topical ophthalmic solution 	AzaSite Plus™ (ISV-502), InSite Vision Inc.	Blepharoconjunctivitis 	DuraSite® drug delivery technology, Polycarbophil	
23
	

Bromfenac
Topical ophthalmic solution
	BromSite™ (ISV-303); InSite Vision Inc. 	Ocular inflammation; Pain; Cataract	DuraSite® drug delivery technology, Polycarbophil	
24,25
	

Dexamethasone,
Topical ophthalmic solution
	DexaSite™(ISV-305); InSite Vision Inc.	Ocular inflammation such as blepharitis	DuraSite® drug delivery technology, Polycarbophil	
24
	

Timolol maleate
Topical ophthalmic gelling vehicle
	Rysmon™ TG; Wakamoto Pharmaceutical Co.	Glaucoma; ocular hypertension	Thermoresponsive gel 	
26,27
	

Timolol maleate 
Topical ophthalmic solution
	Various brands and pharmaceutical companies (Glunil, Lotim Plus, Xalacom, Misopt, Latocom)	Glaucoma	Hydroxpropyl methylcellulose 	-	

Betaxolol 
Topical ophthalmic solution
	Betoptic S™; Alcon	Glaucoma 	Amberlite® IRP-69 	
28-30
	

Tafluprost 
Ophthalmic solution
	DE-085; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	Glaucoma, ocular hypertension	Solution 	
31
	

Lomerizine HCl
Ophthalmic solution
	DE-090; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	Glaucoma, ocular hypertension	Solution 	-	

Tafluprost/timolol maleate
Ophthalmic solution
	DE-111; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	Glaucoma, ocular hypertension	Solution 	-	

Adenosine A2A
Ophthalmic solution
	DE-112; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	Open-angle glaucoma, ocular hypertension	Solution 	-	

Latanoprost
topical ophthalmic emulsion
	Catioprost™; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	
Glaucoma and ocular
hypertension
	Cationic emulsion	
32
	

Tobramycin/Dexamethasone 
Topical ophthalmic solution
	TobraDex™ ST 	Blepharitis 	Xanthan gum 	
33,34
	
Cationic ophthalmic emulsion	Cationorm™, Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	Dry eye symptoms	Cationic emulsion 	
35,36
	

Cyclosporine 
Cationic ophthalmic emulsion
	Vekacia™; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	Vernal keratoconjunctivitis	Cationic emulsion	
37
	

Cyclosporine 
Cationic ophthalmic emulsion
	Cyclokat™; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	
Dry eye
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis
	Cationic emulsion	
38
	

Epinastine HCl
Ophthalmic solution
	DE-114; Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co., Ltd	Allergic conjunctivitis	Solution 	-	

Peptide combination
Ophthalmic solution
	DE-105; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	Persistent corneal epithelial defect	Solution 	-	

Diquafosol sodium
Ophthalmic solution
	DE-089; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	
Corneal/Conjunctival disease
(Dry eye)
	Solution	
39
	

Rivoglitazone
Ophthalmic suspension
	DE-101; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	
Corneal/Conjunctival disease
(Dry eye)
	Suspension 	
	

Ketotifen 
Soft contact lens
	
	Allergic conjunctivitis	Poly(HEMA-co-AA-co-AM-co-NVP-co-PEG200DMA) soft contact lenses	
40
	

Latanoprost 
Subconjunctival insert
	
	Glaucoma, ocular hypertension	Various polymers	
41
	

Cyclosporine
Episcleral implant
	Lucida (LX201), Lux Biosciences, Inc.	
Aeratoconjunctivitis 

	
Biosilicone 

	
42
	

Impacts of corneal barrier


Topically applied drugs face various static (corneal epithelium, corneal stroma, and blood–aqueous barrier) and dynamic (conjunctival blood flow, lymph flow, and tear drainage) barrier functions of the anterior segment while the involved cells are able to control trafficking of the penetrated drugs through regulating the expression of inward and outward transport machineries and even pose metabolic functions on them.1 Such biological structures can selectively control the transportation of substances within the eye, in which the epithelial and/or endothelial cells are sealed by the tight junctional complexes. Fig. 4 schematically illustrates the corneal barrier.



Fig. 4
 Schematic illustration of the corneal structure. The corneal epithelial cells form 5-6 layers of cells composed of superficial, wing and basal cells creating the static barrier of the cornea. Corneal epithelial barrier (CEB) house some important transport machineries that function in favor of mechanism of CEB through selective regulation of inward and outward traverse of exogenous substances. The passive diffusion of lipophilic compounds as transcellular passage is the main drug penetration path into the anterior segment.


The layers of corneal epithelial cells (i.e., superficial, wing and basal cells) forms an excellent tight barrier restrictiveness, in which functional expression of tight junctions prevent paracellular trafficking of topical drugs into the anterior segment while the transcellular trafficking of lipophilic drugs may face with selective modulations of carrier-mediated transporters such as P-gp.



Tear film and lacrimation


It should be noted that the amount and composition of the tear film (the so-called tearing or lacrimation) have profound impact on the healthiness of the ocular surface including the cornea and the conjunctiva, and is largely tightly controlled by the regulation of the orbital glands and also the secretion capacity of the ocular surface epithelia.43 Anatomically, the organelles involved in tearing include lacrimal gland, superior and inferior lacrimal puncta, lacrimal sac, superior and inferior lacrimal canals and nasolacrimal canal.



The lightly buffered aqueous fluid forms the tear film (pH ~7.2–7.5) on the surface of the cornea. Under normal condition, when the ophthalmic medicine is used it can be washed away by the normal physiologic function of tear film that has a turnover rate of 15%-30% per min with the tear volume restoration of 2-3 min, resulting in loss of the applied medicine within the first 15–30 seconds. As a result, the bioavailability of localized therapy in ocular diseases is very low (less than 5%), in large part because of lacrimation and poor drug penetration. In addition, the penetrated drug molecules are also subjected to the absorption by the conjunctival sac and drainage through the nasal cavity and adsorption by the capillaries of the iris.44-46 To overcome such physiologic impediments, nanoscaled medications such as nanosuspension, nanoemulsions and nanoparticles which are able to remain within the local target tissues for a longer period of time or to control the release of encapsulated/incorporated drugs are imperative.47-53 Further, it should be noted that the drug release pattern from nanoscaled formulations is largely dependent upon the physicochemical properties of carriers and drugs. The tear film (with a pH range of 7.3–7.7) is composed of nutrients, electrolytes, proteins, lipids and mucin. It maintains the health of the cornea and conjunctiva, in which the tear proteins (e.g., lysozyme, secretory immunoglobulin IgA, lactoferrin, lipocalin, and peroxidase) provide anti-bacterial/viral potential.54 So far, various formulations have been devised to circumvent these physiologic impediments such as gel-forming systems (e.g., Timoptol-LA and Timoptol-XE, used to treat glaucoma) and mucoadhesives polymers/liposomes and microdiscs, which are also able to prolong the desired pharmacologic activities of the incorporated drug molecules within ocular tissue.55-64 For example, to improve the ocular bioavailability of ciprofloxacin hydrochloride (CPX), mucoadhesive chitosan (CS)-coated liposomes were formulated by means of the thin film hydration technique using L-alpha-phosphatidylcholine (PC), cholesterol (CH), stearylamine (SA) and dicetyl phosphate (DP), for which CS was used to coat the liposomes.61 This study revealed a prolonged in vitro release of CPX from the CS-coated liposomes and a high bioavailability of ciprofloxacin. In another study, CS or Carbopol (CP) coated niosomal timolol maleate formulations as mucoadhesive ophathalmic drug delivery systems were developed and pharmacodynamically evaluated in albino rabbits through assessing the intraocular pressure (IOP) by a non-contact pneumatonometer.65 As compared to a commercially available in situ gel-forming solution of timolol (Timolet GFS, 0.5%; Sun Pharma), it was found that CS and CP coated niosomes carrying timolol maleate can extend the drug release for up to 8 h and 6 h respectively, and decreasing the cardiovascular adverse reaction of drug. All these highlight that mucoadhesive ophthalmic formulations, in particular as nanosystems (NSs), can provide a better treatment modality for controlled and prolonged delivery of drugs into the anterior segment of the eye.



Corneal and/or noncorneal routes


The corneal and/or noncorneal are the main routes for the local drug delivery to the eye,56,66-69 hence advanced biocompatible stimuli-responsive formulations as well as biodegradable implants70,71 may provide much safer methods. However, it should be noted that drug delivery across the conjunctiva and sclera into the intraocular tissues is low in large part because of the functional presence of the local capillary beds that removes the drug from target sites to the general circulation. Despite such pitfall, many drugs (e.g., timolol maleate, gentamicin, and prostaglandin PGF2α) have poor corneal permeability, and hence intraocular delivery via the conjunctiva and sclera may be the best choice in particular when the subconjunctival implants are used as the drug depot.70,72 Peng et al engineered two microfilms using poly [d,l-lactide-co-glycolide] (PLGA) and poly[d,l-lactide-co-caprolactone] (PLC) and evaluated their biocompatibility in rabits upon subconjunctival implantation. They reported that both microfilms showed degradation and surface erosion kinetics with no significant inflammation or vascularization as tested by serial slit-lamp microscopy.



Blood-aqueous barrier


In anterior segment of the eye, the endothelium of the iris/ciliary blood vessels and the non-pigmented epithelium of the ciliary body cell layers form the BAB that displays tight junctional complexes (Fig. 2). The main function of this regulating barrier is to selectively control of the traverse of solutes between the posterior and anterior segments, maintaining the transparency of the eye and the chemical composition of the ocular fluids.73 It should be pointed out that the capillaries of the ciliary are fenestrated and leaky to macromolecules such as horse radish peroxidase (HRP) with molecular weight of 40 kDa. The microvasculature barrier of iris that controls the travers of the plasma proteins into the aqueous humor is tight,74 while the traverse of substances from the aqueous humor into the systemic circulation through the capillary endothelia of iris is less restricted and permeated drugs into the aqueous humor can be washed away from the anterior segment by the iris blood vessels.75 In the anterior segment, small lipophilic drugs are prone to entering into the uveal blood circulation via BAB and subsequent elimination much more rapidly than hydrophilic drugs and macromolecules whose elimination occur solely by aqueous humor turnover. In fact, because of the continuous drainage of the aqueous humor with turnover rate of 2.0–3.0 mL/min, drugs within the anterior segment are not able to enter the posterior segment. Taken all, the locally administered drugs are not able to reach beyond the anterior segment, failing to provide required pharmacological concentration in the posterior segment components such as vitreous, retina and choroid.76 The repeated systemic and intravitreal injections appear to be the remaining options in the clinic that are also associated with some inevitable consequences.


Controlled drug delivery to anterior segment of the eye

Table 2 represents the FDA approved ophthalmologic drugs from 2000 to 2016. Several advanced medical devices and implants have been clinically examined for their clinical potentials. For example, Lacrisert, a sterile hydroxypropyl cellulose insert, has wieldy been used in the inferior cul-de-sac of the eye for lubricating, stabilizing and thickening the precorneal tear film and prolonging the tear film breakup in patients with dry eye states and keratoconjunctivitis sicca.77-79 Accordingly, a study upon the efficacy of lacrisert in subsets of patients (418 patients including 86 contact lens wearers, 79 with cataract diagnosis, 52 with prior cataract surgery, 22 with prior laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis, and 15 with glaucoma) with dry eye syndrome has resulted in significant improvement in the quality of life.79



Table 2
 
FDA approved drugs for ophthalmologic applications (from 2000 to 2016)


Drug
	
Clinical indication
	
Brand, manufacturer
	
Approved year
	
Tasimelteon	Treatment of non-24-hour sleep-wake disorder in the totally blind	Hetlioz ™,Vanda Pharmaceuticals	January 2014	
Phenylephrine and ketorolac injection	For use during eye surgery to prevent intraoperative miosis and reduce post-operative pain	Omidria™,Omeros	June 2014	
Sweet Vernal, Orchard, Perennial Rye, Timothy and Kentucky Blue Grass Mixed Pollens Allergen Extract	Treatment of grass pollen-induced allergic rhinitis with or without conjunctivitis	Oralair™,Greer Labs	April 2014	
Cysteamine hydrochloride	Treatment of corneal cystine crystal accumulation due to cystinosis	Cystaran™,Sigma Tau Pharmaceuticals	October 2012	
Ocriplasmin	Treatment of symptomatic vitreomacular adhesion	Jetrea™,Thrombogenics	October 2012	
Ranibizumab injection	Treatment of diabetic macular edema	Lucentis™, Genentech	August 2012	
Tafluprost ophthalmic solution	Treatment of elevated intraocular pressure	Zioptan ™, Merck	February 2012	
Aflibercept	Treatment of neovascular (wet) age-related macular degeneration	Eylea™, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals	November 2011	
Gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution	Treatment of bacterial conjunctivitis	Zymaxid™,Allergan	May 2010	
Ketorolac tromethamine	Treatment of pain and inflammation following cataract surgery	Acuvail ™,Allergan	July 2009	
Bepotastine besilate ophthalmic solution	Treatment of itching associated with allergic conjunctivitis	Bepreve™,Ista Pharmaceuticals	September 2009	
Besifloxacin ophthalmic suspension	Treatment of bacterial conjunctivitis	Besivance ™, Bausch & Lomb	June 2009	
Dexamethasone	Treatment of macular edema following branch retinal vein occlusion or central retinal vein occlusion	Ozurdex ™, Allergan	June 2009	
Ganciclovir ophthalmic gel	Treatment of acute herpetic keratitis	Zirgan ™, Sirion Therapeutics	September 2009	
Lidocaine hydrochloride	For anesthesia during ophthalmologic procedures	Akten™,Akorn	October 2008	
Azelastine hydrochloride nasal spray	Treatment of seasonal and perennial allergic rhinitis	Astepro™,Meda Pharmaceuticals Inc	October 2008	
Difluprednate	Treatment of inflammation and pain associated with ocular surgery	Durezol™,Sirion Therapeutics	June 2008	
Azithromycin	Treatment of bacterial conjunctivitis	AzaSite™,InSite Vision	April 2007	
Ranibizumab	Treatment of neovascular (wet) age related macular degeneration	Lucentis™,Genentech	June 2006	
Pegaptanib	Treatment of wet age-related macular degeneration	Macugen™,Pfizer / Eyetech Pharmaceuticals	December 2004	
Cyclosporine ophthalmic emulsion	Treatment of low tear production	Restasis™,Allergan	December 2002	
Bimatoprost ophthalmic solution	For the reduction of intraocular pressure in patients with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension	Lumigan™, Allergan	March 2001	
Travoprost ophthalmic solution	For the reduction of elevated intraocular pressure in patients with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension	Travatan™, Alcon	March 2001	
Valganciclovir HCl	For the treatment of cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with AIDS	Valcyte™, Roche	March 2001	
Levobetaxolol hydrochloride suspension	For lowering IOP in patients with chronic open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension	Betaxon™, Alcon	February 2000	
Levofloxacin	For treatment of bacterial conjunctivitis	Quixin™, Santen	August 2000	
Unoprostone isopropyl ophthalmic solution) 0.15%;	For the treatment of open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension	Rescula™, Ciba Vision	August 2000	
Verteporfin for injection	For the treatment of wet age-related macular degeneration (wet AMD)	Visudyne™, QLT	April 2000	

The glaucoma is considered as the second leading cause of blindness, several treatment modalities have been devised to control the glaucoma. Of the anti-glaucoma agents, brimonidine tartrate (BT) is currently widely used, while patient’s compliance to BT therapy is low. To tackle this issue, a BT-liberating ocular insert has been engineered using poly(lactic co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) or polyethylene glycol (PEG) with a linear BT-release profile and smooth surfaces.80 In fact, the ocular insert has significantly advanced the treatment of various eye disease. These DDSs are sterile, thin, multilayered, drug-incorporated solid/semisolid systems that are placed into the cul-de-sac or conjuctival sac. Being composed of a polymeric scaffold, they provide increased ocular residence and sustained-release of ophthalmic drugs. The liberation of drugs from these DDSs, depending on the physicochemical properties of vehicle and drug, may occur by simple diffusion, osmosis, and bioerosion or even stimuli responsive.81



Emergence of the bacterial infection after implanting an artificial corneal scaffold is a well-known issue that brings about serious complication, while the anti-bacterial impacts of conventional antibiotic therapy such as topical vancomycin is limited, in large part because of low bioavailability and high dosing requirement. To prevail such issues, a number of researchers have focused on development of the antibiotic-eluting corneal prosthesis with prolonged liberation of scaffold-impregnated drug molecules. In one study, an artificial corneal scaffold was produced by the incorporation of vancomycin in thick collagen hydrogel, which resulted in a sustained drug elution for up to 7 days. Once implanted intrastromally in rabbit corneas replacing the stromal tissue, the vancomcyin was detectable in the aqueous humor for up to 10 days. Upon intrastromal injection of Staphylococcus aureus inoculate on day 2 postimplantation, the implanted corneas remained clear and nonedematous on day 3 postinfection, showing a marked reduction in S. aureus in comparison with the blank hydrogel-implanted corneas that developed excessive inflammation and edematous. Such drug-eluting corneal implants appear to provide an excellent preventive scaffold on the cornea inhibiting development of bacterial infections.82 As shown in Fig. 5A, the ocular punctal plugs (OPPs, the so-called tear duct plugs) with/without active agents are small medical device inserted into the tear duct to block the duct and possibly release desired drugs.83 The OPPs are usually made from collagen and hence are dissolvable, which can further be advanced to become thermosensitive systems usable for the long-term treatment of the dry eye,84 even though some side effects such as conjunctivitis may limit their applications.85,86 Of the ocular devices, the intacs corneal inserts or implants (Fig. 5B), are considered as a minimally invasive surgical option that are primarily used for the treatment of keratoconus. They have originally been approved by the US FDA for the surgical treatment of mild myopia in 1999, and then in 2006 FDA announced it as a therapeutic device, which have been tested worldwide for the safety and efficacy.87-89 These devices have good potential to become drug-impregnated system to ensure upon the prevention of consequences such as infection.



Fig. 5
 
Selected ocular medical devices. A) Different medical devices used in the anterior segment of the eye, including sight MEMs, soft microeye, intac and punctal plug. The ocular punctal plugs (panel A) and intacs (panel B) used for controlling the dry eye symptoms and Keratoconus, respectively. Punctal plug alone or as impregnated with drug molecules is installed into the punctum. Drug-impregnated punctal plugs can be devised as stimuli sensitive system. Intracorneal rings, intacs, are surgically installed between the layers of the corneal stroma – one crescent ring on each side of the pupil. Readers are directed to see excellent electronic sources in the following URLs from where images were adapted: http://www.allaboutvision.com; http://www.eyedocs.co.uk ; http://www.bouldereyesurgeons.com and http://www.iqlaservision.com as well as MEMS Journal.



Further, flexible silicon hydrogels have been devised as flexible contact lens for continuous daily uses including narafilcon A (Acuvue TruEye), lotrafilcon B (Air Optix) and balafilcon A (BAUSCH & LOMB PureVision™). These silicon based systems can be used to depot necessary ophthalmic drugs.90-94
Table 3 represents some selected ophthalmic drug delivery systems or devices for controlled delivery of medicines to the anterior segment of the eye.



Table 3
 
Selected ophthalmic devices/systems for controlled delivery of medicines to the anterior segment of the eye


Drug delivery system
	
Clinical trial description
	
Clinical indication
	
Sponsor/Collaborator
	

Latanoprost punctal plug 
delivery system (L-PPDS)
	A Study of the L-PPDS With Adjunctive Xalatan® Eye Drops in Subjects With OH or OAG (ID: NCT01037036; Phase 2)	Ocular hypertension (OH); open-angle glaucoma (OAG)	Mati Therapeutics Inc.; QLT Inc.	
Punctal plug 	Safety and Efficacy of Punctal Plug Insertion in Patients With Dry Eye (ID: NCT01684436; Phase 4)	Dry Eye	Allergan	
Perforated Punctal Plugs	Perforated Punctal Plugs for Treatment of Papillary Conjunctivitis in Otherwise Healthy Patients (ID: NCT02503956;)	Epiphora; Conjunctivitis	Rabin Medical Center; Alpha Net Co. Ltd.	
L-PPDS	Comparison of Latanoprost PPDS With Timolol Maleate GFS in Subjects With Ocular Hypertension or Open-Angle Glaucoma (ID: NCT02014142; Phase 2)	OH; OAG	Mati Therapeutics Inc.	
L-PPDS	A Safety Study of the Latanoprost Punctal Plug Delivery System (L-PPDS) in Subjects With Ocular Hypertension or Open Angle Glaucoma (ID: NCT00820300; Phase 2)	Glaucoma; OH; OAG	Mati Therapeutics Inc.	
Sirolimus	Subconjunctival Sirolimus for the Treatment of Autoimmune Active Anterior Uveiti (ID: NCT00876434)	Anterior Uveitis	National Eye Institute (NEI)	
Gamunex-C	Subconjunctival IVIg (Gamunex-C) Injection for Corneal Neovascularization and Inflammatory Conditions (ID: NCT02042027; Phase 1)	
Corneal Neovascularization
Corneal Graft Failure
Anterior Segment Inflammation
	University of Utah	

Timolol; Bimatoprost
Ocular Insert
	Dose-Ranging Study of the Bimatoprost Ocular Insert (ID: NCT02358369; Phase 2)	Glaucoma; OH; OAG	ForSight Vision5, Inc.	
DiscoVisc®; Healon®; Amvisc® Plus	To Compare the Ability of DiscoVisc® OVD to Protect the Corneal Endothelium and Maintain Anterior Chamber Space With Healon® and Amvisc® PLUS During Cataract Surgery (ID: NCT00763360; Phase 4)	Cataract	Alcon Research	

Therefore, de novo treatment modalities such as subconjunctival implants and polymeric depot systems and medical devices that can be injected/implanted directly into the vitreous may provide a long-term sustained-release treatment modalities that are yet to be fully examined for their impacts in a long period use.


Novel intraocular drug delivery technologies

As an axiom, any ophthalmic dosage form must provide suitable biopharmaceutical characteristics as well as an appropriate ocular tolerability in particular when used for treatment of intraocular diseases. However, the topical administration of ophthalmic solutions (nearly 90% as eye drops) fail to meet such criteria. In fact, an excellent restrictiveness of the tight corneal epithelia controls the permeation of drug molecules into the anterior segment of the eye, and the penetrated molecules are significantly washed away by the capillary bed of the iris/ciliary body and/or lacrimation. As a result, very little part of the topically administered drug molecules can reach the posterior segment of the eye. To tackle such shortcomings, we need to use systemic route for the administration of ophthalmic drugs such as anti-glaucoma agents, corticosteroids and certain antibiotics, nevertheless their use through systemic route face with restrictive barrier functionality of BRB as well as BAB. Alternatively, we must advance intravitreal DDSs or devices to be able to deliver the acquired doses of the designated drugs into the posterior segment of the eye and maintain the therapeutic concentration for a long period of time.9


Drug delivery into the posterior segment of the eye

As a thin film light-sensitive tissue, the retina covers the entire inner wall of the eye. The retina includes two main biological barriers that control the entrance of blood-circulating substances into the posterior segment. Such biological barriers together with the functional presence of BAB make drug delivery into the posterior segment a very challenging issue.



Anatomically, in addition to the retinal endothelial cells that form the BRB, the inner part of retina encompasses several cells and tissue including neural cells and glial cells (i.e., Müller cells, astrocytes, microglial cells and oligodendroglial cells). While within the middle part of the retina the photoreceptor cells (rods and cons) are located over the epithelial cells, the outmost part of the retina includes a single layer of specialized pigmented cuboidal epithelial cells that form the excellent impediment function of RPE barrier. The impediment functions of the RPE and BRB are tightly coupled within retina, hence these two barriers of retina play imperative roles in intravitreal drug delivery and targeting. Fig. 6 shows the cellular organization of the retina.



Fig. 6
 The retinal cellular structure. A) The inner blood retinal endothelial cells (RECs) form the blood-retinal barrier (BRB). B) The outer pigmented epithelial cells (PECs) form the retinal pigmented epithelial barrier (PREB). As polarized cells, both retinal endothelial and pigmented epithelial cells possess tight junctions and traverse of nutrients are selectively controlled by transport machineries as carrier-mediated transportation and receptor-mediated transportation.


In early 1990s, to achieve much greater compliance, some important sustained-release ophthalmologic DDSs were developed to control ocular diseases. Since then, few success story encouraged researchers to continue on developing more advanced DDSs for the targeted therapy of ocular ailments. In 1996, Vitrasert™ (ganciclovir-loaded implant) was approved for the treatment of cytomegalovirus retinitis that is associated with late-stage AIDS causing blindness. This DDS liberates the ganciclovir directly to the target site for a long period of time up to 6-8 months, which has successfully been used for the treatment of a large number of patients over the past decades. In addition to VitrasertTM, sustained DDSs can be used as an intravitreal implants including Retisert™ (ﬂuocinolone-loaded implant) and Iluvien™ (ﬂuocinolone-loaded implant) whose drug liberation occurs for up to 3 years, while similar DDSs seem to be necessary for the anterior segment of the eye too.4 These developments appear as the resurgence of advanced intravitreal DDSs shown schematically in Fig. 7.



Fig. 7
 Advanced intravitreal drug delivery systems and devices.

Advanced intravitreal drug delivery systems and devices

Ideally, liberation of the ophthalmic drugs from the DDS/delivery device in the posterior segment of the eye should be performed as sustained/controlled-release or even on-demand by an external stimuli. Most of these sustained-release DDSs are injected intravitreally once without any further needs for repeated injections, while some of the intravitreal devices such as micropumps are refillable systems. Of these, the nanoscaled biodegradable DDSs and sol-gel injectable hydrogels are novel effective ophthalmologic formulations that are deemed to provide maximal clinical benefits with minimal side effects. So far a number of advanced DDSs and devices has significantly improved the intravitreal drug delivery and targeting. Among them, smart NSs were shown to be able to efficiently circumvent the related barriers, enter into the posterior segment of the eye and pose minimal adverse reactions.95 Selected advanced DDSs and devices used to deliver ocular drugs into the posterior segment of the eye are shown in Fig. 7 and some selected forms are listed in Table 4.



Table 4
 
Selected ophthalmic devices/systems for controlled delivery of medicines to the posterior segment of the eye


Drug, dosage form
	
Brand, manufacturer or stage of development
	
Clinical indication
	
Main excipient/device
	

Betamethasone
Sub-Tenon injection of sustained-release microsphere
	DE-102; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. and Oakwood Laboratories	Macular edema associated with diabetes and branch retinal vein occlusion	Biodegradable microspheres	

Sirolimus
Intravitreal injections
	DE-109; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. and Oakwood Laboratories	Non-infectious uveitis of the posterior eye	A slowly dissolving depot	
Biosilicon DDS for small molecules and macromolecules	Thethadur; pSivida Corp.	Intraocular diseases	Honeycomblike nanostructured bioerodible/non-erodible porous silicon	
Ganciclovir ophthalmic implant	Vitrasert™, Zirgan™; pSivida Corp.	Cytomegalovirus (CMV) ocular infection 	Sustained-release silicon implant	
Fuocinolone-loaded ophthalmic implant	Retisert™; pSivida Corp.	Chronic non-infectious posterior uveitis	Sustained-release silicon implant	
Fuocinolone-loaded ophthalmic implant	Iluvien™; pSivida Corp. 	Chronic non-infectious posterior uveitis	Sustained-release silicon implant	

Lntanoprost 
ophthalmic implant
	Durasert™; pSivida Corp. 	Ocular hypertension and glaucoma	Sustained-release biodegradable implant	

dexamethasone 
Intravitreal implant
	Ozurdex™; Allergan, Inc.	Diabetic macular edema (DME)	Sustained-release silicon implant	

Dexamethasone 
Injectable ophthalmic emulsion
	Cortiject™; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.	DME; noninfectious inflammation of the uvea; central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO)	Injectable ophthalmic emulsion containing a corticosteroid prodrug	
Triamcinolone ophthalmic injection	IBI-20089 Verisome™; Icon Bioscience	Cystoid macular edema (CME)	Sustained-release intravitreal lipid-based DDS as verisome (translucent liquid to form gel in the eye)	
BioSilicon-based protein delivery system	Tethadur; pSivida Corp.	Neuroprotective agents	Sustained-release biodegradable (PLGA)/biosilicon implant	

Brimonidine 
Intravitreal implant
	NCT02087085; Allergan Inc.	Geographic atrophy, Macular degeneration	Intravitreal Implant	

Bimatoprost 
Sustained-release DDS
	NCT02250651; Allergan Inc.	
Glaucoma, Open-Angle
Ocular Hypertension
	Sustained-release DDS	

triamcinolone acetonide
Sustained-release implant
	I-vation™; Surmodics Inc.	DME	
Sustained-release DDS 
poly(methyl methacrylate), ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymer
	
Laser activated injectable DDS	ODTx	Different diseases in posterior segment of the eye	Controled drug delivery by activating specific reservoirs	

Ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) producing cells
Semipermeable
hollow fiber membrane
	Renexus (NT-501); Renexus Group & Noah Group	Atrophic age-relate macular degeneration (AMD)	
Semipermeable
hollow fiber membrane with ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) producing cells [retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)]
	
VEGF receptor Fc-fusion protein (VEGFR-Fc)-releasing cells	NT-503; Neurotech	AMD	
Semipermeable
hollow fiber membrane with ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) producing cells [retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)]
	

Triamcinolone acetonide (TA)
Injection device for DDS
	iTrack microcatheter; iScience Interventional	neovascular AMD	Injection device for suprachoroidal delivery of TA	
Refilled with drug solution to provide long-term pharmacotherapy	
	Different diseases in posterior segment of the eye	Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) as refillable DDD	

Ranibizumab
Refillable port drug delivery system (PDS)
	Genentech, ForSight Vision 4 Inc.	ADM	Ranibizumab controlled-release PDS	

Ocular nanomedicines


Having considered the biological impediments in the posterior segment of the eye imposed mainly by the retinal barriers, the ocular nanomedicines can locally/systemically be administered for the delivery of the drug molecules into the vitreous depending on their size and architecture. These nanoscaled DDSs are deemed to provide sustained/controlled liberation of drugs and prolonged pharmacologic impacts. Such objective can be achieved by localized retention in the cul-de-sac, where the entrapped drug can be liberated based on a simple diffusion mechanism or by the means of an external stimuli such as photodynamic therapies from conveying NS. The nanoscaled ophthalmic formulations can provide longer exposure time at the ocular surface by confronting the clearance mechanisms of the eye providing more drug concentration , reducing the dose and frequency of drug administration,96 a number of various nanostructured DDSs have also been developed for the intravitreal applications.97,98 Thus far, different advanced polymer-/lipid-based soft matters have been used for development of a number of nanostructures including nanoparticles (NPs), nanomicelles, nanoemulsions, nanosuspensions, nanocapsules. To attain the best utility of nanomedicines, various parameters should be considered including (a) lipophilic-hydrophilic properties of the advanced materials used, (b) the biocompatibility of the advanced soft materials in association with ocular tissues such as precorneal pocket and subconjunctival tissue, (c) longevity and durability of the NS in biological microenvironment of the eye, (d) drug release profile with or without external stimuli, and (e) the retention efficiency of the NS in the ocular tissues such as precorneal pocket.99-103 To achieve an optimized effect in the case of topical nanoformulations, it is highly desirable to engineer bioadhesive/mucoadhesive NSs to enhance the reactivity and bioavailability of NSs in the ocular cul-de-sac.104 Such aims seem to be achievable by using various micellar colloidal NSs, emulsion nanoformulation, biodegradable polymeric NPs, hydrogel based NSs.105 For instance, amphiphilic molecules with hydrophilic head and hydrophobic tail termed as surfactants can be used for formulation of nanomicelles. These polarized molecules can be found in different status as dipolar/zwitterionic (e.g., dioctanoyl phosphatidyl choline), charged or anionic/cationic (e.g., sodium dodecyl sulfate as an anionic surfactant; dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide as a cationic surfactant), or neutral/non-ionic (e.g., ethylene oxide (N-dodecyl; tetra, C12E4), vitamin E TPGS [d-alpha tocopheryl polyethylene glycol (PEG) 1000 succinate], octoxynol-40). Nanosized micelles are formed when surfactants are dissolved in water at concentration above critical micelle concentration (CMC) under sonication/agitation, showing different architecture (spherical, cylindrical, or planar/discs/bilayers) depending on the aggregation driving force(s). These NSs can be used for controlled topical/intraocular drug delivery.99



Zhang et al. formulated dexamethasone (Dex)-loaded PLGA NPs (Dex-NPs) and evaluated their pharmacokinetics and tolerability in rabbits after intravitreal injection.106 Based on some key ophthalmic examinations (e.g., intraocular pressure measurement, and B-scan ocular ultrasonography), they claimed that the injection of Dex-NPs induce no abnormalities even after 50 days post-injection in rabbits, while the Dex-NPs were able to maintain a sustained liberation of drug for a long period of time (i.e., up to 50 days) in vitreous with a fairly constant level of drug for up to 30 days. The rabbits treated with Dex-NPs showed significantly higher bioavailability of the drug as compared the control group injected with Dex alone.



Jo et al. studied the antiangiogenic impacts of silicate nanoparticles (SiNPs) on the retinal neovascularization, and showed that the SiNPs impose no direct toxicity in the retinal tissues. The intravitreal injection of nanoparticles was able to substantially reduce the anomalous retinal angiogenesis in oxygen-induced retinopathy mice. They claimed that the SiNPs can markedly inhibit the VEGF-elicited angiogenesis through blockage of activation ERK 1/2.107



On the basis that the intravitreal injection of DDSs/implants demands relatively large 22 gauge needle, novel dipeptide (phenylalanine-alpha,beta-dehydrophenylalanine; Phe-Phe) based nanotubes (PNTs) were designed by Panda et al.108 The self-assembled PNTs (with a diameter of ~15-30 nm and a length of ~1500 nm) were designed for the intravitreal delivery of pazopanib with suitable loading efficiency and bioavailability. No cytotoxic impacts were found on the human retinal pigment epithelial (ARPE-19) cells by the PNTs. Once injected, after a period of 15 days in vivo, the PNTs were found to retain the drug levels in the vitreous humor, retina, and choroid-RPE respectively 4.5, 5, and 2.5-folds higher than that of the plain drug.



To treat the macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy, intravitreal injections every 4-8 weeks are inevitable – a treatment modality that is undoubtedly considers as an invasive uncomfortable retinal damaging intervention. Hence, Huu et al developed a novel stimuli-responsive NP-based reservoir platform for the delivery of nintedanib (BIBF 1120) which is a small molecule angiogenesis inhibitor.109 To this end, the researchers capitalized on a far ultraviolet (UV) light-degradable polymer to be able to trigger the liberation of the drug molecules on-demand. Once injected, the NSs were found to be able to keep the encapsulated drug molecules in the vitreous for up to 30 weeks without inducing significant inadvertent side effects, while the liberation of cargo drug molecules was plausible through emission of far UV. They showed that the choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in rats can be suppressed 10 weeks after injection of nintedanib carrying NPs.



Hydrogels as novel intravitreal DDSs


Hydrogels are defined as crosslinked polymeric networks capable of holding large quantities of water or other biological fluids due to the presence of hydrophilic groups or domains within their porous polymeric structure. They are synthesized from both naturally and synthetic polymers by chemical or physical crosslinking methods.110-112 The key properties associated with hydrogels are their remarkable characteristics such as hydrophilicity, flexibility, elasticity and high water content. All these features make them suitable entities with broad application spectra in different biomedical fields such as tissue engineering, regenerative medicine, protein separation, matrices for cell encapsulation and devices for the controlled release of drugs and proteins.



In general, hydrogels show great compatibility with biological settings and their hydrophilic surface has a low interfacial free energy in contact with body fluids. Such characteristics make hydrogels to show low tendency of adhering to proteins and cells, and hence less aggregation. Moreover, the soft and rubbery nature of the hydrogels minimizes irritation to surrounding tissue.112-115 Of the hydrogels, the stimuli-responsive or environmentally-sensitive hydrogels (the so-called smart hydrogels) offer the fantastic swelling – deswelling characteristics (as volume collapse or phase transition) in response to presented physical or chemical stimuli (Fig. 8). They have been used in diverse applications including production of artificial muscles, biomimetic biosensor/bioactuator, immobilization of enzymes and cells, bioseparation and self-regulated DDSs. In situ gel formation makes hydrogels very favorable for the delivery of ophthalmic small and macromolecular drugs as well as tissue engineering. This system provides safe applications in vivo.116,117 Multiple stimuli-responsive hydrogels have attracted significant research interest because the most pH- and temperature-sensitive dual functional systems have a great importance in biological applications and can mimic the responsive macromolecules founds in nature.118,119



Fig. 8
  Schematic representation of stimuli-responsive smart hydrogels.


As for the ocular applications, it should be noted that the stroma of the cornea is a naturally occurring hydrogel (a water-swollen polymer network), and the basic physicochemical principle of a swelling hydrogel should be applicable to this layer.120 Further, it should be also pointed out that the vitreous humor as a clear gel fills the posterior segment of the eye. It is composed of 98%-99% water and a type of collagen called vitrosin that forms a network of collagen type II fibrils in association with glycosaminoglycan, hyaluronan, opticin (a protein belonging to a small leucine-rich repeat protein family), and a wide spectra of other soluble proteins, as a result its viscosity is 2-4 folds higher than that of water. The vitreous humor, unlike the continuously replenished aqueous humor, has a gelatinous consistency and is stagnant. Taken all, the intravitreal hydrogels should mimic such characteristics.



Among various types of polymers, for the intraocular drug delivery, the bioadhesive polymers are deemed to provide a better means. Of these, hydroxypropyl cellulose, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, chitosan, dextran and poly(acrylic acid) derivatives (e.g., carbomer 934 and polycarbophil) have been reported as the most appropriate polymers.



In addition, the high viscosity of the carbomer hydrogels results in the prolonged retention, improving the ocular bioavailability of some drugs. In addition to the effective treatment of edema on the ocular surface121-123 and applications in soft silicone lenses using polymers like poly (2–hydroxyethyl methacrylate), the hydrogels have been used for the intravitreal delivery of active pharmaceutical agents such as small molecules and macromolecules.124-130



Intravitreal implants and devices


In an ideal world, the intravitreal DDSs/DDDs should be degraded imposing trivial/no detrimental impacts on the cells/tissue in the posterior segment of the eye. Despite usefulness of the nanoscaled biodegradable NSs in treatment of ocular diseases, some devices used for intravitreal drug delivery are non-biodegradable such as silicone implants/inserts and micro-pumps (Fig. 7). These devices, which contain drug molecules or drug-producing cells, can be either injected or surgically installed in the vitreous to deliver the designated drug. Here, we provide some concise information upon these implants/devices.



Encapsulated cell technology (ECT)


Renexus (NT-501) developed by Neurotech Pharmaceuticals offers an encapsulated cell technology that provides extracellular delivery of ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF). The system encompasses the genetically modified human retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells (NTC-200 cell line), which can be implanted into the vitreous. As an in-house cellular reactor, the system is able to secrete the recombinant human CNTF and maintain the drug concentration at constant desired doses for a long period of time. RPE cells are mounted on the polyethylene terephthalate yarn scaffold and the produced drug molecules can be released from the device through semipermeable hollow fiber membrane. This ingenious device can protect the mounted exogenous cells from the endogenous immune response of the host while they survive within the vitreous and produce CNTF for inhibition of photoreceptor degradation in patients with retinitis pigmentosa.131-133



Neurotech Pharmaceuticals has also developed another cell-based DSS named NT-503 ECT that encompasses VEGF receptor Fc-fusion protein (VEGFR-Fc)-releasing cells. Having compared to ranibizumab, this cell-based treatment modality showed significantly higher (20-30 folds higher) VEGF neutralization with a drug liberation longevity for up to 1 year in the rabbit vitreous. Based on a phase I and II trial commenced in 2014, this VEGF neutralizing ECT has been being used for the treatment of recurrent CNV secondary to AMD.131



Implants


Here, we provide a concise update on some ocular DDDs that are in clinic or under clinical trial. Of these, I-vation (Surmodics Inc.) is a sustained delivery system that is used as an intravitreal implant to deliver triamcinolone acetonide (TA). It is a titanium helical coil that is coated with poly(methyl methacrylate) and ethylene-vinyl acetate and the polymer coat has been loaded with TA131 Further, On Demand Therapeutics has developed intravitreal non-biodegradable implant called ODTx that contains reservoir of drug molecules whose liberation can be triggered by low-energy laser during eye examination.



In addition to few biodegradable intravitreal NSs (see Table 3), pSivida has developed Thethadur which is porous nanoscaled honeycomblike silicon (biosilicon) or biodegradable polymeric device. It can be loaded with the designated drug molecules (e.g., small molecules and biologics such as antibodies) that can be released in a controlled manner once implanted into the vitreous.



Refillable devices


Of the refillable microelectromechanical systems (MEMs), MicroPumps developed by Replenish Inc. is DDD that can be used for the treatment of chronic and refractory ocular diseases such as DME.



In a study, its safety and surgical feasibility has been evaluated as the first-in-man ocular implant of a novel posterior MicroPump DDD in DME patients, proving its safety for a period of 90 days and possibility for its refiling that makes multiple programmable drug delivery feasible.134 The effectiveness and biocompatibility of the MicroPump DDD has further been followed up in a one-year feasibility study.135 These systems are deemed to last over a 5-year time course before further need for the replacement.


Final remarks and outlook

The eye possesses bio-micro-machineries (i.e., tear film, corneal epithelia, the ciliary epithelium and capillaries of the iris, retina endothelia and epithelia) that selectively restrictively control the entry of exogenous substances (both topical compounds and blood-borne molecules) into the anterior and posterior segments.



Although the restrictive physiological and biological barriers, functionality of the eye retain the normal function of the eye, it makes ocular drug delivery and targeting very challenging.



The locally administered drugs, mostly as topical ophthalmic solutions, must cross the tear film (with fast turnover) and the corneal epithelial barrier. Once entered into the anterior segment, the drug molecules are often subjected to the absorption by the conjunctival sac and the capillaries of the iris.



While the drug molecules in the anterior segment can scarcely enter the posterior segment of the eye, the systemically delivered drugs face with BRB and cannot reach the desired pharmacologic concentration. As a result, the novel DDSs and DDDs aim to elongate the pharmacologic presence of drug molecules in the ocular segments or tissues to perform maximal therapeutic benefits with minimal undesired side effects.



To date, a number of DDSs/DDDs have been used for increasing the bioavailability of drugs in the ocular segments based on nanoscaled colloidal systems,136 nanobioadhesives,137 stimuli-responsive hydrogels,118,138 subconjunctival implants,70,72 refillable DDDs such as MEMs/NEMs-based micropumps and episcleral exoplants139-141 as well as encapsulated cell technology.142 Remarkable characteristics of these systems in extended liberation of drugs in particular for the posterior segment of the eye make some of these advanced systems as the sole treatment modality option for life-devastating diseases such as AMD and DME.



Extra developments are needed to tackle some genetic defects that affect the ocular systems such as mucopolysaccharidoses (MPSs), which are a class of disorders triggered by hereditary genetic defects in lysosomal enzymes resulting in extensive intracellular and extracellular accumulation of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs).143



In the eye, MPSs (e.g., MPS I such as IH/S (Hurler/Scheie) and MPS IH (Hurler) because of deficiency in a-L-iduronidase; MPS VI Maroteaux-Lamy due to deficiency in N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase) manifest as corneal opacification, optic nerve swelling and atrophy, ocular hypertension, and glaucoma.143 To tackle these ocular malfunctions, one powerful, yet simple, approach seems to be the use of injectable stimuli-responsive and transforming hydrogels that can be used for delivery of gene-based nanomedicines into the eye by a single injection. Once injected into the ocular segment/tissue, it can be triggered to liberate the cargo drug molecules on-demand.144



While the advanced treatment modalities for the systemic manifestations of MPSs is bone marrow transplant, the enzyme replacement therapies such as Aldurazyme (laronidase) for MPS I and Naglazyme (galsulfase) for MPS VI appear to be the only treatment modalities for these orphan diseases.



In fact, after proof-of-technologies and several success stories of ocular implants (e.g., Ocusert(1974) for 1 week constant release of pilocarpine from conjunctiva; Vitrasert (1996) for 6 months constant release of ganciclovir from the pars plana area of vitreous; Retisert(2005) for 2.5 years constant release of fluocinolone acetonide; intravitreal injectable biodegradable (Posurdex) and non-biodegradable (Medidur) implants, wouldn’t it be fantastic if we implement these technologies or even the encapsulated cell technology or smart hydrogels and multimodal nanomedicines to treat such diseases?



To achieve such goals, we need to empower the translational medicine researches as well as the leading researchers who tackle these issues through capitalizing on new biomimicry technologies in a holistic manner. Such endeavor needs to be advocated by both governmental and private sectors.


Ethical approval

There is none to be declared.


Competing interests

No competing interests to be disclosed.


Acknowledgments

Authors would like to acknowledge the Research Center for Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology at Tabriz University of Medical Sciences for the financial support.



Review Highlights


 What is current knowledge?


√ Lacrimation, corneal epithelial barrier (CEB) and bloodaqueous
barrier (BAB) restrictedly control entrance of
topically applied pharmaceuticals into the anterior and
posterior segments of the eye.



√ Retinal endothelial and epithelial barriers, together
with BAB, can selectively control traverse of blood-borne
substances and systemically administered pharmaceuticals
into the posterior segment of the eye.



√ Currently used ophthalmic medicines need to be repeatedly
administered to maintain the required concentrations of
drug.



√ Long-acting ocular drug delivery systems (DDSs)
and devices (DDDs) loaded with small molecules or
macromolecules can maintain required intravitreal
concentration for a long period





What is new here?


√ Stimuli-responsive DDSs/DDDs with on-demand drug
liberation potential can provide maximal impacts with
minimal side effects.



√ Nano-scaled targeted DDSs provide much more selective
pharmacological effects.



√ Long-term safety of ocular implants needs to be fully
addressed.
==== Refs
References
1 Cholkar K  Patel SP  Vadlapudi AD  Mitra AK  Novel strategies for anterior segment ocular drug delivery J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2013 29 106 23 10.1089/jop.2012.0200 23215539 
2 Barar J  Asadi M  Mortazavi-Tabatabaei SA  Omidi Y  Ocular drug delivery: impact of in vitro cell culture models Journal of Ophthalmic & Vision Research 2009 4 238 52 23198080 
3 Willoughby CE  Ponzin D  Ferrari S  Lobo A  Landau K  Omidi Y  Anatomy and physiology of the human eye: effects of mucopolysaccharidoses disease on structure and function–a review Clinical & Experimental Ophthalmology 2010 38 2 11 20447093 
4 Kompella UB  Kadam RS  Lee VH  Recent advances in ophthalmic drug delivery Ther Deliv 2010 1 435 56 10.4155/TDE.10.40 21399724 
5 Boddu SH  Gunda S  Earla R  Mitra AK  Ocular microdialysis: a continuous sampling technique to study pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in the eye Bioanalysis 2010 2 487 507 10.4155/bio.10.2 21083257 
6 Tojo K  A pharmacokinetic model for ocular drug delivery Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo) 2004 52 1290 4 15516748 
7 Jones RF  Maurice DM  New methods of measuring the rate of aqueous flow in man with fluorescein Exp Eye Res 1966 5 208 20 10.1016/S0014-4835(66)80009-X 5914653 
8 
Maurice DM, Μισηιµα S. Ocular Pharmacokinetics. In: Sears ML, editor. Pharmacology of the Eye. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1984.

9 Barar J  Javadzadeh AR  Omidi Y  Ocular novel drug delivery: impacts of membranes and barriers Expert Opin Drug Deliv 2008 5 567 81 10.1517/17425247.5.5.567 18491982 
10 
Omidi Y, Gumbleton M. Biological Membranes and Barriers. In: Mahato RI, editor. Biomaterials for Delivery and Targeting of Proteins Nucleic Acids. New York: CRC Press; 2005. p. 232-74.

11 Barar J  Gumbleton M  Asadi M  Omidi Y  Barrier functionality and transport machineries of human ECV304 cells Med Sci Monit 2010 16 BR52 60 20037486 
12 Omidi Y  Campbell L  Barar J  Connell D  Akhtar S  Gumbleton M  Evaluation of the immortalised mouse brain capillary endothelial cell line, bEnd3, as an in vitro blood-brain barrier model for drug uptake and transport studies Brain Res 2003 990 95 112 14568334 
13 Smith M  Omidi Y  Gumbleton M  Primary porcine brain microvascular endothelial cells: biochemical and functional characterisation as a model for drug transport and targeting J Drug Target 2007 15 253 68 10.1080/10611860701288539 17487694 
14 Omidi Y  Barar J  Ahmadian S  Heidari HR  Gumbleton M  Characterization and astrocytic modulation of system L transporters in brain microvasculature endothelial cells Cell Biochem Funct 2008 26 381 91 10.1002/cbf.1455 18210381 
15 Omidi Y  Barar J  Impacts of blood-brain barrier in drug delivery and targeting of brain tumors Bioimpacts 2012 2 5 22 10.5681/bi.2012.002 23678437 
16 Antonetti D  Eye vessels saved by rescuing their pericyte partners Nat Med 2009 15 1248 9 10.1038/nm1109-1248 19893554 
17 Ng EW  Shima DT  Calias P  Cunningham ET  Jr Jr  Guyer DR  Adamis AP  Pegaptanib, a targeted anti-VEGF aptamer for ocular vascular disease Nature reviews Drug discovery 2006 5 123 32 10.1038/nrd1955 16518379 
18 Spitzer MS  Yoeruek E  Sierra A  Wallenfels-Thilo B  Schraermeyer U  Spitzer B   Comparative antiproliferative and cytotoxic profile of bevacizumab (Avastin), pegaptanib (Macugen) and ranibizumab (Lucentis) on different ocular cells Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2007 245 1837 42 10.1007/s00417-007-0568-7 17347807 
19 Ni Z  Hui P  Emerging pharmacologic therapies for wet age-related macular degeneration Ophthalmologica 2009 223 401 10 10.1159/000228926 19622904 
20 Algvere PV  Kvanta A  Seregard S  Shall we use Avastin or Lucentis for ocular neovascularization? Acta Ophthalmol 2008 86 352 5 10.1111/j.1755-3768.2008.01317.x 18498548 
21 Si EC  Cheung PS  Bowman L  Hosseini K  Ocular pharmacokinetics of AzaSite Xtra-2% azithromycin formulated in a DuraSite delivery system Curr Eye Res 2009 34 485 91 19899983 
22 Opitz DL  Harthan JS  Review of Azithromycin Ophthalmic 1% Solution (AzaSite((R))) for the Treatment of Ocular Infections Ophthalmol Eye Dis 2012 4 1 14 10.4137/OED.S7791 23650453 
23 Hosseini K  Hutcheson J  Lindstrom RL  A Phase III clinical study to evaluate the efficacy of combined azithromycin and dexamethasone in the treatment of blepharoconjunctivitis Clin Ophthalmol 2013 7 2225 34 10.2147/OPTH.S52474 24250221 
24 Harris E  Industry Update: The latest developments in therapeutic delivery Ther Del 2013 4 659 65 
25 Hosseini K  Hutcheson J  Bowman L  Aqueous humor concentration of Bromfenac 009%(Bromday) compared with Bromfenac in DuraSite 0075%(Bromsite) in cataract patients undergoing phacoemulsification after 3 days dosing Invest Ophthal Vis Sci 2013 54 5061 
26 Ohno Y  Iga T  Yamada Y  Nagahara M  Araie M  Takayanagi R  Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic analysis of systemic effect of topically applied timolol maleate ophthalmic gelling vehicle (Rysmon TG) Curr Eye Res 2005 30 319 28 10.1080/02713680590923294 16020262 
27 Kawase K  Lin W  Aoyama Y  Yamamoto T  Shimazawa M  Hara H  Effects of timolol-related ophthalmic solutions on cultured human conjunctival cells Jpn J Ophthalmol 2010 54 615 21 10.1007/s10384-010-0881-2 21191725 
28 Trope GE  Liu GS  Basu PK  Toxic effects of topically administered Betagan, Betoptic, and Timoptic on regenerating corneal epithelium J Ocul Pharmacol 1988 4 359 66 3246571 
29 Fry LL  Comparison of the postoperative intraocular pressure with Betagan, Betoptic, Timoptic, Iopidine, Diamox, Pilopine Gel, and Miostat J Cataract Refract Surg 1992 18 14 9 1346539 
30 Yarangumeli A  Kural G  Are there any benefits of Betoptic S (betaxolol HCl ophthalmic suspension) over other beta-blockers in the treatment of glaucoma? Expert Opin Pharmacother 2004 5 1071 81 10.1517/14656566.5.5.1071 15155109 
31 Izumi N  Nagaoka T  Sato E  Mori F  Yoshida A  DE–085 Increases Retinal Blood Flow Invest Ophthal Vis Sci 2004 45 2340 
32 Daull P  Buggage R  Lambert G  Faure MO  Serle J  Wang RF   A comparative study of a preservative-free latanoprost cationic emulsion (Catioprost) and a BAK-preserved latanoprost solution in animal models J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2012 28 515 23 10.1089/jop.2011.0245 22671995 
33 Scoper SV  Kabat AG  Owen GR  Stroman DW  Kabra BP  Faulkner R   Ocular distribution, bactericidal activity and settling characteristics of TobraDex ST ophthalmic suspension compared with TobraDex ophthalmic suspension Adv Ther 2008 25 77 88 10.1007/s12325-008-0019-9 18309465 
34 Potter WS  Nelson LB  Raber IM  Corneal graft rejection in a child and inadvertent substitution of Tobrex for TobraDex Ophthalmic Surg 1990 21 671 2 2250884 
35 Kinnunen K  Kauppinen A  Piippo N  Koistinen A  Toropainen E  Kaarniranta K  Cationorm shows good tolerability on human HCE-2 corneal epithelial cell cultures Exp Eye Res 2014 120 82 9 10.1016/j.exer.2014.01.006 24462278 
36 Pinheiro R  Panfil C  Schrage N  Dutescu RM  Comparison of the lubricant eyedrops Optive(R), Vismed Multi(R), and Cationorm(R) on the corneal healing process in an ex vivo model Eur J Ophthalmol 2015 25 379 84 10.5301/ejo.5000593 25790809 
37 Souza JG  Dias K  Pereira TA  Bernardi DS  Lopez RF  Topical delivery of ocular therapeutics: carrier systems and physical methods J Pharm Pharmacol 2014 66 507 30 24635555 
38 Buggage RR  Amrane M  Ismail D  Deniaud M  Lemp MA  Baudouin C  The Effect of Cyclokat(preservative-free cyclosporine 01% cationic emulsion) on Dry Eye Disease Signs and Symptoms in Sjogren and non-Sjogren Patients with Moderate to Severe DED in a Phase III Randomized Clinical Trial Invest Ophthal Vis Sci 2012 53 576 
39 Colligris B  Crooke A  Huete-Toral F  Pintor J  An update on dry eye disease molecular treatment: advances in drug pipelines Expert Opin Pharmacother 2014 15 1371 90 24773445 
40 Tieppo A  White CJ  Paine AC  Voyles ML  McBride MK  Byrne ME  Sustained in vivo release from imprinted therapeutic contact lenses J Control Release 2012 157 391 7 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.09.087 21982900 
41 Cheng YH  Hung KH  Tsai TH  Lee CJ  Ku RY  Chiu AW   Sustained delivery of latanoprost by thermosensitive chitosan-gelatin-based hydrogel for controlling ocular hypertension Acta Biomater 2014 10 4360 6 10.1016/j.actbio.2014.05.031 24914827 
42 Bock F  Matthaei M  Reinhard T  Bohringer D  Christoph J  Ganslandt T   High-dose subconjunctival cyclosporine a implants do not affect corneal neovascularization after high-risk keratoplasty Ophthalmology 2014 121 1677 82 10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.03.016 24780407 
43 
Dartt DA, Hodges RR, Zoukhri D. Tear and Their Secretion. In: Fischbarg J, editor. The Biology of Eye. New York: Academic Press; 2006. p. 21-82.

44 Leeming JP  Treatment of ocular infections with topical antibacterials Clin Pharmacokinet 1999 37 351 60 10589371 
45 Urtti A  Delivery of antiglaucoma drugs: ocular vs systemic absorption J Ocul Pharmacol 1994 10 349 57 8207339 
46 Hamalainen KM  Kananen K  Auriola S  Kontturi K  Urtti A  Characterization of paracellular and aqueous penetration routes in cornea, conjunctiva, and sclera Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1997 38 627 34 9071216 
47 Souto EB  Doktorovova S  Gonzalez-Mira E  Egea MA  Garcia ML  Feasibility of lipid nanoparticles for ocular delivery of anti-inflammatory drugs Curr Eye Res 2010 35 537 52 10.3109/02713681003760168 20597640 
48 Badawi AA  El-Laithy HM  El Qidra RK  El Mofty H  El dally M  Chitosan based nanocarriers for indomethacin ocular delivery Arch Pharm Res 2008 31 1040 9 10.1007/s12272-001-1266-6 18787795 
49 Ammar HO  Salama HA  Ghorab M  Mahmoud AA  Development of dorzolamide hydrochloride in situ gel nanoemulsion for ocular delivery Drug Development and Industrial Pharmacy 2010 36 1330 9 10.3109/03639041003801885 20545523 
50 Akhter S  Talegaonkar S  Khan ZI  Jain GK  Khar RK  Ahmad FJ  Assessment of ocular pharmacokinetics and safety of Ganciclovir loaded nanoformulations J Biomed Nanotechnol 2011 7 144 5 21485843 
51 Adibkia K  Siahi Shadbad MR  Nokhodchi A  Javadzedeh A  Barzegar-Jalali M  Barar J   Piroxicam nanoparticles for ocular delivery: physicochemical characterization and implementation in endotoxin-induced uveitis J Drug Target 2007 15 407 16 10.1080/10611860701453125 17613659 
52 Adibkia K  Omidi Y  Siahi MR  Javadzadeh AR  Barzegar-Jalali M  Barar J   Inhibition of endotoxin-induced uveitis by methylprednisolone acetate nanosuspension in rabbits J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2007 23 421 32 10.1089/jop.2007.0039 17900230 
53 Barzegar-Jalali M  Adibkia K  Valizadeh H  Shadbad MR  Nokhodchi A  Omidi Y   Kinetic analysis of drug release from nanoparticles J Pharm Pharm Sci 2008 11 167 77 18471378 
54 Fullard RJ  Tucker D  Tear protein composition and the effects of stimulus Adv Exp Med Biol 1994 350 309 14 8030493 
55 Cao Y  Zhang C  Shen W  Cheng Z  Yu LL  Ping Q  Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-chitosan as thermosensitive in situ gel-forming system for ocular drug delivery J Control Release 2007 120 186 94 17582643 
56 Patel SP  Vaishya R  Yang X  Pal D  Mitra AK  Novel thermosensitive pentablock copolymers for sustained delivery of proteins in the treatment of posterior segment diseases Protein Pept Lett 2014 21 1185 200 25315374 
57 Hosny KM  Preparation and evaluation of thermosensitive liposomal hydrogel for enhanced transcorneal permeation of ofloxacin AAPS Pharm Sci Tech 2009 10 1336 42 10.1208/s12249-009-9335-x 
58 Bochot A  Fattal E  Gulik A  Couarraze G  Couvreur P  Liposomes dispersed within a thermosensitive gel: a new dosage form for ocular delivery of oligonucleotides Pharm Res 1998 15 1364 9 9755886 
59 Schenker HI  Silver LH  Long-term intraocular pressure-lowering efficacy and safety of timolol maleate gel-forming solution 05% compared with Timoptic XE 05% in a 12-month study Am J Ophthalmol 2000 130 145 50 11004287 
60 Yoncheva K  Vandervoort J  Ludwig A  Development of mucoadhesive poly(lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles for ocular application Pharm Dev Technol 2011 16 29 35 10.3109/10837450903479954 20038266 
61 Abdelbary G  Ocular ciprofloxacin hydrochloride mucoadhesive chitosan-coated liposomes Pharm Dev Technol 2011 16 44 56 10.3109/10837450903479988 20025433 
62 Mehanna MM  Elmaradny HA  Samaha MW  Mucoadhesive liposomes as ocular delivery system: physical, microbiological, and in vivo assessment Drug Dev Ind Pharm 2009 10.3109/03639040903099751 
63 Choy YB  Park JH  McCarey BE  Edelhauser HF  Prausnitz MR  Mucoadhesive microdiscs engineered for ophthalmic drug delivery: effect of particle geometry and formulation on preocular residence time Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008 49 4808 15 18689699 
64 Ludwig A  The use of mucoadhesive polymers in ocular drug delivery Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 2005 57 1595 639 16198021 
65 Aggarwal D  Kaur IP  Improved pharmacodynamics of timolol maleate from a mucoadhesive niosomal ophthalmic drug delivery system Int J Pharm 2005 290 155 9 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2004.10.026 15664141 
66 Agrawal AK  Das M  Jain S  In situ gel systems as ‘smart’ carriers for sustained ocular drug delivery Expert Opinion on Drug Delivery 2012 9 383 402 10.1517/17425247.2012.665367 22432690 
67 Gupta S  Vyas SP  Carbopol/chitosan based pH triggered in situ gelling system for ocular delivery of timolol maleate Sci Pharm 2010 78 959 76 10.3797/scipharm.1001-06 21179328 
68 Mansour M  Mansour S  Mortada ND  Abd Elhady SS  Ocular poloxamer-based ciprofloxacin hydrochloride in situ forming gels Drug Dev Ind Pharm 2008 34 744 52 10.1080/03639040801926030 18612913 
69 Gupta H  Jain S  Mathur R  Mishra P  Mishra AK  Velpandian T  Sustained ocular drug delivery from a temperature and pH triggered novel in situ gel system Drug Deliv 2007 14 507 15 10.1080/10717540701606426 18027180 
70 Peng Y  Ang M  Foo S  Lee WS  Ma Z  Venkatraman SS   Biocompatibility and biodegradation studies of subconjunctival implants in rabbit eyes PLoS One 2011 6 e22507 10.1371/journal.pone.0022507 21799878 
71 Lee SS  Hughes P  Ross AD  Robinson MR  Biodegradable implants for sustained drug release in the eye Pharm Res 2010 27 2043 53 10.1007/s11095-010-0159-x 20535532 
72 Paula JS  Ribeiro VR  Chahud F  Cannellini R  Monteiro TC  Gomes EC   Bevacizumab-loaded polyurethane subconjunctival implants: effects on experimental glaucoma filtration surgery J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2013 29 566 73 10.1089/jop.2012.0136 23391327 
73 Bill A  The blood-aqueous barrier Trans Ophthalmol Soc UK 1986 105 Pt 2 149 55 2432702 
74 Schlingemann RO  Hofman P  Klooster J  Blaauwgeers HG  van der GR  Vrensen GF  Ciliary muscle capillaries have blood-tissue barrier characteristics Exp Eye Res 1998 66 747 54 9657907 
75 Mannermaa E  Vellonen KS  Urtti A  Drug transport in corneal epithelium and blood-retina barrier: emerging role of transporters in ocular pharmacokinetics Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2006 58 1136 63 10.1016/j.addr.2006.07.024 17081648 
76 
Mitra AK, Anand BS, Duvvuri S. Drug Delivery to the Eye. In: Fischbarg J, editor. The Biology of Eye. New York: Academic Press; 2006. p. 307-51.

77 Prause JU  Treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca with Lacrisert Scand J Rheumatol Suppl 1986 61 261 3 3296154 
78 McDonald M  D’Aversa G  Perry HD  Wittpenn JR  Donnenfeld ED  Nelinson DS  Hydroxypropyl cellulose ophthalmic inserts (lacrisert) reduce the signs and symptoms of dry eye syndrome and improve patient quality of life Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 2009 107 214 21 20126497 
79 Luchs JI  Nelinson DS  Macy JI  Group LACS  Efficacy of hydroxypropyl cellulose ophthalmic inserts (LACRISERT) in subsets of patients with dry eye syndrome: findings from a patient registry Cornea 2010 29 1417 27 10.1097/ICO.0b013e3181e3f05b 20847657 
80 Mealy JE  Fedorchak MV  Little SR  In vitro characterization of a controlled-release ocular insert for delivery of brimonidine tartrate Acta Biomater 2014 10 87 93 10.1016/j.actbio.2013.09.024 24080317 
81 Kumari A  Sharma PK  Garg VK  Garg G  Ocular inserts - Advancement in therapy of eye diseases J Adv Pharm Technol Res 2010 1 291 6 10.4103/0110-5558.72419 22247860 
82 Riau AK  Mondal D  Aung TT  Murugan E  Chen L  Lwin NC   Collagen-Based Artificial Corneal Scaffold with Anti-Infective Capability for Prevention of Perioperative Bacterial Infections ACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering 2015 1 1324 34 
83 Yellepeddi VK  Sheshala R  McMillan H  Gujral C  Jones D  Raghu Raj Singh T  Punctal plug: a medical device to treat dry eye syndrome and for sustained drug delivery to the eye Drug Discov Today 2015 20 884 9 10.1016/j.drudis.2015.01.013 25668579 
84 Kojima T  Matsumoto Y  Ibrahim OM  Wakamatsu TH  Dogru M  Tsubota K  Evaluation of a thermosensitive atelocollagen punctal plug treatment for dry eye disease Am J Ophthalmol 2014 157 311 7 e1 10.1016/j.ajo.2013.10.019 24211863 
85 Yokoi N  Okada K  Sugita J  Kinoshita S  Acute conjunctivitis associated with biofilm formation on a punctal plug Jpn J Ophthalmol 2000 44 559 60 11033137 
86 Rumelt S  Remulla H  Rubin PA  Silicone punctal plug migration resulting in dacryocystitis and canaliculitis Cornea 1997 16 377 9 9143816 
87 Colin J  European clinical evaluation: use of Intacs for the treatment of keratoconus J Cataract Refract Surg 2006 32 747 55 10.1016/j.jcrs.2006.01.064 16765790 
88 Kymionis GD  Siganos CS  Tsiklis NS  Anastasakis A  Yoo SH  Pallikaris AI   Long-term follow-up of Intacs in keratoconus Am J Ophthalmol 2007 143 236 44 10.1016/j.ajo.2006.10.041 17184717 
89 Rabinowitz YS  INTACS for Keratoconus Int Ophthalmol Clin 2010 50 63 76 10.1097/IIO.0b013e3181e21b76 20611018 
90 Engle AT  Laurent JM  Schallhorn SC  Toman SD  Newacheck JS  Tanzer DJ   Masked comparison of silicone hydrogel lotrafilcon A and etafilcon A extended-wear bandage contact lenses after photorefractive keratectomy J Cataract Refract Surg 2005 31 681 6 10.1016/j.jcrs.2004.09.022 15899442 
91 Edwards JD  Bower KS  Sediq DA  Burka JM  Stutzman RD  Vanroekel CR   Effects of lotrafilcon A and omafilcon A bandage contact lenses on visual outcomes after photorefractive keratectomy J Cataract Refract Surg 2008 34 1288 94 10.1016/j.jcrs.2008.04.024 18655978 
92 Long B  Schweizer H  Bleshoy H  Zeri F  Expanding your use of silicone hydrogel contact lenses: using lotrafilcon A for daily wear Eye Contact Lens 2009 35 59 64 10.1097/ICL.0b013e318196ade7 19265325 
93 Mohammadpour M  Amouzegar A  Hashemi H  Jabbarvand M  Kordbacheh H  Rahimi F   Comparison of Lotrafilcon B and Balafilcon A silicone hydrogel bandage contact lenses in reducing pain and discomfort after photorefractive keratectomy: A contralateral eye study Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2015 38 211 4 10.1016/j.clae.2015.01.014 25843674 
94 Sarac O  Gurdal C  Bostanci-Ceran B  Can I  Comparison of tear osmolarity and ocular comfort between daily disposable contact lenses: hilafilcon B hydrogel versus narafilcon A silicone hydrogel Int Ophthalmol 2012 32 229 33 10.1007/s10792-012-9556-y 22484700 
95 Cai X  Conley S  Naash M  Nanoparticle applications in ocular gene therapy Vision Res 2008 48 319 24 10.1016/j.visres.2007.07.012 17825344 
96 Vandervoort J  Ludwig A  Ocular drug delivery: nanomedicine applications Nanomedicine (Lond) 2007 2 11 21 10.2217/17435889.2.1.11 17716187 
97 Nakhlband A  Barar J  Impacts of nanomedicines in ocular pharmacotherapy Bioimpacts 2011 1 7 22 10.5681/bi.2011.003 23678403 
98 
Omidi Y, Barar J, Hamzeiy H. Nanomedicines Impacts in Ocular Delivery and Targeting. Nanotechnology in Health Care 2012; 43.

99 Vaishya RD  Khurana V  Patel S  Mitra AK  Controlled ocular drug delivery with nanomicelles Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nanobiotechnol 2014 6 422 37 10.1002/wnan.1272 24888969 
100 Prow TW  Toxicity of nanomaterials to the eye Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nanobiotechnol 2010 2 317 33 10.1002/wnan.65 20077524 
101 Wadhwa S  Paliwal R  Paliwal SR  Vyas SP  Nanocarriers in ocular drug delivery: an update review Curr Pharm Des 2009 15 2724 50 19689343 
102 Sahoo SK  Dilnawaz F  Krishnakumar S  Nanotechnology in ocular drug delivery Drug Discov Today 2008 13 144 51 10.1016/j.drudis.2007.10.021 18275912 
103 
Kothuri MK, Pinnamaneni S, Das NG, Das SK. Microparticles and Nanoparticles in Ocular Drug Delivery. In: Mitra AK, editor. Ophthalmic Drug Delivery Systems. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.; 2003. p. 437-66.

104 Visor GC  Drug design strategies for ocular therapeutics Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 1994 14 269 79 
105 
Barar J, Omidi Y. Nanoparticles for Ocular Drug Delivery. Nanomedicine in Drug Delivery 2013; 287.

106 Zhang L  Li Y  Zhang C  Wang Y  Song C  Pharmacokinetics and tolerance study of intravitreal injection of dexamethasone-loaded nanoparticles in rabbits Int J Nanomedicine 2009 4 175 83 19774116 
107 Jo DH  Kim JH  Yu YS  Lee TG  Kim JH  Antiangiogenic effect of silicate nanoparticle on retinal neovascularization induced by vascular endothelial growth factor Nanomedicine 2012 8 784 91 10.1016/j.nano.2011.09.003 21945900 
108 Panda JJ  Yandrapu S  Kadam RS  Chauhan VS  Kompella UB  Self-assembled phenylalanine-alpha,beta-dehydrophenylalanine nanotubes for sustained intravitreal delivery of a multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor J Control Release 2013 172 1151 60 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.09.016 24075925 
109 Huu VA  Luo J  Zhu J  Zhu J  Patel S  Boone A   Light-responsive nanoparticle depot to control release of a small molecule angiogenesis inhibitor in the posterior segment of the eye J Control Release 2015 200 71 7 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.01.001 25571784 
110 Hamidi M  Azadi A  Rafiei P  Hydrogel nanoparticles in drug delivery Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 2008 60 1638 49 18840488 
111 Ahmed EM  Hydrogel: preparation, characterization, and applications J Adv Res 2015 6 105 21 10.1016/j.jare.2013.07.006 25750745 
112 Hennink W  Van Nostrum CF  Novel crosslinking methods to design hydrogels Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 2012 64 223 36 
113 Joglekar M  Trewyn BG  Polymer‐based stimuli‐responsive nanosystems for biomedical applications Biotechnol J 2013 8 931 45 23843342 
114 Deligkaris K  Tadele TS  Olthuis W  van den Berg A  Hydrogel-based devices for biomedical applications Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 2010 147 765 74 
115 Radhakrishnan J  Krishnan UM  Sethuraman S  Hydrogel based injectable scaffolds for cardiac tissue regeneration Biotechnol Adv 2014 32 449 61 24406815 
116 Jeong B  Kim SW  Bae YH  Thermosensitive sol–gel reversible hydrogels Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 2002 54 37 51 11755705 
117 Qiu Y  Park K  Environment-sensitive hydrogels for drug delivery Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 2012 64 49 60 
118 Casolaro M  Casolaro I  Lamponi S  Stimuli-responsive hydrogels for controlled pilocarpine ocular delivery European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 2012 80 553 61 22138000 
119 Fathi M  Entezami AA  Arami S  Rashidi M-R  Preparation of N-Isopropylacrylamide/Itaconic Acid Magnetic Nanohydrogels by Modified Starch as a Crosslinker for Anticancer Drug Carriers International Journal of Polymeric Materials and Polymeric Biomaterials 2015 64 541 9 
120 Yasuda H  Biocompatibility of Nanofilm‐Encapsulated Silicone and Silicone‐Hydrogel Contact Lenses Macromolecular Bioscience 2006 6 121 38 16416462 
121 Abrego G  Alvarado H  Souto EB  Guevara B  Bellowa LH  Parra A   Biopharmaceutical profile of pranoprofen-loaded PLGA nanoparticles containing hydrogels for ocular administration Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2015 95 261 70 10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.01.026 25681744 
122 Kaur IP  Smitha R  Penetration enhancers and ocular bioadhesives: two new avenues for ophthalmic drug delivery Drug Development and Industrial Pharmacy 2002 28 353 69 12056529 
123 Stapleton F  Stretton S  Papas E  Skotnitsky C  Sweeney DF  Silicone hydrogel contact lenses and the ocular surface The Ocular Surface 2006 4 24 43 16669523 
124 Xie B  Jin L  Luo Z  Yu J  Shi S  Zhang Z   An injectable thermosensitive polymeric hydrogel for sustained release of Avastin(R) to treat posterior segment disease Int J Pharm 2015 490 375 83 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.05.071 26027491 
125 Kirchhof S  Goepferich AM  Brandl FP  Hydrogels in ophthalmic applications Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2015 95 227 38 10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.05.016 26032290 
126 Rauck BM  Friberg TR  Medina Mendez CA  Park D  Shah V  Bilonick RA   Biocompatible reverse thermal gel sustains the release of intravitreal bevacizumab in vivo Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014 55 469 76 10.1167/iovs.13-13120 24370837 
127 Hu CC  Chaw JR  Chen CF  Liu HW  Controlled release bevacizumab in thermoresponsive hydrogel found to inhibit angiogenesis Biomed Mater Eng 2014 24 1941 50 10.3233/BME-141003 25226890 
128 Gilger BC  Mandal A  Shah S  Mitra AK  Episcleral, intrascleral, and suprachoroidal routes of ocular drug delivery - recent research advances and patents Recent Pat Drug Deliv Formul 2014 8 81 91 25001638 
129 Stanzel BV  Liu Z  Brinken R  Braun N  Holz FG  Eter N  Subretinal delivery of ultrathin rigid-elastic cell carriers using a metallic shooter instrument and biodegradable hydrogel encapsulation Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012 53 490 500 10.1167/iovs.11-8260 22167099 
130 Gao SQ  Maeda T  Okano K  Palczewski K  A microparticle/hydrogel combination drug-delivery system for sustained release of retinoids Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012 53 6314 23 10.1167/iovs.12-10279 22918645 
131 Kuno N  Fujii S  Biodegradable intraocular therapies for retinal disorders: progress to date Drugs Aging 2010 27 117 34 10.2165/11530970-000000000-00000 20104938 
132 Thanos CG  Bell WJ  O’Rourke P  Kauper K  Sherman S  Stabila P   Sustained secretion of ciliary neurotrophic factor to the vitreous, using the encapsulated cell therapy-based NT-501 intraocular device Tissue Eng 2004 10 1617 22 10.1089/ten.2004.10.1617 15684670 
133 Emerich DF  Thanos CG  NT-501: an ophthalmic implant of polymer-encapsulated ciliary neurotrophic factor-producing cells Curr Opin Mol Ther 2008 10 506 15 18830926 
134 Humayun M  Santos A  Altamirano JC  Ribeiro R  Gonzalez R  de la Rosa A   Implantable MicroPump for Drug Delivery in Patients with Diabetic Macular Edema Transl Vis Sci Technol 2014 3 5 10.1167/tvst.3.6.5 25653883 
135 Gutierrez-Hernandez JC  Caffey S  Abdallah W  Calvillo P  Gonzalez R  Shih J   One-Year Feasibility Study of Replenish MicroPump for Intravitreal Drug Delivery: A Pilot Study Transl Vis Sci Technol 2014 3 8 10.1167/tvst.3.3.8 25774328 
136 Fangueiro JF  Veiga F  Silva AM  Souto EB  Ocular Drug Delivery - New Strategies for targeting anterior and posterior segments of the eye Curr Pharm Des 2015 10.2174/1381612822666151216145900 
137 du Toit LC  Pillay V  Choonara YE  Govender T  Carmichael T  Ocular drug delivery - a look towards nanobioadhesives Expert Opin Drug Deliv 2011 8 71 94 10.1517/17425247.2011.542142 21174606 
138 Almeida H  Amaral MH  Lobao P  Lobo JM  In situ gelling systems: a strategy to improve the bioavailability of ophthalmic pharmaceutical formulations Drug Discov Today 2014 19 400 12 10.1016/j.drudis.2013.10.001 24120893 
139 Pontes de Carvalho RA  Krausse ML  Murphree AL  Schmitt EE  Campochiaro PA  Maumenee IH  Delivery from episcleral exoplants Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006 47 4532 9 10.1167/iovs.06-0030 17003449 
140 Lo R  Li PY  Saati S  Agrawal R  Humayun MS  Meng E  A refillable microfabricated drug delivery device for treatment of ocular diseases Lab Chip 2008 8 1027 30 10.1039/b804690e 18584074 
141 Lo R  Li PY  Saati S  Agrawal RN  Humayun MS  Meng E  A passive MEMS drug delivery pump for treatment of ocular diseases Biomed Microdevices 2009 11 959 70 10.1007/s10544-009-9313-9 19396548 
142 Bush RA  Lei B  Tao W  Raz D  Chan CC  Cox TA   Encapsulated cell-based intraocular delivery of ciliary neurotrophic factor in normal rabbit: dose-dependent effects on ERG and retinal histology Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004 45 2420 30 15223826 
143 Ashworth JL  Biswas S  Wraith E  Lloyd IC  Mucopolysaccharidoses and the eye Surv Ophthalmol 2006 51 1 17 10.1016/j.survophthal.2005.11.007 16414358 
144 Fathi M  Barar J  Aghanejad A  Omidi Y  Hydrogels for ocular drug delivery and tissue engineering Bioimpacts 2015 5 159 164 10.15171/bi.2015.31 26929918
