
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951876381010.1177_2374289518763810CommentaryThe Continuing Fellowship Conundrum Powell Suzanne Zein-Eldin MD1Kragel Peter J. MD2Domen Ronald E. MD3
1 Department of Pathology, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX, USA
2 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, East Carolina University
Brody School of Medicine, Greenville, NC, USA
3 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Penn State Hershey Medical
Center and College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USARonald E. Domen, MD, Department of Pathology, H160,
Penn State Hershey Medical Center and College of Medicine, 500 University Drive, Hershey,
PA 17033, USA. Email: rdomen@pennstatehealth.psu.edu19 3 2018 Jan-Dec 2018 5 237428951876381019 1 2018 06 2 2018 11 2 2018 © The Author(s) 20182018SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further permission
provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages
(https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).ethicsfellowshiphonor codemedical educationprofessionalismcover-dateJanuary-December 2018
==== Body
Introduction
The debate for a fair, equitable, and reasonable pathology fellowship application and
selection process has been an ongoing issue with ebb and flow over approximately the past 10
years. The authors of this commentary have been closely involved with the fellowship issue
over the past decade and have been part of the effort to achieve a workable solution with
widespread support. Possible solutions to the concerns raised by various parties have
included efforts to implement a uniform timeline, a formal match through the National
Resident Matching Program (NRMP), a formal match through the San Francisco Matching Program,
and most recently (and the focus of this commentary) a Code of Conduct (Honor Code) and
application clearing house overseen by the Association of Pathology Chairs (APC). Table 1 summarizes these efforts and
their outcomes to date.

Table 1. Potential Solutions and Outcomes to the Pathology Fellowship Conundrum.

Possible Solutions	Outcomes to Date	

Voluntary adherence by programs to a uniform application and offer time
line

Voluntary adherence by programs to not pressure applicants into making
“snap” decisions

Voluntary adherence by applicants to abide by commitments made to a
fellowship program

Formal fellowship match process (eg, NRMP or San Francisco Match)

Voluntary adherence by programs and applicants to an honor code with data
collected by the APC and made available to programs and residents


	
Compliance has not been uniform

Compliance has not been uniform

As noted in the text, last minute openings continue to be a problem

Consensus among program directors and applicants have not supported a
formal match process

No data to date, has not been tried


	
Abbreviations: APC, Association of Pathology Chairs; NRMP, National Resident Matching
Program.

Resident dissatisfaction with the fellowship application process seemed to peak in the
mid-2000s when the College of American Pathologists (CAP) Resident Forum and its Executive
Committee put forward its concerns and voiced support for, and approval of, a “unified” or
“common” application form. The intent was that this common application would be accepted by
training programs around the country. A suggested time line for the application process was
also approved at that time.1,2 This idea was examined and championed by the APC in the 2007 to 2010 time frame.
Association of Pathology Chairs and Pathology Program Directors Section of the APC (PRODS)
recognized the serious issues ingrained in the fellowship application process and dedicated
resources to further explore these issues and concerns and to examine a possible move toward
a match.2


Potential Solutions and the Fellowship Directors Ad Hoc Committee
Other medical subspecialties, when faced with similar fellowship application concerns, had
successfully implemented a fellowship match through the NRMP. To evaluate the probability of
a pathology fellowship match, the APC utilized surveys to identify subspecialties willing to
be “first in line” for fellowship match implementation. It rapidly became apparent that the
NRMP requirement for a time line more proximal to the fellowship matriculation date and the
requirement for a high percentage of programs to agree to participate would be major
hurdles. Only 2 subspecialties demonstrated a sufficient positive response to warrant
pursuit of a match, and ultimately both felt that participation in a match would place them
at a significant disadvantage relative to other subspecialties and nonparticipating
programs. Discussion of the benefits and need for a match at the CAP Residents Forum also
demonstrated that resident support for a match was not universally held. Many residents felt
that being able to apply and accept positions outside the match helped them to accept
multiple fellowships, to better plan for future moves, and to better support their lives
outside of graduate medical education. Subsequently, surveys of residents completing their
in-service examinations through the American Society of Clinical Pathology (ASCP) saw a drop
in trainees’ interest for a formal match process,3,4 even while interest in a uniform time line, common application, and a process that
did not pressure applicants to immediately accept positions at the conclusion of their
interviews was maintained. Needless to say, implementation of a matching process through the
American Association of Medical Colleges and the NRMP did not succeed.

Both APC and PRODS continued to have serious concerns regarding the fellowship application
process and to explore other means to effect change that might garner support and approval
from all stakeholders (Table 1).2,5 In the spring of 2013, the APC formed a Fellowship Directors Ad Hoc Committee (FDAHC)
with representatives from each of the boarded pathology fellowship subspecialties (and
including surgical pathology), with the intent that the members would work through their
respective subspecialty societies to effect change in the fellowship application process. A
move to investigate the San Francisco Matching Program was made, and due to its increased
flexibility relative to the NRMP, it garnered some interest and traction, with the
dermatopathology fellowship program directors planning to “take the plunge” no later than
2020. The future viability of the San Francisco Matching Program to be the vehicle for a
“pan-pathology” match across all subspecialties is unclear at this point in time.

The lack of a meaningful, structured fellowship application process and time line
continues, and anecdotally, the same ongoing issues continue to plague both residents and
program directors.1,2,5 The push for earlier and earlier decision-making by residents and fellowship programs
continue, with decisions not infrequently occurring in the resident’s PGY1 or early PGY2
year of training. These early decisions preclude, in many cases, significant exposure to
some of the subspecialty areas with the greatest need for a pipeline to bolster their
pathologist workforce, for example, pediatric pathology, neuropathology, blood
banking/transfusion medicine, and forensic pathology. Thus, it is not surprising that the
current state manifests itself in increased numbers of programs with the dreaded “unexpected
fellowship opening” for the upcoming academic year, and not uncommonly in the month or two
before the fellowship program’s matriculation date. Data presented at the July 2017 APC
Annual Meeting, based on a review of unexpected fellowship openings posted on the PRODS list
serve, demonstrated that 70 discrete fellowship positions were posted in the 2016 calendar
year, with 17 of those postings occurring between January and March 2016 and 9 of those
postings occurring between April and June 2016 for a July 2016 matriculation date.6 Programs throughout the country were adversely impacted.

A Proposed Honor Code
In light of this history and the fact that little has changed (Table 1), and perhaps even worsened, the FDAHC of the
APC has developed a voluntary Honor Code for fellowship applicants and program directors
(available online under Supplemental Material). In addition, the FDAHC has also proposed the
establishment of a “clearing house” for available and filled positions. The clearing house
would be a current, updated listing with information input from the fellowship program
directors and would be maintained by the APC. Clearing house data would be available to
candidates and programs in a timely manner. A platform to accomplish this has already been
developed by the APC. These proposed ideas have been presented to PRODS at APC, to the ASCP
Residents Council, and to the CAP Residents Forum in 2017. The Honor Code would be applied
to both applicants and programs and would be put into place for those looking for positions
no sooner than 2019 (as many programs have already selected candidates under the current
system). The intent is to gradually move toward a common time line.

The beauty of a formal match process, such as the NRMP program, is not only the speed in
which the process is done, allowing for the programs to enroll new trainees months before
matriculation rather than years, but in the fact that there are penalties associated with
withdrawal. To date, such a process does not exist with pathology fellowships, and the lack
of penalties is perceived to be a weakness inherent in the enforceability and wide adoption
of the Honor Code and clearing house concepts, even though there are clear-cut benefits for
their adoption from both the applicant and program perspectives.

Individual lives change, along with the needs of families, and geographic limitations are
part of the complex nature of the fellowship decision-making process. With such a long time
lag between selection and implementation of a contract, requiring someone to honor a
contract after they have been exposed to a subspecialty they perceive as much more desirable
or after their life circumstances have changed affecting their geographic and life style
requirements is a recipe for disaster. Residents who feel forced to move to a location now
deemed unattractive, or forced to complete a fellowship they now perceive as undesirable,
cannot be expected to “do their best” and positively represent their training program.
Therefore, a process which tightens (ie, shortens) the time line and allows individuals to
experience all of the potential subspecialties through their PGY3 year of training in
combined Anatomic and Clinical Pathology (AP/CP) or PGY2 year of training (AP- or CP-only)
without forcing an early commitment is the one aspect of proposals for change in the
fellowship application process that seems to be consistently supported1,2,5 and which is potentially achievable with or without a formal match process, as long
as fellowship programs across all subspecialties perceive the need and benefits such a
change would provide. The proposed Honor Code reminds every one of their professional
commitment to excellence and to the principles of honesty, integrity, and ethical behavior.1 A central clearing house would allow residents and programs to track openings and
acceptances. The institution of an honor code may seem to be a small step, but it is a step
in the right direction that encourages all of us to be ethical, moral, and professional
physicians, working toward a process where both applicants and programs can find the best
possible match.

Supplemental Material
Supplemental Material, Fellowship_Conundrum_Revisited_(supplement) - The Continuing
Fellowship Conundrum
Click here for additional data file.

Supplemental material, Fellowship_Conundrum_Revisited_(supplement) for The Continuing
Fellowship Conundrum by Suzanne Zein-Eldin Powell, Peter J. Kragel, and Ronald E. Domen in
Academic Pathology

 Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

Supplemental Material: Supplementary material for this article is available online.
==== Refs
References
1 
Domen RE Wehler AB  
An examination of professional and ethical issues in the
fellowship application process in pathology . Hum
Pathol .
2008 ;39 :484 –488 .18342659 
2 
Black-Schaffer WS Crawford JM  
The evolving landscape for pathology subspecialty
fellowship applications . Am J Clin Pathol .
2012 ;137 :513 –515 .22431527 
3 
Crawford JM Hoffman RD Black-Schaffer WS  
Pathology subspecialty fellowship reform .
Am J Clin Pathol .
2001 ;135 :338 –356 .
4 
Bernacki KD McKenna BJ Myers JL  
Challenges and opportunities in the application process
for fellowship training in pathology . Am J Clin Pathol .
2012 ;137 :543 –552 .22431529 
5 
Myers JL Yousem SA DeYoung BR Cibull ML  
Matching residents to pathology fellowships: the road less
traveled? 
Am J Clin Pathol .
2011 ;135 :335 –337 .21350086 
6 
Kragel P  
FDAHC Report . Paper presented
at: APC/PRODS Annual Meeting ; July 2017 ;
Washington DC .

