
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951988872410.1177_2374289519888724Educational CaseEducational Case: Human Papillomavirus–Positive Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell
Carcinoma Shen Minqian MD, PhD1Chute Deborah J. MD1
1 Department of Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USAMinqian Shen, Department of Pathology, Cleveland
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Ave, L13, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Email:
shenm@ccf.org21 11 2019 Jan-Dec 2019 6 237428951988872428 5 2019 7 9 2019 13 10 2019 © The Author(s) 20192019SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as published without
adaptation or alteration, without further permission provided the original work is
attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).
The following fictional case is intended as a learning tool within the Pathology
Competencies for Medical Education (PCME), a set of national standards for teaching
pathology. These are divided into three basic competencies: Disease Mechanisms and
Processes, Organ System Pathology, and Diagnostic Medicine and Therapeutic Pathology.
For additional information, and a full list of learning objectives for all three
competencies, see http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2374289517715040.1

pathology competenciesorgan system pathologyhead and neckhead and neck neoplasiasquamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynxHPVp16cover-dateJanuary-December 2019
==== Body
Primary Objective

Objective HN2.3: Causes of Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma: Compare
and contrast human papillomavirus (HPV)-driven and alcohol-/tobacco-driven development of
squamous cell carcinoma including precursor lesions, tumor formation and progression,
anatomic location, and survival rate.

Competency 2: Organ System Pathology; Topic HN: Head and Neck; Learning Goal 2: Head and
Neck Neoplasia

Secondary Objective

Objective HN2.2: Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Oropharynx: Discuss the
pathogenesis of squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx and the spectrum of histologic
findings from normal mucosa to invasive disease.

Competency 2: Organ System Pathology; Topic HN: Head and Neck; Learning Goal 2: Head and
Neck Neoplasia.

Patient Presentation
A 53-year-old man presented with a palpable 2-cm right lateral neck mass, which had been
present for approximately 2 months. He had no other significant past medical history. He had
been a lifelong nonsmoker and only used alcohol on social occasions. Other than the neck
mass, he reported no other symptoms. Physical examination showed a palpable, mobile nodule
in the right lateral neck, which was painful on palpation. A course of antibiotics was
prescribed by his family practitioner without resolution. Therefore, the patient was
referred for evaluation to an otolaryngologist, who ordered a computed tomography (CT) scan
of the neck.

Diagnostic Findings, Part 1: Imaging
A CT scan of the neck (Figure 1)
was performed. The CT shows an enlarged abnormal lymph node in the right lateral neck with
cystic degeneration, measuring 1.2 cm on its short axis, suspicious for metastasis, along
with subtle asymmetric enhancement of the right palatine tonsil.

Figure 1. Computed tomography (CT): An enlarged abnormal lymph node in the right lateral neck
(yellow arrow) with cystic degeneration, measuring 1.2 cm on its short axis, suspicious
for metastatic disease.

Questions/Discussion Points, Part 1
What Is the Differential Diagnosis Based on Computed Tomography?
The presence of central cystic degeneration/necrosis in a lymph node is highly concerning
for malignancy. In this age-group, the differential diagnosis would include metastatic
carcinoma (most commonly squamous cell carcinoma [SCC] of the head and neck) and lymphoma.
Branchial cleft cysts are benign cystic embryologic remnants that occur in the lateral
neck but are typically seen in young adults and children and should not show
enhancement.

Diagnostic Findings, Part 2: Pathology
A fine needle aspiration biopsy of the right neck mass was performed, which was positive
for metastatic SCC (Figure 2). Fine
needle aspiration biopsy is a good initial screening tool for lesions of the neck and can
guide further patient workup. This result directed the physician to look for a head and neck
primary. Direct laryngoscopy in the office showed an enlarged right palatine tonsil, which
was biopsied, and showed invasive SCC (Figure 3A). Additional ancillary testing performed on the biopsy showed the
carcinoma was strongly and diffusely positive for p16 immunohistochemistry (Figure 3B), supporting a diagnosis of
human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated SCC (HPV-SCC).

Figure 2. A, Aspirate smears of the fine needle aspiration biopsy show cells in a cluster with
enlarged, irregular, hyperchromatic nuclei and abundant dense, pink cytoplasm in a
background of keratinized degenerating cells, diagnostic of metastatic squamous cell
carcinoma (×400, Papanicolaou stain). B, The cell block shows a clusters of
predominantly nonkeratinizing cells with moderate cytoplasm (×400, H&E). H&E
indicates hematoxylin and eosin.

Figure 3. A, Histologic section from the tonsil biopsy shows an invasive nonkeratinizing squamous
cell carcinoma in a background of lymphoid tonsillar tissue (×200, H&E). The inset
shows the nonkeratinizing cells morphology with focal necrosis (arrow; ×400, H&E).
B, P16 immunohistochemical staining shows strong diffuse (>70% nuclear and
cytoplasmic brown) staining within the invasive carcinoma, consistent with an
HPV-associated squamous cell carcinoma (×200, p16 immunohistochemistry). H&E
indicates hematoxylin and eosin; HPV, human papillomavirus.

Questions/Discussion Points, Part 2
What Are the Most Common Malignancies of the Head and Neck?
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common malignancy of the head and neck, accounting
for 90% of all head and neck cancers. Other malignancies can arise in the head–neck
region, including thyroid cancer, salivary gland tumors, and lymphomas. Metastatic
malignancies from lung, breast, and colon can also present as neck mass.2


How Are Squamous Cell Carcinoma and Its Precursor Lesions Distinguished From Benign
Squamous Mucosa on Pathologic Examination?
Benign squamous mucosa in the oral cavity demonstrates architectural maturation and
polarity from base to top with no cytology atypia (Figure 4A) and is typically nonkeratinizing unless
subject to trauma or irritation. In the oral cavity, the most common clinically identified
precursors to the development of SCC are leukoplakia (white patches or plaques) and
erythroplakia (red, velvety eroded areas), but as many as 50% of oral SCCs can arise from
grossly normal mucosa. Leukoplakia generally corresponds, on pathologic examination, to an
area of hyperkeratosis, which may or may not be also associated with squamous dysplasia.
Erythroplakia is highly associated with dysplasia on pathologic examination.

Figure 4. A, Normal squamous mucosa. Note the small uniform nuclei in the basal layer with
maturation toward the surface and the absence of keratinization (×200, H&E). B,
Moderate epithelial dysplasia. Note the marked hyperkeratosis (large arrow) and
granular cell layer (small arrow) at the surface, as well as abundant pink “glassy”
cytoplasm and moderate nuclear variation in size in shape, but a retained flat
interface with the underlying stroma and relatively ordered maturation (×200,
H&E). C, Severe dysplasia/carcinoma in situ. The architecture of the epithelium is
almost completely disordered with marked nuclear pleomorphism, loss of nuclear
polarity, and full-thickness abnormalities. Note the thin layer of hyperkeratotic
epithelium on the surface (large arrow), the dyskeratotic keratin pearl deeper within
the epithelium (open arrow), and the drop-like interface with the underlying stroma
(small arrow; ×200, H&E). D, Invasive squamous cell carcinoma. Note the irregular
small islands (small arrow) of squamous epithelium extending into the underlying
stroma, which shows a marked desmoplastic response (×100, H&E). H&E indicates
hematoxylin and eosin.

Keratinizing squamous dysplasia, the pathologic precursor lesion to most tobacco- and
alcohol-related SCC of the head and neck, is divided into mild, moderate, and
severe/carcinoma in situ grades. In general, all keratinizing dysplasias show
hyperkeratosis at the surface of the epithelium. Hyperkeratosis is the presence of
increased and abnormal keratin at the surface of a squamous epithelium, recognizable with
the deeply eosinophilic color and absence of nuclei. The degree of cytological (nuclear)
atypia and abnormal maturation (architectural disorder) is used to determine the overall
grade of dysplasia.

Mild dysplasia usually shows mild nuclear pleomorphism and nuclear hyperchromasia with
basal cell hyperplasia. Moderate dysplasia shows greater nuclear pleomorphism, and
increased and abnormal mitotic figures, with disordered maturation and dyskeratosis (Figure 4B). Severe dysplasia/carcinoma
in situ shows significant nuclear pleomorphism including prominent nucleoli, marked
variation in nuclear size and shape, abnormal mitotic figures, and architectural
abnormalities such as dyskeratosis, loss of polarity, and a drop-shaped interface with the
underlying submucosa (characterized by an irregular interface with the underlying
submucosa, often teardrop shaped extending downward; Figure 4C). Squamous cell carcinoma is defined by the
presence of invasion by atypical squamous cells into the lamina propria. This is most
readily recognized by the irregular, jagged contours of the epithelial groups which lack
surrounding basement membrane, paradoxical maturation with deep keratin pearls at an
invasive front, and a stromal desmoplastic response (desmoplasia is a stromal change
indicating a response to invasive tumor, usually characterized by increased spindle cells
and a light-colored or myxoid change; Figure 4D).

Recognition and grading of dysplasia in the head and neck is clinically relevant, as it
predicts the risk of malignant transformation. Severe epithelial dysplasia has an overall
malignant transformation rate to invasive SCC of about 16%, whereas moderate dysplasia has
a relative lower malignant transformation risk (3%-15%), and mild epithelial dysplasia has
a very low risk (<5%).3


What Are the Predisposing Factors That Contribute to the Development of Squamous Cell
Carcinoma of the Head and Neck?
Tobacco and alcohol use has been strongly established as the primary risk factor in the
SCC of the head and neck. Both tobacco and alcohol use in the United States have been
steadily declining for the last 5 decades, which is paralleled by decreasing rates of head
and neck cancer incidence and mortality. However, despite decreasing rates of tobacco and
alcohol use, the rates of oropharyngeal cancer have trended steadily upward for the last
decade. This is primarily due to the increase in cancers related to infection with the
HPV, which is mainly spread through oral sexual behavior.

Of note, Areca (betel) nut chewing is another leading cause of oral SCC
in parts of Asia and the Pacific.4


What Are the Classic Clinical and Pathologic Features of Human
Papillomavirus–Associated Squamous Cell Carcinoma That Differentiate It From Tobacco- and
Alcohol-Related Squamous Cell Carcinoma?
Human papillomavirus–associated SCC is a distinct entity, separated from SCC associated
with tobacco/smoking and alcohol consumption by location, patient demographics, and
morphologic appearance. Human papillomavirus–associated SCC usually occurs in the
oropharynx, most commonly in the tonsils or base of tongue. The oropharynx is a highly
specialized area, containing extensive mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue (palatine
tonsils, lingual tonsils in the base of tongue, and adenoids/soft palate), which creates a
more permissive environment for HPV infection.5 Unlike patients with typical SCC, patients with HPV-SCC typically present with
advanced clinical stage involving multiple lymph nodes in the lateral upper to mid neck,
but often with a small or unrecognized primary tumor. Patients with HPV-SCC are also
typically younger, nonsmokers, and lack a history of preexisting dysplasia.
Histopathologically, HPV-SCC exhibits a distinctive nonkeratinizing morphology, compared
to the usual keratinizing invasive SCCs associated with tobacco and alcohol use (Figure 5). Finally, and perhaps most
importantly, despite presenting at a higher stage, HPV-SCC is associated with better
survival outcomes and lower recurrence rates than HPV-negative oropharyngeal SCC (OPSCC;
Table 1)6 and is treated primarily with radiation and chemotherapy, rather than primary
surgical resection.

Figure 5. A, Classic, keratinizing invasive squamous cell carcinoma, showing abundant pink
cytoplasm and entrapped keratin pearls (arrow; ×200, H&E). B, Human
papillomavirus–associated squamous cell carcinoma showing nonkeratinizing morphology,
with scant cytoplasm and dark, closely spaced nuclei (×200, H&E). H&E
indicates hematoxylin and eosin.

Table 1. Comparison of HPV and Alcohol-/Tobacco-Driven Squamous Cell Carcinoma and
HPV-Associated SCC.

Characteristics	HPV-Associated SCC	Usual SCC	
Median age	50-56 years	60-70 years	
Risk factors	Sexual behavior	Tobacco, alcohol	
Location	Oropharynx (base of tongue and palatine tonsils)	Oral cavity	
Dysplasia	Rarely seen	Often present	
Morphology	Nonkeratinizing	Keratinizing	
P16 immunohistochemistry	Positive	Negative	
Primary treatment modality	Radiation and chemotherapy	Surgical resection with adjuvant radiation and chemotherapy as needed	
Overall survival rate (3 years)	82%	57%	
What Is the Mechanism of Human Papillomavirus Carcinogenesis in the Development of
Human Papillomavirus–Associated Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma?
Human papillomaviruses are small, nonenveloped double-stranded DNA viruses, with over 170
types identified. The majority of HPV-positive oropharyngeal tumors are caused by
high-risk HPV, especially type 16, which is responsible for more than 90% of cases.6 Initially, the HPV virus is present within infected cells as circular
extrachromosomal particles or episomes (Figure 6A). If the HPV infection is not cleared, over time the HPV DNA can
become integrated into the DNA of the host genome. The integration of HPV DNA into host
genome is a critical step in the progression to cancer. This integration results in
disruption of the HPV E2 messenger RNA (mRNA), which regulates expression of HPV E6 and E7
oncogenes. The overexpression of E6 and E7 binds to and inactivates host cell tumor
suppressor p53 and the retinoblastoma (Rb) proteins, respectively, leading to p16
accumulation, and unrestricted cellular proliferation (Figure 6B).7 Human papillomavirus integration has been also associated with selective growth
advantage and genomic instability of the infected cells.7


Figure 6. A, Initial HPV infection is episomal, with viral particles in the host cell nucleus,
but separate from the native DNA. However, with persistent infection, the circular DNA
is broken and integrated linearly into the host genome. B, Human papillomavirus
protein E6 binds to the native p53 protein, resulting in degradation of p53 and
inactivation of its tumor suppressor function. Human papillomavirus protein E7 binds
to the native pRB protein, which then triggers pRB phosphorylation and inactivation,
leading to increased cell cycle proliferation. H&E indicates hematoxylin and
eosin; HPV, human papillomavirus; pRB, retinoblastoma protein.

What Testing Is Required for the Diagnosis of Human Papillomavirus–Associated
Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma?
All newly diagnosed OPSCCs should undergo testing for HPV infection, according to the
guidelines developed by the College of American Pathologists (CAP) and endorsed by the
American Society of Clinical Oncology.8 Either the oropharyngeal primary tumor or a cervical lymph node metastasis should
be tested by immunohistochemistry using p16. In addition, in the setting of a lymph node
metastasis involved by SCC but without identification of a primary tumor, HPV testing (by
p16 or other HPV assays) is recommended to help guide identification of the primary site
and therapeutic options.

A positive p16 result is defined as at least 70% tumor nuclear and cytoplasmic expression
with at least moderate-to-strong intensity. If the morphology and p16 immunohistochemistry
appear discordant (ie, nonkeratinizing morphology with absent p16 staining or keratinizing
morphology with strong p16 staining), additional tests with an HPV-specific assay, such as
in situ hybridization for high-risk HPV E6/E7 mRNA, are recommended. At this time, p16
immunohistochemistry is not recommended for routine clinical use in SCCs or other tumor
subtypes outside the oropharynx, as the specificity of p16 as a predictor of
HPV-associated disease drops significantly in other head and neck subsites and diseases.8


Teaching Points
The most common head neck primary malignancy is SCC.

Tobacco and alcohol are still leading risk factors for SCC in the head and neck.

Squamous cell carcinoma usually develops from squamous dysplasia, which is graded from
mild, to moderate, to severe/carcinoma in situ.

The grade of squamous dysplasia is determined based on the degree of nuclear atypia and
architectural disarray.

Human papillomavirus–associated SCC is a unique entity that has been increasing within
recent decades and has a distinctive clinical, epidemiologic, and pathologic
presentation.

The mechanism of HPV-driven oncogenesis is thought to be largely due to HPV genome
integration into host genome, leading to E6 and E7 oncoprotein overexpression and
inactivation of host cell tumor suppressor genes p53 and the Rb protein,
respectively.

Human papillomavirus–associated SCC usually occurs among younger men in the oropharynx
(tonsils and base of tongue) and presents with an advanced clinical stage, with a small
or unrecognized primary tumor and lateral upper to mid neck nodal involvement.

Despite presenting at higher stage, the overall survival outcomes are better in
HPV-associated SCC than usual SCC, and patients respond better to radiation and
chemotherapy.

Human papillomavirus–associated SCC exhibits distinctive predominantly nonkeratinizing
morphology, and the diagnosis can be confirmed by strong and diffuse staining for p16
immunohistochemistry. A positive result is defined as at least 70% of tumor cells with
nuclear and cytoplasmic expression showing at least moderate-to-strong intensity.

The CAP guidelines recommend all OSCCs undergo HPV testing. In addition, when nodal
metastasis is present with an unknown primary tumor, HPV testing can be helpful in
guiding recognition of the primary site and management.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
==== Refs
References
1 
Knollmann-Ritschel BEC Regula DP Borowitz MJ Conran R Prystowsky MB  
Pathology competencies for medical education and
educational cases . Acad Pathol .
2017 :4 
doi:10.1177/2374289517715040 .
2 
Haynes J Arnold KR Aguirre-Oskins C Chandra S  
Evaluation of neck masses in adults .
Am Fam Physician .
2015 ;91 :698 –706 .25978199 
3 
Speight PM  
Update on oral epithelial dysplasia and progression to
cancer . Head Neck Pathol .
2007 ;1 :61 –66 .20614284 
4 
Hernandez BY Zhu X Goodman MT Gatewood R Mendiola M Quinata K Paulino YC  
Betel nut chewing, oral premalignant lesions, and the oral
microbiome . PloS One .
2017 ;12 :e0172196 .28225785 
5 
Rautava J Syrjanen S  
Biology of human papillomavirus infections in head and
neck carcinogenesis . Head Neck Pathol .
2012 ;6 :S3 –15 .22782219 
6 
Westra WH Lewis JS Jr 
Update from the 4th Edition of the World Health
Organization Classification of Head and Neck Tumours: Oropharynx .
Head Neck Pathol .
2017 ;11 :41 –47 .28247229 
7 
Parfenov M Pedamallu CS Gehlenborg N  , et al.
Characterization of HPV and host genome interactions in primary head and
neck cancers . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A .
2014 ;111 :15544 –15549 .25313082 
8 
Lewis JS JrBeadle B Bishop JA  , et al.
Human papillomavirus testing in head and neck carcinomas: guideline from
the College of American Pathologists . Arch Pathol Lab
Med .
2018 ;142 :559 –597 .29251996

