
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951987754910.1177_2374289519877549Educational CaseEducational Case: Regulatory Issues With Laboratory Testing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0856-8402Krasowski Matthew D. MD, PhD1
1 Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, IA,
USAMatthew D. Krasowski, Department of Pathology,
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, 200 Hawkins Drive, C671, GH Iowa City, IA 52242,
USA. Email: matthew-krasowski@uiowa.edu25 9 2019 Jan-Dec 2019 6 237428951987754903 6 2019 22 8 2019 © The Author(s) 20192019SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as published without
adaptation or alteration, without further permission provided the original work is
attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).
The following fictional case is intended as a learning tool within the Pathology
Competencies for Medical Education (PCME), a set of national standards for teaching
pathology. These are divided into three basic competencies: Disease Mechanisms and
Processes, Organ System Pathology, and Diagnostic Medicine and Therapeutic Pathology.
For additional information, and a full list of learning objectives for all three
competencies, see
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2374289517715040.

pathology competenciesdiagnostic medicineClinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)Food and Drug Administrationlaboratory-developed testingbody fluidswaived testingprovided-performed microscopycover-dateJanuary-December 2019
==== Body
Primary Objective

Objective GP1.7: Regulatory Issues. Explain the broad differences between
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved tests and laboratory-developed tests, including
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) waived and nonwaived tests, and discuss
the regulatory issues involved in physician office laboratories, home testing, and
provider-performed microscopy.

Competency 3: Diagnostic Medicine and Therapeutic Pathology; Topic GP: General Principles;
Learning Goal 1: Laboratory Tests.

Patient Presentation
A multispecialty physician office practice that previously performed only waived laboratory
testing (pregnancy tests, rapid streptococcal antigen, and urine dipsticks) recently added
testing for clinical chemistry, hematology, and microscopy for urine sediment. The clinical
chemistry and hematology analyzers added to the physician office laboratory perform Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)-approved assays that are classified as moderate complexity under
the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) of 1988. The physician group upgraded
their CLIA license to cover moderate complexity testing. The clinical chemistry analyzer is
a compact near point-of-care model that uses whole blood (lithium heparin anticoagulated) as
the specimen.

One of the physicians in the group sees a 65-year-old male patient with an inflamed knee
joint and aspirates some of the fluid for cell count, chemistry, and crystal analysis. The
physician practice is affiliated with a medical center, and this type of testing would
normally be sent to the medical center central clinical laboratory. However, the physician
requests that the laboratory technician for the office laboratory analyze the joint fluid
for basic cell counts and chemistries (eg, glucose, protein) on the newly acquired
instruments to get a faster turnaround time while the patient is still in the office.

Diagnostic Findings
The joint fluid is cloudy and more difficult to pipette than whole blood. Analysis of the
fluid on the office laboratory chemistry analyzer returns multiple error flags, with no
value output for glucose concentration. The protein concentration is 3.1 g/dL but with an
absorbance warning flag. The white blood count on the hematology analyzer returns an error
message with a high count warning.

Questions/Discussion Points
What Are the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments Test Complexities for the
Laboratory Tests Run in the Physician Office Laboratory and How Did This Change When They
Added the New Testing?
Under the CLIA regulations, clinical laboratories are certified at the highest level of
test complexity. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) oversees the CLIA
regulations and can grant (“deem”) authority to other organizations (eg, The Joint
Commission, College of American Pathologists) to carry out surveys/inspections and offer
accreditation. The CLIA test complexities are waived, provider-performed microscopy (PPM),
moderate complexity, and high complexity. The 3 categories other than waived are
collectively referred to as “nonwaived” testing and will be the main subject of the
discussions below. The physician group previously performed only waived testing, the
lowest complexity under CLIA. Examples of waived testing include point-of-care testing
such as fingerstick glucose, pregnancy kits, urine dipsticks, and some urine drug of abuse
screening strips. The clinical chemistry and hematology testing added to the physician
group is moderate complexity, a broad category that includes many FDA-approved tests
commonly performed in clinical laboratories. Microscope examination of urine sediment by
physicians or other providers is PPM, a subgroup of moderate complexity. Other examples of
PPM include potassium hydroxide preparations, pinworms preparations, Fern tests, nasal
smears for granulocytes, fecal leukocyte examinations, and qualitative semen analysis
(limited to presence or absence of sperm and the detection of motility).

Joint fluid, surgical drain fluid, or other nonblood body fluids (eg, peritoneal,
pleural) would almost certainly not be specimen types FDA-approved for assays performed on
standard clinical chemistry and hematology analyzers.1 Analysis of these specimens would be considered laboratory-developed tests (LDTs)
that would fall under CLIA high complexity and also require validation by the laboratory.
In addition, as evident in the patient case, analysis of these body fluids can result in
errors or erroneous results if the assay is not suitable for the type of body fluid.

There are 5 types of CLIA certificates.2 Certificates of waiver are issued to laboratories performing only waived tests.
Certificate for provider-performed microscopy procedures (PMPP) is issued to laboratories
in which a physician, midlevel practitioner, or dentist performs no tests other than the
microscopy procedures. Laboratories with the PMPP certificate can also perform waived
testing. There are 3 certificates that apply to laboratories performing moderate or high
complexity testing. The certificates also cover PPM and waived testing. Certificate of
registration is issued to a laboratory until the entity is determined by a survey to be in
compliance with CLIA regulations. A certificate of compliance is issued after an
inspection finds a laboratory to be in compliance with all applicable CLIA requirements. A
certificate of accreditation is issued to a laboratory that achieves accreditation by an
organization approved by CMS.

What Are the Personnel Requirements for the Various Clinical Laboratory Improvement
Amendments Licenses?
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments personnel requirements are found in Subpart M
of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), which details qualifications and
responsibilities for laboratories performing PPM, moderate complexity, and high complexity testing.3 Under CLIA, clinical laboratories performing only waived testing do not have
specific personnel requirements. The requirements and categories of personnel required are
more complex with moderate and high complexity testing. Provider-performed microscopy
classification has specific requirements for testing personnel and laboratory director.
Moderate complexity testing has requirements for testing personnel, laboratory director,
clinical consultant, and technical consultant. High complexity testing has requirements
for general supervisor in addition to the personnel listed above for moderate
complexity.

What Are Some of the Key Differences in Requirements for Laboratory Director for the
Various Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments Classifications?
The Laboratory Director for PPM can be any of the following: DDM/DDS, MD, DO, or DPM
licensed to practice in the state in which the laboratory is located, or midlevel
practitioner (eg, nurse midwife, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant) who is
authorized to practice independently in the state in which the laboratory is located. For
PPM, there is no requirement for laboratory director to have prior experience supervising
or directing nonwaived testing.

There are multiple routes to meet the requirements for laboratory director for moderate
complexity testing.3 For pathologists (MD or DO), the requirement can be met by being a board-certified
pathologist through the American Board of Pathology or the American Osteopathic Board of
Pathology. For nonpathologist physicians (MD or DO), the following can suffice: 1 year of
supervising or directing nonwaived testing, 20 hours of continuing medical education (CME)
commensurate with laboratory director duties, or 20 hours of clinical laboratory training
during medical residency. For the 20 hours of CME, there are commercially available
courses that offer content to meet this requirement. Individuals with doctoral degrees in
science can meet requirements to be laboratory director for moderate complexity testing by
obtaining certification from boards such as the American Board of Medical Microbiology or
the American Board of Clinical Chemistry. This route generally involves approved
fellowship training after doctoral training (eg, in clinical chemistry or medical
microbiology) or documented experience in clinical laboratories. There are also routes for
individuals with bachelor’s or master’s degree in the sciences to qualify as laboratory
director if they have prior experience supervising or directing nonwaived testing. For
those with only a bachelor’s or master’s degree, CME cannot replace the prior experience
requirements.

The requirements for laboratory director for high complexity testing are more stringent
than moderate complexity. One of the key differences is that the nonpathologist MD or DO
cannot use 20 hours of CME to meet the laboratory director requirements and instead needs
2 years of experience supervising or directing nonwaived testing. Similar to moderate
complexity testing, individuals with doctoral degrees in science and certification from
boards such as the American Board of Medical Microbiology or the American Board of
Clinical Chemistry meet requirement for laboratory director for high complexity testing.
Table 1 summarizes CLIA test
complexities and also some of the laboratory director requirements. An additional
stipulation is that any one person can serve as laboratory director for no more than 5
CLIA certificates for nonwaived testing. There is currently no limit for the number of
waived licenses that an individual can be laboratory director.

Table 1. Examples of CLIA Test Complexities and Regulatory Requirements.

Category	Examples	Requirement for Nonpathologist MD or DO to Serve as Laboratory Director Other
Than Valid Medical License in State of the Laboratory Testing	
Waived	Fingerstick glucose
Pregnancy kit
Rapid streptococcal
antigen
Urine dipstick
And many other point-of-care tests	None	
Provider- performed microscopy	Fern test
Potassium hydroxide preparations
Qualitative semen
analysis
Urine sediment examination	None	
Moderate complexity	Many FDA-approved clinical chemistry, hematology, and microbiology tests	20 hours CME, or 20 hours laboratory training in residency, or 1 year
supervising or directing nonwaived testing	
High complexity	Any laboratory-developed test
Test requiring pathologist
interpretation	2 years supervising or directing nonwaived testing	
Abbreviations: CLIA, Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments; CME, continuing
medical education; FDA, Food and Drug Administration.

What Are the Technical and Regulatory Implications for Running Nonblood Body Fluids
on Clinical Chemistry and Hematology Analyzers?
Body fluids from nonblood or urine sources present a difficult challenge for clinical laboratories.1,4 Examples of these fluids include bile, cerebrospinal fluid, cyst contents, gastric
aspirates, joint fluid, peritoneal fluid, pleural fluid, surgical drain fluid, vitreous
fluid, and wound exudates. With few exceptions, FDA-approved tests for these fluid types
are unavailable. It is important to carefully examine the package insert for FDA-approved
tests to see what specimen types are approved. For example, some tests may be approved for
urine and/or cerebrospinal fluid in addition to serum/plasma. The heterogeneous nature of
body fluids leads to technical difficulties in analysis. Some fluid types can be thick and
viscous and difficult to pipette and analyze. Other fluids, especially cyst contents, may
have analyte concentrations far in excess of what is typically encountered with serum or
plasma. An example of this would be amylase from a pancreatic cyst containing high amounts
of pancreatic enzymes.

The key regulatory point is that analyzing a nonapproved specimen type changes the
classification of the test to an LDT, which is automatically high complexity and with
expectations for thorough validation prior to performing the test for clinical purposes.5 Laboratory-developed tests are a broad category and also include highly
labor-intensive tests such as gene or exome sequencing in molecular diagnostics.6 Laboratories considering LDTs should thoroughly review the validation and
regulatory requirements to be sure these can be met.

What Should be Done in Follow-Up to the Patient Case?
The request by the physician to analyze the joint fluid on the office laboratory
instrumentation was not appropriate. There are multiple key issues and action items that
should follow from this incident. The performance of LDTs in a laboratory with only a
moderate complexity CLIA license is not acceptable and opens the laboratory up to
regulatory penalties. The results obtained from the analysis are not reliable and should
not be reported in the patient chart or used for clinical decision-making. That the
instruments returned error or warning flags is fortunate in alerting that the results may
not be valid. However, some assays will return a result even if the specimen type is
inappropriate, opening up the possibility that these results can provide misleading
information. The physicians and office laboratory personnel should review and emphasize
procedure that the clinical chemistry and hematology analyzers are to be used only as
directed in the package inserts for the assays. Nonapproved specimen types should not be
analyzed. Compliance with regulations and acceptable laboratory practice is ultimately the
responsibility of the laboratory director.

Teaching Points
Clinical laboratories (including physician office laboratories) are regulated under
CLIA, with the details in the CFR. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services oversees
the CLIA regulations and deems authority to other organizations (eg, The Joint
Commission, College of American Pathologists) for activities such as surveys,
inspections, and accreditation.

Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments defines 4 categories for laboratory testing
in ascending order of complexity: waived, PPM, moderate complexity, and high complexity.
The last 3 categories are collectively referred to as “nonwaived” testing.

Clinical laboratories must meet CLIA regulations for the highest complexity testing
performed in the laboratory. For example, a laboratory performing almost all waived
testing but some moderate complexity testing needs to meet the moderate complexity
requirements.

Each of the laboratory test categories entail specific requirements for laboratory
director and testing personnel. Moderate and high complexity testing has some additional
personnel category requirements. Clinical laboratories performing testing should
thoroughly review and be in compliance with CLIA regulations.

Laboratory-developed tests are category of tests that are not FDA-approved and are
classified as high complexity. Simple examples include using specimen types other than
those approved in the assay package insert. More technically involved examples are
genomic molecular diagnostic tests. Laboratory-developed tests have demanding validation
requirements.

Body fluids other than blood and urine are often not specimen types that are
FDA-approved for laboratory assays, making their analysis high complexity under CLIA.
There are a number of technical and validation challenges with these fluids. Clinical
laboratories interested in performing analysis on body fluids should thoroughly review
the literature and regulatory requirements.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

ORCID iD: Matthew D. Krasowski 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0856-8402
==== Refs
References
1 
Block DR Ouverson LJ Wittwer CA Saenger AK Baumann NA  
An approach to analytical validation and testing of body
fluid assays for the automated clinical laboratory . Clin
Biochem .
2018 ;58 :44 –52 .29738695 
2 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention .
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA). Test complexities web
page . 2019 ; https://www.cdc.gov/clia/test-complexities.html. Accessed August
23, 2019 .
3 
College of American Pathologists . CAP
Personnel Requirements by Testing Complexity web page . 2018 ;
https://documents.cap.org/documents/CAP-personnel-requirements-by-test-complexity.pdf.
Accessed August 23, 2019 .
4 
Block DR Algeciras-Schimnich A  
Body fluid analysis: clinical utility and applicability of
published studies to guide interpretation of today’s laboratory testing in serous
fluids . Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci .
2013 ;50 :107 –124 .24156653 
5 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services .
CLIA Overview. Laboratory Developed Tests Web Page . 2013 
https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/CLIA/Downloads/LDT-and-CLIA_FAQs.pdf.
Accessed August 23, 2019 .
6 
Genzen JR Mohlman JS Lynch JL Squires MW Weiss RL  
Laboratory-developed tests: a legislative and regulatory
review . Clin Chem .
2017 ;63 :1575 –1584 .28687634

