
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951984606810.1177_2374289519846068Regular ArticleLife After Being a Pathology Department Chair III: Reflections on the
“Afterlife” https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6396-4200Bailey David N. MD1Buja L. Maximilian MD2Gorstein Fred MD3Gotlieb Avrum MD4Green Ralph MD, PhD5Kane Agnes MD, PhD6Lipscomb Mary F. MD7Sanfilippo Fred MD, PhD8
1 Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA,
USA
2 Department of Pathology, University of Texas, Houston, TX, USA
3 Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
4 Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
5 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California,
Davis, CA, USA
6 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA
7 Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM,
USA
8 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA, USADavid N. Bailey, Department of Pathology, University
of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Email:
dnbailey@ucsd.edu29 4 2019 Jan-Dec 2019 6 237428951984606817 2 2019 19 3 2019 1 4 2019 © SAGE Publications2019SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as published without
adaptation or alteration, without further permission provided the original work is
attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).The Association of Pathology Chairs Senior Fellows Group provided reflections on
activities that have kept them engaged and inspired after stepping down as chair. They
offered advice to current chairs who were considering leaving their positions and also to
individuals contemplating becoming pathology chairs. A majority (35/41) responded: 60%
maintained teaching/mentoring activities; 43% engaged in hobbies; 40% took other
administrative positions including deans, medical center chief executive officers, and
residency program directors; 31% continued research; 28% wrote books; 20% performed
community service; 14% led professional organizations; 14% developed specialized programs;
11% engaged in clinical service; and 11% performed entrepreneurial activities. Most
individuals had several of these activities. One-third indicated that those considering
becoming chair should be able to place faculty and department needs before their own.
One-fourth emphasized the need to know why one wants to become chair, the need to develop
clear goals, and the need to know what one wants to accomplish as chair before applying
for and accepting the position. More than half (57%) indicated that before stepping down
as chair, one should have a clear plan and/or professional goals that can be served by
stepping down. Some even suggested that this be in place before applying for the chair.
Almost two-thirds (63%) indicated they had no regrets stepping down as chair. These
findings may be valuable to those contemplating stepping down from or stepping into any
department chair position or other academic leadership role.

advicecareer trajectorypathology chairspostchair activitiesreflectionscover-dateJanuary-December 2019
==== Body
Introduction
Members of the Association of Pathology Chairs (APC) Senior Fellows Group (former
department chairs who have chosen to remain active in APC) have previously contributed to
the literature on lessons learned while serving as chair.1,2 Although there is a considerable literature on elements for success as a chair
including publications from the Association of American Medical Colleges,3,4 it is relatively scanty on how former chairs find fulfillment after stepping down
from the position and how they prepare for it.5-10 Accordingly, in order to address this subject, the APC senior fellows provided
information about what has kept them engaged and inspired after stepping down as chair, what
advice they would give to those contemplating a position as chair, what advice they would
offer to those considering leaving the chair, and whether or not they had misgivings about
stepping down as chair.

Methodology
All APC senor fellows (n = 41) were asked to provide input based upon questions provided to
them by e-mail with a participation rate of 85% (n = 35). The questions were open-ended,
each requiring a narrative response, and the answers were abstracted and anonymized by one
of us (D.N.B.). The assembled information was reviewed and discussed by a work group of
senior fellows (authors of this report), who provided further input in addition to having
responded to the questions themselves. Because the collective findings in this report were
the output of an informed work group, the University of California, San Diego Human Research
Protections Program does not require institutional review board review.

Results
Demographics
The years of service as chair for the 35 respondents totaled 551 (range, 1-34;
mean/standard deviation [SD] = 15.7/7.9). The time elapsing since these individuals
stepped down as chair ranged from less than 1 year to 29 years (mean/SD = 9.3/7.4). Four
(11%) respondents were women, which is less than half the current percent of women chairs
in APC (25%) but about the same as the percent of women senior fellows (12%). Information
on age was not collected. There were no distinguishing features for the group of 6
nonresponders.

Postchair Activities

Table 1 lists the categories
of postchair activities undertaken by the project participants (n = 35), while Table 2 provides a list of
administrative positions held by the 14 (40%) individuals whose postchair activities
included administration. It should be noted that some former chairs (n = 9, 26%) assumed
multiple successive or simultaneous administrative posts following service as chair.

Table 1. Categories of Postchair Activities (% of Participants).*

Teaching/mentoring (60%)	
Hobbies (43%)	
Administration (40%)	
Research (31%)	
Writing books (28%)	
Community service (20%)	
Leadership of professional organizations (17%)	
Development of special programs (14%)	
Clinical service (11%)	
Entrepreneurial activities (11%)	
*Percentages total more than 100% since most respondents participated in multiple
activities.

Table 2. Postchair Administrative Activities.*

Pathology residency program director (n = 11) (31%)	
Medical school dean (n = 6, including one who was dean at 2 different schools)
(17%)	
Medical center chief executive officer (n = 3) (8%)	
Medical director of outreach reference laboratory	
Medical director of 4 outside laboratories	
Director of telemedicine program	
Executive director of medical library	
Executive vice president for academic affairs	
Interim dean for graduate and life sciences education	
Senior academic advisor to the dean	
Interim vice dean for research and international relations	
Deputy vice chancellor for health sciences	
Deputy dean of school of pharmacy	
Vice chancellor for health affairs	
Vice dean for research and innovation	
General pathology course director	
Chief of surgical pathology	
Vice chair for anatomic pathology	
Vice chair for faculty development	
*n = 1 responder unless otherwise indicated. Most former chairs who reported
postchair administrative activities engaged in more than one so that the total
listed in this table is more than the 14 indicated in the text.

Community service was reported by 7 (20%) senior fellows and included an array of
activities and positions: city commission member, county medical society president, local
animal rescue facility volunteer, expert witness in patent litigation, hospital board
member, chamber of commerce board member, barrier island land improvement board member,
fraternity foundation president, and community philanthropic foundation director.

Postchair professional organization leadership (n = 6, 17%) included service as president
of the College of American Pathologists, chief executive officer of the American Medical
Association, chief executive officer of the American Board of Pathology, chair of the
American Registry of Pathology Board of Directors, College of American Pathologists
governor, and medical director of The Marcus Foundation.

Postchair special program development activities (n = 5, 14%) included a national pilot
project on time-variable, competency-based medical education; a faculty leadership
program; a program to introduce nonphysicians early in life science training to the
research world of mechanisms of disease; a program in machine learning and artificial
intelligence; and a telemedicine program. Entrepreneurial activities were reported by 4
(11%) participants, which included launching biotechnology start-up companies, starting an
independent for-profit subsidiary of a major professional organization with an associated
venture fund for it, and building and directing a real estate company.

A significant group (n = 15, 43%) indicated that they spent time with hobbies. It was not
clear how many of these were completely new activities nor that more time was spent in
these pursuits although a few did indicate learning new skills. Finally, there was no
apparent correlation between the years of service as chair and the types of activities in
which respondents engaged after stepping down from the position.

Advice for Those Considering Becoming Chair and for New Chairs
Almost one-third (n = 11, 31%) of respondents indicated that anyone considering a chair
must understand that the needs of the faculty and the department take precedence over
one’s own professional interests. About one quarter (n = 8, 23%) emphasized that
individuals should understand why they want to be chair, must have clear goals for the
department, and know what they want to accomplish as chair. Additional recommendations as
well as individual comments are included in Table 3.

Table 3. Advice for Those Considering Becoming Chair (% of Participants).

Put the needs of the faculty and department before your own (31%)	
Know why you want to become chair, have clear goals, and know what you want to
accomplish as chair (23%)	
Shadow another chair and/or consult with chairs to develop experience to
negotiate for the position (11%)	
Acquire additional skills you may not already have (eg, business, management,
negotiation, communication, finance) (8%)	
Maintain your own personal skills (research, education, practice) in order to
have them when you step down as chair, in order to maintain credibility with the
faculty and staff, and in order to provide some “relief time” as chair (8%)	
Study the institution before applying for chair; know where the opportunities
and landmines are; be sure that the administration is sound (8%)	
Consider serving as chair for a defined period of time and then exit whether
or not a new chair is in place (6%)	
Single comments:	
Assure that your professional goals will be served by becoming chair	
Be visible in the pathology community	
Before applying for a chair, know what you want to do when you step down	
Validate your fit to be chair by making your current job as big as
possible	
Do not rush into the decision to apply for chair prematurely	
Avoid as much as possible getting involved in politics	
Be careful with whom you share your ambition to become chair	
Assure that you prepare escape hatches and landing strips before accepting a
chair	
Declare your interest in leadership so that you can begin to be groomed	
Know whether the chair is to be a placeholder or whether the department is to
grow, and, if the latter, get the dean’s support in writing	
Know what resources will be offered to accomplish the mission	
Understand the department finances	
Have the temperament to deal with conflict	
Be able to balance department interests with those of the institution at
large	
Specific advice for new chairs included being prepared to delegate responsibility and
authority as well as consulting others frequently, including other chairs. Additional
suggestions are included in Table
4.

Table 4. Advice for New Chairs (% of Participants).

Prepare to delegate responsibility and appropriate authority (6%)	
Consult others frequently, including other chairs (6%)	
Single comments:	
Have a mentorship structure in place	
Deal with faculty face-to-face	
Get complaints in writing before acting on them	
Determine how to align faculty and your own personal interests with
departmental and institutional interests	
Have a communication style that is forthright and honest	
Develop good relationships with your superiors	
Develop an advisory group of faculty and staff that you trust	
Do not hire based upon curricula vitae alone	
Garner the support of the dean and at least most of the faculty	
Become familiar with those aspects of professional life with which you may
have had less exposure (eg, basic science, clinical service)	
Advice for Chairs Considering Stepping Down
More than half (n = 20, 57%) of respondents emphasized the need to have a plan and/or
professional goals that can be served by stepping down as chair which includes a process
to follow: assessing one’s motivation, what one has learned, how those lessons fit into
the next career move, assessing one’s readiness to give up power and autonomy (unless
moving to a higher level position), determining what things to do to remain engaged and
inspired, determining salary needs and sources, and negotiating the timing of the
departure (Table 5). Some even
advised developing a plan before applying for the chair. About one quarter (n = 8, 23%)
emphasized the importance of timing when stepping down. The consensus was that one should
step down when the department is strong, still moving upward, and when the chair is not
tired and exhausted but when he/she still has energy, ideas, and a plan to work on
something engaging either inside or outside pathology. Some (n = 5, 14%) advised that the
former chair must not try to remain as department decision maker or surrogate chair. If
the former chair remains in the department, he/she should work out the role with the new
chair and might start by taking a sabbatical leave to allow the new chair time to become
established on his/her own. Several individuals (n = 5, 14%) noted that one should
separate who one is from what one did and should not define oneself in terms of work or
perceived stature (Table
5).

Table 5. Advice for Chairs Considering Stepping Down (% of Participants).*

Have a plan and/or professional goals that can be served by stepping down and
that include an exit strategy and a process to follow: assess motivation for
stepping down, what you have learned, and how that will fit into next career
move; determine what you will do and what your salary needs will be; and
negotiate timing (57%)	
Step down while you still have energy, ideas, and a plan to work on something
engaging either inside or outside of pathology and when the department is still
strong and on an upward trajectory (23%)	
Don’t interfere with department decision-making after you step down (14%)	
Don’t despair or feel sorry for yourself; instead reinvent yourself (14%)	
*Percentages total more than 100% since individuals usually offered recommendations
in more than one area.

Regrets and Coping Strategies After Stepping Down (“Chair Withdrawal”)
Almost two-thirds (n = 22, 63%) of respondents indicated that they had no regrets (“chair
withdrawal”) after stepping down as chair, although a few indicated that they indeed had
some regrets (Table 6). These
included missing interactions with students and other faculty, missing staff assistance,
not being in the “loop” for information, and having concern for the new direction of the
department. Coping strategies included teaching part time, meeting with faculty and
section heads periodically, finding other activities in which to engage, and by keeping
eyes and ears open and developing new information flow sources (Table 7).

Table 6. Regrets After Stepping Down as Chair.

Missing interacting with students	
Missing regular contact with faculty and students as well as being on top of
programs in all faculty members’ areas	
Missing the authority that accompanies the chair	
Missing the staff assistance	
Having concern with the new direction of the department after stepping
down	
No longer being in the “information loop”	
Table 7. Coping Strategies for “Chair Withdrawal.”

Teaching part time	
Meeting with faculty and section heads	
Finding other activities in which to engage	
Seeking information through other contacts	
Discussion
Leaving an administrative position either voluntarily or involuntarily is a momentous,
life-altering decision for most individuals, regardless of whether they “step down” to
retirement, return to active faculty status, “step up” to a different administrative post,
or perhaps even start a career in another field.11 Unfortunately, the literature on this topic is limited. The APC Senior Fellows Group
provided a good opportunity to investigate what a relatively homogenous group of individuals
(all former pathology chairs) have done after leaving the position as well as how they would
advise those who were considering seeking or leaving the position. Although this group has
previously addressed some issues of postchair life,1 the present project focused more broadly on what has kept them engaged and
invigorated following their service as chair.

The majority of 35 former chairs who participated in this effort remained connected with
academia, either teaching or mentoring, engaging in academic administrative activities,
continuing research, writing books, developing special academic programs, or combinations of
these. A smaller number engaged in community service, leading major professional
organizations, focusing on entrepreneurial activities, and performing clinical service. As
one respondent put it: “You can take the chair out of the office, but you cannot take the
office out of the chair. The same qualities that created a successful chair are now
channeled in different directions both academic and nonacademic.”

In his review, Gmelch10 reports that about 20% of department chairs move upward in academic administration
compared with 40% reported by respondents in the current study (Table 1). The report by Gmelch, however, appeared to
focus on department chairs outside the health sciences, while this report is from a group of
former health sciences chairs who have chosen to remain active in their academic
professional society.

Although immersing themselves in these activities, almost half of respondents specifically
mentioned a wide range of hobbies, including some less conventional activities such as
building wood kayaks, collection and restoration of vintage fountain pens, orchid hybrid
development and maintenance, planting olive trees, changing a vineyard from pinot noir to
sauvignon blanc production, and teaching high-performance driving. It is not clear how many
of these activities represent new hobbies or ones in which the former chair had been
previously engaged.

The advice provided to individuals contemplating a position as chair and to new chairs
emphasizes having the ability to put the needs of faculty and the department before one’s
own, understanding why one wants to become chair, and knowing what one hopes to accomplish
as chair. The relative lack of consensus regarding advice specific to new chairs (Table 4) might reflect the fact that
there was wide variation in time elapsed since the senior fellows had stepped down as chair
(<1 year to 29 years), during which time circumstances such as reimbursement, research
expectations for the chair, and healthcare delivery had changed. In some instances, a
perceived leadership vacuum or other serious problems may make individuals aspire to become
chair at their home institution. The importance of being transparent was also stressed as
essential because it helps to build confidence with the faculty. Additional advice included
the preservation of one’s own personal skills in research, education, and practice so that
one can return to them after the chair. Admittedly, this is a difficult balancing act for
many. Although commenting from the perspective of a former graduate school dean rather than
department chair, June12 emphasized the importance of “looking like a faculty member” while in administration,
and the continuation of these activities helps to achieve that end.

Of note is that only 11% of respondents in this study indicated that they engaged in
clinical work after stepping down from the chair, perhaps suggesting that fewer chairs
continue clinical practice while serving as chair. Justice13 notes the difficulty in returning to and/or continuing these activities, particularly research,14 if one is recruited to an administrative post from outside the institution instead of
from within the institution in which these activities are already ongoing. A sabbatical
leave immediately upon stepping down may be very helpful in reestablishing these skills.15 The importance of considering early on what one will do after serving as chair was
also mentioned by the respondents. As one past chair noted: “listen to your heart first and
your mind second; you must be happy in whatever you pursue, and the heart is a better
indicator of happiness than the mind.” It is likely that these recommendations from former
chairs reflected factors that contributed to their own success as chair.

The work group evaluating the responses noted that in some institutions chair term limits
are imposed and that in a few institutions age limits on leadership positions are in place.
Advantages of such limitations may include the fact that the department is forced to
“refresh” itself periodically with new leadership and that the incumbent chair can better
plan with the knowledge that an established end date is approaching. Disadvantages may
include difficulty in recruiting chairs, especially from outside the institution; forcing a
“lame-duck” period for the incumbent chair, which may weaken his/her authority; and having
less time to make big changes. It was also noted that the length of service as chair
(mean/SD = 15.7/7.9) in this cohort greatly exceeded the term of most medical school deans
(5 years or less),16 suggesting that the search for new chairs in institutions with term limits may be
impacted from time to time by the lack of a permanent dean. The work group emphasized that
incoming chairs should know whether or not the institution to which they are recruited has
term limits and that they should also know the criteria by which they will be evaluated.

The work group also noted the importance of diversity, inclusion, and equity as well as
mentoring in being a successful chair.17 In fact, 60% of respondents noted that they continued teaching and mentoring.
Importantly, although the recommendation of putting the needs of department and faculty
before one’s own is critically important, the chair should not ignore his/her own welfare. A
chair with “burnout” simply cannot be successful.

The circumstances leading to the decision to step down as chair could include the desire to
have more time to cultivate other activities, health-related issues, and conflicts with
leadership. However, the specific reasons were not determinable in this group of former
chairs. In offering advice to chairs considering leaving the position, the senior fellows
overarching recommendation is to have a plan and to carefully consider the timing. This is
consistent with the report of Dodds et al18 who stressed the importance of developing a retirement plan. Whenever possible, one
should step down while one still has energy and ideas to work on something else and while
the department is still strong and on an upward trajectory. If one is staying on in the
department, it is important to have the terms (position, resources, space) clearly defined.
Then, having stepped down, one should not look back and second-guess the decision. If one
remains chair too long, he/she cannot take advantage of other personal and professional
opportunities. Some respondents felt it is hard to rationalize that staying on as chair for
more than 10 years or so is good for the department, the institution, and the individual,
although it was acknowledged that in some circumstances there may be exceptions. This is
consistent with the observation of Dunn and Halonen,9 who note that prolonged terms as chair can lead to waning enthusiasm for the position
as well as harm to one’s personal scholarship.

When stepping down, the “lame-duck” period should be short, and a safe haven and soft
landing should be assured. One should not feel guilty about stepping down. As one respondent
suggested: “build a robust culture that will survive you and not a cult that will die as you
fade,” and as another one put it: “realize that being a chair is only a chapter, albeit an
important one, of living your life to its potential; take time to do fun things you never
had time to do before; the second best thing is becoming chair while the best thing is when
you stop being chair.” Finally, one individual boldly stated: “if you are contemplating it,
then it is time to put the plan together and do it.” One respondent recalled advice provided
decades ago by a past chair to new chairs: “it is time to step down when you stop feeling
appreciated by either those who report to you or those to whom you report; either you’re not
doing as good a job as you think or the value of your efforts are not engaging others to the
extent they should.”

Most of the respondents said that they had no regrets about stepping down as chair because
they found many other stimulating things to keep them busy. While many indicated that the
department chair is probably the most rewarding position in academic administration, they
advised that one should not look back but should enjoy having had the opportunity as chair
to do great things and to make a difference. They also emphasized the importance of staying
in touch with colleagues.

One former chair wisely concluded that these individuals fall into 2 groups: (1) those for
whom the chair position was an end in itself and (2) those for whom it was simply one phase
in their professional career and personal life with many rewards before, during, and after
serving as chair, noting that the first group tends to be more disappointed after stepping
down.

In coping with “life after the chair,” several respondents observed the problems of past
chairs remaining in the department who try to “hang on” by operating as a “shadow” chair.
This could be as subtle as becoming a focus for faculty and staff to discuss department
issues, especially with those who are dissatisfied with changes occurring with the new
chair. Another problem can be encouraging ongoing relationships with institutional leaders
that could interfere with those leaders’ developing their relationships with the new chair.
Developing a good relationship with the new chair is important for both the department and
the past chair, especially in following the new chair’s direction on how and when to become
involved in departmental matters. A good rule of thumb suggested for past chairs is to
behave the way you wished a former chair in your department would have behaved when you
became chair and to strive to be a cheerleader for the new chair.

This study yielded many important findings. Interestingly, we were not able to distinguish
differences in advice provided by short-term and long-term chairs, at least with the
approach we used to gathering input. Additionally, it should be noted that this work may be
biased due to the fact that, by definition, the APC senior fellows are a group of former
chairs who have chosen to remain engaged in their academic chair society and therefore not
representative of former pathology chairs overall. Nevertheless, the findings are both
interesting and important and may be translatable to individuals who have left chairs in
other academic disciplines as well as to those departing from other administrative
positions, both higher and lower than the chair. Further studies are needed in this
area.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the following Association of Pathology Chairs (APC)
Senior Fellows for their contributions to this discussion: Abul Abbas, Stanley Cohen, Robert
Colvin, Robert Folberg, Richard Friedberg, Robert Friedman, Stephen Galli, Roger Geiss,
Michael Hart, Reid Heffner, Richard Hegele, William Hickey, Rebecca Johnson, Peter Kragel,
Vinay Kumar, James Madara, Jay McDonald, Salvatore Pizzo, Deborah Powell, Stanley Robboy,
Emanuel Rubin, Clive Taylor, Gregory Threatte, Lowell Tilzer, Peter Ward, Ronald Weinstein,
and David Wilkinson. The authors also appreciate the support of Priscilla Markwood, Mel
Limson, and Jennifer Norman from the APC Office.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

ORCID iD: David N. Bailey, MD 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6396-4200
==== Refs
References
1 
Bailey DN Lipscomb MF Gorstein F Wilkinson D Sanfilippo F  
Life after being a pathology department chair: issues and
opportunities . Acad Pathol .
2016 ;3 
doi:10.1177/2374289516673651 .
2 
Bailey DN Lipscomb MF Gorstein F Wilkinson D Sanfilippo F  
Life after being a pathology department chair II: lessons
learned . Acad Pathol .
2017 ;4 
doi:10.1177/2374289517733734 .
3 
Biebuyck JF Mallon WT  
The Successful Medical School Department Chair: A Guide to Good
Institutional Practices. Module 1 (Search Selection, Appointment, Transition); Module 2
(Characteristics, Responsibilities, Expectations, Skill Sets); Module 3 (Performance
Evaluation, Rewards, Renewal) . Washington, DC :
Association of American Medical Colleges ;
2003 .
4 
Mallon WT Grigsby RK  
Leading: Top Skills, Attributes, and Behaviors Critical for
Success . Washington, DC :
Association of American Medical Colleges ;
2016 .
5 
Lees ND  
Planning priorities for leaving the chair position: part
1 . Academic Briefing . 2017 
https://academicbriefing.com/leadership/leaving-the-chair-position-part-1/.
Accessed August 24, 2018 .
6 
Lees ND  
Planning priorities for leaving the chair position: part
2 . Academic Briefing . 2017 
https://www.academicbriefing.com/leadership/leaving-chair-position-part-2/.
Accessed August 24, 2018 .
7 
Dunn DS Halonen JS  
Have you stayed too long? 
The Chronicle of Higher Education . 2017 
https://chronicle.com/article/have-you-stayed-too-long-/240719.
Accessed August 24, 2018 .
8 
King PE  
Surviving an appointment as department
chair . J Assoc Commun Adm .
1997 ;3 :211 –217 .
9 
Zweig S Matson C Magill M Campbell T Davis A  
Stepping through: the transition from department
chair . Ann Fam Med .
2016 ;14 :479 –480 .
doi:10.1370/afm.1980 .
10 
Gmelch W  
The call for leadership: why chairs serve, what they do,
and how long should they serve . AKA Monographs: Leading and
Managing the Kinesiology Department .
2015 ;1 :1 –12 .
11 
Justice G  
What it felt like to lose my deanship .
The Chronicle of Higher Education . 2018 
https://www.chronicle.com/article/What-It-Felt-Like-to-Lose-My/243169.
Accessed December 24, 2018 .
12 
June AW  
Ex-administrators reveal the secret that eased their
return to the faculty . The Chronicle of Higher
Education . 2018 
https://www.chronicle.com/article/Ex-Administrators-Reveal-the/244372.
Accessed December 24, 2018 .
13 
Justice G  
Leave your administrative job and find out who your
friends aren’t . The Chronicle of Higher Education .
2018 
https://www.chronicle.com/article/Leave-Your-Administrative-Job/243441.
Accessed December 24, 2018 .
14 
Justice G  
Can you really restart your research after years in
administration? 
The Chronicle of Higher Education . 2018 
https://www.chronicle.com/article/Can-You-Really-Restart-Your/243742.
Accessed December 24, 2018 .
15 
Justice G  
I was a dean. And now I’m not . The
Chronicle of Higher Education . 2018 
https://www.chronicle.com/article/I-Was-a-DeanNow-I-m/242865.
Accessed December 24, 2018 .
16 
Clayman RV  
The Compleat Dean: A Guide to Academic Leadership in an Age of
Uncertainty . Scotts Valley, CA :
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform ;
2016 .
17 
Gotlieb AI  
Academic mentorship builds a pathology
community . Acad Pathol .
2015 ;1 
doi:10.1177/2374289515598542 .
18 
Dodds DW Cruz OA Israel H  
Attitudes toward retirement of ophthalmology department
chairs . Ophthalmology .
2013 ;120 :1502 –1504 .23531351

