
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951988604210.1177_2374289519886042Educational CaseEducational Case: The Bleeding Patient https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8335-9526McCool Isaac E. MLS(ASCP)CM, MT(AMT), MD1Muir Jeannie M. MD2https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4571-2143Knollmann-Ritschel Barbara E. C. MD2
1 Department of Pathology, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center,
Bethesda, MD, USA
2 Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USABarbara E. C. Knollmann-Ritschel, Department of
Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge RD,
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA. Email: barbara.knollmann-ritschel@usuhs.edu19 11 2019 Jan-Dec 2019 6 237428951988604231 5 2019 19 7 2019 © The Author(s) 20192019SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as published without
adaptation or alteration, without further permission provided the original work is
attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).
The following fictional case is intended as a learning tool within the Pathology
Competencies for Medical Education (PCME), a set of national standards for teaching
pathology. These are divided into three basic competencies: Disease Mechanisms and
Processes, Organ System Pathology, and Diagnostic Medicine and Therapeutic Pathology.
For additional information, and a full list of learning objectives for all three
competencies, see http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2374289517715040.1


pathology competenciesdiagnostic medicinehematologycoagulation disorderplatelet countprothrombin timeactivated partial thromboplastin timehemophiliacover-dateJanuary-December 2019
==== Body
Primary Objective

Objective H2.5: Evaluation of the Bleeding Patient: Describe how to
evaluate a bleeding patient with a hemorrhagic disorder, and explain how the history
influences testing, including the uses and limitations of screening PT, PTT, and platelet
counts.

Competency 3: Diagnostic Medicine and Therapeutic Pathology; Topic H: Hematology; Learning
Goal 2: Diagnosis and Management of Coagulation Disorders.

Patient Presentation
A 17-year-old Bengali American boy was brought into the primary care clinic by his mother
for evaluation of a large hematoma. Two days ago the boy had attended soccer try-outs in
high school and after heading a soccer ball, the patient developed a “goose-egg” on his
forehead that has not decreased in size. The patient reports no loss of consciousness or
pain, but reports a slight headache. He also does not report a history of easy bleeding or
bruising, taking aspirin or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), excessive
bleeding after minor cuts or dental care, nosebleeds, swollen joints from trauma, fatigue,
shortness of breath, or trouble breathing on exertion.

The patient has no prior surgeries, no allergies, and is currently not taking any
medications. The patient’s mother immigrated to the United States from the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh in 1996 and he reports a maternal uncle with an unknown bleeding disorder had
passed away from an HIV-related tuberculosis infection in the early 1990’s due to a plasma
transfusion-related HIV infection.

The patient’s vital signs are within normal limits. On physical examination there is no
conjunctival pallor, however a 5-cm × 8-cm raised, tender ecchymosis on the patient’s
forehead is noted, and bilaterally warmer than normal, stiff knees, which the patient
attributes to his initial day of training. The patient was sent for laboratory testing and
discharged with acetaminophen and ice packs as needed.

Diagnostic Findings, Part 1
The initial laboratory testing for the patient are given in Table 1.2 Standard reference ranges are given with the patient’s results.

Table 1. Initial Laboratory Testing for Our Patient With a Bleeding Problem.

Test Information	Result	Reference Range	

Lavender Top Test Tube (Potassium EDTA):
	

Complete Blood Count (CBC):*	
White blood cell count	4.8 × 109/L	3.5-11 × 109/L	
Hemoglobin	14.2 g/dL	13.5-17.5 g/dL	
Hematocrit	42.6%	41.0%-53.0%	
Platelet Count	189 × 109/L	150-450 × 109/L	

Light Blue Top Test Tube (Sodium Citrate):
	
Prothrombin time (PT)	12.6 seconds	11.1-13.1 seconds	
International normalized ratio (INR)	1.1	0.8 to 1.1	
Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)	41.6 seconds	23.1-35.1 seconds	

Platelet function testing:
	
Collagen-epinephrine	143 seconds	78-199 seconds	
Collagen-ADP	103 seconds	55-137 seconds	
Abbreviations: ADP, adenosine diphosphate; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid.

* This is not a complete CBC and thus only includes pertinent information from 4
constituents.

Questions/Discussion Points, Part 1
Given the Clinical History, What Is a Broad Differential Diagnosis?
The patient has a traumatic hematoma, stiff, warm knees after vigorous activity, and a
family history of a maternal uncle with an unspecified bleeding disorder. Laboratory
values are all within normal limits with the exception of activated partial thromboplastin
time (aPTT; also called PTT), which is prolonged. Since aPTT can be used for screening
deficiencies/nonfunctioning proteins of the intrinsic and common pathways of the
coagulation cascade, for our male patient, most likely on the differential includes
hemophilia A or hemophilia B/christmas disease. Hemophilia C is less likely; hemophilia C
is more prevalent in Ashkenazi Jews/Israeli Arabs/Iraqi Jews than in other patient
populations. With a negative family history for autosomal dominant inheritance, von
Willebrand Disease (vWD) is less likely. If the patient were malnourished, a vitamin
K/vitamin C deficiency would be included, and with the patient’s age and medication
history, even less likely liver disease or a heparin-induced coagulopathy.3


What Further Testing Is Indicated in This Patient?
The patient’s aPTT is abnormally prolonged, but prothrombin time (PT) is within normal
limits. A prolonged PT illustrates problems with the common and extrinsic pathways—if both
PT and aPTT were prolonged, a common pathway problem would be more likely. Thus, to
further characterize the patient’s prolonged aPTT, a mixing study would be warranted along
with possibly ordering factor assays.

Diagnostic Findings, Part 2
Mixing study and factor assays for patient A are given in Tables 2 and 3, respectfully.2 Factor assays for factors VIII (most likely), IX, or XI (less likely) would be of
concern if the mixing study rules out a lupus anticoagulant/progressive inhibitor.

Table 2. Mixing Study Conducted on the Patient’s Plasma (Citrated, Light Blue Top tube).

	Patient Plasma	1:1 Mixture of Patient Plasma, PNP	Mixture + 60 min Incubation at 37°C	Interpretation	
PT (seconds)	12.1	11.8	12.0	Within normal limits	
aPTT (seconds)	39.5	31.1	32.8	c/w factor deficiency	
Abbreviations: aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; c/w, consistent with;
PNP, pooled normal plasma.

Table 3. Factor Assays Conducted on Citrated Patient Plasma.

Test	Result	Reference Range	
Factor VIII assay	36%	50%-200%	
Factor IX assay	89%	60%-140%	
Factor XI assay	101%	60%-140%	
The patient was referred to the hematology/oncology clinic and was seen 1 week later where
the hematologist drew labs, administered 150 μg of Stimate (DDAVP, or desmopressin) to the
patient intranasally in each nostril and redrew labs 120 minutes later. Results are given in
Table 4.2


Table 4. Hematology/Oncology Clinic Laboratory Findings for Factor VIII Initially and 120
Minutes After DDAVP Administration.

Test Name	Initial	120 mins (DDAVP)	Reference Range	
Factor VIII assay	34%	78%	50%-200%	
Abbreviations: DDAVP, 1-Deamino-8-D-Arginine Vasopressin.

Questions/Discussion Points, Part 2
What Is the Most Likely Diagnosis in This Patient?
The patient most likely has hemophilia A, which is a qualitative/quantitative deficiency
in factor VIII. Hemophilia A is an X-linked recessive disease which affects males and
homozygous females. This explains why his mother is asymptomatic, but her brother is
reported having had a bleeding disorder. A pedigree is given in Figure 1. Desmopressin can cause the release of von
Willebrand Factor (vWF), which indirectly increases factor VIII via stabilization. Factor
VIII has a half-life of 2.4 hours when unbound; vWF-bound factor VIII has a half-life of
12 hours.4


Figure 1. Patient’s pedigree which is typical of a pedigree of a patient with hemophilia. The
blue arrow indicates the patient in this case.

Hemophilia patients can present with deep tissue bleeding, including spontaneous
hemorrhages in joints, which begin with stiffness, increased temperature, and later
decreased range of motion and swelling. Laboratory evaluation yields a normal PT, abnormal
aPTT, mixing study that corrects immediately and after 1 hour of incubation, and decreased
factor VIII assay activity (<1% in severe, 2%-5% in moderate-severe, and 6%-50% in mild disease).4 These patients respond to vasopressin, which causes release of factor VIII, and are
normally treated with recombinant factor VIII. One possible complication of treatment is
the development of antibodies to factor VIII, which appears on a mixing study as a
progressive inhibitor (immediate normalization of aPTT but prolongation after 1 hour).5 Of note, hemophilia patients who received factor VIII concentrates before 1985 were
at high risk of parenteral transmission of HIV and developing AIDS, which occurred in the
patient’s maternal uncle.4


What Is the Best Way to Evaluate a Patient With a Possible Bleeding
Diathesis?
A detailed history and physical examination are essential in the initial evaluation of a
bleeding patient. The major causes of bleeding can be categorized into platelet plug
formation disorders and coagulation clotting factor disorders.

Identification of age and sex may clue providers into hemophilia (male, usually
presenting at infancy or childhood). A detailed history of present illness should include
questions about platelet plug formation and vWD-related symptoms (immediate
bleeding/bruising with trauma, small pinpoint bruising, gingival bleeding, heavy menses
and iron deficiency anemias, nosebleeds), along with coagulation defect-related symptoms
(delayed recurrent bleeding, joint, muscle, and deep tissue bleeding, large bruises).
Traumatic events such as surgeries, dental procedures, or other impact-related trauma will
help characterize the bleeding. Recent viral infections hint at immune thrombocytopenic
purpura. A past medical history of cancer/hematologic malignancy, cardiopulmonary bypass
(thrombocytopenia/platelet function disorder) may illicit causes of bleeding. Family
history of bleeding may be instrumental in making the diagnosis (males primarily in hemophilia).3 Review of medications (β-lactam antibiotics, NSAIDs, aspirin, anticoagulants like
clopidogrel, coumadin or heparin, corticosteroids, fish oil, valproic acid, or selective
serotonin uptake inhibitors) may also help identify a cause of bleeding problems. Social
history of malnutrition, heavy alcohol intake, or physical abuse may become key findings
as well.3


On physical exam, visualization of mucocutaneous bleeding and pinpoint petechiae suggest
a platelet disorder. Hemarthroses or large hematomas point toward a coagulopathy of
clotting factors, with lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly increasing suspicion for
malignancy. Splenomegaly after infection may be due to a postviral immune thrombocytopenic
purpura. Hepatomegaly and jaundice hint at liver failure.3,5


How Does the Patient History Influence Ordering Diagnostic Laboratory
Testing?
When evaluating patients for possible bleeding disorders, the patient history is key to
ordering the most appropriate tests to confirm the suspected diagnosis. In general,
PT/international normalized ratio (INR)/PTT, complete blood count (CBC) with differential,
and platelet function assays are commonly ordered during the initial evaluation of a
bleeding patient. Prothrombin time, aPTT, thrombin time, and fibrinogen are best for
screening if history and physical exam are suggestive of a clotting factor
disorder/coagulopathy. If a platelet plug formation disorder is suspected, platelet
function assays and CBC/diff (which includes platelet count and manual differential) are
excellent screening tests.3,5


What Are the Uses and Limitations of Common Diagnostic Tests Used to Evaluate a
Bleeding Patient?
Usage of PT and aPTT as screening tests are key steps in the initial diagnostic
laboratory evaluation of a bleeding diathesis. Prothrombin time is used to evaluate the
extrinsic pathway (factor VII) and the common pathway (factors X, V, II, and I), with
results recorded in seconds. For patients on heparin, this test counters any possible
heparin anticoagulant effects via usage of protamine sulfate, a low-molecular-weight
compound extracted from salmon sperm that neutralizes heparin.6 One limitation of PT is the reagent variability, which, by company and region,
results in different reference ranges.

International normalized ratio is utilized to standardize PT results worldwide. Different
testing platforms use different phospholipid reagents, some of which are better at
initiating the coagulation cascade than others. The assay’s tissue is evaluated and
compared worldwide among vendors; the resulting ratio calculated is the INR. It is
recommended to utilize the INR instead of PT when reviewing results from outside
facilities. International normalized ratio is also used to evaluate and adjust
anticoagulant dosing of coumadin/warfarin, with an ideal range being between 2 and 3.
Coumadin primarily affects coagulation factors made by usage of vitamin K (Factors II,
VII, IX, X, protein C, protein S). Since factor VII is the sole constituent in the
extrinsic pathway, INR is an excellent test in monitoring warfarin therapy.

Activated partial thromboplastin time is used to evaluate the intrinsic (factors XII, XI,
IX, and VIII) and common pathways, and is also reported in seconds. This test is commonly
used to evaluate effectiveness of heparin therapy. Activated partial thromboplastin time
screening results are prolonged with problems in both common and intrinsic pathways, but
cannot definitively identify a cause, warranting further workup via mixing studies/liver
enzyme assays.3


Platelet count via a CBC and manual differential evaluate the quantity of platelets,
along with visually inspecting the platelets microscopically. This test can rule out
bleeding due to thrombocytopenia but cannot detect pseudothrombocytopenia caused by
platelet clumping. The manual differential can be used to identify platelet clumping and
abnormally large platelets (seen in Bernard Soulier Syndrome and May-Hegglin Anomaly for
example), but large platelets are not diagnostic of any specific disease.3,5


Thrombin time (TT) evaluates for dysfibrinogenemias/hypofibrinogenemias—essentially,
large quantities of factor IIa (thrombin) are added to patient plasma and the resultant
time to clot formation is given in seconds. This is an indirect test; if nonfunctional
fibrinogen is present in the patient plasma, TT will not be able to differentiate a
functional versus a quantitative deficiency.5 Fibrinogen testing is available as well and gives a direct value of the fibrinogen
concentration in mg/dL, but, does not evaluate the qualitative function of the fibrinogen
present.

Mixing studies are primarily used to characterize abnormalities detected in PT/aPTT
screening, namely factor deficiencies versus lupus anticoagulants versus progressive
inhibitors. Patient plasma is mixed with pooled normal plasma of patients with normal
PT/aPTT testing, and then evaluated immediately and after 1 hour of incubation at body
temperature (37°C). If the prolonged value is corrected immediately and after incubation,
it is most likely a factor deficiency. If the value corrects initially then becomes
prolonged after 1 hour of incubation, a progressive inhibitor (like a factor VIII
antibody) is suspect. If there is no correction immediately or after an hour, a lupus
anticoagulant is the most likely cause. Mixing studies are screening tests, and cannot
discern which clotting factor is deficient, and further testing is necessary based on
which test or tests were prolonged (PT or aPTT).3


Factor activity assays measure activity by mixing patient plasma with testing plasma
specifically deficient for the factor in question. These tests are effective in detecting
decreased factor activity but should not be run before a mixing study is evaluated for
factor inhibitors, which would confound the factor activity assay results if present. When
properly utilized, factor activity assays are key for assisting in the diagnosis of
hemophilia A (low factor VIII), hemophilia B/christmas disease (factor IX deficiency), or
hemophilia C (deficient in factor XI).4,7


Platelet function testing is an efficient screening tool used to evaluate the quality of
platelets regardless of clotting factor quality/quantity. Closure time is measured in
seconds as patient citrated plasma is aspirated across a membrane with collagen and
epinephrine (EPI) or collagen and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) in a platelet function
analyzer/microscopic aperture.8 This testing platform has a very high negative predictive value, with some
exceptions, meaning that a normal value is indicative of normal primary hemostasis.
Closure time values are elevated in patients with Bernard Soulier Syndrome, Glanzmann’s
Thrombasthenia, vWD, platelet secretion defects, platelet dense granule deficiencies, ADP
inhibitor medications (like clopidogrel), NSAIDs and aspirin, low vWF activity, liver
disease, uremia, and thrombocytopenia.8 This test is a screening test as well; elevated values warrant follow-up laboratory
testing. Platelet function testing can be influenced by the presence of NSAID’s and
aspirin, giving a falsely elevated value in collagen-EPI, and can also be elevated due to
certain types of foods (cocoa elevates both C-EPI and C-ADP), and type O patients with
naturally lower concentrations of vWF.8


Of historical significance is the bleeding time assay. This test was previously performed
by a phlebotomist. A sphygmomanometer would be inflated to 40 mm Hg, and the phlebotomist
would use a lancet to make 2 superficial incisions in the patient’s ventral forearm. Then,
the phlebotomist would blot the incision with filter paper every 30 seconds until the
bleeding ceased. Usage of this assay in theory would allow providers to evaluate patient’s
ability to control bleeding and thus, platelet quality and function. This test is highly
inaccurate, and was unable to be standardized, with sources of variability and error
fluctuating with each phlebotomist, along with inability to standardize the exact
dimensions/depth of incisions made. Platelet function analyzers have replaced this archaic method.9


Teaching Points
Patient history and physical exam are very effective tools in determining what diseases
belong on the differential diagnosis and what laboratory testing to order.

PT, aPTT, CBC/diff, and platelet function assays are good for initial screening for
bleeding diatheses.

The most common bleeding disorder, von Willebrand disease, will often yield normal PT
and aPTT results, which is why platelet function assays are intrinsic to screen for this
disease.

The most common bleeding disorder in males, hemophilia A, is characterized with a
prolonged aPTT, an immediately corrected mixing study, and below normal factor VIII
activity assay. Hemophilia B is less common but has the same presentation, and a below
normal factor IX activity assay.

Mixing studies that correct immediately indicate a factor deficiency, mixing studies
that do not correct are most likely due to lupus anticoagulants, and mixing studies that
correct immediately and are then prolonged are most likely due to a progressive
inhibitor like a factor VIII antibody.

Laboratory screening to rule in/rule out coagulopathies need to be run in order; the
disease must be evaluated initially via patient history and physical exam findings, then
consider screening tests like PT/PTT/TT/fibrinogen/platelet count/platelet function
assays as needed before ordering for mixing studies or factor activity assays. Ordering
coagulation testing without a well-developed differential diagnosis will lead to a delay
in diagnosis and therapy as well as poor utilization of laboratory resources.

Bleeding time has poor reproducibility and may miss mild platelet function disorders.
Platelet function assays are superior to historical bleeding times in evaluation of
platelet function.

Authors’ Note: The opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily
representative of the official policy of the Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences (USUHS), the Department of Defense (DOD), the United States Army/Navy/Air Force,
or the US Government.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: The article processing fee for this
article was funded by an Open Access Award given by the Society of ‘67, which supports the
mission of the Association of Pathology Chairs to produce the next generation of
outstanding investigators and educational scholars in the field of pathology. This award
helps to promote the publication of high-quality original scholarship in Academic
Pathology by authors at an early stage of academic development.

ORCID iDs: Isaac E. McCool 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8335-9526


Barbara E. C. Knollmann-Ritschel 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4571-2143
==== Refs
References
1 
Knollmann-Ritschel BEC Regula DP Borowitz MJ Conran R Prystowsky MB  
Pathology competencies for medical education and
educational cases . Acad Pathol .
2017 ;4 
doi:10.1177/2374289517715040 .
2 
Data Innovations . Reference Range/Interval
Table . https://datainnovations.com/reference-tables-new. Accessed April 2,
2018 .
3 
Neutze D Roque J  
Clinical evaluation of bleeding a bruising in primary
care . Am Fam Physician .
2016 ;93 :279 –286 .26926815 
4 
Kumar V Abbas A Aster A  , eds. Robbins and Cotran Pathologic Basis of Disease .
9th ed 
Philadelphia, PA :
Elsevier Saunders ;
2015 :116 –122 ,
656 –663 .
5 
Kujovich MJ  
Approach to a bleeding patient .
Lab Med .
2001 ;32 :250 –256 .
doi:10.1309/fdd7-a87u-cx1h-l7gp .
6 
Ni Ainle F Preston RJ Jenkins PV  , et al.
Protamine sulfate down-regulates thrombin generation by inhibiting factor V
activation . Blood .
2009 ;114 :1658 –1665 .
doi:10.1182/blood-2009-05-222109. 
19531655 
7 
Chandler WL Ferrell C Lee J Tun T Kha H  
Comparison of three methods for measuring factor VIII
levels in plasma . Am J Clin Pathol .
2003 ;120 :34 –39 .
doi:10.1309/c8t8ynb4g3w45prf .12866370 
8 
Practical-Haemostasis.com . Platelet Function
Testing: PFA-100 . http://www.practical-haemostasis.com/Platelets/platelet_function_testing_pfa100.html.
Updated January 9, 2013 
Accessed April 4,
2018 .
9 
Harrison P  
The role of PFA-100R testing in the investigation and
management of haemostatic defects in children and adults . Br J
Haematol .
2005 ;130 :3 –10 .
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2141.2005.05511.x .15982339

