
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951876990510.1177_2374289518769905AbstractsAbstracts of the 50th Anniversary Association of Pathology Chairs
Annual Meeting Pathology and Population Health22 5 2018 Jan-Dec 2018 5 2374289518769905© The Author(s) 20182018SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).



The following abstracts were accepted by the Association of Pathology Chairs,
without modification, for poster presentation at the 2017 APC Annual Meeting.
This content was not peer reviewed by Academic Pathology.


cover-dateJanuary-December 2018
==== Body
Education
E001. Residents and Fellows Comprise the Inspection Team for a CAP
Self-Inspection: An Effective Way to Teach Lab Management, Promote
Interprofessional Collaboration, and Prepare Residents for Practice
Stacy G. Beal, MD1, Jesse L. Kresak, MD1, and Tony
Yachnis, MD1


1University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL,
USA
We report our experience at the University of Florida in which residents and
fellows served as the inspection team for a College of American Pathologists
self-inspection. To prepare for the inspection, we provided a series of 4
lunchtime seminars, covering numerous laboratory management topics relating
to inspections and laboratory quality. Preparation for the inspection began
approximately 4 months prior to the date of the inspection. The intent was
to simulate a College of American Pathologists (CAP) peer-inspection, with
the exception that the date was announced. The associate residency program
director of clinical pathology served as the team leader. All residents and
fellows completed inspector training provided by CAP and the team leader
completed the team leader training. A 20-question pretest and posttest was
administered; additionally, an anonymous survey was given after the
inspection. The residents’ and fellows’ posttest scores were an average of
15% higher than on the pretest (P < .01). The survey as
well as subjective comments showed that this experience was a useful tool to
learn accreditation and laboratory management.

E002. Pathology Residents on Rounds: What Are You Doing
Here?
Stacy G. Beal, MD1, Jesse L. Kresak, MD1, Tony
Yachnis, MD1, Vatsal Patel, MD1, and Jong Taek Kim,
MD1


1University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL,
USA
Consultation with colleagues in other departments regarding test selection
and interpretation of results, understanding laboratory processes, and
interprofessional collaboration in activities such as root cause analyses
and quality improvement projects are some of the most common and important
components of the job of a medical director. As such, many of the milestones
set by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education focus on
these activities. We felt that the conventional method of clinical pathology
training, which involved spending the majority of time on the bench in the
laboratory or self-directed learning, did not enhance these skills.
Therefore, we created a new rotation in which the resident serves as a
director for the microbiology, virology, hematology, chemistry,
point-of-care, and electrophoresis laboratory test results under mentorship.
Several components of the curriculum aide in fostering collaboration with
clinical services:The resident attends clinical rounds once per week on a service
of the resident’s choice (with direction from the faculty) and
can tailor it to his/her specific interests. The resident can
choose to attend the same service’s rounds each week in order to
integrate themselves into the clinical team or choose different
services each week to meet a variety of clinicians and learn
about a wide variety of patients. A clinical pathology faculty
member often accompanies the resident on rounds. One of the most
common reactions when pathologists introduce themselves to the
team is a polite but perplexed question, “What are
you doing here?“ which is followed by a
brief explanation of our consultative services and then a warm
welcome from the team.

The resident attends infectious disease (ID) clinical case
conferences and grand rounds. When laboratory-related questions
come up, the resident is able to offer his or her input related
to the topic or case. It is not unusual for the ID fellow who is
presenting a case to ask for microscopic or gross photos which
the resident can provide prior to the presentation.

He or she leads a multidisciplinary plate rounds conference in
the microbiology laboratory, which is an interactive seminar
with trainees and staff from the departments of ID, infection
control, and epidemiology, pharmacy, and pathology. Laboratory
methods and processes are described, usually in the Socratic
method and as an illustration of a few patient cases.

The resident reviews all miscellaneous test requests. This often
involves contacting the physician to discuss the appropriateness
of the test order, possible limitations of the test, and any
possible alternatives.

The resident holds a day pager that is accessible by any
clinician or laboratory technologist.




Residents are sometimes hesitant to serve in the consultative role. However,
they are reminded that it is always appropriate to state whether you are
unsure of the answer to a question but will look into it and follow up
later. The above activities have led to substantial collaboration among
clinicians and pathologists and are generally enjoyed by our residents.

E003. Enhancing Clinical Translation in an Experimental Pathology PhD
Training Program
Janet V. Cross, PhD1, and Christopher Moskaluk, MD,
PhD1


1University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA,
USA
The graduate program in the molecular and cellular basis of disease (MCBD) at
the University of Virginia (UVA) confers the PhD degree in experimental
pathology. The program was established in 2004 with a stated purpose of
providing a graduate training experience with a strong focus on
translational research. The MCBD program draws on the unique environment
provided by the combined clinical and research missions of the UVA
department of pathology to support a unique curriculum that weaves a
disease-centric thread through the entire training predoctoral training
experience.

Students matriculate into the MCBD program near the end of their first year
at UVA, after completing core coursework and research rotations as members
of the umbrella program in Biomedical Sciences (BIMS). Molecular and
cellular basis of disease is one of the 9 degree granting programs that
accept students from the BIMS umbrella. As an interdisciplinary program,
MCBD considers students who are training with mentors holding primary
appointments in any basic science or clinical department, as long as their
proposed research includes a disease focus. Our current roster of 26
students includes trainees working with mentors in 7 basic science
departments and 4 clinical departments/divisions throughout the School of
Medicine and the department of biology.

Once a student has elected to train through MCBD, we devise an individualized
training plan based on his/her research interests. Some aspects of the
training program are quite conventional, including an advancement to
candidacy examination consisting of a written grant proposal and oral
defense. The didactic coursework required for our trainees is designed such
that the lectures and discussions focus on disease topics, each led by a
team composed of a clinician and basic scientist. The students learn about
each disease from these 2 perspectives, gaining an appreciation for how the
disease is diagnosed and treated and the challenges of caring for the
patients as well as an understanding for the state-of-the-art in the
scientific study of the disease. However, the cornerstone of our curriculum
is the rotations in diagnostic and interventional medicine, during which
each student completes 4-week long rotations. Selections are made with the
research interests of the individual student in mind, though all students
are expected to spend at least 1 week in surgical pathology. While on each
rotation, the students are immersed in the daily activities of the service.
While educational in their own right, these rotation experiences also allow
students to establish relationships with our clinical faculty who then serve
as resources for later discussions. Students are encouraged to include these
faculty members on their advisory committee.

Since its inception, MCBD has graduated 17 students with the PhD in
experimental pathology. Many of our alumni have secured successful
postgraduate training opportunities in competitive academic postdocs or, in
the case of our MD/PhD trainees, residencies, and fellowships leading to
faculty positions. Others have launched careers in industry, science
communication, and teaching. Although long-term outcomes will require
additional time, we contend that these students have likely benefited from
unique training opportunities that set our graduates apart from their
peers.

E004. The Role of Quality Management in Quantitative Literacy
Training
Samuel B. Reichberg, MD, PhD1


1Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY, USA
Models of informatics training in medical school, pathology residency, and
informatics pathology subspecialty assume quantitative literacy, but this
often is not the case in our society. Even though pathology and laboratory
data analysis can provide public health information comparable to that of
large planned studies, our involvement in public health studies is limited
by innumeracy. Development of numeracy cannot rely solely on theoretical
instruction or on practice with simulated data. It requires the handling of
actual data as well as expertise in the subject matter. In this study, we
present examples of quality improvement projects carried out with pathology
resident participation. They illustrate the educational opportunities
provided by laboratory and pathology information, as they require data
extraction from different sources, cleanup, use of exploratory data
analysis, and the graphic and tabular communication of results, conclusions,
and actions. Similar data-focused projects can be leveraged within the PIER
framework.


Hypokalemia might help detect primary hyperaldosteronism, yet it
is difficult to detect due to interference by
hemolysis. After analysis of phone call data,
patient and experimental results, the hemolysis index measured
by chemistry instruments was used to cancel spurious K results
and to add warnings of potential hypokalemia-masking hemolysis
to laboratory test reports. This reduced all critical result
calls by nearly one-fourth while making notification of
hyperkalemia more meaningful.

Exactitude in the hemoglobin A1c test (HgbA1c) is essential. Its
imprecision is generally estimated by the coefficient of
variation (CV) of quality control (QC) results, which should not
exceed 1 of 3 of the 6% total error allowed. Increased
imprecision (CV 1.8%-2.0%) had placed the method in borderline
category. We performed exploratory data analysis of 11 453
HgbA1c QC results spanning 6 months and found long-term
fluctuations and high prevalence of outliers. This perspective
brought attention to the frequent interruptions of testing and
test repeats caused by these out-of-control events, and the A1c
instruments were promptly upgraded.

The partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) test is used for the
therapeutic monitoring of intravenous unfractionated heparin
(UFH). Target aPTT intervals are established for each UFH lot
using regression analysis of aPPT versus antiactivated factor X
(aXa) test results. Evaluation of these data revealed that 28.6%
of 234 aPTT results would misclassify patients as being within
the 0.3 to 0.9 U/mL aXa therapeutic interval. That fraction
could be not reduced enough by manipulating aPTT cutoffs. This
led to the partial replacement of the aPTT by the aXa test for
UFH therapeutic monitoring in the institution.




We have thus demonstrated that rigorous mentoring of pathology residents on
data-intensive quality improvement projects can hone their numeracy, the
foundation of informatics training, and eventually lead to a creative role
in the Learning Healthcare System of the future, while familiarizing them
with the complexities of clinical laboratory operations and effecting
favorable outcomes in the delivery of patient care.

E005. Strategic Approach to Restructuring Surgical Pathology Resident
Education in a Subspecialty Practice Model
Aparna Mahajan, MD1, Suzanne Selvaggi, MD1, Robert
Corliss, MD1, Sara Gross1, and Erik Ranheim, MD,
PhD1

1University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health,
Madison, WI, USA

Background: To keep pace with new developments and
subspecialized nature of clinical practice, many academic pathology
departments in the country have transitioned to a subspecialized practice
model in surgical pathology (SP). We found that this transition posed
challenges when structuring the residency education program in SP. The
strategic approach adopted by our institution to manage this issue is
discussed.


Design: At University of Wisconsin Madison, we instituted an SP
Education Committee, comprised of SP faculty, director of SP, residency
program director, laboratory staff, and resident members, tasked to devise
an educational program to meet resident’s needs in the new model. To match
subspecialty (SS) practice, a 2-year didactic curriculum was designed to
supplement resident learning. Conference evaluations were implemented to
provide rapid feedback to faculty. Subspecialty curricula with slide study
sets and examinations specific to each specialty area were developed to
support self-learning and complemented by voluntary evening conferences.
Most challenging was the balancing of resident service needs within
acceptable duty hours. This was met by (1) creation of a unit system for
busier subspecialties to limit the number of large cases grossed by the
resident, (2) implementation of a separate tumor board (TB) rotation to
avoid previewing and sign-out interruption for SP residents, and (3)
limiting biopsy sign out to 3 d/wk and utilizing the remaining 2 days for
frozen sections and added preview/study time. Modules for laboratory
management education in SP were implemented. Recently, we introduced a
frozen section block for our senior residents. To maintain renewed interest
and resident motivation, we implemented formal year-end teaching sessions
conducted by senior residents with an interest in SP.


Results: The immediate impact of these changes showed improved
resident morale and faculty satisfaction of resident performance.
Restructuring the grossing and minimizing interruption during preview and
sign-out enhanced the overall quality of work performed by the residents.
Faculty evaluations on the TB rotation reflected high confidence by majority
of the residents with improved organization and presentation skills. We
observed improvements in our Resident In-Service Examination (RISE) scores
and Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education reviews. However,
we believe that the true impact of these changes will be evident over
time.


Conclusion: Moving to an SS practice model impacts residency
education in SP. Adopting a strategic approach to understanding the issues
and restructuring resident education in this model has shown promising
results within our department. We believe that discussing such educational
strategies at national forums, leading to an exchange of ideas, can help
advance the quality of SP education in an increasingly common SS
setting.

E006. Demystifying Transfusion Medicine for Internal Medicine
residents
Carla R Caruso, MD1, Joseph Merlo, MD, PhD1,
Elizabeth Frauenhoffer, MD1, and Melissa George, DO1


1Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA

Purpose: Transfusion medicine should not simply be viewed as an
isolated branch of medicine. In this discipline, specialists in internal
medicine, surgery, and anesthesiology interact with the blood bank staff
(technicians, trainees, and clinical pathology attendings and nurses). The
main goal of this relationship is to coordinate the delivery of optimal
patient care, often for a complex and critically ill patient population.
Based on our experience and review of the literature, we recognized a
deficit in some basic knowledge concepts of transfusion medicine among
internal medicine residents rotating in our blood bank. These deficiencies
can lead to improper use of blood products and miscommunication between
blood bank staff and clinical teams. Additionally, can cause delays in
urgent patient care and could potentially result in serious patient harm.
Our long-term goal for this project is to include targeted transfusion
medicine education modules in orientation for internal medicine, surgery,
and anesthesiology residency programs. This will foster a better
understanding of appropriate utilization of blood products, basic
immunohematology, and recognition of transfusion reactions, with a secondary
goal of improving communications between clinical teams and blood bank
staff.


Methods: Thirty-two internal medicine residents from first and
second year of the Internal Medicine Program of Penn State Hershey Medical
Center agreed to participate in this study. PGY-3 residents did not
participate in the lectures and, therefore, were excluded from the
assessment. Four educational modules focusing on blood products,
identification of red blood cell antibodies, ABO/Rh compatibility, and
transfusion reactions were specially developed for internal medicine
residents. The 30-minute modules were presented during noon conference on 2
consecutive days. An anonymous online-based survey (SurveyMonkey) with
multiple choice questions was sent 3 days prior and 15 days after the
lectures. γ2 distribution analysis was utilized to estimate the
statistical significance of the results.


Results: All residents (32 of 32) answered the pre- and
post-lecture assessments. The results showed a statistically significant
improvement in the knowledge of blood products and their use
(P = .023), red cell antibody identification
(P = .024), and ABO/Rh compatibility
(P = .004). There was a trend toward adequate knowledge
of transfusion reactions. Anecdotally, participants in the educational
intervention note improved utilization of blood products in their clinical
practice.


Conclusion: Our data suggest that training incoming residents
with brief modules targeting specific blood bank and blood transfusion
principles results in significant improvement in medical knowledge. The
participants note increased confidence in blood utilization and smoother
communication with the blood bank. Future studies are necessary to determine
the outcome on improving patient care, reducing unnecessary blood product
utilization and errors caused by miscommunication.

E007. Objective Structured Pathology Examination (OSPE): Novel Curricular
Tool for the Evaluation of Residents in Anatomic Pathology
Alexander Chan, MD1, Dana Warfield1, Sondra Zabar,
MD1, and Amy Rapkiewicz, MD1


1New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY,
USA

Introduction: The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
Education’s (ACGME) next accreditation system demands greater accountability
for postgraduate education on the part of training programs. Objective
structured clinical examinations (OSCE) have become a mainstay in
undergraduate and graduate medical education, particularly in the evaluation
and assessment of clinical skills as they relate to continuum of training.
As the criterion-based milestones have been clearly delineated by the ACGME,
pathology residency programs are in need of new assessment tools that can be
used to objectively evaluate resident performance. Predominately relying on
direct observation of clinical responsibilities will fall short of truly
evaluating a resident’s competence in practice. In the ACGME pathology
residency milestones, one of the suggested methods of evaluation is
simulation, but there is little literature on the development and
implementation of OSCE in the pathology residency-training forum.
Simulations allow for the evaluation of learners and can be used to show
developmental progression for both common situations as well as for uncommon
situations not readily encountered in a clinical setting. These examinations
can also identify areas of weakness such as in system-based practice that
are hidden from routine rote evaluations. We developed and conducted 5
interactive case-based objective structured pathology examinations twice a
year over 2 years that are linked to the ACGME pathology milestones and
evaluate residents formatively with immediate feedback.


Methods: Objective Structured Pathology Examination (OSPE) was
created by a group of pathologists and clinicians according to the OSCE
blueprint model developed by Zabar et al. The interactive structured
simulation event sessions were conducted with an attending pathologist
(associate program director) and a resident role-playing in mock clinical
scenarios. See figure for an example of an OSPE session blueprint. Detailed
instructor notes were written to guide the attending pathologist so that the
assessments of the goals of the interaction were addressed with each
resident. A milestone-linked evaluation matching the learning objectives was
completed immediately after the interaction and discussed with the resident
at that time.


Conclusion and Lessons Learned: The milestone-linked data
collected show measured improvements in tested areas over the 2.5 years. The
OSPE is a robust and reliable structured evaluation tool that will enhance
the way in which pathology residents can be evaluated with regard to many
ACGME milestones, especially system-based practice and communication skills.
Residents appreciated and valued the immediate feedback regarding their
performance.

E008. Improving Patient Care Through Resident Readiness: Pre-AP Call
Simulation Workshop
Xinhai Zhang, MD1, Summer Blount, MD1, Li Lei, MD,
PhD1, Yan Hu1, Carol Hollstein1, Justin
Kerstetter, MD1, and Mia Perez, MD1


1Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA,
USA

Introduction: Contrary to the clinical pathology training which
does not require the residents to take calls until the second year, the
residents start to take anatomic pathology (AP) calls* shortly after their
training begins. However, due to the limited exposure to AP prior to
residency, the PGY-1 residents generally have no concept of routine surgical
pathology work flow, no experience of proper grossing techniques, and no
clear idea of how essential the accurate and efficient pathologic diagnoses
are on patient-care decisions. Therefore, it is not uncommon that mistakes
can be made by new residents during evening and weekend calls. In turn, this
will increase the anxiety for new residents to take calls. Therefore, we
initiated this pre-AP call simulation workshop.


Methods: During a 3-hour workshop, 26 scenario-based
simulation-style questions that were likely encountered during AP calls were
presented to PGY-1 residents and appropriate guidelines for responding to
these clinical situations with detailed explanation were offered and
discussed. A field trip to the labs was also included to demonstrate how to
handle the specimens when facing the urgent calls. Meanwhile, a 10-question
survey was given to answer pre- and postworkshop, so as to determine whether
the workshop was helpful in decreasing their anxiety level and increasing
their appropriate response in taking the actual calls.


Conclusion: Based on the statistical analysis of the workshop,
it appears to be an efficient way to prepare the PGY-1 residents for their
on-coming AP calls, including improving their understanding and expectation
of the AP calls, self-confidence of taking calls properly, and avoiding
errors that might arise in taking calls. The workshop has been adopted as
part of the training courses for PGY-1 residents routinely.


Note: *AP calls for PGY1 resident reflect the extended work
hours (up to 10 pm when covering after hour-frozen sections). After
10 pm, the PGY2 to 4 residents cover the AP calls.

E009. Integration of Technological Tools in Resident and Fellow Education:
the University of California at Davis Health System Experience
Hooman H. Rashidi, MD1, and Kristin A Olson, MD1


1University of California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento,
CA, USA
Increasing time constraints and educational expectations for all residents
and fellows have created curricular challenges for training programs. These
challenges include an escalating pressure to incorporate newer disciplines
(eg, molecular pathology) into an already saturated curriculum, as well as
an increasing need to educate residents and fellows in pathology and other
medical specialties on the role that the pathologist should play in patient
care. Technological tools allow for an efficient means of enhancing our
teaching of these concepts in the residency and fellow training
environment.

At the University of California Davis Health System, we have pathology
residents, hematopathology fellows, and hematology/oncology fellows
regularly rotating on our hematopathology service. In addition to regular
one-on-one teaching sessions at the microscope and white board, we use our
virtual hematology atlas as a self-learning tool in the hematopathology
rotation for all trainees. This digital hematology atlas is available online
and as a free iPhone/iPad app to orient residents and fellows to the basics
of hematology (eg, vocabulary, cellular morphology) prior to and during the
hematopathology rotation. We have also included several self-assessment
modules within this digital atlas to allow residents and fellows to test
their knowledge before, during, and after each rotation. These tools include
randomly generated multiple choice quizzes on peripheral blood and bone
marrow and matching quizzes that assess the user’s basic hematology
knowledge, along with a novel virtual slide assessment tool that allows for
review of the hematopoietic elements in a rapid, efficient manner. The
material in the atlas can then be reviewed with the trainees during a
didactic session, with inclusion of discussion about the roles played by the
pathologist at different stages in providing excellent patient care.

Another example of the use of technology in our curriculum is the use of
audience response software in our board review sessions. Our faculty
pathologists have collaborated in the design and implementation of a board
review curriculum based on recommendations and public domain data from the
American Board of Pathology (ABP), the College of American Pathologists, and
the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education.

The utilization of this new board review curricular approach allows for a
consistent, systematic review of topics on the ABP board certification
examination, while also offering participants an opportunity to test their
own knowledge and receive “just in time” teaching and feedback. To maximize
the practical applicability of these sessions, the discussion held after
each question also explores practical issues, such as the role of the
pathologist in the patient’s care for a specific condition, recommendations
that could be made to optimize patient management and how to approach
communication about sensitive issues with clinical colleagues. These
audience response lecture sessions have been well received by our trainees,
and we intend to refine and improve these further based on resident and
fellow feedback.

E010. Weekly Clinicopathologic Conferences as a Means of Teaching
Gastroenterology Fellows About the Pathologist as Consultant
Kristin A. Olson, MD1, Dorina Gui, MD, PhD1, Karen
Matsukuma, MD, PhD1, Tao Wang, MD, PhD1, and Hooman H.
Rashidi, MD1


1University of California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento,
CA, USA
Regular education of clinicians on the consultant role of the pathologist is
clearly essential, particularly as our collective medical knowledge
exponentially expands in an increasingly complex health-care system. As at
many academic medical centers, the pathologists at the University of
California at Davis Health System have a long-standing tradition of
contributing to the medical education of our clinical colleagues and
trainees. One such example of this is our weekly gastrointestinal
clinicopathologic conference, in which our gastroenterology fellows select
several interesting cases to review at the multiheaded microscope with a
gastrointestinal pathologist. Other regular attendees of this conference
include gastroenterologists on faculty, internal medicine residents rotating
on the gastroenterology service, medical students rotating on the
gastroenterology or pathology service, and interested pathology residents
and fellows. Each case begins with the gastroenterology fellow presentation
of the patient’s clinical history, physical examination findings, laboratory
and imaging results, and endoscopy findings. This is followed by the
pathologist-led description of the histopathologic findings, with specific
questions asked by the pathologist of the gastroenterology fellows to
increase fellow preparedness for the gastroenterology board certification
examination. Perhaps, most important is the subsequent, often robust
discussion and analysis of the clinical and pathological differential
diagnoses and where they overlap. When cases are particularly
challenging—whether due to an unusual or complex patient presentation, a
significant discrepancy in the clinical and pathological differential
diagnosis, or technical challenges in the procurement and processing of
tissue—this provides fertile ground for a discussion on the best approach to
consulting both anatomic and clinical pathology. We also use this weekly
forum to remind our gastroenterology fellows of several key issues at the
interface between gastroenterology and pathology, including the need to
provide all relevant clinical history on the requisition form, the
importance of procuring sufficient tissue from the correct location to
establish the diagnosis (eg, numerous deeper biopsies are needed to evaluate
for invasion in potentially malignant masses or how biopsies of an
esophageal ulcer bed are best to evaluate mesenchymal cells for
cytomegalovirus infection), how to approach the grouping and labeling of
tissue biopsies by container to balance cost to the health-care system with
the gastroenterologist’s need for accurate information, how to submit more
complex specimens for the most informative results (eg, pinning out and
orienting endoscopic mucosal resections), and a review of the expected time
course and steps involved in the processing and diagnosis of tissue
specimens. In addition, we discuss issues particularly relevant to clinical
pathology, including the best approach to submitting specimens to
microbiology or hematopathology and caveats in the interpretation of
laboratory results such as liver “function” tests and autoimmune disease
panels. Although this conference does require an investment of pathologist
time and effort, we have found that this repeated and reinforced emphasis on
how best to use pathology in consultation to be very helpful in reducing the
number of problematic cases, enabling us to be more helpful still in the
evaluation of our shared patients.

E011. Transfusion Medicine Education for Medical Students
Andrew D, Johnson, MD1, Nicole D. Zantek, MD, PhD1,
Mary Ramey1, and Claudia S. Cohn, MD, PhD1


1University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN,
USA

Background: Transfusion of blood products is the most common
procedure performed at hospitals and medical facilities, most often under
the supervision of physicians without subspecialty training in transfusion
medicine. There are already established curricula delineating which topics
should be included in transfusion medicine education. How this information
is distributed is not clear. Surveys have shown that many trainees receive 1
to 2 transfusion medicine lectures, and some programs do not include
transfusion medicine in their formal training.


Discussion: At our university, we offer a comprehensive and
multifaceted curriculum given throughout their time as medical students,
ranging from didactics to interactive hands-on simulations. In year 1 to 2
of medical school, there are 3 distinct lecture sessions. The lectures and
small-group sessions cover introductory topics including red cell antigens,
antibody characteristics, fundamental blood bank testing, transfusion
indications, and possible complications, as well as coagulation
concepts.

In year 2 of medical school, students participate in a small-group simulation
of a transfusion reaction. A high fidelity simulator is utilized, and the
students assess the “patient” and determine the need for a transfusion. An
acute hemolytic transfusion reaction occurs, and the students work to
diagnose the reaction and manage the patient appropriately. Discussion and
learning are included in a debriefing session.

The elective clerkship in year 3 to 4 offers active participation in our busy
transfusion service. It offers emersion in many aspects of transfusion
medicine, covering transfusion reactions, observe antibody workups, and
participate in the care of apheresis patients.


Conclusion: Transfusion medicine knowledge is an important
skill for a variety of physicians in training. Many different techniques or
teaching styles can be utilized to deliver this information. The transfusion
medicine faculties at our institution are involved in multiple ways to help
provide medical student training over the course of their education.

Practice
P001. Quality Improvement Intervention for Reduction of Redundant
Testing
Alan Ducatman, MD, MS1, Barbara S. Ducatman, MD2,
Danyel H. Tacker, PhD2, and Peter L. Perotta, MD2


1West Virginia University School of Public Health, Morgantown,
WV, USA

2West Virginia University School of Medicine, Morgantown, WV,
USA
In the setting of residual use of creatine kinase M and B isoenzyme (CKMB)
testing for myocardial infarction (MI), we assessed disease outcomes of
discordant CKMB (+)/troponin I (cTnI)(−) test pairs in order to address
anticipated clinician concerns about potential loss of case-finding
sensitivity following proposed discontinuation of routine CK and CK MB
testing. Time-sequenced interventions were introduced at West Virginia
University Hospitals (WVUH). The main outcome was the percentage of cardiac
marker studies performed within guidelines. Nonguideline orders dominated at
baseline. Creatine kinase M and B isoenzyme testing in 7496 order sets
failed to detect additional MIs but was associated with 42 potentially
preventable admissions/quarter. Interruptive computerized soft stops
improved guideline compliance from 32.3% to 58% (P <
.001) in cardiology and nonacademic hospitalists not receiving peer-leader
intervention and to >80% (P < .001) in emergency
medicine with peer leadership that featured dashboard feedback about test
order performance. This successful experience was recapitulated in
interrupted time series within the other 2 services and then in 2-system
hospitals, Jefferson Medical Center, a critical access facility, and
Berkeley Medical Center. Improvements have been sustained postintervention.
Laboratory cost savings at WVUH were estimated to be US$635 000/year. not
including the incalculable additional value of preventing unneeded
admissions. National collaborative data demonstrated improvement in cardiac
marker utilization from fourth to first quartile compared to peer norms.
This example illustrates how pathologists can provide leadership in
assisting clinicians in changing laboratory ordering practices. We found
that clinicians respond to local laboratory data about their own test
performance and evidence suggesting harm is more compelling to clinicians
than evidence of cost savings. Our experience indicates that interventions
done at an academic facility can be readily instituted by private
practitioners at external facilities. The intervention data also supplement
the existing literature that electronic order interruptions are more
successful when combined with modalities that rely on peer education
combined with dashboard feedback about laboratory order performance. The
findings may have implications for the role of the pathology laboratory in
the ongoing pivot from quantity-based to value-based health care.

P002. Laboratory Utilization Management at Vanderbilt University Medical
Center
Julie Field, PhD1, Megan Youngblood, MBA1, Dikshya
Bastakoty, PhD1, Cristina Pacheco, MD1, Laura
Fairbrother, MS, LCGC1, Adam Seegmiller, MD, PhD1,
Mary Zutter, MD, PhD1, Alexandra Kovach, MD1, and
Gordon Bernard, MD1


1Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN,
USA
The ever-increasing rate of scientific discoveries and technological advances
have propelled health care to an era of unprecedented growth. This growth
comes with the promise of personalized care tailored to each individual’s
health history and genetic makeup. A large part of this individualized
approach to care can be attributed to the advancement in laboratory testing,
which has led to a plethora of options for diagnostic tests, which
necessitates tools to ensure only the most optimal tests are utilized. At
Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC), our goal is to provide the
highest quality evidence-based, personalized, and cost-effective health
care. To support this goal, a Medical Center Laboratory Formulary was
developed as a multidisciplinary approach to the evaluation and use of
laboratory testing.

The VUMC Laboratory Formulary initiative was chartered by the Medical Center
Medical Board. The formulary committee is composed of physicians from
multiple clinical disciplines. This core group of voting members is invested
with the authority to approve, eliminate, and/or restrict testing. The
committee collaborates with other clinical teams, laboratory operations and
administration and information technology to identify opportunities for
improvement and to implement committee decisions. The initiative aimed to
develop a formulary composed of approved laboratory tests that are
categorized based on restrictions that ensure appropriate utilization of
tests. To meet this goal, we started with a list of all tests offered at the
time at VUMC and began a 2-pronged approach that (1) identified tests that
were overutilized or had minimal value in patient care and (2) implemented a
system of vetting new tests based on evidence of positive impact on clinical
care before adding to the formulary.

The laboratory formulary was approved in June 2015; in January 2016, the
laboratory formulary implemented restrictions on reference laboratory
ordering for inpatients with long turn-around times. At the same time, we
began genetic counselor and pathologist review of all send out genetic
tests. To date, the initiative has eliminated 8 tests and restricted more
than 8 tests. Six new tests have also been added after careful evaluation by
the Laboratory Formulary Committee. Although the positive impact on patient
care can be difficult to capture, the financial impact of the laboratory
formulary efforts from January 2015 through October 2016 has been at least
US$790 000 in reduction of ordering of tests without any negative feedback
or negative impact on patient care.

P003. Improving American Health Care Through Laboratory Leadership: A Project
SantaFe Report
James M. Crawford, MD, PhD1, Khosrow Shotorbani, MBA, MT
(ASCP)2, Guarav Sharma, MD3, Michael Crossey, MD,
PhD2, Tarush Kothari, MD, MPH1, and Nancy Fisher,
MBA2

1Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY, USA

2TriCore Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, USA

3Henry Ford Health Laboratories, Detroit, MI, USA
In vitro diagnostics, the industry term for clinical laboratory services
represents US$73B of the US$3T spent on US health care—about 2.5%. And yet,
this sector of health care informs the majority of health-care management
decisions. Only recently have laboratories become actively engaged in
developing their value propositions beyond laboratory transactions as a
commodity service.

Project Santa Fe was founded in March 2016, as a coalition of like-minded
national leaders and reputable institutions in laboratory diagnostics. Our
goal is to create and help drive the new frontiers that will define the
future economic valuation and placement of laboratory diagnostic services in
American health care. Serving first as a think tank for innovation and
reassessment of the role of laboratories in health care, the participants in
Project Santa Fe represent major regional health systems that can
operationalize laboratory-driven innovations and test their valuation in
diverse marketplaces in the United States. These value statements are
relevant to patients and the consumer populations that they represent,
health-care providers, and payers, including both the insurer sector of
health care and the employers that bear a major portion of the health care
spent. Besides testing programming pilots, our goal is to develop scalable
opportunities for clinical laboratories across the breadth of the
industry.

Core activities of Project Santa Fe membership will include:Analytics on data streams so as to achieve real-time risk
stratification of populations, identification, and correction of
care gaps, tracking of populations of patients with chronic
diseases and interventions as indicated, and implementation of
novel technologies and analytics into laboratory
diagnostics.

Working with clinical and administrative leadership in our
respective health systems and implementation of clinical
programs based on laboratory-generated information streams.

Advocacy efforts to align new clinical protocols/guidelines with
these innovative practice models.

Optimizing laboratory payment using these new models.




Project Santa Fe participants will track progress through the following
mechanisms:Thought leadership, as through the publication of white
papers.

Identification of opportunities for health-care innovation
through laboratory-driven analytics.

Success in implementing scalable protocols that utilize
evidence-based diagnostics and pathology consultation as a means
of driving improved clinical outcomes and decreased total
cost-of-care.

Demonstration projects, leveraging the substantial geographies of
the member health systems.

Business leadership of this future lab model.




Our goal is to serve as exemplars for the value proposition of in-system
laboratory services. In so doing, we hope to emerge as a nationally
recognized expert coalition in providing high-value diagnostic consultation
and clinical programming beyond the ability to perform tests. In this
fashion, Project Santa Fe is a mechanism for its members to design a new
health-care approach that leverages clinical laboratories to directly
improve the patient experience, lower the costs of health-care delivery, and
improve population health (the Triple Aim). Project Santa Fe aims to drive
innovation through the assembled efforts of the membership and to build the
evidence base for laboratory valuation in the next era of US health
care.

P004. Improving Test Utilization: The Yale-New Haven Health System
Experience
Roa Harb, MD1, Marie Landry, MD1, Scott Sussman,
MD, FHM, FACP1, and Jeff Cotton1


1Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
Laboratory testing is a cornerstone of modern medicine, yet it is estimated
that 20% to 45% of all laboratory testing is unnecessary or inappropriate.
In addition to wasting resources, inappropriate testing can cause patient
harm, start the testing cascade, increase hospital length of stay and add to
legal liability. To address this problem at Yale New Haven Hospital, a
Laboratory Formulary Committee (LFC) cochaired by a laboratory medical
director and a hospitalist and comprised of representatives from varied
clinical services from 3 system hospitals, pharmacy, and hospital IT was
convened in November 2015. The goals of the LFC are to (1) establish the
process for reviews, approvals, and communication; (2) increase awareness of
LFC as the filter and governing body for these decisions; (3) work on
focused utilization areas of opportunity; (4) develop best practice
guidelines; and (5) implement specific clinical decision support strategies.
With full institutional support, the committee secured project management,
EPIC (HIS) and Beaker (LIS) resources to develop tools to both guide and
monitor test utilization.

Members of the committee and others are encouraged to submit proposals to
improve test utilization. Content experts and stakeholders are consulted.
The hospital community is informed via email and feedback obtained.
Agreement is negotiated among 3 system hospitals and voted on in the
committee. The appropriate EPIC tool is selected and implemented. A bypass
mechanism for special cases is provided. Results are monitored, problems
addressed, and EPIC controls adjusted as needed. Initiatives have included
(1) enforcing minimum ordering intervals (range 24 hours to once in a
lifetime) for an increasing list of tests, (2) eliminating creatine kinase M
and B isoenzyme for clinical use, (3) eliminating redundant/outdated thyroid
function tests, (4) reducing inappropriate Mg orders, (5) restricting factor
V Leiden and prothrombin gene testing to outpatients, (6) restricting
genetic tests to outpatients when feasible, (7) reducing urine cultures in
asymptomatic patients first in the emergency department then on the
inpatient wards, (8) creating a CSF order set to guide appropriate ordering,
(9) restricting folate and eliminating RBC folate, (10) optimizing ionized
calcium, and (11) streamlining monoclonal gammopathy orders. Results of
selected initiatives in our first year and a list of EPIC tools are provided
below. The impact of this committee is measured in terms of both blood and
financial savings. In summary, the LFC, with the support of EPIC tools, has
made a significant impact in our first year to optimize test utilization,
promote efficiency, and improve outcomes.

P005. Shared Decision-Making Between Payers, Pathologists, and Providers in
Areas of Complex Genetic Testing
Arundhati Rao, MD, PhD1, Sheila M. Dobin, PhD1,
David R. Krauss, MD1, and Angela Soto, MS1


1Scott & White Medical Center—Temple, Temple, TX, USA
Value-based reimbursement has the potential to deliver high-quality care at
lower cost but is often impeded by a lack of commitment and failure of
communication at different levels of care. One of the least recognized
meaningful collaborations may be between payers and providers, particularly
with regard to diagnostic medicine including complex diagnostic laboratory
tests. An interprofessional approach to shared decision-making linking
multiple professionals and health-care levels with patients and their
families has been extensively discussed and adopted as best practice, but
reimbursement decisions still occur in a siloed fashion.

As part of an integrated health network system, the Scott and White Health
plan covers a sizeable component of the patient population in the Central
Texas area. With the explosion of complex, high-cost, multianalyte genetic
tests in the areas of prenatal screening, reimbursement issues with
inherited diseases including cardiovascular syndromes, oncology
predisposition, and predictive tests were becoming significant. A
multidisciplinary team including health plan medical directors, clinicians
from relevant disciplines, and pathology representatives outlined guidelines
from best practice documents including the National Comprehensive Cancer
Care Network, American College of Obstetrics, American College of Medical
Genetics among others, and implemented preauthorization requirements for
submission. Routine reviews of subsequent requisitions were performed by
pathology representatives as part of the evaluation team. Approval rates of
over 250 requests in a 6-month period were 56% with turn-around time of
consistently less than 24 hours.

Denials were broken down into categories: (1) lack of pertinent clinical
information, (2) wrong or misleading clinical information, (3) lack of or
insufficient evidence of clinical guidelines, and (4) wrong test ordered
particularly with regard to targeted mutations versus panel tests.
Requisition forms were revised to incorporate missing information
responsible for denials, particularly in cases with requests for BRCA
testing in individuals with no personal history of cancer but with a close
relative with a history of ovarian cancer. Request denials included lack of
pedigrees, cases with identification of fourth-degree relatives with ovarian
cancer and cases of undocumented ovarian cancer with no history of
pathological subtype or survival data. Educational material outlining
appropriate guidelines are being developed, particularly for nongenetic
practitioners, to improve appropriate utilization targeting an increase in
approval rates and patient satisfaction.

P006. From Internal Operations to HEDIS to Payors, a Laboratory Data Lake
That Maximizes Value From Pathology Results
Liya Lomsadze1 and Tylis Y Chang, MD1


1Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY, USA

Overview: Pathology data have the distinct advantages of being
diagnostic for many diseases, digital, discrete, real time, and objective.
Their major disadvantages include being spread across data silos, held in
mission critical transactional systems and require database, domain, and
system knowledge to extract and interpret without risking laboratory or
hospital operations. To circumvent these challenges, a laboratory data lake
was created that consumes laboratory, pathology, clinical, and billing data.
This tool has been used to optimize laboratory operations, fulfill
Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS) requirements to
payors and explore and derive value in risk adjustment processes under
insurance contracts and care management processes.


Initial Implementation: Recognizing the need to liberate data
from laboratory information systems in order to optimize internal laboratory
processes, we developed tools to automate data extraction from LIS’s and
make these data accessible to laboratory professionals in a simple web-based
interface. These “self-service” tools provide simple reporting such as
volume and turn-around time as well as complex reporting correlating results
across time and different domains. Users can run their own reports through a
user-friendly interface, interact in real-time with the data, or download
these results into Excel for further manipulations.


The Provider Value Stream: As providers and clinical practices
need to demonstrate value, their data requirements have increased beyond
simple reporting models and the capabilities of their own EMRs. We have used
our tools to develop practice management tools and tailored reports that
focus on the practices’ unique patient needs.


Realizing Value With Payors and HEDIS: The Healthcare
Effectiveness Data and Information Set comprises health-care measures used
by the government and over 90% of payors. Many of these measures arise from
laboratory data. Using the data lake, we were able to rapidly merge data
from 3 laboratory information sources and 2 billing data sources to provide
complete data across the domain set. Payors, recognizing the challenges of
data extraction processes, have funded these efforts to get these data.


Risk Adjustment and the Value of Data in the Insurance Market:
The health insurance market in the United States is highly regulated in
order to prevent “cherry-picking” and “lemon-dropping.” To accomplish this,
the Medicare advantage market, comprising 32% of Medicare enrollees,
implemented a risk adjustment process that was adopted by the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) insurance market. Risk adjustment depends upon insurers’
ability to accurately identify enrollees with chronic conditions such as
diabetes, hepatitis, and cancer. Documenting a condition can be worth
between US$6000 and US$196 000. Claims data available to insurers are lossy,
are missing results, and have a 4- to 5-month lag. We used our
infrastructure to rapidly identify underdocumented patients so that our
insurance company could claim a more accurate adjustment factor.


Care Management and the Future of Data: As price compression
lowers the value of volume, we have partnered with care management to manage
risk pools of patients for the health system. These efforts include risk
stratification and the development of care management “critical values“ to
assist in identifying and preventing avoidable emergency department and
hospital admissions, thus improving both health and financial outcomes.

P007. From “Curbside Consults” to an Integrated Diagnostic Consulting
Service: A New Role for Clinical Pathologists
Semyon A. Risin, MD, PhD1, Lei Chen, MD1, Amer
Wahed, MD1, Andy N. D. Nguyen, MD1, Graham V. Segal,
MD1, and Robert L. Hunter, MD, PhD1


1University of Texas––Houston McGovern Medical School, Houston,
TX, USA
Evaluation for rheumatologic conditions, especially the laboratory testing,
may be challenging for primary care physicians (PCPs) and more so for nurse
practitioners. It is error prone, often involves ordering unnecessary tests,
multiple blood draws, and patient’s visits to PCPs, which cause delays in
the referrals to rheumatologists and in initiation of appropriate treatment.
To address these issues at the Harris Health Hospital System, which is one
of the major safe-net health-care organization in the United States, we had
initiated with an input from rheumatologists a project which started as a
pilot study in 2012 and was fully implemented system-wide in July of 2014
when federal funding for this initiative was secured through Delivery System
Reform Incentive Payment program. The project was conducted in close
collaboration with the Ambulatory Service Administration, Medical Directors
of the Clinics, and PCPs. The objectives were to simplify the test ordering
process by implementing a disease-specific algorithmic approach to
facilitate further the diagnostic process by pathologists reviewing
clinical, laboratory, and all other diagnostic data and issuing a
comprehensive diagnostic consult report with recommendations on referring
patients to rheumatologists as needed. We called this a “one-click process”
for providers and a “one-step process” for patients emphasizing the intent
to eliminate unnecessary multiple steps, making the process more efficient
and error-proof.

Between 2014 and 2016, we have issued about 3800 comprehensive diagnostic
consulting reports. As a result of system-wide implementation of this
project, we were able to essentially avoid unnecessary and duplicate tests,
eliminate about 90% of unneeded referrals, decrease the average waiting time
for obtaining a referral appointment more than in half (from 6 months to 1-3
months), decrease the rate of rejected referrals due to incomplete testing
from 40% to less than 3%, and decrease the average number of patients visits
to phlebotomists before establishing the diagnosis from 2.7 to 1.0. Most
importantly, we have created a prototype of a functional billable
integrative CP Consulting Service and established a new consulting role for
clinical pathologists that we can expand to other areas of clinical
pathology and to other health-care organizations.

P008. Harnessing Laboratory Data to Identify Undocumented Sepsis Cases
Eligible for Risk Stratification
Liya Lomsadze1, Stefan Juretschko, PhD1, Tylis Y.
Chang, MD1, and Gregory Berry, PhD1


1Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY, USA

Background: The health insurance market in the United States is
regulated to prevent insurers from insuring only the healthy and leaving the
unhealthy without coverage. Adjustments to account for the varying levels of
illness among insured populations are done after the fact in order to
account for the increased medical costs associated with less healthy
members. One such risk adjustment framework originated with Medicare
Advantage plans and was extended to others through the Affordable Care Act.
Affected insurers document the medical conditions of their members using a
Hierarchical Condition Coding (HCC) system, and the health of each insured
population is compared across the health insurance market. Supplements are
then paid to insurers with particularly sick patients, whereas insurers with
healthier populations are required to pay into the system.


Opportunity: Northwell Health Laboratories was engaged by an
insurance company whose challenges included limited historical data on their
members’ chronic conditions and inadequate clinical documentation of acute
conditions. Our help was sought in identifying which of their members had
conditions relevant for a risk adjustment. Sepsis is one of the more
valuable conditions to document in the risk adjustment framework.


Methods: Two databases, 1 including insurance plan members
(based on billing data) and the other including laboratory results, were
cross-referenced to find laboratory results on the relevant patient
population. Potential sepsis cases were identified by examining positive
blood culture results. Clear cases of blood culture contamination were
excluded based on established clinical microbiology practices. Feedback on
identified potential sepsis cases was sought from the insurer, and the
financial impact of identifying sepsis cases using laboratory data was then
estimated using HCC coefficients.


Results: In a covered population of 110 000 insured
individuals, 29 patients had positive blood culture results performed at our
laboratory between January 1 and September 28, 2016. Seven patients were
excluded for suspected blood culture contamination. The remaining 22
patients with positive blood cultures suggestive of sepsis were shared with
the insurance company. Fourteen of the 22 identified patients were eligible
for risk adjustment. Of these 14 patients, only 7 had been identified as
sepsis cases, whereas the additional 7 had not been documented. Sepsis falls
under the HCC category “septicemia, sepsis, systemic inflammatory response
syndrome/shock.” Documenting 1 patient with sepsis is worth approximately
US$53 000 per year. Based on this calculation, the additional 7 suspected
sepsis cases identified represent an additional US$371 000 in potentially
realized revenue to the insurer.


Conclusion: In conclusion, we used laboratory databases to
identify 7 suspected sepsis cases that were likely eligible for risk
adjustment but were missed due to inadequate clinical documentation. This
represents 50% of eligible cases and a revenue opportunity of over US$371
000.

P009. Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia, It’s Time for Intervention:
Uncovering Inappropriate Testing and Management Practices
Ryan S. Okal, MD1, Megan Bodge, PharmD, BCOP1, and
Jeffrey A. Vos, MD1


1West Virginia University School of Medicine, Morgantown, WV,
USA
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is a potentially catastrophic
complication of heparin therapy and a condition troubled by challenging
testing and clinical management algorithms. Although the “4T” score is a
useful tool for evaluating the likelihood of thrombocytopenia being related
to heparin exposure, its use in practice appears to be limited. Furthermore,
appropriate testing strategies and interpretation continue to be a source of
confusion among physicians. We set out to determine the scope of test
utilization and patient management problems related to HIT as well as
possible interventions for improvement.

As an initial step, we evaluated test ordering practices for HIT and
determined a need for laboratory oversight related to interpretation of the
screening enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) as well as appropriate
confirmatory testing by serotonin release assay (SRA). We instituted a
protocol whereby ELISA interpretation by the pathologist was followed by
chart review and discussion with the ordering clinician for all positive
results to correlate the clinical findings and determine the appropriateness
of confirmatory SRA testing. Prior to this protocol, the majority of
patients with suspected HIT received concomitant screening and confirmatory
testing (74%). After our intervention, confirmatory SRA testing
significantly decreased (23.6%).

Next, we retrospectively reviewed all ELISA and SRA tests ordered at our
institution from July to November 2016 to evaluate testing and patient
management practices. During this period, 143 ELISA and 19 SRA tests were
ordered. Despite ongoing pathologist intervention, our review found examples
of inappropriate test utilization to include testing without heparin
exposure (35 of 125, 28%), duplicate tests within a single encounter (18 of
143, 12.6%), and lack of needed confirmatory testing (8 of 19, 42.1%).
Furthermore, patient safety and management-related issues were analyzed by
reviewing the electronic medical records of patients who underwent HIT
testing. We identified inappropriate management practices to include
patients receiving heparin while testing was pending (33 of 0125, 26.4%),
patients receiving heparin after a positive test result (3 of 23, 13.0%),
and patients not receiving appropriate alternative anticoagulation (98 of
125, 78.4%). Within the subset of patients receiving appropriate alternative
anticoagulation therapy, some were delayed in receiving therapy (8 of 27,
29.6%), whereas 1 patient received extended therapy. Expert consultation by
the hematology service was utilized in less than half of encounters (51 of
125, 40.8%). However, fewer patients were exposed to heparin during the
testing process and more patients received appropriate anticoagulation
therapy when hematologist consultation was sought, although these trends did
not reach statistical significance.

Clinician education, close medication monitoring, and laboratory oversight of
testing will improve diagnosing HIT, reduce unnecessary testing, and improve
patient safety and management practices. In particular, pathologist
involvement in test interpretation as well as early hematology consultation
appears to improve testing and clinical management practices.

P010. Improving Time-In-Therapeutic Range for Warfarin Anticoagulation: Role
of Pathology in an Enterprise-Wide Standardization Effort
Tarush Kothari, MD, MPH1, Alexander Spyropoulos,
MD1, Maria Vega, NP1, David Rosenberg,
MD1, Carol Patrick, RN, MBA1, Elissa Dipasquale,
PharmD1, and Daniel Kim, MBA1


1Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY, USA

Brief Explanation of Example: In 2014, a multidisciplinary
group of clinical leaders in anticoagulation management called the coalition
of leaders on thrombosis (CLOT) was established to lead an enterprise-wide
effort to standardize anticoagulation management at Northwell Health, a
large integrated health system comprising 21 hospitals and > 400
outpatient practices. We report on the role pathology can play in such a
population-based activity, specifically in measuring and reporting on
variability in standards of care and tracking and improving patient outcomes
for patients on anticoagulants.


Text: Standardizing anticoagulation care for patients on
warfarin represents a major clinical and operational challenge across all
care settings (outpatient, inpatient, and especially transitions of care).
Anticoagulation safety is an important quality metric for Joint Commission
Accreditation and various pay-for-performance programs. In 2013, the health
system recruited an internationally known expert (A.S.) who was tasked with
standardizing anticoagulation management across the health system. Pathology
was one of the earliest contributors to this effort, and a multidisciplinary
clinical transformation team called CLOT was assembled in early 2014 to
spearhead this effort. In addition to the anticoagulation expert (A.C.),
this group comprised of a pathologist (T.K.), senior hospitalist (D.R.), a
nurse (C.P.), nurse practitioner (M.V.), clinical pharmacist (E.D.) and a
project management specialist (D.K.). In 2013, based on claims and
laboratory data, we estimated that more than 5000 patients in our outpatient
practices were on long-term warfarin. There was lack of standardized
anticoagulation management and we needed measures to track optimal care
processes and outcomes. Time-in-therapeutic range (TTR) is the most valid
measure for warfarin monitoring. We aggregated outpatient laboratory
prothrombin time/international normalized ratio (PT/INR) results from our
Cerner Millennium laboratory information system to calculate the percentage
of patients in therapeutic range. We targeted 25 high-volume internal
medicine and cardiology outpatient practices for this standardization
effort. Using aggregated PT/INR results, we calculated the mean TTR for each
practice using the Roosendaal equation. After extensive validation, we
created a dashboard that automates the TTR calculation. The mean TTR for the
25 practices was about 58% (range 45%-67%), the optimal being 65%. Based on
these baseline data, a systematic education and quality improvement program
was initiated by our CLOT team with a goal to improve mean TTR above 65%
over 12 months. Interventions included the installation of clinical decision
support software for using the Hamilton dosing nomogram and provider
education. We tracked monthly mean TTR metric for each practice. Since the
initiation of this standardization effort, the mean TTR has improved to
greater than 65% for all practices in 2015 (range 62%-70%) and demonstrated
sustainability in 2016. Based on the success of this effort, the CLOT group
is now spearheading other anticoagulation standardization initiatives such
as (1) increasing warfarin safety in inpatient settings and (2) adherence to
venous thromboembolism prophylaxis guidelines. In summary, pathologists can
play a crucial role in the successful execution and prioritization of
enterprise-wide efforts related to population health by leveraging their
knowledge of evidence-based medicine and informatics.

P011. Creation of a Pathology Informatics Group in an Academic Department of
Pathology: Prioritization of Work Effort
Rachel Robbins, MD1, Tylis Y. Chang, MD1, Tarush
Kothari, MD, MPH1, Liya Lomsadze1, Yehuda
Jacobs1, Kalpana Reddy, MD1, Claudine
Alexis1, Dwayne Breining, MD1, and James M.
Crawford, MD, PhD1


1Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY, USA
Over the last 20 years, the importance of informatics in the practice of
pathology and laboratory medicine has steadily increased. We report on de
novo establishment of a pathology informatics group. The 2013 recruitment of
a pathologist specializing in public health (T.K.) and the 2014 recruitment
of a senior pathologist informaticist (T.C.) enabled further recruitment of
informatics project specialists and engagement of existing pathology
department faculty, trainees, and management. This 3-year effort has
supported system quality initiatives, business intelligence, and management
of a managed care risk-based population of patients. The prioritization of
pathology informatics work effort was based on enterprise-wide high-priority
clinical programs and financial initiatives. In addition to informatics
efforts internal to the pathology department, system-level initiatives have
included (1) support of a nephrology-led program in identification and
treatment of patients with chronic kidney disease, (2) support of enterprise
growth in health services research through the provision of laboratory data
to these programs, (3) support of an enterprise-wide effort to standardize
adherence to anti-coagulation medication management algorithms, (4)
establishment of a program for early identification of acute kidney injury
(AKI) during hospitalization, (5) validation and reporting of
laboratory-derived data in fulfillment of contractually required HEDIS
reporting measures, (6) reporting on enterprise-wide blood culture fill
volumes in support of interprofessional and multidisciplinary efforts to
improve adherence to quality guidelines, (7) using primary laboratory data
to identify of gaps-in-care and reporting of hierarchical conditions coding
for the health system full-risk insurance products, (8) improving revenue
cycle for diagnostic testing, and (9) evaluating and managing laboratory
test utilization in the inpatient and ambulatory setting. At the enterprise
level, the documented annualized favorable financial impact of the pathology
informatics effort exceeds US$5M (US$2.6M AKI, US$0.4M HEDIS; US$2.3M
revenue cycle, US$0.5M coding) reflecting greater than a 5:1 return on
investment. These data are evidence supporting further institutional
investment in growth of the pathology informatics group. The work
accomplished also provides a rich source for planned academic productivity.
This approach to prioritization of pathology informatics work effort may
serve as a template for other pathology departments that wish to develop
pathology informatics programming.

P012. The Financial Costs of Emergency Room Admissions by Pathophysiological
Categories in a Large Urban/Suburban Integrated Health-Care System
Liya Lomsadze1, Tylis Y. Chang, MD1, Gregory Berry,
PhD1, and Reeti Khare, PhD1


1Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY, USA
Although extraordinary medical value can be realized in avoiding
hospitalizations and preventing hospital acquired conditions, the financial
value of prevention has been harder to quantify. The Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) recently published cost and utilization data for
2014 Medicare hospitalizations, traceable to medical severity-diagnosis
related groups (MS-DRGs). These data suggest a methodical evaluation of the
medical as well as financial prioritization of resources to support
emergency room admission patients.


Methods: Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services data which
reflect the Medicare population and combine both emergency room and
scheduled hospitalizations were downloaded from the CMS website. Average
2014 reimbursements by DRG were used as a proxy for cost per admission and
correlated against 2015 discharges at 13 hospital facilities comprising
urban and suburban hospitals. Hospitalization data, including facility,
admission source, patient age and gender, length of stay, disposition,
MS-DRG, major diagnostic categories (MDCs), and admit and discharge ICD-9/10
codes were acquired from the finance department of a large health system.
Using the CMS-developed MDCs as a guide, MS-DRGs were evaluated and
classified into pathophysiological categories by a pathologist.


Results: Within 13 hospitals of the health system, 157 555
(59%) of the 267 745 discharges originated in an emergency room. These
admissions comprise approximately 0.9% of all emergency room admissions in
the United States. Of these patients, 75.0% were discharged to home and 2.5%
expired. Septicemia or severe sepsis without mechanical ventilation at
>96 hours with major complications or comorbidities was the costliest DRG
(#871), comprising 6.1% of costs and 4.6% of patients. The top 10 DRGs
comprise 22% of total costs (Table 1).

When analyzed using broadly inclusive CMS MDCs, circulatory system disease
patients were the most numerous and costly. After remapping DRGs into
underlying pathophysiological categories, the costliest categories according
to CMS average reimbursement rates were infectious (19.5% of costs),
circulatory (18.7% of costs), and digestive disease (11.1% of costs, Table
2). The relatively high cost of patients with sepsis (US$13 214 per
hospitalization) and infectious disease with operating room procedures
(US$34 282) versus chest pain (US$5169) and syncope (US$5947) contributed to
the greater financial significance of infectious diseases over circulatory
diseases despite the plurality of the latter.


Conclusion: To best utilize limited resources and improve
population health, it is necessary to optimize the cost-benefit ratio when
considering different investments in diagnostic or therapeutic technologies.
The ICD 9/10 and MS-DRG categorizations prioritize organ system over
underlying pathophysiology. This can be misleading because diseases with
similar underlying pathophysiology can fail to group together. For example,
pneumonia and urinary tract infections (2.3% and 1.4% of hospitalizations,
respectively) are classified as respiratory and kidney/urinary tract
diseases rather than infectious diseases. A pathophysiological approach to
disease categorization better reflects diagnostic and therapeutic
modalities. Surprisingly, with this approach, infectious diseases have the
greatest opportunity to find financial value among emergency room
admissions. These epidemiological data on local patient populations and a
detailed quantitative understanding of the financial implications at the
health-care system level assist in prioritizing allocation of effort and
resources for improvement in patient and population outcomes.

Research
R001. Ubiquitous and Continuous Diagnostics and Wellness Monitoring
Robin A. Felder, PhD1


1University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA,
USA
The future of an affordable and safe health-care system will require a focus
on preventative medicine and home-based health-care delivery. Novel
wearable, implantable, insertable, and near patient sensing technologies are
enabling continuous monitoring of body chemistry and physiology as well as
activities such as sleep, nutrition, bathing, and socialization.
Pathologists will be instrumental in the creation of appropriate
technologies for continuous diagnostic assessment and wellness monitoring.
For example, we are developing a submillimeter-sized glucose analyzer that
will be inserted into a tear duct in order to report tear glucose to a
nearby cell phone for interpretation and logging. A smartphone app can alert
the wearer to changes in body glucose and anticipate and then direct
therapeutic interventions. The app can also provide motivational information
that can guide exercise and nutrition choices. Another example is a
semiautonomous remote monitoring system we developed that is currently
operational in over 1000 homes of independently living senior citizens and
providing continuous sleep, bathing, and nutritional information to the care
providers and loved ones. Our case-controlled studies have demonstrated not
only improved quality of life through continuous monitoring but also a 75%
reduction in the cost of care for our study participants.

R002. Evolution and Revolution in Anatomic Pathology: Report of a Banbury
Conference
John Tomaszewski, MD, MASCP1, and James M. Crawford, MD,
PhD2


1University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA

2Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY, USA
Anatomic pathology is on the cusp of disruptive change, with the expectation
that this field will change fundamentally over the next 5 years. However,
this transformation will not be easy. In December 2016, a 2.5-day Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory-hosted Banbury Conference was convened to examine
the barriers and opportunities to implement new technologies and the
enhancements (and potential disruptions), and they may offer clinical
practice. Participants included experts in pathology, oncology, genomic
sciences, computer sciences, information technology, safety, quality, and
regulation. The discussions examined anatomic pathology as quantitative
evidence for medicine, tissue-based molecular diagnostics, data integrity
and interoperability, the pre-analytical environment, image analytics,
machine learning and automation, regulatory and payer environment, clinical
workflow, and pathology education.


Key Conclusions of the Conference Include:
This expected transformation should be managed as a “project” by
stakeholders in our profession.

Deep engagement with industry and federal regulatory agencies
will be necessary to support the critical path for
implementation of novel technologies.

Specific technical hurdles need to be addressed, including
implementing standards for pre-analytic handling of specimens,
creation of quantified structured data in specimen collection,
grossing, sampling, slide creation and staining, automation of
specimen processing and histology, quantitative validation of
image quality, continued integration of biomarkers translated
from genomic sciences into image diagnostics, image annotation
and diagnostic image analysis, integration of machine learning
and automated image processing into interpretive algorithms,
development of systems that allow for pathologist evaluation of
new technologies alongside traditional slide imaging at the time
of case interpretation, and active pursuit of clinical follow-up
as part of the pathology workflow.

Education of pathologists in informatics, industrial engineering,
and data sciences relevant to anatomic pathology should be a
high priority.

Value statements for advances in anatomic pathology should be
articulated for payers, senior health system stakeholders, and
the public.

A foundation as a mechanism for funding and managing industry and
government relationships should be considered.




The follow-through for Banbury Conference participants will include the
following:Formation of an Executive Group, with the initial tasks of
writing a white paper summarizing the conference, mapping out a
critical path for integration of these technologies into
diagnostic and treatment pathways, and seeking the value
propositions for implementation of these technologies.

Doing a cross-walk of the conclusions and action items of this
conference to existing assets, including existing national
initiatives, existing organizations and their governance
structures, the efforts arising from prior convenings of thought
leaders, and the ongoing activities of institutions and other
industry stakeholders pursuing innovation in this space.

Working with leading stakeholders in the field, to establish
and/or strengthen a “project management” approach for advancing
the field of anatomic pathology.




The activities of participants during the calendar year 2017, including
participation in relevant national society meetings during 2017, should give
opportunity to integrate these objectives into the overall trajectory of
this field.

R003. How Inkjet Printing Technology Can Defeat Multidrug-Resistant
Superbugs
Kenneth P. Smith, PhD1, Thea Brennan-Krohn, MD1,
and James E. Kirby, MD1


1Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA
When there is a mismatch between empiric therapy and organism
susceptibility—a much more likely occurrence for emerging
multidrug-resistant bacterial pathogens—patients do poorly. Furthermore,
antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) for new antibiotics or agents of
last resort such as colistin must be sent to reference laboratories for
broth or agar dilution testing, manual methods too complex for
hospital-based clinical laboratories to perform, thus leading to further
unacceptable delay.

Therefore, we conceived and developed 2-related, novel AST platforms called
digital dispensing method (DDM) and microscopy-based AST (for MAST) to close
the antimicrobial testing gap. Both make use of inkjet printer, digital
dispensing technology that enables us perform AST on any antimicrobial at
will. Specifically, the million-fold range of possible inkjet droplet sizes
allows the exact amount of any antimicrobial desired to be dispensed
automatically in 384-well plate format from a single antibacterial stock
solution. Notably, we previously validated that DDM testing of
antimicrobials including colistin in broth microdilution format was as
accurate and more precise than the gold standard used for FDA clearance
studies. However, in contrast to this manual reference method, which
requires 40 human steps, DDM only requires a single pipetting step, making
it simple enough to be used in a clinical laboratory setting. Lastly, DDM
allowed us to facilely perform, large-scale, combinatorial checkerboard
antibiotic testing. Notably, we obtained susceptibility data for
approximately 3-fold more antimicrobial combinations than described thus far
in the world’s literature against carbapenem-resistant
Enterobacteriaceae (CRE), a CDC-designated most urgent
drug resistance threat. Importantly, we identified at least 1 combination
with clinically achievable synergy in 90% of CRE strains, making the case
for clinical synergy testing to guide rescue therapy for CRE infections that
might otherwise not be treatable. Importantly, combinatorial testing,
heretofore, only available in a research setting, requires only 2 pipetting
steps when performed by DDM, thereby for the first time placing
combinatorial testing within the capabilities of a hospital-based clinical
laboratory.

We then examined whether we could accelerate AST further. We initially
demonstrated that the same inkjet technology could be used to quantitatively
(R
2 = 0.99 for Escherichia coli) deliver bacteria
to a precise location in a microwell and further established spatially
precise dispensing of bacteria onto a solidified Mueller-Hinton growth
medium. We also confirmed reliable printing of major human pathogen groups.
Notably, the use of a long focal length objective and automated image
acquisition allowed real-time visualization of bacteria replication on these
microwell surfaces using standard light microscopy optics. Effects of
antimicrobials were detected reliably within 4 hours. Furthermore, a
machine-learning algorithm automatically detected and quantified bacterial
numbers over time, laying the foundation for completely automated
susceptibility calls. Supplies were all off-the-shelf, commercially
available, and inexpensive.

We envision the MAST platform as a way to perform MIC-based AST for any
antimicrobial at will in only a few hours and also avoid need for reference
laboratory testing. Taken together, these attributes should help address the
antimicrobial testing gap and save lives.

R006. Pathology Plays a Key Role in Supporting Hepatitis C Virus Screening at
a Safety Net Hospital
Chris Andry, MPhil, PhD1, Nancy S. Miller, MD1,
Elissa Perkins, MD1, Jon Hall, MPH1, Joshua Hartman,
MPH1, David Twitchell, PharmD1, Beverley
Orr1, Graziella Haddad1, Erin Fenton1,
Neil O’Neill1, Brittney Mailhot1, Thomas Maher,
MS1, Anne Wallbillich1, Abigail Brown,
MFS1, and Daniel Remick, MD

1Boston University, Boston, MA, USA

Background: In addition to the existing national concern for
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in the “baby boomer” 1945 to 1965 birth
cohort, an alarming increase in the incidence of HCV infection has recently
emerged in the Massachusetts population born after 1965, due in part to the
opioid use epidemic. Hepatitis C virus screening and navigation to treatment
is an important public health initiative. Pathologists and administrators
co-led the hospital screening initiative, by guiding hospital policy and
establishing reflex testing and result reporting. Boston Medical Center
(BMC) partnered with Gilead’s FOCUS group and the Massachusetts Department
of Public Health to fund the screening program, research collection, and
data analysis.


Methods: Pathology leaders guided institutional approval for
the program ensuring that integrated reflex testing and hospital policies
were written and approved by the Medical Executive during programmatic
ramp-up in calendar year 2016. The laboratory and the information systems
team designed specimen collection, testing and reporting algorithms that
enabled a 1-step laboratory draw (2 tubes) to provide screening, RNA viral
load and diagnostic confirmation, and genotype testing for antibody-positive
patients. The reflex testing program is now hospital wide.


Situation Assessment: Multiple laboratory draws and length of
time between visits reduced the success of procuring RNA confirmation for
antibody-positive patients and navigating them to treatment and care. In an
11-month period of prereflex testing internal medicine RNA confirmation
follow-up rates were at 87.1%. After 4 months of postreflex implementation,
testing was at 99.1%. Initially emergency department screening volume grew
exponentially (from 18 to 1236 tests per month) with RNA follow-up
increasing from 29.4% to 97.4% in a 4.5-month period. Overall, of 11 072
patients screened since reflex “go live” (August 2016-May 2017), 10.7% are
HCV antibody-positive with an active infection rate of 6.2% among all those
screened. Average turnaround time for antibody-positive patients reflexing
to RNA confirmation over a 4-week period is at 4.4 days.


Conclusion: Pathology engagement in reflex testing and
reporting algorithms have contributed significantly to the initial success
of the HCV screening program by increased RNA confirmation follow-up and
genotype determination.


Funded in part by Gilead’s FOCUS group, Massachusetts Department of
Public Health, BU Mallory Pathology Associates, Inc, and BMC.


R007. Use of Metabolomics and Gut Microbial Profiling in Precision
Diagnostics of Type 2 Diabetes in Caribbean Populations
Roa Harb, MD1, Raimund Herzog, MD1, Carol Odalele,
PhD, MPH1, Marcella Nunez-Smith, MD, MHS1, Tore Eid,
MD, PhD1, and Martin Kriegel, MD, PhD1


1Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) is a globally prevalent disease with
substantial morbidity and mortality. Early prediction of the pathological
processes that lead to type 2 DM is important because it will facilitate
novel interventions aimed at delaying or preventing the disease. Several
risk prediction models that combine clinical information with conventional
biomarkers exist, but most do not account for the large variability in
biological and environmental factors and tend to overestimate risk.

Our long-term goal is to use a precision medicine approach to discover novel
diagnostic biomarkers for early detection of type 2 DM. The biomarkers will
be tailored to specific subject populations, thereby achieving the precision
medicine goal. Our first objective toward this goal will be to carry out
comprehensive analyses of the blood metabolome and gut microbiome in samples
collected from the National Institute on Minority Health and Health
Disparities (NIMHD)-funded Eastern Caribbean Health Outcomes Research
Network (ECHORN) patient cohort. We will use the approach of targeted mass
spectrometry metabolomics of plasma and stool samples and 16S RNA sequencing
of the stool microbiome. Samples from healthy participants, patients with
prediabetes, and patients with established type 2 DM will be first analyzed
in a screening study to identify sets of candidate biomarkers for
prediabetes and type 2 DM. The identified metabolites and microbial profiles
will also be correlated with subject-specific characteristics such as
gender, ethnicity, dietary history, use of nicotine, current medications,
body mass index, and blood pressure. We will next establish the sensitivity
and specificity of the candidate biomarkers in a second, prospective study
of healthy participants who will be followed with annual collections of
blood and stool samples for at least 5 years. Our working hypothesis is that
a unique signature of blood metabolites will predict the development of type
2 DM earlier and more accurately than traditional biomarkers.

The Yale Laboratory Medicine Department initiated this project in
collaboration with the Equity Research and Innovation Center (ERIC) at Yale
University, combining the department’s strengths in “-omics” with the
population health expertise of ERIC. As a proof of concept, we have carried
out preliminary studies in a group of 23 participants selected from the
“Pediatric NAFLD/NASH Cohort,” consisting of 400 obese youth. Our study has
revealed for the first time in a pediatric cohort that plasma concentrations
of the branched amino acids isoleucine, leucine, and valine were
significantly higher in obese adolescents with fatty liver compared to the
group with low hepatic fat accumulation. Moreover, several other amino acid
species particularly tryptophan, lysine, glutamate, ornithine, and alanine
were significantly different or showed a significant trend toward
significance between the 2 groups. We envision that applying this powerful
methodology to a well-characterized cohort with a unique ethnic composition
as present in the ECHORN cohort will reveal similarly predictive markers
that may prove valuable diagnostic and prognostic targets in the future.

R008. Electronic Medical Record and Clinical Laboratory Data Integration for
Real-Time Quality Management
Brian Smith, MD1, Wade L. Schulz, MD, PhD1, Richard
Torres, MD, MS1, and Thomas J. S. Durant MD1


1Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
Recent technology advances have enabled real-time access to data from the
entirety of clinical laboratory results. With adequate monitoring tools,
these data can be used to anticipate and identify problems within the
clinical laboratory, potentially improving turnaround time and quality of
testing. The value of this information can be augmented by linkage with
relevant nonlaboratory information from the electronic health record (EHR),
but the management, organization, and visualization of data from the
laboratory information system (LIS) and EHR often face barriers related to
interoperability, storage, and security. With the deployment of the Beaker
LIS at our institution, we aimed to develop an internal application that
could capture, store, and display a real-time feed of clinical laboratory
and associated patient data. The goal of this system was to provide a more
powerful quality management platform based on moving averages and other
statistical analyses. In addition, we hoped to provide real-time business
intelligence related to test order volumes, turnaround time, and other
customized metrics for our laboratory managers. The software solution was
developed locally on our data science cluster built on the Hadoop and
Elasticsearch platforms. Data from the EHR and LIS were streamed to these
systems and integrated with the specialized distributed storage system that
allows quick access to large data sets. By working closely with information
security and data integration teams within the health system, we were able
to develop and deploy this platform quickly within a production environment.
Ongoing work with laboratory managers and technicians will enable us to
improve the visualizations and dashboards used for business intelligence
with the ultimate goal of increasing laboratory quality. Since deployment,
similar frameworks have been used within the health-care system to acquire
data for patient monitoring and to integrate results from clinical next
generation sequencing laboratories. These repeatable use cases and system
architectures offer significant potential for efficient integration and
deployment within other health-care systems.

R009. Process Improvements in Biobanking in Partnership With the National
Cancer Institute
Chris Andry, MPhil, PhD1, Elizabeth Duffy, MA1,
Cheryl Spencer, MA1, Robert Pistey, MD1, Joel
Henderson, MD1, Ping Guan2, Helen M. Moore,
PhD3, and Daniel Remick, MD1


1Boston University, Boston, MA, USA

2Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick, MD, USA

3National Cancer Institute, Biorepositories and Biospecimen
Research Branch, Bethesda, MD, USA

Statement of the Problem: High-quality cancer biospecimens from
a racially and ethnically diverse patient population is crucial to
successful cancer research. Implementation of a centralized biospecimen
archive research core (BARC) at our institution was set as a strategic goal
in 2007. Evidence of the ability to consent a traditionally underrepresented
population, the ability to obtain high-quality specimens, and funding was
needed in order to make this a successful goal.


Proposed Solution: The BARC is integrated into the diagnostic
pathology service and therefore leverages many of the necessary requirements
for a successful program, namely: available board-certified pathologists,
rapid tissue processing, strong relationships with surgical and medical
oncologists, the surgical preprocedure service, a partnership with radiology
to share images linked to specimens, and committed information technology
support. A central tenet was that diagnostic material would be the first
priority, followed by biospecimen collection. Since inception, the BARC has
a consent rate of 97% with an ethnic breakdown of 52% Caucasian, 28%
African-American, 7% Hispanic, 6% listed as other, 5% Asian, and 3% American
Indian and >1000 specimens. The BARC has adopted the National Cancer
Institute Best Practices for biospecimen procurement and storage.
Contractual partnerships with The Cancer Genome Atlas and Biospecimen
Pre-analytic Variables program allowed the BARC to develop a strong Quality
Management System and procure high-quality samples rapidly (average time
from cold ischemia to fixation was 48 minutes). With further contract
relationships with the Clinical Proteomics Tumor Analysis Consortium and
most recently the Thrombosis in Cancer Patients study, we have decreased the
average time to fixation to 33 minutes, while still procuring samples
suitable for all future cutting edge research.


Conclusion: By utilizing the skill sets of the diagnostic
pathology service, the biorepository has achieved a high consent rate from a
diverse patient population. Consequently, the BARC became a valuable core
repository for the institution, was able to secure extramural funding, and
increased the quality and the number of specimens collected and
utilized.

R010. The Upstream and Downstream Impact of Weekend Hospital
Discharges
Samuel B. Reichberg, MD, PhD1, Liya Lomsadze1, and
Tylis Y. Chang, MD1


1Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY, USA

Introduction: During analysis of factors explaining increased
clinical laboratory workload on Fridays, we studied the well-known pattern
of lesser hospital discharges on Saturdays and Sundays. The impact of this
weekly pattern of patient admissions and discharges on laboratory work and
on length of stay (LOS) has not been sufficiently explored.


Methods: A total of 101 303 admissions/discharges during 2016
in 13 acute care hospitals of Northwell Health, a large, integrated urban
healthcare network, were selected out of a total 274 730 by choosing
patients whose LOS was less than 11 days, were admitted through the
Emergency Service, and were discharged home (82% of all discharged patients
were sent home).


Results: The number of registered beds (103-1025) and yearly
discharges (3942-54 391) ranged widely among the 13 hospitals. But in most,
the number of daily inpatient discharges reflects a regular pattern with a
nadir of about 9000 out of the 101 303 discharges taking place on Sundays
and a peak of almost 20 000 on Fridays. Admissions were also lower on
weekends, but to a lesser extent: about 12 400 admissions took place on
Sundays, and roughly 15 800 on Mondays, the weekday with the highest number
of admissions.

The average LOS (ALOS) of patients discharged on different days varied: from
3.56 days on patients discharged Monday and Tuesday to 3.00 days on Sunday.
To account for differences in disease severity, we calculated the difference
between the LOS and the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
medical severity-diagnosis related group Arithmetic Mean LOS for each
patient. The ALOS were all lower than the CMS means, but the negative
difference was smallest for patients discharged on Mondays and Tuesdays
(−0.65 days) and increased to a maximum (−0.97 days) on those discharged on
Sundays. Assuming a uniform mean LOS difference versus CMS every day of the
week similar to that of patients discharged on Fridays (−0.95 days), we
estimated a potential overall decrease of ALOS of more than 20% for the
population of patients studied.


Discussion: The qualitative impact and cost of weekend
admission and discharge patterns have been widely discussed. The information
presented herein assesses their magnitude and regularity, as well as
recognizes (1) the sizable upstream pattern of Friday increase in discharges
and the downstream effect of sluggish Monday discharge rates, (2) the longer
LOS in patients discharged early in the work week, and (3) the long LOS of
patients admitted on Fridays. These patterns reflect the magnitude and
impact of the overall slower pace of hospital activity on weekends.


Conclusion: By assessing the upstream and downstream ripple
effects of the weekend drop in discharges, we estimate that a ∼20% potential
decrease in overall inpatient LOS could have been realized had the
day-to-day hospital workload been uniform. It is possible that other
indicators of hospital activity would show similar improvement.

