
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951989255910.1177_2374289519892559Educational CaseEducational Case: Granulomatous Dermatitis Stowman Anne M. MD12
1 University of Vermont Health System, Burlington, VT, USA
2 The Robert Larner, MD College of Medicine at the University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT, USAAnne M. Stowman, MD, Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of Vermont, 111 Colchester Ave, Burlington, VT 05401, USA.
Email: anne.stowman@uvmhealth.org18 12 2019 Jan-Dec 2019 6 237428951989255922 5 2019 14 10 2019 2 11 2019 © The Author(s) 20192019SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as published without
adaptation or alteration, without further permission provided the original work is
attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).The following fictional case is intended as a learning tool within the Pathology
Competencies for Medical Education (PCME), a set of national standards for teaching
pathology. These are divided into three basic competencies: Disease Mechanisms and
Processes, Organ System Pathology, and Diagnostic Medicine and Therapeutic Pathology.
For additional information, and a full list of learning objectives for all three
competencies, see
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2374289517715040.1

pathology competenciesorgan system pathologyskinexogenous antigenstattoo-related disordergranulomatous dermatitisnoncaseating granulomatous dermatitiscover-dateJanuary-December 2019typesetterts3
==== Body
Primary Learning Objective

Objective SK3.1: Manifestations of Exogenous Antigens. Describe the
clinical features and pathologic basis for skin manifestations to exogenous antigens
including infectious organisms, drugs, chemicals, and environmental agents.

Competency 2: Organ System Pathology; Topic: Skin (SK); Learning Goal 3: Immune-Related
Disorders of the Skin.

Patient Presentation
A 35-year-old Caucasian male presents to the dermatology office for concerns about a papule
in the middle of his tattoo on his right forearm. The patient states that he noticed it
several months ago and that it is itchy. His past medical history is unremarkable. He takes
no medications. He has no recent travel history.

Diagnostic Findings, Part 1
Physical examination shows a 4-mm erythematous papule seen within the red pigmented portion
of a multicolored tattoo on the patient’s right forearm. The tattoo covers the dorsal
portion of the patient’s forearm. The tattoo is a design outlined with black ink and filled
with areas of blue, green, yellow, orange, and red ink. The remainder of the tattoo and
surrounding skin are unremarkable. Skin examination reveals no other abnormalities.

Questions/Discussion Points, Part 1
What Is the Differential Diagnosis Based on the Clinical Presentation?
The differential diagnosis of a small, itchy papule on an otherwise healthy 35-year-old
male on the distal extremity would include an arthropod bite reaction, eczematous
dermatitis, folliculitis, or possibly infection. The history specifically states that the
papule is seen only within the red pigmented portion of his tattoo, and so the
differential diagnosis would need to include a tattoo-related cutaneous reaction. A
malignancy is unlikely given the patient’s age. The history states that he is not on any
medications, which helps to exclude a drug-related eruption.

Diagnostic Findings, Part 2
A Biopsy Is Performed of the Papule on the Patient’s Forearm and Is Shown in Figures 1, 2, 3, and 4. What Does the
Skin Biopsy Show on the Hematoxylin and Eosin–Stained Sections?

Figure 1 shows a punch biopsy of a
dermal-based granulomatous infiltrate. There are tightly formed clusters of histiocytes,
some with a surrounding rim of small lymphocytes, extending from the superficial papillary
dermis into the mid-reticular dermis. The hair follicle shows mild perifollicular
lymphocytic inflammation, as do the small vessels in the dermis. The epidermis shows focal
reactive change and overlying orthokeratosis. Figure 2 highlights the clusters of histiocytes,
identifiable by their abundant eosinophilic and vacuolated cytoplasm. Rare giant cells are
also seen. Red pigment is seen scattered throughout the dermis. Figure 3 shows a high power view of a granuloma.
Cytologically, the histiocytes contain ovoid to reniform nuclei with variably prominent
nuclei and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. A thin rim of lymphocytes is seen on one edge.
Red pigment is again seen, both within the histiocytes and in the interstitium. Figure 4 shows a higher magnification
image of a granuloma, highlighting the red exogenous pigment located primarily within
histiocytes.

Figure 1. A punch biopsy of the patient’s skin showing a noncaseating granulomatous dermatitis.
There are well-formed clusters of histiocytes, some with surrounding lymphocytic
inflammation, extending from the papillary dermis into the reticular dermis. The
epidermis shows mild reactive change and orthokeratosis (hematoxylin and eosin,
×4).

Figure 2. A medium-power view from the punch biopsy of skin highlighting the clusters of
histiocytes with scattered giant cells (arrow). The histiocytes are identified by
their abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and ovoid nuclei. Red pigment is appreciated at
this power, both within the granuloma and within the interstitium (hematoxylin and
eosin, ×10).

Figure 3. A high-power image of a granuloma from the punch biopsy of skin. The histiocytes are
arranged in a tight cluster, with focal rimming of lymphocytes. Cytologically, the
histiocytes contain ovoid to reniform nuclei and abundant eosinophilic and vacuolated
cytoplasm. Exogenous red pigment is seen within the granuloma (hematoxylin and eosin,
×20).

Figure 4. A high-power view of histiocytes containing exogenous red pigment. The pigment is
coarse, and at this power, individual granules are visible. The histiocytes are
notable for their variably prominent nucleoli, reniform nuclei, and abundant
cytoplasm. Scattered lymphocytes can also be seen (hematoxylin and eosin, ×40).

What Additional Workup Can Be Performed to Narrow the Differential Diagnosis? What
Additional History Could Be Helpful in Excluding Diagnoses?
Histochemical stains are performed to detect acid–fast bacilli (AFB stain), fungi (PAS
stain), and bacteria (gram stain) and are negative, excluding an infectious etiology.
Culture studies are performed and are negative for mycobacterial, fungal, and bacterial
organisms. Polarization microscopy is negative for refractile material, ruling out a
foreign body. Serologic studies for angiotensin-converting enzyme and chest X-ray are
performed to exclude sarcoidosis.2 Angiotensin-converting enzyme levels are normal. Chest X-ray shows no bilateral
hilar lymphadenopathy.

Review of patient medications confirms that the patient is taking no medications to
suspect a medication-induced process. There is no history of Crohn disease or rheumatoid
arthritis to consider a cutaneous presentation of these diseases. There is no
documentation of prior malignancies or history of connective tissue disease, helping to
exclude an interstitial granulomatous dermatitis or lichenoid and granulomatous
dermatitis.

Questions/Discussion Points, Part 2
What Is Your Diagnosis Based on the Clinical Information and Microscopic
Findings?
Clinical history of a healthy 35-year-old male with a single itchy, pink papule inside
red tattoo area showing noncaseating, non-necrotizing granulomatous inflammation
containing exogenous red pigment is consistent with a granulomatous tattoo reaction, a
type of foreign body reaction. While there have been reports of cutaneous sarcoidosis
presenting in areas of tattoo, the negative chest X-ray and negative serologic studies
help to exclude sarcoidosis.2,3


What Is a Granulomatous Dermatitis?
A granulomatous dermatitis is a histologic pattern of inflammation in the skin. The
inflammation is composed of non-neoplastic histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells and
can be seen in a variety of arrangements.4 Granulomatous dermatitides are many in number and variable in etiology and broadly
can be divided into a non-necrotizing or non-necrobiotic group and a necrotizing or
necrobiotic group.5 Within those 2 categories, particular patterns can be seen.

In the non-necrobiotic and non-necrotizing category, one histologic pattern that is seen
is termed “naked” granuloma, with the classic example being sarcoidosis. These granulomata
are arranged as tight clusters of epithelioid histiocytes, specifically without
surrounding inflammation—thus “naked.” Similarly arranged clusters of histiocytes though
with surrounding inflammation can be seen in reactions to foreign material (foreign body
reaction) or infection (usually fungus). Non-necrotizing or non-necrobiotic granulomatous
inflammation can also be seen as loosely arranged histiocytes within the dermis. The
interstitial granulomatous dermatitides are examples of this form. The pattern in this
patient’s biopsy is best categorized as non-necrobiotic, non-necrotizing granulomatous
dermatitis and would fit best in the epithelioid granuloma with surrounding inflammation
pattern.

In the necrotizing or necrobiotic group, a palisading arrangement of histiocytes
surrounding areas of various materials is seen. Granuloma annulare, rheumatoid nodules, or
necrobiosis lipoidica (diabeticorum) show this palisading arrangement. Necrotizing
granulomatous inflammation is most often seen in infectious cases, such as a mycobacterial
infection.

What Is the Differential Diagnosis for a Non-Necrotizing, Noncaseating Granulomatous
Dermatitis?
The differential diagnosis for a non-necrotizing, noncaseating granulomatous dermatitis
is lengthy. The most commonly encountered entities include foreign body reaction,
infectious causes, and sarcoidosis. The complete list can be found in Table 1.

Table 1. Histologic Classification of Cutaneous Granulomatous Dermatitides.

Necrobiotic or Necrotizing	Non-Necrobiotic or Non-Necrotizing	
• Granuloma annulare
• Necrobiosis lipoidica
• Rheumatoid
nodule
• Lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei
• Infectious	• Sarcoidosis
• Foreign body reaction
• Granulomatous
rosacea
• Elastolytic granuloma
• Cutaneous Crohn
disease
• Granulomatous pigmented purpura
• Interstitial
granulomatous dermatitis
• Lichenoid and granulomatous
dermatitis
• Infectious	
What Causes a Granulomatous Reaction in Skin?
Most granulomatous infiltrates are caused by a type IV hypersensitivity reaction wherein
a foreign antigen is processed by histiocytes and presented to T lymphocytes. The T cells
then respond by secreting interleukins and other chemokines which recruit additional
histiocytes to the site of reaction, producing a pathological granulomatous lesion.
Reactions to the metal salts or other products contained in tattoo pigment can occur with
many different pigments but is most commonly seen in red tattoos.6,7 Red tattoo pigment can be either organic or inorganic.8 The inorganic red pigments used in tattoos include mercury and mercury derivatives
(cinnabar), cadmium selenide, and sienna (ferric hydrate). These toxic metals, found in
red tattoo ink, are thought to cause a type IV hypersensitivity reaction. Organic
compounds such as vegetable dyes (sandalwood, brazilwood) have been used to replace
mercury, but sensitivity can still occur. X-ray microanalysis has been used to determine
the composition of red pigments and shown to contain a number of metallic elements
including aluminum, iron, calcium, titanium, silicon, mercury, and cadmium.9 Reactions may occur to one or more of the components, by similar type IV
hypersensitivity reaction.

What Other Histologic Patterns Can Be Seen in a Tattoo-Related Skin Reaction?
Cutaneous reactions to exogenous red pigment include eczematous, lichenoid,
pseudolymphomatous, granulomatous, and pseudoepitheliomatous. These patterns are important
to recognize as they can be mistaken for other more ominous processes, such as carcinoma
(pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia [PEH] pattern) or lymphoma (pseudolymphoma pattern).8 Recognition of intralesional pigment is of utmost importance, particularly in
situations without clinical history.5,10


Eczematous is another way of saying “spongiotic.” A spongiotic dermatitis shows edema
between keratinocytes in the epidermis. A lichenoid pattern is characterized by a
band-like inflammatory infiltrate, often obscuring the dermal–epidermal junctional
keratinocytes. A pseudolymphoma is a lymphoma-like lymphoid infiltrate of the dermis,
often involving the superficial and deep dermis, surrounding vessels. What distinguishes
pseudolymphoma (a reactive condition, a non-neoplastic process) from a lymphoma (a
neoplastic process) is the presence of a mix of B cells and T cells rather than
predominance of either B cells or T cells showing aberrant expression of antigen markers
(meaning expressing proteins on their cell surface that they don’t normally express). A
granulomatous dermatitis, as seen in this case, is an infiltrate of non-neoplastic
histiocytes. Pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia is characterized by irregular and extensive
epidermal hyperplasia (irregularly thickened epidermis) with reactive cytologic changes
(enlarged cells but with retained nuclear:cytoplasmic ratios). Pseudoepitheliomatous
hyperplasia can closely mimic a well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma.
Tattoo-related reactions can present as any one of these histologic patterns.

Teaching Points
Tattoo ink is a common exogenous pigment found in skin biopsies and can cause a type IV
hypersensitivity reaction.

Red tattoo pigment is most frequently implicated in tattoo-related reactions.

Histologically, tattoo-related reactions can take of the form of an eczematous
dermatitis, lichenoid dermatitis, granulomatous dermatitis, pseudolymphoma, or rarely
PEH.

A granulomatous dermatitis is a dermal histiocytic infiltrate which can be arranged in
a variety of patterns.

Granulomatous dermatitides can be histologically classified broadly into either
necrobiotic or necrotizing and non-necrobiotic or non-necrotizing patterns.

The histologic differential diagnosis for a granulomatous dermatitis is broad and
therefore particular attention to architectural arrangement of the histiocytes is
necessary to narrow the differential. Additional workup is often necessary to arrive at
a particular etiology (eg, serologic studies, radiography, infectious studies,
correlation with patient medication, and past medical history).

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: The article processing fee for this
article was funded by an Open Access Award given by the Society of ‘67, which supports the
mission of the Association of Pathology Chairs to produce the next generation of
outstanding investigators and educational scholars in the field of pathology. This award
helps to promote the publication of high-quality original scholarship in Academic
Pathology by authors at an early stage of academic development.
==== Refs
References
1 
Knollmann-Ritschel BEC Regula DP Borowitz MJ Conran R Prystowsky MB  
Pathology competencies for medical education and
educational cases . Acad Pathol .
2017 ;4 
doi:10.1177/2374289517715040 .
2 
Noe MH Rosenbach M  
Cutaneous sarcoidosis . Curr Opin
Pulm Med .
2017 ;23 :482 –486 .28598873 
3 
Simunovic C Shinohara MM  
Complications of decorative tattoos: recognition and
management . Am J Clin Dermatol .
2014 ;15 :525 –536 .25385257 
4 
Mohan H Bal A Dhami GP  
Non-infectious granulomatous dermatitis: a
clinicopathological study . J Cutan Pathol .
2006 ;33 :767 –771 .17177935 
5 
Wick MR  
Granulomatous and histiocytic
dermatitides . Sem Diag Pathol .
2017 ;34 :301 –311 .
6 
Kluger N  
Cutaneous complications related to permanent decorative
tattooing . Expert Rev Clin Immunol .
2010 ;6 :363 –371 .20441423 
7 
Ashinoff R Levine VJ Soter NA  
Allergic reactions to tattoo pigment after laser
treatment . Dermatol Surg .
1995 ;21 :291 –294 .7728477 
8 
Forbat E Al-Niaimi F  
Patterns of reactions to red pigment tattoo and treatment
methods . Dermatol Ther .
2016 ;6 :13 –23 .
9 
Sowden JM Byrne JPH Smith AG  , et al.
Red tattoo reactions: X-ray microanalysis and patch test
studies . Br J Dermatol .
1991 ;124 :576 –580 .2064942 
10 
Balfour E Olhoffer I Leffell D Handerson T  
Massive pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia: an unusual
reaction to tattoo . Am J Dermatopathol .
2003 ;25 :338 –340 .12876493

