
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951983250210.1177_2374289519832502Regular ArticlePatients Who Take Home Their Surgical Pathology Specimens: A Preliminary
Study https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1791-4282Gibson Blake A. MD1Sobonya Richard E. MD2
1 Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2 Department of Pathology, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson,
AZ, USABlake A. Gibson, Department of Pathology, University
of Pittsburgh Medical Center, A711, Scaife Hall 3550, Terrace Street, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Email: gibsonba@upmc.edu10 3 2019 Jan-Dec 2019 6 23742895198325025 6 2018 25 7 2018 2 8 2018 © SAGE Publications2019SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as published without
adaptation or alteration, without further permission provided the original work is
attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).Patients regularly request to take possession of their human tissues after they have
become surgical pathology specimens. To date, few formal research studies have examined
the prevalence of this practice or the reasoning patients’ request that their specimens to
be returned to them. This study interviews patients from 2015 to 2017 at one US academic
medical center who requested their surgical pathology specimens. Of the 22 eligible
patients, 8 patients agreed to be interviewed. Interviews lasted 10 to 30 minutes and
included 5 questions. The questions were: (1) What motivated your decision to obtain your
surgical pathology specimen, (2) What, if anything, did you do with your specimen, (3)
What were positive aspects of your experience, (4) What were negative aspects of your
experience, (5) What can the pathology department change to better support patients who
request their surgical pathology specimens? Verbatim transcripts were generated and a
mixed-methods analysis was performed. The type of specimens included products of
conception, placenta and cord, costal cartilage and ribs, loop explant recorder,
pacemaker, below knee amputation, and cervix, uterus, Fallopian tubes, and ovaries. The
dominant themes included adversity, medical interest, souvenir, cultural beliefs, and
curiosity. Subthemes included becoming whole in the afterlife, preservation, my body,
restoration, honoring, and regret. In conclusion, pathologists can expand their role as
patient advocates and advance patient-centered pathology by supporting patient’s
individual needs, motivations, and goals, when they request their surgical pathology
specimens.

surgical pathologycommunicationpatient-centeredsupportpatientproducts of conceptionmedical deviceamputationcover-dateJanuary-December 2019
==== Body
Introduction
Surgical procedures that remove human tissue become surgical pathology specimens. These
specimens are examined by physicians, called pathologists, who specialize in the gross and
microscopic examination of these tissues. After examination and diagnosis of a surgical
pathology specimen, it is often possible for a patient to request custody of their surgical
pathology specimen. Proposed guidelines for this process of receiving, retaining, and
releasing surgical pathology specimens to patients have been outlined.1,2 Indeed, a document written by the American Perioperative Registered Nurses (AORN)
recommends practices that facilitate the possibility of a surgical specimen being returned
to the patient.3 Similarly, the Association of Surgical Technologists (AST) in a 2008 policy authored
by the AST Board of Directions, Standards of Practice for Handling and Care of
Surgical Specimens, suggest processes for returning surgical pathology specimens
to patients. The Veterans Health Administration (VA) requires the respective hospital
laboratory to have a policy in place for returning surgical pathology specimens to patients,
with special attention to accommodating religious needs.4 Despite these recommendations and mandates, few formal research studies have examined
the prevalence of this practice or the reasoning behind patients’ request for their
specimens. One study of 192 perinatal pathologists across the United States and Canada found
that 61% of survey respondents did allow release of placentas, with the most common reason
for patient request being to bury the placenta.5 One study examined the experience of 47 postoperative patients examining their
surgical pathology specimens. This study concluded that patients who saw their specimens
gained a greater understanding of their clinical situation and appreciated the experience.6 Furthermore, the expansion of patients receiving their surgical pathology specimens
could represent a further component of patient-centered pathology.7 This preliminary study investigates motivations, values, and needs of those who
obtained their surgical pathology specimen at one academic institution in the last 18
months.

Methods
Formal University of Arizona Institutional Review Board approval was obtained
(IRB#1702182306). Twenty-two patients signed “Release of Surgically Removed Tissue and/or
Prosthesis” forms between May 19, 2015, and January 23, 2017. No protected health
information was retained for this study. No patient charts were reviewed. These records
indicated patient name, contact information, and type of specimen removed. Patients were
called and invited to participate in this study, without compensation. Eight of 22 patients
gave consent and were interviewed. Thirteen patients were unable to be contacted due to
incorrect or inoperable phone numbers. One patient declined to be interviewed. Interviews
lasted 10 to 30 minutes and included 5 questions. The questions were: (1) What motivated
your decision to obtain your surgical pathology specimen, (2) What, if anything, did you do
with your specimen, (3) What were positive aspects of your experience, (4) What were
negative aspects of your experience, (5) What can the Banner University Medical Center
Tucson Department of Pathology change to better support patients who request their surgical
pathology specimens? Verbatim transcripts of the interviews were generated. Mixed-methods analysis,8 a combination of both quantitative and qualitative analysis, was performed on the
interview transcripts. An initial review of each transcript was completed by the authors to
assign a single word capturing the key theme of each interview. Then, a second review of the
interview was performed to generate words or concepts that represented subthemes, with no
limit to the number of subthemes that could be assigned. Finally, the frequency of these
themes was tabulated.

Results
Age, sex, and type of surgical pathology specimen received by the patient were recorded
(Table 1). Additionally, the
number of patients in age ranges were as follows: 3 patients between 20 and 29, 3 patients
between 40 and 59, and 2 patients over 60 years old.

Table 1. Study Cohort Characteristics.

Age	Sex	Type of Specimen	
35	F	Products of conception	
36	F	Placenta and cord	
25	F	Costal cartilage and ribs	
86	M	Loop explant recorder	
64	M	Pacemaker	
43	F	Products of conception	
53	M	Below knee amputation	
44	F	Cervix, uterus, bilateral fallopian tube, and ovaries	
Abbreviations: F, female; M, male.

The single word identifying the main theme, as understood by the authors, is seen in Table 2. Additionally, important
subthemes were identified. Themes included: Adversity x 3, medical interest, souvenir,
cultural belief x 2, and curiosity. Subthemes included: depression, placenta encapsulation,
restoration, aid in coping, my body x 2, being a medical student, preservation,
showing/sharing myself with others x 2, burial x 4, becoming whole in the afterlife x 2,
prayer x 2, ancestors, honoring x 2, regret, and unexpected (Table 3).

Table 2. Dominant Themes.

Dominant Theme	Incidence	
Adversity	3	
Medical interest	1	
Souvenir	1	
Cultural belief	2	
Curiosity	1	
Table 3. Subthemes.

Subtheme	Incidence	
Depression	1	
Placenta encapsulation	1	
Restoration	1	
Aid in coping	1	
My body	2	
Being a medical student	1	
Preservation	1	
Showing/sharing myself with others	2	
Burial	4	
Becoming whole in afterlife	2	
Prayer	2	
Ancestors	1	
Honoring	2	
Regret	1	
Unexpected	1	
A number of patients provided notable quotations from their experience. On the theme of
coping with tragic life circumstance, one patient noted that, “[receiving my placenta] did
help ease the experience, as getting the placenta back was more like my original plan [of
home birth] that had been disrupted. Processing why this pregnancy went wrong was very
difficult, so it helped with that.” Another patient noted that, “A medical professional
called my baby ‘tissue.’ He’s not tissue. I just saw the ultrasound; he was a moving baby in
the second trimester. I felt like they were numb to it.”

Two patients expressed how receiving their surgical pathology specimen was an important
part of their cultural beliefs. “I am Native American and in our tradition we have a burial
for amputated body parts. The burial is in the cemetery, so when we pass on, in the same
spot, it will be in my next life.” Another remarked, “[receiving my uterus is important]
because it’s part of my body, and I should take everything back, and have everything back,
so I don’t have to look for it after my death. This is part, a huge part, of our culture. We
say females have a power and the strength that you don’t just throw out.” For one patient,
the ability to receive her surgical pathology specimen back was so important that, “I first
agreed to do the surgery in 2003 at a local hospital, but they said they couldn’t give me
back my uterus, so I did not do the surgery until 2015 when I found a hospital that would
allow it.”

To some patients receiving their surgical pathology specimen was about honoring a lost
life. “To me the products of conception were my baby. I saw my ultrasound, it was a baby…To
have him die so suddenly, with no explanation, it was a shocker. It was the most difficult
thing I’ve ever gone through. One week he was on the ultrasound everything was OK. Next, he
was gone. They didn’t want to do any more tests. I still have no reason for why he died. I
have to accept it. But, the burial gave me closure.” Another patient remarked, “You know,
we’re not very religious, but we didn’t feel right about disposing her remains as medical
waste. So, I carried the pregnancy to term. And then I asked to take home the specimen.
Having a burial ceremony wasn’t really about closure but more about the baby girl that we
lost…We had 2 babies [one intrauterine demise and one viable, born normally] and the dilemma
of how to honor both.”

The events that took place at the burial site of each patient’s surgical pathology specimen
varied. Many patients chose burial sites of familial significance. “At the burial, me and my
children and my boyfriend went to the sacred place to bury him. I buried in the same spot
where I lost my brother to SIDS.” Another patient remarked, “The burial ceremony consisted
of a few prayers and some silence at the gravesite. We have returned once since we buried
him.” Another’s was attended by family and friends, he said, “We dug a hole, 5 feet deep,
not quite as deep as if you’re burying a casket. But just like with a person. We covered my
amputated leg with cactus pads, so no animals would dig up the gravesite. I was with
immediate family and friends. We had a moment of silence, and a prayer or blessing and
prayed the rosary. You know, a few prayers for me.”

Emotions at the burial ceremony of a leg were described by one patient and his wife as,
“[We were] relieved to get it done with. We were really active, now I [patient’s wife] am
the only one that is active. The burial was a way to have it done. Now we are taking it day
by day.” The patient commented, “I don’t know the words or how to explain it. I don’t know
how to put it into words. When the burial was happening, I felt good about the fact that
someday I am going to be with my leg, as if it never happened.”

To others, receiving their surgical pathology specimen related to medical interest,
curiosity, or a sense of ownership over their body parts. One patient said, “I received my
pacemaker because I was curious about what I was carrying around in my chest for 7 years. I
decided I would show and tell my kids about it someday.” Another patient said, “I got to see
surgery and intercostal cartilage in medical school, and this was especially meaningful
because I got to see my own cartilage.” For one patient this was about discovery, “I took it
home as a souvenir. I talked with and showed it to a friend who had the same thing done to
him from Iowa.”

Receiving their surgical pathology specimen was also about showing and sharing with others.
One patient remarked, “I also used it as a ‘party piece’ and would show friends when they
would come over for a party or get together.”

In the time since receiving their specimens, patients have responded in different ways. One
patient noted that “[…] people are surprised to see me getting along so well. For example,
there is a woman I see at Walgreens who has a husband who this same [amputation] happened
to. But he has never been able to walk, he stays in a wheelchair. She told me that seeing me
inspired her to go home and tell her husband that he could also be like me. This was very
meaningful for me.” The wife of a patient remarked, “Most people on the [Native American]
reservation who [undergo leg amputation] want a wheelchair and confine themselves to it. I
said, I wouldn’t let my husband use it. Now on our second year, we went to Mount Lemon and
he was able to walk in the snow.” After their experience one patient suggested a better
system for patients seeking their specimens. “It would be nice to have a dedicated form with
a question like ‘would you like your placenta back.’” The patient believes that “many people
are asking for their placenta, it would be nice to have it as a part of regular
protocol.”

Discussion
The phenomenon of patients requesting and receiving their surgical pathology specimens
remains poorly tracked and underreported. Numerous organizations including AORN, AST,
private pathology laboratories, and the VA permit the practice and implement policies to
that effect.1–4 Little research has examined why patients request their specimens be returned to them
and what their experience is in this process. This study demonstrates a wide array of
motivations. Patients request their specimens because of cultural beliefs and a desire to be
made whole again in the afterlife. Some want to honor a lost life. Still others are curious
what is inside them and feel a sense of ownership of their body parts. For many patients,
their experience helped them cope with tragic life circumstances. In receiving their
surgical pathology specimens, patients were better able to process what had occurred and
why.

It is tempting to view this work in solely a novelty or medical anthropology perspective.
However, the authors believe understanding patients’ motivations and experience serve 2
purposes. Firstly, this restores humanity and patient-centered pathology to the forefront of
the field. Pathologists can, and should, advocate for their patients by supporting patients
who choose to request the return of their surgical pathology specimens. It is evident from
this study that patients gain a great deal of psychological, emotional, and spiritual
benefit from receiving their specimens. After a 20-minute interview attended by the
pathologists, the patient, and his family, the patient remarked, “this meeting did more to
help me cope with happened to me than the entire previous 2 years combined.” With this
understanding, pathologists can practice the sacred healing contained within the art of
doctoring.

Secondly, this information can be used for quality improvement. Thoughtful consideration
can be given to amending presurgery paperwork to include information related to requesting
surgical pathology specimens. This will not only make the process easier for the patient,
but it will also make their request feel more normal and supported by the medical staff.
Indeed, one patient delayed her surgery over 10 years until she found a provider that agreed
to facilitate giving her specimen back. As a matter of safety, each institution’s department
of pathology should thoroughly review procedures in place for patients who request their
surgical pathology specimens. Consideration can be given to easing the process and putting
in place measures that ensure the patients receive their specimens in a safe manner
consistent with their goals. If the patient expresses interest in burying the specimen,
consideration can be given to thoroughly rinsing it of formalin before transfer to the
patient.

The returning of surgical pathology specimens cannot be without consideration of its impact
on the medical evaluation and legal implications of this change in custody. As outlined in
previous publications,1 ample time for the pathologist examination, and subsequent time for the clinical
team’s additional requests, should be given. Legally, there appears to be 2 main
considerations, consent and liability. To obtain adequate consent, each department of
pathology should have a process for releasing surgical pathology specimens to the custody of
the patient. Prior publications address this consideration1 and suggest release forms that require attending pathologist signature, patient
signature, and a process for informed consent and proper notification of any potential
biohazards associated with the specimen. The second consideration is for subsequent
liability. While it is possible for a patient to retain custody of their surgical pathology
specimen for the purpose of second opinion, as this study shows, this practice appears to be
rare. The dominant motivation of patients is to retain their specimen for meaningful
personal purposes. Furthermore, while the pathologist and clinical team have a right to
examine the specimen and retain it for such purpose, the authors do not believe that the
ultimate ownership of a surgical pathology specimen is that of the hospital. Pathologists
are custodians of surgical pathology specimens, not owners. This conceptualization is in
line with the encouragement of organizations such as AORN, AST, and the VA.

In conclusion, pathologists can expand their role as patient advocates, and advance
patient-centered pathology, by better supporting patients who request their surgical
pathology specimens. This support can take many forms, from a brief meeting with the patient
to understand and support their needs, to quality improvement changes to hospital forms and
processes in specimen handling.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

ORCID iD: Blake A. Gibson 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1791-4282
==== Refs
References
1 
Graham AR Parks DG Wick M  
What is involved in tissue sample return? 
Lab Med .
1995 ;26 :170 –171 . 10.1093/labmed/26.3.170 .
2 
Dahl Chase Diagnostic Services . Surgical
Pathology. Release of Specimens to Patients . Reference Number:
AA-00280 
2017 
http://dahlchase.host4.kb.com/article/AA-00280/0/Release-of-Specimens-to-Patients.html.
Accessed July 8, 2018 .
3 
Graybill-D’Ercole P  
RP implementation: specimen management .
AORN J .
2014 ;100 :625 –636 .
doi:10.1016/j.aorn.2014.10.012 .25453682 
4 
Veterans Health Administration . Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine Service Procedures. VHA Handbook 1106.01 .
2016 
https://www.va.gov/VHAPUBLICAtIONs/ViewPublication.asp?pub_ID=3169.
Accessed July 8, 2018 .
5 
Baergen RN Thaker HM Heller DS  
Placental release or disposal? Experiences of perinatal
pathologists . Pediatr Dev Pathol .
2013 ;16 :327 –330 .
doi:10.2350/13-05-1338-OA.1 .23815756 
6 
Hock YL Balachandar C Dicken S Bayley C Ramaiah S  
Patients’ perspective of pathology specimens. A
prospective study . J Clin Pathol .
2005 ;58 :891 –893 .
doi:10.1136/jcp.2004.023812 .16049298 
7 
Gibson B Bracamonte E Krupinski EA  
A “Pathology Explanation Clinic (PEC)” for
patient-centered laboratory medicine test results . Acad
Pathol . 2018 ;5 
doi:10.1177/2374289518756306 .
8 
Onwuegbuzie AJ Leech NL  
Linking research questions to mixed methods data analysis
procedures 1 . Qual Rep .
2006 ;11 :474 –498 . https://nsuworks.nova.edu/tqr/vol11/iss3/37.

