
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951985984110.1177_2374289519859841Regular ArticleAgreement in Histological Assessment of Mitotic Activity Between Microscopy
and Digital Whole Slide Images Informs Conversion for Clinical Diagnosis Wei Bih-Rong PhD12Halsey Charles H. DVM, PhD1Hoover Shelley B. BS1Puri Munish PhD1Yang Howard H. PhD1https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7332-1620Gallas Brandon D. PhD3Lee Maxwell P. PhD1Chen Weijie PhD3Durham Amy C. MS, VMD4Dwyer Jennifer E. MS1Sánchez Melissa D. VMD, PhD4Traslavina Ryan P. DVM5Frank Chad MS, DVM6Bradley Charles VMD4McGill Lawrence D. DVM, PhD7Esplin D. Glen DVM, PhD7Schaffer Paula A. DVM, MS6Cramer Sarah D. DVM, PhD8Lyle L. Tiffany DVM, PhD9Beck Jessica DVM10Buza Elizabeth DVM4Gong Qi MS3Hewitt Stephen M. MD, PhD11https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8852-1297Simpson R. Mark DVM, PhD1
1 Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
2 Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Leidos Biomedical
Research, Inc., Frederick, MD, USA
3 Division of Imaging, Diagnostics, and Software Reliability, Office of
Science and Engineering Laboratories, Center for Devices and Radiological Health, US Food
and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA
4 Department of Pathobiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
USA
5 Section of Infections of the Nervous System, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
6 Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO, USA
7 Animal Reference Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
8 Cancer and Inflammation Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
9 Women’s Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
10 Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
11 Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAR. Mark Simpson, Laboratory of Cancer Biology and
Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
Email: ms43b@nih.gov11 7 2019 Jan-Dec 2019 6 237428951985984108 3 2019 15 5 2019 19 5 2019 © The Author(s) 20192019SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as published without
adaptation or alteration, without further permission provided the original work is
attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).Validating digital pathology as substitute for conventional microscopy in diagnosis
remains a priority to assure effectiveness. Intermodality concordance studies typically
focus on achieving the same diagnosis by digital display of whole slide images and
conventional microscopy. Assessment of discrete histological features in whole slide
images, such as mitotic figures, has not been thoroughly evaluated in diagnostic practice.
To further gauge the interchangeability of conventional microscopy with digital display
for primary diagnosis, 12 pathologists examined 113 canine naturally occurring mucosal
melanomas exhibiting a wide range of mitotic activity. Design reflected diverse diagnostic
settings and investigated independent location, interpretation, and enumeration of mitotic
figures. Intermodality agreement was assessed employing conventional microscopy (CM40×),
and whole slide image specimens scanned at 20× (WSI20×) and at 40× (WSI40×) objective
magnifications. An aggregate 1647 mitotic figure count observations were available from
conventional microscopy and whole slide images for comparison. The intraobserver
concordance rate of paired observations was 0.785 to 0.801; interobserver rate was 0.784
to 0.794. Correlation coefficients between the 2 digital modes, and as compared to
conventional microscopy, were similar and suggest noninferiority among modalities,
including whole slide image acquired at lower 20× resolution. As mitotic figure counts
serve for prognostic grading of several tumor types, including melanoma, 6 of 8
pathologists retrospectively predicted survival prognosis using whole slide images,
compared to 9 of 10 by conventional microscopy, a first evaluation of whole slide image
for mitotic figure prognostic grading. This study demonstrated agreement of replicate
reads obtained across conventional microscopy and whole slide images. Hence, quantifying
mitotic figures served as surrogate histological feature with which to further credential
the interchangeability of whole slide images for primary diagnosis.

cancer gradinginformaticsprognosisreproducibility studyvalidationdigital pathologytechnology adoptiontrainingNational Cancer Institutehttp://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000054Z01-BC-010931cover-dateJanuary-December 2019
==== Body
Introduction
Over the last decade, diagnostic applications in digital pathology have become increasingly
possible. The technology represents a major innovation with potential to significantly
impact a large swath of the health-care enterprise; however, adoption of digital pathology
has been less rapid than anticipated. The protracted momentum appears due in part to cost
and the lack of use cases that demonstrate pathologists can accomplish tasks with whole
slide images (WSIs) at a level equal to, or better than, the conventional optical microscope
(noninferiority). Digital pathology practice requires WSI scanning instruments, computers,
high-quality display monitors, and server solutions for data storage and computational image
processing. Reliable diagnostic implementation of digital pathology must ensure that the
entire tissue section has been scanned and digitized appropriately and that the WSI created
permits uncompromised specimen review and interpretation.1 There is concern that the workflow required for digital pathology can lead to
increased turnaround time, burdening case management compared to conventional microscopy (CM).1 Furthermore, digital microscopy may constrain specimen visualization. For example,
unlike a CM, a single plane WSI does not permit the specimen to be focused in the z-axis
plane, possibly impacting accuracy in primary diagnosis.2,3 Therefore, validating the conversion to digital microscopy from CM in clinical
diagnosis remains a priority to assure effectiveness, and documenting reproducibility is
important for such goals.

Evaluating the substitution of WSI for CM has largely focused on whether the same, or
similar, diagnosis can be reached using each of the viewing modalities (intraobserver and/or
interobserver concordance between modalities).4,5 Histopathological diagnoses using WSI have been considered noninferior to CM.5-7 Additionally, agreement between CM and WSI has been demonstrated when
scoring/interpreting immunohistochemistry (IHC), such as anti-Ki-67 and anti-HER2, when the
targets are readily visible.8,9 By contrast, evaluation designed to validate examination of discrete histological
feature details, such as mitotic figures (MFs) and microorganisms, for primary diagnosis by
digital display, is not well established.10 The number of MF (mitotic counts) in tissue sections relates to tumor proliferative
activity and can provide a clinically relevant, prognostically useful tumor grading
biomarker in surgical pathology. Mitotic activity evaluation generally requires pathologists
to determine the tissue area with most numerous MF (mitotic hot spot), followed by detailed
scrutiny of nuclear morphology to count MF, in order to determine a mitotic activity index.3,11-15 Assessing tumor mitotic activity provides a challenging, yet quantifiable,
histological feature identification task with which to further evaluate pathologist
performance between CM and digital display of WSI. It is plausible that inferiority of one
or the other modality would be more likely revealed in an intermodality comparison that
requires the location, interpretation, and enumeration of MF.

In order to more comprehensively substantiate the interchangeability of digital and CM in
diagnosis, agreement in assessing MF histological feature detail was examined in this
multi-institutional study employing a clinical practice paradigm using both CM and WSI. In
this study, 12 observers, including academic and clinical laboratory-based pathologists,
evaluated a series of canine spontaneous oral mucosal melanoma biopsies, exhibiting a wide
range of mitotic activity. Observer performance was appraised for correlation between CM and
digital WSI, the latter on specimens scanned at 20× as well as 40× magnification. In
addition, the utility of CM and digital modes was assessed for prognostic grading
performance. Detection and enumeration of MF were correlated among modalities, and with
patient survival, developing a foundation for the interchangeability of MF evaluation by
digital display with CM.

Materials and Methods
Study Pathologists
The multi-institutional study comparing CM of glass slide specimens with digital display
of WSIs was performed at 4 institutions. Two academic departments, a national reference
laboratory, and National Institutes of Health (NIH)-based pathologists were represented.
Participating pathologists from these institutions included 1 postresidency pathology
fellow and 11 specialty certified pathologists with 3 to 33 years of clinical diagnostic
experience (8 pathologists, 1-10 years; 2 pathologists, 11-20 years; 2 pathologists >20
years). Pathologists’ self-report of their experience with digital pathology indicated
they generally lacked substantial or, in several cases, any experience with clinical
diagnosis on computer display, with one exception; 1 pathologist used the digital platform
routinely in diagnostic practice.

Specimens
The tumor specimens used in this study were spontaneous, naturally occurring oral mucosal
melanomas obtained from dogs in the course of clinical veterinary patient care. This
malignancy represented a high-fidelity human cancer model and replicates the
histopathology of human cutaneous melanoma.16-18 Study specimens included formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks of
surgically excised spontaneous canine melanomas, sourced from participating institution
archives at the Colorado State University and University of Pennsylvania. Patient survival
data for a subset of cases were provided from these institutions, and in collaboration
with Dr Michael Goldschmidt, University of Pennsylvania, and Dr EJ Ehrhart, Colorado State
University. As a consequence of veterinary patient care management of client-owned pet
dogs, this retrospective use of archived diagnostic specimens is not subject to
prospective research animal use approvals. Tumors had been resected with intent to cure;
patients received no treatment prior to surgery. Specimens were anonymized for this study.
Single paraffin-embedded specimens from each case were processed in the same laboratory.
For each case, one 5 μm-thick section was mounted on a glass slide, rehydrated, bleached
to remove melanin pigment, and subsequently stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
Melanin quenching involved immersing deparaffinized, rehydrated slides in 0.25% aqueous
potassium permanganate solution for 1 hour, washing in running tap water, followed by
decolorizing for 5 minutes in 5% aqueous oxalic acid, washing, and final rinsing in
deionized water (Histoserv, Inc, Gaithersburg, Maryland).

Original histopathological diagnoses from the submitting institutions were reverified (by
C.H.H.), and all cases included following this review had characteristic melanoma features.18 Immunohistochemistry for melanoma differentiation antigens Melan A, PNL2, and Trp-2
was performed on serial sections by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) following methods
described previously,18 in order to further establish the melanocytic origin of all study specimens (data
not shown). Each case was assigned a randomly generated 4-digit identification number to
replace any institutional identifying information. One hundred thirteen H&E-stained
glass slides were subsequently optically scanned as WSI in batch scan mode at both 20×
(0.5 μm per pixel) and 40× (0.25 μm per pixel) using an AT2 digital slide scanner (Leica
Biosystems, Vista, California). Scanned image files were reviewed to ensure proper quality
for examination, including appropriate focus and tissue inclusion. This preliminary
evaluation of image scans led to rescanning 3 slides at both 20× and 40× (2.65% rescan
rate).

Specimen Assessment Protocol
Pathologists at each study location reviewed the same slides and image files for assigned
specimens. Specimen were randomized into 3 case groups (n = 37 or 38 per group), and
assignments for evaluation using 3 microscopy modalities were made according to a split
plot study design.19 Each pathologist reviewed all patient specimens: 2/3 of the total cases by CM, 2/3
by WSI scanned at 20× (WSI20×), and 1/3 by WSI scanned at 40× (WSI40×; Figure 1 and Supplemental Table 1).
Each pathologist group evaluated 1 case group with all 3 modalities. For example, each
observer in observer group 1 evaluated case groups 1 and 2 with CM40×, case groups 2 and 3
using WSI20×, and case group 2 using WSI40× (Supplemental Table 1). In this example, group
1 observers evaluated case group 2 with all 3 modalities (Figure 1). This approach promotes efficient use of
cases, each observer’s time, and the total number of observations from a study.20


Figure 1. Split plot study design for comparing mitotic activity fine histological feature
assessment between CM and digital WSI, depicted graphically according to assigned case
groups and observer groups. One hundred thirteen melanoma biopsy cases were divided
into 3 groups (n = 37 or 38 per case group), and each pathologist examined all 113
patients, by observer group, represented accordingly as assigned cases (gray boxes)
and no assigned cases (white boxes). Three viewing modalities: pathologist’s
conventional microscope (CM) 40× objective lens, whole slide image (WSI) scanned at
20× (WSI20×), and WSI scanned at 40× (WSI40×) were employed. Assessment of digital
image files was conducted on the pathologist’s personal display monitor. The design
provided for each case to be read by at least 8 pathologists in CM40× and WSI20×, and
4 pathologists in WSI40×.

Table 1. Intraobserver and Interobserver, Intermodality Concordance Analyses.

Modality Comparison	Intraobserver	Interobserver	
CM40×/WSI20×	0.785	0.784	
CM40×/WSI40×	0.801	0.786	
WSI20×/WSI40×	0.798	0.794	
Abbreviations: CM, conventional microscopy; WSI, whole slide image.

For each slide (glass or WSI), pathologists examined specimens and identified areas of
most numerous MF (mitotic hot spots) as they would in diagnostic practice according to
experience and preference, consistent with the standard of care.21 Evaluation and subsequent enumeration of MF were made to include 10 consecutive but
nonoverlapping fields at maximum resolution, defined uniquely for the 3 modalities as
using the 40× high-power objective lens by CM for glass slides (CM40×), by computer
display of WSI at the 20× setting for 20× scanned images and at the 40× setting for WSI
scanned at 40×. Data collection included a balanced mix of the order of modalities. The
case order was randomized for each pathologist, for each modality. A washout period of at
least 1 week was structured between examinations of patient groups and modality uses, to
minimize potential case recall bias. Pathologist participation anonymity regarding study
outcomes was maintained.

Pathologists were provided with all study materials. The single set of glass slides used
for the study (no recuts or duplicates) was shipped on a rotation to the various
institutions. Pathologists within an institution completed their assigned cases and
subsequently shipped the glass slides to the next center. Image files, image viewing
software (Aperio ImageScope v12.0.1.5027, Leica Biosystems, Vista, California), cell
counter software application (see Record of Mitotic Figure Counts, Collation, and Quality
Review), assigned cases, randomized read sequence, and study protocol were provided on
external hard drives for each pathologist individually; these materials could all be
loaded onto pathologists’ personal computers. Standard desktop display monitor resolution
varied somewhat among pathologists (median 92.195, range 86.273-102.460 pixels per inch;
Supplemental Table 2). Prior to initiation of the study, pathologists attended a training
webinar, including interactive discussion, during which the study protocol was reviewed,
and examples of MF intended for inclusion were illustrated. Instructions on recording MF
counts using a cell counter were discussed (see “Methods” section). A study director
confirmed that pathologists possessed operational files and had standardized the color
calibration of their digital display monitors (Spyder4PRO, Datacolor, Lawrenceville, New
Jersey).

Record of Mitotic Figure Counts, Collation, and Quality Review
When reading WSI, pathologists annotated their individual images using the annotation
function in ImageScope to record the regions of interest (ROIs) corresponding to each of
10 individual high-power fields of view (FOV) where MF counting was conducted. The size of
a circular ROI was equivalent to area of 1 high-power FOV corresponding to the
pathologist’s personal microscope used for CM40× (Supplemental Figures S1 and S2). A
custom graphical user interface (GUI) counting application was created using MATLAB Coder
(MathWorks, 2012, Natick, Massachusetts) to standardize MF count recording for both CM and
digital WSI (Supplemental Figure S3). The GUI program and instructions for downloading and
navigating the application were included in the external hard drive for each pathologist.
Graphical user interface operation was in 3 functional steps: (1) registration entry of
observer identification, case identification number, and modality; (2) incremental tally
of MF as they were observed within each of 10 FOV in the MF cell counting application by
computer mouse click on the “count” key; this was accompanied by an audible sound for each
count registration made; and (3) exporting data after counts have been registered for 10
FOV by clicking the “Export” key; total MF count summation and export of the case data to
each pathologist’s spreadsheet was executed through the GUI.

The data set for analysis, including 2260 mitotic activity count entries from 20,600 FOV,
was transposed as a relational database in R programming (R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria). The accuracy of the patient-identification codes metadata,
the appropriate performance for each case by each participant, and observer compliance
with the specimen evaluation protocol in each case were inspected. Issues, including
presence of duplicate entries and errors in nomenclature, were identified and corrected
appropriately. Review of pathologist-annotated ROI on WSI revealed deviation from the read
protocol in 4 instances. After excluding these data (613 MF count values [27% of the
total]), there were 1647 total aggregate mitotic activity count entries.

Data Analysis
Analyses were carried out through multiple means. Processing in R (R Foundation for
Statistical Computing) utilized the NIH High Performance Computing Biowulf cluster and
helix systems (https://hpc.nih.gov/, accessed April 24, 2019). Mitotic figure count
relationships between observers using the same modality were established using Spearman
correlation (interobserver/intramodality). Mitotic figure counts derived from different
modalities (intraobserver/intermodality) were compared using Spearman rank correlations
and linear regression analyses. The linear association was evaluated by the slope β,
P value, and R
2 of each linear model. The 95% prediction bands for future observations about
the regression lines were calculated and plotted. We also calculated the intra- and
interobserver rank-based concordance rates for paired observations.22 As with many measurements, especially counts, we found that the variance of the
counts grew with the average. Therefore, MF values were transformed by the function
log10 (MF counts +1).

Two-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to analyze the (fixed) effects of
observers and modalities on MF counts. When the transformed input data log10
(MF counts +1) were used in the 2-factor analysis, a qq-plot analysis of the residuals
provided appropriate support for an assumption of normality in the ANOVA (data not shown).
Clinical utility regarding the relationship of MF counts made by CM and WSI20× to melanoma
patient survival was assessed using Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and the log-rank
test.

Results
Study Performance
Pathologist performance at identifying and counting MF, from H&E-stained specimens of
canine spontaneous mucosal melanomas, was evaluated using 3 microscopy modalities (CM40×,
WSI20×, and WSI40×) based on the clinical paradigm of counting 10 contiguous high-power
FOV for each case. Pathologists were divided into 3 groups (primarily based upon their 4
institutions, providing efficient study of the same slides for all reviews). To maintain
reasonable workloads while conserving statistically performing replicate reads, the study
employed a split-plot design with the total 113 cases divided randomly into 3 assigned
case groups (Figure 1). The design
provided the necessary overlap for replicate reads of each patient in each modality. As a
result, each case was read by at least 8 pathologists for CM40× and WSI20×, or 4
pathologists in the case of WSI40× (Figure 1 and Supplemental Table 1).

Pathologists used their routine clinical microscopes and computer display monitors to
examine cases in their respective diagnostic sign-out environments. Case groups of
melanoma tissue slides were shipped serially to the various pathologist groups for
evaluation by CM. Pathologists were instructed to evaluate specimens by locating the tumor
mitotic hot spot and then begin recording MF numbers in each of 10 consecutive, adjacent,
nonoverlapping FOV at maximum resolution. The CM40× modality, employing a 40× objective
lens for identifying and quantifying MF, was considered the routine standard of care.
Although distinct, the method to assess MF as well as the total area examined has
similarities to the American Joint Committee on Cancer guidelines for cutaneous melanomas.23 The canine melanomas evaluated were of oral mucosa origin and previous efforts have
rigorously demonstrated the histomorphologic similarities of these tumors to those in
humans arising on squamous epithelial surfaces.16-18 Although lacking an ultraviolet injury signature at the molecular level, canine
melanoma biology retains similarities to human melanomas.

A separate examination was conducted for these same case/slides through the visualization
of the digital WSI files on computer display. Each pathologist had their own copy of WSIs
that had been created by scanning the single glass slide per case. The slides were scanned
at both 20× (0.5 μm/pixel) and 40× (0.25 μm/pixel) resolution. Similar to CM, pathologists
were directed to locate and then annotate the mitotic hot spot, as well as the subsequent
9 FOV in succession when reading WSI. Using a circle annotation tool, an ROI equivalent to
the area of 1 high-power FOV of their personal CM was drawn first at the identified hot
spot and subsequently in the neighboring 9 contiguous areas (Supplemental Figures S1 and
S2). Hence, for each pathologist, the tumor area assessed on each patient was constant
across all modalities and depended upon each pathologists’ personal microscope (for most
pathologists, total 2.37 mm2 for 10 FOVs; Supplemental Table 2). In many cases,
mitotic hot spot ROI selection varied among observers for a given case (Supplemental
Figure S2; unpublished data), a factor that appeared capable of influencing MF count
values recorded. Impact of different FOV choices on observed variances among pathologists
is a subject of ongoing study.

All pathologists recorded counts of MF in the identical manner for both CM and WSIs
(Supplemental Figure S3). Twelve pathologists initiated and 10 completed enumeration of
tumor MF (data were excluded from observers D and I; and see Supplemental Table 1).
Primary causes for censoring some data included protocol deviations, that is, not
completing all assigned reads, or failure to place annotated ROI in WSI files according to
study protocol (Supplemental Table 1, and Materials and Methods). Six pathologists
indicated qualitative opinions regarding WSI examination user ergonomics. One considered
WSI and CM modalities to be similar ergonomically, while 2 considered WSI to add to
observer workflow and 3 preferred WSI due to perceived visual enhancement and reduced
operator strain.

Mitotic Figures Feature Agreement
Agreement across conventional and digital microscopy modalities was evaluated using
various analyses in an attempt to determine if one or more modalities might be clearly
superior for the task of identifying and quantifying MF. The design also allowed
examination of individual pathologist performance across the 3 modalities. Overall,
comparisons included (1) between-observer, within-modality, (2) between-observer,
between-modality, and (3) within-observer, between-modality (Figure 1 and Supplemental Table 1).

We first ascertained the agreement between observers within the same modality, based upon
MF counts. Using Spearman correlation analyses, MF identification and quantitation by
CM40× or WSI demonstrated substantial interobserver agreement among pathologists.
Pair-wise comparisons of pathologists’ reads on same cases revealed interobserver
correlation coefficients >0.65 in CM40× (Figure 2A), WSI20× (Figure 2B), and WSI40× (data not shown). Furthermore,
14 (33%)/42 interobserver correlations exhibited greatest agreement (ρ > 0.85) in
CM40×, compared to approximately 5 (18%)/28 having comparable agreement for WSI20×. This
difference may be due to pathologists’ greater familiarity with CM and less experience in
navigating WSI.

Figure 2. Pair-wise interobserver agreement of mitotic figure assessment for each pathologist
(designated A-L) within modalities (A) CM40× and (B) WSI20×. Each cell in the heatmaps
is the Spearman rank correlation coefficient analyses (ρ values) between each pair of
pathologists. White squares indicate a read protocol fault, which were excluded. n =
37 to 75 for each comparison. CM indicates conventional microscopy; WSI, whole slide
image.

Agreement between CM and WSI modalities was assessed in 3 comparisons: CM40× versus
WSI20×, CM40× versus WSI40×, and WSI20× versus WSI40×. Individually, all pathologists
(A-L) achieved significant rank-order correlations for MF quantification in intermodality
comparisons (P < .001; Figure 3), although intermodality correlations varied
among pathologists. This indication of interchangeability between modalities for
individual pathologists was also evident on scatter plots of all cases and all observers
(Figure 4). Each point in these
plots corresponds to one observer evaluating one case in both modalities; each case has
multiple entries from different observers. Intermodality comparisons assessed using
log-transformed data in all 3 combinations were characterized by similar regression slopes
(0.75-0.78) and R
2 values (range, 0.63-0.66; Figure 4). Corroborating the Spearman correlation analyses, intermodality
concordance coefficients spanned narrow ranges (0.785-0.801, intraobserver; and
0.784-0.794, interobserver; Table
1). Collectively, these analyses indicated results achieved among the 3
modalities for the assessment of MF were similarly concordant.

Figure 3. Intermodality agreement of mitotic activity assessment for each of 8 pathologists.
Each bar indicated the Spearman correlation between each pair of modalities. Variable,
but significant correlation (P < 0.001) was achieved under all
microscopy modality comparisons by each pathologist, when assessing the same patients.
The range of the intermodality correlations is (0.54, 0.93) and the mean correlation
is 0.8, n = 37 to 38 for each comparison. Error bars represent standard errors of
means.

Figure 4. Intraobserver tumor mitotic figure counts, in paired comparisons of each of 3
modalities, are shown as scatter plot displays of regression analyses of the total MF
counts (n +1) (log10 transformation). Each data point is an individual
pathologist’s total MF value from 10 FOV of the same patient using the 2 modalities. X
and Y axes labeled for n, instead of n+1. For each comparison, (A) CM40× versus
WSI20×, n = 271; (B) CM40× versus WSI40×, n = 312; and (C) WSI20× versus WSI40×, n =
278, there is a significant correlation between the modalities indicated (solid line
of best fit, P < 0.0001). Dashed lines represent the 95%
prediction band. Indicated slope (β) and R
2 values are similar for A, B, and C, and >0.63, indicating the strong
linear relationship, supporting the interchangeability of modalities. CM indicates
conventional microscopy; FOV, fields of view; MF, mitotic figure; WSI, whole slide
image.

Further analysis into the relative agreement among individual pathologists was examined
using 2-way ANOVAs. For each pathologist, a fitted value (mean of the observer’s MF counts
on all cases read) was plotted against the residuals (differences between each case MF
count and the fitted value) by modality (Supplemental Figure S4). The distribution of
residuals is generally uniform among the observers both within and across all 3
modalities, without obvious outliers. For each pathologist, the fitted values across 3
modalities were similar. Thus, observer performance characteristics among modalities were
comparable by this analysis as well.

Utility for Clinical Prognosis
We next investigated whether the prognostic utility of identifying and enumerating MF for
tumor grading would be sustained when pathologists transferred from CM to digital WSI
microscopy. A clinically predictive MF cut point count was determined from CM data of all
study pathologists to define significant differences in survival. Patient survival
follow-up was available for a subset of 66 dogs through the contributing institutions
(disease-specific survival up to 1 year following diagnosis). The majority of total
mitotic counts from all cases were ≤20 in 10 CM FOV. Therefore, to accomplish mitotic
count cut point determination, continuous MF count values (X = 1-20) from CM counts were
serially applied as putative cut points to divide all cases into short- and longer-term
survivor groups. For each cut point in turn (X), Kaplan-Meier survival curves of cases
with MF ≥ X versus cases with MF < X were plotted and P values were
computed; this was performed for each pathologist (Supplemental Figure S5). At a cut point
of ≥10 MF, survival curves generated from 9 (90%) of 10 pathologists appropriately divided
the cases into a high- or low-survival prognosis (P < .05; Figure 5A). When applying the same cut
point of ≥10 developed by CM40× to mitotic counts obtained using WSI20×, 6 (75%) of 8
pathologists successfully predicted prognostic outcome (Figure 5A). Example Kaplan-Meier survival analyses
for a representative pathologist is shown (Figure 5B and C). Among the cases read by each
observer with WSI40×, only up to 23 of these dogs had survival data available. This small
data set was not sufficient to fully establish significant survival differences in WSI40×
mode (data not shown). The findings supported evidence of clinically acceptable agreement
in the prognostic utility of MF count values from WSI.

Figure 5. Utility of mitotic activity counting for estimating patient survival prognosis,
established using CM, is transferable to WSI. A, Number of pathologists whose MF
counts lead to an optimal prognostic prediction at each assumed cut point (x-axis)
(CM40×, solid line; WSI20× dashed line). The cut point 10 MF, in 10 FOV established by
CM (see also Supplemental Figure S5), was subsequently applied and validated for
predicting survival differences using digital mode, for the same and different
patients (P < 0.05). B, C Example Kaplan-Meier survival analyses
for a representative pathologist displayed for reads obtained by conventional (B,
CM40×) and digital microscopy (C, WSI20×) using the cut point count of 10 mitotic
figures. MF ≥10 black line; MF <10 red line, n = number of patients. CM indicates
conventional microscopy; FOV, fields of view; MF, mitotic figures; WSI, whole slide
image.

Discussion
Studies of diagnostic accuracy using WSI typically assess the ability of pathologists to
agree on tissue diagnosis or IHC expression scoring.24-29 The assessment of fine histological features, such as eukaryotic nuclear structures,
cytoplasmic organelles, or microorganisms in tissue sections using WSI, has not been
sufficiently authenticated in diagnostic practice. Although assessment of discrete
histological features is inherent in the intermodality diagnostic concordance achieved in a
number of studies by others,24-29 enumerating MF provided an objective metric with which to judge intermodality
performance agreement more precisely. In this manner, analyzing pathologist performance
assessing mitotic activity in digital mode is critical to further establish the utility of
digital pathology for primary diagnosis. To address this, we developed a clinical research
framework including study design/execution, data collection protocols (hardware and
software), and data analysis methods/software. Within this framework, we compared the
proficiency of assessing and enumerating MF using 3 modalities to assess the
interchangeability of digital WSI and CM in the routine diagnostic setting. The limited
range of correlation coefficients amid mitotic activity assessments achieved was indicative
of noninferiority among CM and WSI modalities.

These results were further augmented by finding 6 of 8 pathologists successfully predicted
significant differences in patient survival prognosis using digital mode (WSI20×). Such
performance in digital mode, grounded upon an MF count threshold developed with this patient
population, was supportive of task accuracy and represents a first such comparison of
clinical prognostic utility between CM and WSI. The extent of intermodality agreement
achieved among pathologists evaluating mitotic activity by CM and WSI contributes to
understanding the diagnostic interchangeability of the modalities for such a task. The
multiobserver, multicase design facilitates extrapolation of these findings to other
pathologists and other cases,19 although it would be useful to confirm prognostic fitness with validation studies in
additional tumor types and for other discrete histological features. The findings will be
useful for future studies to continue validating the use of WSI to examine discrete
histological feature details, such as MF and microorganisms, which are important components
of primary diagnoses and patient management.

Detailed assessment of discrete histological features using WSI has been previously
examined in related studies that suggested digital display may not be inferior to CM.3,10 However, the approach was more controlled. In particular, MF counts in a previous
breast cancer study were obtained by 3 pathologists who shared the same microscope for
traditional MF counting on glass slide specimens.3 Each observer used the same digital display monitor that was focused to a uniform WSI
FOV for MF enumeration, using high-resolution WSI (WSI40×). Intraclass correlation
coefficients were considered almost perfect by the authors (0.879 and 0.924, for microscopy
and WSI, respectively.3 Weighted κ coefficients ranged from 0.83 to 0.95 in another study evaluating
intermodality detection of MF from melanomas and gastric biopsies.10 Similarly, MF counting in preselected ROI on uniformly shared display monitors in a
separate study also constituted the approach for melanoma mitotic activity enumeration.30 The directed focus for pathologists in these studies likely contributed to the
reproducibility achieved across conventional and digital modalities. Highly controlled
methodologies in which the same FOV by microscope or digital display is employed are
decidedly informative; however, these approaches are manifestly less reflective of the
variety of routine diagnostic evaluations. During the current study by contrast,
pathologists were required to independently localize mitotic hot spots from the entirety of
the series of glass slide specimens and WSI, counting MF, and recording data successfully
using microscopes and digital displays they manipulate daily. This approach was reflective
of diverse clinical practice environments and provided a realistic setting to test the
translatability of CM to diagnosis by digital display. In this regard, previous findings are
insufficient alone to judge the interchangeability for primary diagnosis.3,10,30 Consequently, the present study design, focused on interpretive locating,
identifying, and quantifying MF as it is reduced to actual practice, is a particular
strength.

Assessment of both MF and Helicobacter species microorganisms was the
subject of another related study.10 These discrete microscopic features were detected in WSI using either a consumer
grade or medical application display monitor. This finding has parallels in the present
study, in which a variety of consumer display monitor characteristics were represented.
While not formally controlled for, stipulation of minimum monitor size and use of standard
color calibration for displays was considered to reduce some variability. Color calibration
of monitors has been demonstrated to benefit pathologist performance, although the precise
influence of digital display characteristics and color calibration on the quality of WSI
review remains to be determined.10,30 Effectively a multitude of factors, including display monitor characteristics,
pathologist ability or experience, and resolution of specimen scans, can all impact the
ability to make assessments of WSI.1,2,31 Common WSI viewing software, standardized display color calibration, and uniform
means of obtaining and electronically recording MF counts with the software application
developed for this study (the latter used for both CM and digital WSI reads) controlled for
some variables across settings. These features may have practical benefit employed in
clinical practice. Furthermore, uniform viewing software, color calibration, and counting
application were considered to contribute to the tallied MF counts recorded from the
>20,000 FOV, as well as the reproducibility, in the present study.

Of particular note are the comparisons made with different WSI resolution, that is, optical
scans of identical specimens obtained at both WSI20× and WSI40×. Digital pathology
concordance studies have been conducted using a variety of resolutions corresponding to
either 20× or 40× scans, and in some cases scan resolution is not clearly indicated.27,28,32,33 Contention that WSI20× scans introduce problems with MF visualization28 was not objectively or subjectively confirmed in the present study. By contrast, this
study showed that MF count values from WSI40× were correlated with both CM40× and WSI20×. In
addition, inter- and intraobserver rank-based concordance22 across the 2 digital modes (WSI20× vs WSI40×) were found to be similar (0.794 and
0.798, respectively), findings that function to support the ability to interpret most MF at
either WSI scan resolution in practice, and despite an inability to make focus adjustments
of the WSI in z-axis direction. These observations indicate that certain aspects of tissue
specimen examination conducted at lesser image projection/resolution on display monitors may
not be adversely impacted from limiting scan resolution at image acquisition.

The interpretive nature of pathologist performance is inherently variable. The range of
intramodality ρ correlation values in the visual assessment of mitotic activity documented
among the different observers reinforced previously recognized degrees of uncertainty in
counting MF microscopically.34,35 Sources of MF count variability, both for individual pathologists and among
pathologists, are several,34,35 and do not appear to be entirely circumvented using WSI. In fact, variability among
pathologists working in digital mode in the present study was evident to a greater degree
than in CM. For example, greater correlation coefficients generally were demonstrated for
the intramodality, interobserver comparisons by CM, as compared to WSI20× (Figure 2). These analyses were
interpreted to indicate pathologists were somewhat more adept in CM. The finding was not
surprising, as pathologists self-reported having limited digital pathology experience. The
absence of z-axis focus was not considered disadvantageous in evaluating WSI by 4 of 6
responding pathologists, while the remaining 2 observers felt depth of focus might play a
role in limiting MF identification, in some instances.

Regardless, the practice of enumerating MF in H&E-stained tissue sections by CM
generally lacks consistency and can be conditional upon training and experience. For
example, in a recent study, only 21 of 92 MF were unanimously identified as MF by all 5
participating pathologists examining the same 40 high-power microscopic FOV in bleached,
H&E-stained melanomas.36 In the current study, the same process for bleaching melanomas was not considered to
produce an adverse impact on tissue review. Irrespective of such tissue treatment or not, it
is recognized that false positives and negatives can result from a failure to distinguish MF
from pyknotic nuclei, apoptotic bodies, or other distortions of chromatin pattern.11 Furthermore, other limitations, such as cellular level variations in color,
intensity, and morphological shape/size, can all contribute to counting variability. These
collective circumstances result in an error-prone, tedious, and time-consuming task. The
exercise can be poorly reproducible with interobserver variability resulting in discordant
inter- and intraobserver mitotic count values.34,35,37


In addition to substantial lack of consensus on what constitutes an individual MF, the
degree of agreement on the specific area in the tissue chosen by observers for MF mitotic
hot spot location, and its potential impact on examining prognostic mitotic count
thresholds, is not well understood. Thus, most perceptible sources of discordance appear to
more likely be a greater function of interpretive disparities, rather than due to
intermodality properties; or at the least, such disparities may be responsible for
confounding cross-technology performance issues in comparison studies. Academic training
programs can view these as ongoing challenges to study further and address in preparation
for routine adoption of examination using digital display. Example approaches for continued
investigation of visual evaluations in digital mode can be partly exemplified in the mitotic
hot spot ROI image annotation overlays (unpublished data), and the ongoing Evaluation
Environment for Digital and Analog Pathology project organized with several collaborators
(https://nciphub.org/groups/eedapstudies, accessed April 24, 2019). Proficiencies learned in
examining WSI microscopically by digital display will permit more seamless task integration
with future computational pathology and informatics tools, along with clinical data streams
from other sources, in computer-assisted diagnostics.

How validation assessments of discrete histological features in digital WSI are conducted
can be important to academic programs in evaluating the best means to train pathologists in
digital pathology for primary diagnosis. The extent of replicate observations obtained from
diverse diagnostic settings can be instrumental in performance assessments. These findings,
derived in the context of a wide dynamic range of MF count values in mucosal melanoma,
contributed to further confidence in the agreement estimates in this study.38 Notwithstanding this level of agreement, it is noteworthy that evidence, such as
variability in making ROI annotations by some pathologists in digital mode, supports a
previously published assertion that specific training in digital pathology would stand to
enhance performance.32 Further investigation is also necessary to help determine a most appropriate reading
environment (eg, display resolution, size, and calibration) in an effort to further achieve
improved interobserver concordances. In addition, technology appears to have an expanded
role to play in improving accuracy for such tasks. In the current study, pathologists
welcomed the use of the on-screen counting application for recording counts as a means to
improve consistency in recording and transcribing. Furthermore, technology, such as
automated computer-assisted mitotic hot spot mapping decision support, is emerging to more
efficiently address the impediments or challenges in achieving mitotic hot spot topographic
location consensus among pathologists.39


Supplemental Material
Supplemental_material - Agreement in Histological Assessment of Mitotic Activity
Between Microscopy and Digital Whole Slide Images Informs Conversion for Clinical
Diagnosis
Click here for additional data file.

Supplemental_material for Agreement in Histological Assessment of Mitotic Activity
Between Microscopy and Digital Whole Slide Images Informs Conversion for Clinical
Diagnosis by Bih-Rong Wei, Charles H. Halsey, Shelley B. Hoover, Munish Puri, Howard H.
Yang, Brandon D. Gallas, Maxwell P. Lee, Weijie Chen, Amy C. Durham, Jennifer E. Dwyer,
Melissa D. Sánchez, Ryan P. Traslavina, Chad Frank, Charles Bradley, Lawrence D. McGill,
D. Glen Esplin, Paula A. Schaffer, Sarah D. Cramer, L. Tiffany Lyle, Jessica Beck,
Elizabeth Buza, Qi Gong, Stephen M. Hewitt and R. Mark Simpson in Academic Pathology

 Authors’ Note: This work utilized the computational resources of the NIH High Performance Computing
Biowulf cluster and the NCI Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics High-Dimension Data
Analysis Group. Specimens and patient survival data were provided as a consequence of
collaborations with Drs Michael Goldschmidt, University of Pennsylvania, and EJ Ehrhart,
Colorado State University, in addition to those from coauthors. The research represents a
work of the US Government; however, statements herein are the judgments and opinions of
the authors and do not necessarily represent official US Government policies. The mention
of commercial entities, or commercial products, their sources, or their use in connection
with material reported herein is not to be construed as either an actual or implied
endorsement of such entities or products by the US Department of Health and Human Services
or its constituent agencies.

Halsey is now with Pfizer Drug Safety Research and Development, Groton, CT, USA. Sánchez
is now with Antech Diagnostics, Framingham, MA, USA. Traslavina is now with Antech
Diagnostics, Lacey, WA, and the Comparative Pathology Branch, US Army Medical Research
Institute of Chemical Defense, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD, USA. Cramer is now with Tox
Path Specialists, LLC., subsidiary of StageBio, Frederick, MD, USA. Lyle is now with
Department of Comparative Pathobiology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. Buza
is now with Gene Therapy Program, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr David W. Gardiner, Animal Reference Pathology, Inc, for advice on
study performance.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: This research was supported by the
Intramural Research Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland. Support was also provided through the NIH Comparative Biomedical
Scientist Training Program. Qi Gong was supported by fellowship administered by the Oak
Ridge Institute for Science and Education through an interagency agreement between the US
Department of Energy and the US Food and Drug Administration.

ORCID iD: Brandon D. Gallas 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7332-1620


R. Mark Simpson 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8852-1297


Supplemental Material: Supplemental material for this article is available online.
==== Refs
References
1 
Pantanowitz L Sinard JH Henricks WH  
Validating whole slide imaging for diagnostic purposes in
pathology: guideline from the College of American Pathologists Pathology and Laboratory
Quality Center . Arch Pathol Lab Med .
2013 ;137 :1710 –1722 .23634907 
2 
Jansen I Lucas M Savci-Heijink CD  
Histopathology: ditch the slides, because digital and 3D
are on show . World J Urol .
2018 ;36 :549 –555 .29396786 
3 
Al-Janabi S van Slooten HJ Visser M van der Ploeg T van Diest PJ Jiwa M  
Evaluation of mitotic activity index in breast cancer
using whole slide digital images . PLoS One .
2013 ;8 :e82576 .24386102 
4 
Williams BJ Hanby A Millican-Slater R Nijhawan A Verghese E Treanor D  
Digital pathology for the primary diagnosis of breast
histopathological specimens: an innovative validation and concordance study on digital
pathology validation and training . Histopathology .
2018 ;72 :662 –671 .28940580 
5 
Mukhopadhyay S Feldman MD Abels E  
Whole slide imaging versus microscopy for primary
diagnosis in surgical pathology: a multicenter blinded randomized noninferiority study
of 1992 cases (Pivotal Study) . Am J Surg Pathol .
2018 ;42 :39 –52 .28961557 
6 
Goacher E Randell R Williams B Treanor D  
The diagnostic concordance of whole slide imaging and
light microscopy: a systematic review . Arch Pathol Lab
Med .
2017 ;141 :151 –161 .27399211 
7 
Krishnamurthy S Mathews K McClure S  
Multi-institutional comparison of whole slide digital
imaging and optical microscopy for interpretation of hematoxylin-eosin-stained breast
tissue sections . Arch Pathol Lab Med .
2013 ;137 :1733 –1739 .23947655 
8 
Gavrielides MA Conway C O’Flaherty N Gallas BD Hewitt SM  
Observer performance in the use of digital and optical
microscopy for the interpretation of tissue-based biomarkers .
Anal Cell Pathol (Amst) .
2014 ;2014 :157308 .25763314 
9 
Nunes C Rocha R Buzelin M  
High agreement between whole slide imaging and optical
microscopy for assessment of HER2 expression in breast cancer: whole slide imaging for
the assessment of HER2 expression . Pathol Res Pract .
2014 ;210 :713 –718 .25091257 
10 
Norgan AP Suman VJ Brown CL Flotte TJ Mounajjed T  
Comparison of a medical-grade monitor vs commercial
off-the-shelf display for mitotic figure enumeration and small object
(Helicobacter pylori) detection . Am J Clin
Pathol .
2018 ;149 :181 –185 .29365023 
11 
Bonert M Tate AJ  
Mitotic counts in breast cancer should be standardized
with a uniform sample area . Biomed Eng Online .
2017 ;16 :28 .28202066 
12 
Olar A Wani KM Sulman EP  
Mitotic index is an independent predictor of
recurrence-free survival in meningioma . Brain Pathol .
2015 ;25 :266 –275 .25040885 
13 
Donizy P Kaczorowski M Leskiewicz M  
Mitotic rate is a more reliable unfavorable prognosticator
than ulceration for early cutaneous melanoma: a 5-year survival
analysis . Oncol Rep .
2014 ;32 :2735 –2743 .25310673 
14 
Coindre JM  
Grading of soft tissue sarcomas: review and
update . Arch Pathol Lab Med .
2006 ;130 :1448 –1453 .17090186 
15 
Azzola MF Shaw HM Thompson JF  
Tumor mitotic rate is a more powerful prognostic indicator
than ulceration in patients with primary cutaneous melanoma: an analysis of 3661
patients from a single center . Cancer .
2003 ;97 :1488 –1498 .12627514 
16 
Gillard M Cadieu E De Brito C  
Naturally occurring melanomas in dogs as models for non-UV
pathways of human melanomas . Pigment Cell Melanoma Res .
2014 ;27 :90 –102 .24112648 
17 
Hernandez B Adissu HA Wei BR Michael HT Merlino G Simpson RM  
Naturally occurring canine melanoma as a predictive
comparative oncology model for human mucosal and other triple wild-type
melanomas . Int J Mol Sci .
2018 ;19 :E394 .29385676 
18 
Simpson RM Bastian BC Michael HT  
Sporadic naturally occurring melanoma in dogs as a
preclinical model for human melanoma . Pigment Cell Melanoma
Res .
2014 ;27 :37 –47 .24128326 
19 
Chen W Gong Q Gallas BD  
Paired split-plot designs of multireader multicase
studies . J Med Imaging (Bellingham) .
2018 ;5 :031410 .29795776 
20 
Obuchowski NA Gallas BD Hillis SL  
Multi-reader ROC studies with split-plot designs: a
comparison of statistical methods . Acad Radiol .
2012 ;19 :1508 –1517 .23122570 
21 
Smedley RC Spangler WL Esplin DG  
Prognostic markers for canine melanocytic neoplasms: a
comparative review of the literature and goals for future investigation .
Vet Pathol .
2011 ;48 :54 –72 .21266721 
22 
Kim J-O  
Predictive measures of ordinal
association . Am J Sociol .
1971 ;76 :891 –907 .
23 
Gershenwald JE Scolyer RA  
Melanoma staging: American Joint Committee on Cancer
(AJCC) 8th edition and beyond . Ann Surg Oncol .
2018 ;25 :2105 –2110 .29850954 
24 
Wang H Sima CS Beasley MB  
Classification of thymic epithelial neoplasms is still a
challenge to thoracic pathologists: a reproducibility study using digital
microscopy . Arch Pathol Lab Med .
2014 ;138 :658 –663 .24786123 
25 
Rodriguez-Urrego PA Cronin AM Al-Ahmadie HA  
Interobserver and intraobserver reproducibility in digital
and routine microscopic assessment of prostate needle biopsies .
Hum Pathol .
2011 ;42 :68 –74 .20970164 
26 
Jen KY Olson JL Brodsky S Zhou XJ Nadasdy T Laszik ZG  
Reliability of whole slide images as a diagnostic modality
for renal allograft biopsies . Hum Pathol .
2013 ;44 :888 –894 .23199528 
27 
Al-Janabi S Huisman A Vink A  
Whole slide images for primary diagnostics of
gastrointestinal tract pathology: a feasibility study . Hum
Pathol .
2012 ;43 :702 –707 .21937077 
28 
Campbell WS Lele SM West WW Lazenby AJ Smith LM Hinrichs SH  
Concordance between whole-slide imaging and light
microscopy for routine surgical pathology . Hum Pathol .
2012 ;43 :1739 –1744 .22591912 
29 
Rizzardi AE Johnson AT Vogel RI  
Quantitative comparison of immunohistochemical staining
measured by digital image analysis versus pathologist visual scoring .
Diagn Pathol .
2012 ;7 :42 .22515559 
30 
Krupinski EA Silverstein LD Hashmi SF Graham AR Weinstein RS Roehrig H  
Observer performance using virtual pathology slides:
impact of LCD color reproduction accuracy . J Digit
Imaging .
2012 ;25 :738 –743 .22546982 
31 
Malarkey DE Willson GA Willson CJ  
Utilizing whole slide images for pathology peer review and
working groups . Toxicol Pathol .
2015 ;43 :1149 –1157 .26511845 
32 
Nielsen PS Lindebjerg J Rasmussen J Starklint H Waldstrom M Nielsen B  
Virtual microscopy: an evaluation of its validity and
diagnostic performance in routine histologic diagnosis of skin tumors .
Hum Pathol .
2010 ;41 :1770 –1776 .20869750 
33 
Bertram CA Gurtner C Dettwiler M  
Validation of digital microscopy compared with light
microscopy for the diagnosis of canine cutaneous tumors . Vet
Pathol .
2018 ;55 :490 –500 .29402206 
34 
Ikenberg K Pfaltz M Rakozy C Kempf W  
Immunohistochemical dual staining as an adjunct in
assessment of mitotic activity in melanoma . J Cutan
Pathol .
2012 ;39 :324 –330 .22335591 
35 
Voss SM Riley MP Lokhandwala PM Wang M Yang Z  
Mitotic count by phosphohistone H3 immunohistochemical
staining predicts survival and improves interobserver reproducibility in
well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas . Am J
Surg Pathol .
2015 ;39 :13 –24 .25353284 
36 
Gallas BD Jamal B Qi G  
A Reader Study on a 14-Head Microscope, Pathology Informatics
Summit . Pittsburgh, PA 
2018 
https://nciphub.org/groups/eedapstudies/wiki/Presentation:AReaderStudyona14headMicroscope.
Accessed December 10, 2018 .
37 
Rezanko T Akkalp AK Tunakan M Sari AA  
MIB-1 counting methods in meningiomas and agreement among
pathologists . Anal Quant Cytol Histol .
2008 ;30 :47 –52 .18459587 
38 
Preiss D Fisher J  
A measure of confidence in Bland-Altman analysis for the
interchangeability of two methods of measurement . J Clin Monit
Comput .
2008 ;22 :257 –259 .18607545 
39 
Puri M Hoover SB Hewitt SM  
Automated computational detection, quantitation, and
mapping of mitosis in whole-slide images for clinically actionable surgical pathology
decision support . J Pathol Inform .
2019 ;10 :4 .30915258

