
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951987754710.1177_2374289519877547Regular ArticleServing as a Temporary Pathology Chair: “Boon” or
“Boondoggle”? https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6396-4200Bailey David N. MD1George Melissa R. DO2Howell David N. MD, PhD3Karcher Donald S. MD4Libien Jenny MD, PhD5Powell Deborah E. MD6Sanfilippo Fred MD, PhD7
1 Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA
2 Department of Pathology, Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center,
Hershey, PA, USA
3 Department of Pathology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
4 Department of Pathology, George Washington University, Washington, DC,
USA
5 Department of Pathology, SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University,
Brooklyn, NY, USA
6 Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA
7 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA, USADavid N. Bailey, Department of Pathology, University
of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Email:
dnbailey@ucsd.edu25 9 2019 Jan-Dec 2019 6 237428951987754731 7 2019 28 8 2019 01 9 2019 © The Author(s) 20192019SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as published without
adaptation or alteration, without further permission provided the original work is
attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).The 2019 Association of Pathology Chairs Annual Meeting included a discussion group
sponsored by the Senior Fellows Group (former chairs of academic departments of pathology
who have remained active in Association of Pathology Chairs) that was focused on serving
as temporary pathology chair. Such positions include “acting chair” (service while the
permanent chair is on leave or temporarily indisposed), “interim chair” (service after
departure of the prior chair and before a new chair is appointed), “term-limited chair”
(usually one nonrenewable term of less than 5 years), and “terminal chair” (permanent
chair being asked to stay until a successor is appointed). Discussion group panelists
represented each of these positions and included the perspective of 3 former deans about
the rationale for making such appointments. The potential benefits and risks of serving in
these roles were discussed. Issues addressed included acting as “caretaker manager” or
“change-agent leader”; whether such service and experience would enhance or harm one’s
chances to become a permanent chair of that or another department; the effect of such
service on academic productivity; the influence of department and institutional factors on
the position; the range of authority provided, particularly in addressing significant
problems affecting the department’s future; and the impact of time served in these various
positions. The “lame-duck” effect of prolonged service as “terminal chair” was also
discussed. The observations and advice provided by the panelists and audience discussion
are reported and may be useful for those considering service as temporary chair in
pathology as well as other academic leadership positions.

acting chairinterim chairtemporary chairterminal chairterm-limited chaircover-dateJanuary-December 2019
==== Body
Introduction
Changes in department leadership are difficult for faculty and administration alike. This
may be particularly true in health sciences disciplines because of the clinical mission that
is intertwined with education and research. In addition, health sciences chairs often have a
higher level of responsibility and longer length of service than their counterparts in other
university departments, which can also impact their relationship with faculty and deans.1-3 Depending on institutional culture, when health sciences chairs step down, a
temporary chair is often appointed until a permanent chair can be identified.

These various time-limited positions fall into the following categories: “acting chair”
(service while the permanent chair is on leave or is temporarily indisposed), “interim
chair” (service after departure of the prior chair and before the search for chair is
completed), “term-limited chair” (usually one nonrenewable term of less than 5 years), and
“terminal chair” (the incumbent chair being asked to stay until a successor is appointed;
Table 1). At some
institutions, the terms “acting” and “interim” chair are used for any of these temporary
positions. These positions may pose an array of issues and opportunities for individuals who
are invited to assume them and may include questions such as:Should I be a caretaker/placeholder or a change-agent? If I want the permanent
position and serve as caretaker, the dean and faculty may think that I am not creative
and energetic while, if I make too many changes, they may become unhappy;

If I want the permanent position, will I be less valued as an internal candidate and
will my chair package be less than if I were an external candidate?

If I refuse to accept the temporary position, will the dean and/or faculty question
my loyalty to the department?

If I do not want the permanent position but serve as a temporary chair anyway, to
what degree will my academic productivity be harmed?

Will such service enhance my chances for future leadership positions either at my own
institution or elsewhere?

What are my authority and responsibilities as a temporary chair?

How can I gracefully return to the department after serving as a temporary chair?

If I am the permanent chair, should I tell the dean a long time in advance that I
intend to step down in order to reduce the chance of becoming terminal chair or will I
make myself a lame duck by doing so?




Table 1. Types of Temporary Chairs.


Acting chair


 One who serves while the permanent chair is on leave or is temporarily
indisposed


Interim chair


 One who serves after departure of the prior chair and before a new chair is
appointed


Term-limited chair


 One who serves a nonrenewable term of less than 5 years


Terminal chair


 A permanent chair who is asked to stay until a successor is appointed


	
Although the transition of medical school chairs is a frequent occurrence and the answers
to these questions often have a significant impact on leadership transition, faculty
productivity, and departmental success, the literature on these topics is relatively limited.4-9


The Association of Pathology Chairs (APC) Senior Fellows Group (SFG; former chairs of
academic departments of pathology who have chosen to remain active in APC) have published a
variety of studies describing service as a pathology chair.10-14 Because of the interest in this topic by current and potential pathology chairs, the
SFG sponsored a discussion group on these issues at the 2019 APC Annual Meeting and engaged
a panel of discussants who had served in these various roles.

Methodology
Discussion group panelists included the authors of this report, who have held various roles
including an acting chair, interim chair, interim dean, interim vice chancellor, and then
subsequent permanent holder of each office (D.N.B.); an interim chair (M.R.G.); a long-term
(4 year) interim chair who became permanent chair (J.L.); a long-term (8 year) interim chair
who subsequently served 12 years as permanent chair and is now a terminal chair (D.S.K.); a
former interim chair who did not seek the permanent position (D.N.H.); a former department
chair who had served as a medical school dean at 2 different institutions (D.E.P.); and a
former chair, dean, university executive vice president, medical center and health sciences
center chief executive officer, and health system board chair (F.S.). The reflections of
these individuals and those of the audience participants provided the basis for this
report.

Because the information collected for this report is the output of a discussion group, the
University of California, San Diego Human Research Protections Program does not require
institutional review board review.

Results
The “Acting” and “Interim” Chair
The discussion identified numerous potential benefits as well as risks in service as
either interim or acting chair. The major benefits fell into several categories: personal
and professional growth coupled with experience and skill development; assessment of
interest and ability to serve as a permanent chair; dealing with departmental needs,
priorities, faculty, and staff; and increased opportunities to engage with institutional
leaders in addressing strategic and tactical issues. Potential risks included dealing with
the time, effort, and resources needed to resolve issues facing the department and
institution; not having the appropriate level of authority and influence to deal with
issues; changes in the relationship with other faculty and staff; diminished personal
productivity and work–life integration; and a weakened position as permanent chair
candidate.

A significant issue mentioned frequently was the importance in determining whether the
position was intended by the dean primarily to manage (ie, “caretaker”) or to lead (ie,
“change-agent”). This difference was felt to have a significant impact on the advantages
and disadvantages of the role. A detailed list of the potential risks and benefits that
were identified for acting and interim chairs is given in Table 2.

Table 2. The “Acting” or “Interim” Chair.


Potential benefits


 Assessment of one’s desire and “fit” for being a permanent chair


 Personal and professional experience and growth


 Development of leadership and management skills


 Increased interaction with department faculty and staff on a different
level


 Increased interaction with other chairs and institutional leaders


 Participation in institutional decision-making


 Learning to prioritize institutional and departmental needs above one’s
own


 Setting an example for faculty, staff, and trainees


 Learning when and how to delegate responsibility and authority


Potential risks


 Responsibility for resolving issues during a tumultuous and/or protracted
period of transition


 Serving as a manager (“caretaker”) instead of leader (“change-agent”)


 Inadequate resources for departmental needs and faculty retention and
recruitment


 Less engagement/compliance from faculty who may ignore “one of their own” as
leader


 Weaker negotiating position as an internal candidate for permanent chair


 Uncertainty about retaining availability of one’s original position


 Diminished academic productivity


	
The “Term-Limited” Chair
The major potential benefits and risks of service as term-limited chair include those
mentioned above and listed in Table 2 for acting and interim chairs. In addition, there is a greater
likelihood that nontraditional candidates may be considered for a term-limited
appointment, which provides the opportunity for the appointee and the dean to evaluate the
growth of an individual over a period of time that is longer than that for most acting or
interim chairs. In a sense, this may be considered to be a “trial run.” Such
nontraditional candidates include individuals who are not full professor rank, those who
may have less administrative experience, and those who are not in a tenure-track
appointment. Because the role is term limited, there is a risk (as is also the case for
acting and interim chairs) that expectations for service will be different than that for
permanent chairs. This may include a diminished level of authority and lower expectation
for making changes. Another potential risk is that term-limited chairs who have served for
a longer period of time than the usual acting or interim chair may feel that they have
earned the right to become permanent chair, resulting in tension among the chair, the
dean, and the department. In some instances, this may even lead to the departure of the
disgruntled term-limited chair. A summary of benefits and risks for term-limited chairs is
provided in Table 3.

Table 3. The “Term-Limited” Chair.


Potential benefits (in addition to those listed in Table 2)


 Greater opportunity for nontraditional candidates to serve as chair


 Longer time period for chair and dean to evaluate performance


Potential risks (in addition to those listed in Table 2)


 Diminished authority and expectations for making changes


 Disappointment and tension with dean if not appointed as permanent chair


	
The “Terminal Chair”
Assuming that the terminal chair has served the department and institution well and
decided to step down voluntarily, the potential benefit of this position to the department
is to provide stability and continuity, with the faculty knowing that their current leader
will remain until a successor is in place. It also provides the dean more time to initiate
a thorough department review and subsequently recruit the best possible new chair.
However, retaining the current chair in a terminal appointment can also be a disadvantage
to the department because there may be less impetus to move the search quickly. A risk to
the terminal chair is that she/he may become a “lame duck” for a prolonged period of time,
with diminished influence and authority. Moreover, during a prolonged time period, the
dean may reallocate resources for other priorities that arise or sequester them to create
a package for the new chair. A summary of potential benefits and risks for terminal chairs
is provided in Table 4.

Table 4. The “Terminal” Chair.


Potential benefits


 Increased stability and security with continuity of the chair


 More time to do a thorough department review and search


Potential risks


 Search may become protracted with the former chair in place


 Diminished authority and influence as a prolonged “lame duck”


 Reduced available resources, which are reallocated or sequestered for a new
chair


 Reduced effectiveness in faculty recruitment


	
Discussion
Academic health centers are experiencing a greater turnover of department chairs,5 resulting in the appointment of more temporary chairs. Being asked to serve as
acting, interim, term-limited, and even terminal chair is often unexpected, and such service
may cause considerable angst on the part of the candidate as well as the department,
particularly if these positions are subsequently protracted.

The conditions under which temporary chairs (especially interim chairs) are appointed can
have profound impact on the success of the interim leadership. The death of the incumbent
chair (particularly if unexpected) usually thrusts the department into turmoil. That said,
the department is usually sympathetic to the appointed interim leader as it works through
its grief. In contrast, the involuntary removal of the incumbent chair usually creates a
somewhat hostile environment, especially when factions supportive of the incumbent chair are
in conflict with those who did not support the chair and who may have contributed to her/his
demise. Further complications may occur depending upon the reasons for removal of the
incumbent chair (eg, physical or mental impairment, fiscal irresponsibility, failure to
embrace strategic directions of the school, and even malfeasance). Interim chair service in
those situations provides an additional challenge that may be further complicated by
strained relationships with the dean due to the problems that led to departure of the
permanent chair. In contrast, the impending departure of a retiring chair is usually known
sufficiently far in advance that there can be a careful planning process for appointment of
temporary leadership.

There was consensus among the discussion group participants that the benefits of serving as
a temporary chair are increased when the role is one of leadership with the authority and
resources to make changes. Although service to the department and institution as a
“caretaker” to manage transition to a permanent chair is sometimes the priority of the dean
and is important for the department, this type of role provides a different set of risks and
benefits to those individuals who accept the position. It was observed that the longer an
individual serves in any temporary position, there may be an increased risk of becoming a
caretaker manager, especially if resources become limited as they are saved for a new chair
or are used for other institutional priorities. With prolonged temporary leadership,
opportunities for needed change can be lost, and without needed change, there is risk that
the department may stagnate. Alternatively, increased time as a temporary chair may actually
provide more opportunity to exert leadership and obtain resources to deal with issues that
can no longer be deferred. These matters can also impact a terminal chair who may be asked
to slow down changes and resource utilization in anticipation of a new chair’s priorities or
conversely is asked to increase the pace of changes, especially to resolve issues in
preparation for arrival of the new chair.

As advocated by Soltys,4 it is important for individuals in these temporary positions to negotiate for
appropriate resources for the department and especially for themselves to account for their
diminished academic productivity if they return to their original faculty positions. It is
also important for these individuals to have explicit instruction (in writing) of what they
are expected and empowered to do and not to do, especially recruitment of faculty and staff;
handling of faculty merits, promotions, and discipline; making administrative appointments;
making major budgetary decisions; and developing a strategic plan. Such documentation will
also increase the likelihood of compliance by faculty and staff who otherwise may ignore or
“wait out” the decisions of a temporary chair. Some discussants commented that interim
chairs should have the full authority of the permanent chair. In some cases, this may also
be appropriate for acting chairs, although their term is typically shorter. In all cases,
communication and transparency is paramount to the success of the temporary chair.

Several individuals noted that interim chairs should function as “stabilizers” or
“transition brokers” in the time interval between the former chair and the new chair
because, as noted by Rud,7 these periods of time are frequently characterized by faculty anxiety over their
personal welfare. The importance of maintaining stability was also emphasized by Bullock et al,6 who indicated that interim leaders can continue to promote department core values,
minimize negativity, maintain open communication, and deal with faculty challenges.
Similarly, Quillen et al5 considered the most important role of interim leadership being that of providing
stability during a time of transition.

It was observed by some discussants that the ideal candidate for interim chair is a
department faculty member who is respected by colleagues and who will not be a candidate for
permanent chair. Others viewed the position as an opportunity for individuals aspiring to be
chair to demonstrate their talents. However, there was consensus that such service in some
instances can be injurious to one’s academic productivity, especially if one returns to the
faculty after service as interim chair. It was felt that term-limited chairs should be used
when there is a failed search or if there is an internal candidate who is questionable
because of lack of seniority, rank, or fit with the desired profile. A nonrenewable term of
less than 5 years (often 3 years) is common, which allows deans to “try out” promising
nontraditional candidates without a long-term commitment.

Life as a temporary chair can be very difficult in dealing with one’s former department
faculty peers. For example, some faculty may decide to “cash in” on promises that they
thought were made by the prior chair (eg, higher salaries, appointment to leadership
positions, assignment of more space), whether or not such promises were indeed firm. The
importance of demanding documentation of prior commitments is paramount, although it places
an interim chair in the unenviable position of having to turn down requests from colleagues,
whom they ultimately will rejoin when their service as interim chair has expired.
Additionally, other institutional leaders (especially other department chairs) may view the
interim chair as being in a weakened negotiating position for institutional resources and
responsibilities.

As with permanent chairs, temporary chairs run the risk of becoming “addicted” to the
position and fearing its termination. This can result in inappropriate aversion to the risks
inherent in making necessary changes and dealing with difficult and contentious problems. It
may also lead to the departure of the temporary chair if he/she is not subsequently
appointed permanent chair.

Some participants in the audience discussion emphasized that succession planning is an
essential responsibility for any chair and that this should occur before the chair even
decides to step down. Others noted the importance of creating a process for early
identification and proactive mentoring of talented faculty who could serve as a temporary
chair.

Prior deans commented on criteria they had used in selecting interim, acting, and
term-limited chairs. There was consensus that a necessary attribute of a temporary chair is
a high level of confidence and trust by the departmental faculty being served. Ideally, to
avoid potential conflicts of interest and provide the best opportunity to find the most
appropriate permanent chair, a temporary chair should not be a candidate for the permanent
position. However, it was noted that in several cases a noncandidate for the permanent
position did such an outstanding job that they were asked to consider the permanent
position. In rare cases, the level of conflict within a department is so great that some
deans went to another discipline outside the department to appoint a temporary chair in
order to protect any departmental faculty member from potential repercussions during or
after serving as temporary chair. This often indicates the dean’s lack of confidence in the
department and may be extremely disruptive for all parties. However, in 2 instances cited,
this appeared to be successful in bringing greater stability to the department and allowing
successful recruitment of a permanent chair.

It was agreed by all discussants that providing explicit, objective expectations for
performance is essential in appointing temporary chairs and that describing the implicit,
objective expectations of behavior is very useful as well. The ultimate decision in
selecting temporary chairs (as with permanent chairs) is often a complex process to find the
best fit between the attributes of the candidates and those of the department and the
institution and then balancing the needs of each in terms of risk–benefit.

With the increasing turnover of department chairs, the frequency of temporary chair
appointments will inevitably increase. The reflections offered by this discussion group are
likely applicable to department chairs in other disciplines as well as to other leadership
positions (eg, dean, chief executive officer, vice president) that may utilize acting,
interim, term-limited, and terminal roles.

Acknowledgments
The authors appreciate the support of Priscilla Markwood and Mel Limson from the APC
Office. The authors also thank Charles Alpers for reading and commenting on the
manuscript.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

ORCID iD: David N. Bailey 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6396-4200
==== Refs
References
1 
Hromas R Leverence R Mramba LK  , et al.
What a medical school chair wants from the dean . J
Healthc Leadersh .
2018 ;10 :33 –44 .
doi:10.2147/JHL.S158937 .29872359 
2 
Kastor JA  
Chair of a department of medicine: now a different
job . Acad Med .
2013 ;88 :912 –913 .23799437 
3 
Lieff S Banack JG Baker L  , et al.
Understanding the needs of department chairs in academic
medicine . Acad Med .
2013 ;88 :960 –966 .23702526 
4 
Soltys SM  
Primer for the interim chair . Acad
Psychiatry .
2011 ;35 :122 –125 .21403165 
5 
Quillen DA Aber RC Grigsby RK  
Interim department chairs in academic
medicine . Amer J Med .
2009 ;122 :963 –968 .19786164 
6 
Bullock PL Stalling LL Redish T Gregory D Whitlock RU  
Leading in the interim: navigating interim chair
appointments . 33rd Academic Chairpersons Conference
Proceedings , 2016 
https://newprairiepress.org/accp/2016/Leadership/5/. Accessed
January 17, 2019 .
7 
Rud AG  
The Interim Chair: Special Challenges and Opportunities .
Hoboken, New Jersey : Wiley Online
Library 
2004 ;2004 :45 –54 .
(Special Issue: The Life Cycle of a Department
Chair) .
8 
Mundt MH  
Leading in a time of change: assuming interim academic
administrator positions . J Nurs Educ .
2004 ;43 :496 –501 .15559774 
9 
Alley NM  
Choosing to become an interim
administrator . J Prof Nurs .
2005 ;21 :322 –326 .16179245 
10 
Bailey DN Lipscomb MF Gorstein F Wilkinson D Sanfilippo F  
Life after being a pathology department chair: issues and
opportunities . Acad Pathol .
2016 ;3 
doi:10.1177/2374289516673651 .
11 
Bailey DN Lipscomb MF Gorstein F Wilkinson D Sanfilippo F  
Life after being a pathology department chair II: lessons
learned . Acad Pathol .
2017 ;4 
doi:10.1177/2374289517733734 .
12 
Bailey DN Cohen S Gotlieb A Lipscomb MF Sanfilippo FS.  
What advice current pathology chairs seek from former
chairs . Acad Pathol .
2018 ;5 
doi:10.1177/2374289518807397 .
13 
Sanfilippo F Powell D Folberg R Tykocinski M  
Dealing with deans and academic medical center leadership:
advice from leaders . Acad Pathol .
2018 ;5 
doi:10.1177/2374289518765462 .
14 
Bailey DN Buja LM Gorstein F  , et al.
Life after being a pathology department chair III: reflections on the
“afterlife.” 
Acad Pathol . 2019 ;6 
doi:1177/2374289519846068 .

