
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951879856010.1177_2374289518798560Educational CaseEducational Case: Symptomatic but Unruptured Abdominal Aortic
Aneurysm http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5136-1023Petriceks Aldis H. BA1Olivas John C. BS1Salmi Darren MD12
1 Division of Clinical Anatomy, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
2 Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA, USADarren Salmi, Division of Clinical Anatomy,
Stanford University School of Medicine, 269 Campus Dr, CCSR 0135A, Stanford, CA
94305, USA. Email: dsalmi@stanford.edu09 10 2018 Jan-Dec 2018 5 237428951879856001 5 2018 25 7 2018 06 8 2018 © The Author(s) 20182018SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).The following fictional case is intended as a learning tool within the
Pathology Competencies for Medical Education (PCME), a set of national
standards for teaching pathology. These are divided into three basic
competencies: Disease Mechanisms and Processes, Organ System Pathology, and
Diagnostic Medicine and Therapeutic Pathology. For additional information,
and a full list of learning objectives for all three competencies,
see
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2374289517715040.

pathology competenciesorgan system pathologyabdominal aortic aneurysmaortic dissectionaneurysm risk factorsunruptured aneurysmruptured aneurysmcomplications of abdominal aortic aneurysmsclassification of aortic dissectionscover-dateJanuary-December 2018
==== Body
Primary Objective

Objective CBV2.3: Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm: Describe the clinical
consequences of an abdominal aortic aneurysm.

Competency 2: Organ System Pathology; Topic: Cardiovascular—Blood Vessels (CBV);
Learning Goal 2: Vascular Damage and Thrombosis.

Secondary Objective

Objective CBV2.2: Aortic Aneurysm and Dissection: Compare and
contrast aortic aneurysms and aortic dissections in terms of their predisposing
factors, the sites of involvement, and patient populations likely to be
affected.

Competency 2: Organ System Pathology; Topic: Cardiovascular—Blood Vessels (CBV);
Learning Goal 2: Vascular Damage and Thrombosis.

Patient Presentation
A 68-year-old male patient presents to the emergency department with nausea and a
pulsating pain in his right groin. He reports intermittent bouts of syncope in the
past week, which he never had previously. He also has chronic lower back pain but
states that the pain is now more severe and radiates from belly to back and is very
different from his usual back pain. Further interview reveals that the patient has
smoked approximately 10 cigarettes per day for the past 30 years. He is in visible
distress, although alert and oriented. His vital signs are remarkable for
hypertension, with a blood pressure of 170/115.

Diagnostic Findings, Part I
Physical examination of the right groin reveals a small pulsatile mass. Abdominal
palpation is suboptimal because of the patient’s size. Auscultation of the abdomen
reveals an intermittent bruit, audible during systole, and dependent on heart
rate.

Question/Discussion Points, Part I
Discuss the Differential Based on the Clinical Presentation
The patient presents with nausea, hypertension, syncope, increasing lower back
pain, and pulsing unilateral groin pain. With his obesity, age, and history of
hypertension, the patient likely suffers from atherosclerosis as well. His
alertness and orientation suggest he is hemodynamically stable. These factors
and symptoms suggest a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). The
particularly important risk factors in this patient’s history are as follows:
(1) his advanced age, as AAA is rare in persons younger than 60 years1; (2) his hypertension, as high blood pressure can induce small tears in
the extracellular matrix (ECM), leading to smooth muscle cell (SMC) recruitment,
vascular thickening, reduced vascular compliance, and ultimately aneurysm2; (3) his smoking history, as smoking is the dominant behavioral risk
factor for AAA3; and (4) the likelihood that he also suffers from atherosclerosis, which
is the dominant physiological risk factor for AAA. This is because
atherosclerotic plaques weaken the arterial wall through a combination of
chronic inflammatory response and ischemia of the underlying media.2


The most important signs and symptoms from his clinical presentation are (1) the
patient’s novel and increasing lower back pain, (2) his pulsing unilateral groin
pain and palpable mass, and (3) his absence of hypovolemic shock symptoms (eg,
hypotension, decreased alertness), suggesting that any presumptive aneurysm has
not ruptured.2,4


However, the differential diagnosis still includes the following: aortic
dissection (AD), pancreatitis (particularly because of the radiating lower back
pain), ischemic bowel, renal colic, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, pyelonephritis,
and peptic ulcer disease.

The physical examination does little to narrow this differential, as obesity
makes a thorough abdominal examination difficult. Nonetheless, given the history
and clinical presentation—smoking, hypertension, age, obesity, back and groin
pain, nausea—AAA is the most prominent concern. The unilateral groin pain could
result from an associated aneurysm of the right common iliac artery—a regular
finding in AAA—adding isolated iliac aneurysm to the differential.4 Therefore, the most likely diagnosis is an unruptured AAA with associated
unruptured isolated right common iliac aneurysm. The patient is clearly
symptomatic and should be evaluated for possible or imminent rupture. One should
note that the diagnosis, to this point, has been based on clinical findings.

What Further Testing Is Indicated for This Patient?
In hemodynamically unstable patients, timely diagnoses might preferably be
reached via ultrasound. However, computed tomography (CT) imaging is the
preferred method for this hemodynamically stable patient because (1) CT provides
a more detailed and accurate assessment of the internal abdominal structures,
while also showing relevant vessels and organs that may be involved with the
aneurysm. This is one reason why the Society for Vascular Surgery (SVS)
recommends CT for the assessment of maximum AAA diameter.5 (2) Computed tomography imaging offers less variability in technician
skill and methodology. (3) There are certain regions of the body where
ultrasound is affected by overlying tissue—for instance, the iliac arteries,
where overlying bowel can interfere with the imaging process.6


Therefore, CT scans should be performed to evaluate dilation of the patient’s
aorta and/or other major arteries. The thorax, abdomen, and lower limbs should
all be evaluated to ensure full coverage of possible aneurysms, dissections, or
embolisms.

Diagnostic Findings, Part II

Figure 1 Depicts the CT
findings for this patient. Describe the CT scan and your assessment for the next
step in care of the patient
Figure 1. Abdominal CT image of the patient. A = Aortic lumen, highlighted by
intravenous contrast material. B = Mural thrombus of aortic aneurysm.
Computed tomography imaging was done with intravenous contrast material.
Note the inferior vena cava (IVC) posterior and to the right of the
mural thrombus. In a ruptured AAA, this would likely be obliterated. AAA
indicates abdominal aortic aneurysm; CT computed tomography.

The abdominal CT scan shows a widely dilated area of intravenously injected
contrast material, revealing a widened aortic lumen. The mural thrombus can also
be seen surrounding this contrast material. These 2 facts confirm an aortic
aneurysm. The scan was taken distal to the renal arteries, therefore specifying
the diagnosis to AAA. The peritoneal cavity does not contain any extravasation
of contrast material, indicating an unruptured AAA. The SVS recommends elective
surgical repair for aneurysms larger than 5.5 cm, and the figure caption notes
that this aneurysm is 5.8 cm at maximum diameter. As such, this patient should
likely undergo surgical repair of the AAA.

Question/Discussion Points, Part II
What Clinical Sequelae Might Coincide With an Unruptured Abdominal Aortic
Aneurysm?
Depending on the specific patient and aneurysm, an unruptured AAA may elicit a
diverse set of clinical sequelae. For example, most patients with AAA are
asymptomatic, and their aneurysms are discovered incidentally during physical
examination or unrelated imaging.4 For patients who are symptomatic—as the patient in this case—AAA may
elicit abdominal or lower back pain, fever, syncope, a pulsatile mass in the
abdomen or groin, and/or ischemia of the lower limb due to embolism.4 However, these symptoms are not specific to AAA, and must be corroborated
with imaging or further diagnostic testing. In essence, a patient with
unruptured AAA may present with wide-ranging clinical sequelae depending on
blood pressure, severity of atherosclerosis, and other confounding factors. If
one patient has a stable AAA—for example, only 2.5 cm in diameter—clinical signs
may be absent. Then again, if an aneurysm is large or aggressive, a patient
might present with several of the characteristic symptoms.


Figure 2 Demonstrates
the Gross Anatomy of an Unruptured AAA. Briefly Describe the Anatomy and its
Clinical Implications
Figure 2. Gross anatomy of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). Note the superior
mesenteric artery superior (to the left in this image) to the aneurysm,
and the bifurcation of the common iliac arteries inferiorly (to the
right). Maximum diameter of aneurysm = 8.0 cm, well beyond the standard
for surgical intervention.


Figure 2 shows an
infrarenal, unruptured saccular AAA, in the classic location just superior to
the common iliac bifurcation. A saccular aneurysm is one which bulges in a
distinct, unilateral manner, creating a discrete pouch of dilated vascular wall.
In contrast, fusiform aneurysms bulge circumferentially and are thus somewhat
symmetrical. Both the saccular and fusiform types are “true” aneurysms because,
unless ruptured, all 3 layers of the arterial wall remain intact (These layers
are the intima, media, and adventitia.). Blood is therefore retained as a mural
thrombus adherent to the arterial lumen, as opposed to in an extravascular
hematoma.

The true aneurysm in Figure
2 is 8.0 cm in maximum diameter, making it a remarkably large
aneurysm. Such an aneurysm would be at very high risk for rupture, likely
necessitating surgical intervention. Some AAAs reach up to 20 cm in diameter,
although this is uncommon.2 An associated atherosclerotic plaque might obstruct blood flow to and
through the iliac arteries, causing lower limb ischemia, which could also occur
through thromboembolism.

Given the asymmetric, unilateral appearance of the referenced AAA, one might
confuse this specimen for a “pseudoaneurysm.” Pseudoaneurysms, like true
aneurysms, result from defects in the vascular wall. However, there is a key
difference between the two. In true aneurysms, all 3 layers of the arterial wall
become dilated, creating an intravascular bulge that has the potential for
rupture. On the other hand, pseudoaneurysms occur when blood ruptures through
all 3 arterial layers but is contained within the extravascular tissue.2 This forms an often asymmetrical hematoma outside the artery, still
contiguous with the intravascular space. True aneurysms—until they
rupture—retain blood completely within the intravascular space.

What Risk Factors Might Influence the Likelihood of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm
Rupture in This Patient?
Maximum AAA diameter is highly indicative of rupture risk. There is <1% yearly
risk of rupture for aneurysms smaller than 3.9 cm in maximum diameter,
increasing to 1% at 4.0 to 4.9 cm; 1% to 11% at 5.0 to 5.9 cm; 10% to 22% at 6.0
to 6.9 cm; and 30% to 33% at 7.0 cm or larger.1,5 Rapid aneurysm expansion—defined as a baseline diameter increase of 5 mm
or more over a 6-month period, or 10 mm over a 12-month period—also increases
risk of rupture.5 For comparison, the average rate of AAA expansion is approximately 2.6 mm
per 12 months.7 Larger aneurysms tend to expand faster than smaller ones, although
expansion is nonlinear and can be quite stochastic.8


Other strong risk factors for rupture include tobacco use, hypertension, and
female sex.5,9 It is difficult to characterize the exact contributions of tobacco use,
because the many components of tobacco smoke have wide-ranging, interrelated
bioactivities in vivo. Nonetheless, studies suggest possible
pathways in which T-cells and matrix-degrading enzymes cause inflammatory damage
to the aortic SMCs and ECM, while also reducing expression of enzymes such as prolyl-4-hydroxylase.3 These enzymes are critical to collagen synthesis, and their suppression
might inhibit repair of aortic tissue. As the aortic tissue incurs further
damage and is unable to repair itself, aneurysmal dilation can continue up to
rupture.

Studies indicate that females with AAA are more likely than males to suffer from
AAA rupture—regardless of aneurysm size interval—with a 4-fold greater risk of
rupture in aneurysms less than 5.5 cm wide.10 Obviously, this does not impact the present patient, but the discrepancy
is important to consider nonetheless. Some explanation may be found in the
sex-neutral practices of AAA management and classification. For example, the SVS
currently recommends observation for asymptomatic aneurysms <5.5 cm in
diameter, regardless of patient sex.5 However, studies also suggest that females have smaller relative aortic
diameters, indicating that if a female and a male of similar size have AAAs of
equal diameter, the female has undergone a greater proportional dilation of the aneurysm.11 Therefore, female patients with aneurysm diameters of 5.5 cm may exceed
the proper minimum threshold for recommendation of elective surgery. This means
that females may incur greater risk of AAA rupture, because their current
sex-neutral thresholds for elective surgical intervention are too high.

Finally, uncontrolled hypertension can increase risk of AAA rupture—although the
relationship between hypertension and AAA expansion is less clear—as high blood
pressures propagate stress upon an already-dilated arterial wall.1 In order to prevent further damage to the aorta, initial treatment of AAA
typically involves antihypertensive medication.

The present patient—given his history of smoking, hypertension, and aneurysm
size—is certainly at high risk of AAA rupture. Rupture carries significant
potential for mortality, and the patient should thus be carefully monitored and
treated moving forward.

Discuss the Mortality Rates Associated With Ruptured Abdominal Aortic
Aneurysm
A ruptured AAA is a serious, often fatal surgical emergency. Upon rupture,
patients can present with 3 major symptoms: pain, pulsatile mass, and
hypotension. However, less than half of patients will present with all three.
This can lead to misdiagnosis, contributing to the 90% overall mortality rate in AAA.12 There are 4 main sites for AAA rupture—intraperitoneal, retroperitoneal,
aortocaval fistula, and primary aortoduodenal fistula—and each one presents with
distinct and nuanced clinical features.12


If This Patient Suffered From a Ruptured Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm, How Might
His Computed Tomography Scan Differ From the Original?
One would expect extravasation of the contrast material, leading to visible
retroperitoneal hematoma and loss of the fat plane between the aorta and its
surrounding tissue. In symptomatic but unruptured AAA, the CT often reveals
several distinct findings in lieu of such extravasation: irregular aortic wall,
draping of the aorta over vertebral bodies, and/or the crescent shape of a
layering hematoma.4



Figure 3 Presents the CT
Scan From a Different Patient. Describe the Figure and Diagnose This New
Patient
Figure 3. Abdominal computed tomography image of a ruptured AAA (A) alongside the
same image where the dilated aorta is highlighted in red, the inferior
vena cava in blue, and hemorrhage in orange (B). Maximum aneurysm
diameter = 5.8 cm. Computed tomography imaging was done with intravenous
contrast material. AAA indicates abdominal aortic aneurysm.

In Figure 3A, we see a
dilated aortic lumen, with high density of blood in lieu of the periaortic fat
plane. This blood appears to have dissected into the retroperitoneum and
obliterated the fat plane around the inferior vena cava (IVC) and right psoas
muscle. Figure 3B shows
a colored version of the same scan, giving appreciation of the acute blood
density surrounding the periaortic fat plane, obliterated IVC, retroperitoneum,
and psoas muscle. These images are consistent with a ruptured AAA, as the
extravasation almost certainly originated from an aneurysm directly adjacent to
this abdominal region.

Compare and Contrast the Etiology, Clinical Description, Risk Factors, and
Epidemiology of Aortic Aneurysm and Aortic Dissection
An aortic aneurysm involves dilation of all 3 layers of the arterial wall—the
intima, the media, and the adventitia. In contrast, AD occurs when blood enters
the aortic wall through an intimal tear and then dissects progressively through
the media.13 A “dissection” then continues as blood pulses through the tissue plane,
splitting the attenuated media. Histological data from ADs contrast starkly with
those of normal aortic specimens. For instance, Figure 4A depicts a normal, healthy media
identified by numerous elastin fibers colored black by the Elastic Van Gieson
(EVG) stain. (EVG forms a variety of strong bonds with elastin, staining the
elastic fibers black. As such, EVG is typically used to visualize normal or
pathologic elastic fibers.) In contrast, Figure 4B depicts a medial layer split by
dissecting blood, alongside atherosclerosis between the intima and attenuated
media. The pathological term for this attenuation of the media is cystic
medial necrosis.

Figure 4. Photomicrograph of normal aorta with intact, elastic fibers of tunica
media (A), contrasted with photomicrograph of blood dissecting through
attenuated and weakened tunica media (B). Photomicrographs were taken
with EVG stain and at 40× magnification. Note how in the dissection
specimen, the tunica intima is thickened with an atherosclerotic plaque.
A = tunica adventitia; M = tunica media; D = dissecting blood; I =
tunica intima. EVG indicates Elastic Van Gieson.

Aortic dissection is therefore characterized by a proximal intimal tear—such as
in the ascending aorta—and a medial dissection which can proceed quite distally.
This dissection need not involve the adventitia. Nonetheless, adventitial
rupture can still occur, necessitating immediate emergency action.

Both AD and aortic aneurysm result from some form of structural vascular
weakening in the SMCs and ECM. However, there are distinct differences between
the two, beginning with clinical presentation. In AD, patients typically present
with a “tearing” pain which begins in the chest and then radiates toward the back.13 This symptom is often very acute, with 85% of patients describing a
sudden onset of unique, piercing, and severe pain. The pain can also migrate to
the abdomen as dissection progresses. Syncope presents in 5% to 10% of acute
patients, while a pulse deficit occurs in 9% to 30% of thoracic dissections. If
a dissection progresses proximally from the ascending aorta to the aortic valve,
a heart murmur can also be heard due to aortic valve regurgitation. These
clinical signs may vary depending on the site—or type, as mentioned below—of a
given AD.

The Stanford classification system names 2 categories for AD: type A and type B.
Type A dissections involve the ascending aorta, and may involve the aortic arch
or descending aorta. Type B dissections begin distal to the ascending aorta.
Ascending dissections occur nearly twice as often as descending dissections, and
isolated abdominal dissections are not regularly reported.13 Aortic dissections are also classified as acute (symptomatic for 2 weeks
or less) or chronic (symptomatic for more than 2 weeks).

High blood pressure is the most prominent risk factor for AD, with 1 review
finding that over 70% of acute patients have an antecedent history of hypertension.2,14 Preexisting aneurysms increase risk of AD, being present in over 20% of
patients with descending dissections and over 12% of patients with ascending dissections.13 Family history, male sex, congenital connective tissue disorders, and
advanced age can also increase risk for the disease.13,14 For instance, one review found that over 50% of AD patients younger than
40 years also suffered from Marfan Syndrome, compared to 2% in those older than
40 years.14 The same review indicated that those with a bicuspid aortic valve are at
9 times greater risk of the disease. Few studies exist to suggest any racial or
ethnic predisposition to AD. In the United States, estimated incidence ranges
from 2.6 to 3.5 cases per 100 000 person-years, with a mortality rate of 25% to 30%.13


Aortic aneurysms, like dissections, are diverse and can occur along any point of
the aorta. Because this case is concerned with AAA—and because AAA is the most
common form of aortic aneurysm—the clinical sequelae alluded to earlier will
suffice for clinical comparisons with AD. However, it is important to reiterate
that most patients with AAA do not present with any symptoms and that their
aneurysms are discovered incidentally or after rupture.4 Given the aforementioned classifications of AD, it may also help to
reference the various classes of AAA mentioned earlier—saccular versus fusiform,
true aneurysm versus pseudoaneurysm, and ruptured versus unruptured.

Hypertension is thought to contribute to the onset and/or rupture of some aortic anuerysms.2,15 Other predisposing factors for aortic aneurysm include atherosclerotic
disease, preexisting aneurysms outside the aorta (given that atherosclerosis is
a systemic disease), obesity, smoking, and high salt intake.16 Certain inherited connective tissue disorders, such as Marfan Syndrome,
can lead to aortic aneurysm by weakening the ECM and/or SMCs and decreasing
structural integrity of the arterial wall.1,13 However, such diseases are rare. Advanced age and caucasian ethnicity are
more likely risk factors: Males between 65 to 80 years of age face up to 6 times
higher risk of AAA development than their female counterparts, and caucasian
populations have the highest rates of AAA in the United States—up to 10-fold
higher than Asian American populations and twice as high as African American groups.1 In Western countries, the incidence of AAA is approximately 2.5 to 6.5
cases per 1000 person-years, with a prevalence of 4% to 8% based on screening studies.1 The incidence of AAA rupture is much lower, with one Swedish study
suggesting a rate of 11 cases per 100 000 person-years.17


In essence, AD and aortic aneurysm both involve (1) a weakening or degradation of
SMCs or ECM in the arterial wall, (2) potential for rupture, which carries high
mortality rates, and (3) hypertension as a risk factor, alongside existing
aneurysms, advanced age, and inherited connective tissue disorders.

At the same time, differences between the two include (1) their effects on the
intima, media, and adventitia of the arterial wall, (2) their various clinical
presentations described above, (3) their systems of classification and
categorization, and (4) their presence—or lack thereof—of ethnic, racial, and/or
sex-based dispositions.

There are numerous other comparisons to be made based on dissection type,
aneurysm classification, and other factors. Table 1 broadly summarizes the
similarities and differences between AAA and AD.

Table 1. Comparison of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm and Aortic Dissection.


	Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm	Aortic Dissection	
Unruptured but Symptomatic	Ruptured	
Etiology	
Weakening and degradation of SMCs and ECM in
arterial wall

Dilation of all 3 vascular layers (true
aneurysms), leading to saccular or fusiform
dilation of aorta


	
Continued SMC and ECM degradation further weakens
arterial wall

Aneurysm expands, as arterial wall loses
elasticity and compliance

Weakened, stiffened wall ruptures


	
Weakening and degradation of SMCs and ECM in
arterial wall

Intimal tear, leading to blood dissecting through
attenuated media

As blood continues to pulse through aorta,
dissection often progresses distally


	
Clinical descriptions	
Pain in abdomen, back, and/or flank

Palpable mass in abdomen

Lower limb ischemia

Presyncope or brief episodes of syncope

Fever, malaise


	
Excruciating pain in abdomen, back, and/or
flank

Hypotension

Palpable, pulsatile mass in abdomen

Syncope

Tachycardia


	
Sudden, excruciating, stabbing pain

Pain usually located in chest, radiating to
back

Pulse deficit

Syncope

Heart murmur due to aortic valve
regurgitation


	
Risk factors	
Atherosclerosis

Smoking history

Advanced age

Hypertension

Preexisting nonaortic aneurysms

Connective tissue disorders (eg, Marfan
syndrome)

Male sex

Caucasian race


	
Large aneurysm diameter

Rapid aneurysm

expansion rate

Female sex

Hypertension

Smoking history

Atherosclerosis


	
Hypertension

Preexisting aneurysms

Connective tissue disorders (eg, Marfan
syndrome)

Bicuspid aortic valve

Male sex


	
Epidemiology in Western countries	
Incidence: 2.5-6.5 per 1000 person-years1

Prevalence: 4%-8% based on screening data1


	
Incidence: approx. 11 per 100 000 person-years17


Mortality rate: approx. 90%12


	
Incidence: 2.6-3.5 per 100 000 person-years13


Mortality rate: 25%-30%13


	
Abbreviations: approx, approximately; ECM, extracellular matrix;
SMCs, smooth muscle cells.

Teaching Points

– Although most AAA cases are asymptomatic, clinical features include
abdominal and/or back pain, pulsatile masses, nausea, presyncope or
brief episodes of syncope, and lower-limb ischemia.

– True aneurysms involve dilation of the intima, media, and adventitia
and can be fusiform or saccular.

– Risk factors for AAA development include atherosclerosis, hypertension,
smoking, male sex, advanced age, presence of other non-aortic aneurysms,
and caucasian race.

– Atherosclerosis and hypertension are particularly important to the
etiology of AAA.

– Abdominal aortic aneurysm rupture carries a 90% mortality rate and
should always be ruled out in patients suspected of AAA.

– Risk factors for AAA rupture include large aneurysm diameter,
atherosclerosis, rapid aneurysm expansion, tobacco use, hypertension,
and female sex.

– In AD, blood enters through an intimal tear and dissects through the
media, without necessarily involving the adventitia.

– Clinical features of AD may include sudden radiating chest pain, pulse
deficit, syncope, and heart murmur due to aortic valve
regurgitation.

– In pseudoaneurysms, blood ruptures through all 3 arterial layers but is
contained within extravascular tissue.

– In the Stanford classification system, type A aortic dissections
involve the ascending aorta, while type B dissections begin distal to
the ascending aorta.




Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Stanford University Department of Pathology, for
the diagnostic, histologic, and gross images used in this education case.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

ORCID iD: Aldis H. Petriceks, BA 
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5136-1023
==== Refs
References
1 
Chung J  
Epidemiology, risk factors, pathogenesis, and
natural history of abdominal aortic aneurysm . In:
UpToDate ; 2018 
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/epidemiology-risk-factors-pathogenesis-and-natural-history-of-abdominal-aortic-aneurysm?search=aaaepidemiology&source=search_result&selectedTitle=1∼150&usage_type=default&display_rank=1.
Accessed  March 29, 2018 .
2 
Kumar V Abbas AK Aster JC  
Blood Vessels In: Kumar V Abbas AK Aster JC  , eds. Robbins Basic Pathology . 10th
ed 
Philadelphia, PA :
Elsevier Inc ;
2018 .
3 
Norman PE Curci JA  
Understanding the effects of tobacco smoke on
the pathogenesis of aortic aneurysm . Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol .
2014 ;33 :1473 –1477 .
doi:10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300158.Understanding .
4 
Jim J Thompson RW  
Clinical features and diagnosis of abdominal
aortic aneurysm . In:
UpToDate ; 2018 
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/clinical-features-and-diagnosis-of-abdominal-aortic-aneurysm?search=aaa&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3∼150&usage_type=default&display_rank=3.
Accessed March  30, 2018 .
5 
Chaikof EL Dalman RL Eskandari MK  
The Society for Vascular Surgery practice
guidelines on the care of patients with an abdominal aortic
aneurysm . J Vasc Surg .
2018 ;67 :2 –77 .e2.
doi:10.1016/j.jvs.2017.10.044 .29268916 
6 
Beales L Wolstenhulme S Evans JA West R Scott DJA  
Reproducibility of ultrasound measurement of the
abdominal aorta . Br J Surg .
2011 ;98 :1517 –1525 .
doi:10.1002/bjs.7628 .21861264 
7 
Brady AR Thompson SG Fowkes FG Greenhalgh RM Powell JT  ; UK Small Aneurysm Trial Participants 
Abdominal aortic aneurysm expansion: risk factors and time
intervals for surveillance . Cardiovasc
Surg .
2004 ;110 :16 –21 .
doi:10.1161/01.CIR.0000133279.07468.9F .
8 
Oliver-Williams C Sweeting MJ Turton G  
Lessons learned about prevalence and growth
rates of abdominal aortic aneurysms from a 25-year ultrasound population
screening programme . Br J Surg .
2018 ;105 :68 –74 .
doi:10.1002/bjs.10715 .29265406 
9 
Bhak RH Wininger M Johnson GR  
Factors associated with small abdominal aortic
aneurysm expansion rate . JAMA Surg .
2015 ;150 :44 –50 .
doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2014.2025 .25389641 
10 
Skibba AA Evans JR Hopkins SP  
Reconsidering gender relative to risk of rupture
in the contemporary management of abdominal aortic
aneurysms . J Vasc Surg .
2013 ;62 :1429 –1436 .
doi:10.1016/j.jvs.2015.07.079 .
11 
Forbes TL Lawlor DK DeRose G Harris KA  
Gender differences in relative dilatation of
abdominal aortic aneurysms . Ann Vasc Surg .
2006 ;20 :564 –568 .
doi:10.1007/S10016-006-9079-y .16741651 
12 
Assar AN Zarins CK  
Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm: a surgical
emergency with many clinical presentations . Postgrad
Med J .
2009 ;85 :268 –273 .
doi:10.1136/pgmj.2008.074666 .19520879 
13 
Black JH Manning WJ  
Clinical features and diagnosis of acute aortic
dissection . In: UpToDate ;
2018 
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/clinical-features-and-diagnosis-of-abdominal-aortic-aneurysm?search=aaa&source=search_result&selectedTitle=3∼150&usage_type=default&display_rank=3.
Accessed April 2,  2018 .
14 
Hagan PG Nienaber CA Isselbacher EM  
The International Registry of Acute Aortic
Dissection (IRAD): new insights into an old disease .
JAMA .
2000 ;283 :897 –903 .
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10685714. Accessed
April 29, 2018 .10685714 
15 
Takagi H Umemoto T  ; ALICE (All-Literature
Investigation of Cardiovascular Evidence) Group .
Association of hypertension with abdominal aortic aneurysm
expansion . Ann Vasc Surg .
2017 ;39 :74 –89 .
doi:10.1016/j.avsg.2016.04.019 .27521823 
16 
Dalman RL Mell M  
Overview of abdominal aortic
aneurysm . In: UpToDate ;
2018 
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/overview-of-abdominal-aortic-aneurysm?search=aaa&source=search_result&selectedTitle=2∼150&usage_type=default&display_rank=2.
Accessed March 29, 2018 .
17 
Acosta S Ögren M Bengtsson H Bergqvist D Lindblad B Zdanowski Z  
Increasing incidence of ruptured abdominal
aortic aneurysm: a population-based study . J Vasc
Surg .
2006 ;44 :237 –243 .
doi:10.1016/j.jvs.2006.04.037 .16890847

