
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951988872710.1177_2374289519888727Educational CaseEducational Case: Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS) Komforti Miglena K. DO1Harmon Bryan E. MD1
1 Department of Pathology, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USABryan E. Harmon, Department of Pathology, Montefiore
Medical Center, 1825 Eastchester Road, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. Email:
bharmon@montefiore.org21 11 2019 Jan-Dec 2019 6 237428951988872709 7 2019 08 9 2019 19 10 2019 © The Author(s) 20192019SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as published without
adaptation or alteration, without further permission provided the original work is
attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).
The following fictional case is intended as a learning tool within the Pathology
Competencies for Medical Education (PCME), a set of national standards for teaching
pathology. These are divided into three basic competencies: Disease Mechanisms and
Processes, Organ System Pathology, and Diagnostic Medicine and Therapeutic Pathology.
For additional information, and a full list of learning objectives for all three
competencies, see http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2374289517715040.1

pathology competenciesorgan system pathologybreastcarcinomaductal carcinoma in situDCIScalcificationsbiomarkerscover-dateJanuary-December 2019
==== Body
Primary Objective

BR2.3: Ductal Carcinoma In-Situ (DCIS). Compare and contrast ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) in terms of incidence,
clinical presentation, morphology, biomarker expression, pattern of spread, natural history,
treatment, and prognosis.

Competency 2: Organ System Pathology, Topic Breast (BR). Learning Goal 2: Molecular Basis
of Breast Neoplasia

Secondary Objective

BR2.6: Categories of Breast Cancer. Construct a table to
compare and contrast invasive ductal carcinoma (no special type), invasive lobular
carcinoma, medullary carcinoma, colloid (mucinous) carcinoma, tubular carcinoma, and
metaplastic carcinoma of the breast in terms of incidence, age predilection, etiology,
pathogenesis, clinical presentation, gross and microscopic morphology, grade, molecular
classification, patterns of spread, clinical course, prognostic indicators, treatment
options, and survival rates and to indicate which are more common in males versus
females.

Competency 2: Organ System Pathology, Topic Breast (BR). Learning Goal 2: Molecular Basis
of Breast Neoplasia

Patient Presentation
A 50-year-old female presents to the mammography suite for an annual mammogram. She has no
personal history of breast cancer and her family history is also unremarkable. She reports
no discharge from either breast. Bilateral breast and axillary lymph node examinations do
not demonstrate any palpable masses, lumps, or skin changes.

Diagnostic Findings, Part 1
An image of the left breast mammogram is shown (Figure 1). The left breast demonstrates a 50-mm
grouping of calcifications in a segmental distribution at the 10-o’clock axis, 5 cm from the
nipple (circled area, Figure 1). The
calcifications are coarse in appearance and have a pleomorphic morphology with varying
shape, size, and density. There were no other significant abnormalities in the left breast;
the right breast was unremarkable.

Figure 1. Screening mammogram of this patient’s breast demonstrates a grouping of coarse
pleomorphic calcifications (within the circled area).

Questions/Discussion Points, Part 1
What Is the Differential Diagnosis of Calcifications Identified in the Breast on
Mammogram?
Breast calcifications are a common finding on screening mammogram. Although they are
usually associated with benign processes (fibrocystic changes, hyalinized fibroadenoma,
fat necrosis, etc), certain types and patterns of calcifications may be a sign of breast
cancer. One form of breast cancer most often detected on mammogram as calcifications is
DCIS. In this case, the radiographic findings of the left breast were deemed
suspicious.

Why Were the Calcifications on Mammogram Deemed Suspicious?
Certain features of calcifications seen on mammogram suggest a benign etiology, such as
presence of multiple similar clusters in more than one quadrant of the breast or in both
breasts, stability of the calcifications over time, and uniformity to the sizes and shapes
of the calcifications. Other features of calcifications are deemed suspicious and warrant
further investigation including calcifications with pleomorphic morphology (varying sizes,
shapes, and densities), linear/branching patterns, segmental distribution within a lobe of
the breast, or calcifications that are changing over time.2 These suspicious features are often seen in DCIS, a nonobligate precursor of
invasive ductal carcinoma that does not usually form a mass lesion, and calcifications are
often the only evidence of the lesion on mammogram. Relatively, specific findings on
mammogram for DCIS include calcifications that are pleomorphic, coarse, and in a linear or
granular segmental pattern.3


In this case, the calcifications were considered suspicious because of their coarse and
pleomorphic nature and because of their segmental distribution. The patient underwent a
stereotactic-guided needle core biopsy of the pleomorphic calcifications, which was sent
to the surgical pathology laboratory.

Diagnostic Findings, Part 2
The core biopsy samples were fixed in formalin, embedded in paraffin, and subsequently
tissue sections were prepared at a standard 4-µm thickness and the slides were stained with
routine hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain, and delivered to the pathologist for
microscopic examination.

First, the pathologist scanned the biopsy at low power, then at high power. Low- and
high-power views of the tissue are shown in Figures 2 and 3.

Figure 2. A, Low-power overview of a monomorphic appearing epithelial proliferation expanding but
confined within mammary ducts, with large areas of central necrosis (green arrows) and
microcalcifications (blue arrows). There is no invasive carcinoma seen. B, Low-power
overview of unremarkable breast parenchyma (black arrows), where there is no expansion
of the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) and no epithelial proliferation. Also seen is
usual ductal hyperplasia (UDH; green arrows), where the TDLUs are expanded by a benign
proliferation containing peripherally located and irregular shaped fenestrated spaces
(hematoxylin and eosin stain, magnification ×40).

Figure 3. A, Higher power view of the enlarged neoplastic cells, with round nuclei with open
chromatin and prominent nucleoli. The neoplastic cells also have prominent cytoplasmic
borders, are respecting each other’s space, and look very similar to each other. The
architectural pattern is cribriform, as one can see the punched-out rigid spaces within
the proliferation. B, Higher power view of the unremarkable terminal duct lobular unit
(TDLUs; black arrows) with luminal epithelial cells forming 1 to 2 layers. Also seen is
a higher power view of the usual ductal hyperplasia (UDH; green arrow), where cells are
small, irregularly shaped, with scattered nuclear grooves, and with nuclear overlapping.
Cytoplasmic borders are inconspicuous, nucleoli are not present, and the chromatin is
inactive (or closed), illustrated by its dark color (hematoxylin and eosin stain,
magnification ×200).

Questions/Discussion Points, Part 2
Where Is the Abnormality Located Within the Mammary Tissue (Best Appreciated in the
Low-Power View)?
At low magnification, an architecturally atypical proliferation of cohesive ductal
epithelial cells is seen, confined within terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs; Figure 2A). Even at this low
magnification, one can appreciate the cribriform rigid “punched out” spaces created by the
neoplastic cells (Figure 2A) as
compared to nondistended unremarkable TDLUs (black arrows, Figure 2B) and to TDLUs expanded by usual type ductal
hyperplasia (green arrows, Figure
2B), which is a common nonneoplastic epithelial proliferation within TDLUs. The
usual type ductal hyperplasia contains peripheral and irregular fenestrated spaces within
the proliferation, as opposed to the more evenly distributed punched-out rigid spaces seen
within the neoplastic proliferation. The neoplastic cells have a tendency to demonstrate a
polarity with the long axis of the nucleus oriented toward the center of the punched-out
luminal spaces. The centers of some of the ducts involved by the neoplastic proliferation
show areas of necrotic epithelium (green arrow, Figure 2A) and associated microcalcifications (blue
arrow, Figure 2A). Lastly, the
TDLUs involved by the neoplastic proliferation demonstrate rounded smooth peripheral
borders that supports that the neoplastic cells are contained within the TDLU; there is no
evidence of invasion into the surrounding stroma.

What Are the Histopathologic Features of Ductal Carcinoma In Situ in the Biopsy?
Describe Both Cellular and Architectural Features
High-magnification examination demonstrates that the neoplastic epithelial cells resemble
each other with a monomorphic appearance. Additionally, the cells are seen respecting each
other’s spaces and not overlapping, with each cell’s cytoplasmic border being evident
(Figure 3A). The cells are
enlarged compared with the patient’s normal background mammary epithelial cells (black
arrows, Figure 3B) and the benign
epithelial cells within the usual type ductal hyperplasia (green arrows, Figure 3B). The neoplastic cells have
round nuclei with open chromatin and prominent nucleoli rather than the variable and
irregularly shaped nuclei with scattered grooves and dark inactive chromatin within the
nonneoplastic epithelial cells. The epithelial cells of the usual type ductal hyperplasia
show streaming patterns and areas with nuclear overlapping, without polarizing toward the
spaces within the proliferation. Necrosis, mitoses, and calcifications are less likely to
be seen within usual type ductal hyperplasia (see Table 1 for a comparison of features of benign and
neoplastic epithelial proliferations of the breast).

Table 1. A Comparison of Features of Usual Ductal Hyperplasia (UDH), Ductal Carcinoma In Situ
(DCIS), and Lobular Carcinoma In Situ (LCIS).

Features	UDH	DCIS	LCIS	
Mass forming	No	Uncommon	No	
Associated with calcifications	Rare	Common	Uncommon	
Associated necrosis	Rare	Common	Uncommon	
Cellular cohesion	Tightly cohesive	Cohesive	Discohesive	
Growth patterns	Central sheets of epithelium with irregular peripheral crescent-shaped
fenestrations; streaming arrangement of cells	Rigid epithelial structures with solid, cribriform, papillary, and/or
micropapillary structures	Closely packed together but discohesive cells forming structureless sheets; no
polarization of cells	
Individual cellular features	Bland cells with variability in size and shape, with areas of overlapping
cells, indistinct cytoplasmic borders, dark chromatin, and often with nuclear
grooves	Cell nuclei polarize around rigid spaces, nucleoli present, cytoplasmic
borders are distinct, nuclei are round, chromatin is light and open	Cell membranes usually not well defined; cytoplasm pale or slightly
eosinophilic may show mucin droplets giving it a slightly frothy appearance;
cells have round or globular shape, nucleus usually in the center of each cell
unless displaced by vacuole giving it a “signet-ring” or plasmacytoid
appearance	
High-grade nuclear atypia	No	Present in high-grade DCIS	No (except for the pleomorphic variant of LCIS that shows many features that
overlap with high-grade DCIS)	
What Is the Differential Diagnosis Based on the Histologic Features Seen?
The differential diagnosis of a noninvasive epithelial proliferation occurring within
TDLUs includes benign processes (such as usual type ductal hyperplasia), atypical lesions
that imply an increased risk for the development of breast cancer (such as atypical ductal
hyperplasia and atypical lobular hyperplasia), and noninvasive (in situ) carcinomas (DCIS
and LCIS).

What Is the Diagnosis Based on the Histopathologic Examination of the Biopsy?
The described histologic findings in the biopsy material are diagnostic of DCIS,
intermediate nuclear grade, with cribriform architectural pattern, and associated central
necrosis and microcalcifications. Although DCIS may be a precursor to invasive carcinoma,
there is no evidence of invasive carcinoma in this biopsy sample.

What Are the Diagnostic Criteria for Ductal Carcinoma In Situ?
The ductal epithelial proliferation must meet the following diagnostic criteria to be
classified as DCIS:

must demonstrate both cytologic and architectural atypia

must either measure greater than 2 mm in size or involve at least 2 ducts if the
proliferation shows low or intermediate nuclear grade; proliferations with high
nuclear grade are diagnosed with DCIS regardless of size.

How Is Ductal Carcinoma In Situ Classified?
Ductal carcinoma in situ is classified as low-, intermediate-, or high-grade based on the
nuclear features of the neoplastic cells. The pathology report will also include
information about the architectural pattern, the presence or absence of calcifications,
and necrosis. However, the nuclear features are most important, as nuclear features
determine the grade of DCIS and thus its classification.

Low-grade DCIS is represented by a monomorphic neoplastic proliferation of epithelial
cells that are cytologically similar to benign luminal epithelial cells with only a subtle
increase in nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio. The nuclei have smooth contours, diffuse fine
chromatin, no or indistinct nucleoli, and no or minimal mitotic figures. The cells of
low-grade DCIS often show cribriform architecture with the epithelial cells showing
polarization around the luminal spaces (the epithelial cells are oriented perpendicularly
to the lumen). High-grade DCIS (nuclear grade 3) shows obvious cytologic atypia with
large, markedly pleomorphic and misshapen nuclei, with irregular nuclear membranes, coarse
chromatin, and prominent nucleoli; mitoses are often seen and can be atypical. Necrosis is
commonly identified in high-grade DCIS. Intermediate-grade DCIS (nuclear grade 2) has
features between those of grades 1 and 3. The architectural patterns of the DCIS (most
frequently cribriform or solid pattern with or without associated necrosis) are also
included in the diagnostic report. The architectural patterns are useful in recognizing
DCIS during microscopic examination (particularly in differentiating DCIS from LCIS), but
the grade of the DCIS is of more clinical relevance with higher grade lesions showing
increased propensity to progress to invasive carcinoma.

Lobular carcinoma in situ is the other common neoplastic proliferation of epithelial
cells confined to TDLUs (Figure
4A). In contrast to DCIS, LCIS tends to not be associated with calcifications, and
it is often detected as an incidental histologic finding in breast tissue that has been
biopsied or resected for other reasons. The neoplastic cells of LCIS are characterized by
the loss of expression of the cell-to-cell adhesion protein E-cadherin (Figure 4B), and this manifests
histologically as a proliferation of discohesive epithelial cells filling TDLUs but not
forming specific growth patterns. Conversely, DCIS maintains cohesive properties and forms
various architectural patterns including solid, cribriform, papillary, and/or
micropapillary structures.

Figure 4. A, Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) shows predominantly lobulocentric distention of
the terminal duct lobular unit (TDLU). The neoplastic cells proliferate as patternless
sheets of single cells without forming specific architecture (hematoxylin and eosin
stain, magnification ×200). B, This is due to their lack of expression of E-cadherin
anchoring protein at the cell membranes, shown here as loss of brown membranous
chromogen in LCIS but retention in benign mammary parenchyma (E-cadherin
immunohistochemical stain, magnification ×200).

Once a Diagnosis of Ductal Carcinoma In Situ Has Been Made, Why Is a Careful
Microscopic Examination Required?
Once a diagnosis of DCIS has been established, careful microscopic examination is
warranted to look for evidence of invasive carcinoma arising from the DCIS, as this would
impact the prognosis and the clinical management for the patient. Particularly, close
attention should be paid to any ducts demonstrating irregular borders and ducts showing
adjacent stromal reactions that include inflammatory infiltrates and reactive fibrous
stroma. If there is doubt about whether invasive carcinoma is present, immunohistochemical
markers that highlight myoepithelial cells (p63, calponin, smooth muscle myosin, etc) can
be helpful (Figure 5A and B). The myoepithelial layer of cells
will be intact around ducts involved by in situ carcinoma. A myoepithelial layer will not
be detected around nests of invasive carcinoma as the invasive carcinoma has invaded
beyond the confines of the myoepithelial layer and basement membrane and into the
surrounding stroma.

Figure 5. Myoepithelial cells are highlighted with immunohistochemical stains. A, p63, brown
chromogen at the periphery of each terminal duct lobular unit (TDLU) decorates the
nuclei of the myoepithelial cells; and, (B) smooth muscle myosin or SMMS-1, a
cytoplasmic protein of myoepithelial cells, also at the periphery of each TDLU, is
highlighted with brown chromogen (immunohistochemical stains, original magnification
×200).

What Ancillary Tests Are Performed Subsequent to the Diagnosis of Ductal Carcinoma In
Situ?
Once the diagnosis of DCIS is made, the pathologist will order estrogen receptor (ER) and
progesterone receptor (PgR) immunostains (Figure 6A and B). These
biomarkers have prognostic and predictive significance. Ductal carcinoma in situ retaining
nuclear expression of ER and PR tends to be of lower grade, behaves less aggressively, and
will likely respond to endocrine therapy (such as tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitor), thus
reducing the risk of ipsilateral and contralateral recurrence4,5; while those that are ER- and PgR-negative do not benefit from endocrine
therapy.

Figure 6. Immunohistochemical stains for biomarkers estrogen receptor (ER; A) and progesterone
receptor (PgR; B) show diffuse strong nuclear reactivity, as illustrated by the brown
chromogen, within the neoplastic proliferation (immunohistochemical stains, original
magnification ×200).

What Is the Next Step in Treatment? How Does the Knowledge of the Biologic Behavior
of Ductal Carcinoma In Situ Influence the Treatment Choices?
A diagnosis of DCIS on core biopsy is an indication for surgical excision. If based on
radiologic studies (such as mammogram and magnetic resonance imaging), the area of DCIS
appears relatively localized, a breast-conserving excision (lumpectomy) can be performed.
The goal is to excise the area of DCIS with a rim of uninvolved adjacent breast tissue
(clear margins) while conserving the remainder of the breast. Radiation therapy after the
lumpectomy is often indicated as this may reduce the risk of recurrence by approximately
50% in patients undergoing breast conservation.6,7 In cases where a large area of DCIS is anticipated based on the preoperative
radiologic imaging, or if the imaging findings indicate involvement of multiple quadrants
of the breast (multicentric disease), a mastectomy may be recommended. Mastectomy may also
be indicated for patients when attempts at breast conservation surgery were unable to
attain clear margins.

Ductal carcinoma in situ is considered a preinvasive disease, so cases of pure DCIS are
not expected to spread to regional lymph nodes. However, for patients diagnosed with DCIS
on core biopsy, subsequent surgical excision reveals associated invasive carcinoma in
approximately 25% of cases.8 Sentinel lymph node biopsy is generally not performed during breast-conserving
excisions for DCIS; however, if the final pathology reveals invasive carcinoma the patient
can be brought back for a sentinel node procedure. A mastectomy alters the lymphatic
drainage and the anatomy and makes a subsequent return trip to the operating room for
sentinel lymph node biopsy unreliable. Thus, for patients undergoing mastectomy for DCIS,
sentinel lymph node biopsy is often performed at the time of mastectomy, particularly in
patients with radiologic evidence of a large burden of DCIS and patients considered as
high risk for occult invasive carcinoma.9,10


The management of LCIS and DCIS is substantially different. One reason for this is that
while DCIS is often a localized process amenable to excision, LCIS is more frequently
diffusely distributed including multicentric involvement of a breast (in approximately 50%
of cases) and bilateral breast involvement (approximately 30% of cases), and thus LCIS is
less amenable to cure by a breast-conserving excision. Although LCIS is considered a
precursor lesion to invasive lobular carcinoma, a diagnosis of LCIS implies an increased
risk for developing invasive carcinoma not only in the area of the diagnosed LCIS but also
in other quadrants of that breast and in the contralateral breast. When DCIS is identified
in a needle core biopsy, a surgical excision is performed. In contrast, a diagnosis of
LCIS in a core biopsy does not usually trigger an excision unless other high-risk lesions
are also identified in the same specimen (such as atypical ductal hyperplasia or DCIS). If
DCIS is present at a margin of a surgical excision specimen, an additional surgery is
usually performed to obtain a clean margin. In contrast, if LCIS is present at a margin of
excision, an additional procedure to obtain a clean margin is not performed. Lobular
carcinoma in situ increases the risk of an invasive recurrence in the ipsilateral and
contralateral breasts, but its presence at a surgical margin does not substantially
influence the recurrence risks. In these ways, LCIS is approached like a proliferative
disease associated with increased risk for development of a future cancer.

Teaching Points
Most calcifications seen mammographically correspond to benign conditions, but certain
calcification patterns can be suggestive of DCIS.

On histology, DCIS characteristically shows a monomorphic neoplastic proliferation of
epithelial cells, expanding the TDLUs, but not invading beyond the confines of the
myoepithelial cells and basement membrane.

Ductal carcinoma in situ is classified as low, intermediate, or high nuclear grade,
with higher grade lesions associated with higher risk of progression to invasive
carcinoma.

Ductal carcinoma in situ retaining nuclear expression of ER and PgR tends to be of
lower grade, behaves less aggressively, and will likely respond to endocrine therapy,
thus reducing the risk of recurrence.

After a diagnosis of DCIS on core biopsy, surgical excision is indicated (lumpectomy or
mastectomy), and the risk of finding invasive carcinoma in the excision specimen is
approximately 25%.

Radiation therapy after breast-conserving surgery is often indicated as this may reduce
the risk of recurrence by approximately 50% in patients undergoing breast
conservation.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: The article processing fee for this
article was funded by an Open Access Award given by the Society of ‘67, which supports the
mission of the Association of Pathology Chairs to produce the next generation of
outstanding investigators and educational scholars in the field of pathology. This award
helps to promote the publication of high-quality original scholarship in Academic
Pathology by authors at an early stage of academic development.
==== Refs
References
1 
Knollmann-Ritschel BEC Regula DP Borowitz MJ Conran R Prystowsky MB  
Pathology competencies for medical education and
educational cases . Acad Pathol .
2017 :4 
doi:10.1177/2374289517715040 .
2 
Wilkinson L Thomas V Sharma N  
Microcalcification on mammography: approaches to
interpretation and biopsy . Br J Radiol .
2017 ;90 :20160594 
doi:10.1259/bjr.20160594 .27648482 
3 
D’Orsi CJ  
Imaging for the diagnosis and management of ductal
carcinoma in situ . J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr .
2010 ;2010 :214 –217 .20956833 
4 
Wickerham L  
Tamoxifen—an update on current data and where it can now
be used . Breast Cancer Res Treat .
2002 ;75 :S7 –12 ,
S33 –35 .12353826 
5 
Daly MB  
Tamoxifen in ductal carcinoma in situ .
Semin Oncol .
2006 ;33 :647 –649 .17145343 
6 
Monteau A Sigal-Zafrani B Kirova YM  , et al.
Ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast with close or focally involved
margins following breast-conserving surgery: treatment with reexcision or radiotherapy
with increased dosage . Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys .
2009 ;75 :1021 –1028 .19386441 
7 
Holmberg L Garmo H Granstrand B  , et al.
Absolute risk reductions for local recurrence after postoperative
radiotherapy after sector resection for ductal carcinoma in situ of the
breast . J Clin Oncol .
2008 ;26 :1247 –1252 .18250350 
8 
Brennan ME Turner RM Houssami N  , et al.
Ductal carcinoma in situ at core-needle biopsy: meta-analysis of
underestimation and predictors of invasive breast cancer .
Radiology .
2011 ;260 :119 –128 .
Epub 2011 Apr 14 .21493791 
9 
Yi M Krishnamurthy S Kuerer HM  , et al.
Role of primary tumor characteristics in predicting positive sentinel lymph
nodes in patients with ductal carcinoma in situ or microinvasive breast
cancer . Am J Surg .
2008 ;196 :81 –87 .18436181 
10 
Tunon-de-Lara C Giard S Buttarelli M  , et al.
Sentinel node procedure is warranted in ductal carcinoma in situ with high
risk of occult invasive carcinoma and microinvasive carcinoma treated by
mastectomy . Breast J .
2008 ;14 :135 –140 .18315691

