
==== Front
Acad PatholAcad PatholAPCspapcAcademic Pathology2374-2895SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA 10.1177/237428951987564710.1177_2374289519875647Educational CaseEducational Case: Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia With
PML-RARA https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1297-7858Kunak Rebecca L. DO1Rojiani Amyn MD, PhD1Savage Natasha M. MD1
1 Department of Pathology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University
Medical Center, Augusta, GA, USANatasha M. Savage, Department of Pathology, Medical
College of Georgia, Augusta University Medical Center, Augusta, GA 30912, USA. Email:
nsavage@augusta.edu18 9 2019 Jan-Dec 2019 6 237428951987564713 5 2019 19 7 2019 10 8 2019 © The Author(s) 20192019SAGE Publications Inc.This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as published without
adaptation or alteration, without further permission provided the original work is
attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).The following fictional case is intended as a learning tool within the Pathology
Competencies for Medical Education (PCME), a set of national standards for teaching
pathology. These are divided into three basic competencies: Disease Mechanisms and
Processes, Organ System Pathology, and Diagnostic Medicine and Therapeutic Pathology.
For additional information, and a full list of learning objectives for all three
competencies, see http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2374289517715040.

pathology competenciesorgan system pathologyhematopathologywhite cell disordersclassification of leukemia and lymphomamorphologyacute promyelocytic leukemiacover-dateJanuary-December 2019
==== Body
Primary Objective
Objective HWC3.1: Morphology of Acute Leukemia and Lymphoma. Describe the
morphologic features that characterize typical cases of acute leukemia and lymphoma.

Competency 2: Organ System Pathology; Topic HWC: Hematopathology—White Cell Disorders;
Learning Goal 3: Classification of Leukemia and Lymphomas.

Patient Presentation
A 19-year-old woman presented to the emergency department complaining of fatigue and easy
bruising over the past few weeks as well as fevers without chills or recent weight loss. She
had no significant past medical history. She denied any personal or family history of cancer
and was taking no medications. Physical examination revealed diffuse bruising of the arms,
trunk, and legs without organomegaly or palpable lymphadenopathy.

Diagnostic Findings
A complete blood count (CBC) including the automated differential is provided in Table 1.

Table 1. Complete Blood Count and Automated Differential Count.

Test	Patient	Reference Range	
WBC	1.7 × 109/L	4.5-11 × 109/L	
Hemoglobin	7.5 g/dL	12-16 g/dL	
MCV	83.3 fL	80-98 fL	
RDW	11.70%	11.5%-18%	
Platelets	26 × 109/L	150-400 109/L	
Automated Differential Count	Patient Percentage	Patient Absolute (× 109/L)	Reference Range (× 109/L)	
Granulocytes	65	1.1	1.8-7.8	
Lymphocytes	35	0.6	1-2.8	
Monocytes	0	0	0-1.5	
Eosinophils	0	0	0-0.5	
Basophils	0	0	0-0.2	
Abbreviations: MCV, mean corpuscular volume; RDW, red blood cell distribution
width.

Questions/Discussion Points
What Is the Differential Diagnosis Based on the Clinical Findings and Complete Blood
Count Data and What Should be the Next Step in Evaluating This Patient?
Review of the CBC and automated differential provided by the hematology analyzer reveals
pancytopenia. The differential diagnosis of pancytopenia is broad and includes nutritional
deficiencies, medication effect, other toxins, acute or chronic infections, autoimmune
diseases, infiltrative bone marrow processes, hypersplenism, and primary bone marrow
disorders, including aplastic anemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, leukemia, and paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Given the patient’s age and physical exam findings, a peripheral
smear review with manual differential is an important initial step in narrowing the
differential diagnosis. The manual differential count is performed by having a trained
laboratory person visually review the stained blood smear, count 100 cells, and assess for
cellular morphology, count confirmation, and artifacts, such as platelet clumps.

How Does the Peripheral Smear Findings in This Case Help Narrow the
Differential?
The manual differential is provided in Table 2 and images from the peripheral smear are
shown in Figure 1. The manual
differential confirms pancytopenia and includes circulating nucleated red blood cells and
immature cells/blasts consistent with a leukoerythroblastic smear. Smear review reveals
the leukocytes present to be abnormal in appearance with “figure eight”-shaped or folded
nuclei (Figure 1A), numerous
cytoplasmic granules, and few forms with Auer rods (Figure 1B). Auer rods represent fused primary
granules. The presence of Auer rods is diagnostic of a neoplastic blast with myeloid
differentiation and is important to distinguish from lymphoblasts due to different
treatment regimens in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or other myeloid neoplasms and acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Table 2. Manual Differential Count.

Manual Differential Count	Patient Percentage	Patient Absolute (× 109/L)	Reference Range (× 109/L)	
Granulocytes	23	0.3	1.8-7.8	
Lymphocytes	15	0.2	1-2.8	
Monocytes	0	0	0-1.5	
Eosinophils	0	0	0-0.5	
Basophils	0	0	0-0.2	
Blast	60	1	0	
nRBC	2/100 WBC		0	
Abbreviations: nRBC, nucleated red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell.

Figure 1. A, Leukoerythroblastic peripheral smear (×1000 magnification). Note the abnormal
leukocyte with folded nucleus and numerous cytoplasmic granules (arrow) as well as the
nucleated red blood cell (arrowhead). B, Leukocyte with numerous Auer rods (arrow)
(×1000 magnification). Auer rods result from a fusion of primary granules and are
diagnostic of a neoplasm with myeloid lineage.

The diagnosis of AML requires a blast percentage of ≥20% blasts dedicated to myeloid
differentiation including myeloblasts, atypical/neoplastic promyelocytes,
monoblasts/promonocytes, and/or megakaryoblasts in the peripheral blood or bone marrow. An
exception to this rule is the presence of a translocation involving one of the core
binding factors RUNX1 and core binding factor beta
(CBFβ), which are t(8;21)(22q;q22.1) and
inv(16)(p13.1q22)/t(16;16)(p13.1;q22) or a fusion of the promyelocytic
(PML) gene on 15q22 with the retinoic acid receptor
alpha (RARA) gene on 17q21.1

Acute myeloid leukemia with t(8;21)(22q;q22.1); RUNX1-RUNX1T1 has
distinctive morphologic findings in the peripheral blood and bone marrow. Both show large
myeloblasts with perinuclear hofs, abundant azurophilic cytoplasmic granules, and large
salmon-colored granules.1
RUNX1 is also known as core binding factor alpha
(CBF1α) which is normally involved in regulating hematopoiesis.
Translocation leads to disruption of the alpha subunit blocking the maturation of myeloid
cells. A similar blockade of maturation occurs in AML with
inv(16)(p13.1q22)/t(16;16)(p13.1;q22), except instead of a disruption of
CBF1α, there is a disruption of CBFβ. This AML also
has distinctive morphologic features including blasts with myelomonocytic features and
atypical eosinophils with large basophilic granules. Monoblasts are large with round
nuclei with fine chromatin, abundant basophilic cytoplasm, and can have fine azurophilic
granules, vacuoles, and/or Auer rods. Promonocytes are also considered blast equivalents
and have irregular folded nuclei and less basophilic cytoplasm, with more obvious granules
and vacuoles.1

Acute myeloid leukemia with a predominance of abnormal promyelocytes and a
PML-RARA fusion represents a specific subtype of AML known as acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), previously called AML-M3 via the French-American-British
Classification. These abnormal promyelocytes often have irregular and bilobed/“figure
eight”-shaped nuclei with or without cytoplasmic granules and Auer rods. There are 2
morphologic subtypes of APL including a hypergranular variant (typical) and a hypogranular
(microgranular) variant (Figure
2). The hypergranular variant often presents with leukopenia and consists of
abnormal promyelocytes with bilobed nuclei, numerous cytoplasmic granules, and numerous
Auer rods. The hypogranular variant is more likely to present with a leukocytosis, bilobed
nuclei, numerous submicroscopic granules (seen with myeloperoxidase [MPO] stain), and rare
cells with multiple Auer rods.2

Figure 2. Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). A, Hypergranular APL (×1000 magnification). Note
the abnormal promyelocytes with figure eight-shaped nucleus (arrow) and numerous
cytoplasmic granules. In hypergranular APL, the granules can become so numerous that
they obscure the nuclear features of the cell. B, Hypogranular APL (×1000
magnification). Note the absence of cytoplasmic granules on Wright Giemsa stain
(arrow). The granules in these cases are submicroscopic and can be seen with a
myeloperoxidase (MPO) stain.

What Additional Testing Should Be Performed to Confirm the Suspected
Diagnosis?
Morphologically, the increased blasts with “figure eight”-shaped nuclei, numerous
cytoplasmic granules, and Auer rods are suspicious for APL. To confirm this diagnosis,
flow cytometric evaluation of the peripheral blood as well as rapid fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) to evaluate for PML-RARA fusion should be performed.3 Recognition and early diagnosis of APL is essential due to the high risk of
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), a syndrome that results in inappropriate
systemic activation of coagulation and fibrinolytic pathways with subsequent consumption
of coagulation factors and platelets leading to bleeding, thrombosis, or both. There is a
high risk of DIC in patients with APL due to increased production of procoagulants
including tissue factor, cancer procoagulant, and microparticles as well as numerous
cytokines which lead to endothelial damage and hypercoagulability. At the same time, APL
cells have increased cell surface expression of annexin II and proteases leading to
plasmin generation and hyperfibrionolysis.4

Flow cytometry and FISH can be performed rapidly on peripheral blood or bone marrow
aspirate. Flow cytometry involves labeling cells with fluorescently tagged antibodies that
are specific for hematolymphoid differentiation. These cells are then passed, single file,
through a laser beam which detects the fluorescent label and separates the cells by
antigen profile. In this case, the neoplastic cells were positive for CD117, CD33, CD13,
and CD64 and mostly negative for CD34 and human leukocyte antigen-DR (HLA-DR) (Figure 3). The expression of CD33,
CD13, and CD64 favor myeloid lineage, and this can be confirmed by MPO expression.
Myeloperoxidase is an enzyme found in myeloid cells that aids in immune and inflammatory
functions. The expression of CD117 is a marker of immaturity, and the hypergranular
variant of APL is typically negative for other markers of immaturity including CD34 and
HLA-DR. This is in contrast to the microgranular variant which typically expresses CD34 in
conjunction with CD2. The flow cytometric findings are characteristic of AML and most
consistent with hypergranular APL. The increased suspicion of APL in this case can be
confirmed by FISH which uses DNA probes to recognize specific sequences located in a
particular chromosomal region. These DNA clones are labeled with fluorescent dyes which
bind to the desired chromosomal region and create a signal that is visualized under a
fluorescent microscope.5 Each gene is assigned a specific color probe, and within the cells being evaluated,
there should be 2 signals for each gene (red and green, for example). When a translocation
occurs, the 2 separate color probes fuse and a third color signal (yellow) is present due
to the overlapping of the other 2 colors (Figure 4).

Figure 3. Flow cytometric phenotype of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). The neoplastic cells
(green) are positive for CD117, CD33, CD13, and CD64 and mostly negative for CD34 and
human leukocyte antigen-DR (HLA-DR).

Figure 4. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for PML-RARA fusion. When
a translocation occurs, the PML gene on chromosome 15 (red) and the
RARA gene on chromosome 17 (green) fuse together to produce a third
color signal (yellow). PML gene indicates promyelocytic
(PML) gene; RARA, retinoic acid receptor alpha.

How Does the Fusion of These 2 Genes Result in Leukemia?
Promyelocytic gene is a nuclear regulatory factor gene which acts as a
tumor suppressor gene. Retinoic acid receptor alpha is a transcriptional
activator that suppresses cell growth and promotes cell differentiation in the presence of retinoids.6 Translocation resulting in fusion of these 2 genes converts RARA
to a transcriptional repressor which no longer responds to physiologic levels of
retinoids. The PML-RARA fusion protein disrupts the signaling of both
genes and results in a blockade of myeloid differentiation. This leads to an increase in
abnormal promyelocytes that replace normal marrow elements.6 This blockade of differentiation is necessary for development of APL but is not
sufficient to cause leukemia.3 Additional oncogene mutations cooperate with the PML-RARA fusion
protein to cause leukemia including cytogenetic abnormalities such as gain of chromosome 8
as well as mutations in FLT3. 1

A subset of cases will demonstrate variant translocation partners with the
RARA gene. The most common of these variant partners are shown in Table 3.

Table 3. Common Translocation Partners in APL With Variant RARA
Translocations.

Chromosome Region	Involved Gene	Expected Response to ATRA	
11q23.2	
ZBTB16
	Resistant	
11q13.4	
NUMA1
	Likely responsive	
5q35.1	
NPM1
	Likely responsive	
17q21.2	
STAT5B
	Resistant	
Abbreviations: APL, acute promyelocytic leukemia; ATRA, all-trans retinoic acid;
RARA, retinoic acid receptor alpha.

What Is the Preferred Treatment Regimen for Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia? Are There
Findings That Help Predict the Clinical Course or Treatment Response?
Rapid diagnosis and initiation of treatment of APL is critical due to the high risk of
early death related to DIC. The successful treatment of APL with all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) and arsenic trioxide is well-documented and is one of the first examples of
differentiation therapy.6 The RARA gene usually promotes cell differentiation in the
presence of retinoids, but upon formation of the PML-RARA fusion protein,
a conformational change prohibits the binding of these retinoids at physiologic levels.
Pharmacologic doses of ATRA are able to overcome this state and bind to the
PML-RARA fusion protein resulting in a conformational change that leads
to transcription activation. The ability to differentiate is restored, and the neoplastic
promyelocytes progress to neutrophils.6 These neutrophils have limited life spans and subsequently die leaving the marrow
clear to resume normal hematopoiesis. The arsenic trioxide therapy targets
PML also leading to maturation and apoptosis. Remission is achievable
with ATRA alone, but relapse can occur requiring standard induction chemotherapy to be
given with or after ATRA.1

Two of the known variant translocations that are resistant to ATRA therapy, thus
rendering patients more prone to developing DIC, include t(11;17)(q23;21);
ZBTB16-RARA and t(17;17)(q11.2;q21); STA5B-RARA.2 Previous cases, with older age, hyperleukocytosis, CD56 expression, and
FLT3 internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutation, have reported a worse
prognosis in patients with APL with PML-RARA.1 FLT3 is a receptor tyrosine kinase whose signals mimic normal growth factor
signaling. When an activating mutation occurs (ITD), this leads to increased cellular
growth and survival. Minimal residual disease monitoring can be assessed at the end of
consolidation therapy utilizing quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction.3 Sequential levels of the PML-RARA transcripts are measured, and if
detected after morphologic and cytogenetic complete remission strongly predict the risk of
relapse. Identifying relapse early in these patients allows for delivery of preemptive
therapy while the patient is still in subclinical disease, thus reducing the risk of
treatment-related toxicity and death due to potential coagulopathy that comes with
clinical relapse.3

Teaching Points

Acute myeloid leukemias have distinct morphologic features based on their genetic
aberrations.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia is a specific subtype of AML with a characteristic
t(15;17)(q22;q12); PML-RARA translocation.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia is characterized by atypical promyelocytes that can be
hypergranular with “figure eight” nuclei, abundant cytoplasmic granules, and bundles
of Auer rods, or hypogranular with similar nuclear shape but indistinct cytoplasmic
granules.

Rapid diagnosis by flow cytometry and FISH is essential due to the common association
with DIC.

There is an excellent clinical response to therapy with ATRA and arsenic trioxide
which act as differentiating agents, and when used in combination with standard
induction chemotherapy in high risk patients can achieve complete remission.




Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

ORCID iD: Rebecca L. Kunak 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1297-7858
==== Refs
References
1 
Arber DA Brunning RD Le Beau MM  , et al.
Acute myeloid leukaemia with recurrent genetic
abnormalities In: Swerdlow SH Campo E Lee Harris N Jaffe NL  , eds. WHO Classification of Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid
Tissues , Revised. 
4th ed 
Lyon, France :
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC );
2017 :130 -159.
2 
Arber DA Heerema-McKenney A.  
Acute Myeloid Leukemia . In: Jaffe ES Lee Harris N Vardiman JW Campo E Arber DA  , eds. Hematopathology . 1st ed 
Philadelphia, PA : Elsevier
Saunders ;
2011 :672 –678 .
3 
Vasef MA  
Acute promyelocytic leukemia with t(15;17)(q22;q21),
PML-RARA and variants In: Foucar K Reichard KK Wilson CS  , et al., eds. Diagnostic Pathology: Blood and Bone
Marrow . 1st ed 
Salt Lake City,
UT : Amirsys ;
2012 :156 –159 .
4 
Ikezoe T  
Pathogenesis of disseminated intravascular coagulation in
patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia, and its treatment using recombinant human
soluble thromodulin . Int J Hematol .
2014 ;100 :27 –37 .24217998 
5 
Molecular genetic diagnosis . In: Kumar V Abbas AK Aster JC  , eds. Robbins and Cotran Pathologic Basis of Disease .
9th ed 
Philadelphia, PA :
Elsevier Saunders ;
2015 :177 .
6 
Molecular basis of cancer: role of genetic and epigenetic
alterations . In: Kumar V Abbas AK Aster JC  , eds. Robbins and Cotran Pathologic Basis of Disease .
9th ed 
Philadelphia, PA :
Elsevier Saunders ;
2015 :317 .

