
==== Front
Acta Trop
Acta Trop
Acta Tropica
0001-706X 1873-6254 Elsevier B.V. 

S0001-706X(04)00040-3
10.1016/j.actatropica.2004.02.007
Article
Surveillance of imported infectious diseases in Europe: report from the 4th TropNetEurop workshop
Jelinek Tomas tomas.jelinek@charite.dea∗ Myrvang Bjørn b a Institute of Tropical Medicine, Spandauer Damm 130, Berlin 14050, Germany
b Department of Infectious Diseases, Ullevaal University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49-30-30116-701; fax: +49-30-30116-888. tomas.jelinek@charite.de
6 5 2004 
6 2004 
6 5 2004 
91 1 47 51
20 1 2004 3 2 2004 Copyright © 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.2004Elsevier B.V.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.
==== Body
Infectious diseases remain the leading cause of death worldwide. Reduction in mortality from many infectious diseases has been described as the single most significant public health achievement of the past century. Unfortunately, historical success in treating and controlling some of these diseases left some policy makers with the false perception that the threat to public health from infectious agents is almost non-existent. Emerging infectious diseases that threaten the European public health originate from both domestic and international sources. In recent years, emerging infectious disease threats from abroad have increased significantly. Similarly, various parasitic diseases, once considered exotic in Europe, are emerging or re-emerging as public health threats. Numbers of malaria patients are constantly increasing in various European countries, with drug resistance of the parasite posing an important therapeutic and epidemiological problem for clinicians and the public health service.

Surveillance is the single most important tool for identifying infectious diseases that are emerging, are causing serious public health problems, or are diminishing in importance. The morbidity, mortality, and cost of infectious diseases can be measured through surveillance. Assessing the health of the highly inhomogeneous group of international travellers who are exposed to a variety of infectious diseases that will become clinically apparent only after their return to Europe is difficult, but such populations are often the first and most seriously affected by emerging infectious diseases. Clinics providing specialized services in imported infectious diseases are ideally situated to effectively detect emerging infections at their point of entry into the domestic population.

The European Network on Imported Infectious Disease Surveillance (TropNetEurop) was founded in 1999 with the following objectives:• To provide grounds for preparation of diagnostic and therapeutic guidelines for the management of imported infections within Europe.

• To identify emerging pathogens of public health importance by sampling returning international travellers, immigrants, and foreign visitors.

• To identify trends in specific infectious agents, risk factors, clinical outcomes, and microbial resistance patterns in this population.

• To develop innovative, efficient, and effective data collection and analysis methods for the rapid identification of emerging infectious diseases.

• To provide grounds for cluster investigation and intervention strategies by Public Health authorities.

• To foster epidemiological and clinical teaching of infectious diseases within Europe and to assist the international exchange of data and research on emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases.




Since 2000, the network has held annual workshops on imported infectious diseases, the latest on June 28–29, 2003, at Oslo. The various topics discussed at this workshop mirror the broad spectrum of imported infectious diseases., and summaries of the presentations given follow below.

Nikolai Mühlberger et al. reported about the first results of the TropNetEurop screening for codon 268 mutations of the cytochrome b gene associated with Malarone® resistance. Codon 268 AAT- and TCT-mutations of Plasmodium falciparum’s cytochrome b gene (wildtype=TAT) were recently reported in cases of malarone treatment failure. PCR-methods are available to test for present mutations. Genotypic resistance testing could be used to guide treatment decisions and thereby reduce the risk of treatment failure. However, until now little is known about the prevalence of codon 268 mutations, and their quantitative association with treatment failure. Likewise, information about the diagnostic performance of available tests has not been published in detail. Objectives of this research are (1) to evaluate the performance of three different genotypic resistance tests, (2) to assess the prevalence of codon 286 mutations on the cytochrome b gene, and (3) to estimate the influence of codon 286 mutations on malarone treatment success. In the first batch of samples, 464 TropNetEurop samples were analysed for the Codon 268 AAT- and TCT-mutations. Three different genotypic tests were applied to each sample - PCR_CYTb3&5_NsiI and PCR_CYTb2&6_AlnWI testing for the AAT-mutations and PCR_CYTb2_7_SspI testing for the TCT-mutation. 388 respectively 291 of the 464 samples were successfully tested for the presence of AAT-and TCT-mutations. PCR_CYTb3&5_NsiI and PCR_CYTb2&6_AlnWI, which focus on the detection of AAT-mutation, showed success rates of 79.96% respectively 65.73%. Combining both PCRs yielded an overall success rate of 83.6%. PCR_CYTb2_7_SspI, which focuses on the detection of TCT-mutations, performed well only with 62.72% of the samples. In total one case of AAT-mutation was detected, and no case of a TCT-mutation. The prevalence of AAT-mutations in patients treated in Europe for falciparum malaria can therefore be calculated with 95% confidence to be in-between 0.01–1.43%. Concerning TCT-mutations, one can be 95% confident, that the prevalence does not exceed 1.03% in the European patient pool. Analysing a subsample of 30 patients treated only with Malarone® revealed, that AAT-mutation is highly associated with treatment failure (RR 9.7, 95% CI 3.3–28.2). The mutation was present in one of four patients with treatment failure, but in none of the 26 successfully treated patients.

Ida Gjørup reported about the ongoing TropNetEurop MALHIV Study. Highly active antiviral therapy (HAART) has significantly reduced AIDS morbidity and mortality. As a consequence of prolonged AIDS free time and improved living conditions the number of HIV-patients travelling to malarious can be expected to rise. Pre-travel counselling is especially important for travellers with compromised immune status, however, little is known about the interaction between HIV and malaria so far. HIV-infection causes increasing (cellular) immune suppression and could thus result in an impaired immune response to malaria, leading to failure in preventing infection or suppressing parasitaemia and clinical disease. P. falciparum has been shown to stimulate HIV-replication through the production of cytokines by activated lymphocytes. HIV proviral loads are significantly higher in patients with malaria than those without and remain so for several weeks after treatment. Thus, malaria could cause faster progression of HIV disease.

Zeno Bisoffi et al. presented news about Illicit trade in humans and risks of disease spread: recurrent clusters of malaria in Chinese illegal immigrants to Europe through Africa. Between November 2002 and March 2003, 17 cases of malaria (one fatal) in Chinese immigrants were observed in Italy. All the patients gave a history of a transit through an African country, the majority in Ivory Coast. Several travelled by air to Africa and all to Europe, making the risk of introducing SARS a possibility should this illicit trade in humans continue. Between November 2002 and March 2003, 17 cases of malaria among illegal Chinese immigrants were observed in seven hospitals of Central and Northern Italy (15 cases of P. falciparum, one case of P. malariae and a mixed infection P. falciparum–P. malariae). One patient died. Although malaria is still endemic in parts of China, the major species is the benign form from P. vivax. P. falciparum transmission is confined to provinces bordering Laos and Viet Nam. On investigating the cluster difficulties occurred with language barriers and reticence because of illegal entry into Europe. With the assistance of Chinese translators information was obtained on most cases. Some had already fallen ill whilst in Africa. Other had reportedly died from “fever” before reaching Europe. Prior to 2000, P. falciparum malaria had not been reported in Chinese immigrants to Italy, despite many thousands living in Northern and Central Italy. Malaria in Chinese immigrants brought to light a new route being used by traders of “human cargos”, bypassing the traditional route through Central Asia and Eastern Europe. The 2003 cluster prompted an examination of hospital records, where a further cluster of 12 in four hospitals were identified (August 2002). Ivory Coast was the transit country for almost all patients. They report obtaining visas here to enter Europe, which probably represents a structured (criminal) process. The clustering of cases, despite variable time in transit, suggests that the immigrants arrive in Europe in groups when the entry conditions are more favourable. Although Italy was the final destination, at least some entered through France, which also has had reports of P. falciparum cases in Chinese immigrants.

Ole Wichmann presented Dengue in travellers: disease, definitions & TropNetEurop data. In the past 30 years there has been a dramatic resurgence of epidemic dengue activity in the tropics worldwide.

Dengue fever with its more severe form dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) is a leading cause of hospitalization and death especially among children in South East Asian countries where DHF-epidemics first occurred in the 1950s. Epidemic DHF spread out to the South Pacific islands in the 1970s, and reached the American region in the 1980s and 1990s involving all age-groups during outbreaks. In recent years epidemiological patterns seem to chance in somehow. In South East Asia the median age of DHF-patients shifted constantly to older age-groups, and reports on DSS associated with primary infection as well as reports on unusual clinical manifestations (e.g. liver-involvement, encephalitis and severe GI-bleeding) are increasing. To give some examples of these tendencies, results of an investigation of a 2001-outbreak in Chonburi-Province, Thailand, with more than 4,600 individuals affected, were presented. With increasing air travel, people from non-endemic areas are more often exposed to and infected with dengue viruses. But DHF is rarely seen in travellers. However, in 2002 first fatal cases of dengue infections in travellers have been reported in Europe. Among 483 dengue cases reported between 1999 and 2002 to TropNetEurop 13 were assigned as DHF (2.7%). In our population immigrants and foreign visitors were 4.3 times at higher risk to present with manifestations of dengue haemorrhagic fever when compared with European travellers.

Joaquim Gascon et al. presented preliminary results of a study on Histoplasma capsulatum infection in Spanish travellers to Latin America. In Spain, a great percentage of international travelers go to Latin America. Only 10% of the immune competent people affected by H.capsulatum develop a clinical illness, but even someone who has not suffered acute clinical disease can develop future complications: histoplasmoma or pulmonary/disseminated disease if their immune status changes (AIDS, transplants). The study was performed at the Hospital Clinic in Barcelona between January 2001 and April 2003 in people who travelled (>3 weeks) to Latin America. Travellers were included in the study on a voluntary basis. A control group of travellers (N=29) to West Africa (>3 weeks) and a control group (N=20) of people who had not travelled were also recruited. Travellers filled in a form for clinical and epidemiological information. Only in the presence of symptoms was a physical examination conducted. A histoplasmosis skin test (HST) was performed in all cases and if positive (>5 mm ∅), a chest x-ray was done. In acute clinical cases, other chest pathologies were ruled out. Latex and Double diffusion (DD) serology was performed in 179 and 192 travellers respectively. Altogether, 342 people were recruited who had travelled to Latin America (254 to Central America and 90 to South America), 29 to West Africa and 20 people were in the non-travellers group. 20% (69 cases) of travellers to Latin America and 3% (one case) to West Africa were HST + (P=0.025). In the non-travellers group, all were HST negative. Neither sex nor age differences were found. As for risk factors associated with infection from H.capsulatum, only sleeping on the ground had a positive correlation with a positive HST (P=0.031). Compared with the HST results, the sensitivity and specificity of DD and latex tests were 26.83% and 98.68%, and 18.92% and 100% respectively. During this study, 10 cases of acute pulmonary histoplasmosis were diagnosed, all of them with fever (or mild fever), cough, HST + and compatible chest radiologic changes. One case of Histoplasmoma was detected. Travellers who go to Latin America for 3 weeks or more have a significant risk of H. capsulatum infection.

Mogens Jensenius reported about African tick bite fever in travellers. African tick bite fever is an emerging infectious disease in today’s travel medicine. The disease is caused by Rickettsia africae, a recently identified spotted fever group rickettsia, and is transmitted by cattle ticks of the Amblyomma genus in large parts of rural sub-Saharan Africa. Recent epidemiologic studies indicate that up to 5.0% of short-term safari travellers may acquire African tick bite fever, and that major risk factors include game hunting as purpose of travel, prolonged travel in rural areas, travel to southern Africa, and travel during the summer when tick abundances peak in most endemic areas. African tick bite fever is clinically characterised by acute flu-like symptoms with neck muscle myalgia and frequently accompanied by one or several inoculation eschars, regional lymphadenitis, cutaneous rash and, more rarely, aphthous stomatitis. Complications are rare, but include prolonged fever and reactive arthritis. Treatment with doxycycline or fluoroquinolones is associated with rapid improvement and defervescence in most cases. Preventive measures comprise the wearing of protective clothings (preferably impregnated with acaricides) and the use of repellents on exposed skin whenever bush walking in endemic areas.

Tomas Jelinek summarized clinical and epidemiological features of SARS. With the increasing import of emerging infectious diseases into our societies, National Health Service faces entirely new challenges. The recent epidemic of SARS, caused by a virus with the proposed name Coronavirus pneumoniae (CVP), has shown how fast national boundaries break down in the face of high-speed international travel. Within few days, infected patients turned up at such different places as Hong Kong, Singapore, Toronto, and Frankfurt. The international community did react very fast, but only after the disease had reached Hanoi and Hong Kong. It is worth noting that the current outbreak of SARS actually started much earlier, with the beginning of November 2002, in the Chinese province Guangdong. Reports about a strange cluster of atypical pneumonia cases were carried to international level, but Chinese authorities dissimulated the problem quite effectively. Only after an accidentally infected US citizen managed to leave the area and carried the infection to a more visible level did international attention focus on SARS. Concentration on notifications systems on national levels, the traditional mainstay of National Health Service, is certainly still important. It is, however, entirely inadequate when dealing with the capacity of modern society to spread disease globally. National Health Service needs to link on international level. Here, “to link” does not mean to simply agree on regular contacts and on regular accumulation of national notification data as currently practised across the European Union. It means to form active surveillance networks with members who exchange information on a permanent basis. Such networks need to involve all professionals who may become involved in international outbreaks, staff of National Health Service being among them. Other include diagnostic laboratories and clinical units that carry the burden of caring for the patients. An international model for this may be the global influenza network that is very capable of detecting and identifying new influenza subtypes. However, coping with a known, well defined entity as influenza virus makes surveillance and international collaboration comparatively easy. Future international networks will have to prepare for yet unknown pathogens, as CVP was. This requires a very open-minded approach of all network partners, leaving nationalistic issues, regional financial issues (such as tourism) and personal interests behind. The WHO-led response against SARS gives an excellent example of a coordinated, international response. Simply in order to survive the new challenges that the future will certainly bring, National Health Service needs to organise themselves on similar level.

Andreas Skulberg tackled the issue “Is there an infectious disease threat to Scandinavia from Russia and the Baltic states?” The epidemiological situation on infectious diseases in Russia and three Baltic States gives reasons for grave concerns. The HIV epidemic is spreading rapidly and the prevalence of multiple drug resistant tuberculosis is among the highest in the world. The incidence of sexually transmitted diseases is alarmingly high when it comes to syphilis and gonorrhoea. Data on antibiotic resistance are scarce. The vaccination programs work sub-optimally and coverage varies throughout the region. Information on historical spread of these diseases to other countries was presented and future risk of international transmission discussed. Different political and social factors influencing the infectious disease epidemiology was discussed. It was underlined that relatively few cases of imported infectious diseases from Russia and The Baltic states have hitherto been diagnosed in Scandinavia. The preparedness in the societies to meet new emerging diseases was presented using SARS as an example.

Peter Chiodini reported about Gnathostomiasis as an emerging infection. Increasing international travel brings the more adventurous traveller into contact with helminthic parasites rarely seen outside the tropics. Infection with Gnathostoma spinigerum, leading to the clinical syndrome of gnathostomiasis is a typical example, and one with which few clinicians in non-endemic areas will be familiar. A case series of patients seen at the Hospital For Tropical Diseases (London, UK) was reported to draw attention to this underdiagnosed parasitic infection which may present to a range of different medical specialities.

Eventually, Gunnar Hasle presented an overview on venomous animals.

To produce toxins is a common adaptation in nature, both as a defensive measure to avoid predation, and as weapons to tranquillize, kill and digest prey. About 60,000 people die every year because of snakebites. The victims are mainly agricultural workers, and in Southeast Asia, fishermen. Tourists from Europe or USA are most often bitten while handling snakes. Snakebites are not a major cause of death among tourists, but as travel clinicians, we often get questions about such risks. Of the 2400 species of snakes in the world about 50 have clinical significance.

