
==== Front
Aging CellAging CellacelAging Cell1474-97181474-9726BlackWell Publishing Ltd Oxford, UK 10.1111/acel.12336Issue InformationIssue Information 4 2015 03 3 2015 14 2 i iii Copyright © 2015 The Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd2015
==== Body
EDITORS-IN-CHIEF
Peter Adams
University of Glasgow
CR-UK Beatson Labs
Garscube Estate, Switchback Road, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD United Kingdom

Tel: +(0)141 330 2306

Fax: +(0)141 942 6521

Email: p.adams@beatson.gla.ac.uk

Adam Antebi
Huffington Center on Aging and Dept of Molecular and Cellular Biology Baylor College of Medicine One Baylor Plaza, Room M-320 Houston, TX 77030 USA

Tel: +1 713 798 6661

Fax: +1 713 798 4161

Email: aantebi@bcm.tmc.edu

Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing Gleuelerstr. 50A D-50931 Koeln Germany

Ana Maria Cuervo
Depts of Development and Molecular Biology and of Medicine Albert Einstein College of Medicine 1300 Morris Park Ave Bronx, NY 10461 USA

Tel: +1 718 430 2689

Fax: +1 718 430 8975

Email: ana-maria.cuervo@einstein.yu.edu

Brian Kennedy
President and CEO Buck Institute for Age Research 8001 Redwood Blvd. Novato, CA 94945

Tel: 415 209 2040

Fax: 415 899 1810

Email: bkennedy@buckinstitute.org

REVIEWS EDITOR
John Sedivy,Brown University, USA Email: john_sedivy@brown.edu

EDITORIAL BOARD
Genes and functional genomics
Andrzej Bartke, S. Illinois Univ., USA

Lucio Comai, Univ. of Southern California, USA

Claudio Franceschi, Univ. of Bologna, Italy

David Gems, UCL, UK

Jing-Dong Jackie Han, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Matt Kaeberlein, Univ. of Washington, USA

Cynthia Kenyon, UCSF, USA

Siu Sylvia Lee, Cornell Univ., USA

Valter Longo, Univ. of S. California, USA

Colleen T Murphy, Princeton Univ., USA

Sang Chul Park, Well Aging Research Center, Korea

Linda Partridge, UCL, UK

Marc Tatar, Brown Univ., USA

Stefan Schreiber, Christian-Albrechts-Universität, Germany

Xiao-Li Tian, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking Univ., China

Jan Vijg, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, USA

Epigenetics
Shelley Berger, Univ. of Pennsylvania, USA

Anne Brunet, Stanford Univ., USA

Mario F Fraga, CNB/CSIC and IUOPA, Spain

Masashi Narita, Univ. of Cambridge, USA

Cell proliferation, senescence and death
Fabrizio d’Adda di Fagagna, FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, Italy

Maria Blasco, Spanish Nat. Cancer Center, Spain

Judith Campisi, Lawrence Berkeley Nat. Laboratory, USA

Sandy Chang, MD Anderson Cancer Center, USA

Yosef Gruenbaum, the Hebrew Univ. of Jerusalem, Israel

Thorsten Hoppe, Univ. of Cologne, Germany

Peter Hornsby, UTHSC at San Antonio, USA

Eun Seong Hwang, Univ. of Seoul, Korea

Pidder Jansen-Dürr, Inst. for Biomed. Aging Res., Austria

Brad Johnson, Univ. of Pennsylvania, USA

Jan Karlseder, Salk Inst. for Biological Studies, USA

Joao Passos, Newcastle Univ., UK

Manuel Serrano, Spanish Nat. Cancer Res. Center, Spain

Thomas von Zglinicki, Univ. of Newcastle, UK

Signaling and gene expression
Johan Auwerx, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale, Switzerland

T Keith Blackwell, Joslin Diabetes Center, USA

Marcia Haigis, Harvard Medical School, USA

Shin-ichiro Imai, Washington Univ., USA

Pankaj Kapahi, Buck Institute, USA

David Lombard, Univ. of Michigan, USA

Jeffrey S Smith, University of Virginia, USA

Giulio Taglialatela, Univ. of Texas Medical Branch, USA

Cell stress and damage
Martin Brand, MRC Dunn Human Nutrition Unit, UK

Donato Di Monte, German Center for Neurodegenrative Diseases, Germany

Deborah A Ferrington, Univ. of Minnesota, USA

Toren Finkel, NIH, USA

Judith Frydman, Stanford Univ., USA

Brad Gibson, Buck Institute for Age Research, USA

Robert Goldman, Northwestern Univ., USA

Ming Guo, Univ. of California, USA

Malcolm Jackson, Univ. of Liverpool, UK

Ursula Jakob, Univ. of Michigan, USA

Nils-Göran Larsson, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Germany

Richard A Miller, Univ. of Michigan Dept of Pathology and Geriatrics Center Vincent Monnier, Case Western Reserve Univ., USA

Peter Rabinovitch, Univ. of Washington, USA

Gerald S Shadel, Yale University School of Medicine, USA

Holly Van Remmen, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, USA

Stem cells and aging
Victoria Ballard, GlaxoSmithKline, USA

Mark R Cookson, National Institute on Aging, USA

Jay Edelberg, Cornell Univ., USA

Heinrich Jasper, Buck Insititute, USA

Thomas Nystrom, Goteborg Univ., Sweden

Bradley Olwin, Univ. of Colorado, USA

Charlotte Peterson, Univ. of Kentucky, USA

Thomas A Rando, Stanford Univ., USA

Clifford J Rosen, Tufts Univ. School of Medicine, USA

Ashok Shetty, Inst. for Regenerative Medicine at Texas A&M Health Science Center and Scott & White, Temple, TX

Immunology
Bonnie Blomberg, Univ. of Miami Miller, School of Medicine, USA

Daniel Goldstein, Yale Univ., USA

Laura Haynes, Trudeau Inst., USA

Janet M Lord, MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, UK

Janko Nikolich-Zugich, Univ. of Arizona, USA

Susan Swain, Univ. of Massachusetts, USA

Joanne Turner, Ohio State Univ., USA

Integrative physiology
Julie K Andersen, Buck Inst. for Age Research, USA

Steven J. Burden, New York Univ., USA

Qian Chen, Brown Univ., USA

Cheryl Conover, Mayo Clinic, USA

Rafael De Cabo, Nat. Inst. on Aging, USA

Luigi Fontana, Washington Univ., USA & Salerno Univ., Italy

Laura Haynes, Tudeau Inst., USA

James Kirkland, Mayo Clinic, USA

Simin Meydani, Tufts Univ., USA

Ralph Nixon, NYU School of Med., USA

Henry L Paulson, Univ. of Michigan, USA

Brun Ulfhake, Karolinska Inst., Sweden

Jean Wei, Univ. of Arkansas, USA

Biodemography and comparative studies
Richard M Cawthon, Univ. of Utah, USA

Kaare Christensen, Univ. of S. Denmark, Denmark

Vera Gorbunova, Univ. of Rochester, USA

Nicola Neretti, Brown University, USA

Scott Pletcher, Huffington Center of Aging, USA

Eline Slagboom, Univ. of Leiden, Netherlands

Yousin Suh, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, USA

Theories of aging and longevity
Steven Austad, Univ. of Texas, USA

Tom Kirkwood, Univ. of Newcastle, UK

Daniel Promislow, University of Georgia, USA

SCOPE
The aim of Aging Cell is to publish the highest quality, innovative research addressing fundamental issues in the biology of aging. For publication in Aging Cell, the work must provide a major new contribution to the understanding of aging and be of general interest to the community. Aging Cell seeks to cover all areas of geroscience, highlighting research that uncovers mechanistic aspects of the aging process, as well as the links between aging and age-related disease. Observations of novel aging processes without substantial mechanistic insight will be considered, but should be of especially high impact for the field. Topics including, but not limited to, nutrient-responsive signaling pathways, neuronal and endocrine signaling pathways, tissue interactions, genetic and epigenetic regulation and integrity, proteostasis, circadian rhythms, ROS and mitochondria, cellular senescence, stem cells, progerias and interventions that affect aging are encouraged. All experimental approaches, including plant models, are welcome. Papers that focus on the pathogenesis of a specific age-related pathology are also of interest, but should offer new insights into the fundamental links between aging and disease.

Open Access and Copyright
All articles published by Aging Cell are fully open access: immediately freely available to read, download and share. All Aging Cell articles are published under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and allows the commercial use of published articles.

Copyright on any research article in a journal published by Aging Cell is retained by the author(s). Authors grant Wiley a license to publish the article and identify itself as the original publisher. Authors also grant any third party the right to use the article freely as long as its integrity is maintained and its original authors, citation details and publisher are identified. Further information about open access license and copyright can be found on http://www.wileyopenaccess.com/details/content/12f25db4c87/Copyright--License.html

Use by commercial ‘for-profit’ organisations.

Use of Wiley Open Access articles for commercial, promotional, or marketing purposes requires further explicit permission from Wiley (corporatesales@wiley.com) and will be subject to a fee. Commercial purposes include:
Copying or downloading of articles, or linking to such articles for further redistribution, sale or licensing;

Copying, downloading or posting by a site or service that incorporates advertising with such content;

The inclusion or incorporation of article content in other works or services (other than normal quotations with an appropriate citation) that is then available for sale or licensing, for a fee (for example, a compilation produced for marketing purposes, inclusion in a salespack);

Use of article content (other than normal quotations with appropriate citation) by forprofit organisations for promotional purposes;

Linking to article content in e-mails redistributed for promotional, marketing or educational purposes;

Use for the purposes of monetary reward by means of sale, resale, licence, loan, transfer or other form of commercial exploitation such as marketing products;

Print reprints of Wiley Open Access articles can be purchased from corporatesales@wiley.com.



Disclaimer
The Publisher, the Anatomical Society and Editors cannot be held responsible for errors or any consequences arising from the use of information contained in this journal; the views and opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the Publisher, the Anatomical Society and Editors; neither does the publication of advertisements constitute any endorsement by the Publisher, the Anatomical Society and Editors of the products advertised.

Wiley Open Access articles posted to repositories or websites are without warranty from Wiley of any kind, either express or implied, including, but not limited to, warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. To the fullest extent permitted by law Wiley disclaims all liability for any loss or damage arising out of, or in connection with, the use of or inability to use the content.
