
==== Front
AutophagyAutophagyKAUPkaup20Autophagy1554-86271554-8635Taylor & Francis 28813181135885110.1080/15548627.2017.1358851Autophagic PunctumPathway choice between proteasomal and autophagic degradation K. LU ET AL.AUTOPHAGYLu Kefeng abden Brave Fabian aJentsch Stefan a†a Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max
Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried,
Germanyb State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China
Hospital, Sichuan University and National Collaborative Innovation Center for
Biotherapy, Chengdu, ChinaCONTACT Kefeng Lu lukf@scu.edu.cn; Fabian den Brave denbrave@biochem.mpg.deDepartment of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of
Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried
Germany† Deceased 29 October 2016.

Punctum to: Lu K, den Brave F, Jentsch S. Receptor oligomerization guides pathway
choice between proteasomal and autophagic degradation. Nat Cell Biol.
2017;19(6):732–739. PMID: 28504708; DOI: 10.1038/ncb3531.

2017 16 8 2017 16 8 2017 13 10 1799 1800 18 7 2017 18 7 2017 © 2017 The Author(s). Published with license byTaylor &
Francis2017The Author(s)This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits
non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any
way.ABSTRACT
Efficient degradation of abnormal or aggregated proteins is crucial to protect the cell
against proteotoxic stress. Selective targeting and disposal of such proteins usually
occurs in a ubiquitin-dependent manner by proteasomes and macroautophagy/autophagy.
Whereas proteasomes are efficient in degrading abnormal soluble proteins, protein
aggregates are typically targeted for degradation by autophagic vesicles. Both processes
require ubiquitin-binding receptors, which are targeted to proteasomes via ubiquitin-like
domains or to phagophores (the precursors to autophagosomes) via Atg8/LC3 binding motifs,
respectively. The use of substrate modification by ubiquitin in both pathways raised the
question of how degradative pathway choice is achieved. In contrast to previous models,
proposing different types of ubiquitin linkages for substrate targeting, we find that
pathway choice is a late event largely determined by the oligomeric state of the
receptors. Monomeric proteasome receptors bind soluble substrates more efficiently due to
their higher affinity for ubiquitin. Upon substrate aggregation, autophagy receptors with
lower ubiquitin binding affinity gain the upper hand due to higher avidity achieved by
receptor bundling. Thus, our work suggests that ubiquitination is a shared signal of an
adaptive protein quality control system, which targets substrates for the optimal
proteolytic pathway.

KEYWORDS
autophagyCue5Dsk2proteasomeubiquitin
==== Body
To maintain cellular homeostasis, various protein quality control pathways are used to
either repair misfolded proteins or target them for degradation if misfolding or aggregation
persists. The best pathway for degradation of proteins depends on their physical state
within the cell. Soluble substrates are mainly degraded by proteasomes, whereas large
insoluble aggregated proteins are engulfed by phagophores targeting substrates to the
vacuole/lysosome for their destruction. A shared feature of both proteolytic pathways is
substrate modification by ubiquitin ultimately raising the question of how pathway choice is
achieved.

Key to the degradation of ubiquitinated proteins are proteasomal and autophagy-specific
receptors that recognize their substrates via ubiquitin-binding domains. To separate both
pathways, it was suggested that soluble and aggregated proteins are modified with different
ubiquitin chain types. Lys48-linked chains are well established in targeting proteins for
proteasomal degradation whereas it was initially suggested that Lys63-linked poly-ubiquitin
chains would facilitate degradation by autophagy. However, autophagy receptors show no
obvious preference binding Lys63-linked poly-ubiquitin chains over Lys48-linked chains.
Thus, how substrates are sorted to their designated degradation pathway remained
unclear.

To elucidate how pathway choice is made, we took advantage of the budding yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model organism in which both pathways are
present and are mainly dependent on a single ubiquitin binding receptor, Dsk2 for
proteasomal and Cue5 for autophagic degradation, respectively. To compare the 2 pathways, we
used ubiquitin fused to β-galactosidase (Ub-β-gal), which is soluble, and a
truncated version of this protein (Ub-β-gal-X90), which is aggregation prone, as
substrates.

We observed that indeed Dsk2 mediates the proteasomal degradation of soluble substrates,
whereas Cue5 is required for clearance of aggregated proteins. We therefore tested previous
views on how pathway choice is achieved, focusing first on early events including the
enzymes involved in ubiquitination and different types of ubiquitin chains. We found that
degradation of both soluble Ub-β-gal-WT and aggregation-prone Ub-β-gal-X90 depend
on the same set of enzymes, the E2 conjugating enzymes Ubc4/Ubc5 and the E3 ligase Rsp5.
Moreover, we could exclude the previously suggested requirement of Lys63-linked for
autophagic degradation. Both receptors did not show any ubiquitin linkage specificity,
however, we observed a 10-fold higher affinity of Dsk2 compared with Cue5 toward
ubiquitin.

Having excluded different types of ubiquitin-linkages as a signal for pathway choice, we
continued analyzing how proteasome and autophagy receptors differ. The most remarkable
difference between both types of receptors is the strong capacity of the autophagy receptor
Cue5 to form higher order oligomers, as opposed to Dsk2, which did not show
self-interaction. To evaluate the features required for correct targeting of substrates to
their designated proteolytic pathway, we constructed a set of artificial receptors. All
receptors harbor a ubiquitin-binding UBA domain for substrate recognition but differ in
their oligomeric state due to the presence of 1 or 2 oligomerization domains, creating
monomeric, dimeric and oligomeric molecules. These receptors were additionally modified
either with a proteasome-targeting UBL domain, an Atg8-interacting motif (AIM), or both. We
then analyzed the ability of the artificial receptors in mediating degradation of soluble
and aggregated proteins. As expected, monomeric receptors were able to support degradation
of soluble proteins by the proteasome and failed to facilitate degradation of aggregated
proteins. On the contrary, artificial oligomeric receptors could support autophagy-mediated
degradation of insoluble protein aggregates. Importantly, even for receptors harboring both
UBL (proteasome) and AIM (autophagy) targeting domains, the supported pathway was strictly
dependent on the oligomeric state of the receptor, demonstrating that receptor
oligomerization is the main determinant for proteolytic pathway choice.

Soluble ubiquitinated substrates are efficiently targeted for proteasomal degradation by
monomeric Dsk2 due to its higher affinity to ubiquitin compared with Cue5. However, when
ubiquitinated substrates aggregate, the oligomerization of Cue5 confers higher avidity
toward the substrates due to bundling of several ubiquitin-binding domains, which then
allows for autophagic degradation (Fig. 1).
These findings show that pathway choice is a late event dictated by the physical properties
of the receptors rather than by substrate recognition or modification. Importantly, the
pathway chosen depends on the solubility of the substrates themselves and ensures that
substrates are targeted to the appropriate machinery best suited for their degradation. The
shared upstream enzymes guarantee that ubiquitinated substrates, which fail to be degraded
by the proteasome and thus aggregate, can efficiently be degraded by autophagy without
further modification. Herein, ubiquitination of substrates serves as a common signal for 2
branches of cellular protein quality control. This ensures that potentially harmful
misfolded, soluble or aggregated proteins are eventually targeted for degradation.
Therefore, the mechanism we have uncovered provides an explanation as to how pathway choice
is achieved revealing that misfolded proteins are partitioned to their appropriate
degradative pathway based on solubility and, thus, selective receptor binding. Figure 1. Proteasome receptor Dsk2 and autophagy receptor Cue5 function in the clearance of
soluble and aggregated substrates. Monomeric Dsk2 with high affinity for ubiquitin
binds soluble ubiquitinated substrates and targets them for proteasomal degradation.
When ubiquitinated proteins accumulate in aggregates they are bound by Cue5 receptors
with low affinity for ubiquitin but high avidity due to receptor bundling and
subsequently targeted for degradation by autophagy.




Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

