
==== Front
BJA Educ
BJA Educ
bjaed
bjaed
Bja Education
2058-5349 2058-5357 Oxford University Press 

10.1093/bjaed/mkv052
mkv052
Articles
Severe community-acquired pneumonia
Morgan AJ MBChB MRCP FRCA FFICM1 Glossop AJ BMedSci BM BS MRCP FRCA DICM FFICM2*alastair.glossop@sth.nhs.uk 
1 
Specialist Registrar, Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care
Medicine, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, Herries Road, Sheffield S5 7AU,
UK

2 
Consultant in Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Department of Anaesthesia
and Intensive Care Medicine, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Herries Road, Sheffield S5 7AU,
UK
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +44 114 243 4343; Fax:
+44 114 2269342; E-mail: alastair.glossop@sth.nhs.uk
5 2016 
13 11 2015 
13 11 2015 
16 5 167 172
© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
the British Journal of Anaesthesia. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com2015This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic or until permissions are revoked in writing. Upon expiration of these permissions, PMC is granted a perpetual license to make this article available via PMC and Europe PMC, consistent with existing copyright protections.2C012C022C033C00
==== Body
Key points
Severe community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) is associated with a high mortality rate and
significant morbidity.

Of patients presenting to hospital with CAP, up to 10% will require critical care
admission.


Streptococcus pneumoniae continues as the most common infective
pathogen.


Staphylococcus aureus, Legionella, and gram-negative pathogens are
increasingly frequent causative pathogens.

Combined viral and bacterial infections may induce a more severe spectrum of
disease.

Severe community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) remains a frequent reason for admission to
hospital. It is the most common cause of septic shock requiring escalation to treatment
within an intensive care unit (ICU). Despite earlier recognition and recent advances in
supportive care, severe CAP is still associated with substantial morbidity and mortality,
more often seen in the elderly and those with considerable comorbidities.

Definition
CAP is defined as an acute infection of the pulmonary parenchyma, with symptom onset in the
community. Diagnosis can still be made within 48 h of hospital admission to meet criteria
for a community-acquired infection. Severe CAP is defined as a pneumonia requiring
supportive therapy within a critical care environment, that is associated with a higher
mortality rate. Severe CAP is frequently a multisystem disease and patients will often
present with multiple organ failure.

Epidemiology
The annual incidence of CAP is 1.6–10.6 per 1000 adult population in Europe.1 Between 1.2% and 10% of patients requiring
hospital admission to treat CAP will require ICU admission. The incidence of CAP increases
with age, and more than 90% of deaths related to severe pneumonia occur in patients over the
age of 70. The 28 day mortality rate in patients admitted to critical care is ∼17%, which
increases to 24.4% in those requiring invasive mechanical ventilation and 28.8% in those
that develop septic shock.1 Mortality
rates in younger patients are more influenced by the severity of the infection rather than
the presence of comorbidities. Even in the absence of comorbidities, severe CAP is
associated with excess mortality over subsequent years among survivors independent of
age.

Clinical features
CAP classically presents with a triad of infective signs (fever, leucocytosis), clinical
signs and symptoms (sputum production, tachypnoea, cough, pleuritic chest pain), and a new
or changed infiltrate as observed on radiography, for which there is no other explanation
except infection. However, these clinical signs and symptoms may not be universally seen or
present typically, particularly in the elderly or immunosuppressed. Diagnosis of CAP may be
clouded or complicated by underlying disease states that affect cardiorespiratory function
and by atypical or subacute presentations of infection.

Aetiology
Pneumonia develops when the defensive mechanisms within the lung become overwhelmed by a
pathogen which has been either inhaled or aspirated. This is more likely to occur with more
virulent pathogens and in patients with reduced host defences. Pathogens responsible for CAP
are varied and wide-ranging in their capacity to cause severe disease and extra-pulmonary
features (Table 1). The predominant pathogen
throughout all age groups remains Streptococcus pneumoniae. Legionella,
gram-negative bacilli, influenzae species, and Staphylococcus aureus are
becoming increasingly common causes of severe CAP requiring critical care admission in
comparison with CAP managed outside of critical care units. The frequency of other less
prevalent causes of CAP such as Chlamydophilia psittaci, Coxiella
burnetii, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae varies according to
epidemiological setting and in part on the diagnostic techniques that are used. No causative
organism is identified in up to 36% of cases of severe CAP. 

Table 1 Common pathogens implicated in severe CAP

Pathogen	Risk factors	Other features	

Streptococcus pnemoniae
	Alcoholism, HIV, i.v. drug abuse, hyposplenism	Pleural effusion, empyema	

Staphylococcus aureus
	Structural lung disease, i.v. drug abuse, influenza	Pneumothoraces, cavitation	

 CA-MRSA	Influenza	Necrotizing pneumonia, cavitation, neutropenia, skin
pustules	

Legionella species	Smoking, foreign travel	Neurological symptoms, raised creatinine kinase,
diarrhoea, transaminitis, relative bradycardia	
Gram-negative bacilli	Structural lung disease, recent antibiotics,
immunosuppression		

 Klebsiella pneumoniae
	Alcoholism, aspiration	Leucopenia, cavitation, empyema	

 Acinetobacter baumannii
	Alcoholism, aspiration		

 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
	Smoking, aspiration, HIV, structural lung disease		

Haemophilus influenzae
	Aspiration, COPD, smoking, HIV, i.v. drug abuse		

Moraxella catarrhalis
	COPD, smoking		
Respiratory viruses	Viral pandemics	Interstitial infiltrates or normal chest radiography	

Mycoplasma pneumoniae
	Cyclical pandemics	Headache, erythema multiforme, positive cold agglutinin
titres	

Chlamydophilia
		Interstitial infiltrates	
 Pneumoniae	COPD, smoking		
 Psittaci	Exposure to birds	Horder spots, transaminitis	
Anaerobes	Alcoholism, aspiration, i.v. drug abuse	Cavitation	

Mycobacterium tuberculosis
	Alcoholism, HIV, i.v. drug abuse		
Streptococcus pneumoniae

Streptococcus pneumoniae is a gram-positive α-haemolytic capsulated
organism. Infective risk is highest in the immunocompromised, elderly, and hyposplenic
patients, although overall frequency is reducing due to vaccination against this pathogen.
The clinical response after infection is related to pneumococcal virulence factors and the
genetic background of the patient. These indices are believed to alter the systemic
inflammatory response that is produced through pneumococcal infection. Although the overall
incidence of penicillin resistance is reducing in adults, antibiotic-resistant S.
pneumoniae may be seen in several patient groups including: severely ill patients
admitted to ICU, those at the extremes of age, patients that have recently received β-lactam
therapy, immunosuppressed patients, alcoholics, and patients with medical comorbidities.

Staphylococcus aureus

Staphylococcus aureus is a gram-positive aerobic coagulase-positive
diplococcus. Resistant strains such as methicillin-resistant St. aureus
(MRSA) are increasingly isolated in patients diagnosed with severe pneumonia, although
surveillance and eradication among at-risk patients has been successful in reducing
incidence. MRSA is treated with antibiotics such as vancomycin, linezolid, teicoplanin, and
rifampicin, although resistance to vancomycin is increasing. Community-acquired MRSA
(CA-MRSA) pneumonia may occur in previously healthy patients with no prior healthcare
exposure, often after influenza and can predispose to severe necrotizing pneumonia. The
incidence of CA-MRSA currently remains low but needs consideration in any younger patient
requiring physiological support for severe CAP.

The Panton–Valentine leukocidin (PVL) exotoxin (also referred to as
Toxigenic St. aureus) is strongly associated with virulent strains of
St. aureus. The PVL gene is carried by both MRSA and
methicillin-sensitive St. aureus (MSSA). Most PVL-SA strains are currently
MSSA, although there is an increasing association with CA-MRSA infection.
PVL-SA strains are usually associated with community-acquired infections,
producing a particularly severe form of haemorrhagic pneumonia that is often preceded by a
‘flu-like’ illness or necrotizing soft tissue infection (Table 2). Antimicrobials such as linezolid and clindamycin are thought to
be effective at suppressing toxin production. 

Table 2 Panton–Valentine leukocidin St. aureus pneumonia

Epidemiology	Clinical signs	Investigations	
Immunocompetent adults 
Community-acquired

MSSA strains more common 
Preceding ‘flu-like’ illness or necrotizing
skin infection 
Household history of PVL-SA skin sepsis 
Rapidly
progressing infection with a high mortality rate	Haemoptysis 
Profound hypotension 
Diarrhoea
and vomiting 
Tachycardia >140 beats min−1
Tachypnoea

Skin pustules	Chest radiography may show multi-lobar infiltrates,
effusions, or cavitation 
Markedly elevated C-reactive protein

Leucopenia 
Raised creatinine kinase 
Sputum Gram-film reveals
multiple gram-positive cocci 
Negative pneumococcal and legionella urinary
antigens	
Viral pneumonias
Viral infections are an increasingly common cause of severe CAP, accounting for up to
18–30% of cases. In recent years, we have seen the appearance of several virulent
respiratory strains that can cause a severe pneumonic disease, progressing to multi-organ
failure. These have included avian influenza A virus (H5N1), Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), influenza A virus (H1N1), and severe acute respiratory
syndrome. Viral pneumonias often have seasonal predilection and may be preceded by a viral
prodrome inclusive of fever, myalgia, non-productive cough, and headache. Pregnancy,
obesity, chronic disease, advanced age, and immunosuppression are risk factors for severe
illness and development of complications.

Nearly 20% of patients with CAP who have proven bacterial pneumonia are co-infected with a
virus. It is often unclear if the viral organism is the primary causative pathogen or has
predisposed the patient to secondary bacterial infection.2,3 Secondary
bacterial infection was reported in 4–24% of patients requiring critical care admission
during the H1N1 pandemic in 2009. Streptococcus pneumoniae, St.
aureus, and H. influenzae were the more common pathogens
isolated in these patients in addition to the virus. Mixed infections are thought to induce
a more severe inflammatory response in comparison with an individual pathogen, with variable
and overlapping signs and symptoms occurring. Although biomarkers such as C-reactive protein
(CRP) are more significantly raised in bacterial disease, they are insufficiently sensitive
or specific to be used as sole diagnostic indicators to aid differentiation between
bacterial and viral pneumonias. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays enable
concurrent recognition of multiple viruses and is now the gold standard diagnostic test.
Routine use of these assays has substantially progressed epidemiological knowledge of
respiratory viruses. PCR may be performed on nose and throat swabs and nasopharyngeal and
tracheal aspirates.

Healthcare-associated pneumonia
Infections with pathogens usually associated with hospital-acquired pneumonias (HAP) are an
emerging cause of CAP. Healthcare-associated pneumonia (HCAP)—in which pneumonia develops in
patients who have had recent contact with the healthcare system (Table 3)—is distinguished from CAP not just by the
environment in which infections develop but also by the causative pathogens involved. HCAP
is often caused by MRSA or multi-drug resistant (MDR) gram-negative pathogens such as
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneumoniae. HCAP
is associated with an increased severity of pneumonia and an excess mortality. This is due
to the effects of infection with MDR pathogens and also the age, relatively poor functional
status, and related treatment restrictions of those that tend to be affected. 

Table 3 Risk factors for healthcare-associated and MDR pneumonias

Healthcare-associated pneumonia	
 Chronic haemodialysis	
 Residence in a nursing home or extended care
facility	
 Contact with a family member with an MDR pathogen	
 Hospitalization for >2 days during the previous 90
days	
 I.V. antibiotics, chemotherapy, or wound care within
previous 30 days	
 Immunosuppressive disease or immunomodulating
therapy	
Multi-drug-resistant organisms	
 Previous antibiotic therapy within 3 months	
 Recent hospitalization	
 Alcoholism	
 Immunosuppression	
 Multiple medical comorbidities (particularly structural
lung disease)	
Investigations
General investigations are performed to aid diagnosis, identify the causative pathogen,
assess severity, identify complications, and to monitor response to treatment.
Investigations should be guided by the severity of pneumonia, previous antibiotic therapy,
comorbid illness, and epidemiological factors.

Radiology
Chest radiography (CXR) is the first-line imaging modality in severe CAP. Bacterial and
viral pathogens may both induce a wide range of CXR changes. Multi-lobar consolidation is
often seen in—although not restricted to—pneumonia involving Legionella,
Streptococci, and Staphylococci spp.
Staphylococcus pneumonia may present with cavitation and
pneumothoraces, whereas CA-MRSA may be associated with rapidly enlarging effusions. Chest
ultrasound is useful in confirming the presence of an effusion or empyema and may also
assist in identifying the presence of a pneumothorax or fluid overload. Computed
tomography (CT) of the thorax should be considered in severe infection or if the patient
fails to improve.

Microbiology
In at least 30% of cases, no causative pathogen is isolated. Routine microbiological
investigations in severe CAP should include microscopy and quantitative culture of sputum
samples, blood cultures, PCR, or direct immunofluorescence of respiratory tract samples,
urinary Legionella and pneumococcal antigen tests. Serum pneumococcal
antigen may also be detected with a reported sensitivity of 70–80%. Urine antigen tests
are more sensitive than blood cultures and will remain positive even after the patient has
been exposed to appropriate antibiotic therapy. It is, however, of note that
Legionella urine antigen testing will only detect serogroup 1 which is
responsible for 80–95% of CAP due to Legionella species and therefore may
provide falsely reassuring information. As a general rule, urine antigen
tests are most useful for ‘ruling in’ rather than ‘ruling out’ disease, as a negative test
result for a specific pathogen may only have a sensitivity of 40–86% in early infection
and thus false-negative results are not uncommon. If a patient is
Legionella urine antigen-positive, sputum samples should be tested, so
that the species of Legionella can undergo epidemiological matching.
Bronchoscopy, bronchoalevolar lavage, protected specimen brushing, and thoracocentesis may
aid identification of a causative agent when the diagnosis is not established or treatment
is failing.

An HIV test should be considered in all patients who are positive for
Streptococcus pneumoniae, in severe disease and when atypical features
are present. Serological assays may aid in the diagnosis of less common pathogens such as
C.burnetii and when PCR is not available. β-d-glucan
forms part of the cell wall of fungi including Aspergillus and an assay
is available as a means of diagnosing invasive fungal infection. Measurement of
procalcitonin (PCT) may help to differentiate between infectious and non-infectious causes
of respiratory failure, although must not be used in isolation. PCT can also be used to
monitor the efficacy of antibiotic treatment.

Risk stratification
Timely recognition of high-risk patients with severe illness is essential in ensuring that
appropriate antibiotic treatment is started promptly and physiological support continues
within an appropriate setting. Traditionally, physicians have used clinical evaluation to
define severity. Structured severity assessment tools have been developed to assist
decision-making regarding critical care admission. They should be used in combination with
clinical data, near-patient investigations, and biomarkers to assess severity. Risk
stratification tools that are used regularly include the Pneumonia Severity Index (PSI),
British Thoracic Society (BTS) CURB-65 score (Table 4), and Severe Community-Acquired Pneumonia Score (Table 5) jointly produced by the American Thoracic Society and Infectious
Disease Society of America (ATS/IDSA).2 Both PSI and CURB-65 have been more extensively validated to recognize
low-risk patients and are not as good at predicting need for critical care support. Other
risk stratification scores have been developed, including SMART-COP (Table 6), which was created to help identify patients
who may require invasive respiratory or vasopressor support.4 Both ATS/IDSA and SMART-COP perform well as risk
stratification tools in identifying patients who require ICU admission, but further
validation is required for both. 

Table 4 CURB-65 severity score

Prognostic features	
 Confusion—abbreviated Mental Test Score ≤8, or new
disorientation in person, place, or time	
 Blood urea >7 mmol litre−1	
 Respiratory rate ≥30 bpm	
 Blood pressure—diastolic ≤60 mm Hg or systolic <90 mm
Hg	
 Age ≥65 yr	
Risk stratification (each prognostic feature present
scores 1 point)	
 0–1: Low risk (<3% mortality risk)	
 2: Intermediate risk (3–15% mortality risk)	
 3–5: High risk (>15% mortality risk)	
Table 5 ATS/IDSA severe CAP score. A need for NIV can substitute for a respiratory rate ≥30 bpm
or a PaO2/FIO2 ratio ≤250. The presence of one major, or three or more
of nine minor criteria should warrant consideration for critical care admission

Minor criteria	
 Respiratory rate ≥30 bpm	
 PaO2/FIO2 ratio ≤250	
 Multilobar infiltrates	
 Confusion/disorientation	
 Urea ≥7.14 mmol litre−1 (≥20 mg
dl−1)	
 Leukopenia (WBC count <4×109 cells
litre−1)	
 Thrombocytopenia (count <100×109 platelets
litre−1)	
 Hypothermia (core temperature <36°C)	
 Hypotension (SAP <90 mm Hg; requiring aggressive fluid
resuscitation)	
Major criteria	
 Invasive mechanical ventilation	
 Septic shock with the need for vasopressors	
Table 6 SMART-COP score of 3 or more points identifies 92% of those who will require intensive
respiratory support

Variable	Points	
Systolic arterial pressure <90 mm Hg	2	
Multi-lobar involvement on chest radiography	1	
Albumin level <35 g litre−1	1	
Respiratory rate	1	
 50 yr and younger: ≥25 bpm		
 Older than 50 yr: ≥30 bpm		
Tachycardia (≥125 beats min−1)	1	
New onset confusion	1	
Oxygen level	2	
 50 yr and younger: PaO2<70 mm Hg, oxygen saturation ≤93%, or
PaO2/FIO2 ratio <333		
 Older than 50 yr: PaO2<60 mm Hg, oxygen saturation ≤90%, or
PaO2/FIO2 ratio <250		
Arterial pH<7.35	2	
In an aim to improve simplicity through the use of a single stratification tool, NICE have
recommended that CURB-65 be used in combination with clinical judgement and arterial blood
gas analysis to guide need for critical care admission.5 An approach using early warning scores, a risk
stratification tool, and a resuscitation bundle could potentially reduce ICU admissions and
mortality.6,7

Management
Diagnosis and aggressive interventions at a very early stage of disease presentation may
prevent progression on to multi-organ involvement. Early appropriate parenteral antibiotic
administration has been demonstrated to improve patient outcomes, particularly in patients
at a higher risk of death.8 The
majority of patients that die with severe CAP tend to do so from complications of
multi-organ failure rather than from primary respiratory failure alone and often require
renal replacement therapy, invasive circulatory monitoring, and support. Adherence to
protocols such as those produced by the BTS or IDSA/ATS is associated with a reduction in
overall mortality.2,9

Respiratory
Patients with respiratory failure despite high-flow oxygen therapy can be managed with
non-invasive ventilation (NIV) or invasive ventilation.10 NIV is of particular benefit in those patients who are
immunosuppressed, have underlying obstructive lung disease or Pneumocystis
jiroveci infection. A lower PaO2/FIO2 ratio and bilateral alveolar infiltrates suggesting acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) are independent predictors of NIV failure and in such
patient groups, progression to invasive mechanical ventilation should be considered at an
early stage. Early identification of a failed NIV trial is important as several trials
have demonstrated poorer outcomes in patients requiring intubation after a prolonged
unsuccessful NIV trial. Most patients with severe CAP will require intubation and
mechanical ventilation, particularly in the presence of persistent hypoxaemia, severe
acidosis, depressed consciousness, or progressive hypercapnia. These patients should be
managed with a lung-protective ventilation strategy using low tidal volumes (6 ml
kg−1 predicted body weight) and plateau airway pressures <30 cm
H2O. Although high PEEP levels may improve oxygenation, there is no mortality
difference in comparison with ventilation using low PEEP except in ARDS with a
PaO2/FIO2 ratio <200 mm Hg.11

Advanced respiratory rescue techniques including prone ventilation, extra-corporeal
carbon dioxide removal (ECCO2R), and extra-corporeal membranous oxygenation
(ECMO) should be considered in cases of refractory hypoxaemia or symptomatic
hypercarbia.12

Cardiovascular
Hypotension should be managed according to the Surviving Sepsis
Guidelines of 2012.13
Fluid resuscitation, vasopressor, and inotropic support is guided by clinical assessment
in combination with dynamic flow monitoring, including pulse contour analysis devices
(LiDCO™, PiCCO™, Vigileo™), transoesophageal Doppler, and transthoracic
echocardiography.

Supportive treatment
Standard care for all patients should include adherence to ventilator-acquired pneumonia
and catheter-related bloodstream infection bundles, nutritional support, deep venous
thrombosis, and gastric ulcer prophylaxis and chest physiotherapy. Steroids are not
routinely recommended as adjunctive therapy in hypoxaemic respiratory failure except in
P. jiroveci pneumonia. There is currently insufficient evidence to
support the use of either G-CSF or statins.

Antimicrobials
Antibiotic therapy is usually begun on an empirical basis based on severity of illness
(often guided by severity scoring such as CURB-65), the BTS (Fig. 1) and NICE guidelines, patient risk factors, and local epidemiology
of resistant organisms.5,9 Initial treatment is broad spectrum,
aiming to provide cover for S. pneumoniae, St. aureus,
Legionella, and gram-negative bacteria. Coverage for atypical bacteria
and MDR pathogens should be considered if risk factors for these pathogens are present
(Table 2). Atypical and MDR pathogens are more
common in patients requiring ICU care. Patients with severe CAP treated with combination
antibiotic therapy including a macrolide have an improved survival rate compared with
monotherapy. Empirical macrolide monotherapy should be avoided due to emerging pneumococcal
resistance. Once a pathogen is identified, antibiotic coverage should be narrowed unless
there are concerns about dual pathogen infection. This approach is associated with fewer
complications, reduced risk of Clostridium difficile infection, and
minimizes development of antibiotic resistance. In severe disease, septic shock or in a
non-responding patient, continuous infusions of time-dependent antibiotics such as β-lactams
and carbapenems may improve outcome. There is however an elevated risk of both line-related
infections and thrombophlebitis, both of which are more prevalent in immunosuppressed
patients.14

Fig 1 Anti-microbial recommendations, amended from BTS Guidelines 2009.9 *Associated with hospital-acquired
infections such as Clostridium difficile;≠potential small
risk of cardiac electrophysiological abnormalities with quinolone–macrolide
combinations.

In patients admitted to ICU, the ideal duration of antibiotic therapy remains uncertain.
The BTS and NICE guidelines suggest 7–10 days antibiotic treatment initially. If infection
with St. aureus or a gram-negative bacilli is suspected or confirmed,
antibiotic therapy should be continued for 14–21 days.9 Cavitating pneumonias and lung abscesses are usually
treated for several weeks. Short-course antimicrobial therapy has the potential to improve
efficacy and minimize the emergence of resistant organisms. The use of biomarkers such as
highly sensitive PCT or CRP may help to reduce the duration of antibiotic treatment without
an increase in either mortality or treatment failure.

Treatment for most viral pneumonias is primarily supportive, apart from in patients with
severe influenza and patients at high risk of complications. Depending on current local
influenza rates, anti-viral therapy may be started empirically while awaiting viral PCR
results. Treatment with oseltamivir or zanamivir is recommended for Influenza A infection,
and if started within 48 h of symptom onset may reduce the duration of symptoms, severity of
disease, and risk of complications. Aerosolized ribavirin may be of benefit in treating
respiratory syncytial virus, human metapneumovirus, and parainfluenza infections in
immunocompromised patients.

Complications
Patients with severe CAP often have prolonged critical care admissions and are at risk of
developing severe septic shock, renal and hepatic failure, coagulopathy, and central nervous
system problems including vascular events, encephalopathy, meningitis, and convulsions.
Pulmonary-related complications are frequent and depend on the infecting pathogen. 


Parapneumonic effusions and empyemas are seen in up to 60% of patients
with severe pneumonia. Although many pleural effusions will resolve with appropriate
antimicrobial therapy, ultrasound-guided fluid aspiration and analysis should be
performed if an effusion is present. Diagnostic aspiration yielding pus, pleural fluid
with a pH <7.2, or a positive gram stain or culture are all indications for a tube
thoracostomy and drainage of the effusion. Thoracoscopic decortication and drainage
should be considered in the presence of an organized empyema or treatment failure.


ARDS. Treatment is primarily supportive using a lung-protective
ventilatory strategy. Prone ventilation may be used in severe ARDS with a
PaO2/FIO2 ratio <150 mm Hg and FIO2 of at least 0.6.12 Early use of neuromuscular blockers in patients with
severe ARDS improves 90 day survival and ventilator-free days.15


Lung cavitation and abscess formation are associated with infection
from St. aureus, gram-negative bacilli, Aspergillus,
Mycobacterium, and Nocardia
species. Failure to respond to antibiotic therapy may raise the
possibility of a non-infectious underlying cause such as vasculitis, bronchial
obstruction, or infection with a resistant bacteria, mycobacteria, or fungi.

Bacterial and influenza pneumonias are associated with cardiac-related complications
including myocardial infarction, arrhythmias, and decompensated cardiac failure.
Pulmonary inflammation is thought to trigger cytokine release that up-regulate the
inflammation of atherosclerotic plaques, decreasing plaque stability and increasing the
risk of rupture. Cardiac events are associated with a substantial increase in
mortality.

Failure to respond to treatment
Patients who do not demonstrate improvement within 72 h of commencing antibiotics and
supportive care should be considered non-responders. If a patient requires critical care
admission, the risk of failure to respond to treatment may be as high as 40% with a
mortality that is increased several-fold. Independent risk factors for failure to respond
include multi-lobar infection, presence of cavitation or pleural effusions, liver disease,
and leucopenia. The efficacy of empirical antimicrobials may be reduced through emerging
resistant pathogens such as CA-MRSA, Extended Spectrum β-lactamase-producing organisms, and
Carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae. Failure to respond to treatment should result in
re-evaluation of initial microbiological results, supplementary diagnostic testing, and
either an escalation or change in antibiotic therapy. Alternative diagnoses such as an
eosinophilic or organizing pneumonia need also be considered in patients who are slow or
fail to respond to conventional treatment. The possibility of undiagnosed immunosuppression
should be investigated and further history explored.

Summary
Despite the advancements in supportive care, severe CAP remains a common reason for
critical care admission that is associated with a high mortality. Streptococcus
pneumoniae remains the most common pathogen. However, disease due to
gram-negative organisms is more frequent in patients requiring critical care admission and
are increasingly MDR, despite antibiotic stewardship and increasing surveillance. Further
research is needed to elucidate the extent to which viruses are involved in the pathogenesis
of severe CAP. Viral and bacterial infections may co-exist, but it is unclear to what extent
these organisms are causing the disease or have predisposed the patient to secondary
infection. Future developments within this field are likely to concentrate on diagnostics
and the ability to identify a causative pathogen within a shorter timeframe.

Declaration of interest
None declared.

MCQs
The associated MCQs (to support CME/CPD activity) can be accessed at https://access.oxfordjournals.org by subscribers to BJA
Education.
==== Refs
References
1 
Walden AP , Clarke GM , McKechnie S et
al 
Patients with community acquired pneumonia
admitted to European Intensive Care Units: an epidemiological survey of the GenOSept
cohort
. Crit Care 2014 ;
18 : R58 24690444 
2 
Mandell LA , Wunderink RG ,
Anzueto A et
al 
Infectious Diseases Society of
America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the management of
community-acquired pneumonia
. Clin Infect
Dis 2007 ; 44 (Suppl. 2) :
S27 17278083 
3 
Arnold FW , Summersgill JT ,
Lajoie AS et
al 
A worldwide perspective of atypical pathogens
in community-acquired pneumonia
. Am J Crit Care
Med 2007 ; 175 :
1086 –93

4 
Charles PG , Wolfe R , Whitby M et
al 
SMART-COP: a tool for predicting the need for
intensive respiratory or vasopressor support in community-acquired
pneumonia
. Clin Infect
Dis 2008 ; 47 :
375 –84
18558884 
5 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence .
Diagnosis and management of community- and hospital-acquired pneumonia in
adults
. Clinical guideline 191. December
2014 
6 
Espana PP , Capelastegui A ,
Gorordo I et
al 
Development and validation of a clinical
prediction rule for severe community-acquired pneumonia
.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006 ;
174 : 1249 –56
16973986 
7 
Barochia AV , Cui X , Vitberg D et
al 
Bundled care for septic shock: an analysis of
clinical trials
. Crit Care
Med 2010 ; 38 :
668 –78
20029343 
8 
Frei CR , Attridge RT ,
Mortensen EM et
al 
Guideline-concordant antibiotic use and
survival among patients with community-acquired pneumonia admitted to the intensive care
unit
. Clin Ther 2010 ;
32 : 293 –9
20206787 
9 
Lim WS , Baudouin SV ,
George RC et
al 
Guidelines for the management of community
acquired pneumonia in adults: update 2009
.
Thorax 2009 ;
64 (Suppl. III) :
iii1 –iii55
19783532 
10 
Carrillo A , Gonzalez-Diaz G ,
Ferrer M et
al 
Non-invasive ventilation in
community-acquired pneumonia and severe acute respiratory failure
.
Intensive Care Med 2012 ;
38 : 458 –66
22318634 
11 
Briel M , Meade M , Mercat A et
al 
Higher vs lower positive end-expiratory
pressure in patients with acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress
syndrome
. J Am Med
Assoc 2010 ; 303 :
865 –73

12 
Guerin C , Reignier J , Richard JC et
al 
Prone positioning in severe acute respiratory
distress syndrome
. N Engl J
Med 2013 ; 368 :
2159 –68
23688302 
13 
Dellinger RP , Levy MM , Rhodes A et
al 
Surviving sepsis campaign: international
guidelines for the management of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2012
.
Crit Care Med 2013 ;
2013 : 580 –637

14 
Kasiakou SK , Sermaides GJ ,
Michalopoulos A ,
Soteriades ED ,
Falagas ME  
Continuous versus intermittent intravenous administration of antibiotics:
a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
. Lancet
Infect Dis 2005 ; 5 :
581 –9
16122681 
15 
Papazian L , Forel JM , Gacouin A et
al 
ACURASYS Study Investigators .
Neuromuscular blockers in early acute respiratory distress
syndrome
. N Engl J
Med 2010 ; 363 :
1107 –16
20843245

