
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican Chemical Society 10.1021/nn401487mArticleSelf-Assembly of Heterogeneously Charged Particles
under Confinement Bianchi Emanuela †*Likos Christos N. ‡Kahl Gerhard †† Institut für Theoretische
Physik and Center for Computational Materials Science (CMS), Technische Universität Wien, Wiedner Hauptstrasse
8-10, A-1040 Vienna, Austria,‡ Faculty of Physics, University of Vienna, Boltzmanngasse 5, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria* Address correspondence to emanuela.bianchi@tuwien.ac.at.29 04 2013 28 05 2013 7 5 4657 4667 26 03 2013 29 04 2013 Copyright © 2013 American Chemical Society2013American Chemical SocietyTerms of Use

Self-assembly—the spontaneous organization of microscopic
units into well-defined mesoscopic structures—is a fundamental
mechanism for a broad variety of nanotechnology applications in material
science. The central role played by the anisotropy resulting from
asymmetric shapes of the units and/or well-defined bonding sites on
the particle surface has been widely investigated, highlighting the
importance of properly designing the constituent entities in order
to control the resulting mesoscopic structures. Anisotropy driven
self-assembly can also result from the multipolar interactions characterizing
many naturally occurring systems, such as proteins and viral capsids,
as well as experimentally synthesized colloidal particles. Heterogeneously
charged particles represent a class of multipolar units that are characterized
by a competitive interplay between anisotropic attractive and repulsive
interactions, due to the repulsion/attraction between charged-like/oppositely
charged regions on the particle surface. In the present work, axially
symmetric quadrupolar colloids are considered in a confined planar
geometry; the role of both the overall particle charge and the patch
extension as well as the effect of the substrate charge are studied
in thermodynamic conditions such that the formation of extended structures
is favored. A general tendency to form quasi-two-dimensional aggregates
where particles align their symmetry axes within the plane is observed;
among these planar self-assembled scenarios, a clear distinction between
the formation of microcrystalline gels—branched networks consisting
of purely crystalline domains—as opposed to disordered aggregates
can be observed based on the specific features of the particle–particle
interaction. Additionally, the possible competition of interparticle
and particle–substrate interactions affects the size and the
internal structure of the aggregates and can possibly inhibit the
aggregation process.

inverse patchy colloidsheterogeneously charged particlesself-assemblymicrocystalline gelscharged
substratesquasi-two-dimensional confinementdocument-id-old-9nn401487mdocument-id-new-14nn-2013-01487mccc-price
==== Body
A broad range of self-organizing systems such as viruses, proteins,
and clays are known to give rise to a wealth of structures by virtue
of the asymmetry in their shapes and/or in their interaction surface
patterns. Viruses and virus-like nanoparticles1,2 used
for the production of photonic crystals with a broad range of optical
applications,3 S-layer proteins that self-organize
into highly symmetric planar lattices with well-defined pores,4 and industrial synthetic clays forming stable
gel phases at extremely low densities5 are
just few of the most recent examples of anisotropy driven self-assembly.
In the realm of synthesized nano- and microsized colloids, new classes
of mesoscopic particles with specific, nonspherical shapes6 and colloidal particles with chemically or physically
patterned surfaces, known as “patchy particles”,7−9 are regarded as novel building blocks for a new generation of smart
materials with specific symmetries and physical properties.10−14

The previous examples provide evidence that anisotropic particle–particle
interactions can originate from nonspherical shapes and/or from surface
moieties. Over the past decade, investigations have focused on the
possibilities offered to the self-assembly by asymmetric shapes, such
as ellipsoids, discs, and polyhedra,11,12,15 and/or by the presence of a small number of attractive
regions, termed patches, on the surface of otherwise repulsive colloids;7−9 in the latter case, the orientational and possibly selective bonding
mechanism mediated by the patches guarantees a fine control over the
features of the equilibrium, ordered as well as disordered, self-assembled
structures.13,16

An additional and ubiquitous source of anisotropy at the level
of particle–particle interactions is charge heterogeneity.
When dispersed in a microscopic medium, colloids can acquire charge
due to dissociation of surface groups and/or preferential adsorption
of charged species; the resulting, possibly inhomogeneous, surface
charge distribution leads to strong multipolar interactions, which
can significantly affect the self-organization of particles into specific
structures.5 Moreover, also naturally occurring
systems such as proteins and virus capsids are known to have heterogeneously
charged surfaces which give rise to specific collective behaviors.1,4,17,18

Heterogeneously charged particles can be generally regarded as
charged patchy colloids. To emphasize that these systems significantly
differ from conventional patchy colloids, we have termed them inverse patchy colloids (IPC);19 “inverse” refers to the fact that, while conventional
patchy systems are typically characterized by the presence of attractive
regions on the surface of otherwise repulsive particles,7,8 inverse patchy colloids carry extended patches that repel each other
and attract those parts of the colloid that are free of patches. Due
to the repulsion between like-charge regions and the attraction between
oppositely charged regions, the effective interaction between heterogeneously
charged units can be both attractive and repulsive, depending on the
relative orientation of the particles.

For IPC systems, the Debye–Hückel theory, traditionally
used to describe the electrostatic interactions between homogeneously
charged colloids in a dielectric medium,20 can be generalized to properly account for the effects of charge
heterogeneity. Recently, we have put forward such a general approach
that bridges the gap between a microscopic and a mesoscopic, coarse-grained
description of IPCs.19 In particular, we
have designed a coarse-grained model for spherical colloids with an
axially symmetric surface charge distribution due to the presence
of two polar patches of the same charge, Zp, and an equatorial region of opposite charge, Zc. Our coarse-grained model reproduces the three-region
particle surface and has three independent sets of parameters: the
interaction range and strengths, which reflect the screening conditions
and the ratio Zp/Zc, respectively, and the patch surface coverage.19 For the present contribution, we considered
IPCs under moderate screening conditions; that is, we fixed the particle–particle
interaction range, δ, to 40% of the particle radius, σ,
while we varied as free parameters (i) the patch surface extension
(specified by the opening angle γ) and (ii) the overall particle
charge, which was allowed both to vanish (neutral case) or differ
from zero (overall charged cases). Details of how these parameters
enter the modeling are summarized in the Model and
Methods section (see also panels a and b of Figure 1). The overall particle charge
affects the ratio of the directional attractive and repulsive contributions
to the effective interactions; the same effect has also been reported
in a recently proposed and related model.21

Figure 1 (a,b) Representation of the coarse-grained particle–particle
interaction for both overall neutral and overall charged IPCs with
patch extension γ = 45°. (a) Three characteristic particle–particle
orientations for two IPCs at contact (r = 2σ),
namely, the polar–polar (PP), the equatorial–equatorial
(EE), and the equatorial–polar (EP) configurations. The coarse-grained
IPC is composed by a gray central sphere, corresponding to the hard
colloid; the two yellow caps represent the interaction spheres of
the polar patches; the light gray halo around the central sphere features
the interaction range of the bare colloid.19 In each particle–particle configuration, the continuous black
arrows indicate the translation direction of one IPC with respect
to the other, while the dashed circles with one central dot represent
the rotation of one IPC around an axis perpendicular to the plane.
In the two top/bottom graphs of panel (b), the radial/angular dependence
of the particle–particle interaction between two IPCs in the
three selected configurations is shown; the red, blue, and green continuous/dashed
lines correspond to different initial configurations: colloids at
contact with PP, EE, and EP reciprocal orientation, respectively.
(c,d) Representation of the coarse-grained particle–wall interaction
between the selected IPC types and a planar wall with surface charge
of the same sign as the patches, i.e., ZwZp > 0; the wall is reproduced
in dark yellow on the left side with respect to the IPC. (c) Two characteristic
particle–wall orientations for an IPC at distance r = σ from the wall, namely, the polar–wall (PW) and
the equatorial–wall (EW) configurations. Continuous arrows
and dashed circles represent, respectively, the translational and
rotational moves of the IPC with respect to the wall. In the two top/bottom
graphs of panel (d), the radial/angular dependence of the particle–wall
interaction is shown; the magenta and the turquoise continuous/dashed
lines correspond to different initial configurations: colloid at contact
with the wall in the PW and EW orientation, respectively. Table 1 reports the typical
particle–particle and particle–wall minimum/maximum
contact energies for each IPC type and each selected wall charge.

We investigated the self-organization scenarios of the selected
IPC systems in a restricted geometry, confining the particles between
two parallel, possibly charged, horizontal walls. To this purpose,
the particle–wall interactions were modeled consistently with
the particle–particle interactions; the details of the modeling
are described in the Model and Methods section
(see also panels c and d of Figure 1). We considered both tight confinement conditions,
such that the wall separation prevents particles from sitting on top
of each other, and loose confinement conditions, which allow two particles
to possibly assemble along the vertical direction. Our decision to
study the self-assembly in a confined geometry was motivated by the
fact that such quasi-two-dimensional setups are amenable to an experimental
realization22 or can be assimilated to
situations in which particles sediment onto a horizontal substrate
with a chemically controlled surface charge.

The main focus of our investigation lies on exploring the conditions
under which ordered versus disordered structures
are favored. Controlling crystal versus gel formation
is indeed an important issue in soft matter systems, where the interplay
between, for example, spherical/localized or specific/nonspecific
interactions can favor the formation of either disordered aggregates
or crystalline domains.23,24 For the investigated
IPC systems, a sharp distinction between two different scenarios occurs:
the formation of disordered gel-like structures, characterized by
a large fraction of local, ring-like arrangements, and the self-assembly
of microcrystalline domains with triangular particle coordinations,
which themselves represent the branches of a disordered network. We
refer to this latter scenario as microcrystalline gel. The parameter
space was spanned by (i) the patch extension, (ii) the charge of the
bottom wall, and (iii) the overall charge of the particle. In systems
confined between neutral walls, the patch extension uniquely determines
the internal structure of the aggregates, whereas the overall charge
of the particles plays a minor role. In the cases of charged substrate,
the extent of the domains (from extended aggregates to possibly monomers)
was shown to be controlled by the wall charge, Zw, for both the self-assembly scenarios identified in our investigation.

From the point of view of the multipole expansion of localized
charge distributions, the IPCs considered in this work represent axially
symmetric quadrupoles. While the self-assembly of dipolar colloids
has been widely investigated,25−28 the collective behavior of multipolar particles has
received less attention so far,25,29 despite the fact that
heterogeneously charged, multipolar particles are abundant in nature
as well as in many colloidal systems of new generation.8 Contrary to many recent investigations which
focused on the aggregation behavior of dipolar as well as multipolar
particles in quasi-two-dimensional systems,26,27,29 no field-induced self-assembly has been
considered here for IPCs.

Results and Discussion
Our discussion first focuses on a qualitative, visual analysis
of the systems, attempting to understand the emerging morphologies
of the self-assembled structures on energetic arguments; subsequently,
we provide a more quantitative analysis of the characteristic features
of the aggregates observed in the investigated systems.

A first indication about the self-assembly of IPCs into extended
structures can be inferred by looking at typical simulation snapshots. Figure 2 provides an overview
of all of the investigated systems confined between two planar walls
separated by a distance such that the particles are prevented from
sitting on top of each other; in the central column of the figure,
systems confined between two neutral walls are depicted, while the
left/right columns reproduce the corresponding cases in the presence
of a charged bottom wall; the color code of the particles highlights
the number of bonded interactions per IPC, which is defined as the
number of particle–particle interactions with a negative pair
energy.

Figure 2 Top views of typical simulation snapshots of all the investigated
IPC-types, labeled (from the top to the bottom) as 30n, 30c, 45n,
and 45c, specifying both the patch size as well as the overall particle
charge, under tight confinement between two parallel walls; while
the top wall is always neutral, the bottom wall can be either neutral
(panels in the central column) as well as charged (panels in the left
and right columns). Colors represent the number of bonded interactions
per particle; the color code is displayed on the right-hand side of
the figure.

Ordered versus Disordered Aggregates between
Neutral Walls
For systems confined between neutral walls,
the size and the internal structure of the aggregates formed by the
particles is controlled exclusively by the features of the pair potential,
namely, the patch extension and the overall particle charge. The patch
size is found to have a substantial influence on the morphology of
the aggregates: while IPCs with smaller patches assemble into a locally
and globally disordered gel structure, IPCs with bigger patches form
a particle network whose branches are crystalline domains. Despite
the absence of long-range order, the microcrystalline gel network
shows a local triangular order due to the crystalline domains that
constitute the gel branches. It is worth noting that the self-assembled
network is either microcrystalline or disordered; that is, locally
disordered domains and triangular crystalline domains do not occur
in the same system. In contrast to conventional patchy systems, in
IPC systems, larger patches favor the emergence of local spatial order.
Surprisingly, the effect of the overall particle charge on the self-assembly
process is found to be negligible: the visual analysis of overall
charged particle systems indicates no significant differences, neither
in the size nor in the morphology of the aggregates in comparison
to the overall neutral particle systems. In conclusion, for systems
confined between neutral walls, the tendency to self-assemble either
into disordered or into ordered domains is mainly controlled by the
size of the patch, while the overall charge of the particles and the
ensuing different interplay between attractive and repulsive interactions
play a minor role.

A quantitative analysis of the local surroundings
of the particles is visualized by the color code of the snapshots
displayed in Figure 2. Most of the particles in the disordered gel network form four bonds,
corresponding to a bonding energy upb ≈
−1.6 (in our reduced units), irrespective of the overall particle
charge; in contrast, within the triangular domains of the microcystalline
structure, the average number of bonds per particle is six, corresponding
to a bonding energy upb ≈ −2.0
(in our reduced units), for both the overall neutral and charged particle
cases. Figure 3 clarifies
in magnified views the local spatial structure of the typical aggregate
morphologies: while systems with relatively big patches self-assemble
into compact domains with a triangular particle arrangement, IPCs
with smaller patches aggregate into a open gel network, where particles
possibly arrange into ring-like structures, preferentially formed
by five or six particles.

Figure 3 Magnified views of simulation snapshots of typical aggregates of
overall neutral IPCs, labeled as 30n (left panel) and 45n (right panel),
under tight confinement between two neutral walls. The local spatial
order is highlighted by red bars indicating the orientation of the
corresponding particle: IPCs with relatively small patches aggregate
into disordered structures, possibly forming local ring-like arrangement
of preferentially five or six particles; IPCs with relatively big
patches self-assemble into ordered triangular domains.

Effect of a Charged Plane on the Aggregation Process
As discussed above, for systems confined between two neutral walls,
the size and the morphology of the aggregates depend only on the specific
particle–particle interactions; consequently, the spatial orientation
of particles forming dimers, trimers, and more extended aggregates
is controlled by the features of the pair potential, while the orientation
of isolated particles is homogeneous. When only monomers are considered,
the presence of a charged plane at the bottom of the sample has intuitive
effects: if the charges of the bottom wall and the patches have opposite
sign (i.e., ZwZp < 0), the energetically preferred orientation
of the particles is perpendicular to the xy plane
(polar orientation, labeled PW in panel c of Figure 1); if the charges of the bottom wall and
the patches have the same sign (i.e., ZwZp > 0), isolated particles
prefer to orient themselves parallel to the xy plane
(equatorial orientation, labeled EW in panel c of Figure 1). In contrast, when particles
in clusters are considered, their orientation in space is the result
of the competition between the particle–particle and particle–wall
interactions; that is, the morphology of the aggregates depends on
the balance between the average bonding energy of a particle with
its neighbors, upb, and the bonding energy
of a particle with its charged substrate, uwb. For the chosen values of the wall charge, different scenarios take
place, as described in what follows.

When ZwZp < 0, different behaviors
were observed according to the overall charge of the particles: irrespective
of their patch size, overall neutral particles do not self-assemble
into extended structures, while overall charged particles form a disordered
gel network similar to the corresponding one in the presence of a
neutral bottom wall. In the cases of overall neutral particles, the
energy gain in a particle orientation perpendicular to the xy plane is significantly bigger than the interparticle
bonding energy (i.e., upb/uwb ≪ 1). Particles therefore
tend to approach each other with a relative orientation such that
their equators face each other (EE configuration, reproduced in panel
a of Figure 1) and
consequently the strong particle–particle repulsion prevents
bond formation. The aggregation process is thus completely inhibited,
that is, the systems consist of monomers, as shown in Figure 2. In the overall charged cases,
the energy gain of a particle–wall bond is negligible compared
to the energy gain due to interparticle bonds (i.e., upb/uwb ≫ 1). As a consequence, the aggregation process is essentially
unaffected by the presence of the charged wall, as qualitatively shown
in Figure 2.

When ZwZp > 0, particles prefer to orient themselves parallel to the xy plane and hence planar aggregates, similar to the ones
self-assembling between neutral walls, are expected to be favored.
Nonetheless, irrespective of the essential features of the particle–particle
interactions, the aggregation into large domains turned out to be
less efficient compared to the formation of extended structures in
the presence of neutral walls: as shown in Figure 2, the aggregates are significantly smaller
and more elongated (i.e., thinner). This striking
difference is the result of a newly emerging competition: on one side,
the interparticle bond formation favors a slightly nonplanar orientation
of the particles, on the other side, the minimization of particle–wall
interaction occurs when particles are parallel to the xy plane. Since in these systems upb/uwb ≈ 1, IPCs equally bond to their neighbors
as well as to the bottom substrate; thus local particle rearrangements
to optimize interparticle bonding may not occur efficiently. It is
also worth noting that, while for IPCs with relatively small patches
the internal structure of the aggregates is not significantly affected
by the presence of the charged substrate, for IPCs with relatively
big patches, the substrate influences the local spatial order of the
self-assembled structures. In these latter cases, the presence of
both triangular and locally disordered domains can be observed within
the branches of the same gel network.

Size of the Aggregates
To quantify the size and the
morphology of the emerging self-assembled structures, we have evaluated
the pair correlation functions (plotted in panels a and b of Figure 4) that provide very
clear information about the features of the observed aggregates. While
overall neutral particles close to a charged bottom wall with ZwZp < 0 are characterized
by a fluid-like g(r) which rapidly
approaches to the ideal gas limit, in all other systems, the pair
correlation functions are characterized by sharp peaks that signal
the presence of strong correlations. The fast and often abrupt decay
of these peaks suggests that the local correlations have a well-defined
and rather short range, beyond which the system becomes homogeneous;
the correlation range can thus be considered as a measure of the average
size of the aggregates.30 In order to extract
this range from the g(r), we defined
a threshold value, h, and we calculated the maximum
interparticle distance, rhmax, at which the oscillations
of |g(r) −1| reach that chosen
value,31 |g(rhmax) – 1| ≡ h.

Figure 4 Top: radial distribution functions g(r) for IPC systems with relatively small (a) and big (b) patches in
different confinement conditions (i.e., different
values of ZwZp). Results obtained for different choices of the overall particle
charge are shown with different line colors (as labeled). Bottom:
estimate of the aggregate size, rhmax (as defined
in the text), as a function of the surface charge of the bottom wall
(c) for the four investigated combinations of patch size and overall
particle charge (as labeled).

In panel c of Figure 4, rhmax as a function of the wall charge is
plotted for h = 0.15. A general trend can be observed
for all of the cases in which aggregation occurs (i.e., rhmax > 2σ): under similar confinement
conditions (i.e., for a given sign of ZwZp), bigger patches favor
larger domains. Moreover, at fixed ZwZp values, the domain size of the aggregates
formed by IPCs with relatively small patches is insensitive to the
overall charge of the particles; in contrast for IPCs with bigger
patches, overall charged particles self-assemble into domains that
are often larger than those formed by their overall neutral counterparts.
Additionally, for each IPC system, rhmax assumes its maximum value when ZwZp = 0. The maximum value of rhmax also occurs in overall charged IPC systems when ZwZp < 0, while
the corresponding overall neutral cases under the same confinement
conditions are characterized by rhmax ≈ 2σ
(i.e., gas of monomers). Finally, when ZwZp > 0, aggregates are smaller
when compared to the corresponding ones formed between neutral walls;
as pointed out before, in these cases, the observed reduced efficiency
of the self-assembly process is due to the frustration of the preferred
bond orientations.

Spatial and Orientational Order of the Aggregates
The
analysis of the pair correlation functions also provides important
information about the internal structure of the aggregates. Indeed,
on the basis of the features of the g(r), it is possible to distinguish between triangular and less ordered
domains. When ZwZp = 0, IPCs with relatively big patches form triangular crystalline
domains, independently of the overall particle charge. In this case,
the peaks in the g(r) are sharply
centered at r/2σ = 1, √3, 1 + √3,
2,..., and the g(r) essentially
vanishes between the first peaks. In contrast, under the same confinement
conditions, IPCs with relatively smaller patches form disordered aggregates:
the peaks in the g(r) are smoother,
their positions do not support a triangular order, and the minima
of the g(r) between the first peaks
never approach to zero. The situation is more diversified for all
of the cases in which, when ZwZp ≠ 0, the formation of extended aggregates
occurs: while for IPCs with smaller patches, a charged bottom wall
affects the local particle arrangement only to a minor extent, the
charged wall can have a significant effect on the local order within
aggregates formed by IPCs with bigger patches. Indeed, when the latter
systems are exposed to a charged substrate such that ZwZp > 0, not only the main
peaks of the g(r) due to the triangular
arrangement appear but also secondary peaks develop, indicating that,
on average, the nearest neighbor order is not purely triangular. Such
features of the g(r) confirm the
predominance of thin, elongated clusters where few ordered aggregates
coexist with disordered domains within the same gel branches.

To gain a better insight on the morphology of the aggregates, we
also calculated the probability for a particle to form Nb bonds, P(Nb). Figure 5 reports
the histograms of P(Nb) for all of the studied cases. When ZwZp < 0, aggregation of overall neutral
particles is inhibited, that is, P(Nb = 0) = 1 (see the two corresponding panels of Figure 5). In all other cases,
aggregation occurs and the corresponding P(Nb) histograms show preferential values for Nb. As the existence and the position of a single
pronounced peak indicates, IPCs with relatively small patches self-assemble
into extended structures where most of the particles form four bonds,
independently of the overall particle and wall charges (see left panels
in Figure 5). In contrast,
IPCs with relatively big patches assemble into aggregates where most
of the particles form either four or six bonds (see right panels in Figure 5). More specifically,
when ZwZp =
0, the P(Nb) histograms
for systems of IPCs with relatively big patches are characterized
by two peaks, independently on the overall particle charge: the higher
peak at Nb = 6 is due to the particles
in the bulk of the triangular clusters, and the lower peak at Nb = 4 is due to the particles on the boundaries
of the aggregates; a very similar shape of the P(Nb) histogram can be observed for overall charged
IPCs when ZwZp < 0. In contrast, when ZwZp > 0, only one peak, centered at Nb = 4, can instead be observed irrespective of the overall
particle charge: the number of particles forming six bonds is smaller
than the number of particles with four bonds. This significant difference
with respect to the other cases is related to (i) the presence of
particle domains with nonperfect triangular arrangement within the
gel network, and (ii) the predominance of the boundary regions over
the bulk, due to smaller and more elongated clusters.

Figure 5 Histograms of the probability for a particle to have Nb bonds, P(Nb). IPC systems with relatively small and big patches in different
confinement conditions (i.e., different ZwZp values) are shown in panels
a and b, respectively.

Finally, we characterized the orientational order within the aggregates via two different angles: the angle αz between the particle orientational vector (see panel
c of Figure 6) and
the z-axis, and the angle αxy between the projections on the xy plane of
the orientational vectors of two neighboring particles. For this purpose,
we classified the particles according to their number of bonds, Nb, and calculated the corresponding probability
distributions, P(αz) and P(αxy),
for each type of bonded particles. Figure 6 reports P(αz) and P(αxy) for bonded particles in their typical bonding environment,
that is, Nb = 4 for IPCs with relatively
small patches and Nb = 6 for IPCs with
relatively big patches. Of course, systems that do not aggregate are
not represented. For all of the investigated cases, the probability
distributions P(αz) are very similar to each other, suggesting that, regardless of
the charge of the substrate, all types of IPCs in a highly bonded
state tend orient themselves parallel to the xy plane
(i.e., αz ≈
70–90°). It is worth noting that, when ZwZp > 0, planar particle orientations
are favored and hence the corresponding P(αz) curves are slightly more peaked at α
≈ 90°. The probability distributions P(αxyz) provide evidence of the
presence of well-defined and distinct orientational ordering within
the aggregates. In IPCs with relatively small patches, the P(αxy) curves deviate
weakly from a homogeneous distribution; however, the presence of two
smooth peaks, one at αxy ≈
0 the other at αxy ≈ 60°,
indicates a predominance of hexagonal ring structures (see also Figure 3). In contrast for
IPCs with big patches, the P(αxy) curves are sharply peaked at αxy ≈ 0° and αxy ≈ 90° and show a more pronounced dependence on
the system parameters. The maxima of the P(αxy) curves for IPCs with bigger patches indicate
that particles orient themselves either parallel or perpendicular
to their nearest neighbors (see also Figure 3). In these cases, the shape of the probability
distributions slightly depends on the overall charge of the particles.

Figure 6 Orientational distributions P(αxy) and P(αz) as functions of αxy and
αz, respectively, calculated for
bonded IPCs in their typical bonding environment, i.e., Nb = 4 for IPCs with relatively small
patches (a) and Nb = 6 for IPCs with relatively
big patches (b). (c) Coarse-grained IPC close to the substrate is
reproduced with its orientational vector n̂. The main panels show the probability distributions of the angle
between the projections on the xy plane of the orientational
vectors of two neighboring particles, P(αxy); the insets display the probability distributions
of the angle between the orientational vector of a particle and the z-axis, P(αz). Curves corresponding to different cases are specified by
different colors (as labeled).

Effect of the Confinement
So far, we considered confinement
conditions such that the distance between the walls prevented particles
from sitting on top of each other (tight confinement). However and
surprisingly, similar tendencies of IPCs to form planar structures
were also observed under confinement conditions that allow particles
to aggregate—in principle—along the z-axis (loose confinement). To quantitatively describe the particle
distribution along the z-axis for the two different
types of confinement, the density profiles, ρ(z), have been evaluated. The density profiles of IPCs under tight
confinement between neutral walls, shown in the main panel of Figure 7, are symmetric with
respect to z ≈ Lz/2 = 0.725 (in units of 2σ), confirming that
all IPC systems under tight confinement self-assemble into essentially
planar structures. Surprisingly, also systems under loose confinement
between neutral walls form quasi-two-dimensional planes: the ρ(z) curves are symmetric with respect to z ≈ Lz/2 = 1 (in
units of 2σ), as shown in the main panel of Figure 7. To summarize, when confined
between neutral walls, all of the investigated IPC systems tend to
self-assemble into almost planar structures, even when confinement
conditions allow for the formation of nonplanar aggregates. It is
worth noting that in both confinement types more pronounced peaks
of the ρ(z) curves correspond to IPCs with
relatively bigger patches, indicating an enhanced propensity to form
planar structures.

Figure 7 Density profiles ρ(z) of the investigated
IPC systems both under tight (TC) and in loose (LC) confinement as
function of z (measured from the bottom plane). Main
panel: density profiles when ZwZp = 0; the dashed and dotted lines indicate
the average number density, ρav, for tight and loose
confinement, respectively. Insets: density profiles when ZwZp < 0 (left) and ZwZp > 0 (right).
Profiles corresponding to different cases are specified by different
symbols (as labeled).

The similarities between systems under tight and under loose confinement
continue to occur also when ZwZp ≠ 0, as shown in the insets of Figure 7. It is interesting
to note that, when ZwZp > 0, the density profiles are extremely peaked at z/2σ = 0.5 irrespective of the system parameters and
of the confinement type; this means that the aggregation process occurs
at the bottom wall; that is, particles form bonds with the substrate
as well as with each other. In contrast, when ZwZp < 0, the peaked density
profiles at z/2σ = 0.5 correspond to all systems
where the self-assembly process is inhibited (i.e., overall neutral particles irrespective of the confinement type):
particles bond to the substrate, but they do not aggregate. For nonaggregated
systems under loose confinement conditions, nonzero values of ρ(z) can be observed at z ≈ 1.5 (in
units of 2σ), but such values are negligible in comparison to
the values of ρ(z) at z/2σ
= 0.5. On the other hand, when ZwZp < 0 and aggregation occurs, the density
profiles are not peaked in proximity of the bottom wall but rather
close to the center of the box size along the z-direction.
In these cases though, the ρ(z) curves are
not symmetric with respect to z ≈ Lz/2 but are slightly shifted
toward the top wall, meaning that the aggregates tend to float above
the charged substrate.

It is also worth noting that the visual inspection of the investigated
systems under loose confinement did not show any significant difference
in the size nor in the morphology of the planar aggregates as compared
to the corresponding cases under tight confinement.

Conclusion
In the present work, heterogeneously charged particles, referred
to as inverse patchy colloids (IPCs), have been considered in a restricted,
quasi-two-dimensional geometry. Specifically, we have focused on IPCs
with an axially symmetric surface charge distribution, due to the
presence of two polar patches of identical charge and an equatorial
region of opposite charge on the particle surface. A selection of
several IPCs with two patches has been made in order to investigate
the role of both the overall particle charge and the patch size on
the self-assembly process. The selected IPC systems have been confined
between two parallel walls; the wall separation was varied between
1.45σ with σ being the particle diameter (tight confinement)
and 2σ (loose confinement); in the first case, particles were
prevented from sitting on top of each other, while in the latter case,
they could possibly do it. The cases corresponding to a purely steric
particle–wall repulsion were considered as reference states.
The effect of a charged bottom wall on the aggregation was investigated
when the wall and the patches were carrying either like or unlike
charges. The self-assembly of the selected IPC systems under confinement
was investigated in conditions such that the characteristic energy
of the directional attractive interactions was much greater than the
thermal energy.

For purely steric particle–wall interactions, a general
tendency toward the formation of planar aggregates has been observed.
Our work has shown that, as soon as IPCs formed interparticle bonds,
their orientational vectors lie almost in the same plane—irrespective
of the patch size and the overall particle charge—even though
they could freely rotate in space. Moreover, even under loose confinement
conditions, no aggregation has been observed along the direction perpendicular
to the plane defined by the average particle orientation. In conclusion,
the investigated IPC systems always formed quasi-two-dimensional structures
when confined between neutral walls.

For the almost planar structures observed between neutral walls,
two different aggregation scenarios have been identified: the formation
of a gel structure consisting of disordered aggregates and, in contrast,
the self-assembly of a branched network purely consisting of crystalline
domains; this latter structure is a novel, hybrid form of macroscopic
self-aggregation, which we have termed microcrystalline gel. Similar
structures have been only observed in the bulk of colloidal systems
with competing short-range attractions and long-range repulsions.30,32 The crucial parameter driving the self-assembly into ordered domains,
as opposed to disordered aggregates, was proven to be the patch extension:
bigger patches were found to give rise to extended structures consisting
of ordered triangular domains; in contrast, smaller patches were shown
to favor the formation of several ring-like particle arrangements,
which consequently led to the formation of an open gel network. It
is also worth noting that for IPCs with relatively smaller patches
bonding contacts occur between only one patch and one equator, whereas
for IPCs with bigger patches, one patch often overlaps with two neighboring
equators. Surprisingly, the effect of the overall particle charge,
which is responsible for the specific interplay between directional
attractive and repulsive interactions, turned out to be negligible.
A clear distinction based only on the patch size can therefore be
made between systems which tend to form crystalline domains and systems
which do not. For IPCs with relatively big patches, already trimers
and quadrimers have a three-fold particle arrangement and thus they
are able to act as building blocks for the formation of the microcrystalline
gel. In contrast, for IPCs with smaller patches, the competition between
different ring-like particle arrangements prevents assembly via monomer by monomer addition. In this context, it is
worth noting that recently it was shown that, for a minimal protein
model in two dimensions, the self-assembly via the
sequential addition of individual monomers to a larger structure is
more efficient than hierarchical processes.33

Since, in the investigated regime of moderate asymmetries between
the charges involved in the model, the directional particle–particle
repulsion was shown to play a minor role as compared to the directional
interparticle attraction, the selected IPC systems between neutral
walls might be associated with a specific conventional patchy system.
Bonding patterns similar to those observed in the present work might
in fact form also with colloids carrying two types of patches, two
opposite polar patches of type A and one equatorial patch of type
B, such that only AB bonds are possible. Nonetheless, for conventional
patchy particles of this type, the tendency to form planar structures
under loose confinement conditions is not guaranteed as it is for
IPC systems where the particle–particle repulsion disfavors
the assembly along the direction perpendicular to the particle plane.
It is possible to speculate that a bulk phase consisting of parallel
planar layers might be feasible at least for those IPC systems where
microcrystalline gels form; in contrast for IPCs systems where a disordered
gel network is formed, the competition between local arrangements
with different ring-like coordination might disfavor the assembly
of planar aggregates in the bulk.

As soon as charge was assigned to the substrate, the self-assembly
scenario of the IPCs became more complex. As a consequence of the
competition between the particle–particle and the particle–wall
interaction energies, we have observed either the formation of extended
structures or the complete inhibition of the aggregation process.
When the bottom wall and the patches carried charges of opposite sign,
the overall particle charge turned out to be the key parameter to
control the aggregation properties of the systems: overall charged
particles formed gel structures (either disordered or microcrystalline
according to the patch size), while overall neutral particles did
not aggregate at all but rather were adsorbed to the substrate monomer
by monomer. When the bottom wall and the patches carried charges of
the same sign, aggregation of extended structures was observed; however,
due to the strong adsorption of the particles to the substrate, the
aggregates were found to be smaller and more elongated in comparison
to those formed by the corresponding IPCs confined between neutral
walls. Moreover, in IPC systems that formed microcrystalline gels,
the presence of a bottom wall such that particles are favored to orient
themselves parallel to it affected the internal structure of the aggregates:
as a consequence of the competition between particle–particle
and particle–wall bond formation, locally disordered domains
were found together with crystalline domains within the same gel network.
Optimal self-assembly in the sense of “pure structures”
and larger domains was thus found to occur in the presence of neutral
walls.

The present work forms the basis for the investigation of the collective
behavior of heterogeneously charged colloids close to confining and
possibly charged walls. For systems consisting of quadrupolar IPCs
with two patches, three characteristic parameters, namely, the patch
extension, the overall particle charge, and the charge of the substrate,
have been varied within moderate regimes. Sampling of the parameter
space beyond the chosen ranges as well as the introduction of additional
parameters, such as variable screening conditions, different numbers
of patches per particle and patterned substrates represent possible
future steps. It is worth noting that our model features a strong
anisotropy in the interactions but no anisotropy in the particle shape.
Though the major effects described here are arising from the anisotropy
in the interactions and thus small deviations of the real particles
from sphericity are not anticipated to have dramatic effects, the
combination of shape asphericity and anisotropic interactions is to
be addressed in the future.

The presented results suggest various applications of confinement
directed self-assembly of (nano) colloids (or proteins) on substrates,
where the assembly patterns can be modified in situ via the pH, which controls the charges on the patches, on the equatorial
regions of the particles and on the substrate depending on the respective
isoelectric points. By changing the salinity, it is moreover possible
to tune the interaction range of the screened Coulomb interactions.

Model and Methods
We considered several inverse patchy colloid (IPC) systems confined
in a quasi-two-dimensional geometry and performed Monte Carlo simulations
in the canonical ensemble for a selected state point.

Particle–Particle Interaction
The coarse-grained
model put forward in ref (19) features a spherical, impenetrable colloidal particle (of
radius σ and central charge Zc)
carrying two interaction sites (each of charge Zp) located at a distance e (<σ) in
opposite directions from the particle center. The electrostatic screening
conditions (expressed via the Debye screening length
κ–1) determine the range δ of the pair
interaction independently of the relative orientation of the particles.
For each set (σ,e,δ), the patch size,
defined by the opening angle γ, is uniquely determined by eqs
10 and 11 of ref (19). All lengths are expressed in units of the particle diameter (i.e., 2σ = 1). We fixed the interaction range δ
= 0.2 (corresponding to κσ = 5 with the choice κδ
= 2) and focused on two different patch extensions, namely, γ
≈ 30° and ≈45° (corresponding to e = 0.32 and 0.22, respectively). The energy strengths appearing in
eq 13 of ref (19) are
set by mapping (with the so-called “max” scheme) the
coarse-grained potential to the analytical Debye–Hückel
potential developed for IPCs in water at room temperature.19 The coarse-grained pair potential is further
normalized such that the minimum of the equatorial–polar attraction
sets the energy unit. Going beyond ref (19), we considered not only overall neutral particles
(i.e., Ztot = Zc + 2Zp = 0) but
also overall charged units with |Zc/2Zp| > 1; that is, the net charge is of the same
sign as Zc. A nonzero overall particle
charge results into a different interplay between the directional
attractive and repulsive contributions to the interparticle effective
potential. We selected four different IPC types, and we labeled them
γi, where γ = 30,45 represents the patch
extension in degrees, while i = n,c refers to the overall particle charge. In both
cases of overall charged particles, Ztot has been chosen such that the equatorial–equatorial repulsion
is comparable to the polar–polar repulsion; specifically, Ztot = −10/9Zp for system 30c, while Ztot = −4/9Zp for system 45c. Columns 2 and 3 of Table 1 report the resulting particle–particle interaction
energies at contact for each of the IPC types; additionally, in panel
b of Figure 1, the
pair potentials for systems 45n and 45c are displayed.

Table 1 Maximum/Minimum Interaction Energies
of Characteristic Reference Configurations for Each IPC Typea
IPC type	εPP/|εEP|	εEE/|εEP|	εPW/|εEP|	εEW/|εEP|	
30n	5.09898403	0.05869047	±4.64682970	±1.67603214	
30c	0.16974171	0.12147218	±0.15989868	±1.86408675	
45n	4.08059184	0.11726397	±4.37617824	±1.87726070	
45c	0.24698159	0.20549022	±0.27764452	±2.19682136	
a For sake of clarity, the reference
configurations are graphically reproduced in panels a and c of Figure 1 together with their
corresponding acronym. The second and the third columns of the table
refer to the particle–particle interaction between two particles
at contact (i.e., r/2σ = 1):
εEE and εPP are the maximum values
of the repulsion in the equatorial–equatorial and polar–polar
configuration, respectively, while εEP is the minimum
interaction energy corresponding to the equatorial–polar configuration.
The latter value corresponds to the energy unit, i.e., εEP = −1. The fourth and the fifth columns
of the table refer to the particle–wall interaction for a particle
located at distance r/2σ = 0.5 from the wall:
εPW and εEW are the energy values
corresponding to the polar–wall and equatorial–wall
configuration, respectively. The positive signs in front of the reported
values correspond to a wall charge such that ZwZp > 0, while the negative signs
correspond to the opposite case. The two bottom rows of the table
correspond to the cases that are graphically represented in Figure 1.

Particle–Wall Interaction
The interaction between
a coarse-grained IPC and a neutral wall perpendicular to the z-axis is a steric interaction modeled as a hard repulsion
taking place when the particle is located at distance z ≤ σ from the wall. In the presence of a charged wall
with surface charge σw = Zw/4σ2, a screened electrostatic interaction must
be added to the particle–wall hard repulsion. The electrostatic
interaction has been modeled via a mapping scheme,
outlined in the following, that is consistent with the particle–particle
potential description developed in ref (19). Within the Debye–Hückel approximation,
the external field generated by a uniformly charged plane perpendicular
to the z-axis is34 1  where z is the distance between
the particle center and the wall; the minimum particle–wall
distance is z = σ because of the hard sphere
constraint. In eq 1,
the Debye screening length κ–1 and the dielectric
permittivity ε are the same as in the particle–particle
interaction potential.19 The potential
energy of an IPC in the presence of the external field Φ(z) can be expressed as35 2  where Qeff(θ)
is the orientational dependent, effective charge of an IPC; Qeff(θ) can be read off from eqs 3 and
4 of ref (19) as 3  where qe is the magnitude of the elementary charge, a ≡ e, θ is the angle with respect to
the z-axis, and P2l(cos θ) is the Legendre polynomial of order 2l. Since our coarse-grained particle model features two
types of interaction spheres—one big (B) central sphere, corresponding
to the interaction sphere of the bare colloid, and two small (S) out-of-center
spheres, corresponding to the interaction spheres of the patches19—the coarse-grained particle–wall
potential can be written as the sum of two contributions. Each contribution
is factorized into an energy strength and a geometrical factor, as
postulated also in the derivation of the coarse-grained particle–particle
description.19 Specifically, within the
interaction range set by the screening conditions (i.e., σ ≤ z ≤ σ + δ),
the particle–wall interaction can be written as 4  where uSW and uBW are the energy strengths to be determined via the mapping with the analytical potential in eq 2, while wαW are dimensionless weight factors which depend
on the distance and the relative orientation between the IPC and the
wall. The weight factors wαW are
proportional to the total overlap volume between the planar wall and
all the interaction spheres α contributing to the specific αW
interaction 5  where ΩOTBW = π/3(RB – z)(2RB2 – z2 – RBz) with RB = (σ + δ),
while ΩOTSW = π/3∑i = 12(RS – zi)(2RS2 – zi2 – RSzi) with RS = (σ + δ – e) and zi being
the distance of patch i from the wall; ΩR = 4πσ3/3 is the reference volume.
Two characteristic configurations, namely, the polar–wall and
the equatorial–wall configuration (reproduced in panel c Figure 1 for sake of clarity),
are needed to evaluate the yet undefined energy strengths of the coarse-grained
particle–wall interaction. Once the mapping with the analytical
description is performed, the coarse-grained particle–wall
interaction is fully consistent with the particle–particle
coarse-grained description. The particle–wall potential is
further normalized in units of |εEP|. We considered
walls that carry a surface charge with either the same sign as the
patches (i.e., ZwZp > 0) as well as the same sign as the bare
colloid (i.e., ZwZp < 0). The specific values of the wall charge
have been chosen such that, when ZwZp > 0, the corresponding minima of the particle–wall
attraction of all of the selected IPC types are comparable to each
other, being at the same time also comparable to the particle–particle
bonding energy. Specifically, Zw = ±1/3Zp for systems 30n and 30c, while Zw = ±1/9Zp for systems
45n and 45c. For σ values ranging from tens of nanometers to
some micrometers,19 the chosen σw values are well below one elementary charge per 60 Å2.36 Columns 4 and 5 of Table 1 report the resulting
typical particle–wall interaction energies at contact for each
IPC type; additionally, panel d of Figure 1 reports the particle–wall potentials
for systems 45n and 45c in the presence of a wall carrying a surface
charge such that ZwZp > 0.

Monte Carlo Simulations
We considered selected IPC
systems confined in a quasi-two-dimensional geometry by means of two
planar walls both perpendicular to the z-axis. The
top wall of the sample was always neutral, while the bottom wall could
be neutral or charged. We performed Monte Carlo (MC) simulations in
the canonical ensemble at T* = 0.10 (temperature
in reduced units, i.e., T* = kBT/|εEP|);
we considered N = 1000 particles in a volume V = LxLyLz, where Lx/2σ = Ly/2σ = 50 and Lz/2σ = 1.45 or Lz/2σ = 2. In the case of tight confinement (i.e., Lz/2σ = 1.45),
particles were prevented from sitting on top of each other, while
in the case of loose confinement (i.e., Lz/2σ = 2), the box size possibly
allowed two particles at contact to pile up along the z-axis. Each MC step consists on average of N trial
particle moves, where the acceptance rule is given by the Metropolis
criterion. A particle move is defined as both a displacement in each
direction of a random quantity distributed uniformly between ±δr as well as a rotation around a random axis of a random
angle distributed uniformly between ±δθ. The chosen
values for the trial changes are δr = 0.05
and δθ = δr/2σ rad. Since
the aggregation process was studied out of equilibrium, we ran for
each IPC type 10 MC runs in parallel starting from different initial
conditions. Each run lasted for a total of 107 MC steps.
All quantities shown in this paper are averages over the final 103 MC steps, corresponding to 100 different configurations per
independent run.

Acknowledgments
Financial support by the Austrian Science Foundation (FWF)
under Project Nos. M1170-N16, V249-N27, P23910-N16, and F41 (SFB ViCoM)
is gratefully acknowledged.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.
==== Refs
References
Juhl S. B. ; Chan E. P. ; Ha Y.-H. ; Maldovan M. ; Brunton J. ; Ward V. ; Dokland T. ; Kalmakoff J. ; Farmer B. ; Thomas E. L. ; et al. Assembly of Wiseana Iridovirus: Viruses for Colloidal Photonic Crystals . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2006 , 16 , 1086 –1094 .
Daniel M. C. ; Tsvetkova I. B. ; Quinkert Z. T. ; Murali A. ; De M. ; Rotello V. M. ; Kao C. C. ; Dragnea B. 
Role of Surface Charge
Density in Nanoparticle-Templated Assembly of Bromovirus Protein Cages . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 3853 –3860 .20575505 
Lopez C. 
Materials
Aspects of Photonic Crystals . Adv. Mater. 
2003 , 15 , 1679 –1704 .
Horejs C. ; Gollner H. ; Pum D. ; Sleytr U. B. ; Peterlik H. ; Jungbauer A. ; Tscheliessnig R. 
Atomistic Structure of Monomolecular
Surface Layer Self-Assemblies: Toward Functionalized Nanostructures . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 2288 –2297 .21375257 
Ruzicka B. ; Zaccarelli E. ; Zulian L. ; Angelini R. ; Sztucki M. ; Moussaïd A. ; Narayanan T. ; Sciortino F. 
Observation
of Empty Liquids and Equilibrium Gels in a Colloidal Clay . Nat. Mater. 
2011 , 10 , 56 –60 .21151164 
van
Blaaderen A. 
Materials Science: Colloids Get Complex . Nature 
2006 , 439 , 545 –546 .16452966 
Bianchi E. ; Blaak R. ; Likos C. N. 
Patchy Colloids: State of the Art
and Perspectives . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 13 , 6397 –6410 .21331432 
Pawar A. B. ; Kretzschmar I. 
Fabrication, Assembly, and Application of Patchy Particles . Macromol. Rapid Commun. 
2010 , 31 , 150 –168 .21590887 
Wang Y. ; Wang Y. ; Breed D. R. ; Manoharan V. N. ; Feng L. ; Hollingsworth A. D. ; Weck M. ; Pine D. J. 
Colloids
with Valence and Specific Directional Bonding . Nature 
2012 , 491 , 51 –55 .23128225 
Glotzer S. C. ; Solomon M. J. 
Anisotropy of Building Blocks and Their Assembly into
Complex Structures . Nat. Mater. 
2007 , 6 , 557 –562 .17667968 
Haji-Akbari A. ; Engel M. ; Keys A. S. ; Zheng X. ; Petschek R. G. ; Palffy-Muhoray P. ; Glotzer S. C. 
Disordered, Quasicrystalline and
Crystalline Phases of Densely Packed Tetrahedra . Nature 
2009 , 462 , 773 –777 .20010683 
Sacanna S. ; Pine D. J. 
Shape-Anisotropic Colloids: Building Blocks for Complex
Assemblies . Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2011 , 16 , 96 –105 .
Chen Q. ; Bae S. C. ; Granick S. 
Directed Self-Assembly of a Colloidal
Kagome Lattice . Nature 
2011 , 469 , 381 –384 .21248847 
Jones M. R. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Self-Assembly Gets New Direction . Nature 
2012 , 491 , 42 –43 .23128220 
Damasceno P. F. ; Engel M. ; Glotzer S. C. ; Chen Q. ; Bae S. C. ; Granick S. 
Predictive Self-Assembly of Polyhedra into Complex
Structures . Science 
2012 , 337 , 453 –457 .22837525 
Hong L. ; Cacciuto A. ; Luijten E. ; Granick S. 
Clusters of Amphiphilic
Colloid Spheres . Langmuir 
2008 , 24 , 621 –625 .18181655 
Zhang F. ; Skoda M. W. A. ; Jacobs R. M. J. ; Zorn S. ; Martin R. A. ; Martin C. M. ; Clark G. F. ; Weggler S. ; Hildebrandt A. ; Kohlbacher O. ; et al. Reentrant Condensation
of Proteins in Solution Induced by Multivalent Counterions . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2008 , 101 , 148101 .18851577 
Zhang F. ; Roth R. ; Wolf M. ; Roosen-Runge F. ; Skoda M. W. A. ; Jacobs R. M. J. ; Stzucki M. ; Schreiber F. 
Charge-Controlled
Metastable Liquid–Liquid Phase Separation in Protein Solutions
as a Universal Pathway towards Crystallization . Soft Matter 
2012 , 8 , 1313 –1316 .
Bianchi E. ; Kahl G. ; Likos C. N. 
Inverse Patchy Colloids: From Microscopic
Description to Mesoscopic Coarse-Graining . Soft
Matter 
2011 , 7 , 8313 –8323 .
Verwey E. J. W. ; Overbeek J. T. G.  Theory of the Stability
of Lyophobic Colloids ; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 1948 .
Bozic A. L. ; Podgornik R. 
Symmetry Effects in Electrostatic Interactions between
Two Arbitrarily Charged Spherical Shells in the Debye–Hückel
Approximation . J. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 138 , 074902 .23445030 
Kretzschmar I. ; Song J. H. 
Surface-Anisotropic Spherical Colloids in Geometric
and Field Confinement . Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2011 , 16 , 84 –95 .
Whitelam S. 
Control of
Pathways and Yields of Protein Crystallization through the Interplay
of Nonspecific and Specific Attractions . Phys.
Rev. Lett. 
2010 , 105 , 088102 .20868132 
Geyer T. ; Born P. ; Kraus T. 
Switching between Crystallization
and Amorphous Agglomeration of Alkyl Thiol-Coated Gold Nanoparticles . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2012 , 109 , 128302 .23005995 
Workum K. V. ; Douglas J. F. 
Symmetry, Equivalence, and Molecular Self-assembly . Phys. Rev. E 
2006 , 73 , 031502 .
Weddemann A. ; Wittbracht F. ; Eickenberg B. ; Hütten A. 
Magnetic Field
Induced Assembly of Highly Ordered Two-Dimensional Particle Arrays . Langmuir 
2010 , 26 , 19225 –19229 .21090763 
Osterman N. ; Babič D. ; Poberaj I. ; Dobnikar J. ; Ziherl P. 
Observation
of Condensed Phases of Quasiplanar Core-Softened Colloids . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2007 , 99 , 248301 .18233495 
Leunissen M. E. ; Vutukuri H. R. ; van Blaaderen A. 
Directing Colloidal Self-Assembly
with Biaxial Electric Fields . Adv. Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 3116 –3120 .
Schmidle H. ; Jäger S. ; Hall C. K. ; Velev O. D. ; Klapp S. H. L. 
Two-Dimensional
Colloidal Networks Induced by a Uni-axial External Field . Soft Matter 
2013 , 9 , 2518 –2524 .
Zhang T. H. ; Groenewold J. ; Kegel W. K. 
Observation of a Microcrystalline
Gel in Colloids with Competing Interactions . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 11 , 10827 –10830 .19924316 
Svab E. ; Hiltunen E. J. 
Medium Range Order from Total and Partial Pair Correlation
Functions of Metallic Glasses . Phys. Scr. 
1992 , 46 , 185 –188 .
Zhang T. H. ; Klok J. ; Tromp R. H. ; Groenewold J. ; Kegel W. K. 
Non-equilibrium Cluster States in Colloids with Competing
Interactions . Soft Matter 
2012 , 8 , 667 –672 .
Haxton T. K. ; Whitelam S.  Do Hierarchical
Structures Assemble Best via Hierarchical Pathways? Soft Matter 2013 , DOI: 10.1039/C3SM27637F .
Russel W. B. ; Saville D. A. ; Schowalter W. R.  Colloidal Dispersions ; Cambridge University Press : New York , 1995 .
Jackson J. D.  Classical Electrodynamics , 3 rd ed.; Wiley : New York , 1999 .
Konieczny M. ; Likos C. N. 
From Sea-Urchins to Starfishes: Controlling the Adsorption
of Star-Branched Polyelectrolytes on Charged Walls . Soft Matter 
2007 , 3 , 1130 –1134 .
