
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.6b08228ArticleStop-Frame
Filming and Discovery of Reactions at the
Single-Molecule Level by Transmission Electron Microscopy Chamberlain Thomas
W. †‡Biskupek Johannes §Skowron Stephen T. †Markevich Alexander V. †Kurasch Simon §Reimer Oliver ∥Walker Kate E. †Rance Graham A. †Feng Xinliang ⊥Müllen Klaus #Turchanin Andrey ∇Lebedeva Maria A. †Majouga Alexander G. ○Nenajdenko Valentin G. ○Kaiser Ute *§Besley Elena *†Khlobystov Andrei N. *†† School
of Chemistry, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, United Kingdom‡ Institute
of Process Research and Development, School of Chemistry, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United
Kingdom§ Central
Facility of Electron Microscopy, Electron Microscopy Group of Materials
Science, University of Ulm, 89081 Ulm, Germany∥ Faculty
of Physics, University of Bielefeld, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany⊥ Center
for Advancing Electronics Dresden (cfaed) and Department of Chemistry
and Food Chemistry, Technische Universitaet
Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany# Max Planck
Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 55128 Mainz, Germany∇ Institute
of Physical Chemistry, Friedrich Schiller
University Jena, Lessingstraße 10, 07743 Jena, Germany○ Department
of Chemistry, Moscow M.V. Lomonosov State
University, Leninskiye Gory, Moscow 119992, Russia* E-mail: ute.kaiser@uni-ulm.de.* E-mail: elena.besley@nottingham.ac.uk* E-mail: andrei.khlobystov@nottingham.ac.uk.13 02 2017 28 03 2017 11 3 2509 2520 08 12 2016 13 02 2017 Copyright © 2017 American
Chemical Society2017American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We report an approach, named chemTEM,
to follow chemical transformations
at the single-molecule level with the electron beam of a transmission
electron microscope (TEM) applied as both a tunable source of energy
and a sub-angstrom imaging probe. Deposited on graphene, disk-shaped
perchlorocoronene molecules are precluded from intermolecular interactions.
This allows monomolecular transformations to be studied at the single-molecule
level in real time and reveals chlorine elimination and reactive aryne
formation as a key initial stage of multistep reactions initiated
by the 80 keV e-beam. Under the same conditions, perchlorocoronene
confined within a nanotube cavity, where the molecules are situated
in very close proximity to each other, enables imaging of intermolecular
reactions, starting with the Diels–Alder cycloaddition of a
generated aryne, followed by rearrangement of the angular adduct to
a planar polyaromatic structure and the formation of a perchlorinated
zigzag nanoribbon of graphene as the final product. ChemTEM enables
the entire process of polycondensation, including the formation of
metastable intermediates, to be captured in a one-shot “movie”.
A molecule with a similar size and shape but with a different chemical
composition, octathio[8]circulene, under the same conditions undergoes
another type of polycondensation via thiyl biradical
generation and subsequent reaction leading to polythiophene nanoribbons
with irregular edges incorporating bridging sulfur atoms. Graphene
or carbon nanotubes supporting the individual molecules during chemTEM
studies ensure that the elastic interactions of the molecules with
the e-beam are the dominant forces that initiate and drive the reactions
we image. Our ab initio DFT calculations explicitly
incorporating the e-beam in the theoretical model correlate with the
chemTEM observations and give a mechanism for direct control not only
of the type of the reaction but also of the reaction rate. Selection
of the appropriate e-beam energy and control of the dose rate in chemTEM
enabled imaging of reactions on a time frame commensurate with TEM
image capture rates, revealing atomistic mechanisms of previously
unknown processes.

transmission electron microscopycarbon
nanotubegraphenesingle-molecule imagingsingle-molecule
reactiondocument-id-old-9nn6b08228document-id-new-14nn-2016-08228hccc-price
==== Body
Even in an ideal case, the reaction
kinetics observed in a laboratory experiment by ensemble-averaging
analytical techniques can only support rather than confirm a proposed
mechanism and are unable to rule out that an alternative mechanism
may also result in the same macroscale observations.1,2 In a reaction mixture, molecules possess different amounts of kinetic
energy (described by the Boltzmann distribution) and move chaotically,
colliding with each other in random orientations, such that the intermolecular
reaction is triggered only if the energy of the collision is sufficient
to overcome the reaction activation energy. Commonly any inconsistencies
between experimental observations and the proposed atomistic mechanism
are mitigated simply by including empirical correlation parameters
within the model, such as the steric factor which accounts for the
hypothetical mutual orientation of the reacting molecules.1,2 However, in practice, definitive information about reaction mechanisms
can only be provided by direct observation at the single-molecule
level of the reactants transforming into products over time via metastable intermediates. This dream of every chemist
has recently been brought closer to reality by a series of breakthroughs
in scanning probe microscopy methods that can now shed light on the
fundamental structure of individual molecules adsorbed on surfaces.3−9 In particular, noncontact atomic force microscopy (nc-AFM) has recently
enabled imaging of the atomic structures of reaction products and
reaction intermediates helping to decipher some complex organic reactions
catalyzed by metal surfaces.3,9 The temporal resolution
of scanning probe techniques is 10 orders of magnitude lower than
the typical time scale of a chemical reaction. Therefore, the reactions
on surfaces need to be activated by periodic heating (during which
the molecules remain unobserved) and cooling cycles and thus still
require statistical analysis of the distribution of different species.9 On the other hand, the latest advances in aberration-corrected
high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (AC-HRTEM) have begun
to provide an alternative way to study the mechanisms of chemical
reactions. The combination of sub-angstrom spatial resolution with
a larger overall field of view and an image capture rate significantly
faster than scanning probe microscopy has enabled AC-HRTEM imaging
of chemical transformations in low-dimensional continuous solids,
such as Stone–Wales rearrangements,10 defect formation or metal atom entrapment in graphene,11−13 restructuring in carbon nanotubes,13−16 or transformations of inorganic
nanostructures,17 as well as revealing
fascinating molecular motion.18−20 These examples demonstrate that
the TEM possesses a significantly greater bandwidth for temporal resolution
than any other nanoscale imaging technique, with further improvement
possible by combining carefully correlated laser beam and e-beam pulses
in so-called 4D TEM.21 However, the outstanding
time resolution of the 4D TEM technique has been achieved at the expense
of spatial resolution, as 4D TEM is able to resolve features on the
scale of tens of nm at best (i.e., 100 times bigger than atomic dimensions), thus precluding this
method from imaging chemical reactions at the single-molecule level.

Up to now recording a “movie” of intermolecular reactions,
where chemical transformations of a single, uniquely identifiable
molecule are continually followed from the starting reactant all the
way to the final product, via a series of intermediates,
still remains a formidable challenge. In our chemTEM approach we utilize
the e-beam of the microscope as both a fast imaging tool and a source
of energy to stimulate chemical reactions. Such a dual-use of the
e-beam enables us to trigger and record transformations of molecules
as they happen, without the need to introduce any additional source
of energy (such as heat in nc-AFM or laser pulses in 4D-TEM).3−9,21−23 Moreover, at
different energies (accessible values range between 20–300
keV), the e-beam can trigger qualitatively different chemical processes
in the same material,24 while tuning the
e-beam dose rate may potentially control the rates of reactions.25 Therefore, our chemTEM methodology lends itself
well to the recording of continuous “movies” of chemical
reactions by acquiring a time series of AC-HRTEM images for a single
molecule, where the reaction is taking place simultaneously with the
imaging process.

The choice of molecules for chemTEM experiments
is important: a
candidate molecule should preferably have a well-defined symmetrical
shape that could be easily identified in AC-HRTEM and have sufficient single-molecule
contrast, and most importantly, the molecule must be unreactive until
sufficient energy is delivered from the e-beam to break the bonds
between the atoms and initiate reactions. Provided that the sample
is very thin (i.e., a single molecule or a chain
of molecules within a single-walled carbon nanotube (SWNT) or on
a monolayer of graphene), it is the direct interactions of the e-beam
with atomic nuclei that are the dominant forces, such that during
AC-HRTEM imaging, the kinetic energy of fast electrons, controlled
by the accelerating voltage of the microscope, is transferred directly
to the atoms in ballistic collisions, with the maximum amount of energy
received by a stationary atom in a collision being determined by the
formula: 1  where E is the
energy of
incident electrons (80 keV in our case), me is the mass of an electron, c is the speed of light
and, most importantly, T is inversely proportional
to the atomic weight of the element (M), so that
under the same TEM imaging conditions, lighter elements receive significantly
more energy from the e-beam.25 If the value
of T exceeds the energy threshold for atom displacement
from the molecule (Ed), there is a nonzero
likelihood for the molecule to become reactive as described by the
cross section function σd, the value which determines
the rate of a given chemical transformation (k) under
the e-beam: 2  where n is the number of
bonds of this type in the molecule, and j is the
dose rate of the e-beam in units of e–/nm2·s.26 The latter parameter is precisely
determined and readily controlled by TEM operating conditions which
gives direct control of the rate of the observed reaction in chemTEM
experiments: The greater the rate of the collisions between the fast
electrons and the molecule, the faster the observed reaction. Therefore,
provided that the molecule is stable at low dose rates of the e-beam
of a given energy, the reactions of molecules can be readily accelerated
or decelerated by adjusting the value of j to make
their rate commensurate with the TEM image capture. The overall effect
of chemTEM is that the e-beam activates the molecules and drives their
transformations, while taking a series of images of the processes
which when reconstructed into a “movie” can create a
continuous movement—a technique similar to stop-frame filming
used in photography.

Results and Discussion
In our study we investigate two simple molecules – perchlorocoronene (PCC) and octathio[8]circulene (OTC) – with disk-like shapes easily distinguishable with a TEM. Having higher atomic numbers than carbon,
Cl or S can provide a sufficient and clear contrast for single-molecule
imaging, and the fact that Cl and S atoms are significantly heavier
than carbon ensures higher stability of PCC and OTC under the e-beam
as compared, for example, to the analogous hydrogen-containing molecules.25 We employ single-layer graphene and SWNTs as
substrates to support the molecules during their reaction because
the low contrast of the atomically thin carbon structures enables
virtually unobscured observation of individual molecules, while the
extremely high thermal and electrical conductivities of graphene and
SWNT effectively mitigate any ionization and heating effects of the
e-beam on the molecules during chemTEM experiments. Our previous experimental
and theoretical analyses of the behavior of molecules under the e-beam
clearly indicate that it is elastic (knock-on) interactions with the
e-beam that transfer the energy T to the molecules
which are dominant when a single molecule is adsorbed on graphene27,28 or in a carbon nanotube,25,29 which is different
to complex radiolysis reactions previously documented for molecules
in a crystal or in thick films under high energy e-beams (as in electron
beam lithography), or to ionization processes taking place in molecular
monolayers under a low energy e-beam.30 Overall, the kinetic energy of fast electrons in chemTEM experiments
which is directly transferred to the atomic displacement within the
molecule offers the most direct way of triggering and monitoring a
chemical reaction which can be successfully interpreted within the
framework of elastic interactions, as shown for the two types of molecules
PCC and OTC discussed below.

The molecules deposited on graphene
are in a face-on orientation
with respect to the e-beam and are isolated from each other such that
any reactions initiated by the e-beam will be monomolecular, whereas
the confinement of the molecules within carbon nanotube brings them
close together and is conducive to intermolecular reactions. Both
of these approaches are potentially useful, and we studied PCC on
graphene in order to explore the monomolecular process under e-beam
irradiation before embarking on the more ambitious task of exploring
intermolecular reactions within carbon nanotubes. Individual PCC molecules
on a layer of graphene appear in AC-HRTEM images as dark, roughly
circular shapes due to the higher contrast of the Cl atoms (Supporting Information, Figure S1). Experimental
images of PCC on graphene appear to be significantly blurred as compared
to the simulated images of the stationary molecules (Figure S1), indicating that the physisorbed molecules remain
mobile under the applied imaging conditions (room temperature, high
vacuum, image capture rate ∼1 s); however the motion is not
as fast as it could be expected for a medium-sized molecule on graphene,
indicating that forces stronger than physisorption may exist between
PCC and graphene under chemTEM conditions. Indeed, continuous monitoring
of the behavior of a single PCC molecule by AC-HRTEM reveals that
the same molecule can exist in two different orientations with respect
to the graphene surface: the face-on (appears as a circle) and the
edge-on (appears as a line, Figure 1a) with the latter being stable only for a few seconds
before the molecules return back to the face-on orientation. These
transitions are sudden and repeat numerous times on the time scale
of several seconds, which can be clearly captured in the experimental
AC-HRTEM video (Supporting Video 1), with
the majority of edge-on oriented molecules aligned with the arm–chair
direction of graphene (Figure 1a,f). The edge-on orientation appears to be able to switch
from one direction to another within the time frame of a single image,
effectively “walking” on the graphene, which results
in two lines corresponding to the same molecule (for example, fourth
frame in the time series, Figure 1a). Importantly, the shapes of the PCC molecules are
no longer symmetric after such a transformation, indicating that the
PCC has undergone some form of chemical modification due to an impact
from the 80 keV e-beam employed for AC-HRTEM measurements. A close
inspection of experimental AC-HRTEM images indicates the loss of Cl-atoms,
manifested as a gap in the circle of dark contrast (Figure 1a, third and second images
in the top and bottom time-series, respectively), suggesting chlorine
elimination from PCC as a possible initial step.

Figure 1 (a) Experimental
AC-HRTEM images illustrating the transition of
PCC from a face-on orientation (almost circular shape) to an edge-on
orientation (line) on graphene observed under exposure to the 80 keV
electron beam (dose rate ∼107 e/nm2·s;
an interval of a few seconds exists between each image). Uneven contrast
around the edge of the molecule (third and second images in the top
and bottom time series, respectively) indicates the loss of Cl-atoms.
(b) Snapshots from DFT calculations illustrating structural perturbations
in PCC caused by energy transfer from the e-beam to a carbon atom
(highlighted in yellow). Significant displacement of atoms in PCC
from their equilibrium positions takes place, including the elongation
of C–Cl bonds up to 0.28 nm (equilibrium C–Cl distance
in PCC is 0.174 nm). Structural diagrams showing PCC (c) lying face-on
and (d, e) standing edge-on in two orthogonal orientations. (f) A
proposed scheme of a monomolecular chemical reaction triggered by
the 80 keV electron beam: Energy transfer from the e-beam to a carbon
atom breaks the C–Cl bonds in PCC leading to aryne formation,
which acts as a highly reactive dienophile and binds to the graphene
covalently via Diels–Alder cycloaddition reaction.
As a result of the cycloaddition to graphene, the molecule changes
its orientation from face-on to edge-on. However, C–C bonds
between the aryne and graphene are stretched, and the graphene structure
is deformed, which means that the adduct has only limited stability,
as under further exposure to the e-beam, the bonds with graphene dissociate,
and the molecule returns back to the face-on orientation (the aryne
also appears to be able to switch from one edge-on orientation to
another within a single frame, for example, frame 4 in (a), thus appearing
as two lines at an acute angle). After this cycle of transformations,
the PCC molecule becomes damaged (i.e., missing two Cl atoms) and thus activated for further transformations,
changing its shape and orientation and becoming progressively fragmented
by the e-beam (Supporting Video 1).

The loss of
chlorine atoms from the sterically strained PCC is
explained by considering the elastic interactions of the e-beam with
the atoms constituting the molecule. Thus, the 80 keV e-beam in our
experiments can transfer up to a maximum of 15.8 eV of kinetic energy T (eq 1) to
a carbon atom and only 5.3 eV to a chlorine atom of PCC. In both cases,
the transferred energy causes displacement of the atoms from their
equilibrium positions, but a detailed analysis of the PCC evolution
postcollision with an 80 keV electron by ab initio calculations predicts that the energy transfer from the 80 keV e-beam
to Cl-atoms can cause only small perturbations in the molecule, not
leading to any bond dissociation; however, the energy transfer to
C atoms is large enough to trigger substantial structural changes,
significantly stretching and thus activating the C–Cl bonds
(Figure 1b). Theoretical
modeling of the PCC molecule under the 80 keV electron beam (Supporting Video 2) combined with the experimentally
observed structural changes suggest that graphene may act not only
as a passive surface in AC-HRTEM experiments but also may play an
additional role in promoting the dissociation of C–Cl bonds
due to interactions with the PCC molecules. While ballistic collisions
between the fast electrons of the e-beam and atoms of the PCC molecule26 clearly provide the main source of energy explaining
our experimental observations, any ionization of PCC, albeit not significant
due to the highly conducting surface of graphene, could additionally
reduce the energy barrier for dissociation of the C–Cl bonds.

The observed abrupt transition
of PCC from face-on to edge-on orientations
is therefore consistent with dechlorinated PCC covalently bonding
to graphene (Figure 1a,c–e), suggesting that an aryne of molecular formula C24Cl10, a product of dechlorination of PCC, can
readily engage in bonding with the underlying graphene sheet via a cycloaddition reaction as predicted recently.31 Such a process demands a perpendicular (i.e., edge-on) orientation of C24Cl10 (Figure 1f), closely matching our AC-HRTEM observations (Figure 1a). A theoretical study previously
demonstrated that the bonding of arynes and other biradical species
takes place preferentially along the armchair direction of the graphene
sheet, while the addition of monoradicals or addition of biradicals
along the zigzag direction leads to adducts with open electronic shell
that are significantly less stable.32 This
mode of bonding requires the aryne and graphene to act as a dienophile
and a diene, respectively, leading to an adduct with a closed electronic
shell (Figure 1f) which
agrees well with the observed alignment of the edge-on structures
with the armchair direction in graphene in our AC-HRTEM measurements
(Figure 1a) and confirms
that the sudden change of the orientation is driven by a chemical
reaction rather than by a physical effect of the e-beam. While the
Diels–Alder cycloaddition is clearly favorable for the stabilization
of the reactive aryne species, it severely distorts the flat polyaromatic
structure of the graphene making the adduct metastable,33,34 which means that under AC-HRTEM imaging conditions (high vacuum,
room temperature, energy transferred from the e-beam to the atoms
determined by eq 1),
the aryne-graphene adduct is only transient. Further filming of PCC
on graphene for extended periods of time indicates continuous fragmentation
of PCC (e.g., progressive loss of chlorine and carbon
atoms and extensive rearrangements) that do not lead to any stable
products (Supporting Video 1). Therefore,
beyond the crucial fact that aryne formation under the 80 keV e-beam
is the key step in activating the molecule for reactions, chemTEM
imaging of monomolecular reactions has little relevance to intermolecular
reactions that could potentially lead to stable and valuable products.

Knowing that PCC forms a highly reactive species, aryne,
under
the impact of the 80 keV beam of electrons, we can now generate the
same aryne species inside a SWNT - a nanoscale reaction vessel where
the close-packed molecules are predisposed for intermolecular reactions
(Figure 2a). There
is a significant advantage of the confinement imposed in the nanotube
because, as compared to the molecules scattered on graphene or randomly
moving in the gas or liquid phase: all reactant molecules in SWNT
exist in the same initial state (i.e., all have the same kinetic energy and orientation), because they
are strictly ordered and stacked in the SWNT (Figure 2a). Furthermore, entrapment in the nanotube
can also decelerate chemical transformations due to the extreme spatial
confinement restricting the movement of molecules, both individually
preventing certain molecular conformations and, with respect to neighboring
molecules, preventing sterically demanding orientations; therefore
the SWNT provides ideal conditions for filming intermolecular reactions
step-by-step, from the reactants all the way to the products.

Figure 2 (a) Time-series
AC-HRTEM images showing the transformation of a
stack of PCC within a SWNT under 80 keV e-beam exposure (the electron
dose accumulated by the molecules during the time series is shown
on the right side of each micrograph). (b–d) Close examination
of the experimental images (b) and comparison with simulated TEM images
(c), generated by exposing the corresponding structural models (d)
to limited doses of 1 × 106 e–/nm2 of 80 keV electrons, indicate that intermolecular reactions
are possible only when a PCC molecule can change its orientations
with respect to the neighboring molecules: Two nonparallel molecules
are able to join together to form an angular adduct which gradually
transforms into a planar species approximately twice the length of
the original PCC. (e) The intermolecular addition reaction observed
by AC-HRTEM in carbon nanotubes is consistent with the Diels–Alder
cycloaddition of an aryne (molecular formula = C24Cl10) to PCC predicted by DFT calculation and rearrangement of
the initial adduct (angular) to an elongated flat polyaromatic molecule,
C48Cl18 (planar), which continues reacting with
further aryne species leading to the formation of ribbon-like structures
terminated with chlorine atoms around the edge.

PCC was inserted into SWNT with a mean diameter of 1.5 nm and confirmed
by AC-HRTEM (Figure 2a,b top and left micrographs, respectively), where PCC is seen to
exhibit a tendency similar to polyaromatic hydrocarbons to form stacks
due to π–π interactions,25,35−37 with each molecule separated solely by a van der
Waals gap of 0.3–0.4 nm from its neighbors. Further confirmation was provided by Raman spectroscopy demonstrating a small red shift in the energy of the radial breathing
modes (RBMs) of the filled relative to the empty nanotubes (Figures S13–S14), consistent with the
confinement of guest species within the internal channel of a host
nanotube effecting a softening of these vibrational modes. Despite
the mutual proximity, PCC molecules entrapped in the nanotube (designated
as PCC@SWNT) exhibit surprisingly low reactivity with each other,
as our AC-HRTEM time series images show that intermolecular reactions
occur only when a stack of PCC is disrupted (Figure 2a) (Supporting Video 3). Specifically, two molecules appear to join together
to form an adduct twice the size of the original PCC, with an angle
of 90–110° between the two planes (Figure 2b, third and fourth frames). As the electron
dose increases, the adduct undergoes planarization followed by further
increases in length thus transforming the original PCC into a polymeric
ribbon-like product with a width of 1.04 nm (Figure 2a,b, last frames). The edges of the nanoribbon
are decorated with equidistantly positioned dark dots (Figure 3a,h), suggesting that atoms
with a larger atomic number than carbon are terminating the edges
of the structure. It is important to emphasize that the transformation
of discrete PCC molecules to the polymeric nanoribbon, via a series of metastable inter mediates, has been recorded in a single
experiment, continually acquiring frames of the reaction “movie”
for the same molecules entrapped within the nanotube (Figure 2a, and Supporting Video 3), which means that the fate of each reacting
molecule can be precisely traced throughout the entire multistep reaction
process.

Figure 3 (a–c) HRTEM images (a), corresponding simulated
TEM images
(b), generated by exposing structural models (c) to a limited dose
of 1 × 106 e–/nm2 of
80 keV electrons, showing the initial PCC@SWNT structure (left) and
the resulting graphene nanoribbon terminated with chlorine atoms (right,
Cl-atoms appear as dark dots along the edges of the nanoribbon) formed
by e-beam-promoted elimination of chlorine atoms, aryne cycloaddition
to PCC, rearrangement of the initial adduct to form polyaromatic molecules,
and eventual polycondensation. (d) Experimental time-series images
showing the intermediate steps of the transformation process from
PCC oligomers to a continuous nanoribbon (the electron dose accumulated
by the molecules during the time series is shown on the right side
of each micrograph; note that because the molecules are already oligomerized
at the start of this time series, the total electron dose required
for nanoribbon formation is slightly lower than in Figure 2a which starts from intact
PCC). (e) The carbon nanotube serves as a template for the reaction
blocking all directions for aryne cycloaddition apart from the one
parallel to the nanotube axis, which yields a strictly linear nanoribbon
with the shape determined by the nanotube diameter. (f) Addition of
each aryne increases the length of the nanoribbon by an additional
[C24Cl6] unit and releases three Cl2 molecules so that the overall reaction can be described as a polycondensation
(n ≥ 2). Time-series AC-HRTEM images (h) and
corresponding simulated TEM images (i), generated by exposing the
corresponding structural models (j) to a limited dose of 1 ×
106 e–/nm2 of 80 keV electrons,
illustrating rotation and twisting of the chlorinated graphene nanoribbon
formed from PCC molecules inside the nanotube (a black arrow indicates
the position of a twist in the nanoribbon). (g) Energy dispersive
X-ray spectrum confirming the presence of Cl-atoms in the nanoribbon
structure (Cu peak is due to the specimen holder).

Under the 80 keV e-beam, the molecules entrapped in
a nanotube,
PCC@SWNT, receive the same amount of energy from the fast electrons
(eq 1) and experience
similar conditions to those described earlier for PCC on graphene,
so that the dechlorination process and the formation of reactive aryne
species can be considered as an initial step in PCC@SWNT transformations.
However, the molecular stacks persist visibly unchanged in the nanotube
up to the point that a cumulative dose of 2 × 108 e/nm2 from the 80 keV e-beam has been received by the sample, which
is significantly greater than the theoretically predicted dose of
2.3 × 107 e/nm2 (Supporting Information, Section S2) that is required to trigger the dechlorination
of PCC in the stacks. The discrepancy of a factor of 10 between the
predicted and observed reactivities is explained by the unfavorable
mutual orientations adopted by the molecules within the SWNT cavity
and matches well our AC-HRTEM experimental observations where the
neighboring PCC molecules appear to engage in intermolecular bonding
only when the molecular stack loosens and creates more space for the
molecules to adopt more favorable mutual orientations (Figure 2a,b). While dechlorination
of PCC on graphene by the 80 keV e-beam has been shown to lead to
a Diels–Alder reaction of the resultant aryne with the underlying
graphene sheet (Figure 1a), under the same experimental conditions, the aryne formed within
SWNT will not be able to perform a cycloaddition with the concave
side of the nanotube and therefore is forced to react with a neighboring
molecule (Figure 2e).
Since the Diels–Alder cycloaddition is a particularly sterically
demanding process (e.g., the aryne
on graphene must change to an edge-on orientation, Figure 1f), the reaction between the
aryne and PCC can take place only if their planes adopt a particular
angle of ca. 100°, which is not possible within
the tight molecular stack in PCC@SWNT. Our theoretical modeling confirms
that the angular adduct observed in the AC-HRTEM images corresponds
to C48Cl22, which is a result of the Diels–Alder
cycloaddition of an aryne C24Cl10 (dienophile)
and PCC (diene), with an angular shape due to two bridging sp3-hybridized carbon atoms (Figure 2d), and is sufficiently long-lived to be
captured by AC-HRTEM (Figure 2b).

In similar fashion to PCC on graphene, the kinetic
energy of the
e-beam transferred to an atom of PCC (T, eq 1) drives bond dissociation
in the molecule within the SWNT, but because the bond dissociation
energy threshold depends on the orientation of the bond with respect
to the direction of momentum transferred from the e-beam,25 the energy thresholds for transformations of
PCC inside nanotubes (in which the molecular plane is parallel to
the e-beam) are expected to differ from those on graphene (molecular
plane perpendicular to the e-beam). Our calculations predict two major
energy barriers: 9.1 eV to trigger the formation of the aryne from
PCC and 10.9 eV for the rearrangement of the angular Diels–Alder
adduct (Figure 4).
Both energy barriers can be overcome under our AC-HRTEM imaging conditions
(T = 15.8 eV for carbon, eq 1). However, because the 10.9 eV energy required
to break the C=C bridge in the Diels–Alder adduct, C48Cl22, is relatively high, only rare collisions
with fast electrons of the e-beam can deliver sufficient energy to
the molecule, which explains why the angular adduct C48Cl22 is kinetically stable enough to be observed in our
experiments and transforms only gradually into flat structures corresponding
to C48Cl18via a 1,2-rearrangement
(Figure 2e). The rearrangement
process is driven by the e-beam initiated formation of carbon radicals
within the structure which releases four chlorine atoms, and the resultant
species reorganizes to form the flat molecule C48Cl18, gaining full aromaticity (Figure 4). This transformation proceeds via a series of metastable and hence transient intermediates which are
too short-lived to be captured by AC-HRTEM. Overall, our AC-HRTEM
imaging not only reveals the product of a multistep reaction, i.e., the polycondensation of PCC to form a nanoribbon,
but also successfully captures an important intermediate, the angular
Diels–Alder adduct, thus elucidating the two key steps of this
complex chemical transformation: Diels–Alder addition and planarization
of the adduct.

Figure 4 Energy
profile of the intermolecular reactions observed for PCC
in carbon nanotubes. Impact of the 80 keV e-beam causes dissociation
of C–Cl bonds and the formation of a reactive aryne species
(similar to the reaction of PCC observed on graphene). Provided that
the space in the nanotube is sufficient for the aryne to reach a near-orthogonal
orientation to a neighboring PCC molecule, the aryne (dienophile)
and PCC (diene) undergo a Diels–Alder cycloaddition leading
to the relatively stable C48Cl22 adduct. Under
further e-beam irradiation, the initial adduct loses two Cl2 molecules and rearranges into a flat molecule C24Cl18 with an extended fully aromatic π-system.

C=C bonds within the planar species C48Cl18 (Figure 3e) have similar properties to those in PCC and therefore
can react
with subsequent aryne molecules following an energy profile similar
to that described above (Figure 4). The result of each aryne cycloaddition is that the
molecule elongates by an additional [C24Cl6]
unit, and in the overall process of polycondensation, PCC molecules
join the growing nanoribbon structure and release chlorine atoms (Figure 3e,f). It is important
to emphasize that while the carbon nanotube does not participate in
the transformations directly (unlike graphene), serving merely as
a container, it has a significant effect on the reaction, e.g., defining the growth direction of
the nanoribbon by blocking the nonlinear pathways of polycondensation
(Figure 3e). The nanoribbon
core has a structure identical to that of polyacene with a width of
1.04 nm (Figure 3h–j)
and equidistantly positioned Cl-atoms along the edges of the nanoribbons
(chlorine atoms appear as dark dots, for example Figure 3h), clearly indicating that
these are zigzag nanoribbon edges as opposed to an armchair edge in
which the Cl-atoms would be grouped in pairs. The estimated mass density
of the nanoribbon@SWNT is about one-third lower than that of a PCC@SWNT
stack (Supporting Information, Section
S4), which may be the reason for the observed twisting of the nanoribbon
(Figure 3d,h and Supporting Information, Section S4) as it allows
better compaction of the nanoribbon in the nanotube cavity. Because
the nanotubes are very long (up to several micrometres) compared to
the molecules, we do not observe their SWNT tips to confirm this experimentally.
Graphene nanoribbons are materials with increasing importance for
optical and electronic applications, as their functional properties
can be adapted by strictly controlling their width, and there is a
significant drive to develop efficient synthetic approaches for these
materials. Continuous filming of intermolecular reactions in real
space by AC-HRTEM in this study unveils an unexpected pathway of nanoribbon
growth, previously unforeseen even hypothetically, and which we can now replicate on a preparative scale by heating PCC inside nanotubes
at 700 °C in vacuum (Figure S15).

In order to demonstrate the generality of our approach,
we also
investigated octathio[8]circulene (OTC), a rare class of fully heterocyclic
circulene molecule,38 which has a similar
size and shape to PCC, but with the central disk of carbon atoms surrounded
by eight sulfur atoms (D8h symmetry, Figure 5a). Because sulfur atoms can bridge between two carbon atoms, OTC
is expected to exhibit reaction pathways markedly different to PCC
under the same conditions. OTC was inserted into carbon nanotubes,
as verified by the redshift in the position of the characteristic
G band in the Raman spectrum of filled SWNT (Figures S14–S19), indicative of electron transfer from the electron-donating
guest molecules to the electron-accepting host carbon nanostructure,
and further investigated under the same conditions as PCC@SWNT. Entrapped
in nanotubes, octathio[8]circulene forms stacks, OTC@SWNT (Figure 5c,d), that appear
in AC-HRTEM images almost identical to PCC@SWNT, but time series imaging
reveals that OTC molecules are more sensitive to the e-beam as the
onset of their transformations takes place at a lower dose of the
e-beam by a factor of 100 (Figure 5c). While neighboring PCC molecules require substantial
reorientation within the nanotube to undergo chemical reactions, detailed
analysis of OTC reaction videos (Supporting Video 4) and time-series images (Figure 5c,d) surprisingly indicate that OTC molecules
are able to react with each other while still essentially constrained
within the stack, forming a U-shaped adduct with an interplanar angle
of about 40° (Figure 5d). Upon receiving further doses of electrons from the e-beam,
the adduct of OTC undergoes planarization (Figure 5c), thus gradually converting into a ribbon-like
product inside the nanotube (Figure 5c bottom frame, and Figure 5h). The edge of the ribbon-like polymer has
a higher contrast consistent with the presence of atoms with a higher
atomic number than carbon along the edge (e.g., S atoms, confirmed by EDX, Figure 5b) and has a jagged appearance (Figure 5h) which differs
significantly from the atomically smooth edge of the nanoribbon formed
from PCC under the same conditions.

Figure 5 (a) Structural diagram of OTC. (b) EDX
spectrum confirms the presence
of sulfur in the OTC@SWNT structure. (c) AC-HRTEM time-series images
of OTC inside a SWNT undergoing polycondensation and the electron beam
dose acquired by the molecules at each stage of the reaction. (d–f)
Time-series AC-HRTEM images (d) of the initial reaction steps show
good correlation with simulated TEM images (e), generated by exposing
a structural model (f) to limited doses of 80 keV electrons, and demonstrate
the ability of OTC to react while still within the stack leading to
U-shaped intermediate adducts which subsequently undergo planarization.
(g) Balanced reaction equation of the polycondensation taking place
under AC-HRTEM conditions at 80 keV. (h) A polymeric product formed
as a result of OTC polycondensation showing jagged irregular edges.
(i) Pathways of reactions of OTC with neighboring molecules triggered
by the 80 keV e-beam: Impact of the e-beam eliminates one of the C
atoms, and the formed thiyl biradical attacks a neighboring OTC molecule
leading to an angular C31S16 adduct (U-shaped),
which continues transforming via elimination of the
sextet C atom and out-of-plane S atom (in either order, top and bottom
pathways) to yield a planar C30S15 molecule.
This process repeats with the C30S15 adduct
reacting with a subsequent OTC molecule and ultimately leads to a
ribbon-like product observed at the end of the AC-HRTEM experiment (h).

As in the case of PCC, detailed
analysis of the e-beam interactions
with OTC molecules sheds light on the nature of their transformations
observed by AC-HRTEM. The energy transferred from the 80 keV e-beam
to the C atom of 15.8 eV is significantly greater than that transferred
to the S atom 5.9 eV (eq 1 and Supporting Information, Section S3),
which indicates that the chain of chemical transformations of OTC
is triggered by e-beam impact on the C atom (Supporting Information, Section S5) in similar fashion as
for PCC. Our theoretical calculations indicate that the elimination
of a C atom from OTC leads to the formation of a reactive thiyl (RS•) radical species (Figures 5i and S11), which
have very different steric requirements as compared to the aryne radicals
derived from PCC under the same conditions. While the rigid planar
C24Cl10 aryne must change its orientation within
the nanotube in order to engage in a chemical reaction (Figure 2e), the C15S8 thiyl radical is significantly more conformationally flexible
and thus can attack the neighboring OTC via 1,4-addition
to a thiophene group without any significant reorientation (Figure 5i), leading to a
U-shaped C31S16 cycloadduct as shown by the
AC-HRTEM time-series images (Figure 5c,d). The two flat aromatic parts in the C31S16 cycloadduct bridged by sulfur and sp3-hybridized
carbon atoms provide an interplane angle of ca. 40°
that is clearly observed in the initial stages of OTC@SWNT transformations
under the 80 keV beam (Figure 5d and Supporting Video 3). Our
DFT calculations confirm that the U-shaped C31S16 cycloadduct is a stable species with a sextet carbon atom that exists
as a Schrock-type carbene; however, AC-HRTEM imaging reveals that
upon further exposure to the e-beam, it undergoes transformations
leading to extended structures (Figure 5c) which are consistent with reaction pathways that
involve the elimination of the S atom of the former thiophene ring
pushed out of the plane followed by elimination of the under-coordinated
sextet C atom (Figure 5i, top), or these two processes in a reverse order (Figure 5i, bottom), both leading to
a planarized C30S15 product in which two oligothiophene
units are bridged by two sulfide bridges (Figure 5i), which can be clearly observed in AC-HRTEM
time series (Figure 5d, last two frames). This process of radical addition, followed by
C and S-atom elimination, and finally planarization can repeat again
at either end of the C30S15 molecule, thus gradually
converting the starting OTC compound to a ribbon-like polymeric product
inside the nanotube (Figure 5c bottom frame and Figure 5h). AC-HRTEM images reveal that the polymer formed
from OTC molecules has a complex undulating structure which cannot
be described as either a solely zigzag or armchair edged nanoribbon
because some sulfur atoms appear to have a role terminating the structure
(in the thiophene ring) and while others act as bridging atoms (sulfide
bridge) within the polymeric product (Figure S12), which is in stark contrast to the perfect polyacene (zigzag) nanoribbon
formed from PCC under the same conditions. It is interesting that
even after prolonged irradiation with the 80 keV e-beam, we see no
evidence for the formation of S-terminated nanoribbons with zigzag
edges from OTC, which may be related to an insufficient amount of
carbon in this molecule to form a continuous graphenic lattice containing
nanoribbon as in the case of PCC, such that some S atoms must be
incorporated in the backbone of the polymeric product.

Conclusions
Our chemTEM approach is capable of continuously capturing images
of intermolecular reactions, including the formation of transient
reactive intermediates (aryne, Diels–Alder adduct, short polyaromatic
intermediates, U-shaped and planar sulfide-bridged oligothiophenes),
in real space at the single-molecule level, imaging the entire pathway
of the transformations of uniquely identifiable molecules, from initial
reactants to the final products. The use of carbon nanostructures
as supports for the molecules in our studies is crucial, as it ensures
that the kinetic energy of fast electrons transferred directly to
the atom is a dominant force causing atomic displacements, bond dissociations,
and reactions, the rate of which is determined by the nature of the
atom and the energy and dose rate of the e-beam. These are fully controlled
by the operating conditions of the TEM and can be readily modeled using
our theoretical framework developed for chemTEM. It is important to
emphasize that transformations of the molecules are promoted by the
e-beam itself, without any additional stimulus, and therefore the
reactant molecules must be chosen such that they are activated only
above a certain electron dose rate (eq 2) which allows moderation of the rates of the observed
reactions to make them commensurate with the TEM image capture rate.
For a multistep reaction, such as polycondensations of PCC or OTC,
if the reaction intermediates are separated by sufficient energy barriers,
their structures can also be imaged by ChemTEM, uncovering the reaction
pathway at the molecular level. The comparison of two molecules with
similar shapes but different composition, i.e., PCC
and OTC, confined within a carbon nanotube cavity, demonstrates the
significance of the steric factor in real space. The steric demands
of the key reaction intermediates, the aryne and thiyl biradical formed
from PCC and OTC, respectively, determine the reaction rate, with
the latter being more reactive (by a factor of 100) due to the less
strict steric requirements for reaction of the thiyl biradical. Significantly,
we have demonstrated the potential of this approach not only to study
known chemical reactions but also discover previously unknown reactions
such as polycondensation, which leads to the formation of either chlorinated
graphene nanoribbons or unusual polythiophenes, depending on the structure
of the molecular precursor. The multistep mechanisms of these reactions
determined by AC-HRTEM are complex and difficult to postulate a priori or from macroscopic observations, but our chemTEM
time-series imaging provides the most direct method for enabling and
studying chemical reactions at the molecular level.

Methods
Computational Methods
The typical
workflow for investigating
possible electron beam (e-beam)-induced reactions of a molecule is
as follows: An initial simulation of an electron impact is performed,
corresponding to the largest possible transferral of energy (Tmax) for the relevant beam energy and element
and considering the angle of the electron beam with respect to the
molecule. When repeated for all atoms of the molecule for which e-beam-induced
structural changes are feasible, this identifies the molecule’s
susceptibility to direct knock-on (DKO) damage for the given beam
energy. Taking the impacts that result in structural changes of interest,
the impact simulations are repeated at lower energies until the minimum
energy required to induce them (the threshold energy Ed) is found to the desired accuracy (typically 0.1 eV).
This can then be used to calculate the cross-section (σ) of
the reaction at any beam energy and therefore characterize the rate
of this reaction for any combination of e-beam energy and electron
dose rate (j).

If the initial impact simulations
are not exhaustive, they can be chosen based on experimental TEM observations.
Meanwhile, the computationally optimized structures that result from
this process can be used to aid image interpretation and structural
analysis, particularly with the use of multislice TEM image simulations.
An iterative “back-and-forth” process of comparison
between the computational results, experimental TEM images, and proposed
reaction steps can therefore be used to identify reaction mechanisms
under the e-beam.

Threshold energies of beam-induced processes
were calculated via density functional molecular dynamics (DFT-MD) simulations, performed as
described in a previous
study26 but using the B3LYP/6-31G* level
of theory to accommodate for the increased electronegativity of the
chlorine atoms; use of this basis set both quantitatively and qualitatively
affected the results. The initial atomic velocities in the DFT-MD simulations
were randomly sampled from a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution
at 298 K. Reaction cross sections were calculated using these threshold
energies (as an isotropic approximation) and the McKinley–Feshbach
approximation, which enabled characteristic doses to be calculated
in order to compare to the experimental TEM images. Thermal lattice
contributions to cross sections were calculated from a Maxwell–Boltzmann
distribution at 298 K.

Electron impacts are modeled using DFT-MD with a 1 fs time-step.
The Q-Chem software package is used,39 utilizing
a Fock matrix extrapolation procedure with a sixth-order polynomial
and 12 Fock matrices in order to lower computational cost by using
information from previous time-steps to accelerate SCF convergence
times.40 The SCF convergence criterion
is 106, and the threshold for neglect of two electron integrals
is 109. The energy transferred from the incident electron
to the nucleus is simply added to the existing velocity of the atom
(due to molecular vibration) during a single time-step, as this interaction
is extremely quick (on the order of approximately 10–22 seconds). The dynamics of the system are propagated on the Born–Oppenheimer
surface until the reaction of interest has irreversibly occurred or
until the energy is dissipated throughout the molecule and it is clear
no further reaction will occur; this normally requires at most 500
fs of simulation time and in most cases <200 fs.

Materials Preparation
Perchlorocoronene (PCC) was prepared
by treating coronene using conditions reported previously.41 IR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry confirmed
the product formation, and the degree of chlorination was determined via GC-MS to be >99%. Octathio[8]circulene (OTC) was
synthesized
by a previously reported method.38

SWNT (arc-discharge, P2-SWNT, Carbon Solutions Ltd.) were heated at
500 °C for 20 min in air. PCC (15 mg) was mixed with the SWNT
(5 mg), sealed under vacuum (10–6 mbar) in a Pyrex
glass ampule, and heated at 400 °C for 3 days. The sample was
allowed to cool and was then washed to remove excess molecules from
the exterior of the SWNT by suspending in toluene (20 mL) with ultrasonication,
followed by filtration through a PTFE membrane (0.2 μm pore
size) to give PCC@SWNT samples as a black powder. OTC was inserted
into the SWNT from the gas phase following the same procedure as for
PCC described above. The encapsulation of PCC and OTC in SWNT was
additionally confirmed by EDX and Raman spectroscopy (Supporting Information, Section S8).

Graphene
sheets grown by chemical vapor deposition of methane on
copper foils were transferred onto TEM grids by procedures previously
described.42 Deposition of PCC onto graphene
was carried out by placing the solid compound in a Knudsen cell (Kentax
Evaporator TCE-BSC), which was baked overnight at 200 °C in ultrahigh
vacuum. The temperature was further increased to 250 °C, and
after 30 min of thermal equilibration, the compound was evaporated
for 30 min onto graphene. The adsorption of C24Cl12 on graphene was confirmed by in situ X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (Multiprobe, Omicron) employing a monochromatic Al Kα radiation (Supporting Information, Section S9).

Transmission Electron Microscopy
The aberration-corrected
HRTEM imaging was carried out using an image-side Cs-corrected
FEI Titan 80–300 transmission electron microscope operated
at 80 kV acceleration voltage with modified filament extraction voltage
to enhance the contrast and information limit.42 Images were recorded on a slow-scan CCD camera type Gatan
Ultrascsan XP1000 with pixel binning by a factor of 2 (1k × 1k image
pixel size) using the prespecimen beam-blanker to avoid electron irradiation
during the camera read-out time. Typical dose rates for AC-HRTEM imaging
were between 0.5 and 2 × 106 e-/nm2/s and exposure
times between 0.5 and 1.0 s. 100 kV imaging was performed on a JEOL2100
FEG TEM (used for initial assessment of the filling of nanotubes with
PCC). For all in situ irradiation experiments, the
microscope provided a highly controlled source of local and directed
electron radiation on a selected area of the sample. The electron
flux was kept to a minimum using low magnifications and short exposure
times together with activated prespecimen blanker while searching
for a suitable area, focusing and stigmating the lens, with the total
search dose between 2 and 6 × 105 e-/nm2. This corresponds to an accumulated dose typically used for 1 to
3 normal image acquisitions and does not contribute significantly
(<5–10%) to the total dose used for the observation of chemical
transformations.

Subsequent TEM image simulations of structure
models were performed using the multislice program QSTEM by C. T. Koch
(http://www.qstem.org). Image
simulation parameters were 80 keV electron energy, spherical aberration
parameter CS = 10 μm, focus = −8
nm (corresponds to Scherzer-focus condions with black atom contrast),
focus spread = 4 nm. The dampening effect of the camera (MTF, modulation
transfer function) was included. The effect of limited electron dose
was emulated by applying noise to the calculated (infinite dose)
images using a custom-made Monte Carlo program exploiting the Poisson
statistics of electrons.43

Supporting Information Available
Additional information
is available
online as video files showing reactions of PCC on graphene and in
carbon nanotubes, and a PDF containing The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.6b08228.Details of calculations
for molecules under the e-beam,
additional micrographs showing PCC and OTC reactions in nanotubes
and examples of products formed from these molecules, spectroscopy
data (Raman, energy dispersive X-ray analysis and X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy) and details of TEM image simulations (PDF)

Video S1: chemTEM video of reactions of PCC molecule on graphene under the 80 keV e-beam (AVI)

Video S2: theoretical simulation of the 80 keV e-beam impact on the outer carbon atom of PCC molecule causing displacements of the atoms from their equilibrium positions (MPG)

Video S3: chemTEM video of polycondensation of PCC inside carbon nanotube under the 80 keV e-beam (AVI)

Video S4: chemTEM video of polycondensation of OTC inside carbon nanotube under the 80 keV e-beam (AVI)

Video S5: chemTEM video of the latter stages of PCC polycondensation and formation of zigzag graphene nanoribbon terminated with Cl-atoms under the 80 keV e-beam (AVI)

Video S6: chemTEM video of the dynamic behavior of Cl-terminated graphene nanoribbon under the 80 keV e-beam (AVI)



Supplementary Material
nn6b08228_si_001.pdf

 nn6b08228_si_002.avi

 nn6b08228_si_003.mpg

 nn6b08228_si_004.avi

 nn6b08228_si_005.avi

 nn6b08228_si_006.avi

 nn6b08228_si_007.avi

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
E.B., T.W.C., and A.N.K. acknowledge ERC Consolidator
Grants
and EPSRC for financial support and the Nanoscale and Microscale Research
Centre (nmRC), University of Nottingham, for access to instrumentation.
S.T.S., A.M., and E.B. are grateful to the High Performance Computing (HPC)
Facility at the University of Nottingham for providing computational
time. A.T., J.B., and U.K. acknowledge the support of the “Graphene
Flagship” and DFG SPP “Graphene”. U.K., J.B.,
and S.K. acknowledge the DFG and the Ministry of Science, Research
and the Arts (MWK) of Baden-Wuerttemberg within the frame of the SALVE
(sub-angstrom low-voltage electron microscopy) project. A.T. and O.R.
acknowledge the DFG support through the grants (TU149/2-2 and TU149/5-1).
==== Refs
References
Atkins P. ; Jones L.  Chemical Principles: the Quest for
Insight , 2 nd ed.; W.H.
Freeman & Co : New York , 2002 .
Logan S. R.  Fundamentals of Chemical
Kinetics ; Longman Group Ltd. : London , 1996 .
De
Oteyza D. G. ; Gorman P. ; Chen Y.-C. ; Wickenburg S. ; Riss A. ; Mowbray D. J. ; Etkin G. ; Pedramrazi Z. ; Tsai H.-Z. ; Rubio A. ; Crommie M. F. ; Fischer F. R. 
Direct
Imaging of Covalent Bond Structure in Single-Molecule Chemical Reactions . Science 
2013 , 340 , 1434 –1437 10.1126/science.1238187 .23722428 
Di
Giovannantonio M. ; El Garah M. ; Lipton-Duffin J. ; Meunier V. ; Cardenas L. ; Revurat Y. F. ; Cossaro A. ; Verdini A. ; Perepichka D. F. ; Rosei F. ; Contini G. 
Insight into
Organometallic Intermediate and its Evolution to Covalent Bonding
in Surface-Confined Ullmann Polymerization . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 8190 –8198 10.1021/nn4035684 .23987501 
Hla S.-W. ; Bartels L. ; Meyer G. ; Rieder K.-H. 
Inducing All Steps
of a Chemical Reaction with the Scanning Tunnelling Microscope Tip:
Towards Single Molecule Engineering . Phys. Rev.
Lett. 
2000 , 85 , 2777 –2780 10.1103/PhysRevLett.85.2777 .10991231 
Hulsken B. ; Van Hameren R. ; Gerritsen J. W. ; Khoury T. ; Thordarson P. ; Crossley M. J. ; Rowan A. E. ; Nolte R. J. M. ; Elemans J. A. A. W. 
Speller,
S. Real-Time Single-Molecule Imaging of Oxidation Catalysis at a Liquid–Solid
Interface . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2007 , 2 , 285 –289 10.1038/nnano.2007.106 .18654285 
Zhou H. ; Liu J. ; Du S. ; Zhang L. ; Li G. ; Zhang Y. ; Tang B. Z. ; Gao H.-J. 
Direct Visualization of Surface-Assisted
Two-Dimensional Diyne Polycyclotrimerization . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 5567 –5570 10.1021/ja501308s .24689835 
Treier M. ; Pignedoli C. A. ; Laino T. ; Rieger R. ; Müllen K. ; Passerone D. ; Fasel R. 
Surface-Assisted Cyclodehydrogenation
Provides a Synthetic Route Towards Easily Processable and Chemically
Tailored Nanographenes . Nat. Chem. 
2011 , 3 , 61 –67 10.1038/nchem.891 .21160519 
Riss A. ; Paz A. P. ; Wickenburg S. ; Tsai H.-Z. ; De Oteyza D. G. ; Bradley A. J. ; Ugeda M. M. ; Gorman P. ; Jung H. S. ; Crommie M. F. ; Rubio A. ; Fischer F. R. 
Imaging Single-Molecule
Reaction Intermediates Stabilized by Surface Dissipation and Entropy . Nat. Chem. 
2016 , 8 , 678 –683 10.1038/nchem.2506 .27325094 
Skowron S. T. ; Koroteev V. O. ; Baldoni M. ; Lopatin S. ; Zurutuza A. ; Chuvilin A. ; Besley E. 
Reaction Kinetics of Bond Rotation
in Graphene . Carbon 
2016 , 105 , 176 –182 10.1016/j.carbon.2016.04.020 .
Kotakoski J. ; Mangler C. ; Meyer J. C. 
Imaging
Atomic-Level Random Walk
of a Point Defect in Graphene . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 3991 10.1038/ncomms4991 .24874455 
Robertson A. W. ; Lee G. D. ; He K. ; Yoon E. ; Kirkland A. I. ; Warner J. H. 
Stability and Dynamics
of the Tetravacancy in Graphene . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 1634 –1642 10.1021/nl500119p .24588782 
Rodriguez-Manzo J. A. ; Cretu O. ; Banhart F. 
Trapping Metal
Atoms in Vacancies
of Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 3422 –3428 10.1021/nn100356q .20499848 
Rodriguez-Manzo J. A. ; Terrones M. ; Terrones H. ; Kroto H. W. ; Sun L. T. ; Banhart F. 
In situ Nucleation of Carbon Nanotubes
by Injection of Carbon Atoms into Metal Nanoparticles . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2007 , 2 , 307 –311 10.1038/nnano.2007.107 .18654289 
Sun L. ; Banhart F. ; Krasheninnikov A. V. ; Rodriguez-Manzo J. A. ; Terrones M. ; Ajayan P. M. 
Carbon Nanotubes as High-Pressure
Cylinders and Nanoextruders . Science 
2006 , 312 , 1199 –1202 10.1126/science.1124594 .16728637 
Chamberlain T. W. ; Meyer J. C. ; Biskupek J. ; Leschner J. ; Santana A. ; Besley N. A. ; Bichoutskaia E. ; Kaiser U. ; Khlobystov A. N. 
Reactions
of the Inner Surface of Carbon Nanotubes and Nanoprotrusion Process
Imaged at the Atomic Scale . Nat. Chem. 
2011 , 3 , 732 –737 10.1038/nchem.1115 .21860464 
Sloan J. ; Matthewman G. ; Dyer-Smith C. ; Sung A. Y. ; Zheng Z. ; Suenaga K. ; Kirkland A. I. ; Flahaut E. 
Direct Imaging of the
Structure, Relaxation, and Sterically Constrained Motion of Encapsulated
Tungsten Polyoxometalate Lindqvist Ions within Carbon Nanotubes . ACS Nano 
2008 , 2 , 966 –976 10.1021/nn7002508 .19206494 
Koshino M. ; Niimi Y. ; Nakamura E. ; Kataura H. ; Okazaki T. ; Suenaga K. ; Iijima S. 
Analysis of the Reactivity and Selectivity
of Fullerene Dimerization Reactions at the Atomic Level . Nat. Chem. 
2010 , 2 , 117 –124 10.1038/nchem.482 .21124402 
Harano K. ; Takenaga S. ; Okada S. ; Niimi Y. ; Yoshikai N. ; Isobe H. ; Suenaga K. ; Kataura H. ; Koshino M. ; Nakamura E. 
Conformational Analysis of Single Perfluoroalkyl Chains
by Single-Molecule Real-Time Transmission Electron Microscopic Imaging . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 466 –473 10.1021/ja411235x .24341551 
Khlobystov A. N. ; Porfyrakis K. ; Kanai M. ; Britz D. A. ; Ardavan A. ; Shinohara H. ; Dennis T. J. S. ; Briggs G. A. D. 
Molecular Motion
of Endohedral Fullerenes in Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2004 , 43 , 1386 –1389 10.1002/anie.200352389 .
Lorenz U. J. ; Zewail A. H. 
Observing Liquid Flow in Nanotubes by 4D electron Microscopy . Science 
2014 , 344 , 1496 –1500 10.1126/science.1253618 .24970082 
Zewail A. H. 
Four-Dimensional
Electron Microscopy . Science 
2010 , 328 , 187 –193 10.1126/science.1166135 .20378810 
van
der Veen R. M. ; Kwon O.-H. ; Tissot A. ; Hauser A. ; Zewail A. H. 
Single-Nanoparticle Phase Transitions Visualised by
Four-Dimensional Electron Microscopy . Nat. Chem. 
2013 , 5 , 395 –402 10.1038/nchem.1622 .23609090 
Zoberbier T. ; Chamberlain T. W. ; Biskupek J. ; Suyetin M. ; Majouga A. G. ; Besley E. ; Kaiser U. ; Khlobystov A. N. 
Investigation
of the Interactions and Bonding between Carbon and Group VIII Metals
at the Atomic Scale . Small 
2016 , 12 , 1649 –1657 10.1002/smll.201502210 .26848826 
Chamberlain T. W. ; Biskupek J. ; Skowron S. T. ; Bayliss P. A. ; Bichoutskaia E. ; Kaiser U. ; Khlobystov A. N. 
Isotope
Substitution Extends the
Lifetime of Organic Molecules in Transmission Electron Microscopy . Small 
2015 , 11 , 622 –629 10.1002/smll.201402081 .25208335 
Skowron S. T. ; Lebedeva I. V. ; Popov A. M. ; Bichoutskaia E. 
Approaches
to Modelling Irradiation-Induced Processes in Transmission Electron
Microscopy . Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 6677 –6692 10.1039/c3nr02130k .23783785 
Chuvilin A. ; Kaiser U. ; Bichoutskaia E. ; Besley N. A. ; Khlobystov A. N. 
Direct
transformation of graphene to fullerene . Nat.
Chem. 
2010 , 2 , 450 –453 10.1038/nchem.644 .20489712 
Santana A. ; Zobelli A. ; Kotakoski J. ; Chuvilin A. ; Bichoutskaia E. 
Inclusion
of Radiation Damage Dynamics in High-Resolution Transmission Electron
Microscopy Image Simulations: the Example of Graphene . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2013 , 87 , 094110 10.1103/PhysRevB.87.094110 .
Lebedeva I. V. ; Chamberlain T. W. ; Popov A. M. ; Knizhnik A. A. ; Zoberbier T. ; Biskupek J. ; Kaiser U. ; Khlobystov A. N. 
The Atomistic
Mechanism of Carbon Nanotube Cutting Catalyzed by Nickel under an
Electron Beam . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 14877 –14890 10.1039/C4NR05006A .25363681 
Turchanin A. ; Golzhauser A. 
Carbon Nanomembranes:
Carbon Nanomembranes . Adv. Mater. (Weinheim,
Ger.) 
2016 , 28 , 6075 –6103 10.1002/adma.201506058 .
Sarkar S. ; Bekyarova E. ; Niyogi S. ; Haddon R. C. 
Diels-Alder Chemistry
of Graphite and Graphene: Graphene as Diene and Dienophile . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 3324 10.1021/ja200118b .21341649 
Markevich A. ; Kurasch S. ; Lehtinen O. ; Reimer O. ; Feng X. ; Müllen K. ; Turchanin A. ; Khlobystov A. N. ; Kaiser U. ; Besley E. 
Electron Beam
Controlled Covalent
Attachment of Small Organic Molecules to Graphene . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 2711 –2719 10.1039/C5NR07539D .26757842 
Denis P. A. 
Organic
Chemistry of Graphene: the Diels-Alder Reaction . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2013 , 19 , 15719 –15725 10.1002/chem.201302622 .24115199 
Cao Y. ; Osuna S. ; Liang Y. ; Haddon R. C. ; Houk K. N. 
Diels-Alder
Reactions of Graphene: Computational Predictions of Products and Sites
of Reaction . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 17643 –17649 10.1021/ja410225u .24159929 
Okazaki T. ; Iizumi Y. ; Okubo S. ; Kataura H. ; Liu Z. ; Suenaga K. ; Tahara Y. ; Yudasaka M. ; Okada S. ; Iijima S. 
Coaxially Stacked Coronene
Columns Inside Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 4853 –4857 10.1002/anie.201007832 .
Fujihara M. ; Miyata Y. ; Kitaura R. ; Nishimura Y. ; Camacho C. ; Irle S. ; Iizumi Y. ; Okazaki T. ; Shinohara H. 
Dimerization-Initiated Preferential
Formation of Coronene-Based
Graphene Nanoribbons in Carbon Nanotubes . J.
Phys. Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 15141 –15145 10.1021/jp3037268 .
Botka B. ; Füstös M. E. ; Tóháti H. M. ; Németh K. ; Klupp G. ; Szekrényes Z. ; Kocsis D. ; Utczás M. ; Székely E. ; Váczi T. ; Tarczay G. ; Hackl R. ; Chamberlain T. W. ; Khlobystov A. N. ; Kamarás K. 
Interactions and Chemical Transformations
of Coronene Inside and Outside Carbon Nanotubes . Small 
2014 , 10 , 1369 –1378 10.1002/smll.201302613 .24167020 
Chernichenko K. Yu. ; Sumerin V. V. ; Shpanchenko R. V. ; Balenkova E. S. ; Nenajdenko V. G. 
″Sulflower″: A New Form of Carbon Sulfide . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2006 , 45 , 7367 –7370 10.1002/anie.200602190 .
Shao Y. ; Gan Z. ; Epifanovsky E. ; Gilbert A. T. B. ; Wormit M. ; Kussmann J. ; Lange A. W. ; Behn A. ; Deng J. ; Feng X. ; Ghosh D. ; Goldey M. ; Horn P. R. ; Jacobson L. D. ; Kaliman I. ; Khaliullin R. Z. ; Kuś T. ; Landau A. ; Liu J. ; Proynov E. I. ; et al. Advances
in Molecular Quantum Chemistry Contained in the Q-Chem 4 Program Package . Mol. Phys. 
2015 , 113 , 184 –215 10.1080/00268976.2014.952696 .
Herbert J. M. ; Head-Gordon M. 
Accelerated, Energy-Conserving Born–Oppenheimer
Molecular Dynamics via Fock Matrix Extrapolation . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2005 , 7 , 3269 –3275 10.1039/b509494a .16240040 
Koshino M. ; Kurata H. ; Isoda S. 
Study of Structures at the Boundary
and Defects in Organic Thin Films of Perchlorocoronene by High-Resolution
and Analytical Transmission Electron Microscopy . Ultramicroscopy 
2010 , 110 , 1465 –1474 10.1016/j.ultramic.2010.09.003 .20864258 
Woszczyna M. ; Winter A. ; Grothe M. ; Willunat A. ; Wundrack S. ; Stosch R. ; Weimann T. ; Ahlers F. ; Turchanin A. 
All-Carbon
Vertical van der Waals Heterostructures: Non-Destructive Functionalization
of Graphene for Electronic Applications . Adv.
Mater. (Weinheim, Ger.) 
2014 , 26 , 4831 –4837 10.1002/adma.201400948 .
Biskupek J. ; Hartel P. ; Haider M. ; Kaiser U. 
Effects of Residual
Aberrations Explored on Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Ultramicroscopy 
2012 , 116 , 1 –7 10.1016/j.ultramic.2012.03.008 .
