
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.7b02777ArticleDirect Laser Writing of δ-
to α-Phase
Transformation in Formamidinium Lead Iodide Steele Julian A. *†Yuan Haifeng ‡Tan Collin Y. X. †Keshavarz Masoumeh ‡Steuwe Christian †Roeffaers Maarten B. J. *†Hofkens Johan ‡†Centre
for Surface Chemistry and Catalysis and ‡Department of Chemistry, KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200F, Leuven, 3001, Belgium* E-mail: julian.steele@kuleuven.be.* E-mail: maarten.roeffaers@kuleuven.be.01 08 2017 22 08 2017 11 8 8072 8083 21 04 2017 01 08 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Organolead
halide perovskites are increasingly considered for applications
well beyond photovoltaics, for example, as the active regions within
photonic devices. Herein, we report the direct laser writing (DLW:
458 nm cw-laser) of the formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3) yellow δ-phase into its high-temperature luminescent black
α-phase, a remarkably easy and scalable approach that takes
advantage of the material’s susceptibility to transition under
ambient conditions. Through the DLW of α-FAPbI3 tracks
on δ-FAPbI3 single-crystal surfaces, the controlled
and rapid microfabrication of highly luminescent structures exhibiting
long-term phase stability is detailed, offering an avenue toward the
prototyping of complex perovskite-based optical devices. The dynamics
and kinetics of laser-induced δ- to α-phase transformations
are investigated in situ by Raman microprobe analysis,
as a function of irradiation power, time, temperature, and atmospheric
conditions, revealing an interesting connection between oxygen intercalation
at the surface and the δ- to α-phase transformation dynamics,
an insight that will find application within the wider context of
FAPbI3 thermal phase relations.

formamidinium lead iodideFAPbI3perovskiteRaman scatteringdirect
laser writingphase transformationdocument-id-old-9nn7b02777document-id-new-14nn-2017-02777jccc-price
==== Body
The recent
advent of lead halide
perovskites—compounds based on a general APbX3 formula,
where A denotes an organic cation and X = I, Br, Cl—defined
a historic turning point in solar energy and semiconductor materials
science.1,2 The key characteristics of perovskites that
make these materials excellent light harvesters have sparked interest
in their application elsewhere in the field of optoelectronics and,
specifically, in photonic devices.3−11 Even polycrystalline lead halide perovskites show a very well-defined
tunable12 band gap that is typically observed
only in near-perfect crystalline materials, such as GaAs and other
members of the tetrahedral III–V family.13 Thus, the appeal for synthetic perovskite-based optoelectronic
devices stems from their ability to combine the high performance of
crystalline semiconductors with the ease of solution processing, all
at a low cost.14

While the methylammonum
(MA; CH3NH3+) lead iodide provskite
(MAPbI3) has thus far enjoyed
the preponderance of research interest in the field, recent developments
are shifting attention toward formamidinium (FA; HC(NH2)2+) lead iodide (FAPbI3) and, particularly,
mixtures incorporating dilute amounts of MA.15−18 Compared to the MAPbI3 system, FAPbI3 offers several notable advantages for
its application within optoelectronic devices, from lower hysteresis
during current–voltage measurements,19 superior photo and thermal stability,12,17,20,21 and longer carrier
lifetime (484 ns) to the roughly 1 order of magnitude gain in conductivity
(1.1 × 10–7 (Ωcm)−1).22 Together, these improvements provide
great promise for the production of device-quality FAPbI3-based materials.

However, phase stability issues plague FAPbI3 perovkites.
Of the two main FAPbI3 polymorphs, by far the most interesting
for optoelectronic applications is the high-temperature black perovskite
α-phase (trigonal) because of its appealing optical and electronic
properties,12,22 over its low-temperature yellow
nonperovskite δ-phase (hexagonal) counterpart. While thermal
transformations of FAPbI3 are relatively simple and easily
controlled, synthesis of the desirable α-FAPbI3 and
its stabilization at room temperature are not straightforward.16,23,24 Attempts to better understand
phase transformation relations among the δ and α polymorphs
are currently under way;23,25−27 however, a comprehensive model of the transient stages of phase
stability is yet to fully explain the structural diversity exhibited
by this material.28−30 The scattered formation of dark α-phase nucleation
centers within a yellow δ-FAPbI3 crystal to the coalescence
of a thermodynamically stable dark perovskite represents a scientifically
challenging and technologically important terra incognita. In most studies of perovskite phase relations to date, excluding
the recent in situ transmission electron microscopy
work by Divitini etal.,31 the only real-time in situ structural
diagnostics have been through X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements.
Usually, XRD alone is not versatile enough to yield data suitable
for process control or elucidating transformation dynamics.

Prolonged exposure to light has been shown to enact a variety of
changes in perovskite materials,32−38 not all of them bad. For example, under the right light exposure,39 significantly enhanced photoluminescence and
carrier lifetimes can be achieved. Therefore, following synthesis,
light treatments tailored to improve and modify material properties
offer a highly convenient and versatile postprocessing route. Considering
the fact that the complicated phase properties of FAPbI3-based perovskites remain firmly in the spotlight, it is somewhat
surprising that irradiation-induced phase restructuring is relatively
unexplored.25

Herein, the palette
of functional design parameters available to
material scientists and engineers utilizing FAPbI3-based
perovskites is significantly extended, as we report the direct laser
writing (DLW) of localized and stable δ- to α-phase transformations,
using 458 nm continuous-wave (cw)-laser light. Through the powerful
innovative coupling of in situ Raman scattering experiments
within our laser-driven approach, the transformation dynamics and
kinetics are revealed, for enhanced procedural control, shedding light
on how to exact the phase restructuring for micrometer fabrication.
In terms of engineering functional elements for optoelectronic applications,
the ability to switch the phase of FAPbI3 at the micrometer-level
builds on several other perovskite microprocessing methods available
(DLW synthesis,40 mechanical micropatterning,41 and laser-induced microstructuring38,42) and provides a promising avenue for the controlled preparation
of FAPbI3 materials with specific crystal structure.

Results
and Discussion
Structural, Vibrational, and Optical Properties
of Pure δ-
and α-Phase FAPbI3
We begin by overviewing
the characteristic properties of polymorphic FAPbI3. The
room-temperature stable yellow δ-FAPbI3 is known
to undergo a reversible phase transition above 150 °C,43 rearranging into its desired black α-FAPbI3 structure (see inset of Figure 1 to visualize such a change) before turning
back to its yellow phase following several days of storage under ambient
conditions.43Figure 1a displays powdered XRD scans recorded from
both the δ- and α-phase of FAPbI3, with their
diffraction peaks aligning with hexagonal (P63mc space group) and trigonal (P3m1 space group) structures, respectively.
XRD has thus far been widely used to identify the structural nature
of FAPbI3,25,28,43 with Raman spectroscopy far less utilized22 as a structurally sensitive probe. As will be seen later, a high
tendency for FAPbI3 to experience oxygen intercalation
at the surface44 means accurate Raman scattering
characterization can be achieved only by employing relatively low
excitation power densities (Iexc) and
short exposure and integration times.45

Figure 1 Physical
properties of polymorphic FAPbI3. Characterization
of the pure α-phase (top traces) and δ-phase (bottom traces)
of FAPbI3 by means of (a) powdered XRD, (b) Raman scattering
(λexc = 458 nm; Iexc <
5 × 102 W·cm–2), and (c) PL
(λexc = 532 nm). The inset here shows a typical FAPbI3 single crystal in its yellow phase (bottom) before transforming
into its black phase (top) following a 10 min 160 °C thermal
treatment.

Figure 1b presents
Raman scattering spectra recorded from pure δ- and α-FAPbI3 single crystals using a excitation wavelength of 458 nm and
low excitation intensity; for accurate Raman measurements, “low”
will be considered Iexc < 0.1 kW·cm–2. The δ-phase in Figure 1b exhibits a strong Raman mode centered near
107 cm–1 with a weak low-energy shoulder extending
down to roughly 70 cm–1 and a featureless high-energy
background. The energy of this shouldering band is reminiscent of
the PbI2 phonon density of states (see, for example, Figure 3b), suggesting it originates from I–Pb–I bending and
stretching.35,46 In fact, preliminary measurements
indicate the intensity of this shoulder to be connected to the shade
darkness of the material’s yellow color. On the other hand,
the Raman spectrum of α-FAPbI3 possesses two well-separated
vibrational signatures: a prominent low-energy mode at 137 cm–1, which is blue-shifted and comparably narrow (∼14
cm–1) relative to the δ-phase, and another
much broader and weaker Raman band located near 525 cm–1. The strong blue-shift in the former vibration likely reflects the
large change in lattice constant, and, given its relatively high energy,
the latter feature is expected to arise from the in-plane bending
of FA cations47 (δ(H2N–C–NH2)) within the framework. The in-plane bending of FA cations
similarly contributes to the Raman scattering spectrum of the cubic
perovskite phase of FAPbBr3 (521 cm–1),48 and since this band arises purely
from the trapped organics, it should act as a sensitive marker for
the orientational disorder of α-FAPbI3 single crystals.46

Figure 2 Power dependence of laser-induced surface modifications.
(a) Raman
spectra recorded using low IDLW from the
α-FAPbI3 crystal surface after 25 s of exposure to
the increasing laser powers indicated. These data have been normalized
and offset, with the vertical lines indicating spectral mode assignment,
which is discussed in the text. (b) Laser power density dependence
data of the measured Raman signals identified in (a). The lines fitting
these data provide a guide for the eye, and the SEM image in the inset
shows the extent of the α-FAPbI3 crystal surface
damage following exposure to the highest IDLW value studied.

Figure 3 Oxygen-related changes
in the Raman scattering spectrum. Raman
spectra recoded from δ-FAPbI3 (a) while exposed to
a very low IDLW of 10 W·cm–2 for an extended period of time and (b) before (bottom trace) and
after laser heating (IDLW = 500 W·cm–2) for 10 min under ambient (air; 21% oxygen), pure
oxygen (O2), and pure nitrogen (N2) atmospheres.
Note that spectra in (b) were recorded using Iexc = 50 W·cm–2 and, for direct spectral
comparison, the spectrum of a pure PbI2 crystal is also
presented. For clarity both plots display offset-normalized spectra
(normalization factors given in (a)) with spectral signatures of various
vibrational species labeled.

Figure 1c
displays
the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectrum of our δ- and
α-phase FAPbI3 single crystals over 615–880
nm, recorded using 532 nm excitation and low Iexc. For the low-temperature δ-phase, no emission is
observed over this photonic range. The α-FAPbI3 single
crystals, on the other hand, exhibit a strong singular emission centered
near 820 nm, in sound agreement with other studies.22,39 The comparatively long wavelength of the emission suggests that
our single crystals are relatively free of structural defects or grain
boundaries, which would otherwise act to increase the optical band
gap.22

Laser-Induced Transformation
Dynamics
Next, we explore
the use of intense 458 nm laser light to locally heat and structurally
modify FAPbI3 single-crystal surfaces. An excitation wavelength
of 458 nm was chosen because it provides a relatively small DLW footprint
(compared to longer visible laser wavelengths) and resides on an optical
absorption feature exhibited by δ-FAPbI3 (see Figure
S1 in the Supporting Information), enhancing
the heat transfer efficiency.

To examine the systematic effect
of exposing α-FAPbI3 single crystals to relatively
high DLW optical power densities (IDLW), Raman spectra were acquired using a low Iexc following a 25 s exposure to increasing IDLW values, under an ambient atmosphere. Selected Raman
spectra recorded at different stages of a rising IDLW are presented in Figure 2a, while the analytical fitting of many measurements
made during a systematic increase in IDLW provides the power dependence data (of indicated modes) in Figure 2b. For completeness,
a clear discussion on how the Raman spectra are fitted and analyzed
throughout this work (including an example) can be found in the Supporting Information. Examining the full range
of the IDLW values presented in Figure 2, a relatively complex
spectral evolution is exhibited by δ-FAPbI3 when
exposed to intense laser light. Generally, the surface modifications
depicted in Figure 2b track the following sequence with a rising IDLW: (i) oxygen intercalation into the FAPbI3 crystal
surface (IPb–O), (ii) a δ-
to α-phase transformation (Iα), (iii) the near total degradation of existing Raman signals, and
(iv) the rapid growth of a lead monoxide Raman line shape (IPbO) at relatively high IDLW. Note that the details of this sequence will come later.

The inset in Figure 2b shows a SEM image of the crystal surface after high irradiance
exposure (∼2 kW·cm–2), revealing localized
degradation to the α-FAPbI3 surface. For relatively
large IDLW values, severe laser-induced
crystal damage is ultimately realized, with the Raman signals of polymorphic
FAPbI3 species fading into the formation of a substantial
lead oxide scale. Near 1.3 kW·cm–2 it is not
that the entire Raman signal is lost (as signals near the zero baseline),
but it is under transition with several species coexisting within
the Raman microprobe at once. The moment that lead monoxide modes
first appear in the spectra it is assumed that the status of the sample
is moving toward that of significant degradation, visible in its morphology
changes (inset of Figure 2b). We provide in Figure S3 of the Supporting Information a comparison of the Raman spectrum recorded from
a laser-damaged α-FAPbI3 surface with that measured
from pure PbO powder (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich), under identical conditions.
The observed vibrational energies and fwhm of the PbO-like modes in Figure 2a are far lower and
higher, respectively, compared to the Raman spectra recorded from
pure lead monoxide. Moreover, no notable change is observed in the
relative oscillator strength when comparing modes within the same
DLW-derived PbO spectrum. These differences suggest a lower degree
of structural quality and/or the formation of small ablated PbO crystallites,
leading to “phonon confinement”.49

The Role of Free Oxygen
Hereon we
will focus on the
interesting modifications arising from exposure to lower irradiances
and specifically those that foster the formation of α-FAPbI3 crystal. For IDLW incident with
a power of 0.2 kW·cm–2, modes at 160 and 240
cm–1 are the first to be introduced into the Raman
line shape of Figure 2a. To study this first structural change, Raman spectra were recorded in situ every 5 min using an extremely low Iexc value (∼10 W·cm–2) for
a total of 17 h. The Raman characterization results of this experiment
can be found in Figure 3a. Interestingly, the same new bands at 160 and 240 cm–1 arise in the Raman line shape after a 3 h exposure, paralleled by
a degradation to δ-FAPbI3 Raman signals. Following
much longer exposure times (>6 h) within an ambient atmosphere,
these
modes intensify, before the system equilibrates and the changes significantly
slow. We note that the normalizing factors used to scale these data
grow over time, reflecting a drop in the α-FAPbI3 Raman cross-section. This feature is in fact also contained in Figure 2b, where Iδ decreases rather quickly with increasing
laser powers, relative to the rise of other laser-induced species.
In explaining this, we suspect the weakening of δ-phase Raman
signals under light exposure is driven in multiple parts: (i) oxygen
intercalating into the perovskite (forming Pb–O), reducing
the number of Pb–I oscillators contributing δ-FAPbI3 signals, (ii) light-induced surface restructuring,32−35 and (iii) temperature changes, which act to shift both resonant
Raman effects (via perturbing the electronic structure)
and the Stokes scattering rate (i.e., phonon populations).

To provide further data points on the
role of oxygen, similar measurements to Figure 2 were recorded using a strongly transformative
power density (IDLW ≈ 0.9 kW·cm–2) under atmospheres ranging from pure oxygen to anoxic
(pure nitrogen); see Figure 3b. Exposed to pure N2 gas, the vibrations at 160
and 240 cm–1 never appear. Conversely, within a
pure oxygen atmosphere, these vibrations re-emerge and they are confirmed
to be oxygen-related. Both the vibrational energies and relative intensities
of the vibrations at 160 and 240 cm–1 are indicative
of Pb–O bands within the Raman microprobe, due to oxygen intercalation
at the surface.37 This is not unprecedented,
as parallels can be directly drawn here to the MAPbI3 system,
which suffers from a strong susceptibility to oxygen intercalation.44 Moreover, this effect is optically driven,37 explaining the response of δ-FAPbI3 to long exposures of low-power 458 nm laser light (see Figure 3a). We assign these
modes to oxygen intercalation at the δ-FAPbI3 surface
(IPb–O) and point out that they
are in fact inadvertently contained within the δ-FAPbI3 Raman spectrum reported by Han etal.,22 highlighting the strong propensity
for this phenomenon to occur.

Again we examine the role of oxygen
by acquiring low-power Raman
spectra ex situ for a series of δ-FAPbI3 single crystals heated from 110 °C up to the phase transition
temperature43 at 150 °C. Surprisingly,
the introduction of Pb–O vibrations at the surface is not limited
only to an optically driven process, as these peaks also appear within
the Raman line shape of materials heated as low as 110 °C FAPbI3 (see Figure S4 of the Supporting Information). As well, α-FAPbI3 phonon modes are introduced
into the scattering volume as low as 110 °C. This is in comparison
with powdered XRD measurements, which did not begin to reveal the
emergence of extremely weak α-phase Bragg peaks until reaching
an annealing temperature of 130 °C (see Figure S4 of the Supporting Information). In unravelling this
discrepancy the kinds of information the two techniques yield must
be considered; Raman scattering intrinsically probes surface structure,
rather than the overall average, like in XRD. This result suggests
that when exposed to temperatures well below 150 °C, oxygen finds
its way into the δ-FAPbI3 crystal surface and is
paralleled by the thermally premature transformation of α-FAPbI3 near the surface. We assume here that oxygen migration is
surface limited and that the subsurface crystal is unaffected in this
manner, explaining the XRD results.

DLW of δ- to α-Phase
Transformation in FAPbI3 Single Crystals
For Raman
spectra recorded following
exposure to IDLW = 0.41 kW·cm–2 and slightly higher in Figure 2a, a δ- to α-phase transformation
is clearly observed, manifested via the steady growth
of α-like modes at 137 and 525 cm–1 up to
a maximum relative intensity. Given that 458 nm argon-ion laser light
is used for excitation, the photolytically activated influences (photon-induced
chemical decomposition) are assumed negligible (DLW photon energy
= 2.7 eV) compared to the thermally driven process (radiative transfer).
For the specific case δ-FAPbI3 irradiated by relatively
low intensity 458 nm laser light (see, for example, the long exposure
data contained in Figure 3a), Raman measurements demonstrated no evidence of α-FAPbI3 synthesis following long exposures; only once temperatures
in the laser-heated volume increase will a δ- to α-phase
transformation occur.

The relative weighting of the α-phase
Raman bands exhibited at its height in Figure 2 is archetypal of repeated experiments, covering
a variety of α-FAPbI3 single crystals and IDLW values, a feature likely defined by the
optical penetration of 458 nm laser light incident on the (δ/α-)FAPbI3 surface50,51 and the transformation kinetics
of the laser-driven phase transformation. When comparing the pure
δ- and α-phase Raman signals measured under identical
experimental conditions, the Raman scattering cross-section (λexc = 458 nm) of the δ-phase is found to be over an order
of magnitude larger than that of the α-phase, a resonant Raman
effect likely incited by our choice to position the excitation wavelength
on a prominent absorption feature. Thus, it follows that there must
exist a substantial α-phase deposit within the total scattering
volume to account for the relative intensity of δ- and α-phase
Raman signals. Determining the exact transformation depth here is
difficult; however, depth profiling by near-IR (NIR) fluorescence
microspectroscopy using a high NA oil objective (1.4) reveals it to
be less than the diffraction-limited probe depth of 500 nm.

As already mentioned, δ-FAPbI3 is susceptible
to oxygen intercalation and α-phase modifications at the surface
well below 150 °C. Their appearance in Figure 2 confirms that there are two induced effects:
oxidation intercalation at the δ-FAPbI3 surface (using
ambient oxygen) followed by the restructuring into the α-FAPbI3 perovskite. This is highlighted in Figure 2b, where the introduction of IPb–O signals preludes the formations of α-FAPbI3 material, a seemingly fixed sequence across many experiments.

It is conceivable that the prior formation and growth of Pb–O
bonds and the δ- to α-phase transformation are actually
connected, with the energy barrier for the phase shift being lower
in the presence of intercalated oxygen. For example, exposure to air
during the fabrication of the MAPbI3 system was recently
shown to lead to different restructuring pathways.31 Within the inert anoxic (N2) atmosphere, there
is little option for which FAPbI3 can restructure, and
the material ultimately decomposes to PbI2 (see Figure 3b), akin to excessive
thermal treatments.20,52 Further, no IPb–O vibrations appear and α-FAPbI3 is never synthesized. On the other hand, under pure oxygen, there
is an enhancement in the relative α-phase Raman signal, indicating
that these conditions in fact foster more α-FAPbI3 synthesis compared to an ambient environment (∼21% oxygen).
Developing a comprehensive physical model to aid interpretation is
well outside the scope of the present study. However, these findings
support a strongly plausible argument, one that points toward free
oxygen atoms playing an influential role in FAPbI3 phase
transformation dynamics. This aspect of (δ/α-)FAPbI3 phase transformation has so far been overlooked and is particularly
significant. Moreover, it is also intrinsic to the transformation
kinetics and will be revisited later.

Moisture effects—in
the form of ambient humidity—are
yet to be considered, with their influence on organic cations or perovskite
mostly related to degradation processes by facilitating chemical reactions.53 For our experiments, along with sample storage,
a controlled ambient environment was implemented with a temperature
of 20.5 to 21.5 °C and a relative humidity of 47% to 50%. In
the case of FAPbI3, moisture can enhance photoluminescence;39 however, the influence of moisture on FAPbI3 phase transitions is relatively unexplored. The high susceptibility
to transform phase under ambient conditions is likely connected to
an altered surface energy caused by oxygen incorporation, and recent
density functional theory (DFT) calculations54 have suggested that moisture too can assist in the surface rearrangement
of the analogous MAPbI3 system. It is thus strongly possible
that moisture is further playing a role here by reducing the phase
transition barrier.

The stability of the α-FAPbI3 material transformed
by DLW was investigated over time. Raman spectra were recorded before
and after exposure to high irradiance, and, in both cases, an extremely
low power density was employed. The absence of α-phase vibrational
signatures before irradiation and their presence more than 2 weeks
after storage under ambient conditions reveals a relatively stable
DLW synthesis of α-FAPbI3. Furthermore, no major
decrease in the relative Raman scattering intensities of these peaks
is observed. Thus, DLW of α-FAPbI3 is not only demonstrated
but also shown to be stable at room temperature.
Note that our observations of anomalous long-term stability for the
DLW α-FAPbI3 will be revisited in detail later.

DLW δ- to α-Phase Transformation Kinetics
A
δ- to α-phase FAPbI3 transformation under
an ambient atmosphere was investigated at room temperature on a α-FAPbI3 single crystal using a constant 0.5 kW·cm–2 laser power density and acquiring spectra once a minute. On the
basis of preliminary measurements, this laser power was selected as
it allowed the DLW phase transformation to occur on a well-resolved
time scale. Figure 4a shows selected Raman spectra obtained in situ at
different times during the exposure of laser light on the α-FAPbI3 surface, and the inset summarizes the temporal dependence
of the modes indicated (chosen here for their relative spectral weight).
The assignment of phonon signatures here receives the same treatment
as in Figure 2a, as
the process is initiated by the decrease in δ-phase signal and
the early introduction of IPb–O modes, followed shortly after by the rapid growth of the two α-FAPbI3 vibrational bands. Up until 5 min (indicated by t′), the formation of Pb–O bonds within the Raman microprobe
is steady and relatively quick, before slowing and rapidly equilibrating
(see inset of Figure 4a). Conversely, for longer exposure times, the intensity of the α-phase
bands continues to asymptotically approach their maximum limit, and
by near 100 min temporal changes in the Raman spectra significantly
slow.

Figure 4 In situ temporal Raman microprobe analysis of
transformation kinetics. (a) Raman scattering spectra acquired in situ at different times (t) of a δ-
to α-phase transformation using a laser power density of 500
W·cm–2. Spectra have been offset and normalized
for clarity. The inset displays the temporal integrated intensities
of selected modes from fitting all spectra measured during the 100
min DLW procedure, with the vertical line labeled t′ here indicating the frame at which the IPb–O modes significantly slow, corresponding to
the same frame similarly indicated in the Avrami plot in (b). (b)
Degree of laser-induced δ- to α-phase transformation obtained
from normalized Raman intensity vs time t. The data fit is made using the Avrami equation (eq S1; see Supporting Information), and the inset shows
the corresponding Avrami plot (ln[−ln(1 – X(t))] vs ln(t))
with its linear fit.

Modeling of DLW Phase Transformation Kinetics
Because
the Raman scattering cross-section is proportional to the total scattering
volume, the evolving Raman peaks allow a direct measure of the transformation
degree in real time and can be used to analyze the DLW procedure.
Therefore, we replot the measured temporal integrated intensity of
the α-FAPbI3-like phonon at 137 cm–1 in Figure 4b for
detailed treatment. Our data exhibit an initially rapid reaction rate,
which quickly slows, a behavior indicative of solid-state phase transformation
kinetics (crystallization). The universal method to describe nucleation
to coalescence of solids is the Johnson–Mehl–Avrami–Kolmogorov
(JMAK) theory55−57 (see Supporting Information for details). A central parameter in the theory is the Avrami exponent n, which acquires an integer or half-integer value in the
range 0.5 to 4, depending on the dimensionality of the transformation
and is defined as the local slope in a double-logarithmic Avrami plot:
ln[−ln(1 – X(t))] vs ln(t). The corresponding Avrami plot
and measured exponent are contained in the inset of Figure 4b, where below t′ = 5 min the Avrami plot reveals an initially large and time-dependent
Avrami exponent. A large n value here indicates a
healthy three-dimensional transformation rate that is experiencing
a strong shift in dynamics. Beyond t′ = 5
min, however, a constant Avrami exponent of roughly unity emerges
and signifies a low-dimensional transformation to unfold (i.e., limited to the upper surface). The
low dimensionality here is likely mediated by both the attenuation
of oxygen and low heat transfer into the subsurface; the rotational
degrees of freedom within the “caged” organic sublattice
of analogous MAPbI3 perovskites have been shown to manifest
as an ultralow thermal conductance (0.5 W/(K·m)) for the whole
system.58 Interestingly, the onset of the
Avrami plot data becoming linear coincides within the same measured
time interval (i.e., spectral acquisition
frame) as the sudden halt in IPb–O growth displayed in Figure 4a (identified also by a broken vertical line). The synchronicity
of these two events must be explicated; before t′
both IPb–O and the value of n evolve with time, and following t′,
the stoppage of IPb–O growth coincides
with the α-FAPbI3 transformation adhering to regular
crystallization theory: a time-independent Avrami
exponent. Again, this provides compelling evidence for the strong
influence that oxygen intercalation has on the phase relations of
polymorphic (δ/α-)FAPbI.

DLW Micropatterning of
Luminescent α-FAPbI3 Tracks on δ-FAPbI3 Single Crystals
The in situ Raman
microprobe analysis proved extremely useful
for understanding the δ- to α-phase transformation dynamics
and kinetics, yielding powerful real-time diagnostics and elucidating
parameters that define DLW control. It is within this context we move
onto the rapid and controlled DLW of highly luminescent α-FAPbI3 phase microtracks onto δ-FAPbI3 single crystal
and nanocrystalline thin film surfaces. Because laser-induced δ-
to α-phase transformations occur readily under ambient conditions,
we aim to simplify the DLW process as much as possible and directly
expose an α-FAPbI3 single-crystal surface to focused
458 nm cw-laser light using air objectives and an ambient atmosphere, i.e., no special sample mounting apparatus.
To minimize heat dispersion, cw-laser writing with the lowest dwell
time (write speed = 10 mm/s) and relatively aggressive laser power
was found to yield the best results, i.e., clean and narrow DLW lines with little production of other (luminescent)
byproducts.

An overview of the key optical features of DLW surface
micropatterns can be found in Figure 5. Figure 5a displays an optical micrograph of the DLW α-channel patterning:
a 60 μm long line array periodically cycling every 10 μm.
Here the characteristic yellow color of the δ-FAPbI3 crystal transmission image is interrupted by the dark lines of the
DLW α-phase channels. The inset of Figure 5a displays an scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) micrograph of the typical recessed/grooved contour of the DLW
tracks, complete with a slightly raised lip at the ridge. Figure 5b provides a micro-PL
map of the selected area in Figure 5a, with the analysis of the steady-state PL peak mapping
contained in Figure 5c. Two emissions are seen to derive from our DLW procedure: (i) a
sharp, intense α-FAPbI3 NIR peak near 780 nm, yielding
the bright red tracks in the PL map shown in Figure 5b, and (ii) a weaker and much broader emission
peak around 660 cm, contributing to the green pixels within the top
DLW line. Due to its strong similarity to the steady-state PL spectra
recorded from pure PbO powder (purchased from Sigma-Aldrich; see Figure
S5 of the Supporting Information), we assign
the 660 nm emission to the ablation of PbO particles ejected from
the DLW area. Depending on IDLW parameters
used the amount of ablated PbO debris produced on either side of the
DLW track will differ a great deal, with a tunable landscape of resulting
fluorescence morphologies existing between low and excessive IDLW values (as interpreted by PL mapping; see
Figure S6 in the Supporting Information). The dual red line appearance in Figure 5b is attributed to mapping the emission from
a grooved surface using confocal optics.

Figure 5 Optical properties of
DLW micropatterning. (a) Optical micrograph
of DLW patterning on a δ-FAPbI3 surface written with
a 0.75 NA at 0.8 kW·cm–2. The inset shows a
SEM image of the typical grooved microtrack created on the surface
of the material following laser light exposure. (b) Micro-PL map of
area identified in (a), with (c) PL spectral data showing the peaks
that correspond to the dual color map defined in (b). Note the relative
color intensity represented for the two measured emissions in (b)
(i.e., red and green) has been normalized.
The inset in (c) displays several normalized peaks recorded near 780
nm and highlights the variance of the NIR emission over the DLW area.
(d) NIR fluorescence micrograph of the DLW pattern, with the inset
comparing images rerecorded from the identified area several weeks
after fabrication. (e) Normalized PL intensity of the pattern presented
in (d) over the 4 weeks following microfabrication. Note the PL data
in (d) and (e) were recorded over the spectral range 780 to 800 nm
(see Figure S7 of the Supporting Information), and the sample was stored under ambient conditions.

The NIR emission measured from the DLW tracks is
centered at ∼780
nm, consistently blue-shifted by approximately 40 nm compared to that
of α-FAPbI3 single crystals (820 nm). Such a fixed
PL peak energy has been shown experimentally to arise in a mixed-phase
FAPbI3 system28 as a consequence
of band bending at the δ/α junction, via Fermi level pinning. Nonetheless, some variance is observed across
all PL mapping experiments and is highlighted in the inset of Figure 5c. This is likely
introduced as a result of structural defects or even grain boundaries
forged during the rapid and aggressive (i.e., use of relatively high IDLW) fabrication.22 Moreover, it is known
that the properties of low-dimensional perovskites are further perturbed,
compared to their bulk counterparts.59

Phase Stability of DLW δ- to α-Phase Transformed
Material
The stability of the NIR fluorescence emitted from
DLW arrays was inspected over time, with the findings presented in Figure 5d and e. The spectral
detection range used to construct the fluorescence micrographs is
shown in Figure S7 of the Supporting Information. In line with the results of the Raman characterization, fluorescence
microscopy reveals a stable synthesis of α-FAPbI3, with bright clean lines measured repeatedly over 4 weeks. Notably,
only a slight reduction in the fluorescence intensity is seen over
this time, when compared to day 0 (see Figure 5d). In quantifying the temporal decay in
NIR emission coming from the DLW micropattern, Figure 5e shows the emission intensity to reduce
by roughly 30% over 4 weeks. Further, the accompanying emission spectra
acquired during these experiments exhibit no change over this period
(see Figure S7 of the Supporting Information). Again, we emphasize that this is an unexpected and stunning result,
in that only pure FAPbI3 materials are
present here, i.e., no mixed cations21,60,61 (MA/FA or Cs/FA).

The fundamental
mechanism by which the DLW α-phase is preserved here is yet
to be discussed, and the role of oxygen intercalation at the crystal
surface during the DLW procedure cannot be overlooked. To evaluate
the influence of oxygen on the α-phase stability, a series of
dark α-FAPbI3 single crystals were exposed to ozone
and observed over time (experimental details and results can be found
in Figure S8 of the Supporting Information). In every case, the ozone treatment had a dramatic destabilizing
effect on the black α-phase of FAPbI3, as samples
exposed to ozone exhibited a vivid premature yellowing, compared to
their dark control counterparts. Therefore, while oxygen alone does
appear to influence the δ- to α-phase transformation in
FAPbI3, it does not stabilize the dark metastable perovskite
phase, in fact, quite the opposite. An explanation for the stable
NIR emission coming from our DLW pattern likely resides in the local
microstructure of the system; studies of α/δ phase mixing
and junctions in FAPbI3 recently28 indicated that such microstructuring imposes strong stabilizing effects. As well, no matter the degree of phase mixing,
mixed-phase FAPbI3 materials were shown to be concomitant
with PL emission centered near 780 nm. That the same hypsochromic
780 nm emission (see Figure 5c) is seen in our DLW α-FAPbI3 material strongly
suggests a similar mixed-phase configuration exists to account for
its anomalous long-term stability.

Besides the obvious advantage
of gaining enhanced structural stability
for the α-phase material embedded in the δ-phase crystal,
δ/α mixed-phase FAPbI3 systems were also recently
shown to benefit from other unique physical properties that differ
from either of the pure phases. For example, the mixed phase system
gains a significant enhancement in NIR emissions near 780 nm, a lasting
resistance to humidity, and an increased PL quantum yield.28 In fact, when comparing the average PL intensity
measured from our DLW α-FAPbI3 material with that
recorded from the thermally annealed α-FAPbI3 single-crystal
surface using the same acquisition conditions, the α-FAPbI3 DLW microline emission is around an order of magnitude larger.
Collectively, these distinct physical properties add to an interesting
microstructure worth intense investigation.

Microline Array Resolution
and Precision
Through refining
the DLW parameters explored thus far, we examine the spatial limitations
of our DLW procedure in Figure 6. Figure 6a
presents an optical transmission image acquired for a DLW line array
using a 488 nm laser light, which also served as the excitation for
the corresponding NIR fluorescence image in Figure 6b. Close inspection of Figure 6b reveals the fluorescence to overlay nicely
with the transmission image in Figure 6a, with the fabricated structures exhibiting bright
NIR emissions when compared to the regions that were unexposed to
the writing beam. The variability in fluorescence intensities and
line shape here is attributed to small localized topological differences
across the scanned surface, resulting in variations in the DLW conditions
(i.e., defocused DLW spot).

Figure 6 DLW cycling
and resolution. (a) Bright-field microscopy image of
a DLW line array drawn on a δ-FAPbI3 single-crystal
surface using IDLW = 1.1 kW·cm–2 and a 10×, 0.4 NA objective. (b) Corresponding
fluorescence image of the same area (λexc = 488 nm)
with (c) fluorescence intensity profile determined across the whole
fluorescence image in (b). (d) Comparison of the fluorescent fwhm
measured from patterns written using different DLW optical spot sizes
(measured as the in-focus diffraction-limited beam diameter; see Materials and Methods for details), as determined via line scans akin to that measured in (c). The inset here
presents examples of the normalized intensity profiles, with the arrow
indicating the employment of an increasing NA value. (e) Corresponding
optical and fluorescent micrographs of a DLW pattern drawn on a δ-FAPbI3 thin film surface using IDLW =
3 kW·cm–2 and a 10×, 0.4 NA objective.
The inset shows an SEM image of the DLW microtrack.

Figure 6c presents
the intensity line scan of the array depicted in Figure 6b, highlighting the sharp periodic
cycling of NIR fluoresce emanating from the DLW α-FAPbI3 microline array. The cross-sectional profile of the fluorescence
intensity appears to be Gaussian-like, an aspect common across repeated
experiments with varying DLW parameters (IDLW, spot size, etc.). If follows that the fwhm of
this line shape may be used as a metric to assess the possible resolution
of the DLW lines. Thus, to demonstrate the DLW cycling tunability
of our fabricated structures, a range of α-FAPbI3 line arrays were drawn onto the δ-FAPbI3 single-crystal
surfaces using optimized DLW parameters for three different air objectives
(magnification/NA): (i) 10×/0.4, (ii) 20×/0.75, and (iii)
40×/0.9. An analysis similar to that presented in Figure 6b and c provides the basis
of the microline fwhm data shown in Figure 6d. The inset in Figure 6d directly compares typical normalized line
profiles recorded implementing different NA values. For DLW performed
using the smallest optical spot size (NA = 0.9), a fluorescent line
with a fwhm as low as ∼950 nm is achieved. Moreover, a well-defined
trend for the dependence of the fluorescence fwhm on the NA of the
objective employed emerges when assessing the fwhm across the entire
NA range measured (see Figure 6d). This verifies a high level of control over patterning
of different sized luminescent structures and indicates the approach
detailed to scale effectively.

Examining respectively the optical
transmission image and corresponding
PL map in Figure 5a
and b, it is clear that there is room left for refining the precision
of our DLW procedure. The level of precision exhibited here stems
from the fact that we have adapted a Raman microscope to perform the
task of DLW. Without autotracking and correcting for topological features,62,63 variations in surface height will act to defocus the DLW writing
probe and, thus, lower the patterning precision over longer distances.
Direct laser writing is of course an entire field in itself, with
well-established techniques for dealing with such problems. However,
there are two sides to consider when addressing topological influences:
(i) employing Z-tracking to correct for topological
height changes (ΔZ) across the DLW surface
and (ii) improving the long-range flatness (over distances of 100s
m) of the DLW surface. Implementing a system capable of tracking and
correcting for changes in Z has already been covered,
but addressing the latter will ultimately be of great benefit for
the DLW precision, as well as offering a materials synthesis-based
solution. Strong motivation for this stems from the fact that achieving
single-crystal facets with sufficiently flat surfaces is difficult,
as they often exhibit smooth, uneven angulating features
(see Figure S9 of the Supporting Information for a vivid depiction of said features). This morphological aspect
is seemingly unavoidable and likely arises due to soaking the fresh
as-grown crystals in acetonitrile immediately after growth (see Materials and Methods section).

Thus, for
improved DLW α-phase micropatterning, we control
the flatness of the writing surface over relatively long distances
(10’s of mm) by using spin-coated nanocrystal films. DLW experiments
were performed using a 10×, 0.4 NA objective and IDLW = 3 kW·cm–2, on a 400–500-nm-thick
δ-FAPbI3 nanocrystal thin film. The results of performing
DLW on FAPbI3 thin films are presented in Figure 6e, where corresponding optical
and fluorescence images of narrow α-FAPbI3 lines
reaching 1 mm long are shown. The resulting fluorescence image demonstrates
a significant enhancement to the DLW precision and overall aesthetics,
with bright, continuous, and nicely confined 1-mm-long lines realized.
Again, a similar DLW line morphology is revealed here via the SEM imaging shown here in the inset. In DLW of α-phase
patterns on thin films, rather than single crystals, the local flatness
(in the range of 100’s of nm) is ultimately reduced, as it
is no longer a bulk flat surface, but rather a film of fused nanocrystals
(see Figure S9 of the Supporting Information to visualize the film morphology). Importantly, however, the level
of precision for long-range DLW patterning is substantially enhanced,
without the need for Z-tracking, as demonstrated
in Figure 6e. As well,
use of thin films with thicknesses of 400 to 500 nm provides a limit
in the Z direction for which the DLW patterns can
form. As a result, the optical absorbing volume is reduced and the
required writing laser power to induce the δ- to α-phase
phase transformation is in fact increased (by a factor of 3 to 4 for
the patterns drawn in Figure 6d), relative to that used for the single-crystal materials.
The refined patterning shown here for DLW on flat δ-FAPbI3 thin films provides a promising avenue for applications requiring
high precision, while also being able to lower the transformation
depth to an in-plane α-FAPbI3 microstructure, via controlling the film thickness.

Conclusion
We have demonstrated an all-optical method for inducing localized
δ- to α-phase transformations in δ-FAPbI3. A detailed in situ study of the laser-driven transformation
dynamics and kinetics was achieved through Raman microprobe analysis
and revealed the δ- to α-phase transformation dynamics
to be strongly influenced by the availability of free oxygen. Through
refining the DLW parameters, the rapid writing (10 mm/s) of α-FAPbI3 microtracks atop δ-FAPbI3 single crystals
was shown possible. The method employed was extremely easy, using
standard visible laser light (458 nm), air objectives, and ordinary
mounting, being assisted by the fact that the DLW of α-FAPbI3 is promoted in an atmosphere possessing free oxygen. Refining
of the writing parameters provided fine control over the DLW patterning
dimensions, and highly fluorescent α-FAPbI3 line
arrays with NIR emissions peaking near 780 nm and micrometer-sized
spatial fwhm were realized. The α-FAPbI3 patterning
exhibited anomalous long-term structural stability for at least 4
weeks, likely as the result of synthesizing a δ/α mixed-phase
material. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on
the laser-based fabrication of δ- to α-phase-transformed
material in FAPbI3, let alone outlining a clear path for
refining control over the DLW process for its potential applications.
The ability to locally modify the structural, electrical, and optical
properties of a wide range of optoelectronic materials is the focus
of much current research. Within this context, local laser irradiation
for engineering of a FAPbI3 phase and physical properties,
bypassing conventional indiscriminate bulk thermal treatments, is
important.

Materials and Methods
Chemicals and Reagents
Lead iodide (PbI2) (99.999% trace metal basis), formamidinium
iodide (FAI), dimethylformamide
(DMF), and γ-butyrolactone (GBL) (99%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
All salts and solvents were used as received, without any further
purification.

FAPbI3 Single-Crystal Preparation
FAPbI3 single crystals were prepared by the inverse
temperature
crystallization (ITC) method, as reported by Saidaminov etal.59 Briefly, FAI and
PbI2 were added into GBL followed by sonication to get
a clear 1 M solution at room temperature. The solution was then positioned
on a hot plate that was preheated to 70 °C. The temperature was
then raised gradually (every 15 min) until several tiny dark nuclei
could be observed at the bottom of the vial. The temperature to onset
FAPbI3 crystallization strongly varies depending on the
glass vial used and the volume of solution used. The typical temperature
range to observe crystallite formation is between 100 and 120 °C.
Once the crystallite started to form, the temperature was kept unchanged
to allow the crystal to grow further. Usually it takes several hours
to get a millimeter-sized single crystal of FAPbI3. After
crystal growth, the single crystals were picked out using tweezers
and were briefly soaked in 10 mL of acetonitrile to remove any precursor
residue. The single crystals were then dried using dust-free wipes
(Kimtech) and annealed at 50 °C for 3 min. For experiments on
α-FAPbI3 materials, samples were placed on a 155
°C hot plate for 5 min prior to characterization.

FAPbI3 Thin Film Deposition
A 1 M precursor
solution was prepared by dissolving FAI and PbI2 into an
anhydrous DMSO/DMF (v/v 1:9) mixed solution and stirred overnight
in a glovebox (H2O < 0.1 ppm; O2 < 1 ppm).
The resulting clear, bright yellow solution was filtered with a 0.20
μm polyvinylidene difluoride filter right before spin-coating
(2000 rpm for 20 s and 5000 rpm for 50 s). A drop of chlorobenzene
was injected onto the spinning glass substrate (1.5 mm thickness)
about 30 s prior to the end of spinning. After spin-coating, the film
was annealed at 150 °C for 10 min and turned dark and become
yellow in the following 2 to 3 days. The final δ-FAPbI3 film was roughly 400 to 500 nm thick and was then kept in a dark
and inert environment until optical measurements were conducted.

Synthesis of PbI2 Nanocrystals
A precursor
including 175 mg of lead(II) iodide and 10 mL of water was stirred
at 70 °C for an hour to get a saturated solution. The solution
was kept still at 70 °C for 10 min. Then the colorless supernatant
liquid was sonicated in a water bath for 5 min at room temperature,
which led to the formation of lead(II) iodide crystals. The resulting
yellowish suspension was spin-coated onto a coverslip with a speed
of 1500 rpm for 60 s.

X-ray Diffraction Experiments
Powder
X-ray diffractions
patterns of the ground perovskite were collected using a STOE STADI
MP powder X-ray diffractometer. The diffractometer was running in
Bragg–Brentano mode with 2θ–θ geometry,
a linear position-sensitive detector, and a copper K-α1 (λ
= 1.540 60 Å) source. The diffraction patterns were measured
for an acquisition time of 1200 s per sample and collected values
over −16° to 61° (2θ).

Raman Scattering Experiments
The Raman (micro)spectroscopy
setup is a homemade system, employing an argon ion 458 nm laser excitation
source. Scheme 1 provides
an overview of the important elements of the Raman experiments. An
Ar+ cw-laser (Coherent Inc.) is tuned to operate at 458
nm, with its emission passed through a narrow bandpass filter to remove
plasma lines from recorded spectra. Incident laser light is coupled
into an inverted Olympus IX71 microscope (contrary to the simplified
depiction in Scheme 1), and scattered light is passed through a TriVista triple spectrometer
setup (Princeton Instruments), which used to disperse optical signals
that are detected using a liquid-nitrogen-cooled CCD camera. As it
operates via three independent monochromators (see Scheme 1), a so-called subtraction
measurement was employed, whereby Mono 1 and Mono 2 have matched focal
lengths (500 cm), gratings (G+, G– =
900 g/mm), and opposing dispersion geometries to act as a filter and
negates the need for a Rayleigh filter (through extreme stray light
rejection). Dispersion of Raman spectra is achieved through Mono 3,
which has a focal length of 750 cm and groove density of 1800 g/mm
geometry, facilitating a spectral resolution of ∼5 cm–1 down to Raman shifts of 40 cm–1. Correct instrument
calibration was verified through checking the position of the Si band
at ±520.7 cm–1, and laser power densities were
controlled by neutral density filters and tuning the argon lasing
current. All spectra are presented as raw data (no background subtracting
or smoothing has been performed) and are recorded using the Raman
laser power densities indicated in corresponding figure captions.
A homemade gas flow sample-mounting stage fitted with an optical window
was implemented for experiments performed under differing atmospheres.

Scheme 1 Simplified schematic diagram of the home-made Raman scattering and
DLW instrument, whereby Raman spectra are recovered in situ from the backscattered 458 nm DLW laser light.
Direct Laser Writing
DLW experiments
were performed
on our homemade Raman scattering microscope, using the same incident
458 nm Raman excitation laser light. To ensure Gaussian microprobe
spot sizes neared the diffraction limit, an optical beam expander
was placed before the microscope optics used to focus light onto the
sample via one of three air objectives with different
magnification and numerical aperture (NA) values: (i) 10×, 0.4
NA, (ii) 20×, 0.75 NA, and (ii) 40×, 0.9 NA. The motorized XYZ stage (Märzhäuser Wetzlar) of the Raman
microscope enabled precise sample manipulation, and laser light was
visualized to focus on the sample surface (Z0) through a video camera/beam splitter assembly. With Z0 found, a potential DLW area was scanned using
manual translations in X and Y while
being directly observed through the video camera for adverse changes
in the focal spot. This ensured the plane of the patterned area (typically
on the order of 100 × 100 μm) would remain roughly in focus
during a DLW procedure. Our ideal focus spot sizes were confirmed
through a dual approach: (i) direct measurement across the edge of
a cleaved Si wafer (line scan) and (ii) size and shape (Gaussian-like)
were optimized before every DLW run using the video camera coupled
to the microscope. The power of the DLW spot was controlled via a laser current supply module and selecting the appropriate
neutral-density filter on a computer-controlled wheel and was measured
using a calibrated power meter (ThorLabs photodiode S130VC). Power
density values of the Gaussian beam spot were calculated for the 1/e2 (13.5% of peak) beam diameter. Following preliminary
laser power tests, DLW patterning of α-FAPbI3 microtracks
was achieved by moving the sample using the Märzhäuser
Wetzlar XYZ stage. All kinetic movements of DLW patterning
were defined by a series of XYZ coordinates controlled
by a computer, permitting designs consisting of only straight orthogonal
lines (in X and Y; no diagonals)
with a maximum write speed of 10 mm/s. The limitations of this setup
are evident at XY directional changes, where dwell
time at these sites is maximized, forming a corner “node”.
All DLW patterns (written with cw-laser light) commence and terminate
with the laser focus at a relative positive Z value
(300 μm away from the sample surface, Z0), permitting cleaner (no overexposed or redirected DLW lines)
and discontinuous patterning with cw-laser light. Through this setup,
it was further possible to acquire Raman scatting spectra in situ during the DLW experiments by redirecting backscattering
light to the Raman spectrograph component of the system.

Scanning Electron
Microscopy
SEM characterizations
on the samples were carried out with a FEI Quanta FEG-250 SEM after
optical measurements. An acceleration voltage of 2 or 5 kV was applied
during the measurements to reduce charging on the sample surface.

Micro-PL Spectral Mapping
PL spectral mapping over
the sample was carried out on a home-built inverted optical microscope
(Ti–U, Nikon) in a confocal mode. An air objective of 0.92
NA and 60× magnification was used. A 532 nm diode laser was used
as the excitation light source. The excitation power density was regulated
with a set of neutral density filters. A pair of half- and quarter-wave
plates was used for converting the linear-polarized laser light into
circular-polarized for excitation. A 545 nm long-pass filter was used
in front of the entrance of the spectrograph. A piezostage was used
for sample scanning.

Confocal Fluorescence Microscopy
Confocal fluorescence
micrographs were acquired on an inverted epi-fluorescence confocal
microscope (Olympus IX81), λexc = 488 nm, equipped
with an air immersion objective lens (Olympus, 40×, 0.9 NA).
Detection of fluorescence emission (λ = 780–800 nm to
avoid high-energy species; see Figure S7 of the Supporting Information) was done with a PMT and pixel dwell
time of 20 μs. The images collected have fields of view of 158.72
× 158.72 μm2 with a pixel size of 248 ×
248 nm2, which was zoomed in with a 2× magnification.
Multiple images were taken at several focus planes and processed using
ImageJ to obtain the average projection of the fluorescence signal.
Background intensity was corrected by thresholding using ImageJ to
remove signal contributed by the background.

Optical Absorption
The absorption spectra were recorded
in the wavelength range 300 to 950 nm in a reflection geometry, using
a PerkinElmer-Lambda 950 UV–visible spectrometer.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b02777.Absorption data
on δ-FAPbI3 single
crystals, Raman spectra fitting procedure, Raman scattering and PL
spectra of PbO, thermal δ- to α-phase transformation characterization,
details of JMAK theory, examples of different DLW-synthesized PbO
PL emission morphologies, temporal phase stability of DLW α-phase
PL emission spectra, ozone-induced instability data, and SEM micrographs
of single-crystal and thin films surfaces (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn7b02777_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge financial support from
the Research
Foundation-Flanders (FWO, Grant Nos. G.0962.13, G.0B39.15, and G.0197.11,
postdoctoral fellowship to H.Y.), KU Leuven Research Fund (C14/15/053),
the Hercules Foundation (HER/11/14), and the Belgian Federal Science
Policy Office (IAP-VII/05). The research leading to these results
has received funding from the European Research Council under the
European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013)/ERC
Grant Agreement (Grant No. 307523), ERC-Stg LIGHT to M.B.J.R.
==== Refs
References
Kojima A. ; Teshima K. ; Shirai Y. ; Miyasaka T. 
Organometal Halide
Perovskites as Visible-Light Sensitizers for Photovoltaic Cells . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 6050 –6051 10.1021/ja809598r .19366264 
Lee M. M. ; Teuscher J. ; Miyasaka T. ; Murakami T. N. ; Snaith H. J. 
Efficient
Hybrid Solar Cells Based on Meso-Superstructured Organometal Halide
Perovskites . Science 
2012 , 338 , 643 –647 10.1126/science.1228604 .23042296 
Chen Q. ; De Marco N. ; Yang Y. ; Song T. B. ; Chen C. C. ; Zhao H. ; Hong Z. ; Zhou H. ; Yang Y. 
Under the
Spotlight: The Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Halide Perovskite for Optoelectronic
Applications . Nano Today 
2015 , 10 , 355 –396 10.1016/j.nantod.2015.04.009 .
Noel N. K. ; Abate A. ; Stranks S. D. ; Parrott E. S. ; Burlakov V. M. ; Goriely A. ; Snaith H. J. 
Enhanced
Photoluminescence and Solar
Cell Performance via Lewis Base Passivation of Organic-Inorganic Lead
Halide Perovskites . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 9815 –9821 10.1021/nn5036476 .25171692 
Perumal A. ; Shendre S. ; Li M. ; Tay Y. K. E. ; Sharma V. K. ; Chen S. ; Wei Z. ; Liu Q. ; Gao Y. ; Buenconsejo P. J. S. ; Tan S. T. ; Gan C. L. ; Xiong Q. ; Sum T. C. ; Demir H. V. 
High Brightness
Formamidinium Lead
Bromide Perovskite Nanocrystal Light Emitting Devices . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 36733 10.1038/srep36733 .27827424 
Wang N. ; Cheng L. ; Ge R. ; Zhang S. ; Miao Y. ; Zou W. ; Yi C. ; Sun Y. ; Cao Y. ; Yang R. ; Wei Y. ; Guo Q. ; Ke Y. ; Yu M. ; Jin Y. ; Liu Y. ; Ding Q. ; Di D. ; Yang L. ; Xing G. ; et al. Perovskite Light-Emitting
Diodes Based on Solution-Processed Self-Organized
Multiple Quantum Wells . Nat. Photonics 
2016 , 10 , 699 –704 10.1038/nphoton.2016.185 .
Song J. ; Li J. ; Li X. ; Xu L. ; Dong Y. ; Zeng H. 
Quantum Dot
Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Inorganic Perovskite Cesium Lead Halides
(CsPbX3) . Adv. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 7162 –7167 10.1002/adma.201502567 .26444873 
Brenner P. ; Stulz M. ; Kapp D. ; Abzieher T. ; Paetzold U. W. ; Quintilla A. ; Howard I. A. ; Kalt H. ; Lemmer U. 
Highly Stable
Solution Processed Metal-Halide Perovskite Lasers on Nanoimprinted
Distributed Feedback Structures . Appl. Phys.
Lett. 
2016 , 109 , 141106 10.1063/1.4963893 .
Tan Z.-K. ; Moghaddam R. S. ; Lai M. L. ; Docampo P. ; Higler R. ; Deschler F. ; Price M. ; Sadhanala A. ; Pazos L. M. ; Credgington D. ; Hanusch F. ; Bein T. ; Snaith H. J. ; Friend R. H. 
Bright
Light-Emitting Diodes Based
on Organometal Halide Perovskite . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2014 , 9 , 687 –692 10.1038/nnano.2014.149 .25086602 
Kim Y.-H. ; Cho H. ; Lee T.-W. 
Metal Halide
Perovskite Light Emitters . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2016 , 113 , 11694 –11702 10.1073/pnas.1607471113 .27679844 
Walters G. ; Sutherland B. R. ; Hoogland S. ; Shi D. ; Comin R. ; Sellan D. P. ; Bakr O. M. ; Sargent E. H. 
Two-Photon Absorption
in Organometallic Bromide Perovskites . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 9340 –9346 10.1021/acsnano.5b03308 .26196162 
Eperon G. E. ; Stranks S. D. ; Menelaou C. ; Johnston M. B. ; Herz L. M. ; Snaith H. J. 
Formamidinium Lead
Trihalide: A Broadly Tunable Perovskite
for Efficient Planar Heterojunction Solar Cells . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2014 , 7 , 982 10.1039/c3ee43822h .
Mokkapati S. , Jagadish C.  Mater. Today . 2009 , 12 , 22 10.1016/S1369-7021(09)70110-5 .
Snaith H. J. 
Perovskites:
The Emergence of a New Era for Low-Cost, High-Efficiency Solar Cells . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2013 , 4 , 3623 –3630 10.1021/jz4020162 .
Yang W. S. ; Noh J. H. ; Jeon N. J. ; Kim Y. C. ; Ryu S. ; Seo J. ; Seok S. I. 
High-Performance Photovoltaic Perovskite Layers Fabricated
Through Intramolecular Exchange . Science 
2015 , 348 , 1234 –1237 10.1126/science.aaa9272 .25999372 
Binek A. ; Hanusch F. C. ; Docampo P. ; Bein T. 
Stabilization of the
Trigonal High-Temperature Phase of Formamidinium Lead Iodide . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2015 , 6 , 1249 –1253 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b00380 .26262982 
Koh T. M. ; Fu K. ; Fang Y. ; Chen S. ; Sum T. C. ; Mathews N. ; Mhaisalkar S. G. ; Boix P. P. ; Baikie T. 
Formamidinium-Ccontaining
Metal-Halide: An Alternative Material for Near-IR Absorption Perovskite
Solar Cells . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 16458 –16462 10.1021/jp411112k .
Weber O. J. ; Charles B. ; Weller M. T. 
Phase Behaviour
and Composition in
the Formamidinium-Methylammonium Hybrid Lead Iodide Perovskite Solid
Solution . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2016 , 4 , 15375 –15382 10.1039/C6TA06607K .
Lee J. W. ; Seol D. J. ; Cho A. N. ; Park N. G. 
High-Efficiency
Perovskite Solar Cells Based on the Black Polymorph of HC(NH2)2PbI3 . Adv. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 4991 –4998 10.1002/adma.201401137 .24923708 
Pang S. ; Hu H. ; Zhang J. ; Lv S. ; Yu Y. ; Wei F. ; Qin T. ; Xu H. ; Liu Z. ; Cui G. 
NH2CH=NH2PbI3: An Alternative Organolead Iodide Perovskite
Sensitizer for Mesoscopic Solar Cells . Chem.
Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 1485 –1491 10.1021/cm404006p .
Pellet N. ; Gao P. ; Gregori G. ; Yang T. Y. ; Nazeeruddin M. K. ; Maier J. ; Grätzel M. 
Mixed-Organic-Cation
Perovskite Photovoltaics
for Enhanced Solar-Light Harvesting . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2014 , 53 , 3151 –3157 10.1002/anie.201309361 .
Han Q. ; Bae S. H. ; Sun P. ; Hsieh Y. T. ; Yang Y. ; Rim Y. S. ; Zhao H. ; Chen Q. ; Shi W. ; Li G. ; Yeng Y. 
Single Crystal Formamidinium Lead Iodide (FAPbI3): Insight into the Structural, Optical, and Electrical Properties . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 2253 –2258 10.1002/adma.201505002 .26790006 
Zheng X. ; Wu C. ; Jha S. K. ; Li Z. ; Zhu K. ; Priya S. 
Improved Phase
Stability of Formamidinium Lead Triiodide Perovskite by Strain Relaxation . ACS Energy Lett. 
2016 , 1 , 1014 –1020 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00457 .
Fu Y. ; Wu T. ; Wang J. ; Zhai J. ; Shearer M. J. ; Zhao Y. ; Hamers R. J. ; Kan E. ; Deng K. ; Zhu X.-Y. ; Jin S. 
Stabilization of the Metastable Lead
Iodide Perovskite Phase via
Surface Functionalization . Nano Lett. 
2017 , 17 , 4405 10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b01500 .28595016 
Pool V. L. ; Dou B. ; Van Campen D. G. ; Klein-Stockert T. R. ; Barnes F. S. ; Shaheen S. E. ; Ahmad M. I. ; van Hest M. F. A. M. ; Toney M. F. 
Thermal Engineering of FAPbI3 Perovskite
Material via Radiative Thermal Annealing and in situ XRD . Nat. Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 14075 10.1038/ncomms14075 .28094249 
Xie L. Q. ; Chen L. ; Nan Z. A. ; Lin H. X. ; Wang T. ; Zhan D. P. ; Yan J. W. ; Mao B. W. ; Tian Z. Q. 
Understanding
the Cubic Phase Stabilization and Crystallization Kinetics in Mixed
Cations and Halides Perovskite Single Crystals . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 3320 –3323 10.1021/jacs.6b12432 .28211690 
Petrov A. A. ; Goodilin E. A. ; Tarasov A. B. ; Lazarenko V. A. ; Dorovatovskii P. V. ; Khrustalev V. N. 
Formamidinium Iodide: Crystal Structure
and Phase Transitions . Acta Crystallogr. Sect.
E Crystallogr. Commun. 
2017 , 73 , 569 –572 10.1107/S205698901700425X .28435723 
Ma F. ; Li J. ; Li W. ; Lin N. ; Wang L. ; Qiao J. 
Stable α/δ
Phase Junction of Formamidinium Lead Iodide Perovskites for Enhanced
Near-Infrared Emission . Chem. Sci. 
2017 , 8 , 800 –805 10.1039/C6SC03542F .28451230 
Yan K. ; Long M. ; Zhang T. ; Wei Z. ; Chen H. ; Yang S. ; Xu J. 
Hybrid Halide Perovskite
Solar Cell
Precursors: Colloidal Chemistry and Coordination Engineering behind
Device Processing for High Efficiency . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 4460 –4468 10.1021/jacs.5b00321 .25780941 
Wang P. ; Guan J. ; Galeschuk D. T. K. ; Yao Y. ; He C. F. ; Jiang S. ; Zhang S. ; Liu Y. ; Jin M. ; Jin C. ; Song Y. 
Pressure-Induced Polymorphic, Optical, and Electronic
Transitions of Formamidinium Lead Iodide Perovskite . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2017 , 8 , 2119 –2125 10.1021/acs.jpclett.7b00665 .28440079 
Divitini G. ; Cacovich S. ; Matteocci F. ; Cinà L. ; Di Carlo A. ; Ducati C. 
In situ Observation
of Heat-induced
Degradation of Perovskite Solar Cells . Nat.
Energy 
2016 , 1 , 15012 10.1038/nenergy.2015.12 .
Nie W. ; Blancon J.-C. ; Neukirch A. J. ; Appavoo K. ; Tsai H. ; Chhowalla M. ; Alam M. A. ; Sfeir M. Y. ; Katan C. ; Even J. ; Tretiak S. ; Crochet J. J. ; Gupta G. ; Mohite A. D. 
Light-Activated
Photocurrent Degradation and Self-Healing
in Perovskite Solar Cells . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 11574 10.1038/ncomms11574 .27181192 
Misra R. K. ; Aharon S. ; Li B. ; Mogilyansky D. ; Visoly-Fisher I. ; Etgar L. ; Katz E. A. 
Temperature-
and
Component-Dependent Degradation of Perovskite Photovoltaic Materials
Under Concentrated Sunlight . J. Phys. Chem.
Lett. 
2015 , 6 , 326 –330 10.1021/jz502642b .26261941 
Yuan H. ; Debroye E. ; Janssen K. ; Naiki H. ; Steuwe C. ; Lu G. ; Moris M. ; Orgiu E. ; Uji-I H. ; De Schryver F. ; Samorì P. ; Hofkens J. ; Roeffaers M. 
Degradation
of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite Structures Through Light
and Electron Beam Driven Ion Migration . J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 7 , 561 –566 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02828 .26804213 
Gottesman R. ; Gouda L. ; Kalanoor B. S. ; Haltzi E. ; Tirosh S. ; Rosh-Hodesh E. ; Tischler Y. ; Zaban A. ; Quarti C. ; Mosconi E. ; De Angelis F. 
Photoinduced Reversible Structural
Transformations in Free-Standing CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Films . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2015 , 6 , 2332 –2338 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b00994 .26266613 
Bella F. ; Griffini G. ; Correa-Baena J.-P. ; Saracco G. ; Gratzel M. ; Hagfeldt A. ; Turri S. ; Gerbaldi C. 
Improving Efficiency
and Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells with Photocurable Fluoropolymers . Science 
2016 , 354 , 203 –206 10.1126/science.aah4046 .27708051 
Kong W. ; Rahimi-Iman A. ; Bi G. ; Dai X. ; Wu H. 
Oxygen Intercalation
Induced by Photocatalysis on the Surface of Hybrid Lead Halide Perovskites . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 7606 –7611 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b00496 .
Kanaujia P. K. ; Vijaya Prakash G. 
Laser-Induced Microstructuring of
Two-Dimensional Layered
Inorganic-Organic Perovskites . Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 9666 –9672 10.1039/C6CP00357E .26996747 
Fang H. H. ; Wang F. ; Adjokatse S. ; Zhao N. ; Loi M. A. 
Photoluminescence
Enhancement in Formamidinium Lead Iodide Thin Films . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2016 , 26 , 4653 –4659 10.1002/adfm.201600715 .
Chou S. S. ; Swartzentruber B. S. ; Janish M. T. ; Meyer K. C. ; Biedermann L. B. ; Okur S. ; Burckel D. B. ; Carter C. B. ; Kaehr B. 
Laser Direct
Write Synthesis of Lead Halide Perovskites . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 7 , 3736 –3741 10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b01557 .27593712 
Tian Y. ; Merdasa A. ; Unger E. ; Abdellah M. ; Zheng K. ; McKibbin S. ; Mikkelsen A. ; Pullerits T. o. ; Yartsev A. ; Sundström V. ; Scheblykin I. G. 
Enhanced
Organo-Metal Halide Perovskite Photoluminescence from Nanosized Defect-Free
Crystallites and Emitting Sites . J. Phys. Chem.
Lett. 
2015 , 6 , 4171 –4177 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02033 .26722793 
Wang C. W. ; Dang Y. Y. ; Su Y. H. ; Ni J. C. ; Zhang C. C. ; Li J. W. ; Hu Y. L. ; Chu J. R. ; Huang W. H. ; Wu D. ; Tao X. T. 
Femtosecond Laser Direct Ablating Micro/Nanostructures
and Micropatterns on CH3NH3PbI3 Single
Crystal . IEEE Photonics J. 
2017 , 9 , 1 –10 .
Jeon N. J. ; Noh J. H. ; Yang W. S. ; Kim Y. C. ; Ryu S. ; Seo J. ; Seok S. I. 
Compositional Engineering of Perovskite Materials for
High-Performance Solar Cells . Nature 
2015 , 517 , 476 –480 10.1038/nature14133 .25561177 
Aristidou N. ; Eames C. ; Sanchez-molina I. ; Bu X. ; Kosco J. ; Islam M. S. ; Haque S. A. 
Fast Oxygen Diffusion
and Iodide
Defects Mediate Oxygen-Induced Degradation of Perovskite Solar Cells . Nat. Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 15218 10.1038/ncomms15218 .28492235 
Ledinský M. ; Löper P. ; Niesen B. ; Holovský J. ; Moon S. J. ; Yum J. H. ; De Wolf S. ; Fejfar A. ; Ballif C. 
Raman Spectroscopy
of Organic-Inorganic Halide Perovskites . J.
Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2015 , 6 , 401 –406 10.1021/jz5026323 .26261955 
Quarti C. ; Grancini G. ; Mosconi E. ; Bruno P. ; Ball J. M. ; Lee M. M. ; Snaith H. J. ; Petrozza A. ; Angelis F. D. 
The Raman
Spectrum of the CH3NH3PbI3 Hybrid
Perovskite: Interplay of Theory and Experiment . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2014 , 5 , 279 –284 10.1021/jz402589q .26270700 
Kucharska E. ; Hanuza J. ; Ciupa A. ; Ma̧czka M. ; Macalik L. 
Vibrational Properties and DFT Calculations of Formamidine-Templated
Co and Fe Formates . Vib. Spectrosc. 
2014 , 75 , 45 –50 10.1016/j.vibspec.2014.09.001 .
Wang L. ; Wang K. ; Zou B. 
Pressure-Induced
Structural and Optical
Properties of Organometal Halide Perovskite-Based Formamidinium Lead
Bromide . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 7 , 2556 –2562 10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b00999 .27321024 
Arora A. K. ; Rajalakshmi M. ; Ravindran T. R. ; Sivasubramanian V. 
Raman Spectroscopy
of Optical Phonon Confinement in Nanostructured Materials . J. Raman Spectrosc. 
2007 , 38 , 604 –617 10.1002/jrs.1684 .
Ndione P. F. ; Li Z. ; Zhu K. 
Effects of Alloying on the Optical Properties of Organic-Inorganic
Lead Halide Perovskite Thin Films . J. Mater.
Chem. C 
2016 , 4 , 7775 –7782 10.1039/C6TC02135B .
Xie Z. ; Sun S. ; Yan Y. ; Zhang L. ; Hou R. ; Tian F. ; Qin G. G. 
Refractive
Index and Extinction Coefficient of NH2CH=NH2PbI3 Perovskite Photovoltaic
Material . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2017 , 29 , 245702 10.1088/1361-648X/aa6e6c .28429682 
Lv S. ; Pang S. ; Zhou Y. ; Padture N. P. ; Hu H. ; Wang L. ; Zhou X. ; Zhu H. ; Zhang L. ; Huang C. ; Cui G. 
One-Step, Solution-Processed
Formamidinium
Lead Trihalide (FAPbI(3–x)Clx) for Mesoscopic Perovskite-Polymer Solar
Cells . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 16 , 19206 10.1039/C4CP02113D .25096582 
Ahn N. ; Kwak K. ; Jang M. S. ; Yoon H. ; Lee B. Y. ; Lee J.-K. ; Pikhitsa P. V. ; Byun J. ; Choi M. 
Trapped Charge-Driven
Degradation of Perovskite Solar Cells . Nat.
Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 13422 10.1038/ncomms13422 .27830709 
Zhang L. ; Ju M.-G. ; Liang W. ; McGehee M. D. ; Karunadasa H. I. ; Qiu Y. ; Sadhanala A. ; Eperon G. E. ; Pathak S. K. ; Johnston M. B. ; Johnston M. B. ; Herz L. M. ; Snaith H. J. 
The Effect of Moisture
on the Structures and Properties of Lead Halide Perovskites: A First-Principles
Theoretical Investigation . Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 23174 –23183 10.1039/C6CP01994C .27499005 
Kolmogorov A. 
On the Statistical
Theory of Crystallization of Metals . Izv. Akad.
Nauk. SSSR Ser. Mater. 
1939 , 1 , 355 –359 .
Hillert M. 
Discussion
of ”A Commentary on Reaction Kinetics in Processes of Nucleation
and Growth . Metall. Mater. Trans. A 
2011 , 42 , 3241 10.1007/s11661-011-0780-2 .
Avrami M. 
Kinetics of
Phase Change. I General Theory . J. Chem. Phys. 
1939 , 7 , 1103 –1112 10.1063/1.1750380 .
Pisoni A. ; Jaćimović J. ; Barišić O. S. ; Spina M. ; Gaál R. ; Forró L. ; Horváth E. 
Ultra-Low Thermal Conductivity in
Organic-Inorganic
Hybrid Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2014 , 5 , 2488 –2492 10.1021/jz5012109 .26277821 
Saidaminov M. I. ; Mohammed O. F. ; Bakr O. M. 
Low-Dimensional-Networked Metal Halide
Perovskites: The Next Big Thing . ACS Energy
Lett. 
2017 , 2 , 889 –896 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00705 .
McMeekin D. P. ; Sadoughi G. ; Rehman W. ; Eperon G. E. ; Saliba M. ; Horantner M. T. ; Haghighirad A. ; Sakai N. ; Korte L. ; Rech B. ; Johnston M. B. ; Herz L. M. ; Snaith H. J. 
A Mixed-Cation
Lead Mixed-Halide Perovskite Absorber for Tandem Solar Cells . Science 
2016 , 351 , 151 –155 10.1126/science.aad5845 .26744401 
Li C. ; Zhou Y. ; Wang L. ; Chang Y. ; Zong Y. ; Etgar L. ; Cui G. ; Padture N. P. ; Pang S. 
Methylammonium-Mediated
Evolution of Mixed-Organic-Cation Perovskite Thin Films: A Dynamic
Composition-Tuning Process . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2017 , 56 , 7674 –7678 10.1002/anie.201704188 .
Wang R. ; Wei J. ; Fan Y. 
Chalcogenide Phase-Change Thin films Used as Grayscale
Photolithography Materials . Opt. Express 
2014 , 22 , 4973 10.1364/OE.22.004973 .24663836 
Bai Z. ; Wei J. ; Liang X. ; Zhang K. ; Wei T. ; Wang R. 
High-Speed
Laser Writing of Arbitrary Patterns in Polar Coordinate System . Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
2016 , 87 , 125118 10.1063/1.4973397 .28040956

