
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.6b04930ArticleDiagnosis
and Classification of 17 Diseases from 1404 Subjects via Pattern Analysis of Exhaled Molecules Nakhleh Morad
K. †Amal Haitham †Jeries Raneen †Broza Yoav Y. †Aboud Manal †Gharra Alaa †Ivgi Hodaya †Khatib Salam †Badarneh Shifaa †Har-Shai Lior ‡Glass-Marmor Lea ‡Lejbkowicz Izabella ‡Miller Ariel ‡Badarny Samih §Winer Raz §Finberg John ∥Cohen-Kaminsky Sylvia ⊥Perros Frédéric ⊥Montani David ⊥Girerd Barbara ⊥Garcia Gilles ⊥Simonneau Gérald ⊥Nakhoul Farid #Baram Shira ¶Salim Raed ¶Hakim Marwan □Gruber Maayan ■Ronen Ohad ■Marshak Tal ■Doweck Ilana ■Nativ Ofer ○Bahouth Zaher ○Shi Da-you ●Zhang Wei ●Hua Qing-ling ●Pan Yue-yin ●Tao Li ●Liu Hu ●Karban Amir △Koifman Eduard △Rainis Tova ▲Skapars Roberts ▽Sivins Armands ▽Ancans Guntis ▽Liepniece-Karele Inta ▽Kikuste Ilze ▽▼Lasina Ieva ▽Tolmanis Ivars ▼Johnson Douglas ⬡Millstone Stuart Z. ⬢Fulton Jennifer ††Wells John W. ⬢Wilf Larry H. ‡‡Humbert Marc ⊥Leja Marcis ▽▼Peled Nir §§Haick Hossam *†† Department of Chemical
Engineering and Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute, Technion−Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel‡ Division of Neuroimmunology and Multiple
Sclerosis Center, Carmel Medical Center and Rappaport Family Faculty
of Medicine, Technion−Israel Institute
of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel§ Movement
Disorders Clinic, Department of Neurology, Carmel Medical Center,
and Rappaport Family Faculty of Medicine, Technion−Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel∥ Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Rappaport
Family Faculty of Medicine, Technion−Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel⊥ Univ. Paris-Sud, Faculté
de Médecine, Université Paris-Saclay, AP-HP, Centre National de Référence
de l′Hypertension Pulmonaire Sévère, Département
Hospitalo-Universitaire (DHU) Thorax Innovation, Service de Pneumologie,
Hôpital de Bicêtre, UMRS _999, INSERM and Univ. Paris−Sud,
Laboratoire d’Excellence (LabEx) en Recherche sur le Médicament
et l′Innovation Thérapeutique (LERMIT), Centre Chirurgical
Marie Lannelongue, Le Plessis Robinson 92350, France# Department of
Nephrology and Hypertension Baruch Padeh
Medical Center, Poriya 15208, Israel¶ Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Emek Medical Center, Afula 18101, and Rappaport Family
Faculty of Medicine, Technion−Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel□ Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nazareth Hospital EMMS, Nazareth, and
Faculty of Medicine in the Galilee, Bar
Ilan University, Ramat
Gan, Israel■ The Department of Otolaryngology Head and
Neck Surgery, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa 3436212, Israel○ Department of Urology, Bnai Zion Medical Center, Haifa 31048, Israel● Department
of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital
of Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China△ Internal Medicine C and Gastroenterology Departments,
Rambam Medical Center, Rappaport Family Faculty of Medicine, Technion−Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3525408, Israel▲ Department of Gastroenterology, Bnai Zion
Hospital and Rappaport Family Faculty of Medicine, Technion−Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel▽ Faculty of Medicine, University of Latvia, Digestive Diseases, Riga East University Hospital, 19 Rainisboulv, LV1586 Riga, Latvia▼ Digestive Diseases
Centre, GASTRO, 6 Linezeraiela, LV1006 Riga, Latvia⬡ Department of Radiation
Oncology, Baptist Cancer Institute (BCI), 1235 San Marco Boulevard, Suite100, Jacksonville, Florida 32207, United States⬢ Pulmonary
and Critical Care Associates, Orange Park, Florida 32073, United States†† Pulmonary Diseases, Baptist Medical Center, Jacksonville, Florida 32217, United States‡‡ Oncologic Imaging Division, Florida Radiation Oncology Group, Jacksonville, Florida 32217, United States§§ Thoracic
Cancer Unit, Davidoff Cancer Center, RMC, Kaplan Street, Petach Tiqwa 49100, Israel* E-mail: hhossam@technion.ac.il.21 12 2016 24 01 2017 11 1 112 125 24 07 2016 02 12 2016 Copyright © 2016 American
Chemical Society2016American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We report on an artificially intelligent
nanoarray based on molecularly modified gold nanoparticles and a random
network of single-walled carbon nanotubes for noninvasive diagnosis and classification of a number of diseases from exhaled breath. The performance of this
artificially intelligent nanoarray was clinically assessed on breath
samples collected from 1404 subjects having one of 17 different disease
conditions included in the study or having no evidence of any disease
(healthy controls). Blind experiments showed that 86% accuracy could
be achieved with the artificially intelligent nanoarray, allowing
both detection and discrimination between the different disease conditions
examined. Analysis of the artificially intelligent nanoarray also
showed that each disease has its own unique breathprint, and that
the presence of one disease would not screen out others. Cluster analysis
showed a reasonable classification power of diseases from the same
categories. The effect of confounding clinical and environmental factors
on the performance of the nanoarray did not significantly alter the
obtained results. The diagnosis and classification power of the nanoarray
was also validated by an independent analytical technique, i.e., gas chromatography linked with mass spectrometry. This analysis found that 13 exhaled
chemical species, called volatile organic compounds, are associated with certain diseases, and the composition
of this assembly of volatile organic compounds differs from one disease
to another. Overall, these findings could contribute to one of the
most important criteria for successful health intervention in the
modern era, viz. easy-to-use, inexpensive (affordable), and miniaturized
tools that could also be used for personalized screening, diagnosis,
and follow-up of a number of diseases, which can clearly be extended
by further development.

sensornanoparticlecarbon nanotubenoninvasivediagnosisdiseasebreathvolatile organic compounddocument-id-old-9nn6b04930document-id-new-14nn-2016-04930jccc-price
==== Body
Since antiquity
(∼400 BC), physicians learned to evaluate their patients by
exhaled volatile organic compounds (VOCs), among other means, that
are linked to diseases.1,2 For example, the stools and urine
of infant noblemen were smelt daily by their physicians. This approach
rests on the fact that a compendium of VOCs with relatively low molecular
weight expresses distinct and immediate changes as a consequence to
pathophysiological processes occurring and altering the body’s
metabolism.2−8 Experimental findings show that VOCs can be detected directly from
the headspace of the affected cells, blood, exhaled breath, and/or
other body fluids.4,9 Of these body fluids, exhaled
breath is the most accessible and useful VOC source for monitoring
bodily health and disorder.4,9,10 This is because exhaled breath is easily and noninvasively accessible;
it is suitable for high compliance; it provides a matrix of relative
low complexity, and it can be handled safely and repeated as frequently
as desired.

Detection of diseases from exhaled breath has been
shown in different fields of medicine, particularly infectiology,11−13 respiratory medicine,14−19 and oncology.3,5,20−32 However, for exhaled breath analysis to move to the next stage of
sophistication, by meeting the unmet needs of modern clinical practice,
there is a dire need to extend the exhaled analysis approach so that
it can not only facilitate disease diagnosis but also classify the
disease condition. While disease diagnosis is the recognition of the
presence of a specific disease, classification is extremely
important for understanding the etiology, pathogenesis, and effective therapy of
the patient’s disease.33,34 Indeed, classification
of disease is based on finding as many candidate diseases or conditions
as possible that give the same signs or symptoms. This is followed by a process
of elimination, or at least of rendering the entries more or less
probable by further medical tests and other processing, until one
can reach the point where only one candidate disease or condition
remains as the most probable.33,34 The final result may
also provide a list of possible conditions, ranked in order of probability
or severity.

Considering modern criteria in clinical practice,
analysis of exhaled breath should be therefore low-cost, low-energy,
ultraminiaturized, easily repeated at specific time intervals, and
have little or no impact on the day-to-day activity of the person
diagnosed.35 Nanotechnology-based chemical
sensor matrices based on nanomaterials could serve as the translational
tool leading from fundamental research to the modern point-of-care
practice.6,7,22,36−38 This is because chemical
sensor matrices are significantly smaller, easier to use, and less
expensive than other sensing devices. Basically, recognition of VOCs
by nanotechnology-based sensors can be achieved by selective detection
of (pre)identified VOCs.7,36,39−41 This approach is useful to detect specific well-defined
VOCs in the presence of interfering gaseous species or background
using a highly selective receptor designed for this purpose, which
is a laborious business.42 Despite advances
in detection of VOCs by highly selective nanomaterial-based recognition
methods, this has only been possible to date for indicating VOCs from
a relatively narrow spectrum of diseases. While specific recognition
in controlled backgrounds and interferences is achievable, most diseases
today cannot be properly identified by individual VOCs alone.3,7,36,37 An additional limitation is the problem of synthesizing highly selective
nanomaterials for each VOC, notably when they are nonpolar.42

A complementary approach for disease detection
and classification of a wider variety of diseases relies on cross-reactive
(i.e., semiselective) nanotechnology-based sensor
arrays, using pattern recognition;3,7,36−38 we refer to this approach as
using an “artificially intelligent nanoarray”.43−46 In contrast to the selective method, an artificially intelligent
nanoarray is more suitable for rapid diagnostic methods in which evaluation
of a VOC compendium is qualitative and semiquantitative, with selectivity
being achieved through pattern recognition of the compendium.3,7,36,37 Due to cross-reactivity, each sensor responds to a variety of VOCs,
thereby allowing sensing and analysis of individual components from
multicomponent samples.32,43,44,47,48 The concept of the artificially intelligent nanoarray is based on
the ability of each sensor to detect all or part of the sample compounds.
Although these sensors may have a sensitivity to a specific analyte
(or VOC) lower than that of a selective sensor, they are more
versatile in detecting multicomponent and complex VOC mixtures in
different atmospheres (including those for which the (nano)arrays
were not originally designed).32,43,44,47,48 Artificially intelligent nanoarrays of different composition were
assessed in a series of separate laboratory (preclinical) and clinical
studies for the detection of a wide range of cancerous and noncancerous
diseases.8,14,23−32,43,45,47,49−57 In these studies, disease detection was mostly carried out with
reference to healthy control groups, without examining correlated
and uncorrelated clinical confounding factors. Clinical classification
itself was beyond the focus of these studies.

In the present
study, a multicenter clinical assessment was carried out to examine
the probability of a single artificially intelligent nanoarray to
detect and classify a range of disease types to explore the potential
of this approach to modern clinical practice (Figure 1). A total of 2808 breath samples were collected
from 1404 subjects having one of 17 different disease types that had been
put into three main categories (cancerous, inflammatory, and neurological
diseases) and one group of uncorrelated diseases, as well as a group of healthy controls. The effects of primary
demographic and environmental confounding factors (e.g., sex, age, smoking habits, and geographical location) on the diagnosis
and the classification results were examined. This was especially
important because confounding factors are defined as factors that
cause or prevent the diagnosis/classification of interest, are not
intermediate variables, and are not associated with the diagnosis/classification
under investigation. They give rise to situations in which the effects
of the different processes are not separated, the contribution of the causal
factors cannot be separated, or the measure of the effect of exposure
(or risk) is distorted because of its association with other factors
influencing the outcome. To gain an understanding of the outcome of
the artificially intelligent nanoarrays, all breath samples were examined
using an independent lab-based analytical technique referred to as
gas chromatography linked with mass spectrometry (GC-MS). In contrast
to an artificially intelligent nanoarray that analyzes collective
breath VOC patterns, GC-MS identifies and quantifies specific components
(VOCs) (Figure 1).

Figure 1 Schematic
representation of the concept and design of the study. It involved
collection of breath samples from 1404 subjects in 14 departments
in nine clinical centers in five different countries (Israel, France,
USA, Latvia, and China). The population included 591 healthy controls
and 813 patients diagnosed with one of 17 different diseases: lung
cancer, colorectal cancer, head and neck cancer, ovarian cancer, bladder
cancer, prostate cancer, kidney cancer, gastric cancer, Crohn’s
disease, ulcerative colitis, irritable bowel syndrome, idiopathic
Parkinson’s, atypical Parkinsonism, multiple sclerosis, pulmonary
arterial hypertension, pre-eclampsia, and chronic kidney disease.
One breath sample obtained from each subject was analyzed with the
artificially intelligent nanoarray for disease diagnosis and classification,
and a second was analyzed with GC-MS for exploring its chemical composition.

Results
An artificially intelligent
nanoarray that is based on chemiresistive layers of molecularly modified
gold nanoparticles and random network of single-wall carbon nanotubes
was designed and fabricated (detailed information can be found in
the Experimental Methods). The inorganic nanomaterial-based
species in these sensors (i.e., gold nanoparticles
or single-wall carbon nanotubes) provide the electrical conductivity,
whereas the organic layer functions as a sensing layer (recognition
element) for adsorbed VOCs.7,36,58 The sensing mechanism of these sensors can be affected by one or
a combination of the following mechanisms. Sorption of VOCs into the
organic film affects electron tunneling by reversible swelling or
aggregation of the layers, which increases or decreases interparticle
distance, leading, respectively, to an increase or decrease in the
electrical resistance of the film.6,36,58 Another possible sensing mechanism that does not
have steric changes within the sensing layer is charge transfer from
or to the inorganic nanomaterial that develops on exposure to VOCs.6,36,58 In fact, the dielectric constant
of the organic layer might change significantly when that of sorbed
vapor differs significantly.6,36,58 The permittivity of the organic matrix surrounding the metal cores
increases due to the higher dielectric constant of the sorbed vapor
than that of the organic layer (e.g., water, methanol).
In these cases, tunneling activation energy decreases, leading to
a decrease in the electrical resistance of the sensing film. Hence,
sorbed vapor with a lower dielectric constant results in an increase
in resistivity (e.g., toluene, n-hexane).6,36,58 The chemical
diversity of both conductive inorganic nanomaterials and organic layers
results in the sensors responding differently to breath VOCs, which
creates unique fingerprints in resistance changes. Selection of the
conductive inorganic nanomaterials and organic layers can also be
accurately tailored to a desired sensing application.

In conjunction
with artificial intelligence methods, the nanoarray was used for a
meta-analysis of several groups of subjects under real-world circumstances,
each manifesting a specific health condition (Figure 1). This analysis was carried out on breath
samples collected in a controlled manner from 1404 eligible subjects
collected between January 2011 and June 2014 from 14 departments in
nine clinical centers in five different countries (Israel, France,
USA, Latvia, and China). Of the subjects, 813 were patients diagnosed
with one of the following 17 diseases: chronic kidney failure (CKD),
idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (IPD), atypical Parkinsonism
(PDISM), multiple sclerosis (MS), Crohn’s disease (CD), ulcerative
colitis (UC), irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), pulmonary arterial hypertension
(PAH), pre-eclampsia in pregnant women (PET), head and neck cancer
(HNC), lung cancer (LC), colorectal cancer (CRC), bladder cancer (BC),
kidney cancer (KC), prostate cancer (PC), gastric cancer (GC), and
ovarian cancer (OC). Some of these diseases are not clinically correlated
(e.g., pre-eclampsia and Parkinson’s disease),
and therefore, they can serve as a model for evaluating the performance
of the artificially intelligent nanoarray in disease diagnosis without
disturbances of clinically confounding factors. The other diseases
do possess clinical correlation between each other (e.g., lung cancer and pulmonary artery hypertension; colorectal cancer
and Crohn’s disease), and therefore, they can serve as a model
for evaluating performance in disease diagnosis with practical clinical
interruptions/effects of clinically confounding factors. Most of the
diseases can be categorized into cancerous diseases, inflammatory
diseases, neurological diseases, and independent diseases. Therefore,
inter- and/or intra-comparison between these groups can evaluate the
clinical classification ability of this nanoarray. The mean age of
the patient groups was 55 ± 10 years; 423 (52%) of the patients
population were male, and 296 (36%) were active smokers. Breath samples
were also collected from each of 591 control subjects concurrently
enrolled with the patients at each site. The mean age of the control
population was 52 ± 8 years; 257 (43%) were males, and 134 (23%)
were active smokers. The demographic characteristics of all tested
patients and controls in the current study are reviewed in Table 1. All samples were
collected according to the Helsinki ethics protocol issued for the study
at each of the collaborating institutes and after signed consent of
each subject. Detailed information on the clinical design and inclusion
and exclusion criteria can be found in the Experimental
Methods and Supporting Information (SI), section 1.1, including Tables S1-S12. Detailed information on breath collection and
analysis are also in the Experimental Methods.

Table 1 Demographic Characteristics of Patients and Healthy
Controls in the Current Study
 	patients	controls	
group	n	age ± SDa	male, n (%)	smoker, n (%)	n	age ± SDa	male, n (%)	smoker, n (%)	
lung
cancer (LC)	45	67 ± 09	23 (51%)	44 (98%)	23	56 ± 14	12 (52%)	12 (52%)	
colorectal cancer
(CRC)	71	66 ± 10	42 (59%)	09 (11%)	89	60 ± 14	67 (75%)	09 (13%)	
head and neck cancer (HNC)	22	62 ± 12	19 (86%)	13 (59%)	19	50 ± 12	06 (32%)	05 (25%)	
ovarian cancer (OC)	48	51 ± 11	00 (00%)	00 (00%)	48	47 ± 09	00 (00%)	00 (0%)	
bladder cancer (BC)	73	69 ± 11	68 (93%)	53 (68%)	35	66 ± 12	31 (88%)	25 (71%)	
prostate cancer (PC)	11	66 ± 08	11(100%)	05 (45%)	
kidney cancer (KC)	33	65 ± 13	22 (66%)	15 (45%)	
gastric cancer (GC)	99	63 ± 12	57 (58%)	26 (27%)	155	57 ± 15	55 (34%)	23 (15%)	
Crohn’s disease (CD)	41	38 ± 12	23 (56%)	20 (50%)	44	41 ± 02	28 (60%)	15 (35%)	
ulcerative colitis (UC)	37	41 ± 16	20 (56%)	16 (43%)	
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)	27	38 ± 13	08 (32%)	08 (30%)	
idiopathic Parkinson’s
(IPD)	44	65 ± 14	23 (53%)	07 (15%)	37	62 ± 12	19 (51%)	09 (24%)	
atypical Parkinsonism (PDISM)	16	67 ± 08	07 (44%)	06 (35%)	
multiple sclerosis
(MS)	118	38 ± 10	42 (36%)	38 (32%)	44	39 ± 11	17 (38%)	15 (34%)	
pulmonary hypertension (PAH)	22	48 ± 12	06 (27%)	12 (54%)	23	38 ± 08	10 (43%)	10 (43%)	
pre-eclampsia toxemia (PET)	24	30 ± 06	00 (00%)	00 (00%)	47	29 ± 04	00 (00%)	00 (00%)	
chronic kidney disease (CKD)	82	65 ± 12	52 (64%)	24 (29%)	27	46 ± 02	12 (45%)	11 (40%)	
total	813	55 ± 10	423 (52%)	296 (36%)	591	52 ± 08	257 (43%)	134 (23%)	
a Age given as mean ± standard deviation.

Breath Analysis with the Artificially Intelligent
Nanoarray
During exposure to breath samples, interaction
between the VOCs and the organic sensing layer changes the electrical
resistance of the sensors. This change recovers to baseline resistance
almost immediately at the end of exposure. At this stage, a major caution was taken into account to assure the stability and lack (or minimal) drift of the sensors and/or sensing features over the entire period of study. The outcome indicated that the sensors were highly stable, with negligible drifts and/or fluctuations being seen during the study (see SI, section 2.1 and Figures S1–S3). This finding negates the possibility of discrimination between different diseases because of drift issues. From each sensing response,
four (numerical) sensing features (SFs) were read out: the relative
change of sensors’ resistance at the peak (beginning), middle, and end
of the exposure and the area under the curve of the whole measurement.
In total, 59 eligible and stable SFs (SF-01–SF-59) were used
for the statistical analysis (Figure 2). For details regarding each of the read sensing features,
see SI, Table S13. Figure 2 shows that some sensors were more sensitive
to the differences between the VOC patterns of the different disease
populations. For example, SF-43 (Figure 2, black arrow, and SI, Figure S4), in which the sensor proved highly discriminative between
head and neck cancer and other cancerous disease, whereas discrimination
between inflammatory bowel disease and other internal (noncancerous)
diseases was not (see SI, Figure S4). Although
other sensors were less sensitive, this was indicated by a wide overlap
in their responses to the breath samples from different diseases,
such as SF-29 (Figure 2, blue arrow). At this stage, a major caution was taken into account prior to statistical analysis. The caution was the exploration of multiple linear regression models for examining
and stratifying the effects of possible confounding factors: sex,
age, smoking status, and location of sampling site. This analysis
showed that, of the 59 studied sensing features, 39 were correlated
with age and/or smoking, most of them being negative (i.e., lower signals were obtained from older smokers). Three of the 59
sensing features were correlated with gender. None of the sensing
features were correlated with geographical location. Using linear correlations, the raw data were stratified and adjusted, and a second regression models were applied to ensure the correction was effective. For detailed statistical analysis,
refer to the Experimental Methods.

Figure 2 Heat map of
59 stable sensing features, extracted from 20 different nanomaterial-based
sensors on the artificially intelligent nanoarray. Each raw datum
in the heat map represents the mean responses for each of the 17 diseases
tested in this way. Some sensing features (SFs) were more sensitive
than others to differences in the breath VOCs. No individual sensing
feature was sufficiently informative to discriminate among all the
diseases, but the overall response patterns had discriminative potential
(columns in the heat map). For details regarding each of the measured
sensing features, see SI, Table S13.

To semiquantify the differences
seen in the columns of Figure 2, combinations of sensitive sensors were used to create a
series of discriminant factor analysis (DFA) binary classifiers (see Experimental Methods) to obtain disease breath signatures
that allow the different diseases to be distinguished. To ensure valid
results free from artifacts or overfitting, we have divided the data
set of each analysis as a training and validation set; 77% of each
group was selected randomly for the training set, and 23% of each
group were omitted as blind samples. The DFA classifier consisted
of 120 binary models, each discriminating a pair of the diseases.
Thirty randomly chosen samples from each group were used, for this
analysis, to ensure uniform sample size. For each binary classifier,
46 samples were used as a training set (23 samples per each of the
compared diseases) and 14 randomly chosen independent samples (7 samples
per group) were classified in a blind manner (prostate cancer samples
were excluded from this specific analysis, due to the small sample
size; n = 11). The accuracy of the blind analysis
of each model was calculated as the total number of samples correctly
classified over the total number of independent set samples (n = 14). In some cases, the analysis was of low accuracy
in discriminating between two groups (e.g., 64% in
a comparison of gastric vs bladder cancer). In other
cases, 100% accuracy was found in 13 different comparisons (e.g., lung vs head and neck cancer). The
average accuracy of all 120 classifiers was 86%. Figure 3 presents the discriminative
power of the nanoarray in terms of accuracy scored in the blind analysis;
for the exact sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of each comparison,
please refer to the SI, Table S14. To test whether the discrimination achieved between the different groups was influenced by any bias, possibly caused by the confounding factors geography and/or methodology, we applied the exact obtained classifiers that successfully discriminated among the diseases to the corresponding control groups, collected at the same sites under the same conditions and environment. This last analysis resulted in accuracies between 29% for PAH vs CC and 86% for TOX vs OC, yielding an overall average accuracy for this analysis of 58% (Figure 3). (For the exact sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of each comparison, See SI, Table S15). In some
cases, two or more diseases shared the same control
group, as in (1) Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, and irritable
bowel syndrome; (2) kidney and bladder cancer; and (3) idiopathic
and atypical Parkinsonism. Therefore, the last analysis was not applicable
in these cases (Figure 3, hatched boxes). In contrast to the high accuracy achieved among diseases (86%), the classification of the control samples resulted in random results with a total accuracy of 58%, ruling out the possibility of coincidence. In certain comparisons, the results were higher than the arbitrary classification of the control subjects. Overall, these findings emphasize that the
differences in the VOC composition during disease are much more stressed
and are more significant than the minor intra-individual differences
found among the heterogeneous control groups.

Figure 3 Graphical presentation of the accuracy
of the binary DFA classifiers. Each box represents the accuracy achieved
in a blind validation of each pair of subject groups. The left heat
map gives the results of comparisons between groups of patients, whereas
the graph on the right gives the results of the same classifiers applied
to the corresponding control groups. The average accuracy was 86%
for all disease classifiers (left graph) and 58% for the corresponding
control groups (right graph). The letter “C” beside each disease named in the right figure means the
“control” group relates to that specific disease.

To explore similarities and/or differences among the breath VOCs associated with each disease, hierarchal clustering analysis was conducted. In this analysis, the responses of the sensors were clustered and regrouped according to similarities and/or differences in the collective pattern of the VOCs. Each clustering step represents
greater similarities between the profiles, suggesting considerable
resemblance among the samples (subjects) of a specific cluster (see Experimental Methods for more details). Two important
inferences emerged from the results. The first is that the data were
not clustered according to possible confounding factors, such as sampling
location, racial, and/or ethnic factors (e.g., no
resemblance could be seen between multiple sclerosis and Parkinsonian groups; both
patients and their corresponding control groups), although both were
enrolled and tested in the same department (Carmel Medical Center,
Haifa, Israel). In addition, there is no evidence that the samples
were clustered due to resemblance in features of sex and/or smoking
habits; for example, in the case of pre-eclampsia and ovarian cancer,
both groups included only nonsmoking females (see Figure 4 and SI, Figure S5). Second, there was a strong resemblance between subgroups
with common pathophysiologies; for example, a high similarity was
found among most of the cancerous disease, as also among diseases
associated with increased inflammatory activity (Crohn’s disease,
ulcerative colitis, and pre-eclampsia), whereas the Parkinsonian-related
cases (idiopathic and atypical Parkinsonism) were subgrouped together
(Figure 4). In a parallel
complementary analysis, hierarchal clustering analysis for
the corresponding control groups was carried out. The results indicated
greater similarities and more homogeneous sensing responses compared
with the disease clustering. Figure S5 of the SI show that the interclustering distances are shorter than
the ones in the disease group clustering. These results support the
hypothesis that similarities in pathophysiological processes are expressed
in quite similar breath patterns. However, further in vitro and ex vivo studies are required to support this
conclusion.

Figure 4 Clustering analysis of the responses of the sensors. Each cluster
represents a similar response profile, suggesting considerable resemblance
between samples (subjects) in a specific cluster. It is clear that
the clustering is not based on any of the potential confounding factors,
but there are strong resemblances between subgroups with common pathophysiologies.

Complementary Quantitative
Chemical Analysis
As mentioned earlier, the artificially
intelligent nanoarray analyzes the collective breath VOC patterns
in a black-box approach. To identify and quantify the specific VOCs
associated with each disease state, a second breath sample obtained from all
participants was analyzed by GC-MS. This identified over 150 different
VOCs in the different cohorts, but only 35 VOCs were selected for
further investigation. The choice was made on the following criteria:
(i) they were common to >70% of the total population (patients
and controls); (ii) they were easily identified and verified by the
analysis of pure standards; and (iii) they had concentrations in ambient
air samples at least 10-fold lower (on average) than in the equivalent
breath samples. Owing to the demographic differences between the groups,
multiple linear regression for the abundance of each VOCs was first
carried out to explore any possible correlation between abundance
and the covariates (age, sex, location, and smoking status). The results
indicate that the abundances of 15 VOCs were negatively correlated
with age and/or smoking; three of them were also correlated with gender.
However, there was no significant correlation between the abundance
of those VOCs and the sampling site. Therefore, each VOC with significant
correlations (p < 0.05) was adjusted according
to the calculated coefficient corresponding to the confounding element
(see SI, Table S16). For detailed method
of GC-MS analysis, refer to the Experimental Methods.

Thirteen different VOCs common to all the examined diseases
have been identified in this study and differed significantly (p < 0.01) in abundance from the control groups and/or
the other diseases. They were 2-ethylhexanol, 3-methylhexane, 5-ethyl-3-methyloctane,
acetone, ethanol, ethyl acetate, ethylbenzene, isononane, isoprene,
nonanal, styrene, toluene, and undecane (cf. SI, Table S17). Although the abundances of these VOCs overlapped among
some of the disease states, significant differences were clear between
others. For example, nonanal in Crohn’s disease, irritable
bowel syndrome, and pre-eclampsia was significantly lower than that
in other diseases (Figure 5A). Undecane in lung, head and neck, and ovarian cancers was
markedly higher than that in the remaining groups. The same VOC in
Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, and pulmonary hypertension
was also significantly lower than that in the remaining groups (Figure 5B). Isononane, in
contrast, among patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease,
atypical Parkinsonism, and pre-eclampsia was significantly higher
than that in all other diseases (Figure 5C). Similar observations were noted for each
of the other 10 VOCs.

Figure 5 GC-MS analysis of the breath samples. The area under the
peak (abundance) measured in the different diseases of three representative
VOCs: (a) nonanal, (b) undecane, and (c) isononane. The whisker boxes
present first quartile, third quartile, median (line), and average
(square); the bars represent the 10% and 90% points, whereas the dots
represent minimal and maximal readings.

Figure 6 shows
a heat map of the quantitative GC-MS analysis of patients’
breath samples; it is almost impossible to discriminate between the
different diseases at the single VOC level (the rows in the heat map),
and therefore, a combinatorial approach was taken. The rationale behind
this approach is that 13 VOCs could generate thousands of possible
combinations in which each combination could be valuable in the discrimination
between two or more of the diseases. Indeed, this combinatorial approach
shows that the overall combination of 13 VOCs (columns in the heat
map) obtained for a specific disease differs from the other diseases
(Figure 6); that is,
in the breath VOC composition of each group examined, the combination
of the 13 statistically validated VOCs showed clear differences between
the diseases. For example, none of VOC-04, VOC-08, and VOC-11 solely
discriminated between the diseases due to the overlap in their individual
concentrations. However, the combination of these three VOCs showed
clear distinction between colorectal cancer and ulcerative colitis,
as well as between head and neck cancer and multiple sclerosis. Adding
VOC-02 and VOC-12 to these three VOCs, the discriminative power increases,
making it possible to discriminate between additional diseases, including
lung cancer, pulmonary artery hypertension, and Parkinson’s
disease. These results clearly indicate that assessment of wide subsets
(patterns) of the 13 VOCs gives better discrimination between the
diseases we have explored.

Figure 6 Heat map of the GC-MS analysis of patients’
breath samples. The average of each of the 13 VOCs is given on the
color scale. Hatched boxes are cases in which the VOC was found
in <70% of the samples of a specific group of patients. The VOCs
are VOC-01, 2-ethylhexanol; VOC-02, 3-methylhexane; VOC-03, 5-ethyl-3-methyloctane;
VOC-04, acetone; VOC-05, ethanol; VOC-06, ethyl acetate; VOC-07, ethylbenzene;
VOC-08, isononane; VOC-09, isoprene; VOC-10, nonanal; VOC-11, styrene;
VOC-12, toluene; and VOC-13, undecane. At the individual VOC level,
it becomes almost impossible to distinguish between different diseases
(rows in the heat map). However, the overall VOC composition (columns
in the color map) is quite distinctive.

For the sake of comparison, the discriminatory power of the
13 VOCs in Figure 6 was examined in the context of the different control groups, which
showed that the number of cases of significant differences (p < 0.01) in VOC abundance among the (control) groups
being assessed was 50% lower than in the case-related disease groups.
In fact, there were significant differences (p <
0.01) in 177 of the 858 (21%) of the binary comparisons among the
control groups collected concomitantly with the disease groups. On the other hand, there
were significant differences (p < 0.01) in 760
of the 1768 (43%) of the binary comparisons between the disease groups.
This demonstrates the intra-individual differences in the breath VOC
composition of the controls, but much more obvious and remarkable
ones were found among patients with different diseases. Nevertheless,
and in spite of the intra-individual VOC differences in the control
groups, it is clear that each disease has a remarkably distinctive
VOC composition of the breath that distinguishes it from both the
controls and other disease states.

Discussion
Analysis with
the Artificially Intelligent Nanoarrays
The binary classifiers
of the breath samples collected from the various disease states achieved very high accuracy in most cases,
supported by two independent validation procedures, viz. the leave-one-out
cross-validation method (applied to the training set) and blind analysis
of 14 samples for each classifier. A minimal number (2–4) of
sensors was also used for each comparison, reducing the chance of
overfitting the results. In contrast to the high accuracy achieved among diseases (86%), the classification of the control samples ruled out the possibility of coincidence and/or external biases. Of special
importance, results from the artificially intelligent nanoarrays support
the hypothesis that similarities in pathophysiological processes are
expressed in quite similar breath patterns. The results also indicated
that the adjustment for confounding factors was successful. The subgroups
were not clustered according to similarities in demographic features
or geographical location, which also stresses that the artificially
intelligent nanoarray analysis is less sensitive to possible confounding
factors since we have seen in some cases trends in the control groups
that were like those seen among the diseases.

These observations
could be explained by the fact that the artificially intelligent nanoarray
does not rely on selective or a lock-and-key approach in the detection
of specific VOCs in the biomarkers. Indeed, the nanoarray relies on
sensors that have different chemistries. In this case, all exhaled
VOCs are adsorbed onto the surface of each sensor. Due to the different
chemistry of each sensor, however, a combination of the 13 VOCs could
have higher affinity to the sensor’s surface than others. In
this way, different combination of VOCs (of the 13 VOCs) are detected
by different sensors. With the help of artificial intelligence methods,
combination of these differences can be expressed and attributed to
specific diseases.6,10,37

To
date, some of the classifiers gave relatively poor accuracy, which
will be ineffective in future clinical use. Nevertheless, these results
may well be improved by using tailor-made sensors that are more sensitive
to specific VOC profiles.6,10 New-generation sensors
with modified and more diverse organic coatings may be fabricated
to suit particular VOC composition(s). Their tailor-made characteristics
could be determined by repeated exposure and training phases using
artificial gas samples consisting of the targeted VOC mixture.36,59 For full and efficient operation in real clinical settings, the
artificially intelligent nanoarray needs to be increasingly trained
using known clinical samples to build up a consistent and reliable
database of reference. It can then recognize new samples by comparing
disease-related VOC patterns to those already in its database. On
this issue and other limitations involved in the current study, refer
to SI, section 2.4.

Analysis with the GC-MS
Hundreds of different exhaled VOCs have been reported in the literature.2−5,8,9,20,60 In our study,
150 different VOCs were identified in their different groups, in agreement
with previously published studies (ranging from 100 to 300 VOCs per
subject).8,37 Thirteen of these VOCs could discriminate
between different diseases. These VOCs are well-known, documented
in the literature, and each single VOC has been reported in different
disease states. For example, nonanal was linked to ovarian cancer,25 inflammatory bowel disease,45 breast cancer,61 esophageal
and gastric adenocarcinoma.62 As another
example, isoprene could be linked to chronic liver disease,63 kidney disease,51 diabetes,64 and others. These results
support our finding that no single VOC can discriminate between different
diseases. The use of VOC patterns in exhaled breath samples becomes
a more realistic option for discriminating between different disease
states.

Regression models applied to the raw GC-MS data showed
that the abundance of exhaled VOCs was affected by some common confounding
factors. A number of the VOCs was affected by age and/or smoking habits
(e.g., 2-ethylhexanol, 3-methylhexane, 5-ethyl-3-methyloctane,
acetone, ethanol, ethyl acetate, ethylbenzene, isononane, isoprene,
nonanal, styrene, toluene, and undecane), whereas three of them were
also affected by the gender of the subject (isononane, nonanal, and
undecane). This effect stemming from the first part of the VOCs could
be explained by the relationship between the anatomical and physiological
changes in the respiratory system and circulation associated with
aging and/or smoking injury.65 It includes
stiffness and degeneration of the elastic fibers, fibrosis, aging-associated
destruction of lung parenchyma, emphysema, and chronic bronchitis,
mainly among smokers.66 These alterations
could easily affect the diffusion of VOCs through the blood–air
barrier by altering the thickness or permeability of the epithelium
(the so-called membrane conductance) or by reducing the total surface
area of the membrane.66 These factors could
easily alter the flux, according to Fick’s
first law, affecting the diffusion of gases in the exhaled air, eventually
reducing/stressing the expression and/or concentrations of a wide
range of the exhaled VOC components.5 The
effect stemming from the second part of the VOCs might be attributed
to hormonal or structural gender-related differences.67 However, it remains unclear why in the case of 3-methylhexane,
and despite the strict adjustments that were made, an unexplained
trend was found among the control groups. The concentration of 3-methylhexane
was lower in the multiple sclerosis group than any other disease group
and lower in the corresponding control group than any of the other
control group. It is believed that these rare trends are due to a range
of factors, such as small differences between the different clinical
teams in using the sampling protocol and among the technical properties
of the analytical instruments during analysis. However, it is noteworthy
that the multiple sclerosis patients and their corresponding control
group had been enrolled and sampled in the same location as the Parkinsonian
patients, with the same equipment and by the same staff. Therefore,
it is concluded that the measured concentrations should be corrected in
future applications of breath testing. These results are contrary
to many previous reports in the breath analysis field, which commonly
reported that only a small minority of breath VOCs can be correlated
with common confounding factors.68−70 The main reasons for
this could include the following: (i) in studies consisting of matched
groups, these features had been neglected and left untested; and/or
(ii) owing to the small size of study groups, statistically significant
correlations would not have been obtained. These conclusions will
be considered as empirical findings—as the principal origins
and specific pathways of our VOCs—that remain poorly understood,
although intensive experimental work and theoretical considerations
have been discussed elsewhere.3,5,8 Further in vitro and ex vivo studies, in which, for example, healthy cells/tissues are stimulated with different pathophysiological stimuli to monitor changes in their VOC patterns will be required to understand and further strengthen our conclusions. For further details on the limitations involved in the current proof-of-concept
study, refer to the SI, section 2.4.

Summary and Conclusions
The present study reports on an artificially
intelligent nanoarray based on molecularly modified gold nanoparticles
and random network of single-wall carbon nanotubes for noninvasive
diagnosis and classification of 17 different diseases from exhaled
breath. The nanoarray was used for the practical evaluation of 1404
subjects in nine clinical settings worldwide. Blind experiments with
the artificially intelligent nanoarray showed that 86% accuracy could
be achieved, allowing discrimination between each pair of the diseases,
and that each disease has its own unique volatile molecular print
compared to both healthy controls and other diseases. Consequently,
the presence of one disease would not screen out others—a prerequisite
for developing a new generation(s) of biomedical devices for personalized
diagnosis and classification of diseases in a noninvasive, inexpensive,
and portable manner. The artificially intelligent nanoarray had a
low or no vulnerability to clinical and demographical confounding
factors. The findings by nanoarray were examined by an independent
analytical technique, GC-MS. This analysis found 13 exhaled VOCs associated
with various diseases, and their composition differs from one disease
to another, thereby validating the nanoarray results. While further
and larger translational studies are required to validate these
findings, this work provides a shuttling pad for in statu
nascendi “volatolomics” field (the omics of
volatile biomarkers), as well as a method for obtaining affordable,
easy-to-use, inexpensive, and miniaturized tools for personalized
screening, diagnosis, and follow-up of a range of diseases.

Experimental Methods
Fabrication of the Nanoarray
Breath samples obtained by each subject were analyzed by an array
of cross-reactive sensors that relates to two main chemiresistive
categories: (i) monolayer-capped gold nanoparticles (core diameter:
3–4 nm), and (ii) an organically functionalized random network
of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs). The gold nanoparticles
were synthesized as previously described32,71,72 and drop-casted onto semicircular microelectronic
transducers until a resistance of several MΩ had been reached. The microelectronic transducers consisted
of 10 pairs of circular interdigitated (ID) gold electrodes on silicon
with 300 nm thermal oxide (Silicon Quest International, Nevada, USA).
The outer diameter of the circular electrode area was 3 mm, and the
gap between two adjacent electrodes and the width of each electrode
were both 20 Ωm; the sensors were molecularly modified with
different sensing layers, such as dodecanthiol, 4-chlorobenzene methanethiol,
and several others. The SWCNT sensor was based on an electrically
continuous random network of SWCNTs formed by drop-casting a solution
of SWCNTs (ARRY International LTD, Germany; ∼30% metallic,
∼70% semiconducting, average diameter 1.5 nm, 7 mm) in dimethylformamide
(DMF, from Sigma-Aldrich Ltd., >98% purity) onto the preprepared
electrical transducers. After deposition, the device was slowly dried
overnight under ambient conditions to enhance the self-assembly of
the SWCNTs and evaporate the solvent. This procedure was repeated
until a resistance of 100 KΩ to 10 MΩ was reached. The
microelectronic transducer for the SWCNT sensor consisted of 10 pairs
of 4.5 mm wide interdigitated Ti/Pd electrodes on silicon with 2 μ
thermal oxide (Silicon Quest International, Nevada, USA). The SWCNT
sensor was organically functionalized with PAH derivatives. For details regarding each of the sensors, see SI, Table S13. After fabrication, each sensor went through
a characterization procedure in which it was exposed to several different
concentrations of compounds usually found in breath (e.g., isopropyl alcohol, 2-ethyl hexanol, water vapor, and others), in
a range of 10 or more parts per billion (ppb) – several part
per millions (ppm). Features including, but not only, sensitivity,
selectivity, repeatability, and stability of each sensor were carefully
studied, then the information from these experiments offered the choice
of the most sensitive, stable, and repeatable sensors to be used in
the study.

Design of the Clinical Study
Breath
samples collected between January 2011 and June 2014 were subjected
to meta-analysis; they were provided by collaborators of our research
group (LNBD; Technion-IIT) with 14 departments in nine clinical centers
worldwide. Originally, breath samples had been collected at each site
for different scientific purposes. Nevertheless, the same collection
equipment and the strict procedure were used by all participating
centers to ensure the samples were comparable. However, it should
be noted that different sampling locations had different inclusion/exclusion
criteria, such that in some cases the different subpopulations were
not matched in terms of their demographic characteristics. Analysis
was made on two breath samples from each of the 813 patients diagnosed
with one of the following diseases: chronic kidney failure (CKD) (n = 82) (Poria Hospital, Tiberias, Israel); idiopathic Parkinson’s
disease (IPD) and atypical Parkinsonism (PDISM) (n = 60) (Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel); multiple sclerosis
(MS) (n = 118) (Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel);
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), including Crohn’s disease
(CD) (n = 41), ulcerative colitis (UC) (n = 37) and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) (n = 27)
(Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel); pulmonary arterial hypertension
(PAH) (n = 22) (French National Referral Center for
PAH, Antoine-Béclère Hospital, Paris, France); pre-eclampsia
in pregnant women (PET) (n = 24) (Nazareth English
Hospital, Nazareth, Israel, and Emek Medical Center, Afula); head and neck cancer (HNC) (n = 22) (Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel); lung cancer (LC) (n = 45) (Baptist Cancer Institute (BCI), Jacksonville, FL,
USA); colorectal cancer (CRC) (n = 71) (Faculty of
Medicine, Riga East University Hospital, Riga, Latvia); bladder cancer
(BC) (n = 73), kidney cancer (KC) (n = 33) and prostate cancer (PC) (n = 11) (Bnai-Zion
Medical Center, Haifa, Israel); gastric cancer (GC) (n = 99) (Faculty of Medicine, Riga East University Hospital, Riga,
Latvia); and ovarian cancer (OC) (n = 48) (Department
of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University,
Hefei, China). The mean age of the patient groups was 55 ± 10
years, 423 (52%) being male, which included 296 (36%) active smokers.
Breath samples were also collected from 591 control subjects enrolled
concurrently with the patients at each site. The control population
mean age was 52 ± 8 years; 257 (43%) were males, of which 134
(23%) were active smokers. Demographic characteristics of all these
subpopulations are summarized in Table 1. Samples were collected according to the Helsinki
ethics protocol issued for study at each of the collaborating institutes
and after the signed consent of each subject. Over 95% of the patients
had been enrolled before therapeutic intervention (i.e., de novo); for ethical reasons, the remaining cases
were sampled after treatment had begun. Detailed information on the
clinical design, inclusion, and exclusion criteria can be found in
the SI, section 1.1.

Collection
of the Breath Samples
Briefly, the breath collection procedure
started with a 3–5 min “lung wash” during which
the participant inhaled through both a charcoal (ABEK) and a bacterial
filter to remove 99.99% of exogenous VOCs in the ambient air. The
subject then exhaled through a device that had two separate ports;
one port directed the first 150 mL of exhaled breath, mainly dead
space air, to a waste plastic bag, and the rest (the end tidal volume)
was directed into a 750 mL chemically inert Mylar sampling bag. The
process was repeated within a few minutes to obtain two samples from
each subject. The content of each Mylar bag was transferred using
a simple vacuum air pump into a Tenax TA and Carboxen-1018 glass adsorbent
tube (Sigma-Aldrich Ltd.) or two-bed ORBO 420 Tenax TA sorption tubes
(Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). For quality control, air samples
were collected by pumping ambient air from the collection room through
a sorbent tube for 7 min at 100 mL/min. The tubes were sealed and
stored in refrigerators at 4 °C pending analysis. One sample
was used for chemical analysis using GC-MS and the other for nanoarray
pattern recognition analysis. As a precaution, only subjects who had not consumed food, drink, or tobacco at least 2 h before
sampling were included.

Breath Analysis with the Artificially Intelligent
Nanoarray
To transfer VOCs trapped by the absorption materials,
the samples underwent thermal desorption (at 250 °C) in an autosampler
thermal desorption system (TD20; Shimadzu Corporation, Japan) before
they were temporarily stored in a stainless steel VICI sample loop
(Valco Instruments Co. Inc.) at 150 °C. In parallel, the chamber
containing sensors was kept under vacuum conditions (∼30 mTorr),
until the sample was directed into the chamber; the remaining volume
was filled with N2 (99.999%) at atmospheric pressure. A
Keithley data logger device (model 2701 DMM) was used to sequentially
acquire resistance readings from the nanoarray for 5 min in vacuum
prior to exposure (baseline), followed by 5 min of breath sample that
filled the chamber, which in turn was followed by another 5 min of
sensors recovery starting with a vacuum chamber. The whole system
was controlled by a custom-built LabView program.

Calibration
and Signal Analysis
During exposure of the sensors to breath
samples or calibration gas, interaction between the VOCs and the organic
sensing layer results in a change in resistance. Interactions between
the SWCNTs/GNPs and VOCs are physical, mostly relying on van der Waals
interactions.3,37 Baseline resistance recovers
almost immediately with the evacuation of the sample from the chamber.
From each response, four (numerical) sensing features were read out:
the relative change of sensor’s resistance at the peak (beginning),
middle, and end of the exposure, as well as the area under the curve
of the whole measurement. For example, the middle sensing feature,
of a given exposure, was calculated by the following equation:  To supervise the sensor’s operational
efficiency during the experiment and to overcome drift in sensors’
response, a fixed calibration gas mixture, containing 11.5 ppm isopropyl
alcohol, 2.8 ppm trimethylbenzene, and 0.6 ppm 2-ethylhexanol, was
exposed to the sensors on a daily basis. The raw signals of the breath
samples’ response were normalized by their parallel response
to the calibration gas on the same day. We also used a humidity compensation
method to reduce the effect of water vapor present at higher levels
in samples collected on Tenax-Carboxen trap tubes, due to its ability
to adsorb water vapor.59 Features were
extracted only from 20 sensors that were functional and stable throughout
the entire analysis. Characteristics and sensing features of the eligible
sensor are detailed in Table S13.

Multiple linear regression models were applied to the extracted sensing
features to test and correct the associations between covariates (age,
sex, location, and smoking status) and the numerical outcome. To choose
the most sensitive sensors relevant to a given comparison and obtain
the most selective models for the targeted VOCs, statistical analysis
was used to indicate the F ratio of each sensor (i.e., its power of discrimination). DFA was then applied
to the data (highest ranking SF) to test the ability of the sensors
to distinguish the different diseases from one another. DFA is a supervised linear method supplied with the classification information
for every measurement in the training set. Using a linear combination
of the input variables En, DFA finds new orthogonal axes (canonical values) to minimize the
variance within each given class and maximize variance between two
classes. To prevent overfitting of the data, two to four sensing
features were used to build a discriminatory model, stressing a ratio
of 1:10 of features to samples. Thirty samples (or less in cases with
a limited number of patients) were randomly chosen and used to obtain
binary classifiers using DFA. From each group, seven samples were
first excluded for blind validation of the acquired classifier; the
remaining samples were used as the training set. Each of the samples
were then classified accordingly and we determined whether the result
turned out to be true positive (TP), false positive (FP), true negative
(TN), or false negative (FN). The classification accuracy was identified
by calculating the sensitivity (TP/TP + FN), specificity (TN/TN +
FP), and accuracy (TP + TN/sample size) of the constructed model.

Both cross-validation methods and blind tests were applied to validate
the results. The responses and selected sensing features of 20 eligible sensors were then normalized according a daily calibration system.
Control experiments to test the reproducibility of the sensing responses
and behavior were carried out over periods ranging from 6 months to
3 years. Some day-to-day fluctuations were evident in the calibration
experiments, but their magnitude (noise) was negligible. For detailed
information regarding signal processing, please refer to refs (23−25 and 53).

Chemical Analysis
Using GC-MS
In general, GC-MS analysis is divided into two
steps. In this first step, the sample goes through the GC capillary
column, in which the velocity of a molecule is correlated to its chemical
properties; that is, different molecules will exit the column at different
times (their retention times). Separation of the mixture allows the
MS to capture, ionize, accelerate, deflect, and detect the ionized
molecules separately. The MS does this by breaking each molecule into
ionized fragments, which detects using their mass to charge ratio
and compares it to a given library. The final output contains a chromatogram,
which relates the retention time to the abundance of each compound.
The area under the curve for a specific compound is proportional to
its concentration in the mixture. One of the two breath samples from
each subject was analyzed using GC-MS to determine the chemical nature
and composition of his/her exhaled breath. For this analysis, GC-MS
(GCMS-QP2010; Shimadzu Corporation, Japan), combined with a thermal
desorption system (TD20; Shimadzu Corporation, Japan), was used. The
following oven temperature profile was set: (a) 10 min at 35 °C;
(b) a 4 °C/min ramp until 150 °C; (c) a 10 °C/min ramp
until 300 °C; and (d) 5 min at 300 °C. An SLB-5 ms capillary
column (Sigma-Aldrich Ltd.) with 5% phenyl methyl siloxane (30 m length,
0.25 mm internal diameter, and 0.5 μm thickness) was used. A
splitless injection mode was used for 2 min at 30 cm/s constant linear
speed and 0.70 mL/min column flow. Prior to analysis, the tubes were
conjugated to a 30 mL/min flow of pure helium to reduce their humidity.
GC-MS chromatogram analysis was undertaken with the GC-MS solutions
version 2.53SU1 Postrunanalysis program (Shimadzu Corporation). Student t-test and/or nonparametric Wilcoxon tests are used to determine
statistical differences of the VOCs’ abundance between the
research groups. Due to major technical difficulties and repair of
the instrument, the breath samples collected from CKD patients were
analyzed in a different manner and with different technical parameters
from the rest of the study cohort and, therefore, were excluded from
the GC-MS analysis.

Statistical Analysis for the Artificially
Intelligent Nanoarray
Student t-test was
used to determine statistical differences between the clinical/demographical
features between study groups (including age, sex, smoking habits, etc.); p < 0.05 was used as a cutoff
to determine significant differences. Multiple linear regression models
were used to explore and stratify the effects of possible confounding
factors, including sex, age, smoking status, and location of sampling
site. Sensors’ responses that could be correlated with any
of the tested variables (p < 0.05) were adjusted
according to the relevant coefficient factors. After data correction,
a second regression model was run to ensure the correction was effective.
Statistical differences in the responses of the sensors to different
study groups were tested using nonparametric Wilcoxon test due to
the non-normal distribution; p < 0.01 was used
to determine statistical validation. DFA was carried out detailed
in SI, section 2.4. The validation of the
each obtained model was tested by blind analysis of 14 samples (seven
samples from each of the compared groups). Each of the samples was
then classified accordingly to determine whether the result was a
true positive, false positive, true negative, or false negative. Classification
accuracy was checked by calculating the sensitivity (TP/TP + FN),
specificity (TN/TN + FP), and accuracy (TP + TN/sample size) of the
constructed model. Hierarchal clustering analysis was run on individual
sensors’ responses in all the tested populations. Each clustering
step indicates greater similarities between the profiles, suggesting
considerable resemblance among the samples (subjects) of a specific
cluster.

Statistical Analysis for the GC-MS
After identification
and quantification of the exact composition of exhaled breath samples,
multiple linear regression models were used to test the effects of
confounding factors (sex, age, smoking status, and location of sampling
site) on the concentrations of VOCs. Once a significant correlation
had been noted with any of the tested variables (p < 0.05), we applied a data adjustment method according to the
relevant coefficient factors. After data correction, a second regression
model was obtained to ensure the correction was effective. The Shapiro–Wilk
test was used to check whether the concentrations of the reported
VOCs were normally distributed. Thus, Student t-test
and/or nonparametric Wilcoxon tests could then be used to determine
statistical differences of VOCs’ abundance between the research
groups; p < 0.01 was used as a cutoff for statistical
validation.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available free of
charge on the ACS Publications
website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.6b04930.Detailed methods
section, additional results and figures, and an appendix on the inclusion
and exclusion criteria of the study population (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn6b04930_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
R.J., M.A., Y.Y.B., A.G., H.I.,
S.K., S.B., A.B.H., L.H.S., L.G.M., I.L., A.M., S.B., J.F., S.C.K.,
F.N., M.H., Z.B., A.K., R.W., F.P., D.M., B.G., G.G., G.S., S.B.A.,
R.S., M.G., O.R., T.M., I.D.,O.F., D.S., W.Z., H.Q.L., Y.Y.P., L.Y.,
H.L., E.K., T.R., K.F., R.S., A.S., G.A., I.L.K., I.T., D.J., S.Z.M.,
J.F., J.W.W., L.H.W., M.H., M.L., and N.P. acquired clinical samples,
breath samples analysis, data interpretation, revision, and approval
of the manuscript for important intellectual content. H.A. and M.K.N.
contributed equally to the study design and the clinical data management
and analysis of the cancerous diseases. M.K.N. and H.H. were involved
in the study design and supervision, interpretation of data, manuscript
writing and revision.

The authors declare
no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Morad Nakhleh dedicates this work in the loving memory of his dear father, Kamel N. Nakhleh. This research was funded
from the FP7’s ERC grant under DIAG-CANCER (Grant Agreement
No. 256639; HH); the FP7-Health Program under the LCAOS (Grant Agreement
No. 258868); the EuroNanoMed Program under VOLGACORE (Grant Agreement
No. 3-10551). Sample collection in Latvia was funded in part from
Grant No. 305/2012 from Latvian Council of Science. Fabrication was done at the Micro-Nano Fabrication Unit (MNFU), Technion.
The authors acknowledge Dr. Grisha Shuster, Mrs. Meital Segev, and
Dr. Yael Zilberman for their contributions in sensor fabrication.
==== Refs
References
Phillips M. 
Breath Tests in Medicine . Sci. Am. 
1992 , 267 , 74 –79 10.1038/scientificamerican0792-74 .1502511 
Buszewski B. ; Kesy M. ; Ligor T. ; Amann A. 
Human Exhaled Air Analytics: Biomarkers of Diseases . Biomed. Chromatogr. 
2007 , 21 , 553 –566 10.1002/bmc.835 .17431933 
Haick H. ; Broza Y. Y. ; Mochalski P. ; Ruzsanyi V. ; Amann A. 
Assessment,
Origin, and Implementation of Breath Volatile Cancer Markers . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 1423 –1449 10.1039/C3CS60329F .24305596 
Broza Y. Y. ; Mochalski P. ; Ruzsanyi V. ; Amann A. ; Haick H. 
Hybrid Volatolomics
and Disease Detection . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 11036 –11048 10.1002/anie.201500153 .
Amann A. ; Mochalski P. ; Ruzsanyi V. ; Broza Y. Y. ; Haick H. 
Assessment of the Exhalation
Kinetics of Volatile Cancer Biomarkers Based on Their Physicochemical
Properties . J. Breath Res. 
2014 , 8 , 016003 10.1088/1752-7155/8/1/016003 .24566039 
Nakhleh M. ; Broza Y. Y. ; Haick H. 
Monolayer-Capped Gold
Nanoparticles for Disease Detection from Breath . Nanomedicine (London, U. K.) 
2014 , 9 , 1991 –2002 10.2217/nnm.14.121 .
Broza Y. Y. ; Haick H. 
Nanomaterial-Based Sensors for Detection of Disease by Volatile Organic
Compounds . Nanomedicine (London, U. K.) 
2013 , 8 , 785 –806 10.2217/nnm.13.64 .
Hakim M. ; Broza Y. Y. ; Barash O. ; Peled N. ; Phillips M. ; Amann A. ; Haick H. 
Volatile Organic
Compounds of Lung Cancer and Possible Biochemical Pathways . Chem. Rev. 
2012 , 112 , 5949 –5966 10.1021/cr300174a .22991938 
de Lacy
Costello B. ; Amann A. ; Al-Kateb H. ; Flynn C. ; Filipiak W. ; Khalid T. ; Osborne D. ; Ratcliffe N. M. 
A Review
of the Volatiles from the Healthy Human Body . J. Breath Res. 
2014 , 8 , 014001 10.1088/1752-7155/8/1/014001 .24421258 
Haick H. 
Chemical Sensors Based on Molecularly
Modified Metallic Nanoparticles . J. Phys. D:
Appl. Phys. 
2007 , 40 , 7173 –7186 10.1088/0022-3727/40/23/S01 .
Phillips M. ; Basa-Dalay V. ; Blais J. ; Bothamley G. ; Chaturvedi A. ; Modi K. D. ; Pandya M. ; Natividad M. P. ; Patel U. ; Ramraje N. N. ; Schmitt P. ; Udwadia Z. F. 
Point-of-Care
Breath Test for Biomarkers of Active Pulmonary Tuberculosis . Tuberculosis 
2012 , 92 , 314 –320 10.1016/j.tube.2012.04.002 .22647661 
Phillips M. ; Basa-Dalay V. ; Bothamley G. ; Cataneo R. N. ; Lam P. K. ; Natividad M. P. ; Schmitt P. ; Wai J. 
Breath Biomarkers of Active Pulmonary
Tuberculosis . Tuberculosis 
2010 , 90 , 145 –151 10.1016/j.tube.2010.01.003 .20189456 
Bean H. D. ; Jimenez-Diaz J. ; Zhu J. ; Hill J. E. 
Breathprints of Model Murine Bacterial Lung Infections
are Linked with Immune Response . Eur. Respir.
J. 
2015 , 45 , 181 –190 10.1183/09031936.00015814 .25323243 
Cohen-Kaminsky S. ; Nakhleh M. ; Perros F. ; Montani D. ; Girerd B. ; Garcia G. ; Simonneau G. ; Haick H. ; Humbert M. 
A Proof of Concept for the Detection
and Classification of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Through Breath
Analysis with a Sensor Array . Am. J. Respir.
Crit. Care Med. 
2013 , 188 , 756 –759 10.1164/rccm.201303-0467LE .24032390 
Allers M. ; Langejuergen J. ; Gaida A. ; Holz O. ; Schuchardt S. ; Hohlfeld J. M. ; Zimmermann S. 
Measurement
of Exhaled Volatile Organic Compounds from Patients with Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease (COPD) using Closed Gas Loop GC-IMS and GC-APCI-MS . J. Breath Res. 
2016 , 10 , 026004 10.1088/1752-7155/10/2/026004 .27058460 
Baumbach J. I. ; Maddula S. ; Sommerwerck U. ; Besa V. ; Kurth I. ; Boedeker B. ; Teschler H. ; Freitag L. ; Darwiche K. 
Significant
Different Volatile Biomarker During Bronchoscopic Ion Mobility Spectrometry
Investigation of Patients Suffering Lung Carcinoma . Int. J. Ion Mobility Spectrom. 
2011 , 14 , 159 –166 10.1007/s12127-011-0078-5 .
Bos L. D. ; Weda H. ; Wang Y. ; Knobel H. H. ; Nijsen T. M. ; Vink T. J. ; Zwinderman A. H. ; Sterk P. J. ; Schultz M. J. 
Exhaled Breath Metabolomics as a
Noninvasive Diagnostic Tool for Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome . Eur. Respir. J. 
2014 , 44 , 188 –197 10.1183/09031936.00005614 .24743964 
Mansoor J. K. ; Schelegle E. S. ; Davis C. E. ; Walby W. F. ; Zhao W. ; Aksenov A. A. ; Pasamontes A. ; Figueroa J. ; Allen R. 
Analysis of Volatile Compounds in
Exhaled Breath Condensate in Patients with Severe Pulmonary Arterial
Hypertension . PLoS One 
2014 , 9 , e95331 10.1371/journal.pone.0095331 .24748102 
Smith D. ; Sovova K. ; Dryahina K. ; Dousova T. ; Drevinek P. ; Spanel P. 
Breath Concentration of Acetic Acid
Vapour is Elevated in Patients with Cystic Fibrosis . J. Breath Res. 
2016 , 10 , 021002 10.1088/1752-7155/10/2/021002 .27184114 
Amann A. ; Corradi M. ; Mazzone P. ; Mutti A. 
Lung Cancer Biomarkers
in Exhaled Breath . Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn. 
2011 , 11 , 207 –217 10.1586/erm.10.112 .21405971 
Phillips M. ; Gleeson K. ; Hughes J. M. B. ; Greenberg J. ; Cataneo R. N. ; Baker L. ; McVay W. P. 
Volatile
Organic Compounds in Breath as Markers of Lung Cancer: A Cross-Sectional
Study . Lancet 
1999 , 353 , 1930 –1933 10.1016/S0140-6736(98)07552-7 .10371572 
Zhang Y. ; Gao G. ; Liu H. ; Fu H. ; Fan J. ; Wang K. ; Chen Y. ; Li B. ; Zhang C. ; Zhi X. ; He L. ; Cui D. 
Identification
of Volatile Biomarkers of Gastric Cancer Cells and Ultrasensitive
Electrochemical Detection Based on Sensing Interface of Au-Ag Alloy
Coated MWCNTs . Theranostics 
2014 , 4 , 154 –162 10.7150/thno.7560 .24465273 
Amal H. ; Leja M. ; Funka K. ; Lasina I. ; Skapars R. ; Sivins A. ; Ancans G. ; Kikuste I. ; Vanags A. ; Tolmanis I. ; Kirsners A. ; Kupcinskas L. ; Haick H. 
Breath Testing as Potential Colorectal
Cancer Screening Tool . Int. J. Cancer 
2016 , 138 , 229 –236 10.1002/ijc.29701 .26212114 
Amal H. ; Leja M. ; Funka K. ; Skapars R. ; Sivins A. ; Ancans G. ; Liepniece-Karele I. ; Kikuste I. ; Lasina I. ; Haick H. 
Detection of Precancerous
Gastric Lesions and Gastric Cancer Through Exhaled Breath . Gut 
2016 , 65 , 400 –407 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-308536 .25869737 
Amal H. ; Shi D.-Y. ; Ionescu R. ; Zhang W. ; Hua Q.-L. ; Pan Y.-Y. ; Tao L. ; Liu H. ; Haick H. 
Assessment
of Ovarian Cancer Conditions from Exhaled Breath . Int. J. Cancer 
2015 , 136 , E614 –E622 10.1002/ijc.29166 .25159530 
Barash O. ; Peled N. ; Tisch U. ; Bunn P. A. ; Hirsch F. R. ; Haick H. 
Classification of the Lung Cancer Histology by Gold Nanoparticle
Sensors . Nanomedicine (N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2012 , 8 , 580 –589 10.1016/j.nano.2011.10.001 .
Barash O. ; Zhang W. ; Halpern J. M. ; Hua Q. L. ; Pan Y. Y. ; Kayal H. ; Khoury K. ; Liu H. ; Davies M. P. ; Haick H. 
Differentiation between Genetic Mutations
of Breast Cancer by Breath Volatolomics . Oncotarget 
2015 , 6 , 44864 –44876 10.18632/oncotarget.6269 .26540569 
Davies M. P. ; Barash O. ; Jeries R. ; Peled N. ; Ilouze M. ; Hyde R. ; Marcus M. W. ; Field J. K. ; Haick H. 
Unique Volatolomic Signatures of
TP53 and KRAS in Lung Cells . Br. J. Cancer 
2014 , 111 , 1213 –1221 10.1038/bjc.2014.411 .25051409 
Hakim M. ; Billan S. ; Tisch U. ; Peng G. ; Dvrokind I. ; Marom O. ; Abdah-Bortnyak R. ; Kuten A. ; Haick H. 
Diagnosis of Head and Neck Cancer
from Exhaled Breath . Br. J. Cancer 
2011 , 104 , 1649 –1655 10.1038/bjc.2011.128 .21505455 
Peled N. ; Hakim M. ; Bunn P. A. Jr; Miller Y. E. ; Kennedy T. C. ; Mattei J. ; Mitchell J. D. ; Hirsch F. R. ; Haick H. 
Non-Invasive Breath
Analysis of Pulmonary Nodules . J. Thorac. Oncol. 
2012 , 7 , 1528 –1533 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182637d5f .22929969 
Peng G. ; Hakim M. ; Broza Y. Y. ; Billan S. ; Abdah-Bortnyak R. ; Kuten A. ; Tisch U. ; Haick H. 
Detection of Lung, Breast, Colorectal, and Prostate Cancers from
Exhaled Breath using a Single Array of Nanosensors . Br. J. Cancer 
2010 , 103 , 542 –551 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605810 .20648015 
Peng G. ; Tisch U. ; Adams O. ; Hakim M. ; Shehada N. ; Broza Y. Y. ; Billan S. ; Abdah-Bortnyak R. ; Kuten A. ; Haick H. 
Diagnosing Lung Cancer in Exhaled
Breath Using Gold Nanoparticles . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2009 , 4 , 669 –673 10.1038/nnano.2009.235 .19809459 
McKeown T. 
A Basis for Health Strategies. A
Classification of Disease . Br. Med. J. 
1983 , 287 , 594 –596 10.1136/bmj.287.6392.594 .6411241 
Patterson M. W. 
Classification in General Practice . Family Practice 
1985 , 2 , 1 –3 10.1093/fampra/2.1.1 .3988009 
Savaliya R. ; Shah D. ; Singh R. ; Kumar A. ; Shanker R. ; Dhawan A. ; Singh S. 
Nanotechnology in Disease Diagnostic
Techniques . Curr. Drug Metab. 
2015 , 16 , 645 –661 10.2174/1389200216666150625121546 .26560320 
Vishinkin R. ; Haick H. 
Nanoscale Sensor Technologies
for Disease Detection via Volatolomics . Small 
2015 , 11 , 6142 –6164 10.1002/smll.201501904 .26448487 
Konvalina G. ; Haick H. 
Sensors for Breath Testing: From Nanomaterials to Comprehensive Disease
Detection . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2014 , 47 , 66 –76 10.1021/ar400070m .23926883 
Chen Y. ; Zhang Y. ; Pan F. ; Liu J. ; Wang K. ; Zhang C. ; Cheng S. ; Lu L. ; Zhang W. ; Zhang Z. ; Zhi X. ; Zhang Q. ; Alfranca G. ; de la Fuente J. M. ; Chen D. ; Cui D. 
Breath Analysis
Based on Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Sensors Distinguishes Early
and Advanced Gastric Cancer Patients from Healthy Persons . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 8169 –8179 10.1021/acsnano.6b01441 .27409521 
Gouma P. ; Stanacevic M. 
Selective Nanosensor Array Microsystem For Exhaled
Breath Analysis . Procedia Eng. 
2011 , 25 , 1557 –1560 10.1016/j.proeng.2011.12.385 .
Gouma P. I. ; Kalyanasundaram K. 
A Selective
Nanosensing Probe for Nitric Oxide . Appl. Phys.
Lett. 
2008 , 93 , 244102 10.1063/1.3050524 .
Zhou Y. ; Yu G. ; Chang F. ; Hu B. ; Zhong C. J. 
Gold-Platinum Alloy Nanowires as Highly Sensitive Materials
for Electrochemical Detection of Hydrogen Peroxide . Anal. Chim. Acta 
2012 , 757 , 56 –62 10.1016/j.aca.2012.10.036 .23206396 
Göpel W. 
Chemical Sensing, Molecular Electronics and Nanotechnology:
Interface Technologies Down to the Molecular Scale . Sens. Actuators, B 
1991 , 4 , 7 –21 10.1016/0925-4005(91)80172-G .
Shehada N. ; Cancilla J. C. ; Torrecilla J. S. ; Pariente E. S. ; Bronstrup G. ; Christiansen S. ; Johnson D. W. ; Leja M. ; Davies M. P. ; Liran O. ; Peled N. ; Haick H. 
Silicon Nanowire Sensors Enable Diagnosis
of Patients via Exhaled Breath . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 7047 –7057 10.1021/acsnano.6b03127 .27383408 
Wang B. ; Cancilla J. C. ; Torrecilla J. S. ; Haick H. 
Artificial Sensing
Intelligence with Silicon Nanowires for Ultraselective Detection in
the Gas Phase . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 933 –938 10.1021/nl404335p .24437965 
Nakhleh M. K. ; Baram S. ; Jeries R. ; Salim R. ; Haick H. ; Hakim M. 
Artificially Intelligent
Nanoarray for the Detection of Preeclampsia under Real-World Clinical
Conditions . Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2016 , 1600132 10.1002/admt.201600132 .
Homede E. ; Abo Jabal M. ; Ionescu R. ; Haick H. 
Printing Ultrasensitive
Artificially Intelligent Sensors Array with a Single Self-Propelled
Droplet Containing Nanoparticles . Adv. Funct.
Mater. 
2016 , 26 , 6359 –6370 10.1002/adfm.201602326 .
Shehada N. ; Brönstrup G. ; Funka K. ; Christiansen S. ; Leja M. ; Haick H. 
Ultrasensitive Silicon Nanowire for
Real-World Gas Sensing: Noninvasive Diagnosis of Cancer from Breath
Volatolome . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 1288 –1295 10.1021/nl504482t .25494909 
Wang B. ; Huynh T.-P. ; Wu W. ; Hayek N. ; Do T. T. ; Cancilla J. C. ; Torrecilla J. S. ; Nahid M. M. ; Colwell J. M. ; Gazit O. M. ; Puniredd S. R. ; McNeill C. R. ; Sonar P. ; Haick H. 
Highly Sensitive Ambipolar
Field Effect Transistor-Based Diketopyrrolopyrrole Copolymer for Selective
Detection and Discrimination of Xylene Isomers . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 4012 –4018 10.1002/adma.201505641 .26996398 
Ionescu R. ; Broza Y. ; Shaltieli H. ; Sadeh D. ; Zilberman Y. ; Feng X. ; Glass-Marmor L. ; Lejbkowicz I. ; Mullen K. ; Miller A. ; Haick H. 
Detection of Multiple
Sclerosis from Exhaled Breath using Bilayers of Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons and Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes . ACS Chem. Neurosci. 
2011 , 2 , 687 –693 10.1021/cn2000603 .22860162 
Karban A. ; Nakhleh M. K. ; Cancilla J. C. ; Vishinkin R. ; Rainis T. ; Koifman E. ; Jeries R. ; Ivgi H. ; Torrecilla J. S. ; Haick H. 
Programmed Nanoparticles for Tailoring
the Detection of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases and Irritable Bowel Syndrome
Disease via Breathprint . Adv.
Healthcare Mater. 
2016 , 5 , 2339 –2344 10.1002/adhm.201600588 .
Marom O. ; Nakhoul F. ; Tisch U. ; Shiban A. ; Abassi Z. ; Haick H. 
Gold Nanoparticle Sensors for Detecting Chronic Kidney Disease and
Disease Progression . Nanomedicine (London, U.
K.) 
2012 , 7 , 639 –650 10.2217/nnm.11.135 .
Nakhleh M. K. ; Badarny S. ; Winer R. ; Jeries R. ; Finberg J. ; Haick H. 
Distinguishing Idiopathic
Parkinson’s Disease from Other Parkinsonian Syndromes by Breath
Test . Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 
2015 , 21 , 150 –153 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.11.023 .25511331 
Nakhleh M. K. ; Jeries R. ; Gharra A. ; Binder A. ; Broza Y. Y. ; Pascoe M. ; Dheda K. ; Haick H. 
Detecting Active Pulmonary Tuberculosis by Breath Test using Nanomaterial-Based
Sensors . Eur. Respir. J. 
2014 , 43 , 1522 –1525 10.1183/09031936.00019114 .24789953 
Nardi-Agmon I. ; Abud-Hawa M. ; Liran O. ; Gai-Mor N. ; Ilouze M. ; Onn A. ; Bar J. ; Shlomi D. ; Haick H. ; Peled N. 
Exhaled Breath Analysis
for Monitoring Response to Treatment in Advanced Lung Cancer . J. Thorac. Oncol. 
2016 , 11 , 827 –837 10.1016/j.jtho.2016.02.017 .26968885 
Peled N. ; Barash O. ; Tisch U. ; Ionescu R. ; Broza Y. Y. ; Ilouze M. ; Mattei J. ; Bunn P. A. Jr.; Hirsch F. R. ; Haick H. 
Volatile Fingerprints
of Cancer Specific Genetic Mutations . Nanomedicine
(N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2013 , 9 , 758 –766 10.1016/j.nano.2013.01.008 .
Shuster G. ; Gallimidi Z. ; Reiss A. H. ; Dovgolevsky E. ; Billan S. ; Abdah-Bortnyak R. ; Kuten A. ; Engel A. ; Shiban A. ; Tisch U. ; Haick H. 
Classification of Breast
Cancer Precursors Through Exhaled Breath . Breast
Cancer Res. Treat. 
2011 , 126 , 791 –796 10.1007/s10549-010-1317-x .21190078 
Xu Z. Q. ; Broza Y. Y. ; Ionsecu R. ; Tisch U. ; Ding L. ; Liu H. ; Song Q. ; Pan Y. Y. ; Xiong F. X. ; Gu K. S. ; Sun G. P. ; Chen Z. D. ; Leja M. ; Haick H. 
A Nanomaterial-Based Breath Test
for Distinguishing Gastric Cancer from Benign Gastric Conditions . Br. J. Cancer 
2013 , 108 , 941 –950 10.1038/bjc.2013.44 .23462808 
Tisch U. ; Haick H. 
Nanomaterials for cross-reactive sensor arrays . MRS Bull. 
2010 , 35 , 797 –803 10.1557/mrs2010.509 .
Konvalina G. ; Haick H. 
The Effect of Humidity on Nanoparticle-Based Chemiresistors: A Comparison
Between Synthetic and Real-World Samples . ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2012 , 4 , 317 –325 10.1021/am2013695 .22121824 
Amann A. ; Miekisch W. ; Pleil J. ; Risby T. ; Schubert J. 
Chapter 7:
Methodological Issues of Sample Collection and Analysis of Exhaled
Breath . Europ. Resp. Soc. Monog. 
2010 , 49 , 96 –114 10.1183/1025448x.00018509 .
Li J. ; Peng Y. ; Liu Y. ; Li W. ; Jin Y. ; Tang Z. ; Duan Y. 
Investigation of Potential
Breath biomarkers for the Early Diagnosis of Breast Cancer Using Gas
Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry . Clin. Chim.
Acta 
2014 , 436 , 59 –67 10.1016/j.cca.2014.04.030 .24815034 
Kumar S. ; Huang J. ; Abbassi-Ghadi N. ; Mackenzie H. A. ; Veselkov K. A. ; Hoare J. M. ; Lovat L. B. ; Spanel P. ; Smith D. ; Hanna G. B. 
Mass Spectrometric Analysis of Exhaled
Breath for the Identification of Volatile Organic Compound Biomarkers
in Esophageal and Gastric Adenocarcinoma . Ann.
Surg. 
2015 , 262 , 981 –990 10.1097/SLA.0000000000001101 .25575255 
Alkhouri N. ; Singh T. ; Alsabbagh E. ; Guirguis J. ; Chami T. ; Hanouneh I. ; Grove D. ; Lopez R. ; Dweik R. 
Isoprene in
the Exhaled Breath is a Novel Biomarker for Advanced Fibrosis in Patients
with Chronic Liver Disease: A Pilot Study . Clin.
Transl. Gastroenterol. 
2015 , 6 , e112 10.1038/ctg.2015.40 .26378385 
Smith D. ; Spanel P. ; Fryer A. A. ; Hanna F. ; Ferns G. A. 
Can Volatile
Compounds in Exhaled Breath be Used to Monitor Control in Diabetes
Mellitus? . J. Breath Res. 
2011 , 5 , 022001 10.1088/1752-7155/5/2/022001 .21512208 
Matera M. G. ; Calzetta L. ; Rogliani P. ; Cesario A. ; Cazzola M. 
New Treatments for COPD in the Elderly . Curr. Pharm. Des. 
2014 , 20 , 5968 –5982 10.2174/1381612820666140314154331 .24641227 
Sharma G. ; Goodwin J. 
Effect of Aging on
Respiratory System Physiology and Immunology . Clin. Interv. Aging 
2006 , 1 , 253 –260 10.2147/ciia.2006.1.3.253 .18046878 
Jain R. B. 
Distributions of Selected Urinary Metabolites of Volatile
Organic Compounds by Age, Gender, Race/Ethnicity, and Smoking Status
in a Representative Sample of U.S. Adults . Environ.
Toxicol. Pharmacol. 
2015 , 40 , 471 –479 10.1016/j.etap.2015.07.018 .26282484 
Lechner M. ; Moser B. ; Niederseer D. ; Karlseder A. ; Holzknecht B. ; Fuchs M. ; Colvin S. ; Tilg H. ; Rieder J. 
Gender and Age Specific Differences
in Exhaled Isoprene Levels . Respir. Physiol.
Neurobiol. 
2006 , 154 , 478 –483 10.1016/j.resp.2006.01.007 .16510318 
Phillips M. ; Cataneo R. N. ; Greenberg J. ; Gunawardena R. ; Naidu A. ; Rahbari-Oskoui F. 
Effect of Age on the Breath Methylated
Alkane Contour - A Display of Apparent New Markers of Oxidative Stress . J. Lab. Clin. Med. 
2000 , 136 , 243 –249 10.1067/mlc.2000.108943 .10985503 
Schwarz K. ; Filipiak W. ; Amann A. 
Determining Concentration Patterns
of Volatile Compounds in Exhaled Breath by PTR-MS . J. Breath Res. 
2009 , 3 , 027002 10.1088/1752-7155/3/2/027002 .21383457 
Dovgolevsky E. ; Konvalina G. ; Tisch U. ; Haick H. 
Monolayer-Capped Cubic
Platinum Nanoparticles for Sensing Nonpolar Analytes in Highly Humid
Atmospheres . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 14042 –14049 10.1021/jp105810w .
Dovgolevsky E. ; Tisch U. ; Haick H. 
Chemically
Sensitive Resistors Based on Monolayer-Capped Cubic Nanoparticles:
Towards Configurable Nanoporous Sensors . Small 
2009 , 5 , 1158 –1161 10.1002/smll.200801831 .19274647
