
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.7b04743ArticleA
Carbon Nanotube Optical Reporter Maps Endolysosomal
Lipid Flux Jena Prakrit
V. †¶Roxbury Daniel ‡¶Galassi Thomas V. †§¶Akkari Leila †∥Horoszko Christopher P. †§Iaea David B. §Budhathoki-Uprety Januka †Pipalia Nina §Haka Abigail S. §Harvey Jackson D. †§Mittal Jeetain ⊥Maxfield Frederick R. §Joyce Johanna A. †§#Heller Daniel A. *†§† Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, United States‡ Department
of Chemical Engineering, University of Rhode
Island, Kingston, Rhode Island 02881, United States§ Weill
Cornell Medicine, New York, New York 10065, United States∥ Division
of Tumor Biology & Immunology, The Netherlands
Cancer Institute, Amsterdam 1066 CX, The Netherlands⊥ Department
of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania 18015, United States# Ludwig Center
for Cancer Research, University of Lausanne, Lausanne CH 1066, Switzerland* E-mail: hellerd@mskcc.org.12 09 2017 28 11 2017 11 11 10689 10703 06 07 2017 31 08 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Lipid
accumulation within the lumen of endolysosomal vesicles is
observed in various pathologies including atherosclerosis, liver disease,
neurological disorders, lysosomal storage disorders, and cancer. Current
methods cannot measure lipid flux specifically within the lysosomal
lumen of live cells. We developed an optical reporter, composed of
a photoluminescent carbon nanotube of a single chirality, that responds
to lipid accumulation via modulation of the nanotube’s
optical band gap. The engineered nanomaterial, composed of short,
single-stranded DNA and a single nanotube chirality, localizes exclusively
to the lumen of endolysosomal organelles without adversely affecting
cell viability or proliferation or organelle morphology, integrity,
or function. The emission wavelength of the reporter can be spatially
resolved from within the endolysosomal lumen to generate quantitative
maps of lipid content in live cells. Endolysosomal lipid accumulation
in cell lines, an example of drug-induced phospholipidosis, was observed
for multiple drugs in macrophages, and measurements of patient-derived
Niemann–Pick type C fibroblasts identified lipid accumulation
and phenotypic reversal of this lysosomal storage disease. Single-cell
measurements using the reporter discerned subcellular differences
in equilibrium lipid content, illuminating significant intracellular
heterogeneity among endolysosomal organelles of differentiating bone-marrow-derived
monocytes. Single-cell kinetics of lipoprotein-derived cholesterol
accumulation within macrophages revealed rates that differed among
cells by an order of magnitude. This carbon nanotube optical reporter
of endolysosomal lipid content in live cells confers additional capabilities
for drug development processes and the investigation of lipid-linked
diseases.

single-walled carbon nanotubessingle-cell sensinglive-cell imagingnear-infrared
fluorescencehyperspectral microscopydocument-id-old-9nn7b04743document-id-new-14nn-2017-047437ccc-price
==== Body
Endosomes
and lysosomes are
vacuolar organelles responsible for the breakdown of lipids, proteins,
sugars, and other cellular materials.1 The
failure to catabolize or export lysosomal contents can result in lysosomal
storage disorders (LSDs), a family of approximately 50 diseases characterized
by the accumulation of undigested substrates, such as lipids and glycoproteins,
within the endolysosomal lumen due to an inherited defect in a single
protein.2,3 Lipid accumulation in the endolysosomal
lumen is observed in many LSDs as well as during atherosclerotic foam
cell formation,4 and the transition from
steatosis to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis5 and in multiple neurological disorders,6 cancer,7 and drug-induced phospholipidosis
(DIPL).8 The search for small-molecule
therapeutics against LSDs, as well as our understanding of the aforementioned
diseases, is hampered by the limited number of tools available to
assay lipid content exclusively within the endolysosomal organelles
of live cells.9

Although multiple
classes of sensors and imaging modalities exist
to study lipids, current probes are limited in their capabilities.
Stains such as LipidTox can detect the general accumulation of lipids
within cells10 but are not organelle-specific.
Fluorophore-conjugated and intrinsically fluorescent lipid analogues
are used for analyzing lipid trafficking.10 Lipid analogues, synthesized by conjugation of a fluorophore to
a modified lipid, allow the tracking of uptake and incorporation of
lipids into the cell membrane.11,12 Lipid dynamics can
be tracked in live cells using fluorescent proteins fused with lipid-binding
domains; however the expressed domains can hamper the native function
of the lipid.13 Environmentally sensitive
fluorophores were recently developed, which can respond to lipid order14 in cell membranes undergoing processes such
as endosomal maturation,15 while another
family of polarity-sensitive probes can integrate into lysosomal membranes
and detect changes in the overall polarity.16 The bulk of these technologies are useful for studying lipids present
within a biological membrane, but, to the best of our knowledge, no
existing probe specifically localizes to the lumen of endolysosomal
organelles and reports on the lipid content of its immediate environment.

To develop a biocompatible fluorescent reporter for lipids in the
endolysosomal lumen, we investigated the physicochemical properties
of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs). Semiconducting SWCNTs
emit highly photostable and narrow-bandwidth near-infrared (NIR) photoluminescence,17 which is sensitive to local perturbations.18 The availability of multiple species with different
emission properties can facilitate multiplexed imaging.19 The SWCNT emission energy responds to the solvent
environment20via solvatochromic
energy shifts.21 This response has been
used to detect conformational polymorphism22 of DNA and the nuclear environment in live cells,23 as well as microRNA,24via shifts down to ≤1 nm. While the self-assembly
of lipid derivatives on carbon nanotubes was observed over 14 years
ago,25 the optical response of fluorescent
carbon nanotubes to fatty acids has been noted more recently.26

Due to their applications in biological
sensing and imaging,27 the biocompatibility
of carbon nanotubes has
been a subject of much investigation.28,29 A recent comprehensive
review concluded that the biocompatibility of single-walled carbon
nanotubes is dependent on how the nanomaterial sample is processed
and functionalized.30 In particular, multiwalled
carbon nanotubes and long single-walled carbon nanotubes or nanotube
preparations containing impurities have documented toxic effects on
live cells.31

Here, we present a
biocompatible carbon nanotube optical reporter
of lipids within the endolysosomal lumen of live cells. Composed of
a noncovalent complex consisting of an amphiphilic polymer and a single
(n,m) species (chirality) of carbon
nanotube, the reporter exhibits a solvatochromic shift of over 13
nm in response to biological lipids. In mammalian cells, the reporter
remains within the endolysosomal pathway and localizes specifically
to the lumen of endolysosomal organelles without adversely affecting
organelle morphology, integrity, capacity to digest substrates, or
cell viability or proliferation. Using near-infrared hyperspectral
microscopy, we spatially resolved the solvatochromic response of the
reporter to lipids in the endolysosomal lumen and obtained quantitative
lipid maps of live cells with subcellular resolution. Emission from
the reporter identified the lysosomal storage disease Niemann–Pick
type C (NPC) in fibroblasts from an NPC patient. Furthermore, the
reporter benchmarked treatment, exhibiting a distinct signal reversal
upon administration of hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin, a drug
that reverses the disease phenotype. Additionally, endolysosomal lipid
accumulation was detected using spectroscopy alone, in a 96-well plate
format compatible with high-throughput drug screening. Using the reporter,
single-cell kinetic measurements in a macrophage model system for
lysosomal lipid accumulation identified a subpopulation of cells that
was both significantly lipid deficient and slower to accumulate cholesterol
in the lysosomal lumen. In the context of primary monocyte differentiation
into macrophages, we discovered that, as the lipid content in the
lumen increases, individual endolysosomal organelles within single
cells accumulate lipids at different rates. Thus, our optical reporter
enables quantitative imaging and high-throughput measurement of the
lipid content in the endolysosomal lumen of live cells.

Results and Discussion
Carbon
Nanotube Optical Response to Lipids
To develop
a reporter of endolysosomal lipid content, we first identified a structurally
defined DNA–carbon nanotube complex that responds optically
to lipids. Carbon nanotubes were noncovalently functionalized with
specific ssDNA oligonucleotides to facilitate separation using ion-exchange
chromatography,32 resulting in suspensions
of single-chirality DNA–nanotube complexes. The introduction
of low-density lipoprotein (LDL), a biochemical assembly composed
of lipids and proteins,33 induced a decrease
in emission wavelength (blue-shift) that ranged from 0 to 13 nm (Figure S1). The largest solvatochromic response
was observed from the (8,6) nanotube spectral band complexed with
ss(GT)6, a short oligonucleotide that facilitates separation
of the (8,6) species (Figure S2).32 The isolated ss(GT)6-(8,6) complex
exhibited absorption bands at 730 and 1200 nm and a single photoluminescence
emission peak at 1200 nm (Figures 1a, S2, S3). Previous work
by our lab indicates that the mean length of ss(GT)6-(8,6)
complexes following the preparation method used is 88.9 nm.34 We also recently experimentally identified ss(GT)6-(8,6) as a sequence–chirality pair that optimally
maximized both the high dynamic range of optical modulation by a lipid-like
surfactant (SDC) and the stability of the DNA–nanotube complex.35

Figure 1 Optical response of carbon nanotube complexes to lipid
environments.
(a) Normalized absorption and emission spectra of ss(GT)6–carbon nanotube complexes purified to isolate the (8,6) species.
(b) Emission peak wavelength of ss(GT)6-(8,6) nanotube
complexes in solution as a function of cholesterol-PEG concentration.
Error bars are standard error of the mean, obtained from three technical
replicates performed for each concentration. (c) Mean emission wavelength
of ss(GT)6-(8,6) nanotube complexes exposed to different
solvents. Error bars are standard errors of the mean, obtained from
five technical replicates for each solvent. (d) Frames from all-atom
molecular dynamics simulations of equilibrated structures of the ss(GT)6-(8,6) nanotube complex in water and the same complex equilibrated
in the presence of cholesterol or sphingomyelin. (e) Water molecule
density as a function of distance from the surface of the equilibrated
ss(GT)6-(8,6) nanotube complex and the same complex equilibrated
in the presence of cholesterol or sphingomyelin.

The ss(GT)6-(8,6) complex was characterized by
measuring
the optical response to several classes of biomolecules and water-soluble
lipid analogues. Cholesterol-conjugated polyethylene glycol (PEG),
a water-soluble analogue of cholesterol, induced a ∼10 nm decrease
in the emission wavelength of the complex at both 2 and 24 h, while
saturating concentrations of bovine serum albumin (BSA), dsDNA from
salmon testes, or carboxymethyl cellulose had no measurable effect
(Figure S4). The nanotube emission responded
rapidly to cholesterol-PEG at 2 h, but at equilibrium, two different
classes of water-soluble lipid analogues elicited equivalent, large
blue-shifting responses (Figure S5). The
optical response of the ss(GT)6-(8,6) complex was monotonic
and linear over 2 orders of magnitude of cholesterol concentrations
(Figure 1b). A similar
response was observed for both ceramide (Figure S6) and low-density lipoprotein (Figure S6), indicating the general sensitivity of ss(GT)6-(8,6) to both water-soluble lipid analogues and native lipids.

To probe the underlying mechanism governing the response of the
ss(GT)6-(8,6) complex, we examined the dependence of emission
on the dielectric environment.20 Using
near-infrared hyperspectral microscopy,19 we obtained the emission spectrum from individual surface-adsorbed
ss(GT)6-(8,6) complexes in seven different solvent environments
(Table S1). The peak emission wavelength
of the complexes ranged over 20 nm and exhibited a direct correlation
with the solvent dielectric constant (Figure 1c) with a Spearman correlation of 0.89, p < 0.01. This result suggests that the ss(GT)6-(8,6) complex exhibits a distinct solvatochromic response.

To further understand how lipids interact with the surface of ss(GT)6-(8,6) nanotube complexes to induce a solvatochromic shift,
we conducted all-atom replica exchange molecular dynamics simulations.36,37 First, ss(GT)6 oligonucleotides were equilibrated on
the (8,6) nanotube (Figure S7) to obtain
an equilibrium configuration that exhibited a tight association between
the ssDNA and nanotube (Figure 1d). Cholesterol molecules were then added, and equilibrium
was reached after about 100 ns (Figure S7). In the resulting configuration, cholesterol bound to exposed regions
on the nanotube and induced rearrangement of DNA on the nanotube surface
(Figure S8). The combined effect was an
18.7% decrease in the density of water molecules within 1.2 nm of
the nanotube surface (Figure 1e). These simulations were repeated with sphingomyelin molecules,
and a similar reduction in water density was observed (Figure 1d,e). The simulations suggest
that lipid binding to the ss(GT)6-(8,6) complex reduces
the water density near the nanotube surface, thereby lowering the
effective local solvent dielectric. As experimentally observed, the
lower dielectric environment corresponds to a blue-shift of the nanotube
emission wavelength (Figure 1c).

We further characterized properties of the ss(GT)6-(8,6)
optical response to cholesterol. The emission shift on cholesterol
addition to surface-adsorbed complexes was rapid (under 2 min, limited
by the hyperspectral instrument acquisition time, Figure S9). Sodium deoxycholate, a surfactant and water-soluble
cholesterol analogue, was added and subsequently removed from the
surface-adsorbed complexes, demonstrating that the wavelength shift
on analyte binding is intrinsically reversible (Figure S9). Furthermore, in an acidic environment, the response
of the nanotube complex to lipids was similar to that at a neutral
pH (Figure S9).

Overall, the characteristics
of the ss(GT)6-(8,6) complex
suggest that it can function as a reporter of endolysosomal lipid
accumulation in live cells. When prepared via previously
described methods,34 suspensions of ss(GT)6-(8,6) consist of short (∼90 nm), singly dispersed
nanotubes that are relatively free of impurities and noncovalently
functionalized with biocompatible single-stranded DNA. This minimizes
the key parameters of SWCNT cellular toxicity,30 a topic that is assessed below. The sample length distribution
lies between ultrashort (50 nm) and short (150 nm) nanotubes, which
maximizes cellular uptake of fluorescent nanotubes while minimizing
bundling within cells.38 The observed brightness
of structurally sorted ss(GT)6-(8,6) is intrinsically higher
than unsorted DNA–nanotube sensors, as on-resonance excitation
at 730 nm efficiently excites every nanotube present. Additionally,
this particular sequence–chirality pair is relatively stable
and retains its structural integrity under surfactant exchange.35 The structure, stability, and brightness of
ss(GT)6-(8,6), combined with its sensitivity and specificity
to lipids over other classes of biomolecules, suggest that it may
be applied to live-cell measurements of lipid accumulation.

Uptake
and Localization of DNA–SWCNTs to the Endolysosomal
Lumen
Although past work suggests that DNA–SWCNTs
incubated with cells are taken up via energy-dependent
processes and localize to the endolysosomal lumen, this has not been
assessed quantitatively or on a single-organelle level.39−41 We quantitatively assessed the interaction of ss(GT)6-(8,6) complexes with mammalian cells using NIR and visible fluorescence
microscopy. Macrophages were incubated in complete 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS)-supplemented cell culture media with 0.2 mg/L of ss(GT)6-(8,6) complexes at 37 °C for 30 min, before washing
with fresh, complex-free media. For the conditions used in our experiments,
this concentration corresponds to approximately 39 pM ss(GT)6-(8,6).34 The cells exhibited bright NIR
emission, indicating that nanotubes were strongly associated with
the cells (Figure S10). We observed that
a ss(GT)6-(8,6) concentration of 0.2 mg/L, pulsed for 30
min, was the minima that resulted in sufficient NIR emission from
all cell lines used in this work. We also measured the uptake of the
ss(GT)6-(8,6) complexes as a function of temperature and
quantified the nanotube emission intensity associated with cells.
Incubation at 4 °C resulted in 10-fold lower intensity than incubation
at 37 °C (Figure S11), indicating
that the complexes had been internalized by the cells via an energy-dependent process. These results are consistent with previous
reports of the energy-dependent uptake of ssDNA–nanotube complexes42via endocytosis.39,40 The nanotube emission, quantified from over 700 individual cells
incubated with the complex at 37 °C, followed a normal distribution,
suggesting a relatively homogeneous uptake of the ss(GT)6-(8,6) complexes by the cells (Figure S10).

To determine the localization of ss(GT)6-(8,6)
complexes following uptake, we conducted a series of imaging experiments
in macrophages (RAW 264.7 cell line and bone-marrow-derived monocytes)
and a human osteosarcoma cell line (U2OS-SRA cells). The ss(GT)6 oligonucleotide was covalently labeled with visible fluorophores
(Cy3, Cy5, or Alexa-647) to prepare fluorophore-labeled ss(GT)6–nanotube complexes. Following internalization of 1
mg/L of the complexes by macrophages, we acquired emission from the
Cy3 dye and NIR emission from the nanotubes in the same imaging field.
This higher concentration of 1 mg/L was required to obtain sufficient
emission; it was used for all experiments performed with the unsorted
nanotube sample. The colocalization between the signals, observed
on two different detectors, indicates that emission from a fluorophore
conjugated to the ssDNA on the nanotube is a reliable indicator of
nanotube location (Figure S12). Next, we
colocalized the Cy5-DNA–SWCNT fluorescent complexes with LysoTracker
Green, a fluorescent probe that accumulates in endolysosomal organelles
(Figures 2a, S13). A quantitative analysis using an unbiased
autothresholding approach indicated significant colocalization between
the Cy5 and LysoTracker Green emission (Pearson coefficient of 0.92
± 0.036, Manders split colocalization coefficient of 0.95 ±
0.018), suggesting that the nanotube signal was contained within endolysosomal
organelles. Concomitantly, the NIR emission from the nanotubes localized
to the same regions of the cell as the visible emission from LysoTracker,
further supporting the endolysosomal localization of the nanotubes
(Figure S14).

Figure 2 Localization of DNA–SWCNT
to endolysosomal organelles. (a)
Representative fluorescence microscopy images of 1 mg/L Cy5-labeled
DNA–SWCNT complexes (red) and LysoTracker (green) in live cells.
Scale bar = 10 μm. (b) Representative confocal images of TMR-dextran
(green) and 1 mg/L Alexa-647-SWCNT (red) in U2OS-SRA cells. Lines
(cyan) denote cross sections from the images extracted for further
analysis in (c). Scale bar = 10 μm. (c) Intensity profiles of
TMR (green) and Alexa 647 (red) fit with Gaussian functions. (d) Representative
TEM images of AuNP–SWCNT complexes imaged on the TEM grid.
Scale bar = 250 nm. (e) Representative TEM image of a AuNP–SWCNT
complex within an endolysosomal organelle. Scale bar = 100 nm. (f)
Relative frequency histogram of AuNP–SWCNT complexes per endolysosomal
organelle. (g) Relative frequency histograms comparing the experimentally
observed and predicted numbers of AuNPs per endolysosomal organelle
if AuNPs were not attached to SWCNT complexes.

We next assessed the localization of the nanotubes within
the lumen
of individual endolysosomal organelles, by pulsing the cells with
fluorescent (TMR) 10 000 MW dextran, a polymer that accumulates
in the endolysosomal lumen and does not degrade.43 Following overnight incubation, the cells were maintained
in dextran-free media for 3 h, before 1 mg/L Alexa-647-labeled nanotube
complexes were introduced to the cell media for 30 min and then washed
away. One hour later we performed high-magnification confocal microscopy
in the live cells. An analysis of over 40 cells (Figures 2b, S15) indicates that 50% TMR dextran-labeled endolysosomal organelles
colocalized with Alexa 647–nanotube complexes, suggesting that
within an hour following their addition the nanotubes had been transported
to the dextran-loaded endolysosomal organelles. We extracted line
intensity profiles of TMR and Alexa 647 emission and fit them with
Gaussian functions (Figures 2c, S15). The single Gaussian intensity
distributions of both fluorophores overlapped significantly, with
centers that colocalized with diffraction-limited resolution. This
result suggests that the nanotubes localized to the same region of
endolysosomal organelles as dextran, which is known to remain in the
endolysosomal lumen.43

To further
confirm the presence of DNA–SWCNTs in the endolysosomal
organelles, TEM analysis was performed. As single-walled carbon nanotubes,
composed of only one layer of cylindrical graphene, do not have sufficient
electron density to be visible by TEM in cells, we used gold-labeled
DNA–nanotube complexes to perform the first incidence of gold-enhanced
TEM imaging of individualized SWCNTs in mammalian cells. Citrate-capped
gold nanoparticles (∼10 nm diameter) were conjugated to thiolated
ssDNA–nanotube complexes.44 Unbound
gold nanoparticles were removed via centrifugation.
Images of the gold nanoparticle–nanotube complexes (AuNP–SWCNT)
deposited directly onto a TEM grid (Figures 2d, S16a) confirmed
that all gold nanoparticles were attached to carbon nanotubes. We
then incubated RAW 264.7 macrophages with 1 mg/L of the gold-labeled
nanotubes and fixed the cells for TEM imaging after removing free
gold-nanotube complexes from the solution. In the cells, the gold
nanoparticles were clearly visible as dark circles within endolysosomal
organelles (Figures 2e, S16b,c). We quantified the number of
AuNP–SWCNTs within each endolysosomal organelle (Figure 2f). From the relative frequency
distribution, we found the probability that an endolysosomal organelle
had one gold nanoparticle was 0.14. If two gold nanoparticles were
to independently localize into the same vesicle, we calculated that
the probability would be approximately 0.02 (0.14 × 0.14 = 0.02).
In contrast, the experimentally determined number of endolysosomal
organelles with two AuNPs was 4 times higher (Figure 2g), suggesting that if two AuNPs were observed
within one endolysosomal organelle, then the two nanoparticles were
statistically likely to be linked to each other via a nanotube. This, combined with the removal of free gold nanoparticles via centrifugation and the TEM images showing that all visualized
AuNPs were attached to SWCNTs, suggests that the AuNPs within endolysosomal
organelles were part of AuNP–SWCNT complexes.

To determine
the long-term fate of the complexes, we acquired NIR
movies of ss(GT)6-(8,6) complexes within macrophages at
6, 24, and 48 h after the initial 30 min incubation (Supplementary Videos 1, 2, and 3). At each time point, emission
from the complexes exhibited both passive diffusion and directed,
linear movements consistent with the active translocation of lysosomes
along microtubules,45 suggesting that the
nanotube complexes remain within endolysosomal organelles. The emerging
view, from our series of experiments, indicates the efficient uptake
of DNA–nanotube complexes via endocytosis,
rapid transport to the late endosomes and lysosomes, and stable localization
to the lumen of endolysosomal organelles.

Biocompatibility of DNA–SWCNT
Complexes in Mammalian
Cells
We conducted several experiments to assess the degree
to which ss(GT)6-(8,6) perturbed cells and endolysosomal
organelles in order to determine whether this may be a complication
of its use as a live-cell sensor. Using an annexin V and propidium
iodide assay, we found that, at its working concentration (0.2 mg/L),
ss(GT)6-(8,6) did not affect cell viability or proliferation
(Figure S17). To determine if DNA–SWCNT
complexes altered the morphology of endolysosomal organelles, AuNP–SWCNT
complexes were incubated with RAW 264.7 cells for 30 min before fixing
and preparing for TEM imaging 6 h later (Figure 3a). Analysis of the size, diameter, and aspect
ratio of endolysosomal organelles from the TEM images shows no statistical
differences between control macrophages and macrophages incubated
with 1 mg/L complexes (Figures 3b, S18). Endolysosomal organelles
in which gold nanotubes were explicitly detected also displayed similar
morphology to controls (Figures 3c, S19). At this elevated
concentration of complexes (1 mg/L), we also did not observe a change
in endolysosomal membrane permeabilization (Figure
S20).

Figure 3 Ultrastructural analysis of endolysosomal organelles.
(a) Representative
TEM images of cells that were untreated or incubated with 1 mg/L of
AuNP–SWCNT complexes. Endolysosomal organelles are shaded blue;
scale bars = 2 μm. (b) Comparison of the mean aspect ratio (left)
and area (right) of endolysosomal organelles. Error bars are standard
deviation, and mean values were compared with an unpaired t test. (c) Histograms of the distribution of the aspect
ratio, major axis, and area of endolysosomal organelles from control
cells and endolysosomal organelles containing AuNP–SWCNT complexes.

We next assessed whether DNA–SWCNTs
perturbed the ability
of endolysosomal organelles to maintain their pH gradient. This was
done via a confocal imaging study using LysoTracker,
a lysomotropic fluorescent probe that accumulates in acidic vesicles.
Human bone osteosarcoma cells transfected with type A scavenger receptors
(U2OS-SRA)46 were treated with 1 mg/L (5
times higher than the working concentration) fluorophore-labeled DNA–nanotube
complexes (Alexa 647-SWCNT) and fixed and stained with LysoTracker.
Using fluorescence confocal microscopy, we imaged both LysoTracker
and Alexa 647-SWCNT emission from endolysosomal organelles (Figures 4a, S21). If DNA–SWCNTs prevented endolysosomal organelles
from maintaining a pH gradient, we would expect endolysosomal organelles
containing the DNA–SWCNTs to show decreased levels of LysoTracker
signal. This was not the case, as quantification of LysoTracker fluorescence
from organelles both with and without DNA−SWCNTs showed no
significant difference in LysoTracker intensity (Figures 4b,c, S21).

Figure 4 Assessing the effects of DNA–SWCNT on endolysosomal function.
(a) Representative confocal images of LysoTracker-Red (green) and
Alexa 647-SWCNT (red) and a merged image of the two in U2OS-SRA cells.
Scale bar = 10 μm. (b) Intensity profiles of the two fluorophores
along the dashed line (cyan) in the merged image. (c) Mean intensity
of LysoTracker in endolysosomal organelles that contain Alexa 647-SWCNT
emission and those that did not. Error bars are standard deviation.
Mean intensity was compared with an unpaired t test
(n = 9 images per channel). (d) Representative epifluorescence
images of Alexa 488-AcLDL (green) in U2OS-SRA cells, at 0 and 2 h
after the addition of acetylated LDL, or in control cells. Scale bars
= 10 μm. (e) Number of AcLDL ROIs per 100 μm2. Error bars are standard deviation, obtained from 10 images per
condition. Data were compared using a one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s
multiple comparison test.

To ensure that we could ascertain meaningful results from
a DNA–SWCNT-based
reporter, we also investigated the effect of DNA–SWCNTs on
the ability of endolysosomal organelles to hydrolyze lipoprotein molecules.
We treated U2OS-SRA cells with 1 mg/L of Alexa 647-SWCNT for 30 min
before incubation in fresh media for 2 h. To induce the rapid uptake
of lipoproteins, we then introduced 50 μg/mL of Alexa 488-labeled
acetylated LDL (Alexa 488-AcLDL) to the cell media. Epifluorescence
images showed a stark decrease in AcLDL puncta in both control and
nanotube-treated cells between zero and 2 h of AcLDL addition (Figures 4d, S22). Quantification of AcLDL regions of interest (ROIs),
normalized by cell area, showed that there was no significant difference
in the number of AcLDL ROIs per 100 μm2 between cells
treated with the nanotubes and the control cells at both 0 and 2 h
(Figure 4e), suggesting
that DNA–SWCNTs did not perturb the hydrolysis of lipoproteins.
A lipid biochemical assay showed no significant differences in the
cholesterol or total lipid content of cell fractions from control
or nanotube-containing cells (Figure S23). LipidTox imaging and the expression of LDL receptor (LDLr) also
suggested that DNA–SWCNT complexes did not significantly alter
lipid processing in cells (Figures S24, S25).

The above results suggest that singly dispersed DNA–SWCNTs
that have been separated from large nanotube bundles and carbonaceous
impurities via ultracentrifugation did not adversely
affect cell viability or proliferation or organelle morphology, integrity,
or capacity to digest lipoproteins. However, additional work using
different cell types and culture conditions is warranted prior to
widespread application of the reporter. Moreover, as electronic structure
and chirality of a nanotube sample were not found to directly affect
toxological impact,47 our conclusions on
biocompatibility likely hold for other relatively short DNA–single-walled
carbon nanotube complexes composed of different DNA sequences and
chiralities.

Detecting Lipid Accumulation in the Endolysosomal
Lumen of Live
Cells
We investigated whether the ability of ss(GT)6-(8,6) to detect lipids in vitro could be translated
to the endolysosomal organelles of live cells (Figure 5a). RAW 264.7 macrophages were incubated
with the complexes for 30 min in complete 10% serum-supplemented media
at 37 °C and washed with fresh media. To induce lysosomal accumulation
of free cholesterol, we prepared cells that were pretreated with U18666A,48 a compound that inhibits the action of NPC1,49 a membrane protein that effluxes free cholesterol
out of the lysosomes (Figure 5a), to mimic the Niemann–Pick C1 disease phenotype.
Cells were also pretreated with Lalistat 3a2,50 an inhibitor of lysosomal acid lipase (LAL), which is the central
enzyme that hydrolyzes low-density lipoproteins (Figure 5a).51 Inhibition of LAL leads to the accumulation of esterified cholesterol,
which is observed in Wolman’s disease.

Figure 5 Detection of endolysosomal
lipid accumulation in live cells. (a)
Schematics of the ss(GT)6-(8,6) nanotube complexes in macrophages
treated with U18666A or Lalistat 3a2. (b) Overlay of transmitted light
with hyperspectral image of RAW 264.7 macrophages incubated with ss(GT)6-(8,6) complex under the specified treatments. Color legend
maps to nanotube emission peak wavelength. Scale bar = 50 μm.
(c) Histogram of emission wavelengths of all pixels from the hyperspectral
images, with a bin size of 1 nm. (d) Schematic of the optical setup
for high-throughput measurements of ss(GT)6-(8,6) emission
in live cells. (e) Spectra of ss(GT)6-(8,6) emission from
live RAW 264.7 cells incubated in normal media (control) and in media
with U18666A. (f) Mean center wavelengths of ss(GT)6-(8,6)
emission from n = 5 technical replicates, acquired
using hyperspectral imaging (I) and spectroscopy (S). Mean values
were compared using a one-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparison
test. Error bars are standard error of the mean. *** = p < 0.001, **** = p < 0.0001.

Using NIR hyperspectral microscopy, we acquired
the emission from
the complexes localized within the endolysosomal organelles of macrophages
under these three conditions (Figure 5a). When the emission wavelength is mapped to a color
scale and overlaid on a transmitted light image, the spatially resolved
emission from ss(GT)6-(8,6) complexes resulted in live-cell
maps of endolysosomal lipid content (Figure 5b). The mean emission blue-shift for the
two drug-treated conditions was over 11 nm compared with the control,
with a single population for all three conditions, indicating lipid
accumulation in all endolysosomal organelles that contained the complexes
(Figures 5c, S26). Neither Lalistat 3a2 nor U18666A directly
perturbed the emission wavelength of the complexes (Figure S27). The endolysosomal lipid maps thus reflect the
optical response of the complexes to the accumulation of lipids within
the endolysosomal lumen. We quantified the nanotube emission response
as a function of loading concentration. At a 5-fold dilution of the
working concentration, the response of the emission wavelength to
U18666A-induced lipid accumulation did not change, indicating that
the emission spectra (Figures S28, S29)
and wavelength distribution of the ss(GT)6-(8,6) complex
(Figures S28, S29) were consistent over
a range of concentrations (Figures S28, S29). Finally, we induced endolysosomal lipid accumulation in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts using U18666A and detected a blue-shift in the
ss(GT)6-(8,6) emission when compared with untreated controls
(Figure S30).

On the basis of the
findings from our experiments, we present a
model for the optical response of ss(GT)6-(8,6) ssDNA–nanotube
complexes in live cells under the conditions investigated. The complexes
enter the endolysosomal pathway and localize within the lumen of endolysosomal
organelles. In the complex environment of the endolysosomal lumen,
the nanotube emission functions as a cell-specific spectral fingerprint
for the lipid content. Upon dysfunction of the NPC1 protein via introduction of U18666A to cells, free cholesterol accumulates
within the lumen of endolysosomal organelles and adsorbs to the surface
of the ss(GT)6-(8,6) complex, resulting in a distinct blue-shifting
response of the nanotube emission. Similarly, upon introduction of
Lalistat 3a2 to cells, cholesteryl esters (CE) accumulate in the endolysosomal
lumen, resulting in the adsorption of CE to the nanotube surface and
a concomitant blue-shifting response. In both situations, multiple
secondary lipids also accumulate in the lysosomal lumen.52 Hence, we find that the ss(GT)6-(8,6)
DNA–nanotube complex functions as a quantitative optical reporter
of lipid accumulation in the endolysosomal lumen via solvatochromic shifting of intrinsic carbon nanotube photoluminescence.
Henceforth, we refer to ss(GT)6-(8,6) as the “reporter”.

As the nanotube emission is exclusively from the endolysosomal
lumen, we investigated whether the nanotube spectra alone, obtained
without imaging, could function as an analytical tool to benchmark
drug-induced endolysosomal lipid accumulation in a high-throughput
format. Using a customized NIR spectrometer,53 we obtained spectra from complexes within live RAW 264.7 macrophages
(Figure 5d) and detected
a 9 nm shift in the emission from cells treated with U18666A, an example
of a cationic amphiphilic drug that induces DIPL54 (Figure 5e). These results were similar to the hyperspectral data of control
and U18666A-treated macrophages (Figure 5f), indicating the amenability of the complexes
for both imaging and a spectroscopy-based assay that facilitates higher
throughput.

Measurement of Lysosomal Storage Disorder
Phenotype in NPC1
Patient-Derived Fibroblasts
The reporter was assessed for
its response in primary cells from a patient with Niemann–Pick
type C1 (NPC1), a lysosomal storage disease characterized by an accumulation
of unesterified cholesterol in the lysosomes.55,56 Fibroblasts from an NPC patient, as well as wild-type (WT) human
fibroblasts, were incubated with the reporter for 30 min, then rinsed,
and incubated in fresh media. Hyperspectral data collected after 24
h indicate that the reporter blue-shifted by an average of 6 nm in
NPC1 human fibroblasts, compared to WT human fibroblasts (Figure 6a). The lipid content
of WT fibroblast endolysosomal organelles was relatively homogeneous,
as evinced by the narrow distribution of the reporter emission (Figure 6b). In contrast,
the reporter exhibited a broad emission profile within NPC1 cells
(Figure 6b), confirming
the published findings that NPC1 cells exhibit a wide distribution
of lipid concentrations.57 The histogram
also suggests that a sizable fraction of endolysosomal organelles
contain near-normal cholesterol content.

Figure 6 Measurement of endolysosomal
lipid accumulation and reversal in
NPC1 patient-derived fibroblasts. (a) Mean reporter emission from
wild-type fibroblasts, patient-derived NPC1 fibroblasts, and NPC1
fibroblasts treated with hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin (HPβCD)
for 24 h. Statistical significance was determined with a one-way ANOVA
with Sidak’s multiple comparison test. (b) Histograms of the
nanotube emission wavelength from single endolysosomal organelles
of wild-type fibroblasts, NPC1 patient fibroblasts, and NPC1 fibroblasts
treated with HPβCD for 24 h. (c) Mean filipin intensity from
WT fibroblasts, NPC1 cells, and NPC1 cells treated with HPβCD
for 24 h, at 48 h after nanotube addition. Statistical significance
was determined with a one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison
test. All error bars are SEM from three technical replicate experiments.
* = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01,
*** = p < 0.001.

To test the reversibility of the reporter in live cells,
we measured
the emission from the reporter in NPC1 fibroblasts treated with hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin
(HPβCD), a drug known to facilitate the efflux of accumulated
cholesterol from the lumen of endolysosomal organelles.58 After treatment with 100 μM HPβCD
for 24 h, hyperspectral imaging revealed significant red-shifting
of the reporter emission from the same NPC1 cells that were previously
blue-shifted (Figures 6a,b, S31). The distribution of reporter
emission from the HPβCD-treated NPC1 fibroblasts appeared notably
similar to the emission from WT fibroblasts (Figures 6b, S31), and reduction
of total cell cholesterol content was confirmed by fixing the cells
and staining with filipin (Figure 6c). Filipin staining was more pronounced in NPC1 fibroblasts
as compared to WT fibroblasts, and HPβCD treatment resulted
in significantly diminished filipin signal in NPC1 cells (Figures 6c, S32), thus validating the results obtained from the reporter
alone. Additionally, pretreatment of NPC1 fibroblasts with HPβCD
prevented the blue-shifting of the reporter (Figure
S33).

Single-Cell Kinetic Measurements of Lipid
Accumulation
Recent technological advances have led to an
appreciation of the
complexity of cell populations and the heterogeneity of single cells
within a population of cells that seems uniform on a macroscopic level.59 The ability of the developed reporter to function
in live cell imaging applications positions it to provide data on
a single-cell level. Such data would have the potential to identify
previously unknown subpopulations of cells that could be crucial toward
increasing our understanding of cellular lipid processing.

We
assessed whether the reporter could measure single-cell kinetics of
endolysosomal lipid accumulation. RAW 264.7 macrophages were cultured
in media with lipoprotein-depleted serum (LPDS). Under these conditions
the reporter emission wavelength was approximately 1200 nm. Next,
both AcLDL and U18666A were added to the cell media to induce endolysosomal
lipid accumulation. Endolysosomal lipid accumulation was monitored via the acquisition of hyperspectral images every 10 min
for 2 h (Figure 7a).
Single-cell emission trajectories were computed for all cells with
reporter peak emission intensities of over 4 times higher than the
background. The mean reporter emission from individual cells blue-shifted
and reached an equilibrium over approximately 90 min (Figure 7b). For each cell, the spectral
trajectories were fit with a single-exponential function to obtain
the time constant, time lag, and the starting and final reporter wavelengths
(Figure S34). The time constants of lipid
accumulation in the cells averaged approximately 40 min and followed
a log-normal distribution (Figure 7c). One potential explanation for this finding is that
a log-normal distribution is often observed for a quantity arising
from multiple serial processes.60 We believe
that this distribution of time constants from individual cells is
consistent with the process of endolysosomal lipid accumulation, which
involves sequential processes including LDL uptake into the early
endosome, delivery of LDL to the lysosome, hydrolysis of esterified
cholesterol by LAL, and the inhibited efflux of free cholesterol by
NPC1.

Figure 7 Single-cell kinetics of lipid accumulation. (a) Overlaid bright-field
and hyperspectral images of the reporter emission in RAW 264.7 macrophages
upon addition of AcLDL (100 μg/mL) and U18666A (3 μg/mL)
to LPDS media at t = 0, 30, and 60 min. Scale bar
= 50 μm. (b) Single-cell trajectories of lysosomal lipid accumulation
from 60 cells. Black curve is the mean. Error bars are standard deviation
from n = 4 technical replicates. (c) Distribution
of time constants of lipid accumulation in single cells fitted to
a log-normal distribution. Bin size = 20 nm. (d) Scatter plot of the
time constants vs starting emission wavelength, n = 60 cells. Data from four independent experiments were
combined for this analysis.

Interestingly, the distribution of time constants showed
marked
heterogeneity, with the slowest and fastest time constants differing
by an order of magnitude. Cells exhibiting slower rates of lipid accumulation
also exhibited an initial state of relative lipid deficiency. The
time constant of lipid accumulation modestly correlated with the starting
wavelength (Spearman correlation of 0.33, p <
0.01). Notably, the slowest shifting cells (defined as cells with
a time constant of >90 min) exhibited an initial average emission
wavelength of >1202 nm, 2 nm more red-shifted than the faster shifting
cells (Figure 7d).
This result suggests the existence of a subpopulation of cells that
maintained both lipid-deficient endolysosomal organelles and an extremely
slow rate of lipid accumulation; that is, these individual cells in
the population may be especially resistant to endolysosomal lipid
accumulation.

Quantifying Intracellular Heterogeneity in
Monocyte Endolysosomal
Organelles
After demonstrating the reporter’s ability
to quantify lipid accumulation on a single-cell level, we investigated
whether the reporter could measure lipids on a single-organelle level.
We generated hyperspectral maps to quantify the intracellular heterogeneity
of lipid content within individual endolysosomal organelles of single
bone-marrow-derived monocytes during the differentiation process into
bone-marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) (Figure 8a). Hyperspectral images of two cells (Figure 8b) from the bone-marrow-derived
monocyte population on day 3 of differentiation showed distinctly
different intracellular heterogeneity of the reporter response, evident
from the histogram widths (Figures 8c, S35). To mathematically
quantify the intracellular heterogeneity of reporter emission within
each cell, we used the normalized Simpson’s index (nSI), a
statistical measure of diversity.61,62 For the cells
shown in Figure 8c,
the nSIs were significantly different (cell 1 nSI = 0.18, cell 2 nSI
= 0.74). By plotting the mean reporter emission wavelength and nSI
for a large population of cells on day 3, cells with the most lipid-rich
endolysosomal organelles (shorter wavelength) exhibited greater intracellular
heterogeneity in endolysosomal lipid contents (Figure 8d, Spearman correlation of 0.33, p < 0.01, for n = 64 cells). This observation,
confirmed in BMDMs isolated from four different mice (Figure S36, with at least 60 cells analyzed per
mouse), suggests that within differentiating monocytes, cells with
lipid-rich endolysosomal organelles maintain a subpopulation of these
organelles that are relatively lipid-deficient. Moreover, observation
of BMDMs throughout differentiation validated the ability of the reporter
to detect endolysosomal lipid accumulation in a nonpathological condition
(Figures S37, S38).

Figure 8 Quantifying intracellular
heterogeneity in monocyte endolysosomal
organelles. (a) Near-infrared broadband and overlaid bright-field/hyperspectral
images of the reporter in bone-marrow-derived cells after 3 days of
colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) treatment. (b) Endolysosomal lipid
maps of the reporter in bone-marrow-derived cells at day 3 of maturation.
(c) Corresponding histogram of reporter emission from emissive pixels
within the two cells. Bin size = 1 nm. (d) Scatter plot of the normalized
Simpson’s index (nSI) against the mean emission wavelength
per cell for n = 64 cells. Scale bars = 10 μm.

Conclusion
In
this work, we developed a carbon nanotube optical reporter,
composed of the (8,6) SWCNT species noncovalently functionalized with
a short DNA oligonucleotide, that can function as an optical reporter
of lipid content within the endolysosomal lumen of live cells. The
near-infrared photoluminescence of the nanotube responds quantitatively
to lipids in the local environment of the reporter via shifting of the nanotube optical band gap. Experimental evidence
and all-atom molecular dynamics simulations suggest that the mechanism
of the response is solvatochromic shifting due to the reduction in
water density near the nanotube surface. The reporter remains within
the endocytic pathway and localizes to the lumen of endolysosomal
organelles without adversely affecting organelle morphology, structural
integrity, or function. In the endolysosomal lumen, the reporter’s
near-infrared emission responds rapidly and reversibly to lipid accumulation. Via NIR hyperspectral microscopy, the reporter can quantitatively
map lipids in live cells. Using spectroscopy, the reporter can measure
endolysosomal lipid accumulation in live cells in a high-throughput
drug-screening-type format. The reporter detected lipid accumulation
in lysosomal storage disorders, including in the endolysosomal organelles
of fibroblasts derived from a patient with Niemann–Pick type
C disease, as well as phenotypic reversal in the same cells after
drug treatment. The reporter functioned with single-cell and single-organelle
resolution and was used to assess single-cell kinetics of modified
LDL accumulation within endolysosomal organelles, showing that the
rate of cholesterol accumulation differs by an order of magnitude
across macrophages in the same population of cells. Endolysosomal
lipid accumulation in differentiating bone-marrow-derived monocytes
was also observed, and high-resolution endolysosomal lipid maps revealed
intracellular heterogeneity in the form of a subpopulation of lipid-deficient
endolysosomal organelles in lipid-rich cells. As the first technique
for measuring lipid flux in the endolysosomal lumen of live cells,
we expect this tool will have broad utility in both drug screening
applications and the investigation of disease pathways associated
with altered lipid biology such as atherosclerosis, neurodegenerative
diseases, lysosomal storage disorders, and liver disease.

Materials and Methods
DNA Encapsulation of Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotubes
The chemical reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis,
MO, USA) and Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA, USA). Single-walled
carbon nanotubes produced by the HiPco process were used throughout
the study (Unidym, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The carbon nanotubes were
dispersed with DNA oligonucleotides via probe-tip
ultrasonication (Sonics & Materials, Inc.) of 2 mg of the specified
oligonucleotide (IDT DNA, Coralville, IA, USA) with 1 mg of raw SWCNT
in 1 mL of 0.1 M NaCl for 30 min at 40% of the maximum amplitude of
the ultrasonicator (SONICS Vibra Cell). Following ultrasonication,
the dispersions were ultracentrifuged (Sorvall Discovery 90SE) for
30 min at 280 000g. The top three-fourths
of the resultant supernatant was collected, and its concentration
was determined with a UV/vis/NIR spectrophotometer (Jasco, Tokyo,
Japan) using the extinction coefficient Abs910 = 0.02554
L mg–1cm–1.19 To remove free DNA, 100 kDa Amicon centrifuge filters (Millipore)
were used to concentrate and resuspend the DNA–nanotube complexes.

Purification of Single-Chirality Nanotube Complexes
Carbon
nanotubes were separated by an ion-exchange chromatography
method according to the procedure described by Tu etal.32 Briefly, unsorted
HiPco nanotubes were dispersed using a DNA oligonucleotide with the
sequence ss(GT)6, as described above. The sample was injected
into a high-performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC) (Agilent, 1260
Infinity) fitted with an anion-exchange column (Biochrom Laboratories,
Inc., CNT-NS1500) with a running buffer of 2× SSC at a flow rate
of 2 mL/min. A linearly increasing salt concentration gradient of
1 M NaSCN (5%/min) was used to elute the nanotubes from the stationary
phase, and fractions were collected. The first fraction exciting the
HPLC contained the highest purity of the (8,6) species, estimated
at 86%, which was used for subsequent studies.

Near-Infrared Fluorescence
Microscopy of Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotubes
As described in a previous study,19 near-infrared fluorescence microscopy was used to acquire
the photoluminescence emission from SWCNTs. The system comprised a
continuous wave 730 nm diode laser with an output power of 2 W injected
into a multimode fiber to produce the excitation source for fluorescence
experiments. To ensure a homogeneous illumination over the entire
microscope field of view, the excitation beam passed through a custom
beam-shaping module to produce a top-hat intensity profile with under
20% power variation on the imaged region of the sample. The final
power at the sample was 230 mW. A long pass dichroic mirror with a
cut-on wavelength of 875 nm (Semrock) was aligned to reflect the laser
to the sample stage of an Olympus IX-71 inverted microscope (with
internal optics modified to improve near-infrared transmission from
900 to 1400 nm) equipped with a 20× LCPlan N, 20×/0.45 IR
objective and a UAPON100XOTIRF, 1.49 oil objective (Olympus, USA).
Emission was collected with a 2D InGaAs array detector (Photon Etc.).
Custom codes, written using Matlab software, were used to subtract
background, correct for nonuniformities in excitation profile, and
compensate for dead pixels on the detector. Hyperspectral microscopy
was conducted by passing the emission through a volume Bragg grating
(VBG) placed immediately before the InGaAs array in the optical path.
The filtered image produced on the InGaAs camera was composed of a
series of vertical lines, each with a specific wavelength. The reconstruction
of a spatially rectified image stack was performed using cubic interpolation
on every pixel for each monochromatic image, according to the wavelength
calibration parameters. The rectification produced a hyperspectral
“cube” of images of the same spatial region exhibiting
distinct spectral regions with 3.7 nm fwhm bandwidths. Approximately
50% of the emission intensity from the nanotubes is reduced after
passage through the VBG.

Analysis and Processing of Hyperspectral
Data
Hyperspectral
data acquired were saved as a (320 × 256 × 26) 16-bit array,
where the first two coordinates signify the spatial location of a
pixel and the last coordinate is its position in wavelength space.
For the (8,6) nanotube, the 26-frame wavelength space ranges from
1150 to 1250 nm. An initial filter removed any pixels with a maximum
intensity value outside (1170 to 1220 nm), as these were background
pixels that emit outside the range for (8,6). For the remaining pixels,
a peak-finding algorithm was used to calculate the intensity range
for a given pixel, i.e., range =
(intensity_maximum–intensity_minimum). A data point was designated
as a peak if its intensity was range/4 greater than the intensity
of adjacent pixels. Pixels that failed the peak-finding threshold,
primarily due to low intensity above the background, were removed
from the data sets. The remaining pixels were fit with a Lorentzian
function.

Preparation of Nanotubes Labeled with Visible Fluorophores
To increase the fluorescence intensity of the Cy3 or Cy5 fluorophores
attached to DNA strands encapsulating SWCNTs, a 6-nucleotide-long
polyT tail was added to the end of the (GT)6 sequence,
as fluorophores near the surface of SWCNTs are known to quench63 (Integrated DNA Technologies, sequence = GTGTGTGTGTGTTTTTTT).
For confocal imaging with Alexa-647 SWCNT, a small polyethylene glycol
spacer was also added to further increase the fluorescence intensity
of the fluorophore (Integrated DNA Technologies, sequence = GTGTGTGTGTGTTTTTTT/iSP18//3Alexaf647N//3′).
These modified DNA strands were noncovalently complexed with HiPco
SWCNTs via the previously described sonication and
centrifugation protocol.

Preparation of Gold-Nanoparticle-Conjugated
Nanotubes
Gold-nanoparticle-conjugated nanotubes were prepared
according to
a previously published study.44 Briefly,
10 nm citrate-capped gold nanoparticles were synthesized by using
50 mL of 0.01 wt % HAuCl4 and adding 2 mL of 1 wt % sodium(III)
citrate. After 2 min, the solution turned bright red, indicating nanoparticle
formation. The gold nanoparticles were stabilized via a ligand exchange reaction by shaking overnight with bis(p-sulfonatophenyl)phenyl phosphine dihydrate dipotassium
salt. The nanoparticles were then centrifuged and resuspended in deionized
water. In parallel, ss(GT)27-T6-thiol-dispersed
HiPco nanotube complexes were created by means of the previously described
sonication and centrifugation protocol. The nanotube complexes were
filtered with ultracentrifuge filters three times to remove unbound
DNA. The nanotube complexes and excess gold nanoparticles were then
shaken overnight. The unbound gold nanoparticles were removed via centrifugation, which would pellet the unbound nanoparticles,
and careful supernatant extraction.

Transmission Electron Microscopy
(TEM) Imaging
Gold
nanoparticle–nanotube conjugates were first imaged on carbon-coated
TEM grids by letting a 20 μL drop evaporate in the center of
the grid. For imaging in RAW 264.7 cells, gold nanoparticle–nanotubes
were introduced to the media for 30 min at 1 mg/L and then washed
thoroughly and replaced with fresh media. After 6 h, cells were washed
with serum-free media, then fixed with a modified Karmovsky’s
fix of 2.5% glutaraldehyde, 4% paraformaldehyde, and 0.02% picric
acid in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer at pH 7.2. Following a secondary
fixation in 1% osmium tetroxide and 1.5% potassium ferricyanide, samples
were dehydrated through a graded ethanol series and embedded in an
Epon analogue resin. Ultrathin sections were cut using a Diatome diamond
knife (Diatome, Hatfield, PA, USA) on a Leica Ultracut S ultramicrotome
(Leica, Vienna, Austria). Sections were collected on copper grids,
further contrasted with lead citrate, and viewed on a JEM 1400 electron
microscope (JEOL, USA, Inc., Peabody, MA, USA) operated at 120 kV.
Images were recorded with a Veleta 2K × 2K digital camera (Olympus-SIS,
Germany).

Fluorescence Microscopy of Live Cells
Standard fluorescence
imaging in the UV–visible emission range was performed on the
hyperspectral microscope by using an XCite Series 120Q lamp as the
light source and a QiClick CCD camera (QImaging) directly attached
to a c-mount on a separate port of the microscope. Fluorescence filter
sets from Chroma Technology and Semrock were used. Confocal imaging
was performed on a Zeiss LSM 880, AxioObserver microscope equipped
with a Plan-Apochromat 63× oil 1.4 NA differential interference
contrast M27 objective in a humidified chamber at 37 °C. Z-stacks were obtained using a step size of 198–220
nm.

Fluorescence Spectroscopy of Carbon Nanotubes in Solution
Fluorescence emission spectra from aqueous solutions of SWCNTs
were acquired using a home-built apparatus consisting of a tunable
white light laser source, inverted microscope, and InGaAs NIR detector.54 The SuperK EXTREME supercontinuum white light
laser source (NKT Photonics) was used with a VARIA variable bandpass
filter accessory capable of tuning the output 500–825 nm with
a bandwidth of 20 nm. During the course of the measurements, the excitation
wavelength remained at 730 nm, close to the resonant excitation maximum
of the DNA-encapsulated (8,6) nanotube species. The light path was
shaped and fed into the back of an inverted IX-71 microscope (Olympus),
where it passed through a 20× NIR objective (Olympus) and illuminated
a 100 μL nanotube sample at a concentration of 0.2 mg/L in a
96-well plate (Corning). With an exposure time of 1 s, the emission
from the nanotube sample was collected through the 20× objective
and passed through a dichroic mirror (875 nm cutoff, Semrock). The
light was f/# matched to the spectrometer using several
lenses and injected into an Isoplane spectrograph (Princeton Instruments)
with a slit width of 410 μm, which dispersed the emission using
a 86 g/mm grating with 950 nm blaze wavelength. The spectral range
was 930–1369 nm with a resolution of ∼0.7 nm. The light
was collected by a PIoNIR InGaAs 640 × 512 pixel array (Princeton
Instruments). An HL-3-CAL-EXT halogen calibration light source (Ocean
Optics) was used to correct for wavelength-dependent features in the
emission intensity arising from the spectrometer, detector, and other
optics. A Hg/Ne pencil-style calibration lamp (Newport) was used to
calibrate the spectrometer wavelength. Background subtraction was
conducted using a well in a 96-well plate filled with DI H2O. Following acquisition, the data was processed with custom code
written in Matlab that applied the aforementioned spectral corrections
and background subtraction and was used to fit the data with Lorentzian
functions.

Nanotube Chirality and DNA Sequence-Dependent
Response to LDL
Unsorted DNA–SWCNT samples were diluted
to 2 mg/L in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) and incubated with 0.5 mg/mL LDL (Alfa Aesar) for 18
h at 37 °C. Chirality-separated samples were diluted to 0.2 mg/L
in PBS and incubated with 0.5 mg/mL LDL for 18 h at 37 °C. Controls
were incubated with no LDL present. Photoluminescence spectra were
acquired with 2 s exposure times.

Titrations of DNA–Nanotube
Complexes with PEG-Conjugated
Lipids
Unsorted ss(GT)6-DNA–SWCNT samples
were diluted to mg/L in PBS and incubated with various concentrations
(0–5 μM) of two PEG-conjugated lipids (cholesterol-PEG
600, “cholesterol-PEG”, Sigma-Aldrich; C16 PEG750 Ceramide,
Avanti Lipids). Samples were incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. Photoluminescence
spectra were acquired with 2 s exposure times under 730 nm laser excitation.
PEGs, with molecular weights of 600 or 750 kDa, diluted in PBS, were
used as controls to test for nonspecific interactions. To test the
effect of lowered pH on sensor performance, samples were diluted in
a 100 mM pH 5.5 acetate buffer instead of PBS.

Calculation
of Normalized Simpson’s Index
The
Simpson’s index is a diversity index used to measure the richness
and evenness of a basic data type.62 The
diversity index is maximized when all types of data are equally abundant.
When applied to microbiology, the Simpson’s index is referred
to as the Hunter–Gaston index.62 In our application,  where D is the diversity
index, N is the total number of pixels within each
cell with detectable nanotube emission, S is the
total number of histogram bins, and nj is the total number of pixels within the jth bin. We obtained the Simpson’s index for each
cell, SIj. For the set of SIj calculated for all the cells in an experiment, we
normalized the value to obtain the normalized Simpson’s index,
nSI.

Cell Culture Reagents and Conditions
RAW 264.7 TIB-71
cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) were grown under standard incubation
conditions at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in sterile, filtered
DMEM with 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 2.5% HEPES, 1% glutamine, and
1% penicillin/streptomycin (all from Gibco). For studies performed
with homozygous mutant NPC, compound mutant heterozygote NPC, or wild-type
fibroblasts, the respective cell lines GM18453, GM03123, or GM05659
(Coriell, Camden, NJ, USA) were cultured in MEM with 10% FBS, 2.5%
HEPES, and 1% glutamine. Cells were plated on glass-bottom Petri dishes
or lysine-covered glass dishes (MatTek) for fibroblasts. Chirality-separated
SWCNTs were added at 0.2 mg/L in cell culture media (70 μL total
volume) and incubated with cells for 30 min at 37 °C. This corresponds
to approximately 0.5 picogram of SWCNT per cell, for a 50% cell confluency
in a 9 mm diameter glass-bottom dish. The same procedure was used
for unsorted SWCNTs with a concentration of 1 mg/L. These concentrations
were chosen because they were experimentally observed to be the minimum
concentration needed to obtain strong reporter signal from all of
the cell lines used here. An incubation time of 30 min was chosen
because it was the minimal duration that resulted in a strong reporter
signal from all the cell lines used here.

Cells were imaged
immediately, or trypsinized (Gibco), and replated on fresh Petri dishes
before hyperspectral imaging. All cells were used at 50–70%
confluence.

Filipin Staining of NPC1 Patient-Derived
Fibroblasts
Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for
15 min, washed 3×
with PBS, and stained with filipin III (Sigma) at a concentration
of 50 μg/mL for 20 min. The cells were then washed 3× with
PBS and imaged using a DAPI filter cube.

Cell Viability and Proliferation
Assays
RAW 264.7 macrophages
were seeded in untreated 96-well plates at 7000 cells per well. The
reporter was introduced to the cells at 0.2 mg/L. Reporter, vehicle
(0.027 MSSC + 0.1 M NaSCN), or hydrogen peroxide-treated cells were
incubated (times indicated), washed, detached from the plate with
Versene (1× PBS without Mg2+/Ca2+, 5 mM
EDTA, 2% FBS), pelleted, and incubated with annexin V Alexa Fluor
and propidium iodide (Life Technologies). Cells were analyzed by imaging
cytometry (Tali) to quantify cell number and fluorophore content.
For proliferation assays, RAW 264.7 macrophages treated with 0.2 mg/L
ss(GT)6-(8,6)-SWCNT or vehicle were seeded at 150 000
cells on a 100 mm diameter untreated culture dish on day zero. After
settling for 10 h, cells were harvested with Versene (1× PBS
without Mg2+/Ca2+, 5 mM EDTA, 2% FBS) and by
mechanical tapping to remove cells from the surface, stained with
Calcein AM, and counted for the initial seeding density. Media was
replaced every 2 days. At each 24 h period, cells were harvested as
before and counted. Cell counts represent Calcein AM positive (live)
cells.

Lipidomics Analyses
Six T-175 flasks were seeded at
<50% confluence with RAW 264.7 macrophages in their fifth passage.
Three flasks each were treated as follows: control (untreated) or
carbon nanotube treated (0.2 mg/L for 30 min, washing, and incubating
for 6 h). Cells were harvested (approximately 80% confluence in each
set of flasks) by manual scraping. The flask contents corresponding
to each condition were pooled into separate conical tubes and spun
to a pellet, washed in PBS containing protease inhibitor cocktail
(Thermo-Pierce, 88666), pelleted, and flash frozen in a dry ice/IPA
slurry with a small head volume of the PBS/inhibitor.

For cell
fractionation we adapted a sucrose/iodixanol equilibrium gradient
centrifugation procedure for lysosome separation (Thermo, 89839).
Briefly, flash frozen cells were thawed and suspended in 2× cpv
of PBS/inhibitor, vortexed with reagent included in the kit, and Dounce
homogenized with a cooled, tight fitting pestle using 90 strokes (starting
cell material was >500 mg). After homogenization, reagent was added,
and the tube inverted and then centrifuged at 4 °C, 500×
rcf for 10 min. The pellet was stored as the debris/nuclear fraction
in all experiments. The supernatant was taken for subsequent ultracentrifugation.
Briefly, 1 day before ultracentrifugation, a sucrose/iodixanol gradient
(bottom to top: 30, 27, 23, 20, 17%) was layered into 12 mL polyallomer
tubes (Thermo, 03699) and allowed to equilibrate in a cold room inside
the metal buckets of an appropriate hanging-bucket rotor. The supernatant
from above was mixed with the sucrose/iodixanol gradient to make a
final sample density of 15% (total volume, 1 mL), which was then gently
layered onto the top of the preformed gradient. The buckets were then
sealed and moved into the ultracentrifuge using the following settings:
∼135 000 rcf (32 000 rpm), 2.5 h running time,
acceleration/deceleration 9/5, 4 °C. The fractionated cell supernatant
was removed from the top and pipetted into six fractions based on
volume removed from the ultracentrifuge tube. The volume removed from
top to bottom was kept constant across the three conditions. Fractions
were frozen until analysis.

Each of the six fractions, plus
the nuclear/debris fraction (7
total/condition), was analyzed for the three conditions (21 fractions
total). To quantify total protein, a standard curve was produced using
BSA mixed into the sucrose/iodixanol gradient (Bradford assay background versus varying gradient was not different). 1× Bradford
reagent at room temperature was mixed 1:1 with standard and allowed
to incubate in the dark for 30 min, and the absorption was measured
at 595 nm. Each of the fractions was analyzed in this manner after
addition of 0.2% IPEGAL CA-630 (nonionic detergent) to solubilize
bound proteins.

Cholesterol quantification was performed (Sigma,
MAK043) using
a coupled enzyme reaction between cholesterol oxidase and peroxidase
with a proprietary colorimetric probe. Cholesterol esterase was used
before the reactions to ensure total cholesterol was measured. Briefly,
a three-phase extraction was performed on each sample fraction (7:11:0.1
chloroform/2-propanol/IPEGAL CA-630). The top aqueous phase and interphase
were removed, and the bottom organic phase was vacuum-dried. The dried
fractions were resuspended in provided buffer and reacted for 1 h
at 37 °C with the supplied reagents, and the absorption was read
at 570 nm. This was compared to a standard curve. Cholesterol levels
were normalized by total protein content as measured by the Bradford
assay.

Total lipid (total unsaturated hydrocarbon, including
cholesterol)
was measured after extracting the samples with chloroform as above.
Briefly, a phospho-vanillin color-producing reagent was made by dissolving
5 mg/mL vanillin (Sigma, V1104) in 200 μL of neat ethanol and
adding this to the appropriate volume of 17% phosphoric acid. This
reagent was stored cool in the dark until needed. Dried sample fractions
in glass vials were processed as follows: to each vial was added 200
μL of ∼98% sulfuric acid. The dried contents were coated
with the acid by tipping the vial and vortexing. The vial was placed
into a 100 °C mineral oil bath for 20 min. The resulting brown/black
material was rapidly cooled in a wet ice slurry for at least 5 min,
and 100 μL was placed side-by-side into a 96-well glass plate.
To one well was added 50 μL of the phospho-vanillin reagent,
this was mixed, and the plate was incubated in the dark for 12 min.
Absorption of each well (reagent reacted and sulfuric acid background)
was taken at 535 nm. The difference was the measurement, which was
compared to a standard curve that used oleic acid (Sigma, O1008),
prepared using the above protocol, as a model unsaturated hydrocarbon
material. Total lipid levels were normalized by total protein content.

Extraction and Differentiation of Bone-Marrow-Derived Macrophages
BMDMs were prepared from 6-week-old C57/Bl6 mice and cultured in
the presence of 10 ng/mL of recombinant colony stimulating factor-1.64 Cells were collected 3, 5, and 7 days post-isolation
and submitted to flow cytometry analysis for expression of the differentiation
markers Gr-1 (monocytes/granulocytes-1/200), Cd11b (macrophages-1/200),
and F4/80 (mature macrophages-1/50). Cells were incubated with 1 μL
of Fc Block (BD Biosciences) for every million cells for at least
15 min at 4 °C. Cells were then stained with the appropriate
antibodies (BD Biosciences) for 20 min at 4 °C, washed with FACS
buffer, and resuspended in FACS buffer containing DAPI (5 mg/mL diluted
1:5000) for live/dead cell exclusion.65

LysoTracker–Nanotube Colocalization
RAW 264.7
or BMDM macrophages were incubated with Cy5-ss(GT)6-HiPco
nanotubes for 30 min at a concentration of 1 mg/L. The cells were
then washed 3× with PBS and placed in fresh cell media. Six hours
later, the cells were incubated with 5 nM LysoTracker Green DND-26
(Life Technologies) for 15 min in cell media, washed 3× with
PBS, and imaged immediately in fresh PBS. The FITC or Cy5 channels
were used for LysoTracker Green or Cy5-ss(GT)6-HiPco nanotubes,
respectively. Plates of cells containing only Cy5-ss(GT)6-HiPco nanotubes or LysoTracker Green were used as controls to test
for bleed-through across channels.

Atomic Force Microscopy
(AFM)
A stock solution of ss(GT)6-(8,6)-SWCNTs
at 7 mg/L in 100 mM NaCl was diluted 20×
in dH2O and plated on a freshly cleaved mica substrate
(SPI) for 4 min before washing with 10 mL of dH2O and blowing
dry with argon gas. An Olympus AC240TS AFM probe (Asylum Research)
in an Asylum Research MFP-3D-Bio instrument was used to image in AC
mode. Data was captured at 2.93 nm/pixel XY resolution and 15.63 pm
Z resolution.

Statistics
Statistical analysis
was performed with
GraphPad Prism version 6.02. All data met the assumptions of the statistical
tests performed (i.e., normality,
equal variances, etc.). Experimental variance was
found to be similar between groups using the F-test and Brown–Forsythe
test for unpaired t tests and one-way ANOVAs, respectively.
To account for the testing of multiple hypotheses, one-way ANOVAs
were performed with Dunnet’s, Tukey’s, or Sidak’s
post-tests when appropriate. Sample size decisions were based on the
instrumental signal-to-noise ratios.

Cell Line Source and Authentication
RAW 264.7 cells
were acquired from ATCC and were tested for mycoplasma contamination
by the source. Primary bone-marrow-derived monocytes were tested for
mycoplasma contamination using DAPI staining. Patient-derived fibroblasts
were obtained from Coriell and tested for mycoplasma contamination
by the source. U2OS-SRA cells were generated in the lab of F.R.M.

Code Availability
Matlab code for the data analysis
in this article is available upon request, by contacting the corresponding
author (hellerd@mskcc.org).

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b04743.Supplementary
video (AVI)

Supplementary video (AVI)

Supplementary video (AVI)

Supplementary figures and a table (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn7b04743_si_001.avi

 nn7b04743_si_002.avi

 nn7b04743_si_003.avi

 nn7b04743_si_004.pdf

 Author Contributions
¶ P. V. Jena, D. Roxbury, and T. V. Galassi contributed equally to
this work.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the NIH Director’s
New Innovator
Award (DP2-HD075698), NIH grants R01-HL093324, R01CA148967, R01CA181355,
P20-GM103430, and P30 CA008748 cancer center support grant, the Rhode
Island Foundation (20164347), the Anna Fuller Fund, the Louis V. Gerstner
Jr. Young Investigator’s Fund, The Expect Miracles Foundation
- Financial Services Against Cancer, the Experimental Therapeutics
Center, Mr. William H. Goodwin, Mrs. Alice Goodwin, the Commonwealth
Foundation for Cancer Research, the Honorable Tina Brozman Foundation,
the Alan and Sandra Gerry Metastasis Research Initiative, Cycle for
Survival, the Frank A. Howard Scholars Program, the Ara Parseghian
Medical Research Foundation, and the Center for Molecular Imaging
and Nanotechnology at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. P.V.J.
was supported by an NIH NCI-T32 fellowship (2T32CA062948-21). D.R.
was supported by an American Cancer Society 2013 Roaring Fork Valley
Research Fellowship. T.V.G. was supported by the Frank Lappin Horsfall
Jr. Fellowship. C.P.H. was supported in part by National Cancer Institute
(NCI) Grant NIH T32 CA062948. Molecular simulation work was performed
at Lehigh University and is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE) Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences (BES), and Division
of Material Sciences and Engineering, under Award DE-SC0013979. This
research also used resources of the National Energy Research Scientific
Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported
by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract
No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. L.A. was supported by the American Brain Tumor
Association. J.B. was supported by a Tow Fellowship Award from the
Center for Molecular Imaging and Nanotechnology, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center. D.B.I. was supported by fellowship F31-DK104631 from
the NIH. We thank the Molecular Cytology Core Facility at Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and the Electron Microscopy & Histology
Core Facility at Weill Cornell Medical College. Use of the high-performance
computing capabilities of the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment (XSEDE), supported by the National Science Foundation
(NSF) grant numbers TG-MCB-120014 and TG-MCB-130013, is gratefully
acknowledged. We also thank Y. Shamay, A. Erez, R. Williams, R. Langenbacher,
and J. Shah for helpful discussions and J. Bartlett for aid in manuscript
preparation.
==== Refs
References
Xu H. ; Ren D. 
Lysosomal Physiology . Annu. Rev. Physiol. 
2015 , 77 , 57 –80 10.1146/annurev-physiol-021014-071649 .25668017 
Parenti G. ; Andria G. ; Ballabio A. 
Lysosomal
Storage Diseases: From
Pathophysiology to Therapy . Annu. Rev. Med. 
2015 , 66 , 471 –86 10.1146/annurev-med-122313-085916 .25587658 
Grayson M. 
Lysosomal
Storage Disorders . Nature 
2016 , 537 , S145 –S145 10.1038/537S145a .27652778 
Jerome W. G. 
Lysosomes,
Cholesterol and Atherosclerosis . Clin. Lipidol. 
2010 , 5 , 853 –865 10.2217/clp.10.70 .21643524 
Bieghs V. ; Walenbergh S. M. A. ; Hendrikx T. ; van Gorp P. J. ; Verheyen F. ; Olde Damink S. W. ; Masclee A. A. ; Koek G. H. ; Hofker M. H. ; Binder C. J. ; et al. Trapping of Oxidized LDL in Lysosomes of Kupffer
Cells is a Trigger for Hepatic Inflammation . Liver Int. 
2013 , 33 , 1056 –1061 10.1111/liv.12170 .23617943 
Nixon R. A. 
The Role
of Autophagy in Neurodegenerative Disease . Nat.
Med. 
2013 , 19 , 983 –997 10.1038/nm.3232 .23921753 
Kirkegaard T. ; Jäättelä M. 
Lysosomal
Involvement in Cell Death
and Cancer . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell
Res. 
2009 , 1793 , 746 –754 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.09.008 .
Glock M. ; Muehlbacher M. ; Hurtig H. ; Tripal P. ; Kornhuber J. 
Drug-Induced
Phospholipidosis Caused by Combinations of Common Drugs In
Vitro . Toxicol. In Vitro 
2016 , 35 , 139 –148 10.1016/j.tiv.2016.05.010 .27221059 
Shayman J. A. ; Abe A. 
Drug Induced Phospholipidosis:
An Acquired Lysosomal Storage Disorder . Biochim.
Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell Biol. Lipids 
2013 , 1831 , 602 –611 10.1016/j.bbalip.2012.08.013 .
Maxfield F. R. ; Wüstner D.  Chapter 17 - Analysis
of Cholesterol Trafficking with Fluorescent Probes . In Methods in Cell Biology ; Academic
Press , 2012 ; Vol. 108 , pp 367 –393 .22325611 
Haberkant P. ; Holthuis J. C. 
Fat & Fabulous: Bifunctional Lipids in the Spotlight . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell Biol. Lipids 
2014 , 1841 , 1022 –1030 10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.01.003 .
Hofmann K. ; Thiele C. ; Schott H. F. ; Gaebler A. ; Schoene M. ; Kiver Y. ; Friedrichs S. ; Lutjohann D. ; Kuerschner L. 
A Novel Alkyne Cholesterol to Trace
Cellular Cholesterol
Metabolism and Localization . J. Lipid Res. 
2014 , 55 , 583 –591 10.1194/jlr.D044727 .24334219 
Takatori S. ; Mesman R. ; Fujimoto T. 
Microscopic
Methods to Observe the
Distribution of Lipids in the Cellular Membrane . Biochemistry 
2014 , 53 , 639 –653 10.1021/bi401598v .24460209 
Kucherak O.
A. ; Oncul S. ; Darwich Z. ; Yushchenko D. A. ; Arntz Y. ; Didier P. ; Mely Y. ; Klymchenko A. S. 
Switchable
Nile Red-Based Probe for Cholesterol and Lipid Order at the Outer
Leaflet of Biomembranes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 4907 –4916 10.1021/ja100351w .20225874 
Darwich Z. ; Klymchenko A. S. ; Dujardin D. ; Mely Y. 
Imaging Lipid Order
Changes in Endosome Membranes of Live Cells by Using a Nile Red-Based
Membrane Probe . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 8481 –8488 10.1039/C3RA47181K .
Zhu H. ; Fan J. ; Mu H. ; Zhu T. ; Zhang Z. ; Du J. ; Peng X. 
d-PET-controlled “Off-On”
Polarity-Sensitive Probes
for Reporting Local Hydrophilicity Within Lysosomes . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 1 –10 10.1038/srep35627 .28442746 
O’Connell M. J. ; Bachilo S. H. ; Huffman C. B. ; Moore V. C. ; Strano M. S. ; Haroz E. H. ; Rialon K. L. ; Boul P. J. ; Noon W. H. ; Kittrell C. ; et al. Band Gap Fluorescence from Individual Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes . Science 
2002 , 297 , 593 –596 10.1126/science.1072631 .12142535 
Barone P. W. ; Baik S. ; Heller D. A. ; Strano M. S. 
Near-Infrared Optical
Sensors Based on Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Nat. Mater. 
2005 , 4 , 86 –92 10.1038/nmat1276 .15592477 
Roxbury D. ; Jena P. V. ; Williams R. M. ; Enyedi B. ; Niethammer P. ; Marcet S. ; Verhaegen M. ; Blais-Ouellette S. ; Heller D. A. 
Hyperspectral Microscopy of Near-Infrared
Fluorescence
Enables 17-Chirality Carbon Nanotube Imaging . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 1 –6 10.1038/srep14167 .
Larsen B.
A. ; Deria P. ; Holt J. M. ; Stanton I. N. ; Heben M. J. ; Therien M. J. ; Blackburn J. L. 
Effect of Solvent Polarity and Electrophilicity
on Quantum yields and Solvatochromic Shifts of Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotube Photoluminescence . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 12485 –12491 10.1021/ja2114618 .22746552 
Choi J. H. ; Strano M. S. 
Solvatochromism
in Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Appl. Phys.
Lett. 
2007 , 90 , 223114 10.1063/1.2745228 .
Heller D. A. ; Jeng E. S. ; Yeung T. K. ; Martinez B. M. ; Moll A. E. ; Gastala J. B. ; Strano M. S. 
Optical
detection of DNA Conformational
Polymorphism on Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Science 
2006 , 311 , 508 –511 10.1126/science.1120792 .16439657 
Budhathoki-Uprety J. ; Langenbacher R. E. ; Jena P. V. ; Roxbury D. ; Heller D. A. 
A Carbon
Nanotube Optical Sensor Reports Nuclear Entry via a Noncanonical Pathway . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 3875 –3882 10.1021/acsnano.7b00176 .28398031 
Harvey J. D. ; Jena P. V. ; Baker H. A. ; Zerze G. H. ; Williams R. M. ; Galassi T. V. ; Roxbury D. ; Mittal J. ; Heller D. A. 
A Carbon
Nanotube Reporter of microRNA Hybridization Events In Vivo . Nat. Biomed. Eng. 
2017 , 1 , 1 –11 10.1038/s41551-017-0041 .
Richard C. ; Balavoine F. ; Schultz P. ; Ebbesen T. W. ; Mioskowski C. 
Supramolecular
Self-Assembly of Lipid Derivatives on Carbon Nanotubes . Science 
2003 , 300 , 775 –778 10.1126/science.1080848 .12730595 
Chiu C. F. ; Saidi W. A. ; Kagan V. E. ; Star A. 
Defect-Induced Near-Infrared
Photoluminescence of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Treated with Polyunsaturated
Fatty Acids . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 4859 –4865 10.1021/jacs.7b00390 .28288512 
Jena P. V. ; Galassi T. V. ; Roxbury D. ; Heller D. A. 
Progress Toward
Applications of Carbon Nanotube Photoluminescence . ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 
2017 , 6 , M3075 –M3077 10.1149/2.0121706jss .28845362 
Costa P. M. ; Bourgognon M. ; Wang J. T. ; Al-Jamal K. T. 
Functionalised Carbon
Nanotubes: From Intracellular Uptake and Cell-Related Toxicity to
Systemic Brain Delivery . J. Controlled Release 
2016 , 241 , 200 –219 10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.09.033 .
Biju V. 
Chemical Modifications
and Bioconjugate Reactions of Nanomaterials for Sensing, Imaging,
Drug Delivery and Therapy . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 744 –764 10.1039/C3CS60273G .24220322 
Gao Z. ; Varela J. A. ; Groc L. ; Lounis B. ; Cognet L. 
Toward the
Suppression of Cellular Toxicity from Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Biomater. Sci. 
2016 , 4 , 230 –244 10.1039/C5BM00134J .26678092 
Zhu W. ; von dem Bussche A. ; Yi X. ; Qiu Y. ; Wang Z. ; Weston P. ; Hurt R. H. ; Kane A. B. ; Gao H. 
Nanomechanical
Mechanism for Lipid Bilayer Damage Induced by Carbon Nanotubes Confined
in Intracellular Vesicles . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2016 , 113 , 12374 –12379 10.1073/pnas.1605030113 .27791073 
Tu X. ; Manohar S. ; Jagota A. ; Zheng M. 
DNA Sequence Motifs
for Structure-Specific Recognition and Separation of Carbon Nanotubes . Nature 
2009 , 460 , 250 –253 10.1038/nature08116 .19587767 
Orlova E. V. ; Sherman M. B. ; Chiu W. ; Mowri H. ; Smith L. C. ; Gotto A. M. 
Three-Dimensional Structure of Low Density Lipoproteins
by Electron Cryomicroscopy . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
1999 , 96 , 8420 –8425 10.1073/pnas.96.15.8420 .10411890 
Galassi T. V. ; Jena P. V. ; Roxbury D. ; Heller D. A. 
Single Nanotube
Spectral Imaging To Determine Molar Concentrations of Isolated Carbon
Nanotube Species . Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 1073 –1077 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b04091 .28194986 
Jena P. V. ; Safaee M. M. ; Heller D. A. ; Roxbury D. 
DNA-Carbon Nanotube
Complexation Affinity and Photoluminescence Modulation Are Independent . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 21397 –21405 10.1021/acsami.7b05678 .28573867 
Humphrey W. ; Dalke A. ; Schulten K. 
VMD: Visual
Molecular Dynamics . J. Mol. Graphics 
1996 , 14 , 33 –38 10.1016/0263-7855(96)00018-5 .
Sugita Y. ; Okamoto Y. 
Replica-Exchange Molecular
Dynamics Method for Protein
Folding . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
1999 , 314 , 141 –151 10.1016/S0009-2614(99)01123-9 .
Jin S. ; Wijesekara-Kankanange P. ; Boyer P. ; Dahl K. N. ; Islam M. F. 
Length-Dependent
Intracellular Bundling of Single-Wall
Carbon Nanotubes Influences Retention . J. Mater.
Chem. B 
2017 , 5 , 6657 –6665 10.1039/C7TB00735C .
Bhattacharya S. ; Roxbury D. ; Gong X. ; Mukhopadhyay D. ; Jagota A. 
DNA Conjugated SWCNTs
Enter Endothelial Cells via Rac1Mediated Macropinocytosis . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 1826 –1830 10.1021/nl204058u .22375622 
Heller D. A. ; Baik S. ; Eurell T. E. ; Strano M. S. 
Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotube Spectroscopy in Live Cells: Towards Long-Term Labels and
Optical Sensors . Adv. Mater. 
2005 , 17 , 2793 –2799 10.1002/adma.200500477 .
Jin H. ; Heller D. A. ; Strano M. S. 
Single-Particle
Tracking of Endocytosis
and Exocytosis of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes in NIH-3T3 Cells . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 , 1577 –1585 10.1021/nl072969s .18491944 
Cherukuri P. ; Bachilo S. M. ; Litovsky S. H. ; Weisman R. B. 
Near-Infrared Fluorescence
Microscopy of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes in Phagocytic Cells . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 15638 –15639 10.1021/ja0466311 .15571374 
Kilpatrick B. S. ; Eden E. R. ; Hockey L. N. ; Futter C. E. ; Patel S. 
Methods for
Monitoring Lysosomal Morphology . Methods Cell
Biol. 
2015 , 126 , 1 –19 10.1016/bs.mcb.2014.10.018 .25665438 
Han X. G. ; Li Y. L. ; Deng Z. X. 
DNA-Wrapped Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotubes as Rigid Templates for Assembling Linear Gold Nanoparticle
Arrays . Adv. Mater. 
2007 , 19 , 1518 –1522 10.1002/adma.200602861 .
Bandyopadhyay D. ; Cyphersmith A. ; Zapata J. A. ; Kim Y. J. ; Payne C. K. 
Lysosome
Transport as a Function of Lysosome Diameter . PLoS One 
2014 , 9 , 1 –6 10.1371/journal.pone.0086847 .
Pipalia N. H. ; Subramanian K. ; Mao S. ; Balch W. E. ; Maxfield F. R. 
Histone
Deacetylase Inhibitors Correct the Cholesterol Storage Defect in Most
NPC1Mutant Cells . J. Lipid Res. 
2017 , 58 , 695 –708 10.1194/jlr.M072140 .28193631 
Wang X. ; Mansukhani N. D. ; Guiney L. M. ; Lee J.-H. ; Li R. ; Sun B. ; Liao Y.-P. ; Chang C. H. ; Ji Z. ; Xia T. 
Toxicological
Profiling of Highly Purified Metallic and Semiconducting Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes in the Rodent Lung and E. coli . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 6008 –6019 10.1021/acsnano.6b01560 .27159184 
Liscum L. ; Faust J. R. 
The Intracellular Transport of Low Density Lipoprotein-Derived
Cholesterol is Inhibited in Chinese Hamster Ovary Cells Cultured with
3-β-[2-(diethylamino)ethoxy]androst-5-en-17-one . J. Biol. Chem. 
1989 , 264 , 11796 –11806 .2745416 
Lu F. ; Liang Q. ; Abi-Mosleh L. ; Das A. ; de Brabander J. K. ; Goldstein J. L. ; Brown M. S. 
Identification of NPC1 as the Target
of U18666A, an Inhibitor of Lysosomal Cholesterol Export and Ebola
Infection . eLife 
2015 , 4 , 1 –16 10.7554/eLife.12177 .
Rosenbaum A. I. ; Cosner C. C. ; Mariani C. J. ; Maxfield F. R. ; Wiest O. ; Helquist P. 
Thiadiazole Carbamates: Potent Inhibitors of Lysosomal
Acid Lipase and Potential Niemann– Pick Type C Disease Therapeutics . J. Med. Chem. 
2010 , 53 , 5281 –5289 10.1021/jm100499s .20557099 
Sloan H. R. ; Fredrickson D. S. 
Enzyme Deficiency in Cholesteryl Ester Storage Disease . J. Clin. Invest. 
1972 , 51 , 1923 –1926 10.1172/JCI106997 .5032533 
Walkley S. U. ; Vanier M. T. 
Secondary Lipid Accumulation in Lysosomal Disease . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell Res. 
2009 , 1793 , 726 –736 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.11.014 .
Roxbury D. ; Jena P. V. ; Shamay Y. ; Horoszko C. P. ; Heller D. A. 
Cell Membrane
Proteins Modulate the Carbon Nanotube Optical Bandgap via Surface Charge Accumulation . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 499 –506 10.1021/acsnano.5b05438 .26654246 
Halliwell W. H. 
Cationic
Amphiphilic Drug-Induced Phospholipidosis . Toxicol.
Pathol. 
1997 , 25 , 53 –60 10.1177/019262339702500111 .9061852 
Carstea E. D. ; Morris J. A. ; Coleman K. G. ; Loftus S. K. ; Zhang D. ; Cummings C. ; Gu J. ; Rosenfeld M. A. ; Pavan W. J. ; Krizman D. B. ; et al. Niemann-Pick C1 Disease
Gene: Homology to Mediators of Cholesterol Homeostasis . Science 
1997 , 277 , 228 –231 10.1126/science.277.5323.228 .9211849 
Maxfield F. R. ; Tabas I. 
Role of Cholesterol and Lipid Organization
in Disease . Nature 
2005 , 438 , 612 –621 10.1038/nature04399 .16319881 
Linder M. D. ; Uronen R. L. ; Hölttä-Vuori M. ; Van Der
Sluijs P. ; Peränen J. ; Ikonen E. 
Rab8-Dependent Recycling
Promotes Endosomal Cholesterol Removal in Normal and Sphingolipidosis
Cells . Mol. Biol. Cell 
2007 , 18 , 47 –56 10.1091/mbc.E06-07-0575 .17050734 
Rosenbaum A. I. ; Zhang G. ; Warren J. D. ; Maxfield F. R. 
Endocytosis of Beta-Cyclodextrins
is Responsible for Cholesterol Reduction in Niemann-Pick Type C Mutant
Cells . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2010 , 107 , 5477 –5482 10.1073/pnas.0914309107 .20212119 
Prakadan S. M. ; Shalek A. K. ; Weitz D. A. 
Scaling
by Shrinking: Empowering
Single-Cell’omics’ with Microfluidic Devices . Nat. Rev. Genet. 
2017 , 18 , 345 –361 10.1038/nrg.2017.15 .28392571 
Koch A. L. 
The Logarithm
in Biology - Mechanisms Generating the Log-Normal Distribution Exactly . J. Theor. Biol. 
1966 , 12 , 276 –290 10.1016/0022-5193(66)90119-6 .5972197 
Simpson E. H. 
Measurement
of Diversity . Nature 
1949 , 163 , 688 10.1038/163688a0 .
Hunter P. R. ; Gaston M. A. 
Numerical Index of the Discriminatory Ability of Typing
Systems: An Application of Simpson’s Index of Diversity . J. Clin. Microbiol. 
1988 , 26 , 2465 –2466 .3069867 
Kruss S. ; Landry M. P. ; Vander Ende E. ; Lima B. M. ; Reuel N. F. ; Zhang J. ; Nelson J. ; Mu B. ; Hilmer A. ; Strano M. 
Neurotransmitter Detection Using Corona Phase Molecular
Recognition on Fluorescent Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Sensors . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 713 –724 10.1021/ja410433b .24354436 
Pyonteck S. M. ; Akkari L. ; Schuhmacher A. J. ; Bowman R. L. ; Sevenich L. ; Quail D. F. ; Olson O. C. ; Quick M. L. ; Huse J. T. ; Teijeiro V. ; et al. CSF-1R Inhibition Alters Macrophage Polarization
and Blocks Glioma Progression . Nat. Med. 
2013 , 19 , 1264 –1272 10.1038/nm.3337 .24056773 
Akkari L. ; Gocheva V. ; Kester J. C. ; Hunter K. E. ; Quick M. L. ; Sevenich L. ; Wang H. W. ; Peters C. ; Tang L. H. ; Klimstra D. S. ; et al. Distinct
Functions of Macrophage-Derived and
Cancer Cell-Derived Cathepsin Z Combine To Promote Tumor Malignancy via Interactions with the Extracellular Matrix . Genes Dev. 
2014 , 28 , 2134 –2150 10.1101/gad.249599.114 .25274726

