
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.8b01545ArticleQuenching
Pathways in NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ Upconversion
Nanocrystals Rabouw Freddy
T. Prins P. Tim Villanueva-Delgado Pedro Castelijns Marieke Geitenbeek Robin G. Meijerink Andries *Debye Institute for Nanomaterials
Science, Utrecht University, Princetonplein 1, 3584 CC Utrecht, The Netherlands* E-mail: a.meijerink@uu.nl.12 04 2018 22 05 2018 12 5 4812 4823 27 02 2018 12 04 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Lanthanide-doped
upconversion (UC) phosphors absorb low-energy
infrared light and convert it into higher-energy visible light. Despite
over 10 years of development, it has not been possible to synthesize
nanocrystals (NCs) with UC efficiencies on a par with what can be
achieved in bulk materials. To guide the design and realization of
more efficient UC NCs, a better understanding is necessary of the
loss pathways competing with UC. Here we study the excited-state dynamics
of the workhorse UC material β-NaYF4 co-doped with
Yb3+ and Er3+. For each of the energy levels
involved in infrared-to-visible UC, we measure and model the competition
between spontaneous emission, energy transfer between lanthanide ions,
and other decay processes. An important quenching pathway is energy
transfer to high-energy vibrations of solvent and/or ligand molecules
surrounding the NCs, as evidenced by the effect of energy resonances
between electronic transitions of the lanthanide ions and vibrations
of the solvent molecules. We present a microscopic quantitative model
for the quenching dynamics in UC NCs. It takes into account cross-relaxation
at high lanthanide-doping concentration as well as Förster
resonance energy transfer from lanthanide excited states to vibrational
modes of molecules surrounding the UC NCs. Our model thereby provides
insight in the inert-shell thickness required to prevent solvent quenching
in NCs. Overall, the strongest contribution to reduced UC efficiencies
in core–shell NCs comes from quenching of the near-infrared
energy levels (Er3+: 4I11/2 and Yb3+: 2F5/2), which is likely due to vibrational
coupling to OH– defects incorporated in the NCs
during synthesis.

upconversion luminescencenanocrystalsshell
growthlanthanide ionssurface quenchingexcited-state dynamicsdocument-id-old-9nn8b01545document-id-new-14nn-2018-01545bccc-price
==== Body
Upconversion
(UC) materials
are unconventional color-conversion materials that can absorb low-energy
and emit higher-energy photons. Examples include polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons,1,2 specially designed semiconductor-quantum-dot
geometries,3,4 and crystals doped with lanthanide ions.5−7 Of particular interest have been β-NaREF4 nanocrystals
(NCs; with RE = Y, Gd, or Lu) doped with either Er3+ or
Tm3+ and often co-doped with Yb3+ or other lanthanides
to increase absorption or tune the emission wavelength.8−22 Such NCs exhibit narrow-line emissions, and they are photochemically
and colloidally stable, making them ideal for background-free biomedical
imaging. Moreover, the small size of NCs enables their use in nanoscale
designs to enhance the UC luminescence through sensitization13 or plasmon enhancement.23−29 However, the efficiency of UC luminescence is significantly lower
for nanocrystalline doped NaREF4 than for the corresponding
bulk material, because of excited-state quenching by the NC surface
and the environment.10,11,16,19−21,30 The UC efficiency is particularly low in the smallest NCs.11,14,20

Efforts have been made
to improve the low UC luminescence efficiency
of doped NaREF4 NCs. The common strategy to achieve higher
efficiencies is to grow inert nonluminescent shells of undoped NaREF4 (with RE = Y, Gd, or Lu) around the doped upconverting core.11,16 This serves to spatially isolate the active luminescent core from
the NC surface and the environment. While this general concept has
been well established, a quantitative understanding of UC luminescence
quenching in NCs is still lacking. UC in lanthanide-doped crystals
is a complicated process, involving (at least) two absorption events,
multiple energy-migration and energy-transfer steps, and eventually
emission of a high-energy photon. Meanwhile, the efficiency is limited
by undesired competing processes such as cross-relaxation, back-transfer,
nonradiative decay, and, in the case of NCs, quenching by energy transfer
to high-energy vibrations on the surface and/or in the environment
of the NCs.10,11,16,18,22,30 To understand UC luminescence from NCs and minimize
quenching requires detailed and quantitative studies that unravel
the competition between the various processes at play.

Here,
we investigate the quenching mechanisms of the various energy
levels involved in UC in NaYF4 NCs co-doped with Er3+ and Yb3+, a commonly studied nanocrystalline
upconverter showing green and red emissions upon near-infrared excitation.10,13,14,16,18,20,22 The dynamics of the relevant excited states of Er3+ and Yb3+ are measured upon direct excitation
in NCs with and without shell, with various dopant concentrations,
and dispersed in a range of organic solvents with different refractive
index and chemical nature. We observe a pronounced dependence of quenching
on the chemical nature of the solvent of the NCs (aliphatic versus aromatic), pointing to Förster transfer to
high-energy solvent vibrations as an important quenching mechanism.31,32 Solvent quenching affects all energy levels of Er3+ involved
in near-infrared-to-visible UC, but most notably the red-emitting 4F9/2 level. The green emission from the 2H11/2 and 4S3/2 levels is quenched
by cross-relaxation and energy migration at higher Er3+ concentrations, while the red emission is hardly affected. The near-infrared
levels 4I11/2 (Er3+) and 2F5/2 (Yb3+) are quenched by coupling to the
solvent, by coupling to OH-vibrations of hydroxyl ions incorporated
in the crystal structure, and by energy migration to the NC surface.
The efficiencies of all quenching pathways are suppressed if the refractive
index of the solvent is increased, because this enhances the rates
of photon emission but not energy-transfer (i.e., quenching) rates.33,34 We develop an analytical
model for the various quenching pathways, which matches our experimental
results and can predict the emission dynamics and efficiencies for
NCs of different (quasi-)spherical core–shell geometries and
dopant concentrations.

Results
Solvent-Dependent Decay
Dynamics
We study the popular
UC material β-NaYF4 co-doped with Er3+ and Yb3+.5,8 Upon excitation of Yb3+ in the near-infrared absorption band at 980 nm, this material emits
green light at 520 and 540 nm and red light at 660 nm (Figure 1a). The conversion of low-energy
near-infrared photons to higher-energy visible photons is made possible
by successive energy-transfer steps from two (or more) Yb3+ ions to Er3+. Both the green and the red UC luminescence
can arise after two energy-transfer steps followed by partial nonradiative
relaxation (indicated in Figure 1b), although additional pathways involving three energy-transfer
steps have been identified leading to red luminescence.35−37 The energy-transfer processes relevant to UC compete with undesired
processes such as (multi)phonon relaxation and cross-relaxation that
reduce the UC emission. The spectral characteristics of nanocrystalline
β-NaYF4 phosphors with diameters down to sub-10 nm
(refs (20 and 50)) are similar to
those of bulk β-NaYF4, but the emission efficiencies
are significantly lower.10,11,19−21,30 In this work we systematically
study the energy-loss pathways in UC NCs (Figure 1c, Figure S1 and Table S1) that lead to these lower efficiencies,
as a function of the dopant concentration, for core-only and core–shell
geometries and for NCs dispersed in a range of solvents.

Figure 1 (a) UC emission
spectrum of β-NaYF4 nanocrystals
co-doped with 2% Er3+ and 18% Yb3+ dispersed
in cyclohexane, upon laser excitation in the Yb3+: 2F7/2 → 2F5/2 transition
at 980 nm. The nanocrystals emit green photons from the 2H11/2 (520 nm) and 4S3/2 (540 nm)
states and red photons (660 nm) from the 4F9/2 state. (b) Upon excitation of Yb3+ at 980 nm (dark-red
wavy arrows), two consecutive energy-transfer processes (dotted lines)
excite an Er3+ ion to a high excited state. Subsequently,
after one or more nonradiative decay steps (black arrows) Er3+ can emit a visible photon (red or green wavy arrows). Other, more
complicated, sequences of processes also contribute to the population
of visible-emitting states.35−37 (c) Transmission electron micrograph
of the core-only β-NaYF4:0.1% Er3+ nanocrystals
used in this work. Images of other nanocrystal samples and the extracted
size distributions are presented in Figure S1 and Table S1. (d) Schematic of solvent
quenching, where an excited state on a lanthanide center (here, Er3+) doped in a nanocrystal can decay by transferring energy
to high-energy vibrations in the surrounding solvent. (e) The total
rate of solvent quenching by dipole–dipole interaction depends
strongly on the radial position of the lanthanide center in the nanocrystal,
illustrated here for a nanocrystal of 10 nm radius without (red line)
and with (blue line) a 3 nm-thick nonluminescent shell. (f) The range
of solvents used in our experiments below, with different chemical
nature (affecting the solvent-quenching rate; eq 2) and different refractive index (affecting
the radiative decay rate; eq 3).

Previous studies have identified
that the environment of lanthanide-doped
NCs, most notably the solvent, affects luminescence quenching.10,11,18,22,30 It is not always realized that such quenching
is a form of Förster energy transfer, by dipole–dipole
coupling of an electronic transition of a lanthanide dopant to vibrations
of the solvent and ligand molecules (Figure 1d).38 The rate
of energy transfer by dipole–dipole coupling, γET, scales with the inverse sixth power of the separation between the
energy donor (the luminescent center) and the energy acceptor (the
solvent vibration): 1  where r0 and r are the positions
of the donor and acceptor, respectively.
The parameter C is the “energy-transfer strength”
prefactor, the value of which depends on the energy match of transitions
in the lanthanide center to the vibrational energies of the solvent31,32,38 as well as on the oscillator
strengths of the donor and acceptor transitions involved.43 The total solvent-quenching rate ΓQ experienced by a luminescent center is determined by its
dipole–dipole coupling to all solvent vibrations surrounding
the NC, which depends on the diameter of the NC and on the location
of the center inside the NC. If we assume that the NC is spherical
with an outer radius aout, we obtain a
simple expression by integrating eq 1 over all solvent molecules outside the NC: 2  where Vout is
the volume occupied by solvent, r0 = |r0| is the radial position of the Er3+ center, and ρ is the density of solvent vibrations involved
in quenching. Interestingly, the amount of quenching depends only
on the geometry of the NC (outer radius aout and radial position r0 of the dopant)
and on the “quenching density” ρC—the product of the density of vibrations and the energy-transfer
strength; units of volume per time—that describes the interaction
with the solvent. To avoid that the quenching rate ΓQ becomes infinite at the surface of core-only NCs (r0 = aout in eq 2), we assume throughout this article
that the “outer radius” aout (beyond which volume is occupied by solvent) is 0.3 nm larger than
the physical radius of the NC as determined by electron microscopy.
This 0.3 nm separation can be justified if one realizes that this
space of approximately one atom thickness is occupied by species contributing
significantly less to vibrational quenching than the solvent does,
for example, fluoride anions of the host crystal or headgroups of
the ligands (in our experiments, carboxylate head groups of oleate).
The solvent-quenching model could be further fine-tuned, at the cost
of increased complexity, by considering that the NC can be covered
by long-chain organic ligands (in our experiments below, oleic acid)
that occupy most of the volume up to 1–1.5 nm distance from
the NC surface. Here, we approximate the combination of ligand and
solvent as one continuous medium that can be described with a single
quenching density ρC. In Figure 1e we plot the solvent-quenching rate normalized
to the quenching density ΓQ/ρC. We see that the solvent-quenching rate differs by orders of magnitude
between luminescent centers near the surface and those near the center
of a core-only NC (red line). Growing a shell of 3 nm thickness can
suppress the solvent-quenching rate by a factor 2–1000, depending
on the location of a center in the NC (blue line). These pronounced
effects of geometry on the quenching rate are manifestations of the
strong distance dependence of dipole–dipole coupling. Our model
can predict the distribution of solvent quenching rates for any spherical
NC geometry (core-only or core–shell) if the quenching density
ρC of a particular solvent to a particular
dopant’s excited state is known.

In addition to inducing
nonradiative quenching, the solvent—through
its refractive index n—also affects the radiative
decay rate Γrad of dopant centers in NCs:33,34 3  where
Γradbulk is the radiative decay rate in a
bulk sample, and nNC is the refractive
index of the NC material [here, nNC =
1.48 (ref (39))]. This
effect is the same for all luminescent centers inside a NC independent
of their exact location, if the NC is (quasi-)spherical and much smaller
than the emission wavelength. We measured the values of Γradbulk for each
relevant level on a bulk microcrystalline sample (Figure S2). From these reference values we can calculate the
radiative decay rate in any solvent, if we know its refractive index.
Throughout this article we will use tabulated refractive indices in
the visible, neglecting that they are in fact slightly lower (by at
most 0.02 point) in the infrared where the excited states emit (partially).
This translates into an acceptable error of <1% in the calculated
radiative decay rates in NCs. The series of solvents used in our experiments
(Figure 1f) covers
a range of refractive indices from n = 1.375 (hexane)
to n = 1.627 (carbon disulfide). This corresponds
to a 40% variation in radiative decay rate (eq 3). Importantly, however, the solvents are
different not only in terms of refractive index but also chemically.
The chemical nature of the solvent affects its vibrational spectrum
and thereby the dipole–dipole coupling to various Er3+ transitions. We will see below that resonances of the C–H
stretch vibrational energy with transitions on the Er3+ ion affect the strength of solvent quenching. Hence, solvent effects
manifest as changes in the radiative decay of lanthanide dopants in
NCs (through n in eq 3) as well as in nonradiative quenching (through ρC in eq 2).

The total decay rate Γtot of a luminescent center
in a nanocrystal is the sum of the rates of all available decay pathways: 4  where we have written explicitly that the
radiative decay rate Γrad depends on the solvent
refractive index n and that the solvent-quenching
rate ΓQ depends on the radial coordinate r0 of the center in the NC and on the quenching
density ρC of the solvent. For now we assume
that Γrad and ΓQ are the only decay
pathways for the luminescent centers. Assuming that the dopant centers
are homogeneously distributed within the NC (which may in fact be
not exactly true),40 we obtain the expected
decay dynamics of an ensemble of doped NCs by integrating ΓQ over the NC volume: 5  where a and V are the radius and volume of the luminescent
core of the NC, respectively, 6  is the monoexponential
radiative decay component
(eq 3), and 7  is the multiexponential solvent-quenching
component to the decay (eq 2).

As we will see below, the decay dynamics of luminescent
centers
in NCs are accurately described by eq 5 in many cases. In other cases, at higher doping concentrations,
additional decay processes become active. One of these is energy migration,
that is, hopping of the excited-state energy from center to center.
The effect of energy migration on the excited-state dynamics will
become apparent in our experimental data. This is however difficult
to take into account quantitatively with our microscopic model, because
the microscopic rate distributions (e.g., for solvent quenching) are correlated for neighboring ions involved
in energy migration. In this work we will therefore discuss the effects
of energy migration qualitatively. Another process relevant at high
dopant concentrations is cross-relaxation, in which a luminescent
center transfers part of its energy to neighbors. The effect of this
on the excited-state dynamics of the donor center can be taken into
account analytically.41,42 We use that the rate of cross-relaxation
energy transfer by dipole–dipole interaction depends on the
inverse sixth power of the distance rda between a donor center and an acceptor center. Including this pathway
adds a cross-relaxation term ΓX = ∑aCX/rda6 (where prefactor CX describes the “cross-relaxation strength”,
and the summation runs over all nearby acceptor centers) to the total
decay rate of a donor center (eq 4). To consider all possible local electronic environments
of a luminescent center, that is, its separation from nearby acceptor
centers, we have to take into account the complicated crystal structure
of our β-NaYF4 NCs that has two types of cation sites
for rare-earth ions (Y3+ or luminescent dopants), one of
which is only 50% occupied.5 If we assume
a homogeneous dopant distribution and neglect finite-size effects
in the NC,33 then the local electronic
environment of a luminescent center (determining ΓX) is uncorrelated with its radial position (determining ΓQ). Under this assumption, the total decay including solvent
quenching and cross-relaxation can be written as 8  where the multiexponential
factor X(t) in β-NaYF4 NCs reads
as 9  where ϕ is the doping concentration
of acceptor centers, that is, the fraction of nonluminescent host
cations substituted, and the products run over the (next-)nearest-neighbor
shells as determined by the host-crystal structure. This long expression
with four products explicitly considers the two different rare-earth
cation sites in β-NaYF4, in terms of the neighborlist ri,ni (refs (33, 41, and 42)) for like sites and ri*,ni* for unlike sites. In some of our
NCs studied below, cross-relaxation takes place with both Er3+ and Yb3+ dopants as energy acceptors. The total decay
function for this situation becomes 10  where each factor Xi(t) (i = Er, Yb)
is a function as in eq 9 with ϕ = ϕi and CX = CX,i. Here we neglect correlations in the distribution of cross-relaxation
rates to Er3+ neighbors and those to Yb3+ neighbors,
which is justified at relatively low doping concentrations. Such correlations
become important at the highest doping concentrations, because for
any one excited dopant center, the cross-relaxation rates are determined
by the occupation of nearby cation sites, which can each contain (apart
from an inert Y3+ ion) an Yb3+ acceptor, or
an Er3+ acceptor, but not both at the same time.

We note that all nonradiative decay processes considered here—solvent
quenching, cross-relaxation, and energy migration—are manifestations
of Förster resonance energy transfer by dipole–dipole
coupling. For solvent quenching, an excited lanthanide ion in the
NC is the energy donor and a vibrational mode in a solvent molecule
is the energy acceptor, while for cross-relaxation and energy migration
the donor and acceptor are both lanthanide ions. Dipole–dipole
coupling has a strong distance dependence scaling with the donor–acceptor
distance to the inverse sixth power. This, combined with the random
distribution of luminescent dopants in a (nano)crystal, determines
the multiexponential nature of the decay dynamics. The dipole–dipole
coupling rate also depends on the spectral overlap between the donor
transition (i.e., its emission spectrum)
and the acceptor transition (i.e., its absorption spectrum), as we will discuss below. Importantly,
the efficiency of dipole–dipole coupling—the
rate of coupling compared to other decay processes of the donor, such
as radiative decay—depends on the oscillator strength of the
acceptor transition.43 Since f–f
transitions of lanthanide dopants are parity-forbidden, the dipole–dipole
coupling to lanthanide acceptors is weak and therefore short-range
(Å–nm). This is why cross-relaxation and energy migration
are negligible except at higher doping concentrations, when the average
distance between dopants is of the order of a nm or less. Many vibrational
transitions of organic molecules, on the other hand, are dipole-allowed.
As a result, the coupling of a luminescent dopant in a NC to a molecule
of the surrounding solvent can be significant, even if the separations
are as large as 1–10 nm.

Solvent Quenching of the
Visible Emissions
We focus
first on the dynamics of the green-emitting [4S3/2; in thermal equilibrium with 2H11/2 (ref (44)); Figure 2a] and red-emitting (4F9/2; Figure 2b) levels
in NaYF4 NCs doped with 0.1% Er3+. In these
NCs the interactions between Er3+ centers, for example,
cross-relaxation or energy migration, are expected to be negligible
because the average ion–ion separation is large at low dopant
concentrations. The decay dynamics of these levels are multiexponential
(Figure S3), signifying that nonradiative
decay rates vary among the Er3+ centers as expected in
the case of solvent quenching (Figure 1e). As a first simple analysis, we extract the average
excited-state decay rates ⟨Γtot⟩ of
the green-emitting (Figure 2c) and red-emitting (Figure 2d) levels from single-exponential fits, comparing core-only
NCs (filled circles) and core–shell NCs (open circles) in different
solvents (colors) to bulk material (black cross). The decay rates
in core-only and core–shell NCs (circles) are faster than the
decay rate in bulk (cross) for both levels and for all solvents, confirming
the presence of nonradiative quenching pathways in NCs. Indeed, the
energy gap from both the green- and red-emitting level to the next-lower-energy
level is approximately 3000 cm–1 (Figure 2a,b), which can be bridged
by coupling to vibrations in organic molecules, such as the C–H
stretch vibration. From the fitted decay rates ⟨Γtot⟩ and eq 3 we can estimate the average quantum yield η ≈ Γrad/⟨Γtot⟩ of the Er3+ excited states in NCs, as indicated by the gray “iso-quantum-yield”
contours in Figure 2c,d.34 The quantum yields are approximately
55% (75%) for the green-emitting levels in core-only (core–shell)
NCs and 15–40% (30–60%) for the red-emitting level in
core-only (core–shell) NCs. Clearly, the green emission is
quenched less than the red emission. Furthermore, the growth of a
nonluminescent shell suppresses quenching, as expected from Figure 1e.11,19,20

Figure 2 (a) Energy-level
scheme of Er3+ with the green emission
from the 4S3/2 level (in thermal equilibrium
with 2H11/2; ref (44)) indicated as a green arrow and the nonradiative
transition to the 4F9/2 level as a black dashed
arrow. (b) Same for the red emission from the 4F9/2 level and the competing nonradiative transition to the 4I9/2 level. (c) Average excited-state decay rates ⟨Γtot⟩ of the green-emitting level in NaYF4:0.1% Er3+ NCs dispersed in different solvents (different
colors; see Figure 1f), compared to the decay rate in bulk NaYF4:0.1% Er3+ (black cross). Filled circles represent core-only NCs, open
circles core–shell NCs. Gray lines are iso-quantum-yield contours
plotting η ≈ Γrad(n)/⟨Γtot⟩ with Γrad(n) according to eq 3. (d) Same, but for the red-emitting level. (e) The
emission line shapes of the 4S3/2 → 4F9/2 (green) and the 4F9/2 → 4I9/2 (red) transitions of Er3+, which are responsible for nonradiative decay of the green-
and red-emitting levels (see panel a), estimated based on the data
from ref (45). (f)
Infrared absorption spectra of hexane (red), octane (orange), cyclohexane
(yellow), chloroform (green), toluene (cyan), chlorobenzene (blue),
and o-dichlorobenzene (purple), taken from the SDBS
database of the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology (AIST), Japan. Dashed lines indicate the approximate
spectral position of the C-H stretch vibrational energy in aliphatic
(∼2930 cm–1) and aromatic (∼3070 cm–1) molecules. (g) Photoluminescence decay curves of
the red-emitting 4F9/2 level upon direct excitation
in bulk NaYF4:0.1% Er3+ (gray), compared to
core–shell NCs (dark cyan) and core-only NCs (light cyan) of
the same composition dispersed in toluene. The inset shows a zoom-in
of the first 0.3 ms. Solid lines are fits to the solvent-quenching
model (eq 5). (h) Same,
but comparing bulk to NCs dispersed in cyclohexane.

If the Er3+ excited states in NCs underwent
some quenching
mechanism independent of the surrounding solvent, we would observe
decay rates Γtot(n) = Γrad(n) + Γnr (with a constant
nonradiative component Γnr) that steadily increase
with increasing solvent refractive index n. More
precisely, the dependence would be approximately linear for refractive
indices close to the bulk value (from a series expansion of eq 3): 11  if
Γnr is not affected by
the nature of the solvent. For the green-emitting level we observe
this approximately linear increase in decay rate with refractive index
(Figure 2c), but the
decay rate in chloroform (green) is noticeably slower. For the red-emitting
level the trend in decay rate as described by eq 11 is not apparent (Figure 2d). Instead, the decay rates in the aliphatic
solvents [hexane (red), octane (orange), cyclohexane (yellow)] are
nearly a factor of 2 faster than in the other solvents and even faster
than in water.18 In fact the difference
between the organic solvents considered here is so large that quenching
of the red emission in core–shell NCs dispersed in aliphatic
solvents is similar to quenching of core-only NCs in the aromatic
solvents.

We can qualitatively understand this difference in
quenching rate
between aliphatic and aromatic solvents by considering their vibrational
energy spectra. The highest-energy vibrational modes in hydrocarbon
molecules are CH-stretch modes with energies around 3000 cm–1. This nearly matches the energies of the 4S3/2 → 4F9/2 and 4F9/2 → 4I9/2 transitions of Er3+ (Figure 2e),45 which are involved in the nonradiative decay
of the green- and red-emitting levels. Since we interpret solvent
quenching as dipole–dipole coupling between the excited Er3+ ion and solvent vibrations, the coupling strength should
scale with the oscillator strength of the vibrational mode, the oscillator
strength of the relevant Er3+ transition, and its spectral
overlap of the vibrational mode with the Er3+ transition.43 Indeed, the oscillator strength of the 4F9/2 → 4I9/2 transition
is approximately 5× larger than that of the 4S3/2 → 4F9/2 transition [2.79 ×
10–7versus 6.32 × 10–8 (ref (45))], consistent with the 4–10× faster solvent quenching
(depending on the solvent; Figure 2c,d and Figure S3). More
importantly, the significantly stronger quenching of the red emission
in aliphatic solvents than in aromatic solvents is explained by the
energy resonance of the 4F9/2 → 4I9/2 transition with the CH-stretch vibrational
spectra of the solvents (Figure 2f). While the aliphatic solvents (CH-stretch at ∼2930
cm–1) have good spectral overlap with the 4F9/2 → 4I9/2 transition resulting
in strong quenching, the aromatic solvents (CH-stretch at ∼3070
cm–1) have less overlap resulting in weaker quenching.

Based on these clear indications of solvent-related quenching confirming
results from previous studies,10,11,18,22,30 we use the solvent-quenching model introduced above (eq 5) to quantify the quenching behavior
in the different solvents. As illustrative examples, we analyze the
decay dynamics of the red emission from NaYF4:0.1% Er3+ NCs dispersed in aromatic toluene (Figure 2g) and in aliphatic hexane (Figure 2h). Figure
S3 shows the results for other solvents and for the green emission.
We compare core-only NCs (lighter colors) to core–shell NCs
(darker colors) and bulk material (gray). The decay dynamics in NCs
are clearly multiexponential, while those in the bulk material are
not. The solvent-quenching model (solid lines) matches this multiexponential
behavior very well using the quenching density ρC as the only fit parameter. More precisely, the reduced χ2 parameters representing the fit quality are 1.22 ± 0.08
for green emission from core-only NCs, 1.08 ± 0.05 for green
emission in core–shell NCs, 1.56 ± 0.19 for red emission
from core-only NCs, and 1.26 ± 0.16 for red emission in core–shell
NCs (mean ± standard deviation over eight solvents; Figure S3). The solvent-quenching model captures
the effect of shell growth particularly well,11,19,20 as evidenced by the very similar values
for ρC fitted on the core-only and core–shell
dynamics (Figure S3d,h). This means that,
if the quenching density ρC is known for a
particular dopant excited state in a particular solvent, the model
can predict the solvent-quenching behavior for any (quasi-)spherical
core–shell NCs, or even—with adaptations—for
other shapes.46 For example, the model
predicts that a 9 nm inert shell is required to suppress solvent quenching
of the green luminescence from 20 nm-diameter NCs in hexane and achieve
higher than 95% luminescence quantum yield (at low doping concentration,
in the limit of negligible cross-relaxation), while it requires a
20 nm shell to achieve the same for the red luminescence (Figure 5).

Ion–Ion
Interactions at Higher Doping Concentrations
While NCs doped
at low concentrations of 0.1% are ideal to study
the fundamentals of solvent quenching, NCs must be doped at higher
concentrations to achieve optimal UC efficiencies.47 The average dopant–dopant separations are shorter,
thus enhancing the rates and efficiencies of a variety of energy-transfer
processes. These include the various energy-transfer processes that
are necessary to achieve UC, but also undesired energy-loss pathways
such as cross-relaxation and energy migration to the NC surface. The
UC brightness and efficiency are determined by a subtle balance between
the impact of these different energy-transfer processes.

Figure 3a shows the average
decay rate (from a simple single-exponential fit to the dynamics)
of the green emitting level in NCs with different doping concentrations:
0.1% Er3+ (left), 2% Er3+ (middle), and 2% Er3+ + 18% Yb3+ (right). The decay rates increase
significantly going from the low-doped sample to the higher doping
concentrations, both in NCs (colored bars) and in the bulk material
(white line). This is mostly the result of cross-relaxation, which
occurs between dopant centers at typical separations of 1 nm and closer42 and is therefore similar in 20 nm-diameter NCs
to bulk material. However, we also see that the absolute difference
in decay rate between core-only (dark-colored bars) and core–shell
NCs (light-colored bars) increases with increasing Er3+ concentration. This signifies that the surface-related contribution
to the total decay becomes stronger. We ascribe this to energy migration
from Er3+ to Er3+ ion within the NC, which allows
the excited-state energy to reach the NC surface where it is quenched
rapidly by solvent vibrations (Figure 3e). Migration becomes stronger at higher Er3+ concentrations (compare 0.1% Er3+ and 2% Er3+), but its effect on the decay of the green luminescence is minimized
when the energy can no longer reach the surface (compare core-only
and core–shell).

Figure 3 (a) The average decay rate of the green-emitting
level 4S3/2 for core–shell NCs (dark-colored
bars) and
core-only NCs (light-colors bars) with different doping concentrations
(as indicated) and dispersed in different solvents (different colors),
obtained from a single-exponential fit to the decay dynamics. White
horizontal lines indicate the corresponding average decay rate in
the bulk material. (b) Same for the red-emitting level 4F9/2. (c) Possible cross-relaxation pathways from the
green-emitting levels of Er3+ to neighboring Er3+ or Yb3+ ions in the ground state. (d) Same for the red-emitting
level of Er3+, where all of the possible cross-relaxation
pathways exhibit a large energy mismatch between the donor and acceptor
transition. (e) Schematic representation of energy migration (i.e., hopping) among Er3+ ions
to the NC surface. (f) Photoluminescence decay curves of the green
Er3+ emission in core–shell NCs dispersed in toluene,
with doping concentrations of 0.1% Er3+ (black), 2% Er3+ (blue), and 2% Er3+ + 18% Yb3+ (green).
Solid lines are fits to our model including solvent quenching and
cross-relaxation (eqs 8 and 10). The inset shows a zoom-in on the
first 0.2 ms. (g) Same for the green emission from core-only NCs.
(h) Same for the red emission from core-only NCs, doped with 0.1%
Er3+ (black), 2% Er3+ (yellow), and 2% Er3+ + 18% Yb3+ (red).

Surprisingly, the decay dynamics of the red emission do not
accelerate
with increasing dopant concentrations, neither in NaYF4 NCs nor in the bulk material (Figure 3b). Hence, while the green-emitting levels are quenched
by cross-relaxation and energy migration, the red-emitting level is
not. In fact, the quenching seems to decrease for
the highest dopant concentrations, but this is an artifact due to
the slightly larger sizes of our highly doped NCs (21.6 nm versus ∼19 nm diameter for the lower concentrations; Table S1), resulting in reduced solvent quenching.
We can understand why cross-relaxation has a stronger effect on the
green-emitting level than on the red-emitting level from the energy-level
structures of Er3+ and Yb3+ (Figure 3c,d). Near-perfect energy matching
is possible for cross-relaxation from the green-emitting levels of
Er3+ to neighboring Er3+ ions in the ground
state (blue and yellow arrows in Figure 3c), and a small mismatch exists for cross-relaxation
to a neighboring ground-state Yb3+ ion (blue arrows). In
contrast, possible cross-relaxation pathways of the red-emitting level
of Er3+ all exhibit a larger energy mismatch (Figure 3d) and should therefore
be significantly less efficient. This is consistent with previous
studies on bulk NaYF4 crystals doped with Er3+.6

To more quantitatively analyze
the quenching dynamics in NaYF4 NCs doped with high concentrations
of Er3+ and
Yb3+, we fit the photoluminescence decay dynamics to our
full model including radiative decay, solvent quenching, and cross-relaxation
(eq 8 for NCs doped with
only Er3+ or eq 10 for NCs co-doped with Er3+ and Yb3+). Figure 3f shows
the decay of the green emission in core–shell NCs dispersed
in toluene and doped with 0.1% Er3+ (black), 2% Er3+ (blue), or co-doped with 2% Er3+ and 18% Yb3+ (green). In modeling the experimental data, we introduce
only two new fit parameters, the cross-relaxation strengths CEr and CYb, while
keeping the other parameters fixed based on the solvent-quenching
analysis above (see Figure 2). Our model (solid lines) matches the experimental data very
well using fit parameters CEr = 9.8 ×
105 Å6 ms–1 and CYb = 3.2 × 103 Å6 ms–1 (see Figure S4 for fit results for the other solvents). This corresponds to a critical
Förster radius  of 9.2 Å for Er3+–Er3+ cross-relaxation, a typical value
for Förster transfer
to a lanthanide acceptor.42,51 For Er3+–Yb3+ cross-relaxation we obtain 3.5 Å, somewhat
shorter because of the energy mismatch for this pathway (Figure 3c). Alternatively,
we can calculate a rate of 308 ms–1 for cross-relaxation
from the green-emitting levels (2H11/2 and 4S3/2) to a nearest-neighbor Er3+ ion
or 1.0 ms–1 to a nearest-neighbor Yb3+ ion, compared to a radiative decay rate of 1.6 ms–1 for NCs in toluene. Figure S5 confirms
that quenching of the green emission at high Er3+ concentration
is mainly due to cross-relaxation, not for example energy migration
to the surface,21 because we can perfectly
reproduce the experimental decay curves from bulk NaYF4 doped with high Er3+ concentration assuming only radiative
decay and cross-relaxation, with all parameters fixed. This also confirms
that the distribution of donor–acceptor distances, which determines
the cross-relaxation rates, in our NCs is similar to bulk material.
Hence, if our NCs show deviations from a statistical distribution
of dopant ions as reported by Dong et al.,40 these are not strong enough to affect the interactions
between dopants significantly.

The effect of concentration quenching
due to energy migration becomes
apparent from the green emission dynamics from core-only NCs (Figure 3g). Our model, using
the fit parameters for solvent quenching and cross-relaxation we have
determined before, matches the emission dynamics shortly after the
laser pulse well (inset). At later times (t >
0.2
ms) the experimental decay from NCs with high Er3+ doping
(blue and green) is clearly faster than the model predicts. This is
the result of energy migration, which provides a decay pathway for
the excited Er3+ dopants in the NC center (Figure 3e) that would otherwise decay
slowly. Energy migration from Er3+ to Er3+ can
occur also in core–shell NCs. However, the effect on the emission
dynamics is less significant (Figure 3f), because the undoped shell prevents migration to
the NC surface. This means that our model of solvent quenching plus
cross-relaxation can accurately predict the dynamics and quantum yield
of green Er3+ emission at high dopant concentrations in
core–shell NCs, but will overestimate the green-emission quantum
yield in core-only NCs. Modeling the effect of energy migration quantitatively
is beyond the scope of this article, but can be an interesting follow-up
work.

The decay dynamics of the red emission from core-only
NCs at high
dopant concentrations (Figure 3h) are accurately predicted by the solvent-quenching model
(eq 5; quenching density
ρC fixed) without introducing cross-relaxation
as an additional decay pathway. A small deviation between experiment
and model at late times indicates that some concentration quenching
and energy migration takes place in the red (i.e., among 4F9/2 levels), but weaker
than in the green (i.e., among 2H11/2 and 4S3/2 levels).
This modeling of the red emission dynamics is consistent with our
earlier conclusion that the red emission is hardly affected by cross-relaxation
or energy migration.

Quenching of the Infrared Emissions
We now turn our
attention to the near-infrared energy levels of Er3+ (4I11/2) and Yb3+ (2F5/2). Figure 4a shows
the average decay rate (from a simple single-exponential fit) of the
near-infrared emission (∼1000 nm) from the Er3+4I11/2 level in NCs doped with 2% Er3+. The decay rates, depending on the solvent, are approximately 1
ms–1 for core–shell NCs (open circles) and
6 ms–1 for core-only NCs (filled circles), compared
to 0.13 ms–1 in the bulk material (at 0.1% Er3+; Figure S2). This means that
the 4I11/2 level is strongly quenched in NCs,
to ∼10% quantum yield for core–shell NCs and ∼2%
quantum yield for core-only NCs. Quenching by cross-relaxation to
neighboring Er3+ ions can be excluded, because the energy-level
structure of Er3+ makes energy-conserving cross-relaxation
pathways impossible (see also Figure S6). The quenching of core-only NCs is somewhat dependent on the chemical
nature of the solvent, with the aliphatic solvents showing slightly
faster decay rates and chloroform showing a slower decay rate. However,
for core–shell NCs the linear refractive index dependence of
decay rates indicates a solvent-independent nonradiative component
(eq 11). Moreover, the
solvent-quenching model fails to reproduce the decay dynamics of the
Er3+ near-infrared emission in core-only and core–shell
NCs with a single value for the quenching density (Figure 4b). We propose therefore that
the major contributor to quenching of the near-infrared-emitting Er3+ level, especially in core–shell structures, is energy
transfer to OH-vibrations. Indeed, the vibrational energy of approximately
3500 cm–1 precisely matches the 4I11/2–4I13/2 energy gap, thus explaining
why quenching is strong. OH– ions likely substitute
some native F– sites of the NC during the synthesis,
where NaOH is used as a Na+ source. Indeed, preventing
the inclusion of oxygen in NaYF4 crystals is notoriously
difficult.5 New synthesis procedures20 using Na-oleate instead of NaOH as Na+ source can potentially prevent this and thus suppress quenching
of the Er3+4I11/2 level.

Figure 4 (a) Average
decay rates ⟨Γtot⟩ of
the near-infrared-emitting 4I11/2 level of Er3+ in core-only NCs (filled circles) and core–shell
NaYF4 NCs (open circles) doped with 2% Er3+ and
dispersed in different solvents, as determined from single-exponential
fits. Gray lines are iso-quantum-yield contours plotting η ≈
Γrad(n)/⟨Γtot⟩, based on the bulk decay rate (black cross). (b) Photoluminescence
decay curves of the near-infrared emission from core-only (blue) and
core–shell (red) NaYF4:2% Er3+ NCs dispersed
in toluene. Inset is a zoom-in. Solid lines show an attempt to fit
our solvent-quenching model (eq 5) to the experiments using one value for ρC. (c) Same as in (a), but for the 2F5/2 level
of Yb3+. Filled symbols represent core-only NCs, open symbols
core–shell NCs. The NCs have dopant concentrations of 0.1%
Yb3+ (squares), 18% Yb3+ (triangles), or 2%
Er3+ plus 18% Yb3+(diamonds). The Er3+ and Yb3+ emissions cannot be spectrally distinguished
for the co-doped NCs, so the recorded signal will contain contributions
from both. The iso-quantum-yield contours are based on the bulk decay
rate of Yb3+ (black cross). (d) A cartoon of rapid energy
transfer and energy back-transfer between Er3+ and Yb3+ centers. (e) Photoluminescence decay curves of the near-infrared
Yb3+ emission in NCs doped with 0.1% Yb3+ (red),
18% Yb3+ (green), or co-doped with 2% Er3+ and
18% Yb3+ (blue). The signal recorded from the co-doped
NCs consists for a small part of 4I11/2 emission
from Er3+ ions. This constitutes an estimated <5% of
the total emission, based on the elemental ratio 2/18 and the ratio
of radiative decay rates (Figure S2).

Figure 4c shows
the average decay rate of the near-infrared emission from Yb3+ in NCs doped with various dopant concentrations, comparing core-only
to core–shell NCs. NCs doped with 0.1% Yb3+, with
either core-only or core–shell geometry, show mainly radiative
decay with a rate close to that in the bulk material. We conclude
from this that solvent quenching by dipole–dipole coupling
is negligible for the 2F5/2 excited state, and
we can therefore not use the solvent-quenching model. This was to
be expected, because Yb3+ is effectively a two-level system
with an energy gap of approximately 10,000 cm–1,
that is, over three times the highest vibrational energy in hydrocarbon
molecules. At higher doping concentrations the Yb3+ decay
is faster and strongly dependent on the NC geometry (core-only versus core–shell). Clearly, the Yb3+ luminescence
is quenched by some pathway involving the NC surface that becomes
more efficient at higher doping concentration. Undercoordinated Yb3+ centers at the NC surface could be possible quenching sites,
explaining the strong concentration dependence of quenching (compare
core-only NCs with 0.1% and 18% Yb3+). Higher Yb3+ concentrations would simultaneously increase the number of such
defect sites per NC and enable energy migration toward them. Co-doping
Er3+ and Yb3+ is likely to lead to rapid energy
transfer and energy back-transfer between the nearly resonant Yb3+:2F5/2 and Er3+:4I11/2 levels (Figure 4d). As a result, the effective energy migration is
enhanced, and the strong quenching pathways of Er3+ (likely
by coupling to OH-vibrations; see above) become available to the Yb3+ excited state. This explains why the decay rate of near-infrared
excited states in NCs co-doped with 2% Er3+ plus 18% Yb3+ is enhanced by a factor 2 compared to those doped with only
18% Yb3+ (Figure 4c). The luminescence decay curves of the near-infrared emissions
at high dopant concentrations are close to single-exponential (Figure 4e). This confirms
that fast migration averages out the inhomogeneities in decay pathways
between the luminescent centers (e.g., those near the NC surface versus those in the
center), resulting in one “effective” decay rate for
all centers.43

Discussion
In Figure 5 we summarize the quantum yields of the various
emitting levels involved in UC by the Er3+–Yb3+ couple in NaYF4 NCs, as a function of shell thickness,
doping concentration, and solvent. The data points represent experimental
quantum yields determined by integrating the experimental photoluminescence
decay curves:34 12  where I(0) is the photoluminescence
intensity at t = 0 and Γrad is the
radiative decay rate of the emitting level, estimated from the decay
rate in bulk NaYF4 (Figure S2) and correcting for solvent refractive index (eq 3). Similarly, the lines are predictions of
our model including solvent quenching and cross-relaxation, obtained
by integrating the theoretical decay curves (eq 5 or 10) for UC NCs with
a core diameter of 20 nm. The model reproduces the increase in quantum
yield with increasing shell thickness (open versus filled symbols) and with increasing solvent refractive index [from
hexane (red) to chlorobenzene (blue) to carbon disulfide (gray)].
It predicts that, because of strong solvent quenching, the quantum
yield of the red luminescence can be further increased with even thicker
shells than we used in the experiments presented here (requiring up
to 20 nm thickness for 95% luminescence quantum yield, depending on
the solvent). For the green Er3+ emission, our model reproduces
the dependence on dopant concentration [0.1% Er3+ (circles) versus 2% Er3+ plus 18% Yb3+ (squares)].
The red-emission quantum yield does not show a significant dependence
on doping concentration, because it is not quenched by cross-relaxation
or energy migration. On the other hand, strong quenching due to cross-relaxation
causes the quantum yield of the green emission in high-doping NCs
to saturate at approximately 20% for shells >3 nm. Qualitatively,
it is clear that the near-infrared Yb3+ emission becomes
more efficient with increasing shell thickness, with increasing solvent
refractive index, and with lower doping concentration. However, we
cannot model this quantitatively because this emission is quenched
by other mechanisms than dipole–dipole coupling to solvent
vibrations.

Figure 5 (a–c) The quantum yields of the various emitting levels
in NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ UC NCs as a function
of shell thickness. We consider (a) the green Er3+ emission
from the 4S3/2 level, (b) the red Er3+ emission from the 4F9/2 level, and (c) near-infrared
Yb3+ emission from the 2F5/2 level.
Data points are obtained by integrating experimental photoluminescence
decay curves (eq 12)
from core-only NCs (filled symbols) or core–shell NCs (open
symbols). We compare NCs dispersed in hexane (red), chlorobenzene
(blue), and carbon disulfide (gray) and NCs doped with low concentration
of the active center (0.1%; circles) to NCs co-doped with 2% Er3+ and 18% Yb3+ (squares). Lines are predictions
from our solvent-quenching model for the green- and red-emitting levels
at low doping (solid lines) and high doping (dashed lines; only distinct
for the green emission). (d) Simplified model of UC with a ground
state (0), an intermediate excited state (NIR), and a highest excited
state (VIS). Arrows indicate excitation, decay, and energy-transfer
processes.

To get an idea of what our results
imply for the efficiency of
UC luminescence from NaYF4 NCs, we consider a simplified
three-level model for the UC process (Figure 5d).48 In reality
Er3+–Yb3+-based UC is of course much
more complex, involving more energy levels and multiple energy-transfer
pathways depending on excitation power.49 Our simplified model consists of a ground state ‘0’,
a first excited state “NIR” in the near-infrared, and
a second excited state “VIS” that can emit visible photons.
Excitation into the intermediate level and energy-transfer UC to the
highest excited state, with rate constants Γexc and
ΓUC, respectively, in combination with radiative
and nonradiative decay of the states NIR and VIS lead to the following
set of rate equations: 13   14  where NNIR and NVIS are the populations in the intermediate
and in the highest excited state, and Γitot denotes the
total decay rate (radiative + nonradiative) of state i. The visible UC luminescence is proportional to IUC ∝ ΓVISradNVIS. Solving
the rate equations for steady-state conditions yields for the UC luminescence
to second order in Γexc/ΓNIRtot, that is, in the limit of
weak excitation, that 15  We see that the UC intensity is quadratically
dependent on the quantum yield ηNIR of the intermediate
near-infrared-emitting level and linearly on the quantum yield ηVIS of the highest visible-emitting level. We thus conclude
that the major contribution to low UC efficiencies in NCs compared
to bulk material10,11,19,20 comes from losses in the near-infrared,
in line with the interpretation of Hossan et al.,49 not only because the near-infrared-emitting
levels are quenched strongly at high doping concentrations (Figure 5c) but also because
losses in the infrared affect the overall UC intensity more strongly
than losses in the visible. Shell growth improves the quantum yields
in the near-infrared at high doping concentration by as much as a
factor ∼10 in our experiments (Figure 5c), which translates into a ∼100 increase
in UC intensity according to eq 15. Additionally, the shell improves the UC intensity
further by a smaller factor ∼2 by increasing the quantum yield
in the visible (depending on the color considered and on the solvent; Figure 5a,b). The beneficial
effect of shell growth on the UC intensities thus comes mainly from
the inhibition of quenching in the near-infrared. We ascribe residual
quenching in the infrared in core–shell NCs with a 3 nm shell
to coupling of the 4I11/2 level of Er3+ to OH-vibrations of embedded hydroxide ions, which can potentially
be prevented with improved synthesis procedures that avoid hydroxides
and water.20 The Yb3+2F5/2 level is indirectly quenched by the same pathway, because
at high doping concentrations the Yb3+2F5/2 and
Er3+4I11/2 levels rapidly exchange energy by
transfer and back-transfer. Quenching of the red-emitting 4F9/2 level of Er3+ is due to solvent quenching
and can be further suppressed with thicker shells (solid lines in Figure 5b) than the 3 nm
we consider here or by excluding high-energy vibrations in the environment.
Quenching of the green-emitting 4S3/2 and 2H11/2 levels at high doping concentration relevant
to UC is mainly due to cross-relaxation to Er3+ neighbors
(blue and yellow pathways in Figure 3c) and cannot be avoided by growing thicker shells.
Indeed, also bulk material suffers from this loss pathway (Figure S5).6

Our systematic analysis of the decay dynamics of the various levels
involved in Er3+–Yb3+-based UC provides
important insights into the quenching pathways relevant to UC. However,
many additional effects have to be considered for a full quantitative
understanding of UC under all experimental conditions. For example,
some studies have proposed complex population pathways for the red-emitting
level, involving multiple multiphonon and/or energy-transfer processes.35−37 Moreover, at high excitation powers the state populations can saturate,
and levels higher in energy than the green- or red-emitting ones become
involved in the energy-transfer and cross-relaxation pathways.15,50 It is also important to consider that cross-relaxation and nonradiative
recombination steps may not necessarily lead to irreversible energy
loss, but the energy may be used in a next energy-transfer UC step.
Further, the quantum yields of near-infrared and visible emission
of a particular Er3+ center may be correlated, for example,
if it is located near the NC surface.49 This and other variations of and correlations between the rates
of various UC steps can only be taken into account fully with a microscopic
theoretical model that considers individual luminescent centers (e.g., Er3+ and Yb3+) explicitly,51 as an alternative to the
more common mean-field models.35,52

Conclusion
In
summary, we have presented a detailed study on the excited-state
dynamics in NaYF4 upconversion nanocrystals co-doped with
Er3+ and Yb3+. By systematically varying important
parameters such as doping concentration and the nature of the solvent,
we were able to identify quenching pathways and energy-transfer processes
responsible for the reduced upconversion efficiency in nanocrystals.
A microscopic model was developed to provide quantitative insight
in the contribution of quenching by molecular vibrations (ligands,
solvent) and cross-relaxation processes. For the green and red Er3+ emission, the model accurately reproduces the observed decay
dynamics and also demonstrates how the solvent quenching strength
depends on resonances between solvent vibrational modes and electronic
transitions on the Er3+ ion. Growing an undoped shell around
the upconversion core reduces solvent quenching, and with the model
the shell thickness required for a near-complete suppression of solvent
quenching can be determined. For the near-infrared emission, the agreement
between the observed excited-state dynamics and our model is not satisfactory.
The systematic deviation indicates the presence of an additional quenching
process. Based on the resonance of the O-H stretch vibrational energy
and a transition on Er3+ for the IR emitting level, we
propose that OH– incorporated on F– sites in NaYF4 nanocrystals is responsible. For core–shell
nanocrystals, the most significant improvement in upconversion efficiency
can be achieved by suppressing quenching of the near-infrared-emitting
level which may be realized by alternative synthesis strategies that
prevent incorporation of OH– in the NaYF4 lattice.

Methods
Nanocrystal Synthesis
The NaYF4 core nanocrystals
(NCs) doped with Er3+ and/or Yb3+ were synthesized
following the procedure from ref (53) with modifications based on ref (54). A mixture of REAc3 (4 mmol; with RE = Y, Er, Yb in the desired ratio) in oleic
acid (24 mL) and 1-octadecene (68 mL) was degassed at 120 °C
under vacuum for 90 min and then allowed to cool down to room temperature
under nitrogen atmosphere. A solution of NaOH (10 mmol) and NH4F (16 mmol) in methanol (40 mL) was injected into the reaction
mixture under nitrogen, which was then stirred overnight at room temperature.
Next, the methanol was removed by evaporation at 100 °C under
vacuum for 30 min. The reaction mixture was then quickly heated to
300 °C for 110 min under nitrogen atmosphere while stirring,
during which the NaYF4 NCs form. After cooling down, the
NCs were washed three times by precipitation with ethanol, centrifugation,
and redispersing them in cyclohexane. In the second to last washing
step, a mixture of cyclohexane (12 mL) and oleic acid (12 mL) was
used to redisperse the NCs to increase ligand coverage of the surface
and improve the colloidal stability. The final product was dispersed
in approximately 12 mL of cyclohexane.

Core–shell NCs
were synthesized by growing a nonluminescent NaYF4 shell
around (co)doped cores using the method of ref (54). A solution of YAc3 (1.5 mmol) in oleic acid (9 mL) and 1-octadecene (25.5 mL)
was degassed at 120 °C under vacuum for 60 min. The temperature
was then decreased to 80 °C under nitrogen, and 5.5 nmol of core
particles was added (estimated from transmission electron microscopy
and the dry weight of the cyclohexane stock dispersion). Cyclohexane
was removed at 100 °C under vacuum. The reaction mixture was
then allowed to cool down to room temperature, a solution of NaOH
(3.75 mmol) and NH4F (6 mmol) in methanol (15 mL) was added,
and the mixture was stirred overnight. Next, methanol was evaporated
at 100 °C under vacuum for 10 min. The reaction mixture was then
quickly heated to 300 °C under nitrogen for 120 min before cooling
down to room temperature. The NCs were washed three times by precipitation
with ethanol, centrifugation, and redispersing them in cyclohexane.
In the second to last washing step, a mixture of cyclohexane (3 mL)
and oleic acid (3 mL) was used to redisperse the NCs to increase ligand
coverage of the surface and improve the colloidal stability. The final
product was dispersed in approximately 1.7 mL of cyclohexane.

Microcrystalline powders of (co)doped β-NaYF4 were
prepared as described in ref (5).

Spectroscopic Experiments
Photoluminescence
decay dynamics
of the various Er3+ and Yb3+ emissions were
recorded using an Edinburgh Instruments FLS920 fluorescence spectrometer.
The samples were excited with 10 ns pulses (20 Hz) from a color-tunable
optical parametric oscillator (OPO) system (Opotek HE 355 II) pumped
by the third harmonic of a Nd:YAG laser. The luminescence was detected
with a Hamamatsu H74220–60 photomultiplier tube for visible
wavelength or with a N2-cooled R5507-73 photomultiplier
tube for the near-infrared. To measure the decay dynamics of a certain
energy level, we tuned the excitation laser on the same level but
a few nm blue-shifted from the detection wavelength, except for the
green emission where we excited in the 2H11/2 level and detected emission from the 4S3/2 level. These levels are thermally coupled and show the same decay
dynamics.44 To minimize reabsorption of
emitted light, the NCs were dispersed in an organic solvent at low
concentration, while the microcrystalline powders were diluted with
white BaSO4 powder, typically to 1% w/w or lower.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.8b01545. Tranmission electron
microscopy of the upconversion
nanocrystals, photoluminescence decay of bulk material, and a complete
data set and modeling of excited-state decay dynamics of the visible-emitting
levels (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn8b01545_si_001.pdf

 The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The work
was supported by The Netherlands Center for Multiscale
Catalytic Energy Conversion (MCEC), an NWO Gravitation programme funded
by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science of the government
of The Netherlands. F.T.R. acknowledges financial support from The
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research NWO (VENI grant number
722.017.002). P.V.-D. acknowledges financial support from the Swiss
National Science Foundation SNSF (grant number P2BEP2_172238). We
are grateful to R. Brechbühler for critical reading of the
manuscript.
==== Refs
References
Cao X. ; Hu B. ; Zhang P. 
High Upconversion
Efficiency from Hetero Triplet–Triplet
Annihilation in Multiacceptor Systems . J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 
2013 , 4 , 2334 –2338 10.1021/jz401213w .
Wu M. ; Congreve D. N. ; Wilson M. W. B. ; Jean J. ; Geva N. ; Welborn M. ; Van Voorhis T. ; Bulović V. ; Bawendi M. G. ; Baldo M. A. 
Solid-State Infrared-to-Visible
Upconversion
Sensitized by Colloidal Nanocrystals . Nat. Photonics 
2016 , 10 , 31 –34 10.1038/nphoton.2015.226 .
Deutsch Z. ; Neeman L. ; Oron D. 
Luminescence
Upconversion in Colloidal
Double Quantum Dots . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2014 , 8 , 649 –653 10.1038/nnano.2013.146 .
Makarov N. S. ; Lin Q. ; Pietryga J. M. ; Robel I. ; Klimov V. I. 
Auger Up-Conversion
of Low-Intensity Infrared Light in Engineered Quantum Dots . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 10829 –10841 10.1021/acsnano.6b04928 .27936587 
Krämer K. W. ; Biner D. ; Frei G. ; Güdel H. U. ; Hehlen M. P. ; Lüthi S. R. 
Hexagonal Sodium Yttrium Fluoride
Based Green and Blue Emitting Upconversion Phosphors . Chem. Mater. 
2004 , 16 , 1244 –1251 10.1021/cm031124o .
Suyver J. F. ; Grimm J. ; van Veen M. K. ; Biner D. ; Krämer K. W. ; Güdel H. U. 
Upconversion Spectroscopy and Properties of NaYF4 Doped with Er3+, Tm3+ and/or Yb3+ . J. Lumin. 
2006 , 117 , 1 –12 10.1016/j.jlumin.2005.03.011 .
Martín-Rodríguez R. ; Fischer S. ; Ivaturi A. ; Froehlich B. ; Krämer K. W. ; Goldschmidt J. C. ; Richards B. S. ; Meijerink A. 
Highly Efficient
IR to NIR Upconversion in Gd2O2S:Er3+ for Photovoltaic Applications . Chem. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 1912 –1921 10.1021/cm4005745 .
Heer S. ; Kömpe K. ; Güdel H.-U. ; Haase M. 
Highly Efficient Multicolour
Upconversion Emission in Transparent Colloids of Lanthanide-Doped
NaYF4 Nanocrystals . Adv. Mater. 
2004 , 16 , 2102 –2105 10.1002/adma.200400772 .
Boyer J.-C. ; Vetrone F. ; Cuccia L. A. ; Capobianco J. A. 
Synthesis
of Colloidal Upconverting NaYF4 Nanocrystals Doped with
Er3+, Yb3+ and Tm3+, Yb3+via Thermal Decomposition of Lanthanide Trifluoroacetate
Precursors . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 7444 –7445 10.1021/ja061848b .16756290 
Boyer J.-C. ; Manseau M.-P. ; Murray J. I. ; van Veggel F. C. J. M. 
Surface
Modification of Upconverting NaYF4 Nanoparticles with PEG–Phosphate
Ligands for NIR (800 nm) Biolabeling within the Biological Window . Langmuir 
2010 , 26 , 1157 –1164 10.1021/la902260j .19810725 
Wang F. ; Wang J. ; Liu X. 
Direct Evidence of a Surface Quenching
Effect on Size-Dependent Luminescence of Upconversion Nanoparticles . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2010 , 49 , 7456 –7460 10.1002/anie.201003959 .
Wang F. ; Deng R. ; Wang J. ; Wang Q. ; Han Y. ; Zhu H. ; Chen X. ; Liu X. 
Tuning Upconversion through Energy
Migration in Core–Shell Nanoparticles . Nat. Mater. 
2011 , 10 , 968 –973 10.1038/nmat3149 .22019945 
Zou W. ; Visser C. ; Maduro J. A. ; Pshenichnikov M. S. ; Hummelen J. C. 
Broadband Dye-Sensitized Upconversion
of Near-Infrared
Light . Nat. Photonics 
2012 , 6 , 560 –564 10.1038/nphoton.2012.158 .
Zhao J. ; Lu Z. ; Yin Y. ; McRae C. ; Piper J. A. ; Dawes J. M. ; Jin D. ; Goldys E. M. 
Upconversion Luminescence with Tunable Lifetime in
NaYF4:Yb,Er Nanocrystals: Role of Nanocrystal Size . Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 944 –952 10.1039/C2NR32482B .23223581 
Zhao J. ; Jin D. ; Schartner E. P. ; Lu Y. ; Liu Y. ; Zvyagin A. V. ; Zhang L. ; Dawes J. M. ; Xi P. ; Piper J. A. ; Goldys E. M. ; Monro T. M. 
Single-Nanocrystal Sensitivity Achieved
by Enhanced Upconversion Luminescence . Nat.
Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 8 , 729 –734 10.1038/nnano.2013.171 .23995455 
Chen D. ; Huang P. 
Highly Intense Upconversion Luminescence in Yb/Er:NaGdF4 @NaYF4 Core–Shell Nanocrystals with Complete Shell
Enclosure of the Core . Dalton Trans. 
2014 , 43 , 11299 –11304 10.1039/c4dt01237b .24945114 
Liu Y. ; Zhao J. ; Zhang R. ; Liu Y. ; Liu D. ; Goldys E. M. ; Yang X. ; Xi P. ; Sunna A. ; Lu J. ; Shi Y. ; Leif R. C. ; Huo Y. ; Shen J. ; Piper J. A. ; Robinson J. P. ; Jin D. 
Tunable Lifetime
Multiplexing
Using Luminescent Nanocrystals . Nat. Photonics 
2014 , 8 , 32 –36 10.1038/nphoton.2013.322 .
Arppe R. ; Hyppänen I. ; Perälä N. ; Peltomaa R. ; Kaiser M. ; Würth C. ; Christ S. ; Resch-Genger U. ; Schäferling M. ; Soukka T. 
Quenching of the Upconversion Luminescence
of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ and NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ Nanophosphors by Water: the Role
of the Sensitizer Yb3+ in Non-Radiative Relaxation . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 11746 –11757 10.1039/C5NR02100F .26104183 
Fischer S. ; Johnson N. J. J. ; Pichaandi J. ; Goldschmidt J. C. ; van Veggel F. C. J. M. 
Upconverting Core–Shell Nanocrystals with High
Quantum Yield under Low Irradiance: On the Role of Isotropic and Thick
Shells . J. Appl. Phys. 
2015 , 118 , 193105 10.1063/1.4936119 .
Rinkel T. ; Raj A. N. ; Dühnen S. ; Haase M. 
Synthesis of 10 nm
β-NaYF4:Yb,Er/NaYF4 Core/Shell Upconversion Nanocrystals
with 5 nm Particle Cores . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 1164 –1167 10.1002/anie.201508838 .
Johnson N. J. J. ; He S. ; Diao S. ; Chan E. M. ; Dai H. ; Almutairi A. 
Direct Evidence for Coupled Surface and Concentration
Quenching Dynamics in Lanthanide-Doped Nanocrystals . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 3275 –3282 10.1021/jacs.7b00223 .28169535 
Hyppänen I. ; Höysniemi N. ; Arppe R. ; Schäferling M. ; Soukka T. 
Environmental Impact on the Excitation Path of the
Red Upconversion Emission of Nanocrystalline NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2017 , 121 , 6924 –6929 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b01019 .
Schietinger S. ; Aichele T. ; Wang H.-Q. ; Nann T. ; Benson O. 
Plasmon-Enhanced
Upconversion in Single NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ Codoped Nanocrystals . Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 134 –138 10.1021/nl903046r .20020691 
Han S. ; Deng R. ; Xie X. ; Liu X. 
Enhancing Luminescence
in Lanthanide-Doped Upconversion Nanoparticles . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2014 , 53 , 11702 –11715 10.1002/anie.201403408 .
Sun Q.-C. ; Mundoor H. ; Ribot J. C. ; Singh V. ; Smalyukh I. I. ; Nagpal P. 
Plasmon-Enhanced Energy Transfer for Improved Upconversion
of Infrared Radiation in Doped-Lanthanide Nanocrystals . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 101 –106 10.1021/nl403383w .24279776 
Fischer S. ; Kumar D. ; Hallermann F. ; von Plessen G. ; Goldschmidt J. C. 
Enhanced Upconversion Quantum Yield near Spherical
Gold Nanoparticles – a Comprehensive Simulation Based Analysis . Opt. Express 
2016 , 24 , A460 –A475 10.1364/OE.24.00A460 .27136867 
Yin Z. ; Li H. ; Xu W. ; Cui S. ; Zhou D. ; Chen X. ; Zhu Y. ; Qin G. ; Song H. 
Local Field Modulation Induced Three-Order
Upconversion Enhancement: Combining Surface Plasmon Effect and Photonic
Crystal Effect . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 2518 –2525 10.1002/adma.201502943 .26833556 
Zhou D. ; Liu D. ; Xu W. ; Yin Z. ; Chen X. ; Zhou P. ; Cui S. ; Chen Z. ; Song H. 
Observation of Considerable Upconversion
Enhancement Induced by Cu2–xS Plasmon
Nanoparticles . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 5169 –5179 10.1021/acsnano.6b00649 .27149281 
Xu W. ; Chen X. ; Song H. 
Upconversion
Manipulation by Local
Electromagnetic Field . Nano Today 
2017 , 17 , 54 –58 10.1016/j.nantod.2017.10.011 .
Stouwdam J. W. ; Hebbink G. A. ; Huskens J. ; van Veggel F. C. J. M. 
Lanthanide-Doped
Nanoparticles with Excellent Luminescent Properties in Organic Media . Chem. Mater. 
2003 , 15 , 4604 –4616 10.1021/cm034495d .
Guyot-Sionnest P. ; Wehrenberg B. ; Yu D. 
Intraband Relaxation in CdSe Nanocrystals
and the Strong Influence of the Surface Ligands . J. Chem. Phys. 
2005 , 123 , 074709 10.1063/1.2004818 .16229612 
Aharoni A. ; Oron D. ; Banin U. ; Rabani E. ; Jortner J. 
Long-Range
Electronic-to-Vibrational Energy Transfer from Nanocrystals to Their
Surrounding Matrix Environment . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2008 , 100 , 057404 10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.057404 .18352428 
Rabouw F. T. ; Den Hartog S. A. ; Senden T. ; Meijerink A. 
Photonic Effects
on the Förster Resonance Energy Transfer Efficiency . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 3610 10.1038/ncomms4610 .24694758 
Senden T. ; Rabouw F. T. ; Meijerink A. 
Photonic Effects
on the Radiative
Decay Rate and Luminescence Quantum Yield of Doped Nanocrystals . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 1801 –1808 10.1021/nn506715t .25584627 
Anderson R. B. ; Smith S. J. ; May P. S. ; Berry M. T. 
Revisiting the NIR-to-Visible
Upconversion Mechanism in β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2014 , 5 , 36 –42 10.1021/jz402366r .26276178 
Berry M. T. ; May P. S. 
Disputed Mechanism
for NIR-to-Red Upconversion Luminescence
in NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2015 , 119 , 9805 –9811 10.1021/acs.jpca.5b08324 .26325357 
Zhang J. ; Hao Z. ; Li J. ; Zhang X. ; Luo Y. ; Pan G. 
Observation
of Efficient Population of the Red-Emitting State from the Green State
by Non-Multiphonon Relaxation in the Er3+–Yb3+ System . Light: Sci. Appl. 
2015 , 4 , e239 10.1038/lsa.2015.12 .
van
Dijk J. M. F. ; Schuurmans M. F. H. 
On the Nonradiative and Radiative
Decay Rates and a Modified Exponential Energy Gap Law for 4f–4f Transitions in Rare-Earth Ions . J. Chem. Phys. 
1983 , 78 , 5317 –5323 10.1063/1.445485 .
Sokolov V. I. ; Zvyagin A. V. ; Igumnov S. M. ; Molchanova S. I. ; Nazarov M. M. ; Nechaev A. V. ; Savelyev A. G. ; Tyutyunov A. A. ; Khaydukov E. V. ; Panchenko V. Ya. 
Determination of the Refractive Index
of β-NaYF4/Yb3+/Er3+/Tm3+ Nanocrystals Using Spectroscopic Refractometry . Opt. Spectrosc. 
2015 , 118 , 609 –613 10.1134/S0030400X15040190 .
Dong C. ; Pichaandi J. ; Regier T. ; van Veggel F. C. J. M. 
Nonstatistical
Dopant Distribution of Ln3+-Doped NaGdF4 Nanoparticles . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 15950 –15958 10.1021/jp206441u .
van
Wijngaarden J. T. ; Scheidelaar S. ; Vlugt T. J. H. ; Reid M. F. ; Meijerink A. 
Energy Transfer Mechanism for Downconversion in the
(Pr3+, Yb3+) Couple . Phys.
Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2010 , 81 , 155112 10.1103/PhysRevB.81.155112 .
Yu D. C. ; Martín-Rodrïguez R. ; Zhang Q. Y. ; Meijerink A. ; Rabouw F. T. 
Multi-Photon Quantum
Cutting in Gd2O2S:Tm3+ to Enhance
the Photo-Response of Solar Cells . Light: Sci.
Appl. 
2015 , 4 , e344 10.1038/lsa.2015.117 .
Henderson B. ; Imbusch G. F.  Optical Spectroscopy
of Inorganic Solids ; Clarendon Press : Oxford , 1989 .
Geitenbeek R. G. ; Prins P. T. ; Albrecht W. ; van Blaaderen A. ; Weckhuysen B. M. ; Meijerink A. 
NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+/SiO2 Core/Shell Upconverting Nanocrystals for
Luminescence Thermometry up to 900 K . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2017 , 121 , 3503 –3510 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b10279 .
Villanueva-Delgado P. ; Biner D. ; Krämer K. W. 
Judd–Ofelt Analysis of β-NaGdF4: Yb3+, Tm3+ and β-NaGdF4:Er3+ Single Crystals . J. Lumin. 
2017 , 189 , 84 –90 10.1016/j.jlumin.2016.04.023 .
Fischer S. ; Swabeck J. K. ; Alivisatos A. P. 
Controlled
Isotropic and Anisotropic
Shell Growth in β-NaLnF4 Nanocrystals Induced by
Precursor Injection Rate . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 12325 –12332 10.1021/jacs.7b07496 .28777550 
Wang F. ; Liu X. 
Upconversion Multicolor
Fine-Tuning: Visible to Near-Infrared Emission
from Lanthanide-Doped NaYF4 Nanoparticles . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 5642 –5643 10.1021/ja800868a .18393419 
Pollnau M. ; Gamelin D. R. ; Lüthi S. R. ; Güdel H. U. ; Hehlen M. P. 
Power Dependence of Upconversion Luminescence in Lanthanide
and Transition-Metal-Ion Systems . Phys. Rev.
B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2000 , 61 , 3337 –3346 10.1103/PhysRevB.61.3337 .
Hossan M. Y. ; Hor A. ; Luu Q. ; Smith S. J. ; May S. ; Berry M. T. 
Explaining
the Nanoscale Effect in the Upconversion Dynamics of β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ Core and Core–Shell
Nanocrystals . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2017 , 121 , 16592 –16606 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b04567 .
Gargas D. J. ; Chan E. M. ; Ostrowski A. D. ; Aloni S. ; Altoe M. V. P. ; Barnard E. S. ; Sanii B. ; Urban J. J. ; Milliron D. J. ; Cohen B. E. ; Schuck P. J. 
Engineering
Bright Sub-10-nm Upconverting
Nanocrystals for Single-Molecule Imaging . Nat.
Nanotechnol. 
2014 , 9 , 300 –305 10.1038/nnano.2014.29 .24633523 
Villanueva-Delgado P. ; Krämer K. W. ; Valiente R. ; de Jong M. ; Meijerink A. 
Modeling Blue
to UV Upconversion in β-NaYF4:Tm3+ . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 27396 –27404 10.1039/C6CP04347J .27722287 
Fischer S. ; Steinkemper H. ; Löper P. ; Hermle M. ; Goldschmidt J. C. 
Modeling
Upconversion of Erbium Doped Microcrystals Based on Experimentally
Determined Einstein Coefficients . J. Appl. Phys. 
2012 , 111 , 013109 10.1063/1.3674319 .
Li Z. ; Zhang Y. 
An Efficient and User-Friendly
Method for the Synthesis of Hexagonal-Phase
NaYF4:Yb, Er/Tm Nanocrystals with Controllable Shape and
Upconversion Fluorescence . Nanotechnology 
2008 , 19 , 345606 10.1088/0957-4484/19/34/345606 .21730655 
Wang F. ; Deng R. ; Liu X. 
Preparation
of Core-Shell NaGdF4 Nanoparticles Doped with Luminescent
Lanthanide Ions to Be
Used as Upconversion-Based Probes . Nat. Protoc. 
2014 , 9 , 1634 –1644 10.1038/nprot.2014.111 .24922272

