
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.7b03421ArticleHow
To Identify Plasmons from the Optical Response
of Nanostructures Zhang Runmin †Bursi Luca ‡§◇Cox Joel D. ∥Cui Yao †⊥Krauter Caroline M. #Alabastri Alessandro †Manjavacas Alejandro ∇Calzolari Arrigo §Corni Stefano *§○Molinari Elisa ‡§Carter Emily A. ◆García de Abajo F. Javier *∥¶Zhang Hui *†Nordlander Peter *††Laboratory
for Nanophotonics and the Department of Physics and Astronomy,
MS61 and ⊥Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, United States‡ Dipartimento
di Fisica, Informatica e Matematica-FIM, Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, I-41125 Modena, Italy§ Istituto
Nanoscienze, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche
CNR-NANO, I-41125 Modena, Italy∥ ICFO-Institut
de Ciencies Fotoniques, The Barcelona Institute
of Science and Technology, 08860 Castelldefels, Barcelona, Spain#Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering and ◆School of Engineering and Applied
Science, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544-5263, United States∇ Department
of Physics and Astronomy, University of
New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, United States○ Dipartimento
di Scienze Chimiche, Università di
Padova, I-35131 Padova, Italy¶ ICREA-Institució
Catalana de Reserca i Estudis Avançats, Passeig Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain* E-mail: nordland@rice.edu.* E-mail: yiaimer@gmail.com.* E-mail: javier.garciadeabajo@icfo.es.* E-mail: stefano.corni@unipd.it.26 06 2017 25 07 2017 11 7 7321 7335 16 05 2017 26 06 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A promising
trend in plasmonics involves shrinking the size of
plasmon-supporting structures down to a few nanometers, thus enabling
control over light–matter interaction at extreme-subwavelength
scales. In this limit, quantum mechanical effects, such as nonlocal
screening and size quantization, strongly affect the plasmonic response,
rendering it substantially different from classical predictions. For
very small clusters and molecules, collective plasmonic modes are
hard to distinguish from other excitations such as single-electron
transitions. Using rigorous quantum mechanical computational techniques
for a wide variety of physical systems, we describe how an optical
resonance of a nanostructure can be classified as either plasmonic
or nonplasmonic. More precisely, we define a universal metric for
such classification, the generalized plasmonicity index (GPI), which
can be straightforwardly implemented in any computational electronic-structure
method or classical electromagnetic approach to discriminate plasmons
from single-particle excitations and photonic modes. Using the GPI,
we investigate the plasmonicity of optical resonances in a wide range
of systems including: the emergence of plasmonic behavior in small
jellium spheres as the size and the number of electrons increase;
atomic-scale metallic clusters as a function of the number of atoms;
and nanostructured graphene as a function of size and doping down
to the molecular plasmons in polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Our
study provides a rigorous foundation for the further development of
ultrasmall nanostructures based on molecular plasmonics.

plasmoncollective excitationRPATDDFTMie theoryjellium modeldocument-id-old-9nn7b03421document-id-new-14nn-2017-034213ccc-price
==== Body
Plasmons,
the collective electron
oscillations in metallic nanostructures,1 play a major role in a variety of applications due to their ability
to confine light down to subwavelength volumes. These applications
include chemical and biological sensing,2−5 waveguiding,6 energy-transfer processes,7,8 light harvesting,9,10 photodetection,11 photocatalysis,11,12 and photothermal cancer therapy.13 Plasmons
in noble metal structures are well described by classical electromagnetism
when their size exceeds a few nanometers. However, quantum mechanical
and finite-confinement effects emerge in morphologies including nanometer-sized
gaps, tips, and edges.14−19 These observations have created the subfield of quantum plasmonics,
where quantum mechanical effects can be optically probed and exploited
for active control of plasmonic resonances.20,21 In this context, a great deal of work has been devoted recently
to study the plasmonic properties of ultrasmall nanostructures containing
<1000 conduction electrons,14,22−25 because such structures provide deep subwavelength confinement and
present a large surface-to-volume ratio, an important parameter in
sensing and photocatalysis.23,26−28 In this paper, we are concerned primarily with localized surface
plasmon resonances (LSPRs) that appear in finite nanostructures and,
in contrast to surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) typical of extended
structures, are characterized by a discrete excitation spectrum. However,
our conclusions are most likely valid for both types of plasmonic
modes.

Identification of plasmons is challenging in small systems
(e.g., clusters or molecules), particularly
when only a few electrons are involved29−36 as, for example, in molecules consisting of only a few tens of atoms.37−39 Experimentally, optical resonances have been studied in graphene-like
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) molecules,37,40 which present several characteristic properties of LSPRs. However,
arguments regarding their classification as plasmons still persist.
When the number of charge carriers in a system decreases, the energy
gap between the quantized electronic states increases, resulting in
blurred boundaries between conventional plasmonic behavior and electron–hole
(e–h) pair transitions, which also appear as optical resonances.31 Within a quantum mechanical picture, plasmons
are usually described as coherent superpositions of certain e–h
pair quantum states (Slater determinants). In contrast, pure single-electron
transitions do not exhibit such coherent behavior.

Several theoretical
studies on few-electron nanoparticles (NPs)
or molecular-scale systems have provided important insights into the
origin and emergence of plasmons. For instance, Gao and co-workers
studied linear atomic chains using time-dependent density functional
theory (TDDFT)34,35 and showed how collective excitations
emerge as the length of the chain increases. Bryant and co-workers
compared TDDFT results with exact calculations for small model linear
systems.41,42 More recently, Fitzgerald et al. explored single and coupled sodium atomic chains as ultrasmall
molecular plasmonic nanoantennas.36 Bernadotte et al. and Krauter et al. proposed a scaling
procedure of the interaction between electrons in various first-principles
calculation frameworks30,32 in order to show that plasmons
and single-electron transitions evolve in different ways when varying
the strength of such interaction. Jain studied the physical nature
of few-carrier plasmon resonances using a model in which the electrons
were confined to a potential box.33 The
random-phase approximation (RPA) was adopted to investigate doped
nanocrystals26 as well as graphene nanoislands43 with increasing carrier density, showing both
the evolution of plasmon modes and quantum finite-size effects. These
studies focused on the microscopic nature of plasmons and relied on
elaborate quantum mechanical descriptions to characterize the plasmonic
nature of optical excitations, which, due to their computational cost,
cannot be extended to larger systems.

Clearly, a more universal
approach for classifying plasmonic behavior
and distinguishing such excitations from single-electron transitions
would be highly desirable. Such an approach should ideally be feasible
for systems of arbitrary composition and number of charge carriers.
Very recently, Bursi et al. proposed a “plasmonicity
index” (PI) to characterize and quantify plasmonic behavior.44 This pioneering method was based on the Coulomb
potential induced in the NP upon external illumination and paved the
way toward a universal semiclassical metric for identifying plasmonic
behavior following a simple, specific procedure that does not depend
on the details of the quantum mechanical model used for the analysis.
In this context, we also note that Yan and Mortensen have introduced
a nonclassical-impact parameter within the RPA in order to characterize
the degree of nonclassical effect in plasmon resonance dynamics.45 However, these metrics cannot be applied to
classical systems, and because the PI was not dimensionless, it did
not enable a direct comparison of the “plasmonicity”
for optical excitations in different structures.

In this paper,
we first adopt the RPA26,46−48 framework to
discuss the fundamental difference between
plasmon resonances and other types of optical excitations. We study
the evolution of plasmon resonances and single-electron transitions
in absorption spectra as a function of size and number of conduction
electrons for a wide variety of systems, ranging from small metallic
nanospheres and metal clusters described within the jellium model
to graphene nanostructures and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in
which a tight-binding model based upon localized orbitals provide
a better description of valence electrons. We introduce an improved
metric, the generalized plasmonicity index (GPI) to distinguish plasmons
from single-electron transitions and show its general validity for
discriminating plasmons from other types of optical modes in systems
of varying size, number of electrons, and chemical nature. Unlike
the PI metric,44 the GPI is dimensionless
and can be readily used both with any quantum chemistry approach and
for systems that are well-described by classical electromagnetism.
The GPI not only provides a simple means of answering the question,
how many electrons are required to support a plasmonic collective
mode in a given class of systems, but also offers an intuitive perspective
to understand the fundamental properties of plasmon modes.

The
organization of our paper is as follows: First we discuss the
qualitative difference between plasmons and single-particle excitations,
and we show how they can be distinguished within the RPA. What follows
then is the core of the paper: We introduce the GPI, which provides
a universal quantitative metric for the plasmonic character of optical
excitations. We show hence how the GPI can be calculated at several
different levels of theory (classical electrodynamics, jellium, first-principles)
and then use it to study the emergence of plasmonic behavior as the
number of electrons or atoms in a structure increases. We conclude
with an investigation of the plasmonicity of optical excitations in
nanostructured graphene and in polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons for
different levels of doping.

Theory
Plasmons and Single-Particle Excitations
A metallic
NP can be described simplistically as a conduction electron gas confined
to a lattice of positive ions. In this picture, LSPRs emerge as collective
excitations involving incompressible deformations of the conduction
electron gas with respect to its uniform equilibrium distribution.49Figure 1 conceptually illustrates the induced charges associated with
a dipolar plasmon in a spherical NP. The displacement of the conduction
electrons exposes the positive background on one side of the NP and
results in negative surface charges on the other side. Consequently,
Coulomb interactions within and between the induced charge distribution
create a restoring force that, combined with the kinetic energy of
the conduction electron gas, which effectively acts like a repulsive
force, defines a harmonic oscillator. The coherent motion of many
conduction electrons in a NP contributes to a large dipole moment
and accordingly is responsible for the strong coupling of LSPRs to
light. The significant amount of surface charges that can be induced
from resonant excitations of a LSPR mode is responsible for the large
electric-field amplitude enhancements induced outside the NP surfaces,
which can easily exceed factors of several hundreds and cause inelastic
optical effects such as surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) from
a single molecule adsorbed on the NP surface.4

Figure 1 Schematic
illustration of the differences between a collective
excitation such as a dipolar plasmon (left) and a pure e–h
pair excitation (right). The plasmon involves the coherent motion
of all conduction electrons in the NP and can be roughly modeled as
rigid displacements of the conduction electron gas. This motion induces
strong surface charges at the interface, which in turn induce a significant
field Eind (the depolarization field)
inside the NP. Therefore, plasmonic excitations continue as damped
oscillations after the driving external field is turned off (vertical
dashed line in the lower panels). In contrast, an e–h pair
has no significant induced field beyond the screened internal Coulomb
interaction between the hole and the electron: Rabi oscillations induce
a time-dependent dipolar field as the external field persists, while
after decay the electron recombines with the hole without ringing
(schematically illustrated by an exponential attenuation instead of
a step function).

Just as the plasmon-induced
surface charges generate large field
enhancements outside the supporting NPs, they are also responsible
for an induced field Eind (the depolarization
field) across the interior. In contrast, in pure single-electron transitions,
a charge carrier is excited to an unoccupied state, and the induced
internal field is weaker. Depending on the strength of the interaction
between the electron and the corresponding hole, the excitation can
be long-lived and is often referred to as an exciton. An exciton also
includes correlated motion between the electron and its corresponding
hole together with other electrons involved in the screened e–h
pair; however the phenomenon is not collective in the same sense as
in a plasmon:48 A plasmonic oscillation
strongly depends on the electronic motion spreading across the NP
on which it is sustained, which is why this collective phenomenon
is strongly influenced by the NP geometry; in contrast, a single-electron
transition is a localized event that does not strongly depend on other
states created elsewhere in the NP. While in principle all the electrons
participate in screening the e–h pair, low-density excitons
interact weakly and can be considered to be independent quasi-particles
coupled mainly through Coulomb interactions constrained to the e–h
region, as depicted in Figure 1.

Figure 1 also illustrates
the fundamental difference in temporal behavior between plasmons and
pure e–h pair excitations in a semiclassical approximation.
During irradiation with light that is slightly red-shifted (blue-shifted)
from the plasmon resonance frequency ωp, the electron
gas oscillates with its dipole in phase (out of phase) with the applied
electric field. When the illumination ceases, the plasmon oscillations
continue, aided by Coulomb interactions, but with decreasing amplitudes
due to damping (lifetime τ). The latter is due to the progressive
dephasing of the oscillations of the e–h pairs that collectively
form the plasmon, which finally decay incoherently by e–h recombination.
The number of self-sustained oscillations of the electron cloud after
the incident light is turned off is proportional to the quality factor Q = ωpτ of the plasmon resonance
(the number of oscillations is a factor of 2π smaller than Q when the induced-field intensity has decreased by a factor
of e).50 In contrast,
for a pure e–h pair excitation, although the internal field
is modified by the dipolar field generated by Rabi oscillations while
the external illumination persists, there is no dephasing step after
the illumination ceases because a single e–h pair is present,
and the electron recombines with the hole in a monotonic manner, assuming
the electron and hole are still coupled and have not separated. In
conclusion, the motion of the e–h pairs in the collective plasmon
mode is to a large extent determined by its self-induced surface charges,
while the pure e–h pair dynamics of an exciton are controlled
mainly by the external field.

Identification of Plasmons
within the Random-Phase Approximation
Perhaps the most transparent
way of describing the difference between
plasmons and single-electron transitions is through the RPA. For simplicity
we illustrate this here in momentum space k (i.e., using a plane-wave decomposition), assuming a homogeneous
system (i.e., translational invariance). Although
this basis is not optimal for numerical calculations of finite nanostructures,
the mathematical description simplifies considerably compared to a
real-space description. Optical absorption in a nanostructure is determined
by the motion of the induced charges with respect to the incident
field and can be calculated from the imaginary part of the temporal
Fourier transform of the induced charge distribution (i.e., working in frequency space ω). Within linear response theory,51 the induced charge distribution δn(k, ω) can be written as 1  where χ0 is the
so-called
non-interacting (or independent-electron) susceptibility and vext is the applied external potential, which
for an incident electromagnetic field is the associated quasistatic
electric potential, whereas vind is the
induced potential, responsible for both the external field enhancement
in the vicinity of the NP and the internal depolarization field. The
use of the quasistatic approximation is justified by the small size
of the plasmonic nanostructures as compared to their resonant wavelengths.
The susceptibility χ0 can be calculated using perturbation
theory directly from the electronic wave functions of the system,51 and expressed as a sum of Lorentzian terms,
one per e–h pair excitation, weighted by the transition matrix
elements connecting electron and hole wave functions via the external exciting field. For a homogeneous electron gas, which
is a good model to describe simple metals such as sodium and aluminum,
χ0 can be expressed in an explicit closed-form expression
that is often referred to as the Lindhard susceptibility.52 For light excitation, the wave vector and frequency
are related through the relation ω = ck. Now, for single-particle transitions, the induced potential vind is typically small and can be neglected,
so that single-particle resonances are directly revealed by the poles
of χ0. In practice, these poles occur at complex
frequencies, with negative imaginary parts that reflect their damping.
For this reason, χ0 does not diverge at real frequencies,
but it can become very large near one such resonant mode.

In
contrast to pure e–h pair excitations, in a plasmonic system
near resonance, the induced potential vind can be large compared with the external potential, thus contributing
significantly to δn. In the RPA, one assumes
the induced electric field to be directly related to the induced charge
density via Gauss’s law:  2  With this
expression inserted on the right-hand
side of eq 1, the induced
charge density can be written as  3  which implicitly defines χ as the (interacting)
RPA susceptibility. In the above analysis of the RPA susceptibility,
we neglect electron spin, exchange, and correlation effects. The single-particle
poles that were present in χ 0 are not present in
χ, which instead has poles when the denominator  becomes zero. Near these
zeros, χ
typically exhibits fast variations that define new dressed excitations.
Depending on the strength of the Coulomb interaction ( in eq 2), the energies of these
transitions can be close to the single-particle
transitions (then we have excitonic modes that are only weakly affected
by the Coulomb interaction) or significantly different, in which case
the new poles correspond to plasmon resonances and are directly enabled
by the induced potential vind.

For
simple systems in which χ and χ0 become
analytical (e.g., the non-interacting,
homogeneous electron gas), the poles of these functions provide an
ideal way of distinguishing plasmons from other types of optical excitations.
However, most systems require complicated numerical solutions. For
example, in the widely used TDDFT approach applied to atoms and molecules,
it is far from trivial to identify among the poles of χ those
that are reminiscent of the poles of χ0. As a result,
one cannot trivially distinguish single-electron transitions from
plasmons. A practical way of making this distinction consists of introducing
a scaling parameter λ in the Coulomb potential , leading
to the effective susceptibility: 4  which for λ → 0 becomes equal
to χ0 and for λ → 1 becomes equal to
χ. In this transformation, only the induced Coulomb potential vind in eq 2 should be scaled, not the Coulomb potential which determines
the electronic structure of the system. Such scaling of the induced
Coulomb potential can be implemented in TDDFT to switch between χ
and χ0,30 which thus provides
a means for distinguishing between single-electron transitions and
plasmons; a plasmon mode will be a resonance that depends on λ,
while single-electron transitions will be relatively independent of
λ.

Beyond Qualitative Identification: The Generalized Plasmonicity
Index
Recently, Bursi et al.44 proposed a plasmonicity index (PI) to quantify
the difference between plasmons and single-electron transitions in
finite structures. The PI is proportional to the integral of the squared
modulus of the induced potential |vind(r,ω)|2 over the volume of the
NP and thus captures the fundamental difference between plasmons and
single-electron transitions discussed in conjunction with eq 3. By plotting the PI as
a function of excitation energy, plasmon resonances can thus be identified
directly as peaks in a simple and straightforward manner. However,
a shortcoming of the PI is that its values are not dimensionless and
depend on the size of the system, which complicates the comparison
between structures of different size. Also, the PI cannot be used
to identify plasmonic behavior in classical systems because the induced
charges are then 2D surface charges, resulting in an energy-independent
PI with a value determined only by the geometry and size of the NP
(see section S1 in the Supporting Information (SI) for more details). To construct a more universal metric for
classifying plasmonic behavior, we propose a generalized plasmonicity
index (GPI) denoted as η, which is based on the electrostatic
Coulomb energy in the system associated with the induced charges: 5  The superscript
“*” denotes
the complex conjugate of the corresponding quantity. In the above
expression, the normalization (i.e., the denominator) is proportional to the Coulomb energy associated
with the interaction between the induced charge and the incident electromagnetic
field. In the quasistatic limit, this normalization factor is proportional
to the total induced dipole moment D of the system: 6  where d(r,ω)
= rδn(r,ω)
is the local induced dipole moment at position r, and E0 is the amplitude of the incident field.

The generalized plasmonicity index η is a quantitative measure
of the Coulomb energy associated with the oscillating polarization
of the system and displays a peak at the plasmon energy because these
excitations produce a large induced potential (i.e., vind ≫ vext). In contrast, for a single-electron transition, where vind has a similar order of magnitude as vext, we would expect a GPI close to 1, but the
GPI could in principle also approach 0 if vind becomes very small due to the absence of polarization mechanisms
(more details are given in section S2 in the SI). Remarkably, in the quasistatic classical limit the GPI relates
directly to experimentally accessible quantities (see section S5 in
the SI).

GPI and ab Initio Excitation Energies
The expression of the GPI in eq 5 can be related to a microscopic
energy decomposition of the
excitation energy at the RPA level that provides further insights
into its physical meaning. Starting from the RPA pseudo-eigenvalue
equations in matrix form, we can obtain the following expression for
the Ith excitation energy, as detailed
in Section S3 in the SI: 7  where 8  is the transition density for the excitation I,
the indices i,j and a,b run over occupied and empty (spin)-orbitals
ϕ(r) with single-particle energies ϵi,ϵj and
ϵa,ϵb, respectively, and ρbjI, ρjbI are the corresponding expansion coefficients of
the transition density ρI(r).

The first term on the rhs of eq 7 is the single-particle contribution to the
excitation energy, being an average of single-electron transition
energies (ϵa – ϵi) weighted by the transition density matrix
expansion elements ρaiI and ρiaI. The second term in the rhs of eq 7 has three features that qualify it as a measure
of the plasmonic character of the excitation: (i) it is the only term
found in the RPA besides the single-particle contribution, and the
RPA is known to describe only single-electron transitions and plasmons;
(ii) it is the Coulomb energy associated with the transition charge
density and thus is associated with the induced potential that is
enhanced in plasmons; (iii) it shifts excitation energies upward with respect to the single-particle results, as expected
for plasmons.53,54 Thus, we label this term the plasmonic energy of transition I: 9  This was also
the term scaled by λ in
the approach by Bernadotte et al. and Krauter et al.30,32 to identify plasmonic behavior.
This scaling approach will be exploited for jellium particles in the Results and Discussion section below. Superficially,
the quantities Eplas,I and the GPI appear unrelated (GPI is a frequency-dependent quantity
based on a response formalism, whereas Eplas,I is a single number per each excitation I), but they convey the same physics, namely the Coulomb interaction.
Indeed, by comparing the GPI evaluated at resonance, η(ωI), as well as Eplas,I, it can be shown that they are proportional: 10  where Γ is the damping
energy of the
transition (see section S4 in the SI for
a proof and for a connection between the GPI and the poles of the
response function). Eq 10 reveals the microscopic nature of the GPI: a direct measure of the
plasmonic contribution to the excitation energy, weighted by the damping
of the excitation. The combination of a high Coulomb energy along
with a small damping of charge oscillation provides the most pronounced
plasmonic transitions, whereas damping of the excitation (i.e., increase of Γ) degrades the
GPI. Eq 10 has the typical
form of a Q-factor, representing the Coulomb energy
stored in the plasmon divided by the width of the resonance. This
quantity can be calculated for dark modes as well.

The connection
established in eq 10 allows for a direct calculation of the GPI from any
first-principles approach that provides transition densities (instead
of charge susceptibilities as obtained from linear-response TDDFT)
such as the Casida formulation of TDDFT or wave function-based methods.55

Results and Discussion
Implementation of the GPI
In this subsection, we analyze
a wide range of systems and discuss the implementation of the GPI
in various computational approaches ranging from TDDFT to classical
Mie theory.

Plasmons in Jellium Nanospheres
Here, we calculate
absorption spectra for jellium nanospheres with parameters (electron
density, work function, and lattice background polarizability) chosen
to represent Au. We focus on the evolution of the plasmon resonance
and the single-electron transitions without considering interband
transitions (IBTs) that would be present in real materials. The spectra
(see Methods section) calculated using the
full RPA with χ as in eq 3 are denoted σRPA(ω), while σ0(ω) refers to single-electron transition spectra calculated
using χ0, and σλ(ω)
identifies the spectra calculated using a real-space version of the
scaled χeff(λ) defined in eq 4. Figure 2a shows the calculated absorption spectra σRPA and σ0 for gold jellium nanospheres of
diameters ranging from 2 nm (247 electrons) to 10 nm (30,892 electrons)
with a damping of 0.12 eV. For comparison, we also show the results
from classical calculations using Mie theory for a Drude-model dielectric
function with parameters chosen to fit the Johnson and Christy dielectric
data56 for Au in the visible range (neglecting
IBTs):, with
ε∞ = 9.1,
ωB = 9.07 eV, and a damping γ
= 0.12 eV. The spectra clearly reveal the difference between single-electron
and collective plasmon excitations. The σRPA(ω)
spectra have a pronounced plasmon resonance around 2.7 eV, in excellent
agreement with the Mie result. The single-electron spectra exhibit
an asymmetric absorption band at energies mostly below 1 eV. Both
the plasmon and the single-electron transitions undergo a redshift
with increasing sphere diameter but appear to saturate beyond 8 nm.
These shifts are due to quantum size confinement and agree qualitatively
with previous studies of size-dependent plasmon resonances of NPs.14 To further understand the redshift of the plasmon
resonances with increasing size, Figure 2b shows the plasmon-induced charge density
and field enhancement at the resonance frequency for diameters of
2 and 10 nm. For the smallest diameter D = 2 nm,
the induced charges are mostly located inside the NP and distributed
in concentric shells, reflecting the discrete electronic structure
of the particle. This is in sharp contrast with the classical prediction
of a pure surface charge. When the NP size increases, the electronic
structure becomes denser, and the induced charge density becomes more
prominent at the surface, as expected classically. Interestingly,
the plasmon-induced near-field is well developed and agrees with classical
theory (not shown) already for the smallest D = 2
nm particle. Figure 2c shows the scaled σλ(ω) spectra for
a D = 8 nm sphere. The plasmonic feature can also
clearly be identified here as the dispersive mode ωλ that appears at 0.3 eV for λ = 0 and reaches 2.7 eV for λ
= 1. The other single-electron transitions are essentially independent
of λ. The clear differences between σRPA(ω)
and σ0(ω) spectra for the nanospheres in Figure 2 make it straightforward
to distinguish between single-electron and collective plasmon resonances
for the case of jellium nanospheres.

Figure 2 Plasmonicity in small metallic NPs: size
dependence. (a) Size evolution
of the absorption spectra for gold spheres with diameters from 2 to
10 nm, calculated from the full RPA (σRPA(ω),
solid curves) and the non-interacting RPA (σ0(ω),
dashed curves) for jellium (5.9 × 1022cm–3 electron density). Classical Drude–Mie theory is also included
for comparison (dotted curves). (b) Induced charge density (left column)
and field enhancement (right column) at the plasmon resonance for
particles of diameters D = 2 nm (top) and D = 10 nm (bottom) spheres. (c) Color contour plot of σλ(ω) for a D = 8 nm jellium sphere.
The vertical axis represents λ varying from 0 to 1 (see main
text). The curved streak corresponds to σλ(ω),
while the vertical line indicates the maximum of σ0(ω). (d) GPI spectra as a function of incident energy for the
same spheres as in (a) calculated using the full RPA (solid curves)
and classical Drude–Mie theory (dotted curves, multiplied by
a factor of 3.6).

In Figure 2d, we
show the calculated GPI spectra (eq 5) for the same jellium spheres as in Figure 2a. As expected, prominent peaks
appear in the GPI spectra at energies corresponding to plasmon excitations.
In the low-energy region, where single-electron transitions are present,
the GPI remains flat with values around unity. Figure 2d also shows the GPI for a sphere described
using the classical Drude–Mie model. Again, the plasmon modes
can be clearly discerned as distinct peaks. Because the distributions
of surface charges are different in RPA and classical Drude–Mie
calculations (δ-function distributions in classical theory versus finite distributions of surface charge in the RPA
model), the maximum GPI values in the classical results are different.
In particular, in the quasistatic classical regime, the GPI reduces
to  (see Section S5 in the SI), where ε(ω) is the permittivity
of the spherical
NP. We observe that the classical result for the GPI is very similar
to the RPA result with a pronounced peak at the plasmon energy.

We remark that the GPI is dimensionless and its amplitude at the
plasmon resonances for D = 2–10 nm is large,
thus signaling plasmonic excitations. We conclude that the GPI can
identify plasmonic behavior even when strong quantum finite-size effects
are present, as in the D = 2 nm NP. Because the GPI
is expressed in terms of induced charges and Coulomb potentials, which
are standard physical quantities, it is a straightforward quantity
to calculate in any computational method, whether ab initio (density or wave function based), empirical, or based on classical
electromagnetism. Importantly, the calculation of the GPI is a postprocessing
procedure that can be performed after the time-consuming self-consistent
calculations of the response functions are carried out, and it does
not require separate calculations of the self-consistent σRPA(ω) and σ0(ω) or the calculation
of σλ(ω) spectra for different λ.

Probing Classical Mie Modes with the GPI
We show next
that the GPI can also capture the difference between plasmonic and
photonic modes in NPs. Photonic modes in large dielectric NPs are
currently the subject of considerable research due to their small
losses.57,58 In Figure 3 we compare optical spectra and GPI for Ag and Si nanospheres
with diameters of 80 nm. Such large particles are not in the quasistatic
regime, and thus, we calculate the GPI using Mie theory to obtain
the induced density, which is then directly plugged into the definition
of the GPI (eq 5), therefore
extending its range of validity to larger systems affected by phase
retardation (i.e., different parts
of the NP experiencing different fields because of the finite speed
of light). The Ag NP presents a dipolar resonance at ∼3.3 eV
and a quadrupolar mode at ∼3.5 eV (Figure 3a). The Si sphere exhibits two Mie resonances:
a magnetic dipole around 3.0 eV and an electric dipole around 3.3
eV (Figure 3b). Figure 3c displays the corresponding
GPI as a function of incident energy for the two particles. It is
reassuring to observe that the GPI spectrum for the metallic Ag sphere
has a clear peak and large GPI values (η ≫ 1), clearly
showing that the Ag resonances are plasmonic. On the other hand, the
GPI for the Si particle does not show a distinct resonance and lingers
around unity, which clearly points to its nonplasmonic origin.

Figure 3 Plasmonicity
in large Ag and Si NPs. (a) Calculated absorption,
scattering, and extinction of an 80 nm diameter Ag nanosphere described
using the Johnson and Christy permittivity.56 The insets show the induced charge (left) and field enhancement
(right) distributions for the dipolar and quadrupolar modes (top to
bottom) at the frequencies indicated by arrows in the extinction spectrum.
(b) Calculated absorption, scattering, and extinction of an 80 nm
diameter Si nanosphere using Palik permittivity.77 The insets show the induced charge (left) and field enhancement
(right) distributions for the magnetic dipolar resonance (3.0 eV)
and electric dipolar resonance (3.3 eV) (top to bottom). (c) Calculated
GPI spectra for the Ag (black) and Si (red) spheres. All calculations
are performed using Mie theory.

Because the GPI measures the plasmonicity of a mode, this
metric
may be used to quantify how “plasmonic” conventional
classical plasmons are. Perhaps even more importantly, it is of interest
to pose the question of which classical plasmonic properties contribute
to a large GPI. The GPI may then be used as a metric also for classical
plasmonic systems. Figure 4 compares the Mie theory calculated extinction cross sections,
GPI, and maximum electric-field enhancements for spheres made of Ag,
Au, and Al as a function of energy. The solid curves in Figure 4a show the extinction spectra
of 50 nm diameter Au and Ag spheres and of 25 and 50 nm diameter Al
spheres. The plasmon resonance of the Au sphere overlaps the IBTs
and is not particularly intense. This is reflected in the corresponding
GPI spectra in Figure 4b, where the GPI value of Au (solid red curves) is much smaller than
the GPI value of Ag (solid black curves), because of the damping due
to IBTs. The dashed-red curves show the red-shifted spectra for an
Au sphere immersed in a dielectric medium. As the plasmon resonance
shifts away from the IBTs, it becomes much more pronounced, with a
GPI spectrum that clearly signals a plasmonic behavior (η ≫
1). The spectra for the 50 nm Al sphere also exhibit excellent plasmonic
character. Because of the large plasmon frequency of Al, retardation
effects are large, and the dipolar resonance is highly damped by radiative
losses, thus showing a relatively modest GPI. However, the quadrupolar
and octupolar Al resonances, with their significantly smaller radiative
damping, exhibit excellent plasmonic behavior with η > 5.
The
dashed-blue curves show the spectra for a smaller Al sphere (25 nm
diameter). Here the radiative damping is significantly reduced, thus
resulting in significantly better plasmonic behavior also for the
Al dipolar resonance.

Figure 4 Plasmonicity in a large NP: Ag, Au, and Al. (a) Left:
Extinction
cross sections for a 50 nm diameter Ag nanosphere in vacuum (solid
black) and for a 50 nm diameter Au nanosphere placed in either vacuum
(solid red) or a dielectric medium of refractive index = 3 (dashed
red). Right: The same for 50 nm diameter (solid blue) and 25 nm diameter
(dashed blue) Al nanospheres in vacuum. (b) Corresponding GPI spectra.
(c) Maximum electric-field enhancements. The calculations are performed
using classical Mie theory with the Ag and Au permittivities taken
from ref (56) and the
Al permittivity taken from ref (78).

The damping clearly plays
a crucial role for the GPI. This is explicitly
demonstrated in the fully quantum mechanical result (eq 10), which shows that the GPI is
inversely proportional to the damping. The results from the classical
calculations in Figure 4 also show that damping is detrimental to plasmonicity. The GPI for
the Au sphere increases strongly in a dielectric medium when the red-shifted
plasmon becomes detuned from IBTs. This is also observed for the Al
sphere, where the GPI increases with decreasing radiative damping
for a smaller particle. The same effect is also responsible for the
large GPI of the Au sphere placed in a dielectric medium compared
with the Ag sphere in vacuum. The plasmon resonance for Ag has larger
radiative damping because its energy is twice as large as the Au resonance
and lies close to the IBTs threshold for Ag. We expect that other
types of damping mechanisms, such as interfacial damping, nonlocal
screening, or surface scattering will have a similar adverse effect
on the GPI. IBTs are particularly prominent for transition metals,
which are also known to be poor plasmonic materials. IBTs also play
a detrimental role for the plasmon resonances in other noble metals
such as Cu and Pt, where the GPI for 50 nm spheres is in the 1.0–1.5
range.

Figure 4c shows
the calculated maximum field enhancements outside the spheres, which
clearly correlate with the GPI spectra. This correlation supports
our general notion that better plasmonic materials provide larger
field enhancements. However, the field enhancement by itself is not
an adequate metric for plasmonicity. The field enhancement around
a nanostructure is typically very dependent on its shape and can be
particularly large near sharp protrusions and in narrow junctions
between NPs. Even for simple spheres, the field enhancement does not
perfectly reflect the plasmonicity. For instance, when comparing the
GPI and field enhancement for the Al spheres in Figure 4, we observe that the 50 nm Al sphere has
a larger GPI but smaller field enhancement than the 25 nm sphere.
A more systematic exploration of how the GPI can be used to quantify
the usefulness of plasmon modes will be presented elsewhere.

GPI
for Metal and Semiconductor Clusters from TDDFT
The numerical
results presented so far concerned NPs larger than
2 nm. Here we complete the analysis by computing the GPI at the TDDFT
level for both metallic and semiconductor nanoclusters in the 1–2
nm size regime. Our results indicate that the picture emerging from
the jellium studies above still holds when the size of the systems
is reduced, approaching the molecular limit. In particular, we consider
the first two members of the series of icosahedral silver clusters
[Ag13]5+ and [Ag55]3–,59,60 where the charges have been chosen to result
in a closed-shell electronic structure, as well as a tetrahedral Ag20 cluster.61 Then we analyze two
H-passivated cubic diamond silicon nanocrystals Si10H16 and Si20H36.62

Both icosahedral and tetrahedral clusters are centrosymmetric
and with overall sizes that overlap the smallest jellium spheres analyzed
above. The study of two different geometric shapes allows us to account
also for the effect of the atomic structure on the plasmonic properties.

Figure 5a–c
shows the TDDFT absorption spectra of the silver clusters. Both Ag20 and [Ag55]3– exhibit a dominant
optical resonance around 3.1 eV. Some smaller peaks at lower energies
and some intensity modulations above 3.5–4 eV are also visible.
In the case of the smaller [Ag13]5+, the spectrum
is more structured and the 3.1 eV resonance is replaced with a set
of discrete quasi-molecular features. All absorption properties described
here agree with previous theoretical studies,59−61 although some
minor differences are present due to different computational details
(more in section S6 in the SI).

Figure 5 Absorption
spectra of Ag and Si nanoclusters. The insets show the
isosurface plots (x, y, and z spatial polarizations, respectively) of the imaginary
part of the TDDFT induced charge density response calculated for the
frequencies indicated by arrows in the TDDFT absorption spectra. In
particular, the excitation energies Eexc and isosurface values iso (the same for the three polarizations)
are (a) [Ag13]5+, Eexc = 3.31 eV, iso = 0.05 bohr–3; (b) Ag20, Eexc = 3.18 eV, iso = 0.05 bohr–3; (c) [Ag55]3–, Eexc = 3.10 eV, iso = 0.05 bohr–3; (d) Si10H16, Eexc = 4.84 eV, iso = 0.005 bohr–3; (e) Si29H36, Eexc = 3.62 eV, iso =
0.0005 bohr–3; x, y, and z coordinates relative to the induced charge
density plots are shown, as reference.

The TDDFT absorption spectra of the two hydrogenated silicon
nanocrystals
Si10H16 and Si29H36 are
shown in Figure 5d
and Figure 5e. They
represent prototypical nonplasmonic semiconductor NPs, where excitonic
effects are expected to dominate.62

For analysis of the GPI, we selected one peak in the spectrum of
each system. More specifically, we chose the most intense peak for
those systems that show a dominant (plasmon-like) peak, while we focus
on the absorption edge for the remaining systems. For all the selected
peaks (indicated by arrows in Figure 5), we computed the TDDFT charge density response (insets
in Figure 5) and the
corresponding GPI. The results are shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6 GPI for the Ag and Si nanoclusters considered
here (log scale).
GPIs are calculated from TDDFT for the peaks—one for each system—selected
in Figure 5.

The GPIs identifies the metallic
clusters as being more plasmonic
than the silicon clusters, in agreement with the discussion above.
The GPIs for the Si clusters are about an order of magnitude lower
than for the Ag clusters. Given that the number of valence electrons
in the sp shell is larger in the silicon clusters (four sp electrons
per Si atom) than in the silver clusters (one s electron per Ag atom),
we see that the GPI is more sensitive to the nature of the transition
than to the number of excitable electrons. We carried out the GPI
analysis also for other peaks in the low-energy region of the spectra
of [Ag13]5+, Ag20, Si10H16, and Si29H36 (see Figure S8
in the SI). These results confirm that
the silicon cluster transitions have similarly low GPI values and
thus no plasmonic modes. Note that the GPI values for the silver clusters
are significantly smaller than those for the jellium spheres and classical
particles discussed above. Within the GPI metric, this strong optical
resonance is best described as incipiently plasmonic.

The variation
of the GPI with increasing size of the silver clusters
is nontrivial. Since the damping assumed is the same for all the systems,
the difference should be related to the different Coulomb energies
associated with the transitions in the various clusters. Finally,
we note that the PI metric follows a similar trend as the GPI; the
two metrics are compared in Figure S9 in the SI.

Emergence of Plasmonic Behavior in a Jellium Sphere
We now
address the question of the number of electrons needed for
collective plasmon modes to appear in a NP. In Figure 7a, we show the absorption spectra σRPA and σ0 for a gold nanosphere with diameter D = 8 nm as the number of electrons increase from 10 to
500. As shown in Figure 2a, quantum confinement effects are small in this case due to the
relatively large NP size. The evolution of the plasmon resonances
is thus determined only by the number of interacting electrons. For
low electron density (<50 electrons in the particle), the absorption
spectra σRPA and σ0 have similar
resonance energies, which we refer to as ωRPA and
ω0 in what follows, suggesting that the excitations
are essentially single-electron transitions. However, when the electron
density increases (more than 100 electrons), the two absorption spectra
show a considerable peak separation, signaling plasmonic behavior.
The corresponding induced charge-density distributions shown in Figure 7a confirm the evolution
of the absorption resonance from single-electron transitions to plasmonic
excitations. At the lowest electron density (10 electrons), the induced
charges are mostly confined to the interior of the NP. Conversely,
for larger electron densities, the induced charge distribution becomes
more surface-like and classical.

Figure 7 Plasmonicity in a metallic NP: dependence
on electron density.
(a) Evolution of absorption spectra, σRPA (solid)
and σ0 (dashed), for increasing number of electrons.
The insets show the charge-density distributions associated with the
plasmons. (b) GPI spectra as a function of photon energy for the nanospheres
in (a). (c) (Top) Evolution of resonance energies (peaks) of ωRPA (red) and ω0 (black). (Middle) Evolution
of the GPI values at the resonance ηmax. (Bottom)
Evolution of Δ; see text for definition. The dashed horizontal
line is Δ = 0.5. The diameter of the jellium sphere is D = 8 nm in all cases.

Calculated GPI spectra are presented in Figure 7b. As discussed above, plasmonic
behavior
should result in a clear peak. The GPI spectra for the particles with
the smallest number of electrons (10–30 electrons) do not exhibit
such a feature. A distinct peak only begins to appear for ∼50
electrons and is relatively well developed only around 100 electrons.
The absence of a clear peak in the GPI spectra for low number of electrons
suggests a complementary criterion for identifying plasmonic behavior
based on the shape of the peak. To this end we introduce the quantity , where
η(ω → 0) is the
value of the GPI at zero frequency, and ηmax = η(ωGPI), where ωGPI is the energy of the GPI
resonance (which has coincided with the RPA plasmon resonance ωRPA in all cases considered so far). In the zero-frequency
limit, no plasmons are excited, and the induced fields screen the
external fields almost perfectly, leading to η(ω →
0) = 1 except for very small systems with large quantum size effects
(Figure S2). A value of Δ close to
1 implies a well-defined GPI resonance and is thus a signature of
plasmonic behavior. In Figure 7c, we plot ω0 and ωRPA (top),
ηmax (middle), and Δ (bottom) for the different
nanospheres. The evolution of ωRPA clearly shows
a square root trend as a function of electron density, as predicted
by classical theory, while the peaks of ω0 do not
change significantly. The middle panel in Figure 7c shows a monotonic increase of ηmax with electron density, reaching ηmax >
2 when the electron number exceeds 100. In the bottom panel of Figure 7c, we plot the Δ
values obtained from the GPI spectra (Figure 7b) and find that Δ also increases monotonically
with electron density. The results in Figure 7 allow us to formulate two equivalent criteria
for plasmonic behavior: ηmax > 2 and Δ >
0.5.
All metrics introduced in Figure 7c are consistent with plasmonic behavior emerging for
NPs with more than 100 electrons in the present D = 8 nm NP. More details on how the Δ quantity is related to
the separation between ωRPA and ω0 and to the λ dispersion of the ωλ resonance
in the scaling procedure as well as its size dependence are presented
in Section 2 of the SI. Overall, the GPI
and the corresponding Δ quantity provide an intuitive approach
for quantifying plasmonic behavior in a nanostructure.

Plasmons in
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons and Nanostructured
Graphene
Graphene nanostructures exhibit low-energy plasmons
that strongly depend on the level of electrical doping and geometry.63 When the size of a structure is reduced so that
it contains only a few carbon atoms, one encounters polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs), which were predicted38 and experimentally demonstrated37 to
exhibit qualitatively similar behavior as graphene. These discoveries
have stimulated a variety of studies and created a subfield of quantum
plasmonics research, molecular plasmonics. Classification of the optical
modes supported by PAHs initially relied upon the χ versus χ0 criterion discussed above,38,64 but as demonstrated below, the GPI provides a more universal criterion
to identify plasmonic behavior in these systems as well.

In Figure 8, we present a GPI
analysis of the dominant low-energy optical features in triangular-shaped
PAHs of increasing size (measured by the number of benzene hexagonal
rings Nh along the triangle side), doped
only with one excess electron. We calculate the optical response of
these systems following a previously reported RPA approach (tight-binding
RPA, TB-RPA),65,66 using valence electron wave functions
from a tight-binding model with one spin-degenerate pz orbital per carbon site. A characteristic TB-RPA
absorption spectrum (Figure 8a for a PAH of Nh = 4 consisting
of NC = 60 carbon atoms) clearly reveals
a distinct optical resonance around 1.3 eV. The corresponding GPI
spectrum (Figure 8b)
also displays a maximum at the energy of this peak. The dependence
of the GPI maximum ηmax on PAH size (Figure 8c) reveals a clear evolution
from plasmon-like behavior (GPI > 7) for the smallest molecule
under
consideration (triphenylene, with Nh = 2 and only NC = 18 carbon atoms) to less plasmonic character
for large sizes as expected.37,38 The molecular plasmon
in a PAH is enabled by a change of the electronic structure associated
with addition (or removal) of electrons, while for graphene, it is
the injected electrons or holes that make up the electron gas sustaining
the plasmon. As the structure becomes larger, the electron density
becomes smaller, resulting in less plasmonic behavior, as also shown
for the jellium spheres in Figure 7. We thus conclude that very small PAHs can display
plasmons, even when they are singly charged. In this respect, we note
that the effective number of electrons contributing to the plasmonic
strength is augmented in graphene by the nonparabolic band structure
of its conduction electrons, so that a comparatively small number
of doping charge carriers produces a comparatively larger response
than in metals (i.e., systems with nearly parabolic
dispersion). This effect is quantified by the fact that the effective
number of charge carriers contributing to the response is roughly
given by the geometrical average of the number of doping charges times
the number of carbon atoms, as it has been previously investigated
for small PAHs.63 This explains why plasmons
are sustained in these systems even if they have a small number of
electrons compared with the jellium spheres considered in Figure 7.

Figure 8 (a) Absorption spectrum
for the singly charged Nh = 4 hexagon
(containing NC = 60 carbon atoms) normalized
to the nanotriangle area. (b) The
corresponding GPI spectrum. (c) Size evolution of the GPI at the plasmon
resonances of armchair graphene nanotriangles (see carbon atomic structures
in the insets) doped with a single excess electron. The size Nh denotes the number of benzene hexagonal rings
spanning each side. The assumed damping is 25 meV. Edge carbons are
passivated with hydrogen atoms (not shown).

In Figure 9, we
consider a graphene nanotriangle of fixed size (Nh = 9, with NC = 270 carbon
atoms). The TB-RPA absorption spectra shown in Figure 9a display an interesting evolution as the
number of doping electrons increases. The spectra exhibit two distinct
resonances (low- and high-energy features marked with dashed curves
as guides to the eye in Figure 9b). The low-energy feature discussed in Figure 8 (i.e., the leftmost feature
of the Q/e = −1 spectrum
in Figure 9a, corresponding
to the red arrow in Figure 8c) blue shifts when adding electrons, following a similar
frequency dependence ∼ Q1/4 on
doping charge Q as in extended graphene.65 As inferred from the analysis of Figure 8, the structure is sufficiently
large to prevent plasmonic behavior with only one doping electron.
However, as revealed by the GPI spectral analysis (Figure 9b), the low-energy feature
becomes more plasmonic with increasing electron density. In contrast,
the high-energy feature in the plotted spectra does not exhibit such
behavior and becomes less plasmonic with increasing electron density.
This feature is associated with the HOMO–LUMO IBT found in
the electronic structure of armchair-edged graphene nanotriangles32,55 and is quenched as the LUMO states are populated with additional
electrons due to Pauli blocking67 (see
Section S7 in the SI). Consequently, the
GPI peak of this high-energy feature mostly decreases with doping,
unlike the low-energy feature, which increases until it saturates
at GPI ∼ 10.

Figure 9 (a) Absorption spectra of a 4 nm armchair graphene nanotriangle
(containing NC = 270 carbon atoms and Nh = 9 benzene rings along a side, see inset),
shown as the number of added electrons increases from 1 to 9. (b)
Evolution of the GPI associated with the spectra shown in (a). The
dashed lines are guides to the eye, revealing the evolution of two
prominent modes supported by the structure as the doping charge is
varied. (c) GPI maxima for the two resonances highlighted in (b),
where the square (circular) symbols correspond to the lower-energy
(higher-energy) mode.

Conclusions
We have presented a unified theoretical
approach for the identification
of collective plasmon excitations that can be applied to different
complementary descriptions ranging from ab initio methods to classical electrodynamics of continuous media. In particular
we introduced the generalized plasmonicity index (GPI) as a metric
for the evaluation of plasmonic behavior. The GPI is directly expressed
in terms of the light-induced electron density change, a quantity
that is readily available in virtually any computational scheme. Using
this metric, we studied the emergence of plasmonic behavior with increasing
numbers of electrons in a spherical jellium particle. Specifically,
we demonstrated that for a quantum plasmon mode to display classical
behavior for a NP of nanometer size (D = 8 nm), around
100 electrons are needed. We also showed that the GPI can be used
in conjunction with classical electromagnetic simulations to discriminate
between plasmonic and photonic modes and that it represents a metric
for classifying the quality of a classical plasmon.

Moving toward
the molecular scale, we demonstrated that the GPI
also provides a physically sound classification of the plasmonic character
of optical excitations in noble-metal clusters and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons. The presented findings introduce a systematic classification
of excitations in terms of their plasmonic character that can disclose
currently incognito plasmonic-based physics in optically
active nanomaterials.

Methods
Jellium Model
The jellium spheres were modeled with
an electron density and background permittivity of 9.1 as appropriate
for Au. The optical spectra were calculated using the time-dependent
local density approximation (TDLDA), which amounts to first calculating
the electronic structure using LDA and then solving for the optical
response using the full RPA with a suitably chosen functional to include
interactions between electrons.26,46,47 The electronic ground states were calculated from the Kohn–Sham
equations: M1  where m is the electron
mass, ulk(r) the
radial wave functions, and Elk the corresponding eigenenergies for angular and principal
quantum wave numbers l and k. Veff(r) is the effective one-electron
potential at position r: , where Vext is a constant external potential adjusted
so that the work function
of gold is reproduced, Vxc is the exchange–correlation
potential,68n(r) is the local electron density, and Vh is the Hartree potential.

Random-Phase Approximation
After obtaining the eigenstates
and eigenvalues, the absorption spectra were computed using the RPA.26,69 The induced charge distribution can be calculated from M2  where
χ(r,r′,ω) is the density
response function kernel and χ0(r,r′,ω) is the irreducible
response function for independent electrons. Also, vtot(r,ω) = vext(r,ω) + λvind(r,ω) is the total potential consisting of the
external potential vext(r,ω) and the induced potential vind(r,ω), which is defined as vind(r,ω) = ∫dr′K(r,r′)δn(r′,ω) with K(r,r′) being the Coulomb interaction
kernel. As mentioned earlier, we introduced a scaling parameter λ,
denoting the fraction of induced Coulomb potential vind(r,ω) that enters into the total
potential vtot(r,ω).
When λ = 0, the induced potential is turned off and χ(r,r′,ω) = χ0(r,r′,ω). In this case, the Coulomb
interaction between globally distributed induced charges is ignored,
and only single-electron transitions are considered, as illustrated
in the right-hand side of Figure 1. When λ = 1, we recover the full RPA framework.
From the induced charge density, it is convenient to introduce the
local dipolar polarizability defined as α(r, ω) ≡ r2·δn(r,ω). The RPA equation can then
be expressed in terms of the dipolar polarizability as M3  in
which α0(r, ω) = ∫χl = 10(r,r′,
ω)vext(r′,
ω)dr′
and P(r, ω) is proportional
to the dipolar component of the independent response function for
the independent charge susceptibility χl = 10 in the quasistatic limit.26 By introducing
the dipolar polarizability  the dipolar
absorption is obtained through
the relation: M4   M5  where c is the speed
of light. Eq M4 can
be applied to all
systems where the RPA framework holds, and thus, it is not limited
to the jellium model studied here.

Tight-Binding RPA Description
of PAHs
We followed a
previously described method65,66 to obtain the single-particle,
valence-electron wave functions of graphene-related structures using
a tight-binding model that incorporates a single out-of-plane p orbital
per carbon site l, with a nearest-neighbor hopping
energy of 2.8 eV (edge atoms are considered to be hydrogen-passivated
and undergo the same hopping with their nearest-neighbors). We then
adapted the RPA formalism to express the response in this discrete
basis set, which results in an induced charge density ρlind at each site Rl, as well
as induced and external potentials ϕlind and ϕlext. This allows us to calculate the absorption cross-section (neglecting
retardation) for a unit external electric field as σabs(ω) = Σl(4πω/c)RlIm{ρlind}, and the GPI as M6  Incidentally, this TB-RPA
approach yields
results in excellent agreement with full-electron TDDFT down to small
structures,38 such as the triphenylene
molecule (NC = 18 carbon atoms) considered
above.

TDDFT-Based Calculations
The electronic structures
and absorption spectra of metallic and semiconductor nanoclusters
were simulated using the Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) suite of codes,70 based on TDDFT within periodic boundary conditions.
The PBE71 generalized gradient approximation
(GGA) to the exchange–correlation (xc) functional was adopted.
No Brillouin zone sampling was performed, given these are finite systems.
Vanderbilt ab initio ultrasoft (US) scalar-relativistic
pseudopotentials (PPs)72 were used to describe
the core electrons and nuclei; however, the 4d electrons of Ag were
explicitly included. The single-particle wave functions were expanded
in plane waves up to a kinetic energy cutoff of 45 Ry for Ag clusters
and 28 Ry for Si nanocrystals. Consistent with these values and the
use of US-PPs, the kinetic energy cutoff for the charge densities
was 540 and 280 Ry, respectively. The calculated GPI was not much
sensitive to the xc functional used: test calculations performed on
Ag20, using LDA and hybrid B3LYP xc functionals, as well
as with norm-conserving PPs on Ag20 and [Ag13]5+, were very similar to the results from PBE-US-PPs.
All simulations exploit periodically repeated supercells, each containing
the system and a suitable amount of vacuum (12 Å at least) in
the three spatial directions, in order to separate adjacent replica
and to avoid spurious interactions. A compensating jellium background
was inserted to remove divergences in the charged systems. Since this
may cause errors in the potential if the cell is not large enough,
we run a test by calculating GPIs for [Ag13]5+ with a larger cell (amount of vacuum increased by 50%). The picture
provided by the resulting GPI was the same. The ideal icosahedral
silver clusters were created by adding Mackay shells according to
the homonymous protocol,73,74 using the experimental
bulk value for the bond length. Silicon nanocrystals were obtained
from the bulk silicon whose dangling bonds were passivated with hydrogen
atoms. All the atomic structures were relaxed by using QE with the
PBE-GGA xc functional. The TurboTDDFT code,75 also distributed within QE package, was employed to compute the
optical absorption spectra, as detailed elsewhere,39 and the response charge densities of Ag and Si NPs. This
code implements the Liouville–Lanczos approach to linearized
TDDFT76 in the frequency domain; it is
optimized to treat relatively large systems and enables calculation
of spectra over a wide energy range. For each polarization of the
external electric field, 10,000 Lanczos iterations were performed
and then averaged over the three spatial coordinates to obtain the
spectra.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b03421.Plasmonicity index
discussion (S1); quantitative methods
for distinguishing a plasmon from a single particle transition (S2);
decomposition of the RPA excitation energy (S3); the GPI is proportional
to Eplas at resonance (S4); the GPI in
the quasistatic limit (S5); more on ab initio absorption
spectra of clusters, induced charge densities, PI and GPI (S6); and
further details into the plasmonic nature of PAHs excitations (S7)
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn7b03421_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
◇ Laboratory for Nanophotonics and the Department of Physics and
Astronomy, MS61, Rice University, Houston TX 77005, United States

Author Contributions
P.N.
and
J.G.A. conceived the project. R.Z. and H.Z. performed the jellium
calculations and developed the GPI metric. A.C., S.C., and E.M. designed
the cluster calculations. S.C. and L.B. derived eq 10. L.B. and A.C.
performed the Ag cluster calculations. J.DC. performed the TB-RPA
calculations.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by
the Robert A. Welch Foundation
under grant C-1222 (P.N.), the Air Force Office of Scientific Research
under grant MURI FA9550-15-1-0022 (P.N. and E.A.C.), the Spanish MINECO
(MAT2014-59096-P, Fundació Privada Cellex, and SEV2015-0522),
the European Commission (Graphene Flagship CNECT-ICT-604391 and FP7-ICT-2013-613024-
GRASP), the European Union through the ERC Consolidator Grant 681285
TAME-Plasmons (S.C.), and the European Center of Excellence ‘MaX-Materials
at the exascale’, grant 676598 (E.M.). A.M. acknowledges financial
support from the Department of Physics and Astronomy and the College
of Arts and Sciences of the University of New Mexico. C.M.K. acknowledges
support by a fellowship within the Postdoc Program of the German Academic
Exchange Service (DAAD).
==== Refs
References
Novotny L. ; Hecht B.  Principles of Nano-Optics ; Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , 2012 .
Zeng S. ; Baillargeat D. ; Ho H.-P. ; Yong K.-T. 
Nanomaterials Enhanced
Surface Plasmon Resonance for Biological and Chemical Sensing Applications . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 3426 –3452 10.1039/c3cs60479a .24549396 
Zhang R. ; Zhang Y. ; Dong Z. C. ; Jiang S. ; Zhang C. ; Chen L. G. ; Zhang L. ; Liao Y. ; Aizpurua J. ; Luo Y. ; Yang J. L. ; Hou J. G. 
Chemical Mapping of a Single Molecule
by Plasmon-Enhanced Raman Scattering . Nature 
2013 , 498 , 82 –86 10.1038/nature12151 .23739426 
Moskovits M. 
Surface-Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy: A Brief Retrospective . J.
Raman Spectrosc. 
2005 , 36 , 485 –496 10.1002/jrs.1362 .
Neubrech F. ; Huck C. ; Weber K. ; Pucci A. ; Giessen H. 
Surface-Enhanced
Infrared Spectroscopy Using Resonant Nanoantennas . Chem. Rev. 
2017 , 117 , 5510 –5145 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00743 .
Oulton R. F. ; Sorger V. J. ; Genov D. A. ; Pile D. F. P. ; Zhang X. 
A Hybrid Plasmonic
Waveguide for Subwavelength Confinement and Long-Range Propagation . Nat. Photonics 
2008 , 2 , 496 –500 10.1038/nphoton.2008.131 .
Cushing S. K. ; Li J. ; Meng F. ; Senty T. R. ; Suri S. ; Zhi M. ; Li M. ; Bristow A. D. ; Wu N. 
Photocatalytic Activity Enhanced
by Plasmonic Resonant Energy Transfer from Metal to Semiconductor . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 15033 –15041 10.1021/ja305603t .22891916 
Linic S. ; Christopher P. ; Ingram D. B. 
Plasmonic-Metal Nanostructures for
Efficient Conversion of Solar to Chemical Energy . Nat. Mater. 
2011 , 10 , 911 –921 10.1038/nmat3151 .22109608 
McFarland E.
W. ; Tang J. 
A Photovoltaic
Device Structure Based on Internal Electron Emission . Nature 
2003 , 421 , 616 –618 10.1038/nature01316 .12571591 
Atwater H. A. ; Polman A. 
Plasmonics for Improved Photovoltaic Devices . Nat. Mater. 
2010 , 9 , 865 –865 10.1038/nmat2866 .
Brongersma M. L. ; Halas N. J. ; Nordlander P. 
Plasmon-Induced Hot Carrier Science
and Technology . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 10 , 25 –34 10.1038/nnano.2014.311 .25559968 
Christopher P. ; Xin H. ; Linic S. 
Visible-Light-Enhanced
Catalytic Oxidation Reactions
on Plasmonic Silver Nanostructures . Nat. Chem. 
2011 , 3 , 467 –472 10.1038/nchem.1032 .21602862 
O’Neal D. P. ; Hirsch L. R. ; Halas N. J. ; Payne J. D. ; West J. L. 
Photo-Thermal
Tumor Ablation in Mice Using near-Infrared-Absorbing Nanoparticles . Cancer Lett. 
2004 , 209 , 171 –176 10.1016/j.canlet.2004.02.004 .15159019 
Scholl J. A. ; Koh A. L. ; Dionne J. A. 
Quantum Plasmon
Resonances of Individual
Metallic Nanoparticles . Nature 
2012 , 483 , 421 –427 10.1038/nature10904 .22437611 
Savage K. J. ; Hawkeye M. M. ; Esteban R. ; Borisov A. G. ; Aizpurua J. ; Baumberg J. J. 
Revealing the Quantum
Regime in Tunnelling Plasmonics . Nature 
2012 , 491 , 574 –577 10.1038/nature11653 .23135399 
Scholl J. A. ; García-Etxarri A. ; Koh A. L. ; Dionne J. A. 
Observation
of Quantum Tunneling between Two Plasmonic Nanoparticles . Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 564 –569 10.1021/nl304078v .23245286 
Li G.-C. ; Zhang Y.-L. ; Jiang J. ; Luo Y. ; Lei D. Y. 
Metal-Substrate-Mediated
Plasmon Hybridization in a Nanoparticle Dimer for Photoluminescence
Line-Width Shrinking and Intensity Enhancement . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 3067 –3080 10.1021/acsnano.7b00048 .28291332 
Lei D. Y. ; Aubry A. ; Luo Y. ; Maier S. A. ; Pendry J. B. 
Plasmonic
Interaction between Overlapping Nanowires . ACS
Nano 
2011 , 5 , 597 –607 10.1021/nn102819p .21190374 
Lei D. Y. ; Fernández-Domínguez A. I. ; Sonnefraud Y. ; Appavoo K. ; Haglund R. F. ; Pendry J. B. ; Maier S. A. 
Revealing
Plasmonic Gap Modes in Particle-on-Film Systems Using Dark-Field Spectroscopy . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 1380 –1386 10.1021/nn204190e .22256972 
Marinica D. C. ; Zapata M. ; Nordlander P. ; Kazansky A. K. ; Echenique P. M. ; Aizpurua J. ; Borisov A. G. 
Active Quantum Plasmonics . Sci. Adv. 
2015 , 1 , e1501095 10.1126/sciadv.1501095 .26824066 
Zheng Y. B. ; Yang Y. W. ; Jensen L. ; Fang L. ; Juluri B. K. ; Flood A. H. ; Weiss P. S. ; Stoddart J. F. ; Huang T. J. 
Active
Molecular Plasmonics: Controlling Plasmon Resonances with Molecular
Switches . Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 819 –825 10.1021/nl803539g .19119869 
Morton S. M. ; Silverstein D. W. ; Jensen L. 
Theoretical Studies of Plasmonics
Using Electronic Structure Methods . Chem. Rev. 
2011 , 111 , 3962 –3994 10.1021/cr100265f .21344862 
Zuloaga J. ; Prodan E. ; Nordlander P. 
Quantum Description
of the Plasmon
Resonances of a Nanoparticle Dimer . Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 887 –891 10.1021/nl803811g .19159319 
Esteban R. ; Borisov A. G. ; Nordlander P. ; Aizpurua J. 
Bridging Quantum and
Classical Plasmonics with a Quantum-Corrected Model . Nat. Commun. 
2012 , 3 , 825 10.1038/ncomms1806 .22569369 
Chen X. ; Moore J. E. ; Zekarias M. ; Jensen L. ; Case D. A. 
Atomistic
Electrodynamics Simulations of Bare and Ligand-Coated Nanoparticles
in the Quantum Size Regime . Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 8921 10.1038/ncomms9921 .26555179 
Zhang H. ; Kulkarni V. ; Prodan E. ; Nordlander P. ; Govorov A. O. O. 
Theory of Quantum Plasmon Resonances
in Doped Semiconductor
Nanocrystals . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 16035 –16042 10.1021/jp5046035 .
Carmina
Monreal R. ; Antosiewicz T. J. ; Apell S. P. 
Competition between
Surface Screening and Size Quantization for Surface Plasmons in Nanoparticles . New J. Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 83044 10.1088/1367-2630/15/8/083044 .
Johnson H. E. ; Aikens C. M. 
Electronic Structure
and TDDFT Optical Absorption Spectra
of Silver Nanorods† . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2009 , 113 , 4445 –4450 10.1021/jp811075u .19296635 
Krauter C. M. ; Schirmer J. ; Jacob C. R. ; Pernpointner M. ; Dreuw A. 
Plasmons in Molecules: Microscopic
Characterization Based on Orbital
Transitions and Momentum Conservation . J. Chem.
Phys. 
2014 , 141 , 104101 10.1063/1.4894266 .25217898 
Bernadotte S. ; Evers F. ; Jacob C. R. 
Plasmons
in Molecules . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 1863 –1878 10.1021/jp3113073 .
Guidez E. B. ; Aikens C. M. 
Quantum Mechanical
Origin of the Plasmon: From Molecular
Systems to Nanoparticles . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 11512 –11527 10.1039/C4NR02225D .25163494 
Krauter C. M. ; Bernadotte S. ; Jacob C. R. ; Pernpointner M. ; Dreuw A. 
Identification of Plasmons
in Molecules with Scaled Ab Initio Approaches . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 24564 –24573 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b07659 .
Jain P. K. 
Plasmon-in-a-Box:
On the Physical Nature of Few-Carrier Plasmon Resonances . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2014 , 5 , 3112 –3119 10.1021/jz501456t .26276321 
Yan J. ; Yuan Z. ; Gao S. 
End and Central Plasmon Resonances
in Linear Atomic Chains . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2007 , 98 , 216602 10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.216602 .17677796 
Yan J. ; Gao S. 
Plasmon Resonances
in Linear Atomic Chains: Free-Electron Behavior
and Anisotropic Screening of D Electrons . Phys.
Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2008 , 78 , 235413 10.1103/PhysRevB.78.235413 .
Fitzgerald J. M. ; Azadi S. ; Giannini V. 
Quantum Plasmonic Nanoantennas . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2017 , 95 , 235414 10.1103/PhysRevB.95.235414 .
Lauchner A. ; Schlather A. E. ; Manjavacas A. ; Cui Y. ; McClain M. J. ; Stec G. J. ; Garíca de Abajo F. J. ; Nordlander P. ; Halas N. J. 
Molecular Plasmonics . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 6208 –6214 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b02549 .26244925 
Manjavacas A. ; Marchesin F. ; Thongrattanasiri S. ; Koval P. ; Nordlander P. ; Sánchez-Portal D. ; García de Abajo F. J. 
Tunable
Molecular Plasmons in Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 3635 –3643 10.1021/nn4006297 .23484678 
Bursi L. ; Calzolari A. ; Corni S. ; Molinari E. 
Light-Induced Field
Enhancement in Nanoscale Systems from First-Principles: The Case of
Polyacenes . ACS Photonics 
2014 , 1 , 1049 –1058 10.1021/ph500269q .
Cui Y. ; Lauchner A. ; Manjavacas A. ; García de Abajo F. J. ; Halas N. J. ; Nordlander P. 
Molecular
Plasmon–Phonon Coupling . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 , 6390 –6395 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b02800 .27668447 
Townsend E. ; Bryant G. W. 
Which Resonances
in Small Metallic Nanoparticles Are
Plasmonic? . J. Opt. 
2014 , 16 , 114022 10.1088/2040-8978/16/11/114022 .
Townsend E. ; Debrecht A. ; Bryant G. W. 
Approaching
the Quantum Limit for
Nanoplasmonics . J. Mater. Res. 
2015 , 30 , 2389 –2399 10.1557/jmr.2015.232 .
Manjavacas A. ; García de Abajo F. J. 
Tunable
Plasmons in Atomically Thin
Gold Nanodisks . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 3548 10.1038/ncomms4548 .24671020 
Bursi L. ; Calzolari A. ; Corni S. ; Molinari E. 
Quantifying the Plasmonic
Character of Optical Excitations in Nanostructures . ACS Photonics 
2016 , 3 , 520 –525 10.1021/acsphotonics.5b00688 .
Yan W. ; Mortensen N. A. 
Nonclassical Effects in Plasmonics: An Energy Perspective
to Quantify Nonclassical Effects . Phys. Rev.
B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2016 , 93 , 115439 10.1103/PhysRevB.93.115439 .
Prodan E. ; Nordlander P. 
Electronic Structure and Polarizability of Metallic
Nanoshells . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2002 , 352 , 140 –146 10.1016/S0009-2614(01)01409-9 .
Prodan E. ; Nordlander P. ; Halas N. J. 
Effects of Dielectric Screening on
the Optical Properties of Metallic Nanoshells . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2003 , 368 , 94 –101 10.1016/S0009-2614(02)01828-6 .
Pines D. ; Bohm D. 
A Collective Description of Electron
Interactions: II. Collective
vs Individual Particle Aspects of the Interactions . Phys. Rev. 
1952 , 85 , 338 –353 10.1103/PhysRev.85.338 .
Prodan E. ; Nordlander P. 
Plasmon Hybridization in Spherical Nanoparticles . J. Chem. Phys. 
2004 , 120 , 5444 –5454 10.1063/1.1647518 .15267418 
Jackson J. D.  Classical Electrodynamics , 3 rd ed; John Wiley & Sons,
Inc. : New York , 1998 .
Pines D. ; Nozières P.  . Theory of Quantum Liquids , Advanced Book Program; Perseus Books : Cambridge, MA , 1995 .
Lindhard J. 
On the Properties
of a Gas of Charged Particles . Kgl. Danske Vidensk.
Selsk. Mater.-fys. Medd. 
1954 , 28 , 1 –57 .
Grosso G. ; Pastori Parravicini G.  Solid State
Physics ; Academic Press : Oxford , 2000 .
Andersen K. ; Jacobsen K. W. ; Thygesen K. S. 
Spatially Resolved Quantum Plasmon
Modes in Metallic Nano-Films from First-Principles . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2012 , 86 , 245129 10.1103/PhysRevB.86.245129 .
Casida M. E.  Recent Advances in
Density Functional Methods , Recent Advances in Computational
Chemistry; Chong D.E.  ,
Ed.; World Scientific : Singapore , 1995 ; Vol. 1 .
Johnson P. B. ; Christy R. W. 
Optical Constants
of the Noble Metals . Phys. Rev. B 
1972 , 6 , 4370 –4379 10.1103/PhysRevB.6.4370 .
Sautter J. ; Staude I. ; Decker M. ; Rusak E. ; Neshev D. N. ; Brener I. ; Kivshar Y. S. 
Active
Tuning of All-Dielectric Metasurfaces . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 4308 –4315 10.1021/acsnano.5b00723 .25748581 
Yang Z.-J. 
Fano Interference
of Electromagnetic Modes in Subwavelength Dielectric Nanocrosses . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 21843 –21849 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b07902 .
Kuisma M. ; Sakko A. ; Rossi T. P. ; Larsen A. H. ; Enkovaara J. ; Lehtovaara L. ; Rantala T. T. 
Localized Surface
Plasmon Resonance
in Silver Nanoparticles: Atomistic First-Principles Time-Dependent
Density-Functional Theory Calculations . Phys.
Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2015 , 91 , 115431 10.1103/PhysRevB.91.115431 .
Baseggio O. ; De Vetta M. ; Fronzoni G. ; Stener M. ; Sementa L. ; Fortunelli A. ; Calzolari A. 
Photoabsorption
of Icosahedral Noble
Metal Clusters . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 12773 –12782 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b04709 .
Aikens C. M. ; Li S. ; Schatz G. C. 
From Discrete
Electronic States to Plasmons: TDDFT
Optical Absorption Properties of Agn (N = 10, 20, 35, 56, 84, 120)
Tetrahedral Clusters . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2008 , 112 , 11272 –11279 10.1021/jp802707r .
Luppi E. ; Iori F. ; Magri R. ; Pulci O. ; Ossicini S. ; Degoli E. ; Olevano V. 
Excitons in
Silicon Nanocrystallites:
The Nature of Luminescence . Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys. 
2007 , 75 , 33303 10.1103/PhysRevB.75.033303 .
García
de Abajo F. J. 
Graphene Plasmonics: Challenges and Opportunities . ACS Photonics 
2014 , 1 , 135 –152 10.1021/ph400147y .
Manjavacas A. ; Thongrattanasiri S. ; García de Abajo F. J. 
Plasmons Driven
by Single Electrons in Graphene Nanoislands . Nanophotonics 
2013 , 2 , 139 –151 10.1515/nanoph-2012-0035 .
Thongrattanasiri S. ; Manjavacas A. ; García de Abajo F. J. 
Quantum Finite-Size
Effects in Graphene Plasmons . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 1766 –1775 10.1021/nn204780e .22217250 
Cox J. D. ; Javier García de
Abajo F. 
Electrically Tunable Nonlinear Plasmonics
in Graphene Nanoislands . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 5725 10.1038/ncomms6725 .25500534 
Griffiths D. J.  Introduction to Quantum
Mechanics ; 2 nd ed.; Pearson
Education : Essex, England , 2005 .
Perdew J.
P. ; Zunger A. 
Self-Interaction
Correction to Density-Functional Approximations
for Many-Electron Systems . Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys. 
1981 , 23 , 5048 –5079 10.1103/PhysRevB.23.5048 .
Prodan E. ; Nordlander P. ; Halas N. J. 
Electronic Structure
and Optical
Properties of Gold Nanoshells . Nano Lett. 
2003 , 3 , 1411 –1415 10.1021/nl034594q .
Giannozzi P. ; Baroni S. ; Bonini N. ; Calandra M. ; Car R. ; Cavazzoni C. ; Ceresoli D. ; Chiarotti G. L. ; Cococcioni M. ; Dabo I. ; Dal Corso A. ; de Gironcoli S. ; Fabris S. ; Fratesi G. ; Gebauer R. ; Gerstmann U. ; Gougoussis C. ; Kokalj A. ; Lazzeri M. ; Martin-Samos L. ; et al. QUANTUM ESPRESSO: A Modular and Open-Source
Software Project for Quantum Simulations of Materials . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2009 , 21 , 395502 10.1088/0953-8984/21/39/395502 .21832390 
Perdew J. P. ; Burke K. ; Ernzerhof M. 
Generalized
Gradient Approximation
Made Simple . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1996 , 77 , 3865 –3868 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865 .10062328 
Vanderbilt D. 
Soft Self-Consistent
Pseudopotentials in a Generalized Eigenvalue Formalism . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1990 , 41 , 7892 –7895 10.1103/PhysRevB.41.7892 .
Mackay A. L. 
IUCr. A
Dense Non-Crystallographic Packing of Equal Spheres . Acta Crystallogr. 
1962 , 15 , 916 –918 10.1107/S0365110X6200239X .
Kuo K. H. 
Mackay,
Anti-Mackay, Double-Mackay, Pseudo-Mackay, and Related Icosahedral
Shell Clusters . Struct. Chem. 
2002 , 13 , 221 –230 10.1023/A:1015847520094 .
Ge X. ; Binnie S. J. ; Rocca D. ; Gebauer R. ; Baroni S. 
turboTDDFT
2.0—Hybrid Functionals and New Algorithms within Time-Dependent
Density-Functional Perturbation Theory . Comput.
Phys. Commun. 
2014 , 185 , 2080 –2089 10.1016/j.cpc.2014.03.005 .
Fundamentals of Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory , Lecture Notes in Physics; Marques M. A. L. ; Maitra N. T. ; Nogueira F. M. S. ; Gross E. K. U. ; Rubio A.  , Eds.; Springer : Berlin, Germany , 2012 ; Vol. 837 .
Palik E.  Handbook of Optical Constants
of Solids ; Academic Press : San Diego, CA , 1998 .
Cheng F. ; Su P. H. ; Choi J. ; Gwo S. ; Li X. ; Shih C. K. 
Epitaxial Growth of Atomically Smooth
Aluminum on Silicon
and Its Intrinsic Optical Properties . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 9852 –9860 10.1021/acsnano.6b05556 .27656756

