
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.7b01385ArticleHyaluronan
Nanoparticles Selectively Target Plaque-Associated Macrophages and
Improve Plaque Stability in Atherosclerosis Beldman Thijs J. †Senders Max L. †Alaarg Amr ‡§Pérez-Medina Carlos ‡Tang Jun ‡¶Zhao Yiming ‡Fay Francois ‡Deichmöller Jacqueline ⊥∥Born Benjamin ⊥Desclos Emilie #van der Wel Nicole N. #Hoebe Ron A. #Kohen Fortune ⊥Kartvelishvily Elena □Neeman Michal ⊥Reiner Thomas ¶△Calcagno Claudia ‡Fayad Zahi A. ‡de Winther Menno P. J. †▽Lutgens Esther †▽Mulder Willem J. M. †‡Kluza Ewelina *††Experimental
Vascular Biology, Department of Medical Biochemistry,
and #Cellular Imaging, AMC
Core Facility, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands‡ Department of Radiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, United States¶ Department of Radiology, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, United States§ Department
of Biomaterials Science and Technology, MIRA Institute for Biomedical
Technology and Technical Medicine, University
of Twente, Enschede 7522 NB, The Netherlands⊥Department of Biological Regulation and □Department of Chemical Research
Support, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel∥ Physical Chemistry II, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum 44801, Germany△ Department of Radiology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10065, United States▽ Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich 80336, Germany* E-mail: e.kluza@amc.uva.nl. Tel: +31(0)205665296.02 05 2017 27 06 2017 11 6 5785 5799 27 02 2017 02 05 2017 Copyright © 2017 American
Chemical Society2017American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Hyaluronan is a biologically active polymer, which can be formulated
into nanoparticles. In our study, we aimed to probe atherosclerosis-associated
inflammation by using hyaluronan nanoparticles and to determine whether
they can ameliorate atherosclerosis. Hyaluronan nanoparticles (HA-NPs)
were prepared by reacting amine-functionalized oligomeric hyaluronan
(HA) with cholanic ester and labeled with a fluorescent or radioactive
label. HA-NPs were characterized in vitro by several
advanced microscopy methods. The targeting properties and biodistribution
of HA-NPs were studied in apoe–/– mice, which received either fluorescent or radiolabeled HA-NPs
and were examined ex vivo by flow cytometry or nuclear
techniques. Furthermore, three atherosclerotic rabbits received 89Zr-HA-NPs and were imaged by PET/MRI. The therapeutic effects
of HA-NPs were studied in apoe–/– mice, which received weekly doses of 50 mg/kg HA-NPs during
a 12-week high-fat diet feeding period. Hydrated HA-NPs were ca. 90 nm in diameter and displayed very stable morphology
under hydrolysis conditions. Flow cytometry revealed a 6- to 40-fold
higher uptake of Cy7-HA-NPs by aortic macrophages compared to normal
tissue macrophages. Interestingly, both local and systemic HA-NP–immune
cell interactions significantly decreased over the disease progression. 89Zr-HA-NPs-induced radioactivity in atherosclerotic aortas
was 30% higher than in wild-type controls. PET imaging of rabbits
revealed 6-fold higher standardized uptake values compared to the
muscle. The plaques of HA-NP-treated mice contained 30% fewer macrophages
compared to control and free HA-treated group. In conclusion, we show
favorable targeting properties of HA-NPs, which can be exploited for
PET imaging of atherosclerosis-associated inflammation. Furthermore,
we demonstrate the anti-inflammatory effects of HA-NPs in atherosclerosis.

hyaluronan nanoparticlesatherosclerosisinflammationPET imaginganti-inflammatory effectsantiatherogenic therapydocument-id-old-9nn7b01385document-id-new-14nn-2017-01385accc-price
==== Body
Hyaluronan (HA) is a linear polymer
consisting of N-acetylglucosamine and a β-glucuronic
acid, which displays distinctive physicochemical and biological properties.1 As a key component of the extracellular matrix,
it effectively lubricates and binds water, and, by interacting with
several hyaluronan receptors, hyaluronan regulates cell adhesion,
migration, and proliferation.2 During inflammation,
the hyaluronan lining on vascular endothelium mediates immune cell
rolling and extravasation, and at the site of inflammation the hyaluronic-rich
microenvironment stimulates the tissue penetration by and division
of immune cells.3 In oncology, hyaluronan–CD44
receptor interactions have been proposed as key players in tumor progression
and metastasis.4−7 Notably, the biological activity of hyaluronan depends strongly
on its degree of polymerization. Low-molecular-weight hyaluronan oligomers
have been shown to stimulate inflammation and angiogenesis,8−12 whereas highly polymerized (multi) megadalton (MDa) hyaluronan acts
as a suppressor of these processes.8−10,13−16

The aforementioned properties, nonimmunogenicity, and cost-effective
production of hyaluronan have propelled its application in biomedicine.
At present, hyaluronan’s local administration is applied in
arthrology, ophthalmology, and esthetic medicine,17,18 but its systemic application is highly challenging due to rapid
blood clearance19−22 and susceptibility to hydrolysis. In this respect, hyaluronan-based
therapeutics might benefit from nanomedicine-based formulation strategies,
which have shown their tunability for cellular interactions23 and profound impact on the pharmacokinetic properties
of various biomaterials.24,25 Although hyaluronan
has been deposited on the surface of either lipid or polymeric nanoparticles,
studies exploiting the polymeric backbones of hyaluronan for nanoparticle
assembly, which can be achieved by chemical modification of hyaluronan
carboxyl groups, are scarce.26−32

In our study, we exploit hyaluronan suprachemistry to formulate
nanoparticles, which we propose for targeting of atherosclerosis-associated
inflammation.33−36 This is motivated by the critical role of hyaluronan–immune
cell interactions during the inflammatory processes,3 which drive the atherosclerosis progression and severe
complications.37,38 The diagnosis and treatment of
high-risk patients still remains an unresolved problem.39,40 Macrophages, the key propagators of atherosclerosis and primary
phagocytes in atherosclerotic plaques, express several hyaluronan-binding
receptors, including CD44, ICAM-1, LYVE-1, RHAMM, and TLR-4.41−44 Notably, macrophages are a highly dynamic cell population, the molecular
and functional profile of which is strongly influenced by the tissue
microenvironment.45,46 The assessment of these phenotypic
alternations may be of important predictive and prognostic value in
atherosclerosis.

In view of the rapid hyaluronan degradability,
we extensively studied the morphological and chemical stability of
nanoparticle (NP)-formulated hyaluronan. To this aim, we employed
several advanced microscopy methods, including atomic force microscopy,
cryo-scanning electron microscopy, and super-resolution fluorescence
microscopy. Flow cytometry allowed us to study the nature of the interactions
between nanoparticulate hyaluronan and immune cells and how the atherosclerotic
plaque progression affects these interplays. Furthermore, we performed
radiolabeling of HA-NPs with 89Zr for quantitative evaluation
of plaque targeting efficacy, clearance kinetics, and biodistribution
in atherosclerotic apoe–/– mice. The translational impact of 89Zr-HA-NPs was
investigated by noninvasive imaging of atherosclerotic rabbits using
a fully integrated positron emission tomography and magnetic resonance
imaging (PET/MRI) system. We also investigated the impact of hyaluronan
assembly into nanoparticles on its biological activity, by probing
the atheroprotective effects of HA-NPs.

Results and Discussion
Morphology
of Hyaluronan-Based Nanoparticles and the Impact of Hydrolysis
To determine the morphological characteristics of hyaluronan-based
nanoparticles (HA-NPs) and their stability under hydrolytic conditions,
we applied several advanced microscopy methods (Figure 1A). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) revealed
that the air-dried HA-NPs were spherical structures with a mean diameter
of 32 ± 0.5 nm (Figure 1A,B, first panel). Interestingly, after hyaluronidase (HYAL)
treatment, the nanoparticles were still highly abundant and their
size changed only marginally; that is, we observed them to be 26 ±
5.1 nm in diameter. Cryo-scanning electron microscopy (cryo-SEM) of
a snap-frozen sample of HA-NPs in buffered saline showed larger nanoparticles
of ca. 80 nm in diameter (Figure 1A, second panel). In the HYAL-treated samples,
the nanoparticles were also readily present. Wet-mode environmental
SEM (ESEM) showed larger aggregates of HA-NPs compared to all other
methods, which was likely induced by the surface drying (Figure 1A, third panel).
Interestingly, hydrolyzed HA-NPs appeared to retain more water, as
deduced from their lower image contrast at higher vacuum. Direct stochastic
optical reconstruction microscopy (dSTORM) analysis of surface-immobilized
Cy5.5-labeled HA-NPs in aqueous conditions revealed the presence of
fluorescent nanostructures with a median diameter of 90 nm (Figure 1A,B). HYAL treatment
did not affect the nanoparticle size considerably. Notably, however,
Cy5.5 blinking events appeared to be more disperse for HYAL-treated
nanoparticles. In contrast, dSTORM images of disulfo Cy5-COOH, which
was used as a small-molecular-weight control, showed diffusely distributed
Cy5 molecules and only a small degree of molecule aggregation (Figure
S1, Supporting Information).

Figure 1 (A) Hyaluronan nanoparticles
(HA-NPs) (upper panel) and HA-NPs after hyaluronidase (HYAL) treatment
(lower panel) visualized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (first panel),
cryo-scanning electron microscopy (cryo-SEM) (second panel), environmental
scanning electron microscopy (ESEM) (third panel), and direct stochastic
optical reconstruction microscopy (dSTORM) (fourth panel). The scale
bars shown in the lower images refer also to the upper images. White
arrowheads in ESEM images indicate the location of nanoparticles.
The image insets in the fourth panel show representative dSTORM images
of a single nanoparticle at higher magnification. (B) Normalized distribution
of nanoparticle diameter obtained from AFM (left panel) and dSTORM
(right panel) data. In the left panel, the size distribution of HA-NPs
and hydrolyzed HA-NPs (HA-NPs + HYAL) is shown in gray and red, respectively,
and, in the right panel, in black and gray, respectively. (C) Amount
of terminal N-acetlyglucosamine (NAcGlc) released
from hyaluronan (HA) and HA-NPs during hydrolysis with HYAL, which
is expressed as the percentage of total NAcGlc of substrate hyaluronan.
(D) Transmitted light image of stained polyacrylamide gel showing
the migration spots of different molecular weight hyaluronan, i.e., ∼75 kDa (75k), ∼400
kDa (400k), and ∼1.5 MDa (1.5M), nonlabeled hyaluronan nanoparticles
(NPs), fluorescently labeled HA-NPs (NPsL), and their hydrolysis
products. Symbol “+” indicates the hydrolyzed samples.
Two black arrowheads point at the poorly migrating high-molecular-weight
hyaluronan in HA-NP samples. (E) Wide-field (left panel) and two-color
dSTORM (right panel) microscopy images of aortic endothelium of a
mouse that received an injection of Cy5.5-HA-NPs 2 h before sacrifice.
Endothelial cells were stained with CD31-Alexa Fluor 555. (F) Comparison
of HA-NP morphology in a mouse aortic endothelium after the in vivo administration of Cy5.5-HA-NPs and on a coverglass
after the in vitro seeding of Cy5.5-HA-NPs, assessed
by dSTORM. Scale bars in lower images refer to those in the upper
panel.

The
hydrolytic stability of HA-NPs was established by dynamic light scattering
(DLS). Interestingly, the mean hydrodynamic diameter increased from
100 nm to 125 nm after HYAL treatment (intensity-based) (Figure S2A, Supporting Information). Under both neutral and
hydrolytic conditions, there was a small peak (∼10–20%)
of larger aggregates of 600–800 nm. The zeta potential marginally
changed from −31.3 ± 2.6 mV to −33.3 ± 2.2
mV, indicative of a stable nanosuspension. In comparison, the hydrolysis
of high-molecular-weight HA resulted in a zeta potential drop from
−19.0
± 0.5 mV to −8.5 ± 1.2 mV. A summary of quantitative
parameters obtained for HA-NPs and HYAL-treated counterparts by different
methods is displayed in Figure S2B.

HA-NPs and their hydrolysis products were further analyzed by size
exclusion chromatography (Figure S3, Supporting Information). The median retention time (tR) of HA-NPs was ca. 9 min, which indicates
MDa structures. Hydrolyzed HA-NPs displayed a rather small shift toward
longer tR, i.e, the median tR of about 12 min, ∼300 kDa. The size
distribution was broader but, to a large extent, overlapping with
that of HA-NPs. In the case of free HA, our data indicate its aggregation
into large structures, i.e, above the exclusion limit
of 1.3 MDa. However, HA hydrolysis resulted in the formation of smaller
HA products, ranging between 50 kDa and several hundreds of Da. The
aforementioned results show therefore different effects of hydrolysis
on the NP-formulated HA compared to the linear counterpart. At the
same time, we observed the intrinsic aggregation of oligomeric HA
under the investigated conditions.

Moreover, to determine the
morphology of in vivo-administered HA-NPs, we applied
super-resolution microscopy (dSTORM). In Figure 1E, we show representative wide-field and
dSTORM images of aortic endothelium with the engulfed HA-NPs, which
could be visualized and spatially resolved exclusively by the dSTORM
technique. The observed NP morphology corresponded to that of the in vitro visualized counterparts (Figure 1F), indicative of HA-NPs’ stability
under in vivo conditions.

The visualization of HA supramolecular
structure in solution is very challenging due to its high hydrophilicity.47 We demonstrated that HA-NPs can be successfully
visualized in the hydrated state by cryo- and environmental SEM and
indirectly by dSTORM (Figure 1A). The 3- to 4-fold higher NP size in aqueous conditions
compared to the AFM-assessed dried form reflects the high water-binding
properties of HA-NPs. Importantly, all the applied methods showed
the limited impact of hydrolysis on the nanoparticle morphology and
size distribution. Intriguingly, the release of terminal N-acetylglucosamine, which is a consequence of glycoside bond breakdown
by HYAL, was only slightly lower for HA-NPs compared to free HA (Figure 1C). It needs to be
stressed that both the HA cross-linking and conjugation of cholanic
ester, which occur during NP assembly, do not affect the glycosidic
bonds. This is in line with the unaltered HYAL activity. At the same
time, the electrophoresis experiment revealed the presence of larger
oligomeric products in HYAL-treated HA-NPs (NPs+ and NPsL+) compared to free HA formulations (75k+ , 400k+, and 1.5M+) (Figure 1D). This implies
the presence of stable bonds in HA-NPs, which resisted the HYAL digestion.
In the same experiment, the untreated HA-NPs displayed poor gel migration,
corresponding to that of high-molecular-weight hyaluronan (≥1.5
MDa), but also contained some oligomeric HA. NPs and NPs+ therefore
displayed a different migration profile, which is in contrast to the
results by microscopy or DLS. Possibly, the high voltage used for
electrophoresis (300 V) was able to dissociate oligomeric components
of NPs+, which does not occur under neutral conditions.

From
the aforementioned experiments, we can conclude that NP-incorporated
HA undergoes hydrolysis, which does not lead to NP disintegration.
We believe that the breakdown of glycoside bonds leads to a decreased
HA packing in HA-NPs, as suggested by DLS and dSTORM measurements.
At the same time, HA cross-linking by enthylenediamine bridges as
well as its covalent and amphiphilic interactions48 with hydrophobic cholanic acid molecules prevented the
nanoparticles from disintegrating.

Selectivity of Hyaluronan
Nanoparticles toward Pro-inflammatory Macrophage Phenotype
The targeting properties of HA-NPs were studied in vitro in bone-marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs), which were differentiated
into several macrophage phenotypes using oxidized low-density lipoprotein
(oxLDL), interleukin-4 (IL-4), or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and interferon-γ
(INFγ). The cellular uptake of HA-NPs was measured by flow cytometry,
which is displayed in Figure 2A (upper panel). The LPS-stimulated macrophages, which represent
the pro-inflammatory macrophage phenotype, displayed the highest uptake
of HA-NPs. It was ca. 3-fold higher compared to the
naive and anti-inflammatory (IL-4) macrophages. Interestingly, oxLDL,
which is an important pro-atherogenic factor,49 significantly decreased the HA-NP uptake efficacy in pro-inflammatory
macrophages by approximately 30% (p = 0.0043). Similar
experiments were performed for Cy5-labeled free HA and Cy5.5-labeled
dextran-NPs (Figure S4A). In contrast to
HA-NPs, relative differences between the investigated macrophage phenotypes
were much less apparent after incubation with free HA or dextran-NPs.
Interestingly, and in line with the HA-NP findings, oxLDL decreased
the uptake of HA by 50%. Although oxLDL is a recognized pro-atherogenic
factor, its in vitro effects on macrophages are unclear,
particularly in LPS-stimulated pro-inflammatory macrophages.50 As oxLDL is a poor inducer of foam cell formation
under in vitro conditions, the lipid loading of macrophages
cannot underlie the observed drop in HA-NP uptake efficacy. Alternatively,
oxLDL can act as a competitor for the scavenger receptors CD36 and
SR-A, which might lead to a decreased HA-NP uptake.

Figure 2 (A) Flow cytometry
analysis of the cellular uptake of Cy5.5-labeled hyaluronan nanoparticles
(HA-NPs) in different phenotypes of bone-marrow-derived macrophages.
The macrophages are divided into three main phenotypic groups: naive
(−)
(white bars), interleukin 4 (IL-4)-stimulated (gray bars), and lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) and interferon γ (INFγ)-stimulated (black bars).
Moreover, three concentrations of oxidized low-density lipoprotein
(oxLDL) were used for costimulation, i.e., 25, 50, and 100 μg/mL. The cellular uptake of HA-NPs is
expressed as the median fluorescence intensity per cell (MFI). Bars
represent mean MFI/condition ± SD (ns = 3). Symbol “*”
indicates a significant difference and “#”
indicates significantly higher MFI compared to all other conditions
at p < 0.05. (B) Uptake efficacy of Cy7-HA-NPs
in aortic, splenic, and bone marrow macrophages measured by flow cytometry.
Black and gray bars represent the data obtained for mice fed with
a high-fat diet for 6 (6w HFD) and 12 weeks (12w HFD), respectively.
Symbol “*” indicates intergroup differences, whereas
“#” and “&”
indicate significantly higher MFI compared to all other macrophage
populations within the 6w HFD and 12w HFD groups, respectively, and
at p < 0.05. (C) Scatter plots showing the relation
between the uptake efficacy of HA-NPs and free hyaluronan (HA)-binding
(upper panel) and expression of CD44 receptor (lower panel). All data
were obtained by flow cytometry and are expressed as the median fluorescence
intensity per cell. The correlations were investigated for pooled
aortic leukocyte populations, i.e, macrophages, Ly6chigh and Ly6clow monocytes, and neutrophils, in
6w HFD (left panel, black circles) and 12w HFD mice (right panel,
gray
squares). The black lines serve as guides for the eye. The correlation
coefficient, R, was obtained from the nonparametric
Spearman’s correlation test. (D) Representative confocal microcopy
images of aortic lesions detected in 6w HFD (left image) and 12w HFD
group (right image). The Cy5.5-HA-NPs are shown in red, CD68 staining
of macrophages is shown in green, and cell nuclei are blue. (E) Selectivity
of HA-NPs toward plaque-associated macrophages expressed as the percentage
of HA-NP-positive area that colocalizes with CD68-positive macrophage
area. Bars represent mean ± SD. Symbol “*” represents
significant difference at p < 0.05.

Phagocytosis
is the primary mechanism driving nanoparticle engulfment by macrophages.51,52 However, we also considered an additive effect of HA-NP interaction
with hyaluronan receptors, expressed by macrophages.41−44 We therefore studied the effects of different stimuli on the expression
of hyaluronan receptors in BMDMs and how it relates to HA-NP–receptor
interactions and overall HA-NP uptake. Flow cytometry analysis revealed
the overexpression of almost all hyaluronan receptors, except for
ICAM-1, by IL-4-stimulated (anti-inflammatory) macrophages (Figure S4A, right panel) (Supporting Information). This correlated well with the enhanced
cell membrane association of HA-NP at 4 °C, as visualized by
confocal microscopy (Figure S4B). Notably,
however, this enhanced hyaluronan receptor expression did not lead
to more efficient HA-NP engulfment, as shown in Figure 2A. Furthermore, we performed competition experiments
with free HA and CD44 antibody. Interestingly, only in the case of
LPS-treated (pro-inflammatory) macrophages did the competition with
free HA lead to a significant decrease in the HA-NP uptake (Figure S4C). Anti-CD44 antibody had no or a positive
impact on HA-NP uptake (Figure S4C). It
needs to be stressed that previous studies have shown that hyaluronan
and CD44 antibodies can bind to different sites on the CD44 receptor.53 Furthermore, CD44-mediated hyaluronan binding
to macrophages requires activation of the receptor.54,55 We also cannot exclude the interference of LPS contamination of
anti-CD44 antibody in the latter experiment.

Figure 3 (A) Autoradiography images of aortas excised from a wild-type mouse
(WT, left) and two atherosclerotic mice that were on a high-fat diet
for either 6 weeks (6w HFD, middle) or 12 weeks (12w HFD, right).
Twenty-four
hours before sacrifice, the mice received intravenous injection of 89Zr-HA-NPs. In the images, dark spots indicate higher radioactivity
deposition. (B) Comparison between the radioactivity levels in healthy
aortas (WT, white bar) and aortas with early (6w HFD, black bars)
or advanced atherosclerosis (12w HFD, gray bars). The radioactivity
was measured for the entire aorta by gamma counting 24 h after i.v.
administration of 89Zr-HA-NPs, and it is expressed as the
percentage of injected dose (%ID). (C) Blood clearance kinetics of 89Zr-HA-NPs determined by gamma counting in blood samples probed
at different time points after NP injection. The data were obtained
for the above-mentioned mouse groups and are presented as the mean
± SD of %ID per gram of blood (%ID/g) over time. (D) Coronal
PET/MRI fusion images of an atherosclerotic rabbit, showing the organ
radioactivity distribution at different time points after intravenous
injection of 89Zr-HA-NPs. (E) Clearance kinetics of 89Zr-HA-NPs determined noninvasively in rabbits by measuring
standardized uptake values (SUV) in the aortic blood. (F) Time-dependent
biodistribution of 89Zr-HA-NPs determined by dynamic (20
min to 2 h) and static (12 and 24 h) PET imaging in the spleen (black
squares), liver (gray circles), and kidney (gray triangles). (G) Left
panel displays a representative PET/MRI fusion image of an atherosclerotic
rabbit 12 h after the administration of 89Zr-HA-NPs. PET
signal hot spot can be observed in the abdominal aorta (white arrowhead).
In the right panel, the bar chart shows the difference between SUV
of the aorta and skeletal muscle at 12 h postinjection. (H) Biodistribution
of 89Zr-HA-NPs in different rabbit organs quantified ex vivo by gamma counting and presented as %ID/g of tissue.
(I) Confocal microscopy images of the abdominal (upper left) and thoracic
aorta (upper right) from a rabbit that was co-injected with both 89Zr-HA-NPs and Cy5.5-HA-NPs. The Cy5.5-HA-NPs are displayed
in red, RAM-11 staining of macrophages is shown in green, and cell
nuclei are blue. In the lower panel, higher magnification images of
abdominal aorta show the engulfed HA-NPs by macrophages. In all bar charts,
bars represent mean ± SD and symbol “*” indicates
the significant difference at p < 0.05.

Figure 4 (A) Representative
images of aortic roots from mice that received either PBS (control,
left image panel), HA-NPs (middle image panel), or free HA (right
image panel) during a 12-week high-fat feeding period. The sections
were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), macrophage-specific
antibody (MAC-3), or sirius red (collagen). Scale bar in the upper
right image refers to all H&E-stained sections. Bar charts display
the mean plaque area (top), percentage of plaque area containing macrophages
(middle), and collagen (bottom) in the aforementioned treatment groups.
(B)
Flow cytometry analysis of aortic arches of the treated mice. Left
panel shows representative cell scatter plots and histograms obtained
for a control (upper panel) and HA-NPs-treated mouse (lower panel).
The immune cells are defined as CD45-positive cells. Bar chart compares
the total immune cell count in the control, HA-NPs-treated, and free
HA-treated mice. In all bar charts, bars represent mean ± SD
and symbol “*” indicates the significant difference
at p < 0.05.

Hyaluronan Nanoparticles
Target Plaque-Associated Macrophages in Atherosclerotic Mice
The in vivo targeting efficacy and selectivity of
HA-NPs were studied in apoe–/– mice, in which either early or advanced atherosclerosis was
induced by a six- (6w HFD) or 12-week high-fat diet (12w HFD), respectively.
Flow cytometry on digested atherosclerotic aortas enabled single-cell
analysis of immune cell populations and a quantitative comparison
of the HA-NP uptake in these cells (Figure 2B). In both groups, aortic macrophages displayed
the highest median fluorescence intensity per cell (MFI) generated
by Cy7-HA-NPs compared to both splenic and bone-marrow-resident macrophages
(Figure 2B). These
differences were, however, the most pronounced in the 6w HFD group;
that is, the uptake of HA-NPs by the aortic macrophages was 6- and
40-fold higher compared to splenic and bone-marrow-resident macrophages,
respectively. In contrast, fluorescent poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA)-NPs, used as a control nanoformulation, displayed
considerably higher uptake in splenic macrophages compared to aortic
counterparts (Figure S5A, Supporting Information). Among the aortic immune cell populations, macrophages were found
to engulf some PLGA-NPs (Figure S5B), albeit
at lower levels than HA-NPs, indicative of the latter platform’s
favorable atherosclerotic plaque inflammation targeting features.
Interestingly, we found dramatic differences in HA-NP uptake between
macrophages in early and advanced aortic lesions; that is, MFI was
3060 ± 836 and 697 ± 142 au (arbitrary units), respectively
(p = 0.000 03). These results coincide with
our in vitro findings on the negative impact of oxLDL
(Figure 2A) and suggest
the occurrence of phenotypic changes in the macrophage population
during disease progression. Early lesions are primarily composed of
viable and freshly recruited macrophages, which display a high phagocytic
activity. In contrast, the prolonged exposure to high cholesterol/lipid
levels induces macrophage lipid overload and eventually cell apoptosis
and necrosis. Other microenvironmental factors, such as oxLDL or reactive
oxygen species, the concentrations of which are elevated in complex
plaques, might also have negative effect on the macrophage activity.56 A similar trend was observed for other immune
cell populations in the aorta (Figure S6, Supporting Information) and, interestingly, in other tissues, including
blood monocytes and splenic macrophages, which suggest a systemic
effect of prolonged HFD. In line with our findings, the systemic immune
effects of HFD have been described in the context of enhanced lipid
loading of innate immune cells and their increased production.57 We excluded the impact of instrumental error
by monitoring MFI for unstained and stained control samples (Figure
S7, Supporting Information).

Furthermore,
we investigated the relation among HA-NP uptake in aortic immune cell
populations, the efficacy to bind free HA, and the expression of CD44
receptors. In the early atherosclerosis group, we found a significant
correlation between HA-NP uptake and both HA-binding efficacy and
CD44 expression, with Spearman’s correlation coefficients of
0.62 and 0.74, respectively (both p = 0.0001) (Figure 2C). In mice with
advanced lesions, the aforementioned parameters did not correlate.
This suggests that initially the hyaluronan receptor–HA-NP
interactions might play a role in the overall HA-NP uptake, which
decreases during the disease progression.

Confocal
microscopy analysis of mouse aortic arches confirmed the efficient
uptake of HA-NPs in both early and advanced lesions (Figure 2D). However, based on the fraction
of HA-NP-positive plaque area that colocalized with macrophage staining,
we found a higher selectivity of HA-NPs toward macrophages in early
atherosclerotic plaques, which was 67 ± 19% (Figure 2E). In advanced lesions, the
macrophage selectivity was 46 ± 20%, which means that only this
fraction of the total accumulated HA-NPs was engulfed by plaque macrophages
and implies a considerably higher off-target accumulation of HA-NPs.
We believe that this might be due to the impaired phagocytic activity
of macrophages in advanced lesions (Figure 2B) and the presence of necrotic sites, which
may facilitate passive accumulation of NPs.58,59

NP accumulation mechanisms in atherosclerotic plaques are
rather scarcely explored.60 Considering
very limited neovascularization in mouse lesions, i.e, a microvascular fraction of ca. 1% based on our
histological evaluation, the dysfunctional host endothelium seems
to be a major player in NP plaque retention. This can occur via leaky endothelial junctions, which are formed in response
to pro-atherogenic stimuli and a high tension induced by the subendothelial
plaque deposition.49,61,62 The leaky endothelial junctions have been proposed as a primary
pathway of LDL accumulation in the vessel wall.40 Alternatively, NPs might enter the plaques via the transcellular migration pathway, by exploiting intracellular
vesicles.63 As shown in Figure 1E,F, we could detect diffusely
distributed HA-NPs in aortic endothelial cells. The subendothelial
matrix is known to undergo degradation by the infiltrating macrophages,
and therefore it does not create a physical barrier for NPs.

Atherosclerotic Plaque-Targeting, Circulation
Kinetics, and Biodistribution of 89Zr-HA-NPs in Mice
The accumulation of 89Zr-HA-NPs in mouse atherosclerotic
lesions was determined by autoradiography and gamma counting 24 h
postadministration
(Figure 3A,B). Both
early and advanced atherosclerotic aortas displayed focal accumulation
of radioactive material at typical sites of atherosclerotic plaque
formation, i.e., aortic root, arch,
and renal artery branching (Figure 3A). In contrast, the aortas of wild-type mice displayed
low and homogeneously distributed radioactivity. Radioactivity quantification
of excised aortas by gamma counting revealed a significantly higher
percentage of injected dose (%ID) of 89Zr-HA-NPs in atherosclerotic
mice compared to their normal counterparts of approximately 30% (Figure 3B). Interestingly,
despite a dramatic difference in disease stage, early lesions were
equally well detectable as advanced plaques and displayed similar
radioactivity concentrations. This was confirmed by ex vivo fluorescence imaging of aortas after injection of Cy5.5-HA-NPs (Figure
S8, Supporting Information). This may be
an important finding in view of the present challenges in the detection
of early atherosclerosis.64 In comparison,
the previous studies on 18F-FDG-PET, a method that probes
cell metabolism, have shown an increasing metabolic activity associated
with the atherosclerosis progression, which suggests an increasing
inflammatory burden.65,66 We believe that these discrepancies
originate from the fact of assessing different aspects of macrophage
activity. While macrophage glycolysis was shown to increase significantly
in advanced lesions,67 their phagocytic
activity seems to undergo regression, as demonstrated by our flow
cytometry (FACS) data (Figure 2A,B).

Furthermore, we studied the clearance kinetics
of 89Zr-HA-NPs by gamma counting of blood samples. In contrast
to the previously reported fast clearance of radiolabeled hyaluronan,19−2189Zr-HA-NPs displayed biexponential decay kinetics with
a short blood half-life (t1/2,α)
of approximately 0.5 h and long t1/2,β of 9 h (Figure 3C).
This might be due to the limited sensitivity of HA-NPs to the blood
serum HYAL and/or decreased recognition by the hyaluronic acid receptor
for endocytosis in the liver, which mediates systemic clearance of
hyaluronan from the vascular and lymphatic circulation.68 Nevertheless, we should also not rule out the
impact of a relatively high HA-NP dose, which might lead to clearance
saturation.20 The quantitative determination
of 89Zr-HA-NP biodistribution in mice showed that the liver
and spleen are the primary clearance organs of HA-NPs, containing
between 10 and 20%ID/g (Figure S9, Supporting Information). The heart, which is an important organ in the
context of human coronary atherosclerosis, displayed significantly
lower %ID/g compared to the aorta. This suggests a potentially high
target-to-background signal for PET imaging of coronary disease, which
cannot be achieved by the clinically applied 18F-FDG-PET
since fluorodeoxyglucose is avidly taken up by myocardial cells.69 In our study, we assume the in vivo integrity of HA-NPs and a fluorescent or radioactive label, which
is based on the covalent conjugation and strong in vitro data on the nanoparticle stability. Nevertheless, we cannot reject
the possibility of partial nanoparticle disintegration, which can
occur under the in vivo conditions.70

PET Imaging of Rabbit Atherosclerosis
with 89Zr-HA-NPs
Subsequently, we investigated
the performance of 89Zr-HA-NP for PET imaging of atherosclerosis.
Three rabbits were dynamically scanned on a PET/MRI scanner for 2
h after 89Zr-HA-NP injection, as well as statically at
12 and 24 h postadministration. Representative PET/MRI fusion images
are displayed in Figure 3D, on which we noninvasively monitored the circulation kinetics (Figure 3E) and time-dependent
biodistribution (Figure 3F) of 89Zr-HA-NPs. The initially high aortic PET signal,
which was generated by the circulating 89Zr-HA-NPs, decreased
over time (Figure 3D,E). At 12 h postadministration, the aorta showed a relatively low
but detectable PET signal, with some hot spots localized in the abdominal
aorta (Figure 3G).
The maximum standardized uptake values (SUVmax) were 6-fold
higher for the aorta compared to the skeletal muscle (p = 0.03) (Figure 3G). The signal remained constant until 24 h postadministration. The
clearance kinetics derived from PET images afforded a t1/2 of approximately 3 h (Figure 3F). With respect to the biodistribution,
assessed at 24 h postadministration by gamma counting, 89Zr-HA-NPs reached the highest concentration of ca. 0.05%ID/g in the liver, spleen, kidney, and lungs, but considering
the total organ mass, the liver and spleen were the primary clearance
organs (Figure 3H).
Similar to the mouse data, the heart tissue displayed very low radioactivity
(∼0.002%ID/g),
which is desirable in context of the coronary atherosclerosis imaging.
The confocal microscopy analysis of rabbit aortas confirmed the accumulation
of Cy5.5-HA-NPs (showed in red) in the abdominal aorta, which underwent
balloon injury, and no detectable NP fluorescence in the untreated
thoracic aorta (Figure 3I). In the abdominal aorta, HA-NPs were localized in macrophage-rich
areas and were internalized by aortic macrophages (Figure 3I, lower image panel).

The aforementioned results underline the translational aspect of
our study. We applied a 89Zr-deferoxamine (DFO)-labeling
strategy, which assures an excellent match between nanoparticle biological
half-life and 89Zr physical half-life71 and which we previously demonstrated in lipid- and polymer-based
nanoparticle systems.72,73 We showed that HA-NPs can be
effectively labeled with 89Zr-DFO and enable the detection
of atherosclerosis in two animal models, also at the early disease
stage. The imaging studies that exploited hyaluronan-mediated targeting
of atherosclerosis are scarce.74−76 Previously, only Lee etal.76 based
their nanoformulation on HA and proposed the fluorescence imaging
of atherosclerosis. We, however, provide in-depth analysis of the
underlying HA-NP–immune cell interactions and a strong translational
aspect by employing noninvasive PET/MRI.

Our study shows also
some interspecies differences between the mice and rabbits regarding
HA-NP kinetics and biodistribution. In mice, 89Zr-HA-NPs
displayed biexponential decay kinetics, which has been previously
attributed to the nanoparticle size heterogeneity; that is, larger
nanoparticles are more rapidly cleared from the circulation compared
to smaller counterparts.77 Moreover, a
different clearance mechanism needs to be considered. Our FACS data
indicate a growing involvement of blood phagocytes in the clearance
of HA-NPs over time postadministration, as shown in Figure S10A (Supporting Information) in blood samples taken
15 min and 2 h postinjection. Furthermore, we observed a shift in
the monocyte population toward the Ly6chigh phenotype (Figure S10B). Possibly, the fast clearance phase
is driven by the nanoparticle filtration by the reticuloendothelial
system, while in the slow phase, HA-NPs might be predominantly associated
with the blood-circulating phagocytes. In rabbits, displaying monoexponential
clearance kinetics of 89Zr-HA-NPs, these mechanisms were
not investigated.

With respect to the biodistribution, we report
very different retention values of a total dose per gram of mouse
and rabbit organs. These differences originate from the fact that
we normalize the organ radioactivity to the total injected dose and
organ weight. However, the organ weights of a mouse and New Zealand
White rabbit differ dramatically; for example, for the liver, it is
∼1–1.5 and ∼140–150 g, respectively. Therefore,
10%ID/g of a mouse tissue represents practically a full organ retention,
while 0.05%ID/g of a rabbit liver represents a dose retention in only
a small fraction of this organ. Please note that the relative differences
between the organs’ radioactivity are rather similar in both
mice and rabbits.

Hyaluronan Nanoparticles Improve the Atherosclerotic
Plaque Stability in Atherosclerotic Mice
In view of the previously
reported anti-inflammatory activity of high-molecular-weight HA,10 we hypothesized that HA-NPs, composed of megadalton
HA aggregates, may also exert anti-inflammatory effects. To test this
hypothesis, we studied the effects of HA-NPs on atherosclerosis in apoe–/– mice,
which received weekly injections of HA-NPs for 12 weeks. The effects
were compared to free 75 kDa HA (free HA), which served as a substrate
for the nanoparticle formulation, and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS,
control).

Histological evaluation of aortic roots involved the
assessment of mean plaque area and plaque composition (macrophages
and collagen) (Figure 4A). The HA-NP-treated mice displayed the most favorable plaque phenotype
regarding all the aforementioned parameters. The lesions were significantly
smaller compared to the control group and contained approximately
30%
fewer macrophages compared to both the control and free HA-treated
mice. Moreover, they displayed 30–40% higher collagen content,
which is an important factor for plaque stability.78 The anti-inflammatory effects of HA-NPs were confirmed
by flow cytometry analysis of aortic arches (Figure 4B) and by CD45 staining of aortic roots (Figure
S11, Supporting Information). Both methods
revealed a ∼30–50% lower number of immune cells in the
HA-NP-treated mice compared to both free HA-treated and control mice.
At the same time, we found no systemic immune effects of HA-NPs, as
deduced from the analysis of blood, spleen, and bone marrow (Figure
S12, Supporting Information).

We show that nanoparticle-formulated hyaluronan exerted anti-inflammatory
activity, which was previously attributed exclusively to high-molecular-weight
linear hyaluronan (HMW-HA).10 While the
application of high-viscosity HMW-HA in the treatment of atherosclerosis
is limited by the necessity of local administration,79 our formulation displays favorable blood circulation kinetics
(Figure 3C,E) and selectivity
toward
pro-inflammatory/plaque-associated macrophages (Figure 2A,B). Previously developed HA-containing
NPs induced therapeutic effects via other key-acting
therapeutic agents, while exploiting HA as a targeting moiety.29,80 A possible mechanism of HA-NP atheroprotective activity involves
a direct interaction of HA-NPs with macrophages/monocytes, which might
lead to the downregulation of inflammatory response. This has been
previously described for HMW-HA,10 and,
in our study, it is implied by the reduced immune cell infiltrates
and higher collagen content (Figure 4). In line with this hypothesis, our in vitro study in bone-marrow-derived macrophages showed that a high concentration
of HA-NPs significantly inhibited production of nitric oxide (NO)
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), the key pro-inflammatory mediators
(Figure S13, Supporting Information). A
similar trend was observed for the pro-inflammatory interleukins IL-6
and IL-12. In contrast, oligomeric HA had no significant effect on
the expression on NO or TNF, while it significantly increased the
IL-6 and IL-12 production. Interestingly, we also observed a significant
stimulatory effect of HA-NPs on the expression of arginase-1 gene
(Arg-1), which is considered as an important marker of pro-fibrotic
macrophages and its overexpression may contribute to atherosclerotic
plaque stability. Concurrently, we anticipate a potential impact of
long circulating HA-NPs on the vascular glycocalyx, which is predominantly
composed of hyaluronan.81 HA-NPs might
serve as a circuiting reservoir of hyaluronan and be “built
into” the glycocalyx, which, in consequence, might limit the
immune cell infiltration into the lesion site.

Conclusions
We have developed highly biocompatible HA-NPs as a platform for
imaging and therapy of atherosclerosis. In our nanoformulation, hyaluronan
serves as both the primary building block and the targeting/bioactive
molecule, which yields high morphological stability of HA-NPs under
hydrolytic conditions. HA-NPs are preferentially taken up by pro-inflammatory
macrophages in vitro and display high selectivity
toward
atherosclerotic plaque-associated macrophages in mice. Interestingly,
we found that the efficacy of macrophage–HA-NP interactions
is strongly dependent on the disease stage, which we attribute to
phenotypic dynamics of macrophage population. Furthermore, we showed
that radiolabeled HA-NPs target mouse atherosclerotic lesions and
enable PET imaging of atherosclerosis in rabbits. Finally, we demonstrated
that HA-NPs exert atheroprotective effects by decreasing the immune
cell infiltration in aortic lesions.

Methods
Hyaluronan
Nanoparticle Preparation
Hyaluronan (66–99 kDa) was
purchased from Lifecore Biomedical (Chaska, MN, USA). A 200 mg of HA was dissolved in 10 mL of 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic
acid (MES) buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, Zwijndrecht, The Netherlands) pH
6 and activated with 92 mg of 1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide
hydrochloride (EDC) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Ermelo, The Netherlands)
and 104 mg of N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide (sulfo-NHS)
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). EDC and sulfo-NHS were dissolved in 200
μL
of MES buffer pH 6 and added sequentially to HA solution during stirring,
with 15 min intervals. Subsequently, the pH was adjusted up to 7 using
5 M NaOH, 128 μL of ethylenediamine (Sigma-Aldrich) was added,
and the pH was rapidly adjusted down to 7 using 5 M HCl. The reaction
mixture was stirred at room temperature overnight. The amine-functionalized
HA (HA-NH2) was purified by dialysis against water (Spectra/Por
2 membrane, 12–14 kDa cutoff, Spectrum Laboratories, Breda,
The Netherlands) and four series of ethanol precipitation (3 volumes
ethanol:1 volume water). To induce HA precipitation, NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich)
was added to the postdialysis water solution of HA to obtain a final
concentration of 5% NaCl. Subsequently, 3 parts of ethanol was added,
and the mixture was shaken vigorously until a white precipitate appeared,
which was pelleted by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 20 min. The supernatant
was removed by careful pipetting, and the HA-NH2-containing
pellet was redissolved in ultrapure water. For a subsequent series
of ethanol precipitation, NaCl was added and the process was repeated.
After the fourth ethanol precipitation, the HA pellet was dissolved
in ultrapure water, dialyzed against water overnight, and freeze-dried
(Zirbus VaCo2-II, Zirbus, Bad Grund, Germany). The dry lyophilizate
was weighed (the average yield was 70–80%) and analyzed with
respect to the amine content. The number of primary amines per HA
molecule was 6–12, as determined by the 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic
acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

In the second step, cholanic
NHS ester was prepared by reacting 30 mg of cholanic acid with 17
mg of N,N′-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
(i.e, 83 μL of a 1 M solution) (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) and 13 mg of N-hydroxysuccinimide in
dry dimethylformamide (DMF) (all aforementioned chemicals were from
Sigma-Aldrich). First, cholanic acid was dissolved in 400 μL
of DMF, and 83 μL of N,N′-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
solution was added, which was followed by vortexing. Next, N-hydroxysuccinimide was dissolved in ∼50 μL
of DMF and added to the reaction mixture, which was vortexed again.
The reaction was allowed to sit overnight at room temperature without
stirring. The precipitate of the urea derivative, which is a byproduct
of the reaction, was removed by centrifugation at 10 000 rpm
for 10 min. The supernatant was aspired carefully from above the pellet
and was used for further reaction. The supernatant containing a 6
mol excess of cholanic ester was added drop by drop to the solution
of HA-NH2 in 0.1 N NaHCO3 pH 9 (20 mg/mL). The
reaction was stirred overnight at room temperature, and its product
was purified by dialysis against water and filtration. Subsequently,
the material was freeze-dried, weighed, and stored at −20 °C.

Fluorescence Labeling of Hyaluronan Nanoparticles
Fluorescent
hyaluronan nanoparticles were prepared by conjugating an NHS derivative
of a fluorescent dye to the residual primary amino groups on the nanoparticles.
First, HA-NPs were dispersed in 0.1 N NaHCO3 pH 8.5 at
a concentration of 10 mg/mL, added to a DMF solution of either Cy5.5-
or Cy7-NHS ester (Lumiprobe GmbH, Hannover, Germany) (60% water-based
buffer: 40% DMF), and stirred for 4 h at room temperature. An 8 mol
amount of dye was added per 1 mol of residual NH2 group.
The unreacted dye was removed by ethanol precipitation (four times
or until the supernatant was clear) and dialyzed against water for
24 h. The labeling resulted in approximately 0.2 mol dye/mol of HA,
based on absorbance measurements.

Radiolabeling of Hyaluronan
Nanoparticles
HA-NPs were modified with deferoxamine B to
enable radiolabeling with zirconium-89 (89Zr). p-SCN-Bn-DFO
(Macrocyclix, Plano, TX, USA) in DMSO (5 mg/mL) was added to a nanosuspension
of HA-NPs in 0.1 M carbonate buffer (pH 8.9) (10 mg/mL) in steps of
5 μL until a 2-fold molar excess over residual amine groups
of NP-incorporated HA. The reaction mixture was vortex-mixed after
each addition and then shaken at 37 °C for 4 h. The DFO-modified
nanoparticles (HA-NPs-DFO) were purified by spin filtration using
a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) (Sartorius Stedim Biotech
GmbH, Goettingen, Germany) and washing four times with fresh PBS.
The final retentate was diluted with PBS to achieve a final HA concentration
of 5 mg/mL. The HA-DFO nanoparticles were reacted with 89Zr oxalate in PBS (pH 7.4) for 2 h at 37 °C. Radiolabeled HA
nanoparticles (89Zr-HA-NPs) were separated from unreacted 89Zr by centrifugal filtration using a 10 kDa MWCO and washing
with sterile PBS. The radiochemical yield was 94 ± 1% (n = 3), and the radiochemical purity was >98% as determined
by size exclusion chromatography. The number of DFO labels per HA
molecule was measured to be ∼1 by the isotope dilution method.

Animal Experiments
Mice
Eight-week-old apoe–/– mice (Charles River
Laboratories) were fed with a high-fat diet (TD.88137, Envigo, Alconbury
Huntington, UK) for either 6 or 12 weeks to induce early and advanced
atherosclerotic lesions, respectively. The wild-type mice served as
negative controls. After the diet period, the mice received an injection
of HA-NPs (25 mg/kg), which were labeled with either a fluorescent
dye or radiotracer, via the tail vein. Twenty-four
hours after injection, the mice were sacrificed and perfused with
PBS, and aortas with other organs were removed and underwent different
examinations. The entire aorta with aortic roots, spleen, blood, and
bone marrow from mice that received Cy7-HA-NPs (n = 7) were analyzed by flow cytometry. The immunohistochemical analysis
of aortic arches was performed in mice that were administered with
Cy.5.5-HA-NPs (n = 5). The organs from 89Zr-HA-NPs-injected mice were analyzed by autoradiography and gamma
counting (n = 4).

In the therapeutic study,
8-week-old apoe–/– mice on a high-fat diet received once a week for 12 weeks
an intravenous injection of either HA-NPs, free HA (both 50 mg/kg/week),
or PBS (ns = 10). After 12 weeks of treatment, the mice were sacrificed
and aortas perfused with cold PBS. The excised aortic arch and descending
aorta including the renal arterial branching were analyzed by flow
cytometry, whereas aortic roots were analyzed by histology.

All mouse experiments were performed in accordance with protocols
approved by the Animal Experiment Committee of Academic Medical Center
in Amsterdam or Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Mount
Sinai School of Medicine (MSSM) in New York.

Rabbits
Three
male New Zealand White rabbits (2.5–3.0 months old) were purchased
from Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA, USA). To induce the
formation of atherosclerotic plaques, endothelial denudation of the
aorta was performed by angioplasty. Animals were anesthetized after
an intramuscular (i.m.) administration of ketamine (20 mg/kg) (Fort
Dodge Animal Health, Overland Park, KS, USA) and xylazine (5 mg/kg)
(Bayer AG, Leverkusen, Germany). A 4F-Fogarty embolectomy catheter
(Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) was introduced in the femoral
artery, ascended up to the level of the left subclavian artery, and
inflated until a pressure of 2 atm was established. Next, the balloon
was slowly deflated while retracting until the iliac bifurcation was
reached, all performed under X-ray guidance using a clinical cardiovascular
intervention Philips system (Allura Xper FD20/10, Philips Healthcare,
Best, The Netherlands). The procedure was repeated using the contralateral
femoral artery as point of entry, 4 weeks after first procedure and
6 weeks after the initiation of a high cholesterol diet, composed
of regular chow diet enriched with 0.3% cholesterol and 4.7% coconut
oil (Research Diets, Inc. Brunswick, NJ, USA). After 8 weeks, the
diet was changed to 0.15% enriched cholesterol with 4.7% coconut oil
diet and continued for the remainder of the experiment. The rabbit
experiments were performed in accordance with protocols approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of MSSM and followed
National Institutes of Health guidelines for animal welfare.

Flow
Cytometry of Mouse Tissues
Flow cytometry (FACS) measurements
were performed to determine the targeting properties and immune effects
of HA-NPs in apoe–/– mice. Twenty-four hours after Cy7-HA-NP administration (targeting
study) or 12 weeks after HA-NP therapy (therapeutic study), the mice
were sacrificed and blood was collected by cardiac puncture. Subsequently,
the mice were perfused with cold PBS, and the entire aorta, including
roots, was excised. After 1 h digestion in 4 U/mL Liberase (Roche
Life Sciences, Almere, The Netherlands), 60 U/mL hyluronidase (Sigma-Aldrich),
and 40 U/mL DNase I (Sigma-Aldrich) of PBS solution at 37 °C,
the aorta digests were resuspended, filtered through the cell strainer
(Fisher Scientific), and washed three times with FACS buffer (1% BSA
in PBS). The spleen was homogenized manually and strained through
the cell strainer, whereas bone marrow was flushed out from the femur
bone by using cold PBS and resuspended into a single-cell suspension
by using a 26G needle. Subsequently, the blood, spleen, and bone marrow
underwent erythrocyte lysis (eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA) and
were washed three times with FACS buffer.

The
cell suspensions from all the organs were stained for FACS analysis.
First, the mouse Fc block (BD Pharmingen, Breda, The Netherlands)
was added. Ten minutes thereafter, the antibody cocktail was introduced.
The following anti-mouse antibodies were used for FACS staining of
mice injected with Cy7-HA-NPs: Brilliant Violet 510-CD45, Brilliant
Violet 711-CD11b (both BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA), FITC-F4/80
(CI:A3-1)
(Bio-Rad, Oxford, UK), PE-CF594-Ly6c (AL-21) (BD Pharmingen), Brilliant
Violet 650-CD44 (IM7). All the antibodies were diluted to 1:200 with
FACS buffer. DAPI (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used at a concentration
of 2 μg/mL for dead cell staining. Moreover, we prepared fluorescently
labeled
hyaluronan to determine the hylaronan-binding efficacy by different
immune cell populations. In short, HA (60–90 kDa) was dissolved
in PBS buffer pH 7.2 and reacted with EDC and sulfo-NHS (both ThermoFisher
Scientific) at room temperature while stirring (quantities are given
in the section on HA-NP preparation). After 0.5 h, an 8 molar excess
of disulfo-Cy5-hydrazide (Cyandye, Sunny Isles Beach, FL, USA) in
PBS pH 7.2 was added to the EDC- and sulfo-NHS-reacted HA and stirred
for 4 h at room temperature. The reaction product, Cy5-HA, was purified
by dialysis and ethanol precipitation (four times). For FACS staining,
50 μg/mL of Cy5-HA was used in a cocktail with the aforementioned
antibodies. The cell suspensions were incubated with antibodies and
Cy5-hyaluronan for 30 min and washed three times with FACS buffer.

The FACS staining of mouse material from the therapeutic study
included the following antibodies: Pacific Blue-conjugated NK-1.1,
CD90.2, Ly-6G, TER-119, CD49b and CD45R/B220, Brilliant Violet 510-CD45,
PE-CD11b, FITC- Ly6c (AL-21), PE-Cy7-F4/80 (CI:A3-1), and Cy5-HA (custom-made).
All the antibodies were purchased from BioLegend and used at a dilution
of 1:200 excluding FITC-Ly6c, which was diluted 1:100.

FACS
measurements were performed on either a BD LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences)
(targeting study) or a BD LSR II (BD Biosciences) (therapeutic study).
The obtained data were analyzed with FlowJo V10 software (FLOWJO,
Ashland, OR, USA). The macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils were
defined according to the gating strategy presented in Figure S6A (Supporting Information). For these cell populations,
the uptake of Cy7-HA-NPs was determined and expressed as median fluorescence
intensity per cell. Furthermore, the MFIs of Brilliant Violet 650-CD44
and Cy5-HA were used as quantifiers of CD44 expression and HA-binding
efficacy, respectively. The analysis of FACS data obtained from mice
that underwent a 12-week treatment was limited to the assessment of
total immune cell population (CD45-positive), which was due to overall
low cell numbers obtained from aortic arches.

Autoradiography
of Mouse Aortas
The perfused and excised aortas were placed
in a film cassette against a phosphorimaging plate (BASMS-2325, Fujifilm,
Valhalla, NY, USA) for 72 h at −20 °C to determine the
radiotracer distribution. Phosphorimaging plates were read at a pixel
resolution of 25 μm with a Typhoon 7000IP plate reader (GE Healthcare,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA). The images were postprocessed using ImageJ software.

Pharmacokinetics and Biodistribution in Mice
Gamma counting
was used to assess the biodistribution and clearance kinetics of 89Zr-HA-NPs and performed on a Wizard2 2470 automatic
gamma counter (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA). First, the injection
samples of 89Zr-HA-NP were measured to determine the total
injected dose of radioactivity (ID). Two minutes, 30 min, 2 h, 6 h,
and
24 h postadministration, small blood samples were taken from the lateral
tail vein. At 24 h after injection of 89Zr- HA-NPs, the
mice were sacrificed and the aorta, liver, spleen, kidneys, lung,
heart, and a part of the femoral muscle were collected. The radioactivity
of each sample was measured and normalized to the ID and sample weight
and expressed as the percentage of ID that was retrieved in one gram
of tissue (%ID/g). For statistical comparison of aortas, the aortic
radioactivity was normalized to the ID only and expressed as the percentage
of injected dose.

To determine the blood clearance parameters,
the blood radioactivity data were fitted by a mono- and biexponential
decay model. The best fitting model, as concluded from the correlation
coefficient, r2, was used for reporting.
The same strategy was used for the rabbit data.

Immunohistochemistry
of Mouse Tissues
The mouse aortic arches were embedded in
Tissue-Tek O.C.T. (Sakura; Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands) and
frozen in 2-methylbutane (Sigma) on dry ice. Subsequently, they were
cut into 7-μm-thick sections and fixed with ice-cold acetone
for 5 min. Before staining, they were blocked with 5% fetal calf serum
(FCS) in PBS for 60 min. Next, the sections were incubated overnight
at 4 °C with rat anti-mouse CD68 primary antibody (AbD Serotec;
1:200 dilution; clone: FA-11). After washing, Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated
donkey anti-rat IgG secondary antibody (Thermo Fischer Scientific;
1:500 dilution) was applied for 1 h. Nuclei were stained with DAPI.

The images of stained aortic arches were acquired using a Leica
TCS SP8 confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems) at 400× magnification.
On average, we imaged four different plaque areas in each arch section,
while imaging six tissue sections per mouse. The obtained images were
analyzed using Leica LAS-X software. First, we defined the plaque
area, which was used as a normalizing parameter. Furthermore, we determined
the area positive for Alexa Fluor 488-CD68 (macrophage staining) or
HA-NPs-Cy5.5. This was done by applying a threshold to the appropriate
fluorescence channel and creating a mask, which was used to calculate
the fluorescence-positive area. Furthermore, the area of colocalization
of Alexa Fluor 488-CD68 with HA-NPs-Cy5.5 was determined. Subsequently,
we calculated the percentage of HA-NP-positive area that colocalizes
with macrophage staining, which was used as an indication of the HA-NP
selectivity toward plaque-associated macrophages.

To determine
the effects of HA-NP treatment on the atherosclerotic plaque development,
the mouse hearts with aortic roots were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
(Sigma-Aldrich) and embedded in paraffin, after the process of dehydration.
The aortic roots were cut into 7-μm-thick sections and stained
with (1) hematoxyline and eosin (H&E); (2) rat anti-mouse MAC-3
antibody (clone M3/84; BD Pharmingen; 1:30 dilution; overnight incubation),
followed by rabbit anti-rat biotinylated secondary antibody (Vector
Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA; 1:300 dilution, 30 min incubation)
and avidin-peroxidase (Vectastatin Elite ABC HRP Kit, Vector Laboratories),
color was induced with ImmPact AMEC red peroxidase substrate (Vector
Laboratories); and (3) sirius red staining (Sigma-Aldrich) (collagen
staining). The stained tissues were analyzed with a light microscope
(Leica) at 50× magnification. The mean plaque area was assessed
from H&E-stained sections. This was done by delineating plaque
areas in 5–6 root sections/mouse. The selected sections had
to contain all three aortic valves. The average of all measurements
was used as the mean plaque area. The fractions of macrophage and
collagen area were assessed in a similar manner. First, the total
plaque area was delineated and calculated. The further image analysis
included only the plaque area. Color images were transformed into
gray-scale
images. Subsequently, a threshold was set to select only high-intensity
pixels and create binary image. From the latter, the threshold-limited
area was calculated and normalized to the total plaque area. All the
aforementioned image analyses were performed using Fiji software.82

PET/MR Imaging in Rabbits
Rabbits
(n = 3, weight: 3.6 ± 0.4 kg) received a 24G-catheter
in the right marginal ear vein for injection with 89Zr-HA-NPs
and Cy5.5-HA-NPs (1.40 ± 0.02 mCi; ∼25 mg total HA). Anesthesia
was induced by an intramuscular injection of ketamine (20 mg/kg) (Fort
Dodge Animal Health), combined with xylazine (0.5 mg/kg) (Bayer, Shawnee
Mission, KS, USA). Before scanning, all rabbits received a urine catheter
to prevent any disruptions from signals in the bladder and were placed
in a body matrix coil. During scanning, rabbits received isoflurane
anesthesia at 1.5% by inhalation and were oxygenated for the remainder
of the PET/MR imaging experiment, while vital parameters were monitored.

Shortly after 89Zr-HA-NPs injection, images were acquired
in a dynamic fashion for the duration of 2 h using a clinical 3 T
PET/MRI Biograph mMR (Siemens, München, Germany). Attenuation
correction of PET images was done using the built-in two-point Dixon
MR-based attenuation correction (MR-AC) map, and images were reconstructed
using the OP-OSEM algorithm. After scout scans, the PET scan was initiated
and acquired simultaneously with bright-blood time-of-flight (TOF)
noncontrast
enhanced angiography performed for localization of arterial anatomical
landmarks (renal arteries and iliac bifurcation). Imaging parameters
were as follows: TR, 23 ms; TE, 2.8 ms; flip angle, 20 degrees; spatial
resolution, 0.35 mm2 (interpolated); slice thickness, 1
mm. Simultaneously a black blood 3D T2 weighted sampling perfection
with application optimized contrasts using different flip angle evolution
(SPACE) sequence was used for vessel wall delinetation. Imaging parameters
were as follows: TR, 1600 ms; TE, 115 ms; flip angle, 120 degrees;
echo train length, 83; spatial resolution, 0.63 mm2; slice
thickness, 0.63 mm. Static PET scans were performed at 12 ± 1.8
and 24 ± 0.1 h after injection, using a TOF and MR-AC as described
above.

Analysis of PET images was performed after all data were
processed and divided in different time frames using a custom-made
program written in Matlab (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). All data was
subsequently processed with OsiriX imaging software (Pixmeo SARL,
Bernex, Switzerland) by drawing regions of interest (ROIs) on the
infrarenal abdominal aorta and major organs (liver, spleen, and kidneys).
By averaging all acquired ROIs per organ (≥10 per organ), mean
standardized uptake values (mean SUVmax) (g/mL) for each
target tissue were obtained.

Pharmacokinetics and Biodistribution
in Rabbits
Radioactivity half-lives were determined by drawing
blood from the ear arteries at 1 and 30 min and at 1, 2, 12, and 24
h postinjection. All rabbits were sacrificed by an i.v. injected overdose
of 100 mg/kg sodium pentobarbital and flushed afterward with a bolus
of heparinized saline. All rabbits were pinched in the feet to check
for reaction prior to systemic perfusion with at least 500 mL of saline
solution. Aortas were excised and divided into thoracic and abdominal
aorta, the latter with celiac trunk and renal arteries attached, serving
as landmarks. The following organs were harvested: heart, lungs, liver,
spleen, kidneys, para-aortic lymph node, and muscle. All tissues were
weighed before counting with a Wizard2 2480 automatic gamma
counter (PerkinElmer).

Immunohistochemistry of Rabbit Aorta
From rabbits that were co-injected with 89Zr- and Cy5.5-labeled
HA-NPs, several samples of abdominal and thoracic aorta were collected.
The samples were frozen in Tissue-Tek O.C.T. (Sakura) and cut into
7-μm-thick sections. Before staining, they were fixed for 5
min in ice-cold acetone. After blocking with 4% FCS, the aortic sections
were stained with a mouse anti-rabbit macrophage antibody (RAM-11,
Dako, Heverlee, Belgium). After overnight incubation and washing with
Tris-buffered saline, Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated secondary antibody
was added and incubated for 0.5 h. DAPI was used as a nuclear stain.
The images were acquired using a Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscope
at 200× magnification or higher.

Statistical Analysis
The normality of data distribution was tested by using the Shapiro–Wilk
test.83 The in vitro FACS
data on the macrophage uptake efficacy of Cy5.5-HA-NPs were analyzed
with one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test.
The same test was used to study the differences in the Cy7-HA-NP uptake
efficacy between the aortic, splenic, and bone marrow macrophages.
This comparison was done within the same mouse group, i.e, 6w HFD or 12w HFD. The intergroup differences were studied for
each macrophage population separately with the independent samples t test. To study the correlation between the HA-NP uptake
and CD44 expression, and HA-binding in aortic leukocyte populations,
we performed Spearman’s correlation test for non-normally distributed
data. Furthermore, a t test was performed for the
following parameters: the fraction of Cy5.5-HA-NP-positive area that
colocalized with macrophage staining and SUVmax in rabbits.
The %ID in mouse aortas of two atherosclerotic mouse groups and wild-type
mice were compared with one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test. The same analysis method was used to determine
the effects of weekly dosing of HA-NPs, free HA, and PBS. All the
analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics 23 and setting the
significance level at p < 0.05.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b01385.Additional figures
and methods (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn7b01385_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
T.J.B., M.L.S., A.A., C.P.-M.,
C.C., and E.K. preformed
the animal experiments. E.K., W.J.M.M., and E.L. designed the experiments
and supervised them. J.T., Y.Z., and F.F. contributed to the experimental
setup and practical work. B.B. and J.D. performed AFM experiments.
E.K. and E.K. preformed scanning electron microscopy experiments.
E.D., N.vd.W., and R.H. performed or supervised dSTORM experiments.
M.N. and F.K. supervised the HA-NP preparation protocol. T.R., Z.A.F.,
and M.P.J.d.W. were valuable advisors. The manuscript was written
through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval
to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health grants R01 EB009638 and P01 HL131478 (Z.A.F.); R01 HL125703, R01 HL118440 and P01 HL131478 (W.J.M.M.), an American Heart Association grant 16SDG31390007 (C.P.M.), and the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research NWO Vidi (W.J.M.M.). M.L.S. is supported by the “De Drie Lichten” Foundation in The Netherlands. A.A. is supported by the European Framework Program 7 grant (FP7-Health 309820: Nano-Athero). The authors also thank the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center’s Radiochemistry & Molecular Imaging Probes Core Facility, which is supported by a National Institutes of Health grant P30 CA008748, and Sensi Pharma BV for funding.
==== Refs
References
Laurent T. C.  Structure of
Hyaluronic Acid . In Chemistry and Molecular
Biology of the Intercellular Matrix ; Balasz E. A.  , Ed.; Academic
Press : London , 1970 ; Vol. 2 , pp 703 –732 .
Toole B. P. 
Hyaluronan: From Extracellular Glue
to Pericellular Cue . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2004 , 4 , 528 –539 10.1038/nrc1391 .15229478 
Petrey A. C. ; de la Motte C. A.  Hyaluronan, a Crucial Regulator of Inflammation . Front. Immunol. 2014 , 5 , Article 10110.3389/fimmu.2014.00101 .
Toole B. P. 
Hyaluronan-CD44 Interactions in Cancer:
Paradoxes and Possibilities . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2009 , 15 , 7462 –7468 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0479 .20008845 
Zöller M. 
CD44: Can a Cancer-Initiating Cell
Profit from an Abundantly Expressed Molecule? . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2011 , 11 , 254 –267 10.1038/nrc3023 .21390059 
Misra S. ; Heldin P. ; Hascall V. C. ; Karamanos N. K. ; Skandalis S. S. ; Markwald R. R. ; Ghatak S. 
Hyaluronan-CD44 Interactions
as Potential Targets for Cancer Therapy . FEBS
J. 
2011 , 278 , 1429 –1443 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08071.x .21362138 
McBride W. H. ; Bard J. B. 
Hyaluronidase-Sensitive Halos around Adherent Cells.
Their Role in Blocking Lymphocyte-Mediated Cytolysis . J. Exp. Med. 
1979 , 149 , 507 –515 10.1084/jem.149.2.507 .762499 
Slevin M. ; Kumar S. ; Gaffney J. 
Angiogenic Oligosaccharides of Hyaluronan
Induce Multiple Signaling Pathways Affecting Vascular Endothelial
Cell Mitogenic and Wound Healing Responses . J. Biol. Chem. 
2002 , 277 , 41046 –41059 10.1074/jbc.M109443200 .12194965 
Rooney P. ; Kumar S. ; Ponting J. ; Wang M. 
The Role of Hyaluronan
in Tumour Neovascularization (Review) . Int.
J. Cancer 
1995 , 60 , 632 –636 10.1002/ijc.2910600511 .7532158 
Stern R. ; Asari A. A. ; Sugahara K. N. 
Hyaluronan Fragments: An Information-Rich
System . Eur. J. Cell Biol. 
2006 , 85 , 699 –715 10.1016/j.ejcb.2006.05.009 .16822580 
Oh E. J. ; Park K. ; Kim K. S. ; Kim J. ; Yang J. A. ; Kong J. H. ; Lee M. Y. ; Hoffman A. S. ; Hahn S. K. 
Target Specific and Long-Acting Delivery of Protein,
Peptide, and Nucleotide Therapeutics Using Hyaluronic Acid Derivatives . J. Controlled Release 
2010 , 141 , 2 –12 10.1016/j.jconrel.2009.09.010 .
Taylor K. R. ; Trowbridge J. M. ; Rudisill J. A. ; Termeer C. C. ; Simon J. C. ; Gallo R. L. 
Hyaluronan Fragments Stimulate Endothelial
Recognition of Injury through TLR4 . J. Biol.
Chem. 
2004 , 279 , 17079 –17084 10.1074/jbc.M310859200 .14764599 
Bollyky P. L. ; Lord J. D. ; Masewicz S. A. ; Evanko S. P. ; Buckner J. H. ; Wight T. N. ; Nepom G. T. 
Cutting Edge: High Molecular Weight
Hyaluronan Promotes the Suppressive Effects of CD4+CD25+ Regulatory
T Cells . J. Immunol. 
2007 , 179 , 744 –747 10.4049/jimmunol.179.2.744 .17617562 
Masuko K. ; Murata M. ; Yudoh K. ; Kato T. ; Nakamura H. 
Anti-Inflammatory Effects of Hyaluronan
in Arthritis Therapy: Not Just for Viscosity . Int. J. Gen. Med. 
2009 , 2 , 77 –81 10.2147/IJGM.S5495 .20360891 
Forrester J. V. ; Balazs E. A. 
Inhibition of Phagocytosis by High Molecular Weight
Hyaluronate . Immunology 
1980 , 40 , 435 –446 .7429537 
Tian X. ; Azpurua J. ; Hine C. ; Vaidya A. ; Myakishev-Rempel M. ; Ablaeva J. ; Mao Z. ; Nevo E. ; Gorbunova V. ; Seluanov A. 
High-Molecular-Mass Hyaluronan Mediates
the Cancer Resistance of the Naked Mole Rat . Nature (London, U. K.) 
2013 , 499 , 346 –349 10.1038/nature12234 .23783513 
Burdick J. A. ; Prestwich G. D. 
Hyaluronic Acid Hydrogels for Biomedical Applications . Adv. Mater. (Weinheim, Ger.) 
2011 , 23 , H41 –H56 10.1002/adma.201003963 .
Lo G. H. ; LaValley M. ; McAlindon T. ; Felson D. T. 
Intra-Articular Hyaluronic Acid in Treatment of Knee
Osteoarthritis: A Meta-Analysis . JAMA, J. Am.
Med. Assoc. 
2003 , 290 , 3115 –3121 10.1001/jama.290.23.3115 .
Fraser J. R. ; Laurent T. C. ; Pertoft H. ; Baxter E. 
Plasma Clearance, Tissue
Distribution and Metabolism of Hyaluronic Acid Injected Intravenously
in the Rabbit . Biochem. J. 
1981 , 200 , 415 –424 10.1042/bj2000415 .7340841 
Jadin L. ; Bookbinder L. H. ; Frost G. I. 
A Comprehensive Model of Hyaluronan Turnover in the
Mouse . Matrix Biol. 
2012 , 31 , 81 –89 10.1016/j.matbio.2011.11.002 .22142621 
Laznicek M. ; Laznickova A. ; Cozikova D. ; Velebny V. 
Preclinical Pharmacokinetics of Radiolabelled
Hyaluronan . Pharmacol. Rep. 
2012 , 64 , 428 –437 10.1016/S1734-1140(12)70784-3 .22661195 
Fraser J. R. ; Laurent T. C. ; Engström-Laurent A. ; Laurent U. G. 
Elimination of Hyaluronic Acid from the Blood Stream
in the Human . Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 
1984 , 11 , 17 –25 10.1111/j.1440-1681.1984.tb00235.x .6713733 
Del Pino P. ; Yang F. ; Pelaz B. ; Zhang Q. ; Kantner K. ; Hartmann R. ; Martinez
De Baroja N. ; Gallego M. ; Möller M. ; Manshian B. B. ; Soenen S. J. ; Riedel R. ; Hampp N. ; Parak W. J. 
Basic Physicochemical Properties of Polyethylene Glycol
Coated Gold Nanoparticles That Determine Their Interaction with Cells . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 5483 –5487 10.1002/anie.201511733 .
Davis M. E. ; Chen Z. ; Shin D. M. 
Nanoparticle Therapeutics: An Emerging
Treatment Modality for Cancer . Nat. Rev. Drug
Discovery 
2008 , 7 , 771 –782 10.1038/nrd2614 .18758474 
Li S. D. ; Huang L. 
Pharmacokinetics and
Biodistribution of Nanoparticles . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2008 , 5 , 496 –504 10.1021/mp800049w .
Oommen O. P. ; Duehrkop C. ; Nilsson B. ; Hilborn J. ; Varghese O. P. 
Multifunctional Hyaluronic Acid and
Chondroitin Sulfate Nanoparticles: Impact of Glycosaminoglycan Presentation
on Receptor Mediated Cellular Uptake and Immune Activation . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 20614 –20624 10.1021/acsami.6b06823 .27468113 
Lee S. ; Choi K. Y. ; Chung H. ; Ryu J. H. ; Lee A. ; Koo H. ; Youn I. C. ; Park J. H. ; Kim I. S. ; Kim S. Y. ; Chen X. ; Jeong S. Y. ; Kwon I. C. ; Kim K. ; Choi K. 
Real Time,
High Resolution Video Imaging of Apoptosis in Single Cells with a
Polymeric Nanoprobe . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2011 , 22 , 125 –131 10.1021/bc1004119 .
Yoon H. Y. ; Koo H. ; Choi K. Y. ; Lee S. J. ; Kim K. ; Kwon I. C. ; Leary J. F. ; Park K. ; Yuk S. H. ; Park J. H. ; Choi K. 
Tumor-Targeting
Hyaluronic Acid Nanoparticles for Photodynamic Imaging and Therapy . Biomaterials 
2012 , 33 , 3980 –3989 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.02.016 .22364699 
Thomas R. G. ; Moon M. J. ; Kim J. H. ; Lee J. H. ; Jeong Y. Y.  Effectiveness of Losartan-Loaded Hyaluronic Acid
(HA) Micelles for the Reduction of Advanced Hepatic Fibrosis in C3H/HeN
Mice Model . PLoS One 2015 , 10 , Article e014551210.1371/journal.pone.0145512 .
Choi K. Y. ; Yoon H. Y. ; Kim J. H. ; Bae S. M. ; Park R. W. ; Kang Y. M. ; Kim I. S. ; Kwon I. C. ; Choi K. ; Jeong S. Y. ; Kim K. ; Park J. H. 
Smart Nanocarrier
Based on PEGylated Hyaluronic Acid for Cancer Therapy . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 8591 –8599 10.1021/nn202070n .21967065 
Lee S. J. ; Ghosh S. C. ; Han H. D. ; Stone R. L. ; Bottsford-Miller J. ; Shen D. Y. ; Auzenne E. J. ; Lopez-Araujo A. ; Lu C. ; Nishimura M. ; Pecot C. V. ; Zand B. ; Thanapprapasr D. ; Jennings N. B. ; Kang Y. ; Huang J. ; Hu W. ; Klostergaard J. ; Sood A. K. 
Metronomic Activity of CD44-Targeted
Hyaluronic Acid-Paclitaxel in Ovarian Carcinoma . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2012 , 18 , 4114 –4121 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-3250 .22693353 
Bodnár M. ; Daróczi L. ; Batta G. ; Bakó J. ; Hartmann J. F. ; Borbély J. 
Preparation and Characterization
of Cross-Linked Hyaluronan Nanoparticles . Colloid
Polym. Sci. 
2009 , 287 , 991 –1000 10.1007/s00396-009-2061-9 .
Lobatto M. E. ; Fuster V. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Mulder W. J. M. 
Perspectives
and Opportunities for Nanomedicine in the Management of Atherosclerosis . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2011 , 10 , 835 –852 10.1038/nrd3578 .22015921 
Tang J. ; Lobatto M. E. ; Hassing L. ; van der Staay S. ; van Rijs S. M. ; Calcagno C. ; Braza M. S. ; Baxter S. ; Fay F. ; Sanchez-Gaytan B. L. ; Duivenvoorden R. ; Sager H. B. ; Astudillo Y. M. ; Leong W. ; Ramachandran S. ; Storm G. ; Perez-Medina C. ; Reiner T. ; Cormode D. P. ; Strijkers G. J.  ; Inhibiting Macrophage Proliferation
Suppresses Atherosclerotic Plaque Inflammation . Sci. Adv. 2015 , 1 , Article
e140022310.1126/sciadv.1400223 .
Duivenvoorden R. ; Tang J. ; Cormode D. P. ; Mieszawska A. J. ; Izquierdo-Garcia D. ; Ozcan C. ; Otten M.
J. ; Zaidi N. ; Lobatto M. E. ; van Rijs S. M. ; Priem B. ; Kuan E. L. ; Martel C. ; Hewing B. ; Sager H. ; Nahrendorf M. ; Randolph G. J. ; Stroes E. S. G. ; Fuster V. ; Fisher E. A.  ; A Statin-Loaded Reconstituted High-Density
Lipoprotein Nanoparticle Inhibits Atherosclerotic Plaque Inflammation . Nat. Commun. 2014 , 5 , Article 306510.1038/ncomms4065 .
Fredman G. ; Kamaly N. ; Spolitu S. ; Milton J. ; Ghorpade D. ; Chiasson R. ; Kuriakose G. ; Perretti M. ; Farokhzad O. ; Farokzhad O. ; Tabas I.  Targeted Nanoparticles Containing the Proresolving Peptide Ac2–26
Protect against Advanced Atherosclerosis in Hypercholesterolemic Mice . Sci. Transl. Med. 2015 , 7 , Article 275ra2010.1126/scitranslmed.aaa1065 .
Toole B. P. ; Wight T. N. ; Tammi M. I. 
Hyaluronan-Cell Interactions in Cancer
and Vascular Disease . J. Biol. Chem. 
2002 , 277 , 4593 –4596 10.1074/jbc.R100039200 .11717318 
Chai S. ; Chai Q. ; Danielsen C. C. ; Hjorth P. ; Nyengaard J. R. ; Ledet T. ; Yamaguchi Y. ; Rasmussen L. M. ; Wogensen L. 
Overexpression of Hyaluronan in the
Tunica Media Promotes the Development of Atherosclerosis . Circ. Res. 
2005 , 96 , 583 –591 10.1161/01.RES.0000158963.37132.8b .15705963 
Tarkin J. M. ; Dweck M. R. ; Evans N. R. ; Takx R. A. P. ; Brown A. J. ; Tawakol A. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Rudd J. H. F. 
Imaging Atherosclerosis . Circ.
Res. 
2016 , 118 , 750 –769 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306247 .26892971 
Weber C. ; Noels H. 
Atherosclerosis: Current Pathogenesis and Therapeutic Options . Nat. Med. (N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2011 , 17 , 1410 –1422 10.1038/nm.2538 .
Foley J. P. ; Lam D. ; Jiang H. ; Liao J. ; Cheong N. ; McDevitt T. M. ; Zaman A. ; Wright J. R. ; Savani R. C. 
Toll-like Receptor 2 (TLR2), Transforming
Growth Factor-B, Hyaluronan (HA), and Receptor for HA-Mediated Motility
(RHAMM) Are Required for Surfactant Protein A-Stimulated Macrophage
Chemotaxis . J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 37406 –37419 10.1074/jbc.M112.360982 .22948158 
Noble P. W. ; Lake F. R. ; Henson P. M. ; Riches D. W. H. 
Hyaluronate Activation of CD44 Induces Insulin-like
Growth Factor-1 Expression by a Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha-Dependent
Mechanism in Murine Macrophages . J. Clin. Invest. 
1993 , 91 , 2368 –2377 10.1172/JCI116469 .8514850 
Schledzewski K. ; Falkowski M. ; Moldenhauer G. ; Metharom P. ; Kzhyshkowska J. ; Ganss R. ; Demory A. ; Falkowska-Hansen B. ; Kurzen H. ; Ugurel S. ; Geginat G. ; Arnold B. ; Goerdt S. 
Lymphatic Endothelium-Specific Hyaluronan Receptor
LYVE-1 Is Expressed by Stabilin-1+, F4/80+, CD11b+ Macrophages in
Malignant Tumours and Wound Healing Tissue in Vivo and in Bone Marrow Cultures in Vitro: Implications
for the Assessment of Lymphangiogene . J. Pathol. 
2006 , 209 , 67 –77 10.1002/path.1942 .16482496 
Xu X. H. ; Shah P. K. ; Faure E. ; Equils O. ; Thomas L. ; Fishbein M. C. ; Luthringer D. ; Xu X. P. ; Rajavashisth T. B. ; Yano J. ; Kaul S. ; Arditi M. 
Toll-like Receptor-4 Is Expressed by Macrophages in
Murine and Human Lipid-Rich Atherosclerotic Plaques and Upregulated
by Oxidized LDL . Circulation 
2001 , 104 , 3103 –3108 10.1161/hc5001.100631 .11748108 
Ley K. ; Miller Y. I. ; Hedrick C. C. 
Monocyte
and Macrophage Dynamics during Atherogenesis . Arterioscler., Thromb., Vasc. Biol. 
2011 , 31 , 1506 –1516 10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.221127 .21677293 
Mantovani A. 
Macrophage Diversity and Polarization: In Vivo Veritas Time to Restore Individual Rights for IL-2
and . Blood 
2004 , 108 , 408 –409 10.1182/blood-2006-05-019430 .
Scott J. E. ; Chen Y. ; Brass A. 
Secondary
and Tertiary Structures Involving Chondroitin and Chondroitin Sulphates
in Solution, Investigated by Rotary Shadowing/electron Microscopy
and Computer Simulation . Eur. J. Biochem. 
1992 , 209 , 675 –680 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1992.tb17335.x .1425674 
Scott J. E. 
Supramolecular Organization of Extracellular-Matrix
Glycosaminoglycans, Invitro and in the Tissues . Faseb J. 
1992 , 6 , 2639 –2645 .1612287 
Sitia S. ; Tomasoni L. ; Atzeni F. ; Ambrosio G. ; Cordiano C. ; Catapano A. ; Tramontana S. ; Perticone F. ; Naccarato P. ; Camici P. ; Picano E. ; Cortigiani L. ; Bevilacqua M. ; Milazzo L. ; Cusi D. ; Barlassina C. ; Sarzi-Puttini P. ; Turiel M. 
From Endothelial Dysfunction
to Atherosclerosis . Autoimmun. Rev. 
2010 , 9 , 830 –834 10.1016/j.autrev.2010.07.016 .20678595 
Van Tits L. J. H. ; Stienstra R. ; van Lent P. L. ; Netea M. G. ; Joosten L. A. B. ; Stalenhoef A. F. H. 
Oxidized
LDL Enhances pro-Inflammatory Responses of Alternatively Activated
M2Macrophages:
A Crucial Role for Krüppel-like Factor 2 . Atherosclerosis 
2011 , 214 , 345 –349 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.11.018 .21167486 
Moghimi S. M. ; Hunter A. C. ; Murray J. C. 
Long-Circulating
and Target-Specific Nanoparticles: Theory to Practice . Pharmacol. Rev. 
2001 , 53 , 283 –318 .11356986 
Ahsan F. ; Rivas I. P. ; Khan M. A. ; Torres Suárez A. I. 
Targeting
to Macrophages: Role of Physicochemical Properties of Particulate
Carriers—liposomes and Microspheres—on the Phagocytosis
by Macrophages . J. Controlled Release 
2002 , 79 , 29 –40 10.1016/S0168-3659(01)00549-1 .
Zheng Z. ; Katoh S. ; He Q. ; Oritani K. ; Miyake K. ; Lesley J. ; Hyman R. ; Hamik A. ; Parkhouse R. M. ; Farr A. G. ; Kincade P. W. 
Monoclonal
Antibodies to CD44 and Their Influence on Hyaluronan Recognition . J. Cell Biol. 
1995 , 130 , 485 –495 10.1083/jcb.130.2.485 .7542251 
Lesley J. ; Schulte R. ; Hyman R. 
Binding of Hyaluronic Acid to Lymphoid
Cell Lines Is Inhibited by Monoclonal Antibodies against Pgp-1 . Exp. Cell Res. 
1990 , 187 , 224 –233 10.1016/0014-4827(90)90085-O .2180732 
Lesley J. ; Hyman R. 
CD44 Can Be Activated to Function
as an Hyaluronic Acid Receptor in Normal Murine T Cells . Eur. J. Immunol. 
1992 , 22 , 2719 –2723 10.1002/eji.1830221036 .1382996 
Tavakoli S. ; Asmis R. 
Reactive Oxygen Species and Thiol Redox Signaling in the Macrophage
Biology of Atherosclerosis . Antioxid. Redox
Signaling 
2012 , 17 , 1785 –1795 10.1089/ars.2012.4638 .
Tall A. R. ; Yvancharvet L. 
Cholesterol, Inflammation and Innate Immunity . Nat. Rev. Immunol. 
2015 , 15 , 104 –116 10.1038/nri3793 .25614320 
Sykes E. A. ; Chen J. ; Zheng G. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Investigating
the Impact of Nanoparticle Size on Active and Passive Tumor Targeting
Efficiency . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 5696 –5706 10.1021/nn500299p .24821383 
Albanese A. ; Tang P. S. ; Chan W. C. W. 
The
Effect of Nanoparticle Size, Shape, and Surface Chemistry on Biological
Systems . Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 
2012 , 14 , 1 –16 10.1146/annurev-bioeng-071811-150124 .22524388 
Lobatto M. E. ; Calcagno C. ; Millon A. ; Senders M. L. ; Fay F. ; Robson P. M. ; Ramachandran S. ; Binderup T. ; Paridaans M. P. M. ; Sensarn S. ; Rogalla S. ; Gordon R. E. ; Cardoso L. ; Storm G. ; Metselaar J. M. ; Contag C. H. ; Stroes E. S. G. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Mulder W. J. M. 
Atherosclerotic
Plaque Targeting Mechanism of Long-Circulating Nanoparticles Established
by Multimodal Imaging . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 1837 –1847 10.1021/nn506750r .25619964 
Stancu C. S. ; Toma L. ; Sima A. V. 
Dual Role
of Lipoproteins in Endothelial Cell Dysfunction in Atherosclerosis . Cell Tissue Res. 
2012 , 349 , 433 –446 10.1007/s00441-012-1437-1 .22592627 
Falk E. 
Pathogenesis of Atherosclerosis . J. Am. Coll.
Cardiol. 
2006 , 47 , C7 –C12 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.09.068 .16631513 
von Eckardstein A. ; Rohrer L. 
Transendothelial Lipoprotein Transport and Regulation
of Endothelial Permeability and Integrity by Lipoproteins . Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 
2009 , 20 , 197 –205 10.1097/MOL.0b013e32832afd63 .19395962 
Sanz J. ; Fayad Z. A. 
Imaging of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular
Disease . Nature (London, U. K.) 
2008 , 451 , 953 –957 10.1038/nature06803 .18288186 
Hag A. M. F. ; Pedersen S. F. ; Christoffersen C. ; Binderup T. ; Jensen M. M. ; Jørgensen J. T. ; Skovgaard D. ; Ripa R. S. ; Kjaer A.  18F-FDG PET Imaging of Murine Atherosclerosis: Association
with Gene Expression of Key Molecular Markers . PLoS One 2012 , 7 , Article
e50908e50908 10.1371/journal.pone.0050908 .23226424 
Zhao Y. ; Kuge Y. ; Zhao S. ; Strauss H. W. ; Blankenberg F. G. ; Tamaki N. 
Prolonged High-Fat Feeding Enhances
Aortic 18F-FDG and 99mTc-Annexin A5 Uptake in Apolipoprotein E-Deficient
and Wild-Type C57BL/6J Mice . J. Nucl. Med. 
2008 , 49 , 1707 –1714 10.2967/jnumed.108.051847 .18794270 
Tawakol A. ; Singh P. ; Mojena M. ; Pimentel-Santillana M. ; Emami H. ; Macnabb M. ; Rudd J. H. F. ; Narula J. ; Enriquez J. A. ; Través P. G. ; Fernández-Velasco M. ; Bartrons R. ; Martín-Sanz P. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Tejedor A. ; Boscá L. 
HIF-1α
and PFKFB3Mediate a Tight Relationship Between Proinflammatory Activation
and Anerobic Metabolism in Atherosclerotic Macrophages . Arterioscler., Thromb., Vasc. Biol. 
2015 , 35 , 1463 –1471 10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.305551 .25882065 
Weigel J. A. ; Raymond R. C. ; McGary C. ; Singh A. ; Weigel P. H. 
A Blocking Antibody to the Hyaluronan
Receptor for Endocytosis (HARE) Inhibits Hyaluronan Clearance by Perfused
Liver . J. Biol. Chem. 
2003 , 278 , 9808 –9812 10.1074/jbc.M211462200 .12645574 
Sheikine Y. ; Akram K. 
FDG–PET Imaging
of Atherosclerosis: Do We Know What We See? . Atherosclerosis 
2010 , 211 , 371 –380 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.01.002 .20202637 
Feliu N. ; Docter D. ; Heine M. ; del Pino P. ; Ashraf S. ; Kolosnjaj-Tabi J. ; Macchiarini P. ; Nielsen P. ; Alloyeau D. ; Gazeau F. ; Stauber R. H. ; Parak W. J. 
In Vivo Degeneration
and the Fate of Inorganic Nanoparticles . Chem.
Soc. Rev. 
2016 , 45 , 2440 –2457 10.1039/C5CS00699F .26862602 
Pérez-Medina C. ; Abdel-Atti D. ; Zhang Y. ; Longo V. A. ; Irwin C. P. ; Binderup T. ; Ruiz-Cabello J. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Lewis J. S. ; Mulder W. J. M. ; Reiner T. 
A Modular Labeling Strategy for in Vivo PET and near-Infrared Fluorescence Imaging of Nanoparticle
Tumor Targeting . J. Nucl. Med. 
2014 , 55 , 1706 –1711 10.2967/jnumed.114.141861 .25060196 
Pérez-Medina C. ; Binderup T. ; Lobatto M. E. ; Tang J. ; Calcagno C. ; Giesen L. ; Wessel C. H. ; Witjes J. ; Ishino S. ; Baxter S. ; Zhao Y. ; Ramachandran S. ; Eldib M. ; Sánchez-Gaytán B. L. ; Robson P. M. ; Bini J. ; Granada J. F. ; Fish K. M. ; Stroes E. S. G. ; Duivenvoorden R. ; et al. In Vivo PET Imaging of HDL in Multiple Atherosclerosis Models . JACC: Cardiovascular Imaging 
2016 , 9 , 950 –961 10.1016/j.jcmg.2016.01.020 .27236528 
Pérez-Medina C. ; Abdel-Atti D. ; Tang J. ; Zhao Y. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Lewis J. S. ; Mulder W. J. ; Reiner T.  Nanoreporter
PET Predicts the Efficacy of Anti-Cancer Nanotherapy . Nat. Commun.  [Online] 2016 , 7 , Article 1183810.1038/ncomms11838 .
El-Dakdouki M. H. ; El-Boubbou K. ; Kamat M. ; Huang R. ; Abela G. S. ; Kiupel M. ; Zhu D. C. ; Huang X. 
CD44 Targeting Magnetic
Glyconanoparticles for Atherosclerotic Plaque Imaging . Pharm. Res. 
2014 , 31 , 1426 –1437 10.1007/s11095-013-1021-8 .23568520 
Kamat M. ; El-Boubbou K. ; Zhu D. C. ; Lansdell T. ; Lu X. ; Li W. ; Huang X. 
Hyaluronic Acid Immobilized Magnetic
Nanoparticles for Active Targeting and Imaging of Macrophages . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2010 , 21 , 2128 –2135 10.1021/bc100354m .
Lee G. Y. ; Kim J.-H. ; Choi K. Y. ; Yoon H. Y. ; Kim K. ; Kwon I. C. ; Choi K. ; Lee B.-H. ; Park J. H. ; Kim I.-S. 
Hyaluronic Acid Nanoparticles for Active Targeting
Atherosclerosis . Biomaterials 
2015 , 53 , 341 –348 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.02.089 .25890732 
Juliano R. L. ; Stamp D. 
The Effect of Particle
Size and Charge on the Clearance Rates of Liposomes and Liposome Encapsulated
Drugs . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
1975 , 63 , 651 –658 10.1016/S0006-291X(75)80433-5 .1131256 
Moore K. J. ; Tabas I. 
Macrophages in the
Pathogenesis of Atherosclerosis . Cell 
2011 , 145 , 341 –355 10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.005 .21529710 
Gaffney J. ; Matou-Nasri S. ; Grau-Olivares M. ; Slevin M. 
Therapeutic Applications of Hyaluronan . Mol. BioSyst. 
2010 , 6 , 437 –443 10.1039/B910552M .20174672 
Thomas R. G. ; Moon M. ; Lee S. ; Jeong Y. Y. 
Paclitaxel Loaded
Hyaluronic Acid Nanoparticles for Targeted Cancer Therapy: In Vitro and in Vivo Analysis . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2014 , 72 , 510 –518 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.08.054 .25224289 
Reitsma S. ; Slaaf D. W. ; Vink H. ; Van Zandvoort M. A. M. J. ; Oude Egbrink M. G. A. 
The
Endothelial Glycocalyx: Composition, Functions, and Visualization . Pfluegers Arch. 
2007 , 454 , 345 –359 10.1007/s00424-007-0212-8 .17256154 
Schindelin J. ; Arganda-Carreras I. ; Frise E. ; Kaynig V. ; Longair M. ; Pietzsch T. ; Preibisch S. ; Rueden C. ; Saalfeld S. ; Schmid B. ; Tinevez J.-Y. ; White D. J. ; Hartenstein V. ; Eliceiri K. ; Tomancak P. ; Cardona A. 
Fiji: An Open-Source Platform for Biological-Image
Analysis . Nat. Methods 
2012 , 9 , 676 –682 10.1038/nmeth.2019 .22743772 
Shapiro S. S. ; Wilk M. B. 
An Analysis of Variance
Test for Normality (Complete Samples) . Biometrika 
1965 , 52 , 591 –611 10.1093/biomet/52.3-4.591 .

