
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.6b05737ReviewAdvancement
of the Emerging Field of RNA Nanotechnology Jasinski Daniel †Haque Farzin †Binzel Daniel W Guo Peixuan *College of Pharmacy, Division
of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Chemistry; College of Medicine,
Department of Physiology & Cell Biology; and Dorothy M. Davis
Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, United States* Phone: 614-293-2114. E-mail: guo.1091@osu.edu.03 01 2017 28 02 2017 11 2 1142 1164 25 08 2016 03 01 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The field of RNA
nanotechnology has advanced rapidly during the
past decade. A variety of programmable RNA nanoparticles with defined
shape, size, and stoichiometry have been developed for diverse applications
in nanobiotechnology. The rising popularity of RNA nanoparticles is
due to a number of factors: (1) removing the concern of RNA degradation in vitro and in vivo by introducing chemical
modification into nucleotides without significant alteration of the
RNA property in folding and self-assembly; (2) confirming the concept
that RNA displays very high thermodynamic stability and is suitable
for in vivo trafficking and other applications; (3)
obtaining the knowledge to tune the immunogenic properties of synthetic
RNA constructs for in vivo applications; (4) increased
understanding of the 4D structure and intermolecular interaction of
RNA molecules; (5) developing methods to control shape, size, and
stoichiometry of RNA nanoparticles; (6) increasing knowledge of regulation
and processing functions of RNA in cells; (7) decreasing cost of RNA
production by biological and chemical synthesis; and (8) proving the
concept that RNA is a safe and specific therapeutic modality for cancer
and other diseases with little or no accumulation in vital organs.
Other applications of RNA nanotechnology, such as adapting them to
construct 2D, 3D, and 4D structures for use in tissue engineering,
biosensing, resistive biomemory, and potential computer logic gate
modules, have stimulated the interest of the scientific community.
This review aims to outline the current state of the art of RNA nanoparticles
as programmable smart complexes and offers perspectives on the promising
avenues of research in this fast-growing field.

RNA nanoparticlespRNA 3WJ motifnanotechnologynanobiotechnologysiRNAdocument-id-old-9nn6b05737document-id-new-14nn-2016-05737mccc-price
==== Body
The field of RNA nanotechnology1 has advanced rapidly over the past decade.2−6 RNA’s versatility in structure and function, propensity for
bottom-up self-assembly, defined size and structure, favorable in vivo attributes, and large potential as a therapeutic
modality make it an attractive candidate as a biomaterial for nanoparticle
drug delivery. RNA’s ability to adopt complex quaternary structures,2,7−11 to base stack,12,13 to form canonical Watson–Crick
(A–T, G–C) and noncanonical (G–U wobble, sheared
G–A pair, G–A imino pair, A–U reverse Hoogsteen)
base pairing14,15 leads to a variety of natural
structural motifs.16,17 RNA nanotechnology uses such
properties to construct nanoparticles for use in nanomedicine and
bionanotechnology applications.

The RNA designer can easily
scan through varieties of RNA secondary
and tertiary structural motifs (Figure 1) (e.g., bulges, stems, hairpin, loops,
and junctions). Such motifs are used as building blocks to design
nanoparticles with diverse size and shape by engineering parameters
such as motif angle and sequence length.18−22 Other parameters such as nucleotide type can alter
nanoparticle properties, including enhancing chemical stability using
base or backbone modifications or incorporating fluorescent dyes for
nanoparticle tracking. The physiochemical properties of RNA nanoparticles
can easily be fine-tuned to tailor-make the nanoparticle for desired
applications in vitro and in vivo.

Figure 1 Motifs for constructing RNA nanoparticles. A multitude of RNA motifs
are available for the construction of RNA nanoparticles. RNA motifs
are extracted from biological RNAs and, after in-depth structural
analysis, can be used to generate higher-order structures. The resulting
RNA nanoparticles can be functionalized with targeting, imaging, and
therapeutic modules for diverse applications in nanobiotechnology.

The rapid growth of the RNA nanotechnology
field necessitates the
preparation of an updated review. This article will outline recent
advancements in RNA nanotechnology including recent technologies implemented
to construct a stable RNA nanoparticle with diverse structure and
function. Finally, we will discuss the potential of RNA in medicine
and nanotechnology.

Definition of RNA Nanotechnology
RNA nanotechnology
is the study of nanometer-scale RNA architectures with their major
frame being composed of RNA. The core scaffold, targeting ligand,
regulatory moieties, and therapeutic modules can be all composed exclusively
of RNA. RNA nanoparticles display the simplistic characteristic of
DNA canonical base pairing, while containing the structural flexibility
and functional diversity characteristics of proteins. Noncanonical
base pairing, base stacking, and elaborate networks of tertiary contacts
increase RNA structure versatility while also increasing thermodynamic
stability.

Unlike traditional RNA biology research, RNA nanotechnology
focuses on utilizing the properties of RNA to build architectures
with nanomedicine applications. Classical studies on RNA structure
and function focuses on intra-RNA interactions and 2D/3D structure–function
relationships, whereas RNA nanotechnology focuses on inter-RNA interactions
and quaternary interactions of RNA motifs. However, the fields of
RNA research are not exclusive in their information. Much of the pre-existing
RNA biology research is utilized extensively in RNA nanotechnology.
For example, many RNA nanoparticles use functional RNAs such as ribozymes,23 riboswitches,24 and
miRNAs25 discovered previously by traditional
RNA biology. Additionally, RNA nanoparticles take advantage of RNA
motifs discovered by RNA structural biologists.

Emergence of
the RNA Nanotechnology Field
The emergence
and advancement of the RNA nanotechnology field is not a simple incidence
of the work by one single person but rather a collective effort of
many insightful individuals. In 1998, Peixuan submitted a manuscript2 to Cell, reporting his finding
of the assembly of pRNA (packaging RNA) dimers, trimers, and hexamers
using re-engineered RNA fragments; the Cell associate
editor, Vivian Siegel, and the founding editor of Cell, Benjamin Lewin, immediately were intrigued. They recognized that
this important finding would promote the visibility of their newly
initiated journal Molecular Cell. Thus, this significant
discovery was published in Molecular Cell(2) with a mini-review in Cell to
feature the work. The editors at Cell asked Guo to
recommend an authority in the field to review this finding, and Roger
Hendrix was chosen.26 This Molecular
Cell paper revealed the ability to engineer RNA into precise
constructs to build concise RNA architecture such as dimers, trimers,
and hexamers via bottom-up self-assembly, thus showing
the concept of RNA nanotechnology.

In the early 2000s, a group
led by Eric Westhof predicted that the RNA kissing loop would promote
the formation of special RNA structures.27,28 The original concept of “TectoRNA” or RNA “Tetonics”
has led to empirical results in RNA nanotechnology.29−31 In 2004, when
another empirical paper on RNA nanotechnology was published in Nano Letters, the editor and reporters of MSNBC published
a groundbreaking news story entitled “Scientists build
tiny structures out of RNA” to promote this concept
of RNA nanotechnology. Subsequently, the editors of Science perceived the importance of RNA nanotechnology and published Luc
Jaeger’s paper on tectoRNA32 with
commentary by Hao Yan.33 More importantly,
when three papers exemplifying the use of RNA nanotechnology to treat
cancer were published,34−36 the NCI Alliance in Cancer Nanotechnology, led by
Piotr Grodzinski, recognized the potential of RNA nanotechnology in
cancer treatment (http://nano.cancer.gov/action/news/featurestories/monthly_feature_2006_august.pdf). As part of the NCI’s effort to promote the RNA nanotechnology
field, a Workshop on RNA and Disease was organized
by the pioneer of computational RNA nanotechnology, Bruce Shapiro.
A strong boost to the RNA nanotechnology field can be credited to
an invited review by Nature Nanotechnology(1) and a subsequent publication detailing the finding
of a stable phi29 pRNA three-way junction implemented as an in vivo delivery system.35 The
promoters of the RNA nanotechnology field also include editors of ACS Nano and Nano Today.

Abundance of
RNA in Cells Reveals Third Milestone in Pharmaceutical
Development
To date, there have been two milestones in pharmaceutical
sciences: (1) Chemical drugs and (2) protein drugs, such as antibodies,
enzymes, hormones, or chemicals targeting proteins.37 However, human genome sequencing revealed that only a small
fraction of the human genome, about 2%, codes for protein, with the
remaining 98% thought of as “junk DNA”. Subsequent studies
revealed that a portion of the “junk DNA” actually codes
for small and long noncoding RNAs.38 Noncoding
RNAs are now well-recognized as playing prominent roles in cellular
processes such as translation regulation, RNA splicing, DNA replication,
and so forth.39 As a result, RNA is predicted
to be the third milestone in drug development, including RNA nanoparticles,
small therapeutic RNAs, and chemicals targeting RNAs.

Properties
of RNA Structure and Chemistry Favorable for Nanoparticle
Construction
Nanotechnology that revolves around the manipulation
of biological materials is referred to as nanobiotechnology, which
includes the field of nucleic acid nanotechnology. First envisioned
over 30 years ago,40 DNA self-assembly
was exploited to form nanoparticles using the base-pairing mechanism
(A–T, G–C) (reviewed in refs (41) and (42)). DNA nanostructures including nanocapsules and other nanocarriers
for drug delivery applications have since been constructed.43−45 DNA origami was developed as a powerful tool to build large 2D46 and 3D architectures including tetrahedrons,47 nanorobots,48 helix
bundles,49 and tensegrity-based shapes.50 Although DNA nanostructures have exemplified
the power of the base-pairing mechanism for structure design, DNA
cannot match the thermostability and structural and functional diversity
of its nucleic acid counterpart, RNA.

Similar to DNA, RNA is
a chain-like biopolymer composed of nucleotide subunits joined by
phosphodiester bonds. Each nucleotide is composed of a ribose sugar,
phosphate group, and nitrogenous base. The most common bases are cytosine
(C), guanine (G), adenine (A), and uracil (U). The basis of RNA secondary
structure is hydrogen bonding occurring between complementary nucleotides,
G–C and A–U, analogous to that of canonical base pairing
found in DNA. Besides base paring being important for RNA secondary
structure, base stacking is equally important for nucleic acid stability.
Furthermore, the presence of the 2′-OH in RNA has dramatic
effects on its properties. The C3′-endo sugar conformation
in RNA leads to A-type helical formation (11 bp/turn), offering improved
thermostability over DNA B-type helix.

RNA was first characterized
as the link between genomic DNA and
protein, transferring the genomic code for proteins to the cell’s
translation machinery. Investigation of RNA structure revealed the
catalytic nature of RNA with the discovery of ribozymes.51 The revolutionary finding of catalytic RNA,
an attribute thought only to belong to proteins, led to a shift in
the thought of the function of RNA. In addition to functions generated
by elaborately structured RNA molecules, specific base-pairing interactions
mediated by single-stranded regions of unstructured RNA have further
expanded RNA’s functional repertoire.52 Years of research found that RNA performs diverse functions in biology,
juggling tasks from catalysis to protein synthesis to gene regulation.

Negative
Charge of RNA Nanoparticles Disallows Nonspecific Cell
Entry and Minimizes Toxicity
Many nanoparticle systems rely
solely on passive targeting, such as the enhanced permeability and
retention (EPR) effects.53,54 Targeting the negatively
charged cell membrane, positively charged nanoparticles enter cells via fusion and charge interactions. However, many positively
charged nanoparticles cause toxicity and lead to unnecessary off-target
effects.54,55 RNA’s negatively charged phosphate
backbone renders RNA nanoparticles highly anionic, disallowing nonspecific
targeting. Furthermore, this polyanionic charge density leads to extensive
hydration and minimizes formation of a protein corona that can affect
targeted delivery. RNA nanoparticles are functionalized with targeting
molecules, such as chemical ligands or RNA aptamers, and therefore
utilize receptor-mediated endocytosis to enter cells.

RNA Nanoparticles
Can Harbor Multiple Functionalities While
Retaining Their Authentic Folding
Functional modules composed
of RNA, such as RNA aptamers, ribozymes, riboswitches, siRNA, and
a series of noncoding RNAs, are available and can be seamlessly integrated
into RNA nanoparticles. These motifs are simply fused to the core
sequences of the RNA scaffold. Since RNA nanoparticles are inherently
modular, each of the components self-assemble into the multifunctional
architectures. Additionally, each helical branch of the RNA motif
can be decorated with different subunits. One example is the pRNA-3WJ
scaffold,35 which can harbor three functional
modules. The driving force from the thermodynamically stable 3WJ scaffold
ensures correct folding of RNA functional modules, retaining their
functionality.56 Additionally, chemical
ligands, such as fluorescent dyes, chemotherapeutic drugs, or biotin,
can be easily incorporated to one RNA strand by well-established chemical
conjugation strategies.57 Thus, multiple
functional units for targeting, therapy, and tracking can be combined
into one nanoparticle. Alternatively, multiple units of the same function,
such as identical siRNAs or different siRNAs targeting different genes,
can be combined on the same nanoparticle for enhanced or synergistic
therapeutic effects.

In medical applications, it is paramount
to properly characterize the payload. RNA nanoparticles are constructed
bottom-up; each step along the way is precisely controlled by the
designer. From size, shape, and oligomer selection to functional units
and tracking molecules, each property of the nanoparticle is tailored
to a specific application. The properties of RNA nanoparticles have
the potential to improve upon current delivery systems, while also
generating new routes of therapy, due to the distinct mechanism of
RNA therapeutics.

RNA Nanoparticles Display Favorable Pharmacological
Profiles
Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) profiles
of nanoparticles
are perhaps their most important characteristics besides therapeutic
efficacy. PK/PD profiles depend on a number of factors, including
size, shape, and surface charge. Controlled RNA nanoparticle synthesis
results in consistent assembly with narrow size and shape distributions.
Therefore, a reproducible set of PK/PD factors is achieved, allowing
systematic study of size and shape effect on PK/PD and some predictability
of PK/PD profiles. The homogeneous RNA nanoparticle assembly will
help to expedite FDA approval as they reach the clinic.

One
major factor for in vivo applications is the thermodynamic
stability of RNA nanoparticles. Typically, RNA nanoparticles assemble
through intermolecular interactions, requiring metal ions in the tens
of millimolar. Recently, this limitation was circumvented by the pRNA-3WJ
that can assemble in the absence of metal ions, is resistant to denaturation
by urea, and will remain intact at ultralow concentrations.35

RNA nanoparticles also display an advantageous
size for in vivo applications. They are larger than
10 nm cutoff
for rapid renal excretion yet small enough to enter cells via receptor-mediated endocytosis while avoiding entrapment
by liver Kupffer cells and lung/liver/spleen macrophages. If macrophages
engulf RNA nanoparticles, autoimmunity would be a problem. Additionally,
negatively charged RNAs further minimize interactions with negatively
charged macrophage membranes. Depending on the proportion of chemically
modified nucleotides in the sequence, such as 2′-F, RNA nanoparticles
typically have an extended in vivo half-life of around
5–12 h,34 compared to 0.25–0.75
h for naked/unformulated siRNA.58 More
importantly, after systemic injection in an orthotopic xenograft,
subcutaneous xenograft, or metastatic tumor-bearing mice, pRNA-3WJ
nanoparticles are able to target cancer cells specifically with little
or no accumulation in healthy vital organs and tissues.34−36,59−63

Many RNA nanoparticles are designed to be ratchet-shaped
to favor
migration of RNA nanoparticles toward tumors.35,36,59 Additionally, RNA nanoparticles display
rubber-like elastic property, akin to amoebae, exhibiting strong elasticity.64 This elastic property allows RNA nanoparticles
to “squeeze” through cancer vasculatures by blood pressure
while retaining thermodynamic stability at the tumor microenvironment.
This enhances the EPR effect, while the ratchet shape prevents RNA
nanoparticles from returning to circulation.

RNA Nanoparticle Size and
Shape Tunes Immunogenic Potency for
Use in Cancer Immunotherapy and Enhanced Drug Efficacy
In
general, immune reactions are a defense mechanism of the body. Cancer
cells mutate extremely fast and can develop resistance to protein
therapies through repeated administration. Traditional chemotherapy
targets only one route of tumor proliferation, resulting in chemo-resistant
tumors. Cocktail therapies and repeated administration can overcome
this challenge. Despite increased circulation time, RNA nanoparticles
avoid antibody induction, such as those caused by protein therapies.
Therefore, repeated treatment of chronic disease is possible using
RNA nanoparticles.

The immune response elicited by RNA nanoparticles
is highly dependent on RNA sequence, chemical modifications, size,
and shape. This is exemplified by pRNA nanoparticles, which by themselves
are completely nonimmunogenic.21,34,61 Neither unmodified nor 2′-F-modified pRNA nanoparticles induced
detectable interferon or cytokine induction. RNA nanoparticles can
also be designed as strongly immunogenic21 through the incorporation of CpG DNA, an FDA-approved immunological
adjuvant.65−67 TNF-α and IL-6 induction depended upon the
shape of the RNA polygons and number of CpG per polygon. The results
suggest that CpG coupled to RNA polygons with different shapes have
notable immunostimulatory effects and can be used for more effective
cancer immunotherapy.68

Generally
speaking, RNA nanoparticles are primarily recognized
by Toll-like receptors (TLR) expressed on cell surfaces (TLR3), endosomes
(TLR3/7/8), and cytoplasmic immunoreceptors, such as protein kinase
R (PKR) and helicases (RIG-1 and MDA5). The degree of immune activation via different immunoreceptors is not completely understood
but is known to depend on nanoparticle design, method of delivery,
and type of cells, such as immune cells.69−71 Different chemical
modifications can significantly reduce the immunostimulatory properties
of RNA from different receptors. For instance, siRNA constructs with
2′-F and/or 2′-O-Me caused minimal induction of interferon
or cytokines compared to unmodified counterparts.72 Strikingly, RNA constructs with 2′-F- or 2′-O-Me-modified
U nucleotides were sufficient to eliminate immune off-target effects
including TLR-dependent and TLR-independent pathways.73,74 Modification of the siRNA terminal ends with LNA can also effectively
block interferon-α immunostimulatory activity while retaining
potent silencing activity.75 Similarly,
base modifications with pseudouracil or 2-thiouracil can abolish RIG-1-mediated
immune stimulation due to presence of 5′-triphosphate.73 Chemical modifications thus provide a powerful
tool for not only eliciting gene knockdown without stimulating the
immune system but also recruiting immunoresponse for the treatment
of cancer and chronic viral infections.

RNA Chemical
Modifications: Implications for Serum Stability
and Beyond
RNA’s inherent instability once hindered
RNA’s use
as a construction material. Although RNA nanoparticle size and structure
provides some degree of nuclease resistance, it is not sufficient
for use in vivo. Modifications to RNA’s natural
structure can overcome the susceptibility of RNA therapeutics to serum
exo- and endonucleases. Some of the most popular strategies include
chemical modifications to the ribose sugar of the bases, base modification,
and modification of the link between bases (backbone modification).
Chemical modifications can impart higher chemical and thermal stability
to RNA structure, thereby allowing in vivo use of
RNA therapeutics and nanoparticles.

Sugar Modifications
The most widely used modifications
of RNA are on the sugar moiety of the nucleotides, as most modifications
impart higher thermal76 and enzymatic stability
while not affecting folding into the A-form RNA helix (Figure 2A). While the A-form helix
is imperative to RNAi silencing efficacy, the 2′-OH is not
essential. Thus, when siRNA is modified, it retains its silencing
activity.77 2′-Fluorine- (2′-F),
2′-O-methyl- (2′-O-Me), and 2′-amine-modified
(2′-NH2) RNA are small in size, compared to that
of the 2′-OH native RNA, allowing for modified duplexes to
retain their folding.78,79 Bulkier substitutions, such as
2′-O-methoxyethyl (2′-O-MOE) have seen more use as termini
modifiers, as internal modifications affect RNA folding. LNA is a
sugar modification in that the ribose sugar is structurally constrained
(locked) into the A-form helix (3′-endo) by a methylene bridge
between the 2′-oxygen and the 4′-carbon.80 While a high percentage of LNA modification
to the RNA duplex will affect folding, only a small number of modifications
is typically needed.

Figure 2 RNA modifications to impact the stability of RNA nanoparticles.
(A) Modification to RNA’s sugar moiety. Reprinted with permission
from ref (78). Copyright
2008 Elsevier. (B) Backbone modifications. Reprinted with permission
from ref (78). Copyright
2008 Elsevier. (C) Synthetic RNA triplex to replace native duplex
without compromising original function. Reprinted from ref (85). Copyright 2015 American
Chemical Society. (D) Tm changes of RNA
nanoparticles resulted from 2′ alteration. Reprinted from ref (22). Copyright 2014 American
Chemical Society. (E) The 2′ alteration resulted in different
levels of serum stability. Reprinted from ref (22). Copyright 2014 American
Chemical Society.

Backbone Modifications
Modification of the linkage
between bases also increases RNA’s resistance to nucleases
(Figure 2B). Phosphorothioate
modification, substitution of a sulfur on the phosphodiester backbone
for a nonbridging oxygen, is commonly used.81 Phosphorothioate modification increases thermostability and siRNA
efficiency when modified at the correct positions on the siRNA sequence.
Phosphorothioate modification has also been used to generate a library
of DNA aptamers, called X-aptamers, used for cell-specific targeting.82 Boranophosphate modification, substituting borane
for oxygen on the phosphate backbone, shows increased siRNA efficiency
and provides significant increase in serum stability over native RNA.83 A more significant modification uses amide-linked
bases, peptide nucleic acids (PNA).84 Because
the negatively charged phosphate is replaced with the neutrally charged
amide linkage, affinity between PNA and its complementary RNA or DNA
is increased. In addition, PNA’s foreign structure evades detection
by both nucleases and proteases, increasing PNA’s resistance
to degradation.

Many nucleic acid analogues are being actively
explored, and some of the more promising analogues recently developed
are synthetic nucleic acid mimics that feature an α peptide
backbone and a triaminotriazine base displayed at alternate residues
(Figure 2C). The triazine
(melamine) base can engage with two Watson–Crick faces of thymine
or uracil, thus forming an obligate triplex structure with two T/U-rich
strands of DNA/RNA; for this reason, they term this class of macromolecules
“bifacial peptide nucleic acid” (bPNA). These bPNA hybrid
stems can structurally replace native duplexes, allowing allosteric
regulation of aptamer and ribozyme function.85−87 The triplex
hybridization is functional with different backbones: peptides,88,89 peptoids,90 and polyacrylates.85 Bifacial polyacrylate nucleic acid (bPoNA), produced by functionalizing polyacrylate backbones with melamine
bases, hybridize with DNA/RNA to load polymer nanoparticles and display
targeting modalities on siRNA duplexes. These constructs are effectively
delivered into HEK293 and MCF7 cells through passive nanoparticle
uptake or ligand-driven entry. Using this method, a bPoNA and cholesterol-modified siRNA duplex targeting firefly luciferase
was delivered into HeLa-Luc cells (expressing both firefly and renilla
luciferase) to yield up to 40% luciferase silencing.85−87

Base Modifications
Modified bases have been explored
and are relatively well-tolerated in the RNA duplex. Examples include
5-bromouracil and 5-iodouracil instead of uracil and diaminopurine
instead of adenine.78 Other common therapeutics
include 2-thiouracil, 4-thiouracil, C-linked base pseudouracil, 5-methylation
of pyrimidines, and nonaromatic base, dihydrouracil. In most cases,
the chemical stability is significantly enhanced; however, the biochemical
function can be affected depending on the location of the modified
bases within the sequence. For an in-depth review of RNA modifications,
readers are encouraged to read the following review.78

Structural and Functional Implications
The primary
goal of the aforementioned chemical modifications of RNA was to overcome
the susceptibility of RNA therapeutics to nucleases and in the process
extend in vivo circulation time for therapeutic efficacy.
Over the past decade, more and more useful structural and functional
implications of these chemical modifications have come to light, some
of which are outlined below.

Modulation of Thermal Stability
The ability to control in vivo circulation time
is one advantage of RNA nanoparticles
as a delivery system. For example, substitution of DNA for an RNA
strand in RNA nanoparticle construction decreases thermal stability,
while substitution of 2′-F for unmodified RNA increases thermal
stability (Figure 2D).76 In many therapeutic scenarios, it
will be of great benefit to tune circulation time of the delivery
vector, a possibility when using nucleic acid nanoparticles. Additionally,
for other applications, it may be beneficial for an RNA nanoparticle
to display exceptional thermal stability. Extensive investigations
revealed that thermodynamic stability follows the trend: LNA/LNA >
LNA/2′-F-RNA > 2′-F-RNA/2′-F-RNA > 2′-F-RNA/RNA
> RNA/RNA > RNA/DNA > DNA/DNA.1,76,91−93 When diverse thermodynamic parameters
are utilized
within the same RNA nanoparticle, delivery and drug release mechanisms
can be designed into the system. This is exemplified by a recent paper
showing incorporation of 8 nt LNA-labeled RNA fragment, which is complementary
to the “seed region” of miRNA,60,94 into RNA nanoparticles. Upon delivery in the cytosol, the 8 nt LNA
thermodynamically competed and bound to the 8 nt seed in the miRNA
and inhibited its function.60

Modulation
of Serum Stability
Low stability of RNA
in blood serum is one of the most challenging aspects of utilizing
RNA as a nanoparticle scaffold. When modifications to the RNA chemical
structure are utilized, enhancing stability of RNA in serum is possible.
For example, 2′-F modification to the pRNA monomer structure
increased serum stability from less than 10 min to more than 36 h.79 Additionally, modifying the backbone connectivity
of RNA enhances its stability. Replacing the traditional phosphodiester
bond with phosphorothioate, boranophosphate, or amide-linked (PNA)
connectivity drastically increase circulation time in a degrading
serum environment.78 Therefore, stability
in serum of nanoparticles can be tuned by selecting predetermined
ratios of oligonucleotide. This was shown by the substitution of DNA
and 2′-F oligonucleotide during RNA nanosquare construction,
which destabilized and stabilized, respectively, the nanosquares in
serum (Figure 2E).22

Increase in Potency
The potency
of RNA therapeutics
primarily depends on cell type, target, and sequence. Chemical modifications
can further increase the potency by boosting target-binding affinity,
conformational organization, and flexibility. This is exemplified
by a study showing that a siRNA construct built of 2′-O-Me
and 2′-F nucleotides was 500× more potent than unmodified
constructs using the same sequence.95 Another
study showed that concurrent presence of a low-affinity dihydrouracil
base at the 3′-end of the sense strand and a high-affinity
2′-thiouracil base at the 3′-end of the antisense strand
can generate potent siRNAs.96

RNA Nanoparticle Construction Methods
This review aims to
describe the latest methods of RNA nanoparticle
construction and RNA nanotechnology’s fastest growing topics.
We suggest readers refer to the following reviews for detailed information
on the following construction methods: (1) Construction
of RNA Nanoparticle via Hand–Hand Interactions. The design principles are exemplified by the structural
features of the packaging RNA (pRNA) derived from bacteriophage phi2997 to produce dimers, trimers, tetramers, pentamers,
hexamers, and heptamers using “hand-in-hand” interactions via interlocking loops (Figure 3A-i:1–5).2,59,98,99 (2) Construction of RNA Nanoparticle via Foot-to-Foot
Interactions. pRNA molecules are bridged using
single-stranded palindrome sequences to promote self-assembly via “foot-to-foot” interactions (Figure 3A-i:6–10).59,98,99 (3) Rational
Design Utilizing Stable Natural RNA Motifs. RNA
nanoparticles can be constructed using motifs such as kissing loops,
dovetails, pseudoknots, kink turns, and multiway junctions.16,17,28,31,100 (4) Construction of RNA
Nanoparticle via Extension of Robust pRNA-3WJ Motif. The robust 3WJ drives the folding of pRNA modules attached
to each vertex of the 3WJ (Figure 3A-i:11–14).35 (5) Construction of RNA Nanoparticle via Tectonics. Increasing knowledge of RNA folding and availability of
databases such as the nucleic acid database (NAD)101 and the RNAjunction database10 have increased the power of tectonics, as the number of motifs that
can be used as potential tectoRNAs is quite large. Examples include
the tectoRNA squares and cubes designed from tRNA (Figure 3B-i) and nanoprisms designed
from pRNA (Figure 3B-ii).29,31,32,98,102−110 (6) Construction of RNA Nanoparticles via Computational Design. Several software
programs have been developed over the years, such as NanoTiler,111 Assemble2,112 RNA2D3D,113 INFO-RNA,114 and
NUPACK,115 which are useful to design de novo RNA nanoparticles. Examples are a six-membered RNA
nanoring116 and an RNA nanocube generated
using Nanotiler (Figure 3C).117 Long sequences as well as individual
monomer units that contain internal structures can be computationally
designed and experimentally assembled in a one-pot manner including
co-transcriptional assembly.

Figure 3 Methods for constructing RNA nanoparticles.
(A-i) RNA nanoparticles
constructed based on pRNA-3WJ from bacteriophage phi29. Adapted from
ref (59). Reprinted
with permission from ref (21) (copyright 2014 Oxford University Press) and ref (126) (copyright 2015 Elsevier).
(A-ii) Cryo-EM reconstruction of RNA tetrahedron nanoparticles and
RNA nanoprisms based on the pRNA-3WJ motif. Reprinted with permission
from refs (18) and (125). Copyright 2016 Wiley
Publishing. (B) Tectonics method to construct RNA nanosquares, polyhedron
from tRNA, and nanoprisms from phi29 pRNA. Reprinted with permission
from ref (103) (copyright
2009 American Chemical Society), ref (109) (copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group), and
ref (110) (copyright
2015 Nature Publishing Group). (C) Computational approaches to expedite
RNA nanoparticle manufacture and optimization. Adapted from ref (116) and printed with permission
from ref (117). Copyright
2010 Nature Publishing Group.

Most Recent Development and Advances in RNA Nanoparticle Construction
Approaches
As described in the previous section, information
on RNA nanoparticle construction has been reviewed extensively.1,105,118−123 Readers are encouraged to refer to these reviews if they are interested.
Here, we only review the latest developments, advantages, and progression
of RNA nanoparticle technologies that have not been well-covered in
previous reviews.

Construction of Precise Size RNA Nanoparticles
with Using phi29
pRNA-3WJ
Precise size control is of paramount importance
for clinical scenarios and one of the hardest aspects to control during
nanoparticle formulation. It is a well-known fact that changing the
size or molecular weight of nanoparticles can have drastic effects
on PK/PD in an in vivo system. Random, and therefore
often irreproducible, assembly of nanoparticles is commonly seen.124 The assembly process of RNA nanoparticles can
be controlled precisely by the designer. Every nucleotide in the nanoparticle
is specifically chosen to fit together in an explicit design scheme,
similar to a puzzle piece fitting in one particular location in a
puzzle. Precise assembly processes ensure a high yield and consistent
production of RNA nanoparticles. Any shape and size of RNA nanoparticles
can be broken down to component bases (“puzzle pieces”).

One recent method for the precise control of RNA nanoparticle size
was developed using phi29 pRNA-3WJ nanoparticles. This 3WJ can serve
as a robust scaffold for the design and construction of RNA polygons
using a multistrand assembly process (Figure 3A-i:15–17).20−22 The native
3WJ inner angle of 60° was used to construct equilateral triangles.
By simply adding one additional external strand and increasing the
length of the inner strand, the inner angle of the 3WJ can be increased
to 90° and induce square geometry.22 This same procedure can be followed to induce pentagon geometry.21 The angle stretching of the 3WJ can occur without
disturbing the high thermal stability of the RNA polygons. Following
the same design process, RNA squares were designed and constructed
at sizes of 5, 10, and 20 nm along each edge. Their sizes were characterized
by atomic force microscopy and dynamic light scattering and showed
narrow size distributions. Changing the size of the RNA squares was
easily done by modifying the number of base pairs connecting each
3WJ at the corners of the squares.22

Construction of 3D RNA Architectures and Containers Using phi29
pRNA 3WJ
More recently, the 2D architectures have been extended
to 3D RNA nanoparticles with tetrahedral geometry (four triangular
faces and six edges) (Figure 3A-i:18 and Figure 4A-ii top panel).125 As RNA tetrahedrons
display high mechanical rigidity and structural stability, they are
envisioned to have utility in a broad range of applications in nanomedicine
and nanomaterials. Furthermore, the RNA tetrahedrons showed effective
targeting of triple-negative breast cancer using the EFGR aptamer
fused to the tetrahedron structure.

Figure 4 Methods for constructing RNA nanoparticles.
(A) Rolling circle
transcription to construct RNA architectures and membrane. Reprinted
with permission from ref (5) (copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group) and ref (132) (copyright 2014 Nature
Publishing Group). (B) RNA origami utilizing co-transcriptional folding
to produce large RNA nanostructures, such as hexameric arrays. Reprinted
with permission from ref (127). Copyright 2014 AAAS. (C) RNA arrays. Reprinted with permission
from (C-i) ref (32) (copyright 2004 AAAS) and (C-ii) ref (20) (copyright 2014 American Chemical Society).

Additional applications of 3D
nanostructures were shown by the
encapsulation of a model small molecule drug inside a nanoprism constructed
from two pRNA triangles (Figure 3A-i:19 and Figure 4A-ii bottom panel). Two different size nanoprisms were
constructed, with the smaller prism protecting a fragile RNA aptamer
holding a fluorogenic malachite green molecule. Upon binding of the
malachite green molecule to its aptamer, fluorescence drastically
increases. The small nanoprism blocks the entry of degrading proteins
by steric hindrance, almost doubling the fluorescent half-life of
malachite green dye.18 This encapsulation
mechanism will serve to advance the RNA nanotechnology field by protecting
small molecule drugs as they circulate to cancerous cells, as well
as preventing the leaking of cancer drugs that can sometimes be toxic
to healthy cells.

Construction of RNA Dendrimer Structures
Using phi29 pRNA-3WJ
The 3WJ-driven design method was also
used to construct highly
branched RNA dendrimer architectures (Figure 3A-i:20–24).126 The pRNA nanosquare was used as a symmetrical core for generating
RNA dendrimers. The square shape reduces the possibility of steric
hindrance that may arise while building higher-ordered structures.
A stepwise iterative assembly approach was then applied via intramolecular interactions between pRNA-3WJ motifs to construct
highly branched generation-4 (G4) RNA dendrimers. Resulting particles
displayed precise control of size (∼65 nm), shape (3D globular),
and stoichiometry (32 terminal units). RNA dendrimers have high loading
capacity and can be easily functionalized with a large copy number
of RNA aptamers, chemical ligands, RNAi modules, and chemotherapeutics.
In addition, dense loading of imaging agents will allow high-resolution
visualization of targeted cells/tumors in vivo by
MRI or SPECT/PET imaging.

Construction of RNA Nanoparticles Co-transcriptionally
and Intracellularly
Using phi29 pRNA-3WJ
One ability of RNA nanoparticles is
their ability to form co-transcriptionally, folding of the nanoparticle
as it is being transcribed in vitro.127−129 This was exemplified using the phi29 pRNA-3WJ fused with RNA functionalities
including malachite green fluorogenic aptamer, spinach fluorogenic
aptamer, HBV ribozyme, streptavidin aptamer, and survivin siRNA.56 In different multifunctional nanoparticles,
each functional modality retained its authentic function while assembling
co-transcriptionally and intracellularly.

Intracellular fabrication
will allow for large-scale production of RNA nanoparticles, as plasmids
encoding for nanoparticle components can easily be cloned and expressed
within bacterial cells. In the future, large-scale production of RNA
nanoparticles will be possible through fermentation of bacteria encoding
for RNA nanoparticles.

In summary, rational design requires
prior knowledge of the 3D
folding of individual motifs that will be used as RNA nanoparticle
scaffolds as well as the folding of the functional modules that will
be incorporated onto the scaffold. Care must be taken while altering
any of the nucleic acid sequences as this could affect the global
folding of RNA molecules. Several RNA folding programs are available
to facilitate prediction of RNA structure or folding for nanoparticle
assembly. Since this approach relies on modular building blocks, each
component strand can be chemically synthesized with high yield and
then self-assembled in a stepwise manner or in one pot. Given the
overall simplicity, the method may be generally applied for a wide
range of functional molecules.

Construction of RNA Nanoparticles
by Rolling Circle Transcription
Getting high doses of therapeutic
RNAi to the cell is one problem
that could hinder the use of RNA nanoparticles. Much like rolling
circle amplification (RCA) for isothermal DNA amplification,130 rolling circle transcription (RCT)131 produces large amounts of concatemeric RNA
sequences from a circular DNA template using T7 in vitro transcription. A ssDNA oligomer antisense to the target sequence
is circularized through ligation, then a short splint ssDNA containing
the T7 RNA polymerase promoter sequence is annealed to the circular
DNA, allowing RNA polymerase initiation. After ligation, in
vitro transcription occurs in a continuous fashion.

One example is the construction of a circular DNA harboring the siRNA
gene that is driven by a T7 promoter without any terminators (Figure 4A-i).5 During in vitro transcription, T7 RNA
polymerase progressively works along the circular DNA thousands of
times to generate many repeats of siRNA. As the RNA strand grew in
length, it adopted a fiber-like configuration, followed by lamellar
sheet-like formation, and finally into spherical sponge-like RNA nanoparticles.
The features of the microsponges protected the unmodified RNA from
degradation in serum. The multimeric transcript was successfully processed
by Dicer, yielding a large amount of siRNAs, resulting in successful
gene knockdown.

RCT was also used to construct membranes composed
solely of RNA
(Figure 4A-ii).132 Multiple circular templates were constructed
containing complementary sequences to one another. During the RCT
reaction, long ssRNA oligomers assemble into large complexes, and
after evaporation-induced self-assembly, uniform RNA sheets form.
The final dimensions measured by electron microscopy were about 2.5
μm thick and a few millimeters in width. It is foreseeable that
RNA sheets could be used to load large amounts of therapeutic RNAs
or carry a large payload of intercalating small molecules, such as
anticancer agent doxorubicin.

While less precise than tectonics
or computer-aided designs, many
of the properties of RNA nanoparticles generated from RCT can be controlled.
RCT-based RNA nanoparticles are morphologically round, due to aggregative
formation with metal salts produced during transcription. The size
of the RNA nanoparticles is tuned by increasing or decreasing the
amount of polymerase during the RCT reaction. The size of the RNA
nanoparticles can be further condensed by using synthetic polycations,
such as polyethylenimine to facilitate entry into cells.5 The obvious advantage is that multiple siRNA
targeting the same gene locus or different genes can be incorporated
into one RNA nanoparticle. However, introduction of too much siRNA
into cells can have toxic effects;133 therefore,
the amount of RNA being delivered to cells must be taken under careful
consideration.

Construction of RNA Nanoparticle via Origami
The popularity of DNA origami46 has
led RNA researchers to attempt to employ the same methods for RNA
nanoparticle construction. RNA origami has been achieved despite increased
difficulty due to a more complicated folding pathway in RNA.127 Single-stranded RNA tiles were prepared by
co-transcriptional folding of a single RNA strand into predesigned
tiles (Figure 4B).
The tiles then formed into complex shapes through kissing loop interactions.
The shape of the origami was tuned by modulating the angle of the
kissing loop used for tile association. This approach overcomes costly
chemical synthesis and lengthy annealing steps associated with DNA
origami. Additionally, the real advantage lies in their great potential
to be cloned and expressed in large quantities in vivo for potential applications in synthetic biology.

Construction
of RNA Nanoparticle Arrays
In a cellular
environment, enzymatic pathways are spatially arranged onto scaffolds
or subdivided into specially designed compartments, such as organelles.
Spatial organization expedites the enzymatic processes by arranging
proteins and their substrates in close proximity, while limiting potential
cross-talk between enzymes. DNA nanotechnology has focused on spatial
arrangement of biomolecules; however, it is limited to in
vitro applications due to stability issues. RNA nanoparticles’ in vivo stability allows for cellular control at a more
basal level. One prominent example of this is the isothermal assembly
of RNA molecules in vivo into predefined discrete
1D and 2D structures with distinct protein-docking sites used as scaffolds
for the arrangement of a hydrogen-producing enzymatic pathway.4 In contrast to protein-based approaches, RNA
nanotechnology enables the formation of complex multidimensional architectures
with nanometer precision to engineer biological pathways through spatial
constraints.

Examples of RNA array formation include the arrangement
of tectosquares into a pattern resembling a checkerboard.32,134 The corners of the tectosquares are functionalized with sticky end
overhangs in different patterns to control the assembly of the arrays
(Figure 4C-i). Patterns
include linear one-dimensional arrays, symmetrical arrays from two
and four different tectosquares, as well as arrays with specifically
designed holes, all based on sticky end geometry.

Triangles
constructed from the pRNA-3WJ were also used to construct
supramolecular patterned arrays (Figure 4C-ii top panel).20 Two triangles were constructed containing three distinct sticky
ends at each vertex: A, B, C on one triangle and a′, b′,
and c′ on the other. A is complementary to a′, B is
complementary to b′, and C is complementary to c′. This
resulted in the formation of honeycomb-patterned arrays. Blocking
formation of one of the sticky ends by changing b′ to B resulted
in the formation of hexamer-shaped particles constructed from triangles
(Figure 4C-ii bottom
panel).

Applications in Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology
Due to advances in nanotechnology, many nanoparticles platforms
have been developed over the years including liposomes,135−137 polymers,138,139 viral nanoparticles,140,141 dendrimers,142−145 and inorganic nanoparticles.143,146 These sub-micron-sized
platforms show potential for improving the performance of therapeutic
modalities.55,147 Nonetheless, nonspecific accumulation
of therapeutic nanoparticles in healthy vital organs (i.e., liver, lungs, kidneys, and spleen) remains as a major challenge.
Low specificity reduces the fraction of nanoparticles that reach diseased
cells while increasing the toxicity and side effects. These adverse
effects are often related to particle heterogeneity, aggregation,
dissociation, unfavorable PK/PD profiles, and difficulty in penetrating
biological barriers surrounding diseased cells, such as the tumor
microenvironment.124,148,149 In addition, high production cost, unstable thermodynamic and chemical
properties, and lack of controlled-release mechanisms impede clinical
translation.150 Complex compositions of
nanocarriers with diverse functional modules (inorganic/organic nanoscaffolds,
RNAi/protein targeting antibodies, chemical drugs/antibodies) may
cause regulatory approval issues of these technologies.124,151 Recent studies have shown that RNA nanoparticles can address several
of these issues to overcome critical hurdles in nanomedicine for cancer
therapy,34−36,59−63,152 viral infections,8,153,154 and eye disease.155

Application of RNA Biochemical Properties
in RNA Nanotechnology
Applying RNA Aptamers for Targeted Therapeutic
Delivery or as
Potent Inhibitors
Targeted delivery of nanoparticles greatly
reduces off-target toxicity and nanoparticle accumulation in healthy
organs generally associated with passive mechanisms relying solely
on EPR effects. An emerging class of targeted therapeutic molecules
has been developed based on RNA aptamers:156 single-stranded RNA sequences that fold into specific 3D configurations
and bind with high selectivity and affinity to extracellular domains
of cell surface receptors. A combination of electrostatic interactions,
hydrogen bonding, van der Waals forces, and base stacking mediates
binding. Aptamers possess many advantages over protein antibodies
as targeting reagents including low cost, faster selection and optimization
process, convenient synthesis and modification with high batch fidelity,
low immunogenicity, rapid tissue penetration, and long-term stability.1,157 The development of the systematic evolution of ligands by an exponential
enrichment (SELEX)158,159 process has made aptamer development
possible for many proteins and peptides. The broad applicability of
SELEX means that, theoretically, an aptamer for any target can be
selected. Currently, tens of RNA aptamers are available for targeting
specific cell surface receptors followed by subsequent internalization
of RNA nanoparticles: glioblastoma (e.g., EGFRvIII),160 breast cancer (e.g., EGFR,
HER2, HER3) (Figure 5A-ii),161−163 prostate cancer (e.g.,
PSMA) (Figure 5A-iv),164 ovarian cancer (e.g., E-selectin),165 colon cancer (e.g., EpCAM),166 and lymphoma (e.g., CD19)167 cells as well as for viral infected cells,
such as HIV (e.g., CD4).168 By sequence fusion, cell-internalizing RNA aptamers are incorporated
into RNA nanoparticles for targeted delivery of therapeutic agents
such as siRNA, miRNA, and chemotherapeutics into the cytosol.

Figure 5 RNA nanoparticles
for therapy. (A) RNA aptamers and chemical ligands
are used to specifically target tumors in vivo without
accumulation in healthy organs, targeting glioblastoma,63 breast cancer,60 gastric
cancer,61 prostate cancer,152 colorectal cancer,62 and head and neck cancer.59 Adapted with
permission from indicated references. (B) Targeting colorectal cancer
metastasis utilizing RNA nanoparticles. Adapted from ref (62). Copyright 2015 American
Chemical Society. (C) Ribozymes for cleaving specific RNA substrates
similar to RNAi. Adapted with permission from ref (35). Copyright 2011 Nature
Publishing Group. (D) Riboswitches to regulate gene expression. Reprinted
with permission from ref (175). Copyright 2009 Elsevier. (E) Thermodynamic properties
of nucleic acids used for activation and reagent release. Reprinted
from (E-i) ref (181) (copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group) and (E-ii) ref (180) (copyright 2014 American
Chemical Society).

Additional strategies
for cell-specific targeting include the conjugation
of small molecule ligands to the RNA nanoparticles, for example, folic
acid, which bind to receptors on the surfaces of cells.169 Many epithelial cancer cells overexpress the
folate receptor on their cell surface, allowing for folic acid conjugated
nanoparticles to target these cells at a rate higher than that of
normal cells.169 Cancer types such as glioblastoma
(Figure 5A-i),63 gastric cancer (Figure 5A-iii),61 colorectal
cancer (Figure 5A-v),62 and head and neck cancer (Figure 5A-vi)59 have been
targeted using pRNA-3WJ-folate nanoparticles.

Targeting cancer
metastasis is another area in which RNA nanoparticles
have shown considerable promise. Many metastatic cancers are hard
to target due to the spread of cancerous cells to distant organs and
the lymph nodes.170 Utilizing the folic
acid as a targeting agent, RNA nanoparticles were able to simultaneously
target colon cancer cells in the major sites of metastasis including
the liver, lymph nodes, and lungs (Figure 5B).62

Aptamer-based
therapeutics rely on direct binding of an aptamer
to a therapeutic target to modulate downstream signaling. Leading
examples include those that target receptor tyrosine kinases (e.g., anti-EGFR inhibitors), cell adherence factors (e.g., E-selectin), modulators of the immune system (e.g., anti-CTLA-4 inhibitors), and cell growth (e.g., α-fetoprotein) for cancer therapy.156,171,172 Tens of aptamers are in preclinical
and clinical testing.172 Aptamers have
also been developed for the treatment of neurological disorders including
multiple sclerosis (e.g., IL-17), Alzheimer’s
disease (e.g., β-scretase1), Parkinson’s
disease (e.g., AMPA), and stroke (e.g., Factor IX-a).156,171,172 RNA nanotechnology offers an avenue to enhance the thermodynamic
stability and functionality of therapeutic aptamers by inclusion of
robust scaffolds during the in vitro selection process.

Applying Ribozymes for Targeted Therapy
Ribozyme-based
therapeutic strategies have emerged as powerful tools for the treatment
of cancer and viral infections. Ribozymes are RNA motifs that possess
catalytic properties much like those of proteins. Ribozymes targeting
mRNA show promise for gene therapy of breast cancer and hepatocellular
carcinoma in animal models as they display similar effectiveness as
RNAi, while exhibiting less off-target effects.173 Ribozyme-based therapies are considered as viable alternatives
to anti-retroviral therapies, which are often plagued with toxicity
and the emergence of resistant phenotypes.174 However, the challenge lies in developing nonviral vectors for in vivo delivery of ribozymes to specific cells. Ribozyme
sequences are fused with RNA scaffolds creating a targeting platform
to specifically deliver ribozymes. This is exemplified by pRNA nanoparticles
harboring hepatitis B virus (HBV) hammerhead ribozyme that retains
its enzymatic activity to cleave the poly(A) signal on HBV mRNA and
in the process inhibited HBV replication (Figure 5C).8,35

Applying
Riboswitches for Modulating Gene Expression and as
Antimicrobial Targets
Riboswitches offer therapeutic avenues
for addressing a wide range of diseases by regulating gene expression.
They are widespread in numerous evolutionarily distant bacteria, with
counterparts in archaea, plants, fungi, and algae. Riboswitches are
composed of two domains, a sensor portion (a natural aptamer) for
ligand recognition and an expression platform that can adopt two mutually
exclusive conformations based on ligand binding for controlling gene
expression (without the need for protein cofactors) (Figure 5D).175 Metabolite-binding riboswitches can potentially address multiple
drug resistance as they can be considered as antimicrobial targets.176 Examples include the TPP riboswitch, which
is involved in the biosynthesis and transport of thiamine in bacteria;
the lysine riboswitch, which is involved in the control of biosynthesis
and transport of lysine; the FMN riboswitch, which is involved in
the control of riboflavin biosynthesis; and the guanine riboswitch,
which controls the expression of genes involved in purine biosynthesis
and transport.177,178 In eukaryotes, TPP riboswitches
regulate genes via alternative splicing to generate
mRNAs containing internal stop codons that cause either translation
of aberrant peptides or premature translation. Since riboswitches
control vital metabolic and virulence genes in pathogenic species,
they represent an attractive strategy for therapeutic intervention
without inflicting side effects on the eukaryotic host. Riboswitches
can also be used to engineer artificial genetic circuits controlled
by introducing synthetic ligands in human cells. Based on simplistic
design principles, RNA nanotechnology can be applied not only to deliver
the RNA switches in vivo but also to rationally engineer
synthetic riboswitches to repress or activate gene expression in a
ligand-dependent fashion.

Applying Thermodynamic Properties for Controlled
Release of
Functional Agents
The thermodynamic property displayed by
different types of nucleic acids can be programmed into RNA nanoparticles
to trigger the release or activation of functional modules. As discussed
before, nucleotide selection provides tunable nanoparticle stability
and thus controllable release. This is evident in pRNA-based nanosquares
that can be tuned by substituting their “core” strands
for DNA and 2′-F RNA22 (Figure 2D,E). 2′-F
RNA as the core strand increases both melting temperature and its
resistance to serum degradation, whereas DNA substitution does the
exact opposite. Strategies utilizing differences in nucleic acid thermodynamic
stability can be used to tune the release of drugs from the particle,
whether the drugs are intercalated or conjugated to the vertices of
the particles.

RNA/DNA hybrid duplex and strand displacement
have also been used to design triggers for the conditional release
of dicer substrate RNA.179−182 An RNA nanoparticle consisting of a partial
RNA/DNA duplex region, which is complementary to a target mRNA, can
conditionally release the Dicer substrate upon binding to its target
mRNA, thereby avoiding off-target toxicity associated with RNAi. Additionally,
functionalities can be split among different helices, and upon toe-hold
interaction, their functions are triggered. To monitor the release,
each piece of the split-functionality is labeled with a FRET pair
molecule; therefore, upon association of the functionalities, FRET
signal drastically increases (Figure 5E).

Applying RNA Interference Therapy: siRNA,
miRNA, and LNA
The discovery of the RNA interference (RNAi)
pathway in 1998183 created an avenue of
treatments for many diseases,
including cancer. RNAi is the process by which the expression of a
gene is modulated by short double-stranded RNA sequences, typically
21–23 nucleotides in length. There are two central molecules
to RNAi, miRNA and siRNA.184 While miRNAs
are endogenous to cells and target multiple genes, siRNAs are mostly
artificial sequences (some endogenous siRNAs do exist in cells185) that are designed to target a specific mRNA.
Theoretically, any known mRNA sequence can be targeted using siRNAs
and miRNAs, making diseases previously thought to be undruggable susceptible
to RNAi therapy. RNA nanoparticles are designed such that endonuclease
Dicer can access the dsRNA sequences encoding for the siRNAs and miRNAs
and cleave them to generate functional miRNA and siRNA, which are
then loaded into the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) and thereby
regulate gene expression by selectively targeting mRNAs.

The
delivery of siRNA in vivo is exemplified by pRNA-3WJ
nanoparticles.60,63 In one study, pRNA-3WJ harboring
folate as a targeting ligand and BRCAA1 siRNA as therapeutic module
demonstrated potentials for gastric cancer therapy (Figure 6A).61 Upon systemic injection in subcutaneous gastric tumor xenograft-bearing
mice, the RNA nanoparticles were internalized into tumors via folate-receptor-mediated endocytosis and the siRNA silenced
the expression of BRCAA1. BRCAA1 knockdown down-regulated the expression
of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 gene and up-regulated the expression of pro-apoptotic
Rb and Bax genes, thereby regressing the growth of the tumors. Another
study demonstrated that pRNA-3WJ nanoparticles harboring folate and
luciferase siRNA can efficiently silence the expression of the luciferase
gene after systemic injection in intracranial glioblastoma xenograft-bearing
mice.63 In an alternative strategy, RNAi
microsponges, composed of tandem repeats of luciferase siRNA synthesized
by RCT, were efficiently cleaved by Dicer, converting stable hairpin
RNA to siRNA only after cellular uptake (Figure 6B). Luciferase expression was successfully
silenced in subcutaneous ovarian cancer xenograft-bearing mice.5 This system was further developed to contain
multiple siRNAs for targeting of multiple genes.186 Another study showed the potentials for viral therapy by
demonstrating that intravaginal application of RNA nanoparticles,
composed of CD4 aptamer and siRNAs targeting HIV coreceptor CCR5,
gag, and vif, protected humanized mice from sexual transmission of
HIV.187

Figure 6 RNA nanoparticles for RNAi. (A) pRNA-3WJ
to deliver BRCAA1 siRNA in vivo and inhibit the growth
of gastric tumors. Adapted
with permission from ref (61). Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (B) RCT used to
generate kilobase concatemeric RNA oligomers for a high payload delivery
of multiple siRNA. Adapted with permission from ref (186). Copyright 2016 Wiley
Publishing Group. (C) Multivalency of siRNA showing a synergistic
effect on gene knockdown. Increasing the copy number of luciferase
siRNA shows drastic decrease in luminescence units. Reprinted with
permission from ref (36). Copyright 2012 Elsevier. (D) RNA nanorings to carry six siRNAs
for different targets in HIV for gene knockdown. Adapted from ref (188). Copyright 2014 American
Chemical Society. (E) pRNA-3WJ to deliver anti-miRNA, LNA, to slow
the growth of tumors in triple negative breast cancer. Adapted from
ref (60). Copyright
2015 American Chemical Society.

Effective gene knockdown using siRNA is sometimes limited,
casting
doubt on the future of siRNA therapy. To circumvent limited efficacy,
multivalent siRNA delivery can be implemented. Increasing the copy
number of luciferase siRNA on the pRNA X-way motif was shown to cause
a synergistic effect on gene knockdown (Figure 6C).36 In an alternative
approach, RNA nanorings were functionalized with six different siRNAs,
each targeting a different region of HIV-1.188 The nanoring drastically reduced rates of virus production in HeLa
cells, as tested by reverse transcriptase measurements (Figure 6D).

RNA nanoparticles
can effectively deliver anti-miRNAs to down-regulate
oncogenic miRNAs or miRNAs to increase endogenous downstream tumor
suppressor miRNAs. pRNA-3WJ nanoparticles harboring EGFR-targeting
RNA aptamers and anti-miR-21 efficiently inhibited the growth of triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) (Figure 6E). Upon systemic injection in orthotopic TNBC tumor-bearing
mice, EGFR aptamer-harboring RNA nanoparticles effectively targeted
and internalized into tumor cells via receptor-mediated
endocytosis.60 After entering cells, an
8-mer anti-miR-21 LNA agent bound to the miR-21 seed region,94 thereby inhibiting miR-21’s oncogenic
properties. Similarly, pRNA-3WJ nanoparticles harboring PSMA aptamer
and anti-miR-21 targeted subcutaneous prostate xenografts and delivered
anti-miR-21 to inhibit tumor growth in animal models.152 The pRNA-3WJ was also shown to be an effective
carrier of miRNA to silence viral genes by targeting the 3′-untranslated
region (UTR) of the coxsackievirus genome.189,190

Using RNA Nanoparticles for Immunotherapy
The versatility
of RNA nanoparticles allows sequence integration of immune system
stimulating motifs, such as CpG,191 acting
as immuno-adjuvants. This is exemplified by RNA polygons functionalized
with CpG DNA that induce a potent immune response in mice, displaying
100-fold increase in cytokine TNF-α and IL-6 induction (Figure 7A).21 Recent studies showed that sequence modification coupled
with structural modification can generate potent immunostimulatory
RNA sequences. For example, introduction of a miRNA-like nonpairing
uridine bulge in the passenger strand of siRNA that can induce immunostimulatory
activity on human immune cells.192 These
immune-cell-activating sequences have potential applications in antiviral
therapies and cancer immunotherapy.

Figure 7 RNA nanoparticles for immunotherapy and
chemotherapeutic delivery.
(A) RNA nanoparticles display little to no immune response under normal
conditions, but addition of immunostimulatory CpG sequences results
in huge increases in the immune response for cytokine production.
Reprinted with permission from ref (21). Copyright 2014 Oxford University Press. (B)
Methods for conjugation of chemicals and drugs to RNA nanoparticles.
Reprinted with permission from ref (119). Copyright 2014 Elsevier.

Recently, aptamers were developed to target proteins involved
in
cancer immunotherapy preventing tumor cells from escaping the host
immune system.193 Aptamer-based immunotherapy
can potentially replace traditional monoclonal antibody therapy primarily
because they can overcome dose-limiting autoimmune responses. Aptamers
are available for secretory targets such as cytokines and chemokines
(e.g., IFN-γ, TGF-β), co-stimulatory
molecules (e.g., CTLA-4, CD28), adhesion molecules
(e.g., VCAM-1, Selectin-P/L), tumor immunosuppressive
induction molecules, activation and inhibitory receptors (for agonist
and antagonist targeting) on T cells, NK cells, macrophages, and dendritic
cells. Bispecific RNA aptamers, mimicking bispecific antibodies, and
siRNA have have been used to induce HIV resistance.194 These are re-engineered RNA fragments with two different
variable regions binding to two different molecular targets. Dual
aptamers can form a bridge to enable simultaneous binding to two cell
surface markers or recruit T-cells to the proximity of tumor cells,
leading to destruction of diseased cells. One example of a bispecific
aptamer is one that simultaneously binds to CD16α on natural
killer (NK) cells and c-Met receptor of receptor tyrosine kinases
present on tumors.195 This results in recruitment
of NK cells to c-Met-positive tumor cells, thereby inducing antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) mediated antitumor response. RNA nanotechnology
can help overcome challenges associated with developing bispecific
aptamers such as refolding, instability, loss of binding specificity
after fusing two different aptamers into one RNA sequence, and size
modulation to enable binding to both targets simultaneously.35

Chemotherapeutic Drug Delivery
Small
molecule chemotherapy
drugs are routinely used for the treatment of cancers. However, chemotherapeutic
drug delivery traditionally relies on passive targeting via EPR effects. Small molecule drugs pass kidneys and blood vessels
quickly due to their low molecular weight. After systemic administration,
however, distribution is typically observed throughout the whole body
with poor accumulation at tumor sites, thus producing suboptimal antitumor
potency while increasing off-target effects.55,124 Due to tumor heterogeneities, not all cancers exhibit EPR effects,
thus losing drug efficacy in some tumors. RNA nanotechnology is an
attractive strategy to improve all aspects of traditional chemotherapy,
including enhanced circulation time and blood plasma concentration,
reduction in the administered dose, lowering of off-target effects
by delivering payloads specifically to diseased cells and tissues,
and enabling release mechanisms to decrease systemic toxicity. Many
well-established conjugation methods are available for linking chemical
drugs to chemically synthesized end-labeled RNA nanoparticles in high
yield including thiourea linkage, click chemistry, amide linkage through
NHS-ester chemistry, and thioether linkage, among others (Figure 7B).57 Conjugation of hydrophobic chemical drugs to the highly
negatively charged and water-soluble RNA oligomers further solubilizes
the drugs, helping to avoid potentially toxic organic delivery solutes.

Controlled release of drug conjugates is one approach to minimize
off-target toxicity. Many factors present in cancer cells, but not
healthy cells, can be exploited for controlled release mechanisms.
For example, high esterase activity in some cancer cell types has
been exploited by synthesizing a drug linker sensitive to esterase
degradation.196 Additionally, increased
acidity in tumor microenvironment and more importantly in endosomes,
a location where many nanoparticles are trapped, has been extensively
utilized. Incorporation of an acid-labile linker, where low pH causes
cleavage, releases the drugs so that they can diffuse out of the endosomes.196 Intercalating drugs have the potential for
a much higher ratio of drug to RNA nanoparticle. Doxorubicin, for
example, can intercalate into sequence-specific regions in the RNA
and DNA backbone, 5′-GC-3′ specifically.197 Drug release profiles have been tuned based
on intercalator density and oligonucleotide properties. Intercalation
serves as a viable alternative to drug conjugation, as long as minute
amounts of drugs are released in the circulation prior to reaching
the tumor microenvironment. Encapsulation of drugs in 3D RNA architectures
is another feasible alternative without changing intrinsic drug properties.

Other Promising and Upcoming Applications
Molecular Beacons
There is a significant interest in
developing image-guided vectors for detecting RNA trafficking, endogenous
gene expression, and silencing in vivo. Molecular
beacons to image intracellular RNA expression in vitro by competitive hybridization methods is a popular detection method.198−206 These are stem-loop (hairpin) structures of oligonucleotide dual-labeled
with a fluorophore on one end and quencher on the other. Initially,
the fluorophore and quencher are in close proximity, resulting in
little to no fluorescence (Figure 8A). Upon hybridization with a complementary RNA target,
the “reporter” fluorophore and quencher separate and
fluorescence is restored.207 Several studies
have shown the feasibility of detecting mRNAs and monitoring the transportation
of RNAs in cells,208−210 but robust in vivo delivery
vectors are needed to apply this promising technology into broad research
areas or into a routine clinical procedure. RNA nanotechnology can
significantly advance the development of molecular-beacon-based RNA
nanoparticles, especially in regards to improving their thermodynamic
and chemical stability for efficient competitive hybridization to
the mRNA targets. For more detailed information on the design and
application of molecular beacons, readers are encouraged to refer
to articles referenced in this review.211,212

Figure 8 Application
of RNA nanotechnology in beacons (A) and resistive
biomemory (B). Panel A reprinted with permission from ref (207). Copyright 2006 Nature
Publishing Group. Panel B reprinted from ref (220). Copyright 2015 American
Chemical Society.

In Vitro Diagnostics
Early detection
of diseases is beneficial as it helps doctors react quickly to patient’s
needs. Importantly, survival prognosis increases with early detection.
To achieve early detection, a system needs to detect as low amounts
as possible of diseases markers, such as a small molecule or protein
indicators. Aptamer-based biosensors (aptasensors) have emerged as
powerful alternatives to traditional antibodies and enzymes, especially
with the advent of nanotechnology.213 To
increase target sensitivity, after aptasensor binding, amplification
steps such as real-time PCR and rolling circle amplification have
been used, allowing picomolar sensitivity of the analyte. These platforms
can be integrated with microarrays to quantify thousands of targets.214 The folding conformation of aptamers can be
modulated to facilitate either adsorption or desorption of a target
by competitive interaction among aptamer, target, and complementary
sequence. These properties of aptamers coupled with methods in signal
generation (e.g., labeling with dyes or functional
group for oriented immobilization on solid supports) enable the development
of sophisticated biosensors for the detection of small molecule targets
and protein/peptide biomarkers by SPR or quartz crystal microbalance.
RNA nanotechnology could facilitate further development of aptasensors
given that the tunable size and shape, optical properties, surface
properties, switchable modules, ease of labeling, and catalytic activities
of RNA nanoparticles can be useful not only for signal generation
but also for signal amplification. For more detailed information on
RNA based in vitro diagnostics, readers are encouraged
to refer to articles referenced in this review.215−217

RNA Computing and Biomemory
As computers become faster
and transistors become smaller, more methods for computing are needed
to keep pace with Moore’s law prediction of double the capacity
of transistors in the same unit area every 2 years. Many researchers
are looking to use computation to analyze nucleic acids. Because of
the atomic size of nucleic acids, it is possible that DNA or RNA computing
can keep pace with Moore’s law prediction. The first DNA logic
gate was designed in 1989,218 followed
by the beginning of molecular scale computing in 1994 when a DNA-based
computational design was used to solve a seven-city Hamiltonian math
equation.219 Nucleic-acid-based molecular
computing works by hybridization of an input DNA to a chip-immobilized
DNA. The stability of DNA and on/off controllability of DNA hybridization
makes it an ideal material for molecular-scale computation. Since
RNA displays many different structural motifs compared to DNA, it
could be advantageous to employ the structural diversity and complexity
of RNA in nucleic acid computation. In addition, RNA can act as an
insulator for biomemory applications. The pRNA-3WJ motif was used
as both insulator and mediator in an RNA–quantum dot conjugate
for biomemory applications (Figure 8B).220 Because the size
of RNA nanoparticles is tunable, the distance between the conducting
surfaces of a circuit is precisely controlled, leading to consistent
current across a chip’s surface.

RNA Nanotechnology and
CRISPR
The gene editing system
“clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats”
(CRISPR)-associated nuclease Cas9 has attracted much attention recently
as it may have tremendous potential to specifically edit, add, or
remove genes from a genome.221 An appropriate
guide RNA can specifically edit genes, rendering them benign, or can
deliver genes imparting genetic effects.222,223 One example is the suppression of hepatitis B virus in chronically
infected cells.224,225 However, similar to delivering
naked siRNA in vivo, there are potential stability
issues with delivering naked, unmodified guide RNA into cells.226 In the future, RNA nanotechnology may aid in
the design of guide RNAs for the CRISPR/Cas system. Similar to how
RNA nanoparticles and chemically modified RNAs confer stability into
native RNA strands, RNA nanotechnology techniques may contribute to
increasing the stability and effectiveness of CRISPR guide RNAs.

Challenges and Outlook
RNA nanotechnology for drug
delivery has garnered much attention
recently as it has tremendous potential to help treat many diseases,
especially cancer. Certainly, improvements are necessary to push this
innovative platform toward clinical trials and bring the product to
the market. Some of the challenges and possible solutions are discussed
below.

Limited Small Molecule Payload
Currently, RNA nanoparticles
have limited small molecule drug loading capacity. Single drugs can
be labeled onto the terminal ends of RNA strands with exquisite drug
release mechanisms. Whole chain labeling methods can increase chemical
drug payload but can cause misfolding of RNA nanoparticles due to
steric hindrance and also compromise the release of the drugs. Computational
approaches can help to identify locations where drugs can be introduced
without disrupting the folding of the nanoparticle. Ensuring the drugs
are orientated out of plane from the RNA nanostructure can also minimize
any structural defects in the scaffold.

Intercalation is another
viable approach to increase drug loading capacity, but drug release
profiles need to be closely evaluated as premature release of the
drug leads to nonspecific side effects. For instance, if the pRNA-3WJ
nanoparticle is used as a delivery vector for targeting solid tumors,
the projected half-life of the intercalated drug release should be
more than 4 h, as extensive biodistribution studies revealed that
the vast majority of the systemically administered pRNA-3WJ nanoparticles
localize in the tumor site within 1–4 h.

Recently, RNA
dendrimers have been constructed up to generation-4.126 Dendrimers can potentially overcome the loading
challenges due to their branched architecture with repetitive concentric
layers and hollow cavities suitable for loading drugs as well as peripheral/terminal
units for harboring multiple drugs and other targeting modules. More
recently, 3D RNA polygons have been developed that can potentially
serve as RNA cages or containers to encapsulate hundreds of small
molecule drugs.18,125 Plus, the RNA cages can assemble
in organic or aqueous solvent without changing intrinsic RNA properties
and are biocompatible and biodegradable compared to synthetic nanocarriers.

RNAi is considered the next frontier of cancer therapy and is thought
by many to have potential to “drug the undruggable”.
However, like chemical drug conjugation, RNA nanoparticles are limited
in the number of RNAi molecules that can be delivered to cells. However,
this limitation may not be an issue as studies report that there are
only about 103–105 Dicer molecules per
cell, and oversaturation of therapeutic RNAs can lead to nonspecific
binding and off-target gene knockdown.133 Too much shRNA delivered to cells can cause cytotoxic effects.227 Therefore, it is possible that too much of
a good thing is actually bad, and RNA nanoparticles’ lower
payload may eventually be an advantage, evidenced in animal studies
showing that RNA nanoparticles have minimal toxicity. RNA microsponges
have the potential for delivering high payloads of siRNAs,5 and their utility in broader preclinical studies
will be improved if the particle size can be reduced to avoid organ
accumulation.

Endosome Escape To Fulfill the Promise of
RNAi
Similar
to most nanoparticle platforms, RNA nanoparticles enter cells through
receptor-mediated endocytosis. Thus, intracellular RNA nanoparticle
trafficking becomes the next challenge. Early endosomal vesicles are
the first destination of RNA nanoparticles. Once sorted, RNA nanoparticles
are transferred to late endosomes and lysosomes, where they are trapped
without reaching their intended target. Fortunately, endosomal escape
using small 8 nt anti-miRNA LNA fragments in RNA nanoparticle delivery
was successful and cancer regression efficient,60 but the efficacy of endosomal escape of siRNA in RNA nanoparticles
is still unknown as cancer regression after siRNA delivery via receptor-mediated endocytosis is relatively low.3,61 To date, there is very limited knowledge on different cellular endocytosis
or internalization pathways that govern subsequent intracellular processing
and endosomal escape of RNA nanoparticles. Nevertheless, there are
well-characterized tools available to enhance endosome escape such
as chemical functional groups including acid-cleavable linkers such
as acetal, hydrazone, and maleic amides, or other acid protonating
groups such as amino esters and sulfonamide.228 The pH-sensitive materials undergo high amounts of protonation,
thereby inducing an influx of ions into the endosome, resulting in
osmosis and endosome rupture—referred to as “proton-sponge”
effect. As discussed earlier, a wide range of chemical conjugation
strategies are available for site-specific incorporation of the endosome
disrupting chemicals to RNA nanoparticles.

Large-Scale Production
and Purification of RNA Nanoparticles
One of the major bottlenecks
for future clinical applications is
the large-scale production, large-scale purification, and cost of
RNA nanoparticle production. Typically, RNA nanoparticles are designed
to be modular composed of multiple short strands that are well within
the limits of chemical synthesis (maximum of 80 nt). Over the years,
the cost of RNA oligosynthesis has progressively decreased due to
major improvements in chemical synthesis efficiency based on 2′-protecting
groups, such as ether, acetal, orthoester, ester, O-acetalester, and
pivaloyloxymethyl (PivOM).229,230 Commercial vendors
have developed production facilities capable of producing tens of
grams of RNA per synthesis cycle in GMP grade production capabilities.
However, large-scale purification remains a challenge. HPLC and gel
electrophoresis have limited capabilities with somewhat low yields.
Due to the special nature of RNA nanotechnology, the size of the assembled
nanoparticle is significantly different from its building blocks,
thus, preparative ultracentrifugation has recently been employed231 and looks to be a promising approach for purification
of fully assembled RNA nanoparticles with high yield.

Rational Incorporation
of Chemically Modified Nucleotides
While chemical modifications
offer many advantages concerning serum
stability, thermodynamic stability, and immunogenicity, in some cases
they do affect the folding of RNA motifs. For example, the malachite
green (MG) fluorogenic RNA aptamer232 is
nonfunctional after 2′-F modification due to misfolding. Rational
modification is a case by case issue and is RNA-sequence- and structure-dependent.
Specific patterns of chemical modifications can work well with one
system but may not for another. The challenge is to find universal
chemical modification strategies that can work for any given sequence.
General consideration of improvement in RNA nanoparticle designs related
to chemical modification is still necessary for clinical translation
of a wide range of RNA-based drugs.

Computational Guide to
RNA Nanoparticle Assembly
Understanding
the correct global folding of RNA constructs is of paramount importance
to ensure authentic function of multifunctional RNA nanoparticles.
RNA molecules are dynamic and can alternate between different 3D conformations
that display small differences in ΔG. Larger
assemblies pose more constraints on the thermodynamic and kinetic
aspects of RNA folding. Although several user-friendly online resources
have been developed including Mfold,233 RNA designer,234 Sfold,235 NUPACK,115 Nanofolder,236 and Hyperfold,182 accurate prediction of RNA structure and folding for nanoparticle
assembly remains a great challenge. RNA nanotechnology necessitates
the development of prediction software capable of predicting inter-RNA
interaction and analyzing 3D and 4D structures for nanoparticle designs.
Some progress has been made in RNA 3D computation from the traditional
intramolecular interactions to intermolecular interactions,111,116,117 but the field is still in its
infancy.

Conclusions
RNA nanotechnology has
come a long way since its inception in 1998.2 Some of the most exciting advancements happened
only within the last 5 years. The design of elegant nanostructures
with precise arrangement of functional modules in 3D space and self-assembly
in a programmable 4D structure with controlled manner have greatly
advanced the field. Progress in the understanding of the principle
for structure-based design will enhance the capacity to make more
intricate RNA nanoparticles with diverse function that 1 day can mimic
naturally occurring RNA nanomachines like the ribosome. It is clear
that RNA nanoparticles display many advantages over other nanoparticle
systems; however, the development of RNA nanoparticles as drugs lags
behind that of liposome and polymer systems, which have been in clinical
trials for years. To reach clinical applications, the development
of RNA nanoparticles should broaden beyond that of just their construction
and focus more on applying the advantages of RNA nanotechnology. RNA
nanotechnology has certainly sparked interest from investors evidenced
by the establishment of several start-up companies whose goal is to
rapidly advance the technology from the bench to the clinic.

Author Contributions
† D.J. and F.H. contributed equally to this
work.

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): P.G.'s Sylvan G. Frank
Endowed Chair position in Pharmaceutics and Drug Delivery is funded
by the CM Chen Foundation. P.G.'s inventions at the University
of
Kentucky have been licensed to Matt Holding LTD. The content is solely
the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of NIH. P.G. is the consultant of Oxford Nanopore
Technologies and Nanobio Delivery Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, as well
as the cofounder of Shenzhen P&Z Bio-medical Co. Ltd and its subsidiary
US P&Z Biological Technology LLC.

Acknowledgments
The research in P.G.’s lab was supported
by NIH Grants
R01EB019036, U01CA151648, and U01CA207946.

Vocabulary
RNA building blocka central
core RNA structure allowing for the construction of RNA nanoparticles,
resulting in a more complex shape and particles than the individual
building block

RNA motifa single-stranded RNA sequence that folds into a complex
structure, resulting in a specific and defined functionality much
like that of a protein; examples are RNA aptamers, riboswitches, and
ribozymes

quaternary interactions
(4D)interactions between at least two RNA monomer
motifs building a multiunit molecule such as the complexing of the
Phi29 pRNA into a hexameric ring via hand-in-hand
interactions

immuno-adjuvanta substance that creates an enhanced immune response
which may or may not be directed to a specific antigen; in RNA nanotechnology,
specific nucleic acids can result in the stimulation of the immune
system

thermostabilitya governing principle in RNA nanoparticle design,
in which the base-pairing thermodynamics results in the construction
of a stable structure for in vivo applications

RNAi(or
RNA interference) the result of short nucleic acid strands blocking
a specific gene expression through the complexation with RNA-induced
silencing complex (RISC) and degradation of messenger RNA (mRNA)
==== Refs
References
Guo P. 
The Emerging
Field of RNA Nanotechnology . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2010 , 5 , 833 –842 10.1038/nnano.2010.231 .21102465 
Guo P. ; Zhang C. ; Chen C. ; Trottier M. ; Garver K. 
Inter-RNA
Interaction of Phage Phi29 PRNA to Form a Hexameric Complex for Viral
DNA Transportation . Mol. Cell 
1998 , 2 , 149 –155 10.1016/S1097-2765(00)80124-0 .9702202 
Guo S. ; Tschammer N. ; Mohammed S. ; Guo P. 
Specific Delivery of
Therapeutic RNAs to Cancer Cells Via the Dimerization
Mechanism of Phi29 Motor PRNA . Hum. Gene Ther. 
2005 , 16 , 1097 –1109 10.1089/hum.2005.16.1097 .16149908 
Delebecque C. J. ; Lindner A. B. ; Silver P. A. ; Aldaye F. A. 
Organization of
Intracellular Reactions With Rationally Designed RNA Assemblies . Science 
2011 , 333 , 470 –474 10.1126/science.1206938 .21700839 
Lee J. B. ; Hong J. ; Bonner D. K. ; Poon Z. ; Hammond P. T. 
Self-Assembled
RNA Interference Microsponges for Efficient SiRNA Delivery . Nat. Mater. 
2012 , 11 , 316 –322 10.1038/nmat3253 .22367004 
Zuo H. ; Wu S. ; Li M. ; Li Y. ; Jiang W. ; Mao C. 
A Case Study
of the Likes and Dislikes of DNA and RNA in Self-Assembly . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 15118 –15121 10.1002/anie.201507375 .
Laurenti E. ; Barde I. ; Verp S. ; Offner S. ; Wilson A. ; Quenneville S. ; Wiznerowicz M. ; MacDonald H. R. ; Trono D. ; Trumpp A. 
Inducible Gene and ShRNA Expression
in Resident Hematopoietic Stem Cells in Vivo . Stem Cells 
2010 , 28 , 1390 –1398 10.1002/stem.460 .20641037 
Hoeprich S. ; ZHou Q. ; Guo S. ; Qi G. ; Wang Y. ; Guo P. 
Bacterial Virus Phi29 PRNA As a Hammerhead Ribozyme Escort to Destroy
Hepatitis B Virus . Gene Ther. 
2003 , 10 , 1258 –1267 10.1038/sj.gt.3302002 .12858191 
Chang K. Y. ; Tinoco I. Jr.
Characterization of a ″Kissing″
Hairpin Complex Derived From the Human Immunodeficiency Virus Genome . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
1994 , 91 18 8705 –8709 10.1073/pnas.91.18.8705 .8078946 
Bindewald E. ; Hayes R. ; Yingling Y. G. ; Kasprzak W. ; Shapiro B. A. 
RNAJunction:
a Database of RNA Junctions and Kissing Loops for Three-Dimensional
Structural Analysis and Nanodesign . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2008 , 36 , D392 –D397 10.1093/nar/gkm842 .17947325 
Wagner C. ; Ehresmann C. ; Ehresmann B. ; Brunel C. 
Mechanism of Dimerization
of Bicoid MRNA: Initiation and Stabilization . J. Biol. Chem. 
2004 , 279 , 4560 –4569 10.1074/jbc.M306511200 .14607826 
Sugimoto N. ; Nakano S. ; Katoh M. ; Matsumura A. ; Nakamuta H. ; Ohmichi T. ; Yoneyama M. ; Sasaki M. 
Thermodynamic
Parameters to Predict Stability of RNA/DNA Hybrid Duplexes . Biochemistry 
1995 , 34 , 11211 –11216 10.1021/bi00035a029 .7545436 
Searle M. S. ; Williams D. H. 
On the Stability of Nucleic Acid Structures in Solution:
Enthalpy-Entropy Compensations, Internal Rotations and Reversibility . Nucleic Acids Res. 
1993 , 21 , 2051 –2056 10.1093/nar/21.9.2051 .7684832 
Lemieux S. ; Major F. 
RNA Canonical and Non-Canonical Base Pairing Types: a Recognition
Method and Complete Repertoire . Nucleic Acids
Res. 
2002 , 30 , 4250 –4263 10.1093/nar/gkf540 .12364604 
Leontis N.
B. ; Westhof E. 
Geometric
Nomenclature and Classification of RNA Base
Pairs . RNA 
2001 , 7 , 499 –512 10.1017/S1355838201002515 .11345429 
Leontis N. B. ; Lescoute A. ; Westhof E. 
The Building
Blocks and Motifs of
RNA Architecture . Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
2006 , 16 , 279 –287 10.1016/j.sbi.2006.05.009 .16713707 
Leontis N. B. ; Westhof E. 
Analysis of RNA Motifs . Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 
2003 , 13 , 300 –308 10.1016/S0959-440X(03)00076-9 .12831880 
Khisamutdinov E. F. ; Jasinski D. L. ; Li H. ; Zhang K. ; Chiu W. ; Guo P. 
Fabrication of RNA 3D Nanoprism for
Loading and Protection of Small
RNAs and Model Drugs . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 10079 –10087 10.1002/adma.201603180 .27758001 
Khisamutdinov E. F. ; Bui M. N. ; Jasinski D. ; Zhao Z. ; Cui Z. ; Guo P. 
Simple Method for Constructing
RNA Triangle, Square, Pentagon by
Tuning Interior RNA 3WJ Angle From 60 Degrees to 90 Degrees or 108
Degrees . Methods Mol. Biol. 
2015 , 1316 , 181 –193 10.1007/978-1-4939-2730-2_15 .25967062 
Khisamutdinov E. F. ; Jasinski D. L. ; Guo P. 
RNA As a Boiling-Resistant
Anionic
Polymer Material to Build Robust Structures With Defined Shape and
Stoichiometry . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 4771 –4781 10.1021/nn5006254 .24694194 
Khisamutdinov E. ; Li H. ; Jasinski D. ; Chen J. ; Fu J. ; Guo P. 
Enhancing
Immunomodulation on Innate Immunity by Shape Transition Among RNA
Triangle, Square, and Pentagon Nanovehicles . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , 9996 –10004 10.1093/nar/gku516 .25092921 
Jasinski D. ; Khisamutdinov E. F. ; Lyubchenko Y. L. ; Guo P. 
Physicochemically Tunable
Poly-Functionalized RNA Square Architecture With Fluorogenic and Ribozymatic
Properties . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 7620 –7629 10.1021/nn502160s .24971772 
Scott W. G. 
Ribozymes . Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
2007 , 17 , 280 –286 10.1016/j.sbi.2007.05.003 .17572081 
Breaker R. R. 
Riboswitches
and the RNA World . Cold Spring Harbor Perspect.
Biol. 
2012 , 4 , a003566 10.1101/cshperspect.a003566 .
Ha M. ; Kim V. N. 
Regulation of MicroRNA
Biogenesis . Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
2014 , 15 , 509 –524 10.1038/nrm3838 .25027649 
Hendrix R. W. 
Bacteriophage
DNA Packaging: RNA Gears in a DNA Transport Machine (Minireview) . Cell 
1998 , 94 , 147 –150 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81413-0 .9695942 
Leontis N. B. ; Stombaugh J. ; Westhof E. 
The Non-Watson-Crick Base Pairs and
Their Associated Isostericity Matrices . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2002 , 30 , 3497 –3531 10.1093/nar/gkf481 .12177293 
Jaeger L. ; Westhof E. ; Leontis N. B. 
TectoRNA:
Modular Assembly Units
for the Construction of RNA Nano-Objects . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2001 , 29 , 455 –463 10.1093/nar/29.2.455 .11139616 
Ishikawa J. ; Furuta H. ; Ikawa Y. 
RNA Tectonics (TectoRNA) for RNA
Nanostructure Design and Its Application in Synthetic Biology . Wiley. Interdiscip. Rev. RNA 
2013 , 4 , 651 –664 10.1002/wrna.1185 .23836522 
Jaeger L. ; Chworos A. 
The Architectonics of Programmable RNA and DNA Nanostructures . Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
2006 , 16 , 531 –543 10.1016/j.sbi.2006.07.001 .16843653 
Westhof E. ; Masquida B. ; Jaeger L. 
RNA Tectonics:
Towards RNA Design . Folding Des. 
1996 , 1 , R78 –R88 10.1016/S1359-0278(96)00037-5 .
Chworos A. ; Severcan I. ; Koyfman A. Y. ; Weinkam P. ; Oroudjev E. ; Hansma H. G. ; Jaeger L. 
Building Programmable
Jigsaw Puzzles
With RNA . Science 
2004 , 306 , 2068 –2072 10.1126/science.1104686 .15604402 
Yan H. 
Nucleic Acid
Nanotechnology . Science 
2004 , 306 , 2048 –2049 10.1126/science.1106754 .15604395 
Abdelmawla S. ; Guo S. ; Zhang L. ; Pulukuri S. ; Patankar P. ; Conley P. ; Trebley J. ; Guo P. ; Li Q. X. 
Pharmacological
Characterization of Chemically Synthesized Monomeric PRNA Nanoparticles
for Systemic Delivery . Mol. Ther. 
2011 , 19 , 1312 –1322 10.1038/mt.2011.35 .21468004 
Shu D. ; Shu Y. ; Haque F. ; Abdelmawla S. ; Guo P. 
Thermodynamically Stable
RNA Three-Way Junctions for Constructing Multifuntional Nanoparticles
for Delivery of Therapeutics . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 6 , 658 –667 10.1038/nnano.2011.105 .21909084 
Haque F. ; Shu D. ; Shu Y. ; Shlyakhtenko L. ; Rychahou P. ; Evers M. ; Guo P. 
Ultrastable
Synergistic Tetravalent RNA Nanoparticles for Targeting
to Cancers . Nano Today 
2012 , 7 , 245 –257 10.1016/j.nantod.2012.06.010 .23024702 
Lander E. S. ; Linton L. M. ; Birren B. ; Nusbaum C. ; Zody M. C. ; Baldwin J. ; Devon K. ; Dewar K. ; Doyle M. ; FitzHugh W. ; Funke R. ; Gage D. ; Harris K. ; Heaford A. ; Howland J. ; Kann L. ; Lehoczky J. ; Levine R. ; McEwan P. ; McKernan K. ; et al. Initial
Sequencing and Analysis of the Human Genome . Nature 
2001 , 409 , 860 –921 10.1038/35057062 .11237011 
Claverie J.
M. 
Fewer Genes,
More Noncoding RNA . Science 
2005 , 309 , 1529 –1530 10.1126/science.1116800 .16141064 
Lieberman J. ; Slack F. ; Pandolfi P. P. ; Chinnaiyan A. ; Agami R. ; Mendell J. T. 
Noncoding RNAs and
Cancer . Cell 
2013 , 153 , 9 –10 10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.019 .23781554 
Seeman N. C. 
Nucleic
Acid Junctions and Lattices . J. Theor. Biol. 
1982 , 99 , 237 –247 10.1016/0022-5193(82)90002-9 .6188926 
Jones M. R. ; Seeman N. C. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Nanomaterials.
Programmable Materials
and the Nature of the DNA Bond . Science 
2015 , 347 , 1260901 10.1126/science.1260901 .25700524 
Seeman N. C. 
Nanomaterials
Based on DNA . Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
2010 , 79 , 65 –87 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060308-102244 .20222824 
Andersen E. S. ; Dong M. ; Nielsen M. M. ; Jahn K. ; Subramani R. ; Mamdouh W. ; Golas M. M. ; Sander B. ; Stark H. ; Oliveira C. L. ; Pedersen J. S. ; Birkedal V. ; Besenbacher F. ; Gothelf K. V. ; Kjems J. 
Self-Assembly
of a Nanoscale DNA
Box With a Controllable Lid . Nature 
2009 , 459 , 73 –76 10.1038/nature07971 .19424153 
Goodman R. P. ; Heilemann M. ; Doose S. ; Erben C. M. ; Kapanidis A. N. ; Turberfield A. J. 
Reconfigurable, Braced, Three-Dimensional DNA Nanostructures . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2008 , 3 , 93 –96 10.1038/nnano.2008.3 .18654468 
Yang Y. R. ; Liu Y. ; Yan H. 
DNA Nanostructures As Programmable Biomolecular Scaffolds . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2015 , 26 , 1381 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.5b00194 .
Rothemund P. W. K. 
Folding
DNA to Create Nanoscale Shapes and Patterns . Nature 
2006 , 440 , 297 –302 10.1038/nature04586 .16541064 
Ke Y. ; Sharma J. ; Liu M. ; Jahn K. ; Liu Y. ; Yan H. 
Scaffolded DNA Origami
of a DNA Tetrahedron Molecular Container . Nano
Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 2445 –2447 10.1021/nl901165f .19419184 
Douglas S.
M. ; Bachelet I. ; Church G. M. 
A Logic-Gated Nanorobot for Targeted
Transport of Molecular Payloads . Science 
2012 , 335 , 831 –834 10.1126/science.1214081 .22344439 
Dietz H. ; Douglas S. M. ; Shih W. M. 
Folding
DNA into Twisted and Curved
Nanoscale Shapes . Science 
2009 , 325 , 725 –730 10.1126/science.1174251 .19661424 
Liedl T. ; Hogberg B. ; Tytell J. ; Ingber D. E. ; Shih W. M. 
Self-Assembly
of Three-Dimensional Prestressed Tensegrity Structures From DNA . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2010 , 5 , 520 –524 10.1038/nnano.2010.107 .20562873 
Zaug A. J. ; Grabowski P. J. ; Cech T. R. 
Autocatalytic Cyclization of an Excised
Intervening Sequence RNA Is a Cleavage-Ligation Reaction . Nature 
1983 , 301 , 578 –583 10.1038/301578a0 .6186917 
Jady B. E. ; Kiss T. 
A Small Nucleolar Guide RNA Functions Both in 2’-O-Ribose
Methylation and Pseudouridylation of the U5 Spliceosomal RNA . EMBO J. 
2001 , 20 , 541 –551 10.1093/emboj/20.3.541 .11157760 
Matsumura Y. ; Maeda H. 
A New Concept for Macromolecular Therapeutics in Cancer Chemotherapy:
Mechanism of Tumoritropic Accumulation of Proteins and the Antitumor
Agent Smancs . Cancer Res. 
1986 , 46 , 6387 –6392 .2946403 
Prabhakar U. ; Maeda H. ; Jain R. K. ; Sevick-Muraca E. M. ; Zamboni W. ; Farokhzad O. C. ; Barry S. T. ; Gabizon A. ; Grodzinski P. ; Blakey D. C. 
Challenges and Key Considerations
of the Enhanced Permeability and Retention Effect for Nanomedicine
Drug Delivery in Oncology . Cancer Res. 
2013 , 73 , 2412 –2417 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561 .23423979 
Lammers T. ; Kiessling F. ; Hennink W. E. ; Storm G. 
Drug Targeting to Tumors:
Principles, Pitfalls and (Pre-) Clinical Progress . J. Controlled Release 
2012 , 161 , 175 –187 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.09.063 .
Shu D. ; Khisamutdinov E. ; Zhang L. ; Guo P. 
Programmable
Folding
of Fusion RNA Complex Driven by the 3WJ Motif of Phi29 Motor PRNA . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , e10 10.1093/nar/gkt885 .24084081 
Paredes E. ; Evans M. ; Das S. R. 
RNA Labeling,
Conjugation and Ligation . Methods 
2011 , 54 , 251 –259 10.1016/j.ymeth.2011.02.008 .21354310 
Behlke M. A. 
Progress
Towards in Vivo Use of SiRNAs . Mol. Ther. 
2006 , 13 , 644 –670 10.1016/j.ymthe.2006.01.001 .16481219 
Shu Y. ; Haque F. ; Shu D. ; Li W. ; Zhu Z. ; Kotb M. ; Lyubchenko Y. ; Guo P. 
Fabrication of 14 Different
RNA Nanoparticles for Specific Tumor Targeting Without Accumulation
in Normal Organs . RNA 
2013 , 19 , 767 –777 10.1261/rna.037002.112 .23604636 
Shu D. ; Li H. ; Shu Y. ; Xiong G. ; Carson W. E. ; Haque F. ; Xu R. ; Guo P. 
Systemic Delivery of Anti-MiRNA for Suppression of
Triple Negative Breast Cancer Utilizing RNA Nanotechnology . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 9731 –9740 10.1021/acsnano.5b02471 .26387848 
Cui D. ; Zhang C. ; Liu B. ; Shu Y. ; Du T. ; Shu D. ; Wang K. ; Dai F. ; Liu Y. ; Li C. ; Pan F. ; Yang Y. ; Ni J. ; Li H. ; Brand-Saberi B. ; Guo P. 
Regression of Gastric Cancer by Systemic Injection of RNA Nanoparticles
Carrying Both Ligand and SiRNA . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 10726 10.1038/srep10726 .26137913 
Rychahou P. ; Haque F. ; Shu Y. ; Zaytseva Y. ; Weiss H. L. ; Lee E. Y. ; Mustain W. ; Valentino J. ; Guo P. ; Evers B. M. 
Delivery of RNA
Nanoparticles into Colorectal Cancer
Metastases Following Systemic Administration . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 1108 –1116 10.1021/acsnano.5b00067 .25652125 
Lee T. J. ; Haque F. ; Shu D. ; Yoo J. Y. ; Li H. ; Yokel R. A. ; Horbinski C. ; Kim T. H. ; Kim S.-H. ; Nakano I. ; Kaur B. ; Croce C. M. ; Guo P. 
RNA Nanoparticles
As a Vector for Targeted SiRNA Delivery into Glioblastoma Mouse Model . Oncotarget 
2015 , 6 , 14766 –14776 10.18632/oncotarget.3632 .25885522 
Chiu H. C. ; Koh K. ; Evich M. ; Lesiak A. ; Germann M. W. ; Bongiorno A. ; Riedo E. ; Storici F. 
RNA Intrusions
Change DNA Elastic
Properties and Structure . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 10009 –10017 10.1039/C4NR01794C .24992674 
Krieg A. M. 
CpG Motifs
in Bacterial DNA and Their Immune Effects . Annu.
Rev. Immunol. 
2002 , 20 , 709 –760 10.1146/annurev.immunol.20.100301.064842 .11861616 
Krieg A. M. 
Therapeutic
Potential of Toll-Like Receptor 9 Activation . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2006 , 5 , 471 –484 10.1038/nrd2059 .16763660 
Vollmer J. ; Krieg A. M. 
Immunotherapeutic Applications of CpG Oligodeoxynucleotide
TLR9 Agonists . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2009 , 61 , 195 –204 10.1016/j.addr.2008.12.008 .
Vanneman M. ; Dranoff G. 
Combining Immunotherapy
and Targeted Therapies in Cancer
Treatment . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2012 , 12 , 237 –251 10.1038/nrc3237 .22437869 
Whitehead K. A. ; Dahlman J. E. ; Langer R. S. ; Anderson D. G. 
Silencing or Stimulation?
SiRNA Delivery and the Immune System . Annu.
Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng. 
2011 , 2 , 77 –96 10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-061010-114133 .22432611 
Judge A. D. ; Sood V. ; Shaw J. R. ; Fang D. ; McClintock K. ; MacLachlan I. 
Sequence-Dependent
Stimulation of the Mammalian Innate
Immune Response by Synthetic SiRNA . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2005 , 23 , 457 –462 10.1038/nbt1081 .15778705 
Judge A. D. ; Bola G. ; Lee A. C. H. ; Maclachlan I. 
Design of
Noninflammatory Synthetic SiRNA Mediating Potent Gene Silencing in Vivo . Mol. Ther. 
2006 , 13 , 494 –505 10.1016/j.ymthe.2005.11.002 .16343994 
Morrissey D. V. ; Lockridge J. A. ; Shaw L. ; Blanchard K. ; Jensen K. ; Breen W. ; Hartsough K. ; Machemer L. ; Radka S. ; Jadhav V. ; Vaish N. ; Zinnen S. ; Vargeese C. ; Bowman K. ; Shaffer C. S. ; Jeffs L. B. ; Judge A. ; Maclachlan I. ; Polisky B. 
Potent and Persistent in Vivo Anti-HBV
Activity of Chemically Modified SiRNAs . Nat.
Biotechnol. 
2005 , 23 , 1002 –1007 10.1038/nbt1122 .16041363 
Hornung V. ; Ellegast J. ; Kim S. ; Brzozka K. ; Jung A. ; Kato H. ; Poeck H. ; Akira S. ; Conzelmann K. K. ; Schlee M. ; Endres S. ; Hartmann G. 
5′-Triphosphate
RNA Is the Ligand for RIG-I . Science 
2006 , 314 , 994 –997 10.1126/science.1132505 .17038590 
Cekaite L. ; Furset G. ; Hovig E. ; Sioud M. 
Gene Expression Analysis
in Blood Cells in Response to Unmodified and 2’-Modified SiRNAs
Reveals TLR-Dependent and Independent Effects . J. Mol. Biol. 
2007 , 365 , 90 –108 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.09.034 .17054988 
Hornung V. ; Guenthner-Biller M. ; Bourquin C. ; Ablasser A. ; Schlee M. ; Uematsu S. ; Noronha A. ; Manoharan M. ; Akira S. ; de Fougerolles A. ; Endres S. ; Hartmann G. 
Sequence-Specific
Potent Induction of IFN-[Alpha] by Short Interfering RNA in Plasmacytoid
Dendritic Cells Through TLR7 . Nat. Med. 
2005 , 11 , 263 –270 10.1038/nm1191 .15723075 
Binzel D. W. ; Khisamutdinov E. F. ; Guo P. 
Entropy-Driven One-Step Formation
of Phi29 PRNA 3WJ From Three RNA Fragments . Biochemistry 
2014 , 53 , 2221 –2231 10.1021/bi4017022 .24694349 
Behlke M.
A. 
Chemical
Modification of SiRNAs for in Vivo Use . Oligonucleotides 
2008 , 18 , 305 –319 10.1089/oli.2008.0164 .19025401 
Watts J. K. ; Deleavey G. F. ; Damha M. J. 
Chemically Modified SiRNA: Tools
and Applications . Drug Discovery Today 
2008 , 13 , 842 –855 10.1016/j.drudis.2008.05.007 .18614389 
Liu J. ; Guo S. ; Cinier M. ; Shlyakhtenko L. S. ; Shu Y. ; Chen C. ; Shen G. ; Guo P. 
Fabrication of Stable and RNase-Resistant
RNA Nanoparticles Active in Gearing the Nanomotors for Viral DNA Packaging . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 237 –246 10.1021/nn1024658 .21155596 
Elmen J. ; Thonberg H. Ã. ; Ljungberg K. ; Frieden M. ; Westergaard M. ; Xu Y. ; Wahren B. ; Liang Z. ; Ã̃rum H. ; Koch T. 
Locked Nucleic Acid (LNA) Mediated Improvements in SiRNA Stability
and Functionality . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2005 , 33 , 439 –447 10.1093/nar/gki193 .15653644 
Eckstein F. 
Phosphorothioates,
Essential Components of Therapeutic Oligonucleotides . Nucleic Acid Ther. 
2014 , 24 , 374 –387 10.1089/nat.2014.0506 .25353652 
Somasunderam A. ; Thiviyanathan V. ; Tanaka T. ; Li X. ; Neerathilingam M. ; Lokesh G. L. ; Mann A. ; Peng Y. ; Ferrari M. ; Klostergaard J. ; Gorenstein D. G. 
Combinatorial Selection of DNA Thioaptamers
Targeted to the HA Binding Domain of Human CD44 . Biochemistry 
2010 , 49 , 9106 –9112 10.1021/bi1009503 .20843027 
Hall A. H. ; Wan J. ; Shaughnessy E. E. ; Ramsay S. B. ; Alexander K. A. 
RNA Interference
Using Boranophosphate SiRNAs: Structure-Activity Relationships . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2004 , 32 , 5991 –6000 10.1093/nar/gkh936 .15545637 
Porcheddu A. ; Giacomelli G. 
Peptide Nucleic Acids (PNAs), a Chemical Overview . Curr. Med. Chem. 
2005 , 12 , 2561 –2599 10.2174/092986705774370664 .16248816 
Zhou Z. ; Xia X. ; Bong D. 
Synthetic Polymer Hybridization
With DNA and RNA Directs
Nanoparticle Loading, Silencing Delivery, and Aptamer Function . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 8920 –8923 10.1021/jacs.5b05481 .26138550 
Xia X. ; Piao X. ; Bong D. 
Bifacial Peptide Nucleic Acid As
an Allosteric Switch for Aptamer and Ribozyme Function . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 7265 –7268 10.1021/ja5032584 .24796374 
Piao X. ; Xia X. ; Mao J. ; Bong D. 
Peptide Ligation and RNA Cleavage Via an Abiotic Template Interface . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 3751 –3754 10.1021/jacs.5b00236 .25747470 
Zeng Y. ; Pratumyot Y. ; Piao X. ; Bong D. 
Discrete Assembly of
Synthetic Peptide-DNA Triplex Structures From Polyvalent Melamine-Thymine
Bifacial Recognition . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 832 –835 10.1021/ja2099326 .22201288 
Piao X. ; Xia X. ; Bong D. 
Bifacial Peptide
Nucleic Acid Directs Cooperative Folding
and Assembly of Binary, Ternary, and Quaternary DNA Complexes . Biochemistry 
2013 , 52 , 6313 –6323 10.1021/bi4008963 .23964711 
Mao J. ; Bong D. 
Synthesis of DNA-Binding Peptoids . Synlett 
2015 , 26 11 1581 –1585 10.1055/s-0034-1380698 .
Bondensgaard K. ; Petersen M. ; Singh S. K. ; Rajwanshi V. K. ; Kumar R. ; Wengel J. ; Jacobsen J. P. 
Structural Studies
of LNA:RNA Duplexes by NMR: Conformations and Implications for RNase
H Activity . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2000 , 6 , 2687 –2695 10.1002/1521-3765(20000804)6:15<2687::AID-CHEM2687>3.0.CO;2-U .10985717 
Kaur H. ; Arora A. ; Wengel J. ; Maiti S. 
Thermodynamic, Counterion,
and Hydration Effects for the Incorporation of Locked Nucleic Acid
Nucleotides into DNA Duplexes . Biochemistry 
2006 , 45 , 7347 –7355 10.1021/bi060307w .16752924 
Kurreck J. ; Wyszko E. ; Gillen C. ; Erdmann V. A. 
Design of Antisense
Oligonucleotides Stabilized by Locked Nucleic Acids . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2002 , 30 , 1911 –1918 10.1093/nar/30.9.1911 .11972327 
Obad S. ; dos Santos C. O. ; Petri A. ; Heidenblad M. ; Broom O. ; Ruse C. ; Fu C. ; Lindow M. ; Stenvang J. ; Straarup E. M. ; Hansen H. F. ; Koch T. ; Pappin D. ; Hannon G. J. ; Kauppinen S. 
Silencing
of MicroRNA Families by Seed-Targeting Tiny LNAs . Nat. Genet. 
2011 , 43 , 371 –378 10.1038/ng.786 .21423181 
Allerson C.
R. ; Sioufi N. ; Jarres R. ; Prakash T. P. ; Naik N. ; Berdeja A. ; Wanders L. ; Griffey R. H. ; Swayze E. E. ; Bhat B. 
Fully 2’-Modified
Oligonucleotide Duplexes With Improved in Vitro Potency
and Stability Compared to Unmodified Small
Interfering RNA . J. Med. Chem. 
2005 , 48 , 901 –904 10.1021/jm049167j .15715458 
Sipa K. ; Sochacka E. ; Kazmierczak-Baranska J. ; Maszewska M. ; Janicka M. ; Nowak G. ; Nawrot B. 
Effect of
Base Modifications
on Structure, Thermodynamic Stability, and Gene Silencing Activity
of Short Interfering RNA . RNA 
2007 , 13 , 1301 –1316 10.1261/rna.538907 .17585051 
Guo P. ; Erickson S. ; Anderson D. 
A Small Viral
RNA Is Required for in Vitro Packaging of Bacteriophage
Phi29 DNA . Science 
1987 , 236 , 690 –694 10.1126/science.3107124 .3107124 
Shu D. ; Moll W. D. ; Deng Z. ; Mao C. ; Guo P. 
Bottom-Up
Assembly of RNA Arrays and Superstructures As Potential Parts in Nanotechnology . Nano Lett. 
2004 , 4 , 1717 –1723 10.1021/nl0494497 .21171616 
Shu Y. ; Shu D. ; Haque F. ; Guo P. 
Fabrication of PRNA Nanoparticles
to Deliver Therapeutic RNAs and Bioactive Compounds into Tumor Cells . Nat. Protoc. 
2013 , 8 , 1635 –1659 10.1038/nprot.2013.097 .23928498 
Petrov A. I. ; Zirbel C. L. ; Leontis N. B. 
Automated Classification
of RNA 3D Motifs and the RNA 3D Motif Atlas . RNA 
2013 , 19 , 1327 –1340 10.1261/rna.039438.113 .23970545 
Abraham M. ; Dror O. ; Nussinov R. ; Wolfson H. J. 
Analysis
and Classification of RNA Tertiary Structures . RNA 
2008 , 14 , 2274 –2289 10.1261/rna.853208 .18824509 
Grabow W. W. ; Zakrevsky P. ; Afonin K. A. ; Chworos A. ; Shapiro B. A. ; Jaeger L. 
Self-Assembling RNA Nanorings Based
on RNAI/II Inverse Kissing Complexes . Nano Lett. 
2011 , 11 , 878 –887 10.1021/nl104271s .21229999 
Severcan I. ; Geary C. ; Verzemnieks E. ; Chworos A. ; Jaeger L. 
Square-Shaped RNA Particles From
Different RNA Folds . Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 1270 –1277 10.1021/nl900261h .19239258 
Dibrov S. M. ; McLean J. ; Parsons J. ; Hermann T. 
Self-Assembling
RNA Square . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2011 , 108 , 6405 –6408 10.1073/pnas.1017999108 .21464284 
Parlea L. ; Bindewald E. ; Sharan R. ; Bartlett N. ; Moriarty D. ; Oliver J. ; Afonin K. A. ; Shapiro B. A. 
Ring Catalog:
A Resource for Designing Self-Assembling RNA Nanostructures . Methods 
2016 , 103 , 128 –137 10.1016/j.ymeth.2016.04.016 .27090005 
Jaeger L. ; Leontis N. B. 
Tecto-RNA: One Dimensional Self-Assembly
Through Tertiary Interactions . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2000 , 39 , 2521 –2524 10.1002/1521-3773(20000717)39:14<2521::AID-ANIE2521>3.0.CO;2-P .
Nasalean L. ; Baudrey S. ; Leontis N. B. ; Jaeger L. 
Controlling
RNA Self-Assembly to Form Filaments . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2006 , 34 , 1381 –1392 10.1093/nar/gkl008 .16522648 
Geary C. ; Chworos A. ; Jaeger L. 
Promoting RNA Helical
Stacking Via A-Minor Junctions . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2011 , 39 , 1066 –1080 10.1093/nar/gkq748 .20876687 
Severcan I. ; Geary C. ; Chworos A. ; Voss N. ; Jacovetty E. ; Jaeger L. 
A Polyhedron Made of TRNAs . Nat.
Chem. 
2010 , 2 , 772 –779 10.1038/nchem.733 .20729899 
Yu J. W. ; Liu Z. Y. ; Jiang W. ; Wang G. S. ; Mao C. D. 
De Novo Design of
an RNA Tile That
Self-Assembles into a Homo-Octameric Nanoprism . Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 5724 –5729 10.1038/ncomms6724 .25635537 
Bindewald E. ; Grunewald C. ; Boyle B. ; O’Connor M. ; Shapiro B. A. 
Computational Strategies for the Automated Design of
RNA Nanoscale Structures From Building Blocks Using NanoTiler . J. Mol. Graphics Modell. 
2008 , 27 , 299 –308 10.1016/j.jmgm.2008.05.004 .
Jossinet F. ; Ludwig T. E. ; Westhof E. 
Assemble:
an Interactive
Graphical Tool to Analyze and Build RNA Architectures at the 2D and
3D Levels . Bioinformatics 
2010 , 26 , 2057 –2059 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq321 .20562414 
Martinez H. M. ; Maizel J. V. ; Shapiro B. A. 
RNA2D3D:
A Program
for Generating, Viewing, and Comparing 3-Dimensional Models of RNA . J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 
2008 , 25 , 669 –683 10.1080/07391102.2008.10531240 .18399701 
Busch A. ; Backofen R. 
INFO-RNA--a Server
for Fast Inverse
RNA Folding Satisfying Sequence Constraints . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2007 , 35 , W310 –W313 10.1093/nar/gkm218 .17452349 
Zadeh J. N. ; Steenberg C. D. ; Bois J. S. ; Wolfe B. R. ; Pierce M. B. ; Khan A. R. ; Dirks R. M. ; Pierce N. A. 
NUPACK:
Analysis and Design of Nucleic Acid Systems . J. Comput. Chem. 
2011 , 32 , 170 –173 10.1002/jcc.21596 .20645303 
Yingling Y. G. ; Shapiro B. A. 
Computational Design of an RNA Hexagonal
Nanoring and an RNA Nanotube . Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 2328 –2334 10.1021/nl070984r .17616164 
Afonin K. A. ; Bindewald E. ; Yaghoubian A. J. ; Voss N. ; Jacovetty E. ; Shapiro B. A. ; Jaeger L. 
In
Vitro Assembly of Cubic RNA-Based Scaffolds Designed . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2010 , 5 , 676 –682 10.1038/nnano.2010.160 .20802494 
Guo P. ; Coban O. ; Snead N. M. ; Trebley J. ; Hoeprich S. ; Guo S. ; Shu Y. 
Engineering RNA for Targeted SiRNA Delivery and Medical
Application . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2010 , 62 , 650 –666 10.1016/j.addr.2010.03.008 .
Shu Y. ; Pi F. ; Sharma A. ; Rajabi M. ; Haque F. ; Shu D. ; Leggas M. ; Evers B. M. ; Guo P. 
Stable RNA Nanoparticles
As Potential New Generation Drugs for Cancer Therapy . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2014 , 66C , 74 –89 10.1016/j.addr.2013.11.006 .
Li H. ; Lee T. ; Dziubla T. ; Pi F. ; Guo S. ; Xu J. ; Li C. ; Haque F. ; Liang X. ; Guo P. 
RNA As a Stable
Polymer to Build Controllable and Defined Nanostructures for Material
and Biomedical Applications . Nano Today 
2015 , 10 , 631 –655 10.1016/j.nantod.2015.09.003 .26770259 
Grabow W. W. ; Jaeger L. 
RNA Self-Assembly and
RNA Nanotechnology . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2014 , 47 , 1871 –1880 10.1021/ar500076k .24856178 
Leontis N. B. ; Westhof E. 
Chemistry. Self-Assembled
RNA Nanostructures . Science 
2014 , 345 , 732 –733 10.1126/science.1257989 .25124412 
Afonin K. A. ; Lindsay B. ; Shapiro B. A. 
Engineered
RNA Nanodesigns
for Applications in RNA Nanotechnology . DNA
and RNA Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 1 , 1 –15 10.2478/rnan-2013-0001 .
Grodzinski P. , Torchilin V.  , Eds. Advanced Drug Delivery
Reviews: Cancer Nanotechnology ; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 2014 ; Vol. 66 .
Li H. ; Zhang K. ; Pi F. ; Guo S. ; Shlyakhtenko L. ; Chiu W. ; Shu D. ; Guo P. 
Controllable
Self-Assembly
of RNA Tetrahedrons With Precise Shape and Size for Cancer Targeting . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 7501 –7507 10.1002/adma.201601976 .27322097 
Sharma A. ; Haque F. ; Pi F. ; Shlyakhtenko L. ; Evers B. M. ; Guo P. 
Controllable Self-Assembly of RNA
Dendrimers . Nanomedicine 
2016 , 12 , 835 –844 10.1016/j.nano.2015.11.008 .26656633 
Geary C. ; Rothemund P. W. ; Andersen E. S. 
A Single-Stranded
Architecture for Co-Transcriptional Folding of RNA Nanostructures . Science 
2014 , 345 , 799 –804 10.1126/science.1253920 .25124436 
Afonin K. A. ; Desai R. ; Viard M. ; Kireeva M. L. ; Bindewald E. ; Case C. L. ; Maciag A. E. ; Kasprzak W. K. ; Kim T. ; Sappe A. ; Stepler M. ; Kewalramani V. N. ; Kashlev M. ; Blumenthal R. ; Shapiro B. A. 
Co-Transcriptional
Production of RNA-DNA Hybrids for Simultaneous Release of Multiple
Split Functionalities . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , 2085 –2097 10.1093/nar/gkt1001 .24194608 
Afonin K. A. ; Kireeva M. ; Grabow W. W. ; Kashlev M. ; Jaeger L. ; Shapiro B. A. 
Co-Transcriptional
Assembly of Chemically
Modified RNA Nanoparticles Functionalized With SiRNAs . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 5192 –5195 10.1021/nl302302e .23016824 
Dean F. B. ; Nelson J. R. ; Giesler T. L. ; Lasken R. S. 
Rapid Amplification
of Plasmid and Phage DNA Using Phi 29 DNA Polymerase and Multiply-Primed
Rolling Circle Amplification . Genome Res. 
2001 , 11 , 1095 –1099 10.1101/gr.180501 .11381035 
Daubendiek S. ; Ryan K. ; Kool E. 
Rolling-Circle
RNA
Synthesis: Circular Oligonucleotides As Efficient Substrates for T7
RNA Polymerase . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1995 , 117 29 7818 –7819 10.1021/ja00134a032 .27524830 
Han D. ; Park Y. ; Kim H. ; Lee J. B. 
Self-Assembly of
Free-Standing RNA Membranes . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 4367 10.1038/ncomms5367 .24994070 
Wang D. ; Zhang Z. ; O’Loughlin E. ; Lee T. ; Houel S. ; O’Carroll D. ; Tarakhovsky A. ; Ahn N. G. ; Yi R. 
Quantitative Functions of Argonaute
Proteins in Mammalian Development . Genes Dev. 
2012 , 26 , 693 –704 10.1101/gad.182758.111 .22474261 
Hansma H. G. ; Oroudjev E. ; Baudrey S. ; Jaeger L. 
TectoRNA and
’Kissing-Loop’ RNA: Atomic Force Microscopy of Self-Assembling
RNA Structures . J. Microsc. 
2003 , 212 , 273 –279 10.1111/j.1365-2818.2003.01276.x .14629553 
Yingchoncharoen P. ; Kalinowski D. S. ; Richardson D. R. 
Lipid-Based
Drug Delivery Systems in Cancer Therapy: What Is Available and What
Is Yet to Come . Pharmacol. Rev. 
2016 , 68 , 701 –787 10.1124/pr.115.012070 .27363439 
Niu Z. ; Conejos-Sanchez I. ; Griffin B. T. ; O’Driscoll C.
M. ; Alonso M. J. 
Lipid-Based
Nanocarriers for Oral Peptide Delivery . Adv.
Drug Delivery Rev. 
2016 , 106 , 337 –354 10.1016/j.addr.2016.04.001 .
Liu D. M. ; He C. B. ; Wang A. Z. ; Lin W. B. 
Application
of Liposomal Technologies for Delivery of Platinum Analogs in Oncology . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2013 , 8 , 3309 –3319 10.2147/IJN.S38354 .
Pack D. W. ; Hoffman A. S. ; Pun S. ; Stayton P. S. 
Design
and Development of Polymers for Gene Delivery . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2005 , 4 , 581 –593 10.1038/nrd1775 .16052241 
Duncan R. 
Polymer Therapeutics
As Nanomedicines: New Perspectives . Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 
2011 , 22 , 492 –501 10.1016/j.copbio.2011.05.507 .21676609 
Lee K. L. ; Twyman R. M. ; Fiering S. ; Steinmetz N. F. 
Virus-Based
Nanoparticles As Platform Technologies for Modern Vaccines . Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 
2016 , 8 , 554 –578 10.1002/wnan.1383 .26782096 
Smith M. T. ; Hawes A. K. ; Bundy B. C. 
Reengineering
Viruses
and Virus-Like Particles Through Chemical Functionalization Strategies . Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 
2013 , 24 , 620 –626 10.1016/j.copbio.2013.01.011 .23465756 
Hong C. A. ; Eltoukhy A. A. ; Lee H. ; Langer R. ; Anderson D. G. ; Nam Y. S. 
Dendrimeric SiRNA for Efficient Gene
Silencing . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 6740 –6744 10.1002/anie.201412493 .
Sun W. ; Mignani S. ; Shen M. ; Shi X. 
Dendrimer-Based Magnetic
Iron Oxide Nanoparticles: Their Synthesis and Biomedical Applications . Drug Discovery Today 
2016 , 21 , 1873 10.1016/j.drudis.2016.06.028 .27388223 
Chaplot S. P. ; Rupenthal I. D. 
Dendrimers for Gene Delivery--a Potential
Approach for Ocular Therapy? . J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 
2014 , 66 , 542 –556 10.1111/jphp.12104 .24635556 
Hsu H. J. ; Bugno J. ; Lee S. R. ; Hong S. 
Dendrimer-Based
Nanocarriers: a Versatile Platform for Drug Delivery . Wiley. Interdiscip. Rev.:Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 
2017 , 9 , e1409 10.1002/wnan.1409 .
Chen S. ; Hao X. ; Liang X. ; Zhang Q. ; Zhang C. ; Zhou G. ; Shen S. ; Jia G. ; Zhang J. 
Inorganic Nanomaterials As Carriers for Drug Delivery . J. Biomed. Nanotechnol. 
2016 , 12 , 1 –27 10.1166/jbn.2016.2122 .27301169 
van der Meel R. ; Vehmeijer L. J. ; Kok R. J. ; Storm G. ; van Gaal E. V. 
Ligand-Targeted Particulate Nanomedicines Undergoing
Clinical Evaluation: Current Status . Adv. Drug
Delivery Rev. 
2013 , 65 , 1284 –1298 10.1016/j.addr.2013.08.012 .
Grodzinski P. ; Farrell D. 
Future Opportunities in Cancer Nanotechnology--NCI
Strategic Workshop Report . Cancer Res. 
2014 , 74 , 1307 –1310 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2787 .24413533 
Zamboni W. C. ; Torchilin V. ; Patri A. K. ; Hrkach J. ; Stern S. ; Lee R. ; Nel A. ; Panaro N. J. ; Grodzinski P. 
Best Practices in Cancer Nanotechnology:
Perspective
From NCI Nanotechnology Alliance . Clin. Cancer
Res. 
2012 , 18 , 3229 –3241 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2938 .22669131 
Peer D. ; Karp J. M. ; Hong S. ; Farokhzad O. C. ; Margalit R. ; Langer R. 
Nanocarriers As an Emerging Platform
for Cancer Therapy . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2007 , 2 , 751 –760 10.1038/nnano.2007.387 .18654426 
Tandon P. ; Farahani K. 
NCI Image-Guided Drug
Delivery Summit . Cancer Res. 
2011 , 71 , 314 –317 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2629 .21224356 
Binzel D. ; Shu Y. ; Li H. ; Sun M. ; Zhang Q. ; Shu D. ; Guo B. ; Guo P. 
Specific Delivery
of MiRNA for High Efficient Inhibition of Prostate Cancer by RNA Nanotechnology . Mol. Ther. 
2016 , 24 , 1267 –1277 10.1038/mt.2016.85 .27125502 
Zhou J. ; Shu Y. ; Guo P. ; Smith D. ; Rossi J. 
Dual Functional RNA
Nanoparticles Containing Phi29 Motor PRNA and
Anti-Gp120 Aptamer for Cell-Type Specific Delivery and HIV-1 Inhibition . Methods 
2011 , 54 , 284 –294 10.1016/j.ymeth.2010.12.039 .21256218 
Ma X. ; Wang D. ; Wu Y. ; Ho R. ; Jia L. ; Guo P. ; Hu L. ; Xing G. ; Zeng Y. ; Liang X. J. 
AIDS Treatment
With Novel Anti-HIV Compounds Improved by Nanotechnology . AAPS J. 
2010 , 12 , 272 –278 10.1208/s12248-010-9187-z .20373061 
Feng L. ; Li S. K. ; Liu H. ; Liu C. Y. ; LaSance K. ; Haque F. ; Shu D. ; Guo P. 
Ocular Delivery
of PRNA Nanoparticles: Distribution and Clearance After Subconjunctival
Injection . Pharm. Res. 
2014 , 31 , 1046 –1058 10.1007/s11095-013-1226-x .24297069 
Sundaram P. ; Kurniawan H. ; Byrne M. E. ; Wower J. 
Therapeutic
RNA Aptamers in Clinical Trials . Eur. J. Pharm.
Sci. 
2013 , 48 , 259 –271 10.1016/j.ejps.2012.10.014 .23142634 
Guo P. ; Haque F. ; Hallahan B. ; Reif R. ; Li H. 
Uniqueness,
Advantages, Challenges, Solutions, and Perspectives in Therapeutics
Applying RNA Nanotechnology . Nucleic Acid Ther. 
2012 , 22 , 226 –245 10.1201/b15152-4 .22913595 
Ellington A. D. ; Szostak J. W. 
In Vitro Selection
of RNA Molecules That Bind Specific Ligands . Nature 
1990 , 346 , 818 –822 10.1038/346818a0 .1697402 
Tuerk C. ; Gold L. 
Systematic Evolution
of Ligands by
Exponential Enrichment: RNA Ligands to Bacteriophage T4 DNA Polymerase . Science 
1990 , 249 , 505 –510 10.1126/science.2200121 .2200121 
Liu Y. ; Kuan C. T. ; Mi J. ; Zhang X. ; Clary B. M. ; Bigner D. D. ; Sullenger B. A. 
Aptamers Selected Against the Unglycosylated
EGFRvIII Ectodomain and Delivered Intracellularly Reduce Membrane-Bound
EGFRvIII and Induce Apoptosis . Biol. Chem. 
2009 , 390 , 137 –144 10.1515/BC.2009.022 .19040357 
Esposito C. L. ; Passaro D. ; Longobardo I. ; Condorelli G. ; Marotta P. ; Affuso A. ; de Franciscis V. ; Cerchia L. 
A Neutralizing RNA Aptamer Against EGFR Causes Selective
Apoptotic Cell Death . PLoS One 
2011 , 6 , e24071 10.1371/journal.pone.0024071 .21915281 
Thiel K. W. ; Hernandez L. I. ; Dassie J. P. ; Thiel W. H. ; Liu X. ; Stockdale K. R. ; Rothman A. M. ; Hernandez F. J. ; McNamara J. O. ; Giangrande P. H. 
Delivery
of Chemo-Sensitizing SiRNAs
to HER2+-Breast Cancer Cells Using RNA Aptamers . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2012 , 40 , 6319 –6337 10.1093/nar/gks294 .22467215 
Chen C. H. ; Chernis G. A. ; Hoang V. Q. ; Landgraf R. 
Inhibition
of Heregulin Signaling by an Aptamer That Preferentially Binds to
the Oligomeric Form of Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor-3 . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2003 , 100 , 9226 –9231 10.1073/pnas.1332660100 .12874383 
Rockey W. M. ; Hernandez F. J. ; Huang S. Y. ; Cao S. ; Howell C. A. ; Thomas G. S. ; Liu X. Y. ; Lapteva N. ; Spencer D. M. ; McNamara J. O. ; Zou X. ; Chen S. J. ; Giangrande P. H. 
Rational Truncation of an RNA Aptamer
to Prostate-Specific
Membrane Antigen Using Computational Structural Modeling . Nucleic Acid Ther. 
2011 , 21 , 299 –314 10.1089/nat.2011.0313 .22004414 
Mann A. P. ; Somasunderam A. ; Nieves-Alicea R. ; Li X. ; Hu A. ; Sood A. K. ; Ferrari M. ; Gorenstein D. G. ; Tanaka T. 
Identification of Thioaptamer Ligand Against E-Selectin:
Potential Application for Inflamed Vasculature Targeting . PLoS One 
2010 , 5 , e13050 10.1371/journal.pone.0013050 .20927342 
Shigdar S. ; Lin J. ; Yu Y. ; Pastuovic M. ; Wei M. ; Duan W. 
RNA Aptamer
Against a Cancer Stem Cell Marker Epithelial
Cell Adhesion Molecule . Cancer Sci. 
2011 , 102 , 991 –998 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.01897.x .21281402 
Mayer G. ; Ahmed M. S. ; Dolf A. ; Endl E. ; Knolle P. A. ; Famulok M. 
Fluorescence-Activated
Cell Sorting
for Aptamer SELEX With Cell Mixtures . Nat. Protoc. 
2010 , 5 , 1993 –2004 10.1038/nprot.2010.163 .21127492 
Davis K. A. ; Lin Y. ; Abrams B. ; Jayasena S. D. 
Staining
of Cell Surface Human CD4 With 2’-F-Pyrimidine-Containing RNA
Aptamers for Flow Cytometry . Nucleic Acids Res. 
1998 , 26 , 3915 –3924 10.1093/nar/26.17.3915 .9705498 
Low P. S. ; Kularatne S. A. 
Folate-Targeted
Therapeutic and Imaging
Agents for Cancer . Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 
2009 , 13 , 256 –262 10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.03.022 .19419901 
Schroeder A. ; Heller D. A. ; Winslow M. M. ; Dahlman J. E. ; Pratt G. W. ; Langer R. ; Jacks T. ; Anderson D. G. 
Treating
Metastatic Cancer With Nanotechnology . Nat.
Rev. Cancer 
2012 , 12 , 39 –50 10.1038/nrc3180 .
Kang K. N. ; Lee Y. S. 
RNA Aptamers: a
Review of Recent
Trends and Applications . Adv. Biochem. Eng./Biotechnol. 
2012 , 131 , 153 –169 10.1007/10_2012_136 .
Zhou J. ; Bobbin M. L. ; Burnett J. C. ; Rossi J. J. 
Current
Progress of RNA Aptamer-Based Therapeutics . Front. Genet. 
2012 , 3 , 234 10.3389/fgene.2012.00234 .23130020 
Mulhbacher J. ; St-Pierre P. ; Lafontaine D. A. 
Therapeutic
Applications of Ribozymes and Riboswitches . Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 
2010 , 10 , 551 –556 10.1016/j.coph.2010.07.002 .20685165 
Fanning G. ; Amado R. ; Symonds G. 
Gene Therapy for HIV/AIDS:
the Potential for a New Therapeutic Regimen . J. Gene Med. 
2003 , 5 , 645 –653 10.1002/jgm.436 .12898634 
Serganov A. 
The Long and the Short
of Riboswitches . Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
2009 , 19 , 251 –259 10.1016/j.sbi.2009.02.002 .19303767 
Blount K. F. ; Breaker R. R. 
Riboswitches As
Antibacterial Drug
Targets . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2006 , 24 , 1558 –1564 10.1038/nbt1268 .17160062 
Suess B. ; Weigand J. E. 
Engineered Riboswitches
- Overview,
Problems and Trends . RNA Biol. 
2008 , 5 , 24 –29 10.4161/rna.5.1.5955 .18388492 
Berens C. ; Groher F. ; Suess B. 
RNA Aptamers
As Genetic
Control Devices: the Potential of Riboswitches As Synthetic Elements
for Regulating Gene Expression . Biotechnol.
J. 
2015 , 10 , 246 –257 10.1002/biot.201300498 .25676052 
Afonin K. A. ; Bindewald E. ; Kireeva M. ; Shapiro B. A. 
Computational
and Experimental Studies of Reassociating RNA/DNA Hybrids Containing
Split Functionalities . Methods Enzymol. 
2015 , 553 , 313 –334 10.1016/bs.mie.2014.10.058 .25726471 
Afonin K. A. ; Viard M. ; Kagiampakis I. ; Case C. L. ; Dobrovolskaia M. A. ; Hofmann J. ; Vrzak A. ; Kireeva M. ; Kasprzak W. K. ; KewalRamani V. N. ; et al. Triggering of RNA Interference With RNA–RNA, RNA–DNA,
and DNA–RNA Nanoparticles . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 251 –259 10.1021/nn504508s .25521794 
Afonin K. A. ; Viard M. ; Martins A. N. ; Lockett S. J. ; Maciag A. E. ; Freed E. O. ; Heldman E. ; Jaeger L. ; Blumenthal R. ; Shapiro B. A. 
Activation of Different
Split Functionalities
on Re-Association of RNA-DNA Hybrids . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 8 , 296 –304 10.1038/nnano.2013.44 .23542902 
Bindewald E. ; Afonin K. A. ; Viard M. ; Zakrevsky P. ; Kim T. ; Shapiro B. A. 
Multistrand Structure
Prediction of Nucleic Acid Assemblies
and Design of RNA Switches . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 , 1726 –1735 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b04651 .26926528 
Fire A. ; Xu S. ; Montgomery M. K. ; Kostas S. A. ; Driver S. E. ; Mello C. C. 
Potent and Specific
Genetic Interference by Double-Stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis Elegans . Nature 
1998 , 391 , 806 –811 10.1038/35888 .9486653 
Aagaard L. ; Rossi J. J. 
RNAi Therapeutics: Principles, Prospects
and Challenges . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2007 , 59 , 75 –86 10.1016/j.addr.2007.03.005 .
Ni J. Z. ; Chen E. ; Gu S. G. 
Complex
Coding of
Endogenous SiRNA, Transcriptional Silencing and H3K9Methylation on
Native Targets of Germline Nuclear RNAi in C. Elegans . BMC Genomics 
2014 , 15 , 1157 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1157 .25534009 
Roh Y. H. ; Deng J. Z. ; Dreaden E. C. ; Park J. H. ; Yun D. S. ; Shopsowitz K. E. ; Hammond P. T. 
A Multi-RNAi Microsponge
Platform for Simultaneous Controlled Delivery of Multiple Small Interfering
RNAs . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 3347 –3351 10.1002/anie.201508978 .
Wheeler L. A. ; Vrbanac V. ; Trifonova R. ; Brehm M. A. ; Gilboa-Geffen A. ; Tanno S. ; Greiner D. L. ; Luster A. D. ; Tager A. M. ; Lieberman J. 
Durable Knockdown
and Protection From HIV Transmission in Humanized Mice Treated With
Gel-Formulated CD4 Aptamer-SiRNA Chimeras . Mol.
Ther. 
2013 , 21 , 1378 –1389 10.1038/mt.2013.77 .23629001 
Afonin K. A. ; Viard M. ; Koyfman A. Y. ; Martins A. N. ; Kasprzak W. K. ; Panigaj M. ; Desai R. ; Santhanam A. ; Grabow W. W. ; Jaeger L. ; Heldman E. ; Reiser J. ; Chiu W. ; Freed E. O. ; Shapiro B. A. 
Multifunctional
RNA Nanoparticles . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 5662 –5671 10.1021/nl502385k .25267559 
Ye X. ; Hemida M. ; Zhang H. M. ; Hanson P. ; Ye Q. ; Yang D. 
Current Advances in
Phi29 PRNA Biology and Its Application in Drug
Delivery . Wiley. Interdiscip. Rev. RNA 
2012 , 3 , 469 –481 10.1002/wrna.1111 .22362726 
Ye X. ; Liu Z. ; Hemida M. G. ; Yang D. 
Targeted Delivery of
Mutant Tolerant Anti-Coxsackievirus Artificial MicroRNAs Using Folate
Conjugated Bacteriophage Phi29 PRNA . PLoS One 
2011 , 6 , e21215 10.1371/journal.pone.0021215 .21698212 
Shirota H. ; Klinman D. M. 
Use of CpG Oligonucleotides
for Cancer
Immunotherapy and Their Effect on Immunity in the Tumor Microenvironment . Immunotherapy 
2013 , 5 , 787 –789 10.2217/imt.13.70 .23902544 
Gantier M. P. ; Tong S. ; Behlke M. A. ; Irving A. T. ; Lappas M. ; Nilsson U. W. ; Latz E. ; McMillan N. A. ; Williams B. R. 
Rational
Design of Immunostimulatory SiRNAs . Mol. Ther. 
2010 , 18 , 785 –795 10.1038/mt.2010.4 .20125126 
Khedri M. ; Rafatpanah H. ; Abnous K. ; Ramezani P. ; Ramezani M. 
Cancer Immunotherapy Via Nucleic Acid
Aptamers . Int. Immunopharmacol. 
2015 , 29 , 926 –936 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.10.013 .26603636 
Anderson J. ; Akkina R. 
HIV-1 Resistance Conferred
by SiRNA
Cosuppression of CXCR4 and CCR5 Coreceptors by a Bispecific Lentiviral
Vector . AIDS Res. Ther. 
2005 , 2 , 1 –12 10.1186/1742-6405-2-1 .15813990 
Boltz A. ; Piater B. ; Toleikis L. ; Guenther R. ; Kolmar H. ; Hock B. 
Bi-Specific Aptamers
Mediating Tumor
Cell Lysis . J. Biol. Chem. 
2011 , 286 , 21896 –21905 10.1074/jbc.M111.238261 .21531729 
Pramod P. S. ; Deshpande N. U. ; Jayakannan M. 
Real-Time
Drug Release Analysis of Enzyme and PH Responsive Polysaccharide Nanovesicles . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2015 , 119 , 10511 –10523 10.1021/acs.jpcb.5b05795 .26237375 
Agudelo D. ; Bourassa P. ; Berube G. ; Tajmir-Riahi H. A. 
Intercalation
of Antitumor Drug Doxorubicin and Its Analogue by DNA Duplex: Structural
Features and Biological Implications . Int. J.
Biol. Macromol. 
2014 , 66 , 144 –150 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.02.028 .24560949 
Chen A. K. ; Behlke M. A. ; Tsourkas A. 
Avoiding False-Positive
Signals With Nuclease-Vulnerable Molecular Beacons in Single Living
Cells . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2007 , 35 , e105 10.1093/nar/gkm593 .17702767 
Chen A. K. ; Behlke M. A. ; Tsourkas A. 
Efficient Cytosolic
Delivery of Molecular Beacon Conjugates and Flow Cytometric Analysis
of Target RNA . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2008 , 36 , e69 10.1093/nar/gkn331 .18503086 
Mhlanga M. M. ; Vargas D. Y. ; Fung C. W. ; Kramer F. R. ; Tyagi S. 
TRNA-Linked Molecular Beacons for
Imaging MRNAs in the Cytoplasm
of Living Cells . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2005 , 33 , 1902 –1912 10.1093/nar/gki302 .15809226 
Rhee W. J. ; Santangelo P. J. ; Jo H. ; Bao G. 
Target Accessibility
and Signal Specificity in Live-Cell Detection of BMP-4 MRNA Using
Molecular Beacons . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2008 , 36 , e30 10.1093/nar/gkn039 .18276638 
Kim J. K. ; Choi K. J. ; Lee M. ; Jo M. H. ; Kim S. 
Molecular Imaging of a Cancer-Targeting
Theragnostics Probe Using
a Nucleolin Aptamer- and MicroRNA-221 Molecular Beacon-Conjugated
Nanoparticle . Biomaterials 
2012 , 33 , 207 –217 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.09.023 .21944470 
Peng X. H. ; Cao Z. H. ; Xia J. T. ; Carlson G. W. ; Lewis M. M. ; Wood W. C. ; Yang L. 
Real-Time
Detection
of Gene Expression in Cancer Cells Using Molecular Beacon Imaging:
New Strategies for Cancer Research . Cancer Res. 
2005 , 65 , 1909 –1917 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3196 .15753390 
Bryson J. M. ; Fichter K. M. ; Chu W. J. ; Lee J. H. ; Li J. ; Madsen L. A. ; McLendon P. M. ; Reineke T. M. 
Polymer Beacons
for Luminescence and Magnetic Resonance Imaging of DNA Delivery . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2009 , 106 , 16913 –16918 10.1073/pnas.0904860106 .19805101 
Qiu L. ; Wu C. ; You M. ; Han D. ; Chen T. ; Zhu G. ; Jiang J. ; Yu R. ; Tan W. 
A Targeted, Self-Delivered,
and Photocontrolled Molecular Beacon for MRNA Detection in Living
Cells . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 12952 –12955 10.1021/ja406252w .23931073 
Liu T. W. ; Akens M. K. ; Chen J. ; Wise-Milestone L. ; Wilson B. C. ; Zheng G. 
Imaging of Specific
Activation of
Photodynamic Molecular Beacons in Breast Cancer Vertebral Metastases . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2011 , 22 , 1021 –1030 10.1021/bc200169x .
Mhlanga M. M. ; Tyagi S. 
Using TRNA-Linked Molecular Beacons
to Image Cytoplasmic MRNAs in Live Cells . Nat.
Protoc. 
2006 , 1 , 1392 –1398 10.1038/nprot.2006.242 .17406426 
Amrute-Nayak M. ; Bullock S. L. 
Single-Molecule Assays Reveal That
RNA Localization Signals Regulate Dynein-Dynactin Copy Number on Individual
Transcript Cargoes . Nat. Cell Biol. 
2012 , 14 , 416 –423 10.1038/ncb2446 .22366687 
Tadakuma H. ; Ishihama Y. ; Shibuya T. ; Tani T. ; Funatsu T. 
Imaging of Single MRNA Molecules
Moving Within a Living
Cell Nucleus . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
2006 , 344 , 772 –779 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.03.202 .16631111 
Vargas D. Y. ; Raj A. ; Marras S. A. ; Kramer F. R. ; Tyagi S. 
Mechanism of MRNA Transport in the
Nucleus . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2005 , 102 , 17008 –17013 10.1073/pnas.0505580102 .16284251 
Zheng J. ; Yang R. ; Shi M. ; Wu C. ; Fang X. ; Li Y. ; Li J. ; Tan W. 
Rationally
Designed Molecular Beacons for Bioanalytical and Biomedical Applications . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 3036 –3055 10.1039/C5CS00020C .25777303 
Han S. X. ; Jia X. ; Ma J. L. ; Zhu Q. 
Molecular
Beacons: a Novel Optical Diagnostic Tool . Arch.
Immunol. Ther. Exp. 
2013 , 61 , 139 –148 10.1007/s00005-012-0209-7 .
Kim Y. S. ; Raston N. H. ; Gu M. B. 
Aptamer-Based Nanobiosensors . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2016 , 76 , 2 –19 10.1016/j.bios.2015.06.040 .26139320 
Kraemer S. ; Vaught J. D. ; Bock C. ; Gold L. ; Katilius E. ; Keeney T. R. ; Kim N. ; Saccomano N. A. ; Wilcox S. K. ; Zichi D. ; Sanders G. M. 
From SOMAmer-Based
Biomarker Discovery to Diagnostic and Clinical Applications: a SOMAmer-Based,
Streamlined Multiplex Proteomic Assay . PLoS
One 
2011 , 6 , e26332 10.1371/journal.pone.0026332 .22022604 
Khodakov D. ; Wang C. ; Zhang D. Y. 
Diagnostics
Based
on Nucleic Acid Sequence Variant Profiling: PCR, Hybridization, and
NGS Approaches . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2016 , 105 , 3 –19 10.1016/j.addr.2016.04.005 .
Schulte C. ; Zeller T. 
MicroRNA-Based Diagnostics
and Therapy
in Cardiovascular Disease-Summing Up the Facts . Cardiovasc. Diagn. Ther. 
2015 , 5 , 17 –36 10.3978/j.issn.2223-3652.2014.12.03 .25774345 
Chan K. ; Ng T. B. 
In-Vitro Nanodiagnostic
Platform Through Nanoparticles and DNA-RNA Nanotechnology . Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
2015 , 99 , 3359 –3374 10.1007/s00253-015-6506-4 .25761622 
Okamoto A. ; Tanaka K. ; Saito I. 
DNA Logic
Gates . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 9458 –9463 10.1021/ja047628k .15281839 
Adleman L. M. 
Molecular Computation of Solutions
to Combinatorial
Problems . Science 
1994 , 266 , 1021 –1024 10.1126/science.7973651 .7973651 
Lee T. ; Yagati A. K. ; Pi F. ; Sharma A. ; Choi J.-W. ; Guo P. 
Construction of RNA-Quantum
Dot Chimera for Nanoscale Resistive Biomemory
Application . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 6675 –6682 10.1021/acsnano.5b03269 .26135474 
Zalatan J. G. ; Lee M. E. ; Almeida R. ; Gilbert L. A. ; Whitehead E. H. ; La Russa M. ; Tsai J. C. ; Weissman J. S. ; Dueber J. E. ; Qi L. S. ; Lim W. A. 
Engineering
Complex
Synthetic Transcriptional Programs With CRISPR RNA Scaffolds . Cell 
2015 , 160 , 339 –350 10.1016/j.cell.2014.11.052 .25533786 
Yin H. ; Song C. Q. ; Dorkin J. R. ; Zhu L. J. ; Li Y. ; Wu Q. ; Park A. ; Yang J. ; Suresh S. ; Bizhanova A. ; Gupta A. ; Bolukbasi M. F. ; Walsh S. ; Bogorad R. L. ; Gao G. ; Weng Z. ; Dong Y. ; Koteliansky V. ; Wolfe S. A. ; Langer R. ; et al. Therapeutic Genome Editing
by Combined Viral and Non-Viral Delivery of CRISPR System Components in Vivo . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2016 , 34 , 328 –333 10.1038/nbt.3471 .26829318 
Jiang W. ; Marraffini L. A. 
CRISPR-Cas:
New Tools for Genetic
Manipulations From Bacterial Immunity Systems . Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 
2015 , 69 , 209 –228 10.1146/annurev-micro-091014-104441 .26209264 
Ramanan V. ; Shlomai A. ; Cox D. B. ; Schwartz R. E. ; Michailidis E. ; Bhatta A. ; Scott D. A. ; Zhang F. ; Rice C. M. ; Bhatia S. N. 
CRISPR/Cas9 Cleavage
of Viral DNA
Efficiently Suppresses Hepatitis B Virus . Sci.
Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 10833 10.1038/srep10833 .26035283 
Kennedy E. M. ; Bassit L. C. ; Mueller H. ; Kornepati A. V. ; Bogerd H. P. ; Nie T. ; Chatterjee P. ; Javanbakht H. ; Schinazi R. F. ; Cullen B. R. 
Suppression of Hepatitis
B Virus DNA Accumulation in Chronically Infected Cells Using a Bacterial
CRISPR/Cas RNA-Guided DNA Endonuclease . Virology 
2015 , 476 , 196 –205 10.1016/j.virol.2014.12.001 .25553515 
Hendel A. ; Bak R. O. ; Clark J. T. ; Kennedy A. B. ; Ryan D. E. ; Roy S. ; Steinfeld I. ; Lunstad B. D. ; Kaiser R. J. ; Wilkens A. B. ; Bacchetta R. ; Tsalenko A. ; Dellinger D. ; Bruhn L. ; Porteus M. H. 
Chemically
Modified Guide RNAs Enhance CRISPR-Cas Genome Editing in Human Primary
Cells . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2015 , 33 , 985 –989 10.1038/nbt.3290 .26121415 
Moore C. B. ; Guthrie E. H. ; Huang M. T. ; Taxman D. J. 
Short Hairpin
RNA (ShRNA): Design, Delivery, and Assessment of Gene Knockdown . Methods Mol. Biol. 
2010 , 629 , 141 –158 10.1007/978-1-60761-657-3_10 .20387148 
Kwon Y. J. 
Before and After Endosomal Escape: Roles of Stimuli-Converting
SiRNA/Polymer Interactions in Determining Gene Silencing Efficiency . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2012 , 45 , 1077 –1088 10.1021/ar200241v .22103667 
Lavergne T. ; Bertrand J. R. ; Vasseur J. J. ; Debart F. 
A Base-Labile
Group for 2’-OH Protection of Ribonucleosides: a Major Challenge
for RNA Synthesis . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2008 , 14 , 9135 –9138 10.1002/chem.200801392 .18767078 
Beaucage S. L. ; Reese C. B.  Recent Advances
in the Chemical Synthesis of RNA . Current
Protocols in Nucleic Acid Chemistry ; John
Wiley & Sons : Hoboken, NJ , 2009 ; Chapter 2: Unit 2.16 1–31, Unit 31.2.16.110.1002/0471142700.nc0216s38 .
Jasinski D. ; Schwartz C. ; Haque F. ; Guo P. 
Large Scale
Purification of RNA Nanoparticles by Preparative Ultracentrifugation . Methods Mol. Biol. 
2015 , 1297 , 67 –82 10.1007/978-1-4939-2562-9_5 .25895996 
Flinders J. ; Defina S. C. ; Brackett D. M. ; Baugh C. ; Wilson C. ; Dieckmann T. 
Recognition of Planar and Nonplanar
Ligands in the Malachite Green-RNA Aptamer Complex . ChemBioChem 
2004 , 5 , 62 –72 10.1002/cbic.200300701 .14695514 
Zuker M. 
Mfold Web Server for Nucleic Acid Folding and Hybridization Prediction . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2003 , 31 , 3406 –3415 10.1093/nar/gkg595 .12824337 
Andronescu M. ; Fejes A. P. ; Hutter F. ; Hoos H. H. ; Condon A. 
A New Algorithm
for RNA Secondary Structure Design . J. Mol.
Biol. 
2004 , 336 , 607 –624 10.1016/j.jmb.2003.12.041 .15095976 
Ding Y. ; Chan C. Y. ; Lawrence C. E. 
Sfold Web Server
for Statistical Folding and Rational Design of Nucleic Acids . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2004 , 32 , W135 –W141 10.1093/nar/gkh449 .15215366 
Bindewald E. ; Afonin K. ; Jaeger L. ; Shapiro B. A. 
Multistrand
RNA Secondary Structure Prediction and Nanostructure Design Including
Pseudoknots . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 9542 –9551 10.1021/nn202666w .22067111

