
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.6b06040Nano FocusDiverse
Applications of Nanomedicine Pelaz Beatriz †Alexiou Christoph ‡Alvarez-Puebla Ramon A. §∥Alves Frauke #¶□Andrews Anne M. ■○ΦAshraf Sumaira †Balogh Lajos P. ●Ballerini Laura △Bestetti Alessandra ▲Brendel Cornelia ▽Bosi Susanna ▼Carril Monica ⬡⬢Chan Warren C. W. $Chen Chunying ∞Chen Xiaodong ⊗Chen Xiaoyuan ∫Cheng Zhen ⧧Cui Daxiang ℏDu Jianzhong ∀Dullin Christian ¶Escudero Alberto †ƛFeliu Neus ∂Gao Mingyuan ∮George Michael ∏Gogotsi Yury ◑Grünweller Arnold ⊕Gu Zhongwei &Halas Naomi J. ¤Hampp Norbert ⌽Hartmann Roland K. ⊕Hersam Mark C. ⌀Hunziker Patrick ⟠◊Jian Ji ⧫Jiang Xingyu ∞Jungebluth Philipp ◨Kadhiresan Pranav $Kataoka Kazunori ⊡Khademhosseini Ali ††Kopeček Jindřich ‡‡Kotov Nicholas A. §§Krug Harald F. ⊥⊥Lee Dong Soo ¶¶Lehr Claus-Michael □□■■Leong Kam W. ○○Liang Xing-Jie ∞●●Ling Lim Mei ∂Liz-Marzán Luis M. ⬡⬢△△Ma Xiaowei ●●Macchiarini Paolo ▲▲Meng Huan ■▼▼Möhwald Helmuth ▽▽Mulvaney Paul ▲Nel Andre E. ■▼▼Nie Shuming ⬡⬡Nordlander Peter ¤Okano Teruo ⬢⬢Oliveira Jose $$Park Tai Hyun ∞∞⊗⊗Penner Reginald M. ∫∫Prato Maurizio ▼⬡⬢Puntes Victor ∥⧧⧧ΦΦRotello Vincent M. ℏℏSamarakoon Amila $Schaak Raymond E. ∀∀Shen Youqing ƛƛSjöqvist Sebastian ∂Skirtach Andre G. ▽▽∂∂Soliman Mahmoud G. †Stevens Molly M. ∮∮Sung Hsing-Wen ⊕⊕Tang Ben Zhong ∏∏Tietze Rainer ‡Udugama Buddhisha N. $VanEpps J. Scott §§Weil Tanja &&◑◑Weiss Paul S. ■○¤¤Willner Itamar ⌽⌽Wu Yuzhou ◑◑⌀⌀Yang Lily $$Yue Zhao †Zhang Qian †Zhang Qiang ⟠⟠Zhang Xian-En ◊◊Zhao Yuliang ∞Zhou Xin ⧫⧫Parak Wolfgang J. *†⬡†Fachbereich Physik, ▽Fachbereich Medizin, ⊕Fachbereich Pharmazie, and ⌽Department of Chemistry, Philipps Universität Marburg, 35037 Marburg, Germany‡ ENT-Department, Section of Experimental Oncology & Nanomedicine
(SEON), Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung-Professorship for Nanomedicine, University Hospital Erlangen, 91054 Erlangen, Germany§ Department of Physical Chemistry, Universitat Rovira I Virgili, 43007 Tarragona, Spain∥ ICREA, Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain#Department of Haematology and Medical Oncology, ¶Department of Diagnostic
and Interventional Radiology, University
Medical Center Göttingen, 37075 Göttingen Germany□ Department of Molecular Biology of Neuronal Signals, Max-Planck-Institute for Experimental Medicine, 37075 Göttingen, Germany■California NanoSystems Institute, ○Department of Chemistry
and Biochemistry and ΦDepartment of Psychiatry and Semel Institute
for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, ▼▼Division of NanoMedicine and Center
for the Environmental Impact of Nanotechnology, and ¤¤Department of Materials Science
and Engineering, University of California,
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095, United States● AA Nanomedicine & Nanotechnology Consultants, North Andover, Massachusetts 01845, United States△ International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA/ISAS), 34136 Trieste, Italy▲ School of Chemistry & Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia▼ Department of Chemical
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University
of Trieste, 34127 Trieste, Italy⬡ CIC biomaGUNE, Paseo de Miramón 182, 20014, Donostia - San Sebastián, Spain⬢ Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation
for Science, 48013 Bilbao, Spain$ Institute of Biomaterials
and Biomedical Engineering, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G9, Canada∞ CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience and CAS Key
Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of Nanomaterials and Nanosafety, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology of
China, Beijing 100190, China⊗ School of Materials
Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore 639798∫ Laboratory of Molecular Imaging and Nanomedicine,
National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, United States⧧ Molecular
Imaging Program at Stanford and Bio-X Program, Canary Center at Stanford
for Cancer Early Detection, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United Statesℏ Institute of Nano Biomedicine and Engineering, Department of Instrument
Science and Engineering, School of Electronic Information and Electronical
Engineering, National Center for Translational Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 200240 Shanghai, China∀ Department of Polymeric Materials, School of Materials
Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, Chinaƛ Instituto
de Ciencia de Materiales de Sevilla. CSIC, Universidad de Sevilla, 41092 Seville, Spain∂ Department of Clinical Science, Intervention, and Technology (CLINTEC), Karolinska Institutet, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden∮ Institute of Chemistry, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 100190 Beijing, China∏ Nanion, 80636 München, Germany& College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, 610000 Chengdu, China◑ Department of Materials Science and Engineering and A.J. Drexel Nanomaterials
Institute, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States¤ Departments of Physics and Astronomy, Rice
University, Houston, Texas 77005, United
States⌀ Departments of Materials Science and Engineering, Chemistry,
and Medicine, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, United States⟠ University Hospital, 4056 Basel, Switzerland◊ CLINAM,
European Foundation for Clinical Nanomedicine, 4058 Basel, Switzerland⧫Department of Polymer Science and Engineering and ƛƛCenter for
Bionanoengineering and Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, 310027 Hangzhou, China◨ Thoraxklinik Heidelberg, Universitätsklinikum
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany⊡ The University
of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8654, Japan†† Havard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States‡‡ Biomedical Polymers Laboratory, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, United States§§ Emergency Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48019, United States⊥⊥ EMPA, Federal Institute for Materials
Science and Technology, CH-9014 St. Gallen, Switzerland¶¶Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical
Sciences and ∞∞School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea□□ Department of Pharmacy, Saarland University, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany■■ HIPS - Helmhotz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Helmholtz-Center for Infection Research, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany○○ Department of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, New York City, New York 10027, United States●● Laboratory of Controllable Nanopharmaceuticals, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), 100190 Beijing, China△△ Biomedical Research Networking Center in Bioengineering Biomaterials and Nanomedicine, Ciber-BBN, 20014 Donostia - San Sebastián, Spain▲▲ Laboratory of Bioengineering Regenerative Medicine (BioReM), Kazan Federal University, 420008 Kazan, Russia▽▽ Department of Interfaces, Max-Planck
Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, 14476 Potsdam, Germany⬡⬡ Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, United States⬢⬢ Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan$$ SMALL, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, German⊗⊗ Advanced Institutes of Convergence Technology, Suwon, South Korea∫∫ Department of Chemistry, University of
California, Irvine, California 92697, United States⧧⧧ Institut Català de Nanotecnologia, UAB, 08193 Barcelona, SpainΦΦ Vall d’Hebron University Hospital
Institute of Research, 08035 Barcelona, Spainℏℏ Department
of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003, United States∀∀ Department of Chemistry, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, United States∂∂ Department of Molecular Biotechnology, University of Ghent, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium∮∮ Department of Materials,
Department of Bioengineering, Institute for Biomedical Engineering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom∏∏ Hong Kong Branch of Chinese National Engineering Research Center for Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction, Hong Kong, China⊕⊕ Department of Chemical Engineering and Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu City, Taiwan,
ROC 300&& Institut für
Organische Chemie, Universität Ulm, 89081 Ulm, Germany◑◑ Max-Planck-Institute for Polymer Research, 55128 Mainz, Germany⌽⌽ Institute of Chemistry, The Center for
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel⌀⌀ School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 430074 Wuhan, China⟠⟠ School of Pharmaceutical Science, Peking University, 100191 Beijing, China◊◊ National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules,
CAS Center for Excellence in Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 15 Datun Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100101, China⧫⧫ Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance in Biological Systems, State Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance and Atomic and Molecular Physics, National Center for Magnetic Resonance in Wuhan, Wuhan Institute of Physics and Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China* E-mail: wolfgang.parak@physik.uni-marburg.de.14 03 2017 28 03 2017 11 3 2313 2381 07 09 2016 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
design and use of materials in the nanoscale size range for addressing
medical and health-related issues continues to receive increasing
interest. Research in nanomedicine spans a multitude of areas, including
drug delivery, vaccine development, antibacterial, diagnosis and imaging tools, wearable
devices, implants, high-throughput screening platforms, etc. using biological, nonbiological, biomimetic, or hybrid materials. Many of these
developments are starting to be translated into viable clinical products.
Here, we provide an overview of recent developments in nanomedicine
and highlight the current challenges and upcoming opportunities for
the field and translation to the clinic.

document-id-old-9nn6b06040document-id-new-14nn-2016-06040accc-price
==== Body
Medicine is the science, engineering,
and practice of diagnosing, treating, curing, monitoring, predicting,
and preventing diseases. Most people associate nanomedicine with pharmaceutical
formulations, where soft or hard particles of nanometer dimensions
are injected into humans for diagnosis and treatment. However, this
field covers a broader range of research and development. Nanomedicine
differs from other types of medicine in that it involves the development
and application of materials and technologies with nanometer length
scales to function in all the ways described below.1−5

Properties of nanoscale objects are transitional between molecular
and bulk regimes. Nanoscale properties exist for all materials, regardless
of whether they are found in nature or are synthetic. However, only
synthetic objects are typically considered part of “nanoscience
and engineering”, whereas the study of biological nanoscale
structures is often thought as part of characterization without
considering biological properties. Because of the transitional nature
of “nanoscale” materials, it is difficult to limit a
material’s reach and define its borders by strict definitions
and solid numbers (e.g., larger
than atoms or small molecules, but smaller than 100 nm). More importantly,
nanoscale particles can demonstrate new properties that can be exploited
for the design of new therapeutic effects and diagnostics.

Nanomedicine is an
interdisciplinary field, where nanoscience, nanoengineering, and nanotechnology
interact with the life sciences. Given the broad scope of nanomedicine,
we expect it eventually to involve all aspects of
medicine. Moreover, nanomedicine, like medicine, can enter the clinics
and can be part of conventional clinical practice assuming all aspects
of translation are satisfied, including safety, regulatory, and ethical
requirements. It is expected that nanomedicine will lead to the development
of better devices, drugs, and other applications for early diagnoses
or treatment of a wide range of diseases with high specificity, efficacy,
and personalization, with the objective being to enhance patients’
quality of life. In this Nano Focus, we do not attempt to define nanomedicine
but rather to provide an overview of recent achievements, materials,
and technologies belonging to nanomedicine.

Nanoparticles (NPs)
are key components of nanomedicine, and currently, a large variety
of nanoparticle types exist. However, no standardized nomenclature
exists in the literature; therefore, terms such as engineered nanomaterials,
nonbiological complex drugs (NBCDs), nanomedicals/nanomedicines, etc. are used freely. Many nanomaterials can replicate some
functions of globular biological macromolecules.6 Examples are lipid micelles,7 different polymeric nanostructures,8 protein
constructs,9 ribonucleic acid (RNA) NPs
(RNPs),10 carbon dots (C-dots),11 nanodiamonds (NDs),12 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),13 graphene,14 as well as inorganic materials such as mesoporous
silica NPs (MSNP), superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs (SPIONs),15 quantum dots (QDs),16 plasmonic NPs,17 gold nanoclusters (GNCS),18 upconverting NPs (UCNPs),19etc. Many of these nanoscale materials
have unique size- and shape-dependent optical, electronic, and magnetic
properties, and these properties are dependent upon
methods to synthesize, to purify, and to characterize them.20−23 Many researchers note that small changes in size and shape can significantly
affect the properties of the NPs. Precision syntheses are therefore
necessary to produce samples with tightly focused distributions in
order to achieve the targeted functions specifically and to correlate
observed functions with specific NP characteristics. Detailed characterization
of NP samples that are used in a medical application is also critical
because one must know and understand what is being injected into the
body. A sample of NPs may be heterogeneous with distinct subpopulations
after synthesis.24,25 Microscopic imaging is conventionally
used, but this technique may be insufficient because it is limited
to a small number of NPs that may or may not be representative of
the whole sample. Thus, microscopic imaging may not provide sufficient
information about surface functionalization, composition, and other
property-determining features. Other techniques that are starting
to become part of the characterization scheme of NPs prior to use
in humans are dynamic light scattering, transmission electron microscopy,
gel electrophoresis, and ζ-potential analysis. However, there
are no standardized characterization requirements of NPs26 prior to use in humans, and this must be a focus
for nanomedicine applications. The main reason is that the biodistribution
and interaction of NPs with proteins is strongly size- and surface-dependent,
and thus, in a heterogeneous sample, many NPs will distribute differently
and may exhibit undesired effects or even toxicity. In addition to
characterization, there is also a need to develop new and improved
methods of NP separation and purification to produce optimal samples
for nanomedical applications and for studying NP behavior inside the
body27,28 (which is important to design optimal NP
formulations for medical use).

Despite the need to standardize
characterization methods, NPs are expected to improve the detection
and diagnosis of diseases. First, smart NPs can be designed to provide
contrast at the zone of interest and report information about the
local environment after administration into the body. This information
can aid in imaging the anatomical fine structures of organs and labeling
tissues with certain markers and enables local read-out of the concentrations
of molecules of interest, which helps to analyze diseases directly
inside the human body. Second, NPs are key components of many high-throughput
diagnostics machines that can analyze extracted samples (such as blood,
tissue, etc.) outside of the body for rapidly detecting
biological makers and molecular alterations. The ability to analyze
multiple biomarkers simultaneously may improve diagnostic precision.
Moreover, multifunctional or theranostic NPs that can simultaneously
diagnose, treat, and even monitor therapeutic efficacy are being
engineered.29

Nanoparticles are also
being developed for the treatment of disease; NPs are used as delivery
vehicles for pharmaceutical agents,30 as
bioactive materials, or as important components in implants.31 In the case of delivery, NP-based carrier systems
have a unique ability to cross biological barriers. Thus, NPs can
enter tumors via their localized leaky vasculature
and are retained due to poor lymphatic drainage in the tumor microenvironment.32 This passive targeting is called the enhanced
permeation and retention (EPR) effect.33 There is an ongoing debate in the literature about the effectiveness
of active, i.e., ligand/receptor-mediated
targeting, versus passive targeting, but any carrier
has to be delivered to the designated site before it can bind to cell surface
receptors or be retained by other effects.34

In addition to using nanomedicine to diagnose and to treat
diseases, it is also important to establish NPs’ efficacy and
safety in biological systems. After the NP has functioned as designed
after administration into the body, what happens to the carrier particle
when the drug has been delivered or the tissue imaged? Elimination
of the particles can potentially occur via renal
or hepatobiliary clearance. If they do not get cleared, the long-term
fate of the NPs is not clear. These particles may degrade and get
cleared renally because they are small enough to transport through
the kidney’s filtration slits,35−37 or they may accumulate
in different organs and interact with off-target cells. The in vivo fate of NPs can potentially be a dynamic process,
and thus, there is a need to understand nanobiokinetics (nanopharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics), which may relate to unique and interesting
toxicological responses of NPs.

Nanomedicine is not limited to
colloidal materials and technologies to evaluate them for in vivo applications. Nanomedicine developments go beyond
the “magic particulate bullet” concept.38 Nanomedicine could involve the design of new scaffolds
and surfaces for engineering sensors or implantable systems and electronics
to aid in the regeneration of tissues (i.e., regenerative medicine). Many of these concepts are still
at the early stages of development, but some have already reached
clinical practice.

This Nano Focus article is organized into
four subsections that are focused on specific applications of materials
or systems with nanoscale properties: (a) in vivo diagnostics, (b) in vitro diagnostics, (c) in vivo therapeutics, and (d) implantable nanomaterials.

In Vivo Diagnosis (“Smart Imaging”)
A key focus in nanomedicine involves the use of nanomaterials as
contrast agents for anatomical and functional imaging. Using nanomaterials
as contrast agents enables visualization of structures inside the
human body and helps clinicians to delineate healthy from diseased
tissues and to recommend proper treatment. Nanoparticles can be engineered
with different contrast properties. The most common modalities are
computed tomography (CT); magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); imaging
of radioactivity, such as positron emission tomography (PET) or single
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT); fluorescence imaging;
and photoacoustic imaging. For all these techniques, material development
is crucial because the NPs are contrast agents that enable visualization
of biological tissues. For this application, NPs can be engineered
to localize in specific tissues and potentially produce high contrast.

Computed Tomography
X-ray-based imaging enables high-resolution anatomical and, in
the case of CT also three-dimensional (3D), imaging of mostly skeletal
tissues at unlimited depth in human applications. Computed tomography
imaging is the work-horse in clinical diagnostics due to the simplicity
of the technique, the comparable low demands on infrastructure, the
rapid image generating, and the low costs for a standard examination.

In recent years, around 250 out of every 1000 people in the United
States underwent CT imaging.39 Classical
X-ray imaging harnesses the tissue-specific attenuation of X-ray energy
to generate contrast in the recorded radiographs. Therefore, bones
generate more contrast than soft tissue because of the larger relative
electron density of bone. In order to boost the low contrast of soft
tissue, contrast agents with elements such as iodine and barium characterized
by a high-electron density are typically applied to visualize blood
vessels in gastrointestinal (GI) tract, tumors, and other soft tissues.
In contrast to typical functional imaging techniques such as PET and
SPECT, in CT, the photons/X-rays are produced outside the body and
only modulated by the tissues through which they travel. Thus, the
large photon flux enables a high signal-to-noise ratio, leading CT
to outperform other 3D imaging techniques in terms of spatial resolution.
However, the weak interaction between tissue and the incident X-ray
beam results in comparably limited sensitivity of CT, which might
explain why specifically targeting contrast strategies are virtually
non-existent.

This poor sensitivity has encouraged nanomedicine
researchers to develop nanoparticles as contrast agents for X-ray
imaging. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are central to this development.
Due to its high atomic number and electron density (79 and 19.32 g/cm3, respectively, versus the typical X-ray contrast agent, iodine, with values
of 53 and 4.9 g/cm3, respectively), AuNPs have higher attenuation
coefficients and can be used as contrast agents for X-ray imaging,
CT, and micro-CT.40 The AuNPs are typically
coated with targeting molecules such as folic acid so that they can
highlight distinct tissue structures. Gold nanoclusters (NCs), which
are smaller structures than AuNPs, are also being developed as CT
contrast agents.18,40 Folic-acid-conjugated AuNCs with
silica shells were demonstrated to exhibit good biocompatibility and
could actively target the folic acid receptor (+) in vitro of MGC-803 cells and in vivo gastric cancer tissues
with 5 mm diameter in nude mice models. The researchers showed that
the use of NCs exhibited excellent contrast for CT imaging. In addition
to CT imaging, these NCs can also be used for molecular imaging since
red fluorescence emission was observed.41,42 These NCs
also penetrated the tumor and were retained, but their small size
enabled them to be cleared renally.41,42 Thus, these
NPs are promising candidates for future clinical use.

Besides
gold, NPs composed of other materials with a high atomic number are
also suited for CT. One example is NaGdF4-based UCNPs.
Besides providing contrast for CT, these NPs can be imaged optically
(see Figure 1). In
addition to their ability to provide contrast for CT, potential toxicity
of NPs plays an important role toward translation to clinics (vide infra).

Figure 1 (I) In vitro CT images of (a) lanthanide-doped
NaGdF4 upconversion “nanoclusters” (<5
nm) suspended in aqueous solution. (b) CT attenuation plot (given
in Hounsfield units, HU) of NaGdF4 NPs in dependence of
the concentration of each sample from 0.2 to 10 mg/mL to further investigate
the CT contrast effect. (II) Images of a control group before injection
of NPs: (c) photograph of a nude mouse loaded with gastric cancer
MGC-803 cells; (d) X-ray image, and (e–g) CT images of nude
mice from the control group. (III) (h–k) CT images and (IV)
(l–n) MRI images of mice after intravenous injection with NaGdF4 UCNPs, making use of passive targeting (EPR effect). The
pulse sequence: electromagnetic conversion (EC) = 1/141.7 kHz; repetition
time (TR time) = 2000; echo time (TE time) = 65.6/Ef (echo frequency).
Parameters of transverse plane: the pulse sequence, EC = 1/141.7 kHz;
TR time = 2000; TE time = 43.8/Ef. It took about 6 h to acquire one
image. The relaxivity value of NaGdF4 UCNPs at 1.5 T is
about 4.5 mMs–1. Adapted with permission from ref (43). Copyright 2015 Royal
Society of Chemistry.

In parallel to the development of new CT contrast agents,
there has also been progress in instrumentation relating to the preparation
and detection of the agents. Novel X-ray sources such as synchrotrons
provide tremendously more flux and a higher degree of coherence and
therefore enable the exploitation of the wave nature of X-rays for
imaging purposes. These novel X-ray sources have led to new applications
like phase contrast CT, diffraction enhanced imaging, and holotomography,
to name a few.44−46 For example, phase contrast CT provides 10–200
times more contrast in soft tissue applications than classical absorption-based
CT.47,48 This gain in contrast directly translates
into an increase in sensitivity. By coupling this increased sensitivity
with the use of target-specific contrast agents, submicrometer-scale
3D spatial resolution can be achieved. This technique can be applied
to gather structural information indicative of asthma within the lung
of a mouse.49 It can also be applied in
the visualization of macrophages loaded with barium sulfate after
intracheal instillation.49 In a study by
Dullin et al., the researchers achieved
9 μm resolution, which enabled the visualization of macrophage
function within the local 3D environment.46 The spatial resolution could be further improved to 400 nm by using
holotomography (see Figure 2).50

Figure 2 Three-dimensional localization
of labeled macrophages in a 500 μm thick lung section of a healthy
mouse, scanned by holotomography. Three orthogonally oriented slices
are shown, together with automatically labeled barium clusters (green),
representing macrophages loaded with barium sulfate and alveolar walls
in a small region of interest (ROI, yellow). A part of a blood vessel
has been marked semi automatically (purple). Adapted with permission
from ref (50). Copyright
2015 Nature Publishing Group.

The NP-based CT imaging technologies can potentially change
the way we perform CT-based clinical diagnosis.51 Currently, soft tissue imaging via CT
requires a large dose of iodine- or barium-containing contrast agents
to overcome poor sensitivity. However, the high dose may not be well
tolerated by patients. Furthermore, it is difficult to design traditional contrast agents to target specifically and to bind to
cellular biomarkers or accumulate in tissues of interest such as sites
of inflammation or primary tumors and metastasis. Combining targeted
AuNPs with the recent development of energy-resolved detectors,52 the discrimination of a multitude of different
materials in a single CT scan should be possible in the near future.
Therefore, the challenge facing the field is to design and to engineer
small NP probes of high-atomic-number materials like iodine, gold,
or barium, conjugated to targeting moieties that specifically label
certain cell types in vivo, similar to probes used
in optical imaging. Moreover, since novel CT techniques do not focus
on X-ray attenuation but on phase shift or scattering as sources of
contrast, other types of NPs like hollow spheres53 or NPs with X-ray scattering properties will become increasingly
important. Despite the negative effects of the applied X-ray dose,
CT is the most applied technique in clinical diagnosis (e.g., ∼50% of imaging-based diagnostics
performed in Germany in 2013 were by CT).54 Improved detectors and the implementation of novel algorithms, especially
newly developed reconstruction techniques, have already dramatically
lowered X-ray doses.55 Techniques like
limited angle reconstruction and zoom tomography will further aid
in this development.50,56

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging is widely used for in vivo applications, due to its safety, spatial resolution, soft tissue
contrast, clinical relevance, and ability to record anatomical and
functional information about soft tissues and organs. Notably, MRI-responsive
contrast agents provide physiological information that complements
routine anatomical images. Since the technology is based on the interaction
of nuclei with surrounding molecules in a magnetic field, MRI has
no need for ionizing radiation and possesses unlimited depth of penetration
and unparalleled soft tissue contrast.57 However, MRI has relatively poor sensitivity in comparison to nuclear
and optical modalities, thus leading to longer acquisition time and
use of large amounts of contrast agents. Although the introduction
of higher magnetic fields (higher than 4.7 T) could increase the signal-to-noise
ratio, thereby permitting higher resolution and faster scanning, the
safety of high static magnetic field strengths on human health is
of great concern.58,59 The development of hyperpolarized
MRI (i.e., polarization of the nuclear
magnetic moments far beyond thermal equilibrium conditions)60 has improved the sensitivity of the desired
nuclei and enables quantitative in vivo imaging and
real-time metabolic profiling using stable isotope precursors.60 Current contrast agents such as paramagnetic
agents or SPIONs play important roles in enhancing contrast in T1 or T2 images,
which provide higher MRI sensitivity and accuracy for imaging living
subjects. These agents accelerate the rate of T1 and T2 relaxation, thereby enhancing
local contrast.61 Paramagnetic agents (e.g., gadolinium-based agents) principally
accelerate longitudinal T1 recovery, generating
positive contrast, while superparamagnetic agents (e.g., iron oxide-based agents such as SPIONs) primarily
increase the rate of dephasing or transverse T2 decay, resulting in negative contrast effects.61 However, both types of agents have been associated
with toxic effects, which needs to be taken into account for their
use on humans and in veterinary medicine (vide infra).62,63

Conventional T1 contrast agents such as paramagnetic complexes (based on
Gd3+, Mn2+, or Fe3+) are small molecules
that leave the vascular system within minutes and are renally cleared.
The short circulation time makes it difficult to acquire a high-resolution
image of desired sites. Biocompatible NP-based T1 contrast agents have been developed because they have a number
of advantages over conventional T1 contrast.64,65 Researchers can tailor the size, shape, and composition; circulation
time; target cells and tissues; and optical and physical properties
to meet the biological requirements for optimizing imaging. For example,
Gd(III)–nanodiamond conjugates enable contrast enhancement
with a much smaller amount of Gd compared to other agents used.66 For example, melanin has been intensively studied
as a target for melanoma imaging and was recently a major focus for
designing a multimodal imaging nanoplatform. Melanin NPs with diameters
of 4.5 nm not only retain their unique optical properties but also
have natural binding capability with various metal ions. After chelation
with Fe3+ ions and subsequent conjugation with cyclic arginine-glycine-aspartic
acid (RGD) molecules, melanin NPs serve as T1 contrast agents for targeted MRI of U87MG glioblastoma.67,68 In another example, a noncytotoxic asymmetrical cancer-targeting
polymer vesicle based on R-poly(l-glutamic acid)-block-poly(ε-caprolactone) [R is folic acid or diethylenetriaminepentacetatic acid (DTPA)],
as shown in Figure 3, was reported as a T1 MRI contrast agent
with enhanced sensitivity, and it also served as a delivery vehicle
for cancer chemotherapy.69 Such asymmetrical
vesicles have a cancer-targeting outer corona coupled with a Gd(III)-chelating
and drug-loading-enhancing inner corona. Liu and colleagues demonstrated
that such vesicles exhibited an extremely high T1 relaxivity (42.39 mM–1 s–1, 8-fold better than that of DTPA-Gd) and anticancer drug loading
efficiency (52.6% for doxorubicin hydrochloride, DOX·HCl).69 Moreover, the DOX-loaded vesicles
exhibited 2-fold better antitumor activity than free DOX.69

Figure 3 Illustration of multifunctional asymmetrical polymer vesicles
for ultrasensitive T1 MRI and effective
cancer targeted drug delivery. Adapted from ref (69). Copyright 2015 American
Chemical Society.

As T2 contrast agents, SPIONs establish a substantial locally
perturbed dipolar field to shorten proton relaxation of the surrounding
tissues significantly. The magnetism of NPs under normal magnetic
field strengths is dependent on the magnetocrystalline anisotropy
and the size of the NPs. In comparison to their spherical counterparts,
for example, iron oxide NPs with an octapod shape exhibit an ultrahigh
transverse relaxivity value, and dramatically increase the sensitivity
of MRI for early stage cancer detection, largely due to their effective
radius and the local field inhomogeneity of the magnetic core.70 Because of the negative contrast effect and
magnetic susceptibility artifacts, it is still a major challenge to
distinguish the region of signals induced by iron oxide NPs from low-level
background magnetic resonance (MR) signals originating from adjacent
tissues such as bone, vasculature, calcification, fat, hemorrhage,
blood clots, etc. As a combination of paramagnetic
and SPIONs, e.g., in core/shell structures,71 dual-mode T1/T2 contrast agents
have been developed for dual T1 and T2 mode MRI because they help validate reconstruction
and visualization of the data in an accurate and reliable way. However,
interference inevitably occurs when both T1 and T2 contrast agents are integrated
into a single nanostructure in close proximity. The magnetic field
induced by the T2 contrast material perturbs
the relaxation process of paramagnetic T1 contrast materials, leading to undesirable quenching of the T1 signal. Core/shell structures can efficiently
reduce their magnetic coupling by introducing a separating layer between
the superparamagnetic core and paramagnetic shell. Such magnetically
decoupled dual-mode T1/T2 contrast agents not only provide superior MR contrast
effects in both modes, but also enable self-confirmation of images
and essentially function as an “AND logic gate” to reduce
susceptibility artifacts from the raw images to enhance accuracy of
the MRI.72,73 In contrast to core/shell structures, dumbbell
hybrid nanostructures combine T1 and T2 contrast agents together in a nanocomposite via a bridge NP, which spatially separates two contrast
agents at a certain distance to reduce their magnetic coupling.74 Unlike core/shell structures where T2 contrast agents are sequestered within a supporting
matrix, dumbbell nanostructures allow both T1 and T2 contrast agents to be
exposed to their immediate environment without compromising their
magnetic properties. Moreover, both surfaces of T1 and T2 contrast agents are
available for subsequent surface coating for targeting molecular imaging.

Besides being “mere” contrast agents for MRI,75,76 activatable or “smart” NPs can respond to a change
in tumor microenvironment to instigate the therapeutic and diagnostic
mechanism.77,78 The most common triggers for
activatable NPs are stimuli such as pH, temperature, redox reactions,79 metabolites, ions, proteases, ultrasound, and light.80 The tumor microenvironment regulates
tumor progression and the spread of cancer in the body. Responsive
agents capable of reporting diagnostically relevant physicochemical
properties of the microenvironment in which the contrast agent distributes
have gained tremendous attention. Various nanocarriers have been tested
in combination with a myriad of imaging contrast agents, payload drugs,
and targeting moieties, leading to the formulation of theranostic
NPs capable of delivering therapy concomitant with diagnosis. In the
case of MRI, different “smart” NP probes have been demonstrated.
The design of pH-responsive probes is of great interest, since it
is an important physiological parameter and pH dysregulation can be
a cancer marker. Gao and colleagues reported a smart pH-activatable 19F-probe for detecting specific and narrow pH transitions
ranging from 5.5 to 7.4 in biological systems.81 They developed micelles composed of fluorinated polymers
with tertiary amines having different pKa values. The protonation of such amines at pH below their pKa results in micelle disassembly and 19F-MRI/nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) signal activation.
They were able to determine the pH through the identification of the
corresponding activated 19F-reporter. In another related
example, hypoxia in the tumor microenvironment results in lactic acid
production and, hence, acidic conditions. Zhou and colleagues fabricated
pH-triggered NPs for 19F-MRI and fluorescence imaging (MRI-FI)
of cancer cells.8219F was attached
to AuNPs by acid-labile hydrazone linkers. Fluorescence imaging revealed
highly selective uptake of these NPs by lung cancer cells. The “trick”
to these NPs involves selective release of 19F-MRI contrast
agent after the NPs have reached the tumor environment. In the acidic
intracellular compartments of cancer cells the 19F detached
from the AuNPs and appreciably enhances the intracellular 19F-MRI signal, as shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4 (A) Synthesis of AuNPs capped with folic acid and 19F contrast agent. Folic acid with a high tumor affinity due
to the overexpression of its receptors on the cancer cells was conjugated
onto the surface of the AuNPs. 19F contrast agent was covalently
conjugated onto the AuNPs via acid-labile hydrazone
linkers. (B) pH-triggered release of the 19F contrast agent
from the AuNPs to the cytosol via the selective removal
of the pH-labile cap in the acidic intracellular compartments of cancer
cells. Adapted with permission from ref (82). Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.

Temperature differences between
tissues is a common feature in pathological conditions, especially
in tumors. Thus, a second class of “smart” NP probes
for MRI uses hypersensitive detection of temperature changes in different
tissues.83 Langereis and colleagues84 reported a combined temperature-sensitive liposomal 1H chemical exchange saturation transfer (CEST)85 and 19F magnetic resonance (MR) contrast
agent as a potential carrier system for MRI-guided drug delivery.
The liposomes contain both a chemical shift agent as well as a highly
fluorinated compound. Upon reaching the melting temperature of the
agents’ lipid membrane, the lipo-CEST contrast enhancement
vanishes, due to the release of the chemical shift agent. Simultaneously,
the 19F-MRI probe is freed from the influence of the paramagnetic
shift agent causing an appearance of a 19F-MRI signal.
The combined CEST and 19F-MR temperature-sensitive liposomal
carrier provides CEST-based contrast enhancement, which can be switched
on and off, to localize the liposomes before release, while the 19F-MR signal can potentially quantify local drug release of
drugs with MRI.

Redox reactions play crucial roles in biological
processes, and abnormal redox reactions are implicated in various
conditions including liver damage and human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV). A third class of “smart” NP probes for MRI uses
redox reactions in the tumor microenvironment for cleavage of atoms
from the NP structure. Kikuchi and co-workers designed redox activatable
NPs to image reducing environments.86 Gd3+ complexes were attached to the surface of 19F
containing NPs by disulfide linkers. Vicinity of the Gd3+ to 19F reduces the transveral relaxation time T2 of the fluorine compounds by the paramagnetic
relaxation enhancement effect, which attenuates the 19F
NMR/MRI signal (see Figure 5). When the disulfide bonds enabling attachment of Gd3+ are reduced, the Gd3+ complexes are cleaved from
the NP surface. Then, the T2 NMR/MRI signal
of the encapsulated 19F compounds increases, indicating
the presence of the NPs in redox active environment.

Figure 5 Design of redox activatable
NPs. Adapted with permission from ref (86). Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &
Co.

Imaging Radiolabels
There has been rapid progress in the development of NP-based radiolabels.87 Chelators such as 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic
acid (DOTA) and 1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1,4,7-trisacetic acid are
commonly used to label diagnostic positron emitters, e.g., 68Ga or 64Cu, or therapeutic beta-emitters, e.g., 177Lu or 90Y. The sequential
use of different poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) -coated emitters, e.g., 68Ga and 177Lu enable multiplexed
labeling, as well as improved circulation time. For this purpose,
micelle encapsulation was introduced for combining a mixture of amphiphiles
comprising chelators bearing the radiolabels, ligands for targeting,
and PEG for surface passivation with originally hydrophobic NPs.88 The same method could successfully be applied
for different types of NPs, such as SPIONs, plasmonic NPs, and core/shell
UCNPs. Sometimes the NPs can be labeled postsynthetically without
the use of chelators for radiometals.89 The resulting radiolabeled NPs enable researchers to trace their
biodistribution when administered systemically, and to study fundamental
NP in vivo process (e.g., determining
the contribution of active versus passive tumor targeting
in mouse models).90

In fact, radiolabels
are particularly suited for quantitative biodistribution studies.
γ-emission is barely absorbed by tissue, and radioactivity is
independent of the probe’s local environment, i.e., there are no substantial quenching effects
such as in the case of fluorophores, which often exhibit pH-dependent
emission. Using radiolabels produces excellent signals and, therefore,
a low dose can yield sufficient image quality to make a diagnostic
interpretation. One additional advantage is the ability for multiplexed
read-out of radiolabels with different γ-emission energies in
parallel. This has been recently used for recording the biodistribution
of several compounds of NPs independently.37 Most NPs are hybrid structures composed of their functional part
(i.e., contrast for imaging) and an organic surface
coating that provides colloidal stability and targeting capability,
as well as the corona of adsorbed proteins.91,92 By adding radiolabels of different energies to different parts of
the NPs, the NPs could disintegrate after in vivo administration, i.e., the organic surface capping
may come off the functional particle core.37 Such studies in the future will enable imaging of the different
NP components to elucidate the fate of the different parts of the
NP. This will be important for understanding the biodegradability
of all different parts of a NP and their elimination. This is decisive
for guiding the design of NPs for use in in vivo delivery
applications. However, when different labeling methods and radioisotopes
are used to label NPs to study their fate, it is crucial to ensure
that the radioisotopes are incorporated onto the NPs with little impact
on their original biological behavior.

Fluorescence Imaging
Fluorescence is a useful imaging modality because the emission
of the probes after excitation can be visualized by the naked eye
or at higher resolution with optical microscopy. There is an abundance
of available fluorophores that can be tailored to specific applications.
Many traditional organic fluorophores suffer from aggregation-caused
quenching (ACQ), thereby limiting design schemes where specific interactions
promote fluorophore localization. This has forced researchers to use
dilute solutions (often at the nanomole level) of fluorophores. Given
the minuscule amount of fluorophore, they can be easily photobleached,
which imposes a limit on the achievable contrast. Contrary to ACQ,
aggregation-induced emission (AIE) is where increased aggregation
yields a stronger fluorescent signal.93 This makes AIE fluorogens (AIEgens) good candidates for bioimaging
applications.94 The accumulation of AIEgens
at regions of interest results in the formation of nanoaggregates
(AIE dots), which intensifies the fluorescence signal. The AIE dots
are resistant to photobleaching, enabling high-quality bioimaging
over a wide time window. They are suitable for long-term tracking
of theranostic processes such as tumor-metastasis monitoring, drug
delivery/release, and stem-cell therapy.95 Organic AIE dots enjoy almost all advantages of inorganic QDs,96,97 yet are free of the disadvantages of the latter (e.g., cytotoxicity98,99). In addition, AIE molecules
and nanoaggregates can be decorated by functional groups with binding
specificity to particular receptors that enables active targeting.94,96,97 Integration of an RGD unit with
the AIEgen structure, for example, has generated integrin-specific
fluorescence turn-on bioprobes for tumor cell targeting, image-guided
drug delivery, in situ monitoring of therapeutic
effect, etc.(100,101)

Two decades
ago, fluorescent semiconductor QDs were introduced for the fluorescent
labeling of biological molecules and cells.102,103 Due to their narrow emission bands, QDs are suited for multiplexed
read-out, as detailed below.104,105 Semiconductor QDs are also bright and show reduced photobleaching,
which makes them suitable for long-term imaging at the single-molecule
level.106−108 However, semiconductor QDs can be cytotoxic
toward cells due to the release of metal ions98,99 and many researchers take this fact into consideration in designing
QDs for their long-term imaging studies.109−111 For example, CdSe QDs can be coated with ZnS polymer shells or SiO2 layers to suppress the dissolution of possibly toxic semiconductor
core materials.99 Details about the mechanism
for potential toxicity are still under discussion.

Rare earth
(RE)-based nanophosphors, which consist of a host inorganic matrix
doped with luminescent lanthanide (Ln) cations, constitute another
type of luminescent materials. Their main advantages are their low
toxicity, high photostability, high thermal and chemical stability,
high luminescence quantum yield, and sharp emission bands.112 However, they normally show low luminescence
intensity, which is caused by the low absorption of the parity-forbidden
Ln3+ 4f–4f transitions.113 The optical properties of such NPs can be further modified by doping,
as shown recently in the case of Eu3+, Bi3+ codoped
REVO4 (RE = Y, Gd) NPs. Intense red luminescence was achieved
by using indirect excitation of the Eu3+ cations via the vanadate anions. The incorporation of Bi3+ into the REVO4 structure resulted in a shift of the original
absorption band corresponding to the vanadate toward longer wavelengths,
yielding nanophosphors excitable by near-ultraviolet and visible light.114

Carbon dots are another class of fluorescent
NPs. Carbon dots are zero-dimensional carbon nanomaterials and possess
the advantageous characteristics of QDs over organic fluorophores,
such as high photostability, tunable emission, and large two-photon
excitation cross sections.11 Moreover,
C-dot fluorescence does not blink. They are water-soluble, can be
functionalized, can be produced economically, and have excellent cell
permeability and biocompatibility, making them attractive for intracellular
sensing.11,115,116 Also, C-dots
without heavy metal content are environmentally friendly and can be
much safer for biological applications than traditional Cd-containing
QDs.11,115,116 In a recent
study, C-dots were subjected to a systematic safety evaluation involving
acute toxicity, subacute toxicity, and genotoxicity experiments (including
a mouse bone marrow micronuclear test and a Salmonella
typhimurium mutagenicity test).117 Carbon dot dosages of 51 mg/kg weight body showed no significant
toxic effects, i.e., no abnormality or lesions, and
no genotoxicity in the organs of the animals.

Nanodiamonds,
another group of carbon NPs, are receiving growing interest for drug
delivery and other biomedical applications because they have good
biocompatibility.118 Intravenously administered
ND complexes at high dosages did not change serum indicators of liver
and systemic toxicity.119 Nanodiamond powder
produced by detonation (5–6 nm, see Figure 6) or other methods (20–50 nm) are
readily available in commercial quantities at moderate cost and are
among the most promising carbon nanomaterials for drug delivery, imaging,
and theranostic applications. Fluorescence of NDs due to nitrogen-vacancy
(NV) centers (see Figure 6) that are composed of a substitutional nitrogen and a next
neighbor vacancy enables biomedical imaging.120,121 Fluorescent NPs can also be produced by linking or adsorbing various
fluorophores onto NDs. For example, bright blue fluorescent NDs were
produced via covalent linking of octadecylamine to
carboxylic groups on the ND surface (ND-ODA).122 In biomedical imaging, fluorescent NDs combine the advantages
of semiconductor QDs (small NP size, high photostability, and bright
multicolor fluorescence) with biocompatibility, lack of toxicity,
and tunable surface chemistry. Therefore, they are promising for in vivo imaging. Since the sizes of ND particles can be smaller than
5 nm NPs, they can be removed by renal excretion without leaving any
toxic residue in the body.123,124

Figure 6 (A) Schematic model of
a 5 nm ND with a fluorescent NV center and a variety of surface terminations
after oxidative purification is shown. The diamond core is covered
by a layer of surface functional groups that stabilize the NP by terminating
its dangling bonds. The surface can also be stabilized by the conversion
of sp3 carbon to sp2 carbon. Adapted with permission
from ref (118). Copyright
2012 Nature Publishing Group. (B) Plot showing the strength of binding
(KL) versus the monolayer
capacity (Amax) based on a Langmuir model
for DOX, polymyxin B, tetracycline, and vancomycin adsorbed on detonation-produced
ND from two sources (ZH and ND) with different surface chemistries:
the as-received surface, like in the right picture, carboxylated (−COOH)
and aminated (−NH2) surfaces. Adapted with permission
from refs (125 and 126). Copyright 2016 Elsevier and copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, respectively.

Besides using fluorescent NPs
as contrast labels for imaging, “smart” fluorophores
that change their fluorescence signal depending on the local environment
can be designed. By integrating pH-sensitive fluorophores on the surfaces
of NPs, information about their local environment can be gained, for
example, whether they are located extracellularly in neutral pH or
intracellularly inside acidic endosomes/lysosomes.127,128 By combining analyte-sensitive fluorophores with NPs, the concentrations
of different analytes in the vicinity of the NPs can be determined.129,130

Fluorescent NPs based on AIE offer another concept in this
direction. The AIE process has been utilized to develop light-up biosensors.
Cell apoptosis, for example, has been followed in real time by making
use of the AIE process (see Figure 7).131 Tetraphenylethene
(TPE), an archetypical AIEgen, has been functionalized by a short
oligopeptide (DEVDK) through click chemistry, affording DEVDK-TPE,
a peptide–AIEgen adduct. DEVDK-TPE is soluble in aqueous buffers
and hence emits no fluorescence (i.e., no residual
emission). It remains nonfluorescent in intracellular media after
cells internalize it. During apoptosis, caspase enzyme cleaves the
DEVD segment. The residual segment (K-TPE) is not hydrophilic enough
to be dissolved in aqueous media and thus forms intracellular nanoaggregates.
The aggregate formation turns on the fluorescence of TPE, which is
gradually intensified with the progress of apoptosis. This enables
real-time and in situ monitoring of the biological
process of programmed cell death.131

Figure 7 Diagrammatic
illustration of the real-time monitoring of cell apoptosis process
by DEVDK-TPE, an AIE-active fluorescent bioprobe. Adapted from ref (131). Copyright 2012 American
Chemical Society.

For cellular and in vivo cancer imaging, Nie, Gao, and their co-workers have
developed a class of activatable NPs based on the use of copolymer
materials with ionizable tertiary amine groups and covalently conjugated
fluorescence dyes.132,133 The self-assembled NP structures
undergo a dramatic and sharp transition within a narrow range of pH
(often less than 0.2 pH units). This pH-induced transition leads to
rapid and complete dissociation of the nanomicelles. As a result,
the covalently linked dyes change from a self-quenched “off”
state to a highly emissive bright “on” state. This supersensitive
and nonlinear response to external pH enables targeting acidic organelles
in cancer cells as well as the acidic microenvironment in solid tumors.
This feature is important in addressing the tumor heterogeneity problem,
which is a major challenge for various imaging and therapeutic approaches
based on molecular or receptor targeting. By targeting the common
“hallmarks”
of tumors (i.e., the acidic habitat or microenvironment
and the growth of new blood vessels or angiogenesis), this work has
opened exciting opportunities in detecting and potentially treating
a broad range of human solid tumors. This approach leads to improved
detection sensitivity because each NP contains multiple dye molecules,
which are turned on (restored to fluorescence) in an all-or-none fashion,
leading to amplified fluorescence signals that are many times brighter
than those of single dye molecules.

Laboratory-Based Diagnosis
(“High-Throughput Screening”)
Nanoparticles
can also be used for detection of molecules, cells, and
tissues outside the human body. In this diagnostic application, the
function of the NP is to identify unique biological molecules in biological
fluids that are associated with the health of the patient. The NPs
act as transducers and are coated with ligands to enable the biorecognition
of unique biological molecules in the fluid in the in vitro sensing applications. For example, AuNPs have been modified with
ligands that specifically bind to a complementary protein. The presence
of these proteins induces the cross-linking of the NPs (i.e., agglutination). This controlled agglomeration can be observed colometrically
by the change of color of the NP solution.134,135 These concepts have been later refined, for example in rapid colorimetric
DNA sensing.136,137 This AuNP-based diagnostic technology
has advanced to testing of patient samples and is now used in the
clinic.138 Nanotechnology presents an opportunity
to improve the overall diagnostic process by lowering the limit of
detection, thus enabling high throughput and multiplexed detections
of biological targets with high sensitivity.

Screening Based on Fluorescence Read-Out
Quantum dots are frequently used as fluorescence labels in proteins
or nucleic acid assays. One example in this direction is a QD-based
fluorescence polarization assay for screening of antigen surface epitopes.139 In this example, a method for quickly screening
and identifying dominant B cell epitopes was developed using hepatitis
B virus (HBV) surface antigen as a target. Eleven amino acid fragments
from the HBV surface antigen were synthesized by 9-fluorenylmethoxy
carbonyl solid-phase peptide synthesis strategy, and then CdTe QDs
were used to label the N-terminals of all peptides. After optimizing
the factors for this fluorescence polarization (FP) immunoassay, the
antigenicities of synthetic peptides were determined by analyzing
the recognition and combination of peptides and standard antibody
samples. The results of the FP assays confirmed that 10 of the 11 synthetic
peptides had distinct antigenicities. In order to screen dominant
antigenic peptides, the FP assays were carried out to investigate
the antibodies against the 10 synthetic peptides of the HBV surface
antigen in 159 samples of anti-HBV surface antigen-positive antiserum.
The results showed that 3 of the 10 antigenic peptides might be immunodominant,
because the antibodies against them existed more widely among the
samples and their antibody titers were higher than those of other
peptides. Using three dominant antigenic peptides, 293 serum samples
were detected for HBV infection by the FP assays. The results showed
that the antibody-positive ratio was 51.9%, and the sensitivity and
specificity were 84.3% and 98.2%, respectively. This QD-based FP assay
is a simple, rapid, and convenient method for determining immunodominant
antigenic peptides and has potential in applications such as epitope
mapping, vaccine designing, or clinical disease diagnosis.

Another
application of QDs is multiplexed detection, as described by Nie and
co-workers. Quantum dots have been incorporated into microbeads to
generate barcodes, where unique optical emission for each bead can
be generated by different amounts and sizes of QDs.140 Fluorescent QDs are ideal optical coders, because they
have narrow fluorescence line widths, size- and shape-tunable emission,
photostability, and all fluorescence emission can be excited with
a single wavelength. Thus, barcodes can be designed with high coding
precision, cost-effective instrumentation can be used by simplifying
the optical components and excitation source for read out, and, finally,
it has been suggested that over 1 million unique barcodes can be generated
using different emitting QDs and intensities. There are several methods
to prepare QD barcodes: (a) the “swelling” technique,
where polystyrene beads are mixed in a solvent to enable beads to
increase in volume, which allows the diffusion of hydrophobic QDs
into the outermost layer,140 (b) layer-by-layer
(LbL) assembly of different emitting QDs onto the surface of the beads,141 (c) incorporation of QDs inside a silica NP
with a hydrophobic core,142,143 and (d) microfluidic
flow focusing to incorporate QDs inside the microbeads.144−146 Each method of barcode preparation has a different fluorescence
signal stability. Some formulations tend to expose QDs to small ions
in the buffer, which leads to high read-out variability.147 Hence, careful selection of preparation method
is required for reproducibility in the biological assay. This optimization
is important for the use of barcodes in diagnosing patient samples
as outlined in the following examples.

To make use of barcodes
for biological applications, the surface of the barcodes typically
needs to be coated with biorecognition molecules (e.g., oligonucleotides or antibodies). Panels of different, uniquely
emitting barcodes can be designed for detecting “sets”
of diseases. For example, a mixture of five unique emitting barcodes
with three distinct target proteins has been designed for diagnosing
patients with HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C. The two other barcodes
were used as positive and negative controls. These five barcodes can
be mixed with a patient’s plasma and secondary probes. If the
patient presents the antigen that recognizes the antibody on the barcode
surface and the secondary probe, molecular assembly forms sandwich
complexes of barcode–patient antigen–secondary probes.
The overall optical signal of the barcode for positive detection changes
upon the assembly process, and can be distinguished by using flow
cytometry148 or a smartphone camera.149 A demonstration of the use of QD barcodes for
diagnosing patient samples was reported by Ming et
al., who found that barcodes could be used to detect
the genetic targets of patients infected with HIV and hepatitis B.149 Kim et al. described the clinical sensitivity and specificity for QD barcode
diagnostic analysis of hepatitis B to be greater than 90%.150 This is a promising step for the clinical translation
of this technology. The QD barcode is an example of a number of emerging
nanotechnology-based diagnostic devices, where multiplexing occurs
by the design of the barcoding system (e.g., Raman-based barcodes, graphic barcodes).151,152

Novel approaches in instrumentation have also been developed
to enable automation of barcode-based diagnostic assays. Microfluidic
chips are an ideal platform for high-throughput multiplexed read-out.
This approach has been demonstrated by coupling microfluidics
with traditional Western blots (WBs) in protein identification.153 Parallel microfluidic channels are designed
to incorporate the internal molecular weight marker, loading control,
and antibody titration in one protocol. Compared to the conventional
WB that detects only one protein, the microfluidic WB (μWB)
can analyze at least 10 proteins simultaneously from a single sample,
while requiring only about 1% of the amount of antibody used in conventional
WB. For nucleic acid analyses, microcapillary and loop-mediated isothermal
amplification are incorporated (cLAMP) to achieve straightforward,
robust, multiplexed, and point-of-care testing (see Figure 8). The cLAMP uses capillaries
(glass or plastic) to introduce and to house samples/reagents, segments
of water droplets to prevent contamination, pocket warmers to provide
heat, and a hand-held flashlight for visual read-out of the fluorescence
signal. It enables the simultaneous detection of two regions of the
HIV genome from multiple plasma samples. As few nucleic acid detection
methods can be wholly independent of external power supply and equipment,
the cLAMP holds great promise for point-of-care applications in resource-poor
settings.154 To enhance the throughput
for detection and to integrate the analysis of proteins and nucleic
acids into one protocol, barcode-based bioassays that are capable
of encoding and decoding are introduced. A single barcoded microchip
can carry out tens of individual protein/nucleic acid assays (encode),
and immediately yield all assay results by a portable barcode reader
or a smartphone (decode). The applicability of barcoded microchips
has been demonstrated by HIV immunoassays for simultaneous detection
of three targets (anti-gp41 antibody, anti-gp120 antibody, and anti-gp36
antibody) from six human serum samples. However, the barcode-based
assay can also be applied for the simultaneous detection of pathogen-specific
oligonucleotides by a single chip containing both positive and negative
controls.155

Figure 8 Illustration of μWB
and multiplexed cLAMP carried out in a variety of forms by means of
microcapillaries. (A) Proteins are transferred from a polyacrylamide
gel to a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane by electroblotting.
(B) μWB chip is assembled by incorporating a polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS) microfluidic network with the blotted PVDF membrane. Panels
(A) and (B) adapted from ref (153). Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (C) Microfluidic
channels are oriented perpendicular to the protein bands on the membrane.
Antibodies for specific proteins are introduced in parallel microfluidic
channels. Adapted from ref (154). Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.

Another multiplex detection technology that is
gaining interest is “chemical nose” sensors.156 Array-based “chemical nose” sensors
have been designed where individual spots are coated with chemical
agents to recognize specific molecules in a complex analyte mixture.
These systems use selective recognition of analytes, a complementary
approach to traditional biomarker-based strategies. Nanoparticle-based
chemical noses have been used for sensing of sera,157 cell-surface based discrimination of bacteria,158 and genotyping of cancer cells.159 These systems used separate recognition elements
to generate the selectivity-based pattern required for analyte identification.
Recently, an alternative multiplexing strategy was used to create
a high-throughput multichannel sensor that was able to determine the
mechanism of chemotherapeutics within minutes,160 instead of the weeks required for traditional biochemical
approaches (see Figure 9). The multiplexed platform complexed a single AuNP with three different
fluorescent proteins (FPs) to detect drug-induced physicochemical
changes on cell surfaces. This result demonstrates the ability of
nanomaterials to sense minute changes in cell surfaces rapidly, enabling
high-throughput screening. These systems are promising for a wide
variety of applications, including diagnostics for wound biofilms.161

Figure 9 Multichannel AuNP fluorescent protein sensor, generating
different responses for drug-induced phenotypes. Clustering of the
mechanisms was performed using linear discriminant analysis, enabling
identification of new drugs as “known” or “novel”.
Adapted from ref (160). Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.

While in the above example, the fluorophores were merely
used as passive labels, they can also be used for active sensing in
intracellular assays. The functionalization of luminescent NPs and
their incorporation into cells provide versatile means to image cells.
However, the design of functional NPs that quantitatively respond
to specific cellular biomarkers or intracellular conditions remains
challenging. Several recent reviews have addressed advances in the
application of luminescent NPs for intracellular sensing.162−164 Quantum dots have been widely applied as luminescent transducers
for the development of optical biosensors.165,166 Quantum dots can be functionalized with moieties that alter their
fluorescence properties in response to particular cellular conditions
or cellular biomarkers. This approach can be used to develop intracellular
sensors. As an example, core/shell CdSe/ZnS QDs were functionalized
with a dopamine-conjugated peptide monolayer to act as pH sensors
(see Figure 10A).
Under aerobic conditions, the dopamine ligands are oxidized to quinone
units, which quench the transfer of electrons. The quenching efficiency
of the QDs is dependent on the redox potential of quinone units, which,
in turn, are pH-dependent.167 By altering
the pH, the quenching efficiency of the QDs can be tuned.167 The ability of the QDs to respond to intracellular
pH changes was demonstrated experimentally by Medintz et al.(167) By subjecting
COS-1 cells loaded with QDs to extracellular nystatin, which induces
pH changes in the cells, the intracellular pH changes could be quantified
using an in vitro-derived calibration curve (see Figure 10B).

Figure 10 (A) Dopamine-functionalized
QDs for the photoluminescence (PL) sensing of pH via the pH-dependent oxidation of dopamine to the quinone derivative,
and the accompanying electron-transfer quenching of the QDs. (B) Differential
interference contrast (DIC) and fluorescence confocal imaging of pH-changes
in COS-1 cell subjected to internalized pH-responsive dopamine-functionalized
QDs (fluorescence at 550 nm) and co-incorporated red fluorescent Fluorophorex
(FLX) 20 nm nanospheres acting as an internal strand, emitting at
680 nm. The calibration curve corresponding to the intracellular fluorescence
changes derived from the confocal fluorescence images is displayed
at the bottom. Adapted with permission from ref (167). Copyright 2010 Nature
Publishing Group.

Similarly, cytochrome c functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs can be used for detection
of the reactive oxygen species (ROS) superoxide radical (O2•–). The O2•–-mediated reduction of cytochrome c enhances the
fluorescence of QDs. The ability of the QDs to respond to intracellular
changes in O2•– was demonstrated
experimentally by Li et al.(168) By subjecting HeLa and HL-7702 cells to phorbol
myristate-induced generation of O2•–, the resulting fluorescence could provide a quantitative measure
of the time-dependent concentration of O2•– in the cells.168

Quantum dots can
also be applied for the detection of dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH).169 CdSe/ZnS QDs were functionalized
with a monolayer of Nile Blue (NB+), which quenches the
fluorescence via an energy transfer mechanism (see Figure 11A). Freeman et al. demonstrated that NADH, a cofactor
generated via the metabolic Krebs cycle, induced
reduction of NB+ to the colorless NBH reduced state, which
resulted in the recovery of QD fluorescence (see Figure 11B). The metabolism of HeLa
cells can be inhibited by anticancer drugs, e.g.,
taxol, which substantially lowers the intracellular NADH concentration
to yield low fluorescence (see Figure 11C). This latter example highlights the potential
use of intracellular QDs biosensors for drug screening applications.169

Figure 11 (A) Schematic analysis of NADH using NB+-functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs. (B) Calibration curve corresponding
to the fluorescence changes of the CdSe/ZnS QDs upon analyzing different
concentrations of NADH. (C) Time-dependent fluorescence changes observed
upon the glucose (50 mM)-stimulated activation of the metabolism in
HeLa cancer cells loaded with NB+-functionalized CdSe/ZnS
QDs in (1) untreated HeLa cells, (2) Taxol-treated HeLa cells. Inset:
Time-dependent confocal microscopy images of a HeLa cell (without
Taxol treatment) upon triggering the metabolism with glucose 50 mM.
Adapted with permission from ref (169). Copyright 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

The potential toxicity associated
with the intracellular application of QDs can be avoided by using
alternatives such as C-dots. Figure 12 illustrates the application of fluorescein-modified
C-dots as optical transducers in the fluorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET)-based detection of intracellular pH.170 Carbon dots serve as the donor in the FRET pairing with
fluorescein to provide a ratiometric detection of pH within a region
of pH = 4.0 to pH = 8.0 (Figure 12B). Similar experiments have been performed with QDs
modified with a pH-sensitive fluorophore,171 demonstrating that the concept of active pH sensing can be carried
out with a variety of different NP materials. Du et al.(170) demonstrated
the use of fluorescein-functionalized C-dots in monitoring temporal
and spatial intracellular pH changes in L929 cells using fluorescence
spectroscopy (see Figure 12C).

Figure 12 (A) Schematic pH-stimulated fluorescence changes of fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC)-functionalized C-dots. (B) Fluorescence spectra
of the FITC-modified C-dots at different pH values. (C) Confocal microscopy
images (fluorescence, FL, and bright-field BF) following the spatial
pH changes in L929 cells loaded with the FITC-modified C-dots. Adapted
with permission from ref (170). Copyright 2013 IOP Publishing.

In addition to the sensor mentioned above, several other
intracellular fluorescent C-dot-based pH sensors have also been reported.172,173 The quantification of intracellular pH is particularly interesting
since abnormal pH values are often associated with certain diseases
such as cancer or Alzheimer’s disease.174,175 Moreover, functionalized C-dots have been modified for intracellular
sensing of metal ions.176,177 For example, quinoline-functionalized
C-dots were applied to sense Zn2+ ions in the intracellular
environment (see Figure 13).177

Figure 13 Carbon-dot-based sensor
for the intracellular sensing of Zn2+ ions. Adapted from
ref (177). Copyright
2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.

Organic and inorganic polymer NPs have been implemented as
functional units for intracellular sensing applications. For example,
silica NPs have been widely used to transport fluorophores for the
intracellular sensing of oxygen levels,178 pH,179 or metal ions.180 In these systems, the fluorophore embedded within the SiO2 NPs responds selectively to the intracellular analyte, thus
providing an optical output in response to stimuli. Often the combination
of two fluorophores, where only one fluorophore responds to the respective
analyte, are integrated with the NPs, to enable the ratiometric detection
of the analyte. For example, the pH-sensitive FITC and pH-insensitive
Ru(bpy)32+ fluorophores were incorporated into
SiO2 NPs. The labeled NPs were then applied for sensing
the drug-induced lysosomal pH changes in murine macrophages stimulated
by chloroquine, and for the dexamethasone-induced acidification in
apoptotic HeLa cells.181 A sense-and-treat
SiO2 NPs system was demonstrated by the immobilization
of Atto 647 dye and a DOX-functionalized polymer on the SiO2 NP. The functionalized NPs were incorporated in Hep-G2 cells, and
the pH-induced release of the DOX in endosomal and lysosomal domains
of the cells was probed by the two fluorophores, while releasing the
anticancer DOX drug.

Organic polymer NPs exhibit several advantages
for transporting intracellular sensing moieties. Many different nontoxic
polymer matrices are available and their hydrophilic/hydrophobic properties
can be tailored for optimal cell permeation. Furthermore, the versatile
methods available to modify polymer NPs enable the functionalization
of recognition ligands, fluorophores, and cell-targeting ligands and
functionalities, and minimize nonspecific adsorption. Figure 14 illustrates two general strategies
to assemble polymer-based NPs for intracellular sensing applications.
One type of sensing NPs involves the incorporation of a fluorophore
into the NP matrices where it serves as both binding ligand and optical
transducer, panel I. The second type of intracellular optical sensors
involves the modification of the NPs with two functional elements:
(i) a recognition ligand that binds the analyte and (ii) a transducer
that responds optically to the recognition event, panel II. This two-element
NP composite is known as an opt(r)ode, in analogy to electrochemical
sensing electrodes. In this approach, electrochemical reactions stimulated
by the recognition complex or intracellular environmental changes, e.g., pH changes, induced by the sensing events, trigger
the optical transducer in the NPs.

Figure 14 Chemically modified polymer NPs for intracellular
sensing: (I) NPs function as optically responsive ligands. (II) Particles
functionalized with an analyte recognition unit and an optical-transducing
element. The recognition event activates the optical transducer.

Fluorescent sensors for the intracellular
detection of specific ions such as Cu2+, Mg2+, and Zn2+ were developed182−184 using ion-responsive
fluorophores embedded in polymer NPs (Figure 14, panel I). An interesting optical sensor
that follows the principle shown in Figure 14, panel I, and probes intracellular levels
of H2O2 is depicted in Figure 15. Polyacrylonitrile (BPAN) NPs modified
with the Schiff base ligands of aminopyridine boronate ester (50 nm
diameter) were used as the sensor NPs (Figure 15A). In the presence of H2O2, oxidative cleavage of the boronate ester units occurred,
leading to the formation of the hydroxy-pyridine-substituted polymer
nanoparticles, which exhibited a characteristic fluorescence band
at λ = 400 nm. The intensity of the fluorescence band was correlated
with the concentration of H2O2 (Figure 15B), and other ROS species
did not interfere with it.185

Figure 15 (A) Chemically
modified boronate ester-functionalized BPAN NPs for intracellular
fluorescence probing H2O2. (B) Fluorescence
spectra changes of the modified polymer NPs upon interaction with
increasing amounts of H2O2: 0, 20, 40, 60, and
80 μM. Adapted from ref (185). Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.

In yet another example, researchers developed bifunctional
polymer NPs that acted as optrodes to probe intracellular levels of
H2O2, according to the principle shown in Figure 14, panel II.186 They modified PEG hydrogel nanospheres (250–350
nm) with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and the Amplex Red (10-acetyl-3,7-dihydroxy
phenoxazine) transducer (Figure 16A). In the presence of stress-induced and intracellular
formation of H2O2, the HRP-catalyzed oxidation
of Amplex Red proceeds, yielding the fluorescent resorufin transducer.186 The hydrogel NPs were introduced into macrophages,
and these responded to exogenous H2O2 (100 μM)
or endogenous peroxide stimulated by lipopolysaccharides (1 μg·mL–1). Similarly, a nanosensor capable of monitoring intracellular
glucose levels is depicted in Figure 16B). Polyacrylamide NPs were implemented as a carrying
matrix for glucose oxidase, GOx, and the Ru(II)-tris-bipyridine, Ru(bpy)32+, transducer. While the Ru(bpy)32+ fluorescence is quenched by intracellular O2 levels,
the O2-driven GOx-catalyzed oxidation of glucose depletes
the O2 levels, resulting in the triggered-on fluorescence
of the Ru(bpy)32+ luminescent probe. As the
degree of O2 depletion by the biocatalytic process is controlled
by the concentration of glucose, the resulting fluorescence of the
transducer provided a quantitative measure for the concentration of
glucose.187 The use of composite polymer
NPs carrying enzymes and optical transducers as bifunctional sensing
elements is particularly attractive since the products generated by
many enzyme-driven processes may activate optical (fluorescent) transducers.
The use of such intracellular nanosensors should be implemented with
caution, however, since intracellular environmental conditions, e.g., changes in pH, might alter the enzyme activities,
thus perturbing the intracellular nanosensor performances.

Figure 16 Bifunctional
recognition/dye polymer NPs for sensing: (A) Sensing of H2O2via the HRP-driven oxidation of Amplex-Red
to the fluorescent Resorufin product. (B) Sensing of glucose by the
depletion of O2 by the GOx-mediated oxidation of glucose,
using Ru(bpy)32+ as auxiliary fluorescent probe.

Screening Based on Surface Plasmon Resonance
Plasmonic NPs
are also designed for optical read-out,188−192 in particular, in the form of colorimetric responses. The aggregation
of AuNPs shifts the absorption maximum to longer wavelengths. Aggregation
can be induced by the selective binding of analyte molecules to the
functionalized surfaces of AuNPs.193 The
most popular example in this research direction is DNA detection,
as developed by Mirkin and co-workers.136,194,195 There are now many similar assays. For example, Stevens
and co-workers used AuNPs to detect the enzyme phospholipase A2 at a concentration of 700 pM.190 A more complex scheme was used by Pompa and co-workers to detect
cancer-related point mutations in the Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene
homologue (KRAS) gene.189 In this case,
AuNP aggregates form when the target gene hybridizes with the complementary
single-stranded capture probes functionalized to AuNPs. Subsequently,
the AuNP–target-gene complex undergoes a secondary binding
event with DNA-functionalized magnetic Fe3O4 microparticles. In addition to nucleic acid detection, AuNPs functionalized
with capture antibodies and patterned onto dielectric surfaces can
be used to fabricate a protein biosensor.192 The characteristic surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of such AuNPs
is shifted by the binding of target proteins, and this spectral shift
can be detected using conventional SPR imaging spectrometers. Tamiya
and co-workers demonstrated a 300-channel version of this device,
capable of label-free detection of targets down to 100 pg/mL.192

Taking advantage of the high cross-section
absorbance of plasmonic NPs, their SPR can also be used in plasmonic-driven
thermal sensing. Qin et al. presented
an improved lateral flow immunoassay using AuNPs, which improved the
analytical sensitivity of the method 32-fold, achieving similar sensitivity
to an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).196 Furthermore, Polo et al. reported a SPR-based detection of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
with a sensitivity 3 orders of magnitude better than standard ELISAs
using anisotropic AuNPs.197

One of the emerging techniques related to plasmon resonance that demonstrated high sensitivity and versatility is the chiroplasmonic method developed by Kotov and Xu.xx1−xx3 This technique is based on the giant polarization rotation characteristic of nanoscale assemblies highly polarizable metallic nanoparticles. The chiroptical effects in these structures are several orders of magnitude higher than in small organic molecules due to high polarizability of the inorganic nanomaterials and larger dimension. Notably, the physics of chiroplasmonic detection differs from that of red-blue plasmon coupling assays or screening with Raman scattering based (see below). Polarization rotation in NP assemblies is primarily based on interactions of the electromagnetic field with asymmetric nanostructures rather than on the formation of so-called ‘hot spots’ or plasmon coupling.xx4 This difference is essential for biomedical diagnostics because it enables detection of long strands of DNA and large proteins. For instance, translation-inspiring sensitivity was obtained for prostate specific antigen using this method.xx5 Most recently, this method in combination with UCNPs also enabled dual detection of one of the most promising diagnostic targets micro RNAs (miRNA) at the levels sufficient for its application in cancer diagnostics.xx6

Screening based
on surface-enhanced Raman scattering
Surface-enhanced Raman
scattering (SERS) is another class of NP-based molecular detection.198,199 Surface-enhanced Raman scattering is an ultrasensitive molecular
spectroscopy technique that benefits from the electromagnetic fields
generated upon excitation of plasmons in nanomaterials. Despite the
impressive detection limits of SERS, down to the single molecule level,200 its application in diagnosis has been restricted
until recently by the inherent complexity of biological samples. Thus,
direct SERS detection of disease markers have typically been carried
out either in lab samples, where the marker was diluted in a controlled
solution, or in biological samples, where the marker is characterized
by an extraordinary affinity for the plasmonic surfaces, such as the
use of SERS detection for Creutzfeldt-Jakob prionic diseases (see Figure 17A).199 The use of chemoreceptors, intermediary molecular
species with selective affinity for the molecular target (i.e., the disease marker),201 has notably increased the applicability of SERS as an efficient
diagnostic tool. Surface-enhanced Raman scattering has therefore been
applied to ex vivo detection of drugs,202 proteins,203 metabolites
indicative of disease,204 or even toxic
ions,205 but also to in vitro monitoring of relevant small inorganic molecules such as nitric
oxide206 or pH levels207 inside living cells (see Figure 17B). In this approach, SERS detection is
achieved indirectly as the spectral changes for the chemoreceptor
are monitored before and after reaction with the target analyte, rather
than directly detecting the analyte. Ideally, the chemoreceptor needs
to show a recognizable spectral change, either structural or electronically,
upon conjugation with its target. Although this property can be found
easily in small aromatic molecules, such as aromatic thiols and amines,
porphyrins, and dyes, macromolecules such as peptides and proteins
usually do not present spectrally discernible differences. In such
cases, however, the use of molecular springs as an interface between
the metallic surface and the protein chemoreceptor can be employed
to monitor the interactions with the analytical target. This strategy
has been demonstrated successfully in the quantification of the oncogenic
protein c-JUN in cell lysates by using the transcription factor FOS208 coupled with mercaptobenzoic acid as the molecular
spring (see Figure 17C).209 An alternative approach to the
use of SERS for diagnostics and bioimaging relies on the highly intense
signals that can be obtained from plasmonic NPs labeled with molecules
featuring large SERS cross sections. This strategy, pioneered by Shuming
Nie, has been demonstrated extensively for bioimaging of tumors in
mice (see Figure 17D) and for use as a contrast agent for the multiplex labeling in
tissue preparations.211 The use of different
Raman labels in combination with different antibodies can further
expand the multiplexing capability of these systems. Moreover, a variety
of membrane receptors can be targeted specifically to obtain pertinent
spatial information.212 Surface-enhanced
Raman scattering NP tags have also been used for multiplexed detection
of circulating tumor cells and cardiovascular protein biomarkers in
blood samples.213 Nie and co-workers developed
a sandwich-type assay involving magnetic capturing beads and SERS
tags for measuring a panel of four cardiac protein biomarkers (sVCAM-1,
suPAR, HSP70, and CRP). The magnetic beads enable easy purification
while the SERS tags enable simultaneous quantification. Due to multiplexing,
high sensitivity, and the large dynamic range of SERS, multiple biomarkers
can be assessed over a wide concentration range in a single tube.
Since this system removes many purification and enrichment steps,
SERS-based assays can provide better positive and negative predictive
values in high-risk patients. In the context of coronary arterial
disease, a major clinical problem is the prediction of sudden cardiac
events such as plaque rupture and myocardial infarction. Hence, it
is important to develop assays to distinguish high-risk populations
for plaque rupture that require immediate intervention and treatment.

Figure 17 (A)
Scheme showing prion mutation and prion ultradetection in human blood.
Surface-enhanced Raman spectra (SERS) of (a) natural and (b) spiked
human blood; (c) natural and (d) spiked human plasma; (e) spiked human
plasma after spectral subtraction of the matrix (human plasma); (f)
the scrambled prion. Adapted with permission from ref (199). Copyright 2011 National
Academy of Sciences. (B) (a) Optical spectra and SERS (mapped at 1548
cm–1, as marked with the arrow below) images of
3T3 cells in the presence of capsules. The SERS spectra (bottom) show
the signals for the colored circles in the image (top). (b) Optical
images and intracellular NO formation over time (obtained through
the I1583/(I1583 + I1548) relation) for three different
samples upon NO induction with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). A control sample without the presence of H2O2 is also shown for comparison. Representative normalized SERS
spectra obtained at different times are shown. The SERS dashed (blue)
and dotted (red) spectra represent the reference vibrational pattern
for aminobezenethiol and hydroxybenzenethiol, respectively. Adapted
with permission from ref (206). Copyright 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (C) (a) Outline
of the c-Fos/c-Jun dimerization on the metal surface and the resulting
deformation of the Raman label structure. (b) Details of the 1000–1100
cm–1 spectral regions of the SERS of the molecular
spring (benzenethiol) interfacing the NP and the protein c-Fos.(c)
Spectral shift of the benzenethiol band at ca. 1075
cm–1 as a function of c-Jun concentration (logarithmic
scale) in HEPES buffer. Adapted from ref (209). Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.
(D) (a) In vivo cancer targeting and SERS detection
by using ScFv-antibody-conjugated AuNPs that recognize the tumor biomarker
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Top: Photographs showing
a laser beam focusing on the tumor site or on the anatomic location
of liver. Bottom: SERS spectra obtained from the tumor and the liver
locations by using (a) targeted and (b) nontargeted NPs. Two nude
mice bearing human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (Tu686) xenograft
tumors (3 mm diameter) received 90 mL of ScFv EGFR-conjugated SERS
tags or PEGylated SERS tags (460 pM). The NPs were administered via tail vein single injection. SERS spectra were taken
5 h postinjection. In vivo SERS spectra were obtained
from the tumor site (red) and the liver site (blue) with 2 s signal
integration and at 785 nm excitation. The spectra were background-subtracted
and shifted for better visualization. The Raman reporter molecule
was malachite green, with distinct spectral signatures as labeled.
Adapted with permission from ref (210). Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group.

Screening Based on Electronic
Read-Out
Nanowires214−223 are enabling a novel class of biosensors that are capable of detecting
disease markers in blood, saliva, and urine, and able to convert the
detection events into electronic signals. Semiconductor nanowire field-effect
transistors (FETs) make use of nanowires that are sensitive to surface-binding
events.224 This sensitivity is derived
from the proximity of the binding sites to the charge carriers within
the nanowire.225−227 Nanoengineered FETs differ considerably
from conventional, microlithography-based FETs for solution-based
detection.228−230 For example, nanoengineering enables miniaturization
and also enables the detector to be close to the target. Silicon nanowires
can detect proteins at 10 fM concentrations in low ionic strength
buffers; however, the detection of analyte molecules by nanowire FETs
in high ionic strength (>mM) solutions, including all physiological
solutions of interest, has posed problems. In such solutions, the
Debye length is reduced to 0.2–2.0 nm and the screening of
analyte charge by the electrolytes either reduces sensitivity or,
more often, prevents detection of the analyte altogether.215,231 Andrews, Weiss, and Yang showed that aptamer-functionalized FETs
can operate in full ionic strength buffer, presumably because of the
proximity of the charged backbone to the gated semiconductor, and
thus show promise for in vivo measurements.232,233 A recent study demonstrated224 that backfilling
antibody-functionalized silicon nanowires with a PEG layer extends
the Debye length, enabling the detection of prostate-specified antigen
at a concentration of 10 nM in 100 mM phosphate buffer.224 Nanowires composed of conductive polymers (e.g., polyaniline234−237) have also been adapted for electrical biosensing
using either FET-based transduction238,239 or chemoresistive
transduction.222,223 In these systems, the binding
sites are either antibodies or virus particles displaying peptide
motifs, both of which are capable of recognizing and binding analyte
molecules. Conveniently, either of these two “receptors”
can be entrained in the polymer from the polymerization solution during
nanowire fabrication. In contrast to nanowire FETs, transduction of
analyte binding to polymer nanowires is not completely understood.
Carbon nanotubes have been also used as transducers for biosensing.240 All these biosensors are “label-free”—capable
of providing a signal correlated to the concentration of analyte by
immersion in a solution without added reagents or process steps. Thus,
these devices are ideally suited for use in point-of-care disease
diagnostics.

An electrically responsive NP sensing scheme requires
electrical contact. One approach described by Gadopadhyay et al.(234) involves
the incorporation of AuNPs into polyaniline films on electrode surfaces.234 In this case, AuNPs facilitate the attachment
of single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) capture strands to the nanowire, using
a thiol-based immobilization scheme. Binding of target DNA to the
ssDNA capture strands impedes the redox responsiveness of polyaniline
and reduces peak currents by providing an insulating layer to the
electrode surface.234 Gadopadhyay et al. demonstrated that target nucleotide
concentrations down to 10–18 M can be detected by
monitoring changes in peak currents. Similarly, QDs have been used
as transducer in electrochemistry based detection schemes.241−248

Biological molecules can also act as transducers that directly
convert binding events into electrical signals. This action can be
in the form of ion channels, which open in response to binding events
and subsequently result in a signal cascade.249 Olfactory receptors, for example, can be used for the development
of sensitive and selective odor-sensing biosensors.250−252 These biosensors can screen numerous volatile compounds generated
by the human body, such as exhaled breath and body odors, to detect
diseases and health conditions.253,254 Olfactory
receptors have also been combined with various transducers such as
quartz crystal microbalance,255−257 SPR sensors,258,259 microelectrodes,260,261 NPs,262 graphene,263,264 and nanotubes265−271 to generate different types of read-outs. For example, a biosensor
with an electrical read-out was constructed by immobilizing olfactory
receptors on nanotubes.265,266 Similarly, a nanovesicle-based
olfactory biosensor, where nanovesicles with surface olfactory receptors
were immobilized on nanotubes, was successfully used for cancer diagnosis.257,270,271 In addition to olfactory receptors,
others, such as hormone receptors,262 taste
receptors,272,273 and peptides274 can also efficiently be used in biosensors that can detect
components of saliva, tears, blood, urine, cerebral spinal fluid,
mucous, and even tissues.275,276

Similarly, whole
cells can be used as transducers, whereby electric currents of electrically
excitable cells are recorded.277 Primary
cells278 and stem cells279 from patients have become interesting targets that can
be used as potential tools for personalized medicine. In addition
to whole cells, specific ion channels can also be used as transducers.
Ion channels are involved in electrical signal conduction (such as
in the nervous or cardiac systems) as well as in other disease areas
such as oncology,280 cystic fibrosis,281 diabetes,282 and
infection.283 The gold standard for monitoring
ion channel currents is the patch clamp technique,284 which provides highly accurate functional recordings from
single or multiple ion channels in cells. However, the low throughput
and the need for highly trained operators exclude the classical patch
clamp technique from many screening applications. This situation changed
with the development of the planar patch clamp technique.285,286 The latest generations of planar patch clamp devices like the SyncroPatch
384PE (2013 by Nanion Technologies) enable recordings of up to 768
cells at a time, and can be integrated into high-throughput screening
cascades of the pharmaceutical industry. Nanotechnology has had a
leading role in shaping these technologies by providing nanopores
responsible for sealing the cell and the detector surface. Such nanopores
can be used not only for electrophysiological measurements of cells,
but also have been used in the context of DNA detection.287 In most cases, electrophysiological detection
is used for monitoring overexpressing ion channels, which has implications
in primary drug targeting or for eliciting dangerous side effects.
One prominent example is the cardiac herG channel that plays an important
role in heart arrythmia and QT-prolongation.278,279,288−290

At the tissue and organ levels, indicators like electrophysiological
signals have been widely employed for evaluation of organ function.
However, conventional electrodes are confronted with the mismatch
between rigid/planar electrodes and soft/curvilinear tissues. By designing
gold nanobelts with sinusoidal structures on flexible tripod substrates,
one is able to create stretchable biointegrated electrodes for direct
recording of electrophysiological signals of rat cerebral cortex with
desirable sensitivity and stability.291 The transfer of thin, flexible electronics onto polymers also enables
conformal placement and measurements.292 Given the abundance of material candidates and nanofabrication techniques,
more novel and smart tools capable of monitoring function and quantity
would emerge and boost the development of nanomedicine and its transition
into practical applications.

Biomechanical Assays
Nanoenabled
tools can be designed for diagnostics and therapies based on the mechanical
properties of cells.293 At the subcellular
and cellular levels, many biophysical properties have recently emerged
as indicators of cell physiology and pathology, as complementary or
regulatory alternatives for disease development. Cell migration, for
example, can be traced by removing the trail of adherent cells left
on a substrate coated with AuNPs294,295 or with QDs.110 The morphology of the trails correlates with
the metastatic potential of the cells.296 The force that adherent cells exert on a substrate can also be measured.
For example, cell-traction-force microscopy based on the deformation
of the polymer substrates on which cells are grown is able to spatiotemporally
map cell traction force as precise as a nanonewton.297−299 It can also be used to uncover previously hidden details of drug–cell
interactions and mechanical contributions during cell migration.297−299 For example, previously retarded cell migration upon NP uptake was
attributed to cytoskeleton disruption. However, the uptake of the
NPs actually transforms cells from the motile phenotype into an adhesive
phenotype, as revealed by the increased cell traction force and altered
patterns of cell traction force.300 More
importantly, ultrasensitive cell traction force microscopy could be
competitive to traditional cell biology methods such as the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide assays,301 WB, and flow cytometry,
since early changes can be readily observed under cell-traction-force
microscopy.

In Vivo Treatment (“Particle-Based
Delivery”)
Nanoparticles have been designed to treat
many diseases, but the most prominent disease focus has been in cancer.
The literature is replete with large sets of in vivo data obtained from animals, and some NP formulations for cancer
treatment have already been approved by regulatory agencies and have
reached hospitals, showing much reduced adverse effects compared to
bare drugs.302 However, their therapeutic
efficacies are most often not or only marginally improved.303,304 Thus, there are ongoing efforts to develop systems with high therapeutic
efficacies.305 The key in such developments
is to improve the design of the nanodelivery system by precisely controlling
the functions/properties of the materials.

Nanoparticles as Anticancer Drugs
The cancer drug delivery process to a solid tumor consists of five
critical steps, termed the CAPIR cascade: circulation
in blood, accumulation and penetration into
the tumor, cellular internalization, and intracellular
drug release. Thus, the overall therapeutic efficiency
of a nanomedicine is determined by its efficiency in each step (see Figure 18).306 A nanomedicine efficiently accomplishing the
whole CAPIR cascade should have a high therapeutic index. Correspondingly,
such a nanomedicine should have 2R2SP properties, the abbreviation
of “drug retention vs release (2R)”,
“surface stealthy vs sticky (2S)” and
“tumor penetration (P)”.307 The 2R indicates the required properties of the nanomedicine in
terms of the loaded drug, i.e., it must tightly retain
the drug without burst release during the transport in blood compartments
and tumor tissues, while efficiently releasing the drug at the intracellular
target to exert its pharmaceutical action. Similarly, the 2S gives
the needed properties in terms of the NP surface, which should be
stealthy while in blood circulation for passive tumor accumulation,
whereas it should become sticky once nearby the tumor cells to interact
with them for efficient cellular uptake. Besides the 2R2S properties,
the nanomedicine should be able to penetrate in tumor tissues to reach
remote tumor cells from blood vessels. Only if a nanomedicine possesses
2R2SP properties will it be able to accomplish the CAPIR cascade successfully
and to deliver active drugs at the right time and place to provide
an overall high therapeutic efficacy and favorable prognosis.306,307 Therefore, the current focus on developing nanomedicines of high
therapeutic index lies on tailoring the basic physiochemical properties
of NPs, i.e., “size, surface properties, and
stability (3S nanoproperties)” to achieve 2R2SP properties
to accomplish the CAPIR cascade efficiently.

Figure 18 (A) Five-step CAPIR
cascade in targeted cancer drug delivery. Reprinted with permission
from ref (306). Copyright
2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (B) Needed properties of a nanomedicine
capable of accomplishing the cascade.

A demonstration of such a 2R2SP nanomedicine is a dendrimer
core–lipid shell nanoassembly mimicking a “cluster-bomb”,
which shows enhanced efficacy, as demonstrated by Sun et al.(306) The nanocomplex is able to cruise
to a tumor, shed “bomblets” to penetrate into the tumor,
and then “fire” at tumor cells to accomplish the CAPIR
cascade. A sixth-generation nontoxic degradable polyaminoester dendrimer
with a diameter of 5 nm was chosen as the “bomblet”
because of its ability to carry anticancer drugs and, more importantly,
its pH-dependent 2-(N,N-diethylamino)ethyl
termini.306,308,309 The lipid shell was composed of fusogenic DOPE phospholipids, PEGylated
DSPE-PEG lipids, and cholesterol in order to keep the nanoassembly
stable and to provide a stealth surface in the blood compartment.
The 45 nm NPs contained ∼27 5 nm dendrimers surrounded by a
PEGylated lipid layer. The NPs could circulate in blood and accumulate
in the tumor via the EPR effect. Once in the tumor,
the fusion of the lipid layer with the cell membrane released the
dendrimers intracellularly or extracellularly. The nearly neutral
dendrimers were shown to penetrate into tumor tissues easily due to
their size, where the extracellular pH is acidic (pH ∼6–7).
The dendrimers were then protonated and became positively charged,
efficiently triggering fast cellular uptake, and releasing the drug
inside the cells. The dendrimer–lipid nanoassembly efficiently
accomplished the CAPIR cascade and thus exerted strong anticancer
activity in DOX-resistant tumor compared with typical PEG–PCL
micelles.306

Nanoparticulate Delivery
Vehicles
A vast number of classes of nanoparticulate delivery
vehicles have been reported.310−345 As demonstrated by Huynh et al.,311 drug-loaded delivery vehicles are attractive because they
can be passively or actively targeted to cancer tissues to improve
anticancer drug selectivity and thereby reduce severe side effects.
Liposomes310 are perhaps one of the most
advanced delivery vehicles concerning clinical translation, with several
formulations approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).310 Liposome-based systems encapsulating drugs
are already used in some cancer therapies (e.g., Myocet, Daunoxome, Doxil). However, liposomes have some
significant drawbacks: they have a low capacity to encapsulate lipophilic
drugs, they are manufactured through processes involving organic solvents,
they are often leaky and are unstable in biological fluids and aqueous
solutions.311

Polymeric micelles
embedded with drugs can also reduce undesirable side effects. Micelle
formation involves the self-assembly of amphiphilic molecules in which,
upon separation of hydrophilic and hydrophobic moieties, hollow capsules
are formed. In water, the interior of those micelles forms the hydrophobic
container, whereas the outside imposes the hydrophilic interface.
Encapsulation of anticancer drugs within micelles can reduce toxicity
and improve circulation.312,346,347 For example, nephrotoxicity is significantly reduced by loading
cisplatin into polymeric micelles.312 Shielding
the cisplatin-loaded core with PEG improves longevity in blood circulation
by reducing acute kidney accumulation of polymeric micelles. In this
regard, the secondary structure of the micelle core also plays a critical
role in stabilizing polymeric micelles in diluted conditions in the
blood. For example, since the core-forming segment in this formulation
is poly(l-glutamic acid) (PLG), cisplatin binding to the
side chain of the PLG segment induces α-helix formation. Regular
assembly of cisplatin-bound helical bundles in the core is key to
keeping the micellar structure intact during blood circulation.313 Five different formulations of polymeric micellar
drugs based on poly(ethylene glycol)-poly(amino acid) block copolymers,
developed by Kataoka and colleagues, are already in clinical translation
in Asia and North America.314 Specifically,
a polymeric micellar drug loaded with paclitaxel is close to completing
its Phase III clinical trial, and is expected to be up for approval
soon. Polymeric micelles thus provide a mature platform with numerous
advantages to improve patient compliance appreciably, including outpatient
treatment without hospitalization.

Micelles can also be jointly
fabricated with polymers as well as lipids. Microfluidic chips can
be used for the controlled production of these micelles for the delivery
of therapeutic agents.315,316 By adopting a microfluidic
platform (see Figure 19), NPs of varying water content and rigidity but with the same chemical
composition, size, and surface properties can be synthesized. It is
important to be able to vary the properties of these micelles efficiently
since cellular uptake can be entirely dependent on these characteristics.
For example, rigid or “hard” NPs, with less interfacial
water between the polymeric core and lipid shell, can enter cells
more easily than those that are flexible (“soft”). In
contrast, bigger particles have poor accumulation in cells.128,317 In this regard, a hollow-structured rigid nanovesicle (RNV) was
fabricated to entrap various hydrophilic reagents effectively by multistage
microfluidic chips in one step, without complicated synthesis, extensive
use of emulsifiers or stabilizers, or laborious purification procedures.
The RNVs contain a hollow water core, a rigid poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) shell, and an outermost lipid layer.
The entrapment efficiency of hydrophilic reagents such as calcein,
rhodamine B, and small interfering ribonucleic acid (siRNA) inside
the hollow water core of RNVs was approximately 90%.42

Figure 19 Scheme of a two-stage microfluidic platform for assembling
polymer–lipid hybrid NPs with varying amounts of water. (a)
Nanoparticles composed of the lipid shell and PLGA core are produced
by injecting the PLGA solution in the first stage and lipid–PEG
solution in the second stage (mode 1, P–L NPs). (b) Nanoparticles
composed of the lipid shell, interfacial water layer, and PLGA core
are produced by injecting the lipid–PEG solution in the first
stage and the PLGA solution in the second stage (mode 2, P–W–L
NPs). Adapted with permission from ref (316). Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Unlike micelles, polymer capsules
provide a delivery platform for encapsulating hydrophilic drugs. Polymer
capsules can be formed with entirely hydrophilic polymers, for example,
the LbL approach can form these capsules by templating particles.318,319,348 While such capsules are often
on the micrometer scale, smaller polymer NPs can be obtained from
polymer capsules by thermal shrinkage.321 In this approach, hollow capsules “filled” with a
desired medicine with an even polyelectrolyte layer number are subjected
to elevated temperatures (above the temperature of the glass transition
temperature of the polyelectrolyte complex, i.e.,
∼40 °C). At temperatures above 60 °C, polymeric NPs
are formed.

In contrast to the aforementioned NPs, where lab-made
synthesis is required, exosomes are naturally occurring nanosized-vesicles
endogenously secreted by cells.322 They
are involved in intercellular and tissue-level communication by transferring
biological material (i.e., microRNAs
[miRNAs], siRNA) among cells. Exosomes exhibit great potential as
nanocarriers for a wide range of therapies, including inflammatory
diseases and cancer,323 as well as for
diagnosis.324

Nanocarriers are not
always in the form of vesicles; there are numerous other types of
delivery vehicles including water-soluble polymers, dendrimers, and
even polysaccharides.325,328,334,335 Water-soluble polymers in a
random coil conformation can be efficient carriers of anticancer drugs.318,325 Recently, backbone degradable N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide (HPMA) copolymer–drug conjugates
synthesized by reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer
copolymerization demonstrated high efficacy in treating solid tumors.
These conjugates contain a degradable oligopeptide sequence (GFLG)
in the backbone and drug in the backbone and at the termini.
This design permits the use of high molecular weight, long-circulating
polymer carriers without impairing their biocompatibility (the carrier
will degrade into fragments that will be eliminated from the body).349 Consequently, as a result of maintaining the
concentration gradient (blood to tumor) for an extended period of
time, the EPR effect is considerably more effective: the drug can
accumulate in solid tumor to a higher extent. Conjugates with epirubicin,326 DOX,327 and a combination
of conjugates with gemcitabine (GEM) and paclitaxel8 were highly effective in the treatment of experimental
ovarian cancer using this platform.

Dendrimers328 are another form of polymeric NPs, which have the advantage
of being nearly monodisperse, in contrast to polymerization products,
while having a defined structure and composition.328,329 Remarkably, dendrimers with adequate hydrophilicity, unlike liposomes
and polymer micelles, do not have a critical micelle concentration.330 Therefore, dendrimers should not “in
principle” fragment upon dilution.331 Additionally, the number of functional groups grows exponentially
as the number of generations increases. These features make dendrimers
a powerful platform for drug delivery. Drugs can be loaded into the
dendrimers in different ways, such as by encapsulation or by covalent
binding of the drug. Drug encapsulation can be realized in unimolecular
micelles or in supramolecular assemblies.332 This approach enables encapsulation of the most widely used chemotherapeutic
agents, e.g., DOX, methotrexate, paclitaxel, and
campthothecin.329 The covalent binding
of drugs is traditionally used to overcome the encapsulation problems,
and the drugs are linked to the dendrimer surface using groups that
will be cleaved following cellular uptake (e.g., cis-aconityl or acyl hydrazine groups, ester groups or disulfide
groups).329 All these characteristics distinguish
these materials as potential carriers for different therapeutic applications.333

Another class of carrier vehicles is
based on polysaccharides, such as chitosan, which are promising carriers
for oral delivery of therapeutic proteins.350 The oral route is considered to be the most convenient and comfortable
means of drug administration for patients.351 Chitosan is a biocompatible polysaccharide derived from the shells
of crustaceans. It is a mucoadhesive agent and a permeation enhancer
that is able to mediate the opening of tight junctions between epithelial
cells reversibly.352 A NP carrier system
formed by self-assembly of positively charged chitosan and negatively
charged poly(γ-glutamic acid) in an aqueous milieu has been
developed for delivering protein drugs orally.334,335 The as-prepared chitosan NPs are pH-responsive in the intestines,
because the pKa of chitosan is approximately
6.5. The working mechanism for this oral delivery system is that the
mucoadhesive chitosan NPs adhere to and infiltrate the mucus layer
on the intestinal surface. The infiltrated NPs can transiently open
the tight junctions between epithelial cells while becoming unstable
and disintegrated, owing to their pH-responsiveness, and releasing
the loaded protein. The released protein then permeates the paracellular
pathway via opened tight junctions, ultimately absorbing
into the systemic circulation.336 However,
the enhanced absorption of therapeutic proteins, as delivered by chitosan
NPs, occurs mainly in the duodenum, most likely because chitosan is
insoluble in a neutral/basic pH environment in the jejunum and ileum.337 Additionally, these chitosan NPs are not able
to protect the released protein from degradation by the proteases
present in the mucus layer. One strategy of inhibiting intestinal
protease activities is to remove essential metal ions such as Ca2+ from the enzyme structure using chelating agents such as
ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid (EGTA). Furthermore, the use of chelating
agents for removing extracellular Ca2+ can disrupt intercellular
junctions and increase paracellular permeability. According to reported
experiments, EGTA-conjugated chitosan NPs can significantly reduce
enzymatic degradation by the specific removal of extracellular Ca2+ from the intestinal lumen. This enhanced stability causes
intracellular internalization of junctional components, and thereby
increases the absorption of protein throughout the small intestine.338 A recent large animal study performed with
beagle dogs revealed that EGTA-conjugated chitosan NPs could successfully
deliver proteins into the plasma.339 Although
chitosan-based NPs are promising for oral delivery of therapeutic
proteins, further preclinical studies are required to test their efficacy
and safety.

Proteins can themselves form the basis of another
class of drug carriers.340 The abundant
plasma protein, serum albumin, has been successfully converted into
a drug transporter and was launched to the market in 2005 for delivering
the anticancer drug paclitaxel (Abraxane).341 Serum albumin is a nontoxic, nonantigenic, and biodegradable material.
In fact, albumins are excellent charge-reversible materials. Albumins
have characteristic isoelectric points, due to the existence of both
carboxylic acid and amino groups. When the environmental pH is higher
than the pI, albumins have more negative charge on their surface,
otherwise albumins are more positively charged. In addition, the pI
of albumins can be adjusted by changing the ratio between the carboxylic
acid and amino groups through chemical modifications. By tuning charge,
albumin NPs have been successfully used to deliver negatively charged
nucleic acids as biomolecules for gene therapy.353 Recent approaches broadened the applicability of this successful
platform and there is further development of novel features that aims
to advance intelligent drug delivery. Boronic-acid-rich albumin NPs
have been equipped with targeting peptides cRGD on the surface and
DOX encapsulated inside the NPs.342 The
boronic acid groups enhance the recognition of NPs to cancer cells,
since the boronic acids reversibly interact with overexpressed sialic
acid residues. Encouraged by the success of albumin NPs, other endogenous
proteins are being investigated such as milk casein,343 or the iron-transport protein ferritin.344 Proteins in their denatured form reproducibly enable the
attachment of PEG chains as well as drug molecules to improve circulation
times and solubility. In this way, polypeptide–PEG copolymers
of human serum albumin have been obtained that can form small micelles.
These micelles were able to transport and to release multiple copies
of the drug DOX in leukemia cells via a two-step
release mechanism.345

Similar to
protein carriers, ribonucleic acid (RNA) nanotechnology has emerged
as a potential platform for drug delivery applications. This use is
largely due to the ability to design structures with high thermodynamic
stability, and favorable and distinctive in vivo attributes.354 RNA can act both as a delivery vehicle as well
as an active therapeutic agent. As an example, Qiu et al. combined the bacteriophage phi29 DNA packaging motor pRNA three-way
junction (3WJ) with folic acid, a near-infrared (NIR) marker, and
BRCAA1 (breast cancer associated antigen 1, AF208045) siRNA (see Figure 20).43 These RNA NPs comprise functionality for targeting, imaging,
delivery, gene silencing, and regression of gastric cancer. In vitro assays revealed that the RNA NPs specifically bind
to gastric cancer MGC803 cells. The siRNA incorporated in the RNA
NPs thereby significantly silences the BRCAA1 gene. The apoptosis
of gastric cancer cells was observed as a result of silencing the
antiapoptosis factor BCl-2 and up-regulation of the proapoptosis factor
Rb and Bax expression. Animal trials using a gastric tumor-bearing
nude mice model confirmed that these RNA NPs could be used to image
gastric cancer in vivo, while showing little accumulation
in crucial organs and tissues several hours postsystemic injection.
The growth of the gastric tumor noticeably decreased during the course
of treatment. No damage to important organs by the RNA NPs was detected.
All results show that RNA nanotechnology can overcome some conventional
cancer therapeutic limitations and open new opportunities for specific
delivery of therapeutics such as siRNA, miRNA, and/or chemotherapeutic
drugs to stomach cancer. In recent work, siRNA attached to glucose-modified
AuNPs (AuNP@PEG@glucose@siRNA) were applied in vitro to a luciferase-CMT/167 adenocarcinoma cancer cell line and in vivo to the lungs of B6 albino mice.355 The siRNA-bearing NPs induced the expression of pro-apoptotic
proteins such as Fas/CD95 and caspases 3 and 9 in CMT/167 adenocarcinoma
cells in a dose-dependent manner, independent of the inflammatory
response. Moreover, in vivo pulmonary delivered siRNA-bearing
NPs were capable of targeting c-Myc gene expression (a crucial regulator
of cell proliferation and apoptosis) via in vivo RNA
interference (RNAi) in tumor tissue. This led to an ∼80% reduction
in tumor size without associated inflammation. Overall, RNA NPs can
improve therapeutic efficacy while reducing toxicity and side effects
and therefore provide an avenue for use in clinical tumor therapy
in the near future.

Figure 20 Global structure of therapeutic RNA NPs with BRCAA1 siRNA.
(A) Design of the RNA NPs. The left image shows the NP structure as
used in animal trials. On the right, an extended structure imaged
by atomic force microscopy (AFM) is shown. (B) AFM image of extended
3WJ RNA NPs. The RNA complex as shown in (A) on the left is estimated
to be around 10 nm in size. Due to convolution of the tip size (∼10
nm in diameter) in AFM images, features smaller than the size of the
tip cannot be resolved. To characterize the structure of the RNA constructs,
the 3WJ NPs were extended by 39–60 base pairs (in red color,
A, on the right), which is within the persistence length of dsRNA
and will not affect the 3WJ folding as described before by Shu et al.,356 to generate the AFM
image as shown. Adapted with permission from ref (354). Copyright 2015 Nature Publication Group.

Nanodiamonds are among the most promising carbon nanomaterials
for drug delivery, as well as imaging and theranostic applications.
Nanodiamonds that are ∼5 nm have a large accessible surface
and tailorable surface chemistry, combined with unique optical, mechanical,
and thermal properties.118 In drug delivery,
the rational surface modification of NDs allows for enhanced adsorption
and chemical binding of the drugs for sustained or triggered drug
release. Both the amount of drug adsorbed and the strength of adsorption
can be controlled by the surface chemistry. By attaching drugs to
the surface of NDs and by achieving controlled release, it is possible
to renew the potency of anticancer chemotherapeutics.125 Similarly, the development of NDs for targeted
delivery of antibiotics and other drugs may also restore the drug
efficiency and reduce systemic toxicity. Currently, NDs are being
investigated for the delivery and sustained release of anticancer
chemotherapeutics,119,357 nucleic acids,358 and insulin.359 Nanodiamonds
have also been demonstrated for covalent binding of proteins, sometimes
enhancing their activity.360

Similarly,
inorganic NPs are frequently used as delivery vehicles. Among the
inorganic nanocarriers, mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNPs) have emerged as a multifunctional platform
that enables the development of custom-designed treatment modalities
for disease-specific applications. One example is the use of MSNPs
to address cancer-specific challenges such as the dysplastic stroma
of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). The stroma serves as a
treatment barrier due to inaccessible tumor blood vessels as well
as the expression of cytidine deaminase, which is responsible for
rapid degradation of the first line chemotherapeutic agent, GEM. It
is possible to use a variety of MSNP designs to address the stromal
barrier, including drug delivery to decrease the stromal abundance
or negotiating vascular access by interfering with the action of pericytes
that closely adhere to vascular fenestrations in the stromal blood
vessels (see Figure 21A).361−364 In one formulation, a MSNP carrier was developed to deliver a small-molecule
inhibitor of the TGF-β receptor kinase, which is responsible
for providing the cellular signal for the adherence of pericytes to
endothelial cells.365 This was accomplished
by placing a polycationic polymer on the NP surface to interact with
the small molecule inhibitor via hydrogen bonding.
Under acidic conditions, the small molecule inhibitor was rapidly
released in the tumor stroma. When used as a first-wave carrier, this
NP construct opened vascular fenestrations within 1–2 h, thereby
making it possible for a second-wave carrier (e.g., a liposome) to deliver GEM to the tumor site (see Figure 21B).365 Another formulation included the development of a dual delivery
carrier, where a lipid-bilayer-coated MSNP (LB-MSNP) was used to codeliver
a synergistic GEM/paclitaxel combination to the site of orthotopic
human tumor implants in the pancreas of a murine model.366 This dual-delivery MSNP carrier was ∼10×
more potent than Abraxane, which recently received FDA approval in
combination with GEM. Not only did the ratiometric-designed carrier
suppress the tumor stroma, but it also decreased the expression of
cytidine deaminase, enabling increased uptake of activated GEM at
the cancer site (see Figure 21C).366 The LB-MSNP could also be used
with considerable efficacy to deliver irinotecan to the pancreatic
cancer site. This result can be achieved using a remote loading method
in which the drug is imported for high loading efficiency across the
lipid bilayer through the use of a proton gradient.367 This carrier was more effective than a liposomal equivalent
that was recently approved by the FDA, but it also improved safety
because of its more stable drug retention. Together, these examples
demonstrate the use of multifunctional MSNPs for the treatment of
pancreatic cancer.

Figure 21 (A) Schematic to show the barriers and challenges that
are responsible for failed chemotherapy in PDAC. This includes abundant
dysplastic stroma, which serves as a physical and biological barrier,
interference in vascular access and the presence of a high local concentration
of deaminase activity, which leads to in activation of GEM. Trichrome
staining of human PDAC is also shown: blue staining is collagen deposition.
(B) Two-wave approach for PDAC treatment. PEI/PEG-MSNP binds to the
TGFβ inhibitor, LY364947. The complexation is highly stable
in the physiological conditions, but can be disrupted in the acidic
stromal environment. NIR-labeled particles retention was increased
10-fold prior to injecting the TGFβi carrier into mice with
BxPC3 xenografts (circle), with significantly decreased pericyte coverage
on endothelial cells in tumor blood vessel. Reprinted from ref (365). Copyright 2013 American
Chemical Society. (C) Schematic describing GEM trapping in MSNP pores,
which are sealed off by the LB that contains a subtoxic dose of paclitaxel
(PTX). Ratiometric codelivery of GEM/PTX by LB-MSNP inhibits PANC-1
orthotopic tumor growth through increased delivery of GEM at the tumor
site. GEM/PTX loaded LB-MSNP leads to CDA inhibition in parallel with
increased oxidative stress. Adapted from ref (366). Copyright 2015 American
Chemical Society.

Naturally there are
many more types of NPs used for delivery applications, such as CNTs,
graphene, and also the already mentioned inorganic NPs such as SPIONs,
plasmonic NPs, etc. However, due to their sheer number,
it is impossible to describe them all in this Nano Focus.

Targeting
Targeting of NPs refers to delivery to specific tissues and cells in vivo. Nanoparticles can be designed to be stealthy to
escape immune clearance and avoid nonspecific cell uptake but should
also be capable of being sticky to target tissues and interacting
with and/or be taken up by desired cells. Nanoparticles can passively
or actively accumulate in the desired tissue via transport
through leaky vessels and unique intraorgan pressures, or adhere to
specific biological structures in the targeted tissue via molecule recognition to surface-bound ligands.368 Recently, researchers designed smarter NPs that can turn
from stealthy to sticky. Switching between these two properties may
enhance the biodistribution and targeting of NPs to diseased tissues.

Researchers have found inspiration in nature by using principles
of viruses, transport proteins and their interactions with cell membranes,
to achieve “stealthy and sticky” properties. Mimicking
envelope-type viruses, different envelope-type369,370 or shell-sheddable nanocarriers371,372 have been
explored to enhance the distribution of NPs in target tissue. Polymers
with strong antifouling properties, such as PEG or zwitterionic polymers,
were tethered onto NPs by cleavable anchor groups that are responsive
to different stimuli, e.g., pH, redox, and proteolytic
enzymes. The NPs with the stealthy shell had prolonged circulation
times and enhanced accumulation in solid tumors due to the EPR effect, i.e., passive targeting. The unique stimuli within the targeting
tissue enable the NP to release the shell, thus converting from stealthy
into sticky. In a similar direction, zwitterionic surfaces containing
mixed positive and negative charges have received great attention
due to their unique stealthy properties and their similarity to proteins.
Many proteins behave stealthily to most cells and they can have long
circulation times in vivo. However, they can alternate
between “stealthy and sticky” under even a slight stimulus
such as a minor change in pH.373 Although
the detailed mechanism of this change has not been elucidated and
might indeed be complex, the zwitterionic properties of amino acids
and the mixed-charge structures of proteins might contribute to this
feature. By exploiting pH changes in different structures (e.g., in tumor tissues, 6.5–6.8;
in endosomes, 5.5–6.8; and in lysosomes, 4.0–5.0), zwitterionic
polymer-based NPs, capable of altering their charge densities in different
tissues, can be prepared. This responsiveness involves introducing
a surface moiety sensitive to tumor extracellular acidity (pH ∼6.8)373 as the anionic part of the zwitterionic polymer
(see Figure 22).

Figure 22 Interchange
between “stealthy and sticky” for zwitterionic polymer
micelles (left) and the mix-charged AuNPs (right). Adapted with permission
from ref (373) and (374). Copyright 2012 and 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Nanoparticles can also be covered by neoglycoconjugates,
or sugar-like functional groups and other functionalities such as
thiol groups, to convert the NPs from stealthy to sticky. Though typically
uncharged, such glycan-based ligands provide extremely high stability
in biofluids, while minimizing nonspecific cell internalization. Whereas
much research has been carried out with nanometer-size AuNPs,375 these
moieties have only recently been shown to work for larger AuNPs with
various morphologies, including nanorods.369,376 Interestingly, even though the stealthiness was shown to be superior
to that of PEG ligands, specific protein-binding was retained, enabling
the AuNPs to target cell types that overexpress certain protein receptors.
The NPs thus exhibit prolonged circulation times due to the pronounced
antifouling properties of the zwitterionic polymer. However, when
the NPs are in an acidic tumor environment, surface charges change
from negative to positive, leading to enhanced cellular uptake and
accumulation of the NPs within tumor tissue. Compared with the NPs
that switch their charge states by cleavage of the responsive covalent
bonds, charge conversion of weakly electrolytic groups at different
pH proceeds rapidly and better mimics the changes in charge density
of amino acid segments within proteins. Surface engineering of inorganic
NPs via mix-charged ligands can enhance NP retention
in tumors by modulating the aggregation of NPs.374,377,378 The mixed-charge modified AuNPs
present not only a transition from stealthy to sticky under the acidic
extracellular pH of solid tumors, but also a significant aggregation
of NPs with much higher tumor accumulation, retention, and cellular
internalization. Aggregation of AuNPs can also shift the surface plasmon
band to the near-infrared wavelengths for photothermal therapy.379 Moreover, recent studies on 3D spheroids of
liver cells made in inverted colloidal crystals demonstrated that
targeted nanotubes display unusually fast passive diffusion in the
tissues.380 Such an effect originates from
the effective two-dimensional (2D) translation of nanotubes over the
surface of the cells in the tissues when the attractive forces between
nanotubes are balanced with electrostatic repulsion. This finding
suggests that nanoscale design of drug delivery vehicles can result
in deep and effective penetration into the tumors.

In addition
to tailoring the surface properties of NPs, optimizing the sizes of
NPs is also particularly important for tumor accumulation, penetration,
and finally treatment efficacy,381 particularly
in targeting stroma-rich tumors.382 By
using micelles, ranging from 20 to 300 nm with the same chemical structure
and physical properties, Wang et al. found that the
blood circulation time and tumor accumulation of micelles increased
with an increase in their diameters; with optimal diameters ranging
from 100 to 160 nm. However, higher tumor accumulation of the large
micelles (100 nm) did not result in significantly improved therapeutic
efficacy, because larger micelles had poorer tumor penetration than
did smaller micelles (30 nm). An optimal size that balances drug accumulation
and penetration in tumors is critical for improving the therapeutic
efficacy of nanoparticulate formulations.381 The size effect is more pronounced in pancreatic tumors, which usually
have thicker stroma and hypovascular characteristics that limit NP
penetration. In the same direction, Kataoka and co-workers discovered
that tuning the size of polymeric micelles in the range below 50 nm
significantly improved the penetrability into stroma-rich pancreatic
tumor and consequently improved antitumor efficacy.361 In addition, 30 nm polymeric micelles loaded with cisplatin
have proceeded onto Phase III clinical trials for the treatment of
pancreatic cancer patients by extending survival times in Phase I/II
compared to standard treatment using GEM.

Apart from passive
targeting, as described above, there are also exciting recent developments
in actively targeting NPs. As one of the early studies in designing
integrin-targeted nanomedicines, RGD-modified stealth liposomes achieved
higher intracellular levels of DOX.383 In
recent years, more novel ligands against various tumor targets have
been employed by making use of different targeting motifs, including
alpha-conotoxin ImI, PHSCNK, lanreotide, octreotide and chlorotoxin
for alpha 7 nAChR, integrin α5β1, somatostatin receptors, and chloride channels.384−388 However, receptor redistribution induced by ligand binding decreases
receptor affinity for ligands. A special dimeric RGD with proper distance
between two RGD motifs was used to circumvent this problem.389 On the other hand, an electrically neutral
but hydrophobic penetration peptide was introduced to modify NPs against
different breast cancer cell phenotypes irrespective of their receptor
expression, displaying lasting accumulation and better inhibition
of the tumor.390 Still, there are ongoing
discussions about the benefits of active versus passive
targeting.34,391

Besides ligand-mediated
active targeting, active physical targeting has also been demonstrated.
Magnetic focusing can enrich iron oxide NPs in the tumor region. Materials
most commonly used for magnetic drug delivery contain metal or metal
oxide NPs, such as SPIONs. Superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs consist
of an iron oxide core, often coated with organic materials such as
fatty acids, polysaccharides, or polymers to improve colloidal stability
and to prevent separation into NPs and carrier medium.392,393 For some applications, a permanent magnet is placed in the targeted
region prior to the administration of magnetic NPs. This has
been done for ferric steel implants, which were placed in the subarachnoid
space in an in vitro human spine model prior to NP
administration into the spine.394 Similarly,
dilute microferrimagnetic wires implanted within blood vessels in
combination with an externally applied magnetic field can provide
specific enrichment of simultaneously administered ferromagnetic NPs.395 The challenge of NP enrichment in deeper body
regions was addressed by He and co-workers, who deployed Halbach-like
magnet arrays.396 Nacev et al. also developed a sophisticated approach based on fast magnetic pulses
on ferromagnetic rods that led to reversing the sign of the potential
energy term in Earnshaw’s theorem. This process enabled a quasi-static,
stable trap between magnets, resulting in the concentration of ferromagnetic
rods on a central target.397 These concepts
are still far away from clinics. Magnetic drug targeting (MDT), based
on intra-arterial administration of drug-loaded SPIONs, is closer
to application in patients. This technology involves enriching SPIONS via a strong external magnetic field. A proof-of-principle
preclinical study was conducted to demonstrate successful application
of SPIONs for cancer treatment.398 Simultaneous
injection of Mitoxantone–SPIONs into the tumor-supplying vessel
in rabbits and the application of a strong external magnetic field
over a VX2 squamous cell led to complete tumor remissions without
side effects. By applying only 5–10% of the conventional chemotherapeutic
dose, complete tumor remissions were achieved. The distribution profile
after MDT displayed 57.2% of the total recovery of administered drug:
with 66.3% of the particles localized in the tumor region with magnetic
targeting, compared to less than 1% of drug and NPs reaching the tumor
region during conventional intravenous application. Magnetic drug
targeting enables better enrichment of drug formulations and, consequently,
enables more specific treatment. The majority of magnetic material
is based on magnetic NPs either encapsulated or coated by different
inorganic core/shell coatings399 or by
various polymer-based matrices, which are from natural400−402 or artificial origin.403,404 To translate these
magnetic nanoparticles for clinical applications, the development
of methods for large-scale synthesis is required. A promising approach
to synthesizing fatty acid-coated SPIONs, shielded with albumin and
functionalized with adsorptive mitoxantrone, was developed with easy
scale-up synthesis pathways in order to obtain antitumor-effective
magnetic NPs.405 Nanoparticles derived
from this process have proven to be stable under appropriate storage
conditions.406

Delivery of Macromolecular
Biopharmaceuticals across Biological Barriers
Nanomedicines
are also being developed for diagnosing and treating infectious, neurodegenerative,
or cardiovascular diseases.407 Anticancer
drugs are typically small organic molecules; however, the number and
impact of macromolecular biopharmaceuticals (i.e., polypeptides and polynucleotides) are increasing enormously. Their
size and complexity impose significant challenges to their use as
safe and effective medicines, including fast elimination and poor metabolic
stability. Furthermore, this class of compounds notoriously suffers
from limited permeability across biological barriers, such as cellular
membranes or epithelial tissues (see Figure 23).408 On the
other hand, their medical use offers not only the ability to ameliorate
symptoms, but also the opportunity to cure or to prevent diseases,
either by directly correcting hormonal disorders (e.g., insulin in diabetes) or by correcting, inhibiting, or reprogramming
genetically disordered cells. The delivery of macromolecular biopharmaceuticals,
preferentially via noninvasive (“needle free”)
approaches, is therefore another important future application of nanomedicines.
This approach takes advantage of the fact that NPs can both stabilize
and protect the therapeutic cargo, while translocating across epithelial
tissue barriers like those of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, skin,
or lungs.409

Figure 23 Cellular and noncellular
barriers of the lung: after landing on lung lining fluids, (1) the
drug (or eventually entire NPs) must cross the pulmonary epithelium
(2) in order to reach the underlying tissue or the systemic circulation,
respectively. Besides, inhalation, nanopharmaceuticals must also overcome
effective clearance processes (3) provided by either mucus in the
central lung (bronchi) or by macrophages in the peripheral lung (alveoli).
Reprinted with permission from ref (408). Copyright 2014 Elsevier.

Similar to the EPR effect, which occurs at the endothelium
of tumor blood vessels, NPs can also accumulate in inflamed mucosal
areas. This phenomenon was demonstrated recently by confocal laser
endoscopy in colitis patients.410 In several
colitis mouse models, oral administration of enteric-coated NPs that
encapsulated an anti-inflammatory compound showed significant alleviation
of symptoms and inflammatory markers compared to the same dose of
free drug and nanocarriers without enteric coating. At the same time,
adverse effects elicited by drugs can be reduced through targeted
delivery, which reduces the dosing frequency as well as adverse side
effects.411,412

Nanoparticles can also
accumulate in hair follicles and skin folds after transport through
the stratum corneum (SC). This phenomenon depends on the NP size and
shape. As a medical application, it offers the potential to reach
the perifollicular antigen-presenting cells without impairing the
SC barrier. Transfollicular delivery of ovalbumin using polymeric
NPs was recently shown to induce a significant cellular and humoral
immune response, without compromising the SC barrier by any pretreatment,
when combined with innovative adjuvants.413−415

Lastly, pulmonary delivery of inhalation nanopharmaceuticals
is an area of emerging interest for the treatment of both systemic
and pulmonary diseases. Market approval of several inhalative formulations
demonstrates the preference of the public for less invasive means
of drug delivery. However, the lung features several biological barriers
that normally protect our bodies against potentially noxious substances,
which need to be overcome for effective delivery.416

Transport of biomolecular pharmaceuticals across
barriers such as biofilms has also been a topic of focus. For example,
patients suffering from cystic fibrosis, a genetic disorder, typically
get infections by opportunistic bacteria, most notably Pseudomonas aeruginosa. These Gram-negative bacteria
protect themselves from attacks from the immune system by forming
biofilms. Interfering with their so-called quorum sensing communication
systems by novel types of anti-infectives may prevent biofilm formation,
therefore combatting the bacteria while minimizing the development
of resistance. Using solid lipid NPs (<100 nm), researchers observed
about a 7-fold increase in potency to reduce the virulence factor
pyocyanin compared to the free drug.417 Nanoparticles can also be used to address respiratory problems with
implications for bacterial or viral infections. Aerosolized chitosan-coated
PLGA nanoparticles have been used for in vivo genome
editing by nuclease-encoding RNA of a lethally deficient surface protein
B. As opposed to viral vectors, which caused lethal adverse effects
in clinical trials, the nanotechnology-based nonviral carriers can
be prepared by well-controlled chemical processes and do not bear
the typical risks of viral vectors.418

Stimuli-Responsive Release
Controlled-release systems can
potentially reduce or alter toxicity by selectively controlling the
rate of drug release and directly killing diseased cells. Researchers
have thus far developed many different controlled-release methods.30 For instance, transporter polymers containing
pH-sensitive groups are protonated or deprotonated in the local microenvironment.
This responsiveness again leads to the disruption of the hydrophilic–hydrophobic
balance of the nanocarriers, triggering drug release. Alternatively,
cleavage of chemical bonds in response to pH can degrade the nanocarrier
and release drug molecules. Acid-sensitive polypeptide nanogels have
been reported for efficient DOX loading and release. Dual pH-sensitive
polymer–drug conjugates that reversed their surface charges
from negative to positive at tumor extracellular pH (∼6.8)
promoted cell internalization and DOX drug release at pH 5.0 (endo/lysosomal
pH) by cleaving acid-labile hydrazine bonds.419

Besides pH, redox potential has recently emerged as a ubiquitous
natural stimulus for intracellular drug and gene delivery because
of the large concentration gradient of glutathione (GSH) in healthy
(∼2–10 mM) and tumor tissues (∼10–25 mM).
Glutathione-responsive nanocarriers have been designed containing
disulfide bonds,420,421 either in the hydrophobic block
of amphiphilic copolymers,422 at the interconnection
of two polymer blocks,423 or as cross-linkers.424 The redox potential differences of disulfide
and diselenide bonds425,426 could even facilitate a dual
reduction-sensitive polyplex for programmed gene transfection, by
sequentially deshielding the reductive conditions of tumor tissues
and consequently degrading in response. In addition, thioether bridges
of higher chemical stability have been introduced offering better
handling and storage compared to disulfide bridges.427 Cleavage of the thioethers is only triggered by high GSH
concentrations above 10 mM, which maximizes the local specificity
of redox triggered drug release in tumor cells.

Another powerful
stimulus to release NPs are enzymes, which can be in overabundance
under pathological conditions such as cancer or inflammation. Elevated
local concentrations of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), phospholipases,
or glycosidases have been exploited to release drug molecules from
drug transporters containing the respective enzyme substrates. For
instance, MMP-sensitive nanocarriers have been designed by conjugating
DOX to silica NPs via a MMP-sensitive peptide.369 The delivery of the nanocarrier to the tumor
exposed the carrier to the presence of MMPs in the tumor, which degrades
the peptide linker and causes rapid release of the drug DOX from the
silica NP.

Tumor cells are characteristically heterogeneous
in many aspects.428 As a result, nanocarriers
responding to a single type of signal would release the drug only
in the fraction of tumor cells overexpressing that particular signal
but not in other tumor cells, thereby decreasing the overall therapeutic
efficacy of the drug formulation.429 For
instance, cancer cells may be under reducing conditions as a result
of their elevated intracellular GSH levels, which may be several-fold
higher than those of normal cells.430 Also,
many tumor cells are reported to overproduce ROS, e.g., perhaps more than 1 order of magnitude higher than healthy cells,431 and thus increase oxidative stress.432 These heterogeneous cells may exist in different
tumors, but may also coexist in different regions in one tumor. Tumor
cells at different stages may also have different GSH/ROS levels.429,430,432−434 To compensate for this observed tumor heterogeneity, Wang et al. proposed an amphiphilic SN38-prodrug formed nanocapsule
that could respond to both intracellular GSH and ROS to release the
carried drug (see Figure 24).435 The thioether linker of the
prodrug was designed to undergo thiolysis in the presence of GSH or
fast hydrolysis due to ROS oxidation of the linker, giving rise to
high in vitro cytotoxicity and in vivo anticancer therapeutic activity. The nanocapsules had a SN38 loading
content of 35 wt % and were able to target the tumor passively via the EPR effect, making them ideal for translational
nanomedicine.435

Figure 24 SN38 prodrug formed
nanocapsule responsive to tumor GSH/ROS heterogeneity, releasing the
parent drug SN38 via thiolysis in the presence of
GSH or via enhanced hydrolysis due to ROS oxidation
of the linker. This process thereby gives rise to high in
vitro cytotoxicity and in vivo anticancer
therapeutic activity. Reprinted with permission from ref (435). Copyright 2013 John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.

The development of intracellular stimuli-responsive drug-loaded
NPs has recently attracted substantial research efforts.436 Specifically, the intracellular release of
drugs by biomarker triggers or intracellular environmental conditions
holds great promise as a means to localize the drug in disease-carrying
cells. Consequently, this decreases the dose of drugs required for
treatment and reduces harmful effects on normal cells. The recognition
and catalytic properties encoded in nucleic acids have been implemented
to develop mesoporous SiO2 NPs for the intracellular controlled
release of anticancer drugs. Figure 25A exemplifies the controlled release of the anticancer
drug camptothecin (CPT) from mesoporous SiO2 NPs (100 nm
diameter) using intracellular triggers.437 The system makes use of the fact that adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
is overexpressed in cancer cells due to their enhanced metabolism,
and the fact that specific enzymes, such as the exonuclease EndoGI,
are produced in certain cancer cells. Accordingly, the mesoporous
SiO2 NPs were loaded with the CPT anticancer drug, and
the pores were capped with bulky hairpin nucleic acid units. The hairpin
structures included programmed sequence-specific aptamer domains,
which recognize the ATP biomarker. The interaction of intracellularly generated ATP with functionalized NPs resulted in the reconfiguration
of the hairpin units into ATP–aptamer complexes that were recognized
by the secondary intracellular cancer cell biomarker EndoGI. The biocatalytic
digestion of the duplex domains of the ATP–aptamer complexes
resulted in the regeneration of the ATP biomarker, and the EndoGI-stimulated
unlocking of the capped pores, leading to the release of the CPT drug. Figure 25B shows the cytotoxic
effects of the stimuli-responsive CPT-loaded mesoporous SiO2 NPs on MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, panel I, and on normal epithelial
MCF-10a breast cells, panel II. After a time interval of 48 h, the
cell viability of the MDA-MB-231 cells decreased by 65%, whereas the
viability of normal cells only decreased by 20%. The effective cell-death
of the cancer cells was attributed to the ATP-EndoGI-driven release
of CPT in cancer cells.

Figure 25 ATP-EndoGI sense-and-treat system involving
CPT-loaded mesoporous SiO2 NPs: (A) Reconfiguring the DNA
capping units via the formation of ATP–aptamer
complexes, followed by the Endo GI digestion of these complexes which
leads to the recycling of the ATP biomarker and the release of CPT.
(B) Cytotoxicity of the ATP/EndoGI-responsive CPT-loaded SiO2 NPs toward (I) MDA-MB 231 cells, (II) MCF-10a cells. Entries (a)
correspond to treatment of the cells with unloaded NPs and (b) correspond
to CPT-loaded SiO2 NPs. Gray bars correspond to cell viability
after 24 h, and black bars represent the cell viabilities after 48
h. Adapted from ref (437). Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.

Mesoporous SiO2 NPs were also loaded with anticancer
drugs, such as DOX, and capped with various other stimuli-responsive
nucleic acids responding to substances or environmental conditions
existing in cancer cells. For example, the in vitro release of DOX from mesoporous NPs was triggered by the miR-21 biomarker
present in cancer cells438 or by releasing
the i-motif locking units under the acidic conditions available in
cancer cells.439 Similarly, Zhang et al. reported the cleavage of DNA-capped, DOX-loaded mesoporous
SiO2 NPs by the ATP-promoted activation of a catalytic
Mg2+-dependent DNAzyme that was associated with the capping
units.440 The intracellular release of
DOX from DNA-capped mesoporous nanoparticles using photogenerated
ROS species has also been demonstrated.441 In order to realize the potential of these stimuli-responsive NPs
fully, toxicity must be evaluated in cells and animals.

Although
numerous internal stimuli have been investigated, it remains a challenge
to receive a sharp response to subtle changes in environmental conditions.
As a result, many exogenous stimuli-responsive drug nanocarriers have
been designed to respond to external stimuli such as temperature changes,
magnetic or electric fields, and light (i.e., electromagnetic
waves) to control the spatial location of drug release.442,443 Particularly, magnetically responsive transporters have been developed
to target tumor tissue under the influence of an external magnetic
field.444 This concept has demonstrated
great potential in cancer therapy and increased therapeutic efficacy
at lower doses with fewer toxic effects. In addition, magnetic resonance
imaging combines diagnostics and therapy in the same system, as we
will emphasize in the theranostics section. Light is another attractive
stimulus for the construction of stimuli-responsive drug nanocarriers,
since this approach enables remote and spatiotemporal drug release
by tuning the wavelength, energy, and site of irradiation. The advantages
of phototriggered drug release are obvious; however, accessibility
of the body for light is limited.445 Skin
treatment is the most obvious application of this technology, but
there are numerous other methods used for drug release on or through
the skin by epitopical methods. Interestingly, Sykes and co-workers
showed that QDs and AuNPs can accumulate and transit through the skin
after tail vein injection. Their results suggest that skin may be
a depot for light-activated NP drug release.446 Photochemical drug release has also been studied in the lungs. Practically
all organs accessible by endoscopic tools may be treated this way.447 For the combination of light and interventional
therapy, fixed-point drug release can be realized by taking advantage
of optical fibers. Near-infrared laser-triggered drug nanocarriers
are particularly promising due to deeper tissue penetration, lower
scattering properties, and minimal harm imposed on tissues. Thus,
NIR-responsive systems are promising platforms for clinical applications.448−450 Several studies have demonstrated that upon NIR irradiation,451 AuNPs incorporated in the wall of the polymer-based
delivery container can convert light into heat through a series of
photophysical processes. The heat can directly destroy cancer cells
or facilitate disruption of thermoresponsive NPs, resulting in the
release of encapsulated drugs.452,453 Controlling this process
by minimizing heat accumulation can lead to nondestructive opening
of capsules and intracellular delivery of medicine.454−456 However, even though these strategies have proven successful in
several examples, deep tissue penetration to reach less accessible
targets is still challenging and the accuracy is often low due to
complicated tissue and bone environments inside the body. Thus, the
future success of this strategy is not only dependent on material
design, but also on the development of advanced instruments to position
the therapeutic stimulus accurately.

In ophthalmology, there
is a need to release drugs for the treatment of secondary cataracts
years after implantation of an artificial intraocular lens. In this
case, since the cornea is a good ultraviolet light absorber, the use
of ultraviolet light is not appropriate for treatment. Photochemical
drug release from polymers by two-photon absorption can potentially
overcome these problems. In addition to low molecular weight drugs,
NPs can similarly be released by two-photon absorption.457 Examples of such materials have been developed
and successfully tested in the lab and in animal models. Thermoresponsive
drug nanocarriers have been intensively investigated as drug delivery
systems. These transporters reveal high stability at body temperature
(∼37 °C) but rapidly release their drug cargos within
locally heated tissue (∼40–42 °C).458 This approach is particularly attractive in
combination with AuNP-assisted NIR plasmonic photothermal therapy.

Alternative Delivery Strategies
An alternative delivery
strategy involves combining multiple antitumor drugs in one carrier.459,460 The poor specificity of most drugs and the complexity of tumors (e.g., multiple targets) contribute greatly
to the poor prognosis of chemotherapy. Passively or actively targeted
nanopreparations usually enhance the selectivity of anticancer drugs
while the combination of therapies against more than one single tumor
target improves the therapeutic outcome.461 Co-delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs and nucleic acids has shown
promising results in overcoming multidrug resistance. Simultaneous
delivery of small-molecule drugs and nucleic acids is challenging
due to the pronounced differences in their physicochemical properties,
which may greatly affect their biodistribution and pharmacokinetics.
The preparation of delivery systems that enable the delivery of structurally
differing drugs with comparable pharmacokinetics is attractive to
inhibit tumor growth efficiently. For example, Zhang et al. demonstrated that the combined use of octreotide-modified paclitaxel
micelles and salinomycin micelles eradicated both breast cancer and
cancer stem cells.462 Zhou et al. have shown that treatment of prostate cancer with a combination
of two nanoconjugates, one targeting the hedgehog-signaling pathway
of stem cells (HPMA copolymer-cyclopamine conjugate) and the other
differentiated cells (HPMA copolymer-docetaxel conjugate), improved survival rates.463 Dai et al. reported a strategy combining the mTOR inhibitor,
rapamycin, and DOX-loaded octapeptide liposomes to combat triple-negative
breast cancer.464 Feng et al. studied the synergistic inhibition of breast cancer by codelivering
VEGF siRNA and paclitaxel via vapreotide-modified
core/shell NPs.465 Fan et al. found that the reduction of tumor interstitial fluid pressure by
liposomal imatinib improved the antitumor effect of liposomal DOX.466 Finally, Wang et al. demonstrated
the sequential killing of tumor vasculature and tumor cells via integrin-targeted polymeric micelles loaded with both
combretastatin A4 and DOX.467

In
addition to intravenous delivery, nanomedicines can be delivered locally.
Most chemotherapeutics are delivered systemically, where high doses
result in severe side effects and only a limited amount of drug reaches
the tumor site. Intratumor or peritumor delivery is thought to improve
these issues but the challenge is in simultaneously achieving high
drug loading, sustained and stable drug release, and long-term local
drug retention. One platform achieved these requirements by incorporating
micelles or nanocrystals of a hydrophobic antitumor drug, such as
docetaxel and paclitaxel, into a thermosensitive injectable hydrogel.468,469

Tumor metastasis accounts for 90% of cancer-associated deaths
and is almost inaccessible by chemotherapy, surgical operation, or
radiotherapy. A nanomedicine modified with a peptide-targeting metastasis
can facilitate DOX in inhibiting metastatic tumor growth and prevent
the initiation and progression of tumor metastasis.470 Its targeting to highly metastatic tumors was demonstrated
in a double tumor-bearing model with both metastatic and nonmetastatic
tumors in the same mouse.471 Lymph-targeting
peptides can enhance nanoparticle delivery to a highly metastatic tumor
and its lymphatics.472 Chlorotoxin, a venom
peptide previously used for brain targeting, was found to inhibit
metastatic tumor growth and metastasis.473 After intravenous injection, CPT NPs accumulated in the lungs, a
major metastatic site for many types of cancers, which led to greater
antimetastatic efficacy.474 Finally, a
macrophage-based biomimetic delivery system inhibited metastasis due
to its tumor-homing properties.475

Regulating
Cells with RNA
Targeting protein-coding messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and
regulating noncoding RNAs by delivering therapeutic RNA effectors
or modified derivatives has become an important research topic in
nanomedicine. In principle, there are four different strategies to
deliver nucleic acid effector molecules: (i) through viral vectors
that encode RNA effectors such as short hairpin (shRNAs), usually
adeno-associated viruses or lentiviruses;476−478 (ii) via NPs based on liposomes (lipoplexes), polycations,
or polyamines (polyplexes);479,480 (iii) as conjugates
with hydrophobic molecules (e.g., cholesterol or
tocopherol),481,482N-acetylgalactosamine,483 or aptamers;484 and
(iv) by gymnotic (“naked”) delivery of chemically modified
RNA, which means functional delivery into cells without any further
formulation.485 There are various possibilities
to form nanoplexes with nucleic acid effectors. For example, chitosans,
dendrimers, polyethylenimine, atelocollagen, or cyclodextrin can be
used to produce polymeric NPs for delivery. Cationic or neutral liposomes,
as well as zwitterionic polymer micelles are available options among
liposome-based NPs. Several of these nanoplexes are now in clinical
studies, illustrating that RNA-based therapeutics are considered promising
for future healthcare. Functionalization of nanoplex delivery sytems
opens many perspectives for a more specific delivery of NPs to their
target cells.

We will focus our discussion on relatively small
nucleic acid effectors, usually not exceeding 50 nucleotides (nt;
U1 adaptors, siRNA duplexes) and as short as 8 nt (tiny locked nucleic
acids [LNAs]). Such antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) effectors are
routinely designed with strategic nucleotide modifications to improve
various features, such as stability in biological fluids, cellular
uptake, target RNA affinity, and specificity, or to minimize toxicity,
nonspecific immune stimulation, and off-target effects.486 At present, the most effective and widely used
chemical modifications are phosphorothioates, ribose 2′-OH
modifications (e.g., 2′-O-methyl, 2′-fluoro
or 2′-O-methoxyethyl modifications), and LNA residues with
their ribose moiety locked in the 3′-endo conformation by a
methylene bridge connecting the 2′-oxygen and the 4′-carbon
atom (see Figure 26A). Locked nucleic acid modifications make ASOs nuclease-resistant
and increase duplex stability with target RNAs more than any other
known nucleotide modification, without compromising target specificity
as long as immune stimulatory sequences are avoided.487,488 Gapmers are ASOs carrying an internal stretch of at least 6 DNA
oligonucleotides for the recruitment of endogenous RNase H activities
that cleave the target RNA in the RNA:DNA hybrid region. The 5′-
and 3′-terminal nucleotides of gapmers preferentially modified with LNA residues (termed LNA gapmers)489 to optimize target affinity and to confer nuclease
resistance (see Figure 26B). Such LNA gapmers are applied to knocking down mRNAs and
long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) which have emerged, like miRNAs (see
below), as an abundant class of regulators of gene expression.490 Aberrant expression of lncRNAs is often causatively
linked to pathological processes.491,492

Figure 26 (A) Chemical
nucleoside modifications frequently used for nucleic acid effectors.
In many cases, phosphorothioate (PS) modifications (one of the two
nonbridging oxygens of the phosphodiester replaced with sulfur) are
incorporated, to improve the pharmacokinetic properties and cellular
uptake. (B) LNA gapmers composed of terminal LNA residues and at least
6 central DNA nucleotides enable cleavage of RNA target strands as
part of RNA:DNA hybrids by endogenous RNase H activities. (C) In the
U1 adaptor approach, a U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP)
(an abundant spliceosomal RNP) is guided to the 3′-terminal
exon of a target pre-mRNA via a dual antisense oligonucleotide
that simultaneously anneals to the 5′-end of U1 RNA. This blocks
polyadenylation via an inhibitory interaction between
poly(A) polymerase (PAP) and the U1–70K protein. As a result,
the pre-mRNA is still cleaved but not polyadenylated, which induces
its degradation. Efficient down-regulation by “U1 interference
(U1i)” was observed with target domains of 12–15 nt
(with up to 15 LNA residues) and 10–13 nt in the U1 RNA binding
domain (good efficiency observed with eight 2′-O-methyl and
five LNA residues). A PS backbone was also found to be compatible
with U1i.493,494 U1A, U1C, U1–70k and
the Sm ring proteins are integral components of the U1 snRNP. PAP:
poly(A) polymerase; CPSF: cleavage and polyadenylation specificity
factor (including the endonucleolytic subunit 73); CA: cleavage site.
Adapted with permission from ref (494). Copyright 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

The classical RNAi effectors are
siRNAs, usually delivered in the siRNA duplex format (19 bp plus 2
nt overhangs at the 3′-ends; see Figure 27), although other formats have been reported, often combined with strategic chemical
modifications.486 siRNAs can be delivered
indirectly by using viral vectors (e.g., lentiviral vectors) that encode one or a few shRNAs (see Figure 27). Such approaches
have been explored for anti-HIV therapy,478,495 as they permit controlled expression of shRNAs and increase the
duration of the RNAi effect.

Figure 27 Exogenous RNA effectors utilizing the RNAi
machinery of mammalian cells (siRNA duplexes, shRNAs, miRNA mimics)
or interfering with the function of endogenous miRNAs (antimiRs).
siRNA duplexes, 19 bp long, mimicking the processing products of the
RNase Dicer, are incorporated into the RNA-induced silencing complex
(RISC). One of the two siRNA strands (termed the guide strand) is
selected by RISC to guide the complex to complementary mRNAs sequences
that are cleaved by the endonuclease Ago2 followed by mRNA decay.
This catalytic process is highly efficient as one siRNA-programmed
RISC can cleave many complementary mRNA molecules. In the case of
small shRNA expression vectors, a single or multiple shRNAs are usually
transcribed from RNA polymerase III promoters after the DNA vector
has reached the nucleus; alternatively, miRNA polycistrons can be
transcribed from RNA polymerase II (Pol II) promoters. The miRNA primary
transcripts (termed pri-miRNAs), vector-encoded shRNAs or polycistronic
miRNA transcripts are processed by Drosha and DGCR8 and are exported
as precursor intermediates (pre-miRNAs or shRNAs) from the nucleus
by the export factor exportin 5 (Exp. 5). The final maturation to
short duplexes is catalyzed by the RNase Dicer in the cytoplasm. siRNA
and miRNA pathways differ after guide strand selection by RISC: whereas
siRNAs are fully complementary to the target mRNA and induce its cleavage,
miRNA strands guide the RISC primarily to the 3′-UTR of their
target mRNAs where they form only partial base pairing interactions.
The prevailing biological miRNA effects are inhibition of the 5′-cap-dependent
initiation of protein biosynthesis and/or induction of mRNA transfer
into cytoplasmic “processing (P) bodies”, where the
mRNAs are stored or degraded; m7G: 7-methyl-guanosine-5′,5′-triphosphate
cap at the 5′ end of mRNAs; An: poly(A) tail at
the 3′-end of mRNAs.

The miRNAs, representing
the endogenous RNAi effector branch, are interesting targets because
their aberrant expression (down- or up-regulation) is also causatively
linked to many pathological processes such as tumorigenesis. Here, two
different therapeutic strategies have emerged: (i) delivery of so-called
miRNA mimics (aiming at restoring the normal levels of a miRNA), and
(ii) ASOs that sequester overexpressed mature single-stranded miRNAs,
called anti-miRNAs as the overarching term. Classical anti-miRs are complementary
to 15 or more nucleotides of the miRNA single strand and are modified
with 2′-O-methyl groups and PS internucleotide bonds.496 Recently, Miravirsen (Roche Innovation Center
Copenhagen A/S), a 15-meric miR-122-specific anti-miR with a PS-modified
backbone and a mixture of LNA and DNA residues,497−499 successfully passed a phase 2 clinical trial after significantly
reducing hepatitis C virus replication in liver cells.497−499 As a peculiarity of miRNAs, the essential base-pairing interaction
with target mRNAs is confined to the so-called seed region comprising
the 5′-terminal 6–8 nt of the miRNA. In fact, there
are families of miRNAs whose members share the same seed sequence
and are likely to interact with the same target mRNAs. For the sake
of a strong therapeutic effect, in many cases it appears reasonable
to inactivate all miRNA members of the same family. This inactivation
is achieved by a class of anti-miRs termed “tiny LNAs”
which are uniformly PS- and LNA-modified 8-mers directed against the
miRNA seed region. Tiny LNAs specific to miR-122 have been successfully
delivered without any formulation to the livers of primates and nonprimates,
where they down-regulated cholesterol levels.500 In addition, 14-meric fully LNA-modified anti-miRs, termed
antiseeds, carrying a natural PO backbone and covering the seed region
plus the central part of the target miRNA, were shown to exert a remarkably
persistent inhibition effect against miRNA families. Such antiseeds
can also be delivered as NPs with a branched low-molecular-weight
polyethylenimine (PEI LMW-25), whereas tiny LNAs can not.501 More efficient formulation of longer antiseeds
relative to tiny LNAs may be of advantage for NP-based delivery into
tissues not accessible by gymnotic delivery. A PO instead of PS backbone
may reduce spurious interactions with extra- and intracellular proteins.

Another promising ASO strategy is based on U1 adaptors, which are
dual antisense molecules that base-pair with the 3′-terminal
region of U1 RNA as part of the highly abundant U1 snRNPs, and with
an accessible sequence in the last exon of the target mRNA.494 This recruitment of the U1 snRNP blocks polyadenylation
of the mRNA (but not its cleavage), which consequently results in
its degradation by exonucleases493 (see Figure 26C).502 It will be interesting to see if the U1 adaptor
strategy is applicable to pathologically overexpressed lncRNAs that
also undergo polyadenylation.

Here, we have described short
nucleic acid effectors. Their potential advantages are (i) cost-effective
synthesis, (ii) modulation and control of their properties by introduction
of chemical modifications, and (iii) facile incorporation into many
NP platforms. Of course, more complex RNA-based therapeutics have
been conceived. As an example, Qiu et al. combined
the bacteriophage phi29 DNA packaging motor pRNA 3WJ with folic acid
targeting, a NIR marker for imaging and a BRCAA1 (breast cancer associated
antigen 1, AF208045) siRNA for RNAi43 (see Figure 20).

Inorganic NP-Mediated
Cell Death
Most nanoparticle formulations for cancer treatment
act as delivery vehicles of cytotoxic agents to induce a cytostatic
effect on tumors. Another emerging application of nanomedicine is
the direct use of NPs as highly efficient and low-toxic drugs without
carrying drug molecules: the inorganic NPs themselves are used as
the therapeutic agent. For example, Gd@C82(OH)22 with a dose level as low as 10–7 mol/kg exhibits
an antineoplastic efficiency in tumor-bearing mice.503 The Gd@C82(OH)22 NPs directly possess a strong
capacity to improve immunity504,505 and interfere with
tumor metastases in vivo,506−509 with tolerable toxicity in vivo and in
vitro. The high antitumor efficiency of these NPs is not
due to direct toxic effects induced on tumor cells, indicating that
the anticancer mechanisms are different from classical cancer therapeutics.
Results from recent studies suggest a new concept of “caging
cancer” with Gd@C82(OH)22 NPs, versus “killing cancer” by classical therapeutics.
The “caging cancer” concept509,510 refers to rendering the tumor microenvironment inhospitable for
tumor growth by forming an induced fibrous layer around the surface
of a solid tumor, while using the Gd@C82(OH)22 NPs to regulate the diverse components of the tumor microenvironment.
By employing this concept, the Gd@C82(OH)22 NPs
were able to prevent tumor resistance to therapeutic drugs507 while reducing ROS production in tumor-bearing
mice. Furthermore, these NPs mitigated damage to the main organs by
decreasing all metalloprotease enzyme activities, while restoring
other parameters, such as oxidative stress, close to normal levels.511,512 These NPs also induced dendritic cells to become functionally mature
and increased their capacity to activate allogeneic T cells in tumor-bearing
mice.504,505,513 Tumor angiogenesis
can also be inhibited by simultaneously down-regulating more than
20 angiogenic factors.507 More interestingly,
Gd@C82(OH)22 NPs were found to be capable of
inhibiting triple-negative breast cancer cells by blocking the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition, resulting in the efficient elimination of cancer stem
cells (CSCs) in vitro and in vivo.(514) In comparison, the use of classical
anticancer drugs like paclitaxel resulted in a relatively high enrichment
of CSC and promoted tumor sphere formation and abrogation of tumor
initiation and metastasis, probably due to its selective toxicity
to regular tumor cells only but not to CSCs.514 However, the nontoxic Gd@C82(OH)22 NPs selectively
target CSCs but not regular tumor cells under hypoxic conditions.
Such effects have not been observed in normal stem cells. The direct
use of nontoxic nanomedicines with new acting mechanisms like “caging
cancer” instead of killing cancer can be considered a potentially
revolutionary shift in cancer therapeutics in clinical applications.515 In the future, such strategies based on shutting
down the tumor infrastructure will gain more importance due to their
reduced side effects. Despite the broad medical utility of this NP
system, the use of Gd-based nanomedicine has recently faced controversy
related to potential toxicity issues.516,517

In
another example, Cha et al. proposed ZnO NPs as a
therapeutic agent since these NPs can be engineered to specific shapes
that act like biomimetic enzyme inhibitors.518 The ZnO NPs were able to inhibit the activity of beta-galactosidase
reversibly in a shape-dependent manner (see Figure 28A). That inhibition was not the result of
protein denaturation, but rather a subtler conformational frustration
of the enzyme that more closely resembles the mechanism of naturally
occurring enzyme inhibitors. Furthermore, Cha et al. demonstrated that the NP-based enzyme inhibition can be characterized
using the classical Michaelis–Menten and Eadie-Hofstee formalisms
(see Figure 28C–E).
As many traditional pharmacological therapeutics are enzyme inhibitors,
this work opens the door for the design of a new class of degradation-resistant
inorganic NP enzyme inhibitors that can be particularly suitable for antibiotic resistant bacteria exemplified by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA, see below).

Figure 28 (A) Relative catalytic activity of galactosidase
in the presence of three different shapes of ZnO NPs. The relative
catalytic activity of galactosidase with each of the ZnO NPs was normalized
with respect to free enzyme activity. (B) Pictorial representation
of pyramid-shaped NPs interacting with the active site of galactosidase.
(C–E) Lineweaver–Burk plots of galactosidase activity
with various concentrations of ZnO (C) nanopyramids, (D) nanoplates,
and (E) nanospheres. Adapted from ref (518). Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.

Another approach used to design
NP-based drugs to induce apoptosis in malignant cells is based on
the cross-linking induction of the surface noninternalizing receptors.
Receptor cross-linking involves the biorecognition of high-fidelity
natural binding motifs with cell receptors or with side chains of
water-soluble polymers. The general design concept of drug-free macromolecular
therapeutics is shown in Figure 29. An important feature of these designs is the absence
of low-molecular-weight cytotoxic compounds. The concept was validated
for the treatment of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) using nanoconjugates
that target CD20 (noninternalizing) receptors on B cells. The system
is composed of two nanoconjugates: (a) an anti-CD20 Fab′ fragment
covalently linked to a biological moiety (oligopeptide or oligonucleotide)
and (b) a polyHPMA grafted with multiple copies of the complementary
oligopeptide/oligonucleotide. Exposure of human NHL Raji B cells to
anti-CD20 Fab′-Motif 1 decorates the cell surface with peptides/oligonucleotides.
Further exposure of the decorated cells to graft copolymer P-(Motif
2)x results in heterodimerization or hybridization
and triggers the cross-link between CD20 receptors and initiating
apoptosis in vitro and in a NHL animal model in vivo.519−521 Magnetic resonance imaging and flow cytometry
analysis indicated that no residual cancer cells were detectable in
long-term survivors (125 days).521 Multimodality
imaging studies investigating the interaction between cellular membranes
and nanoconstructs confirmed that self-assembly plays a critical role
in this highly specific therapeutic system.522,523 This new paradigm demonstrated activity in the treatment of cells
isolated from patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and mantle
cell lymphoma.524,525 This interdisciplinary strategy
has potential to overcome rituximab-related resistance and become
a new drug development pipeline for the treatment of NHL and other
B-cell-derived hematological neoplastic diseases and autoimmune disorders.526

Figure 29 Schematic of overall design and possible mechanism
of drug-free macromolecular therapeutics for treatment of NHL. Adapted
from ref (521). Copyright
2014 American Chemical Society.

Killing Cells with Inorganic NPs upon External Stimuli
Inorganic
NPs can respond to external stimuli to elicit tumor cell death. In
the following section, we describe three common examples of external
stimuli-driven NP therapies, including photodynamic therapy (PDT),
photothermal therapy (PTT), and magnetic hyperthermia.527−529

In its simplest form, PDT relies on the interaction between
a photosensitizer (PS), a light source, and oxygen. A PS is a nontoxic
compound capable of absorbing light and producing ROS upon de-excitation,
producing ROS. Photosensitizer excitation is usually achieved via one-photon transition between its ground state S0 and a singlet excited state, S1. At this point, the molecule may return to its ground
state via emission of a photon (fluorescence), but
the excited PS may also generate a triplet state T1 by intersystem crossing. The lifetime of T1 is longer (microseconds) than S1 (nanoseconds), enabling the system to react in one of two ways,
called the Type I and Type II mechanisms. The Type I mechanism involves
electron transfer between the PS and a substrate, yielding free radicals
that can then react with oxygen to form ROS, such as superoxide radical
anions. In the Type II mechanism, singlet oxygen is generated via an energy transfer between the PS and triplet oxygen.530

Desirable characteristics of PSs are
(i) high absorption coefficient in the spectral region of the excitation
light, preferably in the NIR emission range if PSs are to be used
in PDT of cancer states; (ii) a triplet state of appropriate energy
(ET > 95 kJ mol–1) to enable efficient energy
transfer to ground state oxygen; (iii) high quantum yield (QY) for
formation of the triplet state and long triplet state lifetimes (τ
> 1 μs); and (iv) high photostability. Organic dyes and aromatic
hydrocarbons are one class of molecules that possess these properties.
They include dyes such as rose bengal, eosin, and methylene blue that
are effective PSs because they possess triplet states of appropriate
energy. They have high singlet oxygen yields, with rose bengal reaching
a value of Φ = 0.71,531 and strong
absorption bands in the green region of the spectrum. Aromatic hydrocarbons
such as napthalenes, anthracenes, and biphenyls have also been investigated
as PSs. Studies found that the efficiency of energy transfer to triplet
oxygen is greatly affected by the substituents on the biphenyl ring
and by the polarity of the solvent. Finally, quinones are good PSs,
with QYs in the range of 0.11–0.76,532 but sometimes they lack strong absorption bands at wavelengths shorter
than 600 nm. Porphyrins, phthalocyanines, and related tetrapyrroles
are another class of molecules that were identified as excellent PSs.
Porphyrins and their analogues are ideal PS candidates because they
occur naturally in biological systems and therefore generally lack
cytotoxicity in the absence of light. These compounds have high QYs
and properties that can be easily tuned by changing the substituents
on the macrocycle, but they are susceptible to photobleaching. Also
worth mentioning are naphthalocyanines, which bear a second benzene
ring on the primary phthalocyanine ring. This addition is responsible
for an attractive red-shift in absorption from 680 to 770 nm. Chlorins,
derived from the porphyrin structure through saturation of one or
two double bonds, also have absorbance spectra red-shifted into the
therapeutic spectral window. The most studied member of this class
is hematoporphyrin, which has high singlet oxygen production QY of
0.65 but unfortunately only a weak absorption band at 630 nm (ε
= 3500 M–1 cm–1). Some transition
metal complexes have been identified as efficient photosensitizers,
having singlet oxygen QY comparable to the well-studied organic compounds
methylene blue and rose bengal. Ru(II) tris-bipyridine and [Ru(bpy)3]2+, in particular, are effective singlet oxygen
producers with a QY of 0.73 in oxygen-saturated deuterated methanol
and 0.22 in water.533 Lastly, little attention
has been paid to semiconductor NPs as PSs. However, singlet oxygen
production and subsequent cytotoxicity from photoexcited semiconductors
such as TiO2 and ZnO have been reported.534

In addition to the aforementioned requirements, the
application of PDT to the treatment of cancer or other pathological
conditions places other requirements on potential PSs. First, the
compound should have low dark toxicity (i.e., it
should not be toxic to the organism in the absence of light). Second,
it should selectively accumulate into the affected tissue in order
to minimize side effects and maximize cytotoxic efficiency. In fact,
the half-life of singlet oxygen in biological systems is <0.04
μs, translating into a radius of action of <0.02 μm.535 Finally, strong absorbance in the red-NIR portion
of the spectrum would be advantageous for the PS, as these wavelengths
are able to penetrate the deepest into biological tissue (see Figure 30). The ability
to excite a PS in this region would increase ROS production efficiency,
lowering the number of scattered photons, and achieve maximum attainable
treatment depth.

Figure 30 Relative absorbance of body tissue components such as
water, hemoglobin (Hb), oxygenated hemoglobin (HbO2), and
melanin. The window that will allow the deepest penetration is the
600–1200 nm region, in the red-NIR. Adapted from ref (544). Copyright 2001 Nature
Publishing Group.

Keeping in mind these
requirements, PSs for PDT of cancer have been classified into three
generations. (i) The first generation consists of hematoporphyrin
derivative (HpD) and its analogues. Beginning in the 1970s, this compound
was the first tested and authorized for clinical use. HpD (stage 1)
is obtained from hematoporphyrin and is a mixture of ∼10 components.
Descending directly from HpD and now one of the most widely used PSs,
porfimer sodium (Photofrin, Sinclair) is HpD stage 2, which is HpD
purified from its monomeric fraction via high performance
liquid chromatography. Despite being the most studied, this group
of PSs suffers from major drawbacks; their selectivity is poor and
only 0.1–3.0% of injected PS is found in tumor tissue.536 The cutaneous tissue can take up and retain
these compounds for up to 10 weeks after intake, thus causing photosensitivity
in the patient. Furthermore, their absorbance in the NIR optical window
is weak, limiting the efficiency of light uptake. (ii) The second
generation has been designed with the aim of overcoming previous limitations
and includes structurally distinct compounds with long-wavelength
absorption and high singlet oxygen QYs. Part of this generation is
hematoporphyrin derivatives with enhanced solubility properties for
faster clearance from the organism and chlorins. Meso-tetrakis(m-hydroxyphenyl)chlorin
(m-THPC/Temoporfin, commercialized as Foscan, Biolitech Pharma), for
example, causes less photosensitization than Photofrin but is 100
times more photoactive. Other members of the group are purpurines,
which have the disadvantage of being highly hydrophobic, and phthalocyanines.
(iii) The third generation focuses on PSs with additional properties
through the use of composite structures. Better selectivity toward
the tumor tissue is often achieved by conjugation of PSs to monoclonal
antibodies or other ligands that bind specifically to the surface
of cancerous cells. Also, the use of delivery vehicles like proteins
or NPs leads to improved overall hydrophilicity and higher PS loads.
(iv) Emerging PDT systems target the development of mesoscale carriers,
which can incorporate large numbers of sensitizer molecules. These
mesoscale particles are surface modified to minimize removal by immunogenic
response mechanisms and reduce nonspecific binding. Specific antibodies
attached to these larger functional delivery particles offer advantages
over simpler PSs, which have low absorption cross sections and which
do not localize specifically to tumors.

There are three main
mechanisms by which PDT mediates tumor destruction: direct killing,
vascular damage, and activation of an immune response against tumor
cells. In the first case, the ROS generated by PDT can kill tumor
cells directly. However, complete eradication is not always realized
because of the nonhomogeneous distribution of the PS within the tumor,
nonhomogeneous penetration of light, and the possibility of limited
oxygen availability within the tissue due to the photodynamic process
itself. Vascular damage, on the other hand, targets the tumor vasculature
system and, therefore, the concentration of nutrients and oxygen that
reach it. In this case, the precise action mechanism is not yet fully
understood, but a biphasic vascular reaction following PDT has been
suggested,537 namely, a first immediate
response consisting of vasoconstriction and, after 3 h, a second long-term
response characterized by thrombus formation. Both of these effects
were correlated with delay or inhibition of tumor growth. Depending
on the kind of pathology to be treated, the interval between the sensitizer
administration and light exposure might be a deciding factor for one
mechanism over the other. When a short interval (minutes) is allowed
between drug and light administration, the sensitizer predominantly
accumulates in the vascular compartment, thus favoring indirect tumor
killing by vascular damage. Conversely, a longer interval (hours)
between intravenous drug injection and light administration results
in localization of the PS within the extravascular compartment of
the tumor and subsequent direct tumor-killing action. Therefore, administration
of PSs at multiple time intervals before light activation (fractionated
drug-dose PDT) is found to be the most effective way to target both
tumor blood vessels and tumor cells. More recent studies in the late
1980s and early 1990s reported infiltration of lymphocytes, leukocytes,
and macrophages into PDT-treated tissue, indicating activation of
the immune response. Differences in the nature and intensity of the
inflammatory reaction between normal and cancerous tissues could contribute
to the selectivity of PDT-induced tissue damage.

Photodynamic therapy
is a reliable tool for treatment of a variety of diseases, whose clinical
use is common and well established. This process involves two major
steps, the administration of a PS and the delivery of light. The administration
of a PS can be topical or intravenous, depending on the pathology
to be treated and the ease of access to the area: skin diseases that
allow for topical application will require drugs with different characteristics
than will diseases for which an intravenous approach is required.
Along with vascular permeability and interstitial diffusion, chemical
properties like molecular size, configuration, charge, and the hydrophilic
or lipophilic character of the compound will all impact transport
and retention of the PS.

Conventionally, PDT is administered
as a single treatment using the highest PS dose that avoids systemic
toxicity and skin photosensitivity, and the highest light fluence
rate that avoids tissue heating and photochemical depletion of oxygen.
However, for reasons discussed above, there have been a few studies
about fractionated PDT, in which the PS administration
is spread over time. Preliminary studies have shown improved responses
to this kind of metronomic PDT compared to single doses, most likely
due to the simultaneous action of direct tumor cell killing and blood
vessel damage. Light can be delivered by surface or interstitial irradiation.
Surface irradiation includes cases where the light source is external
to the body (e.g., treatment of
skin lesions), or is placed within and illuminates the inner surface
of a body cavity (e.g., a hollow
organ or a surgical resection space). Interstitial treatments are
usually carried out by placing an optical fiber that carries the light
directly into the tissue. Typically, 1–5 W of usable power
are required in the 630–850 nm range at irradiances of up to
several hundred mW·cm–2 in order to deliver
treatments in tens of minutes. For this reason, there are three main
classes of clinical PDT light sources: lasers, light-emitting diodes
(LEDs), and filtered lamps (see Figure 31). Lasers are powerful and efficient but
they are expensive single-wavelength devices where a separate unit
is required for each photosensitizer. In the past few years, LEDs
have become a viable technology for PDT, particularly for irradiation
of easily accessible tissue surfaces. The main advantages over (diode)
laser sources are the low cost and ease of configuring arrays of LEDs
into different irradiation geometries. On the other hand, the relatively
poor electrical-to-light conversion efficiency (less than 15%) remains
an obstacle, because the generated heat must be removed. Finally,
a number of lamp systems can be spectrally filtered to match any photosensitizer
and they allow flexible geometries. Their drawback is that they are
not suitable for endoscopic use because they can be efficiently coupled
only into optical fiber bundles or liquid light guides (5–10
mm diameter).538

Figure 31 Surgeons delivering
laser light through an optical fiber for the treatment of an internal
tumor.

Photodynamic therapy design is
still a relatively young field and substantial improvements could
come from better PSs: higher absorption in the optical window, larger
extinction coefficients, more efficient singlet oxygen production,
and better chemical and physical properties. Interesting new directions
that could overcome some of the intrinsic limitations of current compounds
are currently being explored. (i) In two-photon PDT, the PS ground
state is able to absorb two photons of NIR light simultaneously, which
can be administered in short pulses: the total energy absorbed is
the same as that from one-photon absorption at λNIR/2 and the resulting photophysical and photochemical processes are
the same. This two-photon absorption enables a much wider choice of
PS absorbing at high extinction coefficients in the visible, while
retaining the possibility of using light in the biological optical
window. Also, the quadratic dependence of the two-photon absorption
probability can be exploited to give more precise spatial confinement
of the PDT effect by high-numerical-aperture focusing of the activating
laser beam. One of the drawbacks of this technique is that, in order
for the photons to be absorbed simultaneously, the light pulse must
typically be shorter than ca. 100 fs, a factor that
substantially increases the cost of light sources. (ii) Another concept
currently being investigated is the use of molecular beacons to improve target selectivity. Molecular beacons comprise a targeting
moiety, a PS, and, optionally, a quencher. In their simplest form,
the targeting group is responsible for accumulation of a higher number
of PSs in the cancer cells and therefore higher selectivity. Alternatively,
a target-labile linker keeps a PS and a quencher in close proximity,
so that FRET prevents activation of the PS. Upon interacting with
the target, the linker is either broken or opened so that the PS and
quencher are separated, enabling FRET-driven PDT action to occur.
(iii) Finally, NP technology provides several different
novel approaches to PDT. A first approach is the use of NPs as PS
carriers, a method already applied to many other imaging contrast
agents and therapeutic compounds. The advantages are that the loading
of PS molecules per NP can be high and that the NPs can impart new
desirable qualities to the compound, such as greater hydrophilicity
or targeting ability. Examples include the incorporation of PS into
modified silica NPs or into lipoprotein NPs with antibody targeting
capabilities, the decoration of AuNPs with PS, or the use of NPs that
are themselves photoactive. Another approach is the use of NP–PS
conjugates, where the NP serves as the primary light absorber that,
through FRET, activates the PS. An issue with all these NP strategies,
besides potential toxicity, is the delivery of the NPs or NP–PS
conjugates to the target tissues, because the pharmacokinetics are
strongly dependent on the NP properties.

In contrast to PDT, which kills cells by the generation of ROS,
hyperthermia kills cells by heat. Tumor treatment by heat is one of
the oldest ways to cure cancer. The application of pyrogens induces
endogenous hyperthermia, where heat is generated by a substance or
agent that reacts with the human immune system. This was the standard
treatment for inoperable tumors until the middle of the 20th century.
After administration of various bacterial toxins (or later on, vaccines)
and the subsequent feverish reaction, a significantly higher survival
rate was observed. Because of the inability to control the induced
fever and the insufficient outcome, it is now applied only rarely.542 Modern hyperthermia can be performed using
plasmonic NPs and light, as well as magnetic NPs and alternating magnetic
fields. Inorganic NPs act as local heat sources, triggered by light
or alternating magnetic fields. Hyperthermia can be used as a stand-alone
approach, or in combination with certain chemotherapeutics.

One of the most promising therapeutic strategies in nanomedicine
is that of photothermal cancer therapy.543 In this drug-free therapy, these NPs absorb energy at a wavelength
of 700–1000 nm544 and generate heat.
They can burn off the tumor when the irradiation occurs after the
particles have accumulated in the tumor. Intensity of the incident
laser irradiation, the nature of the NPs (i.e., the
localization of the surface plasmon resonance), and the size of NPs
are the factors that will determine the efficiency of the localized
heating. It was shown at an in vitro level that such
localized heating can be applied to kill cancer cells.453,545−549In vivo, the highly localized hyperthermic response
induced by resonant laser irradiation results in tumor remission for
subcutaneous tumors with high efficacy (see Figure 32).550 Researchers
have demonstrated both passive and active uptake of nanoshells, a
type of heat-generating NPs, into tumors.551,552 In addition to nanoshells, other plasmonic NPs such as gold nanorods
and gold nanocages have been shown to be useful for hyperthermia applications.546,553 In preparation for transition to clinical trials, the toxicity of
nanoshells was investigated extensively. No toxic effects were found
in this study.554 Recent improvements in
nanoshell design can enhance their clinical utility. The addition
and integration of imaging functionalities with the therapeutic function
of these NPs resulted in NIR-enhanced fluorescence and NIR-enhanced
imaging of tumors.555−557 Smaller diameter, multilayer NPs known as
“nanomatryoshkas”, which also have NIR-absorptive responses,
can enhance NIR fluorescence for emitters encased between their inner
and outer gold layers.558 These NPs have
shown increased uptake in tumors relative to nanoshells and outstanding
remission rates with active targeting of aggressive triple negative
breast cancer tumors.559

Figure 32 Evaluation of tumor
response to PTT by bioluminescence imaging. The bioluminescence signal
is generated only in living cancer cells, as a result of luciferase
activity. (A) Representative mice of each experimental group showing
the luciferase activity in the tumor. The mice injected with nanomatryoshkas
or nanoshells and treated with laser experienced loss of bioluminescence
in the area illuminated by the laser, as seen after therapy. Mice
were euthanized when tumor volume reached 1500 mm3 or if
the tumor persisted at 60 days after treatment. (B) Luciferase activity
in the tumor. The luciferase signal was normalized to the signal before
treatment. Adapted from ref (560). Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.

Local heat can also be produced by magnetic NPs
upon exposure to alternating magnetic fields.561−564 The basic precondition for effective magnetic heating is that the
NPs have adequate magnetization values. Iron oxides (magnetite/maghemite)
are particularly preferred since they have been used as contrast agents
in radiology for many years, e.g., in the detection
of cancers in the liver and spleen. The generation of heat is based
on NP morphology as well as on the energy dissipation during the NPs
magnetization process.565−567 This means that the magnetization
reversal of NPs with core diameters larger than 100 nm is governed
by the motion of magnetic domain walls. In contrast, cores that are
smaller than 100 nm behave like single-domain NPs where no domain
walls exist. Even smaller NPs behave as if they are superparamagnetic
and the magnetization reversal proceeds either by rotation of the
magnetic moment inside the core (Néel relaxation) or by mechanical
rotation of the whole NP (Brown relaxation) during exposure to an
alternating magnetic field. It has been demonstrated that sufficient
thermal energies can be obtained with NPs with core sizes between
10 to 50 nm.568−570 Concerning NP synthesis, the current challenge
is the stabilization of NPs with a relatively larger core size distribution.571 Promising materials in this context are magnetosomes
derived from magnetotactic bacteria, which were successfully deployed
in a mouse breast cancer model.572 To enhance
treatment efficacy, coapplied chemotherapeutics or drug-carrying magnetic
NPs are included. Cisplatin, in combination with magnetic heating,
exhibits additive cytotoxic effects, particularly when it reaches
its target site of action where it forms DNA adducts after its chloride
ions have been displaced by hydroxyl groups.573 A promising NP formulation with cisplatin payloads was developed
by Unterweger et al.(400) Most magnetic hyperthermia developments for treating diseases are
in the preclinical stage with a few used in the clinic.

Biodegradation
There is increasing awareness of the potential threats of using
exogenous nanomaterials in vivo. In particular, the
development of increasingly sophisticated nanocarriers further increases
the risk of undesired side effects, discussed below. Therefore, it
is highly desirable that drug delivery vehicles exert only minimal
effects on the biological system after their cargo has been delivered,
where the vehicles should ideally be eliminated after delivery to
target tissues. Consequently, in vivo degradation
with well-defined rates and with the formation of nontoxic and degradable
byproducts that can be excreted becomes increasingly important.574,575 Currently, there are a number of organic NPs that can be degraded,
which will be discussed below.

Water-soluble polymeric drug
carriers are one such class of compounds that can be designed to be
biodegradable. For these carriers, molecular weight and molecular
weight distribution are important factors in their design, impacting
both their therapeutic efficacy and their biocompatibility. The higher
the molecular weight of the polymer carrier, the higher the accumulation
of polymer–drug conjugate in the tumor tissue with concomitant
increase in therapeutic efficacy.325,576 However,
the renal clearance threshold limits the molecular weight of nondegradable
polymeric carriers (such as HPMA-based) to below 50 kDa.577 This issue lowers the retention time of the
conjugate in circulation with simultaneous decrease in pharmaceutical
efficiency. Consequently, higher molecular weight drug carriers with
nondegradable backbones deposit and accumulate in various organs,
impairing biocompatibility. These concerns can be addressed by the
incorporation of degradable polymer backbones, such as those seen
in backbone degradable (second generation) HPMA copolymer carriers.
These carriers have long circulation times while preserving biocompatibility
and are based on the combination of controlled/living radical polymerization
and click chemistry.349,578,579 The backbone degradable HPMA copolymer–drug conjugates provide
long-circulating water-soluble therapeutics that effectively accumulate
in tumor tissue. They are eliminated from the body after enzymatic
cleavage of the oligopeptide segments in the backbone (producing polymer
fragments below the renal threshold) and in side chains (releasing
the drug). The synthesis procedures proposed are versatile; they provide
a platform for the preparation of a large variety of polymer–drug
conjugates with tailor-made properties, such as predetermined circulation
time and composition.

Controlled degradation—nonspecific
cargo release from slow hydrolysis in physiological fluids like the
bloodstream—remains a challenge. Therefore, design of biodegradable
polymers requires incorporation of fast and efficient polymer degradation
at the target site while retaining high stability in circulation and
at off-target sites. Polypeptides offer great potential in this aspect,
since their stability can be adjusted based on their monomer sequence,
their molecular weight, or by attaching stabilizing or degradable
side chains along the backbone. The most commonly used hydrophilic
polypeptides have protonated amino side chains, e.g., poly(lysine), poly(arginine), poly(glutamate), and poly(aspartate),
which ensure excellent water solubility and increase the interaction
with the negatively charged cell membrane to facilitate cellular uptake.
Amphiphilic block copolymers of two or three homopolypeptides have
been prepared with hydrophobic segments such as poly(leucine) and
hydrophilic segments such as poly(lysine) that form polymersomes and
encapsulate hydrophobic drugs. However, highly positively charged
polypeptides often reveal uncontrolled protein absorption, immediate
immune responses, opsonization by macrophages, or rapid clearance
from the bloodstream by renal or hepatobiliary excretion. To overcome
these limitations while taking advantage of the aforementioned properties,
innovative materials in biological systems that have a degradable
but peptidic nature are highly desirable.

Polymers based on
the body’s own amino acid sarcosine (N-methylated
glycine) have been obtained and are one of the first polymers synthesized
by living ring-opening polymerization.580 The polypeptoid polysarcosine offers high water solubility, nonimmunogenicity,581−583 and protein resistance584 due to its
special characteristics, e.g., weak
hydrogen bond acceptor with the lack of hydrogen donor capabilities.585 Polysarcosine is a nonionic and highly water-soluble
polymer that is similar to PEG but potentially offers in vivo degradability as suggested from in vitro studies
under physiologically relevant conditions.586 The synthesis of block copolymers based on polysarcosine and polylysine,
polycysteine, polyglutamic acid, or derivatives thereof, by ring-opening
polymerization of the corresponding α-N-amino
acid carboxyanhydrides in a controlled fashion, offers high end-group
integrity, precise control over molecular weight, and low dispersities
of around 1.1. The amphiphilic block copolypeptides are nontoxic up
to concentrations of 3 mg/mL and stabilize hydrophilic/hydrophobic
interfaces in drug formulations and mini emulsion techniques.586 The deprotected polymers polysarcosine-block-polylysine enabled the formation of core/shell polyplexes
for efficient in vitro transfections.587 Degradable polypeptide copolymers have been
achieved from natural protein precursors. Unlike synthetic polypeptides,
which consist of repeating amino acid sequences, the polypeptide backbone
of proteins provides a higher diversity of reactive functional groups,
which enables further chemical modifications. Moreover, depending
on the precursor protein chosen, these polypeptides offer distinctive
and adjustable molecular weights, precisely defined sequences, low
cytotoxicity, and full degradability. They have been applied for coating
fluorescent NPs as well as for the delivery of cytotoxic drug molecules.

A challenge when using inorganic NPs is the ability of the animal
to degrade and to eliminate them. Sub-5 nm NPs such as NDs can be
eliminated from the body renally without biodegradation and without
leaving toxic residues.588 However, larger
inorganic NPs are more difficult to clear from the body. Studies have
shown that AuNPs reside in macrophages after uptake and do not appear
to be degraded;589 ZnS-CdSe QDs have also
been shown to remain stable in mice and rats after several months.590,591 There is evidence to suggest that some inorganic NPs (e.g., CdSe QDs and hollow AuNPs) can break down by oxidation or other
chemical processes. This process is slow but there is evidence to
show they are excreted through the kidneys.35,592,593 The chemistry and design of
the inorganic NPs can influence the degradation pattern. Although
the core composition is difficult to degrade for most inorganic NPs,
the organic surface coating has been shown to degrade in vivo. This effect was demonstrated by using multiplexed radiolabels that
tag the inorganic core and surface coating with an organic molecule.
This labeling strategy enabled the measurements of differential temporal
biodistribution of all different parts of a NP after in vivo administration. It was discovered that inorganic NPs stabilized
by an amphiphilic polymer shell via amide bonds lose
parts of the organic shell upon enzymatic cleavage in vivo.37 Taking the concept further, a number
of researchers have started to use organic molecules to assemble inorganic
NPs into complex systems for in vivo medical applications.
For example, DNA can assemble inorganic NPs into a complex core–satellite
system that can target tumors, but these NPs can subsequently enter
liver macrophages.36 The enzymes in these
cells degrade the DNA linker and release the inorganic NPs back into
the bloodstream to be eliminated through the kidneys. Linker molecules
to build nanosystems are not limited to DNA but can also be polymers
that can potentially be responsive to enzymatic degradation.594,595 The clinical translation of inorganic NPs may depend on whether
they are cleared from the body, as the long-term toxicity of metal-containing
NPs remains unclear. This research area will continue to be active
from the fundamental (i.e., understanding the clearance
mechanism of inorganic NPs) to the design (i.e.,
using assembly techniques to build degradable nanosystems containing
inorganic NP components) perspectives.

Laboratory-Based Material
Production for Treatment (“Implants Made with Nanotechnology”)
While some nanomaterials are designed to deliver a drug or an action
to diseased tissue and programmed to degrade afterwards, researchers
are also synthesizing nanomaterials that can be introduced into the
body with the intention “to stay”. Surface modeling
on the nanoscale can provide new functions and properties to implants, etc.596 Incorporation of nanomaterials
with key features for driving tissue engineering is a useful means
to achieve unprecedented performance.597,598 In particular,
carbon nanostructures (e.g., single- or multiwall
CNTs (SWCNT/MWCNT), graphene, carbon nanohorns, NDs, fullerenes, etc.) can provide mechanical strength and useful electronic
properties, thanks to their chemical structures.599 They have been shown to be biocompatible with and to support
the growth and proliferation of many classes of cells. Despite the
issues associated with CNT use in medicine,600 there is a growing body of work showcasing their utility in nanomedicine
after appropriate chemical functionalization.601 For example, CNT addition to hydrogels are biomaterials
that can be designed to respond to diverse stimuli, e.g., for drug release applications.602 Some
selected examples and applications are detailed below.

Nano- and Microengineered
Implants
Nanodiamond–polymer composites can be used
in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, particularly showing
potential for restoring damaged tissue. Excellent mechanical properties
of NDs in combination with fluorescence, delivery of drugs and biologically
active molecules, and biocompatibility are used for reinforcement
of implantable polymers to create multifunctional tissue engineering
scaffolds. Octadecylamine-modified NDs incorporated into poly L-lactic
acid (PLLA) provided fluorescence for monitoring the implant biodegradation
(see Figure 33). While
biodegradable polymers such as PLLA are not mechanically robust, the
incorporation of NDs brings the composite properties close to those
of human cortical bone. It increased the composite’s mechanical
strength and strain to failure, and enabled the use of the composite
as a bioresorbable bone-growth scaffold for manufacturing bone fixation
devices.31 In terms of toxicity, murine
7F2 osteoblast morphology and proliferation were unaffected when cultured
with the ND-PLLA. These composites possess clinically relevant properties
while being nontoxic and highly scalable to produce.603

Figure 33 Bone fixation screw made of a biodegradable polymer (PLLA)
reinforced with octadecylamine (ODA)-funtionalized fluorescent nanodiamond
NPs (ND-ODA) that provide reinforcement, monitoring of biodegradation,
and, eventually, drug delivery. Adapted with permission from ref (603). Copyright 2011 Elsevier.

Naturally, for such implants the
interface between the implanted devices and surrounding cells and
tissues is important. Selection of the geometry offers a useful handle
in this direction. Elongated objects, such as nanoneedles, for example,
have suitable properties for the delivery of bioactive agents to cells
and tissues. This field of nanoneedles for cell-interfacing, which
is still emerging, is now growing rapidly and shows great promise.
A number of interesting nanoneedles have been developed recently with
a multitude of capabilities. Some of these capabilities include transferring
biological information to many cells in parallel,604 sensing intracellular biological signaling such as the
presence of enzymes,605 and measuring intracellular
pH at many points across individual cells.606 The nanoneedles can deliver to the cell cytosol and yet, due to
their nanoscale dimensions, are not destructive to the cells. These
nanoneedles represent a highly promising technology for intracellular
delivery, probing, and interfacing. Porous silicon-based nanoneedles
were developed and utilized to deliver DNA and siRNA to cells in vitro efficiently and showed transfection efficiencies
greater than 90% while silencing (of GAPDH expression) was quantified
as 80% effective,607 encouraging for in vivo applications. The authors showed that they could
achieve neo-vascularization in the muscles on the backs of mice by
using porous silicon nanoneedles to deliver human VEGF165 plasmid
DNA.607 This finding is of interest when
considering the potential to prevascularize sites at which tissue
engineered implants might be transplanted in vivo. It also has the added advantage that nucleic acids can simply be
loaded into the nanoneedles and no covalent modifications are required.
The nanoneedles are a platform technology that could potentially be
used to deliver a wide range of nucleic acids and other bioactive
agents for all types of tissues.

Toward Interfacing Electrically
Active Tissues
Electrical signals can be used to control
the interactions of nanomaterials with tissues. This strategy to control
tissue function may be important for many applications such as in
the design of neuroprostheses. Below, we describe a number of these
applications.

First attempts for electrically interfacing cells
were based on microstructured devices,608−610 but more recently,
nanostructured devices such as nanowires have been used.611 Two criteria for building successful devices
are “wiring” and size, where “wiring”
involves the connection of the recording sites to the outside,612 and size is essential for brain implants to
avoid local inflammation.613 Neuroprosthetic
implants made from LbL biomimetic nanocomposites investigated by Kotov and coworkers provide a unique combination
of properties that enable manufacturing of smallest possible brain
implants that can be safely integrated within brain tissues.614 Some of these properties include high strength,
conductivity, toughness, and biocompatibility.615,616 Additionally,612−614 brain implants have been made with gold
nanowires.617

A major step forward
in this field has emerged by exploring the interactions of CNTs with
neuronal systems. Indeed, the presence of CNTs influences the electrical
activity of neurons, especially in terms of synaptic events. In the
past decade, it has been established that CNT-based substrates are
able to impact neuronal physiology profoundly from the functional
(electrical) point of view. With their exceptional properties of small
size, flexibility, strength, inertness, electrical conductivity, and
ease of combination with various biological compounds, CNTs are the
excellent candidates for interfacing with damaged neuronal tissues.
In 2000, it was found that neurons deposited on functionalized CNTs
were not only surviving, but also elongating their neurites in all
directions.618 Since then, the study of
these materials as functional components of composites for the support
of the regeneration of neural tissue has been set up by many research
groups.

Carbon nanotubes have high electron mobility, have an
affinity for neurons, and can integrate with cell membranes
at both dendrites and somas. As a result of these tight interactions,
not only neurons, but also entire 3D slices of spinal cord (SC) tissue
exhibit desirable behavior.619−622 The most important results obtained can
be summarized in three points: (i) neuronal signaling is enhanced
when brain circuits are cultured interfaced to CNT films, (ii) CNT
networks are able to induce the formation of a higher number of new
synaptic contacts with respect to reference substrates, and (iii)
CNT interfaces promote nerve fibers regrowth, potentiating growth
cone activity and synaptic responses in entire SC slices: this is
an efficient translation from single cell to complex tissues such
as SC explants.

It has been found that neonatal hippocampal
neurons, laid over a film of CNTs, increase their spontaneous electrical
activity. Thereafter high-resolution electron microscopy elucidated
the intimate contacts between regrown neuronal processes and CNTs
where the boundary line between organic and inorganic matter is ambiguous.620,622 The most outstanding results concerning the interface between CNTs
and neurons are related to the effects on the electrical activity
of neuronal networks. Lovat et al. compared the electrical
activity of hippocampal neuronal networks directly grown on a MWCNT
mat with that of networks grown on control substrate by means of the
patch-clamp technique.619 The frequency
of spontaneous events (postsynaptic currents) in networks cultured
on CNTs was strongly increased (approximately 6-fold) compared with
controls. The balance between inhibitory and excitatory components
in the neuronal network was not affected.619 By means of single-cell electrophysiology techniques, electron microscopy
analysis and theoretical modeling, it was hypothesized that CNTs can
provide a kind of shortcut between the proximal and distal compartments
of the neuron.621 This hypothesis, supported
by the observation that neuronal membranes establish tight contacts
with the CNT substrate, was further corroborated by other experiments.
When cells were forced to fire trains of action potentials, reverberations
were detected following depolarization potentials and this reverberation
occurred more frequently on CNT-deposited cells than on those grown
on inert glassy supports. This type of back-propagating action potential
represents a regenerative ability that neurons exhibit in cellular
processes, such as the tuning of synaptic activity, the expression
of spike-timing-dependent plasticity, the release of modulatory messengers
and the modulation of synaptic plasticity.

Another interesting
observation concerns the impact of CNTs on the synaptic activity of
neuronal networks. The probability of finding synaptically connected
pairs of neurons is almost doubled in the presence of the CNT substrate.
The synaptic plasticity was also affected because cells grown on CNTs
demonstrate potentiated short-term synaptic conditions instead of
normal depression in response to afferent presynaptic spike trains.
This activity mimicked the high frequency flow of information. All
this gain of function is entirely attributable to the peculiar features
of conductivity and physiochemical properties of CNTs that affect
the network activity and spike propagation.621

The ability of CNT substrates to have an effect on central
nervous system tissue has been tested by coculturing embryonic spinal
cord and dorsal root ganglia multilayered explants chronically interfaced
to a film of purified MWCNTs.622 With respect
to the controls, spinal explants cultured on CNTs displayed higher
numbers of longer neuronal processes growing in tight contact with
substrates bearing higher numbers of growth cones at their tips. These
neuronal processes seemed to be slack on the CNT carpet that increased
their contact surface but were less stiff than in the control, apparently
integrating CNTs as their own supports or exoskeletons. The overall
interactions of the spinal tissue with the substrate appear to be
intimate and similar to the results reported for isolated cell cultures.
When sensory afferent pathways, preserved in spinal explants differentiated in vitro were exogenously activated, the resulting synaptic
responses recorded from single neurons not in direct contact with
the CNT layer were strongly increased. This result indicates that
the boosting effects of CNTs at the interface were transferred from
the layers of neurons directly exposed to the CNTs to those functionally
connected yet physically far from the interface.

In order to
improve the biocompatibility of unconstrained CNTs, groups have tried
to incorporate CNTs into polymeric scaffolds. In addition to improved
biocompatibility, they aim to produce 3D structures that are able
to be colonized by neuronal cells and to foster the communication
among them, where the CNTs play strengthening and electrically functional
roles. To this end, CNTs have been integrated into various biopolymer-based
hydrogels as collagen, chitosan,623 and
agarose.624 In general, all these substrates
are good supports for neuronal cells, able to sustain their growth
and their ability to extend neurites and growth cones without a remarkable
toxicity. None of these scaffolds have yet been tested in
vivo, however. Similar results have been achieved by CNT
composites based on synthetic polymers, mostly polyester polymers
such as electrospun fibers of PLGA625 and
of poly(l-lactic acid-co-caprolactone).626 Bosi et al. have recently
produced a nanocomposite system where CNTs are integrated into a polymeric
matrix that can be modeled into different porosities, stiffnesses,
and shapes. This nanocomposite consists of a microporous, self–standing,
elastomeric scaffold whose skeleton material is made of PDMS, while
the micrometric cavities are generated by dissolving a sugar template
embedded in PDMS.627 This 3D structure
showed viability as a supporting scaffold allowing neuronal colonization
and 3D synaptic network reconstruction, but was soft enough to match
the viscoelastic nature of native hippocampal neural tissue.628 The PDMS porous scaffold surfaces was then
enriched of MWCNTs, endowing the structure with nanofeatures and implementing
its electrical conductivity.

Because of their peculiar electrical
features, CNTs are useful as interfaces with other electrically active
tissues such as cardiac tissue. Martinelli et al.(629) discovered outstanding effects on
cardiac cells cultured on CNT substrates. Neonatal rat ventricular
myocytes (NRVM) were able to interact with nonfunctionalized MWNTs deposited on glass coverslips by forming tight contacts with
the material (see Figure 34). Cardiac myocytes modify their viability, proliferation,
growth, maturation, and electrophysiological properties when interacting
with CNT scaffolds. Two opposing effects on the development appear
to take place. Cells prolong the proliferative state, which maintains
some cells in an undifferentiated state. They accelerate the maturation
of the differentiated cardiac myocytes in terms of a more negative
NRVM resting potential compared to the control so that the cells become
more “adult-like”. By transmission electron microscopy
it has been observed that CNTs establish irregular tight contacts
with the membranes, in a way that is morphologically similar to neurons
cultured on MWNTs.619 It is not excluded
that other modifications indirectly brought about by MWNTs, such as
the deposition of the extracellular matrix (ECM) or the cell contact driven
cytoskeletal dynamics, are ultimately responsible for the positive
effect.

Figure 34 Left: Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a spinal explant
peripheral neuronal fiber on a MWCNT substrate. Note the tight and
intimate contacts (red arrows) between the neurite membrane and the
MWCNTs. Scale bar: 500 nm. Reprinted from ref (622). Copyright 2012 American
Chemical Society. Right: SEM image of cardiac myocyte deposited on
a layer of MWNT. Adapted from ref (633). Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.

Such an effect holds promise to
solve the issue of arrhythmias arising from nonconductive scaffolds,
as exemplified also by a chitosan-based hydrogel, where the inserted
CNTs act as nanobridges that electrically connect cardiomyocytes.630 Another interesting cardiac construct has been
produced by Shin and colleagues:631 CNTs
were embedded into photo-cross-linkable gelatin methacrylate (Gel-MA)
hydrogels, resulting in ultrathin 2D patches where neonatal rat cardiomyocytes
were seeded. These cells showed strong spontaneous and stimulated
synchronous beating. In addition, a protective effect against DOX
(cardiotoxic) and heptanol (cardio-inhibitor) was observed. When released
from glass substrates, the 2D cardiac patches (centimeter size) formed
3D soft actuators with controllable linear contractile, pumping, and
swimming actuation behaviors. For heart tissue engineering, CNTs can
also constitute a templating guide for the electrospinning of hybrid
hydrogel nanofibers that form a superb biomimicking scaffold that
is capable of matching the orientation index of the left ventricular
tissue, thus promoting cardiomyocyte alignment and synchronous beating.632,633

The high potential of CNTs in the field
of excitable tissue engineering stems from their exceptional nature
and the desire to develop synthetic materials with appropriate nanostructure
and cell-recognition properties that are able to regulate cell adhesion,
survival, and growth. The in vivo application of
nanotechnology tools and of CNT-based platforms, in particular, is
largely directed to basic research applications. However, the extraordinary
effects of these materials hint at developing safer devices to promote
tissue reconstruction. A major challenge for biomedical applications
of CNTs is to overcome the current limitations of CNT degradation
time, elimination, and/or safety of use.

Biological Cell-Based Implants
Implants used for regenerative medicine can also be of biological
origin. Cell-based therapies offer great potential. For example, stem
cells delivered to injured tissue have the potential to regenerate
defective tissue.634,635 One general problem with cell-based
therapies, however, is that individually delivered cells have limited
retention times in the target tissue. In order to improve retention
times, cells can, for example, be delivered in already connected form
(so-called cell patches), or they can be seeded into matrices to which
they have high binding affinity. Treatment based on connected cell
patches instead of isolated cells thus may offer decisive advantages.
However, it is not trivial to cultivate cell patches, as at one point
connected cells need to be isolated from the culture substrate. Cell
adhesion typically can be suspended by enzymatic treatment (e.g., with trypsin) or by depletion in
calcium. However, while this enables the collection of cells from
culture substrates it also interferes with intracellular contacts.
Nanotechnology has helped create culture substrates that enable switching
on and off adhesive properties to cells. For example, smart surfaces
enable switching from hydrophobic to hydrophilic properties upon changes
in temperature. In this way, whole cell patches can be detached from
the culture substrate and can be used for transplants.636 Also, plasmonic heating may be a useful technique
in this direction.637 Such advanced culture
methods pave the way for future cell and tissue-engineering therapies.
Cell sheet patch therapies were clinically applied to human patients
suffering from diseases such as cornea epithelium deficient disease,
recovery from endoscopic submucosal dissension surgery for esophageal
epithelial cancer, cardiomyopathy,638,639 periodontal
regeneration,640 and osteoarthritis.641 While the number of cell layers grown on top
of each other within one cell patch is limited as transport of nutrients
and oxygen to the cells needs to be warranted,642 subsequent transplantation of several cell patches of up
to ∼100 μm thickness is possible and vascularization
of the transplants has been demonstrated.643,644 Cells can also be seeded into matrices resembling replicas of cell
surfaces,645 into decellularized matrices,646 or even into completely synthetic scaffolds
to improve their biocompatibility and engraftment.647,648 There have been some attempts for translation to the clinic,649,650 but results have been and are still heavily scrutinized.651−653 The basic requirements such transplants need to fullfill involve
vascularization, in order to warrant continuous blood supply,654 and, in case of exposure to the environment
(e.g., air, food), antimicrobial coatings. Severe
skepticism toward the use of these technologies in general is reported.655

Toward Artificial Organs
A current
need in medicine is with the construction of whole organs in vitro to address the issue of shortages in organ donation.656 Nanotechnology is emerging as a powerful tool
that can help to fulfill this need by assisting in the engineering
of artificial organs for regenerative medicine as well as organs-on-a-chip
applications.657,658 The need for nanoscale architecture
is derived from the ability of cells to sense the nanoscale structures
in their microenvironment.659 In particular,
many ECM molecules that surround cells form
nanofibrous structures that help to organize cellular architecture
and to induce directional migration and alignment.660 As outlined in the case of implants, one approach to engineer
such nanoscale structures is through the generation of 3D-fibrous
scaffolds.660−662 Techniques like electrospinning and microfluidic-based
fiber fabrication have emerged as methods to engineer 3D scaffolds
for inducing cellular organization and alignment.663−666 Furthermore, self-assembling peptides have been used to form nanofibrous
structures, which mimic the complex nanoscale architecture of native
ECM molecules.

Utilization of biomimetic
composite coatings made using LbL assembly on inverted colloidal crystal
scaffolds on ceramics,667 gels,668,669 PLGA polymer670 enabled, for instance,
the creation of ex vivo models of bone marrow,671 thymus,672 and liver.673 One of the advantages of the ex vivo organs is that they enable multifaceted evaluation of the toxicity
of NPs in human tissues in the cellular constructs replicating real
organs.674

In addition, nanomaterials
can be integrated into hydrogels to direct cellular behavior. For
example, the integration of nanoscale silicate materials can induce
the directed differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into
osteogenic fates.675 Polymeric nano- and
microparticles that release growth factors and cytokines in a controlled
manner can be integrated into scaffolds to regulate the surrounding
biology. For example, controlled release of angiogenic factors, such
as VEGF and PDGF, through polymeric NPs can induce the formation of
blood vessels. Other types of nanomaterials such as CNTs and graphene
NPs can be incorporated into hydrogels to change their mechanical
and electrical properties, as described above. The resulting gels
have been shown to enhance the formation of cardiac and skeletal muscle
tissues.631,676,677

Nanoscale tools also provide means to form tissues with controlled
microarchitectures. For example, cell-laden hydrogels can be induced
to assemble into particular structures that better mimic the microarchitecture
of tissues in the body through the use of nanoscale “programmable
glues”.678 In this approach, the
various sides of microgels of controlled shapes were coated with adhesive,
long, single-stranded DNA where the function of the strands is to
induce programmed assembly. It was demonstrated that the resulting
DNA strands form nanoscale objects on the surface of gels that uniquely
recognized their complementary base-paired strands on other gels to
induce assembly. Such structures could 1 day provide scalable ways
of engineering tissue structures with predefined architectures.

These and many other examples have shown the power of nanotechnology
to direct cellular behavior for inducing tissue formation. It is anticipated
that with our increased knowledge of how nanoscale objects interact
with cells along with our ability to engineer more controllable nanomaterials
will lead to a new era of nanomedicine for regenerative medicine applications.

Antibacterial Coatings
Biofilm formation and dissemination
of antibiotic-resistant bacteria by indirect transmission through
contaminated surfaces is becoming a major global public health threat.
Steel and aluminum surfaces, commonly present in hospital settings
as knobs, buttons, frames, taps, etc. possess limited
or very low antimicrobial activity. A promising approach for limiting
indirect transmission is the realization of stable and effective antimicrobial
surfaces obtained by nanostructured coatings. Similarly, infections
associated with medical devices (catheters, implants, etc.) have become a major concern. The adhesion of bacteria to the devices’
surfaces during the initial 24 h is believed to be a decisive period
for implant-associated infections and the design of optimal antiadhesion
of microbes in this period is key. Multilayer coating by LbL
self-assembly provides a robust method to design multifunctional dynamic
antibacterial surfaces. For example, a multilayer of (heparin/chitosan)10–(polyvinylpyrrolidone/poly(acrylic acid))10 [(HEP/CHI)10–(PVP/PAA)10] provides
the properties of contact killing of bacteria due to the underlying
(HEP/CHI)10 while the top (PVP/PAA)10 multilayer
film shows a top-down degradable capability in the determined period.
This activity leads to almost no adhesion of bacteria within 24 h.
The combination of the adhesion resistance and the contact-killing
properties shows enhanced antibacterial capability through targeting
the “decisive period” of implantation and may have potential
for applications in medical implants, tissue engineering, etc.(679)

Surfaces with immobilized
antimicrobial peptides present high and broad antimicrobial activity.680 Similarly, a topic worth exploring involves
immobilizing antimicrobial ligands onto NPs to enhance their antimicrobial
activity. A quaternary ammonium cationic surfactant, didodecyldimethylammonium
bromide (DDAB), was immobilized onto silica NPs to develop antimicrobial
NPs. These NPs revealed much lower minimal inhibitory concentrations
against bacteria and fungi than the soluble surfactant. The electrostatic
interaction of the DDAB with the NP is strong since no measurable
loss of antimicrobial activity was observed after suspension in aqueous
solution for 60 days. This result means that the antimicrobial activity
of the NP does not require the leaching of the surfactant from the
surface of the NPs. More interestingly, the NP properties expanded
to virucidal activity. The versatility, relative facility in preparation,
low cost, and large antimicrobial activity of those NPs makes them
attractive as coatings for biomedical devices.681

Suspensions of ZnO NPs are effective against a broad
spectrum of microbial organisms682−684 but there are many
misconceptions about their mechanism(s) of killing bacteria.518 Generation of ROS was often considered to be
the source of antibacterial activity.685 However, according to analysis of the mechanism of bacterial inhibition
by ZnO NPs of different shapes,518 at least
part of the antibacterial activity originates from enzyme inhibition.
Anisotropic ZnO and potentially other NPs can mimic biological inhibitors
by partially matching their geometries with those of the protein inhibitors.
Such activity originates from the similarity of the surface chemistry
and size of water-soluble NPs and those of many globular proteins.6 Applerot et al. used ultrasound
irradiation to generate ZnO NP-coated surfaces that resist bacterial
biofilm formation.686 Layer-by-layer coatings
of ZnO NPs reduce biofilm growth of MRSA by 95%. Silver in bulk
and nanomaterial forms has been used extensively as medical device
coatings but these devices have not lived up to the promise of their in vitro data.687 Silver’s
antimicrobial function is based on the concentration of silver ions
and their associated toxicity.688,689 Unfortunately, the
therapeutic window between efficacy and toxicity for silver is quite
narrow, which has led to disappointing clinical effectiveness of silver-coated
medical devices.687 ZnO is significantly
less expensive than silver and has selective toxicity for bacteria
over mammalian cells.690,691 ZnO is generally recognized
as safe by the FDA.

Nanoparticles can be designed with antibacterial
coatings to circulate in the blood to target bacterial infections
post-tumor surgery. During chemotherapy, some patients may be more
susceptible to bacterial infections.692,693 This susceptibility
cannot be addressed using antibiotics alone, however, as some antibiotics
may lead to serious side effects for some patients postsurgery. Abuse
of antibiotics has caused the emergence of more resistant and virulent
strains of pathogens. As a result, in some cases, clinicians need
to prescribe multiple antibiotics in addition to anticancer drugs
before and after the surgery. Particles can be engineered with antibacterial
properties to target bacteria in vivo specifically,
which can potentially minimize resistance. For example, a polymer
vesicle antibacterial drug carrier has been developed recently. The
chitosan-based carrier is grafted with an antibacterial polypeptide
and demonstrated to kill both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria
(see Figure 35). This
polymer vesicle has excellent blood compatibility and low cytotoxicity,
which may benefit patients after tumor surgery.694,695 The enhanced antibacterial efficacy of polymer vesicles compared
with an individual antibacterial polymer chain results from the high
concentrations of local positive charges in the polymer vesicles.

Figure 35 Antibacterial
polypeptide-grafted chitosan-based vesicles capable of delivering
anticancer and antiepileptic drugs simultaneously. Reprinted from
ref (694). Copyright
2013 American Chemical Society.

In Vivo Combination of Diagnosis and Treatment
(“Theranostics”)
Theranostics involves the
combination of both diagnosis and treatment. Image-guided tumor resection
is one such application that uses theranostics. The diagnostic use
of NPs to label cancer cells, in particular tumor borders and small
metastatic regions, can be used to guide the surgeon for subsequent
therapeutic surgical removal of the tumors.696 These diagnostic NPs could also be loaded with therapeutic agents
for treating postsurgery. Another interesting application of theranostic
agents is NPs that can deliver therapeutic agents into tumors while
tracking NP drug delivery.697 These agents
enable noninvasive imaging to provide information on the fate of the
drug once they are administered in vivo. Theranostics
research is an exciting area of research as many different combinations
of diagnostic and therapeutic strategies can be built into NP systems.

Image-Guided
Surgery
Recently, first-in-human pilot studies have successfully
used both passive and active targeting agents for image-guided surgery
of human tumors.698 The specific tumor
types studied include breast, lung, ovarian, and pancreatic cancers.
Although still preliminary, the results have helped clarify two important
issues: (i) most human tumors (but not all) have moderately leaky
vasculatures, so the EPR effect provides a general means for passive
delivery of imaging agents (5–6 nm albumin-bound indocyanine
green) to a broad range of human tumors; (ii) fluorescent dyes such
as fluorescein can be conjugated to targeting ligands such as folic
acid for specific targeting and high-contrast imaging of human tumors.

In the first approach, passive fluorescent agents do not involve
targeting ligands, but rely simply on the biodistribution of the free
fluorophore. Singhal and co-workers conducted a small trial on nontargeted
NIR dyes, enrolling 5 patients undergoing surgery for removal of their
cancers (3 lung nodules, 1 chest wall mass, and 1 anterior mediastinal
mass).698,699 Two surgeons reached a consensus about the
clinical stage and operative approach prior to surgery. All enrolled
patients were thought to have limited disease, be amenable to surgery,
and have no metastases (i.e., potentially curable).
Patients were injected with indocyanine green (ICG) prior to surgery.700 At the time of surgery, the body cavity was
opened and inspected. The results demonstrated that NIR imaging can
identify tumors from normal tissues, provides excellent tissue contrast,
and facilitates the resection of tumors.698 In situations where there is significant peritumoral inflammation,
NIR imaging with ICG is not helpful. This suggests that nontargeted
NIR dyes that accumulate in hyperpermeable tissues will have significant
limitations in the future, and receptor-specific NIR dyes may be necessary
to overcome this problem.

In contrast to passive agents, active
fluorescent agents are linked to targeting ligands that are designed
to recognize specific receptors at the target tissue. Near-infrared-dye-labeled
antibodies (MW ∼ 150 kDa) that
are currently used in the clinic for targeted cancer therapy, such
as VEGF antibody (bevacizumab), EGFR antibody (cetuximab), and HER2
antibody (trastuzumab), have been evaluated as targeted optical imaging
probes in preclinical animal tumor models.701−703 Several antibody-based imaging probes are approved for clinical
trials for image-guided surgery.704 Potential
limitations for antibody-based optical imaging probes include increased
background fluorescence resulting from relatively long blood circulation
times, as well as low efficiency in penetrating through tumor tissues.701 To address these issues, smaller antibody fragments,
such as affibodies (MW ∼ 7–8
kDa) against HER2 or EGFR, were labeled with NIR dyes for targeted
optical imaging. Specificity and sensitivity of those affibody optical
imaging probes have been demonstrated in various animal tumor models,701,705−707 with several groups in the process of conducting
clinical trials. For intraoperative imaging of tumor margins, a class
of protease activatable optical imaging probes can detect tumor edges
since many proteases are highly expressed in the invasive tumor areas
that are close to the tumor edge.708 The
first-in-human results have been reported from intraoperative tumor-specific
fluorescence imaging by using fluorescein-conjugated agents to target
the folate receptors in both ovarian cancer and lung cancer.709,710 In patients with lung cancer, the results show that targeted molecular
imaging could identify 46 (92%) of the 50 lung adenocarcinomas, and
had no false positive uptake in the chest. In vivo, prior to exposing the tumor, molecular imaging could only locate
7 of the lesions. After dissecting the lung parenchyma, 39 more nodules
could be detected. Four nodules were not fluorescent, and immunohistochemistry
showed these nodules did not express FRα (folate receptor alpha).
In 46 positive nodules, tumor fluorescence was independent of size,
metabolic activity, histology, and tumor differentiation. Tumors closer
to the pleural surface were more fluorescent than tumors deep in the
parenchyma. In two cases, this strategy was able to discover tumor
nodules that were not located preoperatively or intraoperatively by
standard techniques. These pilot clinical trials have demonstrated
that targeted intraoperative imaging may lead to more complete surgical
resections and potentially better staging.

Fluorescent NPs can
be used for similar image-guided applications as organic fluorophores.
Targeted NP-based optical imaging probes have been developed by conjugating
peptides, natural ligands, antibodies, antibody fragments, and small
molecules, to NPs that have optical imaging properties or are labeled
with fluorescence dyes. Results of preclinical studies were promising,
showing increased specificity and sensitivity in tumor imaging by
systemic delivery of targeted NP optical imaging probes as opposed
to nontargeted probes.711,712 It has been shown
that optical imaging probes can be targeted to highly expressed tumor
cell receptors and active tumor stromal fibroblasts and macrophages,
such as urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR). They are
good imaging probes for sensitive detection of tumor margins.713 In many solid tumors, active tumor stromal
cells with a high level of uPAR expression are found in the peripheral
tumor areas. Even at the early stage of tumor development, for example
in ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast, small
tumor lesions were surrounded by uPAR expressing macrophages and fibroblasts.
Therefore, optical imaging probes targeting active tumor stromal cells
offer the opportunity of intraoperative detection of small tumor lesions
(<1 mm) that lack tumor vessels that may enable EPR effect to occur
or that cannot be delivered to tumor cells.714 However, clinical translation of targeted NP imaging probes has
been a challenging task. The preclinical studies required for filing
an Investigational New Drug Application to the FDA for a clinical
trial are much more extensive compared to those required for developing
small-molecule, peptide, or antibody-based imaging probes. Additionally,
the cost of production of targeting ligand-conjugated imaging NPs
in good manufacturing practice (GMP)-grade for human use is higher
than those of peptide and antibody-based imaging probes.

Tracing of
Drug Delivery
Nanoparticles can be engineered to observe
the delivery process directly. Theranostic nanocarriers offer high
capacity drug loading as well as the ability to track and image the in vivo pathway of both the transporter and the drug in
the body. Human tumors are highly heterogeneous in their tumor vascular
structures, microenvironment, and tumor cells. Efficiency of intratumoral
drug delivery and distribution varies among different tumors. Drug
delivery using theranostic NPs enables noninvasive in vivo imaging of the NP delivery process and may enable assessment of
treatment responses at an early stage. As a tool to visualize cellular
uptake and cargo release, fluorescent NPs/polymers have been widely
used. Quantum dots, AuNPs, iron oxide NPs, and NDs have emerged as
valuable tools for combined therapy and diagnostic imaging due to
their high stability in vivo. DNA, as well as drug
transport and release of polycationic QDs and NDs into cells has been
visualized by confocal imaging, which, in principle, offers monitoring
of the entire gene delivery pathway inside cells.357,715

Polymer NPs
with intrinsic imaging properties that do not require conjugation
of imaging groups have recently been developed. For instance, the
weakly fluorescent polyethylenimine (PEI) polymer was conjugated to
hydrophobic polylactide (PLA), yielding amphiphilic PEI with a high
payload capacity for the antitumor drug paclitaxel. After conjugation
with PLA, the formed NPs exhibited bright and multicolor fluorescence,
which could be tuned to the NIR region. Although fluorescence enables
spatially resolved imaging at the cellular and tissue levels, it is
not applicable for in vivo imaging deep inside the
body. The high background autofluorescence from the organism, the
poor penetration of the fluorescent signal in and out of the animal,
and the risk of tissue damage by high intensity excitation light limit
the application of fluorescence-based imaging in vivo. Magnetic resonance imaging, PET, and CT imaging are considered
more attractive and promising for clinical applications. Nanoparticles
can be designed to contain MRI contrast agents (e.g., Gd-DOTA) or magnetic iron oxide NPs and to carry drugs
using polymers to construct a theranostic agent.

Vasiljeva and
co-workers developed an effective delivery system for targeting both
tumors and their stromal components based on ferrimagnetic nanoclusters.716 This multiplexed targeting strategy is important
for imaging and treating tumors as the tumor microenvironment has
many diverse components including extracellular matrix components
and stroma cells. The universal lipidated magnetic NPs (called ferri-liposomes
by the authors) enhance the MRI contrast properties and are effectively
taken up by tumors and their stromal components. Chemical compounds
within the ferri-liposomes are successfully released when administered in vivo and can be visualized at both the cellular and tissue
levels. Furthermore, this theranostic agent offers an exciting possibility
to deliver and to detect therapeutic agents simultaneously in vivo. As such, the cathepsin inhibitor JPM-565 was targeted
by ferri-liposomes to the peri-tumoral region of mouse breast cancer,
which resulted in a significant reduction in tumor size.

Another
class of theranostic NPs uses light for activation. One example incorporates
a second-generation PDT drug, Pc 4, with a cancer-targeting ligand
and iron oxide NPs as a MRI-guided PDT platform (see Figure 36).717 The delivery of Pc 4 by NPs enhanced the treatment efficacy and
reduced the required PDT drug dose. The targeted IO-Pc 4 NPs have
potential to serve as both an MRI agent and PDT drug.

Figure 36 Construction of targeted
NPs carrying the PDT drug Pc 4. Quantitative measures of T2 values show that the cells with Fmp-iron oxide (IO)
NPs had lower T2 values as compared to
those with only SPIONs. Reprinted from ref (717). Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.

Other NP materials may also be
used for simultaneous imaging and therapy. One example involves chlorin
e6-conjugated C-dots as the light-triggered theranostics NP platform.
This platform uses simultaneous enhanced photosensitizer fluorescence
detection (PFD) and PDT by FRET.718 Huang et al. reported folic acid-conjugated silica-modified gold
nanorods, showing highly selective targeting, enhanced radiation therapy,
and PTT effects on MGC803 gastric cancer cells, and also strong X-ray
attenuation for in vivo X-ray and CT imaging.719 In a similar strategy, multifunctional PEGylated
gold nanostar NPs were prepared with CD44v6 monoclonal antibodies
conjugated as the targeting ligands.720 The prepared NPs had high affinity toward gastric cancer stem cell
spheroid colonies. Upon NIR laser treatment with a low power density
(790 nm, 1.5 W/cm2, 5 min), those spheroid colonies could
be completely destroyed in vitro, while being simultaneously
observed with X-ray/CT imaging and photoacoustic imaging. Orthotopic
and subcutaneous xenografted nude mice models of human gastric cancer
were established. Computed tomography imaging observed in
situ gastric cancer clearly at 4 h postinjection, and photoacoustic
imaging revealed that CD44v6-modified NPs could actively target the
gastric cancer vascular system at 4 h postinjection, while the NPs
inhibited tumor growth upon NIR laser irradiation, and even extended
survivability of the gastric cancer-bearing mice. These NPs exhibited
good potential for applications of gastric cancer targeted imaging
and PTT treatment.

Hybrid materials are increasingly attracting
attention since they enable the combination of different properties
and functions in one multipurpose material with high adaptability.
Phosphate-based inorganic–organic hybrid NPs (IOH-NPs) are
attractive tools as imaging and therapeutic drugs.721 The NPs are generally composed of [ZrO]2+[Rfunction(O)PO3]2– (Rfunction = functional organic group such as drug and/or fluorescent dye)
and enable multipurpose and multifunctional combination of a wide
range of properties such as drug delivery (e.g., chemotherapeutic agents or anti-inflammatory drugs) as
well as optical and CT-based detection or MRI. For example, the anti-inflammatory
potential of [ZrO]2+[BMP]2–0.996[DUT]2–0.004 was tested in vitro on an alveolar macrophage cell line, where MHS cells were treated
with the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 200 ng/mL) to provoke
an inflammatory response. Cells were simultaneously incubated either
with IOH-NPs (10–10 to 10–5 M)
or the control drug dexamethasone (DM, 10–7 M).
Incubation of LPS-stimulated macrophages with increasing amounts of
[ZrO]2+[BMP]2–0.996[DUT]2–0.004 resulted in a dose-dependent reduction
in TNFα, IL-6, and NO secretion, with an efficacy of 10–5 M IOH-NPs comparable to 10–7 M
of dissolved molecular DM. Fluorescence microscopy confirmed these
results.

Another efficient way to implement theranostic delivery
carriers is to design multicompartment nanomedicine vehicles.722 This approach is based on multicompartment
capsules, which can be designed in the form of concentric, pericentric,
innercentric, and anisotropic or acentric structures.723 The multicompartments are composed of smaller
nanocapsules or NPs, which are often assembled around a bigger nano-
or microcapsule or particle. In such an arrangement, some multicompartments
are responsible for diagnostics by, for example, incorporating sensing
molecules,724 while other subcompartments
are constructed for therapy and treatment, i.e.,
for on-demand delivery of biomedicine. Among other alternative structures
are capsosomes and polymersomes. Capsosomes represent delivery carriers
formed by adsorbing liposomes and polymers on a particle template,
followed by removal of template cores. A number of interesting applications
have been demonstrated for capsosomes, including controlling the rates
of enzyme-catalyzed reactions, and pH- and temperature triggered release.725 Polymersomes, on the other hand, are delivery
carriers based on block copolymers.726 The
versatility of controlling their properties makes them, together with
polymeric vesicles,727 an indispensable
class of drug delivery vehicles.

Theranostic NPs not only provide
signals for imaging the locations of drug delivery vehicles, they
also may respond to the local environment and thus report delivery
by a change in the read-out signal. A first look at delivery in vitro helps to demonstrate this concept. When NPs are
incorporated into cells via endocytotic pathways,
the NPs experience radical changes in their ambient environments.
This involves a change in pH from neutral/slightly alkaline extracellular
medium, to highly acidic endosomes/lysosomes, which, for example,
enables reporting cellular internalization by observing pH changes
by pH-sensitive fluorophores integrated into the NPs.128,171 Endosomes and lysosomes are also rich in proteolytic enzymes, which
act on internalized NPs. Fluorescence markers that change signal upon
proteolytic activity enable the detection of intracellular internalization.728,729 These principles have been applied for online observation of the
delivery of micelles. Here, a color change reports successful delivery
upon degradation of the micelles. The delivery of embedded drugs can
be imaged directly.9,730,731 Murakami and co-workers demonstrated this approach using micelles
of BODIPY FL-PEG-b-poly(glutamic acid)-BODIPY TR
loaded with 1,2-(diaminocyclohexane)platinum(II). The micelles were
built to emit due to the shell-conjugated dye, while the core-conjugated
dye was quenched. The micelle degradation is triggered by changes
in pH and concentration of chloride ions, i.e., changes
that occur in late endosomes. The last approach was tested in vivo using confocal laser scanning microscopy. Despite
rapid progress in this field, theranostic NPs are still at an early
stage of development.

Nanoparticle-Labeled Stem Cells for Targeted
Imaging and Therapy
Stem cell nanotechnology, as a newly
emerging interdisciplinary field, refers to the application of nanotechnology
in stem-cell research and development. Hundreds of clinical trials
with autologous or allogeneic MSCs are currently ongoing, with efforts
being made to ensure the safety and efficacy of these advanced therapy
medicinal products. Although significant advances in the field of
stem cells have been, and are continuously being made, several obstacles
must be overcome before their therapeutic application can be realized.
These steps include the development of advanced techniques to understand
and to control functions of microenvironment signals as well as novel
methods to track and to guide transplanted stem cells. The application
of nanomaterials and nanotechnology in stem-cell research and development
exhibits attractive technological prospects to solve current problems
of stem-cell research and development.732 Mesenchymal stem cells are multipotent stem cells that can differentiate
into a variety of cell types, including osteoblasts (bone cells),
chondrocytes (cartilage cells), and adipocytes (fat cells). In addition,
MSCs possess immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory properties and
have the tendency to home to the sites of active tumorigenesis. Thus,
MSCs can be considered as a candidate cell type for cell-based tissue
engineering, cancer therapeutics, and regenerative medicine applications.

One fascinating and upcoming application is the generation of induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) from MSCs with potential in regenerative
medicine. Combining negatively charged nucleic acids such as transcription
factors and siRNA with cationized NP formulations provided superior
reprogramming efficiency compared to conventional “Yamanaka
factors” (see Figure 37).733 The highly tumorigenic c-MYC
and KLF4 oncogenes were dispensable in this approach, which employed
polysaccharides to form self-assembling NPs instead of lentiviral
transduction for iPSC generation from MSCs.

Figure 37 Negatively charged plasmid
mixture (encoding Oct4, Sox2, miR302-367) and the positively charged
cationized Pleurotus eryngii polysaccharide
(CPEPS) self-assembled into NPs, named as CPEPS- OS-miR NPs, which
were applied to human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells for iPSCs
generation. Adapted from ref (733). Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.

However, the distribution and final fate of MSCs
inside the human body have still not been clarified, for which novel
labeling and in vivo tracking technologies are urgently
needed. Nanoparticles are potentially suitable labels. However, little
is known about alteration of MSC biology after exposure or uptake
of NPs. As an example, silica-coated fluorescent supermagnetic NPs
were evaluated for their effects on MSCs, and then used to label MSCs.
The distribution and final sites of the labeled MSCs were observed in vivo in nude mice models with gastric cancer. Mesenchymal
stem cells were efficiently labeled with NPs, yielding stable fluorescent
signals and magnetic properties within 14 days. The NP-labeled MSCs
targeted and could be used to image in vivo gastric
cancer cells after being intravenously injected for 14 days (see Figure 38).734 Nanoparticle-labeled MSCs could significantly
inhibit the growth of gastric cancer in vivo based
on hyperthermia effects of the NPs, and the CCL19/CCR7 and CXCL12/CXCR4
axis loops may play key roles in targeting MSCs to gastric cancer in vivo. This NP-based labeling and tracking technology
has potential in applications such as labeling and tracking in implanted
cells, evaluating cell therapeutic effects, and recognizing and mapping
early gastric cancer cells.

Figure 38 Fluorescence and MR imaging of NP-labeled MSCs
targeting gastric cancer cells in vivo. (A) In vivo fluorescence images show that (right) tumor sites
of the mice in the test group had fluorescence signals of NP-labeled
MSCs postinjection after 7 and 14 days, and (left) tumor sites of
the mice in the control group had no fluorescence signal of NPs postinjection
after 7 and 14 days. (B) Fluorescence images of major organs show
that (left) no signal was detected in the tumor and organs of the
control group, and (right) obvious fluorescence signals were detected
in the tumor tissues of the test group. (C) MR imaging of NP-labeled
MSCs targeting gastric cancer cells after 7 and 14 days postinjection.
Adapted with permission from ref (734). Copyright 2012 Ruan et al.

Dendritic cells (DCs) also display
promising potential in cancer immunity. However, enhancing DCs’
immunotherapeutic effect in cancer-targeted immunotherapy and prevention
remains a challenge. Li et al. reported an allogenic
DC and tumor cell fused vaccine combined with cytokine-induced killing
cells (CIKs) for targeted imaging and enhanced immunotherapeutic efficacy
of gastric cancer (GC).735 The fused vaccine
was prepared by PEG-mediated fusion between mature DCs and inactive
GC MGC803 cells. The immunotherapeutic and prophylactic potentials
of the fused cells (FCs) were evaluated in tumor-bearing, postsurgery,
and tumor-free mice models. The migration and homing process of NIR-QD-labeled
FCs were investigated with a real-time animal-imaging system. Results
showed that the FCs and FC + CIKs could trigger the tumor-specific
cytotoxic T lymphocytes against GC cells. They target the tumor tissue,
enhance the prophylactic effects, and suppress the tumor growth in vivo. These allogenic DC and tumor cell fused vaccine
can be used for targeted imaging and enhanced immunotherapeutic efficacy
of GC. Similarly, the FC + CIK strategy shows potential in clinical
applications, such as early therapy and prevention of tumor metastasis
and relapse in near future.

Reducing Side Effects with
Safe-by-Design Approaches
Potential Risks of Nanomedicines
While there are many applications of nanomedicines, there are concerns
over their potential side effects when they are used in patients.
These concerns may limit their translation to patients. Thus, the
questions of how to reduce risks and to increase benefits are vital for
the development of safe and effective nanomedicines. First, we need
to understand how physicochemical properties of nanocarriers and nanomedicine
relate to their biological behavior and fate in vivo.(574,736) These physicochemical properties include
size, shape, surface chemistry, hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity,
chirality, aggregation, degradability, and catalytic ability. All
of these properties may influence their fate and subsequent biological
responses. The other issue to take into consideration is the protein
corona. When nanocarriers and nanomedicine are injected in the blood,
they can quickly adsorb blood proteins, such as albumin, fibrinogen,
transferrin, immunoglobulin, lipoproteins, and so on.737−740 This corona determines the distribution and transport behavior of
such NBCDs.741 Altered biokinetics, which
are dependent on the types of polymer used and on surface chemistry,
may enhance the transport velocity but, at the same time, they may
cause the NPs to enrich undesirably in some specific tissues, thereby
leading to high local concentrations at these parts of the body.742,743 These distribution and metabolism changes may induce new and unpredictable
effects that must be taken into consideration. Second, we need to
design and to utilize those properties rationally to optimize their
application for therapeutic efficacy and safety. As an example, if
the NPs are coated with “stealth” components to keep
them in the bloodstream longer, the release of the drug molecules
should be low at this stage in order not to treat the blood cells
and endothelium with the drug.

The much more complex structure
of nanomedicines compared to simple drug molecules makes it important
to characterize them carefully. This is relevant not only for the
understanding of their activity and effects but also for the responsible
production of such structures. For this purpose, in Europe, the “Nanomedicine
Characterization Laboratory” (http://www.euncl.eu) was founded and is funded by the European
Council.

A further critical issue and major problem for nanomedicine
is the quick uptake by cells typically in the reticuloendothelial
system (RES), which results in their high accumulation in the liver
and spleen.744−746 Toxicity against these cells and tissues
should be carefully tested. Besides these “normal” distribution
kinetics, NPs may have novel metabolic and excretion profiles which
arise due to the interactions of NPs with tissue microstructure and
specific biomicroenvironments.747−749 Small NPs might be removed from
the blood by renal clearance (<5 nm) or rapid liver uptake (10–200
nm),750 whereas large NPs are filtered
in the sinusoidal spleen (>200 nm)751 or are recognized and cleared by the RES.752 Renal clearance studies in mice using QDs with zwitterionic cysteine
demonstrated that the size threshold for glomerular filtration of
QDs was about 5.5 nm, while renal excretion was prevented when the
diameter was above this value.123 Therefore,
NPs between 20 and 200 nm can remain in the circulation for extended
periods of time,751 though there is still
debate in the literature on this front.753

Usually, the increased drug uptake by cells and favorable
drug release profiles can be easily achieved using nanodelivery systems.
However, toxicity, stability, and degradation properties of such NPs
are yet to be well evaluated. Moreover, toxicity testing with NPs
is not easy, as good models for testing are not available and most
simple in vitro systems have not been suitable so
far.754 There are significant variabilities
in how different organs interact with NPs and this variability is
difficult to capture in vitro. It is well accepted
that the transport of NPs across tissue barriers is clearly size-dependent.
This has been demonstrated for various uptake pathways and different
tissues such as the gastrointestinal tract,755 the lung,756 the blood–brain barrier,757,758 or the human placenta.759,760 Logically, these tissues
have to be tested intensely in toxicity assays.744,755−761

For assessment of the safety and therapeutic efficacy, proper
methodology and state-of-art techniques are necessary to study biological
behaviors and transformation of nanomaterials and nanomedicine in vivo and in vitro. Systemic and quantitative
information from proteomics, genomics, transcriptomics, and metabolomics
can capture the changes on metabolism, signaling pathways, and biological
functions as well.762,763

Safe-by-Design Approaches
An important consideration in the development of new nanotherapeutics
is the intrinsic safety of the design platform, from conception to
implementation. Appropriate consideration should be given to material
compositions that are already considered safe by the FDA and contain
degradable ingredients that do not lead to biopersistance or bioaccumulation.
It is also important to consider intrinsic nanomaterial properties
that are generally known to be more hazardous for nanomaterial profiling
studies, including high cationic density, high surface reactivity,
dissolution and shedding of potentially toxic metal ions (e.g., gadolinium516,517), high aspect ratio, etc. One approach involves the selection of the initial
NP composition and subjecting its components to multiparametric high-throughput
screening. This screening would enable one to discern possible effects
on cells of potential target tissues and could be used to eliminate
hazardous in vitro effects such as cytotoxicity,
membrane disruption, organellar damage (e.g., mitochondria
and lysosomes), unwanted redox activity leading to oxidative stress,
biopersistance, off target genotoxicity, etc. Attempts
are made to relate any adverse in vitro effects to
specific physicochemical properties, which could then be adapted,
eliminated, or redesigned to render a safer in vitro profile. This approach reduces the number of subsequent animal studies
to be performed, if the intrinsic material design is intended to be
safe. However, ultimately, the design’s efficacy and safety
need to be demonstrated through the performance of in vivo studies, including making use of well-established safety screening
procedures as well as screening for specific material properties that
cannot be assessed in vitro, e.g., immunogenicity of PEG-coated particles.

Carbon nanomaterials,
including one-dimensional CNTs and 2D graphene, exhibit unique physical,
chemical, and electrical properties, that make them attractive candidates
for electronics, energy technologies, medical diagnostics, and drug
delivery.764 Due to this significant potential
for industrial applications, methods for safe handling and use of
these nanomaterials are of critical importance. Furthermore, emerging
biomedical uses of these nanomaterials765,766 necessitate
the development of strategies to minimize toxicity. For example, in
a series of studies involving SWCNTs,767 MWCNTs,768 and graphene,769 it was shown that stable aqueous dispersions
of carbon nanomaterials can be achieved with the amphiphilic block
copolymer surfactant Pluronic F108.770 In
contrast to aggregated samples, carbon nanomaterials that are effectively
dispersed with Pluronic F108 further minimize toxicity in
vivo.(767−771) This same dispersion strategy also minimizes negative environmental
outcomes of these nanomaterials in aquatic environments.772−775 The positive benefits of Pluronic block copolymer surfactants have
also recently been realized for related 2D nanomaterials,776 such as transition metal dichalcogenides (e.g., MoS2), both in vivo(777) and in aquatic environments.778

Challenges to Clinical Translation
To reach the patient and to contribute to the benefit of society,
medical nanomaterials need to succeed in an industrial technology
transfer phase and in clinical translation. This translation is a
lengthy, costly, and complex process that should be considered early
on in the development process of novel nanotechnology-based therapies.302 For nanomedicine to be considered for “from
the benchtop to the bedside”, clinical translation, high therapeutic
efficacy alone is not sufficient.779−782 The nanomedicine must simultaneously
meet the basic requirement triangles—high therapeutic efficacy,
material excipientability, and scale-up ability307—to meet the safety, effectiveness, and producibility
requirements for a drug (see Figure 39). Typical roadblocks for clinical translation of academic
research projects into nanomedicine include: (i) the failure either
to target an unmet clinical need, or to do so beyond what can be expected
with simpler products in the near future; (ii) reproducibility and
characterization problems of the nanomaterials involved; (iii) design
complexity forbidding economic production; (iv) scale-up challenges;
(v) lack of efficacy in humans; (vi) unexpected clinical toxicity;
(vii) lack of a convincing business case; (viii) a fragile patent
situation; (ix) a delay in the registration process of nanomaterials
and nanodevices; and (x) crowding of research project topics toward
specific disease groups (cancer) while other important disease classes
(e.g., poverty diseases, metabolic disease, vascular
diseases) are neglected.

Figure 39 Essential requirements for a nanomedicine to
be translational. Adapted with permission from ref (307). Copyright 2012 Elsevier.

Lack of efficacy is frequently
seen in humans, despite success in animal models of disease, because
the physiology of humans differs from that of small animals in many
aspects. This is particularly important in cancer, where the usual
xenograft models of human cancer in mice are often curable by nanotechnologies,
while current clinical success in cancer therapy remains limited with
differences in tumor vascularization playing a key role.783 To achieve rational, prospective design criteria
for the development of future nanomaterials for particular tasks,
a strong scientific understanding of nano–bio interactions
will be required. Predictive models of such interactions can be used
to design novel materials in silico, where their
interaction with blood components, biological barriers, cell membranes,
and intracellular structures can be predicted using the model. This
goal can be achieved in part by utilizing the combined power of macromolecule
modeling, supramolecular modeling, cell modeling, pharmacokinetic
modeling, and computational toxicology.

Toxicity, as discussed
in the prior section, is a second key reason for the pharmaceutical
industry to abandon a therapy after it has reached first-in-human
and phase 1 or phase 2 clinical trials. Excipientability, i.e., the feasibility of the carrier material(s) to be finally
proven as an excipient used in humans, is directly related to the
safety of the nanomedicine.307 To have
good excipientability, the carrier material itself should be nontoxic
and easy to excrete completely from the body via the
liver (into bile) or the kidneys (into urine) or both. According to
Choi and Frangioni,779 safety and clearance
(renal or hepatic) should be included among the basic criteria for
clinical translation of formulation/materials administered to humans.
Accumulation of any foreign material in the body, even inert polymers
like PVP, can cause health problems.784−786 Additionally, in order
to expedite and to increase the probability of successful translation,
the carrier materials should have a clear and simple structure with
known degradation products. An even better case, as mentioned earlier,
would be for the carrier material to be made of FDA-approved building
blocks. In addition to concerns surrounding accumulation, complement
activation upon intravenous injection by nanomaterials is a frequent
and potentially dangerous event.787 The
potential for complement activation of novel nanomaterials can be
assessed by combining in vitro tests and in vivo models,788 but a full
mechanistic understanding of complement activation on nanosurfaces
is still missing. Rational design of nanomaterials that will not react
with complement by design is highly desirable but not yet reality.

For the pharmaceutical industry, the lack of clear and standardized
pathways to regulatory approval for nanosystems renders development
riskier and therefore less attractive, unless highly convincing first-in-human
studies can be demonstrated by academia. Patent protection is also
of key importance for industry, but the flooding of the patent field
by a myriad of nanoscience patents in the past decade, with content
that is often overlapping and insufficiently examined, has rendered
the business case for nanomaterials more difficult. Too many open-ended
promises of new technologies may paradoxically reduce the propensity
of managers and regulators to act.789 Joint
efforts by the scientific community, industry, and international regulatory
bodies to find a common ground through annual, interdisciplinary discussion
of the challenges of nanomedicine design and toxicity, and regulation
in the CLINAM conferences (http:/www.clinam.org) have contributed to streamlining the regulatory aspects of nanomedicine
in recent years.

Process scale-up ability is the feasibility
of making large volumes of NPs with consistent and reproducible quality
to establish GMP.307 For instance, a nanomedicine
of drug-loaded micelles made of block copolymers must be produced
with reproducible NP size, NP size distribution, and drug-loading
efficiency and content. As the nanomedicine structures become more
complex, the number of quality-control parameters dramatically increases,790,791 which makes it increasingly difficult to produce acceptably consistent
formulations. A nanomedicine requiring only simple production processes
is more favorable for the establishment of a GMP process. For instance,
self-assembling prodrugs can spontaneously form nanomedicines with
advantages that include clear and well-characterized molecular structures,
fixed drug loading contents, 100% loading efficiency, no burst-release
problems, and easy fabrication, all of which are favorable for clinical
translation.435,792,793 For nanomedicine aimed at clinical translation, it is advisable
to look into excipientability and scale-up ability issues early at
the bench to expedite the process.

Conclusions and Prospects
New NPs tuned for nanomedicine applications are emerging, especially
in the fields of drug delivery, antibiotic resistance, imaging, diagnostics, and cancer therapies.
Recent studies have shown that the use of multiple nanomaterials (i.e., NDs and proteins) or a single nanoplatform functionalized
with several therapeutic agents can successfully image and treat tumors
with improved efficacy. NPs-based drug delivery has been included
in the rational, biomimetic, and systematic design of optimal therapeutic combinations.

Nanomedicine in cellular, preclinical, and clinical studies has
led to many important advances, both fundamental and translational.
Many of these advances, however, have been in the field of cancer
diagnosis and treatment. This disproportionate focus is expected to
be addressed in upcoming years with research focuses expanding to
other medical challenges such as antibiotic resistance and artificial
organs. Nanomedicine is poised to be of benefit in these areas by
virtue of the versatility of the nanomaterial platform design, be
it through multimodal therapeutic approaches or through highly specialized
multifaceted design for relevant biological applications.

Although
nanomedicine has raised exciting expectations for many medical problems,
scientific challenges have arisen as well, mainly due to the lack
of knowledge about the behavior of nanomaterials inside living organisms.
However, due to the basic research focused on these issues, we are
now closer to solving them and to reaching “real” medical
solutions based on nanomedicine.

The
authors declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This
report is partly based on presentations held at the Sino-German Symposium
Nanomaterials for Biomedical Applications, October 27–31, 2013,
Hangzhou, China, ChinaNanomedicine 2015, April 6–9, 2015, Hangzhou,
China, the third International Symposium on Molecular Imaging and
Nanomedicine, April 25–29, Suzhou, China, and the 5th Asian
Biomaterials Congress (ABMC5), May 6–9, 2015, Taipei, Taiwan
(ROC), and the Micro- and Nanotechnologies for Medicine: Emerging
Frontiers and Applications, July 27–31, 2015, Cambridge, MA,
United States. This work was supported by the Deutscher Akademischer
Austauschdienst (DAAD to Philipps Universität Marburg and Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou), the Chinesisch Deutsches Zentrum für
Wissenschaftsförderung (“CDZ” to Z.G. and W.J.P.),
and the Chinese Academy of Science (CAS). Part of this work was
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation (51390481, 81227902, 81625011),
National Basic Research Program (2014CB931900) of China (to Y.S.),
by the European Commission grant Futurenanoneeds (to V.P. and W.J.P.),
by the Spanish Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad (CTQ2011-23167
and CTQ2014-59808R to R.A.A.P.), the Generalitat of Catalunya (2014-SGR-612
to R.A.A.P.), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) (AL552/8-1 to R.T.), the Swiss National Science Foundation (NRP62 to P.H.),
the Claude & Julianna Foundation (grant to P.H.), the National Science Foundation (NSF) grants CHE-1306928 (to R.P.) and ECS-0601345; CBET 0933384; CBET 0932823; and CBET 1036672 (to N.A.K.), Canadian Institute of Health Research (grant to W.C.W.C.),
and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (grant
to W.C.W.C.). S.A. and B.P. acknowledge a fellowship from the Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation. N.F. acknowledges the Lars Hiertas Minne
Foundation. M.C. acknowledges Ikerbasque for a Research Fellow position. X.C. acknowledges the Intramural Research Program (IRP), National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB), National Institutes of Health (NIH). B.Z.T. acknowledges the Innovation and Technology Commission of Hong Kong (ITC-CNERC14SC01). The Pancreatic Cancer research of A.E.N. and H.M. was funded by the U.S. National Cancer Institute, NIH grant # U01CA198846. A.E. acknowledges Junta de Andalucía (Spain) for a Talentia Postdoc Fellowship, co-financed by the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme, grant agreement no 267226. A.G.S. acknowledges support by BOF (UGent) and FWO (Research Foundation Flanders). Part of this work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81625011).
==== Refs
References
Min Y. ; Caster J. M. ; Eblan M. J. ; Wang A. Z. 
Clinical Translation of Nanomedicine . Chem. Rev. 
2015 , 115 , 11147 –11190 10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00116 .26088284 
Kim B. Y. S. ; Rutka J. T. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Nanomedicine . N. Engl. J. Med. 
2010 , 363 , 2434 –2443 10.1056/NEJMra0912273 .21158659 
Lobatto M. E. ; Fuster V. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Mulder W. J. M. 
Perspectives
and Opportunities for Nanomedicine in the Management of Atherosclerosis . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2011 , 10 , 963 –963 10.1038/nrd3614 .
Langer R. ; Weissleder R. 
Nanotechnology . J. Am. Med. Assoc. 
2015 , 313 , 135 –136 10.1001/jama.2014.16315 .
Shao K. ; Singha S. ; Clemente-Casares X. ; Tsai S. ; Yang Y. ; Santamaria P. 
Nanoparticle-Based
Immunotherapy for Cancer . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 16 –30 10.1021/nn5062029 .25469470 
Kotov N. A. 
Inorganic Nanoparticles as Protein
Mimics . Science 
2010 , 330 , 188 –189 10.1126/science.1190094 .20929766 
Torchilin V. P. 
Micellar Nanocarriers: Pharmaceutical
Perspectives . Pharm. Res. 
2007 , 24 , 1 –16 10.1007/s11095-006-9132-0 .17109211 
Zhang R. ; Yang J. ; Sima M. ; Zhou Y. ; Kopeček J. 
Sequential Combination Therapy of
Ovarian Cancer with Degradable N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide Copolymer
Paclitaxel and Gemcitabine Conjugates . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2014 , 111 , 12181 –12186 10.1073/pnas.1406233111 .25092316 
Lee Y. ; Fukushima S. ; Bae Y. ; Hiki S. ; Ishii T. ; Kataoka K. 
A Protein Nanocarrier from Charge-Conversion Polymer
in Response to Endosomal pH . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 5362 –5363 10.1021/ja071090b .17408272 
Guo P. 
The Emerging Field of RNA Nanotechnology . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2010 , 5 , 833 –842 10.1038/nnano.2010.231 .21102465 
Baker S. N. ; Baker G. A. 
Luminescent Carbon Nanodots: Emergent Nanolights . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2010 , 49 , 6726 –6744 10.1002/anie.200906623 .
Yu S. J. ; Kang M. W. ; Chang H. C. ; Chen K. M. ; Yu Y. C. 
Bright
Fluorescent Nanodiamonds: No Photobleaching and Low Cytotoxicity . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 127 , 17604 –17605 10.1021/ja0567081 .16351080 
Baughman R. H. ; Zakhidov A. A. ; de Heer W. A. 
Carbon Nanotubes—The Route
toward Applications . Science 
2002 , 297 , 787 –792 10.1126/science.1060928 .12161643 
Nurunnabi M. ; Khatun Z. ; Reeck G. R. ; Lee D. Y. ; Lee Y.-k. 
Photoluminescent Graphene Nanoparticles
for Cancer Phototherapy and Imaging . ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 12413 –12421 10.1021/am504071z .25054687 
Colombo M. ; Carregal-Romero S. ; Casula M. F. ; Gutiérrez L. ; Morales M. P. ; Böhm I. B. ; Heverhagen J. T. ; Prosperi D. ; Parak W. J. 
Biological Applications of Magnetic
Nanoparticles . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 4306 –4334 10.1039/c2cs15337h .22481569 
Parak W. J. ; Pellegrino T. ; Plank C. 
Labelling of Cells with Quantum Dots . Nanotechnology 
2005 , 16 , R9 –R25 10.1088/0957-4484/16/2/R01 .21727419 
Sperling R. A. ; Rivera Gil P. ; Zhang F. ; Zanella M. ; Parak W. J. 
Biological Applications
of Gold Nanoparticles . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2008 , 37 , 1896 –1908 10.1039/b712170a .18762838 
Lin C.-A. J. ; Yang T.-Y. ; Lee C.-H. ; Huang S. H. ; Sperling R. A. ; Zanella M. ; Li J. K. ; Shen J.-L. ; Wang H.-H. ; Yeh H.-I. ; Parak W. J. ; Chang W. H. 
Synthesis, Characterization, and Bioconjugation of
Fluorescent Gold Nanoclusters toward Biological Labeling Applications . ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 , 395 –401 10.1021/nn800632j .19236077 
Wilhelm S. ; Kaiser M. ; Wuerth C. ; Heiland J. ; Carrillo-Carrion C. ; Muhr V. ; Wolfbeis O. S. ; Parak W. J. ; Resch-Genger U. ; Hirsch T. 
Water Dispersible Upconverting Nanoparticles: Effects
of Surface Modification on their Luminescence and Colloidal Stability . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 1403 –1410 10.1039/C4NR05954A .25503253 
Sapsford K. E. ; Tyner K. M. ; Dair B. J. ; Deschamps J. R. ; Medintz I. L. 
Analyzing Nanomaterial Bioconjugates: A Review of Current
and Emerging Purification and Characterization Techniques . Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 4453 –4488 10.1021/ac200853a .21545140 
Schaak R. E. ; Williams M. E. 
Full Disclosure: The Practical Side of Nanoscale Total
Synthesis . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 8492 –8497 10.1021/nn304375v .23030512 
Wolf L. K. 
Sweating the Small Stuff . Chem. Eng. News 
2012 , 90 , 48 –50 .
Kovalenko M. V. ; Manna L. ; Cabot A. ; Hens Z. ; Talapin D. V. ; Kagan C. R. ; Klimov V. I. ; Rogach A. L. ; Reiss P. ; Milliron D. J. ; Guyot-Sionnnest P. ; Konstantatos G. ; Parak W. J. ; Hyeon T. ; Korgel B. A. ; Murray C. B. ; Heiss W. 
Prospects of Nanoscience with Nanocrystals . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 1012 –1057 10.1021/nn506223h .25608730 
Beveridge J. S. ; Buck M. R. ; Bondi J. F. ; Misra R. ; Schiffer P. ; Schaak R. E. ; Williams M. E. 
Purification and Magnetic Interrogation of Hybrid Au-Fe3O4 and FePt-Fe3O4 Nanoparticles . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 9875 –9879 10.1002/anie.201104829 .
Kowalczyk B. ; Lagzi I. ; Grzybowski B. A. 
Nanoseparations: Strategies for Size
and/or Shape-Selective Purification of Nanoparticles . Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2011 , 16 , 135 –148 10.1016/j.cocis.2011.01.004 .
Mulvaney P. ; Parak W. J. ; Caruso F. ; Weiss P. S. 
Standardizing Nanomaterials . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 9763 –9764 10.1021/acsnano.6b07629 .27934085 
Saha S. ; Xiong X. ; Chakraborty P. K. ; Shameer K. ; Arvizo R. R. ; Kudgus R. A. ; Dwivedi S. K. D. ; Hossen Md. N. ; Gillies E. M. ; Robertson J. D. ; Dudley J. T. ; Urrutia R. A. ; Postier R. G. ; Bhattacharya R. ; Mukherjee P. 
Gold Nanoparticle Reprograms Pancreatic
Tumor Microenvironment and Inhibits Tumor Growth . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 10636 –10651 10.1021/acsnano.6b02231 .27758098 
Melamed J. R. ; Riley R. S. ; Valcourt D. M. ; Day E. S. 
Using Gold Nanoparticles
To DIsrupt the Tumor Microenvironment: An Emerging Therapeutic Strategy . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 10631 –10635 10.1021/acsnano.6b07673 .28024339 
Chow E. K. ; Ho D. 
Cancer Nanomedicine: From Drug Delivery to Imaging . Sci. Transl. Med. 
2013 , 5 , 216rv4 10.1126/scitranslmed.3005872 .
Singh R. ; Lillard J. W. Jr
Nanoparticle-Based Targeted Drug
Delivery . Exp. Mol. Pathol. 
2009 , 86 , 215 –223 10.1016/j.yexmp.2008.12.004 .19186176 
Zhang Q. W. ; Mochalin V. N. ; Neitzel I. ; Hazeli K. ; Niu J. J. ; Kontsos A. ; Zhou J. G. ; Lelkes P. I. ; Gogotsi Y. 
Mechanical Properties and Biomineralization
of Multifunctional Nanodiamond-PLLA Composites for Bone Tissue Engineering . Biomaterials 
2012 , 33 , 5067 –5075 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.03.063 .22494891 
Altınoğlu E. I. ; Russin T. J. ; Kaiser J. M. ; Barth B. M. ; Eklund B. C. ; Kester M. ; Adair J. H. 
Near-Infrared Emitting Fluorophore-Doped Calcium Phosphate
Nanoparticles for In Vivo Imaging of Human Breast
Cancer . ACS Nano 
2008 , 2 , 2075 –2084 10.1021/nn800448r .19206454 
Matsumura Y. ; Maeda H. 
A New Concept for Macromolecular
Therapeutics in Cancer Chemotherapy: Mechanism of Tumoritropic Accumulation
of Proteins and the Antitumor Agent Smancs . Cancer Res. 
1986 , 46 , 6387 –6392 .2946403 
Wilhelm S. ; Tavares A. J. ; Dai Q. ; Ohta S. ; Audet J. ; Dvorak H. F. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Analysis
of Nanoparticle Delivery to Tumours . Nat. Rev.
Mater. 
2016 , 1 , 16014 10.1038/natrevmats.2016.14 .
Kolosnjaj-Tabi J. ; Javed Y. ; Lartigue L. ; Volatron J. ; Elgrabli D. ; Marangon I. ; Pugliese G. ; Caron B. ; Figuerola A. ; Luciani N. ; Pellegrino T. ; Alloyeau D. ; Gazeau F. 
The One Year Fate of Iron Oxide Coated
Gold Nanoparticles in Mice . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 7925 –7939 10.1021/acsnano.5b00042 .26168364 
Chou L. Y. T. ; Zagorovsky K. ; Chan W. C. W. 
DNA Assembly of Nanoparticle Superstructures for Controlled
Biological Delivery and Elimination . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2014 , 9 , 148 –155 10.1038/nnano.2013.309 .24463361 
Kreyling W. G. ; Abdelmonem A. M. ; Ali Z. ; Alves F. ; Geiser M. ; Haberl N. ; Hartmann R. ; Hirn S. ; de Aberasturi D. J. ; Kantner K. ; Khadem-Saba G. ; Montenegro J. M. ; Rejman J. ; Rojo T. ; de Larramendi I. R. ; Ufartes R. ; Wenk A. ; Parak W. J. 
In Vivo Integrity of Polymer-Coated Gold Nanoparticles . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 10 , 619 –623 10.1038/nnano.2015.111 .26076469 
Peteiro-Cartelle J. ; Rodríguez-Pedreira M. ; Zhang F. ; Rivera Gil P. ; del Mercato L. L. ; Parak W. J. 
One Example on how Colloidal Nano-
and Microparticles could Contribute to Medicine . Nanomedicine 
2009 , 4 , 967 –979 10.2217/nnm.09.84 .19958232 
OECD , OECD Health
Statistics 2014 – Frequently Requested Data. 2014 . http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/oecd-health-statistics-2014-frequently-requested-data.htm (Accessed January 12, 2017).
Bao C. ; Conde J. ; Polo E. ; del Pino P. ; Moros M. ; Baptista P. ; Grazu V. ; Cui D. ; de la Fuente J. 
A Promising
Road with Challenges: Where are Gold Nanoparticles in Translational
Research? . Nanomedicine 
2014 , 9 , 2353 –2370 10.2217/nnm.14.155 .25413854 
Zhou Z. J. ; Zhang C. L. ; Qian Q. R. ; Ma J. B. ; Huang P. ; Zhang X. ; Pan L. Y. ; Gao G. ; Fu H. L. ; Fu S. ; Song H. ; Zhi X. ; Ni J. ; Cui D. X. 
Folic Acid-Conjugated Silica Capped Gold Nanoclusters
for Targeted Fluorescence/X-Ray Computed Tomography Imaging . J. Nanobiotechnol. 
2013 , 11 , 17 10.1186/1477-3155-11-17 .
Zhang C. L. ; Li C. ; Liu Y. L. ; Zhang J. P. ; Bao C. C. ; Liang S. J. ; Wang Q. ; Yang Y. ; Fu H. L. ; Wang K. ; Cui D. X. 
Gold Nanoclusters-Based Nanoprobes for Simultaneous
Fluorescence Imaging and Targeted Photodynamic Therapy with Superior
Penetration and Retention Behavior in Tumors . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2015 , 25 , 1314 –1325 10.1002/adfm.201403095 .
Qiu P. Y. ; Sun R. J. ; Gao G. ; Yin T. ; Shen Y. L. ; Chen B. ; Wang K. ; Zhang C. L. ; Qian X. Q. ; Cui D. X. 
Crystal Cell Oriented-Rotation Triggered Phase Transition
of Porous Upconversion Nanocrystals Synthesis in Hydrothermal System . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2015 , 3 , 3948 –3958 10.1039/C5TB00290G .
Momose A. ; Takeda T. ; Itai Y. ; Hirano K. 
Phase-Contrast X-Ray
Computed Tomography for Observing Biological Soft Tissues . Nat. Med. 
1996 , 2 , 473 –475 10.1038/nm0496-473 .8597962 
Chapman D. ; Thomlinson W. ; Johnston R. ; Washburn D. ; Pisano E. ; Gmür N. ; Zhong Z. ; Menk R. ; Arfelli F. ; Sayers D. 
Diffraction Enhanced X-Ray Imaging . Phys. Med. Biol. 
1997 , 42 , 2015 10.1088/0031-9155/42/11/001 .9394394 
Cloetens P. ; Ludwig W. ; Baruchel J. ; Van Dyck D. ; Van Landuyt J. ; Guigay J. P. ; Schlenker M. 
Holotomography: Quantitative Phase
Tomography with Micrometer Resolution using Hard Synchrotron Radiation
XRays . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
1999 , 75 , 2912 –2914 10.1063/1.125225 .
Mohammadi S. ; Larsson E. ; Alves F. ; Dal Monego S. ; Biffi S. ; Garrovo C. ; Lorenzon A. ; Tromba G. ; Dullin C. 
Quantitative Evaluation of a Single-Distance
Phase-Retrieval Method Applied on In-Line Phase-Contrast Images of
a Mouse Lung . J. Synchrotron Radiat. 
2014 , 21 , 784 –789 10.1107/S1600577514009333 .24971975 
Beltran M. A. ; Paganin D. M. ; Uesugi K. ; Kitchen M. J. 
2D and 3D X-Ray Phase Retrieval of Multi-Material Objects
using a Single Defocus Distance . Opt. Express 
2010 , 18 , 6423 –6436 10.1364/OE.18.006423 .20389666 
Dullin C. ; dal Monego S. ; Larsson E. ; Mohammadi S. ; Krenkel M. ; Garrovo C. ; Biffi S. ; Lorenzon A. ; Markus A. ; Napp J. ; Salditt T. ; Accardo A. ; Alves F. ; Tromba G. 
Functionalized
Synchrotron In-Line Phase-Contrast Computed Tomography: A Novel Approach
for Simultaneous Quantification of Structural Alterations and Localization
of Barium-Labelled Alveolar Macrophages within Mouse Lung Samples . J. Synchrotron Radiat. 
2015 , 22 , 143 –155 10.1107/S1600577514021730 .25537601 
Krenkel M. ; Markus A. ; Bartels M. ; Dullin C. ; Alves F. ; Salditt T. 
Phase-Contrast Zoom Tomography Eeveals
Precise Locations of Macrophages in Mouse Lungs . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 9973 10.1038/srep09973 .25966338 
Zhou S. A. ; Brahme A. 
Development of Phase-Contrast
X-Ray Imaging Techniques and Potential Medical Applications . Phys. Med. 
2008 , 24 , 129 –148 10.1016/j.ejmp.2008.05.006 .18602852 
Cormode D. P. ; Roessl E. ; Thran A. ; Skajaa T. ; Gordon R. E. ; Schlomka J. P. ; Fuster V. ; Fisher E. A. ; Mulder W. J. M. ; Proksa R. ; Fayad Z. A. 
Atherosclerotic
Plaque Composition: Analysis with Multicolor CT and Targeted Gold
Nanoparticles . Radiology 
2010 , 256 , 774 –782 10.1148/radiol.10092473 .20668118 
Tang R. B. ; Xi Y. ; Chai W. M. ; Wang Y. T. ; Guan Y. J. ; Yang G. Y. ; Xie H. L. ; Chen K. M. 
Microbubble-Based Synchrotron Radiation Phase Contrast
Imaging: Basic Study and Angiography Applications . Phys. Med. Biol. 
2011 , 56 , 3503 –3512 10.1088/0031-9155/56/12/004 .21606555 
Statistisches Bundesamt . Wiesbaden, Germany, 2016 . Fallpauschalenbezogene Krankenhausstatistik (DRG-Statistik)
Operationen und Prozeduren der vollstationären Patientinnen
und Patienten in Krankenhäusern. https://www.destatis.de/DE/Publikationen/Thematisch/Gesundheit/Krankenhaeuser/OperationenProzeduren5231401137014.pdf (Accessed January 18, 2016).
Silva A. C. ; Lawder H. J. ; Hara A. ; Kujak J. ; Pavlicek W. 
Innovations
in CT Dose Reduction Strategy: Application of the Adaptive Statistical
Iterative Reconstruction Algorithm . AJR, Am.
J. Roentgenol. 
2010 , 194 , 191 –199 10.2214/AJR.09.2953 .20028923 
Sidky E. Y. ; Kao C. M. ; Pan X. H. 
Accurate Image Reconstruction from
Few-Views and Limited-Angle Data in Divergent-Beam CT . J. X-Ray Sci. Technol. 
2006 , 14 , 119 –139 .
James M. L. ; Gambhir S. S. 
A Molecular Imaging Primer: Modalities, Imaging Agents,
and Applications . Physiol. Rev. 
2012 , 92 , 897 –965 10.1152/physrev.00049.2010 .22535898 
Formica D. ; Silvestri S. 
Biological
Effects of Exposure to Magnetic Resonance Imaging: An Overview . Biomed. Eng. Online 
2004 , 3 , 11 10.1186/1475-925X-3-11 .15104797 
Hartwig V. ; Giovannetti G. ; Vanello N. ; Lombardi M. ; Landini L. ; Simi S. 
Biological Effects and Safety in Magnetic Resonance Imaging: A Review . Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 
2009 , 6 , 1778 –1798 10.3390/ijerph6061778 .19578460 
Leawoods J. C. ; Yablonskiy D. A. ; Saam B. ; Gierada D. S. ; Conradi M. S. 
Hyperpolarized 3He Gas Production and MR Imaging of the Lung . Concepts Magn. Reson. 
2001 , 13 , 277 –293 10.1002/cmr.1014 .
Xu W. ; Kattel K. ; Park J. Y. ; Chang Y. ; Kim T. J. ; Lee G. H. 
Paramagnetic Nanoparticle T1 and T2 MRI Contrast Agents . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 14 , 12687 –12700 10.1039/c2cp41357d .22885983 
Singh N. ; Jenkins G. J. S. ; Asadi R. ; Doak S. H. 
Potential Toxicity
of Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles (SPION) . Nano Rev. 
2010 , 1 , 5358 10.3402/nano.v1i0.5358 .
Khawaja A. Z. ; Cassidy D. B. ; Al Shakarchi J. ; McGrogan D. G. ; Inston N. G. ; Jones R. G. 
Revisiting the Risks
of MRI with Gadolinium Based Contrast Agents—Review of Literature
and Guidelines . Insights Imag. 
2015 , 6 , 553 –558 10.1007/s13244-015-0420-2 .
Na H. B. ; Song I. C. ; Hyeon T. 
Inorganic
Nanoparticles for MRI Contrast Agents . Adv.
Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 2133 –2148 10.1002/adma.200802366 .
Johnson N. J. J. ; Oakden W. ; Stanisz G. J. ; Scott Prosser R. ; van Veggel F. C. J. M. 
Size-Tunable, Ultrasmall NaGdF4 Nanoparticles: Insights
into Their T1MRI Contrast Enhancement . Chem.
Mater. 
2011 , 23 , 3714 –3722 10.1021/cm201297x .
Manus L. M. ; Mastarone D. J. ; Waters E. A. ; Zhang X.-Q. ; Schultz-Sikma E. A. ; MacRenaris K. W. ; Ho D. ; Meade T. J. 
Gd(III)-Nanodiamond
Conjugates for MRI Contrast Enhancement . Nano
Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 484 –489 10.1021/nl903264h .20038088 
Fan Q. L. ; Cheng K. ; Hu X. ; Ma X. W. ; Zhang R. P. ; Yang M. ; Lu X. M. ; Xing L. ; Huang W. ; Gambhir S. S. ; Cheng Z. 
Transferring
Biomarker into Molecular Probe: Melanin Nanoparticle as a Naturally
Active Platform for Multimodality Imaging . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 15185 –15194 10.1021/ja505412p .25292385 
Qin C. X. ; Cheng K. ; Chen K. ; Hu X. ; Liu Y. ; Lan X. L. ; Zhang Y. X. ; Liu H. G. ; Xu Y. D. ; Bu L. H. ; Su X. H. ; Zhu X. H. ; Meng S. X. ; Cheng Z. 
Tyrosinase as a Multifunctional Reporter Gene for Photoacoustic/MRI/PET
Triple Modality Molecular Imaging . Sci. Rep. 
2013 , 3 , 1490 10.1038/srep01490 .23508226 
Liu Q. M. ; Chen S. ; Chen J. ; Du J. Z. 
An Asymmetrical Polymer Vesicle Strategy for Significantly Improving T1 MRI Sensitivity and Cancer-Targeted Drug Delivery . Macromolecules 
2015 , 48 , 739 –749 10.1021/ma502255s .
Zhao Z. H. ; Zhou Z. J. ; Bao J. F. ; Wang Z. Y. ; Hu J. ; Chi X. Q. ; Ni K. Y. ; Wang R. F. ; Chen X. Y. ; Chen Z. ; Gao J. H. 
Octapod Iron Oxide Nanoparticles
as High-Performance T-2 Contrast Agents for Magnetic Resonance Imaging . Nat. Commun. 
2013 , 4 , 2266 10.1038/ncomms3266 .23903002 
Ali Z. ; Abbasi A. Z. ; Zhang F. ; Arosio P. ; Lascialfari A. ; Casula M. F. ; Wenk A. ; Kreyling W. ; Plapper R. ; Seidel M. ; Niessner R. ; Knoll J. ; Seubert A. ; Parak W. J. 
Multifunctional
Nanoparticles for Dual Imaging . Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 2877 –2882 10.1021/ac103261y .21413785 
Shin T. H. ; Choi J. S. ; Yun S. ; Kim I. S. ; Song H. T. ; Kim Y. ; Park K. I. ; Cheon J. 
T(1) and T(2) Dual-Mode MRI Contrast Agent for Enhancing Accuracy
by Engineered Nanomaterials . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 3393 –3401 10.1021/nn405977t .24673493 
Choi J. S. ; Lee J. H. ; Shin T. H. ; Song H. T. ; Kim E. Y. ; Cheon J. 
Self-Confirming “AND”
Logic Nanoparticles for Fault-Free MRI . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 11015 –11017 10.1021/ja104503g .20698661 
Cheng K. ; Yang M. ; Zhang R. ; Qin C. ; Su X. ; Cheng Z. 
Hybrid Nanotrimers for Dual T1 and
T2-Weighted Magnetic Resonance Imaging . ACS
Nano 
2014 , 8 , 9884 –9896 10.1021/nn500188y .25283972 
Tassa C. ; Shaw S. Y. ; Weissleder R. 
Dextran-Coated
Iron Oxide Nanoparticles: A Versatile Platform for Targeted Molecular
Imaging, Molecular Diagnostics, and Therapy . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2011 , 44 , 842 –852 10.1021/ar200084x .21661727 
Hu F. Q. ; Wei L. ; Zhou Z. ; Ran Y. L. ; Li Z. ; Gao M. Y. 
Preparation
of Biocompatible Magnetite Nanocrystals for in Vivo Magnetic Resonance Detection of Cancer . Adv.
Mater. 
2006 , 18 , 2553 –2556 10.1002/adma.200600385 .
Lee W. W. ; Marinelli B. ; van der Laan A. M. ; Sena B. F. ; Gorbatov R. ; Leuschner F. ; Dutta P. ; Iwamoto Y. ; Ueno T. ; Begieneman M. P. V. ; Niessen H. W. M. ; Piek J. J. ; Vinegoni C. ; Pittet M. J. ; Swirski F. K. ; Tawakol A. ; Di Carli M. ; Weissleder R. ; Nahrendorf M. 
PET/MRI of Inflammation in Myocardial
Infarction . J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 
2012 , 59 , 153 –163 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.08.066 .22222080 
Kleijn A. ; Chen J. W. ; Buhrman J. S. ; Wojtkiewicz G. R. ; Iwamoto Y. ; Lamfers M. L. ; Stemmer-Rachamimov A. O. ; Rabkin S. D. ; Weissleder R. ; Martuza R. L. ; Fulci G. 
Distinguishing
Inflammation from Tumor and Peritumoral Edema by Myeloperoxidase Magnetic
Resonance Imaging . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2011 , 17 , 4484 –4493 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0575 .21558403 
Breckwoldt M. O. ; Chen J. W. ; Stangenberg L. ; Aikawa E. ; Rodriguez E. ; Qiu S. ; Moskowitz M. A. ; Weissleder R. 
Tracking the Inflammatory Response in Stroke in Vivo by Sensing the Enzyme Myeloperoxidase . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2008 , 105 , 18584 –18589 10.1073/pnas.0803945105 .19011099 
Delcea M. ; Möhwald H. ; Skirtach A. G. 
Stimuli Responsive LbL Capsules and Nanoshells for Drug Delivery . Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 
2011 , 63 , 730 –747 10.1016/j.addr.2011.03.010 .21463658 
Huang X. ; Huang G. ; Zhang S. ; Sagiyama K. ; Togao O. ; Ma X. ; Wang Y. ; Li Y. ; Soesbe T. C. ; Sumer B. D. ; Takahashi M. ; Sherry A. D. ; Gao J. 
Multi-Chromatic pH-Activatable 19F-MRI Nanoprobes with Binary ON/OFF pH Transitions and Chemical
Shift Barcodes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 8074 –8078 10.1002/anie.201301135 .
Chen S. Z. ; Yang Y. Q. ; Li H. D. ; Zhou X. ; Liu M. L. 
pH-Triggered Au-Fluorescent Mesoporous
Silica Nanoparticles for 19F MR/Fluorescent Multimodal
Cancer Cellular Imaging . Chem. Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 283 –285 10.1039/C3CC47324D .
Zhu X. L. ; Chen S. Z. ; Luo Q. ; Ye C. H. ; Liu M. L. ; Zhou X. 
Body Temperature Sensitive
Micelles for MRI Enhancement . Chem. Commun. 
2015 , 51 , 9085 –9088 10.1039/C5CC02587G .
Langereis S. ; Keupp J. ; van Velthoven J. L. J. ; de Roos I. H. C. ; Burdinski D. ; Pikkemaat J. A. ; Grull H. 
A Temperature-Sensitive Liposomal
H-1 CEST and F-19 Contrast Agent for MR Image-Guided Drug Delivery . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 1380 –1381 10.1021/ja8087532 .19173663 
Rivlin M. ; Horev J. ; Tsarfaty I. ; Navon G. 
Molecular Imaging of
Tumors and Metastases Using Chemical Exchange Saturation Transfer
(CEST) MRI . Sci. Rep. 
2013 , 3 , 3045 10.1038/srep03045 .24157711 
Nakamura T. ; Matsushita H. ; Sugihara F. ; Yoshioka Y. ; Mizukami S. ; Kikuchi K. 
Activatable F-19 MRI Nanoparticle Probes for the Detection
of Reducing Environments . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 1007 –1010 10.1002/anie.201409365 .
Lee D. S. ; Im H. J. ; Lee Y. S. 
Radionanomedicine: Widened Perspectives of Molecular
Theragnosis . Nanomedicine 
2015 , 11 , 795 –810 10.1016/j.nano.2014.12.010 .25645957 
Lee Y. K. ; Jeong J. M. ; Hoigebazar L. ; Yang B. Y. ; Lee Y. S. ; Lee B. C. ; Youn H. ; Lee D. S. ; Chung J. K. ; Lee M. C. 
Nanoparticles Modified
by Encapsulation of Ligands with a Long Alkyl Chain to Affect Multispecific
and Multimodal Imaging . J. Nucl. Med. 
2012 , 53 , 1462 –1470 10.2967/jnumed.111.092759 .22859859 
Sun X. L. ; Cai W. B. ; Chen X. Y. 
Positron
Emission Tomography Imaging Using Radio labeled Inorganic Nanomaterials . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2015 , 48 , 286 –294 10.1021/ar500362y .25635467 
Bartlett D. W. ; Su H. ; Hildebrandt I. J. ; Weber W. A. ; Davis M. E. 
Impact
of Tumor-Specific Targeting on the Biodistribution and Efficacy of
siRNA Nanoparticles Measured by Multimodality in Vivo Imaging . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2007 , 104 , 15549 –15554 10.1073/pnas.0707461104 .17875985 
Rivera Gil P. ; Jimenez de Aberasturi D. ; Wulf V. ; Pelaz B. ; del Pino P. ; Zhao Y. ; de la Fuente J. ; Ruiz de Larramendi I. ; Rojo T. ; Liang X.-J. ; Parak W. J. 
The Challenge to Relate the Physicochemical Properties
of Colloidal Nanoparticles to Their Cytotoxicity . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2013 , 46 , 743 –749 10.1021/ar300039j .22786674 
Pelaz B. ; Charron G. ; Pfeiffer C. ; Zhao Y. ; de la Fuente J. M. ; Liang X.-J. ; Parak W. J. ; del Pino P. 
Interfacing Engineered
Nanoparticles with Biological Systems: Anticipating Adverse Nano–Bio
Interactions . Small 
2013 , 9 , 1573 –1584 10.1002/smll.201201229 .23112130 
Mei J. ; Hong Y. N. ; Lam J. W. Y. ; Qin A. J. ; Tang Y. H. ; Tang B. Z. 
Aggregation-Induced
Emission: The Whole Is More Brilliant than the Parts . Adv. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 5429 –5479 10.1002/adma.201401356 .24975272 
Ding D. ; Li K. ; Liu B. ; Tang B. Z. 
Bioprobes Based on AIE Fluorogens . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2013 , 46 , 2441 –2453 10.1021/ar3003464 .23742638 
Ding D. ; Mao D. ; Li K. ; Wang X. M. ; Qin W. ; Liu R. R. ; Chiam D. S. ; Tomczak N. ; Yang Z. M. ; Tang B. Z. ; Kong D. L. ; Liu B. 
Precise and Long-Term Tracking of
Adipose-Derived Stem Cells and Their Regenerative Capacity via Superb Bright and Stable Organic Nanodots . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 12620 –12631 10.1021/nn505554y .25427294 
Liang J. ; Tang B. Z. ; Liu B. 
Specific Light-up Bioprobes Based
on AIEgen Conjugates . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 2798 –2811 10.1039/C4CS00444B .25686761 
Kwok R. T. ; Leung C. W. ; Lam J. W. ; Tang B. Z. 
Biosensing by Luminogens with Aggregation-Induced Emission
Characteristics . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 4228 –4238 10.1039/C4CS00325J .25374162 
Derfus A. M. ; Chan W. C. W. ; Bhatia S. N. 
Probing
the Cytotoxicity of Semiconductor Quantum Dots . Nano Lett. 
2004 , 4 , 11 –18 10.1021/nl0347334 .
Kirchner C. ; Liedl T. ; Kudera S. ; Pellegrino T. ; Muñoz Javier A. ; Gaub H. E. ; Stölzle S. ; Fertig N. ; Parak W. J. 
Cytotoxicity of Colloidal CdSe and
CdSe/ZnS Nanoparticles . Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 , 331 –338 10.1021/nl047996m .15794621 
Zhang C. Q. ; Jin S. B. ; Li S. L. ; Xue X. D. ; Liu J. ; Huang Y. R. ; Jiang Y. G. ; Chen W. Q. ; Zou G. Z. ; Liang X. J. 
Imaging Intracellular
Anticancer Drug Delivery by Self-Assembly Micelles with Aggregation-Induced
Emission (AIE Micelles) . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 5212 –5220 10.1021/am5005267 .24606837 
Xue X. D. ; Zhao Y. Y. ; Dai L. R. ; Zhang X. ; Hao X. H. ; Zhang C. Q. ; Huo S. D. ; Liu J. ; Liu C. ; Kumar A. ; Chen W. Q. ; Zou G. Z. ; Liang X. J. 
Spatiotemporal Drug Release Visualized through a Drug
Delivery System with Tunable Aggregation-Induced Emission . Adv. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 712 –717 10.1002/adma.201302365 .24129910 
Bruchez M. Jr.; Moronne M. ; Gin P. ; Weiss S. ; Alivisatos A. P. 
Semiconductor Nanocrystals as Fluorescent
Biological Labels . Science 
1998 , 281 , 2013 –2016 10.1126/science.281.5385.2013 .9748157 
Chan W. C. W. ; Nie S. 
Quantum Dot Bioconjugates
for Ultrasensitive Nonisotopic Detection . Science 
1998 , 281 , 2016 –2018 10.1126/science.281.5385.2016 .9748158 
Akinfieva O. ; Nabiev I. ; Sukhanova A. 
New Directions
in Quantum Dot-Based Cytometry Detection of Cancer Serum Markers and
Tumor Cells . Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol. 
2013 , 86 , 1 –14 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2012.09.004 .23058250 
Xu H. ; Sha M. Y. ; Wong E. Y. ; Uphoff J. ; Xu Y. ; Treadway J. A. ; Truong A. ; O’Brien E. ; Asquith S. ; Stubbins M. ; Spurr N. K. ; Lai E. H. ; Mahoney W. 
Multiplexed SNP Genotyping Using
the Qbead() System: A Quantum Dot-Encoded Microsphere-Based Assay . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2003 , 31 , 43e 10.1093/nar/gng043 .12519944 
Chang Y. ; Pinaud F. ; Antelman J. ; Weiss S. 
Tracking Bio-Molecules
in Live Cells Using Quantum Dots . J. Biophotonics 
2008 , 1 , 287 –298 10.1002/jbio.200810029 .19343652 
Pinaud F. ; Clarke S. ; Sittner A. ; Dahan M. 
Probing Cellular Events, One Quantum Dot at a Time . Nat. Methods 
2010 , 7 , 275 –285 10.1038/nmeth.1444 .20354518 
Clarke S. ; Pinaud F. ; Beutel O. ; You C. J. ; Piehler J. ; Dahan M. 
Covalent Monofunctionalization of Peptide-Coated Quantum Dots for
Single-Molecule Assays . Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 2147 –2154 10.1021/nl100825n .20433164 
Hoshino A. ; Hanaki K.-i. ; Suzuki K. ; Yamamoto K. 
Applications of T-Lymphoma Labeled with Fluorescent
Quantum Dots to Cell Tracing Markers in Mouse Body . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
2004 , 314 , 46 –53 10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.11.185 .14715244 
Parak W. J. ; Boudreau R. ; Le Gros M. ; Gerion D. ; Zanchet D. ; Micheel C. M. ; Williams S. C. ; Alivisatos A. P. ; Larabell C. A. 
Cell Motility and Metastatic Potential
Studies Based on Quantum Dot Imaging of Phagokinetic Tracks . Adv. Mater. 
2002 , 14 , 882 –885 10.1002/1521-4095(20020618)14:12<882::AID-ADMA882>3.0.CO;2-Y .
Pinaud F. ; King D. ; Moore H.-P. ; Weiss S. 
Bioactivation and Cell Targeting of Semiconductor CdSe/ZnS Nanocrystals
with Phytochelatin-Related Peptides . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 6115 –6123 10.1021/ja031691c .15137777 
Wang G. F. ; Peng Q. ; Li Y. D. 
Lanthanide-Doped
Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Optical-Magnetic Properties, and Applications . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2011 , 44 , 322 –332 10.1021/ar100129p .21395256 
Wisser M. D. ; Chea M. ; Lin Y. ; Wu D. M. ; Mao W. L. ; Salleo A. ; Dionne J. A. 
Strain-Induced Modification of Optical
Selection Rules in Lanthanide-Based Upconverting Nanoparticles . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 1891 –1897 10.1021/nl504738k .25647523 
Escudero A. ; Carrillo-Carrión C. ; Zyuzin M. V. ; Ashraf S. ; Hartmann R. ; Núñez N.
O. ; Ocaña M. ; Parak W. J. 
Synthesis and Functionalization of Monodispers near-Ultraviolet
and Visible Excitable Multifunctional Eu3+, Bi3+:REVO4 Nanophosphors for Bioimaging and Biosensing Applications . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 12221 –12236 10.1039/C6NR03369E .27253384 
Li H. ; He X. ; Kang Z. ; Huang H. ; Liu Y. ; Liu J. ; Lian S. ; Tsang C. H. A. ; Yang X. ; Lee S.-T. 
Water-Soluble
Fluorescent Carbon Quantum Dots and Photocatalyst Design . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2010 , 49 , 4430 –4434 10.1002/anie.200906154 .
Sahu S. ; Behera B. ; Maiti T. K. ; Mohapatra S. 
Simple One-Step
Synthesis of Highly Luminescent Carbon Dots from Orange Juice: Application
as Excellent Bio-Imaging Agents . Chem. Commun. 
2012 , 48 , 8835 –8837 10.1039/c2cc33796g .
Wang K. ; Gao Z. C. ; Gao G. ; Wo Y. ; Wang Y. X. ; Shen G. X. ; Cui D. X. 
Systematic Safety
Evaluation on Photoluminescent Carbon Dots . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2013 , 8 , 122 10.1186/1556-276X-8-122 .23497260 
Mochalin V. N. ; Shenderova O. ; Ho D. ; Gogotsi Y. 
The Properties and Applications of Nanodiamonds . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 7 , 11 –23 10.1038/nnano.2011.209 .22179567 
Chow E. K. ; Zhang X. Q. ; Chen M. ; Lam R. ; Robinson E. ; Huang H. J. ; Schaffer D. ; Osawa E. ; Goga A. ; Ho D. 
Nanodiamond Therapeutic Delivery
Agents Mediate Enhanced Chemoresistant Tumor Treatment . Sci. Transl. Med. 
2011 , 3 , 73ra21 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001713 .
Chang Y. R. ; Lee H. Y. ; Chen K. ; Chang C. C. ; Tsai D. S. ; Fu C. C. ; Lim T. S. ; Tzeng Y. K. ; Fang C. Y. ; Han C. C. ; Chang H. C. ; Fann W. 
Mass Production and
Dynamic Imaging of Fluorescent Nanodiamonds . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2008 , 3 , 284 –288 10.1038/nnano.2008.99 .18654525 
Wu Y. ; Jelezko F. ; Plenio M. B. ; Weil T. 
Diamond Quantum Devices
in Biology . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 6586 –6598 10.1002/anie.201506556 .
Mochalin V. N. ; Gogotsi Y. 
Wet Chemistry Route
to Hydrophobic Blue Fluorescent Nanodiamond . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 4594 –4595 10.1021/ja9004514 .19290627 
Soo
Choi H. ; Liu W. ; Misra P. ; Tanaka E. ; Zimmer J. P. ; Itty Ipe B. ; Bawendi M. G. ; Frangioni J. V. 
Renal Clearance
of Quantum Dots . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2007 , 25 , 1165 –1170 10.1038/nbt1340 .17891134 
Liu J. ; Yu M. ; Ning X. ; Zhou C. ; Yang S. ; Zheng J. 
PEGylation and Zwitterionization:
Pros and Cons in the Renal Clearance and Tumor Targeting of Near-IR-Emitting
Gold Nanoparticles . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 12572 –12576 10.1002/anie.201304465 .
Mochalin V. N. ; Pentecost A. ; Li X. M. ; Neitzel I. ; Nelson M. ; Wei C. Y. ; He T. ; Guo F. ; Gogotsi Y. 
Adsorption of Drugs on Nanodiamond:
Toward Development of a Drug Delivery Platform . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2013 , 10 , 3728 –3735 10.1021/mp400213z .
Giammarco J. ; Mochalin V. N. ; Haeckel J. ; Gogotsi Y. 
The Adsorption of Tetracycline
and Vancomycin onto Nanodiamond with Controlled Release . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2016 , 468 , 253 –261 10.1016/j.jcis.2016.01.062 .26852349 
Semmling M. ; Kreft O. ; Muñoz
Javier A. ; Sukhorukov G. B. ; Käs J. ; Parak W. J. 
A Novel Flow-Cytometry-based Assay for Cellular Uptake
Studies of Polyelectrolyte Microcapsules . Small 
2008 , 4 , 1763 –1768 10.1002/smll.200800596 .18819140 
Hartmann R. ; Weidenbach M. ; Neubauer M. ; Fery A. ; Parak W. J. 
Stiffness-Dependent in Vitro Uptake and Lysosomal Acidification of Colloidal
Particles . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 1365 –1368 10.1002/anie.201409693 .
Riedinger A. ; Zhang F. ; Dommershausen F. ; Röcker C. ; Brandholt S. ; Nienhaus G. U. ; Koert U. ; Parak W. J. 
Ratiometric Optical Sensing of Chloride Ions with Organic
Fluorophore - Gold Nanoparticle Hybrids: A Systematic Study of Distance
Dependency and the Influence of Surface Charge . Small 
2010 , 6 , 2590 –2597 10.1002/smll.201000868 .20957760 
Kantner K. ; Ashraf S. ; Carregal-Romero S. ; Carrillo-Carrion C. ; Collot M. ; del Pino P. ; Heimbrodt W. ; Jimenez de Aberasturi D. ; Kaiser U. ; Kazakova L. I. ; Lelle M. ; Martinez de Baroja N. ; Montenegro J.-M. ; Nazarenus M. ; Pelaz B. ; Peneva K. ; Rivera Gil P. ; Sabir N. ; Schneider L. M. ; Shabarchina L. I. ; et al. Particle-Based Optical Sensing of Intracellular Ions at the Example
of Calcium - What are the Experimental Pitfalls? . Small 
2015 , 11 , 896 –904 10.1002/smll.201402110 .25504784 
Shi H. B. ; Kwok R. T. K. ; Liu J. Z. ; Xing B. G. ; Tang B. Z. ; Liu B. 
Real-Time Monitoring of Cell Apoptosis and Drug Screening Using Fluorescent
Light-Up Probe with Aggregation-Induced Emission Characteristics . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 17972 –17981 10.1021/ja3064588 .23043485 
Zhou K. ; Liu H. ; Zhang S. ; Huang X. ; Wang Y. ; Huang G. ; Sumer B. D. ; Gao J. 
Multicolored pH-Tunable and Activatable
Fluorescence Nanoplatform Responsive to Physiologic pH Stimuli . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 7803 –7811 10.1021/ja300176w .22524413 
Wang Y. ; Zhou K. ; Huang G. ; Hensley C. ; Huang X. ; Ma X. ; Zhao T. ; Sumer B. D. ; DeBerardinis R. J. ; Gao J. 
A Nanoparticle-Based Strategy for the Imaging of a Broad Range of
Tumours by Nonlinear Amplification of Microenvironment Signals . Nat. Mater. 
2013 , 13 , 204 –212 10.1038/nmat3819 .24317187 
Leuvering J. H. W. ; Thal P. J. H. M. ; Waart M. v. d. ; Schuurs A. H. W. M. 
Sol
Particle Agglutination Immunoassay For Human Chorionic-Gonadotropin . Fresenius' Z. Anal. Chem. 
1980 , 301 , 132 10.1007/BF00467777 .
Leuvering J. H. W. ; Thal P. ; Vanderwaart M. ; Schuurs A. 
A Sol Particle Agglutination
Assay For Human Chorionic-Gonadotropin . J. Immunol.
Methods 
1981 , 45 , 183 –194 10.1016/0022-1759(81)90212-X .7288195 
Elghanian R. ; Storhoff J. J. ; Mucic R. C. ; Letsinger R. L. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Selective Colorimetric Detection of Polynucleotides
Based on the Distance-Dependent Optical Properties of Gold Nanoparticles . Science 
1997 , 277 , 1078 –1081 10.1126/science.277.5329.1078 .9262471 
Stehr J. ; Hrelescu C. ; Sperling R. A. ; Raschke G. ; Wunderlich M. ; Nichtl A. ; Heindl D. ; Kürzinger K. ; Parak W. J. ; Klar T. A. ; Feldmann J. 
Gold Nano-Stoves for
Microsecond DNA Melting Analysis . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 , 619 –623 10.1021/nl073028i .18220441 
Xu X. Y. ; Daniel W. L. ; Wei W. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Colorimetric Cu2+ Detection Using DNA-Modified
Gold-Nanoparticle Aggregates as Probes and Click Chemistry . Small 
2010 , 6 , 623 –626 10.1002/smll.200901691 .20108231 
Meng Z. J. ; Song R. H. ; Chen Y. ; Zhu Y. ; Tian Y. H. ; Li D. ; Cui D. X. 
Rapid Screening and Identification of Dominant B Cell
Epitopes of HBV Surface Antigen by Quantum Dot-Based Fluorescence
Polarization Assay . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2013 , 8 , 118 10.1186/1556-276X-8-118 .23452727 
Han M. ; Gao X. ; Su J. Z. ; Nie S. 
Quantum-Dot-Tagged Microbeads for Multiplexed Optical Coding of Biomolecules . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2001 , 19 , 631 –635 10.1038/90228 .11433273 
Wang D. ; Rogach A. L. ; Caruso F. 
Semiconductor Quantum Dot-Labeled
Microsphere Bioconjugates Prepared by Stepwise Self-Assembly . Nano Lett. 
2002 , 2 , 857 –861 10.1021/nl025624c .
Sheng W. ; Kim S. ; Lee J. ; Kim S. W. ; Jensen K. ; Bawendi M. G. 
In-Situ Encapsulation of Quantum Dots into Polymer Microspheres . Langmuir 
2006 , 22 , 3782 –3790 10.1021/la051973l .16584256 
O’Brien P. ; Cummins S. S. ; Darcy D. ; Dearden A. ; Masala O. ; Pickett N. L. ; Ryley S. ; Sutherland A. J. 
Quantum
Dot-Labelled Polymer Beads by Suspension Polymerisation . Chem. Commun. 
2003 , 2532 –2533 10.1039/b307500a .
Fournier-Bidoz S. ; Jennings T. L. ; Klostranec J. M. ; Fung W. ; Rhee A. ; Li D. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Facile and Rapid One-Step Mass Preparation of Quantum-Dot
Barcodes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 5577 –5581 10.1002/anie.200800409 .
Wang G. ; Leng Y. K. ; Dou H. J. ; Wang L. ; Li W. W. ; Wang X. B. ; Sun K. ; Shen L. S. ; Yuan X. L. ; Li J. Y. ; Sun K. ; Han J. S. ; Xiao H. S. ; Li Y. 
Highly Efficient Preparation
of Multiscaled Quantum Dot Barcodes for Multiplexed Hepatitis B Detection . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 471 –481 10.1021/nn3045215 .23205725 
Chen K. ; Chou L. Y. T. ; Song F. Y. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Fabrication of
Metal Nanoshell Quantum-Dot Barcodes for Biomolecular Detection . Nano Today 
2013 , 8 , 228 –234 10.1016/j.nantod.2013.04.009 .
Lee J. A. ; Mardyani S. ; Hung A. ; Rhee A. ; Klostranec J. ; Mu Y. ; Li D. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Toward
the Accurate Read-out of Quantum Dot Barcodes: Design of Deconvolution
Algorithms and Assessment of Fluorescence Signals in Buffer . Adv. Mater. 
2007 , 19 , 3113 –3118 10.1002/adma.200701955 .
Giri S. ; Sykes E. A. ; Jennings T. L. ; Chan W. C. 
Rapid Screening
of Genetic Biomarkers of Infectious Agents Using Quantum Dot Barcodes . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 1580 –1587 10.1021/nn102873w .21355538 
Ming K. ; Kim J. ; Biondi M. J. ; Syed A. ; Chen K. ; Lam A. ; Ostrowski M. ; Rebbapragada A. ; Feld J. J. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Integrated
Quantum Dot Barcode Smartphone Optical Device for Wireless Multiplexed
Diagnosis of Infected Patients . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 3060 –3074 10.1021/nn5072792 .25661584 
Kim J. ; Biondi M. J. ; Feld J. J. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Clinical Validation of Quantum Dot Barcode Diagnostic
Technology . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 4742 –4753 10.1021/acsnano.6b01254 .27035744 
Pregibon D. C. ; Toner M. ; Doyle P. S. 
Multifunctional
Encoded Particles for High-Throughput Biomolecule Analysis . Science 
2007 , 315 , 1393 –1396 10.1126/science.1134929 .17347435 
Fenniri H. ; Chun S. ; Ding L. H. ; Zyrianov Y. ; Hallenga K. 
Preparation, Physical Properties, on-Bead Binding Assay
and Spectroscopic Reliability of 25 Barcoded Polystyrene-Poly(ethylene
Glycol) Graft Copolymers . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125 , 10546 –10560 10.1021/ja035665q .12940737 
Pan W. Y. ; Chen W. ; Jiang X. Y. 
Microfluidic
Western Blot . Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 3974 –3976 10.1021/ac1000493 .20426486 
Zhang Y. ; Zhang L. ; Sun J. ; Liu Y. ; Ma X. ; Cui S. ; Ma L. ; Xi J. J. ; Jiang X. 
Point-of-Care Multiplexed Assays of Nucleic Acids Using Microcapillary-based
Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification . Anal.
Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 7057 –7062 10.1021/ac5014332 .24937125 
Zhang Y. ; Sun J. ; Zou Y. ; Chen W. ; Zhang W. ; Xi J. J. ; Jiang X. 
Barcoded Microchips
for Biomolecular Assays . Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 , 900 –906 10.1021/ac5032379 .25513831 
Anslyn E. V. ; Rotello V. M. 
Chemosensory Models:
Approaches and Applications of Differential Sensing Editorial Overview . Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 
2010 , 14 , 683 –684 10.1016/j.cbpa.2010.08.024 .20863741 
De M. ; Rana S. ; Akpinar H. ; Miranda O. R. ; Arvizo R. R. ; Bunz U. H. F. ; Rotello V. M. 
Sensing of Proteins
in Human Serum Using Conjugates of Nanoparticles and Green Fluorescent
Protein . Nat. Chem. 
2009 , 1 , 461 –465 10.1038/nchem.334 .20161380 
Miranda O. R. ; Li X. N. ; Garcia-Gonzalez L. ; Zhu Z. J. ; Yan B. ; Bunz U. H. F. ; Rotello V. M. 
Colorimetric
Bacteria Sensing Using a Supramolecular Enzyme-Nanoparticle Biosensor . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 9650 –9653 10.1021/ja2021729 .21627131 
Bajaj A. ; Miranda O. ; Kim I. ; Phillips R. ; Jerry D. ; Bunz U. ; Rotello V. 
Detection and Differentiation of
Normal, Cancerous, and Metastatic Cells Using Nanoparticle-Polymer
Sensor Arrays . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.
A. 
2009 , 106 , 10912 –10916 10.1073/pnas.0900975106 .19549846 
Rana S. ; Le N. D. B. ; Mout R. ; Saha K. ; Tonga G. Y. ; Bain R. E. S. ; Miranda O. R. ; Rotello C. M. ; Rotello V. M. 
A Multichannel
Nanosensor for Instantaneous Readout of Cancer Drug Mechanisms . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2014 , 10 , 65 –69 10.1038/nnano.2014.285 .25502312 
Li X. N. ; Kong H. ; Mout R. ; Saha K. ; Moyano D. F. ; Robinson S. M. ; Rana S. ; Zhang X. R. ; Riley M. A. ; Rotello V. M. 
Rapid Identification of Bacterial
Biofilms and Biofilm Wound Models Using a Multichannel Nanosensor . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 12014 –12019 10.1021/nn505753s .25454256 
Stark W. J. 
Nanoparticles
in Biological Systems . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 1242 –1258 10.1002/anie.200906684 .
Wegner K. D. ; Hildebrandt N. 
Quantum Dots:
Bright and Versatile in Vitro and in Vivo Fluorescence Imaging Biosensors . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 4792 –834 10.1039/C4CS00532E .25777768 
Ruedas-Rama M. J. ; Walters J. D. ; Orte A. ; Hall E. A. H. 
Fluorescent Nanoparticles
for Intracellular Sensing: A Review . Anal. Chim.
Acta 
2012 , 751 , 1 –23 10.1016/j.aca.2012.09.025 .23084048 
Gill R. ; Zayats M. ; Willner I. 
Semiconductor Quantum Dots for Bioanalysis . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 7602 –7625 10.1002/anie.200800169 .
Freeman R. ; Willner B. ; Willner I. 
Integrated Biomolecule-Quantum
Dot Hybrid Systems for Bioanalytical Applications . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2011 , 2 , 2667 –2677 10.1021/jz2006572 .
Medintz I. L. ; Stewart M. H. ; Trammell S. A. ; Susumu K. ; Delehanty J. B. ; Mei B. C. ; Melinger J. S. ; Blanco-Canosa J. B. ; Dawson P. E. ; Mattoussi H. 
Quantum-Dot/Dopamine Bioconjugates
Function as Redox Coupled Assemblies for in Vitro and Intracellular pH Sensing . Nat. Mater. 
2010 , 9 , 676 –684 10.1038/nmat2811 .20651808 
Li D.-W. ; Qin L.-X. ; Li Y. ; Nia R. P. ; Long Y.-T. ; Chen H.-Y. 
CdSe/ZnS Quantum
Dot–Cytochrome c Bioconjugates for Selective Intracellular
O2•– Sensing . Chem. Commun. 
2011 , 47 , 8539 –8541 10.1039/c1cc13160e .
Freeman R. ; Gill R. ; Shweky I. ; Kotler M. ; Banin U. ; Willner I. 
Biosensing and Probing of Intracellular Metabolic Pathways
by NADH-Sensitive Quantum Dots . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 309 –313 10.1002/anie.200803421 .
Du F. ; Ming Y. ; Zeng F. ; Yu C. ; Wu S. 
A Low Cytotoxic and
Ratiometric Fluorescent Nanosensor Based on Carbon-Dots for Intracellular
pH Sensing and Mapping . Nanotechnology 
2013 , 24 , 365101 10.1088/0957-4484/24/36/365101 .23942146 
Zhang F. ; Lees E. ; Amin F. ; Rivera-Gil P. ; Yang F. ; Mulvaney P. ; Parak W. J. 
Polymer-Coated
Nanoparticles: A Universal Tool for Biolabelling Experiments . Small 
2011 , 7 , 3113 –3127 10.1002/smll.201100608 .21928301 
Shi W. ; Li X. ; Ma H. 
A Tunable Ratiometric pH Sensor Based on Carbon Nanodots
for the Quantitative Measurement of the Intracellular pH of Whole
Cells . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 6432 –6435 10.1002/anie.201202533 .
Kong B. ; Zhu A. ; Ding C. ; Zhao X. ; Li B. ; Tian Y. 
Carbon Dot-Based Inorganic–Organic
Nanosystem for Two-Photon Imaging and Biosensing of pH Variation in
Living Cells and Tissues . Adv. Mater. 
2012 , 24 , 5844 –5848 10.1002/adma.201202599 .22933395 
Izumi H. ; Torigoe T. ; Ishiguchi H. ; Uramoto H. ; Yoshida Y. ; Tanabe M. ; Ise T. ; Murakami T. ; Yoshida T. ; Nomoto M. ; Kohno K. 
Cellular pH
Regulators: Potentially Promising Molecular Targets for Cancer Chemotherapy . Cancer Treat. Rev. 
2003 , 29 , 541 –549 10.1016/S0305-7372(03)00106-3 .14585264 
Davies T. A. ; Fine R. E. ; Johnson R. J. ; Levesque C. A. ; Rathbun W. H. ; Seetoo K. F. ; Smith S. J. ; Strohmeier G. ; Volicer L. ; Delva L. ; Simons E. R. 
Non-Age Related
Differences in Thrombin Responses by Platelets from Male Patients
with Advanced Alzheimer′s Disease . Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 
1993 , 194 , 537 –543 10.1006/bbrc.1993.1853 .8333868 
Jiang Y. ; Wang Z. ; Dai Z. 
Preparation of Silicon–Carbon-Based
Dots@Dopamine and Its Application in Intracellular Ag+ Detection and
Cell Imaging . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 3644 –3650 10.1021/acsami.5b08089 .26502274 
Zhang Z. ; Shi Y. ; Pan Y. ; Cheng X. ; Zhang L. ; Chen J. ; Li M.-J. ; Yi C. 
Quinoline Derivative-Functionalized Carbon Dots as a Fluorescent
Nanosensor for Sensing and Intracellular Imaging of Zn2+ . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2014 , 2 , 5020 –5027 10.1039/C4TB00677A .
Koo Y. E. L. ; Cao Y. F. ; Kopelman R. ; Koo S. M. ; Brasuel M. ; Philbert M. A. 
Real-Time Measurements
of Dissolved Oxygen inside Live Cells by Organically Modified Silicate
Fluorescent Nanosensors . Anal. Chem. 
2004 , 76 , 2498 –2505 10.1021/ac035493f .15117189 
Wu S. ; Li Z. ; Han J. ; Han S. 
Dual Colored Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles with pH Activable Rhodamine-Lactam
for Ratiometric Sensing of Lysosomal Acidity . Chem. Commun. 
2011 , 47 , 11276 –11278 10.1039/c1cc14627k .
He C. ; Zhu W. ; Xu Y. ; Zhong Y. ; Zhou J. ; Qian X. 
Ratiometric
and Reusable Fluorescent Nanoparticles for Zn2+ and H2PO4– Detection in Aqueous Solution
and Living Cells . J. Mater. Chem. 
2010 , 20 , 10755 –10764 10.1039/c0jm01925a .
Peng J. ; He X. ; Wang K. ; Tan W. ; Wang Y. ; Liu Y. 
Noninvasive Monitoring of Intracellular
pH Change Induced by Drug Stimulation Using Silica Nanoparticle Sensors . Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2007 , 388 , 645 –654 10.1007/s00216-007-1244-9 .17440714 
Park E. J. ; Brasuel M. ; Behrend C. ; Philbert M. A. ; Kopelman R. 
Ratiometric Optical PEBBLE Nanosensors for Real-Time
Magnesium Ion Concentrations Inside Viable Cells . Anal. Chem. 
2003 , 75 , 3784 –3791 10.1021/ac0342323 .14572044 
Sumner J. ; Aylott J. W. ; Monson E. ; Kopelman R. 
A Fluorescent PEBBLE Nanosensor for Intracellular Free
Zinc . Analyst 
2002 , 127 , 11 –16 10.1039/b108568a .11827375 
Seo S. ; Lee H. Y. ; Park M. ; Lim J. M. ; Kang D. ; Yoon J. ; Jung J. H. 
Fluorescein-Functionalized
Silica Nanoparticles as a Selective Fluorogenic Chemosensor for Cu2+ in Living Cells . Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 
2010 , 2010 , 843 –847 10.1002/ejic.200901039 .
Oh W.-K. ; Jeong Y. S. ; Kim S. ; Jang J. 
Fluorescent Polymer Nanoparticle for Selective Sensing of Intracellular
Hydrogen Peroxide . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 8516 –8524 10.1021/nn204899m .22971112 
Kim S.-H. ; Kim B. ; Yadavalli V. K. ; Pishko M. V. 
Encapsulation of Enzymes within Polymer Spheres To
Create Optical Nanosensors for Oxidative Stress . Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 6828 –6833 10.1021/ac0507340 .16255579 
Xu H. ; Aylott J. W. ; Kopelman R. 
Fluorescent
Nano-PEBBLE Sensors for the Real-Time Measurement of Glucose Inside
Living Cells . Analyst 
2002 , 127 , 1471 –1477 10.1039/b202782h .12475037 
Chapman R. ; Lin Y. ; Burnapp M. ; Bentham A. ; Hillier D. ; Zabron A. ; Khan S. ; Tyreman M. ; Stevens M. M. 
Multivalent Nanoparticle Networks
Enable Point-of-Care Detection of Human Phospholipase-A2 in Serum . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 2565 –2573 10.1021/nn5057595 .25756526 
Valentini P. ; Fiammengo R. ; Sabella S. ; Gariboldi M. ; Maiorano G. ; Cingolani R. ; Pompa P. P. 
Gold-Nanoparticle-Based
Colorimetric Discrimination of Cancer-Related Point Mutations with
Picomolar Sensitivity . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 5530 –5538 10.1021/nn401757w .23697628 
Aili D. ; Mager M. ; Roche D. ; Stevens M. M. 
Hybrid Nanoparticle-Liposome Detection of Phospholipase
Activity . Nano Lett. 
2011 , 11 , 1401 –1405 10.1021/nl1024062 .20795711 
Liu G. D. ; Mao X. ; Phillips J. A. ; Xu H. ; Tan W. H. ; Zeng L. W. 
Aptamer-Nanoparticle Strip Biosensor
for Sensitive Detection of Cancer Cells . Anal.
Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 10013 –10018 10.1021/ac901889s .19904989 
Endo T. ; Kerman K. ; Nagatani N. ; Hiepa H. M. ; Kim D.-K. ; Yonezawa Y. ; Nakano K. ; Tamiya E. 
Multiple Label-Free Detection of Antigen-Antibody Reaction
Using Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance-Based Core-Shell Structured
Nanoparticle Layer Nanochip . Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 6465 –6475 10.1021/ac0608321 .16970322 
Leuvering J. H. W. ; Thal P. ; Schuurs A. 
Optimization
Of A Sandwich Sol Particle Immunoassay For Human Chorionic-Gonadotropin . J. Immunol. Methods 
1983 , 62 , 175 –184 10.1016/0022-1759(83)90244-2 .6886430 
Storhoff J. J. ; Elghanian R. ; Mucic R. C. ; Mirkin C. A. ; Letsinger R. L. 
One-Pot Colorimetric Differentiation of Polynucleotides
with Single Base Imperfections Using Gold Nanoparticle Probes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1998 , 120 , 1959 –1964 10.1021/ja972332i .
Reynolds R. A. ; Mirkin C. A. ; Letsinger R. L. 
Homogeneous, Nanoparticle-Based Quantitative
Colorimetric Detection of Oligonucleotides . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2000 , 122 , 3795 –3796 10.1021/ja000133k .
Qin Z. P. ; Chan W. C. W. ; Boulware D. R. ; Akkin T. ; Butler E. K. ; Bischof J. C. 
Significantly Improved Analytical Sensitivity of Lateral
Flow Immunoassays by Using Thermal Contrast . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 4358 –4361 10.1002/anie.201200997 .
Polo E. ; del Pino P. ; Pelaz B. ; Grazu V. ; de la Fuente J. M. 
Plasmonic-Driven Thermal Sensing: Ultralow Detection
of Cancer Markers . Chem. Commun. 
2013 , 49 , 3676 –3678 10.1039/c3cc39112d .
Chen W. ; Bian A. ; Agarwal A. ; Liu L. ; Shen H. ; Wang L. ; Xu C. ; Kotov N. A. 
Nanoparticle Superstructures Made by Polymerase Chain Reaction: Collective Interactions of Nanoparticles and a New Principle for Chiral Materials . Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 2153 –2159 10.1021/nl900726s .19320495 
Ma M. ; Kuang H. ; Xu L. ; Ding L. ; Xu C. ; Wang L. ; Kotov N. A. 
Attomolar DNA Detection with Chiral Nanorod Assemblies . Nature Comm 
2013 , 4 , 2689 10.1038/ncomms3689 .
Zhao Y. ; Xu L. ; Ma W. ; Wang L. ; Kuang H. ; Xu C. ; Kotov N. A. 
Shell-Engineered Chiroplasmonic Assemblies of Nanoparticles for Zeptomolar DNA Detection . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 3908 –3913 10.1021/nl501166m .24857406 
Ma M. ; Kuang H. ; Xu L. ; Ding L. ; Xu C. ; Wang L. ; Kotov N. A. 
Attomolar DNA Detection with Chiral Nanorod Assemblies . Nature Comm. 
2013 , 4 , 2689 10.1038/ncomms3689 .
Wu X. ; Xu L. ; Liu L. ; Ma W. ; Yin H. ; Kuang H. ; Wang L. ; Xu C. ; Kotov N.A. 
Unexpected Chirality of Nanoparticle Dimers and Ultrasensitive Chiroplasmonic Bioanalysis . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 135 , 18629 –18636 10.1021/ja4095445 .
Li S. ; Xu L. ; Ma W. ; Wu X. ; Sun M. ; Kuang H. ; Wang L. ; Kotov N. A. ; Xu C. 
Dual-Mode Ultrasensitive Quantification of MicroRNA in Living Cells by Chiroplasmonic Nanopyramids Self-Assembled from Gold and Upconversion Nanoparticles . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 306 –312 10.1021/jacs.5b10309 .26691742 
Alvarez-Puebla R. A. ; Zubarev E. R. ; Kotov N. A. ; Liz-Marzan L. M. 
Self-Assembled Nanorod Supercrystals for Ultrasensitive
SERS Diagnostics . Nano Today 
2012 , 7 , 6 –9 10.1016/j.nantod.2011.11.001 .
Alvarez-Puebla R. A. ; Agarwal A. ; Manna P. ; Khanal B. P. ; Aldeanueva-Potel P. ; Carbo-Argibay E. ; Pazos-Perez N. ; Vigderman L. ; Zubarev E. R. ; Kotov N. A. ; Liz-Marzan L. M. 
Gold Nanorods 3D-Supercrystals as Surface Enhanced
Raman Scattering Spectroscopy Substrates for the Rapid Detection of
Scrambled Prions . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.
S. A. 
2011 , 108 , 8157 –8161 10.1073/pnas.1016530108 .21536908 
Nie S. M. ; Emery S. R. 
Probing Single Molecules and Single Nanoparticles by
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering . Science 
1997 , 275 , 1102 –1106 10.1126/science.275.5303.1102 .9027306 
Alvarez-Puebla R. A. ; Liz-Marzan L. M. 
Traps and
Cages for Universal SERS Detection . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 43 –51 10.1039/C1CS15155J .21818469 
Sanles-Sobrido M. ; Rodriguez-Lorenzo L. ; Lorenzo-Abalde S. ; Gonzalez-Fernandez A. ; Correa-Duarte M. A. ; Alvarez-Puebla R. A. ; Liz-Marzan L. M. 
Label-Free
SERS Detection of Relevant Bioanalytes on Silver-Coated Carbon Nanotubes:
The Case of Cocaine . Nanoscale 
2009 , 1 , 153 –158 10.1039/b9nr00059c .20644874 
Guerrini L. ; Arenal R. ; Mannini B. ; Chiti F. ; Pini R. ; Matteini P. ; Alvarez-Puebla R. A. 
SERS Detection
of Amyloid Oligomers on Metallorganic-Decorated Plasmonic Beads . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 9420 –9428 10.1021/acsami.5b01056 .25897657 
Stuart D. A. ; Yuen J. M. ; Shah N. ; Lyandres O. ; Yonzon C. R. ; Glucksberg M. R. ; Walsh J. T. ; Van Duyne R. P. 
In Vivo Glucose
Measurement by Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy . Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 7211 –7215 10.1021/ac061238u .17037923 
Guerrini L. ; Rodriguez-Loureiro I. ; Correa-Duarte M. A. ; Lee Y. H. ; Ling X. Y. ; Garcia de Abajo F. J. ; Alvarez-Puebla R. A. 
Chemical Speciation of Heavy Metals
by Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Spectroscopy: Identification
and Quantification of Inorganic- and Methyl-Mercury in Water . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 8368 –8375 10.1039/c4nr01464b .24938410 
Rivera
Gil P. ; Vazquez-Vazquez C. ; Giannini V. ; Callao M. P. ; Parak W. J. ; Correa-Duarte M. A. ; Alvarez-Puebla R. A. 
Plasmonic
Nanoprobes for Real-Time Optical Monitoring of Nitric Oxide inside
Living Cells . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 13694 –13698 10.1002/anie.201306390 .
Kneipp K. ; Kneipp H. ; Kneipp J. 
Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering in Local Optical Fields of Silver and Gold Nanoaggregates-From
Single-Molecule Raman Spectroscopy to Ultrasensitive Probing in Live
Cells . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2006 , 39 , 443 –450 10.1021/ar050107x .16846208 
Milde-Langosch K. 
The Fos Family of Transcription Factors
and Their Role in Tumourigenesis . Eur. J. Cancer 
2005 , 41 , 2449 –2461 10.1016/j.ejca.2005.08.008 .16199154 
Guerrini L. ; Pazos E. ; Penas C. ; Vazquez M. E. ; Mascarenas J. L. ; Alvarez-Puebla R. A. 
Highly
Sensitive SERS Quantification of the Oncogenic Protein c-Jun in Cellular
Extracts . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 10314 –10317 10.1021/ja405120x .23815097 
Qian X. M. ; Peng X. H. ; Ansari D. O. ; Yin-Goen Q. ; Chen G. Z. ; Shin D. M. ; Yang L. ; Young A. N. ; Wang M. D. ; Nie S. M. 
In Vivo Tumor Targeting and Spectroscopic Detection with Surface-Enhanced
Raman Nanoparticle Tags . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2007 , 26 , 83 –90 10.1038/nbt1377 .18157119 
Lutz B. ; Dentinger C. ; Sun L. ; Nguyen L. ; Zhang J. ; Chmura A. ; Allen A. ; Chan S. ; Knudsen B. 
Raman Nanoparticle Probes for Antibody-Based
Protein Detection in Tissues . J. Histochem.
Cytochem. 
2008 , 56 , 371 –379 10.1369/jhc.7A7313.2007 .18071064 
Bodelon G. ; Montes-Garcia V. ; Fernandez-Lopez C. ; Pastoriza-Santos I. ; Perez-Juste J. ; Liz-Marzan L. M. 
Au@pNIPAM SERRS Tags for Multiplex
Immunophenotyping Cellular Receptors and Imaging Tumor Cells . Small 
2015 , 11 , 4149 –4157 10.1002/smll.201500269 .25939486 
Wang X. ; Qian X. M. ; Beitler J. J. ; Chen Z. G. ; Khuri F. R. ; Lewis M. M. ; Shin H. J. C. ; Nie S. M. ; Shin D. M. 
Detection
of Circulating Tumor Cells in Human Peripheral Blood Using Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering Nanoparticles . Cancer Res. 
2011 , 71 , 1526 –1532 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3069 .21212408 
So H. Y. ; Lee K. ; Murthy N. ; Pisano A. P. 
All-in-One Nanowire-Decorated Multifunctional Membrane
for Rapid Cell Lysis and Direct DNA Isolation . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 20693 –20699 10.1021/am506153y .25420232 
Lu N. ; Dai P. F. ; Gao A. R. ; Valiaho J. ; Kallio P. ; Wang Y. L. ; Li T. 
Label-Free and Rapid Electrical Detection
of hTSH with CMOS-Compatible Silicon Nanowire Transistor Arrays . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 20378 –20384 10.1021/am505915y .25338002 
Cai B. J. ; Wang S. T. ; Huang L. ; Ning Y. ; Zhang Z. Y. ; Zhang G. J. 
Ultrasensitive Label-Free
Detection of PNA-DNA Hybridization by Reduced Graphene Oxide Field-Effect
Transistor Biosensor . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 2632 –2638 10.1021/nn4063424 .24528470 
Kulkarni G. S. ; Zhong Z. H. 
Detection beyond
the Debye Screening Length in a High-Frequency Nanoelectronic Biosensor . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 719 –723 10.1021/nl203666a .22214376 
Dorvel B. R. ; Reddy B. ; Go J. ; Duarte Guevara C. ; Salm E. ; Alam M. A. ; Bashir R. 
Silicon Nanowires with
High-k Hafnium Oxide Dielectrics for Sensitive Detection of Small
Nucleic Acid Oligomers . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 6150 –6164 10.1021/nn301495k .22695179 
Chua J. H. ; Chee R. E. ; Agarwal A. ; Wong S. M. ; Zhang G. J. 
Label-Free Electrical Detection of
Cardiac Biomarker with Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor-Compatible
Silicon Nanowire Sensor Arrays . Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 6266 –6271 10.1021/ac901157x .20337397 
Bangar M. A. ; Shirale D. J. ; Chen W. ; Myung N. V. ; Mulchandani A. 
Single Conducting Polymer Nanowire
Chemiresistive Label-Free Immunosensor for Cancer Biomarker . Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 2168 –2175 10.1021/ac802319f .19281260 
Gao Z. Q. ; Agarwal A. ; Trigg A. D. ; Singh N. ; Fang C. ; Tung C. H. ; Fan Y. ; Buddharaju K. D. ; Kong J. M. 
Silicon Nanowire Arrays for Label-Free Detection of
DNA . Anal. Chem. 
2007 , 79 , 3291 –3297 10.1021/ac061808q .17407259 
Arter J. A. ; Taggart D. K. ; McIntire T. M. ; Penner R. M. ; Weiss G. A. 
Virus-PEDOT Nanowires for Biosensing . Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 4858 –4862 10.1021/nl1025826 .21038915 
Arter J. A. ; Diaz J. E. ; Donavan K. C. ; Yuan T. ; Penner R. M. ; Weiss G. A. 
Virus-Polymer Hybrid Nanowires Tailored to Detect Prostate-Specific
Membrane Antigen . Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 2776 –2783 10.1021/ac203143y .22339784 
Gao N. ; Zhou W. ; Jiang X. C. ; Hong G. S. ; Fu T. M. ; Lieber C. M. 
General Strategy
for Biodetection in High Ionic Strength Solutions Using Transistor-Based
Nanoelectronic Sensors . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 2143 –2148 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b00133 .25664395 
Li J. S. ; Zhang Y. L. ; To S. ; You L. D. ; Sun Y. 
Effect of Nanowire Number, Diameter,
and Doping Density on Nano-FET Biosensor Sensitivity . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 6661 –6668 10.1021/nn202182p .21815637 
Mu L. Y. ; Droujinine I. A. ; Rajan N. K. ; Sawtelle S. D. ; Reed M. A. 
Direct,
Rapid, and Label-Free Detection of Enzyme Substrate Interactions in
Physiological Buffers Using CMOS-Compatible Nanoribbon Sensors . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 5315 –5322 10.1021/nl502366e .25164567 
Duan X. X. ; Rajan N. K. ; Routenberg D. A. ; Huskens J. ; Reed M. A. 
Regenerative
Electronic Biosensors Using Supramolecular Approaches . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 4014 –4021 10.1021/nn306034f .23566420 
Bergveld P. 
Development,
Operation, and Application of the Ion-Sensitive Field-Effect Transistor
as a Tool for Electrophysiology . IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 
1972 , BME-19 , 342 –351 10.1109/TBME.1972.324137 .
Bergveld P. 
The Development and Application of FET-based Biosensors . Biosensors 
1986 , 2 , 15 –33 10.1016/0265-928X(86)85010-6 .3790175 
van der Schoot B. H. ; Bergveld P. 
ISFET Based Enzyme
Sensors . Biosensors 
1987 , 3 , 161 –186 10.1016/0265-928X(87)80025-1 .3447596 
Stern E. ; Wagner R. ; Sigworth F. J. ; Breaker R. ; Fahmy T. M. ; Reed M. A. 
Importance of the
Debye Screening Length on Nanowire Field Effect Transistor Sensors . Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 3405 –3409 10.1021/nl071792z .17914853 
Kim J. ; Rim Y. S. ; Chen H. ; Cao H. H. ; Nakatsuka N. ; Hinton H. L. ; Zhao C. ; Andrews A. M. ; Yang Y. ; Weiss P. S. 
Fabrication of High-Performance Ultrathin In203 Film
Field-Effect Transistors and Biosensors Using Chemical Lift-Off Lithography . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 4572 –4582 10.1021/acsnano.5b01211 .25798751 
Rim Y. S. ; Bae S.-H. ; Chen H. ; Yang J. L. ; Kim J. ; Andrews A. M. ; Weiss P. A. ; Yang Y. ; Tseng H.-R. 
Printable
Ultrathin Metal Oxide Semiconductor-Based Conformal Biosensors . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 12174 –12181 10.1021/acsnano.5b05325 .26498319 
Gangopadhyay R. ; Chowdhury A. D. ; De A. 
Functionalized Polyaniline
Nanowires for Biosensing . Sens. Actuators, B 
2012 , 171 , 777 –785 10.1016/j.snb.2012.05.071 .
Penner R. M. 
Chemical Sensing with Nanowires . Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 5 , 461 –485 10.1146/annurev-anchem-062011-143007 .
Luo X. L. ; Lee I. ; Huang J. Y. ; Yun M. H. ; Cui X. Y. T. 
Ultrasensitive Protein Detection
Using an Aptamer-Functionalized Single Polyaniline Nanowire . Chem. Commun. 
2011 , 47 , 6368 –6370 10.1039/c1cc11353d .
Fan Y. ; Chen X. T. ; Trigg A. D. ; Tung C. H. ; Kong J. M. ; Gao Z. Q. 
Detection of microRNAs Using Target-Guided Formation
of Conducting Polymer Nanowires in Nanogaps . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 5437 –5443 10.1021/ja067477g .17411036 
Bangar M. A. ; Chen W. ; Myung N. V. ; Mulchandani A. 
Conducting
Polymer 1-Dimensional Nanostructures for FET Sensors . Thin Solid Films 
2010 , 519 , 964 –973 10.1016/j.tsf.2010.08.023 .
Shirale D. J. ; Bangar M. A. ; Chen W. ; Myung N. V. ; Mulchandani A. 
Effect of Aspect Ratio (Length:Diameter) on a Single
Polypyrrole Nanowire FET Device . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2010 , 114 , 13375 –13380 10.1021/jp104377e .
Zelada-Guillen G. A. ; Riu J. ; Duzgun A. ; Rius F. X. 
Immediate Detection of Living Bacteria
at Ultralow Concentrations Using a Carbon Nanotube Based Potentiometric
Aptasensor . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 7334 –7337 10.1002/anie.200902090 .
Liu G. D. ; Lin Y. Y. ; Wang J. ; Wu H. ; Wai C. M. ; Lin Y. H. 
Disposable Electrochemical Immunosensor
Diagnosis Device Based on Nanoparticle Probe and Immunochromatographic
Strip . Anal. Chem. 
2007 , 79 , 7644 –7653 10.1021/ac070691i .17877418 
Chikkaveeraiah B. V. ; Bhirde A. A. ; Morgan N. Y. ; Eden H. S. ; Chen X. Y. 
Electrochemical Immunosensors for
Detection of Cancer Protein Biomarkers . ACS
Nano 
2012 , 6 , 6546 –6561 10.1021/nn3023969 .22835068 
Stoll C. ; Kudera S. ; Parak W. J. ; Lisdat F. 
Quantum Dots on Gold:Electrodes For Photoswitchable
Cytochrome c Electrochemistry . Small 
2006 , 2 , 741 –743 10.1002/smll.200500441 .17193115 
Katz E. ; Zayats M. ; Willner I. ; Lisdat F. 
Controlling the Direction of Photocurrents by Means
of CdS Nanoparticles and Cytochrome c-Mediated Biocatalytic Cascades . Chem. Commun. 
2006 , 1395 –1397 10.1039/b517332a .
Stoll C. ; Gehring C. ; Schubert K. ; Zanella M. ; Parak W. J. ; Lisdat F. 
Photoelectrochemical
Signal Chain Based on Quantum Dots on Gold-Sensitive to Superoxide
Radicals in Solution . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2008 , 24 , 260 –265 10.1016/j.bios.2008.03.039 .18487040 
Khalid W. ; El Helou M. ; Murböck T. ; Yue Z. ; Montenegro J.-M. ; Schubert K. ; Göbel G. ; Lisdat F. ; Witte G. ; Parak W. J. 
Immobilization of
Quantum Dots via Conjugated Self-Assembled Monolayers
and Their Application as a Light-Controlled Sensor for the Detection
of Hydrogen Peroxide . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 9870 –9876 10.1021/nn2035582 .22070721 
Yue Z. ; Lisdat F. ; Parak W. J. ; Hickey S. G. ; Tu L. P. ; Sabir N. ; Dorfs D. ; Bigall N. C. 
Quantum-Dot-Based Photoelectrochemical Sensors for
Chemical and Biological Detection . ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 2800 –2814 10.1021/am3028662 .23547912 
Sabir N. ; Khan N. ; Völkner J. ; Widdascheck F. ; del Pino P. ; Witte G. ; Riedel M. ; Lisdat F. ; Konrad M. ; Parak W. J. 
Photo-Electrochemical Bioanalysis
of Guanosine Monophosphate Using Coupled Enzymatic Reactions at a
CdS/ZnS Quantum Dot Electrode . Small 
2015 , 11 , 5844 –5850 10.1002/smll.201501883 .26395754 
Stieve H. 
Sensors of Biological Organisms—Biological
Transducers . Sens. Actuators 
1983 , 4 , 689 –704 10.1016/0250-6874(83)85083-5 .
Jones D. T. ; Reed R. R. 
Golf: An Olfactory
Neuron Specific-G Protein Involved in Odorant Signal Transduction . Science 
1989 , 244 , 790 –795 10.1126/science.2499043 .2499043 
Malnic B. ; Godfrey P. A. ; Buck L. B. 
The Human Olfactory
Receptor Gene Family . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 
2004 , 101 , 2584 –2589 10.1073/pnas.0307882100 .14983052 
Spehr M. ; Schwane K. ; Riffell J. A. ; Zimmer R. K. ; Hatt H. 
Odorant Receptors
and Olfactory-like Signaling Mechanisms in Mammalian Sperm . Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 
2006 , 250 , 128 –136 10.1016/j.mce.2005.12.035 .16413109 
Machado R. F. ; Laskowski D. ; Deffenderfer O. ; Burch T. ; Zheng S. ; Mazzone P. J. ; Mekhail T. ; Jennings C. ; Stoller J. K. ; Pyle J. ; Duncan J. ; Dweik R. A. ; Erzurum S. C. 
Detection of Lung Cancer by Sensor
Array Analyses of Exhaled Breath . Am. J. Respir.
Crit. Care Med. 
2005 , 171 , 1286 –1291 10.1164/rccm.200409-1184OC .15750044 
Nakhleh M. ; Amal H. ; Jeries R. ; Broza Y. ; Aboud M. ; Gharra A. ; Ivgi H. ; Khatib S. ; Badarneh S. ; Har-Shai L. ; Glass-Marmor L. ; Lejbkowicz I. ; Miller A. ; Badarny S. ; Winer R. ; Finberg J. ; Cohen-Kaminsky S. ; Perros F. ; Montani D. ; Girerd B. 
Diagnosis and Classification of 17 diseases from 1404
Subjects via Pattern Analysis of Exhaled Molecules . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 112 10.1021/acsnano.6b04930 .28000444 
Ko H. J. ; Park T. H. 
Piezoelectric Olfactory
Biosensor: Ligand Specificity and Dose-Dependence of an Olfactory
Receptor Expressed in a Heterologous Cell System . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2005 , 20 , 1327 –1332 10.1016/j.bios.2004.05.002 .15590286 
Sung J. H. ; Ko H. J. ; Park T. H. 
Piezoelectric Biosensor
Using Olfactory Receptor Protein Expressed in Escherichia
coli . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2006 , 21 , 1981 –1986 10.1016/j.bios.2005.10.002 .16297612 
Ko H. J. ; Park T. H. 
Enhancement of Odorant
Detection Sensitivity by the Expression of Odorant-Binding Protein . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2008 , 23 , 1017 –1023 10.1016/j.bios.2007.10.008 .18061435 
Lee S. H. ; Ko H. J. ; Park T. H. 
Real-Time Monitoring
of Odorant-Induced Cellular Reactions Using Surface Plasmon Resonance . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2009 , 25 , 55 –60 10.1016/j.bios.2009.06.007 .19559592 
Lee J. Y. ; Ko H. J. ; Lee S. H. ; Park T. H. 
Cell-Based
Measurement of Odorant Molecules Using Surface Plasmon Resonance . Enzyme Microb. Technol. 
2006 , 39 , 375 –380 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2005.11.036 .
Lee S. H. ; Jun S. B. ; Ko H. J. ; Kim S. J. ; Park T. H. 
Cell-Based Olfactory Biosensor Using
Microfabricated Planar Electrode . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2009 , 24 , 2659 –2664 10.1016/j.bios.2009.01.035 .19237280 
Lee S. H. ; Jeong S. H. ; Jun S. B. ; Kim S. J. ; Park T. H. 
Enhancement of Cellular Olfactory
Signal by Electrical Stimulation . Electrophoresis 
2009 , 30 , 3283 –3288 10.1002/elps.200900124 .19722204 
Kwon O. S. ; Ahn S. R. ; Park S. J. ; Song H. S. ; Lee S. H. ; Lee J. S. ; Hong J. Y. ; Lee J. S. ; You S. A. ; Yoon H. ; Park T. H. ; Jang J. 
Ultrasensitive and Selective Recognition of Peptide Hormone Using
Close-Packed Arrays of hPTHR-Conjugated Polymer Nanoparticles . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 5549 –5558 10.1021/nn301482x .22650249 
Park S. J. ; Kwon O. S. ; Lee S. H. ; Song H. S. ; Park T. H. ; Jang J. 
Ultrasensitive Flexible Graphene Based Field-Effect Transistor (FET)-Type
Bioelectronic Nose . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 5082 –5090 10.1021/nl301714x .22962838 
Kwon O. S. ; Lee S. H. ; Park S. J. ; An J. H. ; Song H. S. ; Kim T. ; Oh J. H. ; Bae J. ; Yoon H. ; Park T. H. ; Jang J. 
Large-Scale Graphene
Micropattern Nano-Biohybrids: High-Performance Transducers for FET-Type
Flexible Fluidic HIV Immunoassays . Adv. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 4177 –4185 10.1002/adma.201301523 .23744620 
Kim T. H. ; Lee S. H. ; Lee J. ; Song H. S. ; Oh E. H. ; Park T. H. ; Hong S. 
Single-Carbon-Atomic-Resolution
Detection of Odorant Molecules using a Human Olfactory Receptor-Based
Bioelectronic Nose . Adv. Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 91 –94 10.1002/adma.200801435 .
Yoon H. ; Lee S. H. ; Kwon O. S. ; Song H. S. ; Oh E. H. ; Park T. H. ; Jang J. 
Polypyrrole
Nanotubes Conjugated with Human Olfactory Receptors: High-Performance
Transducers for FET-Type Bioelectronic Noses . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 2755 –2758 10.1002/anie.200805171 .
Lee S. H. ; Kwon O. S. ; Song H. S. ; Park S. J. ; Sung J. H. ; Jang J. ; Park T. H. 
Mimicking the Human
Smell Sensing Mechanism with an Artificial Nose Platform . Biomaterials 
2012 , 33 , 1722 –1729 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.11.044 .22153868 
Lee S. H. ; Jin H. J. ; Song H. S. ; Hong S. ; Park T. H. 
Bioelectronic Nose with High Sensitivity
and Selectivity Using Chemically Functionalized Carbon Nanotube Combined
with Human Olfactory Receptor . J. Biotechnol. 
2012 , 157 , 467 –472 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.09.011 .21945089 
Park J. ; Lim J. H. ; Jin H. J. ; Namgung S. ; Lee S. H. ; Park T. H. ; Hong S. 
A Bioelectronic
Sensor Based on Canine Olfactory Nanovesicle-Carbon Nanotube Hybrid
Structures for the Fast Assessment of Food Quality . Analyst 
2012 , 137 , 3249 –3254 10.1039/c2an16274a .22497005 
Jin H. J. ; Lee S. H. ; Kim T. H. ; Park J. ; Song H. S. ; Park T. H. ; Hong S. 
Nanovesicle-Based Bioelectronic Nose
Platform Mimicking Human Olfactory Signal Transduction . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2012 , 35 , 335 –341 10.1016/j.bios.2012.03.012 .22475887 
Lim J. H. ; Park J. ; Oh E. H. ; Ko H. J. ; Hong S. ; Park T. H. 
Nanovesicle-Based Bioelectronic Nose
for the Diagnosis of Lung Cancer from Human Blood . Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2014 , 3 , 360 –366 10.1002/adhm.201300174 .
Song H. S. ; Kwon O. S. ; Lee S. H. ; Park S. J. ; Kim U. K. ; Jang J. ; Park T. H. 
Human Taste Receptor-Functionalized
Field Effect Transistor as a Human-Like Nanobioelectronic Tongue . Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 172 –178 10.1021/nl3038147 .23176205 
Song H. S. ; Jin H. J. ; Ahn S. R. ; Kim D. ; Lee S. H. ; Kim U. K. ; Simons C. T. ; Hong S. ; Park T. H. 
Bioelectronic
Tongue Using Heterodimeric Human Taste Receptor for the Discrimination
of Sweeteners with Human-like Performance . ACS
Nano 
2014 , 8 , 9781 –9789 10.1021/nn502926x .25126667 
Lim J. H. ; Park J. ; Ahn J. H. ; Jin H. J. ; Hong S. ; Park T. H. 
A Peptide Receptor-Based
Bioelectronic Nose for the Real-Time Determination of Seafood Quality . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2013 , 39 , 244 –249 10.1016/j.bios.2012.07.054 .22901715 
Norton J. J. S. ; Lee D. S. ; Lee J. W. ; Lee W. ; Kwon O. ; Won P. ; Jung S.-Y. ; Cheng H. ; Jeong J.-W. ; Akce A. ; Umunna S. ; Na I. ; Kwon Y. H. ; Wang X.-Q. ; Liu Z. ; Paik U. ; Huang Y. ; Bretl T. ; Yeo W.-H. ; Rogers J. A. 
Soft, Curved
Electrode Systems Capable of Integration on the Auricle as a Persistent
Brain–Computer Interface . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2015 , 112 , 3920 –3925 10.1073/pnas.1424875112 .25775550 
Rim Y. S. ; Bae S.-H. ; Chen H. ; Yang J. L. ; Kim J. ; Andrews A. M. ; Weiss P. S. ; Yang Y. ; Tseng H.-R. 
Printable
Ultrathin Metal Oxide Semiconductor-Based Conformal Biosensors . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 12174 –12181 10.1021/acsnano.5b05325 .26498319 
Liu Q. ; Cai H. ; Xu Y. ; Li Y. ; Li R. ; Wang P. 
Olfactory Cell-Based Biosensor: A First Step towards a Neurochip
of Bioelectronic Nose . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2006 , 22 , 318 –322 10.1016/j.bios.2006.01.016 .16567087 
Milligan C. J. ; Li J. ; Sukumar P. ; Majeed Y. ; Dallas M. L. ; English A. ; Emery P. ; Porter K. E. ; Smith A. M. ; McFadzean I. ; Beccano-Kelly D. ; Bahnasi Y. ; Cheong A. ; Naylor J. ; Zeng F. ; Liu X. ; Gamper N. ; Jiang L. H. ; Pearson H. A. ; Peers C. ; et al. Robotic Multiwell Planar
Patch-Clamp for Native and Primary Mammalian Cells . Nat. Protoc. 
2009 , 4 , 244 –255 10.1038/nprot.2008.230 .19197268 
Haythornthwaite A. ; Stoelzle S. ; Hasler A. ; Kiss A. ; Mosbacher J. ; George M. ; Bruggemann A. ; Fertig N. 
Characterizing Human Ion Channels in Induced Pluripotent
Stem Cell-Derived Neurons . J. Biomol. Screening 
2012 , 17 , 1264 –1272 10.1177/1087057112457821 .
Yao X. ; Kwan H. Y. 
Activity of Voltage-Gated
K+ Channels Is Associated with Cell Proliferation and Ca2+ Influx in Carcinoma Cells of Colon Cancer . Life Sci. 
1999 , 65 , 55 –62 10.1016/S0024-3205(99)00218-0 .10403493 
Oblatt-Montal M. ; Reddy G. L. ; Iwamoto T. ; Tomich J. M. ; Montal M. 
Identification of an Ion Channel-Forming
Motif in the Primary Structure of CFTR, the Cystic Fibrosis Chloride
Channel . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
1994 , 91 , 1495 –1499 10.1073/pnas.91.4.1495 .7509074 
Abbott G. W. ; Pitt G. S. 
Ion Channels under
the Sun . FASEB J. 
2014 , 28 , 1957 –1962 10.1096/fj.14-0501ufm .24786286 
Sakurai Y. ; Kolokoltsov A. A. ; Chen C. C. ; Tidwell M. W. ; Bauta W. E. ; Klugbauer N. ; Grimm C. ; Wahl-Schott C. ; Biel M. ; Davey R. A. 
Two-Pore
Channels Control Ebola Virus Host Cell Entry and Are Drug Targets
for Disease Treatment . Science 
2015 , 347 , 995 –998 10.1126/science.1258758 .25722412 
Neher E. ; Sakmann B. 
Single-Channel Currents
Recorded from Membrane of Denervated Frog Muscle Fibres . Nature 
1976 , 260 , 799 –802 10.1038/260799a0 .1083489 
Farre C. ; Stoelzle S. ; Haarmann C. ; George M. ; Bruggemann A. ; Fertig N. 
Automated Ion Channel Screening: Patch Clamping Made
Easy . Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 
2007 , 11 , 557 –565 10.1517/14728222.11.4.557 .17373884 
Farre C. ; Fertig N. 
HTS Techniques for
Patch Clamp-Based Ion Channel Screening - Advances and Economy . Expert Opin. Drug Discovery 
2012 , 7 , 515 –524 10.1517/17460441.2012.682056 .
Ang Y. S. ; Yung L. Y. L. 
Rapid and Label-Free
Single-Nucleotide Discrimination via an Integrative
Nanoparticle-Nanopore Approach . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 8815 –8823 10.1021/nn302636z .22994459 
Polonchuk L. 
Toward a new gold standard for early
safety: automated temperature-controlled hERG test on the Patch Liner
(R) . Front. Pharmacol. 
2012 , 3 , 3 10.3389/fphar.2012.00003 .22303293 
Sager P. T. ; Gintant G. ; Turner J. R. ; Pettit S. ; Stockbridge N. 
Rechanneling the Cardiac Proarrhythmia Safety Paradigm:
A Meeting Report from the Cardiac Safety Research Consortium . Am. Heart J. 
2014 , 167 , 292 –300 10.1016/j.ahj.2013.11.004 .24576511 
Becker N. ; Stoelzle S. ; Gopel S. ; Guinot D. ; Mumm P. ; Haarmann C. ; Malan D. ; Bohlen H. ; Kossolov E. ; Kettenhofen R. ; George M. ; Fertig N. ; Bruggemann A. 
Minimized Cell Usage for Stem Cell-Derived and Primary
Cells on an Automated Patch Clamp System . J.
Pharmacol. Toxicol. Methods 
2013 , 68 , 82 –87 10.1016/j.vascn.2013.03.009 .23567076 
Qi D. ; Liu Z. ; Yu M. ; Liu Y. ; Tang Y. ; Lv J. ; Li Y. ; Wei J. ; Liedberg B. ; Yu Z. ; Chen X. 
Highly Stretchable
Gold Nanobelts with Sinusoidal Structures for Recording Electrocorticograms . Adv. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 3145 –3151 10.1002/adma.201405807 .25865755 
Viventi J. ; Kim D.-H. ; Vigeland L. ; Frechette E. S. ; Blanco J. A. ; Kim Y.-S. ; Avrin A. E. ; Tiruvadi V. R. ; Hwang S. W. ; Vanleer A. C. ; et al. Flexible, Foldable,
Actively Multiplexed, High-Density Electrode Array for Mapping Brain
Activity in Vivo . Nat. Neurosci. 
2011 , 14 , 1599 –1605 10.1038/nn.2973 .22081157 
Di Carlo D. 
A Mechanical Biomarker of Cell State
in Medicine . J. Lab. Autom. 
2012 , 17 , 32 –42 10.1177/2211068211431630 .22357606 
Albrecht-Buehler G. 
The Phagokinetic Tracks of 3T3 Cells . Cell 
1977 , 11 , 395 –404 10.1016/0092-8674(77)90057-5 .329998 
Bernstein L. R. ; Antoniades H. ; Zetter B. R. 
Migration of Cultured Vascular Cells
in Response to Plasma and Platelet-Derived Factors . J. Cell Sci. 
1982 , 56 , 71 –82 .7166578 
Pellegrino T. ; Parak W. J. ; Boudreau R. ; LeGros M. ; Gerion D. ; Alivisatos A. P. ; Larabell C. 
Quantum Dot-Based Cell Motility Assay . Differentiation 
2003 , 71 , 542 –548 10.1111/j.1432-0436.2003.07109006.x .14686951 
Tijore A. ; Cai P. ; Nai M. H. ; Zhuyun L. ; Yu W. ; Tay C. Y. ; Lim C. T. ; Chen X. ; Tan L. P. 
Role of Cytoskeletal Tension in the
Induction of Cardiomyogenic Differentiation in Micropatterned Human
Mesenchymal Stem Cell . Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2015 , 4 , 1399 –1407 10.1002/adhm.201500196 .
Lam C. R. ; Tan C. ; Teo Z. ; Tay C. Y. ; Phua T. ; Wu Y. L. ; Cai P. Q. ; Tan L. P. ; Chen X. ; Zhu P. ; Tan N. S. 
Loss of
TAK1 Increases Cell Traction Force in a ROS-Dependent Manner to Drive
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition of Cancer Cells . Cell Death Dis. 
2013 , 4 , e848 10.1038/cddis.2013.339 .24113182 
Tay C. Y. ; Wu Y. L. ; Cai P. ; Tan N. S. ; Venkatraman S. S. ; Chen X. ; Tan L. P. 
Bio-Inspired Micropatterned Hydrogel
to Direct and Deconstruct Hierarchical Processing of Geometry-Force
Signals by Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells during Smooth Muscle Cell
Differentiation . NPG Asia Mater. 
2015 , 7 , e199 10.1038/am.2015.66 .
Tay C. Y. ; Cai P. ; Setyawati M. I. ; Fang W. ; Tan L. P. ; Hong C. H. ; Chen X. ; Leong D. T. 
Nanoparticles Strengthen Intracellular Tension and
Retard Cellular Migration . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 83 –88 10.1021/nl4032549 .24313755 
Berridge M. V. ; Herst P. M. ; Tan A. S. 
Tetrazolium
Dyes as Tools in Cell Biology: New Insights into Their Cellular Reduction . Biotechnol. Annu. Rev. 
2005 , 11 , 127 –152 10.1016/S1387-2656(05)11004-7 .16216776 
Lehner R. ; Wang X. Y. ; Marsch S. ; Hunziker P. 
Intelligent
Nanomaterials for Medicine: Carrier Platforms and Targeting Strategies
in the Context of Clinical Application . Nanomedicine 
2013 , 9 , 742 –757 10.1016/j.nano.2013.01.012 .23434677 
Barenholz Y. 
Doxil(R) - The First FDA-Approved
Nano-Drug: Lessons learned . J. Controlled Release 
2012 , 160 , 117 –134 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.03.020 .
Stirland D. L. ; Nichols J. W. ; Miura S. ; Bae Y. H. 
Mind the Gap: A Survey of How Cancer Drug Carriers
Are Susceptible to the Gap between Research and Practice . J. Controlled Release 
2013 , 172 , 1045 –1064 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.09.026 .
Cheng Z. ; Al Zaki A. ; Hui J. Z. ; Muzykantov V. R. ; Tsourkas A. 
Multifunctional Nanoparticles: Cost versus Benefit of Adding Targeting and Imaging Capabilities . Science 
2012 , 338 , 903 –910 10.1126/science.1226338 .23161990 
Sun Q. H. ; Sun X. R. ; Ma X. P. ; Zhou Z. X. ; Jin E. L. ; Zhang B. ; Shen Y. Q. ; Van Kirk E. A. ; Murdoch W. J. ; Lott J. R. ; Lodge T. P. ; Radosz M. ; Zhao Y. L. 
Integration of Nanoassembly Functions for an Effective
Delivery Cascade for Cancer Drugs . Adv. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 7615 –7621 10.1002/adma.201401554 .25328159 
Sun Q. H. ; Radosz M. ; Shen Y. Q. 
Challenges
in Design of Translational Nanocarriers . J.
Controlled Release 
2012 , 164 , 156 –169 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.05.042 .
Ma X. P. ; Tang J. B. ; Shen Y. Q. ; Fan M. H. ; Tang H. D. ; Radosz M. 
Facile Synthesis of Polyester Dendrimers
from Sequential Click Coupling of Asymmetrical Monomers . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 14795 –14803 10.1021/ja9037406 .19772342 
Shen Y. Q. ; Ma X. P. ; Zhang B. ; Zhou Z. X. ; Sun Q. H. ; Jin E. L. ; Sui M. H. ; Tang J. B. ; Wang J. Q. ; Fan M. H. 
Degradable Dual pH- and Temperature-Responsive Photoluminescent
Dendrimers . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2011 , 17 , 5319 –5326 10.1002/chem.201003495 .21465587 
Fan Y. ; Zhang Q. 
Development of Liposomal
Formulations: From Concept to Clinical Investigations . Asian J. Pharm. Sci. 
2013 , 8 , 81 –87 10.1016/j.ajps.2013.07.010 .
Huynh N. T. ; Passirani C. ; Saulnier P. ; Benoit J. P. 
Lipid Nanocapsules:
A New Platform for Nanomedicine . Int. J. Pharm. 
2009 , 379 , 201 –209 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2009.04.026 .19409468 
Nishiyama N. ; Okazaki S. ; Cabral H. ; Miyamoto M. ; Kato Y. ; Sugiyama Y. ; Nishio K. ; Matsumura Y. ; Kataoka K. 
Novel Cisplatin-Incorporated Polymeric
Micelles Can Eradicate Solid Tumors in Mice . Cancer Res. 
2003 , 63 , 8977 –8983 .14695216 
Mochida Y. ; Cabral H. ; Miura Y. ; Albertini F. ; Fukushima S. ; Osada K. ; Nishiyama N. ; Kataoka K. 
Bundled Assembly of Helical Nanostructures in Polymeric
Micelles Loaded with Platinum Drugs Enhancing Therapeutic Efficiency
against Pancreatic Tumor . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 6724 –6738 10.1021/nn500498t .24927216 
Cabral H. ; Kataoka K. 
22. The Impact of ″Development
of the Polymer Micelles Carrier System for Doxorubicin″ on
the Nanomedicine Realm: Original Research Article: Development of
the Polymer Micelle Carrier System for Doxorubicin, 2001 References . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 190 , 70 –72 .
Zhang L. ; Feng Q. ; Wang J. L. ; Sun J. S. ; Shi X. H. ; Jiang X. Y. 
Microfluidic Synthesis of Rigid Nanovesicles for Hydrophilic
Reagents Delivery . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 3952 –3956 10.1002/anie.201500096 .
Sun J. S. ; Zhang L. ; Wang J. L. ; Feng Q. ; Liu D. B. ; Yin Q. F. ; Xu D. Y. ; Wei Y. J. ; Ding B. Q. ; Shi X. H. ; Jiang X. Y. 
Tunable
Rigidity of (Polymeric Core)-(Lipid Shell) Nanoparticles for Regulated
Cellular Uptake . Adv. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 1402 –1407 10.1002/adma.201404788 .25529120 
Sun H. L. ; Wong E. H. H. ; Yan Y. ; Cui J. W. ; Dai Q. ; Guo J. L. ; Qiao G. G. ; Caruso F. 
The Role of Capsule Stiffness on Cellular Processing . Chem. Sci. 
2015 , 6 , 3505 –3514 10.1039/C5SC00416K .
Donath E. ; Sukhorukov G. B. ; Caruso F. ; Davis S. A. ; Möhwald H. 
Novel Hollow
Polymer Shells by Colloid-Templated Assembly of Polyelectrolytes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
1998 , 37 , 2201 –2205 10.1002/(SICI)1521-3773(19980904)37:16<2201::AID-ANIE2201>3.3.CO;2-5 .
Sukhorukov G. B. ; Donath E. ; Lichtenfeld H. ; Knippel E. ; Knippel M. ; Budde A. ; Mohwald H. 
Layer-by-Layer
Self Assembly of Polyelectrolytes on Colloidal Particles . Colloids Surf., A 
1998 , 137 , 253 –266 10.1016/S0927-7757(98)00213-1 .
Sukhorukov G. B. ; Rogach A. L. ; Parak W. J. ; Winterhalter M. 
Nanoengineered Polymer Capsules: Tools for Detection,
Controlled Delivery and Site Specific Manipulation . Small 
2005 , 1 , 194 –200 10.1002/smll.200400075 .17193429 
Köhler K. ; Shchukin D. G. ; Mohwald H. ; Sukhorukov G. B. 
Thermal
Behavior of Polyelectrolyte Multilayer Microcapsules. 1. The Effect
of Odd and Even Layer Number . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2005 , 109 , 18250 –18259 10.1021/jp052208i .16853348 
Willms E. ; Johansson H. J. ; Mäger I. ; Lee Y. ; Blomberg K. E. M. ; Sadik M. ; Alaarg A. ; Smith C. I. E. ; Lehtiö J. ; El Andaloussi S. ; Wood M. J. A. ; Vader P. 
Cells Release Subpopulations
of Exosomes with Distinct Molecular and Biological Properties . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 22519 10.1038/srep22519 .26931825 
Tran T.-H. ; Mattheolabakis G. ; Aldawsari H. ; Amiji M. 
Exosomes as Nanocarriers for Immunotherapy
of Cancer and Inflammatory Diseases . Clin. Immunol. 
2015 , 160 , 46 –58 10.1016/j.clim.2015.03.021 .25842185 
El Andaloussi S. ; Lakhal S. ; Mäger I. ; Wood M. J. A. 
Exosomes for Targeted siRNA Delivery across Biological
Barriers . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2013 , 65 , 391 –397 10.1016/j.addr.2012.08.008 .
Kopeček J. 
Polymer–drug Conjugates: Origins,
Progress to Date and Future Directions . Adv.
Drug Delivery Rev. 
2013 , 65 , 49 –59 10.1016/j.addr.2012.10.014 .
Yang J. ; Zhang R. ; Radford D. C. ; Kopeček J. 
FRET-Trackable
Biodegradable HPMA Copolymer-Epirubicin Conjugates for Ovarian Carcinoma
Therapy . J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 218 , 36 –44 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.09.045 .
Pan H. ; Sima M. ; Yang J. ; Kopeček J. 
Synthesis of Long-Circulating, Backbone Degradable
HPMA Copolymer–Doxorubicin Conjugates and Evaluation of Molecular-Weight-Dependent
Antitumor Efficacy . Macromol. Biosci. 
2013 , 13 , 155 –160 10.1002/mabi.201200353 .23339052 
Wei T. ; Chen C. ; Liu J. ; Liu C. ; Posocco P. ; Liu X. X. ; Cheng Q. ; Huo S. D. ; Liang Z. C. ; Fermeglia M. ; Pricl S. ; Liang X. J. ; Rocchi P. ; Peng L. 
Anticancer Drug Nanomicelles Formed
by Self-Assembling Amphiphilic Dendrimer to Combat Cancer Drug Resistance . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2015 , 112 , 2978 –2983 10.1073/pnas.1418494112 .25713374 
Mintzer M. A. ; Grinstaff M. W. 
Biomedical
Applications of Dendrimers: A Tutorial . Chem.
Soc. Rev. 
2011 , 40 , 173 –190 10.1039/B901839P .20877875 
Rolland O. ; Turrin C.-O. ; Caminade A.-M. ; Majoral J.-P. 
Dendrimers and Nanomedicine: Multivalency in Action . New J. Chem. 
2009 , 33 , 1809 –1824 10.1039/b901054h .
Bussy C. ; Alexiou C. ; Petros R. A. ; Nyström A. M. ; Methven L. ; Kostarelos K.  Therapeutic Applications . In Adverse Effects of Engineered Nanomaterials ; Fadeel B. , Pietroiusti A. , Shvedova A. A.  , Eds.; Boston Academic Press : Boston , 2012 ; pp 285 –313 .
Raghupathi K. R. ; Guo J. ; Munkhbat O. ; Rangadurai P. ; Thayumanavan S. 
Supramolecular Disassembly of Facially
Amphiphilic Dendrimer Assemblies in Response to Physical, Chemical,
and Biological Stimuli . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2014 , 47 , 2200 –2211 10.1021/ar500143u .24937682 
Nyström A. M. ; Wooley K. L. 
The Importance of
Chemistry in Creating Well-Defined Nanoscopic Embedded Therapeutics:
Devices Capable of the Dual Functions of Imaging and Therapy . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2011 , 44 , 969 –978 10.1021/ar200097k .21675721 
Sung H. W. ; Sonaje K. ; Liao Z. X. ; Hsu L. W. ; Chuang E. Y. 
pH-Responsive
Nanoparticles Shelled with Chitosan for Oral Delivery of Insulin:
From Mechanism to Therapeutic Applications . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2012 , 45 , 619 –629 10.1021/ar200234q .22236133 
Sung H. W. ; Sonaje K. ; Feng S. S. 
Nanomedicine for Diabetes Treatment . Nanomedicine 
2011 , 6 , 1297 –1300 10.2217/nnm.11.124 .22026374 
Hsu L. W. ; Ho Y. C. ; Chuang E. Y. ; Chen C. T. ; Juang J. H. ; Su F. Y. ; Hwang S. M. ; Sung H. W. 
Effects of pH on
Molecular Mechanisms of Chitosan-Integrin Interactions and Resulting
Tight-Junction Disruptions . Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 784 –793 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.09.082 .23103155 
Chen M. C. ; Mi F. L. ; Liao Z. X. ; Hsiao C. W. ; Sonaje K. ; Chung M. F. ; Hsu L. W. ; Sung H. W. 
Recent Advances in Chitosan-Based Nanoparticles for
Oral Delivery of Macromolecules . Adv. Drug Delivery
Rev. 
2013 , 65 , 865 –879 10.1016/j.addr.2012.10.010 .
Chuang E. Y. ; Lin K. J. ; Su F. Y. ; Chen H. L. ; Maiti B. ; Ho Y. C. ; Yen T. C. ; Panda N. ; Sung H. W. 
Calcium
Depletion-Mediated Protease Inhibition and Apical-Junctional-Complex
Disassembly via an EGTA-Conjugated Carrier for Oral
Insulin Delivery . J. Controlled Release 
2013 , 169 , 296 –305 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.11.011 .
Liao Z. X. ; Chuang E. Y. ; Hsiao C. W. ; Sung H. W. 
21. pH-Sensitive Chitosan-Based Nanoparticles for Protein
Drug Delivery: Oral Approaches: Original Research Article: A Novel
pH-Sensitive Hydrogel Composed of Carboxymethyl Chitosan and Alginate
Cross-Linked by Genipin for Protein Drug Delivery, 2004 . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 190 , 68 –70 .
MaHam A. ; Tang Z. ; Wu H. ; Wang J. ; Lin Y. 
Protein-Based
Nanomedicine Platforms for Drug Delivery . Small 
2009 , 5 , 1706 –1721 10.1002/smll.200801602 .19572330 
Gradishar W. J. 
Albumin-Bound Paclitaxel: A Next-Generation
Taxane . Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 
2006 , 7 , 1041 –1053 10.1517/14656566.7.8.1041 .16722814 
Wang J. ; Wu W. ; Zhang Y. J. ; Wang X. ; Qian H. Q. ; Liu B. R. ; Jiang X. Q. 
The Combined
Effects of Size and Surface Chemistry on the Accumulation of Boronic
Acid-Rich Protein Nanoparticles in Tumors . Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 866 –878 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.10.028 .24157313 
Elzoghby A. O. ; Abo El-Fotoh W. S. ; Elgindy N. A. 
Casein-Based Formulations as Promising Controlled Release
Drug Delivery Systems . J. Controlled Release 
2011 , 153 , 206 –216 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.02.010 .
Liang M. M. ; Fan K. L. ; Zhou M. ; Duan D. M. ; Zheng J. Y. ; Yang D. L. ; Feng J. ; Yan X. Y. 
H-Ferritin-Nanocaged Doxorubicin Nanoparticles Specifically
Target and Kill Tumors with a Single-Dose Injection . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2014 , 111 , 14900 –14905 10.1073/pnas.1407808111 .25267615 
Wu Y. Z. ; Ihme S. ; Feuring-Buske M. ; Kuan S. L. ; Eisele K. ; Lamla M. ; Wang Y. R. ; Buske C. ; Weil T. 
A Core-Shell Albumin Copolymer Nanotransporter
for High Capacity Loading and Two-Step Release of Doxorubicin with
Enhanced Anti-Leukemia Activity . Adv. Healthcare
Mater. 
2013 , 2 , 884 –894 10.1002/adhm.201200296 .
Jones M.-C. ; Leroux J.-C. 
Polymeric Micelles–A New Generation of Colloidal
Drug Carriers . Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 
1999 , 48 , 101 –111 10.1016/S0939-6411(99)00039-9 .10469928 
Torchilin V. P. 
Structure and Design of Polymeric
Surfactant-Based Drug Delivery Systems . J. Controlled
Release 
2001 , 73 , 137 –172 10.1016/S0168-3659(01)00299-1 .
Sukhorukov G. B. ; Rogach A. L. ; Zebli B. ; Liedl T. ; Skirtach A. G. ; Köhler K. ; Antipov A. A. ; Gaponik N. ; Susha A. S. ; Winterhalter M. ; Parak W. J. 
Nanoengineered Polymer Capsules:
Tools for Detection, Controlled Delivery and Site Specific Manipulation . Small 
2005 , 1 , 194 –200 10.1002/smll.200400075 .17193429 
Pan H. ; Yang J. ; Kopečková P. ; Kopeček J. 
Backbone Degradable
Multiblock N-(2-Hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide Copolymer Conjugates via Reversible Addition–Fragmentation Chain Transfer
Polymerization and Thiol–ene Coupling Reaction . Biomacromolecules 
2011 , 12 , 247 –252 10.1021/bm101254e .21158387 
Agnihotri S. A. ; Mallikarjuna N. N. ; Aminabhavi T. M. 
Recent Advances on Chitosan-Based
Micro- and Nanoparticles in Drug Delivery . J.
Controlled Release 
2004 , 100 , 5 –28 10.1016/j.jconrel.2004.08.010 .
Pouton C. W. 
Lipid Formulations for Oral Administration of Drugs:
Non-Emulsifying, Self-Emulsifying and “Self-Microemulsifying”
Drug Delivery Systems . Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 
2000 , 11 , S93 –8 10.1016/S0928-0987(00)00167-6 .11033431 
Yeh T.-H. ; Hsu L.-W. ; Tseng M. T. ; Lee P.-L. ; Sonjae K. ; Ho Y.-C. ; Sung H.-W. 
Mechanism
and Consequence of Chitosan-Mediated Reversible Epithelial Tight Junction
Opening . Biomaterials 
2011 , 32 , 6164 –6173 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.03.056 .21641031 
Nicolì E. ; Syga M. I. ; Bosetti M. ; Shastri V. P. 
Enhanced Gene Silencing through Human Serum Albumin-Mediated
Delivery of Polyethylenimine-siRNA Polyplexes . PLoS One 
2015 , 10 , e0122581 10.1371/journal.pone.0122581 .25856158 
Cui D. X. ; Zhang C. L. ; Liu B. ; Shu Y. ; Du T. ; Shu D. ; Wang K. ; Dai F. P. ; Liu Y. L. ; Li C. ; Pan F. ; Yang Y. M. ; Ni J. ; Li H. ; Brand-Saberi B. ; Guo P.X. 
Regression of Gastric Cancer by Systemic Injection of RNA Nanoparticles Carrying both Ligand and siRNA . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 10726 10.1038/srep10726 .26137913 
Conde J. ; Tian F. R. ; Hernandez Y. ; Bao C. C. ; Baptista P. V. ; Cui D. X. ; Stoeger T. ; de la Fuente J. M. 
RNAi-Based
Glyconanoparticles Trigger Apoptotic Pathways for in Vitro and in Vivo Enhanced Cancer-Cell Killing . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 9083 –9091 10.1039/C4NR05742B .25924183 
Shu D. ; Shu Y. ; Haque F. ; Abdelmawla S. ; Guo P. X. 
Thermodynamically
Stable RNA Three-Way Junction for Constructing Multifunctional Nanoparticles
for Delivery of Therapeutics . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 6 , 658 –667 10.1038/nnano.2011.105 .21909084 
Wu Y. ; Ermakova A. ; Liu W. ; Pramanik G. ; Vu T. M. ; Kurz A. ; McGuinness L. ; Naydenov B. ; Hafner S. ; Reuter R. ; Wrachtrup J. ; Isoya J. ; Förtsch C. ; Barth H. ; Simmet T. ; Jelezko F. ; Weil T. 
Programmable Biopolymers for Advancing
Biomedical Applications of Fluorescent Nanodiamonds . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2015 , 25 , 6576 –6585 10.1002/adfm.201502704 .
Alhaddad A. ; Adam M. P. ; Botsoa J. ; Dantelle G. ; Perruchas S. ; Gacoin T. ; Mansuy C. ; Lavielle S. ; Malvy C. ; Treussart F. ; Bertrand J. R. 
Nanodiamond as a
Vector for siRNA Delivery to Ewing Sarcoma Cells . Small 
2011 , 7 , 3087 –3095 10.1002/smll.201101193 .21913326 
Shimkunas R. A. ; Robinson E. ; Lam R. ; Lu S. ; Xu X. Y. ; Zhang X. Q. ; Huang H. J. ; Osawa E. ; Ho D. 
Nanodiamond-Insulin
Complexes as pH-Dependent Protein Delivery Vehicles . Biomaterials 
2009 , 30 , 5720 –5728 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.07.004 .19635632 
Knapinska A. M. ; Tokmina-Roszyk D. ; Amar S. ; Tokmina-Roszyk M. ; Mochalin V. N. ; Gogotsi Y. ; Cosme P. ; Terentis A. C. ; Fields G. B. 
Solid-Phase Synthesis,
Characterization, and Cellular Activities of Collagen-Model Nanodiamond-Peptide
Conjugates . Biopolymers 
2015 , 104 , 186 –195 10.1002/bip.22636 .25753561 
Cabral H. ; Matsumoto Y. ; Mizuno K. ; Chen Q. ; Murakami M. ; Kimura M. ; Terada Y. ; Kano M. R. ; Miyazono K. ; Uesaka M. ; Nishiyama N. ; Kataoka K. 
Accumulation of Sub-100 nm Polymeric
Micelles in Poorly Permeable Tumours Depends on Size . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 6 , 815 –823 10.1038/nnano.2011.166 .22020122 
Sugahara K. N. ; Teesalu T. ; Karmali P. P. ; Kotamraju V. R. ; Agemy L. ; Greenwald D. R. ; Ruoslahti E. 
Coadministration
of a Tumor-Penetrating Peptide Enhances the Efficacy of Cancer Drugs . Science 
2010 , 328 , 1031 –1035 10.1126/science.1183057 .20378772 
Frese K. K. ; Neesse A. ; Cook N. ; Bapiro T. E. ; Lolkema M. P. ; Jodrell D. I. ; Tuveson D. A. 
Nab-Paclitaxel Potentiates
Gemcitabine Activity by Reducing Cytidine Deaminase Levels in a Mouse
Model of Pancreatic Cancer . Cancer Discovery 
2012 , 2 , 260 –269 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0242 .22585996 
Liu J. ; Liao S. ; Diop-Frimpong B. ; Chen W. ; Goel S. ; Naxerova K. ; Ancukiewicz M. ; Boucher Y. ; Jain R. K. ; Xu L. 
TGF-β Blockade
Improves the Distribution and Efficacy of Therapeutics in Breast Carcinoma
by Normalizing the Tumor Stroma . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 16618 –16623 10.1073/pnas.1117610109 .22996328 
Meng H. ; Zhao Y. ; Dong J. ; Xue M. ; Lin Y.-S. ; Ji Z. ; Mai W. X. ; Zhang H. ; Chang C. H. ; Brinker C. J. ; Zink J. I. ; Nel A. E. 
Two-Wave
Nanotherapy To Target the Stroma and Optimize Gemcitabine Delivery
To a Human Pancreatic Cancer Model in Mice . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 10048 –10065 10.1021/nn404083m .24143858 
Meng H. ; Wang M. ; Liu H. ; Liu X. ; Situ A. ; Wu B. ; Ji Z. ; Chang C. H. ; Nel A. E. 
Use of a Lipid-Coated Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticle
Platform for Synergistic Gemcitabine and Paclitaxel Delivery to Human
Pancreatic Cancer in Mice . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 3540 –3557 10.1021/acsnano.5b00510 .25776964 
Liu X. ; Situ A. ; Kang Y. ; Villabroza K. R. ; Liao Y. ; Chang C. H. ; Donahue T. ; Nel A. E. ; Meng H. 
Irinotecan Delivery by Lipid-Coated
Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles Shows Improved Efficacy and Safety
over Liposomes for Pancreatic Cancer . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 2702 –2715 10.1021/acsnano.5b07781 .26835979 
Torchilin V. 
Tumor Delivery of Macromolecular
Drugs Based on the EPR Effect . Adv. Drug Delivery
Rev. 
2011 , 63 , 131 –135 10.1016/j.addr.2010.03.011 .
Zhang J. ; Yuan Z. F. ; Wang Y. ; Chen W. H. ; Luo G. F. ; Cheng S. X. ; Zhuo R. X. ; Zhang X. Z. 
Multifunctional
Envelope-Type Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles for Tumor-Triggered
Targeting Drug Delivery . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 5068 –5073 10.1021/ja312004m .23464924 
Quan C. Y. ; Chen J. X. ; Wang H. Y. ; Li C. ; Chang C. ; Zhang X. Z. ; Zhuo R. X. 
Core-Shell Nanosized
Assemblies Mediated by the Alpha-Beta Cyclodextrin Dimer with a Tumor-Triggered
Targeting Property . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 4211 –4219 10.1021/nn100534q .20521828 
Zhong Y. N. ; Yang W. J. ; Sun H. L. ; Cheng R. ; Meng F. H. ; Deng C. ; Zhong Z. Y. 
Ligand-Directed
Reduction-Sensitive Shell-Sheddable Biodegradable Micelles Actively
Deliver Doxorubicin into the Nuclei of Target Cancer Cells . Biomacromolecules 
2013 , 14 , 3723 –3730 10.1021/bm401098w .23998942 
Chen W. ; Zou Y. ; Meng F. ; Cheng R. ; Deng C. ; Feijen J. ; Zhong Z. 
Glyco-Nanoparticles with Sheddable Saccharide Shells: A Unique and
Potent Platform for Hepatoma-Targeting Delivery of Anticancer Drugs . Biomacromolecules 
2014 , 15 , 900 –907 10.1021/bm401749t .24460130 
Yuan Y. Y. ; Mao C. Q. ; Du X. J. ; Du J. Z. ; Wang F. ; Wang J. 
Surface Charge Switchable Nanoparticles Based on Zwitterionic Polymer
for Enhanced Drug Delivery to Tumor . Adv. Mater. 
2012 , 24 , 5476 –5480 10.1002/adma.201202296 .22886872 
Liu X. S. ; Li H. ; Jin Q. ; Ji J. 
Surface Tailoring of Nanoparticles via Mixed-Charge
Monolayers and Their Biomedical Applications . Small 
2014 , 10 , 4230 –4242 10.1002/smll.201401440 .25123827 
Marradi M. ; Chiodo F. ; Garcia I. ; Penades S. 
Glyconanoparticles
as Multifunctional and Multimodal Carbohydrate Systems . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 4728 –4745 10.1039/c2cs35420a .23288339 
Garcia I. ; Sanchez-Iglesias A. ; Henriksen-Lacey M. ; Grzelczak M. ; Penades S. ; Liz-Marzan L. M. 
Glycans as Biofunctional Ligands
for Gold Nanorods: Stability and Targeting in Protein-Rich Media . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 3686 –3692 10.1021/jacs.5b01001 .25706836 
Liu X. S. ; Chen Y. J. ; Li H. ; Huang N. ; Jin Q. ; Ren K. F. ; Ji J. 
Enhanced Retention and Cellular Uptake
of Nanoparticles in Tumors by Controlling Their Aggregation Behavior . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 6244 –6257 10.1021/nn402201w .23799860 
Liu X. S. ; Li H. ; Chen Y. J. ; Jin Q. ; Ren K. F. ; Ji J. 
Mixed-Charge
Nanoparticles for Long Circulation, Low Reticuloendothelial System
Clearance, and High Tumor Accumulation . Adv.
Healthcare Mater. 
2014 , 3 , 1439 –1447 10.1002/adhm.201300617 .
Li H. ; Liu X. S. ; Huang N. ; Ren K. F. ; Jin Q. ; Ji J. 
Mixed-Charge Self-Assembled Monolayers″ as a Facile Method
to Design pH-induced Aggregation of Large Gold Nanoparticles for Near-Infrared
Photothermal Cancer Therapy . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 18930 –18937 10.1021/am504813f .25286378 
Wang Y. C. ; Bahng J. H. ; Che Q. T. ; Han J. S. ; Kotov N. A. 
Anomalously Fast Diffusion of Targeted
Carbon Nanotubes in Cellular Spheroids . ACS
Nano 
2015 , 9 , 8231 –8238 10.1021/acsnano.5b02595 .26181892 
Wang J. Q. ; Mao W. W. ; Lock L. L. ; Tang J. B. ; Sui M. H. ; Sun W. L. ; Cui H. G. ; Xu D. ; Shen Y. Q. 
The Role
of Micelle Size in Tumor Accumulation, Penetration, and Treatment . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 7195 –7206 10.1021/acsnano.5b02017 .26149286 
Huo S. D. ; Ma H. L. ; Huang K. Y. ; Liu J. ; Wei T. ; Jin S. B. ; Zhang J. C. ; He S. T. ; Liang X. J. 
Superior
Penetration and Retention Behavior of 50 nm Gold Nanoparticles in
Tumors . Cancer Res. 
2013 , 73 , 319 –330 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2071 .23074284 
Xiong X. B. ; Huang Y. ; Lu W. L. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang H. ; Nagai T. ; Zhang Q. 
Enhanced Intracellular
Delivery and Improved Antitumor Efficacy of Doxorubicin by Sterically
Stabilized Liposomes Modified with a Synthetic RGD Mimetic . J. Controlled Release 
2005 , 107 , 262 –275 10.1016/j.jconrel.2005.03.030 .
Mei D. ; Lin Z. Q. ; Fu J. J. ; He B. ; Gao W. ; Ma L. ; Dai W. B. ; Zhang H. ; Wang X. Q. ; Wang J. C. ; Zhang X. ; Lu W. L. ; Zhou D. M. ; Zhang Q. 
The Use of Alpha-Conotoxin ImI to Actualize the Targeted Delivery
of Paclitaxel Micelles to Alpha 7 nAChR-Overexpressing Breast Cancer . Biomaterials 
2015 , 42 , 52 –65 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.11.044 .25542793 
Dai W. B. ; Yang T. Y. ; Wang Y. G. ; Wang X. Q. ; Wang J. C. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang Q. 
Peptide PHSCNK
as an Integrin alpha(5)beta(1) Antagonist Targets Stealth Liposomes
to Integrin-Overexpressing Melanoma . Nanomedicine 
2012 , 8 , 1152 –1161 10.1016/j.nano.2012.01.003 .22306158 
Zheng N. ; Dai W. ; Du W. ; Zhang H. ; Lei L. ; Zhang H. ; Wang X. ; Wang J. ; Zhang X. ; Gao J. ; Zhang Q. 
A Novel Lanreotide-Encoded
Micelle System Targets Paclitaxel to the Tumors with Overexpression
of Somatostatin Receptors . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2012 , 9 , 1175 –1188 10.1021/mp200464x .
Zhang J. L. ; Jin W. ; Wang X. Q. ; Wang J. C. ; Zhang X. A. ; Zhang Q. A. 
A Novel Octreotide
Modified Lipid Vesicle Improved the Anticancer Efficacy of Doxorubicin
in Somatostatin Receptor 2 Positive Tumor Models . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2010 , 7 , 1159 –1168 10.1021/mp1000235 .
Xiang Y. ; Liang L. ; Wang X. ; Wang J. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang Q. 
Chloride Channel-Mediated Brain Glioma Targeting of Chlorotoxin-Modified
Doxorubicine-Loaded Liposomes . J. Controlled
Release 
2011 , 152 , 402 –410 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.03.014 .
Guo Z. M. ; He B. ; Jin H. W. ; Zhang H. R. ; Dai W. B. ; Zhang L. R. ; Zhang H. ; Wang X. Q. ; Wang J. C. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang Q. 
Targeting Efficiency of RGD-Modified Nanocarriers with Different
Ligand Intervals in Response to Integrin Alpha v Beta 3 Clustering . Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 6106 –6117 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.04.031 .24794924 
Cai D. ; Gao W. ; He B. ; Dai W. ; Zhang H. ; Wang X. ; Wang J. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang Q. 
Hydrophobic Penetrating Peptide PFVYLI-Modified Stealth Liposomes
for Doxorubicin Delivery in Breast Cancer Therapy . Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 2283 –2294 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.11.088 .24360410 
Sykes E. A. ; Chen J. ; Zheng G. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Investigating the Impact of Nanoparticle Size on Active
and Passive Tumor Targeting Efficiency . ACS
Nano 
2014 , 8 , 5696 –5706 10.1021/nn500299p .24821383 
Laurent S. ; Saei A. A. ; Behzadi S. ; Panahifar A. ; Mahmoudi M. 
Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles
for Delivery of Therapeutic Agents: Opportunities and Challenges . Expert Opin. Drug Delivery 
2014 , 11 , 1449 –1470 10.1517/17425247.2014.924501 .
Alexiou C. ; Arnold W. ; Klein R. J. ; Parak F. G. ; Hulin P. ; Bergemann C. ; Erhardt W. ; Wagenpfeil S. ; Lübbe A. S. 
Locoregional
Cancer Treatment with Magnetic Drug Targeting . Cancer Res. 
2000 , 60 , 6641 –6648 .11118047 
Lueshen E. ; Venugopal I. ; Soni T. ; Alaraj A. ; Linninger A. 
Implant-Assisted
Intrathecal Magnetic Drug Targeting to Aid in Therapeutic Nanoparticle
Localization for Potential Treatment of Central Nervous System Disorders . J. Biomed. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 11 , 253 –261 10.1166/jbn.2015.1907 .26349301 
Hournkumnuard K. ; Natenapit M. 
Magnetic Drug Targeting by Ferromagnetic
Microwires Implanted within Blood Vessels . Med.
Phys. 
2013 , 40 , 062302 10.1118/1.4805097 .23718604 
He W. ; Ji Y. ; Luo C. ; Xu Z. 
Development of Single-Side Magnet Array for Super Paramagnetic Nano-Particle
Targeting . Res. J. Appl. Sci., Eng. Technol. 
2014 , 7 , 3022 –3029 10.19026/rjaset.7.637 .
Nacev A. ; Weinberg I. N. ; Stepanov P. Y. ; Kupfer S. ; Mair L. O. ; Urdaneta M. G. ; Shimoji M. ; Fricke S. T. ; Shapiro B. 
Dynamic Inversion Enables External
Magnets To Concentrate Ferromagnetic Rods to a Central Target . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 359 –364 10.1021/nl503654t .25457292 
Tietze R. ; Lyer S. ; Durr S. ; Struffert T. ; Engelhorn T. ; Schwarz M. ; Eckert E. ; Goen T. ; Vasylyev S. ; Peukert W. ; Wiekhorst F. ; Trahms L. ; Dorfler A. ; Alexiou C. 
Efficient Drug-Delivery
Using Magnetic Nanoparticles – Biodistribution and Therapeutic
Effects in Tumour Bearing Rabbits . Nanomedicine 
2013 , 9 , 961 –971 10.1016/j.nano.2013.05.001 .23669367 
Karamipour S. ; Sadjadi M. S. ; Farhadyar N. 
Fabrication
and Spectroscopic Studies of Folic Acid-Conjugated Fe3O4@Au Core-Shell for Targeted Drug Delivery Application . Spectrochim. Acta, Part A 
2015 , 148 , 146 –155 10.1016/j.saa.2015.03.078 .
Unterweger H. ; Tietze R. ; Janko C. ; Zaloga J. ; Lyer S. ; Durr S. ; Taccardi N. ; Goudouri O. M. ; Hoppe A. ; Eberbeck D. ; Schubert D. W. ; Boccaccini A. R. ; Alexiou C. 
Development and Characterization
of Magnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles with a Cisplatin-Bearing Polymer
Coating for Targeted Drug Delivery . Int. J.
Nanomed. 
2014 , 9 , 3659 –3676 10.2147/IJN.S63433 .
Hamarat Sanlier S. ; Yasa M. ; Cihnioglu A. O. ; Abdulhayoglu M. ; Yilmaz H. ; Ak G. 
Development of Gemcitabine-Adsorbed
Magnetic Gelatin Nanoparticles for Targeted Drug Delivery in Lung
Cancer . Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol. 
2016 , 1 –7 10.3109/21691401.2014.1001493 .
Huang J. ; Shu Q. ; Wang L. Y. ; Wu H. ; Wang A. Y. ; Mao H. 
Layer-by-Layer Assembled Milk Protein
Coated Magnetic Nanoparticle Enabled Oral Drug Delivery with High
Stability in Stomach and Enzyme-Responsive Release in Small Intestine . Biomaterials 
2015 , 39 , 105 –113 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.10.059 .25477177 
Halupka-Bryl M. ; Asai K. ; Thangavel S. ; Bednarowicz M. ; Krzyminiewski R. ; Nagasaki Y. 
Synthesis and in Vitro and in Vivo Evaluations of Poly(ethylene
Glycol)-Block-poly(4-Vinylbenzylphosphonate) Magnetic Nanoparticles
Containing Doxorubicin as a Potential Targeted Drug Delivery System . Colloids Surf., B 
2014 , 118 , 140 –147 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2014.03.025 .
Wang N. ; Guan Y. P. ; Yang L. R. ; Jia L. W. ; Wei X. T. ; Liu H. Z. ; Guo C. 
Magnetic Nanoparticles
(MNPs) Covalently Coated by PEO-PPO-PEO Block Copolymer for Drug Delivery . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2013 , 395 , 50 –57 10.1016/j.jcis.2012.11.062 .23305884 
Zaloga J. ; Janko C. ; Nowak J. ; Matuszak J. ; Knaup S. ; Eberbeck D. ; Tietze R. ; Unterweger H. ; Friedrich R. P. ; Duerr S. ; Heimke-Brinck R. ; Baum E. ; Cicha I. ; Dorje F. ; Odenbach S. ; Lyer S. ; Lee G. ; Alexiou C. 
Development of a Lauric
Acid/Albumin Hybrid Iron Oxide Nanoparticle System with Improved Biocompatibility . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2014 , 9 , 4847 –4866 10.2147/IJN.S68539 .
Zaloga J. ; Janko C. ; Agarwal R. ; Nowak J. ; Muller R. ; Boccaccini A. R. ; Lee G. ; Odenbach S. ; Lyer S. ; Alexiou C. 
Different Storage Conditions Influence Biocompatibility
and Physicochemical Properties of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles . Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2015 , 16 , 9368 –9384 10.3390/ijms16059368 .25918940 
Lepeltier E. A. ; Nuhn L. ; Lehr C. M. ; Zentel R. 
Not Just for
Tumor Targeting: Unmet Medical Needs and Opportunities for Nanomedicine . Nanomedicine 
2015 , 10 , 3147 –3166 10.2217/nnm.15.132 .26447353 
de Souza
Carvalho C. ; Daum N. ; Lehr C. M. 
Carrier Interactions
with the Biological Barriers of the Lung: Advanced in Vitro Models and Challenges for Pulmonary Drug Delivery . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2014 , 75 , 129 –140 10.1016/j.addr.2014.05.014 .
Mitragotri S. ; Burke P. A. ; Langer R. 
Overcoming the Challenges
in Administering Biopharmaceuticals: Formulation and Delivery Strategies . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2014 , 13 , 655 –672 10.1038/nrd4363 .25103255 
Schmidt C. ; Lautenschlaeger C. ; Collnot E. M. ; Schumann M. ; Bojarski C. ; Schulzke J. D. ; Lehr C. M. ; Stallmach A. 
Nano- and Microscaled Particles for
Drug Targeting to Inflamed Intestinal Mucosa-A First in Vivo Study in Human Patients . J. Controlled Release 
2013 , 165 , 139 –145 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.10.019 .
Ali H. ; Weigmann B. ; Collnot E. M. ; Khan S. A. ; Windbergs M. ; Lehr C. M. 
Budesonide Loaded
PLGA Nanoparticles for Targeting the Inflamed Intestinal Mucosa-Pharmaceutical
Characterization and Fluorescence Imaging . Pharm.
Res. 
2016 , 33 , 1085 –1092 10.1007/s11095-015-1852-6 .26718953 
Ali H. ; Weigmann B. ; Neurath M. F. ; Collnot E. M. ; Windbergs M. ; Lehr C. M. 
Budesonide Loaded Nanoparticles with pH-Sensitive Coating
for Improved Mucosal Targeting in Mouse Models of Inflammatory Bowel
Diseases . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 183 , 167 –177 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.03.039 .
Mittal A. ; Schulze K. ; Ebensen T. ; Weissmann S. ; Hansen S. ; Guzman C. A. ; Lehr C. M. 
Inverse
Micellar Sugar Glass (IMSG) Nanoparticles for Transfollicular Vaccination . J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 206 , 140 –152 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.03.017 .
Mittal A. ; Schulze K. ; Ebensen T. ; Weissmann S. ; Hansen S. ; Lehr C. M. ; Guzman C. A. 
Efficient Nanoparticle-Mediated
Needle-Free Transcutaneous Vaccination via Hair Follicles
Requires Adjuvantation . Nanomedicine 
2015 , 11 , 147 –154 10.1016/j.nano.2014.08.009 .25200611 
Mittal A. ; Raber A. S. ; Schaefer U. F. ; Weissmann S. ; Ebensen T. ; Schulze K. ; Guzman C. A. ; Lehr C. M. ; Hansen S. 
Non-Invasive Delivery of Nanoparticles
to Hair Follicles: A Perspective for Transcutaneous Immunization . Vaccine 
2013 , 31 , 3442 –3451 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.12.048 .23290836 
Paranjpe M. ; Müller-Goymann C. 
Nanoparticle-Mediated
Pulmonary Drug Delivery: A Review . Int. J. Mol.
Sci. 
2014 , 15 , 5852 –5873 10.3390/ijms15045852 .24717409 
Nafee N. ; Husari A. ; Maurer C. K. ; Lu C. B. ; de Rossi C. ; Steinbach A. ; Hartmann R. W. ; Lehr C. M. ; Schneider M. 
Antibiotic-Free
Nanotherapeutics: Ultra-Small, Mucus-Penetrating Solid Lipid Nanoparticles
Enhance the Pulmonary Delivery and Anti-Virulence Efficacy of Novel
Quorum Sensing Inhibitors . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 192 , 131 –140 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.06.055 .
Mahiny A. J. ; Dewerth A. ; Mays L. E. ; Alkhaled M. ; Mothes B. ; Malaeksefat E. ; Loretz B. ; Rottenberger J. ; Brosch D. M. ; Reautschnig P. ; Surapolchai P. ; Zeyer F. ; Schams A. ; Carevic M. ; Bakele M. ; Griese M. ; Schwab M. ; Nurnberg B. ; Beer-Hammer S. ; Handgretinger R. ; et al. In Vivo Genome Editing Using Nuclease-Encoding mRNA Corrects SP-B Deficiency . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2015 , 33 , 584 –586 10.1038/nbt.3241 .25985262 
Zhang X. ; Malhotra S. ; Molina M. ; Haag R. 
Micro- and Nanogels
with Labile Crosslinks - from Synthesis to Biomedical Applications . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 1948 –1973 10.1039/C4CS00341A .25620415 
Kakizawa Y. ; Harada A. ; Kataoka K. 
Environment-Sensitive Stabilization
of Core–Shell Structured Polyion Complex Micelle by Reversible
Cross-Linking of the Core through Disulfide Bond . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1999 , 121 , 11247 –11248 10.1021/ja993057y .
Cheng R. ; Feng F. ; Meng F. H. ; Deng C. ; Feijen J. ; Zhong Z. Y. 
Glutathione-Responsive Nano-Vehicles as a Promising
Platform for Targeted Intracellular Drug and Gene Delivery . J. Controlled Release 
2011 , 152 , 2 –12 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.01.030 .
Sun Y. ; Yan X. L. ; Yuan T. M. ; Liang J. ; Fan Y. J. ; Gu Z. W. ; Zhang X. D. 
Disassemblable Micelles
Based on Reduction-Degradable Amphiphilic Graft Copolymers for Intracellular
Delivery of Doxorubicin . Biomaterials 
2010 , 31 , 7124 –7131 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.06.011 .20580429 
Sun H. L. ; Guo B. N. ; Cheng R. ; Meng F. H. ; Liu H. Y. ; Zhong Z. Y. 
Biodegradable Micelles
with Sheddable Poly(Ethylene Glycol) Shells for Triggered Intracellular
Release of Doxorubicin . Biomaterials 
2009 , 30 , 6358 –6366 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.07.051 .19666191 
Zhang J. ; Jiang X. ; Zhang Y. ; Li Y. ; Liu S. 
Facile Fabrication of Reversible Core Cross-Linked
Micelles Possessing Thermosensitive Swellability . Macromolecules 
2007 , 40 , 9125 –9132 10.1021/ma071564r .
Xu H. P. ; Cao W. ; Zhang X. 
Selenium-Containing Polymers: Promising Biomaterials
for Controlled Release and Enzyme Mimics . Acc.
Chem. Res. 
2013 , 46 , 1647 –1658 10.1021/ar4000339 .23581522 
He Y. Y. ; Nie Y. ; Cheng G. ; Xie L. ; Shen Y. Q. ; Gu Z. W. 
Viral Mimicking Ternary Polyplexes:
A Reduction-Controlled Hierarchical Unpacking Vector for Gene Delivery . Adv. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 1534 –1540 10.1002/adma.201304592 .24757715 
Wang T. ; Ng D. Y. W. ; Wu Y. Z. ; Thomas J. ; TamTran T. ; Weil T. 
Bis-Sulfide Bioconjugates for Glutathione
Triggered Tumor Responsive Drug Release . Chem.
Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 1116 –1118 10.1039/C3CC47003B .
Marusyk A. ; Polyak K. 
Tumor Heterogeneity: Causes and Consequences . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Rev. Cancer 
2010 , 1805 , 105 –117 10.1016/j.bbcan.2009.11.002 .
van Vlerken L. E. ; Amiji M. M. 
Multi-Functional
Polymeric Nanoparticles for Tumour-Targeted Drug Delivery . Expert Opin. Drug Delivery 
2006 , 3 , 205 –216 10.1517/17425247.3.2.205 .
Lee F. Y. F. ; Vessey A. ; Rofstad E. ; Siemann D. W. ; Sutherland R. M. 
Heterogeneity of Glutathione Content
in Human Ovarian-Cancer . Cancer Res. 
1989 , 49 , 5244 –5248 .2766292 
Konstantinov A. A. ; Peskin A. V. ; Popova E. Y. ; Khomutov G. B. ; Ruuge E. K. 
Superoxide Generation by the Respiratory-Chain
of Tumor Mitochondria . Biochim. Biophys. Acta,
Bioenerg. 
1987 , 894 , 1 –10 10.1016/0005-2728(87)90206-4 .
Fang J. ; Seki T. ; Maeda H. 
Therapeutic Strategies by Modulating
Oxygen Stress in Cancer and Inflammation . Adv.
Drug Delivery Rev. 
2009 , 61 , 290 –302 10.1016/j.addr.2009.02.005 .
Grek C. L. ; Tew K. D. 
Redox Metabolism and Malignancy . Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 
2010 , 10 , 362 –368 10.1016/j.coph.2010.05.003 .20627682 
Ray P. D. ; Huang B. W. ; Tsuji Y. 
Reactive Oxygen Species
(ROS) Homeostasis and Redox Regulation in Cellular Signaling . Cell. Signalling 
2012 , 24 , 981 –990 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.01.008 .22286106 
Wang J. R. ; Sun X. R. ; Mao W. W. ; Sun W. L. ; Tang J. B. ; Sui M. H. ; Shen Y. Q. ; Gu Z. W. 
Tumor Redox
Heterogeneity-Responsive Prodrug Nanocapsules for Cancer Chemotherapy . Adv. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 3670 –3676 10.1002/adma.201300929 .23740675 
Lu C.-H. ; Willner I. 
Stimuli-Responsive DNA-Functionalized
Nano-/Microcontainers for Switchable and Controlled Release . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 12212 –12235 10.1002/anie.201503054 .
Zhang Z. X. ; Balogh D. ; Wang F. A. ; Sung S. Y. ; Nechushtai R. ; Willner I. 
Biocatalytic Release of an Anticancer
Drug from Nucleic-Acids-Capped Mesoporous SiO2 Using DNA or Molecular
Biomarkers as Triggering Stimuli . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 8455 –8468 10.1021/nn403772j .23985013 
Zhang P. ; Cheng F. ; Zhou R. ; Cao J. ; Li J. ; Burda C. ; Min Q. ; Zhu J.-J. 
DNA-Hybrid-Gated
Multifunctional Mesoporous Silica Nanocarriers for Dual-Targeted and
MicroRNA-Responsive Controlled Drug Delivery . Angew. Chem. 
2014 , 126 , 2403 –2407 10.1002/ange.201308920 .
He D. ; He X. ; Wang K. ; Cao J. ; Zhao Y. 
A Photon-Fueled
Gate-Like Delivery System Using i-Motif DNA Functionalized Mesoporous
Silica Nanoparticles . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2012 , 22 , 4704 –4710 10.1002/adfm.201201343 .
Zhang Z. X. ; Balogh D. ; Wang F. A. ; Willner I. 
Smart Mesoporous SiO2 Nanoparticles for
the DNAzyme-Induced Multiplexed Release of Substrates . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 1934 –1940 10.1021/ja311385y .23298334 
Chen C. ; Zhou L. ; Geng J. ; Ren J. ; Qu X. 
Photosensitizer-Incorporated
Quadruplex DNA-Gated Nanovechicles for Light-Triggered, Targeted Dual
Drug Delivery to Cancer Cells . Small 
2013 , 9 , 2793 –2800 10.1002/smll.201201916 .23341257 
Eastoe J. ; Vesperinas A. ; Donnewirth A.-C. ; Wyatt P. ; Grillo I. ; Heenan R. K. ; Davis S. 
Photodestructible Vesicles . Langmuir 
2006 , 22 , 851 –853 10.1021/la052882r .16430234 
Brazel C. S. 
Magnetothermally-Responsive Nanomaterials:
Combining Magnetic Nanostructures and Thermally-Sensitive Polymers
for Triggered Drug Release . Pharm. Res. 
2009 , 26 , 644 –656 10.1007/s11095-008-9773-2 .19005741 
Carregal-Romero S. ; Guardia P. ; Yu X. ; Hartmann R. ; Pellegrino T. ; Parak W. J. 
Magnetically Triggered
Release of Molecular Cargo from Iron Oxide Nanoparticle Loaded Microcapsules . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 570 –576 10.1039/C4NR04055D .25415565 
Rai P. ; Mallidi S. ; Zheng X. ; Rahmanzadeh R. ; Mir Y. ; Elrington S. ; Khurshid A. ; Hasan T. 
Development and Applications
of Photo-Triggered Theranostic Agents . Adv.
Drug Delivery Rev. 
2010 , 62 , 1094 –1124 10.1016/j.addr.2010.09.002 .
Sykes E. A. ; Dai Q. ; Tsoi K. M. ; Hwang D. M. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Nanoparticle Exposure in Animals Can Be Visualized
in the Skin and Analysed via Skin Biopsy . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 3796 10.1038/ncomms4796 .24823347 
Pass H. I. 
Photodynamic Therapy in Oncology:
Mechanisms and Clinical Use . J. Natl. Cancer
Inst. 
1993 , 85 , 443 –456 10.1093/jnci/85.6.443 .8445672 
Chen C. J. ; Liu G. Y. ; Liu X. S. ; Pang S. P. ; Zhu C. S. ; Lv L. P. ; Ji J. 
Photo-Responsive, Biocompatible Polymeric
Micelles Self-Assembled from Hyperbranched Polyphosphate-Based Polymers . Polym. Chem. 
2011 , 2 , 1389 –1397 10.1039/c1py00094b .
Chen C. J. ; Liu G. Y. ; Shi Y. T. ; Zhu C. S. ; Pang S. P. ; Liu X. S. ; Ji J. 
Biocompatible Micelles Based on Comb-like
PEG Derivates: Formation, Characterization, and Photo-Responsiveness . Macromol. Rapid Commun. 
2011 , 32 , 1077 –1081 10.1002/marc.201100196 .21674666 
Liu G. Y. ; Chen C. J. ; Li D. D. ; Wang S. S. ; Ji J. 
Near-Infrared Light-Sensitive Micelles for Enhanced Intracellular
Drug Delivery . J. Mater. Chem. 
2012 , 22 , 16865 –16871 10.1039/c2jm00045h .
Skirtach A. G. ; Dejugnat C. ; Braun D. ; Susha A. S. ; Parak W. J. ; Möhwald H. ; Sukhorukov G. B. ; Rogach A. L. 
The Role of Metal Nanoparticles in
Remote Release of Encapsulated Materials . Nano
Lett. 
2005 , 5 , 1371 –1377 10.1021/nl050693n .16178241 
Carregal-Romero S. ; Ochs M. ; Rivera Gil P. ; Ganas C. ; Pavlov A. M. ; Sukhorukov G. B. ; Parak W. J. 
NIR-Light Triggered Delivery of Macromolecules
into the Cytosol . J. Controlled Release 
2012 , 159 , 120 –127 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.12.013 .
Muñoz Javier A. ; del Pino P. ; Bedard M. F. ; Skirtach A. G. ; Ho D. ; Sukhorukov G. B. ; Plank C. ; Parak W. J. 
Photoactivated Release of Cargo from
the Cavity of Polyelectrolyte Capsules to the Cytosol of Cells . Langmuir 
2008 , 24 , 12517 –12520 10.1021/la802448z .18844388 
Skirtach A. G. ; Javier A. M. ; Kreft O. ; Köhler K. ; Alberola A. P. ; Möhwald H. ; Parak W. J. ; Sukhorukov G. B. 
Laser-Induced
Release of Encapsulated Materials inside Living Cells . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2006 , 45 , 4612 –4617 10.1002/anie.200504599 .
Ochs M. ; Carregal-Romero S. ; Rejman J. ; Braeckmans K. ; De Smedt S. C. ; Parak W. J. 
Light-Addressable Capsules as Caged
Compound Matrix for Controlled in Vitro Release . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 695 –699 10.1002/anie.201206696 .
Ambrosone A. ; Marchesano V. ; Carregal-Romero S. ; Intartaglia D. ; Parak W. J. ; Tortiglione C. 
Control of
Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling Pathway in Vivo via Light Responsive Capsules . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 4828 –4834 10.1021/acsnano.5b07817 .26799662 
Kim H.-C. ; Härtner S. ; Behe M. ; Behr T. M. ; Hampp N. A. 
Two-Photon Absorption-Controlled
Multidose Drug Release: A Novel Approach for Secondary Cataract Treatment . J. Biomed. Opt. 
2006 , 11 , 034024 10.1117/1.2209564 .
Rahimi M. ; Kilaru S. ; Hajj Sleiman G. E. L. ; Saleh A. ; Rudkevich D. ; Nguyen K. 
Synthesis and Characterization
of Thermo-Sensitive Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery Applications . J. Biomed. Nanotechnol. 
2008 , 4 , 482 –490 10.1166/jbn.2008.014 .20526427 
Au K. M. ; Min Y. ; Tian X. ; Zhang L. ; Perello V. ; Caster J. M. ; Wang A. Z. 
Improving Cancer
Chemoradiotherapy Treatment by Dual Controlled Release of Wortmannin
and Docetaxel in Polymeric Nanoparticles . ACS
Nano 
2015 , 9 , 8976 –8996 10.1021/acsnano.5b02913 .26267360 
Goldman A. ; Kulkarni A. ; Kohandel M. ; Pandey P. ; Rao P. ; Natarajan S. K. ; Sabbisetti V. ; Sengupta S. 
Rationally Designed
2-in-1 Nanoparticles Can Overcome Adaptive Resistance in Cancer . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 5823 –5834 10.1021/acsnano.6b00320 .27257911 
Li J. ; Wang Y. ; Zhu Y. ; Oupický D. 
Recent Advances
in Delivery of Drug-Nucleic Acid Combinations for Cancer Treatment . J. Controlled Release 
2013 , 172 , 589 –600 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.04.010 .
Zhang Y. ; Zhang H. ; Wang X. Q. ; Wang J. C. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang Q. 
The Eradication of Breast Cancer
and Cancer Stem Cells Using Octreotide Modified Paclitaxel Active
Targeting Micelles and Salinomycin Passive Targeting Micelles . Biomaterials 
2012 , 33 , 679 –691 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.09.072 .22019123 
Zhou Y. ; Yang J. ; Rhim J. S. ; Kopeček J. 
HPMA Copolymer-Based Combination Therapy Toxic to Both
Prostate Cancer Stem/Progenitor Cells and Differentiated Cells Induces
Durable Anti-Tumor Effects . J. Controlled Release 
2013 , 172 , 946 –953 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.09.005 .
Dai W. B. ; Yang F. ; Ma L. ; Fan Y. C. ; He B. ; He Q. H. ; Wang X. Q. ; Zhang H. ; Zhang Q. 
Combined mTOR Inhibitor Rapamycin
and Doxorubicin-Loaded Cyclic Octapeptide Modified Liposomes for Targeting
Integrin Alpha 3 in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer . Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 5347 –5358 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.03.036 .24726747 
Feng Q. ; Yu M. Z. ; Wang J. C. ; Hou W. J. ; Gao L. Y. ; Ma X. F. ; Pei X. W. ; Niu Y. J. ; Liu X. Y. ; Qiu C. ; Pang W. H. ; Du L. L. ; Zhang Q. 
Synergistic Inhibition of Breast
Cancer by Co-Delivery of VEGF siRNA and Paclitaxel via Vapreotide-Modified Core-Shell Nanoparticles . Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 5028 –5038 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.03.012 .24680191 
Fan Y. C. ; Du W. W. ; He B. ; Fu F. Y. ; Yuan L. ; Wu H. N. ; Dai W. B. ; Zhang H. ; Wang X. Q. ; Wang J. C. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang Q. 
The Reduction of Tumor
Interstitial Fluid Pressure by Liposomal Imatinib and Its Effect on
Combination Therapy with Liposomal Doxorubicin . Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 2277 –2288 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.12.012 .23290525 
Wang Y. G. ; Yang T. Y. ; Wang X. ; Dai W. B. ; Wang J. C. ; Zhang X. A. ; Li Z. Q. ; Zhang Q. A. 
Materializing Sequential
Killing of Tumor Vasculature and Tumor Cells via Targeted
Polymeric Micelle System . J. Controlled Release 
2011 , 149 , 299 –306 10.1016/j.jconrel.2010.10.027 .
Lin Z. Q. ; Gao W. ; Hu H. X. ; Ma K. ; He B. ; Dai W. B. ; Wang X. Q. ; Wang J. C. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang Q. 
Novel Thermo-Sensitive Hydrogel System
with Paclitaxel Nanocrystals: High Drug-Loading, Sustained Drug Release
and Extended Local Retention Guaranteeing Better Efficacy and Lower
Toxicity . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 174 , 161 –170 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.10.026 .
Yang Y. ; Wang J. ; Zhang X. ; Lu W. ; Zhang Q. 
A Novel Mixed Micelle Gel with Thermo-Sensitive Property
for the Local Delivery of Docetaxel . J. Controlled
Release 
2009 , 135 , 175 –182 10.1016/j.jconrel.2009.01.007 .
Wang Z. ; Yu Y. ; Dai W. ; Cui J. ; Wu H. ; Yuan L. ; Zhang H. ; Wang X. ; Wang J. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang Q. 
A Specific Peptide Ligand-Modified Lipid Nanoparticle Carrier for
the Inhibition of Tumor Metastasis Growth . Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 756 –764 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.10.018 .23117217 
Wang Z. H. ; Yu Y. ; Dai W. B. ; Lu J. K. ; Cui J. R. ; Wu H. N. ; Yuan L. ; Zhang H. ; Wang X. Q. ; Wang J. C. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang Q. 
The Use of a Tumor Metastasis Targeting Peptide to Deliver Doxorubicin-Containing
Liposomes to Highly Metastatic Cancer . Biomaterials 
2012 , 33 , 8451 –8460 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.08.031 .22940213 
Wang Z. H. ; Yu Y. ; Ma J. ; Zhang H. R. ; Zhang H. ; Wang X. Q. ; Wang J. C. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang Q. 
LyP-1 Modification To Enhance Delivery
of Artemisinin or Fluorescent Probe Loaded Polymeric Micelles to Highly
Metastatic Tumor and Its Lymphatics . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2012 , 9 , 2646 –2657 10.1021/mp3002107 .
Qin C. ; He B. ; Dai W. B. ; Zhang H. ; Wang X. Q. ; Wang J. C. ; Zhang X. ; Wang G. J. ; Yin L. F. ; Zhang Q. 
Inhibition of Metastatic
Tumor Growth and Metastasis via Targeting Metastatic
Breast Cancer by Chlorotoxin-Modified Liposomes . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2014 , 11 , 3233 –3241 10.1021/mp400691z .
Zhang H. ; Wang X. ; Dai W. ; Gemeinhart R. A. ; Zhang Q. ; Li T. 
Pharmacokinetics and Treatment Efficacy
of Camptothecin Nanocrystals on Lung Metastasis . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2014 , 11 , 226 –233 10.1021/mp4004018 .
Fu J. J. ; Wang D. ; Mei D. ; Zhang H. R. ; Wang Z. Y. ; He B. ; Dai W. B. ; Zhang H. ; Wang X. Q. ; Zhang Q. 
Macrophage
Mediated Biomimetic Delivery System for the Treatment of Lung Metastasis
of Breast Cancer . J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 204 , 11 –19 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.01.039 .
Borel F. ; Kay M. A. ; Mueller C. 
Recombinant
AAV as a Platform for Translating the Therapeutic Potential of RNA
Interference . Mol. Ther. 
2014 , 22 , 692 –701 10.1038/mt.2013.285 .24352214 
Liu Y. P. ; Berkhout B. 
Lentiviral Delivery
of RNAi Effectors Against HIV-1 . Curr. Top.
Med. Chem. 
2009 , 9 , 1130 –1143 10.2174/156802609789630866 .19860713 
Liu Y. P. ; Berkhout B.  Gene Silencing
Methods Using Vector-Encoded siRNAs or miRNAs . Handbook of RNA Biochemistry , 2 nd ed.; Hartmann R. K. , Bindereif A. , Schön A. , Westhof E.  , Eds.; Wiley-VCH : Weinheim, Germany , 2014 ; pp 1221 –1242 .
Grunweller A. ; Hartmann R. K. 
RNA Interference as a Gene-Specific
Approach for Molecular Medicine . Curr. Med.
Chem. 
2005 , 12 , 3143 –3161 10.2174/092986705774933489 .16375707 
Zhou J. ; Shum K.-T. ; Burnett J. ; Rossi J. 
Nanoparticle-Based
Delivery of RNAi Therapeutics: Progress and Challenges . Pharmaceuticals 
2013 , 6 , 85 –107 10.3390/ph6010085 .23667320 
Krutzfeldt J. ; Rajewsky N. ; Braich R. ; Rajeev K. G. ; Tuschl T. ; Manoharan M. ; Stoffel M. 
Silencing of mMcroRNAs in
Vivo with “Antagomirs. . Nature 
2005 , 438 , 685 –689 10.1038/nature04303 .16258535 
Nishina K. ; Unno T. ; Uno Y. ; Kubodera T. ; Kanouchi T. ; Mizusawa H. ; Yokota T. 
Efficient in Vivo Delivery of siRNA to the Liver by Conjugation of
Alpha-Tocopherol . Mol. Ther. 
2008 , 16 , 734 –740 10.1038/mt.2008.14 .
Matsuda S. ; Keiser K. ; Nair J. K. ; Charisse K. ; Manoharan R. M. ; Kretschmer P. ; Peng C. G. ; Kel’in A. V. ; Kandasamy P. ; Willoughby J. L. S. ; Liebow A. ; Querbes W. ; Yucius K. ; Nguyen T. ; Milstein S. ; Maier M. A. ; Rajeev K. G. ; Manoharan M. 
siRNA Conjugates Carrying Sequentially Assembled Trivalent
N-Acetylgalactosamine Linked Through Nucleosides Elicit Robust Gene
Silencing in Vivo in Hepatocytes . ACS Chem. Biol. 
2015 , 10 , 1181 –1187 10.1021/cb501028c .25730476 
Zhou J. H. ; Li H. T. ; Li S. ; Zaia J. ; Rossi J. J. 
Novel Dual
Inhibitory Function Aptamer-siRNA Delivery System for HIV-1 Therapy . Mol. Ther. 
2008 , 16 , 1481 –1489 10.1038/mt.2008.92 .18461053 
Stein C. A. ; Hansen J. B. ; Lai J. ; Wu S. J. ; Voskresenskiy A. ; Hog A. ; Worm J. ; Hedtjarn M. ; Souleimanian N. ; Miller P. ; Soifer H. S. ; Castanotto D. ; Benimetskaya L. ; Orum H. ; Koch T. 
Efficient Gene Silencing
by Delivery of Locked Nucleic Acid Antisense Oligonucleotides, Unassisted
by Transfection Reagents . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2010 , 38 , e3 10.1093/nar/gkp841 .19854938 
Bramsen J. B. ; Grünweller A. ; Hartmann R. K. ; Kjems J.  Using Chemical Modification To Enhance siRNA Performance . Handbook of RNA Biochemistry , 2 nd ed.; Hartmann R. K. , Bindereif A. , Schön A. , Westhof E.  , Eds.; Wiley-VCH : Weinheim, Germany , 2014 ; pp 1243 –1277 .
Grunweller A. ; Hartmann R. K. 
Locked Nucleic Acid
Oligonucleotides – The Next Generation of Antisense Agents? . BioDrugs 
2007 , 21 , 235 –243 10.2165/00063030-200721040-00004 .17628121 
Sarvestani S. T. ; Stunden H. J. ; Behlke M. A. ; Forster S. C. ; McCoy C. E. ; Tate M. D. ; Ferrand J. ; Lennox K. A. ; Latz E. ; Williams B. R. G. ; Gantier M. P. 
Sequence-Dependent
off-Target Inhibition of TLR7/8 Sensing by Synthetic microRNA Inhibitors . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2015 , 43 , 1177 –1188 10.1093/nar/gku1343 .25539920 
Grunweller A. ; Wyszko E. ; Bieber B. ; Jahnel R. ; Erdmann V. A. ; Kurreck J. 
Comparison of Different Antisense
Strategies in Mammalian Cells Using Locked Nucleic Acids, 2 ′-O-Methyl
RNA, Phosphorothioates and Small Interfering RNA . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2003 , 31 , 3185 –3193 10.1093/nar/gkg409 .12799446 
Rinn J. L. ; Chang H. Y. 
Genome Regulation by Long Noncoding RNAs . Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
2012 , 81 , 145 –166 10.1146/annurev-biochem-051410-092902 .22663078 
Uchida S. ; Dimmeler S. 
Long Noncoding RNAs
in Cardiovascular Diseases . Circ. Res. 
2015 , 116 , 737 –750 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.302521 .25677520 
Yang G. D. ; Lu X. Z. ; Yuan L. J. 
LncRNA:
A Link between RNA and cancer . Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, Gene Regul. Mech. 
2014 , 1839 , 1097 –1109 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.08.012 .
Goraczniak R. ; Behlke M. A. ; Gunderson S. I. 
Gene Silencing
by Synthetic U1 Adaptors . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2009 , 27 , 257 –263 10.1038/nbt.1525 .19219028 
Grunweller A. ; Hartmann R. K. 
Expanding RNA Silencing
Approaches by U1 Adaptors . ChemBioChem 
2009 , 10 , 1599 –1601 10.1002/cbic.200900271 .19533720 
ter Brake O. ; ’t Hooft K. ; Liu Y. P. ; Centlivre M. ; von Eije K. J. ; Berkhout B. 
Lentiviral
Vector Design for Multiple shRNA Expression and Durable HIV-1 Inhibition . Mol. Ther. 
2008 , 16 , 557 –564 10.1038/sj.mt.6300382 .
Stenvang J. ; Petri A. ; Lindow M. ; Obad S. ; Kauppinen S. 
Inhibition of microRNA Function by antimiR Oligonucleotides . Silence 
2012 , 3 , 1 10.1186/1758-907X-3-1 .22230293 
Elmen J. ; Lindow M. ; Schutz S. ; Lawrence M. ; Petri A. ; Obad S. ; Lindholm M. ; Hedtjarn M. ; Hansen H. F. ; Berger U. ; Gullans S. ; Kearney P. ; Sarnow P. ; Straarup E. M. ; Kauppinen S. 
LNA-Mediated
microRNA Silencing in Non-Human Primates . Nature 
2008 , 452 , 896 –899 10.1038/nature06783 .18368051 
Lennox K. A. ; Behlke M. A. 
Chemical Modification
and Design of Anti-miRNA Oligonucleotides . Gene
Ther. 
2011 , 18 , 1111 –1120 10.1038/gt.2011.100 .21753793 
Lindow M. ; Kauppinen S. 
Discovering the First microRNA-Targeted Drug . J. Cell Biol. 
2012 , 199 , 407 –412 10.1083/jcb.201208082 .23109665 
Obad S. ; dos Santos C. O. ; Petri A. ; Heidenblad M. ; Broom O. ; Ruse C. ; Fu C. X. ; Lindow M. ; Stenvang J. ; Straarup E. M. ; Hansen H. F. ; Koch T. ; Pappin D. ; Hannon G. J. ; Kauppinen S. 
Silencing
of microRNA Families by Seed-Targeting Tiny LNAs . Nat. Genet. 
2011 , 43 , 371 –378 10.1038/ng.786 .21423181 
Thomas M. ; Lange-Grunweller K. ; Dayyoub E. ; Bakowsky U. ; Weirauch U. ; Aigner A. ; Hartmann R. K. ; Grunweller A. 
PEI-Complexed LNA Antiseeds as miRNA
Inhibitors . RNA Biol. 
2012 , 9 , 1088 –1098 10.4161/rna.21165 .22894918 
Weirauch U. ; Grunweller A. ; Cuellar L. ; Hartmann R. K. ; Aigner A. 
U1 Adaptors for the
Therapeutic Knockdown of the Oncogene Pim-1 Kinase in Glioblastoma . Nucleic Acid Ther. 
2013 , 23 , 264 –272 10.1089/nat.2012.0407 .23724780 
Chen C. ; Xing G. ; Wang J. ; Zhao Y. ; Li B. ; Tang J. ; Jia G. ; Wang T. ; Sun J. ; Xing L. ; Yuan H. ; Gao Y. ; Meng H. ; Chen Z. ; Zhao F. ; Chai Z. ; Fang X. 
Multihydroxylated
[Gd@C82(OH)22]n Nanoparticles: Antineoplastic Activity of High Efficiency
and Low Toxicity . Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 , 2050 –2057 10.1021/nl051624b .16218736 
Yang D. ; Zhao Y. ; Guo H. ; Li Y. ; Tewary P. ; Xing G. ; Hou W. ; Oppenheim J. J. ; Zhang N. 
[Gd@C(82) (OH)(22)](n) Nanoparticles Induce Dendritic Cell Maturation
and Activate Th1 Immune Responses . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 1178 –1186 10.1021/nn901478z .20121217 
Liu Y. ; Jiao F. ; Qiu Y. ; Li W. ; Lao F. ; Zhou G. ; Sun B. ; Xing G. ; Dong J. ; Zhao Y. ; Chai Z. ; Chen C. 
The Effect
of Gd@C82(OH)22 Nanoparticles on the Release of Th1/Th2 Cytokines
and Induction of TNF-Alpha Mediated Cellular Immunity . Biomaterials 
2009 , 30 , 3934 –3945 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.04.001 .19403166 
Kang S. G. ; Zhou G. ; Yang P. ; Liu Y. ; Sun B. ; Huynh T. ; Meng H. ; Zhao L. ; Xing G. ; Chen C. ; Zhao Y. ; Zhou R. 
Molecular
Mechanism of Pancreatic Tumor Metastasis Inhibition by Gd@C82(OH)22 and Its Implication for de Novo Design of Nanomedicine . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 15431 –15436 10.1073/pnas.1204600109 .22949663 
Liang X. J. ; Meng H. ; Wang Y. ; He H. ; Meng J. ; Lu J. ; Wang P. C. ; Zhao Y. ; Gao X. ; Sun B. ; Chen C. ; Xing G. ; Shen D. ; Gottesman M. M. ; Wu Y. ; Yin J. J. ; Jia L. 
Metallofullerene
Nanoparticles Circumvent Tumor Resistance to Cisplatin by Reactivating
Endocytosis . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2010 , 107 , 7449 –7454 10.1073/pnas.0909707107 .20368438 
Meng H. ; Xing G. ; Sun B. ; Zhao F. ; Lei H. ; Li W. ; Song Y. ; Chen Z. ; Yuan H. ; Wang X. ; Long J. ; Chen C. ; Liang X. ; Zhang N. ; Chai Z. ; Zhao Y. 
Potent Angiogenesis Inhibition by the Particulate Form of Fullerene
Derivatives . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 2773 –2783 10.1021/nn100448z .20429577 
Meng H. ; Xing G. M. ; Blanco E. ; Song Y. ; Zhao L. N. ; Sun B. Y. ; Li X. D. ; Wang P. C. ; Korotcov A. ; Li W. ; Liang X. J. ; Chen C. Y. ; Yuan H. ; Zhao F. ; Chen Z. ; Sun T. ; Chai Z. F. ; Ferrari M. ; Zhao Y. L. 
Gadolinium Metallofullerenol
Nanoparticles Inhibit Cancer Metastasis through Matrix Metalloproteinase
Inhibition: Imprisoning instead of Poisoning Cancer Cells . Nanomedicine 
2012 , 8 , 136 –146 10.1016/j.nano.2011.08.019 .21930111 
Song Y. ; Zhang M. ; Zhao L. ; Yin X. ; Zhao J. ; Li J. ; He R. ; Chang Y. ; Jin J. ; Zhao Y. ; Li J. ; Xing G. 
Regulation on Mechanical
Properties of Collagen: Enhanced Bioactivities of Metallofullerol . Nanomedicine 
2014 , 10 , 783 –793 10.1016/j.nano.2013.11.011 .24333590 
Wang J. X. ; Chen C. Y. ; Li B. ; Yu H. W. ; Zhao Y. L. ; Sun J. ; Li Y. F. ; Xing G. M. ; Yuan H. ; Tang J. ; Chen Z. ; Meng H. ; Gao Y. X. ; Ye C. ; Chai Z. F. ; Zhu C. F. ; Ma B. C. ; Fang X. H. ; Wan L. J. 
Antioxidative Function
and Biodistribution of [Gd@C82(OH)22]n Nanoparticles in Tumor-Bearing Mice . Biochem.
Pharmacol. 
2006 , 71 , 872 –881 10.1016/j.bcp.2005.12.001 .16436273 
Yin J. J. ; Lao F. ; Meng J. ; Fu P. P. ; Zhao Y. L. ; Xing G. M. ; Gao X. Y. ; Sun B. Y. ; Wang P. C. ; Chen C. Y. ; Liang X. J. 
Inhibition of Tumor Growth by Endohedral Metallofullerenol
Nanoparticles Optimized as Reactive Oxygen Species Scavenger . Mol. Pharmacol. 
2008 , 74 , 1132 –1140 10.1124/mol.108.048348 .18635669 
Yin J. J. ; Lao F. ; Fu P. P. ; Wamer W. G. ; Zhao Y. ; Wang P. C. ; Qiu Y. ; Sun B. ; Xing G. ; Dong J. ; Liang X. J. ; Chen C. 
The Scavenging
of Reactive Oxygen Species and the Potential for Cell Protection by
Functionalized Fullerene Materials . Biomaterials 
2009 , 30 , 611 –621 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2008.09.061 .18986699 
Liu Y. ; Chen C. Y. ; Qian P. X. ; Lu X. F. ; Sun B. Y. ; Zhang X. ; Wang L. M. ; Gao X. F. ; Li H. ; Chen Z. Y. ; Tang J. L. ; Zhang W. J. ; Dong J. Q. ; Bai R. ; Lobie P. E. ; Wu Q. F. ; Liu S. L. ; Zhang H. F. ; Zhao F. ; Wicha M. S. ; Zhu T. ; Zhao Y. L. 
Gd-Metallofullerenol
Nanomaterial as Non-Toxic Breast Cancer Stem Cell-Specific Inhibitor . Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 5988 10.1038/ncomms6988 .25612916 
Balogh L. P. 
Caging Cancer . Nanomedicine 
2015 , 11 , 867 –896 10.1016/j.nano.2015.02.005 .25733383 
Thomsen H. S. 
Nephrogenic
Systemic Fibrosis: A Serious Adverse Reaction to Gadolinium –
1997–2006–2016. Part 2 . Acta Radiol. 
2016 , 57 , 643 10.1177/0284185115626481 .26802070 
Thomsen H. S. 
Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis: A
Serious Adverse Reaction to Gadolinium – 1997–2006–2016.
Part 1 . Acta Radiol. 
2016 , 57 , 515 10.1177/0284185115626480 .26802069 
Cha S. H. ; Hong J. ; McGuffie M. ; Yeom B. ; VanEpps J. S. ; Kotov N. A. 
Shape-Dependent Biomimetic Inhibition
of Enzyme by Nanoparticles and Their Antibacterial Activity . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 9097 –9105 10.1021/acsnano.5b03247 .26325486 
Wu K. ; Liu J. ; Johnson R. N. ; Yang J. ; Kopeček J. 
Drug-Free
Macromolecular Therapeutics: Induction of Apoptosis by Coiled-Coil-Mediated
Cross-Linking of Antigens on the Cell Surface . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2010 , 49 , 1451 –1455 10.1002/anie.200906232 .
Wu K. ; Yang J. ; Liu J. ; Kopeček J. 
Coiled-Coil
Based Drug-Free Macromolecular Therapeutics: In Vivo Efficacy . J. Controlled Release 
2012 , 157 , 126 –131 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.08.002 .
Chu T.-W. ; Yang J. ; Zhang R. ; Sima M. ; Kopeček J. 
Cell Surface Self-Assembly of Hybrid
Nanoconjugates via Oligonucleotide Hybridization
Induces Apoptosis . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 719 –730 10.1021/nn4053827 .24308267 
Zhang R. ; Yang J. ; Chu T.-W. ; Hartley J. M. ; Kopeček J. 
Multimodality Imaging of Coiled-Coil
Mediated Self-Assembly in a “Drug-Free” Therapeutic
System . Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2015 , 4 , 1054 –1065 10.1002/adhm.201400679 .
Hartley J. M. ; Chu T.-W. ; Peterson E. M. ; Zhang R. ; Yang J. ; Harris J. ; Kopeček J. 
Super-Resolution
Imaging and Quantitative Analysis of Membrane Protein/Lipid Raft Clustering
Mediated by Cell-Surface Self-Assembly of Hybrid Nanoconjugates . ChemBioChem 
2015 , 16 , 1725 –1729 10.1002/cbic.201500278 .26097072 
Chu T.-W. ; Kosak K. M. ; Shami P. J. ; Kopeček J. 
Drug-Free
Macromolecular Therapeutics Induce Apoptosis of Patient Chronic Lymphocytic
Leukemia Cells . Drug Delivery Transl. Res. 
2014 , 4 , 389 –394 10.1007/s13346-014-0209-8 .
Chu T.-W. ; Zhang R. ; Yang J. ; Chao M. P. ; Shami P. J. ; Kopeček J. 
A Two-Step
Pretargeted Nanotherapy for CD20 Crosslinking May Achieve Superior
Anti-Lymphoma Efficacy to Rituximab . Theranostics 
2015 , 5 , 834 –846 10.7150/thno.12040 .26000056 
Chu T.-W. ; Kopecek J. 
Drug-Free Macromolecular
Therapeutics – A New Paradigm in Polymeric Nanomedicines . Biomater. Sci. 
2015 , 3 , 908 –922 10.1039/C4BM00442F .26191406 
Lucky S. S. ; Soo K. C. ; Zhang Y. 
Nanoparticles in Photodynamic Therapy . Chem. Rev. 
2015 , 115 , 1990 –2042 10.1021/cr5004198 .25602130 
Jaque D. ; Martinez Maestro L. ; del Rosal B. ; Haro-Gonzalez P. ; Benayas A. ; Plaza J. L. ; Martin Rodriguez E. ; Garcia Sole J. 
Nanoparticles for Photothermal Therapies . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 9494 –9530 10.1039/C4NR00708E .25030381 
Deatsch A. E. ; Evans B. A. 
Heating Efficiency in Magnetic Nanoparticle Hyperthermia . J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 
2014 , 354 , 163 –172 10.1016/j.jmmm.2013.11.006 .
Castano A. P. ; Demidova T. N. ; Hamblin M. R. 
Mechanisms in Photodynamic
Therapy: Part One—Photosensitizers, Photochemistry and Cellular
Localization . Photodiagn. Photodyn. Ther. 
2004 , 1 , 279 –293 10.1016/S1572-1000(05)00007-4 .
Redmond R. W. ; Gamlin J. N. 
A Compilation of
Singlet Oxygen Yields from Biologically Relevant Molecules . Photochem. Photobiol. 
1999 , 70 , 391 –475 10.1562/0031-8655(1999)070<0391:ACOSOY>2.3.CO;2 .10546544 
DeRosa M. C. ; Crutchley R. J. 
Photosensitized
Singlet Oxygen and Its Applications . Coord.
Chem. Rev. 
2002 , 233 , 351 –371 10.1016/S0010-8545(02)00034-6 .
GarciaFresnadillo D. ; Georgiadou Y. ; Orellana G. ; Braun A. M. ; Oliveros E. 
Singlet-Oxygen 1Δg Production by ruthenium(II) Complexes
Containing Polyazaheterocyclic Ligands in Methanol and in Water . Helv. Chim. Acta 
1996 , 79 , 1222 –1238 10.1002/hlca.19960790428 .
Ibanez J. A. ; Litter M. I. ; Pizarro R. A. 
Photocatalytic Bactericidal
Effect of TiO2 on Enterobacter Cloacae. Comparative Study with Other
Gram (−) Bacteria . J. Photochem. Photobiol.,
A 
2003 , 157 , 81 –85 10.1016/S1010-6030(03)00074-1 .
Dolmans D. ; Fukumura D. ; Jain R. 
Photodynamic
Therapy for Cancer . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2003 , 3 , 380 –387 10.1038/nrc1071 .12724736 
Wohrle D. ; Hirth A. ; Bogdahn-Rai T. ; Schnurpfeil G. ; Shopova M. 
Photodynamic Therapy of Cancer: Second
and Third Generations of Photosensitizers . Russ.
Chem. Bull. 
1998 , 47 , 807 –816 10.1007/BF02498146 .
Dolmans D. E. J. G. J. ; Kadambi A. ; Hill J. S. ; Waters C. A. ; Robinson B. C. ; Walker J. P. ; Fukumura D. ; Jain R. K. 
Vascular Accumulation
of a Novel Photosensitizer, MV6401, Causes Selective Thrombosis in
Tumor Vessels after Photodynamic Therapy . Cancer
Res. 
2002 , 62 , 2151 –2156 .11929837 
Wilson B.
C. ; Patterson M. S. 
The Physics,
Biophysics and Technology of Photodynamic Therapy . Phys. Med. Biol. 
2008 , 53 , R61 –R109 10.1088/0031-9155/53/9/R01 .18401068 
Wust P. ; Hegewisch-Becker S. ; Issels R. 
Hyperthermia: Current Status and
Therapeutic Results . Dtsch. Med. Wochenschr. 
2003 , 128 , 2023 –2029 10.1055/s-2003-42557 .14508698 
Hirsch L. R. ; Stafford R. J. ; Bankson J. A. ; Sershen S. R. ; Rivera B. ; Price R. E. ; Hazle J. D. ; Halas N. J. ; West J. L. 
Nanoshell-Mediated Near-Infrared
Thermal Therapy of Tumors Under Magnetic Resonance Guidance . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2003 , 100 , 13549 –13554 10.1073/pnas.2232479100 .14597719 
Weissleder R. 
A Clearer Vision for in Vivo Imaging . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2001 , 19 , 316 –317 10.1038/86684 .11283581 
Huang X. H. ; Jain P. K. ; El-Sayed I. H. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Determination of the Minimum Temperature Required for
Selective Photothermal Destruction of Cancer Cells with the Use of
Immunotargeted Gold Nanoparticles . Photochem.
Photobiol. 
2006 , 82 , 412 –417 10.1562/2005-12-14-RA-754 .16613493 
Huang X. ; El-Sayed I. H. ; Qian W. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Cancer Cell Imaging
and Photothermal Therapy in the Near-Infrared Region by Using Gold
Nanorods . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 2115 –2120 10.1021/ja057254a .16464114 
Jain P. K. ; El-Sayed I. H. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Au Nanoparticles
Target Cancer . Nano Today 
2007 , 2 , 18 –29 10.1016/S1748-0132(07)70016-6 .
Perez-Hernandez M. ; Del Pino P. ; Mitchell S. G. ; Moros M. ; Stepien G. ; Pelaz B. ; Parak W. J. ; Galvez E. M. ; Pardo J. ; de la Fuente J. M. 
Dissecting
the Molecular Mechanism of Apoptosis during Photothermal Therapy Using
Gold Nanoprisms . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 52 –61 10.1021/nn505468v .25493329 
Pelaz B. ; Grazu V. ; Ibarra A. ; Magen C. ; del Pino P. ; de la Fuente J. M. 
Tailoring
the Synthesis and Heating Ability of Gold Nanoprisms for Bioapplications . Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 8965 –8970 10.1021/la204712u .22260484 
O’Neal D. P. ; Hirsch L. R. ; Halas N. J. ; Payne J. D. ; West J. L. 
Photo-Thermal
Tumor Ablation in Mice Using near Infrared-Absorbing Nanoparticles . Cancer Lett. 
2004 , 209 , 171 –176 10.1016/j.canlet.2004.02.004 .15159019 
Loo C. ; Lin A. ; Hirsch L. ; Lee M. H. ; Barton J. ; Halas N. J. ; West J. ; Drezek R. 
Nanoshell-Enabled
Photonics-Based Imaging and Therapy of Cancer . Technol. Cancer Res. Treat. 
2004 , 3 , 33 –40 10.1177/153303460400300104 .14750891 
Loo C. ; Lowery A. ; Halas N. ; West J. ; Drezek R. 
Immunotargeted Nanoshells for Integrated Cancer Imaging
and Therapy . Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 , 709 –711 10.1021/nl050127s .15826113 
Chen J. ; Wang D. ; Xi J. ; Au L. ; Siekkinen A. ; Warsen A. ; Li Z. Y. ; Zhang H. ; Xia Y. ; Li X. 
Immuno Gold Nanocages with Tailored Optical Properties
for Targeted Photothermal Destruction of Cancer Cells . Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 1318 –1322 10.1021/nl070345g .17430005 
Gad S. C. ; Sharp K. L. ; Montgomery C. ; Payne J. D. ; Goodrich G. P. 
Evaluation
of the Toxicity of Intravenous Delivery of Auroshell Particles (Gold-Silica
Nanoshells) . Int. J. Toxicol. 
2012 , 31 , 584 –594 10.1177/1091581812465969 .23212452 
Bardhan R. ; Chen W. X. ; Perez-Torres C. ; Bartels M. ; Huschka R. M. ; Zhao L. L. ; Morosan E. ; Pautler R. G. ; Joshi A. ; Halas N. J. 
Nanoshells with
Targeted Simultaneous Enhancement of Magnetic and Optical Imaging
and Photothermal Therapeutic Response . Adv.
Funct. Mater. 
2009 , 19 , 3901 –3909 10.1002/adfm.200901235 .
Bardhan R. ; Chen W. X. ; Bartels M. ; Perez-Torres C. ; Botero M. F. ; McAninch R. W. ; Contreras A. ; Schiff R. ; Pautler R. G. ; Halas N. J. ; Joshi A. 
Tracking of
Multimodal Therapeutic Nanocomplexes Targeting Breast Cancer in Vivo . Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 4920 –4928 10.1021/nl102889y .21090693 
Bardhan R. ; Lal S. ; Joshi A. ; Halas N. J. 
Theranostic Nanoshells: From Probe Design to Imaging
and Treatment of Cancer . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2011 , 44 , 936 –946 10.1021/ar200023x .21612199 
Ayala-Orozco C. ; Liu J. G. ; Knight M. W. ; Wang Y. M. ; Day J. K. ; Nordlander P. ; Halas N. J. 
Fluorescence Enhancement of Molecules Inside a Gold
Nanomatryoshka . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 2926 –2933 10.1021/nl501027j .24738706 
Ayala-Orozco C. ; Urban C. ; Bishnoi S. ; Urban A. ; Charron H. ; Mitchell T. ; Shea M. ; Nanda S. ; Schiff R. ; Halas N. ; Joshi A. 
Sub-100 Nm
Gold Nanomatryoshkas Improve Photo-Thermal Therapy Efficacy in Large
and Highly Aggressive Triple Negative Breast Tumors . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 191 , 90 –97 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.07.038 .
Ayala-Orozco C. ; Urban C. ; Knight M. W. ; Urban A. S. ; Neumann O. ; Bishnoi S. W. ; Mukherjee S. ; Goodman A. M. ; Charron H. ; Mitchell T. ; Shea M. ; Roy R. ; Nanda S. ; Schiff R. ; Halas N. J. ; Joshi A. 
Au Nanomatryoshkas
as Efficient Near-Infrared Photothermal Transducers for Cancer Treatment:
Benchmarking against Nanoshells . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 6372 –6381 10.1021/nn501871d .24889266 
Pankhurst Q. A. ; Connolly J. ; Jones S. K. ; Dobson J. 
Applications of Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedicine . J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
2003 , 36 , R167 –R181 10.1088/0022-3727/36/13/201 .
Pankhurst Q. A. ; Thanh N. K. T. ; Jones S. K. ; Dobson J. 
Progress in
Applications of Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedicine . J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
2009 , 42 , 224001 10.1088/0022-3727/42/22/224001 .
Fortin J. P. ; Wilhelm C. ; Servais J. ; Menager C. ; Bacri J. C. ; Gazeau F. 
Size-Sorted Anionic Iron Oxide Nanomagnets as Colloidal
Mediators for Magnetic Hyperthermia . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 2628 –2635 10.1021/ja067457e .17266310 
Guardia P. ; Di Corato R. ; Lartigue L. ; Wilhelm C. ; Espinosa A. ; Garcia-Hernandez M. ; Gazeau F. ; Manna L. ; Pellegrino T. 
Water-Soluble
Iron Oxide Nanocubes with High Values of Specific Absorption Rate
for Cancer Cell Hyperthermia Treatment . ACS
Nano 
2012 , 6 , 3080 –3091 10.1021/nn2048137 .22494015 
Hergt R. ; Andrä W. ; d’Ambly C. G. ; Hilger I. ; Kaiser W. A. ; Richter U. ; Schmidt H.-G. 
Physical Limits of Hyperthermia Using Magnetite Fine
Particles . IEEE Trans. Magn. 
1998 , 34 , 3745 –3754 10.1109/20.718537 .
Kettering M. ; Winter J. ; Zeisberger M. ; Alexiou C. ; Bremer-Streck S. ; Bergemann C. ; Kaiser W. A. ; Hilger I. 
Magnetically Based Enhancement of
Nanoparticle Uptake in Tumor Cells: Combination of Magnetically Induced
Cell Labeling and Magnetic Heating . Rofo-Fortschritte
Auf Dem Gebiet Der Rontgenstrahlen Und Der Bildgebenden Verfahren 
2006 , 178 , 1255 –1260 10.1055/s-2006-927140 .
Zhang Q. ; Castellanos-Rubio I. ; Munshi R. ; Orue I. ; Pelaz B. ; Gries K. I. ; Parak W. J. ; del Pino P. ; Pralle A. 
Model Driven Optimization
of Magnetic Anisotropy of Exchange-Coupled Core-Shell Ferrite Nanoparticles
for Maximal Hysteretic Loss . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 7380 –7387 10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b03261 .
Hergt R. ; Hiergeist R. ; Hilger I. ; Kaiser W. A. ; Lapatnikov Y. ; Margel S. ; Richter U. 
Maghemite Nanoparticles with Very
High AC-Losses for Application in RF-Magnetic Hyperthermia . J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 
2004 , 270 , 345 –357 10.1016/j.jmmm.2003.09.001 .
Hergt R. ; Hiergeist R. ; Zeisberger M. ; Glockl G. ; Weitschies W. ; Ramirez P. ; Hilger I. ; Kaiser W. A. 
Enhancement of AC-Losses of Magnetic Nanoparticles
for Heating Applications . J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 
2004 , 280 , 358 –368 10.1016/j.jmmm.2004.03.034 .
Hergt R. ; Hiergeist R. ; Zeisberger M. ; Schuler D. ; Heyen U. ; Hilger I. ; Kaiser W. A. 
Magnetic Properties of Bacterial Magnetosomes as Potential
Diagnostic and Therapeutic Tools . J. Magn. Magn.
Mater. 
2005 , 293 , 80 –86 10.1016/j.jmmm.2005.01.047 .
Dutz S. ; Hergt R. 
Magnetic Particle Hyperthermia-a Promising Tumour Therapy? . Nanotechnology 
2014 , 25 , 452001 10.1088/0957-4484/25/45/452001 .25337919 
Alphandery E. ; Faure S. ; Seksek O. ; Guyot F. ; Chebbi I. 
Chains of
Magnetosomes Extracted from AMB-1 Magnetotactic Bacteria for Application
in Alternative Magnetic Field Cancer Therapy . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 6279 –6296 10.1021/nn201290k .21732678 
Raaphorst G. P. ; Li L. F. ; Yang D. P. ; LeBlanc J. M. 
Cisplatin Sensitization by Concurrent
Mild Hyperthermia in Parental and Mutant Cell Lines Deficient in Homologous
Recombination and Non-Homologous Endjoining Repair . Oncol. Rep. 
2005 , 14 , 281 –285 .15944802 
Feliu N. ; Docter D. ; Heine M. ; del Pino P. ; Ashraf S. ; Kolosnjaj-Tabi J. ; Macchiarini P. ; Nielsen P. ; Alloyeau D. ; Gazeau F. ; Stauber R. H. ; Parak W. J. 
In Vivo Degradation and the Fate of Inorganic Nanoparticles . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2016 , 45 , 2440 –2457 10.1039/C5CS00699F .26862602 
Yu M. ; Zheng J. 
Clearance Pathways and Tumor Targeting of Imaging Nanoparticles . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 6655 –6674 10.1021/acsnano.5b01320 .26149184 
Shiah J. G. ; Dvořák M. ; Kopečková P. ; Sun Y. ; Peterson C. M. ; Kopeček J. 
Biodistribution and Antitumour Efficacy
of Long-Circulating N-(2-Hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide Copolymer–doxorubicin
Conjugates in Nude Mice . Eur. J. Cancer 
2001 , 37 , 131 –139 10.1016/S0959-8049(00)00374-9 .11165140 
Seymour L. W. ; Duncan R. ; Strohalm J. ; Kopeček J. 
Effect of Molecular Weight (Mw) of N-(2-Hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide
Copolymers on Body Distribution and Rate of Excretion after Subcutaneous,
Intraperitoneal, and Intravenous Administration to Rats . J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 
1987 , 21 , 1341 –1358 10.1002/jbm.820211106 .3680316 
Yang J. ; Luo K. ; Pan H. ; Kopečková P. ; Kopeček J. 
Synthesis of Biodegradable Multiblock Copolymers by
Click Coupling of RAFT-Generated Heterotelechelic polyHPMA Conjugates . React. Funct. Polym. 
2011 , 71 , 294 –302 10.1016/j.reactfunctpolym.2010.10.005 .21499527 
Luo K. ; Yang J. ; Kopečková P. ; Kopeček J. 
Biodegradable Multiblock Poly[N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide] via Reversible Addition–Fragmentation Chain Transfer
Polymerization and Click Chemistry . Macromolecules 
2011 , 44 , 2481 –2488 10.1021/ma102574e .21552355 
Kricheldorf H. R.   In Models of Biopolymers by Ring-Opening Polymerization ; Penczek S.  , Ed.; CRC Press : Boca Raton, FL , 1990 .
Maurer P.
H. ; Subrahmanyam D. ; Katchalski E. ; Blout E. R. 
Antigenicity of Polypeptides (Poly
Alpha Amino Acids) . J. Immunol. 
1959 , 83 , 193 –197 .
Sela M. 
Immunological Studies with Synthetic
Polypeptides . Adv. Immunol. 
1966 , 5 , 29 –129 10.1016/S0065-2776(08)60272-2 .5332821 
Hara E. ; Ueda M. ; Kim C. J. ; Makino A. ; Hara I. ; Ozeki E. ; Kimura S. 
Suppressive
Immune Response of Poly-(Sarcosine) Chains in Peptide-Nanosheets in
Contrast to Polymeric Micelles . J. Pept. Sci. 
2014 , 20 , 570 –577 10.1002/psc.2655 .24863398 
Lau K. H. A. ; Ren C. L. ; Sileika T. S. ; Park S. H. ; Szleifer I. ; Messersmith P. B. 
Surface-Grafted
Polysarcosine as a Peptoid Antifouling Polymer Brush . Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 16099 –16107 10.1021/la302131n .23101930 
Hortz C. ; Birke A. ; Kaps L. ; Decker S. ; Wachtersbach E. ; Fischer K. ; Schuppan D. ; Barz M. ; Schmidt M. 
Cylindrical
Brush Polymers with Polysarcosine Side Chains: A Novel Biocompatible
Carrier for Biomedical Applications . Macromolecules 
2015 , 48 , 2074 –2086 10.1021/ma502497x .
Huesmann D. ; Sevenich A. ; Weber B. ; Barz M. 
A Head-to-Head Comparison of Poly(sarcosine) and Poly(ethylene Glycol)
in Peptidic, Amphiphilic Block Copolymers . Polymer 
2015 , 67 , 240 –248 10.1016/j.polymer.2015.04.070 .
Heller P. ; Birke A. ; Huesmann D. ; Weber B. ; Fischer K. ; Reske-Kunz A. ; Bros M. ; Barz M. 
Introducing PeptoPlexes: Polylysine-block-Polysarcosine
Based Polyplexes for Transfection of HEK 293T Cells . Macromol. Biosci. 
2014 , 14 , 1380 –1395 10.1002/mabi.201400167 .24943513 
Ho D. ; Wang C.-H. K. ; Chow E. K.-H. 
Nanodiamonds: The Intersection of
Nanotechnology, Drug Development, and Personalized Medicine . Sci. Adv. 
2015 , 1 , e1500439 10.1126/sciadv.1500439 .26601235 
Fischer H. C. ; Hauck T. S. ; Gomez-Aristizabal A. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Exploring Primary
Liver Macrophages for Studying Quantum Dot Interactions with Biological
Systems . Adv. Mater. 
2010 , 22 , 2520 –2524 10.1002/adma.200904231 .20491094 
Ballou B. ; Lagerholm B. C. ; Ernst L. A. ; Bruchez M. P. ; Waggoner A. S. 
Noninvasive Imaging
of Quantum Dots in Mice . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2004 , 15 , 79 –86 10.1021/bc034153y .
Fischer H. C. ; Liu L. ; Pang K. S. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Pharmacokinetics of Nanoscale Quantum Dots: In Vivo Distribution,sequestration, and Clearance in the
Rat . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2006 , 16 , 1299 –1305 10.1002/adfm.200500529 .
Goodman A. ; Cao Y. ; Urban C. ; Neumann O. ; Ayala-Orozco C. ; Knight M. ; Joshi A. ; Nordlander P. ; Halas N. 
The Surprising in Vivo Instability of Near-IR-Absorbing Hollow Au-Ag Nanoshells . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 3222 –3231 10.1021/nn405663h .24547810 
Hauck T. S. ; Anderson R. E. ; Fischer H. C. ; Newbigging S. ; Chan W. C. W. 
In Vivo Quantum-Dot Toxicity Assessment . Small 
2010 , 6 , 138 –144 10.1002/smll.200900626 .19743433 
Van Haute D. ; Longmate J. M. ; Berlin J. M. 
Controlled Assembly of Biocompatible
Metallic Nanoaggregates Using a Small Molecule Crosslinker . Adv. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 5158 –5164 10.1002/adma.201501602 .26208123 
Chou L. Y. T. ; Song F. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Engineering the
Structure and Properties of DNA-Nanoparticle Superstructures Using
Polyvalent Counterions . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 4565 –4572 10.1021/jacs.6b00751 .26942662 
Bruinink A. ; Bitar M. ; Pleskova M. ; Wick P. ; Krug H. F. ; Maniura-Weber K. 
Addition of
Nanoscaled Bioinspired Surface Features: A Revolution for Bone-Related
Implants and Scaffolds? . J. Biomed. Mater. Res.,
Part A 
2014 , 102 , 275 –294 10.1002/jbm.a.34691 .
Marchesan S. ; Prato M. 
Nanomaterials for (Nano)medicine . ACS Med.
Chem. Lett. 
2013 , 4 , 147 –149 10.1021/ml3003742 .24900637 
Marchesan S. ; Melchionna M. ; Prato M. 
Wire Up on Carbon Nanostructures! How To Play a Winning Game . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 9441 –9450 10.1021/acsnano.5b04956 .26390071 
Ku S. H. ; Lee M. ; Park C. B. 
Carbon-Based Nanomaterials
for Tissue Engineering . Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2013 , 2 , 244 –260 10.1002/adhm.201200307 .
Marchesan S. ; Kostarelos K. ; Bianco A. ; Prato M. 
The Winding Road for Carbon Nanotubes
in Nanomedicine . Mater. Today 
2015 , 18 , 12 –19 10.1016/j.mattod.2014.07.009 .
Battigelli A. ; Ménard-Moyon C. ; Da Ros T. ; Prato M. ; Bianco A. 
Endowing Carbon Nanotubes
with Biological and Biomedical Properties by Chemical Modifications . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2013 , 65 , 1899 –1920 10.1016/j.addr.2013.07.006 .
Saito N. ; Haniu H. ; Usui Y. ; Aoki K. ; Hara K. ; Takanashi S. ; Shimizu M. ; Narita N. ; Okamoto M. ; Kobayashi S. ; Nomura H. ; Kato H. ; Nishimura N. ; Taruta S. ; Endo M. 
Safe Clinical Use of
Carbon Nanotubes as Innovative Biomaterials . Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 6040 –6079 10.1021/cr400341h .24720563 
Zhang Q.
W. ; Mochalin V. N. ; Neitzel I. ; Knoke I. Y. ; Han J. J. ; Klug C. A. ; Zhou J. G. ; Lelkes P. I. ; Gogotsi Y. 
Fluorescent PLLA-Nanodiamond
Composites for Bone Tissue Engineering . Biomaterials 
2011 , 32 , 87 –94 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.08.090 .20869765 
Shalek A. K. ; Robinson J. T. ; Karp E. S. ; Lee J. S. ; Ahn D. R. ; Yoon M. H. ; Sutton A. ; Jorgolli M. ; Gertner R. S. ; Gujral T. S. ; MacBeath G. ; Yang E. G. ; Park H. 
Vertical Silicon Nanowires as a Universal
Platform for Delivering Biomolecules into Living Cells . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2010 , 107 , 1870 –1875 10.1073/pnas.0909350107 .20080678 
Chiappini C. ; Campagnolo P. ; Almeida C. S. ; Abbassi-Ghadi N. ; Chow L. W. ; Hanna G. B. ; Stevens M. M. 
Mapping Local Cytosolic Enzymatic Activity in Human
Esophageal Mucosa with Porous Silicon Nanoneedles . Adv. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 5147 –5152 10.1002/adma.201501304 .26197973 
Chiappini C. ; Martinez J. O. ; De Rosa E. ; Almeida C. S. ; Tasciotti E. ; Stevens M. M. 
Biodegradable Nanoneedles for Localized
Delivery of Nanoparticles in Vivo: Exploring the
Biointerface . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 5500 –5509 10.1021/acsnano.5b01490 .25858596 
Chiappini C. ; De Rosa E. ; Martinez J. O. ; Liu X. ; Steele J. ; Stevens M. M. ; Tasciotti E. 
Biodegradable
Silicon Nanoneedles Delivering Nucleic Acids Intracellularly Induce
Localized in Vivo Neovascularization . Nat. Mater. 
2015 , 14 , 532 –539 10.1038/nmat4249 .25822693 
Gross G. W. ; Rieske E. ; Kreutzberg G. W. ; Meyer A. 
A New Fixed-Array Multi-Microelectrode
System Designed for Long-Term Monitoring of Extracellular Single Unit
Neuronal Activity in Vitro . Neurosci. Lett. 
1977 , 6 , 101 –105 10.1016/0304-3940(77)90003-9 .19605037 
Fromherz P. ; Offenhäusser A. ; Vetter T. ; Weis J. 
A Neuron-Silicon
Junction: A Retzius Cell of the Leech on an Insulated-Gate Filed-Effect
Transistor . Science 
1991 , 252 , 1290 –1293 10.1126/science.1925540 .1925540 
Stein B. ; George M. ; Parak W. J. ; Gaub H. E. 
Extracellular Measurements of Averaged Ionic Currents
with the Light-Addressable Potentiometric Sensor (LAPS) . Sens. Actuators, B 
2004 , 98 , 299 –304 10.1016/j.snb.2003.10.034 .
Patolsky F. ; Timko B. P. ; Yu G. H. ; Fang Y. ; Greytak A. B. ; Zheng G. F. ; Lieber C. M. 
Detection, Stimulation,
and Inhibition of Neuronal Signals with High-Density Nanowire Transistor
Arrays . Science 
2006 , 313 , 1100 –1104 10.1126/science.1128640 .16931757 
George M. ; Parak W. J. ; Gaub H. E. 
Highly
Integrated Surface Potential Sensors . Sens.
Actuators, B 
2000 , 69 , 266 –275 10.1016/S0925-4005(00)00506-2 .
Kotov N. A. ; Winter J. O. ; Clements I. P. ; Jan E. ; Timko B. P. ; Campidelli S. ; Pathak S. ; Mazzatenta A. ; Lieber C. M. ; Prato M. ; Bellamkonda R. V. ; Silva G. A. ; Kam N. W. S. ; Patolsky F. ; Ballerini L. 
Nanomaterials
for Neural Interfaces . Adv. Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 3970 –4004 10.1002/adma.200801984 .
Zhang H. N. ; Patel P. R. ; Xie Z. X. ; Swanson S. D. ; Wang X. D. ; Kotov N. A. 
Tissue-Compliant
Neural Implants from Microfabricated Carbon Nanotube Multilayer Composite . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 7619 –7629 10.1021/nn402074y .23930825 
Kim Y. ; Zhu J. ; Yeom B. ; Di Prima M. ; Su X. L. ; Kim J. G. ; Yoo S. J. ; Uher C. ; Kotov N. A. 
Stretchable Nanoparticle
Conductors with Self-Organized Conductive Pathways . Nature 
2013 , 500 , 59 –63 10.1038/nature12401 .23863931 
Zhu J. ; Zhang H. N. ; Kotov N. A. 
Thermodynamic and Structural Insights
into Nanocomposites Engineering by Comparing Two Materials Assembly
Techniques for Graphene . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 4818 –4829 10.1021/nn400972t .23659325 
Kang M. ; Jung S. ; Zhang H. N. ; Kang T. ; Kang H. ; Yoo Y. ; Hong J. P. ; Ahn J. P. ; Kwak J. ; Jeon D. ; Kotov N. A. ; Kim B. 
Subcellular Neural Probes from Single-Crystal Gold Nanowires . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 8182 –8189 10.1021/nn5024522 .25112683 
Mattson M. P. ; Haddon R. C. ; Rao A. M. 
Molecular Functionalization of Carbon
Nanotubes and Use as Substrates for Neuronal Growth . J. Mol. Neurosci. 
2000 , 14 , 175 –182 10.1385/JMN:14:3:175 .10984193 
Lovat V. ; Pantarotto D. ; Lagostena L. ; Cacciari B. ; Grandolfo M. ; Righi M. ; Spalluto G. ; Prato M. ; Ballerini L. 
Carbon Nanotube Substrates Boost
Neuronal Electrical Signaling . Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 , 1107 –1110 10.1021/nl050637m .15943451 
Cellot G. ; Cilia E. ; Cipollone S. ; Rancic V. ; Sucapane A. ; Giordani S. ; Gambazzi L. ; Markram H. ; Grandolfo M. ; Scaini D. ; Gelain F. ; Casalis L. ; Prato M. ; Giugliano M. ; Ballerini L. 
Carbon Nanotubes Might Improve Neuronal Performance
by Favouring Electrical Shortcuts . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2009 , 4 , 126 –133 10.1038/nnano.2008.374 .19197316 
Cellot G. ; Toma F. M. ; Kasap
Varley Z. ; Laishram J. ; Villari A. ; Quintana M. ; Cipollone S. ; Prato M. ; Ballerini L. 
Carbon Nanotube
Scaffolds Tune Synaptic Strength in Cultured Neural Circuits: Novel
Frontiers in Nanomaterial–Tissue Interactions . J. Neurosci. 
2011 , 31 , 12945 –12953 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1332-11.2011 .21900573 
Fabbro A. ; Villari A. ; Laishram J. ; Scaini D. ; Toma F. M. ; Turco A. ; Prato M. ; Ballerini L. 
Spinal Cord Explants Use Carbon Nanotube Interfaces
To Enhance Neurite Outgrowth and To Fortify Synaptic Inputs . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 2041 –2055 10.1021/nn203519r .22339712 
Huang Y.-C. ; Hsu S.-H. ; Kuo W.-C. ; Chang-Chien C.-L. ; Cheng H. ; Huang Y.-Y. 
Effects of Laminin-Coated Carbon
Nanotube/Chitosan Fibers on Guided Neurite Growth . J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A 
2011 , 99A , 86 –93 10.1002/jbm.a.33164 .
Lewitus D. Y. ; Landers J. ; Branch J. ; Smith K. L. ; Callegari G. ; Kohn J. ; Neimark A. V. 
Biohybrid
Carbon Nanotube/Agarose Fibers for Neural Tissue Engineering . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2011 , 21 , 2624 –2632 10.1002/adfm.201002429 .21887125 
Lee H. J. ; Yoon O. J. ; Kim D. H. ; Jang Y. M. ; Kim H. W. ; Lee W. B. ; Lee N.-E. ; Kim S. S. 
Neurite
Outgrowth on Nanocomposite Scaffolds Synthesized from PLGA and Carboxylated
Carbon Nanotubes . Adv. Eng. Mater. 
2009 , 11 , B261 –B266 10.1002/adem.200900144 .
Jin G.-Z. ; Kim M. ; Shin U. S. ; Kim H.-W. 
Neurite Outgrowth of Dorsal Root Ganglia Neurons Is
Enhanced on Aligned Nanofibrous Biopolymer Scaffold with Carbon Nanotube
Coating . Neurosci. Lett. 
2011 , 501 , 10 –14 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.06.023 .21723372 
Bosi S. ; Rauti R. ; Laishram J. ; Turco A. ; Lonardoni D. ; Nieus T. ; Prato M. ; Scaini D. ; Ballerini L. 
From 2D to 3D: Novel Nanostructured
Scaffolds to Investigate Signalling in Reconstructed Neuronal Networks . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 9562 10.1038/srep09562 .25910072 
Tyler W. J. 
The Mechanobiology of Brain Function . Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
2012 , 13 , 867 –878 10.1038/nrn3383 .23165263 
Martinelli V. ; Cellot G. ; Toma F. M. ; Long C. S. ; Caldwell J. H. ; Zentilin L. ; Giacca M. ; Turco A. ; Prato M. ; Ballerini L. ; Mestroni L. 
Carbon Nanotubes Promote Growth and
Spontaneous Electrical Activity in Cultured Cardiac Myocytes . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 1831 –1838 10.1021/nl204064s .22432413 
Pok S. ; Vitale F. ; Eichmann S. L. ; Benavides O. M. ; Pasquali M. ; Jacot J. G. 
Biocompatible Carbon Nanotube–Chitosan
Scaffold Matching the Electrical Conductivity of the Heart . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 9822 –9832 10.1021/nn503693h .25233037 
Shin S. R. ; Jung S. M. ; Zalabany M. ; Kim K. ; Zorlutuna P. ; Kim S. B. ; Nikkhah M. ; Khabiry M. ; Azize M. ; Kong J. ; Wan K. T. ; Palacios T. ; Dokmeci M. R. ; Bae H. ; Tang X. S. ; Khademhosseini A. 
Carbon-Nanotube-Embedded Hydrogel
Sheets for Engineering Cardiac Constructs and Bioactuators . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 2369 –2380 10.1021/nn305559j .23363247 
Kharaziha M. ; Shin S. R. ; Nikkhah M. ; Topkaya S. N. ; Masoumi N. ; Annabi N. ; Dokmeci M. R. ; Khademhosseini A. 
Tough and
Flexible CNT–polymeric Hybrid Scaffolds for Engineering Cardiac
Constructs . Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 7346 –7354 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.05.014 .24927679 
Martinelli V. ; Cellot G. ; Toma F. M. ; Long C. S. ; Caldwell J. H. ; Zentilin L. ; Giacca M. ; Turco A. ; Prato M. ; Ballerini L. ; Mestroni L. 
Carbon Nanotubes Instruct Physiological Growth and
Functionally Mature Syncytia: Nongenetic Engineering of Cardiac Myocytes . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 5746 –5756 10.1021/nn4002193 .23734857 
Sheng Z. Y. ; Fu X. B. ; Cai S. ; Lei Y. H. ; Sun T. Z. ; Bai X. D. ; Chen M. L. 
Regeneration of Functional Sweat
Gland-Like Structures by Transplanted Differentiated Bone Marrow Mesenchymal
Stem Cells . Wound Repair Regen. 
2009 , 17 , 427 –435 10.1111/j.1524-475X.2009.00474.x .19660052 
Li H. H. ; Fu X. B. ; Ouyang Y. S. ; Cai C. L. ; Wang J. ; Sun T. Z. 
Adult Bone-Marrow-Derived
Mesenchymal Stem Cells Contribute to Wound Healing of Skin Appendages . Cell Tissue Res. 
2006 , 326 , 725 –736 10.1007/s00441-006-0270-9 .16906419 
Kushida A. ; Yamato M. ; Konno C. ; Kikuchi A. ; Sakurai Y. ; Okano T. 
Decrease in Culture Temperature Releases
Monolayer Endothelial Cell Sheets Together with Deposited Fibronectin
Matrix from Temperature-Responsive Culture Surfaces . J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 
1999 , 45 , 355 –362 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4636(19990615)45:4<355::AID-JBM10>3.0.CO;2-7 .10321708 
Giner-Casares J. J. ; Henriksen-Lacey M. ; García I. ; Liz-Marzán L.
M. 
Plasmonic Surfaces for
Cell Growth and Retrieval Triggered by Near-Infrared Light . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 974 –978 10.1002/anie.201509025 .
Haraguchi Y. ; Shimizu T. ; Yamato M. ; Kikuchi A. ; Okano T. 
Electrical Coupling of Cardiomyocyte Sheets Occurs Rapidly via Functional Gap Junction Formation . Biomaterials 
2006 , 27 , 4765 –4774 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2006.04.034 .16737736 
Shimizu T. ; Yamato M. ; Isoi Y. ; Akutsu T. ; Setomaru T. ; Abe K. ; Kikuchi A. ; Umezu M. ; Okano T. 
Fabrication of Pulsatile
Cardiac Tissue Grafts Using a Novel 3-Dimensional Cell Sheet Manipulation
Technique and Temperature-Responsive Cell Culture Surfaces . Circ. Res. 
2002 , 90 , 40e –48 10.1161/hh0302.105722 .
Iwata T. ; Yamato M. ; Ishikawa I. ; Ando T. ; Okano T. 
Tissue Engineering in Periodontal Tissue . Anat.
Rec. 
2014 , 297 , 16 –25 10.1002/ar.22812 .
Matsuura K. ; Utoh R. ; Nagase K. ; Okano T. 
Cell Sheet Approach for Tissue Engineering
and Regenerative Medicine . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 190 , 228 –239 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.05.024 .
Folkman J. ; Hochberg M. 
Self-Regulation of
Growth in 3 Dimensions . J. Exp. Med. 
1973 , 138 , 745 –753 10.1084/jem.138.4.745 .4744009 
Haraguchi Y. ; Shimizu T. ; Sasagawa T. ; Sekine H. ; Sakaguchi K. ; Kikuchi T. ; Sekine W. ; Sekiya S. ; Yamato M. ; Umezu M. ; Okano T. 
Fabrication
of Functional Three-Dimensional Tissues by Stacking Cell Sheets . Nat. Protoc. 
2012 , 7 , 850 –858 10.1038/nprot.2012.027 .22481530 
Sekine H. ; Shimizu T. ; Sakaguchi K. ; Dobashi I. ; Wada M. ; Yamato M. ; Kobayashi E. ; Umezu M. ; Okano T. 
In Vitro Fabrication
of Functional Three-Dimensional Tissues with Perfusable Blood Vessels . Nat. Commun. 
2013 , 4 , 1399 10.1038/ncomms2406 .23360990 
Mahmoudi M. ; Bonakdar S. ; Shokrgozar M. A. ; Aghaverdi H. ; Hartmann R. ; Pick A. ; Witte G. ; Parak W. J. 
Cell-Imprinted Substrates Direct the Fate of Stem Cells . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 8379 –8384 10.1021/nn403844q .24059979 
Ott H. C. ; Matthiesen T. S. ; Goh S.-K. ; Black L. D. ; Kren S. M. ; Netoff T. I. ; Taylor D. A. 
Perfusion-Decellularized Matrix:
Using Nature’s Platform To Engineer a Bioartificial Heart . Nat. Med. 
2008 , 14 , 213 –221 10.1038/nm1684 .18193059 
Liu A. ; Xue G.-h. ; Sun M. ; Shao H.-f. ; Ma C.-y. ; Gao Q. ; Gou Z.-r. ; Yan S.-g. ; Liu Y.-m. ; He Y. 
3D Printing
Surgical Implants at the Clinic: A Experimental Study on Anterior
Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 21704 10.1038/srep21704 .26875826 
Liu N. B. ; Huang S. ; Yao B. ; Xie J. F. ; Wu X. ; Fu X. B. 
3D Bioprinting Matrices
with Controlled Pore Structure and Release Function Guide In Vitro Self-Organization of Sweat Gland . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 34410 10.1038/srep34410 .27694985 
Mansfield E. G. ; Greene V. K. Jr.; Auguste D. T. 
Patterned, Tubular Scaffolds Mimic Longitudinal and
Radial Mechanics of the Neonatal Trachea . Acta
Biomater. 
2016 , 33 , 176 –182 10.1016/j.actbio.2016.01.034 .26821338 
Dua K. S. ; Hogan W. J. ; Aadam A. A. ; Gasparri M. 
In-Vivo Oesophageal Regeneration in a Human Being by Use of a Non-Biological
Scaff Old and Extracellular Matrix . Lancet 
2016 , 388 , 55 –61 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)01036-3 .27068836 
Delaere P. R. 
Stem-Cell “Hype” in
Tracheal Transplantation? . Transplantation 
2010 , 90 , 927 –928 10.1097/TP.0b013e3181f10f18 .20962608 
Delaere P. R. 
Tracheal Transplantation . Curr. Opin. Pulm. Med. 
2012 , 18 , 313 –320 10.1097/MCP.0b013e3283539673 .22498734 
Abbott A. 
Culture of Silence and Nonchalance Protected Disgraced
Trachea Surgeon . Nature 
2016 , 10.1038/nature.2016.20533 .
Delaere P. R. ; Hermans R. 
Clinical Transplantation of a Tissue-Engineered
Airway . Lancet 
2009 , 373 , 717 –718 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60429-3 .
Delaere P. ; Raemdonck D. V. 
Tracheal
Replacement . J. Thorac. Dis. 
2016 , 8 , S186 –S196 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2016.01.85 .26981270 
Murphy S. V. ; Atala A. 
3D Bioprinting of Tissues
and Organs . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2014 , 32 , 773 –785 10.1038/nbt.2958 .25093879 
Bhise N. S. ; Ribas J. ; Manoharan V. ; Zhang Y. S. ; Polini A. ; Massa S. ; Dokmeci M. R. ; Khademhosseini A. 
Organ-on-a-Chip Platforms for Studying Drug Delivery
Systems . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 190 , 82 –93 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.05.004 .
Cha C. Y. ; Shin S. R. ; Annabi N. ; Dokmeci M. R. ; Khademhosseini A. 
Carbon-Based Nanomaterials: Multifunctional
Materials for Biomedical Engineering . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 2891 –2897 10.1021/nn401196a .23560817 
Gaharwar A. K. ; Peppas N. A. ; Khademhosseini A. 
Nanocomposite
Hydrogels for Biomedical Applications . Biotechnol.
Bioeng. 
2014 , 111 , 441 –453 10.1002/bit.25160 .24264728 
Hassanzadeh P. ; Kharaziha M. ; Nikkhah M. ; Shin S. R. ; Jin J. ; He S. ; Sun W. ; Zhong C. ; Dokmeci M. R. ; Khademhosseini A. ; Rolandi M. 
Chitin Nanofiber Micropatterned Flexible Substrates
for Tissue Engineering . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2013 , 1 , 4217 –4224 10.1039/c3tb20782j .
Kharaziha M. ; Nikkhah M. ; Shin S. R. ; Annabi N. ; Masoumi N. ; Gaharwar A. K. ; Camci-Unal G. ; Khademhosseini A. 
PGS:Gelatin Nanofibrous Scaffolds with Tunable Mechanical
and Structural Properties for Engineering Cardiac Tissues . Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 6355 –6366 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.04.045 .23747008 
Kang H.-W. ; Lee S. J. ; Ko I. K. ; Kengla C. ; Yoo J. J. ; Atala A. 
A 3D Bioprinting System
to Produce Human-Scale Tissue Constructs with Structural Integrity . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2016 , 34 , 312 –316 10.1038/nbt.3413 .26878319 
Tamayol A. ; Akbari M. ; Annabi N. ; Paul A. ; Khademhosseini A. ; Juncker D. 
Fiber-Based Tissue Engineering: Progress, Challenges,
and Opportunities . Biotechnol. Adv. 
2013 , 31 , 669 –687 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2012.11.007 .23195284 
Hasan A. ; Memic A. ; Annabi N. ; Hossain M. ; Paul A. ; Dokmeci M. R. ; Dehghani F. ; Khademhosseini A. 
Electrospun Scaffolds for Tissue Engineering of Vascular
Grafts . Acta Biomater. 
2014 , 10 , 11 –25 10.1016/j.actbio.2013.08.022 .23973391 
Ifkovits J. L. ; Devlin J. J. ; Eng G. ; Martens T. P. ; Vunjak-Novakovic G. ; Burdick J. A. 
Biodegradable Fibrous
Scaffolds with Tunable Properties Formed from Photo-Cross-Linkable
Poly(glycerol sebacate) . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2009 , 1 , 1878 –1886 10.1021/am900403k .20160937 
Seidlits S. K. ; Lee J. Y. ; Schmidt C. E. 
Nanostructured
Scaffolds for Neural Applications . Nanomedicine 
2008 , 3 , 183 –199 10.2217/17435889.3.2.183 .18373425 
Kotov N. A. ; Liu Y. F. ; Wang S. P. ; Cumming C. ; Eghtedari M. ; Vargas G. ; Motamedi M. ; Nichols J. ; Cortiella J. 
Inverted Colloidal Crystals as Three-Dimensional
Cell Scaffolds . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 7887 –7892 10.1021/la049958o .15350047 
Liu Y. F. ; Wang S. P. ; Krouse J. ; Kotov N. A. ; Eghtedari M. ; Vargas G. ; Motamedi M. 
Rapid Aqueous
Photo-Polymerization Route to Polymer and Polymer-Composite Hydrogel
3D Inverted Colloidal Crystal Scaffolds . J.
Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A 
2007 , 83A , 1 –9 10.1002/jbm.a.31199 .
Zhang Y. J. ; Wang S. P. ; Eghtedari M. ; Motamedi M. ; Kotov N. A. 
Inverted-Colloidal-Crystal Hydrogel
Matrices as Three-Dimensional Cell Scaffolds . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2005 , 15 , 725 –731 10.1002/adfm.200400325 .
Cuddihy M. J. ; Kotov N. A. 
Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) Bone
Scaffolds with Inverted Colloidal Crystal Geometry . Tissue Eng., Part A 
2008 , 14 , 1639 –1649 10.1089/ten.tea.2007.0142 .18491955 
Nichols J. E. ; Cortiella J. Q. ; Lee J. ; Niles J. A. ; Cuddihy M. ; Wang S. P. ; Bielitzki J. ; Cantu A. ; Mlcak R. ; Valdivia E. ; Yancy R. ; McClure M. L. ; Kotov N. A. 
In Vitro Analog
of Human Bone Marrow from 3D Scaffolds with Biomimetic Inverted Colloidal
Crystal Geometry . Biomaterials 
2009 , 30 , 1071 –1079 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2008.10.041 .19042018 
Lee J. ; Kotov N. A. 
Notch Ligand Presenting
Acellular 3D Microenvironments for ex vivo Human Hematopoietic Stem-Cell
Culture made by Layer-By-Layer Assembly . Small 
2009 , 5 , 1008 –1013 10.1002/smll.200801242 .19334013 
Lee J. ; Shanbhag S. ; Kotov N. A. 
Inverted
Colloidal Crystals as Three-Dimensional Microenvironments for Cellular
Co-Cultures . J. Mater. Chem. 
2006 , 16 , 3558 –3564 10.1039/b605797g .
Lee J. ; Lilly G. D. ; Doty R. C. ; Podsiadlo P. ; Kotov N. A. 
In Vitro Toxicity
Testing of Nanoparticles in 3D Cell Culture . Small 
2009 , 5 , 1213 –1221 10.1002/smll.200801788 .19263430 
Gaharwar A. K. ; Mihaila S. M. ; Swami A. ; Patel A. ; Sant S. ; Reis R. L. ; Marques A. P. ; Gomes M. E. ; Khademhosseini A. 
Bioactive
Silicate Nanoplatelets for Osteogenic Differentiation of Human Mesenchymal
Stem Cells . Adv. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 3329 –3336 10.1002/adma.201300584 .23670944 
Ahadian S. ; Ramon-Azcon J. ; Estili M. ; Liang X. B. ; Ostrovidov S. ; Shiku H. ; Ramalingam M. ; Nakajima K. ; Sakka Y. ; Bae H. ; Matsue T. ; Khademhosseini A. 
Hybrid Hydrogels Containing Vertically
Aligned Carbon Nanotubes with Anisotropic Electrical Conductivity
for Muscle Myofiber Fabrication . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 4271 10.1038/srep04271 .24642903 
Shin S. R. ; Bae H. ; Cha J. M. ; Mun J. Y. ; Chen Y. C. ; Tekin H. ; Shin H. ; Farshchi S. ; Dokmeci M. R. ; Tang S. ; Khademhosseini A. 
Carbon Nanotube
Reinforced Hybrid Microgels as Scaffold Materials for Cell Encapsulation . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 362 –372 10.1021/nn203711s .22117858 
Qi H. ; Ghodousi M. ; Du Y. ; Grun C. ; Bae H. ; Yin P. ; Khademhosseini A. 
DNA-Directed Self-Assembly of Shape-Controlled
Hydrogels . Nat. Commun. 
2013 , 4 , 2275 10.1038/ncomms3275 .24013352 
Wang B. ; Ren K. ; Wang H. ; Ji J. ; Chang H. 
Construction of Degradable
Multilayer Films for Enhanced Antibacterial Properties . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 4136 –4143 10.1021/am4000547 .23597281 
Paulo C. S. O. ; Vidal M. ; Ferreira L. S. 
Antifungal
Nanoparticles and Surfaces . Biomacromolecules 
2010 , 11 , 2810 –2817 10.1021/bm100893r .20845938 
Botequim D. ; Maia J. ; Lino M. M. F. ; Lopes L. M. F. ; Simoes P. N. ; Ilharco L. M. ; Ferreira L. 
Nanoparticles
and Surfaces Presenting Antifungal, Antibacterial and Antiviral Properties . Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 7646 –7656 10.1021/la300948n .22545667 
Jones N. ; Ray B. ; Ranjit K. T. ; Manna A. C. 
Antibacterial Activity of ZnO Nanoparticle
Suspensions on a Broad Spectrum of Microorganisms . FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 
2008 , 279 , 71 –76 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2007.01012.x .18081843 
Raghupathi K. R. ; Koodali R. T. ; Manna A. C. 
Size-Dependent
Bacterial Growth Inhibition and Mechanism of Antibacterial Activity
of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 4020 –4028 10.1021/la104825u .21401066 
Zhang L. L. ; Jiang Y. H. ; Ding Y. L. ; Povey M. ; York D. 
Investigation into the Antibacterial
Behaviour of Suspensions of ZnO Nanoparticles (ZnO Nanofluids) . J. Nanopart. Res. 
2007 , 9 , 479 –489 10.1007/s11051-006-9150-1 .
Applerot G. ; Lipovsky A. ; Dror R. ; Perkas N. ; Nitzan Y. ; Lubart R. ; Gedanken A. 
Enhanced Antibacterial
Activity of Nanocrystalline ZnO Due to Increased ROS-Mediated Cell
Injury . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2009 , 19 , 842 –852 10.1002/adfm.200801081 .
Applerot G. ; Perkas N. ; Amirian G. ; Girshevitz O. ; Gedanken A. 
Coating of Glass with ZnO via Ultrasonic Irradiation and a Study of Its Antibacterial
Properties . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2009 , 256 , S3 –S8 10.1016/j.apsusc.2009.04.198 .
Politano A. D. ; Campbell K. T. ; Rosenberger L. H. ; Sawyer R. G. 
Use of Silver in the Prevention and Treatment of Infections:
Silver Review . Surg. Infect. 
2013 , 14 , 8 –20 10.1089/sur.2011.097 .
Schierholz J. M. ; Lucas L. J. ; Rump A. ; Pulverer G. 
Efficacy of Silver-Coated Medical Devices . J. Hosp. Infect. 
1998 , 40 , 257 –262 10.1016/S0195-6701(98)90301-2 .9868616 
Darouiche R. O. 
Anti-Infective Efficacy of Silver-Coated Medical Prostheses . Clin. Infect. Dis. 
1999 , 29 , 1371 –1377 10.1086/313561 .10585781 
Premanathan M. ; Karthikeyan K. ; Jeyasubramanian K. ; Manivannan G. 
Selective
Toxicity of ZnO Nanoparticles toward Gram-Positive Bacteria and Cancer
Cells by Apoptosis through Lipid Peroxidation . Nanomedicine 
2011 , 7 , 184 –192 10.1016/j.nano.2010.10.001 .21034861 
Hanley C. ; Layne J. ; Punnoose A. ; Reddy K. M. ; Coombs I. ; Coombs A. ; Feris K. ; Wingett D. 
Preferential Killing
of Cancer Cells and Activated Human T Cells Using ZnO Nanoparticles . Nanotechnology 
2008 , 19 , 295103 10.1088/0957-4484/19/29/295103 .18836572 
Bressler A. M. ; Kaye K. S. ; LiPuma J. J. ; Alexander B. D. ; Moore C. M. ; Reller L. B. ; Woods C. W. 
Risk Factors for
Burkholderia Cepacia Complex Bacteremia among Intensive Care Unit
Patients without Cystic Fibrosis: A Case-Control Study . Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 
2007 , 28 , 951 –958 10.1086/519177 .17620243 
Lai C. C. ; Teng L. J. ; Hsueh P. R. ; Yuan A. ; Tsai K. C. ; Tang J. L. ; Tien H. F. 
Clinical
and Microbiological Characteristics of Rhizobium Radiobacter Infections . Clin. Infect. Dis. 
2004 , 38 , 149 –153 10.1086/380463 .14679463 
Zhou C. C. ; Wang M. Z. ; Zou K. D. ; Chen J. ; Zhu Y. Q. ; Du J. Z. 
Antibacterial Polypeptide-Grafted Chitosan-Based Nanocapsules As
an ″Armed″ Carrier of Anticancer and Antiepileptic Drugs . ACS Macro Lett. 
2013 , 2 , 1021 –1025 10.1021/mz400480z .
Wang M. Z. ; Zhou C. C. ; Chen J. ; Xiao Y. F. ; Du J. Z. 
Multifunctional
Biocompatible and Biodegradable Folic Acid Conjugated Poly(epsilon-caprolactone)-Polypeptide
Copolymer Vesicles with Excellent Antibacterial Activities . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2015 , 26 , 725 –734 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.5b00061 .
Kim S. ; Lim Y. T. ; Soltesz E. G. ; De Grand A. M. ; Lee J. ; Nakayama A. ; Parker J. A. ; Mihaljevic T. ; Laurence R. G. ; Dor D. M. ; Cohn L. H. ; Bawendi M. G. ; Frangioni J. V. 
Near-Infrared Fluorescent Type II
Quantum Dots for Sentinel Lymph Node Mapping . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2004 , 22 , 93 –97 10.1038/nbt920 .14661026 
Xie J. ; Lee S. ; Chen X. Y. 
Nanoparticle-Based Theranostic Agents . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2010 , 62 , 1064 –1079 10.1016/j.addr.2010.07.009 .
Okusanya O. T. ; Holt D. ; Heitjan D. ; Deshpande C. ; Venegas O. ; Jiang J. ; Judy R. ; DeJesus E. ; Madajewski B. ; Oh K. ; Wang M. ; Albelda S. M. ; Nie S. M. ; Singhal S. 
Intraoperative Near-Infrared Imaging
Can Identify Pulmonary Nodules . Ann. Thorac.
Surg. 
2014 , 98 , 1223 –1230 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.05.026 .25106680 
Keating J. J. ; Kennedy G. T. ; Singhal S. 
Identification of a Subcentimeter
Pulmonary Adenocarcinoma Using Intraoperative near-Infrared Imaging
during Video-Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery . J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg. 
2015 , 149 , e51 –e53 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2014.10.081 .25827389 
Keating J. ; Crisman E. ; Singhal S. 
Indocyanine Green (ICG)
Extraction and Quantification for Intraoperative Molecular Imaging
of Tumors . J. Nucl. Med. 
2015 , 56 , 1218 .26089550 
Freise A. C. ; Wu A. M. 
In Vivo Imaging with Antibodies and Engineered Fragments . Mol. Immunol. 
2015 , 67 , 142 –152 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.04.001 .25934435 
Sampath L. ; Kwon S. ; Ke S. ; Wang W. ; Schiff R. ; Mawad M. E. ; Sevick-Muraca E. M. 
Dual-Labeled
Trastuzumab-Based Imaging Agent for the Detection of Human Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor 2 Overexpression in Breast Cancer . J. Nucl. Med. 
2007 , 48 , 1501 –1510 10.2967/jnumed.107.042234 .17785729 
van Scheltinga A. G. T. T. ; van Dam G. M. ; Nagengast W. B. ; Ntziachristos V. ; Hollema H. ; Herek J. L. ; Schroder C. P. ; Kosterink J. G. W. ; Lub-de Hoog M. N. ; de Vries E. G. E. 
Intraoperative
Near-Infrared Fluorescence Tumor Imaging with Vascular Endothelial
Growth Factor and Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 Targeting
Antibodies . J. Nucl. Med. 
2011 , 52 , 1778 –1785 10.2967/jnumed.111.092833 .21990576 
Rosenthal E. L. ; Warram J. M. ; de Boer E. ; Chung T. K. ; Korb M. L. ; Brandwein-Gensler M. ; Strong T. V. ; Schmalbach C. E. ; Morlandt A. B. ; Agarwal G. ; Hartman Y. E. ; Carroll W. R. ; Richman J. S. ; Clemons L. K. ; Nabell L. M. ; Zinn K. R. 
Safety and Tumor Specificity of Cetuximab-IRDye800
for Surgical Navigation in Head and Neck Cancer . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2015 , 21 , 3658 –3666 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3284 .25904751 
van de Ven S. M. W. Y. ; Elias S. G. ; Chan C. T. ; Miao Z. ; Cheng Z. ; De A. ; Gambhir S. S. 
Optical
Imaging with Her2-Targeted Affibody Molecules Can Monitor Hsp90 Treatment
Response in a Breast Cancer Xenograft Mouse Model . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2012 , 18 , 1073 –1081 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-3213 .22235098 
Lee S. B. ; Hassan M. ; Fisher R. ; Chertov O. ; Chernomordik V. ; Kramer-Marek G. ; Gandjbakhche A. ; Capala J. 
Affibody Molecules for in Vivo Characterization
of HER2-Positive Tumors by near-Infrared Imaging . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2008 , 14 , 3840 –3849 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4076 .18559604 
Gong H. B. ; Kovar J. ; Little G. ; Chen H. X. ; Olive D. M. 
In Vivo Imaging of Xenograft Tumors
Using an Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor-Specific Affibody Molecule
Labeled with a Near-Infrared Fluorophore . Neoplasia 
2010 , 12 , 139 –149 10.1593/neo.91446 .20126472 
Nguyen Q. T. ; Olson E. S. ; Aguilera T. A. ; Jiang T. ; Scadeng M. ; Ellies L. G. ; Tsien R. Y. 
Surgery
with Molecular Fluorescence Imaging Using Activatable Cell-Penetrating
Peptides Decreases Residual Cancer and Improves Survival . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2010 , 107 , 4317 –4322 10.1073/pnas.0910261107 .20160097 
Holt D. ; Okusanya O. ; Judy R. ; Venegas O. ; Jiang J. ; DeJesus E. ; Eruslanov E. ; Quatromoni J. ; Bhojnagarwala P. ; Deshpande C. ; Albelda S. ; Nie S. ; Singhal S. 
Intraoperative near-Infrared
Imaging Can Distinguish Cancer from Normal Tissue but Not Inflammation . PLoS One 
2014 , 9 , e103342 10.1371/journal.pone.0103342 .25072388 
van Dam G. M. ; Themelis G. ; Crane L. M. ; Harlaar N. J. ; Pleijhuis R. G. ; Kelder W. ; Sarantopoulos A. ; de Jong J. S. ; Arts H. J. ; van der Zee A. G. ; Bart J. ; Low P. S. ; Ntziachristos V. 
Intraoperative
Tumor-Specific Fluorescence Imaging in Ovarian Cancer by Folate Receptor-Alpha
Targeting: First in-Human Results . Nat. Med. 
2011 , 17 , 1315 –1319 10.1038/nm.2472 .21926976 
Nielsen B. ; Rank F. ; Illemann M. ; Lund L. ; Dano K. 
Stromal Cells Associated with Early
Invasive Foci in Human Mammary Ductal Carcinoma in Situ Coexpress Urokinase and Urokinase Receptor . Int. J. Cancer 
2007 , 120 , 2086 –2095 10.1002/ijc.22340 .17290405 
Pyke C. ; Graem N. ; Ralfkiaer E. ; Ronne E. ; Hoyerhansen G. ; Brunner N. ; Dano K. 
Receptor for Urokinase Is Present
in Tumor-Associated Macrophages in Ductal Breast-Carcinoma . Cancer Res. 
1993 , 53 , 1911 –1915 .8385573 
Yang L. ; Sajja H. R. ; Cao Z. ; Qian W. ; Bender M. ; Marcus A. I. ; Lipowska M. ; Wood W. C. ; Wang A. 
uPAR-targeted
Optical Imaging Contrasts as Theranostic Agents for Tumor Margin Detection . Theranostics 
2014 , 4 , 106 –118 10.7150/thno.7409 .
Yang L. ; Mao H. ; Cao Z. ; Wang Y. ; Peng X. ; Wang X. ; Sajja H. ; Wang L. ; Duan H. ; Ni C. ; Staley C. ; Wood W. ; Gao X. ; Nie S. 
Molecular
Imaging of Pancreatic Cancer in an Animal Model Using Targeted Multifunctional
Nanoparticles . Gastroenterology 
2009 , 136 , 1514 –1525 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.01.006 .19208341 
Wu Y. Z. ; Eisele K. ; Doroshenko M. ; Algara-Siller G. ; Kaiser U. ; Koynov K. ; Weil T. 
A Quantum
Dot Photoswitch for DNA Detection, Gene Transfection, and Live-Cell
Imaging . Small 
2012 , 8 , 3465 –3475 10.1002/smll.201200409 .22915540 
Mikhaylov G. ; Mikac U. ; Magaeva A. A. ; Itin V. I. ; Naiden E. P. ; Psakhye I. ; Babes L. ; Reinheckel T. ; Peters C. ; Zeiser R. ; Bogyo M. ; Turk V. ; Psakhye S. G. ; Turk B. ; Vasiljeva O. 
Ferri-Liposomes
as an MRI-Visible Drug-Delivery System for Targeting Tumours and Their
Microenvironment . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 6 , 594 –602 10.1038/nnano.2011.112 .21822252 
Wang D. S. ; Fei B. W. ; Halig L. V. ; Qin X. L. ; Hu Z. L. ; Xu H. ; Wang Y. A. ; Chen Z. J. ; Kim S. ; Shin D. M. ; Chen Z. 
Targeted Iron-Oxide
Nanoparticle for Photodynamic Therapy and Imaging of Head and Neck
Cancer . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 6620 –6632 10.1021/nn501652j .24923902 
Huang P. ; Lin J. ; Wang X. S. ; Wang Z. ; Zhang C. L. ; He M. ; Wang K. ; Chen F. ; Li Z. M. ; Shen G. X. ; Cui D. X. ; Chen X. Y. 
Light-Triggered Theranostics Based on Photosensitizer-Conjugated
Carbon Dots for Simultaneous Enhanced-Fluorescence Imaging and Photodynamic
Therapy . Adv. Mater. 
2012 , 24 , 5104 –5110 10.1002/adma.201200650 .22718562 
Huang P. ; Bao L. ; Zhang C. ; Lin J. ; Luo T. ; Yang D. ; He M. ; Li Z. ; Gao G. ; Gao B. ; Fu S. ; Cui D. 
Folic Acid-Conjugated
Silica-Modified Gold Nanorods for X-Ray/CT Imaging-Guided Dual-Mode
Radiation and Photo-Thermal Therapy . Biomaterials 
2011 , 32 , 9796 –9809 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.08.086 .21917309 
Liang S. J. ; Li C. ; Zhang C. L. ; Chen Y. S. ; Xu L. ; Bao C. C. ; Wang X. Y. ; Liu G. ; Zhang F. C. ; Cui D. X. 
CD44v6Monoclonal Antibody-Conjugated
Gold Nanostars for Targeted Photoacoustic Imaging and Plasmonic Photothermal
Therapy of Gastric Cancer Stem-like Cells . Theranostics 
2015 , 5 , 970 –984 10.7150/thno.11632 .26155313 
Heck J. G. ; Napp J. ; Simonato S. ; Mollmer J. ; Lange M. ; Reichardt H. M. ; Staudt R. ; Alves F. ; Feldmann C. 
Multifunctional Phosphate-Based
Inorganic-Organic Hybrid Nanoparticles . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 7329 –7336 10.1021/jacs.5b01172 .26018463 
Xiong R. ; Soenen S. J. ; Braeckmans K. ; Skirtach A. G. 
Towards Theranostic
Multicompartment Microcapsules: In-Situ Diagnostics and Laser-Induced
Treatment . Theranostics 
2013 , 3 , 141 –151 10.7150/thno.5846 .23471141 
Delcea M. ; Yashchenok A. ; Videnova K. ; Kreft O. ; Mohwald H. ; Skirtach A. G. 
Multicompartmental
Micro- and Nanocapsules: Hierarchy and Applications in Biosciences . Macromol. Biosci. 
2010 , 10 , 465 –474 10.1002/mabi.200900359 .20166231 
Kreft O. ; Muñoz Javier A. ; Sukhorukov G. B. ; Parak W. J. 
Polymer Microcapsules as Mobile Local pH-Sensors . J. Mater. Chem. 
2007 , 17 , 4471 –4476 10.1039/b705419j .
Chandrawati R. ; Hosta-Rigau L. ; Vanderstraaten D. ; Lokuliyana S. A. ; Stadler B. ; Albericio F. ; Caruso F. 
Engineering Advanced
Capsosomes: Maximizing the Number of Subcompartments, Cargo Retention,
and Temperature-Triggered Reaction . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 1351 –1361 10.1021/nn901843j .20192233 
Discher B. M. ; Bermudez H. ; Hammer D. A. ; Discher D. E. ; Won Y. Y. ; Bates F. S. 
Cross-Linked Polymersome
Membranes: Vesicles with Broadly Adjustable Properties . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2002 , 106 , 2848 –2854 10.1021/jp011958z .
Discher D. E. ; Eisenberg A. 
Polymer Vesicles . Science 
2002 , 297 , 967 –973 10.1126/science.1074972 .12169723 
Rivera Gil P. ; De Koker S. ; De Geest B. G. ; Parak W. J. 
Intracellular Processing of Proteins Mediated by Biodegradable
Polyelectrolyte Capsules . Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 4398 –4402 10.1021/nl902697j .19860453 
Chanana M. ; Rivera Gil P. ; Correa-Duarte M. A. ; Parak W. J. ; Liz-Marzán L. M. 
Physicochemical
Properties of Protein-Coated Gold Nanoparticles in Biological Fluids
and Cells before and after Proteolytic Digestion . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 4179 –4183 10.1002/anie.201208019 .
Suma T. ; Miyata K. ; Anraku Y. ; Watanabe S. ; Christie R. J. ; Takemoto H. ; Shioyama M. ; Gouda N. ; Ishii T. ; Nishiyama N. ; Kataoka K. 
Smart Multilayered
Assembly for Biocompatible siRNA Delivery Featuring Dissolvable Silica,
Endosome-Disrupting Polycation, and Detachable PEG . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 6693 –6705 10.1021/nn301164a .22835034 
Kim H. ; Ishii T. ; Zheng M. ; Watanabe S. ; Toh K. ; Matsumoto Y. ; Nishiyama N. ; Miyata K. ; Kataoka K. 
Multifunctional
Polyion Complex Micelle Featuring Enhanced Stability, Targetability,
and Endosome Escapability for Systemic siRNA Delivery to Subcutaneous
Model of Lung Cancer . Drug Delivery Transl.
Res. 
2014 , 4 , 50 –60 10.1007/s13346-013-0175-6 .
Wang Z. ; Ruan J. ; Cui D. X. 
Advances
and Prospect of Nanotechnology in Stem Cells . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2009 , 4 , 593 –605 10.1007/s11671-009-9292-z .20596412 
Deng W. ; Cao X. ; Chen J. ; Zhang Z. ; Yu Q. ; Wang Y. ; Shao G. ; Zhou J. ; Gao X. ; Yu J. ; Xu X. 
MicroRNA Replacing Oncogenic Klf4 and c-Myc for Generating
iPS Cells via Cationized Pleurotus eryngii Polysaccharide-based Nanotransfection . ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 18957 –18966 10.1021/acsami.5b06768 .26269400 
Ruan J. ; Ji J. J. ; Song H. ; Qian Q. R. ; Wang K. ; Wang C. ; Cui D. X. 
Fluorescent Magnetic
Nanoparticle-Labeled Mesenchymal Stem Cells for Targeted Imaging and
Hyperthermia Therapy of in Vivo Gastric Cancer . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2012 , 7 , 309 10.1186/1556-276X-7-309 .22709686 
Li C. ; Liang S. J. ; Zhang C. L. ; Liu Y. L. ; Yang M. ; Zhang J. P. ; Zhi X. ; Pan F. ; Cui D. X. 
Allogenic Dendritic Cell and Tumor
Cell Fused Vaccine for Targeted Imaging and Enhanced Immunotherapeutic
Efficacy of Gastric Cancer . Biomaterials 
2015 , 54 , 177 –187 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.03.024 .25907051 
Rivera Gil P. ; Oberdorster G. ; Elder A. ; Puntes V. F. ; Parak W. J. 
Correlating Physico-Chemical
with Toxicological Properties of Nanoparticles: The Present and the
Future . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 5527 –5531 10.1021/nn1025687 .20973573 
Ge C. ; Du J. ; Zhao L. ; Wang L. ; Liu Y. ; Li D. ; Yang Y. ; Zhou R. ; Zhao Y. ; Chai Z. ; Chen C. 
Binding of
Blood Proteins to Carbon Nanotubes Reduces Cytotoxicity . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2011 , 108 , 16968 –16973 10.1073/pnas.1105270108 .21969544 
Wang L. ; Jiang X. ; Ji Y. ; Bai R. ; Zhao Y. ; Wu X. ; Chen C. 
Surface Chemistry of
Gold Nanorods: Origin of Cell Membrane Damage and Cytotoxicity . Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 8384 –8391 10.1039/c3nr01626a .23873113 
Walkey C. D. ; Olsen J. B. ; Song F. Y. ; Liu R. ; Guo H. B. ; Olsen D. W. H. ; Cohen Y. ; Emili A. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Protein
Corona Fingerprinting Predicts the Cellular Interaction of Gold and
Silver Nanoparticles . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 2439 –2455 10.1021/nn406018q .24517450 
Lundqvist M. ; Stigler J. ; Elia G. ; Lynch I. ; Cedervall T. ; Dawson K. A. 
Nanoparticle Size
and Surface Properties Determine the Protein Corona with Possible
Implications for Biological Impacts . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2008 , 105 , 14265 –14270 10.1073/pnas.0805135105 .18809927 
Tinkle S. ; McNeil S. E. ; Muhlebach S. ; Bawa R. ; Borchard G. ; Barenholz Y. ; Tamarkin L. ; Desai N. 
Nanomedicines: Addressing the Scientific
and Regulatory Gap . Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 
2014 , 1313 , 35 –56 10.1111/nyas.12403 .24673240 
Qiu Y. ; Liu Y. ; Wang L. M. ; Xu L. G. ; Bai R. ; Ji Y. L. ; Wu X. C. ; Zhao Y. L. ; Li Y. F. ; Chen C. Y. 
Surface Chemistry
and Aspect Ratio Mediated Cellular Uptake of Au Nanorods . Biomaterials 
2010 , 31 , 7606 –7619 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.06.051 .20656344 
Zhang Z. ; Wang J. ; Nie X. ; Wen T. ; Ji Y. ; Wu X. ; Zhao Y. ; Chen C. 
Near Infrared
Laser-Induced Targeted Cancer Therapy Using Thermoresponsive Polymer
Encapsulated Gold Nanorods . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 7317 –7326 10.1021/ja412735p .24773323 
Wang Y. W. ; Grainger D. W. 
Barriers to Advancing
Nanotechnology to Better Improve and Translate Nanomedicines . Front. Chem. Sci. Eng. 
2014 , 8 , 265 –275 10.1007/s11705-014-1442-x .
He X. ; Zhang H. ; Ma Y. ; Bai W. ; Zhang Z. ; Lu K. ; Ding Y. ; Zhao Y. ; Chai Z. 
Lung Deposition and Extrapulmonary Translocation of Nano-Ceria after
Intratracheal Instillation . Nanotechnology 
2010 , 21 , 285103 10.1088/0957-4484/21/28/285103 .20562477 
Wang B. ; Feng W. ; Zhu M. ; Wang Y. ; Wang M. ; Gu Y. ; Ouyang H. ; Wang H. ; Li M. ; Zhao Y. ; Chai Z. ; Wang H. 
Neurotoxicity of Low-Dose Repeatedly Intranasal Instillation of Nano-
and Submicron-Sized Ferric Oxide Particles in Mice . J. Nanopart. Res. 
2009 , 11 , 41 –53 10.1007/s11051-008-9452-6 .
Zhu M. T. ; Nie G. J. ; Meng H. ; Xia T. ; Nel A. ; Zhao Y. L. 
Physicochemical Properties Determine Nanomaterial Cellular
Uptake, Transport, and Fate . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2013 , 46 , 622 –631 10.1021/ar300031y .22891796 
Wang B. ; He X. ; Zhang Z. Y. ; Zhao Y. L. ; Feng W. Y. 
Metabolism of Nanomaterials in Vivo: Blood Circulation and Organ Clearance . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2013 , 46 , 761 –769 10.1021/ar2003336 .23964655 
Ernsting M. J. ; Murakami M. ; Roy A. ; Li S. D. 
Factors Controlling
the Pharmacokinetics, Biodistribution and Intratumoral Penetration
of Nanoparticles . J. Controlled Release 
2013 , 172 , 782 –794 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.09.013 .
Longmire M. ; Choyke P. L. ; Kobayashi H. 
Clearance
Properties of Nano-Sized Particles and Molecules as Imaging Agents:
Considerations and Caveats . Nanomedicine 
2008 , 3 , 703 –717 10.2217/17435889.3.5.703 .18817471 
Petros R. A. ; DeSimone J. M. 
Strategies in the
Design of Nanoparticles for Therapeutic Applications . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2010 , 9 , 615 –627 10.1038/nrd2591 .20616808 
Koo H. ; Huh M. S. ; Sun I. C. ; Yuk S. H. ; Choi K. ; Kim K. ; Kwon I. C. 
In Vivo Targeted Delivery of Nanoparticles for Theranosis . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2011 , 44 , 1018 –1028 10.1021/ar2000138 .21851104 
He X. X. ; Nie H. L. ; Wang K. M. ; Tan W. H. ; Wu X. ; Zhang P. F. 
In Vivo Study of Biodistribution and
Urinary Excretion of Surface-Modified Silica Nanoparticles . Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 9597 –9603 10.1021/ac801882g .19007246 
Hartung T. 
Toxicology
for the Twenty-First Century . Nature 
2009 , 460 , 208 –212 10.1038/460208a .19587762 
Schleh C. ; Semmler-Behnke M. ; Lipka J. ; Wenk A. ; Hirn S. ; Schaeffler M. ; Schmid G. ; Simon U. ; Kreyling W. G. 
Size and Surface
Charge of Gold Nanoparticles Determine Absorption across Intestinal
Barriers and Accumulation in Secondary Target Organs after Oral Administration . Nanotoxicology 
2012 , 6 , 36 –46 10.3109/17435390.2011.552811 .21309618 
Kreyling W. G. ; Hirn S. ; Möller W. ; Schleh C. ; Wenk A. ; Celik G. ; Lipka J. ; Schäffler M. ; Haberl N. ; Johnston B. D. ; Sperling R. ; Schmid G. ; Simon U. ; Parak W. J. ; Semmler-Behnke M. 
Air–Blood
Barrier Translocation of Tracheally Instilled Gold Nanoparticles Inversely
Depends on Particle Size . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 222 –233 10.1021/nn403256v .24364563 
Kreuter J. 
Drug Delivery to the Central Nervous
System by Polymeric Nanoparticles: What Do We Know? . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2014 , 71 , 2 –14 10.1016/j.addr.2013.08.008 .
Wang B. ; Feng W. Y. ; Wang M. ; Shi J. W. ; Zhang F. ; Ouyang H. ; Zhao Y. L. ; Chai Z. F. ; Huang Y. Y. ; Xie Y. N. ; Wang H. F. ; Wang J. 
Transport
of Intranasally Instilled Fine Fe2O3 Particles into the Brain: Micro-distribution,
Chemical States, and Histopathological Observation . Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 
2007 , 118 , 233 –243 10.1007/s12011-007-0028-6 .17916926 
Wick P. ; Malek A. ; Manser P. ; Meili D. ; Maeder-Althaus X. ; Diener L. ; Diener P. A. ; Zisch A. ; Krug H. F. ; von Mandach U. 
Barrier Capacity of Human Placenta
for Nanosized Materials . Environ. Health Perspect. 
2009 , 118 , 432 –436 10.1289/ehp.0901200 .20064770 
Grafmuller S. ; Manser P. ; Krug H. F. ; Wick P. ; von Mandach U. 
Determination of the Transport Rate
of Xenobiotics and Nanomaterials Across the Placenta using the ex Vivo Human Placental Perfusion Model . J. Visualized Exp. 
2013 , 76 , e50401 10.3791/50401 .
Batrakova E. V. ; Kabanov A. V. 
Pluronic
Block Copolymers: Evolution of Drug Delivery Concept from Inert Nanocarriers
to Biological Response Modifiers . J. Controlled
Release 
2008 , 130 , 98 –106 10.1016/j.jconrel.2008.04.013 .
Zhou T. ; Yu M. ; Zhang B. ; Wang L. ; Wu X. ; Zhou H. ; Du Y. ; Hao J. ; Tu Y. ; Chen C. ; Wei T. 
Inhibition
of Cancer Cell Migration by Gold Nanorods: Molecular Mechanisms and
Implications for Cancer Therapy . Adv. Funct.
Mater. 
2014 , 24 , 6922 –6932 10.1002/adfm.201401642 .
Chen C. ; Li Y.-F. ; Qu Y. ; Chai Z. ; Zhao Y. 
Advanced Nuclear
Analytical and Related Techniques for the Growing Challenges in Nanotoxicology . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 8266 –8303 10.1039/c3cs60111k .23868609 
Jariwala D. ; Sangwan V. K. ; Lauhon L. J. ; Marks T. J. ; Hersam M. C. 
Carbon
Nanomaterials for Electronics, Optoelectronics, Photovoltaics, and
Sensing . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 2824 –2860 10.1039/C2CS35335K .23124307 
Hung A. H. ; Duch M. C. ; Parigi G. ; Rotz M. W. ; Manus L. M. ; Mastarone D. J. ; Dam K. T. ; Gits C. C. ; MacRenaris K. W. ; Luchinat C. ; Hersam M. C. ; Meade T. J. 
Mechanisms of Gadographene-Mediated
Proton Spin Relaxation . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 16263 –16273 10.1021/jp406909b .
Hung A. H. ; Holbrook R. J. ; Rotz M. W. ; Glasscock C. J. ; Mansukhani N. D. ; MacRenaris K. W. ; Manus L. M. ; Duch M. C. ; Dam K. T. ; Hersam M. C. ; Meade T. J. 
Graphene Oxide Enhances Cellular Delivery of Hydrophilic
Small Molecules by Co-Incubation . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 10168 –10177 10.1021/nn502986e .25226566 
Mutlu G. M. ; Budinger G. R. S. ; Green A. A. ; Urich D. ; Soberanes S. ; Chiarella S. E. ; Alheid G. F. ; McCrimmon D. R. ; Szleifer I. ; Hersam M. C. 
Biocompatible
Nanoscale Dispersion of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Minimizes in Vivo Pulmonary Toxicity . Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 1664 –1670 10.1021/nl9042483 .20377197 
Wang X. ; Xia T. ; Duch M. C. ; Ji Z. X. ; Zhang H. Y. ; Li R. B. ; Sun B. B. ; Lin S. J. ; Meng H. ; Liao Y. P. ; Wang M. Y. ; Song T. B. ; Yang Y. ; Hersam M. C. ; Nel A. E. 
Pluronic
F108 Coating Decreases the Lung Fibrosis Potential of Multiwall Carbon
Nanotubes by Reducing Lysosomal Injury . Nano
Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 3050 –3061 10.1021/nl300895y .22546002 
Duch M. C. ; Budinger G. R. S. ; Liang Y. T. ; Soberanes S. ; Urich D. ; Chiarella S. E. ; Campochiaro L. A. ; Gonzalez A. ; Chandel N. S. ; Hersam M. C. ; Mutlu G. M. 
Minimizing Oxidation and Stable Nanoscale Dispersion
Improves the Biocompatibility of Graphene in the Lung . Nano Lett. 
2011 , 11 , 5201 –5207 10.1021/nl202515a .22023654 
Wang X. ; Duch M. C. ; Mansukhani N. ; Ji Z. X. ; Liao Y. P. ; Wang M. Y. ; Zhang H. Y. ; Sun B. B. ; Chang C. H. ; Li R. B. ; Lin S. J. ; Meng H. ; Xia T. ; Hersam M. C. ; Nel A. E. 
Use of a Pro-Fibrogenic Mechanism-Based
Predictive Toxicological Approach for Tiered Testing and Decision
Analysis of Carbonaceous Nanomaterials . ACS
Nano 
2015 , 9 , 3032 –3043 10.1021/nn507243w .25646681 
Wick P. ; Manser P. ; Limbach L. K. ; Dettlaff-Weglikowska U. ; Krumeich F. ; Roth S. ; Stark W. J. ; Bruinink A. 
The Degree and Kind of Agglomeration Affect Carbon
Nanotube Cytotoxicity . Toxicol. Lett. 
2007 , 168 , 121 –131 10.1016/j.toxlet.2006.08.019 .17169512 
Chowdhury I. ; Duch M. C. ; Gits C. C. ; Hersam M. C. ; Walker S. L. 
Impact of Synthesis Methods on the
Transport of Single Walled Carbon Nanotubes in the Aquatic Environment . Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2012 , 46 , 11752 –11760 10.1021/es302453k .23016910 
Chowdhury I. ; Duch M. C. ; Mansukhani N. D. ; Hersam M. C. ; Bouchard D. 
Colloidal
Properties and Stability of Graphene Oxide Nanomaterials in the Aquatic
Environment . Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2013 , 47 , 6288 –6296 10.1021/es400483k .23668881 
Chowdhury I. ; Duch M. C. ; Mansukhani N. D. ; Hersam M. C. ; Bouchard D. 
Deposition and Release of Graphene
Oxide Nanomaterials Using a Quartz Crystal Microbalance . Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2014 , 48 , 961 –969 10.1021/es403247k .24345218 
Chowdhury I. ; Duch M. C. ; Mansukhani N. D. ; Hersam M. C. ; Bouchard D. 
Interactions
of Graphene Oxide Nanomaterials with Natural Organic Matter and Metal
Oxide Surfaces . Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2014 , 48 , 9382 –9390 10.1021/es5020828 .25026416 
Jariwala D. ; Sangwan V. K. ; Lauhon L. J. ; Marks T. J. ; Hersam M. C. 
Emerging Device Applications for
Semiconducting Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenides . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 1102 –1120 10.1021/nn500064s .24476095 
Wang X. ; Mansukhani N. D. ; Guiney L. M. ; Ji Z. ; Chang C. H. ; Wang M. ; Liao Y.-P. ; Song T.-B. ; Sun B. ; Li R. ; Xia T. ; Hersam M. C. ; Nel A. E. 
Differences in the
Toxicological Potential of Two-Dimensional versus Aggregated Molybdenum Disulfide in the Lung . Small 
2015 , 11 , 5079 –5087 10.1002/smll.201500906 .26237579 
Lanphere J. D. ; Luth C. J. ; Guiney L. M. ; Mansukhani N. D. ; Hersam M. C. ; Walker S. L. 
Fate and Transport of Molybdenum
Disulfide Nanomaterials in Sand Columns . Environ.
Eng. Sci. 
2015 , 32 , 163 –173 10.1089/ees.2014.0335 .25741176 
Choi H. S. ; Frangioni J. V. 
Nanoparticles for Biomedical Imaging: Fundamentals
of Clinical Translation . Mol. Imaging 
2010 , 9 , 291 –310 .21084027 
Lavik E. ; von Recum H. 
The Role of
Nanomaterials in Translational Medicine . ACS
Nano 
2011 , 5 , 3419 –3424 10.1021/nn201371a .21604811 
Stern S.
T. ; Hall J. B. ; Yu L. L. ; Wood L. J. ; Paciotti G. F. ; Tamarkin L. ; Long S. E. ; McNeil S. E. 
Translational Considerations for
Cancer Nanomedicine . J. Controlled Release 
2010 , 146 , 164 –174 10.1016/j.jconrel.2010.04.008 .
Dodson B. P. ; Levine A. D. 
Challenges in the
Translation and Commercialization of Cell Therapies . BMC Biotechnol. 
2015 , 15 , 70 10.1186/s12896-015-0190-4 .26250902 
Prabhakar U. ; Maeda H. ; Jain R. K. ; Sevick-Muraca E. M. ; Zamboni W. ; Farokhzad O. C. ; Barry S. T. ; Gabizon A. ; Grodzinski P. ; Blakey D. C. 
Challenges and Key Considerations
of the Enhanced Permeability and Retention Effect for Nanomedicine
Drug Delivery in Oncology . Cancer Res. 
2013 , 73 , 2412 –2417 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561 .23423979 
Dunn P. ; Kuo T. T. ; Shih L. Y. ; Wang P. N. ; Sun C. F. ; Chang M. W. J. 
Bone Marrow Failure
and Myelofibrosis in a Case of PVP Storage Disease . Am. J. Hematol. 
1998 , 57 , 68 –71 10.1002/(SICI)1096-8652(199801)57:1<68::AID-AJH12>3.0.CO;2-5 .9423820 
Kuo T. T. ; Hu S. ; Huang C. L. ; Chan H. L. ; Chang M. J. W. ; Dunn P. ; Chen Y. J. 
Cutaneous
Involvement in Polyvinylpyrrolidone Storage Disease: A Clinicopathologic
Study of Five Patients, Including Two Patients with Severe Anemia . Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 
1997 , 21 , 1361 –1367 10.1097/00000478-199711000-00011 .9351574 
Schneider P. ; Korolenko T. A. ; Busch U. 
A Review of Drug-Induced Lysosomal Disorders of the Liver in Man
and Laboratory Animals . Microsc. Res. Tech. 
1997 , 36 , 253 –275 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0029(19970215)36:4<253::AID-JEMT4>3.0.CO;2-N .9140926 
Urbanics R. ; Bedocs P. ; Szebeni J. 
Lessons Learned
from the Porcine CARPA Model: Constant and Variable Responses to Different
Nanomedicines and Administration Protocols . Eur. J. Nanomed. 
2015 , 7 , 219 –231 10.1515/ejnm-2015-0011 .
Dézsi L. ; Fülöp T. ; Mészáros T. ; Szénási G. ; Urbanics R. ; Vázsonyi C. ; Őrfi E. ; Rosivall L. ; Nemes R. ; Kok R. J. ; Metselaar J. M. ; Storm G. ; Szebeni J. 
Features of Complement
Activation-Related Pseudoallergy to Liposomes with Different Surface
Charge and PEGylation: Comparison of the Porcine and Rat Responses . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 195 , 2 –10 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.08.009 .
Parandian A. ; Rip A. ; Te Kulve H. 
Dual Dynamics of Promises,
and Waiting Games around Emerging Nanotechnologies . Technol. Anal. Strateg. 
2012 , 24 , 565 –582 10.1080/09537325.2012.693668 .
Irfan M. ; Seiler M. 
Encapsulation Using Hyperbranched
Polymers: From Research and Technologies to Emerging Applications . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2010 , 49 , 1169 –1196 10.1021/ie900216r .
Tyrrell Z. L. ; Shen Y. ; Radosz M. 
Fabrication of Micellar Nanoparticles
for Drug Delivery through the Self-Assembly of Block Copolymers . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2010 , 35 , 1128 –1143 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2010.06.003 .
Shen Y. Q. ; Jin E. L. ; Zhang B. ; Murphy C. J. ; Sui M. H. ; Zhao J. ; Wang J. Q. ; Tang J. B. ; Fan M. H. ; Van Kirk E. ; Murdoch W. J. 
Prodrugs
Forming High Drug Loading Multifunctional Nanocapsules for Intracellular
Cancer Drug Delivery . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 4259 –4265 10.1021/ja909475m .20218672 
Tang H. D. ; Murphy C. J. ; Zhang B. ; Shen Y. Q. ; Sui M. H. ; Van Kirk E. A. ; Feng X. W. ; Murdoch W. J. 
Amphiphilic Curcumin Conjugate-Forming Nanoparticles
as Anticancer Prodrug and Drug Carriers: In Vitro and in Vivo Effects . Nanomedicine 
2010 , 5 , 855 –865 10.2217/nnm.10.67 .20735222
