
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.7b03717ArticleControlling
Protein Surface Orientation by Strategic
Placement of Oligo-Histidine Tags Wasserberg Dorothee †‡§#Cabanas-Danés Jordi †‡#Prangsma Jord §O’Mahony Shane ⊥Cazade Pierre-Andre ⊥Tromp Eldrich ‡§Blum Christian §Thompson Damien *⊥Huskens Jurriaan *‡Subramaniam Vinod *§∥Jonkheijm Pascal *†‡†Bioinspired
Molecular Engineering Laboratory, MIRA Biomedical Technology
and Technical Medicine Institute, ‡Molecular nanoFabrication Group, MESA+ Institute
for Nanotechnology, and §Nanobiophysics Group, MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology,
and MIRA Biomedical Technology and Technical Medicine Institute, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands⊥ Department
of Physics, Bernal Institute, University
of Limerick, Limerick V94 T9PX, Ireland∥ Free
University of Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands* E-mail: damien.thompson@ul.ie.* E-mail: j.huskens@utwente.nl.* E-mail: v.subramaniam@vu.nl.* E-mail: p.jonkheijm@utwente.nl.29 08 2017 26 09 2017 11 9 9068 9083 26 05 2017 29 08 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

We
report oriented immobilization of proteins using the standard
hexahistidine (His6)-Ni2+:NTA (nitrilotriacetic
acid) methodology, which we systematically tuned to give control of
surface coverage. Fluorescence microscopy and surface plasmon resonance
measurements of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of red fluorescent
proteins (TagRFP) showed that binding strength increased by 1 order
of magnitude for each additional His6-tag on the TagRFP
proteins. All TagRFP variants with His6-tags located on
only one side of the barrel-shaped protein yielded a 1.5 times higher
surface coverage compared to variants with His6-tags on
opposite sides of the so-called β-barrel. Time-resolved fluorescence
anisotropy measurements supported by polarized infrared spectroscopy
verified that the orientation (and thus coverage and functionality)
of proteins on surfaces can be controlled by strategic placement of
a His6-tag on the protein. Molecular dynamics simulations
show how the differently tagged proteins reside at the surface in
“end-on” and “side-on” orientations with
each His6-tag contributing to binding. Also, not every
dihistidine subunit in a given His6-tag forms a full coordination
bond with the Ni2+:NTA SAMs, which varied with the position
of the His6-tag on the protein. At equal valency but different
tag positions on the protein, differences in binding were caused by
probing for Ni2+:NTA moieties and by additional electrostatic
interactions between different fractions of the β-barrel structure
and charged NTA moieties. Potential of mean force calculations indicate
there is no specific single-protein interaction mode that provides
a clear preferential surface orientation, suggesting that the experimentally
measured preference for the end-on orientation is a supra-protein, not a single-protein, effect.

protein immobilizationmultivalencymonolayersmolecular dynamics simulationsself-assemblydocument-id-old-9nn7b03717document-id-new-14nn-2017-03717jccc-price
==== Body
Proteins
anchored on solid substrates
play a crucial role in biomedical, bioanalytical, and biotechnological
applications, biomaterials, and nanobiotechnological devices and surfaces.1−9 Specific properties of surface-based diagnostic assays and cell
culture supports often depend on site-selective attachment of proteins
to solid supports.10−12 Grafting a suitable binding motif to a specific site
on the protein provides control over the orientation of proteins on
solid supports,13−16 which, unlike nonspecific or non-site-selective anchoring, generates
homogeneous surface coverage and, if well-considered, easy accessibility
to the proteins’ active sites.10−12 Consequently, different
types of bio-orthogonal reactions, both noncovalent and covalent,
have been developed to site-specifically attach proteins to surfaces.10−12,17−31 While functional attachment of proteins to solid supports with some
control over orientation has been achieved, firm structural evidence
of uniformly oriented proteins is lacking. For example, Saavedra and
co-workers studied, using emission anisotropy, the distribution of
orientations of cytochrome c, which were site-selectively
and covalently attached to substrates through disulfide bond formation
between a single reduced cysteine residue on the proteins and the
surface-exposed thiol groups of a self-assembled monolayer (SAM).32 A broad range (12° ± 33°) of
heme orientations signified a disordered layer with a substantial
fraction of nonspecifically adsorbed proteins.32 Taking advantage of a lipid bilayer to resist nonspecific
protein adsorption yielded more oriented cytochrome c layers (41° ± 11°).33 Scoles
and co-workers grafted metal-chelating thiols (specifically, nitrilotriacetic
acid (NTA)-terminated thiols) into antifouling SAMs to capture hexahistidine
(His6)-tagged antibodies with high affinity for specific
epitopes on prion proteins.34 Oriented
immobilization of prion proteins was topographically detected.34 Multivalent host–guest interactions have
been used by us to immobilize light-harvesting protein LH2 complexes
that were engineered with cysteine residues close to the C-terminus
of each of the nine α-domains of LH2 and functionalized with
adamantane guests.35 These positions ensured
oriented, yet irreversibly bound, protein complexes upon binding to
β-cyclodextrin host surfaces.35 In
linear arrays of such oriented proteins characteristic energy migration
could be observed.36 Tampé and co-workers
attached a 20S proteasome to substrates functionalized with metal-chelating
NTA complexes using His6-tags attached (randomly) to only
one of the subunits, either the outer α- or inner β-subunit,
of the 20S proteasome.37,38 Placing His6-tags
on the outer α-subunits resulted in an end-on orientation of
the barrel-shaped enzyme, while His6-tags attached to the
inner β-subunits resulted in side-on immobilization.37,38 Proteolytic activity was determined for both orientations of the
20S proteasome on the surface and found to differ by a factor of 2.38 End-on immobilization of the proteasome demonstrated
that one pore is sufficient for substrate entry and product release.38 Remarkably, end-on-oriented proteasomes could
process only one substrate at a time, while in contrast, the side-on-immobilized
proteasome could bind two substrates.38 These findings demonstrated clearly that orientational control over
the immobilization of proteins influenced their efficiency and functionality.
Yet, despite the fact that control over protein orientation and geometry
has a strong influence on protein function when immobilized, protein
immobilization has not as yet been demonstrated with tunable control
over the orientation, binding strength, and reversibility of protein
adsorption.

We have previously reported on a covalent disulfide
lock between
two ferrocenyl (guest)-modified fluorescent proteins to switch from
monovalent to divalent interactions with the β-cyclodextrin
(β-CD) host surface, yielding stable immobilized protein layers
with homogeneous orientation.27 Here, using
multivalency as a design principle,39,40 we study controlled
immobilization based on a combination of site-directed mutagenesis,
surface modification techniques, multivalent numerical models, and
molecular simulations. Fluorescent proteins were engineered with His6-tag residues at specific positions on the proteins (Chart 1). These strategic
positions ensured unique orientations and properties of proteins upon
binding to Ni2+:NTA surfaces. Given the widespread use
of His6-tag technology in protein diagnostics, isolation,
surface-based devices, and bionanostructures, the results of this
investigation should be of general interest.21,41−55 Isothermal calorimetry and stop-flow fluorescence studies in solution
by Tampé and co-workers show that individual Ni2+:NTA-His2 complexes (forming one coordination pair) are
of low affinity (Kd = 14 μM), two
coordination pairs in Ni2+:NTA-His4 complexes
are of moderate affinity (Kd = 0.27 μM),
while high affinity (Kd = 20 nM) could
be reached by incorporating three NTA moieties into a single multivalent
chelator entity (forming three coordination pairs in Ni2+:NTA-His6 complexes).56 While
not all of these values have been validated on surfaces, Szoka and
co-workers found nanomolar affinities for immobilizing His6-tagged proteins on trivalent NTA chelators on gold chips, which
depended on linker length and surface density of the chelator.62 Complex formation remains reversible upon addition
of competitive binding moieties, which has been demonstrated in several
other protein immobilization studies.21,47,48,55−64 On surfaces, dissociation of longer His10-tagged proteins
could be inhibited by accumulated “patches” of multivalent
NTA entities on surfaces.58,59 Analogously, we have
established multivalent Ni2+:NTA surfaces anchored to β-cyclodextrin
host surfaces employing a divalent adamantyl-NTA moiety, yet the binding
affinities were estimated to be markedly lower when compared to solution
data, due to incomplete complex formation.55,63 More precisely, on such β-cyclodextrin-anchored Ni2+:NTA surfaces about 60% of the His6-tagged proteins formed
three coordination pairs with an estimated affinity of Kd = 1 μM taking advantage of the spatial arrangement
of NTA ligands on the host surface, while the remaining 40% formed
only two coordination pairs with an estimated affinity of Kd = 10 μM.55,63 Rant and co-workers
employed an electric field to switch between horizontally and vertically
oriented His6-tagged proteins on the Ni2+:NTA
substrate.65 They also demonstrated that
binding characteristics of His6-tagged proteins are largely
affected by additional interactions in the local chemical environment
between the protein and surface, yielding KD values ranging between 1 μM and 1 nM.65

Chart 1 Schematic representation of the five TagRFP variants (0H, 1H, 2H, 1 + 1H, 2
+ 1H) used in this study with different numbers of His6-tags located at the N- and/or C-terminus and/or at the serine-to-cysteine
mutation site (S128C). End-on and side-on oriented TagRFP binding
scenarios and the complexation of Ni2+:NTA SAMs (for preparation
see Scheme S1) by a His6-tag
are shown.
Here, we manipulate
the orientation of histidine-tagged proteins
on Ni2+:NTA functional surfaces without resorting to other
substrate–protein interactions55,63 or external
forces.65 The molecular-scale details of
the protein–surface interface were monitored using fluorescence
microscopy, IR spectroscopy, surface plasmon resonance, and time-resolved
fluorescence anisotropy techniques supported by equilibrium and steered
molecular dynamics computer simulations. Our results demonstrate that
the orientation of proteins on surfaces can be controlled by strategic
placement of His6-tags on the protein.

Results and Discussion
Engineering
Protein Variants
The protein we employed
is a red fluorescent protein (RFP), more specifically, an orange,
monomeric variant of an RFP from the sea anemone Entacmaea
quadricolor, TagRFP,66 and we
trace the proteins at the surface using (time-resolved, polarized)
spectroscopy, fluorescence microscopy, and surface plasmon resonance.
Recombinant variants of TagRFP were made containing between zero and
three His6-tags at different positions on the protein (Chart 1 and Methods). His6-tags were introduced at either one
or both of the termini by cloning and/or after site-selective mutagenesis
to create a single accessible cysteine residue by orthogonal conjugation.
The studied proteins included a (wild-type) wtTagRFP (0H) that contains no His6-tags (Chart 1) and two mutants of wtTagRFP each with native cysteines C114 and C222 mutated to serine
(C114S and C222S) to remove solvent-accessible cysteine residues.
Both mutants have either one or two His6-tags, named NHis6-TagRFP (1H) and NHis6-CHis6-TagRFP (2H), respectively.
The N- and C-termini in TagRFP are located at the base of its cylindrical
structure, the so-called β-barrel, which places the two His6-tags of 2H at the same end of the β-barrel
(Chart 1). Furthermore,
two more mutants with two and three His6-tags were made,
each containing three mutations, i.e., again C114S and C222S but now also serine S128 are mutated into
a cysteine (S128C) to give a single, solvent-accessible cysteine residue.
These two mutants were conjugated with a maleimide caproic acid modified
hexahistidine tag (mic-His6). The conjugates were named NHis6-S128CHis6-TagRFP (1 + 1H) and NHis6-CHis6-S128CHis6-TagRFP (2 + 1H). The single accessible cysteine at position 128 is located in a
flexible loop on the side of the β-barrel opposite the N- and
C-termini. This means that conjugates 1 + 1H and 2 + 1H have the second or, respectively, the third of their
His6-tags situated at the opposite end of their β-barrels
with regard to the first or, respectively, the first two His6-tags (Chart 1 and Methods). The steady-state and time-resolved spectroscopic
properties of all mutants and conjugates were verified to match those
of the wild-type TagRFP (Table S1).

Demonstration
of Reversible Binding of Protein Variants
For a qualitative
assessment of the stability and reversibility of
the immobilization, TagRFP variants 1H, 2H, 1 + 1H, and 2 + 1H were immobilized on
bifunctional line patterns made by nanoimprint lithography (NIL; Methods and Scheme S2). Patterns consisted of wide Ni2+:NTA-terminated lines
(varying width) and narrower (5 μm wide) poly(ethylene oxide)
(PEG)-terminated lines. These patterned surfaces were incubated with
solutions of the TagRFP variants for 30 min. After washing, no distinctive
patterns were observed. By contrast, extended washing for 12 h in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with 5% Tween (PBST) yielded clean
backgrounds and specifically immobilized proteins. Fluorescence micrographs
(Figure 1) were recorded,
and fluorescence intensity profiles measured across the lines (insets Figure 1). All variants were
bound to Ni2+:NTA regions, and only faint signatures of
nonspecific binding to the proteophobic PEG-terminated regions were
observed, indicating site-selective binding of the His6-tag(s) to Ni2+:NTA-terminated surfaces. No binding was
observed to the entire surface in the case of 0H, indicating
the specificity of the binding of the proteins by the His6-tags. No significant differences in fluorescence intensities were
observed between the different variants after 12 h of washing. However,
after washing with PBST for 48 h the 1H line patterns
had vanished (Figure 1b) and 2H and 1 + 1H patterns showed significantly
reduced intensities, while 2 + 1H remained unchanged
(Figure 1f,j,n). This
indicates that the binding strength of a protein can be increased
by increasing the number of binding motifs (multivalency).

Figure 1 Fluorescence
micrographs of NIL-patterned substrates with Ni2+:NTA-
(broad lines) and PEG-terminated regions (narrow lines)
after incubation with 1H (a–d), 2H (e–h), 1 + 1H (i–l), and 2 + 1H (m–p) and subsequent washing with PBS containing 5% Tween
for 12 h (a, e, i, m), for 48 h (b, f, j, n), and for 2 h with PBS
containing 5% Tween saturated with imidazole (c, g, k, o) or EDTA
(d, h, l, p), and, subsequently, with PBS containing 5% Tween for
12 h (c, d, g, h, l, k, p, o). Insets show the corresponding intensity
profiles perpendicular to the pattern. Imaging parameters, such as
the exposure time of 2 s, were kept constant for all measurements.

Next, the reversibility of protein
binding to the surface was tested
by washing with imidazole, a monovalent ligand that competes to bind
Ni2+:NTA, and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) a
hexadentated chelating agent for the (effectively irreversible) removal
of Ni2+ ions from Ni2+:NTA (Figure 1). Washing with a large excess
of monovalent imidazole resulted in nearly complete reversal of 1H immobilization (Figure 1c), while 2H and 1 + 1H showed
only reduced intensities (Figure 1g, k) and 2 + 1H patterns remained essentially
unchanged (Figure 1o) when compared with the surfaces after 12 h of washing in buffer
(Figure 1a,e,i,m).
These results support the idea that the higher the valency, the higher
the resistance to replacement by the competitor, due to increased
binding strength of the proteins with the surface. We relate these
observations to multivalency, i.e., increased local concentration (see below), and not to cooperativity.
While small differences in secondary structure can, in principle,
exist between the different His6-tags on the protein due
to conformation and location on the protein, our molecular dynamics
results (see below) show that the conformations of the His6-tags appear to be random coil, as expected, and that the His6-tags point outward, as designed, away from the proteins,
as can be seen from the structures in Figure S2, making us believe that multivalent effects are prevailing. The
observations from the reversibility experiments are in agreement with
literature showing reversible binding of single, short His6-tagged proteins and practically irreversible binding of longer His10-tagged proteins to high-valency Ni2+:NTA chelating
groups on surfaces.55,56,58,59,63 By contrast,
when washing with EDTA, the 2H and 1 + 1H patterns were much more severely reduced than when under treatment
with imidazole (Figure 1h,l). As EDTA binds Ni2+, it removes the ion from the
complex, preventing any further His6-tag (re)attachment.
Hence, only the highest valency variant 2 + 1H can prevent
the EDTA-mediated Ni2+ depletion to a significant degree
(Figure 1p), indicating
that 2 + 1H is, indeed, the most strongly bound variant.

Surface Binding Affinities
The qualitative findings
from fluorescence microscopy were quantified using surface plasmon
resonance (SPR). Figure 2 (left) shows maximum SPR responses after reaching thermodynamic
equilibrium, for varying concentrations (10 pM to 20 μM) of
each of the five variants binding to Ni2+:NTA-functionalized
SPR sensors (Scheme S1) as well as their
corresponding fits to a multivalency model (Table 1 and described below). Binding was clearly
observed for all four His6-tagged proteins, while the control, 0H, shows only minimal binding even at a very high concentration
(1 μM). These results confirm that the adsorption of TagRFP
occurs through specific interaction between His6-tags and
surface-bound Ni2+:NTA. Moreover, SPR corroborates the
microscopy data, as the binding strength clearly increases, signified
by the shifts of the inflection points of the curves of about 1 order
of magnitude for each additional His6-tag (Figure 2, Table 1). In addition, SPR reveals information about
the absolute amount of immobilized protein. The variants with His6-tag(s) on only one side of the β-barrel (1H and 2H) have a maximum attained coverage of approximately
3 ng/mm2, as estimated from the differential SPR angle
shift (Δαmax) of around 300 millidegrees (see
fitting below). By contrast, the remaining two variants (1 +
1H and 2 + 1H with His6-tags on opposite
sides of the β-barrel) have a significantly lower maximum attained
coverage of around 200 millidegrees. This difference in maximum attainable
coverage, as well as the range of concentrations in which a particular
mutant reaches a total surface coverage (Figure 2, right), suggests a difference in packing
of the proteins on the surface. Each His6-tag contributes
to the binding of the proteins to the surface (Table 1), which makes it plausible that protein
variants with His6-tags on both sides of the β-barrel
absorb in flat, side-on orientations on the surface (see Chart 1).

Figure 2 (Left) Maximum response
values of SPR titrations of TagRFP variants 0H (black,
squares) 1H (red, circles), 2H (blue, triangles), 1 + 1H (green, pentagons),
and 2 + 1H (orange, stars) at various concentrations
binding to SPR sensors functionalized with Ni2+:NTA SAMs
with their corresponding fits to the multivalency model (see text).
(Right) Total surface coverage of the four His6-tagged
TagRFP variants estimated from fitting each data point to the multivalency
model, plotted as lines. Data represent single measurements that have
been reproduced.

Table 1 Optimized
Parameters Determined by
Fitting the Experimental Data to Langmuir and Multivalency Modelsa
variant	KLM (M–1)	Kd,LM (nM)	Ceff (μM)	
1H	2.7 × 106	370	N/A	
2H	3.8 × 107	26	1.8	
1 + 1H	4.7 × 107	21	5.7	
2 + 1H	2.7 × 108	3.7	12	
a KLM is
the apparent overall binding association constant (Kd,LM is the related binding dissociation constant) obtained
from the fit using a 1:1 Langmuir-type model for each variant. Ceff is the effective concentration obtained
from a fit using a multivalency model (see text and Methods).

The observed
difference in maximum coverage for the variants with
binding motifs on only one side of the β-barrel suggests that
those variants prefer to adopt a more upright, end-on orientation.
This alternative orientation reduces their footprint to provide closer
packing, which in turn allows higher surface coverages.

The
SPR data were first fitted using a 1:1 Langmuir-type model,27 which assumes that each His6-tag
interacts as a single entity with the Ni2+:NTA surface
(Table 1). The resulting
fits are in very good agreement with the experimental SPR data. As
the Langmuir model yields only overall observable binding constants
(KLM; Table 1), we employed a second more detailed model,
based on the concept of multivalency and effective concentration (Ceff).67 This model
provides deeper insight into the differences in binding conformations
as a function of the number and position of the His6-tags
of the different variants (Methods). Briefly, Ceff is a measure for the (much increased) probability,
compared to a monovalent ligand, of a second (or third, etc.) binding moiety of a multivalent ligand attaching to the surface
after the first moiety has bound. It takes the form of a concentration
(number of molecules per unit volume), as it can be viewed as the
number of binding sites the second (or third, etc.) binding moiety could reach within its probing volume (considering
steric aspects). For fitting the SPR titration data for 1H, we used the maximum attained coverage Δamax and the intrinsic binding association constant of
a single His6-tag (Ki,His6)
as variables. We have treated the binding of an entire His6-tag as a single binding event throughout this analysis. We obtain
a value for Ki,His6 = 2.8 × 106 M–1 (Kd = 0.36
μM), which is in very good agreement with the KLM value measured for 1H (Table 1), indicating that the histidine
binding is equal to the overall binding constant. Our value is in
agreement with literature values measured in solution for cases where
two coordination bonds are formed between His6-tags and
trivalent chelating NTAs55 and higher than
literature values for cases of His6-tag binding to assembled
Ni2+:NTA ligands on β-CD surfaces,57,63 indicating that, here, less than three coordination pairs (see Chart 1) between the His6-tag and surface are formed. Furthermore, the Langmuir fits
show that variant 2 + 1H binds 1 order of magnitude stronger
than the bivalent constructs 2H and 1 + 1H (Table 1), which
is 1 order of magnitude stronger than literature values measured in
solution for forming three coordination bonds with trivalent NTA chelating
entities,56 indicating that more than three
coordinating bonds were formed on our surfaces for 2 + 1H. For fitting the data of the other variants, Ki,His6 was fixed to the value found for 1H, while
Δamax and Ceff were optimized. The resulting Ceff values of 1.8 μM (2H), 5.7 μM (1
+ 1H), and 12 μM (2 + 1H) (Table 1) increase stepwise in magnitude
and provide some insight into how the different TagRFP variants attach
to the surface. It is worth mentioning at this point that typical Ceff values tend to be in the millimolar range,55,63,68 while here they are in the micromolar
range. We attribute this fact to our use of N-hydroxy
succinimide chemistry for the functionalization of the SPR sensors
(Scheme S1), which resulted in low surface
density of metal-chelating NTA units, which we, in turn, corroborated
using X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) (Table S3). We did not include an explicit quenching of residual succinimidyl
esters in our functionalization protocol because during intensive
washing steps these esters are subject to hydrolysis.47 A low surface density of NTA puts a much lower number of
binding sites in reach of the ligands and, thus, much lower Ceff than obtained previously with, for example,
cyclodextrin-terminated SAMs.55,63,68 We emphasize that there is a significant difference between the
His6-tag proteins interacting with NTA bound to a surface
and with free NTA in solution. In solution NTA moieties are isolated
from each other, while on a surface they are immobilized in close
proximity to each other, allowing multivalent binding, here responsible
for the observed enhanced binding of the multivalently tagged proteins.
It is important to realize that any binding experiment in solution
between monovalent NTA moieties and any His6-tag of the
constructs will lead only to a determination of the monovalent binding
event between one NTA moiety and (two) histidine residues. Therefore,
we compared our binding constants on our surfaces with referenced
solution data of Tampé, Piehler, and co-workers56,57 in which the interaction between a trivalent NTA moiety (i.e., three connected NTAs) with His-tags
in solution was studied and also represents a case of multivalency
where in solution multivalent interactions can occur between the three
individual NTA moieties and the histidine residues.

As mentioned
above, Ceff is directly
proportional to the number of accessible binding sites, which in turn
is directly proportional to the (accessible) surface area, with a
square dependence on the linker length, r, linking
the binding moieties. Furthermore, Ceff is inversely dependent on the probing volume, which has a cubic
dependence on the linker length, i.e., Ceff ∼ area/volume ∼ r2/r3. With this
in mind, it can be reasoned why 2 + 1H has the highest Ceff value of 12 μM. The conformational
freedom of the third His6-tag is highly constrained in
the divalently bound protein, and this reduction in flexibility reduces
the accessible surface area, but more strongly the probing volume,
resulting in the high Ceff for the trivalent
complex. Interestingly, the Ceff values
found for 2H and 1 + 1H clearly differ. Ceff is higher for 1 + 1H, the variant
with the His6-tags on opposite sides of the β-barrel,
than for 2H. This effect can be due only to the difference
in position of the second His6-tag, which raises the possibility
that site-specific attachment of binding motifs can provide different
binding strengths even for complexes with the same number of binding
motifs, evident from the separation between 2H and 1 + 1H data sets in the SPR titration plots in Figure 2. Intuitively, we expected
that the necessary side-on orientational change needed to bind the
second tag of 1 + 1H is more difficult than the search
for a second NTA by the second tag of 2H. However, in
the case of end-on binding of 2H, the two His6-tags compete for the same and limited NTA moieties, whereas this
does not occur in the case of side-on binding of 1 + 1H. Moreover, in the case of side-on binding of 1 + 1H additional (possibly competing or repulsive) electrostatic interactions
between a larger fraction of the β-barrel structure and charged
NTA moieties could be possible. Taken together, the differences in KLM and Ceff for
the different variants from SPR data, corroborated by our multivalency
model, suggest that the binding affinity and orientation of the protein
variants on the surface depend on both the position and number of
binding motifs present.

Polarization-Resolved Lifetime Imaging on
Immobilized Proteins
Polarization-resolved fluorescence lifetime
imaging microscopy
was performed to compare the anisotropy decay times of end-on and
side-on oriented immobilized TagRFP. As concluded from SPR studies,
two different types of surface coverages, i.e., packing,
for each of which one representative variant was selected. As representative
variants for this study, we used the proteins with the highest binding
strengths (i.e., stability) per
orientation, 2H (end-on) and 2 + 1H (side-on),
as these samples would be most stable in terms of protein adsorption,
as the measurements are very time-consuming (4 to 6 replicas). Representative
plots of polarization anisotropy versus time can
be found in Figure S15. The proteins were
immobilized at the saturation levels determined from SPR (Figure 2). Anisotropy decay
times were determined for 2H and 2 + 1H immobilized
on various Ni2+:NTA/PEG line patterns on glass, measuring
at different locations on different samples (see Methods for a detailed description of sample preparation,
setup, and analysis). A plot with all fitted anisotropy lifetimes versus peak intensity is shown in Figure 3. Decay times cluster into two distinct groups
(Figure 3) with decay
times of 2H systematically shorter than those of 2 + 1H. The X-ray structure of TagRFP shows that the chromophore
is oriented approximately perpendicular to the long axis of the barrel.69 The distribution of orientations of the chromophores
is therefore expected to be the same for end-on and side-on orientation
of the proteins on the surfaces, i.e., in both cases randomly oriented transition dipole moments parallel
to the surface. The direction of detection is perpendicular to the
surface. This means that there will be no difference in orientation
dependence of the fluorescence of isolated chromophores (proteins)
when comparing end-on and side-on adsorption. Differences in fluorescence
intensity should therefore solely stem from differences in the density
of proteins on the surface. From this it also follows that there should
not be a difference in orientation dependence of polarization anisotropy
decay between end-on and side-on orientations. Polarization anisotropy
decay is strongly dependent only on the relative distance and orientation
of two TagRFP chromophores that undergo energy transfer. Therefore,
we believe that the loss of anisotropy could be caused by two conceivable
mechanisms: energy transfer between the chromophores of neighboring
molecules (homo-FRET) and freedom of movement or rotation. The loss
of anisotropy is much faster for 2H, indicating that
in this case proteins are either more closely packed, making for more
efficient energy transfer between chromophores, or more mobile. When
considering that relatively high, saturated, surface coverages were
used for these measurements, homo-FRET seems the more likely explanation.
The time-resolved anisotropy results, then, support the assumption
of more close packing between end-on (2H) oriented TagRFP
variants (2 + 1H can adsorb side-on; Chart 1). We note also that 2H samples all exhibited much higher fluorescence intensities than 2 + 1H samples (Table S2), which
points to a higher surface coverage of 2H and thus a
closer packing for end-on oriented 2H.

Figure 3 Plot of the fitted anisotropy
lifetimes τ versus the sum of their peak intensities
for immobilized 2H (open squares) and 2 + 1H (solid squares). Data represent
single measurements.

Polarization modulation infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy
(PM-IRRAS) was carried out on end-on (1H) and end-on
(2 + 1H) oriented TagRFP immobilized on Ni2+:NTA-functionalized gold substrates at saturation levels (Figure 4). The immobilization
of protein caused a marked increase in the proportion of the dichroic
ratio coming from amide versus carbonyl groups when
compared to bare Ni2+:NTA layers on gold, as monitored
for the amide I band at 1660 cm–1 and the carbonyl
stretch vibration of COOH groups at 1740 cm–1. The
amide I to COOH ratio of unity on bare Ni2+:NTA rises to
4.5 for 1H but only to 2.3 for 2 + 1H, which
is consistent with the existence of more closely packed protein in
the case of the end-on binding mode.

Figure 4 PM-IRRAS differential reflectance spectra
of 1H (red
line) and 2 + 1H (blue line) immobilized on Ni2+:NTA SAMs (the black line is the Ni2+:NTA surface prior
to protein binding). Colored bands correspond to regions associated
with specific secondary structural elements within the amide I region
of the protein, and the changes in these bands are used to elucidate
protein orientation. Intensities on the y-axis are
given as dichroic ratios.

Furthermore, the amide I band between 1600 and 1700 cm–1 can be largely assigned to C=O stretch vibrations,
and different
regions of this band are correlated with different secondary structural
elements of proteins.70 More specifically,
the signal at 1654 cm–1 corresponds to α-helices
(magenta) and the dichroic ratio at 1633 cm–1 to
β-sheets (cyan).71 Ratios between
the dichroic ratios for α-helix and β-sheet were determined
to be 1.3 and 1.1 for 1H and 2 + 1H, respectively.
Since 1H and 2 + 1H are structurally identical,
apart from their number of His6-tags, this observation
indicates a difference in orientation. From crystallographic data
it can be seen that the only substantial α-helical structural
element of TagRFP is oriented along the axis of the β-barrel.
Therefore, the α-helical C=O stretch vibration, which
is nearly parallel to the axis of the α-helix, should be observable
in PM-IRRAS (for high angles of incidence of the polarized light on
a conductive surface) only if the protein is oriented end-on. The
differential reflectance spectrum of 1H, with its higher
relative α-helix signal, indicates that the β-barrel and,
thus, the α-helix are oriented more end-on, or normal to the
surface, while the spectrum of 2 + 1H indicates that
the β-barrel is oriented more side-on, or parallel to the surface.
Taken collectively, all experimental data indicate a distinct preference
for an end-on orientation for immobilized TagRFP variants with His6-tags placed on the same side of the β-barrel, in contrast
with side-on orientation taken by alternative TagRFP variants with
His6-tags placed on either end of the β-barrel.

Simulations of His6-Tagged Protein Complexation to
Ni2+:NTA SAMs
In an effort to reveal the atomic-scale
details of the effect that the number and positioning of His6-tags has on the strength of the binding interactions as well as
the orientation of the protein upon binding to Ni2+:NTA
SAMs, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were performed (see Methods for a detailed description). There have
been only a few reports of MD studies on the Ni2+:NTA-His6 system.72−74 Most notably, Zhang etal. performed molecular dynamics simulations on a His6-tag
interacting with a single Ni2+:NTA complex and found that
the residue pair His(2,3) was the most stable pair, while secondary
structure analysis showed that the His6 structure has a
high propensity for random coil conformations.74 While MD has been used to describe the behavior of fluorescent
proteins in solution75−77 as well as the interactions of a green fluorescent
protein with a silicon substrate,78 there
have been, to the best of our knowledge, no MD studies on the immobilization
of fluorescent proteins onto SAMs. Therefore, to better understand
the atomic-scale structure of the protein–SAM interface, we
modeled the immobilization of all our TagRFP proteins with a varying
number of His6-tags (Figure S2) to Ni2+:NTA-modified SAMs. Top and side views of uniform
Ni2+:NTA (control simulation) and mixed Ni2+:NTA/carboxylic acid SAMs are given in Figures S3 and S4. More ordered SAM structures were formed for the
mixed monolayer,79 which represents our
fabricated low NTA density SAMs. To study the protein–SAM interactions,
the histidine residues of the TagRFP variants were placed near Ni2+:NTA in the SAM in positions where a complex might form.
After equilibration, 20 ns of free dynamics was performed for each
complex and showed that the magnitude of the computed protein–SAM
interaction energy is directly correlated with the number of histidine
residues complexed (Figures S5–S7). The final computed structures of the His6-tags binding
to the uniform and mixed Ni2+:NTA SAMs are given in Figures S8–S13. In general, the N-terminal
His6-tag has the largest number of NTA-complexed histidine
residues, whereas the C-terminal His6-tag may have fewer
complexed histidine residues because of repulsive interactions between
the C-terminal region of the TagRFP and the NTA carboxylate oxygens.
We estimated a tag–surface interaction energy (summed over
electrostatic and van der Waals interactions) of −190 kcal/mol
(Table S4) for the His6-tag
with all six histidine residues bound. This gives an interaction energy
per histidine of approximately −32 kcal/mol, which is similar
to the value (−30 kcal/mol) calculated by Yang etal.80 using quantum
mechanical simulations of the binding of a Ni2+ ion to
one histidine. Computed interaction energies for the uniform and mixed
SAMs with all TagRFP variants and orientations are given in Table S4. During simulations on both the uniform
and mixed SAMs, the protein remains bound and maintains a near-constant,
to within a few angstroms, center-of-mass height above the surface.
Apart from the interactions at the His6-Ni2+:NTA binding sites, interactions between the SAM and the proteins
are driven mostly by electrostatic interactions involving amino acids
with charged side chains on the exterior of the protein and the charged
terminal headgroups of the SAM. Also, the protein–SAM interaction
energies are much larger for the uniform control SAM (Table S4) since the protein is in direct contact
with more of the SAM. For the experimentally used mixed SAM, the interaction
energy between the protein and the SAM is comparable to that of the
interaction energy between the His6-tag and the SAM (Table S4). To investigate whether on balance
the protein prefers a side-on or end-on orientation, the total interaction
energy, including protein–water interactions as well as protein–SAM
interactions, was evaluated. Increasing the number of His6-tags on the protein gives an increase in the total interaction energy,
which agrees with experimental results. However, for both uniform
and mixed SAMs, there are no large differences in the interaction
energies for proteins immobilized in an end-on compared to a side-on
orientation (Table S4). In fact, for both
SAMs, the end-on oriented 1H has less favorable time-averaged
interaction energies than 1H oriented side-on on the
SAM. This indicates that the computed loss in protein–SAM interactions
on standing up is greater than the gain in protein–water interactions.
For 2H the time-averaged preference for the side-on orientation
is smaller than in the case of 1H, but we still do not
see a computed preference for the end-on orientation, at odds with
the experimental observations. From these equilibrium simulations
no strong preference in protein orientation can be deduced. We hypothesize
that at experimental time scales proteins adopt an end-on orientation
simply because it allows more proteins to be immobilized so the magnitude
of the protein–SAM interaction energy per unit area is increased,
as is the density of lateral protein–protein contacts. We tentatively
propose an assembly mechanism analogous to the concentration-dependent
assembly of alkanethiol SAMs on gold,81 which grow from sparse populations of horizontally oriented single
or few-molecule clusters to tightly packed clusters of vertically
oriented molecules with intermolecular forces becoming stronger than
molecule–surface forces. The protein–surface contact
area is approximately doubled when the protein is immobilized side-on,
and so larger surface coverages are achieved for the end-on orientation,
while the surrounding water density is comparable (Table S5). The protein conformational energy and radius of
gyration values show little deviation between bulk solvated and SAM-bound
(via the His6-tags) states (Table S6, less than 5% change in conformational
stability and size). This indicates that the His6-tag method
of immobilizing proteins allows the protein to be tethered to the
SAM surface in its native conformation. This fits with the unchanged
fluorescence properties of the proteins upon immobilization, which
is known to be a sensitive probe of structural integrity for fluorescent
proteins.

We used the computed MD protein–SAM structures
as starting points for nonequilibrium steered MD (SMD) simulations
to estimate the potential of mean force (PMF) required to remove an
immobilized 2H His6-tagged TagRFP protein
from the mixed Ni2+:NTA SAMs. The SMD simulation was used
to pull the protein a distance of 11 nm away from the SAM over a time
of 7 ns. Fifty-eight equally spaced configurations were extracted
from the pulling trajectory, and umbrella sampling was performed for
10 ns on these to obtain the PMF. Figure 5 shows the PMF profiles that were calculated
for detachment of 2H when immobilized in end-on and side-on
orientations, while Figures 6 and 7 show key configurations along
the unbinding pathways (starting configurations are shown in Figure S14). The two different binding orientations
show different desorption paths. It costs approximately 18 kcal/mol
to unbind 2H starting from the end-on orientation, in
which only the His6-tags are in contact with the SAM, roughly
half the energy required to unbind 2H starting from the
side-on orientation (approximately 38 kcal/mol), in which the protein
β-barrel is also in contact with the SAM.

Figure 5 Computed potential of
mean force profiles for 2H desorption
in side-on (black squares) and end-on (red circles) orientations.
The pulling force is applied to the main body of the protein excluding
the His6-tags.

Figure 6 2H desorption, starting from an end-on bound orientation.
The structures correspond to distances of (a) 64 Å; (b) 65 Å;
(c) 74 Å; and (d) 77 Å in the force profile (Figure 5, red curve).

Figure 7 2H desorption, starting from a side-on bound
orientation.
The structures correspond to distances of (a) 48 Å; (b) 59 Å;
(c) 70 Å; and (d) 71 Å in the force profile (Figure 5, black curve).

Figure 6a and b
show configurations of end-on oriented 2H just before
and after, respectively, desorbing the C-terminal His6-tag
at around 65 Å on the horizontal axis, which agrees with the
observation from the equilibrium MD simulations that the C-terminal
His6-tag usually had a lower number of bound histidine
residues, resulting in turn in a lower binding energy (Figure S8). Figure 6c shows the configuration of an intermediate
state in which the N-terminal His6-tag was still immobilized
and the C-terminal His6-tag was completely detached, and Figure 6d shows the configuration
after both His6-tags were desorbed. The observation that
the core protein barrel of end-on oriented 2H has practically
zero interaction with the SAM (Figure 6) contrasts with the substantial protein–SAM
interactions that must be broken to desorb the side-on oriented 2H (see also computed interaction energies in Table S4). For the side-on oriented 2H, the barrel desorbed from the SAM at a distance of 48 Å (Figure 7a) with a 3 kcal/mol
magnitude loss in adsorption energy. Then, the C-terminal His6-tag desorbed from the SAM at 59 Å (Figure 7b), giving an additional 9
kcal/mol loss in energy. The N-terminal His6-tag desorbed
at 71 Å (configurations shown in Figure 7c and d (before and after, respectively)),
with an energy difference of 18 kcal/mol between the unique events
where each of the two His6-tags were desorbing. However,
these events were undetectable in the force profile for desorbing
side-on oriented 2H (Figure 7), from which we conclude that it is, nonobviously,
the protein pushing against water that contributes the most to the
force. Protein adsorbed in the side-on orientation has a higher surface
area in the direction of desorption (normal to the plane of the SAM)
and also showed a much longer interaction length of 50 Å compared
with 20 Å for end-on oriented 2H. Therefore, the
PMF data quantify the energy required to disrupt water adlayers as
the protein desorbs from the alternative bound conformations,82,83 which has been associated with a high entropic cost due to the disruption
of the water hydrogen-bonding network.

The simulations then
complement the experiments by suggesting a
binding mechanism in which the protein approaches the surface end-on
to minimize disruption to water adlayers (from the PMF calculations)
then flips between approximately isoenergetic bound end-on and side-on
states (from the equilibrium MD simulations) before (presumably) adopting
an end-on orientation to maximize packing with other adsorbing proteins.
Future work could involve explicit modeling of the adsorbed protein
SAM, which would require sampling of the full range of possible protein–protein
and protein–surface orientations, beyond the scope of the present
work.

Conclusions
Proteins have been successfully engineered
with strategically placed
His6-tags on both N- and C-termini and a solvent-accessible
loop of TagRFP. Steady-state and time-dependent spectroscopic properties
of five mutants and conjugates matched those of the wild-type TagRFP.
The binding strength of the variants increased with increasing numbers
of binding motifs as qualitatively assessed by following fluorescent
patterns in reversibility and competition experiments. These findings
were corroborated by SPR studies signifying that each additional His6-tag increases the binding strength by 1 order of magnitude.
With each His6-tag contributing to the binding of the proteins
to the surface, additional information from SPR revealed that the
absolute amount of immobilized proteins was reduced by a third when
placing the binding motifs on opposite sides of the barrel. With binding
motifs placed on the same side of the barrel a more upright, end-on
orientation is adopted, while binding motifs placed at opposite sides
of the barrel give a preference for a flat, side-on orientation. Measured
binding affinities and binding modes calculated in the molecular simulations
have shown that not all histidine residue pairs are involved in complexation,
due to a combination of repulsive interactions between the protein
and the solvated surface interactions and sterical hindrance at the
His6-(Ni2+-NTA)3 sites. Time-resolved
fluorescence anisotropy techniques verified that the orientation and
thus coverage cause distinct, different fluorescent lifetime characteristics.
Potential of mean force calculations coupled with calculated protein–surface
adsorption energies suggest that the experimentally measured end-on
orientation is a supra-protein effect driven by maximization
of horizontal protein–protein interactions as the “footprint”
of each individual protein is reduced.

The scientific challenge
of this work was to provide evidence that
protein immobilization occurs with envisioned control over orientation,
surface coverages, affinities, and function. Firm structural evidence
of uniformly oriented proteins is currently lacking, and firm quantification
of binding characteristics by experiment and theory is lacking in
most if not all protein immobilization studies. With this contribution
we show evidence and discussion that tunable control over the orientation
and binding strength of protein immobilization can be achieved by
well-considered placement of multivalent binding motif(s) on the protein.
We realize that in light of further development and understanding
of protein immobilization and tag placement on the proteins it would
be interesting to optimize the His6-tag NTA interaction
by finding ways to fully involve each and every residue of all His6-tags in the formation of the maximum number of six coordination
bonds with surface-bound NTA. We show by experiment and theory that
this is not the case and that the solution to this challenge should
not be sought in whether N- and C-termini or loops are chosen for
tagging but rather in the spacing of the entire hexahistidine tag
with respect to the protein and, equally important, the internal spacing
of two histidine residues with respect to two other histidines to
avoid steric crowding effects between the six histidine residues with
the surface-bound NTA moieties.

The strict correlation between
the intact tertiary structure (i.e., folding) and the unchanged fluorescence
characteristics of fluorescent proteins makes them excellent model
systems to probe the preservation of structural integrity of the protein
upon immobilization. Any impairment of the structural integrity of
the fluorescent protein would immediately lead to drastic changes
in fluorescence characteristics, such as its intensity and lifetime,
which can be observed by state-of-the-art fluorescence microscopy.
A comparison of the relevant time traces showed no significant changes
in fluorescence lifetimes between samples with proteins adsorbed side-on
and end-on; only the anisotropy decay changed significantly. The realization
of design of orientation of immobilized proteins not only is important
for the fluorescent protein field itself but would be applicable to
a range of much broader fields, such as the fundamental study of the
protein dynamics and chemistry (folding, maturation, etc.) while being attached to an immobile surface. These developments
are also highly relevant to fields to improve the performance of proteins
when using His6-tag (or other tags) technology in diagnostic
assays, purification protocols, and immobilization studies. Broad
application of the results is foreseen when employing weak to moderate
supramolecular interactions to immobilize proteins in applications
where (reversible) control over orientation, binding strength, surface
coverage, and function is required to optimize the performance of
the assay, material, or device.

Methods
Materials
Maleimide caproic acid hexa(histidine) (mic-His6) was
purchased from JPT Peptide Technologies, Germany. All
solvents were of p.a. quality and purchased from
Biosolve (Valkenswaard, The Netherlands). All other starting compounds
were purchased from Acros (Geel, Belgium) or Sigma-Aldrich (Zwijndrecht,
The Netherlands). All compounds were used as received unless stated
otherwise. Deuterated solvents used for NMR spectroscopy were purchased
from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, and the water used was always
of Milli-Q quality (Millipore, R = 18.2 MΩ·cm).

Preparation of NHis6-wtTagRFP
The following primers were used for PCR amplification of wtTagRFP using pTagRFP-C (Evrogen JSC) as DNA template: 5′-cgcggatccaatgagcgagctgattaaggagaacatgca-3′
containing a unique BamH I restriction site (underlined)
and 5′-cgcgaattccttgtgccccagtttgctag-3′
containing a unique EcoR I restriction site (underlined).
The PCR product was purified and digested with BamH I and EcoR I restriction enzymes (NEB) and ligated
into pRSETB plasmid (Invitrogen), digested with the same restriction
enzymes. pRSETB contains an N-terminal hexahistidine tag (NHis6-tag) for nickel-affinity purification and an enterokinase
recognition site (DDDDK) to allow for the subsequent cleavage of the
His6-tag. The resulting plasmid, pRSETB-wtTagRFP,
was first transformed into E. coli (XL10 gold,
Stratagene) using standard procedures in the presence of ampicillin
(100 mg/L) for amplification and further mutagenesis. pRSETB-wtTagRFP plasmid was also transformed into E. coli BL21 pLysS using standard procedures in the presence of ampicillin
(100 mg/L) and chloramphenicol (34 mg/L) for protein expression. Single-colony
transformants were selected, and precultures were grown overnight
at 37 °C. These precultures were each used to inoculate 2 L of
LB medium containing ampicillin (100 mg/L) and chloramphenicol (34
mg/L) at 37 °C with shaking until an OD600 = 0.6 was
reached. The cultures were cooled to 16 °C before protein expression
was induced with isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG) to a final concentration of 1 mM and incubated overnight at
16 °C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4000g at 4 °C for 20 min. The resulting cell pellets were
resuspended for 20 min in BugBuster reagent with benzonase nuclease
(Novagen) according to the supplier’s instructions. The lysate
was cleared by centrifugation at 16000g for 30 min
at 4 °C. Ni2+:NTA agarose beads (QIAGEN) were added
to the protein-containing supernatant at a 1:10 v/v ratio, respectively,
and incubated at 4 °C for at least an hour with slow but continuous
mixing. The agarose beads were filtered and washed with wash buffer
(20 mM Tris buffer, 300 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, pH 8.0), and the
bound protein fraction was eluted with elution buffer (20 mM Tris
buffer, 300 mM NaCl, 1 M imidazole, pH 8.0). The purified NHis6-wtTagRFP fractions (∼30 μM)
were subsequently rebuffered using PD10 columns (GE Healthcare) into
0.1× PBS (0.8 mM phosphate buffer, 14.4 mM NaCl, 0.27 mM KCl,
pH 7.4), aliquoted, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at
−80 °C. The protein was characterized using SDS- and native
PAGE (Figure S1), UV–vis, steady-state
and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy, and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry
(see below).

Preparation of NHis6-CHis6-TagRFP
For the insertion of
a second, C-terminal
His6-tag (CHis6-tag), the following
procedure was used regardless of the mutant. The TagRFP gene was amplified
using 5′-cgcggatccaatgagcgagctgattaaggagaacatgca-3′
(BamH I restriction site is underlined) and 5′-gcggaattcttagtggtggtggtggtggtgcttgtgccccagtttgcta-3′
(EcoR I restriction site is underlined, encoding
a His6-tag) as forward and reverse primers, respectively,
and pRSETB-TagRFP as DNA template. After PCR purification, the gene
product and pRSETB-TagRFP were digested sequentially, first with EcoR I, then BamH I, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. DNA ligations were performed using T4-ligase (NEB) at
16 °C overnight, and the resulting pRSETB-TagRFP-His6 plasmid was transformed into E. coli (XL10
gold, Stratagene) competent cells according to standard procedures
in the presence of ampicillin (100 mg/L) for amplification and further
mutagenesis. pRSETB-wtTagRFP-His6 plasmid was
also transformed into E. coli BL21 pLysS in
the presence of ampicillin (100 mg/L) and chloramphenicol (34 mg/L).
Single-colony transformants were selected, and precultures were grown
overnight at 37 °C. These precultures were each used to inoculate
2 L cultures of E. coli BL21 pLysS cells, which
were grown at 37 °C to OD600 = 0.6 and cooled to 16
°C, and protein expression was induced with IPTG to a final concentration
of 1 mM. The culture was incubated overnight at 16 °C. The cells
were harvested by centrifugation (4000g, 20 min)
and lysed using BugBuster (as described above). Protein purification
and characterization were carried out as described above.

Preparation
of NHis6-S128CTagRFP, NHis6-CHis6-S128CTagRFP, NHis6-TagRFP (1H), and NHis6-CHis6-TagRFP (2H)
By site-directed mutagenesis (QuikChange Multi
kit, Stratagene Technologies), selected mutations were introduced
into pRSETB-wtTagRFP (for both singly- and doubly-His6-tagged TagRFP) using the following primers: S128C forward
5′-ggtgaacttcccatgcaacggccctgtga-3′; reverse
5′-tcacagggccgttgcatgggaagttcacc-3′; C222S
forward 5′-ggctgtggccagatactccgacctccc-3′;
reverse 5′-gggaggtcggagtatctggccacagcc-3′;
C114S forward 5′-gcctccaggacggctccctcatctacaac-3′;
reverse 5′-gttgtagatgagggagccgtcctggaggc-3′.

Mutations S128C, C222S, and C114S yielded mutants “S128CTagRFP” containing a single accessible cysteine
residue in a loop at the top of the β-barrel. Mutations C222S
and C114S yielded mutants “TagRFP” with no accessible
cysteine residues left. All mutant variants were expressed and purified
under the same conditions as the wild-type, to yield NHis6-S128CTagRFP, NHis6-CHis6-S128CTagRFP, NHis6-TagRFP (1H), and NHis6-CHis6-TagRFP (2H). Characterization
by SDS- and native PAGE (Figure S1), UV–vis,
steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy, and MALDI-ToF
mass spectrometry (see below) was carried out and confirmed the successful
expression and purification of the respective proteins. The mutants
showed no discernible differences regarding their photophysical properties
from the wild-type variants NHis6-wtTagRFP and NHis6-CHis6-wtTagRFP, thus indicating that their overall structure
and fluorescence properties upon site-directed mutagenesis are retained.

Preparation of wtTagRFP without His6-Tags
(0H)
Removal of the His6-tag from
the NHis6-wtTagRFP was accomplished
by enterokinase digestion using enterokinase (Invitrogen) and its
corresponding enterokinase removal kit (EKaway, Invitrogen) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. In short, enterokinase
digestion of NHis6-wtTagRFP was carried
out overnight at 37 °C using protein stock solution with varying
amounts of enzyme, where undigested protein served as negative control.
Cleavage was nearly complete using 4 units of enterokinase per 20
μg of NHis6-wtTagRFP. After
digestion, enterokinase was removed by letting it bind to the removal
kit’s enterokinase-binding resin, which was, in turn, removed
by centrifugation (5000g, 2 min). Subsequently, residual,
undigested protein was removed using nitrilotriacetatenickel (Ni2+:NTA)-affinity chromatography, resulting in a flow-through
fraction of pure, His6-tag-free wtTagRFP (0H). Characterization by SDS-/native PAGE and Western blotting
(Figure S1), UV–vis, and steady-state
and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy (see below) was carried
out and confirmed the successful expression and purification of 0H.

Preparation of NHis6-CHis6-S128CHis6-TagRFP
(2 + 1H) and NHis6-S128CHis6-TagRFP (1 + 1H) Conjugation
NHis6-S128CTagRFP and NHis6-CHis6S128CTagRFP,
which both possess
a single accessible cysteine residue at position 128, were conjugated
with a thiol-reactive maleimide-functionalized oligopeptide, maleimide
caproic acid hexa(histidine) (mic-His6), to yield NHis6-S128CHis6-TagRFP (1 + 1H) and NHis6-CHis6-S128CHis6-TagRFP (2 + 1H), respectively. As negative and control NHis6-TagRFP and NHis6- CHis6-TagRFP were used, respectively. Conjugations were carried out by
first reducing the cysteine residues using 10 mM phospate buffer (PB)
containing 0.1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (pH 8.0) for 30 min and removing
the DTT again (Zeba Spin, Thermo Scientific) and then by incubating
a 10:1 mixture of maleimide/protein (∼20 μM) in 10 mM
PB (pH 8.0) in the dark for 24 h at room temperature (RT). The reactions
were subsequently quenched by adding a 10-fold molar excess (with
respect to the maleimide) of DTT for 30 min at RT, after which the
samples were rebuffered (Zeba Spin, Thermo Scientific) into 0.1×
PBS at least three times to remove any residual peptide and DTT. Characterization
was performed as described above, and conjugation yields were typically
in the range 30–50% (see below).

Purification of the
His6-tagged conjugates was conducted using an Äkta
FPLC system and a 1 mL HisTrap HP column (GE Healthcare) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Conjugates containing two
and three His6-tags could be separated from the native
proteins containing one and two His6-tags, respectively,
and were isolated and characterized using SDS- and native PAGE (Figure S1) as well as MALDI-ToF MS (see below).
The overall purity was found to be at least >80% after purification
and rebuffering into 0.1× PBS using PD10 spin columns (GE Healthcare).

Surface Plasmon Resonance
SPR measurements were performed
using instruments in Kretschmann configuration: either a Resonant
Technologies GmbH (Germany) RT2005 SPR setup or an IBIS Technologies
imaging SPR (iSPR) system (see below). In both cases glass substrates
covered with a 50 nm gold layer were used. On the gold, Ni2+:NTA was self-assembled into a monolayer via Au–sulfide
interactions (see below). In the case of the Resonant Technologies
setup, these substrates were attached to a 70 μL volume microfluidic
cell mounted on a prism, which in turn was mounted on a double goniometer
head, with which the angle of incidence of the exciting laser on the
prism (Schott, LaSFN9) could be controlled. Light from a 2 mW HeNe
laser of 633 nm wavelength passed through the prism and onto the substrate.
The intensity of the reflected light from the substrate was measured
by a large-area photodiode. In both setups the gold-on-glass substrate
was optically matched to the prism using index matching oil (Cargille;
series B; nD25 = 1.700 ±
0.002). Imaging SPR measurements on the iSPR (IBIS Technologies),
also set up in Kretschmann configuration, using a laser of 800 nm
wavelength, were performed on the above type of substrates, and various
regions of interest were assigned, for each of which SPR sensograms
were determined, individually. Here too, the resonance angle was determined
by continuously scanning through the surface plasmon resonance dip
and finding the minimum, during binding experiments in a flow-cell.
PBS with 0.01% Tween-20 was used as a running buffer in all experiments.
All SPR experiments were performed at a continuous flow rate of 20
μL/min.

Steady-State and Time-Dependent Spectroscopy
Absorption
spectra of all fluorescent proteins, their mutants, and conjugates
were recorded using a Perkin Elmer LAMBDA850 UV/vis spectrophotometer.
Fluorescence spectra and lifetime data of all fluorescent proteins,
their mutants, and conjugates were recorded using a JobinYvon-Horiba
Fluoromax4 fluorimeter including a TCSPC system for time-dependent
measurements with pulsed LEDs for excitation at 561 nm. Results are
summarized in Table S1.

Fluorescence
Microscopy
Steady-state fluorescence microscopy
images were recorded using an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope equipped
with a U-RFL-T mercury burner lamp as light source and a digital Olympus
DR70 color camera for image acquisition. Olympus filter cubes with
appropriate band-pass or long-pass filters and dichroic mirrors (Semrock)
were used. Fluorescence micrographs were acquired using a 20×
Fluorplan objective from Olympus and exposure times of 2 s.

Fluorescence
Anisotropy Measurements
Fluorescence anisotropy
measurements were carried out on a custom-made microscope based on
an Olympus IX71 body. Light from a Fianium SC 400-2-PP super continuum
laser was passed through an acousto-optical tunable filter set to
515 nm and an additional band-pass filter (FF01-520/15, Semrock) into
the microscope. The light was passed through a linear polarization
filter (LPVISA100, Thorlabs) and focused on the sample with an Olympus
UplanSApo 60× 1.2 NA water immersion objective. The generated
fluorescence was filtered using a long-pass filter (LLP01-532R, Semrock)
and a polarizer (LPVISB, Thorlabs). Detection was performed by an
avalanche photodiode (PDM, Micro Photon Devices) that is connected
to a Becker & Hickl SPC-830 counting card operating in time-tagged
mode. For each measurement (all at equal exposure times) two sequential
images of the same region were taken, one with the polarization parallel
to the polarized excitation and one perpendicular; the results were
checked to be independent of the order of acquisition. The anisotropy
lifetime was obtained using a commercial software package (FluoFit
v4.5, PicoQuant) by a fit of the observed time-dependent anisotropy
using a single-exponential decay. Intensities were the sum of the
peaks of the parallel and perpendicular time traces.

Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectrometry of small molecules
and peptides was performed using a Waters micromass LCT ESI mass spectrometer.
Mass spectrometry on all protein variants and conjugates was carried
out using a MALDI ToF mass spectrometer (Voyager-DE-RP, Applied Biosystems)
and sinapinic acid as matrix. Protein samples were desalted prior
to spotting on the sample plate, and all measurements were carried
out on several spots per sample with varying protein concentrations.
For a summary of the mass spectrometry data of protein variants see Table S1.

Infrared Reflection Absorption
Spectroscopy Measurements
Infrared spectra were recorded
on monolayers of proteins immobilized
on glass substrates covered with a thin layer of gold, which in turn
was modified with a self-assembled thiol-monolayer terminated with
Ni2+:NTA (see below), using a Thermo Fisher PM-IRRAS system
under an angle of incidence of 81°. Protein immobilization was
carried out according to the protocol below.

X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
XPS were recorded
using a Physical Electronics Quantera SXM (scanning XPS microprobe)
spectroscope using the Al Kα line as monochromatic X-ray source
at 1486.6 eV. For all samples one survey spectrum to identify regions
for element analysis and 3 element scans per analyzed element were
recorded in order to determine the relative abundance of carbon, sulfur,
and, where present, nitrogen (Table S3).
Spectra were recorded on 4 samples on 1 in. glass wafers covered with
a 50 nm thick gold layer functionalized with monolayers (see below)
of (1) 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA); (2) N-hydroxysuccinimide
(NHS)-activated MUA; (3) Nα,Nα-bis(carboxymethyl)-l-lysine
(NTA-NH2)-functionalized MUA; and (4) nickel(II) nitrilotriacetatenickel
(Ni2+:NTA)-functionalized MUA.

Preparation of Ni2+:NTA Monolayers on Gold-Coated
Substrates
SPR sensors (1 in., Ssense) were cleaned in a
solution of H2SO4/H2O2, 3:1 (which should be handled with care, as it reacts violently
with organic material), for 30 s, rinsed with water, dried
in a flow of N2, and subsequently immersed in a solution
of 2 mM MUA in 1:1 EtOH/water and left at least 16 h under ambient
conditions to react. To remove any excess MUA, the samples were rinsed
thoroughly with EtOH and dried in a flow of N2. The resulting
carboxylic acid-terminated monolayers were activated using a freshly
prepared solution of 300 mM NHS and 40 mM N-(dimethyl
aminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide (EDC) in
40 mM PB, pH 8.0, for at least 30 min under ambient conditions. After
the reaction, the samples were rinsed with water and dried in a flow
of N2, and the activated ester-terminated monolayers were
immediately reacted with a 1 mM solution of Nα,Nα-bis(carboxymethyl)-l-lysine hydrate in 40 mM PB, pH 8.0, for 2 h under ambient
conditions. Samples were then washed with water, incubated for 30
min in a 5 g/L aqueous solution of NiCl2·6H2O, washed with water, and dried in a flow of N2; the samples
could be stored under dry N2 for a maximum of 4 weeks before
use.

Preparation of Bifunctional NTA/PEG-Line-Patterned Glass Substrates
Using Nanoimprint Lithography
Four-inch Borofloat (Schott,
Borofloat 33) glass wafers were immersed in a solution of H2SO4/H2O2, 3:1 (which should
be handled with care, as it reacts violently with organic material), for 10 min, rinsed with water, dried in a flow of N2, and subsequently spin-coated (Speedline, p6700) with a 6% w/v 350
kDa poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) solution in toluene for 30 s
at 3000 rpm. To remove residual solvent, the wafer was baked at 120
°C for 10 min. NIL was carried out using a Peltier temperature-controlled
(Julabo FP 50) HP Specac NIL setup at 200 °C set to 1 ton for
10 min. As imprint master a 4 in. 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane
(AB111155, ABCR)-coated Si-wafer with 24 1 cm2 patterns
of 10 to 25 μm wide ridges separated by 5 μm wide and
∼0.5 μm deep trenches was used. In detail, the patterned
imprint master was brought into contact with the spin-coated PMMA
layer on the Borofloat wafer, cushioned with Kunze heat-conducting
cushioning foil (KU-TXE100) on one side and 4 layers of aluminum foil
on the other side, and sealed with aluminum foil. This stack was heated
to 200 °C, without applying pressure; then the pressure was carefully
increased to the equivalent of 1 ton, and these conditions were kept
constant for 10 min. Subsequently, the heating was switched off, while
keeping the pressure constant. Upon reaching 100 °C, the pressure
was left to decrease simultaneously with the temperature. Upon reaching
80 °C and complete pressure relief, the stack was removed from
the NIL setup and disassembled and residual layer removal was carried
out using an SPI Supplies Plasmaprep II oxygen-plasma cleaner. The
progress of residual layer removal was monitored for each of the 1
cm2 patterns individually using an Olympus BH2 light microscope
in transmission mode with a halogen lamp as light source. Upon completion
of removing the residual layer (with only 5 μm wide ridges of
PMMA remaining), the substrates were silanized by overnight chemical
vapor deposition of N-[3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl]ethylenediamine in vacuo. To remove any excess silane, the samples were
rinsed thoroughly with ethanol. The resulting amine-terminated line
patterns were reacted with phenyl diisothiocyanate (ITC). To this
end, the samples were immersed in a 0.04 M solution of ITC in ethanol
for 2 h at 50 °C under argon. After the reaction, the samples
were rinsed with ethanol and dried in a flow of N2. The
ITC-terminated line patterns were then functionalized with Nα,Nα-bis(carboxymethyl)-l-lysine (NTA-NH2). To this
end, the samples were incubated in a 1 mM solution of NTA-NH2 in water at 50 °C for 2 h under argon. All remaining PMMA was
then stripped from the Borofloat substrates by 30 min sonication in
1 L of acetone, rinsing with acetone, and drying with N2. Subsequently, the unfunctionalized (5 μm wide) lines were
functionalized with a solution of 100 μL of [methoxy(polyethyleneoxy)propyl]trimethoxysilane
(PEG)-silane (AB111226, ABCR) in 60 mL of dry toluene by leaving the
samples to react overnight at room temperature under argon. After
washing the samples with toluene they were dried under a flow of N2. The resulting NTA/PEG line patterns could be stored under
N2 for a maximum of 4 weeks prior to use.

Protein Immobilization
on (Patterned) Substrates
For
protein immobilization NTA-terminated (patterned) layers were incubated,
if necessary, with a 1 mM NiCl2·6H2O solution
in water for 30 min, and the substrates were rinsed briefly with water.
For the subsequent immobilization of proteins, substrates were incubated
with the appropriate protein solution (of 1 μM concentration,
unless stated otherwise) for 1 h (unless stated otherwise) in a humidity
chamber. Protein solutions were then removed with a pipet and retained
for further use, and samples washed on an orbital shaker (80 rpm)
in the appropriate buffers overnight (unless stated otherwise). Samples
were then rinsed with the appropriate buffer and subsequently with
water and imaged using an Olympus IX70 inverted fluorescence microscope;
see below.

Thermodynamic Multivalency Model for Fitting
SPR Titration Data
We adapted a model previously reported
in the literature41,63,67 in order to predict and determine
the thermodynamic stability parameters of the protein–surface
complexes to fit the SPR data obtained experimentally. We here consider
each His6-tag to behave as a single motif, binding to three
surface-bound Ni2+:NTA (NiNTA in formulas) units simultaneously,
with an effective concentration value (Ceff) controlling the binding of consecutive His6-tags once
the first one is bound. The model is summarized in the Supporting Information (eqs S1–S5) and
solved using a spreadsheet approach.84

Molecular Dynamics
Molecular Langevin dynamics were
performed using the NAMD program85 together
with the CHARMM force field.86 Short-range
nonbonded interactions were computed up to 1.2 nm distance. Ewald
summation was used to calculate the electrostatic interactions, and
a 2 fs time step was used for dynamics by constraining covalent bonds
to hydrogen. The coordinates for TagRFP were taken from the PDB (ID: 3M22). The VMD87 mutate residue plugin was used to change residues
Cys114, Cys222, and Ser128 to serine and cysteine, respectively. In
order to run Molecular Dynamics simulations on the TagRFP-His6-Ni2+:NTA interface, it was necessary to parametrize
the chromophore found in the center of the protein, the maleimide
linker used to attach the third His tag to the protein, and the Ni2+:NTA molecule used in the SAM. Parametrization was carried
out using the Paramchem88 Web tool, and
the partial charges were mapped onto the CHARMM force field.89

A Au(111) slab of surface area 2800 Å2 was cut from bulk gold metal, and 384 Ni2+:NTA
molecules were placed on one face. The SAM model was encased in a
large water box with dimensions 20 × 20 × 10 nm, and periodic
boundary conditions were applied. The SAM (31 872 atoms) was
first relaxed using 6000 steps of steepest descent minimization and
then allowed to equilibrate to a stable room-temperature structure
over 1 ns of molecular dynamics and subjected to a further 7 ns of
dynamics with a constant-density monolayer forming within 5 ns. The
sulfur atoms were then weakly constrained at these equilibrated surface-bound
positions to simulate the gold–sulfur bond that is formed in
the experiments. A similar protocol was used to model the mixed SAM,
with clusters of 5–10 Ni2+:NTA molecules surrounded
by nonfunctionalized acid-terminated chains. Simulation input files
and calculated SAM structures are available on request from D.T. To
study the protein–SAM interactions, the TagRFP protein was
placed near the SAM in two different orientations (end-on and side-on;
see Chart 1) with a
varying number of bound histidine residues, and the Avogadro program90 was used to position the histidine residues
near the Ni2+ ions in the SAM in positions where a complex
might form. The system was equilibrated with gradually loosening positional
constraints on the histidine side chains for 8 ns. Free dynamics simulations
were then run on the system for 20 ns, sampling every 100 ps. Image
generation and Tcl script-based trajectory analysis were performed
using the VMD program.87

For the
steered MD simulations, two configurations were taken from
the equilibrium MD simulations. They were chosen to have the same
number of adsorbed histidine residues in order to be able to compare
like with like as much as possible. For both configurations, SMD simulations
were performed using GROMACS 5.1.191 and
the CHARMM force field to pull the protein a distance of 110 Å
over a time of 7 ns from the SAM. Fifty-eight configurations were
then taken from these trajectories and subjected to 10 ns of umbrella
sampling simulations. The PMF profile was calculated over the sampled
windows using the gmx_wham command in GROMACS.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b03717.Schemes S1, S2;
Tables S1–S7; Figures S1–S15;
and eqs S1–S5 (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn7b03717_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
D.W. and
P.J. conceived the project. D.W. engineered and together with E.T.
produced the protein mutants. D.W., V.S., and P.J. analyzed the protein
constructs. D.W. and J.C.-D. performed (patterned) protein immobilization
studies. D.W., J.C.-D., and E.T. performed SPR binding studies. J.C.-D.
applied the multivalent model, which was supervised by J.H. J.P. designed
and together with D.W. performed fluorescence lifetime measurements,
and J.P, D.W., and C.B. analyzed the data. C.B. and V.S. supervised
polarization anisotropy setups. IRRAS measurements were done by D.W.
and J.C.-D. S.O’M., P.-A.C., and D.T. performed and analyzed
computer simulations, which was supervised by D.T. D.W., J.C.-D.,
J.P., S.O’M., P.-A.C., D.T., J.H., V.S., and P.J. were involved
in the analysis of the data. D.W. and J.C.-D. prepared the manuscript.
P.J. wrote the manuscript. P.J. supervised the entire project. All
authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

Author Contributions
# D. Wasserberg and J. Cabanas-Danés contributed
equally.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
D.W. thanks
the German Academic Exchange Service for financial
support under postdoctoral research grant D/08/46093. Work by J.C.-D.,
E.T., and P.J. was funded by Project P2.02 OAcontrol of the research
program of the BioMedical Materials Institute, cofunded by the Dutch
Ministry of Economic Affairs. J.P. and V.S. acknowledge support from
Stichting Technische Wetenschappen (STW) under the nanoscopy program
(project no. 12149). The work by D.W. and P.J. was cofunded by Starting
ERC Grant (259183 Sumoman). D.T. acknowledges financial support from
the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013)
under grant number 604530-2 (CellulosomePlus) and thanks Science Foundation
Ireland (SFI) for financial support under Grant Number 15/CDA/3491
and for provision of computing resources at the SFI/Higher Education
Authority Irish Centre for High-End Computing (ICHEC). The authors
thank Dr. M. Koay from the University of Twente for discussions and
comments.
==== Refs
References
Dufva M. ; Christensen C. B. V. 
Diagnostic
and Analytical Applications of Protein Microarrays . Expert Rev. Proteomics 
2005 , 2 , 41 –48 10.1586/14789450.2.1.41 .15966851 
Terstappen G. C. ; Schluepen C. ; Raggiaschi R. ; Gaviraghi G. 
Target Deconvolution
Strategies in Drug Discovery . Nat. Rev. Drug
Discovery 
2007 , 6 , 891 –903 10.1038/nrd2410 .17917669 
Weinrich D. ; Jonkheijm P. ; Niemeyer C. M. ; Waldmann H. 
Applications of Protein
Biochips in Biomedical and Biotechnological Research . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 7744 –7751 10.1002/anie.200901480 .
Manoli K. ; Magliulo M. ; Mulla M. Y. ; Singh M. ; Sabbatini L. ; Palazzo G. ; Torsi L. 
Printable Bioelectronics to Investigate
Functional Biological Interfaces . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 12562 –12576 10.1002/anie.201502615 .
Mitchell A. C. ; Briquez P. S. ; Hubbell J. A. ; Cochran J. R. 
Engineering Growth
Factors for Regenerative Medicine Applications . Acta Biomater. 
2016 , 30 , 1 –12 10.1016/j.actbio.2015.11.007 .26555377 
Wei Q. ; Becherer T. ; Angioletti-Uberti S. ; Dzubiella J. ; Wischke C. ; Neffe A. T. ; Lendlein A. ; Ballauff M. ; Haag R. 
Protein Interactions with Polymer Coatings and Biomaterials . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2014 , 53 , 8004 –8031 10.1002/anie.201400546 .
Tong Z. ; Solanki A. ; Hamilos A. ; Levy O. ; Wen K. ; Yin X. ; Karp J. M. 
Application of Biomaterials to Advance Induced Pluripotent
Stem Cell Research and Therapy . EMBO J. 
2015 , 34 , 987 –1008 10.15252/embj.201490756 .25766254 
Gupta A. ; Patel V. K. ; Kant R. ; Bhattacharya S. 
Surface Modification
Strategies for Fabrication of Nano-biodevices: A Critical Review . RAA 
2016 , 4 , 166 –191 10.7569/RAA.2016.097307 .
Mendes P. M. 
Stimuli-Responsive
Surfaces for Bio-Applications . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2008 , 37 , 2512 –2529 10.1039/b714635n .18949123 
Wong L. S. ; Khan F. ; Micklefield J. 
Selective
Covalent Protein Immobilization:
Strategies and Applications . Chem. Rev. 
2009 , 109 , 4025 –4053 10.1021/cr8004668 .19572643 
Rusmini F. ; Zhong Z. ; Feijen J. 
Protein Immobilization
Strategies
for Protein Biochips . Biomacromolecules 
2007 , 8 , 1775 –1789 10.1021/bm061197b .17444679 
Jonkheijm P. ; Weinrich D. ; Schroeder H. ; Niemeyer C. M. ; Waldmann H. 
Chemical Strategies
for Generating Protein Biochips . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 9618 –9647 10.1002/anie.200801711 .
Hackenberger C. P. R. ; Schwarzer D. 
Chemoselective Ligation and Modification Strategies
for Peptides and Proteins . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 10030 –10074 10.1002/anie.200801313 .
Chen Y.-X. ; Triola G. ; Waldmann H. 
Bioorthogonal Chemistry for Site-Specific
Labeling and Surface Immobilization of Proteins . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2011 , 44 , 762 –773 10.1021/ar200046h .21648407 
Reyna K. V. L ; Qing L. 
Bioorthogonal Chemistry: Recent Progress and Future Directions . Chem. Commun. 
2010 , 46 46 1589 –1600 10.1039/b925931g .
Sletten E. M. ; Bertozzi C. R. 
Bioorthogonal Chemistry:
Fishing for Selectivity in
a Sea of Functionality . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 2 –27 10.1002/anie.200900942 .
Duckworth B. P. ; Xu J. ; Taton T. A. ; Guo A. ; Distefano M. D. 
Site-Specific,
Covalent Attachment of Proteins to a Solid Surface . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2006 , 17 , 967 –974 10.1021/bc060125e .
Govindaraju T. ; Jonkheijm P. ; Gogolin L. ; Schroeder H. ; Becker C. F. W. ; Niemeyer C. M. ; Waldmann H. 
Surface Immobilization
of Biomolecules by Click Sulfonamide Reaction . Chem. Commun. 
2008 , 32 , 3723 –3725 10.1039/b806764c .
Christman K. L. ; Broyer R. M. ; Tolstyka Z. P. ; Maynard H. D. 
Site-Specific Protein
Immobilization Through N-Terminal Oxime Linkages . J. Mater. Chem. 
2007 , 17 , 2021 –2027 10.1039/b618002g .
Hodneland C. D. ; Lee Y.-S. ; Min D.-H. ; Mrksich M. 
Selective Immobilization
of Proteins to Self-Assembled Monolayers Presenting Active Site-Directed
Capture Ligands . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.
A. 
2002 , 99 , 5048 –5052 10.1073/pnas.072685299 .11959956 
Wasserberg D. ; Nicosia C. ; Tromp E. E. ; Subramaniam V. ; Huskens J. ; Jonkheijm P. 
Oriented Protein Immobilization Using
Covalent and Non-Covalent Chemistry on a Thiol-Reactive Self-Reporting
Surface . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 3104 –3111 10.1021/ja3102133 .23379762 
Becker C. F. W. ; Wacker R. ; Bouschen W. ; Seidel R. ; Kolaric B. ; Lang P. ; Schroeder H. ; Mueller O. ; Niemeyer C. M. ; Spengler B. ; Goody R. S. ; Engelhard M. 
Direct Readout
of Protein-Protein Interactions by Mass Spectrometry from Protein-DNA
Microarrays . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2005 , 44 , 7635 –7639 10.1002/anie.200502908 .
Kwon Y. ; Coleman M. A. ; Camarero J. A. 
Selective
Immobilization of Proteins
onto Solid Supports Through Split-Intein-Mediated Protein Trans-Splicing . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2006 , 45 , 1726 –1729 10.1002/anie.200503475 .
Hwang I. ; Baek K. ; Jung M. ; Kim Y. ; Park K. M. ; Lee D.-W. ; Selvapalam N. ; Kim K. 
Noncovalent Immobilization
of Proteins on a Solid Surface by Cucurbit[7]uril-Ferrocenemethylammonium
Pair, a Potential Replacement of Biotin-Avidin Pair . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 4170 –4171 10.1021/ja071130b .17373802 
Grunwald C. ; Schulze K. ; Reichel A. ; Weiss V. U. ; Blaas D. ; Piehler J. ; Wiesmuller K.-H. ; Tampé R. 
In
Situ Assembly of Macromolecular Complexes Triggered by Light . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2010 , 107 , 6146 –6151 10.1073/pnas.0912617107 .20200313 
Wan P. ; Wang Y. ; Jiang Y. ; Xu H. ; Zhang X. 
Fabrication
of Reactivated Biointerface for Dual-Controlled Reversible Immobilization
of Cytochrome c . Adv. Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 4362 –4365 10.1002/adma.200901237 .26042945 
Yang L. ; Gómez-Casado A. ; Young J. F. ; Nguyen H. D. ; Cabanas-Danés J. ; Huskens J. ; Brunsveld L. ; Jonkheijm P. 
Reversible
and Oriented Immobilization of Ferrocene-Modified Proteins . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 19199 –19206 10.1021/ja308450n .23126430 
Gutiérrez
Sánchez C. ; Su Q. ; Schönherr H. ; Grininger M. ; Nöll G. 
Multi-Ligand-Binding Flavoprotein
Dodecin as a Key Element for Reversible Surface Modification in Nano-Biotechnology . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 3491 –3500 10.1021/nn506993s .25738566 
Muller W. ; Ringsdorf H. ; Rump E. ; Wildburg G. ; Zhang X. ; Angermaier L. ; Knoll W. ; Liley M. ; Spinke J. 
Attempts to
Mimic Docking Processes of the Immune System: Recognition-Induced
Formation of Protein Multilayers . Science 
1993 , 262 , 1706 –1708 10.1126/science.8259513 .8259513 
Mrksich M. ; Grunwell J. R. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Biospecific
Adsorption of Carbonic
Anhydrase to Self-Assembled Monolayers of Alkanethiolates That Present
Benzenesulfonamide Groups on Gold . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
1995 , 117 , 12009 –12010 10.1021/ja00153a029 .
González-Campo A. ; Eker B. ; Gardeniers H. J. G. E. ; Huskens J. ; Jonkheijm P. 
A Supramolecular
Approach to Enzyme Immobilization in Micro-Channels . Small 
2012 , 8 , 3531 –3537 10.1002/smll.201200565 .22887837 
Wood L. L. ; Cheng S. S. ; Edmiston P. L. ; Saavedra S. S. 
Molecular Orientation
Distributions in Protein Films 2. Site-Directed Immobilization of
Yeast Cytochrome c on Thiol-Capped, Self-Assembled Monolayers . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1997 , 119 , 571 –576 10.1021/ja9623673 .
Edminston P. L. ; Saavedra S. S. 
Molecular Orientation Distributions in Protein Films.
4. A Multilayer Composed of Yeast Cytochrome c Bound through an Intermediate
Streptavidin Layer to a Planar Supported Phospholipid Bilayer . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1998 , 120 , 1665 –1671 10.1021/ja972634k .
Sanavio B. ; Scaini D. ; Grunwald C. ; Legname G. ; Scoles G. ; Casalis L. 
Oriented Immobilization of Prion Protein Demonstrated via Precise Interfacial Nanostructure Measurements . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 6607 –6616 10.1021/nn101872w .20958083 
Escalante M. ; Zhao Y. ; Ludden M. J. W. ; Vermeij R. ; Olsen J. D. ; Berenschot E. ; Hunter C. N. ; Huskens J. ; Subramaniam V. ; Otto C. 
Nanometer Arrays of Functional Light Harvesting Antenna Complexes
by Nanoimprint Lithography and Host–Guest Interactions . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 8892 –8893 10.1021/ja802843m .18570413 
Escalante M. ; Lenferink A. ; Zhao Y. ; Tas N. ; Huskens J. ; Hunter C. N. ; Subramaniam V. ; Otto C. 
Long-Range Energy Propagation
in Nanometer Arrays of Light Harvesting Antenna Complexes . Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 1450 –1457 10.1021/nl1003569 .20232894 
Dorn I. T. ; Eschrich R. ; Seemueller E. ; Guckenberger R. ; Tampé R. 
High-Resolution AFM-Imaging and Mechanistic Analysis
of the 20S Proteasome . J. Mol. Biol. 
1999 , 288 , 1027 –1036 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2714 .10329196 
Hutschenreiter S. ; Tinazli A. ; Model K. ; Tampé R. 
Two-Substrate
Association with the 20S Proteasome at Single-Molecule Level . EMBO J. 
2004 , 23 , 2488 –2497 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600262 .15175655 
Mammen M. ; Choi S.-K. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Polyvalent
Interactions in Biological
Systems: Implications for Design and Use of Multivalent Ligands and
Inhibitors . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
1998 , 37 , 2754 –2794 10.1002/(SICI)1521-3773(19981102)37:20<2754::AID-ANIE2754>3.0.CO;2-3 .
Mulder A. ; Huskens J. ; Reinhoudt D. N. 
Multivalency
in Supramolecular Chemistry
and Nanofabrication . Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2004 , 2 , 3409 –3424 10.1039/b413971b .15565230 
De M. ; Rana S. ; Rotello V. M. 
Nickel-Ion-Mediated
Control of the
Stoichiometry of His-Tagged Protein/Nanoparticle Interactions . Macromol. Biosci. 
2009 , 9 , 174 –178 10.1002/mabi.200800289 .19127602 
Schmitt J. ; Hess H. ; Stunnenberg H. G. 
Affinity Purification of Histidine-Tagged
Proteins . Mol. Biol. Rep. 
1993 , 18 , 223 –230 10.1007/BF01674434 .8114690 
Hochuli E. ; Dobeli H. ; Schacher A. 
New Metal
Chelate Adsorbent Selective
for Proteins and Peptides Containing Neighbouring Histidine Residues . J. Chromatogr. A 
1987 , 411 , 177 –184 10.1016/S0021-9673(00)93969-4 .
Young C. L. ; Britton Z. T. ; Robinson A. S. 
Recombinant Protein
Expression and
Purification: A Comprehensive Review of Affinity Tags and Microbial
Applications . Biotechnol. J. 
2012 , 7 , 620 –634 10.1002/biot.201100155 .22442034 
Goodman R. P. ; Erben C. M. ; Malo J. ; Ho W. M. ; McKee M. L. ; Kapanidis A. N. ; Turberfield A. J. 
A Facile Method for Reversibly Linking
a Recombinant Protein to DNA . ChemBioChem 
2009 , 10 , 1551 –1557 10.1002/cbic.200900165 .19449345 
Nieba L. ; Nieba-Axmann S. E. ; Persson A. ; Hämäläinen M. ; Edebratt F. ; Hansson A. ; Lidholm J. ; Magnusson K. ; Karlsson Å. F. ; Plückthun A. 
BIACORE Analysis of Histidine-Tagged
Proteins Using a Chelating NTA Sensor Chip . Anal. Biochem. 
1997 , 252 , 217 –228 10.1006/abio.1997.2326 .9344407 
André T. ; Reichel A. ; Wiesmueller K.-H. ; Tampé R. ; Piehler J. ; Brock R. 
Selectivity of Competitive Multivalent
Interactions at Interfaces . ChemBioChem 
2009 , 10 , 1878 –1887 10.1002/cbic.200900001 .19565593 
Alonso J. M. ; Reichel A. ; Piehler J. ; del Campo A. 
Photopatterned
Surfaces for Site-Specific and Functional Immobilization of Proteins . Langmuir 
2007 , 24 , 448 10.1021/la702696b .18092825 
Zhu H. ; Bilgin M. ; Bangham R. ; Hall D. ; Casamayor A. ; Bertone P. ; Lan N. ; Jansen R. ; Bidlingmaier S. ; Houfek T. ; Mitchell T. ; Miller P. ; Dean R. A. ; Gerstein M. ; Snyder M. 
Global Analysis
of Protein Activities
Using Proteome Chips . Science 
2001 , 293 , 2101 –2105 10.1126/science.1062191 .11474067 
Selmi D. N. ; Adamson R. J. ; Attrill H. ; Goddard A. D. ; Gilbert R. J. C. ; Watts A. ; Turberfield A. J. 
20. DNA-Templated
Protein Arrays
for Single-Molecule Imaging . Nano Lett. 
2011 , 11 , 657 –660 10.1021/nl1037769 .21218848 
Marin V. L. ; Bayburt T. H. ; Sligar S. G. ; Mrksich M. 
Functional Assays of
Membrane-Bound Proteins with SAMDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2007 , 46 , 8796 –8798 10.1002/anie.200702694 .
Maury P. ; Escalante-Marun M. ; Péter M. ; Reinhoudt D. N. ; Subramaniam V. ; Huskens J. 
Creating Nanopatterns of His-Tagged
Proteins on Surfaces by Nanoimprint Lithography Using Specific NiNTA-Histidine
Interactions . Small 
2007 , 3 , 1584 –1592 10.1002/smll.200700046 .17647255 
Turchanin A. ; Tinazli A. ; El-Desawy M. ; Großmann H. ; Schnietz M. ; Solak H. H. ; Tampé R. ; Gölzhäuser A. 
Molecular Self-Assembly, Chemical
Lithography, and Biochemical Tweezers: a Path for the Fabrication
of Functional Nanometer-Scale Protein Arrays . Adv. Mater. 
2008 , 20 , 471 –477 10.1002/adma.200702189 .
Hansen J. A. ; Sumbayev V. V. ; Gothelf K. V. 
An Electrochemical Sensor Based on
the Human Estrogen Receptor Ligand Binding Domain . Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 2831 –2834 10.1021/nl071451l .17655270 
Cabanas-Danés J. ; Dooms Rodrigues E. ; Landman E. ; van Weerd J. ; van Blitterswijk C. A. ; Verrips T. ; Huskens J. ; Karperien M. ; Jonkheijm P. 
A Supramolecular Host-Guest Carrier System for Growth
Factors Employing VHH Fragments . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 12675 –12681 10.1021/ja505695w .25153343 
Lata S. ; Reichel A. ; Brock R. ; Tampé R. ; Piehler J. 
High-Affinity Adaptors for Switchable
Recognition of
Histidine-Tagged Proteins . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 127 , 10205 –10215 10.1021/ja050690c .16028931 
Lata S. ; Gavutis M. ; Tampé R. ; Piehler J. 
Specific and Stable
Fluorescence Labeling of Histidine-Tagged Proteins for Dissecting
Multi-Protein Complex Formation . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 2365 –2372 10.1021/ja0563105 .16478192 
Valiokas R. ; Klenkar G. ; Tinazli A. ; Reichel A. ; Tampe R. ; Piehler J. ; Liedberg B. 
Self-Assembled
Monolayers Containing
Terminal Mono-, Bis-, and Tris-nitrilotriacetic Acid Groups: Characterization
and Application . Langmuir 
2008 , 24 , 4959 –4967 10.1021/la703709a .18393558 
Lata S. ; Piehler J. 
Stable and Functional
Immobilization of Histidine-Tagged
Proteins via Multivalent Chelator Headgroups on a
Molecular Poly(ethylene glycol) Brush . Anal.
Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 1096 –1105 10.1021/ac048813j .15858991 
Tinazli A. ; Tang J. ; Valiokas R. ; Picuric S. ; Lata S. ; Piehler J. ; Liedber B. ; Tampé R. 
High-Affinity
Chelator Thiols for Switchable and Oriented Immobilization of Histidine-Tagged
Proteins: A Generic Platform for Protein Chip Technologies . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2005 , 11 , 5249 –5259 10.1002/chem.200500154 .15991207 
Huang Z. ; Park J. I. ; Watson D. S. ; Hwang P. ; Szoka F. C. Jr.
Facile Synthesis of Multivalent Nitrilotriacetic Acid
(NTA) and NTA Conjugates for Analytical and Drug Delivery Applications . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2006 , 17 , 1592 –1600 10.1021/bc0602228 .
Huang Z. ; Hwang P. ; Watson D. S. ; Cao L. ; Szoka F. C. Jr.
Tris-Nitrilotriacetic Acids of Subnanomolar Affinity
Toward Hexahistidine Tagged Molecules . Bioconjugate
Chem. 
2009 , 20 , 1667 –1672 10.1021/bc900309n .
Ludden M.
J. W. ; Mulder A. ; Schulze K. ; Subramaniam V. ; Tampé R. ; Huskens J. 
Anchoring of Histidine-Tagged Proteins
to Molecular Printboards: Self-Assembly, Thermodynamic Modeling, and
Patterning . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2008 , 14 , 2044 –2051 10.1002/chem.200701478 .18189256 
Zhen G. ; Falconnet D. ; Kuennemann E. ; Vörös J. ; Spencer N. D. ; Textor M. ; Zürcher S. 
Nitrilotriacetic
Acid Functionalized Graft Copolymers: A Polymeric Interface for Selective
and Reversible Binding of Histidine-Tagged Proteins . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2006 , 16 , 243 –251 10.1002/adfm.200500232 .
Knezevic J. ; Langer A. ; Hampel P. A. ; Kaiser W. ; Strasser R. ; Rant U. 
Quantitation of Affinity, Avidity, and Binding Kinetics of Protein
Analytes with a Dynamically Switchable Biosurface . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 15225 –15228 10.1021/ja3061276 .22946661 
Merzlyak E. M. ; Goedhart J. ; Shcherbo D. ; Bulina M. E. ; Shcheglov A. S. ; Fradkov A. F. ; Gaintzeva A. ; Lukyanov K. A. ; Lukyanov S. ; Gadella T. W. ; Chudakov D. M. 
Bright Monomeric Red Fluorescent
Protein with an Extended Fluorescence Lifetime . Nat. Methods 
2007 , 4 , 555 –557 10.1038/nmeth1062 .17572680 
Huskens J. ; Mulder A. ; Auletta T. ; Nijhuis C. A. ; Ludden M. J. ; Reinhoudt D. N. 
A Model
for Describing the Thermodynamics of Multivalent
Host-Guest Interactions at Interfaces . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 6784 –6797 10.1021/ja049085k .15161307 
Mulder A. ; Auletta T. ; Sartori A. ; Del Ciotto S. ; Casnati A. ; Ungaro R. ; Huskens J. ; Reinhoudt D. N. 
Divalent
Binding of a Bis(adamantyl)-Functionalized Calix[4]arene to β-Cyclodextrin-Based
Hosts: An Experimental and Theoretical Study on Multivalent Binding
in Solution and at Self-Assembled Monolayers . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 6627 –6636 10.1021/ja0317168 .15161290 
Subach O. M. ; Malashkevich V. N. ; Zencheck W. D. ; Morozova K. S. ; Piatkevich K. D. ; Almo S. C. ; Verkhusha V. V. 
Structural Characterization of Acylimine-Containing
Blue and Red Chromophores in mTagBFP and TagRFP Fluorescent Proteins . Chem. Biol. 
2010 , 17 , 333 –341 10.1016/j.chembiol.2010.03.005 .20416505 
Frey B. L. ; Corn R. M. 
Covalent Attachment
and Derivatization of Poly(L-lysine)
Monolayers on Gold Surfaces as Characterized by Polarization-Modulation
FT-IR Spectroscopy . Anal. Chem. 
1996 , 68 , 3187 –3193 10.1021/ac9605861 .
Goormaghtigh E. ; Cabiaux V. ; Ruysschaert J. M. 
Secondary
Structure and Dosage of
Soluble and Membrane-Proteins by Attenuated Total Reflection Fourier-Transform
Infrared-Spectroscopy on Hydrated Films . Eur.
J. Biochem. 
1990 , 193 , 409 –420 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1990.tb19354.x .2226461 
Chen C.-W. ; Liu H.-L. ; Lin J.-C. ; Ho Y. 
Molecular Dynamics
Simulations of Metal Ion Binding to the His-tag Motif . J. Chin. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 52 , 1281 –1290 10.1002/jccs.200500185 .
Watly J. ; Simonovsky E. ; Wieczorek R. ; Barbosa N. ; Miller Y. ; Kozlowski H. 
Insight into the Coordination and the Binding Sites
of Cu2+ by the Histidyl-6-Tag using Experimental and Computational
Tools . Inorg. Chem. 
2014 , 53 , 6675 –6683 10.1021/ic500387u .24905906 
Zhang Y. ; Lai C.-T. ; Hinds B. J. ; Schatz G. C. 
Kinetic Master Equation
Modeling of an Artificial Protein Pump . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 14495 –14501 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b03076 .
Nifosì R. ; Tozzini V. 
Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Enhanced Green Fluorescent
Proteins: Effects of F64L, S65T and T203Y Mutations on the Ground-State
Proton Equilibria . Proteins: Struct., Funct.,
Genet. 
2003 , 51 , 378 –389 10.1002/prot.10335 .12696049 
Mitchell F.
L. ; Frank F. ; Marks G. E. ; Suzuki M. ; Douglas K. T. ; Bryce R. A. 
Molecular
Dynamics Study of Chemically Engineered Green
Fluorescent Protein Mutants: Comparison of Intramolecular Fluorescence
Resonance Energy Transfer Rate . Proteins: Struct.,
Funct., Genet. 
2009 , 75 , 28 –39 10.1002/prot.22218 .18767157 
Demachy I. ; Ridard J. ; Laguitton-Pasquier H. ; Durnerin E. ; Vallverdu G. ; Archirel P. ; Lévy B. 
Cyan Fluorescent Protein: Molecular
Dynamics, Simulations, and Electronic Absorption Spectrum . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 24121 –24133 10.1021/jp054656w .16375404 
Nishiyama K. ; Watanabe T. ; Hoshino T. ; Ohdomari I. 
Analysis of Interactions
between Green Fluorescent Protein and Silicon Substrates Using Molecular
Dynamics Simulations . Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 
2005 , 44 , 8210 –8215 10.1143/JJAP.44.8210 .
Khassanov A. ; Steinrück H.-G. ; Schmaltz T. ; Magerl A. ; Halik M. 
Structural
Investigations of Self-Assembled Monolayers for Organic Electronics:
Results from X-ray Reflectivity . Acc. Chem.
Res. 
2015 , 48 , 1901 –1908 10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00022 .26072927 
Yang Z. Y. ; Zhao Y. P. 
QM/MM and Classical Molecular Dynamics Simulation of
Histidine-Tagged Peptide Immobilization on Nickel Surface . Mater. Sci. Eng., A 
2006 , 423 , 84 –91 10.1016/j.msea.2005.10.078 .
Love J. C. ; Estroff L. A. ; Kriebel J. K. ; Nuzzo R. G. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Self-Assembled
Monolayers of Thiolates on Metals as a Form of Nanotechnology . Chem. Rev. 
2005 , 105 , 1103 –1170 10.1021/cr0300789 .15826011 
Chandler D. 
Interfaces
and the Driving Force of Hydrophobic Assembly . Nature 
2005 , 437 , 640 –647 10.1038/nature04162 .16193038 
Höök F. ; Rodahl M. ; Kasemo B. ; Brezezinski P. 
Structural
Changes in Hemoglobin During Adsorption to Solid Surfaces: Effects
of pH, Ionic Strength, and Ligand Binding . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
1998 , 95 , 12271 –12276 10.1073/pnas.95.21.12271 .9770476 
Huskens J. ; Van Bekkum H. ; Peters J. A. 
A Convenient Spreadsheet
Approach
to the Calculation of Stability Constants and the Simulation of Kinetics . Comput. Chem. 
1995 , 19 , 409 –416 10.1016/0097-8485(95)00042-Q .
Phillips J. C. ; Braun R. ; Wang W. ; Gumbart J. ; Tajkhorshid E. ; Villa E. ; Chipot C. ; Skeel R. D. ; Kalé L. ; Schulten K. 
Scalable Molecular Dynamics with
NAMD . J. Comput. Chem. 
2005 , 26 , 1781 –1802 10.1002/jcc.20289 .16222654 
Vanommeslaeghe K. ; Hatcher E. ; Acharya C. ; Kundu S. ; Zhong S. ; Shim J. ; Darian E. ; Guvench O. ; Lopes P. ; Vorobyov I. ; Mackerell A. D. 
CHARMM
General Force Field: A Force
Field for Drug-Like Molecules Compatible with the CHARMM All-Atom
Additive Biological Force Fields . J. Comput.
Chem. 
2010 , 31 , 671 –690 10.1002/jcc.21367 .19575467 
Humphrey W. ; Dalke A. ; Schulten K. 
VMD: Visual
Molecular Dynamics . J. Mol. Graphics 
1996 , 14 , 33 –38 10.1016/0263-7855(96)00018-5 .
CGenFF
Home. Available at https://cgenff.paramchem.org/. Accessed: Sep 21, 2016.
Vanommeslaeghe K. ; Raman E. P. ; MacKerell A. D. 
Automation of the CHARMM General
Force Field (CGenFF) II: Assignment of Bonded Parameters and Partial
Atomic Charges . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2012 , 52 , 3155 –3168 10.1021/ci3003649 .23145473 
Hanwell M. D. ; Curtis D. E. ; Lonie D. C. ; Vandermeersch T. ; Zurek E. ; Hutchison G. R. 
Avogadro:
An Advanced Semantic Chemical
Editor, Visualization, and Analysis Platform . J. Cheminf. 
2012 , 4 , 17 10.1186/1758-2946-4-17 .
Abraham M. J. ; Murtolar T. ; Schulz R. ; Pall S. ; Smith J. C. ; Hess B. ; Lindahl E. 
GROMACS: High
Performace Molecular
Simulations Through Multi-Level Parallelism From Laptops to Supercomputers . SoftwareX 
2015 , 1–2 , 19 –25 10.1016/j.softx.2015.06.001 .

