
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.9b04091PerspectivePlasmon
Nanocavity Array Lasers: Cooperating over
Losses and Competing for Gain Koenderink A. Femius *Center for Nanophotonics, AMOLF, Science Park 104, 1098XG Amsterdam, The Netherlands* E-mail: f.koenderink@amolf.nl.18 06 2019 23 07 2019 13 7 7377 7382 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Plasmon
nanocavity array lasers leverage the combination of locally
enhanced electromagnetic fields at localized particle plasmons with
collective diffractive effects in periodic lattice geometries for
low-threshold lasing with excellent coherence, line width, and directivity.
This combination is enabled by the collective reduction of ohmic and
radiative loss of plasmon antennas that hybridize to form surface
lattice resonances. At the same time, candidate lasing modes compete
for gain in the tight confines of the unit cell, where electromagnetic
fields and population inversion are strongly structured in space,
time, and polarization. This Perspective reviews the state of the
art in understanding and manipulating this balance to combat losses
and to optimize gain.

document-id-old-9nn9b04091document-id-new-14nn-2019-04091hccc-price
==== Body
One of the
kickstarters of the
field of plasmonics was the proposal by Bergman and Stockman that
surface plasmon resonances in nanoscale metal particles can be amplified
by stimulated emission.1 The original proposal
for this polaritonic equivalent of a laser envisioned confinement
of the electromagnetic field to nanometers in all three dimensions
and spurned coupling to far-field radiation. In subsequent years,
a sequence of plasmon-resonance-assisted lasers were reported that
traded off confinement against thresholds and practical applicability
as a bright device.2 One of the foremost
examples of a low-threshold practical lasing architecture that benefits
from plasmons is the plasmon nanocavity array laser, first reported
7 years ago by the Odom group at Northwestern University3,4 and since followed up by several other groups.5,6 This
geometry marries the benefits of distributed feedback (DFB) lasing
with the near-field properties of metal nanoparticles, thereby going
back to a first experiment by Stehr et al. on DFB
lasing in metal nanoparticle gratings.7 In this Perspective, I describe the current status of plasmon nanocavity
array lasers and the related work by Knudsonet al. that is reported in this issue of ACS Nano.8 The Perspective highlights
how the phenomenon that appears to be a plasmon-enhanced version of
DFB lasing actually is critically dependent on, and controllable by,
a near-field structure in the vector field of light on 20 nm length
scales.

The success of the plasmon nanocavity array lasing architecture
depends on the spectrally sharp, angularly selective resonances of
the periodic arrays of plasmonic nanoparticles (Figure 1a,b). The nanoparticles themselves are interchangeably
called “nanocavities”, or “nanoantennas”,
indicating that they are at the same time resonant and strongly scattering.
As a consequence, the nanoparticles individually have quality factors
of 5–30. However, “spectrally sharp” means that
quality factors in lattices are in excess of Q ∼
300 (equivalent to a few nm line width), exceeding the resonance quality
factor of the individual particles by at least a factor of 10.9,10 These ‘surface lattice resonances’ appear close to
conditions for grazing diffraction orders. Although they are extended
collective modes, they still have notable plasmonic character in terms
of strong field concentration at each of the constituent plasmon nanoantennas.
It is this marriage between confinement and Q that
has made surface lattice resonances a staple tool in plasmonics for
applications ranging from refractive index sensing, to Raman spectroscopy,
to fluorescence enhancement in solid-state lighting contexts, to collective
strong coupling.10Figure 1c shows, for instance, that ensembles of
fluorophores next to the particles do not emit as a simple Lambertian
source but show enhanced emission at angles coincident with lattice
resonances.10 In a suite of experiments
that began in 2012, the Odom group demonstrated that surface lattice
resonances are an excellent means to provide distributed feedback,
meaning that plasmon lattices easily lase when optically pumped with
(sub)picosecond pulses of modest energy density (<mJ/cm2).3−7,11 Evidence that lasing occurs is
immediately observable from a dramatic spectral line width narrowing
and a transition from Lambertian to highly directional output right
at the threshold, which is apparent in input–output curves
(output in just the lasing line versus pump power, Figure 1d). The lasing is
highly directional and has subnanometer spectral line width, thus
showing the signatures of spatial and temporal coherence. Since diffraction
is used to set the lasing conditions, the emission is easily tunable
by periodicity and refractive index.11 This
functionality directly translates to tools for real-time dynamic control
of plasmon lattice lasers, since they can be made on elastomeric stretchable
substrates (tunable periodicity) and in liquid flow-cell geometries
(tunable refractive index and gain medium).

Figure 1 (a) Scheme of a typical
plasmon lattice laser: a periodic metal
nanoparticle array supporting high-Q surface lattice
resonances coupled to a gain medium. (b) Example scanning electron
microscopy image of an aluminum nanoparticle array that can be used
for plasmon lasing. The array was made using a template stripping
technique that is suited to covering large areas. Reprinted with permission
from ref (12). Copyright
2016 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
(c) Example k-space photoluminescence (PL) enhancement
patterns for fluorophores on plasmonic nanoparticle arrays below (left)
and above (right) the lasing threshold. These are not real space images,
but are recorded by Fourier imaging; they represent signal versus emission angle. Bright arcs indicate enhanced PL
into the isofrequency contours of the repeated zone scheme lattice
resonance dispersion. Lasing occurs at their intersection in the middle
(second Bragg condition), such that the laser light is emitted in
the normal direction. (d) Example emission spectra near the lasing
threshold, showing the emergence of a laser peak from the broad luminescence
band. These data are taken from research by the author. Reprinted
and adapted with permission from13 Springer
Nature: Springer, Quantum Plasmonics. Springer Series in Solid-State
Sciences, vol 185, edited by S. Bozhevolnyi, L. Martin-Moreno, F.
Garcia-Vidal, Chapter Plasmon Particle Array Lasers, by Y. Hadad,
A. H. Schokker, F. van Riggelen, A. Alù and A. F. Koenderink
2017.

Basic Principles of Plasmon Lattice Lasing
To appreciate the forefront of plasmon nanocavity array laser research,
it is useful first to summarize the basic physical mechanisms that
go into lasers built from plasmon nanoparticle arrays.10 The first step is to take a two-dimensional
(2D) periodic lattice, usually taken to be square, and select a pitch
that is equal to the wavelength of the desired lasing output as measured
in the medium surrounding the nanoantennas. This selection defines
a band structure of grating anomalies that can be understood with
the dispersion relation of the medium surrounding the nanoantennas
folded back into the first Brillouin zone (Figure 2a). Hybridization of these anomalies with
the polarizability of the particles forms surface lattice resonances,
just slightly shifted in frequency from the grating anomaly conditions.
Around high-symmetry points, anti-crossings appear, and lasing can
occur at the edges of the resulting stop gaps, where standing modes
arise and the bands are flat. As is standard practice for DFB lasers
optimized for out-of-plane radiation, one chooses the pitch to operate
at the second-order Bragg condition to ensure that the structure will
have bright outcoupling at the same time as feedback.

Figure 2 (a) Illustration of the
expected dispersion band structure of a
square lattice (left), simply repeating the dispersion of free space k|| = ω/c every reciprocal
lattice vector. Modes that lie inside the light cone (orange) that
hybridize with the plasmon particle resonance give rise to surface
lattice resonance features in extinction and fluorescence (example
measured band structure shown; lasing in this example occurs on the
narrow, lower, band edge). (b) Energy diagram of a plasmon lattice
laser proposed by Zhou et al.4 Plasmonic lattice modes (gray) can be excited at frequencies matched
with the lasing transition (orange), providing an additional radiative
decay channel for the inverted population (red). Copyright 2013 Springer
Nature. (c) Electric field distribution associated with an optical
eigenmode in an Ag particle array (COMSOL eigen mode solver, 40 nm
silver disks in a dielectric) at the Γ point (k|| = 0). The main challenges include understanding and
optimizing the interplay between the localized electromagnetic fields
of the dipolar (this example) and higher order plasmon resonances
and the spatiotemporal physics in the gain medium.

As opposed to the usually weakly scattering dielectric
corrugation
in DFB lasers, the unit cell is filled with scatterers that offer
a combination of plasmonic enhancement effects. First, plasmonic particles
pack the largest possible optical cross section for scattering ((3/2π)λ2 for dipole scatterers) in
a small volume, meaning that the feedback per unit cell is strong
and scattering is not perturbative. Second, plasmonic particles concentrate
the optical pump field as well as the field of the lasing mode in
small shells of ∼20 nm thickness surrounding the particles.
Third, the plasmonic particles at the metal interface provide substantial
Purcell enhancements, promoting spontaneous emission rates and accelerating
the time scales for buildup and decay of population inversion that
would enter a rate equation description. Thus, while the gain medium
is usually applied as a homogeneous distribution of fluorophores in
a solvent4,11 or polymer film,5 in fact, its participation in the lasing is spatially inhomogeneous.
Therefore, the lasing is determined by physics in the gain media on
the nanometer length scale and picosecond time scale.14,15

Open Questions
One might extrapolate that plasmon nanocavity
array lasers are
similar to organic DFB lasers, simply with stronger feedback. Indeed,
some characteristics are similar: laser wavelength directly tunes
with pitch and refractive index via the Bragg condition,
and plasmon lattice lasers have similar angular output and polarization
properties. The strong feedback expresses itself as a remarkable resilience
of these systems, for example, introducing disorder by randomly removing
nanoparticles from the lattice, shrinking the laser to just a few
unit cells across, or introducing variations in lattice geometry over
a hierarchical set of length scales, such as in supercells and quasiperiodic
arrays.6,16−19 This freedom to modify lasing
geometry dramatically without immediately paying a price in lasing
threshold enables researchers to program multimode lasing as well
as multibeam output of phase-locked beams. These are all highly useful
properties for applications as nanoscale light sources and sensors.

Yet, beyond the analogy to DFB lasers lies a vast field of open
questions. Standard DFB lasers are well understood through the seminal
coupled wave theory of Kogelnik and Shank, a perturbation theory for
plane waves in the presence of losses and gain coupled with perturbative
refractive index corrugation.20 In real-space
terms, such a model holds that the lasing mode simply traces out sinusoidal
standing waves within the unit cell, and the only spatial structure
of interest is on the length scale of many unit cells in the form
of slowly varying mode envelopes that depend on the applied gain and
the available scattering strength for feedback. Plasmon nanoparticle
arrays, however, are not perturbative in terms of scattering strength,
and the laser fields are highly structured on short length scales.
These plasmon nanoparticle array characteristics lead to two interconnected
puzzles.

The first puzzle relates to the long-range collective
modes, that
is, the nature of the band structure underlying lasing, and the long-range
spatial structure of the lasing modes. Coupled wave theory only classifies
the bands of weakly perturbative photonic band structures and, thus,
does not apply near nanoantenna resonances, where the antenna scattering
cross-section is as large as the unit cell and provides a nontrivial
phase shift upon scattering. Figure 2a shows a representative measurement of bands in below-threshold
fluorescence. Although the anti-crossing linear bands and parabolas
are expected from folded grating anomaly cartoons, neither the magnitude
of the splitting between bands, the fuzzy width of the bands, nor
the contrast with which they appear in the data are easy to understand.
Intuitively, one would expect the relevant parameter in this puzzle
to be the particle scattering strength, as set by the complex-valued
particle polarizability tensor in the vein of ref (21). However, at best, measured
observables in ω,k can be reproduced in full
wave simulations but cannot be cast in a simple understanding in terms
of scattering strength, which also makes it difficult to estimate
feedback from band structures consistently. According to Kogelnik
and Shank’s theory, stop gap widths and feedback strength are
directly related.20 In practice, measured
stop bands in plasmon lattice band structures and measured shapes
of slowly varying mode envelopes in finite-sized lasers are dramatically
inconsistent in terms of extracting parameters for feedback strength.22 The underlying physics indicate that the feedback
strength is heavily influenced by the local electromagnetic field
distribution, which can have sharp gradients over the particles (involving
higher order multipoles) and gain medium.

The second puzzle
essentially revolves around the imprint of the
fine length scales of plasmonic field confinement on the population
inversion and dynamics in the gain medium, a puzzle already recognized
in the first publications in the field.4 A variety of effects are simultaneously at work here. Local enhancement
of the pump light defines a spatially inhomogeneous pumping of the
gain medium. Tight confinement of the lattice plasmon modes means
that modes compete for the gain preferentially in hot spots ∼20
nm across (Figure 2c). Finally, Purcell enhancement effects change the dynamics of spontaneous
emission as another strongly spatially dependent factor entering the
gain medium dynamics. In this second puzzle, the relevant parameters
are decoupled from the nanoantenna scattering strength as measured
by scattering cross-section, for example. Instead, the relevant quantities
are the local field distributions associated with the antenna resonances
at the pump and laser wavelengths and the local density of optical
states in the spectral fluorescence bandwidth of the gain medium.
Strictly speaking, these near-field effects are not just spatially
dependent but also are vectorial. For instance, pump
polarization will determine not only the location of hot spots where
emitters are excited but also potentially which subset of emitters
in the hot spots is excited through projection of the near-field pump
polarization on the emitter transition dipole moments. Similarly,
the various competing laser modes and the local Purcell enhancement
factor can all have distinct polarizations encoded in them.

New Puzzle
Piece by Knudson et al.
Systematically dissecting
the role of scattering strength and near-field
enhancement effects in experiments is not easy. For instance, when
asking how to probe which nanoantenna parameters matter, one would
ideally independently vary scattering strength (cross
section, polarizability), absorption, and near-field enhancement for
pump and lasing modes. In a similar vein, to understand the imprint
of near fields on the gain medium, it would be highly desirable to
study a given antenna geometry while programming at will within the
laser unit cell which subvolumes provide gain and which do not. If
one could indeed control the gain in the unit cell spatially and vectorially,
then one could understand and tailor the lasing through the controlled
variation of the overlap of gain and plasmonic Bloch modes. Unfortunately,
these abstract ideals are not straightforward to achieve. For instance,
swapping out nanoantenna material (e.g., Ag, Au, Al) modifies scattering strength, albedo, and near-field
enhancement, but not independently. Similarly, programming the spatial
and vectorial distribution of gain at will within the unit cell is difficult because the length scales are far below
the diffraction limit.

In this issue of ACS Nano, Knudson et
al. report an interesting experiment that cleverly exposes
the possibility of programming the overlap between gain and Bloch
modes.8 To this end, the authors study
lattices of a low symmetry, essentially taking a squashed hexagonal
unit cell with lattice angles up to 70°, instead of 60°.
The consequence of the rhombohedral symmetry is that Bragg conditions
that are degenerate for hexagonal lattices split, leading to two stop
gaps that are close in wavelength. Not surprisingly, both Bragg conditions
can be made to lase. In addition to turning to low lattice symmetry,
the authors also changed the nanoparticle type from conventionally
isotropic, cylindrical particles to markedly elongated shapes. This
change essentially ensures that within the gain bandwidth, the nanoantennas
are resonant only along one axis and hardly respond for orthogonal
polarization. The surprise of the work is that the authors can control which mode lases on the basis of the pump polarization.
One would anticipate that by changing pump polarization, one could
excite spatially different hot spots in the gain
medium, thereby selecting through spatial overlap which of the two
lattice modes gets sufficient gain to lase. However, simulations show
that, in this work, the associated lattice modes have nearly identical
real space distributions, with shared hot spots of their electromagnetic
energy density essentially pinned by the short-axis resonance of each
nanoantenna. Knudson et al. argue that the selection
of which mode lases is not through spatial patterns
in the gain, but rather through the vectorial nature of light. The
competing modes may share the same hot spots spatially, but through
different near-field polarization nonetheless couple to different
populations of the gain medium. Streak camera imaging indicates that
such a vectorially controlled preference for either of the two modes
also directly imprints on the temporal dynamics that occur in the
gain medium, giving an unprecedented glimpse into the polarization-resolved
mode competition occurring on picosecond time scales in the plasmonic
hot spots. Recently, theoretical techniques were developed that incorporate
such intricate interplay between gain medium dynamics and electromagnetic
fields.15 Still, theory has major challenges
ahead if it is to catch up with experiment, since theory can only
tackle single unit cells with periodic boundary conditions and deterministic
driving to kickstart the system into amplification. These two assumptions
impose the lasing mode instead of letting lasing start from noise
and allowing the laser itself to select the winner.

Outlook
There are many interesting repercussions to the essential insight
that one can construct intrinsically multimode nanolasers in which
one can selectively elicit desired (superpositions of) modes by programming
the pump field distribution in the unit cell and that one can do so
without having any requirement for subdiffraction illumination techniques
to structure the pump light. Indeed, the antennas themselves transduce
the far-field pump light to near-field structure in the population
inversion. Whereas in the present work, Knudson et al. used only pump polarization to control near-field polarized excitation
of hot spots of gain medium, one can envision that angle of incidence,
wavelength, polarization, beam orbital angular momentum, and, for
pulsed pumping, temporal pulse envelope could also steer near-field
distributions of pump light. This technique would provide a method
for laser modulation that transcribes spatial properties of a control
signal (pump) onto spectral and temporal laser characteristics. As
Knudson et al. point out, the control parameters
including the pump field polarization also provide engineering cues
to working with low-dimensional materials such as 2D semiconducting
transition-metal dichalcogenides and perovskites, which have highly
anisotropic linear and/or circular transition dipole moments.8 These ideas also have the potential to impact
the emerging field of strong coupling plasmonics.23 In this field, workers seek to hybridize excitons in dense
molecular matter with plasmons, where sufficiently large vacuum Rabi
splitting may lead to new collective effects such as Bose–Einstein
condensation of exciton polaritons, modifications of photochemistry,
and modification of transport properties of charge and excitons. Although
the density of exitonic material is an order of magnitude higher in
strong coupling studies than in lasers, the plasmonic part is similar.
Hence, the precise understanding gleaned from building plasmon lattice
lasers translates to strong coupling studies. In that community, experiments
usually do not account for the huge heterogeneity of light–matter
coupling strength, even if it likely has a major impact on observables.

A further impact of the work of Knudson et al.
may be in the field of active metasurfaces. Metasurfaces are 2D nanostructured
surfaces, often 2D arrangements of metallic or dielectric resonant
nanoantennas, with the potential to reshape transmitted wavefronts
at will. They could be seen as analog signal processors acting on
2D data sets, that is, incident beams.24 Imbuing metasurfaces with gain by applying a pump but working below
any lasing threshold, one could not only envision improving the efficiency
of existing linear metasurface functions by having another degree
of freedom to control refractive index and impedance independently,
but also to create new, nonlinear function through amplification and
gain saturation. Thus, spatially manipulated gain is one of several
routes toward spatiotemporal control of metasurfaces.25 Conceivably, the ideas of Knudson et al. could be generalized to programming gain in metasurfaces by programming
the illuminating pump field. These notions also link to the potential
of realizing metasurfaces and plasmon lattices with (broken) parity-time
symmetry.26

The author declares no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The author thanks Ke Guo, Hinke Schokker, Sachin
Kasture, Yakir Hadad, Andrea Alù, Alexei Halpin, Mohammad Ramezani,
and Jaime Gomez Rivas for interesting discussions on surface lattice
resonance systems and gain and to Radoslaw Kolkowski for help preparing
the figures. This work is part of the research program of The Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research.
==== Refs
References
Bergman D. J. ; Stockman M. I. 
Surface Plasmon
Amplification by Stimulated Emission
of Radiation: Quantum Generation of Coherent Surface Plasmons in Nanosystems . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2003 , 90 , 027402 10.1103/PhysRevLett.90.027402 .12570577 
Ma R.-M. ; Oulton R. F. 
Applications
of Nanolasers . Nat.
Nanotechnol. 
2019 , 14 , 12 –22 10.1038/s41565-018-0320-y .30559486 
Suh J. Y. ; Kim C. H. ; Zhou W. ; Huntington M. D. ; Co D. T. ; Wasielewski M. R. ; Odom T. W. 
Plasmonic Bowtie
Nanolaser Arrays . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 5769 –5774 10.1021/nl303086r .23013283 
Zhou W. ; Dridi M. ; Suh J. Y. ; Kim C. H. ; Co D. T. ; Wasielewski M. R. ; Schatz G. C. ; Odom T. W. 
Lasing Action in
Strongly Coupled Plasmonic Nanocavity Arrays . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 8 , 506 –511 10.1038/nnano.2013.99 .23770807 
Schokker A. H. ; Koenderink A. F. 
Lasing at the Band Edges of Plasmonic Lattices . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2014 , 90 , 155452 10.1103/PhysRevB.90.155452 .
Hakala T. K. ; Rekola H. T. ; Väkeväinen A. I. ; Martikainen J.-P. ; Nečada M. ; Moilanen A. J. ; Törmä P. 
Lasing in
Dark and Bright Modes of a Finite-Sized Plasmonic Lattice . Nat. Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 13687 10.1038/ncomms13687 .28045047 
Stehr J. ; Crewett J. ; Schindler F. ; Sperling R. ; von Plessen G. ; Lemmer U. ; Lupton J. ; Klar T. ; Feldmann J. ; Holleitner A. ; Forster M. ; Scherf U. 
A Low Threshold Polymer
Laser Based on Metallic Nanoparticle Gratings . Adv. Mater. 
2003 , 15 , 1726 –1729 10.1002/adma.200305221 .
Knudson M. P. ; Li R. ; Wang D. ; Wang W. ; Schaller R. D. ; Odom T. W.  Polarization Dependent Lasing Behavior from Low-Symmetry
Nanocavity Arrays . ACS Nano 2019 , 10.1021/acsnano.9b01142 .
Zou S. ; Schatz G. C. 
Narrow Plasmonic/Photonic
Extinction and Scattering
Line Shapes for One and Two Dimensional Silver Nanoparticle Arrays . J. Chem. Phys. 
2004 , 121 , 12606 –12612 10.1063/1.1826036 .15606284 
Wang W. ; Ramezani M. ; Väkeväinen A. I. ; Törmä P. ; Rivas J. G. ; Odom T. W. 
The Rich Photonic World of Plasmonic
Nanoparticle Arrays . Mater. Today 
2018 , 21 , 303 –314 10.1016/j.mattod.2017.09.002 .
Yang A. ; Hoang T. B. ; Dridi M. ; Deeb C. ; Mikkelsen M. H. ; Schatz G. C. ; Odom T. W. 
Real-Time
Tunable Lasing from Plasmonic
Nanocavity Arrays . Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 6939 10.1038/ncomms7939 .25891212 
Yang A. ; Hryn A. J. ; Bourgeois M. R. ; Lee W.-K. ; Hu J. ; Schatz G. C. ; Odom T. W. 
Programmable
and Reversible Plasmon
Mode Engineering . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.
S. A. 
2016 , 113 , 14201 –14206 10.1073/pnas.1615281113 .27911819 
Hadad Y. ; Schokker A. ; van Riggelen F. ; Koenderink A.   In Quantum Plasmonics ; Bozhevolnyi S. , Martin-Moreno L. , Garcia-Vidal F.  , Eds.; Springer
Series in Solid State Sciences ; Springer : Cham, Switzerland , 2017 ; Vol. 185 , pp 165 –190 .
Cuerda J. ; Rüting F. ; García-Vidal F.
J. ; Bravo-Abad J. 
Theory of
Lasing Action in Plasmonic Crystals . Phys. Rev.
B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2015 , 91 , 041118 10.1103/PhysRevB.91.041118 .
Trivedi D. J. ; Wang D. ; Odom T. W. ; Schatz G. C. 
Model for Describing
Plasmonic Nanolasers using Maxwell-Liouville Equations with Finite-Difference
Time-Domain Calculations . Phys. Rev. A: At.,
Mol., Opt. Phys. 
2017 , 96 , 053825 10.1103/PhysRevA.96.053825 .
Schokker A. H. ; Koenderink A. F. 
Statistics of Randomized Plasmonic Lattice Lasers . ACS Photonics 
2015 , 2 , 1289 –1297 10.1021/acsphotonics.5b00226 .
Schokker A. H. ; Koenderink A. F. 
Lasing in Quasi-Periodic and Aperiodic
Plasmon Lattices . Optica 
2016 , 3 , 686 –693 10.1364/OPTICA.3.000686 .
Wang D. ; Yang A. ; Wang W. ; Hua Y. ; Schaller R. D. ; Schatz G. C. ; Odom T. W. 
Band-Edge Engineering
for Controlled
Multi-Modal Nanolasing in Plasmonic Superlattices . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2017 , 12 , 889 –894 10.1038/nnano.2017.126 .28692060 
Rekola H. T. ; Hakala T. K. ; Törmä P. 
One-Dimensional Plasmonic Nanoparticle
Chain Lasers . ACS Photonics 
2018 , 5 , 1822 –1826 10.1021/acsphotonics.8b00001 .
Kogelnik H. ; Shank C. V. 
Coupled-Wave Theory
of Distributed Feedback Lasers . J. Appl. Phys. 
1972 , 43 , 2327 –2335 10.1063/1.1661499 .
García
de Abajo F. J. 
Colloquium: Light Scattering by Particle and Hole Arrays . Rev. Mod. Phys. 
2007 , 79 , 1267 –1290 10.1103/RevModPhys.79.1267 .
Guo K. ; Koenderink A. F. 
Spatial Intensity Distribution in
Plasmonic Particle
Array Lasers . Phys. Rev. Appl. 
2019 , 11 , 024025 10.1103/PhysRevApplied.11.024025 .
Barnes B. ; García Vidal F. ; Aizpurua J. 
Special Issue on Strong Coupling
of Molecules to Cavities . ACS Photonics 
2018 , 5 , 1 –1 10.1021/acsphotonics.7b01609 .
Silva A. ; Monticone F. ; Castaldi G. ; Galdi V. ; Alù A. ; Engheta N. 
Performing Mathematical Operations with Metamaterials . Science 
2014 , 343 , 160 –163 10.1126/science.1242818 .24408430 
Shaltout A. M. ; Shalaev V. M. ; Brongersma M. L. 
Spatiotemporal Light Control with
Active Metasurfaces . Science 
2019 , 364 , eaat310010.1126/science.aat3100 .31097638 
Cerjan A. ; Raman A. ; Fan S. 
Exceptional
Contours and Band Structure
Design in Parity-Time Symmetric Photonic Crystals . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2016 , 116 , 203902 10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.203902 .27258869

