
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.9b00538ArticleIn-Plane
Nanowires with Arbitrary Shapes on Amorphous
Substrates by Artificial Epitaxy Ben-Zvi Regev †Burrows Hadassah †Schvartzman Mark †‡Bitton Ora §Pinkas Iddo §Kaplan-Ashiri Ifat §Brontvein Olga §Joselevich Ernesto *††Departments
of Materials and Interfaces and §Department of Chemical Research Support, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel* E-mail: ernesto.joselevich@weizmann.ac.il.17 04 2019 28 05 2019 13 5 5572 5582 21 01 2019 17 04 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
challenge of nanowire assembly is still one of the major obstacles
toward their efficient integration into functional systems. One strategy
to overcome this obstacle is the guided growth approach, in which
the growth of in-plane nanowires is guided by epitaxial and graphoepitaxial
relations with the substrate to yield dense arrays of aligned nanowires.
This method relies on crystalline substrates which are generally expensive
and incompatible with silicon-based technologies. In this work, we
expand the guided growth approach into noncrystalline substrates and
demonstrate the guided growth of horizontal nanowires along straight
and arbitrarily shaped amorphous nanolithographic open guides on silicon
wafers. Nanoimprint lithography is used as a high-throughput method
for the fabrication of the high-resolution guiding features. We first
grow five different semiconductor materials (GaN, ZnSe, CdS, ZnTe,
and ZnO) along straight ridges and trenches, demonstrating the generality
of this method. Through crystallographic analysis we find that despite
the absence of any epitaxial relations with the substrate, the nanowires
grow as single crystals in preferred crystallographic orientations.
To further expand the guided growth approach beyond straight nanowires,
GaN and ZnSe were grown also along curved and kinked configurations
to form different shapes, including sinusoidal and zigzag-shaped nanowires.
Photoluminescence and cathodoluminescence were used as noninvasive
tools to characterize the sine wave-shaped nanowires. We discuss the
similarities and differences between in-plane nanowires grown by epitaxy/graphoepitaxy
and artificial epitaxy in terms of generality, morphology, crystallinity,
and optical properties.

artificial epitaxynanoimprint lithographyguided nanowiresZnSeGaNCdSZnTeZnOdocument-id-old-9nn9b00538document-id-new-14nn9b00538ccc-price
==== Body
The growth
of straight and aligned
horizontal nanowires by the guided-growth approach has been widely
demonstrated over the past few years,1−8 mainly due to its potential as a way to fabricate and study nanowire-based
planar devices.9−16 A vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) process,17 guided by a crystalline surface, yields horizontal nanowires
with controlled directions and crystallographic orientations, determined
by the epitaxial and graphoepitaxial relations with the substrate.
In epitaxial growth, the guidance occurs along specific lattice directions
of a flat surface according to the atomic registry of the nanowire
and the underlying substrate. In graphoepitaxy, the nanowires grow
along nanosteps or nanogrooves and must satisfy both geometrical constraints
and lattice constraints with the exposed facets (Figure 1a). This guided growth approach, by either epitaxy or graphoepitaxy,
in which both assembly and alignment of nanowires are achieved during
growth, eliminates the need for postgrowth processes and enables deterministic
control over the position, direction, and length of the nanowires.
Although in the past few years it was shown to be useful and general
to a large variety of materials and substrates,18−23 it is limited to crystalline substrates and yields only straight
or randomly kinked nanowires, but no arbitrary shapes designed at
will.

Figure 1 Schematic representation of the three guiding modes: epitaxy, graphoepitaxy,
and artificial epitaxy. (a) Straight nanowires are the common outcome
of epitaxy (guided growth along flat crystal planes) and graphoepitaxy
(guided growth along faceted crystal planes). In artificial epitaxy,
nanowires grow along a noncrystalline template and (b) can therefore
yield any predesigned shape.

The opportunity to expand the guided growth approach to nanowires
with arbitrary shapes is clearly attractive from a technological point
of view, enabling the creation of specialized devices with configurations
suitable for optical waveguides and electric circuits. Recently, tremendous
efforts have been invested in creating in-plane geometries of nanowire
networks in pursuit of quantum-computing devices based on Majorana
fermions,24−26 using in-plane selective area growth (SAG), in which
nanowires are created in a patterned mask on a single-crystal substrate
with clear epitaxial relations.27−29 The ability to eliminate the
use of a crystalline substrate offers the possibility of using a much
larger variety of substrates, such as flexible substrates and commonly
used oxidized silicon,30 for CMOS- and
MEMS-compatible optoelectronics. The extension of the guided growth
approach beyond crystallographic guidance of straight nanowires is
not trivial. The question is whether geometry alone is enough to guide
the growth of horizontal nanowires, and if so, what would be the effect
on their morphology and crystallinity. In addition, we wish to explore
the possibility to guide nanowires along arbitrary shapes. Growing
nanowires with predesigned curvature can be used for the study of
strain-related effects on crystallinity and properties of nanowires
from different materials. It was widely demonstrated that when vertically
grown nanowires are bent or curved after growth, a red-shift of the
near band edge (NBE) emission is observed in points with higher curvature
along the nanowire, indicating a strain-related decrease of the band
gap.31−35 However, nanowires growing along curved features might differ from
nanowires under postgrowth straining, and to the best of our knowledge,
the effect on the optical properties in this case has yet to be studied.

The concept of using amorphous lines as nucleation sites and growth
guides was termed “artificial epitaxy” in Givargizov’s
pioneering work.36 This type of oriented
crystal growth is sometimes also referred to as graphoepitaxy, but
we use the term artificial epitaxy to specify that the substrate is
amorphous, whereas in graphoepitaxy the substrate can also be crystalline
(even though the growth is guided by relief features larger than the
lattice parameter). The idea of artificial epitaxy is very similar
to the scratching of a glass beaker in order to induce and guide recrystallization
processes. In artificial epitaxy, growth occurs along relief features
on an amorphous substrate by geometric guidance alone. In the past,
we found such growth to be rather challenging. In fact, our first
attempts to guide GaN nanowires along templates patterned by photolithography
failed, primarily due to the limitations of the lithographic technique.
The microscale dimensions of the templates were too large, their features
too rough, and their density too sparse for successful guidance of
nanowires.37 We have overcome these limitations
by using higher resolution lithographic techniques, such as electron-beam
lithography (EBL), which can produce any arbitrary pattern (Figure 1b). A nonepitaxial,
in-plane guided shaping of nanowires is possible by several approaches.
For example, the VLS growth of Si and Ge nanowires in predefined shapes
was demonstrated by confining the growth in closed channels created
by EBL followed by multiple fabrication steps.38 The growth in this case is limited by the diffusion into
the closed channel, and the size and shape of the nanowire is determined
by the dimensions and quality of the channel. Alternatively, nanowires
can be guided along the edges of a shaped open trench, as demonstrated
by Xue etal., and presents a monolike
high crystallinity.39 However, this process
was specifically developed for the solid–liquid–solid
growth of Si nanowires40−42 and not for the general growth of nanowires from
different materials.

A different approach for creating nanowires
with different geometries
is based on postgrowth shaping and usually involves placement of vertically
grown nanowires along lithographic patterns, such as anchors that
result in U-shaped nanowires,43 or scaffolding
that results in periodically strained nanowires.44 These techniques offer only partial control over the geometry
of nanowires and lack the above-mentioned advantages of the guided
growth method. More specifically, since postgrowth manipulations and
transfer of nanowires is required in these methods, the nanowires
are more prone to fracture and contamination. 3D and in-plane buckled
nanowires can be achieved by transferring them onto a prestrained
elastomer and releasing the tensile strain.34,35,45−47 In principle, this method
can be applied to any nanowire material but is limited to a specific
“wavy” geometry. To truly expand the guided growth approach
of nanowires, a high-throughput method that is not limited to a specific
material and geometry is desired.

Herein we demonstrate the
growth of semiconductor nanowires along
open nanolithographic ridges and trenches on the amorphous thermal
oxide layer of a silicon wafer by artificial epitaxy. We first demonstrate
guided growth along straight lines, as a proof of concept that our
method can indeed be applied to the growth of nanowires in open amorphous
features. Nanowires of several material systems (GaN, ZnSe, CdS, ZnTe,
and ZnO) are successfully grown within these ridges and trenches.
These artificial guiding features were initially patterned by EBL
(a serial process) for prototyping and then by nanoimprint lithography
(NIL), demonstrating a fully parallel (i.e., high-throughput)
process. We examine two different cross-sections for the guiding features:
smooth curved trenches and a 90° profile ridges. We characterize
the morphology of ZnSe and GaN nanowires growing in the two different
templates by cutting thin, electron-transparent slices across the
nanowires with a focused-ion beam (FIB) and observing them under a
transmission electron microscope (TEM). We further characterize the
quality and crystallographic orientation of the nanowires by using
high-resolution TEM. Surprisingly, despite the lack of epitaxial relations,
we find preferred crystallographic orientations for both ZnSe and
GaN nanowires. Using NIL, we further introduce various curved and
kinked guiding features for synthesizing planar nanowires of arbitrary
shapes (spiral, zigzag, and sinusoidal shapes). Specifically, sine
wave-shaped ZnSe and GaN nanowires are compared and show pronounced
vapor–solid (VS) growth and no VS growth, respectively. Photoluminescence
(PL) and cathodoluminescence (CL) mapping were performed as noninvasive
characterization techniques and show shifts in the NBE emission along
the nanowires. While in ZnSe these changes do not correlate with the
sinusoidal geometry of the shaped nanowire and are likely due to VS
growth, in GaN, a red-shift in PL emission is correlated with higher
curvature areas, suggesting strain-induced reduction of the band gap.
This combination of top-down and bottom-up approaches can be applied
for the large-scale fabrication and study of predesigned shapes of
nanowires from different materials.

Results and Discussion
Demonstration
of Guided Growth along Lithographic Ridges and
Trenches
In order to study the guided growth of nanowires
on amorphous substrates by artificial epitaxy, we started by patterning
nanometer-scale straight open lithographic guides on a Si wafer covered
with a 300 nm oxide layer. The first attempts were done by EBL. After
writing and developing the e-beam resist (PMMA 950 A3, see Methods), the lithographic guides are created by
either wet-etch of the silica layer using a buffered oxide etch (BOE)
or by depositing alumina using electron-beam evaporation and liftoff.
These two methods yield either isotropic, curved trenches, or ridges
with a 90° angle between surface and ridge walls, respectively
(Figure 2a). (More
details regarding the fabrication of lithographic guides can be found
in the Methods section.) From this point on,
the two different cross-section morphologies of the lithographic guides
will be referred to as trenches and ridges. Dimensions of lithographic
guides range from 10 to 20 nm in height and 80–160 nm in pitch,
with various widths. We note that the guides are not designed to confine
the horizontal nanowires but only to guide their growth along the
artificial features. Figure 2b shows a scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of straight
ridges created by EBL followed by alumina evaporation and liftoff.
Both ridge and trench configurations (discussed below) show similar
quality and uniformity and are both used for the growth of horizontal
nanowires by artificial epitaxy.

Figure 2 Guided growth of nanowires by artificial
epitaxy in straight lithographic
guides patterned by electron-beam lithography (EBL). (a) Schematic
of the EBL fabrication process of lithographic guides for artificial
epitaxy. Patterns are written by EBL in a positive-tone polymer; the
exposed areas are washed away upon development. Two processes are
employed to create the lithographic guides: (1) Isotropic grooves
are wet-etched by BOE at the exposed areas to create trenches. (2)
Stripes of amorphous alumina are placed within the exposed areas by
electron-beam evaporation to create ridges. In both cases, after liftoff
of unexposed polymer, catalyst patterning is performed, followed by
CVD growth of nanowires. (b) Scanning electron micrograph of a ridge
configuration before growth. (c) Straight ZnSe nanowires growing in
a ridge configuration.

Microscale thin-film islands of metal catalyst are patterned
perpendicular
to the lithographic guides, using photolithography, electron-beam
evaporation (nominal thickness 0.5 nm), and lift-off. Upon heating
the sample at 550 °C, the metallic film breaks into nanodroplets
in a dewetting process, which serve as the catalyst droplets for nanowire
growth in the VLS mechanism. Nanowires of different materials are
then grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), at similar conditions
formerly found by our group for the epitaxial and graphoepitaxial
growth of horizontal nanowires on sapphire.5,6,9,11,48 The general growth scheme can be found in the Supporting
Information (Figure S1). In Figure 2c we present horizontal ZnSe
nanowires guided along straight ridges prepared by EBL. Nanowire lengths
and diameters were comparable to those grown by epitaxy and graphoepitaxy
on sapphire,9 with lengths surpassing 20
μm. The catalyst droplet is apparent at the edge of the nanowires,
indicating the expected VLS growth mechanism.

Parallel Process by Nanoimprint
Lithography
Although
EBL is a broadly used method for the fabrication of high-quality nanoscale
features that can be used for the guided growth of horizontal nanowires
by artificial epitaxy, it is a serial, low-throughput process. Therefore,
once successful growth was achieved along the lithographic guides,
EBL was replaced by thermal NIL. In NIL,49 the same mold is used to pattern a large number of samples, upgrading
guided growth by artificial epitaxy into a parallel process. The mold
itself is created by EBL, using hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) as the
electron-beam resist. HSQ is used to achieve high-resolution features
due to its low line-edge roughness and low molecular weight.50 Upon development and thermal treatment, it hardens
into porous silica and can withstand multiple uses as a hard mold.
In thermal NIL, the hard mold is pressed at high pressure into a thermoplastic
polymer (the imprint resist) at a temperature in the viscous phase
and then rapidly cooled below the polymer’s glass transition
temperature (Tg) before separation51 (technical details regarding the imprint process
can be found in the Methods section). Using
the same mold to pattern a large number of samples drastically improves
the process throughput (Figure 3a). After molding the pattern into the imprint resist, different
methods can be used to transfer the patterned features from the imprint
resist to the silica layer. All methods include removal of any polymer
remaining in the depressed areas by a gentle reactive ion etching
(RIE) as one of the first steps (see Methods). We use two pattern-transfer methods based on either wet-etch or
deposition of amorphous alumina, which are similar to the final steps
in the EBL process. Therefore, the NIL process results in the two
same final configurations of trenches and ridges. A schematic of the
complete NIL process can be found in the Supporting Information including both pattern-transfer methods for the
two configurations of trenches and ridges in Figures S2 and S3, respectively Straight trenches, with a 120 nm pitch,
fabricated by NIL, are shown in Figure 3b. The inset shows a cross-section prepared by FIB
of similar trenches with an 80 nm pitch. Nanowires of different materials
are grown on both trench and ridge configurations. The quality and
crystallinity of nanowires grown in the two configurations are discussed
below. In Figure 3c,
GaN nanowires grown along ridges prepared by NIL are depicted. As
can be seen, the quality of lithographic guides produced by NIL (Figure 3b), realized mainly
by their uniformity and low roughness, is no less than those produced
by EBL (Figure 2b).
More importantly, the high quality of the NIL guides is manifested
in the high yield and alignment of nanowires growing along them (Figure 3c). As shown in Figure 3d, the nanowire diameter
is not determined by the distance between the two ridges, but is rather
affected by the size of the catalyst droplet, in accordance with the
VLS mechanism. The nanowire is attached to one ridge, where the alumina
wall, only 10 nm in height, guides and aligns the nanowire. This configuration
of open lithographic guides allows a VLS growth with minimal confinement,
where the nanowires are at least partially free to expose their most
stable facets under the relevant growth conditions. This issue will
be further discussed below.

Figure 3 Guided growth of nanowires by artificial epitaxy
in straight lithographic
guides patterned by nanoimprint lithography. (a) Schematic of the
NIL process. A hard mold with the desired pattern is pressed into
a thermoplastic polymer coated on the target substrate and heated
above the glass transition temperature (Tg). Pneumatic pressure is applied, followed by rapid cooling of the
system and separation of the mold and the now plastic, patterned substrate.
Throughput is greatly increased with the repeated use of a single
master mold. (b) Scanning electron micrograph of a trench configuration
before growth with 120 nm pitch. In the inset, a cross-section made
by FIB milling of such trenches before growth with 80 nm pitch. Inset
schematic describes the process of transferring the imprinted pattern
to the substrate: first, any polymer remaining in the depressed areas
is removed by a gentle RIE. Lithographic guides are prepared by the
same two methods described in the EBL process. (c) Straight GaN nanowires
growing in a ridge configuration. (d) High-magnification image of
a single GaN nanowire attached to the ridge’s wall. The diameter
of the nanowire, estimated by the SEM image, is 35 nm.

Morphology and Crystallinity
One
important issue, arising
from the fact that the substrate is amorphous and not a single crystal
(as in previous cases of guided growth and SAG), is the crystallinity
of the nanowires. In the past few years, we established that guided
horizontal nanowires growing by epitaxy and graphoepitaxy on crystalline
substrates not only grow as a single crystal but also show relatively
low density of defects.5,6,22 Moreover,
their high crystal quality is manifested in their optical and optoelectronic
properties.9,13,48 A few works on horizontal nanowires grown on amorphous substrates
demonstrated that the nanowires in this case also grow as single crystals.38,39 However, the question of preferred crystallographic orientation
of these nanowires remains open. One of the main advantages of the
guided growth of nanowires on crystalline substrates is the control
over the crystallographic orientation of the nanowires. For example,
ZnO nanowires guided on R-plane sapphire grow with extremely high
yield in a polar orientation (where the [0001] direction aligns with
the long axis of the nanowire).5,52 This is due to the
strong epitaxial relations between the nanowire and the substrate.
Since on amorphous substrates epitaxial relations are completely absent,
we ask if the nanowires will exhibit a preferred crystallographic
orientation or, with no epitaxy to constrain them, will exhibit completely
random behavior. In addition, we wish to characterize the morphology
of nanowires guided by amorphous guides, since it can reflect their
quality and uniformity. In order to characterize both the morphology
and crystallographic orientations of nanowires guided by artificial
epitaxy, cross-sectional electron-transparent lamellae were cut across
the nanowires by FIB and observed under a TEM.

We start by studying
the effect of the amorphous templates on the morphology of the horizontal
nanowires. More specifically, we are interested in studying the structure
of nanowires, manifested in their shape, diameter, quality, and faceting.
Clearly, a separate consideration is required for trench and ridge
configurations. A low-magnification TEM image (Figure 4Aa) presents the cross-section of ZnSe nanowires
guided by artificial epitaxy along ridges. As can be seen, the ZnSe
nanowire grows directly on the amorphous silica surface and is guided
by a 10 nm alumina wall. The open configuration of the lithographic
guide does not confine the growth and allows the nanowire to accommodate
a diameter larger than the dimension of the wall and to display well-defined
facets. The wires are observed to grow as high-quality single crystals,
and no structural defects are observed. More examples can be found
in the Supporting Information (Figure S4). Additionally, a longitudinal lamella was cut and observed by TEM
(Figure S5). The images, at both low magnification
and atomic resolution including their fast Fourier transform (FFT),
reveal high uniformity and crystal quality along the ZnSe nanowire.

Figure 4 Morphology
and crystallinity studied by cross-sectional TEM: (A)
(a) Low-magnification TEM of a cross-section of a ZnSe nanowire guided
along a ridge configuration. The nanowire grows on the amorphous silica
layer, where only a small part is attached to the alumina wall. (b)
Low-magnification TEM of a cross-section of a GaN nanowire guided
in a trench configuration. The bottom part, which is in contact with
the silica layer, is rounded, while the upper part exposes facets.
(B) (a) Fringes of the ZnSe crystal structure observed by HRTEM. Inset:
FFT of a ZnSe crystal, from which crystallographic orientation is
determined. (b) Fringes of the GaN crystal structure observed by HRTEM.
Inset: FFT of GaN crystal, from which crystallographic orientation
is determined.

A second lamella was
cut across GaN nanowires guided by artificial
epitaxy in a trench configuration. Low-magnification image is presented
in Figure 4Ab. As can
be seen, the nanowire cross-section appears round at the interface
with the substrate and faceted at the upper, exposed part. This cross-section
resembles GaN nanowires grown horizontally on quartz, in which the
nanowires grow embedded in the quartz substrate.20 The silica layer seems to be enveloping the GaN nanowires,
distorting the cross-section of a typical trench profile in comparison
to that observed before growth (inset of Figure 3b). In fact, we observe the reconstruction
of the amorphous silica at the conditions of the synthesis, resulting
in a half-closed channel around the lower part of the nanowire. In
its upper part, which is not in contact with the surface, the nanowire
is faceted (more examples are available in Figure S6). Although the nanowires grow as single crystals (see below),
we observe a relatively high concentration of plane defects in comparison
to GaN nanowires grown by epitaxy and graphoepitaxy modes (Figure S6). We suggest that the reconstruction
of the silica during the growth of the nanowire leads to a more constrained
growth and results in a higher density of plane defects. This observation
suggests that the trench configuration is less preferable for the
guided growth of materials with relatively high CVD temperature (950
°C for the guided growth of GaN nanowires). In general this observation
supports the importance of an open configuration of the lithographic
guides for the growth of nanowires with high crystal quality, in which
the trench only guides but does not confine the growth. Next, we proceed
to the crystallographic characterization of the nanowires under consideration.

Crystallographic Orientation
In order to characterize
the crystallographic orientations of nanowires grown by artificial
epitaxy, we use high-resolution TEM (HRTEM). Higher magnification
images display clear fringes (Figure 4Ba and Bb for ZnSe and GaN, respectively) and enable
the determination of the crystallographic orientations by using FFT.
The FFT peaks are identified with known crystallographic data and
fitted to atomic models of ZnSe and GaN. From HRTEM and crystallographic
analysis, we find ZnSe nanowires to be high-quality single crystals.
No evidence for structural defects is observed. We attribute this
observation to the growth along spaced ridges, allowing the crystal
to accommodate its stable structure and expose its stable facets under
the relevant growth conditions. More interestingly and to our surprise,
we find a well-defined crystallographic orientation. Despite the fact
that these nanowires are guided by amorphous features and no epitaxial
relations with the substrate play a role in this guiding mechanism,
we find a preferred growth orientation. We were able to determine
the crystallographic orientation of seven nanowires, five of which
grew along the [1213] direction in a wurtzite
(WZ) structure (see table in Figure S4).
This specific direction was not observed in epitaxial ZnSe nanowires,
guided by either epitaxy or graphoepitaxy on different planes of sapphire.9,53

The same methodology is used for the crystallographic analysis
of GaN nanowires. We find a relatively large variety of crystallographic
orientations (see table in Figure S6).
Nevertheless, among the different orientations, we find [1210] to be the most common growth direction. We note that
even nanowires with the same growth direction can be found rotated
in different angles with respect to the growth axis. These observations
all resemble our past findings regarding the guided growth of GaN
nanowires on quartz.20 This similarity
is explained by the observed amorphization of the quartz at the interface
with the GaN nanowires, which in fact obscures the epitaxial relations,
very much like the horizontal growth of nanowires on the amorphous
oxide layer of the silicon wafer.

The nonpolar orientations,
[1213] and [1100], also
known as the a and m directions,
respectively, are the most frequently observed
crystallographic orientation for GaN nanowires.54−62 Kuykendall etal. demonstrated
that the catalyst composition in VLS growth plays a central role in
directing the crystallographic orientation of GaN nanowires.58 More specifically, they showed that Ni-rich
catalyst leads to growth along the a-axis ([1210]) on two different substrates. In analogy, Ni is used
as the catalyst for the growth of GaN nanowires in this work, which
are indeed found to grow most commonly along the a direction. It is suggested that the catalyst composition either
stabilizes the (1210) planes at the growth front
(energetically controlled growth) or changes the barrier between the
catalyst and the (1210) planes of GaN (kinetically
controlled growth). In principle, a third, noncatalytic possible effect
can be considered: minute amounts of catalyst can migrate to the sides
of the wire and stabilize specific facets, thus dictating the growth
direction. Since the nanowires in this work present a round cross-section
at the interface with the silica and only a small part is faceted,
we consider the last suggestion to be less likely in this case. Based
on the absence of epitaxial relations and former observations regarding
the preferred growth directions in vertically grown GaN nanowires,
the catalyst seems to play a major role in guiding the growth axis
of these artificial-epitaxy-guided nanowires.

Generality for Different
Materials
To further test
the generality of guided growth by artificial epitaxy, in addition
to ZnSe and GaN, we grew CdS, ZnTe, and ZnO nanowires along lithographic
guides, as depicted in Figure 5Aa, Ab, and Ac, respectively. Nanowires from the different
materials were grown using either EBL or NIL with both trench and
ridge configurations. As can be seen, all nanowires demonstrate guided
growth along the patterned guides, displaying the adaptability and
generality of the method. However, nanowire growth from different
materials differs in both yield and nanowire morphology. The observed
differences between all five materials are also observed in the guided
growth by epitaxy and graphoepitaxy on sapphire5,6,9,11,48 and are discussed below. SEM images reveal that after
dewetting the density of catalyst droplets is comparable to the density
of lithographic guides. Therefore, every guide could potentially support
the growth of a nanowire (Figure S7). However,
the density of nanowires is clearly lower than that of lithographic
trenches, leading to the conclusion that the yield of nanowire growth
is affected by the parameters of the CVD process and is not limited
by the catalyst density. This issue is material-specific, and synthesis
parameters could be adjusted to increase the yield for each material.
In general, the CVD process on a patterned silicon substrate is very
similar to that on sapphire, and in most cases guided growth by epitaxy,
graphoepitaxy, and artificial epitaxy can be achieved under the exact
same conditions in the same synthesis. In some cases, adjustment of
the sample temperature is required to improve the yield of nanowire
growth by artificial epitaxy, mainly due to the different thermal
conductivity of silicon and sapphire.

Figure 5 Guided growth of arbitrarily shaped horizontal
nanowires of different
materials by artificial epitaxy: (A) Guided growth of straight (a)
CdS, (b) ZnTe, and (c) ZnO. Lithographic guides were made by EBL in
a ridge configuration. (B) Guided growth of GaN in (a) sine wave and
(b) right angle kinked (zigzag) shapes. Guided growth of ZnSe in (c)
spiral, (d) zigzag, and (e) sine wave shapes. Lithographic guides
were made by NIL in a trench configuration.

Guided chalcogenide nanowires often show, in addition to
the VLS
mechanism that leads to the elongation of the nanowires, a significant
extent of VS growth, in which material from the gas phase is directly
deposited on the growing nanowire. The VS/VLS growth rate can be controlled
to some level by adjusting the parameters of the synthesis. A prominent
VS growth can be manifested as nanowalls or very “bulky”
nanowires, as was observed in guided chalcogenide nanowires on sapphire.11,48 The VS growth is present in chalcogenide nanowires grown by artificial
epitaxy as well. This phenomenon is most pronounced in the growth
of ZnTe in our working conditions (Figure 5Ab), but even very thick bulky nanowires
are well aligned by the patterned guides. We note that the dimensions
of the patterned guides were optimized to the growth of GaN nanowires,
which do not show any VS growth. More specifically, the pitch of the
array, together with the width and height of the guides, was adjusted
to fit the observed yield and typical diameters of GaN nanowires on
sapphire, respectively.6 The growth yield
of chalcogenide nanowires with typically larger dimensions could be
improved by adjusting the spacing, width, and height of the guides.

Similarly to all other materials, the CVD growth of ZnO by artificial
epitaxy resolved in elongated nanostructures along the guides, with
a droplet at the edge that indicates a VLS growth, as can be seen
in Figure 5Ac. However,
when performing AFM, we observed that where a nanowire seemed to grow
from the SEM top view, there was instead a trench wall that was a
few nanometers higher than expected. To better understand the structure,
we cut a thin electron-transparent lamella using FIB and examined
it by TEM. We found that instead of ZnO nanowires, a thin layer of
ZnO was covering the wall of the trench, creating some sort of cupping
(Figure S8). By adjusting the synthesis
parameters, we did succeed in growing ZnO nanowires inside the trenches,
but they were short (∼1 micron) (further information can be
found in the Supporting Information). This
is not completely surprising. Although the yield and alignment of
ZnO nanowires on sapphire guided by epitaxy are extremely high,5,52 from our experience the guidance by graphoepitaxy is usually more
challenging. Since guided growth by artificial epitaxy is only topographic,
it is expected to be less appropriate for the guidance of long ZnO
nanowires.

Arbitrary Shapes
Growing nanowires
on patterned amorphous
substrates offers the possibility of growing them in arbitrary shapes
and expand the guided growth approach beyond the realization of straight
nanowires. To test the possibility of growing arbitrarily shaped nanowires,
we patterned zigzag, sinusoidal, and spiral features by NIL in both
trench and ridge configurations. Mold patterning in HSQ with arbitrary
shapes is presented in Figure S9. The growth
of GaN and ZnSe within the shaped guides is presented in Figure 5B. As shown in Figure 5Ba, GaN nanowires
follow the sine wave-shaped guides in a trench configuration. The
nanowires do not show any VS growth, and the diameter stays constant
along the wire. In a few cases the nanowires manage to jump between
adjacent trenches, indicating the need for higher walls. While the
height of the walls proved to be fit for the growth of aligned straight
nanowires, it seems that the trenches are a bit too shallow for the
growth of nonstraight nanowires. Zigzag-shaped GaN nanowires grown
in a ridge configuration are presented in Figure 5Bb. The nanowires nicely follow the sharp
90° turns with a yield that is comparable to that of straight
nanowires guided by artificial epitaxy. In general, the GaN nanowires
seem to better follow the shaped guides in the ridge configuration
in comparison to the trench one. This is the case even when the nanowires
are forced to take sharper turns during growth. We suggest that the
sharper profile of the ridge is preferred for the growth of nanowires
in arbitrary shapes, which grow attached to the ridge walls. GaN nanowires
growing in the curved smooth profile of the trenches are more prone
to escape from them.

Figure 5Bc, Bd, and Be show the growth of ZnSe along spiral,
zigzag, and a sine wave shapes, respectively. The shaped nanowires
all show a high level of tapering due to pronounced VS growth. According
to the VLS mechanism, the tip of the nanowire, close to the catalyst
droplet, is the most recently crystallized segment. This segment has
the same dimensions of the patterned trenches. During the synthesis,
material from the vapor phase nucleates on top of the nanowire, leading
to a thicker and bulkier morphology toward its other end. This logic
suggests that the nanowire follows the shaped groove while it is still
in the appropriate dimensions, and VS growth occurs on top of the
shaped wire. Although VS growth is sometimes apparent in epitaxial-
and graphoepitaxial -guided ZnSe nanowires,9,53 it
is much more pronounced in the shaped nanowires. We suggest that the
growth in a curved or kinked configuration induces a higher density
of defects in and on the surface of the nanowires, and thus results
in more nucleation sites for VS growth. This is significant for the
growth of shaped chalcogenide nanowires, which tend to suffer from
VS growth, as manifested by thicker and chunkier morphology.

After growing sine-wave-shaped GaN (Figure 5Ba) and ZnSe (Figure 5Be) nanowires, we proceeded to characterize
their optical properties. As mentioned above, wavy configurations
of nanowires can be achieved also in postgrowth methods by transferring
vertically grown nanowires onto a prestrained elastomer and releasing
the tensile strain.34,35 This approach results in a periodic
modulation in the NBE energy, where the buckled segments show a red-shifted
PL emission with respect to the straight segments. This effect is
attributed to a strain-induced band gap shrinking. In general, bent
nanowires (and other nanostructures) show a red-shift in their PL33 and CL31,32 emission. However,
the nanowires in this work were not bent after growth but rather formed
along a curved feature. The optical properties of nanowires grown
by this mode, especially the impact it may have on their NBE emission,
has yet to be studied. In order to characterize the sine wave-shaped
GaN and ZnSe nanowires guided by artificial epitaxy, we map the PL
emission along the curved nanowire. We use a micro PL system (Horiba
LabRAM HR Evolution) with a He–Cd laser (325 nm) for excitation.
Mapping is done by scanning a predetermined area with a motorized
stage where at each position a full spectrum is acquired. The NBE
peak of the spectrum at each location can then be fitted to a Gaussian,
and its height (above the baseline) and center, which corresponds
to the emission intensity and wavelength, can be plotted in a color-scale
to produce an intensity and a spectral map, respectively. This enables
us to follow the NBE emission along the shaped structure.

Figure 6Aa shows
an SEM image of a sine wave ZnSe nanowire guided by artificial epitaxy.
Significant VS growth is observed, typical of the shaped chalcogenide
nanowires, as mentioned above. Figure 6Ab and Ac show the complementary PL intensity map and
spectral map, respectively. Variation of 8 nm in the band edge emission
is observed in the range of 459.5–467.5 nm, where the maximum
error of the fitting is 0.6 nm. However, no correlation between the
NBE energy and the periodic shape of the nanowire is found. We attribute
the relatively wide range of NBE energies to the significant extent
of VS growth. To follow the NBE with a better spatial resolution,
we further perform CL on an additional sine wave-shaped ZnSe nanowire
(Figure 6Ad). Each
point along the nanowire represents the location in which a spectrum
was taken. The color represents the wavelength extracted from the
center of the Gaussian fitted to the NBE peak, as described above
for PL. A representative CL spectrum is shown in the Supporting Information
(Figure S10). Similar to PL, a variation
in the NBE energy from different points along the nanowire is observed,
but with no correlation to the periodic curved geometry of the nanowire.
CL spectra also reveal defect emissions at wavelengths larger than
480 nm (Figure S10). This observation is
in good agreement with the large extent of VS growth observed by SEM
imaging.

Figure 6 Optical properties of shaped nanowires. (A) Photoluminescence and
cathodoluminescence mapping of a sine wave-shaped ZnSe nanowire: (a)
SEM micrograph of a ZnSe nanowire grown in a sinusoidal open trench
prepared by NIL; (b) PL intensity map and (c) PL spectral map of the
nanowire in (a); the color change corresponds to variations in wavelength.
(d) CL spectral data taken at specific points along the wire. The
color corresponds to the wavelength extracted from the center of the
NBE peak. (B) Photoluminescence mapping of a sine wave-shaped GaN
nanowire: (a) SEM micrograph of a GaN nanowire grown in a sinusoidal
open trench prepared by NIL. (b) PL intensity map and (c) PL spectral
map of the nanowire in (a); the color change corresponds to variations
in wavelength.

Unlike the sine wave-shaped
ZnSe nanowires, sine wave-shaped GaN
nanowires are much more uniform and exhibit no VS growth, as presented
in Figure 6Ba. Figure 6Bb presents the PL
intensity map of the area marked in a white rectangle in Figure 6Ba. No significant
variation in intensity is observed along the nanowire itself, indicating
the uniformity of the structure and diameter of the GaN nanowire that
grows in a pure VLS mechanism. In Figure 6Bc we plot the PL spectral map of the NBE
emission. In order to exclude signal from adjacent nanowires, we focus
on the half-sine wave at the far edge of the nanowire. A clear red-shift
of the NBE emission is observed with correlation to the curved geometry
of the nanowire. The wavelengths of NBE emission in the curved regions
differ from the wavelengths in the straight regions by 4 nm (358 and
362 nm), where the maximum error of the Gaussian fit is 0.2 nm. This
red-shift indicates strain-induced band gap reduction, as found in
postgrowth bent nanowires. Nevertheless, we note that no yellow luminescence,
which is correlated with defects in GaN, is observed either in straight
or in curved regions, as was found in GaN nanowires guided by epitaxy
and graphoepitaxy on sapphire.6 In other
words, except for the strain-related red-shift due to the curved template,
the growth by artificial epitaxy on an amorphous substrate does not
affect the optical properties of guided GaN nanowires in comparison
to epitaxy and graphoepitaxy. The full spectrum can be found in the Supporting Information (Figure S11).

Conclusions
In summary, artificial epitaxy was used to produce in-plane nanowires
of five different materials guided along straight and arbitrarily
shaped ridges and trenches. Using the high-throughput process of NIL,
nanolithographic guides were fabricated with comparable yield and
quality to those fabricated by EBL. Two different configurations of
lithographic guides were examined and were found to be useful for
the guided growth of nanowires by artificial epitaxy. Although the
substrate is amorphous, straight nanowires were found to grow as single
crystals along preferred crystallographic orientations. We suggest
that the catalyst plays an important role in promoting specific orientations
in the absence of any epitaxial relations between the nanowire and
the substrate. PL and CL were used as noninvasive tools to characterize
nanowires with arbitrary shapes containing curved regions. With the
absence of VS growth, a red-shift in the NBE emission was observed
in higher curvature segments of GaN, suggesting a strain-related band
gap decrease, as in the case of postgrowth bending of nanowires. Guided
growth by artificial epitaxy proves to be general and adaptable to
the growth of different materials and in principle can be used for
the growth of any other material. The precise dimensions of the trenches
as well as the growth parameters can be optimized for each material
to improve the yield and morphology of the nanowires. This combination
of top-down and bottom-up approaches expands the guided growth approach
and offers the possibility of controlling and manipulating semiconductor
nanosystems for optoelectronic and quantum computing, compatible with
silicon-based CMOS and MEMS technologies.

Methods
EBL Patterning
Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA 950
A3) was spin-coated (5000 rpm) on a Si/SiO2 (300 nm, thermal
oxide) wafer (SVM) and baked on a hot plate for 2 min at 180 °C.
Different designs were patterned using a Raith e-Line Plus electron-beam
lithography system. Cold developing was done in standard MIBK/IPA
(1:3) at 5 °C for 40 s. After development two methods are used
to create either trenches or ridges:

(1) A trench configuration
is created by wet-etch: BOE (6:1 with surfactant, J.T. Baker) was
diluted in a 5:1 ratio in distilled water. First, a sacrificial sample
of Si/SiO2 is immersed for 1 min to calibrate the exact
etching rate. Using an ellipsometer (Rudolph Auto EL) the thickness
of the thermal oxide layer is measured before and after etching to
calculate the etching rate. After EBL and development, the sample
is etched for the time required to remove 20 nm of the oxide layer,
according to the calculated rate, to form 20 nm isotropic trenches
in the SiO2 layer.

(2) A ridge configuration is created
by evaporation of amorphous
alumina: Evaporation of alumina was done in an electron-beam evaporation
chamber (PVD, Telemark) at a rate of 1 Å/s.

The two specified
methods are followed by liftoff in acetone.

Nanoimprint Lithography
Mold
Writing
Hard molds were prepared from 325 μm
thick Si wafers (SVM) cut into 1.6 cm2 squares by etching
the native oxide in a buffered oxide etch of hydrofluoric acid (BOE
6:1 with surfactant, J. T. Baker), spin-coating the wafers with a
35 nm thickness of 2% HSQ e-beam resist (XR-1451, Dow Corning). The
designs were patterned using a Raith e-line Plus electron-beam lithography
system at a 30 kV accelerating voltage, developing the mold in AZ
726 (Clariant GmBH) for 60 s followed by a 30 s water rinse. The design
elements are one-dimensional pixel-lines exposed with doses ranging
from 1800 to 3000 pC/cm depending on the pattern and the line pitch,
which ranges from 120 to 180 nm. The dosage value directly determines
the line thickness, which ranged from 20 to 40 nm. Arrays of straight
lines, zigzags (with acute, right (90°), and obtuse angles),
sine waves, and spirals were designed and patterned in this fashion.
Each array was 30 × 70 or 30 × 100 μm in size. Each
mold had four duplicate areas of 100 arrays. Plasma ashing (1 min,
1 sccm O2, 150 W) and thermal annealing (60 min, 600 sccm
Ar, 900 °C) hardened and developed HSQ into porous silica. Finally,
the fabricated mold was covered with a mold release agent (Nanonex
NXT-100). SEM images of arbitrary shapes patterned in HSQ can be found
in the Supporting Information (Figure S9).

Imprint
PMMA resist designed specifically for NIL,
PMMA 35K (EM Resist Ltd., ∼13% PMMA in anisole), was diluted
with anisole (anhydrous, 99.7%, Sigma-Aldrich) at different ratios
to obtain mixtures that could produce thicknesses ranging from 40
to 105 nm. An ellipsometer (Rudolph Auto EL) and an optical profiler
(Zeta-20) were both used to measure resist thickness. The resist was
spin-coated onto 18 × 18 mm2 squares of 500 μm
silicon with a 300 nm thermal oxide layer (SVM) and baked on a hot
plate at 180 °C for 2 min.

A homemade thermal imprinting
system (Figure S12) was used to perform
imprinting. The sample was placed on the imprint chuck. The mold was
placed face-down on top of the sample. A 6 × 6 cm2 double layer of silica elastomer was placed on top of the mold,
and a vacuum pump was used in order to ensure a good seal. The chamber
was lowered onto this sandwich and then heated to 200 °C, which
is above the Tg of PMMA (105 °C).
High pressure (17 bar N2) was then introduced to the system
for a period of 5 min. The system was then rapidly cooled using a
flow of chilled water. After cooling to 40 °C, the pressure was
vented. Upon removal from the chuck the mold and sample were separated
using a razor blade.

Pattern transfer was accomplished using
either wet etch to create
trenches or alumina evaporation to create ridges, as described below.
The two methods were used on samples with ∼40 and ∼70
nm PMMA thickness, respectively.

Pattern Transfer after
NIL
Two pattern-transfer processes
were employed to create trenches and ridges: (1) For trenches, the
residual resist layer was first removed by plasma etching (STS ASE
ICP, 30 mTorr, 30 sccm O2, no coil, 20 W platen power),
and the exposed silicon dioxide was etched in BOE to form 20 nm isotropic
trenches. (2) For ridges, we first deposited a metal mask of 15 nm
Ti, using electron beam evaporation onto the imprinted samples tilted
by 30°.63,64 Then, residual resist was etched
through the deposited mask using oxygen plasma (STS ASE ICP, 30 mTorr,
30 sccm O2, no coil, 20 W platen power, followed by electron-beam
evaporation of 10 nm amorphous alumina. The last stage in both pattern
transfer methods is liftoff in acetone. Schematics of the two pattern-transfer
methods can be found in the Supporting Information (Figures S2 and S3).

Catalyst Patterning and
Nanowire Growth
Catalyst islands
were patterned perpendicularly to the guiding features by photolithography,
using negative-tone resist NR-9 1000PY (developed with RD-6) and a
mask aligner (MA/BA6 Karl Suss), followed by electron-beam evaporation
(PVD, Telemark) of 5 Å Ni catalyst (for the growth of GaN) or
Au (for the growth of all other materials). Dewetting of the catalyst
was performed at 550 °C. Growth was performed in a CVD system
according to protocols published by our group for various materials.
The growth scheme can be found in the Supporting Information (Figure S1).

Structural Characterization
Imaging of nanowires was
done by scanning electron microscope (Supra 55VP FEG LEO Zeiss). For
the characterization of morphology and crystallinity, a focused ion
beam (FEI Helios 600 dual beam microscope) was used to cut thin (50–100
nm) lamellae across the nanowires, which were later inspected under
a high-resolution transmission electron microscope (FEI Tecnai F30).
To study the crystallographic orientations, HRTEM images were analyzed
using FFT from selected areas, and the FFT peaks were fitted to the
crystallographic tables of bulk ZnSe and GaN.

Photoluminescence
PL measurements were done using a
micro-Raman/micro-PL system (Horiba LabRAM HR Evolution). A He–Cd
325 nm laser was focused on the nanowire through a reflective objective
lens, and PL was collected using the same objective and sent to a
300 lines/mm grating and a front-illuminated cooled open-electrode
CCD camera.

Cathodoluminescence
CL measurements
were done with
SEM cathodoluminescence using a Gatan MonoCL Elite system that is
installed in a Zeiss GeminiSEM 500, high-resolution SEM. CL signal
was excited by a 5 kV electron beam and collected by a diamond-turned
mirror. The spectra were acquired by directing the light to a monochromator
and a CCD for parallel spectroscopy either as spectral map or point
by point on specific locations. The spectral resolution was set to
2.7 nm by choosing a slit size of 1 mm and grating of 1200 lines/mm.
SEM and CL images were recorded simultaneously.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b00538.Additional information
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn9b00538_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
‡ Present address of M. Schvartzman: Department of Materials Engineering
and Ilse Katz Institute for Nanoscale Science and Technology, Ben
Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, 8410501, Israel.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Israel
Science
Foundation 1493/10, Minerva Stiftung (Project No. 711138), European
Research Council (ERC) Advanced Grant (No. 338849), ERC Proof of Concept
(PoC) Grant No. 838702, Helena and Martin Kimmel Center for Nanoscale
Science, Moskowitz Center for Nano and Bio-Nano Imaging, and the Carolito
Stiftung. E.J. holds the Drake Family Professorial Chair of Nanotechnology.
R.B.Z. acknowledges funding from the Clore Foundation.
==== Refs
References
Fortuna S. A. ; Wen J. ; Chun I. S. ; Li X. 
Planar GaAs Nanowires on GaAs (100)
Substrates: Self-Aligned, Nearly Twin-Defect Free, and Transfer-Printable . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 , 4421 –4427 . 10.1021/nl802331m .19367971 
Hsin C. ; He J. ; Lee C. ; Wu W. ; Yeh P. ; Chen L. ; Wang Z. 
Lateral Self-Aligned p-Type In2O3 Nanowire Arrays Epitaxially Grown on Si Substrates . Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 1799 –1803 . 10.1021/nl0707914 .17516681 
Nikoobakht B. ; Michaels C. A. ; Stranick S. J. ; Vaudin M. D. 
Horizontal Growth
and in situ Assembly of Oriented Zinc Oxide Nanowires . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2004 , 85 , 3244 –3246 . 10.1063/1.1803951 .
Shen Y. ; Turner S. ; Yang P. ; Van Tendeloo G. ; Lebedev O. I. ; Wu T. 
Epitaxy-Enabled Vapor-Liquid-Solid
Growth of Tin-Doped Indium Oxide Nanowires with Controlled Orientations . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 4342 –4351 . 10.1021/nl501163n .24971997 
Tsivion D. ; Schvartzman M. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; Joselevich E. 
Guided Growth
of Horizontal ZnO Nanowires with Controlled Orientations on Flat and
Faceted Sapphire Surfaces . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 6433 –6445 . 10.1021/nn3020695 .22725665 
Tsivion D. ; Schvartzman M. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; von Huth P. ; Joselevich E. 
Guided Growth
of Millimeter-Long Horizontal Nanowires with Controlled Orientations . Science 
2011 , 333 , 1003 –1007 . 10.1126/science.1208455 .21852496 
Zi Y. ; Jung K. ; Zakharov D. ; Yang C. 
Understanding Self-Aligned
Planar Growth of InAs Nanowires . Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 2786 –2791 . 10.1021/nl4010332 .23634940 
Rothman A. ; Forsht T. ; Danieli Y. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; Rechav K. ; Houben L. ; Joselevich E. 
Guided Growth
of Horizontal ZnS Nanowires on Flat and Faceted Sapphire Surfaces . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2018 , 122 , 12413 –12420 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b04063 .
Oksenberg E. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; Rechav K. ; Joselevich E. 
Guided Growth
of Horizontal ZnSe Nanowires and Their Integration into High-Performance
Blue-UV Photodetectors . Adv. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 3999 –4005 . 10.1002/adma.201500736 .26011601 
Oksenberg E. ; Sanders E. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; Houben L. ; Joselevich E. 
Surface-Guided
CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanowires on Flat and Faceted Sapphire
with Size-Dependent Photoluminescence and Fast Photoconductive Response . Nano Lett. 
2018 , 18 , 424 –433 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b04310 .29210586 
Reut G. ; Oksenberg E. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; Rechav K. ; Joselevich E. 
Guided Growth
of Horizontal p-Type ZnTe Nanowires . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 17087 –17100 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b05191 .
Schvartzman M. ; Tsivion D. ; Mahalu D. ; Raslin O. ; Joselevich E. 
Self-Integration
of Nanowires into Circuits Via Guided Growth . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2013 , 110 , 15195 –200 . 10.1073/pnas.1306426110 .23904485 
Shalev E. ; Oksenberg E. ; Rechav K. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; Joselevich E. 
Guided CdSe
Nanowires Parallelly Integrated into Fast
Visible-Range Photodetectors . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 213 –220 . 10.1021/acsnano.6b04469 .28032987 
Wang Q. ; Li J. ; Lei Y. ; Wen Y. ; Wang Z. ; Zhan X. ; Wang F. ; Wang F. ; Huang Y. ; Xu K. 
Oriented Growth
of Pb1-XSnxTe Nanowire Arrays for Integration
of Flexible Infrared Detectors . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 3596 –3601 . 10.1002/adma.201506338 .26990637 
Wang X. ; Aroonyadet N. ; Zhang Y. ; Mecklenburg M. ; Fang X. ; Chen H. ; Goo E. ; Zhou C. 
Aligned Epitaxial
SnO2 Nanowires on Sapphire: Growth and Device Applications . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 3014 –3022 . 10.1021/nl404289z .24837617 
Xu J. Y. ; Rechav K. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; Nevo I. ; Feldman Y. ; Joselevich E. 
High-Gain 200 ns Photodetectors from Self-Aligned CdS-CdSe
Core-Shell Nanowalls . Adv. Mater. 
2018 , 30 , 1800413 10.1002/adma.201800413 .
Wagner R. ; Ellis W. 
Vapor-Liquid-Solid
Mechanism of Single Crystal Growth . Appl. Phys.
Lett. 
1964 , 4 , 89 –90 . 10.1063/1.1753975 .
Cheng C. ; Guo H. ; Amini A. ; Liu K. ; Fu D. ; Zou J. ; Song H. 
Self-Assembly and Horizontal
Orientation Growth of VO2 Nanowires . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 4 , 5456 10.1038/srep05456 .
Du W. ; Yang X. ; Pan H. ; Ji X. ; Ji H. ; Luo S. ; Zhang X. ; Wang Z. ; Yang T. 
Controlled-Direction
Growth of Planar InAsSb Nanowires on Si Substrates without Foreign
Catalysts . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 , 877 –882 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b03587 .26789719 
Goren-Ruck L. ; Tsivion D. ; Schvartzman M. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; Joselevich E. 
Guided Growth of Horizontal GaN Nanowires
on Quartz
and Their Transfer to Other Substrates . ACS
Nano 
2014 , 8 , 2838 –2847 . 10.1021/nn4066523 .24579932 
Nikoobakht B. ; Herzing A. 
Where Is the
Required Lattice Match in Horizontal Growth
of Nanowires? . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 12814 –12821 . 10.1039/C4NR04537H .25225768 
Tsivion D. ; Joselevich E. 
Guided Growth
of Epitaxially Coherent GaN Nanowires
on SiC . Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 5491 –5496 . 10.1021/nl4030769 .24134637 
Tsivion D. ; Joselevich E. 
Guided Growth
of Horizontal GaN Nanowires on Spinel
with Orientation-Controlled Morphologies . J.
Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 19158 –19164 . 10.1021/jp504785v .
Aseev P. ; Fursina A. ; Boekhout F. ; Krizek F. ; Sestoft J. E. ; Borsoi F. ; Heedt S. ; Wang G. ; Binci L. ; Martí-Sánchez S. ; Swoboda T. ; Koops R. ; Uccelli E. ; Arbiol J. ; Krogstrup P. ; Kouwenhoven L. P. ; Caroff P. 
Selectivity Map for Molecular Beam
Epitaxy of Advanced Iii-V Quantum Nanowire Networks . Nano Lett. 
2019 , 19 , 218 –227 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b03733 .30521341 
Lee J. S. ; Choi S. ; Pendharkar M. ; Pennachio D. J. ; Markman B. ; Rodwell M. J. ; Krogstrup P. ; Palmstrøm C. J.  Selective-Area
Chemical Beam Epitaxy of in-Plane InAs One-Dimensional Channels Grown
on InP (001) and InP (111) B Surfaces . ArXiv:1808.04563v1
Cond-Mater. , 2018.
Friedl M. ; Cerveny K. ; Weigele P. ; Tütüncüoglu G. ; Martí-Sánchez S. ; Huang C. ; Patlatiuk T. ; Potts H. ; Sun Z. ; Hill M. O. ; Güniat L. ; Kim W. ; Zamani M. ; Dubrovskii V. G. ; Arbiol J. ; Lauhon L. J. ; Zumbühl D. M. ; Fontcuberta i Morral A. 
Template-Assisted Scalable
Nanowire Networks . Nano Lett. 
2018 , 18 , 2666 –2671 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b00554 .29579392 
Okamoto A. ; Ohata K. 
Selective Epitaxial
Growth of InAs on GaAs by Molecular Beam Epitaxy . Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 
1987 , 26 , L1174 10.1143/JJAP.26.L1174 .
Okamoto A. ; Ohata K. 
Selective Epitaxial
Growth of Gallium Arsenide by Molecular Beam
Epitaxy . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
1987 , 51 , 1512 –1514 . 10.1063/1.98619 .
Cho A. 
Recent Developments
in Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) . J. Vac. Sci.
Technol. 
1979 , 16 , 275 –284 . 10.1116/1.569926 .
Schmid H. ; Borg M. ; Moselund K. ; Gignac L. ; Breslin C. ; Bruley J. ; Cutaia D. ; Riel H. 
Template-Assisted Selective
Epitaxy of Iii-V Nanoscale Devices for Co-Planar Heterogeneous Integration
with Si . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2015 , 106 , 233101 10.1063/1.4921962 .
Fu Q. ; Zhang Z. Y. ; Kou L. ; Wu P. ; Han X. ; Zhu X. ; Gao J. ; Xu J. ; Zhao Q. ; Guo W. 
Linear Strain-Gradient
Effect on the Energy Bandgap in Bent CdS Nanowires . Nano Res. 
2011 , 4 , 308 –314 . 10.1007/s12274-010-0085-6 .
Han X. ; Kou L. ; Lang X. ; Xia J. ; Wang N. ; Qin R. ; Lu J. ; Xu J. ; Liao Z. ; Zhang X. 
Electronic
and Mechanical
Coupling in Bent ZnO Nanowires . Adv. Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 4937 –4941 . 10.1002/adma.200900956 .25376615 
Kim Y. ; Im H. S. ; Park K. ; Kim J. ; Ahn J. P. ; Yoo S. J. ; Kim J. G. ; Park J. 
Bent Polytypic
ZnSe
and CdSe Nanowires Probed by Photoluminescence . Small 
2017 , 13 , 1603695 10.1002/smll.201603695 .
Sun F. ; Sun L. ; Zhang B. ; Chen G. ; Wang H. ; Shen X. ; Lu W. 
The Optical
Waveguide of Buckled CdS Nanowires Modulated by Strain-Engineering . ACS Photonics 
2018 , 5 , 746 –751 . 10.1021/acsphotonics.7b01348 .
Sun L. ; Kim D. H. ; Oh K. H. ; Agarwal R. 
Strain-Induced Large
Exciton Energy Shifts in Buckled CdS Nanowires . Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 3836 –3842 . 10.1021/nl401860f .23899018 
Givargizov E. 
Mechanisms
of Oriented Crystallization in Artificial Epitaxy (Graphoepitaxy) . Thin Solid Films 
1990 , 189 , 389 –396 . 10.1016/0040-6090(90)90468-S .
Bronshtain T.  Guided Growth
of Nanowires: Mechanism and Surface Pertubation Effects ; Weizmann Institute of Science : Rehovot , 2012 .
Pevzner A. ; Engel Y. ; Elnathan R. ; Tsukernik A. ; Barkay Z. ; Patolsky F. 
Confinement-Guided
Shaping of Semiconductor
Nanowires and Nanoribbons:“Writing with Nanowires . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 7 –12 . 10.1021/nl201527h .22142384 
Xue Z. ; Sun M. ; Dong T. ; Tang Z. ; Zhao Y. ; Wang J. ; Wei X. ; Yu L. ; Chen Q. ; Xu J. 
Deterministic Line-Shape
Programming of Silicon Nanowires for Extremely Stretchable Springs
and Electronics . Nano Lett. 
2017 , 17 , 7638 –7646 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b03658 .29189013 
Yu L. ; Chen W. ; O’Donnell B. ; Patriarche G. ; Bouchoule S. ; Pareige P. ; Rogel R. ; Claire Salaun A. ; Pichon L. ; Roca i Cabarrocas P. 
Growth-in-Place
Deployment of in-Plane
Silicon Nanowires . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2011 , 99 , 203104 10.1063/1.3659895 .
Yu L. ; Oudwan M. ; Moustapha O. ; Fortuna F. ; Roca i Cabarrocas P. 
Guided Growth
of in-Plane Silicon Nanowires . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2009 , 95 , 113106 10.1063/1.3227667 .
Xu M. ; Xue Z. ; Yu L. ; Qian S. ; Fan Z. ; Wang J. ; Xu J. ; Shi Y. ; Chen K. ; Roca i Cabarrocas P.
R. 
Operating
Principles of in-Plane Silicon Nanowires at Simple Step-Edges . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 5197 –5202 . 10.1039/C4NR06531J .25700247 
Zhao Y. ; Yao J. ; Xu L. ; Mankin M. N. ; Zhu Y. ; Wu H. ; Mai L. ; Zhang Q. ; Lieber C. M. 
Shape-Controlled Deterministic Assembly
of Nanowires . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 , 2644 –2650 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b00292 .26999059 
Hu Y. ; Li J. ; Tian J. ; Xuan Y. ; Deng B. ; McNear K. L. ; Lim D. G. ; Chen Y. ; Yang C. ; Cheng G. J. 
Parallel
Nanoshaping of Brittle Semiconductor Nanowires for Strained Electronics . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 , 7536 –7544 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03366 .27960457 
Durham
III J. W. ; Zhu Y. 
Fabrication of Functional Nanowire
Devices on Unconventional Substrates Using Strain-Release Assembly . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 256 –261 . 10.1021/am302384z .23249184 
Ryu S. Y. ; Xiao J. ; Park W. I. ; Son K. S. ; Huang Y. Y. ; Paik U. ; Rogers J. A. 
Lateral
Buckling Mechanics in Silicon
Nanowires on Elastomeric Substrates . Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 3214 –3219 . 10.1021/nl901450q .19670847 
Xu F. ; Lu W. ; Zhu Y. 
Controlled
3d Buckling of Silicon Nanowires for Stretchable
Electronics . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 672 –678 . 10.1021/nn103189z .21189041 
Xu J. ; Oksenberg E. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; Rechav K. ; Joselevich E. 
Bottom-up
Tri-Gate Transistors and Submicrosecond Photodetectors from Guided
CdS Nanowalls . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 15958 –15967 . 10.1021/jacs.7b09423 .29035565 
Chou S. Y. ; Krauss P. R. ; Renstrom P. J. 
Imprint
of Sub-25 nm Vias and Trenches
in Polymers . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
1995 , 67 , 3114 –3116 . 10.1063/1.114851 .
Namatsu H. ; Takahashi Y. ; Yamazaki K. ; Yamaguchi T. ; Nagase M. ; Kurihara K. 
Three-Dimensional
Siloxane Resist
for the Formation of Nanopatterns with Minimum Linewidth Fluctuations . J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Process. Phenom. 
1998 , 16 , 69 –76 . 10.1116/1.589837 .
Lan H. B. ; Ding Y. C. 
Nanoimprint Lithography . Lithography 
2010 , 457 –494 . 10.5772/8189 .
Neeman L. ; Ben-Zvi R. ; Rechav K. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; Oron D. ; Joselevich E. 
Crystallographic
Mapping of Guided
Nanowires by Second Harmonic Generation Polarimetry . Nano Lett. 
2017 , 17 , 842 –850 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b04087 .28094977 
Oksenberg E. ; Martí-Sánchez S. ; Popovitz-Biro R. ; Arbiol J. ; Joselevich E. 
Surface-Guided
Core-Shell ZnSe@ ZnTe
Nanowires as Radial p-n Heterojunctions with Photovoltaic
Behavior . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 6155 –6166 . 10.1021/acsnano.7b02199 .28505415 
Chen C.-C. ; Yeh C.-C. ; Chen C.-H. ; Yu M.-Y. ; Liu H.-L. ; Wu J.-J. ; Chen K.-H. ; Chen L.-C. ; Peng J.-Y. ; Chen Y.-F. 
Catalytic Growth
and Characterization of Gallium Nitride
Nanowires . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2001 , 123 , 2791 –2798 . 10.1021/ja0040518 .11456965 
Ji H. ; Kuball M. ; Burke R. A. ; Redwing J. M. 
Vibrational and
Optical Properties of GaN Nanowires Synthesized by Ni-Assisted Catalytic
Growth . Nanotechnology 
2007 , 18 , 445704 10.1088/0957-4484/18/44/445704 .
Kuykendall T. ; Pauzauskie P. ; Lee S. ; Zhang Y. ; Goldberger J. ; Yang P. 
Metalorganic Chemical
Vapor Deposition Route to GaN Nanowires with
Triangular Cross Sections . Nano Lett. 
2003 , 3 , 1063 –1066 . 10.1021/nl034422t .
Kuykendall T. ; Pauzauskie P. J. ; Zhang Y. ; Goldberger J. ; Sirbuly D. ; Denlinger J. ; Yang P. 
Crystallographic Alignment
of High-Density Gallium Nitride Nanowire Arrays . Nat. Mater. 
2004 , 3 , 524 10.1038/nmat1177 .15273744 
Kuykendall T. R. ; Altoe M. V. P. ; Ogletree D. F. ; Aloni S. 
Catalyst-Directed Crystallographic
Orientation Control of GaN Nanowire Growth . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 6767 –6773 . 10.1021/nl502079v .25390285 
Li Q. ; Wang G. T. 
Improvement in Aligned
GaN Nanowire Growth Using Submonolayer
Ni Catalyst Films . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2008 , 93 , 043119 10.1063/1.2965798 .
Lim S. K. ; Crawford S. ; Gradečak S. 
Growth Mechanism
of GaN Nanowires:
Preferred Nucleation Site and Effect of Hydrogen . Nanotechnology 
2010 , 21 , 345604 10.1088/0957-4484/21/34/345604 .20683137 
Wang G. T. ; Talin A. A. ; Werder D. J. ; Creighton J. R. ; Lai E. ; Anderson R. J. ; Arslan I. 
Highly Aligned, Template-Free Growth
and Characterization of Vertical GaN Nanowires on Sapphire by Metal-Organic
Chemical Vapour Deposition . Nanotechnology 
2006 , 17 , 5773 10.1088/0957-4484/17/23/011 .
Zhou X. ; Chesin J. ; Crawford S. ; Gradečak S. 
Using Seed
Particle Composition to Control Structural and Optical Properties
of GaN Nanowires . Nanotechnology 
2012 , 23 , 285603 10.1088/0957-4484/23/28/285603 .22717518 
Schvartzman M. ; Nguyen K. ; Palma M. ; Abramson J. ; Sable J. ; Hone J. ; Sheetz M. ; Wind S. 
Fabrication of Nanoscale
Bioarrays for the Study of Cytoskeletal Protein Binding Interactions
Using Nanoimprint Lithography . J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.--Process. Meas., Phenom. 
2009 , 27 , 61 –65 . 10.1116/1.3043472 .19777075 
Schvartzman M. ; Wind S. J. 
Robust Pattern Transfer
of Nanoimprinted Features for
Sub-5-nm Fabrication . Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 3629 –3634 . 10.1021/nl9018512 .19722536

