
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsnano.9b08244ArticleSeparation of Specific
Single-Enantiomer Single-Wall
Carbon Nanotubes in the Large-Diameter Regime Li Han *†Gordeev Georgy ‡Garrity Oisin ‡Peyyety Naga Anirudh †§Selvasundaram Pranauv Balaji †§Dehm Simone †Krupke Ralph †§Cambré Sofie ∥Wenseleers Wim ∥Reich Stephanie ‡Zheng Ming ⊥Fagan Jeffrey A. *⊥Flavel Benjamin S. *†† Institute
of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology, Karlsruhe 76021, Germany‡ Department
of Physics, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin 14195, Germany§ Institute
of Materials Science, Technische Universität
Darmstadt, Darmstadt 64287, Germany∥ Physics
Department, University of Antwerp, Antwerp 2020, Belgium⊥ Materials
Science and Engineering Division, National
Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, United States* E-mail: han.li@kit.edu (H.L.).* E-mail: jeffrey.fagan@nist.gov (J.A.F.).* E-mail: benjamin.flavel@kit.edu (B.S.F.).19 11 2019 28 01 2020 14 1 948 963 18 10 2019 19 11 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The enantiomer-level isolation of single-walled carbon
nanotubes
(SWCNTs) in high concentration and with high purity for nanotubes
greater than 1.1 nm in diameter is demonstrated using a two-stage
aqueous two-phase extraction (ATPE) technique. In total, five different
nanotube species of ∼1.41 nm diameter are isolated, including
both metallics and semiconductors. We characterize these populations
by absorbance spectroscopy, circular dichroism spectroscopy, resonance
Raman spectroscopy, and photoluminescence mapping, revealing and substantiating
mod-dependent optical dependencies. Using knowledge of the competitive
adsorption of surfactants to the SWCNTs that controls partitioning
within the ATPE separation, we describe an advanced acid addition
methodology that enables the fine control of the separation of these
select nanotubes. Furthermore, we show that endohedral filling is
a previously unrecognized but important factor to ensure a homogeneous
starting material and further enhance the separation yield, with the
best results for alkane-filled SWCNTs, followed by empty SWCNTs, with
the intrinsic inhomogeneity of water-filled SWCNTs causing them to
be worse for separations. Lastly, we demonstrate the potential use
of these nanotubes in field-effect transistors.

chiral sortingATPESWCNTdextranPEGpolymerdocument-id-old-9nn9b08244document-id-new-14nn9b08244ccc-price
==== Body
The use of single-walled carbon
nanotubes (SWCNTs) in next-generation electronics,1 energy applications,2 biosensing,3 and quantum information4 requires the development of protocols for enrichment by their chiral
lattice structure (i.e., their species and enantiomeric handedness).
Much effort, including a combination of both selective growth5 and a wealth of processing techniques,6,7 has enabled the preparation of SWCNT populations with tailored diameter,8 length,9 wall number
and wall type,10,11 electronic properties,12 and chirality (species).13 Notably, the development of W6Co7,14 Mo2C, and WC catalysts15 and separation methods such as polymer extraction,16−19 gel permeation chromatography,20−26 density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGU),12,27−30 aqueous two-phase extraction (ATPE),31−33 and selective DNA strands13 have all allowed for rapid progress in this
area. In the small SWCNT diameter regime (Dt = 0.8 to 1 nm), these techniques have now made accessible a vast
library of chirality-pure SWCNTs and have even allowed for the discrimination
of single enantiomers.30,34−38 Regrettably, however, for SWCNT diameters larger
than 1 nm, the list of isolated single-chiral species is dramatically
smaller, and enantiomer enrichment has yet to be demonstrated.39

The reasons for the lack of resolution
among the larger diameter
nanotube species are manifold but are chiefly due to the increasing
number of species with similar diameters and difficulties in controlling
the catalyst size during growth.5 This
leads to both a greater number of species in larger diameter raw materials
and each (n,m) comprising a commensurately
lower mass fraction of the total. For example, there are ∼32
possible chiral species with a diameter of 0.6 to 1 nm (carbon-center-to-carbon-center
definition), whereas there are close to 150 species with a diameter
between 1 and 2 nm.40 This theoretical
increase is matched in experimental reports of detectable SWCNT species
from various sources. van Bezouw et al.41 detected up to 34 different semiconducting (n,m) species in plasma torch (PT) synthesis and laser vaporization
(LV) raw soot materials (Dt ≈ 0.945
to 1.53 nm) compared with CoMoCAT-SG65i (Dt ≈ 0.69 to 0.92 nm) with only 17 species.42 Both measures likely undercounted small fractional population
(n,m) species interdigitated with
the observed species and also disregarded the added complexity of
most observed species being divided between both left- and right-hand
twisted enantiomers.

As a further difficulty, large-diameter
raw soot tends to have
less dispersible SWCNT content on a mass powder basis (∼70%)
relative to its small-diameter counterparts (up to ∼95%). Consequently,
significantly more raw material is required to obtain an appreciable
quantity of any one species from a separation. Combined with the reduced
mass of any given (n,m) species
per mass, it is also generally accepted that the chemical differences
between (n,m) species decrease with
increasing diameter, as both the difference in band levels between
the metallic (m) and semiconducting (s) subpopulations is reduced
and, within these subpopulations, the variations in bond strain and
the diameters between adjacent (n,m) species are decreased.39 These factors
are likely to reduce the structural differences in adsorbed dispersant
coatings around each (n,m) species,
which are especially important for separation protocols reliant upon
surfactant-wrapped SWCNTs.39,43

A large SWCNT
diameter is also associated with an increased technical
difficulty for characterization. Indeed, few laboratories are equipped
with the appropriate combination of detectors and tunable light sources
to measure Raman and photoluminescence excitation (PLE) contour maps
of CNTs with a diameter >1.4 nm. Even for standard absorbance spectroscopy
the spectral position of the first-order semiconducting optical transition
(S11 ≈ 1400–2000 nm) becomes coincident with
absorbance features of H2O, adding technical difficulty
and cost to characterization. This is in contrast with small-diameter
SWCNTs, which exhibit all of their optical transitions at <1400
nm and thus can be observed through standard cuvettes, at lower SWCNT
concentrations, and without D2O exchange. For large-diameter
SWCNTs (generally >1.6 nm), the entire aqueous separation must
either
be performed using costly D2O or solvent-exchange processes
must be employed to allow for the observation of the S11 features.39 Lastly, for open-ended nanotubes
exposed to an aqueous environment, the signal-to-noise ratio from
all of the optical characterization methods is reduced due to the
dramatic broadening and quenching of optical features for water-filled
SWCNTs.44−46

Despite the associated challenges, electronically
defined, single-chirality,
large-diameter SWCNTs are expected to be important building blocks
for research and both electronic and photonic applications. For example,
the performance of SWCNT field-effect transistors (SWCNT-FETs) was
shown to be enhanced when using SWCNTs with a diameter >1.2 nm
due
to a reduction of the Schottky barrier height47 and the quadratic dependence of carrier mobility on the SWCNT diameter.47 Solar cells and light sensors48 will also benefit from light absorption deeper in the infrared
and the low sheet resistance of films from large-diameter SWCNTs.48,49 Type-II heterojunctions have already been shown to form between
large-diameter s-SWCNTs (Dt ≈ 1.665 nm) and fullerene acceptors with high electron affinity,49 and species such as (16,3), (15,5) (14,3), and
(13,5) (Dt ≈ 1.25–1.43 nm)48 are predicted to have the least overlap with
the solar spectrum in the region of silicon absorption, an important
property for their use as a conductive layer in Si-CNT solar cells.48 In emerging photonic technologies, the infrared
position of S11 and the generation of controlled emissive
defect states50 make large-diameter SWCNTs
technologically attractive for electrically driven on-chip single-photon
emitters in telecommunications.4 Moreover,
the endohedral volume of large-diameter SWCNTs also provide a scaffold
for advanced 1D heterostructures such as dye molecules to create new
nanoprobes for bioimaging,51 nonlinear
optical phenomena,52 and energy-transfer
processes.41

The process we use to
isolate the large-diameter SWCNT species
and enantiomers in this contribution is ATPE. ATPE provides key advantages
for the isolation of SWCNTs in the large-diameter regime such as the
ability to process concentrated SWCNT dispersions, ready scale-up
through the use of larger containers, the tailorable control of conditions
affecting partitioning, and even easy concentration of final products
via partition into a small volume of the opposing phase39,53 to facilitate solvent exchange and reduce material expense. The
true advantage of ATPE, however, is that it is sensitive to extremely
small differences in the surfactant shell around an SWCNT,54 providing the necessary resolution in the large-diameter
regime. In this regard, strong oxidants, reductants,55 salts,54 temperature,54 and surfactant concentration39 have been shown to modulate the composition and density
of the surfactant shell and enable separation. Most recently, we have
demonstrated the use of pH to control ATPE,56 which adds the ability to modulate species-based SWCNT partitioning
while the global surfactant composition remains (nearly) fixed. In
this contribution, we combine this advance with the use of alkane-filled
SWCNTs for the large-diameter nanotubes to improve the characterizability
of the optical properties and simplify the spectroscopic analysis.44 We now further develop the use of acid in the
ATPE system to extract large-diameter SWCNT enantiomers.

Results and Discussion
The acid-addition ATPE separation
approach is illustrated in Figure 1a. A parent SWCNT
suspension is added to a self-separating polyethylene glycol (PEG)/dextran
(DX) two-phase system, resulting in a known global surfactant concentration(s)
and typically partitioning the SWCNTs into the bottom phase. For competition
between bile salts and surfactants such as SDS, the addition of HCl
aliquots changes the equilibrium composition of the adsorbed interfacial
layer on the SWCNTs in an orderly fashion and drives those SWCNTs
whose interfaces change with the acid addition to partition from the
bottom DX to the top PEG phase.56 The resultant
SWCNT-containing PEG phase is then removed and replaced with a clean
mimic PEG phase (containing a surfactant composition at concentrations
truly mimicking the original two-phase system), and the process is
repeated to obtain a series of stage-1 fractions (T1–Tn), with more total acid added for each new top phase. These
fractions are either used directly (T1, T2,
T3, T6) or recombined (T4, T5) with fresh DX mimic phase in a cascade series to generate
stage-2 fractions (e.g., T4T1, T4T2, T4T3). Although further stages
are possible, the cascade was intentionally restricted to two stages
to impart an inherent simplicity to the approach and improve the reproducibility
for others in the field. The important concept is that in a pH-driven
ATPE approach, the global surfactant concentrations do not change,
only the distribution of the surfactants between the SWCNT surface
and the soluble/insoluble molecules in solution, and thus it is highly
important that appropriate conditions are found prior to separation.

Figure 1 Illustration
of the aqueous two-phase separation and preparation
of the parent SWCNT suspension for enantiomer sorting. (a) A two-phase
extraction cascade consisting of two stages is used to separate the
parent suspension into (n,m) pure
fractions. In stage 1, the parent (initially located in the bottom
phase) is split into sequential top-phase fractions (T1–Tn) by adding increasing volumes
of HCl. Between each acid addition, the top phase (Tn) is extracted and replaced by a fresh mimic top phase. In
stage 2, a top-phase fraction (Tn) is
added to fresh bottom phase to re-establish the two-phase system before
repeating the sequential addition of HCl to obtain new top-phase fractions
(TnTm). (b)
Proposed mechanism for pH-driven ATPE separation of large-diameter
(∼1.5 nm) SWCNTs. Before the addition of HCl, the SWCNTs are
mainly wrapped in DOC/SC, and their surfactant shell is chirality-dependent.
After the addition of HCl, the protonation of the carboxylic acid
on DOC/SC leads to an increase in their aggregation number and the
formation of surfactant aggregates in solution. Consequently, DOC/SC
is replaced by SDS around the nanotube, and this occurs in a chirality-dependent
manner. This process drives the nanotubes into the PEG phase. (c)
C16H34@EA SWCNTs are dispersed in H2O via sonication in 2% DOC, followed by centrifugation, rate-zonal
centrifugation, and electronic-type separation to obtain two parent
suspensions.

Surfactant Conditions
Surfactant concentrations must
be used that ensure discriminable differences in the surfactant shells
of different (n,m) species with
enough sensitivity to achieve separation within a limited number of
steps. In the past, Li et al.56 used a
sodium deoxycholate (DOC)/sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) cosurfactant
mixture of 0.05% DOC/0.5% SDS to separate small-diameter (Dt ≈ 0.9 nm) SWCNTs in one to three steps,
Fagan et al.39,42 used combinations from 0.04 to
0.15% DOC with 0.5 to 1.2% SDS, and Subbaiyan et al.54 showed that the addition of sodium cholate (SC) (0.05%
DOC/1 to 2% SDS/0.5% SC) further enhanced the purity of specific small-diameter
chiralities and allowed for the number of experimental steps to be
reduced to 2. These authors discussed the importance of more DOC and
less SDS for larger diameter SWCNTs along with the importance of SC
to introduce a selectivity to the chiral angle, as first demonstrated
for specific small diameters54 or enantiomeric
types.42,56 Previously, it was found that at sufficiently
high DOC concentration, all SWCNTs separate in the more hydrophilic
DX phase, which was interpreted as the critical concentration for
SWCNTs to be coated with a completed DOC layer.57 For SC, this critical concentration is slightly higher
(∼0.2 to 0.3%), whereas for SDS-dominated interfaces, the SWCNTs
normally separate in the less hydrophilic top phase.54 Surfactant concentration and competition between the surfactants
then determine the ATPE separation. In the competition for the SWCNT
surface, at equivalent surfactant concentrations, it is often observed
that the binding affinity follows the order DOC > SC ≫ SDS,
with each of them also depending on the SWCNT (n,m) type.56 In the current contribution,
global surfactant concentrations of 0.15% DOC/0.225% SDS/0.9% SC were
employed. The role of each surfactant is shown in Figure 1b, and a description of how
these conditions were obtained is discussed later.

In the past,
the importance of DOC to pH-driven ATPE has been discussed by Li et
al.,56 and both DOC and SC have similar
chemical structures and might a priori be expected
to behave similarly. In brief, the protonation of the carboxylic acid
on DOC (or SC) leads to its aggregation and the replacement by SDS
on the nanotube’s surface. The susceptibility to protonation
by acid addition for the two bile salts is similar (DOC, pKa 6.6; SC, pKa 6.4)
and is much larger than that for SDS.56,58 Despite their
similarity, DGU experiments have demonstrated that for SC, the density
of the SWCNT/surfactant complexes shows pronounced variations with
SWCNT structure up to large diameters, indicating a much more pronounced
variation of surfactant packing than with DOC.45,59 These variations were moreover shown to be enhanced with decreasing
SC concentration (0.7 vs 2%).45 The marked
differences in surfactant coating between SC and DOC were attributed
to the extra OH group on the cholesterol moiety of SC, creating a
polar face and forcing a face-on stacking on the SWCNT surface, which
is more structure- and diameter- selective (leaving gaps in the surfactant
coating depending on how the stacking matches the circumference of
the tubes and creating large variations in density as well as in hydrophobicity),
whereas DOC has only one polar edge, allowing for a more flexible,
overlapping stacking on the SWCNT wall, which can hence more flexibly
adapt to different diameters.

The strategy for isolating single
SWCNT species in the large-diameter
range is thus to determine conditions under which a lower pKa bile salt surfactant, in this case SC, will
continue to cover most SWCNT (n,m) species as the DOC content is effectively depleted through the
acid addition. This is the basis for enhancing the otherwise insufficient
contrast at two separation stages for single (n,m) species in the >1.4 nm regime. At the specific surfactant
concentrations used, SWCNTs begin in the more hydrophilic DX phase,
indicating a complete coating by the bile salt surfactants. By increasing
the acid addition, bile salt molecules are preferentially removed
from the SWCNT surface, leading to partial coverage by SDS and eventual
migration to the top phase. It is expected that those (n,m) species with the least complete bile surfactant
coating will be the first to become covered by SDS (or at least a
disrupted bile salt coverage) and hence the first to migrate into
the PEG phase. As previously shown by DGU,45,59 an incomplete bile-salt stacking around the SWCNT is promoted by
the inclusion of SC. Whereas the exact surfactant packing in the DGU
work may not be directly comparable to the present conditions, as
here a three-surfactant system is used, the specific diameter-dependent
stacking of SC on the SWCNT walls does explain why adding SC is required
for this separation. Here the structure-dependent surfactant stacking
is even further enhanced by the precisely balanced competition with
the other surfactants (combination with DOC) and by the extreme sensitivity
of the ATPE separation to subtle differences in the surfactant coating.
This allows for the resolution of SWCNT (n,m) species to the single-enantiomer level.

Separation and Spectral Analysis
In this contribution,
electric-arc (EA)-discharge-synthesized SWCNTs were used as the starting
material. The EA-SWCNTs have open ends, and to avoid water filling,
endohedral filling with hexadecane (C16H34)
was performed prior to separation.44 EA-SWCNTs
have an average diameter of ∼1.55 nm, with their full diameter
distribution spanning approximately 1.25 to 1.7 nm, and have S11 features in the 1550–2100 nm wavelength range, S22 features in the 900–1100 nm range, and S33 features in the visible (450–550 nm) wavelength range. M11 features are centered around ∼650 nm. To ease separation,
all SWCNT samples in this work were first purified of impurities using
bulk centrifugation, followed by rate-zonal ultracentrifugation60 to remove residual small bundles and other remaining
impurities. This parent dispersion was subsequently processed via
ATPE39,55,60 to yield highly
separated s- and m-SWCNT parent
populations. Absorbance spectra of the parent C16H 34@EA populations are presented in Figure 1c. As discussed later, additional parent
suspensions were also tested, and their absorbance spectra along with
PLE maps can be found in the Supporting Information (SI) in Figures S1 and S13. These
samples consisted of alternative endohedral fillings (H2O or C24H50), EA-AP (as-prepared) SWCNTs, which
are essentially the same as EA but contain some close-ended (and thus
empty) SWCNTs, and two other raw soot sources, known as PT and EA2.
EA2 are also electric-arc-discharge SWCNTs but consist of a slightly
smaller average (n,m) distribution
compared with the EA and EA-AP samples. In all cases, the spectra
show strong and sharp absorbance features, which are sharpened in
comparison with water-filled SWCNTs by the predispersion filling with
an alkane.

Absorption spectra for the first six top-phase fractions
(T1–T6) at stage 1 for the semiconducting
C16H34@EA parent are shown in Figure 2a. Spectra for the complete
(T1–T12) top-phase fractions are reported
in the SI (Figure S2). Excitingly, the first three (T1–T3) fractions as well as the sixth (T6) contain highly enriched
chirality SWCNT populations at stage 1. Because of their similarity,
T1–T3 were combined to yield T1–3. Both T1–3 and T6 were concentrated
(T1–3 = 30 to ∼8 mL, T6 = 10 to
∼1.5 mL) and transferred to D2O while removing all
polymers using repeated ultrafiltration. The resulting fractions and
their spectra are shown in Figure 2b,c, respectively. After concentration, it can be seen
that T1–3 is indeed highly pure and can be assigned
to the (14,6) species, which has a diameter of 1.411 nm.61 T6 is assigned to (15,5) with a diameter
of 1.431 nm.61 The ability to concentrate
fractions and exchange solvents in this way is important because it
ensures “clean” spectra and allows for accurate chiral
identification and purity analysis. Fractions T4 and T5 were taken for stage 2 of the cascade, and the results are
shown in Figure 2d,e.
The original spectra in H2O can be found in Figure S3. The nondiscrete nature of the surfactant
shell around any (n,m) species leads
to some breadth in the extraction conditions, even for a uniform population,
and T4 can be seen to contain residual (14,6) from the
obtained population primarily extracted in T1–T3 due to this effect. To further purify T4, these
SWCNTs were isolated at stage 2 by the addition of a mimic bottom
phase to increase the available DOC concentration, partitioning all
other species to the bottom and allowing the extraction of the residual
(14,6) in T4T1. After the complete extraction
of (14,6), the bottom phase T4B1 was re-extracted
to the top phase using the acid-addition methodology to form T4T2, which is found to be a single-chirality population
assignable from optical characterization (vide infra) as the (16,3) species with a diameter of 1.405 nm.61 The comparison of T1, T4, and T5 reveals that the relative concentration of (14,6) is at first
high in T1, is reduced to only contaminant-level fractional
concentration by the extraction for fraction T4, but then
is observed again at high fractional concentration in T5. This is an indication that there are two different (14,6) populations
that adsorb discriminably different surfactant shells in the C16H34@EA parent. This second population of the (14,6)
species is obtained in the greatest fractional concentration in T5T2.

Figure 2 Separation of the C16H34@EA semiconducting
parent. (a) Absorption spectra of stage-1 fractions in H2O (T1–T6). T1–T3 and T6 contained single-chirality SWCNTs after
stage 1, and these were concentrated and transferred to D2O. (b) Photograph of the (n,m)
pure fractions obtained and (c) their absorption spectra. T4 and T5 were further processed in stage 2, and the corresponding
spectra are shown in panels d and e, respectively. To improve the
spectral clarity, all stage-2 fractions were concentrated and transferred
to D2O. Note: The absorbance of water shifts with pH, and
the scattering in the samples increases with increasing acid content.
Therefore, all fractions measured in H2O contain a water-related
component at 1350–1450 nm and are responsible for the negative
absorbance distortions in samples. The increased short wavelength
absorbance below 500 nm in T5 and T6 is due
to scattering. T1–3 was assigned to (14,6) with
a diameter of 1.411 nm (S11 = 1660 nm, S22 =
1003 nm, S33 = 479 nm, S44 = 459 nm). T6 was assigned to (15,5) with a diameter of 1.431 nm (S11 = 1766 nm, S22 = 938 nm, S33 = 544
nm, S44 = 365 nm). T4T2 was assigned
to (16,3) with a diameter of 1.405 nm (S11 = 1763 nm, S22 = 913 nm, S33 = 545 nm, S44 = 376
nm).

Following on from the results of Figure 2, a question arises as to whether
it is possible
to obtain further single-chirality species. Examination of higher
order fractions at stage 1 (T7–T12, Figure S2) were not found to contain single-chirality
species, and those fractions that appeared to be ideal candidates
for separation at stage 2 (T7, T8, Figure S3) were unable to be further enriched
(T7–8, Figure S3c). Nevertheless,
a clear trend of increasing diameter can be seen from T1 to T12. The inability to enrich other species implies
that for 0.15% DOC/0.225% SDS/0.9% SC, the surfactant shells around
(15,5), (16,3), and two populations of (14,6) are very different compared
with all of the other species in the C16H34@EA
parent, which are extracted under conditions consistent with the weaker
SDS–DOC diameter dependence previously reported by Fagan et
al.39 This dependence does not generate
a sufficient difference in surfactant shells between other species
under the current global surfactant conditions to enable resolution
in two stages by pH-driven ATPE. This is strongly consistent with
the previous DGU experiments and our strategy previously outlined
to find a resolving surfactant concentration, as DGU reports only
showed a fluctuation in the SC coating around SWCNT species with a
diameter close to (14,6).45 The importance
of the global surfactant concentration being appropriately tailored
is highlighted in Figure S4, where the
DOC concentration is varied from 0 to 0.2% for a stage-1 separation
of (14,6). For the addition of similar aliquots of HCl, the purity
of the (14,6) fraction is dramatically reduced on either side of 0.15%
DOC and demonstrates the highly sensitive role played by the surfactant
concentration in the relative competition with SDS and SC. Furthermore,
the importance of SC in combination with DOC is shown in Figure S5, where a comparable separation to that
in Figure 2a was not
obtained in the absence of SC. The next species in the EA parent with
a diameter closest to those isolated in this work is (17,1), but its
low abundance makes enrichment and observation difficult. This is
followed by (12,8), but it is clear that the isolation of it and other
(n,m) species will require further
optimization of the global surfactant conditions and is the focus
of future work.

The most exciting notion about the discriminably
different extraction
conditions for two (14,6) populations from the same source soot is
that these two populations are the left- and right-handed enantiomers,
that is, (14,6) and (20, −6), differing in structure only in
the twist direction of the carbon lattice. Absorbance spectra of the
two (14,6) populations (T1–3, T5T2) are shown in Figure 3a and are consistent with this hypothesis. (See also Figure S23.) The absorbance spectra of the two
(14,6) populations are nearly identical, except for a slight red shift
of T1–3 relative to T5T2 of
5 nm at the S11 (Δ = 2.2 meV). The shift for S22 (0.5 nm, Δ = 0.5 meV), S33 (0.6 nm, Δ
= 3.2 meV), and S44 (0.3 nm, Δ = 1.2 meV) is <1
nm and below the resolution of our instrument. This sort of difference
has previously been observed for small-diameter SWCNT enantiomers,62 for which the different packing structure of
the naturally handed surfactant, in our case DOC or SC, on (n,m) versus (n + m, −n) leads to differences in the
dielectric environment experienced by the SWCNT. Moreover, as shown
in Figure 3a, it is
the fraction T1–3 that is red-shifted, which suggestive
of a larger dielectric constant, such as would be expected for a CNT
surface exposed more to water due to a less complete surfactant coverage
(both fractions were dispersed in 1% DOC in D2O for the
measurement), in line with the weaker adsorption of DOC to the T1–3 (14,6) SWCNT interface and the partition order of
T1–3 before T5T2.

Figure 3 Enantiomer
enrichment and separation of the C16H34@EA metallic
parent. (a) Absorption in D2O and
(b) circular dichroism (CD) spectra of the two (14,6) enantiomers
(T1–3 and T5T2). CD spectra
were referenced against each fraction’s S33 absorption
intensity and measured three to seven times in 1% DOC in D2O. The error bars represent k = 1 standard deviations
of the propagated uncertainties. As scaled by the absorbance of the
S33 peak to correct for the different concentrations of
the samples, the two samples have large and near-equal opposing signals
at each optical transition (S33, S44, and higher
order). Moreover, the absence of a significant CDnorm signal
from the parent strongly indicates that the two enantiomers are not
significantly divergent in abundance in the parent population. (c)
Stage-1 separation of the C16H34@EA metallic
parent in H2O to obtain a series of top-phase fractions
(T1–T8). The upgoing signal at 1400 nm
is due to H2O. (d) T1 and T2 were
combined, concentrated, and transferred to D2O to improve
the spectral clarity. (e) CD spectrum of (13,7). T1–2 in panel d is assigned to (13,7) with a diameter of 1.40 nm (M11H = 689 nm, M11L = 638 nm), where the presence of two peaks
is due to trigonal warping effects.

Circular dichroism (CD) absorbance spectroscopy
is, however, the
primary characterization method for determining enantiomer enrichment
and handedness of SWCNT populations. CD spectra and photographs of
T1–3, T5T2, and the parent
semiconducting SWCNT dispersion are presented in Figure 3b. CD spectra of the fractions
demonstrate the two (14,6) populations to be highly enriched in opposite
twist enantiomers (T1–3 = R-(14,6), T5T2 = L-(14,6)) and to an approximately equal degree, as
scaled by the absorbance of the S33 optical transition
to account for concentration differences between the samples.63 CD spectra of the (15,5) and (16,3) fractions
are shown in Figure S12 and also are observed
to have strong CD signals. Despite the inability to isolate both enantiomers
for each species, highly enantiomer-enriched populations of R-(15,5)
and R-(16,3) were obtained.

Similar separations using the acid-addition
ATPE strategy are achievable
for metallic SWCNTs, with a stage-1 separation of metallic C16H34@EA shown in Figure 3c and stage-2 separation shown in Figure S6. Unlike with the semiconducting parent, further
enrichment at stage 2 was not found to yield additional single-chirality
species. However, the discrimination of species is significantly more
difficult for metallic than semiconducting SWCNTs.39 Combining and concentrating fractions T1 and
T2 at stage 1 into 1% DOC in D2O (i.e., to form
T1–2), it can be seen that a single (n,m) is highly enriched by the procedure. The absorbance
spectra of this fraction are reported in Figure 3d and can be assigned to (13,7) with a diameter
of 1.40 nm.64 Prior to this measurement,
it should be noted that contamination from residual semiconducting
species (absorbing in the 1600–1800 nm range in T1 and T2) was removed from T1–2 by performing
a second semiconducting/metallic separation. Despite being of a different
electronic type, it is worth noting that (13,7) and (14,6) have similar
diameters and that they both partition into the upper, PEG-rich ATPE
phase after the addition of similar HCl aliquots and thus appear in
fractions T1–T3. This implies that for
the global surfactant conditions used, it is the nanotube diameter
that is primarily determining the surfactant shell and not the electronic
type. Other metallic species with similar diameters to the (14,6),
(15,5), and (16,3) fractions include the (12,9), (16,4), (17,2), and
(18,0) fractions; however, we were unable to isolate these species
from the EA population. Except for the (16,4) fraction, this is likely
attributable to the lower abundance of those species in the starting
material. As shown in Figure 3e, the (13,7) fraction isolated in fraction T1–2 is also enantiomerically enriched, with the population in T1–2 the R-(13,7) enantiomer, as determined by the CD
spectra.

To demonstrate that the obtained fractions are not
an artifact
from the use of a certain batch of starting material, we repeated
the separation with multiple other SWCNT populations with different
filler molecules and from other sources. For all cases, the surfactant
concentrations and HCl additions used were comparable to those for
the C16H34@EA samples. For alkane-filled SWCNT
populations, highly equivalent separations were generated to those
described above; as an example, separation results for a C24H50@PT semiconducting parent are reported in Figure S7. There are slight variations attributable
to the different (n,m) distributions
of the EA and PT SWCNTs, but the fact that the (14,6) species appears
in an identical fraction (T1) supports the hypothesis of
the separation dependence upon the surfactant shell composition, which
is, in turn, coupled to the nanotube species rather than a process
that is specific to a particular raw soot.

Importantly, the
second set of control experiments investigated
the effects of endohedral filling on the separation, including results
on semiconducting separated populations from H2O@EA, H2O@EA2, and empty EA-AP-SWCNT parents. Results from these experiments
suggest that alkane filling affects the separation more significantly
than simply reducing spectral broadness during postseparation characterization.
For both semiconducting H2O@SWCNT parent populations the
purity of the extracted (14,6) and other species was dramatically
reduced, and it became difficult to obtain single-chiral species at
stage 1 or 2. In both cases, additional SWCNTs (S11 ≈
1750–1850 nm) were found to partition with (14,6), and this
was also accompanied by a reduction in yield (concentration) relative
to the alkane-filled samples; the spectra of the fraction extracted
from the H2O@EA SWCNT and H2O@EA2 semiconducting
populations are reported in Figures S8 and S9, respectively. In contrast, for the empty@EA-AP parents (Figures S10 and S11), the separation of (14,6),
(16,3), and (15,5) was found to be possible, with the fraction numbers
closely following those of the C16H34@EA parent.
The purity and yield were also higher compared with the H2O-filled samples. Unfortunately, a similar spectral shoulder to those
observed for the water-filled SWCNTs was observed in several of the
fractions (∼1750–1850 nm in (T3T1, T2)), reducing the achieved purity relative to the C16H34-filled fractions. This is likely the result
of <100% isolation of empty SWCNTs from residual water-filled EA-AP-SWCNTs
during the rate-zonal centrifugation, the presence of which were confirmed
in the population using Raman spectroscopy (Figure S26a). This highlights an additional benefit of using alkane-filled
SWCNTs, which is that the population should be entirely alkane-filled
and so should not suffer from heterogeneity, as a population of empty
SWCNTs contaminated with solvent-filled ones can.

This observation
of a significant improvement in ATPE resolution
for alkane-filled and empty SWCNTs over water-filled ones may significantly
explain why it has taken so long for single-chiral species in the
large-diameter regime to appear in the literature. During sonication,
to disperse the CNTs with surfactants, any open-ended nanotubes will
fill with the solvent, and many closed-ended (i.e., empty) SWCNTs
(if there are any in the population to begin with) will break and
spontaneously fill with solvent.60 In their
previous report, Fagan et al.39 utilized
almost exclusively empty SWCNTs separated after sonication for their
reported SDS-DOC ATPE experiments, but primarily to aid characterization,
and so did not draw this conclusion. It is possible to speculate that
such endohedral water (and hydronium or oxygen species), and potentially
cations, dramatically increases the heterogeneity of the chemical
environment felt by the surfactant around the nanotubes. Ideally,
the chemical environment for adsorption to the SWCNT sidewall is specified
by the intrinsic lattice structure of the nanotube itself, and this
translates into a variation in the surfactant coverage between (n,m) species and enantiomers. With the
inclusion of water, however, it seems apparent that a sufficient proportion
of that chemical environment is determined by the effects of water
broadening the partition coefficient curves for SWCNTs and greatly
reducing discrimination in ATPE. This is one of the key scientific
findings of our work and is expected to be relevant not just for ATPE
separation but for all surfactant-based methods. To date, the endohedral
environment has been neglected (in separation methods not reliant
upon density), but here we show that it is a controlling factor for
nanotube separation.

Having isolated near-mono chiral and highly
enantiomer-enriched
populations of the (14,6) and other species, we also utilized the
additional optical characterization methods of PLE and resonant Raman
spectroscopy (RRS) to quantify the success of the separations and
to explore intrinsic optical phenomena.

Photoluminescence Excitation Spectroscopy
2D PLE maps
allowed (n,m) purity to be quantified
in the semiconducting fractions. Fractions from the C16H34@EA semiconducting parent are shown in Figure 4a. Spectra for the C24H50, H2O-filled, and empty fractions can be
found in Figure S14. Histogram plots of
the photoluminescence intensity were then generated from advanced
fitting of the PLE maps, as outlined in the SI for each sample, and are provided in Figures S15–S22. For the C16H34-filled
samples, the purity of the separated populations was determined to
be 79, 69, 78, and 44% for R-(14,6), L-(14,6), R-(16,3), and R-(15,5),
respectively, although ignoring differences in photoluminescence (PL)
quantum yield and absorption cross sections. This is compared with
total (both enantiomer) fractional concentrations in the parent population
of ∼9.2% (including both (14,6) enantiomers), 3.7% for the
(16,3), and 4.4% for the (15,5). Applying the method of Yomogida et
al.,23 which takes the ratio of the enantiomer
mass to the total mass of the semiconducting parent, we were able
to estimate the yield of the enriched fractions to be 8.1, 1.7, 1.5,
and 3.8% for the R-(14,6), R-(16,3), L-(14,6), and R-(15,5), respectively.
This calculation considers interfacial trapping, which was estimated
to be 32% of the semiconducting parent. The purity of C24H50 filled (14,6) from the PT parent was also high at
75%. As expected from the previous discussion, the empty samples were
less pure with 71, 59, and 49% for (14,6), (16,3), and (15,5), and
the H2O-filled samples were below this at 20–40%.
As seen previously by Cambré et al.45,52 and others,60 the endohedral environment
strongly impacts the spectral position of the observed emission. Relative
to the empty samples, the endohedral filling red-shifted the S11 emission of (14,6) by ∼30 nm for H2O and
∼14–16 nm for the alkanes. A 3 nm shift in the emission
wavelength was also observed between the two C16H34@(14,6) enantiomers, as shown in Figure S23, consistent with the work of Ghosh et al.30 and the 5 nm S11 shift previously noted in the absorbance
analysis.

Figure 4 Optical characterization of fractions obtained from the semiconducting
C16H34@EA parent. (a) Photoluminescence excitation
(PLE) map and (b) radial breathing mode (RBM) resonance Raman maps
constructed from spectra at 20 different excitation energies. A dashed
line indicates excitation via S22, S33, or S44 in the PLE maps and divides energy ranges where the resonance
of S44, S33, and M11 is expected
in the Raman maps. The cyan (S44) and magenta (S33) open circles and yellow (M11) open squares are from
the Kataura plot and indicate the transition energy as a function
of tube diameter. A solid circle indicates the expected Raman shift
for the (n,m) species displayed.

Raman Spectroscopy
The sorted fractions were additionally
characterized with 2D resonant Raman maps, which were constructed
from radial breathing mode (RBM) spectra at 20 different excitation
energies. These are displayed in Figure 4b for the semiconducting fractions and Figure 5a for the metallic
fractions. The raw data can be found in Figures S24a–e and S25a,b. The excitation range partially covered
the S33 (blue dots) and S44 (violet dots) transitions,
and the chirality assignment data were obtained from Araujo et al.65 and Doorn et al.66 In the C16H34@EA semiconducting parent, multiple
intense peaks are present, each composed of signals from multiple
chiralities of similar diameters and transition energies. In the enriched
samples, only one SWCNT dominates. Figure S24f provides a closer examination of the RBM spectra obtained at 2.75
eV, where the parent and T4T2 samples are compared
in resonance with S33. The RBM spectrum of the parent consists
of several peaks (gray and red), whereas the spectrum of T4T2 has only one belonging to R-(16,3) and is evidence
of excellent enrichment. RRS maps are particularly important for the
characterization of metallic SWCNT populations because these species
are not active in PLE. RRS confirms the isolation of R-(13,7) in its
enriched sample, and once again, a comparison of single-line RBM spectra
obtained at 1.8 eV for the C16H34@EA metallic
parent and T1–2 in Figure S25c shows a dramatic reduction in the number of peaks. The narrow peak
observed in T1–2 is resonant with M11L of R-(13,7)
and is in contrast with the five different RBMs in the parent.

Figure 5 Characterization
by RBM resonance Raman maps and Raman intensity
profile. (a) RBM resonance Raman map of C16H34@R-(13,7). The yellow (M11) open squares
are from the Kataura plot and indicate the transition energy as a
function of tube diameter. A solid square indicates the expected Raman
shift for (13,7). (b) Comparison of the RBM:G+ intensity
for excitation at S33 and S44 of R-(14,6). (c)
Absorption spectra of R-(14,6) compared with (d) the calibrated Raman
intensity. (e) Absorption spectra of R-(13,7) compared with (f) the
calibrated Raman RBM for excitation at M11L and M11H.

We also use the characterization of the separated
samples with
RRS to extract for the first time precise transition energy and RBM
shifts due to the alkane filler as compared with empty SWCNTs without
the confounding effects of a multispecies population. In Figure 4b, it can be seen
that the transition energies differ between the empty SWCNTs (black
dots) and the C16H34-filled samples. By applying
third-order perturbation theory to the Raman profile67 (solid lines in Figure 5d,f), the transition energies were obtained, and the
absolute values are listed for all species in Table S8. S44 of the alkane-filled (14,6) species
and S33 of the (15,5) and (16,3) species were found to
shift 40 and 10 meV, respectively, to lower energies relative to the
empty SWCNTs.

The RBM frequencies of the C16H34-filled
SWCNTs exceeded those of the empty species by 2–8 cm–1. RBM spectra and peak positions for the empty, alkane-, and water-filled
SWCNTs can be found in Figure S26. The
RBM peak of the empty nanotube fits the expected position,67 and filling stiffens the radial vibration and
alters the RBM frequency. The effects are best observed using the
example of the (14,6) species. Once the nanotube is filled with water
molecules, the RBM peak of the (14,6) species is shifted to a higher
frequency, although this is partially obscured by the reduced purity
of the population separable from a water-filled population. A shift
of 5 cm–1 between empty and water-filled samples
is consistent with previous studies.46,68 C16H34 filling provides an additional upshift of 1 cm–1 compared with water-filled species. The absence of
two peaks for the alkane-filled sample suggests that it is more homogeneous
compared with the water-filled samples. The water-filled sample contains
both empty and water-filled nanotubes and a small quantity of other
(n,m) types, as shown in the absorption
data. RBM frequencies of the R and L (14,6) enantiomers in 1% DOC/H2O were found to be the same within an experimental error of
0.005 cm–1. All other chiralities were found to
have a similar shift between the empty and C16H34-filled cases. Combined with the transition energy shift, the change
in RBM frequency shifts suggests a high packing density of alkane
chains inside the nanotube. This is an example of the versatility
of the nanotube physics, where optical properties can be tailored
by the endohedral filler.

Another characterization made possible
by the obtainment of large-diameter
SWCNTs is related to exciton–phonon coupling. The transition
number and (2n + m) mod 3 type of
an SWCNT define the position in the reciprocal space where the exciton
formation occurs. The exciton–RBM coupling is high for the
excitons originating from the K–M valley, whereas in the K−Γ
valley, it is weak.69 (14,6) is a type-1 s-SWCNT; therefore, S33 is in the K−Γ
valley and S44 is in the K–M valley. The RBM intensity
profile of (14,6) covering S33 and S44 is shown
in Figure 5d. The intensity
of the RBM in resonance with S44 was found to be up to
20 times larger compared with the S33. For comparison,
the absorption cross section does not contain a phonon-coupling term
and has very similar cross sections for S33 and S44 (Figure 5c). On the
contrary, (13,7) is a metallic SWCNT, and the Raman profile shows
a significant enhancement at M11L and almost no intensity at M11H despite both transitions having
similar absorption cross sections (Figure 5e,f). The low RBM intensity at M11H is related to
an exciton from the K−Γ valley.66

To confirm that the interplay of the RBM intensities is related
to the exciton–phonon coupling, it is possible to exclude exciton–photon
coupling by comparing the RBM and the G modes. The coupling strength
between the exciton and the G-mode phonon in semiconducting SWCNTs
is proportional to the energy of the excitonic state.70 The S33 and S44 transitions of (14,6)
have close energies and thus provide similar G-mode intensities, in
contrast with the RBMs; see Figure 5b. The G mode comprises two components: the G+ longitudinal
(LO) and the G– transverse (TO) at 1591 and 1566 cm–1, respectively. The ratios between the RBM and G+ increase dramatically
from 0.01 at S33 to 0.25 at S44. This is consistent
with resonance Raman profiles of RBMs and confirms the effects related
to exciton–phonon coupling. The resonance window of the G mode
is greater than the distance between these transitions, which allows
for an overlap of the G-mode Raman profiles. Because of overlap, the
phonons excited simultaneously at the different transitions interfere
in a peculiar way; the LO (TO) phonons interfere negatively (positively),
providing lower (higher) intensity in resonance with S33 compared with S44. The monochiral samples in this work
allow for a direct comparison between the absorbance and the RBM resonance
Raman profile across S33 and S44 and confirm
that G phonons interfere with each other when transitions are tight
enough. Additionally, the RBM intensity oscillates depending on the
transition number and the mod 3 type.

Separation Mechanism
Having previously discussed the
hypothesized ATPE separation mechanism in detail, we now use the separated
fractions to analyze the accuracy of this hypothesis. To test the
hypothesis that the DOC coating is reduced on the extracted SWCNTs
(n,m) species relative to the general
EA (n,m) population, analytical
ultracentrifugation (AUC) experiments were conducted at 10 g/L DOC
to obtain the anhydrous density of the SWCNT–DOC complex for
the (14,6) SWCNT compared with values for the entire semiconducting
alkane-filled population. The value of the s-SWCNT
parent (gray) is from alkane-filled SWCNTs from the same EA soot reported
by Campo et al.44 Results from the AUC
experiments, shown in Figure 6a, find that both the (14,6) (T1–3) and
(13,7) (T1–2) populations exhibit the best estimate
anhydrous densities greater than the average for the mixed (n,m) alkane-filled population. Because
of the lower density of a DOC molecule compared with an alkane-filled
SWCNT, and in line with previous analysis,59 this greater anhydrous density of the (14,6) population implies
a lower DOC binding density for the (14,6) than for the other SWCNTs
in the EA synthesis (n,m) distribution.
This result thus supports the mechanism hypothesis supporting the
separation strategy enabling the separation of the fractions. Other
methods for comparatively determining the quantity of bound surfactants
are currently infeasible at the quantities of sample produced to date.71,72

Figure 6 Characterization
by analytical ultracentrifugation and CNT-FETs.
(a) Viscosity-corrected mean sedimentation coefficients for the (14,6)
and (13,7) species versus the density of the solution as adjusted
by the amount of D2O (anhydrous density) compared with
the s-SWCNT parent. Uncertainties are one standard
deviation, and experiments were conducted at 10 g/L DOC. (b) Representative
curve of the source-drain current versus the gate voltage (ID–VGIS) at a source drain voltage (VSD) of 0.5 V from the CNT-FET device of C16H34@R-(14,6). An SEM image of the device measured is shown
as an inset. (c) Scatter plot of the on-state conductance (Gon) versus the on/off ratio. The number of SWCNTs
in a 600 nm channel are indicated between brackets.

SWCNT-FET Devices
Lastly, to demonstrate the utility
of (14,6) as a functional material, we have fabricated SWCNT transistor
devices, as shown in Figure 6b. Here it is important to state that the SWCNTs still contain
alkane, and no effort was made to remove the filler for final devices.
The transistor channel length (LCH) was
adapted to the AFM-derived nanotube length distribution to obtain
short-channel devices in which nanotubes make direct contact between
electrodes. All transistor devices show a uniform p-type conduction
with a typical on-state current density of ∼1 μA/μm
at 0.5 V source-drain bias VSD and an
on/off ratio of up to 6 × 106. Out of the nine measured
devices (Figure S27), only one device showed
metallic behavior, with an off-state current on the order of 3 to
4 μA. To make the number of bridging nanotubes per device countable
by SEM, the nanotube density per contact was deliberately kept low
to about 1–5 SWCNTs μm–1 by choosing
the dielectrophoretic deposition parameters accordingly. In Figure 6c. the conductance
per micrometer channel width (WCH) versus
the on/off ratio is plotted. The data show that the single-chirality
SWCNTs in this diameter range are suitable for fabricating transistors
with competitive performance, in particular, when comparing with transistors
made from aqueous solution-processed nanotubes.73 Still, there is room for improvement. The device mobility,
μ, as calculated via μ = (LCH/WCH)(1/CG·VSD)(dISD/dVG), with CG determined by the parallel plate capacitor model (εSiO2 = 3.9),74 is 10 ± 5
cm2 V–1 s–1 and hence
is an order of magnitude lower than that in the work of Hennrich et
al.73 This correlates with the order of
magnitude lower nanotube density in our devices. By increasing the
nanotube density and further shortening the channels, a further increase
in the mobility and on-state conductance per nanotube is anticipated.
Probing the limits was, however, not the intention of this study (and
also screening among tightly packed nanotubes can have detrimental
effects on the switching behavior) and is a research subject in itself.75

Conclusions
Enantiomer-pure fractions of R-(14,6),
L-(14,6), R-(16,3), R-(15,5),
and R-(13,7) with diameters of ∼1.41 nm were isolated with
a single-chirality purity of up to 80% using a pH-driven ATPE approach.
Clear evidence was provided that surfactant-based separations are
not limited to small diameters (<1 nm), and pH was demonstrated
to be a highly sensitive lever for nanotube separation. In the future,
it is expected that other surfactant conditions can be found that
will soon enable a rich library of other large-diameter species. Here
it is predicted that a reduction in the DOC concentration below 0.15%
will be necessary, and the use of alkane filling is recommended to
improve not only the optical properties but also the homogeneity of
the SWCNTs to be separated and thereby the result of the separation.
It is expected that monochiral large-diameter SWCNTs will be a valuable
tool in the research field of carbon science. Already, in this work,
they have allowed for a direct comparison between the absorbance and
the RBM resonance Raman profile across S33 and S44 and confirmed that G phonons interfere with each other, and their
use in CNT-FET devices appears highly promising.

Methods
Certain equipment, instruments, or
materials are identified
in this paper in order to adequately specify the experimental details.
Such identification does not imply recommendation by the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) nor does it imply the
materials are necessarily the best available for the purpose.

Materials
Electric-arc (EA-AP-SWCNT (lot AP-A218) and
EA-SWCNT (lot EA-A011) from Carbon Solutions and EA2-SWCNT (lot ASP-100F)
Hanwha Chemicals) and plasma-torch (PT-SWCNT, RN220 (lot RNB365) from
Raymor Nanotech) SWCNTs were procured from or donated by the manufacturer
and utilized without modification. DOC (BioXtra 98+%), SDS (>99%),
SC (>99%), and iodixanol (sold as Opti-Prep) were acquired from
Sigma-Aldrich
and used without further purification. NaClO (10–15% solution)
was acquired from Sigma-Aldrich and diluted 1:99 with 18.1 MΩ
H2O to generate a working NaClO stock solution. Poly(ethylene
glycol) (PEG, Mw 6 kDa) was acquired from
Alfa Aesar. Dextran 70 (DX, Mw 70 kDa)
was purchased from TCI. Initial stock solutions of PEG and DX were
prepared on a mass/mass basis, and stock surfactant solutions were
prepared on a mass/volume basis; iodixanol is sold as a 60% volume
fraction stock solution. All solutions prepared from these stock solutions
were prepared by volumetric dilution, with nominal concentrations
estimated with respect to the volumetric ratio of the dilution.

Endohedral Filling
As previously reported,44 alkane filling of EA-SWCNT and PT-SWCNT was
performed by adding the raw SWCNT powders (160 mg) to ∼10 mL
of hexadecane (C16H34) or tetracosane (C24H50) and incubating them for 1 h in the liquid
state (at room temperature for C16H34 and in
an oven at 60–65 °C for C24H50).
After incubation, the mixtures were filtered (Millipore VVLP membrane,
0.1 μm pore size) at room temperature and washed by heptane
to remove the residual alkane on the outside of the SWCNTs. The resulting
filter cakes were placed in a fume hood to allow the heptane to evaporate
prior to the dispersion with surfactants.

SWCNT Suspension and Rate-Zonal Centrifugation
Dispersion
and pre-ATPE SWCNT purification have been extensively reported in
prior work.39 In brief, SWCNT powder (1
mg/mL) was dispersed in 2% DOC (20 g/L) solution via tip sonication
(45 min, 0.9 W/mL) in an ice bath, followed by centrifugation (Beckman
J-2 centrifuge, JA-20 rotor, 1884 rad/s, 2 h), followed by the collection
of the supernatant. 8.2 mL aliquots of the supernatant were then layered
on top of 28 mL of 10% (volume/volume) iodixanol containing 1% DOC
(10 g/L) and ultracentrifuged for 2 h 45 min in a VTi-50 rotor (Beckman-Coulter)
at 5240 rad/s (50 000 rpm) at 20 °C. Primary bands in
the middle of each centrifuge tube containing well-individualized
SWCNTs were collected; for EA-AP SWCNTs, two bands were collected.
The top collected band has previously been shown to contain empty,
closed-ended SWCNTs, and the lower band contained water-filled SWCNTs.45 All collected SWCNT populations were concentrated
and adjusted toward a 1% DOC (10 g/L) concentration using iterative
concentration dilution cycles in a pressurized ultrafiltration stirred
cell (Millipore) with either a 100 or 300 kDa molecular weight (MW)
cutoff membrane.

Aqueous Two-Phase Extraction
The production of the
semiconducting and metallic parent populations was performed as previously
reported39,55 and recently extensively described by Fagan.76 Six parts SWCNT suspension (concentrated in
1% DOC after ultracentrifugation sorting) were mixed with five parts
20% (m/m) DX and four parts 25%
(m/m) PEG to perform a first preconcentration
(PC) of the SWCNTs and an adjustment of the DOC concentration to ∼0.4%.
After discarding the top phase from the PC step, a surfactant adjustment
step was performed to further decease the DOC concentration to ∼0.1%
and introduce SC at 0.9% by adding 1.5 parts 25% (m/m) PEG, 0.8 parts 4.5% SC, and 0.7 parts H2O to the CNT-containing DX phase (one part). In a second surfactant
adjustment step, the DX-rich bottom phase containing almost all SWCNTs
(1 part) was mixed with 4.5 parts 25% (m/m) PEG, 1.8 parts 4.5% SC, 1.55 parts 4.5% SDS, and 1.15
parts of H2O to reach a desired global surfactant concentration
of 0.9% SC, 0.7% SDS, and <0.02% DOC. Following the addition of
6–10 μL/mL NaClO, the metallic species remained in the
DX, and the semiconducting species were enriched in the PEG. Iterative
isolation was then performed using top (12.5% PEG, 0.9% SC, 0.7% SDS)
and bottom (15% DX, 0.9% SC, 0.7% SDS) mimic phases to enrich the
metallic and semiconducting fractions. Finally, the metallic nanotubes
(one part) in the rich DX phase were pushed to the top PEG-rich phase
by adding one part top-phase mimic (12.5% PEG, 1.2% SDS, 0.04% DOC).
Metallic and semiconducting populations were concentrated and adjusted
toward a DOC concentration of 10 g/L (1%) using iterative concentration
dilution cycles in a pressurized ultrafiltration stirred cell (Millipore)
with either a 100 or 300 kDa MW cutoff membrane.

For chiral
separation, two parts semiconducting (or metallic) SWCNTs in 1% DOC
were mixed with 1 part 20% DX and 1 part 25% PEG to perform an SWCNT
PC and adjust the DOC concentration to 0.5%. After discarding the
top phase from the PC step, a surfactant adjustment step was performed
to further decease the DOC concentration to ∼0.15% and introduce
SC at 0.9% and SDS at 0.225% by adding 1.15 parts 25% (m/m) PEG, 0.165 parts 4.5% SDS, 0.66 parts 4.5% SC,
and 0.325 parts H2O to the CNT-containing DX phase (1 part).
After discarding the top phase from the surfactant adjustment step,
one part DX-rich bottom phase was iteratively mixed with two parts
top mimic phase (12.5% PEG, 0.15% DOC, 0.225% SDS, 0.9% SC), and various
HCl additions were made to afford stage-1 separation (T1, T2, T3, ..., Tn). To ensure the accurate extraction of SWCNTs, the suspension near
the interface was drawn into a micropipette, and the micropipette
was held vertically until the two-phase system separated. The bottom
phase was then slowly injected back into the container, leaving only
the top phase in the micropipette. With this method, it was possible
to obtain at least 95% of the top phase. In the case of large-scale
experiments, the suspension near the interface was briefly centrifuged
before performing an extraction with a micropipette. The top phases
containing single-chirality tubes were used directly for further processing,
whereas top phases with multiple (n,m) species were added to fresh bottom-phase mimic (15% DX, 0.15% DOC,
0.225% SDS, 0.9% SC) with additional HCl to afford a stage-2 separation
(TnT1, TnT2, TnT3,
..., TnTm).
The exact volumes of the top and bottom phases along with the amount
of HCl added at each step can be found in Tables S1–S7. Finally, enantiomer-pure fractions were concentrated
and adjusted toward a DOC 1% (10 g/L) concentration in H2O or D2O using iterative concentration dilution cycles
in a pressurized ultrafiltration stirred cell (Millipore) with either
a 100 or 300 kDa MW cutoff membrane.

Absorption and Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
UV–vis–NIR
absorbance spectra were collected on a Cary 5000 spectrometer from
1880 to 200 nm for samples in H2O and from 2500 to 200
nm for samples in D2O in 1 nm increments through a 1 or
2 mm quartz cuvette with an integration time of 0.1 s/nm. The spectra
of the corresponding blank surfactant solution were collected separately
and linearly subtracted during data analysis. CD measurements were
performed on an OLIS RSM-090 CD spectrometer with a dual grating monochromator
(400 line/nm, 500 nm blaze; two 0.600 mm slits) through a 2 mm path
length cuvette in 1.5 nm steps (bandpass ∼2.2 nm). Multiple
measurements were collected for each sample as well as for the matching
10.0 g/L DOC in the D2O reference (semiconducting samples)
or 10.0 g/L DOC in the H2O reference (metallic samples),
with reported uncertainties reflecting the total propagated uncertainties
including the reference subtraction.

Photoluminescence Excitation Spectroscopy
2D IR PLE
spectra were recorded using a home-built setup. The sample was excited
with a pulsed Xe lamp (Edinburgh Instruments, Xe900-xP920), and excitation
wavelengths were spectrally selected with a 300 mm grating monochromator
(Acton SpectraPro 2355). Emission was collected at 90° and analyzed
using a 150 mm grating spectrograph (Acton SpectraPro 2156) with a
liquid-nitrogen-cooled extended InGaAs photodiode array detector (Princeton
Instruments OMA V:1024/LN-2.2) sensitive up to 2.2 μm. Spectra
were recorded with 5 nm steps in excitation wavelength. Appropriate
filters were used to eliminate stray light and higher order diffractions
from the spectrometers, and all spectra were corrected for detector
and spectrograph efficiency, filter transmission, reabsorption within
the cell, and (temporal and spectral) variations of the excitation
light intensity.

Raman Spectroscopy
The Raman spectra were acquired
in two experimental setups: The first was optimized for laser excitation
energies between 1.9 and 2.2 eV. The light for excitation was produced
by a Radiant Dye laser, with Rhodamin 110, R6G, and DCM dyes, and
focused on the sample by a lens (N.A. = 0.8). The backscattered light
was collected by the same lens and guided into a Horiba t64000 spectrometer
with a triple grating configuration. The spectrometer was equipped
with 900 grooves per millimeter gratings and a silicon charge-coupled
device (CCD). The second setup was optimized for the 2.2 to 2.7 eV
excitation range. Light emitted by a Hübner Photonics C-WAVE
laser was focused and collected by the same lens (N.A. = 0.8). The
Raman light was filtered by a tunable long-pass filter (Semrock) and
focused onto the slit of an Andor Kymera 328i spectrometer. The light
was dispersed by a 1600 grooves per millimeter grating and analyzed
by a silicon CCD. The Raman shift and Raman intensity were calibrated
with cyclohexane molecules acquired for each spectrum in the same
sample geometry. Raman measurements on the (14,6) samples at 458 nm
in Figure S26a were performed using an
Ar laser and a Dilor XY800 triple Raman spectrometer.

Analytical Ultracentrifugation
AUC was conducted in
a Beckman-Coulter XL-I analytical ultracentrifuge with a Ti-50 rotor
at 20.0 °C and a rotation rate of 2932 rad/s, similar to previous
reports for SWCNT characterization.77,78 Radial absorbance
scans were measured at 245 (data for anhydrous densities) or 460 nm
(data for buoyant densities). Prior to starting an experiment, cells
were equilibrated for a minimum time of 1.5 h in the instrument to
ensure temperature equilibration. The density and viscosity of the
exact 10.0 g/L DOC in unenriched water, in 100% (nominal) D2O, and in 80% D218O/20% D2O used
for the dilution of samples in the experiments were measured separately
in an Anton-Parr DMA 5000–LOVIS M densitometer–viscometer.
Linear interpolation was used for intermediate isotope concentrations.
Typical sample and reference volumes were 400 μL but were reduced
to between 300 and 360 μL for D218O-containing
samples. Constant dilution factors were utilized to achieve as similar
as possible initial SWCNT concentrations in the measured samples.

The analysis of recorded radial absorbance profiles was conducted
using the numerical fitting software SEDFIT.79,80 Sedimentation was modeled using the c(s) model with the measured solution parameters, a discretization to
1/10th of a s value, and a regularization of 0.95.
The meniscus and noise were fit for each experiment but agreed well
with the apparent positions in the data. The initial values for the
partial specific volume were taken from previous reports, but the
final data evaluation was conducted with values extracted from the
extrapolation of the SWCNT sample densities in this contribution.
Friction factor values for the (14,6) and (13,7) populations were
fit separately and found to be essentially invariant, as expected,
for each population with respect to the isotopic composition of the
water.

SWCNT-FET Fabrication
Transistor devices were fabricated
by the dielectrophoretic deposition of nanotubes onto 45 nm Pd/5 nm
Cr thick electrodes, forming 600 nm long and 1 μm wide channels
defined by e-beam pattering on a 300 nm SiO2/p-Si substrate. The SWCNTs were deposited from aqueous dispersion via
alternating-current (AC) dielectrophoresis (DEP), as described in
previous work.81 During the DEP process,
a drop of 10 μL of diluted dispersion (dilution ratio 1:100)
was placed onto the sample ,and an AC voltage of 2 Vpp at
300 kHz was applied between the common drain electrode and the p-Si back gate. After 5 min, the surface of the sample was
repeatedly rinsed with deionized H2O before the AC field
was switched off. All devices were subsequently annealed on a hot
plate at 150 °C in air for 0.5 h. Electrical characterization
was conducted in an ambient atmosphere using an Agilent 4155C semiconductor
parameter analyzer. Transfer characteristics were measured with back-gate
voltage sweeps from VG = −10 to
+10 V (step size 100 mV) at source-drain voltages of 0.5 and 1 V.
SEM images were obtained after the electrical characterization with
a Zeiss Ultra Plus scanning electron microscope under a 1 kV electron
beam.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.9b08244.Additional information on the surfactant conditions
required for separation, a comparison of different raw materials and
fillers, and further optical and electronic characterization (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn9b08244_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
H.L., M.Z.,
J.A.F., and B.S.F. conceived the idea for this work and designed and
performed the experiments. G.G., O.G., and S.R. characterized the
samples with Raman spectroscopy, and S.C. and W.W. characterized the
samples with 2D PLE mapping. N.A.P., P.B.S., S.D., and R.K. performed
the electrical characterization with CNT-FETs. All authors analyzed
the results and contributed to the preparation of the manuscript.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
B.S.F. acknowledges support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) under grant numbers FL 834/2-1, FL 834/2-2, FL 834/5-1, and
FL 834/7-1. S.C. and W.W. acknowledge funding from the Fund for Scientific
Research Flanders (FWO project nos. G040011N, G02112N, G035918N, and
G036618N and the EOS-charming project G0F6218N [EOS-ID 30467715])
and the European Research Council Starting Grant no. 679841. R.K.
acknowledges funding by the Volkswagen Foundation.
==== Refs
References
Avouris P. ; Chen Z. ; Perebeinos V.  Carbon-Based Electronics . In Nanoscience and Technology: A Collection of Reviews
from Nature Journals ; Rogers P.  ; Nature Publishing Group : London , 2009 ; pp 174 –184 .
Arnold M. S. ; Blackburn J. L. ; Crochet J. J. ; Doorn S. K. ; Duque J. G. ; Mohite A. ; Telg H. 
Recent Developments in the Photophysics
of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes for Their Use as Active and Passive
Material Elements in Thin Film Photovoltaics . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 14896 –14918 . 10.1039/c3cp52752b .23913009 
Angione M. D. ; Pilolli R. ; Cotrone S. ; Magliulo M. ; Mallardi A. ; Palazzo G. ; Sabbatini L. ; Fine D. ; Dodabalapur A. ; Cioffi N. ; et al. Carbon Based Materials for Electronic Bio-Sensing . Mater. Today 
2011 , 14 , 424 –433 . 10.1016/S1369-7021(11)70187-0 .
He X. ; Htoon H. ; Doorn S. K. ; Pernice W. H. ; Pyatkov F. ; Krupke R. ; Jeantet A. ; Chassagneux Y. ; Voisin C. 
Carbon Nanotubes as Emerging Quantum-Light Sources . Nat. Mater. 
2018 , 17 , 663 –670 . 10.1038/s41563-018-0109-2 .29915427 
Rao R. ; Pint C. L. ; Islam A. E. ; Weatherup R. S. ; Hofmann S. ; Meshot E. R. ; Wu F. Q. ; Zhou C. W. ; Dee N. ; Amama P. B. ; Carpena-Nunez J. ; Shi W. B. ; Plata D. L. ; Penev E. S. ; Yakobson B. I. ; Balbuena P. B. ; Bichara C. ; Futaba D. N. ; Noda S. ; Shin H. M. ; et al. Carbon
Nanotubes and Related Nanomaterials: Critical Advances and Challenges
for Synthesis Toward Mainstream Commercial Applications . ACS Nano 
2018 , 12 , 11756 –11784 . 10.1021/acsnano.8b06511 .30516055 
Zheng M. 
Sorting Carbon
Nanotubes . Top. Curr. Chem. 
2017 , 375 , 13 10.1007/s41061-016-0098-z .
Moore K. E. ; Tune D. D. ; Flavel B. S. 
Double-Walled Carbon
Nanotube Processing . Adv. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 3105 –3137 . 10.1002/adma.201405686 .25899061 
Arnold M. S. ; Stupp S. I. ; Hersam M. C. 
Enrichment
of Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotubes by Diameter in Density Gradients . Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 , 713 –718 . 10.1021/nl050133o .15826114 
Huang X. ; McLean R. S. ; Zheng M. 
High-Resolution
Length Sorting and
Purification of DNA-Wrapped Carbon Nanotubes by Size-Exclusion Chromatography . Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 6225 –6228 . 10.1021/ac0508954 .16194082 
Moore K. E. ; Pfohl M. ; Hennrich F. ; Chakradhanula V. S. K. ; Kuebel C. ; Kappes M. M. ; Shapter J. G. ; Krupke R. ; Flavel B. S. 
Separation of Double-Walled Carbon Nanotubes by Size
Exclusion Column Chromatography . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 6756 –6764 . 10.1021/nn500756a .24896840 
Moore K. E. ; Pfohl M. ; Tune D. D. ; Hennrich F. ; Dehm S. ; Chakradhanula V. S. K. ; Kubel C. ; Krupke R. ; Flavel B. S. 
Sorting
of Double-Walled Carbon Nanotubes According to Their Outer Wall Electronic
Type via a Gel Permeation Method . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 3849 –3857 . 10.1021/nn506869h .25758564 
Arnold M. S. ; Green A. A. ; Hulvat J. F. ; Stupp S. I. ; Hersam M. C. 
Sorting
Carbon Nanotubes by Electronic Structure Using Density Differentiation . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2006 , 1 , 60 –65 . 10.1038/nnano.2006.52 .18654143 
Zheng M. ; Jagota A. ; Strano M. S. ; Santos A. P. ; Barone P. ; Chou S. G. ; Diner B. A. ; Dresselhaus M. S. ; Mclean R. S. ; Onoa G. B. 
Structure-Based Carbon Nanotube Sorting
by Sequence-Dependent DNA Assembly . Science 
2003 , 302 , 1545 –1548 . 10.1126/science.1091911 .14645843 
Yang F. ; Wang X. ; Zhang D. Q. ; Yang J. ; Luo D. ; Xu Z. W. ; Wei J. K. ; Wang J. Q. ; Xu Z. ; Peng F. ; Li X. M. ; Li R. M. ; Li Y. L. ; Li M. H. ; Bai X. D. ; Ding F. ; Li Y. 
Chirality-Specific
Growth of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes on Solid Alloy Catalysts . Nature 
2014 , 510 , 522 –524 . 10.1038/nature13434 .24965654 
Zhang S. C. ; Kang L. X. ; Wang X. ; Tong L. M. ; Yang L. W. ; Wang Z. Q. ; Qi K. ; Deng S. B. ; Li Q. W. ; Bai X. D. ; Ding F. ; Zhang J. 
Arrays of Horizontal
Carbon Nanotubes of Controlled Chirality Grown Using Designed Catalysts . Nature 
2017 , 543 , 234 –238 . 10.1038/nature21051 .28199307 
Nish A. ; Hwang J.-Y. ; Doig J. ; Nicholas R. J. 
Highly Selective
Dispersion of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Using Aromatic Polymers . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2007 , 2 , 640 –646 . 10.1038/nnano.2007.290 .18654390 
Graf A. ; Zakharko Y. ; Schiessl S. P. ; Backes C. ; Pfohl M. ; Flavel B. S. ; Zaumseil J. 
Large Scale, Selective Dispersion
of Long Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes with High Photoluminescence
Quantum Yield by Shear Force Mixing . Carbon 
2016 , 105 , 593 –599 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2016.05.002 .
Hwang J. Y. ; Nish A. ; Doig J. ; Douven S. ; Chen C. W. ; Chen L. C. ; Nicholas R. J. 
Polymer
Structure and Solvent Effects
on the Selective Dispersion of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 3543 –3553 . 10.1021/ja0777640 .18293976 
Shea M. J. ; Mehlenbacher R. D. ; Zanni M. T. ; Arnold M. S. 
Experimental Measurement
of the Binding Configuration and Coverage of Chirality-Sorting Polyfluorenes
on Carbon Nanotubes . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2014 , 5 , 3742 –3749 . 10.1021/jz5017813 .26278744 
Flavel B. S. ; Moore K. E. ; Pfohl M. ; Kappes M. M. ; Hennrich F. 
Separation
of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes with a Gel Permeation Chromatography
System . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 1817 –1826 . 10.1021/nn4062116 .24460395 
Liu H. ; Nishide D. ; Tanaka T. ; Kataura H. 
Large-Scale Single-Chirality
Separation of Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes by Simple Gel Chromatography . Nat. Commun. 
2011 , 2 , 309 10.1038/ncomms1313 .21556063 
Zeng X. ; Yang D. ; Liu H. ; Zhou N. ; Wang Y. ; Zhou W. ; Xie S. ; Kataura H. 
Detecting and Tuning
the Interactions Between Surfactants and Carbon Nanotubes for Their
High-Efficiency Structure Separation . Adv. Mater.
Interfaces 
2018 , 5 , 1700727 10.1002/admi.201700727 .
Yomogida Y. ; Tanaka T. ; Zhang M. ; Yudasaka M. ; Wei X. ; Kataura H. 
Industrial-Scale Separation
of High-Purity Single-Chirality
Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes for Biological Imaging . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 12056 10.1038/ncomms12056 .27350127 
Liu H. ; Feng Y. ; Tanaka T. ; Urabe Y. ; Kataura H. 
Diameter-Selective
Metal/Semiconductor Separation of Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes by
Agarose Gel . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 9270 –9276 . 10.1021/jp1017136 .
Flavel B. S. ; Kappes M. M. ; Krupke R. ; Hennrich F. 
Separation of Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes by 1-Dodecanol-Mediated Size-Exclusion Chromatography . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 3557 –3564 . 10.1021/nn4004956 .23540203 
Jain R. M. ; Ben-Naim M. ; Landry M. P. ; Strano M. S. 
Competitive Binding
in Mixed Surfactant Systems for Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Separation . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 22737 –22745 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b07947 .
Tyler T. P. ; Shastry T. A. ; Leever B. J. ; Hersam M. C. 
Narrow
Diameter
Distributions of Metallic Arc Discharge Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes via Dual-Iteration Density Gradient Ultracentrifugation . Adv. Mater. 
2012 , 24 , 4765 –4768 . 10.1002/adma.201201728 .22833215 
Bonaccorso F. ; Hasan T. ; Tan P. H. ; Sciascia C. ; Privitera G. ; Di Marco G. ; Gucciardi P. G. ; Ferrari A. C. 
Density Gradient
Ultracentrifugation of Nanotubes: Interplay of Bundling and Surfactants
Encapsulation . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 17267 –17285 . 10.1021/jp1030174 .
Seo J. W. T. ; Yoder N. L. ; Shastry T. A. ; Humes J. J. ; Johns J. E. ; Green A. A. ; Hersam M. C. 
Diameter
Refinement of Semiconducting
Arc Discharge Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes via Density
Gradient Ultracentrifugation . J. Phys. Chem.
Lett. 
2013 , 4 , 2805 –2810 . 10.1021/jz4013596 .
Ghosh S. ; Bachilo S. M. ; Weisman R. B. 
Advanced
Sorting of Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes by Nonlinear Density-Gradient Ultracentrifugation . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2010 , 5 , 443 –450 . 10.1038/nnano.2010.68 .20453856 
Khripin C. Y. ; Fagan J. A. ; Zheng M. 
Spontaneous Partition of Carbon Nanotubes
in Polymer-Modified Aqueous Phases . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 6822 –6825 . 10.1021/ja402762e .23611526 
Turek E. ; Wasiak T. ; Stando G. ; Janas D. 
Probing the Mechanics
of Aqueous Two-Phase Extraction Using Large Diameter Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes . Nanotechnology 
2018 , 29 , 405704 10.1088/1361-6528/aad359 .30004027 
Omachi H. ; Komuro T. ; Matsumoto K. ; Nakajima M. ; Watanabe H. ; Hirotani J. ; Ohno Y. ; Shinohara H. 
Aqueous Two-Phase
Extraction of Semiconducting Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes with Isomaltodextrin
and Thin-Film Transistor Applications . Appl.
Phys. Express 
2019 , 12 , 097003 10.7567/1882-0786/ab369e .
Wei X. ; Tanaka T. ; Hirakawa T. ; Yomogida Y. ; Kataura H. 
Determination
of Enantiomeric Purity of Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes Using Flavin
Mononucleotide . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 16068 –16071 . 10.1021/jacs.7b09142 .29069542 
Peng X. ; Komatsu N. ; Bhattacharya S. ; Shimawaki T. ; Aonuma S. ; Kimura T. ; Osuka A. 
Optically
Active Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2007 , 2 , 361 –365 . 10.1038/nnano.2007.142 .18654308 
Green A. A. ; Duch M. C. ; Hersam M. C. 
Isolation
of Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotube Enantiomers by Density Differentiation . Nano Res. 
2009 , 2 , 69 –77 . 10.1007/s12274-009-9006-y .
Akazaki K. ; Toshimitsu F. ; Ozawa H. ; Fujigaya T. ; Nakashima N. 
Recognition
and One-Pot Extraction of Right-and Left-Handed Semiconducting Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotube Enantiomers Using Fluorene-Binaphthol Chiral Copolymers . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 12700 –12707 . 10.1021/ja304244g .22788840 
Liu H. ; Tanaka T. ; Kataura H. 
Optical Isomer Separation of Single-Chirality
Carbon Nanotubes Using Gel Column Chromatography . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 6237 –6243 . 10.1021/nl5025613 .25347592 
Fagan J. A. ; Hároz E. H. ; Ihly R. ; Gui H. ; Blackburn J. L. ; Simpson J. R. ; Lam S. ; Hight Walker A. R. ; Doorn S. K. ; Zheng M. 
Isolation of > 1 nm Diameter Single-Wall
Carbon Nanotube Species Using Aqueous Two-Phase Extraction . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 5377 –5390 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b01123 .25871430 
Liu K. ; Deslippe J. ; Xiao F. ; Capaz R. B. ; Hong X. ; Aloni S. ; Zettl A. ; Wang W. ; Bai X. ; Louie S. G. ; et al. An Atlas of Carbon Nanotube Optical Transitions . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 , 325 –329 . 10.1038/nnano.2012.52 .22504706 
van
Bezouw S. ; Arias D. H. ; Ihly R. ; Cambre S. ; Ferguson A. J. ; Campo J. ; Johnson J. C. ; Defillet J. ; Wenseleers W. ; Blackburn J. L. 
Diameter-Dependent Optical Absorption
and Excitation Energy Transfer from Encapsulated Dye Molecules Toward
Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . ACS Nano 
2018 , 12 , 6881 –6894 . 10.1021/acsnano.8b02213 .29965726 
Fagan J. A. ; Khripin C. Y. ; Silvera
Batista C. A. ; Simpson J. R. ; Hároz E. H. ; Hight Walker A. R. ; Zheng M. 
Isolation of Specific Small-Diameter
Single-Wall Carbon Nanotube Species via Aqueous Two-Phase
Extraction . Adv. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 2800 –2804 . 10.1002/adma.201304873 .24448916 
Wenseleers W. ; Vlasov I. I. ; Goovaerts E. ; Obraztsova E. D. ; Lobach A. S. ; Bouwen A. 
Efficient Isolation
and Solubilization
of Pristine Single-Walled Nanotubes in Bile Salt Micelles . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2004 , 14 , 1105 –1112 . 10.1002/adfm.200400130 .
Campo J. ; Piao Y. ; Lam S. ; Stafford C. M. ; Streit J. K. ; Simpson J. R. ; Hight Walker A. R. ; Fagan J. A. 
Enhancing Single-Wall
Carbon Nanotube Properties Through Controlled Endohedral Filling . Nanoscale Horiz 
2016 , 1 , 317 –324 . 10.1039/C6NH00062B .
Cambre S. ; Wenseleers W. 
Separation and Diameter-Sorting of Empty (End-Capped)
and Water-Filled (Open) Carbon Nanotubes by Density Gradient Ultracentrifugation . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 2764 –2768 . 10.1002/anie.201007324 .
Wenseleers W. ; Cambre S. ; Culin J. ; Bouwen A. ; Goovaerts E. 
Effect of
Water Filling on the Electronic and Vibrational Resonances of Carbon
Nanotubes: Characterizing Tube Opening by Raman Spectroscopy . Adv. Mater. 
2007 , 19 , 2274 –2278 . 10.1002/adma.200700773 .
Chen Z. H. ; Appenzeller J. ; Knoch J. ; Lin Y. M. ; Avouris P. 
The Role of
Metal-Nanotube Contact in the Performance of Carbon Nanotube Field-Effect
Transistors . Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 , 1497 –1502 . 10.1021/nl0508624 .16178264 
Tune D. D. ; Flavel B. S. 
Advances in Carbon
Nanotube-Silicon Heterojunction
Solar Cells . Adv. Energy Mater. 
2018 , 8 , 1703241 10.1002/aenm.201703241 .
Ihly R. ; Mistry K. S. ; Ferguson A. J. ; Clikeman T. T. ; Larson B. W. ; Reid O. ; Boltalina O. V. ; Strauss S. H. ; Rumbles G. ; Blackburn J. L. 
Tuning
the Driving Force for Exciton Dissociation in
Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Heterojunctions . Nat. Chem. 
2016 , 8 , 603 –609 . 10.1038/nchem.2496 .27219706 
Piao Y. ; Meany B. ; Powell L. R. ; Valley N. ; Kwon H. ; Schatz G. C. ; Wang Y. 
Brightening
of Carbon Nanotube Photoluminescence
Through the Incorporation of sp3 Defects . Nat. Chem. 
2013 , 5 , 840 –845 . 10.1038/nchem.1711 .24056340 
Gaufrès E. ; Tang N.-W. ; Lapointe F. ; Cabana J. ; Nadon M.-A. ; Cottenye N. ; Raymond F. ; Szkopek T. ; Martel R. 
Giant Raman
Scattering from J-Aggregated Dyes Inside Carbon Nanotubes for Multispectral
Imaging . Nat. Photonics 
2014 , 8 , 72 –78 . 10.1038/nphoton.2013.309 .
Cambré S. ; Campo J. ; Beirnaert C. ; Verlackt C. ; Cool P. ; Wenseleers W. 
Asymmetric
Dyes Align Inside Carbon Nanotubes to Yield
a Large Nonlinear Optical Response . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 10 , 248 –252 . 10.1038/nnano.2015.1 .25643253 
Albertsson P. A. K.  Partition
of Cell Particles and Macromolecules ; Wiley-Interscience : New York , 1971 .
Subbaiyan N. K. ; Cambré S. ; Parra-Vasquez A. N. G. ; Hároz E. H. ; Doorn S. K. ; Duque J. G. 
Role of
Surfactants and Salt in Aqueous
Two-Phase Separation of Carbon Nanotubes Toward Simple Chirality Isolation . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 1619 –1628 . 10.1021/nn405934y .24450507 
Gui H. ; Streit J. K. ; Fagan J. A. ; Hight Walker A. R. ; Zhou C. ; Zheng M. 
Redox Sorting of Carbon Nanotubes . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 1642 –1646 . 10.1021/nl504189p .25719939 
Li H. ; Gordeev G. ; Garrity O. ; Reich S. ; Flavel B. S. 
Separation
of Small-Diameter Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes in One to Three Steps
with Aqueous Two-Phase Extraction . ACS Nano 
2019 , 13 , 2567 –2578 . 10.1021/acsnano.8b09579 .30673278 
Subbaiyan N. K. ; Parra-Vasquez A. N. G. ; Cambré S. ; Cordoba M. A. S. ; Yalcin S. E. ; Hamilton C. E. ; Mack N. H. ; Blackburn J. L. ; Doorn S. K. ; Duque J. G. 
Bench-Top Aqueous Two-Phase Extraction
of Isolated Individual Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Nano Res. 
2015 , 8 , 1755 –1769 . 10.1007/s12274-014-0680-z .
Sorensen H. ; Sorensen S. ; Bjergegaard C. ; Michaelsen S.  Chromatography and Capillary
Electrophoresis in Food Analysis ; Royal Society
of Chemistry : Cambridge, U.K. , 2007 .
Cambré S. ; Muyshondt P. ; Federicci R. ; Wenseleers W. 
Chirality-Dependent
Densities of Carbon Nanotubes by In Situ 2D Fluorescence-Excitation
and Raman Characterisation in a Density Gradient After Ultracentrifugation . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 20015 –20024 . 10.1039/C5NR06020F .26565985 
Fagan J. A. ; Huh J. Y. ; Simpson J. R. ; Blackburn J. L. ; Holt J. M. ; Larsen B. A. ; Walker A. R. H. 
Separation of
Empty and Water-Filled Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 3943 –3953 . 10.1021/nn200458t .21480636 
Weisman R. B. ; Bachilo S. M. 
Dependence of Optical Transition Energies on Structure
for Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes in Aqueous Suspension: An Empirical
Kataura Plot . Nano Lett. 
2003 , 3 , 1235 –1238 . 10.1021/nl034428i .
Ao G. ; Streit J. K. ; Fagan J. A. ; Zheng M. 
Differentiating Left-and
Right-Handed Carbon Nanotubes by DNA . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 16677 –16685 . 10.1021/jacs.6b09135 .27936661 
Sato N. ; Tatsumi Y. ; Saito R. 
Circular Dichroism of Single-Wall
Carbon Nanotubes . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys. 
2017 , 95 , 155436 10.1103/PhysRevB.95.155436 .
Hároz E. H. ; Duque J. G. ; Tu X. ; Zheng M. ; Hight Walker A. R. ; Hauge R. H. ; Doorn S. K. ; Kono J. 
Fundamental Optical
Processes in Armchair Carbon Nanotubes . Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 1411 –1439 . 10.1039/c2nr32769d .23340668 
Araujo P. T. ; Jorio A. ; Dresselhaus M. S. ; Sato K. ; Saito R. 
Diameter Dependence
of the Dielectric Constant for the Excitonic Transition Energy of
Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2009 , 103 , 146802 10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.146802 .19905592 
Doorn S. K. ; Araujo P. T. ; Hata K. ; Jorio A. 
Excitons and Exciton-Phonon
Coupling in Metallic Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes: Resonance Raman
Spectroscopy . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys. 
2008 , 78 , 165408 10.1103/PhysRevB.78.165408 .
Maultzsch J. ; Telg H. ; Reich S. ; Thomsen C. 
Radial Breathing Mode
of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes: Optical Transition Energies and
Chiral-Index Assignment . Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys. 
2005 , 72 , 205438 10.1103/PhysRevB.72.205438 .
Cambré S. ; Schoeters B. ; Luyckx S. ; Goovaerts E. ; Wenseleers W. 
Experimental Observation of Single-File Water Filling
of Thin Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes Down to Chiral Index (5, 3) . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2010 , 104 , 207401 10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.207401 .20867062 
Machón M. ; Reich S. ; Telg H. ; Maultzsch J. ; Ordejón P. ; Thomsen C. 
Strength of Radial Breathing Mode
in Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Phys. Rev.
B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2005 , 71 , 035416 10.1103/PhysRevB.71.035416 .
Gordeev G. ; Flavel B. ; Krupke R. ; Kusch P. ; Reich S. 
Asymmetry
of Resonance Raman Profiles in Semiconducting Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotubes at the First Excitonic Transition . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2019 , 99 , 045404 10.1103/PhysRevB.99.045404 .
Bergler F. F. ; Stahl S. ; Goy A. ; Schöppler F. ; Hertel T. 
Substrate-Mediated Cooperative Adsorption of Sodium
Cholate on (6,5) Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes . Langmuir 
2016 , 32 , 9598 –9603 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b02759 .27575847 
Shastry T. A. ; Morris-Cohen A. J. ; Weiss E. A. ; Hersam M. C. 
Probing Carbon Nanotube–Surfactant
Interactions with Two-Dimensional DOSY NMR . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 6750 –6753 . 10.1021/ja312235n .23369051 
Hennrich F. ; Li W. ; Fischer R. ; Lebedkin S. ; Krupke R. ; Kappes M. M. 
Length-Sorted,
Large-Diameter, Polyfluorene-Wrapped Semiconducting Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes for High-Density, Short-Channel Transistors . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 1888 –1895 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b05572 .26792404 
Li W.-S. ; Hou P.-X. ; Liu C. ; Sun D.-M. ; Yuan J. ; Zhao S.-Y. ; Yin L.-C. ; Cong H. ; Cheng H.-M. 
High-Quality,
Highly Concentrated Semiconducting Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes for
Use in Field Effect Transistors and Biosensors . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 6831 –6839 . 10.1021/nn401998r .23883135 
Brady G. J. ; Jinkins K. R. ; Arnold M. S. 
Channel
Length Scaling Behavior in
Transistors Based on Individual versus Dense Arrays
of Carbon Nanotubes . J. Appl. Phys. 
2017 , 122 , 124506 10.1063/1.4996586 .
Fagan J. 
Aqueous Two-Polymer
Phase Extraction of Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes using Surfactants . Nanoscale Adv. 
2019 , 1 , 3307 –3324 . 10.1039/C9NA00280D .
Fagan J. A. ; Zheng M. ; Rastogi V. ; Simpson J. R. ; Khripin C. Y. ; Silvera Batista C. A. ; Hight Walker A. R. 
Analyzing Surfactant Structures on
Length and Chirality Resolved (6, 5) Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes
by Analytical Ultracentrifugation . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 3373 –3387 . 10.1021/nn4002165 .23530719 
Lam S. ; Zheng M. ; Fagan J. A. 
Characterizing
the Effect of Salt
and Surfactant Concentration on the Counterion Atmosphere Around Surfactant
Stabilized SWCNTs Using Analytical Ultracentrifugation . Langmuir 
2016 , 32 , 3926 –3936 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b00605 .27031248 
Schuck P. 
Size-Distribution
Analysis of Macromolecules by Sedimentation Velocity Ultracentrifugation
and Lamm Equation Modeling . Biophys. J. 
2000 , 78 , 1606 –1619 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(00)76713-0 .10692345 
Schuck P.  Sedimentation Velocity
Analytical Ultracentrifugation: Discrete Species and Size-Distributions
of Macromolecules and Particles ; CRC Press : New York , 2016 .
Vijayaraghavan A. ; Blatt S. ; Weissenberger D. ; Oron-Carl M. ; Hennrich F. ; Gerthsen D. ; Hahn H. ; Krupke R. 
Ultra-Large-Scale
Directed Assembly of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Devices . Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 1556 –1560 . 10.1021/nl0703727 .17488050

