
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.9b00241ArticleNanoparticles
to Knockdown Osteoporosis-Related Gene
and Promote Osteogenic Marker Expression for Osteoporosis Treatment Mora-Raimundo Patricia †Lozano Daniel †‡Manzano Miguel *†‡Vallet-Regí María *†‡† Chemistry
in Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy. Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain. Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria
Hospital 12 de Octubre i + 12, Plaza de Ramón y Cajal s/n, E-28040 Madrid, Spain‡ Networking
Research Center on Bioengineering, Biomaterials
and Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN), E-28034 Madrid, Spain* E-mail: vallet@ucm.es.* E-mail: mmanzano@ucm.es.09 05 2019 28 05 2019 13 5 5451 5464 10 01 2019 09 05 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Osteoporosis
is the most common disease involving bone degeneration.
Current clinical treatments are not able to offer a satisfying curative
effect, so the development of effective treatments is desired. Gene
silencing through siRNA delivery has gained great attention as a potential
treatment in bone diseases. SOST gene inhibits the Wnt signaling pathway
reducing osteoblast differentiation. Consequently, silencing SOST
genes with a specific siRNA could be a potential option to treat osteoporosis.
Generally, siRNAs have a very short half-life and poor transfection
capacity, so an effective carrier is needed. In particular, mesoporous
silica nanoparticles (MSNs) have attracted great attention for intracellular
delivery of nucleic acids. We took advantage of their high loading
capacity to further load the pores with osteostatin, an osteogenic
peptide. In this study, we developed a system based on MSNs coated
with poly(ethylenimine), which can effectively deliver SOST siRNA
and osteostatin inside cells, with the consequent augmentation of
osteogenic markers with a synergistic effect. This established the
potential utility of MSNs to co-deliver both biomolecules to promote
bone formation, this being a potential alternative to treat osteoporosis.

mesoporous nanoparticlesgene silencingosteoporosistherapeutic co-deliveryosteogenic stimulationdocument-id-old-9nn9b00241document-id-new-14nn-2019-002417ccc-price
==== Body
In the last
few decades, the
mean life expectancy has increased, which has consequently boosted
the impact of skeletal diseases. In healthy adults, bone is continuously
renewed by a coordinated process in which osteoclasts resorb old bone
and osteoblasts synthesize and mineralize new bone matrix.1 Imbalances in this physiological process, more-pronounced
bone resorption, commonly produce a decreased bone mass and microarchitectural
deterioration of bone tissue, named osteoporosis.2,3

The conventional treatment options of osteoporosis are limited
to (1) anti-resorptive drugs that act mainly by suppressing osteoclast
activity, preserving bone mass and increasing bone strength; and (2)
anabolic agents that induce bone formation, effectively increasing
bone mass and reversing bone deterioration.4 However, current pharmacological therapy presents some limitations
related to bioavailability issues and toxicity.5 Thus, bisphosphonates, which are the most clinically used
anti-resorptive therapeutic drugs, are poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract.6 Consequently, high doses are required,
which leads to gastrointestinal problems.7 Another commonly used antiresorptive drug is Denosumab (anti-receptor
activator of nuclear factor κB ligand (RANKL) monoclonal antibody),
which reduces bone resorption by decreasing osteoclast activation
and differentiation. As a member of the tumor necrosis factor family,
RANKL is also expressed on T lymphocytes; therefore, its inhibition
could lead to impaired immunity.8 However,
parathyroid hormone (PTH), which was the first anabolic agent to be
approved, stimulates osteoblast function by binding to a specific
receptor and activating several signaling pathways.9 Additionally, PTH therapy presents some disadvantages,
such as the activation of bone resorption and the limited efficacy
on nonvertebral fractures. These drawbacks justified the research
of novel analogs exhibiting “pure” bone anabolism.10 Different N-terminal PTH related protein (PTHrP)
peptides such as PTHrP (1–36) or PTHrP (1–34) (abaloparatide)
also bind to the PTH/PTHrP type 1 receptor as PTH. They activate the
signal transduction with equal potency as PTH but produce less activation
of bone resorption.9 The C-terminal fragment
of PTHrP (107–111) (osteostatin) has been found to be an important
osteoclast inhibitor while inducing osteogenic features in
vitro and stimulating bone regeneration in vivo.11−14 However, the intravenously administration of those peptides might
be impeded by proteases, opsonization, and agglutination. Our group
showed that it is possible to use bulk mesoporous ceramics or hidroxyapatites
to deliver this peptide both in vitro and in vivo.15−17 However, if intravenous delivery might be targeted,
other vectors need to be developed. Consequently, as it has been stated
above, all of these conventional osteoporotic drugs have a healing
effect far from satisfactory, and their several side effects limit
their further application.

Therapies based on gene expression
modification have merged as
potential alternative treatments to bone diseases. RNA interference
is a natural cellular process that regulates gene expression. It enables
the degradation of a specific mRNA (mRNA) and, therefore, knockdown-specific
proteins.18 According to this, RNAi-based
therapies, in which genes that have been identified to down-regulate
bone formation, could be targeted leading to an alternative treatment
for osteoporosis.19 In this sense, gene
silencing through the delivery of small interfering RNA (siRNA) has
gained great attention as a method to increase bone formation.20−22 Wnt/β-catenin is a major signaling pathway that regulates
bone development and remodeling.23 This
pathway is inhibited by the protein sclerostin and encoded by SOST
gene. The inhibition of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway
decreases bone formation by reducing osteoblast differentiation.24−26 For this reason, silencing SOST gene using siRNAs could be an effective
way of reducing sclerostin expression and, therefore, increasing bone
formation and potentially treating osteoporosis.

Generally,
siRNAs are well-known for their very short half-life
and their poor penetration capacity through cell membranes.20,21 These unresolved issues have induced the use of nanocarriers to
protect and deliver siRNAs. Among them, different polymeric nanoparticles,
including liposomes27,28 or cationic-polymeric nanoparticles29,30 have been proposed as siRNA nanocarriers. In this sense, poly(ethylenimine)-siRNA
complexes have been investigated for siRNA delivery, although their
high cytotoxicity has compromised their use.31

Mesoporous silica
nanoparticles (MSNs) have attracted research
interest in biomedicine due to their great properties for drug delivery,
such as large surface area, high loading capacity, and biocompatibility.32−35 It could also be highlighted that their surface could be chemically
modified with different moieties to provide MSNs with different capabilities.
Normally, surface modifications are carried out to improve the targeting
ability of nanoparticles36,37 or to design stimuli-responsive
nanocarriers.38,39 In this sense, MSNs can be functionalized
with cationic polymers such as poly(ethylenimine) (PEI) to transport
siRNAs and achieve a better uptake by cells.40,41 In fact, MSNs covered with PEI have been reported to be biocompatible,
showing much less cytotoxicity to cells than the PEI-siRNA complexes
mentioned above.40

In this work,
we have engineered a system based on MSNs coated
with PEI that can effectively bind and deliver SOST siRNA, preserving
its knockdown capability and increasing bone formation (Figure 1). We took advantage of the
high loading capacity of MSNs to further loading the pores with osteostatin,
which has been observed to stimulate osteoblastic cell growth and
differentiation.42 Thus, this dual therapy
is expected to boost bone formation being a potential alternative
to the current treatments for osteoporosis.

Figure 1 Schematic representation
of the designed nanocarrier based on mesoporous
silica nanoparticles loaded with osteostatin and siRNA to knockdown
SOST and promote the expression of early markers of osteogenic differentiation
both in vitro and in vivo.

Results and Discussion
MSNs@PEI and Effective
Loading and Delivering of SOST siRNA
inside Cells
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles with diameter
of ca. 150 nm and mesopores of 2 nm were synthesized
following a modification of the Stöber method.43 (See the Methods section for details
of MSNs synthesis, functionalization, and characterization.) The external
surface of the nanoparticles was functionalized with phosphonate groups,
providing the strong negative charge to the nanoparticles surface
needed to coat them afterwards with the cationic polymer. The PEI
grafting to MSNs surface was verified by different characterization
techniques as it is described below. The PEI coating was confirmed
through the phosphotungstic acid stained-layer covering the surface
of PEI functionalized nanoparticles, which was not present on the
plain as it can be appreciated by transmission electron microscopy
(TEM). TEM also showed that the nanoparticles were spherical and monodispersed
(Figure 2A).

Figure 2 PEI grafting
to MSNs surface. TEM micrographs of the nanoparticles
(A) before and (B) after coating with 5 kDa PEI polymer. The ζ
potential before and after coating with 5, 8, and 10 kDa PEI polymer
(bottom right corner inset).

MSNs presented the characteristic zeta potential of −21.5
mV at pH = 7, which was shifted to positive and 31 mV at pH = 7 after
PEI coating (Figure 2B). These data confirm that the external surface of the particles
was successfully grafted with the polymer (more details of the characterization
can be found in the Supporting Information).

The aim of covering the surface of MSNs with PEI was to
provide
them with the ability to bind siRNA. However, depending on the molecular
weight employed, PEI could damage the cell membrane, mitochondria,
and lysosomes.44,45 Therefore, optimization of PEI
coating was the first task to accomplish in this work using different
molecular weights (5, 8, and 10 kDa). Their capacity of binding to
siRNA versus reduction of toxicity was evaluated using a fluorescent
siRNA-analog (siGLO Green Transfection Indicator).

In
vitro cell viability of MSNs coated with PEI
(MSNs@PEI) was evaluated by incubating the nanoparticles at different
concentrations with mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells for 2 h.
Then, the cell viability was measured after 48 h of incubation, and
it was found that MSNs@PEI of 10 kDa reduced the cellular viability
at concentrations >100 μg/mL (Figure 3A). In contrast, nanoparticles coated with
8 or 5 kDa PEI showed no toxic effects at concentrations as high as
200 μg/mL. It should be noted that bare nanoparticles without
PEI coating were nontoxic for MEF cells at concentrations as high
as 200 μg/mL. Therefore, MSNs@PEI of 10 kDa were refused due
to their toxicity, and we focused on MSNs@PEI of 5 kDa.

Figure 3 Effective SOST
siRNA model molecule binding to MSNs@PEI and cell
viability in mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells. (A) MEF cell
viability (measured by Alamar Blue) in contact with different concentrations
of MSNs@PEI nanoparticles at 48 h of cell culture. Data are mean ±
SEM of three independent experiments performed in triplicate. Pound
signs indicate p < 0.01 vs MSN,
MSNs@PEI 5kD, and MSNs@PEI 8kD. (B) Agarose gel electrophoresis of
MSNs@PEI and complexed siGLO siRNA in different nanoparticle to nucleic
acid (N/P) ratios. M: molecular weight marker. The ϕ lane contains
only siRNA. After the loading of osteostatin, the N/P ratio and the
electrophoretic mobility did not change. The data showed that all
siRNA was bound when the N-to-P ratio was over 16 in MSNs@PEI 5 kDa,
and over 32 in the case of PEI 8 kDa and PEI 10 kDa.

The siRNA delivery from MSNs@PEI was initially
determined by the
binding capacity of the polymeric coating towards the nucleic acid.
The highest amount of siRNA that could be bound to MSNs@PEI was determined
by agarose gel electrophoresis. In particular, different amounts of
MSNs@PEI ranging from 0.8 to 6.4 μg (using PEI with different
molecular weights) were dispersed with 0.1 μg of siRNA in aqueous
solution to obtain particle-to-nucleic acid ratios (N/P) of 8–64.
N/P is a mass ratio in which N and P, respectively, correspond to
the mass of positive (nitrogen (MSNs@PEI)) and negative (phosphonate
(siGLO)) charges (Figure 3B). The ratio results from dividing the μg of nanoparticles
between the μg of siRNA. One channel was filled just with siGLO
as control (ϕ). Then, these dispersions with different nanoparticle
to siRNA (N/P) ratios were electrophoresed. Only uncomplexed siGLO
was able to migrate to the positive electrode and, therefore, be observed
on the gel. Thus, when the band generated by siGLO is no longer visible
means that all the nucleic acid has been complexed with the added
nanoparticles, and that would be the optimal concentration of nanoparticles
needed to complex the siGLO present. The results observed in Figure 3b indicated that
all siGLO was bound to the nanoparticles at a N/P ratio of >16
(for
PEI 5 kDa) and >32 (for PEI 8 and 10 kDa). Thus, 16 μg of
MSNs@PEI
5 kDa were needed to load 1 μg of siGLO and 32 μg of the
MSNs@PEI 8 and 10 kDa. Consequently, the siRNA loading capacity of
the nanoparticles was found to be ca. 5 wt %. Taking
into consideration that the amount of siRNA recommended by the manufacturer
to achieve a proper knockdown effect was around 0.5–1 μM,
it means that final concentration should be between 6.65 and 13.3
μg/mL. Thus, taking into account the ratio obtained (16 N/P
ratio), we can aproximate that the nanoparticle concentration should
be between 106 and 213 μg/mL, which is within the nontoxicity
window for 5 kDa PEI. Then, although the loading capacity of the nanoparticles
could be considered low, it was found to be good enough to transport
the efficient amount of siRNA needed for an effective knockdown.

Consequently, the 5 kDa PEI resulted on the lowest cell toxicity
of MSNs@PEI while maintaining the effective siRNA bind and delivery
ability. Based on these results, the 5 kDa PEI was selected and further
used for the next steps in our research. It is worth mentioning that
the siRNA presence in the PEI mesh remained the cell viability unchanged
(Figure S2).

The next step consisted
on the evaluation of the cellular uptake
of the MSNs@PEI through flow cytometry (Figure 4A) and confocal laser scanning microscopy
(Figures 4B and 5).
For the flow cytometry assay, FITC labeled nanoparticles (F-MSNs)
coated with PEI and bound with siGLO were used. After coating the
MSNs with PEI, the nanoparticle uptake significantly increased, which
could be ascribed to the drastic change on the surface charge previously
mentioned, from negative (MSNs) to positive (MSNs@PEI). This is in
agreement with the literature because it is easier for the surface
membrane (negative) to endocyte the positively charged nanoparticles
(Figure 4A).44 After the binding of the siGLO to the nanoparticles,
the amount of nanoparticles internalized was approximately the same
as expected, but the fluorescence intensity doubled, confirming that
siGLO was inside the cells being the responsible of the fluorescence
intensity increase.

Figure 4 MSNs@PEI-siGLO uptake by mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF)
cells
by flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy. (A) Cellular uptake
of different fluorescein-labeled MSNs, MSNs@PEI, and MSNs@PEI-siGLO
was measured by flow cytometry at 2 h of internalization in MEF cells.
Representative flow cytometry images are shown on the top. Data are
mean ± SEM of three independent experiments performed in triplicate.
Asterisks indicate p < 0.03 vs MSN; pound signs indicate p < 0.01 vs MSN and MSNs@PEI. (B) Representative confocal laser scanning microscopy
images of MEF cells incubated with Rhodamine-B-labeled MSNs, MSNs@PEI,
and MSNs@PEI-siGLO nanoparticles at 2 h of internalization. Blue fluorescence
(nuclei), red fluorescence (Rh-MSNs@PEI), and green fluorescence (siGLO).

Figure 5 SiGLO release from MSNs@PEI in MEF cells. Representative
fluorescence
microscopy images of MEF cells incubated 2 h with MSNs@PEI nanoparticles
with siGLO at 0 and 48 h after nanoparticle incubation. Blue fluorescence
(nuclei), red fluorescence (MSNs@PEI), and green fluorescence (siGLO).
Arrows denote the siGLO released.

For the microscopy assay, rhodamine B-labeled nanoparticles
coated
with PEI and bound with siGLO were used. The MSNs (red) and siGLO
(green) co-localize in the cell (yellow), proving that the nucleic
acid was attached to the PEI mesh at the initial stage of the experiment
(Figure 4B).

The Rh-MSNs@PEI-siGLO were added to the cells and after 2 h, the
media, including the non-internalized nanoparticles, were removed
and refreshed. At that moment (0 h), green and red fluorescence co-localize,
while after 48 h, the green fluorescence started to spread, turning
green the cytoplasm, which could be ascribed to the siGLO being released
from the Rh-MSNs@PEI (Figure 5).

The release kinetics of the MSN@PEI carrier was evaluated
using
siGLO as a siRNA model. Loaded nanoparticles were suspended in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) and placed on a Transwell permeable support. At every
time point studied, the amount of cargo released in the solution outside
the transwell was determined by fluorescence. Figure S3 shows the release profile of siGLO from MSNs@PEI.
At the beginning, only a small amount of the cargo was released (around
20% of the cargo after 24 h), possibly due to the strong interactions
between PEI and siRNA.30 However, over
80% of the cargo was released after 48 h as a consequence of the reduction
of the electrostatic interaction between siGLO and the cationic mesh.
This release delay would provide the system with the necessary time
to arrive to the target area (osteoporotic bone) before releasing
the cargo, providing the protection that siRNA needs around system
circulation.

In Vitro Model for SOST
Expression
To demonstrate that the designed system could
effectively knockdown
the SOST gene in vitro, it was necessary to have
a cell line that expressed this gene. In particular, it has been reported
that MEFs generate detectable levels of SOST expression.28 Thus, we cultured MEFs for 3 weeks observing
increased levels of SOST expression detectable after 3 days, which
were increased up to 20-fold after 14 days (Figure 6A). It was also observed that as SOST mRNA
levels lessened, the expression of two osteoblastic differentiation
markers, Runx2 and Alp, increased (Figures 6B,C).

Figure 6 Changes in SOST mRNA levels and Runx2
and Alp bone osteogenic markers
in MEF cells. (A) SOST, (B) Alp, and (C) Runx2 gene expression (measured
by real-time PCR) in MEF cells at different times. Data are mean ±
SEM of three independent experiments performed in triplicate. Single
asterisks indicate p < 0.01 vs 3 days; triple asterisks indicate p < 0.001 vs 3 and 7 days.

As mentioned above, SOST gene is involved in different developmental
processes, particularly, inhibits osteoblastic activity and differentiation,
therefore modulates bone formation. Then, when cells differentiate,
SOST expression falls and decreases to lower values, instead, different
genes like Runx2 or Alp, known as osteogenic markers, increased their
expression. The results obtained by real-time PCR are in agreement
with this statement.

In consequence, MEFs provides an in vitro system
in which SOST is greatly expressed after 2 weeks of incubation without
the necessity to expose the cells to any osteogenic inductors. This
system would permit us to study the SOST knockdown efficiency by the
specific siRNA. In addition, the modified expression of osteogenic
markers as well as SOST gene in MEF cells permits its use to evaluate
the impact of SOST knockdown on bone osteogenic marker genes.

Silencing
Capability of MSNs@PEI-siRNA
First, it was
necessary to evaluate the free SiRNA capacity to in vitro knockdown SOST gene in MEF model. The transfection of SOST siRNA
to MEF cells was evaluated after 14 days of incubation in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle medium (DMEM). That period of time was selected after
the previous experiment, in which the maximum expression of SOST in
MEF cells was observed after 14 days of culture. SiRNA transfection
was promoted using Accell siRNA delivery media (free from BSA, which
inhibit the transfection of free Accell siRNA). Quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used to evaluate
SOST expression after 2 h of transfection at day 14 of cell culture.
A pair of controls were used to optimize the experiment: a negative
control siRNA (SiCtl) (“non-targeting control”, which
targets a site that is absent in human, mouse, and rat genomes), as
well as positive control (PosControl) (“GAPD control”,
which targets GAPDH, a gene common between human, mouse, and rat).
SiCtl is necessary to verify that the silencing resulted from a sequence-specific
process, and it is not due to a nonspecific effect. In contrast, PosControl
targets a housekeeping gene, which means that the target gene is expressed
in all cell types at a level that does not fluctuate with cell cycle.
In this sense, PosControl would verify the efficiency of siRNA delivery
into cells. It was also used an untreated control (MEF or MSNs@PEI
MEF) to determine a baseline of target gene level. After evaluation
of the gene expression levels (Figure S4), it was found that when treating the cells with the SiCtl, SOST
expression was very similar to the untreated control (MEF). Instead,
after applying the PosControl, SOST expression decreased to significantly
lower levels, confirming that siRNA transfection was carried out successfully.
The data obtained showed that the expression of SOST decreased notably
(ca. 98%) after treatment with SOST siRNA, verifying
its functionality and the utility of the in vitro model to assess afterwards the capability of MSNs@PEI to transfect
siRNA into cells.

After confirming the siRNA activity, we have
to take into account that in a real in vivo scenario,
siRNA cannot just be injected into the bloodstream because it would
be degraded, so a nanocarrier was designed for delivering the siRNA.
It was necessary to verify that siRNA knockdown capability was maintained
after being bound and released from MSNs@PEI. The efficacy of SOST
siRNA delivered by MSNs@PEI was evaluated in MEFs. In this case, the
MSNs would be the transfection vector, and then it was not necessary
to use the Accell siRNA delivery media; hence, DMEM was used instead.
At day 14 of culture, 600 μL of a 115 μg/mL MSNs@PEI dispersion
bound with 15 μL of 20 μM siRNA were added to the cells,
and after 2 h, the media were refreshed. Considering the amount of
siRNA bound to the nanoparticles as well as the nanoparticles internalized
inside the cells, we could approximate the amount of siRNA delivered
to the cells, assuming that all the siRNA loaded would be released.
A total of 600 μL of a 115 μg/mL MSNs@PEI dispersion bound
with 15 μL of 20 μM of siRNA was added to cells, i.e. 70 μg of nanoparticles were loaded with 4 μg
of siRNA. The 80% of the loaded nanocarriers were internalized, which
means that, 56 μg of nanoparticles were taken up, and 3.2 μg
of siRNA were released into cells.

Then, after 48 h, SOST-mRNA
was measured using qRT-PCR. MEFs transfected
with SOST siRNA presented a significant reduced expression of SOST
relative to NeControl (ca. 95%) as well as MSNs@PEI
control (Figure 7A),
which was quite similar to the one obtained before with the Accell
siRNA transfected with the Accell siRNA delivery media. Osteogenic
markers gene levels (Runx2 and Alp) were also measured to determine
the impact of SOST down-regulation (Figure 7B,C). Because SOST is a gene involved in
cell-differentiation inhibition, its knockdown is expected to increase
the expression of these osteogenic markers. The data showed, as it
was proposed above, that when SOST was knocked down, the expression
of the osteogenic markers increased, being correlated with a possibly
increased cell differentiation in a complex environment such as osteopororotic
bone. The expression of Runx2 increased up to 2-fold and Alp up to
1.5-fold after siRNA transfection compare to MEF cells expression
(Figure 7B,C). The
increment in bone osteogenic markers expression was slight; thus,
the next step was to evaluate the coadministration with other anabolic
agent to determine if an additive effect could be achieved.

Figure 7 SOST, Runx2,
and ALP gene expression in the presence of SiRNA-Sost
bound to MSNs@PEI in MEF cells. (A) SOST mRNA expression (measured
by real-time PCR) in MEF cells at 14 days of cell culture. (B) Alp
and (C) Runx2 mRNA expression (measured by real-time PCR) in MEF cells
at 14 days of cell culture. A negative-control siRNA (SiCtl) was used.
MSNs@PEI nanoparticles bound to NeControl (MSNs@PEI SiCtl). Data are
mean ± SEM of three independent experiments performed in triplicate.
Asterisks indicate p < 0.01 vs MSNs@PEI MEF control cells.

Co-delivery of siRNA and Osteostatin to Cells and Its Effect
in Osteogenic Marker Expression
Even though osteostatin has
been shown to be effective at inducing osteoblast differentiation in vitro (even in the sub-nanometer range)11−14 and increasing bone regeneration in vivo,15−17 its use in combination with siRNAs has never been reported. As it
has been mentioned above, MSNs could be used to explore that possible
synergistic effect. For this reason, we designed a dual release system
in which osteostatin would be loaded in the mesopores, and the therapeutic
siRNA would be bound to the PEI network. In this sense, the system
will be able to transport and release both molecules at the target
destination, where the effect of their dual release would be evaluated.

First, it was necessary to test whether the PEI coating affects
the osteostatin release from the MSNs. Osteostatin was loaded in the
mesopores of the MSNs by immersing the nanoparticles in a solution
of osteostatin overnight, and then the nanoparticles were coated with
PEI. Afterwards, a release experiment was carried out, and the amount
of osteostatin released was measured by fluorescence (Figure 8). Osteostatin release data
showed in Figure 8 can
be fitted to a first-order kinetic model, with a typical release profile
from mesoporous materials (eq 1):39 1  The equation parameters could be described
as Y being the amount of osteostatin released (microgram
of osteostatin per milligram of MSNs@PEI) at time t (h), with A being the maximum amount of osteostatin
released (in micrograms of osteostatin per milligram of MSNs@PEI),
and with k being the release rate constant. The release
data showed that MSNs loaded with osteostatin and coated with PEI
(OST-MSNs@PEI) released osteostatin in a time-dependent manner, reaching
values of 0.5476 micrograms of osteostatin per milligram of MSNs@PEI.
Thus, despite PEI coating, which it is not acting as a physical barrier
impeding the osteostatin release, the MSNs were able to release the
cargo, so MSNs@PEI could be used to transport and deliver osteostatin.
Osteostatin delivery from other mesoporous matrices, such as SBA15,
has been previously explored in vivo, conferring
osteoinductive features thanks to the peptide delivery. In fact, despite
the non-controlled delivery of osteostatin, no clinical alterations
were observed.15

Figure 8 Time-dependent osteostatin
(OST) release from MSNs@PEI in PBS at
pH 7.4, simulating the physiological fluids. Nanoparticles were loaded
with OST and afterwards coated with PEI (OST-MSNs@PEI). Points to
trace the curves are the means of three independent measurements per
time period.

After testing of the
osteostatin and siRNA release separately,
both components were integrated into a multifunctional system capable
of release both biomolecules inside cells. First, osteostatin was
loaded into the mesopores as described above. Then, the PEI coating
was accomplished, and siRNA was bound, leading to the final system
(OST-MSNs@PEI-siRNA). At day 14 of MEF cell culturing, the complete
system was added to the cells following the same procedure described
above. After 48 h, SOST-mRNA, Runx2 and Alp expression were measured
(Figure 9). The results
showed that SOST was effectively knocked down either by the SOST-siRNA
release or the osteostatin release and, more efficiently, by the delivery
of both molecules (Figure 9A). Furthermore, Alp expression rose up to 17-fold when OST-MSNs@PEI-siRNA
were administrated (Figure 9B). Besides, Runx2 expression notably increased up to 110-fold
when osteostatin and SOST siRNA were released together by the nanoparticles
(Figure 9C). The results
obtained with the administration of the nanocarrier loaded just with
SOST siRNA (MSNs@PEI-siRNA) or only with osteostatin (OST-MSNs@PEI)
were also measured and compared with those obtained with the nanocarrier
loaded with both. The data showed that the coadministration of both
biomolecules at the same time, compared with the administration of
the biomolecules separately, increased the expression of both osteogenic
markers to notably high levels, being a combined effect between osteostatin
and siRNA. It was also measured the effect of one pulse of free osteostatin
at the same concentration as the one achieved by the nanoparticles
(7 × 10–7 M). It is true that in both cases
(Runx2 and Alp), the gene expression levels rose up signaly higher
when the osteostatin is released from the nanoparticles than when
is added on its free form. This fact has been noticed before, producing
higher effects in mineralization the continuous release of free osteostatin
from a mesoporous biomaterial than one pulse of osteostatin at the
beginning of the experiment.17 The reasons
that could support this theory are, first, that from the osteogenic
perspective, a controlled and sustained released of osteostatin for
longer time is more effective than a punctual administration of higher
doses of osteostatin. Second, it has also been reported that, the
mere presence of silica would increase the expression of different
osteogenic markers as well as increase the proliferation of osteoblast.46 In addition, the MSNs could also protect the
peptide from degradation, being gradually released in perfect conditions.
So, unlike just one pulse of osteostatin at the beginning of the experiment,
which would be progressively degraded, the release from MSNs would
keep a uniform concentration of active osteostatin for longer time,
being that the effect in this sense is more noticeable. Therefore,
the delivery of osteostatin from our system improves osteostatin effects
in osteogenic marker expression.

Figure 9 (A) SOST, (B) Alp, and (C) Runx2bone osteogenic
markers gene expression
in the presence of SiRNA-SOST bound to MSNs@PEI in mouse embryonic
fibroblast (MEF) cells in the presence or absence of osteostatin (OST).
SOST mRNA expression (measured by real-time PCR) in MEF cells at 14
days of cell culture and Alp and Runx2 mRNA expression (measured by
real-time PCR) in MEF cells at 14 days of cell culture. To optimize
the experiment, one control was used: a negative control siRNA (SiCtl)
(“non-targeting control”, which targets a site that
is absent in human, mouse, and rat genomes); MSNs@PEI nanoparticles
were bound to SiCtl (MSNs@PEI SiCtl). Data are mean ± SEM of
three independent experiments performed in triplicate. Triple asterisks
indicate p < 0.001 vs MSNs@PEI
MEF; pound signs indicate p < 0.05 vs OST-MSNs@PEI and MSNs@PEI-SiRNA.

In Vivo Evaluation of siRNA and OST Co-delivery
and Their Implications on Gene Expression
After the successful in vitro validation of the system, the next step was the in vivo evaluation in a reduced bone mass model. It has
been used ovariectomized C57/BL6 female mice with a decreased femoral
bone mineral density compared to non-ovariectomized (62.98 ±
0.28 mg/cm2versus 66.56 ± 0.47 mg/cm2; p < 0.001) as previously described.47 First, 50 μL of the complete nanocarrier
(OST-MSNs@PEI-siRNA) dispersion (0.8 mg/mL) were injected in the femur
bone marrow of ovariectomized mice (Figure 10A). Even-higher concentrations of these
nanoparticles have been widely used in different works without any
toxic effects.39,48−50 After 5 days,
SOST, Runx2, and Alp mRNA were measured by qRT-PCR (Figure 10). Because the injection of
the nanoparticles was local, i.e., the nanoparticles
were already at the target tissue, we did not evaluate the biodistribution
of the nanoparticles in the animals.

Figure 10 In vivo injection of
OST-MSNs@PEI-siRNA. SOST,
Alp, and Runx2 bone osteogenic markers gene expression in the presence
of SiRNA-SOST bound to MSNs@PEI in ovariectomized mice (OVX) in the
presence or absence of osteostatin. (A) Femur bone-marrow injection
in ovariectomized female mice and cyanine-7 labeled nanoparticles
accumulation. (B) SOST mRNA expression (measured by real-time PCR)
in femur bone. (C) Alp and (D) Runx2 mRNA expression (measured by
real-time PCR) in femur bone. To optimize the experiment, one control
was used: a negative control siRNA (SiCtl) (“non-targeting
control”, which targets an absent site in human, mouse, and
rat genomes) and MSNs@PEI nanoparticles bound to SiCtl (MSNs@PEI SiCtl).
Data are mean ± SEM of three independent experiments performed
in triplicate. Triple asterisks indicate p < 0.001 vs MSNs@PEI; pound signs indicate p <
0.05 vs OST-MSNs@PEI and MSNs@PEI-SiRNA.

First, it should be mentioned that, the expression
of SOST in ovariectomized
mice (OVX) increased compared to non-ovariectomized mice (control)
and were statistically significant. However, the injection of the
nanoparticles, with SOST siRNA or osteostatin notably decreased the
expression of SOST (ca. 50% and 60%, respectively),
being particularly effective the injection of the SOST siRNA and osteostatin
coloaded nanoparticles, which achieved the greatest knockdown effect, ca. 75% of silencing (Figure 10B).

The osteogenic markers, Runx2
and Alp, decreased their expression
in OVX compared to Control group as expected (Figure 10C,D). The results also showed that Runx2
and Alp expression notably increased when osteostatin and SOST siRNA
were released together by the complete system (up to 3 or 2.2 n-fold, respectively, compared with OVX), in total agreement
with the previously in vitro results. The results
obtained with the administration of the system loaded just with the
SOST siRNA (OVX+MSNs-siRNA) or only with the osteostatin (OVX+MSNs-OST)
were also measured, being up to 1.5 or 2.5 n-fold,
respectively, for Runx2 and up to 1.8 or 2.6 n-fold,
respectively, for Alp, compared with OVX. The data showed that the
co-administration of both biomolecules at the same time compared with
the administration of the biomolecules separately, increased the expression
of both osteogenic markers to notably higher levels and decreased
the expression of SOST gene, being a combined effect between osteostatin
and siRNA (OVX plus MSNs-siRNA plus OST).

The design of the
dual delivery nanosystem enhanced the expression
of osteogenic markers and, effectively, knockdown of the SOST gene
through the combined effect of osteostatin and SOST siRNA in vivo, being a synergy between this two molecules. This
complete system could provide a potential alternative to the current
treatment of osteoporosis, empowering cell differentiation by osteogenic
features.

Conclusions
The inhibition of the
Wnt/β-catenin pathway has recently
gained attention as therapeutic target in bone diseases such as osteoporosis.
One of the main inhibitors of this pathway is sclerostin, a protein
encoded by the SOST gene. Its activity results in a reduction of osteoblast
formation and differentiation. Several types of sclerostin monoclonal
antibodies have been developed as anabolic drugs to block the activity
of sclerostin, increasing osteoblast differentiation for osteoporosis
treatment.5,9,51−53 However, these antibodies can cause an immune response, which limits
the use of this treatment.53 Silencing
SOST gene with a specific siRNA in osteocytes could be a more effective
approach that could overcome the immune response limitation. Osteocytes
are the most abundant cells in bone tissue and responsible for SOST
gene expression. In face of the difficulties with finding an osteocyte in vitro model that expresses SOST; we had to use MEFs,
which are known to generate detectable levels of SOST expression.
We optimized the conditions of MEFs culturing so we could use them
as a platform to test the siRNA effectivity. Even though siRNAs seem
to be promising candidates as therapy agents for bone disorders, their
main problem relies on their delivery due to their very short half-life
and poor internalization capacity through cell membranes. This is
an old problem for nucleic acid therapeutics, in which the major challenge
has remained the same for the last 40 years.54 Here, we have employed MSNs as siRNA nanocarriers due to their exquisite
properties for drug delivery, such as large surface area, high loading
capacity, and biocompatibility, among others. We took advantage of
the network of cavities within of MSNs to load the pores with the
osteogenic peptide osteostatin, which has been observed to stimulate
osteoblastic cell growth and differentiation.

Hence, our purpose
was to co-deliver two therapeutic agents, SOST
siRNA and osteostatin, at the same time inside cells. After evaluation
of the effect of both biomolecules in vitro with
promising results (high capacity of silencing SOST and notably higher
levels of the osteogenic markers), the system was injected in the
femoral bone marrow of ovariectomized mice, and the obtained results
were in agreement with the in vitro experiments.
However, mice treated with each biomolecule separately have modified
the expression of the three genes, (knocking down SOST and increasing
the expression of Runx2 and Alp), the co-administration of both biomolecules
yielded synergistic effects. Thus, it can be concluded that our system
was able to transport, co-deliver, and transfect to cells SOST siRNA
and osteostatin, maintaining its activity and achieving an effective
silencing effect. The combination of SOST siRNA with the osteogenic
peptide, promoted a synergistic effect, thus increasing the expression
of early markers of osteogenic differentiation in ovariectomized mice.
These promising results might lead to further investigations. This
system has demonstrated remarkable efficacy for an intrabone marrow
injection. In consequence, this system will constitute a promising
candidate as a platform for gene therapy in osteoporosis treatment.

Methods
Synthesis and Surface Modification
of Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles,
MSNs, were synthesized following
a modification of the Stöber method.43 First, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB (1 g, 2.74 mmol)), the
structure directing agent, was dissolved in H2O (480 mL)
and NaOH (3.5 mL, 2 M) in a 1 L round-bottom flask under moderate
magnetic stirring. The mixture was heated at 80 °C, and tetraethylorthosilicate
(TEOS (4.5 mL, 20.15 mmol)) was added drop-wise at 0.33 mL/min rate
with a pump. For the phosphonate modification, 30 min after the TEOS
addition, 3-trihydroxysilylpropyl methylphosphonate (TSPMP (0.5 mL,
1.31 mmol)) was added and heated for a further 1.5 h at 80 °C
under magnetic stirring. Then, the solution was centrifuged and washed
once with water and twice with ethanol. The product was dried at room
temperature under vacuum. The surfactant was removed by ionic exchange
using 350 mL of a solution of ammonium nitrate (10 mg/mL) in ethanol
(95%) at 80 °C overnight under magnetic stirring. The product
was centrifuged, washed 3 times with ethanol, and dried under vacuum.

Rhodamine B-labeled nanoparticles and fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC)-labeled nanoparticles were synthesized by reacting 1 mg of
Rhodamine-B isothiocyanate or fluorescein isothiocyanate with 2.2
μL of (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) in 100 μL
of ethanol for 2 h. Then, this solution was mixed with 4.5 mL of TEOS,
and the whole mixture was added to the surfactant solution as previously
described. The rest of the procedure was carried out as described
above.

For the synthesis of cyanine-7-labeled nanoparticles,
5 mg of cyanine-7
with 4.4 μL of APTES were dissolved in 140 μL of dimethyl
sulfoxide and stirred overnight. Then, this solution was mixed with
4.5 mL of TEOS, and the whole mixture was added to the surfactant
solution as previously described. The rest of the procedure was carried
out as described above.

To perform the PEI coating, 5 mg of
phosphonate-modified nanoparticles
were dispersed in a solution of 2.5 mg of PEI (5, 8, and 10 kDa) in
1 mL of absolute ethanol. After sonicating for 20 s and stirring for
30 min, the PEI coated nanoparticles (MSNs@PEI) were consequently
washed with PBS and ethanol.41

Physicochemical
Characterization of MSNs
All of the
materials were characterized for size, shape, and charge. Surface
morphology was analyzed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
carried out with a JEOL JEM 2100 instrument operated at 200 kV, equipped
with a charge-coupled device camera (KeenView Camera). The ζ
potential and hydrodynamic size of nanoparticles were measured by
means of a Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments) equipped with a
633 nm “red” laser. The PEI coating was verified by
thermogravimetry and Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectra. Thermogravimetry
and differential temperature analyses (TGA/DTA) were performed in
a PerkinElmer Pyris Diamond TG/DTA analyzer, with 5 °C/min heating
ramping up from room temperature to 600 °C. A Nicolet Nexus spectrometer
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to obtain the FTIR spectra. X-ray
diffraction (XRD) was carried out to confirm the order of the mesopores
from the nanoparticles in a Philips X-Pert MPD diffractometer equipped
with Cu Kα radiation. N2 adsorption was carried out
to obtain surface area and pore size values. Micromeritics ASAP 2010
instrument was used; surface area was obtained by applying the BET
method to the isotherm, and the pore size distribution was determined
by the BJH method from the desorption branch of the isotherm. The
mesopore diameter was determined from the maximum of the pore size
distribution curve. Fluorescence spectrometry was used to determine
cargo release by means of a Biotek Synergy 4 device. Fluorescence
microscopy was used to verify the colocalization on MSNs and siRNA
constructs. It was performed with an Evos FL Cell Imaging System equipped
with three LED light cubes (lEX, nanometers; lEM, nanometers): DAPY
(357/44; 447/60), GFP (470/22; 525/50), and RFP (531/40; 593/40) from
AMG (Advance Microscopy Group).

Optimization of siGLO Binding
to MSNs@PEI Nanoparticles
The transfection conditions and
the release efficiency were optimized
using a siRNA-analog called siGLO Green Transfection Indicator (Abs/Em
max 494/520 nm). The siRNA binding capability of MSNs@PEI was determined
by agarose gel retardation assay. Different amounts of MSNs@PEI ranging
from 0.8 to 6.4 μg were mixed with 0.1 μg of siGLO in
aqueous solution to obtain particle-to-nucleic acid ratios (N/P) of
8–64. N/P is a mass ratio in which N and P, respectively, correspond
to the moles of positive (nitrogen (MSNs@PEI)) and negative (phosphonate
(siGLO)) charges. Free siGLO was used as control. A total of 20 μL
of MSNs@PEI and siGLO complex solution were mixed with 5 μL
of loading buffer and electrophoresed in a 2% agarose gel containing
0.5 μg/mL of GelRed (Nucleic Acid Gel Stain) at 80 V for 40
min in Tris/Borate/EDTA (TBE) running buffer. Nucleic acid bands were
detected by UV light (254 nm). It is important to mention that only
uncomplexed siGLO is able to migrate to the positive electrode and,
therefore, observed on the gel. Then, when the spot of free siGLO
is no longer visible means that the amount of nanoparticles added
had complexed with all the siGLO present (total binding particle/nucleic
acid). The lowest N/P ratio that complexed all the siGLO is called
threshold.41 In 8 and 10 kDa MSN@PEI appears
the same threshold, 32, but for 5 kDa PEI, the threshold was 16.

SiGLO Loading and Release from MSNs@PEI
The final concentration
to bind the siGLO in the polymer (N/P ratio of 32) was achieved adding
165 μL of siGLO (20 μM) to 0.35 mL of a 4 mg/mL solution
of MSNs@PEI in PBS 7.4 (10 mM). A 24-transwell plate was employed
to determine the siGLO release. To perform the assay, 0.1 mL of the
nanoparticle dispersion were placed on a Transwell permeable support
(three replications were performed). The well was filled with 0.6
mL of PBS pH 7.4 (10 mM), and the suspension was orbitally stirred
at 37 °C at 100 rpm during all the experiment. At every time
point studied, the solution outside the transwell insert was removed
and replaced with fresh PBS. The amount of cargo released in the solution
removed was determined by fluorescence (absorbance/emission: 494/520
nm).

Cell Cultures
Cell culture tests were performed using
MEFs because they are known to express SOST gene. MEF cells were then
plated at a density of 20 000 cells per square centimeter in
1 mL of DMEM, respectively, containing 10% of heat-inactivated fetal
bovine serum and 1% penicillin–streptomycin at 37 °C in
a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2, and incubated for the
specific time of each experiment. The tested nanoparticles were placed
into each well of 12- or 24-well plates after cell seeding. Some wells
without nanoparticles were seeded as controls.

Cell Viability
MEF viability was determined by addition
of Alamar Blue solution at 10% (v/v) to the cell culture. After 2
h of contact with different concentrations of modified MSNs (n = 3), the cells were grown for 48 h in 24 well plates
at a density of 104 cells per square centimeter. Afterward,
Alamar Blue solution was added following the manufacturer’s
instructions.55 Fluorescence intensity
was measured using excitation emission wavelengths of 570 and 600
nm, respectively, in a Unicam UV-500 UV–visible spectrophotometer.

Cell MSNs@PEI Uptake by Flow Cytometry, Fluorescence, and Confocal
Laser Scanning Microscopy
MEF cells were cultured in each
well of a 12-well plate and incubated at different times in the absence
or presence of the tested FITC-labeled nanoparticles at a concentration
of 50 μg/mL (MSNs, MSNs@PEI, and MSNs@PEI-siGLO). After 2 h,
cells were washed twice with PBS and incubated at 37 °C with
trypsin–EDTA solution for cell detachment. The reaction was
stopped with culture medium after 5 min, and cells were centrifuged
at 1000 rpm for 10 min and suspended in fresh medium. Then, the fluorescence
present in the surface of the cells was quenched with Trypan blue
(0.4%) to confirm the presence of intracellular and, therefore, internalized
fluorescent signal. Flow cytometry measurements were performed at
an excitation wavelength of 488 nm, and green fluorescence was measured
at 530 nm (FL1). The trigger was set for the green fluorescence channel
(FL1). The conditions for the data acquisition and analysis were established
using negative and positive controls with the CellQuest Program of
Becton–Dickinson, and these conditions were maintained during
all the experiments. Each experiment was carried out three times and
single representative experiments are displayed. For statistical significance,
at least 10 000 cells were analyzed in each sample in a FACScan
machine (Becton, Dickinson and Company) and the mean of the fluorescence
emitted by these single cells was used.

The cell uptake of MSNs
was evaluated using fluorescence and confocal laser scanning microscopy
incubating the cells with Rhodamine-B-labeled MSNs, MSNs@PEI, and
MSNs@PEI-siGLO for 2 h. Each well was washed with PBS three times
to clear the no internalized nanoparticles and then fixed with 75%
ethanol for 10 min. Cells were permeabilized with 0.5% of Triton X-100
during 5 min. The nonspecific background was reduced through the addition
of 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) to the solution and left for 20 min.
The nucleus of both types of cells were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-fenilindol
(DAPI, ≥ 98%) for 5 min, respectively, and then washed three
times with PBS. The nanoparticles internalized into MEF cells were
evaluated by fluorescence microscopy and performed with an Evos FL
Cell Imaging System and with a confocal laser scanning microscope
Olympus FV1200. The images were prepared for analysis using 3D Imaris
software to project a single 2D image from the multiple Z sections
by using an algorithm that displays the maximum value of the pixel
of each Z slice of 1 μm of depth. The resulting projection was
then converted into an image file using this software. The red channel
was used for detecting Rhodamine-B-labeled MSNs@PEI, green channel
for siGLO and blue for cell nucleus.

SOST mRNA Expression and
siRNA Transfection
MEFs were
seeded in 12-well plates and incubated during 3, 7, 14, and 21 days
(n = 3). Total RNA was isolated from MEF cells by
a standard procedure (Trizol, Invitrogen, Groningen, The Netherlands),
and cDNA synthesis was performed using a high-capacity RNA-to-cDNA
kit. Gene expression was analyzed by real-time PCR using a QuantStudio
5 Real-Time PCR System. Unlabeled mouse-specific primers for SOST,
Runx2, Alp, and TaqMan MGB probe were used to perform qRT-PCR
assay. The mRNA copy numbers were calculated for each sample by using
the cycle threshold (Ct) value. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH) rRNA (a housekeeping gene) was amplified in parallel with
tested genes. The relative gene expression was represented by 2−ΔΔCt,
where ΔΔCt = ΔCttarget gene – ΔCtGAPDH.

The efficacy of gene silencing using specific SOST siRNA on MEFs in vitro was tested seeding cells in 12-well plates and
incubated for 2 weeks. Cells were then transfected with the specific
siRNAs at 0.5 μM concentration and incubated as required (experiments
run for triplicate). To optimize the experiment, two controls were
used: a negative control siRNA (“non-targeting control”,
which targets a site that is absent in human, mouse, and rat genomes)
as well as a positive control (“GAPD control”, which
targets GAPDH, a gene common between human, mouse, and rat). SiRNA
transfection was promoted using Accell siRNA transfection media. Transfection
progressed for 2 h and after that, and cells were lysed with 500 μL
of Trizol. Then, gene expression was analyzed by real-time PCR as
described before. Bar graphs represent expression of SOST mRNA relative
to GAPDH.

SOST mRNA Knockdown by MSNs@PEI-siRNA
MSNs@PEI-siRNA
complexes were prepared with the N/P ratios previously described.
First, 15 μL of 20 μM SOST siRNA or negative or positive
control siRNA were added to 70 μg of MSNs@PEI 5kD (N/P ratio
= 16) in 600 μL of DMEM. The complexes were added to MEFs cells
at day 14 and exposed for 2 h. Then, the medium was replaced with
fresh medium and cultured for further 48 h. Cells were then lysed
using 500 μL of Trizol, and the SOST, Runx2, and Alp expression
levels were quantified by real-time PCR as previously described.

Osteostatin Loading and Release
The MSNs were loaded
before PEI coating with osteostatin (OST) by incubating 5 mg of MSNs
in a solution of OST 10–4 M in PBS overnight at
4 °C to maintain osteostatin stability. Then, the nanoparticles
were recovered by centrifugation and washed with PBS. The loaded nanoparticles
were functionalized with PEI, as previously described. Then, the OST-loaded
MSNs@PEI nanoparticles (OST-MSNs@PEI) were centrifuged and washed
with PBS.

A 24-transwell plate was employed to determine the
OST release. From a 14 mg/mL dispersion of OST-MSNs@PEI dispersed
in PBS with a pH of 7.4 (10 mM), 0.1 mL was placed on a Transwell
permeable support (3 replications were performed). The well was filled
with 0.6 mL of PBS pH 7.4 (10 mM), and the suspension was stirred
at 100 rpm at 37 °C during the experiment. At every time point
studied, the solution outside the transwell insert was measured by
fluorescence and replaced again on the plate. The amount of cargo
released was determined by fluorescence at a wavelength of absorbance/emission
of 280/320 nm. It was confirmed by a gel electrophoresis assay that
osteostatin loading process keeps unaffected the binding ability of
OST-MSNs@PEI to siGLO.

Osteostatin Delivery in MEF Cells in the
Presence and Absence
of siRNA SOST
For the performance of the experiment, first
MSNs were loaded with osteostatin as described before; afterward,
they were coated with PEI and bound to siRNA (OST-MSNs@PEI-siRNA).
Then, 15 μL of 20 μM SOST siRNA or negative or positive
control siRNA were added to 70 μg of OST-MSNs@PEI 5kD (N/P ratio
of 16) in 600 μL of DMEM. The complexes were added to MEFs cells
at day 14 and exposed for 2 h. OST-MSNs@PEI were also used as control.
Then, the medium was replaced with fresh medium and cultured for further
48 h. Cells were then lysed using 500 μL of Trizol, and the
SOST, Runx2, and Alp expression levels were quantified by real-time
PCR as previously described.

In Vivo Evaluation
Young mature virgin
female C57BL/6J mice (Charles River) that underwent bilateral OVX
or sham operations (control) of 12 weeks of age were used. They were
assigned to 6 groups (n = 5 per group), OVX, MSNs,
MSNs@PEI-siCtl, MSNs@PEI-siRNA, OST-MSNs@PEI, OST-MSNs@PEI-siRNA,
and one more control group with 5 mice. They were stabilized in the
Animal Research Facility at Hospital 12 de Octubre for 2 weeks. All
animal experiments in this study were performed according to approved
protocols. Animals were given free access to water and fed a standard
diet (8.8 g/kg calcium and 5.9 g/kg phosphate) in a room maintained
at 22 °C on 12 h light/12 h dark cycles.

Mice were anesthetized
with isoflurane, and 50 μL of nanoparticle dispersion (0.8 mg/mL)
was injected in the femur bone marrow by bilateral oblique incisions
that were made over the patellar ligament. A hole was made through
patellar ligament using the needle from the syringe, and then the
dispersion was injected.

After 5 days, mice were euthanized
by incubating them with 5% isoflurane
in oxygen, and both femurs, the one injected with nanoparticles and
the other one as control, were removed. Bone samples were crushed
under liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was extracted from these homogenized
samples with Trizol following the manufacturer’s instructions.
SOST, Runx2, and Alp expression levels were quantified by real-time
PCR as previously described.

Dual-Energy X-ray Absorptiometry
The bone mineral density
of femur was measured in anaesthetized control and ovariectomized
mice at the start of the study to confirm decreased bone mass using
PIXImus (GE Lunar Corp., Madison, WI).12

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b00241.Figures showing
physicochemical characterizations, MEF
cell viability, time-dependent SiGLO release, SOST gene expression
knockdown in the presence of SiRNA-Sost in MEF cells, and representative
fluorescence microscopy images; tables showing particle size and ζ
potential before and after coating with PEI and particle size and
size distribution graphics (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn9b00241_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work has been
done thanks to the financial
support provided by European Research Council (Advanced Grant VERDI;
ERC-2015-AdG proposal no. 694160).
==== Refs
References
Kanis J. A. ; McCloskey E. V. ; Johansson H. ; Oden A. ; Melton L. J. ; Khaltaev N. 
A Reference
Standard for the Description of Osteoporosis . Bone. 
2008 , 42 , 467 –475 10.1016/j.bone.2007.11.001 .18180210 
Kanis J. A. 
Assessment
of Fracture Risk and Its Application to Screening for Postmenopausal
Osteoporosis: Synopsis of a WHO Report . Osteoporosis
Int. 
1994 , 4 , 368 –381 10.1007/BF01622200 .
Moshiri A. ; Sharifi A. M. ; Oryan A. 
Current Knowledge,
Drug-Based Therapeutic
Options and Future Directions in Managing Osteoporosis . Clin. Rev. Bone Miner. Metab. 
2017 , 15 , 1 –23 10.1007/s12018-016-9207-3 .
Arcos D. ; Boccaccini A. R. ; Bohner M. ; Díez-Pérez A. ; Epple M. ; Gómez-Barrena E. ; Herrera A. ; Planell J. A. ; Rodríguez-Mañas L. ; Vallet-Regí M. 
The Relevance of Biomaterials to the Prevention and
Treatment of Osteoporosis . Acta Biomater. 
2014 , 10 , 1793 –1805 10.1016/j.actbio.2014.01.004 .24418434 
Khajuria D. K. ; Razdan R. ; Mahapatra D. R. 
Drugs for
the Management of Osteoporosis:
A Review . Rev. Bras. Reumatol. 
2011 , 51 , 372 –382 10.1590/S0482-50042011000400008 .
Rachner T. D. ; Khosla S. ; Hofbauer L. C. 
Osteoporosis:
Now and the Future . Lancet 
2011 , 377 , 1276 –1287 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)62349-5 .21450337 
Russell R. G. G. 
Bisphosphonates:
The First 40 Years . Bone. 
2011 , 49 , 2 –19 10.1016/j.bone.2011.04.022 .21555003 
Mackey P. A. ; Whitaker M. D. 
Osteoporosis: A
Therapeutic Update . J. Nurse Pract. 
2015 , 11 , 1011 –1017 10.1016/j.nurpra.2015.08.010 .
Iñiguez-Ariza N. M. ; Clarke B. L. 
Bone Biology,
Signaling Pathways, and Therapeutic Targets
for Osteoporosis . Maturitas 
2015 , 82 , 245 –255 10.1016/j.maturitas.2015.07.003 .26255682 
Esbrit P. ; Herrera S. ; Portal-Núñez S. ; Nogués X. ; Díez-Pérez A. 
Parathyroid Hormone-Related
Protein
Analogs as Osteoporosis Therapies Therapy . Calcif.
Tissue Int. 
2016 , 98 , 359 –369 10.1007/s00223-015-0050-1 .26259869 
Cornish J. ; Callon K. E. ; Lin C. ; Xiao C. ; Moseley J. M. ; Reid I. A. N. R. 
Stimulation of Osteoblast Proliferation by C-Terminal
Fragments of Parathyroid Hormone - Related Protein . J. Bone Miner. Res. 
1999 , 14 , 915 –922 10.1359/jbmr.1999.14.6.915 .10352099 
Lozano D. ; Fernández-De-Castro L. ; Portal-Núñez S. ; López-Herradón A. ; Dapía S. ; Gómez-Barrena E. ; Esbrit P. 
The C-Terminal Fragment of Parathyroid
Hormone-Related Peptide Promotes Bone Formation in Diabetic Mice with
Low-Turnover Osteopaenia . Br. J. Pharmacol. 
2011 , 162 , 1424 –1438 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.01155.x .21175568 
Fenton A. J. ; Kemp B. E. ; Kent G. N. ; Moseley J. M. ; Zheng M. ; Rowe D. J. ; Britto J. M. ; Martin T. J. ; Nicholson G. C. 
A Carboxyl-Terminal
Peptide from the Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein Inhibits Bone
Resorption by Osteoclasts . Endocrinology 
1991 , 129 , 1762 –1768 10.1210/endo-129-4-1762 .1915066 
Lewinson D. ; Rihani-Basharat S. 
Rapid Communication
PTHrP (107 - 111) Inhibits In Vivo Resorption That
Was Stimulated by PTHrP (1 - 34)
When Applied Intermittently to Neonatal Mice . Calcif. Tissue Int. 
1997 , 61 , 426 –428 10.1007/s002239900359 .9351886 
Lozano D. ; Trejo C. G. ; Gómez-Barrena E. ; Manzano M. ; Doadrio J. C. ; Salinas A. J. ; Vallet-Regí M. ; García-Honduvilla N. ; Esbrit P. ; Buján J. 
Osteostatin-Loaded
onto Mesoporous Ceramics Improves the Early Phase of Bone Regeneration
in a Rabbit Osteopenia Model . Acta Biomater. 
2012 , 8 , 2317 –2323 10.1016/j.actbio.2012.03.014 .22414621 
Lozano D. ; Sánchez-Salcedo S. ; Portal-Núñez S. ; Vila M. ; López-Herradón A. ; Ardura J. A. ; Mulero F. ; Gómez-Barrena E. ; Vallet-Regí M. ; Esbrit P. 
Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein
(107–111) Improves the Bone Regeneration Potential of Gelatin
- Glutaraldehyde Biopolymer-Coated Hydroxyapatite . Acta Biomater. 
2014 , 10 , 3307 –3316 10.1016/j.actbio.2014.03.025 .24704694 
Lozano D. ; Manzano M. ; Salinas A. J. ; Esbrit P. ; Doadrio J. C. ; Vallet-Regí M. ; Gómez-Barrena E. 
Osteostatin-Loaded
Bioceramics Stimulate Osteoblastic Growth and Differentiation . Acta Biomater. 
2010 , 6 , 797 –803 10.1016/j.actbio.2009.08.033 .19716446 
Tokatlian T. ; Segura T. 
siRNA Applications in Nanomedicine . WIREs Nanomed Nanobiotechnol. 
2010 , 2 , 305 –315 10.1002/wnan.81 .
Zhang G. ; Guo B. ; Wu H. ; Tang T. ; Zhang B.-T. ; Zheng L. ; He Y. ; Yang Z. ; Pan X. ; Chow H. ; et al. A Delivery
System Targeting Bone Formation Surfaces to Facilitate RNAi-Based
Anabolic Therapy . Nat. Med. 
2012 , 18 , 307 –314 10.1038/nm.2617 .22286306 
Kim T. ; Singh R. K. ; Kang M. S. ; Kim J. ; Kim H. 
Inhibition
of Osteoclastogenesis through siRNA Delivery with Tunable Mesoporous
Bioactive Nanocarriers . Acta Biomater. 
2016 , 29 , 352 –364 10.1016/j.actbio.2015.09.035 .26432439 
Wang Y. ; Tran K. K. ; Shen H. ; Grainger D. W. 
Selective Local
Delivery of RANK siRNA to Bone Phagocytes Using Bone Augmentation
Biomaterials . Biomaterials 
2012 , 33 , 8540 –8547 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.07.039 .22951320 
Sun Y. ; Ye X. ; Cai M. ; Liu X. ; Xiao J. ; Zhang C. ; Wang Y. ; Yang L. ; Liu J. ; Li S. ; Kang C. ; Zhang B. ; Zhang Q. ; Wang Z. ; Hong A. ; Wang X. 
Osteoblast-Targeting-Peptide
Modified
Nanoparticle for siRNA/microRNA Delivery . ACS
Nano 
2016 , 10 , 5759 –5768 10.1021/acsnano.5b07828 .27176123 
Baron R. ; Kneissel M. 
WNT Signaling in Bone Homeostasis and Disease: From
Human Mutations to Treatments . Nat. Med. 
2013 , 19 , 179 –192 10.1038/nm.3074 .23389618 
Duan P. ; Bonewald L. F. 
The Role of the
Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling Pathway
in Formation and Maintenance of Bone and Teeth . Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 
2016 , 77 , 23 –29 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.05.015 .27210503 
Wang Y. ; Li Y.-P. ; Paulson C. ; Shao J.-Z. ; Zhang X. ; Wu M. ; Chen W. 
Wnt and the Wnt Signaling
Pathway in Bone Development
and Disease . Front. Biosci., Landmark Ed. 
2014 , 19 , 379 –407 10.2741/4214 .24389191 
Pietrzyk B. ; Smertka M. ; Chudek J. 
Sclerostin:
Intracellular Mechanisms
of Action and Its Role in the Pathogenesis of Skeletal and Vascular
Disorders . Adv. Clin. Exp. Med. 
2017 , 26 , 1283 –1291 10.17219/acem/68739 .29264888 
Zhang J. ; Li X. ; Huang L. 
Non-Viral
Nanocarriers for siRNA Delivery in Breast
Cancer . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 190 , 440 –450 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.05.037 .
Basha G. ; Ordobadi M. ; Scott W. R. ; Cottle A. ; Liu Y. ; Wang H. ; Cullis P. R. 
Lipid Nanoparticle
Delivery of siRNA
to Osteocytes Leads to Effective Silencing of SOST and Inhibition
of Sclerostin in Vivo . Mol.
Ther.--Nucleic Acids 
2016 , 5 , 1 –15 10.1038/mtna.2016.68 .
Cavallaro G. ; Sardo C. ; Craparo E. F. ; Porsio B. ; Giammona G. 
Polymeric
Nanoparticles for siRNA Delivery: Production and Applications . Int. J. Pharm. 
2017 , 525 , 313 –333 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.04.008 .28416401 
Goyal R. ; Tripathi S. K. ; Tyagi S. ; Sharma A. ; Ram K. R. ; Chowdhuri D. K. ; Shukla Y. ; Kumar P. ; Gupta K. C. 
Linear
PEI Nanoparticles: Efficient pDNA/siRNA Carriers in Vitro and in Vivo . Nanomedicine
(N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2012 , 8 , 167 –175 10.1016/j.nano.2011.06.001 .
Swami A. ; Kurupati R. K. ; Pathak A. ; Singh Y. ; Kumar P. ; Gupta K. C. 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
2007 , 362 , 835 –841 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.08.073 .17822674 
Manzano M. ; Vallet-Regí M. 
Mesoporous
Silica Nanoparticles in Nanomedicine Applications . J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med. 
2018 , 29 , 65 10.1007/s10856-018-6069-x .29737405 
Mora-Raimundo P. ; Manzano M. ; Vallet-Regí M. 
Nanoparticles
for the Treatment of
Osteoporosis . AIMS Bioeng. 
2017 , 4 , 259 –274 10.3934/bioeng.2017.2.259 .
Vallet-Regí M. ; Balas F. ; Arcos D. 
Mesoporous
Materials for Drug Delivery . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2007 , 46 , 7548 –7558 10.1002/anie.200604488 .
Vallet-Regí M. ; Rámila A. ; Del Real R. P. ; Pérez-Pariente J. 
A New Property
of MCM-41: Drug Delivery System . Chem. Mater. 
2001 , 13 , 308 –311 10.1021/cm0011559 .
Villaverde G. ; Nairi V. ; Baeza A. ; Vallet-Regí M. 
Double Sequential
Encrypted Targeting Sequence: A New Concept for Bone Cancer Treatment . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2017 , 23 , 7174 –7179 10.1002/chem.201605947 .28225182 
Baeza A. ; Noureddine A. ; Durfee P. N. ; Butler K. S. ; Agola J. O. ; Villegas M. R. ; Brinker C. J. ; Vallet-Regi M. 
Multifunctional
Protocells for Enhanced Penetration in 3D Extracellular Tumoral Matrices . Chem. Mater. 
2018 , 30 , 112 –120 10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b03128 .
Gisbert-Garzarán M. ; Lozano D. ; Vallet-Regí M. ; Manzano M. 
Self-Immolative Polymers
as Novel pH-Responsive Gate Keepers for Drug Delivery . RSC Adv. 
2017 , 7 , 132 –136 10.1039/C6RA26771H .
Paris J. L. ; Cabañas M. V. ; Manzano M. ; Vallet-Regí M. 
Polymer-Grafted
Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles as Ultrasound-Responsive Drug Carriers . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 11023 –11033 10.1021/acsnano.5b04378 .26456489 
Hom C. ; Lu J. ; Liong M. ; Luo H. ; Li Z. ; Zink J. I. ; Tamanoi F. 
Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles Facilitate Delivery
of siRNA to Shutdown Signaling Pathways in Mammalian Cells . Small 
2010 , 6 , 1185 –1190 10.1002/smll.200901966 .20461725 
Meng H. ; Liong M. ; Xia T. ; Li Z. ; Ji Z. ; Zink J. I. ; Nel A. E. 
Engineered Design of Mesoporous Silica
Nanoparticles to Deliver Doxorubicin and Pgp siRNA to Overcome Drug
Resistance in a Cancer Cell Line . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 4539 –4550 10.1021/nn100690m .20731437 
Trejo C. G. ; Lozano D. ; Manzano M. ; Doadrio J. C. ; Salinas A. J. ; Dapía S. ; Gómez-Barrena E. ; Vallet-Regí M. ; García-Honduvilla N. ; Buján J. 
The Osteoinductive
Properties of Mesoporous Silicate Coated with Osteostatin in a Rabbit
Femur Cavity Defect Model . Biomaterials 
2010 , 31 , 8564 –8573 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.07.103 .20727584 
Stober W. ; Fink A. ; Bohn E. 
Controlled
Growth of Monodispersed
Silica Spheres in the Micron Size Range . J.
Colloid Interface Sci. 
1968 , 26 , 62 –69 10.1016/0021-9797(68)90272-5 .
Xia T. ; Kovochich M. ; Liong M. ; Meng H. ; Kabehie S. ; George S. ; Zink J. I. ; Nel A. E. 
Polyethyleneimine
Coating Enhances the Cellular Uptake of Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles
and Allows Safe Delivery of siRNA and DNA Constructs . ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 , 3273 –3286 10.1021/nn900918w .19739605 
Fuller J. E. ; Zugates G. T. ; Ferreira L. S. ; Ow H. S. ; Nguyen N. N. ; Wiesner U. B. ; Langer R. S. 
Intracellular Delivery of Core-Shell
Fluorescent Silica Nanoparticles . Biomaterials 
2008 , 29 , 1526 –1532 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2007.11.025 .18096220 
Lozano D. ; Feito M. J. ; Portal-Núñez S. ; Lozano R. M. ; Matesanz M. C. ; Serrano M. C. ; Vallet-Regí M. ; Portolés M. T. ; Esbrit P. 
Osteostatin Improves the Osteogenic
Activity of Fibroblast Growth Factor-2 Immobilized in Si-Doped Hydroxyapatite
in Osteoblastic Cells . Acta Biomater. 
2012 , 8 , 2770 –2777 10.1016/j.actbio.2012.04.002 .22487933 
de
Castro L. F. ; Lozano D. ; Portal-Núñez S. ; Maycas M. ; de la Fuente M. ; Caeiro J. R. ; Esbrit P. 
Comparison
of the Skeletal Effects Induced by Daily Administration of PTHrP (1–36)
and PTHrP (107–139) to Ovariectomized Mice . J. Cell. Physiol. 
2012 , 227 , 1752 –1760 10.1002/jcp.22902 .21702049 
Dogra P. ; Adolphi N. L. ; Wang Z. ; Lin Y. S. ; Butler K. S. ; Durfee P. N. ; Croissant J. G. ; Noureddine A. ; Coker E. N. ; Bearer E. L. ; Cristini V. ; Brinker C. J. 
Establishing
the Effects of Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticle Properties on in Vivo Disposition Using Imaging-Based Pharmacokinetics . Nat. Commun. 
2018 , 9 , 1 –14 10.1038/s41467-018-06730-z .29317637 
Wen S. ; Zheng F. ; Shen M. ; Shi X. 
Surface Modification
and PEGylation of Branched Polyethyleneimine for Improved Biocompatibility . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2013 , 128 , 3807 –3813 10.1002/app.38444 .
Zink J. I. ; Wang X. ; Ji Z. ; Lin S. ; Xue M. ; Xia T. ; Zhao Y. ; Zhang H. ; Mai W. X. ; Nel A. E. ; Meng H. 
Codelivery of an Optimal Drug/siRNA Combination Using Mesoporous
Silica Nanoparticles To Overcome Drug Resistance in Breast Cancer in Vitro and in Vivo . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 994 –1005 10.1021/nn3044066 .23289892 
Suen P. K. ; Qin L. 
Sclerostin, an Emerging
Therapeutic Target for Treating Osteoporosis
and Osteoporotic Fracture: A General Review . J. Orthop. Transl. 
2016 , 4 , 1 –13 10.1016/j.jot.2015.08.004 .
Deal C. 
Potential
New Drug Targets for Osteoporosis . Nat. Clin.
Pract. Rheumatol. 
2009 , 5 , 20 –27 10.1038/ncprheum0977 .19098925 
Li X. ; Warmington K. S. ; Niu Q. T. T. ; Asuncion F. J. ; Barrero M. ; Grisanti M. ; Dwyer D. ; Stouch B. ; Thway T. M. ; Stolina M. ; Ominsky M. S. ; Kostenuik P. J. ; Simonet W. S. ; Paszty C. ; Ke H. Z. 
Inhibition of Sclerostin
by Monoclonal Antibody Increases Bone Formation, Bone Mass, and Bone
Strength in Aged Male Rats . J. Bone Miner. Res. 
2010 , 25 , 2647 –2656 10.1002/jbmr.182 .20641040 
Dowdy S. F. ; Levy M. 
RNA Therapeutics (Almost)
Comes of Age: Targeting, Delivery and Endosomal
Escape . Nucleic Acid Ther. 
2018 , 28 , 107 –108 10.1089/nat.2018.29001.dow .29782220 
Invitrogen  . Alamar Blue Assay . U.S. Patent No. 5501959 , 5 , 1 –27 .

