
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.9b00220ArticleShape
and Size Control of Artificial Cells for Bottom-Up
Biology Fanalista Federico †§Birnie Anthony †§Maan Renu †Burla Federica ‡Charles Kevin †Pawlik Grzegorz †Deshpande Siddharth †Koenderink Gijsje H. ‡Dogterom Marileen †Dekker Cees *†† Department
of Bionanoscience, Kavli Institute of Nanoscience Delft, Delft University of Technology, Van der Maasweg 9, 2629 HZ Delft, The Netherlands‡ Department
of Living Matter, Biological Soft Matter Group, AMOLF, Science Park
104, 1098 XG Amsterdam, The Netherlands* E-mail: c.dekker@tudelft.nl.10 05 2019 28 05 2019 13 5 5439 5450 09 01 2019 10 05 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Bottom-up
biology is an expanding research field that aims to understand
the mechanisms underlying biological processes via in vitro assembly of their essential components in synthetic cells. As encapsulation
and controlled manipulation of these elements is a crucial step in
the recreation of such cell-like objects, microfluidics is increasingly
used for the production of minimal artificial containers such as single-emulsion
droplets, double-emulsion droplets, and liposomes. Despite the importance
of cell morphology on cellular dynamics, current synthetic-cell studies
mainly use spherical containers, and methods to actively shape manipulate
these have been lacking. In this paper, we describe a microfluidic
platform to deform the shape of artificial cells into a variety of
shapes (rods and discs) with adjustable cell-like dimensions below
5 μm, thereby mimicking realistic cell morphologies. To illustrate
the potential of our method, we reconstitute three biologically relevant
protein systems (FtsZ, microtubules, collagen) inside rod-shaped containers
and study the arrangement of the protein networks inside these synthetic
containers with physiologically relevant morphologies resembling those
found in living cells.

microfluidicslab-on-a-chipbottom-up
biologysynthetic cellmorphology controldropletsliposomesdocument-id-old-9nn9b00220document-id-new-14nn-2019-00220rccc-price
==== Body
Throughout
evolution, cells
have radiated into a dazzling variety of morphologies, where prokaryotes
are found in the shape of, for example, rods, spheres, and spirals,1 archaea can exhibit even triangular or flattened
square shapes,2 and eukaryotic cells range
from orderly shaped plant cells3 to the
extensively branched dendritic cells of the immune system.4 This wide morphological diversity raises questions
on the underlying reasons and the interplay between morphology and
the myriad of internal cellular processes. The shape and size of a
cell are the product of internal molecular processes that drive cellular
growth and division and are also guided by external environmental
factors such as the surrounding cells or simply the amount of available
space. The cellular container shell itself is maintained by cytoskeleton
and membrane machineries5−9 that are present in all kingdoms of life.

Unicellular organisms
may benefit from specific shapes for a selective
advantage,10,11 while for multicellular organisms,
the cellular morphology is closely linked to cell–cell interactions
and the extracellular matrix (ECM).12,13 Similarly,
cells in colonies of unicellular organisms such as biofilms display
a morphological variation depending on their function at a particular
position and time within the colony lifecycle.14,15 To accommodate such variations in morphology, the processes inside
a cell should be robust against variations of the cellular shape.
For example, to ensure faithful division, pattern-formation processes
should successfully guide the cellular division machinery to the right
location, irrespective of the precise shape and size of the cellular
boundary.16,17 The mechanisms through which such processes
remain robust in varying environments and boundary conditions are
a topic of active research.18 Confinement
and shape not only influence cellular processes but also have an effect
on extracellular structures such as the ECM, the fibrous network located
in the space between eukaryotic cells in tissues and prokaryotic cells
in biofilms.19,20 The large morphological variety
of cells also poses interesting questions from the perspective of
polymer physics. Cells contain many polymers, such as cytoskeletal
components and the genomic material. The spatial distribution and
dynamics of polymers are in general sensitive to the spatial confinement,21−26 and as a result, biopolymers such as actin networks27 and the genome28−30 will re-organize upon morphological
perturbation of the cellular container.

Confronted with the
imposing complexity and connectivity of cellular
processes, researchers are aiming to reconstitute essential cellular
systems with a minimal set of components inside controlled confinements.31,32 The nature of the artificial containers used in these endeavors
is quite diverse, ranging from liposomes, single-emulsion droplets
(water-in-oil droplets, from now on called droplets), to double-emulsion
droplets (water-in-oil-in-water droplets, henceforth called double
emulsions) and even solid-state microchambers.33,34 With such bottom-up approaches, cytoskeletal components (e.g., actin,35 tubulin,36 MreB,37 FtsZ38), cytokinesis and segregation
machinery (e.g., actin-myosin rings,39 mitotic spindles40), cell-free expression systems (e.g., cell extracts,41 PURE system42), pattern formation systems (e.g., the Min system43), and genomes44 can be encapsulated inside
such artificial containers (Figure 1, top).

Figure 1 Shape and size control of synthetic cells to explore the
influence
of confinement and geometry on cellular processes. Most current approaches
to bottom-up biology encapsulate purified cellular components inside
large, spherical containers. For example, on the top row, three prokaryotic
key systems, which in some form are present in all kingdoms of life,
are reconstituted in spherical droplets: DNA (E. coli nucleoid, blue), cytoskeletal components (FtsZ, green), and pattern
formation systems (Min proteins, red). However, these key systems
are, like most processes and structures inside a cell, sensitive to
the confinement size and the geometry. Using a microfluidic approach
(middle), we manipulate the shape and size of the initially spherical
synthetic cells. In this manner, we are able to experimentally access
a set of parameters which were hitherto unexplored in the field of
bottom-up biology. The method offers the possibility of observing
more in vivo-like dynamics for various cellular systems
encapsulated inside synthetic cells (bottom).

The shape of the artificial containers is an often-overlooked
parameter
in mimicking cells. Indeed, thus far, the majority of synthetic cell
studies used simple spherical containers with a diameter of 10–50
μm.33 However, most living cells
are nonspherical, and while this size range is fitting for eukaryotic
cells, it applies much less so for the more abundant bacterial and
archaeal cells. In the past two decades, research in bottom-up biology
has also been performed in microfabricated chambers that allow for
a range of shapes,45−47 but those are obviously nondeformable, preventing
the observation of dynamics as a function of changing confinement
size. Furthermore, the open-top geometry (“a chamber without
a roof”) that was used in some cases45 decreases the ratio between the bulk volume of the protein reservoir
and the surface with which these proteins interact, introducing ambiguities
in the local protein concentrations that are important for pattern-formation
processes.18 There have been some reports
on the manipulation of spherical vesicles, but these efforts mainly
concentrated on the immobilization of droplets through mechanical
trapping48−51 and some elaborated manipulation with dielectrophoresis.52 While Boukellal et al. introduced
a method to trap droplets in tubular-shaped confinements,53 these containers were so large (upward of 100
μm) that they were not well applicable for synthetic cell research.
Furthermore, methods to split containers on-chip by running them against
T- or Y-shaped junctions have been developed both for droplets54 and liposomes,55 offering
a tool to obtain containers with half the original volumes. Some osmosis-based
size control of spherical droplets and double emulsions was demonstrated
recently as well,41,44 but again, the involved size
ranges were not well suited for reconstituting bacterial systems in
artificial cells.

Here, we introduce a general microfluidic
platform to control the
shape and size of various deformable containers, from droplets to
liposomes, at cell-like scales in the sub-5 μm range (Figure 1, middle). Using
this system, we are able to access the same shape and size parameter
space as is present in the cells from which the reconstituted components
are isolated. Specifically, we are able to shape various artificial
cell containers into confinements with dimensions down to almost 1
μm. Furthermore, we demonstrate the ability to precisely and
reversibly control the size of these containers. The method offers
experimental avenues to unravel the interconnection between cellular
processes and the confinement geometry. We provide examples for three
biologically relevant protein systems (FtsZ, microtubules, collagen)
inside rod-shaped containers. We anticipate that this platform will
contribute to closing the gap between the dynamics in artificial cells
and the in vivo dynamics of real cells (Figure 1, bottom).

Results
and Discussion
To obtain an efficient system for shaping
artificial cells on-chip
and impose user-defined dimensions to a variety of initially spherical
containers, we designed and fabricated a simple but effective microfluidic
chip with an array of local micropatterned structures (“traps”).
We first tested the functionality of the design using water-in-oil
droplets. Technical details of the experimental procedure, from the
droplet production to the device design and operation, are described
in Figure S1. Figure 2a shows an example of the shape manipulation
process of a droplet that is transformed into a tubular geometry:
A spherical droplet gets caught at the trap entrance and subsequently
is reshaped into a cylindrical shape. Because of the presence of fluorescent
lipids into the oil phase, the trap profile and the droplet are clearly
distinguishable as dark regions. Fluid flow through the trap, necessary
to catch the droplets, was ensured by including three exit holes that
are visible at the end of the structure. The entrance of the traps
has a conical funnel shape that narrows down to the predefined trap
width, so that a minimal fluid pressure has to be applied to squeeze
the droplets inside. Upon entering the trap, the droplet gets deformed
and remains fixed in the desired shape. With an array of these traps,
it is possible to stably observe tens of such rod-shaped droplets
in a single field-of-view (Figure S2a).
Aided by the precision provided by cleanroom-based fabrication techniques,
we tested the versatility of our trap design over a wide range of
confinements and aspect ratios. To mimic small organisms such as Escherichia coli, we mainly focused our efforts on obtaining
small containers with diameters below 5 μm, thereby recreating
the rod-shaped morphology that many bacteria possess.1 By varying both the width of the traps and the overall
height of the device, we obtained rod-shaped droplets of arbitrary
lengths and widths ranging from 4.8 μm down to 1.4 μm
(Figure 2b and Figure S2b). We determined the trapping efficiency
of these designs as the ratio of the number of traps that stably contained
a tubular droplet over the total number of traps present in the device:
For the design with the largest trap width (4.8 μm, Figure 2b), we found that
98% of the traps (N = 103/105) contained a rod-shaped
droplet. Designs with narrower traps have a higher hydrodynamic resistance56 and hence require higher fluid pressures and,
as a result, are less straightforward to operate. For the design with
the narrowest traps achieved in this work (1.4 μm, Figure 2b), we found that
33% (N = 19/57) of the traps contained a rod-shaped
droplet. We also explored the potential of our microfluidics-based
approach to deform spherical droplets into flat circular discs (“pancakes”).
To do so, we employed multiheight microfluidic devices. Figure 2c shows an example where spherical
droplets first travel undeformed within a large channel of 15 μm
height. When they encounter narrower channels of 2 μm height,
they are forced into the confining channels by the fluid pressure
and consequently are deformed into pancake-like containers that mimic
the morphology of, for example, certain disc-shaped archaea.2 In addition, the disc-shaped droplets can be
immobilized and stored for analysis in an array of microfluidic traps,
as shown in Figure S1c.

Figure 2 Shape control of water-in-oil
droplets via microfluidic
structures. (a) Droplet loading into a tubular trap: The droplet is
captured at the entrance of the trap and progressively squeezed into
the confinement, assuming the imposed geometry. RhodPE lipids are
dissolved in the oil phase to enhance the contrast between the oil
phase, the aqueous phase, and the profile of the trap. (b) The tubular
trap design offers the possibility to deform droplets into rod-shaped
geometries of different dimensions. To visualize the droplets, Alexa647
fluorescent dye is encapsulated in the aqueous phase. (c) A multiheight
microfluidic device is used for the deformation of spherical droplets
into thin disc-shaped containers or “pancakes”. As they
pass from a 15 μm to a 2 μm high channel, the spherical
droplets get consequently squeezed into a disc shape. The figure shows
the deformation process of two droplets, marked with a red star and
green triangle. The images combine both bright-field and fluorescent
signals from the Alexa647 fluorescent dye encapsulated inside the
droplets.

Another fascinating aspect of
living systems is the capacity of
cellular processes to adapt and re-arrange over time as the cell changes
during its growth and life cycle. To enable the investigation of such
phenomena in vitro, isolated cellular components
should be reconstituted into artificial containers with a size that
can be controllably changed over time. Using a system inspired by
the work of Shim et al.,57 we managed to vary the size of the droplets captured in the traps.
Specifically, we assembled a multilayer polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
device consisting of three parts, see Figure 3a: a thick rectangular piece of PDMS containing
a hole (“water chamber”) sitting on top of a thin layer
imprinted with microfluidic traps, which in its turn is sealed off
at the bottom by a PDMS-covered glass coverslip. By taking advantage
of the fact that PDMS is permeable to water, it is possible to induce
osmosis between the droplets and the water chamber through the thin
PDMS membrane that separates them. Consequently, when the aqueous
solution of the droplets has a salt concentration lower or higher
compared to the one in the water chamber, water is able to flow across
the PDMS membrane to restore isotonicity, leading to, respectively,
shrinking or expanding droplets. When forced into a tubular shape,
the droplets consequently re-adjusted their volume by shortening or
elongating along their main axis inside the traps (Figure 3b, left and right). Immediately
after the trapping, for the first 20 min, the length of the droplets
changed quickly to reduce the osmolarity difference with the water
chamber. As the osmotic balance between the droplets and the water
chamber is approached, the size of the droplets tended to stabilize.
By contrast, in isotonic conditions, the volume of the droplets remained
approximately constant (Figure 3b, middle).

Figure 3 Size control of water-in-oil droplets via a multilayer
microfluidic device. (a) Schematic of the three different layers composing
the device. The bottom layer (gray) consists of a PMDS-covered glass
coverslip, followed by a second layer (green) of a thin PDMS membrane
imprinted with the microfluidic channels and traps design. The design
includes two inlet channels, the first one for the droplets and a
second one for oil, which cross each other in a large T-junction.
After this junction, a single large channel leads to the array of
traps to capture and manipulate the droplets. The third layer (blue)
is a thicker piece of PDMS containing a water chamber, placed above
the array of traps. (b) Water-in-oil droplets contain Alexa647 for
visualization and 200 mM KCl. Depending on the relative salt concentration
between the water chamber and the droplets, different behaviors are
observed over time: In hypotonic conditions (100 mM KCl in water chamber),
the droplets expand (left); in isotonic conditions (200 mM KCl in
the water chamber), the droplet size remains qualitatively stable
(center); and in hypertonic conditions (300 mM KCl in the water chamber),
the droplets shrink consistently relative to their original volume
(right).

Beyond droplets, we explored size
and shape manipulation of containers
that are physiologically closer to living cells, namely, double emulsions
and liposomes. We used our microfluidic octanol-assisted liposome
assembly (OLA) platform to produce double emulsions on-chip (Figure 4a). By dissolving
the lipids in oleic acid, the double emulsions undergo a process of
partial dewetting,58,59 by which the excess solvent and
lipids accumulate in a side pocket. The volume of double emulsions
can be varied using an applied osmotic pressure difference due to
new buffer fluid that is administered through side channels (Figure 4a). Upon inducing
such volume changes, excess material in the side-pocket may act as
a reservoir to concurrently re-adjust the surface area (Figure 4b). In other words, as the
water flows through the membrane to restore osmotic balance, the surface
automatically re-adjusts its area to fit the new volume, using the
side pocket as a source or sink for membrane lipids. To check this
hypothesis, we produced and immobilized oleic acid double emulsions
in an array of traps (Figure 4c). Next, an aqueous solution was flushed via a feeding channel to create an osmotic imbalance between the inner
and outer aqueous environment of the double emulsions. In hypertonic
conditions, the osmosis process led to a fast reduction of the double
emulsion volume (Figure 4d, top), which shrank from an average diameter value d = 12.3 ± 0.1 μm down to d = 7.5 ±
0.1 μm (N = 45). Simultaneously, the membrane
surface area re-adjusted to the new volume, with a consequent visible
growth of the side pockets. When the original osmotic conditions were
restored, the same double emulsions underwent the inverse process
(Figure 4d, bottom):
The volume expanded back close to the original size (d = 11.1 ± 0.2 μm), with an associated membrane area increase
at the cost of the side pocket, showing that the process is largely
reversible. Looking at the variation of the double emulsion diameters
over time compared to their original size (Figure 4e), the shrinkage and the expansion processes
appeared symmetric. The size variation was initially slow and then
was followed by a phase of faster size change. As the osmolarity difference
between the outer and the inner aqueous phases was re-equilibrated,
the size variation slowed down again. The degree by which the double
emulsions shrank or expanded under, respectively, hypertonic or hypotonic
conditions was quantified by measuring the diameter of each double
emulsion after and before each size manipulation. The ratio between
these diameters was obtained, and two distinct peaks are observed
(Figure 4f). This indicates
that specific osmolarity differences lead to specific volume re-adjustments
and that the size manipulation is a well-controlled process. These
data show that the size of the double emulsions can be tuned through
the surrounding osmotic conditions in a reversible manner, providing
artificial scaffolds for reconstituting cellular systems into containers
of adaptable size.

Figure 4 Size control of oleic acid double emulsions on-chip. (a)
Design
of the microfluidic device: Six channels containing an inner aqueous
phase, a lipid phase, and an outer aqueous phase cross in a junction
where double emulsions are produced. The inner aqueous solution blows
a bubble into two streams of DOPC lipids dissolved in oleic acid.
The resulting lipid film is pinched-off by the outer aqueous stream,
and a double emulsion is formed. An array of traps downstream from
the production junction immobilizes the double emulsions, and two
additional feeding channels allow further adjustment of the outer
aqueous solution forming the environment of the trapped double emulsions.
(b) Schematic representation of an oleic acid double emulsion: By
inducing an osmotic pressure difference, water is able to flow through
the membrane to re-establish osmotic equilibrium. At the same time,
the side pocket formed by the excess of lipids and solvent can serve
as a reservoir for the surface to expand or shrink as required by
the volume change. (c) Fluorescent image showing the production process
and the trapping of oleic acid double emulsions on-chip. RhodPE fluorescent
lipids allow the visualization of the lipid phase. (d) By inducing
an osmotic pressure difference, it is possible to vary the size of
double emulsions. Both inner aqueous and outer aqueous solutions initially
contain 25 mM sucrose. After a solution containing 200 mM sucrose
is flushed through the feeding channel, to re-establish osmotic equilibrium,
the double emulsions consequently shrink (top). Afterward, the same
batch of double emulsions is re-exposed to the original outer aqueous
solution (bottom), so their volume re-expanded. (e) Size variation
of double emulsions (N = 10) over time: In hypotonic
or hypertonic conditions, the diameter of the double emulsions, respectively,
increased or decreased over time. (f) Histogram showing the ratio
of the double emulsion (N = 45) diameters measured
at the end (df) and at
the beginning (di) of
both processes. In a hypertonic condition, the double emulsions shrink
by an average factor of df/di = 0.61 ± 0.01.
When back in hypotonic conditions, we measured a factor df/di = 1.49 ± 0.02.

Encouraged by the ease of the size manipulation of double
emulsions,
we verified that it is possible to deform them into rod shapes resembling
bacterial cells. To do so, we punched a hole at the end of the microfluidic
circuit (“collection well”, Figure 5a) and collected double emulsions from the
well to transfer them into the device containing the tubular traps.
The insertion of double emulsions into the traps is found to be significantly
aided by the presence of the side-pocket, since the membrane can dynamically
adapt to the new geometry by using material from the side-pocket reservoir
to accommodate the changing surface-to-volume ratio. Figure 4c–d shows two examples
where we deformed double emulsions into tubular geometries with widths
of 4 and 1.3 μm. For the former design, we found that a trapping
yield of nearly 100% (Figure 5b) is easily achievable, meaning that essentially all the
traps (N = 105 per device) contained a double emulsion
after a few minutes. As with droplets, filling smaller traps appeared
more difficult as double emulsions occasionally broke as a result
of the higher pressure required for the entrapping due to the higher
hydrodynamic resistance.56 Given that the
deformation of double emulsions worked for the traps with dimensions
as small as 1.3 μm, we assumed that it would also be successful
for the larger sizes explored with droplets (Figure 2b). Next to double emulsions, we also explored
the deformation of liposomes from spherical into other shapes. Since
liposomes only tolerate a small areal strain (∼5%) before rupture,60 we induced an external osmotic pressure to create
a reduced volume and thus excess surface area,61 which made the liposomes “floppy” and predisposed
to accommodate the increase in surface-to-volume ratio upon shape
change. When transferred inside the trap device, we observed a fraction
of liposomes that successfully deformed into the traps, alongside
with liposomes showing various defects (Figure S3a). Possibly, the induced floppiness made the liposomes prone
to damage during the transfer process into the trap device, resulting
in the observed heterogeneous population. Still, we managed to obtain
liposomes comparable in size and shape to E. coli cells (Figure S3b), which is a helpful
step toward the proper recreation of artificial minimal cells.

Figure 5 Shape manipulation
of oleic acid double emulsions on-chip. (a)
Schematic cross section of the collection well: At the end of the
microfluidic circuit, after the production junction, a 4 mm diameter
hole is punched. The double emulsions contain 5 mM dextran to make
them denser than the environment and consequently sink to the bottom
of the well. After sufficient production, double emulsions are pipetted
from the well and introduced into a device containing the microfluidic
traps. (b) Fluorescent image showing an array of double emulsions
captured in tubular traps. Thanks to their side pocket, which serves
as a membrane reservoir, double emulsions are easily reshaped, so
that almost all traps in the device (N = 105) contained
a double emulsion. Fluorescent signal comes from RhodPE lipids in
the lipid phase. (c) Zoom-in of single double emulsions in tubular
traps of different dimensions: 5 μm diameter (top) and 2 μm
diameter (bottom). (d) Fluorescent profiles measured at the midcell
cross section of tubular double emulsions. The peaks indicate the
location of the membrane and provide a measure of the width of the
double emulsion.

To illustrate how our
platform can be useful for applications in
the synthetic cell field, we encapsulated a variety of fiber-network
forming proteins inside nonspherical containers. For these experiments,
we chose droplets, due to the ease of their production process. Specifically,
we studied three important proteins from diverse biological systems
and environments: FtsZ, a key protein necessary for division in almost
all bacteria;62 its eukaryotic homologue
tubulin, which is a key element of the cytoskeleton in eukaryotic
cells; and collagen,63 the most abundant
protein in extracellular matrix structures. First, to reconstitute
FtsZ bundles on a lipid membrane, a soluble version of ZipA, a protein
responsible for anchoring FtsZ to the membrane in Gammaproteobacteria
(like E. coli),64 was
added to the inner aqueous phase. This soluble version of ZipA, provided
with a His-Tag, offers to FtsZ-filaments a way to properly dock to
a membrane composed by a mixture of DOPC and DGS-NTA lipids. When
such a system was reconstituted in liposomes, FtsZ formed long filamentous
bundles on the surface (Figure S4), which
arranged in a single ring-like structure as the dimensions of the
liposomes approached the sub-5 μm range. To verify whether such
a system could also be reconstituted into droplets for subsequent
shape-manipulation with our microfluidic platform, we assembled a
lipid monolayer at the water–oil interface of droplets by adding
the necessary lipids to the oil phase. Similar to what was observed
in liposomes, both in spherical (Figure 6a, top) and in rod-shaped droplets (Figure 6a, middle), FtsZ
formed long filamentous bundles localized at the droplet surface.
The clear presence of bundles on the surface, compared to the lumen,
indicates the successful attachment of FtsZ to the lipid monolayer
at the interface. Next, we tested whether it is possible to grow microtubules
inside the rod-shaped droplets. Tubulin seeds bound to nonhydrolyzable
guanosine triphosphate (GMPCPP) were co-encapsulated in the inner
aqueous solution, together with tubulin dimers and guanosine triphosphate
(GTP) (Figure 6b, middle).
As GTP hydrolysis is required for the disassembly of microtubules,
the tubulin seeds act as a stable template from which the microtubules
can grow. Since the seeds and the tubulin dimers were labeled with
different dyes, it was possible to observe long microtubules (green)
that were grown from the seeds (red) and spanned the length of the
rod-shaped droplet following the prevalent axis of symmetry (Figure 6b, right), contrasting
to the situation in spherical droplets (Figure 6a, left), where the microtubules grew without
an obvious preferential orientation. This observation is confirmed
by a quantitative analysis of the microtubule orientations: In the
spherical droplets, microtubules did not show any strong preferential
orientation, while in rod-shaped droplets, the measured angles distinctly
peaked around 0°, that is, the microtubules were aligned along
the droplet main axis (Figure 6b, right). Finally, we applied our method to an in
vitro assay for collagen type 1, which is an important component
of the extracellular matrix. Figure 6c shows that it is possible to successfully reconstitute
collagen type 1 fibers inside rod-shaped droplets. Similar to the
microtubules, a quantitative analysis of the fiber orientations (Figure 6c, right) showed
that the collagen fibers oriented themselves along the symmetry axis
of the cylindrical container, which again is markedly different to
what is observed in spherical droplets.

Figure 6 Impact of container geometry
on the organization of various protein
bundle networks encapsulated inside rod-shaped droplets. (a) FtsZ
filamentous bundles in spherical (top) and rod-shaped (middle) water-in-oil
droplets. The FtsZ superstructures visible on the bottom plane of
the rod-shaped droplet (middle) adhere to the surface of the droplet,
as is also seen on the equatorial plane. A lipid monolayer containing
DGS-NTA lipids (dark red) and DOPC (red) is assembled at the water–oil
interface. By replacing its transmembrane tail with a His-tag, which
can bind to the Ni-tag on the headgroup of DGS-NTA lipids, ZipA functions
as a membrane anchor for the FtsZ filaments (bottom). FtsZ is labeled
with Alexa488. (b) Microtubules grown in spherical (left) and rod-shaped
droplets (middle). As shown both qualitatively in the images and quantitatively
by the analysis of the fiber orientations (right), the microtubules
inside spherical droplets (N = 10) grow without any
strong preferential orientation, whereas in the rod-shaped droplets
(N = 10), the network appears to follow the symmetry
axis of the droplet. For the reconstitution of microtubules, GMPCPP
stabilized seeds (labeled with rhodamine tubulin) serve as templates
for the growth of microtubules through the addition of tubulin dimers
in solution (bottom). Fluorescent HiLyte 488 tubulin was used to label
the microtubules. (c) Collagen fibril reconstituted inside spherical-
(left) and rod-shaped droplets (middle). Similar to what is observed
for microtubules, the analysis of the fiber orientation (right) shows
that the collagen network in spherical droplets (N = 4) remains weakly organized, but inside the rod-shaped droplets
(N = 4), it re-arranges to align with the symmetry
axis of the droplet. As sketched (middle-bottom), a collagen fibril
is formed by the staggering of collagen triple-helix monomers (red)
driven by noncovalent interactions, which give rise to a characteristic
periodic pattern (blue and light-blue).

Conclusions
In this paper, we presented a method that enables
the control of
the shape and the size of a range of cell-like containers, a useful
research tool within the synthetic cell field. In fact, as is schematically
illustrated in Figure 7, our system provides access to a much broader range of morphologies
than is currently possible in the synthetic cell field. By pushing
the boundaries of both volume and aspect ratio by 1–2 orders
of magnitude as compared to previous methods, we bridged the gap between
the dimensions of natural cells and artificial containers inside which
the isolated cellular components are reconstituted.

Figure 7 Phase diagram comparing
the shape and size of various cells found
in nature with the deformable artificial containers used in previous
research work and those presented in this paper. Assuming roughly
spheroid-like containers and cells, the morphological space is defined
by the aspect ratio of the smallest and the largest axis of the containers
(x-axis) and the volume (y-axis).
The space is divided between rods (right), spheres (y-axis), and discs (left). In blue, an approximate cloud encircles
the morphologies adopted by a selected number of living organisms
(blue dots, see Table S6). The red dots
represent container geometries reported previously in the field (see Table S6), with the red line showing the lower
morphological boundaries achieved so far. Similarly, the green line
delineates the new lower boundaries achieved within this work. Compared
to previous research, we expanded the boundaries of volume and aspect
ratio by 1–2 orders of magnitude. This advance enables us to
cover a broader range of shapes and sizes, and it bridges the gap
between artificial and natural cells.

We showed that droplets, double emulsions, and liposomes
can be
deformed into a variety of shapes, from tubes of different diameters
and lengths, to pancake-shape discs with a high aspect ratio between
their height and diameter. Second, through the principle of osmosis,
we were able to regulate the volume of such artificial cells. And
finally, as a proof-of-concept of the range of possibilities that
our approach offers, we encapsulated three different filamentous protein
networks inside droplets with a tubular shape. The resulting organization
of the protein networks in the tubular containers was markedly different
from the situation in spherical droplets, underlining the importance
of the container shape and size.

Reconstitution of protein bundles
such as microtubules and extracellular
matrix collagen inside shaped droplets enables us to study how fibrous
networks adapt their conformation depending on the geometry of the
confinement. Microtubular orientation is an important feature in eukaryotic
cells to establish cell polarity: By elongating from the nucleus toward
cell extremities, microtubules drive several polarizing factors toward
opposite cell poles. Differently from what is observed in spherical
droplets, microtubules encapsulated into rod-shaped droplets appeared
aligned along the main symmetry axis of the confinement. The shape
and dimensions of the confinement, together with the microtubule alignment,
are features that well resemble the conditions found in model eukaryotic
cells, such as fission yeast.65 The possibility
to control the orientation of cytoskeletal components inside artificial
containers thus offers the possibility to reconstitute microtubule-driven
polarization in minimal artificial cells. Similar phenomena are observed
for the extracellular matrix. In vivo, the ECM is
secreted and assembled in the narrow spaces between cells, and collagen
matrix fibers therefore adapt their arrangement depending on the imposed
geometrical constraints. Our microfluidic platform provides microscopic
confinements with dimensions spanning a broad range of aspect ratios,
resembling those found in some tissues.66 As in vivo, our results indicate that the geometry
of the confinement directly influences the collagen matrix configuration.
Similar to what is observed in many tissues, e.g., the cornea or the tendon,67,68 we can induce the collagen
fibers to align along a prevalent symmetry axis. Being able to recreate
the orientation of the collagen fibers in the extracellular matrix
is of fundamental importance, since the network architecture determines
the tissue response to mechanical deformations. Thus, we anticipate
that the possibility provided by our method to control the collagen
network arrangement via the morphology of the container
will allow to more closely mimic the architecture and mechanical response
of living tissues.

Moreover, since our platform uses deformable
containers, it provides
the opportunity to observe how protein networks and other biopolymers
re-arrange dynamically in response to evolving boundaries and gradual
changes in crowding and salt concentrations. The reversibility of
the volume change of double emulsions (Figure 4) makes it possible to study whether changes
in the protein network configuration are reversible or display some
form of hysteresis. Given the range of sizes that can be enforced
upon vesicles, our approach also allows to study the influence of
the confinement surface curvature on the alignment and positioning
of membrane-bound proteins, which is key for many proteins involved
in membrane remodeling.

We believe that our approach to shape
and size control can be broadly
applied. The ability to tune the container volume will, for example,
aid the study of how the crowding environment impacts the dynamics
of various cellular processes. The approach also allows to explore
the relation between membrane curvature and the spatial arrangement
of lipids domains and membrane proteins.69 Finally, similar to recent in vivo studies of shape-sculpted
bacteria,16,17,29,30,70 the platform offers
the chance to investigate pattern formation and chromosome dynamics
as a function of confinement geometry.

Methods
Microfabrication
Microfluidic devices were fabricated
in a cleanroom with the following protocol. A layer of hexamethyldisilazane
(HMDS, BASF SE) was deposited on a 4-in. silicon wafer by spin-coating
at 1000 rpm for 1 min. The wafer was baked at 200 °C for 2 min.
Subsequently, a layer of NEB22a negative e-beam resist (Sumitomo Chemical)
was spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 1 min and baked at 110 °C for
3 min. Correct adhesion of the NEB22a onto the silicon surface is
ensured by the first HMDS layer. The designs were written on the coated
wafer using electron beam lithography (EBPG-5000+, Raith GmbH, dose:
16 μC cm–2, acceleration voltage: 100 kV,
aperture: 400 μm). Post-exposure baking of wafer was performed
at 105 °C for 3 min. The patterns were then developed by submerging
the wafer in MF322 (Dow Chemical Company) for 1 min, then in diluted
MF322 (distilled water:MF322 = 1:10) for 30 s, and finally rinsing
in distilled water for 30 s. Bosch process deep reactive-ion etching
was used to dry etch the structures into the silicon wafer, with an
inductive coupled plasma reactive-ion etcher (Adixen AMS 100 I-speeder).
During the process, the pressure was kept at about 0.04 mbar, the
temperature of the wafer was kept at 10 °C, while the plasma
temperature was 200 °C. The sample holder was held at 200 mm
from the plasma source. The etching step involved 200 sccm SF6 for 7 s with the ICP power set to 2000 W without a bias on
the wafer itself. The passivation step was done with 80 sccm C4F8 for 3 s with the ICP power set to 2000 W and
the bias power on the wafer alternate with a low frequency: 80 W,
for 10 ms, and 0 W for 90 ms. Total etching time depended on the desired
final height of the device (etching depths for the wafers containing
tubular traps used in each figure are listed in Table S5). Finally, the excess of resist was removed from
the wafer by exposure to oxygen plasma for 10 min. In the case of
multiheight devices (Figure 2b), the parts of the device with bigger height were patterned
on the wafer after the small channels through optical lithography,
being careful to properly align the two structures. To do so, silicon
wafer was spin-coated with a SU-8 2000 negative resist (Microchem),
then soft baked for 3 min at 95 °C, exposed with 140 mJ cm–2 dose, and then baked at 4 min 95 °C. Development
of the structured followed as described. Silanization of the wafer
was done with (tridecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrooctyl) trichlorosilane
(ABCR GmbH & Co.) overnight in a vacuum desiccator to enhance
hydrophobicity of the surface and facilitate subsequent peeling-off
of the PDMS.

Soft Lithography
Single-layer PDMS
devices were cured
and assembled following the procedure previously described.71 Multilayer devices for control of water-in-oil
droplets size were produced by the assembly of three different layers
obtained from three different wafers. A thin layer of PDMS was spin-coated
on the device-wafer using a spin-coater (POLOS) at 200 rpm for 5 s
and 300 rpm for 20 s (acceleration 100 rpm/s). The second wafer (silanized
and without any patterned structures) was used to prepare glass coverslips
with a thin PDMS coating. This was achieved by firmly pressing down
the coverslips on the wafer through the uncured PDMS, so that a thin
PDMS layer was formed beneath them. The third wafer (silanized and
without any patterned structures) was used to produce a ∼5
mm-thick PDMS slab. All of the wafers were baked for 4 h at 80 °C.
The coverslips and the PDMS slab were removed from the plain wafers.
The slab was cut into separate pieces (approximately 1 cm × 2
cm), and a 4 mm hole was punched in each of them to create a water
chamber using a rapid core punch (World Precision Instruments, 4 mm
diameter). Both the PDMS-covered device-wafer and the water chambers
were cleaned with isopropanol, blow-dried with nitrogen, and then
activated by exposing them to oxygen plasma (Plasmatic System, Inc.)
for about 10 s. Each water chamber was then bonded to the device-wafer,
taking care that the water chamber was aligned with the part of the
device containing the microfluidic traps. The device-wafer with bonded
water chambers was then baked for 20 min at 80 °C. Subsequently,
the thin PDMS layer with bonded water chambers on top was peeled off
from the device-wafer. The devices were cut to size with scissors,
and inlet and exit holes were punched into the devices using a rapid
core punch (World Precision Instruments, 0.75 mm diameter). Both PDMS
coverslips and devices were cleaned with isopropanol and bonded by
the oxygen plasma procedure described above. After bonding, devices
were left overnight at 80 °C to enhance the device hydrophobicity.
For the experiment shown in Figure 6a, the channels walls were treated by flushing RainX
for 2 min immediately after bonding, in order to further enhance surface
hydrophobicity. The solutions were introduced into the devices via tubing (Tygon Microbore Tubing, 0.2 mm inner diameter)
fitted with home-built metal connectors using pressure-driven microfluidic
pumps (Fluigent, controlled by Fluigent MAESFLO software).

Image
Acquisition and Processing
Wide-field microscopy
measurements were performed using an Olympus IX-81 inverted microscope
combined with epifluorescence illumination and appropriate filter
sets. Images were acquired and recorded using an Olympus 60×
PlanApo (NA 1.45, oil) objective and a Zyla 4.2 PLUS CMOS camera (Andor
Technology). The microscope was operated through Micromanager software
(version 1.4.14). Confocal microscopy of fluorescent collagen fibers
was performed using an inverted Olympus IX81 combined with an Andor
Revolution illumination system and a Yokogawa CSU X1 detection system.
Images were acquired with a 60× UPlanFLN (NA 1.25, oil) objective
and recorded with an EM-CCD Andor iXon X3 DU897 camera. Confocal microscopy
of tubulin was performed at 30 °C using Nikon Ti-E microscope
(Nikon, Japan) equipped with a Nikon plan Apo 100× 1.45 NA oil
immersion objective and an Evolve 512 EMCCD camera (Roper Scientific,
Germany). Images of collagen in spherical droplets were captured with
an inverted Eclipse Ti Nikon microscope in combination with a Nikon
100× objective (NA 1.49, oil). The resulting images (Figures 1 and 6c) were obtained by a z-stack projection over a depth of 20
μm (0.2 μm step size). Images were analyzed and background
appropriately subtracted using Fiji (ImageJ).

Lipid Solutions
All lipids were purchased from Avanti
Polar lipids, Inc. in chloroform solutions. For water-in-oil droplets,
lipids were mixed according to the required ratios and dried in a
glass tube by desiccating for at least 1 h. The resulting dried film
was then resuspended in mineral oil (light oil bioXtra, Sigma-Aldrich)
at the desired concentration and sonicated for 30 min at room temperature.
For production of double emulsion and liposomes, lipids were mixed
in the desired ratios, dried for at least 1 h, and then resuspended
in chloroform or ethanol at a concentration of 100 mg mL–1.

Double Emulsions
Three solutions were used to produce
double emulsions on-chip: a lipid-containing solution, an inner aqueous
solution, and an outer aqueous solution. The lipid-containing solution
was composed of 2 mg mL–1 lipids (99.9 mol
% DOPC + 0.1 mol % Liss Rhod PE) dissolved in oleic acid. In
all of the experiments involving double emulsions, both inner and
outer aqueous and the feeding channel solutions contained 5% v/v pluronic
surfactant (poloxamer 188, Sigma-Aldrich) and 15% v/v glycerol. For
the experiments shown in Figure 4, the inner aqueous and outer aqueous contained an
additional 25 mM sucrose and 5 mM MgCl2. The solution flushed
through
the feeding channel to induce an osmotic pressure difference contained
an additional 200 mM sucrose. To make the double emulsion denser than
the surrounding solution and thereby facilitate their extraction from
the device (Figure 5), an additional 5 mM dextran was added to the inner aqueous solution
and osmotically balanced by 5 mM of glucose in the outer aqueous solution.

Liposomes
Liposomes were produced using OLA, an on-chip
microfluidic method that results in unilamellar liposomes.71 All liposomes in Figure S3 were made with the lipid-carrying organic phase containing
2 mg ml–1 lipids (99.9 mol
% DOPC + 0.1 mol % Liss Rhod PE) dissolved in 1-octanol. The
inner aqueous phase consisted of 15% v/v glycerol (Figure S3a–b), 5 μM Alexa-647 (Figure S3a), 5 mM PEG-8000 (Figure S3a), 100 mM sucrose (Figure S3b), and 5
μM 72-bases long ssDNA (Figure S3b); the outer aqueous phase was a solution of 5% v/v pluronic surfactant
poloxamer 188 (Figure S3a–b), 15%
v/v glycerol (Figure S3a–b), 5 mM
PEG-8000 (Figure S3a), 100 mM sucrose (Figure S3b); the collection well contained 20
μL (added upon the liposomes reaching the collection well) of
15% v/v glycerol (Figure S3a–b),
5 mM PEG-8000 (Figure S3a), and 100 mM
glucose (Figure S3b). After sufficient
production (thousands of liposomes in the collection well), liposomes
were carefully harvested from the collection well by pipetting out
15 μL of the solution. The liposomes were then pumped into the
microfluidic device containing the trap design. For Figure S2a, before being pumped into the device containing
the traps, the liposomes were mixed with another solution in order
to bring the outside environment to a concentration of 8 mM PEG-8000
and 15% v/v glycerol and to induce an osmotic pressure difference.

Water-in-Oil Droplets
Water-in-oil droplets were produced
with two different protocols: droplets in Figure 1a containing nucleoids, and droplets in Figures 2a and 6b were produced on-chip via a standard cross-junction
method, where the aqueous stream gets pinched into droplets by the
continuous oil stream. The droplets produced were then trapped downstream
from the junction on the same device. All of the droplets showed in
the other figures were produced by pipetting up and down a few microliters
(2–5 μL) of aqueous solutions into 100 μL of oil
solution. The shear forces provided by the pipetting broke the droplets
into smaller ones. In Figure 2a, to enhance the contrast with the microfluidic traps, fluorescent
lipids were added to the oil solution (0.1 mol % Liss Rhod
PE) together with 1% v/v SPAN 80 surfactant. For the experiments shown
in Figures 2 and 3, the oil solution contained 5% v/v SPAN 80 surfactant.
The inner aqueous solution of the droplets shown in Figures 2 and 3 contained 5 μM Alexa 647 fluorescent dye. Additionally, droplets
shown in Figure 3 contained
200 mM KCl, while the water chamber contained 100, 200, and 300 mM
KCl water solution to, respectively, create hypotonic, isotonic, and
hypertonic environments for the droplets.

Min Proteins in Droplets
Min protein oscillations in
spherical droplets (Figure 1a) were observed in water-in-oil droplets containing the following
inner aqueous: 0.8 μM MinD, 0.2 μM MinD-Cy3, 0.8 μM
MinE, 0.2 μM MinE-Cy5, 5 mM ATP, 4 mM phosphoenolpyruvate, 0.01
mg mL–1 of pyruvate kinase, 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5),
150 mM KCL, and 5 mM MgCl2. Min proteins were isolated
and labeled as described previously.72 For
these experiments, 2 mg mL–1 of lipids
(66.6 mol % DOPC + 33.3 mol % DOPG + 0.1 mol % Liss
Rhod PE) were dissolved in mineral oil as described above.

FtsZ in
Droplets
The inner aqueous solution for experiments
involving FtsZ in water-in-oil droplets contained 12 μM FtsZ,
6 μM ZipA, 2 mM guanosine triphosphate (GTP), 180 mM KCl, 25
mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 5 mM MgCl2, and 15% v/v glycerol.
The oil phase contained 25 mg mL–1 of lipids
(89.9 mol % DOPC+10 mol % DGS-NTA(Ni) + 0.1 mol % Liss
Rhod-PE) for spherical droplets (Figure 1), while the same composition at a lower
concentration (1 mg mL–1) was used for tubular
droplets (Figure 6a).
Proteins were isolated and labeled as described previously.73

Nucleoids in Droplets
The nucleoid
isolation protocol
is based on Cunha et al.74 The BN2179 strain containing Ori1/Ter3 labels and HUmYpet (AB1157, Ori1::lacOx240-hygR, Ter3::tetOx240-accC1 ΔgalK::tetR-mCerulean
frt, ΔleuB::lacI-mCherry frt) was used for the experiments.30 Cells were grown in LB medium for 65 h. One
mL of culture was spun down at 10000g for 2.5 min
and resuspended in 475 μL of ice cold sucrose buffer, containing
0.58 M sucrose, 10 mM NaPi buffer (pH 7.0–7.4, Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4), 10 mM EDTA, and 100
mM NaCl. Immediately after this cold shock, 25 μL of lysozyme
solution (1 mg mL–1 in ultrapure water) was added,
and the cell suspension was briefly vortexed and incubated at room
temperature for 15 min, resulting in spheroplasts. To lyse the spheroplasts
and obtain isolated nucleoids, 20 μL of the spheroplast suspension
was slowly added, using a cut pipet tip, to 1 mL of a solution containing
10 mM NaPi (pH 7.4) and 100 ng mL–1 DAPI, after
which the Eppendorf was inverted once. This nucleoid suspension was
used as the aqueous phase for microfluidically produced water-in-oil
droplets of 10 μm diameter. The oil phase was HFE-7500 (Novec
Engineering Fluids) with 0.1% v/v Picosurf-1 surfactant (Dolomite
Microfluidics). The droplets were immobilized for observation using
an array of traps that was placed downstream of the production junction.

Tubulin in Droplets
The aqueous solution contained
MRB80 buffer (80 mM PIPES, 4 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, pH 6.8)
with 39 μM unlabeled tubulin, 1 μM labeled tubulin (HiLyte
488), 3 mM GTP, 50 mM KCl, 4 mM DTT, 2 mg mL–1 of
bovine serum albumin, 1 mg mL–1 of glucose oxidase,
0.5 mg mL–1 of catalase, and 50 mM glucose. The
oil phase contained 1 mg mL–1 of lipids (90% DOPS
+ 10% PEG2000-PE) in mineral oil with 2% v/v SPAN 80. To nucleate
microtubules in droplets, short microtubules (labeled with 12% Hilyte
561 tubulin) of an approximate length of 1 μM were added, stabilized
with guanylyl-(α,β)-methylene-diphosphonate (GMPCPP),
into the aqueous solution.

Collagen in Droplets
To obtain collagen
networks in
spherical confinement, telopeptide collagen (TeloCol, CellSystems,
supplied at 3.1 mg mL–1 in 0.01 M HCl) was brought
to a neutral pH with the addition of NaOH (Sigma-Aldrich) in phosphate
buffered saline (PBS, Sigma-Aldrich), to obtain a final collagen concentration
of 1 mg mL–1 for the spherical droplets and 2 mg
mL–1 for the droplets in the tubular confinement.
The collagen-binding protein CNA35 fluorescently labeled with EGFP
(a kind gift from Maarten Merkx, AddGene) was added to collagen in
a molar ratio 20:1 to allow for collagen network visualization. The
oil phase contained 2% v/v SPAN 80 surfactant in mineral oil (Sigma-Aldrich).
The collagen was allowed to polymerize for at least 90 min at room
temperature before visualization. For imaging the spherical droplets,
the water-in-oil solution was placed between two coverslips (Menzel
Microscope Coverslips 24 mm × 60 mm, #1, Thermo Scientific) separated
by a silicone chamber (Grace Bio-Laboratories CultureWell chambered
coverglass, Sigma-Aldrich).

Data Analysis
The width of the droplets
in Figure 2 was obtained
from
the fluorescent profiles measured at the middle of the tubular droplet
across its width (see Figure S2b) of 10
individual droplets per type of trap. For each droplet, the width
was obtained from the full width at half-maximum of its profile, and
these values were then averaged to obtain, for each type of trap,
a measure of the width. Errors were omitted since the standard error-of-the-mean
value (<100 nm) was smaller than the optical resolution of our
microscope. The size change of the double emulsions in Figure 4 was measured every 12 frames
(12 s) in the 3 min time lapse, for both the shrinking process (hypertonic
condition) and the expansion process (hypotonic condition). Using
Fiji (ImageJ), a circle was manually fitted to the outer contour of
the double emulsion, excluding the side pocket. The errors quoted
in Figure 4 are the
standard error-of-the-mean.

In Figure 6, the values of tubulin and collagen bundle
orientations were obtained using Fiji (OrientationJ plugin) after
the background was appropriately subtracted. In Figure 7, we calculated the aspect ratio and volumes
of the artificial cell containers and natural cells, of which the
smallest and largest dimensions are listed in Table S6 as obtained from literature (for dots denoted as
“Previous Work” and “Nature”) or as measured
in our experiments (for dots labeled as “This Work”).
We approximated the cell shapes as spheroids characterized by longest
and shortest semiaxes a and c. Discs
correspond to oblate spheroids with c < a, while
rods are equivalent to prolate spheroids with c > a. The aspect ratio in Figure 7 is defined as c/a. The
volume of a spheroid is calculated as V = (4π/3)a2c.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b00220.Figures S1–S4
and Tables S5 and S6 (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn9b00220_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
§ These authors contributed equally.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We want to thank J. Kerssemakers and K. Vendel for
useful discussions, E. van der Sluis for purifying FtsZ, and S. Pud,
M. Last, A. Japaridze, S. Faes, and L. van Buren for help with the
experiments. The OrientationJ plugin was written by D. Sage (EPFL,
Lausanne). This work was supported by ERC Advanced Grant SynDiv (no.
669598) to C.D. and by The Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO/OCW), as part of the NanoFront and BaSyC programs. The
work of R.M. and M.D. is supported by Sinergia grant 160728 from the
Swiss National Science Foundation (SNF). The work of F.B. and G.H.K.
is part of the Industrial Partnership Programme Hybrid Soft Materials
that is carried out under an agreement between Unilever Research and
Development B.V. and The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research
(NWO).
==== Refs
References
Randich A. M. ; Brun Y. V. 
Molecular Mechanisms
for the Evolution of Bacterial
Morphologies and Growth Modes . Front. Microbiol. 
2015 , 6 , 580 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00580 .26106381 
Bisson-Filho A. W. ; Zheng J. ; Garner E. 
Archaeal Imaging:
Leading the Hunt
for New Discoveries . Mol. Biol. Cell 
2018 , 29 , 1675 –1681 10.1091/mbc.E17-10-0603 .30001185 
Ivakov A. ; Persson S. 
Plant Cell Shape: Modulators
and Measurements . Front. Plant Sci. 
2013 , 4 , 439 10.3389/fpls.2013.00439 .24312104 
Steinman R. M. ; Cohn Z. A. 
Identification of
a Novel Cell Type in Peripheral Lymphoid
Organs of Mice . J. Exp. Med. 
1973 , 137 , 1142 –1162 10.1084/jem.137.5.1142 .4573839 
Margolin W. 
Sculpting
the Bacterial Cell . Curr. Biol. 
2009 , 19 , R812 –R822 10.1016/j.cub.2009.06.033 .19906583 
Young K. D. 
Bacterial
Shape . Mol. Microbiol. 
2003 , 49 , 571 –580 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03607.x .12914007 
Young K. D. 
The Selective
Value of Bacterial Shape . Microbiol. Mol. Biol.
Rev. 
2006 , 70 , 660 –703 10.1128/MMBR.00001-06 .16959965 
Mulla Y. ; Aufderhorst-Roberts A. ; Koenderink G. H. 
Shaping up Synthetic Cells . Phys. Biol. 
2018 , 15 , 041001 10.1088/1478-3975/aab923 .29570090 
Fletcher D. A. ; Mullins R. D. 
Cell Mechanics and the Cytoskeleton . Nature 
2010 , 463 , 485 –492 10.1038/nature08908 .20110992 
Young K. D. 
Bacterial
Morphology: Why Have Different Shapes? . Curr.
Opin. Microbiol. 
2007 , 10 , 596 –600 10.1016/j.mib.2007.09.009 .17981076 
Justice S. S. ; Hunstad D. A. ; Cegelski L. ; Hultgren S. J. 
Morphological
Plasticity
as a Bacterial Survival Strategy . Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 
2008 , 6 , 162 –168 10.1038/nrmicro1820 .18157153 
Chen C. S. ; Mrksich M. ; Huang S. ; Whitesides G. M. ; Ingber D. E. 
Geometric Control of Cell Life and Death . Science 
1997 , 276 , 1425 –1428 10.1126/science.276.5317.1425 .9162012 
Mogilner A. ; Keren K. 
The Shape of Motile Cells . Curr. Biol. 
2009 , 19 , R762 –R771 10.1016/j.cub.2009.06.053 .19906578 
Smith W. P. J. ; Davit Y. ; Osborne J. M. ; Kim W. ; Foster K. R. ; Pitt-Francis J. M. 
Cell Morphology Drives Spatial Patterning
in Microbial
Communities . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2017 , 114 , E280 –E286 10.1073/pnas.1613007114 .28039436 
Yang D. C. ; Blair K. M. ; Salama N. R. 
Staying
in Shape: The Impact of Cell
Shape on Bacterial Survival in Diverse Environments . Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 
2016 , 80 , 187 –203 10.1128/MMBR.00031-15 .26864431 
Wu F. ; van Schie B. G. C. ; Keymer J. E. ; Dekker C. 
Symmetry and Scale
Orient Min Protein Patterns in Shaped Bacterial Sculptures . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 10 , 719 –726 10.1038/nnano.2015.126 .26098227 
Mannik J. ; Wu F. ; Hol F. J. H. ; Bisicchia P. ; Sherratt D. J. ; Keymer J. E. ; Dekker C. 
Robustness and Accuracy of Cell Division in Escherichia
Coli in Diverse Cell Shapes . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 6957 –6962 10.1073/pnas.1120854109 .22509007 
Frey E. ; Halatek J. ; Kretschmer S. ; Schwille P.  Protein Pattern
Formation . In Physics of Biological Membranes ; Bassereau P. , Sens P.  , Eds.; Springer
International Publishing : Cham , 2018 ; Vol. 113 , pp 229 –260 .
Vos B. E. ; Liebrand L. C. ; Vahabi M. ; Biebricher A. ; Wuite G. J. L. ; Peterman E. J. G. ; Kurniawan N. A. ; MacKintosh F. C. ; Koenderink G. H. 
Programming
the Mechanics of Cohesive
Fiber Networks by Compression . Soft Matter 
2017 , 13 , 8886 –8893 10.1039/C7SM01393K .29057402 
Dragoš A. ; Kovács Á. T. 
The Peculiar Functions of the Bacterial
Extracellular Matrix . Trends Microbiol. 
2017 , 25 , 257 –266 10.1016/j.tim.2016.12.010 .28089324 
Govindan B. S. ; Spillman W. B. 
Steady States of
a Microtubule Assembly in a Confined
Geometry . Phys. Rev. E 
2004 , 70 , 032901 10.1103/PhysRevE.70.032901 .
Zelinski B. ; Müller N. ; Kierfeld J. 
Dynamics and Length
Distribution
of Microtubules under Force and Confinement . Phys. Rev. E 
2012 , 86 , 041918 10.1103/PhysRevE.86.041918 .
Lagomarsino M. C. ; Tanase C. ; Vos J. W. ; Emons A. M. C. ; Mulder B. M. ; Dogterom M. 
Microtubule Organization
in Three-Dimensional Confined
Geometries: Evaluating the Role of Elasticity Through a Combined In Vitro and Modeling Approach . Biophys.
J. 
2007 , 92 , 1046 –1057 10.1529/biophysj.105.076893 .17098802 
Junier I. ; Boccard F. ; Espéli O. 
Polymer Modeling of the E. Coli Genome
Reveals the Involvement of Locus Positioning and Macrodomain Structuring
for the Control of Chromosome Conformation and Segregation . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , 1461 –1473 10.1093/nar/gkt1005 .24194594 
Marenduzzo D. ; Micheletti C. ; Orlandini E. 
Biopolymer Organization upon Confinement . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2010 , 22 , 283102 10.1088/0953-8984/22/28/283102 .21399272 
Jun S. ; Mulder B. 
Entropy-Driven Spatial
Organization of Highly Confined
Polymers: Lessons for the Bacterial Chromosome . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2006 , 103 , 12388 –12393 10.1073/pnas.0605305103 .16885211 
Olson M. F. ; Sahai E. 
The Actin Cytoskeleton
in Cancer Cell Motility . Clin. Exp. Metastasis 
2009 , 26 , 273 –287 10.1007/s10585-008-9174-2 .18498004 
McGregor A. L. ; Hsia C.-R. ; Lammerding J. 
Squish and
Squeeze — the Nucleus
as a Physical Barrier during Migration in Confined Environments . Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 
2016 , 40 , 32 –40 10.1016/j.ceb.2016.01.011 .26895141 
Wu F. ; Swain P. ; Kuijpers L. ; Zheng X. ; Felter K. ; Guurink M. ; Chaudhuri D. ; Mulder B. ; Dekker C.  Cell Boundary Confinement Sets
the
Size and Position of the E. Coli Chromosome . Curr. Biol. 2019 , in press.
Wu F. ; Japaridze A. ; Zheng X. ; Kerssemakers J. W. J. ; Dekker C.  Direct Imaging of the Circular
Chromosome of a Live Bacterium . Nat. Commun. 2018 , in press.
Schwille P. 
Jump-Starting
Life? Fundamental Aspects of Synthetic Biology . J. Cell Biol. 
2015 , 210 , 687 –690 10.1083/jcb.201506125 .26323686 
Szostak J. W. ; Bartel D. P. ; Luisi P. L. 
Synthesizing Life . Nature 
2001 , 409 , 387 –390 10.1038/35053176 .11201752 
Spoelstra W. K. ; Deshpande S. ; Dekker C. 
Tailoring the Appearance: What Will
Synthetic Cells Look Like? . Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 
2018 , 51 , 47 –56 10.1016/j.copbio.2017.11.005 .29183001 
Buddingh’ B. C. ; van Hest J. C. M. 
Artificial Cells:
Synthetic Compartments with Life-like
Functionality and Adaptivity . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2017 , 50 , 769 –777 10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00512 .28094501 
Alvarado J. ; Mulder B. M. ; Koenderink G. H. 
Alignment
of Nematic and Bundled
Semiflexible Polymers in Cell-Sized Confinement . Soft Matter 
2014 , 10 , 2354 –2364 10.1039/C3SM52421C .24623093 
Sanchez T. ; Chen D. T. N. ; Decamp S. J. ; Heymann M. ; Dogic Z. 
Spontaneous
Motion in Hierarchically Assembled Active Matter . Nature 
2012 , 491 , 431 –434 10.1038/nature11591 .23135402 
Chanasakulniyom M. ; Martino C. ; Paterson D. ; Horsfall L. ; Rosser S. ; Cooper J. M. 
Expression of Membrane-Associated Proteins within Single
Emulsion Cell Facsimiles . Analyst 
2012 , 137 , 2939 10.1039/c2an35047e .22441306 
Mellouli S. ; Monterroso B. ; Vutukuri H. R. ; Brinke E. Te ; Chokkalingam V. ; Rivas G. ; Huck W. T. S. 
Self-Organization of the Bacterial
Cell-Division Protein FtsZ in Confined Environments . Soft Matter 
2013 , 9 , 10493 –10500 10.1039/c3sm51163d .
Miyazaki M. ; Chiba M. ; Eguchi H. ; Ohki T. ; Ishiwata S. 
Cell-Sized
Spherical Confinement Induces the Spontaneous Formation of Contractile
Actomyosin Rings in Vitro . Nat. Cell Biol. 
2015 , 17 , 480 –489 10.1038/ncb3142 .25799060 
Good M. C. ; Vahey M. D. ; Skandarajah A. ; Fletcher D. A. ; Heald R. 
Cytoplasmic
Volume Modulates Spindle Size during Embryogenesis . Science 
2013 , 342 , 856 –860 10.1126/science.1243147 .24233724 
Sokolova E. ; Spruijt E. ; Hansen M. M. K. ; Dubuc E. ; Groen J. ; Chokkalingam V. ; Piruska A. ; Heus H. A. ; Huck W. T. S. 
Enhanced
Transcription Rates in Membrane-Free Protocells Formed by Coacervation
of Cell Lysate . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.
A. 
2013 , 110 , 11692 –11697 10.1073/pnas.1222321110 .23818642 
Van
Nies P. ; Westerlaken I. ; Blanken D. ; Salas M. ; Mencía M. ; Danelon C. 
Self-Replication of DNA by Its Encoded Proteins in
Liposome-Based Synthetic Cells . Nat. Commun. 
2018 , 9 , 1583 10.1038/s41467-018-03926-1 .29679002 
Zieske K. ; Chwastek G. ; Schwille P. 
Protein Patterns
and Oscillations
on Lipid Monolayers and in Microdroplets . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 13455 –13459 10.1002/anie.201606069 .
Deng N.-N. ; Vibhute M. A. ; Zheng L. ; Zhao H. ; Yelleswarapu M. ; Huck W. T. S. 
Macromolecularly Crowded Protocells from Reversibly
Shrinking Monodisperse Liposomes . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2018 , 140 , 7399 –7402 10.1021/jacs.8b03123 .29870243 
Zieske K. ; Schwille P. 
Reconstitution of Pole-to-Pole Oscillations of Min
Proteins in Microengineered Polydimethylsiloxane Compartments . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 459 –462 10.1002/anie.201207078 .
Holy T. E. ; Dogterom M. ; Yurke B. ; Leibler S. 
Assembly and Positioning
of Microtubule Asters in Microfabricated Chambers . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
1997 , 94 , 6228 –6231 10.1073/pnas.94.12.6228 .9177199 
Deshpande S. ; Pfohl T. 
Real-Time Dynamics
of Emerging Actin Networks in Cell-Mimicking Compartments . PLoS One 
2015 , 10 , e011652110.1371/journal.pone.0116521 .25785606 
Huebner A. ; Bratton D. ; Whyte G. ; Yang M. ; Demello A. J. ; Abell C. ; Hollfelder F. 
Static Microdroplet
Arrays: A Microfluidic
Device for Droplet Trapping, Incubation and Release for Enzymatic
and Cell-Based Assays . Lab Chip 
2009 , 9 , 692 –698 10.1039/B813709A .19224019 
Wang W. ; Yang C. ; Li C. M. 
On-Demand
Microfluidic Droplet Trapping
and Fusion for on-Chip Static Droplet Assays . Lab Chip 
2009 , 9 , 1504 –1506 10.1039/b903468d .19458854 
Shi W. ; Qin J. ; Ye N. ; Lin B. 
Droplet-Based Microfluidic System
for Individual Caenorhabditis Elegans Assay . Lab Chip 
2008 , 8 , 1432 10.1039/b808753a .18818795 
Yu L. ; Chen M. C. W. ; Cheung K. C. 
Droplet-Based
Microfluidic System
for Multicellular Tumor Spheroid Formation and Anticancer Drug Testing . Lab Chip 
2010 , 10 , 2424 10.1039/c004590j .20694216 
Hunt T. P. ; Issadore D. ; Westervelt R. M. 
Integrated
Circuit/Microfluidic Chip
to Programmably Trap and Move Cells and Droplets with Dielectrophoresis . Lab Chip 
2008 , 8 , 81 –87 10.1039/B710928H .18094765 
Boukellal H. ; Selimović Š. ; Jia Y. ; Cristobal G. ; Fraden S. ; Selimović E. ; Jia Y. ; Cristobal G. ; Fraden S. 
Simple, Robust Storage of Drops and Fluids in a Microfluidic
Device . Lab Chip 
2009 , 9 , 331 –338 10.1039/B808579J .19107293 
Christopher G. F. ; Bergstein J. ; End N. B. ; Poon M. ; Nguyen C. ; Anna S. L. 
Coalescence and Splitting of Confined Droplets at Microfluidic
Junctions . Lab Chip 
2009 , 9 , 1102 10.1039/b813062k .19350092 
Deshpande S. ; Spoelstra W. K. ; van Doorn M. ; Kerssemakers J. ; Dekker C. 
Mechanical Division of Cell-Sized Liposomes . ACS Nano 
2018 , 12 , 2560 –2568 10.1021/acsnano.7b08411 .29455527 
McGrath J. ; Jimenez M. ; Bridle H. 
Deterministic Lateral Displacement
for Particle Separation: A Review . Lab Chip 
2014 , 14 , 4139 –4158 10.1039/C4LC00939H .25212386 
Shim J. ; Cristobal G. ; Link D. R. ; Thorsen T. ; Jia Y. ; Piattelli K. ; Fraden S. 
Control and Measurement of the Phase
Behavior of Aqueous Solutions Using Microfluidics . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 8825 –8835 10.1021/ja071820f .17580868 
Shum H. C. ; Lee D. ; Yoon I. ; Kodger T. ; Weitz D. A. 
Double Emulsion
Templated Monodisperse Phospholipid Vesicles . Langmuir 
2008 , 24 , 7651 –7653 10.1021/la801833a .18613709 
Shum H. C. ; Santanach-Carreras E. ; Kim J. W. ; Ehrlicher A. ; Bibette J. ; Weitz D. A. 
Dewetting-Induced
Membrane Formation
by Adhesion of Amphiphile-Laden Interfaces . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 4420 –4426 10.1021/ja108673h .21381735 
Hallett F. R. ; Marsh J. ; Nickel B. G. ; Wood J. M. 
Mechanical Properties
of Vesicles. II. A Model for Osmotic Swelling and Lysis . Biophys. J. 
1993 , 64 , 435 –442 10.1016/S0006-3495(93)81384-5 .8457669 
Seifert U. ; Berndl K. ; Lipowsky R. 
Shape Transformations
of Vesicles:
Phase Diagram for Spontaneous- Curvature and Bilayer-Coupling Models . Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 
1991 , 44 , 1182 –1202 10.1103/PhysRevA.44.1182 .
Bi E. ; Lutkenhaus J. 
FtsZ Ring
Structure Associated with Division in Escherichia
Coli . Nature 
1991 , 354 , 161 –164 10.1038/354161a0 .1944597 
Ramachandran G. N. ; Kartha G. 
Structure of Collagen . Nature 
1954 , 174 , 269 –270 10.1038/174269c0 .13185286 
den
Blaauwen T. ; Hamoen L. W. ; Levin P. A. 
The Divisome at
25: The Road Ahead . Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 
2017 , 36 , 85 –94 10.1016/j.mib.2017.01.007 .28254403 
Chang F. ; Martin S. G. 
Shaping Fission
Yeast with Microtubules . Cold Spring Harbor
Perspect. Biol. 
2009 , 1 , a001347 –a001347 10.1101/cshperspect.a001347 .
Tønnesen J. ; Inavalli V. V. G. K. ; Nägerl U. V. 
Super-Resolution
Imaging of the Extracellular
Space in Living Brain Tissue . Cell 
2018 , 172 , 1108 –1121 10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.007 .29474910 
Provenzano P. P. ; Vanderby R. 
Collagen Fibril Morphology
and Organization: Implications
for Force Transmission in Ligament and Tendon . Matrix Biol. 
2006 , 25 , 71 –84 10.1016/j.matbio.2005.09.005 .16271455 
Gutsmann T. ; Fantner G. E. ; Venturoni M. ; Ekani-Nkodo A. ; Thompson J. B. ; Kindt J. H. ; Morse D. E. ; Fygenson D. K. ; Hansma P. K. 
Evidence That Collagen Fibrils in Tendons Are Inhomogeneously
Structured in a Tubelike Manner . Biophys. J. 
2003 , 84 , 2593 –2598 10.1016/S0006-3495(03)75064-4 .12668467 
McMahon H. T. ; Gallop J. L. 
Membrane Curvature
and Mechanisms of Dynamic Cell Membrane
Remodelling . Nature 
2005 , 438 , 590 –596 10.1038/nature04396 .16319878 
Söderström B. ; Badrutdinov A. ; Chan H. ; Skoglund U. 
Cell Shape-Independent
FtsZ Dynamics in Synthetically Remodeled Bacterial Cells . Nat. Commun. 
2018 , 9 , 4323 10.1038/s41467-018-06887-7 .30337533 
Deshpande S. ; Caspi Y. ; Meijering A. E. C. ; Dekker C. 
Octanol-Assisted Liposome
Assembly on Chip . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 10447 10.1038/ncomms10447 .26794442 
Caspi Y. ; Dekker C. 
Mapping out Min Protein
Patterns in Fully Confined
Fluidic Chambers . eLife 
2016 , 5 , e19271 10.7554/eLife.19271 .27885986 
Fanalista F. ; Deshpande S. ; Lau A. ; Pawlik G. ; Dekker C. 
FtsZ-Induced
Shape Transformation of Coacervates . Adv. Biosyst. 
2018 , 2 , 1800136 10.1002/adbi.201800136 .
Cunha S. ; Woldringh C. L. ; Odijk T. 
Polymer-Mediated Compaction and Internal
Dynamics of Isolated Escherichia Coli Nucleoids . J. Struct. Biol. 
2001 , 136 , 53 –66 10.1006/jsbi.2001.4420 .11858707

