
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.8b08875ArticleNanoparticle-Aided
Characterization of Arterial Endothelial
Architecture during Atherosclerosis Progression and Metabolic Therapy Beldman Thijs
J. †○Malinova Tsveta S. ‡○Desclos Emilie §Grootemaat Anita E. §Misiak Aresh L. S. †van der Velden Saskia †van Roomen Cindy P. A. A. †Beckers Linda †van Veen Henk A. §Krawczyk Przemyslaw M. ∥Hoebe Ron A. §Sluimer Judith C. ⊥Neele Annette E. †de Winther Menno P. J. †#van der Wel Nicole N. §Lutgens Esther †#Mulder Willem J. M. †∇Huveneers Stephan ‡Kluza Ewelina *†† Experimental
Vascular Biology, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Amsterdam Cardiovascular
Sciences (ACS), Amsterdam University Medical
Center, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands‡ Vascular
Microenvironment and Integrity, Department of Medical Biochemistry,
Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences (ACS), Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The
Netherlands§ Cellular
Imaging-Core Facility, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands∥ Department
of Medical Biology, Amsterdam University
Medical Center, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands⊥ Department
of Pathology, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht 6229 ER, The Netherlands# Institute
for Cardiovascular Prevention, Ludwig Maximilians
University, Munich 80336, Germany∇ Translational
and Molecular Imaging Institute, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, United States* E-mail: e.kluza@amc.uva.nl.03 07 2019 24 12 2019 13 12 13759 13774 21 11 2018 03 07 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Atherosclerosis is
associated with a compromised endothelial barrier,
facilitating the accumulation of immune cells and macromolecules in
atherosclerotic lesions. In this study, we investigate endothelial
barrier integrity and the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR)
effect during atherosclerosis progression and therapy in Apoe–/– mice using hyaluronan
nanoparticles (HA-NPs). Utilizing ultrastructural and en face plaque imaging, we uncover a significantly decreased junction continuity
in the atherosclerotic plaque-covering endothelium compared to the
normal vessel wall, indicative of disrupted endothelial barrier. Intriguingly,
the plaque advancement had a positive effect on junction stabilization,
which correlated with a 3-fold lower accumulation of in vivo administrated HA-NPs in advanced plaques compared to early counterparts.
Furthermore, by using super-resolution and correlative light and electron
microscopy, we trace nanoparticles in the plaque microenvironment.
We find nanoparticle-enriched endothelial junctions, containing 75%
of detected HA-NPs, and a high HA-NP accumulation in the endothelium-underlying
extracellular matrix, which suggest an endothelial junctional traffic
of HA-NPs to the plague. Finally, we probe the EPR effect by HA-NPs
in the context of metabolic therapy with a glycolysis inhibitor, 3PO,
proposed as a vascular normalizing strategy. The observed trend of
attenuated HA-NP uptake in aortas of 3PO-treated mice coincides with
the endothelial silencing activity of 3PO, demonstrated in
vitro. Interestingly, the therapy also reduced the plaque
inflammatory burden, while activating macrophage metabolism. Our findings
shed light on natural limitations of nanoparticle accumulation in
atherosclerotic plaques and provide mechanistic insight into nanoparticle
trafficking across the atherosclerotic endothelium. Furthermore, our
data contribute to the rising field of endothelial barrier modulation
in atherosclerosis.

nanomedicineatherosclerosisenhanced
permeability
and retention effectendothelial normalizationvascular endothelial cadherindocument-id-old-9nn8b08875document-id-new-14nn8b08875ccc-price
==== Body
Nanomedicine applies nanotechnology
tools to aid in disease management. Therapeutic and diagnostic benefits
of long-circulating nanoparticles rely on their ability to reach the
disease site at high efficacy and selectivity, which has been demonstrated
in animal models of cancer, atherosclerosis, and autoimmune diseases.1−5 This lesion-favorable biodistribution has been attributed to the
compromised endothelial barrier and impaired lymphatic drainage, often
referred to as the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect.6 Clinical evidence of the EPR effect has been
provided by several imaging studies, predominantly, for radiolabeled
liposomes.7,8 However, the accumulation of clinical trial
data shed light on the inter- and intratumor heterogeneity of the
EPR effect in human tumors,9−11 which has been overseen by, and
underinvestigated in, earlier preclinical studies. Recently, nanomedicine
entered cardiovascular medicine.12,13 One of the
key findings of a small trial by van der Valk et al.12 is the uptake of intravenously administrated
long-circulating liposomes by macrophages of human atherosclerotic
lesions, which supports the preceding preclinical observations.2 Our present study focuses on the identification
of intrinsic and acquired limitations of nanoparticle performance
in atherosclerosis and understanding the mechanism(s) driving nanoparticle
accumulation at the lesion site.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic
inflammatory disease, characterized
by the formation of lipid-rich lesions (plaques) in the vessel wall14 and compromised endothelial barrier.15 In recent years, nanoparticle-based strategies
for diagnosis and treatment of atherosclerosis have emerged,5 aimed predominantly at the plaque inflammation.
It is important that feasibility studies include the context of the
natural lesion progression, which is associated with a considerable
microenvironmental diversification, including the lipid buildup, immune
cell recruitment, foam cell formation, collagen deposition, smooth
muscle cell proliferation, and necrotic core formation. Notably, in
an individual atherosclerosis patient, we can find lesions at different
stages of development.16,17 We have addressed the aspect
of lesion diversity in our recent report on hyaluronan nanoparticles
(HA-NPs), which showed high selectivity in targeting plaque-associated
macrophages in mice, but, interestingly, they were 6-fold less effectively
taken up by macrophages in advanced plaques compared to early lesions.18 To explain this striking difference, we here
investigate the impact of disease progression on the integrity of
atherosclerotic endothelium and the concomitant plaque-homing efficacy
and intraplaque distribution of HA-NPs. Furthermore, we use our nanoparticle
platform to probe the EPR effect in a therapeutic setting, which aims
at the normalization of atherosclerotic endothelium and which is inspired
by recent findings on the tumor vessel normalization by glycolysis
inhibition.19 The endothelial barrier-related
effects are studied jointly with the arterial glycolytic activity
and plaque inflammatory burden.

The aforementioned aims cannot
be fully reached without understanding
the mechanistic aspect of nanoparticle homing to atherosclerotic lesions.
In the current literature, the selectivity and efficacy of nanomaterials
to atherosclerotic lesions have primarily been attributed to the enhanced
permeability of plaque neovasculature,20−22 yet these are mostly
absent in murine lesions and highly heterogeneous in human plaques.
However, nanoparticle plaque accumulation may potentially occur via different routes, that is, the plaque-covering macrovascular
endothelium or microvasculature running through the plaque. Transendothelial
crossing of NPs may be para- or transcellular, and blood leukocytes
might be involved as transporters.23−25 As few reports address
this aspect of nanomedicine, we recently published on the targeting
mechanism of long-circulating liposomes in rabbit atherosclerosis,
showing a significant correlation between the early accumulation level
of liposomes and aortic endothelial permeability.21

In this paper, we study endothelial barrier integrity
in atherosclerosis
development and progression and its impact on plaque targetability
by HA-NPs. The experiments were performed in Apoe–/– mice, with either early
or advanced atherosclerosis.26En face visualization of vascular endothelial cadherin (VEC),
one of the key endothelial cell–cell junction proteins that
forms the endothelial barrier,27,28 was investigated in
atherosclerotic aorta by confocal microscopy. This was corroborated
by the readout of HA-NP plaque-homing efficacy. Subsequently, the
endothelial junction ultrastructure was studied by advanced microscopy
methods, including the two-color super-resolution microscopy and correlative
light and electron microscopy to unveil the trafficking pathways of
HA-NPs to atherosclerotic lesions. Finally, we evaluate the endothelial
and inflammatory effects of metabolic therapy with 3PO, a small-molecule
glycolysis inhibitor,19 in atherosclerotic
mice. HA-NPs and a fluorescent glucose analogue, 2-NBDG, were used
to probe the aortic endothelial barrier function and metabolic (glycolytic)
activity, respectively. This was complemented by histological analyses
of the plaque inflammatory burden and hypoxia.

Results and Discussion
Experimental
Setup
To investigate the relation between
the vascular endothelial barrier integrity and HA-NP plaque targetability
in the atherosclerotic plaque progression, Apoe–/– mice were put on a 6- or
12-week high-fat diet (HFD) to develop early or advanced atherosclerotic
lesions, respectively (n = 5/group). Two h before
sacrifice, the mice received an intravenous (i.v.) injection of Cy5.5-labeled
HA-NPs. The chosen time point post-HA-NP administration was based
on the previously reported correlation between early accumulation
levels of long-circulating nanoparticles and plaque permeability.21 The correlation was strong at 30 min and 6 h
and became non-significant at 24 h post-administration, which we
attributed to the intraplaque NP redistribution and cell internalization.
Therefore, 2 h circulation time ensures detectable levels of plaque-associated
HA-NPs interacting with the endothelium. The excised aortas were cut
longitudinally to expose the luminal endothelium surface for immunofluorescence
imaging, as described previously,29 and
were stained for endothelial adherens junctions (vascular endothelial
cadherin, VEC), macrophages (MAC-3), and nuclei (DAPI). Subsequently,
the aortic arch samples were imaged by advanced microscopy methods,
including confocal, super-resolution, electron, and correlative
fluorescence and electron microscopy. Our experimental setup is outlined
in Figure 1A.

Figure 1 (A) Schematic
representation of experimental setup used to study
atherosclerotic endothelial integrity. ApoE–/– mice were on either a 6-week or
12-week HFD to develop early or advanced atherosclerotic lesions,
respectively. Subsequently, the mice received Cy5.5-labeled HA-NPs
2 h before their sacrifice. The excised aortic arches were fixed and
cut longitudinally to expose luminal endothelial surface. The samples
were stained and imaged en face by confocal and super-resolution
fluorescence microscopy. Furthermore, sections of aortic arches were
investigated by electron microscopy and correlative super-resolution
fluorescence and electron microscopy. (B) Representative confocal
microscopy data obtained by en face analysis of the
aortic arch of an Apoe–/– mouse after 6 weeks HFD. 3D visualization of an early atherosclerotic
lesion (left image; MAC-3: green, VEC: red, DAPI: blue, HA-NPs: cyan
blue). MIP of the luminal surface of the same atherosclerotic plaque
with the VEC-stained endothelium (middle image) and the corresponding
MIP of the entire plaque volume displaying HA-NP fluorescence (left
image). (C) Heterogeneity of intraplaque distribution of HA-NPs in
mice after 6-week HFD. The images represent luminal (upper), intermediate
(middle), and medial (lower) sections of atherosclerotic plaque. The
changes in the plaque cellularity can be deduced from DAPI staining
(blue, left panel), whereas the presence of vascular endothelium is
visualized by VEC staining (red, middle). In the right panel, the
intraplaque distribution of HA-NP fluorescence (cyan blue) can be
followed. It changes from relatively homogeneous at the plaque surface
to focal in the intermediate plaque compartment and finally disappears
at the media. (D) The HA-NP uptake (cyan blue, right) by intimal macrophages
(green, left). Upper panel displays single, presumably recently recruited
macrophages in the aortic intima, which contain high levels of internalized
HA-NPs. The middle and lower images display macrophages/foam cells
found superficially and in deeper compartments of established atherosclerotic
lesions, receptively. The former internalized efficiently HA-NPs,
whereas the latter had only HA-NP-positive cell margins.

En Face Visualization of
Atherosclerotic Plaques
and Plaque-Associated Hyaluronan Nanoparticles
To study the
relation between the plaque endothelial barrier integrity and HA-NP
accumulation, we performed en face confocal microscopy
of aortic samples. En face analysis enabled us to
assess multiple lesions per animal, that is, approximately 4 lesions/mouse,
and to acquire the entire plaque volume as well as the underlying
media. Figure 1B displays
the representative three-dimensional (3D) visualization of early atherosclerotic
plaque (left image) and the corresponding maximum intensity projection
(MIP) of the VEC-stained plaque endothelial surface (middle image)
and HA-NP uptake (right image). The latter image shows a high affinity
and selectivity of HA-NPs to atherosclerotic plaque foci. Based on
the image z-stacks, we could follow the intraplaque
distribution of HA-NPs. As presented in Figure 1C, HA-NP fluorescence was intense and rather
homogeneous at the luminal plaque side (upper panel). At intermediate
plaque sections, the HA-NP signal was more heterogeneous, that is,
high accumulation in acellular areas (free from DAPI staining) and
peri-cellular localization around large foam cells (macrophages that
engulfed lipids) comprising the core of the atherosclerotic plaques
(middle panel). In all studied early and advanced plaques, HA-NPs
penetrated throughout the entire plaque depth, however no HA-NP fluorescence
was detected in the underlying medial layer of the vessel wall (lower
panel). The HA-NP interaction with intimal macrophages was dependent
on the macrophage differentiation and their spatial localization in
the plaque. The upper panel in Figure 1D depicts single macrophages, presumably recently recruited
to the vessel intima, which had a high intracellular HA-NP signal
(upper panel). In established plaques, the superficial (close to the
vessel lumen) macrophages also internalized HA-NPs efficiently (middle
panel). In contrast, in deeper areas with foam cells, HA-NP were confined
to cell margins (lower panel). The macrophage-HA-NP overlay images
are presented in Figure S1A. Figure S2 contains additional images explaining
the imaging plane, plaque sectioning strategy, and spatial localization
of HA-NPs within the vessel wall and plaque microenvironment.

The current data need to be considered in the context of HA-NPs’
physicochemical and biological properties, which we reported previously
and are discussed below.18 HA-NPs, formulated
by reacting amine-functionalized oligomeric hyaluronan (70 kDa) (HA)
with cholanic ester, are approximately 90 nm in diameter, in a hydrated
state, and display a stable morphology under hydrolytic conditions,
as confirmed by atomic force, electron, and super-resolution microscopy.
We have demonstrated their 3-fold higher uptake by pro-inflammatory
(LPS-stimulated) macrophages, compared to naïve and anti-inflammatory
(IL4-stimulated) counterparts, which was not found for non-formulated
HA and dextran-based NPs. Furthermore, we investigated the involvement
of HA-binding receptors: CD44, ICAM-1, LYVE-1, and RHAMM, in the HA-NP
internalization. When endocytosis is impaired in vitro by performing the incubations at 4 °C, HA-NPs co-localized
to a strong degree with CD44 expression at the macrophage cell membrane
and only partially with ICAM-1 signal (Figure S3A,B). No co-localization was observed with either RHAMM or
LYVE-1 (Figure S3C,D). Although flow cytometry
analysis revealed no quantitative correlation between the expression
levels of HA-binding epitopes and HA-NP uptake efficacy, the competition
experiment with free HA showed a ca. 50% drop of
HA-NP signal in pro-inflammatory macrophages. Our data suggest that
both receptor-mediated and non-specific pathways are involved in the
HA-NP cell trafficking, but establishing the exact identity of the
target(s) and mechanism of delivery require further investigations.

In mice, 89Zr-labeled HA-NPs showed biexponential blood
clearance kinetics with a short and long half-life of 0.5 and 9 h,
respectively, and predominant accumulation in the liver and spleen
at 10–20% ID/g (total injected dose/g). In early atherosclerosis,
HA-NPs displayed a much stronger selectivity for lesion-associated
macrophages, 6- and 40-fold higher mean fluorescence intensity compared
to splenic and bone marrow macrophages, respectively. In contrast,
control poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)-NPs
had an approximately 3-fold higher affinity to splenic macrophages
compared to the aortic counterparts. The cellular uptake levels of
HA-NPs correlated significantly with the HA-binding efficacy and CD44
expression in aortic immune cell populations (Spearman’s correlation
coefficient of 0.62 and 0.74, respectively). In advanced lesions,
however, we found a decreasing role of HA receptor-HA-NP interactions
and a 4-fold lower HA-NP uptake in plaque-associated macrophages.
In a therapeutic study, we demonstrated that a 12-week treatment with
HA-NPs induces atheroprotective effects by decreasing the immune cell
infiltration in mouse aortic lesions, by approximately 50%. Furthermore,
PET imaging in atherosclerotic rabbits revealed a similar kinetic
behavior of 89Zr-HA-NP and their accumulation in aortic
macrophages.

Structural and Functional Integrity of Atherosclerotic
Endothelium
during Disease Progression
En face visualization
technique was essential to determine the junction architecture of
plaque-covering endothelium. The representative confocal MIPs of the
endothelial surface of atherosclerotic and normal vessel walls are
displayed in Figure 2A (upper and middle panels). In both early (6w HFD) and advanced
(12w HFD) atherosclerosis groups, the normal vessel wall, that is,
displaying no macrophage infiltration, was characterized by continuous
junctions, which indicate a tight endothelial barrier.28 In contrast, VEC expression pattern of plaque
endothelium was disorganized and frequently discontinued, indicative
of endothelial activation and remodeling.30 The quantification of VEC continuity confirmed the disrupted endothelial
junction organization in atherosclerotic lesions, that is, a ca. 20% lower VEC continuity compared to the normal vessel
endothelium (Figure 2A, upper, right panel). Furthermore, by using ground-state depletion
(GSD) super-resolution fluorescence microscopy, we could visualize
the endothelial junction ultrastructure, as shown in Figure 2B. The atherosclerotic endothelial
junctions displayed spaces between VEC units reaching up to 3 μm
(Figure 2B, lower panel).
In the normal endothelium, VEC molecules were tightly organized, and
rarely observed spaces between junction units were approximately 0.5
μm. The abnormal and thickened cell morphology and junction
abnormalities in atherosclerotic endothelium were further confirmed
by transmission electron microscopy (Figure 2C). Intriguingly, advanced plaques displayed
a small but significant degree of endothelial normalization, as deduced
from a significantly higher VEC continuity compared to early plaques
(Figure 2A, upper,
right panel). In line with this finding, advanced plaques were less
accessible to i.v. administered HA-NPs, which were found in 10 ±
5% of plaque area and was significantly lower compared to 30 ±
10% of early plaques (Figure 2A, right, lower panel). The representative MIPs of HA-NP fluorescence
in the entire plaque volume are displayed in Figure 2A (lower, left panel).

Figure 2 (A) Comparison of the
endothelial adherens junction architecture
and HA-NP uptake efficacy in atherosclerotic lesions and normal vessel
wall. Upper, left panel displays representative MIPs of VEC-stained
endothelial junctions (red) in early (6w HFD) and advanced (12w HFD)
atherosclerosis. The white frames depict regions of interest (ROIs)
that are enlarged in the middle panel. The corresponding MIPs of HA-NP
accumulation (cyan blue) in atherosclerotic plaques and a normal vessel
wall are shown in the lower panel. In the right section, the upper
chart displays the mean VEC continuity determined in the plaque and
normal endothelium, and the lower chart shows the HA-NP uptake efficacy
expressed as the fraction of HA-NP-positive plaque area. Gray and
black bars represent early and late atherosclerosis, respectively.
(B) The comparison of endothelial junction architecture of mouse aorta
as visualized by epifluorescence microscopy (left and middle image)
and GSD super-resolution fluorescence microscopy (right image) (upper
panel). The lower images are representative for the ultrastructural
organization of VEC-based junctions in atherosclerotic and normal
aortic endothelium. In the example of atherosclerotic endothelial
junction, large gaps between VEC molecules can be observed (left).
In contrast, a normal aortic endothelium has tightly organized VEC
(right). The right chart displays the largest intrajunction distance
in the atherosclerotic endothelium compared to that of normal vessel
wall (n = 13). (C) In the upper panel, TEM images
display the altered endothelial cell morphology in atherosclerotic
(left image) compared to normal endothelium (right image). Bar chart
shows the endothelial cell thickness, measured in the nuclear cutoff
of endothelial cells (bottom panel) (n = 44 and n = 29 for the plaque and normal vessel wall, respectively).
L: lumen, E: elastin, ECM: extracellular matrix, M: media. In all
charts, bars represent mean ± SD. Symbol “*” represents
a significant difference at p < 0.05.

The negative impact of plaque progression on the
accumulation efficacy
of HA-NPs was also seen in our previous work,18 where we reported a 6-fold lower uptake of HA-NPs in advanced plaque-associated
macrophages compared to early lesions, measured by flow cytometry.
A similar pattern was observed by autoradiography of mouse aortas
after administration of 89Zr-labeled HA-NPs. Previously,
we attributed these differences to lower macrophage activity in advanced
atherosclerosis. However, in the light of present findings, endothelial
barrier remodeling might be an important contributing factor. Accordingly,
early atherosclerotic events are associated with more severe endothelial
barrier disruption compared to the advanced disease stage. As presented
in Figure S1B, endothelial junction abnormalities
were also observed in the presence of single intimal macrophages.
Possibly, the observed endothelial normalization in advanced plaques
is due to the endothelial adaptation to HFD-induced chronic inflammation.31 Additionally, an increased collagen production
and smooth muscle cell proliferation, which occur in advanced plaques,
might have a stabilizing effect on the endothelial barrier. A similar
observation has previously been reported in atherosclerotic rabbits
by Friedman and Byers et al.,32 who compared different HFD regimes. They concluded that
excessive permeability of aortic intima ceases after fibrous healing
or maturation of atherosclerotic plaque. Detailed analysis of magnetic
resonance imaging study by Phinikaridou et al.,33 which probed atherosclerotic wall permeability
at 8- and 12-weeks HFD by using an albumin-binding contrast agent,
leads to similar conclusion. The vessel wall with early lesions displayed
a similar mean post-contrast relaxation rate R1 compared to advanced
lesions, which, considering a dramatically different lesion size,
is indicative of a higher endothelial permeability in early atherosclerosis.
This was also supported by the levels of extravasated albumin. Notably,
however, there is a large fraction of human culprit lesions with endothelial
erosion,34 which implies progressive endothelial
damage.35 In this context, endothelial
normalization strategies appear as an attractive therapeutic option.

In the current study, we quantitatively evaluated HA-NP plaque
accumulation at 4 h post-administration (10 mice/group, Figure S4A). At this time point, the majority
(more than 75%) of injected HA-NPs was cleared from the blood.18 This short circulation period resulted in the
mean radiant efficiency (p/s/cm2/sr) of 6.6 × 107 ± 7.9 × 107 (early atherosclerosis)
and 6.7 × 107 ± 1.3 × 107 (advanced
atherosclerosis), which was significantly higher compared to the baseline
signal in non-injected mice, that is, 3.2 × 106 ±
6.1 × 106 (p = 0.012 and p = 0.005 in early and advanced atherosclerosis, respectively).
Previously, we performed corresponding experiments after allowing
HA-NP to circulate for 24 h, at which low, but detectable levels of
HA-NPs are still present in the circulation.18 In mice on a short-term diet, the prolonged circulation time did
not result in a significant increase in HA-NP plaque accumulation
compared to the 4 h time point, yielding 7.9 × 107 ± 3.1 × 107 fluorescence intensity (p = 0.86, compared to 4 h post-administration). In contrast,
in animals with large advanced lesions, we did observe a plaque accumulation
dependence with circulation time. Namely, the HA-NP signal has risen
to 1.3 × 108 ± 4.0 × 107 (p =
0.0014, compared to 4 h time point).

The early atherosclerosis
data indicate fast extravasation and
plaque accumulation. Moreover, flow cytometry measurements uncovered
efficient intraplaque redistribution of HA-NPs. Namely, we found a
3-fold higher level of HA-NP engulfment in plaque-associated macrophages
at 24 h18 compared to 4 h time point (Figure S4B). We attribute this phenomenon to
a highly permeable endothelial barrier, small plaque size, HA and
proteoglycan-rich extracellular matrix,36 and high phagocytic activity of resident macrophages. In contrast,
large advanced plaques adopt a “tumor-like” accumulation
profile, which benefits from long circulating NPs. In the latter case,
both collagen and smooth muscle cells, which underlay endothelium
and form up to 40–50% of plaque microenvironment, create structural
barriers and slow down extravasating NPs. Similarly, in tumor lesions,
the tissue morphology as well as heterogeneous blood supply were proposed
as primary limiting factors of NP trafficking.37

Using the same experimental setup as described above,
we visualized
plaque neovasculature, that is, VEC-positive tubes running through
the plaque (Figure S5). These were however
rarely observed, that is, in ca. 10% of all lesions,
in both the early and advanced atherosclerosis group, and in line
with our CD31-based microvascular readout in aortic arch sections
(Figure S6). Our data coincide with the
previous findings by Moulton et al.,38 who also found a low incidence of lesion neovascularization
in Apoe–/– mice. Interestingly,
the plaque neovasculature that we observed was exclusively of the
macrovascular origin, as deduced from its connectivity to the plaque-covering
aortic endothelium and the microvessel-free media. Traditionally,
the adventitial microvasculature was associated with angiogenic activation
in atherosclerosis. The invasion of adventitial microvasculature into
the lesion site has previously been demonstrated in several human
histological studies.39,40 In atherosclerotic mice, intravital
microscopy study by Eriksson et al.,41 and microcomputed tomography study by Langheinrich et al.42 demonstrated the microvascular
enhancement in aortic adventitia associated with advanced atherosclerosis.
Notably, however, both papers do not provide selective information
on the lesion microvascular status, except for qualitative light or
electron microscopy. On the other hand, Rademakers et al.43 showed that atherosclerosis-enhanced
adventitial microvessels had no connectivity with the intraplaque
neovasculature, which is in line with our findings. The advantage
of our experimental setup in assessing the plaque microvascular status
is the ability to visualize the entire plaque volume as well as the
underlying tissue layers. The limitation might be, however, the penetration
efficacy of the anti-VEC antibody through the tissue sample, which
might be restricted in large, complex lesions. Previously, the relevance
of plaque microvasculature has also been investigated in the context
of the immune cell trafficking. Based on intravital microscopy, Eriksson et al.41 proposed the adventitial
microvasculature as a primary trafficking pathway. However, Swirski et al.44 showed by histology
that freshly recruited Ly-6Chigh monocytes are localized
at the luminal plaque side, which corroborates our findings.

Trafficking
Pathway(s) of Hyaluronan Nanoparticle to Atherosclerotic
Lesions
The trafficking of systemically administered nanoparticles
to atherosclerotic lesions is poorly understood. Several aspects need
to be considered. First, both the macrovascular endothelium covering
the plaque surface as well as intraplaque microvasculature might be
involved. As demonstrated in the previous section, incidence of neovascularization
in mouse lesions was very low, and therefore the luminal endothelial
pathway was our primary focus. Second, NPs either can enter the plaque
in their free form or can first be taken up by blood phagocytes and
subsequently carried to the plaque. In our previous study, we observed
a dramatically lower association of HA-NPs with newly recruited monocytes
compared to differentiated plaque-associated macrophages,18 which supports the former hypothesis. Furthermore,
the transfer of NPs across the endothelium can occur via either transcellular or paracellular pathways, which are both potentially
relevant in activated endothelium.45

To address the aforementioned aspects of nanoparticle trafficking
to atherosclerotic lesions, we first examined the luminal plaque surface
by confocal microscopy. As displayed in Figure 3A, VEC-stained endothelial junctions (red,
left) were enriched with HA-NP fluorescence (cyan blue, middle). However,
as shown in the ROI (Figure 3A, fourth image), the spatial resolution was insufficient
to certainly identify the extra- or intracellular localization of
HA-NPs. To overcome this limitation, we investigated the HA-NP-endothelium
interactions by two-color super-resolution GSD microscopy, which enabled
us to spatially resolve HA-NPs and to assess them in context of the
endothelial junction nanoarchitecture. Figure 3B displays en face organization
of VEC molecules (red) in 18 × 18 μm2 field
of view (first image) of mouse aorta after 6-week HFD. VEC units were
loosely arranged within the endothelial cell junction (Figure 3B, first and last images),
which is in line with the Figure 2B data. HA-NPs (cyan blue, second image), appearing
as spherical structures of ∼100 nm in diameter, were predominantly
associated with junctions, as deduced from the overlay image (third
and fourth images). Notably, they did not co-localize with VEC units,
but were confined within VEC-negative junction areas (fourth image).
Based on the analysis of multiple endothelial areas (n = 13) visualized in two different mouse aortas, paracellular and
intracellular localizations were determined for 75% and 25% of detected
HA-NPs, respectively (Figure S1C). This
dominant junctional pathway of HA-NPs led to their efficient extravasation
into the plaque interior, as observed 24 h after HA-NP administration
(Figure S6, upper panel), and the engulfment
by plaque-associated macrophages, as demonstrated in our previous
study.18

Figure 3 (A) Confocal microscopy images of VEC-stained
endothelial junctions
(red, first image) and HA-NPs (cyan blue, second image) at the surface
of an atherosclerotic plaque. The co-distribution of HA-NP and VEC
can be deduced from the overlay image (third image) and enlarged ROI
depicted by the white frame (fourth image). (B) Super-resolution images
of VEC organization in endothelial junctions (red, first image) and
spatially resolved single HA-NPs (cyan blue, second image) on the
atherosclerotic plaque surface. As shown in the overlay image (third
image) and enlarged ROI indicated by the white frame (fourth image),
HA-NPs are localized predominantly in the cell junction. (C) CLEM
of atherosclerotic plaque section obtained 15 min after HA-NP-Cy5.5
administration. Morphological details of the plaque microenvironment
were assessed by TEM (first image). The following components can be
identified: vessel lumen (L), endothelial cells (EC), extracellular
matrix (ECM), and macrophages/foam cells (FC). Super-resolution GSD
microscopy was used for the localization of HA-NPs (second image).
As deduced from the overlay image (third image), HA-NPs (red) are
abundant in the ECM, at the luminal plaque side. The fourth image
shows the enlarged interface area of lumen (L), endothelium (hypointense
layer), and extracellular matrix (ECM). (D) In enlarged CLEM image
ROIs, endothelial cells displayed no intracellular HA-NP accumulations
(first image). Interestingly, within the endothelial layer, we can
observe sparsely distributed rows of HA-NPs (indicated with arrow
heads in second and third image), suggesting the paracellular/junctional
trafficking of HA-NPs. Fourth image displays a superficially localized
(close to the aortic lumen) macrophage/foam cell, which is surrounded
by HA-NP-rich ECM and contains some internalized HA-NPs. The presented
data were acquired in aortas of three different mice after 6-week
HFD.

Correlative light (GSD) and electron
microscopy (CLEM) is a powerful
bimodal microscopy technique, which we used to visualize HA-NPs in
the plaque microenvironment, at nanoscale spatial resolution (Figure 3C). Cryo-sections
of atherosclerotic aortas were first analyzed by GSD and subsequently
by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to acquire a HA-NP signal
(Figure 3C, second
image) and plaque morphology (Figure 3C, first image), respectively. The overlay image displays
the intraplaque localization of HA-NPs 15 min after i.v. injection
(Figure 3C, third image).
The imaged superficial plaque area is shown at a lower magnification
in the Figure S1D. HA-NPs were detected
exclusively at the luminal plaque side, and they were confined predominantly
to the extracellular matrix (Figure 3C, third and fourth images). The enlarged areas of
CLEM image are present in the Figure 3D. The endothelial cells displayed no internalization
of HA-NPs (Figure 3D, first image). However, at several sites of the endothelial layer,
HA-NPs formed narrow queues (Figure 3D, second and third images), which imply the pericellular
transendothelial trafficking of HA-NPs. Unfortunately, semi-thin sections
of 200 nm, which we used for CLEM analysis, were too thick to precisely
identify endothelial junctions (Figure S1D), but necessary for the HA-NP visualization. Interestingly, already
at this early time point after HA-NP administration (15 min), we could
observe some initial NP internalization in foam cells/macrophages,
localized in close vicinity of the endothelium (Figure 3D, fourth image).

To investigate the
contribution of atherosclerotic microvasculature
in NP accumulation at lesions, confocal microscopy was used. In Figure S5B, we show an example of plaque with
an extensive microvascular network. These fine vessels were found
to be positive for HA-NP fluorescence, which indicates that they actively
contribute to the NP distribution and extravasation (Figure S5, lower panel). However, considering the low incidence
of microvasculature-positive plaques (Figure S5A, Figure S6B), we believe that the overall
impact of microvasculature in NP trafficking to mouse atherosclerotic
lesions is limited compared to the macrovascular endothelium.

Nanoparticle-facilitated targeting of atherosclerotic lesions has
been demonstrated in several preclinical studies.46−48 However, few
studies focused on the specific pathways of nanoparticle trafficking
to plaques. Previously, our colleagues have investigated the mechanism
of liposomal targeting of atherosclerotic lesions in New Zealand white
rabbits.21 The obtained results indicated
a dominant role of adventitia-originating microvasculature, which
is in contrast to our mouse findings. We attribute these discrepancies
to the biological context, namely, the animal model and lesion phenotype.
The previously investigated rabbit lesions were highly angiogenic,
with presumably absent or injured luminal endothelium, which is a
consequence of balloon injury.49 In contrast,
mouse atherosclerotic lesions had an “intact” luminal
endothelium and rarely present microvasculature (Figure 2, Figures S5 and S6). Sluimer et al.50 demonstrated a large variability in the vascularization
of human atheromas, with approximately 50 microvessels per mm2 at hotspots. 60% of those had opened endothelial junctions,
as determined by TEM. On the other hand, several scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) studies on human carotid artery atherosclerosis revealed
a number of luminal endothelial abnormalities, including endothelial
cell shape irregularities, loss of endothelial connectivity, and endothelial
erosion/denudation,51,52 which is in line with our findings.
Possibly, both the macrovascular endothelium and plaque microvasculature
are relevant trafficking pathways for the immune cells and, potentially,
for nanomedicine in human atherosclerosis.

Considering the HA-NP
characteristics, that is, the diameter of
approximately 90 nm, negative charge, and relatively long and biexponential
blood clearance kinetics, which were studied in the previous paper,18 we believe that our findings can be extrapolated
to many of the previously proposed nanoparticle platforms. Although
Poller et al. demonstrated that 10 nm-large citrate-coated
iron oxide nanoparticles were internalized by the endothelial cell
lining of atherosclerotic lesions, the authors do not report whether
this was the exclusive route.25 The virtual
absence of HA-NP-endothelial cell interactions, demonstrated in Figure 3 and Figure S6, is of special interest. Hyaluronan
(HA), which creates a structural backbone of HA-NPs, is a biologically
active polysaccharide and a ligand of ICAM-1, an important endothelial
marker involved in leukocyte adhesion.45 Molecular recognition of ICAM-1 is one of the leading concepts of
endothelium-targeted drug delivery and diagnostics.53 Despite the previously reported high binding affinity of
HA to ICAM-1, KD of 9 × 10–12,54 we did not observe co-localization
of ICAM-1 and HA-NPs in macrophages (Figure S3B). We anticipate that HA functionalization and cross-linking may
have partially affected its receptor-binding affinity compared to
non-modified HA, as we have previously shown for CD44.18 In the latter case, however, a high expression
of CD44, >10-fold higher compared to ICAM-1 in macrophages, sustained
specific interactions with modified HA. Noteworthy, previously proposed
HA-based or -functionalized NPs were also employed for CD44 targeting.55 We have also hypothesized that HA modifications
are responsible for a relatively long circulation time of HA-NPs,
by decreasing their recognition by the liver hyaluronan receptor for
endocytosis (HARE). Considering the ICAM-1 internalization half-time
between 5 and 20 min,56,57 our readout time points of 15
min and 2 h post-administration were suitable for the identification
of intracellular NPs, and yet only minute endothelial cell-association
was observed (Figure 3B, Figures S1C and S6C). We believe that
the transcellular endothelial pathway-dependent nanostrategies are
attractive, especially in advanced plaques. As demonstrated by Michaelis et al. in the blood–brain barrier, apolipoprotein
E can strongly enhance endothelial transfer of nanoparticles.58 The transcellular endothelial route is also
relevant for apolipoprotein A-containing high-density lipoprotein
(HDL), which represents a leading concept of nanoparticle design in
our group.59,60

Metabolic Modulation of
Endothelial Barrier in Atherosclerosis
Inspired by recent
findings on the tumor vascular normalization
by a small-molecule glycolysis inhibitor, 3PO,19 we studied the feasibility of this therapeutic strategy
in atherosclerosis. (2E)-3-(3-Pyridinyl)-1-(4-pyridinyl)-2-propen-1-one
(3PO) exerts its antiglycolytic activity by inhibiting the 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase
3 (PFKFB3) enzyme, which acts as a coenzyme in the glycolysis pathway
(Figure 4A, left panel).
Since glycolysis plays a major role in the endothelial cell and macrophage
metabolism, our in vitro and in vivo experiments addressed both endothelial and inflammatory aspects
of 3PO therapy. The glucose uptake and Glut1 expression were used
as markers of the glycolytic activity in cells and atherosclerotic
mouse aortas. The former was probed by a fluorescent glucose analogue,
2-NBDG, which mimics the clinically applied 18F-fluorodeoxygluose
(18F-FDG).61 The endothelial
barrier remodeling was investigated in vitro by VEC
and F-actin stress fiber analysis and in vivo by
using HA-NP-based permeability readout. The therapeutic outcome was
validated by histology.

Figure 4 (A) Schematic representation of the glycolysis
pathway, in which
3PO inhibits activity of PFKFB3 enzyme (left panel). The right panel
displays in vitro effects of different concentrations
of 3PO (1–20 μM for 24 h) on the uptake of a fluorescent
glucose analogue, 2-NBDG, in HUVEC and HMDM. Pure culture medium was
used as a control and 0.03% DMSO as a vehicle. TNF (10 ng/mL) and
LPS (100 ng/mL) were applied as pro-inflammatory co-stimuli of HUVEC
and HMDM, respectively. 2-NBDG was used at a concentration of 100
μM for 30 min. (B) Representative immunofluorescence microscopy
images of HUVEC treated with either 10 ng/mL of TNF (left) or 10 ng/mL
of TNF and 10 μM of 3PO (TNF + 3PO, right) for 24 h. The upper
panel displays VEC staining of endothelial junctions. White frames
depict ROIs enlarged in the second panel. TNF treatment resulted in
vague and frequently discontinued junctional VEC, which was effectively
suppressed by 3PO co-incubation. Third panel from the top shows F-actin
staining of cytoskeleton. The stress fiber formation was more apparent
after TNF treatment compared to TNF + 3PO. The bottom panel displays
an overlay image of VEC (red) and F-actin (green) images. In the charts
below, the quantified VEC continuity and F-actin fiber length are
compared between the TNF- and TNF + 3PO-treated HUVEC. (C) In vivo effects of glycolysis inhibition with 3PO in atherosclerotic
mice. A 6-week-long therapy (3 × /week 25 mg/kg intraperitonealy)
was followed by an i.v. administration of Cy5.5-labeled HA-NPs and
2-NBDG to determine the endothelial barrier integrity and glycolytic
activity, respectively. Two upper panels display representative IVIS
images of HA-NP and 2-NBDG signal in aortic arches form a non-treated
(control, left) and 3PO-treated mouse (right). The charts in the right
compare the average radiant efficacy in aortic arches between the
study groups. Two lower image series represent histological data on
macrophage content (third panel from the top, MAC-3-stained, brown)
and glucose transporter Glut1 expression (cyan blue, bottom panel)
in aortic root plaques. The corresponding charts display the quantified
percentages of MAC-3-positive plaque area and mean Glut1 fluorescence
intensity (arbitrary units). (D ) Representative images of atherosclerotic
plaque section with nuclear expression of HIF-1α. Left image
shows plaque morphology with MAC-3-stained macrophages (red), alpha
smooth muscle actin (αSMA)-stained smooth muscle cells (green),
and DAPI-stained nuclei (blue). The right image displays the corresponding
HIF-1α staining (cyan blue). Arrowheads indicate the nuclear
localization of HIF-1α signal. In (A, C, D), bars represent
mean ± standard deviation. In (B), the charts display mean ±
standard error of the mean; control: white bars; 3PO-therapy: black
bars ( n = 10). Symbol “*” represents
a significant difference at p < 0.05.

First, we compared the efficacy of glycolysis inhibition
by 3PO
in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) and human monocyte-derived
macrophages (HMDM), which represent relevant cellular targets in atherosclerosis
(Figure 4A, middle
and right panels). The cells were treated with 3PO (1–20 μM)
for 24 h. Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) were used as pro-inflammatory co-stimuli in HUVEC and HMDM,
respectively, to mimic the inflammatory activation in atherosclerosis.62 In HUVEC, 3PO significantly and dose-dependently
reduced 2-NBDG uptake, measured by flow cytometry (Figure 4A, middle panel). The cells
treated with 10 μM 3PO displayed an approximately 25% lower
median fluorescence intensity (MFI) compared to the control. This
was associated with a significantly reduced Glut1 expression (Figure S7A, left). In contrast, the uptake of
2-NBDG in HMDM was not affected significantly by any of the tested
3PO concentrations (Figure 4A, right panel). At the same time, we found a small but significant
reduction in Glut1 expression (Figure S7A, right). Similar intercellular differences in the response to 3PO
were observed for HUVEC and HMDM without pro-inflammatory co-stimulation
(Figure S7B).

Subsequently, we studied
the effects of 3PO in an in vitro endothelial barrier
model. A confluent HUVEC monolayer was treated
with 10 μM 3PO and co-stimulated with TNF-α, an inflammatory
cytokine, which results in the endothelial junction63,64 and cytoskeleton rearrangement.65 The
lengths of VEC junctions and F-actin stress fibers were used as quantifiers
of these effects. 3PO significantly inhibited TNF-α-induced
endothelial activation, as demonstrated by both parameters (Figure 4B). It increased
the VEC continuity, while decreasing the length of F-actin stress
fibers, both by approximately 10%.

To determine the effects
of 3PO in atherosclerosis, Apoe–/– mice underwent treatment
in combination with a HFD. 3PO was administered intraperitoneally
three times per week at the dose of 25 mg/kg, as described previously.66 After 6 weeks of treatment, the mice were injected
with Cy5.5-labeled HA-NPs and 2-NBDG, 2 h and 15 min before the sacrifice,
respectively. The accumulation efficacy of both probes was analyzed ex vivo by the IVIS imaging system. Figure S8 depicts a schematic overview of these therapeutic
experiments. The 6-week therapeutic regimen in developing atherosclerosis
was motivated by our findings on a significantly higher endothelial
barrier dysfunction in early plaques compared to advanced counterparts,
which undergo a natural endothelial normalization (Figure 2).

Representative IVIS
images of aortic arches with HA-NP and 2-NBDG
fluorescence are shown in Figure 4C (upper two panels), while the images of whole aortas
can be found in Figure S9A. HA-NPs produced
a patchy fluorescence signal, with hot spots at atherosclerosis-prone
sites, that is, aortic arch and bifurcations, indicating selective
plaque association. The quantification of HA-NP fluorescence intensity
in lesion-rich aortic arches revealed an approximately 20% lower mean
radiant fluorescence intensity in 3PO-treated mice compared to control
counterparts. However, both groups displayed a large spread, resulting
in no significant differences (Figure 4C, upper panel, and Figure S10). In contrast, 3PO treatment led to a ca. 30% higher
2-NBDG uptake compared to non-treated animals (Figure 4C, second panel from the top). Significantly
enhanced mean radiance efficacy was found in both the aortic arches
as well as entire aortas (Figure S9A).
The aortic distribution of 2-NBDG signal was much more diffuse compared
to HA-NPs, which might be due to its low-molecular weight as well
as uptake by non-plaque cellular components of vessel wall.

Previously, the enhanced glucose uptake in atherosclerotic vessel
wall was associated with an increased inflammatory burden and plaque
progression.67 To verify this relation,
we determined the macrophage content in aortic root plaques of the
same animals that underwent IVIS experiments. MAC-3-positive plaque
area was significantly lower in the 3PO-treated group compared to
the control (Figure 4C, third panel), that is, ∼50% versus ∼70%
for treated and non-treated mice, respectively. Although we found
no significant differences in the plaque size, both the collagen and
smooth muscle cell content, which are considered as markers of a stable
plaque phenotype,68 were significantly
increased in the 3PO-treated mice (Figure S9B). The necrosis fraction was low (5%) and similar in both the 3PO
and control groups (Figure S9B).

The revealed mismatch between the glycolytic activity and inflammatory
readout stimulated us to investigate the atherosclerotic plaque expression
of the primary glucose transporter Glut1 (Figure 4C, lower panel) and hypoxia marker HIF-1α
in atherosclerotic lesions (Figure 4D). The mean plaque expression of Glut1 was ∼25%
higher in 3PO-treated mice compared to the control group (Figure 4C, lower, right panel).
The same trend was observed when Glut1 was determined separately for
the macrophage and smooth muscle cell population (Figure S9C). The analysis of nuclear translocation of HIF-1α
in plaque-associated macrophages, which is explained in Figure S11, revealed on average 30% more HIF-1α-positive
macrophage nuclei induced by 3PO. Notably, a large spread was observed,
especially in the control group, which resulted in no significant
differences.

Six-week-long antiglycolytic therapy induced no
major side effects.
3PO-treated mice had a slightly lower weight gain compared the control
group, as shown in Figure S12A. The major
body organs displayed normal morphology (Figure S12B). In one 3PO-treated mouse, renal abnormalities were found,
including immune cell infiltrations in the renal capsule and areas
of necrosis. We anticipate that this might be a local effect of intraperitoneal
3PO therapy rather than its systemic manifestation. The comprehensive
hematological and metabolic analyses of blood after a 3-week therapeutic
regimen (three injections per week) revealed similar parameter values
in both control and 3PO-treated mice (Table S1).

Glycolysis plays a key role in endothelial activation and
inflammation.69 Therefore, the reprogramming
of atherosclerotic
plaque metabolism appears as a promising therapeutic strategy. Previously,
3PO has extensively been studied in the context of endothelial metabolic
modulation. In the influential studies from the Carmeliet group, the
authors demonstrated partial and transient inhibition of endothelial
glycolysis by 3PO70 and its normalizing
effect on tumor vasculature.19 In mouse
atherosclerosis, 3PO significantly decreased glycolytic flux markers,
that is, FDG-based target-to-background signal and Fru-2,6-P2, and pro-inflammatory mediators, that is, TNF-α and CCL2.71 Our study shows favorable effects of 3PO on
the atherosclerotic plaque morphology, including a significantly decreased
macrophage content (Figure 4C) and an increased collagen fraction (Figure S9B). However, the macroscopic readout of endothelial
barrier function by HA-NPs revealed no significant response to 3PO,
although the endothelial normalization trend could be observed (Figure 4C). This can potentially
be attributed to a large distribution of plaque size, which we accounted
in both study groups, that is, differences in the average plaque area
were up to 4-fold (Figures S9 and S10).
Notably, however, we found no correlation between the plaque size
and HA-NP uptake in either 3PO-treated or control animals (Figure S10), which suggests a high natural variability
of endothelial barrier function in atherosclerotic mice. We believe
that this was a key limitation of our in vivo therapy
readout, particularly, if we consider rather subtle in vitro endothelial effects of 3PO (Figure 4A,B). Alternatively to the endothelial barrier remodeling,
glycolytic silencing of atherosclerotic endothelium might modulate
other endothelial functions, such as the interaction with immune cells,
which we do not investigate in our paper.

Our second important
readout addressed the metabolic effects of
3PO therapy. Surprisingly, 3PO-treated aortas displayed a 30% higher
2-NBDG uptake compared to control vessels, although histological analysis
revealed a significantly decreased macrophage burden (Figure 4C). The latter has previously
been considered as a primary source of glycolytic activity in atherosclerosis
and cancer.72,73 However, the mismatch between
the glycolytic and inflammatory profile of an atherosclerotic vessel
wall has been foreseen by Folco et al.,74 who pointed to hypoxia as an important propagator
of glycolysis in both macrophages and smooth muscle cells. Accordingly,
we found a significant overexpression of Glut1 in these two cell populations
(Figure S9C) and a considerably increased
nuclear expression of HIF-1α in macrophages (Figure 4D), which suggest a role of
hypoxia in the 3PO-induced glycolytic activation. This may explain
the enhanced 2-NBDG uptake, yet it seems paradoxical to the mechanism
of 3PO action. Considering our in vitro findings
on the 3PO selectivity toward endothelial cells (Figure 4A), the plaque endothelium
might be the primary target for 3PO in atherosclerosis. It needs to
be stressed that the acquired 2-NBDG signal originated predominantly
from the macrophages and smooth muscle cells, the two largest cell
populations in atherosclerosis plaques, while the contribution of
endothelial monolayer is likely negligible. We anticipate that 3PO-induced
endothelial silencing, although not readily demonstrated in our mouse
experiments, may have limited the plaque accessibility to oxygen and
nutrients, eventually leading to hypoxia and glycolytic activation
in plaque-associated macrophages and smooth muscle cells. From a general
perspective, our results shed light on the relation between the inflammation
and metabolism and on the feasibility of metabolic readout for the
inflammatory burden assessment.

Conclusions
In
conclusion, we demonstrated significant structural abnormalities
in the macrovascular endothelium covering mouse atherosclerotic plaques,
which correlated with the plaque targeting efficacy of HA-NPs. Interestingly,
advancement of the plaque had a positive effect on the endothelial
junction architecture and, consequently, a negative impact on the
HA-NP plaque accumulation. By using two-color super-resolution microscopy
and correlative light and electron microscopy, we traced HA-NPs in
endothelial junctions and plaque microenvironment, respectively. We
found that HA-NPs enter the plaque via endothelial
junctions, and they subsequently distribute throughout the ECM to
be eventually engulfed by plaque-associated macrophages. Finally,
our therapeutic data show that a subtle normalization of endothelial
barrier function, deduced from the aortic HA-NP retention, coincides
with a significant modulation of inflammatory and metabolic activity
in atherosclerotic lesions.

Methods
Hyaluronan
Nanoparticle Preparation
Hyaluronan nanoparticles
(HA-NPs) were prepared as previously described.18 In short, HA was dissolved in 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic
acid (MES) buffer and activated with 1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide
hydrochloride (EDC) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA) and N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide (sulfo-NHS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Subsequently, ethylenediamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri,
United States) was added, and the reaction mixture was stirred at
room temperature overnight. The amine-functionalized HA (HA-NH2) was purified by dialysis against ultrapure water and ethanol
precipitation. Afterward, the obtained product was lyophilized. NHS
ester of cholanic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) was prepared by a reaction
of cholanic acid with N,N′-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (Sigma-Aldrich) in dry dimethylformamide
(Sigma-Aldrich). The lyophilized HA-NH2 was dissolved in
0.1 N NaHCO3 pH 9, after which the cholanic ester solution
was added drop-by-drop and stirred overnight. Purification of the
product was performed by filtration and dialysis against ultrapure
water. The final product was freeze-dried and stored at −20
°C.

Fluorescent labeling of the nanoparticles was performed
by a conjugation of cyanine5.5-NHS ester (Lumiprobe GmbH, Hannover,
Germany) to the remaining primary amine groups on the HA. Cyanine5.5-NHS
ester was dissolved in dry DMF and added to a solution of HA-NPs in
0.1 N NaHCO3 pH 8.5 (40% (v/v) DMF) at a 8:1 molar ratio
dye to residual NH2 groups and stirred for 4 h at room
temperature. Unconjugated dye was removed by ethanol precipitation
and dialyses against ultrapure water.

Animal Experiments
Eight week-old Apoe–/– mice (Charles River
Laboratories, Beerse, Belgium) were fed with a high-fat diet (HFD)
(TD.88137, Envigo, Alconbury Huntington, UK) for either 6 or 12 weeks
(n = 5/group) to induce early and advanced atherosclerotic
lesions, respectively. After the diet period, the mice received an
injection of Cy5.5-labeled HA-NPs (25 mg/kg) via the
tail vein. Two h after injection, the mice were sacrificed and perfused
with PBS. The aortic arch samples were used for both the confocal
and GSD microscopy experiments. For electron microscopy and correlative
light and electron microscopy, two atherosclerotic mice were perfused
with McDowell Trump’s fixative (4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and
1% glutaraldehyde).

In the therapeutic study, 8 week-old Apoe–/– mice on
a HFD received either no treatment (control) or three times per week
intraperitoneal injection of 3PO (Sigma-Aldrich; 25 mg/kg) (metabolic
therapy) (n = 10). After 6 weeks of treatment and/or diet, the mice
received i.v. injection of Cy5.5-HA-NPs and 2-NBDG, a fluorescent
glucose analogue (Invitrogen, ThermoFisher Scientific), 2 h and 15
min before the sacrifice, respectively. The sacrificed animals were
perfused with PBS, which was followed by excision of the entire aorta,
that is, aortic arch and descending aorta including the renal arterial
branching. Subsequently, the aortas were imaged using the IVIS imaging
system, whereas aortic roots were processed for histology.

All
mouse experiments were performed in accordance with protocols
approved by the Animal Experiment Committee of Academic Medical Center
in Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

En Face Analysis of Aortic Samples by Confocal
Microscopy
The aortas harvested for en face immunofluorescence microscopy experiments were fixed in 4% PFA in
PBS (supplemented with 1 mM CaCl2 and 0.5 mM MgCl2) for 12 min at room temperature (RT). Aortic arches, which are the
most prone to atherosclerotic plaque development, were taken for further
analysis. First, the carotid and subclavian arteries were cut out
of the aortas. The aortic arch was sectioned into pieces and immobilized
with 0.1 mm diameter pins on a Petri dish coated with a silicone layer,
with the endothelium facing up. Subsequently, the samples were permeabilized
with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 min and blocked for 30 min with
2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS. Afterward, the vessels were
incubated with goat antimouse VEC (Santa Cruz; 1:100 dilution; clone
C-19) and rat antimouse CD107b (BD Pharmingen; dilution 1:100; clone
M3/84) primary antibodies for 1 h at RT, then washed with 0.5% BSA
in PBS, and incubated with the Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated chicken
antigoat and Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated donkey antirat (both Thermo
Fisher Scientific; dilution 1:100) secondary antibodies for an additional
1 h at RT. The cell nuclei were visualized using 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) at the concentration of 2 μg/mL for 10 min. After staining,
the vessels were mounted in a drop of mowiol on microscope slides
with the endothelium facing up. A glass coverslip was then placed
on the top and gently pressed to flatten the tissue.

Imaging
was performed by using Leica TCS SP8 confocal laser scanning microscope
(Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany), equipped with CS2 63×/1.40
oil objective, 405 nm UV diode and 470–670 nm Argon lasers.
The localization of atherosclerotic plaques was based on intimal MAC-3-positive
macrophages. In each aortic arch, we visualized approximately four
lesions, for which image Z-stacks were acquired. Quantification of
VE-cadherin (VEC) continuity was performed using ImageJ. First, VEC
images were processed with a Gaussian Blur filter with a radius of
1.5, which was followed by the image binarization and skeletonization.
Subsequently, the length of VEC skeleton branches was calculated,
and the data were imported into Prism5 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla,
CA), with a minimum cutoff of 3 μm. The mean length of VEC branching
per lesion was used for the statistical comparison of VEC continuity.
To determine the efficacy of HA-NP accumulation in the plaque, first,
the plaque area was defined in each Z-stack plane.
Subsequently, an intensity threshold was manually set to select high-intensity
Cy5.5-HA-NP-positive pixels. From the binary image, the HA-NP area
was determined and normalized to the plaque area. The mean percentage
of HA-NP-positive plaque area, calculated from all plaque focal planes,
was used as a quantifier of the plaque accessibility to HA-NPs.

En Face Analysis of Aortic Samples by Super-Resolution
Fluorescence Microscopy
Samples used for super-resolution
fluorescence microscopy underwent the same fixation protocol as the
samples used for confocal microscopy imaging (4% PFA; 12 min). The
samples were stained using rat antimouse VEC (Biolegend, San Diego,
USA; dilution 1:100; clone BV13) primary antibody, for 1 h, in combination
with a goat antirat Alexa Fluor 555-conjugated secondary antibody
(Thermo Fischer Scientific; dilution 1:100) for an additional 1 h.
The aortic sample was placed on an ultraclean coverslip and covered
with a drop of imaging buffer (50 μL mercaptoethylamine (MEA;
Sigma-Aldrich) 0.5 M, pH 8–8.5; 3 μL of NaOH 5M; 15 μL
of oxygen-reducing reagent OxeA (Oxyrase Inc., Mansfield, USA); 100
μL of sodium d,l-lactate (equal concentration
of d and l isomers and 350 μL PBS) before
being covered with a second coverslip to stabilize its position. The
sample was then mounted on a Chamlide CMB magnetic chamber (Live Cell
Instrument, Chamlide CM-B25-1).

Ground-state depletion (GSD)
followed by individual molecule return (GSDIM) imaging was performed
in total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) mode with a Leica
SR-GSD microscope (Leica Microsystems; Wetzlar, Germany), equipped
with a 160×/oil immersion dedicated SR objective, a sCMOS pco.edge42
camera, and a 647 nm/500 mW laser. Between 20,000 and 40,000 frames
were acquired with a 10 ms exposure time with image size of 180 ×
180. Raw data sets were processed using the ImageJ plug-in ThunderStorm,75 and images were reconstructed with a rendering
pixel size of 20 nm.

The processed GSDIM images were analyzed
with respect to the continuity
of VEC expression, which was manually determined as the largest distance
between VEC molecules by using ImageJ. This was done for both the
normal vessel wall and atherosclerotic endothelial data (n = 13). The subcellular localization of HA-NPs in the atherosclerotic
endothelium was analyzed for the para- (junction) and intracellular
compartments. First, the total number of HA-NPs was determined from
the binary image, applying a size threshold of four pixels. Subsequently,
the endothelial junction area was delineated based on the VEC molecule
expression, and the number of associated HA-NPs was determined (Figure S1C). HA-NPs outside the junction were
considered as intracellular. For statistical comparison, normalized
HA-NP values were used.

Transmission Electron Microscopy and Correlative
Light and Electron
Microscopy of Aortic Sections
Aortic arches were fixed using
McDowell Trump’s fixative for 24 h. Subsequently, they were
infiltrated in a series of gelatin (until 12%) in PBS, incubated overnight
in 2 M sucrose, and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Semi-thin cryo-sections
(100–250 nm) were cut as described by Bedussi et al.76 and transferred to a copper finder
or normal 150 mesh grid.

For transmission electron microscopy,
the samples were stained with a mixture of uranyl acetate/tylose and
imaged using a Tecnai T12 electron microscope at 120 kV. For correlative
fluorescence and electron microscopy, the aortic sections were first
imaged with GSDIM microscope to detect Cy5.5-labeled HA-NPs. The sample
preparation and image acquisition was the same as described in the
section on super-resolution microscopy. Additionally, epifluorescence
images were acquired for the morphological context. Subsequently,
the sample grids were carefully washed with water, stained with a
uranyl acetate/tylose mixture and imaged using a Tecnai T12 electron
microscope. The image alignment was based on morphological hallmarks
visible by both fluorescence and electron microcopy, that is, elastin
and macrophage lipid droplets, and was performed in Adobe Photoshop
CS6 (Adobe inc., San Jose, USA).

In Vitro Effects of 3PO on the Endothelial
Barrier Integrity
HUVEC (passage 3) were seeded on fibronectin-coated
glass coverslips and grown for 24 h until confluency. The cells were
stimulated with either TNF-α (10 ng/mL) alone or in combination
with 10 μM 3PO (Axon Medchem). DMSO was used as vehicle control.
After 24 h, the cells were fixed for 10 min at RT with 4% PFA in PBS++.

Fixed HUVEC were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100
in PBS for 5 min and blocked for 15 min with 2% BSA in PBS. After
blocking, the cells were incubated for 45 min at RT with VEC primary
polyclonal rabbit antibody (Cayman Chemical; dilution 1:100), washed
with 0.5% BSA in PBS, and incubated at RT with a secondary chicken
antirabbit Alexa Fluor 594 coupled antibody (Invitrogen; dilution
1:100) in combination with Promofluor 488-coupled phalloidin (F-actin
staining; PromoKine; dilution 1:200) for an additional 45 min. DAPI
(2 μg/mL) was used to visualize the cell nuclei. Coverslips
were then mounted with mowiol on microscope slides. Widefield imaging
was performed on Nikon microscope, equipped with Apo TIRF 40×
oil objective, 470–670 argon laser, and an Andor Zyla sCMOS
digital camera. All obtained images were adjusted for brightness/contrast
and processed with an unsharp mask filter in ImageJ (National Institute
of Health). Image processing and quantification of VEC continuity
were performed using the same method as described in the en
face analysis of aortic samples by confocal microscopy. F-actin
continuity was quantified using the same protocol as for VEC, using
a minimum branch length cutoff of 7 μm.

In Vitro Evaluation of Metabolic Effects of
3PO in Human Endothelial Cells and Macrophages
To determine
the cell type specific metabolic effects of 3PO, the uptake of fluorescent
glucose analogue 2-NBDG and expression of GLUT-1 receptor was measured
by flow cytometry (FACS). HUVEC and HMDM were incubated with 3PO at
a concentration ranging from 1 μM to 30 μM. Non-treated
or DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich) treated cells were used as controls. After
30 min of pretreatment, 100 ng/mL of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
10 ng/mL of TNF-α were added to HMDM and HUVEC, respectively.
After 24 h, the medium was replaced by fresh medium containing 100
μM of 2-NBDG. After 30 min of incubation, the medium was removed,
and the cells were washed with PBS. The HUVEC and HMDM were detached
by 5 min incubation with trypsin or citrate solution, respectively.
The cell suspension was transferred to U-bottom 96-wells plates (Greiner),
centrifuged for 5 min at 600 g, and resuspended in
FACS buffer (2 mM EDTA, 0.5% BSA in PBS). Cells that were incubated
with either DMSO or 10 μM 3PO were resuspended in FACS buffer
containing rabbit polyclonal antimouse GLUT-1 antibody (Merck; dilution
1:100) and incubated for 30 min. For HMDM, i.v. immunoglobulin (IVIG;
Sanquin, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; dilution 1:100) was used to block
fc-receptor binding. After washing with FACS buffer, antirabbit Alexa
Fluor 647 secondary antibody (dilution 1:500) was added, and the cell
suspension was incubated for another 30 min. Afterward, the cells
were washed two times and resuspended in 100 μL of FACS buffer.

FACS measurements were performed on a CytoFLEX S flow cytometer
(Beckman Coulter). Data analysis was carried out using FlowJo V10
software (FLOWJO, Ashland, OR, USA). A single cell population was
selected on the basis of forward and side scatter. Within this population,
the median fluorescence intensity (MFI) of 2-NGBG signal was determined
as a parameter of glucose uptake, while MFI of Alexa Fluor 647 was
used as a measure of GLUT-1 expression.

IVIS Imaging of Aortas
IVIS imaging was performed on
a IVIS 200 Spectrum optical imaging system (Xenogen, Corporation,
Alameda, USA) at the imaging unit of the Mouse Cancer Clinic at The
Netherlands Cancer Institute. The vessels were immobilized on clear
plastic dishes with lids (dimensions 41 × 23 × 12 mm), coated
with BISON silicone (color antracid). The dishes were filled with
PBS to prevent dehydration, sealed, and stored in dark at 4 °C
until imaging. The fluorescence signal of 2-NBDG was imaged using
an excitation filter of 465 nm and emission filter of 540 nm. For
imaging of Cy5.5-HA-NP fluorescence, an excitation filter of 675 nm
and emission filter of 720 nm were used. For both 2-NBDG and Cy5.5-HA-NP
imaging, the exposure time was 1 s. Image analysis was performed using
Living Image 4.0 software (PerkinElmer, Waltham, USA). For each sample,
a ROI was drawn around the aortic arch and the first part of subclavian
and carotid branches. For each ROI, the average radiant efficiency
of 2-NBDG and Cy5.5-HA-NP was quantified and used for statistical
comparison.

Histology of Aortic Roots
To determine
the effects
of metabolic therapy on the atherosclerotic plaque size and morphology,
the hearts with aortic roots were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for
24 h, followed by dehydration and embedding in paraffin. Subsequently,
the roots where cut into 4 μM-thick sections. Before staining,
the sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated.

The plaque
size and necrosis fraction was determined from the hematoxyline and
eosin (H&E; Sigma-Aldrich)-stained aortic root sections. The mean
plaque area was derived from measurements of 5–6 sections per
mouse, in which all three aortic valves were present. The plaque necrosis
was measured as the acellular plaque area and normalized to the total
plaque area. Collagen content was quantified based on Sirius red (Sigma-Aldrich)
staining.

For immunohistochemical stainings, endogenous peroxidase
activity
was blocked by treatment with 0.3% H2O2 (Merck,
Burlington, USA) in methanol for 30 min. Subsequently, the samples
were placed in boiling citrate-based antigen unmasking solution (Vector
Laboratories, Burlingame, USA) for 10 min. Blocking was performed
for 60 min using 4% FCS in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 1%
BSA and 0.1% Tween-20. The macrophage and smooth muscle cell content
was determined in sections stained with rat antimouse MAC-3 (BD Pharmingen;
dilution 1:30; clone M3/84) and mouse antimouse α smooth muscle
actin (αSMA; Sigma-Aldrich; 1:500; clone 1A4) primary antibody,
respectively. After overnight incubation with the primary antibodies,
biotinylated rabbit antirat (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA;
dilution 1:300) or biotinylated goat antimouse (DAKO; dilution 1:1250)
secondary antibody was applied for 30 min. Thereafter, avidin-peroxidase
(Vectastatin Elite ABC HRP Kit, Vector Laboratories) was added for
another 30 min. Color development was induced using ImmPact AMEC red
peroxidase substrate (Vector Laboratories). Images were acquired using
a light microscope (Leica Microsystems) at 100× magnification.

The expression of HIF-1α and Glut1 in aortic root plaques
was determined by immunofluorescence. HIF-1α and Glut1 were
stained with a rabbit antimouse HIF-1α (Novus, Littleton, USA;
dilution 1:50) and rabbit antimouse Glut1 (Merck; dilution 1:200)
polyclonal primary antibody, respectively. As a secondary antibody,
a donkey antirabbit Alexa 647 conjugated secondary antibody (Thermo
Fischer Scientific; 1:500 dilution) was applied. Macrophages were
visualized using a rat antimouse MAC-3 primary antibody (BD Pharmingen;
dilution 1:100; clone M3/84) in combination with a donkey antirat
Alexa 594-conjugated secondary antibody (Thermo Fischer Scientific;
1:500 dilution). Smooth muscle cells were stained with a FITC-conjugated
antimouse αSMA primary antibody (Sigma-Aldrich; 1:3000; clone
1A4). The sections were incubated with the aforementioned primary
antibodies overnight at 4 °C, after which the samples were washed,
and secondary antibodies were applied for 1 h. Nuclei were stained
with DAPI at a concentration of 2 μg/mL for 10 min. Images were
acquired using a Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems).

Quantification of collagen, MAC-3, and αSMA area was performed
using ImageJ. First, RGB images were converted to 8-bit gray-scale
images. After adjusting an intensity threshold, the stained area was
masked, quantified, and normalized to the total plaque area. Quantification
of the Glut1 and HIF-1α expression was performed using LAS X
software (Leica Microsystems). For Glut1, first the atherosclerotic
plaques were defined as ROIs on the basis MAC-3 and αSMA staining.
Subsequently, the average fluorescence intensity of Alexa 647-stained
Glut1 was calculated from all ROIs. Glut1 expression was also determined
separately for MAC-3 and αSMA-positive plaque areas. Nuclear
expression of HIF-1α was determined for plaque-associated macrophages.
Only macrophages with a well-defined cytoplasm and nucleus were included
in the analysis (∼50 cells/plaque). For each included macrophage,
a line was drawn through the cytoplasm and nucleus to generate the
signal intensity histogram of Alexa Fluor 647-HIF-1α. DAPI histogram
served as a reference (representative histograms can be found in Figure S11). The nucleus was considered as HIF-1α
positive if its HIF-1α fluorescence signal was approximately
3-fold higher compared to the cytoplasm. The percentage of HIF-1α
positive macrophage nuclei was used as a quantifier of hypoxic activation.

Statistical Analysis
The normality of data distribution
was tested with a Shapiro-Wilk test. The comparison of the endothelial
junction continuity in the plaque and normal vessel wall was performed
using a two-tailed paired Student’s t test.
The intergroup comparisons of the endothelial junction continuity
and HA-NP plaque accumulation were done using a two-tailed unpaired
Student’s t test. The same analysis was performed
when comparing the largest intrajunctional distance and endothelial
cell thickness between the plaque and normal vessel wall. In vitro data on glucose uptake in HUVEC and HMDM were analyzed
using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test.
The in vitro VEC continuity and F-actin fiber length
data were analyzed using an unpaired Student’s t test. The same test was used to compare the histological outcome
of the 3PO and control group. All of the analyses were performed using
IBM SPSS Statistics 23 by setting the significance level at p < 0.05.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.8b08875.Figures S1–S12
and Table S1 (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn8b08875_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
○ These authors contributed equally to the
study. T.J.B., T.M., E.D.,
S.vdV., C.P.A.A.vR., L.B., and E.K. preformed in vivo and/or ex vivo animal experiments. E.K., S.H.,
W.J.M.M., and E.L. designed the experiments and supervised them. A.L.S.M.
contributed to the in vitro cell experiments. A.E.G.
preformed TEM experiments. E.D. and E.K. performed GSD experiments.
N.N.vd.W. and H.A.vV. supervised electron and super-resolution microscopy.
M.P.J.d.W, A.E.N., J.C.S., R.A.H., and P.A.K. were valuable advisors.
The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All
authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was financially supported by National
Institutes of Health grants R01 HL118440 (W.J.M.M.), R01 HL125703
(W.J.M.M.), R01 CA155432 (W.J.M.M.), as well as The Netherlands Organization
for Scientific Research (NWO) Vidi (016.136.324, W.J.M.M.), Vidi (016.156.327,
S.H.), STW (15851, W.J.M.M.), and Vici (016.176.622, W.J.M.M.). The
authors also thank Sensi Pharma BV for their funding. We thank Ralph
J. Sinn and Pascal J. H. Kusters for help with histopathological preparation
and analysis.
==== Refs
References
Duivenvoorden R. ; Tang J. ; Cormode D. P. ; Mieszawska A. J. ; Izquierdo-Garcia D. ; Ozcan C. ; Otten M. J. ; Zaidi N. ; Lobatto M. E. ; van Rijs S. M. ; Priem B. ; Kuan E. L. ; Martel C. ; Hewing B. ; Sager H. ; Nahrendorf M. ; Randolph G. J. ; Stroes E. S. G. ; Fuster V. ; Fisher E. A. ; et al. A Statin-Loaded Reconstituted High-Density Lipoprotein Nanoparticle
Inhibits Atherosclerotic Plaque Inflammation . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 3065 10.1038/ncomms4065 .24445279 
Lobatto M. E. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Silvera S. ; Vucic E. ; Calcagno C. ; Mani V. ; Dickson S. D. ; Nicolay K. ; Banciu M. ; Schiffelers R. M. ; Metselaar J. M. ; van Bloois L. ; Wu H.-S. ; Fallon J. T. ; Rudd J. H. ; Fuster V. ; Fisher E. A. ; Storm G. ; Mulder W. J. M. 
Multimodal Clinical
Imaging To Longitudinally Assess a Nanomedical Anti-Inflammatory Treatment
in Experimental Atherosclerosis . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2010 , 7 , 2020 –2029 . 10.1021/mp100309y .
Shi J. ; Kantoff P. W. ; Wooster R. ; Farokhzad O. C. 
Cancer
Nanomedicine: Progress, Challenges and Opportunities . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2017 , 17 , 20 –37 . 10.1038/nrc.2016.108 .27834398 
Gharagozloo M. ; Majewski S. ; Foldvari M. 
Therapeutic Applications of Nanomedicine
in Autoimmune Diseases: From Immunosuppression to Tolerance Induction . Nanomedicine (N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2015 , 11 , 1003 –1018 . 10.1016/j.nano.2014.12.003 .
Mulder W. J. M. ; Jaffer F. A. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Nahrendorf M. 
Imaging and
Nanomedicine in Inflammatory Atherosclerosis . Sci. Transl. Med. 
2014 , 6 , 239sr1 10.1126/scitranslmed.3005101 .24898749 
Matsumura Y. ; Maeda H. 
A New Concept for Macromolecular Therapeutics in Cancer Chemotherapy:
Mechanism of Tumoritropic Accumulation of Proteins and the Antitumor
Agent Smancs . Cancer Res. 
1986 , 46 , 6387 –6392 .2946403 
Harrington K. J. ; Mohammadtaghi S. ; Uster P. S. ; Glass D. ; Peters A. M. ; Vile R. G. ; Stewart J. S. 
Effective Targeting
of Solid Tumors
in Patients with Locally Advanced Cancers by Radiolabeled Pegylated
Liposomes . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2001 , 7 , 243 –254 .11234875 
Koukourakis M. I. ; Koukouraki S. ; Giatromanolaki A. ; Kakolyris S. ; Georgoulias V. ; Velidaki A. ; Archimandritis S. ; Karkavitsas N. N. 
High Intratumoral Accumulation of Stealth Liposomal
Doxorubicin in Sarcomas: Rationale for Combination with Radiotherapy . Acta Oncol 
2000 , 39 , 207 –211 .10859012 
Danhier F. 
To Exploit
the Tumor Microenvironment: Since the EPR Effect Fails in the Clinic,
What Is the Future of Nanomedicine? . J. Controlled
Release 
2016 , 244 , 108 –121 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.11.015 .
Prabhakar U. ; Maeda H. ; Jain R. K. ; Sevick-Muraca E. M. ; Zamboni W. ; Farokhzad O. C. ; Barry S. T. ; Gabizon A. ; Grodzinski P. ; Blakey D. C. 
Challenges and Key Considerations
of the Enhanced Permeability and Retention Effect for Nanomedicine
Drug Delivery in Oncology . Cancer Res. 
2013 , 73 , 2412 –2417 . 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561 .23423979 
Lee H. ; Shields A. F. ; Siegel B. A. ; Miller K. D. ; Krop I. ; Ma C. X. ; LoRusso P. M. ; Munster P. N. ; Campbell K. ; Gaddy D. F. ; Leonard S. C. ; Geretti E. ; Blocker S. J. ; Kirpotin D. B. ; Moyo V. ; Wickham T. J. ; Hendriks B. S. 
64 Cu-MM-302 Positron
Emission Tomography Quantifies Variability of
Enhanced Permeability and Retention of Nanoparticles in Relation to
Treatment Response in Patients with Metastatic Breast Cancer . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2017 , 23 , 4190 –4202 . 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-3193 .28298546 
van
der Valk F. M. ; van Wijk D. F. ; Lobatto M. E. ; Verberne H. J. ; Storm G. ; Willems M. C. M. ; Legemate D. A. ; Nederveen A. J. ; Calcagno C. ; Mani V. ; Ramachandran S. ; Paridaans M. P. M. ; Otten M. J. ; Dallinga-Thie G. M. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Nieuwdorp M. ; Schulte D. M. ; Metselaar J. M. ; Mulder W. J. M. ; Stroes E. S. 
Prednisolone-Containing Liposomes
Accumulate in Human Atherosclerotic Macrophages upon Intravenous Administration . Nanomedicine (N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2015 , 11 , 1039 –1046 . 10.1016/j.nano.2015.02.021 .
Kharlamov A. N. ; Tyurnina A. E. ; Veselova V. S. ; Kovtun O. P. ; Shur V. Y. ; Gabinsky J. L. 
Silica-Gold Nanoparticles
for Atheroprotective Management
of Plaques: Results of the NANOM-FIM Trial . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 8003 –8015 . 10.1039/C5NR01050K .25864858 
Libby P. ; Ridker P. M. ; Maseri A. 
Inflammation
and Atherosclerosis . Circulation 
2002 , 105 , 1135 –1143 . 10.1161/hc0902.104353 .11877368 
Gimbrone M. A. ; García-Cardeña G. 
Endothelial
Cell Dysfunction and
the Pathobiology of Atherosclerosis . Circ. Res. 
2016 , 118 , 620 –636 . 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306301 .26892962 
Box L. C. ; Angiolillo D. J. ; Suzuki N. ; Box L. A. ; Jiang J. ; Guzman L. ; Zenni M. A. ; Bass T. A. ; Costa M. A. 
Heterogeneity
of Atherosclerotic Plaque Characteristics in Human Coronary Artery
Disease: A Three-Dimensional Intravascular Ultrasound Study. Catheter . Cardiovasc. Interv. 
2007 , 70 , 349 –356 . 10.1002/ccd.21088 .
Insull W. 
The Pathology
of Atherosclerosis: Plaque Development and Plaque Responses to Medical
Treatment . Am. J. Med. 
2009 , 122 , S3 –S14 . 10.1016/j.amjmed.2008.10.013 .
Beldman T. J. ; Senders M. L. ; Alaarg A. ; Pérez-Medina C. ; Tang J. ; Zhao Y. ; Fay F. ; Deichmöller J. ; Born B. ; Desclos E. ; van der
Wel N. N. ; Hoebe R. A. ; Kohen F. ; Kartvelishvily E. ; Neeman M. ; Reiner T. ; Calcagno C. ; Fayad Z. A. ; de Winther M. P. J. ; Lutgens E. ; et al. Hyaluronan Nanoparticles
Selectively Target Plaque-Associated Macrophages and Improve Plaque
Stability in Atherosclerosis . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 5785 –5799 . 10.1021/acsnano.7b01385 .28463501 
Cantelmo A. R. ; Conradi L. C. ; Brajic A. ; Goveia J. ; Kalucka J. ; Pircher A. ; Chaturvedi P. ; Hol J. ; Thienpont B. ; Teuwen L. A. ; Schoors S. ; Boeckx B. ; Vriens J. ; Kuchnio A. ; Veys K. ; Cruys B. ; Finotto L. ; Treps L. ; Stav-Noraas T. E. ; Bifari F. ; et al. Inhibition
of the Glycolytic Activator PFKFB3 in Endothelium Induces Tumor Vessel
Normalization, Impairs Metastasis, and Improves Chemotherapy . Cancer Cell 
2016 , 30 , 968 –985 . 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.10.006 .27866851 
Kim Y. ; Lobatto M. E. ; Kawahara T. ; Lee Chung B. ; Mieszawska A. J. ; Sanchez-Gaytan B. L. ; Fay F. ; Senders M. L. ; Calcagno C. ; Becraft J. ; Tun Saung M. ; Gordon R. E. ; Stroes E. S. G. ; Ma M. ; Farokhzad O. C. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Mulder W. J. M. ; Langer R. 
Probing Nanoparticle
Translocation across the Permeable Endothelium in Experimental Atherosclerosis . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2014 , 111 , 1078 –1083 . 10.1073/pnas.1322725111 .24395808 
Lobatto M. E. ; Calcagno C. ; Millon A. ; Senders M. L. ; Fay F. ; Robson P. M. ; Ramachandran S. ; Binderup T. ; Paridaans M. P. M. ; Sensarn S. ; Rogalla S. ; Gordon R. E. ; Cardoso L. ; Storm G. ; Metselaar J. M. ; Contag C. H. ; Stroes E. S. G. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Mulder W. J. M. 
Atherosclerotic
Plaque Targeting
Mechanism of Long-Circulating Nanoparticles Established by Multimodal
Imaging . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 1837 –1847 . 10.1021/nn506750r .25619964 
Stein-Merlob A. F. ; Hara T. ; McCarthy J. R. ; Mauskapf A. ; Hamilton J. A. ; Ntziachristos V. ; Libby P. ; Jaffer F. A.  Atheroma Susceptible to Thrombosis Exhibit Impaired Endothelial Permeability In Vivo as Assessed by Nanoparticle-Based Fluorescence Molecular
Imaging. Circ .: Cardiovascular
Imaging 2017 , 10 .10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.116.005813 
Wang Z. ; Tiruppathi C. ; Cho J. ; Minshall R. D. ; Malik A. B. 
Delivery
of Nanoparticle-Complexed Drugs across the Vascular Endothelial Barrier via Caveolae . IUBMB Life 
2011 , 63 , 659 –667 . 10.1002/iub.485 .21766412 
Barua S. ; Mitragotri S. 
Challenges
Associated with Penetration of Nanoparticles
across Cell and Tissue Barriers: A Review of Current Status and Future
Prospects . Nano Today 
2014 , 9 , 223 –243 . 10.1016/j.nantod.2014.04.008 .25132862 
Poller W. C. ; Ramberger E. ; Boehm-Sturm P. ; Mueller S. ; Möller K. ; Löwa N. ; Wiekhorst F. ; Wagner S. ; Taupitz M. ; Schellenberger E. ; Baumann G. ; Stangl K. ; Stangl V. ; Ludwig A. 
Uptake of Citrate-Coated Iron Oxide Nanoparticles into
Atherosclerotic Lesions in Mice Occurs via Accelerated
Transcytosis through Plaque Endothelial Cells . Nano Res. 
2016 , 9 , 3437 –3452 . 10.1007/s12274-016-1220-9 .
Nakashima Y. ; Plump A. S. ; Raines E. W. ; Breslow J. L. ; Ross R. 
ApoE-Deficient Mice Develop Lesions of All Phases of Atherosclerosis
throughout the Arterial Tree . Arterioscler.
Thromb. 
1994 , 14 , 133 –140 . 10.1161/01.ATV.14.1.133 .8274468 
Vestweber D. 
VE-Cadherin:
The Major Endothelial Adhesion Molecule Controlling Cellular Junctions
and Blood Vessel Formation . Arterioscler., Thromb.,
Vasc. Biol. 
2008 , 28 , 223 –232 . 10.1161/ATVBAHA.107.158014 .18162609 
Dejana E. ; Orsenigo F. ; Lampugnani M. G. 
The Role of Adherens Junctions and
VE-Cadherin in the Control of Vascular Permeability . J. Cell Sci. 
2008 , 121 , 2115 –2122 . 10.1242/jcs.017897 .18565824 
van
Geemen D. ; Smeets M. W. J. ; van Stalborch A.-M. D. ; Woerdeman L. A. E. ; Daemen M. J. A. P. ; Hordijk P. L. ; Huveneers S. 
F-Actin–Anchored Focal Adhesions
Distinguish Endothelial Phenotypes of Human Arteries and Veins . Arterioscler., Thromb., Vasc. Biol. 
2014 , 34 , 2059 –2067 . 10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.304180 .25012130 
Malinova T. S. ; Huveneers S. 
Sensing of
Cytoskeletal Forces by Asymmetric Adherens
Junctions . Trends Cell Biol. 
2018 , 28 , 328 –341 . 10.1016/j.tcb.2017.11.002 .29195724 
Tie G. ; Messina K. E. ; Yan J. ; Messina J. A. ; Messina L. M.  Hypercholesterolemia
Induces Oxidant Stress That Accelerates the Ageing of Hematopoietic
Stem Cells . J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2014 , 3 .10.1161/JAHA.113.000241 
Friedman M. ; Byers S. O. 
Endothelial Permeability in Atherosclerosis . Arch. Pathol. 
1963 , 76 , 99 –105 .13963131 
Phinikaridou A. ; Andia M. E. ; Protti A. ; Indermuehle A. ; Shah A. ; Smith A. ; Warley A. ; Botnar R. M. 
Noninvasive
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Evaluation of Endothelial Permeability
in Murine Atherosclerosis Using an Albumin-Binding Contrast Agent . Circulation 
2012 , 126 , 707 –719 . 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.092098 .22753191 
White S. J. ; Newby A. C. ; Johnson T. W. 
Endothelial
Erosion of Plaques as
a Substrate for Coronary Thrombosis . Thromb.
Haemostasis 
2016 , 115 , 509 –519 . 10.1160/th15-09-0765 .26791872 
Quillard T. ; Franck G. ; Mawson T. ; Folco E. ; Libby P. 
Mechanisms
of Erosion of Atherosclerotic Plaques . Curr.
Opin. Lipidol. 
2017 , 28 , 434 –441 . 10.1097/MOL.0000000000000440 .28682809 
Nakashima Y. ; Wight T. N. ; Sueishi K. 
Early Atherosclerosis
in Humans:
Role of Diffuse Intimal Thickening and Extracellular Matrix Proteoglycans . Cardiovasc. Res. 
2008 , 79 , 14 –23 . 10.1093/cvr/cvn099 .18430750 
Wilhelm S. ; Tavares A. J. ; Dai Q. ; Ohta S. ; Audet J. ; Dvorak H. F. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Analysis of Nanoparticle Delivery
to Tumours . Nat. Rev. Mater. 
2016 , 1 , 16014 10.1038/natrevmats.2016.14 .
Moulton K. S. ; Heller E. ; Konerding M. A. ; Flynn E. ; Palinski W. ; Folkman J. 
Angiogenesis Inhibitors
Endostatin or TNP-470 Reduce
Intimal Neovascularization and Plaque Growth in Apolipoprotein E-Deficient
Mice . Circulation 
1999 , 99 , 1726 –1732 . 10.1161/01.CIR.99.13.1726 .10190883 
Kumamoto M. ; Nakashima Y. ; Sueishi K. 
Intimal Neovascularization in Human
Coronary Atherosclerosis: Its Origin and Pathophysiological Significance . Hum. Pathol. 
1995 , 26 , 450 –456 . 10.1016/0046-8177(95)90148-5 .7535741 
Moreno P. R. ; Purushothaman K. R. ; Fuster V. ; Echeverri D. ; Truszczynska H. ; Sharma S. K. ; Badimon J. J. ; O’Connor W. N. 
Plaque
Neovascularization Is Increased in Ruptured Atherosclerotic Lesions
of Human Aorta . Circulation 
2004 , 110 , 2032 –2038 . 10.1161/01.CIR.0000143233.87854.23 .15451780 
Eriksson E. E. 
Intravital
Microscopy on Atherosclerosis in Apolipoprotein E–Deficient
Mice Establishes Microvessels as Major Entry Pathways for Leukocytes
to Advanced Lesions . Circulation 
2011 , 124 , 2129 –2138 . 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.030627 .21986280 
Langheinrich A. C. ; Michniewicz A. ; Sedding D. G. ; Walker G. ; Beighley P. E. ; Rau W. S. ; Bohle R. M. ; Ritman E. L. 
Correlation of Vasa
Vasorum Neovascularization and Plaque Progression in Aortas of Apolipoprotein
E –/– /Low-Density Lipoprotein –/– Double Knockout Mice . Arterioscler., Thromb.,
Vasc. Biol. 
2006 , 26 , 347 –352 . 10.1161/01.ATV.0000196565.38679.6d .16293797 
Rademakers T. ; Douma K. ; Hackeng T. M. ; Post M. J. ; Sluimer J. C. ; Daemen M. J. A. P. ; Biessen E. A. L. ; Heeneman S. ; van Zandvoort M. A. 
Plaque-Associated
Vasa Vasorum in Aged Apolipoprotein E–Deficient Mice Exhibit
Proatherogenic Functional Features In Vivo . Arterioscler., Thromb., Vasc. Biol. 
2013 , 33 , 249 –256 . 10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300087 .23241413 
Swirski F. K. ; Libby P. ; Aikawa E. ; Alcaide P. ; Luscinskas F. W. ; Weissleder R. ; Pittet M. J. 
Ly-6Chi Monocytes Dominate Hypercholesterolemia-Associated
Monocytosis and Give Rise to Macrophages in Atheromata . J. Clin. Invest. 
2007 , 117 , 195 –205 . 10.1172/JCI29950 .17200719 
Vestweber D. 
How Leukocytes
Cross the Vascular Endothelium . Nat. Rev. Immunol. 
2015 , 15 , 692 –704 . 10.1038/nri3908 .26471775 
Nahrendorf M. ; Zhang H. ; Hembrador S. ; Panizzi P. ; Sosnovik D. E. ; Aikawa E. ; Libby P. ; Swirski F. K. ; Weissleder R. 
Nanoparticle
PET-CT Imaging of Macrophages in Inflammatory Atherosclerosis . Circulation 
2008 , 117 , 379 –387 . 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.741181 .18158358 
Sanchez-Gaytan B. L. ; Fay F. ; Lobatto M. E. ; Tang J. ; Ouimet M. ; Kim Y. ; van der
Staay S. E. M. ; van Rijs S. M. ; Priem B. ; Zhang L. ; Fisher E. A. ; Moore K. J. ; Langer R. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Mulder W. J. M. 
HDL-Mimetic PLGA Nanoparticle To Target Atherosclerosis
Plaque Macrophages . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2015 , 26 , 443 –451 . 10.1021/bc500517k .
Tang J. ; Baxter S. ; Menon A. ; Alaarg A. ; Sanchez-Gaytan B. L. ; Fay F. ; Zhao Y. ; Ouimet M. ; Braza M. S. ; Longo V. A. ; Abdel-Atti D. ; Duivenvoorden R. ; Calcagno C. ; Storm G. ; Tsimikas S. ; Moore K. J. ; Swirski F. K. ; Nahrendorf M. ; Fisher E. A. ; Pérez-Medina C. ; et al. Immune Cell Screening
of a Nanoparticle Library Improves Atherosclerosis Therapy . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2016 , 113 , E6731 –E6740 . 10.1073/pnas.1609629113 .27791119 
Weidinger F. F. ; McLenachan J. M. ; Cybulsky M. I. ; Fallon J. T. ; Hollenberg N. K. ; Cooke J. P. ; Ganz P. 
Hypercholesterolemia Enhances Macrophage
Recruitment and Dysfunction of Regenerated Endothelium after Balloon
Injury of the Rabbit Iliac Artery . Circulation 
1991 , 84 , 755 –767 . 10.1161/01.CIR.84.2.755 .1713536 
Sluimer J. C. ; Kolodgie F. D. ; Bijnens A. P. J. J. ; Maxfield K. ; Pacheco E. ; Kutys B. ; Duimel H. ; Frederik P. M. ; van Hinsbergh V. W. M. ; Virmani R. ; Daemen M. J. A. P. 
Thin-Walled
Microvessels in Human
Coronary Atherosclerotic Plaques Show Incomplete Endothelial Junctions
Relevance of Compromised Structural Integrity for Intraplaque Microvascular
Leakage . J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 
2009 , 53 , 1517 –1527 . 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.12.056 .19389562 
Walski M. ; Chlopicki S. ; Celary-Walska R. ; Frontczak-Baniewicz M. 
Ultrastructural
Alterations of Endothelium Covering Advanced Atherosclerotic Plaque
in Human Carotid Artery Visualised by Scanning Electron Microscope . J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 
2002 , 53 , 713 –723 .12512705 
Carlo D. ; Quacci D. ; Raspanti M. ; Congiu T. ; Reguzzoni M. ; Protasoni M. 
Atherosclerotic Alterations in Human Carotid Observed
by Scanning Electron Microscopy . Ital. J. Anat.
Embryol. 
2010 , 115 , 53 –58 .21072990 
Muzykantov V. R. 
Targeted
Drug Delivery to Endothelial Adhesion Molecules . ISRN Vasc. Med. 
2013 , 2013 , 1 10.1155/2013/916254 .
Laurent T. C. ; Fraser J. R. E. ; Pertoft H. ; Smedsrød B. 
Binding of
Hyaluronate and Chondroitin Sulphate to Liver Endothelial Cells . Biochem. J. 
1986 , 234 , 653 –658 . 10.1042/bj2340653 .3087347 
Huang G. ; Huang H. 
Application of Hyaluronic Acid as Carriers in Drug Delivery . Drug Delivery 
2018 , 25 , 766 –772 . 10.1080/10717544.2018.1450910 .29536778 
Muro S. ; Wiewrodt R. ; Thomas A. ; Koniaris L. ; Albelda S. M. ; Muzykantov V. R. ; Koval M. 
A Novel Endocytic Pathway
Induced
by Clustering Endothelial ICAM-1 or PECAM-1 . J. Cell Sci. 
2003 , 116 , 1599 –1609 . 10.1242/jcs.00367 .12640043 
Muro S. ; Schuchman E. H. ; Muzykantov V. R. 
Lysosomal Enzyme Delivery by ICAM-1-Targeted
Nanocarriers Bypassing Glycosylation- and Clathrin-Dependent Endocytosis . Mol. Ther. 
2006 , 13 , 135 –141 . 10.1016/j.ymthe.2005.07.687 .16153895 
Michaelis K. ; Hoffmann M. M. ; Dreis S. ; Herbert E. ; Alyautdin R. N. ; Michaelis M. ; Kreuter J. ; Langer K. 
Covalent Linkage
of
Apolipoprotein E to Albumin Nanoparticles Strongly Enhances Drug Transport
into the Brain . J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 
2006 , 317 , 1246 –1253 . 10.1124/jpet.105.097139 .16554356 
Pérez-Medina C. ; Binderup T. ; Lobatto M. E. ; Tang J. ; Calcagno C. ; Giesen L. ; Wessel C. H. ; Witjes J. ; Ishino S. ; Baxter S. ; Zhao Y. ; Ramachandran S. ; Eldib M. ; Sánchez-Gaytán B. L. ; Robson P. M. ; Bini J. ; Granada J. F. ; Fish K. M. ; Stroes E. S. G. ; Duivenvoorden R. ; et al. In Vivo PET Imaging of HDL in Multiple Atherosclerosis Models . JACC Cardiovasc. Imaging 
2016 , 9 , 950 –961 . 10.1016/j.jcmg.2016.01.020 .27236528 
Braza M. S. ; van Leent M. M. T. ; Lameijer M. ; Sanchez-Gaytan B. L. ; Arts R. J. W. ; Pérez-Medina C. ; Conde P. ; Garcia M. R. ; Gonzalez-Perez M. ; Brahmachary M. ; Fay F. ; Kluza E. ; Kossatz S. ; Dress R. J. ; Salem F. ; Rialdi A. ; Reiner T. ; Boros P. ; Strijkers G. J. ; Calcagno C. ; et al. Inhibiting
Inflammation with Myeloid Cell-Specific
Nanobiologics Promotes Organ Transplant Acceptance . Immunity 
2018 , 49 , 819 –828 . 10.1016/j.immuni.2018.09.008 .30413362 
Reske S. N. ; Kotzerke J. 
FDG-PET for Clinical Use . Eur.
J. Nucl. Med. 
2001 , 28 , 1707 –1723 . 10.1007/s002590100626 .11702115 
Madge L. A. ; Pober J. S. 
TNF Signaling in Vascular Endothelial Cells . Exp. Mol. Pathol. 
2001 , 70 , 317 –325 . 10.1006/exmp.2001.2368 .11418010 
Huveneers S. ; Oldenburg J. ; Spanjaard E. ; van der Krogt G. ; Grigoriev I. ; Akhmanova A. ; Rehmann H. ; de Rooij J. 
Vinculin Associates
with Endothelial VE-Cadherin Junctions to Control Force-Dependent
Remodeling . J. Cell Biol. 
2012 , 196 , 641 –652 . 10.1083/jcb.201108120 .22391038 
Angelini D. J. ; Hyun S. W. ; Grigoryev D. N. ; Garg P. ; Gong P. ; Singh I. S. ; Passaniti A. ; Hasday J. D. ; Goldblum S. E. 
TNF-α
Increases Tyrosine Phosphorylation of Vascular Endothelial Cadherin
and Opens the Paracellular Pathway through Fyn Activation in Human
Lung Endothelia . Am. J. Physiol. 
2006 , 291 , L1232 –L1245 . 10.1152/ajplung.00109.2006 .
Wójciak-Stothard B. ; Entwistle A. ; Garg R. ; Ridley A. J. 
Regulation of TNF-α-Induced
Reorganization of the Actin Cytoskeleton and Cell-Cell Junctions by
Rho, Rac, and Cdc42 in Human Endothelial Cells . J. Cell. Physiol. 
1998 , 176 , 150 –165 . 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4652(199807)176:1<150::AID-JCP17>3.0.CO;2-B .9618155 
Cantelmo A. R. ; Pircher A. ; Kalucka J. ; Carmeliet P. 
Vessel Pruning
or Healing: Endothelial Metabolism as a Novel Target? . Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 
2017 , 21 , 239 –247 . 10.1080/14728222.2017.1282465 .28081641 
Rudd J. H. F. ; Warburton E. A. ; Fryer T. D. ; Jones H. A. ; Clark J. C. ; Antoun N. ; Johnström P. ; Davenport A. P. ; Kirkpatrick P. J. ; Arch B. N. ; Pickard J. D. ; Weissberg P. L. 
Imaging
Atherosclerotic Plaque Inflammation With [18F]-Fluorodeoxyglucose
Positron Emission Tomography . Circulation 
2002 , 105 , 2708 –2711 . 10.1161/01.CIR.0000020548.60110.76 .12057982 
Libby P. ; Aikawa M. 
Stabilization of Atherosclerotic
Plaques: New Mechanisms
and Clinical Targets . Nat. Med. (N. Y., NY,
U. S.) 
2002 , 8 , 1257 –1262 . 10.1038/nm1102-1257 .
Eelen G. ; de Zeeuw P. ; Simons M. ; Carmeliet P. 
Endothelial
Cell Metabolism in Normal and Diseased Vasculature . Circ. Res. 
2015 , 116 , 1231 –1244 . 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.302855 .25814684 
Schoors S. ; De Bock K. ; Cantelmo A. R. ; Georgiadou M. ; Ghesquière B. ; Cauwenberghs S. ; Kuchnio A. ; Wong B. W. ; Quaegebeur A. ; Goveia J. ; Bifari F. ; Wang X. ; Blanco R. ; Tembuyser B. ; Cornelissen I. ; Bouché A. ; Vinckier S. ; Diaz-Moralli S. ; Gerhardt H. ; Telang S. ; et al. Partial and Transient
Reduction of Glycolysis by PFKFB3 Blockade Reduces Pathological Angiogenesis . Cell Metab. 
2014 , 19 , 37 –48 . 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.11.008 .24332967 
Tawakol A. ; Singh P. ; Mojena M. ; Pimentel-Santillana M. ; Emami H. ; MacNabb M. ; Rudd J. H. F. ; Narula J. ; Enriquez J. A. ; Través P. G. ; Fernández-Velasco M. ; Bartrons R. ; Martín-Sanz P. ; Fayad Z. A. ; Tejedor A. ; Boscá L. 
HIF-1α and PFKFB3Mediate a Tight Relationship
Between Proinflammatory Activation and Anerobic Metabolism in Atherosclerotic
Macrophages . Arterioscler., Thromb., Vasc. Biol. 
2015 , 35 , 1463 –1471 . 10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.305551 .25882065 
Rudd J. H. F. ; Myers K. S. ; Bansilal S. ; Machac J. ; Pinto C. A. ; Tong C. ; Rafique A. ; Hargeaves R. ; Farkouh M. ; Fuster V. ; Fayad Z. A. 
Atherosclerosis
Inflammation Imaging with 18F-FDG PET: Carotid, Iliac, and Femoral
Uptake Reproducibility, Quantification Methods, and Recommendations . J. Nucl. Med. 
2008 , 49 , 871 –878 . 10.2967/jnumed.107.050294 .18483100 
Kelloff G. J. ; Hoffman J. M. ; Johnson B. ; Scher H. I. ; Siegel B. A. ; Cheng E. Y. ; Cheson B. D. ; O’shaughnessy J. ; Guyton K. Z. ; Mankoff D. A. ; Shankar L. ; Larson S. M. ; Sigman C. C. ; Schilsky R. L. ; Sullivan D. C. 
Progress and Promise
of FDG-PET Imaging for Cancer Patient Management and Oncologic Drug
Development . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2005 , 11 , 2785 –2808 . 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-04-2626 .15837727 
Folco E. J. ; Sheikine Y. ; Rocha V. Z. ; Christen T. ; Shvartz E. ; Sukhova G. K. ; Di Carli M. F. ; Libby P. 
Hypoxia but Not Inflammation
Augments Glucose Uptake in Human Macrophages: Implications for Imaging
Atherosclerosis with 18fluorine-Labeled 2-Deoxy-D-Glucose Positron
Emission Tomography . J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 
2011 , 58 , 603 –614 . 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.03.044 .21798423 
Ovesný M. ; Křížek P. ; Borkovec J. ; Švindrych Z. ; Hagen G. M. 
ThunderSTORM: A
Comprehensive ImageJ Plug-in for PALM
and STORM Data Analysis and Super-Resolution Imaging . Bioinformatics 
2014 , 30 , 2389 –2390 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu202 .24771516 
Bedussi B. ; van der Wel N. N. ; de Vos J. ; van Veen H. ; Siebes M. ; van Bavel E. ; Bakker E. N. 
Paravascular Channels,
Cisterns,
and the Subarachnoid Space in the Rat Brain: A Single Compartment
with Preferential Pathways . J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 
2017 , 37 , 1374 –1385 . 10.1177/0271678X16655550 .27306753

