
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.9b01025ArticleCustom-Size,
Functional, and Durable DNA Origami with
Design-Specific Scaffolds Engelhardt Floris
A. S. †Praetorius Florian †Wachauf Christian H. †Brüggenthies Gereon †Kohler Fabian †Kick Benjamin †Kadletz Karoline L. †Pham Phuong Nhi †Behler Karl L. ‡Gerling Thomas †Dietz Hendrik *††Physics
Department and ‡Lehrstuhl für Bioverfahrenstechnik, Technical University of Munich, Am Coulombwall 4a, 85748 Garching bei München, Germany* E-mail: dietz@tum.de.16 04 2019 28 05 2019 13 5 5015 5027 05 02 2019 16 04 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

DNA
origami nano-objects are usually designed around generic single-stranded
“scaffolds”. Many properties of the target object are
determined by details of those generic scaffold sequences. Here, we
enable designers to fully specify the target structure not only in
terms of desired 3D shape but also in terms of the sequences used.
To this end, we built design tools to construct scaffold sequences de novo based on strand diagrams, and we developed scalable
production methods for creating design-specific scaffold strands with
fully user-defined sequences. We used 17 custom scaffolds having different
lengths and sequence properties to study the influence of sequence
redundancy and sequence composition on multilayer DNA origami assembly
and to realize efficient one-pot assembly of multiscaffold DNA origami
objects. Furthermore, as examples for functionalized scaffolds, we
created a scaffold that enables direct, covalent cross-linking of
DNA origami via UV irradiation, and we built DNAzyme-containing
scaffolds that allow postfolding DNA origami domain separation.

nanostructuresDNA origamiDNA nanotechnologyself-assemblyphagemiddocument-id-old-9nn9b01025document-id-new-14nn9b01025ccc-price
==== Body
DNA origami has become a valuable
tool for basic science in a diversity
of research fields, and applications in material sciences, medicine,
and in other areas have begun to emerge.1 The DNA origami design methodology can be used to create custom
2D2 and 3D shapes3,4 with
nanometer dimensions. DNA origami uses a set of short “staple”
DNA oligonucleotides that are designed to fold a long, usually circular
“scaffold” DNA single strand into a user-defined shape.
The self-assembly can proceed rapidly and with high yields and quality,
depending on design and assembly procedures used. During DNA origami
design, the scaffold sequence is typically taken as a fixed input
from a library of generic scaffold sequences that are available to
the community. The sequence string is then routed through a strand
diagram that encodes the connectivity of the target object to be made.
The sequences for the staple strands are derived by considering local
Watson–Crick base complementarity to the scaffold.2,3

Generic scaffold sequences, as others have noted previously,5 may limit the scope of applications that could
be addressed with DNA origami. To understand the resulting restrictions,
it is helpful to consider the M13 bacteriophage single-strand genome
variants which are the most popular generic scaffolds currently used
in the field. Many properties of the DNA origami built with M13-based
scaffolds are naturally determined by the length and sequence of the
M13 phage genome: First, the overall dimensions of a single DNA origami
are by default limited by the length of the scaffold strand. Second,
designers cannot control global sequence properties such as GC content
or sequence redundancy, which could potentially affect the self-assembly
behavior as others have speculated.6 Third,
designers cannot avoid undesired sequence motifs such as potentially
immunogenic CpG motifs7 which occur frequently
within M13-based scaffolds. Fourth, phage genes may be undesirable
in the context of in vivo applications. Fifth, custom
sequence motifs can be introduced in DNA origami objects only as appendices
or insertions in staple strands, which may negatively affect the yield
of incorporation of such motifs,8 unless
the scaffold strand itself is customized by the user. One example
of sequence motifs that could be of use at hundreds of sites in the
scaffold are AA motifs at all crossovers positions, as this could
enable covalent stabilization of the target object via UV point-welding.9

We envision
that rather than designing objects around generic scaffold
sequences, as the current DNA origami paradigm posits, designers should
be able to fully specify the target structure not only in terms of
desired 3D shape but also in terms of the sequences used. Realizing
design-specific scaffolds requires a design tool that can interpret
design diagrams and algorithmically build a scaffold sequence, and
it also requires scaffold production methods adapted for making fully
sequence-customized scaffolds. In order to address real-world applications,
it should also be possible to manufacture the resulting design-specific
scaffolds in a scalable and cost-efficient process. Whereas M13 scaffolds
can be efficiently produced biotechnologically, a substantial portion
of the M13 phage genome cannot be modified because these portions
are required for the phage lifecycle. Scaffolds for DNA origami may
be produced in test tubes using enzymatic reactions3,6,10−15 or in bacterial cultures via phage-based biotechnological
production.2,3,16−20 Enzymatic production in test tubes affords the possibility of choosing
user-defined sequences but is unfortunately economical only on analytical
(μg) scales. In general, biotechnological processes using bacterial
cultures allow production on much larger scales such as those required
for biomedical or materials applications of DNA origami.18,20,21

The objective of this work
is to provide the missing tools and
methods to realize design-specific scaffolds for DNA origami. To this
end, we built a tool called “scaffold smith” that can
construct design-specific scaffold sequences for DNA origami, and
we developed a biotechnological approach to produce fully sequence-customized
scaffolds. In total, we produced a library of 17 customized scaffold
strands with attractive properties that should be useful to the community
as generic scaffolds (plasmids available via Addgene,
alongside a target plasmid for construction of other scaffolds). Our
design tools and production methods for making design-specific scaffolds
allow designing fully user-specified DNA origami while maintaining
the possibility to produce materials at larger scales.

Results and Discussion
Sequence
Design and Strand Production
To construct
design-specific custom scaffold sequences, we created a design tool
termed “scaffold smith” (Figure 1A and Supporting Information Note S1). The tool integrates with the conventional DNA origami
design workflow at the point when the user has produced a caDNAno
strand diagram.22 The scaffold smith generates
the scaffold string that users will then use subsequently to generate
the staple sequences. The user can define sequence motifs that will
be excluded entirely, and the user can specify a list of sequence
strings to be placed in the scaffold at desired locations in the target
object. The tool also enables constructing a design-specific scaffold
string for direct, modification-free UV cross-linking of the target
object.9 To this end, the tool automatically
identifies all scaffold base indices located at staple termini and
at crossovers and places “A” or “AA”,
respectively, at those positions in the scaffold string. Also, scaffolds
may be produced that have fixed scaffold motifs at staple termini
so that residual overhangs of staples that are produced biotechnologically
and DNAzyme-digested as previously described21 can directly pair with the scaffold. The scaffold smith can either
generate sequences de novo or operate on existing
scaffold strings to create new variants of them that include desired
motifs at desired locations. For de novo construction,
the sequence is built base-by-base with a stochastic Monte Carlo process
beginning at a user-defined site in the strand diagram. The algorithm
controls the scaffold sequence composition in terms of the statistical
weights of base pair steps (e.g., how often A should
be followed by A, C, G, or T, respectively), which gives the user
control over the thermodynamic properties of the scaffold to be built.
It also enables directly reducing or avoiding entirely the occurrence
of known immunogenic or UV-radiation-sensitive motifs such as CG or
TT, respectively. The tool considers the degree of sequence redundancy
that emerges during sequence construction and can build (pseudo-)
De Bruijn sequences of user-defined order. It can generate sequences
where all strings of a user-defined length (for example 8 bases) appear
only as often as the user accepts it in the entire scaffold sequence
(for example, not more than once). Finally, the tool computes the
overall statistics of the generated scaffold string with respect to
composition and redundancy. The user may then adjust parameters and
repeat the sequence construction. To summarize, the scaffold sequence
construction with the scaffold smith has a deterministic and a stochastic
part. The user can define properties, which will be strictly realized,
such as exclusion and site-directed inclusion of user-defined sequence
motifs. All remaining sites (i.e., sites where the
user makes no specific demands) will be filled up stochastically;
however, the user has control over the overall statistics of the sequence
built in terms of composition and redundancy. The underlying algorithms
are described in more detail in Supporting Information Note S1. We created a stand-alone graphical user interface
(GUI) for the scaffold smith, but it should be straightforward to
introduce the underlying concepts into future caDNAno versions or
into future variants of automated design solutions such as DAEDALUS,23 PERDIX,24 TALOS,25 or vHelix.26

Figure 1 Design-specific
scaffold sequences in minimum-constraint vectors
for making fully user-defined DNA origami. (A) Schematic diagram of
input for the scaffold smith used for creating custom scaffold sequences:
exemplary caDNAno design diagram with scaffold strand indicated in
blue and staple strands in multiple colors (I), user-specific constraints
(II), and weighting factors for a stochastic base distribution (III).
(B) Illustration of scaffold production with helper-plasmid system
using phagemids with a split-ori approach (top) and a modified split-ori
approach where the backbone sequence is flanked by self-cleaving DNAzymes
(bottom). Zn2+ addition leads to excision of the backbone
and linearization. Black, constant parts for each type of scaffold;
gray, user-definable parts; light green, backbone present only in
the double-stranded plasmid and not in the single-stranded product;
red, self-cleaving DNAzymes.

We now focus on the question of how to practically make fully
sequence-customized
DNA single strands. A scalable solution for ssDNA production makes
use of bacteriophages with fast growing Escherichia
coli (E. coli) cells
as host, but phage-based ssDNA scaffolds inevitably contain cassettes
with sequences that cannot be altered because they are required for
the phage production. User-defined insert sequences can only be added
to these fixed parts. In fully customizable scaffolds, the length
of the fixed part should be negligible compared to the total length
of the scaffold. However, in the conventional M13 phage production
method,18,27 the fixed part is approximately 6000 bases
long, which is not negligible at all. Phagemids, in combination with
helper phages28 or helper plasmids,29 allow producing ssDNA with fixed backbones of
∼2000 bases, which is still not negligible. Our goal was thus
minimizing the fixed-sequence cassettes to maximize the freedom to
design custom scaffold sequences while maintaining the possibility
for efficient production in bacterial cultures. To this end, we developed
and tested several methods with minimized constant-sequence cassettes
(Supporting Information Note S2).

The production method used for most of our custom scaffolds relies
on a split origin of replication (split-ori) that was originally developed
to produce microphages containing comparably short 221 bases long
ssDNA, in combination with helper phages.30 Here, we integrated our design-specific scaffold sequences as custom
inserts into the split-ori system (Figure 1B) and identified a suitable helper plasmid
that allows producing pure target ssDNA without contamination of helper
phage DNA or other unwanted DNA species (Supporting Information Figure S5). The thus-produced ssDNA scaffold strands
are circular with a minimal constant-sequence backbone of 234 bases
(Figure 1B). This residual
backbone can then also be removed entirely via Zn2+-dependent digestion when flanking self-excising DNAzyme
cassettes21 are added during sequence preparation
for gene synthesis. As a result, the user obtains linear scaffold
molecules with virtually 100% custom sequence (except for two and
seven base residuals at the two termini). In support of the robustness
of the split-ori/helper-phage approach, we note that, concurrent to
our work, Douglas and co-workers produced scaffolds for DNA origami
by inserting coding genes or parts of the lambda phage genome into
a split-ori backbone, although Douglas et al. used
a different helper plasmid.31

Sequence Redundancy
and Sequence Composition Rules
The commonly used M13-phage-based
scaffolds have a comparably high
degree of sequence redundancy, and others have speculated that this
redundancy may negatively influence the self-assembly behavior of
DNA origami.6 On the other hand, it has
also been speculated that the M13-based sequences were particularly
well-behaved and thus especially suited for DNA origami.32 In addition, the influence of sequence composition
(e.g., AT vs GC content) on self-assembly
remains in the dark. For designing synthetic scaffolds, it is important
to understand the impact of sequence redundancy and sequence composition
on self-assembly in order to arrive at relevant sequence construction
criteria. To study these parameters, we constructed five synthetic
7560 bases long scaffolds (SC2–6) and compared them to a popular
M13-based scaffold variant (SC1) of the same length (Figure 2). The designed portions of
the custom scaffolds SC2–6 were low redundancy de Bruijn sequences
of order 7, which means that sequence strings with length 7 occur
exactly once or not at all.33 All of these
scaffolds could be produced in shake flasks with yield and purity
similar to that in conventional M13-based production (Supporting Information Note S2 and Figures S4–S6).
Four of the scaffolds (SC2, SC4, SC5, SC6) have insert sequences that
are orthogonal to each other and to the conventional M13-based scaffolds.
Residual sequence overlaps between these four individual scaffolds
are determined by details of the constant-sequence cassettes in the
phagemids and have lengths between 180 and 426 bases, which is small
compared to the total length (7560) of the scaffold variants. Scaffold
variant SC3 had a longer 1387 bases long sequence fragment taken from
the M13 genome; SC3 has thus a degree of sequence redundancy which
fell between the low-redundant de Bruijn scaffolds and the highly
redundant M13.

Figure 2 Influence of base composition and sequence redundancy
of custom
scaffolds on DNA origami self-assembly. Blue indicates M13-based scaffolds;
orange, magenta, red, cyan, and green indicate custom scaffolds. (A)
Schematic representations of six different 42-helix bundles folded
using the six different scaffolds. SC1, M13-based scaffold; SC2, reduced
backbone phagemid scaffold with CpG-free de Bruijn insert sequence;
SC3, conventional phagemid with high duplicity fragment and de Bruijn
insert sequence; SC4, conventional phagemid with de Bruijn insert
sequence; SC5 and SC6, split-ori based scaffold with de Bruijn sequence;
L, length; GC, GC content of the corresponding scaffold. (B) Electrophoretic
mobility analysis of self-assembly reactions of the 42-helix bundles
shown in (A) at different temperatures and salt concentrations. SC,
scaffold reference; C50 and C20, assembly reactions containing 50
nM (C50) or 20 nM (C20) scaffold, 200 nM staples, and 20 mM MgCl2 that were subjected to an annealing ramp from 60 to 44 °C
(1 h per °C); temperature screen, assembly mixtures as in C50
but subjected to annealing ramps covering the temperature intervals
indicated above each lane (1 h per °C); magnesium screen, assembly
reactions containing 50 nM scaffold, 200 nM staples, and MgCl2 concentrations between 5 mM (M5) and 30 mM (M30). P, pocket;
F, folded 42-helix bundle. All samples were loaded onto the gel at
an approximate scaffold concentration of 20 nM. All temperature ramps
contained an initial denaturation step at 65 °C for 15 min. Laser
scanned fluorescent images of the electrophoretic analysis were autoleveled.
(C) Statistics of sequence duplicates of different scaffold variants
as a function of fragment length. Colors as in (A). (D) Experimentally
observed optimal folding temperature intervals of the 42-helix bundles
plotted against total NN energy of corresponding scaffold variant.
Total NN energy was calculated using nearest-neighbor free energy
parameters,36 ignoring edge effects. Dots
in red indicate upper, and dots in blue indicate lower limit of the
highest folding temperature interval where the sample appeared fully
folded. Solid lines represent linear fits.

To test our custom scaffolds, we used them as templates for
variants
of a previously described brick-like 42-helix bundle (42hb)34 and synthesized the corresponding sets of staple
oligonucleotides (Figure 2A). We analyzed the assembly behavior of the different 42hb
variants at different temperatures and salt concentrations using a
standardized folding screen.35 The assembly
reactions yielded well-folded products for all six scaffold sequence
variants of the 42hb object, as manifested by sharp leading bands
in gel electrophoresis (Figure 2B). Contrary to what has been speculated previously,6 we did not observe systematic quality differences
between the scaffold variants with higher or lower degree of sequence
redundancy. In particular, we did not detect a beneficial effect on
assembly behavior when using the low-redundancy de Bruijn sequences
compared to the conventional, much more redundant M13-based scaffold
variant (Figure 2C
and Supporting Information Figure S7).
Similarly, we could not detect any drawbacks of synthetically designed
scaffold sequences that are not M13-based.

Sequence composition,
however, did have noticeable effects on self-assembly
behavior. For example, well-folded objects self-assembled already
at lower salt concentrations for sequence variants with higher GC
content (Figure 2B,
right). As seen previously for other DNA origami objects,34 each sequence variant assembled successfully
in narrowly defined temperature intervals. For our 42hb variants,
we found that the sequence composition of the scaffold variant determined
the temperature intervals in which the objects folded successfully
(Figure 2A,B). In particular,
the temperature intervals that yielded the highest folding quality
correlated strongly with the scaffold sequence composition in terms
of the total nearest-neighbor energy (Figure 2D).36 In the SC2
sequence, C is never followed by G. As the CG base pair step has a
particularly strong stacking energy, the omission of this base pair
step leads to a substantially reduced nearest-neighbor energy. Only
looking at GC content as predictor is too coarse: SC2 has the lowest
temperature interval but the second-lowest GC percentage (44%), whereas
SC1 (=M13) has the lowest GC content but does not fold in the lowest
temperature interval. Hence, the sequence composition should be considered
during sequence construction at the level of base pair step composition.
Our design tool scaffold smith was thus built accordingly.

Smaller
DNA Origami
Depending on the target application,
scaffolds shorter than the conventional M13 variants (∼8000
bases) may be desirable. With the scaffold smith, scaffold sequence
strings of any length may now be designed. However, the scaffold production
method must be adapted according to the length of the target strand.
We thus tested the split-ori approach for its capacity to produce
short scaffolds in the ∼1000 bases length range. To this end,
we built a circular, 1317 bases long mini-scaffold (Supporting Information Figures S5 and S6D,E). We found that
the ssDNA amount per culture volume for this short scaffold was substantially
lower (0.38 mg/L) compared to the yields obtained for target strands
with lengths between ∼3000 (3.6 mg/L) and ∼9000 bases
(2.6 mg/L). We therefore developed an alternative method for the convenient
biotechnological production of short linear scaffolds with completely
user-definable sequences. The method builds on our recently reported
strategy for the biotechnological production of staple strands.21 We integrated multiple copies of the same target
scaffold sequence in one phagemid and interleaved them with Zn2+-dependent, self-excising DNAzyme “cassettes”.
The resulting multi-insert circular DNA single strands have a total
size comparable to that of the conventional M13 genome, which is presumably
favorable for DNA packaging and phage particle production. Indeed,
the multi-insert phagemids can be produced with satisfying yields.
Upon incubation with Zn2+, the DNAzyme cassettes become
catalytically active and the circular ssDNA is digested into excised
DNAzyme snippets, residual backbone, and multiple copies of the linear
single-stranded target scaffold (Figure 3A). Thus, the multi-insert excision approach
effectively allows mass producing homotypic pools of DNA oligonucleotides
(as opposed to heterotypic pools as in our previous work21). We used our multi-insert excision approach
to produce three scaffold variants with lengths of 1024, 1512, and
2048 bases and used them to assemble 13-helix bundles of different
lengths. All 13-helix bundle variants self-assembled with excellent
yield into the desired shape, as corroborated by gel electrophoresis,
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging, and reference-free
class averaging (Figure 3A,B). For making scaffolds with lengths between ∼3000 and
∼9000 bases, we found the conventional phagemid approach to
be well-suited. As an example, we produced an additional series of
synthetic-sequence scaffolds with lengths of 2873, 4536, 6048, and
9072 bases (Figure S6D,E). These variants
expand the currently available set of generic scaffolds17,32 that is available to the community and that may be used to produce
DNA origami with corresponding sizes.

Figure 3 DNA origami objects with sizes ranging
between 1024 bp (633 kDa)
and 37800 bp (23.4 MDa) can be assembled using mini-scaffolds or in
one-pot assembly reactions containing multiple scaffolds. Blue indicates
M13-based scaffolds; orange, green, cyan, and red indicate custom
scaffolds. (A) Schematic representation of a circular DNA single strand
(top left) that, in the presence of Zn2+, cleaves itself
to yield four copies of a short, linear scaffold (top right) that
can subsequently be used to assemble a small DNA origami object (bottom).
(B) Schematic representation (top) and average TEM images of 13-helix
bundle (13hb) variants assembled from linear mini-scaffolds comprising
1024 (I), 1536 (II), or 2048 bases (III). Scale bar: 20 nm. (C) Electrophoretic
mobility analysis of mini-scaffolds and 13-helix bundle variants described
in (B). (D) Schematic representations, single TEM images, and average
TEM images (from top to bottom) of a 42-helix bundle assembled with
five scaffolds in one-pot reactions. Scale bar: 50 nm. (E) Schematic
representations, single TEM images, and average TEM images (from top
to bottom) of an improved 42-helix bundle design with five interlocked
scaffolds. Scale bar: 50 nm. (F) Electrophoretic mobility analysis
of the two 42-helix bundle versions shown in (D,E). (G) Schematic
representation (top), average TEM images with corresponding model
views (left), and gel electrophoretic analysis (right) of a 126-helix
bundle (126hb) assembled with two interlocked scaffolds. Scale bar:
50 nm. (H) Overlay of a cryo-EM density map fragment and the corresponding
scaffold routing diagram. Blue and orange paths indicate the two orthogonal
scaffolds. Laser scanned fluorescent images of the electrophoretic
analyses were autoleveled. P, pocket; sta, staples.

Larger DNA Origami
Many applications
of DNA origami
require objects whose sizes exceed the dimensions of conventional
M13 scaffolds.16,37−41 Researchers have thus invested effort into building
larger DNA origami to achieve greater overall dimensions and to integrate
more features.41,42 One possibility to build larger
DNA origami with sizes beyond 10000 base pairs is to use increasingly
long scaffold chains. Consequently, other researchers have reported
up to 50000 bases long scaffold strands that were constructed from
biological sequences, including E. coli genomic sequences and lambda phage sequences.16,43 However, for scaffold lengths beyond 10kb assembly, cloning and
plasmid handling become challenging. Moreover, when we compared the
yield of production of scaffolds of different lengths, a trend emerged
indicating that the yield drops for lengths approaching 10000 (Supporting Information Figure S6F), although
the data are not entirely conclusive. A second possibility for making
larger objects is to form higher-order assemblies from separately
folded DNA origami subunits.40,41,44,45 Oligomerization of individually
assembled DNA origami objects can be achieved using sticky-end interactions37,40 or via shape-complementary surface features and
stacking interactions.38,39,41 When following these routes, the individual building blocks must
be produced separately and usually require some type of purification,
which in addition to manual labor can negatively affect the overall
yield.

Here, we thus pursued a third, complementary strategy
to make larger DNA origami which considers the usage of multiple scaffold
chains in one-pot assembly reactions, which has been used already
exemplarily in our own previous work41 and
in those of others.31,46 For one-pot assembly of multiscaffold
DNA origami, we anticipate that the scaffold sequences must be sufficiently
distinct (“orthogonal”) to achieve productive folding
of the target object. We tested these requirements experimentally
and found that successful one-pot coassembly does indeed require orthogonal
scaffold sequences (Supporting Information Figures S8 and S9). To enable one-pot coassembly with multiple scaffolds,
we thus designed four 7560 bases long scaffolds (SC2, 4, 5, 6, compare Figure 2) that are orthogonal
to each other and to the conventional M13-based scaffold (SC1). As
a proof-of-concept, we designed a long pentameric 42-helix bundle
object (Figure 3D)
that self-assembled in a one-pot folding reaction mixture containing
the five scaffold chains with distinct sequences and the several hundred
staple oligonucleotides. Direct imaging with negative-staining TEM
revealed the expected 42-helix bundle pentamers without visible seams
between the subunits containing the individual scaffolds (Figure 3D). Reference-free
class averages indicated a global twist deformation along the helical
axis, which is consistent with recent findings concerning the occurrence
of residual twist in honeycomb DNA origami.41 TEM imaging further revealed higher-order branched networks in which
well-folded 42hb pentamers were connected with other 42hb pentamers
(Supporting Information Figure S10). We
attributed these connected pentamers to design flaws: For this initial
demonstration, we simply designed staple strands that connect the
individual single-scaffold 42hb blocks across the helical interface.
Some of these connecting staple strands featured long binding segments
that presumably cause the undesired branched connections. We thus
made a second, distinct 42hb pentamer design in which we changed the
routing of the five scaffold chains to better interlock the individual
chains. We also corrected right-handed twist using base pair deletions
in the design, and we included an asymmetric feature. The thus-revised
object self-assembled in the expected shape as seen by TEM (Figure 3E), now with reduced
twist, and it appears as a single discrete species as seen in gel
electrophoresis (Figure 3F). The extent of aggregates was substantially reduced compared to
the variant without interlocked scaffolds. Importantly, the folding
reaction mixtures for both 42hb pentamer design variants yielded only
the pentameric target object in addition to a design-dependent extent
of aggregates of intact pentamers, as seen in gel electrophoresis
(Figure 3F). Incomplete
pentamers were absent in both design versions. To achieve complete
pentamers as a single folding product, the scaffold concentrations
must be adjusted such that they appear in exactly equivalent amounts
in the folding reaction mixture.

To illustrate the excellent
potential of using multiple orthogonal
scaffold chains for efficiently constructing larger DNA origami with
high yield and high quality, we designed a barrel-like 126-helix bundle
(126hb) comprising 15120 base pairs distributed over two orthogonal
scaffolds that are interlocked in the helical direction (Figure 3G). When the relative
scaffold concentrations were properly adjusted, the object formed
successfully with close to 100% yield and virtually no side products,
as seen in gel electrophoretic mobility analysis and TEM imaging (Figure 3G,H and Figure S11). Reference-free class averages from
single-particle micrographs were in very good agreement with the designed
shape. Due to the high quality of the object, we were able to solve
a structure of this object using cryo-electron microscopy, in which
nearly all of the 126 constituent helices were resolved in such detail
that the grooves of double helices and all connecting crossovers could
be discerned. We analyzed the map with respect to systematic differences
at scaffold–scaffold seams and could not find any differences
between seams containing one or both scaffolds (Figure 3G). Therefore, given a suitable scaffold
routing and properly calibrated strand concentrations, multiscaffold
DNA origami objects can be assembled with the high yield and the high
quality known from well-behaved single-scaffold DNA origami designs.
One-pot assembly of multiscaffold objects represents thus a powerful
route for building larger DNA origami.

Functional Scaffolds: Catalytic
Motifs and Covalent Cross-Linking
The design of fully synthetic
scaffolds enables exclusion of undesired
motifs and the inclusion of specific sequence motifs that serve user-defined
purposes. As a demonstration for motif exclusion, we built a synthetic
de Bruijn scaffold on the order of 7 that lacks CG base pair steps
(SC2 from Figure 2).
The absence of these CpG motifs could potentially circumvent Toll-like
receptor-9-mediated immunogenic reactions in organisms.7 This CG-free scaffold could be particularly advantageous
when exploring in vivo applications of DNA origami.
As a demonstration for the site-directed functionalization of synthetic
scaffolds with functional sequences, we built two scaffolds that contain
catalytic sequence motifs. We included one or two self-excising DNAzyme
cassettes during sequence construction. Upon incubation with Zn2+, the DNAzymes become catalytically active, causing excision
of the DNAzyme cassettes and thus linearization or bisection of the
scaffold. Including these 132 bases long DNAzyme cassettes into the
scaffold sequence ensures incorporation into every assembled DNA origami.

To illustrate the functionality, we used the self-bisecting scaffold
to assemble a variant of a previously published DNA origami switch
object (Figure 4A).38,47 The switch object consists of two rigid beams that are flexibly
linked by a single scaffold crossover at the center. The switch features
double-helical shape-complementary protrusions and recessions that
can dock into each other, stabilizing a closed state of the switch via base stacking interactions. Due to the electrostatic
repulsion of the negatively charged DNA arms, the switch will predominantly
occupy its open state at low salt concentrations. At higher salt concentrations,
the electrostatic repulsion is shielded, and the stacking interactions
are sufficient to stabilize the closed state. In our bisectable switch
variant, we placed the self-excising DNAzyme cassettes directly at
the pivot point, where the scaffold chain crosses from one switch
arm to the other (Figure 4A). The thus-designed objects self-assembled with high yield
and predominantly populated an open state at <10 mM MgCl2 and a closed state at >10 mM MgCl2, as expected. When
incubated with Zn2+, the switch objects are cut at the
pivot point due to the excision of the DNA enzyme cassettes (Figure 4B). Gel electrophoretic
mobility analysis (Figure 4C,D) reveals that the bisection reaction goes to completion,
and that the kinetics of bisection strongly depends on the state of
the switch: at high salt (closed state), the reaction is substantially
slower, which we attribute to activity-reducing conformational constraints
on the DNAzyme cassettes. A simple Mg2+ dependence of the
reaction kinetics can be ruled out because the reaction speed is the
same in the presence of 1.4 or 5 mM MgCl2. The cleavage
reaction was also faster when residual staple oligonucleotides were
removed by PEG precipitation48 prior to
incubation with Zn2+ (Figure 4D).

Figure 4 Self-cleaving DNA origami. (A) Schematic representations
of circular
scaffolds containing two self-excising DNAzyme cassettes (top left)
that can be cleaved into two linear scaffolds (bottom left) or assembled
into a switch object (top right). Individual switch arms (bottom right)
can be obtained by cleavage of assembled switch objects or assembly
using cleaved linear scaffolds. (B) Electrophoretic analysis of reaction
kinetics of scaffold cleavage. Controls: cleaved scaffold (lane 1),
undigested sample (lane 2), and switch arms assembled separately (lane
7) using cleaved scaffold. (C) Field-of-view TEM images of uncleaved
(left) and cleaved (right) switch objects. (D) Electrophoretic analysis
of cleavage reactions containing unpurified (lanes 1 and 5) and PEG-purified
(lanes 2–4, 6–8) switch objects at 1.4, 4, 10, or 20
mM MgCl2. Laser scanned fluorescent images of the electrophoretic
analysis were autoleveled, and the highlighted region was autoleveled
individually. P, pocket; U, undigested species; D, digested species.
Scale bar: 100 nm.

Synthetic scaffold design
also allows integrating hundreds of user-defined
motifs site-specifically into a DNA origami, which can be exploited,
for example, for sequence-programmable, chemical-modification-free
covalent cross-linking of DNA origami objects,9 termed UV point-welding. UV point-welded DNA origami objects are
substantially more durable compared to nontreated objects and can
remain stable at temperatures up to 90 °C and in pure double-distilled
water with no additional cations present. In our previous work, covalent
cross-linking was achieved by placing additional thymidine bases in
the staple strand sequences at all termini and at all double-crossover
positions.9 Irradiation of such objects
with 310 nm light induces the formation of covalent cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimer (CPD) bonds between colocalized thymidine bases. As a result,
double-helical domains become topologically trapped, and the constituent
strands of thus-treated DNA origami can no longer dissociate, unless
covalent bonds are broken. The possibility of making fully customized
scaffolds offers an elegant way to realize the formation of UV-induced
CPD bonds at desired sites while suppressing the formation of CPD
bonds at undesired sites. Using the scaffold smith tool, a scaffold
sequence can be designed that does not exhibit any TT motifs and that
features AA only at desired crossover sites and strand termini as
specified in the strand diagram.

As a demonstration, we constructed
a semigeneric scaffold that
can be used to create UV-cross-linkable single- or multilayer DNA
origami objects in square lattice packing. In this scaffold, AA sites
simply appear in regular intervals of eight bases. Given appropriate
scaffold routing, all staple crossover sites feature AA motifs on
the scaffold, which therefore leads to thymidines in staple strands
that can be cross-linked (Figure 5A). We produced the corresponding 7560 bases long welding
scaffold using the backbone excision split-ori method described in Figure 1B and used it to
assemble a variant of a previously reported multilayer DNA origami
object known as the pointer.49 The UV-welding-ready
pointer object self-assembled with satisfyingly high yield, as judged
by electrophoretic mobility analysis (Figure 5C, lanes 2 and 12) and TEM imaging (Figure 5BI). We then irradiated
the pointer object at 310 nm in the presence of 30 mM magnesium chloride.
TEM images of the pointer acquired directly after exposure to UV light
compared very well to those acquired prior to irradiation (Figure 5BII), indicating
that the object retained its structure. We then incubated the irradiated
sample for 48 h in physiological (low) ionic strength conditions (PBS
buffer) at 40 °C (Figure 5BIII). Under such low ionic strength conditions, nonirradiated
control pointer objects immediately dissociated into staple strands
and scaffold strand as seen in gel electrophoresis (Figure 5B, left). By contrast, the
irradiated samples remained fully intact, as indicated by the fact
that the electrophoretic mobility did not change and by the absence
of dissociated staple strand bands (Figure 5C, right). TEM imaging of the 48 h long PBS-incubated
UV-welded pointer reveals well-folded objects consistent with the
designed shape (Figure 5B, right). We thus conclude that the UV point-welding via scaffold-templated CPD bonds of the pointer was successful.

Figure 5 UV point-welding
of DNA origami with a custom scaffold. (A) Section
of a multilayer DNA origami strand diagram with a customized scaffold
featuring AA motifs every 8 base pairs, which results in adjacent
Thymidines in separate staple strands that may be UV-cross-linked.
Blue lines, scaffold strand; gray lines, staple strands. (B) Schematic
representation (left) and average TEM images of the pointer object
assembled with the welding scaffold. Average images of the pointer
as obtained in the presence of 30 mM MgCl2 before irradiation
(I), after irradiation for 2 h at 310 nm (II) in the presence of 30
mM MgCl2, and after irradiation for 2 h at 310 nm and 48
h long incubation in low ionic strength phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) at 40 °C (III). (C) Electrophoretic analysis of nonirradiated
and irradiated pointer objects incubated over time in PBS at 40 °C.
L, 1kB Ladder; NI, not irradiated; RT, room temperature; P, pocket;
F, folded species; sta, staples. Scale bar: 50 nm.

Conclusion
With the tools and methods
presented herein, researchers can now
fully specify a target structure not only in terms of desired 3D shape
and dimensions but also in terms of the sequences used. There is no
longer a need to design objects around generic scaffold sequences
as in the original DNA origami procedures. We demonstrated the potential
of these tools and methods with a set of synthetic-sequence scaffolds
which we used to explore the effects of sequence redundancy and sequence
composition on the self-assembly of DNA origami, which is important
input for guiding the construction of design-specific scaffolds. We
built mini scaffolds as short as 1024 bases and a set of fully orthogonal
scaffolds that enable efficient one-pot multiscaffold assembly of
DNA origami comprising up to ∼38000 base pairs. We also made
scaffolds containing functional motifs that enable DNAzyme-driven
linearization and bisection of scaffolds or folded structures, which
can enable constructing for example interlocked machine-like objects.
Interlocked parts of these objects could be released by DNAzyme cleavage
triggered by Zn2+-addition. We demonstrate that functional
sequence motifs like DNAzymes, which are too long for staple strand
synthesis, can be integrated in the scaffold sequence. We also constructed
a CpG-free scaffold with presumably lower immunogenicity for future in vivo applications. Finally, we produced a customized
scaffold with AA motifs spaced in intervals of 8 base pairs, which
enables constructing square-lattice like single- or multilayer DNA
origami that can be covalently cross-linked via UV
point-welding right after folding. This scaffold can be considered
as a demonstration of a fully design-specific scaffold, but the design
was done such that the resulting scaffold can be used modularly in
many other DNA origami designs.

With the currently available
commercial gene synthesis services,
our method allows constructing an entirely custom scaffold for less
than 1000 € synthesis cost and requiring about 2 weeks of manual
labor. We deposited precursor plasmids for all of our scaffolds at
Addgene to make them available for the use by other researchers, along
with the helper plasmids needed to produce the actual scaffold ssDNA.
We also deposited a designated target plasmid containing the split-ori
cassette, allowing other researchers to easily create their own custom
scaffolds. Synthetic genes or gene fragments can be introduced into
our target plasmid using a convenient and robust one-step Golden Gate
cloning protocol.50

With custom-sequence
scaffolds, DNA origami designers may rationally
exploit sequence composition as a design parameter. Here, we produced
mostly scaffold variants having a total nearest-neighbor energy higher
than the conventional M13 variants, which led to assembly at temperatures
higher than those of the M13-scaffolded object. It may be beneficial
to explore whether the sequence composition may be tuned to push productive
assembly temperature intervals down to physiological temperatures
and without requiring a prior denaturation step. Furthermore, with
full control over sequence design, sets of orthogonal scaffolds may
now be produced that enable the direct and efficient assembly of oligomeric
superstructures in one pot. For optimized designs such as the 126hb,
we observed virtually perfect assembly yield in a one-pot reaction
containing multiple scaffolds, which underlines the great potential
of the multiscaffold strategy.

DNA origami applications often
rely on the positioning of functionalities
that typically consist of or are attached to specific ssDNA sequences.
When conventional M13 scaffolds or natural sequences are used, these
functional sequences must be introduced as extensions of staple strands.
The incorporation yield of these extended staple strands may vary
and can be unsatisfyingly low (e.g., 48%).8 If, on the other hand, the desired functional
sequences are included in the scaffold strand, the incorporation yield
into a folded DNA origami is 100%. As we demonstrated, custom scaffolds
can be designed and produced to include functional sequences at user-defined
positions. An extreme example is the welding scaffold that contained
hundreds of custom AA sites while excluding undesired TT sites. As
an example, we integrated self-excising DNAzyme cassettes as functional
motifs into our scaffolds. Assembly of mechanically interlocked DNA
origami mechanisms39,51 should become much easier with
such bisectable scaffolds because detachment and component release
can be achieved through Zn2+-induced excision of the DNAzyme
cassettes. Self-linearizing scaffolds should be useful for designing
multilayer DNA origami with odd-numbered helices and for making objects
with applications such as nanopore translocation52,53 or for tethered fluorophore motion assays54 that require a linear scaffold. Future custom scaffolds might be
designed to include other functional sequence motifs, such as aptamers,
recognition sites for DNA-binding proteins, and indicator sites for
complementary DNA strands as needed, for example, for DNA paint super-resolution
microscopy.55

Another attractive
aspect of creating design-specific scaffolds
is that they lower the barrier to making DNA origami at larger scales.
Previously, we reported how to biotechnologically mass produce pools
of staple strands.21 The synthesis of the
necessary plasmids with many interleaved self-cleaving DNAzyme cassettes
poses an initial obstacle, which may render this method somewhat unattractive
at intermediate scales and in situations where design variants will
need to be iterated. However, precursor plasmids for custom-sequence
scaffolds are easily synthesized as they do not, by default, contain
repetitive sequences. Hence, the DNA origami concept can now be inverted:
one fixed pool of staple strands could be mass-produced biotechnologically
in a lab-scale (or even industrial scale) bioreactor. Then, different
custom-sequence scaffolds can be made in shake flasks that fold the
set of fixed-sequence staple strands into different structures, thereby
allowing to iterate through design versions at scales inaccessible
with DNA reagents produced via chemical synthesis.
A variant of this idea has been tested presented previously with the
goal to reuse chemically produced DNA oligonucleotides.19

Methods
Design and
Construction of Scaffold Plasmids
For our
custom scaffolds, we designed insert sequences for the variable part
using either a python-based de Bruijn sequence generator or by using
the scaffold smith GUI (see Supporting Information Note S1). Resulting insert sequences were split into shorter
fragments to facilitate gene synthesis either manually or using a
gene splitter GUI. Gene fragments were ordered either as linear gene
strands or as genes in plasmids from Eurofins genomics (Ebersberg,
Germany) or Twist bioscience (San Francisco, CA, USA). Full-length
precursor plasmids were assembled using either Gibson assembly56 or Golden Gate cloning.50 Correct assembly was verified using restriction digest and DNA sequencing
(Eurofins genomics, Ebersberg Germany). Sequences of all plasmids
used in this work can be found in an Excel table in the Supporting Information.

Production of ssDNA in
Shaker flasks
A detailed overview
of the four different production methods is given in Supporting Information Note S2. M13 phage scaffolds were produced
as previously described.18 For custom scaffolds
(methods II, III, and IV), chemically competent cells (E. coli DH5α) were cotransformed with the corresponding
precursor plasmid and a helper plasmid. The actual ssDNA production
for methods II and IV was carried out as previously described.21 For convenience, the protocol is reprinted below:

“A single clone was picked and grown to saturation in a
5 mL pre-culture in 2xYT medium containing 5 mM MgCl2,
30 μg/mL kanamycin, and either 50 μg/mL carbenicillin
or 30 μg/mL chloramphenicol, depending on the phagemid backbone
used; 750 mL of the same medium was inoculated with the preculture
and grown overnight at 37 °C in 2.5 L Ultra Yield flasks (Thomson).
Bacteria were removed by centrifugation for 30 min at 4000 rcf. Phagemid
particles were precipitated by adding 3% polyethylene glycol 8000
(PEG-8000) and 0.5 M NaCl and centrifugation for 30 min at 4000 rcf.
The pellet was resuspended in 5 mL of 1× TE buffer (10 mM Tris,
1 mM EDTA, pH 8) and centrifuged again for 15 min at 16000 rcf to
remove residual bacterial cell fragments.”

For method
III, ssDNA production was carried out analogously but
using a growth medium containing 16 g/L tryptone, 10 g/L yeast extract,
60 g/L sucrose, and 30 μg/mL kanamycin.57 For all methods, ssDNA was subsequently isolated from the phagemid
particles using alkaline lysis according to standard protocols for
M13 ssDNA purification.58 Purity of ssDNA
was analyzed using gel electrophoresis, and sequences of custom scaffolds
were verified using DNA sequencing. ssDNA concentrations were determined via the absorbance at 260 nm using extinction coefficients
of 9828 M–1 cm–1 per base. Extinction
coefficients for all scaffolds used in this work can be found in an Excel table in the Supporting Information.

Design, Assembly, and Purification
of 3D DNA Origami
DNA origami objects were designed using
caDNAno22 and the designs were evaluated
using CanDo.59,60 Design diagrams can be found
in Supporting Information Figures S11–S17 or in the corresponding references.34,41,49,61 Reaction
mixtures contained concentrations of scaffold strands and staples
that were optimized for each object (42hb monomers: 50 nM scaffold
+ 200 nM staples; one-pot reaction mixture of 42hb and 10hb: 10 nM
scaffold + 100 nM staples; 94hb: 20 nM scaffold + 100 nM staples;
126hb: 20 nM scaffold + 220 nM staples; 42hb pentamer version I assembly
setup: 10 nM scaffold + 100 nM staples; 42hb pentamer version II assembly
setup: 10 nM scaffold + 200 nM staples; switch object and pointer
object: 20 nM scaffold + 200 nM staples nM; 13hb variants: 40 nM scaffold
+ 200 nM staples). All reaction mixtures contained 5 mM Tris, 1 mM
EDTA, 20 mM MgCl2, and 5 mM NaCl (pH 8). To compare different
scaffolds, 42hb monomers were assembled using a standardized folding
screen (for details see the caption of Figure 1), which was also used to identify optimized
temperature intervals for each DNA origami object. Hence, each reaction
mixture was subjected to an individually optimized thermal annealing
ramp using a TETRAD (MJ Research, now Biorad), which included a preincubation
step at 65 °C for 15 min. Subsequent temperature ramps were 60–40
°C at 1 h/°C for the 94hb, the switch-object, the pointer
object, and for all one-pot reaction mixtures with multiple objects;
60–40 °C at 3 h/°C for the 126 and 42hb oligomers
and 60–40 °C at 15 min/°C for the 13hb variants.
DNA origami objects were purified via PEG precipitation.35,48 For the 13hb objects, a final PEG concentration of 10.7% (w/v),
a final NaCl concentration of 535 mM, and a final MgCl2 concentration of 14.7 mM were used for precipitation. After precipitation,
all pellets were resuspended in a buffer containing 5 mM Tris, 1 mM
EDTA, 5 mM MgCl2, and 5 mM NaCl (pH 8).

Agarose Gel
Electrophoresis
In general, scaffolds and
assembled DNA origami objects were analyzed using 1–2% agarose
gels in 0.5× TBE buffer (45 mM Tris base, 45 mM boric acid, 1
mM EDTA) including 5.5 mM MgCl2 and 0.5 μg/mL ethidium
bromide at 90 V for 1.5 h in a water bath. Agarose concentrations
were 1.5% for the 94hb in Figure S9 and
the 42hb oligomers in Figure 3 and 2% for all other gels. Gels were scanned using a Typhoon
FLA 9500 laser scanner (GE) at a resolution of either 50 or 25 μm/px
(EtBr-channel: excitation at 535 nm, emission >575 nm). Images
were
inverted and autoleveled (Adobe Photoshop CS6).

Transmission
Electron Microscopy Imaging and Image Processing
Samples
were diluted to final concentrations between 1 and 5 nM
in a buffer containing 20 mM MgCl2 and adsorbed for 30
s to 1 min on glow-discharged Formvar-supported carbon-coated Cu400
TEM grids (Science Services, Munich) and stained using a 2% aqueous
uranyl formate solution containing 25 mM NaOH. Imaging was performed
using a Philips CM100 EM operated at 100 kV and an AMT 4 megapixel
CCD camera (magnification: 28500×) or using a Tecnai Spirit operated
at 120 kV and a TVIPS F416 detector (Tietz Camera Systems) (magnification:
30000×). For reference-free class averaging, image libraries
were created by individual particle picking and analyzed using Xmipp
3.0.62 TEM micrographs shown were subjected
to high-pass filtering and autoleveling (Adobe Photoshop CS6).

Sample
Preparation of 126hb for the Cryo-EM Study
The
126hb sample was purified and enriched via ultrafiltration
with centrifugation steps at 10000 rcf for 5 min at 20 °C (Amicon
Ultra 0.5 mL 50 kDa cutoff filters, Millipore). The sample was diluted
4-fold with folding buffer (1× FOB = 1 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, and
5 mM NaCl) prior to the first run. The filters were rinsed with 1×
FOB including 5 mM MgCl2 (1× FOB5), filled with 500
μL sample each and subjected to a centrifugation step. After
six washing steps consisting of removing of the flow-through, refilling
of the filters to 500 μL with 1× FOB5, and a centrifugation
step, the filters were placed upside down in fresh tubes and subjected
to another centrifugation step. The recovered sample was pooled from
the filter tubes and added to one fresh filter in steps of 500 μL
each followed by a centrifugation step. The filter was placed upside
down in a fresh tube and subjected to two final centrifugation steps.
The final concentration of the recovered sample was measured to be
1.2 μM.

Cryo-EM: Acquisition and Processing of Data
The purified
and enriched sample was applied to C-Flat 2/1 4C (Protochips) grids
and plunge-frozen using a Vitrobot Mark V (FEI, now Thermo Scientific)
at the following settings: temperature of 22 °C, humidity of
100%, 0 s wait time, 2 s blot time, −1 blot force, 0 s drain
time. The data were acquired on a Titan Krios G2 electron microscope
operated at 300 kV equipped with a Falcon 3 direct detector using
the EPU software for automated data collection (FEI, now Thermo Scientific).
Micrograph movies comprising 7 frames each were recorded at a calibrated
magnification of 47000 and magnified pixel size of 1.39 Å, a
total dose of ∼50 e–/Å2 and defocus values from −1 to −2 μm.
The image processing was performed in RELION 2.163 and 3.0,64 using MotionCor265 and CTFFIND4.166 for
motion correction and contrast transfer function estimation, respectively.
A total of 2118 particles were manually picked and subjected to reference-free
2D classification. Four of the best classes (as judged by visual inspection)
were selected as templates for automated particle picking. The particles
were subjected to multiple rounds of 2D and 3D classification using
a 3D de novo initial model created inside RELION
as a 3D reference. A total of 123433 particles assigned to classes
showing the most features were selected for a 3D refinement and further
motion-corrected using the Bayesian Polishing tool. A focused refinement
of a subregion was performed using the Multibody Refinement tool.
The refined maps were sharpened by automatically estimated B-factors
and locally filtered using the post processing and local resolution
tool, respectively.

Zn-Induced Excision of DNAzyme Cassettes
and Postpurification
Using EtOH
Cleavage reactions were performed by incubating
20 nM phagemid ssDNA or 20 nM switch object in a buffer containing
50 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, and 2 mM ZnCl2, pH 7.0 at 37
°C overnight. ssDNA cleavage products were purified by adding
0.3 vol of 3 M KOAc (pH5), 0.033 vol of 1 M MgCl2, and
2 vol of isopropyl alcohol. After 5 h incubation at −20 °C,
the sample was pelleted by centrifugation for 45 min at 16000 rcf.
The pellet was washed with 75% ethanol to remove residual salt, centrifuged
again, and dissolved in 1× TE buffer. Switch object cleavage
products were purified via PEG purification and resuspended
in 1× FOB5.

UV Irradiation and Buffer Exchange to PBS
and Incubation at
40 °C
The pointer object was irradiated for 120 min
in folding buffer (5 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, 30 mM MgCl2, and
5 mM NaCl) with a 300 W xenon light source (MAX-303 from Asahi Spectra)
with a high transmission band-pass filter centered around 310 nm (XAQA310
from Asahi Spectra). A light guide (Asahi Spectra) was placed directly
on top of a 0.65 mL reaction tube to couple the light into the sample.
For all samples (cross-linked and un-cross-linked control) buffer
exchange to PBS was achieved via ultrafiltration
(Amicon Ultra 0.5 mL 50 kDa cutoff filters, Millipore) with three
centrifugation steps at 7000 rcf for 5 min at 20 °C (Eppendorf
5424R). Samples were then incubated at 40 °C, and aliquots were
shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen after different time intervals.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b01025.Detailed notes
on generating a design-specific scaffold
sequence with the scaffold smith, overview of methods for phage-based
production of ssDNA scaffolds, workflow for the design, cloning, and
production of a custom scaffold, supplementary experimental data and
design schematics (PDF)

Sequence information for scaffolds and plasmids used
in this work (XLSX)

Tools used in this work to design and analyze scaffold
sequences (ZIP)



Supplementary Material
nn9b01025_si_001.pdf

 nn9b01025_si_002.xlsx

 nn9b01025_si_003.zip

 Author Contributions
F.A.S.E. and
F.P. contributed equally to this work. F.A.S.E., F.P., and C.H.W.
performed the research, and H.D. designed the research. G.B., B.K.,
K.L.K., P.N.P., and K.L.B. performed auxiliary experiments. F.K. performed
cryo-EM. T.G. designed the bisectable switch and performed auxiliary
experiments. F.A.S.E., F.P., and H.D. prepared figures and wrote the
manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Max Honemann
for technical assistance,
and Klaus Wagenbauer for auxiliary experiments. We thank Dirk Weuster-Botz
for providing auxiliary resources. This project was supported by European
Research Council consolidator Grant No. 724261, the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
through grants provided within the Gottfried-Wilhelm-Leibniz Program,
and the SFB863 TPA9.
==== Refs
References
Hong F. ; Zhang F. ; Liu Y. ; Yan H. 
DNA Origami: Scaffolds
for Creating Higher Order Structures . Chem.
Rev. 
2017 , 117 , 12584 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00825 .28605177 
Rothemund P. W. 
Folding
DNA to Create Nanoscale Shapes and Patterns . Nature 
2006 , 440 , 297 –302 . 10.1038/nature04586 .16541064 
Douglas S.
M. ; Dietz H. ; Liedl T. ; Hogberg B. ; Graf F. ; Shih W. M. 
Self-Assembly
of DNA into Nanoscale Three-Dimensional
Shapes . Nature 
2009 , 459 , 414 –418 . 10.1038/nature08016 .19458720 
Dietz H. ; Douglas S. M. ; Shih W. M. 
Folding
DNA into Twisted and Curved
Nanoscale Shapes . Science 
2009 , 325 , 725 –730 . 10.1126/science.1174251 .19661424 
Wei B. ; Dai M. ; Yin P. 
Complex Shapes
Self-Assembled from Single-Stranded
DNA Tiles . Nature 
2012 , 485 , 623 –626 . 10.1038/nature11075 .22660323 
Kozyra J. ; Ceccarelli A. ; Torelli E. ; Lopiccolo A. ; Gu J.-Y. ; Fellermann H. ; Stimming U. ; Krasnogor N. 
Designing
Uniquely Addressable Bio-Orthogonal Synthetic Scaffolds for DNA and
Rna Origami . ACS Synth. Biol. 
2017 , 6 , 1140 –1149 . 10.1021/acssynbio.6b00271 .28414914 
Krieg A. M. 
Cpg Motifs
in Bacterial DNA and Their Immune Effects . Annu.
Rev. Immunol. 
2002 , 20 , 709 –760 . 10.1146/annurev.immunol.20.100301.064842 .11861616 
Strauss M. T. ; Schueder F. ; Haas D. ; Nickels P. C. ; Jungmann R. 
Quantifying
Absolute Addressability in DNA Origami with Molecular Resolution . Nat. Commun. 
2018 , 9 , 1600 10.1038/s41467-018-04031-z .29686288 
Gerling T. ; Kube M. ; Kick B. ; Dietz H. 
Sequence-Programmable
Covalent Bonding of Designed DNA Assemblies . Sci. Adv. 
2018 , 4 , eaau115710.1126/sciadv.aau1157 .30128357 
Ducani C. ; Kaul C. ; Moche M. ; Shih W. M. ; Hogberg B. 
Enzymatic
Production of ’Monoclonal Stoichiometric’ Single-Stranded
DNA Oligonucleotides . Nat. Methods 
2013 , 10 , 647 –652 . 10.1038/nmeth.2503 .23727986 
Ducani C. ; Bernardinelli G. ; Hogberg B. 
Rolling Circle Replication Requires
Single-Stranded DNA Binding Protein to Avoid Termination and Production
of Double-Stranded DNA . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , 10596 –10604 . 10.1093/nar/gku737 .25120268 
Schmidt T. L. ; Beliveau B. J. ; Uca Y. O. ; Theilmann M. ; Da Cruz F. ; Wu C. T. ; Shih W. M. 
Scalable
Amplification
of Strand Subsets from Chip-Synthesized Oligonucleotide Libraries . Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 8634 10.1038/ncomms9634 .26567534 
Elbaz J. ; Yin P. ; Voigt C. A. 
Genetic
Encoding of DNA Nanostructures and Their Self-Assembly
in Living Bacteria . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 11179 10.1038/ncomms11179 .27091073 
Krieg E. ; Shih W. M. 
Selective Nascent
Polymer Catch-and-Release Enables
Scalable Isolation of Multi-Kilobase Single-Stranded DNA . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2018 , 57 , 714 –718 . 10.1002/anie.201710469 .
Veneziano R. ; Shepherd T. R. ; Ratanalert S. ; Bellou L. ; Tao C. ; Bathe M. 
In Vitro Synthesis of Gene-Length Single-Stranded
DNA . Sci. Rep. 
2018 , 8 , 24677 10.1038/s41598-018-24677-5 .
Marchi A. N. ; Saaem I. ; Vogen B. N. ; Brown S. ; LaBean T. H. 
Toward
Larger DNA Origami . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 5740 –5747 . 10.1021/nl502626s .25179827 
Brown S. ; Majikes J. ; Martínez A. ; Girón T. ; Fennell H. ; Samano E. ; LaBean T. 
An Easy-to-Prepare
Mini-Scaffold for DNA Origami . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 16621 –16624 . 10.1039/C5NR04921K .26413973 
Kick B. ; Praetorius F. ; Dietz H. ; Weuster-Botz D. 
Efficient
Production of Single-Stranded Phage DNA as Scaffolds for DNA Origami . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 4672 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b01461 .26028443 
Niekamp S. ; Blumer K. ; Nafisi P. M. ; Tsui K. ; Garbutt J. ; Douglas S. M. 
Folding Complex
DNA Nanostructures from Limited Sets
of Reusable Sequences . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2016 , 44 , e10210.1093/nar/gkw208 .27036861 
Kick B. ; Hensler S. ; Praetorius F. ; Dietz H. ; Weuster-Botz D. 
Specific Growth
Rate and Multiplicity of Infection Affect High-Cell-Density Fermentation
with Bacteriophage M13 for Ssdna Production . Biotechnol. Bioeng. 
2017 , 114 , 777 –784 . 10.1002/bit.26200 .27748519 
Praetorius F. ; Kick B. ; Behler K. L. ; Honemann M. N. ; Weuster-Botz D. ; Dietz H. 
Biotechnological Mass Production of DNA Origami . Nature 
2017 , 552 , 84 –87 . 10.1038/nature24650 .29219963 
Douglas S. M. ; Marblestone A. H. ; Teerapittayanon S. ; Vazquez A. ; Church G. M. ; Shih W. M. 
Rapid Prototyping of 3d DNA-Origami Shapes with Cadnano . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2009 , 37 , 5001 –5006 . 10.1093/nar/gkp436 .19531737 
Veneziano R. ; Ratanalert S. ; Zhang K. ; Zhang F. ; Yan H. ; Chiu W. ; Bathe M. 
Designer Nanoscale DNA Assemblies
Programmed from the Top Down . Science 
2016 , 352 , 1534 10.1126/science.aaf4388 .27229143 
Jun H. ; Zhang F. ; Shepherd T. ; Ratanalert S. ; Qi X. ; Yan H. ; Bathe M. 
Autonomously
Designed Free-Form 2d
DNA Origami . Sci. Adv. 
2019 , 5 , eaav065510.1126/sciadv.aav0655 .30613779 
Jun H. ; Shepherd T. R. ; Zhang K. ; Bricker W. P. ; Li S. ; Chiu W. ; Bathe M. 
Automated
Sequence Design of 3d Polyhedral
Wireframe DNA Origami with Honeycomb Edges . ACS Nano 
2019 , 10.1021/acsnano.8b08671 .
Benson E. ; Mohammed A. ; Gardell J. ; Masich S. ; Czeizler E. ; Orponen P. ; Hogberg B. 
DNA Rendering of Polyhedral Meshes
at the Nanoscale . Nature 
2015 , 523 , 441 –444 . 10.1038/nature14586 .26201596 
Bellot G. ; McClintock M. A. ; Chou J. J. ; Shih W. M. 
DNA Nanotubes for
Nmr Structure Determination of Membrane Proteins . Nat. Protoc. 
2013 , 8 , 755 –770 . 10.1038/nprot.2013.037 .23518667 
Vieira J. ; Messing J. 
Production of Single-Stranded Plasmid DNA . Methods Enzymol. 
1987 , 153 , 3 –11 . 10.1016/0076-6879(87)53044-0 .3323803 
Chasteen L. ; Ayriss J. ; Pavlik P. ; Bradbury A. R. 
Eliminating
Helper
Phage from Phage Display . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2006 , 34 , e14510.1093/nar/gkl772 .17088290 
Specthrie L. ; Bullitt E. ; Horiuchi K. ; Model P. ; Russel M. ; Makowski L. 
Construction of a Microphage
Variant of Filamentous
Bacteriophage . J. Mol. Biol. 
1992 , 228 , 720 –724 . 10.1016/0022-2836(92)90858-H .1469710 
Nafisi P. M. ; Aksel T. ; Douglas S. M. 
Construction
of a Novel Phagemid
to Produce Custom DNA Origami Scaffolds . Synth.
Biol. 
2018 , 10.1093/synbio/ysy015 .
Said H. ; Schuller V. J. ; Eber F. J. ; Wege C. ; Liedl T. ; Richert C. 
M1.3--a Small Scaffold for DNA Origami . Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 284 –290 . 10.1039/C2NR32393A .23160434 
De
Bruijn N. G. 
A Combinatorial Problem . Koninklijke
Nederlandse Akademie v. Wetenschappen 
1946 , 49 , 758 –764 .
Sobczak J. P. ; Martin T. G. ; Gerling T. ; Dietz H. 
Rapid Folding of DNA
into Nanoscale Shapes at Constant Temperature . Science 
2012 , 338 , 1458 –1461 . 10.1126/science.1229919 .23239734 
Wagenbauer K. F. ; Engelhardt F. A. ; Stahl E. K. ; Hechtl V. K. ; Stömmer P. ; Seebacher F. ; Meregalli L. ; Ketterer P. ; Gerling T. ; Dietz H. 
How We Make DNA Origami . ChemBioChem 
2017 , 18 , 1873 10.1002/cbic.201700377 .28714559 
SantaLucia J. Jr.; Hicks D. 
The Thermodynamics
of DNA Structural
Motifs . Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 
2004 , 33 , 415 –440 . 10.1146/annurev.biophys.32.110601.141800 .15139820 
Berardi M. J. ; Shih W. M. ; Harrison S. C. ; Chou J. J. 
Mitochondrial Uncoupling
Protein 2 Structure Determined by Nmr Molecular Fragment Searching . Nature 
2011 , 476 , 109 –113 . 10.1038/nature10257 .21785437 
Gerling T. ; Wagenbauer K. F. ; Neuner A. M. ; Dietz H. 
Dynamic DNA Devices
and Assemblies Formed by Shape-Complementary, Non-Base Pairing 3d
Components . Science 
2015 , 347 , 1446 –1452 . 10.1126/science.aaa5372 .25814577 
Ketterer P. ; Willner E. M. ; Dietz H. 
Nanoscale
Rotary Apparatus Formed
from Tight-Fitting 3d DNA Components . Sci. Adv. 
2016 , 2 , e150120910.1126/sciadv.1501209 .26989778 
Tikhomirov G. ; Petersen P. ; Qian L. 
Fractal Assembly
of Micrometre-Scale
DNA Origami Arrays with Arbitrary Patterns . Nature 
2017 , 552 , 67 –71 . 10.1038/nature24655 .29219965 
Wagenbauer K. F. ; Sigl C. ; Dietz H. 
Gigadalton-Scale Shape-Programmable
DNA Assemblies . Nature 
2017 , 552 , 78 –83 . 10.1038/nature24651 .29219966 
Ong L. L. ; Hanikel N. ; Yaghi O. K. ; Grun C. ; Strauss M. T. ; Bron P. ; Lai-Kee-Him J. ; Schueder F. ; Wang B. ; Wang P. ; Kishi J. Y. ; Myhrvold C. ; Zhu A. ; Jungmann R. ; Bellot G. ; Ke Y. ; Yin P. 
Programmable
Self-Assembly of Three-Dimensional Nanostructures from 10,000 Unique
Components . Nature 
2017 , 552 , 72 –77 . 10.1038/nature24648 .29219968 
Chen X. ; Wang Q. ; Peng J. ; Long Q. ; Yu H. ; Li Z. 
Self-Assembly of Large
DNA Origami with Custom-Designed Scaffolds . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 24344 –24348 . 10.1021/acsami.8b09222 .29989388 
Iinuma R. ; Ke Y. ; Jungmann R. ; Schlichthaerle T. ; Woehrstein J. B. ; Yin P. 
Polyhedra Self-Assembled from DNA Tripods and Characterized with
3d DNA-Paint . Science 
2014 , 344 , 65 –69 . 10.1126/science.1250944 .24625926 
He Y. ; Ye T. ; Su M. ; Zhang C. ; Ribbe A. E. ; Jiang W. ; Mao C. 
Hierarchical
Self-Assembly of DNA into Symmetric Supramolecular Polyhedra . Nature 
2008 , 452 , 198 –201 . 10.1038/nature06597 .18337818 
Zhang F. ; Jiang S. ; Wu S. ; Li Y. ; Mao C. ; Liu Y. ; Yan H. 
Complex Wireframe DNA Origami Nanostructures with Multi-Arm
Junction Vertices . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 10 , 779 –784 . 10.1038/nnano.2015.162 .26192207 
Bruetzel L. K. ; Walker P. U. ; Gerling T. ; Dietz H. ; Lipfert J. 
Time-Resolved
Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering Reveals Millisecond Transitions of a
DNA Origami Switch . Nano Lett. 
2018 , 18 , 2672 –2676 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b00592 .29554806 
Stahl E. ; Martin T. G. ; Praetorius F. ; Dietz H. 
Facile and Scalable
Preparation of Pure and Dense DNA Origami Solutions . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2014 , 53 , 12735 –12740 . 10.1002/anie.201405991 .
Bai X. C. ; Martin T. G. ; Scheres S. H. ; Dietz H. 
Cryo-Em Structure of
a 3d DNA-Origami Object . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 20012 –20017 . 10.1073/pnas.1215713109 .23169645 
Engler C. ; Kandzia R. ; Marillonnet S. 
A One Pot, One Step, Precision Cloning
Method with High Throughput Capability . PLoS
One 
2008 , 3 , e364710.1371/journal.pone.0003647 .18985154 
List J. ; Falgenhauer E. ; Kopperger E. ; Pardatscher G. ; Simmel F. C. 
Long-Range Movement
of Large Mechanically Interlocked
DNA Nanostructures . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 12414 10.1038/ncomms12414 .27492061 
Plesa C. ; van Loo N. ; Ketterer P. ; Dietz H. ; Dekker C. 
Velocity of
DNA During Translocation through a Solid-State Nanopore . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 732 –737 . 10.1021/nl504375c .25496458 
Bell N. A. ; Keyser U. F. 
Digitally Encoded DNA Nanostructures for Multiplexed,
Single-Molecule Protein Sensing with Nanopores . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2016 , 11 , 645 –651 . 10.1038/nnano.2016.50 .27043197 
Schickinger M. ; Zacharias M. ; Dietz H. 
Tethered Multifluorophore Motion
Reveals Equilibrium Transition Kinetics of Single DNA Double Helices . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2018 , 115 , E7512 10.1073/pnas.1800585115 .30037988 
Jungmann R. ; Avendaño M. S. ; Woehrstein J. B. ; Dai M. ; Shih W. M. ; Yin P. 
Multiplexed 3d Cellular Super-Resolution Imaging with DNA-Paint and
Exchange-Paint . Nat. Methods 
2014 , 11 , 313 10.1038/nmeth.2835 .24487583 
Gibson D. G. ; Young L. ; Chuang R.-Y. ; Venter J. C. ; Hutchison C. A. III; Smith H. O. 
Enzymatic Assembly of DNA Molecules
up to Several Hundred Kilobases . Nat. Methods 
2009 , 6 , 343 10.1038/nmeth.1318 .19363495 
Luke J. ; Carnes A. E. ; Hodgson C. P. ; Williams J. A. 
Improved Antibiotic-Free
DNA Vaccine Vectors Utilizing a Novel Rna Based Plasmid Selection
System . Vaccine 
2009 , 27 , 6454 –6459 . 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.06.017 .19559109 
Douglas S. M. ; Chou J. J. ; Shih W. M. 
DNA-Nanotube-Induced
Alignment of
Membrane Proteins for Nmr Structure Determination . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2007 , 104 , 6644 –6648 . 10.1073/pnas.0700930104 .17404217 
Castro C. E. ; Kilchherr F. ; Kim D. N. ; Shiao E. L. ; Wauer T. ; Wortmann P. ; Bathe M. ; Dietz H. 
A Primer to Scaffolded
DNA Origami . Nat. Methods 
2011 , 8 , 221 –229 . 10.1038/nmeth.1570 .21358626 
Kim D. N. ; Kilchherr F. ; Dietz H. ; Bathe M. 
Quantitative Prediction
of 3d Solution Shape and Flexibility of Nucleic Acid Nanostructures . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2012 , 40 , 2862 –2868 . 10.1093/nar/gkr1173 .22156372 
Pfitzner E. ; Wachauf C. ; Kilchherr F. ; Pelz B. ; Shih W. M. ; Rief M. ; Dietz H. 
Rigid DNA Beams for High-Resolution
Single-Molecule Mechanics . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 7766 –7771 . 10.1002/anie.201302727 .
Scheres S. H. ; Nunez-Ramirez R. ; Sorzano C. O. ; Carazo J. M. ; Marabini R. 
Image Processing
for Electron Microscopy Single-Particle Analysis Using Xmipp . Nat. Protoc. 
2008 , 3 , 977 –990 . 10.1038/nprot.2008.62 .18536645 
Kimanius D. ; Forsberg B. O. ; Scheres S. H. ; Lindahl E. 
Accelerated Cryo-Em
Structure Determination with Parallelisation Using Gpus in Relion-2 . eLife 
2016 , 5 , 18722 10.7554/eLife.18722 .
Zivanov J. ; Nakane T. ; Forsberg B. O. ; Kimanius D. ; Hagen W. J. ; Lindahl E. ; Scheres S. H. 
New Tools
for Automated High-Resolution
Cryo-Em Structure Determination in Relion-3 . eLife 
2018 , 7 , 42166 10.7554/eLife.42166 .
Zheng S. Q. ; Palovcak E. ; Armache J. P. ; Verba K. A. ; Cheng Y. ; Agard D. A. 
Motioncor2: Anisotropic
Correction of Beam-Induced
Motion for Improved Cryo-Electron Microscopy . Nat. Methods 
2017 , 14 , 331 –332 . 10.1038/nmeth.4193 .28250466 
Mindell J.
A. ; Grigorieff N. 
Accurate Determination
of Local Defocus and Specimen
Tilt in Electron Microscopy . J. Struct. Biol. 
2003 , 142 , 334 –347 . 10.1016/S1047-8477(03)00069-8 .12781660

