
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.9b03824ArticleCorona
Composition Can Affect the Mechanisms Cells
Use to Internalize Nanoparticles Francia Valentina †Yang Keni †Deville Sarah ‡§Reker-Smit Catharina †Nelissen Inge ‡Salvati Anna *†† Department
of Pharmacokinetics, Toxicology and Targeting, Groningen Research
Institute of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713AV Groningen, The Netherlands‡ Health
Department, Flemish Institute for Technological
Research (VITO), Boeretang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium§ Biomedical
Research Institute, Hasselt University, Agoralaan building D, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium* E-mail: a.salvati@rug.nl.17 09 2019 22 10 2019 13 10 11107 11121 16 05 2019 17 09 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Nanosized
objects, such as nanoparticles and other drug carriers
used in nanomedicine, once in contact with biological environments
are modified by adsorption of biomolecules on their surface. The presence
of this corona strongly affects the following interactions at cell
and organism levels. It has been shown that corona proteins can be
recognized by cell receptors. However, it is not known whether the
composition of this acquired layer can also affect the mechanisms
nanoparticles use to enter cells. This is of particular importance
when considering that the same nanoparticles can form different coronas
for instance in vitro when exposed to cells in different
serum amounts or in vivo depending on the exposure
or administration route. Thus, in this work, different coronas were
formed on 50 nm silica by exposing them to different serum concentrations.
The uptake efficiency in HeLa cells was compared, and the uptake mechanisms
were characterized using transport inhibitors and RNA interference.
The results showed that the nanoparticles were internalized by cells via different mechanisms when different coronas were formed,
and only for one corona condition was uptake mediated by the LDL receptor.
This suggested that coronas of different composition can be recognized
differently by cell receptors, and this in turn leads to internalization via different mechanisms. Similar studies were performed
using other cells, including A549 cells and primary HUVEC, and different
nanoparticles, namely 100 nm liposomes and 200 nm silica. Overall,
the results confirmed that the corona composition can affect the mechanisms
of nanoparticle uptake by cells.

biomolecule
coronananoparticleuptake mechanismstransport inhibitorssilicadocument-id-old-9nn9b03824document-id-new-14nn9b03824ccc-price
==== Body
Nanosized
materials are widely
investigated for their potential use as drug delivery systems thanks
to their ability to distribute in the body and enter cells and the
possibility to engineer them for multiple purposes.1−3 Several nanomedicines
are already on the market; however it is recognized that a better
understanding of the mechanisms by which these objects are processed
at organism and cell levels could contribute to further advance their
clinical success.4−6

In recent years, particular interest has been
drawn on the impact
of the biological environment in which nanomaterials are applied on
their interactions at the organism and cellular level. Once in contact
with a biological environment, nanosized objects immediately interact
with the surrounding biomolecules, which can adsorb on the nanoparticle
surface, leading to the formation of a biomolecular corona.7,8 Some of the biomolecules in this layer associate with the nanoparticle
surface almost irreversibly, affecting de facto the
subsequent behavior. For instance, it has been shown that the formation
of the corona can affect nanomaterial stability and biodistribution,
macrophage sequestration, immune system activation, cellular recognition,
and nanomaterial final fate.9−11 In some cases, the formation
of a biomolecular corona can also affect the specificity of targeted
drugs, by masking targeting ligands attached to the nanocarrier.12,13 Polymers such as poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) are usually grafted
on the nanoparticle surface to partially reduce protein binding and
subsequent macrophage sequestration.14−16 However, recent work
suggested that the so-called stealth effect is actually conferred
by specific corona proteins adsorbed on PEGylated surfaces.17 At the same time, researchers are also trying
to exploit the biomolecular corona as a targeting strategy to direct
nanoparticles toward specific cellular routes.18−20

So far,
corona formation and its composition have been widely investigated.21−24 It is known that different nanoparticle properties such as size,
charge, and shape can influence corona composition, and this can lead
to different cellular responses to nanomaterials.8,25,26 The corona composition also varies depending
on the nature of the biological fluids in which nanoparticles are
dispersed, such as fetal bovine serum, human serum, or plasma,27 and even in the same fluid, when the ratio between
nanoparticle and fluid concentration is changed.28 It has also been shown that the composition of this layer
evolves over time or for instance during nanoparticle exposure to
cells, because of adsorption of biomolecules secreted by cells in
the medium.21,22,29,30

Importantly, several studies have
highlighted that the corona composition
affects nanoparticle–cell association31 and that corona proteins can engage with specific cell receptors.10,20,32,33 For instance, it has been shown that the uptake of silica nanoparticles
is mediated by the recognition of corona proteins by the low density
lipoprotein (LDL) receptor.10 However,
it is not known yet whether the corona composition and the initial
recognition of corona proteins by specific cell receptors also affect
the following mechanism cells use to internalize the nanoparticles.

To this aim, in this work we characterized and compared the mechanisms
of uptake of nanoparticles dispersed in media containing two very
different serum concentrations, a high serum content close to protein
concentration in blood (roughly 60 mg/mL) and a 5 times lower one.
Silica nanoparticles (SiO2 nanoparticles) of 50 nm diameter
were used as a representative model system to form different coronas
in the two conditions. It is known that varying serum amount can lead
to formation of different coronas.28 Then,
the effect of serum content on the uptake efficiency in HeLa cells
was investigated, and common pharmacological inhibitors of endocytosis
were used in order to determine potential differences in the mechanisms
of uptake in the two conditions. Next, RNA interference was used to
silence the expression of the LDL receptor, here selected as a first
illustrative example, given the previous reports on its involvement
in the uptake of similar silica nanoparticles.10 This allowed us to test its involvement in the initial
recognition of the corona proteins by cells. Finally, similar experiments
were performed on different cells, i.e. A549 cells and primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC),
and with different nanoparticles, including 200 nm silica and 100
nm 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol) (DOPG)–cholesterol liposomes, in order
to translate the results to other systems. In this way, we have been
able to connect the effect of corona composition on the initial recognition
by specific cell receptors (here the LDL receptor) with the following
mechanisms cells use to internalize nanoparticles.

Results and Discussion
Characterization
of the Corona–Nanoparticle Complexes
Silica of 50
nm were selected as a well-characterized model nanoparticle.
Extensive information on their corona properties and interactions
with cells is already available.21,28,34,35 Furthermore, thanks
to their density, simple centrifugation can be used to separate corona-coated
nanoparticles from the unbound serum biomolecules, making isolation
of corona–nanoparticle complexes relatively easy (see Methods and Supplementary Table
S1 for details).

In order to form different coronas and
study their effect on cellular uptake mechanisms, the nanoparticles
were dispersed in two very different serum amounts, a lower and a
roughly 5 times higher serum concentration (12 and 62 mg/mL proteins,
respectively). Instead of standard fetal bovine serum, pooled human
serum was used as a more relevant serum source when testing uptake
mechanisms on human cells. Similarly, as a first step, serum was selected
instead of plasma to avoid additional complications related to the
choice of the anticoagulant used to prepare it.36

Exposure of nanoparticles to different amounts of
proteins may
also affect particle stability, and this, in turn, could affect the
resulting interactions with cells.37−39 Thus, the nanoparticle
dispersions in (MEM) cell media supplemented with the different amounts
of serum and the corresponding corona–nanoparticle complexes
(low-serum and high-serum corona–nanoparticle complexes, LC
and HC, respectively) were characterized by dynamic light scattering
(DLS) and differential centrifugal sedimentation (DCS) (see Figure 1A, Supplementary Figure S1, and Supplementary
Tables S2 and S3 for details). In some cases, DLS showed small
peaks at larger sizes, suggesting the presence of micrometer-sized
agglomerates. However, the DCS results on the isolated corona complexes
allowed us to exclude the presence of large agglomerates and confirmed
that fairly homogeneous dispersions of isolated corona complexes were
obtained, including small agglomerates (such as dimers, trimers, and
similar) in the case of the complexes formed in lower serum (Figure 1A and Supplementary Table S2).

Figure 1 Characterization of the
corona formed on 50 nm silica nanoparticles
in low and high serum content (LC and HC, respectively). (A) Differential
centrifugal sedimentation (DCS) of 50 nm silica nanoparticles in PBS
and the corona–nanoparticle complexes formed in low or high
amount of serum (LC and HC, respectively), performed as described
in the Methods (see also Supplementary Table S2). (B) SDS-PAGE gel image of the proteins
recovered from corona–nanoparticle complexes formed in low
(lane 1 and 2) or high (lane 3 and 4) human serum and isolated after
30 min (lane 2 and 4) or 1 h (lane 1 and 3) centrifugation. The corona
formed on 300 μg/mL silica nanoparticles dispersed in 12 and
62 mg/mL human serum, respectively, was prepared and isolated as described
in the Methods. The gel shows that different
bands were present in the two conditions (arrows indicate some examples).
M: molecular weight ladder. (C) Venn diagram of the total amount of
proteins identified by mass spectrometry in the corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed in the two conditions.

Next, SDS-PAGE was used to confirm, that—as previously reported
for similar nanoparticles28—the
dispersion in different serum concentrations led to adsorption of
different amounts and types of proteins on the surface of the nanoparticles
(Figure 1B, with arrows
indicating for illustration some examples of differences in the bands
detected).

Mass spectrometry was used to characterize the corona
composition
(Figure 1C, Table 1, and full list in
the Supporting Information). About 300 different
proteins were identified in both samples, with the 15 most abundant
ones contributing alone to roughly 36% (HC) and 50% (LC) of the total
proteins recovered. As already observed for similar studies, although
most of the proteins were present in both coronas, the relative abundance
of some of them was very different between the two samples. For instance,
while apolipoprotein B-100 content was comparable in the two cases,
the histidine-rich glycoprotein was particularly enriched in the corona
formed at high serum amount, and vice versa apolipoprotein
A-I content was much higher in the corona formed in low serum.

Table 1 List of the Most Abundant Proteins
Identified in the Corona Formed on 50 nm Silica Nanoparticles in Low
and High Serum Content (LC and HC, Respectively)a
 	 	 	 	% of
total	
av mass (Da)	accession number	gene name	protein
name	LC	HC	
30778	P02647	APOA1	apolipoprotein A-I	17.9	7.0	
59578	P04196	HRG	histidine-rich glycoprotein	5.4	9.5	
14747	P35542	SAA4	serum amyloid A-4 protein	4.4	2.7	
36154	P02649	APOE	apolipoprotein E	3.9	3.2	
11175	P02652	APOA2	apolipoprotein A-II	3.2	1.9	
515611	P04114	APOB	apolipoprotein B-100	2.6	2.2	
46737	P01009	A1AT	alpha-1-antitrypsin	1.7	1.5	
39731	P27169	PON1	serum paraoxonase/arylesterase 1	1.5	0.9	
45399	P06727	APOA4	apolipoprotein A-IV	1.5	1.0	
15887	P02766	TTHY	transthyretin	1.3	1.5	
69367	P02768	ALBU	serum albumin	1.3	1.3	
43974	O14791	APOL1	apolipoprotein L1	1.3	0.8	
11765	P01834	IGKC	immunoglobulin kappa
constant	1.2	1.2	
13532	P0DJI8	SAA1	serum
amyloid A-1 protein	1.2	0.7	
10852	P02656	APOC3	apolipoprotein C-III	1.0	0.5	
 	 	 	total
% top 15 proteins	49.5	35.8	
a The corona formed on 300 μg/mL
silica nanoparticles dispersed in 12 and 62 mg/mL human serum (low
serum corona, LC, and high serum corona, HC, respectively) was prepared
and isolated as described in the Methods.
Thus, the corona proteins were identified by mass spectrometry, and
their relative abundance over total (% of total) was quantified (see Methods for details). The table shows the relative
abundance of the top 15 proteins identified in the two conditions.

Nanoparticle Uptake Efficiency in Situ and
after Corona Isolation
As a next step, the cellular uptake
efficiency of the silica nanoparticles in the different serum conditions
was tested. To this aim, HeLa cells were used as a standard cell model
commonly applied for similar uptake studies, in both the endocytosis
and nanomedicine fields.40−42 Cells were exposed to the nanoparticles
in the presence of low and high serum content in situ or after isolation of the corona–nanoparticle complexes and
removal of the free proteins in solution (Figure 2). As already reported in the literature,
the uptake efficiency in the presence of a high amount of serum was
much lower than for nanoparticles incubated with a low amount of serum.10,12 This can be explained—at least in part—by the presence
of a high amount of free serum biomolecules in solution. Since the
corona biomolecules can mediate the uptake of nanoparticles through
recognition by specific cellular receptors,8,10,12 it is likely that the free serum proteins
in solution might also compete for the same receptors and, in this
way, reduce the uptake levels of the corona–nanoparticle complexes.
Indeed, the uptake was higher when the corona–nanoparticle
complexes were isolated and the free proteins in solution were removed.
Given the very different uptake efficiency, in order to focus solely
on the effect of corona composition on the mechanisms of uptake and
exclude additional effects due to the interference of the free serum
molecules in the process, the following studies were performed using
isolated corona–nanoparticle complexes. However, it is interesting
to note that even after removal of the excess free serum the uptake
efficiency was lower for the complexes formed at higher serum content.
Quantification by fluorescence of the nanoparticles recovered after
corona isolation confirmed that this was not simply due to loss of
nanoparticles in the isolation procedure (Supplementary
Table S1).

Figure 2 Uptake kinetics of 50 nm red silica nanoparticles in the
presence
of low and high human serum and the respective corona–nanoparticle
complexes. HeLa cells were exposed to 100 μg/mL nanoparticles
in a low or high amount of human serum in situ (4
and 20 mg/mL, respectively, with excess free proteins left in solution)
or to the corresponding corona–nanoparticle complexes formed
at the same nanoparticle to protein ratio, after removal of the free
proteins in excess (see Methods for details).
The results are the average and standard deviation over three replicates
of the median cell fluorescence intensities obtained by flow cytometry.

Confocal fluorescence imaging confirmed uptake
of the corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed in both low and high serum and—as observed
for most nanomaterials4,43,44—accumulation in the lysosomes (Supplementary
Figure S2).

Uptake Mechanisms of Low- and High-Serum
Corona–Nanoparticle
Complexes
In order to characterize the mechanisms of uptake
of the different corona–nanoparticle complexes, common pharmacological
inhibitors of endocytosis were used. These compounds are often used
to study transport into cells, given their fast action and apparent
ease of use.41,42,45−48 However, due to their toxicity and limits connected to their mechanism
of action, stringent controls are needed in order to verify their
efficacy and set up protocols specific to the cells and conditions
applied. We previously performed an extensive study on these aspects
and carefully optimized their use on HeLa cells, in order to demonstrate
their efficacy and minimize their toxicity.49 The same conditions were applied for this study. There, we also
found that the presence of serum can strongly limit the efficacy of
some of these compounds. Thus, by using isolated corona complexes
in serum-free conditions, we ensured optimal efficacy of all the inhibitors.
Moreover, we performed time-resolved uptake studies in order to follow
the kinetics of the process. Time-resolved studies allowed us to rule
out the contribution of potential nanoparticles adhering outside cells,
which can confuse uptake results at a single exposure time, especially
when short.50

A panel of six different
inhibitors was used. Figure 3 shows one representative example of the kinetics of uptake
of corona–nanoparticle complexes formed in low and high amounts
of serum (central and right panels) in the presence or absence of
each of the different inhibitors. In every experiment and for each
compound, a control to confirm inhibitor efficacy was also included
(Figure 3, left panels).
These results, together with two other independent replicates, are
shown in Supplementary Figure S3 after normalization
for the uptake in cells without inhibitors. Their normalized average
is shown in Figure 4 as an overview of the inhibition efficacy (see Methods for details).

Figure 3 Characterization of the uptake mechanisms of
the corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed on 50 nm silica in low and high amounts of serum.
Briefly, the corona–nanoparticle complexes formed on 300 μg/mL
nanoparticles in MEM supplemented with 12 mg/mL (low-serum corona,
LC, middle panels) or 62 mg/mL (high-serum corona, HC, right panels)
of human serum were isolated as described in the Methods and added to HeLa cells at a final nanoparticle concentration
of 100 μg/mL in serum-free medium, in the presence or absence
of 100 μM EIPA, 10 μg/mL chlorpromazine (CP), 2.5 mg/mL
methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MBCD), 25 μg/mL dynasore (Dyn),
2.5 μg/mL cytochalasin D (CytoD), or 5 μM nocodazole (NZ).
For each inhibitor, the left panels show the corresponding controls
of drug efficacy, with HeLa cells exposed to 2 μg/mL Dil-LDL
in serum-free MEM as control for chlorpromazine and dynasore, 250
μg/mL 10 kDa TRITC dextran in complete MEM as control for EIPA,
and 1 μM LacCer in serum-free MEM for methyl-β-cyclodextrin.
Uptake kinetics were obtained by flow cytometry, and the results are
the average and standard deviation over three replicates of the median
cell fluorescence intensities of cells exposed to control markers
or corona complexes with or without the different inhibitors. Immunostaining
of actin and tubulin was used to confirm efficacy of cytochalasin
D and nocodazole, respectively (see Methods for details). In the confocal fluorescence images: blue DAPI-stained
nuclei and red-stained actin or tubulin. Scale bar: 100 μm.

Figure 4 Overview of the effects of transport inhibitors on the
uptake of
the corona–nanoparticle complexes formed on 50 nm silica in
low and high amounts of serum. Briefly, the corona complexes formed
on 300 μg/mL nanoparticles in MEM supplemented with 12 mg/mL
(low-serum corona) or 62 mg/mL (high-serum corona) of human serum
were isolated as described in the Methods and
incubated on HeLa cells at a final nanoparticle concentration of 100
μg/mL in serum-free medium, in the presence or absence of 100
μM EIPA, 10 μg/mL chlorpromazine, 2.5 mg/mL methyl-β-cyclodextrin
(MβCD), 25 μg/mL dynasore, 2.5 μg/mL cytochalasin
D, or 5 μM nocodazole. Data are normalized for the uptake in
cells without inhibitors to show the inhibition efficacy. The results
are the average and standard error of the median cell fluorescence
intensities obtained in three independent experiments (with the exception
of the last exposure time, 6 h, for cells exposed to nocodazole, and
the last exposure time, 7 h, for cells exposed to for chlorpromazine
in low-serum corona, which were performed once). The results of the
individual experiments are shown in Supplementary
Figure S3. A black dashed line and a red dashed line are included
in each panel as a reference, at 100% and 60% uptake, respectively
(with 60% uptake shown as an indicative threshold for inhibition efficacy).

Chlorpromazine hydrochloride was used as a commonly
used inhibitor
of clathrin-mediated endocytosis,41,46,47 one of the most relevant and characterized mechanisms
of cellular uptake. It is generally believed that nanoparticles and
drug carriers with sizes up to roughly 100 nm typically use clathrin-mediated
endocytosis to enter cells.41,51 Cells exposed to chlorpromazine
showed up to 70% reduction of uptake of 1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindocarbocyanine
perchlorate (Dil)-labeled LDL, known to enter cells via this mechanism,52 confirming drug efficacy
in the conditions applied. Interestingly, while for the complexes
formed at low serum content uptake was substantially reduced in the
presence of chlorpromazine (up to 75% reduction at the latest exposure
time), only minor effects could be observed for the complexes formed
at high serum content, with an uptake reduction between 0 and maximum
30% at different exposure times in different replicate experiments
(Figures 3 and 4 and Supplementary Figure S3). This suggests that clathrin-mediated endocytosis is involved in
the uptake of these nanoparticles only when they are added to cells
in the presence of lower amounts of serum.

Next, EIPA (5-(N-ethyl-N-isopropyl)amiloride)
was used as inhibitor of macropinocytosis.53,54 This mechanism involves an actin-driven formation of membrane ruffles
to engulf a portion of extracellular medium.55 Several examples in the literature have suggested the involvement
of this mechanism in the uptake of nanomedicines and nanoparticles.48,56 EIPA efficacy on HeLa cells was confirmed using a fluorescent fluid
phase marker, 10 kDa TRITC dextran; its uptake was reduced up to 80%
after 5 h in the presence of EIPA. For the corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed at low serum content, the uptake in the presence
of EIPA was reduced from 50% to 80% at increasing exposure times,
but for the complexes formed at high serum content only minor effects
were observed (in the averaged results of Figure 4, between 0 and maximum 30% reduction at
increasing exposure times). These results suggest that macropinocytosis
is involved in the uptake of corona–nanoparticle complexes
formed in the presence of a low amount of serum, with only minor effects
at high-serum content.

The role of cholesterol in the uptake
mechanism was assessed by
using methyl-β-cyclodextrin, a compound that sequesters the
cholesterol in the cell membrane, often used as an inhibitor of lipid-raft-mediated
mechanisms. Methyl-β-cyclodextrin efficacy on HeLa cells was
confirmed by measuring the uptake of a fluorescent sphingolipid, BODIPY
FL C5-lactosylceramide/BSA complex (LacCer).46,57 The results showed 70% reduction in LacCer uptake in the presence
of methyl-β-cyclodextrin. Also in this case, nanoparticle uptake
was strongly reduced for corona formed at low serum content (from
40% to 70% at increasing exposure times), whereas no effect was observed
for the complexes formed at high serum content.

Next, dynasore
was used to inhibit dynamin, a key protein for several
pathways of endocytosis, including clathrin-mediated endocytosis and
other dynamin-dependent mechanisms.58,59 Dynamin mediates
the scission of the cell membrane for the formation of the endosome.
Dynasore efficacy on HeLa cells was confirmed by the strong reduction
(75%) on the uptake of LDL in its presence. In cells exposed to dynasore,
the uptake of the LC and HC complexes was reduced up to 30% in the
first 5 h of exposure, while the inhibition seemed to increase to
60% and 40%, respectively, at the longest exposure time.

Finally,
the role of the actin cytoskeleton and microtubules was
studied using respectively cytochalasin D and nocodazole.60,61 Actin has a predominant role for macropinocytosis to mediate the
formation of membrane ruffles.55 However,
it is involved also in several other mechanisms, including clathrin-mediated
endocytosis.62,63 Disruption of actin and microtubules
upon treatment with the inhibitors was confirmed by confocal microscopy
using TRITC-phalloidin or an antibody against α-tubulin (Figures 3). For the LC complexes,
only minor uptake reduction could be observed in the presence of cytochalasin
D (on average a maximum 30% reduction). On the other hand, nocodazole
had a strong effect on the uptake of these complexes (40–50%
reduction at all exposure times). For the complexes formed in high
serum instead, both cytochalasin D and nocodazole showed a similar
trend, with the uptake reduction increasing up to 40% over time, possibly
suggesting an actin and microtubule-driven mechanism at the longer
exposure times.

Overall, the results suggest an involvement
of multiple mechanisms
in the two conditions. In the case of the corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed in low amount of serum (white bars in Figure 4), clathrin-mediated endocytosis
and macropinocytosis seem involved in the uptake, which also depends
on cholesterol and microtubules. The limited effects observed with
cytochalasin D, however, seem in contrast with the observed involvement
of macropinocytosis. The time-resolved study also suggests a role
for dynamin, mainly at longer exposure times.

Instead, in the
case of corona–nanoparticle complexes formed
in high amount of serum (gray bars in Figure 4) several differences were observed, and
overall all inhibitors seemed to have minor effects in reducing nanoparticle
uptake, perhaps increasing at the longer exposure times. One reason
for this can be connected to the slower uptake kinetics for these
complexes, even after corona isolation, making it harder to see clear
effects on uptake when inhibitors are added (Figure 3, right panels). Unfortunately, these compounds
cannot be used for much longer time, due to their intrinsic toxicity.4,46 Nevertheless, the results suggested that, especially at the longest
exposure times, HC uptake is partially dependent on dynamin, actin,
and microtubules, however with effects never stronger than a 40% uptake
reduction. On the other hand, as opposed to what was observed for
LC complexes, clearly clathrin-mediated endocytosis, macropinocytosis,
and cholesterol did not appear to be involved in the uptake of these
nanoparticles when corona was formed at high serum content.

As a next step, we investigated the potential mechanisms beyond
the observed differences. We hypothesized that different coronas are
recognized differently by cell receptors, and this may lead to activation
of different uptake mechanisms. To test this hypothesis, we used RNA
interference to selectively shut down the expression of the LDL receptor
and test its involvement in the recognition of the corona complexes
in the two conditions (Figure 5). It was previously shown that in A549 lung epithelial cells
the uptake of 100 nm silica nanoparticles dispersed in human serum
was mediated by the recognition of the apolipoprotein B-100 present
in the corona by the LDL receptor.10 For
each experiment, silencing efficacy was confirmed by measuring the
uptake of labeled LDL. The results confirmed that silencing the expression
of the LDL receptor reduced LDL uptake by about 60% (Figure 5A and B). Interestingly, even
in HeLa cells and with the smaller 50 nm silica nanoparticles used
for this study, silencing the expression of the LDL receptor reduced
the uptake of the corona complexes formed in higher serum amount (Figure 5A and C), confirming
its involvement in the uptake of these nanoparticles also in HeLa
cells. However, no reduction (rather a strong increase) was observed
in the uptake of the corona complexes formed in low serum (Figure 5A and D). This suggests
that, in agreement with our hypothesis, the different coronas formed
on the 50 nm silica are recognized differently by the LDL receptor,
and this, in turns, leads to the activation of different pathways
for their internalization, as we observed (Figures 3 and 4).

Figure 5 Involvement
of the LDL receptor (LDLR) in the uptake of the corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed on 50 nm silica in low and high amounts of serum.
Briefly, the expression of the LDL receptor was silenced as described
in the Methods (siLDLR). Cells silenced with
a scramble siRNA were used as control (Neg siRNA). Then, the corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed on 300 μg/mL nanoparticles in MEM supplemented
with 12 mg/mL (LC, low-serum corona) or 62 mg/mL (HC, high-serum corona)
of human serum were isolated as described in the Methods and incubated on HeLa cells at a final nanoparticle
concentration of 100 μg/mL in serum-free medium for 14 h. The
uptake of 1 μg/mL Dil-labeled LDL after 4.5 h exposure
was measured to confirm silencing efficacy. (A) Uptake of LDL and
HC or LC complexes on cells silenced for the LDL receptor, normalized
by the uptake in control cells silenced with a scrambled siRNA. The
results are the average and standard error of the median cell fluorescence
intensity obtained by flow cytometry in three independent experiments.
A black dashed line is included as a reference at 100% uptake. (B–D)
Raw results (without normalization) of one representative experiment
for the uptake of LDL (B), high-serum corona (C), and low-serum corona
(D). The fluorescence of untreated control cells is included as a
reference (Untreated). The data are the average and standard deviation
over three replicates of the median cell fluorescence intensity obtained
by flow cytometry.

It is interesting to
notice that, in our system, the mass spectrometry
results showed that apolipoprotein B-100, the major ligand of this
receptor, was present in both coronas and in comparable amounts (Table 1). This indicates
that the presence of certain proteins in the corona, alone, does not
necessarily imply recognition by the corresponding cell receptors
for nanoparticle internalization. Similarly, it is also most likely
that other receptors, not investigated here, are involved in the two
cases.

Next, we tested our hypothesis on other common cell models,
namely,
human lung epithelial cancer cells (A549) and primary HUVEC. Also
for these cells, the conditions for using the panel of inhibitors
were optimized in order to exclude toxicity and confirm drug efficacy
(Supplementary Figures S4 and S5). Since
different cell types express different cell receptors on the plasma
membrane and uptake mechanisms are also differently active, we expected
some differences in the way 50 nm silica nanoparticles were internalized
by these cells. Indeed, the results showed that the effects of the
inhibitors on the uptake of the HC and LC complexes were different
in A549 cells and HUVEC (Figure 6) and with respect to what is observed in HeLa cells
(Figure 4). In A549
cells overall the effects of the inhibitors on nanoparticle uptake
were minor, with the exception of dynasore, which suggested a clear
role for dynamin in the mechanisms involved in the uptake of both
HC and LC complexes (Figure 6A and Supplementary Figure S5 for
experiment replicates). In HUVEC most of the inhibitors reduced the
uptake of nanoparticles, but no major differences between the two
corona conditions were observed (Figure 6C and Supplementary Figure
S5). These results suggest that in A549 cells and HUVEC similar
mechanisms are involved in the uptake of the corona complexes formed
in low and high amounts of serum. We then tested the involvement of
the LDL receptor in all conditions. Interestingly, in A549 cells,
as opposed to what was observed in HeLa cells, silencing the expression
of the LDL receptor led to a strong reduction in the uptake of both
the HC and LC complexes (Figure 6B). For the HUVEC, given the poor silencing efficacy
in primary cells, LDL was added to the cells together with the corona–nanoparticle
complexes in order to assess potential competition for the LDL receptor
(Figure 6D). Although
not as specific as silencing, adding increasing concentrations of
unlabeled LDL caused a progressive reduction of the uptake of both
the HC and LC complexes (the same was not observed when bovine serum
albumin (BSA) was added, as a control), suggesting that the LDL receptor
is involved in their internalization, possibly together with other
LDL receptors, for which LDL could also compete.

Figure 6 Characterization of the
uptake mechanisms of the corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed on 50 nm silica in low and high amounts of serum
in A549 (A and B) and HUVEC (C and D) cells. Briefly, the corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed on 300 μg/mL 50 nm silica nanoparticles in
MEM supplemented with 12 mg/mL (LC, low serum corona) or 62 mg/mL
(HC, high serum corona) of human serum were isolated as described
in the Methods and incubated on cells at a
final nanoparticle concentration of 100 μg/mL in serum-free
medium. A549 (A) and HUVEC (C) cells were exposed for 6 h to the nanoparticles
in the presence of chlorpromazine (CP), EIPA, methyl-β-cyclodextrin
(MBCD), dynasore (Dyn), cytochalasin D (CytD), or nocodazole (NZ)
(see Methods for details of concentrations
for each cell line). Data are normalized for the uptake in cells without
inhibitors. The results are the average and standard error of the
median fluorescence intensity obtained in two independent experiments,
which are shown in Supplementary Figure S5. A black dashed line and a red dashed line are included as a reference,
at 100% and 60% uptake, respectively (with 60% uptake shown as an
indicative threshold for inhibition efficacy). (B) Uptake of LC or
HC corona–nanoparticle complexes (14 h exposure) and 1 μg/mL
Dil-labeled LDL (4.5 h exposure) in A549 cells silenced for the LDL
receptor (as described in the Methods). The
results are the average and standard error of the median fluorescence
intensity obtained in three independent experiments, normalized by
the uptake in control cells silenced with a scrambled negative siRNA.
(D) Uptake of LC or HC nanoparticle complexes by HUVEC in the presence
of increasing amounts of unlabeled LDL (12× = 36 μg/mL;
24× = 73 μg/mL; 50× = 146 μg/mL, with respect
to the number of nanoparticles added) or with bovine serum albumin
(BSA 50× = 4,2 μg/mL) (14 h exposure). The results are
the average and standard deviation over three replicates of the median
cell fluorescence intensity obtained by flow cytometry, normalized
by the uptake in cells exposed to the corona complexes in serum-free
medium with the same volume of PBS added (PBS).

Understanding all the factors controlling corona recognition by
cell receptors and how these change in different cells remains a central
challenge for the field, far beyond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless,
these results suggest that when the same receptor is engaged (in this
particular example, the LDL receptor), the same mechanisms are involved
in the following internalization. This confirms the hypothesis that
the initial recognition of corona proteins by specific cell receptors
can affect the mechanisms of internalization.

As a final step,
we performed similar experiments using other nanoparticles
of different sizes and materials. For this purpose, we selected larger
silica nanoparticles of 200 nm in diameter and 100 nm DOPG–cholesterol
liposomes, as an example closer to the materials used in nanomedicine.
Also with these nanoparticles, different coronas were formed by incubation
with two different amounts of serum, followed by isolation of the
corona–nanoparticle complexes by centrifugation and—in
the case of the liposomes—size exclusion chromatography (see Methods for details). DLS characterization showed
that for both materials good dispersions of the isolated corona–nanoparticles
complexes could be obtained in both serum conditions (Supplementary Table S3 and Supplementary
Figure S6). For the 200 nm silica, this was further confirmed
by DCS and nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) (also in Supplementary Figure S6). SDS-PAGE showed that
with both nanoparticles dispersion in different serum concentrations
led to the adsorption of different proteins on their surface (Figure 7C and F, with arrows
to show some examples of bands with different intensities in the two
conditions).

Figure 7 Characterization of the uptake mechanisms of the corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed on 200 nm silica (A–C) and 100 nm liposomes
(D–F) in low and high amount of serum in HeLa cells and corona
composition. Briefly, the corona–nanoparticle complexes formed
on 1200 μg/mL 200 nm silica nanoparticles or 300 μg/mL
liposomes in MEM supplemented with 12 or 62 mg/mL human serum (low
and high corona complexes, respectively, LC and HC complexes) were
isolated as described in the Methods and incubated
on cells in serum-free medium at a final nanoparticle concentration
of 300 or 50 μg/mL, respectively. (A and D) Uptake in HeLa cells
in the presence of chlorpromazine (CP), EIPA, methyl-β-cyclodextrin
(MBCD), dynasore (Dyn), cytochalasin D (CytD), or nocodazole (NZ)
(see Methods for details) after 7 h (A) or
5 h (D) exposure. Data are normalized for the uptake in cells without
inhibitors. The results are the average and standard error of the
median fluorescence intensity obtained in two independent experiments,
which are shown in Supplementary Figure S7. A black dashed line and a red dashed line are included as a reference,
at 100% and 60% uptake, respectively (with 60% uptake shown as an
indicative threshold for inhibition efficacy). (B and E) Uptake of
HC or LC complexes (14 h exposure) and 1 μg/mL Dil-labeled LDL
(4.5 h exposure) in HeLa cells silenced for the LDL receptor (as described
in the Methods). The results are the average
and standard error of the median fluorescence intensity obtained in
three independent experiments, normalized by the uptake in control
cells silenced with a scrambled negative siRNA. (C and F) SDS-PAGE
gel image of the proteins recovered on corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed in low (LC) or high (HC) human serum content. The
corona was prepared and isolated as described in the Methods. The gel images show that different bands were present
in the corona formed in low and high serum content (arrows indicate
some examples). M: molecular weight ladder.

Then, the panel of transport inhibitors was used to characterize
the mechanisms of uptake in HeLa cells. The results showed that, as
expected, different mechanisms were involved in the uptake of 200
nm silica and of the liposomes (Figure 7A and D, respectively, and Supplementary
Figure S7 for experiment replicates), with respect to what
was observed for the 50 nm silica (Figure 4).

Interestingly, as observed for the
50 nm silica, also for the 200
nm silica different mechanisms were involved in the uptake of corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed in low and high serum amounts, the latter involving
dynamin and microtubules (Figure 7A). This is a further confirmation that the corona
composition can affect the mechanisms cells use to internalize nanoparticles.

In the case of the liposomes, instead, for most inhibitors no major
differences were found in the two conditions. However, cholesterol
depletion reduced the uptake of HC complexes by 60%, with only minor
effects for LC ones (Figure 7D), confirming once more effects of corona composition on
the uptake mechanisms.

As a final test, we assessed the involvement
of the LDL receptor
in the uptake of these nanoparticles. The results showed that for
both nanoparticles and the different corona complexes silencing the
expression of the LDL receptor did not affect uptake (Figure 7B and E). This indicates that
in the case of these two nanoparticles other receptors are involved
in the uptake. Further studies are required to identify all receptors
involved in each case, including for the 50 nm silica, for which additional
ones are likely to be involved, together with the LDL receptor.

In conclusion, the results presented indicate that the same nanoparticles
can enter cells via different mechanisms when coated
by coronas of different composition following dispersion in different
protein contents. Changing protein concentration can also affect nanoparticle
stability and, as a consequence of that, the following interactions
with cells.37−39 Indeed, in the case of the 50 nm silica, the presence
of small agglomerates observed by DCS at lower serum content (Figure 1A) may contribute
in part to some of the differences observed on HeLa cells in the uptake
mechanisms of the LC and HC complexes (Figure 4). However, differences in uptake mechanisms
were observed also with liposomes and 200 nm silica (Figure 7), for which characterization
clearly showed that homogeneous dispersions of isolated corona–nanoparticle
complexes were obtained (Supplementary Figure S6). This excludes that the observed differences in uptake mechanisms
are solely due to differences in nanoparticle stability and further
confirms the hypothesis that corona composition can affect the mechanisms
cells use to internalize nanoparticles.

Conclusions
So
far, most studies on the mechanisms nanoparticles use to enter
cells have adopted either serum-free conditions or dispersion in standard
cell culture medium supplemented with a low amount of (bovine) serum.
Serum is added to cell cultures simply for providing nutrients to
cells. However, the presence of biological fluids has much more profound
effects on the interactions of nanosized objects with cells, due to
the adsorption of molecules on their surface and corona formation.7 Cell receptors can recognize and engage with
such corona proteins, and overall it is known that this layer strongly
affects the subsequent interactions with cells.10

Given that corona proteins can be recognized by specific
cell receptors,
it comes natural to wonder whether this layer can also affect the
mechanisms cells use to internalize nanosized objects. Recent works
have shown that the presence or absence of a corona has an impact
on the mechanisms cells use to internalize nanosized materials.64,65 However, it is not known whether the corona composition (as opposed
to simply the presence of a corona) also matters. This is of particular
importance given that the same nanoparticles can form very different
coronas depending on the biological fluid in which they are applied
(thus the exposure route or, for nanomedicines, the administration
route) and also on its concentration.7,66 The implications
can be profound. For instance, in vivo, nanoparticles
in blood encounter much higher serum concentrations than what is usually
applied in in vitro studies (passivating nanomedicines
by exposure to serum prior to their administration in vivo may be considered in the future as an approach to try to control
uncertainties related to changes in corona composition). Indeed, our
results suggest that the corona composition can affect the initial
recognition by cell receptors and, as a result, the same nanoparticle
can be internalized by cells using different mechanisms when different
coronas are formed. Potential subtle differences in nanoparticle stability
for different coronas could also contribute in part to similar differences
and should also be considered.

Another interesting observation
is that nanoparticle uptake is
lower at higher serum content. Similar observations were already reported
for experiments where the excess proteins were left in situ,12,67 possibly due to competition with the corona
proteins for the same receptors.10 However,
here lower uptake was observed also after corona isolation and removal
of excess free proteins. The lower uptake could be related to specific
differences in corona composition. For instance, a study on macrophages
suggested that the presence of histidine-rich glycoprotein in the
corona is associated with a decreased uptake.68 Here, similarly, the observed higher abundance of this protein in
the corona formed at higher serum content could be one of the factors
contributing to their lower uptake. Further studies are necessary
to fully demonstrate similar effects connected to the relative abundance
of individual proteins in the corona.

Next to this, the results
suggest that multiple uptake mechanisms
seem involved at the same time in the uptake of nanoparticles. It
has been previously hypothesized that, within a sample, multiple subpopulations
of different coronas may be formed,7 and
this could explain—at least in part—the observed co-presence
of different uptake mechanisms. More subtle changes of corona composition
over time and during exposure to cells could also explain this observation.
Further studies are required to fully characterize the molecular details
of the mechanisms involved in each case, possibly combining the use
of transport inhibitors and RNA interference with other methods, such
as the use of genetically modified cells.

Overall, these results
clearly highlight the importance of defining
what the “correct corona” is for each nanomedicine (or
nanoparticle) when investigating its behavior on cells. For instance,
for nanomedicines administered by injection, not only higher serum
content but also other factors likely to affect corona composition
should be considered, such as the presence of blood flow and the more
complex composition of plasma in vivo (as opposed
to the serum used here).13,36 Similar considerations
should also be applied to nanomedicines administered via different routes, for instance inhaled or ingested nanomedicines,
for which a serum corona may be not relevant. Additionally, other
more complex factors such as the evolution of corona composition over
time and changes due to the interaction with secreted cellular biomolecules
may also affect the uptake mechanisms on cells.21,22,29,30

Finally,
while we could partially resolve the role of a particular
receptor, here the LDL receptor, in mediating nanoparticle uptake
in the different conditions tested, it is likely that many other receptors
are involved, depending on the cell type, the nanoparticle, and the
corona. Much more work will be required in this field to fully disentangle
which epitopes are exposed on the outer surface of the corona and
may be accessible for recognition by cells. Some first works have
started to address this aspect and have illustrated its complexity.17,69 Nevertheless, the phenomenon reported has profound implications
for the field, and it is rather surprising to discover that this acquired
layer can have such deep implications in the way cells process nanomaterials.

Methods
Cell Culture
HeLa
cells (ATCC CCL-2) and adenocarcinomic
human alveolar basal epithelial cells (A549) (ATCC CCL-185) were cultured
at 37 °C, 5% CO2 in complete cell culture medium (cMEM)
consisting of MEM (Gibco ThermoFisher Scientific) supplemented with
10% v/v fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco ThermoFisher Scientific). All
experiments were performed with cells cultured for no longer than
20 passages after defrosting. Cells were tested monthly to exclude
mycoplasma infection. HUVEC from pooled donors (LONZA) were cultured
at 37 °C, 5% CO2 in endothelial cell growth medium
(Endothelial Cell Growth Medium 2, Promocell). In order to limit cell
senescence and loss of the primary cell characteristics, experiments
were performed using HUVEC from passage 2 to maximum 7. The medium
was refreshed every 48 h.

Nanoparticle Characterization by DLS
Fluorescently
labeled 50 and 200 nm silica nanoparticles (SiO2) were
purchased from Kisker Biotech. Nanoparticles were labeled by the manufacturer
during polymerization using a fluorescent monomer with excitation
and emission of 569/585 nm, respectively. Liposomes labeled with Dil
dye with excitation and emission of 549/565 nm, respectively, were
prepared as described below. Nanoparticle stability was assessed by
measuring the particle hydrodynamic diameter by DLS using a Malvern
Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments Ltd.) using disposable capillary
cells (Malvern). The same instrument was used to measure nanoparticle
zeta potential. Briefly, 100 μg/mL 50 and 200 nm silica and
300 μg/mL liposomes were dispersed in 1 mL of dH2O or PBS. Silica nanoparticles of 50 nm were also dispersed in MEM
supplemented with 4 or 20 mg/mL pooled human serum (TCS BioSciences
Ltd.). Additionally, the nanoparticle–corona complexes of 50
and 200 nm silica and of liposomes formed as described below were
also characterized after isolation and dispersion in serum-free MEM
at the same final concentration as applied on cells. In all cases,
for each sample, at least three measurements of five runs each were
performed.

Differential Centrifugal Sedimentation
Differential
centrifugal sedimentation was performed using a CPS disc centrifuge
model DC24000 (CPS Instruments Inc.) with an 8–24% sucrose
gradient using water as the aqueous component (Merck) and a rotation
speed of 18 000 rpm. Each particle size measurement was calibrated
using 100 μL of a PVC standard with a nominal diameter of 0.237
μm (CPS Instruments Inc.). A 200 μL amount of 1 mg/mL
silica nanoparticle dispersions in PBS or of the corona complexes
formed as described below was injected. Two (200 nm silica) to three
(50 nm silica) independent repetitions from separate corona–nanoparticle
complex preparations were performed.

Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis
The corona complexes
formed on 200 nm silica nanoparticle were characterized by nanoparticle
tracking analysis using a ZetaView TWIN instrument (Particle Metrix).
All samples were diluted in PBS to a final volume of 1 mL. Optimal
measurement concentrations were found by pretesting the particle per
frame value (100–200 particles/frame) and were typically a
dilution of 1:10 000 from 1 mg/mL corona complexes or nanoparticles
in PBS. For each sample, three technical replicates of one cycle were
performed by scanning 11 cell positions each and capturing 60 frames
per position (video setting: medium) under the following settings:
focus, autofocus; camera sensitivity, 75.0; shutter, 100; scattering
intensity, between 4 and 7; cell temperature, 25 °C. After capture,
the videos were analyzed by the built-in ZetaView Software 8.05.05
with specific analysis parameters, which are a maximum particle size
of 1000, a minimum particle size of 5, and a minimum particle brightness
of 50. Two independent measurements on separate corona–nanoparticle
complex preparations were performed.

Liposome Preparation and
Characterization
Liposomes
were prepared by thin lipid film hydration, followed by freeze–thaw
cycles and extrusion. Briefly, DOPG, cholesterol (Avanti Polar Lipids),
and the lipophilic dye Dil (Sigma-Aldrich) in a molar ratio of 2.5:1:0.005
were dissolved and mixed in chloroform. The organic solvent was evaporated
with dry nitrogen for 30 min and under vacuum overnight. Then, the
lipid film was hydrated with PBS to produce large multilamellar liposomes
at a final concentration of 10 mg/mL lipids. Small unilamellar liposomes
were obtained by eight freeze and thaw cycles in liquid nitrogen and
warm water and 21 extrusions through a 0.1 μm polycarbonate
membrane using the Avanti mini-extruder (Avanti Polar Lipids). Zeta
spin desalting columns (7K MWCO, from ThermoFisher Scientific) were
used to remove potential free Dil. Liposomes were stored at 4 °C
and used for a maximum of one month after preparation. The final lipid
concentration was quantified via Stewart assay.70 For this, a ferrothiocyanate reagent was prepared
first by dissolving 27 mg of ferric chloride hexahydrate (Sigma-Aldrich)
and 30.4 mg of ammonium thiocyanate (Sigma-Aldrich) in 1 mL of Milli-Q
water. Then, 10 μL of liposomes was mixed with 1 mL of chloroform
and 1 mL of ferrothiocyanate reagent, followed by 1 min vortex and
10 min centrifugation at 300g. The organic phase
was transferred to a quartz cuvette, and the absorbance was measured
at 470 nm with a Unicam UV500 spectrophotometer (Unicam Instruments).
The lipid concentration was calculated according to a standard curve.

Silica Corona–Nanoparticle Complex Preparation and Characterization
Corona–nanoparticle complexes were formed and isolated before
incubation on cells and characterization. Briefly, 300 μg/mL
50 nm or 1200 μg/mL 200 nm silica nanoparticles were dispersed
in MEM containing roughly 62 mg/mL (HC nanoparticles) or 12 mg/mL
(LC nanoparticles) pooled human serum (TCS BioSciences) diluted in
PBS at 37 °C under continuous shaking (250 rpm). After 1 h of
incubation the dispersion was centrifuged for 1 h at 15 °C (for
50 nm silica) or 30 min (for 200 nm silica) at 16000g in order to pellet the corona–nanoparticle complexes. The
supernatant containing unbound serum was collected, and its fluorescence
at 600 nm after excitation at 550 nm measured with a SpectraMax Gemini
XPS microplate spectrofluorometer (Molecular Devices), together with
that of the resuspended pellet in order to verify that no nanoparticles
were left in solution and all of them were recovered in the pellet
(see Supplementary Table S1 for details).
The pellet containing corona–nanoparticle complexes was resuspended
to 1 mg/mL nanoparticle in PBS by careful pipeting. For cell experiments
with isolated corona–nanoparticle complexes, for 50 nm silica
nanoparticles the complexes were further diluted in serum-free MEM
to a final concentration of 100 μg/mL and then added to cells.
For 200 nm silica, the corona–nanoparticle complexes were diluted
in serum-free MEM to a final concentration of 300 μg/mL for
7 h of exposure on cells for uptake studies with the inhibitors and
25 μg/mL for 14 h of exposure for silencing experiments. For
SDS PAGE and mass spectrometry analysis, instead, the corona–nanoparticle
complexes were washed in 1 mL of PBS and centrifuged again at 16000g for 1 h for 50 nm silica (or 30 min, for 200 nm silica)
for a total of four centrifugations, in order to isolate hard corona-coated
nanoparticles. The final amount of nanoparticles present in the pellet
after four washing steps was quantified again as above with a spectrofluorometer.
Afterward, the corona–nanoparticle complexes were resuspended
in gel loading buffer, boiled 5 min at 95 °C, and loaded into
a 10% polyacrylamide gel for SDS-PAGE. The complexes recovered were
quantified by fluorescence measurement as described above, and the
same amount of high and low corona–nanoparticle complexes were
loaded in each well. After the electrophoretic run, the gel was incubated
for 1 h with a solution containing 0.1% w/v Coomassie blue R-250 in
a water/methanol/glacial acetic acid (5:4:1) solution and washed with
Milli-Q water, and pictures were taken using a ChemiDoc XRS (Biorad).

For the isolation of the corona–nanoparticle complexes for
differential centrifugal sedimentation and nanoparticle tracking analysis,
the samples (prepared as described above) were spun down using a benchtop
Eppendorf centrifuge (Sigma 3-30KS) for 40 min at 4 °C at 14000g (50 nm silica) or 15 min at 16000g (200
nm silica).

Corona–Liposome Complex Preparation
and Characterization
Liposomes (300 μg/mL) were incubated
with 12 or 62 mg/mL
human serum at 37 °C, 250 rpm. After 1 h of incubation, size
exclusion chromatography was used to separate the liposome–corona
complexes from the unbound proteins. Briefly, 1 mL of sample was loaded
on a 15 × 1.5 cm Sepharose CL-4B column (Sigma-Aldrich) equilibrated
with PBS. The eluate was collected in fractions of 0.5 mL. The absorbance
of each fraction was measured at 280 nm (for proteins) and 549 nm
(for Dil) using a NanoDrop One Microvolume UV–vis spectrophotometer
(ThermoFisher Scientific). The fractions containing the liposome–corona
complexes were pooled together and concentrated by using an Amicon
Ultra-15 centrifugal filter (30 kDa, Millipore) for 1 h at 1700g. The lipid concentration was measured by a Stewart assay,
as described above, and the liposome–corona complexes were
dispersed in serum-free MEM and incubated on cells at a final concentration
of 50 μg/mL for 5 h for uptake studies with the inhibitors and
for 14 h for silencing experiments. For SDS PAGE, the corona–liposome
complexes were further concentrated and then resuspended in gel loading
buffer, boiled 5 min at 95 °C, and loaded into a 10% polyacrylamide
gel for SDS-PAGE. After the electrophoretic run, the gel was incubated
for 1 h with a solution containing 0.1% w/v Coomassie blue R-250 (Sigma-Aldrich)
in a water/methanol/glacial acetic acid (5:4:1) solution and washed
with Milli-Q water, and pictures were taken using a ChemiDoc XRS (Biorad).

Mass Spectrometry Analysis
For mass spectrometry analysis,
the protein content of the recovered 50 nm silica corona–nanoparticles
complexes prepared as described above was quantified after four centrifugation
and washing steps using a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFisher)
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Then, corona–nanoparticle
complexes were diluted in PBS in order to have the same protein concentration
for all samples. Samples were incubated with the same volume of 0.1%
Rapigest (Waters Chromatography B.V.), an MS-compatible surfactant
used to enhance enzymatic digestion of proteins. Afterward, samples
were incubated for 3 h at 37 °C with 40 μL of a solution
of 400 ng of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega Corporation)
resuspended in 0.1% Rapigest, to allow protein digestion. Samples
were shaken every hour during digestion. The digestion reaction was
stopped by adding 10 μL of 75% v/v acetonitrile and 25% of a
solution of 5% v/v formic acid in water. The nanoparticles and digested
peptides were loaded in SPE (solid phase extraction) GracePure columns
(W. R. Grace & Co.). Columns were first equilibrated by adding
twice 1 mL of 0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile and then twice
1 mL of 0.1% v/v formic acid in water. Then 900 μL of 0.1% v/v
formic acid in water was added to the samples, which were subsequently
loaded in the columns. Samples were washed twice with 1 mL of 0.1%
v/v formic acid in water and then eluted by adding twice 400 μL
of 50% v/v acetonitrile + 0.1% v/v formic acid. The eluted sample
was spun down for 5 min at 16 100 rcf in order to pellet down
the remaining nanoparticles. The supernatant containing the peptides
was collected and dried using a speed vacuum for about 2 h. Afterward,
samples were resuspended in 75 μL of 0.1% formic acid in water,
and 2 μL samples were loaded into a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole–orbitrap
mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) using Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC columns
(ThermoFisher). Samples were analyzed using the software PEAKS Studio
8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.), and proteins identified using
the manually reviewed UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database. Only proteins
identified by at least one unique peptide were included in the analysis.
Spectral counts were normalized by the molecular weight of the identified
protein and the total normalized spectral counts used to calculate
the relative abundance of each protein in the corona (% of total).

Uptake Studies with Pharmacological Inhibitors of Transport
HeLa, A549, and HUVEC cells were treated with pharmacological inhibitors
in order to characterize the uptake mechanism of the corona–nanoparticle
complexes formed in low and high serum content. The optimization of
the incubation conditions of the inhibitors in HeLa cells has
been described elsewhere.49 Briefly, 50 000
cells/well were seeded in a 24-well plate (Greiner) 1 day before the
experiments. For HUVEC, wells were precoated with 0.1 mg/mL cold rat-tail
collagen type-I (Corning) for 1 h and washed three times with PBS
before cell seeding. Cells were pretreated with the inhibitors for
10 min (or 20 min for nocodazole) in MEM or cMEM. The concentrations
of inhibitors used in the present work are the following: 100 μM
(HeLa), 40 μM (A549), or 50 μM (HUVEC) EIPA, 10 μg/mL
(HeLa) or 5 μg/mL (A549, HUVEC) chlorpromazine hydrochloride,
2.5 mg/mL (HeLa), 2 mg/mL (A549), or 4 mg/mL (HUVEC) methyl-β-cyclodextrin,
25 μg/mL (HeLa), 50 μg/mL (A549), or 50 μg/mL (HUVEC)
dynasore (all from Sigma-Aldrich), 5 μM (HeLa, A549) or 2.5
μM (HUVEC) nocodazole (Biovision), 2.5 μg/mL (HeLa, A549)
or 0.5 μg/mL (HUVEC) cytochalasin D (ThermoFisher Scientific).
Afterward, the corona–nanoparticles complexes were incubated
on cells with or without the inhibitors. Drug efficacy was assessed
in parallel for each experiment by measuring the uptake of markers
of endocytosis, by light microscopy or by immunohistochemistry. As
a control for chlorpromazine and dynasore, the uptake of 2 μg/mL
fluorescently labeled low-density lipoprotein, Dil-LDL (ThermoFisher
Scientific), dispersed in serum-free MEM was measured. As a control
for methyl-β-cyclodextrin, the uptake of 1 μg/mL BODIPY
LacCer (ThermoFisher Scientific) in serum-free MEM was measured. As
a control for EIPA, the uptake of 250 μg/mL 10 kDa TRITC dextran
(ThermoFisher Scientific) in cMEM was used.

Flow Cytometry Analysis
HeLa, A549, and HUVEC cells
were incubated with red fluorescently labeled 50 nm silica nanoparticles,
red fluorescently labeled 200 nm silica nanoparticles, Dil-labeled
DOPG–cholesterol liposomes, BODIPY FL C5-LacCer, 10 kDa TRITC
dextran, or Dil-LDL, and their uptake was measured by flow cytometry.
After exposure, cells were washed with cMEM and twice with PBS to
remove the excess nanoparticles and markers and minimize the eventual
contribution of nanoparticles adhering outside cells.46 Afterward, cells were harvested using 0.05% trypsin–EDTA
for 5 min, centrifuged, resuspended in PBS, and measured immediately
using a Cytoflex flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter) with a 488 or 561
nm laser. Data were analyzed using Flowjo software (Flowjo, LLC).
Dead cells and cell doublets were excluded from the analysis by setting
gates in the forward and side scattering double scatter plots. At
least 20 000 cells were acquired for each sample, and each
condition was repeated in triplicate. Results are expressed as the
average of the median cell fluorescence intensity and standard deviation
over the three technical replicates, unless otherwise stated.

Immunohistochemistry
and Fluorescence Imaging
The efficacy
of cytochalasin D and nocodazole on, respectively, actin or microtubule
disruption and the uptake and distribution of 50 nm silica nanoparticles
in HeLa cells was assessed by immunohistochemistry. A total of 50 000
cells/well HeLa cells were seeded in a 24-well plate in which glass
coverslips were inserted. After 24 h, the corona complexes formed
on 300 μg/mL 50 nm silica nanoparticles in MEM supplemented
with 12 or 62 mg/mL human serum were isolated as described above and
incubated at a concentration of 100 μg/mL in serum-free medium
for 5 h. Then, cells were washed for 30 min in MEM supplemented with
10% FBS, in order to remove the excess of nanoparticles in the incubation
medium and on the cell surface. Next, cells were washed with PBS and
fixed by incubation in 4% formaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature,
and the cell membrane was permeabilized by incubation in 0.1% saponin
for 5 min. Then, HeLa cells treated with nocodazole were incubated
for 1 h with a mouse primary antibody against human α-tubulin
(Merck Millipore) followed by 1 h of incubation with a goat anti-mouse
Alexa Fluor488 secondary antibody (ThermoFisher Scientific). Cells
treated with cytochalasin D were incubated with TRITC-Phalloidin (Sigma-Aldrich),
which selectively stains F-actin. Lysosomal staining was performed
by incubating cells with a mouse primary antibody against LAMP-1 (clone
H4A3, BD Biosciences) for 1 h, followed by 1 h of incubation with
an Alexa Fluor 488 goat secondary anti-mouse antibody. Cells were
washed three times with PBS after each antibody incubation and subsequently
incubated for 5 min with a PBS solution containing 0.2 μg/mL
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for nuclear staining.
Finally, the coverslips were mounted on glass slides using Mowiol
4-88 mounting medium (EMD Chemical, Inc.). Images were acquired using
a Leica TCS SP8 confocal fluorescence microscope (Leica Microsystems)
with a 63× objective, using a 405 nm laser for DAPI excitation,
a 488 nm laser for Alexa Fluor488 secondary antibody, and a 552 nm
laser for TRITC-Phalloidin. ImageJ software (http://www.fiji.sc) was used for image
processing.

Silencing and Competition Experiments
In order to silence
the expression of the LDL receptor in HeLa and A549 cells, oligofectamine
(ThermoFisher) and Silencer Select siRNA (ThermoFisher) were used.
Briefly, 13 000 cells/well were seeded in a 24-well plate (Greiner).
Twenty-four hours after seeding, cells were washed in serum-free MEM
for 20 min. Then, each well was incubated with 250 μL of a mix
including 1 μL of oligofectamine, 10 pmol of siRNA, and Opti-MEM
(ThermoFisher), prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
A scrambled siRNA was used as a negative control (Neg siRNA). After
4 h, 125 μL of MEM supplemented with 30% v/v fetal bovine serum
was added to each well, and cells were grown for a further 72 h at
37 °C, 5% CO2. After a 72 h silencing, cells were
exposed to the corona complexes or Dil-LDL as described above.

For competition experiments with HUVEC, 50 000 cells/well
were seeded in a 24-well plate (Greiner) precoated with collagen as
described above. Twenty-four hours after seeding, cells were exposed
for 14 h to the corona complexes in serum-free MEM or medium containing
increasing concentrations of unlabeled LDL (BioVision).

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b03824.Dispersion characterization, uptake
results of
independent replicate experiments,  confocal microscopy
images of cells exposed to the corona-nanoparticle complexes and the
optimization of the inhibitors on A549 cells and HUVEC (PDF)

Full results
obtained by mass spectrometry for the identification
of the proteins recovered in the corona formed on the silica nanoparticles
in low and high serum content (XLSX)



Supplementary Material
nn9b03824_si_001.pdf

 nn9b03824_si_002.xlsx

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the European
Research Council
(ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and
Innovation Programme under grant agreement no. 637614 (NanoPaths).
A.S. kindly acknowledges the University of Groningen for additional
funding (Rosalind Franklin Fellowship). S.D. was supported by a postdoctoral
fellowship granted by the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO) and the
Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO) under grant agreement
12S6517N. Financial support from the China Scholarship Council to
K.Y. is also acknowledged. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed
in the Interfaculty Mass Spectrometry Center of the University of
Groningen (RUG) and University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG). The
authors would like to thank H. Permentier and C. M. Jeronimus-Stratingh
for technical help and suggestions for sample preparation for mass
spectrometry.
==== Refs
References
Ferrari M. 
Cancer Nanotechnology:
Opportunities and Challenges . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2005 , 5 , 161 –171 . 10.1038/nrc1566 .15738981 
Chauhan V. P. ; Jain R. K. 
Strategies for Advancing
Cancer Nanomedicine . Nat. Mater. 
2013 , 12 , 958 –962 . 10.1038/nmat3792 .24150413 
Shi J. ; Kantoff P. W. ; Wooster R. ; Farokhzad O. C. 
Cancer
Nanomedicine: Progress, Challenges and Opportunities . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2017 , 17 , 20 –37 . 10.1038/nrc.2016.108 .27834398 
Iversen T. G. ; Skotland T. ; Sandvig K. 
Endocytosis and Intracellular Transport
of Nanoparticles: Present Knowledge and Need for Future Studies . Nano Today 
2011 , 6 , 176 –185 . 10.1016/j.nantod.2011.02.003 .
Editorial 
Time to Deliver . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2014 , 32 , 961 10.1038/nbt.3045 .25299892 
Farokhzad O.
C. ; Langer R. 
Impact of
Nanotechnology on Drug Delivery . ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 , 16 –20 . 10.1021/nn900002m .19206243 
Monopoli M. P. ; Åberg C. ; Salvati A. ; Dawson K. A. 
Biomolecular Coronas
Provide the Biological Identity of Nanosized Materials . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 , 779 –786 . 10.1038/nnano.2012.207 .23212421 
Nel A. E. ; Mädler L. ; Velegol D. ; Xia T. ; Hoek E. M. V. ; Somasundaran P. ; Klaessig F. ; Castranova V. ; Thompson M. 
Understanding Biophysicochemical Interactions at the
Nano-Bio Interface . Nat. Mater. 
2009 , 8 , 543 –557 . 10.1038/nmat2442 .19525947 
Dobrovolskaia M. A. ; Shurin M. ; Shvedova A. A. 
Current
Understanding of Interactions
Between Nanoparticles and the Immune System . Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
2016 , 299 , 78 –89 . 10.1016/j.taap.2015.12.022 .26739622 
Lara S. ; Alnasser F. ; Polo E. ; Garry D. ; Lo Giudice M. C. ; Hristov D. R. ; Rocks L. ; Salvati A. ; Yan Y. ; Dawson K. A. 
Identification of Receptor Binding to the Biomolecular
Corona of Nanoparticles . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 1884 –1893 . 10.1021/acsnano.6b07933 .28112950 
Dai Q. ; Guo J. ; Yan Y. ; Ang C. S. ; Bertleff-Zieschang N. ; Caruso F. 
Cell-Conditioned Protein
Coronas on Engineered Particles
Influence Immune Responses . Biomacromolecules 
2017 , 18 , 431 –439 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.6b01545 .28075126 
Salvati A. ; Pitek A. S. ; Monopoli M. P. ; Prapainop K. ; Baldelli Bombelli F. ; Hristov D. R. ; Kelly P. M. ; Åberg C. ; Mahon E. ; Dawson K. A. 
Transferrin-Functionalized
Nanoparticles
Lose Their Targeting Capabilities When a Biomolecule Corona Adsorbs
on the Surface . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 8 , 137 –143 . 10.1038/nnano.2012.237 .23334168 
Hadjidemetriou M. ; Al-Ahmady Z. ; Mazza M. ; Collins R. F. ; Dawson K. ; Kostarelos K. 
In
Vivo Biomolecule Corona around
Blood-Circulating, Clinically Used and Antibody-Targeted Lipid Bilayer
Nanoscale Vesicles . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 8142 –8156 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b03300 .26135229 
Pozzi D. ; Colapicchioni V. ; Caracciolo G. ; Piovesana S. ; Capriotti A. L. ; Palchetti S. ; De Grossi S. ; Riccioli A. ; Amenitsch H. ; Laganà A. 
Effect of
Polyethyleneglycol (PEG) Chain Length on the Bio–Nano-Interactions
between PEGylated Lipid Nanoparticles and Biological Fluids: From
Nanostructure to Uptake in Cancer Cells . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 2782 –2792 . 10.1039/c3nr05559k .24463404 
Veronese F. M. ; Pasut G. 
PEGylation, Successful
Approach to Drug Delivery . Drug Discovery Today 
2005 , 10 , 1451 –1458 . 10.1016/S1359-6446(05)03575-0 .16243265 
Greenwald R. B. ; Choe Y. H. ; McGuire J. ; Conover C. D. 
Effective Drug Delivery
by PEGylated Drug Conjugates . Adv. Drug Delivery
Rev. 
2003 , 55 , 217 –250 . 10.1016/S0169-409X(02)00180-1 .
Schöttler S. ; Becker G. ; Winzen S. ; Steinbach T. ; Mohr K. ; Landfester K. ; Mailänder V. ; Wurm F. R. 
Protein Adsorption Is Required for Stealth Effect of
Poly(Ethylene Glycol)- and Poly(Phosphoester)-Coated Nanocarriers . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2016 , 11 , 372 –377 . 10.1038/nnano.2015.330 .26878141 
Wagner S. ; Zensi A. ; Wien S. L. ; Tschickardt S. E. ; Maier W. ; Vogel T. ; Worek F. ; Pietrzik C. U. ; Kreuter J. ; von Briesen H. 
Uptake Mechanism of ApoE-Modified
Nanoparticles on Brain Capillary Endothelial Cells As a Blood-Brain
Barrier Model . PLoS One 
2012 , 7 , 3 –9 . 10.1371/journal.pone.0032568 .
Kah J. C. Y. ; Chen J. ; Zubieta A. ; Hamad-Schifferli K. 
Exploiting
the Protein Corona Around Gold Nanorods for Loading and Triggered
Release . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 6730 –6740 . 10.1021/nn301389c .22804333 
Caracciolo G. ; Cardarelli F. ; Pozzi D. ; Salomone F. ; Maccari G. ; Bardi G. ; Capriotti A. L. ; Cavaliere C. ; Papi M. ; Laganà A. 
Selective
Targeting Capability Acquired
with a Protein Corona Adsorbed on the Surface of 1,2-Dioleoyl-3-Trimethylammonium
Propane/Dna Nanoparticles . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 13171 –13179 . 10.1021/am404171h .24245615 
Tenzer S. ; Docter D. ; Kuharev J. ; Musyanovych A. ; Fetz V. ; Hecht R. ; Schlenk F. ; Fischer D. ; Kiouptsi K. ; Reinhardt C. ; Landfester K. ; Schild H. ; Maskos M. ; Knauer S. K. ; Stauber R. H. 
Rapid Formation
of Plasma Protein Corona Critically Affects Nanoparticle Pathophysiology . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 8 , 772 –781 . 10.1038/nnano.2013.181 .24056901 
Casals E. ; Pfaller T. ; Duschl A. ; Oostingh G. J. ; Puntes V. 
Time Evolution
of Nanoparticle Protein Corona . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 3623 –3632 . 10.1021/nn901372t .20553005 
Röcker C. ; Pötzl M. ; Zhang F. ; Parak W. J. ; Nienhaus G. U. 
A Quantitative
Fluorescence Study of Protein Monolayer Formation on Colloidal Nanoparticles . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2009 , 4 , 577 –580 . 10.1038/nnano.2009.195 .19734930 
Cedervall T. ; Lynch I. ; Lindman S. ; Berggard T. ; Thulin E. ; Nilsson H. ; Dawson K. A. ; Linse S. 
Understanding the Nanoparticle-Protein
Corona Using Methods to Quantify Exchange Rates and Affinities of
Proteins for Nanoparticles . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2007 , 104 , 2050 –2055 . 10.1073/pnas.0608582104 .17267609 
Duan X. ; Li Y. 
Physicochemical Characteristics of Nanoparticles Affect Circulation,
Biodistribution, Cellular Internalization, and Trafficking . Small 
2013 , 9 , 1521 –1532 . 10.1002/smll.201201390 .23019091 
Lundqvist M. ; Stigler J. ; Elia G. ; Lynch I. ; Cedervall T. ; Dawson K. a. 
Nanoparticle Size and Surface Properties Determine
the Protein Corona with Possible Implications for Biological Impacts . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2008 , 105 , 14265 –14270 . 10.1073/pnas.0805135105 .18809927 
Mirshafiee V. ; Kim R. ; Mahmoudi M. ; Kraft M. L. 
The Importance of Selecting a Proper
Biological Milieu for Protein Corona Analysis In Vitro: Human Plasma Versus Human Serum . Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 
2016 , 75 , 188 –195 . 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.11.019 .26643610 
Monopoli M. P. ; Walczyk D. ; Campbell A. ; Elia G. ; Lynch I. ; Baldelli Bombelli F. ; Dawson K. A. 
Physical-Chemical Aspects of Protein
Corona : Relevance to In Vitro and In Vivo Biological Impacts of Nanoparticles . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 2525 –2534 . 10.1021/ja107583h .21288025 
Barrán-Berdón A. L. ; Pozzi D. ; Caracciolo G. ; Capriotti A. L. ; Caruso G. ; Cavaliere C. ; Riccioli A. ; Palchetti S. ; Laganaì A. 
Time Evolution of Nanoparticle-Protein Corona in Human
Plasma: Relevance for Targeted Drug Delivery . Langmuir 
2013 , 29 , 6485 –6494 . 10.1021/la401192x .23631648 
Albanese A. ; Walkey C. D. ; Olsen J. B. ; Guo H. ; Emili A. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Secreted Biomolecules Alter the Biological
Identity
and Cellular Interactions of Nanoparticles . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 5515 –5526 . 10.1021/nn4061012 .24797313 
Walkey C.
D. ; Olsen J. B. ; Song F. ; Liu R. ; Guo H. ; Olsen D. W. H. ; Cohen Y. ; Emili A. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Protein
Corona Fingerprinting Predicts the Cellular Interaction of Gold and
Silver Nanoparticles . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 2439 –2455 . 10.1021/nn406018q .24517450 
Deng Z. J. ; Liang M. ; Monteiro M. ; Toth I. ; Minchin R. F. 
Nanoparticle-Induced
Unfolding of Fibrinogen Promotes Mac-1 Receptor Activation and Inflammation . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 6 , 39 –44 . 10.1038/nnano.2010.250 .21170037 
Gilleron J. ; Querbes W. ; Zeigerer A. ; Borodovsky A. ; Marsico G. ; Schubert U. ; Manygoats K. ; Seifert S. ; Andree C. ; Stöter M. ; Epstein-Barash H. ; Zhang L. ; Koteliansky V. ; Fitzgerald K. ; Fava E. ; Bickle M. ; Kalaidzidis Y. ; Akinc A. ; Maier M. ; Zerial M. 
Image-Based Analysis
of Lipid Nanoparticle-Mediated SiRNA Delivery, Intracellular Trafficking
and Endosomal Escape . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2013 , 31 , 638 –646 . 10.1038/nbt.2612 .23792630 
Walczyk D. ; Baldelli Bombelli F. ; Monopoli M. P. ; Lynch I. ; Dawson K. A. 
What the
Cell “Sees” in Bionanoscience . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 5761 –5768 . 10.1021/ja910675v .20356039 
Lesniak A. ; Fenaroli F. ; Monopoli M. P. ; Åberg C. ; Dawson K. A. ; Salvati A. 
Effects of the Presence or Absence
of a Protein Corona on Silica Nanoparticle Uptake and Impact on Cells . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 5845 –5857 . 10.1021/nn300223w .22721453 
Schöttler S. ; Klein K. ; Landfester K. ; Mailänder V. 
Protein Source
and Choice of Anticoagulant Decisively Affect Nanoparticle Protein
Corona and Cellular Uptake . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 5526 –5536 . 10.1039/C5NR08196C .26804616 
Izak-Nau E. ; Voetz M. ; Eiden S. ; Duschl A. ; Puntes V. F. 
Altered
Characteristics of Silica Nanoparticles in Bovine and Human Serum:
The Importance of Nanomaterial Characterization Prior to Its Toxicological
Evaluation . Part. Fibre Toxicol. 
2013 , 10 , 56 –67 . 10.1186/1743-8977-10-56 .24206572 
Piella J. ; Bastús N. G. ; Puntes V. F. 
Size-Dependent Protein–Nanoparticle
Interactions in Citrate-Stabilized Gold Nanoparticles: The Emergence
of the Protein Corona . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2017 , 28 , 88 –97 . 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.6b00575 .
Cho E. C. ; Zhang Q. ; Xia Y. 
The Effect
of Sedimentation and Diffusion
on Cellular Uptake of Gold Nanoparticles . Nat.
Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 6 , 385 –391 . 10.1038/nnano.2011.58 .21516092 
Panarella A. ; Bexiga M. G. ; Galea G. ; O’Neill E. D. ; Salvati A. ; Dawson K. A. ; Simpson J. C. 
A Systematic High-Content
Screening Microscopy Approach Reveals Key Roles for Rab33b, OATL1
and Myo6 in Nanoparticle Trafficking in HeLa Cells . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 28865 10.1038/srep28865 .27374232 
Rejman J. ; Oberle V. ; Zuhorn I. S. ; Hoekstra D. 
Size-Dependent Internalization
of Particles via the Pathways of Clathrin- and Caveolae-Mediated
Endocytosis . Biochem. J. 
2004 , 377 , 159 –169 . 10.1042/bj20031253 .14505488 
Al
Soraj M. ; He L. ; Peynshaert K. ; Cousaert J. ; Vercauteren D. ; Braeckmans K. ; De Smedt S. C. ; Jones A. T. 
SiRNA and Pharmacological Inhibition
of Endocytic Pathways to Characterize the Differential Role of Macropinocytosis
and the Actin Cytoskeleton on Cellular Uptake of Dextran and Cationic
Cell Penetrating Peptides Octaarginine (R8) and HIV-Tat . J. Controlled Release 
2012 , 161 , 132 –141 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.03.015 .
Kim J. A. ; Åberg C. ; Salvati A. ; Dawson K. A. 
Role of
Cell Cycle
on the Cellular Uptake and Dilution of Nanoparticles in a Cell Population . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 , 62 –68 . 10.1038/nnano.2011.191 .
Shapero K. ; Fenaroli F. ; Lynch I. ; Cottell D. C. ; Salvati A. ; Dawson K. A. 
Time and Space Resolved Uptake Study of Silica Nanoparticles
by Human Cells . Mol. BioSyst. 
2011 , 7 , 371 –378 . 10.1039/C0MB00109K .20877915 
Agarwal R. ; Singh V. ; Jurney P. ; Shi L. ; Sreenivasan S. V. ; Roy K. 
Mammalian Cells Preferentially
Internalize Hydrogel Nanodiscs over
Nanorods and Use Shape-Specific Uptake Mechanisms . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2013 , 110 , 17247 –17252 . 10.1073/pnas.1305000110 .24101456 
Vercauteren D. ; Vandenbroucke R. E. ; Jones A. T. ; Rejman J. ; Demeester J. ; De Smedt S. C. ; Sanders N. N. ; Braeckmans K. 
The Use of
Inhibitors to Study Endocytic Pathways of Gene Carriers : Optimization
and Pitfalls . Mol. Ther. 
2010 , 18 , 561 –569 . 10.1038/mt.2009.281 .20010917 
dos
Santos T. ; Varela J. ; Lynch I. ; Salvati A. ; Dawson K. A. 
Quantitative Assessment of the Comparative Nanoparticle-Uptake
Efficiency of a Range of Cell Lines . Small 
2011 , 7 , 3341 –3349 . 10.1002/smll.201101076 .22009913 
Dausend J. ; Musyanovych A. ; Dass M. ; Walther P. ; Schrezenmeier H. ; Landfester K. ; Mailänder V. 
Uptake Mechanism of Oppositely Charged
Fluorescent Nanoparticles in Hela Cells . Macromol.
Biosci. 
2008 , 8 , 1135 –1143 . 10.1002/mabi.200800123 .18698581 
Francia V. ; Reker-Smit C. ; Boel G. ; Salvati A. 
Limits and Challenges
in Using Transport Inhibitors to Characterize How Nano-Sized Drug
Carriers Enter Cells . Nanomedicine (London,
U. K.) 
2019 , 14 , 1533 –1549 . 10.2217/nnm-2018-0446 .
Lesniak A. ; Salvati A. ; Santos-Martinez M. J. ; Radomski M. W. ; Dawson K. A. ; Åberg C. 
Nanoparticle Adhesion to the Cell Membrane and Its
Effect on Nanoparticle Uptake Efficiency . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 1438 –1444 . 10.1021/ja309812z .23301582 
Blanco E. ; Shen H. ; Ferrari M. 
Principles of Nanoparticle Design
for Overcoming Biological Barriers to Drug Delivery . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2015 , 33 , 941 –951 . 10.1038/nbt.3330 .26348965 
Goldstein J. L. ; Anderson R. G. ; Brown M. S. 
Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis and
the Cellular Uptake of Low Density Lipoprotein . Ciba Found. Symp. 
2008 , 92 , 77 –95 . 10.1002/9780470720745.ch5 .
Koivusalo M. ; Welch C. ; Hayashi H. ; Scott C. C. ; Kim M. ; Alexander T. ; Touret N. ; Hahn K. M. ; Grinstein S. 
Amiloride
Inhibits Macropinocytosis by Lowering Submembranous pH and Preventing
Rac1 and Cdc42 Signaling . J. Cell Biol. 
2010 , 188 , 547 –563 . 10.1083/jcb.200908086 .20156964 
Lim J. P. ; Gleeson P. A. 
Macropinocytosis:
An Endocytic Pathway for Internalising
Large Gulps . Immunol. Cell Biol. 
2011 , 89 , 836 –843 . 10.1038/icb.2011.20 .21423264 
Lee E. ; Knecht D. A. 
Visualization of
Actin Dynamics During Macropinocytosis
and Exocytosis . Traffic 
2002 , 3 , 186 –192 . 10.1034/j.1600-0854.2002.030304.x .11886589 
Bannunah A. M. ; Vllasaliu D. ; Lord J. ; Stolnik S. 
Mechanisms of Nanoparticle
Internalization and Transport Across an Intestinal Epithelial Cell
Model: Effect of Size and Surface Charge . Mol.
Pharmaceutics 
2014 , 11 , 4363 –4373 . 10.1021/mp500439c .
Marks D. L. ; Singh R. D. ; Choudhury A. ; Wheatley C. L. ; Pagano R. E. 
Use of
Fluorescent Sphingolipid Analogs to Study Lipid Transport along the
Endocytic Pathway . Methods 
2005 , 36 , 186 –195 . 10.1016/j.ymeth.2004.12.001 .15905102 
Kirchhausen T. ; Macia E. ; Pelish H. E. 
Use of
Dynasore, the Small Molecule
Inhibitor of Dynamin, in the Regulation of Endocytosis . Methods Enzymol. 
2008 , 438 , 77 –93 . 10.1016/S0076-6879(07)38006-3 .18413242 
Macia E. ; Ehrlich M. ; Massol R. ; Boucrot E. ; Brunner C. ; Kirchhausen T. 
Dynasore, a Cell-Permeable Inhibitor
of Dynamin . Dev. Cell 
2006 , 10 , 839 –850 . 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.04.002 .16740485 
Hoebeke J. ; Van Nijen G. ; De Brabander M. 
Interaction of Oncodazole (R 17934),
a New Anti-Tumoral Drug, with Rat Brain Tubulin . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
1976 , 69 , 319 –324 . 10.1016/0006-291X(76)90524-6 .1267789 
Schliwa M. 
Action of
Cytochalasin D on Cytoskeletal Networks . J.
Cell Biol. 
1982 , 92 , 79 –91 . 10.1083/jcb.92.1.79 .7199055 
Boulant S. ; Kural C. ; Zeeh J. C. ; Ubelmann F. ; Kirchhausen T. 
Actin Dynamics
Counteract Membrane Tension During Clathrin-Mediated Endocytosis . Nat. Cell Biol. 
2011 , 13 , 1124 –1132 . 10.1038/ncb2307 .21841790 
Sverdlov M. ; Shajahan A. N. ; Minshall R. D. 
Tyrosine Phosphorylation-Dependence
of Caveolae-Mediated Endocytosis: Caveolae Review Series . J. Cell. Mol. Med. 
2007 , 11 , 1239 –1250 . 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2007.00127.x .18205698 
Mazzolini J. ; Weber R. J. M. ; Chen H. S. ; Khan A. ; Guggenheim E. ; Shaw R. K. ; Chipman J. K. ; Viant M. R. ; Rappoport J. Z. 
Protein
Corona Modulates Uptake and Toxicity of Nanoceria via Clathrin-Mediated Endocytosis . Biol. Bull. 
2016 , 231 , 40 –60 . 10.1086/689590 .27638694 
Digiacomo L. ; Cardarelli F. ; Pozzi D. ; Palchetti S. ; Digman M. A. ; Gratton E. ; Capriotti A. L. ; Mahmoudi M. ; Caracciolo G. 
Apolipoprotein-Enriched
Biomolecular
Corona Switches the Cellular Uptake Mechanism and Trafficking Pathway
of Lipid Nanoparticles . Nanoscale 
2017 , 9 , 17254 –17262 . 10.1039/C7NR06437C .29115333 
Walkey C. D. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Understanding
and Controlling the Interaction of Nanomaterials
with Proteins in a Physiological Environment . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 2780 –2799 . 10.1039/C1CS15233E .22086677 
Kim J. A. ; Salvati A. ; Åberg C. ; Dawson K. A. 
Suppression of Nanoparticle
Cytotoxicity Approaching In Vivo Serum Concentrations:
Limitations of In Vitro Testing for Nanosafety . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 14180 –14184 . 10.1039/C4NR04970E .25340311 
Fedeli C. ; Segat D. ; Tavano R. ; Bubacco L. ; De Franceschi G. ; de Laureto P. P. ; Lubian E. ; Selvestrel F. ; Mancin F. ; Papini E. 
The Functional Dissection of the
Plasma Corona of SiO2-NPs Spots Histidine Rich Glycoprotein
As a Major Player Able to Hamper Nanoparticle Capture by Macrophages . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 17710 –17728 . 10.1039/C5NR05290D .26451907 
Kelly P. M. ; Åberg C. ; Polo E. ; O’Connell A. ; Cookman J. ; Fallon J. ; Krpetić Ž. ; Dawson K. A. 
Mapping Protein Binding Sites on the Biomolecular Corona
of Nanoparticles . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 10 , 472 –479 . 10.1038/nnano.2015.47 .25822932 
Stewart J. C. M. 
Colorimetric
Determination of Phospholipids with Ammonium Ferrothiocyanate . Anal. Biochem. 
1980 , 104 , 10 –14 . 10.1016/0003-2697(80)90269-9 .6892980

