
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.8b09410ArticleWeak
Multivalent Binding of Influenza Hemagglutinin
Nanoparticles at a Sialoglycan-Functionalized Supported Lipid Bilayer Di Iorio Daniele †Verheijden Mark L. †van der Vries Erhard *‡Jonkheijm Pascal †Huskens Jurriaan *†† Molecular
Nanofabrication Group, MESA + Institute for Nanotechnology, Faculty
of Science and Technology, University of
Twente, P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands‡ Virology
Division, Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Faculty
of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, 3584 CL Utrecht, The Netherlands* J.H.: E-mail, j.huskens@utwente.nl.* E.v.d.V.: E-mail, e.vandervries@uu.nl07 03 2019 26 03 2019 13 3 3413 3423 12 12 2018 07 03 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Quantification
of the multivalent interactions of influenza viruses
binding at interfaces may provide ways to tackle key biological questions
regarding influenza virulence and zoonoses. Yet, the deconvolution
of the contributions of molecular and interfacial parameters, such
as valency, interaction area, and receptor density, to the binding
of whole viruses is hindered by difficulties in the direct determination
of these parameters. We report here a chemical platform technology
to study the binding of multivalent recombinant hemagglutinin (rHA)
nanoparticles at artificial sialoglycan cell receptor-presenting interfaces
in which all these parameters can be derived, thus allowing the desired
full and quantitative binding analysis. SiO2 substrates
were functionalized with supported lipid bilayers containing a targeted
and tunable fraction of a biotinylated lipid, followed by the adsorption
of streptavidin and biotinylated polyvalent 2,3- or 2,6-sialyl lactosamine
(SLN). rHA nanoparticles were used as a virus mimic to provide a good
prediction of the number of interactions involved in binding. Low
nanomolar affinities and selectivities for binding at the 2,6-SLN
platforms were observed for rHA particles from three different virus
variants. When fitting the data to a multivalency model, the nanomolar
overall affinity appears to be achieved by 6–9 HA–sugar
molecular interaction pairs, which individually present a rapid association/dissociation
behavior. This dynamic behavior may be an essential biological attribute
in the functioning of the influenza virus.

multivalencyinfluenza virusinterfacehemagglutinincell mimicsglycansdocument-id-old-9nn8b09410document-id-new-14nn-2018-09410kccc-price
==== Body
Influenza
remains a threat to
global health, causing millions of human infections and substantial
mortality every year.1,2 Influenza A viruses are subtyped
based on the antigenic properties of the two glycoproteins hemagglutinin
(HA) and neuraminidase (NA).3 HA is responsible
for binding of the virus to sialic acid (SA)-terminated carbohydrates
present at cell membranes, and the resulting adsorption of the virus
to a cell membrane embodies the onset of the infection. The initial
virus attachment to the cell is regulated by multivalent interactions,
where homotrimeric HA binds to SAs and multiple HA trimers are involved
in the interaction with the carbohydrate-covered cell surface.4 The NA, instead, facilitates the release of the
virus from the cell after reproduction by cleaving the SA residues
present on the cell membrane.5

The
overall affinity of the virus binding depends on the virus
strain, expressed in the occurrence of different HA and NA subtypes,
in combination with the specific form and density of SA presented
at the membrane. Together, these factors determine the specificity
of a virus for a particular host species. For example, avian influenza
viruses bind preferentially to 2,3-sialyl-(N-acetyl-lactosamine)
residues (2,3-SLN) while human influenza viruses show a preference
for 2,6-sialyl-(N-acetyl-lactosamine) residues (2,6-SLN).6,7 Switching of a virus’ specificity to another host species
occasionally occurs and may cause a pandemic when such a “zoonotic”
virus further adapts to humans by improving its replication/transmission
efficiencies.8,9 The latest example, the outbreak
of the 2009 influenza pandemic,10 stresses
the importance of a thorough understanding of the factors driving
such events. Alteration of the binding specificity is essential at
this first stage, and this involves, for instance, mutation at the
HA binding site and/or reassortment of different HA and NA glycoproteins.
However, subsequent adaptations appear to be required,8,9 including those that improve the functional balance between the
HA and NA glycoproteins. To better understand these virus changes,
it will be key to thoroughly understand the relationship between multivalent
HA binding and virus infectivity at the molecular level.

A first
step toward an improved molecular understanding is to provide
a platform to study the binding selectivity of various virus strains
for different SA residues and to quantify their interaction at these
artificial cell surface mimics. Some examples of 2D sensor platforms
bearing surface modifications for the study of the interaction of
viruses with model cell receptors have been reported.8,11,12 These platforms, based on streptavidin-modified
surfaces at which a fast and easy modification with biotinylated receptors
or aptamers is achieved, allow an efficient detection of viruses.
However, this type of surface modification does not resemble the structure
and properties of the cell surface, such as, for example, the membrane
fluidity. Moreover, the sugar density at cell membranes is known to
affect the binding characteristics of the influenza virus strongly
by influencing the valency and the multivalent effect of the overall
interaction.13,14 Therefore, it is important to
design platforms that allow a good control over the SA density at
the surface.

Various methods have been developed to achieve
control over surface
densities of ligands or receptors, using self-assembled monolayers
(SAMs) or (fluid) supported lipid bilayers (SLBs), to obtain static
or laterally mobile layers, respectively.15−17 For example,
the surface density of surface-exposed NTA(Ni) moieties was controlled
using mixed SAMs of suitably modified thiols for His6-tag
protein immobilization,18 the surface density
of arginine–glycine–aspartic acid (RGD) peptide was
varied using SAMs to investigate the effect on cell binding,19 and the surface density of biotin was controlled
both using SAMs and SLBs to investigate the multivalent binding of
streptavidin.20 However, so far, SLBs have
not been used to quantify the interaction of influenza viruses.

A surface analytical technique such as biolayer interferometry
(BLI) has proven to be suitable for the study of virus–platform
interactions, and it allows the determination of the selectivity of
different virus variants or mutants for specific SA residues at surfaces
at which the SA density is varied.8 However,
a molecular understanding of the avidity observed for the interactions
between influenza viruses and SAs is required to better understand
the mechanism of virus infection and the role of multivalent binding
therein. Another important open question is whether the bound virus
remains dynamic upon adsorption, which is in large part determined
by the nature of the multivalent binding. Technical issues of the
BLI technique, such as limited knowledge of the surface presentation
of the sugars at the detection platforms, as well as biological ones,
such as the inhomogeneity of whole virus samples regarding size distribution,
contact area when adsorbing to a surface, and distribution of HA and
NA proteins, prohibit a better understanding of the valency of the
binding and the resulting multivalent effects.

Here, we report
a SA receptor-presenting SLB platform that functions
as a mimic for a cell membrane and aims to provide control over the
receptor density. Together with the use of recombinant protein clusters
(“rosettes”) of HA (rHA) as virus models, this system
enables control of the interaction area between the surface and the
virus-like particle and thereby of the binding valency. The surface
modification with SLBs provides a well-known cell membrane mimic that
offers ease of preparation, controlled functionalization by incorporation
of tunable fractions of functionalized lipids, and excellent nonfouling
properties.21 By introducing tunable amounts
of biotinylated lipids in the SLB, followed by the attachment of streptavidin
(SAv), the surfaces have been functionalized with biotinylated human
or avian receptors with control over their surface density. rHA rosettes
bind selectively to the receptors, and their interactions have been
quantified using quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring
(QCM-D). The tunable sugar density at the SLB platform, together with
the controlled valency of the rHA protein cluster in its interaction
with this platform, enables the use of a multivalent binding model
to quantify the multivalent interaction in terms of the individual
affinity constant of a single HA-receptor site, the valency, and the
receptor density-dependent, effective molarity.

Results and Discussion
Design
and Characterization of the SLB Platform
To
achieve control over the interaction area between the cell surface
mimic and a virus particle, we have employed small rHA nanoparticles,
also called rosettes, as a model for the influenza virus, while at
the same time reducing complicating factors due to the heterogeneity
of whole influenza viruses regarding their size, shape, and HA and
NA fractions. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements
showed that these rosettes are approximately 22 nm in size and consist
of, on average, 10–12 recombinant HA0 (rHA) trimers
embedded in a surfactant layer (see Supporting Information (SI), Figure S1).22,23 rHAs of different
influenza A/H1N1 viruses, with affinities for different receptors,
have been used here: influenza viruses A/California/07/2009 (Cal/09),
A/New Caledonia/20/99 (NC/99), and A/Brisbane/59/07 (Bris/07) virus.
All three viruses have been reported to bind preferentially to human
sialic acid (2,6-SLN) residues.24−26

The SLB-based interaction
platform was built up in a number of steps as schematically presented
in Figure 1A. Unilamellar
vesicles consisting of both 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(DOPC) lipids and a targeted fraction of the lipid 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(biotinyl)
(DOPE-biotin) were prepared by extrusion, using a polycarbonate membrane
with 100 nm pore size, and their size was measured to be 78 ±
29 nm by dynamic light scattering (SI, Figure S2). Such vesicles are known to adhere to and rupture on oxidized
glass substrates, resulting in SLBs that display biotin moieties at
the SLB–water interface.20,27 SLBs consisting of
zwitterionic DOPC lipids have been demonstrated to suppress nonspecific
interactions effectively.21 This is of
particular importance here, considering that the binding of viruses
to the SLBs is based on multiple weak specific interactions, necessitating
the suppression of nonspecific interactions.

Figure 1 Schematic representation
of the SLN-modified SLB platform and its
interaction with rHA nanoparticles. (A) Step-by-step formation of
the platform: the first step consists of the formation of the biotinylated
SLB on a silicon oxide substrate presenting water at the interface,
followed by adsorption of SAv and subsequently by the adsorption of
biotinylated polyvalent SLN (biotin-PAAm-SLN) that can interact with
the rosettes. (B) Molecular structure of the molecules used for the
formation of the platform.

The density of biotin moieties displayed at the SLB can be
conveniently
controlled by mixing in the desired fraction, here varied from 0.1
to 5%, of the DOPE-biotin lipid during vesicle preparation. Subsequently,
streptavidin (SAv) was bound to the surface by exploiting the strong
biotin–SAv interaction. The surface-bound SAv presents additional
free binding pockets, and these were used to bind a poly[N-(2-hydroxyethyl)acrylamide]-based (PAAm) polymer (biotin-PAAm-SLN,
see Figure 1B), presenting
both biotin and SLN moieties in a random fashion at the PAAm backbone.
Polymers with an average of 22 SLN moieties and 5.5 biotins per polymer
chain (thus with a ratio of 4 SLNs per biotin unit) were used. By
controlling the biotin density in the SLB, the SAv density and ultimately
the SLN density can be tuned. Such polymers are routinely used for
the variation of SLN density in virus binding studies using BLI.28,29

QCM-D was used to monitor in situ the step-by-step formation
of
the SLB platform as well as the interaction of the rosettes with surface-bound
SLNs (Figure 1A), thus
allowing quantitative comparison of the experiments for different
(2,6 and 2,3) SLN receptors and different rHA particles. An important
consideration when using QCM-D for the (quantitative) analysis of
biological entities at surfaces is the contribution of hydrated mass
to the QCM-D output parameters, i.e., frequency (f) and dissipation (D). Because the associated
water fraction is generally unknown, the relative surface coverages
of bound molecules or particles can be determined from the QCM-D output
(as the relative coverage will depend linearly on the frequency shift),
but the absolute coverages cannot be determined exactly. Therefore,
we primarily used the frequency shifts (Δf)
to obtain relative coverages of rHA rosettes. Yet the relative contribution
of the mass of hydrated water can still depend on the packing density
of the adhered particles, especially at high packing densities, where
hydration shells can significantly overlap, deviations from linearity
may occur.30

In Figure 2A, an
example of four parallel QCM-D measurements is presented where the
DOPE-biotin fraction was varied between 0.1 and 5%. The first step,
corresponding to the adsorption of the vesicles and their subsequent
rupture, indicates the formation of high quality SLBs (i.e., Δf = −24 ± 1 Hz and ΔD < 0.5 × 10–6) on the SiO2-coated sensors.27 An intriguing
property of SLBs is the lateral mobility of individual lipid constituents.
The lateral mobility of the lipid bilayer, as well as of SAv bound
to the biotin groups in a subsequent step, was confirmed using a fluorescently
labeled lipid and fluorescently labeled SAv, respectively. DOPC-based
SLBs with 1 mol % DOPE-biotin showed a lateral mobility of bound SAv
similar to that of the native SLB, as was verified by fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP, see SI, Figure S3).

Figure 2 Control over the SLN density at the SLB platform. (A) Example of
four parallel QCM-D measurements showing SLB formation using DOPC
vesicles with a molfraction x (0.1, 0.4, 1, and 5%)
of DOPE-biotin followed by binding of SAv (0.5 μM) and subsequently
of biotin-PAAm-2,6-SLN (4 μg/mL). Gray areas indicate the binding
steps and white areas indicate buffer wash steps. All steps are under
flow. (B) Correlation between QCM-D frequency shifts (Δf5, 5th overtone) of SAv binding as a function
of the DOPE-biotin fraction. The red dashed line is a guide to the
eye. (C) Correlation between QCM-D frequency shifts of the biotin-PAAm-2,6-SLN
binding as a function of the frequency shift for SAv binding. The
red dashed line is a linear fit to the data points.

Subsequently, all four substrates were washed with
buffer and incubated
with SAv. The frequency shift induced by adsorption of SAv as a function
of the fraction of biotin in the SLB is reported in Figure 2B. The data shows a close-to-linear
trend between the biotin density and the coverage of SAv up to 1%
of DOPE-biotin, but the SAv coverage saturated at higher DOPE-biotin
fractions. This observation suggests that above 1–2 mol % of
DOPE-biotin, the surface reaches physical saturation with SAv, which
is in agreement with previously reported dense packing of SAv at SLBs
that were functionalized with 5% or 10% of biotin.31,32 The frequency shift of the subsequent binding of biotin-PAAm-2,6-SLN
onto the SAv-modified substrates was found to be linearly related
to the coverage of SAv that was reached in the preceding step (Figure 2C).

The results
discussed above show that this platform is suited to
tune the density of the sialic acid residues presented at the SLB
platform. When we assume (i) that every SAv binds to two biotin moieties
of DOPE-biotin present in the SLB,20 and
(ii) that all biotin moieties of biotin-PAAm-SLN bind to and saturate
the remaining available binding pockets of SAv, SLN densities values
are estimated between 0.92 and 45.8 pmol/cm2 for 0.1 and
5% of biotin, respectively (see SI), here
ignoring packing effects of SAv. Experimental average SLN densities
ranged from 3.5 to 26 pmol/cm2, corresponding to 6.9 and
2.5 nm average spacing between SA residues, respectively. These values
are based on an estimated 80% water content (based on experimental
values ranging from 70% to 90% obtained for other large biomolecules)21 and the assumption that the Sauerbrey model
is valid (a reasonable assumption considering the small increase in
dissipation for the polymer binding step). The observed differences
between the calculated and the experimental values for the SLN densities
has reasonable explanations at both the lower and higher biotin densities:
At a low fraction of DOPE-biotin in the SLB, and a concomitantly low
coverage of SAv, the polymeric sugar probably binds to the surface
with only two (of approximately 5.5) biotin moieties per polymer chain,
allowing the attachment of a higher relative amount of polymer on
the surface. At the other limit, the calculated value does not take
into account the SAv saturation on the surface that occurs at a biotin
percentage above 2% (Figure 2B), and thus not every biotin from DOPE-biotin can bind to
SAv because of steric hindrance and, therefore, this omission leads
to an overestimation of the polymer density on the surface. Yet, both
the experimental and model values are average densities and do not
take into account the probably inhomogeneous SLN distribution over
the sensor surface which is related to the use of a polymer with a
fixed degree of functionalization with biotin and SLN moieties. This
issue is discussed in more detail below.

Rosette Binding on the
SLB Platform
The specificity
and selectivity of the interaction between the rHA rosettes and the
SLN-displaying platform were investigated by studying the adsorption
of the different nanoparticles onto SLBs with varying types and densities
of SLN receptors. After verifying the formation of biotin-functionalized
SLBs, the subsequent binding of SAv and of a biotinylated PAAm polymer,
two different concentrations (0.14 and 0.56 nM) of Cal/07 rHA rosettes
were flown over SLBs modified with biotin-PAAm (without SLN) or biotin-PAAm-2,6-SLN. Figure 3A shows the successful
binding of rosettes to surfaces that were functionalized with 2,6-SLN,
while no binding was observed in the absence of 2,6-SLN at the SLB.
The higher dissipation signals relative to the obtained frequency
shifts, in comparison with the results presented in Figure 2A, suggests that the rosettes
interact with the SLB as intact particles. These results indicate
that nonspecific interactions between the platform and the rosettes
are negligible and that the binding of the rosettes to the SLN-functionalized
platform is caused by specific, i.e., SLN-HA, interactions.

Figure 3 Selectivity
of the binding of HA rosettes at the SLB platform.
(A) QCM-D results of the binding of A/California/07/2009 (Cal/09)
rHA rosettes to SLBs modified with biotin-PAAm-2,6-SLN or biotin-PAAm
(without SLN). (B) QCM-D results of the binding of A/Brisbane/59/07
(Bris/07) rHA rosettes to SLBs modified with biotin-PAAm-2,6-SLN or
biotin-PAAm-2,3-SLN. Steps shown here were performed after (not shown):
formation of SLB presenting biotin groups, subsequent binding of SAv,
and of biotin-PAAm with/without SLN groups. DOPE-biotin densities
were (A) 1% and (B) 0.4%. Gray areas indicate the binding steps and
white areas indicate buffer wash steps. All steps were recorded under
flow.

Various influenza viruses are
known to bind selectively to specific
glycan structures. Therefore, the selectivity of the binding of the
Bris/07 rHA rosettes to both 2,6-SLN- and 2,3-SLN-functionalized SLBs
was evaluated. A much higher (approximately 4-fold) QCM-D response
was observed (see Figure 3B) for the 2,6-SLN-modified SLBs, indicating a preference
for binding of the Bris/07 rHA virus particles to the human 2,6-sialic
acid residues. This difference was not due to a different density
of SA residues bound to the sensor surface because the coverages of
biotin-PAAm-SLN at the biotin-SAv-modified SLB were comparable (<10%
difference in Δf5). The rHA rosette
binding was evaluated at two concentrations, showing an increased
amount of binding at the higher concentration but with similar selectivity.
Even more selective binding was observed in the case of binding of
Cal/09 and NC/99 rHA clusters to 2,6-SLN-modified SLBs: no significant
binding was observed for either of these clusters on 2,3-SLN surfaces,
while significant binding was observed at 2,6-SLN surfaces (SI, Figure S4).

To determine the overall dissociation
constant (Kd) of the interaction of Cal/09
rHA clusters with the
2,6-SLN-modified SLBs, solutions of Cal/09 rHA clusters at concentrations
ranging from 0.14 to 4.2 nM were titrated at the surface and adsorptions
were monitored with QCM-D. Biotin fractions in the SLB of 0.4 and
5 mol % were used, and Figure 4A reports the frequency shifts obtained in the titration performed
with the SLB containing 0.4% of DOPE-biotin. Figure 4A shows clear binding steps at all concentrations,
visible both in the frequency and dissipations signals, in agreement
with the adsorption of soft particles. The adsorption steps reached
a plateau in approximately 10 min, while flow of the respective solutions
was maintained for 40 min, indicating that equilibrium was reached
in each step. The reversibility of the particle binding is further
indicated by the observed, though slow desorption upon switching the
flow to buffer after the last particle solution. The data confirms
qualitatively that the rosettes allow the assessment of their binding
affinity by employing regular titrations performed under thermodynamic
equilibrium.

Figure 4 Affinity of Cal/09 rHA rosettes at the 2,6-SLN surface
and effect
of sugar density. (A) QCM-D titration of the Cal/09 rosettes at a
2,6-SLN-presenting SLB with 0.4 mol % of DOPE-biotin present in the
SLB. Gray areas indicate the binding steps and white areas indicate
buffer wash. All steps were performed under flow. Surface functionalization
up to the rHA cluster binding was monitored as well but not shown
here. (B) Binding curves from QCM-D titrations for Cal/09 rHA clusters
at 2,6-SLN surfaces starting from 0.4% (red circles, left y-axis) and 5% (black squares, right y-axis)
DOPE-biotin. Langmuir model fitting (solid lines) provided the binding
constants shown.

Figure 4B shows
the resulting binding data when plotting the plateau values of the
frequency shift after each rosette binding step versus the concentration
of the rosette. A Kd of 5.2 nM was found
from fitting the 0.4 mol % DOPE-biotin data with a standard 1:1 (Langmuir)
model. When the same type of titration was performed on a 2,6-SLN-modified
SLB with a higher fraction (5 mol %) of DOPE-biotin, which resulted
in a three times higher surface coverage of 2,6-SLN (based on Figure 2C), a very similar Kd of 9.4 nM was found (Figure 4B). In correspondence with this relatively
strong binding, limited, but notable desorption was observed at the
measurement time scale when washing the surface with buffer after
the titration (Figure 4A).

The Langmuir fits of the dissociation constants (Figure 4B) require cofitting
of the
frequency shift plateau values that correspond to saturation of the
surface with rHA nanoparticles. For the 0.4% and 5% platforms, these
saturation frequencies, Δfmax, were
95 and 335 Hz, respectively. These values agree reasonably well with
the relative differences in SLN receptor and SAv densities at these
platforms as mentioned above. However, the plateau values estimated
by these fits have a relatively large error because the titration
data do not level off sufficiently to estimate more accurate values
of the saturation levels. Limited stock concentrations of the rosettes
prohibited us, however, from extending the titrations to higher concentrations.

QCM measurements of the binding of biotinylated lipid bilayer vesicles
of 100 nm in diameter at SAv-modified SLBs showed a maximal binding
frequency of about 150 Hz at dense vesicle coverage (see SI, Figure S5). This suggests that the here used
smaller rHA rosettes probably bind in a close to dense fashion at
the 5% platform and that the plateau frequency will most likely not
be much larger than now estimated. Consequently, the estimated Kd values will not be much higher than the fitted
values given above. Overall, this analysis indicates that the dissociation
constants are definitely in the low nM regime.

Noteworthy, the Kd values for the interaction
of the 0.4% and 5% platforms with the Cal/09 rosette are very similar.
This seemingly contradicts published work performed on whole viruses
which have shown strong dependencies of the binding affinity on the
(polyvalent) sugar density.8,13,29 At the same time, however, it must be noted that these data may
not be directly comparable, as these are often performed at only one
virus concentration. As a consequence, full titrations (i.e., with different concentrations of virus to obtain different surface
coverages), like done here for the rosettes, are normally not performed
with whole viruses. For example, concentrations of 100 pM of whole
influenza virus were used by Gamblin et al.13 to achieve either partial or full virus coverage of surfaces coated
with the same biotin-PAAm-2,6-SLN polymer as used in this work and
were used for monitoring relative differences between viruses without
determining the binding constants.

Similar titrations were performed
for rHA rosettes derived from
NC/99 (at 0.4 mol % DOPE-biotin only) and Bris/07 (at 0.4 mol % and
5 mol % DOPE-biotin) (see SI, Figures S4 and S6), and the resulting overall dissociation constants are summarized
in Table 1. Comparing
the results for the three rosettes, very similar dissociation constants
were found for the 2,6-SLN presenting surfaces, all in the low nM
concentrations. Both the Cal/09 and Bris/07 rosettes showed (slightly)
higher dissociation constants, i.e. weaker binding,
at the 5% platforms in comparison to the 0.4% platforms. The differences
in binding affinity may be due to the error involved with estimating
the saturation frequency values, as indicated above, and possibly
to small deviations from the linear frequency dependence at the densely
packed 5% surface (see below), but it contrasts data on whole viruses
that show generally stronger binding at higher receptor densities.
Moreover, higher saturation values were obtained for Bris/07 clusters
compared to the other clusters tested here. This may be due to a difference
in size of the nanoparticles and, therefore, a different packing density
on the surface, as well as a difference in the hydration of the rosettes.
However, when the data were fitted by fixing the saturation values
to 100 and 300 Hz at 0.4 mol % and 5 mol % DOPE-biotin, respectively,
the Kd values obtained from the fitting
did not decrease significantly: values of 1.9 and 6.4 nM were found
for the lower and higher SLN densities, respectively, confirming the
same low-nM Kd range already observed
for the Cal/09 rosettes described above.

Table 1 Dissociation
Constants for rHA Rosettes
of Three Different Viruses at 2,6-SLN-Presenting Surfaces with 0.4
mol % or 5 mol % DOPE-Biotina
DOPE-biotin (mol %)	Kd/nM (Δfmax/Hz) Cal/09	Kd/nM (Δfmax/Hz) Bris/07	Kd/nM (Δfmax/Hz) NC/99	
0.4	5.2 (95)	3.2 (130)	3.4 (71)	
5	9.4 (335)	20 (739)	 	
a In parentheses
are given the
saturation frequency shifts calculated from the Langmuir fits for
each titration.

As mentioned
above, the relative contribution of hydrated water
can depend on the packing density of the adhered entities, in this
case the rHA rosettes. To evaluate whether possible hydration shell
overlap influences the observed binding curves, we evaluated the dissipation
signal as a function of the frequency shift for all titrations. SI, Figure S7, shows that these −Δf/ΔD plots were largely linear at
0.4 mol % DOPE-biotin density, whereas at 5 mol % DOPE-biotin density,
the corresponding titrations showed nonlinear behavior with the ΔD leveling off at higher Δf values,
which may be related to increasingly overlapping hydrations shells
of the rHA rosettes. This indicates that the relative frequency shifts
and the saturation frequencies are more reliable for the 0.4% platforms,
and therefore we interpret the binding data obtained at the 5% platforms
to be essentially very similar in affinity as observed for the 0.4%
ones.

When we assume a plateau value to hold for a particular
rosette
(for example, of 130 Hz for Bris/07 at the 0.4% platform), Kd values for the 2,3-SLN platforms can be determined
as well, leading to a Kd value of 26 nM
of the Bris/07 rosette on the 0.4% platform. The 1 order of magnitude
weaker binding to the 2,3-platform compared to the 2,6 is a clear
signature of the difference in binding selectivity of the HA of this
rosette.

As observed (Figure 4B, and Table 1, Δfmax values), the absolute
amounts of binding
are higher at the higher sugar densities. However, these results do
not show the expected increased affinity for the higher sugar density.
Instead, the affinities (Kd values) appear
unaffected by the SLN surface density, suggesting that the sugar density
sensed by the HA rosettes does not change with increasing densities
of biotin-PAAm-SLN. Therefore, we here propose that this insensitivity
of the rosette binding to the sugar density is caused by a fixed local SLN density due to restriction of the interaction
area of a rosette to a single polymeric biotin-PAAm-SLN
at the SLB platform.

Figure 5A shows
a schematic top view of the surface and how a rosette particle interacts
with it. Looking at the composition and structure of the SLN-modified
polymer, the biotin-PAAm-SLN contains approximately 115 acrylamide
monomer units with a stretched main chain of approximately 30 nm,
of which, on average, 22 monomer units contain an SLN moiety and 5.5
a biotin group. One polymer chain can therefore bind 2–3 SAv
proteins simultaneously. Indeed, adsorbed biotin-PAAm-SLN has been
shown to cover an area with a diameter of 15 nm,33i.e., of 175 nm2, which can
easily accommodate the area of the SAv molecules it binds to (approximately
25 nm2 per protein). From the SAv-bound biotin moieties
located at the surface, small chain segments with a length of a few
nm may stick out upward and sideward, exposing SLN units (and their
linker chains) to provide additional flexibility.

Figure 5 Interaction and contact
area of an HA rosette binding to a single
biotin-PAAm-SLN polymer at the SLB platform. (A) Schematic presentation
of the constant local SLN density sensed by the HA rosettes for different
biotin-PAAm-SLN coverages. (B) Representation of a single rosette
interacting with three of its HA trimers with a single SLN-polymer
at the SLB substrate.

The HA clusters have a diameter of 22 nm, assuming a diameter
of
about twice the length of one HA trimer.22 With 10–12 HA trimers, we can view such a particle as an
icosahedron with an HA trimer at (almost) each apex, with an angle
of 63° between neighboring trimers. This gives a contact area
in which three trimers interact with the substrate, while the other
trimers will be >5 nm away from the surface. At the protruding
tips
of the trimers, tip–tip distances of 15 nm can be estimated
in this geometry, which is not far off from the 11 nm trimer–trimer
distance in whole viruses.34,35 The somewhat larger
tip–tip distance in the rosettes is a direct result of the
much higher curvature of the smaller rHA rosettes compared to the
whole virus.

Taken together, these considerations indicate an
excellent match
between the contact area of a rHA rosette and that of a single biotin-PAAm-SLN
polymer molecule displayed at the sensor platform. This analysis supports
the observed lack of density dependence in the binding behavior of
the rHA rosettes, and it also explains the seemingly contradictory
coverage-dependent virus binding observed in literature. Because the
whole virus has a diameter of approximately 100 nm, it has a much
larger contact area and valency with the substrate than an rHA nanoparticle.
As a consequence, the virus can interact with multiple biotin-PAAm-2,6-SLN polymer molecules simultaneously, whereas the
rosettes only bind to a single polymer molecule at
a time, making the interaction of the whole virus sensitive to the
polymeric SLN density whereas that of the rosette is not.13

The relatively small and well-defined
contact area between an rHA
rosette and the substrate allows for a detailed description of the
multivalent interaction and the overall affinity resulting from the
interaction. From an estimated interaction area involving three HA
trimers, a valency of 6–9 can be estimated, depending on whether
all three sites of a trimer can interact or not. For a tripodal arrangement
of trimers, maximally two sites of each bonding trimer can be in direct
contact with the substrate at any time. Yet, the third site of these
trimers is at a distance of approximately 2.5 nm from the surface.
From seeing the length and flexibility of the biotin-PAAm-SLN polymer
and the linker connecting the SLN moieties to the polyacrylamide backbone,
we estimate that this distance can be bridged easily by the SLN-modified
polymer segments protruding from the surface.

The overall binding
affinity, Kov (which
is the inverse of Kd experimentally assessed
above), of a multivalent ligand at a surface, following methodology
developed earlier in our group,36 can be
described as follows (eq 1). 1  Here, Ki is the intrinsic affinity constant of a single
interaction
pair, here between an HA monomeric binding site and an SLN moiety,
EM is the effective molarity, which is a measure for the probability
of intramolecular bond formation applicable to additional interaction
pairs formed upon formation of the first intermolecular interaction,
and n is the valency of the multivalent interaction.
Here, we ignore statistical prefactors and differences in probabilities
of intramolecular bond formation resulting from the tripodal trimeric
arrangement, which would formally need a nested multivalent approach.
Yet, because of the flexibility of the biotin-PAAm-SLN polymer, and
the similar distances between binding sites with an HA trimer (5 nm)
and between sites from neighboring trimers (7–8 nm), we here
assume one value for EM to hold for all intramolecular binding steps
of the rHA particle to the surface. Furthermore, eq 1 only holds when the multivalent enhancement
factor, KiEM, which is a measure of how
much Kov is enhanced when an additional
binding site is added to the multivalent interaction, is substantially
larger than 1.37

From the titrations
with the rHA rosettes at the 0.4% platforms
(see Table 1) and the
nanomolar Kd values found here, Kov values can be calculated to be approximately
2–3 × 108 M–1. Values for
the monovalent interaction affinity (Ki) of SLN with HA have been reported in the literature for different
influenza variants, and we here assume a value of 1000 M–1 (a Kd of 1 mM).13 When assuming all sites of three HA trimers to be involved (n = 9), KiEM can be calculated
to be approximately 5, leading to an EM value of approximately 5 mM.
For two sites per HA trimer (n = 6), KiEM can be calculated to be around 12, leading to an EM
value of approximately 12 mM. It should be noted that this analysis
of the KiEM and EM values is rather insensitive
to changes in n and Kov. This is a direct result of the exponential relationship shown in eq 1. When rewritten as eq 2, it becomes clear that KiEM is only logarithmically dependent on the
ratio Kov/Ki and inversely on the number of intramolecular bonds, n – 1. 2  Therefore, limited
accuracy
in the determination of Kov can be tolerated,
as even variations of an order of magnitude have limited influence
on KiEM. Likewise, the range of n values assumed here has only limited effect on KiEM, as already shown above. Errors in Ki have a similarly low effect on KiEM but have of course a direct influence on EM.

EM values on the order of 10 mM are not unreasonable for such surface
densities, and slightly higher values (on the order of 100 mM) have
been obtained for cyclodextrin host–guest surface assemblies
that have a higher surface receptor density.38 Besides the difference in binding site density, the lower EM value
obtained for the rHA rosettes compared to other systems might be attributed
to the rigidity of the rosettes interacting with the receptor surface.
It should be noted that assuming a lower valency leads to a higher
EM value needed to explain the overall affinity, as explained above.

Apparently and noteworthy for this system, KiEM is well above 1, confirming the validity of eq 1, but is at the same time only moderately
high, on the order of 10. The moderate nature of the value of KiEM indicates that an increase of the valency
of the system has only a moderate effect on the overall affinity.
In other words, the here observed difference of approximately 5 orders
of magnitude in affinity between the monovalent (Ki) and multivalent interaction (Kov) is reached with 6–9 molecular interaction pairs
(of which 1 is regarded as intermolecular, and 5–8 as intramolecular),
so less than 1 order of magnitude per added site. Such avidities are
not uncommon for biological systems like influenza inhibitors39 but are in contrast to much stronger multivalent
effects observed for synthetic systems where KiEM values of >1000 have been observed.38,40

What is the biological relevance of the multivalent enhancement
factor KiEM? Apart from the molecular
understanding of what a binding site contributes to the overall affinity
increase in a multivalent system, it gives insight into the dynamics of a system. The ratio of lifetimes of the bound
and unbound states of an interaction pair in an intramolecular system
is given by KiEM:1, and therefore the
corresponding relative bound/unbound fractions by KiEM/(KiEM + 1) and 1/(KiEM + 1), respectively. For moderate values
of KiEM, say ranging from 0.1 to 10, these
bound and unbound lifetimes are of the same order of magnitude, indicating
that each interaction pair is dynamically equilibrating between its
bound and unbound states, the frequency of which is dictated by the
intrinsic dissociation rate constant, kd,i. For considerably stronger multivalent systems with KiEM ≫10, for example, >1000 as observed before
for cyclodextrin surfaces,38,40 the bound lifetime
is orders of magnitude higher than the unbound one, and consequently
the bound/unbound dynamics is reduced. This kinetic trapping at high KiEM has been observed in an earlier study,39 where only a divalent guest showed measurable
surface diffusion along a cyclodextrin-coated surface, while mobility
of a trivalent guest was not observed due to too strong binding.

The binding energy landscape of a multivalent particle at a surface
is therefore described by both a thermodynamic parameter (the difference
between the overall and monovalent affinities) as well as a kinetic
parameter (the average fraction of bound sites). Figure 6 shows this energy landscape
graphically, by plotting the bound fraction, KiEM/(KiEM + 1), and the avidity
parameter, log Kov – log Ki, as a function of the multivalency parameters, i.e., the valency, n, and the multivalent
enhancement factor, KiEM. When KiEM < 0.1, the system behaves basically as
a monovalent system: Kov ≈ Ki and the bound fraction of the interaction
sites (and for each site individually) is below 10%. At high KiEM, >10, Kov scales
as given by eq 1, and
thus log Kov, is linearly dependent on n and on log KiEM. That means
that systems with high valencies reach very high Kov values. Taken together with a bound fraction that approaches
1, indicating that all sites are practically all of the time in the
bound state, such systems get kinetically trapped: neither spontaneous
desorption, which would require dissociation of all binding sites, nor interfacial mobility, which is based on partial site dissociation, are possible under these circumstances.
In between these extremes, we call these systems “weakly
multivalent”: for moderate values of KiEM, ranging from 0.1 to 10 (as indicated green in Figure 6), the system is
multivalent and dynamic at the same time. Additional
binding sites do contribute to the overall affinity, but with less
than 1 order of magnitude, and the fractions of bound and unbound
sites are comparable as well as their lifetimes. Therefore, such systems
can exhibit dynamic behavior, especially in processes like interfacial
mobility in which only partial site dissociation is needed. We coin
this part of the multivalent binding energy landscape to be called
the “sweet spot”.

Figure 6 Energy landscape of multivalent
interactions. Average bound fraction
(left y axis) of all interaction pairs at any given
time, given by KiEM/(KiEM + 1), and avidity parameter log Kov – log Ki (right y axis), here for three cases with n =
6, 9, and 12, as a function of KiEM. The
dark-gray area (right upper corner) indicates the kinetic trap: slowing
dynamics of the system when the number of potentially interacting
sites, n, increases at high KiEM; the bound fraction approaches 1 and log Kov scales with log KiEM and
with n. The green area indicates the “sweet
spot”: the multivalent enhancement factor is not too low (KiEM < 0.1, bound fraction <0.1), where
an increased valency does not lead to enhanced multivalent binding,
nor too high (KiEM > 10, bound fraction
>0.9), where the system becomes kinetically trapped.

As a result of the above analysis, we believe that
the biological
origin of the here observed weakly multivalent behavior of HA rosettes
is inherent to the function of the adhesion process of influenza in
real life: a virus may bind to a cell surface or to the mucus layer,
but the interaction remains dynamic until a site is found at the cell
surface where endocytosis is induced. This notion also provides insight
in why the intrinsic binding affinity of an HA site of influenza is
always of the same order of magnitude: mutations that would take the
virus–cell surface interaction outside the sweet spot would
either render the virus nonbinding or running into a kinetic trap
upon interaction, which are both detrimental for virus proliferation.

How realistic is the rosette–SLB interaction for mimicking
the interaction of whole viruses at cell surfaces and for understanding
the interaction at a quantitative level? This question has aspects
that affect the platform and those that deal with the rosette as a
virus-like particle. While the cell surface with its glycocalyx is
a tremendously complex system,41 we here
look only to the density of the displayed glycans. On the cell level,
the quantitative determination of the glycan density is a recent and
important technical development, and densities of 107 sialic
acids per cell have been reported.42 However,
knowledge on local areal density, type of glycan, and determinations
on relevant cell types will have to be performed to provide a more
quantitative comparison. At a more technical level, the BLI method
employs SAv-coated surfaces which have a similar density43 as the SLB platform developed here. Because
the BLI method has been used on whole viruses,8,13 we
are confident that our platform can exhibit the right glycan densities
to study the binding of whole viruses with similar quantitative rigor
as the rosettes described here.

When comparing smaller virus-like
particles, such as the rHA clusters
employed here, with whole viruses, some considerations need to be
discussed. As stated above, a virus is considerably larger than a
rosette, and some differences are expected for these systems for their
binding behavior on platforms like the one reported here. First of
all, as larger particles experience slower diffusion toward the surface
and whole viruses are normally applied at lower particle concentrations,
reaching thermodynamic equilibrium for whole viruses binding to the
interaction platform might be slower, and therefore verification of
equilibrium will be necessary when designing full titration experiments
to acquire thermodynamic binding constants. Moreover, several examples
have been reported in the literature where binding of whole viruses
is observed on platforms using a fixed concentration of 100 pM.8,13 Therefore, relevant values of Kov of
the interaction of these viruses are expected to be in the range of,
approximately, 1010–1013 M–1, which are significantly higher than the ones measured for the rHA
clusters reported here. Obviously, higher values of Kov are expected, as the contact area of a whole virus
with the platform (or host cell) surface is expected to be much larger
than the one of a rosette, and consequently many more HA trimers are
involved in the overall interaction. When we assume that, for example,
only 5% of the outer surface area of a virus binds to the platform
surface and that the trimer–trimer distance in a virus is 11
nm,34,35 an average of approximately 12 HA trimers, i.e., 36 HA–sugar molecular interaction pairs, is
involved in the interaction with the platform surface, which will
increase the avidity accordingly. When we assume at the same time
that the HA densities at a whole virus and a rosette are similar,
and we note that EM in the KiEM factor
is primarily governed by this density, the individual HA–sugar
interaction pairs will remain dynamic, which will cause the overall
binding behavior of the virus to be dynamic as well. Future work on
studying the overall binding behavior of whole viruses and their dynamics
will have to be performed to verify this behavior experimentally.

Conclusion
We have reported the development of a platform
that mimics the
multivalent interaction of influenza A viruses at host cell membranes.
The use of biotinylated supported lipid bilayers (SLBs) provides control
over the type and density of sialoglycan receptors on the surface.
Selectivity for human sialic acid residues was established as expected
for the here used recombinant hemagglutinin (rHA) rosettes. Low nanomolar
affinities for the rHA rosettes binding to the SA-presenting surfaces
were obtained from full titration curves. Because of the small size
of the rosette and its limited number of HA trimers compared to the
whole virus, the interaction area and the valency in binding to a
surface can be estimated relatively well. This allowed us to assess
the extent of multivalent binding, and quite low multivalent enhancement
factors, KiEM, of about 5–10 were
found, indicating that each additional binding site contributes with
less than 1 order of magnitude to the overall binding affinity of
the rHA particle. Because of the similar HA site density present at
whole influenza A viruses, we assume that these have similarly low
multivalent enhancement factors as the rosettes studied here.

By evaluating the relationship between the overall binding affinity Kov, the individual Ki, the valency n, and the effective molarity EM,
a binding energy landscape has been sketched in which a sweet spot
is evident for weakly multivalent systems, that is, for systems in
which the individual binding sites equilibrate between bound and unbound
with similar frequencies, rendering the multivalent system dynamic
in nature. Future work will be focused on scaling the interaction
area and valency to the values found in whole viruses. In addition,
the methodology and analysis developed here may be applied to screen
for future antiviral drugs or antibodies, which have the potential
to block influenza virus binding.39,44 Finally, the
quantitative assessment of weak multivalency may also be applicable
to study different virus–host cell interactions, or other biological
systems in which multivalent interactions drive cellular responses,
such as the mono- or low-valency ligand interactions triggering the
B-cell antigen receptor.45−47

Materials
and Methods
Materials
Chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
and Acros Organics. Commercial lipids were obtained from Avanti Polar
Lipids. Streptavidin labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 (SAv488) was obtained
from ThermoFisher. HEPES buffer contained 0.01 M HEPES and 0.15 M
sodium chloride was made using Milli-Q water (MQ, Millipore, 18.2
mΩ) and adjusted to pH 7.4 at 25 °C using sodium hydroxide.
Biotin-PAA-SLN was obtained from Lectinity and used as received. rHA
protein clusters were obtained from Protein Sciences Corporation.
The concentration of the stock solutions of the protein clusters used
in this work ranged from 100 nM to 246 nM.

QCM-D Measurements
QCM-D measurements were performed
using a Qsense analyzer (Biolin Scientific). Measurements were performed
at 22 °C and operated with four parallel flow chambers, using
two Ismatec peristaltic pumps with a flow rate of 100 μL/min.
Throughout this work, the fifth overtone was used for the normalized
frequency (Δf5) and dissipation
(ΔD5). SiO2-coated sensors
(QSX303, Biolin Scientific) were used. During every rHA protein cluster
addition, solutions were recycled.

Large Unilamellar Vesicles
(LUV) and Supported Lipid Bilayer
(SLB) Formation
1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(DOPC) and 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(cap biotinyl), sodium salt (biotin-PE), were stored in
chloroform at −20 °C. The headgroup modified lipid–dye
conjugate, Texas Red-1,2-dihexadecanoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(TR, ThermoFisher scientific) was stored in methanol at −20
°C. Dissolved lipids were mixed in desired molar ratios before
use and dried under a flow of nitrogen in a glass vial in order to
create a film of lipid material at the glass wall. This film was further
dried under vacuum for at least 1 h and subsequently hydrated by vortexing
with Milli-Q water to form multilamellar vesicles at 1 mg/mL. The
lipid suspension was extruded 11 times through a polycarbonate membrane
(Whatman) with 100 nm pore size, resulting in large unilamellar vesicles
(LUVs) that were stored in the refrigerator and used within 2 weeks.
For SLB fabrication, vesicles were diluted to a concentration of 0.1
mg/mL in HEPES directly before use. SLB formation was achieved by
flowing this solution on a cleaned and activated surface. For flat
QCM-D sensors or glass bottom well plates, cleaning was performed
using a 2 wt % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution and thorough
rising with Milli-Q. Activation was performed with 30 min UV/ozone
treatment (for QCM-D sensors) using a Bioforce chamber (Nanosciences)
or overnight incubation in 2% Hellmanex and again thorough Milli-Q
rinsing (for well plates). The quality of SLBs was monitored by fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) or in situ by
QCM-D (where high quality SLB defined as Δf = −24 ± 1 Hz and ΔD < 0.5
× 10–6). After SLB formation, care was taken
to keep the surface submerged in buffer and without bubbles.

Fluorescence
Recovery after Photobleaching (FRAP)
A
DOPC SLB was doped with 0.2 mol % of TR and 1% of biotin-PE. Subsequently,
the surface was incubated with 0.2 μM SAv488 for 1 h and washed
carefully with buffer for at least 15 times. Using a confocal microscope,
a spot of 10 μm diameter was bleached, and subsequently, the
fluorescence intensity in this bleached region was monitored. The
intensity was normalized and corrected for acquisition bleaching by
using the fluorescence intensity in a location not too close to the
bleached spot. The FRAP protocol consisted of 11 imaging loops (1
s interval) before bleaching, 10 loops bleaching with no delay in
between loops, and 300 loops of recovery (1 s interval). For confocal
microscopy, a Nikon confocal (A1) microscope was used equipped with
a 488 nm laser and a 525/50 nm emission filter and with a 561 nm laser
with a 595/50 nm emission filter. In microscopy images displayed in
this work, contrast and brightness were adapted for using ImageJ.

Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)
The original
solution of rHA was diluted 1:2 with PBS. Then 5 μL of the suspension
was pipetted onto a hydrophilized (by 60 s glow discharging at 8 W
in a BALTEC MED 020 device (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany))
Formvar-supported carbon-covered microscopical copper grid (400 mesh).
After 30 s, a piece of filter paper was used to remove excess fluid.
Subsequently, 5 μL of a contrast-enhancing heavy metal staining
solution (1% phosphotungstic acid, pH 7.4) was applied and blotted
again after 45 s. After air-drying, a standard holder was used to
transfer the sample into a Talos L120C microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific
Inc., Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) equipped with a LaB6-cathode operated at an acceleration voltage of 120 kV. Micrographs
were recorded with a 4k × 4k Ceta 16 M camera at a nominal magnification
of 57000×.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.8b09410.TEM, DLS, and
FRAP measurements; QCM-D binding profiles
for titrations of rHA clusters and Langmuir binding data; QCM-D binding
profile of biotinylated lipid bilayer vesicles of 100 nm; ΔD5/−Δf5plot for rHA cluster titrations; calculations details of quantification
of receptors on a surface (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn8b09410_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
D.D.I. and
M.L.V. contributed equally. The manuscript was written through contributions
of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version
of the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Dr. Kai Ludwig, Freie Universität
Berlin, core facility “BioSupraMol,” for the TEM measurements,
and Manon Cox and Indresh Srivastava from Protein Sciences corporation
for providing the rHA clusters. J.H. acknowledges the Institute of
Advanced Study, Durham University, UK, for hosting him as a Fellow
and for fruitful discussions. This work was financially supported
by the Marie Curie Innovative Training Network MULTI-APP (no. 642793)
and the Volkswagen Foundation. M.V. and P.J. thank The Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research, NWO (Vidi Grant no. 723.012.106)
for funding.
==== Refs
References
Molinari N.-A. M. ; Ortega-Sanchez I. R. ; Messonnier M. L. ; Thompson W. W. ; Wortley P. M. ; Weintraub E. ; Bridges C. B. 
The Annual Impact of Seasonal Influenza in the US:
Measuring Disease Burden and Costs . Vaccine 
2007 , 25 , 5086 –5096 10.1016/j.vaccine.2007.03.046 .17544181 
Iuliano A. D. ; Roguski K. M. ; Chang H. H. ; Muscatello D. J. ; Palekar R. ; Tempia S. ; Cohen C. ; Gran J. M. ; Schanzer D. ; Cowling B. J. ; Wu P. ; Kyncl J. ; Ang L. W. ; Park M. ; Redlberger-Fritz M. ; Yu H. ; Espenhain L. ; Krishnan A. ; Emukule G. ; van Asten L. ; et al. Estimate of Global Seasonal Influenza-Associated Mortality: A Modelling
Study . Lancet 
2018 , 391 , 1285 –1300 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)33293-2 .29248255 
Medina R. A. ; García-Sastre A. 
Influenza
A Viruses: New Research Developments . Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 
2011 , 9 , 590 –603 10.1038/nrmicro2613 .21747392 
Mammen M. ; Choi S.-K. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Polyvalent
Interactions in Biological
Systems: Implications for Design and Use of Multivalent Ligands and
Inhibitors . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
1998 , 37 , 2754 –2794 10.1002/(SICI)1521-3773(19981102)37:20<2754::AID-ANIE2754>3.0.CO;2-3 .
Wagner R. ; Wolff T. ; Herwig A. ; Pleschka S. ; Klenk H.-D. 
Interdependence
of Hemagglutinin Glycosylation and Neuraminidase as Regulators of
Influenza Virus Growth: A Study by Reverse Genetics . J. Virol. 
2000 , 74 , 6316 –6323 10.1128/JVI.74.14.6316-6323.2000 .10864641 
Connor R. J. ; Kawaoka Y. ; Webster R. G. ; Paulson J. C. 
Receptor Specificity
in Human, Avian, and Equine H2 and H3 Influenza Virus Isolates . Virology 
1994 , 205 , 17 –23 10.1006/viro.1994.1615 .7975212 
Matrosovich M. ; Tuzikov A. ; Bovin N. ; Gambaryan A. ; Klimov A. ; Castrucci M. R. ; Donatelli I. ; Kawaoka Y. 
Early Alterations of the Receptor-Binding Properties
of H1, H2, and H3 Avian Influenza Virus Hemagglutinins after Their
Introduction into Mammals . J. Virol. 
2000 , 74 , 8502 –8512 10.1128/JVI.74.18.8502-8512.2000 .10954551 
Vachieri S. G. ; Xiong X. ; Collins P. J. ; Walker P. A. ; Martin S. R. ; Haire L. F. ; Zhang Y. ; McCauley J. W. ; Gamblin S. J. ; Skehel J. J. 
Receptor Binding
by H10 Influenza Viruses . Nature 
2014 , 511 , 475 –477 10.1038/nature13443 .24870229 
Herfst S. ; Imai M. ; Kawaoka Y. ; Fouchier R. A. M.  Avian Influenza Virus Transmission
to Mammals . In Influenza Pathogenesis and
Control ; Springer International Publishing , 2014 ; Vol. 1 , pp 137 –155 .
Garten R. J. ; Davis C. T. ; Russell C. A. ; Shu B. ; Lindstrom S. ; Balish A. ; Sessions W. M. ; Xu X. ; Skepner E. ; Deyde V. ; Okomo-Adhiambo M. ; Gubareva L. ; Barnes J. ; Smith C. B. ; Emery S. L. ; Hillman M. J. ; Rivailler P. ; Smagala J. ; de Graaf M. ; Burke D. F. ; et al. Antigenic
and Genetic Characteristics of Swine-Origin 2009 A(H1N1) Influenza
Viruses Circulating in Humans . Science 
2009 , 325 325 197 –201 10.1126/science.1176225 .19465683 
Bai H. ; Wang R. ; Hargis B. ; Lu H. ; Li Y. 
A SPR Aptasensor
for Detection of Avian Influenza Virus H5N1 . Sensors 
2012 , 12 , 12506 –12518 10.3390/s120912506 .23112728 
Carvalho S.
B. ; Moleirinho M. G. ; Wheatley D. ; Welsh J. ; Gantier R. ; Alves P. M. ; Peixoto C. ; Carrondo M. J. T. 
Universal Label-Free
In-Process Quantification of Influenza Virus-Like Particles . Biotechnol. J. 
2017 , 12 , 1700031 10.1002/biot.201700031 .
Xiong X. ; Coombs P. J. ; Martin S. R. ; Liu J. ; Xiao H. ; McCauley J. W. ; Locher K. ; Walker P. A. ; Collins P. J. ; Kawaoka Y. ; Skehel J. J. ; Gamblin S. J. 
Receptor Binding
by a Ferret-Transmissible H5 Avian Influenza Virus . Nature 
2013 , 497 , 392 –396 10.1038/nature12144 .23615615 
Jung H. ; Robison A. D. ; Cremer P. S. 
Multivalent Ligand-Receptor Binding
on Supported Lipid Bilayers . J. Struct. Biol. 
2009 , 168 , 90 –94 10.1016/j.jsb.2009.05.010 .19508894 
Gooding J. J. ; Parker S. G. ; Lu Y. ; Gaus K. 
Molecularly Engineered
Surfaces for Cell Biology: From Static to Dynamic Surfaces . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 3290 –3302 10.1021/la4037919 .24228944 
Satav T. ; Huskens J. ; Jonkheijm P. 
Effects of Variations in Ligand Density
on Cell Signaling . Small 
2015 , 11 , 5184 –5199 10.1002/smll.201500747 .26292200 
Koçer G. ; Jonkheijm P. 
Guiding hMSC
Adhesion and Differentiation on Supported
Lipid Bilayers . Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2017 , 6 , 1600862 10.1002/adhm.201600862 .
Wasserberg D. ; Cabanas-Danés J. ; Prangsma J. ; O’Mahony S. ; Cazade P.-A. ; Tromp E. ; Blum C. ; Thompson D. ; Huskens J. ; Subramaniam V. ; Jonkheijm P. 
Controlling
Protein Surface Orientation by Strategic Placement of Oligo-Histidine
Tags . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 9068 –9083 10.1021/acsnano.7b03717 .28850777 
Houseman B. T. ; Mrksich M. 
The Microenvironment
of Immobilized Arg-Gly-Asp Peptides
Is an Important Determinant of Cell Adhesion . Biomaterials 
2001 , 22 , 943 –955 10.1016/S0142-9612(00)00259-3 .11311013 
Dubacheva G. V. ; Araya-Callis C. ; Geert Volbeda A. ; Fairhead M. ; Codée J. ; Howarth M. ; Richter R. P. 
Controlling Multivalent Binding through
Surface Chemistry: Model Study on Streptavidin . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 4157 –4167 10.1021/jacs.7b00540 .28234007 
van
Weerd J. ; Karperien M. ; Jonkheijm P. 
Supported
Lipid Bilayers for the Generation of Dynamic Cell-Material Interfaces . Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2015 , 4 , 2743 –2779 10.1002/adhm.201500398 .
Rhodes D. G. ; Holtz K. ; Robinson P. ; Wang K. ; McPherson C. E. ; Cox M. M. ; Srivastava I. K. 
Improved Stability of Recombinant
Hemagglutinin Using a Formulation Containing Sodium Thioglycolate . Vaccine 
2015 , 33 , 6011 –6016 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.09.029 .26409814 
Böttcher C. ; Ludwig K. ; Herrmann A. ; van Heel M. ; Stark H. 
Structure
of Influenza Haemagglutinin at Neutral and at Fusogenic pH by Electron
Cryo-Microscopy . FEBS Lett. 
1999 , 463 , 255 –259 10.1016/S0014-5793(99)01475-1 .10606732 
Ward B. J. ; Landry N. ; Trépanier S. ; Mercier G. ; Dargis M. ; Couture M. ; D’Aoust M.-A. ; Vézina L.-P. 
Human Antibody
Response to N-Glycans Present on Plant-made Influenza Virus-Like Particle
(VLP) Vaccines . Vaccine 
2014 , 32 , 6098 –6106 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.08.079 .25240757 
McBrayer A. ; Camp J. V. ; Tapp R. ; Yamshchikov V. ; Grimes S. ; Noah D. L. ; Jonsson C. B. ; Bruder C. E. 
Course
of Seasonal Influenza A/Brisbane/59/07 H1N1 Infection in the Ferret . Virol. J. 
2010 , 7 , 149 10.1186/1743-422X-7-149 .20618974 
Daum L. T. ; Canas L. C. ; Smith C. B. ; Klimov A. ; Huff W. ; Barnes W. ; Lohman K. L. 
Genetic
and Antigenic Analysis of
the first A/New Caledonia/20/99-like H1N1 Influenza Isolates Reported
in the Americas . Emerging Infect. Dis. 
2002 , 8 , 408 –412 10.3201/eid0804.010311 .11971776 
Lind T. K. ; Cárdenas M. 
Understanding
the Formation of Supported Lipid Bilayers via Vesicle
Fusion—A Case that Exemplifies the Need
for the Complementary Method Approach . Biointerphases 
2016 , 11 , 02080110.1116/1.4944830 .27033712 
Xiong X. ; Martin S. R. ; Haire L. F. ; Wharton S. A. ; Daniels R. S. ; Bennett M. S. ; McCauley J. W. ; Collins P. J. ; Walker P. A. ; Skehel J. J. ; Gamblin S. J. 
Receptor
Binding by an H7N9 Influenza
Virus from Humans . Nature 
2013 , 499 , 496 –499 10.1038/nature12372 .23787694 
Collins P. J. ; Vachieri S. G. ; Haire L. F. ; Ogrodowicz R. W. ; Martin S. R. ; Walker P. A. ; Xiong X. ; Gamblin S. J. ; Skehel J. J. 
Recent Evolution of Equine Influenza
and the Origin
of Canine Influenza . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 
2014 , 111 , 11175 –11180 10.1073/pnas.1406606111 .25024224 
Reviakine I. ; Johannsmann D. ; Richter R. P. 
Hearing What You Cannot See and Visualizing
What You Hear: Interpreting Quartz Crystal Microbalance Data from
Solvated Interfaces . Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 8838 –8848 10.1021/ac201778h .21939220 
Reviakine I. ; Brisson A. 
Streptavidin 2D Crystals
on Supported Phospholipid
Bilayers: Toward Constructing Anchored Phospholipid Bilayers . Langmuir 
2001 , 17 , 8293 –8299 10.1021/la010626i .
Larsson C. ; Rodahl M. ; Höök F. 
Characterization of DNA Immobilization
and Subsequent Hybridization on a 2D Arrangement of Streptavidin on
a Biotin-modified Lipid Bilayer Supported on SiO2 . Anal. Chem. 
2003 , 75 , 5080 –5087 10.1021/ac034269n .14708781 
Bovin N. V. 
Polyacrylamide-based
Glycoconjugates as Tools in Glycobiology . Glycoconjugate
J. 
1998 , 15 , 431 –446 10.1023/A:1006963717646 .
Wasilewski S. ; Calder L. J. ; Grant T. ; Rosenthal P. B. 
Distribution
of Surface Glycoproteins on Influenza A Virus Determined by Electron
Cryotomography . Vaccine 
2012 , 30 , 7368 –7373 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.09.082 .23063838 
Harris A. ; Cardone G. ; Winkler D. C. ; Heymann J. B. ; Brecher M. ; White J. M. ; Steven A. C. 
Influenza
Virus Pleiomorphy Characterized
by Cryoelectron Tomography . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2006 , 103 , 19123 –19127 10.1073/pnas.0607614103 .17146053 
Huskens J. ; Mulder A. ; Auletta T. ; Nijhuis C. A. ; Ludden M. J. W. ; Reinhoudt D. N. 
A Model for Describing the Thermodynamics of Multivalent
Host–Guest Interactions at Interfaces . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 6784 –6797 10.1021/ja049085k .15161307 
Hunter C. A. ; Anderson H. L. 
What is Cooperativity? . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 7488 –7499 10.1002/anie.200902490 .
Mulder A. ; Huskens J. ; Reinhoudt D. N. 
Multivalency in Supramolecular Chemistry
and Nanofabrication . Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2004 , 2 , 3409 –3424 10.1039/b413971b .15565230 
Bhatia S. ; Lauster D. ; Bardua M. ; Ludwig K. ; Angioletti-Uberti S. ; Popp N. ; Hoffmann U. ; Paulus F. ; Budt M. ; Stadtmuller M. ; Wolff T. ; Hamann A. ; Bottcher C. ; Herrmann A. ; Haag R. 
Linear Polysialoside Outperforms
Dendritic Analogs for Inhibition of Influenza Virus Infection In Vitro and In Vivo . Biomaterials 
2017 , 138 , 22 –34 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2017.05.028 .28550754 
Perl A. ; Gomez-Casado A. ; Thompson D. ; Dam H. H. ; Jonkheijm P. ; Reinhoudt D. N. ; Huskens J. 
Gradient-Driven Motion of Multivalent
Ligand Molecules along a Surface Functionalized with Multiple Receptors . Nat. Chem. 
2011 , 3 , 317 –322 10.1038/nchem.1005 .21430692 
Ohtsubo K. ; Marth J. D. 
Glycosylation in Cellular Mechanisms of Health and
Disease . Cell 
2006 , 126 , 855 –867 10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.019 .16959566 
Chen Y. ; Ding L. ; Liu T. ; Ju H. 
Arrayed Profiling of
Multiple Glycans on Whole Living Cell Surfaces . Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 11153 –11158 10.1021/ac403150n .24124646 
Guo H. ; Rabouw H. ; Slomp A. ; Dai M. ; van der
Vegt F. ; van Lent J. W. M. ; McBride R. ; Paulson J. C. ; de Groot R. J. ; van Kuppeveld F. J. M. ; de Vries E. ; de Haan C. A. M. 
Kinetic
Analysis of the Influenza A Virus HA/NA Balance Reveals Contribution
of NA to Virus-Receptor Binding and NA-Dependent Rolling on Receptor-containing
Surfaces . PLoS Pathog. 
2018 , 14 , e100723310.1371/journal.ppat.1007233 .30102740 
Bangaru S. ; Zhang H. ; Gilchuk I. M. ; Voss T. G. ; Irving R. P. ; Gilchuk P. ; Matta P. ; Zhu X. ; Lang S. ; Nieusma T. ; Richt J. A. ; Albrecht R. A. ; Vanderven H. A. ; Bombardi R. ; Kent S. J. ; Ward A. B. ; Wilson I. A. ; Crowe J. E. 
A Multifunctional Human Monoclonal
Neutralizing Antibody
that Targets a Unique Conserved Epitope on Influenza HA . Nat. Commun. 
2018 , 9 , 2669 10.1038/s41467-018-04704-9 .29991715 
Kim Y.-M. ; Pan J. Y.-J. ; Korbel G. A. ; Peperzak V. ; Boes M. ; Ploegh H. L. 
Monovalent Ligation
of the B Cell Receptor Induces
Receptor Activation but Fails to Promote Antigen Presentation . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2006 , 103 , 3327 –3332 10.1073/pnas.0511315103 .16492756 
Avalos A. M. ; Bilate A. M. ; Witte M. D. ; Tai A. K. ; He J. ; Frushicheva M. P. ; Thill P. D. ; Meyer-Wentrup F. ; Theile C. S. ; Chakraborty A. K. ; Zhuang X. ; Ploegh H. L. 
Monovalent
Engagement of the BCR Activates Ovalbumin-Specific Transnuclear B
Cells . J. Exp. Med. 
2014 , 211 , 365 –379 10.1084/jem.20131603 .24493799 
Villar R. F. ; Patel J. ; Weaver G. C. ; Kanekiyo M. ; Wheatley A. K. ; Yassine H. M. ; Costello C. E. ; Chandler K. B. ; McTamney P. M. ; Nabel G. J. ; McDermott A. B. ; Mascola J. R. ; Carr S. A. ; Lingwood D. 
Reconstituted B Cell
Receptor Signaling Reveals Carbohydrate-Dependent
Mode of Activation . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 36298 10.1038/srep36298 .27796362

