
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.8b02213ArticleDiameter-Dependent
Optical Absorption and Excitation
Energy Transfer from Encapsulated Dye Molecules toward Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes van Bezouw Stein †#Arias Dylan H. ‡#Ihly Rachelle ‡Cambré Sofie †Ferguson Andrew J. ‡Campo Jochen †Johnson Justin C. ‡Defillet Joeri †Wenseleers Wim *†Blackburn Jeffrey L. *‡† Physics
Department, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 Antwerp, Belgium‡ Chemistry
& Nanoscience Center, National Renewable
Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401, United States* E-mail: wim.wenseleers@uantwerp.be.* E-mail: jeffrey.blackburn@nrel.gov.02 07 2018 24 07 2018 12 7 6881 6894 24 03 2018 20 06 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
hollow cores and well-defined diameters of single-walled carbon
nanotubes (SWCNTs) allow for creation of one-dimensional hybrid structures
by encapsulation of various molecules. Absorption and near-infrared
photoluminescence-excitation (PLE) spectroscopy reveal that the absorption
spectrum of encapsulated 1,3-bis[4-(dimethylamino)phenyl]-squaraine
dye molecules inside SWCNTs is modulated by the SWCNT diameter, as
observed through excitation energy transfer (EET) from the encapsulated
molecules to the SWCNTs, implying a strongly diameter-dependent stacking
of the molecules inside the SWCNTs. Transient absorption spectroscopy,
simultaneously probing the encapsulated dyes and the host SWCNTs,
demonstrates this EET, which can be used as a route to diameter-dependent
photosensitization, to be fast (sub-picosecond). A wide series of
SWCNT samples is systematically characterized by absorption, PLE,
and resonant Raman scattering (RRS), also identifying the critical
diameter for squaraine filling. In addition, we find that SWCNT filling
does not limit the selectivity of subsequent separation protocols
(including polyfluorene polymers for isolating only semiconducting
SWCNTs and aqueous two-phase separation for enrichment of specific
SWCNT chiralities). The design of these functional hybrid systems,
with tunable dye absorption, fast and efficient EET, and the ability
to remove all metallic SWCNTs by subsequent separation, demonstrates
potential for implementation in photoconversion devices.

carbon nanotubesenergy transferencapsulationexciton dynamicssolar photoconversionspectroscopydocument-id-old-9nn8b02213document-id-new-14nn-2018-022133ccc-price
==== Body
Single-walled
carbon nanotubes
(SWCNTs), and in particular their semiconducting species (s-SWCNTs),
show great promise for solar photoconversion schemes, that is, photovoltaic
and photocatalytic systems, due to their large absorption coefficients,
enhanced stability (photochemical, thermal, etc.),
and high exciton diffusion and charge carrier mobility.1,2 The optical absorption properties of SWCNTs are determined by the
quasi-one-dimensional (1D) structure with a highly delocalized π-electron
network, resulting in discrete, narrow, and chirality-dependent excitonic
transitions spanning the infrared to the UV.3,4 The
same quasi-1D π-conjugated structure, along with a small reorganization
energy,5 enables the facile transport of
charges and excitons over long distances,6−8 a clear advantage
for the efficient conversion of solar photons to useful work.

Despite strong absorption in the near-infrared and visible regions,
the narrow excitonic transitions of semiconducting SWCNTs only cover
a small part of the solar spectrum (depending on the specific diameter
distribution). In recent years, filling of SWCNTs with functional
molecules has become a powerful strategy to create new optical and
electronic properties, for example, amphoteric doping of the SWCNTs
through encapsulation of electron donor/acceptor molecules,9 tuning of the SWCNT properties through modification
of the internal dielectric environment of the SWCNTs,10−14 observation of giant Raman cross sections for confined dyes,13 and strong second-order nonlinear optical response
due to specific head-to-tail alignment of elongated dipolar molecules
inside the SWCNTs hollow core.12 Furthermore,
the 1D hollow core of SWCNTs can provide an elegant approach to control
molecular orientations15 and aggregation
through tuning of the SWCNT diameter and, accordingly, the strength
of confinement. For example, Gaufrès et al. demonstrated that large-diameter SWCNTs facilitated the formation
of strongly coupled J-aggregates of α-sexithiophene molecules.13,16 Beyond these effects, encapsulation of sensitizing chromophores
offers a powerful strategy to complement light absorption in SWCNT
systems through energy transfer to the SWCNTs.17,18

In this work, we exploit the inner hollow space of SWCNTs
to encapsulate
1,3-bis[4-(dimethylamino)phenyl]-squaraine (SQ) dye molecules that
can strongly sensitize SWCNT excitation in the visible region of the
solar spectrum so that energy transfer of photoexcitation from the
dye to the SWCNTs enhances their excitation in regions outside of
the distinct excitonic absorption transitions. SQ is an ideal SWCNT
photosensitizer owing to its large extinction coefficient (2.25 ×
105 L mol–1 cm–1 at
the peak absorption wavelength in chloroform), appropriate size for
SWCNT encapsulation (inset of Figure 1a and see further Figure 7) and its peak absorption wavelength of ca.
630 nm, which matches well with the energy gap between the second
(S22) and third (S33) van Hove transitions of
the s-SWCNTs with diameters that can accommodate the dye (vide infra).

Figure 1 Optical absorption and RRS characterization of SQ encapsulation
in SWCNTs. Normalized absorption spectra of the (a) LV950 and (b)
LV950-ATPE samples. SQ@SWCNT samples are denoted by red traces and
reference DCM@SWCNT samples by black traces. The spectrum for the
encapsulated SQ dye, obtained by subtraction of the DCM@SWCNT spectrum
from the SQ@SWCNT spectrum, is identified by the blue traces. The
spectrum for free SQ dye in toluene is denoted by the green trace.
Ranges for the excitonic transitions for semiconducting (S11, S22, S33) and metallic (M11) SWCNTs
and phonon side bands (X11) are indicated, and the region
where a strong D2O absorption band complicates the background
subtraction is identified by an asterisk. (c) Absorbance contribution
due to encapsulated SQ for all five SWCNT samples, estimated by subtraction
of the DCM@SWCNT spectrum from the SQ@SWCNT spectrum and compared
to the absorption spectrum of SQ freely dissolved in toluene. (d)
Raman spectra of the SQ@LV950 (red trace) and DCM@LV950 (black trace)
samples excited at 676.4 nm. The spectrum of encapsulated SQ (blue
trace) is obtained by subtracting the Raman spectra of DCM@LV950 from
the SQ@LV950 spectrum (see SI, section
6, for other excitation wavelengths). The Raman spectrum of the pure
SQ powder (gray trace) obtained at 514.5 nm is also shown.

The solution-phase synthesis of SQ-filled SWCNTs
has been demonstrated
previously and fast EET to the SWCNTs was observed.18 Here, we encapsulated SQ dye molecules in a wide range
of SWCNT samples with different diameter distributions to characterize
in detail the diameter-dependent ultrafast energy transfer in these
hybrid structures using an extensive combination of dedicated spectroscopic
techniques and postsynthesis diameter and electronic type separation.

We first generated hybrid structures of SQ dye molecules encapsulated
in SWCNTs with many different diameters, originating from different
SWCNT synthesis methods. These SQ@SWCNT nanohybrids were subsequently
sorted by either aqueous two-phase extraction (ATPE)19−21 or highly selective polymer wrapping with polyfluorene-based polymers,22 allowing selection of subsets of SWCNT diameters
and/or pure semiconducting (s-)SWCNT samples, respectively. Separation
of filled SWCNTs by chirality23 or metallicity24 has been performed before using density gradient
ultracentrifugation (DGU), but being based on density, this requires
the separation protocols to be adapted for the specific filler molecule.
Since the encapsulated molecules should not significantly alter the
outer wall properties of the SWCNTs, the separation techniques of
ATPE25 and selective polymer wrapping used
here, which rely on the chirality-specific interaction with the outer
SWCNT wall, can be directly transferred to filled SWCNTs. We utilize
steady-state absorption, two-dimensional photoluminescence excitation
(2D PLE), and wavelength-dependent resonant Raman scattering (RRS)
experiments to prove (in a chirality-selective way) the encapsulation
of the dye molecules and identify the minimal SWCNT diameter needed
to accommodate the dye. 2D PLE mapping demonstrates efficient diameter-dependent
EET to the SWCNTs, showing that the quasi-1D supramolecular architectures
formed by the encapsulated dyes strongly depend on the SWCNT diameter
since the 1D arrays of confined dyes feature drastically shifted absorption
spectra with respect to the free dye absorption. Transient absorption
(TA) spectroscopy, following the excited state dynamics of both SWCNT
and dye, reveals ultrafast sub-picosecond EET for all filled diameters
studied. These results suggest that diameter- and chirality-selected
SWCNT “nanoencapsulants” can guide the structure of
molecular aggregates for hybrid light-absorbing materials.

Results
and Discussion
In this study, we spectroscopically interrogate
five primary sample
types, prepared from two different SWCNT raw materials, either SWCNTs
synthesized at NREL by laser vaporization at a furnace temperature
of 950 °C (LV950) or commercially available arc discharge (AD)
SWCNTs, corresponding to smaller and larger SWCNT diameters, respectively.
SWCNTs were opened by chemical processing, and SQ-filling was achieved
by refluxing the SWCNTs in a saturated solution of SQ in dichloromethane
(DCM) (see Experimental Methods for details
and Supporting Information (SI), section
1). The LV950 SWCNTs were dispersed in D2O with sodium
deoxycholate (DOC), corresponding to a sample with a relatively broad
diameter range. To investigate in detail those SWCNT diameters in
which a single file of dye molecules narrowly fits (as determined
from characterization of the broad diameter distribution samples,
see below), an ATPE separation protocol for enriching these LV950
SWCNTs with a mean diameter of ca. 1.195 nm and dominated by the (9,8),
(10,8), and (11,6) chiralities was developed (see Experimental Methods) and afterward applied to the filled
SWCNTs. The AD SWCNTs were either dispersed in D2O with
DOC (AD-DOC) or dispersed with two different molecular-weight PFH-A
polymers in toluene to extract either a large-diameter s-SWCNT sample
strongly enriched with near-armchair SWCNT chiralities (AD-PFHA1)22 or a broader distribution of large-diameter
s-SWCNTs (AD-PFHA2). The five samples are detailed in Table 1; in all cases, we will refer
to squaraine-filled SWCNTs as “SQ@sample_name”.

Table 1 Summary of SWCNT Samples Investigated
in This Study
sample name	SWCNT source	polymer/surfactant	solvent	enrichment	diameter
rangea (nm)	
LV950	LV 950 °C	DOC	D2O	none	0.945–1.445	
LV950-ATPE	LV 950 °C	DOC	D2O	diameter-enriched	1.135–1.255	
AD-DOC	arc discharge	DOC	D2O	none	1.08–1.42	
AD-PFHA1	arc discharge	PFH-A (MW = 39 kDA)	(d-)toluene	>99.98% s-SWCNTs26 mostly near-armchair	1.02–1.36	
AD-PFHA2	arc discharge	PFH-A (MW = 125 kDA)	(d-)toluene	s-SWCNTs	1.15–1.53	
a Diameter range determined as the
smallest and largest diameter yielding a measurable signal in PLE
and used to extract the EET peak positions (see further). Note that
for surfactant-solubilized samples in D2O, the absorption
of D2O limits the PL detection from larger-diameter SWCNTs
(λem < 1750 nm), while deuterated toluene enables
measurements at longer PL wavelengths (transparent throughout the
entire sensitive area of the detector up to 2200 nm).

Since the encapsulation procedure
is performed in the presence
of dichloromethane (DCM), DCM is also potentially encapsulated in
the SWCNTs (for example, in SWCNTs too narrow to be filled by the
dye). We therefore prepared appropriate control samples by repeating
the filling procedure without the presence of the dye (DCM@sample_name).
Afterward the same sorting protocols were applied on the DCM-filled
SWCNTs. We also repeated the same refluxing procedure in the presence
of the dye with partially closed SWCNTs, to distinguish dye encapsulation
from residual adsorption on their outer walls (see further and SI, Figure S3).

In the first part of this article,
we prove the encapsulation of
the SQ molecules and then focus on the observed excitation energy
transfer (EET) by TA for the ATPE-enriched LV950 sample (i.e., comparing DCM@LV950-ATPE and SQ@LV950-ATPE), since this sample
contains a very narrow diameter distribution centered around the thinnest
SWCNTs that can accommodate the dyes. Such a small set of SWCNT chiralities
simplifies in particular the TA analysis. Finally, we turn to a detailed
treatment of PLE maps of all samples that permits in-depth characterization
of diameter-dependent EET from encapsulated dyes to the SWCNTs.

Spectroscopic
Characterization of Squaraine Encapsulation in
SWCNTs
To prove the encapsulation of the SQ dyes inside the
SWCNT samples, we employ a combination of different spectroscopic
techniques, as demonstrated in previous work.12 A first indication of dye encapsulation is obtained from optical
absorption spectroscopy. Figure 1a,b compares the absorption spectra of the SQ- and
DCM-filled LV950 and LV950-ATPE SWCNTs. Figure S2 in the SI shows the same comparison for the other samples.
The absorption spectra feature excitonic transitions for s-SWCNTs
(S11, S22, and S33), metallic SWCNTs
(M11), and phonon side bands (X11).27 In the SQ@SWCNT samples, an additional absorption
band appears near 700–740 nm, corresponding to the encapsulated
SQ dye molecules. This dye absorption is completely absent for the
reference samples prepared with closed SWCNTs (Figure S3), proving that the dye is encapsulated inside the
SWCNTs and not adsorbed on the outer walls.

Subtracting the
absorption spectra of the reference DCM@SWCNT from the spectra of
the SQ@SWCNT samples (blue traces in Figure 1a,b and plotted for all samples in Figure 1c) and comparing
this with the absorption spectrum of the dye molecules dissolved freely
in toluene (green traces in Figures 1a–c) highlight a strong bathochromic shift (∼220
meV), and spectral broadening upon encapsulation, indicating that
the dye molecules experience a very different environment relative
to the solvent. Moreover, Figure 1c demonstrates that SQ molecules in the five different
SWCNT samples have different absorption spectra. In particular, for
the ATPE-extracted SWCNTs (blue curve in Figure 1c), containing just a few chiralities with
similar (and relatively small) diameters, the dye absorption displays
the strongest redshift and narrowest line width. The other samples
contain larger diameters and a broader diameter range, and accordingly
the SQ absorption envelope broadens and shifts to shorter wavelengths.
These results suggest that the absorption shift of encapsulated SQ
molecules is directly tied to the diameter of the SWCNTs in which
they are encapsulated (vide infra). Figure 1c also shows that the polymer-wrapped
SWCNTs exhibit a weak absorption band near 625 nm associated with
free SQ dyes in solution, indicating that a small fraction of the
encapsulated dye molecules redisperses into the toluene. We also found
that polyfluorene-wrapped SWCNTs enable the SQ dye molecules to be
(reversibly) encapsulated into SWCNTs after preparing dispersions, since the dye is soluble in toluene. Figure S4 (SI Section 4) demonstrates this postdispersion filling.
In contrast, the dye leaching does not occur in aqueous suspensions
because the SQ dye is not soluble in water, and the absorption spectra
of these aqueous suspensions were found to be stable for at least
18 months. Thanks to strong quenching of the dye emission after encapsulation,
it is furthermore possible to measure the RRS spectrum of the encapsulated
dye throughout the entire absorption wavelength range (Figure 1d and S5, SI).

As detailed in the SI (sections
2, 6,
and 7), an extensive combination of absorption, RRS, and PLE experiments
(see also below) with comparative reference samples with DCM-filled
and closed SWCNTs, indicates that SQ molecules are successfully incorporated
into all the samples outlined in Table 1. Importantly, this suite of experiments also demonstrates
that both the ATPE-sorting and PFH-A wrapping protocols, used to select
specific SWCNT chiralities, are not hampered by the presence of encapsulated
dye molecules. This result confirms the expectation that encapsulated
dyes are shielded from interactions with the environment by the SWCNT
wall and implies that numerous separation methods developed for raw
SWCNTs can be directly applied to dye-filled SWCNTs.

Tracking Energy
Transfer with PLE and Transient Absorption Spectroscopy
2D
PLE spectroscopy and TA spectroscopy are used to characterize
EET in the SQ@SWCNT nanohybrids. Figure 2a,b presents PLE maps of the SQ-filled and
DCM-filled LV950-ATPE samples, respectively, and Figure 2d presents a PLE map obtained
from the SQ@AD-DOC sample. PLE maps of other samples can be found
in the SI (Figure S7–S11) and will
be discussed in more detail in the next section (vide infra). By comparing the PLE maps in Figure 2a,b, we can distinguish
two important regions. In the excitation wavelength range of ca. 800–1050
nm, s-SWCNTs are excited through direct excitation at their S22 optical transitions. The specific peak positions and line
widths associated with the different SWCNTs are clearly influenced
by the dye-filling, as was also observed in previous work for a dipolar
dye molecule encapsulated inside SWCNTs.12 At a shorter excitation wavelength, highlighted by the dashed line
in Figure 2a,b, the
SQ-filled SWCNTs clearly exhibit an additional peak compared to the
DCM-filled reference sample. The near-IR emission observed here is clearly associated with the SWCNTs but is observed
upon excitation of the encapsulated dye molecules
(ca. 740 nm) and is therefore a direct manifestation of energy transfer
from the dye molecules to the SWCNTs. Such peaks will henceforth be
referred to as EET peaks. Figure 2c demonstrates that the EET peak extracted from the
PLE map by integrating excitation slices from 1410 to 1460 nm overlays
very well with the absorption of the encapsulated dye species (from Figure 1c), confirming that
the EET arises from the encapsulated dye molecules.

Figure 2 PLE spectroscopy of SQ-filled
SWCNTs. (a,b) PLE maps of (a) SQ@LV950-ATPE
and (b) DCM@LV950-ATPE. White points indicate possible peak positions
obtained from empirical relations for empty SWCNTs,28 and the white dashed line highlights the position of the
additional EET peak. (c) Comparison of free SQ absorbance in toluene
(green), encapsulated SQ absorbance (blue, see Figure 1c), and PL excitation spectra of SQ@LV950-ATPE
(red) and DCM@LV950-ATPE (black) obtained from the PLE maps by integrating
over emission wavelengths from 1410 to 1460 nm. (d) PLE map of SQ@AD-DOC
with the two dashed lines highlighting the EET excitation window.
(e) PL excitation spectra of SQ@AD-DOC and DCM@AD-DOC integrated over
emission wavelengths 1420–1440 nm and comparison between SQ
absorption of the free and encapsulated molecules (colors as in panel
c), as well as obtained by integrating excitation spectra of SQ@AD-DCM@AD
for indicated emission wavelength ranges (dotted curves). The absorption
envelope of the encapsulated dyes clearly originates from a superposition
of EET peaks for different host SWCNTs (for an enlarged version see
SI, Figure S12). (f) Normalized difference
PLE map (see main text) clearly highlighting the EET and prominently
showing the onset of EET at an emission wavelength of about 1420 nm
and the variation of dye excitation wavelength with SWCNT diameter
(hence emission wavelength). The bottom panel represents the integrated
intensity of the normalized EET band, integrated over excitation wavelengths
690–750 nm.

More pronounced EET peaks
were found for the SQ@AD-DOC sample in
the excitation range between 690 and 750 nm as highlighted by the
dashed lines in the Figure 2d. Since this sample represents a broader diameter range than
the SQ@LV950-ATPE sample, we now observe EET peaks with different
(dye) absorption wavelengths at different (SWCNT) emission wavelengths
(see also Figure 2e,
which compares different excitation slices with each other).

In order to better visualize the EET band and compare its relative
intensity as a function of the encapsulating SWCNTs (emission wavelength),
it is useful to subtract the DCM@SWCNT PLE map (pure SWCNT signals)
from the SQ@SWCNT PLE map, after normalization over the intrinsic
SWCNT signals, to eliminate the influence of SWCNT chirality dependent
abundance and PL efficiency (see SI section 8 and ref (12)). The
obtained map (Figure 2f, top), containing solely EET peaks, clearly shows the dependence
of the EET peak position on the SWCNT emission wavelength. Plotting
its integrated intensity (over excitation wavelengths 690–750
nm) as a function of emission wavelength (Figure 2f, bottom) clearly shows an onset of the
EET band at about 1420 nm, corresponding to the emission of the (9,8)
and (11,6) chiralities. SWCNTs with smaller diameters, that is, shorter
emission wavelengths, do not show any EET as they appear to be too
narrow in diameter to accommodate the dye. Note that we find a much
smaller critical diameter for SQ-filling than in previous work,18 which may be ascribed to the more efficient
SWCNT opening procedure used here, including air oxidation, acid treatment,
and high-temperature annealing. In particular the latter step removes
any functional groups, for example those formed during oxidation,
and results in clean, open SWCNT ends.12

Steady-state PL studies also indicate that the SQ emission
is quenched
by a factor of ∼105 by encapsulation within SWCNTs
(see SI, section 5). Reports of fluorescence
quantum yield of SQ range from 0.65 to 0.85,29 showing that the SQ excited state decays primarily via a radiative
process for the isolated molecule. This near-quantitative PL quenching
implies a strong interaction between the dye molecules and the SWCNTs
that leads to rapid nonradiative excited state deactivation, consistent
with the intense EET peaks observed in SWCNT PLE maps. Indeed, when
comparing the PL excitation spectra to the absorption spectra, the
intensity of the SQ (EET) and S22 excitation bands is of
the same order of magnitude, indicative of a high EET efficiency (Figure S12). However, this does not allow for
a quantitative determination of EET efficiency due to the diameter-dependent
PL efficiency of the SWCNTs. Since quenching of SQ emission alone
cannot distinguish between EET and other nonradiative decay pathways,
we turn to TA spectroscopy to characterize the excited-state dynamics
of encapsulated dye molecules and SWCNTs.

The ATPE sorted sample
allows us to thoroughly track the well-isolated
spectral signatures of s-SWCNTs with diameters close to 1.195 nm,
effectively removing the spectral congestion present in more polydisperse
samples. Furthermore, the absorption energy of the encapsulated SQ
dye species is even better separated from SWCNT exciton transitions
(for both metallic and semiconducting species). Thus, in contrast
to previous TA studies,18 where SQ molecules
were encapsulated in unsorted SWCNTs and the SQ dynamics were not
directly probed, the SWCNT enrichment we demonstrate here allows us
to probe the excited state dynamics for the encapsulated SQ with minimal
overlap with SWCNT excited state TA features.

TA spectra for
the SQ@LV950-ATPE and DCM@LV950-ATPE samples, taken
at relatively short probe delays (∼400 fs) following a 748
nm pump pulse, that is, at the long-wavelength side of the dye absorption,
are shown in Figure 3a. There are two primary differences between the spectra: (1) there
is clear SQ ground-state bleach (GSB) at ca. 750 nm in the SQ@LV950-ATPE
sample that is absent for the DCM@LV950-ATPE sample, and (2) the S11 and S22 signal intensities (∼1400–1600
nm and 800–1000 nm, respectively) are enhanced for the SQ@LV950-ATPE
sample relative to the DCM@LV950-ATPE sample. Figure 3b displays the GSB dynamics of SQ molecules
either in toluene (green trace) or encapsulated in SWCNTs (blue trace).
The SQ GSB for isolated molecules decays with a lifetime of 2.1 ±
0.1 ns, consistent with the measured photoluminescence lifetime (2.0
± 0.1 ns) for the integrated fluorescence decay over the wavelength
range 590–760 nm (Figure S19). Figure 3b illustrates that
the encapsulated SQ excited-state lifetime, measured via the GSB at
748 nm, is dramatically reduced compared to isolated SQ molecules.
The dominant decay component (∼92%) is 205 ± 12 fs, obtained
after deconvolution with the instrument response function (IRF, ∼200
fs), and hence not limited by it. There is a second, low-amplitude
component (∼8%) with a 1.9 ± 0.3 ps decay time. When probing
the decay of the complete SQ spectrum, as presented in Figure 4, we find that at early times
(dominated by the 205 fs component) the GSB peaks at 748 nm and excited-state
absorption peaks at 720 nm. At later times, the transient spectrum
changes to a derivative-like spectrum with a node at 748 nm that lasts
for tens of picoseconds (Figure 4b) indicating a shifted absorption spectrum. To investigate
the origin of these different components, we first turn to the GSB
kinetics of the surrounding SWCNTs.

Figure 3 TA spectroscopy of ATPE-sorted LV950 SWCNTs
pumped at 748 nm (i.e., in the SQ absorption band).
(a) Peak transient absorption
spectra at early times (solid traces) and steady-state absorption
spectra (dashed traces) of DCM-filled (black traces) and SQ-filled
(red traces) SWCNTs. Dashed vertical lines indicate the probe wavelengths
at which the kinetic slices in panel b, that is, 748 nm (also the
pump wavelength) and in panel c, that is, 1511 nm were obtained. (b)
Kinetic slices for the SQ ground state bleach at 748 nm (blue trace),
with the corresponding biexponential fit (black trace). The kinetic
traces for free SQ dye in toluene (green trace) and the instrument
response function, IRF (gray trace), are shown for reference. A probe-wavelength-dependent
TA map is presented in Figure 4. (c) Kinetic slices at the peak (1511 nm) of the NIR ground
state bleach dominated by the (10,8) S11 transition for
the SQ@LV950-ATPE (red trace) and reference DCM@LV950-ATPE (black
trace). The kinetic trace for the IRF (gray trace) is shown for reference.
Inset: Non-normalized kinetics with same color scheme as main panel.

Figure 4 Focus on TA of the SQ@LV950-ATPE sample near
the SQ absorption.
(a) 2D TA map showing the spectral evolution of the encapsulated SQ
absorption. (b) Selected TA spectra for short (sub-ps), medium (ps),
and long (tens of ps) time scales. Inset shows a few selected normalized
TA spectra (see also Figure S23 for kinetic
slices at different probe wavelengths).

Figure 3c
compares
the GSB kinetics at 1511 nm, primarily probing the exciton generation
and decay dynamics of the (10,8) s-SWCNTs. The increased intensity
of the GSB peaks of s-SWCNTs within the SQ@LV950-ATPE sample compared
to DCM@LV950-ATPE, seen in both spectral (Figure 3a) and kinetic (Figure 3c, inset) traces, indicates increased exciton
populations in the s-SWCNTs following photoexcitation of encapsulated
SQ molecules, consistent with the EET peaks observed in the PLE maps.
The dynamics of both the rise and decay of the GSB
features associated with the S11 exciton envelope, through
comparison of direct excitation of the s-SWCNT in the DCM@LV950-ATPE
reference sample to excitation of encapsulated SQ in the dye-filled
sample, allow us to better understand the dynamics related to the
EET process. The fact that this increased GSB intensity is observed
instantaneously suggests that EET from encapsulated SQ to the (10,8)
species occurs on a time scale similar to the IRF (see SI Figure S23 for direct comparison of SQ and CNT
GSB kinetics). This strongly suggests that the 205 fs component of
the SQ decay (reported in Figure 3b) reflects the EET time. The normalized transients
(Figure 3c) also illustrate
that the SWCNT exciton dynamics are nearly indistinguishable in the
two samples. This overlap suggests that none of the slower components
in the SQ decay contribute significantly to the SWCNT dynamics and,
hence, cannot be attributed to EET. Otherwise, this would be observed
as an apparent slowing of the GSB decay of the SQ-filled SWCNTs with
respect to the reference sample (due to a superimposed rise of GSB
intensity from the hypothetical slower EET process on top of the decay
from recombination of excitons already excited in or transferred to
the s-SWCNTs).

Since the slower components do not appear to
be related to EET
from SQ to s-SWCNTs, we undertook other analyses to try to better
understand their origin. The absorption spectrum in Figure 1b demonstrates that the LV950-ATPE
sample contains reduced but still appreciable amounts of metallic
SWCNTs. It is thus conceivable that the slower SQ GSB recovery results
from EET (or another induced nonradiative decay pathway) associated
with SQ molecules within metallic SWCNTs. Therefore, to ensure that
metallic SWCNTs do not significantly affect the dynamics, we also
performed TA measurements on PFH-A extracted s-SWCNTs (SQ@AD-PFHA1),
where the metallic SWCNT content is expected to be less than 0.02%.26 The results for the SQ@AD-PFHA1 (see SI, section 13) are similar to those for the
SQ@LV950-ATPE sample, confirming that the slower components are not
related to SQ interactions within metallic SWCNTs. Similar ultrafast
S11 intensity enhancements observed for the two SQ-filled
samples confirms that the ca. 205 fs process corresponds to EET.

Taken as a whole, the ability to probe simultaneously the SQ and
SWCNT dynamics as presented in Figures 3 and 4 suggests that excitation
of the encapsulated SQ dye leads to EET to the surrounding s-SWCNT
on a time scale of ca. 205 fs, consistent with several previous literature
studies of EET from dyes to SWCNTs.17,18,30,31 In addition, the broadband
probe spectral window utilized here allows determination of the encapsulated
SQ kinetics, which exhibit minor components with a shifted absorption
spectrum with lifetimes greatly exceeding the IRF (Figure 3b and 4b). One possible origin for the 1.9 ps component in the SQ GSB would
be that a subpopulation of SQ molecules does not undergo EET but decays
nonradiatively to the ground state on a picosecond time scale. However,
it could also be (perhaps more likely) that the EET leaves the SQ
molecules in a vibrationally hot ground electronic state and that
the 1.9 ps component corresponds to relaxation within the vibrational
manifold of this state, which would also explain why this component
is not observed in the SWCNT decay. Yet, the exact origin of the 1.9
ps component is difficult to assign and warrants further investigation.

The longer 34 ps component of the SQ decay shows a derivative-like
TA spectrum, indicating a redshift of the SQ ground state absorption,
which could be caused by charge carriers present in the surrounding
SWCNTs (i.e., Stark effect) that are generated either
from excitons directly created in the SWCNTs or transferred from SQ.
Indeed, components in this time range seem to be present in the GSB
decay of the SWCNTs but are superimposed on a much slower (nanosecond)
decay, which was previously attributed to, for example, triplet excitons32 or phonon thermalization,33 both of which would be consistent with the absence of a
long-lived Stark shift of the SQ absorption. While we do not have
direct evidence for the creation of charges in the SWCNTs studied
here, charge generation in neat PFO-wrapped SWCNT samples has been
observed in several other studies.34−36 Such charge generation
has also been invoked to explain Stark shifts observed previously
for higher-energy excitons of the SWCNTs themselves37 and implies that encapsulated molecules could potentially
serve as probes for the excited-state SWCNT properties. We summarize
the states explored by TA and the rates between them in Scheme 1.

Scheme 1 Photophysical Scheme
Illustrating the Excited State Manifold Present
for the SQ@SWCNT Samples
The pump pulse generates
the
excited state of encapsulated squaraine molecules (SQe*).
TA measurements probing directly at the SQe* energy track
the total excited state decay of SQe* by radiative and
non-radiative decay (kr + knr) or energy transfer to SWCNTs (kEET). Arrival
of excitons in SWCNTs via energy transfer is probed
either by TA or PLE measurements at the energy of the first exciton,
S11*.

The quantum yield of EET (ϕEET) can be estimated in many ways. First,
the near-quantitative quenching
(≥99.999%) of SQ fluorescence after encapsulation (see section
5 in SI) suggests that all SQ excited states
decay nonradiatively, either through EET or other nonemissive pathways.
If we assume that EET is the dominant nonradiative decay pathway for
encapsulated SQ molecules, then the PL quenching result suggests ϕEET ≥ 99.999%.

Second, whereas fluorescence only
monitors emissive states, the
SQ GSB kinetics track the entire excited-state population, including
both emissive and dark states resulting from encapsulation. Thus,
the measured rates of SQ excited state decay pathways can be used
as a second means to estimate ϕEET: 1  where kEET is
the rate coefficient for EET and the denominator sums all rate coefficients
for decay from the encapsulated SQ excited state, including EET (Figure 3d). If we assume
that the dominant decay pathway(s) competing against EET do not change
for SQ molecules upon encapsulation (although decay times can change
upon aggregation38,39), then the 2.1 ns lifetime of
free SQ molecules in toluene with respect to the GSB recovery time
constant of encapsulated SQ molecules (i.e., τ
= 205 fs) results in ϕEET ≅ 99.99%. If, as
mentioned above, the 1.9 ps component stems from a separate SQ excited-state
population not undergoing EET, then using the amplitude of the biexponential
fit of the SQ kinetics gives an approximate efficiency, ϕEET ≅ 92%.

As a final method for estimating ϕEET, one can
use the enhanced TA signal intensities of the SQ-filled SWCNTs with
respect to the DCM-filled reference sample combined with the fraction
of light absorbed by the SQ at the pump wavelength to estimate the
ϕEET. This method is described in detail in section
12 of the SI, but it suffers from a finite,
unknown contribution of SWCNT absorption at the pump wavelength. This
uncertainty means that estimates using this approach result in 64%
≤ ϕEET ≤ 100%.

Chirality-Dependent SQ
Excitation Energy Transfer
We
now turn to an extensive investigation of the diameter-dependent excitation
wavelength of the encapsulated SQ molecules, using the full range
of samples with varying diameter distribution. The first implication
of strong interchromophore coupling comes from the large bathochromic
absorbance shift for encapsulated SQ molecules (∼220 meV),
observed in absorption and PLE measurements (Figure 1c and Figure 2). In general, bathochromic shifts of the dye absorption
can originate from a change in dielectric environment or intermolecular
electronic coupling in dimers or aggregate structures.40 The SWCNT internal cavity by itself is known
to act as a very apolar environment41 and
thus cannot explain the redshift. Moreover, the redshift (∼220
meV) observed for SQ molecules in the SQ@LV950-ATPE sample is much
larger than typically observed for changes in dielectric environment
of isolated SQ molecules in solution: the wavelength of maximum absorbance
for SQ dissolved in acetonitrile (ε = 37) and toluene (ε
= 2.93) differs by less than 10 meV (see Figure S13). Similarly, a reaction field of induced molecular dipoles
of neighboring molecules in the 1D encapsulated array forming a polar
environment, somewhat analogous to that described previously for an
array of molecules with a large permanent dipole moment,12 cannot account for the magnitude of the redshift
observed here. Intermolecular transition dipole coupling between the
dye molecules is therefore more likely to be the dominant cause of
the large absorbance shifts here, as is well described for J-aggregates.
Previous work has shown that such interactions can indeed be induced
by SWCNT encapsulation, leading to, for example, α-sexithiophene
J-aggregates.13,16,31 The magnitude and sign of the electronic shift induced by such aggregation
should strongly depend on the particular geometry of stacking that
the molecules adopt, that is, H-like and J-like aggregates.40,42,43 Studies on SQ thin films (in
the absence of SWCNTs) demonstrate that the formation of SQ J-aggregates
shifts the absorption to a broad wavelength range between ca. 700
and 780 nm,39 consistent with the shift
observed here for all SQ@SWCNT samples (Figure 1c). Of course, the inclusion of solvent molecules
in addition to dye molecules cannot be excluded, yet the strong redshift
(which moreover is maximal for small diameter tubes as expected, vide infra) shows that dye–dye interactions are large
(much larger than solvent effects on these molecules), and thus no
significant spacing by solvent molecules occurs. Encapsulation of
SQ molecules within the internal SWCNT pore hence offers a strategy
for hybrid optical materials wherein the diameter of the SWCNT may
act to guide or constrain the particular aggregate geometries available
to the molecules, tuning the properties of the exact same molecules.

The PLE maps presented in Figure 2 provide a robust platform for unraveling such diameter-dependent
interactions since the selectivity in excitation and emission wavelengths
disentangles the electronic transitions of each SWCNT chiral species
on a two-dimensional map. Figure 2d displays a PLE map of the SQ@AD-DOC sample, which
contains a relatively broad range of both small and large diameter
s-SWCNTs. Strikingly, as we briefly discussed above, the excitation
wavelength of the EET peaks, that is, the one corresponding to the
dye absorption, varies strongly with emission wavelength; hence SWCNT
structures with shorter emission wavelengths (smaller diameters) generally
correspond to longer EET excitation wavelengths.

The diameter-dependent
SQ absorption can be analyzed in more detail
by taking vertical slices (excitation spectra) from the 2D PLE maps
and integrating the emission intensity between two emission wavelengths,
hence selectively probing only a small subset of SWCNT chiralities
(those emitting in this specific wavelength range). The right panel
of Figure 2e compares
excitation spectra for emission wavelengths between 1420 and 1440
nm, corresponding to the emission of the (9,8) and (11,6) chiralities,
for the DCM@AD-DOC (black curve) and SQ@AD-DOC (red curve) samples.
The presence of the dye absorption at ∼739 nm can be clearly
observed in the SQ@AD-DOC sample and is the signature of EET to the
(9,8) and (11,6) s-SWCNTs. By subtracting the excitation spectra for
the DCM-filled sample from those for the SQ-filled sample (after scaling
to match the intrinsic S22 excitation peak amplitudes),
for various emission ranges, we obtain the contribution of encapsulated
SQ to the excitation slices, shown in the left panel of Figure 2e (see Figure S12 in the SI for more detail). The EET excitation
peaks (dotted curves) are narrower than, and fall within the range
of, the overall absorption spectrum of the encapsulated SQ molecules
(solid blue curve) and are all clearly redshifted with respect to
the absorption of the free dye in toluene (solid green curve).

While these vertical slices of the PLE maps already convincingly
demonstrate the diameter dependence of the EET peaks, much more accurate
information can be deduced by a detailed two-dimensional fitting of
the PLE maps. To this end, we adapted the previously developed fitting
routine, which was successfully employed to extract peak positions,
line widths, and amplitudes for the intrinsic SWCNT peaks in the PLE
maps12 and is based on an accurate model
for the complicated excitation line shape associated with both excitonic
and band-to-band excitations as well as phonon side bands for the
SWCNTs. Here, in addition, for each SQ-filled SWCNT chirality, we
included an EET peak which was modeled by the experimental absorption
spectrum of the free dye molecules in toluene and spectrally shifted
and contracted to match the EET peaks for each different chirality
(see SI, section 10 for more details).

Interestingly, although the PFH-A-wrapped SWCNTs experience a different
outer environment compared to the DOC-dispersed SWCNTs, hence yielding
different SWCNT (S11/S22) peak positions and
line widths, the corresponding chirality-dependent EET excitation
peak positions and excitation line widths are identical to those obtained
for the DOC-dispersed SWCNTs (while emission peaks and line widths
do shift with environment). This confirms that the specific EET excitation
wavelength (i.e., the absorption) of the encapsulated
dyes, is solely determined by the diameter of the SWCNT in which the
dye molecules are encapsulated, and not the dielectric environment
provided by the solvent. In addition, the SWCNT peak positions of
the DOC-dispersed SQ@LV950 and SQ@AD samples vary slightly, due to
different filling fractions in these samples (PLE peak positions of
empty and filled SWCNTs are different10,28 but not resolved
in partially filled samples, resulting in effective average peak positions),
but the EET excitation peak positions and line widths remain the same
in both samples. Therefore, the 2D fits were obtained by fitting the
SQ@AD-DOC, SQ@LV950, and SQ@AD-PFHA2 samples simultaneously, with
different SWCNT peak positions but the same EET excitation peak positions,
allowing for a more accurate determination of the chirality-dependent
EET peak positions. The simultaneous fit of samples with different
relative abundance of SWCNT chiralities helps in disentangling information
on those chiralities with nearly identical emission wavelengths. For
chiralities that differ ∼15 nm or more in emission wavelength,
the chirality assignment of the EET excitation peak position is unambiguous,
but for chiralities that differ much less in emission wavelength,
a possible interchange of chirality assignment of the EET cannot be
excluded (e.g., for the (14,6) and (11,9) chiralities).
The latter is not included in the error bars on the EET excitation
wavelengths that are directly obtained from the fit. In addition,
it should be noted that the model also includes the assumption that
the EET line width is the same for all chiral structures. While we
cannot ensure the validity of this assumption, fixing the line width
helps to minimize the number of free fit parameters, while still yielding
an excellent fit. Interestingly, the absorption of dyes within one
single chiral structure is significantly narrower (∼24% ±
3%) than the absorption of freely isolated dyes in solution (see SI, Figure S18), which is also consistent with the
formation of J-aggregates.44 While the
narrowing may not be as extensive as many prototypical J-aggregate
systems,44 such differences may reflect
differences in the extent of exciton delocalization rather than the
physical extent of the aggregate. Note that Yanagi et al.(18) previously used the broadening in absorption
as evidence against J-aggregate formation. However, by disentangling
the SQ absorption for every single chirality through analysis of the
EET, we see that the apparent broadening in absorption is due to the
broad diameter distribution of the SWCNTs and the associated range
of aggregate geometries (vide infra).

Figure 5 presents
a representative example of a 2D fit of the PLE maps (see SI, section 10, for 2D PLE fits for all samples),
demonstrating the excellent correspondence between the empirical model
and the experimental data, and Figure 6 presents the peak positions extracted from these fits. Figure 6a presents the obtained
EET peak positions for different chiralities as a function of SWCNT
diameter and Figure 6b presents the electronic transitions (S11 and S22) of the SWCNTs, from which we can observe that the (9,8) chirality
is one of the smallest diameter SWCNTs that shows a significant bathochromic
shift of the SWCNT absorption/excitation (S22) and emission
(S11) with respect to the DCM-filled SWCNT. This observation
is in good agreement with the fact that this chirality is also the
smallest diameter SWCNT that exhibits an EET peak (Figure 2f), establishing the (9,8)
chirality as the smallest diameter (d = 1.15 nm)
for which filling with SQ molecules is clearly observed. Also the
(9,7) chirality (d = 1.09 nm) shows a notable shift
of the SWCNT transitions, but no detectable EET peak; hence most likely
only a small fraction of the (9,7) SWCNTs are filled, similar to what
was observed before for a different dye near the critical diameter
for filling.12 While for the smallest filled
diameters the EET peak position shows a large but constant redshift,
at diameters larger than or equal to the (13,5) SWCNT (d = 1.26 nm; highlighted by the purple shaded area in Figure 6a), a more complex dependence
of the SQ EET peak position on diameter is observed, indicating additional
variations in stacking.

Figure 5 2D spectral analysis PLE map of the SQ@AD-DOC
sample. (a) Experimental
PLE map of SQ@AD-DOC. (b) 2D fit of the PLE map, including both the
intrinsic SWCNT PLE peaks (white dots) and the respective EET peaks
(indicated by black stars). (c,d) Selected emission and excitation
slices for the denoted excitation/emission wavelength ranges, showing
the excellent correspondence between experimental data (black traces)
and fit (red traces).

Figure 6 (a) Position of the EET excitation peak, extracted from the 2D
spectral analysis of the dye-filled PLE maps, as a function of the
s-SWCNT diameter. The pink shaded area (in both panels a and b) represents
the minimal encapsulation diameter range, and the purple shaded area
represents the diameter range after which a more complex behavior
is found with the diameter of the SWCNTs increasing according to the
green arrow in panel (b) (see also main text). (b) Peak positions
of empty (black stars), SQ-filled (red circles), and DCM-filled (green
circles) SWCNTs as obtained from the PLE fits. A clear change in S11/S22 peak position between the SQ- and DCM-filled
samples can be observed for SWCNTs with diameters similar or larger
than the (9,8) SWCNT, indicative of filling with the SQ-molecules,
also highlighted by the pink shaded area.

One can understand the dependence of SQ stacking on SWCNT
diameter
by considering the degrees of geometric freedom available to the SQ
molecules. The exciton splitting energy, defined as the energy difference
between the upper and lower excited states associated with simple
dimer formation between interacting molecular monomers,45 within a simple point dipole model, depends
on the acute “slip-stack” angle formed between the transition
dipole of one molecule, the line joining the centers of the transition
dipoles, and the distance between monomers. Since all the observed
shifts are bathochromic relative to the monomer absorption, the dominant
behavior for encapsulated SQ molecules appears to be the formation
of J-like aggregates.45 The largest redshift
is expected for molecules arranged in a head-to-tail fashion (i.e., slip-stack angle ∼0), which would be expected
for SWCNTs with the minimum diameter that allows SQ encapsulation.
Indeed, the (9,8) and other similarly small diameters show among the
longest wavelength SQ excitation peaks.

To further support this
conclusion, we performed quantum-chemical
modeling of SQ molecules within SWCNTs. To computationally estimate
the minimal encapsulation diameter of an array of SQ molecules, we
first optimized the structure of an individual SQ molecule in vacuum
using quantum-chemical calculations at the Hartree–Fock level
with the semiempirical Hamiltonian PM746,47 (MOPAC).48 The minimal diameter of a cylinder surrounding
this optimized molecular structure was calculated (0.7546 nm, essentially
determined by the O–O distance of the squaraine unit of SQ),
taking into account standard van der Waals radii49 and the van der Waals radius of the SWCNT carbon atoms
(taken to be half the interlayer spacing of graphite, i.e., 0.1677 nm) was added (twice) to account for the inner van der Waals
surface of the SWCNT. Using this approach, we obtain an estimated
minimal encapsulation diameter of 1.09 nm, precisely corresponding
to the diameter of the (9,7) SWCNT, which indeed shows a shift in
SWCNT emission, but slightly smaller (by 0.06 nm) than the diameter
of the (9,8) chirality, which is the smallest diameter for which EET
is observed (see above). This is in line with previous work,12 where we found that near the critical diameter
SWCNTs are filled only partially, because of which the approximation
by van der Waals radii seems to slightly underestimate the minimal
encapsulation diameter. This is, perhaps, not surprising, since the
molecules need to enter through the open ends of the SWCNTs, which
might be slightly smaller due to the end structure, and filling near
the critical diameter may also be kinetically limited.

We also
calculated the structure of a (single) SQ molecule inside
a (9,7) SWCNT (finite, hydrogen terminated section) at the semiempirical
Hartree–Fock level using both the PM6-D3H4 and PM7 levels (Figure 7a). In both cases, we find that the molecule sits off-center
in the SWCNT, in agreement with the structure previously determined
using X-ray diffraction for SWCNTs with a larger diameter distribution.18 However, the PM7 calculation yields a significantly
smaller distance between the SQ molecule and SWCNT wall. Note that
although for molecular structure calculations PM7 is expected to perform
slightly better than PM6, dispersion corrections are intrinsically
incorporated in the PM7 Hamiltonian, while for PM6 these are applied
as separate corrections (D3H4 includes both corrections for hydrogen
bonding50 and Grimme’s D3 correction
for dispersion),51 which is the more established
method for modeling van der Waals interactions in semiempirical calculations.
To obtain a representative spacing for a 1D array in a narrow SWCNT,
while avoiding the complications of the periodic potential of specific
chirality SWCNTs, we also calculated the geometry of a SQ head-to-tail
dimer by restricting the nitrogen atoms to lie on a straight line,
yielding a lattice spacing of 1.90 nm.

Figure 7 Possible SQ stacking
geometries in different diameter SWCNTs. (a)
Calculated structure of a single SQ molecule in a (9,7) SWCNT, as
optimized at the semiempirical level using the PM6 Hamiltonian with
D3H4 correction (top) and using the PM7 Hamiltonian (bottom). (b)
Qualitative models of possible stacking of SQ molecules in different
diameter SWCNTs, based on the calculated intermolecular distances
in π-stacked and head-to-tail SQ dimers. Top to bottom: 1D array
of SQ in a (9,7) SWCNT; tilted single-file SQ array and double-file
array with small slip-shift between π-stacked monomers are both
plausible structures in a (10,9) SWCNT; and a staggered double-file
array of SQ molecules in a (12,8) SWCNT would explain the even larger
redshift. In panel a, spheres represent atom’s standard van
der Waals radii.

The minimized diameter
for double-file encapsulation was then estimated
by the above method of calculating the narrowest cylinder surrounding
the optimized structure, yielding a minimal encapsulation diameter
of 1.188–1.217 nm, depending on the specific relative stacking
orientation with respect to each other (i.e., close
to cofacial or more slipped with respect to each other). Considering
the small empirical offset as for the monomer in the (9,8) SWCNT,
this amounts to a minimum SWCNT diameter of 1.267–1.296 nm.

Hence, at diameters larger than this threshold, additional variations
in stacking may be expected, for example, slightly tilted versus two
staggered parallel rows. We have highlighted this threshold with a
purple band in Figure 6a, which agrees with the onset of a more complex dependence of the
SQ EET peak position on diameter, while for smaller diameters a more
monotonic dependence is observed. Interestingly, H-aggregate formation,
that is, blue-shifted absorption with respect to the free dyes in
solution, is not observed experimentally, suggesting that intermolecular
geometries (i.e., paired parallel rows or large tilt
angles) that result in significant oscillator strength for absorption
to the upper manifold of the split excited states, while in principle
possible from a purely geometrical point of view in larger diameters,
seem not to occur. However, note that the usual point-dipole approximation
may differ significantly from the actual interactions between molecules
having charge centers near their ends (nitrogen atoms), which implies
that head-to-tail interactions tend to dominate in many of the possible
1D stacking geometries.

Of course, the geometrical degrees of
freedom are too large (especially
with increasing diameter; the energy landscape exhibiting a vast number
of local minima) to deterministically predict the exact stacking of
SQ molecules in SWCNTs with the semiempirical approach. Based on the
theoretically calculated intermolecular distances in π-stacked
and head-to-tail SQ dimers and wall-to-dye distance for a SQ monomer
inside a (9,7) SWCNT, a qualitative picture of possible stacking geometries
of SQ in different diameter SWCNTs was obtained (Figure 7b). For (9,7) and similarly
small diameters, a restriction to a 1D head-to-tail stacking is consistent
with the large and nearly constant redshift of SQ absorption. For
the wider (10,9) SWCNTs, either a tilted SQ array or a double-file
array with small slip offset between π-stacked pairs may explain
the smaller redshift observed experimentally (J-aggregate-type head-to-tail
interaction partly compensated by H-aggregate-type interaction between
π-stacked neighbors). For the (12,8) tubes, a double-file stacking
with large slip offset would be consistent with the extra-large redshift
observed, by the cooperative effects of J-aggregate type interactions
between both π-stacked and head-to-tail neighbors.

While
many uncertainties regarding intermolecular interactions
(e.g., coherence length43 and inter- or intrachromophore charge transfer interactions52), as well as the fact that different stacking
arrangements could lead to the same redshift, preclude us from assigning
particular SQ transition energies to specific stacking arrangements,
the simple qualitative framework discussed above provides insights
into the role of the SWCNT diameter in dictating the stacking and
electronic properties of the encapsulated SQ molecules. Our data are
all consistent with SQ molecules interacting to a variable extent
as J-aggregates within SWCNTs, where the precise stacking and associated
absorption energies of encapsulated SQ molecules depend sensitively
upon the surrounding SWCNT diameter.

Conclusions
In
this work, we demonstrate that squaraine molecular dyes encapsulated
inside the hollow cores of SWCNTs experience strong interchromophore
interactions that are consistent with the formation of J-aggregates
and undergo ultrafast EET to surrounding SWCNTs. Extensive simulation
of 2D PLE maps demonstrates that the SQ absorption envelope is narrowed,
relative to the free dye, and that the precise SQ absorption energy
is linked to the diameter of the SWCNT in which the dyes are encapsulated.
Transient absorption measurements demonstrate that the majority of
SQ excited states undergo ultrafast EET to the surrounding nanotubes,
with a characteristic time constant of ca. 205 fs. The near-complete
fluorescence quenching and the comparison of the excited state lifetimes
of free and encapsulated dye, along with analysis of SWCNT TA intensities,
are all consistent with close to quantitative EET efficiency. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that molecular encapsulation is fully compatible with
multiple separation and extraction techniques. This compatibility
should facilitate the incorporation of broadly tunable molecules into
chirality-enriched and purely semiconducting SWCNT distributions for
optoelectronic device applications, such as photodetectors and photovoltaic
devices targeting specific spectral regions for energy harvesting.
Such nanohybrids will also serve as important model systems for understanding
the effects of spatial confinement and collective interactions between
chromophores on dynamic excited state processes such as energy transfer,
exciton delocalization, and charge transfer and transport.

Experimental Methods
SQ Encapsulation in SWCNTs
Two different SWCNT batches
were used: commercial raw arc-discharge SWCNTs from Raymor (batch
no. RNL 12-010-113, abbreviated here as AD) and in-house produced
laser vaporization SWCNTs synthesized at 950 °C (LV950). To open
the SWCNTs before filling, we employed a similar procedure to that
described previously.12,18 First, the raw SWCNT powders
were oxidized in air. The oxidation temperature and envisaged weight
loss was selected based on thermogravimetric analysis of the starting
raw material (see SI, section 1) and amounted
to 300 °C (18% weight loss) for the LV950 tubes and 460 °C
(55% weight loss) for the AD SWCNTs. Second, the remaining SWCNTs
were sonicated for 1 h in concentrated HCl (37 wt % in water) at 60
°C (bath sonicator, Bransonic 1510E-MTH, 70 W, 42 kHz) followed
by thorough washing with deionized water to neutralize the SWCNTs.
Finally, SWCNTs were annealed in high vacuum at 800 °C to remove
any remaining functional groups at the SWCNT ends or (acid) filling
inside their hollow core.

Filling of each of these opened SWCNT
batches was performed by refluxing in a saturated solution of 1,3-bis[4-(dimethylamino)phenyl]-squaraine
or in short Squarylium III dye (SQ, Aldrich, 90% purity, chemical
structure presented in Figure 1a) in dichloromethane (DCM, Acros 99.6%, ACS reagent grade,
typically 15 mg in 25 mL), followed by repeated rinsing with dichloromethane
(∼500 mL) over a filtration membrane (Zefluor supported PTFE,
0.5 μm) with short (∼1 min) bath sonication between the
subsequent washing cycles to remove any excess dye adsorbed on the
outer SWCNT walls, while maintaining the dye in the endohedral SWCNT
volume. These samples are further referred to as SQ@AD and SQ@LV950,
where “@” refers to endohedral inclusion. As a reference
sample for distinction from potential encapsulation of the reflux-solvent
dichloromethane inside the SWCNTs, the same “filling”
procedure was repeated on the same SWCNT soot without the presence
of the SQ dye: DCM@AD and DCM@LV950. To distinguish encapsulation
from any external adsorption, a closed SWCNT reference sample was
also prepared (see SI, section 3).

Solubilizing
the SWCNT Hybrids
To analyze the samples
by optical spectroscopy, the SQ@SWCNT hybrids were isolated in solution.
SQ- and DCM-filled SWCNTs were solubilized in a 1% w/v sodium deoxycholate
(DOC, Acros Organics, 99%) solution in D2O (Cortecnet,
99.8 atom % D). The samples were bath sonicated for 1 h on the first
3 days and subsequently magnetically stirred for 3 weeks, after which
a short (1 h) centrifugation at 16000g (Sigma 2-16KCH,
with swing-out rotor) was performed to remove undissolved species.

In Raman and 2D PLE measurements, selectivity in excitation allows
for samples with a broad diameter distribution to be analyzed, yielding
a wealth of information on the many individual SWCNT chiralities present.
To this end, individual filled SWCNTs were thoroughly isolated from
bundles by density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGU) in an Optima
MAX tabletop ultracentrifuge (MLS50 swing out rotor operated at 218 000g for at least 18 h) as discussed previously,12 and afterward the gradient medium was removed
by dialysis in an ultrafiltration cell equipped with 30 kDa membranes.
For comparison of spectral peak positions, empty, closed SWCNTs of
each of the different SWCNT batches were also extracted by DGU, after
gentle solubilization of the unopened (raw) SWCNTs powders according
to previous work.28

Sorting of SQ Filled SWCNTs
While this polydispersity
in SWCNT diameter provides a wealth of information in the above-mentioned
(2D selective) steady-state spectroscopy, the same heterogeneity generates
severe spectral congestion that obscures the interpretation of transient
absorption spectra (and hence the kinetics extracted from these spectra).
To obtain a narrow chirality distribution, we followed two different
and complementary approaches. We utilized chiral sorting by aqueous
two-phase extraction (ATPE) of the thinnest SWCNTs that are filled
with the SQ dye, that is, enriching the (9,8) chirality (see further).
The sorting protocol was developed as a two-step procedure, similar
to that previously reported for (6,5) and (7,5) SWCNTs.21 More critical for future photovoltaic applications,
we applied selective polymer wrapping to achieve a narrow diameter
distribution and at the same time remove all metallic SWCNTs from
the sample.22 Both methods are described
below.

ATPE Sorting of SQ@LV950 SWCNTs
Poly(ethylene glycol)
(PEG, Alfa Aesar, MW 6 kDa) and dextran (Tokyo Chemical Industry Co.,
MW 40 kDa) were dissolved in D2O in 15.3% w/w solutions.
For the first separation step, 700 μL of 15.3% w/w PEG and 300
μL of 15.3% w/w dextran were mixed together with 12 μL
of a 4.33% w/w DOC solution, 24 μL of a 4.33% w/w sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate
(SDBS, Acros, 88%) suspension, 60 μL of the SWCNT solution (0.9%
w/w DOC), and 104 μL of D2O. Benchtop centrifugation
was performed (10 min at 5000g in an Eppendorf MiniSpin
Plus centrifuge) to separate both phases. For the second step, a stock
solution of 332 μL of 15.3% w/w PEG, 59.2 μL of 15.3%
w/w dextran, 45.8 μL of 0.9% w/w DOC, and 18 μL of 8.3%
w/w SDBS solution was prepared. A 75 μL portion of the bottom
phase after step 1 was mixed with 175 μL of this stock solution,
followed by a short centrifugation. Note that this separation can
be easily scaled up to obtain several milliliters of sorted samples.
In the first step, the (9,8) SWCNT together with most smaller diameter
SWCNTs separate in the bottom phase. In the second step, the surfactant
concentrations are slightly different, so that preferentially the
(9,8) SWCNT chirality migrates to the top phase, while the other chiralities
remain in the bottom phase. The top phase is then extracted and dialyzed
in an ultrafiltration cell (100 kDa membranes) to a 1 wt %/V DOC/D2O suspension. All separations were performed at room temperature,
21 °C.

Polymer Wrapping of SQ@AD SWCNTs
Polymer wrapping,
using polymers based on the fluorene moiety, has emerged as one of
the best methods for producing highly pure, isolated s-SWCNTs with
narrow chirality distributions. Importantly, these polymers are highly
selective and can result in metallic SWCNT impurity levels of <0.02%,26 and the precise subset of s-SWCNTs can be targeted
by judicious choice of the starting SWCNT raw material and the chemical
structure of the fluorene-based polymer.22 To generate s-SWCNT samples with a small subset of s-SWCNT species
here, we employ poly[(9,9-dihexylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(9,10-anthracene)] (PFH-A) as the wrapping polymer since it yields
high selectivity for large-diameter semiconducting SWCNTs with a narrow
distribution of s-SWCNT species under appropriate processing conditions.22

SQ- and DCM-filled AD SWCNT hybrids were
dispersed in a solution containing PFH-A in 10 mL of toluene (2 mg
mL–1) using a 0.5 in. probe tip sonicator (Cole-Parmer
CPX 750) operating at 40% power and held at a temperature of 18 °C
using a bath of cool flowing water for 30 min. The resulting dispersion
was centrifuged at 13 200 rpm using a SW32Ti rotor (Beckman
Coulter), and the supernatant was collected for absorption and 2D
PLE spectroscopy. For 2D PLE experiments, samples were exchanged to
deuterated toluene (Aldrich, 99.6 atom % D), for its better IR transparency,
by first drying the toluene suspension and afterward redispersing
the as-formed film in deuterated toluene using short bath sonication.
Two different samples were prepared with different molecular weight
PFH-A, so that either a broad diameter distribution of only semiconducting
tubes is formed (high MW = 125 kDa) or a small subset of near-armchair
semiconducting SWCNTs is selected (lower MW = 39 kDa).

Spectroscopic
Methods
Absorbance measurements were
acquired on a Cary 500 spectrophotometer using cuvettes with a 5 mm
path length or a Cary 5000 using a microcell with a 3 mm path length
and 60 μL sample volume. 2D PLE maps were collected in an in-house
developed dedicated spectrometer consisting of a pulsed Xe lamp (Edinburgh
Instruments, Xe900-XP920) for excitation and a liquid-nitrogen cooled
extended InGaAs array detector (Princeton Instruments OMA V:1024)
sensitive up to 2.2 μm. Spectra were recorded in 90° geometry
in a 3 mm microcell, with 5 nm steps in excitation wavelength. All
2D PLE maps were corrected for detector and spectrograph efficiency,
filter transmission, and temporal variations of the excitation intensity.

Raman spectra were collected in backscattering geometry using a
Dilor XY800 triple-grating spectrometer equipped with a liquid nitrogen
cooled CCD detector. Excitation at various wavelengths was afforded
by Ar+ (514.5 nm), Kr+ (647.1 and 676.4 nm),
and tunable Ti:sapphire (700–900 nm) lasers. Individual spectra
were corrected for detector and spectrograph efficiency and obtained
with sub-wavenumber spectral resolution.

All transient absorption
data were collected using an optical setup
utilizing a Coherent Libra amplifier to pump visible and mid-IR OPAs
(Light Conversion TOPAS-C) and an Ultrafast Systems Helios transient
absorption spectrometer for collecting data. Each pulse was 100–150
fs long, giving an IRF near 200 fs. Specifically, the Libra output
3 mJ of 800 nm light at 1 kHz. For visible probing (∼400–800
nm), a small fraction of the 800 nm beam light is used to generate
continuum probe light in a 2 mm sapphire crystal; for NIR probing
(∼800–1600 nm), a small fraction of the 800 nm is sent
into a thick 1 cm sapphire crystal to generate the probe. The mid-IR
OPA pumped by the Libra was used to generate mid-IR probe light with
∼75 nm bandwidth; several probes were used to cover the range
∼1600–1800 nm. In all experiments, the visible TOPAS
was used to excite the samples.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.8b02213.Thermogravimetric
analysis, absorption, RRS, and PLE
maps and fits for all samples, quenching of encapsulated SQ fluorescence,
solvatochromism of SQ, SQ time-resolved PL in toluene, and EET efficiency
estimation from TA (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn8b02213_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
# S.v.B. and D.H.A. contributed equally.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
D.H.A., R.I., A.J.F., J.C.J., and J.L.B. appreciate
funding for support for this project from the Solar Photochemistry
Program, Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences,
Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy (DOE),
through contract DE-AC36-08GO28308 to NREL. This Office of Science
funding supported LV SWCNT synthesis, polyfluorene SWCNT enrichment,
postdispersion dye encapsulation work, steady-state absorption spectroscopy,
transient absorption spectroscopy, and time-resolved luminescence
spectroscopy. S.v.B., S.C., J.C., J.D., and W.W. acknowledge funding
from the Fund for Scientific Research Flanders, Belgium (FWO projects
No. G040011N, G02112N, 1512716N, G020612N, G052213N, G035918N, G036618N
and the EOS-CHARMING project: 30467715), which also supported S.C.
through a postdoctoral fellowship and S.v.B. through a travelling
fellowship to visit the NREL group to perform part of the TA spectroscopy
and polymer-wrapping, and the postdispersion dye-encapsulation work.
S.C., J.D., and J.C. also acknowledge funding from the European Research
Council Starting Grant No. 679841. Funding to U. Antwerp supported
most of the dye encapsulation work, aqueous SWCNT separations (DGU
and ATPE), steady-state absorption, RRS, and photoluminescence excitation
spectroscopy, 2D-PLE fitting, and quantum chemical modeling of dye
geometries within SWCNTs. The authors thank Prof. Pegie Cool (Laboratory
of Adsorption and Catalysis, Chemistry Department, University of Antwerp)
for the thermogravimetric analysis.
==== Refs
References
Arnold M. S. ; Blackburn J. L. ; Crochet J. J. ; Doorn S. K. ; Duque J. G. ; Mohite A. ; Telg H. 
Recent Developments in the Photophysics
of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes for Their Use as Active and Passive
Material Elements in Thin Film Photovoltaics . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 14896 –14918 10.1039/c3cp52752b .23913009 
Blackburn J. L. 
Semiconducting
Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes in Solar Energy Harvesting . ACS Energy Lett. 
2017 , 2 , 1598 –1613 10.1021/acsenergylett.7b00228 .
Bachilo S. M. ; Strano M. S. ; Kittrell C. ; Hauge R. H. ; Smalley R. E. ; Weisman R. B. 
Structure-Assigned Optical Spectra
of Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes . Science 
2002 , 298 , 2361 –2366 10.1126/science.1078727 .12459549 
Wang F. ; Dukovic G. ; Brus L. E. ; Heinz T. F. 
The Optical Resonances
in Carbon Nanotubes Arise from Excitons . Science 
2005 , 308 , 838 –841 10.1126/science.1110265 .15879212 
Ihly R. ; Mistry K. S. ; Ferguson A. J. ; Clikeman T. T. ; Larson B. W. ; Reid O. ; Boltalina O. V. ; Strauss S. H. ; Rumbles G. ; Blackburn J. L. 
Tuning
the Driving Force for Exciton Dissociation in
Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Heterojunctions . Nat. Chem. 
2016 , 8 , 603 –609 10.1038/nchem.2496 .27219706 
Crochet J.
J. ; Duque J. G. ; Werner J. H. ; Doorn S. K. 
Photoluminescence
Imaging of Electronic-Impurity-Induced Exciton Quenching in Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 , 126 –132 10.1038/nnano.2011.227 .22231665 
Dowgiallo A.-M. ; Mistry K. S. ; Johnson J. C. ; Blackburn J. L. 
Ultrafast
Spectroscopic Signature of Charge Transfer between Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotubes and C60 . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 8573 –8581 10.1021/nn503271k .25019648 
MacLeod B. A. ; Stanton N. J. ; Gould I. E. ; Wesenberg D. ; Ihly R. ; Owczarczyk Z. R. ; Hurst K. E. ; Fewox C. S. ; Folmar C. N. ; Holman
Hughes K. ; Zink B. L. ; Blackburn J. L. ; Ferguson A. J. 
Large N- and P-Type Thermoelectric Power Factors from
Doped Semiconducting Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Thin Films . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2017 , 10 , 2168 –2179 10.1039/C7EE01130J .
Takenobu T. ; Takano T. ; Shiraishi M. ; Murakami Y. ; Ata M. ; Kataura H. ; Achiba Y. ; Iwasa Y. 
Stable and Controlled
Amphoteric Doping by Encapsulation of Organic Molecules inside Carbon
Nanotubes . Nat. Mater. 
2003 , 2 , 683 –688 10.1038/nmat976 .12958593 
Cambré S. ; Santos S. M. ; Wenseleers W. ; Nugraha A. R. T. ; Saito R. ; Cognet L. ; Lounis B. 
Luminescence
Properties of Individual
Empty and Water-Filled Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 2649 –2655 10.1021/nn300035y .22314108 
Campo J. ; Piao Y. ; Lam S. ; Stafford C. ; Streit J. ; Simpson J. ; Hight Walker A. R. ; Fagan J. 
Enhancing Single-Wall
Carbon Nanotube Properties through Controlled Endohedral Filling . Nanoscale Horiz. 
2016 , 1 , 317 –324 10.1039/C6NH00062B .
Cambré S. ; Campo J. ; Beirnaert C. ; Verlackt C. ; Cool P. ; Wenseleers W. 
Asymmetric Dyes Align inside Carbon Nanotubes to Yield
a Large Nonlinear Optical Response . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 10 , 248 –252 10.1038/nnano.2015.1 .25643253 
Gaufrès E. ; Tang N.-W. ; Lapointe F. ; Cabana J. ; Nadon M.-A. ; Cottenye N. ; Raymond F. ; Szkopek T. ; Martel R. 
Giant Raman
Scattering from J-Aggregated Dyes inside Carbon Nanotubes for Multispectral
Imaging. Nat . Nat. Photonics 
2014 , 8 , 72 –78 10.1038/nphoton.2013.309 .
Khlobystov A. N. ; Britz D. A. ; Briggs G. A. D. 
Molecules
in Carbon Nanotubes . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2005 , 38 , 901 –909 10.1021/ar040287v .16359162 
Ma X. ; Cambré S. ; Wenseleers W. ; Doorn S. K. ; Htoon H. 
Quasiphase
Transition in a Single File of Water Molecules Encapsulated in (6,5)
Carbon Nanotubes Observed by Temperature-Dependent Photoluminescence
Spectroscopy . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2017 , 118 , 027402 10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.027402 .28128601 
Gaufrès E. ; Tang N. Y.-W. ; Favron A. ; Allard C. ; Lapointe F. ; Jourdain V. ; Tahir S. ; Brosseau C.-N. ; Leonelli R. ; Martel R. 
Aggregation Control
of Α-Sexithiophene Via Isothermal Encapsulation
inside Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotubes . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 10220 –10226 10.1021/acsnano.6b05660 .27779852 
Koyama T. ; Tsunekawa T. ; Saito T. ; Asaka K. ; Saito Y. ; Kishida H. ; Nakamura A. 
Synthesis and Photophysics of Quaterrylene
Molecules in Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes: Excitation Energy Transfer
between a Nanoscale Cylinder and Encapsulated Molecules . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 21671 –21681 10.1021/jp506361b .
Yanagi K. ; Iakoubovskii K. ; Matsui H. ; Matsuzaki H. ; Okamoto H. ; Miyata Y. ; Maniwa Y. ; Kazaoui S. ; Minami N. ; Kataura H. 
Photosensitive Function of Encapsulated
Dye in Carbon Nanotubes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 4992 –4997 10.1021/ja067351j .17402730 
Fagan J. A. ; Hároz E. H. ; Ihly R. ; Gui H. ; Blackburn J. L. ; Simpson J. R. ; Lam S. ; Hight Walker A. R. ; Doorn S. K. ; Zheng M. 
Isolation of > 1 Nm Diameter Single-Wall
Carbon Nanotube Species Using Aqueous Two-Phase Extraction . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 5377 –5390 10.1021/acsnano.5b01123 .25871430 
Khripin C. Y. ; Fagan J. A. ; Zheng M. 
Spontaneous Partition of Carbon Nanotubes
in Polymer-Modified Aqueous Phases . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 6822 –6825 10.1021/ja402762e .23611526 
Subbaiyan N. K. ; Cambré S. ; Parra-Vasquez A. N. G. ; Hároz E. H. ; Doorn S. K. ; Duque J. G. 
Role of
Surfactants and Salt in Aqueous
Two-Phase Separation of Carbon Nanotubes toward Simple Chirality Isolation . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 1619 –1628 10.1021/nn405934y .24450507 
Mistry K. S. ; Larsen B. A. ; Blackburn J. L. 
High-Yield Dispersions of Large-Diameter
Semiconducting Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes with Tunable Narrow
Chirality Distributions . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 2231 –2239 10.1021/nn305336x .23379962 
Kawai M. ; Kyakuno H. ; Suzuki T. ; Igarashi T. ; Suzuki H. ; Okazaki T. ; Kataura H. ; Maniwa Y. ; Yanagi K. 
Single Chirality
Extraction of Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes for the Encapsulation of
Organic Molecules . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 9545 –9548 10.1021/ja3013853 .22647140 
Yanagi K. ; Miyata Y. ; Liu Z. ; Suenaga K. ; Okada S. ; Kataura H. 
Influence of Aromatic
Environments on the Physical
Properties of Β-Carotene . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2010 , 114 , 2524 –2530 10.1021/jp910568k .
Campo J. ; Piao Y. ; Lam S. ; Stafford C. M. ; Streit J. K. ; Simpson J. R. ; Hight
Walker A. R. ; Fagan J. A. 
Enhancing Single-Wall
Carbon Nanotube Properties through Controlled Endohedral Filling . Nanoscale Horiz. 
2016 , 1 , 317 –324 10.1039/C6NH00062B .
Brady G. J. ; Joo Y. ; Wu M. Y. ; Shea M. J. ; Gopalan P. ; Arnold M. S. 
Polyfluorene-Sorted,
Carbon Nanotube Array Field-Effect Transistors with Increased Current
Density and High on/Off Ratio . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 11614 –11621 10.1021/nn5048734 .25383880 
Blackburn J. L. ; Holt J. M. ; Irurzun V. M. ; Resasco D. E. ; Rumbles G. 
Confirmation
of K-Momentum Dark Exciton Vibronic Sidebands Using 13c-Labeled, Highly
Enriched (6,5) Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 1398 –1403 10.1021/nl204072x .22313425 
Cambré S. ; Wenseleers W. 
Separation
and Diameter-Sorting of Empty (End-Capped)
and Water-Filled (Open) Carbon Nanotubes by Density Gradient Ultracentrifugation . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 2764 –2768 10.1002/anie.201007324 .
Cornelissen-Gude C. ; Rettig W. ; Lapouyade R. 
Photophysical Properties of Squaraine
Derivatives:  Evidence for Charge Separation . J. Phys. Chem. A 
1997 , 101 , 9673 –9677 10.1021/jp971577e .
Koyama T. ; Tsunekawa T. ; Saito T. ; Asaka K. ; Saito Y. ; Kishida H. ; Nakamura A. 
Ultrafast Excitation Energy Transfer
from Encapsulated Quaterrylene to Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube . J. Lumin. 
2016 , 169 , 645 –648 10.1016/j.jlumin.2014.12.068 .
Loi M. A. ; Gao J. ; Cordella F. ; Blondeau P. ; Menna E. ; Bártová B. ; Hébert C. ; Lazar S. ; Botton G. A. ; Milko M. ; Ambrosch-Draxl C. 
Encapsulation
of Conjugated Oligomers in Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes: Towards Nanohybrids for Photonic Devices . Adv. Mater. 
2010 , 22 , 1635 –1639 10.1002/adma.200903527 .20496395 
Stich D. ; Späth F. ; Kraus H. ; Sperlich A. ; Dyakonov V. ; Hertel T. 
Triplet–Triplet Exciton Dynamics in Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes. Nat . Nat. Photonics 
2014 , 8 , 139 –144 10.1038/nphoton.2013.316 .
Koyama T. ; Yoshimitsu S. ; Miyata Y. ; Shinohara H. ; Kishida H. ; Nakamura A. 
Transient
Absorption Kinetics Associated
with Higher Exciton States in Semiconducting Single-Walled Carbon
Nanotubes: Relaxation of Excitons and Phonons . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 20289 –20299 10.1021/jp406650t .
Bindl D. J. ; Ferguson A. J. ; Wu M.-Y. ; Kopidakis N. ; Blackburn J. L. ; Arnold M. S. 
Free Carrier Generation and Recombination
in Polymer-Wrapped Semiconducting Carbon Nanotube Films and Heterojunctions . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2013 , 4 , 3550 –3559 10.1021/jz401711m .
Ferguson A. J. ; Dowgiallo A.-M. ; Bindl D. J. ; Mistry K. S. ; Reid O. G. ; Kopidakis N. ; Arnold M. S. ; Blackburn J. L. 
Trap-Limited
Carrier Recombination in Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Heterojunctions
with Fullerene Acceptor Layers . Phys. Rev. B:
Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2015 , 91 , 245311 10.1103/PhysRevB.91.245311 .
Park J. ; Reid O. G. ; Blackburn J. L. ; Rumbles G. 
Photoinduced Spontaneous
Free-Carrier Generation in Semiconducting Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 8809 10.1038/ncomms9809 .26531728 
Soavi G. ; Scotognella F. ; Viola D. ; Hefner T. ; Hertel T. ; Cerullo G. ; Lanzani G. 
High Energetic Excitons in Carbon
Nanotubes Directly Probe Charge-Carriers . Sci.
Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 9681 10.1038/srep09681 .25959462 
Furuki M. ; Tian M. ; Sato Y. ; Pu L. ; Tatsuura S. ; Kawashima H. ; Sasaki F. ; Kobayashi S. ; Tani T. 
Ultrafast Nonlinearoptical Response of Squarylium Dye J-Aggregates
and Fabrication of Their Lb-Films . Colloids
Surf., A 
2002 , 198 , 651 –656 10.1016/S0927-7757(01)00975-X .
Furuki M. ; Tian M. ; Sato Y. ; Pu L. S. ; Kawashima H. ; Tatsuura S. ; Wada O. 
Observation of Sub-100-Fs Optical
Response from Spin-Coated Films of Squarylium Dye J Aggregates . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2001 , 78 , 2634 –2636 10.1063/1.1369621 .
Pescitelli G. ; Di Bari L. ; Berova N. 
Application of Electronic Circular
Dichroism in the Study of Supramolecular Systems . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 5211 –5233 10.1039/C4CS00104D .24825540 
Cambré S. ; Wenseleers W. ; Goovaerts E. 
Endohedral Copper(II)Acetylacetonate/Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotube Hybrids Characterized by Electron Paramagnetic Resonance . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2009 , 113 , 13505 –13514 10.1021/jp903724h .
Dimitriev O. ; Dimitriyeva A. ; Tolmachev A. ; Kurdyukov V. 
Solvent-Induced
Organization of Squaraine Dyes in Solution Capillary Layers and Adsorbed
Films . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 4561 –4567 10.1021/jp045097g .16851533 
Emerson E. ; Conlin M. ; Rosenoff A. E. ; Norland K. ; Rodriguez H. ; Chin D. ; Bird G. R. 
The Geometrical
Structure and Absorption
Spectrum of a Cyanine Dye Aggregate . J. Phys.
Chem. 
1967 , 71 , 2396 –2403 10.1021/j100867a003 .
Würthner F. ; Kaiser T. E. ; Saha-Möller C.
R. 
J-Aggregates: From Serendipitous
Discovery to Supramolecular Engineering of Functional Dye Materials . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 3376 –3410 10.1002/anie.201002307 .
Kasha M. ; Rawls H. R. ; Ashraf El-Bayoumi M. 
The Exciton Model in Molecular Spectroscopy . Pure Appl. Chem. 
1965 , 11 , 371 –392 10.1351/pac196511030371 .
Stewart J. J. P. 
Optimization
of Parameters for Semiempirical Methods Vi: More Modifications to
the Nddo Approximations and Re-Optimization of Parameters . J. Mol. Model. 
2013 , 19 , 1 –32 10.1007/s00894-012-1667-x .23187683 
Stewart J. J. P. 
Optimization
of Parameters for Semiempirical Methods V: Modification of Nddo Approximations
and Application to 70 Elements . J. Mol. Model. 
2007 , 13 , 1173 –1213 10.1007/s00894-007-0233-4 .17828561 
Stewart J. J. P.  Computational
Chemistry . http://openmopac.net (accessed Jan. 8th, 2018 ).
Bondi A. 
Van Der Waals
Volumes and Radii . J. Phys. Chem. 
1964 , 68 , 441 –451 10.1021/j100785a001 .
Řezáč J. ; Hobza P. 
Advanced Corrections
of Hydrogen Bonding and Dispersion for Semiempirical
Quantum Mechanical Methods . J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 
2012 , 8 , 141 –151 10.1021/ct200751e .26592877 
Grimme S. ; Antony J. ; Ehrlich S. ; Krieg H. 
A Consistent and Accurate Ab Initio Parametrization
of Density Functional Dispersion
Correction (Dft-D) for the 94 Elements H-Pu . J. Chem. Phys. 
2010 , 132 , 154104 10.1063/1.3382344 .20423165 
Hestand N.
J. ; Zheng C. ; Penmetcha A. R. ; Cona B. ; Cody J. A. ; Spano F. C. ; Collison C. J. 
Confirmation of the Origins of Panchromatic
Spectra in Squaraine Thin Films Targeted for Organic Photovoltaic
Devices . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 18964 –18974 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b05095 .

