
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.9b04702ArticleToward
Real-Time Monitoring and Control of Single
Nanoparticle Properties with a Microbubble Resonator Spectrometer Hogan Levi T. †‡Horak Erik H. †‡Ward Jonathan M. §Knapper Kassandra A. †Nic Chormaic Síle §Goldsmith Randall H. *†† Department
of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United States§ Light-Matter
Interactions for Quantum Technologies Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, Onna, Okinawa 904-0495, Japan* E-mail: rhg@chem.wisc.edu.15 10 2019 26 11 2019 13 11 12743 12757 15 06 2019 15 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Optical microresonators
have widespread application at the frontiers
of nanophotonic technology, driven by their ability to confine light
to the nanoscale and enhance light–matter interactions. Microresonators
form the heart of a recently developed method for single-particle
photothermal absorption spectroscopy, whereby the microresonators
act as microscale thermometers to detect the heat dissipated by optically
pumped, nonluminescent nanoscopic targets. However, translation of
this technology to chemically dynamic systems requires a platform
that is mechanically stable, solution compatible, and visibly transparent.
We report microbubble absorption spectrometers as a versatile platform
that meets these requirements. Microbubbles integrate a two-port microfluidic
device within a whispering gallery mode microresonator, allowing for
the facile exchange of chemical reagents within the resonator’s
interior while maintaining a solution-free environment on its exterior.
We first leverage these qualities to investigate the photoactivated
etching of single gold nanorods by ferric chloride, providing a method
for rapid acquisition of spatial and morphological information about
nanoparticles as they undergo chemical reactions. We then demonstrate
the ability to control nanorod orientation within a microbubble through
optically exerted torque, a promising route toward the construction
of hybrid photonic-plasmonic systems. Critically, the reported platform
advances microresonator spectrometer technology by permitting room-temperature,
aqueous experimental conditions, which may be used for time-resolved
single-particle experiments on non-emissive, nanoscale analytes engaged
in catalytically and biologically relevant chemical dynamics.

microresonatorsingle-particle spectroscopygold nanorodphotothermalabsorption spectroscopydocument-id-old-9nn9b04702document-id-new-14nn9b04702ccc-price
==== Body
Optical microresonators,
devices
that confine light to microscopic volumes, have found widespread application
within chemistry, biology, physics, and engineering.1−5 A broad class of optical microresonators, whispering gallery mode
(WGM) resonators, have exhibited superb sensitivity including the
detection of single nanoparticles,6,7 single molecules,8−11 and even single metal ions.12 However,
the ability to perform spectroscopy on adsorbed objects would not
only allow for label-free chemical identification but also allow the
interrogation of single object properties, free from the static and
dynamic blurring of typical ensemble measurements. To this end, we
recently employed microtoroid resonators as single-particle absorption
spectrometers, whereby the heat dissipated by optically pumped nano-objects
such as gold nanorods (AuNRs),13−16 carbon nanotubes,17 or
conductive polymers18 is detected via small shifts in the WGM resonance condition. However,
to harness the sensitivity of this method for chemically dynamic systems,
a platform easily compatible with solution-phase measurements is necessary.
Here, we report such a platform, the microbubble resonator, and use
it to study the photoactivated chemical etching and reorientation
of single AuNRs.

AuNRs19 have important
chemical and
biological20 applications such as bioimaging,21 treatment of cancer22,23 and infection,24 label-free biosensing25 down to single molecules,26 surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy,27,28 fluorescence enhancement,29 drug delivery,30 and light harvesting to drive catalytic reactions.31 These applications heavily rely on tuning the
morphology-dependent optical features of AuNRs, necessitating precise
tailoring of their dimensions. This result can be achieved during
AuNR fabrication, where seed-mediated synthesis32 can often tame the polydispersity that typically plagues
samples. However, in many cases, polydisperse AuNR samples are still
common, and post-synthetic modifications offer an attractive route
to achieve a desired morphology. Furthermore, significant particle-to-particle
variations of key optical properties of AuNRs both on surfaces33 and in solution34 highlight the heterogeneity within a population of nanoparticles,
underscoring the need for single-particle inspection, including during
nanoparticle synthesis and modification. A variety of optical methods
exist for probing nonluminescent single nanoparticles and molecules via photothermal,35−38 scattering,39−41 and other techniques.42−45 Observation of the chemical etching of single AuNRs has recently
been accomplished with one-photon luminescence,46,47 dark-field scattering,48−54 and liquid transmission electron microscopy (TEM).55 However, a highly sensitive absorption technique for monitoring
such chemical dynamics is needed to compliment these methods and would
be extremely valuable for accessing targets that are not luminescent
or are too small for scattering experiments. WGM resonators are perfectly
poised to fill this gap in methodology.

Various WGM microresonator
geometries have been employed for sensing
in solution, including microspheres,9−11 microrings,5,56 microtoroids,6,57 microbubbles,58,59 microdroplets,60 microtubes,61 and microbottles.62,63 In particular,
the variations and capabilities of hollow microresonators for sensing
have been reviewed in detail elsewhere.64 To adapt a microresonator for in-solution, visible-wavelength photothermal
spectroscopy, three requirements must be met: (i) high sensitivity
for interrogating nanoscopic analytes, (ii) resonator transparency
at visible wavelengths to mitigate photothermal background, and (iii)
robust performance in solution. Employing silica-on-silicon (SiO2-Si) microtoroids for photothermal spectroscopy, one can resolve
attometer shifts of the WGM resonant wavelength from thermal fluxes
of target nano-objects.13 High backgrounds
in SiO2-Si toroids can be mitigated with all-glass microtoroids,
which can be used for visible spectroscopy.15,16 However, immersing a WGM microresonator in water mandates the use
of larger microresonators to avoid bending losses,65 with consequent lower photothermal sensitivity. Furthermore,
although tapers66 and prisms9 can be optically coupled to WGM microresonators
in water, immersion of such couplers in solution may reduce mechanical
stability and also result in fouling, particularly as more caustic
reagents are employed for chemical studies. Therefore, an alternative
platform is preferable for in-solution experiments. The microbubble
WGM resonator, Figure 1B, which possesses a hollow, solution-accessible interior, while
maintaining an air-glass exterior interface, meets the requirements
for in-solution, visible spectroscopy of nanoscopic analytes.

Figure 1 Microbubble
absorption spectroscopy. (A) Cartoon of instrumentation.
PDH = Pound–Drever–Hall. LC = Liquid crystal. APD =
Avalanche photodiode. (B) Optical micrographs of two microbubble resonators
with different geometries. Scale bars 20 μm. (C) Photothermal
maps of a microbubble resonator similar in geometry to the left microbubble
in (B), both out-of-focus (left) and in-focus (right). Scale bars
20 μm.

Microbubbles are fabricated from
glass capillaries, resulting in
low background signals at visible wavelengths, tunable fabrication,
and two-port connectivity through which it is easy to flow reagents.
Compared to a solid resonator immersed in solution, a microbubble
maintains an air–glass interface on its exterior, enabling
a higher refractive index contrast and allowing for smaller diameter
resonators before bending losses occur. Additionally, the tapered
optical fiber used for coupling light into the resonator can approach
in air, reducing noise from the instability of coupling in-solution
and eliminating solution contamination of the taper. Furthermore,
the unique, thin-walled structure of the microbubble allows for high-order
optical modes that exist almost entirely within the liquid-core of
the resonator, a situation termed the “quasi-droplet regime”.
Operating in the quasi-droplet regime, microbubbles have proven to
be exceptional sensors, most recently for detecting polystyrene nanoparticles
in aqueous solution with a sensitivity ∼280 times larger than
similar experiments using microsphere resonators.58 Together, these factors make microbubble resonators ideal
for time-resolved spectroscopy of single-particle chemical reaction
dynamics when exposed to solution. In this paper, we introduce microbubble
absorption spectrometers for probing and controlling the chemical
and rotational dynamics associated with the photoactivated chemical
etching of AuNRs. This platform holds promise for elucidating mechanistic
insights into nanoparticle reactions with a method orthogonal to existing
techniques that rely on scattering or luminescence and is an attractive
candidate for future single-particle and single-molecule studies.

Results/Discussion
Experimental
Design
WGM resonators operate via total
internal reflection, wherein light propagates
around a closed geometric loop, resulting in resonance conditions
where only specific wavelengths propagate constructively. WGM resonances
are interrogated by the “probe beam”, provided by a
continuous wave (CW), narrow-line width, tunable laser coupled through
a tapered optical fiber67 (Figure 1A). Transmitted light through
the tapered fiber is collected, and the probe beam is actively locked
to a resonance by a Pound–Drever–Hall locking system.6,13,68−70 The hollow
core of the microbubble is filled with the desired reagents by attaching
the microbubble capillary to a syringe pump. Two microbubbles are
pictured in Figure 1B, highlighting the tunability of geometric parameters, and consequent
versatility on optofluidic properties.

A second beam, the “pump
beam”, is focused onto the microbubble surface to excite analytes.
CW diode lasers at 532, 635, and 785 nm are coaligned using dichroic
mirrors, permitting interrogation at different wavelengths. The linearly
polarized pump beam is amplitude modulated at 433 Hz using an optical
chopper, encoding the photothermal signal at this frequency and allowing
for use of lock-in amplification to drastically lower the experimental
noise floor.13 Two galvanometer mirrors
steer the pump beam through a relay lens system to a 40× objective
with piezo-controlled focus, providing spatial control of the pump
beam on the microbubble resonator. This spatial control is leveraged
to photothermally map the interior surface of microbubble resonators,
at low resolution for an entire resonator and high resolution for
single diffraction-limited objects. Figure 1C shows two photothermal maps of a microbubble
resonator at different objective foci, with the out-of-focus map indicating
the curvature of the microbubble from the varied PSFs across the map.
The polarization angle of the linearly polarized pump beam is rapidly
scanned using a voltage-controlled liquid crystal, which is sandwiched
between a polarizer and a quarter-waveplate (see Methods). This combination of wavelength, spatial, and polarization
control permits thorough characterization of individual analytes bound
to the resonator, realized at exquisite sensitivity due to the double-modulation
scheme.

Operation of Single-Particle Microresonator Spectrometers
Microresonator sensing schemes generally rely on the reactive mechanism,10 whereby binding of an analyte imparts a small
refractive index change, shifting the resonance wavelength. Instead,
microresonator-based photothermal spectroscopy relies on a resonance
shift resulting from the heat plume generated by optically pumping
a non-emissive object bound to the resonator surface.17 The temperature rise accompanying this heat plume alters
the resonator’s refractive index according to its thermo-optic
coefficient (dn/dT), changing the
WGM optical path length and shifting the resonance condition. The
ability to detect this resonance shift is related to the figure of
merit Q/V, the ratio of the resonator’s
quality factor (Q) and mode volume (V). A resonator with minimized absorption, bending, and scattering
losses allows photons to repeatedly circulate the resonator, resulting
in a high Q, narrow line width resonance. This narrow
line width increases the visibility of minute resonance shifts. A
smaller resonator with consequent tighter confinement of light produces
a smaller V, increasing the overlap between the thermal
plume of the analyte and the optical mode. This increased overlap
contributes a larger effective refractive index change and thus a
larger resonance shift.17 To properly examine
the microbubble photothermal response, we employed finite-element
simulations (COMSOL) of both the optical modes and the thermal properties
of the microresonator. Simulated optical modes for a particular microbubble
geometry are shown in Figure 2A. Varying mode numbers, defined in the traditional spherical
geometric indices (polar, azimuthal, and radial, Supporting Information), clearly show the complicated mode
structure inherent in the microbubble resonators. This complex mode
structure gives rise to several important experimental considerations.

Figure 2 Optical
resonances in microbubble resonators. (A) Simulated electric
field distributions at 780 nm for first-, second-, and third-order
radial modes, for both first- and second-order polar modes. All modes
shown are transverse electric (TE). White curves are added to clearly
indicate the position of the microbubble walls. (B) A 180 pm span
of the mode spectrum of a microbubble resonator. (C) Left: The signal
at the beginning of analyte pumping. Right: Signal once the resonator
has reached a thermal equilibrium with its surroundings (theoretical).
(D) Resonance shift from pumping a single AuNR with the 635 nm beam
at decreasing powers (blue points). The red point indicates the signal
for pump beam off. The inset is a zoom-out, showing signal linearity
over orders of magnitude in pumping power. Further details in main
text. Error bars are standard deviation of the mean.

First, the efficient excitation of high-order modes leads
to incredibly
congested mode spectra. An illustrative 180 pm window of a water-filled
microbubble’s resonance landscape is shown in Figure 2B. This high mode density stems
from the highly prolate resonator geometry lifting the polar mode
degeneracy relative to an ideal spherical resonator,71 leading to varying effective resonator sizes for modes,
as well as differing free-spectral ranges.72 The differing free-spectral ranges cause spectral overlap of modes
of different azimuthal mode order,73 an
effect that is compounded by the disparate dielectric environments
experienced by different-order radial modes, which have different
fractions of the electric field contained in glass, water, and air.
Second, the burrowing of higher-order radial modes into the water-filled
interior not only changes the effective refractive index of the mode
but also yields tremendous variations in dn/dT. This varied dn/dT,
which can even switch signs, produces very different thermal responsivities
for modes. The combined congested mode spectrum and differential shifting
from dn/dT variation amplifies experimental
challenges, as photothermal heating or ambient temperature drifting
can cause modes to shift through each other. Therefore, modes that
are both thermally responsive and spectrally isolable are desirable.

Choosing a high thermal responsivity mode requires delving into
the expected thermal response with finite element simulations. As
described above, the radial mode order drastically alters the effective dn/dT, as glass has a small positive dn/dT of 9 × 10–6 K–1 and water a large negative dn/dT of −91 × 10–6 K–1. Thus, while glass-contained modes in a water-filled
resonator offer Q values over 106 and
show small positive resonance shifts upon heating, higher-order, water-contained
modes offer Q values of mid-105 and show
large negative resonance shifts captured both experimentally (Supporting Information) and in our simulations
in Figure 2C. The “shark
fin” shape results from the pump beam amplitude modulation.
Interestingly, this modulation rides atop a rising baseline magnitude
as heat builds over many modulation cycles (left panel) before thermal
equilibrium is reached (right panel). This baseline stems from the
lack of an effective, proximal heat sink in microbubbles with equilibration
reached only after sufficient heat dissipation to the air, yielding
a baseline shift about 10 times larger than the modulating shift,
both experimentally and theoretically (Supporting Information).

Finding high-order water-contained radial
modes to leverage their
larger thermal response requires careful consideration of the coupling
geometry. Specifically, the tapered fiber diameter72 greatly impacts mode selectivity through phase matching
conditions and evanescent field overlap. By translating along the
length of the tapered fiber, this diameter was tuned until these water-contained
modes were suitably excited. Then a thermally sensitive and spectrally
isolated mode was selected by wavelength scanning. Importantly, the
precise identity of this mode was not discerned, precluding direct
relation of a resonance shift with an absolute absorption cross-section
as in our previous experiments.13,17 Identification is possible,74−76 particularly when implementing procedures to simplify the mode structure,73,77 but difficult in practice and was not pursued here.

Importantly,
this lack of mode identification precludes the selection
of the maximally thermally responsive mode. While the optimal mode
is required for ideal sensor response, use of a less responsive resonance
was sufficient for examination of AuNRs. The limit-of-detection of
our system was investigated by optically pumping a single AuNR inside
a resonator. The photothermal signal, averaged for 30 s with a time
constant of 1 s (Figure 2D), was monitored at decreasing powers until it was indistinguishable
from the signal obtained with the pump beam blocked. As the inset
in Figure 2D shows,
the signal remains linear over multiple orders of magnitude, flattening
out at low powers as the noise floor is reached. The detection limit
for this platform is in the low tens of attometers of wavelength shift
(a comparison with microtoroids is made in the Supporting Information). For context, the typical photothermal
response of a single AuNR at our pump fluxes is in the range of 10–100
fm, easily resolvable by many orders of magnitude. Additionally, this
detection limit surpasses the expected femtometer photothermal shift
for measuring a single chromophore.17 As
a first step toward monitoring reaction dynamics of molecules, we
show below that microbubbles are well-suited for probing the chemical
and spatial dynamics of single AuNRs.

Probing Photophysical Features
of Single AuNRs
AuNRs
exhibit optical features known as localized surface plasmon resonances
(LSPRs), which result from light exciting collective oscillations
of conduction band electrons. Two orthogonal LSPRs exist in AuNRs:
the longitudinal plasmon band (LPB) and the transverse plasmon band
(TPB), oriented parallel and perpendicular, respectively, to the long
axis of the rod (Figure 3A). The LPB is at the longer wavelength in the bulk extinction spectra
of the AuNRs used in this report (80 × 40 nm), Figure 3B. These spectral features
are probed with the microbubble platform detailed in Figure 1A at the single AuNR level,
at specific pump beam wavelengths (solid vertical lines Figure 3B). The LPB central wavelengths
will likely be red-shifted compared to the bulk due to interaction
with the glass surface.39,78,79

Figure 3 Probing
photophysical features of single AuNRs. (A) Cartoon illustrating
the photophysical features of a AuNR. LPB = Longitudinal plasmon band.
TPB = Transverse plasmon band. (B) Bulk absorption spectrum of AuNRs,
with the various laser beams in our experiment indicated by vertical
lines. LPB and TPB indicated. (C) Example photothermal maps of a nanorod
as pump polarization are varied in increments of 20°, as shown
by the red arrow in the cartoon above the photothermal maps. Scale
bar 1 μm. (D) Polarization fits for three different pump beams
acquired using photothermal mapping. (E) Polarization traces for three
different pump beams, acquired by recording photothermal signal as
the linear pump polarization is quickly rotated 180° (∼10
s).

After depositing AuNRs inside
of a microbubble resonator (Methods), the
resonator is photothermally mapped
to find objects. To confirm successful deposition of single AuNRs,
photothermal maps are acquired with the pump beam, linearly polarized
from 0 to 180° (Figure 3C) at three different pump wavelengths. These maps are fit
to extract an intensity at each polarization (Methods), shown as data points in Figure 3D. These polarization-dependent intensities are fit
(dotted lines) to give a depth-of-modulation, M (Methods). The 635 and 785 nm traces, which probe
the LPB, have a value of M close to unity for a single
AuNR. A criterion of M ≥ 0.98 was used for
classifying an object as a single AuNR. Small well-ordered aggregates
could also exhibit high M values, but these are unlikely
due to the presence of CTAB during deposition. Alternatively, a much
faster method of probing AuNR orientation is to rapidly rotate the
pump beam’s linear polarization while centered on an object,
and fit the results to extract M. Although this method
(Figure 3E) lacks background
subtraction, it allows for hundreds of data points to be collected
in a few seconds, resulting in quick determination of AuNR orientation
and relative absorption cross-section at the pumping wavelength during
reactions.

For both of the above polarization methods, the traces
for the
635 and 785 nm pump beams align in peak angle (Figure 3D,E) because both of these wavelengths excite
the LPB. In contrast, the 532 nm trace has a peak angle orthogonal
to the other two traces because this wavelength excites the TPB at
a pump polarization orthogonal to the LPB excitation. In addition,
the 532 nm trace does not go to zero, because at that wavelength the
pump beam is not only pumping the polarization-dependent TPB but also
the interband transitions of gold, which are independent of pump beam
polarization. Notably, the use of multiple wavelengths means that
AuNRs can not only be localized but also studied spectroscopically.
Herein, these capabilities are employed to study the etching of AuNRs
in real-time.

Selecting an Etchant
The photophysical
properties of
AuNRs are well understood as a function of geometry,80 and post-synthetic modifications are extremely useful for
exerting control over these properties. Since 2002, when Jana and
co-workers observed anisotropic etching of gold spheroids in both
cyanide and persulfate solutions,81 at
least 20 other reagents have been reported to etch or accelerate the
etching of AuNRs, often with spatial selectivity (see Supporting Information). Such reports include
assays for facile detection of analytes at ultralow concentrations
in both environmental and biological samples, indicating the utility
of morphological control of AuNRs both in-the-field and at points-of-care.

Most of the aforementioned reports used spectrophotometers to study
ensembles of AuNRs. Although some studies used TEM intermittently
to verify nanorod morphology, this approach is limited in time resolution
and generally requires stopping reactions for analysis. Optical monitoring
of reactions of single AuNRs can also be accomplished in situ. Dark-field spectral imaging has been used to study anisotropic
etching of individual AuNRs by hydrogen peroxide,49 potassium iodide/iodine,50 and
gold(III).53 In a different experimental
design, luminescence was employed to study the cyanide etching of
AuNRs.47 Additionally, dissolution of AuNRs via substrate voltage tuning has been monitored using dark-field
hyperspectral imaging.48,54 Perhaps the most commonly reported
reagent for etching single AuNRs in recent years is iron(III) chloride,
starting with bulk studies in 2009.82 Since
then, FeCl3 etching of single AuNRs has been reported using
dark-field monitoring, sometimes utilizing Le Chatlier’s principle
to drive the reaction.51,52 Ferric etching of single AuNRs
using an electron beam, monitored by liquid-TEM, has also been reported.55 Excepting the electron beam study, these reports
evoked purely chemical mechanisms to explain their reported chemistries.
However, the light-induced etching of AuNRs using FeCl3 has also been reported, both in bulk studies83 and single AuNR experiments using one-photon luminescence.46 Due to significant interest in ferric etching
of AuNRs and the intriguing mechanistic parameter space, FeCl3 was employed for etching in this report.

Single AuNR
Reactions
After single AuNRs deposited
in the microbubble resonator were identified, they were chemically
etched using FeCl3. The etching solution, ranging between
250 μM and 2 mM FeCl3 dissolved in dilute hydrochloric
acid (pH ∼ 1.3) to prevent hydrolysis of the oxidant, was flowed
into the microbubble. Due to differences in sensitivity resulting
from microbubble geometries, mode selection, and even nanorod location
within the same microbubble, the relative photothermal signals between
nanorods cannot be directly compared. However, the relative signal
of one AuNR reacting over time, using the same resonance, directly
maps onto a change in absorption cross-section of the nanorod at the
pump wavelength and thus its etching progress. Conveniently, nanorod
etching was found to be photoactivated by the pump beam illumination
(discussed further below), allowing controlled reaction initiation.
The AuNRs were monitored by repeatedly rotating the linearly polarized
pump, interrogating the relative absorption and orientation of the
AuNR as it is etched. Importantly, before each polarization trace
is taken, a beam-centering algorithm is used to mitigate any false
signal decrease from spatial drift of the bubble. The centering also
serves as a “dosing” period to enable AuNR etching between
polarization traces. Each polarization data point required only 50
ms of data acquisition time, suggesting that fast chemical dynamics
can be followed with our approach. A further discussion of time resolution
and imaging of small gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) is presented below.

Figure 4A(i-iii)
features three exemplary traces of a single AuNR reaction (additional
examples in the Supporting Information).
These three reactions were taken in different microbubbles on different
days, confirming reproducibility of the experiment. A logarithmic
version of reaction (i) (Figure 4B) readily shows the late stage continued reaction
progression along with AuNR rotation. This behavior is better illustrated
in the extracted maximum signal and angle traces from reaction (ii)
seen in Figure 4C,D,
respectively. “Exposure time” refers to the total time
that the AuNR has been exposed to the laser beam, which does not include
the “switching time” at the dotted lines, where the
laser was turned off so that the power could be increased. The reactions
slowed as they progressed, as seen by the plateauing effect in the
maximum signal. This plateauing is a direct result of the photoactivation
mechanism: As a nanorod shrinks, its absorption cross-section decreases,
resulting in less light absorption and thus slower etching. This photoactivation
is further confirmed by incrementally increasing the pump power (dotted
vertical lines), quickening the reactivity before it plateaus once
again. Although the three reactions in Figure 4A were taken at ferric chloride concentrations
spanning almost an order of magnitude, the time scales of reaction
vary by much less (discussion in Supporting Information). It is also evident that AuNRs sometimes rotate as they etch, especially
late in reactions, as seen in Figure 4D and discussed later (see Single
AuNR Rotations).

Figure 4 Etching single AuNRs. (A) Reaction series of
polarization traces
for three difference reactions, progressing in time from red traces
to blue traces. Maximum signal is normalized by pump flux. Each trace
was taken over the course of 10 s (0.05 s per point, 200 different
angles), with a 1 s delay between traces (except when switching power)
and 3 s for beam-centering between each trace. (B) The data for reaction
(ii), but with signal shown logarithmically. (C) Maximum signal of
polarization traces over the course of reaction (ii), showing the
decrease in relative absorption cross section at 635 nm. Dashed lines
indicate points in time at which pump power was increased. (D) Maximum
angle of polarization traces over the course of reaction (ii), showing
nanorod orientation. Dashed lines indicate points in time at which
pump power was increased. Reaction conditions: dilute aqueous HCl
(pH ∼ 1.3), room temperature, varied FeCl3 concentrations
(i) 1 mM, (ii) 250 μM, (iii) 2 mM. Pump fluxes for reaction
(i) were 2.7, 6.7, 11.4, 21.0, and 34.5 kW/cm2. Pump fluxes
for reaction (ii) were 4.1, 11.9, and 35.4 kW/cm2. Pump
fluxes for reaction (iii) were 6.4, 15.9, 31.6, 57.3, and 121 kW/cm2.

A control experiment was performed
with a nanorod-containing resonator
filled with dilute hydrochloric acid (pH ∼ 1.3) without FeCl3, confirming that the acid alone is not enough to etch the
nanorods under illumination. Additionally, when nanorods are left
in etching solution for multiple days without laser illumination,
they do not observably react, supporting a photoactivated etching
mechanism. AuNRs exposed to etching solution for hours within a microbubble,
with the probe beam on and locked to water-dominated modes but no
pump beam on, also did not undergo significant etching, indicating
that the probe beam is not sufficient to drive etching. Therefore,
we hypothesize a photoactivated mechanism resulting from hot electrons
generated from LPB decay (see Mechanistic Discussion). We also note that, occasionally, nanorods were “impervious”
to photoactivated etching, as discussed further in the Supporting Information.

To exemplify the
spectroscopic versatility of this platform, nanorod
etching was also induced with the 532 nm pump beam. Because this wavelength
pumps the TPB (as well as direct interband transitions), nanorod orientation
can still be tracked. In Figure 5A, a single AuNR reaction time series is shown for
532 nm-driven (TPB-driven) conditions, with a logarithmic version
of the data shown in Figure 5B for clear visualization of late-stage etching data. The
polarization traces are conspicuously different than in Figure 4 because of the presence of
polarization-independent interband transitions. In Figure 5C, maximum signals are extracted
for this reaction and one other TPB-driven reaction in the same resonator.
For direct comparison, a different nanorod in the same microbubble
was reacted using the 635 nm pump beam (LPB-driven), with the extracted
maximum signals shown in Figure 5D (note, this is the same reaction shown in Figure 4A(iii)). Overall,
three such reactions were performed for each color in the same resonator
to confirm reproducibility (Supporting Information). Although quantitative comparison of reaction rates between experiments
is difficult due to the decreasing rate as absorption cross-section
diminishes, it is clear from the extracted maximum signals that while
the etching rate of the 532 nm-induced reactions is faster than the
rate of the 635 nm-induced reactions, it is not multiple orders of
magnitude faster, in contrast to previously reported bulk measurements,
discussed further below.83 The shapes of
maximum signal traces for the LPB-driven and TPB-driven reactions
are noticeably different, with the LPB-driven reactions yielding a
concave up shape, and the TPB-driven reactions yielding a concave-down
(Figure 5c(i)) or even
sigmoidal shape (Figure 5c(ii)).

Figure 5 Etching reactions driven at two different pump wavelengths. (A)
The reaction of a single AuNR being driven with the 532 nm pump beam,
progressing in time from red traces to blue traces. Maximum signal
is normalized by pump flux. Each trace was taken over the course of
10 s (0.05 s per point, 200 different angles), with a 1 s delay between
traces (except when switching power), and 3 s for beam-centering between
each trace. (B) The same data as in (A), but with signal shown logarithmically.
(C) (i) Maximum signal of polarization traces for the reaction shown
in (A). Polarization trace for indicated data point in inset. (ii)
A similar trace for a different nanorod reacted in the same bubble
using the 532 nm beam. Dashed lines indicate time points at which
pump power was increased. (D) Maximum signal of polarization traces
for the reaction of a nanorod in the same bubble, but using the 635
nm pump beam to drive the reaction. Dashed lines indicate time points
at which pump power was increased. Reaction conditions: dilute aqueous
HCl (pH ∼ 1.3), room temperature, 1 mM FeCl3. Pump
fluxes for reaction (Ci) were 16.1, 39.2, and 63.3 kW/cm2. Pump fluxes for reaction (Cii) were 6.4, 31.6, and 57.3 kW/cm2. Pump fluxes for reaction (D) were 6.4, 15.9, 31.6, 57.3,
121 kW/cm2.

We also use data from
a TPB-driven reaction to discuss imaging
of small AuNPs and compare to darkfield microscopy. Typical dark-field
techniques can image AuNPs as small as 30 nm in diameter,84 with more optimized approaches pushing down
to 10 nm.85 The threshold at which the
absorption cross-section overtakes the scattering cross-section in
magnitude is at a diameter of around 80 nm for gold nanospheres.39 At diameters of 20 nm, this ratio of σabs/σscat is ∼100.39 The initial sizes of the AuNRs in this report (approximate
volume 4 × 105 nm2, as calculated for an
80 × 40 nm cylinder) are already well below the volume of an
80 nm nanosphere (2 × 106 nm2). Furthermore,
after etching the AuNR, the volume is much lower, and we can estimate
that volume. For this calculation, we use a 532 nm-driven reaction
because the TPB is not expected to shift significantly in its center
wavelength regardless of whether the etching is isotropic or anisotropic,
meaning that the measured signal should scale proportionally with
nanorod volume.39 The inset of Figure 5c(i) shows a polarization
trace from late in the reaction, with its corresponding data point
indicated. Although later data points show even smaller signals, this
data point was selected because the trace still clearly shows the
polarization-dependence associated with the TPB. The signal at 180°
in the inset is lower than the signal at 0° because the nanorod
is reacting rapidly at the high pump flux (as indicated by the slope
of Figure 5c(i)). The
selected data point has a signal 34 times smaller than the initial
signal, equivalent to a volume of 1.2 × 104 nm2, or a sphere with a diameter of 14 nm. Thus, even with time
resolution of 50 ms per point, microbubble spectrometers are well-suited
to study AuNPs of a size that is challenging to reach with dark-field
measurements. Significant further increases to our sensitivity can
be achieved with use of media with higher thermo-optic coefficients37,86−88 or use of more optimized optical modes (see discussion
above).

Mechanistic Discussion
Our proposed mechanism relies
on the generation of hot electrons, as in previous reports of photoactivated
AuNR etching.82,89 Interest in such hot carrier
chemical processes has exploded in recent years in a variety of applications,90 especially photocatalysis.91−93 The mechanisms
of hot carrier generation and transfer have been extensively studied,94−97 including efforts toward untangling the contributions of hot carrier
effects and photothermal effects in nanoparticle synthesis98 and plasmonic photocatalysis99 and mapping hot carrier driven catalytic reactions nanoscopically.100,101 Although there are still unresolved questions regarding plasmon-driven
chemistry, hot carrier transfer can generally be predicted by using
an energy overlap model.102

In the
reported reactions, we expect a nominal temperature rise at the nanorod’s
surface of <1 K as calculated from the known absorption cross-section
and excitation intensity (Supporting Information), meaning that the observed etching mechanism should not be significantly
influenced by photothermal heating.46 With
no noticeable dark reaction rate and a photothermal mechanism ruled
out, a hot carrier mechanism, whereby the decay of LSPRs or excitation
of interband transitions results in hot electrons that can transfer
to ferric ions on the nanorod surface, must be invoked to explain
the observed reactions. Hot electrons lower the Gibbs free energy
of the etching reaction52 and reduce the
thermal activation barrier for electron transfer,99 thus modifying both the thermodynamics and kinetics of
the reaction. Photoexcitation of plasmonic NPs has been experimentally
shown to lower the activation enthalpy for transferring electrons
from gold nanoparticles to Fe3+103 and to lower the energy barrier for reaction at the surface of plasmonic
NPs by affecting ligand-NP interactions.104

When the LSPRs of an AuNR decay, hot electrons are generated
from
the conduction band of the nanorod. These hot electrons are on average
at lower energy than those generated by interband transitions, though
a few carriers will be hotter in the LSPR decay case.83 Although it was previously reported that interband pumping
can drive etching orders of magnitude faster than LPB pumping,83 this was not observed in our reported reactions.
CTAB concentration and halide concentration play significant roles
in AuNR etching,82,89 and we attribute this observed
discrepancy to different CTAB-mediated mechanisms. Our nanorod deposition
procedure likely removes a significant part but not all of the CTAB
(see Supporting Information).105,106 Thus, the AuNRs in our study have significantly lower CTAB coverage
than the report where pumping the interband transition resulted in
order of magnitude increase in etch rate, where etching occurred in
a medium with CTAB concentration greater than the critical micelle
concentration (CMC).83 Ultimately, the
reaction relies on ferric ions binding to the nanorod before hot electron
transfer can take place. Thus, a plausible mechanism for the reported
reactions entails a two-step process, whereby slow ligand exchange
of CTAB with Fe3+, or intercalation of the Fe3+ through the residual CTAB, is followed by fast photoactivated etching.
A relative increase in the rate of the photoactivated step, as seen
previously,83 is then ultimately masked
in the observed rate due to the slowness of the first ligand exchange
step, as shown Figure 6. In the limit where ligand exchange is slow, increases in the rate
of the photoinduced step would give a somewhat muted effect on the
overall reaction rate, as observed.

Figure 6 Proposed mechanistic explanation for etching
rates. A slow initial
step requiring CTAB dissociation before ferric ions can bind determines
the overall rate for the reaction, muting the effect of the higher
rate for TPB excitation, even though hot electrons are more efficiently
generated. Eventually, etching stops when the absorbed light falls
below a threshold necessary for hot-electron-driven etching.

To further understand the shape of the reaction
profiles, we modeled
the spectral changes of the TPB and LPB for a nanorod being etched
for etching schemes ranging from tip-only etching to side-only etching
(Supporting Information). Modeling was
able to reproduce the concave-up shape observed in the LPB-driven
reactions (Figure 4C). However, no combination of variables was able to capture the
concave down or sigmoidal trend seen in some TPB-driven reactions
(Figure 5C) or fully
reproduce the threshold behavior observed. Thus, with a completely
linear reaction mechanism ruled out, we can speculate on possible
origins of nonlinearity in the etching mechanism. One possible origin
stems from the evolution of nanorod morphology over time. For example,
it was observed previously that for certain laser powers, nanorod
LPBs would red-shift, then blue-shift.46 Another possible origin derives from the changing surface concentration
of CTAB, with a relatively dense coverage providing competitive inhibition
for ferric ion binding at early times but AuNR etching resulting in
easier access at later times. Future studies utilizing multiple pump
beams could be valuable in studying these complex kinetics, as the
evolution of the LPB and TPB spectra would yield important insight
into the reaction mechanism. Thus, the reported microbubble platform
may be used for spectroscopic, mechanistic studies into the wavelength
dependence of hot-carrier-driven chemical dynamics in single plasmonic
nanoparticles.

Single AuNR Rotations
Beyond using
our microbubble
spectrometer to monitor and control nanoparticle size, we can also
use it to monitor and control nanoparticle orientation, adding significant
utility to the microbubble spectrometer platform. Indicated by the
shift in peak polarization during etching reactions (Figures 4 and 5), AuNRs can rotate while etching. Alternatively, active rotation
can be induced with the pump beam, allowing for control over nanorod
orientation. This control results from the optical torque exerted
by linearly polarized light on an anisotropic, absorbing plasmonic
structure (Figure 7a), a phenomenon that has been demonstrated experimentally107 and theoretically108,109 and is discussed further in the Supporting Information.

Figure 7 Orientation control of single AuNRs. (A) A cartoon illustrating
the optically induced torque that a AuNR experiences under illumination
with linearly polarized light, both from side-view (top) and top-view
(bottom). (B) A series of pumping experiments showing optical control
of nanorod orientation. (C) Trace showing the photothermal signal
as two different AuNRs are pumped at increasing laser powers until
the AuNRs dislodge slightly from the resonator wall and rotate, eventually
settling down off-axis of the polarization.

Theory predicts that the optical torque acting on the AuNR from
the 635 nm pump beam will align the AuNR perpendicular to the polarization
of the incident beam. Indeed, this perpendicular alignment is exhibited
upon sufficient excitation power. In this way, nanorod orientation
can be controlled to within approximately 10° (Figure 7b) as AuNR orientation is stepped
through a ∼ 180° rotation. This control was accomplished
by monitoring the photothermal signal, dislodging the nanorod with
a large optical torque above some threshold incident power, and dithering
the polarization until the photothermal signal was minimized at the
desired polarization angle. This thresholding behavior was demonstrated
further by a stepwise ramping of the pump laser intensity, resulting
in an upward staircase of photothermal signal, until rotation was
finally induced. As can be seen in the examples in Figure 7C, two different nanorods required
significantly different pump powers to dislodge them from the microbubble
surface. Following dislodgment, the signal quickly stabilized to around
70% of the maximum signal for the left nanorod trace, whereas it behaved
semistochastically for the right trace, before settling at <40%
of the maximum signal. These differences in orientational dynamics
highlight the differences in the local environments around the two
nanorods, including both Coulombic effects and refractive index differences.
These staircase experiments were performed repeatedly for both nanorods
in Figure 7C to confirm
reproducibility (Supporting Information).

Light-induced rotation during reactions was observed more
frequently
as AuNR etching progressed. Likely, as Coulombic attractions between
the AuNR and the resonator’s surface were weakened, hydrodynamic
or optical torques were allowed to rotate the AuNR. Although rotation
events could be forced in water-filled resonators, higher pump thresholds
were generally required, and AuNRs were immune to rotation at powers
that would result in rotation in ferric chloride solution. Therefore,
it appears that the presence of etchant reduces the Coulombic attraction
between nanorods and the resonator wall, possibly through charge screening,
permitting facile rotation. Though optical rotation of nanorods has
been seen in previous experiments, the coupling between evolving surface
chemistry and propensity for rotation has not been explored to our
knowledge.

Radiation pressure and optical gradient forces could
also influence
AuNRs, affecting the rotation power threshold. However, varying the
pump beam focus position, which would change forces along the optical
axis, did not significantly impact rotation thresholds. Therefore,
it appears that the torque described above is the dominant driver
of nanorod rotation. Although scattering forces in three-dimensional
trapping can orient anisotropic plasmonic nanoparticles parallel to
the optical axis of the excitation beam,110 one would expect this to result in a highly stochastic signal over
time in the polarization traces of Figures 3 and 4, as well as
a revival of signal upon shutting off and turning back on the pump
beam. Such behavior was not observed. Therefore, AuNRs likely remain
parallel to the plane of the resonator’s surface during rotation,
rotating only in two dimensions.

Conclusions
We
have demonstrated microbubble resonators as a robust platform
for studying chemical dynamics in solution via single-particle
absorption spectroscopy. We used a microbubble spectrometer to observe
changes in the optical properties of AuNRs as they were controllably
etched by ferric chloride via a photoinduced mechanism.
The sizes of the etched AuNRs push the limit of what can be imaged via dark-field scattering. The hypothesis that ligand-exchange-limited
etching is the reason for muted wavelength dependence of etching will
require more experiments in the future to confirm and understand.
Additionally, we monitored and controlled the orientation of the AuNRs
using optical torque.

With this demonstration, we lay the groundwork
for studying more
complex reaction dynamics of single particles and molecules. Thus,
this technique provides a complementary measurement to the luminescence
and dark-field methods previously used to observe similar reactions
as reported here. In particular, the demonstrated exquisite sensitivity
offers prospects of examining non-emissive objects inaccessible with
fluorescence and too small to observe with scattering, which scales
as 1/volume2, a more severe penalty than in absorption
measurements, which scale more favorably as 1/volume. Furthermore,
rotational control could be used to estimate Coulombic forces attaching
deposited objects to the resonator, helping to understand the interface
between nanoparticles and the surface. This knowledge, combined with
structured light-field manipulation of nanoparticles,111 might be used to arrange arrays of plasmonic
nanoparticles as desired. The optical control of plasmonic nanoparticles
within a microbubble resonator may allow for in-solution, photonic-plasmonic
assembly, and live control of emergent optical properties in such
coupled systems. Additionally, by providing a direct thermal readout,
our method could be used to untangle the respective contributions
of photothermal heating and hot carrier generation for nanoparticle
reactions, aiding the design of improved nanocatalysts. Overall, there
is a compelling case for the use of microbubbles in materials studies,
sensing, and chemical kinetics, and even hybridizing them with plasmonic
or acoustic sensing schemes for further applications. Microbubble
absorption spectrometers thus hold great potential for pushing the
frontiers of absorption spectroscopy at the nanoscale.

Methods
Microbubble Fabrication
Microbubble
resonators were
fabricated according to the method reported by Yang and co-workers.112 First, a glass capillary (Polymicro Technologies,
TSP250350) is tapered using a heat-and-pull method, until it is approximately
25 μm in diameter. Next, counter-propagating CO2 laser
beams are focused onto the capillary, while positive pressure is applied
from the inside of the capillary using an inert gas. The heat from
the laser beams softens the capillary, allowing for the local expansion
of the capillary to 50–100 μm in diameter, depending
on the experimental parameters. Eventually, radiative cooling from
the expanded glass outcompetes the expansion process, and the bubble’s
size stops increasing. To operate in the quasi-droplet regime, a wall
thickness close to the wavelength of the laser beam used for WGM excitation
is desirable. Microbubble wall thickness is determined by an equation
reported by Henze and co-workers113 and
validated separately by others.114

Tapered Optical Fiber Fabrication
Single-mode optical
fiber was purchased from Corning (HI 780C). Tapered fibers are made
by removing the polymer sheath, cleaning the fiber, and tapering using
a heat-and-pull method with a hydrogen torch and motorized actuators
(Thorlabs Z825B) until the fiber returns to single-mode, as determined
using a 785 nm diode laser (Thorlabs LPS-785-FC) and optical power
meter.

Instrumentation for Photothermal Spectroscopy
A tunable,
ultranarrow line width, fiber-coupled CW laser (Newport TLB-6712)
with a wavelength range of 765–781 nm was used for coupling
into resonators. Pound–Drever–Hall (PDH) locking electronics
were constructed as previously reported,13 except for the use of a different voltage-controlled oscillator
(Mini Circuits ZX95-310A+) and different lithium niobate phase-modulator
(EOSPACE PM-0S5-01-PFA-PFA-765/782). PDH feedback was applied to the
tunable laser using high-speed servo controller (Newport LB1005).
The optical output from the experiment was collected using an APD
(Thorlabs APD430A), and the photothermal signal was extracted using
a lock-in amplifier (Ametek 7265). The resulting signal was collected
using a data acquisition (DAQ) card (National Instruments BNC2120)
for later processing. Custom LabVIEW code was used for instrumentation
control. For photothermal mapping, a lock-in time constant of 20 or
50 ms was used. For polarization traces, a lock-in time constant of
50 ms was used.

Diode lasers were used for pump beams, with
the wavelengths 532 nm (FTEC2 532–20), 635 nm (FTEC2 635-50),
and 785 nm (Thorlabs LPS-785-FC). The pump beam was amplitude modulated
using an optical chopper system (Thorlabs MC200B) and steered using
galvanometer mirrors (Thorlabs GVS212) run by outputs from the DAQ
mentioned above, modified using custom electronics. The pump beam
was focused using a piezo-controlled (Thorlabs DRV517) objective (Nikon
Plan 40×, 0.65 NA). Pump beam polarization was controlled using
a three-optic system, comprised of a linear polarizer (LPVISE100-A),
followed by a liquid crystal variable retarder (Thorlabs LCC1423-A,
LCC25) with its fast axis set 45° relative to the polarization
axis, followed by a zero-order achromatic quarter-wave plate (Thorlabs
AQWP05M-600) with its fast axis set 45° relative to the liquid
crystal’s fast axis. In this design, tuning of the liquid crystal
voltage results in a rotation of linearly polarized light at the output
of the three-optic system.

Polarization Plots
Shown in Figure 3C,D, AuNRs are first
identified by photothermally
mapping them at different pump polarizations and processing these
maps with a 2D-Gaussian fit, which results in background subtraction.
Then, the maximum signals for each plot are together fit to provide
a depth-of-modulation (M), using eq 1, which also gives the maximum signal
(σmax) plotted in Figure 4C, and the polarization angle of the maximum
signal (θmax) plotted in Figure 4D. 1  

For the data in Figure 3E, the liquid crystal is used to rapidly
collect many data points that are then fit to eq 1 to obtain M. This method
does not include background subtraction.

Bulk/UV–vis Studies
The bulk absorption spectrum
in Figure 3B was taken
using a UV–visible spectrophotometer (Varian Cary 50). Additionally,
studies were conducted to confirm the effects of CTAB concentration
and FeCl3 concentration on bulk nanorod etching. The effects
of added NaCl were studied to further examine the impacts of chloride
concentration. Results and further discussion are in the Supporting Information.

Nanorod Deposition in Microbubbles
All chemicals were
purchased through Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise noted. To deposit
nanorods in a microbubble, a 500× serial dilution is made of
AuNRs (Nanopartz A12-40-650-CTAB-DIH-1-25, size: 80 × 40 nm,
ζ potential: 35 mV, stock pH: 7, stock CTAB concentration: 5
mM) in a solution of 200× diluted HCl and 25 μM CTAB in
water. The low CTAB concentration prevents nanorod aggregation during
deposition, but keeps the CTAB concentration well below the CMC of
∼1 mM. Dilute hydrochloric acid, which results in a pH of around
1.3, encourages binding of the nanorods on the resonator interior
by enhancing Coulombic interactions.9 For
deposition, water is first flowed through the resonator using a syringe
pump attached to the first port of the resonator’s capillary.
Then, dilute HCl is flowed through the resonator to prime the glass
surface for deposition. Next, deposition solution is backfilled through
the second capillary port, which is cut to a much shorter length to
reduce deposition of AuNRs to the capillary’s interior walls.
Following this, dilute HCl is flowed through the resonator, followed
by water, through the first port of the capillary to push out the
deposition solution while maintaining a pH gradient. Water is flowed
through the resonator for at least several minutes to ensure the removal
of nonbound objects and remove excess CTAB from the nanorod surfaces.

Reactions in Microbubbles
All chemicals were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich. Reaction mixtures are made by dissolving and serial
diluting ferric chloride hexahydrate in 1/200 dilute hydrochloric
acid, resulting in a solution pH of around 1.3. While reaction solution
is flowed into the bubble, resonances shift as the refractive index
being probed by the WGM changes. Complete filling of the microbubble
with reaction mixture is indicated when the resonances have stopped
shifting. Following this stabilization, the syringe pump pressure
is released, resulting in a microbubble primed for etching experiments.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04702.Geometric parameters
of microbubbles, COMSOL simulations,
comparison with microtoroids, static offset vs. modulated signal,
mode shifting for different dn/dT values (experimental), modeling of LPB and TPB during etching, thermal
expansion, diagram for mode indices, additional single AuNR etching
data, additional rotation data, bulk reaction results, brief discussion
on extracting reaction kinetics, background on AuNR etchants, impervious
nanorods, discussion of role of CTAB in etching mechanism, estimation
of CTAB remaining on AuNRs after deposition, estimation of nanorod
temperature increase, theory of nanorod rotation, Matlab code for
modeling plasmon changes during etching (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn9b04702_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
‡ These
authors contributed equally.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
R.H.G. acknowledges support
from NIH (GM127957)
and NSF (DBI-1556241). S.N.C. and J.M.W. acknowledge support from
the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University.
We thank J. Millstone and C. Murphy for enlightening conversations
about nanoparticle chemistry.
==== Refs
References
Heylman K. D. ; Knapper K. A. ; Horak E. H. ; Rea M. T. ; Vanga S. K. ; Goldsmith R. H. 
Optical
Microresonators for Sensing and Transduction:
A Materials Perspective . Adv. Mater. 
2017 , 29 , 1700037 10.1002/adma.201700037 .
Kim E. ; Baaske M. D. ; Vollmer F. 
Towards Next-Generation
Label-Free
Biosensors: Recent Advances in Whispering Gallery Mode Sensors . Lab Chip 
2017 , 17 , 1190 –1205 . 10.1039/C6LC01595F .28265608 
Bozzola A. ; Perotto S. ; De Angelis F. 
Hybrid Plasmonic-Photonic Whispering
Gallery Mode Resonators for Sensing: A Critical Review . Analyst 
2017 , 142 , 883 –898 . 10.1039/C6AN02693A .28225100 
Li Y. ; Jiang X. ; Zhao G. ; Yang L.  Whispering
Gallery Mode Microresonator for Nonlinear Optics . 2018 , arXiv:physics/1809.04878. arXiv e-Print archive . https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.04878 (accessed September 13, 2018).
Wade J. H. ; Bailey R. C. 
Applications
of Optical Microcavity Resonators in Analytical
Chemistry . Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 9 , 1 –25 . 10.1146/annurev-anchem-071015-041742 .
Swaim J. D. ; Knittel J. ; Bowen W. P. 
Detection
of Nanoparticles with a
Frequency Locked Whispering Gallery Mode Microresonator . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2013 , 102 , 183106 10.1063/1.4804243 .
Zhi Y. Y. ; Yu X. C. ; Gong Q. H. ; Yang L. ; Xiao Y. F. 
Single
Nanoparticle Detection Using Optical Microcavities . Adv. Mater. 
2017 , 29 , 1604920 10.1002/adma.201604920 .
Kim E. ; Baaske M. D. ; Schuldes I. ; Wilsch P. S. ; Vollmer F. 
Label-Free
Optical Detection of Single Enzyme-Reactant Reactions and Associated
Conformational Changes . Sci. Adv. 
2017 , 3 , e160304410.1126/sciadv.1603044 .28435868 
Baaske M. D. ; Foreman M. R. ; Vollmer F. 
Single-Molecule
Nucleic Acid Interactions
Monitored on a Label-Free Microcavity Biosensor Platform . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2014 , 9 , 933 –939 . 10.1038/nnano.2014.180 .25173831 
Dantham V. R. ; Holler S. ; Barbre C. ; Keng D. ; Kolchenko V. ; Arnold S. 
Label-Free Detection of Single Protein Using a Nanoplasmonic-Photonic
Hybrid Microcavity . Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 3347 –3351 . 10.1021/nl401633y .23777440 
Yu W. Y. ; Jiang W. C. ; Lin Q. ; Lu T. 
Cavity Optomechanical
Spring Sensing of Single Molecules . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 12311 10.1038/ncomms12311 .27460277 
Baaske M. D. ; Vollmer F. 
Optical Observation
of Single Atomic Ions Interacting
with Plasmonic Nanorods in Aqueous Solution . Nat. Photonics 
2016 , 10 , 733 –739 . 10.1038/nphoton.2016.177 .
Heylman K. D. ; Thakkar N. ; Horak E. H. ; Quillin S. C. ; Cherqui C. ; Knapper K. A. ; Masiello D. J. ; Goldsmith R. H. 
Optical
Microresonators as Single-Particle Absorption Spectrometers . Nat. Photonics 
2016 , 10 , 788 –795 . 10.1038/nphoton.2016.217 .
Thakkar N. ; Rea M. T. ; Smith K. C. ; Heylman K. D. ; Quillin S. C. ; Knapper K. A. ; Horak E. H. ; Masiello D. J. ; Goldsmith R. H. 
Sculpting
Fano Resonances to Control Photonic-Plasmonic Hybridization . Nano Lett. 
2017 , 17 , 6927 –6934 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b03332 .28968499 
Knapper K. A. ; Heylman K. D. ; Horak E. H. ; Goldsmith R. H. 
Chip-Scale
Fabrication of High-Q All-Glass Toroidal Microresonators for Single-Particle
Label-Free Imaging . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 2945 –2950 . 10.1002/adma.201504976 .26853536 
Knapper K. A. ; Pan F. ; Rea M. T. ; Horak E. H. ; Rogers J. D. ; Goldsmith R. H. 
Single-Particle
Photothermal Imaging via Inverted Excitation through
High-Q All-Glass Toroidal Microresonators . Opt.
Express 
2018 , 26 , 25020 –25030 . 10.1364/OE.26.025020 .30469610 
Heylman K. D. ; Knapper K. A. ; Goldsmith R. H. 
Photothermal Microscopy of Nonluminescent
Single Particles Enabled by Optical Microresonators . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2014 , 5 , 1917 –1923 . 10.1021/jz500781g .26273873 
Horak E. H. ; Rea M. T. ; Heylman K. D. ; Gelbwaser-Klimovsky D. ; Saikin S. K. ; Thompson B. J. ; Kohler D. D. ; Knapper K. A. ; Wei W. ; Pan F. ; Gopalan P. ; Wright J. C. ; Aspuru-Guzik A. ; Goldsmith R. H. 
Exploring Electronic Structure and Order in Polymers via Single-Particle Microresonator Spectroscopy . Nano Lett. 
2018 , 18 , 1600 –1607 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b04211 .29378412 
Chen H. J. ; Shao L. ; Li Q. ; Wang J. F. 
Gold Nanorods
and
Their Plasmonic Properties . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 2679 –2724 . 10.1039/C2CS35367A .23128995 
Dreaden E. C. ; Alkilany A. M. ; Huang X. H. ; Murphy C. J. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
The Golden
Age: Gold Nanoparticles for Biomedicine . Chem.
Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 2740 –2779 . 10.1039/C1CS15237H .22109657 
Huang X. H. ; El-Sayed I. H. ; Qian W. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Cancer Cell Imaging
and Photothermal Therapy in the Near-Infrared Region by Using Gold
Nanorods . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 2115 –2120 . 10.1021/ja057254a .16464114 
Yin D. Y. ; Li X. L. ; Ma Y. Y. ; Liu Z. 
Targeted Cancer Imaging
and Photothermal Therapy via Monosaccharide-Imprinted
Gold Nanorods . Chem. Commun. 
2017 , 53 , 6716 –6719 . 10.1039/C7CC02247F .
Ali M. R. K. ; Wu Y. ; Ghosh D. ; Do B. H. ; Chen K. ; Dawson M. R. ; Fang N. ; Sulchek T. A. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Nuclear
Membrane-Targeted Gold Nanoparticles Inhibit Cancer Cell Migration
and Invasion . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 3716 –3726 . 10.1021/acsnano.6b08345 .28333438 
Meeker D. G. ; Chen J. Y. ; Smeltzer M. S. 
Could Targeted,
Antibiotic-Loaded
Gold Nanoconstructs Be a New Magic Bullet to Fight Infection? . Nanomedicine 
2016 , 11 , 2379 –2382 . 10.2217/nnm-2016-0260 .27529572 
Cao J. ; Sun T. ; Grattan K. T. V. 
Gold Nanorod-Based Localized Surface
Plasmon Resonance Biosensors: A Review . Sens.
Actuators, B 
2014 , 195 , 332 –351 . 10.1016/j.snb.2014.01.056 .
Taylor A. B. ; Zijlstra P. 
Single-Molecule Plasmon Sensing: Current Status and
Future Prospects . ACS Sens. 
2017 , 2 , 1103 –1122 . 10.1021/acssensors.7b00382 .28762723 
Lin K. Q. ; Yi J. ; Hu S. ; Liu B. J. ; Liu J. Y. ; Wang X. ; Ren B. 
Size Effect
on SERS of Gold Nanorods Demonstrated via Single
Nanoparticle Spectroscopy . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 20806 –20813 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b02098 .
Gao Z. ; Burrows N. D. ; Valley N. A. ; Schatz G. C. ; Murphy C. J. ; Haynes C. L. 
In Solution
SERS Sensing Using Mesoporous Silica-Coated
Gold Nanorods . Analyst 
2016 , 141 , 5088 –5095 . 10.1039/C6AN01159D .27396950 
Khatua S. ; Paulo P. M. R. ; Yuan H. F. ; Gupta A. ; Zijlstra P. ; Orrit M. 
Resonant Plasmonic
Enhancement of Single-Molecule Fluorescence by
Individual Gold Nanorods . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 4440 –4449 . 10.1021/nn406434y .24684549 
Nima Z. A. ; Alwbari A. M. ; Dantuluri V. ; Hamzah R. N. ; Sra N. ; Motwani P. ; Arnaoutakis K. ; Levy R. A. ; Bohliqa A. F. ; Nedosekin D. ; Zharov V. P. ; Makhoul I. ; Biris A. S. 
Targeting
Nano Drug Delivery to Cancer Cells Using Tunable, Multi-Layer, Silver-Decorated
Gold Nanorods . J. Appl. Toxicol. 
2017 , 37 , 1370 –1378 . 10.1002/jat.3495 .28730725 
Wang F. ; Li C. H. ; Chen H. J. ; Jiang R. B. ; Sun L. D. ; Li Q. ; Wang J. F. ; Yu J. C. ; Yan C. H. 
Plasmonic Harvesting
of Light Energy for Suzuki Coupling Reactions . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 5588 –5601 . 10.1021/ja310501y .23521598 
Gole A. ; Murphy C. J. 
Seed-Mediated Synthesis of Gold Nanorods: Role of the
Size and Nature of the Seed . Chem. Mater. 
2004 , 16 , 3633 –3640 . 10.1021/cm0492336 .
Baida H. ; Christofilos D. ; Maioli P. ; Crut A. ; Del Fatti N. ; Vallee F. 
Surface Plasmon Resonance Spectroscopy of Single Surfactant-Stabilized
Gold Nanoparticles . Eur. Phys. J. D 
2011 , 63 , 293 –299 . 10.1140/epjd/e2010-10594-y .
Li Z. M. ; Mao W. Z. ; Devadas M. S. ; Hartland G. V. 
Absorption Spectroscopy
of Single Optically Trapped Gold Nanorods . Nano
Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 7731 –7735 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b03833 .26495877 
Yorulmaz M. ; Nizzero S. ; Hoggard A. ; Wang L. Y. ; Cai Y. Y. ; Su M. N. ; Chang W. S. ; Link S. 
Single-Particle Absorption
Spectroscopy by Photothermal Contrast . Nano
Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 3041 –3047 . 10.1021/nl504992h .25849105 
Berciaud S. ; Cognet L. ; Tamarat P. ; Lounis B. 
Observation of Intrinsic
Size Effects in the Optical Response of Individual Gold Nanoparticles . Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 , 515 –518 . 10.1021/nl050062t .15755105 
Gaiduk A. ; Yorulmaz M. ; Ruijgrok P. V. ; Orrit M. 
Room-Temperature Detection
of a Single Molecule’s Absorption by Photothermal Contrast . Science 
2010 , 330 , 353 –356 . 10.1126/science.1195475 .20947760 
Chien M. H. ; Brameshuber M. ; Rossboth B. K. ; Schutz G. J. ; Schmid S. 
Single-Molecule
Optical Absorption Imaging by Nanomechanical Photothermal Sensing . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2018 , 115 , 11150 –11155 . 10.1073/pnas.1804174115 .30254155 
Crut A. ; Maioli P. ; Del Fatti N. ; Vallee F. 
Optical Absorption
and Scattering Spectroscopies of Single Nano-Objects . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 3921 –3956 . 10.1039/c3cs60367a .24724158 
Zrimsek A. B. ; Wong N. L. ; Van Duyne R. P. 
Single Molecule Surface-Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy: A Critical Analysis of the Bianalyte versus Isotopologue Proof . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 5133 –5142 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b00606 .
Young G. ; Kukura P. 
Interferometric Scattering
Microscopy . Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 
2019 , 70 , 301 –322 . 10.1146/annurev-physchem-050317-021247 .30978297 
Celebrano M. ; Kukura P. ; Renn A. ; Sandoghdar V. 
Single-Molecule
Imaging by Optical Absorption . Nat. Photonics 
2011 , 5 , 95 –98 . 10.1038/nphoton.2010.290 .
Chong S. S. ; Min W. ; Xie X. S. 
Ground-State
Depletion Microscopy: Detection Sensitivity
of Single-Molecule Optical Absorption at Room Temperature . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2010 , 1 , 3316 –3322 . 10.1021/jz1014289 .
Maley A. M. ; Lu G. J. ; Shapiro M. G. ; Corn R. M. 
Characterizing Single
Polymeric and Protein Nanoparticles with Surface Plasmon Resonance
Imaging Measurements . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 7447 –7456 . 10.1021/acsnano.7b03859 .28692253 
Jiang D. ; Jiang Y. Y. ; Li Z. M. ; Liu T. ; Wo X. ; Fang Y. M. ; Tao N. J. ; Wang W. ; Chen H. Y. 
Optical
Imaging of Phase Transition and Li-Ion Diffusion Kinetics of Single
LiCoO2 Nanoparticles During Electrochemical Cycling . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 186 –192 . 10.1021/jacs.6b08923 .27959535 
Thambi V. ; Kar A. ; Ghosh P. ; Khatua S. 
Light-Controlled In Situ Bidirectional Tuning and Monitoring of Gold Nanorod Plasmon via Oxidative Etching with FeCl3 . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2018 , 122 , 24885 –24890 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06679 .
Carattino A. ; Khatua S. ; Orrit M. 
In Situ Tuning of
Gold Nanorod Plasmon through Oxidative Cyanide Etching . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 15619 –15624 . 10.1039/C6CP01679K .27221741 
Al-Zubeidi A. ; Hoener B. S. ; Collins S. S. E. ; Wang W. ; Kirchner S. R. ; Hosseini Jebeli S. A. ; Joplin A. ; Chang W.-S. ; Link S. ; Landes C. F. 
Hot Holes Assist Plasmonic Nanoelectrode Dissolution . Nano Lett. 
2019 , 19 , 1301 –1306 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b04894 .30616352 
Cheng J. ; Liu Y. ; Cheng X. D. ; He Y. ; Yeung E. S. 
Real Time Observation
of Chemical Reactions of Individual Metal Nanoparticles with High-Throughput
Single Molecule Spectral Microscopy . Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 8744 –8749 . 10.1021/ac101933y .20849132 
Sun S. S. ; Gao M. X. ; Lei G. ; Zou H. Y. ; Ma J. ; Huang C. Z. 
Visually Monitoring
the Etching Process of Gold Nanoparticles
by Ki/I2 at Single-Nanoparticle Level Using Scattered-Light
Dark-Field Microscopic Imaging . Nano Res. 
2016 , 9 , 1125 –1134 . 10.1007/s12274-016-1007-z .
Wang J. ; Zhang H. Z. ; Liu J. J. ; Yuan D. ; Li R. S. ; Huang C. Z. 
Time-Resolved Visual
Detection of Heparin by Accelerated
Etching of Gold Nanorods . Analyst 
2018 , 143 , 824 –828 . 10.1039/C7AN01923H .29363687 
Zhang H. Z. ; Li R. S. ; Gao P. F. ; Wang N. ; Lei G. ; Huang C. Z. ; Wang J. 
Real-Time
Dark-Field Light Scattering
Imaging to Monitor the Coupling Reaction with Gold Nanorods as an
Optical Probe . Nanoscale 
2017 , 9 , 3568 –3575 . 10.1039/C6NR09453H .28244517 
Xie T. ; Jing C. ; Ma W. ; Ding Z. F. ; Gross A. J. ; Long Y. T. 
Real-Time Monitoring
for the Morphological Variations
of Single Gold Nanorods . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 511 –517 . 10.1039/C4NR05080K .25409885 
Flatebo C. ; Collins S. S. E. ; Hoener B. S. ; Cai Y.-y. ; Link S. ; Landes C. F. 
Electrodissolution
Inhibition of Gold Nanorods with
Oxoanions . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2019 , 123 , 13983 –13992 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b01575 .
Ye X. C. ; Jones M. R. ; Frechette L. B. ; Chen Q. ; Powers A. S. ; Ercius P. ; Dunn G. ; Rotskoff G. M. ; Nguyen S. C. ; Adiga V. P. ; Zettl A. ; Rabani E. ; Geissler P. L. ; Alivisatos A. P. 
Single-Particle
Mapping of Nonequilibrium Nanocrystal
Transformations . Science 
2016 , 354 , 874 –877 . 10.1126/science.aah4434 .27856905 
Sun Y. Z. ; Fan X. D. 
Optical Ring Resonators
for Biochemical and Chemical
Sensing . Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2011 , 399 , 205 –211 . 10.1007/s00216-010-4237-z .20938769 
Lu T. ; Lee H. ; Chen T. ; Herchak S. ; Kim J. H. ; Fraser S. E. ; Flagan R. C. ; Vahala K. 
High Sensitivity Nanoparticle Detection
Using Optical Microcavities . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2011 , 108 , 5976 –5979 . 10.1073/pnas.1017962108 .21444782 
Ward J. M. ; Yang Y. ; Lei F. C. ; Yu X. C. ; Xiao Y. F. ; Nic Chormaic S. 
Nanoparticle Sensing Beyond Evanescent Field Interaction
with a Quasi-Droplet Microcavity . Optica 
2018 , 5 , 674 –677 . 10.1364/OPTICA.5.000674 .
Barucci A. ; Berneschi S. ; Giannetti A. ; Baldini F. ; Cosci A. ; Pelli S. ; Farnesi D. ; Righini G. C. ; Soria S. ; Conti G. N. 
Optical
Microbubble Resonators with High Refractive
Index Inner Coating for Bio-Sensing Applications: An Analytical Approach . Sensors 
2016 , 16 , 1992 10.3390/s16121992 .
Giorgini A. ; Avino S. ; Malara P. ; De Natale P. ; Gagliardi G. 
Liquid Droplet Microresonators . Sensors 
2019 , 19 , 473 10.3390/s19030473 .
Madani A. ; Harazim S. M. ; Quinones V. A. B. ; Kleinert M. ; Finn A. ; Naz E. S. G. ; Ma L. B. ; Schmidt O. G. 
Optical Microtube
Cavities Monolithically Integrated on Photonic Chips for Optofluidic
Sensing . Opt. Lett. 
2017 , 42 , 486 –489 . 10.1364/OL.42.000486 .28146508 
Han K. W. ; Kim J. ; Bahl G. 
High-Throughput
Sensing of Freely Flowing Particles
with Optomechanofluidics . Optica 
2016 , 3 , 585 –591 . 10.1364/OPTICA.3.000585 .
Stoian R.-I. ; Bui K. V. ; Rosenberger A. 
Silica Hollow
Bottle Resonators for
Use as Whispering Gallery Mode Based Chemical Sensors . J. Opt. 
2015 , 17 , 125011 10.1088/2040-8978/17/12/125011 .
Ward J. M. ; Dhasmana N. ; Nic Chormaic S. 
Hollow Core, Whispering Gallery Resonator
Sensors . Eur. Phys. J.: Spec. Top. 
2014 , 223 , 1917 –1935 . 10.1140/epjst/e2014-02236-5 .
Kippenberg T. J. ; Spillane S. M. ; Vahala K. J. 
Demonstration
of Ultra-High-Q Small
Mode Volume Toroid Microcavities on a Chip . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2004 , 85 , 6113 –6115 . 10.1063/1.1833556 .
Armani A. M. ; Vahala K. J. 
Heavy Water Detection Using Ultra-High-Q Microcavities . Opt. Lett. 
2006 , 31 , 1896 –1898 . 10.1364/OL.31.001896 .16729107 
Armani D. K. ; Kippenberg T. J. ; Spillane S. M. ; Vahala K. J. 
Ultra-High-Q Toroid
Microcavity on a Chip . Nature 
2003 , 421 , 925 –928 . 10.1038/nature01371 .12606995 
Black E. D. 
An Introduction
to Pound-Drever-Hall Laser Frequency Stabilization . Am. J. Phys. 
2001 , 69 , 79 –87 . 10.1119/1.1286663 .
Barnes J. A. ; Gagliardi G. ; Loock H. P. 
Absolute Absorption Cross-Section
Measurement of a Submonolayer Film on a Silica Microresonator . Optica 
2014 , 1 , 75 –83 . 10.1364/OPTICA.1.000075 .
Carmon T. ; Kippenberg T. J. ; Yang L. ; Rokhsari H. ; Spillane S. ; Vahala K. J. 
Feedback Control of Ultra-High-Q Microcavities: Application
to Micro-Raman Lasers and Microparametric Oscillators . Opt. Express 
2005 , 13 , 3558 –3566 . 10.1364/OPEX.13.003558 .19495260 
Murugan G. S. ; Petrovich M. N. ; Jung Y. ; Wilkinson J. S. ; Zervas M. N. 
Hollow-Bottle Optical Microresonators . Opt. Express 
2011 , 19 , 20773 –20784 . 10.1364/OE.19.020773 .21997087 
Nasir M. N. M. ; Murugan G. S. ; Zervas M. N. 
Spectral Cleaning and Output Modal
Transformations in Whispering-Gallery-Mode Microresonators . J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 
2016 , 33 , 1963 –1970 . 10.1364/JOSAB.33.001963 .
Ding M. ; Murugan G. S. ; Brambilla G. ; Zervas M. N. 
Whispering Gallery
Mode Selection in Optical Bottle Microresonators . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2012 , 100 , 081108 10.1063/1.3688601 .
Schunk G. ; Furst J. U. ; Fortsch M. ; Strekalov D. V. ; Vogl U. ; Sedlmeir F. ; Schwefel H. G. L. ; Leuchs G. ; Marquardt C. 
Identifying Modes of Large Whispering-Gallery
Mode
Resonators from the Spectrum and Emission Pattern . Opt. Express 
2014 , 22 , 30795 –30806 . 10.1364/OE.22.030795 .25607028 
Ward J. M. ; Yang Y. ; Nic Chormaic S. 
Highly Sensitive Temperature Measurements
with Liquid-Core Microbubble Resonators . IEEE
Photonics Technol. Lett. 
2013 , 25 , 2350 –2353 . 10.1109/LPT.2013.2283732 .
Hall J. M. M. ; Francois A. ; Afshar V. S. ; Riesen N. ; Henderson M. R. ; Reynolds T. ; Monro T. M. 
Determining the
Geometric Parameters
of Microbubble Resonators from Their Spectra . J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 
2017 , 34 , 44 –51 . 10.1364/JOSAB.34.000044 .
Murugan G. S. ; Wilkinson J. S. ; Zervas M. N. 
Selective Excitation of Whispering
Gallery Modes in a Novel Bottle Microresonator . Opt. Express 
2009 , 17 , 11916 –11925 . 10.1364/OE.17.011916 .19582106 
Davletshin Y. R. ; Lombardi A. ; Cardinal M. F. ; Juve V. ; Crut A. ; Maioli P. ; Liz-Marzan L. M. ; Vallee F. ; Del Fatti N. ; Kumaradas J. C. 
A Quantitative Study of the Environmental Effects on
the Optical Response of Gold Nanorods . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 8183 –8193 . 10.1021/nn302869v .22931408 
Ni W. H. ; Chen H. J. ; Kou X. S. ; Yeung M. H. ; Wang J. F. 
Optical
Fiber-Excited Surface Plasmon Resonance Spectroscopy of Single and
Ensemble Gold Nanorods . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2008 , 112 , 8105 –8109 . 10.1021/jp801579m .
Park K. ; Biswas S. ; Kanel S. ; Nepal D. ; Vaia R. A. 
Engineering
the Optical Properties of Gold Nanorods: Independent Tuning of Surface
Plasmon Energy, Extinction Coefficient, and Scattering Cross Section . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 5918 –5926 . 10.1021/jp5013279 .
Jana N. R. ; Gearheart L. ; Obare S. O. ; Murphy C. J. 
Anisotropic Chemical
Reactivity of Gold Spheroids and Nanorods . Langmuir 
2002 , 18 , 922 –927 . 10.1021/la0114530 .
Zou R. X. ; Guo X. ; Yang J. ; Li D. D. ; Peng F. ; Zhang L. ; Wang H. J. ; Yu H. 
Selective Etching of Gold Nanorods
by Ferric Chloride at Room Temperature . CrystEngComm 
2009 , 11 , 2797 –2803 . 10.1039/b911902g .
Zhao J. ; Nguyen S. C. ; Ye R. ; Ye B. H. ; Weller H. ; Somorjai G. A. ; Alivisatos A. P. ; Toste F. D. 
A Comparison of
Photocatalytic Activities of Gold Nanoparticles Following Plasmonic
and Interband Excitation and a Strategy for Harnessing Interband Hot
Carriers for Solution Phase Photocatalysis . ACS Cent. Sci. 
2017 , 3 , 482 –488 . 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00122 .28573211 
Zijlstra P. ; Orrit M. 
Single Metal Nanoparticles: Optical
Detection, Spectroscopy and Applications . Rep.
Prog. Phys. 
2011 , 74 , 106401 10.1088/0034-4885/74/10/106401 .
Weigel A. ; Sebesta A. ; Kukura P. 
Dark Field
Microspectroscopy with
Single Molecule Fluorescence Sensitivity . ACS
Photonics 
2014 , 1 , 848 –856 . 10.1021/ph500138u .
Chang W. S. ; Link S. 
Enhancing the Sensitivity
of Single-Particle Photothermal Imaging
with Thermotropic Liquid Crystals . J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 
2012 , 3 , 1393 –1399 . 10.1021/jz300342p .26286788 
Parra-Vasquez A. N. G. ; Oudjedi L. ; Cognet L. ; Lounis B. 
Nanoscale Thermotropic
Phase Transitions Enhancing Photothermal Microscopy Signals . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2012 , 3 , 1400 –1403 . 10.1021/jz300369d .26286789 
Ding T. N. X. ; Hou L. ; van der Meer H. ; Alivisatos A. P. ; Orrit M. 
Hundreds-Fold Sensitivity Enhancement of Photothermal Microscopy
in near-Critical Xenon . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 7 , 2524 –2529 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b00964 .27295542 
Rodriguez-Fernandez J. ; Perez-Juste J. ; Mulvaney P. ; Liz-Marzan L. M. 
Spatially-Directed
Oxidation of Gold Nanoparticles by Au(III)-CTAB Complexes . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 14257 –14261 . 10.1021/jp052516g .16852790 
Brongersma M. L. ; Halas N. J. ; Nordlander P. 
Plasmon-Induced Hot Carrier Science
and Technology . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 10 , 25 –34 . 10.1038/nnano.2014.311 .25559968 
Zhang Y. C. ; He S. ; Guo W. X. ; Hu Y. ; Huang J. W. ; Mulcahy J. R. ; Wei W. D. 
Surface-Plasmon-Driven
Hot Electron Photochemistry . Chem. Rev. 
2018 , 118 , 2927 –2954 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00430 .29190069 
Kale M. J. ; Avanesian T. ; Christopher P. 
Direct Photocatalysis by Plasmonic
Nanostructures . ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4 , 116 –128 . 10.1021/cs400993w .
Linic S. ; Aslam U. ; Boerigter C. ; Morabito M. 
Photochemical Transformations
on Plasmonic Metal Nanoparticles . Nat. Mater. 
2015 , 14 , 567 –576 . 10.1038/nmat4281 .25990912 
Besteiro L. V. ; Kong X. T. ; Wang Z. M. ; Hartland G. ; Govorov A. O. 
Understanding
Hot-Electron Generation and Plasmon Relaxation in Metal Nanocrystals:
Quantum and Classical Mechanisms . ACS Photonics 
2017 , 4 , 2759 –2781 . 10.1021/acsphotonics.7b00751 .
Hartland G. V. ; Besteiro L. V. ; Johns P. ; Govorov A. O. 
What’s So
Hot About Electrons in Metal Nanoparticles? . ACS Energy Lett. 
2017 , 2 , 1641 –1653 . 10.1021/acsenergylett.7b00333 .
Wu K. ; Chen J. ; McBride J. R. ; Lian T. 
Efficient Hot-Electron
Transfer by a Plasmon-Induced Interfacial Charge-Transfer Transition . Science 
2015 , 349 , 632 –635 . 10.1126/science.aac5443 .26250682 
Minutella E. ; Schulz F. ; Lange H. 
Excitation-Dependence of Plasmon-Induced
Hot Electrons in Gold Nanoparticles . J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 
2017 , 8 , 4925 –4929 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.7b02043 .28945966 
Kamarudheen R. ; Castellanos G. W. ; Kamp L. P. J. ; Clercx H. J. H. ; Baldi A. 
Quantifying
Photothermal and Hot Charge Carrier Effects in Plasmon-Driven Nanoparticle
Syntheses . ACS Nano 
2018 , 12 , 8447 –8455 . 10.1021/acsnano.8b03929 .30071160 
Zhou L. A. ; Swearer D. F. ; Zhang C. ; Robatjazi H. ; Zhao H. Q. ; Henderson L. ; Dong L. L. ; Christopher P. ; Carter E. A. ; Nordlander P. ; Halas N. J. 
Quantifying Hot
Carrier and Thermal Contributions in Plasmonic Photocatalysis . Science 
2018 , 362 , 69 –72 . 10.1126/science.aat6967 .30287657 
Wu C. Y. ; Wolf W. J. ; Levartovsky Y. ; Bechtel H. A. ; Martin M. C. ; Toste F. D. ; Gross E. 
High-Spatial-Resolution
Mapping of Catalytic Reactions on Single Particles . Nature 
2017 , 541 , 511 –515 . 10.1038/nature20795 .28068671 
Cortes E. ; Xie W. ; Cambiasso J. ; Jermyn A. S. ; Sundararaman R. ; Narang P. ; Schlucker S. ; Maier S. A. 
Plasmonic Hot Electron Transport Drives Nano-Localized
Chemistry . Nat. Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 14880 10.1038/ncomms14880 .28348402 
Schlather A. E. ; Manjavacas A. ; Lauchner A. ; Marangoni V. S. ; DeSantis C. J. ; Nordlander P. ; Halas N. J. 
Hot Hole Photoelectrochemistry
on Au@SiO2@Au Nanoparticles . J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 
2017 , 8 , 2060 –2067 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.7b00563 .28427261 
Kim Y. ; Torres D. D. ; Jain P. K. 
Activation Energies of Plasmonic
Catalysts . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 , 3399 –3407 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01373 .27064549 
Smith J. G. ; Jain P. K. 
The Ligand Shell
as an Energy Barrier
in Surface Reactions on Transition Metal Nanoparticles . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 6765 –6773 . 10.1021/jacs.6b00179 .27152595 
Burrows N. D. ; Lin W. ; Hinman J. G. ; Dennison J. M. ; Vartanian A. M. ; Abadeer N. S. ; Grzincic E. M. ; Jacob L. M. ; Li J. ; Murphy C. J. 
Surface Chemistry of Gold Nanorods . Langmuir 
2016 , 32 , 9905 –9921 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b02706 .27568788 
He J. ; Unser S. ; Bruzas I. ; Cary R. ; Shi Z. W. ; Mehra R. ; Aron K. ; Sagle L. 
The Facile
Removal
of CTAB from the Surface of Gold Nanorods . Colloids
Surf., B 
2018 , 163 , 140 –145 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2017.12.019 .
Ruijgrok P. V. ; Verhart N. R. ; Zijlstra P. ; Tchebotareva A. L. ; Orrit M. 
Brownian Fluctuations and Heating of an Optically Aligned Gold Nanorod . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2011 , 107 , 037401 10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.037401 .21838403 
Trojek J. ; Chvatal L. ; Zemanek P. 
Optical Alignment and
Confinement of an Ellipsoidal Nanorod in Optical Tweezers: A Theoretical
Study . J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 
2012 , 29 , 1224 –1236 . 10.1364/JOSAA.29.001224 .
Xu X. H. ; Cheng C. ; Zhang Y. ; Lei H. X. ; Li B. J. 
Scattering and Extinction Torques:
How Plasmon Resonances Affect
the Orientation Behavior of a Nanorod in Linearly Polarized Light . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 7 , 314 –319 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02375 .26720710 
Tong L. M. ; Miljkovic V. D. ; Kall M. 
Alignment, Rotation,
and Spinning of Single Plasmonic Nanoparticles and Nanowires Using
Polarization Dependent Optical Forces . Nano
Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 268 –273 . 10.1021/nl9034434 .20030391 
Yan Z. J. ; Sweet J. ; Jureller J. E. ; Guffey M. J. ; Pelton M. ; Scherer N. F. 
Controlling the
Position and Orientation
of Single Silver Nanowires on a Surface Using Structured Optical Fields . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 8144 –8155 . 10.1021/nn302795j .22900883 
Yang Y. ; Saurabh S. ; Ward J. M. ; Nic Chormaic S. 
High-Q, Ultrathin-Walled
Microbubble Resonator for Aerostatic Pressure Sensing . Opt. Express 
2016 , 24 , 294 –299 . 10.1364/OE.24.000294 .26832260 
Henze R. ; Seifert T. ; Ward J. ; Benson O. 
Tuning Whispering
Gallery Modes Using Internal Aerostatic Pressure . Opt. Lett. 
2011 , 36 , 4536 –4538 . 10.1364/OL.36.004536 .22139234 
Cosci A. ; Quercioli F. ; Farnesi D. ; Berneschi S. ; Giannetti A. ; Cosi F. ; Barucci A. ; Conti G. N. ; Righini G. ; Pelli S. 
Confocal Reflectance Microscopy for
Determination of Microbubble Resonator Thickness . Opt. Express 
2015 , 23 , 16693 –16701 . 10.1364/OE.23.016693 .26191681

