
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.7b05182ArticleAsymmetric Assembling of Iron Oxide Nanocubes for Improving Magnetic
Hyperthermia Performance Niculaes Dina †‡¶Lak Aidin †¶Anyfantis George C. †Marras Sergio †Laslett Oliver §Avugadda Sahitya K. †‡Cassani Marco †‡Serantes David ∥Hovorka Ondrej §Chantrell Roy ⊥Pellegrino Teresa *†† Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy‡ Dipartimento di Chimica e Chimica Industriale,
Università di Genova, Via Dodecaneso 31, 16146 Genova,
Italy§ Engineering and the Environment, University
of Southampton, Southampton SO16 7QF, United
Kingdom∥ Applied Physics Department and Instituto de
Investigacións Tecnolóxicas, Universidade de Santiago de
Compostela, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain⊥ Department of Physics, University of
York, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom* E-mail:
teresa.pellegrino@iit.it.20 11 2017 26 12 2017 20 11 2018 11 12 12121 12133 21 07 2017 20 11 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any
adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Magnetic hyperthermia (MH) based on magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) is a promising
adjuvant therapy for cancer treatment. Particle clustering leading to complex magnetic
interactions affects the heat generated by MNPs during MH. The heat efficiencies,
theoretically predicted, are still poorly understood because of a lack of control of the
fabrication of such clusters with defined geometries and thus their functionality. This
study aims to correlate the heating efficiency under MH of individually coated iron
oxide nanocubes (IONCs) versus soft colloidal nanoclusters made of
small groupings of nanocubes arranged in different geometries. The controlled clustering
of alkyl-stabilized IONCs is achieved here during the water transfer procedure by tuning
the fraction of the amphiphilic copolymer, poly(styrene-co-maleic
anhydride) cumene-terminated, to the nanoparticle surface. It is found that increasing
the polymer-to-nanoparticle surface ratio leads to the formation of increasingly large
nanoclusters with defined geometries. When compared to the individual nanocubes, we show
here that controlled grouping of nanoparticles—so-called “dimers”
and “trimers” composed of two and three nanocubes,
respectively—increases specific absorption rate (SAR) values, while conversely,
forming centrosymmetric clusters having more than four nanocubes leads to lower SAR
values. Magnetization measurements and Monte Carlo-based simulations support the
observed SAR trend and reveal the importance of the dipolar interaction effect and its
dependence on the details of the particle arrangements within the different
clusters.

controlled colloidal clusteringiron oxide nanocubesspecific absorption ratepoly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride)magnetic hyperthermiaannealingMonte Carlo simulationdocument-id-old-9nn7b05182document-id-new-14nn-2017-05182yccc-price
==== Body
Magnetic hyperthermia (MH) is a novel noninvasive treatment, now undergoing clinical trials
on patients with brain or prostate tumors,1 that exploits the heat
generated by magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) when exposed to an alternating magnetic
field.2−4 The use of MNPs as heat
mediators in MH treatment impairs the monitoring of tumor progression by magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI)1 because it requires a substantial dose of MNPs to achieve
the clinically relevant heating efficiency, incompatible with MRI imaging. Although several
research studies have aimed at the design of optimal heat mediators that would allow
reduction of the MNP dose, while maintaining the required heating performance, the low
heating efficiency remains among the current limitations of MNPs used in clinical
trials.5−7 In parallel to the direct
synthesis of nanoparticles with optimized heat performances, the research focus was also
directed toward the assembly of the same building blocks into controlled clusters in order
to maximize their heating performance.8−11 The aim behind this strategy is to achieve higher magnetic
hyperthermia performances of defined MNPs used as building blocks by controlling the
specific configuration of the MNPs in the final assembly.

The heating efficiency of the magnetic nanoparticles is expressed by their specific
absorption rate (SAR). The SAR value is defined as the power absorbed per mass of the heat
mediator in the case of MNPs. SAR depends on various factors, among them (i) the applied
magnetic field characteristics (frequency and amplitude), (ii) the intrinsic magnetic
properties (i.e., saturation magnetization, anisotropy) that depend on MNP
features such as size, shape, composition, and arrangement, and (iii) the characteristics of
the dispersing medium (i.e., viscosity, concentration, heat capacity).

Controlled or uncontrolled aggregation in a centrosymmetric 3D configuration—a
bead-like assembly—was reported to lower SAR values.12−15 On the contrary,
controlled aggregation in chain-like structures driven by anisotropic interactions of
magnetic nanoparticles was reported to improve SAR values. For instance, bacterial
magnetosome chains that are ca. 50 nm cubic-shape iron oxide nanoparticles
individually coated with a lipid shell—naturally aligned in chain-like morphologies
on protein filaments—are currently state-of-the-art in terms of hyperthermia
performance.16 Similar findings were demonstrated by Serantes
et al.,8 who have investigated the influence of
dipolar interactions on the hysteresis loops in magnetic nanoassemblies by means of Monte
Carlo simulations. Their Monte Carlo computational model predicted an increase in the area
of the hysteresis loop by increasing the chain length as the key factor to improve SAR
values. Alongside their mathematical calculations, their experimental calorimetric
measurements—on 44 nm ferromagnetic spherical magnetite nanoparticles forming
micrometer long chains in agarose upon applying 0.12 T magnetic fields—demonstrated
the importance of chain alignment on the heating efficiency.8

Their model also showed how centrosymmetric assemblies composed of eight nanoparticles led
to smaller hysteresis loops compared to the corresponding chain-like configuration.8 This indicates the importance of obtaining elongated assemblies of MNPs.
Magnetic dipole–dipole interactions leading to the formation of chain-like structures
under the action of external magnetic fields were also exploited by other groups to showcase
the effect of the arrangement at the nanoscale on magnetic hyperthermia. Compared to the
nonaligned samples, 40 nm magnetite nanoparticles—dispersed in agarose gel matrix and
magnetically aligned in 40 mT fields—presented SAR values enhanced by a factor of
2.10

However, only relatively few studies have investigated the formation of particle
arrangements of defined geometries—1D, 2D, or 3D structures—colloidally stable
in a solution without the application of an external field and their correlation with
magnetic hyperthermia measurements. In the work of Andreu et al.,9 in order to build clusters of different geometries, different encapsulating
materials were exploited. Magnetic nanoparticles were embedded in silica nanoworms to obtain
1D chain arrangements, while
poly(d,l-lactide-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) was used for
small 2D grouping of nanoparticles enwrapped in polymer spheres, showing that their magnetic
properties and the hyperthermia response were governed by nanoparticle arrangement. The 1D
and 2D nano-objects displayed an improved SAR behavior compared to that of single
nanoparticles or agglomerates of NPs.9

Besides using PLGA polymer, known to be biocompatible and noncytotoxic,17 also many other polymers including dioleate-modified polyethylene glycol,18 poly(ε-caprolactone)-b-poly(ethylene glycol)
(PCL-b-PEG),19 poly(trimethylammonium ethyl acrylate
methyl sulfate)-b-poly(acrylamide),20 poly(ethylene
oxide-b-acrylate) (H2N-PEO-b-PAA),21 poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid)-b-poly(ethylene glycol) (PLGA-b-PEG),22 and even triblock copolymers such as poly(ethylene
imine)-b-poly(ε-caprolactone)-b-poly(ethylene
glycol) (PEI-b-PCL-b-PEG)23 were used
in the literature to form polymeric colloidal clusters of nanocrystals. These soft colloidal
nanocrystal clusters—a term introduced by Bakandritsos et al.(24)—have been evaluated as contrast agents for MRI, while no hyperthermia
studies have been reported.18−23

In this study, by using one type of nanocube and one specific amphiphilic polymer and by
adjusting the polymer-to-nanoparticle parameter we controlled the formation of colloidally
stable (i) single particles, (ii) dimer and trimer assemblies, and (iii) centrosymmetric
structures. We then studied the evolution of SAR with the size and spatial arrangement of
clusters and the corresponding magnetic parameters of the various soft colloidal clusters.
The experimental SAR results are supported here by the theoretical simulations carried out
by means of a kinetic Monte Carlo computational model on the clusters. We demonstrate that
the primary factor responsible for the enhancement of SAR is, in fact, not the variation of
Ms but rather the dipolar interaction effect induced by the
arrangement of nanocubes into dimers, trimers, and centrosymmetric clusters. This work
clearly shows that when working with one single type of MNP while promoting the anisotropic
assembly of the MNPs, structured nanomaterials with enhanced heat performance are
obtained.

Results and Discussion
The overall clustering process is schematically shown in Figure 1I. FeO/Fe3O4 core–shell iron oxide
nanocubes25 (IONCs, with an edge length of 20.2 ± 1.5 nm,
Figure S1) were first used in this study. The choice of core–shell
nanocubes was dictated by their magnetically noninteracting nature, alongside their initial
stability in tetrahydrofuran (THF), as evidenced by the clear THF solution. Both conditions
were considered prerequisites for a successful clustering protocol. Attempts done with
noncompletely soluble nanoparticles were not successful (data not shown).

Figure 1 Scheme of the clustering protocol using 20 nm core–shell iron oxide nanocubes.
Representative TEM micrographs of IONCs@PScMA in water and just after
they have been prepared at a ratio of (A) 16.5, (B) 33, (C) 50, and (D) 66 polymer
chains/nm2 of particle surface. (E–H) Collection of TEM images at
higher magnification of dimers and trimers formed at the ratio of 33. (I) Schematic
representation of the formation of soft colloidal nanoclusters.

In a typical clustering procedure for obtaining centrosymmetric clusters, taken as an
example, as-synthesized oleic-acid-coated IONCs (mFe = 0.23 mg)
were dispersed in 10 mL of THF together with the amphiphilic polymer
poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride) (PScMA),
cumene-terminated (Mn = 1600 g/mol), at a ratio of 66 polymer
chains/nm2 of nanoparticle surface. Subsequently, the addition of 1 mL of
H2O by a syringe pump (0.5 mL/min), followed by sonication of the
NP–polymer solution in an ice bath. During this step, the solution had to remain
clear as the water transfer would fail if the THF/H2O mixture became turbid
during the water addition.

Interestingly, in the H2O/THF mixture (ca. 1.5 mL), the
nanocubes were not yet clustered; they still appeared as single nanocubes on the
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) grid (data not shown), and the solution was clear. As
the last 0.5 mL of THF evaporated, the solution became turbid. After full evaporation of
THF, the IONCs were already clustered, and a thin layer of polymer was clearly evident on
the clusters as checked by TEM characterization, even before the CHCl3 addition
(Figure S2a). These data suggest that the clustering was favored by the change
in solubility of polymer and nanocubes as soon as the THF evaporated from THF/water mixture.
The chloroform addition step promoted the extraction of the excess of polymer/surfactant
molecules from the aqueous phase into the organic phase. This was clearly evident as a milky
layer of polymer was found at the interface between CHCl3 and water (Figure S3), and after CHCl3 addition, no more extra polymer was
visible on the TEM grid (Figure S2b).

To set the clustering protocol, different parameters were investigated systematically. This
list included the rate of THF evaporation, the ratio of water to THF, the total solution
volume, and the amount of polymer. However, the main parameter that allowed a fine-tuning of
the cluster size and the configuration of the nanoclusters was the number of molecules of
amphiphilic polymer, poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride), per square
nanometer of particle surface. This ratio varied between 16.5 and 66
molecules/nm2, corresponding to a change in size and configuration of the
formed clusters. With an increase in polymer amount, the degree of clustering increased, as
seen in the TEM micrographs in Figure 1. As judged
by the distribution of nanoparticles on the TEM grid and from the interparticle distance
(Figure 1A), with a ratio of 16.5 molecules of
polymer/nm2, the majority of the nanocubes were individually coated, whereas by
doubling the amount of polymer to 33 molecules/nm2, dimers and trimers were
formed (Figure 1B). In this specific case, the
dimer and trimer arrangements were even more evident by looking at a collection of TEM
images in which isolated groups of two or three nanocubes were clearly seen. Often, on the
same grid, different dimers and trimers were observed (Figure 1E–H). At 50 and 66 molecules of polymer/nm2, the
number of nanocubes per cluster increased, respectively, forming more tetramers or grouping
of centrosymmetric clusters containing more than 5 nanocubes each (Figure
1C,D). The corresponding hydrodynamic volume distributions, as
measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS), also reflected the size increase from
ca. 40 to 100 nm (Figure 2). The
mean hydrodynamic diameters by volume were 38 ± 2 nm (PDI 0.12), 51 ± 3 nm (PDI
0.14), 68 ± 4 nm (PDI 0.08), and 99 ± 2 nm (PDI 0.07) for 16.5, 33, 50, and 66
PScMA/nm2, respectively. Note that the very low polydispersity
index (PDI) values indicate a homogeneous distribution of the clusters obtained. Once
formed, the cluster solutions could be kept for a very long time (more than a year) without
showing any sign of aggregation (DLS and TEM characterization were the same as for freshly
prepared samples).

Figure 2 Tuning the mean hydrodynamic diameter of clusters by different polymer amounts. Volume
distribution of hydrodynamic size dH of soft colloidal
clusters measured in water starting from 20 nm IONCs. The dH
was adjusted between 38 and 99 nm. No aggregation of clusters was detected as PDI values
were between 0.07 and 0.14 (see inset).

Given that the hydrodynamic diameter obtained was an average value and that TEM images
provide only qualitative images of the assemblies, in an attempt to quantify the percentage
of individually coated nanoparticles, dimers, trimers, and clusters with more than four
nanocubes for the different samples, we ran a statistical image analysis using ImageJ
software. Numerous TEM micrographs were analyzed in order to obtain a statistical
distribution of individually coated nanocubes versus 1D and 2D constructs
(dimers and trimers, respectively) versus 3D constructs (bigger colloidal
nanoclusters with n ≥ 4) so that at least 250 objects were analyzed
for each sample (Figure S4). We focused on the three available samples: at 16.5, 33, and 66
polymer molecules/nm2 samples (from now on, they will be referred to as
16.5PScMA, 33PScMA, and 66PScMA,
respectively), as on those samples, further SAR measurements and magnetic characterizations
were carried out. For sample 16.5PScMA, 255 objects were studied,
corresponding to a total of 342 individual nanocubes, of which 66% were individually coated,
28% were dimers, 4% were trimers, and 2% were bigger clusters (Figure 3A). For sample 33PScMA, when doubling the amount of
polymer with respect to the 16.5PScMA sample, out of 254 objects analyzed
(Figure S4), corresponding to 493 IONCs, 70% consisted of an equal population
of dimers and trimers (Figure 3B). The 30%
remaining objects were 19% individually coated NPs and 11% 3D arrangements. For sample
66PScMA, when still doubling the polymer amount with respect to sample
33PScMA, almost only 3D clusters were obtained, representing 86% (Figure 3C) of the 259 objects inspected, corresponding
to more than 1000 NPs (Figure S4). The remaining 14% of sample 66PScMA was equally
distributed between single particles (5%), dimers (5%), and trimers (4%). Overall, we could
statistically confirm that by increasing the polymer amount from 16.5 to 33 and further to
66 molecules of PScMA/nm2 of NP surface, the resulting clusters
evolved from a major population of individually coated nanoparticles to dimers and trimers
and, last, to groups of more than 4 nanocubes per unit.

Figure 3 Statistical analysis of fractions of different objects for samples (A)
16.5PScMA, (B) 33PScMA, and (C)
66PScMA indicated the presence of (A) 32% 1D and 2D constructs (28%
dimers and 4% trimers) in sample 16.5PScMA, (B) majority of 70% (35%
dimers and 35% trimers) in sample 33PScMA, and (C) only 9% (5% dimers
and 4% trimers) 1D and 2D structures in sample 66PScMA, with a majority
of clusters with a number of nanocubes higher than 4 (86%).

Thermogravimetric Analysis
Nanoparticle Surfactant Effect
In addition to the evaporation rate of THF, polymer amount, and initial stability of
the nanocubes in THF, another crucial parameter for the successful water transfer and
cluster formation was the surfactant amount associated with the nanocubes. We observed
differences in the clustering procedure when changing the batch of core–shell
IONCs (20.2 ± 1.5 nm) to a batch with a similar edge length of 20 ± 2 nm
(Figure S5). Indeed, sometimes even if the initial cubes were soluble in
THF, as for other batches of nanocubes, the procedure did not result in cluster
formation. In order to elucidate the correlation between different batches of nanocubes
and the clustering procedure, we carried out thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) on the two
batches of nanocubes, as the amount of surfactant molecules, oleic acid (OA),
stabilizing the nanocubes may have also contributed to cluster formation.

The thermogravimetric analysis of the IONC sample dispersed in CHCl3 (sample
A), for which the clustering process worked straightforwardly, showed a first weight
loss of 26.4 wt % in the temperature range from 150 to 300 °C and a second weight
loss of 31.2 wt % from 300 to 400 °C (Figure 4a, blue line). The first transition is mainly attributed to unbound or
physisorbed OA,26−28 whereas the second
transition is related to the oleate molecules chemisorbed on the particle
surface.26−28 As a comparison, the
TGA degradation profile of oleic acid is plotted showing a weight loss of
ca. 90 wt % at 300 °C (Figure 4a, violet line), supporting the claim that the first weight loss is due to
free oleic acid.

Figure 4 (a) TGA weight-loss profiles of oleic-acid-capped IONCs (sample A, blue curve) and
free oleic acid (violet curve) performed in air. The first weight loss in the region
between 150 and 300 °C corresponded to free oleic acid in solution, and the
second weight loss in the region between 300 and 400 °C corresponded to oleate
chemisorbed to the surface of the IONCs. (b) TGA weight-loss profiles of a new batch
of as-synthesized oleic-acid-capped IONCs (sample B, red curve) and sample B after
washing to remove excess of oleic acid (green curve). On sample B, before washing,
no clusters were obtained. Upon one washing, the amount of oleate decreased from
68.1 to 43.3 wt %, re-establishing the cluster formation on sample B.

It should also be noted that, for this batch of IONCs, the amount of oleate chemisorbed
to the surface of the IONCs—ligand density (ρl)—was much
higher than the theoretical 5 ligands/nm2.29,30 The calculated ligand density was 27
ligands/nm2 if only the second weight loss seen in TGA was considered. If
instead the total weight loss of surfactant is considered—both decomposition
steps between 150 and 400 °C—the surfactant density was 50
ligands/nm2, with a 46 and 54% fraction corresponding to free oleic acid
and oleate bound to the surface of the NPs, respectively. These results suggest a
multilayer coating of surfactant on the particle (likely promoted by the hydrophobic
interaction between the OA alkyl chains).

Next, TGA analysis was carried out on the core–shell IONC batch before and after
the washing step, as for this batch the clustering process did not work initially (Figure 4b, sample B as-synthesized), but it did
work after washing the excess surfactant (Figure 4b, sample B washed once). For the as-synthesized sample in CHCl3
(Figure 4b), the organic layer accounted for
a mass loss of 79.6 wt %, with 11.5 wt % corresponding to free oleic acid in solution
and 68.1 wt % to oleate molecules (Figure 4b,
red curve). The excess amount of oleate was due to a change in the amount of OA used for
the synthesis of this batch. Interestingly, after centrifuging the sample in a mixture
of chloroform/methanol (1:3 v/v), on the final sample, the total oleic acid amount
associated with the IONCs was assessed to be 54.8 wt %, of which the oleate amount
decreased to 43.3 wt % (Figure 4b, green
curve). These results suggested that the amount of chemisorbed OA was crucial to the
cluster formation: when too high, no clusters were formed, suggesting that the
polystyrene branches of the amphiphilic PScMA could not intercalate
with the surfactant layer, as the surfactant molecules were tightly packed close to one
another. After the washing, as some of the OA molecules were stripped from the external
layers, the decrease in the amount of chemisorbed OA facilitated the NP interaction with
the polymer, and the water transfer proceeded. It is worth mentioning that there is a
range of concentration of OA per nanoparticles in which the protocol works. We noticed,
for instance, that an additional second washing step on the same sample did not result
in cluster formation anymore. This indicated that by decreasing the chemisorbed OA
amount from 124 (as-synthesized sample) to 29 (sample washed once)
ligands/nm2, the hydrophobic tail of the polymer, the PS units, could
intercalate with the alkyl chain on the nanocube, while having even less oleate
molecules, the interaction was no longer favorable.

Overall, the TGA data suggest that the balance between the oleate molecules chemically
bound to the surface of the IONCs and the oleic acid molecules physisorbed or
intercalated between the oleate molecules, forming additional outer layers of
surfactant, was a crucial parameter to be controlled in order to obtain soft colloidal
clusters.

It is interesting to note that the arrangement in chain configurations of nanoparticles
has been observed in many phenyl-based polymers.31−33 Polystyrene has been used, for instance, to cluster cobalt ferrite
nanoparticles in chain assemblies of micrometer chain length31 and
the same polymer has also been used to chain gold nanorods in a tip-to-tip
configuration.32 Similar to the latter work, in our system, the
cumene-terminated polymer and the nanocubes are both well soluble in THF; however, the
addition of water as an antisolvent induces a different precipitation of the hydrophobic
poly(styrene) moieties of the cumene-terminated polymer and the oleic-acid-capped
nanocubes. We might speculate that the polymer–polymer interaction is more
favorable compared to the polymer–nanoparticle interaction, likely because of
their difference in solubility in the solvent mixture. Given that the nanocubes have
multiple layers of OA, this shell (OA bears a carboxyl moiety) might provide a greater
solubility of the IONCs compared to that of the amphiphilic PScMA in
the THF/water mixture. This would likely provide a higher nanocube–nanocube
affinity and drive the slow arrangement of the nanocubes in chains while the polymer
molecules would tend to interact through phenyl rings. If this is the case, we would
also explain why here, and in contrast to other works,23 an increase
in the polymer amount favors the clustering rather than the individual coating of
nanocubes. If we compare our procedure to a previously reported procedure,23 in which the authors reported that a high polymer/NP ratio favored the
formation of discretely encapsulated MNPs, whereas at low ratio particle clustering was
enforced by the relative depletion of polymer, we can underline that the main difference
was the type of amphiphilic polymer chosen. Indeed, while we opted for the copolymer
poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride), in the work of Pöselt
et al.,23 the triblock polymer poly(ethylene
imine)-b-poly(ε-caprolactone)-b-poly(ethylene
glycol) was used for cluster formation.

Finally, it should be noted that our cluster procedure can be extended to other
core–shell systems prepared by other methods34−36 (see, for instance, Figure S6 for another core–shell nanocube having a similar edge
size and Figure S7 for iron oxide nanoparticle of 18 nm diameter and spherical
shape). However, the procedure did not work when using Fe3O4
nanocubes that did not have a core–shell structure.6 For
instance, Fe3O4 nanocubes of 20 nm were not soluble in THF, the
initial solvent, and therefore, the procedure could not be tested. For 13 nm
Fe3O4 nanocubes, being superparamagnetic and thus
noninteracting, although the particles were soluble in THF, despite changing several
reaction parameters in order to optimize them, only deformed groupings of nanocubes were
obtained, but no dimers and trimers were properly formed (data not shown).

Magnetic Properties
Hyperthermia
The SAR measurements were performed on clustered samples that were prepared starting
from core–shell nanoparticles which were subsequently aged for 1 year at room
temperature. Under these conditions, the samples slowly changed from a core–shell
structure to a quasi-one-phase material. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the aged
nanocubes is shown in Figure S8. The major reflections coincide with
Fe2.96O4 (ICSD collection code: 82443). There exists
10–15 wt % FeO phase (Fe0.942O, ICSD: 24696) in the nanocubes.

The SAR values were obtained at the highest frequency (302 kHz) and magnetic field
(23.8 kA/m) of the instrument (nB Nanoscale Biomagnetics DM100 series) as the Fe
concentration of the samples was in the range of 0.65–0.95 g/L in a volume of 200
μL. The values were 213 ± 9, 253 ± 10, and 184 ± 8 W/gFe
for nanoconstructs formed at ratios of 16.5, 33, and 66 molecules
PScMA/nm2 of particle surface. By plotting (Figure 5) the trend observed for the different
samples, we registered an increase in SAR for the mixture of dimers and trimers (33
molecules polymer/nm2, Figure 1B,E–H) compared to both samples of individually coated nanoparticles
(16.5 molecules polymer/nm2, Figure 1A) and soft colloidal clusters with n ≥ 4 (66
molecules polymer/nm2, Figure 1D),
with n being the number of particles per cluster. When looking at the
statistics, we could confirm that on the sample in which we have measured the highest
SAR value (the 33 PScMA sample), the percentage of dimers and trimers
was statistically higher. Individual nanocubes and clusters with n
≥ 4 were instead the predominant population for the samples
16.5PScMA and 66PScMA, respectively. As already
reported by other groups, our data also suggest that centrosymmetric clusters
significantly reduced the SAR value of the nanocubes (Figure 5). The inset in Figure 5
shows results of calculations based on the kinetic Monte Carlo modeling (see Materials and Methods section), which recovers the behavior observed
experimentally for the different cluster types. Obtaining the agreement between the
simulation and experiment (within the error bar) required setting the anisotropy
constant value to K = 5 × 104 erg/cm3. The
single-particle values of the saturation magnetization were taken directly from the
experimental data and corresponded to Ms of 367, 407, 407,
and 314 emu/cm3 for the ensembles of, respectively, noninteracting,
two-particle, three-particle, and six-particle clusters. The low value of
K suggests that dipolar interactions dominate the anisotropy field of
particles, as will be discussed later.

Figure 5 SAR values for soft colloidal nanoclusters after 1 year aging time, formed at
ratios of 16.5, 33, and 66 molecules PScMA/nm2 of
particle surface (f = 302 kHz, H = 23.8 kA/m). A
higher SAR value was recorded for dimers and trimers compared to individual IONCs
and clusters with n ≥ 4. Clustering the IONCs in
centrosymmetric bead-like structures decreased their heating performance. Each
experimental data point was calculated as the mean value of at least three
independent measurements, with error bars indicating the mean deviation. Inset: SAR
values obtained from kinetic Monte Carlo modeling of the structures as described in
the text, reproducing the observed experimental trend within the error bar.
Interparticle spacing for the simulation has been set to 1 nm gap as measured on the
TEM images.

Magnetization Measurements
To gain a deeper knowledge about the magnetic properties of the fabricated constructs and
also in an attempt to correlate static magnetic properties with dynamic features, here
specifically the SAR, applied field and temperature-dependent magnetization measurements
were carried out on all three samples. The magnetization hysteresis loops
MversusH recorded at 298 and 10 K are shown in Figure 6. The formation of dimers is expected to enhance a collective
magnetic behavior owing to the anisotropic alignment of nanoparticles and results in a
significant enhancement of the hysteresis loop area. On the contrary, larger clusters
(n ≥ 4) and also trimers experience a demagnetization effect due
to their specific particle configuration with the tendency to form flux closure domains,
thus causing a weakened coupling to external magnetic fields, that is, narrow hysteresis
loops (see also our simulations Figure S13). At T = 298 K, both single nanoparticles and
dimers and trimers reveal an identical remanent magnetization
Mr and coercive field Hc (Figure 6b), while Mr and
Hc decrease significantly in the 3D clusters (clusters with
n ≥ 4). These results are supported by our numerical
simulations, which show significant differences in the shape of dynamic hysteresis loops
for different particle cluster structures (see Figures S13 and S14). Different behavior is observed at 10 K where the
variation of Hc and Mr with a
clustering state vanishes. This suggests that the increased anisotropy field and
coercivity at the low temperature is sufficient to overcome the effects of interactions,
an observation consistent with the interpretation of the room temperature magnetic
properties in terms of different cluster structures. We also confirmed by using numerical
simulations that increasing the values of Ms in magnetic
nanostructures can lead to an improved overall heating performance; however, the
dependence is nontrivial and significantly dependent on the particle cluster geometry
(Figures S15 and S16).

Figure 6 Magnetization hysteresis loops measured at room temperature (a,b), after cooling to
10 K in 5 T magnetic fields (c), and temperature-dependent zero-field-cooled and
field-cooled magnetization measurements performed on aqueous suspension of
nanoclusters after a year of aging time, solidified in gypsum matrix recorded at 50 Oe
magnetic fields (d): 16.5PScMA (blue line, individual IONCs),
33PScMA (red line, dimers and trimers), and
66PScMA (green line, clusters with n ≥
4).

It is tempting indeed to assume that large Ms values give
rise to higher SAR because, given that the maximum magnetization of the system is directly
proportional to Ms, intuitively higher
Ms should imply a higher hysteresis loop area. However, a
simple physical picture based on the Stoner–Wohlfarth particle theory suggests that
given that the coercive field is inversely proportional to Ms
(i.e., Hc ∝
1/Ms), and the hysteresis loop area is related to
Ms·Hc apart from a
proportionality factor, the dependence of the loop area on Ms
is eliminated (see (1) in the left columns in Figures S15 and S16). However, the value of Ms
contributes to the heat dissipation indirectly, through determining the coercive field
which, relative to the amplitude of the applied magnetic field, affects the size of minor
or major hysteresis loops and thereby may induce significant differences in the heating
output.37 The value of Ms also determines
the strength of the dipolar interactions, which also affects SAR, and the interaction
effect may even dominate over the single-particle properties as suggested
previously38,39 and
also by the present study (Figures 5, S15, and S16). Our numerical simulations assuming the same
Ms = 450 emu/cm3 for all types of cluster
structures clearly displays the same quantitative trend in SAR (Figure S15D,E). Moreover, at fixed K, varying the value of
Ms in the range between 300 and 500 emu/cm3
preserves the overall trend of SAR for the different cluster types with minor difference
between SAR versus clusters for different Ms
values (Figure S16). These data support only a minor dependence on SAR of clusters
over Ms and support the interpretation that the interparticle
interactions and their dependence on the details of the particle arrangement within the
clusters are an important factor in determining SAR.

We have also investigated using simulations the dependence of SAR on the interparticle
edge to edge spacing as a way to control the dipolar interaction strength. Figure S17 suggests that while SAR is independent of the interparticle
spacing for noninteracting particles, it decays monotonically with the spacing distance
for dimers. This is expected because dipolar interaction weakens as particles are brought
further apart. Interestingly, however, the spacing dependence of SAR is nonmonotonic for
trimers and hexamers, which can be attributed to the effect of magnetic frustration and
the collective magnetization behavior relevant for small spacing distances when particles
are close and dipolar interactions strong. In addition, we have also used simulations to
explore the cluster shape dependence of SAR, by considering six-particle clusters arranged
into statistically different geometries quantified by a variable fractal dimension
(Figure S18).40 The values of SAR are the largest for
statistically chain-like structures and continually decrease with the increasing degree of
geometrical symmetry. Spherical cluster geometries lead to the lowest values of SAR. This
confirms that tuning the cluster shape has profound consequences on SAR values.

It is well-known that such antiferromagnetic–ferrimagnetic (AFM–FiM)
core–shell nanoparticles show so-called exchange bias identified by a shifted
hysteresis loop , toward the opposite direction of the applied field in a
field-cooled (FC) measurement. All three cluster samples, measured after 1 year aging
time, show a slightly shifted loop with HE of around 6 mT
(Figure 6c). This means that all the samples
have virtually the same phase composition and, yet after a year, show a small
AFM–FiM interface volume. This feature was also confirmed by XRD data (Figure S8). The XRD pattern of aged nanocubes in CHCl3 is
identical to the nanocubes forming the clusters, as shown in Figure S8. The major reflections coincide with
Fe2.96O4 (ICSD: 98-008-2443). Likely, the existence of
10–15 wt % FeO phase (Fe0.942O, ICSD: 98-002-4696) in the particles,
together with the structural defects, can account for the persistence of
HE. In a previous work,25 we have found
that similar core–shell nanocubes, which underwent thermal annealing at 130 °C
and were thus fully transformed to the spinel phase, were still showing
HE of 5 mT. This was related to the existence of structural
defects such as antiphase boundaries (APBs) as was also reported by other groups.35

Broadly speaking, the magnetic energy barrier KV distribution, with
K being the magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant and
V the nanoparticle magnetic volume, can be qualitatively judged by
looking at the steepness of zero-field-cooled (ZFC) curves as well as FC ones (Figure 6d). A steeper ZFC curve corresponds to a
narrower KV distribution. At a first glance, it is seen that the dimers
and trimers (33PScMA) and 3D constructs (66PScMA) show
the steepest and the most gradually rising ZFC curve, proportional to the narrowest and
broadest KV distribution, respectively. The superparamagnetic blocking
temperature Tb, estimated from the maximum of ZFC curves,
increases from 346 to 355 K and then to 379 K for singly coated particles, to dimers and
trimers, and ultimately to 3D clusters, respectively. To a first approximation, knowing
the Tb, the anisotropy constant is estimated by exploiting the
Néel relaxation formula given by KV =
25kBTb (only valid at zero
magnetic field, no magnetic interaction, and assuming typical measurement time at SQUID of
100 s), and K ∝ Tb/V
holds that with both Tb and V increasing as
dimers/trimers and 3D clusters are formed, it is plausible to assume that
K constants of all three samples are comparable. Note that having
assigned an identical K value (K = 5 ×
104 erg/cm3) to all three samples in the Monte Carlo simulations,
a good numerical reproduction of the SAR results was achieved (Figure
5 inset and Figure S15).

SAR Value Improvement by Annealing
Having chosen FeO/Fe3O4 core–shell nanoparticles as starting
materials, questions arose whether (i) the clusters, once formed, would be stable against
a thermal oxidation transforming the initial biphasic core–shell system into a
single phase material in a much shorter time, in comparison to the case of spontaneous
room temperature oxidation discussed above, and (ii) whether the trend in SAR values of
individual IONCs versus dimers and trimers and versus
bigger soft colloidal clusters (n ≥ 4) would still be
maintained.

We chose a freshly synthesized sample of core–shell iron oxide nanocubes with an
edge length of 20 ± 2 nm (sample B, Figure S5) similar in size to the previous one studied for the clustering
(Table S1). The XRD pattern of this sample reveals reflections of both
Fe2.96O4 (ICSD: 82443) and Fe0.942O (ICSD: 24696)
phases, however dominated by the latter one (Figure S9a). Once the clusters were obtained (Figure S9b), the FeO core was oxidized to magnetite by thermal annealing in
an oven at 80 °C for different time periods, each of them with an overnight duration
up to a total of 52 h (Figure S9b). Hyperthermia experiments were carried out before and after each
step of the annealing process, alongside XRD, DLS, and TEM characterization to follow the
evolution of the phase composition, the morphology, and the colloidal stability of the
clusters (Figures 7 and S10).

Figure 7 Evolution of SAR values of soft colloidal nanoclusters by annealing in an oven at 80
°C. (A) SAR values (with standard deviation) for soft colloidal nanoclusters
during the annealing process: individual IONCs, blue bars; dimers and trimers, red
bars; and clusters with n ≥ 4, green bars. Only after 18 h of
annealing did the sample of dimers and trimers show higher SAR values. The trend was
maintained up to 52 h of annealing. (B) Schematic representation of the oxidation of
the FeO core for clusters of different sizes in an oven at 80 °C.

The SAR values before annealing were below 50 W/gFe (Figure
7a and Table 1),
which was expected for core–shell iron oxide nanocubes, due to a nearly
noncontributing paramagnetic FeO core and small magnetite domains oriented differently on
the outer layers.25 As the first oxidation of the core by heat
treatment started, the SAR values gradually increased up to a factor of 3.7 to 131 ±
5, 179 ± 1, and 97 ± 4 W/gFe for individual IONCs, dimers/trimers,
and bigger clusters, respectively (Table 1). The
dimer and trimer samples showed the highest SAR values compared to those of the other two
samples after only 18 h of annealing. The trend was maintained throughout the whole
annealing process, up to 52 h (Figure 7a and
Table 1). After 52 h, the SAR values for all
the samples did not improve any further. The XRD pattern of the 52 h annealed sample is
dominated by the Fe2.96O4 (ICSD: 82443) phase, yet there is a
detectable fraction of FeO (Figure S9b). It seems that in order to obtain completely oxidized particles,
harsher oxidative conditions (e.g., higher temperatures, oxygen purging)
have to be applied, compromising the stability and shape of the particles. In our previous
work, we have observed that long oxidation times on individually coated nanocubes at 130
°C result in a full oxidation to maghemite, having a lower
Ms and more aggregated state, with a marginal SAR
improvement.25

Table 1 SAR Values of Soft Colloidal Nanoclusters at 302 kHz Frequency and 23.8 kA/m
Magnetic Field
 	individual IONCs@GaPEG SAR (W/gFe)	dimers and trimers SAR (W/gFe)	bigger clusters (n ≥ 4)
SAR (W/gFe)	
before annealing	46 ± 2	48 ± 3	42 ± 2	
after 18 h annealing	131 ± 5	179 ± 1	97 ± 4	
after 35 h annealing	180 ± 5	216 ± 1	142 ± 9	
after 42 h annealing	183 ± 2	233 ± 1	138 ± 3	
after 52 h annealing	162 ± 7	246 ± 8	150 ± 3	
Remarkably, all the samples were stable during the annealing process as confirmed by DLS
measurements (Figure S10). For example, for the sample of clusters with n
≥ 4, the volume weighted hydrodynamic diameter remained unchanged during the whole
annealing process, with a Z-average of 98.1 ± 0.6 nm (PDI 0.07)
before annealing and 96.5 ± 0.2 (PDI 0.08) after 52 h of annealing.

Similar static magnetic measurements have been performed on these samples (Figure S11). HE of all three sample is
ca. 6 mT (Figure S11c), similar to that of the other clusters (Figure
6c). This means that for all the colloidal assemblies the
building block nanocubes have a similar phase composition, as also deduced from the XRD
patterns (Figures S8 and S9b). Temperature-dependent magnetization curves reveal some
interesting features (Figure S11d). It can be discerned that the dimers and trimers have the
steepest ZFC curve rise, implying the narrowest KV distribution among all
the samples. Strikingly, individual particles show a higher Tb
(ca. 400 K) than dimers and trimers (i.e., 370 K),
presumably caused by magnetic dipole–dipole interactions. It is known that slight
particle–particle interactions can significantly shift
Tb toward higher temperatures.41

Figure S15 shows results of simulations using the kinetic Monte Carlo
modeling for variable value of effective anisotropy constant K. We set
Ms = 450 kA/m of bulk Fe3O4. The right
column of Figure S15 shows data similar to that in Figure 7, where Figure S15D resembles the 18 h annealed data well. This points to low
effective anisotropy of particles K = 5 × 104
erg/cm3, as the trend is in qualitative disagreement for higher value of the
anisotropy constant. For this low effective anisotropy value, the dipolar interactions
dominate the anisotropy, and therefore, the differences in SAR can be attributed to the
presence of dipolar interactions, in agreement with previous studies.35
They found significant reduction of the value of the effective anisotropy
K with respect to the nominal value expected for cubic anisotropy
Kc = −1.1 × 105 erg/cm3.
This is also supported by previous analysis, which estimates equivalent value of the
effective uniaxial K to be equal to about 70% of
Kc. The left column plots (a–d) in Figure S15 show the SAR before mixing the different fractions of the
clusters according to Figure 3, which allows one
to compare contributions to SAR from the distinct populations (i.e., only
single cubes, only dimers, etc.).

Overall, these data suggest that for core–shell nanoparticles the assembly can be
easily performed when the particles are in a noninteracting state, while their
transformation to a more heat efficient material by annealing at moderate temperatures can
occur after having obtained the clusters without losing their arrangement and colloidal
stability. It is also worth highlighting that clustering the core–shell MNPs
followed by the oxidation of the core is a promising method to achieve the highest yield
of soft clusters with higher SAR values.

It may be worth mentioning here that other anisotropic nanomagnets, for example,
nanowires or nanorods, could offer similar enhanced heating performances (with easier to
tune aspect ratio).42,43 Furthermore, such anisotropic structures can have also
magnetomechanical actuation properties exploitable for cell damage.44
However, it must be emphasized that the discrete nature of the dimers and trimers,
reported by us, makes easier their disassembling and elimination after use, an important
aspect to consider for clinically aimed approaches.45

Conclusions
We have shown here that SAR values of core–shell IONCs were enhanced by forming
anisotropic structures compared to both individually coated nanocubes and centrosymmetric
clusters. The controlled clustering occurred during the water transfer of IONCs in the
presence of the amphiphilic poly(maleic anhydride) polymer having poly(styrene) groups as
hydrophobic chains. A few parameters were crucial to the cluster formation: while the
anisotropic structures were dictated by the amount of amphiphilic polymer per nanoparticle
surface, the rate of THF evaporation alongside the amount of surfactant determined the
reproducibility of the protocol. The 1D and 2D structures formed with two and three IONCs,
so-called dimers and trimers formed at the ratio of 33 molecules polymer per nanometer
square of particle surface, showed higher SAR values than the individually coated
nanoparticles and the centrosymmetric clusters, highlighting the importance of the
arrangement of the nanoparticles at the nanoscale. For this study, we have selected freshly
synthesized FeO/Fe3O4 core–shell nanocubes that, after cluster
formation, underwent structural transformation in aqueous solution from
FeO/Fe3O4 core–shell structure to mainly
Fe3O4 phase either by slow aging at room temperature (time scale of
a year) or by faster annealing process in an oven at 80 °C (time scale of few days).
Remarkably, even in the latter case, the grouping of nanocubes in dimers and trimers
presented higher SAR values than single cubes and centrosymmetric clusters, while their
aqueous stability was not compromised upon annealing treatment. We also observed a variation
of Ms between the different cluster structures, where the
highest values of Ms corresponded also to the dimer and trimer
cluster structures. Although this might suggest that the variation of
Ms correlates with the observed enhanced values of SAR for
dimer and trimer cluster structures, we demonstrated by means of a kinetic Monte Carlo
computational model that the primary factor responsible for the enhancement of SAR is, in
fact, not the variation of Ms but rather the magnetic dipolar
effect induced by the particular arrangement of nanocubes into dimers, trimers, and
centrosymmetric clusters (compare Figures S15 and S16). Finally, using the Monte Carlo simulation to numerically
reproduce the high experimental values of SAR observed for the different cluster types
required setting a rather low anisotropy constant K = 5 ×
104 erg/cm3 (Figure S15). This value agrees with the K value found
experimentally for iron oxide nanocubes of the 19 nm cube edge.5
Increasing the value of K leads to a gradually diminishing effect of the
clustering of nanocubes and ultimately to no real clustering-induced gain in SAR (Figure S15).

This work presents a versatile and smart strategy to use the same nanoparticle building
blocks and achieve higher heat performances first by their controlled arrangement into
anisotropic constructs made of two to three particles and second by promoting their phase
transformation to Fe3O4.

Materials and Methods
Chemicals
All reagents were obtained from commercial suppliers and used without further
purification. Iron pentacarbonyl (Fe(CO)5, 98%), 1-octadecene (1-ODE, 99%), OA
(90%), triethylamine (99%), chloroform (CHCl3), ethanol, dichloromethane,
poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride), cumene-terminated
(Mn = 1600 g/mol), α,ω-aminopropyl-poly(ethylene
glycol) (Mn = 2000 g/mol), gallic acid, phosphate-buffered
saline (150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4), and sodium hydroxide were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Sodium oleate (97%) was obtained from TCI. THF was purchased from Carlo Erba Reagents.

Synthesis of Nanocubes
Core–shell iron oxide nanocubes with an edge length of 20.2 ± 1.5 nm were
synthesized following a recently published procedure25 with a slight
modification in order to obtain bigger nanoparticles. Briefly, in a typical synthesis of
20 nm nanocubes (Figure S1, sample A), OA (1.6 g, 5.7 mmol), sodium oleate (0.939 g, 3 mmol),
and 1-ODE (5 mL) were added to a 50 mL three-neck flask connected to a reflux condenser
and degassed for 30 min at 90 °C (the amounts for sample B were as follows: oleic
acid (2.6 g, 9.2 mmol), sodium oleate (0.939 g, 3 mmol), and 1-octadecene (3 mL)).
Subsequently, the solution was cooled to 60 °C and put under N2 reflux.
Then the precursor solution Fe(CO)5 (0.597 g, 3 mmol, dissolved in 1 mL of
1-ODE) was injected, and the mixture was heated within 20 min to 320 °C. The solution
reaction was stirred vigorously at 320 °C, and as nucleation started (the solution
turned black), it was kept at that temperature for another 1.5 h and then cooled to room
temperature. Finally, the IONCs were collected by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 10 min
and washed in a mixture of chloroform/methanol/acetone (1:6:1). The cleaning process was
carried out three times, and the IONCs were finally dispersed in CHCl3.

Controlled Clustering
For the formation of soft colloidal nanoclusters with hydrodynamic diameters around 100
nm, corresponding to 66 PScMA molecules/nm2 for sample A, in a
20 mL vial, to 9 mL of THF solution was added 1 mL of stock solution of
poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride), cumene-terminated
(PScMA, Mn = 1600 g/mol) polymer (obtained
by dissolving 35 mg of polymer in 10 mL of THF, resulting in a [PScMA] =
2.19 mM). For 33 PScMA, to 9.5 mL of THF was added 0.5 mL of polymer
stock solution. Instead, for 16.5 PScMA, to 9.75 mL of THF was added 0.25
mL of polymer stock solution. It followed the addition of 35 μL of iron oxide
nanocubes solution ([Fe] = 6.09 g/L in CHCl3, 0.33 μM in Fe) with a cube
edge length of 20 nm. Subsequently, 1 mL of H2O was added by a syringe pump, at
the rate of 0.5 mL/min, while sonicating the solution in an ice bath. Next, the solution
was placed on a horizontal shaker rotating at a speed of 100 rpm, and the vial was left
uncapped overnight at room temperature (25 °C) to slowly evaporate the THF. The
following day, the remaining 0.8–1 mL of solution was transferred to a 2 mL
Eppendorf vial, and an equivalent volume of CHCl3 was added. The Eppendorf vial
was vigorously stirred at room temperature, and the two phases were left to separate for a
couple of hours. Once the upper aqueous phase became clear, showing no sign of turbidity,
it was transferred into a 1 mL HPLC vial. More in detail, to remove THF, allowing the
final IONC dispersion in water, several evaporation methods were tried including (i)
evaporation under reduced pressure (for roughly 1 h), (ii) atmospheric pressure
evaporation of THF, while stirring the solution with a magnetic stirrer in an open beaker
under the fume hood (for several hours), and (iii) nitrogen bubbling of the solution (for
a couple of hours). When using evaporation under reduced pressure and nitrogen bubbling,
although the clusters could be obtained, the reproducibility of the experiments was poor.
This suggested that the rate of THF evaporation was crucial for cluster formation. Indeed,
when slowly evaporating THF over 24 h by placing a 20 mL vial (without lid) on a
horizontal shaker at a speed of 100 rotations per minute, the clusters were formed and the
reproducibility of the cluster formation was significantly improved. At the last step,
CHCl3 was added to form a well-defined two-phase system, with the top layer
being the aqueous phase containing the nanoclusters (colored phase on top, Figure S2).

Dynamic Light Scattering
Particle hydrodynamic size measurements were carried out using a Malvern Zetasizer Nano
series instrument, operated in a 173° backscattered mode on diluted aqueous solutions
of nanoclusters. The measurements were performed at 25 °C. An equilibration time of 2
min was allowed before each measurement, and at least three measurements were performed on
each sample. The DLS sample was prepared by adding 25 μL of a cluster sample to 0.4
mL of water.

X-ray Diffraction
X-ray diffraction analysis was carried out on a Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer, equipped
with a 9 kW Cu Kα rotating anode and operating at 40 kV and 150 mA. The patterns
were acquired in Bragg–Brentano geometry, using a D\tex Ultra 1D silicon strip
detector set in X-ray fluorescence reduction mode. The samples were prepared by drying
concentrated drops of particle suspensions on zero diffraction silicon wafer.

Transmission Electron Microscopy
Conventional TEM images were obtained using JEOL JEM 1011 electron microscope, working at
an acceleration voltage of 100 kV and equipped with a W thermionic electron source and a
11Mp Orius CCD camera (Gatan Company, USA). Samples were prepared by placing a drop of
sample onto a carbon-coated copper grid, which was then left to dry before imaging.

Thermogravimetric Analysis
The weight loss of the oleic-acid-coated nanoparticles was determined using a TA
Instruments Hi-Res TGA 2950 thermogravimetric analyzer under air atmosphere (60
cm3/min). The samples (5–10 mg) of the surfactant-coated nanocubes
were heated from room temperature to 50 °C, and an isotherm was applied for 15 min
and then heated to 700 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C/min.

The formula used for the calculation of ligand density
(ρl) was described by Tong et
al.:46  where
wl is the weight fraction of the ligand,
NAv is Avogadro’s number,
Mw,l is the molecular weight of the ligand,
mNP is the mass of one nanoparticle,
wNP is the weight fraction of the iron oxide nanoparticles,
and ANP is the surface area of one nanoparticle. The edge
length of one nanocube was taken as 20 nm for area and volume calculations. For the
nanoparticle mass calculation, the density of bulk magnetite was considered (5.18
g/cm3).

SAR Measurements
The calorimetric measurements to determine the specific absorption rate value of the iron
oxide nanoclusters were carried out using the Nanoscale Biomagnetics instrument (DM100)
operating over the range of frequencies from 105 to 302 kHz and fields up to 40 and 30 mT
for 105 and 302 kHz, respectively. The SAR value was calculated using the
formula:  where
C is the specific heat capacity of dispersing medium (H2O in
most cases) per unit volume (J/K), and m is the concentration (g/L of Fe)
of magnetic material in solution. The calorimetric measurements were carried out in
quasi-adiabatic conditions, and the slope of the curve
dT/dt was measured by taking into account only the
first 20–25 s of the measurement. The measurements were done on samples of 200
μL at an Fe concentration ranging from 0.65 to 3.2 mg/mL.

Magnetic Characterization
Field-dependent static magnetic measurements performed on immobilized nanoclusters were
carried out by employing magnetic property measurement system (MPMS-XL, Quantum Design)
with EverCool technology. The samples were prepared by mixing 50 μL of nanoclusters
dispersed in milli-Q water, at an iron concentration of 0.9 g/L, with 60 mg gypsum in the
designated polycarbonate capsules and by drying the mixture thoroughly. The
zero-field-cooled and field-cooled temperature-dependent magnetization measurements were
performed on samples prepared in the same way in the cooling field of 5 mT. The residual
magnetic field in the SQUID magnets was nulled using the designated low-field Hall sensor
prior to ZFC measurements. All the presented magnetization data are corrected with respect
to the diamagnetic and paramagnetic contributions of water and gypsum using the automatic
background subtraction routine. The curves were normalized to the iron concentration as
obtained from the elemental analysis.

Elemental Analysis
Elemental analysis was carried out via inductively coupled plasma atomic
emission spectroscopy on a ThermoFisher iCAP 6000 series instrument. The samples were
prepared by digesting 2.5–10 μL of sample in 1 mL of aqua regia in a 10 mL
volumetric flask overnight. The next day, the flask was filled up to the graduation mark
with milli-Q water and filtered through a 0.45 μm filter membrane prior to the
measurement.

Magnetic Modeling Methodology
The kinetic Monte Carlo method used in this study systematically incorporates the
complexity of realistic particle distributions, thermal fluctuations, and time varying
external fields. The model assumes Stoner–Wohlfarth particles with uniaxial
anisotropy k⃗i =
Kik̂i,
where the unit vectors k̂i for each
nanocube are spherically distributed (i.e., following the uniform
distribution on a unit sphere), and for simplicity,
Ki is set to a constant
K. We systematically explored the effect of the anisotropy constant
K and found that the value 5 × 103 J/m3
gives good qualitative agreement with the experimentally observed trends in SAR. Particles
with cubic shape and cube edge of a = 20 nm and volume
Vi = V =
a3 are considered. The magnetic state of every individual
particle is represented by a magnetic dipole moment
m⃗i =
Msm̂i
positioned in the center of its cube, where Ms is the
saturation magnetization and m̂i the
particle moment normalized to unity. To reflect the slight degree of misalignment of
nanocubes within clusters, which can be noted from the TEM image (Figure
1), the particle positions within elementary clusters were
randomized using the fractal generating algorithm described previously40 after setting the fractal dimension Df = 3, which produces
cluster structures, as illustrated in Figure S10. The chain-like and triangular clusters can also be obtained by
the algorithm after setting Df = 1 and
Df = 2, respectively, but given the small numbers of
particles within the clusters, these can be obtained equivalently by setting
Df = 3, which allows one to systematically generate higher
order clusters.

The Stoner–Wohlfarth energy of a cluster
is 1  where the sum runs through particles i
inside a cluster. The effective local field acting on particle i is given
by the sum of the external applied field, H, and the dipolar interaction
field described by the following
equation: 2  Thermal fluctuations are accounted in the model by
assuming the Néel–Arrhenius physical picture, where
fluctuations—leading to frequency-dependent behavior—are described as a
random hopping process over energy barriers ΔE separating the
different states (magnetic moment configurations), defining the relaxation time scales
as 3  where τ0 = 10–9 s,
kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the
temperature. The essence of the kinetic Monte Carlo modeling is to solve the hopping
dynamics via the master-equation formalism, including the interacting
nature of particles, as given by eqs 1 and 2 and with realistic time scales as given by eq 3. Details of the method can be found in recent
studies.39,40

Throughout the present study, we consider systems of 3000 nanocubes, which were for
simulation of the different ensembles split to 1500 dimers, 1000 trimers, and 500
six-particle centrosymmetric clusters. To study the noninteracting system, dipolar
interactions H⃗idip are set to zero for all particle pairs. We choose a parameter
set consistent with the experimental conditions as discussed above, that is, the frequency
of the applied field for calculations of SAR (determined from the hysteresis loop area)
was set to f = 300 kHz, the field orientation was set along the
z-axis of the coordinate system, and field amplitude was set to
H0 = 23.8 kA/m. For the inset of Figure
5, Ms values were set at 367, 407,
407, and 314 emu/cm3 for, respectively, single, dimers, trimers, and
centrosymmetric clusters by converting Ms estimated from in
Figure 6 from emu/g of Fe in emu/cm3
of Fe3O4. We also developed a case study with fixed
Ms = 450 kA/m (450 emu/cm3,
i.e., bulk magnetite-like particles) for all different types of cluster
structures (see supplementary section, Figures S13–S15) consistent with the experiments on annealed systems
(Figure 7 and Figure S11), which allows a straightforward comparison of the dipolar
effects induced by the differences of the particle arrangement within the different
cluster types. The particle temperature is set to constant T = 300 K,
thus ignoring the self-heating effect, which is equivalent to assuming infinite heat
capacity of particles.

The SAR was determined by evaluating the area of hysteresis loops computed for the
ensembles of isolated particles and of two-particle, three-particle, or six-particle
structures. Examples of the computed dynamic hysteresis loops are shown in Figure S13.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b05182.Additional TEM images of nanocubes and clusters, XRD spectra of the nanocube samples
and DLS characterization of soft colloidal clusters, additional SQUID measurements of
some samples, and additional images of the numerical Monte Carlo simulations
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn7b05182_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
¶ D.N. and A.L. contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the financial support by the EU-Initial Training Network
Mag(net)icFun (PITN-GA-2012-290248), the Royal Society International Exchanges Scheme
(IE160535), and the European Research Council (ERC) (Starting Grant ICARO project, Contract
No. 678109). D.S. acknowledges the Xunta de Galicia for financial support (I2C Plan). O.L.
gratefully acknowledges financial support from the EPSRC doctoral training center grant
(EP/G03690X/1). We thank Simone Nitti for nanocube sample preparation.
==== Refs
References
Maier-Hauff K. ; Ulrich F. ; Nestler D. ; Niehoff H. ; Wust P. ; Thiesen B. ; Orawa H. ; Budach V. ; Jordan A. 
Efficacy and Safety of Intratumoral Thermotherapy Using Magnetic Iron-Oxide
Nanoparticles Combined with External Beam Radiotherapy on Patients with Recurrent
Glioblastoma Multiforme . J. Neuro-Oncol. 
2011 , 103 , 317 –324 10.1007/s11060-010-0389-0 .
Lagendijk J. J. W. 
Hyperthermia Treatment Planning . Phys. Med. Biol. 
2000 , 45 , R61 –R76 10.1088/0031-9155/45/5/201 .10843091 
Rosensweig R. E. 
Heating Magnetic Fluid with Alternating Magnetic Field . J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 
2002 , 252 , 370 –374 10.1016/S0304-8853(02)00706-0 .
Laurent S. ; Dutz S. ; Häfeli U. O. ; Mahmoudi M. 
Magnetic Fluid Hyperthermia: Focus on Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide
Nanoparticles . Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2011 , 166 , 8 –23 10.1016/j.cis.2011.04.003 .21601820 
Guardia P. ; Di Corato R. ; Lartigue L. ; Wilhelm C. ; Espinosa A. ; Garcia-Hernandez M. ; Gazeau F. ; Manna L. ; Pellegrino T. 
Water-Soluble Iron Oxide Nanocubes with High Values of Specific Absorption
Rate for Cancer Cell Hyperthermia Treatment . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 3080 –3091 10.1021/nn2048137 .22494015 
Guardia P. ; Riedinger A. ; Nitti S. ; Pugliese G. ; Marras S. ; Genovese A. ; Materia M. E. ; Lefevre C. ; Manna L. ; Pellegrino T. 
One Pot Synthesis of Monodisperse Water Soluble Iron Oxide Nanocrystals
with High Values of the Specific Absorption Rate . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2014 , 2 , 4426 –4434 10.1039/c4tb00061g .
Chen M. ; Christiansen M. G. ; Anikeeva P. 
Maximizing Hysteretic Losses in Magnetic Ferrite Nanoparticles
via Model-Driven Synthesis and Materials Optimization . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 8990 –9000 10.1021/nn4035266 .24016039 
Serantes D. ; Simeonidis K. ; Angelakeris M. ; Chubykalo-fesenko O. ; Marciello M. ; Morales P. ; Baldomir D. ; Martinez-Boubeta C. 
Multiplying Magnetic Hyperthermia Response by Nanoparticle
Assembling . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 5927 –5934 10.1021/jp410717m .
Andreu I. ; Natividad E. ; Solozábal L. ; Roubeau O. 
Nano-Objects for Addressing the Control of Nanoparticle Arrangement and
Performance in Magnetic Hyperthermia . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 1408 –1419 10.1021/nn505781f .25658023 
Myrovali E. ; Maniotis N. ; Makridis A. ; Terzopoulou A. ; Ntomprougkidis V. ; Simeonidis K. ; Sakellari D. ; Kalogirou O. ; Samaras T. ; Salikhov R. ; Spasova M. ; Farle M. ; Wiedwald U. ; Angelakeris M. 
Arrangement at the Nanoscale: Effect on Magnetic Particle
Hyperthermia . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 37934 10.1038/srep37934 .27897195 
Lartigue L. ; Hugounenq P. ; Alloyeau D. ; Clarke S. P. ; Lévy M. ; Bacri J.-C. ; Bazzi R. ; Brougham D. F. ; Wilhelm C. ; Gazeau F. 
Cooperative Organization in Iron Oxide Multi-Core Nanoparticles Potentiates
Their Efficiency as Heating Mediators and MRI Contrast Agents . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 10935 –10949 10.1021/nn304477s .23167525 
Materia M. E. ; Guardia P. ; Sathya A. ; Pernia Leal M. ; Marotta R. ; Di Corato R. ; Pellegrino T. 
Mesoscale Assemblies of Iron Oxide Nanocubes as Heat Mediators and Image
Contrast Agents . Langmuir 
2015 , 31 , 808 –816 10.1021/la503930s .25569814 
Ovejero J. G. ; Cabrera D. ; Carrey J. ; Valdivielso T. ; Salas G. ; Teran F. J. 
Effects of Inter- and Intra-Aggregate Magnetic Dipolar Interactions on the
Magnetic Heating Efficiency of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 10954 –10963 10.1039/C6CP00468G .27041536 
Coral D. F. ; Mendoza Zélis P. ; Marciello M. ; Morales M. D. P. ; Craievich A. ; Sánchez F. H. ; Fernández Van Raap M. B. 
Effect of Nanoclustering and Dipolar Interactions in Heat Generation for
Magnetic Hyperthermia . Langmuir 
2016 , 32 , 1201 –1213 10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b03559 .26751761 
Guibert C. ; Dupuis V. ; Peyre V. ; Fresnais J. 
Hyperthermia of Magnetic Nanoparticles: Experimental Study of the Role of
Aggregation . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 28148 –28154 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b07796 .
Alphandéry E. ; Faure S. ; Raison L. ; Duguet E. ; Howse P. A. ; Bazylinski D. A. 
Heat Production by Bacterial Magnetosomes Exposed to an Oscillating
Magnetic Field . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 18 –22 10.1021/jp104580t .
Anderson J. M. ; Shive M. S. 
Biodegradation and Biocompatibility of PLA and PLGA
Microspheres . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
1997 , 28 , 5 –24 10.1016/S0169-409X(97)00048-3 .
Xiong F. ; Chen Y. ; Chen J. ; Yang B. ; Zhang Y. ; Gao H. ; Hua Z. ; Gu N. 
Rubik-like Magnetic Nanoassemblies as an Efficient Drug Multifunctional
Carrier for Cancer Theranostics . J. Controlled Release 
2013 , 172 , 993 –1001 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.09.023 .
Ai H. ; Flask C. ; Weinberg B. ; Shuai X. ; Pagel M. D. ; Farrell D. ; Duerk J. ; Gao J. 
Magnetite-Loaded Polymeric Micelles as Ultrasensitive Magnetic-Resonance
Probes . Adv. Mater. 
2005 , 17 , 1949 –1952 10.1002/adma.200401904 .
Berret J.-F. ; Schonbeck N. ; Gazeau F. ; El Kharrat D. ; Sandre O. ; Vacher A. ; Airiau M. 
Controlled Clustering of Superparamagnetic Nanoparticles Using Block
Copolymers: Design of New Contrast Agents for Magnetic Resonance Imaging . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 1755 –1761 10.1021/ja0562999 .16448152 
Pothayee N. ; Balasubramaniam S. ; Pothayee N. ; Jain N. ; Hu N. ; Lin Y. ; Davis R. M. ; Sriranganathan N. ; Koretsky A. P. ; Riffle J. S. 
Magnetic Nanoclusters with Hydrophilic Spacing for Dual Drug Delivery and
Sensitive Magnetic Resonance Imaging . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2013 , 1 , 1142 –1149 10.1039/c2tb00275b .25328679 
Yang J. ; Lee C. H. ; Ko H. J. ; Suh J. S. ; Yoon H. G. ; Lee K. ; Huh Y. M. ; Haam S. 
Multifunctional Magneto-Polymeric Nanohybrids for Targeted Detection and
Synergistic Therapeutic Effects on Breast Cancer . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2007 , 46 , 8836 –8839 10.1002/anie.200703554 .
Pöselt E. ; Kloust H. ; Tromsdorf U. ; Janschel M. ; Hahn C. ; Maßlo C. ; Weller H. 
Relaxivity Optimization of a Pegylated Iron-Oxide-Based Negative Magnetic
Resonance Contrast Agent for T2-Weighted Spin-Echo Imaging . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 1619 –1624 10.1021/nn204591r .22276942 
Zoppellaro G. ; Kolokithas-Ntoukas A. ; Polakova K. ; Tucek J. ; Zboril R. ; Loudos G. ; Fragogeorgi E. ; Diwoky C. ; Tomankova K. ; Avgoustakis K. ; Kouzoudis D. ; Bakandritsos A. 
Theranostics of Epitaxially Condensed Colloidal Nanocrystal Clusters,
through a Soft Biomineralization Route . Chem. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 2062 –2074 10.1021/cm404053v .
Lak A. ; Niculaes D. ; Anyfantis G. C. ; Bertoni G. ; Barthel M. J. ; Marras S. ; Cassani M. ; Nitti S. ; Athanassiou A. ; Giannini C. ; Pellegrino T. 
Facile Transformation of FeO/Fe3O4 Core-Shell
Nanocubes to Fe3O4via Magnetic Stimulation . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 33295 10.1038/srep33295 .27665698 
Mahdavi M. ; Ahmad M. ; Haron M. J. ; Namvar F. ; Nadi B. ; Ab Rahman M. Z. ; Amin J. 
Synthesis, Surface Modification and Characterisation of Biocompatible
Magnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles for Biomedical Applications . Molecules 
2013 , 18 , 7533 –7548 10.3390/molecules18077533 .23807578 
Jadhav N. V. ; Prasad A. I. ; Kumar A. ; Mishra R. ; Dhara S. ; Babu K. R. ; Prajapat C. L. ; Misra N. L. ; Ningthoujam R. S. ; Pandey B. N. ; Vatsa R. K. 
Synthesis of Oleic Acid Functionalized Fe3O4 Magnetic
Nanoparticles and Studying Their Interaction with Tumor Cells for Potential Hyperthermia
Applications . Colloids Surf., B 
2013 , 108 , 158 –168 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2013.02.035 .
Marín T. ; Montoya P. ; Arnache O. ; Calderón J. 
Influence of Surface Treatment on Magnetic Properties of
Fe3O4 Nanoparticles Synthesized by Electrochemical
Method . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2016 , 120 , 6634 –6645 10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b01796 .27267938 
Hauser H. ; Darke A. ; Phillips M. C. 
Ion-binding to phospholipids. Interaction of calcium with
phosphatidylserine . Eur. J. Biochem. 
1976 , 62 , 335 –344 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1976.tb10165.x .3416 
Lueth H. ; Nyburg S. C. ; Robinson P. M. ; Scott H. G. 
Crystallographic and Calorimetric Phase Studies of the N-Eicosane,
C20H42: N-Docosane, C22H46
System . Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. 
1974 , 27 , 337 –357 10.1080/15421407408083141 .
Keng P. Y. ; Kim B. Y. ; Shim I. ; Sahoo R. ; Veneman P. E. ; Armstrong N. R. ; Yoo H. ; Pemberton J. E. ; Bull M. M. ; Griebel J. J. ; Ratcliff E. L. ; Nebesny K. G. ; Pyun J. 
Colloidal Polymerization of Polymer-Coated Ferromagnetic Nanoparticles into
Cobalt Oxide Nanowires . ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 , 3143 –3157 10.1021/nn900483w .19799415 
Nie Z. ; Fava D. ; Kumacheva E. ; Zou S. ; Walker G. C. ; Rubinstein M. 
Self-Assembly of Metal-Polymer Analogues of Amphiphilic Triblock
Copolymers . Nat. Mater. 
2007 , 6 , 609 –614 10.1038/nmat1954 .17618291 
Lunn D. J. ; Finnegan J. R. ; Manners I. 
Self-Assembly of “patchy” Nanoparticles: A Versatile Approach
to Functional Hierarchical Materials . Chem. Sci. 
2015 , 6 , 3663 –3673 10.1039/C5SC01141H .28706712 
Walter A. ; Billotey C. ; Garofalo A. ; Ulhaq-Bouillet C. ; Lefèvre C. ; Taleb J. ; Laurent S. ; Vander Elst L. ; Muller R. N. ; Lartigue L. ; Gazeau F. ; Felder-Flesch D. ; Begin-Colin S. 
Mastering the Shape and Composition of Dendronized Iron Oxide Nanoparticles
To Tailor Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Hyperthermia . Chem. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 5252 –5264 10.1021/cm5019025 .
Wetterskog E. ; Tai C. ; Grins J. ; Bergstrom L. ; Salazar-Alvarez G. 
Anomalous Magnetic Properties of Nanoparticles Arising from Defect
Structures: Topotaxial Oxidation of Fe1-xO/Fe3O4
Core-Shell Nanocubes to Single-Phase Particles . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 7132 –7144 10.1021/nn402487q .23899269 
Levy M. ; Quarta A. ; Espinosa A. ; Figuerola A. ; Wilhelm C. ; García-Hernandez M. ; Genovese A. ; Falqui A. ; Alloyeau D. ; Buonsanti R. ; Cozzoli P. D. ; García M. A. ; Gazeau F. ; Pellegrino T. 
Correlating Magneto-Structural Properties to Hyperthermia Performance of
Highly Monodisperse Iron Oxide Nanoparticles Prepared by a Seeded-Growth
Route . Chem. Mater. 
2011 , 23 , 4170 –4180 10.1021/cm201078f .
Munoz-Menendez C. ; Serantes D. ; Ruso J. M. ; Baldomir D. 
Towards Improved Magnetic Fluid Hyperthermia: Major-Loops to Diminish
Variations in Local Heating . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2017 , 19 , 14527 –14532 10.1039/C7CP01442B .28537285 
Conde-Leboran I. ; Baldomir D. ; Martinez-Boubeta C. ; Chubykalo-Fesenko O. ; Del Puerto Morales M. ; Salas G. ; Cabrera D. ; Camarero J. ; Teran F. J. ; Serantes D. 
A Single Picture Explains Diversity of Hyperthermia Response of Magnetic
Nanoparticles . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 15698 –15706 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b02555 .
Ruta S. ; Hovorka O. ; Chantrell R. 
Unified Model of Hyperthermia via Hysteresis Heating in
Systems of Interacting Magnetic Nanoparticles . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 9090 10.1038/srep09090 .25766365 
Hovorka O. 
Thermal Activation in Statistical Clusters of Magnetic
Nanoparticles . J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
2017 , 50 , 044004 10.1088/1361-6463/aa5066 .
Lak A. ; Kraken M. ; Ludwig F. ; Kornowski A. ; Eberbeck D. ; Sievers S. ; Litterst F. J. ; Weller H. ; Schilling M. 
Size Dependent Structural and Magnetic Properties of
FeO-Fe3O4 Nanoparticles . Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 12286 –12295 10.1039/c3nr04562e .24154669 
Alonso J. ; Khurshid H. ; Sankar V. ; Nemati Z. ; Phan M. H. ; Garayo E. ; García J. A. ; Srikanth H. 
FeCo Nanowires with Enhanced Heating Powers and Controllable Dimensions for
Magnetic Hyperthermia . J. Appl. Phys. 
2015 , 117 , 17D113 10.1063/1.4908300 .
Das R. ; Alonso J. ; Nemati Porshokouh Z. ; Kalappattil V. ; Torres D. ; Phan M. H. ; Garaio E. ; García J. Á. ; Sanchez Llamazares J. L. ; Srikanth H. 
Tunable High Aspect Ratio Iron Oxide Nanorods for Enhanced
Hyperthermia . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 10086 –10093 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b02006 .
Simeonidis K. ; Morales M. P. ; Marciello M. ; Angelakeris M. ; de la Presa P. ; Lazaro-Carrillo A. ; Tabero A. ; Villanueva A. ; Chubykalo-Fesenko O. ; Serantes D. 
In-Situ Particles Reorientation during Magnetic
Hyperthermia Application: Shape Matters Twice . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 38382 10.1038/srep38382 .27922119 
Kolosnjaj-Tabi J. ; Lartigue L. ; Javed Y. ; Luciani N. ; Pellegrino T. ; Wilhelm C. ; Alloyeau D. ; Gazeau F. 
Biotransformations of Magnetic Nanoparticles in the Body . Nano Today 
2016 , 11 , 280 –284 10.1016/j.nantod.2015.10.001 .
Tong L. ; Lu E. ; Pichaandi J. ; Cao P. ; Nitz M. ; Winnik M. A. 
Quantification of Surface Ligands on NaYF4 Nanoparticles by
Three Independent Analytical Techniques . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 4899 –4910 10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b02190 .

