
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.9b05337ArticleTailoring Cu+ for Ga3+ Cation Exchange in
Cu2–xS and CuInS2 Nanocrystals by
Controlling the Ga Precursor Chemistry Hinterding Stijn O. M. †⊥Berends Anne C. †¶Kurttepeli Mert ‡#Moret Marc-Etienne §Meeldijk Johannes D. ∥Bals Sara ‡van der Stam Ward †▲de Mello Donega Celso *†† Condensed Matter and Interfaces, Debye Institute for
Nanomaterials Science, Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80000, 3508
TA Utrecht, The Netherlands‡ Electron Microscopy for Materials Science (EMAT),
University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan 171, B-2020 Antwerp,
Belgium§ Organic Chemistry and Catalysis, Debye Institute for
Nanomaterials Science, Utrecht University, Universiteitsweg 99,
3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands∥ Electron Microscopy Utrecht, Debye Institute for
Nanomaterials Science, Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht,
The Netherlands* E-mail: c.demello-donega@uu.nl.16 10 2019 26 11 2019 13 11 12880 12893 07 07 2019 16 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No
Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and
creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Nanoscale cation exchange (CE) has resulted in colloidal nanomaterials that are
unattainable by direct synthesis methods. Aliovalent CE is complex and synthetically
challenging because the exchange of an unequal number of host and guest cations is
required to maintain charge balance. An approach to control aliovalent CE reactions is
the use of a single reactant to both supply the guest cation and extract the host
cation. Here, we study the application of GaCl3–L complexes [L =
trioctylphosphine (TOP), triphenylphosphite (TPP), diphenylphosphine (DPP)] as reactants
in the exchange of Cu+ for Ga3+ in
Cu2–xS nanocrystals. We find that noncomplexed
GaCl3 etches the nanocrystals by S2– extraction, whereas
GaCl3–TOP is unreactive. Successful exchange of Cu+ for
Ga3+ is only possible when GaCl3 is complexed with either TPP or
DPP. This is attributed to the pivotal role of the
Cu2–xS–GaCl3–L activated
complex that forms at the surface of the nanocrystal at the onset of the CE reaction,
which must be such that simultaneous Ga3+ insertion and Cu+
extraction can occur. This requisite is only met if GaCl3 is bound to a
phosphine ligand, with a moderate bond strength, to allow facile dissociation of the
complex at the nanocrystal surface. The general validity of this mechanism is
demonstrated by using GaCl3–DPP to convert CuInS2 into
(Cu,Ga,In)S2 nanocrystals, which increases the photoluminescence quantum
yield 10-fold, while blue-shifting the photoluminescence into the NIR biological window.
This highlights the general applicability of the mechanistic insights provided by our
work.

semiconductor nanocrystalscation exchangecopper sulfidecopper gallium sulfidecopper indium sulfidecopper indium gallium sulfidedocument-id-old-9nn9b05337document-id-new-14nn9b05337ccc-price
==== Body
Compound copper chalcogenide nanocrystals (NCs) offer a promising alternative to the widely
studied CdX and PbX NCs (X = S, Se, Te), as they consist of less toxic elements and display
exciting optoelectronic properties, such as photoluminescence (PL) tunability in the visible
to the near-infrared (NIR) spectral window and localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPR)
in the NIR.1−4 Another advantage of these nanomaterials is the wide range of
compositions that can be obtained, ranging from binary to multinary compounds with up to
five different elements.1−3 This makes them a versatile
class of materials, offering ample opportunities for property
engineering.1−3,5
However, some morphologies and compositions are not easily accessible by direct approaches
due to synthetic limitations, such as the lack of suitable precursors for multinary
compounds.1 Nanoscale cation exchange (CE) has emerged as a promising
postsynthetic tool to circumvent these limitations, providing pathways to NCs and hetero-NCs
with compositions, morphologies, crystal structures, and heteroarchitectures that would
otherwise remain unavailable.5−8 The extent of the CE (ranging from doping, e.g.,
Ag:CdSe NCs,9 Zn:CsPbBr3 NCs,10 Mn:ZnTe
magic-size clusters,11 to full replacement)5−8 and the elemental
distribution profile of the product NCs (i.e., homogeneous or gradient
alloys, e.g., (Cd,Zn)Se NCs,12 or heterostructured NCs,
e.g., ZnSe/CdSe,12 PbSe/CdSe13
core/shell quantum dots) depends on a number of physicochemical properties, such as the
miscibility of the parent and product phases and the diffusion rates of the incoming and
outgoing cations within the NCs and can be tailored by adjusting reaction variables, such as
reaction temperature and concentration of guest cations in solution.5−13

In isovalent CE, such as Zn2+ for Cd2+ exchange in ZnSe NCs12 and Pb2+ for Cd2+ in PbX NCs,13−15 a direct place exchange reaction occurs at the surface of the template
NCs, through which the outgoing host cation and the incoming guest cation swap places
(i.e., the guest cation is incorporated in the NC, while the host cation
forms a complex with the ligand molecule that was carrying the guest cation).12 This is in contrast with aliovalent CE, such as Cu+ for
In3+ in Cu2–xS NCs16 or
Cd2+ for Ag+ in CdSe,5,9,17 which typically occurs through two
separate chemical pathways.5−8,16 This makes balancing the in- and outgoing
diffusion rates challenging. An approach to better control aliovalent CE reactions is the
use of a single precursor, which both provides the guest cation and extracts the host
cation. In the case of the Cu+ for In3+ exchange, a stoichiometric
InCl3–trioctylphosphine complex has been shown to be a suitable
precursor, even allowing for topotactic sequential CE (viz., Cd2+ for
Cu+, followed by partial Cu+ for In3+) in large and
complex anisotropic NCs such as CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod nanorods, with preservation of the size,
shape, and heterostructure of the template NCs in the product
CuInSe2/CuInS2 dot-in-rod nanorods.18 The strict
control over the CE rates provided by this approach has been recently exploited to fabricate
air-stable CuInSe2 NC transistors by postdeposition sequential CE.19 Here, we extend the single precursor approach to the exchange of
Cu+ for Ga3+ in Cu2–xS and
CuInS2 NCs by using stoichiometric GaCl3–phosphine complexes
to simultaneously deliver Ga3+ and extract Cu+. Our choice is
motivated by the fact that CuGaS2 (CGS) and Cu(In,Ga)S2 (CIGS) exhibit
interesting optoelectronic properties, which make them promising materials for applications
in photocatalysis,20,21
light-emitting devices,22,23 and photovoltaics.24−27 Moreover, studies of Cu+ for
Ga3+ and In3+ for Ga3+ cation exchange are
scarce.28−30 Although Ga3+
and In3+ are both trivalent cations of group IIIA metals, they have significantly
different ionic radii (rGa3+ = 47 pm,
rIn3+ = 62 pm)31 and Lewis
acidity (ηGa3+ = 17 eV, ηIn3+ = 13
eV)32 and are thus expected to behave differently in cation exchange
reactions. Our study thus offers an ideal testbed to investigate the relationship between
the chemistry of the metal chloride–phosphine complexes and the outcome of cation
exchange reactions in Cu chalcogenide NCs.

We investigated different GaCl3–L Lewis acid–base adduct complexes
[L = trioctylphosphine (TOP), triphenylphosphite (TPP), and diphenylphosphine DPP)] as
reagents for the exchange of Cu+ for Ga3+ and found that the choice of
ligand has a profound impact on the reaction outcome. Noncomplexed GaCl3 is a
strong Lewis acid that yields hollow NCs through etching by sulfide extraction, whereas the
complex GaCl3–trioctylphosphine leads to neither etching nor cation
exchange. In contrast, both GaCl3–triphenylphosphite and
GaCl3–diphenylphosphine successfully converted
Cu2–xS NCs in CuGaS2 NCs through
Cu+ for Ga3+ exchange. These different reactivities are attributed
to the stability and geometry of the activated
Cu2–xS–GaCl3–L complex that
must be formed at the surface of the NCs prior to the cation exchange. Density functional
theory (DFT) calculations show that, in these complexes, the Ga–P bond strength
decreases with increasing electron-withdrawing nature of the side groups on the phosphine
ligands (i.e., the Ga–P bond strength ε follows the trend
εGaCl3–TOP >
εGaCl3–DPP >
εGaCl3–TPP). Complexing GaCl3 with DPP or
TPP lowers the activation energy barrier for the CE reaction, while kinetically favoring the
Cu+ for Ga3+ place exchange over the sulfide extraction. These
insights were used to successfully convert CuInS2 NCs into Cu-poor
(Cu,In,Ga)S2 NCs through Cu+ for Ga3+ exchange, yielding
NCs with vastly improved photoluminescence quantum yields with respect to the parent NCs.
The findings presented in this work are thus generally applicable, resulting in
nanomaterials with combinations of size, shape, composition, and crystal structure that are
not directly accessible by conventional synthesis routes.

Results and Discussion
Stoichiometric InCl3–TOP and GaCl3–TOP as
Reactants for Cation Exchange in Cu2–xS NCs
Throughout this work, low-chalcocite 12 nm Cu2–xS
(x < 0.04) bifrustum NCs are used as parent NCs to investigate the
Cu+ for Ga3+ cation exchange reaction. For comparison, these NCs
(Figure 1a,d) are converted into wurtzite
CuInS2 (CIS) bifrustum NCs (Figure 1b,e) by partial, self-limited Cu+ for In3+ CE at 100
°C, using a stoichiometric InCl3–trioctylphosphine
(InCl3–TOP) Lewis acid–base adduct as precursor, as previously
reported by our group.18 The transformation from low chalcocite to
wurtzite is evidenced by the electron diffraction (ED) patterns (Figure
1a,b,d,e). The powder ED (PED) pattern obtained after
azimuthal integration of the 2D ED pattern of the product NCs (Figure
1e) corresponds well to the reference pattern of wurtzite CIS.
The shape and size of the NCs are preserved after the reaction (Supporting Information, Figure S1), confirming the topotactic nature of the
Cu+ for In3+ CE reaction. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(EDS) measurements further confirm the conversion of
Cu2–xS NCs into ternary CIS NCs (Cu/In = 1.00:0.79;
Supporting Information, Figure S2). Compared to the
Cu2–xS parent NCs, the product CIS NCs no longer
exhibit a LSPR absorption band in the NIR (Supporting Information, Figure S3a,b). The absorption spectrum of the CIS
NCs agrees well with spectra reported in the literature.33 In contrast,
the use of the stoichiometric GaCl3–TOP Lewis acid–base adduct as
a precursor does not lead to any significant change in the composition (Cu/Ga = 1.00:0.02,
Supporting Information, Figure S4), crystal structure, size, and shape of
the NCs (Figure 1c,f). The absorption spectrum of
NCs obtained after reaction with GaCl3–TOP exhibits little to no LSPR
band (Supporting Information, Figure S3c), which indicates the absence of excess
free holes in these NCs, due to (limited) reduction at the NC surface.

Figure 1 TEM images of (a) parent Cu2–xS bifrustum NCs, (b)
product Cu1.03In0.81S2 (CIS) bifrustum NCs, after
reaction with InCl3–TOP at 100 °C, and (c)
Cu1.99Ga0.04S nanocrystals, after reaction with
GaCl3–TOP at 100 °C. Top-right insets display the
corresponding ED pattern. Bottom panels show azimuthally integrated ED (PED) patterns
of (d) parent low-chalcocite Cu2–xS nanocrystals,
(e) product wurtzite CIS nanocrystals, and (f) product low-chalcocite
Cu1.99Ga0.04S nanocrystals. Reference bars in (d,f) are
calculated patterns based on the low-chalcocite
Cu2–xS crystal structure described in ref (34). Reference bars in (e) were obtained from JCPDS
PDF-card 01-077-9459 for wurtzite CIS.

Reaction of Noncomplexed GaCl3 with
Cu2–xS NCs
Clearly, the Cu+ for Ga3+ CE does not significantly occur when
GaCl3–TOP is used as the reactant under the same conditions that
successfully lead to Cu+ for In3+ CE using
InCl3–TOP. Therefore, other Ga precursors were examined, starting with
the simplest possible case: GaCl3 dissolved in neat toluene. The reaction with
GaCl3 at the same temperature used with GaCl3–TOP (100
°C) was found to severely deteriorate the NCs (Supporting Information, Figure S5). To minimize the degradation, the
temporal evolution of this reaction was studied at a lower temperature (30 °C) (Figure 2b–e). The TEM images of the product
NCs show that, despite the lower reaction temperature, a low-contrast spot appears in the
NCs already after 15 min of reaction (Figure 2b,
red arrows) and increases in size over time (Figure 2c–e). The PED pattern shows that the crystal structure of the NCs
remains low-chalcocite Cu2–xS, even after 120 min of
reaction (Figure 2f), despite the dramatic
morphological changes (Figure 2e). After 120 min
of reaction, these NCs no longer exhibit an LSPR absorption band (Supporting Information, Figure S3f), presumably due to their poorly defined
shape.

Figure 2 TEM images of (a) parent Cu2–xS NCs and
(b–e) product NCs obtained after reacting the NCs shown in (a) with
GaCl3 at 30 °C for (b) 15 min, (c) 30 min, (d) 60 min, and (e) 120
min. Red arrows indicate regions of low contrast within the nanocrystals (cartoons in
the lower-left corner give an impression of the observed contrast in the NCs).
Top-right inset in (e) depicts an electron diffraction pattern of the corresponding
sample. Panel (f) is the azimuthally integrated ED pattern depicted in (e). Reference
bars in (f) are calculated patterns based on the low-chalcocite
Cu2–xS crystal structure described in ref
(34). The blue curve in (f) corresponds to
the PED pattern of the parent Cu2–xS nanocrystals.
Dotted lines serve as guides for the eye.

To determine the nature of the low contrast region and its position within the particles,
high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission microscopy (HAADF-STEM) tomography
measurements were performed. Visualizations of the 3D reconstructed volumes of NCs after
different reaction times are shown in Figure 3.
Animated versions of the tomograms are also provided in the web-enhanced movies 1, 2, and 3. The tomography measurements show that, after 15 min of
reaction with GaCl3, a small cavity is present at the surface of some
Cu2–xS NCs (Figure 3a) and increases in size as the reaction progresses (Figure 3b,c). Acquired orthoslices, which were used
to reconstruct the 3D morphologies, are displayed in Figure 3d–f. These measurements indicate that the brighter regions
observed in TEM images coincide with cavities at the surface of the NCs. The cavities
appear to form at the surface of the NCs at early reaction stages and
subsequently grow inward over time. A small portion of the NCs (indicated by red arrows in
Figure 3) appears to be hollow, without an
obvious opening at the surface.

Figure 3 3D characterization of tomographic visualization of the
Cu2–xS bifrustum NCs after reaction with
GaCl3 at 30 °C for (a) 15 min, (b) 30 min, and (c) 60 min. After 15 min, only a small dimple is present at
the surface of the NCs. After longer reaction times, these cavities are found to be
larger. Red arrows indicate hollow NCs without an apparent opening at the surface.
(d–f) Orthoslices used to reconstruct the 3D morphologies presented in
(a–c). Animated (rotating) versions of the models depicted in panels
(a–c) are provided.

These observations bear similarities with previous reports on hollow nanoparticles, whose
formation has been ascribed to the nanoscale Kirkendall effect,35,36 which involves an imbalance between
outward and inward diffusion fluxes during the chemical conversion of a NC into a
different material through reaction with a reactant present in solution. The surface of
the parent NC is first converted into a shell of the product material by reaction with a
species present in solution, after which further conversion can only take place through
solid-state diffusion of the reactant species through the NC.35 In case
the outward diffusion rate is faster than the inward diffusion rate, there is a net flow
of material going out of the NC, leaving vacancies behind.35
Condensation of these vacancies gives rise to voids that eventually collect in a central
void in the NCs.35 The nanoscale Kirkendall process has also been
recently proposed as an explanation for the conversion of
Cu2–xS nanoplatelets into CuInS2
nanorings through partial Cu+ for In3+ CE.37 Our
observations, however, are not consistent with the nanoscale Kirkendall effect, as the
cavities form at the surface of the NCs and grow inward, in striking contrast with the
outward growing inner voids that characterize the Kirkendall effect.

Surface erosion of the NCs and preservation of a low-chalcocite
Cu2–xS shell after the reaction with
GaCl3 indicate that a reaction other than cation exchange is taking place. In
the successful Cu+ for In3+ cation exchange reaction using the
InCl3–TOP Lewis acid–base adduct complex, TOP (a soft Lewis
base) acts as Cu+ extractor,5,18 likely forming CuCl–TOP Lewis acid–base
adduct complexes. In the present reaction using noncomplexed GaCl3, there are
no species present to directly extract Cu+. However, GaCl3 is a
strong Lewis acid38,39
and therefore can extract S2– from the NC as S2– is a
Lewis base. This extraction destabilizes the crystal lattice, as the S2–
anions form the framework of Cu2–xS NCs, resulting in
etching of the NCs and formation of cavities at the surface. The collapse of the NC
framework will release Cu+ ions, which are likely stabilized in solution by
binding to the chloride ions released from GaCl3 after its reaction with the NC
sulfides.

Although the NCs react with a strong Lewis acid, they do not dissolve completely, even
after 300 min (Supporting Information, Figure S6). Interestingly, in micrographs obtained
using HAADF-STEM, most particles exhibit a uniform contrast after reacting for 300 min
(Supporting Information, Figure S6e). This uniform contrast indicates that
the previously formed cavities are filled with new material. EDS elemental maps show that
this material consists mostly of gallium. These observations suggest that Ga-containing
monomers, formed upon extraction of S2– by GaCl3, precipitate
inside the NC cavities after longer reaction times. This refilling of the cavities likely
blocks further reactions on the NC surface, preventing further dissolution.

Tailoring the Ga Precursor Chemistry To Boost the Cu+ for Ga3+
Cation Exchange
We have discussed above two extreme cases of reactivity imbalance: whereas
GaCl3–TOP is too inert, hardly leading to any change in the parent
Cu2–xS NCs, noncomplexed GaCl3 is too
reactive toward the sulfide anions, thereby etching the parent NCs without any significant
cation exchange. In the following, we will tailor the chemistry of the Ga precursor
complex to allow successful Cu+ for Ga3+ cation exchange.

The observation that the reactivity of the GaCl3–TOP Lewis
acid–base adduct complex as a cation exchange precursor is much lower than that of
the InCl3–TOP complex is surprising, considering that the
metal–phosphorus bond in GaCl3–TOP should be weaker than that in
InCl3–TOP as Ga3+ is a harder Lewis acid than
In3+ (η = 17 and 13 eV, respectively),32 whereas TOP
is a soft Lewis base (η ≈ 6 eV).5,40 This implies that other variables are more relevant in
determining the Cu+ for Ga3+ cation exchange rates and prompted us
to explore the influence of the nature of the phosphine ligand on the cation exchange
reaction by using triphenylphosphite and diphenylphosphine as ligands for GaCl3
(Figure 4b,c). The coordination behavior of a
phosphine ligand with respect to a metal center is determined by its steric and electronic
properties.41,42
The most frequently used parameter to quantify the steric properties of phosphines is the
Tolman cone angle, defined as the apex angle of a cylindrical cone with origin 2.28 Å
from the center of the phosphorus atom, whose sides just touch the Van der Waals surfaces
of the outermost atoms of the organic substituents.41 The three
phosphine ligands used in the present work have significantly different electronic
properties and total molecular volume, but their Tolman cone angles are essentially the
same: 128° for both DPP and TPP and 132° for TOP.41 The value
for TOP is taken to be the same as that reported by Tolman for other tertiary
alkylphosphines, such as tri-n-butylphosphine, although a recent work has
estimated it to be 128°.40 Steric effects are thus not expected to
play a significant role in the cation exchange reactions investigated in our work. The
electronic properties of phosphines are determined by their σ-donor ability and
π-acceptor strength as they bind to metals by a combination of σ-donation from
the lone pair of the P atom and π-back bonding from the d orbitals of the metal into
their empty P–R σ* molecular orbital (R = organic
substituent).41,42
More electronegative (i.e., electron-withdrawing) substituents on the
phosphorus atom decrease the basicity and σ-donating ability of the phosphine, while
increasing its π-acceptor strength.40−43 This effect is due to
the decrease of the electronic density on the phosphorus atom and increase of the
s-character of the lone electron pair.41,42 An increase in electronegativity of the substituents on
the phosphorus atom should lead to weaker bonding to the metal, as should be the case for
GaCl3–TPP and GaCl3–DPP compared to
GaCl3–TOP.

Figure 4 (Top row) Ground-state geometries of three GaCl3–phosphine
complexes obtained from DFT calculations (see below): (a) GaCl3 complexed
with triethylphosphine, used as model for GaCl3 complexed with
trioctylphosphine (GaCl3–TOP), (b) GaCl3 complexed with
triphenylphosphite (GaCl3–TPP), and (c) GaCl3 complexed
with diphenylphosphine (GaCl3–DPP). (Middle row) TEM images of
product NCs obtained after reaction of Cu2–xS NCs
with (d) GaCl3–TOP at 100 °C, (e) GaCl3–TPP
at 100 °C, and (f) GaCl3–DPP at 50 °C. Black arrows
indicate intraparticle contrast in the NCs reacted with GaCl3–TPP.
Top-right insets show the corresponding ED patterns. Bottom row (g–i) shows the
corresponding azimuthally integrated ED patterns. Reference bars in (h,i) are
calculated patterns based on the wurtzite CuGaS2 crystals structure,44 and reference bars in (g) are based on the low-chalcocite
Cu2–xS crystal structure.34

Indeed, the use of both GaCl3–TPP and GaCl3–DPP as
reactants results in successful CE reactions even after reaction times much shorter than
those used for GaCl3–TOP (1 h instead of 12 h, at the same temperature),
as clearly demonstrated by EDS analysis of the product NCs obtained after reaction with
GaCl3–TPP and GaCl3–DPP at 100 °C, which
reveals Cu/Ga ratios of 1.00:1.38 and 1.00:1.48, respectively (Supporting Information, Figures S7 and S8). The NCs that reacted with
GaCl3–TPP are partially deformed and exhibit intraparticle contrast in
TEM images (Figure 4e, indicated by black
arrows), similar to the NCs that reacted with GaCl3 (see Figures 2 and 3). The NCs that reacted with
GaCl3–DPP form agglomerates (Supporting Information, Figure S9), which is likely due to displacement of
the original organic capping ligands (dodecanethiol) with DPP during the CE reaction. DPP
is a relatively small molecule and thus poorly suitable as a steric stabilizer. In
comparison, the NCs cluster less after reaction with GaCl3–TPP as
triphenylphosphite is bulky enough to provide steric stabilization. To increase the
colloidal stability of the NCs reacted with GaCl3–DPP, oleylamine (OLAM)
was added to the reaction mixture and a lower reaction temperature (50 °C) was
employed, which indeed inhibited NC agglomeration (Figure 4f). However, under these milder reaction conditions, the
Cu+ for Ga3+ exchange proceeds to a lesser extent, as shown by EDS
analysis (Cu/Ga ratio of 1.00:0.62, Supporting Information, Figure S10). The PED pattern (Figure 4e,h) of the NCs reacted with
GaCl3–TPP corresponds to the wurtzite crystal structure, confirming that
Cu+ for Ga3+ CE has indeed taken place. Interestingly, the peaks
in the ED pattern are shifted to lower q values compared to those of the
reference wurtzite CGS, indicating that the product CGS NCs have a larger lattice constant
than the reference. This observation will be discussed in more detail below. The PED
pattern (Figure 4f,i) of the NCs reacted with
GaCl3–DPP exhibits broad, poorly defined peaks, indicating that these
particles have partially lost their crystallinity during the CE procedure, which precludes
a definitive assignment of the crystal structure. The NCs reacted with
GaCl3–TPP and GaCl3–DPP are both smaller than the
parent Cu2–xS NCs (diameters = 10.8 ± 1.0, 11.1
± 1.1, and 12.3 ± 1.0 nm, respectively, Supporting Information, Figure S1). The NCs reacted with
GaCl3–TPP no longer exhibit an LSPR absorption band, whereas those
reacted with GaCl3–DPP exhibit an LSPR absorption band with a reduced
intensity (Supporting Information, Figure S3d,e). In the latter NCs, Cu+ was
exchanged for Ga3+ to a lesser extent; the presence of an LSPR absorption band
thus indicates that these NCs remain cation-deficient, requiring excess holes for charge
neutrality.

The intraparticle contrast observed in the NCs after reaction with
GaCl3–TPP was studied with HAADF-STEM and EDS elemental mapping. In
micrographs obtained using HAADF-STEM, the intraparticle contrast appears similar to that
observed in TEM images (compare Figure 5a to
Figure 4e). In the elemental maps, the regions
of low contrast coincide with regions of low signal for both cations (Figure 5, indicated by orange arrows). As the Cu and Ga
distributions correlate well (Figure 5b,c), the
intraparticle contrast is clearly not due to an inhomogeneous composition. Instead, it
appears that the low contrast regions in HAADF-STEM and TEM images simply contain less
material. Likely, surface erosion by GaCl3 is not completely suppressed when
GaCl3–TPP is used as reactant, resulting in the formation of small
cavities at the NC surface.

Figure 5 (a) HAADF-STEM images and EDS elemental maps of (b, blue) Cu and (c, red) Ga of
product NCs obtained by reacting Cu2–xS NCs with
GaCl3–TPP at 100 °C. Orange arrows indicate regions of low
contrast (HAADF-STEM) coinciding with regions of low signal (EDS maps).

Similar to the previously reported conversion of low-chalcocite
Cu2–xS into wurtzite CIS NCs by Cu+ for
In3+ CE,16,18,33 the exchange of Cu+ for Ga3+ in
Cu2–xS NCs using GaCl3–DPP or
GaCl3–TPP as precursors is also partial and self-limited as CGS,
rather than Ga2S3, NCs are produced. In the case of the
Cu+ for In3+ CE in Cu2–xS NCs,
the topotactic, partial, and self-limited character of the exchange was attributed to the
high energy barrier associated with the conversion of the hexagonal close-packed anionic
sublattice of the parent low-chalcocite Cu2–xS NCs into
the face-centered cubic sublattice of the spinel structure of In2S3,
which requires a substantial reorganization of the sulfide anions (by 58% of a S–S
interatomic distance).16 In contrast, the hexagonal wurtzite structure
of CuInS2 requires only minor rearrangements of the sulfide sublattice with
respect to that of the template NCs (1.4 and 6.4% contraction within and between the
hexagonal S2– layers, respectively).16 The topotactic
nature of the cation exchange in Cu2–xS NCs has been
recently exploited to achieve structure-selective conversion of
Cu2–xS NC templates into ZnS, CdS, and
CuInS2, with hexagonal roxbyite Cu1.78S and cubic digenite
Cu1.8S yielding product NCs with the wurtzite and the zinc blende structures,
respectively.45

In the present case, however, the structural differences between the possible products
and the template NCs are less pronounced because low-chalcocite
Cu2–xS, wurtzite CuGaS2, and the stable
form of bulk Ga2S3, monoclinic
α′-Ga2S3, all have a hexagonal close-packed sulfide
sublattice,34,44,46 with hexagonally structured layers stacked in an
...ABAB... fashion (Figure 6a,b). However, we
observe that, in all three dimensions, the wurtzite CuGaS2 structure exhibits a
significant lattice contraction compared to that of low-chalcocite
Cu2–xS (Figure 6c,d). These contractions are 5.6, 5.7, and 9.5% in x,
y, and z, respectively. On the other hand, the anion
positions of wurtzite CuGaS2 and α′-Ga2S3
are very similar: transforming the former into the latter, the lattice has to contract by
only 0.6, 0.5, and 2.5% in x, y, and z,
respectively (the definition of x, y, and
z directions in terms of crystallographic directions are provided in
the caption of Figure 6). It is thus clear that,
based on the bulk crystal structure parameters, the sulfide sublattice of the template
low-chalcocite Cu2–xS would have to undergo similar
degrees of reconstruction, regardless of whether the cation exchange would be partial,
yielding wurtzite CuGaS2, or complete, yielding
α′-Ga2S3. However, we note that the product wurtzite
CGS NCs (with Cu/Ga ratios ranging from 1:1.48 to 1:0.62) obtained in our work exhibit a
larger lattice constant than the wurtzite CuGaS2 reference (Figure 4h,i), indicating that the degree of contraction was
smaller than expected based on the bulk lattice parameters, and therefore, that the
product CGS NCs are under tensile strain. This suggests that the mild reaction conditions
used in our work do not allow the anion sublattice to undergo full reconstruction in order
to relax the strain induced by the CE.

Figure 6 (a,b) Hexagonal close-packed structure viewed from two different orientations: (a)
characteristic arrangement into hexagonally constructed layers, defined here as the
x,y-plane, and (b) characteristic ...ABAB...
stacking of these hexagonal layers, defined here as the
x,z-plane. (c,d) Anion positions of (black)
low-chalcocite Cu2–xS, (cyan) wurtzite
CuGaS2, and (purple) α′-Ga2S3 overlaid
onto each other. (c) Hexagonal ordering in the
x,y-plane and (d) ...ABAB... stacking in the
x,z-plane. Δx,
Δy, and Δz, denoted in (a,b),
correspond to the lattice distances used to determine the lattice contractions
mentioned in the main text. The
x,y,z-directions correspond to
the following crystallographic directions: (low-chalcocite
Cu2–xS) [201],[010],[001]; (wurtzite
CuGaS2) [11̅0],[110],[001]; (monoclinic
α′-Ga2S3) [010],[100],[102]. Anion coordinates
were obtained from the crystal structures of low-chalcocite
Cu2–xS,34 wurtzite
CuGaS2,44 and monoclinic
α′-Ga2S3.46

Recently, lattice strain was shown to play an important role in the conversion of
djurleite Cu2–xS nanorods (NRs) into
Cu2–xS/CGS hetero-NRs by partial Cu+ for
Ga3+ CE.30 Shim and co-workers showed that lattice strain
prevented the homogeneous conversion of Cu2–xS NRs
(∼170 nm long, 20 nm diameter) into CGS NRs, resulting instead in hetero-NRs
containing one or multiple wurtzite CGS domains.30 The authors argued
that the strain induced by the lattice mismatch between the parent djurleite
Cu2–xS phase and the product wurtzite CGS phase
would make Ga3+ diffusion into Cu2–xS
unfavorable, thereby limiting the extent of the CE reaction and leading to
wurtzite–djurleite superlattice formation as a way to minimize the resulting
strain. However, we note that in the present work
Cu2–xS NCs were successfully converted into homogeneous
CGS NCs, despite the tensile strain resulting from insufficient contraction to the lattice
parameters of fully relaxed bulk CuGaS2. This difference can be attributed to
the fact that the NCs used here are much smaller than those used by Shim and co-workers
(viz. 12 nm diameter vs ∼170 nm long, 20 nm diameter rods). The
smaller volume of the template NCs used in our work favors conversion to homogeneous CGS
NCs because smaller NCs can more easily accommodate lattice strain. This also offers a
possible explanation for the self-limiting character of the Cu+ for
Ga3+ exchange in Cu2–xS NC templates: the
α′-Ga2S3 structure is probably unable to accommodate
as much tensile strain as wurtzite CGS, preventing full CE.

Density Functional Theory Calculations
To corroborate our assumption of weaker Ga–P bond strengths in
GaCl3–DPP and GaCl3–TPP with respect to
GaCl3–TOP, we conducted DFT calculations at the
B3LYP/6-311+G(d,p);Ga:SDD level to estimate both the ground-state geometry of the
complexes and the Ga–P bond enthalpy. In the DFT calculations, we modeled TOP as
triethylphosphine to avoid an extensive conformational search due to the many degrees of
freedom of the long alkyl chains. We expect that only the first few CH2 groups
of TOP significantly influence the Ga–P bond, making PEt3 an acceptable
surrogate for TOP. To verify whether the outcome of these calculations is physically
reasonable, we compare calculated geometries to experimental structures obtained from
X-ray crystallography. We include an additional complex
(GaCl3–PPh3), as, to the best of our knowledge, the
structures of GaCl3–DPP and GaCl3–TPP have not been
resolved experimentally. The results of the DFT calculations (Ga–P bond lengths and
dissociation enthalpies) and the experimentally determined Ga–P bond lengths are
shown in Table 1. The Ga–P bond lengths
determined by DFT deviate from the experimental ones by only 4–5%. Moreover, the
DFT results reproduce the experimental trend in Ga–P bond length from
GaCl3–PEt3 to GaCl3–PPh3.
Thus, although the absolute values obtained from the DFT calculations are 4–5%
longer than the experimental ones, the trends in the DFT results are reliable. We observe
that, with increasing electron-withdrawing nature of the side groups on the phosphine
ligand, the Ga–P bond length L increases (viz.,
LGaCl3–TOP <
LGaCl3–DPP <
LGaCl3–TPP). The dissociation enthalpy
follows the reverse trend. These results show that, indeed, the Ga–P bonds in
GaCl3–DPP and GaCl3–TPP are weaker than those in
GaCl3–TOP.

Table 1 DFT-Calculated (B3LYP/6-311+G(d,p);Ga:SDD) and Experimental Ga–P Bond
Lengths and DFT-Calculated Dissociation Enthalpies of
GaCl3–PEt3, GaCl3–PPh3,
GaCl3–DPP, and GaCl3–TPP
complex	Ga–P bond length (Å), calculated	Ga–P bond length (Å), experimental	dissociation enthalpy (kcal/mol), calculated	
GaCl3–PEt3	2.453	2.35347	31.2	
GaCl3–PPh3	2.487	2.37248	27.2	
GaCl3–DPP	2.498	not available	23.0	
GaCl3–TPP	2.540	not available	14.7	
Mechanism for the Cu+ for Ga3+ Exchange in
Cu2–xS NCs
Nanoscale CE reactions consist of a number of linked elementary kinetic
steps:5,6,8,12 (i) extraction of the host cations from the NC
surface, (ii) incorporation of guest cations at the NC surface, (iii) solid-state
diffusion of the guest cations into the NC, and (iv) solid-state diffusion of the native
cations to the NC surface. The thermodynamic driving force for the reaction is determined
by the energy balance of the overall reaction.5,6,8 However, the energy input or output
involved in each step is important as all steps are kinetically linked and must proceed in
a concerted manner. Therefore, the outcome of nanoscale CE reactions
(i.e., extent of the exchange, homogeneous or heterostructured
nanocrystals, etc.) is dictated by the kinetic balance between a number
of competing processes taking place in solution, at the NC surface and within the NC.

Aliovalent CE reactions are inherently more complex than isovalent ones as preservation
of charge balance is in this case kinetically more challenging because a different number
of host and guest cations must be exchanged to keep charge neutrality
(e.g., three Cu+ cations must be extracted to allow the
incorporation of one In3+ or Ga3+ cation). Aliovalent CE involving
Cu+ has been extensively investigated because the small charge and high
solid-state diffusion rates of Cu+ ions make both their incorporation into and
extraction from NCs facile and fast. This makes copper chalcogenide NCs attractive not
only as templates for other binary, multinary, or hetero-NCs that cannot be easily
obtained by direct routes (e.g., CuInS2,16,28,30,33,37,45
CuInSe2,8,49,50 Cu4SnS4,19,51
Cu2–xSe/ZnSe,52
ZnS/Cu1.8S,28,53etc.) but also as intermediates in sequential CE reactions, making it
possible to synthesize NCs and hetero-NCs that would otherwise remain inaccessible
(e.g., PbS NRs from CdS NRs by Cd2+ for Cu+
followed by Cu+ for Pb2+ CE,5 wurtzite ZnSe/ZnS
and CuInSe2/CuInS2 core/shell NRs from CdSe/CdS core/shell
NRs18,54). As a
result of this extensive research, the thermodynamics and kinetics of aliovalent CE
reactions involving Cu+ are reasonably well-understood and known to depend on
many variables: presence of Cu-extracting ligands in solution,5,6,8 leaving ability
of the ligands bound to the incoming guest Mn+ cation,37 concentration of Cu+ vacancies,52,55 valence and diffusion rate of the
incoming guest Mn+ cation,8,28,30 crystal structure of the
template Cu2–xS NCs,8,45 and miscibility of the parent and product
phases.8 As we will discuss below, the results presented above
unravel one more crucial parameter governing the kinetics of CE reactions: the activated
complex that must form at the surface of the template NC when a direct place exchange
reaction is used (i.e., when the Cu-extracting ligand is bound to the
guest heterocation).

As previously demonstrated by Buhro and co-workers,37 the aliovalent
Cu+ for In3+ exchange in Cu2–xS
NCs is in the reaction-limited regime. The incorporation of In3+ is preceded by
the adsorption of the InX3 precursor on the NC surface. The displacement of the
X– ligand is proposed to occur by nucleophilic attack of lattice
S2– ions on the adsorbed InX3 precursor.37 The height of the energy barrier for this reaction is given by the leaving-group
ability of the X– ligand.37 We add that when a direct
place exchange reaction is promoted by using a TOP–InCl3 complex, the
energy barrier is lowered by the formation of an incipient bond between the P donor group
and a Cu+ ion in the vicinity of the S2– ion responsible for
the nucleophilic attack on the In–Cl bond. This makes the reaction rates faster and
allows for a direct place exchange between the incoming In3+ guest cation and
one outgoing Cu+ cation, while facilitating extraction of two additional
Cu+ ions as neutral CuCl units. However, the formation of such an activated
complex imposes constraints on the orientation of the binding TOP–InCl3
with respect to the surface Cu+ and S2–. Nevertheless, in the
case of Cu+ for In3+ CE, these constraints are not very strict
because the activated complex can follow only two possible reaction pathways: CE or
desorption without reaction, in which case it may bind again in the proper orientation
later.

In the case of Cu+ for Ga3+ CE, the constraints imposed on the
activated complex are more severe because GaCl3 is a much stronger Lewis acid
than InCl3, therefore being capable of extracting lattice S2–
from the template Cu2–xS NCs (Ga–S = 393 kJ/mol,
In–S = 313–316 kJ/mol),56 leading to etching rather than
CE (Figure 7a), as demonstrated above (Figures 2 and 3). Complexation of
GaCl3 with TOP suppresses the NC etching but does not lead to CE. This
demonstrates that the activated complex formed upon adsorption of
GaCl3–TOP on the NC surface effectively weakens the interaction between
Ga and the lattice S2– and also prevents interaction between the P donor
head and the Cu+ ions (Figure 7b). In
contrast, both GaCl3–TPP and GaCl3–DPP result in
successful Cu+ for Ga3+ CE. All three ligands (TOP, TPP, DPP) are
bound to GaCl3 through the lone pair on the phosphorus atom and an empty
sp3 orbital of gallium.48,57,58 To extract Cu+, the
phosphine acts as Lewis base and binds to Cu+ through the same lone pair. In
order for the phosphine to bind to Cu+, while still preventing etching by
attack of the Ga3+ to lattice S2– ions, the activated complex
at the NC surface (Figure 7c) must be such that
the Cu–P bond formation and the Ga–P bond breaking occur simultaneously
(Figure 7c, steps 1–3) and are followed
by the immediate place exchange between Cu+ and Ga3+. We attribute
the higher CE reactivities of the GaCl3–TPP and
GaCl3–DPP to a more favorable geometry of the activated complex formed
upon their adsorption on the surface of the template
Cu2–xS NCs, as well as a weaker Ga–P bond
compared to GaCl3–TOP. In GaCl3–TPP and
GaCl3–DPP, the Ga–P bond is weaker than that in
GaCl3–TOP (see Table 1),
fulfilling the conditions for a fast place exchange between Ga3+ and
Cu+, while still making the competing reaction between GaCl3 and
the lattice S2– ions less likely (Figure 7c, steps 1–3). We note that the Cu+ for
Ga3+ place exchange is thermodynamically favored as it results in the
formation of two new bonds that are stronger than the initial ones (viz., the Cu–P
bond in the Cu–phosphine Lewis acid–base adduct, which is favored because
Cu+ is a much softer Lewis acid than Ga3+, η = 6.28 and 17
eV, respectively,32 and the Ga–S bond, which has a bond strength
of 393 kJ/mol while the enthalpy of formation of Cu2S is only −79.5
kJ/mol59). Nevertheless, some degree of etching still occurs as the
NCs reacted with GaCl3–TPP and GaCl3–DPP are smaller
than the template NCs (viz., 10.8 ± 1.0, 11.1 ± 1.1, and 12.3 ± 1.0 nm,
respectively, Supporting Information, Figure S1). The observed shrinkage (12.2 and 9.76%,
respectively) is too large to be attributed to a decrease in unit cell volume alone (see
discussion on crystal lattice contraction above). The difference in reactivity between
InCl3–TOP and GaCl3–TOP as CE reactants may be due
to the fact that In3+ exhibits three-, four-, five-, and six-coordination,
whereas Ga3+ is limited to three- and four-coordination.57
InCl3–TOP has thus more degrees of freedom to rearrange itself at the
nanocrystal surface to form the
Cu2–xS–InCl3–TOP activated
complex, whereas GaCl3–TOP does not, making the formation of the
Cu2–xS–GaCl3–TOP activated
complex subjected to more stringent orientational constraints and therefore less
likely.

Figure 7 Schematic depiction of the Cu+ for Ga3+ cation exchange
reaction in Cu2–xS nanocrystals. (a) Free
GaCl3 reacts as a Lewis acid, extracting S2–, leading
to etching of the nanocrystals. (b) Extraction of S2– is inhibited
when GaCl3 is complexed with a phosphine ligand. (c) Successful cation
exchange involves four steps: (i) cleavage of the Ga–P bond at the
Cu2–xS nanocrystal surface, at which point
Ga–S and P–Cu bonds are made simultaneously; (ii) extraction of
Cu+ by the phosphine; (iii) subsequent incorporation of Ga3+
into the nanocrystal; and (iv) reaction of remaining Cl– with
Cu+, extracting two additional Cu+ ions, completing the
exchange.

As mentioned above, the steric demands of all three phosphines used in the present work
are essentially the same (viz., 128° for DPP and TPP, 132° for TOP),41 and therefore, steric effects are not expected to play a significant role
in the outcome of the cation exchange reactions. However, Tolman cone angles are just a
first approximation as they do not take into account the effect of different M–P
bond lengths, different metal centers, and the overall interaction with other ligands
coordinated to the same metal center.43,60,61 Therefore, actual cone angles
obtained from X-ray structural data (the so-called solid cone angles) typically deviate
from the Tolman cone angles, varying over a wide range depending on the nature of the
metal center and bond length (shorter bonds result in larger cone angles).60 For example, the solid cone angles determined for triphenylphosphine
complexes range from 129 to 168°,61 whereas the Tolman cone angle
of triphenylphosphine is 145°.41,43 In the case of Ni complexes, a slightly larger solid cone angle has
been reported for TPP with respect to DPP complexes (135 and 124°,
respectively),43 consistent with the bulkier nature of the former
(containing three phenyl groups) with respect to the latter (which contains only two
phenyl groups). If the impact of steric effects on the outcome of the cation exchange
reactions were significant, one would expect a difference between the reactivity of the
complexes using TPP and DPP as ligands, in contrast with our experimental data, which show
that GaCl3–TPP and GaCl3–DPP have similar
reactivities. This implies that the kinetics of the cation exchange reactions studied in
our work are primarily dictated by the electronic properties of the phosphine ligands
used, which determine the Ga–P bond strength of the resulting Lewis
acid–base adduct complexes with GaCl3 and the geometry of the activated
Cu2–xS–GaCl3–L complex
that forms at the surface of the Cu2–xS NC at the onset
of the cation exchange reaction. After the place exchange between the outgoing
Cu+ and the incoming Ga3+ cations has taken place, the two
chlorides still bound to the incorporated Ga3+ cation will react with two
neighboring Cu+ cations, extracting them from the NC surface as neutral CuCl
units, which are highly soluble in the apolar reaction medium used in our experiments
(Figure 7c, step 4). This likely increases the
thermodynamic driving force of the overall CE reaction both entropically and enthalpically
as two more chemical species are released in solution and solvated.5,6,8 The two
Cu+ vacancies left will further promote the CE reaction by allowing more
Cu+ cations to diffuse to the surface, while allowing the incorporated
Ga3+ guest cation to diffuse inward. As previously shown for CE reactions in
copper chalcogenide NCs, the CE rates increase with increasing concentration of
Cu+ vacancies.52,62

Cu+ for Ga3+ Exchange in Luminescent CuInS2
NCs
To illustrate the general applicability of the findings presented above, we used
GaCl3–DPP to convert luminescent CuInS2 (CIS) NCs into
(Cu,In,Ga)S2 (CIGS) NCs with much brighter photoluminescence (see Methods for details). The parent CIS NCs have an
indium-rich composition with a Cu/In ratio of 0.68 ± 0.008:1. EDS analysis of the
product NCs gives a Cu/Ga/In ratio of 0.20 ± 0.001:0.16 ± 0.001:1, indicating
that Cu+ ions are exchanged for Ga3+. These cation ratios imply that
the charge balance is preserved through the CE reaction, as the relative concentration of
Ga ions multiplied by their charge of +3 exactly corresponds to the decrease in Cu
concentration (with charge +1; 0.16 × 3 = 0.48; 0.68–0.20 = 0.48).
Interestingly, the size (∼5.5 nm) and pyramidal shape of the CIS NCs are preserved
in the product CIGS NCs (see Figure 8a,d),
despite the removal of a significant amount of cations from the NC. Fast Fourier transform
(FFT) analysis of the high-resolution TEM images allows determination of the lattice
spacings, being 0.18, 0.21, and 0.34 nm before and after the reaction
(i.e., they are not significantly changed by the CE reaction). However,
analysis of the ED patterns shows a shift to higher q values (Figure 8e), indicating a small contraction of the
unit cell. This contraction is consistent with the exchange of the relatively large
Cu+ for the relatively small Ga3+
(rCu+ = 60 pm,
rGa3+ = 47 pm).31

Figure 8 Cu+ for Ga3+ cation exchange in luminescent CIS NCs. (a)
High-resolution TEM image of the parent CIS NCs. The inset shows the FFT of the image.
(b) High-resolution TEM image of the product CIGS NCs after reaction; the inset shows
the FFT of the image. (c,d) Enlarged TEM image of single NCs before (c) and after (d)
the Ga3+ for Cu+ CE reaction, with the corresponding FFTs. Both
scale bars correspond to 5 nm. (e) Azimuthally integrated ED patterns of the parent
CIS NCs and product CIGS NCs, and bulk roquesite CIS X-ray diffraction reference
pattern (JPCDS PDF-card 00-047-1372). (f) Absorption and (g) PL spectra of the parent
CIS NCs and product CIGS NCs. The inset in (f) shows the normalized absorption
spectra. The PL quantum yield of the product CIGS NCs is at least 10 times higher than
that of the parent CIS NCs. The dip in the PL spectrum around 1150 nm is caused by
absorption of emitted light by toluene, which was used as solvent.

The optical properties of the template CIS NCs and the product Ga-containing (CIGS) NCs
are shown in Figure 8f,g. Both the absorption
(Figure 8f) and photoluminescence (PL, Figure 8g) spectra show a blue shift after the CE
reaction, indicating a widening of the band gap. This can be attributed to either an
increase in quantum confinement due to a smaller effective CIS core
size,2,33 in case a
CIS/CIGS core/shell NC is formed, or by the intrinsic increase in band
gap,63,64 in case a
homogeneous CIGS alloy is formed, as the band gap of bulk CuGaS2 is larger than
that of CuInS2 (2.50 and 1.55 eV, respectively).1−3 Our results, however, do not allow a distinction between the two cases
to be made. The PL quantum yield (QY) of the product CIGS NCs increases by 1 order of
magnitude in comparison to that of the parent CIS NCs (Figure 8g). Such an increase in PLQY could originate from a strong
enhancement of the radiative recombination rates, from elimination of nonradiative
recombination pathways, or from a combination of both. Considering that similar PLQY
enhancements have been previously observed upon shelling of CIS NCs with both ZnS and CdS,
and attributed to passivation of nonradiative recombination centers at the
surface,1,65−67 it is likely
that the higher PLQY of the CIGS NCs obtained by cation exchange is also due to improved
surface passivation. It is interesting to note that PL of CIGS NCs is generally not
reported,26,68
suggesting that the exciton recombination in these materials tends to be dominated by
nonradiative decay pathways, in striking contrast to the (Cu-poor) CIGS NCs prepared in
our work by postsynthetic Cu+ for Ga3+ cation exchange in CIS NCs.
The scarce literature on the PL of CIGS NCs makes it difficult to unambiguously identify
the radiative recombination mechanism in these materials. However, their large global
Stokes shift and broad PL peak suggest that, similar to CIS and other
I–III–VI2 NCs, the PL in these nanomaterials most likely
originates from the radiative recombination of a delocalized conduction band electron with
a hole localized at a Cu(I) ion.69 Time-resolved spectroscopic
measurements could provide additional insights into the origin of the radiative
recombination in these nanomaterials but are beyond the scope of the present work. It
should be noted that the PL of these Pb- and Cd-free NCs is centered in the NIR biological
window.65 This, in combination with their high PLQY, makes them
promising candidates for bioimaging applications. Most importantly, the results discussed
above show that the CE mechanism proposed in the present work is widely applicable.

Conclusions
Our work shows the importance of reactant chemistry in aliovalent cation exchange reactions
in Cu2–xS nanocrystals. Noncomplexed GaCl3
reacts as Lewis acid, extracting S2– from the nanocrystals, thereby
etching them. Etching is inhibited when GaCl3 is bound to a phosphine ligand in a
GaCl3–L complex (L = trioctylphosphine, triphenylphosphite, and
diphenylphosphine). GaCl3–TOP was found to be unreactive, whereas
GaCl3–TPP and GaCl3–DPP lead to successful exchange of
Cu+ for Ga3+, converting the parent
Cu2–xS nanocrystals into CuGaS2
nanocrystals. This is rationalized by considering that the activated
Cu2–xS–GaCl3–L complex that
forms at the surface of the nanocrystal upon adsorption of the GaCl3–L
complex must allow for simultaneous Ga3+ insertion and Cu+ extraction,
while preventing S2– extraction. This requirement is only fulfilled by
activated complexes in which the Ga–P bond is sufficiently weak. DFT calculations
show that the Ga–P bond strength decreases with increasing electron-withdrawing
nature of the side groups of the phosphine ligand. Our findings highlight several factors
(viz., Lewis acidity, influence of ligand electronic properties on reactivity) which need be
taken into account when designing cation exchange protocols. Finally, we showed that the
mechanism proposed here is generally applicable by using GaCl3–DPP to
convert CuInS2 nanocrystals into Cu-poor (Cu,Ga,In)S2 nanocrystals
with an increased photoluminescence quantum yield in the NIR spectral window.

Methods
Materials
Copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate (CuSO4·5H2O, 99.995%), oleic
acid (OA, tech., 90%), 1-dodecanethiol (DDT, ≥98%), oleylamine (tech., 70%),
gallium(III) chloride (GaCl3, anhydrous, beads), trioctylphosphine (90%),
diphenylphosphine (98%), triphenylphosphite (97%), indium(III) acetate
(In(Ac)3, 99.99%), copper(I) iodide (CuI, 98%), anhydrous methanol, anhydrous
butanol, and anhydrous toluene were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as supplied,
except for OA and OLAM, which were degassed prior to use.

Synthesis of Cu2–xS Bifrustum Nanocrystals
Cu2–xS bifrustum nanocrystals were prepared according
to the method described in the literature.16 Typically, 0.203 g of
CuSO4·5H2O, 6 mL of OA, and 7.5 mL of DDT were brought into a
three-neck round-bottom flask, connected to a Schlenk line. Under constant stirring and
nitrogen atmosphere, the mixture was heated to 200 °C at a rate of about 30
°C/min. After reaction for 2 h at 200 °C, the mixture was allowed to cool to
approximately 110 °C, when it was quenched by injection of 5 mL of toluene. The
product was precipitated by addition of a mixture of methanol and butanol as nonsolvent
and isolated by centrifugation at 2500 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was removed, and
the residue was redispersed in toluene. The mass of product was estimated by weighing the
empty sample vials prior to sample retrieval and after removal of the supernatant. The
amount of toluene used to redisperse the particles was chosen such that a concentration of
approximately 20 g/L was obtained.

Preparation of Cation Exchange Precursors
Ga– and In–phosphine precursors were prepared in a way similar to our
previously reported method.18

InCl3–TOP was prepared in a N2-filled glovebox, by addition
of 1.250 mL (2.8 mmol) of TOP to an equimolar amount (0.620 g) of InCl3,
followed by heating to 50 °C under constant stirring. The resulting turbid, white,
viscous liquid was diluted by addition of 1.250 mL of toluene.

GaCl3–TOP was prepared in a N2-filled glovebox, by addition
of 0.500 mL (1.12 mmol) TOP to an equimolar amount (0.197 g) of GaCl3, followed
by heating to 50 °C under constant stirring, yielding a transparent, orange, viscous
liquid.

GaCl3–DPP was prepared in a N2-filled glovebox, by addition
of 0.815 mL (4.683 mmol) DPP to an equimolar amount (0.8246 g) of GaCl3,
followed by heating to 50 °C under constant stirring. After a few minutes, an opaque,
white, viscous liquid formed. Over the course of several hours, the liquid changed into an
opaque, white, crystalline solid, which was dissolved in 10 mL of toluene at 100
°C.

GaCl3–TPP was prepared in a N2-filled glovebox, by addition
of 1.125 mL (4.281 mmol) TPP to an equimolar amount (0.7538 g) of GaCl3,
followed by heating to 50 °C under constant stirring. After a few minutes, an opaque,
white, crystalline solid formed, which was dissolved in 10 mL of toluene at 100
°C.

GaCl3 cation exchange precursor was prepared in a N2-filled
glovebox, by making a 1 mol/L (176.08 g/L) solution of GaCl3 in toluene,
resulting in a transparent, bright green liquid. It was found that the solution degraded
over time, even when stored under inert atmosphere. Degradation was indicated by a change
of color from bright green to dark red. In all reactions with GaCl3 as
precursor, a fresh batch of precursor was used.

Cation Exchange in Cu2–xS Bifrustum
Nanocrystals
The cation exchange reactions were performed following the method reported in ref (18) inside a N2-filled glovebox. The
equivalent of 0.2 mmol cation exchange precursor (0.200 mL of InCl3–TOP,
0.100 mL of GaCl3–TOP, 0.425 mL of GaCl3–DPP, 0.465 mL
of GaCl3–TPP, 0.200 mL of GaCl3 solution) was placed in a
vial. Toluene was added to make the total reaction volume after addition of the NC
dispersion 2.700 mL (added volume: with InCl3–TOP, 2.000 mL; with
GaCl3–TOP, 2.100 mL; with GaCl3–DPP, 1.775 mL; with
GaCl3–TPP, 1.735 mL; with GaCl3, 2.000 mL). The mixture of
toluene and cation exchange precursor was heated to the reaction temperature (100 °C
with InCl3–TOP, GaCl3–TOP,
GaCl3–DPP, GaCl3–TPP and 30 °C with
GaCl3) under constant stirring at 400 rpm. Once the desired temperature was
reached, 0.500 mL of parent NC dispersion (equivalent to approximately 10 mg of parent
particles) was swiftly injected. The reaction was stopped (reaction time: with
InCl3–TOP, overnight; with GaCl3–TOP, overnight;
with GaCl3–TPP, 60 min; with GaCl3–DPP, 60 min; with
GaCl3, 15, 30, 60, 120, and 300 min) by removing the vial from the heater and
quenched by the addition of methanol and butanol as nonsolvents. All samples were washed
at least twice prior to analysis, by addition of methanol and butanol as nonsolvent,
centrifugation and removal of the supernatant. Finally, the particles were redispersed in
toluene.

Cation Exchange under Milder Reaction Conditions with
GaCl3–DPP
To prevent particle agglomeration, the reaction of
Cu2–xS nanocrystals with GaCl3–DPP
was also performed under milder reaction conditions. This reaction was performed at half
the scale of the reactions discussed above, inside a N2-filled glovebox. To
this end, 0.1 mmol (0.210 mL) GaCl3–DPP, 0.860 mL of toluene, and 0.025
mL of OLAM were placed in a vial. The mixture was heated to 50 °C, under constant
stirring at 400 rpm. Once the desired temperature was reached, 0.250 mL of parent NC
dispersion (equivalent to approximately 5 mg of parent particles) was swiftly injected.
The reaction was stopped by removing the vial from the heater and quenched by the addition
of methanol and butanol as nonsolvents. The product was washed twice prior to analysis, by
addition of methanol and butanol as nonsolvent, centrifugation, and removal of the
supernatant. Finally, the particles were redispersed in toluene.

Synthesis of CuInS2 NCs
For the synthesis of luminescent CuInS2 (CIS) NCs a protocol reported earlier
by Li et al.(66) was adapted. Briefly, 297 mg of
In(Ac)3, 191 mg of CuI, and 5 mL of DDT were mixed and degassed under vacuum
for 1 h at 80 °C. The reaction mixture was then heated under N2 flow to
230 °C and allowed to react for 100 min. The reaction was stopped by removing the
heating mantle. The NCs were precipitated with a methanol/butanol 1/1 mixture and, after
centrifugation and decanting the supernatant, dispersed in 10 mL of toluene.

Cation Exchange in CuInS2 NCs
CIS NCs (0.250 mL) in toluene were diluted in a vial with 1 mL of toluene and mixed with
0.1 mL of DDT (extra ligand) and 0.1 mL of GaCl3–DPP (prepared as
described above, however, not dissolved in toluene), which was melted at a heating plate
with a plate temperature of 100 °C. The vial containing this mixture was placed on
the heating plate with Tplate = 100 °C for 30 min, after
which the vial was removed and the NCs were precipitated with a methanol/butanol 1/1
mixture and, after centrifugation and decanting the supernatant, dispersed in 0.2 mL of
toluene.

Optical Spectroscopy
Samples were prepared by placing a diluted dispersion of nanocrystals in toluene in a
quartz cuvette with 10 mm path length. Absorption spectra were measured using a
PerkinElmer Lambda 16 UV–vis–NIR spectrometer. Photoluminescence spectra
were measured on an Edinburgh Instruments FLS920 spectrofluorimeter equipped with a
Hamamatsu R5509-72 PMT with a monochromator grated at 1200 nm. A 900 W Xe lamp was used as
the excitation source.

Transmission Electron Microscopy
TEM images were recorded on Thermo Fisher Scientific (formerly Philips/FEI) Tecnai 10,
Tecnai 12, and Tecnai 20 electron microscopes. TEM samples were prepared by drop-casting a
dispersion of particles in toluene onto a copper TEM grid, with a carbon-coated polymer
support film.

Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy
EDS measurements were performed on Thermo Fisher Scientific Tecnai 20F and Talos F200X
electron microscopes using Tecnai Imaging and Analysis software. Sample preparation was
similar to the preparation of TEM samples. In all cases, aluminum TEM grids were used. A
low-background sample holder was used. Measurements were performed on areas with >500
nanoparticles. Discussed elemental compositions are normalized to the stoichiometric
sulfur contents.

Elemental Mapping
Elemental mapping was performed on a Talos F200X electron microscope equipped with a 200
kV XFEG. X-ray detection was done using four symmetrically placed SuperX-EDX detectors.
Imaging was performed in high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron
microscopy mode, with a current of 700 pA using a Fischione Instruments HAADF detector.
Obtained data were analyzed using Bruker Esprit software.

HAADF-STEM Tomography
Tilt series for HAADF-STEM tomography were acquired with a FEI Tecnai Osiris operated at
200 kV in combination with an advanced tomography holder from Fischione Instruments and
the FEI XPlore3D acquisition software. Tilt series consisting of 31 HAADF-STEM images were
acquired with tilt increments of 5° over a range of ±75°. Alignment of the
data was carried out using the FEI Inspect3D software package. The reconstruction was
performed using the simultaneous iterative reconstruction technique, with 25 iterations,
implemented in Inspect3D. Amira (Visage Imaging GmbH) was used for the visualization of
the reconstructed volume.

Electron Diffraction
Due to the large amount of sample required for X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements and
low signal-to-noise ratio in XRD measurements for the samples presented in this work, ED
was used instead to determine the crystal structure and crystallinity of the samples. ED
patterns were measured on a Tecnai 12 electron microscope with an acceleration voltage of
120 kV at a camera length of 1 m.

Data processing of ED patterns measured on Cu2–xS NCs
and the particles obtained after reaction of these parent NCs with cation exchange
precursors was performed as follows: measured two-dimensional patterns were reduced to one
dimension by azimuthal integration of the patterns around the center, which was manually
defined for every pattern. The measured ED patterns were calibrated to a gold reference
sample (Agar S106). The calibration procedure is described in detail in the Supporting Information.

Data processing of ED patterns measured on CIS NCs and the particles obtained after
reaction of these parent NCs with cation exchange precursors, was performed using the
Crystallographic Tool Box (CrysTBox) software,70 which automatically
performed the required steps of center localization, azimuthal integration, and
calibration to a gold reference sample.

Calculated Diffraction Patterns
Diffraction patterns for the low-chalcocite Cu2–xS and
wurtzite CuGaS2 crystal structures were calculated from the relevant crystal
structures (for low-chalcocite Cu2–xS, the crystal
structure reported in ref (34); for wurtzite CGS,
the crystal structure reported in ref (44)) using
the Visualization for Electronic and Structural Analysis (VESTA) software program (version
3.3.9),71 using the default settings. The calculated lattice
distances in real space, d, were transformed into distances in reciprocal
space, q, using the equation q =
2π/d.

Comparison of the Anion Sublattices
Using the VESTA software program,71 all cations were removed from the
crystal structures of low-chalcocite Cu2–xS,34 wurtzite CGS,44 and monoclinic
α′-Ga2S3,46 and a supercell
(consisting of multiple unit cells) was constructed. Data corresponding to a single
hexagonal layer and a single ...ABAB... layer was exported for each crystal structure. The
anion coordinates were translated and rotated to orient the three data sets in the same
manner. In this common orientation, the x, y, and
z directions correspond to the following crystallographic directions:
low-chalcocite Cu2–xS: [201],[010],[001]; wurtzite
CuGaS2: [11̅0],[110],[001]; monoclinic
α′-Ga2S3: [010],[100],[102]. Lattice distances
Δx, Δy, and Δz were
measured over 5, 8, and 5 anion–anion distances in x,
y, and z, respectively. Relative lattice contraction
values, corresponding to a transformation of lattice A into
B, are defined as  (and similarly for the y
and z directions).

DFT Calculations
All DFT calculations were performed using the Gaussian 09, revision D.01, software
package.72 Geometry optimizations were performed using the B3LYP
(Becke, three-parameter, Lee–Yang–Parr) functional, the relativistic
Stuttgart–Dresden (SDD) pseudopotential and basis set on Ga and In and the
6-311+G(d,p) basis set on all other atoms. The structures were optimized without any
symmetry restraints. Frequency analyses at the same level were performed on all
calculations to verify that the obtained stationary points are in fact energy minima.
Thermochemical analysis was performed using a temperature of 298.15 K. Depicted
visualizations of the geometry-optimized structures were prepared using the VESTA software
program.71

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b05337.NC
size histograms, EDS of NCs before and after CE reaction, absorption spectra of NCs
before and after CE, TEM images of NCs after reaction with GaCl3 and
GaCl3–DPP at 100 °C, HAADF-STEM images and EDS elemental maps
of Cu2–xS NCs after reaction with GaCl3,
detailed description of PED calibration procedure (PDF)

File showing the results of the DFT
calculations (ground-state geometries and bond enthalpies for the phosphine complexes
used in our work (XYZ)



Supplementary Material
nn9b05337_si_001.pdf

 nn9b05337_si_005.xyz

 Animated versions of the 3D tomographic reconstructions shown in Figure 3.

Author Present Address
⊥ S.O.M.H.: Soft Condensed Matter/Inorganic Chemistry and Catalysis, Debye Institute for
Nanomaterials Science, Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80000, 3508 TA Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Author Present Address
¶ A.C.B.: Seaborough Research B.V., Science Park 106, 1098XG Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Author Present Address
# M.K.: Foseco Nederland B.V., Pantheon 30, 7521PR Enschede, The Netherlands.

Author Present Address
▲ W.v.d.S.: Inorganic Chemistry and Catalysis, Debye Institute for Nanomaterials Science,
Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80000, Universiteitsweg 99, 3584CG Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
S.O.M.H., W.v.d.S., A.C.B., and C.d.M.D. acknowledge financial support from the division of
Chemical Sciences (CW) of The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) under
Grant Nos. ECHO.712.012.0001 and ECHO.712.014.001. S.B. acknowledges financial support from
the European Research Council (ERC Consolidator Grant No. 815128-REALNANO). S.O.M.H. is
supported by The Netherlands Center for Multiscale Catalytic Energy Conversion (MCEC), an
NWO Gravitation Programme funded by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science of the
government of The Netherlands. DFT calculations were carried out on the Dutch national
e-infrastructure with the support of SURF Cooperative. This work was sponsored by NWO
Physical Sciences for the use of supercomputer facilities. The authors thank Jessi van der
Hoeven for EDS and TEM measurements.
==== Refs
References
Van der Stam W. ; Berends A. C. ; de Mello Donegá C. 
Prospects of Colloidal Copper Chalcogenide Nanocrystals . ChemPhysChem 
2016 , 17 , 559 –581 . 10.1002/cphc.201500976 .26684665 
Kolny-Olesiak J. ; Weller H. 
Synthesis and Application of Colloidal CuInS2 Semiconductor
Nanocrystals . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 12221 –12237 . 10.1021/am404084d .24187935 
Coughlan C. ; Ibáñez M. ; Dobrozhan O. ; Singh A. ; Cabot A. ; Ryan K. M. 
Compound Copper Chalcogenide Nanocrystals . Chem. Rev. 
2017 , 117 , 5865 –6109 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00376 .28394585 
Van der Stam W. ; Gudjonsdottir S. ; Evers W. H. ; Houtepen A. J. 
Switching between Plasmonic and Fluorescent Copper Sulfide
Nanocrystals . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 13208 –13217 . 10.1021/jacs.7b07788 .28841295 
Beberwyck B. J. ; Surendranath Y. ; Alivisatos A. P. 
Cation Exchange: A Versatile Tool for Nanomaterials
Synthesis . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 19759 –19770 . 10.1021/jp405989z .
Rivest J. B. ; Jain P. K. 
Cation Exchange on the Nanoscale: An Emerging Technique for New Material
Synthesis, Device Fabrication, and Chemical Sensing . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 89 –96 . 10.1039/C2CS35241A .22968228 
Gupta S. ; Kershaw S. V. ; Rogach A. L. 
25th Anniversary Article: Ion Exchange in Colloidal
Nanocrystals . Adv. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 6923 –6944 . 10.1002/adma.201302400 .24108549 
De Trizio L. ; Manna L. 
Forging Colloidal Nanostructures via Cation Exchange
Reactions . Chem. Rev. 
2016 , 116 , 10852 –10887 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00739 .26891471 
Sahu A. ; Kang M. S. ; Kompch A. ; Notthoff C. ; Wills A. W. ; Deng D. ; Winterer M. ; Frisbie C. D. ; Norris D. J. 
Electronic Impurity Doping in CdSe Nanocrystals . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 2587 –2594 . 10.1021/nl300880g .22533700 
Van der Stam W. ; Geuchies J. J. ; Altantzis T. ; Van den Bos K. H. W. ; Meeldijk J. D. ; Van Aert S. ; Bals S. ; Vanmaekelbergh D. ; de Mello Donegá C. 
Highly Emissive Divalent Ion Doped Colloidal
CsPb1–xMxBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals through
Cation Exchange . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 4087 –4097 . 10.1021/jacs.6b13079 .28260380 
Eilers J. ; Groeneveld E. ; de Mello Donegá C. ; Meijerink A. 
Optical Properties of Mn-Doped ZnTe Magic Size Nanocrystals . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2012 , 3 , 1663 –1667 . 10.1021/jz300300g .26285725 
Groeneveld E. ; Witteman L. ; Lefferts M. ; Ke X. ; Bals S. ; Van Tendeloo G. ; de Mello Donegá C. 
Tailoring ZnSe-CdSe Colloidal Quantum Dots via Cation
Exchange: From Core/Shell to Alloy Nanocrystals . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 7913 –7930 . 10.1021/nn402931y .23941394 
Grodzińska D. ; Pietra F. ; Van Huis M. A. ; Vanmaekelbergh D. ; de Mello Donegá C. 
Thermally Induced Atomic Reconstruction of PbSe/CdSe Core/Shell Quantum
Dots into PbSe/CdSe Bi-Hemisphere Hetero-Nanocrystals . J. Mater. Chem. 
2011 , 21 , 11556 –11565 . 10.1039/c0jm04458j .
Fan Z. ; Lin L.-C. ; Buijs W. ; Vlugt T. J. H. ; Van Huis M. A. 
Atomistic Understanding of Cation Exchange in PbS Nanocrystals Using
Simulations with Pseudoligands . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 11503 10.1038/ncomms11503 .27160371 
Hewavitharana I. K. ; Brock S. L. 
When Ligand Exchange Leads to Ion Exchange: Nanocrystal Facets Dictate the
Outcome . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 11217 –11224 . 10.1021/acsnano.7b05534 .29035564 
Van der Stam W. ; Berends A. C. ; Rabouw F. T. ; Willhammar T. ; Ke X. ; Meeldijk J. D. ; Bals S. ; de Mello Donegá C. 
Luminescent CuInS2 Quantum Dots by Partial Cation Exchange in
Cu2-xS Nanocrystals . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 621 –628 . 10.1021/cm504340h .
Jharimune S. ; Sathe A. A. ; Rioux R. M. 
Thermochemical Measurements of Cation Exchange in CdSe Nanocrystals Using
Isothermal Titration Calorimetry . Nano Lett. 
2018 , 18 , 6795 –6803 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b02661 .30160126 
Van der Stam W. ; Bladt E. ; Rabouw F. T. ; Bals S. ; de Mello Donegá C. 
Near-Infrared Emitting CuInSe2/CuInS2 Dot Core/Rod
Shell Heteronanorods by Sequential Cation Exchange . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 11430 –11438 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b05496 .26449673 
Wang H. ; Butler D. J. ; Straus D. B. ; Oh N. ; Wu F. ; Guo J. ; Xue K. ; Lee J. D. ; Murray C. B. ; Kagan C. R. 
Air-Stable CuInSe2 Nanocrystal Transistors and Circuits
via Post-Deposition Cation Exchange . ACS Nano 
2019 , 13 , 2324 –2333 . 10.1021/acsnano.8b09055 .30707549 
Regulacio M. D. ; Ye C. ; Lim S. H. ; Zheng Y. ; Xu Q.-H. ; Han M.-Y. 
Facile Noninjection Synthesis and Photocatalytic Properties of
Wurtzite-Phase CuGaS2 Nanocrystals with Elongated
Morphologies . CrystEngComm 
2013 , 15 , 5214 –5217 . 10.1039/c3ce40352a .
Guijarro N. ; Prévot M. S. ; Yu X. ; Jeanbourquin X. A. ; Bornoz P. ; Bourée W. ; Johnson M. ; Le Formal F. ; Sivula K. 
A Bottom-Up Approach toward All-Solution-Processed High-Efficiency
Cu(In,Ga)S2 Photocathodes for Solar Water Splitting . Adv. Energy Mater. 
2016 , 6 , 1501949 10.1002/aenm.201501949 .
Lee K.-H. ; Kim J.-H. ; Jang H. S. ; Do Y. R. ; Yang H. 
Quantum-Dot-Based White Lighting Planar Source through Downconversion by
Blue Electroluminescence . Opt. Lett. 
2014 , 39 , 1208 –1211 . 10.1364/OL.39.001208 .24690708 
Kim J.-H. ; Lee K.-H. ; Jo D.-Y. ; Lee Y. ; Hwang J. Y. ; Yang H. 
Cu-In-Ga-S Quantum Dot Composition-Dependent Device Performance of
Electrically Driven Light-Emitting Diodes . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2014 , 105 , 133104 10.1063/1.4896911 .
Moon S. H. ; Park S. J. ; Kim S. H. ; Lee M. W. ; Han J. ; Kim J. Y. ; Kim H. ; Hwang Y. J. ; Lee D.-K. ; Min B. K. 
Monolithic DSSC/CIGS Tandem Solar Cell Fabricated by a Solution
Process . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 8970 10.1038/srep08970 .25759191 
Yang Y. ; Chen Q. ; Hsieh Y.-T. ; Song T.-B. ; De Marco N. ; Zhou H. ; Yang Y. 
Multilayer Transparent Top Electrode for Solution Processed
Perovskite/Cu(In,Ga)(Se,S)2 Four Terminal Tandem Solar
Cells . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 7714 –7721 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b03189 .26098134 
Zhao J. ; Zhang J. ; Wang W. ; Wang P. ; Li F. ; Ren D. ; Si H. ; Sun X. ; Ji F. ; Hao Y. 
Facile Synthesis of CuInGaS2 Quantum Dot Nanoparticles for
Bilayer-Sensitized Solar Cells . Dalton Trans 
2014 , 43 , 16588 –16592 . 10.1039/C4DT02150A .25300426 
Dilena E. ; Xie Y. ; Brescia R. ; Prato M. ; Maserati L. ; Krahne R. ; Paolella A. ; Bertoni G. ; Povia M. ; Moreels I. ; Manna L. 
CuInxGa1-xS2 Nanocrystals with Tunable
Composition and Band Gap Synthesized via a Phosphine-Free and Scalable
Procedure . Chem. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 3180 –3187 . 10.1021/cm401563u .
Liu Y. ; Yin D. ; Swihart M. T. 
Valence Selectivity of Cation Incorporation into Covellite CuS
Nanoplatelets . Chem. Mater. 
2018 , 30 , 1399 –1407 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b05198 .
Song J. ; Zhang Y. ; Dai Y. ; Hu J. ; Zhu L. ; Xu X. ; Yu Y. ; Li H. ; Yao B. ; Zhou H. 
Polyelectrolyte-Mediated Nontoxic
AgGaxIn1-xS2 QDs/Low-Density Lipoprotein Nanoprobe
for Selective 3D Fluorescence Imaging of Cancer Stem Cells . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2019 , 11 , 9884 –9892 . 10.1021/acsami.9b00121 .30779876 
Zhai Y. ; Flanagan J. C. ; Shim M. 
Lattice Strain and Ligand Effects on the Formation of
Cu2–xS/I-III-VI2 Nanorod Heterostructures through Partial
Cation Exchange . Chem. Mater. 
2017 , 29 , 6161 –6167 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b02392 .
Shannon R. D. 
Revised Effective Ionic Radii and Systematic Studies of Interatomic
Distances . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen.
Crystallogr. 
1976 , 32 , 751 –767 . 10.1107/S0567739476001551 .
Pearson R. G. 
Absolute Electronegativity and Hardness: Application to Inorganic
Chemistry . Inorg. Chem. 
1988 , 27 , 734 –740 . 10.1021/ic00277a030 .
Xia C. ; Wu W. ; Yu T. ; Xie X. ; Van Oversteeg C. ; Gerritsen H. C. ; de Mello Donegá C. 
Size-Dependent Band-Gap and Molar Absorption Coefficients of Colloidal
CuInS2 Quantum Dots . ACS Nano 
2018 , 12 , 8350 –8361 . 10.1021/acsnano.8b03641 .30085648 
Evans H. T. 
Crystal Structure of Low Chalcocite . Nature, Phys. Sci. 
1971 , 232 , 69 –70 . 10.1038/physci232069a0 .
Wang W. ; Dahl M. ; Yin Y. 
Hollow Nanocrystals through the Nanoscale Kirkendall Effect . Chem. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 1179 –1189 . 10.1021/cm3030928 .
Yin Y. ; Rioux R. M. ; Erdonmez C. K. ; Hughes S. ; Somorjai G. A. ; Alivisatos A. P. 
Formation of Hollow Nanocrystals through the Nanoscale Kirkendall
Effect . Science 
2004 , 304 , 711 –714 . 10.1126/science.1096566 .15118156 
Mu L. ; Wang F. ; Sadtler B. ; Loomis R. A. ; Buhro W. E. 
Influence of the Nanoscale Kirkendall Effect on the Morphology of Copper
Indium Disulfide Nanoplatelets Synthesized by Ion Exchange . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 7419 –7428 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b02427 .26165847 
Ogawa A. ; Fujimoto H. 
Lewis Acidity of Gallium Halides . Inorg. Chem. 
2002 , 41 , 4888 –4894 . 10.1021/ic020268m .12230392 
Hogg J. M. ; Coleman F. ; Ferrer-Ugalde A. ; Atkins M. P. ; Swadźba-Kwaśny M. 
Liquid Coordination Complexes: A New Class of Lewis Acids as Safer
Alternatives to BF3 in Synthesis of Polyalphaolefins . Green Chem. 
2015 , 17 , 1831 –1841 . 10.1039/C4GC02080D .
Ruberu T. P. A. ; Albright H. R. ; Callis B. ; Ward B. ; Cisneros J. ; Fan H.-J. ; Vela J. 
Molecular Control of the Nanoscale: Effect of Phosphine–Chalcogenide
Reactivity on CdS–CdSe Nanocrystal Composition and Morphology . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 5348 –5359 . 10.1021/nn301182h .22519805 
Tolman C. A. 
Steric Effects of Phosphorus Ligands in Organometallic Chemistry and
Homogeneous Catalysis . Chem. Rev. 
1977 , 77 , 313 –348 . 10.1021/cr60307a002 .
Kühl O. 
Predicting the Net Donating Ability of Phosphines - Do We Need
Sophisticated Theoretical Methods? . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2005 , 249 , 693 –704 . 10.1016/j.ccr.2004.08.021 .
Brown T. L. ; Lee K. J. 
Ligand Steric Properties . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
1993 , 128 , 89 –116 . 10.1016/0010-8545(93)80025-Z .
Xiao N. ; Zhu L. ; Wang K. ; Dai Q. ; Wang Y. ; Li S. ; Sui Y. ; Ma Y. ; Liu J. ; Liu B. ; Zou G. ; Zou B. 
Synthesis and High-Pressure Transformation of Metastable
Wurtzite-Structured CuGaS2 Nanocrystals . Nanoscale 
2012 , 4 , 7443 –7447 . 10.1039/c2nr31629c .23086438 
Fenton J. L. ; Steimle B. C. ; Schaak R. E. 
Structure-Selective Synthesis of Wurtzite and Zincblende ZnS, CdS, and
CuInS2 Using Nanoparticle Cation Exchange Reactions . Inorg. Chem. 
2019 , 58 , 672 –678 . 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b02880 .30525523 
Pardo M. P. ; Guittard M. ; Chilouet A. ; Tomas A. 
Diagramme de Phases Gallium-Soufre et Études Structurales Des Phases
Solides . J. Solid State Chem. 
1993 , 102 , 423 –433 . 10.1006/jssc.1993.1054 .
Nogai S. ; Schmidbaur H. 
Dichlorogallane (HGaCl2)2: Its Molecular Structure
and Synthetic Potential . Inorg. Chem. 
2002 , 41 , 4770 –4774 . 10.1021/ic0203015 .12206703 
Cheng F. ; Codgbrook H. L. ; Hector A. L. ; Levason W. ; Reid G. ; Webster M. ; Zhang W. 
Gallium(III) Halide Complexes with Phosphines, Arsines and Phosphine Oxides
– a Comparative Study . Polyhedron 
2007 , 26 , 4147 –4155 . 10.1016/j.poly.2007.05.008 .
Yarema O. ; Yarema M. ; Wood V. 
Tuning the Composition of Multicomponent Semiconductor Nanocrystals: The
Case of I-III-VI Materials . Chem. Mater. 
2018 , 30 , 1446 –1461 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b04710 .
Berends A. C. ; Van der Stam W. ; Akkerman Q. A. ; Meeldijk J. D. ; Van der Lit J. ; de Mello Donegá C. 
Anisotropic 2D Cu2-xSe Nanocrystals from Dodecaneselenol and
Their Conversion to CdSe and CuInSe2 Nanoparticles . Chem. Mater. 
2018 , 30 , 3836 –3846 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b01143 .29910536 
Tan J. M. R. ; Scott M. C. ; Hao W. ; Baikie T. ; Nelson C. T. ; Pedireddy S. ; Tao R. ; Ling X. ; Magdassi S. ; White T. ; Li S. ; Minor A. M. ; Zheng H. ; Wong L. H. 
Revealing Cation-Exchange-Induced Phase Transformations in Multielemental
Chalcogenide Nanoparticles . Chem. Mater. 
2017 , 29 , 9192 –9199 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b03029 .
Lesnyak V. ; Brescia R. ; Messina G. C. ; Manna L. 
Cu Vacancies Boost Cation Exchange Reactions in Copper Selenide
Nanocrystals . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 9315 –9323 . 10.1021/jacs.5b03868 .26140622 
Fenton J. L. ; Steimle B. C. ; Schaak R. E. 
Tunable Intraparticle Frameworks for Creating Complex Heterostructured
Nanoparticle Libraries . Science 
2018 , 360 , 513 –517 . 10.1126/science.aar5597 .29724950 
Li H. ; Brescia R. ; Krahne R. ; Bertoni G. ; Alcocer M. J. P. ; D’Andrea C. ; Scotognella F. ; Tassone F. ; Zanella M. ; De Giorgi M. ; Manna L. 
Blue-UV-Emitting ZnSe(Dot)/ZnS(Rod) Core/Shell Nanocrystals Prepared from
CdSe/CdS Nanocrystals by Sequential Cation Exchange . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 1637 –1647 . 10.1021/nn204601n .22283644 
Chakraborty P. ; Jin Y. ; Barrows C. J. ; Dunham S. T. ; Gamelin D. R. 
Kinetics of Isovalent (Cd2+) and Aliovalent (In3+)
Cation Exchange in Cd1-xMnxSe Nanocrystals . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 12885 –12893 . 10.1021/jacs.6b05949 .27593346 
Zuckerman J. J. ;
Hagen A. P.  Inorganic Reactions and Methods: Formation of Bonds to O, S, Se, Te, Po (Part
1) , 1 st ed.; VCH Publishers,
Inc. : New York , 1992 ; Vol.
5 , p 217 .
Burt J. ; Levason W. ; Reid G. 
Coordination Chemistry of the Main Group Elements with Phosphine, Arsine
and Stibine Ligands . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 260 , 65 –115 . 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.09.020 .
Chen F. ; Ma G. ; Bernard G. M. ; Wasylishen R. E. ; Cavell R. G. ; McDonald R. ; Ferguson M. J. 
An Investigation of 1:1 Adducts of Gallium Trihalides with
Triarylphosphines by Solid-State 69/71Ga and 31P NMR
Spectroscopy . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2013 , 19 , 2826 –2838 . 10.1002/chem.201202954 .23307415 
Haynes W. M.  CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics , 95 th ed.;
CRC Press : Boca Raton,
FL , 2014 ; section 5–11.
Clavier H. ; Nolan S. P. 
Percent Buried Volume for Phosphine and N-Heterocyclic Carbene Ligands:
Steric Properties in Organometallic Chemistry . Chem. Commun. (Cambridge, U. K.) 
2010 , 46 , 841 –861 . 10.1039/b922984a .
Snelders D. J. M. ; Van Koten G. ; Klein Gebbink R. J. M. 
Steric, Electronic, and Secondary Effects on the Coordination Chemistry of
Ionic Phosphine Ligands and the Catalytic Behavior of Their Metal
Complexes . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2011 , 17 , 42 –57 . 10.1002/chem.201002508 .21207599 
Chakraborty P. ; Jin Y. ; Barrows C. J. ; Dunham S. T. ; Gamelin D. R. 
Kinetics of Isovalent (Cd2+) and Aliovalent (In3+)
Cation Exchange in Cd1-xMnxSe Nanocrystals . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 12885 –12893 . 10.1021/jacs.6b05949 .27593346 
Choi Y.-M. ; Lee Y.-I. ; Kim S. ; Choa Y.-H. 
Metallic Alloy Nanoparticle-Based Fabrication and Optical Properties of a
Cu(In1-xGax)S2 Absorber Layer for Solar
Cells . J. Alloys Compd. 
2014 , 615 , 496 –500 . 10.1016/j.jallcom.2014.06.174 .
Chang S.-H. ; Chiang M.-Y. ; Chiang C.-C. ; Yuan F.-W. ; Chen C.-Y. ; Chiu B.-C. ; Kao T.-L. ; Lai C.-H. ; Tuan H.-Y. 
Facile Colloidal Synthesis of Quinary
CuIn1-xGax(SySe1-y) (CIGSSe) Nanocrystal
Inks with Tunable Band Gaps for Use in Low-Cost Photovoltaics . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2011 , 4 , 4929 –4932 . 10.1039/c1ee02341a .
Xia C. ; Meeldijk J. D. ; Gerritsen H. C. ; de Mello Donegá C. 
Highly Luminescent Water-Dispersible NIR-Emitting Wurtzite
CuInS2/ZnS Core/Shell Colloidal Quantum Dots . Chem. Mater. 
2017 , 29 , 4940 –4951 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b01258 .28638177 
Li L. ; Pandey A. ; Werder D. J. ; Khanal B. P. ; Pietryga J. M. ; Klimov V. I. 
Efficient Synthesis of Highly Luminescent Copper Indium Sulfide-Based
Core/Shell Nanocrystals with Surprisingly Long-Lived Emission . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 1176 –1179 . 10.1021/ja108261h .21207995 
Berends A. C. ; Rabouw F. T. ; Spoor F. C. M. ; Bladt E. ; Grozema F. C. ; Houtepen A. J. ; Siebbeles L. D. A. ; De Mello Donegá C. 
Radiative and Nonradiative Recombination in CuInS2 Nanocrystals
and CuInS2-Based Core/Shell Nanocrystals . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 7 , 3503 –3509 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b01668 .27552674 
Bai X. ; Purcell-Milton F. ; Gun’ko Y. 
Optical Properties, Synthesis, and Potential Applications of Cu-Based
Ternary or Quaternary Anisotropic Quantum Dots, Polytypic Nanocrystals, and Core/Shell
Heterostructures . Nanomaterials 
2019 , 9 , 85 10.3390/nano9010085 .
Berends A. C. ; Mangnus M. J. J. ; Xia C. ; Rabouw F. T. ; De Mello Donegá C. 
Optoelectronic Properties of Ternary I-III-VI2 Semiconductor
Nanocrystals: Bright Prospects with Elusive Origins . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2019 , 10 , 1600 –1616 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b03653 .30883139 
Klinger M. ; Jäger A. 
Crystallographic Tool Box (CrysTBox): Automated Tools for Transmission
Electron Microscopists and Crystallographers . J. Appl. Crystallogr. 
2015 , 48 , 2012 –2018 . 10.1107/S1600576715017252 .26664349 
Momma K. ; Izumi F. 
VESTA 3 for Three-Dimensional Visualization of Crystal, Volumetric and
Morphology Data . J. Appl. Crystallogr. 
2011 , 44 , 1272 –1276 . 10.1107/S0021889811038970 .
Frisch M.
J. ; Trucks G.
W. ; Schlegel H.
B. ; Scuseria G.
E. ; Robb M.
A. ; Cheeseman J.
R. ; Scalmani G. ; Barone V. ; Mennucci B. ; Petersson G.
A. ; Nakatsuji H. ; Caricato M. ; Li X. ; Hratchian H.
P. ; Izmaylov A.
F. ; Bloino J. ;
Zheng G. ;
Sonnenberg J. L. ;
Hada M. ;
Ehara M.  ; Gaussian 09 ; Gaussian Inc. :
Wallingford, CT , 2009 .

