
==== Front
ACS NanoACS Nanonnancac3ACS Nano1936-08511936-086XAmerican
Chemical Society 10.1021/acsnano.8b07902ArticleIntrinsic
Antibacterial Activity of Nanoparticles
Made of β-Cyclodextrins Potentiates Their Effect as Drug
Nanocarriers against Tuberculosis Machelart Arnaud †Salzano Giuseppina ‡Li Xue ‡Demars Aurore §Debrie Anne-Sophie †Menendez-Miranda Mario ‡Pancani Elisabetta ‡Jouny Samuel †Hoffmann Eik †Deboosere Nathalie †Belhaouane Imène †Rouanet Carine †Simar Sophie ∥Talahari Smaïl ∥Giannini Valerie ⊥Villemagne Baptiste #Flipo Marion #Brosch Roland ⊥Nesslany Fabrice ∥Deprez Benoit #Muraille Eric §¶Locht Camille †Baulard Alain R. †Willand Nicolas #Majlessi Laleh ⊥□Gref Ruxandra *‡Brodin Priscille *†† Université
de Lille, CNRS, INSERM, CHU Lille, Institut
Pasteur de Lille, U1019 - UMR 8204 - CIIL
- Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, F-59000 Lille, France‡ Université
Paris Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, UMR 8214 - Institute for Molecular Sciences of Orsay (ISMO), F-91405 Orsay, France§ Research
Unit in Microorganisms Biology (URBM), Laboratory of Immunology and
Microbiology, Université de Namur, Narilis, B-5000 Namur, Belgium∥ Université
de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, EA 4483, F-59000 Lille, France⊥ Institut
Pasteur, Unit for Integrated
Mycobacterial Pathogenomics, Paris, CNRS
UMR 3525, 25 Rue du Dr. Roux, F-75015 Paris, France# Université
de Lille, INSERM, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1177 - Drugs and Molecules for living Systems, F-59000 Lille, France¶ Laboratory
of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Université
Libre de Bruxelles, B-1070 Brussels, Belgium* E-mail: ruxandra.gref@u-psud.fr.* E-mail: priscille.brodin@inserm.fr.01 03 2019 23 04 2019 01 03 2020 13 4 3992 4007 16 10 2018 01 03 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Multi-drug-resistant
tuberculosis (TB) is a major public health
problem, concerning about half a million cases each year. Patients
hardly adhere to the current strict treatment consisting of more than
10 000 tablets over a 2-year period. There is a clear need
for efficient and better formulated medications. We have previously
shown that nanoparticles made of cross-linked poly-β-cyclodextrins
(pβCD) are efficient vehicles for pulmonary delivery of powerful
combinations of anti-TB drugs. Here, we report that in addition to
being efficient drug carriers, pβCD nanoparticles are endowed
with intrinsic antibacterial properties. Empty pβCD nanoparticles
are able to impair Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)
establishment after pulmonary administration in mice. pβCD hamper
colonization of macrophages by Mtb by interfering with lipid rafts,
without inducing toxicity. Moreover, pβCD provoke macrophage
apoptosis, leading to depletion of infected cells, thus creating a
lung microenvironment detrimental to Mtb persistence. Taken together,
our results suggest that pβCD nanoparticles loaded or not with
antibiotics have an antibacterial action on their own and could be
used as a carrier in drug regimen formulations effective against TB.

tuberculosiscyclodextrinsdrug nanocarrierantibacterial activityhost-directed
therapydocument-id-old-9nn8b07902document-id-new-14nn-2018-079023ccc-price
==== Body
Pulmonary tuberculosis (TB),
caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), kills
1.3 million HIV-negative and an additional 374 000 HIV-positive
people in the world, annually.1 Although
TB mortality has decreased over the past 15 years due to implementation
of improved TB control programs and strategies, the continuous emergence
of multi-drug-resistant (MDR) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR)
TB remains highly alarming. New means to fight MDR- and XDR-TB are
urgently needed. The current regimen for the treatment of drug-sensitive
TB relies on a six-month course of four drugs to be taken orally on
a daily basis: isoniazid (INH), rifampicin (RIF), ethambutol (EMB),
and pyrazinamide (PZA). Lack of patient compliance and individual
host variability in drug pharmacokinetics have led to the development
of MDR-TB cases. Treatment of MDR-TB requires two years of second-line
antibiotics, such as ethionamide (ETH), fluoroquinolones, and aminoglycosides,
which are less effective and cause more severe side effects, whereby
the cure rates remain desperately low.2

Mtb is a professional pathogen that initially invades and
replicates
essentially inside phagocytes, such as alveolar and interstitial macrophages.
Intracellular Mtb subverts the microbicidal properties of macrophages,
which may lead to inefficient containment and development of TB pathology.3

Lungs are the major infection site of Mtb
transmitted by human-to-human
aerogenic spread. In this organ, ingestion and replication of Mtb
leads to immune cell recruitment and formation of granulomas, which
is a hallmark of the antimycobacterial immune response. The granuloma
is composed of an organized aggregation of cells including infected
and noninfected macrophages, dendritic cells, inflammatory monocytes
and neutrophils, and natural killers and lymphocytes. To exert their
activity, antimycobacterial drugs must reach granulomas and express
their sterilizing activity within the phagosomes of the innate immune
cells in which the bacilli reside.4 If
the bacterial growth is not sufficiently controlled, necrotic tissue
lesions can become caseous to form cavities, from which Mtb may be
disseminated to other parts of the lung parenchyma. This leads to
the initiation of secondary infectious sites, Mtb release to the airways,
and thereby transmission to new hosts.

Local administration
of anti-TB drugs directly into the lung is
an attractive strategy to improve the efficacy of current TB treatment
and to reduce systemic side effects. It should also be beneficial
in preventing bacterial dissemination and disease establishment by
targeting more efficiently infected macrophages, thus reducing administered
doses.5 Nanotechnologies as therapeutic
tools to fight microbial resistance, especially against tuberculosis,
have been proposed as an effective approach.6−10 For example, the use of nanoparticles (NPs) allows
the administration of poorly soluble drugs into the lungs.11−13 We recently described that coencapsulation of ETH together with
the booster of its bioactivation, called Booster BDM41906,14 in nanoparticles made of cross-linked poly-β-cyclodextrins
(pβCD) overcame the drawbacks related to the strong tendency
of ETH to crystallize and to the low solubility of the Booster in
aqueous media.13 Interestingly, pβCD
allowed an efficient one-step incorporation of both ETH and Booster
by a “green” procedure, which means that no organic
solvents were used in the process. Importantly, as we previously described,
treatment of Mtb-exposed mice with pβCD loaded with ETH and
BDM41906 was shown to lead to a significant decrease of the mycobacterial
burden in lungs, similar to that generated by the first-line reference
drug INH.13

Here, we also investigated
the antimycobacterial activity of unloaded
pβCD NPs and showed that their pulmonary administration in mice
exposed to Mtb results in decreased lung mycobacterial burden compared
to nontreated control mice. These results seem to be linked to the
finding that pβCD disrupt cell surface lipid rafts and thereby
counteract bacterial host cell invasion. Moreover, pβCD induce
apoptotic cell death in murine macrophages as well as in vivo, which may contribute to the depletion of alveolar macrophages,
a main Mtb reservoir. The effect of unloaded NPs against Mtb replication in vivo appeared to be rather specific for pβCD. Furthermore,
unloaded pβCD were able to impact Mtb but not other bacterial
pulmonary pathogens. Taken together, our findings argue for the use
of pβCD in drug regimen formulations as an effective tool against
TB.

Results and Discussion
Intrinsic Properties of pβCD against
Mtb Growth in Vivo
To study the possible
impact of unloaded
pβCD on the control of Mtb growth in vivo,
we used a mouse model of acute Mtb infection. BALB/c mice (n = 4/group) were inoculated with 105 CFU/mouse
of Mtb H37Rv via the intranasal (i.n.) route (Figure 1A). The i.n. route
of infection was chosen because it is currently widely used15 and was approved by our animal ethics committee.
Mice were then left for 7 days to allow a 1-log increase of Mtb load
in the lungs. From day 7 on, and every second day, groups of mice
received via the endotracheal route (e.t.), by use
of a microsprayer device,13 50 μL/mouse of diverse concentrations of pβCD,
ranging from 15 to 200 mg/mL. These doses are equivalent to 30 to
400 mg/kg of body weight. Compared to untreated mice, on day 21 postchallenge,
the animals that had received pβCD displayed decreased pulmonary
mycobacterial load by 1-log for all concentrations ≥ 30 mg/mL
(p < 0.01) (Figure 1B). Therefore, it seems that pβCD alone had an
intrinsic antimycobacterial effect in vivo.

Figure 1 Assessment
of the effect of pβCD on the lung mycobacterial
load in Mtb-challenged mice. (A) Experimental design: BALB/c mice
were anesthetized and i.n. inoculated with 105 CFU of Mtb
H37Rv strain contained in 20 μL of PBS. At days 7, 9, 11, 14,
16, and 18 postchallenge, mice received administrations of 50 μL
of pβCD of various concentrations via the e.t.
route by use of a microsprayer device that generated aerosolization
directly into the lungs. At day 21 postchallenge, lungs were harvested
for determination of bacterial burden by CFU counting. (B) Mice received
6 inoculations of 50 μL of pβCD preparations at defined
concentrations by the e.t. route before pulmonary bacterial load was
evaluated at day 21 postchallenge. (C) Comparison of the impact of
pβCD (6 × 50 μL at 150 mg/mL) on Mtb pulmonary load
administrated by the i.n. route or by the e.t. route after i.n. infection.
(D) Comparison of the effect of the administration of unloaded pβCD
and pβCD loaded with ETH alone, [ETH:BDM43266] or [ETH:BDM41906]
(6 × 50 μL at 150 mg/mL of pβCD). Data are presented
as mean ± SEM and are representative of at least two independent
experiments. Symbols ** and *** denote p < 0.01
and p < 0.001, respectively.

We next examined whether the route of administration had
an impact
on this activity. The antimycobacterial effect of the same pβCD
dose (50 μL of 150 mg/mL) was compared between the e.t. and
i.n. routes, using the same regimen as detailed in Figure 1A. A similar decrease in mycobacterial
load was detected for both delivery routes by comparison with untreated
controls, showing that the two routes of administration can both be
equivalently used for further studies (Figure 1C).

We then determined whether the
intrinsic antimycobacterial activity
of pβCD could synergize with that of the combination of anti-TB
drugs when given directly into the lungs. To this end, we investigated
the administration of pβCD loaded with both ETH and Booster.
Briefly, ETH is a pro-drug that requires bioactivation, mediated by
the bacterial mono-oxygenase EthA. This enzyme is under the control
of the repressor EthR.16 Booster molecules
induce conformational changes in EthR, resulting in the inhibition
of its repressor activity and thereby an enhancement of ETH activity.14 As previously described, BDM43266, which has
been optimized through fragment screening and structure-based design,
allows an increase by 10-fold of the activity of ETH against Mtb growth in vitro.17 BDM43266 was thus
co-loaded with ETH into pβCD using the previously described
conditions of encapsulation.18 Briefly,
powders of the two lipophilic drugs were mixed with suspensions of
pβCD at 150 mg/mL overnight, resulting in their spontaneous
incorporation in the hydrophobic cavities of the pβCD. This
method has the advantage of avoiding the use of organic solvents.
Moreover, the drugs were incorporated at the molecular state and did
not crystallize upon storage, which is usually an issue with ETH alone.
In a previous study with two hydrophobic molecules, drug release from
CD-based materials was found to be related in an equilibrium established
between free and incorporated drug in vitro. We expect
the same mechanism to occur for ETH and Booster in alveolar macrophages,
which will be investigated in depth in a future study.19

Six administrations of pβCD loaded
with ETH alone via the e.t. route induced a decrease
of the bacterial load
similarly to that upon administration of pβCD alone, showing
that, as expected, delivery of ETH at this low concentration had no
antibacterial properties (Figure 1D). Moreover, the administration of pβCD co-loaded
with both drugs ETH and BDM43266 ([ETH:43266]) in Mtb-challenged mice
led to a significant decrease (p < 0.05) of the
pulmonary bacterial load by 1 log, compared to the group that received
ETH only. These results first showed that BDM43266 had an effective
boosting effect on ETH. Second, pβCD were able to deliver sufficient
amounts of ETH and BDM43266 in vivo. We next compared
the boosting efficacy of BDM43266 with that of BDM41906, which we
previously reported. No difference was observed concerning the boosting
efficacy between BDM41906 and BDM43266. We observed that both Boosters
exerted similar effects in our model of infection, suggesting that
they should be considered as potent drug candidates for future anti-TB
investigations.

The antibacterial activity of NPs is an intense
area of research,20−22 but to the best of our knowledge, only metal nanoparticles,
such
as silver-, gold-, iron-, or copper-based ones, were shown to promote
pathogen eradication.23−25 However, concerns can be raised upon repetitive administration
of metal-based NPs in pathologies such as TB.

Altogether, this
interesting and unexpected result shows that pβCD,
when administered directly into the lungs, exert two beneficial actions:
(i) making it possible to administer poorly soluble anti-TB drugs
without using organic solvents and to transport them to the lungs,
the main site of infection, and (ii) potentiating the antimycobacterial
effect of these drugs with which they synergize through their intrinsic
antimycobacterial property.

Indeed, drug administration into
the lungs bypasses limitations
of some current TB drugs, which are given orally. Besides, when a
patient with active TB sneezes, coughs, or spits, droplets containing
Mtb can be inhaled by surrounding individuals, who can become infected.
The main advantages of the drug administration directly into the lungs
are that (i) bacteria could be rapidly eradicated and (ii) Mtb spreading
to other cells could be prevented, which is considered as a main strategy
to eradicate infection.4,26−28

pβCD
Are Engulfed by Alveolar Macrophages after Administration
The discovery of the intrinsic antibacterial ability of pβCD
prompted us to explore the type of lung cells that could be impacted
by this effect. Rhodamine B-conjugated pβCD (Rhod-pβCD)
were therefore administered to mice via the e.t.
route. Diverse cell subsets, including alveolar or interstitial macrophages,
neutrophils, eosinophils, T cells, and B lymphocytes, were then examined
by flow cytometry for the presence of fluorescent pβCD. Two
hours after administration, Rhod-pβCD were preferentially located
in alveolar macrophages (CD11c+ F4/80+ SiglecF+) with approximatively 40% of these cells emitting the rhodamine
B fluorescent signal (hence referred as Rhod+) (Figure 2A). Taken together,
these observations showed that, at early time points following inoculation,
pβCD were mainly internalized by alveolar macrophages in mouse
lungs, which are among the main cells used by Mtb as a reservoir.
This property is of main importance for the delivery of anti-TB drugs.
Indeed, the ability for chemical entities to reach Mtb-containing
lesions has recently been demonstrated to be an important parameter
to take into account during their development.4 Moreover, having a class of NPs that acts on the interactions between
bacteria and the host allows opportunities for the development of
macrophage-targeted host-directed therapies.

Figure 2 pβCD invade preferentially
alveolar macrophages. (A) BALB/c
mice received one e.t. administration of rhodamine-coupled pβCD
(50 μL of 150 mg/mL) and were euthanized 2 h postadministration
to identify cells that internalized nanoparticles by flow cytometry.
The following cell types were discriminated: alveolar macrophages
(CD11c+ F4/80+ SiglecF+), interstitial
macrophages (F4/80+ CD11cint SiglecF–), neutrophils (CD11b+ Ly6G+), eosinophils
(SiglecF+ CD11c–), T cells (CD3+), and B cells (B220+ MHCII+). Data represent
FSC vs Rhod plots of selected populations of one
representative mouse in two independent experiments. (B, top image)
BMDM originated from BALB/c were incubated 24 h with rhodamine-coupled
pβCD before fixation and staining with DAPI in order to label
the nuclei for confocal microscopy (scale bar: 20 μm). (B, bottom
image) Using Columbus software, images were segmented to delimit cells
(white) and Rhod+ pβCD (color). (C) Fields were analyzed
to quantify the total number of cells, the percentage of cells interacting
with pβCD, and the number of nanoparticles per cell. Data are
presented as mean ± SEM and are representative of two independent
experiments. ** denotes p < 0.01.

The efficient uptake of pβCD by macrophages
was further supported
by using murine bone-marrow-derived macrophages (BMDM), as typical
surrogate cells used in in vitro infection experiments.
BMDM were incubated with various concentrations of Rhod-pβCD
for 24 h, washed, and imaged by confocal microscopy (Figure 2B, top image). Using the image-analysis
software Columbus, all images were segmented to delimit each cell
and each intracellular Rhod+ nanoparticle (Figure 2B, bottom image). These analyses
revealed that more than 80% of the cells had phagocytosed pβCD
when added at concentrations of 5 and 25 mg/mL (Figure 2C). Of note, at lower concentrations of pβCD
tested (2 mg/mL), 50% of the cells contained approximately two Rhod+ NPs, highlighting the strong capacity of macrophages to internalize
pβCD. The number of BMDM per well was also determined (Figure 2C), and this parameter
informs on the cytotoxicity of pβCD. There was no difference
in cell number for concentrations up to 5 mg/mL compared to control
nontreated cells, clearly showing that pβCD are not cytotoxic.
However, we observed a 40% decrease of the number of cells for samples
incubated with pβCD at 25 mg/mL, suggesting that at this very
high concentration pβCD induced cell death. It is important
to mention that this concentration is likely never reached in lungs
of mice. Indeed, with an administration of 50 μL of a solution
containing 150 mg/mL of pβCD, mice received approximately 7.5
mg within lungs, covering a pulmonary volume of approximately 1 mL.
The possible genotoxic properties of pβCD are further investigated
in the following section.

pβCD Are Not Genotoxic and Have Poor
Pro-inflammatory
Properties
It is generally admitted that βCD are not
genotoxic.23−25,29 To determine whether
the pβCD used in this study share the same properties, their
possible genotoxic properties were evaluated on differentiated human
macrophage-like THP1 cells, incubated for 24 h with pβCD and
processed for the formation of micronuclei, an indicator of chromosomal
damage, or for the “comet” assay, which
measures DNA strand breaks.30,31 Results showed that
pβCD induced neither micronuclei (Figure 3A) nor DNA damage (Figure 3B) in comparison to untreated cells up to
25 mg/mL. Altogether this suggests that pβCD NPs are not genotoxic.

Figure 3 pβCD
are not genotoxic and poorly induce pro-inflammatory
responses. (A, B) THP1 cells were incubated for 24 h with different
concentrations of pβCD for the evaluation of genotoxicity. The
micronucleus assay (A) was used to detect any damage that occurred
during cell division (mitomycin was used as positive control), while
the comet assay (B) was used to evaluate DNA strand breaks (methyl
methanesulfonate was used as positive control). (C) BMDC were incubated
overnight with pβCD or were inoculated with BCG (MOI = 1), as
a positive control. After overnight incubation, cells were stained
with FITC-conjugated antibodies. The FITC signal gated on CD11c+ cells shows the surface expression level of co-stimulatory
molecules (CD40, CD80, CD86) and MHC-I or MHC-II molecules, as phenotypic
dendritic cell maturation markers. (D) As a hallmark of functional
dendritic cell maturation, IL-1β and TNF-α were quantified
by ELISA in the supernatants of the same cultures, described in (C).
Symbols ** and *** denote p < 0.01 and p < 0.001, respectively.

We next investigated whether pβCD can induce inflammatory
responses, using a highly sensitive dendritic cell maturation assay.
Bone-marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDC) were incubated for 24 h
with different concentrations of pβCD, and the surface expression
of CD40, CD80, and CD86, as well as of major histocompatibility complex
(MHC)-class I or -II molecules, was studied by flow cytometry to assess
the phenotypic maturation of BMDC. In contrast to the positive control, Mycobacterium bovis (Bacillus Calmette-Guerin, BCG) at a
multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1, which induced substantial up-regulation
of these surface maturation markers (Figure 3C, right), pβCD did not modify the
expression profile of these markers (Figure 3C, left). We also quantified the secretion
of targeted cytokines by BMDM that had been incubated with different
concentrations of pβCD. We observed that pβCD did not
induce secretion of the inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-1β
up to the concentration of 5 mg/mL. At 25 mg/mL, the production of
IL-1β and TNF-α by BMDMs increased to 400 and 200 pg/mL,
respectively, upon an overnight incubation with pβCD at 25 mg/mL,
although their levels remained much lower than the positive control
used here (BCG vaccine) with 1100 and 700 pg/mL, respectively. Altogether
these results showed that pβCD had only very low pro-inflammatory
effect at high concentration and no potential for inflammasome activation
(Figure 3D).

pβCD
Prevent Mtb Uptake by Macrophages via Cholesterol
Depletion
It is well recognized that monomeric
βCD affect the cholesterol content of plasma membranes and disturb
lipid raft distribution.32−35 We therefore examined the effect of pβCD on
the BMDM plasma membrane using a green-fluorescent Cholera toxin B
subunit (CTB-FITC) as a marker that binds to cholesterol and lipid
rafts. BMDM were first incubated with various concentrations of pβCD
and then labeled with CTB-FITC. In control macrophages, cholesterol
was detected exclusively on the plasma membrane, whereas in pβCD-treated
cells, cholesterol was depleted from the plasma membrane and distributed
in a diffuse manner throughout the cytosol (Figure 4A), which indicates a translocation of plasma
membrane cholesterol subsequent to pβCD treatment.

Figure 4 pβCD
disturb lipid raft integrity of macrophages and prevent
Mtb uptake. BMDM were incubated overnight with pβCD at different
concentrations and then fixed with formalin. (A) Effect of pβCD
on cholesterol distribution at the plasma membrane in BMDM. Typical
images obtained by automated confocal microscopy (pβCD: 16 h
at 2 mg/mL) and related quantification. CTB-FITC- and DAPI-labeled
nuclei shown in green and blue, respectively. Scale bar: 10 μm.
(B, C, D) BMDM were incubated with different concentrations of pβCD
for 2 or 16 h prior to infection with red-fluorescent Mtb. (B) Typical
images of H37Rv-pMRF1- and DAPI-labeled nuclei are shown in red and
blue, respectively (pβCD: 16 h at 5 mg/mL). Scale bar: 50 μm.
Percentage of Mtb-infected BMDM (2 h (C) or 16 h (D) postinfection)
upon pre-incubation with pβCD. Data are presented as mean ±
SEM and are representative of two independent experiments. Symbols
*, **, and *** denote p < 0.05, p < 0.01, and p < 0.001, respectively.

As cholesterol plays an essential
role in the entry of mycobacteria
into macrophages,36,37 we wondered whether pβCD
could affect the uptake of Mtb in cells. BMDM were first incubated
with pβCD at various concentrations for either 2 or 16 h. After
washing, red-fluorescent Mtb (H37Rv-pMRF1) was added at an MOI of
2. Two hours later, the cells were fixed and stained with DAPI (DNA
marker), and the percentage of cells containing mycobacteria was determined
by automated confocal microscopy and image analysis. Around 40% of
BMDM harbored Mtb in control cells (Cont.), whereas less than 25%
of pβCD-treated BMDM showed intracellular Mtb independent of
the concentrations tested (Figure 4B,C). The effect was even more striking when BMDM had
been preincubated with pβCD for 16 h (Figure 4D). Only 11% of BMDM were found infected
in the presence of 2 mg/mL of pβCD. A maximal reduction of 7%
was found at a pβCD concentration of 25 mg/mL. Thus, these data
demonstrate that pβCD inhibit macrophage colonization in vitro by inducing the depletion of cholesterol at the
plasma membrane. Our data suggest a direct correlation between the
inhibition of the bacterial uptake in vitro and the
reduced Mtb infection in vivo. This may be explained
by the fact that the bacterium does not reach its intracellular niche,
where replication occurs. It was also reported that lipid rafts are
needed for translocation of innate immune receptors such as TLR2 during
Mtb infection,38 raising the hypothesis
that cholesterol depletion by pβCD could impair innate immune
responses against bacteria. These hypotheses deserve further investigation.

pβCD Impair in Vitro Mtb Replication
and Induce Host Cell Apoptosis
We next investigated the abilities
of pβCD to modulate the replication of Mtb inside macrophages.
BMDM were infected with red-fluorescent Mtb (H37Rv-pMRF1) at an MOI
of 2 for 4 h before extensive washing to remove extracellular bacteria.
Twenty-four hours postinfection, cells were incubated with pβCD
at concentrations ranging from 1 to 25 mg/mL during 5 days before
being fixed, and the cell nuclei were labeled with DAPI. After image
acquisition, a dedicated image analysis enabled the quantification
of the bacterial area per infected cell, which is a biological correlate
of infection corresponding to the bacterial load per cell (Figure 5A). In nontreated
macrophages (Cont.), the bacterial area reached around 400 pixels2 5 days postinfection. Interestingly, infected cells that
were incubated with pβCD resulted in a bacterial area lower
than 300 pixels2, demonstrating that pβCD reduce
Mtb replication.

Figure 5 pβCD impair bacterial replication and induce macrophage
apoptosis.
(A) BMDM were infected with red fluorescent Mtb (Mtb-pMRF1) for 4
h before being incubated for 5 days with pβCD. (Left panel)
Typical images of Mtb-infected BMDM upon a 5-day incubation of pβCD
at 2 mg/mL. H37Rv-pMRF1- and DAPI-labeled nuclei are shown in red
and blue, respectively. Scale bar: 10 μm. (Right panel) Image-based
quantification of Mtb replication represented by the bacterial area
per infected cells. Cont. corresponds to samples incubated with water.
(B, C) Effect of pβCD on necrosis/apoptosis induction in BMDM.
(B) Typical images (pβCD: 16 h at 2 mg/mL) and (C) related quantification.
DAPI-labeled nuclei are shown in blue. This method allows the detection
of early apoptotic cells (positive for annexin V, gray), necrotic
cells (positive for DNA intercalating dye, red), and late apoptotic
cells (positive for both markers). Staurosporine was used as positive
control. Scale bar: 50 μm. Data are presented as mean ±
SEM and are representative of two independent experiments. Symbols
*, **, and *** denote p < 0.05, p < 0.01, and p < 0.001, respectively.

Taking into account this observation,
the cytosolic translocation
of cholesterol (Figure 4A) and the fact that targeting cholesterol by βCD renders cells
more sensitive to apoptosis,32,33,39 we investigated whether treatment with pβCD is pro-apoptotic
for macrophages. BMDM were incubated with various concentrations of
pβCD for 24 h, prior to fixation and labeling with annexin V
and a DNA intercalating dye. In this assay, necrotic cells are single
positive for the DNA intercalating dye, while cells in early apoptosis
are single positive for annexin V, and late apoptotic cells are double
positive. While untreated BMDM were double negative in this assay,
cells incubated with pβCD were single positive for annexin V,
in contrast to the BMDM treated with staurosporine, which typically
leads to late apoptotic, double-positive cells (Figure 5B,C). This effect is important to counteract
the blockade of host cell apoptosis, previously reported for Mtb.40 Moreover, Mtb eludes immunity and disseminates
in a necrosis-dependent manner. Therefore, reprogramming the host
cell death toward apoptosis can be detrimental to mycobacterial growth.41 In addition, the host is able to kill bacteria
through efferocytosis, by which Mtb-infected macrophages in apoptosis
are rapidly phagocytized by uninfected bystander macrophages.42

pβCD Induce in Vivo Apoptosis in Lungs,
Impairing Reservoirs for Mtb
We next studied the cell composition
of lung immune cells after e.t. administration of pβCD. BALB/c
mice (n = 4 per group) received via e.t. route 50 μL of pβCD at 150 mg/mL. At various time
points postadministration, the cell populations were studied by flow
cytometry. As expected, an increase in the absolute number of neutrophils
was observed early at 2 h postinoculation (Figure 6A). Slight decreases were observed in the
absolute numbers of interstitial macrophages and eosinophils at 2
h, while an increase was detected in the absolute number of T and
B lymphocytes, which were increased at 24 h postinoculation. Only
the increase in B lymphocytes persisted until 72 h postinoculation.
In contrast, inoculation of pβCD caused a 10-fold decrease in
the number of alveolar macrophages as soon as 24 h postinoculation.
This last observation, together with the previous results, suggested
that pβCD were mainly ingested by alveolar macrophages, leading
to their apoptotic death. To prove our hypothesis, the quantification
of apoptotic cells in lungs of infected mice that had been previously
treated with pβCD was performed. BALB/c mice were infected via i.n. route with Mtb and treated with pβCD (50
μL at 150 mg/mL) at days 7, 9, 11, 14, 16, and 18. At 21 days
postinfection, mice were anesthetized and received via i.n. route the NucView 488 caspase-3 substrate that labels apoptotic
cells. After 1 h, mice were euthanized, and their lungs were then
fixed and prepared for histology. Samples were sliced into 10 μm
sections and stained with DAPI for fluorescence microscopy analysis
(Figure 6B). Results
showed that pβCD administration increased 4 times the number
of apoptotic cells in lungs of infected mice in comparison to nontreated,
infected mice. Thus, our results suggest that pulmonary administration
of pβCD may result in a transient but drastic depletion of alveolar
macrophages by inducing apoptotic cell death.

Figure 6 pβCD induce alveolar
macrophage depletion and pulmonary apoptosis.
(A) BALB/c mice received one i.n. administration of pβCD (150
mg/mL, 50 μL) and were euthanized at indicated time points postadministration
to evaluate the number of different cell populations in lungs by flow
cytometry. The following cell types were analyzed: alveolar macrophages
(CD11c+ F4/80+ SiglecF+), interstitial
macrophages (F4/80+ CD11cint SiglecF–), neutrophils (CD11b+ LY6G+), eosinophils
(SiglecF+ CD11c–), T cells (CD3+), and B cells (B220+ MHCII+). (B) BALB/c mice
were inoculated via the i.n. route with Mtb H37Rv
(105 CFU). At days 7, 9, 11, 14, 16, and 18 postchallenge,
mice received administrations of 50 μL of pβCD (150 mg/mL) via the e.t. route. At day 21 postchallenge, 50 μL
of NucView 488 caspase-3 substrate (diluted in PBS) was administered
i.n. to each mouse for 1 h before lung harvesting and subsequent fluorescence
histology analysis. Data are presented as mean ± SEM and are
representative of two independent experiments. Symbols *, **, and
*** denote p < 0.05, p < 0.01,
and p < 0.001, respectively.

Of note, the in vivo depletion of alveolar
macrophages
by pβCD treatment is rapid and transient, suggesting it has
little impact on lung homeostasis. In support of our findings, a recent
study showed that specific depletion of alveolar macrophages by pulmonary
administration of liposomal formulations leads to a decrease of lung
Mtb burden with similar efficacy to that for the pβCD treatment
performed in the present study.43

pβCD
Antibacterial Activity Is Specific for Mtb in Vivo
To establish whether such intrinsic inhibitory
effect was specific to pβCD or shared by other nanocarriers,
we expanded the study to other unloaded nanoparticles. First, we investigated
the effect against an Mtb challenge of nanoparticles of poly-α-CD
(pαCD) and poly-γ-CD (pγCD), for which no genotoxicity
was observed (Supp. Figure 1). Interestingly,
we observed that pβCD had an antibacterial activity but not
pαCD or pγCD (Figure 7A).

Figure 7 Effect of other types of nanoparticles on Mtb infection
and effect
of pβCD on other bacterial pulmonary diseases in mice. (A, C)
BALB/c mice were infected via the i.n. route with
105 Mtb H37Rv (20 μL of PBS). At days 7, 9, 11, 14,
16, and 18 mice received pulmonary administration of nanoparticles
in a volume of 50 μL (pαCD, pβCD, or pγCD
150 mg/mL, PLGA 15 mg/mL, MOF 5 mg/mL) 21 days postinfection. Lungs
were harvested for bacterial burden evaluation by CFU counting. (B)
Solubility properties of ETH and BDM43266 using pαCD, pβCD,
and pγCD. (D) Mice were i.n. infected with the indicated bacteria.
At defined days postinfection, mice received i.n. administration of
pβCD (150 mg/mL, 50 μL) before CFU counting. Data are
presented as mean ± SEM and are representative of two independent
experiments. Symbols * and *** denote p < 0.05
and p < 0.001, respectively.

Of note, the pαCD and pγCD NPs were less prone
to solubilize
both drugs (ETH and BDM43266) than pβCD (Figure 7B). As shown in Figure 7B, the apparent solubility of both ETH and
Booster increased linearly by increasing pCD concentrations, which
was also the case with native CDs (Supp. Figure 2). The phase solubility diagram was a typical AL-type, indicating
the formation of soluble ETH/CD and Booster/CD complexes.44 The obtained binding constants K1:1 (M-1) of these complexes are shown in Supp. Table 1. All the CDs or pCDs were able
to increase the apparent solubility of both drugs. Interestingly,
it appears that both ETH and Booster are better accommodated in the
cavity of βCD as compared to the other types of CDs, as shown
by the obtained K1:1 of 24, 100, and 47
for αCD, βCD, and γCD, respectively, in the case
of ETH and 100, 514, and 256 in the case of Booster (Supp. Table 1). Compared to these native CD monomers, pCDs
were more efficient in enhancing the apparent solubilities, especially
for the Booster. For example, the K1:1 of Booster was 100 for αCD and 503 for pαCD, which is
possibly due to the contributions of hydrophobic microdomains formed
in the cross-linked pβCD. In a nutshell, pβCD was the
best among all tested CD-based materials to increase the apparent
solubility of both drugs, achieving a K1:1 of 110 and 1037 for ETH and Booster, respectively. Moreover, this
polymer is highly water-soluble, allowing a dramatic increase of the
apparent solubility of both ETH and Booster and avoiding crystallization
issues.18 Together, these results show
that pβCD is a good candidate to study its intrinsic antibacterial
activity.

We further investigated the intrinsic antimycobacterial
properties
of nanoparticles made of poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid) (PLGA), one of the most widely employed biomaterials for drug
loading,45,46 and the more recently developed highly porous
hybrid nanoparticles made of metal–organic frameworks (nanoMOF).47 PLGA nanoparticles and nanoMOFs were administered
i.n. at the highest doses for which there was no aggregation. Subsequent
to 6 i.n. administrations of NPs, we detected no effect on mycobacterial
loads in nanoMOF-treated mice, but a slight decrease of 0.5-log in
the bacterial loads in PLGA-treated mice, which however did not reach
the observed rate in pβCD-treated mice (Figure 7C).

Finally, we sought to determine
whether the antibacterial effect
of pβCD was specific to tuberculosis bacilli. We thus evaluated
the effect of pβCD on bacterial loads in mouse models of infection
with (i) Brucella abortus, the causative agent of
brucellosis, and (ii) Bordetella pertussis, the causative
agent of whooping cough. B. abortus is a facultative
intracellular Gram-negative coccobacillus that infects mammals and
may cause fetus abortion. Human brucellosis is a zoonotic infection
transmitted mainly through ingestion and inhalation.48B. pertussis is an extracellular bacterium
causing whooping cough or pertussis, a severe respiratory disease
that can be life-threatening in young infants. Both bacterial pathogens
colonize the respiratory tract and persist several days in lungs after
challenge. Administration of pβCD in the lung of mice infected
with either B. abortus or B. pertussis had no impact on the bacterial load, as determined at day 14 and
day 21 postchallenge, respectively, in contrast to the effects observed
in the Mtb mouse model (Figure 7D). This suggests that pβCD act in a specific manner
by interfering with macrophage colonization by Mtb. The absence of
pβCD effect on B. pertussis may result from
the fact that this pathogen, in contrast to Mtb, is an extracellular
bacterium, and thus its in vivo replication is not
directly dependent on macrophages impacted by the pβCD treatment.
The fact that pβCD have no effect on the intracellular pathogen B. abortus underscores a cellular mechanism that is not
common to other intracellular bacteria, which deserves more investigation.
Thus, the antibacterial effect of pβCD in the lung is specific
and helps host cells to control Mtb infection.

Conclusions
Current TB therapy is characterized by a complex drug regimen that
needs to be taken for 6 months, causing problems of toxicity and compliance.
Therefore, treating TB remains a challenge given the complexity and
the lack of understanding of many aspects of the basic biology underlying
this disease. The limitations of conventional therapies and the increasing
incidence of MDR- and XDR-TB underpin the need for innovative therapeutic
approaches. One of them consists of using nanotechnologies to combat
microbial resistance.21

Taken together,
we showed that e.t. administration of pβCD
to Mtb-exposed mice leads to a decrease of Mtb burden, which is concomitant
with reprogramming the properties of alveolar macrophages (Figure 8). Pulmonary administration
of pβCD induces transitory depletions of one of the main Mtb
reservoir cells, which could contribute to the decrease of Mtb burden via efferocytosis of apoptotic alveolar macrophages containing
surviving bacteria. Moreover, with the specific depletion of membrane
cholesterol in alveolar macrophages, extracellular bacteria will be
less likely to invade their neighboring cells. In summary, we identified
a promising tool that not only improves drug bioavailability at the
site of infection but also makes macrophages less permissive to Mtb
replication. The search for new molecules able to boost host capacities
for Mtb killing is considered as a promising strategy to counteract
the limitation of current TB treatment and the appearance of MDR mycobacteria.49 βCD-based NPs represent a potent drug
carrier that could contribute to move this concept forward. This activity
could fit into the emerging and promising concept of anti-TB approaches
by host-directed therapy, which aims to empower host immune properties
for the elimination of mycobacteria and/or for the reduction of tissue
damage induced by the infection.50

Figure 8 Model of antimycobacterial
activities of pβCD within alveoli
of infected lungs. (A) In the absence of treatment, Mtb uses cholesterol-rich
lipid raft structures to invade alveolar macrophages. Then, Mtb interferes
with the endocytic pathway to inhibit vacuolar acidification and to
induce phagosomal rupture, enabling its replication. The decrease
of the lung bacterial burden upon pβCD aerosolization is caused
by three independent properties of the nanoparticle: (B) pβCD
allows drug encapsulation for administration of nonsoluble molecules
directly into the lung, the main site of Mtb infection. (C) pβCD
induces host cell apoptosis, leading to efferocytosis, which is detrimental
for Mtb establishment. (D) pβCD induces cholesterol depletion,
impairing bacterial uptake.

Methods
Nanoparticle Preparation
β-Cyclodextrin was kindly
supplied by Roquette, Lestrem, France. pβCD nanoparticles of
around 10 nm were produced as previously described51,52 by cross-linking βCD under strongly alkaline conditions with
epichlorohydrin (EP). Briefly, 100 g of anhydrous βCD was solubilized
overnight in 160 mL of NaOH 33% w/w solution. After adding 81.52 g
of EP, the reaction was stopped in the vicinity of the gelation point.
The pβCD, recovered by ultrafiltration followed by freeze-drying,
contained 70% w/w βCD, as determined by 1H NMR spectroscopy.
Using the same cross-linking method, αCD and γCD (Sigma-Aldrich,
Saint Quentin Fallavier, France) were cross-linked, leading to the
formation of pαCD and pγCD, respectively. These materials
had similar properties except their CD content, which was 61% w/w
and 82% w/w for pαCD and pγCD, respectively.

Nanoparticle
preparations were purified using high-capacity endotoxin-free columns
(ThermoFisher). For both cellular and in vivo experiments,
pβCD were dispersed in water. For the various cellular assays,
nanoparticles were harvested in microplates, and manual dilutions
of the mother solution in a final volume of 100 μL were performed
in sterile Milli-Q water in a 384 deep well “diamond plate”
(Axygen) in order to obtain a dose–response curve. Previously,
5 μL of each concentration of the pβCD were dispensed
in 384-well clear-bottom polystyrene assay plates (Greiner Bio-One).
Water was used as negative control (Cont). Rhod-pβCD were synthesized
according to a previously reported method.53

Nanoparticles of porous nanoMOF MIL-100(Fe) (MIL stands for
Material
of Institut Lavoisier) were synthesized by microwave-assisted hydrothermal
reaction as previously described.54 A mixture
containing the iron source (iron(III) chloride hexahydrate) (6.0 mmol)
and the organic bridging ligand (1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid)
(4.02 mmol) was heated in 20 mL of deionized water, 6 min at 130 °C
under stirring. The reaction was carried out in a Pyrex reactor at
a power of 800 W (Mars-5, CEM, US). The crystalline iron-trimesate
nanoMOFs were recovered by centrifugation (15 min, 10000g) and purified by washing six times with absolute ethanol. The nanoparticles
had a mean diameter of 225 nm and a specific BET surface of 1650 m2/g, in agreement with previously reported data.47 For in vivo administration,
nanoMOF were administrated dispersed in water at a concentration of
5 mg/mL.

Poly(d,l-lactide-co-glycolide)
(50:50 acid terminated, MW: 5–20 kDa, 10P019) was kindly provided
by PCAS (Expansorb, Aramon, France). Nanoparticles were produced by
an emulsification method as described in our previous study.13 Their mean diameter was 180 nm. For in vivo experiments, PLGA were administrated at a concentration
of 15 mg/mL.

Ethionamide and Booster Co-incorporation
and Phase Solubility
Studies
A series of CD aqueous solutions (0, 3, 6, and 9
mM for αCD, βCD, pβCD, and γCD; 0, 2, 5, and
7 mM for pαCD and 0, 4, 8, and 12 mM for pγCD) were introduced
in vials containing excess amounts of ETH and Booster, respectively.
The dispersions, accurately protected from light, were kept under
shaking for 3 days for drug:CD complexation to reach equilibrium.
Then, the excess (not dissolved) drugs were removed by centrifugation
to obtain saturated ETH- or Booster-loaded systems. Drugs in the supernatants
were extracted by adding equal volumes of a DMSO/acetonitrile (1:10
v/v) mixture, followed by centrifugation at 17000g for 20 min to remove the precipitated CDs or NPs. Drug concentration
in the clear supernatants was assessed by RP-HPLC as previously described.18 An Agilent HPLC system (Agilent 1100 Series)
equipped with a C18 column (Kinetex 5 μm, 100A, Phenomenex)
and a UV detector at 280 nm was used. The eluants were as follows:
solvent A 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in Milli-Q water and solvent
B 0.1% TFA in acetonitrile; 0–2 min: 0–20% B, 2–6
min: 20–45% B, 6–10 min: 45–75% B, 10–15
min: 75–0%. The flow rate was 1.0 mL/min at room temperature.

Phase solubility diagrams were obtained by plotting the apparent
solubility of ETH or Booster against the equivalent molar CDs’
concentrations. For pCDs, the concentrations were calculated taking
into account their CD content determined by NMR. Assuming a 1:1 stoichiometry
of the binding interactions, the binding constants (K1:1) were calculated from the linear regression curve
of solubility diagrams, according to the following equation:44  S0 determines
drug solubility in water.

For in vitro and in vivo studies,
ETH and Boosters (BDM43266 and BDM 41906) were encapsulated in pCDs
without using any organic solvent, by mixing overnight 150 mg of pCD
suspensions with the drug powders, 3 mg of ETH, and 3 mg of Booster
per mL of water as previously described.18

Mice
Six-week-old Balb/c female mice and C57BL/6 female
mice were purchased from Janvier (Le Genest-Saint-Isle, France) and
were maintained in the animal facility of the Pasteur Institute of
Lille, France (Agreement B59-350009). The project received ethical
approval by the French Committee on Animal Experimentation and the
Ministry of Education and Research (00579.01 approved on December
2, 2015, and APAFIS#10232-2017061411305485 v6 approved in September
2018). All experiments were performed in accordance with relevant
guidelines and regulations.

Murine Bone-Marrow Macrophages and Dendritic
Cells
Murine bone-marrow progenitors were obtained by sampling
tibias and
femur bones from 7- to 11-week-old C57BL/6 mice. BMDM and BMDC were
obtained by seeding 107 bone marrow cells in 75 cm2 flasks in RPMI 1640 Glutamax medium (Gibco) supplemented
with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco) and 10%
L929-conditioned medium containing macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(M-CSF) or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF).
After 7 days’ incubation at 37 °C and 5% CO2, BMDM were rinsed with Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline
(D-PBS) and harvested with Versene (Gibco) to be used for the following
assays.

CTB-FITC Staining and Apoptosis Assay
A total of 104 BMDM were seeded in 384-well plates in the presence of various
concentrations of pβCD diluted in 50 μL of RPMI containing
10% FBS and M-CSF. After an overnight incubation with pβCD,
BMDM were fixed with 10% neutral buffered formalin solution (HT5014)
containing 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min and then labeled with CTB-FITC
(C1655) and DAPI at 10 μg/mL in D-PBS for 10 min at room temperature
(RT). The GFP-certified apoptosis/necrosis detection kit (Enzo, ENZ-51002)
was used to monitor cell death. Confocal images were acquired using
an Opera automated confocal microscope (PerkinElmer), and image quantification
was performed using Columbus software.

Mtb Entry or Replication
Assay
Recombinant Mtb H37Rv
expressing the red fluorescent protein DsRed (H37Rv-pMRF1)55 was cultured at 37 °C for 2 weeks in Middlebrook
7H9 medium (Difco) supplemented with 10% Middlebrook oleic acid-albumin-dextrose-catalase
(OADC, Difco), 0.5% glycerol (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.05% Tween 80 (Sigma-Aldrich),
and 20 μg/mL kanamycin (Invitrogen). Mycobacteria were washed
three times with D-PBS (free of MgCl2 and CaCl2, Gibco) and resuspended in RPMI-1640 Glutamax medium containing
10% heat-inactivated FBS (Life Technologies). Clumped mycobacteria
were removed by centrifugation at 700 rpm for 2 min, and homogeneous
supernatants were used for infection. Bacterial titer was determined
by measuring the red fluorescence on a Victor multilabel counter (PerkinElmer)
and a standard titration curve. The bacterial suspension was diluted
at 2 × 106 CFU per mL in RPMI 1640 supplemented with
10% FBS (RPMI-FBS) before being added to BMDM for infection.

For the Mtb entry assay, bacteria were added to BMDM that had been
incubated for 2 or 16 h with various dilutions of pβCD. At 2
h postinfection, cells were fixed with 10% neutral buffered formalin
solution (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min and then labeled with DAPI at
10 μg/mL in D-PBS for 10 min at RT for image-based analysis.

For the Mtb replication assay, BMDM were infected during 24 h (MOI
2) before being incubated with various concentrations of pβCD
until day 5 postinfection. Then, cells were fixed with 10% neutral
buffered formalin solution (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min and then labeled
with DAPI at 10 μg/mL in D-PBS for 10 min at RT for image-based
analysis.

Image Acquisition and Image-Based Analysis
For intracellular
assays, image acquisition of 384-well plates was performed on an automated
fluorescent confocal microscope (InCell6000, GE Healthcare), using
a 20× objective. The confocal microscope was equipped with 405,
488, 561, and 640 nm excitation lasers. A series of six fields was
taken per well, and each one was analyzed using the image-analysis
software Columbus (version 2.5.1, PerkinElmer). Cells (nuclei and
cytoplasm) were detected by an intensity detection algorithm applied
on the DAPI channel. A spot detection algorithm based on the RFP channel
was applied for the detection of Mtb-pMRF1 in cells, and the bacterial
intensity and area in pixels were measured. Images were analyzed to
determine the percentage of infected cells.

Genotoxicity Assay
THP1 (ATCC TIB-202) cells were incubated
for 4 h in complete medium with different concentrations of pCD suspensions
in sterile water or positive controls as described.56 For the in vitro micronucleus assay, cells
were washed and reincubated for a 1.5–2 cell cycle recovery
period. At the end of this recovery period, cells were washed and
trypsinized. After centrifugation at 1000 rpm (95g) for 6 min, supernatant was discarded and cells were treated with
a hypotonic solution (culture medium diluted 1:1 in distilled water).
After the hypotonic shock, a prefixation step was performed by adding
cold Carnoy’s fixative (methanol/glacial acetic acid, 3:1 v/v).
Cells were then centrifuged and suspended in Carnoy’s fixative
for 10 min. After another centrifugation, cells were resuspended and
spread on duplicate glass slides. Slides were air-dried overnight
and stained for 10 min with 4% v/v Giemsa in water. Micronuclei, identified
according to recommended criteria, were scored at 500× magnification
in 1000 intact mononucleated cells per slide. The comet assay was
performed under alkaline conditions (pH > 13). At the end of the
4
h treatment, THP1 cells were washed and trypsinized. Trypsin was inactivated
by adding complete medium. Viable cells were counted using Trypan
blue exclusion, and 8 × 104 viable cells were mixed
with 0.5% w/v low melting point agarose (LMPA) kept at 37 °C.
Cells embedded in LMPA were spread on regular precoated microscopy
slides (1.5% and 0.8% w/v normal melting point agarose). All the following
steps were sheltered from daylight to prevent the occurrence of additional
DNA damage. Slides were immersed for at least 1 h at 4 °C in
a cold lysing solution (2.5 M NaCl, 100 mM EDTA, 10 mM Trizma base,
pH 10, supplemented with 1% v/v Triton X-100 and 10% v/v dimethyl
sulfoxide). All slides were then placed in a horizontal tank filled
with fresh electrophoresis solution (1 mM EDTA and 300 mM NaOH, pH
> 13) for 20 min to allow DNA unwinding and expression of strand
breaks
and alkali-labile sites. Next, electrophoresis was performed for 20
min using an electric current of 0.7 V cm–1. Slides
were then placed for 10 min in a neutralization solution (0.4 M Trizma
base, pH 7.5), and gels were dehydrated by immersion in absolute ethanol
for 5 min. Finally, slides were air-dried and stored at room temperature.
Slides were independently coded and analyzed after addition of propidium
iodide (20 μg/mL) and a coverslip on each slide. Slides were
then examined at 250× magnification using a fluorescence microscope
(Leica Microscopy and Scientific Instruments Group, Heerbrugg, Switzerland)
equipped with an excitation filter of 515–560 nm and a 590
nm barrier filter, connected through a gated CCD camera to Comet Image
Analysis System software, version 4.0 (Perceptive Instruments Ltd.,
Haverhill, UK). One hundred randomly selected cells were scored on
each slide, corresponding to 200 cells.

Dendritic Cell Maturation
Assay
BMDC were incubated
with 1 or 2 mg/mL of pβCD overnight. M. bovis BCG1173P2, a strong inducer of DC maturation, was used as positive
control. Cells were washed and incubated with anti-CD16/CD32 (2.4G2
mAb, BD Pharmingen) during 20 min followed by surface staining during
a 20 min incubation with appropriate dilutions of PE-Cy7-anti-CD11c
in combination with FITC-conjugated anti-CD40 (HM40-3, SONY), anti-CD80
(B7-1) (16-10A1 Biolegend), anti-CD86 (B7-2) (PO3, SONY), anti-MHCII
(I-A/I-E) (MS/114.15.2, eBioscience), anti-MHC-I (H-2kb) (AF6-88-5-5-3, eBioscience), or the control Ig isotype antibodies.
The stained cells were washed twice in PBS containing 3% FBS and 0.1%
NaN3 and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde during 18
h at 4 °C prior to sample acquisition by a CytoFlex cytometer
system (Beckman Coulter). As a functional DC maturation assay, TNF-α
and IL-1β were quantified by ELISA in the culture supernatants
of the same cultures, as described.57

Effect of pβCD on Mtb-Infected Mice
Eight-week-old
BALB/c mice (4 mice per group) were inoculated with Mtb H37Rv via the i.n. route (105 CFU/20 μL) as described.13 Briefly, 50 μL of water containing pβCD
(or PBS alone as control) was administered to mice via the e.t. route using a microsprayer (MicroSprayer Aerosolizer model
IA-1C-M and FMJ-250 high-pressure syringe, Penn Century Inc., Wyndmoor,
PA, USA) or via the i.n. route. Administrations were
performed on day 7, 9, 11, 14, 16, and 18. At day 21, mice were euthanized
and lungs were homogenized using the MM300 bead beater (Retsch), and
10-fold serial dilutions were plated onto 7H11 agar plates supplemented
with 10% OADC. CFUs were determined after a three-week growth period
at 37 °C.

Effect of pβCD on B. abortus-Infected
Mice
As described,58 8-week-old
BALB/c mice were i.n. infected by B. abortus 2308
(105 CFU in 30 μL). Cultures were grown overnight
with shaking at 37 °C in 2YT medium (Luria–Bertani broth
with double quantity of yeast extract) and were washed twice in RPMI
1640 (Gibco Laboratories) (3500g, 10 min) before
inoculation of the mice. The mice were anesthetized with a cocktail
of xylazine (9 mg/kg) and ketamine (36 mg/kg) in PBS before being
inoculated. The infectious doses were validated by plating serial
dilutions of the inoculum; i.n. administrations of pβCD were
performed on day 7, 9, 11, 14, 16, and 18. The mice were sacrificed
21 days after infection by cervical dislocation. Immediately after
sacrifice, lungs were collected for bacterial counts. Organs were
crushed and transferred to PBS/0.1% X-100 Triton (Sigma-Aldrich).
We performed successive serial dilutions in RPMI and plated them onto
2YT medium. The CFUs were determined after 5 days of culture at 37
°C.

pβCD Effect on B. pertussis-Infected
Mice
Groups of 4 or 5 BALB/c mice (8-weeks-old) were sedated
with pentobarbital (CEVA Santé Animale, La Ballastière,
France) and i.n. infected with 20 μL of PBS containing 106 CFU of B. pertussis. The B. pertussis strain used was streptomycin-resistant BPSM and was grown on Bordet-Gengou
agar (Difco Laboratories) supplemented with 1% glycerol, 20% defibrinated
sheep blood, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin at 37 °C as described.59 After growth, the bacteria were collected and
resuspended in PBS at the desired density; i.n. administrations of
pβCD was performed on day 1, 3, and 6. Seven days postinfection,
lungs were harvested, homogenized in PBS, and plated in serial dilutions
onto BG-blood agar for CFU quantification after 5 days of incubation
at 37 °C.

Flow Cytometry Analysis of Lungs
Harvested organs were
cut into small pieces and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C with a mix
of DNase I (100 μg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich) and collagenase D (400
U/mL, Roche). Lung cells were washed and filtered before being incubated
with saturating doses of purified 2.4G2 (anti-mouse Fc receptor, ATCC)
in 200 μL of PBS, 0.2% BSA, and 0.02% NaN3 (FACS
buffer) for 20 min at 4 °C to prevent antibody binding to Fc
receptors. Various fluorescent monoclonal antibody (mAb) combinations
in FACS buffer were used to stain (3–5) × 106 cells. Acquisitions were done on a FACScanto II cytofluorometer
(Becton Dickinson) with the following mAbs: fluorescein (FITC)-coupled
anti-CD3 (145-2C11, BD Biosciences), FITC-coupled anti-CD11c (HL3,
ThermoFisher), FITC-coupled anti LY6G (1A8, BD Biosciences), phycoerythrine
(PE)-coupled anti-SiglecF (E50-2440, BD Biosciences), PE-coupled anti-MHCII
(M5, BD Biosciences), PE-coupled anti CD11b (M1/70, BD Biosciences),
allophycocyanin (APC)-coupled anti-F4/80 (BM8, BD Biosciences), APC-coupled
anti-B220 (RA3-6B2, BD Biosciences), APC-coupled anti-CD11c (HL3,
BD Biosciences), Brillant violet 421 (BV421)-coupled anti SiglecF
(E50-2440, BD Biosciences), BV421-coupled anti-MHCII (M5, BD Biosciences).
Fixable viability dye aqua (ThermoFisher) was used to gate viable
cells.

Fluorescent Histology on Infected Lung and Apoptosis Staining
Mice were anesthetized and via i.n. administrated
with 50 μL of NucView 488 caspase-3 substrate (Ozyme) diluted
in PBS (250×). One hour after injection, mice were euthanized
to harvest lungs for histological analysis. In detail, lungs were
fixed overnight at 4 °C with 10% neutral buffered formalin solution
(Sigma-Aldrich), washed in PBS, and incubated overnight at RT in a
20% PBS/sucrose solution under vacuum. Tissues were then embedded
in the Tissue-Tek OCT compound (Sakura) and frozen in liquid nitrogen,
and cryostat sections (10 μm) were prepared. For staining, tissue
sections were rehydrated in PBS and incubated in a PBS solution containing
1% blocking reagent (Boeringer) (PBS-BR 1%) and DAPI nucleic acid
stain for 20 min. Slides were mounted in Fluoro-Gel medium (Electron
Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA, USA). Labeled tissue sections were
visualized with an Axiovert M200 inverted microscope (Zeiss, Iena,
Germany) equipped with a high-resolution monochrome camera (AxioCam
HR, Zeiss). At least three slides were analyzed per organ from three
different animals, and the results are representative of two independent
experiments.

Statistical Analysis
A Mann–Whitney
test was
applied using GraphPad Prism software. Each group of mice was compared
to the control group. Comparison of groups two-by-two was performed,
and the results are displayed when required. Values of p < 0.05 were considered significant. Indicated symbols of *, **,
and *** denote p < 0.05, p <
0.01, and p < 0.001, respectively.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available
free of charge on the ACS Publications
website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.8b07902.Additional information
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn8b07902_si_002.pdf

 Author Present Address
□ Present address: Institut Pasteur, Theravectys
Joint Lab, 28 Rue
du Dr. Roux, F-75015 Paris, France.

Author Contributions
The author(s)
have made the following declarations about their contributions: Conceived
and designed the experiments: A.M., G.S., L.M., R.G., P.B. Performed
the experiments: A.M., G.S., X.L., A.D., A.S.D., M.M.M., E.P., S.J.,
E.H., N.D., I.B., C.R., S.S., S.T., V.G., F.N., L.M., R.G., P.B. Contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools: A.M., G.S., X.L., M.M.M., E.H.,
N.D., B.V., M.F., R.B., F.N., B.D., E.M., C.L., A.R.B., N.W., R.G.,
P.B. Performed data analysis: A.M., L.M., F.N., R.G., P.B. Wrote the
paper: A.M., E.H., L.M., R.G., P.B.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge F. Leroux,
H. Bauderlique,
O. R. Song, I. Ricard, and A. Vandeputte for technical assistance
and helpful discussions. We also acknowledge R. Prath, N. Vandenabeele,
and D. Legrand for technical assistance in BSL3 and animal facilities.
We are grateful to Roquette for kindly providing us with a sample
of β-cyclodextrin. We acknowledge the PICT-IBiSA and F. Lafont
from BiCEL for providing access to microscopy equipment. Financial
support for this work was provided by the European Community (CycloNHit
no. 608407, ERC-STG INTRACELLTB no. 260901, MM4TB no. 260872), the
Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-10-EQPX-04-01, ANR-14-CE08-0017,
ANR-16-CE35-0009), the Projet Transversal de l’Institut Pasteur
(PTR441, PTR22-16), the EMBO Young Investigator Program, the Feder
(12001407 (D-AL) Equipex Imaginex BioMed), the Région Hauts-de-France
(convention no. 12000080), and the Fondation pour la Recherche Medicale
(SPF20170938709). This work was supported by a public grant overseen
by the French National Research Agency (ANR) as part of the “Investissements
d’Avenir” program (Labex NanoSaclay, ANR-10-LABX-0035).
==== Refs
References
WHO . Global
Tuberculosis Report 2018 . 2018 .
Gandhi N. R. ; Nunn P. ; Dheda K. ; Schaaf H. S. ; Zignol M. ; van Soolingen D. ; Jensen P. ; Bayona J. 
Multidrug-Resistant
and Extensively Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis: a Threat to Global Control
of Tuberculosis . Lancet 
2010 , 375 , 1830 –1843 . 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60410-2 .20488523 
Queval C. J. ; Brosch R. ; Simeone R. 
The Macrophage:
A Disputed Fortress
in the Battle Against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. . Front. Microbiol. 
2017 , 8 , 2284 –2295 . 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02284 .29218036 
Prideaux B. ; Via L. E. ; Zimmerman M. D. ; Eum S. ; Sarathy J. ; O’Brien P. ; Chen C. ; Kaya F. ; Weiner D. M. ; Chen P. Y. ; Song T. ; Lee M. ; Shim T. S. ; Cho J. S. ; Kim W. ; Cho S. N. ; Olivier K. N. ; Barry C. E. 3rd; Dartois V. 
The Association
Between
Sterilizing Activity and Drug Distribution Into Tuberculosis Lesions . Nat. Med. 
2015 , 21 , 1223 –1227 . 10.1038/nm.3937 .26343800 
Hickey A. J. ; Durham P. G. ; Dharmadhikari A. ; Nardell E. A. 
Inhaled Drug Treatment
for Tuberculosis: Past Progress and Future Prospects . J. Controlled Release 
2016 , 240 , 127 –134 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.11.018 .
Dakal T. C. ; Kumar A. ; Majumdar R. S. ; Yadav V. 
Mechanistic
Basis of
Antimicrobial Actions of Silver Nanoparticles . Front. Microbiol. 
2016 , 7 , 1831 –1848 . 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01831 .27899918 
Chen W. ; Cheng C. A. ; Lee B. Y. ; Clemens D. L. ; Huang W. Y. ; Horwitz M. A. ; Zink J. I. 
A Facile Strategy
Enabling Both High
Loading and High Release Amounts of the Water-insoluble Drug Clofazimine
Using Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles . ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 31870 –31881 . 10.1021/acsami.8b09069 .30160469 
Huo S. ; Jiang Y. ; Gupta A. ; Jiang Z. ; Landis R. F. ; Hou S. ; Liang X. J. ; Rotello V. M. 
Fully Zwitterionic Nanoparticle Antimicrobial
Agents through Tuning of Core Size and Ligand Structure . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 8732 –8737 . 10.1021/acsnano.6b04207 .27622756 
Fenaroli F. ; Repnik U. ; Xu Y. ; Johann K. ; Van Herck S. ; Dey P. ; Skjeldal F. M. ; Frei D. M. ; Bagherifam S. ; Kocere A. ; Haag R. ; De Geest B. G. ; Barz M. ; Russell D. G. ; Griffiths G. 
Enhanced Permeability and Retention-like
Extravasation of Nanoparticles From the Vasculature Into Tuberculosis
Granulomas in Zebrafish and Mouse Models . ACS
Nano 
2018 , 12 , 8646 –8661 . 10.1021/acsnano.8b04433 .30081622 
Fenaroli F. ; Westmoreland D. ; Benjaminsen J. ; Kolstad T. ; Skjeldal F. M. ; Meijer A. H. ; van der Vaart M. ; Ulanova L. ; Roos N. ; Nystrom B. ; Hildahl J. ; Griffiths G. 
Nanoparticles
as Drug Delivery System Against Tuberculosis in Zebrafish Embryos:
Direct Visualization and Treatment . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 7014 –7026 . 10.1021/nn5019126 .24945994 
Pelgrift R. Y. ; Friedman A. J. 
Nanotechnology as
a Therapeutic Tool to Combat Microbial
Resistance . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2013 , 65 , 1803 –1815 . 10.1016/j.addr.2013.07.011 .
Pancani E. ; Menendez-Miranda M. ; Pastor A. ; Brisset F. ; Bernet-Camard M. F. ; Desmaele D. ; Gref R. 
Nanoparticles With High Payloads
of Pipemidic Acid, a Poorly Soluble Crystalline Drug: Drug-Initiated
Polymerization and Self-Assembly Approach . Acta
Pharm. Sin. B 
2018 , 8 , 420 –431 . 10.1016/j.apsb.2018.03.008 .29881681 
Costa-Gouveia J. ; Pancani E. ; Jouny S. ; Machelart A. ; Delorme V. ; Salzano G. ; Iantomasi R. ; Piveteau C. ; Queval C. J. ; Song O. R. ; Flipo M. ; Deprez B. ; Saint-Andre J. P. ; Hureaux J. ; Majlessi L. ; Willand N. ; Baulard A. ; Brodin P. ; Gref R. 
Combination
Therapy for Tuberculosis Treatment: Pulmonary Administration of Ethionamide
and Booster Co-Loaded Nanoparticles . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 5390 –5404 . 10.1038/s41598-017-05453-3 .28710351 
Willand N. ; Dirié B. ; Carette X. ; Bifani P. ; Singhal A. ; Desroses M. ; Leroux F. ; Willery E. ; Mathys V. ; Déprez-Poulain R. 
Synthetic
EthR Inhibitors Boost Antituberculous
Activity of Ethionamide . Nat. Med. 
2009 , 15 , 537 –544 . 10.1038/nm.1950 .19412174 
Russell D. G. ; Huang L. ; VanderVen B. C. 
Immunometabolism
at the Interface
Between Macrophages and Pathogens . Nat. Rev.
Immunol. 
2019 , s41577 –019–0124 . 10.1038/s41577-019-0124-9 .
Baulard A. R. ; Betts J. C. ; Engohang-Ndong J. ; Quan S. ; McAdam R. A. ; Brennan P. J. ; Locht C. ; Besra G. S. 
Activation of the
Pro-Drug Ethionamide is Regulated in Mycobacteria . J. Biol. Chem. 
2000 , 275 , 28326 –28331 . 10.1074/jbc.M003744200 .10869356 
Villemagne B. ; Flipo M. ; Blondiaux N. ; Crauste C. ; Malaquin S. ; Leroux F. ; Piveteau C. ; Villeret V. ; Brodin P. ; Villoutreix B. O. ; Sperandio O. ; Soror S. H. ; Wohlkonig A. ; Wintjens R. ; Deprez B. ; Baulard A. R. ; Willand N. 
Ligand Efficiency
Driven Design of New Inhibitors of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Transcriptional Repressor EthR Using Fragment Growing, Merging,
and Linking Approaches . J. Med. Chem. 
2014 , 57 , 4876 –4888 . 10.1021/jm500422b .24818704 
Salzano G. ; Wankar J. ; Ottani S. ; Villemagne B. ; Baulard A. R. ; Willand N. ; Brodin P. ; Manet I. ; Gref R. 
Cyclodextrin-Based Nanocarriers Containing
a Synergic Drug Combination:
A Potential Formulation for Pulmonary Administration of Antitubercular
Drugs . Int. J. Pharm. 
2017 , 531 , 577 –587 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.05.030 .28522424 
Daoud-Mahammed S. ; Couvreur P. ; Bouchemal K. ; Cheron M. ; Lebas G. ; Amiel C. ; Gref R. 
Cyclodextrin
and Polysaccharide-Based
Nanogels: Entrapment of Two Hydrophobic Molecules, Benzophenone and
Tamoxifen . Biomacromolecules 
2009 , 10 , 547 –554 . 10.1021/bm801206f .19173558 
Andrade F. ; Rafael D. ; Videira M. ; Ferreira D. ; Sosnik A. ; Sarmento B. 
Nanotechnology and
Pulmonary Delivery to Overcome Resistance
in Infectious Diseases . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2013 , 65 , 1816 –1827 . 10.1016/j.addr.2013.07.020 .
Costa-Gouveia J. ; Ainsa J. A. ; Brodin P. ; Lucia A. 
How Can Nanoparticles
Contribute to Antituberculosis Therapy? . Drug
Discovery Today 
2017 , 22 , 600 –607 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2017.01.011 .28137645 
Gnanadhas D. P. ; Ben Thomas M. ; Thomas R. ; Raichur A. M. ; Chakravortty D. 
Interaction
of Silver Nanoparticles With Serum Proteins Affects Their Antimicrobial
Activity In Vivo. . Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 
2013 , 57 , 4945 –4955 . 10.1128/AAC.00152-13 .23877702 
Maronpot R. R. ; Hobbs C. A. ; Davis J. ; Swartz C. ; Boyle M. ; Koyanagi M. ; Hayashi S. M. 
Genetic and Rat Toxicity Studies
of Cyclodextrin Glucanotransferase . Toxicol.
Rep. 
2016 , 3 , 381 –392 . 10.1016/j.toxrep.2016.03.002 .28959560 
Kurkov S. V. ; Loftsson T. 
Cyclodextrins . Int. J. Pharm. 
2013 , 453 , 167 –180 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2012.06.055 .22771733 
Shelat R. ; Chandra S. ; Khanna A. 
Detailed Toxicity
Evaluation of Beta-Cyclodextrin
Coated Iron Oxide Nanoparticles for Biomedical Applications . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2018 , 110 , 357 –365 . 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.09.067 .28939520 
Bivas-Benita M. ; Ottenhoff T. H. ; Junginger H. E. ; Borchard G. 
Pulmonary DNA Vaccination:
Concepts, Possibilities and Perspectives . J.
Controlled Release 
2005 , 107 , 1 –29 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2005.05.028 .
Misra A. ; Hickey A. J. ; Rossi C. ; Borchard G. ; Terada H. ; Makino K. ; Fourie P. B. ; Colombo P. 
Inhaled Drug
Therapy
for Treatment of Tuberculosis . Tuberculosis 
2011 , 91 , 71 –81 . 10.1016/j.tube.2010.08.009 .20875771 
Sharma A. ; Sharma S. ; Khuller G. K. 
Lectin-Functionalized
Poly (Lactide-Co-Glycolide)
Nanoparticles as Oral/Aerosolized Antitubercular Drug Carriers for
Treatment of Tuberculosis . J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 
2004 , 54 , 761 –766 . 10.1093/jac/dkh411 .15329364 
Stella V. J. ; He Q. 
Cyclodextrins . Toxicol. Pathol. 
2008 , 36 , 30 –42 . 10.1177/0192623307310945 .18337219 
Elespuru R. ; Pfuhler S. ; Aardema M. J. ; Chen T. ; Doak S. H. ; Doherty A. ; Farabaugh C. S. ; Kenny J. ; Manjanatha M. ; Mahadevan B. ; Moore M. M. ; Ouedraogo G. ; Stankowski L. F. Jr.; Tanir J. Y. 
Genotoxicity Assessment
of Nanomaterials: Recommendations on Best Practices, Assays, and Methods . Toxicol. Sci. 
2018 , 164 , 391 –416 . 10.1093/toxsci/kfy100 .29701824 
Udroiu I. ; Sgura A. 
Cytogenetic Tests for Animal Production: State of the Art and Perspectives . Anim. Genet. 
2017 , 48 , 505 –515 . 10.1111/age.12581 .28741802 
Yamaguchi R. ; Perkins G. ; Hirota K. 
Targeting Cholesterol With Beta-Cyclodextrin
Sensitizes Cancer Cells for Apoptosis . FEBS
Lett. 
2015 , 589 , 4097 –4105 . 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.11.009 .26606906 
Badana A. K. ; Chintala M. ; Gavara M. M. ; Naik S. ; Kumari S. ; Kappala V. R. ; Iska B. R. ; Malla R. R. 
Lipid Rafts Disruption
Induces Apoptosis by Attenuating Expression of LRP6 and Survivin in
Triple Negative Breast Cancer . Biomed. Pharmacother. 
2018 , 97 , 359 –368 . 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.10.045 .29091885 
Zidovetzki R. ; Levitan I. 
Use of Cyclodextrins
to Manipulate Plasma Membrane
Cholesterol Content: Evidence, Misconceptions and Control Strategies . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2007 , 1768 , 1311 –1324 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2007.03.026 .
Hinzey A. H. ; Kline M. A. ; Kotha S. R. ; Sliman S. M. ; Butler E. S. ; Shelton A. B. ; Gurney T. R. ; Parinandi N. L. 
Choice
of Cyclodextrin for Cellular Cholesterol Depletion for Vascular Endothelial
Cell Lipid Raft Studies: Cell Membrane Alterations, Cytoskeletal Reorganization
and Cytotoxicity . Indian J. Biochem. Biophys. 
2012 , 49 , 329 –341 .23259319 
Gatfield J. ; Pieters J. 
Essential Role for
Cholesterol in Entry of Mycobacteria
Into Macrophages . Science 
2000 , 288 , 1647 –1650 . 10.1126/science.288.5471.1647 .10834844 
Munoz S. ; Rivas-Santiago B. ; Enciso J. A. 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Entry Into
Mast Cells Through Cholesterol-Rich Membrane Microdomains . Scand. J. Immunol. 
2009 , 70 , 256 –263 . 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2009.02295.x .19703015 
Shin D. M. ; Yang C. S. ; Lee J. Y. ; Lee S. J. ; Choi H. H. ; Lee H. M. ; Yuk J. M. ; Harding C. V. ; Jo E. K. 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Lipoprotein-Induced Association
of TLR2 With Protein Kinase C Zeta in Lipid Rafts Contributes to Reactive
Oxygen Species-Dependent Inflammatory Signalling in Macrophages . Cell. Microbiol. 
2008 , 10 , 1893 –1905 . 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01179.x .18503635 
Chen Y. C. ; Gowda R. ; Newswanger R. K. ; Leibich P. ; Fell B. ; Rosenberg G. ; Robertson G. P. 
Targeting Cholesterol Transport in
Circulating Melanoma Cells to Inhibit Metastasis . Pigm. Cell Melanoma Res. 
2017 , 30 , 541 –552 . 10.1111/pcmr.12614 .
Schaaf K. ; Smith S. R. ; Duverger A. ; Wagner F. ; Wolschendorf F. ; Westfall A. O. ; Kutsch O. ; Sun J. 
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis Exploits the PPM1A Signaling Pathway to Block
Host Macrophage Apoptosis . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 42101 –42117 . 10.1038/srep42101 .28176854 
Lam A. ; Prabhu R. ; Gross C. M. ; Riesenberg L. A. ; Singh V. ; Aggarwal S. 
Role of Apoptosis and
Autophagy in
Tuberculosis . Am. J. Physiol. 
2017 , 313 , 218 –229 . 10.1152/ajplung.00162.2017 .
Martin C. J. ; Booty M. G. ; Rosebrock T. R. ; Nunes-Alves C. ; Desjardins D. M. ; Keren I. ; Fortune S. M. ; Remold H. G. ; Behar S. M. 
Efferocytosis is an Innate Antibacterial
Mechanism . Cell Host Microbe 
2012 , 12 , 289 –300 . 10.1016/j.chom.2012.06.010 .22980326 
Huang L. ; Nazarova E. V. ; Tan S. ; Liu Y. ; Russell D. G. 
Growth
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis In Vivo Segregates
With Host Macrophage Metabolism and Ontogeny . J. Exp. Med. 
2018 , 215 , 1135 –1152 . 10.1084/jem.20172020 .29500179 
Saokham P. ; Muankaew C. ; Jansook P. ; Loftsson T. 
Solubility of Cyclodextrins
and Drug/Cyclodextrin Complexes . Molecules 
2018 , 23 , 1161 –1176 . 10.3390/molecules23051161 .
Petros R. A. ; DeSimone J. M. 
Strategies in the
Design of Nanoparticles for Therapeutic
Applications . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2010 , 9 , 615 –627 . 10.1038/nrd2591 .20616808 
Shive M. S. ; Anderson J. M. 
Biodegradation and
Biocompatibility of PLA and PLGA
Microspheres . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
1997 , 28 , 5 –24 . 10.1016/S0169-409X(97)00048-3 .
Horcajada P. ; Chalati T. ; Serre C. ; Gillet B. ; Sebrie C. ; Baati T. ; Eubank J. F. ; Heurtaux D. ; Clayette P. ; Kreuz C. ; Chang J. S. ; Hwang Y. K. ; Marsaud V. ; Bories P. N. ; Cynober L. ; Gil S. ; Ferey G. ; Couvreur P. ; Gref R. 
Porous Metal-Organic-Framework
Nanoscale
Carriers as a Potential Platform for Drug Delivery and Imaging . Nat. Mater. 
2010 , 9 , 172 –178 . 10.1038/nmat2608 .20010827 
Godfroid J. ; Cloeckaert A. ; Liautard J. P. ; Kohler S. ; Fretin D. ; Walravens K. ; Garin-Bastuji B. ; Letesson J. J. 
From the Discovery
of the Malta Fever’s Agent to the Discovery of a Marine Mammal
Reservoir, Brucellosis Has Continuously Been a Re-Emerging Zoonosis . Vet. Res. 
2005 , 36 , 313 –326 . 10.1051/vetres:2005003 .15845228 
Machelart A. ; Song O. R. ; Hoffmann E. ; Brodin P. 
Host-Directed Therapies
Offer Novel Opportunities for the Fight Against Tuberculosis . Drug Discovery Today 
2017 , 22 , 1250 –1257 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2017.05.005 .28533187 
Kaufmann S. H. E. ; Dorhoi A. ; Hotchkiss R. S. ; Bartenschlager R. 
Host-Directed
Therapies for Bacterial and Viral Infections . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2017 , 17 , 35 –56 . 10.1038/nrd.2017.162 .28935918 
Gref R. ; Amiel C. ; Molinard K. ; Daoud-Mahammed S. ; Sebille B. ; Gillet B. ; Beloeil J. C. ; Ringard C. ; Rosilio V. ; Poupaert J. ; Couvreur P. 
New Self-Assembled
Nanogels Based on Host-Guest Interactions: Characterization and Drug
Loading . J. Controlled Release 
2006 , 111 , 316 –324 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2005.12.025 .
Othman M. ; Bouchemal K. ; Couvreur P. ; Desmaele D. ; Morvan E. ; Pouget T. ; Gref R. 
A Comprehensive Study of the Spontaneous
Formation of Nanoassemblies in Water by a ″Lock-and-Key″
Interaction Between Two Associative Polymers . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2011 , 354 , 517 –527 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2010.11.015 .21131000 
Aykac A. ; Noiray M. ; Malanga M. ; Agostoni V. ; Casas-Solvas J. M. ; Fenyvesi E. ; Gref R. ; Vargas-Berenguel A. 
A Non-Covalent
″Click Chemistry″ Strategy to Efficiently Coat Highly
Porous MOF Nanoparticles With a Stable Polymeric Shell . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj. 
2017 , 1861 , 1606 –1616 . 10.1016/j.bbagen.2017.01.016 .28137620 
Rodriguez-Ruiz V. ; Maksimenko A. ; Anand R. ; Monti S. ; Agostoni V. ; Couvreur P. ; Lampropoulou M. ; Yannakopoulou K. ; Gref R. 
Efficient ″Green″
Encapsulation of a Highly Hydrophilic
Anticancer Drug in Metal-Organic Framework Nanoparticles . J. Drug Targeting 
2015 , 23 , 759 –767 . 10.3109/1061186X.2015.1073294 .
Deboosere N. ; Iantomasi R. ; Queval C. J. ; Song O. R. ; Deloison G. ; Jouny S. ; Debrie A. S. ; Chamaillard M. ; Nigou J. ; Cohen-Gonsaud M. ; Locht C. ; Brodin P. ; Veyron-Churlet R. 
LppM Impact on the Colonization of Macrophages by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. . Cell.
Microbiol. 
2017 , 19 , e1261910.1111/cmi.12619 .
Moche H. ; Chevalier D. ; Vezin H. ; Claude N. ; Lorge E. ; Nesslany F. 
Genotoxicity
of Tungsten Carbide-Cobalt (WC-Co) Nanoparticles In VitroMechanisms-of-Action Studies . Mutat. Res.,
Genet. Toxicol. Environ. Mutagen. 
2015 , 779 , 15 –22 . 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2015.02.002 .25813722 
Sayes F. ; Sun L. ; Di Luca M. ; Simeone R. ; Degaiffier N. ; Fiette L. ; Esin S. ; Brosch R. ; Bottai D. ; Leclerc C. ; Majlessi L. 
Strong Immunogenicity
and Cross-Reactivity
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis ESX-5 Type VII Secretion:
Encoded PE-PPE Proteins Predicts Vaccine Potential . Cell Host Microbe 
2012 , 11 , 352 –363 . 10.1016/j.chom.2012.03.003 .22520463 
Machelart A. ; Khadrawi A. ; Demars A. ; Willemart K. ; De Trez C. ; Letesson J. J. ; Muraille E. 
Chronic Brucella Infection Induces Selective and Persistent Interferon Gamma-Dependent
Alterations of Marginal Zone Macrophages in the Spleen . Infect. Immun. 
2017 , 85 , 115 –117 . 10.1128/IAI.00115-17 .
Feunou P. F. ; Kammoun H. ; Debrie A. S. ; Locht C. 
Heterologous Prime-Boost
Immunization With Live Attenuated B. pertussis BPZE1
Followed by Acellular Pertussis Vaccine in Mice . Vaccine 
2014 , 32 , 4281 –4288 . 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.06.019 .24950361

