
==== Front
ACS Nano
ACS Nano
nn
ancac3
ACS Nano
1936-0851 1936-086X American
Chemical Society 

10.1021/acsnano.9b08142
Article
Meta-Analysis
of Nanoparticle Delivery to Tumors Using
a Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Modeling and Simulation Approach
Cheng Yi-Hsien †‡ He Chunla † Riviere Jim E. †§ Monteiro-Riviere Nancy A. ‡ Lin Zhoumeng *†‡ † Institute
of Computational Comparative Medicine (ICCM), Department of Anatomy
and Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506, United States
‡ Nanotechnology
Innovation Center of Kansas State (NICKS), Department of Anatomy and
Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506, United States
§ 1Data
Consortium, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506, United States
* Email: zhoumeng@ksu.edu.
20 02 2020 
24 03 2020 
14 3 3075 3095
15 10 2019 20 02 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Numerous studies
have engineered nanoparticles with different physicochemical
properties to enhance the delivery efficiency to solid tumors, yet
the mean and median delivery efficiencies are only 1.48% and 0.70%
of the injected dose (%ID), respectively, according to a study using
a nonphysiologically based modeling approach based on published data
from 2005 to 2015. In this study, we used physiologically based pharmacokinetic
(PBPK) models to analyze 376 data sets covering a wide range of nanomedicines
published from 2005 to 2018 and found mean and median delivery efficiencies
at the last sampling time point of 2.23% and 0.76%ID, respectively.
Also, the mean and median delivery efficiencies were 2.24% and 0.76%ID
at 24 h and were decreased to 1.23% and 0.35%ID at 168 h, respectively,
after intravenous administration. While these delivery efficiencies
appear to be higher than previous findings, they are still quite low
and represent a critical barrier in the clinical translation of nanomedicines.
We explored the potential causes of this poor delivery efficiency
using the more mechanistic PBPK perspective applied to a subset of
gold nanoparticles and found that low delivery efficiency was associated
with low distribution and permeability coefficients at the tumor site
(P < 0.01). We also demonstrate how PBPK modeling
and simulation can be used as an effective tool to investigate tumor
delivery efficiency of nanomedicines.

advanced materialdrug deliverynanomedicinenanoparticlephysiologically based
pharmacokinetic
modelingtissue biodistributiontumor deliverydocument-id-old-9nn9b08142document-id-new-14nn9b08142ccc-price
==== Body
Nanomaterials
or nanoparticles
(NMs or NPs) can be engineered to have different physicochemical and
biological properties, such as different shapes, sizes, charges, and
surface coatings, to provide a multifunctional platform for diagnosis
and targeting therapy of various diseases, including cancer.1−4 In particular, the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect
is purported to be one of the major mechanisms for passive retention
of 10–200 nm NPs, due to the impaired lymphatic drainage and
relatively high permeability of vascular endothelial cells in tumors.4−6 Examples include, but are not limited to, self-assembled polymeric
micelles7 and liposomes8 that can be encapsulated with anticancer drugs to enhance
tumor targeting and on-site drug releasing. In contrast, active targeting
is a strategy that counts on surface functionalization with a certain
ligand,9 peptide,10 or coating11 to facilitate the recognition
and binding to the surface of tumors.

Numerous studies have
been devoted to the design of nanomedicines
with higher therapeutic indices, i.e., higher tumor targeting ability, longer circulating half-lives
in blood, tumor accumulation, and lower systemic toxicity in normal
tissues.12,13 Despite these purported advantages, NP translation
into clinical applications is limited partly due to a low tumor delivery
efficiency of only 0.70% of the injected dose (%ID) as previously
reported.14 Subsequent quantitative analyses
further revealed that <0.0014%ID intravenously (IV) administered
NPs with active targeting moiety were delivered to targeted cancer
cells in the tumor sites with only 2.0% of the cancer cells interacting
with NPs.15 These surprisingly low tumor
delivery and cancer cell targeting efficiencies suggest the importance
of examining key physicochemical and pharmacokinetic determinants
of NP disposition within the tumor microenvironment. Additionally,
these low delivery efficiencies were estimated using empirical noncompartmental
and nonphysiologically based modeling approaches14,15 that are inherently unable to be extrapolated to predict time-dependent
kinetics of NP distribution to tumors/tissues across species with
different physiologies and study designs nor to provide a mechanistic
explanation of estimated NP delivery in tumor-bearing animals. These
computational limitations in prior pharmacokinetic modeling approaches
can be addressed by using a physiologically based pharmacokinetic
(PBPK) modeling approach, which is a mechanism-based computational
modeling method that simulates absorption, distribution, metabolism,
and excretion (ADME) of substances in an organism.16−19 A number of PBPK models have
been developed for different types of NPs loaded with or without anticancer
drugs.17,20−30 However, none of these studies use a PBPK modeling approach to systematically
analyze and compare NP disposition across hundreds of disparate data
sets from tumor-bearing animals in order to obtain a more insightful
and comprehensive conclusion on the key determinants of NP delivery
efficiency to tumors.

To improve our understanding and reveal
the critical factors in
the systemic delivery of NM to tumors, the present study aimed to
develop and apply a generic PBPK model for describing NM disposition
in tumor-bearing mice and then employ this model to analyze tissue
and tumor distributions of various types of NMs in order to identify
key determinants of NM tumor delivery efficiency. In addition, we
applied the model to simulate short-term (24 h), long-term (168 h),
and time-dependent biodistribution to tumors to examine the time dependence
of NM tumor delivery efficiency. Finally, we proposed a long-term
strategy for future studies of nanomedicines to enhance the design
of preclinical trials and to facilitate clinical translation of NMs
with higher tumor delivery efficiency and optimal therapeutic index,
with a focus on the role of PBPK modeling and simulation in this process.

Results
and Discussion
PBPK Model Calibration and Simulation in
Tumor-Bearing Mice
This study used the inclusion/exclusion
criteria listed in Figure 1 to screen the literature
and identified 200 pharmacokinetic studies (376 data sets in total)
for subsequent PBPK modeling and simulations with experimental protocols
summarized in Table S1 in Supporting Information.
A PBPK model for NMs in healthy mice (Figure 2A) was calibrated with the biodistribution
data for venous plasma, lungs, liver, spleen, and kidneys in healthy
mice injected IV with 13 nm gold (Au) NPs (AuNPs).31 The predicted values were in good agreement with reported
kinetic profiles for up to 168 h postdosing as indicated by the estimated
coefficient of determination (R2) of 0.95
(Figure S1 in Supporting Information).
The tumor-bearing PBPK models (Figure 2B) extrapolated from the PBPK model in healthy mice
(Figure 2A) adequately
simulated most of the tumor delivery kinetics for 313 out of 376 total
data sets (83%) with R2 ≥ 0.75
or <10% difference in tumor delivery efficiency. This difference
was estimated at the last sampling time point and calculated using
the PBPK model (DETlast) (Table S2) versus a noncompartmental linear trapezoidal integration
method (DETlast_PK) (Table S1).

Figure 1 Procedure, strategies, and inclusion/exclusion criteria for the
literature search. Following the literature search from the databases
of Cancer Nanomedicine Repository (CNR) and PubMed and application
of listed selection criteria, 200 tumor-bearing mouse studies with
a total of 376 data sets published from 2005 to 2018 were identified
for subsequent PBPK modeling and simulation analyses.

Figure 2 Schematic diagram of PBPK models in (A) healthy and (B) tumor-bearing
mice intravenously administered with AuNPs and various inorganic and
organic nanomaterials (INMs and ONMs), respectively. Except plasma
and brain, each compartment is divided into three major parts: capillary
blood, tissue interstitium, and endocytic/phagocytic cells (PCs) or
tumor cells (TCs).

Figure 3 shows comparisons
of PBPK model simulations with 29 representative data sets of tumor
delivery kinetics in tumor-bearing mice following IV injection with
different types of inorganic (I) or organic (O) NMs (INMs or ONMs).
Additional information associated with performing the PBPK simulations
as well as the estimated nanoparticle-specific parameter values are
summarized in Tables S1–S2 with
details provided in the Supporting Information Excel files E1–E4. Within
24–48 h after IV administration, most tumor kinetic profiles
displayed distinctive uptake during the accumulation phases, indicating
that NMs were delivered to solid tumors successfully and resided in
the tumors for at least 24–48 h and then were eliminated from
the tumors (Figure 3).

Figure 3 Representative simulation results from the PBPK model in tumor-bearing
mice intravenously administered with various types of INMs, including
(A) and (B) gold,167,179 (C) iron oxide,176 (D) gadolinium (Gd)-calcium phosphate (CaP),147 and (E) silica157 NMs as well as ONMs, including (F) liposome,121 (G) dendrimer,35 (H) hydrogel,36 (I) polymeric,11 (J)
single-wall carbon nanotube (SWCNT),122 (K) ginseng extract,195 and (L) anticancer
drug 10-hydroxycamptothecin (HCPT)102 NMs.
Tumor tissue concentrations as presented in the y-axis are expressed in the units of percent of the injected dose
(%ID),%ID/g, or μg/g according to units used in the original
articles. R2 is the coefficient of determination.
Uppercase letters P and A followed by each legend represent passive
and active targeting strategies, respectively. Abbreviations: A, active
targeting; AuNP, gold nanoparticle (NP); BSA, bovine serum albumin;
F, folate; FA, folic acid; G4 dendrimer, generation 4 polyamidoamine
dendrimer; GNC, gold nanocluster; IONP, iron oxide NP; NC/ND/NR, nanocube/nanodisc/nanorod;
P, passive targeting; PEG, polyethylene glycol; PSMA, prostate-specific
membrane antigen; RGD, arginine-glycine-aspartic acid peptide; SNP,
silica NP; Tat, peptide; Zn, zinc(II).

In the present meta-analysis, we established a general tumor-bearing
PBPK modeling framework that successfully simulated most of the available
published data sets (i.e., 313 out
of 376 data sets) for describing NM biodistribution to tissues/tumors
in tumor-bearing mice for up to 168 h after systemic administration.
These PBPK models allow one to simulate the maximum, short-term (24
h), long-term (168 h), and NM concentration–time profiles in
the tumor that reflects the time dependency of tumor delivery efficiency;
a perspective typically not available or difficult to obtain from
traditional animal studies.

Effect of Parameter Sensitivity on Tumor
Delivery
A
local sensitivity analysis was performed based on one representative
study32 with sufficient measured data points
conducted using AuNPs in tumor-bearing mice for up to 168 h in order
to determine the contribution, as well as the importance of each parameter,
to the short-term (24 h) and long-term (168 h) dose metrics of tissues
and tumor. Specifically, positive values of the normalized sensitivity
coefficient (NSC) estimates indicate that an increase in the parameter
value would also increase the dose metrics, and vice versa. Table S3 lists all the calculated NSC
values for highly influential parameters on short-term and long-term
dose metrics of AuNPs distributed to tumors or organs/tissues, in
which parameters with |NSC| ≥ 0.3 were considered sensitive.

For physiological parameters, cardiac output (QCC) had more impact
on the 168 h dose metrics of liver, spleen, and kidneys than the 24
h dose metrics; while fractional cardiac output to spleen (QSC) was
highly influential to the liver dose metrics at 24 h (Table S3). Other physiological parameters such
as fractional volume of the body for plasma, liver, spleen, kidneys,
and tumor (VPlasmaC, VLC, VSC, VKC, and VTC, respectively) and blood
volume fraction of liver tissue (BVL) had significant contribution
to the increase in the dose metrics for individual tissues with most
|NSC| estimates of >0.5. NM-specific parameters, distribution coefficients
for spleen, kidneys, and tumor (PS, PK, and PT) were identified as
highly influential parameters that affected both 24 h and 168 h biodistributions
in spleen, kidneys, and tumor with estimated |NSC| values ranging from 0.7 to 1. NM-specific parameters associated
with endocytic/phagocytic and tumor cell uptake within particular
tissues had a greater impact on the dose metrics for liver, spleen,
kidneys, and tumor estimated at 168 h than on the 24 h dose metrics.

Our sensitivity analysis suggests that tumor delivery efficiency
of NMs was highly sensitive to the following parameters; PT (i.e., tumor tissue:plasma distribution
coefficient), Kmax,T (i.e., maximum uptake rate constant by tumor
cells in the tumor tissue), and VTC (i.e., volume fraction of tumor tissue in the body) (Table S3). We further explored the relationship between tumor
delivery efficiency and nanoparticle-specific parameters using AuNPs
as an example (66 data sets). The results of rank-sum test (i.e., the estimated AuNPs-related parameters
were separated into two groups with 33 data sets in each group according
to their ranked values) suggest that lower distribution and permeability
coefficients at the tumor site (PT and PATC) would hinder the targeting
delivery of AuNPs and therefore lower the delivery efficiency (Table S4). The multivariable linear regression
results indicate that PATC is a critical factor in affecting delivery
efficiency of AuNPs to the tumor tissue. However, these results were
based on estimated parameter values that had a degree of uncertainty.
They remain to be optimized using more advanced statistical methods,
such as the Bayesian approach with Markov chain Monte Carlo simulation33 and verified experimentally with in
vitro and/or in vivo studies. The cause
and mechanism that lead to low tumor delivery efficiency might be
due in part to multiple tumor physiological factors that are worth
exploring in future studies.

Subgroup Analyses and Future Nanomedicine
Design from the PBPK
Perspective
Among all the estimates of tumor delivery efficiency,
including DETlast, DE24 (tumor delivery efficiency
estimated at 24 h post-IV administration), DE168 (tumor
delivery efficiency estimated at 168 h post-IV administration), DEmax (maximum tumor delivery efficiency post-IV administration),
and DETlast_PK; DE168 had the lowest median
delivery efficiency of 0.35%ID, suggesting that by 168 h post-systemic
administration, most of the NMs delivered to the tumor site had left
the tumor site (Figure 4 and Figure S2). There was a slight improvement
in the mean DETlast value of 2.23%ID estimated from this
study based on the data sets collected from 2005 to 2018 using a physiologically
based approach, compared with the previously reported result of 1.48%ID
estimated based on the literature from 2005 to 2015 using a nonphysiologically
based approach14 (Figure 4A and Table 1). The median DETlast estimates from Wilhelm et al.14 and the present study
had no apparent difference (0.70% vs 0.76%ID), implying
that the studied NMs can be delivered to solid tumors successfully
at a median delivery efficiency of ∼0.7%ID. Surprisingly, using
the PBPK approach, there was no apparent improvement in the mean tumor
delivery efficiencies estimated from data sets after 2015 (2.33%ID) versus before 2015 (2.13%ID) (P = 0.65).
There was no significant improvement of median tumor delivery efficiency
from recent published data sets (after 2015) (P >
0.15). No statistically significant differences were observed in further
comparison of mean delivery efficiency estimated using nonphysiologically
and physiologically based approaches (i.e., DETlast_PKvs DETlast)
(P = 1.00), indicating that both approaches generate
similar tumor delivery efficiency estimates (Table S5).

Figure 4 Subgroup analyses on tumor delivery efficiencies estimated at the
last sampling time point according to the original literature (DETlast) using our tumor-bearing PBPK model. Box-and-whisker
plots of tumor delivery efficiency data (%ID) for different subgroups:
(A) year, (B) targeting strategy, (C) type of nanomaterials (NMs),
(D) inorganic NMs, (E) organic NMs, (F) shape, (G) hydrodynamic diameter,
(H) ζ potential, (I) tumor model, and (J) cancer type. The boxes
represent the 25th to 75th percentiles, and solid lines in the boxes
indicate the median values. The pink dashed and solid lines denote
the median and mean values of tumor delivery efficiencies derived
from a previous study based on 193 published data sets from 2005 to
2015.14 The green dashed and solid lines
stand for the median and mean values of tumor delivery efficiencies
derived from the present study based on 376 published data sets from
2005 to 2018.

Table 1 Summary of Tumor
Delivery Efficiency
Estimates for Different Types of Nanomaterials*
* DETlast, DE24, and DE168 represent tumor
delivery efficiency estimated
at the last sampling time point according to the original pharmacokinetic
study at 24 h and 168 h, respectively. DEmax is the maximum
tumor delivery efficiency based on individual PBPK simulation.

a DETlast_PK is the tumor
delivery efficiency estimated at the last sampling time point according
to the original pharmacokinetic study using the noncompartmental linear
trapezoidal integration method as used by Wilhelm et al., i.e., area-under-the-tumor-concentration-curve
(AUC) method.14

b Median (mean).

Several trends were observed from subgroup analyses
by comparing
median estimates of tumor delivery efficiencies (DETlast) (Table 1). First,
active targeting strategies had slightly higher delivery efficiencies
of 0.89%ID compared to 0.70%ID of passive targeting strategies (P < 0.01) (Figure 4B, Table 1,
and Table S5). Second, INMs had superior
tumor delivery efficiencies of 1.12%ID in comparison with 0.62%ID
of ONMs (P < 0.05) (Figure 4C, Table 1, and Table S5). Furthermore,
INMs composed of iron oxide and ONMs such as dendrimers tended to
have higher delivery efficiencies of 2.80% and 7.96%ID, respectively
(Figure 4D,E and Table 1). Third, rod-shaped
NMs had the highest median DETlast estimate of 1.62%ID
followed by spherical and other shaped NMs of 0.74% and 0.58%ID, respectively
(Figure 4F and Table 1). Fourth, NMs with
hydrodynamic diameters of <10 nm displayed the highest median DETlast estimate of 1.41%ID, followed by >200 nm, 10–100
nm, and 100–200 nm NMs of 0.94%, 0.75%, and 0.56%ID, respectively
(Figure 4G and Table 1). Fifth, NMs with
neutral and positive surface charges possessed higher delivery efficiencies
of 0.81% and 0.90%ID, respectively, compared to 0.47%ID of negatively
charged NMs (Figure 4H and Table 1). Finally,
mice with orthotopically inoculated tumors, regardless of allografted
or xenografted ones, had relatively higher delivery efficiencies of
>1.00%ID, compared with approximate or lower than 0.70%ID for heterotopically
inoculated tumor models (Figure 4I and Table 1).

Tables S6 and S7 summarize
the results
of a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test and simple linear regression
for all 376 data sets and the selected 313 data sets that had confidence
in the estimation of tumor delivery efficiency. The results for the
curated confidently predicted data sets showed that the variables
“tumor model” and “cancer type” had similar
and significant contributions to the tumor delivery efficiencies of
Au NMs and INMs (P < 0.05) (Table S7). By contrast, in addition to variable “cancer
type”, variables related to NM physicochemical properties,
including “core materials”, “shape”, “hydrodynamic
diameter”, and “ζ potential” had significant
influence on the overall tumor delivery efficiencies of ONMs (P < 0.05) (Table S7).

Table 2 and Tables S8 and S9 list the multivariable linear
regression models constructed for Au NMs, INMs, ONMs, and all NMs
as well as the related statistical criteria for determining the significance
and goodness-of-fit of each model. By excluding 63 data sets with
weakly estimated (low confidence) tumor delivery efficiencies (R2 < 0.75 or >10% differences by comparing
DETlast with DETlast_PK), the full regression
models based on the selected confidently predicted 313 data sets with
the same variables being included can better describe the response, e.g., log(DETlast), for gold
NM (R2 = 0.62; P <
0.01), INMs (R2 = 0.51; P < 0.001), ONMs (R2 = 0.43; P < 0.001), and all NMs (R2 = 0.36; P < 0.001) (Table 2), compared to the full regression models
based on all the 376 data sets (Table S8). Overall, the estimated best regression models for the curated
313 confident data sets revealed that “cancer type”,
“tumor model”, and “ζ potential”
were critical factors in determining tumor delivery efficiency, regardless
of the type of NMs studied (Table 2).

Table 2 Multiple Linear Regression Results
of Selected Models for the Log-Transformed Tumor Delivery Efficiency
Estimated at the Last Sampling Time Point (log(DETlast))
Based on the 313 Confidently Predicted Datasetsa
a **P < 0.01,
and ***P < 0.001. R2, coefficient of determination; Adj-R2, adjusted R2; AIC, Akaike information
criterion; BIC, Bayesian or Schwarz Bayesian information criterion;
Type, inorganic or organic nanomaterials (INMs or ONMs); MAT, core
material of INMs or ONMs; TS, targeting strategy; CT, cancer type;
TM, tumor model; log(HD), log-transformed hydrodynamic diameter; ZP,
ζ potential.

Based
upon the Welch’s t-test, active targeting
had statistically significant higher mean tumor delivery efficiency
than passive targeting (Table S5). In contrast,
the rank-sum test results suggest the median tumor delivery efficiency
of active targeting was not statistically superior compared to passive
targeting (Table S5). While most of the
calibrated pharmacokinetic studies report that active targeted NMs
have statistically significant higher tumor delivery efficiency, anticancer
drug efficacy,34−37 tumor cell toxicity,8,10,35−42 and tumor growth inhibition8,10,35−43 compared to passive targeting, some studies indicate either the
opposite or no significant differences depending on the targeting
strategy.44−48 Comparing INMs with ONMs, both mean and median tumor delivery efficiencies
of INMs were statistically significant higher than ONMs (Table S5). However, it must be noted that statistically
significant differences do not always translate to biologically significant
events or improved clinical outcome, and vice versa.49−51 Biologically significant events or clinical improvements depend
on multiple factors. Besides the delivery efficiency of the NP to
the tumor site, other critical factors include the therapeutic potency
and efficacy of the drug, the duration of exposure of the NP-carried
drug at a concentration above the therapeutic threshold, as well as
the toxicological profile of the drug.

This study confirms that
smaller NMs with <10 nm hydrodynamic
diameter can be delivered to tumors at a higher delivery efficiency
compared to larger NMs (>10 nm). Significantly, there were Au52,53 and dendrimer54−56 NMs with measured hydrodynamic size <10 nm and
estimated tumor delivery efficiency >5.00%ID (Table S1). Another noteworthy finding is that NMs with hydrodynamic
diameter >200 nm have a relatively higher tumor delivery efficiency
compared to NMs with ∼10–200 nm in hydrodynamic diameter.
Several studies using >200 nm NMs with higher tumor delivery efficiency
(>5.00%ID) support this observation (Table S1).37,43,57−59

Our results suggest that in addition to size,
the geometry of NMs
can modulate tumor uptake and in vivo disposition
of NMs. In particular, a tumor delivery efficiency of 1.62%ID was
observed for rod-shaped NMs which was greater than spherical (0.74%ID),
plate-, or flake-shaped NMs (0.46%ID) as well as other geometries
(0.58%ID). Several studies show that elongated nanostructures, compared
to nanospheres, exhibit greater tumor accumulation and longer half-lives
in blood circulation perhaps due to adherence to the endothelial cells
lining the blood vessel walls that enhance the site-specific delivery.43,60,61

Our analyses show that
administered NMs with positive (>10 mV)
and near-neutral (−10 to 10 mV) surface charges have similar
tumor deliver efficiencies (0.81–0.90%ID), but are higher than
the negatively charged NMs (0.47%ID). Surface properties, such as
charge (ζ potential), play a critical role in the type and magnitude
of biomolecule (e.g., proteins,
lipids, carbohydrates) adsorption that results in the formation of
a biocorona, which in turn influences the pharmacokinetics, biodistribution,
and cellular uptake of systemically administered NMs.62−69 Surface charge of administered NMs can affect not only the above-mentioned
site-specific extravasation10,70−72 but also subsequent cancer cell type-specific internalization, e.g., higher internalizations of positively
charged NMs have been reported in several cancer cell types, compared
with their negatively charged counterparts.73−76 Not surprisingly, our regression
analyses reveal that in addition to NM ζ potential, heterogeneity
in tumor physiology (i.e., cancer
type) is an important factor in determining efficiency of tumor cell
targeting, which is consistent and supported by previous studies.7,73,77

Similar to the nonphysiologically
based study by Wilhelm et al.14 that covered the time
period from 2005 to 2015, the current PBPK model-based study suggests
that there was no statistically significant improvement in NM tumor
delivery efficiency before and after 2015 (up to year 2018). Compared
to the results reported by Wilhelm et al.,14 several key findings and major differences from
the present study have been summarized in Table 3. Briefly, the current study employs a physiologically
based approach (i.e., PBPK modeling)
that is capable of estimating time-dependent tumor delivery efficiency
and generates models that are extrapolatable across administration
routes and doses as well as species; a computational approach that
is not possible using traditional noncompartmental pharmacokinetics
as used by Wilhelm et al.14 Besides “cancer type” and “tumor model”
as critical factors affecting tumor delivery efficiency reported by
the previous study,14 we have identified
another critical factor “ζ potential”. These differences
may be due in part to the incorporation of recent published data sets
after 2015, different categorization methods used in subgroup and
statistical analyses, and different tumor delivery efficiency estimates
between the previous study14 and the present
study. Other statistical methods, including principal component analysis-based
regression78 or random forest regression79 may be worth exploring in the future to determine
the potential key determinants of tumor delivery efficiency.

Table 3 Summary* of
the Differences and Major Findings between Current Study and the Previous
Study by Wilhelm et al.(14)
* DETlast_PK is the tumor
delivery efficiency estimated at the last sampling time point according
to the original pharmacokinetic study using the noncompartmental AUC
approach as used by Wilhelm et al.14 DE24, DE168, and DETlast represent tumor delivery efficiency estimated at 24 h, 168 h, and
the last sampling time point, respectively, according to the original
pharmacokinetic study. DEmax is the maximum tumor delivery
efficiency based on the individual PBPK simulation.

a The mean value of 1.48%ID was calculated
from 193 included data sets based on the reported tumor delivery efficiencies
by Wilhelm et al.14 and
the Cancer Nanomedicine Repository (CNR) database. There were 238
data sets in the CNR database at the time of the present study, 232
of which were analyzed and reported in the Wilhelm et al.14 paper. One additional study containing
6 data sets was uploaded into the CNR database after the publication
of the Wilhelm et al.14 paper. After excluding studies due to lack of information and/or
did not meet the criteria for subsequent PBPK modeling and simulation
as described in Figure 1, there were 193 data sets from the CNR database being included and
analyzed.

In the past several
decades, many small molecule cancer drugs have
been approved and used to treat different cancers successfully.80 In general, the potential weaknesses of cancer
chemotherapy include its low bioavailability, high-dose requirements,
adverse side effects, low therapeutic indices, development of multiple
drug resistances, and nonspecific targeting.81 In the field of small molecule cancer chemotherapy, the pharmacokinetic
focus is on improving overall drug bioavailability. For most of the
approved cancer chemotherapeutic drugs, bioavailability data via oral route are available. However, the specific information
on the “delivery efficiency” of a small molecule cancer
drug to the tumor site is lacking, which is quite different from the
delivery efficiency to the tumor site of NPs that is commonly reported
in NM literature. In theory, we can calculate the “delivery
efficiency” of a small molecule drug to the tumor site provided
that we have the complete pharmacokinetic data in the plasma and tumor.
However, this would be an entirely new investigation whose goals would
be to confirm whether NP-based drug formulations outperform conventional
small molecular chemotherapy.

Our PBPK model successfully simulates
the majority of the tumor
delivery kinetics for various types of NMs in tumor-bearing mice.
Yet, there are several challenges and limitations to implement this
PBPK computational framework in order to more appropriately describe
NM disposition to the tumor and tissues in tumor-bearing animals.
First, the model fails to capture the kinetics in the tumor for several
NMs (63 data sets). This may be a result of many factors, including
an insufficient number of and improperly timed experimental data points,
unobvious uptake or release phases of the tumor kinetic profiles,
a sudden increase in the tumor uptake phase and/or abrupt decrease
following IV injection, or extended retention of delivered NMs until
later time points. The exact mechanisms of these phenomena remain
to be investigated, prohibiting our inclusion of these mechanisms
in our general model. Importantly, the present study has employed
a strict standard to evaluate model simulation results via both qualitative (i.e., visual
inspection of the simulated and measured kinetic profiles) and quantitative
evaluation (i.e., linear regression
analysis and quantitative comparison between DETlast and
DETlast_PK). In addition, a review of the curated confidently
estimated data sets indicates that such a mechanism-based PBPK modeling
approach could be used as a screening tool to select well-behaved
data sets for further analyses. Finally, these analyses were conducted
in mice, and integrating data sets from other laboratory animals
would ultimately help improve NM designed for humans.23

Some limitations and challenges to the current approach
remain
to be addressed. Our PBPK model does not simulate the process of biocorona
formation that dynamically alters the NMs’ properties and disposition64,68 within an animal as we have previously reported.66,82,83 PBPK models incorporating biocorona formation
kinetics of NMs would better describe NM-specific tumor dosimetry
and remain to be implemented. Moreover, the tumor vasculature, extracellular
matrix, and microenvironment are highly variable in animals and humans
bearing solid tumors. It is necessary to develop a nanomedicine-specific
and tumor-bearing PBPK model in humans incorporating drug/nanomedicine
pharmacodynamics84,85 to describe individual tumor
progression,86 anticancer drug releasing
pharmacokinetics,19,22 and therapeutic response after
receiving chemotherapy, i.e., PBPK/PD,
to facilitate designs of the next-generation nanomedicines with optimal
therapeutic index.87−91

To address these aspects, we propose a long-term integrative
computational
strategy from the PBPK perspective that could aid in the design of
nanomedicine studies (Figure 5). Specifically, by implementing our tumor-bearing PBPK models
for a specific type of NMs coupled to constructed regression models,
researchers may be able to estimate the tumor delivery efficiency
of administered NMs and/or propensity of loaded anticancer drugs.
By comparing to the specific type of NMs in our database, nanoscientists
performing fundamental bench work would be able to modify their synthesized
NMs with desired physicochemical properties and optimize the therapeutic
index of NMs with higher drug loading capacity and tumor delivery
efficiency with minimum systemic toxicity (left panel in Figure 5). The present study
provides a ready-to-use PBPK modeling framework calibrated by hundreds
of pharmacokinetic data sets in mice bearing various tumor types.
These informative and organized data sets for NMs that have been tested
in the literature are provided in the Supporting Information Excel files E1–E4. The representative model code and all model parameters are provided
in Supporting Information. This PBPK modeling
framework may be extrapolated to rats, dogs, monkeys, and humans to
gain more insight into determining the optimal dose with minimum side
effects and systemic toxicity for designing personalized and optimized
cancer therapy for preclinical trials as well as for individual cancer
patients undergoing clinical trials (right panel in Figure 5).

Figure 5 Proposed long-term strategy
in facilitating the design of future
nanomedicines and translation from preclinical studies to clinical
applications, and the role of PBPK modeling and simulation approach
in this field.

In view of the generally slow
progress and limited success in translating
nanomedicine into clinical applications, integrative PBPK modeling
and systems biology analyses are needed and would be facilitated if
the authors always reported physicochemical (e.g., size, shape, ζ potential, etc.) and biological (e.g., pharmacokinetic,
biodistribution, and (cyto)toxicity data) properties of their synthesized
NPs and details in experimental protocols (e.g., dose in the units of mg or mg/kg and tumor concentration
in the units of μg/g tumor,%ID, or %ID/g tumor) as well as raw
concentration–time data.92 Only
extensive interdisciplinary communication of reproducible nanomedicine
design aiming at solving a clinical problem, in combination with open
source repository documenting transparent experimental details provided
by the authors that meet the “minimum information reporting”
standard,92 would possibly realize successful
clinical translation.89

Conclusions
While one can be impressed with the dramatic advancement of nanotechnology
and nanomedicine over the past decades, we must acknowledge that our
current progress in translating cancer nanomedicine research into
clinical application was slow before 2015, and in the ensuing years
after 2015 (up to 2018). This continues to bring into question the
validity of the EPR effect which is based on preferential tumor retention.
A thorough understanding of NM-tumor interaction is necessary for
facilitating clinical development of cancer nanomedicines with NM
toxicity screening and safety evaluation, followed by manufacture
of favorable, contaminant-free, reproducible, and scalable NMs. To
accomplish this goal, a modeling framework that factors in species-specific
physiological disposition is essential to extrapolate both from in vitro to in vivo as well as from animals
to humans. This study explores tumor delivery efficiencies using data
from hundreds of nanoplatforms in such a PBPK modeling and simulation
framework to identify influential factors influencing tumor delivery
kinetics. We hope this study and the computational approach facilitate
the future design of cancer nanomedicines and improve clinical translation
from bench work to bedside.

Materials and Methods
Data Source
and Model Structure
In an elegant analysis,
Wilhelm et al.14 estimated
tumor delivery efficiencies (%ID) using a noncompartmental linear
trapezoidal integration pharmacokinetic method, which estimates the
area of delivery efficiency under the concentration–time curve
of the tumor (AUC). This statistical moment approach was applied to
over a hundred publications which identified key factors that influenced
tumor delivery.14 The relationships between
low tumor delivery efficiencies (<1.0%ID) and multiple factors
were reported, including physicochemical properties of NMs, targeting
strategies, cancer types, etc. In addition, they
constructed the open source database of Cancer Nanomedicine Repository
(CNR) that included the tumor delivery efficiency, related biological
information, and physicochemical properties of delivered NMs from
118 publications (http://inbs.med.utoronto.ca/cnr/). On the basis of their work, we included published tumor delivery
studies since 2015.

The criteria for whether or not to include
the latest publications in the current analysis are summarized in Figure 1. Specifically, relevant
tumor delivery studies were selected from the databases of CNR (studies
published between 2005 and 2015) and PubMed (from January first, 2015
to September fourth, 2018) for further computational analyses, including
PBPK model calibration and simulation, sensitivity analysis, and multivariable
linear regression analysis. The literature search was conducted using
the following keywords: nanoparticle delivery, nanomaterial delivery,
biodistribution, pharmacokinetics, mice, rats, and “tumor or
tumour”. In brief, this study only included published articles
suitable for PBPK modeling, i.e.,
studies reported tumor concentration data in more than or equal to
3 sampling time points in units of μg/g tumor, %ID, and %ID/g
tumor from tumor-bearing rodents following IV administration in convertible
dose units of mg or mg/kg. IV is the major route of administration
for nanomedicines and provides a better estimate of the actual dose
delivered to the systemic circulation by eliminating potentially confounding
absorption kinetics. Tumor delivery studies conducted with tumor-bearing
rats were excluded due to insufficient number of studies compared
to those in tumor-bearing mice (i.e., 10 out of 393 studies). Our analysis also excluded studies of
which the corresponding authors did not respond to our requests for
essential data and experimental details that are needed for PBPK analysis.
In total, there were 376 data sets from 200 NP tumor delivery studies
in tumor-bearing mice that were included for PBPK simulations and
analyses (Table S1).7−11,22,32,34−48,52−60,70,71,73,76,93−257

There were two phases in PBPK model calibration and simulation
in the present analysis: Phase I was to establish a permeability-limited
PBPK model to simulate the biodistribution of AuNPs to organs/tissues
following IV administration in healthy mice based upon our previously
developed PBPK model (Figure 2A), and phase II was to extrapolate the healthy mouse PBPK
model to a tumor-bearing PBPK model. This generic model structure
was then employed to simulate the delivery of various INMs or ONMs
to solid tumors after IV injection in tumor-bearing mice (Figure 2B). Specifically,
the concentration data in healthy mice after IV injection of AuNPs
were obtained from Cho et al. for PBPK model calibration.31 In brief, 6-week old male BALB/c mice were injected
with polyethylene glycol (PEG)-coated AuNPs (4, 13, or 100 nm) via the tail vein at 0.85 mg/kg body weight. Mice (n = 9/group) were euthanized at 0.5, 4, 24, 168 h and 1,
3, and 6 months post-injection at each sampling time point, and their
plasma and tissue samples (e.g.,
lungs, liver, spleen, and kidneys) were collected and analyzed for
Au concentrations using inductively coupled plasma-mass spectroscopy
(ICP-MS). The 13 nm AuNP mouse pharmacokinetic data were selected
to calibrate the healthy mouse PBPK model because of the sufficient
sampling time points.

This model structure was based upon our
recently developed PBPK
model for AuNPs20 with minor modifications
to incorporate muscle and tumor compartments, respectively, for describing
the biodistribution of NMs following IV administration in healthy
and tumor-bearing mice. Specifically, the permeability-limited PBPK
model for healthy mice contained eight compartments, including plasma,
lungs, liver, kidneys, spleen, brain, muscle, and remaining tissues
(i.e., pooled other tissues) (Figure 2A). Since tumor cells
were inoculated subcutaneously into nude mice according to most tumor
delivery studies, this present study included muscle as an additional
compartment in the PBPK schematic (Figure 2B). Moreover, the present model considered
uneven distribution between capillary blood and tissue, membrane-limited
transcapillary transport, as well as nonlinear endocytic uptake and
first-order exocytic release of administered AuNPs in order to describe
the permeability-limited pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution
of NMs in healthy mice. Besides plasma and brain, using standard PBPK
modeling practice, all compartments were divided into three subcompartments:
capillary blood, tissue interstitium, and endocytic/phagocytic cells
(PCs) (Figure 2A).
Similarly, to describe the NM distribution to tissues as well as to
tumor microenvironment in tumor-bearing mice, a tumor compartment
was subcompartmentalized as capillary blood, tumor tissue interstitium,
and tumor cells (TCs) (Figure 2B). Pharmacokinetic data from both healthy and tumor-bearing
mice were extracted using the WebPlotDigitizer (Version 4.1, Austin,
TX, https://apps.automeris.io/wpd/) and provided in Supporting Information Excel files E3 and E4. Other experimental
details extracted from original pharmacokinetic studies were documented
and/or tabulated in Supporting Information Excel files E1 and E2 as well as Table S1.

Main Mathematical Description
of the Model
Based on
our earlier study,20 endocytic uptake of
NMs was more accurately described by the Hill function. Therefore,
we employed the Hill function to describe the endocytic/phagocytic
or tumor uptake of NMs as expressed in the following equation: 1  where t is the simulation
time (h), Kup,i(t) is the uptake rate constant by endocytic/phagocytic or
tumor cells in the tissue interstitium i at a particular
time t (per h), Kmax,i is the maximum uptake rate constant (per h), t50,i represents the time reaching
half-maximum uptake rate (h), and ni is the Hill coefficient (unitless).

Furthermore, the
distribution of NMs among subcompartments of capillary blood, tissue
interstitium, and PCs/TCs in lungs, spleen, kidneys, muscle, remaining
tissues, and tumor tissues are described using the following equations,
respectively: 2   3   4  where ABlood,i and AT,i represent amounts of NMs in the capillary blood
and interstitium
of tissue i (μg), APC,i and ATC are amounts
of NMs being taken up by PCs or TCs (μg), Qi is the regional blood flow to tissue i (L/h), Ca is the concentration
of NMs in the arterial plasma (μg/L), CVi is the concentration of NMs in the venous
plasma in tissue i (μg/L), PAi is approximated to the product of permeability
coefficient between capillary blood and tissue membrane (PACi, unitless) and regional blood flow Qi (L/h) of tissue i (L/h), CT,i is the
concentration of NMs in the tissue interstitium i (μg/g), Pi is
the tissue:plasma distribution coefficient for tissue i (unitless), and Kre,i is the release rate constant of NMs by PCs or TCs to the tissue
interstitium i (per h). Similar equations were used
to simulate the distribution of NMs among different subcompartments
in the liver. The only difference in the liver compared to other organs
is that the liver has Kupffer cells which are liver macrophages that
can directly phagocytize NMs from the capillary blood subcompartment
since they are located in the liver sinusoids and directly exposed
to blood.258−260

PBPK Model Calibration and Evaluation
All simulations
and model calibration were performed using Berkeley Madonna (Version
8.3.23.0, University of California at Berkeley, CA, USA) to obtain
visually reasonable fits to the pharmacokinetic data from healthy
and tumor-bearing mice. The model for healthy mice was calibrated
with the pharmacokinetic data in mice up to 168 h after IV administration
with 13 nm PEG-coated AuNPs.31 To develop
the most parsimonious model following IV administration, most physiological
parameters were kept consistent with the literature.261,262 For physicochemical parameters, distribution, and permeability coefficients,
values obtained from our previous study20 were used as references for further optimization for the present
PBPK models in healthy mice using visual fitting and the Curve Fitting
Module in Berkeley Madonna. Similarly, other physicochemical parameters
were estimated using visual fitting and the Curve Fitting Module,
including cellular uptake and release rates by PCs of the lungs, liver,
spleen, kidneys, muscle, and remaining tissues as well as excretion
rate constants to establish the PBPK model in healthy mice.

The healthy mouse model was expanded to include a tumor compartment
to describe NM biodistribution following IV injection in tumor-bearing
mice. Except for tumor-related parameters, all physiological as well
as NM-specific parameters for other organs/tissues remained the same
as those used in the healthy mouse PBPK model. The tumor-related parameters
included fractional blood flow to tumor (QTC), fractional tumor weight
(VTC), fractional blood volume in the tumor tissue (BVT), distribution
coefficient (PT), permeability coefficient to the tumor tissue (PATC),
maximum NM uptake rate constant for TCs (Kmax,T), time reaching half-maximum NM uptake rate for TCs (t50,T), Hill coefficient for the uptake by TCs (nT), and NM release rate constant from TCs to
the tumor interstitium (Kre,T). Specifically,
VTC was estimated based on the original tumor-bearing study. QTC and
BVT were assigned with very small numbers initially (∼0.02–0.03)
as the blood flow inside and around the tumor only accounts for a
small fraction of the cardiac output and optimized afterward using
visual fitting and the Curve Fitting Module. Other tumor-related parameters
(PT, PATC, Kmax,T, t50,T, nT, and Kre,T) were obtained similarly. The calibrated PBPK models
in tumor-bearing mice were then used to predict short-term (24 h)
and long-term (168 h) delivery efficiency and kinetics for each NM
to the tumor. The PBPK model example code from a representative study
is provided in the Supporting Information.

The performance of the PBPK models for both healthy and tumor-bearing
mice was evaluated by comparing model simulations with measured pharmacokinetic
data based on the criteria described in the World Health Organization
(WHO) guideline.263 Specifically, if the
simulated tissue distribution matched the measured kinetic profile
visually and the simulated values were within a factor of 2 of the
measured values, the model was considered acceptable. In addition,
the goodness of fit between log-transformed values of measured and
predicted tissue distribution (i.e., μg/g tissue, %ID, or %ID/g tissue) were further evaluated
by analyzing coefficient of determination (R2) using simple linear regression with an R2 ≥ 0.75 of predicted over measured values considered
adequate.

Sensitivity Analysis
Local sensitivity analyses were
conducted to identify highly influential parameters (e.g., physiological and NM-specific parameters) governing
the overall tissue distribution and tumor delivery efficiency after
IV administration of various NMs. One representative study by Karmani et al.,32 with an adequate simulation
of AuNP distribution to tumor compartment for up to 168 h (R2 > 0.95), was selected to estimate the dose
metrics for target organs or tissues. Specifically, each parameter
(p) was increased in increments of 1% and the corresponding
AUC (%ID × h) of NMs in the venous plasma, liver, spleen, kidneys,
and tumor were computed at 24 h and 168 h after IV administration.
Highly influential parameters identified by 24 and 168 h AUC estimates
were compared to determine the differential effects of parameters
on the short-term and long-term internal dose metrics, respectively.
NSC was calculated by dividing the relative change in AUC (dAUC/AUC) with the relative change in each parameter (dp/p).20 Parameters
with at least one absolute value of the calculated NSC around or greater
than 0.3 (i.e., |NSC| ≥ 0.3)
were considered sensitive.

Subgroup Statistical Analyses
To
compare with the delivery
efficiency results reported by Wilhelm et al. from
2005 to 2015,14 the present study used
different approaches to calculate the delivery efficiency for each
data set, including (1) the maximum tumor delivery efficiency of the
simulated delivery efficiency kinetics using the calibrated PBPK models
(DEmax, %ID); (2) AUC-based tumor delivery efficiency estimated
based upon PBPK simulations, i.e., AUCs of tumor delivery efficiency estimated at 24 h, 168 h, and
the last sampling time point (Tlast) in
accordance with the original study (%ID × h) and then divided
by time (h) to generate DE24, DE168, and DETlast (%ID), respectively; and (3) the tumor delivery efficiency
estimated at Tlast based upon original
tumor pharmacokinetic data (DETlast_PK, %ID) using a noncompartmental
linear trapezoidal integration method as used by Wilhelm et
al.14 Subsequently, all tumor
delivery efficiency data were categorized into varied subgroups, including
the year of publication, physicochemical properties of administered
NMs (i.e., shape, size, and ζ
potential), targeting strategy, type and core materials of delivered
NMs, method of inoculation, as well as inoculated cancer cell types.14 The ζ potentials measured at pH 7.4 of
< –10 mV, −10 to 10 mV, and >10 mV were
categorically
defined as negative, neutral, and positive, respectively.14 Following subgrouping, unpaired parametric t-test assuming unequal variances (Welch’s t-test) and nonparametric rank-sum test (Mann–Whitney
test) were implemented to examine, respectively, whether a significantly
higher mean and median tumor delivery efficiency can be observed by
comparing two subgroups. Welch’s t-test and
Mann–Whitney test were performed using GraphPad Prism (Version
6.05, GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA).

Multivariable linear
regression was used to determine the potential effects of various
physicochemical characteristics, including the hydrodynamic size,
ζ potential, type of NMs, targeting strategies, cancer types,
and tumor models on tumor delivery efficiency. Tests for normality
were performed first for both delivery efficiencies with or without
log transformation to identify dependent variables (i.e., delivery efficiencies) with (or at least more
like) normal distributions. Based on the results from the normality
test, the log-transformed delivery efficiencies were employed for
a one-way ANOVA, simple linear regression, and multivariable linear
regression analyses. One-way ANOVA and simple linear regression were
performed prior to multivariable linear regression to examine the
significance (P < 0.05) of categorical and continuous
variables, respectively. Statistical analyses, including normality
test, one-way ANOVA, simple and multivariable linear regression, were
conducted using R language (Version 3.6.0).

Specifically, variables
including physicochemical properties of
delivered NMs (e.g., log-transformed
hydrodynamic diameter (log(HD)), ζ potential (ZP), and shape)
as well as type of NMs (ONMs or INMs) (Type), core material of ONMs
or INMs (MAT), targeting strategy (TS), cancer type (CT), and tumor
model (TM) were considered for one-way ANOVA, simple, and multivariable
linear regression analyses. In total, we report 80 regression models
from 5 log-transformed tumor delivery efficiencies (DETlast, DE24, DE168, DEmax, and DETlast_PK) for 4 different types of NMs (Au NMs, INMs, ONMs,
and all NMs). For a specific response of delivery efficiency from
a particular type of NMs, we have included 4 regression models, i.e., full, best, full confident, and best
confident models. The full and best regression models were based on
all the 376 data sets. The full confident and best confident regression
models were computed based on delivery efficiency data that were confidently
predicted (only 313 data sets), e.g., the simulations visually matched the measured tumor distribution
kinetics reported by original literature and with either R2 ≥ 0.75 or <10% difference by comparing DETlast to DETlast_PK. This difference was estimated
at Tlast (up to 168 h) and calculated
using the PBPK model versus a nonphysiologically
based linear trapezoidal integration method. The best and best confident
regression models were determined using a stepwise approach whenever
the values of Akaike information criterion (AIC) reached the smallest
among all established regression models. Other critical statistical
criteria, including R2, adjusted R2 (Adj-R2), P-value, and Bayesian information criterion (BIC) obtained
from simulation outputs were used to help determine the appropriateness
in selected regression models for predicting tumor delivery efficiency.
Moreover, to explore the potential association of NM tumor delivery
efficiency with tumor microenvironment and NM properties, a multivariable
linear regression analysis was conducted to explore the relationship
between log-transformed tumor delivery efficiency (DETlast) and 4 nanoparticle-specific parameters at tumor site (PT, PATC, Kmax,T, and Kre,T) using AuNPs as a case study. This analysis was done only for AuNPs
to avoid confounding by different types of NMs.

Supporting Information Available
Supporting Information
Available:
Supplementary Excel files E1–E4, The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.9b08142.Figures S1–S3,
as well as Tables S1–S9
include all the necessary information on pharmacokinetic data in tumor-bearing
mice, the results for PBPK modeling and simulation in both healthy
and tumor-bearing mice, local sensitivity analyses, Welch’s t-tests, rank-sum tests, simple linear regression analyses,
one-way ANOVA tests, multivariable linear regression analyses, and
subgroup analyses. Example code for PBPK modeling in tumor-bearing
mice is provided (PDF)

E1: Summarized information including physicochemical
properties of administered INMs, implanted tumor type, site, size,
and body weight as well as the injected dose for tumor-bearing mice,
estimated tumor delivery efficiencies, and adequacy in the model simulation
of NM kinetics in the tumor (XLSX)

E2: Summarized information including physicochemical
properties of administered ONMs, implanted tumor type, site, size,
and body weight as well as the injected dose for tumor-bearing mice,
estimated tumor delivery efficiencies, and adequacy in the model simulation
of NM kinetics in the tumor (XLSX)

E3: PBPK simulations of pharmacokinetics
in healthy
mice intravenously injected with 13 nm AuNPs. In addition, PBPK simulations
of tumor pharmacokinetics and associated tumor- and NM-specific parameters
for INMs following systemic administration in tumor-bearing mice were
included (XLSX)

E4: PBPK simulations of tumor pharmacokinetics and associated
tumor- and NM-specific parameters for ONMs following systemic administration
in tumor-bearing mice (XLSX)



Supplementary Material
nn9b08142_si_001.pdf

 nn9b08142_si_002.xlsx

 nn9b08142_si_003.xlsx

 nn9b08142_si_004.xlsx

 nn9b08142_si_005.xlsx

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Mal Hoover,
a certified
medical illustrator at the College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas
State University, for helping create the TOC image. The authors also
would like to acknowledge financial support from the National Institute
of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, US National Institutes of
Health (NIH) (grant nos.: R03EB025566 and R03EB026045), the New Faculty
Start-up funds of Kansas State University, and the SUCCESS-FYI grant
by the College of Veterinary Medicine at Kansas State University.
==== Refs
References
Brigger I. ; Dubernet C. ; Couvreur P. 
Nanoparticles in Cancer Therapy and
Diagnosis
. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2012 , 64 , 24 –36
. 10.1016/j.addr.2012.09.006 .
Zhang P. ; Liu G. ; Chen X. 
Nanobiotechnology:
Cell Membrane-Based Delivery Systems
. Nano Today 
2017 , 13 , 7 –9
. 10.1016/j.nantod.2016.10.008 .28435439 
Peer D. ; Karp J. M. ; Hong S. ; Farokhzad O. C. ; Margalit R. ; Langer R. 
Nanocarriers as an
Emerging Platform
for Cancer Therapy
. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2007 , 2 , 751 –760
. 10.1038/nnano.2007.387 .18654426 
Chen H. ; Zhang W. ; Zhu G. ; Xie J. ; Chen X. 
Rethinking
Cancer Nanotheranostics
. Nat. Rev. Mater. 
2017 , 2 , 17024 10.1038/natrevmats.2017.24 .29075517 
Bae Y. H. ; Park K. 
Targeted Drug Delivery
to Tumors: Myths, Reality and Possibility
. J.
Controlled Release 
2011 , 153 , 198 –205
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.06.001 .
Maeda H. 
The Enhanced
Permeability and Retention (EPR) Effect in Tumor Vasculature: The
Key Role of Tumor-Selective Macromolecular Drug Targeting
. Adv. Enzyme Regul. 
2001 , 41 , 189 –207
. 10.1016/S0065-2571(00)00013-3 .11384745 
Cabral H. ; Matsumoto Y. ; Mizuno K. ; Chen Q. ; Murakami M. ; Kimura M. ; Terada Y. ; Kano M. R. ; Miyazono K. ; Uesaka M. ; Nishiyama N. ; Kataoka K. 
Accumulation of Sub-100
nm Polymeric Micelles in Poorly Permeable Tumours Depends on Size
. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 6 , 815 –823
. 10.1038/nnano.2011.166 .22020122 
Yeh C. Y. ; Hsiao J. K. ; Wang Y. P. ; Lan C. H. ; Wu H. C. 
Peptide-Conjugated
Nanoparticles for Targeted Imaging and Therapy of Prostate Cancer
. Biomaterials 
2016 , 99 , 1 –15
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.05.015 .27209258 
Kim J. H. ; Kim Y. ; Bae K. H. ; Park T. G. ; Lee J. H. ; Park K. 
Tumor-Targeted
Delivery of Paclitaxel Using Low Density Lipoprotein-Mimetic Solid
Lipid Nanoparticles
. Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2015 , 12 , 1230 –1241
. 10.1021/mp500737y .
Huang P. ; Liu J. ; Wang W. ; Zhang Y. ; Zhao F. ; Kong D. ; Liu J. ; Dong A. 
Zwitterionic Nanoparticles Constructed from Bioreducible
RAFT–ROP Double Head Agent for Shell Shedding Triggered Intracellular
Drug Delivery
. Acta Biomater. 
2016 , 40 , 263 –272
. 10.1016/j.actbio.2015.11.038 .26607767 
Agrawal U. ; Chashoo G. ; Sharma P. R. ; Kumar A. ; Saxena A. K. ; Vyas S. P. 
Tailored Polymer-Lipid
Hybrid Nanoparticles for the
Delivery of Drug Conjugate: Dual Strategy for Brain Targeting
. Colloids Surf., B 
2015 , 126 , 414 –425
. 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2014.12.045 .
Barua S. ; Mitragotri S. 
Challenges
Associated with Penetration of Nanoparticles
across Cell and Tissue Barriers: A Review of Current Status and Future
Prospects
. Nano Today 
2014 , 9 , 223 –243
. 10.1016/j.nantod.2014.04.008 .25132862 
Kang H. ; Hu S. ; Cho M. H. ; Hong S. H. ; Choi Y. ; Choi H. S. 
Theranostic
Nanosystems for Targeted Cancer Therapy
. Nano
Today 
2018 , 23 , 59 –72
. 10.1016/j.nantod.2018.11.001 .31186672 
Wilhelm S. ; Tavares A. J. ; Dai Q. ; Ohta S. ; Audet J. ; Dvorak H. F. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Analysis of Nanoparticle Delivery
to Tumours
. Nat. Rev. Mater. 
2016 , 1 , 16014 10.1038/natrevmats.2016.14 .
Dai Q. ; Wilhelm S. ; Ding D. ; Syed A. M. ; Sindhwani S. ; Zhang Y. ; Chen Y. Y. ; Macmillan P. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Quantifying the Ligand-Coated Nanoparticle Delivery
to Cancer Cells in Solid Tumors
. ACS Nano 
2018 , 12 , 8423 –8435
. 10.1021/acsnano.8b03900 .30016073 
Li M. ; Al-Jamal K. T. ; Kostarelos K. ; Reineke J. 
Physiologically Based
Pharmacokinetic Modeling of Nanoparticles
. ACS
Nano 
2010 , 4 , 6303 –6317
. 10.1021/nn1018818 .20945925 
Lee H. A. ; Leavens T. L. ; Mason S. E. ; Monteiro-Riviere N. A. ; Riviere J. E. 
Comparison of Quantum Dot Biodistribution
with a Blood-Flow-Limited
Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Model
. Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 794 –799
. 10.1021/nl803481q .19128005 
Lin Z. ; Monteiro-Riviere N. A. ; Riviere J. E. 
Pharmacokinetics of Metallic Nanoparticles
. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 
2015 , 7 , 189 –217
. 10.1002/wnan.1304 .25316649 
Yuan D. ; He H. ; Wu Y. ; Fan J. ; Cao Y. 
Physiologically Based
Pharmacokinetic Modeling of Nanoparticles
. J.
Pharm. Sci. 
2019 , 108 , 58 –72
. 10.1016/j.xphs.2018.10.037 .30385282 
Lin Z. ; Monteiro-Riviere N. A. ; Riviere J. E. 
A Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic
Model for Polyethylene Glycol-Coated Gold Nanoparticles of Different
Sizes in Adult Mice
. Nanotoxicology 
2016 , 10 , 162 –172
. 10.3109/17435390.2015.1027314 .25961857 
Opitz A. W. ; Wickstrom E. ; Thakur M. L. ; Wagner N. J. 
Physiologically
Based Pharmacokinetics of Molecular Imaging Nanoparticles for mRNA
Detection Determined in Tumor-Bearing Mice
. Oligonucleotides 
2010 , 20 , 117 –125
. 10.1089/oli.2009.0216 .20406142 
Shalgunov V. ; Zaytseva-Zotova D. ; Zintchenko A. ; Levada T. ; Shilov Y. ; Andreyev D. ; Dzhumashev D. ; Metelkin E. ; Urusova A. ; Demin O. ; McDonnell K. ; Troiano G. ; Zale S. ; Safarova E. 
Comprehensive Study of the Drug Delivery Properties
of Poly(L-Lactide)-Poly(Ethylene Glycol) Nanoparticles
in Rats and Tumor-Bearing Mice
. J. Controlled
Release 
2017 , 261 , 31 –42
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.06.006 .
Lin Z. ; Monteiro-Riviere N. A. ; Kannan R. ; Riviere J. E. 
A Computational
Framework for Interspecies Pharmacokinetics, Exposure and Toxicity
Assessment of Gold Nanoparticles
. Nanomedicine
(London, U. K.) 
2016 , 11 , 107 –119
. 10.2217/nnm.15.177 .
Lin Z. ; Jaberi-Douraki M. ; He C. ; Jin S. ; Yang R. S. H. ; Fisher J. W. ; Riviere J. E. 
Performance Assessment and Translation
of Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Models from AcslX to Berkeley
Madonna, Matlab, and R Language: Oxytetracycline and Gold Nanoparticles
as Case Examples
. Toxicol. Sci. 
2017 , 158 , 23 –35
. 10.1093/toxsci/kfx070 .28402537 
Cheng Y.-H. ; Riviere J. E. ; Monteiro-Riviere N. A. ; Lin Z. 
Probabilistic Risk
Assessment of Gold Nanoparticles after Intravenous Administration
by Integrating In Vitro and In Vivo Toxicity with Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Modeling
. Nanotoxicology 
2018 , 12 , 453 –469
. 10.1080/17435390.2018.1459922 .29658401 
Chen W.-Y. ; Cheng Y.-H. ; Hsieh N.-H. ; Wu B.-C. ; Chou W.-C. ; Ho C.-C. ; Chen J.-K. ; Liao C.-M. ; Lin P. 
Physiologically
Based Pharmacokinetic Modeling of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles and Zinc
Nitrate in Mice
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2015 , 10 , 6277 –6292
. 10.2147/IJN.S86785 .
Bachler G. ; von Goetz N. ; Hungerbühler K. 
A Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic
Model for Ionic Silver and Silver Nanoparticles
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2013 , 8 , 3365 –3382
. 10.2147/IJN.S46624 .
Li M. ; Panagi Z. ; Avgoustakis K. ; Reineke J. 
Physiologically Based
Pharmacokinetic Modeling of PLGA Nanoparticles with Varied MPEG Content
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2012 , 7 , 1345 –1356
. 10.2147/IJN.S23758 .
Li D. ; Johanson G. ; Emond C. ; Carlander U. ; Philbert M. ; Jolliet O. 
Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic
Modeling of Polyethylene Glycol-Coated Polyacrylamide Nanoparticles
in Rats
. Nanotoxicology 
2014 , 8 , 128 –137
. 10.3109/17435390.2013.863406 .24392664 
Sweeney L. M. ; MacCalman L. ; Haber L. T. ; Kuempel E. D. ; Tran C. L. 
Bayesian
Evaluation of a Physiologically-Based Pharmacokinetic (PBPK) Model
of Long-Term Kinetics of Metal Nanoparticles in Rats
. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 
2015 , 73 , 151 –163
. 10.1016/j.yrtph.2015.06.019 .26145831 
Cho W. S. ; Cho M. ; Jeong J. ; Choi M. ; Han B. S. ; Shin H. S. ; Hong J. ; Chung B. H. ; Jeong J. ; Cho M. H. 
Size-Dependent
Tissue Kinetics of PEG-Coated Gold Nanoparticles
. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
2010 , 245 , 116 –123
. 10.1016/j.taap.2010.02.013 .20193702 
Karmani L. ; Labar D. ; Valembois V. ; Bouchat V. ; Nagaswaran P. G. ; Bol A. ; Gillart J. ; Leveque P. ; Bouzin C. ; Bonifazi D. ; Michiels C. ; Feron O. ; Gregoire V. ; Lucas S. ; Borght T. V. ; Gallez B. 
Antibody-Functionalized Nanoparticles
for Imaging Cancer: Influence of Conjugation to Gold Nanoparticles
on the Biodistribution of 89Zr-Labeled Cetuximab in Mice
. Contrast Media Mol. Imaging 
2013 , 8 , 402 –408
. 10.1002/cmmi.1539 .23740810 
Chou W. C. ; Lin Z. 
Bayesian Evaluation of a Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic (PBPK)
Model for Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) to Characterize the Interspecies
Uncertainty between Mice, Rats, Monkeys, and Humans: Development and
Performance Verification
. Environ. Int. 
2019 , 129 , 408 –422
. 10.1016/j.envint.2019.03.058 .31152982 
Goel S. ; Chen F. ; Hong H. ; Valdovinos H. F. ; Hernandez R. ; Shi S. ; Barnhart T. E. ; Cai W. 
VEGF121-Conjugated Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticle: A Tumor
Targeted Drug
Delivery System
. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 21677 –21685
. 10.1021/am506849p .25353068 
Yan C. ; Gu J. ; Hou D. ; Jing H. ; Wang J. ; Guo Y. ; Katsumi H. ; Sakane T. ; Yamamoto A. 
Improved Tumor Targetability
of Tat-Conjugated PAMAM Dendrimers as a Novel Nanosized Anti-Tumor
Drug Carrier
. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 
2015 , 41 , 617 –622
. 10.3109/03639045.2014.891127 .24564798 
Zhang Z. ; Wan J. ; Sun L. ; Li Y. ; Guo J. ; Wang C. 
Zinc Finger-Inspired
Nanohydrogels with Glutathione/pH Triggered Degradation Based on Coordination
Substitution for Highly Efficient Delivery of Anti-Cancer Drugs
. J. Controlled Release 
2016 , 225 , 96 –108
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.01.035 .
Mehra N. K. ; Jain N. K. 
One Platform Comparison of Estrone
and Folic Acid Anchored
Surface Engineered MWCNTs for Doxorubicin Delivery
. Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2015 , 12 , 630 –643
. 10.1021/mp500720a .
He Z. ; Huang J. ; Xu Y. ; Zhang X. ; Teng Y. ; Huang C. ; Wu Y. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang H. ; Sun W. 
Co-Delivery of Cisplatin and Paclitaxel by Folic Acid Conjugated
Amphiphilic PEG-PLGA Copolymer Nanoparticles for the Treatment of
Non-Small Lung Cancer
. Oncotarget 
2015 , 6 , 42150 –42168
. 10.18632/oncotarget.6243 .26517524 
Li M. ; Tang Z. ; Zhang Y. ; Lv S. ; Li Q. ; Chen X. 
Targeted Delivery of Cisplatin by
LHRH-Peptide Conjugated Dextran
Nanoparticles Suppresses Breast Cancer Growth and Metastasis
. Acta Biomater. 
2015 , 18 , 132 –143
. 10.1016/j.actbio.2015.02.022 .25735801 
Zhang L. ; Liu F. ; Li G. ; Zhou Y. ; Yang Y. 
Twin-Arginine Translocation
Peptide Conjugated Epirubicin-Loaded Nanoparticles for Enhanced Tumor
Penetrating and Targeting
. J. Pharm. Sci. 
2015 , 104 , 4185 –4196
. 10.1002/jps.24649 .26398477 
Dai Y. ; Xing H. ; Song F. ; Yang Y. ; Qiu Z. ; Lu X. ; Liu Q. ; Ren S. ; Chen X. ; Li N. 
Biotin-Conjugated
Multilayer Poly [D, L-Lactide-Co-Glycolide]-Lecithin-Polyethylene
Glycol Nanoparticles for Targeted Delivery of Doxorubicin
. J. Pharm. Sci. 
2016 , 105 , 2949 –2958
. 10.1016/j.xphs.2016.03.038 .27209461 
Zou Y. ; Fang Y. ; Meng H. ; Meng F. ; Deng C. ; Zhang J. ; Zhong Z. 
Self-Crosslinkable and Intracellularly
Decrosslinkable Biodegradable Micellar Nanoparticles: A Robust, Simple
and Multifunctional Nanoplatform for High-Efficiency Targeted Cancer
Chemotherapy
. J. Controlled Release 
2016 , 244 , 326 –335
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.05.060 .
Hou J. ; Guo C. ; Shi Y. ; Liu E. ; Dong W. ; Yu B. ; Liu S. ; Gong J. 
A Novel High
Drug Loading Mussel-Inspired Polydopamine
Hybrid Nanoparticle as a pH-Sensitive Vehicle for Drug Delivery
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 
2017 , 533 , 73 –83
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.09.058 .
Yang X. ; Hong H. ; Grailer J. J. ; Rowland I. J. ; Javadi A. ; Hurley S. A. ; Xiao Y. ; Yang Y. ; Zhang Y. ; Nickles R. J. ; Cai W. ; Steeber D. A. ; Gong S. 
CRGD-Functionalized,
DOX-Conjugated, and 64Cu-Labeled Superparamagnetic Iron
Oxide Nanoparticles for Targeted Anticancer Drug Delivery and PET/MR
Imaging
. Biomaterials 
2011 , 32 , 4151 –4160
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.02.006 .21367450 
Gormley A. J. ; Malugin A. ; Ray A. ; Robinson R. ; Ghandehari H. 
Biological
Evaluation of RGDfK-Gold Nanorod Conjugates for Prostate Cancer Treatment
. J. Drug Targeting 
2011 , 19 , 915 –924
. 10.3109/1061186X.2011.623701 .
Bae Y. ; Nishiyama N. ; Kataoka K. 
In Vivo Antitumor
Activity of the Folate-Conjugated pH-Sensitive Polymeric Micelle Selectively
Releasing Adriamycin in the Intracellular Acidic Compartments
. Bioconjugate Chem. 
2007 , 18 , 1131 –1139
. 10.1021/bc060401p .
Rossin R. ; Pan D. ; Qi K. ; Turner J. L. ; Sun X. ; Wooley K. L. ; Welch M. J. 
Radiotherapy: Synthesis, Radiolabeling, and Biologic
Evaluation
. Blood Vessels 
2005 , 46 , 1210 –1218
.
Wang X. ; Yang C. ; Zhang Y. ; Zhen X. ; Wu W. ; Jiang X. 
Delivery of Platinum(IV) Drug to Subcutaneous Tumor
and Lung Metastasis
Using Bradykinin-Potentiating Peptide-Decorated Chitosan Nanoparticles
. Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 6439 –6453
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.04.016 .24811257 
Lovell D. P. 
Biological
Importance and Statistical Significance
. J.
Agric. Food Chem. 
2013 , 61 , 8340 –8348
. 10.1021/jf401124y .23909755 
Sullivan G. M. ; Feinn R. 
Using Effect Size—or Why the P Value Is Not Enough
. J. Grad. Med. Educ. 
2012 , 4 , 279 –282
. 10.4300/JGME-D-12-00156.1 .23997866 
Page P. 
Beyond Statistical
Significance: Clinical Interpretation of Rehabilitation Research Literature
. Int. J. Sports Phys. Ther. 
2014 , 9 , 726 –736
.25328834 
Zhang C. ; Li C. ; Liu Y. ; Zhang J. ; Bao C. ; Liang S. ; Wang Q. ; Yang Y. ; Fu H. ; Wang K. ; Cui D. 
Gold Nanoclusters-Based Nanoprobes for Simultaneous Fluorescence
Imaging and Targeted Photodynamic Therapy with Superior Penetration
and Retention Behavior in Tumors
. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 
2015 , 25 , 1314 –1325
. 10.1002/adfm.201403095 .
Camerin M. ; Moreno M. ; Marín M. J. ; Schofield C. L. ; Chambrier I. ; Cook M. J. ; Coppellotti O. ; Jori G. ; Russell D. A. 
Delivery of a Hydrophobic Phthalocyanine
Photosensitizer Using PEGylated Gold Nanoparticle Conjugates for the In Vivo Photodynamic Therapy of Amelanotic Melanoma
. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 
2016 , 15 , 618 –625
. 10.1039/C5PP00463B .27064601 
Kukowska-Latallo J. F. ; Candido K. A. ; Cao Z. ; Nigavekar S. S. ; Majoros I. J. ; Thomas T. P. ; Balogh L. P. ; Khan M. K. ; Baker J. R. 
Nanoparticle Targeting of Anticancer
Drug Improves
Therapeutic Response in Animal Model of Human Epithelial Cancer
. Cancer Res. 
2005 , 65 , 5317 –5324
. 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3921 .15958579 
Sadekar S. ; Ray A. ; Janàt-Amsbury M. ; Peterson C. M. ; Ghandehari H. 
Comparative
Biodistribution of PAMAM Dendrimers and HPMA Copolymers in Ovarian-Tumor-Bearing
Mice
. Biomacromolecules 
2011 , 12 , 88 –96
. 10.1021/bm101046d .21128624 
Kesharwani P. ; Tekade R. K. ; Jain N. K. 
Generation
Dependent Safety and Efficacy
of Folic Acid Conjugated Dendrimer Based Anticancer Drug Formulations
. Pharm. Res. 
2015 , 32 , 1438 –1450
. 10.1007/s11095-014-1549-2 .25330744 
Ohyama A. ; Higashi T. ; Motoyama K. ; Arima H. 
In
Vitro and In Vivo Tumor-Targeting siRNA
Delivery Using
Folate-PEG-Appended Dendrimer (G4)/α-Cyclodextrin Conjugates
. Bioconjugate Chem. 
2016 , 27 , 521 –532
. 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.5b00545 .
Kong M. ; Tang J. ; Qiao Q. ; Wu T. ; Qi Y. ; Tan S. ; Gao X. ; Zhang Z. 
Biodegradable
Hollow Mesoporous Silica
Nanoparticles for Regulating Tumor Microenvironment and Enhancing
Antitumor Efficiency
. Theranostics 
2017 , 7 , 3276 –3292
. 10.7150/thno.19987 .28900509 
Cheng X. ; Li D. ; Lin A. ; Xu J. ; Wu L. ; Gu H. ; Huang Z. ; Liu J. ; Zhang Y. ; Yin X. 
Fabrication
of Multifunctional Triple-Responsive Platform Based on CuS-Capped
Periodic Mesoporous Organosilica Nanoparticles for Chemo-Photothermal
Therapy
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2018 , 13 , 3661 –3677
. 10.2147/IJN.S167407 .
Arnida ; Janát-Amsbury M. M. ; Ray A. ; Peterson C. M. ; Ghandehari H. 
Geometry and Surface Characteristics
of Gold Nanoparticles Influence Their Biodistribution and Uptake by
Macrophages
. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 
2011 , 77 , 417 –423
. 10.1016/j.ejpb.2010.11.010 .21093587 
Smith B. R. ; Kempen P. ; Bouley D. ; Xu A. ; Liu Z. ; Melosh N. ; Dai H. ; Sinclair R. ; Gambhir S. S. 
Shape Matters:
Intravital Microscopy Reveals Surprising Geometrical Dependence for
Nanoparticles in Tumor Models of Extravasation
. Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 3369 –3377
. 10.1021/nl204175t .22650417 
Nel A. E. ; Mädler L. ; Velegol D. ; Xia T. ; Hoek E. M. V. ; Somasundaran P. ; Klaessig F. ; Castranova V. ; Thompson M. 
Understanding Biophysicochemical
Interactions at the
Nano-Bio Interface
. Nat. Mater. 
2009 , 8 , 543 –557
. 10.1038/nmat2442 .19525947 
Blanco E. ; Shen H. ; Ferrari M. 
Principles
of Nanoparticle Design
for Overcoming Biological Barriers to Drug Delivery
. Nat. Biotechnol. 
2015 , 33 , 941 –951
. 10.1038/nbt.3330 .26348965 
Kreyling W. G. ; Abdelmonem A. M. ; Ali Z. ; Alves F. ; Geiser M. ; Haberl N. ; Hartmann R. ; Hirn S. ; De Aberasturi D. J. ; Kantner K. ; Khadem-Saba G. ; Montenegro J. M. ; Rejman J. ; Rojo T. ; De Larramendi I. R. ; Ufartes R. ; Wenk A. ; Parak W. J. 
In Vivo Integrity of Polymer-Coated Gold Nanoparticles
. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 10 , 619 –623
. 10.1038/nnano.2015.111 .26076469 
Sasidharan A. ; Riviere J. E. ; Monteiro-Riviere N. A. 
Gold and Silver Nanoparticle Interactions
with Human Proteins: Impact and Implications in Biocorona Formation
. J. Mater. Chem. B 
2015 , 3 , 2075 –2082
. 10.1039/C4TB01926A .
Chen R. ; Riviere J. E. 
Biological and Environmental Surface Interactions of
Nanomaterials: Characterization, Modeling, and Prediction
. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 
2017 , 9 , e144010.1002/wnan.1440 .
Hirn S. ; Semmler-Behnke M. ; Schleh C. ; Wenk A. ; Lipka J. ; Schäffler M. ; Takenaka S. ; Möller W. ; Schmid G. ; Simon U. ; Kreyling W. G. 
Particle Size-Dependent
and Surface Charge-Dependent Biodistribution of Gold Nanoparticles
after Intravenous Administration
. Eur. J. Pharm.
Biopharm. 
2011 , 77 , 407 –416
. 10.1016/j.ejpb.2010.12.029 .21195759 
Monopoli M. P. ; Åberg C. ; Salvati A. ; Dawson K. A. 
Biomolecular Coronas
Provide the Biological Identity of Nanosized Materials
. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 , 779 –786
. 10.1038/nnano.2012.207 .23212421 
Wang H. X. ; Zuo Z. Q. ; Du J. Z. ; Wang Y. C. ; Sun R. ; Cao Z. T. ; Ye X. D. ; Wang J. L. ; Leong K. W. ; Wang J. 
Surface Charge Critically Affects Tumor Penetration and Therapeutic
Efficacy of Cancer Nanomedicines
. Nano Today 
2016 , 11 , 133 –144
. 10.1016/j.nantod.2016.04.008 .
Liu J. ; Yu M. ; Ning X. ; Zhou C. ; Yang S. ; Zheng J. 
PEGylation
and Zwitterionization: Pros and Cons in the Renal Clearance and Tumor
Targeting of Near-IR-Emitting Gold Nanoparticles
. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 12572 –12576
. 10.1002/anie.201304465 .
Liu X. ; Li H. ; Chen Y. ; Jin Q. ; Ren K. ; Ji J. 
Mixed-Charge
Nanoparticles for Long Circulation, Low Reticuloendothelial System
Clearance, and High Tumor Accumulation
. Adv.
Healthcare Mater. 
2014 , 3 , 1439 –1447
. 10.1002/adhm.201300617 .
Arvizo R. R. ; Miranda O. R. ; Moyano D. F. ; Walden C. A. ; Giri K. ; Bhattacharya R. ; Robertson J. D. ; Rotello V. M. ; Reid J. M. ; Mukherjee P. 
Modulating Pharmacokinetics, Tumor Uptake and Biodistribution
by Engineered Nanoparticles
. PLoS One 
2011 , 6 , e2437410.1371/journal.pone.0024374 .21931696 
Balogh L. ; Nigavekar S. S. ; Nair B. M. ; Lesniak W. ; Zhang C. ; Sung L. Y. ; Kariapper M. S. T. ; El-Jawahri A. ; Llanes M. ; Bolton B. ; Mamou F. ; Tan W. ; Hutson A. ; Minc L. ; Khan M. K. 
Significant Effect
of Size on the In Vivo Biodistribution of Gold Composite
Nanodevices in Mouse Tumor Models
. Nanomedicine
(N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2007 , 3 , 281 –296
. 10.1016/j.nano.2007.09.001 .
Gratton S. E. A. ; Ropp P. A. ; Pohlhaus P. D. ; Luft J. C. ; Madden V. J. ; Napier M. E. ; DeSimone J. M. 
The Effect of Particle
Design on
Cellular Internalization Pathways
. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2008 , 105 , 11613 –11618
. 10.1073/pnas.0801763105 .18697944 
Osaka T. ; Nakanishi T. ; Shanmugam S. ; Takahama S. ; Zhang H. 
Effect of
Surface Charge of Magnetite Nanoparticles on Their Internalization
into Breast Cancer and Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells
. Colloids Surf., B 
2009 , 71 , 325 –330
. 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2009.03.004 .
Mussi S. V. ; Parekh G. ; Pattekari P. ; Levchenko T. ; Lvov Y. ; Ferreira L. A. M. ; Torchilin V. P. 
Improved
Pharmacokinetics and Enhanced Tumor Growth Inhibition Using a Nanostructured
Lipid Carrier Loaded with Doxorubicin and Modified with a Layer-by-Layer
Polyelectrolyte Coating
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam,
Neth.) 
2015 , 495 , 186 –193
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.08.079 .
Ekdawi S. N. ; Jaffray D. A. ; Allen C. 
Nanomedicine and Tumor Heterogeneity:
Concept and Complex Reality
. Nano Today 
2016 , 11 , 402 –414
. 10.1016/j.nantod.2016.06.006 .
Chen R. ; Zhang Y. ; Monteiro-Riviere N. A. ; Riviere J. E. 
Quantification of
Nanoparticle Pesticide Adsorption: Computational Approaches Based
on Experimental Data
. Nanotoxicology 
2016 , 10 , 1118 –1128
. 10.1080/17435390.2016.1177745 .27074998 
Oh E. ; Liu R. ; Nel A. ; Gemill K. B. ; Bilal M. ; Cohen Y. ; Medintz I. L. 
Meta-Analysis
of Cellular Toxicity for Cadmium-Containing
Quantum Dots
. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2016 , 11 , 479 –486
. 10.1038/nnano.2015.338 .26925827 
Physicians’ Cancer Chemotherapy Drug Manual
2020 , 20 th ed.; Chu E. , DeVita V. T. Jr. , Eds., Jones & Bartlett
Learning, LLC : Burlington, MA , 2020 .
Senapati S. ; Mahanta A. K. ; Kumar S. ; Maiti P. 
Controlled Drug Delivery
Vehicles for Cancer Treatment and Their Performance
. Signal Transduction Targeted Ther. 
2018 , 3 , 7 10.1038/s41392-017-0004-3 .
Sahneh F. D. ; Scoglio C. M. ; Monteiro-Riviere N. A. ; Riviere J. E. 
Predicting the Impact
of Biocorona Formation Kinetics on Interspecies Extrapolations of
Nanoparticle Biodistribution Modeling
. Nanomedicine
(London, U. K.) 
2015 , 10 , 25 –33
. 10.2217/nnm.14.60 .
Riviere J. E. ; Scoglio C. ; Sahneh F. D. ; Monteiro-Riviere N. A. 
Computational
Approaches and Metrics Required for Formulating Biologically Realistic
Nanomaterial Pharmacokinetic Models
. Comput.
Sci. Discovery 
2013 , 6 , 014005 10.1088/1749-4699/6/1/014005 .
Hauert S. ; Berman S. ; Nagpal R. ; Bhatia S. N. 
A Computational
Framework for Identifying Design Guidelines to Increase the Penetration
of Targeted Nanoparticles into Tumors
. Nano
Today 
2013 , 8 , 566 –576
. 10.1016/j.nantod.2013.11.001 .25009578 
He H. ; Liu C. ; Liu Y. ; Liu X. ; Wu Y. ; Fan J. ; Zhao L. ; Cao Y. 
Mathematical Modeling of the Heterogeneous
Distributions of Nanomedicines in Solid Tumors
. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 
2019 , 142 , 153 –164
. 10.1016/j.ejpb.2019.06.005 .31226367 
Shi J. ; Kantoff P. W. ; Wooster R. ; Farokhzad O. C. 
Cancer
Nanomedicine: Progress, Challenges and Opportunities
. Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2017 , 17 , 20 –37
. 10.1038/nrc.2016.108 .27834398 
Park K. 
Facing the
Truth about Nanotechnology in Drug Delivery
. ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 7442 –7447
. 10.1021/nn404501g .24490875 
Mitragotri S. ; Lammers T. ; Bae Y. H. ; Schwendeman S. ; De Smedt S. ; Leroux J. C. ; Peer D. ; Kwon I. C. ; Harashima H. ; Kikuchi A. ; Oh Y. K. ; Torchilin V. ; Hennink W. ; Hanes J. ; Park K. 
Drug Delivery Research
for the Future: Expanding the Nano Horizons and Beyond
. J. Controlled Release 
2017 , 246 , 183 –184
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.01.011 .
Leong H. S. ; Butler K. S. ; Brinker C. J. ; Azzawi M. ; Conlan S. ; Dufés C. ; Owen A. ; Rannard S. ; Scott C. ; Chen C. ; Dobrovolskaia M. A. ; Kozlov S. V. ; Prina-Mello A. ; Schmid R. ; Wick P. ; Caputo F. ; Boisseau P. ; Crist R. M. ; McNeil S. E. ; Fadeel B. ; et al. On the
Issue of Transparency and Reproducibility in Nanomedicine
. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2019 , 14 , 629 –635
. 10.1038/s41565-019-0496-9 .31270452 
Wolfram J. ; Ferrari M. 
Clinical Cancer Nanomedicine
. Nano Today 
2019 , 25 , 85 –98
. 10.1016/j.nantod.2019.02.005 .31360214 
Allen C. ; Park K. 
What Do We Do Next?
. J. Controlled Release 
2019 , 302 , 203 10.1016/j.jconrel.2019.04.024 .
Faria M. ; Björnmalm M. ; Thurecht K. J. ; Kent S. J. ; Parton R. G. ; Kavallaris M. ; Johnston A. P. R. ; Gooding J. J. ; Corrie S. R. ; Boyd B. J. ; Thordarson P. ; Whittaker A. K. ; Stevens M. M. ; Prestidge C. A. ; Porter C. J. H. ; Parak W. J. ; Davis T. P. ; Crampin E. J. ; Caruso F. 
Minimum Information
Reporting in Bio–Nano Experimental Literature
. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2018 , 13 , 777 –785
. 10.1038/s41565-018-0246-4 .30190620 
Mastria E. M. ; Chen M. ; McDaniel J. R. ; Li X. ; Hyun J. ; Dewhirst M. W. ; Chilkoti A. 
Doxorubicin-Conjugated
Polypeptide
Nanoparticles Inhibit Metastasis in Two Murine Models of Carcinoma
. J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 208 , 52 –58
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.01.033 .
Liu H. ; Lu H. ; Liao L. ; Zhang X. ; Gong T. ; Zhang Z. 
Lipid Nanoparticles
Loaded with 7-Ethyl-10-Hydroxycamptothecin-Phospholipid Complex: In Vitro andIn Vivo Studies
. Drug Delivery 
2015 , 22 , 701 –709
. 10.3109/10717544.2014.895069 .24625262 
Kudo S. ; Nagasaki Y. 
A Novel Nitric Oxide-Based Anticancer
Therapeutics
by Macrophage-Targeted Poly(L-Arginine)-Based Nanoparticles
. J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 217 , 256 –262
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.09.019 .
He C. ; Liu D. ; Lin W. 
Self-Assembled Core-Shell Nanoparticles
for Combined
Chemotherapy and Photodynamic Therapy of Resistant Head and Neck Cancers
. ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 991 –1003
. 10.1021/nn506963h .25559017 
Du X. J. ; Wang J. L. ; Liu W. W. ; Yang J. X. ; Sun C. Y. ; Sun R. ; Li H. J. ; Shen S. ; Luo Y. L. ; Ye X. D. ; Zhu Y. H. ; Yang X. Z. ; Wang J. 
Regulating the Surface
Poly(Ethylene Glycol) Density of Polymeric Nanoparticles and Evaluating
Its Role in Drug Delivery In Vivo
. Biomaterials 
2015 , 69 , 1 –11
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.07.048 .26275857 
Dalela M. ; Shrivastav T. G. ; Kharbanda S. ; Singh H. 
pH-Sensitive Biocompatible
Nanoparticles of Paclitaxel-Conjugated Poly(Styrene-Co-Maleic Acid) for Anticancer Drug Delivery in Solid Tumors of Syngeneic
Mice
. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 26530 –26548
. 10.1021/acsami.5b07764 .26528585 
Battogtokh G. ; Kang J. H. ; Ko Y. T. 
Long-Circulating
Self-Assembled Cholesteryl
Albumin Nanoparticles Enhance Tumor Accumulation of Hydrophobic Anticancer
Drug
. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 
2015 , 96 , 96 –105
. 10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.07.013 .26212785 
Alibolandi M. ; Sadeghi F. ; Abnous K. ; Atyabi F. ; Ramezani M. ; Hadizadeh F. 
The Chemotherapeutic
Potential of
Doxorubicin-Loaded PEG-b-PLGA Nanopolymersomes in
Mouse Breast Cancer Model
. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 
2015 , 94 , 521 –531
. 10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.07.005 .26170161 
Harivardhan Reddy L. ; Sharma R. K. ; Chuttani K. ; Mishra A. K. ; Murthy R. S. R. 
Influence of Administration Route
on Tumor Uptake and
Biodistribution of Etoposide Loaded Solid Lipid Nanoparticles in Dalton’s
Lymphoma Tumor Bearing Mice
. J. Controlled Release 
2005 , 105 , 185 –198
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2005.02.028 .
Tian B. ; Zhang X. ; Yu C. ; Zhou M. ; Zhang X. 
The Aspect Ratio Effect of Drug Nanocrystals
on Cellular Internalization
Efficiency, Uptake Mechanisms, and In Vitro and In Vivo Anticancer Efficiencies
. Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 3588 –3593
. 10.1039/C4NR06743F .25630950 
Sadekar S. ; Linares O. ; Noh G. J. ; Hubbard D. ; Ray A. ; Janát-Amsbury M. ; Peterson C. M. ; Facelli J. ; Ghandehari H. 
Comparative
Pharmacokinetics of PAMAM-OH Dendrimers
and HPMA Copolymers in Ovarian Tumor-Bearing Mice
. Drug Delivery Transl. Res. 
2013 , 3 , 260 –271
. 10.1007/s13346-012-0119-6 .
Wu M. ; Shi J. ; Fan D. ; Zhou Q. ; Wang F. ; Niu Z. ; Huang Y. 
Biobehavior
in Normal and Tumor-Bearing Mice of Tobacco
Mosaic Virus
. Biomacromolecules 
2013 , 14 , 4032 –4037
. 10.1021/bm401129j .24093622 
Okuda T. ; Kawakami S. ; Akimoto N. ; Niidome T. ; Yamashita F. ; Hashida M. 
PEGylated Lysine Dendrimers
for Tumor-Selective
Targeting after Intravenous Injection in Tumor-Bearing Mice
. J. Controlled Release 
2006 , 116 , 330 –336
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2006.09.012 .
Qian H. ; Wang X. ; Yuan K. ; Xie C. ; Wu W. ; Jiang X. ; Hu L. 
Delivery of Doxorubicin In
Vitro and In Vivo Using Bio-Reductive Cellulose
Nanogels
. Biomater. Sci. 
2014 , 2 , 220 –232
. 10.1039/C3BM60176E .
Cheng Y. ; Yu S. ; Zhen X. ; Wang X. ; Wu W. ; Jiang X. 
Alginic Acid Nanoparticles
Prepared through Counterion
Complexation Method as a Drug Delivery System
. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2012 , 4 , 5325 –5332
. 10.1021/am3012627 .23020277 
Xu J. ; Gattacceca F. ; Amiji M. 
Biodistribution and Pharmacokinetics
of EGFR-Targeted Thiolated Gelatin Nanoparticles Following Systemic
Administration in Pancreatic Tumor-Bearing Mice
. Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2013 , 10 , 2031 –2044
. 10.1021/mp400054e .
Ganesh S. ; Iyer A. K. ; Gattacceca F. ; Morrissey D. V. ; Amiji M. M. 
In Vivo Biodistribution
of siRNA and Cisplatin Administered Using CD44-Targeted Hyaluronic
Acid Nanoparticles
. J. Controlled Release 
2013 , 172 , 699 –706
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.10.016 .
Wu W. ; Yao W. ; Wang X. ; Xie C. ; Zhang J. ; Jiang X. 
Bioreducible Heparin-Based Nanogel
Drug Delivery System
. Biomaterials 
2015 , 39 , 260 –268
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.11.005 .25468376 
Yang C. ; Wang X. ; Yao X. ; Zhang Y. ; Wu W. ; Jiang X. 
Hyaluronic Acid Nanogels
with Enzyme-Sensitive Cross-Linking
Group for Drug Delivery
. J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 205 , 206 –217
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.02.008 .
Han X. ; Li Z. ; Sun J. ; Luo C. ; Li L. ; Liu Y. ; Du Y. ; Qiu S. ; Ai X. ; Wu C. ; Lian H. ; He Z. 
Stealth CD44-Targeted
Hyaluronic
Acid Supramolecular Nanoassemblies for Doxorubicin Delivery: Probing
the Effect of Uncovalent Pegylation Degree on Cellular Uptake and
Blood Long Circulation
. J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 197 , 29 –40
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.10.024 .
Zamboni W. C. ; Strychor S. ; Joseph E. ; Walsh D. R. ; Zamboni B. A. ; Parise R. A. ; Tonda M. E. ; Yu N. Y. ; Engbers C. ; Eiseman J. L. 
Plasma, Tumor, and
Tissue Disposition
of STEALTH Liposomal CKD-602 (S-CKD602) and Nonliposomal CKD-602 in
Mice Bearing A375 Human Melanoma Xenografts
. Clin. Cancer Res. 
2007 , 13 , 7217 –7223
. 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-1035 .18056203 
Paolino D. ; Cosco D. ; Racanicchi L. ; Trapasso E. ; Celia C. ; Iannone M. ; Puxeddu E. ; Costante G. ; Filetti S. ; Russo D. ; Fresta M. 
Gemcitabine-Loaded
PEGylated Unilamellar Liposomes vs GEMZAR®: Biodistribution, Pharmacokinetic Features and In Vivo Antitumor Activity
. J. Controlled Release 
2010 , 144 , 144 –150
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2010.02.021 .
Khalid M. N. ; Simard P. ; Hoarau D. ; Dragomir A. ; Leroux J. C. 
Long Circulating Poly(Ethylene Glycol)-Decorated
Lipid
Nanocapsules Deliver Docetaxel to Solid Tumors
. Pharm. Res. 
2006 , 23 , 752 –758
. 10.1007/s11095-006-9662-5 .16550475 
Miyajima Y. ; Nakamura H. ; Kuwata Y. ; Lee J.-D. ; Masunaga S. ; Ono K. ; Maruyama K. 
Transferrin-Loaded
Nido-Carborane Liposomes: Tumor-Targeting Boron Delivery System for
Neutron Capture Therapy
. Bioconjugate Chem. 
2006 , 17 , 1314 –1320
. 10.1021/bc060064k .
Hirsjarvi S. ; Sancey L. ; Dufort S. ; Belloche C. ; Vanpouille-Box C. ; Garcion E. ; Coll J.-L. ; Hindre F. ; Benoit J.-P. 
Effect of Particle Size on the Biodistribution
of Lipid
Nanocapsules: Comparison between Nuclear and Fluorescence Imaging
and Counting
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 
2013 , 453 , 594 –600
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2013.05.057 .
Wong A. W. ; Ormsby E. ; Zhang H. ; Seo J. W. ; Mahakian L. M. ; Caskey C. F. ; Ferrara K. W. 
A Comparison
of
Image Contrast with 64Cu-Labeled Long Circulating Liposomes
and 18F-FDG in a Murine Model of Mammary Carcinoma
. Am. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 
2013 , 3 , 32 –43
.23342299 
Negi L. M. ; Talegaonkar S. ; Jaggi M. ; Verma A. K. ; Verma R. ; Dobhal S. ; Kumar V. 
Surface Engineered
Nanostructured Lipid Carriers for Targeting MDR Tumor: Part II. In Vivo Biodistribution, Pharmacodynamic and Hematological
Toxicity Studies
. Colloids Surf., B 
2014 , 123 , 610 –615
. 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2014.09.061 .
Song G. ; Darr D. B. ; Santos C. M. ; Ross M. ; Valdivia A. ; Jordan J. L. ; Midkiff B. R. ; Cohen S. ; Nikolaishvili-Feinberg N. ; Miller C. R. ; Tarrant T. K. ; Rogers A. B. ; Dudley A. C. ; Perou C. M. ; Zamboni W. C. 
Effects
of Tumor Microenvironment Heterogeneity on Nanoparticle Disposition
and Efficacy in Breast Cancer Tumor Models
. Clin. Cancer Res. 
2014 , 20 , 6083 –6095
. 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0493 .25231403 
Ekdawi S. N. ; Stewart J. M. P. ; Dunne M. ; Stapleton S. ; Mitsakakis N. ; Dou Y. N. ; Jaffray D. A. ; Allen C. 
Spatial and
Temporal Mapping of Heterogeneity in Liposome Uptake and Microvascular
Distribution in an Orthotopic Tumor Xenograft Model
. J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 207 , 101 –111
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.04.006 .
Liu Z. ; Cai W. ; He L. ; Nakayama N. ; Chen K. ; Sun X. ; Chen X. ; Dai H. 
In
Vivo Biodistribution
and Highly Efficient Tumour Targeting of Carbon Nanotubes in Mice
. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2007 , 2 , 47 –52
. 10.1038/nnano.2006.170 .18654207 
Hong H. ; Zhang Y. ; Engle J. W. ; Nayak T. R. ; Theuer C. P. ; Nickles R. J. ; Barnhart T. E. ; Cai W. 
In
Vivo Targeting and Positron Emission Tomography Imaging of
Tumor Vasculature with 66Ga-Labeled Nano-Graphene
. Biomaterials 
2012 , 33 , 4147 –4156
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.02.031 .22386918 
Shi S. ; Yang K. ; Hong H. ; Chen F. ; Valdovinos H. F. ; Goel S. ; Barnhart T. E. ; Liu Z. ; Cai W. 
VEGFR Targeting
Leads to Significantly Enhanced Tumor Uptake of Nanographene OxideIn Vivo
. Biomaterials 
2015 , 39 , 39 –46
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.10.061 .25477170 
Xu H. ; Fan M. ; Elhissi A. M. A. ; Zhang Z. ; Wan K. W. ; Ahmed W. ; Phoenix D. A. ; Sun X. 
PEGylated Graphene
Oxide for Tumor-Targeted Delivery of Paclitaxel
. Nanomedicine (London, U. K.) 
2015 , 10 , 1247 –1262
. 10.2217/nnm.14.233 .
Shi S. ; Yang K. ; Hong H. ; Valdovinos H. F. ; Nayak T. R. ; Zhang Y. ; Theuer C. P. ; Barnhart T. E. ; Liu Z. ; Cai W. 
Tumor Vasculature Targeting and Imaging in Living Mice
with Reduced Graphene Oxide
. Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 3002 –3009
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.01.047 .23374706 
Pathak A. ; Kumar P. ; Chuttani K. ; Jain S. ; Mishra A. K. ; Vyas S. P. ; Gupta K. C. 
Gene Expression,
Biodistribution, and Pharmacoscintigraphic Evaluation of Chondroitin
Sulfate – PEI Nanoconstructs Mediated Tumor Gene Therapy
. ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 , 1493 –1505
. 10.1021/nn900044f .19449835 
Cabral H. ; Nishiyama N. ; Kataoka K. 
Optimization of (1,2-Diamino-Cyclohexane)Platinum(II)-Loaded
Polymeric Micelles Directed to Improved Tumor Targeting and Enhanced
Antitumor Activity
. J. Controlled Release 
2007 , 121 , 146 –155
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2007.05.024 .
He C. ; Hu Y. ; Yin L. ; Tang C. ; Yin C. 
Effects of
Particle Size and Surface Charge on Cellular Uptake and Biodistribution
of Polymeric Nanoparticles
. Biomaterials 
2010 , 31 , 3657 –3666
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.01.065 .20138662 
Mondal N. ; Halder K. K. ; Kamila M. M. ; Debnath M. C. ; Pal T. K. ; Ghosal S. K. ; Sarkar B. R. ; Ganguly S. 
Preparation,
Characterization, and Biodistribution of Letrozole Loaded PLGA Nanoparticles
in Ehrlich Ascites Tumor Bearing Mice
. Int.
J. Pharm. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 
2010 , 397 , 194 –200
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2010.06.049 .
Sasatsu M. ; Onishi H. ; Machida Y. 
Preparation and Biodisposition
of Methoxypolyethylene Glycol Amine-Poly(DL-Lactic Acid)
Copolymer Nanoparticles Loaded with Pyrene-Ended Poly(DL-Lactic Acid)
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 
2008 , 358 , 271 –277
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2008.03.011 .
Bae Y. ; Nishiyama N. ; Fukushima S. ; Koyama H. ; Yasuhiro M. ; Kataoka K. 
Preparation
and Biological Characterization of Polymeric
Micelle Drug Carriers with Intracellular pH-Triggered Drug Release
Property: Tumor Permeability, Controlled Subcellular Drug Distribution,
and Enhanced In Vivo Antitumor Efficacy
. Bioconjugate Chem. 
2005 , 16 , 122 –130
. 10.1021/bc0498166 .
Bibby D. C. ; Talmadge J. E. ; Dalal M. K. ; Kurz S. G. ; Chytil K. M. ; Barry S. E. ; Shand D. G. ; Steiert M. 
Pharmacokinetics
and Biodistribution of RGD-Targeted Doxorubicin-Loaded Nanoparticles
in Tumor-Bearing Mice
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam,
Neth.) 
2005 , 293 , 281 –290
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2004.12.021 .
Cabral H. ; Nishiyama N. ; Okazaki S. ; Koyama H. ; Kataoka K. 
Preparation
and Biological Properties of Dichloro(1,2-Diaminocyclohexane)
Platinum(II) (DACHPt)-Loaded Polymeric Micelles
. J. Controlled Release 
2005 , 101 , 223 –232
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2004.08.022 .
Sumitani S. ; Oishi M. ; Nagasaki Y. 
Carborane Confined
Nanoparticles for Boron Neutron Capture Therapy: Improved Stability,
Blood Circulation Time and Tumor Accumulation
. React. Funct. Polym. 
2011 , 71 , 684 –693
. 10.1016/j.reactfunctpolym.2011.03.010 .
Guo X. ; Shi C. ; Wang J. ; Di S. ; Zhou S. 
pH-Triggered
Intracellular Release from Actively Targeting Polymer Micelles
. Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 4544 –4554
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.02.071 .23510854 
Ma Y. ; Sadoqi M. ; Shao J. 
Biodistribution
of Indocyanine Green-Loaded
Nanoparticles with Surface Modifications of PEG and Folic Acid
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 
2012 , 436 , 25 –31
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2012.06.007 .
Chu K. S. ; Schorzman A. N. ; Finniss M. C. ; Bowerman C. J. ; Peng L. ; Luft J. C. ; Madden A. J. ; Wang A. Z. ; Zamboni W. C. ; DeSimone J. M. 
Nanoparticle
Drug Loading as a Design
Parameter to Improve Docetaxel Pharmacokinetics and Efficacy
. Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 8424 –8429
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.07.038 .23899444 
Chu K. S. ; Hasan W. ; Rawal S. ; Walsh M. D. ; Enlow E. M. ; Luft J. C. ; Bridges A. S. ; Kuijer J. L. ; Napier M. E. ; Zamboni W. C. ; DeSimone J. M. 
Plasma,
Tumor and
Tissue Pharmacokinetics of Docetaxel Delivered via Nanoparticles of Different Sizes and Shapes in Mice Bearing SKOV-3
Human Ovarian Carcinoma Xenograft
. Nanomedicine
(N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2013 , 9 , 686 –693
. 10.1016/j.nano.2012.11.008 .
Ding M. ; Song N. ; He X. ; Li J. ; Zhou L. ; Tan H. ; Fu Q. ; Gu Q. 
Toward the
Next-Generation Nanomedicines: Design of Multifunctional Multiblock
Polyurethanes for Effective Cancer Treatment
. ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 1918 –1928
. 10.1021/nn4002769 .23411462 
Chen Y. ; Zhang W. ; Huang Y. ; Gao F. ; Sha X. ; Fang X. 
Pluronic-Based Functional Polymeric
Mixed Micelles
for Co-Delivery of Doxorubicin and Paclitaxel to Multidrug Resistant
Tumor
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 
2015 , 488 , 44 –58
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.04.048 .
Shi Y. ; van der Meel R. ; Theek B. ; Oude Blenke E. ; Pieters E. H. E. ; Fens M. H. A. M. ; Ehling J. ; Schiffelers R. M. ; Storm G. ; van Nostrum C. F. ; Lammers T. ; Hennink W. E. 
Complete
Regression of Xenograft Tumors upon Targeted Delivery of Paclitaxel via ∏ - ∏ Stacking Stabilized Polymeric Micelles
. ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 3740 –3752
. 10.1021/acsnano.5b00929 .25831471 
Guo J. ; Hong H. ; Chen G. ; Shi S. ; Zheng Q. ; Zhang Y. ; Theuer C. P. ; Barnhart T. E. ; Cai W. ; Gong S. 
Image-Guided and Tumor-Targeted Drug Delivery with Radiolabeled Unimolecular
Micelles
. Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 8323 –8332
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.07.085 .23932288 
Yu H. ; Tang Z. ; Zhang D. ; Song W. ; Zhang Y. ; Yang Y. ; Ahmad Z. ; Chen X. 
Pharmacokinetics, Biodistribution
and In Vivo Efficacy of Cisplatin Loaded Poly(L-Glutamic Acid)-g-Methoxy Poly(Ethylene Glycol)
Complex Nanoparticles for Tumor Therapy
. J.
Controlled Release 
2015 , 205 , 89 –97
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.12.022 .
Hou L. ; Shan X. ; Hao L. ; Feng Q. ; Zhang Z. 
Copper Sulfide
Nanoparticle-Based Localized Drug Delivery System as an Effective
Cancer Synergistic Treatment and Theranostic Platform
. Acta Biomater. 
2017 , 54 , 307 –320
. 10.1016/j.actbio.2017.03.005 .28274767 
Gao Z. ; Nakanishi Y. ; Noda S. ; Omachi H. ; Shinohara H. ; Kimura H. ; Nagasaki Y. 
Development of Gd3N@C80 Encapsulated Redox Nanoparticles for High-Performance
Magnetic
Resonance Imaging
. J. Biomater. Sci., Polym.
Ed. 
2017 , 28 , 1036 –1050
. 10.1080/09205063.2017.1288774 .28132586 
Dewi N. ; Mi P. ; Yanagie H. ; Sakurai Y. ; Morishita Y. ; Yanagawa M. ; Nakagawa T. ; Shinohara A. ; Matsukawa T. ; Yokoyama K. ; Cabral H. ; Suzuki M. ; Sakurai Y. ; Tanaka H. ; Ono K. ; Nishiyama N. ; Kataoka K. ; Takahashi H. 
In Vivo Evaluation
of Neutron Capture Therapy Effectivity Using Calcium Phosphate-Based
Nanoparticles as Gd-DTPA Delivery Agent
. J.
Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 
2016 , 142 , 767 –775
. 10.1007/s00432-015-2085-0 .26650198 
Li Z. ; Hu Y. ; Howard K. A. A. ; Jiang T. ; Fan X. ; Miao Z. ; Sun Y. ; Besenbacher F. ; Yu M. 
Multifunctional Bismuth Selenide Nanocomposites for Antitumor Thermo-Chemotherapy
and Imaging
. ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 984 –997
. 10.1021/acsnano.5b06259 .26655250 
Shi J. ; Chen Z. ; Wang L. ; Wang B. ; Xu L. ; Hou L. ; Zhang Z. 
A Tumor-Specific
Cleavable Nanosystem of PEG-Modified
C60@Au Hybrid Aggregates for Radio Frequency-Controlled Release, Hyperthermia,
Photodynamic Therapy and X-Ray Imaging
. Acta
Biomater. 
2016 , 29 , 282 –297
. 10.1016/j.actbio.2015.10.027 .26485168 
Liu L. X. ; Li B. X. ; Wang Q. Y. ; Dong Z. P. ; Li H. M. ; Jin Q. M. ; Hong H. ; Zhang J. ; Wang Y. 
An Integrative
Folate-Based Metal Complex Nanotube as a Potent Antitumor
Nanomedicine as well as an Efficient Tumor-Targeted Drug Carrier
. Bioconjugate Chem. 
2016 , 27 , 2863 –2873
. 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.6b00520 .
Shi S. ; Fliss B. C. ; Gu Z. ; Zhu Y. ; Hong H. ; Valdovinos H. F. ; Hernandez R. ; Goel S. ; Luo H. ; Chen F. ; Barnhart T. E. ; Nickles R. J. ; Xu Z. P. ; Cai W. 
Chelator-Free Labeling
of Layered Double Hydroxide Nanoparticles
for In Vivo PET Imaging
. Sci.
Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 16930 10.1038/srep16930 .26585551 
Huang H. ; Yue T. ; Xu K. ; Golzarian J. ; Yu J. ; Huang J. 
Fabrication and Evaluation
of Tumor-Targeted Positive
MRI Contrast Agent Based on Ultrasmall MnO Nanoparticles
. Colloids Surf., B 
2015 , 131 , 148 –154
. 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2015.04.047 .
Mi P. ; Kokuryo D. ; Cabral H. ; Kumagai M. ; Nomoto T. ; Aoki I. ; Terada Y. ; Kishimura A. ; Nishiyama N. ; Kataoka K. 
Hydrothermally Synthesized
PEGylated
Calcium Phosphate Nanoparticles Incorporating Gd-DTPA for Contrast
Enhanced MRI Diagnosis of Solid Tumors
. J. Controlled
Release 
2014 , 174 , 63 –71
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.10.038 .
Yu J. ; Yin W. ; Zheng X. ; Tian G. ; Zhang X. ; Bao T. ; Dong X. ; Wang Z. ; Gu Z. ; Ma X. ; Zhao Y. 
Smart MoS2/Fe3O4 Nanotheranostic
for Magnetically Targeted Photothermal Therapy Guided by Magnetic
Resonance/Photoacoustic Imaging
. Theranostics 
2015 , 5 , 931 –945
. 10.7150/thno.11802 .26155310 
Lee J. ; Lee T. S. ; Ryu J. ; Hong S. ; Kang M. ; Im K. ; Kang J. H. ; Lim S. M. ; Park S. ; Song R. 
RGD Peptide-Conjugated
Multimodal NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+ Nanophosphors for Upconversion Luminescence,
MR, and PET Imaging of Tumor Angiogenesis
. J.
Nucl. Med. 
2013 , 54 , 96 –103
. 10.2967/jnumed.112.108043 .23232276 
Hu H. ; Dai A. ; Sun J. ; Li X. ; Gao F. ; Wu L. ; Fang Y. ; Yang H. ; An L. ; Wu H. ; Yang S. 
Aptamer-Conjugated
Mn3O4@SiO2 Core-Shell
Nanoprobes for Targeted Magnetic Resonance Imaging
. Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 10447 –10454
. 10.1039/c3nr03490a .24057072 
Wu F. ; Zhang M. ; Lu H. ; Liang D. ; Huang Y. ; Xia Y. ; Hu Y. ; Hu S. ; Wang J. ; Yi X. ; Zhang J. 
Triple Stimuli-Responsive Magnetic Hollow Porous Carbon-Based Nanodrug
Delivery System for Magnetic Resonance Imaging-Guided Synergistic
Photothermal/Chemotherapy of Cancer
. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 21939 –21949
. 10.1021/acsami.8b07213 .29893126 
Ansari L. ; Jaafari M. R. ; Bastami T. R. ; Malaekeh-Nikouei B. 
Improved Anticancer
Efficacy of Epirubicin by Magnetic Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles: In Vitro and In Vivo Studies
. Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol. 
2018 , 46 , 594 –606
. 10.1080/21691401.2018.1464461 .29688064 
Su J. ; Sun H. ; Meng Q. ; Zhang P. ; Yin Q. ; Li Y. 
Enhanced Blood Suspensibility
and Laser-Activated Tumor-Specific
Drug Release of Theranostic Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles by Functionalizing
with Erythrocyte Membranes
. Theranostics 
2017 , 7 , 523 –537
. 10.7150/thno.17259 .28255347 
Xue H. ; Yu Z. ; Liu Y. ; Yuan W. ; Yang T. ; You J. ; He X. ; Lee R. J. ; Li L. ; Xu C. 
Delivery of
MiR-375 and Doxorubicin Hydrochloride by Lipid-Coated Hollow Mesoporous
Silica Nanoparticles to Overcome Multiple Drug Resistance in Hepatocellular
Carcinoma
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2017 , 12 , 5271 –5287
. 10.2147/IJN.S135306 .
Huo M. ; Wang L. ; Chen Y. ; Shi J. 
Tumor-Selective Catalytic
Nanomedicine by Nanocatalyst Delivery
. Nat.
Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 357 10.1038/s41467-017-00424-8 .28842577 
Chen F. ; Hong H. ; Zhang Y. ; Valdovinos H. F. ; Shi S. ; Kwon G. S. ; Theuer C. P. ; Barnhart T. E. ; Cai W. 
In
Vivo Tumor Targeting and Image-Guided Drug Delivery with
Antibody-Conjugated, Radiolabeled Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles
. ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 9027 –9039
. 10.1021/nn403617j .24083623 
Benezra M. ; Penate-Medina O. ; Zanzonico P. B. ; Schaer D. ; Ow H. ; Burns A. ; DeStanchina E. ; Longo V. ; Herz E. ; Iyer S. ; Wolchok J. ; Larson S. M. ; Wiesner U. ; Bradbury M. S. 
Multimodal Silica
Nanoparticles Are Effective Cancer-Targeted Probes in a Model of Human
Melanoma Find the Latest Version: Technical Advance Multimodal Silica
Nanoparticles Are Effective Cancer-Targeted Probes in a Model of Human
Melanoma
. J. Clin. Invest. 
2011 , 121 , 2768 –2780
. 10.1172/JCI45600 .21670497 
Chen F. ; Hong H. ; Shi S. ; Goel S. ; Valdovinos H. F. ; Hernandez R. ; Theuer C. P. ; Barnhart T. E. ; Cai W. 
Engineering of Hollow
Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles for Remarkably
Enhanced Tumor Active Targeting Efficacy
. Sci.
Rep. 
2015 , 4 , 5080 10.1038/srep05080 .
Chen F. ; Nayak T. R. ; Goel S. ; Valdovinos H. F. ; Hong H. ; Theuer C. P. ; Barnhart T. E. ; Cai W. 
In
Vivo Tumor Vasculature Targeted PET/NIRF Imaging with TRC105(Fab)-Conjugated,
Dual-Labeled Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles
. Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2014 , 11 , 4007 –4014
. 10.1021/mp500306k .
Chen M. ; Fang X. ; Tang S. ; Zheng N. 
Polypyrrole
Nanoparticles for High-Performance In Vivo Near-Infrared
Photothermal Cancer Therapy
. Chem. Commun. (Cambridge,
U. K.) 
2012 , 48 , 8934 –8936
. 10.1039/c2cc34463g .
Wang J. ; Bai R. ; Yang R. ; Liu J. ; Tang J. ; Liu Y. ; Li J. ; Chai Z. ; Chen C. 
Size- and Surface Chemistry-Dependent
Pharmacokinetics and Tumor
Accumulation of Engineered Gold Nanoparticles after Intravenous Administration
. Metallomics 
2015 , 7 , 516 –524
. 10.1039/C4MT00340C .25671498 
Zolata H. ; Abbasi Davani F. ; Afarideh H. 
Synthesis, Characterization
and Theranostic Evaluation of Indium-111 Labeled Multifunctional Superparamagnetic
Iron Oxide Nanoparticles
. Nucl. Med. Biol. 
2015 , 42 , 164 –170
. 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2014.09.007 .25311750 
Yang M. ; Cheng K. ; Qi S. ; Liu H. ; Jiang Y. ; Jiang H. ; Li J. ; Chen K. ; Zhang H. ; Cheng Z. 
Affibody Modified and Radiolabeled
Gold-Iron Oxide Hetero-Nanostructures for Tumor PET, Optical and MR
Imaging
. Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 2796 –2806
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.01.014 .23343632 
Chen W. H. ; Yang C. X. ; Qiu W. X. ; Luo G. F. ; Jia H. Z. ; Lei Q. ; Wang X. Y. ; Liu G. ; Zhuo R. X. ; Zhang X. Z. 
Multifunctional Theranostic Nanoplatform
for Cancer Combined Therapy Based on Gold Nanorods
. Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2015 , 4 , 2247 –2259
. 10.1002/adhm.201500453 .
Elbialy N. S. ; Fathy M. M. ; Khalil W. M. 
Doxorubicin Loaded
Magnetic Gold Nanoparticles for In Vivo Targeted
Drug Delivery
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 
2015 , 490 , 190 –199
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.05.032 .
Robinson R. ; Gerlach W. ; Ghandehari H. 
Comparative
Effect of Gold Nanorods and Nanocages for Prostate Tumor Hyperthermia
. J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 220 , 245 –252
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.10.036 .
Poon W. ; Zhang X. ; Bekah D. ; Teodoro J. G. ; Nadeau J. L. 
Targeting B16 Tumors In Vivo with
Peptide-Conjugated Gold Nanoparticles
. Nanotechnology 
2015 , 26 , 285101 10.1088/0957-4484/26/28/285101 .26111959 
DeNardo S. J. ; DeNardo G. L. ; Natarajan A. ; Miers L. A. ; Foreman A. R. ; Gruettner C. ; Adamson G. N. ; Ivkov R. 
Thermal Dosimetry Predictive of Efficacy
of 111In-ChL6 Nanoparticle AMF-Induced Thermoablative Therapy for
Human Breast Cancer in Mice
. J. Nucl. Med. 
2007 , 48 , 437 –444
.17332622 
Quan Q. ; Xie J. ; Gao H. ; Yang M. ; Zhang F. ; Liu G. ; Lin X. ; Wang A. ; Eden H. S. ; Lee S. ; Zhang G. ; Chen X. 
HSA Coated
Iron Oxide Nanoparticles as Drug Delivery Vehicles for Cancer Therapy
. Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2011 , 8 , 1669 –1676
. 10.1021/mp200006f .
Behnam
Azad B. ; Banerjee S. R. ; Pullambhatla M. ; Lacerda S. ; Foss C. A. ; Wang Y. ; Ivkov R. ; Pomper M. G. 
Evaluation of a
PSMA-Targeted BNF Nanoparticle Construct
. Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 4432 –4442
. 10.1039/C4NR06069E .25675333 
Kanazaki K. ; Sano K. ; Makino A. ; Shimizu Y. ; Yamauchi F. ; Ogawa S. ; Ding N. ; Yano T. ; Temma T. ; Ono M. ; Saji H. 
Development
of Anti-HER2
Fragment Antibody Conjugated to Iron Oxide Nanoparticles for In Vivo HER2-Targeted Photoacoustic Tumor Imaging
. Nanomedicine (N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2015 , 11 , 2051 –2060
. 10.1016/j.nano.2015.07.007 .
Cheng K. ; Kothapalli S. R. ; Liu H. ; Koh A. L. ; Jokerst J. V. ; Jiang H. ; Yang M. ; Li J. ; Levi J. ; Wu J. C. ; Gambhir S. S. ; Cheng Z. 
Construction
and Validation of Nano Gold Tripods for Molecular Imaging of Living
Subjects
. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 3560 –3571
. 10.1021/ja412001e .24495038 
Black K. C. L. ; Wang Y. ; Luehmann H. P. ; Cai X. ; Xing W. ; Pang B. ; Zhao Y. ; Cutler C. S. ; Wang L. V. ; Liu Y. ; Xia Y. 
Radioactive 198Au-Doped Nanostructures with Different Shapes for In Vivo Analyses of Their Biodistribution, Tumor Uptake, and Intratumoral
Distribution
. ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 4385 –4394
. 10.1021/nn406258m .24766522 
Shah N. B. ; Vercellotti G. M. ; White J. G. ; Fegan A. ; Wagner C. R. ; Bischof J. C. 
Blood-Nanoparticle
Interactions and In Vivo Biodistribution: Impact
of Surface PEG and Ligand
Properties
. Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2012 , 9 , 2146 –2155
. 10.1021/mp200626j .
Kennedy L. C. ; Bear A. S. ; Young J. K. ; Lewinski N. A. ; Kim J. ; Foster A. E. ; Drezek R. A. 
T Cells
Enhance Gold Nanoparticle
Delivery to Tumors In Vivo
. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2011 , 6 , 283 10.1186/1556-276X-6-283 .21711861 
Chen Q. ; Wang H. ; Liu H. ; Wen S. ; Peng C. ; Shen M. ; Zhang G. ; Shi X. 
Multifunctional
Dendrimer-Entrapped Gold Nanoparticles Modified with RGD Peptide for
Targeted Computed Tomography/Magnetic Resonance Dual-Modal Imaging
of Tumors
. Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 , 3949 –3956
. 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b00135 .25768040 
Razzak R. ; Zhou J. ; Yang X. H. ; Pervez N. ; Bédard E. L. R. ; Moore R. B. ; Shaw A. ; Amanie J. ; Roa W. H. 
The Biodistribution and Pharmacokinetic
Evaluation
of Choline-Bound Gold Nanoparticles in a Human Prostate Tumor Xenograft
Model
. Clin. Investig. Med. 
2013 , 36 , 133 –142
. 10.25011/cim.v36i3.19724 .
Wang Y. ; Liu Y. ; Luehmann H. ; Xia X. ; Brown P. ; Jarreau C. ; Welch M. ; Xia Y. 
Evaluating
the Pharmacokinetics and In Vivo Cancer Targeting
Capability of Au Nanocages by Positron Emission Tomography Imaging
. ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 5880 –5888
. 10.1021/nn300464r .22690722 
Chakravarty R. ; Goel S. ; Hong H. ; Chen F. ; Valdovinos H. F. ; Hernandez R. ; Barnhart T. E. ; Cai W. 
Hollow Mesoporous
Silica Nanoparticles for Tumor Vasculature Targeting and PET Image-Guided
Drug Delivery
. Nanomedicine (London, U. K.) 
2015 , 10 , 1233 –1246
. 10.2217/nnm.14.226 .
Hu H. ; Huang P. ; Weiss O. J. ; Yan X. ; Yue X. ; Zhang M. G. ; Tang Y. ; Nie L. ; Ma Y. ; Niu G. ; Wu K. ; Chen X. 
PET and NIR Optical
Imaging Using
Self-Illuminating 64Cu-Doped Chelator-Free Gold Nanoclusters
. Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 9868 –9876
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.08.038 .25224367 
Sykes E. A. ; Chen J. ; Zheng G. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Investigating
the Impact of Nanoparticle Size on Active and Passive Tumor Targeting
Efficiency
. ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 5696 –5706
. 10.1021/nn500299p .24821383 
Dam D. H. M. ; Culver K. S. B. ; Kandela I. ; Lee R. C. ; Chandra K. ; Lee H. ; Mantis C. ; Ugolkov A. ; Mazar A. P. ; Odom T. W. 
Biodistribution
and In Vivo Toxicity of Aptamer-Loaded Gold Nanostars
. Nanomedicine (N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2015 , 11 , 671 –679
. 10.1016/j.nano.2014.10.005 .
Meyers J. D. ; Cheng Y. ; Broome A. M. ; Agnes R. S. ; Schluchter M. D. ; Margevicius S. ; Wang X. ; Kenney M. E. ; Burda C. ; Basilion J. P. 
Peptide-Targeted
Gold Nanoparticles
for Photodynamic Therapy of Brain Cancer
. Part.
Part. Syst. Charact. 
2015 , 32 , 448 –457
. 10.1002/ppsc.201400119 .25999665 
Goodrich G. P. ; Bao L. ; Gill-Sharp K. ; Sang K. L. ; Wang J. ; Payne J. D. 
Photothermal Therapy
in a Murine Colon Cancer Model Using Near-Infrared Absorbing Gold
Nanorods
. J. Biomed. Opt. 
2010 , 15 , 018001 10.1117/1.3290817 .20210487 
Zhong J. ; Wen L. ; Yang S. ; Xiang L. ; Chen Q. ; Xing D. 
Imaging-Guided
High-Efficient Photoacoustic
Tumor Therapy with Targeting Gold Nanorods
. Nanomedicine (N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2015 , 11 , 1499 –1509
. 10.1016/j.nano.2015.04.002 .
Perrault S. D. ; Walkey C. ; Jennings T. ; Fischer H. C. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Mediating Tumor Targeting Efficiency
of Nanoparticles
through Design
. Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 1909 –1915
. 10.1021/nl900031y .19344179 
Hong H. ; Yang K. ; Zhang Y. ; Engle J. W. ; Feng L. ; Yang Y. ; Nayak T. R. ; Goel S. ; Bean J. ; Theuer C. P. ; Barnhart T. E. ; Liu Z. ; Cai W. 
In Vivo Targeting and Imaging of Tumor
Vasculature
with Radiolabeled, Antibody-Conjugated Nanographene
. ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 2361 –2370
. 10.1021/nn204625e .22339280 
Park J. ; Park J. E. ; Hedrick V. E. ; Wood K. V. ; Bonham C. ; Lee W. ; Yeo Y. 
A Comparative In Vivo Study of Albumin-Coated
Paclitaxel Nanocrystals
and Abraxane
. Small 
2018 , 14 , 1703670 10.1002/smll.201703670 .
Dai L. ; Zhu W. ; Si C. ; Lei J. 
Nano-Ginseng”
for Enhanced Cytotoxicity AGAINST Cancer Cells
. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2018 , 19 , 627 10.3390/ijms19020627 .
Narmani A. ; Yavari K. ; Mohammadnejad J. 
Imaging, Biodistribution
and In Vitro Study of Smart 99mTc-PAMAM
G4 Dendrimer as Novel Nano-Complex
. Colloids
Surf., B 
2017 , 159 , 232 –240
. 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2017.07.089 .
Yang G. ; Wang X. ; Fu S. ; Tang R. ; Wang J. 
pH-Triggered
Chitosan Nanogels via an Ortho Ester-Based
Linkage for Efficient Chemotherapy
. Acta Biomater. 
2017 , 60 , 232 –243
. 10.1016/j.actbio.2017.05.003 .28479490 
Li C. ; Ge X. ; Wang L. 
Construction
and Comparison of Different
Nanocarriers for Co-Delivery of Cisplatin and Curcumin: A Synergistic
Combination Nanotherapy for Cervical Cancer
. Biomed. Pharmacother. 
2017 , 86 , 628 –636
. 10.1016/j.biopha.2016.12.042 .28027539 
Yang C. ; Li C. ; Zhang P. ; Wu W. ; Jiang X. 
Redox Responsive Hyaluronic Acid Nanogels for Treating RHAMM (CD168)
Over-Expressive Cancer, Both Primary and Metastatic Tumors
. Theranostics 
2017 , 7 , 1719 –1734
. 10.7150/thno.18340 .28529647 
Wang L. ; Li D. ; Hao Y. ; Niu M. ; Hu Y. ; Zhao H. ; Chang J. ; Zhang Z. ; Zhang Y. 
Gold Nanorod-Based
Poly(Lactic-Co-Glycolic Acid) with Manganese Dioxide
Core-Shell Structured Multifunctional Nanoplatform for Cancer Theranostic
Applications
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2017 , 12 , 3059 –3075
. 10.2147/IJN.S128844 .
Boissenot T. ; Bordat A. ; Larrat B. ; Varna M. ; Chacun H. ; Paci A. ; Poinsignon V. ; Fattal E. ; Tsapis N. 
Ultrasound-Induced Mild Hyperthermia
Improves the Anticancer Efficacy of Both Taxol® and
Paclitaxel-Loaded Nanocapsules
. J. Controlled
Release 
2017 , 264 , 219 –227
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.08.041 .
Wang J. ; Lee G. Y. ; Lu Q. ; Peng X. ; Wu J. ; Wu S. ; Kairdolf B. A. ; Nie S. ; Wang Y. ; Lane L. A. 
Quantitative
Examination of the Active Targeting Effect:
The Key Factor for Maximal Tumor Accumulation and Retention of Short-Circulated
Biopolymeric Nanocarriers
. Bioconjugate Chem. 
2017 , 28 , 1351 –1355
. 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.7b00138 .
Hoang B. ; Ernsting M. J. ; Tang W. H. S. ; Bteich J. ; Undzys E. ; Kiyota T. ; Li S. D. 
Cabazitaxel-Conjugated
Nanoparticles for Docetaxel-Resistant and Bone Metastatic Prostate
Cancer
. Cancer Lett. (N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2017 , 410 , 169 –179
. 10.1016/j.canlet.2017.09.029 .
Chen L. ; Chen B. ; Deng L. ; Gao B. ; Zhang Y. ; Wu C. ; Yu N. ; Zhou Q. ; Yao J. ; Chen J. 
An Optimized Two-Vial Formulation Lipid Nanoemulsion
of Paclitaxel for Targeted Delivery to Tumor
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 
2017 , 534 , 308 –315
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.10.005 .
Xu S. ; Zhu X. ; Huang W. ; Zhou Y. ; Yan D. 
Supramolecular
Cisplatin-Vorinostat Nanodrug for Overcoming Drug Resistance in Cancer
Synergistic Therapy
. J. Controlled Release 
2017 , 266 , 36 –46
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.09.007 .
Logie J. ; Ganesh A. N. ; Aman A. M. ; Al-Awar R. S. ; Shoichet M. S. 
Preclinical Evaluation of Taxane-Binding
Peptide-Modified
Polymeric Micelles Loaded with Docetaxel in an Orthotopic Breast Cancer
Mouse Model
. Biomaterials 
2017 , 123 , 39 –47
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2017.01.026 .28161682 
Gou J. ; Liang Y. ; Miao L. ; Guo W. ; Chao Y. ; He H. ; Zhang Y. ; Yang J. ; Wu C. ; Yin T. ; Wang Y. ; Tang X. 
Improved Tumor Tissue
Penetration
and Tumor Cell Uptake Achieved by Delayed Charge Reversal Nanoparticles
. Acta Biomater. 
2017 , 62 , 157 –166
. 10.1016/j.actbio.2017.08.025 .28827183 
Liu G. ; Tsai H.-I. ; Zeng X. ; Zuo Y. ; Tao W. ; Han J. ; Mei L. 
Phosphorylcholine-Based Stealthy
Nanocapsules Enabling
Tumor Microenvironment-Responsive Doxorubicin Release for Tumor Suppression
. Theranostics 
2017 , 7 , 1192 –1203
. 10.7150/thno.17881 .28435458 
Guo Y. ; Zhao Y. ; Wang T. ; Li R. ; Han M. ; Dong Z. ; Zhu C. ; Wang X. 
Hydroxycamptothecin
Nanorods Prepared by Fluorescently Labeled Oligoethylene Glycols (OEG)
Codendrimer: Antitumor Efficacy In Vitro and In Vivo
. Bioconjugate Chem. 
2017 , 28 , 390 –399
. 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.6b00536 .
Wu J. ; Tang C. ; Yin C. 
Co-Delivery
of Doxorubicin and Interleukin-2 via Chitosan Based
Nanoparticles for Enhanced Antitumor
Efficacy
. Acta Biomater. 
2017 , 47 , 81 –90
. 10.1016/j.actbio.2016.10.012 .27729232 
Kim J. E. ; Park Y. J. 
Paclitaxel-Loaded
Hyaluronan Solid
Nanoemulsions for Enhanced Treatment Efficacy in Ovarian Cancer
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2017 , 12 , 645 –658
. 10.2147/IJN.S124158 .
Deng H. ; Zhao X. ; Deng L. ; Liu J. ; Dong A. 
Reactive Oxygen Species Activated Nanoparticles with Tumor Acidity
Internalization for Precise Anticancer Therapy
. J. Controlled Release 
2017 , 255 , 142 –153
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.04.002 .
Ni S. ; Qiu L. ; Zhang G. ; Zhou H. ; Han Y. 
Lymph Cancer
Chemotherapy: Delivery of Doxorubicin-Gemcitabine Prodrug and Vincristine
by Nanostructured Lipid Carriers
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2017 , 12 , 1565 –1576
. 10.2147/IJN.S120685 .
Wang F. ; Wang Y. ; Ma Q. ; Cao Y. ; Yu B. 
Development and Characterization of Folic Acid-Conjugated
Chitosan
Nanoparticles for Targeted and Controlled Delivery of Gemcitabinein
Lung Cancer Therapeutics
. Artif. Cells, Nanomed.,
Biotechnol. 
2017 , 45 , 1530 –1538
. 10.1080/21691401.2016.1260578 .27894196 
Zhu B. ; Yu L. ; Yue Q. C. 
Co-Delivery of Vincristine and Quercetin
by Nanocarriers for Lymphoma Combination Chemotherapy
. Biomed. Pharmacother. 
2017 , 91 , 287 –294
. 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.02.112 .28463792 
Cui T. ; Zhang S. ; Sun H. 
Co-Delivery of Doxorubicin
and pH-Sensitive
Curcumin Prodrug by Transferrin-Targeted Nanoparticles for Breast
Cancer Treatment
. Oncol. Rep. 
2017 , 37 , 1253 –1260
. 10.3892/or.2017.5345 .28075466 
Yan G. ; Wang J. ; Qin J. ; Hu L. ; Zhang P. ; Wang X. ; Tang R. 
Well-Defined Poly(Ortho
Ester Amides)
for Potential Drug Carriers: Probing the Effect of Extra- and Intracellular
Drug Release on Chemotherapeutic Efficacy
. Macromol.
Biosci. 
2017 , 17 , 1600503 10.1002/mabi.201600503 .
Yan G. ; Wang J. ; Hu L. ; Wang X. ; Yang G. ; Fu S. ; Cheng X. ; Zhang P. ; Tang R. 
Stepwise Targeted Drug
Delivery to Liver Cancer Cells for Enhanced Therapeutic Efficacy by
Galactose-Grafted, Ultra-pH-Sensitive Micelles
. Acta Biomater. 
2017 , 51 , 363 –373
. 10.1016/j.actbio.2017.01.031 .28087485 
Roy A. ; Zhao Y. ; Yang Y. ; Szeitz A. ; Klassen T. ; Li S. D. 
Selective Targeting and Therapy of
Metastatic and Multidrug Resistant
Tumors Using a Long Circulating Podophyllotoxin Nanoparticle
. Biomaterials 
2017 , 137 , 11 –22
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2017.05.019 .28528299 
Lin L. ; Wang X. ; Li X. ; Yang Y. ; Yue X. ; Zhang Q. ; Dai Z. 
Modulating
Drug Release Rate from
Partially Silica-Coated Bicellar Nanodisc by Incorporating PEGylated
Phospholipid
. Bioconjugate Chem. 
2017 , 28 , 53 –63
. 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.6b00508 .
Cheng X. ; Wang X. ; Cao Z. ; Yao W. ; Wang J. ; Tang R. 
Folic Acid-Modified Soy Protein Nanoparticles
for Enhanced Targeting and Inhibitory
. Mater.
Sci. Eng., C 
2017 , 71 , 298 –307
. 10.1016/j.msec.2016.10.018 .
Hong J. ; Liu Y. ; Xiao Y. ; Yang X. ; Su W. ; Zhang M. ; Liao Y. ; Kuang H. ; Wang X. 
High Drug
Payload Curcumin Nanosuspensions Stabilized by MPEG-DSPE and SPC: In Vitro and In Vivo Evaluation
. Drug Delivery 
2017 , 24 , 109 –120
. 10.1080/10717544.2016.1233589 .28155567 
He R. ; Yin C. 
Trimethyl Chitosan Based Conjugates
for Oral and Intravenous
Delivery of Paclitaxel
. Acta Biomater. 
2017 , 53 , 355 –366
. 10.1016/j.actbio.2017.02.012 .28189812 
Zhang R. X. ; Cai P. ; Zhang T. ; Chen K. ; Li J. ; Cheng J. ; Pang K. S. ; Adissu H. A. ; Rauth A. M. ; Wu X. Y. 
Polymer-Lipid Hybrid
Nanoparticles Synchronize Pharmacokinetics of
Co-Encapsulated Doxorubicin-Mitomycin C and Enable Their Spatiotemporal
Co-Delivery and Local Bioavailability in Breast Tumor
. Nanomedicine (N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
2016 , 12 , 1279 –1290
. 10.1016/j.nano.2015.12.383 .
Svenson S. ; Case R. I. ; Cole R. O. ; Hwang J. ; Kabir S. R. ; Lazarus D. ; Lim Soo P. ; Ng P. S. ; Peters C. ; Shum P. ; Sweryda-Krawiec B. ; Tripathi S. ; van der Poll D. ; Eliasof S. 
Tumor Selective Silencing
Using an RNAi-Conjugated Polymeric Nanopharmaceutical
. Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2016 , 13 , 737 –747
. 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.5b00608 .
Shi J. ; Wang B. ; Chen Z. ; Liu W. ; Pan J. ; Hou L. ; Zhang Z. 
A Multi-Functional
Tumor Theranostic Nanoplatform for
MRI Guided Photothermal-Chemotherapy
. Pharm.
Res. 
2016 , 33 , 1472 –1485
. 10.1007/s11095-016-1891-7 .26984128 
Yang X. ; Liu Y. ; Zhao Y. ; Han M. ; Guo Y. ; Kuang H. ; Wang X. 
A Stabilizer-Free and Organic Solvent-Free
Method to Prepare 10-Hydroxycamptothecin Nanocrystals: In
Vitro and In Vivo Evaluation
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2016 , 11 , 2979 –2994
. 10.2147/IJN.S102726 .
Mei L. ; Liu Y. ; Zhang H. J. ; Zhang Z. ; Gao H. ; He Q. 
Antitumor and Antimetastasis Activities of Heparin-Based Micelle
Served as Both Carrier and Drug
. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 9577 –9589
. 10.1021/acsami.5b12347 .27058058 
Jiang Y. ; Yang N. ; Zhang H. ; Sun B. ; Hou C. ; Ji C. ; Zheng J. ; Liu Y. ; Zuo P. 
Enhanced In
Vivo Antitumor Efficacy of Dual-Functional Peptide-Modified
Docetaxel Nanoparticles through Tumor Targeting and Hsp90 Inhibition
. J. Controlled Release 
2016 , 221 , 26 –36
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.11.029 .
Zhang L. ; Li G. ; Gao M. ; Liu X. ; Ji B. ; Hua R. ; Zhou Y. ; Yang Y. 
RGD-Peptide Conjugated
Inulin-Ibuprofen Nanoparticles for Targeted Delivery of Epirubicin
. Colloids Surf., B 
2016 , 144 , 81 –89
. 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2016.03.077 .
Ghanghoria R. ; Tekade R. K. ; Mishra A. K. ; Chuttani K. ; Jain N. K. 
Luteinizing Hormone-Releasing Hormone
Peptide Tethered
Nanoparticulate System for Enhanced Antitumoral Efficacy of Paclitaxel
. Nanomedicine (London, U. K.) 
2016 , 11 , 797 –816
. 10.2217/nnm.16.19 .
Tomalova B. ; Sirova M. ; Rossmann P. ; Pola R. ; Strohalm J. ; Chytil P. ; Cerny V. ; Tomala J. ; Kabesova M. ; Rihova B. ; Ulbrich K. ; Etrych T. ; Kovar M. 
The Structure-Dependent Toxicity,
Pharmacokinetics and Anti-Tumour
Activity of HPMA Copolymer Conjugates in the Treatment of Solid Tumours
and Leukaemia
. J. Controlled Release 
2016 , 223 , 1 –10
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.12.023 .
Yin T. ; Cai H. ; Liu J. ; Cui B. ; Wang L. ; Yin L. ; Zhou J. ; Huo M. 
Biological
Evaluation of PEG Modified
Nanosuspensions Based on Human Serum Albumin for Tumor Targeted Delivery
of Paclitaxel
. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 
2016 , 83 , 79 –87
. 10.1016/j.ejps.2015.12.019 .26699227 
Wang M. ; Li J. ; Li X. ; Mu H. ; Zhang X. ; Shi Y. ; Chu Y. ; Wang A. ; Wu Z. ; Sun K. 
Magnetically and pH Dual Responsive Dendrosomes for
Tumor Accumulation Enhanced Folate-Targeted Hybrid Drug Delivery
. J. Controlled Release 
2016 , 232 , 161 –174
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.04.015 .
Du L. ; Zhang B. ; Lei Y. ; Wang S. ; Jin Y. 
Long-Circulating
and Liver-Targeted Nanoassemblies of Cyclic Phosphoryl N-Dodecanoyl Gemcitabine for the Treatment of Hepatocellular Carcinoma
. Biomed. Pharmacother. 
2016 , 79 , 208 –214
. 10.1016/j.biopha.2016.02.024 .27044830 
Li W. ; Yi X. ; Liu X. ; Zhang Z. ; Fu Y. ; Gong T. 
Hyaluronic Acid Ion-Pairing Nanoparticles for Targeted
Tumor Therapy
. J. Controlled Release 
2016 , 225 , 170 –182
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.01.049 .
Qu Q. ; Wang Y. ; Zhang L. ; Zhang X. ; Zhou S. 
A Nanoplatform
with Precise Control over Release of Cargo for Enhanced Cancer Therapy
. Small 
2016 , 12 , 1378 –1390
. 10.1002/smll.201503292 .26763197 
Liu H. ; Gao M. ; Xu H. ; Guan X. ; Lv L. ; Deng S. ; Zhang C. ; Tian Y. 
A Promising Emodin-Loaded
Poly (Lactic-Co-Glycolic Acid)-d-α-Tocopheryl Polyethylene Glycol 1000 Succinate Nanoparticles
for Liver Cancer Therapy
. Pharm. Res. 
2016 , 33 , 217 –236
. 10.1007/s11095-015-1781-4 .26334502 
Qu N. ; Lee R. J. ; Sun Y. ; Cai G. ; Wang J. ; Wang M. ; Lu J. ; Meng Q. ; Teng L. ; Wang D. ; Teng L. 
Cabazitaxel-Loaded
Human Serum Albumin
Nanoparticles as a Therapeutic Agent against Prostate Cancer
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2016 , 11 , 3451 –3459
. 10.2147/IJN.S105420 .
Tang Z. ; Zhang L. ; Wang Y. ; Li D. ; Zhong Z. ; Zhou S. 
Redox-Responsive Star-Shaped Magnetic
Micelles with Active-Targeted and Magnetic-Guided Functions for Cancer
Therapy
. Acta Biomater. 
2016 , 42 , 232 –246
. 10.1016/j.actbio.2016.06.038 .27373437 
Chen Y. ; Xia R. ; Huang Y. ; Zhao W. ; Li J. ; Zhang X. ; Wang P. ; Venkataramanan R. ; Fan J. ; Xie W. ; Ma X. ; Lu B. ; Li S. 
An Immunostimulatory
Dual-Functional Nanocarrier That Improves Cancer Immunochemotherapy
. Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 13443 10.1038/ncomms13443 .27819653 
Nascimento A. V. ; Gattacceca F. ; Singh A. ; Bousbaa H. ; Ferreira D. ; Sarmento B. ; Amiji M. M. 
Biodistribution
and Pharmacokinetics of Mad2 siRNA-Loaded EGFR-Targeted Chitosan Nanoparticles
in Cisplatin Sensitive and Resistant Lung Cancer Models
. Nanomedicine (London, U. K.) 
2016 , 11 , 767 –781
. 10.2217/nnm.16.14 .
Li F. ; Zheng C. ; Xin J. ; Chen F. ; Ling H. ; Sun L. ; Webster T. J. ; Ming X. ; Liu J. 
Enhanced Tumor Delivery
and Antitumor Response of Doxorubicin-Loaded Albumin Nanoparticles
Formulated Based on a Schiff Base
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2016 , 11 , 3875 –3890
. 10.2147/IJN.S108689 .
He C. ; Poon C. ; Chan C. ; Yamada S. D. ; Lin W. 
Nanoscale
Coordination Polymers Codeliver Chemotherapeutics and Sirnas to Eradicate
Tumors of Cisplatin-Resistant Ovarian Cancer
. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 6010 –6019
. 10.1021/jacs.6b02486 .27088560 
Zhang W. ; Sun J. ; Fang W. ; Ai X. ; Cai C. ; Tang Y. ; Su X. ; Feng Z. ; Liu Y. ; Tao M. ; Yan X. ; Chen G. ; He Z. 
Nanomicelles Based
on X-Shaped Four-Armed Peglyated Distearylglycerol as Long Circulating
System for Doxorubicin Delivery
. Eur. J. Pharm.
Sci. 
2015 , 66 , 96 –106
. 10.1016/j.ejps.2014.10.007 .25446512 
Wei H. ; Xu L. ; Sun Y. ; Li G. ; Cui Z. ; Yan G. ; Chen Q. ; Yin H. ; Ma C. 
Preliminary Pharmacokinetics
of PEGylated Oxaliplatin Polylactic Acid Nanoparticles in Rabbits
and Tumor-Bearing Mice
. Artif. Cells, Nanomed.,
Biotechnol. 
2015 , 43 , 258 –262
. 10.3109/21691401.2014.883402 .24564351 
Zhang X. ; Zhang T. ; Ye Y. ; Chen H. ; Sun H. ; Zhou X. ; Ma Z. ; Wu B. 
Phospholipid-Stabilized
Mesoporous Carbon Nanospheres as Versatile Carriers for Systemic Delivery
of Amphiphobic SNX-2112 (a Hsp90 Inhibitor) with Enhanced Antitumor
Effect
. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 
2015 , 94 , 30 –41
. 10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.04.023 .25936860 
Wan X. ; Zheng X. ; Pang X. ; Zhang Z. ; Jing T. ; Xu W. ; Zhang Q. 
The Potential
Use of Lapatinib-Loaded Human Serum Albumin
Nanoparticles in the Treatment of Triple-Negative Breast Cancer
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 
2015 , 484 , 16 –28
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.02.037 .
Xu P. ; Meng Q. ; Sun H. ; Yin Q. ; Yu H. ; Zhang Z. ; Cao M. ; Zhang Y. ; Li Y. 
Shrapnel Nanoparticles
Loading Docetaxel Inhibit Metastasis and Growth of Breast Cancer
. Biomaterials 
2015 , 64 , 10 –20
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.06.017 .26106797 
Yang L. ; Jiang J. ; Hong J. ; Di J. ; Liao Y. ; Kuang H. ; Wang X. 
High Drug Payload 10-Hydroxycamptothecin
Nanosuspensions Stabilized by Cholesterol-PEG: In Vitro and In Vivo Investigation
. J. Biomed. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 11 , 711 –721
. 10.1166/jbn.2015.2050 .26310077 
Starmans L. W. E. ; Hummelink M. A. P. M. ; Rossin R. ; Kneepkens E. C. M. ; Lamerichs R. ; Donato K. ; Nicolay K. ; Grüll H. 
89Zr- and Fe-Labeled Polymeric Micelles for Dual Modality PET and T1-Weighted MR Imaging
. Adv. Healthcare
Mater. 
2015 , 4 , 2137 –2145
. 10.1002/adhm.201500414 .
Xiong H. ; Zhou D. ; Qi Y. ; Zhang Z. ; Xie Z. ; Chen X. ; Jing X. ; Meng F. ; Huang Y. 
Doxorubicin-Loaded
Carborane-Conjugated Polymeric Nanoparticles as Delivery System for
Combination Cancer Therapy
. Biomacromolecules 
2015 , 16 , 3980 –3988
. 10.1021/acs.biomac.5b01311 .26564472 
Wang J. ; Mao W. ; Lock L. L. ; Tang J. ; Sui M. ; Sun W. ; Cui H. ; Xu D. ; Shen Y. 
The Role of
Micelle Size in Tumor Accumulation, Penetration, and Treatment
. ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 7195 –7206
. 10.1021/acsnano.5b02017 .26149286 
Nikpoor A. R. ; Tavakkol-Afshari J. ; Gholizadeh Z. ; Sadri K. ; Babaei M. H. ; Chamani J. ; Badiee A. ; Jalali S. A. ; Jaafari M. R. 
Nanoliposome-Mediated Targeting of
Antibodies to Tumors: IVIG Antibodies as a Model
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 
2015 , 495 , 162 –170
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.08.048 .
Poon C. ; He C. ; Liu D. ; Lu K. ; Lin W. 
Self-Assembled Nanoscale Coordination Polymers Carrying
Oxaliplatin
and Gemcitabine for Synergistic Combination Therapy of Pancreatic
Cancer
. J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 201 , 90 –99
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.01.026 .
Yao X. ; Xie C. ; Chen W. ; Yang C. ; Wu W. ; Jiang X. 
Platinum-Incorporating
Poly(N-Vinylpyrrolidone)-Poly(Aspartic
Acid) Pseudoblock Copolymer Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery
. Biomacromolecules 
2015 , 16 , 2059 –2071
. 10.1021/acs.biomac.5b00479 .26023705 
Oh Y. ; Swierczewska M. ; Kim T. H. ; Lim S. M. ; Eom H. N. ; Park J. H. ; Na D. H. ; Kim K. ; Lee K. C. ; Pomper M. G. ; Lee S. 
Delivery of Tumor-Homing
TRAIL Sensitizer
with Long-Acting TRAIL as a Therapy for TRAIL-Resistant Tumors
. J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 220 , 671 –681
. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.09.014 .
Owens D. E. ; Peppas N. A. 
Opsonization, Biodistribution, and
Pharmacokinetics of Polymeric Nanoparticles
. Int. J. Pharm. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 
2006 , 307 , 93 –102
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2005.10.010 .
Liang X. ; Wang H. ; Grice J. E. ; Li L. ; Liu X. ; Xu Z. P. ; Roberts M. S. 
Physiologically
Based Pharmacokinetic
Model for Long-Circulating Inorganic Nanoparticles
. Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 , 939 –945
. 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b03854 .26771694 
Gustafson H. H. ; Holt-Casper D. ; Grainger D. W. ; Ghandehari H. 
Nanoparticle
Uptake: The Phagocyte Problem
. Nano Today 
2015 , 10 , 487 –510
. 10.1016/j.nantod.2015.06.006 .26640510 
Brown R. P. ; Delp M. D. ; Lindstedt S. L. ; Rhomberg L. R. ; Beliles R. P. 
Physiological Parameter Values for
Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Models
. Toxicol. Ind. Health 
1997 , 13 , 407 –484
. 10.1177/074823379701300401 .9249929 
Davies B. ; Morris T. 
Physiological Parameters in Laboratory
Animals and Humans
. Pharm. Res. 
1993 , 10 , 1093 –1095
. 10.1023/A:1018943613122 .8378254 
International Programme on Chemical Safety Harmonization
Project
Document No. 9. Characterization and Application of Physiologically
Based Pharmacokinetic Models in Risk Assessment ; WHO : Geneva, Switzerland , 2010 . https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/44495/9789241500906_eng.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y (accessed 2020 /01/07).

