
==== Front
ACS Nano
ACS Nano
nn
ancac3
ACS Nano
1936-0851 1936-086X American
Chemical Society 

10.1021/acsnano.9b09761
Article
Probing
Mobile Charge Carriers in Semiconducting Carbon
Nanotube Networks by Charge Modulation Spectroscopy
Zorn Nicolas
F. †‡ Scuratti Francesca § Berger Felix J. †‡ Perinot Andrea § Heimfarth Daniel †‡ Caironi Mario *§ Zaumseil Jana *†‡ † Institute
for Physical Chemistry, Universität
Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
‡ Centre
for Advanced Materials, Universität
Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
§ Center
for Nano Science and Technology @PoliMi, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 20133 Milano, Italy
* E-mail: zaumseil@uni-heidelberg.de.* E-mail: Mario.Caironi@iit.it.
30 01 2020 
25 02 2020 
14 2 2412 2423
12 12 2019 30 01 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Solution-processed
networks of semiconducting, single-walled carbon
nanotubes (SWCNTs) have attracted considerable attention as materials
for next-generation electronic devices and circuits. However, the
impact of the SWCNT network composition on charge transport on a microscopic
level remains an open and complex question. Here, we use charge-modulated
absorption and photoluminescence spectroscopy to probe exclusively
the mobile charge carriers in monochiral (6,5) and mixed SWCNT network
field-effect transistors. Ground-state bleaching and charge-induced
trion absorption features as well as exciton quenching are observed
depending on applied voltage and modulation frequency. Through correlation
of the modulated mobile carrier density and the optical response of
the nanotubes, we find that charge transport in mixed SWCNT networks
depends strongly on the diameter and thus bandgap of the individual
species. Mobile charges are preferentially transported by small bandgap
SWCNTs especially at low gate voltages, whereas large bandgap species
only start to participate at higher carrier concentrations. Our results
demonstrate the excellent suitability of modulation spectroscopy to
investigate charge transport in nanotube network transistors and highlight
the importance of SWCNT network composition for their performance.

single-walled carbon
nanotubesnetworkscharge
transportcharge modulation spectroscopyphotoluminescencetriondocument-id-old-9nn9b09761document-id-new-14nn9b09761ccc-price
==== Body
Semiconducting
single-walled
carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) have emerged as a promising material for
future electronic applications, as they combine high charge carrier
mobilities with mechanical flexibility and solution processability.1,2 Stimulated by the major progress in sorting techniques such as gel
chromatography,3,4 density gradient ultracentrifugation,5 aqueous two-phase separation,6 and polymer-wrapping,7−9 the reproducible fabrication of
high-performance field-effect transistors (FETs) and circuits based
on networks of purely semiconducting SWCNTs has become feasible.10−16 Nonetheless, charge transport in nanotube networks is not yet fully
understood especially regarding mixed networks of nanotube species
with varying composition.17,18 A detailed understanding
of the fundamental transport parameters is necessary to further optimize
effective carrier mobilities for competitive network devices at a
minimum cost for purification.

Charge transport in semiconductors
is commonly studied through
temperature-dependent measurements of conductivities and carrier mobilities.17,19−21 However, these techniques cannot distinguish between
different SWCNT species and thus are not suitable to examine the chirality-dependent
contributions to the macroscopic device performance. Given the high
sensitivity of SWCNT absorption and emission features to charge carriers,
which was shown in several studies,22−25 electro-optical methods could
provide additional and even chirality-specific insights. For example,
based on the analysis of the E11 absorption band change
of (6,5) SWCNTs upon electrochemical doping, Eckstein et al. suggested that charges become localized through interaction with
counterions.26 Recently, Ferguson et al. investigated redox-doped (6,5) SWCNT films using
a combination of quasi-optical microwave and electrical conductivity
measurements to quantify the ratio between localized and delocalized
carriers.27 Only few reports, however,
have focused on the chirality and diameter dependence of charge accumulation
and transport in networks consisting of different SWCNT species. For
nanotube networks composed of five different semiconducting species,
static photoluminescence (PL) quenching experiments indicated the
preferential accumulation of charge carriers on small bandgap SWCNTs.28 By using gate voltage-dependent electroluminescence
(EL), Rother et al. investigated preferential current
pathways in mixed semiconducting SWCNT networks.29 The emission from SWCNTs with small bandgaps was found
to dominate the EL spectra even though those nanotubes represented
a minority species within the network. These experimental results
were in good agreement with the carrier density-dependent distribution
of current among nanotubes obtained by numerical simulations based
on a random resistor network.18 However,
the mentioned methods rely on changes in the absorption or emission
properties that are static and could be the result of either mobile
or trapped charges. Hence, their correlation with actual charge transport
in a device is ambiguous. A spectroscopic technique is required that
only responds to mobile charge carriers and thus directly provides
their optical signatures and distribution in a mixed network of nanotubes,
and that can be applied directly to conventional thin film devices.

A highly sensitive method to study charge transport in organic
semiconductors is charge modulation spectroscopy (CMS). CMS is a lock-in-based
technique that records the differential change in absorption of a
semiconducting layer upon modulation of the gate voltage in an operating
FET.30,31 Since trapped charges cannot follow the
bias modulation, the detected spectral features are directly associated
with only mobile carriers. The technique was applied successfully
to polymer32−38 and small molecule39,40 semiconductors and enabled the
identification of different polaron absorption features associated
with charge localization and specific molecular orientations within
the channel.41,42 For ambipolar semiconductors
both types of carriers (i.e., electrons
and holes) can be studied by changing the polarity of the applied
gate voltage, as shown for polyselenophene and donor–acceptor
copolymer FETs.36,43 Through the combination of CMS
with a confocal microscopy setup, Chin et al. were
even able to visualize the ambipolar transport regime and map the
distribution of holes and electrons across the FET channel.36 In a recent study, Pace et al. could demonstrate that electrons and holes selectively bleach different
absorption transitions in a donor–acceptor copolymer film,
thus indicating different interactions and transport properties.44 Despite these advances in understanding the
transport properties of organic semiconductors enabled by CMS, several
aspects of the technique have not been explored yet. For example,
although the gate voltage modulation is at the heart of CMS, so far
only very few reports have put any emphasis on the impact of the applied
gate bias or its modulation frequency (typically 37 Hz) on the detected
signal and the possible insights gained from that.30,31,43 Most importantly, CMS has not yet been applied
to SWCNT networks despite their almost ideal optical properties for
this technique, such as strong and narrow absorption and emission
features and excellent photostability.

Here, we demonstrate
charge modulation absorption and PL spectra
of SWCNT FETs and thus probe hole and electron transport in random
semiconducting nanotube networks with defined compositions. The dense
SWCNT networks and their excellent performance in field-effect transistors
resulted in charge-modulated spectra with high signal-to-noise ratios.
The achieved sensitivity allowed for frequency-dependent measurements
up to modulation frequencies of 100 kHz, only restricted by the detection
limit of the lock-in amplifier. Evaluation of the voltage dependence
of the modulated E11 absorption and emission features provided
clear evidence that at low gate voltages, mobile charge carriers are
preferentially accumulated on and transported through SWCNTs with
the smallest bandgaps (largest diameters), even if these only represent
a small proportion of the network. We find that the distribution of
mobile carriers within the network changes with applied gate voltage
and carrier density, thus creating a semiconducting channel that is
complex and dynamic in its effective composition.

Results and Discussion
To study the charge transport
in SWCNT networks, we employed selective
polymer-wrapping to prepare two different dispersions containing only
semiconducting nanotube species. A nearly monochiral dispersion of
(6,5) SWCNTs (bandgap 1.27 eV, diameter 0.76 nm) in toluene was obtained
from CoMoCAT raw material with poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-alt-co-(6,6′-(2,2′-bipyridine))] (PFO-BPy)
as a wrapping polymer via shear force mixing as described
previously.45 The absorbance spectrum (Figure 1a) shows the characteristic
E11 transition of (6,5) SWCNTs at 998 nm and the phonon
sideband (PSB) at 859 nm. A dispersion of HiPco nanotubes with poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene)
(PFO) in toluene yielded a mixture of five chiralities, namely (7,5),
(7,6), (8,6), (8,7), and (9,7) SWCNTs with bandgaps from 1.21 to 0.94
eV, as reported by Nish et al.9 Further details on the sample preparation can be found
in the Methods section. Five distinct peaks
corresponding to the E11 absorptions are visible in the
near-IR (nIR) absorbance spectrum (Figure 1b). The abundance of individual nanotube
species was determined from fits of the E11 absorption
peaks and spectrally integrated molar absorptivities46 (see Supporting Information, Table S1). Raman spectroscopy and PL excitation–emission maps
confirmed the absence of significant amounts of other nanotube species
(see Supporting Information, Figures S1 and S2). Figure 1c shows
the linear density of states (DOS) of the different species weighted
by their respective abundance in the dispersion, indicating the differences
between the conduction band energy levels.

Figure 1 (a) Absorbance spectrum
of a monochiral (6,5) SWCNT dispersion
obtained from CoMoCAT raw material via polymer-wrapping
with PFO-BPy. (b) Absorbance spectrum of a mixed HiPco/PFO dispersion.
(c) DOS of the five SWCNT chiralities present in the HiPco/PFO dispersion
weighted by their abundance. Only the first subbands in the conduction
band are shown. (d) Schematic structure of SWCNT FETs studied in this
work. (e) Typical ambipolar transfer characteristics (source/drain
current, solid lines; gate leakage, dashed lines) in the linear regime
(Vd = −0.1 V)
of FETs based on random networks of monochiral (6,5) SWCNTs (blue)
and mixed SWCNTs (red), respectively.

Both dispersions were used to fabricate bottom-contact, top-gate
FETs (schematic device layout shown in Figure 1d). Random SWCNT networks were deposited
on photolithographically patterned, interdigitated gold source/drain
electrodes with 20 μm channel length. Atomic force microscopy
images showed dense networks with well-resolved individual nanotubes,
suggesting only negligible residual amounts of unbound polymer (see Supporting Information, Figure S3). A hybrid
dielectric, consisting of ∼11 nm poly(methyl methacrylate)
(PMMA) and a ∼61 nm layer of hafnium oxide (HfOx) on top, was chosen to achieve low gate leakage
currents and to permit low-voltage operation.47 To complete the devices, a semitransparent 20 nm silver gate electrode
was thermally evaporated onto the dielectric through a shadow mask.

All devices exhibited ambipolar charge transport with low leakage
currents and high on/off ratios on the order of 105–106 as shown in the transfer characteristics at low source-drain
bias (Vd = −0.1
V, Figure 1e) and the
respective output curves (see Supporting Information, Figure S4). On-currents for the mixed network FETs were lower
than for devices based on monochiral (6,5) SWCNT networks. This difference
was also reflected in the linear carrier mobilities. For monochiral
(6,5) SWCNT networks, average mobilities of 8.2 cm2 V–1 s–1 for electrons and 9.9 cm2 V–1 s–1 for holes were
obtained. Mixed networks exhibited carrier mobilities of 1.9 cm2 V–1 s–1 for electrons
and 2.3 cm2 V–1 s–1 for holes. In agreement with recent results, the different mobilities
might be attributed to the variation of bandgaps in the mixed network
and the associated energy barriers for charge hopping between different
SWCNTs.19,29 Small bandgap nanotubes could potentially
act as traps, thus limiting the device performance. The shape of the
output curves (Supporting Information, Figure S4) also indicates a higher injection barrier for electrons
than holes and thus contact resistance.19 However, all devices were suitable for optical characterization
in both electron and hole accumulation regimes.

Monochiral (6,5) SWCNT
Networks
As a model system for
the application of charge modulation spectroscopy to investigate nanotube
network FETs, we chose monochiral (6,5) SWCNTs that are available
in large quantities and high quality.45 All CMS measurements were carried out in transmission as depicted
in Figure S5 of the Supporting Information. Understanding the spectral features that correspond to mobile charge
carriers in a monochiral SWCNT layer and their gate voltage dependence
is the prerequisite for the analysis of mobile carriers in more complex
mixed networks. Figure 2a shows the CMS spectra of a (6,5) SWCNT network transistor acquired
in hole accumulation for different offset (gate) voltages Vos with a peak-to-peak modulation Vpp of 0.2 V and a modulation
frequency of 363 Hz. The complete data set is shown in Figure S6a,b of the Supporting Information. Notably,
the detected differential change in transmission (ΔT/T = 10–4–10–3) was 3–4 orders of magnitude below the static transmission,
which underlines the high sensitivity of this method. Two main bleaching
signals (ΔT/T > 0) were
observed
at ∼1000 nm and ∼870 nm, which match the ground-state
absorptions of the E11 exciton and the PSB, respectively.48 At low voltages, a charge-induced absorption
feature (ΔT/T < 0) emerged
at ∼1165 nm that can be attributed to absorption into a trion
state (charged exciton) in good agreement with previously reported
values.23,24 The same features were observed for CMS
spectra in electron accumulation (Figure 2b, full data set shown in the Supporting Information, Figure S6c,d), although
higher voltages had to be applied to achieve the same bleaching effect.
This offset can be attributed to the higher threshold voltage for
electron injection probably due to contact resistance, as indicated
by the transfer and output characteristics. The large absolute CMS
signal and the high signal-to-noise ratio highlight the outstanding
suitability of this modulation technique for the investigation of
carbon nanotube networks due to their high oscillator strength, photostability,
and sensitivity toward doping22 as well
as the optimized device structure with a thin but robust high-capacitance
gate dielectric that prevents optical interference issues.47

Figure 2 Vos-dependent
CMS
spectra (Vpp = 0.2 V)
of (6,5) SWCNTs (a) in hole accumulation and (b) in electron accumulation.
(c) Extracted CMS signals of (6,5) SWCNTs (hole accumulation) at the
wavelengths of E11 bleaching and trion absorption (left
axis) and E11 peak positions (right axis). Lines are guides
to the eye.

The strong and reproducible CMS
signal for both hole and electron
accumulation in (6,5) SWCNT networks enabled a detailed investigation
of the impact of the total carrier density and modulation frequency
on the observed spectral features, which has been a challenging task
for organic semiconductors. The variation of the offset voltage indeed
led to distinct changes in the CMS spectra. All bleaching and charge-induced
absorption signals initially increased with hole accumulation until
they reached their maximum values at Vos ≈ −1.0 V. This gate voltage corresponds
to a carrier density of about 5 × 1011 cm–2. Further increasing the negative offset voltage led to a decrease
in intensity of these signals. Eventually, a change from negative
to positive ΔT/T at the wavelength
of the trion absorption was observed. CMS spectra for electron accumulation
revealed the same trends (Figure 2b). Notably, the ratio between E11 and PSB
bleaching signals remained constant throughout all spectra, while
the E11 signal exhibited a blueshift with increasing Vos, that is, a decrease in
exciton binding energy.49Figure 2c shows the E11 peak
positions and the extracted CMS signals at the wavelengths of the
E11 and trion transitions depending on offset voltage.
It should be emphasized again that CMS is a differential method and
the spectra essentially represent the difference in transmission upon
modulation of the mobile carrier density. The observed voltage dependence
of the E11 signal can be rationalized by taking the device
capacitance (increasing with Vos) and the oscillator strength (decreasing with Vos) into account. Once the threshold
voltage for mobile carrier injection is reached, the steep increase
in capacitance with Vos leads to a higher modulated charge density and consequently a stronger
CMS signal, as shown by the first three data points in Figure 2c. A representative capacitance–voltage
(C–V) sweep for a (6,5) SWCNT
network is shown in the Supporting Information, Figure S7a. With increasing doping level, however, the oscillator
strength of the E11 transition decreases due to static
exciton bleaching,22,50 whereas the capacitance essentially
remains constant once the semiconductor layer is fully charged. Eckstein et al. recently quantified the dependence of the E11 exciton bleaching on the doping level for electrochemically and
chemically doped (6,5) SWCNTs.50 When plotted
linearly, their data show a steep increase in exciton bleach for low
doping levels, which flattens for high charge densities. The derivative
of the exciton bleach, which is the quantity to compare due to the
differential nature of modulation spectroscopy, steadily decreases
with increasing carrier densities. This decrease is reflected in the
attenuation of the E11 bleaching signal intensity in the
CMS spectra (electrostatic doping) at higher offset voltages. The
data corroborate that at high Vos, the E11 absorption is bleached to such an extent
that the differential change in transmission due to gate modulation
becomes less and less significant.

The charge-induced absorption
feature corresponding to the trion
decreases in intensity and even changes sign from negative to positive
ΔT/T with increasing offset
voltage. Previous studies on static voltage-dependent absorbance of
SWCNTs reported the so-called heavily doped regime that is characterized
by a broad, featureless absorption band (denoted as “H-band”) across the visible and nIR spectral regions
between approximately 630 and 1170 nm.22,23 The trion
optical density reaches a maximum as a function of doping and subsequently
decreases until only a broad H-band remains.22,23,26,27 This decrease is reflected in a positive ΔT/T signal (i.e., trion bleaching) in the CMS spectra and thus explains the observed
evolution of the trion signature.

We compared our CMS spectra
to the absorbance spectra of a (6,5)
SWCNT film in an electrochromic device at different voltages, as reported
by Berger et al.23 (see Supporting Information, Figure S8). The subtracted
static spectra clearly have a very similar shape to the CMS spectra
and reveal identical trends for an increasing total charge density,
that is, decrease of the E11 bleaching signal and change
from a charge-induced absorption to a bleaching signal for the trion
absorption. Furthermore, the comparison to the spectroelectrochemical
data corroborates that the small, negative dips next to the E11 bleaching signal, which are also visible in CMS, are due
to the spectral evolution upon doping of the SWCNT film and not due
to electroabsorption. Note that in order to ensure the correct assignment
of the observed transitions and to prevent misinterpretation of any
features, additional cross-checks (second harmonic detection and measurements
under different angles of the incident light beam) were performed.
A detailed discussion and second harmonic spectra can be found in
the Supporting Information, Figure S9.

Furthermore, we performed CMS measurements in the visible spectral
range and observed the charge-induced bleaching of the E22 transition at ∼580 nm. The simultaneous modulation of the
two absorption features corroborates a common ground state and the
excitonic nature of the excited state of SWCNTs. However, the E22/E11 ratio of the CMS signals is considerably
lower than that of the static absorbance spectrum. This discrepancy
in the decrease of oscillator strengths with voltage has been previously
reported for electrochemically doped SWCNT films.22,23 A spectrum comprising both the visible and the nIR regions is shown
in the Supporting Information, Figure S10. The absence of any spectral features that could be ascribed to
polymer polaron bands corroborates that the wrapping polymer does
not participate in charge transport in networks of polymer-sorted
SWCNTs.

So far, all CMS spectra were obtained by modulating
the gate voltage
with a frequency of 363 Hz. In order to study the temporal response
of the mobile charge carriers, frequency-dependent measurements were
performed on (6,5) SWCNT network transistors. Figure 3a shows a dependence on the modulation frequency
in the CMS spectra obtained at moderate hole accumulation (Vos = −1.5 V). The CMS
signal decreased by approximately a factor of 2 upon increase of the
frequency by an order of magnitude (3035 Hz) and by a factor of 10
when modulating at 36295 Hz. The normalized spectra, however, are
essentially identical (see Supporting Information, Figure S11a), corroborating that the signals have a common
physical origin, that is, they are solely charge-induced. CMS signals
with different physical origins are expected to respond to the voltage
modulation on different time scales.30 This
notion was used in previous CMS experiments on oligothiophenes and
poly(3-hexylthiophene) to distinguish between polarons and bipolarons.51,52 For high carrier concentrations (Vos = −3.5 V, Figure 3b), the CMS spectra of the (6,5) SWCNT FETs
showed almost no dependence on the modulation frequency up to the
detection limit of the lock-in amplifier (100 kHz). The normalized
spectra in Supporting Information, Figure S11b are identical.

Figure 3 Frequency-dependent CMS spectra of (6,5) SWCNTs (a) at
moderate
hole doping level (Vos = −1.5 V, Vpp = 0.2 V) and (b) in strong hole accumulation (Vos = −3.5 V, Vpp = 0.2 V). (c) Frequency-dependent
magnitude of the device admittance of a (6,5) SWCNT FET for different
gate voltages Vg. The
contribution which scales with modulation frequency is due to the
source-to-drain capacitance.

The variation in frequency dependence with Vos can be rationalized with the linear carrier
mobilities. For low gate (offset) voltages (|Vg| < 2 V), effective carrier mobilities
are still low (below 10–2 cm2 V–1 s–1), as the device is not yet in full accumulation
(for a graph of the voltage-dependent mobility, see Figure S12a of the Supporting Information). Hence, charges
cannot respond fully at higher modulation frequencies and the CMS
signal decreases. For higher Vg, the mobilities are sufficiently high (>1 cm2 V–1 s–1) for carriers to follow
modulation
frequencies of almost 100 kHz, resulting in nearly frequency-independent
CMS features. This difference in cutoff with gate voltage is also
shown from frequency-dependent capacitance measurements (see Supporting Information, Figure S13). Further
evidence is provided by the frequency-dependent device admittance
as measured by modulating the source terminal of the FET (Figure 3c). Such frequency-dependent
measurements can be employed to evaluate the physical limit to the
device operation frequency (fτ)
as imposed by the carrier transit time.53 For f < fτ, the carrier velocity is sufficient to follow the modulation, yielding
a constant admittance value. At higher frequencies, however, the admittance
will drop due to the limited carrier velocity. The data in Figure 3c and the corresponding
phase plot, in Figure S14 (Supporting Information), show that fτ is above 100 kHz
for full accumulation (Vg = −4 V), while it is in the range of few kHz at lower gate
voltages (Vg = −1
V). These data are in good agreement with the frequency-dependent
CMS spectra, whose maximum frequency was limited by the lock-in amplifier
when in full accumulation (see Figure 3b).

As a complementary method to investigate
charge transport in SWCNT
networks, we turn to the nanotube PL, which is even more sensitive
to injected charges due to nonradiative Auger quenching of excitons.54,55 Static voltage-dependent PL spectra were acquired with the (6,5)
SWCNTs being excited resonantly at the E22 transition at
577 nm. Figure 4a shows
a steady decrease in intensity of the E11 emission feature
and the red-shifted PSB with increasing gate voltage and thus carrier
density. Trion emission becomes visible at 1180 nm and eventually
exceeds the exciton PL intensity at high carrier concentrations. The
trion peak is shifted by 176 meV with respect to the exciton in good
agreement with the approximation by Park et al.56 For electron accumulation (data shown in Figure S15 of the Supporting Information), an
energy difference of 181 meV between exciton and trion emission was
observed, which is also consistent with previous reports on the energy
shifts for positive and negative trions, respectively.24 The E11 emission peak blueshifts
with increasing Vg for
both hole and electron doping similar to the CMS E11 bleaching
peak although to a much lesser extend (approximately 3 nm versus 13 nm).

Figure 4 (a) Static gate voltage-dependent PL spectra
and (b) Vos-dependent
CMPL spectra (Vpp = 0.3
V) of (6,5) SWCNTs in hole accumulation.
(c) CMPL spectra of (6,5) SWCNTs with modulation between zero bias
and on-state of the FET.

Emission quenching in
these static PL measurements occurs through
interaction of excitons with both mobile and trapped charges. Thus,
it does not provide unambiguous information on the distribution of
mobile carriers that contribute to the transistor current. To address
this issue, we added the modulation technique to our PL setup in order
to perform charge modulation PL spectroscopy (CMPL). This technique
combines the high sensitivity of the SWCNT emission to injected charges
and the specificity of modulation spectroscopy to only mobile carriers.
A schematic of the measurement setup can be found in the Supporting Information, Figure S16.

In
CMPL, the gate voltage is again modulated with a sinusoidal
peak-to-peak voltage Vpp around an offset voltage Vos. During this modulation, the sample is excited with monochromatic
laser light, and the differential change in PL at the frequency of
modulation is recorded with a lock-in amplifier. Only the low-voltage
regime is accessible in CMPL measurements due to the highly efficient,
charge-mediated PL quenching and thus loss of emission intensity.
In agreement with the data obtained from CMS and frequency-dependent
admittance measurements (Figure 3), a frequency dependence of the (6,5) SWCNT CMPL signal
intensity was observed, but no change in the normalized signal (Supporting Information, Figure S17). Hence, a
modulation frequency of 73 Hz was chosen for all experiments.

CMPL spectra (Vpp =
0.3 V) at different offset voltages for an FET with monochiral (6,5)
SWCNTs are shown in Figure 4b. The differential PL signal (ΔPL; positive values
indicate quenching, whereas negative signals indicate charge-induced
emission) corresponding to E11 exciton quenching shows
a similar behavior to that in the CMS experiments. Initially, the
signal increases with Vos due to the increase of modulated charge carrier concentration. The
maximum ΔPL intensity was observed at Vos ≈ −1.0 V, which is in good
agreement with the value extracted from CMS. For higher voltages,
the CMPL signal decreases again. In contrast to the experiments in
transmission, no distinct trion feature was observed. This is consistent
with the static absorbance and PL spectra (Figures S8a and 4a), which show that charge-induced trion absorption
is already very pronounced at low voltages, whereas trion emission
only becomes significant at high carrier densities. Since modulation
spectroscopy records the change in absorption/emission upon carrier
modulation, the trion signal is basically absent in the CMPL spectra.
In a different approach, we simultaneously varied Vos and Vpp in order to modulate between zero bias (off-state)
and on-state (Vpp = 2 |Vos|) in analogy to experiments by Koopman et al. on
PL electro-modulation microscopy of organic FETs.57 This measurement scheme consists of a stepwise increase
of the modulated charge density. Thus, with increasing voltage, the
E11 ΔPL signal should approach the total PL intensity
of the unbiased film, as indicated in Figure 4c. The PL of the unbiased film (shown for
comparison) was obtained by modulating the excitation laser with a
mechanical chopper that simultaneously served as reference for the
lock-in amplifier. In Figure 4a,c, the wavelength of trion emission is indicated with an
arrow. As shown for the static experiments (Figure 4a), the trion PL intensity is comparable
to the intensity of the red-shifted PSB in the voltage range probed
with CMPL and is only slightly higher for high voltages (e.g., −5 V). Due to the differential nature
of CMPL, this is reflected in a dip in the ΔPL signal at the
trion wavelength.

Overall, both techniques—CMS and CMPL—are
suitable
to quantitatively follow spectral features associated with mobile
charge carriers in SWCNT network FETs. The E11 bleaching
and quenching features depend strongly on the concentration of mobile
charge carriers. The trion absorption, which is very prominent in
the CMS measurements, changes substantially with offset voltage and
may complicate the analysis of CMS signals from mixed nanotube networks.
For those samples, the very weak charge-induced trion emission in
the CMPL spectra compared to the E11 emission quenching
should be advantageous.

Mixed SWCNT Networks
After clarifying
the different
spectral contributions and their voltage dependence for (6,5) SWCNT
FETs, we now turn to the mixed SWCNT networks based on the HiPco/PFO
dispersion, consisting of five semiconducting nanotube species as
shown in Figure 1b.
Through comparison with the static absorbance spectrum, the five dominant
bleaching features in the Vos-dependent CMS spectra in Figure 5a (Vpp = 0.2 V, modulation frequency 363 Hz) were assigned to the
E11 transitions of the different nanotube species. All
E11 bleaching peaks show a blueshift with increasing Vos. For the (8,7) and (9,7)
SWCNTs, the trion features are visible as a broad charge-induced absorption
band at wavelengths above 1400 nm. Trion absorption peaks corresponding
to the other nanotube species are difficult to identify due to the
spectral overlap. Additional CMS spectra with 2ω detection (Supporting Information, Figure S18) did not show
any significant contributions from electroabsorption similar to the
(6,5) SWCNT devices.

Figure 5 (a) Vos-dependent
CMS spectra of mixed SWCNTs in hole accumulation (Vpp = 0.2 V). (b) Spectra normalized to
the (8,6) SWCNT E11 bleaching signal. (c) Extracted CMS
signals of mixed SWCNTs in the hole accumulation regime (Vpp = 0.2 V) normalized to the maximum
bleaching intensity. Lines are guides to the eye.

In agreement with the voltage-dependent spectral evolution of the
E11 feature of the monochiral samples (see above), the
exciton bleaching signals for the mixed networks initially increased
to a maximum intensity and then decreased. Again, this change can
be attributed to the initial increase of the device capacitance (for
a C–V double sweep of a mixed
network FET, see the Supporting Information, Figure S7b) followed by a reduced total oscillator strength of the
E11 transition. In comparison to (6,5) SWCNTs, however,
the gate (offset) voltages for maximum bleaching as well as the highest
voltage to acquire a spectrum were significantly lower. This difference
results from the smaller bandgaps of the five nanotube species in
the mixed network compared to the (6,5) SWCNTs. A closer inspection
of the spectra also revealed a pronounced difference between the CMS
peak intensities at the lowest offset voltage (Vos = −0.35 V) and the static absorbance
spectrum (Figures 1b and 5a). The (8,7) SWCNT exciton bleaching
is dominant, whereas only small CMS signals can be attributed to (7,5)
and (7,6) nanotubes. Furthermore, the signal intensities change relatively
to each other with Vos, which is more clearly shown in the CMS spectra normalized to the
(8,6) E11 bleaching feature (Figure 5b). With increasing offset voltage, bleaching
signals of the nanotubes with larger bandgaps increase with respect
to the (8,6) peak, whereas those of smaller bandgap SWCNTs decrease.

It should be emphasized again that only mobile (not trapped) charges
are detected in CMS. Hence, these measurements allow us to draw direct
conclusions on the distribution of mobile carriers within the complex
electronic structure of mixed nanotube networks and thus charge transport
within them. At low voltages, small bandgap SWCNTs carry the largest
portion of mobile charges leading to high relative bleaching signals.
With increasing Vos,
the relative contribution of the large bandgap nanotubes to the overall
charge transport rises, and thus a relative increase in the respective
signal intensities is observed. Meanwhile the CMS bleaching signals
corresponding to the small bandgap SWCNTs already decrease again.
These observations are consistent with previous results from voltage-dependent
electroluminescence spectroscopy and theoretical simulations of HiPco/PFO
networks, which suggested that the distribution of charges within
the network changes with gate voltage.18,29

Figure 5c shows
the extracted CMS signal intensities at the wavelengths of the different
E11 transitions normalized to their respective maxima.
The bleaching intensities for the individual species show the same
general evolution as the (6,5) SWCNTs (Figure 2c) but reach their maxima at different Vos. Note that the evaluation
of the (9,7) SWCNT E11 bleaching was not possible due to
the spectral overlap with the charge-induced trion absorption of the
(8,6) nanotubes. The offset voltage values for the bleaching maxima
follow the energetic levels of the valence band and thus bandgaps
of the nanotubes (see Figure 1c). The larger the bandgap, the higher the offset voltage
at which the highest CMS intensity was recorded. Furthermore, the
drop of intensity with Vos is steeper for the small bandgap nanotubes compared to the large
bandgap SWCNTs. We can conclude that the distribution of mobile carriers
within mixed SWCNT networks depends strongly on the overall carrier
density and the distribution of nanotube species with different bandgaps.
A disproportionate amount of current, that is, more than what is expected
from the relative amounts of SWCNT species within the network, is
carried by the small bandgap nanotubes especially at lower gate voltages.
At high gate voltages, when the device is in full accumulation, the
entire network appears to contribute to the charge transport.

Similar to the monochiral (6,5) SWCNTs, a strong frequency dependence
of the CMS signal was observed for the mixed network FETs at low voltages
(Supporting Information, Figure S19a,b).
At higher frequencies, the CMS signal was again lower, but the normalized
spectra and peak ratios were essentially identical, confirming the
common physical origin of the observed features. The frequency- and
gate voltage-dependent admittance of mixed SWCNT FETs (Supporting Information, Figure S19c) was also
very similar to that of (6,5) SWCNT-based devices. A graph of the
voltage-dependent mobility is shown in Figure S12b of the Supporting Information.

To further corroborate
the notion of chirality-dependent charge
accumulation and transport, we investigated the PL properties of the
mixed networks. Successive, static voltage-dependent PL quenching
with increasing gate voltage is shown in Figure 6a. Evidently, emission from the small bandgap
SWCNTs is strongly quenched, whereas the PL from (7,5) SWCNTs is only
weakly affected. This observation of chirality-dependent accumulation
of carriers within the nanotube network is in very good agreement
with previous experimental results as well as the expected static
carrier density distribution based on a one-dimensional semiconductor
model.28,29 Notably, trion emission becomes significant
at higher voltages (peaks at 1360 and 1480 nm).

Figure 6 (a) Static voltage-dependent
PL spectra of a mixed SWCNT network
FET and (b) CMPL spectra with modulation between zero bias and on-state
of the same device. (c) Normalized fraction of quenched PL (ΔPL/PL)
for each chirality in the mixed SWCNT networks. Values were determined
from peak fits and represent the share of mobile carriers on these
nanotubes and, thus, the current share at varying total charge densities
(offset voltages Vos).
Lines are guides to the eye.

To exclusively probe mobile charge carriers, we performed CMPL
experiments on mixed SWCNT FETs. Despite the decrease in signal intensity
with increasing modulation frequency, frequency-dependent measurements
confirmed that the peak intensities remained constant in relation
to each other (see Supporting Information, Figure S20). By modulating between the off- and on-states of the device,
the gradual increase in total PL quenching resulting from the stepwise
increase in modulated charge density was recorded. As evident from
the spectra in Figure 6b, PL quenching is strongest for the small bandgap (8,7) and (9,7)
SWCNTs. For Vos = −0.6
V (i.e., modulation between 0 V
and −1.2 V), emission from these two species is quenched predominantly,
whereas the total PL quenching of (7,5) SWCNTs determined from peak
fits is only 24%.

To further quantify the chirality dependence
of charge-induced
quenching, the fraction of PL quenched by mobile carriers (ΔPL/PL)
was calculated for each individual chirality. Assuming that the efficiency
of exciton quenching is independent of the SWCNT species, the share
of ΔPL/PL (Figure 6c) should reflect the fraction of mobile carriers passing through
SWCNTs of a given chirality, or in other words, the current share
for this chirality. The graphs in Figure 6c show that the portion of mobile charge
concentration is not proportional to the abundance of the SWCNT species
in the network, but is highest for the small bandgap SWCNT species.
The data further corroborate that the distribution of mobile carriers
changes with applied gate voltage. The contribution of large bandgap
SWCNTs to the current increases with Vos.18,29 Schießl et al. simulated carrier density-dependent charge transport in mixed HiPco/PFO
networks by solving Kirchhoff’s equations for a random
resistor network.18 Charge carrier concentrations
in these simulations were on the order of 1010−1012 cm–2, which is comparable to those in
the CMPL experiments. The CMPL data shown in Figure 6c nicely reproduce the gate voltage-dependent
current distribution of the simulated networks with very similar species
fractions. Especially the current shares for (7,5) and (7,6) SWCNTs
are in excellent agreement (5–10% and 10–20%, respectively).
The model predicted a current share of 10–15% for the (9,7)
SWCNTs with an abundance of 6%. In CMPL, the ΔPL/PL share was
25–35% (calculated abundance of 10.5%).

To further assess
the validity of the CMPL method, we investigated
FETs based on mixed HiPco/PFO SWCNT networks with another network
composition. Differences in nanotube species abundance (see the Supporting Information, Table S2) are due to
variations in the polymer-wrapping process. The absorbance spectrum
of the dispersion and representative transfer and output characteristics
of these devices are shown in the Supporting Information, Figure S21. Additional CMPL measurements of FETs in hole and
electron accumulation confirmed the nanotube species-dependent PL
quenching through modulation of charge density (Supporting Information, Figure S22). Despite the different
abundances, the overall trends such as the dominant ΔPL/PL contribution
by small bandgap SWCNTs and the change of mobile carrier distribution
with increasing gate voltage are reproduced. Thus, by assuming that
the relative ΔPL/PL intensity reflects the current share of
a particular nanotube species, we can infer that charge transport
is dominated by the small bandgap SWCNTs within a mixed network at
low gate voltages before charges can access and travel through the
entire network at high gate voltages.

Conclusion
We
have studied mobile charge carriers in FETs based on SWCNT networks
by means of charge-modulated absorption (CMS) and photoluminescence
(CMPL) spectroscopy. The unusually strong signal intensities and high
signal-to-noise ratios for these devices enabled a thorough analysis
of the modulated spectra depending on total charge density and modulation
frequency. In agreement with previous experiments on chemically and
electrochemically doped SWCNTs, we observed charge-induced exciton
bleaching/quenching and trion absorption/emission features that can
now unambiguously be associated with mobile carriers rather than localized
or trapped charges. By establishing a clear correlation between the
modulated concentration of mobile carriers and the detected signals,
we could further corroborate the idea that charge transport in mixed
semiconducting SWCNT networks strongly depends on network composition
and gate voltage. It occurs preferentially through small bandgap (large
diameter) SWCNTs at lower voltages, irrespective of their nominal
abundance within the network. The distribution of mobile carriers
and thus current changes as a function of applied gate voltage, with
large bandgap SWCNTs starting to participate only at higher voltages.
This increase of active transport paths with carrier density in a
mixed network suggests that typical assumptions and equations for
the current–voltage characteristics of FETs with homogeneous
semiconducting layers may not be applicable for SWCNT networks at
low gate voltages. However, in full accumulation and at high gate
voltages, the notion that the entire network participates in the transport
appears to be valid. Nevertheless, monochiral networks of small bandgap
nanotubes do not suffer from these issues and hence are most promising
for SWCNT-based FETs with maximum performance. Our results demonstrate
the merits of gate voltage- and frequency-dependent modulation spectroscopy
of FETs in general as well as their excellent suitability for the in situ investigation of mobile carriers in SWCNT network
devices beyond model systems. Further CMS and CMPL studies could be
used to examine the impact of intentional functionalization of nanotubes,
for example, with luminescent sp3 defects,58 on charge transport in networks.

Methods
Preparation
of (6,5) SWCNT Dispersions
Nearly monochiral
(6,5) SWCNT dispersions were obtained via polymer-wrapping
using shear force mixing as previously described in detail by Graf et al.45 Briefly, 50 mg of the
CoMoCAT SWCNT raw material (CHASM Advanced Materials Inc., Charge
No. SG65i-L58) was added to a solution of 65 mg of poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-alt-co-(6,6′-(2,2′-bipyridine))]
(PFO-BPy, American Dye Source, MW = 34 kg mol–1) in 140 mL of toluene and shear mixed for 72 h at 20 °C (Silverson
L2/Air mixer, 10230 rpm). The dispersion was centrifuged twice for
45 min at 60,000g (Beckman Coulter Avanti J26XP centrifuge),
and the supernatant was collected. The dispersion was filtered through
a polytetrafluoroethylene membrane (Millipore JVWP, pore size 0.1
μm), and the filter cake was washed with hot toluene (80 °C,
three times, 10 min each) to remove excess unwrapped polymer. Ultrasonication
in 1 mL of toluene for 30 min gave a strongly colored purple dispersion,
which was adjusted to an optical density of 10 cm–1 at the wavelength of E11 absorption and immediately used
for spin-coating of SWCNT networks.

Preparation of Mixed SWCNT
Dispersions
15 mg of HiPco
SWCNT raw material (Unidym Inc., Batch No. 2172) was added to a solution
of poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (PFO, Aldrich, MW > 20 kg mol–1) in toluene (10 mL, 2
mg
mL–1). After ultrasonication for 45 min (Branson
2510 sonication bath), the suspension was centrifuged for 45 min at
60,000g (Beckman Coulter Avanti J26XP centrifuge),
and the supernatant was collected. To increase the yield of dispersed
SWCNTs, the pellet was recycled twice, and the supernatants were combined.
To reduce the content of excess unwrapped polymer, PFO-wrapped SWCNTs
were sedimented by ultracentrifugation for 20 h at 284,600g (Beckman Coulter Optima XPN-80 centrifuge), and the supernatant
was removed. The pellets were washed by addition of tetrahydrofuran
(THF) and subsequent centrifugation for 30 min at 30,000g. Bath sonication of the pellet in 1 mL of toluene for 30 min yielded
a light green dispersion that was immediately used in the FET fabrication
process.

FET Fabrication
Interdigitated bottom contact electrodes
were patterned on glass substrates (Schott AG, AF32eco, 300 μm)
using double-layer resist photolithography (MicroChem LOR5B/Microposit
S1813 resist; Suess MicroTec MA6 mask aligner, UV dose 182 mJ cm–2) and electron-beam evaporation (Winter Vakuum Technik
HVB 130) of chromium (2 nm) and gold (30 nm), followed by lift-off
in N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP). Substrates were cleaned
by ultrasonication in acetone and 2-propanol for 10 min, respectively,
and UV ozone treatment (Ossila E511, 10 min) before deposition of
the semiconductor layer. The SWCNTs were deposited either via spin-coating or aerosol-jet printing onto the patterned
electrodes as detailed below. The samples were annealed at 300 °C
for 1 h in dry nitrogen atmosphere, followed by spin-coating (4000
rpm, 60 s) of 80 μL of a solution of poly(methyl methacrylate)
(PMMA, Polymer Source, MW = 315 kg mol–1, syndiotactic) in n-butyl acetate
(6 g L–1). On top of the ∼11 nm PMMA layer,
a ∼61 nm HfOx layer was deposited via atomic layer deposition (Ultratech Inc., Savannah S100)
at a temperature of 100 °C using a tetrakis(dimethylamino)hafnium
precursor (Strem Chemicals Inc.) and water as oxidizing agent. Thermal
evaporation (MB-ProVap 3G, M. Braun Inertgas-Systeme) of silver top
gate electrodes (20 nm) using shadow masks completed the devices.

SWCNT Network Deposition
SWCNT networks were deposited
either via spin-coating or aerosol-jet printing.
Spin-coating of SWCNT inks (3× 80 μL, 2000 rpm, 30 s) was
performed with annealing steps (100 °C, 2 min) in between. After
rinsing with THF and 2-propanol, spin-coated nanotube networks were
patterned in order to remove all SWCNTs outside the channel area.
This was achieved using photolithography as described above, oxygen
plasma treatment (Nordson MARCH AP-600/30, 100 W, 2 min), and lift-off
in NMP. Aerosol-jet printing of SWCNTs with an AJ200 printer (Optomec
Inc.) followed the procedure described in detail by Rother et al.59 Terpineol (2–5
vol %) was added to the SWCNT dispersion to increase viscosity for
aerosol formation. A 200 μm inner diameter nozzle was used at
a sheath gas and carrier gas (nitrogen) flow of 30 and 25 sccm, respectively.
During the process, the movable stage was heated to 100 °C. The
substrates were subsequently rinsed with THF and 2-propanol.

Characterization
Baseline-corrected absorbance spectra
of SWCNT/polymer dispersions were recorded with a Cary 6000i UV–vis-nIR
spectrometer (Varian Inc.). Raman spectra on drop-cast SWCNT/polymer
films were obtained with a Renishaw inVia confocal Raman microscope
in backscattering configuration using an Olympus ×50 long working
distance objective (N.A. 0.5) and three different lasers (532 nm,
633 nm, 785 nm). A Bruker Dimension Icon atomic force microscope (AFM)
in the ScanAsyst mode was used for the acquisition of AFM images under
ambient conditions. Current–voltage measurements (transfer
and output characteristics) were performed in dry nitrogen atmosphere
with an Agilent 4156C semiconductor parameter analyzer. The effective
device capacitances were obtained with an impedance analyzer (Solatron
Analytical ModuLab XM MTS System) under inert atmosphere and with
the transistors operated as plate capacitors (source and drain electrodes
shorted and grounded). The frequency was 100 Hz, and the maximum capacitance
was extracted in the on-state of the device. Frequency-dependent admittance
measurements were performed in a custom setup under inert atmosphere.
An Agilent E5061B Vector Network Analyzer (VNA) provided a sinusoidal
signal superimposed on a DC bias to the transistor’s source
terminal, while the gate electrode was biased independently using
an Agilent B2912A source meter. During the measurement, the gate/source
DC bias was varied between −1 V and −4 V, while the
drain/source DC bias was set at 100 mV. The current flowing into the
FET drain terminal was collected using a transimpedance amplifier
(Femto DHPCA-100), whose output was fed back into the VNA, yielding
an admittance function. The amplifier gain was set to 2 × 103, the sinusoidal signal was set to a fixed power of 0 dBm,
and the maximum signal frequency was set to 2 MHz.

Charge Modulation
Spectroscopy
For CMS measurements
in the transmission mode, the FETs were mounted in a custom-made vacuum
chamber (pressure <10–6 mbar) with electrical
feedthroughs. A schematic of the setup is shown in the Supporting Information, Figure S5. Source and
drain electrodes were grounded, and the gate voltage was modulated
with a peak-to-peak voltage Vpp around an offset voltage Vos using a Keithley 3390 waveform generator. A modulation frequency
of 363 Hz was used unless otherwise specified. As the light source,
the spectral output of a tungsten-halogen lamp (SP ASBN-W) was wavelength-filtered
(step width 3 nm) with a monochromator (SP DK240 1/4 m) using gratings
with 660 g/mm ruling, 1200 nm blaze (nIR) and 1200 g/mm ruling, 550
nm blaze (visible), respectively. The light was focused on the device
(illumination spot size ∼1 × 1 mm2), and the
transmitted light was focused on a photodiode detector (InGaAs, Thorlabs
FGA21 (nIR) or Si, Thorlabs FDS100 (visible)). A transimpedance amplifier
(Femto DHPCA-100) provided the signal for the lock-in amplifier (Stanford
Research Systems SR830), which recorded the differential transmission
signal ΔT. The reference transmission spectrum T was acquired using the same setup with no applied gate
bias and by modulating the light with an optical chopper (Stanford
Research Systems SR540). The ΔT/T CMS spectrum was obtained by dividing the first harmonic (1ω)
component of ΔT by the transmission T to correct for the substrate absorption, the absorption
of optics in the detection path, and the wavelength-dependent output
of the light source.

Photoluminescence Spectroscopy
For
the acquisition
of static gate voltage-dependent PL spectra, the three terminals of
the device were electrically connected, and a bias was applied to
the gate electrode of the device (fixed source/drain bias Vd = −0.01 V) using a
Keithley 2612A source meter. Nanotube layers were excited with a supercontinuum
laser (Fianium Ltd. WhiteLase SC400, 20 MHz repetition rate, 6 ps
pulse width) that was wavelength-filtered at 577 nm ((6,5) SWCNTs)
and 600 nm (mixed SWCNTs), respectively, and focused by a nIR-optimized
×50 objective (Olympus LCPLN50XIR, N.A. 0.65). Emitted photons
were collected with the same objective and passed through a dichroic
mirror (cutoff wavelength 875 nm) and a long-pass filter (LP830) to
block scattered light of the laser beam. Spectra were recorded with
an Acton SpectraPro SP2358 spectrometer (grating blaze 1200 nm, 150
lines per mm) and a liquid nitrogen-cooled InGaAs line camera (Princeton
Instruments OMA V:1024). Each spectrum was corrected to account for
the absorption of the optics in the detection path and wavelength-dependent
detection efficiency of the camera.

Charge Modulation Photoluminescence
Spectroscopy
CMPL
spectra were acquired with a modified PL spectroscopy setup. For a
schematic setup, see the Supporting Information, Figure S16. The source and drain electrodes were grounded,
and the gate bias was modulated with a peak-to-peak voltage Vpp around an offset voltage Vos using a Keysight 33600A
waveform generator. Unless otherwise specified, a modulation frequency
of 73 Hz was used. The PL was spectrally resolved (step width 3 nm)
with an Acton SpectraPro SP2358 spectrometer (grating blaze 1200 nm,
150 lines per mm) and detected with a photodiode (InGaAs, Thorlabs
FGA10), then amplified with a transimpedance amplifier (Femto DLPCA-200)
and sent to a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems SR830)
that was phase-locked to the waveform generator signal. All spectra
were corrected for the absorption of optics in the detection path
to obtain the differential PL signal ΔPL.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.9b09761.Characterization (Raman,
PL excitation–emission
spectroscopy) of mixed SWCNT dispersion and calculation of abundance
of individual nanotube chiralities; AFM images of SWCNT networks;
output characteristics, capacitance–voltage sweeps, and voltage-dependent
linear mobilities of SWCNT FETs; frequency-dependent capacitance and
device admittance of SWCNT FETs for different gate voltages; schematics
of CMS and CMPL experimental setups; additional voltage-dependent
CMS spectra and combined vis-nIR CMS spectrum of (6,5) SWCNT FETs;
comparison between CMS spectra of (6,5) SWCNT FETs and static absorbance
spectra of an electrochemically doped (6,5) SWCNT film; second harmonic
and frequency-dependent CMS of (6,5) and mixed SWCNT FETs; additional
voltage-dependent PL spectra of (6,5) SWCNT FETs in electron accumulation;
frequency-dependent CMPL spectra of (6,5) and mixed SWCNT FETs; and
additional CMPL spectra and characterization of mixed SWCNT FETs with
a different network composition (PDF)



Supplementary Material
nn9b09761_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This project has
received funding from the European
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme (grant agreement no. 817494 “TRIFECTs”
and grant agreement no. 638059 “HEROIC”). N.F.Z. would
like to thank G. Meinusch for valuable technical support and advice
throughout the implementation of the CMPL setup.
==== Refs
References
Cao Y. ; Cong S. ; Cao X. ; Wu F. ; Liu Q. ; Amer M. R. ; Zhou C. 
Review of Electronics
Based on Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes
. Top. Curr. Chem. 
2017 , 375 , 75 10.1007/s41061-017-0160-5 .
Zaumseil J. 
Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotube Networks for Flexible and Printed Electronics
. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 
2015 , 30 , 07400110.1088/0268-1242/30/7/074001 .
Liu H. ; Nishide D. ; Tanaka T. ; Kataura H. 
Large-Scale Single-Chirality
Separation of Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes by Simple Gel Chromatography
. Nat. Commun. 
2011 , 2 , 309 10.1038/ncomms1313 .21556063 
Yomogida Y. ; Tanaka T. ; Zhang M. ; Yudasaka M. ; Wei X. ; Kataura H. 
Industrial-Scale Separation
of High-Purity Single-Chirality
Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes for Biological Imaging
. Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 12056 10.1038/ncomms12056 .27350127 
Arnold M. S. ; Green A. A. ; Hulvat J. F. ; Stupp S. I. ; Hersam M. C. 
Sorting
Carbon Nanotubes by Electronic Structure Using Density Differentiation
. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2006 , 1 , 60 –65
. 10.1038/nnano.2006.52 .18654143 
Li H. ; Gordeev G. ; Garrity O. ; Reich S. ; Flavel B. S. 
Separation
of Small-Diameter Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes in One to Three Steps
with Aqueous Two-Phase Extraction
. ACS Nano 
2019 , 13 , 2567 –2578
. 10.1021/acsnano.8b09579 .30673278 
Gomulya W. ; Costanzo G. D. ; de Carvalho E. J. F. ; Bisri S. Z. ; Derenskyi V. ; Fritsch M. ; Fröhlich N. ; Allard S. ; Gordiichuk P. ; Herrmann A. ; Marrink S. J. ; dos Santos M. C. ; Scherf U. ; Loi M. A. 
Semiconducting Single-Walled
Carbon
Nanotubes on Demand by Polymer Wrapping
. Adv.
Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 2948 –2956
. 10.1002/adma.201300267 .23616236 
Ozawa H. ; Ide N. ; Fujigaya T. ; Niidome Y. ; Nakashima N. 
One-Pot Separation
of Highly Enriched (6,5)-Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Using a Fluorene-Based
Copolymer
. Chem. Lett. 
2011 , 40 , 239 –241
. 10.1246/cl.2011.239 .
Nish A. ; Hwang J.-Y. ; Doig J. ; Nicholas R. J. 
Highly Selective
Dispersion of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Using Aromatic Polymers
. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2007 , 2 , 640 –646
. 10.1038/nnano.2007.290 .18654390 
Schiessl S. P. ; Fröhlich N. ; Held M. ; Gannott F. ; Schweiger M. ; Forster M. ; Scherf U. ; Zaumseil J. 
Polymer-Sorted Semiconducting
Carbon Nanotube Networks for High-Performance Ambipolar Field-Effect
Transistors
. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 682 –689
. 10.1021/am506971b .25493421 
Lau P. H. ; Takei K. ; Wang C. ; Ju Y. ; Kim J. ; Yu Z. ; Takahashi T. ; Cho G. ; Javey A. 
Fully Printed, High
Performance Carbon Nanotube Thin-Film Transistors on Flexible Substrates
. Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 3864 –3869
. 10.1021/nl401934a .23899052 
Zhong D. ; Zhang Z. ; Ding L. ; Han J. ; Xiao M. ; Si J. ; Xu L. ; Qiu C. ; Peng L.-M. 
Gigahertz Integrated
Circuits Based on Carbon Nanotube Films
. Nat.
Electron. 
2018 , 1 , 40 –45
. 10.1038/s41928-017-0003-y .
Yang Y. ; Ding L. ; Han J. ; Zhang Z. ; Peng L.-M. 
High-Performance
Complementary Transistors and Medium-Scale Integrated Circuits Based
on Carbon Nanotube Thin Films
. ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 4124 –4132
. 10.1021/acsnano.7b00861 .28333433 
Tang J. ; Cao Q. ; Tulevski G. ; Jenkins K. A. ; Nela L. ; Farmer D. B. ; Han S.-J. 
Flexible
CMOS Integrated Circuits Based on Carbon Nanotubes
with sub-10 ns Stage Delays
. Nat. Electron. 
2018 , 1 , 191 –196
. 10.1038/s41928-018-0038-8 .
McMorrow J. J. ; Cress C. D. ; Gaviria
Rojas W. A. ; Geier M. L. ; Marks T. J. ; Hersam M. C. 
Radiation-Hard
Complementary Integrated Circuits Based
on Semiconducting Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
. ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 2992 –3000
. 10.1021/acsnano.6b08561 .28212000 
Lei T. ; Shao L.-L. ; Zheng Y.-Q. ; Pitner G. ; Fang G. ; Zhu C. ; Li S. ; Beausoleil R. ; Wong H. S. P. ; Huang T.-C. ; Cheng K.-T. ; Bao Z. 
Low-Voltage High-Performance Flexible
Digital and Analog Circuits Based on Ultrahigh-Purity Semiconducting
Carbon Nanotubes
. Nat. Commun. 
2019 , 10 , 2161 10.1038/s41467-019-10145-9 .31089127 
Brohmann M. ; Berger F. J. ; Matthiesen M. ; Schießl S. P. ; Schneider S. ; Zaumseil J. 
Charge Transport in
Mixed Semiconducting
Carbon Nanotube Networks with Tailored Mixing Ratios
. ACS Nano 
2019 , 13 , 7323 –7332
. 10.1021/acsnano.9b03699 .31184852 
Schießl S. P. ; de Vries X. ; Rother M. ; Masse A. ; Brohmann M. ; Bobbert P. A. ; Zaumseil J. 
Modeling Carrier Density Dependent
Charge Transport in Semiconducting Carbon Nanotube Networks
. Phys. Rev. Mater. 
2017 , 1 , 04600310.1103/PhysRevMaterials.1.046003 .
Brohmann M. ; Rother M. ; Schießl S. P. ; Preis E. ; Allard S. ; Scherf U. ; Zaumseil J. 
Temperature-Dependent
Charge Transport
in Polymer-Sorted Semiconducting Carbon Nanotube Networks with Different
Diameter Distributions
. J. Phys. Chem. C 
2018 , 122 , 19886 –19896
. 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b04302 .
Itkis M. E. ; Pekker A. ; Tian X. ; Bekyarova E. ; Haddon R. C. 
Networks of Semiconducting SWNTs:
Contribution of Midgap
Electronic States to the Electrical Transport
. Acc. Chem. Res. 
2015 , 48 , 2270 –2279
. 10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00107 .26244611 
Gao J. ; Loo Y.-L. 
Temperature-Dependent Electrical Transport in Polymer-Sorted
Semiconducting Carbon Nanotube Networks
. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 
2015 , 25 , 105 –110
. 10.1002/adfm.201402407 .
Hartleb H. ; Späth F. ; Hertel T. 
Evidence for Strong Electronic Correlations
in the Spectra of Gate-Doped Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes
. ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 10461 –10470
. 10.1021/acsnano.5b04707 .26381021 
Berger F. J. ; Higgins T. M. ; Rother M. ; Graf A. ; Zakharko Y. ; Allard S. ; Matthiesen M. ; Gotthardt J. M. ; Scherf U. ; Zaumseil J. 
From Broadband to Electrochromic
Notch Filters with Printed Monochiral Carbon Nanotubes
. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 11135 –11142
. 10.1021/acsami.8b00643 .29521086 
Jakubka F. ; Grimm S. B. ; Zakharko Y. ; Gannott F. ; Zaumseil J. 
Trion Electroluminescence
from Semiconducting Carbon Nanotubes
. ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 8477 –8486
. 10.1021/nn503046y .25029479 
Park J. S. ; Hirana Y. ; Mouri S. ; Miyauchi Y. ; Nakashima N. ; Matsuda K. 
Observation of Negative
and Positive Trions in the
Electrochemically Carrier-Doped Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 14461 –14466
. 10.1021/ja304282j .22870955 
Eckstein K. H. ; Hartleb H. ; Achsnich M. M. ; Schöppler F. ; Hertel T. 
Localized Charges Control Exciton Energetics and Energy
Dissipation in Doped Carbon Nanotubes
. ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 10401 –10408
. 10.1021/acsnano.7b05543 .28881133 
Ferguson A. J. ; Reid O. G. ; Nanayakkara S. U. ; Ihly R. ; Blackburn J. L. 
Efficiency
of Charge-Transfer Doping in Organic Semiconductors Probed with Quantitative
Microwave and Direct-Current Conductance
. J.
Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2018 , 9 , 6864 –6870
. 10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b03074 .30457866 
Jakubka F. ; Backes C. ; Gannott F. ; Mundloch U. ; Hauke F. ; Hirsch A. ; Zaumseil J. 
Mapping Charge Transport
by Electroluminescence
in Chirality-Selected Carbon Nanotube Networks
. ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 7428 –7435
. 10.1021/nn403419d .23915032 
Rother M. ; Schießl S. P. ; Zakharko Y. ; Gannott F. ; Zaumseil J. 
Understanding
Charge Transport in Mixed Networks of Semiconducting Carbon Nanotubes
. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 5571 –5579
. 10.1021/acsami.6b00074 .26867006 
Brown P. J. ; Sirringhaus H. ; Harrison M. ; Shkunov M. ; Friend R. H. 
Optical
Spectroscopy of Field-Induced Charge in Self-Organized High Mobility
Poly(3-Hexylthiophene)
. Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys. 
2001 , 63 , 4108 10.1103/PhysRevB.63.125204 .
Deng Y. Y. ; Sirringhaus H. 
Optical Absorptions
of Polyfluorene Transistors
. Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys. 
2005 , 72 , 578 10.1103/PhysRevB.72.045207 .
Sirringhaus H. ; Brown P. J. ; Friend R. H. ; Nielsen M. M. ; Bechgaard K. ; Langeveld-Voss B. M. W. ; Spiering A. J. H. ; Janssen R. A. J. ; Meijer E. W. ; Herwig P. ; de Leeuw D. M. 
Two-Dimensional Charge Transport
in Self-Organized, High-Mobility Conjugated Polymers
. Nature 
1999 , 401 , 685 –688
. 10.1038/44359 .
Zhao N. ; Noh Y.-Y. ; Chang J.-F. ; Heeney M. ; McCulloch I. ; Sirringhaus H. 
Polaron Localization at Interfaces in High-Mobility
Microcrystalline Conjugated Polymers
. Adv. Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 3759 –3763
. 10.1002/adma.200900326 .
Caironi M. ; Bird M. ; Fazzi D. ; Chen Z. ; Di Pietro R. ; Newman C. ; Facchetti A. ; Sirringhaus H. 
Very Low Degree
of Energetic Disorder as the Origin of High Mobility in an N-Channel
Polymer Semiconductor
. Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2011 , 21 , 3371 –3381
. 10.1002/adfm.201100592 .
D’Innocenzo V. ; Luzio A. ; Petrozza A. ; Fazzi D. ; Caironi M. 
Nature of
Charge Carriers in a High Electron Mobility Naphthalenediimide Based
Semiconducting Copolymer
. Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2014 , 24 , 5584 –5593
. 10.1002/adfm.201400394 .
Chin X. Y. ; Pace G. ; Soci C. ; Caironi M. 
Ambipolar Charge Distribution
in Donor–Acceptor Polymer Field-Effect Transistors
. J. Mater. Chem. C 
2017 , 5 , 754 –762
. 10.1039/C6TC05033F .
Xu H. ; Li J. ; Mai J. ; Xiao T. ; Lu X. ; Zhao N. 
Influence
of Donor–Acceptor Arrangement on Charge Transport in Conjugated
Copolymers
. J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 5600 –5605
. 10.1021/jp5013126 .
Chew A. R. ; Ghosh R. ; Pakhnyuk V. ; Onorato J. ; Davidson E. C. ; Segalman R. A. ; Luscombe C. K. ; Spano F. C. ; Salleo A. 
Unraveling
the Effect of Conformational and Electronic Disorder in the Charge
Transport Processes of Semiconducting Polymers
. Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2018 , 28 , 1804142 10.1002/adfm.201804142 .
Meneau A. Y. B. ; Olivier Y. ; Backlund T. ; James M. ; Breiby D. W. ; Andreasen J. W. ; Sirringhaus H. 
Temperature Dependence of Charge
Localization in High-Mobility, Solution-Crystallized Small Molecule
Semiconductors Studied by Charge Modulation Spectroscopy
. Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2016 , 26 , 2326 –2333
. 10.1002/adfm.201502502 .
Sakanoue T. ; Sirringhaus H. 
Band-Like Temperature Dependence of Mobility in a Solution-Processed
Organic Semiconductor
. Nat. Mater. 
2010 , 9 , 736 –740
. 10.1038/nmat2825 .20729848 
Martino N. ; Fazzi D. ; Sciascia C. ; Luzio A. ; Antognazza M. R. ; Caironi M. 
Mapping Orientational
Order of Charge-Probed Domains
in a Semiconducting Polymer
. ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 5968 –5978
. 10.1021/nn5011182 .24815931 
Lee M. J. ; Chen Z. ; Pietro R. d. ; Heeney M. ; Sirringhaus H. 
Electrooptical
Spectroscopy of Uniaxially Aligned Polythiophene Films in Field-Effect
Transistors
. Chem. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 2075 –2082
. 10.1021/cm400266h .
Chen Z. ; Bird M. ; Lemaur V. ; Radtke G. ; Cornil J. ; Heeney M. ; McCulloch I. ; Sirringhaus H. 
Origin of
the Different Transport Properties of Electron and Hole Polarons in
an Ambipolar Polyselenophene-Based Conjugated Polymer
. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2011 , 84 , 115211 10.1103/PhysRevB.84.115211 .
Pace G. ; Bargigia I. ; Noh Y.-Y. ; Silva C. ; Caironi M. 
Intrinsically
Distinct Hole and Electron Transport in Conjugated Polymers Controlled
by Intra and Intermolecular Interactions
. Nat.
Commun. 
2019 , 10 , 5226 10.1038/s41467-019-13155-9 .31745091 
Graf A. ; Zakharko Y. ; Schießl S. P. ; Backes C. ; Pfohl M. ; Flavel B. S. ; Zaumseil J. 
Large Scale,
Selective Dispersion
of Long Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes with High Photoluminescence
Quantum Yield by Shear Force Mixing
. Carbon 
2016 , 105 , 593 –599
. 10.1016/j.carbon.2016.05.002 .
Streit J. K. ; Bachilo S. M. ; Ghosh S. ; Lin C.-W. ; Weisman R. B. 
Directly
Measured Optical Absorption Cross Sections for Structure-Selected
Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
. Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 1530 –1536
. 10.1021/nl404791y .24502235 
Held M. ; Schießl S. P. ; Miehler D. ; Gannott F. ; Zaumseil J. 
Polymer/Metal
Oxide Hybrid Dielectrics for Low Voltage Field-Effect Transistors
with Solution-Processed, High-Mobility Semiconductors
. Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2015 , 107 , 08330110.1063/1.4929461 .
Kadria-Vili Y. ; Bachilo S. M. ; Blackburn J. L. ; Weisman R. B. 
Photoluminescence
Side Band Spectroscopy of Individual Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
. J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 23898 –23904
. 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b08768 .
Spataru C. D. ; Léonard F. 
Tunable Band Gaps and Excitons in
Doped Semiconducting
Carbon Nanotubes Made Possible by Acoustic Plasmons
. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2010 , 104 , 177402 10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.177402 .20482140 
Eckstein K. H. ; Oberndorfer F. ; Achsnich M. M. ; Schöppler F. ; Hertel T. 
Quantifying Doping Levels in Carbon Nanotubes by Optical
Spectroscopy
. J. Phys. Chem. C 
2019 , 123 , 30001 –30006
. 10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b08663 .
Ziemelis K. E. ; Hussain A. T. ; Bradley D. D. C. ; Friend R. H. ; Rühe J. ; Wegner G. 
Optical Spectroscopy
of Field-Induced Charge in Poly(3-Hexyl
Thienylene) Metal-Insulator-Semiconductor Structures: Evidence for
Polarons
. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1991 , 66 , 2231 –2234
. 10.1103/PhysRevLett.66.2231 .10043430 
Harrison M. G. ; Fichou D. ; Gamier F. ; Yassar A. 
In Situ Charge-Modulation Spectroscopy
of Oligothiophene Field-Effect Diodes:
From Sexithiophene Towards Polythiophene
. Opt.
Mater. 
1998 , 9 , 53 –58
. 10.1016/S0925-3467(97)00090-6 .
Perinot A. ; Giorgio M. ; Caironi M.  Development of
Organic Field-Effect Transistors for Operation at High Frequency
. In Flexible Carbon-Based Electronics ; Samorí P. , Palermo V.  , Eds.; Wiley-VCH : Weinheim , 2018 ; pp 71 –94
.
Kinder J. M. ; Mele E. J. 
Nonradiative Recombination of Excitons in Carbon Nanotubes
Mediated by Free Charge Carriers
. Phys. Rev.
B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2008 , 78 , 155429 10.1103/PhysRevB.78.155429 .
Freitag M. ; Steiner M. ; Naumov A. ; Small J. P. ; Bol A. A. ; Perebeinos V. ; Avouris P. 
Carbon Nanotube Photo- and Electroluminescence
in Longitudinal Electric Fields
. ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 , 3744 –3748
. 10.1021/nn900962f .19928934 
Park J. S. ; Hirana Y. ; Mouri S. ; Miyauchi Y. ; Nakashima N. ; Matsuda K. 
Observation of Negative
and Positive Trions in the
Electrochemically Carrier-Doped Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 14461 –14466
. 10.1021/ja304282j .22870955 
Koopman W. W. A. ; Natali M. ; Bettini C. ; Melucci M. ; Muccini M. ; Toffanin S. 
Contact Resistance in Ambipolar Organic Field-Effect
Transistors Measured by Confocal Photoluminescence Electro-Modulation
Microscopy
. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 35411 –35419
. 10.1021/acsami.8b05518 .30230308 
Berger F. J. ; Lüttgens J. ; Nowack T. ; Kutsch T. ; Lindenthal S. ; Kistner L. ; Müller C. C. ; Bongartz L. M. ; Lumsargis V. A. ; Zakharko Y. ; Zaumseil J. 
Brightening of Long, Polymer-Wrapped
Carbon Nanotubes by sp3 Functionalization in Organic Solvents
. ACS Nano 
2019 , 13 , 9259 –9269
. 10.1021/acsnano.9b03792 .31381849 
Rother M. ; Brohmann M. ; Yang S. ; Grimm S. B. ; Schießl S. P. ; Graf A. ; Zaumseil J. 
Aerosol-Jet Printing of Polymer-Sorted
(6,5) Carbon Nanotubes for Field-Effect Transistors with High Reproducibility
. Adv. Electron. Mater. 
2017 , 3 , 1700080 10.1002/aelm.201700080 .

