
==== Front
BMC ProcBMC Proceedings1753-6561BioMed Central 1753-6561-4-S2-P5Poster PresentationObesity and breast cancer: inflammatory and adipocytokine correlations Matafome Paulo C 1236paulomatafome@gmail.comGomes Ana L 1Gomes Manuel 4Santos Lélita C 4Sarmento Ana B 56Seiça Raquel F 1361 Institute of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal 2 Center of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal 3 Institute of Biomedical Research in Light and Image (IBILI), Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal 4 Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospitals, Coimbra, Portugal 5 Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal 6 CIMAGO, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal2010 24 9 2010 4 Suppl 2 Abstracts of the 16th International Charles Heidelberger Symposium on Cancer ResearchAna M Urbano, A J Guiomar, Carlos F Oliveira, Isabel M Carreira and Maria C AlpoimThe 16th International Charles Heidelberger Symposium on Cancer Research thanks ACIMAGO,  BPI, FCT,  FLAD,  Pfizer,  Fundação Champalimaud, Alfagene, Reagente 5 and Câmara Municipal de Montemor o Velho who sponsor this Symposium.http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/pdf/1753-6561-4-S2-info.pdfP5 P5 Copyright ©2010 Matafome et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.2010Matafome et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.26-28 September 2010 16th International Charles Heidelberger Symposium on Cancer Research Coimbra, Portugal
==== Body
Obesity is a chronic disease affecting millions of individuals around the world and has taken epidemic proportions. Often, obesity is associated with other risk factors such as hypertension and dyslipidemia, increasing metabolic syndrome- related complications. Such complications include several cancer types, namely breast cancer. Several mechanisms are likely to be involved in cancer development and progression, however obesity as been proved to be a risk factor. This study was designed in order to analyse metabolic, inflammatory and oxidative stress correlations between obesity and breast cancer, studying three groups of patients: obesity, breast cancer and obesity plus breast cancer.

Our results revealed no significant metabolic changes between groups, despite some increased glycemia and lipid levels were observed in obesity plus cancer group. Furthermore, obesity plus cancer patients showed increased fasting insulin levels and insulin resistance. Regarding inflammatory biomarkers there were observed no differences in TNF-alpha, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-10. However, MCP-1 levels were found to be increased in obese patients with cancer, suggesting an involvement in obesity- associated tumours. Serum levels of adiponectin were similar in all groups and leptin levels were directly correlated with the BMI. However, resistin levels were increased in obese plus cancer group following MCP-1 profile.

This work revealed some biological markers of breast cancer in obese woman, suggesting dysfunctional adipose tissue as the link between obesity and cancer.
