
==== Front
BMC ProcBMC Proceedings1753-6561BioMed Central 1753-6561-4-S3-O3Oral PresentationLipidomics in biomarker development Wenk Markus 1bchmrw@nus.edu.sg1 Department of Biochemistry and Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 117597, Singapore2010 17 12 2010 4 Suppl 3 Proceedings of Immunodiagnosis of Tuberculosis: New Questions, New ToolsMaria Laura Gennaro and T Mark DohertyPublication of these proceedings has been made possible with funding from the Statens Serum Institute and the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. The organizers would like to thank the sponsors of the conference: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND), the Special Programme for Research & Training in Tropical Diseases (TDR) at the World Health Organization, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.O3 O3 Copyright ©2010 Wenk; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.2010Wenk; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.21-23 September 2008 Immunodiagnosis of Tuberculosis: New Questions, New Tools Virginia, VA, USA
==== Body
Research into the cell biology of intracellular pathogens has provided information on host-pathogen interactions and on the importance of lipids at various stages in the interactions. Lipids are “gatekeepers” in important chemical reactions involving cell signaling during pathogen docking, invasion and traffic in and out of cells. Working with the Novartis Institute for Tropical Diseases, our team is exploring how TB takes advantage of normal cellular processes by using its own lipids to subvert the host’s lipid signaling - allowing it to enter the host cell and survive there. Our focus is on developing host and pathogen biomarkers that correlate with TB infection in laboratory animals and in humans. We are performing mass spectrometry-based multi-marker quantification of lipids in tissue and body fluids (blood, urine, sputum), specifically host lipids (e.g. phospholipids and ceramides) and pathogen-derived lipids (e.g. mycolates, LAM, etc.). Our research is focused on laboratory animals and TB patients in clinical trials, to be used both for drug efficacy studies as well as case detection and monitoring of treatment response. For analysis of the host response, lipids are extracted from infected tissues and cells, isolated and analyzed by mass spectrometry to develop a lipid profile, which is used to identify the metabolic pathways involved in the infection and the enzyme/protein that facilitates the process. This technique is very sensitive - a drop of blood is potentially enough to perform the analysis. For pathogen biomarker discovery, mycobacterial lipids are isolated directly from small volumes of infected body fluids such as sputum and subsequently quantified via mass spectrometry. We expect this research will be (i) useful in providing a better description of mycobacterial biosynthetic activity, which will be helpful in developing new diagnostics, drugs and vaccines, and (ii) for the development of lipid biomarker for TB case detection.
