
==== Front
BMC ProcBMC Proceedings1753-6561BioMed Central 1753-6561-4-S2-P2Poster PresentationAssociation between night shift work, melatonin and estradiol in nurses Peplonska Beata 1Bukowska Agnieszka 1bukowska@imp.lodz.plGromadzinska Jolanta 2Sobala Wojciech 1Reszka Edyta 2Lie Jenny AS 31 Department of Environmental Epidemiology, Nofer Institute of Occupational Medicine, Lodz, Poland 2 Department of Toxicology and carcinogenesis, Nofer Institute of Occupational Medicine, Lodz, Poland 3 National Institute of Occupational Health, Oslo, Norway2010 24 9 2010 4 Suppl 2 Abstracts of the 16th International Charles Heidelberger Symposium on Cancer ResearchAna M Urbano, A J Guiomar, Carlos F Oliveira, Isabel M Carreira and Maria C AlpoimThe 16th International Charles Heidelberger Symposium on Cancer Research thanks ACIMAGO,  BPI, FCT,  FLAD,  Pfizer,  Fundação Champalimaud, Alfagene, Reagente 5 and Câmara Municipal de Montemor o Velho who sponsor this Symposium.http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/pdf/1753-6561-4-S2-info.pdfP2 P2 Copyright ©2010 Bukowska et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.2010Bukowska et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.26-28 September 2010 16th International Charles Heidelberger Symposium on Cancer Research Coimbra, Portugal
==== Body
Synthesis of melatonin is regulated through visible light exposure, with peak production during the night. Melatonin regulates various physiological processes including secretion of other hormones, and has anticarcinogenic properties as demonstrated in animal and in vitro experiments. It has been suggested that night shift work (exposure to light at night) may disrupt circadian rhythm, and melatonin synthesis leading to other hormonal alterations including increase in estradiol. Few epidemiological studies have investigated an association between night shift work, melatonin secretion and estradiol and their results are inconsistent, with support only from The Nurses Health Study in the US.

In order to clarify the associations between night shift work, melatonin and estradiol we performed analyses of the data collected in the cross-sectional study of 360 nurses working currently on rotating night-shifts and 365 nurses who work currently only during the day. Information on occupational history, use of hormones, menopausal status and breast cancer risk factors was collected in personal interviews. Morning and evening urinary 6-sulfatoxymelatonin (MT6), and estradiol levels in blood were determined.

Preliminary analyses showed no significant associations between current night shift work, melatonin and estradiol in pre-menopausal women. However, significant positive associations were found between total night shift work duration and estradiol in postmenopausal nurses.

Our findings in post-menopausal women support the thesis on alterations in estradiol as a result of prolonged exposure to rotating night shift work in nurses.
