
==== Front
BMC ProcBMC Proceedings1753-6561BioMed Central 1753-6561-4-S2-P60Poster PresentationHistone deacetylation - a new epigenetic target in cancer  Carvalho João A 1andre_carvalho_7@hotmail.comCortesão Emília 123Branco José D 1Gonçalves Ana C 13Neves Sílvia 134Carvalho Filipa 1Ribeiro André 1Alves Vera 1Silva Teresa 1Dourado Marília 13Nascimento-Costa José M 123Sarmento-Ribeiro Ana B 1341 Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra (FMUC), Coimbra, Portugal 2 University Hospital of Coimbra (HUC), Coimbra, Portugal 3 Center for Investigation on Environment, Genetics and Oncobiology (CIMAGO), FMUC, Coimbra, Portugal 4 Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology (CNC), Coimbra, Portugal2010 24 9 2010 4 Suppl 2 Abstracts of the 16th International Charles Heidelberger Symposium on Cancer ResearchAna M Urbano, A J Guiomar, Carlos F Oliveira, Isabel M Carreira and Maria C AlpoimThe 16th International Charles Heidelberger Symposium on Cancer Research thanks ACIMAGO,  BPI, FCT,  FLAD,  Pfizer,  Fundação Champalimaud, Alfagene, Reagente 5 and Câmara Municipal de Montemor o Velho who sponsor this Symposium.http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/pdf/1753-6561-4-S2-info.pdfP60 P60 Copyright ©2010 Carvalho et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.2010Carvalho et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.26-28 September 2010 16th International Charles Heidelberger Symposium on Cancer Research Coimbra, Portugal
==== Body
The hypermethylation of the "CpG islands" and histone deacetylation have been considered key epigenetic mechanisms in several types of cancer. Despite hypomethylating agents are already used in the treatment of some subtypes of Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS), the role of ,histone deacetylase inhibitors in hematological and solid tumors is still unclear.

With this work we intend to evaluate the potential therapeutic effect of the histone deacetylase inhibitor, Trichostatin A (TSA), in MDS, Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) and in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

For this, the cell lines EHEB (B-CLL), F36P (MDS) and HUH-7 (HCC were maintained in culture in absence and presence of TSA and/or Decitabine (DEC), a demethylating drug. The density and cell viability was assessed using Trypan Blue and/or Alamar test. Cell death was evaluated by flow cytometry using Annexin V and optic microscopy.

Our results show that epigenetic modulators, TSA and DEC, induce a decrease in cell proliferation and viability in a dose, time, administration squeme and cell type dependent manner, inducing cell death by apoptosis. Besides TSA was also more effective in monotherapy, when administered to cells 3/4 hours before than DEC, or in a daily dose it was observed an increase in the cytotoxic effect. On the other hand, MDS seems to be the less sensitive cells and the higher cytotoxic effect is achieved earlier and at lower doses in HUH-7 cells than in EHEB cells, for the same drug concentration.

This study suggests that histone deacetylation may become a new therapeutic approach in cancer. However, the schedule of drugs administration and cell type may interfere with their therapeutic efficacy.
