
==== Front
Anim NutrAnim NutrAnimal Nutrition2405-65452405-6383KeAi Publishing S2405-6545(17)30121-X10.1016/j.aninu.2018.01.007Animal Nutrition is indebted to Dr. Chengbo Yang of the University of Manitoba and Dr. Joshua Gong of Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada for their skills and dedication in organising and editing the paperNon-antibiotic feed additives in diets for pigs: A review Liu Yanhong aEspinosa Charmaine D. bAbelilla Jerubella J. bCasas Gloria A. bcLagos L. Vanessa bLee Su A. bKwon Woong B. bMathai John K. bNavarro Diego M.D.L. bJaworski Neil W. dStein Hans H. hstein@illinois.edub∗a Department of Animal Science, University of California, Davis, CA 95817, USAb Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USAc Department of Animal Production, College of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, University of Colombia, Bogota 111321, Colombiad Trouw Nutrition, Boxmeer, 5831 JN, The Netherlands∗ Corresponding author. hstein@illinois.edu08 2 2018 6 2018 08 2 2018 4 2 113 125 28 6 2017 14 12 2017 17 1 2018 © 2018 Chinese Association of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd.2018Chinese Association of Animal Science and Veterinary MedicineThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).A number of feed additives are marketed to assist in boosting the pigs' immune system, regulate gut microbiota, and reduce negative impacts of weaning and other environmental challenges. The most commonly used feed additives include acidifiers, zinc and copper, prebiotics, direct-fed microbials, yeast products, nucleotides, and plant extracts. Inclusion of pharmacological levels of zinc and copper, certain acidifiers, and several plant extracts have been reported to result in improved pig performance or improved immune function of pigs. It is also possible that use of prebiotics, direct-fed microbials, yeast, and nucleotides may have positive impacts on pig performance, but results have been less consistent and there is a need for more research in this area.

Keywords
AcidifiersDirect-fed microbialsMineralsPlant extractsPrebioticsPigs
==== Body
1 Introduction
The increased awareness of potential negative effects of including antibiotic growth promoters in diets fed to pigs has resulted in an increased interest in producing pigs without using antibiotic growth promoters. However, by eliminating antibiotic growth promoters from diets fed to newly weaned pigs, disease problems may be increased and growth performance may be reduced. In contrast, removal of antibiotic growth promoters from diets fed to growing-finishing pigs does not always result in increased disease problems (Wierup, 2001). Because growth performance is increased to a greater extent in weanling pigs than in growing – finishing pigs if antibiotic growth promoters are used, the negative effects on growth performance of removing antibiotics from diets fed to finishing pigs is less than for weanling pigs (Cromwell, 2013). Nevertheless, to avoid the negative effects of removing antibiotic growth promoters from diets for pigs, changes in management and nutritional strategies may be required (Pettigrew, 2006, Stein and Kil, 2006, Kil and Stein, 2010). The aim of these changes is to improve the pigs' ability to prevent pathogenic bacteria from colonizing the intestinal system, which often is accomplished via an improved immunological response to pathogens. This also can be accomplished via mechanisms that prevent the pathogens from adhering to intestinal mucosa or releasing toxins, and thus, reduce the damaging effects of the pathogens on the host. In the present contribution, some of the additives that may be used to ameliorate the negative impacts of removing antibiotic growth promoters from the diets will be discussed. The objective of the review is to provide an overview over the additives that are available for inclusion in diets for pigs and also to include the believed mechanisms for each additive as well as the most recent results from growth performance and digestibility experiments that are available. However, it is not the objective to provide an exhaustive review on each additive.

2 Acidifiers
Acidifiers are often used as alternatives to antibiotic growth promoters because of their ability to create a favorable intestinal environment for beneficial microbes which may result in increased nutrient digestibility, increased growth performance, and reduced diarrhea. Dietary acidifiers may be organic or inorganic acids or salts of acids (Partanen and Mroz, 1999, Papatsiros and Billinis, 2012). Blends of acids including mixtures of various organic acids, or mixtures of organic and inorganic acids may also be used to maximize acidification effects in diets for pigs (Zentek et al., 2013, Ahmed et al., 2014, Kuang et al., 2015). However, despite many years of research, the exact mode of action of dietary acidifiers has not been fully elucidated, but the following mechanisms have been proposed: 1) a decreased or stabilized gastric pH may lead to increased pepsin activity; 2) a modulation and alteration of the gut microbiota may inhibit pathogenic bacterial activity; and 3) acidifiers may improve nutrient digestibility in the small and large intestines resulting in increased nutrient retention (Kil et al., 2011, Papatsiros and Billinis, 2012).

2.1 Organic acids
The most commonly used organic acids include formic acid, fumaric acid, lactic acid, and citric acids and a comprehensive review of the effects of these acids is available (Suiryanrayna and Ramana, 2015). Supplementation of diets with organic acids usually results in a reduction in stomach pH (Eidelsburger et al., 1992b, Roth et al., 1992a, Radcliffe et al., 1998). Formic acid, citric acid, and benzoic acid improved growth rate and feed conversion ratio when included in diets fed weanling pigs (Guggenbuhl et al., 2007, Halas et al., 2010, Papatsiros et al., 2011, Diao et al., 2016, Luise et al., 2017) and growing pigs (Giesting and Easter, 1985; Suryanarayana et al., 2012). Formic acid and its salts had a positive effect on the apparent total tract digestibility (ATTD) of protein (Eckel et al., 1992), but not on ileal amino acid digestibility (Gabert et al., 1995) and in fact a reduction in ileal amino acid digestibility has been reported as a result of diet acidification (Gabert and Sauer, 1995). However, supplementation of diets with citric acid had a positive effect on the digestibility of protein, calcium and phosphorus in sows (Liu et al., 2014a, Liu et al., 2014b). Dietary benzoic acid has been shown to improve the apparent digestibility of Ca and P in growing pigs (Sauer et al., 2009, Bühler et al., 2010, Xu et al., 2018), crude protein in weanling pigs (Guggenbuhl et al., 2007, Halas et al., 2010, Xu et al., 2018), and organic matter, crude protein, ether extract and crude fiber in sows (Kluge et al., 2010). Formic acid added to diets for weanling pigs may also increase intestinal microbial diversity and change concentrations of certain intestinal microbes (Luise et al., 2017). It is possible that sources of protein and inclusion levels of acids in the diets are among the reasons for the inconsistent results that have been reported (Blank et al., 1999, Kil et al., 2011). As an example, diets containing oilseed meals as the primary protein source usually show a greater response to acidifiers compared with diets containing milk protein and responses to acidifiers are usually dose dependent (Ravindran and Kornegay, 1993).

Recently, combinations of organic acids and medium-chain fatty acids have been demonstrated to reduce pathogenic activity than if acids or fatty acids are fed individually (Zentek et al., 2013) and the combination of organic acids and medium-chain fatty acids had positive effects on the digestibility of nutrients as well as on growth performance (Upadhaya et al., 2014, Kuang et al., 2015, Long et al., 2018). It was demonstrated that the reason for this observation is that expression of proinflammatory cytokines was downregulated and proliferation of lactobacillus was increased (Kuang et al., 2015). The pH in the stomach as well as the concentration of pathogenic bacteria in the intestinal tract were also reduced in pigs fed diets containing a combination of organic acids and medium-chain fatty acids (Zentek et al., 2013). Likewise, the concentration of hydroxyl radicals in serum was reduced if pigs were fed a combination of organic acids and medium-chain fatty acids (Long et al., 2018).

2.2 Inorganic acids
Inorganic acids commonly used in diets include hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, and phosphoric acid. Positive responses to supplementations of diets with phosphoric acid and hydrochloric acid have been reported (Mahan et al., 1996), although a lack of a positive response to hydrochloric acid has also been observed (Gedek et al., 1992, Eidelsburger et al., 1992a, Roth et al., 1992b, Kil et al., 2006, Kil et al., 2011). Supplementation of diets with sulfuric acid has been reported to result in a negative effect on growth performance (Eidelsburger et al., 1992b, Mahan et al., 1996).

2.3 Salts of acids
Salts of acids also have been used as acidifiers for pigs and these salts include calcium-formate, potassium-diformate, sodium-diformate, and sodium-fumarate. Positive effects of calcium-formate on growth performance and diarrhea scores were reported (Bosi et al., 2007), but in general, calcium-formate is not as efficient as potassium-diformate (Li et al., 2008a). Potassium-diformate may result in greater gastric hydrochloric acid and lactic acid concentrations because of increased mRNA expression of H+-K+-ATPase and gastrin receptors in the gastric oxyntic mucosa (Xia et al., 2016). Positive effects on dry matter and protein digestibility of supplementing diets with sodium-diformate and sodium-fumarate have also been reported (Eidelsburger et al., 1992b).

Butyric acid, also known as butanoic acid, is one of the short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) that are produced by microbial fermentation in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract of pigs (Mallo et al., 2012). Especially, the propionic and butyric acids produced in the GI tract are considered important metabolites that have antibacterial effects on pathogenic bacteria (Stecher and Hardt, 2011). Addition of butyric acid directly to a swine diet may be limited because of its highly volatile and corrosive characteristics (Piva et al., 2002). Therefore, some products of butyric acid have been used in combined forms with Ca and Na. Machinsky et al. (2015) observed a positive effect of Na-butyrate on the protein digestibility of pigs. Recently, dietary Na-butyrate decreased diarrhea scores of weanling pigs (Fang et al., 2014) and improved growth performance (Lu et al., 2008, Hanczakowska et al., 2014, Huang et al., 2015). In addition, Na-butyrate supplementation to gestating sow diets and pre-weanling pig diets (Le Gall et al., 2009, Lu et al., 2012) was reported to have a positive effect on muscle and adipose tissue oxidative genes and growth performance.

2.4 Blends of acids
A mixture of citric acids and sorbic acids resulted in improved growth performance of pigs (Grilli et al., 2010), and a blend of organic and inorganic acids increased fecal Lactobacillus spp. and decreased Escherichia coli counts, but did not improve growth performance of pigs (Ahmed et al., 2014). Likewise, addition of a blend of organic acids (fumaric, lactate, citric, propionic, and benzoic acids) followed by a blend of phosphoric, fumaric, lactic, and citric acid improved growth performance of newly weaned pigs (Walsh et al., 2007). Upadhaya et al. (2014) also reported increased Lactobacillus spp. count in feces from pigs fed a blend of acidifiers and a blend of acidifiers was effective in reducing diarrhea in pigs that were stressed by changing temperatures (Wang et al., 2016a, Wang et al., 2016b).

In conclusion, a number of acidifiers are used in diets fed to pigs, but results reported in the literature have not been consistently positive. Further research is, therefore, needed to clarify the modes of action of acidifiers and establish under which conditions a positive response can be expected.

3 Minerals
Minerals are inorganic elements needed by pigs for maintenance, growth, and reproduction. Minerals needed in quantities greater than 100 mg/kg of feed are called macro minerals whereas minerals required in smaller quantities are called micro minerals or trace minerals. Examples of micro minerals are Cu and Zn, which are needed for normal bodily functions of pigs. However, unlike most other minerals, Cu and Zn have antimicrobial properties and they are therefore often added to diets in quantities greater than what is needed to fulfill the nutritional requirements.

3.1 Zinc
Zinc is a component and activator of several metalloenzymes, and has a major function in production and secretion of hormones. It also plays a role in skin and wound healing and in the integrity of the immune system (McDowell, 1992). Nursery pigs usually require 80 to 100 mg/kg of Zn (van Heugten et al., 2003, NRC, 2012) and deficiency of Zn in weanling pig diets leads to growth retardation, loss of appetite, skeletal abnormalities, and hyperkeratinization of the skin called parakeratosis (Ku et al., 1970, Prasad et al., 1971). However, use of pharmacological levels (2,000 to 4,000 mg/kg) of inorganic Zn in the form of ZnO is a common recommendation to reduce post-weaning diarrhea and improve growth performance (Poulsen, 1998, Smith et al., 1997, Hill et al., 2000, Hu et al., 2012). It has also been reported that high levels of Zn stimulate and can improve feed intake by 14% to 17% (Hahn and Baker, 1993, Case and Carlson, 2002). Aside from ZnO, there are also other forms of Zn, which can be included in diets at lower concentrations. These forms include the chelated sources of Zn such as Zn-methionine, which has greater bioavailability of Zn than ZnO (Ward et al., 1996) and addition of 250 mg/kg of Zn-methionine to nursery diets has beneficial effects that are equivalent to addition of 2,000 mg/kg of Zn from ZnO (Mavromichalis et al., 2001). The biological mechanism of Zn in enhancing growth performance points may be related to its function in the intestinal integrity and morphology in weanling pigs (Pearce et al., 2015). High Zn intake improves the intestinal morphology of weaning pigs, increasing the villous height and the villous height to crypt depth ratio (Carlson et al., 1998, Li et al., 2001, Li et al., 2006, Hu et al., 2013a, Xia et al., 2017, Zhu et al., 2017) and decreases crypt depth in the small intestine of weaned pigs (Li et al., 2001, Zhu et al., 2017). Dietary Zn also assists in regeneration of injured intestinal epithelial tissue (Alam et al., 1994), stability of the microflora and diversity of the coliform microbes (Katouli et al., 1999), reduction of intestinal permeability of weanling pigs (Zhang and Guo, 2009), and lymphocyte proliferation (van Heugten et al., 2003).

The intestinal barrier is mainly formed by a layer of epithelial cells joined by tight junction proteins, which consist mainly of the transmembrane protein complexes (e.g., claudins and occludins) and the cytosolic proteins ZO (e.g., junctional adhesion molecule, ZO-1, ZO-2 and ZO-3; Al-Sadi et al., 2009). The ZO-1 and occludin, therefore, are key proteins of tight junction, and the levels of these proteins are consistently associated with the gut barrier function (Song et al., 2015). High levels of Zn intake increase the ileum mucosa (Zhang and Guo, 2009, Zhu et al., 2017) and jejunum mucosa (Hu et al., 2013a, Xia et al., 2017) of occludin and ZO-1 and high dietary Zn reduces the paracellular flux of FD4 across the epithelium (Hu et al., 2013a, Song et al., 2015), which is an indication of improved intestinal barrier function.

Zinc is also a molecular signal for immune cells, and it is required for differentiation and generation of T helper cells (Prasad, 2014). Deficiency of Zn induces thymic atrophy, lymphopenia, and compromised cell- and antibody-mediated responses, resulting in increased rates and longer duration of infection (Hirano et al., 2008). In contrast, high levels of Zn downregulate the mRNA expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines: TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-6, IL-8, IL-1β and nuclear factor kappa beta (Hu et al., 2013a, Zhu et al., 2017), and upregulate the anti-inflammatory cytokine TFG-β (Zhu et al., 2017). Pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-1β and IL-6) may induce pathological openings of the intestinal tight junction barrier and increase intestinal epithelial permeability (Al-Sadi et al., 2009), which will disrupt intestinal barrier function (Hu et al., 2013b). High doses of Zn doses may also increase mRNA expression of IGF-1 and CDK4 (Xia et al., 2017). The IGF-1 can be locally synthesized in the gastrointestinal tract, is an important mediator of the proliferation and differentiation of enterocytes (Prasad, 2014), whereas CDK4 is used as a marker to monitor proliferation and apoptosis due to its functions in G1 phase of cell cycle (Hu et al., 2013b). Also, high Zn levels in the diet improved the small intestinal redox state in weaned piglets by increasing the ratio of reduced glutathione to oxidized glutathione and prevented apoptosis in the small intestine and increased the number of goblet cells in the intestinal tract (Slade et al., 2011).

However, addition of pharmacological levels of ZnO in diets for weanling pigs will reduce the digestibility of Ca and P and reduce the effectiveness of microbial phytase in the diets (Walk et al., 2013, Walk et al., 2015, Blavi et al., 2017). The reason for the reduced digestibility of P is most likely that an antagonistic relationship between Zn and P exists, whereas reduced digestibility of Ca is a result of competition for the absorptive transporters in the brush border (Bertolo et al., 2001, Walk et al., 2015).

Inclusion of pharmacological levels of ZnO will be discontinued in the European Union from 2022 due to concerns about buildup of Zn in soil fertilized with pig manure. However, in the rest of the world, ZnO may still be used.

3.2 Copper
Copper is an essential component of several metalloenzymes including cytochrome oxidase and lysyl oxidase, and is involved in oxidation–reduction reactions, transport of oxygen and electrons, and protection against oxidative stress (Hill, 2013). Copper is also involved in metabolic reactions, including cellular respiration, tissue pigmentation, hemoglobin formation, and connective tissue development (McDowell, 1992). Neonatal pigs usually require 5 to 6 mg/kg of Cu for normal metabolism (Underwood, 1977; NRC, 2012), but as pigs get older, the requirement for Cu decreases. Pigs deprived of copper develop critical dysfunctions and hypocuprosis (Suttle, 2010). Microcytic anemia is a sign of copper deficiency due to its role in hemoglobin formation and development (Hart et al., 2002, Suttle and Angus, 1978). Pigs may also suffer from bone abnormalities and unusual leg condition with various degrees of crookedness due to a lack of copper in the diet (Baxter et al., 1953). Addition of pharmacological levels of Cu in pig diets has been a common practice to improve growth performance (Ma et al., 2015). and supplementing Cu to diets fed to weanling pigs at 100 to 250 mg/kg may reduce post-weaning scouring and improve average daily gain (ADG) and average daily feed intake (ADFI) (Poulsen, 1995, Rutkowska-Pejsak et al., 1998, Perez et al., 2011). In most cases, additional Cu is included in the sulfate form, however, other chemical forms of Cu may be used. It has been reported that tribasic copper chloride (TBCC) is as effective as CuSO4 in enhancing growth rate and feed efficiency in pigs (Cromwell et al., 1998). Use of TBCC instead of CuSO4 also results in improved utilization of P in broilers (Banks et al., 2004), which may be because TBCC results in less inhibition of microbial phytase (Pang and Applegate, 2006). It also appears that TBCC is less aggressive in premixes, and therefore reduces the destruction of vitamins, phytase, and probiotics in vitamin mineral premixes during storage. Chelated Cu, such as Cu citrate, may also be used in diets for pigs, and because the availability of Cu in Cu citrate is greater than in CuSO4, lower concentrations are needed in the diets which results in reduced excretion of Cu (Armstrong et al., 2004).

The growth promoting effects of dietary Cu have been attributed to its bacteriostatic and bactericidal properties (Stahly et al., 1980) because Cu may reduce bacterial populations in the intestine, which may affect the growth and community structure of microorganisms in the cecum and colon (Hojberg et al., 2005). It has also been speculated that improvement in ADFI as a result of Cu supplementation is due to the role of Cu in upregulating the mRNA expression of neuropeptide Y (Li et al., 2008b), which is considered a feed intake inducer (Gehlert, 1999). Copper may also disrupt enzyme structure and functions of bacteria by binding to S or carboxylate-containing groups and amino groups of proteins (Sterritt and Lester, 1980). Inclusion of Cu at pharmacological levels in diets fed to weanling pigs also increases villus height and reduces crypt depth, thus improving intestinal health (Zhao et al., 2007).

3.3 Additive effects of Cu and Zn
Results of several experiments have indicated beneficial effects of supplementing pharmacological levels of Cu and Zn individually, but in some experiments, effects of adding pharmacological levels of both Cu and Zn were investigated. However, results of some experiments indicated that effects of the two minerals are not additive (Hill et al., 2000), but other results have indicated some additive effects (Perez et al., 2011). It was reported that ZnO may modify the colonic microbial profile, whereas Cu in addition to altering the microbiota profile also reduces microbial diversity in the ileum and colon, which may be the reason for additive effects of the two minerals (Namkung et al., 2006).

4 Prebiotics
The composition of the gut microbiota plays an important role in the health of pigs and increasing the population of bacteria of genus Bifidobacterium, lactobacilli, and eubacteria in the gut may improve the health of the animals, and decrease the risk of diseases (Roberfroid et al., 2010, van der Aar et al., 2017). Growth of these bacteria increases the concentration of lactic and acetic acid, which will reduce the pH in the intestine and increase fermentation with a subsequent increase in the concentration of SCFA and a reduced concentration of pathogenic bacteria (Smiricky-Tjardes et al., 2003).

Prebiotics are mainly non digestible oligosaccharides and have been defined as “non-digestible food ingredients that beneficially affects the host by selectively stimulating the growth and/or activity of one or a limited number of bacteria in the colon, and thus improves host health” (Gibson and Roberfroid, 1995). Non-digestible carbohydrates are the main substrate for gut microbiota, however, only a fraction of non-digestible carbohydrates can be considered as prebiotic because not all indigestible carbohydrates impacts the microbial population.

Inulin, fructo-oligosaccharides, transgalacto-oligosaccharides, and lactulose are the most common carbohydrates that have been recognized as prebiotics because these carbohydrates are easily fermentable and therefore will result in reduced luminal pH (de Lange et al., 2010, Bach Knudsen et al., 2012). However, other dietary carbohydrates such as arabino-xylans, xyloglucans, and resistant starch also may have prebiotic effects (Bach Knudsen et al., 2012). Prebiotics also may be obtained by chemical processing that hydrolyze polysaccharides (i.e., isomalto-oligosaccharides from starch) or by enzymatic or chemical synthesis from disaccharides (Broek et al., 2008). Most prebiotics are synthesized or isolated from plant and algae polysaccharides (Smiricky-Tjardes et al., 2003, Saad et al., 2013, Wu et al., 2017).

Beneficial effects of prebiotics in diets fed to pigs have been related to increased fermentability, because the subsequent synthesis of SCFA results in reduced intestinal pH. Increased concentrations of SCFA also reduce protein fermentation in the intestinal tract (Awati et al., 2006, Roberfroid et al., 2010, Lindberg, 2014). Butyrate regulates epithelial cell growth and induces differentiation and apoptosis in the small intestine, which is believed to result in increased intestinal cell proliferation and improved digestive and absorptive capacities of the small intestine (Lindberg, 2014, van der Aar et al., 2017). Addition of 100 or 200 mg/kg of chito-oligosaccharide (a derived of the of chitosan) to diets for weaning pigs, improved growth performance and increased digestibility of dietary nutrients, decreased the incidence of diarrhea, and improved small intestine morphology (Liu et al., 2008). Isomalto-oligosaccharides, added at 6.0 g/kg to diets for weanling pigs improved growth performance, decreased fecal scores and increased ATTD of dry matter, organic matter, and gross energy in diets fed to weanling pigs. Also, greater villus height in the ileum and increased concentrations of volatile fatty acids in cecum and colon contents were observed by adding isomalto-oligosaccharides to diets (Wang et al., 2016a, Wang et al., 2016b, Wu et al., 2017). However, supplementation of 0.1% of chicory, mannan oligosaccharides, or 0.02% of chitosan to diets for weaning pigs had no effect on growth performance or serum concentration of IgA (Li et al., 2016) and addition of inulin to diets for weanling pigs had not effect on ATTD of gross energy or dry matter or on nitrogen retention (Acosta et al., 2017).

Results of several studies have also demonstrated that the prebiotic lactulose may result in greater concentrations of serum IgM and IgA and improved immunity against Salmonella typhymuriun (Naqid et al., 2015). Positives effects of lactulose on growth performance, microbiota composition, and immune response of weaning pig challenged with enterotoxigenic E. coli K88 or S. typhymuriun have also been reported, but those effects have not been observed in growing pigs (Guerra-Ordaz et al., 2014; Naqid et al., 2015, Tran et al., 2016). Likewise, increased cell-mediated immune response, IL-1β gene expression, and serum levels of IL-1β, IL-2, and IL-6, were observed when diets for weaned pigs were supplemented with chitosan [6-sugar unit of N acetyl glucosamine with β-(1 to 4) linkages] and galacto-mannan oligosaccharides (Yin et al., 2008).

In conclusion, although several mechanisms have been suggested for the action of action of prebiotics, it appears that modified intestinal microbiota and increased concentrations of volatile fatty acids in the intestinal tract are the best documented and accepted effects of prebiotics. However, it is possible that prebiotics also impact the immune system, but additional research is needed to document these effects. Among the compounds with prebiotic effects, inulin and fructo oligosaccharides are the most studied. The inconsistent results that have been obtained with these compounds may be due to differences in age of pigs, health status, or environmental conditions.

5 Direct-fed microbials (DFM) and yeast
Direct-fed microbials, which may be more commonly known as probiotics, are defined as, “live microorganisms which, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host (FAO/WHO, 2001).” Since 1989, the Food and Drug Administration has required that the term probiotic only be used when referring to human microbial products; therefore, the term “DFM” is used in the U.S. feed industry, whereas “probiotic” is used interchangeably with human and animal feed worldwide. Direct-fed microbials are categorized into 3 main groups: Bacillus, lactic acid-producing bacteria, and yeast (Stein and Kil, 2006, NRC, 2012). Yeast include a broad range of products that may be available in pig feed, therefore, a brief overview of yeast will be separately discussed in the current review. Bacillus-based DFM are spore-forming, which makes them thermostable and able to survive at low pH. Bacillus-based DFM have been identified as potent producers of extracellular fiber-degrading enzymes, which may aid nutrient digestion and utilization (Ferrari et al., 1993, Schreier, 1993). Lactic-acid producing bacteria are not spore-forming and survival during feed processing is of concern (de Lange et al., 2010). Lactic-acid producing bacteria dominate the gastrointestinal tract of the nursing pig (Li et al., 2003, Richards et al., 2005), which helps reduce the pH in the gut by producing lactic acid through fermentation, inhibiting enteric pathogens (Vandenbergh, 1993), and improving host immunity (Niers et al., 2005, de Lange et al., 2010). However, after weaning of pigs, the concentration of lactic-acid producing bacteria diminishes; therefore, supplementation of weaned pig diets with lactic-acid producing DFM may be beneficial (Stein and Kil, 2006).

Addition of DFM to swine diets may improve gut health by modifying the microflora, which may help control pathogens (Prescott et al., 2005), enhance immune regulation and response (Galdeano and Perdigon, 2006), increase nutrient digestibility (Giang et al., 2011), improve health status, and improve pig growth performance (Kenny et al., 2011, Cromwell, 2013). Addition of DFM to diets for pigs may also reduce the immune stimulation, indicated by a reduction in pro-inflammatory cytokines in enterocytes, which may shift energy normally used for excessive immune stimulation to growth, thereby improving feed efficiency (Cho et al., 2011).

5.1 Mode of action
As the name suggests, DFM are added to the diet where they must survive processing technologies such as extrusion and pelleting. Once consumed by the pig, DFM enter the stomach where they are subjected to a low pH and pepsin. Bacillus DFM are metabolically inactive spores that are thermostable and survive at a low pH and, therefore, are thought to survive feed processing and digestion in the stomach. The pH in the small intestine is 6 to 7, which is optimal for the spores to germinate, grow, and produce enzymes (Merchant et al., 2011). The DFM continue to survive due to their ability to produce enzymes that degrade the feed and produce SCFA as a by-product of fermentation. The SCFA produced are utilized by the pig as an energy source, and the increased SCFA concentration reduces the pH in the gastrointestinal tract, which may inhibit growth of pathogenic bacteria. The DFM also may degrade non-starch polysaccharides to reducing sugars that may serve as an energy source for the pig (Jaworski et al., 2017). Direct-fed microbials may also improve gastrointestinal health by promoting the growth of beneficial bacteria such as lactobacilli and bifidobacteria, thereby decreasing the growth of deleterious bacteria from the large family of Gram-negative Enterobacteriaceae. The decrease in pathogenic bacteria and increase in gastrointestinal health may correspond to an increase in the ability of the pig to digest and ferment nutrients, enhance their utilization of feed and energy, decrease the maintenance energy requirement associated with immune system stimulation, and thereby increase growth performance (Kenny et al., 2011).

5.2 Efficacy of direct-fed microbials
Published reviews have concluded that the efficacy of DFM added to swine diets is inconsistent (Pollmann, 1986, Pollmann, 1992; Nousiainen and Setala, 1993; Stavric and Kornegay, 1995). However, due to improvements in the strains used in commercial DFM, older reports may not always be appropriate to use to assess the efficacy of new DFM because the development of DFM and the technology associated with production of DFM has improved, which may lead to increased efficiency.

Addition of 0, 5.0 × 104, 6.7 × 106, or 7.5 × 108 cfu/d of Bifidobacterium globosum A (lactic-acid producing DFM) to weanling pig corn-soybean meal-based diets quadratically improved ADG and average daily feed intake, but did not affect G:F, immune response, or pH of intestinal contents (Apgar et al., 1993). This same feeding regimen was maintained through the growing-finishing phase and pig performance and carcass characteristics were not affected by DFM addition (Apgar et al., 1993). More recent studies utilizing lactic-acid producing DFM (Bifidobacterium lactis NCC2818) supplemented to a weanling pig diet produced an up-regulation of proteins associated with epithelial tight cell junctions and reduced IgA in intestinal mucosal tissues, indicating increased gut barrier function (Lewis et al., 2013). It has also been demonstrated that effects of DFM are most likely diet dependent (Merrifield et al., 2013, Bailey, 2016).

Feeding DFM has been suggested to increase cellulolytic bacteria in the rumen of cows (Dawson et al., 1990) and to enhance dietary fiber fermentation in the horse (Godbee, 1983). However, addition of 0, 8%, or 16% peanut hulls, added at the expense of corn, to diets fed to pigs linearly reduced the ATTD of dry matter, acid detergent fiber, and neutral detergent fiber, and DFM addition did not ameliorate the reduced digestibility (Kornegay et al., 1995). Kornegay and Risley (1996) observed no difference in the ATTD of dry matter, acid detergent fiber, and neutral detergent fiber by 60 kg pigs fed either a corn-soybean meal diet without or with a DFM containing Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus licheniformis, or with a DFM containing B. subtilis, B. licheniformis, and Bacillus pumilus.

In a study utilizing 270 wean-to-finish pigs, the dose of DFM (0, 0.64 × 106, 1.28 × 106, 1.92 × 106 viable spores of BioPlus 2B, which contained B. licheniformis and B. subtilis in a 1:1 ratio) and duration of DFM addition (weaning only or wean-to-finish) to pig diets was investigated. Results indicated that ADG, G:F, and carcass quality were improved with increased dose and duration of DFM addition (Alexopoulos et al., 2004). Lee et al. (2014) produced a B. subtilis DFM grown on citrus-juice waste and included this DFM at 0, 1.5, 3.0, or 4.5 g/kg in phase 1 and phase 2 corn-soybean meal based nursery pig diets. Linear improvements were observed in pig growth performance, ATTD of nutrients and energy, serum immunoglobulins, and small intestinal morphology (Lee et al., 2014).

Improved ADG and G:F and reduced time required to wash manure off of mats was observed by addition of 0.05% DFM comprised of two strains of B. lichenformis and one strain of B. subtilis (Davis et al., 2008). The authors hypothesized that performance and pen cleaning were improved with DFM addition because of increased dietary fiber degradation by enzymes secreted by the DFM. Therefore, further research is necessary to determine the effect of Bacillus-based DFM on dietary fiber fermentation. The ATTD of N and energy by pigs fed a corn-soybean meal-based diet were improved by addition of a DFM composed of B. subtilis and Clostridium butyricum and, subsequently, pig ADG and G:F were improved (Meng et al., 2010). Pigs challenged with Salmonella enterica had reduced ADG and G:F and increased bacterial shedding scores compared with non-challenged pigs, but addition of a Lactobacillus plantarum DFM did not influence recovery from the challenge (Gebru et al., 2010). Weanling pigs fed a Lactobacillus reuteri and L. plantarum DFM for 28 d had improved overall ADG and ATTD of protein and gross energy compared with pigs fed no DFM. Results for pigs fed the DFM were similar to results for pigs fed a diet containing 0.01% apramycin, indicating that the Lactobacillus reuteri and L. plantarum DFM may minimize antibiotic use in weanling pig diets (Zhao and Kim, 2015). However, DFM cannot replace antibiotics in terms of preventing or treating of sickness or disease, but seem to be a viable alternative to antibiotics used as growth promoters.

A diet containing corn, soybean meal, and distillers dried grains with solubles (DDGS) supplemented with 500 g/metric ton Bacillus spp. DFM and fed to nursery pigs had a 100 kcal/kg increase in digestible energy (DE) due to a 9.2% increase in the ATTD of neutral detergent fiber compared with the control diet with no DFM (Owusu-Asiedu et al., 2014). Growing-finishing pigs fed high-fiber diets based on corn, soybean meal, DDGS, wheat middlings, corn germ, and soybean hulls supplemented with a Bacillus spp. DFM had increased fecal SCFA concentrations and, subsequently, greater available dietary energy, which corresponded with improved ADG and G:F, and a greater loin eye area and fat-free lean percentage compared with pigs fed no DFM (Jaworski et al., 2014). Likewise, improved G:F of weanling pigs has also been reported as a result of inclusion of DFM in the diets (Jaworski et al., 2017). These results are supportive of the hypothesis that Bacillus DFM may result in increased fiber degradation in the intestinal tract of pigs. A consequence of this is that the response to DFM most likely is diet dependent because not all diets contain the same amount and types of fibers. In addition, addition of a DFM to diets for pigs may result in increased concentrations of intestinal microbes that express enzymes that aid in fiber fermentation.

5.3 Yeast
Yeast may be supplemented in diets fed to pigs in several forms: whole live yeast cells, heat-treated yeast cells, ground yeast cells, purified yeast cell cultures, and yeast extracts. Effects of the supplements vary based on the form of supplementation, and therefore, the intended uses of each type of supplementation also vary. As such, care must be taken in the interpretation of results of various yeast supplements. However, there are some generally proposed uses for yeast supplements. Yeast or yeast-based product supplementation may boost ADFI and pig growth performance, augment mucosal immunity, promote intestinal development, adsorb mycotoxins, reduce post-weaning diarrhea, and modulate gut microbiota (Kogan and Kocher, 2007, Shen et al., 2009, Sauer et al., 2011, Jiang et al., 2015). Substantial evidence, however, for many of these claims has yet to be reported.

Yeast is resilient to deactivation in the gut and may be effective in modulating colonization of the host’s gut (Bontempo et al., 2006). The mechanism by which yeast cells can provide these benefits is the result of the composition of the yeast cells. The specific sugar types that form large parts of the cell walls of yeast, notably β-d-glucans and α-d-mannans, are believed to be responsible for the effects of yeasts cells (Kogan and Kocher, 2007, Shen et al., 2009).

Additionally, yeast extracts contains nucleotides, and although nucleotides are present in nearly all feed ingredients and the requirement for nucleotides is typically met via endogenous synthesis (Sauer et al., 2011), there is some evidence that the requirement for nucleotides may be increased under certain conditions, such as during disease, high stress, or rapid growth (Carver and Walker, 1995, Waititu et al., 2016). If there was a period of a pig’s life that matched these conditions, and therefore induced a potential nucleotide deficiency, it would be during the time right after weaning, and in that case, yeast cells may be potentially beneficial.

Part of easing the transition around weaning of pigs involves preparing the gut for the change in diet form. Weaning itself causes villus atrophy and decreases replacement of enterocytes both of which inhibit nutrient absorption (Jiang et al., 2015). However, supplementation of live yeast and finely ground live yeast may result in increased villus heights and villus-to-crypt ratios (Bontempo et al., 2006; Jiang et al., 2015). Similar results were reported for yeast fermentation products (Shen et al., 2009). Additionally, there has been evidence that live yeast supplementation may increase gut cell proliferation and increase the concentration of glycoconjugates in the mucin of supplemented pigs, thereby increasing their resistance to pathogenic invasion (Bontempo et al., 2006). However, supplementation with yeast cultures or yeast culture products supplemented with mannan-oligosaccharides has also been shown to have no benefits on gut morphology (van der Peet-Schwering et al., 2007).

Many of the beneficial effects of yeast products are claimed to be the result of immune-modulation (Kogan and Kocher, 2007, Molist et al., 2014) and there is evidence that yeast and yeast products stimulate the immune system because the β-d-glucans in yeast cell walls enhance the function of macrophages and neutrophils by binding to their receptors causing cascades cytokines and increased antibody production (Kogan and Kocher, 2007; Kim et al., 2017). Feeding of live yeast and finely ground live yeast also increases serum concentrations of IgA, IL-2, and IL-6 (Jiang et al., 2015). The α-d-mannans in yeast have possible antioxidant effects (Kogan and Kocher, 2007). In particular, the α-d-mannans are believed to bind to mannose-specific receptors that are present on many bacteria such as E. coli and Salmonella spp., which prevents adhesion of these pathogens to the mannose rich glycoproteins lining the intestinal lumen (Kogan and Kocher, 2007). Indeed, it was reported that pigs that were fed diets supplemented with live yeast and exposed to enterotoxigenic E. coli had reduced disease-related stress, reduced diarrhea scores, reduced duration of diarrhea, and reduced shedding of E. coli (Trckova et al., 2014). Likewise, pigs that are challenged with E. coli K88 and fed diets containing a yeast fermentation product have grater concentrations of serum tumor necrosis factor-alpha, less diarrhea, greater appetite and reduced adherence of E. coli to the intestinal mucosa than pigs fed an un-supplemented control (Kiarie et al., 2011, Kiarie et al., 2012). However, results of other studies were less affirmative (Weedman et al., 2011).

Results from research investigating growth performance of pigs fed yeast or yeast-based products are mixed, but it has been reported that there were no difference between pigs fed antibiotic growth promoters and pigs fed diets supplemented with yeast on growth performance, nutrient digestibility, and intestinal morphology, indicating that yeast products may be an effective alternative to antibiotic growth promoters (Shen et al., 2009). It also was demonstrated that the immune-potentiating costs of yeast-based supplements had no negative effect on pig growth performance (Molist et al., 2014). However, it has also been reported that yeast cultures have no impact on pig growth performance or ATTD of dry matter, crude protein, acid detergent fiber, and neutral detergent fiber (Kornegay et al., 1995).

In conclusion, DFM supplementation to swine diets has produced more beneficial results in the past decade compared with earlier reports, indicating an improvement in the development and use of DFM. Lactic acid-producing bacteria appear to be more beneficial for weanling pigs to help stabilize the gastrointestinal tract after weaning, whereas Bacillus-based DFM may be more beneficial for growing-finishing pigs to increase the digestibility of energy and nutrients in less expensive high-fiber diets and, subsequently, increase performance and carcass characteristics. Effects of supplementing pig diets with yeast products is not fully understood, but it is believed that yeast products may have a number of positive effects if added to diets for pigs and there is some evidence that yeast-based products may be used as partial or fully substitutes for antibiotic growth promoters. Intestinal health benefits and immunomodulatory effects of yeast-cells are significant and represent the most likely benefits of addition of yeast to diets for pigs.

6 Nucleotides
Nucleotides are molecules that contain a nitrogenous base, which is a purine or a pyrimidine, linked to a pentose sugar and at least one phosphate group. In ribonucleic acids (RNA), the pentose sugar is a ribose whereas the ribose in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is a 2′-deoxyribose. Pyrimidines include uridine, cytosine, and thymine and they all have a six membered ring structure. Purines include adenine, guanine, and hypoxanthine and they contain a six membered ring structure that is attached to a five membered ring. The phosphate group may be in a mono, di, or tri phosphate form, and is commonly esterified to the C-5′ hydroxyl group of the pentose sugar (Rudolph, 1994). A chain of nucleotides attached together via a phosphodiester linkage at the 3′ and 5′ positions of neighboring ribose units are called polynucleotides or nucleic acids. Nucleosides are similar in structure to nucleotides with the exception that the phosphate groups are absent.

Nucleotides are synthesized by the animals via the de novo Pathway or the Salvage Pathway, but de novo synthesis requires the amino acid glutamine and is considered a metabolically costly process as it requires energy in the form of adenosine tri phosphate. The salvage pathway synthesizes nucleotides by using products of nucleotide catabolism or from dietary sources. In addition to being building blocks for nucleic acids (DNA and RNA), nucleotides also have physiological roles in the body such as being a source of energy, cofactors in oxidation and reduction reactions, serve as physiological regulators, and carry activated intermediates (i. e., UDP-glucose, CMP-sialic acid, and CDP-choline) and acyl groups (i. e., CoA). In addition, nucleotides may influence the development of the immune system, the microbiota of the intestinal tract, and the integrity of the small intestine.

Dietary nucleotide supplementation has been associated with both humoral and cellular immunity, but the exact mechanism has not been elucidated. Dietary nucleotides contribute to the circulating pool of nucleosides available to stimulate leukocyte production (Kulkarni et al., 1994, Carver and Walker, 1995). Therefore, there is an elevated need for nucleotides during periods of immunological challenges. Supplementation of diets with nucleotides may increase the number of lymphocytes and macrophages of the intra-epithelium of the piglet ileum (Domeneghini et al., 2004, Šperanda et al., 2008), decrease damage of the blood lymphocyte DNA (Salobir et al., 2005), decrease the concentration of TNF-α and IL-6 in blood serum 2 and 4 h after an E. coli injection (Hung, 2015), and increase plasma and serum concentrations of IgA (Lee et al., 2007, Sauer et al., 2012a, Sauer et al., 2012b) in pigs.

Dietary nucleotides enhance intestinal absorption of iron, affect lipoprotein and long chain polyunsaturated fatty acid metabolism, have trophic effects on the intestinal mucosa and liver, and reduce the incidence of diarrhea (Cosgrove, 1998, Schlimme et al., 2000). The fecal microbiota of human infants fed a nucleotide-supplemented commercial milk formula had a predominance of bifidobacteria (Tanaka and Mutai, 1980), whereas enterobacteria dominated in the fecal microbiota of infants fed a commercial formula without nucleotide supplementation (Uauy, 1994). These data indicate that nucleotide supplementation may positively influence the microbiota in the gastrointestinal tract which leads to a lowering of gastric pH and hinders proliferation of pathogenic bacterial species as evidenced by a lower rate of diarrhea (Yu, 1998). Newly weaned pigs fed a nucleotide deficient diet supplemented with nucleosides had elevated quantities of probiotic bacteria and reduced concentrations of Cl. perfringens compared with control pigs fed non-supplemented diets (Mateo et al., 2004). Pigs infected by E. coli that were fed diets supplemented with 4% yeast extract as a source of nucleotides had ADG and G:F, and reduced incidence of diarrhea (Maribo, 2003). However, it has also been reported that nucleotide supplementation has no impact on the composition of the microbiota in the small and large intestine of piglets (Sauer et al., 2011, Sauer et al., 2012a, Sauer et al., 2012b).

Dietary nucleotides may enhance the growth and maturation of intestinal epithelial cells as evidenced by an increased formation of mucosal protein, DNA, taller villi in the small intestine, and increased maltase to lactase enzyme ratio (Uauy et al., 1990, Carver, 1994). Dietary nucleotides may also stimulate enterocyte differentiation (Sanderson and He, 1994). Parenteral supplementation of nucleic acids supports mucosal cell proliferation and function as demonstrated by increased mucosal wet weight, protein and DNA contents, villous height, and narrower tight junctions of the jejunal mucosa width (Kishibuchi et al., 1997, Tsujinaka et al., 1999).

Improvement in growth performance was observed when pure nucleotides were supplemented to diets fed to pigs (Zomborszky-Kovacs et al., 2000, Weaver and Kim, 2014), or if a nucleotide-rich yeast extract was used (Carlson et al., 2005, Waititu et al., 2016). However, results of several other studies indicated that supplementation of pig diets with nucleotides had no influence on growth performance (Di Giancamillo et al., 2003, Domeneghini et al., 2004, Lee et al., 2007, Martinez-Puig et al., 2007, Šperanda et al., 2008, Moore et al., 2011, Sauer et al., 2012a, Sauer et al., 2012b, Waititu, 2016). It is possible that these inconsistent responses to nucleotide supplementation are a result of differences in the amount and type of nucleotides provided and the existing environmental condition (Grimble and Westwood, 2001, Sauer et al., 2011, Hung, 2015, Waititu, 2016).

7 Plant extracts
Plant extracts are secondary plant metabolites, which are responsible for the odor and color of plants. Plant extracts are composed of more than a hundred individual components and in two different forms: liquid oil and solid powder. Most of the oil formed plant extracts are water-insoluble and often called essential oils. Plant extracts may be extracted from plants through steam distillation, maceration, cold pressing, and solvent extraction or may be synthesized (Kerrola, 1995). Plant extracts are of potential interest due to their potential biological functions, such as antiviral, antimicrobial, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory effects (Baydar et al., 2004, Sökmen et al., 2004, Dundar et al., 2008, Liu et al., 2012, Liu et al., 2013a, Liu et al., 2013b, Liu et al., 2014a, Liu et al., 2014b). This may lead to the ability to use plant extracts to replace antibiotics in-feed to improve performance and health of animals (Pettigrew, 2006, Stein and Kil, 2006). Based on the literature, plant extracts may improve animal health through several mechanisms such as direct suppression of the proliferation of pathogens, alteration of gut microbial populations, and enhancement of immune functions. Lee et al. (2004), Calsamiglia et al. (2007), and Bakkali et al. (2008) have well reviewed plant extracts and their biological effects.

Anti-microbial activities of various plant extracts have been well organized. Plant extracts exhibit a wide spectrum of antibacterial activities against gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria, including Escherichia, Salmonella, Staphylococcus, Klebsiella, Proteus, Bacillus, Clostridium, and Mycobacterium (Hammer et al., 1999, Dorman and Deans, 2000, Wong et al., 2008). Considering the large number of different groups of chemical components present in plant extracts, it is not surprising that several modes of action are involved in their anti-microbial effects. Plant extracts may directly kill pathogens due to their hydrophobicity and due to the high percentage of phenolic compounds (Farag et al., 1989, Dorman and Deans, 2000, Lambert et al., 2001, Carson et al., 2002, Burt, 2004, Xu et al., 2008). Certain bioactive components in plant extracts may prevent the development of virulent structures in bacteria (Burt et al., 2007). The active components in plant extracts may also disturb the enzyme system of bacteria and then block the virulence of the microbe (Ankri and Mirelman, 1999).

The anti-inflammatory effects of plant extracts have been well identified in in vitro cell culture models. Plant extracts (i.e. carvacrol, cinnamaldehyde, eugenol. etc.) inhibit the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines from endotoxin stimulated immune cells and epithelial cells (Lang et al., 2004, Lee et al., 2005, Tung et al., 2008, Liu et al., 2012). The research on the potential mechanisms of anti-inflammatory effects of plant extracts are still limited. It has been indicated that anti-inflammatory activities may be partially mediated by blocking the NF-κB activation pathway (Jobin et al., 1999, Lee et al., 2005, Choi et al., 2007).

Plant extracts are also proposed to be used as antioxidants in animal feed, which will protect animals from oxidative damage caused by free radicals. The antioxidative properties of extracts of oregano, thyme, clove, pepper, lavender, and basil have been evaluated by many studies in vitro (Economou et al., 1991, Gülçin et al., 2004, Oboh et al., 2007). Slamenova et al. (2008) indicated that carvacrol given in drinking water reduced the level of DNA lesions induced in freshly isolated hepatocytes and testicular cells by H2O2, which could be associated with an increase of antioxidant activity of liver and testicular cells in these animals. Frankič et al. (2010) demonstrated that supplementation of plant extracts to pigs reduced the DNA damage in lymphocytes, which indicated their potentially beneficial effects on the immune system under dietary-induced oxidative stress. The antioxidant activity of plant extracts is highly correlated with their chemical compositions (Teissedre and Waterhouse, 2000). The presence of phenolic OH groups in thymol, carvacrol, and other plant extracts act as hydrogen donors to the peroxy radicals produced during the first step in lipid oxidation, thus retarding the hydroxyl peroxide formation (Farag et al., 1989, Djeridane et al., 2006).

7.1 Plant extracts on performance and health
Use of phytogenic products as feed additives for swine has been reviewed by Windisch et al. (2008). Allan and Bilkei (2005) reported that sows fed diets containing 1,000 mg/kg oregano (dried leaf and flower of Origanum vulgare, consisted of 50% cold-pressed essential oil of O. vulgare) had lower annual sow mortality rate, lower sow culling rate, increased farrowing rate, increased number of liveborn piglets per litter, and decreased stillbirth rate. However, in a different study, no beneficial effect was observed from sows fed with oregano EO (Ariza-Nieto et al., 2011).

A large variation was observed in growth performance of newly-weaned pigs fed diets supplemented with different types of plant extracts. Supplementation of 1,000 mg/kg of oregano extract increased weight gain but reduced disease incidence of weaned pigs (Sads and Bilkei, 2003), however, no benefits on performance of weaned pigs were observed in other studies (Manzanilla et al., 2004, Neill et al., 2006, Nofrarias et al., 2006).

Although failing to find beneficial effect on productive performance, feeding plant extracts have been indicated to improve gut health by modulating gut microbiota or immunity. Manzanilla et al. (2004) and Nofrarias et al. (2006) reported that a mixture of plant extracts (oregano, cinnamon and Mexican pepper) increased stomach contents and percentage of DM, suggesting an increased gastric retention time. In addition, those mixture decreased ileal total microbial mass and increased the Lactobacilli to Enterobacteria ratio. Michiels et al. (2010) also indicated that supplementing with 500 mg/kg carvacrol and thymol reduced the number of intra-epithelial lymphocytes and increased villus height/crypt depth in the distal small intestine. Disease challenge study with a pathogenic E. coli indicated that inclusion of low dose (10 mg/kg) of capsicum oleoresin, turmeric oleoresin, or garlicon reduced frequency of diarrhea and improved gut health of weanling pigs, as indicated by improved intestinal villi height and gut barrier function and integrity (Liu et al., 2013b). Feeding plant extracts also reduced the systemic and gut inflammation of weanling caused by E. coli infection (Liu et al., 2013b). It has also been demonstrated that inclusion of capsicum oleoresin, garlicon, and turmeric oleoresin in diets for weanling pigs challenged with porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) may help alleviate negative impacts of infection, as indicated by reducing viral load and serum concentrations of inflammatory mediators, and shortening the time of fever in PRRSV-infected pigs (Liu et al., 2013a). Thus, there is strong evidence that inclusion of several different plant extracts may contribute to improved health of weanling pigs.

In the grower-finisher period, the application of different levels and different sources of plant extracts also shows benefits on growth performance. Cullen et al. (2005) and Janz et al. (2007) reported pigs fed with a garlic-treated diet had higher ADG, ADFI, and feed conversion ratio compared with the pigs fed with the control diets. Grela et al. (1998) observed a significant improvement in ADG and feed conversion ratio with the use of an herb mixture (great nettle, garlic, wheat grass) in the diet of pigs from 25 to 105 kg. Dunshea et al. (2003) demonstrated an improvement in growth performance with the inclusion of vanillylnonamide, a capsaicin analog, in the diets of finisher pigs.

In summary, plant extracts are strong candidates to replace antibiotics in feed to improve growth performance and health of pigs in different stages. However, the potential benefits of plant extracts may differ due to the large variation in the composition of plant extracts, resulting in difficulty in comparing the efficiency of different plant extracts. The major bioactive compounds of plant extracts are polyphenols, and their composition and concentration vary according to the plant, parts of the plant, geographical origin, harvesting season, environmental factors, storage conditions, and processing techniques. The predominant constituents in the popular plant extracts include anethol, capsaicin, carvacrol, cinnalmaldehyde, curcumin, eugenol, thymol, and others. The chemical compositions of many plant extracts were summarized by Burt (2004) and Surburg and Panten (2006) and plant extracts may contain 20 to 60 components in different concentrations. The major components can constitute up to 85% of the plant extracts, whereas other components are present only as trace amounts. For example, the concentration of thymol from the same species of plants, Origanum vaulgare can vary from trace amounts to 64%, while Thymus vulgaris may vary from 10% to 64%. Another component, carvacrol, has been reported to range from trace amounts to 80% in the extract of O. vaulgare and from 2% to 11% in T. vulgaris (Lawrence and Reynolds, 1984, Burt, 2004). Thus, the variations in active compounds in plants and plant-derived products have to be considered when plant extracts are used as potential alternatives to antibiotic growth promoters. Nevertheless, one commercial blend of plant extracts (containing carvacrol, cinnamaldehyde and capsicum oleoresin) has been approved in the European Union as the first botanical feed additive for improving growth performance in broiler chickens and livestock. Synthetic components have been used by the industry to keep the finished products more consistent and reduce the cost. In addition, different encapsulation methods by using polymer particles, liposomes, and solid lipid nanoparticles have also been adopted to control the release of plant extracts and effectively deliver them to the middle of the small intestine, which is believed to most effectively improve intestinal health (Sherry et al., 2013, El Asbahani et al., 2015). However, more research will be needed to evaluate the efficacy of plant-derived products and the modes of action in order to improve the utilization of plant extracts on animal health and production.

8 Conclusions
Several feed additives may be effective in regulating intestinal environments and improving pig growth performance if diets without antibiotic growth promoters are fed. For example, acidifiers may modulate GI tract pH, and thereby affect the diversity of the gut microbiota and increase nutrient digestibility. Zinc and copper have beneficial effects on gut health beyond their nutritional values, which is likely due to the antibacterial effects of these minerals. Prebiotics and DFM may increase the population of beneficial microbes in the GI tract by serving as substrates for specific microbes in the gut or by directly adding beneficial microbes in the gut. Nucleotides and plant extracts also affect the gut microbiota and may boost immunity of pigs. Thus, there are a number of feed additives that potentially may be used in diets fed to pigs, but the main challenge with all of these additives is the fact that results obtained so far have been inconsistent. The reason for this inconsistency may be that efficiencies of each additive are diet dependent and also dependent on the health status of the animals. It is, therefore, not possible to recommend a specific additive that will have positive effects in all diets, but it is likely that if no antibiotic growth promoters are used, at least some additives will be beneficial in diets fed to pigs.

Peer review under responsibility of Chinese Association of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine.
==== Refs
References
Acosta J.A.  Gable N.K.  Frank J.W.  Bass B.E.  Patience J.F.   Effect of lactose, inulin, Lactobacillus acidophilus fermentation product, or dietary antibiotics on nursery pig digestibility and nitrogen retention J Anim Sci 95 Suppl. 2 2017 143 
Ahmed S.T.  Hwang J.A.  Hoon J.  Mun H.S.  Yang C.J.   Comparison of single and blend acidifiers as alternative to antibiotics on growth performance, fecal microflora, and humoral immunity in weaned piglets Asian Australas J Anim Sci 27 2014 93 100 25049931 
Alam A.N.  Sarker S.A.  Wahed M.A.  Khatun M.  Rahaman M.M.   Enteric protein loss and intestinal permeability changes in children during acute shigellosis and after recovery: effect of zinc supplementation Gut 35 1994 1707 1711 7829006 
Alexopoulos C.  Georgoulakis I.E.  Tzivara A.  Kyriakis C.S.  Govaris A.  Kyriakis S.C.   Field evaluation of the effect of a probiotic-containing Bacillus licheniformis and Bacillus subtilis spores on the health status, performance, and carcass quality of grower and finisher pigs J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 51 2004 306 312 15485567 
Allan P.  Bilkei G.   Oregano improves reproductive performance of sows Theriogenology 63 2005 716 721 15629791 
Al-Sadi R.  Boivin M.  Ma T.   Mechanism of cytokine modulation of epithelial tight junction barrier Front Biosci 14 2009 2765 2778 
Ankri S.  Mirelman D.   Antimicrobial properties of allicin from garlic Microbes Infect 1 1999 125 129 10594976 
Apgar G.A.  Kornegay E.T.  Lindemann M.D.  Wood C.M.   The effect of feeding various levels of Bifidobacterium globosum A on the performance, gastrointestinal measurements, and immunity of weanling pigs and on the performance and carcass measurements of growing-finishing pigs J Anim Sci 71 1993 2173 2179 8376242 
Ariza-Nieto C.  Bandrick M.  Baidoo S.K.  Anil L.  Molitor T.W.  Hathaway M.R.   Effect of dietary supplementation of oregano essential oils to sows on colostrum and milk composition, growth pattern and immune status of suckling pigs J Anim Sci 89 2011 1079 1089 21415421 
Armstrong T.A.  Cook D.R.  Ward M.M.  Williams C.M.  Spears J.W.   Effect of dietary copper source (cupric citrate and cupric sulfate) and concentration on growth performance and fecal copper excretion in weanling pigs J Anim Sci 82 2004 1234 1240 15080347 
Awati A.  Williams B.A.  Bosch M.W.  Gerrits W.J.  Verstegen M.W.   Effect of inclusion of fermentable carbohydrates in the diet on fermentation end-product profile in feces of weanling piglets J Anim Sci 84 2006 2133 2140 16864874 
Bach Knudsen K.E.  Hedemann M.S.  Lærke H.N.   The role of carbohydrates in intestinal health of pigs Anim Feed Sci Technol 173 2012 41 53 
Bailey M.   Interaction between immunological system, microflora of the gastrointestinal tract and metabolism Skomiał J.  Lapierre H.   Energy and protein metabolism and nutrition. 5th EAAP international symposium on energy and protein metabolism and nutrition, Krakow, Poland, 12-15 September 2016 2016 Wageningen Academic Publishers Wageningen, The Netherlands 27 33 
Bakkali F.  Averbeck S.  Averbeck D.  Idaomar M.   Biological effects of essential oils–a review Food Chem Toxicol 46 2008 446 475 17996351 
Banks K.M.  Thompson K.L.  Rush J.K.  Applegate T.J.   Effects of copper source on phosphorus retention in broiler chicks and laying hens Poult Sci 83 2004 990 996 15206627 
Baxter J.H.  Van Wyk J.J.  Follis R.H. Jr.   A bone disorder associated with copper deficiency. II. Histological and chemical studies on the bones Bull Johns Hopkins Hosp 93 1953 25 39 13082312 
Baydar N.G.  Özkan G.  Sağdiç O.   Total phenolic contents and antibacterial activities of grape (Vitis vinifera L.) extracts Food Control 15 2004 335 339 
Bertolo R.  Bettger W.  Atkinson S.   Calcium competes with zinc for a channel mechanism on the brush border membrane of piglet intestine J Nutr Biochem 12 2001 66 72 11182548 
Blank R.  Mosenthin R.  Sauer W.C.  Huang S.   Effect of fumaric acid and dietary buffering capacity on ileal and fecal amino acid digestibilities in early-weaned pigs J Anim Sci 77 1999 2974 2984 10568467 
Blavi L.  Sola-Oriol D.  Perez J.F.  Stein H.H.   Effects of zinc oxide and microbial phytase on digestibility of calcium and phosphorus in maize-based diets fed to growing pigs J Anim Sci 95 2017 847 854 28380588 
Bontempo V.  Di Giancamillo A.  Savoini G.  Dell’Orto V.  Domeneghini C.   Live yeast dietary supplementation acts upon intestinal morpho-functional aspects and growth in weanling piglets Anim Feed Sci Technol 129 2006 224 236 
Bosi P.  Sarli G.  Casini L.  De Filippi S.  Trevisi P.  Mazzoni M.   The influence of fat protection of calcium formate on growth and intestinal defence in Escherichia coli K88-challenged weanling pigs Anim Feed Sci Technol 139 2007 170 185 
Broek L.A.M.  Hinz S.W.A.  Beldman G.  Vincken J.P.  Voragen A.G.J.   Bifidobacterium carbohydrases – their role in breakdown and synthesis of (potential) prebiotics Mol Nutr Food Res 52 2008 146 163 18040988 
Bühler K.  Liesegang A.  Bucher B.  Wenk C.  Broz J.   Influence of benzoic acid and phytase in low-phosphorus diets on bone characteristics in growing-finishing pigs J Anim Sci 88 2010 3363 3371 20562353 
Burt S.   Essential oils: their antibacterial properties and potential applications in foods–a review Int J Food Microbiol 94 2004 223 253 15246235 
Burt S.A.  van der Zee R.  Koets A.P.  de Graaff A.M.  van Knapen F.  Gaastra W.   Carvacrol induces heat shock protein 60 and inhibits synthesis of flagellin in Escherichia coli O157:H7 Appl Environ Microbiol 73 2007 4484 4490 17526792 
Calsamiglia S.  Busquet M.  Cardozo P.W.  Castillejos L.  Ferret A.   Invited review: essential oils as modifiers of rumen microbial fermentation J Dairy Sci 90 2007 2580 2595 17517698 
Carlson M.  Veum T.  Turk J.   Effects of yeast extract versus animal plasma in weanling pig diets on growth performance and intestinal morphology J Swine Health Prod 13 2005 204 
Carlson M.S.  Hoover S.L.  Hill G.M.  Link J.E.  Turk J.R.   Effect of pharmacological zinc on intestinal metallothionein concentration and morphology in the nursery pig J Anim Sci 76 Suppl. 1 1998 57 [Abstr] 
Carson C.F.  Mee B.J.  Riley T.V.   Mechanism of action of Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree) oil on Staphylococcus aureus determined by time-kill, lysis, leakage, and salt tolerance assays and electron microscopy Antimicrob Agents Chemother 46 2002 1914 1920 12019108 
Carver J.D.  Walker A.W.   The role of nucleotides in human nutrition J Nutr Biochem 6 1995 58 72 
Carver J.D.   Dietary nucleotides: cellular immune, intestinal and hepatic system effects J Nutr 124 Suppl. 1 1994 144s 148s 8283305 
Case C.L.  Carlson M.S.   Effect of feeding organic and inorganic sources of additional zinc on growth performance and zinc balance in nursery pigs J Anim Sci 80 7 2002 1917 1924 12162660 
Cho J.H.  Zhao P.Y.  Kim I.H.   Probiotics as a dietary additive for pigs: a review J Anim Vet Adv 10 2011 2127 2134 
Choi C.Y.  Park K.R.  Lee J.H.  Jeon Y.J.  Liu K.H.  Oh S.   Isoeugenol suppression of inducible nitric oxide synthase expression is mediated by down-regulation of NF-kappaB, ERK1/2, and p38 kinase Eur J Pharmacol 576 2007 151 159 17698059 
Cosgrove M.   Perinatal and infant nutrition. Nucleotides Nutrition 14 1998 748 751 9785353 
Cromwell G.L.  Lindemann M.D.  Monegue H.J.  Hall D.D.  Orr D.E. Jr.   Tribasic copper chloride and copper sulfate as copper sources for weanling pigs J Anim Sci 76 1998 118 123 9464892 
Cromwell G.L.   Feed additives in swine diets Chiba L.I.   Sustainable swine nutrition 1st ed. 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc Ames, IA 302 304 
Cullen S.P.  Monahan F.J.  Callan J.J.  O'Doherty J.V.   The effect of dietary garlic and rosemary on grower-finisher pig performance and sensory characteristics of pork Ir J Agric Food Res 44 2005 57 67 
Davis M.E.  Parrott T.  Brown D.C.  de Rodas B.Z.  Johnson Z.B.  Maxwell C.V.   Effect of a Bacillus-based direct-fed microbial feed supplement on growth performance and pen cleaning characteristics of growing-finishing pigs J Anim Sci 86 2008 1459 1467 18192557 
Dawson K.A.  Newman K.E.  Boling J.A.   Effects of microbial supplements containing yeast and lactobacilli on roughage-fed ruminal microbial activities J Anim Sci 68 1990 3392 3398 2123850 
de Lange C.F.M.  Pluske J.  Gong J.  Nyachoti C.M.   Strategic use of feed ingredients and feed additives to stimulate gut health and development in young pigs Livest Sci 134 2010 124 134 
Di Giancamillo A.  Domeneghini C.  Paratte R.  Dell'Orto V.  Bontempo V.   2003. Oral feeding with L-Glutamine and Nucleotides: impact on some GALT (gut associated lymphoid tissue) parameters and cell proliferation/death rates in weaning piglets Ital J Anim Sci 2 2003 364 366 
Diao H.  Gao Z.  Yu B.  Zheng P.  He J.  Yu J.   Effects of benzoic acid (VevoVitall(R)) on the performance and jejunal digestive physiology in young pigs J Anim Sci Biotechnol 7 2016 32 38 27239300 
Djeridane A.  Yousfi M.  Nadjemi B.  Boutassouna D.  Stocker P.  Vidal N.   Antioxidant activity of some algerian medicinal plants extracts containing phenolic compounds Food Chem 97 2006 654 660 
Domeneghini C.  Di Giancamillo A.  Savoini G.  Paratte R.  Bontempo V.  Dell'Orto V.   Structural patterns of swine ileal mucosa following L-glutamine and nucleotide administration during the weaning period. An histochemical and histometrical study Histol Histopathol 19 2004 49 58 14702171 
Dorman H.J.  Deans S.G.   Antimicrobial agents from plants: antibacterial activity of plant volatile oils J Appl Microbiol 88 2000 308 316 10736000 
Dundar E.  Olgun E.G.  Isiksoy S.  Kurkcuoglu M.  Baser K.H.  Bal C.   The effects of intra-rectal and intra-peritoneal application of Origanum onites L. essential oil on 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid-induced colitis in the rat Exp Toxicol Pathol 59 2008 399 408 18222658 
Dunshea F.R.  Suster D.  Kerton D.J.  Leury B.J.   A capsacin analogue improves growth and dressing rate in pigs, particularly gilts Paterson J.E.   Manipulating pig production vol. IX 2003 Australasian Pig Science Association Inc. Werribee, Australia 26 
Eckel B.  Kirchgessner M.  Roth F.X.   Influence of formic acid on daily weight gain, feed intake, feed conversion rate and digestibility. 1. The nutritive value of organic acids in the rearing of piglets J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 62 1992 93 100 
Economou K.D.  Oreopoulou V.  Thomopoulos C.D.   Antioxidant activity of some plant extracts of the family labiatae J Am Oil Chem Soc 68 1991 109 113 
Eidelsburger U.  Roth R.X.  Kirchgessner M.   Influence of formic acid, calcium formate and sodium bicarbonate on daily weight gain, feed intake, feed conversion rate and digestibility. 7. Nutritive value of organic acids in piglet rearing J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 67 1992 258 267 
Eidelsburger U.  Roth R.X.  Kirchgessner M.   Influence of fumaric acid, hydrochloric acid, sodium formate, tylosin and toyocerin on daily weight gain, feed conversion rate and digestibility. 11. Nutritive value of organic acids in piglet rearing J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 68 1992 82 92 
El Asbahani H.  Miladi K.  Badri W.  Sala M.  Aït Addi E.H.  Casabianca H.   Essential oils: from extraction to encapsulation Int J Pharm 483 2015 220 243 25683145 
Fang C.L.  Sun H.  Wu J.  Niu H.H.  Feng J.   Effects of sodium butyrate on growth performance, haematological and immunological characteristics of weanling piglets J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 98 2014 680 685 24024579 
FAO/WHO (Food and Agriculture Organization/World Health Organization)   Health and nutritional properties of probiotics in food including powder milk with live lactic acid bacteria. Report of a joint FAO/WHO expert consultation on evaluation of health and nutritional properties of probiotics in food including powder milk with live lactic acid bacteria 2001 1 33 Córdoba, Argentina 
Farag R.S.  Daw Z.Y.  Hewedi F.M.  El-Baroty G.S.A.   Antimicrobial activity of some Egyptian spice essential oils J Food Prot 52 1989 665 667 
Ferrari E.  Jarnagin A.  Schmidt B.   Commercial production of extracellular enzymes Sonenshein A.  Hoch J.  Losick R.   Bacillus subtilis  and other gram-positive bacteria 1993 ASM Press Washington, DC 917 937 
Frankič T.  Levart A.  Salobir J.   The effect of vitamin E and plant extract mixture composed of carvacrol, cinnamaldehyde and capsaicin on oxidative stress induced by high PUFA load in young pigs Animal 4 2010 572 578 22444044 
Gabert V.M.  Sauer W.C.  Schmitz M.  Ahrens F.  Mosenthin R.   The effect of formic acid and buffering capacity on the ileal digestibilities of amino acids and bacterial populations and metabolites in the small intestine of weanling pigs fed semipurified fish meal diets Can J Anim Sci 75 1995 615 623 
Gabert V.M.  Sauer W.C.   The effect of fumaric acid and sodium fumarate supplementation to diets for weanling pigs on amino acid digestibility and volatile fatty acid concentrations in ileal digesta Anim Feed Sci Technol 53 1995 243 254 
Galdeano C.M.  Perdigon G.   The probiotic bacterium Lactobacillus casei induces activation of the gut mucosal immune system through innate immunity Clin Vaccine Immunol 13 2006 219 226 16467329 
Gebru E.  Lee J.S.  Son J.C.  Yang S.Y.  Shin S.A.  Kim B.   Effect of probiotic-, bacteriophage-, or organic acid-supplemented feeds or fermented soybean meal on the growth performance, acute-phase response, and bacterial shedding of grower pigs challenged with Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium J Anim Sci 88 2010 3880 3886 20729283 
Gedek B.  Roth R.F.  Kirchgessner M.  Wiehler S.  Bott A.  Eidelsburger U.   Influence of fumaric acid, hydrochloric acid, sodium formate, tylosin, and toyocerin on the microflora in different segments of the gastrointestinal tract. 14. Nutritive value of organic acids in piglet rearing J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 68 1992 209 217 
Gehlert D.R.   Role of hypothalamic neuropeptide Y in feeding and obesity Neuropeptides 33 1999 329 338 10657510 
Giang H.H.  Viet T.Q.  Ogle B.  Lindberg J.E.   Effects of supplementation of probiotics on the performance, nutrient digestibility and faecal microflora in growing-finishing pigs Asian Australas J Anim Sci 24 2011 655 661 
Gibson G.R.  Roberfroid M.B.   Dietary modulation of the human colonic microbiota: introducing the concept of prebiotics J Nutr 125 1995 1401 1412 7782892 
Giesting D.W.  Easter R.A.   Response of starter pigs to supplementation of corn-soybean meal diets with organic acids J Anim Sci 60 1985 1288 1294 4040130 
Godbee R.   Effect of yeast culture on apparent digestibility and nitrogen balance in horses 1983 Res. Bull. Clemson Univ. Clemson, SC 
Grela E.R.  Krusiński R.  Matras J.   Efficacy of diets with antibiotic and herb mixture additives in feeding of growing-finishing pigs J Anim Feed Sci 7 Suppl. 1 1998 171 175 
Grilli E.  Messina M.R.  Tedeschi M.  Piva A.   Feeding a microencapsulated blend of organic acids and nature identical compounds to weaning pigs improved growth performance and intestinal metabolism Livest Sci 133 2010 173 175 
Grimble G.K.  Westwood O.M.   Nucleotides as immunomodulators in clinical nutrition Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 4 2001 57 64 11122561 
Guerra-Ordaz A.A.  Gonzalez-Ortiz G.  La Ragione R.M.  Woodward M.J.  Collins J.W.  Perez J.F.   Lactulose and Lactobacillus plantarum, a potential complementary synbiotic to control postweaning colibacillosis in piglets Appl Environ Microbiol 80 2014 4879 4886 24907322 
Guggenbuhl P.  Séon A.  Quintana A.P.  Nunes C.S.   Effects of dietary supplementation with benzoic acid (VevoVitall®) on the zootechnical performance, the gastrointestinal microflora and the ileal digestibility of the young pig Livest Sci 108 2007 218 221 
Gülçin Ì.  Güngör Şat İ.  Beydemir Ş.  Elmastaş M.  İrfan Küfrevioǧlu Ö.   Comparison of antioxidant activity of clove (Eugenia caryophylata Thunb) buds and lavender (Lavandula stoechas L.) Food Chem 87 2004 393 400 
Hahn J.D.  Baker D.H.   Growth and plasma zinc responses of young pigs fed pharmacologic levels of zinc J Anim Sci 71 1993 3020 3024 8270523 
Halas D.  Hansen C.F.  Hampson D.J.  Mullan B.P.  Kim J.C.  Wilson R.H.   Dietary supplementation with benzoic acid improves apparent ileal digestibility of total nitrogen and increases villous height and caecal microbial diversity in weaner pigs Anim Feed Sci Technol 160 2010 137 147 
Hammer K.A.  Carson C.F.  Riley T.V.   Antimicrobial activity of essential oils and other plant extracts J Appl Microbiol 86 1999 985 990 10438227 
Hanczakowska E.  Niwińska B.  Grela E.R.  Węglarzy K.  Okoń K.   Effect of dietary glutamine, glucose and/or sodium butyrate on piglet growth, intestinal environment, subsequent fattener performance, and meat quality Czech J Anim Sci 59 2014 460 470 
Hart E.B.  Steenbock H.  Waddell J.  Elvehjem C.A.   Iron in nutrition. VII. Copper as a supplement to iron for hemoglobin building in the rat. 1928 J Biol Chem 277 2002 e22 
Hill G.M.  Cromwell G.L.  Crenshaw T.D.  Dove C.R.  Ewan R.C.  Knabe D.A.   Growth promotion effects and plasma changes from feeding high dietary concentrations of zinc and copper to weanling pigs (regional study) J Anim Sci 78 2000 1010 1016 10784192 
Hill G.M.   Minerals and mineral utilization in swine Chiba L.I.   Sustainable swine nutrition 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Oxford, U.K. 186 189 
Hirano T.  Murakami M.  Fukada T.  Nishida K.  Yamasaki S.  Suzuki T.   Roles of zinc and zinc signaling in immunity: zinc as an intracellular signaling molecule Adv Immunol 97 2008 149 176 18501770 
Hojberg O.  Canibe N.  Poulsen H.D.  Hedemann M.S.  Jensen B.B.   Influence of dietary zinc oxide and copper sulfate on the gastrointestinal ecosystem in newly weaned piglets Appl Environ Microbiol 71 2005 2267 2277 15870311 
Hu C.  Song J.  You Z.  Luan Z.  Li W.   Zinc Oxide-Montmorillonite hybrid influences diarrhea, intestinal mucosal integrity, and digestive enzyme activity in weaned pigs Biol Trace Elem Res 149 2012 190 196 22539019 
Hu C.  Song J.  Li Y.  Luan Z.  Zhu K.   Diosmetite-zinc oxide composite improves intestinal barrier function, modulates expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and tight junction protein in early weaned pigs Br J Nutr 110 2013 681 688 23308387 
Hu C.H.  Xiao K.  Luan Z.S.  Song J.   Early weaning increases intestinal permeability, alters expression of cytokines and tight junction proteins, and activates mitogen-activated protein kinases in pigs J Anim Sci 91 2013 1094 1101 23230104 
Huang C.  Song P.  Fan P.  Hou C.  Thacker P.  Ma X.   Dietary sodium butyrate decreases postweaning diarrhea by modulating intestinal permeability and changing the bacterial communities in weaned piglets J Nutr 145 2015 2774 2780 26491121 
Hung I.F.   The effect of dietary nucleotides in sow and nursery piglet diets on reproduction, growth, and immune response [PhD Thesis] 2015 University of Kentucky Lexington 
Janz J.A.  Morel P.C.  Wilkinson B.H.  Purchas R.W.   Preliminary investigation of the effects of low-level dietary inclusion of fragrant essential oils and oleoresins on pig performance and pork quality Meat Sci 75 2007 350 355 22063669 
Jaworski N.W.  Owusu-Asiedu A.  Walsh M.C.  McCann J.C.  Loor J.J.  Stein H.H.   Effects of a 3 strain Bacillus -based direct-fed microbial and dietary fiber concentration on growth performance, intestinal concentrations of volatile fatty acids, and expression of genes related to absorption and metabolism of volatile fatty acids in weanling pigs J Anim Sci 95 2017 308 319 28177388 
Jaworski N.W.  Owusu-Asiedu A.  Awati A.A.  Stein H.H.   Effect of Bacillus  spp. direct-fed microbials on fecal VFA concentrations, growth performance, and carcass characteristics of growing-finishing pigs J Anim Sci 92 Suppl. 2 2014 56 [Abstract] 
Jiang Z.  Wei S.  Wang Z.  Zhu C.  Hu S.  Zheng C.   Effects of different forms of yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae on growth performance, intestinal development, and systemic immunity in early-weaned piglets J Anim Sci Biotechnol 6 2015 47 54 26568826 
Jobin C.  Bradham C.A.  Russo M.P.  Juma B.  Narula A.S.  Brenner D.A.   Curcumin blocks cytokine-mediated NF-kappa B activation and proinflammatory gene expression by inhibiting inhibitory factor I-kappa B kinase activity J Immunol 163 1999 3474 3483 10477620 
Katouli M.  Melin L.  Jensen-Waern M.  Wallgren P.  Mollby R.   The effect of zinc oxide supplementation on the stability of the intestinal flora with special reference to composition of coliforms in weaned pigs J Appl Microbiol 87 1999 564 573 10583685 
Kenny M.  Smidt H.  Mengheri E.  Miller B.   Probiotics - do they have a role in the pig industry? Animal 5 2011 462 470 22445413 
Kerrola K.   Literature review: isolation of essential oils and flavor compounds by dense carbon dioxide Food Rev Int 11 1995 547 573 
Kiarie E.  Bhandari S.  Scott M.  Krause D.O.  Nyachoti C.M.   Growth performance and gastrointestinal microbial ecology responses of piglets receiving Saccharomyces cerevisiae  fermentation products after an oral challenge with Escherichia coli  (K88) J Anim Sci 89 2011 1062 1078 21148775 
Kiarie E.  Scott M.  Krause D.O.  Khazanehei H.  Khafipour E.  Nyachoti C.M.   Interactions of Saccharomyces cerevisiae  fermentation product and an in-feed antibiotic on gastrointestinal and immunological responses in piglets challenged with with Escherichia coli  K88 J Anim Sci 90 Suppl. 4 2012 1 3 
Kil D.Y.  Piao L.G.  Long H.F.  Lim J.S.  Yun M.S.  Kong C.S.   Effects of organic or inorganic acid supplementation on growth performance, nutrient digestibility and white blood cell counts in weanling pigs Asian Australas J Anim Sci 19 2006 252 261 
Kil D.Y.  Kwon W.B.  Kim B.G.   Dietary acidifiers in weanling pig diets: a review Rev Colombiana Ciencias Pecuarias 24 2011 231 247 
Kil D.Y.  Stein H.H.   Invited Review. Management and feeding strategies to ameliorate the impact of removing antibiotic growth promoters from diets fed to weanling pigs Can J Anim Sci 90 2010 447 460 
Kim J.  Hosseindoust A.  Lee S.  Choi Y.  Kim M.  Lee J.   Bacteriophage cocktail and multi-strain probiotics in the feed for weanling pigs: effects on intestine morphology and targeted intestinal coliforms and clostridium Animal 11 2017 45 53 27353334 
Kishibuchi M.  Tsujinaka T.  Yano M.  Morimoto T.  Iijima S.  Ogawa A.   Effects of nucleosides and a nucleotide mixture on gut mucosal barrier function on parenteral nutrition in rats JPEN J Parenter Enter Nutr 21 1997 104 111 
Kluge H.  Broz J.  Eder K.   Effects of dietary benzoic acid on urinary pH and nutrient digestibility in lactating sows Livest Sci 134 2010 119 121 
Kogan G.  Kocher A.   Role of yeast cell wall polysaccharides in pig nutrition and health protection Livest Sci 109 2007 161 165 
Kornegay E.T.  Rhein-Welker D.  Lindemann M.D.  Wood C.M.   Performance and nutrient digestibility in weanling pigs as influenced by yeast culture additions to starter diets containing dried whey or one of two fiber sources J Anim Sci 73 1995 1381 1389 7665367 
Kornegay E.T.  Risley C.R.   Nutrient digestibilities of a corn-soybean meal diet as influenced by Bacillus products fed to finishing swine J Anim Sci 74 1996 799 805 8728001 
Ku P.K.  Ullrey D.E.  Miller E.R.   Mills C.F.   Zinc deficiency and tissue nucleic acid and protein concentration 1970 E. & S. Livingstone Edinburgh, UK 158 164 
Kuang Y.  Wang Y.  Zhang Y.  Song Y.  Zhang X.  Lin Y.   Effects of dietary combinations of organic acids and medium chain fatty acids as a replacement of zinc oxide on growth, digestibility and immunity of weaned pigs Anim Feed Sc Technol 208 2015 145 157 
Kulkarni A.D.  Rudolph F.B.  Van Buren C.T.   The role of dietary sources of nucleotides in immune function: a review J Nutr 124 Suppl. 8 1994 1442s 1446s 8064400 
Lambert R.J.  Skandamis P.N.  Coote P.J.  Nychas G.J.   A study of the minimum inhibitory concentration and mode of action of oregano essential oil, thymol and carvacrol J Appl Microbiol 91 2001 453 462 11556910 
Lang A.  Lahav M.  Sakhnini E.  Barshack I.  Fidder H.H.  Avidan B.   Allicin inhibits spontaneous and TNF-alpha induced secretion of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines from intestinal epithelial cells Clin Nutr 23 2004 1199 1208 15380914 
Lawrence B.M.  Reynolds R.J.   Progress in essential oils Perfum Flavor 9 1984 23 31 
Le Gall M.  Gallois M.  Seve B.  Louveau I.  Holst J.J.  Oswald I.P.   Comparative effect of orally administered sodium butyrate before or after weaning on growth and several indices of gastrointestinal biology of piglets Br J Nutr 102 2009 1285 1296 19480733 
Lee D.N.  Liu S.R.  Chen Y.T.  Wang R.C.  Lin S.Y.  Weng C.F.   Effects of diets supplemented with organic acids and nucleotides on growth, immune responses and digestive tract development in weaned pigs J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 91 2007 508 518 17988355 
Lee K.W.  Everts H.  Beynen A.C.   Essential oils in broiler nutrition Int J Poult Sci 3 2004 738 752 
Lee S.H.  Ingale S.L.  Kim J.S.  Kim K.H.  Lokhande A.  Kim E.K.   Effects of dietary supplementation with Bacillus subtilis LS 1–2 fermentation biomass on growth performance, nutrient digestibility, cecal microbiota and intestinal morphology of weanling pig Anim Feed Sci Technol 188 2014 102 110 
Lee S.H.  Lee S.Y.  Son D.J.  Lee H.  Yoo H.S.  Song S.   Inhibitory effect of 2'-hydroxycinnamaldehyde on nitric oxide production through inhibition of NF-kappa B activation in RAW 264.7 cells Biochem Pharmacol 69 2005 791 799 15710356 
Lewis M.C.  Patel D.V.  Fowler J.  Duncker S.  Zuercher A.W.  Mercenier A.   Dietary supplementation with Bifidobacterium lactis NCC2818 from weaning reduces local immunoglobulin production in lymphoid-associated tissues but increases systemic antibodies in healthy neonates Br J Nutr 110 2013 1243 1252 23473077 
Li B.T.  van Kessel A.G.  Caine W.R.  Huang S.X.  Kirkwood R.N.   Small intestinal morphology and bacterial populations in ileal digesta and feces of newly weaned pigs receiving a high dietary level of zinc oxide Can J Anim Sci 81 2001 511 516 
Li J.  Yan L.  Zheng X.  Liu G.  Zhang N.  Wang Z.   Effect of high dietary copper on weight gain and neuropeptide Y level in the hypothalamus of pigs J Trace Elem Med Biol 22 2008 33 38 18319138 
Li M.  Gong J.  Cottrill M.  Yu H.  de Lange C.  Burton J.   Evaluation of QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit for ecological studies of gut microbiota J Microbiol Methods 54 2003 13 20 12732417 
Li X.  Yin J.  Li D.  Chen X.  Zang J.  Zhou X.   Dietary supplementation with zinc oxide increases Igf-I and Igf-I receptor gene expression in the small intestine of weanling piglets J Nutr 136 2006 1786 1791 16772438 
Li Z.  Yi G.  Yin J.  Sun P.  Li D.  Knight C.   Effects of organic acids on growth performance, gastrointestinal pH, intestinal microbial populations and immune responses of weaned pigs Asian Australas J Anim Sci 21 2008 252 261 
Li Y.S.  Trenhaile M.D.  Lima M.M.  Moore K.C.  van Sambeek D.M.  Burkey E.   Growth performance and serum IgA concentrations in weanling pigs fed dietary prebiotics J Anim Sci 94 Suppl. 2 2016 7 [Abstract] 
Lindberg J.E.   Fiber effects in nutrition and gut health in pigs J Anim Sci Biotechnol 5 2014 15 21 24580966 
Liu P.  Piao X.S.  Kim S.W.  Wang L.  Shen Y.B.  Lee H.S.   Effects of chito-oligosaccharide supplementation on the growth performance, nutrient digestibility, intestinal morphology, and fecal shedding of Escherichia coli and Lactobacillus in weaning pigs J Anim Sci 86 2008 2609 2618 18502883 
Liu S.T.  Hou W.X.  Cheng S.Y.  Shi B.M.  Shan A.S.   Effects of dietary citric acid on performance, digestibility of calcium and phosphorus, milk composition and immunoglobulin in sows during late gestation and lactation Anim Feed Sci Technol 191 2014 67 75 
Liu Y.  Che T.M.  Song M.  Lee J.J.  Almeida J.A.  Bravo D.   Dietary plant extracts improve immune responses and growth efficiency of pigs experimentally infected with porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus J Anim Sci 91 2013 5668 5679 24126276 
Liu Y.  Song M.  Che T.M.  Almeida J.A.  Lee J.J.  Bravo D.   Dietary plant extracts alleviate diarrhea and alter immune responses of weaned pigs experimentally infected with a pathogenic Escherichia coli J Anim Sci 91 2013 5294 5306 24045466 
Liu Y.  Song M.  Che T.M.  Bravo D.  Pettigrew J.E.   Anti-inflammatory effects of several plant extracts on porcine alveolar macrophages in vitro J Anim Sci 90 2012 2774 2783 22328722 
Liu Y.  Song M.  Che T.M.  Lee J.J.  Bravo D.  Maddox C.W.   Dietary plant extracts modulate gene expression profiles in ileal mucosa of weaned pigs after an Escherichia coli infection J Anim Sci 92 2014 2050 2062 24663182 
Long S.F.  Xu Y.T.  Pan L.  Wang Q.Q.  Wang C.L.  Wu J.Y.   Mixed organic acids as antibiotic substitutes improve performance, serum immunity, intestinal morphology and microbiota for weaned piglets Anim Feed Sci Technol 235 2018 23 32 
Lu H.  Su S.  Ajuwon K.M.   Butyrate supplementation to gestating sows and piglets induces muscle and adipose tissue oxidative genes and improves growth performance J Anim Sci 90 Suppl. 4 2012 430 432 23365400 
Lu R.  Wang X.  Sun D.F.  Tian X.Q.  Zhao S.L.  Chen Y.X.   Folic acid and sodium butyrate prevent tumorigenesis in a mouse model of colorectal cancer Epigenetics 3 2008 330 335 19098451 
Luise D.  Motta V.  Salvarani C.  Chiappelli M.  Fusco L.  Bertocchi M.   Long-term administration of formic acid to weaners: influence on intestinal microbiota, immunity parameters and growth performance Anim Feed Sci Technol 232 2017 160 168 
Ma Y.L.  Zanton G.I.  Zhao J.  Wedekind K.  Escobar J.  Vazquez-Anon M.   Multitrial analysis of the effects of copper level and source on performance in nursery pigs J Anim Sci 93 2015 606 614 25548207 
Machinsky T.G.  Kessler M.  Ribeiro A.M.L.  Moraes L.  Mello da Silva I.C.  Mayorga Cortes M.E.   Nutrient digestibility and Ca and P balance in pigs receiving butyric acid, phytase and different calcium levels Ciencia Rural 40 2015 2350 2355 
Mahan D.C.  Newton E.A.  Cera K.R.   Effect of supplemental sodium chloride, sodium phosphate, or hydrochloric acid in starter pig diets containing dried whey J Anim Sci 74 1996 1217 1222 8791192 
Mallo J.J.  Balfagon A.  Gracia M.I.  Honrubia P.  Puyalto M.   Evaluation of different protections of butyric acid aiming for release in the last part of the gastrointestinal tract of piglets J Anim Sci 90 Suppl. 4 2012 227 229 23365338 
Manzanilla E.G.  Perez J.F.  Martin M.  Kramel C.  Baucells F.  Gasa J.   Effect of plant extracts and formic acid on the intestinal equilibrium of early-weaned pigs J Anim Sci 82 2004 3210 3218 15542467 
Maribo H.   Weaning pigs without antibiotic growth promoters: strategies to improve health and performance Lyons T.P.  Jacques K.A.   Nutritional biotechnology in the feed and food industries. Proc. of Alltech's 19th international symposium 2003 Nottingham University Press Nottingham, UK 179 184 
Martinez-Puig D.  Manzanilla E.G.  Morales J.  Borda E.  Pérez J.F.  Piñeiro C.   Dietary nucleotide supplementation reduces occurrence of diarrhoea in early weaned pigs Livest Sci 108 2007 276 279 
Mateo C.D.  Dave R.  Stein H.H.   Effects of supplemental nucleosides for newly weaned pigs J Anim Sci 82 Suppl. 2 2004 42 
Mavromichalis I.  Webel D.M.  Parr E.N.  Baker D.H.   Growth-promoting efficacy of pharmacological doses of tetrabasic zinc chloride in diets for nursery pigs Can J Anim Sci 81 2001 387 391 
McDowell L.R.   Minerals in animal and human nutrition 1992 Academic Press Inc. San Diego, CA 
Meng Q.W.  Yan L.  Ao X.  Zhou T.X.  Wang J.P.  Lee J.H.   Influence of probiotics in different energy and nutrient density diets on growth performance, nutrient digestibility, meat quality, and blood characteristics in growing-finishing pigs J Anim Sci 88 2010 3320 3326 20562363 
Merchant H.A.  McConnell E.L.  Liu F.  Ramaswamy C.  Kulkarni R.P.  Basit A.W.   Assessment of gastrointestinal pH, fluid and lymphoid tissue in the Guinea pig, rabbit and pig, and implications for their use in drug development Eur J Pharm Sci 42 2011 3 10 20932902 
Merrifield C.A.  Lewis M.C.  Claus S.P.  Pearce J.T.  Cloarec O.  Duncker S.   Weaning diet induces sustained metabolic phenotype shift in the pig and influences host response to Bifidobacterium lactis NCC2818 Gut 62 2013 842 851 22661492 
Michiels J.  Missotten J.  Van Hoorick A.  Ovyn A.  Fremaut D.  De Smet S.   Effects of dose and formulation of carvacrol and thymol on bacteria and some functional traits of the gut in piglets after weaning Arch Anim Nutr 64 2010 136 154 20481352 
Molist F.  van Eerden E.  Parmentier H.K.  Vuorenmaa J.   Effects of inclusion of hydrolyzed yeast on the immune response and performance of piglets after weaning Anim Feed Sci Technol 195 2014 136 141 
Moore K.L.  Mullan B.P.  Pluske J.R.  Kim J.C.  D'Souza D.N.   The use of nucleotides, vitamins and functional amino acids to enhance the structure of the small intestine and circulating measures of immune function in the post-weaned piglet Anim Feed Sci Technol 165 2011 184 190 
Namkung H.  Gong J.  Yu H.  de Lange C.F.M.   Effect of pharmacological intakes of zinc and copper on growth performance, circulating cytokines and gut microbiota of newly weaned piglets challenged with coliform lipopolysaccharides Can J Anim Sci 86 2006 511 522 
Naqid I.A.  Owen J.P.  Maddison B.C.  Gardner D.S.  Foster N.  Tchórzewska M.A.   Prebiotic and probiotic agents enhance antibody-based immune responses to Salmonella Typhimurium infection in pigs Anim Feed Sci Technol 201 2015 57 65 
Neill C.R.  Nelssen J.L.  Tokach M.D.  Goodband R.D.  DeRouchey J.M.  Dritz S.S.   Effects of oregano oil on growth performance of nursery pigs J Swine Health Prod 14 2006 312 316 
Niers L.E.  Timmerman H.M.  Rijkers G.T.  van Bleek G.M.  van Uden N.O.  Knol E.F.   Identification of strong interleukin-10 inducing lactic acid bacteria which down-regulate T helper type 2 cytokines Clin Exp Allergy 35 2005 1481 1489 16297146 
Nofrarias M.  Manzanilla E.G.  Pujols J.  Gibert X.  Majo N.  Segales J.   Effects of spray-dried porcine plasma and plant extracts on intestinal morphology and on leukocyte cell subsets of weaned pigs J Anim Sci 84 2006 2735 2742 16971575 
Nousiainen J.  Setala J.   Lactic acid bacteria as animal probiotics Salminen S.  von Wright A.   Lactic acid bacteria 1993 Marcel Dekker New York, NY 315 356 
NRC   Nutrient requirements of swine 11th rev 2012 Natl. Acad. Press Washington, DC 
Oboh G.  Puntel R.L.  Rocha J.B.T.   Hot pepper (Capsicum annuum , Tepin and Capsicum Chinese , Habanero) prevent Fe2+  -induced lipid peroxidation in brain – in vitro  Food Chem 102 2007 178 185 
Owusu-Asiedu A.  Jaworski N.W.  Awati A.A.  Stein H.H.   Effect of Bacillus  spp. direct-fed microbial supplementation on the nutrient digestibility by weanling pigs J Anim Sci 92 Suppl. 2 2014 143 [Abstract] 
Pang Y.  Applegate T.J.   Effects of copper source and concentration on in vitro  phytate phosphorus hydrolysis by phytase J Agr Food Chem. 54 2006 1792 1796 16506835 
Papatsiros V.G.  Billinis C.   The prophylactic use of acidifiers as antibacterial agents in swine Antimicrobial agents  Bobbarala V.   InTech, Rijeka, Croatia 2012 295 310 
Papatsiros V.G.  Tassis P.D.  Tzika E.D.  Papaioannou D.S.  Petridou E.  Alexopoulos C.   Effect of benzoic acid and combination of benzoic acid with a probiotic containing Bacillus cereus var. Toyoi in weaned pig nutrition Pol J Vet Sci 14 2011 117 125 21528721 
Partanen K.H.  Mroz Z.   Organic acids for performance enhancement in pig diets Nutr Res Rev 12 1999 117 145 19087448 
Pearce S.C.  Sanz Fernandez M.V.  Torrison J.  Wilson M.E.  Baumgard L.H.  Gabler N.K.   Dietary organic zinc attenuates heat stress-induced changes in pig intestinal integrity and metabolism J Anim Sci 93 2015 4702 4713 26523563 
Perez V.G.  Waguespack A.M.  Bidner T.D.  Southern L.L.  Fakler T.M.  Ward T.L.   Additivity of effects from dietary copper and zinc on growth performance and fecal microbiota of pigs after weaning J Anim Sci 89 2011 414 425 20935138 
Pettigrew J.E.   Reduced use of antibiotic growth promoters in diets fed to weanling pigs: dietary tools, Part 1 Anim Biotechnol 17 2006 207 215 17127531 
Piva A.  Morlacchini M.  Casadei G.  Gatta P.P.  Biagi G.  Prandini A.   Sodium butyrate improves growth performance of weaned piglets during the first period after weaning Ital J Anim Sci 1 2002 35 41 
Pollmann D.S.   Probiotics in pig diets Haresign W.  Cole D.J.A.   Recent advances in animal nutrition 1st ed. 1986 Butterworths London, UK 193 205 
Pollmann D.S.   Probiotics in swine diets Leger D.A.  Ho S.K.   Proc. int. roundtable anim. feed biotechnol. – res. sci. reg 1st ed. 1992 Agriculture Canada Ottawa, ON, Canada 65 74 
Poulsen H.D.   Zinc oxide for weanling piglets Acta Agric Scand A Anim Sci 45 1995 159 167 
Poulsen H.D.   Zinc and copper as feed additives, growth factors or unwanted environmental factors J Anim Feed Sci 7 1998 135 142 
Prasad A.S.  Oberleas D.  Miller E.R.  Luecke R.W.   Biochemical effects of zinc difficiency: changes in activities of zinc-dependent enzymes and ribonucleic acid and deoxyribonucleic acid content of tissues J Lab Clin Med 77 1971 144 152 5540423 
Prasad A.S.   Zinc: an antioxidant and anti-inflammatory agent: role of zinc in degenerative disorders of aging J Trace Elem Med Biol 28 2014 364 371 25200490 
Prescott S.L.  Dunstan J.A.  Hale J.  Breckler L.  Lehmann H.  Weston S.   Clinical effects of probiotics are associated with increased interferon-gamma responses in very young children with atopic dermatitis Clin Exp Allergy 35 2005 1557 1564 16393321 
Radcliffe J.S.  Zhang Z.  Kornegay E.T.   The effects of microbial phytase, citric acid, and their interaction in a corn-soybean meal-based diet for weanling pigs J Anim Sci 76 1998 1880 1886 9690644 
Ravindran V.  Kornegay E.T.   Acidification of weaner pig diets: a review J Sci Food Agr 62 1993 313 322 
Richards J.D.  Gong J.  de Lange C.F.M.   The gastrointestinal microbiota and its role in monogastric nutrition and health with an emphasis on pigs: current understanding, possible modulations, and new technologies for ecological studies Can J Anim Sci 85 2005 421 435 
Roberfroid M.  Gibson G.R.  Hoyles L.  McCartney A.L.  Rastall R.  Rowland I.   Prebiotic effects: metabolic and health benefits Br J Nutr 104 Suppl. 2 2010 S1 S63 
Roth F.X.  Eidelsburger U.  Kirchgessner M.   Influence of fumaric acid, hydrochloric acid, sodium formate, tylosin and toyocerin on pH, dry matter content, concentration of carbonic acids and ammonia in different segments of the gastrointestinal tract. 12. Nutritive value of organic acids in piglet rearing J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 68 1992 93 103 
Roth F.X.  Eckel B.  Kirchgessner M.  Eidelsburger U.   Influence of formic acid on pH, dry matter content, and concentrations of volatile fatty acids and lactic acid in the gastrointestinal tract. 3. Nutritive value of organic acids in piglet rearing J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 67 1992 148 156 
Rudolph F.B.   The biochemistry and physiology of nucleotides J Nutr 124 Suppl. 1 1994 124s 127s 8283301 
Rutkowska-Pejsak B.  Mokrzycka A.  Szkoda J.   Influence of zinc oxide in feed on the health status of weaned pigs Med Weter 54 1998 194 200 
Saad N.  Delattre C.  Urdaci M.  Schmitter J.M.  Bressollier P.   An overview of the last advances in probiotic and prebiotic field LWT Food Sci Technol 50 2013 1 16 
Sads O.R.  Bilkei G.   The effect of oregano and vaccination against Glasser's disease and pathogenic Escherichia coli on postweaning performance of pigs Ir Vet J 56 2003 611 615 
Salobir J.  Rezar V.  Pajk T.  Levart A.   Effect of nucleotide supplementation on lymphocyte DNA damage induced by dietary oxidative stress in pigs Anim Sci 81 2005 135 140 
Sanderson I.R.  He Y.   Nucleotide uptake and metabolism by intestinal epithelial cells J Nutr 124 Suppl. 1 1994 131s 137s 8283303 
Sauer N.  Eklund M.  Bauer E.  Ganzle M.G.  Field C.J.  Zijlstra R.T.   The effects of pure nucleotides on performance, humoral immunity, gut structure and numbers of intestinal bacteria of newly weaned pigs J Anim Sci 90 2012 3126 3134 22859755 
Sauer N.  Eklund M.  Roth S.  Rink F.  Jezierny D.  Bauer E.   Short-term effect of dietary yeast nucleotide supplementation on small intestinal enzyme activities, bacterial populations and metabolites and ileal nutrient digestibilities in newly weaned pigs J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl) 96 2012 700 708 21797935 
Sauer N.  Mosenthin R.  Bauer E.   The role of dietary nucleotides in single-stomached animals Nutr Res Rev 24 2011 46 59 21226977 
Sauer W.  Cervantes M.  Yanez J.  Araiza B.  Murdoch G.  Morales A.   Effect of dietary inclusion of benzoic acid on mineral balance in growing pigs Livest Sci 122 2009 162 168 
Schlimme E.  Martin D.  Meisel H.   Nucleosides and nucleotides: natural bioactive substances in milk and colostrum Br J Nutr 84 Suppl. 1 2000 S59 S68 11242448 
Schreier H.J.   Biosynthesis of glutamine and glutamate and the assimilation of ammonia Sonenshein A.L.  Hoch J.A.  Losick R.   Bacillus subtilis  and other gram-positive bacteria 1993 Am Soc Microbiol Washington, DC 281 285 
Shen Y.B.  Piao X.S.  Kim S.W.  Wang L.  Liu P.  Yoon I.   Effects of yeast culture supplementation on growth performance, intestinal health, and immune response of nursery pigs J Anim Sci 87 2009 2614 2624 19395514 
Sherry M.  Charcosset C.  Fessi H.  Greige-Gerges H.   Essential oils encapsulated in liposomes: a review J Liposome Res 23 2013 268 275 23879218 
Slade R.D.  Kyriazakis I.  Carroll S.M.  Reynolds F.H.  Wellock I.J.  Broom L.J.   Effect of rearing environment and dietary zinc oxide on the response of group-housed weaned pigs to enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli O149 challenge Animal 5 2011 1170 1178 22440169 
Slamenova D.  Horvathova E.  Marsalkova L.  Wsolova L.   Carvacrol given to rats in drinking water reduces the level of DNA lesions induced in freshly isolated hepatocytes and testicular cells by H(2)O(2) Neoplasma 55 2008 394 399 18665749 
Smiricky-Tjardes M.R.  Grieshop C.M.  Flickinger E.A.  Bauer L.L.  Fahey G.C. Jr.   Dietary galactooligosaccharides affect ileal and total-tract nutrient digestibility, ileal and fecal bacterial concentrations, and ileal fermentative characteristics of growing pigs J Anim Sci 81 2003 2535 2545 14552381 
Smith J.W. 2nd  Tokach M.D.  Goodband R.D.  Nelssen J.L.  Richert B.T.   Effects of the interrelationship between zinc oxide and copper sulfate on growth performance of early-weaned pigs J Anim Sci 75 1997 1861 1866 9222843 
Song H.Z.  Xiao K.  Ke Y.L.  Jiao L.F.  Hu C.H.   Zinc oxide influences mitogen-activated protein kinase and TGF-β1 signaling pathways, and enhances intestinal barrier integrity in weaned pigs Innate Immun 21 2015 341 348 24917655 
Sökmen M.  Serkedjieva J.  Daferera D.  Gulluce M.  Polissiou M.  Tepe B.   In vitro  antioxidant, antimicrobial, and antiviral activities of the essential oil and various extracts from herbal parts and callus cultures of Origanum acutidens J Agr Food Chem 52 2004 3309 3312 15161188 
Šperanda M.  Đidara M.  Šperanda T.  Domaćinović M.  Valpotić H.  Kovačević J.   Hydrolyzed brewery yeast product like immunomodulator in weaned piglets Arch Zootech 11 2008 52 60 
Stahly T.S.  Cromwell G.L.  Monegue H.J.   Effects of the dietary inclusion of copper and (or) antibiotics on the performance of weanling pigs J Anim Sci 51 1980 1347 1351 6782067 
Stavric S.  Kornegay E.T.   Microbial probiotics for pigs and poultry Wallace R.J.  Chesson A.   Biotechnology in animal feeds and feeding 1st ed. 1995 VCH Verlagsgesellscharft Weinheim, Germany 205 231 
Stecher B.  Hardt W.D.   Mechanisms controlling pathogen colonization of the gut Curr Opin Microbiol 14 2011 82 91 21036098 
Stein H.H.  Kil D.Y.   Reduced use of antibiotic growth promoters in diets fed to weanling pigs: dietary tools, part 2 Anim Biotechnol 17 2006 217 231 17127532 
Sterritt R.M.  Lester J.N.   Interactions of heavy metals with bacteria Sci Total Environ 14 1980 5 17 6988964 
Suiryanrayna M.V.  Ramana J.V.   A review of the effects of dietary organic acids fed to swine J Anim Sci Biotechnol 6 2015 45 55 26500769 
Surburg H.  Panten J.   Common fragrance and flavor materials: preparation, properties and uses 2006 Wiley-VCH Weinheim 289 303 
Suryanarayana M.V.A.N.  Suresh J.  Rajasekhar M.V.   Organic acids in swine feeding: a review Agric Sci Res J 2 2012 523 533 
Suttle N.F.  Angus K.W.   Effects of experimental copper deficiency on the skeleton of the calf J Comp Pathol 88 1 1978 137 148 621299 
Suttle N.F.   Mineral nutrition of livestock 4th ed. 2010 CABI Publishing Oxon, U.K 
Tanaka R.  Mutai M.   Improved medium for selective isolation and enumeration of Bifidobacterium Appl Environ Microbiol 40 1980 866 869 7447440 
Teissedre P.L.  Waterhouse A.L.   Inhibition of oxidation of human low-density lipoproteins by phenolic substances in different essential oils varieties J Agr Food Chem 48 2000 3801 3805 10995274 
Tran T.H.T.  Everaert N.  Bindelle K.   Review on the effects of potential prebiotics on controlling intestinal enteropathogens Salmonella  and Escherichia coli  in pig production J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 2016 
Trckova M.  Faldyna M.  Alexa P.  Sramkova Zajacova Z.  Gopfert E.  Kumprechtova D.   The effects of live yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae on postweaning diarrhea, immune response, and growth performance in weaned piglets J Anim Sci 92 2014 767 774 24305872 
Tsujinaka T.  Kishibuchi M.  Iijima S.  Yano M.  Monden M.   Nucleotides and intestine JPEN J Parenter Enter Nutr 23 Suppl. 5 1999 S74 S77 
Tung Y.T.  Chua M.T.  Wang S.Y.  Chang S.T.   Anti-inflammation activities of essential oil and its constituents from indigenous cinnamon (Cinnamomum osmophloeum) twigs Bioresour Technol 99 2008 3908 3913 17826984 
Uauy R.  Stringel G.  Thomas R.  Quan R.   Effect of dietary nucleosides on growth and maturation of the developing gut in the rat J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 10 1990 497 503 2358983 
Uauy R.   Nonimmune system responses to dietary nucleotides J Nutr 124 Suppl. 1 1994 157s 159s 8283307 
Underwood E.J.   Trace elements in human and animal nutrition 4th ed. 1977 Academic Press New York, US 
Upadhaya S.D.  Lee K.Y.  Kim I.H.   Protected organic Acid blends as an alternative to antibiotics in finishing pigs Asian Australas J Anim Sci 27 2014 1600 1607 25358320 
van der Aar P.J.  Molist F.  van der Klis J.D.   The central role of intestinal health on the effect of feed additives on feed intake in swine and poultry Anim Feed Sci Technol 233 2017 64 75 
van der Peet-Schwering C.M.  Jansman A.J.  Smidt H.  Yoon I.   Effects of yeast culture on performance, gut integrity, and blood cell composition of weanling pigs J Anim Sci 85 2007 3099 3109 17609465 
van Heugten E.  Spears J.W.  Kegley E.B.  Ward J.D.  Qureshi M.A.   Effects of organic forms of zinc on growth performance, tissue zinc distribution, and immune response of weanling pigs J Anim Sci 81 2003 2063 2071 12926788 
Vandenbergh P.A.   Lactic acid bacteria, their metabolic products and interference with microbial growth FEMS Microbiol Rev 12 1993 221 237 
Waititu S.M.  Heo J.M.  Patterson R.  Nyachoti C.M.   Dietary yeast-based nucleotides as an alternative to in-feed antibiotics in promoting growth performance and nutrient utilization in weaned pigs Can J Anim Sci 96 2016 289 293 
Waititu S.M.   The role of nucleotides in the nutrition of newly weaned pigs. PhD Diss., Doctoral dissertation 2016 University of Manitoba Canada 
Walk C.L.  Srinongkote S.  Wilcock P.   Influence of a microbial phytase and zinc oxide on young pig growth performance and serum minerals J Anim Sci 91 2013 286 291 23100571 
Walk C.L.  Wilcock P.  Magowan E.   Evaluation of the effects of pharmacological zinc oxide and phosphorus source on weaned piglet growth performance, plasma minerals and mineral digestibility Animal 9 2015 1145 1152 26087155 
Walsh M.C.  Sholly D.M.  Hinson R.B.  Saddoris K.L.  Sutton A.L.  Radcliffe J.S.   Effects of water and diet acidification with and without antibiotics on weanling pig growth and microbial shedding J Anim Sci 85 2007 1799 1808 17296768 
Wang X.X.  Song P.X.  Wu H.  Xue J.X.  Zhong X.  Zhang L.Y.   Effects of graded levels of isomalto-oligosaccharides on the performance, immune function and intestinal status of waned pigs Asian Australas J Anim Sci 29 2 2016 250 256 26732450 
Wang Y.  Kuang Y.  Zhang Y.  Song Y.  Zhang X.  Lin Y.   Rearing conditions affected responses of weaned pigs to organic acids showing a positive effect on digestibility, microflora and immunity Anim Sci J 87 2016 1267 1280 26800117 
Ward T.L.  Asche G.A.  Louis G.F.  Pollman D.S.   Zinc-methionine improves growth performance of starter pigs J Anim Sci 74 Suppl. 1 1996 182 [Abstract] 
Weaver A.C.  Kim S.W.   Supplemental nucleotides high in inosine 5'-monophosphate to improve the growth and health of nursery pigs J Anim Sci 92 2014 645 651 24398830 
Weedman S.M.  Rostagno M.H.  Patterson J.A.  Yoon I.  Fitzner G.  Eicher S.D.   Yeast culture supplement during nursing and transport affects immunity and intestinal microbial ecology of weanling pigs J Anim Sci 89 2011 1908 1921 21606447 
Wierup M.   The Swedish experience of the 1986 year ban of antimicrobial growth promoters, with special reference to animal health, disease prevention, productivity, and usage of antimicrobials Microb Drug Resist 7 2001 183 190 11442345 
Windisch W.  Schedle K.  Plitzner C.  Kroismayr A.   Use of phytogenic products as feed additives for swine and poultry J Anim Sci 86 Suppl. 14 2008 E140 E148 18073277 
Wong S.Y.  Grant I.R.  Friedman M.  Elliott C.T.  Situ C.   Antibacterial activities of naturally occurring compounds against Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis Appl Environ Microbiol 74 2008 5986 5990 18676709 
Wu Y.  Pan L.  Shang Q.H.  Ma X.K.  Long S.F.  Xu Y.T.   Effects of isomalto-oligosaccharides as potential prebiotics on performance, immune function and gut microbiota in weaned pigs Anim Feed Sci Technol 230 2017 126 135 
Xia S.  Yao W.  Zou B.  Lu Y.  Lu N.  Lei H.   Effects of potassium diformate on the gastric function of weaning piglets Anim Prod Sci 56 2016 1161 1166 
Xia T.  Lai W.  Han M.  Ma X.  Zhang L.   Dietary ZnO nanoparticles alters intestinal microbiota and inflammation response in weaned piglets Oncotarget 8 2017 64878 64891 29029398 
Xu J.  Zhou F.  Ji B.P.  Pei R.S.  Xu N.   The antibacterial mechanism of carvacrol and thymol against Escherichia coli Lett Appl Microbiol 47 2008 174 179 19552781 
Xu Y.T.  Liu L.I.  Long S.F.  Piao X.S.   Effects of organic acids and essential oils on performance, intestinal health and digestive enzyme activities of weaned pigs Anim Feed Sci Technol 235 2018 110 119 
Yin Y.L.  Tang Z.R.  Sun Z.H.  Liu Z.Q.  Li T.J.  Huang R.L.   Effect of galacto-mannan-oligosaccharides or chitosan supplementation on cytoimmunity and humoral immunity in early-weaned piglets Asian Australas J Anim Sci 21 2008 723 731 
Yu V.Y.   The role of dietary nucleotides in neonatal and infant nutrition Singapore Med J 39 1998 145 150 9676143 
Zentek J.  Ferrara F.  Pieper R.  Tedin L.  Meyer W.  Vahjen W.   Effects of dietary combinations of organic acids and medium chain fatty acids on the gastrointestinal microbial ecology and bacterial metabolites in the digestive tract of weaning piglets J Anim Sci 91 2013 3200 3210 23798515 
Zhang B.  Guo Y.   Supplemental zinc reduced intestinal permeability by enhancing occludin and zonula occludens protein-1 (ZO-1) expression in weaning piglets Br J Nutr 102 2009 687 693 19267955 
Zhao J.  Harper A.F.  Estienne M.J.  Webb K.E. Jr.  McElroy A.P.  Denbow D.M.   Growth performance and intestinal morphology responses in early weaned pigs to supplementation of antibiotic-free diets with an organic copper complex and spray-dried plasma protein in sanitary and nonsanitary environments J Anim Sci 85 2007 1302 1310 17264238 
Zhao P.Y.  Kim I.H.   Effect of direct-fed microbial on growth performance, nutrient digestibility, fecal noxious gas emission, fecal microbial flora and diarrhea score in weanling pigs Anim Feed Sci Technol 200 2015 86 92 
Zhu C.  Lv H.  Chen Z.  Wang K.  Wu X.  Chen Z.   Dietary zinc oxide modulates antioxidant capacity, small intestinal development, and jejunal gene expression in weaned pigs Biol Trace Elem Res 175 2017 331 338 27339255 
Zomborszky-Kovacs M.  Bardos L.  Biro H.  Tuboly S.  Wolf-Taskai E.  Toth A.   Effect of beta-carotene and nucleotide base supplementation on blood composition and immune response in weaned pigs Acta Vet Hung 48 2000 301 311 11402714

