
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 2781906310.1021/acsomega.6b00188ArticleMultiplex Flow Assays Haushalter Kristofer
J. Vetcha Srinivas Haushalter Robert C. *Parallel Synthesis Technologies,
Inc., 3054 Lawrence Expwy., Santa Clara, California 95051, United States* E-mail: bob@parallume.com.17 10 2016 31 10 2016 1 4 586 599 14 08 2016 28 09 2016 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical
Society2016American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Lateral flow or dipstick assays (e.g.,
home pregnancy tests), where
an analyte solution is drawn through a porous membrane and is detected
by localization onto a capture probe residing at a specific site on
the flow strip, are the most commonly and extensively used type of
diagnostic assay. However, after over 30 years of use, these assays
are constrained to measuring one or a few analytes at a time. Here,
we describe a completely general method, in which any single-plex
lateral flow assay is transformed into a multiplex assay capable of
measuring an arbitrarily large number of analytes simultaneously.
Instead of identifying the analyte by its localization onto a specific
geometric location in the flow medium, the analyte-specific capture
probe is identified by its association with a specific optically encoded
region within the flow medium. The capture probes for nucleic acids,
antigens, or antibodies are attached to highly porous agarose beads,
which have been encoded using multiple lanthanide emitters to create
a unique optical signature for each capture probe. The optically encoded
capture probe-derivatized beads are placed in contact with the analyte-containing
porous flow medium and the analytes are captured onto the encoded
regions as the solution flows through the porous medium. To perform
a multiplex diagnostic assay, a solution comprising multiple analytes
is passed through the flow medium containing the capture probe-derivatized
beads, and the captured analyte is treated with a suitable fluorescent
reporter. We demonstrate this multiplex analysis technique by simultaneously
measuring DNA samples, antigen–antibody pairs, and mixtures
of multiple nucleic acids and antibodies.

document-id-old-9ao6b00188document-id-new-14ao-2016-00188jccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Lateral flow assays (LFAs), such as home
pregnancy or drug tests,
comprise the most widespread diagnostic assay format and, because
of low cost, portability, no reagent handling and use by untrained
personnel, have been called the most successful microfluidic application.1 Many lateral flow assays are sandwich immunoassays2 with an antigen binding to detection antibodies
conjugated to nanoparticles such as gold,3 which subsequently binds through a second antigenic epitope to capture
antibodies at a specific location on the flow strip,4 indicating a positive test. It would be highly desirable
to perform lateral flow assays in a multiplexed manner so that many
diagnostic targets (e.g., proteins, antibodies, and nucleic acids)
could be measured simultaneously, but difficulties in manipulating
and detecting large numbers of different nanoparticles have prevented
deep multiplexing. We report here multiplex flow assays (MFAs) that
can measure arbitrarily large numbers of analytes in a flow format
using only molecular species without nanoparticle reporters. Porous
agarose beads, which are optically encoded with multiple lanthanide
emitters and derivatized with capture probes for the analyte targets,
contact the analyte-containing flow medium whereupon each capture
probe binds its target. After reporter-staining the captured target,
the lanthanide code and reporter intensity are measured for each bead
giving the amount of each analyte. We demonstrate this multiplexing
by measuring antibodies (against human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),
hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), influenza A (Inf
A), and troponin I), multiple DNA sequences, or mixtures of antibodies
and DNA in one sample. Using passive (no active fluid pumping) lateral
flow, flow through, or capillary channel flow, the samples are analyzed
with a portable (<500 g) instrument. With the analysis time, manufacturability,
and required reagents similar to those of a single-plex assay, MFAs
will increase the number of disease analytes screened, their screening
rate, and diagnostic access for resource-challenged environments.
MFAs represent the first steps toward self-screening for any disease.

Lateral flow and flow-through assays are the most common type of
diagnostic assay performed outside of a clinical setting, and more
than 200 companies are involved in the U.S. $ > 2 billion market.5 Most current LFAs, which are relatively unchanged
since their introduction 30 years ago, share the common characteristics
of (a) detecting an antigen (Ag)–antibody (Ab) interaction,
(b) passive flow (no active fluid pumping) of an analyte-containing
fluid by capillary action, (c) use of nanoparticles as reporters,
and (d) localization of the nanoparticles onto a specific geometric
location to indicate a positive test (Figure 1a). LFAs exploiting Ag–Ab interactions
for diagnostic purposes had their beginnings in early agglutination
studies,6−8 radioimmunoassays in 1960,9 the immobilization of the Ag–Ab moieties onto a solid support.10The first example of ELISA assays11 combined with capillary flow12−14 gave lateral
flow devices similar to those widely used today. The advantages of
the LFA, including passive flow-based fluidics, minimal reagent handling,
small portable format, ease of use by clinically inexperienced practitioners,
and low manufacturing cost, would be considerably expanded if LFAs
could be used in a multiplexed fashion to measure large numbers of
samples simultaneously in a single assay (i.e., MFA).

Figure 1 Comparison between (a)
traditional single-plex lateral flow assay,
where the analyte is identified by localization onto a specific location
(the capture line), and the new (b, c) MFAs where an analyte is identified
via its optical code rather than onto a specific geometric location.
A traditional lateral flow assay has a detection Ab attached to an
Au nanoparticle and a capture Ab bound to the test line at a specific
location (a1). The antigen within the analyte solution moves through
the flow medium (purple arrows), bonds to the capture Ab (a2), and
the tripartite antigen/capture Ab/Au nanoparticle moiety localizes
onto a second Ab at the test line location (a3), indicating a positive
antigen test. In contrast, the MFA assay for antigens (b) or antibodies
(c) instead of nanoparticles uses a multitude of lanthanide-encoded
beads contacting the flow medium to identify the captured analyte,
and only molecular species move within the flow. To identify Ags using
sandwich ELISA in a multiplexed fashion (b), the beads are derivatized
with capture probe Abs, with each capture probe bound to a bead set
with a unique optical code (b4), exposed to the Ag analyte solution,
treated with the detection Ab (b5), and stained with antispecies stain
or streptavidin–phycoerythrin (SAPE) to measure the amount
of Ag (b6). To identify Abs instead of Ags in a multiplexed assay
(c), a recombinant protein, which acts as an Ag against the Ab of
interest, is attached to the lanthanide-encoded bead set (c7), exposed
to the Ab analyte solution (c8), and labeled with an antispecies stain
against the captured Ab (c9) to give the amount of analyte.

However, the preparation and manipulation
of many different nanoparticle
reporters, lack of covalent attachment methods for bonding capture
probes to nanoparticles such as Au,3 use
of unnatural substrates such as nitrocellulose that display irreversible
protein binding, and the need to identify the target by localization
onto a specific geometric location have precluded development of deeply
multiplexed lateral flow assays with only two to three analytes reported
in most studies to date.

All known LFA examples identify the
analyte by its localization
onto a specific location (capture line) on the flow strip.15−18

Results
We report here a new type of MFA, which (a) can
multiplex and analyze
arbitrarily large combinations of protein, antibody, and DNA analytes,
(b) does not employ any nanoparticles but uses only soluble molecular
reagents (Figure 1b,c),
(c) contains >50 individual beads/mm2 (see number of
beads/mm2 in Figure 2a or mask holes/mm2 in Figure 2f), (d) does not require localization of
a reporter onto a line for analysis and may be randomly located within
the flow medium, (e) uses familiar, low-binding and porous agarose
as the capture probe substrate, (f) is inexpensively fabricated from
polymer, paper, and tape components (Figure 2), and (g) may be rapidly analyzed with an
inexpensive, portable, and wireless instrument.

Figure 2 MFA uses ratiometrically
encoded lanthanide emitters to optically
encode and identify the capture probe-derivatized beads using lateral
flow (a–g), flow-through (h), or capillary channel flow (i–n)
geometries. Each capture probe is attached
to a different lanthanide bead code (a) and the beads are in contact
with the analyte-containing solution within the flow medium (b), whereupon the target analyte binds to
the bead-bound capture probe. Only beads protruding through the well
bottoms (g) are imaged (a, c). After the lanthanide optical code is
read (a, b), the captured target is stained (c, d) with a labeled
reporter (Alexafluor 555), and the reporter signal intensity provides
the amount of analyte captured. The laser-machined, opaque polymer
mask (e; where 1 = 37 × 37 grid, 2 = paper flow medium, and 3
= tethers to attach grid to flow medium) holds the beads in contact
with the analyte solution within the paper flow medium (e) or the
flow-through device shown in (h). The wells (f) are micromachined
into a cup shape to accommodate beads of any size (g). A 6-plex MFA
may be performed using a capillary tube geometry (110 μm i.d.
borosilicate tube) where the analyte-containing solution flows over
the capture probe-derivatized, encoded beads within the tube or channel.
In panels (i)–(n), where the left figure in each of the six
panels (i–n) is the lanthanide image taken under 320 nm excitation
and the right image is the reporter image under 532 nm excitation,
six different DNA capture probes are present on six different bead
codes in all reactions. The 10 nM dye-labeled targets are added one
or two at a time according to the protocols given in the Methods and Experimental Procedures section and
the hybridization results showed selectivities comparable to the lateral
flow DNA hybridization assays in Figure 7a–f.

The MFA measures analytes by (a) covalently attaching the
capture
probe to porous lanthanide-encoded beads (Figure 1b,c), (b) placing the beads into one of the
MFA devices (Figure 2e–n), (c) passing the analyte-containing target solution through
the flow medium and encoded regions, (d) staining the beads with a
reporter if the target is unstained, and (e) imaging the beads to
determine both the capture probe-identifying optical code (Figure 2a,b) and the amount
of target analyte captured on each bead code (Figure 2c,d).

The most important enabling component
of the MFA technology is
the capture probe-derivatized regions (Figure 1b,c), each of which has been uniquely ratiometrically
optically encoded with multiple lanthanide emitters19−22 (the so-called Parallume lanthanide
optical encoding technology). The deep optical multiplexing is enabled
by unique lanthanide optical properties, which include (a) very narrow
(2–10 nm), nonoverlapping emission peaks (Figure 3), which allow thousands of
optical codes to be resolved,19,20 (b) no photobleaching,
(c) no overlap among the excitation spectra of lanthanides, proteins/DNA,
and any organic reporter dye (Figures 2a,c and 3 inset), (d) very bright
and stable phosphor type. Therefore, each encoded capture probe (Figures 1 and 2a) is associated with a unique Parallume optical code (Figure 4) emission (Figures 2a and 3), and (e) unlike organic dyes, all lanthanide colors are
excited by a single excitation source. With >300 ratiometric lanthanide
optical codes resolved using two colors,19 ∼1012 codes are statistically resolvable for six
lanthanide emitter colors. It would be difficult to encode beads similarly
with organic dyes instead of lanthanides because the extensive spectral
overlap of the broad (compared to lanthanides) organic emission peaks
(full-width at half-maximum ≈ 30–50 nm) (Figure 3) precludes resolving numerous
optical codes, the organic dyes are unstable toward code-changing
photobleaching, and the emission of the organic reporter dyes overlaps
with that of the organic encoding dyes, concomitantly decreasing code
resolution. Previous reports of using lanthanide materials in lateral
flow assays used only lanthanide nanoparticles as reporters (analogous
to Au nanoparticles) localized onto a line.23−25

Figure 3 Plot of emission intensity
vs wavelength for potential encoding
fluorophores shows that lanthanide emission peaks (purple line) are
much narrower than emission peaks from organic dyes or quantum dots.
These narrow lanthanide emission peaks, which display less spectral
overlap than any other fluorophore, allow their relative emission
intensities to be measured more accurately thereby giving rise to
more resolvable and numerous optical codes. Unlike the organic dyes
and quantum dots, which are susceptible to code-altering photo-oxidation,
the lanthanide material cannot be photochemically altered. The inset
shows that nucleic acids and proteins are not excited at the lanthanide
excitation wavelength used and any autofluorescence is eliminated.
The 315 nm excitation also does not overlap with the absorption of
the visible-light-excited, colored reporter dyes and, conversely,
the colorless lanthanide materials are not excited by visible light
eliminating any optical crosstalk between encoding and reporter fluorophores.

Figure 4 Lanthanide-encoded beads used for the MFA, where
the capture probe
is identified by the lanthanide-derived optical code of the bead to
which it is attached, are optically encoded ratiometrically with multiple
lanthanide emitters (in this case Er, Sm, and Tm) creating “optical
bins” into which the beads are sorted for identification. The
individual beads are shown enclosed by a tetragon representing the
optical bin. As the beads are identified from the ratio of emission
intensity of multiple lanthanide emitters, and not the absolute intensity
of the emission, the measured ratios are independent of the bead size,
excitation source brightness, angle of illumination, sample–detector
distance, detector efficiency, etc.; thus, many bead sizes may be
used (Figure 2g). The
optical bins and bead data points are falsely colored for clarity
as most encoded beads with three or more lanthanide emitters appear
whitish to the eye.

The ∼40–80
μm Parallume-encoded (Figure 4) agarose beads (Figures 1b,c and 2a) are synthesized
at a rate of millions of beads per minute by spraying26 and are (a) carboxylated to allow covalent attachment
of the capture probe and (b) crosslinked to allow polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) thermal cycling without decomposition. Multiplex titrations
investigating bead pore size versus target size show that proteins
and antibodies diffuse
rapidly (Figure 5)
into the beads, and species up to 1.4 MDa are accommodated within
the bead pores (Figures 5 and 6).

Figure 5 Target species diffuse rapidly into the
capture probe-derivatized,
Parallume-encoded beads without agitation. Two bead types, which contain
DNA capture probes homologous (red) or nonhomologous (green) toward
a 60-nt dye-labeled target (a), are placed into a flow-through device
(Figure 2h), imaged
at 315 nm (a), and subsequently treated with an excess of 10 nM dye-labeled
target without agitation. Images in panels (b) and (c) show the reporter
signal of the same beads imaged with 532 nm excitation at ∼1
min (b) and 60 min (c) after target addition. The chart (bottom) shows
the time course of the static target diffusion into and captured by
the beads with the homologous capture probe.

Figure 6 Six-plex ELISA titrations as a function of target size and percentage
agarose in the beads show the effect of agarose concentration on bead
pore size (pore size 1 = 4 wt % agarose, pore size 2 = 2 wt % agarose
and pore size 3 = 1 wt % agarose; lower agarose percentage gives larger
average pore size). An IgG Ab against GM-CSF Ag is attached to each
of the three different pore size beads and an IgG Ab against IgM Ag
is likewise attached to each of the three different pore size beads.
The six pore size–capture probe combinations, each of which
has its own unique bead optical code, are pooled together and titrated
with increasing concentrations of either 15–30 kDa GM-CSF antigen
(top) or ∼970 kDa IgM (bottom). The beads are treated with
a biotinylated monoclonal Ab against the target species and then stained
with SAPE. The top plot shows that none of the GM-CSF titrant is captured
by the three codes with the anti-IgM capture probes, but the GM-CSF
is taken up by the anti-GM-CSF capture Ab bead codes with larger pores
capturing more protein target. The bottom plot shows that none of
the IgM titrant reacts with either the bead codes with the anti-GM-CSF
capture Ab or the small-pore 4 wt % agarose beads with anti-IgM capture
Abs, but the large IgM target is taken up by the larger pore (1 and
2% agarose) beads.

These beads may be used
in lateral flow (Figure 2a–d), flow-through (Figure 2h), or capillary channel flow
(Figure 2i–n)
configurations where the flowing analyte solutions contact the encoded
target-sensing regions. In the lateral flow geometry, the beads are
held in contact with the analyte solution by a laser-drilled, light-opaque
polymer mask (Figure 2e). The opaque mask, which immobilizes the beads for imaging while
allowing facile reagent flow, optically isolates the beads (Figure 2a–d). The
mask eliminates bead-to-bead crosstalk from the lanthanide or reporter
emission, allowing a very high sample density. The assembled device
consists of a tape substrate to which the paper fluid medium and the
bead-loaded mask are attached and is sealed by a UV-transparent tape
for the lateral flow format or flow-through format or is used in a
capillary flow channel where the beads directly contact the flowing
analyte within a ∼100 μm channel (Figure 2i–n). In a manufactured device, the
beads would be embedded directly into the flow medium thereby abrogating
the need of the mask.

We demonstrate the multiplexing utility
of this system by simultaneously
analyzing, both individually and with all samples pooled, several
Abs and nucleic acid sequences. Multiplex DNA detection (all capture
probes present) was performed with both directly labeled targets and
tripartite probe–target–reporter assemblies, and the
results summarized in Figure 7a–f showing high target
selectivity and a low and uniform background for probes with no targets
in both lateral-flow and flow-through systems.

Figure 7 MFA allows selective
multiplex detection of nucleic acids (a–f),
antibodies (g–k), or both nucleic acids and antibodies simultaneously
(l). In panels (a)–(e), six different DNA capture probe sequences
on six different optical codes, one of which is a universal negative
control (S3), are present in all reactions set up as a
lateral flow experiment (Figure 2a–f). Five dye-labeled targets (∼10 nM),
each of which is complementary to one of the five bead-bound capture
probes (a–e), are added one at a time to the six bead codes
present in each of the five assays (a–e). Each target rapidly
binds to its complementary capture probe with high selectivity (Figure 5) and all noncomplementary
capture probes display low backgrounds without washing (a–e).
When all five labeled targets are added, all beads except the negative
control bind their respective targets (f). Ab analytes may be detected
in a multiplexed fashion as shown in Figure 1c. The Abs against the bead-bound recombinant
protein antigens troponin I (g), HBV (h), HCV (i), and Inf A (j) are
added in a flow-through geometry (Figure 2h) to the five bead-bound recombinant protein
capture probes one at a time (g–j) or all (troponin I, HBV,
HCV, HIV, and Inf A) at once (k) and subsequently stained with dye-labeled
rabbit anti-mouse (troponin I, HBV, HCV, and Inf A) or labeled rabbit
anti-human (HIV). It is also possible to detect simultaneously four
DNA sequences, three Abs, and a negative control within the same assay
(l). The number of beads measured for each analyte is given at the
lower right of each bar.

In addition to the multiplex sandwich ELISA (Figure 1b) format used to
investigate the pore size
access of various Abs (Figure 6), “antigen down” assays with the antigen as
the capture probe (Figure 1c) have been performed to detect Abs against HIV, HCV, HBV,
Inf A, and troponin I. With all antigenic capture probe-derivatized
beads present, the Abs are added individually (Figure 4g–j) and then together (Figure 4k), clearly demonstrating selective
and multiplexed target capture.

It is also possible to detect
selectively and simultaneously both
nucleic acids and Abs. When all nucleic acid targets and all Ab targets
are pooled and mixed with the pooled capture probes, all added targets
are selectively detected, indicating the capability to analyze both
antibodies and nucleic acids within the same assay (Figure 4l).

Discussion
As
the LFA diagnostic methods are currently one of the most useful
and widespread assay varieties, expanding the number and scope of
assays that may be performed simultaneously has obvious advantages
in terms of cost, logistics, and convenience. In this section, we
discuss why embedding lanthanide-encoded capture probes within a porous
solid represents a general, straightforward, and particularly well-suited
means to perform a MFA. This is followed by a discussion of the responsibility
of the multiplexed assays shown in Figure 7.

Multiplexing
Multiplexing refers
to the ability to
screen each component within a multicomponent target analyte mixture
simultaneously against multiple capture probes. To accomplish this
multiplexing, the capture probes are pooled and added to the multicomponent
target analyte mixture, and it is obvious that it must be possible
to distinguish all of the different capture probes used from one another.
Two common methods for differentiating capture probes are as follows:
(a) spot the capture probe onto a planar substrate and identify the
probe by its x, y location on the
substrate or (b) attach the capture probe to a bead that has been
optically encoded to differentiate it from other bead-bound capture
probes. The below discussion emphasizes why porous agarose beads that
have been optically encoded with multiple lanthanide emitters form
a particularly well-suited platform for creating a diagnostic assay.

The multiplexing scheme
used here to build an MFA to detect either antigens or antibodies
is schematically illustrated in Figure 1b,c, respectively, depending on the whether an antibody
or antigen acts as the capture probe to detect its corresponding antigen
or antibody.

The aspects of assay multiplexing that may be facilitated
by our
method are contrasted to those omnipresent, recurring difficulties
and difficult to control variables, such as matrix effects and nonspecific
cross-reactivity, which are independent of the analysis platform.

Planar Arrays versus Beads
There are many reasons why
porous encoded beads are superior to planar arrays for most diagnostic
applications including the following:Kinetics: assay time to completion. The diffusion rates
for mixing surface-bound and bulk solution species directly on a planar
surface are very low compared to bulk diffusion rates, and planar
arrays often contact target mixtures for 12–18 h. Because the
porous agarose beads are typically >95 wt % water and the beads
can
be agitated and stirred, reactant diffusion rates approach those of
bulk solution. Small oligonucleotide targets reach equilibrium with
bead-bound targets in <2 min and larger oligos within minutes.27 A typical LFA takes 10–30 min to perform.

Amount of capture probe per unit image area.
The beads
have a surface area ∼10 000× greater than that
of a planar array spot of the same diameter; thus, for a given image
size used for analysis, the beads can capture orders of magnitude
more target in the same image area. Consider a qualitative comparison
of a 50 μm planar spot and a 50 μm diameter bead with
both appearing as a 50 μm object when analyzing the image for
the assay. The surface area of the planar spot is about 2 × 103 μm2, whereas an agarose sphere of 50 μm
diameter, with a typical agarose surface area of ∼250 m2/g beads, ∼106 beads/mL, and 5 wt % agarose,
has a surface area of about 107 μ2. Obviously,
the bead can capture far more target than a planar spot. As the Parallume
beads are >95 wt % water, they are essentially transparent and
much
of the emitted light may be captured and measured.

Fabrication. Although each spot must be placed onto
each individual array at a carefully defined location using expensive
robotic equipment, the encoded beads may be placed at any random location
within the flow assay. The beads could possibly be cast within the
porous media during device fabrication. The porous Parallume beads
are synthesized by spraying a mixture of Parallume nanoparticles in
agarose at a rate of millions of beads per minute in a completely
scalable process.

Probe substrate density. Although
it is easy to place 50 μm beads at a distance of 10 μm
from one another within a porous substrate, printing 50 μm liquid
spots onto a porous membrane is more challenging. The beads could
easily be much smaller than 50 μm but printed spots on a porous
substrate cannot made as small.

Nonspecific
binding. Agarose is widely used as a gel
and is known for very low nonspecific binding of proteins and nucleic
acids. Unnatural substrates such as glass have much higher nonspecific
binding per unit area than agarose.

Self-similarity.
Because beads are synthesized in millions
at a time in a single batch, the assays performed on the beads synthesized
at the same time would be expected to have a lower sample-to-sample
variance than the spots deposited one at a time.

Lower operational costs. Bead handling requires no special
equipment such as spotters, scanners, incubators, or mixers, and beads
may be handled in standard PCR tubes.

Ease of use. Beads may be handled in everyday laboratory
containers and transferred with standard pipets, whereas slides are
more difficult to manipulate. For example, it is straightforward to
perform PCR or primer extension on beads but quite difficult to thermally
cycle or store slides.



Lanthanide Encoding
The advantages of lanthanide encoding
over optical encoding with organic dyes are numerous and substantial.
Two important advantages are the larger number of optical codes available
with lanthanides because of the narrow emission peak width (Figure 3) and the exceptional
chemical stability and photostability of the solid-state inorganic
lanthanide materials, which provide stable and immutable optical codes.

The host compound used to create the multilanthanide Parallume
materials in this study is YVO4. As prepared with a final
calcination at >1000 °C, the surface of the YVO4 is
dehydroxylated and hydrophobic and difficult to wet. In this state,
YVO4 tenaciously and irreversibly binds DNA and proteins.
These calcined particles are mixed with agarose, and the molten agarose
is sprayed from a nozzle to form the beads,26 which are typically 1–4 wt % agarose and 1–2 wt %
lanthanide-doped YVO4. The
fact that the extremely low-binding level on agarose beads does not
change with and without entrained YVO4 particles, and bare
YVO4 instantly and strongly binds DNA, indicates that no
YVO4 within the agarose beads is exposed to the target-containing
solution. We have never observed any change in the Parallume codes
(i.e., any change in the relative amounts of the multiple lanthanide
emitters) once synthesized, as indicated by the facts that (a) the
Parallume optical bins into which the encoded beads are sorted (Figure 4) are the same before
and after any reaction, (b) the Parallume codes did not change upon
storage in water for over five years, and (c) we have never observed
a change in optical code when Parallume beads are thermally cycled
under PCR conditions for 100 cycles. There is no indication of any
lanthanide leakage from the beads under any conditions.

Unlike
most organic reporters and dyes, the lanthanides in the
YVO4 host used here have excitation spectra that do not
overlap with the excitation spectra of either DNA/proteins (Figure 3 inset) or organic
dyes absorbing in the near UV or visible (vis). Therefore, an image
taken at 315 nm excites only the lanthanides and the white YVO4 is transparent to the visible excitation used to excite the
reporter dyes (e.g., 532 nm).

Unlike organic dyes, which have
very limited photostability especially
in air, the lanthanide-doped YVO4 cannot be photobleached
under any circumstances. These materials are photostable enough to
form laser cavities, as evidenced by the popular
green laser pointers (532 nm), which is the frequency-doubled 1064
nm output from Nd3+-doped YVO4.

Pore Properties
of the Parallume Beads
The pore structure
of beads and diffusion of analyte targets into the beads were studied
in two different ways. The agarose is chemically crosslinked so that
the pore structure is fixed and stable. As shown in Figure 5, a static diffusion experiment
with a dyed target and a bead-bound capture probe provides information
about the kinetic diffusion rate into the bead. As there is no mixing
or agitation provided in this experiment, this represents the slowest
diffusion rate possible. As seen in Figure 7b, the dyed target begins to be concentrated
onto the correct capture probe within 1 min. A typical minimally acceptable
3:1 positive:negative control is achieved within minutes. When the
samples are agitated (e.g., on a plate shaker), target–probe
binding is very rapid and reaches a steady state within a few minutes.27

It is well known that agarose forms smaller
pores and a higher surface area as the weight percentage of agarose
increases upon forming a gel. The pore size sieving effect on target
analyte size as a function of pore size is strong, sharp, and clear
for the Parallume beads. As shown in Figure 6, the access of a series of antibody–antigen
pairs and the SAPE stain is allowed or not allowed depending on the
relative target and pore sizes. Note that the pores in the 1–2
wt % beads are very large and can accommodate species up to 1.4 MDa
in size (probe + target + SAPE).

Multiplex Nucleic Acid
and Antigen–Antibody Detection:
Matrix Effects
Three types of multiplex target detection
experiments were performed: (a) multiple antibody–antigen pairs,
(b) multiple complementary strands of nucleic acids, or (c) both antigens
and nucleic acid analytes, which are shown in Figure 7. An important general point to note is that
LFA are used nearly exclusively to determine the presence or absence
of an analyte and not often used for quantitative measurements.

It should be noted that in Figure 7, the signals from the same target are weaker when
present within the multiplexed assay than when in the control assay
with only one species present. This is because all targets are of
a fixed concentration and when combined are necessarily diluted. For
example, if six antibodies of concentration 1 mg/mL are mixed together,
the concentration of each is 1/6 mg/mL. Of course, this situation
would never occur in an actual assay as there is only one target mixture
to be analyzed and is only relevant while preparing standards.

Common to all multiplex reactions are nonspecific cross-reactivity
between targets and probes and matrix effects. It is seen that the
cross-reactivity is higher with the antigens and antibodies (Figure 7g–j) than
with DNA. This is because (a) the DNA is 10–50× more concentrated
than the commercially obtained antibodies and (b) the antibodies are
much less stable than the DNA and the amount of fully reconstituted
and completely functional protein present is not known. Therefore,
other interfering species are more likely to be present within the
unstable protein samples than the chemically pure synthetic DNA samples.

In the case of the antibodies, cross-reactivity may be seen even
when there is only one target added. For example, there is obvious
cross-reactivity between the HBV and HCV antigens but very little
with Inf A and Trop I.

Summary
We have shown that the use
of optically encoded regions instead
of a known geometric location on a flow medium for analyte identification
can transform the most commonly used diagnostic assay format from
a single-plex assay to a multiplex assay with the multiplexing enabled
by the very narrow optical emission from the multicolor Parallume
encoding materials. As the MFA employs the same reagents and similar
manufacturing methods as conventional lateral flow assays, rapid introduction
into the existing POC diagnostic area will lower the cost and increase
availability in the short term for many types of assays. Comprehensive
and wide-ranging MFA screenings reliably performed by anyone could
provide the private, rapid, and detailed knowledge to participate
in one’s own critical health decisions.

Methods and Experimental
Procedures
General Bead Handling Procedures
These procedures are
suitable for either (a) covalently attaching a capture antibody to
the beads or (b) covalently attaching a recombinant protein to the
beads using the well-known 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide
hydrochloride (EDC)/N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) protocol.
Smaller peptides often bind spontaneously to the beads without chemical
crosslinking, but larger proteins and all antibodies require the crosslinking
procedure given here to covalently link them to the beads.1. The virgin Parallume
beads, which have
never been treated with any proteins, surfactants, detergents, cell
extracts, or nucleic acids, that is, as received from Parallel, are
reactive and may adhere to the walls of the pipet tip and reaction
tube or clump together. If the underivatized beads cling to the pipet
tip while using your buffer, the use of commercially available “low-adhesion”
pipet tips is recommended. If the beads clump or adhere to the tube
during protein conjugation or coating, just continue with the protocol.
Once the buffer contains surfactant, proteins, antibodies, etc., or
the PBST used here, in subsequent steps of the assay, the beads will
no longer adhere to surfaces and should become free floating once
again.

2. Stirring means
agitation on an orbital
plate shaker (suggested: 5 mm orbit). The speed of shaking required
to best suspend the beads depends on the size and shape of the tube
and the amount of beads used. For 0.1–50 μL of beads
in 10–1000 μL of buffer, a 1.5 mL round-bottom centrifuge
tube (Eppendorf) is shaken at 800 rpm, a 1.5 μL conical-bottom
tube at 1200 rpm and a 200 μL PCR tube at >1700 rpm. In general,
the beads are the easiest to stir in round-bottom tubes. Bead volumes
of several microliters or larger may be conveniently handled in a
1.5 mL Pall Nanosep with a 500 μL 0.45 μm filter insert.
Visually inspect the beads when on the plate shaker to make sure the
liquid vortex rises up out of the bottom of the tube and coats the size
of the tube—but not so fast that liquid adheres uniformly to
the entire tube wall from centrifugal force. Rotation at too fast
or too slow a speed results in less efficient mixing and potentially
compromised detection limits. If the beads are not mixed as vigorously
as required, the kinetic diffusion of the material in and out of the
porous beads, as well as the detection limits, could suffer.

3. To obtain more uniformity
among beads
during a reaction, do not add a concentrated solution of a reagent
to the beads without agitation, but rather immediately aspirate the
solution in and out of the pipet tip as rapidly as possible to expose
all beads as quickly as possible to the same concentration of the
reagent at the same time.

4. Unless otherwise specified, washing
means stirring for 5 min on the plate shaker.

5. For isolation, the beads may be quickly
centrifuged on a small centrifuge, pulled down with a magnet if magnetic
beads are used or just allowed to settle by gravity.

6. Settled beads refer to beads that have
been allowed to settle for at least 10 min or centrifuged; 1 μL
of settled beads is about 1 mg of beads and there are approximately
1500–3000 beads/μL. In general, 10 or more beads are
needed per assay depending on the particular assay.

7. To measure a small volume of beads,
pipet a volume of beads into the appropriate dilution volume, quickly
aspirate the beads in and out of the pipet tip to completely and uniformly
suspend them, and then transfer the desired volume of suspended (diluted)
beads. Accurate aliquotting requires a uniform and homogeneous bead
suspension.

8. Store bare,
unused Parallume beads
at room temperature or 4 °C in 0.03% NaN3. Beads are
always supplied in 0.03% NaN3 unless otherwise specified.



Protocol for Conjugating Antibodies or Recombinant
Proteins
to Encoded Agarose Beads
Materials and Reagents
(a) Carboxylated Parallume
beads.

(b) Capture antibody
or recombinant protein.

(c) Stain for antibody (usually dye-labeled
antispecies antibody).

(d) Zeba 7K MWCO spin columns (if needed).

(e) Activation buffer: 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic
acid (MES) buffer = 100 mM MES, 150 mM
NaCl, pH 6.0.

(f) 1×
phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS), pH 7.4.

(g) 1×
PBST, pH 7.4 (PBST is 0.05%
v/v Tween-20 in PBS).

(h) NHS or Sulfo-NHS (Thermo Scientific).

(i) EDC (Thermo Scientific) [Do not substitute
other brands of EDC]. When the EDC is received, place small samples
into individual containers with an O-ring or equivalent seals and
store at −20 °C. Always allow the EDC to warm to room
temperature for at least 15 min before opening. Use only if the EDC
appears as a fluffy powder—any sign of clumping or a damp appearance
is indicative of decomposition and such material should be discarded.

(j) Quench for EDC activation
= 50 mM
hydroxylamine in 1× PBST.

(k) ELISA buffer (1% bovine serum albumin
(BSA) in 1× PBST, pH 7.4).

(l) Blocking buffer (appropriate normal
serum, ELISA buffer or 5% w/v non-fat milk powder or other preferred
blocking reagent).

(m) Nanosep spin columns, 1.5 mL tubes
or 200 μL PCR tubes.

(n) Centrifuge for 1.5 mL or 200 μL
PCR tubes.

(o) Orbital
plate shaker.

1. Important: Materials
that are often present in protein or antibody preparations, which
could interfere with the EDC coupling, such as nucleophiles like Tris
or azide, surfactants, urea, Tween and other materials, must be removed
before commencing the bead–protein coupling reaction. Before
coupling, the protein or antibody is passed through a 7K MWCO Zeba
column to remove materials reactive toward EDC and to exchange the
protein shipping/storage buffer for 1× PBS buffer, pH 7.4.

2. Transfer 2 mg of settled
agarose beads
(∼2 μL) to a 200 μL tube, 1.5 mL tube, or Nanosep
column.

3. Add 200 μL
(or more if using
a 1.5 mL tube) of 100 mM MES, 150 mM NaCl buffer, pH 6.0. Wash the
beads by stirring at room temperature for 5 min.

4. Pellet the beads and aspirate the supernatant
and discard without disturbing the pellet.

5. Add 200 μL of 100 mM MES, 150
mM NaCl buffer, pH 6.0, and repeat the washing procedure twice for
a total of three washes.

6. Resuspend the beads in 20 μL
of 100 mM MES, 150 mM NaCl, pH 6.0.

7. In two separate tubes, prepare in 100
mM MES, 150 mM NaCl buffer, pH 6.0, a 15 mg/100 μL Sulfo-NHS
solution (or a 6 mg/100 μL solution of NHS) and 5 mg/100 μL
EDC solutions.

8. Add 20
μL of the NHS solution
to the beads, briefly mix, then add 20 μL of the EDC solution
to the beads and stir at room temperature for 30 min to activate the
carboxylate COOH groups.

9. Pellet and wash the beads once with
200 μL of 100 mM MES, 150 mM NaCl buffer, pH 6.0, and twice
with 200 μL of 1× PBS, pH 7.4, to remove excess coupling
reagents.

10. Resuspend
the beads in 20 μL
of 1× PBS, pH 7.4.

11. Add capture antibody or recombinant
protein (1–5 μg/mg of beads) in 1× PBS to the activated
beads, adjust the final volume with 1× PBS, pH 7.4, to 50 μL
and stir the reaction mixture at room temperature for 2 h. Note: use 5 μg protein for the first derivatization
protocol and subsequently optimize.

12. Wash the beads twice with 200 μL
of 1× PBST, pH 7.4, by stirring, centrifuging, and removing the
supernatant.

13. Quench
any excess coupling reagent
by treating beads with 50 mM hydroxylamine in 100 μL 1×
PBST.

14. Stir beads for
15 min at room temperature.

15. Wash the beads thrice with stirring
in 200 μL 1× PBST.

16. Pellet the beads in a mini centrifuge
and discard the supernatant.

17. The beads are now ready for target
capture.

Protocol for Blocking Antigen
or Antibody-Derivatized Beads
When using an antispecies reporter
stain, it is best to use serum
from the species that produces the antibody for the stain for blocking
if possible. For example, if the detection antibody is a monoclonal
mouse antibody, block with normal rabbit serum if the antispecies
antibody reporter stain is rabbit anti-mouse. Use 1–5% v/v
normal serum/PBST for blocking.1. Prepare a blocking buffer in PBST using
normal serum, ELISA buffer (1% BSA in 1× PBST, pH 7.4), milk,
or other preferred blocking buffer.

2. Add 200 μL of the blocking buffer
to the pelleted beads and stir at room temperature for 1 h.

3. Wash in PBST, pellet the
beads, and
discard the supernatant.

4. The capture probe-derivatized beads,
which should be stored at 4 °C if not used immediately, are now
ready for use in capturing antigens or antibodies.



Protocol for Preclearing Human Serum for Immunoassays on Agarose
Beads
If human serum is part of the assay, there appears
to be a human antibody against agarose present in all human sera that
must be removed from the serum before any assay is performed.1. Prepare the serum
for preclearing by
placing 1 μL serum in 50 μL ELISA buffer. (This is the
amount for a single assay.)

2. To preclear the serum, add 1 mg of
“preclearing” beads (∼1 μL settled beads)
to the above serum/buffer solution. Any agarose beads that have never
been previously used are suitable for preclearing.

3. Stir for 45 min, then spin down beads
and collect the supernatant. These preclearing beads should be discarded,
but if these beads are stained with rabbit anti-human IgG, they stain
very intensely.

4. As,
for example, the human HIV antibodies
against the HIV coat protein gp41 are easily detected in human serum
after this preclearing treatment, the preclearing does not remove
other antibodies.

5. This
supernatant is the precleared
serum.



Protocol for ELISA or Antibody
Capture
Depending on
whether an antigen (antigen down assay) or antibody (ELISA) was coupled
to the beads as the capture probe, the following protocol is used
to capture and stain the target antibody or antigen, respectively.

Target
Capture
1. Bead volume: use 0.05–0.2 mg
of the above coupled and blocked beads per assay (i.e., per optical
code). See Note 7 in General Bead Handling Procedures (above), for measuring and dispensing small bead volumes.

2. Centrifuge and remove excess
blocking
buffer from the capture probe-derivatized and blocked beads.

3. Add 50 μL of the
previously precleared
serum or other sample in ELISA buffer to the bead pellet.

4. Stir for 1 h.

5. Wash the beads thrice using 1×
PBST and remove supernatant.

6. If the target is reporter-labeled,
the sample is ready for fluorescent measurement of the reporter.

Target Staining
If the target is
not labeled, then
the bead-bound target or detection antibody must be stained with a
reporter antibody.1. Important: To obtain
more uniform staining, do not add concentrated stain to a tube that
has beads in a small volume of buffer. First, dilute the stain in
a separate tube with buffer and mix thoroughly. Then quickly add this
diluted stain to the beads and mix by aspiration or stirring as rapidly
as possible.

2. Stain the
bound target by adding the
reporter antibody in PBST. If the antibody is 1 mg/mL, then use a
1:500 dilution as a starting point. If the detection antibody is biotinylated,
use ∼50 μL of 10 μg/mL SAPE in PBST.

3. Stir the diluted reporter-labeled antibody
in PBST with the beads containing the bead-bound targets.



The sample is ready for fluorescence measurement
of
the reporter.

Protocol for Coupling Amine-Modified Oligonucleotides
to Carboxylated
Agarose Beads
Materials and Reagents
(a) Carboxylated Parallume
beads

(b) Amino-oligonucleotide1 (100 μM)

(c) EDC (Thermo Scientific)

(d) NHS (Thermo Scientific)

(e) MES buffer 0.1 M, pH 4.5

(f) 1× PBS, pH 7.4

(g) 1× PBST, pH 7.4 (PBST is 0.05%
v/v Tween-20 in PBS)

(h) Tween-20 (Concentrated)

(i) Tween-20 (0.05% w/v in H2O)

(j) Tris–HCl 50 mM, pH 8.0

(k) 1.5 mL round-bottom centrifuge tubes
or 200 μL PCR tubes or, for bead volumes of several microliters
or larger, Pall Nanosep spin columns (500 μL)

(l) Plate shaker for stirring

(m) Thermal cycler

1. Remove EDC from the freezer and let
it warm to room temperature for at least 15 min.

2. Vortex or repeatedly aspirate the stock
beads for 10 s. Quickly aspirate the desired amount (2–4 mg)2 from the suspension and dispense into a 1.5 mL or
200 μL PCR tube or spin column.

3. Spin down the beads for 15 s and remove
the supernatant without disturbing the pellet or centrifuge in a filter
spin column.

4. Add 200
μL of 0.1 M MES buffer,
pH 4.5, and 1 μL of concentrated Tween-20 and stir for 5 min
at room temperature, pellet the beads, and remove the supernatant.
Repeat once, wash once with 200 mL of 0.1 M, pH 4.5, MES buffer, spin
down the beads, and remove the supernatant.

5. Resuspend the pelleted beads in 20
μL of 0.1 M MES buffer, pH 4.5.

6. For each mg of the beads, add 0.1 nmol
(1.0 μL of a 100 mM solution) of amino-oligo capture probe.

7. Stir the beads for 2 min.

8. Prepare a 58 mg/mL solution
of NHS
in 0.1 M MES buffer, pH 4.5.

9. Add 10 μL of the NHS solution
to the tube and stir the beads for 1 min.

10. Prepare the required volume of a 50
mg/mL solution of EDC in 0.1 M MES buffer, pH 4.5.

11. Add 20 μL of the freshly prepared
EDC solution to the tube.

12. Stir the beads for 30 min at room
temperature.

13. Prepare
another fresh solution of
50 mg/mL EDC in 0.1 M MES buffer, pH 4.5.

14. Add a second aliquot of 20 μL
of freshly prepared EDC solution to the tube.

15. Stir the beads for an additional 30
min at room temperature.

16. Pellet the beads in a mini centrifuge
for 10 s. Remove as much solution as possible without disturbing the
bead pellet.

17. Wash the
beads with 200 mL of 0.1
M MES buffer, pH 4.5, then 200 μL of H2O with 0.05%
Tween-20, pellet the beads, remove the supernatant, and repeat the
washing procedure once more.

18. Wash the beads once with 200 μL
of 50 mM hydroxylamine hydrochloride in PBST, pH 7.4, or 50 mM Tris,
pH 8.0, for 5 min to quench any unreacted EDC or activated carboxylate
groups, pellet the beads, and remove the supernatant.

19. Wash the beads with 200 μL of
50 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.0, for 2 min at 95 °C and 5 min at 55
°C in a thermal cycler, pellet the beads, and remove the supernatant.
Repeat the washing once more. These capture probe-derivatized beads
are ready for target capture.

20. If very low detection limits are required,
it is possible to remove a small amount of bead background fluorescence
generated during the EDC procedure using a borohydride procedure.
This step is designed to reduce bead autofluorescence generated from
the EDC coupling. This step is not usually necessary, especially when
analyzing concentrated solutions such as PCR products. Prepare a fresh
0.25% sodium borohydride solution in 2× standard saline citrate
(SSC), 0.05% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Add 200 μL of the
NaBH4 solution to the washed beads from step 19. Incubate
at 42 °C for 30 min with stirring. Leave the lid of the tube
slightly open to allow the hydrogen gas generated during the NaBH4 treatment to escape. Pellet the beads and remove the NaBH4 solution. Repeat this treatment with 200 μL of freshly
prepared NaBH4 solution. Pellet the beads to remove the
supernatant. Wash the beads twice in 1× SSC, 0.05% Tween-20 at
42 °C for 10 min with stirring. Wash the beads two more times
in 0.0.2× SSC, 0.05% Tween-20 at 42 °C for 10 min with stirring.
Resuspend the beads in appropriate amount of 0.2× SSC, 0.05%
Tween-20 so that the final bead concentration is between 0.01 and
0.02 mg/μL.

21. Store
oligo-derivatized beads at 4
°C in 0.03% NaN3 for long-term storage.

Protocol for Hybridization to Bead-Bound Oligonucleotide Capture
Probes
This section contains the protocols for hybridizing
the lanthanide-encoded beads in bulk, whereas the section Protocols for Lateral Flow, Flow-Through and Capillary
Flow Assays below provides protocols for performing hybridizations
in the lateral flow and flow-through geometries.

Materials and Reagents
1. Parallume beads
with immobilized capture
probes

2. Hybridization
buffer

(a) Ficoll (Sigma, 2 mg/mL)

(b) Poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (Sigma, 2 mg/mL)

(c) BSA (10 mg/mL)

(d) 3× SSC

(e) SDS (0.25%)

3. Wash buffer 1: 2× SSC, 0.03% SDS

4. Wash buffer 2: 1× SSC, 0.05% Tween-20

5. Wash buffer 3: 0.2×
SSC, 0.05%
Tween-20

6. 1.5 mL tubes
or 200 μL PCR tubes

7. Centrifuge for 1.5 mL or 200 μL
tubes

8. Thermal cycler

9. Orbital plate shaker

Prehybridization Blocking Procedure
1. Transfer the
appropriate amount of
capture probe-immobilized beads (0.1–4 mg) to a 200 μL
PCR tube or 1.5 mL round-bottom tube, pellet the beads, and remove
the supernatant.

2. Add
200 μL of hybridization buffer
to the beads and block the beads by incubating at 95 °C for 2
min and then at the hybridization temperature overnight with stirring.

Hybridization
1. Transfer the desired amount (0.02–0.2
mg) of preblocked beads to a 200 μL PCR tube.

2. Pellet the beads and remove the supernatant.

3. Prepare 30–50 μL
of labeled
target DNA (direct hybridization) or unlabeled target plus labeled
reporter (probe–target–reporter sandwich hybridization)
in hybridization buffer, add the target DNA/reporter solution to the
beads.

4. Hybridization
is carried out in a thermal
cycler for 2 min at 95 °C and 30–45 min at the hybridization
temperature (usually capture probe Tm −10 °C).

Posthybridization Washing
1. Pellet the
beads and remove as much
supernatant as possible.

2. Add 200 μL of 2× SSC, 0.03%
SDS to the beads, incubate at 54 °C for 10 min with stirring.

3. Pellet the beads and wash
again in
200 μL of 1× SSC, 0.05% Tween-20 at 48 °C for 10 min
with stirring.

4. Pellet
the beads and wash again in
200 μL of 0.2XSSC, 0.05% Tween-20 at 38 °C for 10 min.

5. Pellet the beads and remove
the wash
buffer.

Imaging and Analysis of
the Assays
Image Acquisition
The optical imaging data was collected
on one of two the commercially available Multiplex Assay Reader System
(MARS) instruments. A portable system (http://www.parallume.com/mmm.html) is based on a Dinolite color USB microscope where the color separation
required to measure the intensity ratios of the lanthanide emitters
derives from the color filters on each pixel of the microscope’s
color CMOS sensor. A tri-pass notch filter, which has 25 nm wide transmission
windows centered at 464/542/639 nm, is optionally placed in front
of the color sensor during acquisition of the UV-excited image. The
samples may also be measured with a MARS that has a CCD camera combined
with seven notch filters to separate the lanthanide and reporter color
intensity (http://www.parallume.com/mars.html).(a) For the UV image,
a UV LED (∼100
μW) with 310–320 nm output is used and any visible light
emitted removed with a UG-11 filter.

(b) For the vis reporter image, the vis
LED (5 W) has 532 nm output. The excitation light above 532 nm is
removed using a short pass filter and the emitted reporter image collected
using a 532 nm long pass filter.

(c) Reporter images are taken with exposures
times that are entered in the “Acquire UV Images” and
“Acquire Reporter Images” dialog.

(d) All images are saved as bitmap (.bmp)
files with 2592 × 1944 resolution.

(e) All images are saved in 24 bit RGB
color.



Bead Identification
(a) Bead locations
are identified using
the total (no emission filters) UV image.

(b) AForge.NET Framework-2.2.4 is used
for bead analysis.

(c) The minimum acceptable width and height
for bead identification values are set in the Exposure tab of the
Instrument Settings dialog.

Bead Analysis
(a) For each image,
each identified bead
location is used for initial analysis.

(b) The bead is examined for size, shape,
separation distance to nearest bead neighbors, brightness, and color
to determine whether the bead is acceptable for analysis

(c) If two beads are closer together than
a given minimum pixel distance, then both beads are rejected. The
distance value is set in the Exposure tab of the Instrument Settings
dialog.

(d) If the ratio
of the bead width versus
bead height is too large or small, it is rejected. The ratio is set
in the Exposure tab of the Instrument Settings dialog.

(e) At each location, all pixel values
that are within an annulus around the bead center are analyzed. The
bead height and width are examined and the larger of the two values
is used as the initial radius. A percent of this radius is then included
in the analysis. The percent value is set in the Exposure tab of the
Instrument Settings dialog.

(f) The number of any saturated pixels
in the UV image is counted. A pixel is considered to be saturated
if any of the RGB channels is saturated. If more than 30% of the pixels
are saturated, the bead is rejected.

(g) For the UV image, pixels with red,
green, or blue signals above a threshold are included. The threshold
value is set in the Exposure tab of the Instrument Settings dialog.
If the red, green, or blue value for a pixel is saturated, the pixel
is excluded. The red, green, and blue signals of included pixels are
summed, individually.

(h) For the reporter image, pixels with
red, green, or blue signals above a threshold are included. The threshold
value is set in the Exposure tab of the Instrument Settings dialog.
The red, green, and blue signals of these pixels are summed, individually.

(i) For the reporter image,
a minimum
number of accepted pixels are required for the reporter signal to
be accepted. The minimum value is set in the Exposure tab of the Instrument
Settings dialog.

(j) Two
ratios are calculated from the
UV image sums. The red sum is divided by the green sum, and the blue
sum is divided by the green sum R/G and B/G.

(k) All bead locations, the number of
pixels included for the UV images, and the summed values for the UV
and reporter images are saved in an Excel file named RawData.xlsx

(l) All bead locations, the
number of
pixels included for the UV images, the number of saturated pixels
found, the summed values for the UV and reporter images, and the ratios
are saved in an Excel file named BeadData.xlsx.

Optical Bin Creation and Analysis
(a) The desired number of ratiometrically
encoded lanthanide bead sets is prepared, with each set containing
>200 beads of the same optical code, and imaged to obtain the RGB
intensity values at each pixel in the image measured individually
for each individual code.

(b) The ratiometric intensities of R/G
and B/G are plotted and a quadrilateral enclosing the beads of each
code is drawn. This creates an optical bin for each ratiometric lanthanide
code, which is used to sort the beads in a given image into their
proper optical bin. The bins are sufficiently separated in ratiometric
color space such that beads from a given code reside in only one bin.

(c) For each bead in an experimental
image,
the computed R/G and B/G ratios are compared to the bin locations
of each bead type in the well.

(d) For each bin, linear regression is
used to fit a line to the ratios.

(e) The ratios are rotated by the slope
from the linear regression and translated by the intercept of the
linear regression to position the ratios along the x axis.

(f) The bead ratios
are also rotated by
the slope from the linear regression.

(g) It is then determined whether the
rotated bead ratios are within the rotated bin areas (i.e., the optical
bins) and, if so, the bead code is recorded.

(h) For each set of beads with the same
code, outliers are calculated and removed using the fourth spread
method. The BeadData.xlsx is updated to include the outlier and bin
information for each bead.

Reporter
Analysis
(a) For each bead associated with a code,
the red, green, and blue reporter values are summed, and the summed
value is divided by the integration time of the reporter images to
normalize to a 1 second integration time.

(b) If the user has chosen to normalize
the reporter values to the bead size, an average is calculated for
the sum of the red, green, and blue UV image values for all the beads
with the given code, with outliers excluded. Each integration time
normalized reporter value is then multiplied by this averaged UV value
and divided by the sum of the red, green, and blue UV image values
for the given bead.

(c) A reporter data Excel file is created.
This file includes the code numbers, associated probes, the averages
and standard deviations of the normalized reporters for each code,
the exposure time for the reporter images, the number of outlier beads
for the code, and the number of beads associated with the code. The
number of beads in the well that were not associated with a bead code
is also recorded. The reporter values are also graphed. This file
is named ReporterData.xlsx.

Protocols for
Lateral Flow, Flow-Through and Capillary Flow
Assays
General
The assays
may be performed in a flow-through or lateral flow geometry using
the devices shown in Figure 2, where the analyte-containing fluid contacts the capture
probes in the encoded regions as it passively flows from a fluid source
through a porous flow medium to a fluid sink by capillary action.
The rate of fluid transport through the sample and porous flow medium
is determined by the volume of the solution applied and especially
the absorbent capacity and rate of the sink. In the devices here,
the analyte-containing solution is applied to the source side of the
device with a pipet and the sink comprises dry filter paper. The time
for which the analyte-containing solution remains in contact with
encoded regions may be controlled by the size of the sink, its capacity,
and when it is applied to the flow medium. If the relative humidity
is too low, the lateral flow and flow-through devices are placed in
a closed container to prevent evaporation.

For imaging, the
samples are treated with a solution of 10–20% glycerin in 1×
PBST to slow evaporation or imaged directly in the device.

Materials
The devices shown in Figure 2 are made from a combination of hydrophobic,
double-sided and single-sided adhesive pressure-sensitive adhesive
(PSA) tape, a bead-masking grid, which is laser cut from a 50 μm
thick black polymer film and Whatman filter paper. All grids contain
an array of 37 × 37 holes. The tape and PSA are very hydrophobic,
so the solution flow is completely confined to the porous flow medium
and samples.

The lateral flow devices are fabricated from a
length of filter paper strip (∼5 mm wide) either mounted directly
onto the PSA tape serving as backing or mounted to a substrate with
double-sided tape. The masking grid containing the encoded beads is
placed in firm and intimate contact with the flow medium by taping
the grid over the flow medium strip (Figure 2), and a UV-transparent PSA (3M) tape forms
the top layer.

The flow-through devices are fabricated from
8 mm o.d. × 6
mm i.d. × 6 mm long UV-transparent acrylic tubing with a 37 ×
37 bead-masking grid sealed to the acrylic with double-sided tape
(Figure 2).

Lateral
Flow Assays
An aliquot of the analyte-containing
solution (1–20 μL depending on the sample size and concentration)
is placed on the source region, travels through the capture probe-derivatized
beads and into the sink. The time for which the solution is in contact
with the bead samples may be controlled, from <1 s to indefinitely,
by the location, dimensions, and capacity of the sink region.

Flow-Through
Assays
The solution sample is placed onto
the bead-containing grid, allowed to remain in contact with the beads
for the desired time, and the solution removed by contacting the grid
with the sink material. The rate at which the solution moves through
the bead samples may be controlled by the location, dimensions, and
capacity of the sink region.

Author Contributions
All authors
performed experiments and discussed the manuscript. R.C.H. conceived
the project and wrote the manuscript.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): R.C.H. and
S.V. are employees of Parallel Synthesis Technologies, Inc. R.C.H.
is an inventor on U.S. Patents 8,927,892, 8,796,030, and 8,676,107
and U.S. Patent Applications 20150192522 and 20140336061.

Acknowledgments
We thank
the U.S. National Institutes of Health and the U.S.
National Science Foundation for financial support and Dr. Jun Wang
for obtaining the data in Figure 6.

1 It is recommended
that the amino-oligonucleotide
contain a linker group of six poly(ethylene glycol) (−CH2CH2O−) linker groups, that is, (−CH2CH2O−)6, between the amino functionality
and the oligo itself. A hexamethylene (−CH2−)6 linker may be used but is shorter and hydrophobic.

2 There are ∼1–2 ×
103 beads/mg and ∼10 or more beads are required
for each sample analysis.
==== Refs
References
Mukhopadhyay R. 
Microfluidics:
On the Slope of Enlightenment . Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 4169 –4173 . 10.1021/ac900638w .19422188 
Gan S. D. ; Patel K. R. 
Enzyme Immunoassay and Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent
Assay . J. Invest. Dermatol. 
2013 , 133 , e12 10.1038/jid.2013.287 .23949770 
Chun P.  Colloidal Gold
and Other Labels for Lateral Flow Immunoassays . In Lateral Flow Immunoassays ; Wong R. C. , Tse H. Y.  , Eds.; Springer , 2009 ; pp 75 –94 .
Posthuma-Trumpie G. A. ; Korf J. ; van Amerongen A. 
Lateral flow
(immuno)assay: its strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities and threats. A literature survey . Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2009 , 393 , 569 –582 . 10.1007/s00216-008-2287-2 .18696055 
Rosen S.  Market Trends
in Lateral Flow Immunoassays . In Lateral Flow
Immunoassays ; Wong R. C. , Tse H. Y.  , Eds.; Springer , 2009 ; pp 35 –50 .
Durham H. E. 
On a special
action of the serum of highly immunised animals . J. Pathol. 
1897 , 4 , 13 –44 . 10.1002/path.1700040104 .
Marrack J. 
Nature of
Antibodies . Nature 
1934 , 133 , 292 –293 . 10.1038/133292b0 .
Landsteiner K. 
Zur Kenntnis der
antifermentativen, lytischen und agglutinierenden wirkungen des blutserums
und der Lymphe . Zentbl. Bakt. Orig. 
1900 , 27 , 357 –362 . An English translation may be found in Camp, F. R., Jr.,
Ellis, F. R., Ed.; Selected Contributions to the Literature of Blood
Groups and Immunology; Vol. 1. www.dtic.mil/get-tr-doc/pdf?AD=AD0662074. .
Yalow R. S. ; Berson S. A. 
Immunoassay of endogenous
plasma insulin in man . J. Clin. Invest. 
1960 , 39 , 1157 –75 . 10.1172/JCI104130 .13846364 
Wide L. ; Axen R. ; Porath J. 
Radioimmunosorbent assay for proteins.
Chemical couplings of antibodies to insoluble dextran . Immunochemistry 
1967 , 4 , 381 –386 . 10.1016/0019-2791(67)90097-3 .
Engvall E. ; Perlmann P. 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA). Quantitative
assay of immunoglobulin G . Immunochemistry 
1971 , 8 , 871 –874 . 10.1016/0019-2791(71)90454-X .5135623 
Campbell R. L. ; Wagner D. B. ; O’Connel J. P.  Solid-Phase Assay with Visual Readout . U.S. Patent 4,703,017 , 1987 .
Rosenstein R. W. ; Bloomster T. G.  Solid-Phase Assay Employing Capillary Flow . U.S.
Patent 4,855,240 , 1989 .
May K. ; Prior M.
E. ; Richards I.  Capillary Immunoassay
and Device Therefore Comprising Mobilizable Particulate Labeled Reagents . U.S. Patent 5,622,871 , 1997 .
Cohen M. H. ; Gabriel K. A. ; Loomis L. J.  Multiplexed
Lateral Flow Assay Arrays . U.S. Patent 8,715,590 , 2014 .
Swanson C. ; D’Andrea A. 
Lateral flow
assay with near-infrared dye for multiplex
detection . Clin. Chem. 
2013 , 59 , 641 –648 . 10.1373/clinchem.2012.200360 .23364182 
Xu Y. ; et al. Fluorescent probe-based lateral flow assay for multiplex
nucleic
acid detection . Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 5611 –5614 . 10.1021/ac5010458 .24892496 
Yonekita T. J. ; et al. Development of a novel multiplex lateral flow assay using an antimicrobial
peptide for the detection of Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli . J. Microbiol.
Methods 
2013 , 93 , 251 –256 . 10.1016/j.mimet.2013.03.006 .23523969 
Haushalter R. C.  Methods for Fabricating Optically Encoded Particles
and Methods for
Optically Encoding Objects with such Particles . U.S.
Patent 8,673,107 , 2014 .
Haushalter R. C.  Methods for Optically Encoding an Object with Upconverting Materials
and Compositions Used Therein . U.S. Patent 8,796,030 , 2014 .
Haushalter R. C.  Rare Earth Downconverting Phosphor Compositions for
Optically Encoding
Objects and Methods and Apparatus Relating to Same . U.S. Patent 8,927,892 , 2015 .
Zhang F. ; et al. Rare-Earth Upconverting
Nanobarcodes for Multiplexed Biological Detection . Small 
2011 , 7 , 1972 –1976 . 10.1002/smll.201100629 .21726042 
Niedbala R. S. ; et al. Detection of analytes
by immunoassay using upconverting phosphor
technology . Anal. Biochem. 
2001 , 293 , 22 –30 . 10.1006/abio.2001.5105 .11373074 
Hampl ; et al. Upconverting Phosphor
Reporters in Immunochromatographic Assays . Anal.
Biochem. 
2001 , 288 , 176 –187 . 10.1006/abio.2000.4902 .11152588 
Corstjens P. L. ; et al. Tools for diagnosis,
monitoring and screening of Schistosoma infections
utilizing lateral-flow based assays and upconverting phosphor labels . Parasitology 
2014 , 141 , 1841 –55 . 10.1017/S0031182014000626 .24932595 
Cook R. B.  Process of
Making Microparticles of a Thermally-Gelled Polysaccharide . U.S. Patent 6,248,268, 1998 
Diffusion
Data for Labeled Targets Diffusing into the Parallume Beads Containing
Complementary, Bead-bound Captures Probes. http://parallume.com/beads.html#3-g.

