
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 2771393110.1021/acsomega.6b00123ArticleFree Energy-Based Virtual Screening and Optimization
of RNase H Inhibitors of HIV-1 Reverse Transcriptase Zhang Baofeng †D’Erasmo Michael
P. †‡Murelli Ryan P. †‡Gallicchio Emilio *†‡§∥† Department
of Chemistry, Brooklyn
College, City University of New York, Brooklyn, New York 11210, United States‡Ph.D. Program in Chemistry and §Ph.D. Program in
Biochemistry, The Graduate Center of the
City University of New York, New
York, New York 10016, United States* E-mail: egallicchio@brooklyn.cuny.edu.21 09 2016 30 09 2016 1 3 435 447 11 07 2016 07 09 2016 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society2016American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We
report the results of a binding free energy-based virtual screening
campaign of a library of 77 α-hydroxytropolone derivatives against
the challenging RNase H active site of the reverse transcriptase (RT)
enzyme of human immunodeficiency virus-1. Multiple protonation states,
rotamer states, and binding modalities of each compound were individually
evaluated. The work involved more than 300 individual absolute alchemical
binding free energy parallel molecular dynamics calculations and over
1 million CPU hours on national computing clusters and a local campus
computational grid. The thermodynamic and structural measures obtained
in this work rationalize a series of characteristics of this system
useful for guiding future synthetic and biochemical efforts. The free
energy model identified key ligand-dependent entropic and conformational
reorganization processes difficult to capture using standard docking
and scoring approaches. Binding free energy-based optimization of
the lead compounds emerging from the virtual screen has yielded four
compounds with very favorable binding properties, which will be the
subject of further experimental investigations. This work is one of
the few reported applications of advanced-binding free energy models
to large-scale virtual screening and optimization projects. It further
demonstrates that, with suitable algorithms and automation, advanced-binding
free energy models can have a useful role in early-stage drug-discovery
programs.

document-id-old-9ao6b00123document-id-new-14ao-2016-00123zccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
It is very challenging
to design potent and specific drugs for
clinical use. The chemical synthesis of specific derivatives to probe
binding preferences is often the most involved and time-consuming
process. Information from experimental structures of receptor–inhibitor
complexes, when available, is often an invaluable resource to guide
the chemical synthesis efforts toward the most promising leads. Often,
however, crystallographic data are limited to a very small fraction
of chemical space and biological conditions. The design of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)-1 RNase H inhibitors is a particularly difficult medicinal
chemistry problem. The RNase H domain of the reverse transcriptase
(RT) catalyzes the degradation of the DNA/RNA hybrid formed during
the RT process.1 Inhibition of this functionality
of HIV RT prevents viral replication.2 However,
despite substantial efforts,3−11 to this date there have been no clinically approved drugs that target
the RNase H domain of RT. This is in contrast to the widely available
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors12,13 and integrase strand transfer inhibitors,10,14,15 which target two-metal catalyzed nuclease
functionalities similar to that of RNase H.

There is likely
a fundamental biophysical basis for the lack of
progress. The HIV RNase H active site is rather shallow and offers
few specific structural anchors to exploit.4,16 Compared
to polymerization and integrase inhibitors, with half maximal inhibitory
concentrations (IC50’s) in the low nanomolar range,
even the best RNase H inhibitors display relatively weak and nonspecific
binding. The lack of specificity in turn causes toxicity due to unwanted
binding to the structurally similar human RNase H and to other cellular
enzymes. Lack of thorough structural and mechanistic understanding
of the function of RNase H in the cellular context also poses additional
challenges. For example, the effect of the RNA/DNA substrate on inhibitor
binding is complex and poorly understood. Often RNase H inhibitors
with promising in vitro characteristics do not display effective viral
neutralization capacity when tested in vivo.17,18

Structure-based computer-aided drug design has become standard
practice in drug-discovery programs in academia and industry. The
fundamental idea is to use available crystallographic models to predict
computationally the strength of binding of ligands to protein receptors
to guide synthetic, biochemical, and medicinal efforts. Most often
computational modeling in this area is in the form of high-throughput
virtual screens using fast docking and scoring methods capable of
processing ligand libraries containing thousands of ligands.19−23 Docking and scoring methods are particularly successful in screening
out ligands unlikely to bind due to steric and energetic incompatibility
and in providing structural models of the receptor–ligand complexes.
They are, however, often unsuitable for accurate ranking of binders
as well as for lead optimization. These applications are increasingly
being addressed by physics-based methods that seek to directly compute
the binding constant or, equivalently, the free energy of protein–ligand
binding.24 Relative free energy perturbation
protocols aimed at estimating differences of binding free energies
between related compounds have achieved a high level of reliability
and automation.25 Deployment of absolute
binding free energy models within drug-discovery programs26−32 is far less common. These are applicable to ligand libraries containing
diverse scaffolds that are not amenable to relative binding free energy
approaches. They are also suitable for comparative studies of binding
to multiple receptors to, for instance, enhance specificity. From
a biophysical point of view, the main advantage of binding free energy
models is their ability to represent entropic and reorganization effects
that oppose binding. We have shown for example that free energy models
can improve screening enrichment of focused ligand libraries.32,33

In this work, we investigate computationally the binding of
a library
of α-hydroxytropolones (Figure 1),34 a promising class of
RNase H inhibitors,17,18,35 by means of free energy modeling using the binding energy distribution
analysis method (BEDAM) and advanced parallel molecular dynamics conformational
sampling. The best synthetic α-hydroxytropolones characterized
so far have exhibited in vitro potencies in the hundreds of nanometers
range and a reasonable therapeutic window in cell-based antiviral
assays. However, biochemical inhibition data collected so far do not
show strong structure–activity relationships (SARs). The RNase
H functionality of HIV-1 RT continues to be the subject of intense
investigation because it is one of the few fundamental biochemical
functions of the virus that is not yet targeted by antiviral drugs.
Many inhibitors of HIV-1 RNase H have been discovered;4,6,36 however, none of them has entered
clinical trials due to poor in vivo activity. α-Hydroxytropolones,
chiefly represented by the parent compound β-thujaplicinol,
are observed to noncompetitively bind to the active site of RNase
H of HIV-1 RT. β-Thujaplicinol and manicol are two α-hydroxytropolone
natural products, which have shown to potently inhibit HIV-1 RNase
H with promising specificity and a favorable therapeutic window.4,35 The α-hydroxytropolone core offers a convenient and flexible
platform to build a large and diverse library of inhibitors. Our efforts
are aimed at discovering synthetic α-hydroxytropolone derivatives
with increased affinity and specificity for HIV-1 RNase H, so as to
achieve enhanced in vivo potency. The modeling work reported here
is part of an effort to gain further insight into the physicochemical
properties of the RNase H active site to guide further synthetic and
biochemical investigations toward this goal.18

Figure 1 Nomenclature
of side-chain substituents around the α-hydroxytropolone
core.

This work also represents an interdisciplinary
experiment aimed
at evaluating the feasibility and usefulness of incorporating advanced-binding
free energy modeling into the structure-based drug-discovery pipeline.
Investigating SAR exclusively by experimental means, involving the
synthesis of a large variety of derivatives and inferring their effects
on receptor binding by measuring their in vitro and in vivo activities,
is a tedious and expensive process. In addition, because of the complexities
of inhibitory mechanisms, the relationship between receptor binding
and activity is often unclear. The known structures of the RNase H
domain of HIV-1 in complex with inhibitors, as well as with several
α-hydroxytropolones, can serve as the basis of structure-based
efforts to guide synthetic and biochemical efforts. However, standard
docking and scoring computational approaches to predict affinities
of α-hydroxytropolones have been of limited usefulness due to
lack of discriminatory potential. Compounds known to have poor affinity
are often docked and ranked as favorably as more potent ones. This
is likely due to the shallow nature of the RNase H active site and
subtle conformational reorganization effects, which affect binding.

Our absolute binding free energy model29,37,38 is particularly suitable to tackle difficult
systems such as this. It fully treats the thermodynamics of binding
including the formation of ligand–receptor interactions and
conformational reorganization processes. We describe in this work,
several cases in which, for example, binding is enhanced by interactions
with structural elements that form with some ligands but not with
others. Conversely, in some cases, intramolecular hydrophobic interactions
adversely affect binding. Representing these dynamical processes is
key to understand binding propensities in this and other systems.
At the same time, our methodology, because it treats each ligand independently
and unlike double-decoupling methods,39 requires only one thermodynamic transformation step and is straightforward
to setup and deploy for relatively large ligand libraries. The protocol
outlined here should find general applicability to structure-based
drug-discovery programs.

Materials and Methods
System Preparation
The computational model of the RNase
H domain of HIV-1 RT was generated from the PDB crystal structure 3K2P(4) with bound β-thujaplicinol (Figure 2). Receptor preparation (hydrogen atom addition,
protonation state selection, etc.) was carried out with the software
“Protein Preparation Wizard, Schrodinger Suite (2014) LLC,
New York, NY”40 using the optimized
potential for liquid simulations (OPLS) 2005 force field. Modeling
of the ligand chelation of the magnesium cations41 (replaced in the crystal structure by the corresponding
manganese(II) cations) is important as these play a key role in the
ribonuclease function of the enzyme.4 The
metal cations are known not to bind simultaneously to the binding
site in the absence of a bound substrate or inhibitor,4 and the alchemical process (see below) includes the modeling
of the ligand-free state of the receptor. In addition, the applicability
of classical nonpolarizable force fields, such as the one employed
here, to describe interactions between organic ligands and divalent
metal cations is challenging.42,43 Hence, we opted to
impose restraining potentials to the metal cations to maintain them
bound to the active site residues. Specifically, flat-bottom harmonic
potentials centered at 3.0 Å and of tolerance 2.0 Å were
applied to the distance between metal ion A, which is the one closer
to HIS 539, and the Cα atoms of
residues 478, 443, and 498, and between metal “B” and
the Cα atoms of the residues 443,
498, and 549 (metal cations are labeled as in ref (4)).

Figure 2 Crystal structure (3K2P) of the β-thujaplicinol
bound active site of
the RNase H (A), and β-thujaplicinol modeled in the corresponding
flipped conformation, obtained by 180° rotation around the ligand
axis in the plane of the bound cations (B).

We selected a virtual library of 77 α-hydroxytropolones
(see Table S1), based on known leads and
ongoing synthetic
efforts.17,18 β-Thujaplicinol, a naturally occurring
α-hydroxytropolone inhibitor,44 was
set as the reference compound for the computation of relative binding
free energies (see below). The classical force field used here is
not suitable to describe accurately variations in the strength of
the interaction between the ligand and the metal cations. The model
employed here is meant to probe the effects of substitutions away
from the metal chelation groups, assuming that metal chelation modality
and strength do not vary significantly across the ligands in the library.
Consequently, the other known natural α-hydroxytropolone inhibitor,
manicol, could not be treated with the present model, given its unique
mode of chelation of the metal cations.17

Ligand structures were prepared by using the LigPrep workflow
within
the Maestro program. The protonation and tautomerization states were
generated at a target pH of 7.0 ± 2.0. The two hydroxyl groups
on the tropolone ring, which contact the metal ions of the receptor,
were modeled as deprotonated.4,34,45 Ionization penalties were calculated at pH 7 with Epik46 and added to the BEDAM results (see below) to
yield protonation state-specific binding free energies. Stereoisomers
resulting from alkyl nitrogen inversion, rotamers, and binding
poses separated by high energy barriers were modeled individually,
as they do not interconvert during the simulations. Motivated by the
free energy combination expression,31,47 the predicted
binding free energy of a compound was taken as the most favorable
among the ones obtained for all of its conformers and protonation
states considered.

A total of 136 complexes resulting from multiple
protonation states
and alternative stereoisomers of the 77 ligands considered were input
into the Glide docking program (Schrodinger, LLC). Glide receptor
grid generation employed the structure of the receptor prepared as
above. The crystallographic position of β-thujaplicinol in 3K2P was identified as
the center of the docking search region. Positional constraints and
metal coordination constraints were applied to correctly chelate the
ligands with two Mn(II) ions. The resulting docked conformations of
the complexes were used as initial structures for the binding free
energy calculation.

BEDAM Binding Free Energy Protocol
The BEDAM29,48 is an established protocol for
the estimation of absolute binding
free energies of molecular complexes.31,33,49−53 The model employs the analytic generalized Born plus nonpolar (AGBNP2)
implicit representation of the aqueous solution.37 The standard binding free energy, ΔGAB°, of
a receptor A and a ligand B is expressed as49 1  where C° is the standard
concentration of ligand molecules (1 M, or, equivalently, 1/(1668
Å3)) and Vsite is the
volume of the binding site. The first term of eq 1, −kBT  ln C°Vsite, can be interpreted as the entropic work
related to transfer the ligand from a solution at concentration C° to the binding site of the ligand–receptor
complex, which depends only on the standard state and the definition
of the complex macrostate and is independent of specific energetic
and structural properties of the ligand and the receptor. The second
term on the right-hand side of eq 1 is the excess contribution to the binding free energy.
It represents the work to couple a receptor and a ligand, that is
to turn on receptor–ligand interactions, while the ligand is
confined within the binding site region. Formally, the excess binding
free energy is defined as 2  where β = 1/kBT, ⟨⟩0 represents
an ensemble
average in the artificial state in which the ligand and the receptor
are uncoupled (with the ligand confined within the binding site) when
they interact only with the solvent continuum,29 and r represents a specified conformation
of the complex. In eq 2, u(r) is the binding energy of the
complex in conformation r defined as 3  where U1(r) and U0(r) are
the effective potential energies of the complex when the ligand and
the receptor are coupled and uncoupled, respectively.

ΔGAB is evaluated by staged free energy perturbation54 using the λ-dependent biasing hybrid potential
energy function 4  where λ
is the free energy progress
parameter, 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1. ΔGAB is defined as the free energy difference between the
λ = 0 and 1 states of the complex. Other intermediate values
of λ trace an alchemical thermodynamic path connecting these
two states. Binding energy samples are collected from multiple molecular
dynamic simulations at different values of λ. These are analyzed
using the unbinned weighted histogram analysis method52,55 to compute the binding free energy, ΔGAB. A soft core binding energy function31 is introduced to improve the convergence of the binding
free energy near λ = 0 5  where umax is
a large positive value (1000 kcal/mol in this work). This modified
binding energy function replaces the actual binding energy function
(eq 3) wherever it appears,
so as to cap the maximum unfavorable value of the binding energy while
leaving the favorable value of binding energies unchanged.

The
AGBNP2 implicit solvation model was used in this work. The
full description of the AGBNP2 model is available elsewhere.37 It is based on a geometrical-parameter-free
analytical implementation of the pairwise descreening scheme of the
generalized Born model.56 The AGBNP2 model
estimates the solvation free energy of the solute, ΔGsolv, in the form of 6  where ΔGelec is the electrostatic
contribution, ΔGnp is the nonpolar
contribution, and ΔGHB is a solute–solvent
hydrogen bonding term. The
electrostatic term is calculated by means of a variation of the continuum
dielectric Generalized Born model.57,58 The nonpolar
contribution includes cavitation- and dispersion-free energy terms;
the first is modeled by a surface area model and the second by an
expression based on the Born radius of each atom.58

To accelerate conformational sampling, a biased sampling
and parallel
Hamiltonian replica exchange method (HREM) was employed in this work.29 In this scheme, pairs of simulation replicas
periodically attempt to exchange λ values through a Monte Carlo
λ-swapping move. Despite the use of HREM, we observed very slow
interconversion between conformations of the ligands related by 180°
rotation with respect to the metal coordination plane (Figure 2). To correct this deficiency
in this work, we have individually considered the two orientations
of the ligand. In this strategy, the binding free energy of each of
the 77 ligands considered was estimated from the results of two BEDAM
simulations, corresponding to the two orientations of the ligand,
for a total of 272 BEDAM simulations. The binding free energy of the
ligand is obtained by combining the BEDAM results for each conformation,
assuming equal populations in solution of the two orientations.59

Orientations of β-thujaplicinol
analogues are classified
on the basis of the crystal structure of β-thujaplicinol in
complex with HIV RNase H (PDB id 3K2P). In this structure, the isopropyl side
chain is on the same side as the “A” metal cation and
proximal to His 539 (Figure 2). For the analogues of β-thujaplicinol, we define the
crystallographic orientation as the one in which the larger of the
R1 and R2 side groups (see Figure 1) is at the same position as the side group of the
isopropyl side group of β-thujaplicinol in the 3K2P crystal structure.
The opposite orientation is classified as “flipped”.
Examples of crystallographic and flipped conformations for β-thujaplicinol
are shown in Figure 2.

Computational Details
The BEDAM simulations employed
the 2005 version of the OPLS-AA60 force
field together with the AGBNP2 implicit solvent model.37 The force field parameters were automatically
assigned by using Schrödinger’s atomtyper.61 The parallel alchemical Hamiltonian Replica
Exchange molecular dynamics simulations were conducted using the Asynchronous
Replica Exchange software62 with the IMPACT
MD engine.61 Approximately half of the
BEDAM free energy calculations were conducted on the SuperMIC cluster
at the Louisiana State University as part of the Extreme Science and
Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) NSF consortium. The other
half of calculations were conducted on the Brooklyn College WEB computational
grid, based on the BOINC grid software. The simulation temperature
was set to be 300 K for all simulations. A total of 18 intermediate
alchemical steps at λ = 0.0, 0.002, 0.004, 0.008, 0.01, 0.02,
0.04, 0.07, 0.1, 0.17, 0.25, 0.35, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, and 1.0
were used to conduct the λ-biased replica exchanges. The binding
site volume was defined as the conformation in which the center of
mass of the ligand was within 5 Å of the center of mass of the
receptor, where the center of mass of the ligand was calculated including
only the atoms of the core structure (C1-C2-C3-C4-C5-C6-C7). The center
of mass of the receptor site was calculated in terms of the Cα atoms of residues 443, 444, 478, 498,
539, 549, and 557 (RT chain A numbering).63 A flat-bottom torsional restraint potential in terms of the dihedral
angle between the C1, C6 atoms of the ligand and the Cα atoms of the residue 478 and 443 was applied to
confine the ligand in one of the two orientations relative to the
metal coordination plane (see above). The simulation system was minimized
and thermalized at 300 K. Bond lengths with hydrogen atoms were constrained
using SHAKE. The mass of hydrogen atoms was set to be 5 amu. A 12
Å residue-based cutoff was imposed on both direct and generalized
Born pair interactions. BEDAM calculations were performed for approximately
2.5 ns of MD simulation per replica (45 ns in total for each complex),
starting from the docked ligand poses.
Data from the last 2 ns per replica was used for free energy analysis.
Binding energies were sampled with a frequency of 1 ps for a total
of 18 × 2000 = 36 000 binding energy samples per complex.

Results
Binding Free Energy-Based Screening of Ligand Library
The natural α-hydroxytropolone, β-thujaplicinol, was
simulated starting from the 3K2P crystal structure.4 The
crystal structure of β-thujaplicinol in complex with the RNase
H domain (3K2P) served also as a starting structural model for all of the complexes
with α-hydroxytropolone derivatives considered here. β-thujaplicinol
is known to coordinate two divalent metal ions at the RNase H active
site through its carbonyl and hydroxyl functional groups.4 In the crystal structure, the tropolone ring
of β-thujaplicinol is approximately coplanar with the metal
cations. The same coplanar conformation is seen in our molecular dynamics
simulations of β-thujaplicinol and its derivatives in both the
orientations considered (Figure 2). The pattern of interactions between the oxygen atoms
of the tropolone ring and the metal cations is also reproduced. The
isopropyl side group of β-thujaplicinol does not significantly
interact with residues of the RNase H active site. Consequently, the
binding free energy scores for the two binding orientations are similar
(ΔΔGb° = 0.8 kcal/mol, favoring the flipped
orientation).

The BEDAM estimates of the relative binding free
energies of the 77 analogues of β-thujaplicinol studied here
are listed in Table S1 of the Supporting
Information. The results for a selected set are shown in Table 1. Relative binding
free energy estimates are expressed with respect to the binding free
energy estimate of the flipped orientation of β-thujaplicinol.

Table 1 Computed BEDAM Relative Binding Free
Energies, ΔΔGb°, for Selected Inhibitors of HIV-1
RNase H
a See text for a description of ligand
identifiers.

b In kcal/mol.

c Reference compound.

d “Cryst.” refers to
the crystallographic orientation, and “flipped” refers
to the flipped orientation.

Preference
for Flipped Binding Orientation
As discussed
above, to thoroughly score all possible binding modes, we separately
evaluated the crystallographic and flipped binding orientations of
each ligand (see Figures 2 and 3). Interestingly, for most ligands,
the flipped orientation yielded a more favorable binding free energy.
For example (see Table 1), ligand 23 in the crystallographic orientation has a relative binding
free energy of 0.9 kcal/mol compared to −2.0 kcal/mol for the
flipped orientation, a difference of 2.9 kcal/mol favoring the flipped
orientation. Similarly, the flipped orientation of ligand 26 is favored
by 3.8 kcal/mol over the crystallographic orientation (Table 1). In general, we found that
the flipped orientation is preferred over the crystallographic orientation
in 61 of the 77 analogues.

Figure 3 Representative structures of the crystallographic
(A) and flipped
(B) binding poses of ligand 23.

Analysis of the molecular dynamics trajectories reveals that
this
behavior is due to the placement of the R2 side group within the interaction
distance with the so-called “500” area64 of the RNase H active site. Illustrative structures for
ligand 23 are shown in Figure 3. In the crystallographic orientation (Figure 3A), the long aromatic R2 substituent of the
ligand does not strongly interact with neighboring residues. Conversely,
in the flipped orientation (Figure 3B), the R2 substituent forms strong hydrophobic interactions
with GLN 500 and TYR 501. These interactions stabilize the complex
and lead to a more favorable binding free energy.

The ratio
of populations of the two binding poses is equal to the
ratio of the Boltzmann factors of their corresponding binding free
energies.31,59 For example, the calculations predict that
the flipped binding pose of ligand 23 is approximately 190 times more
probable than the crystallographic pose. In contrast, β-thujaplicinol,
for which the difference in the binding free energy between the two
orientations is significantly smaller, is predicted to position in
the two orientations with similar probability. This is consistent
with the crystallographic structures.

Biochemical evidence and
SAR analysis suggest that in the cellular
environment, in the presence of the RNA/DNA hybrid substrate, the
flipped binding pose may not be accessible to α-hydroxytropolones
inhibitors.65 It is believed that the substrate,
anchored to the polymerization site65 and
the inhibitor, bound to the RNase H active site, can bind concurrently
to the HIV RT dimer. Furthermore, according to this model, the 3′
end of the RNA strand covers the 500 region of the RNase H domain65 and sterically limits the orientation of the
inhibitor. Whenever useful, below we analyze the modeling results
for each orientation of the ligand individually. The significance
of the crystallographic orientation rests on its potential relevance
for in vivo inhibition. The flipped orientation is significant for
its potential to acquire additional inhibition activity by means of
substrate displacement and as a starting point for the design of more
potent and specific inhibitors incorporating DNA intercalators.66

Effect of R3 Side Group
The most
evident SAR emerging
from the binding free energy data is the significantly higher affinity
of compounds substituted at the R3 position. For the reference compound,
β-thujaplicinol, and for most of the ligands in the library,
R3 is hydrogen. In compounds 1 through 5, this position is replaced
by methyl and phenyl esters, methyl, or bromide (Tables 2 and S1). All of these substituents at R3, although less so for methyl,
result in significantly more favorable binding free energies than
β-thujaplicinol (gains as high as ∼10 kcal/mol) in both
the crystallographic and flipped poses. The improvements in binding
free energy is likely overestimated. Nevertheless, the qualitative
trend appears to be robust based on the structural information gained
in the simulations. In the crystallographic orientation, the substituent
at R3 fits into a side pocket lined by ARG 557, ALA 538, and HIS 539.
Interestingly, we found that ARG 557, which is normally disordered,
in the presence of a substituent at R3 forms a strong solvent-shielded
hydrogen bond with one of the deprotonated hydroxyl groups of the
ligand. In addition, see, for example, Figure 6, this interaction is further strengthened
by hydrophobic interactions between the arginine head group and the
aliphatic end group of the R3 substituent. In the flipped conformation
(see, for example, Figure 7), the R3 substituent occupies a pocket on the other side
of the active site, forming very stable interactions with TYR 501
and SER 499. Similar affinity gains are predicted for R3 substitutions
applied to the crystallographic or flipped poses.

Table 2 Computed BEDAM Relative Binding Free
Energies, ΔΔGb°, and Experimental ΔTm and IC50 for Some of the Inhibitors
of RNase H
a See text for a description of ligand
identifiers.

b In kcal/mol.

c In degree.

d “Cryst.” refers to
the crystallographic orientation.

e In μM.

Effect of
R2 Side Group
The greatest chemical variation
in the ligand library investigated is focused on the size and nature
of the R2 side group. The reference compound, β-thujaplicinol,
has an isopropyl R2 side group. All of the members of the library,
except β-thujaplicinol, have a methyl substituent at R1. We
have investigated mostly aromatic substituents at R2, linked to the
tropolone ring by means of alkyl, aromatic, piperidine, carbonyl,
and amide linkers (Table S1). In contrast
to the R3 side group, we have generally observed a weak dependence
of binding affinity on the composition of the R2 group.

The
effect of R2 is especially weak and often unfavorable for the crystallographic
binding orientation. About two-thirds of the compounds unsubstituted
at R3 have a worse predicted binding affinity relative to β-thujaplicinol
when in the crystallographic orientation, and only three compounds
(ligand 6, 9, and 13) have a predicted binding free energy gain of
2 kcal/mol or better (the assumed accuracy limit of the computational
model). The best gain is −3.2 kcal/mol achieved for compound
6 with a methyl ester substituent at R2 (Table 2). This a relatively small gain compared
to those for substitutions at R3, which are as high as 10 kcal/mol.
The best compounds in this category, 6, 9, and 13, have an aromatic
or alkyl side group at R2 joined to the tropolone ring by a carbonyl
linker. We found that in the best binding poses, the R2 head group
makes hydrophobic interactions with ALA 538 and the Cβ of HIS 539. Compound 13, which has a longer R2
side group, makes additional interactions with TRP 535, PRO 537, and
less often with LYS 540. These interactions are possible only when
selecting an appropriate rotameric state for R2. We observed that
rotation of the carbonyl linker is highly restrained (especially when
R3 is substituted) and is rarely observed in the simulations. In a
number of these circumstances, we have scored various R2 and R3 rotameric
states individually (see below).

Apart from the moderate gains
noted above, substitutions at R2
are predicted to have small or negative effects on affinity when in
the crystallographic orientation. The R2 position points away from
the body of the receptor, so opportunities for strong ligand–receptor
interactions are few. In many cases, the R2 substituent is found to
be mostly solvated and not contributing significantly to binding.
Polar substituents tend to weakly oppose binding due to partial desolvation.
This negative trend is amplified for charged substituents (for ammonium-containing
groups in particular), for which binding is predicted to be significantly
weak. Larger hydrophobic groups, except for the case noted, tend to
disfavor binding, likely because of unfavorable desolvation of HIS
539, which is often seen to be turned away from the binding site.
Interestingly, particularly long R2 groups, such as for ligand 64
(Table S1), are seen to loop around to
make contact with TYR 500 and nearby residues, which are normally
within the interaction distance only when the tropolone ring is in
the flipped pose. However, these interactions are weakened by intramolecular
strain of the R2 side group, as evidenced by the lack of similar conformations
in the unbound conformational ensemble of the ligand. In other cases,
large and flexible hydrophobic groups form strong intramolecular interactions,
which further disfavor binding (discussed below).

The R2 side
group has a greater effect on binding affinity in the
flipped binding pose. R2 side groups containing piperidine linkers
generally lead to poorer activity, especially when the nitrogen is
protonated. This effect does not seem to be directly related to the
piperidine group itself but rather to the hydrophobic head and greater
length of the R2 side group that contain it. The piperidine group
tends to interact with TYR 501, whereas the hydrophobic head group
is forced to extend into the solvent. With other linkers, nitrogen-containing
aromatic head groups tend to lead to better affinity but only if not
protonated. Ligand 27 (see Table 1), where R2 is a phenyl linker and a naphthyl head
group, is the compound predicted to have the best affinity among those
lacking a R3 substituent. The R2 side group, in the flipped pose,
interacts with GLN 500, TRP 535, and PRO 537. To do so, the R2 group
is required to assume a specific rotameric state. Ligand 27 has been
chosen as the starting point for focused optimization below. As exemplified
by ligand 20 (see Table S1), in which R2
is a biphenyl group, interactions of R2 with the 500 region of the
receptor can be established even with relatively rigid moieties. In
this case, it is the tropolone ring that tilts away from the optimal
metal coordination plane to allow optimal positioning of the R2 group
near TYR 501 and GLN 500.

In general, among the ones we considered,
the nature of the R2
side group linker is predicted to be a minor determinant factor of
improved affinity in both the crystallographic and flipped binding
orientations. Ligands 23 and 24, for example, which differ by the
para- or meta-substituted phenyl linker (see Table 1), have very similar predicted binding free
energies (−2.0 and −2.1 kcal/mol, respectively) in their
flipped binding orientations. Ligands with similar head groups having
either amide or carbonyl linkers are predicted to bind with similar
strength.

Intramolecular Hydrophobic Interactions Decrease
Binding Affinity
The computational model employed in this
work attempts to take
into account the conformational variability of both the ligand and
the receptor. This feature has proven to be useful in the rationalization
of surprising trends in binding affinities. For example, even though
they differ by only one additional methylene linker group, we predict
a large difference between the binding affinities of ligands 42 and
46 (see Table 1). In
this case, and in a few other cases, we observed that, during the
molecular dynamics simulations, intramolecular interactions develop
between side groups of the ligand, which adversely affect the binding
affinity. As illustrated in Figure 4A, and consistent with its favorable binding free energy,
ligand 42 forms favorable interactions with the 500 region of the
receptor through its R2 substituent. Conversely, due to its greater
length and flexibility, the R2 substituent of ligand 46 is found to
loop back to form a strong intramolecular hydrophobic interaction
with the methyl group at the R1 position of the tropolone ring. Hence,
the R2 side group of ligand 46 is not available to interact favorably
with the receptor. In addition, the bulkier ligand volume shields
the highly polar active site from the solvent, thereby decreasing
the effect of favorable dielectric polarization. Both of these effects
contribute to the poor predicted binding affinity of ligand 46 relative
to ligand 42 despite their chemical similarity. Examples such as this
underscore the complexities of molecular interactions and the difficulties
in identifying SARs of general applicability.

Figure 4 Representative structures
of the complexes with ligands 42 (A)
and 46 (B). The binding of ligand 46 is disfavored by intramolecular
hydrophobic interactions.

Binding Free Energy-Based Virtual Lead Optimization
Some of the best compounds emerging from the free energy-based screening
of the library were chosen as the starting point for the optimization
attempts of side groups. We focused on the optimization of the R2
side group (see Figure 1 for nomenclature of side groups), using ligand 27 as a starting
point (Table 1), and
on the R3 side group, using ligand 1 as a starting point (Table 2).

Optimization of R2 Side
Group
Ligand 27 with the benzyl-naphthyl
substituent at the R2 position showed the best affinity among the
72 members of the library lacking a R3 substituent (see Figure 5A and Table S1). As for most other ligands in this class, ligand 27 shows
a preference to bind in the flipped conformation, where the side group
forms interactions with residues proximal to TYR 501. The optimization
strategy we followed consisted therefore in extending the head groups
to the R2 side chain of ligand 27 to form interactions between the
R2 side groups and the residues along the 500 region of the receptor,
hypothesized to play a role in the allosteric inhibition of RNase
H.67 The R2 side group was modified in
a sequence of steps, which included extending it with biphenyl and
ethyl linkers, and derivatizing it with acetyl and dicarbonyl polar
groups to improve solubility and to attempt to form hydrogen bonds
with the TYR 501 and GLN 500 residues. The optimization results are
interesting. The final optimized inhibitor (ligand 78, see Table 3) does provide better
binding affinity, having a binding free energy of −6.6 versus
−4.6 kcal/mol for ligand 27. From Figure 5B, it can be seen that a π–π
stacking interaction is formed between the head group of TYR 501 and
the naphthyl ring; however, no strong hydrogen bonding is observed
between the carbonyl linkers and the residues along the 500 helix.
As expected, the added biphenyl head group accesses the area of GLN
507 residue, which was predicted to be a promising binding region
for inhibitors.64

Figure 5 Representative structures
of the complexes with ligand 27 (A) and
R2-optimized ligand 78 (B).

Table 3 Computed BEDAM Relative Binding Free
Energies, ΔΔGb°, for Optimized α-Hydroxytropolone
Inhibitors of RNase H
a See text for a
description of ligand
identifiers.

b In kcal/mol.

c “cryst.” refers
to
the crystallographic orientation.

Optimization of R3 Side Group
As
mentioned above, the
molecular dynamics free energy calculations revealed that substitutions
at the R3 position (ligands 1 through 5) could induce recruitment
of ARG 557 to form strong ionic interactions with one of the deprotonated
hydroxyl of the α-hydroxytropolone ligand. In the absence of
the R3 substituent, ARG 557 is consistently disordered and does not
contribute to binding. This observation motivated us to consider the
R3 position as a useful optimization target.

Of the five ligands
in the library with substitutions at R3, we chose ligand 1 with a
methyl ester substituent as a starting point because of the opportunity
of optimization of hydrophobic interactions with the side chain of
ARG 557. Replacing the methyl ester group with a phenyl-ketone group,
which is thin enough to fit into the groove between ARG 557 and HIS
539 and at the same time has the potential to form π–π
interactions with the head group of ARG 557, increased affinity by
approximately 2.4 kcal/mol. We observed that the resulting compound
(ligand 79 in Table 3) was also able to form transient interactions with HIS 539. In an
attempt to stabilize the latter interactions, we introduced a second
phenyl group in the ortho position relative to the carbonyl linker.
This second alteration (ligand 81 in Table 3) indeed resulted in the formation of stable
π–π interactions with HIS 539 and increased the
affinity by 2.1 kcal/mol (Figure 8).

It should be noted that ligand 1 and its descendants
(ligands 79
and 81) display severely hindered rotation of the ester side groups
at the R2 and R3 positions. Indeed, interconversion between rotamers
may be slow (on the order of hours or more) so as to be considered
separate atropisomer species.68 Rotameric
states of these ligands have been simulated individually, as they
do not interconvert during the molecular dynamics trajectories. In
particular, ligand 79 has four atropisomer-like states, all of which
have been simulated and only one (shown in Figure 6) displaying strong affinity to RNase H (−10.7 kcal/mol).
Only in this particular conformation, in which the phenyl groups of
the R2 and R3 side groups point toward opposite sides of the tropolone
ring, can the ligand effectively engage ARG 557, as described.

Figure 6 Representative
structure of the complex with ligand 79. The HIS
539 and ARG 557 residues are shown in licorice representation.

Addition of R4 Side Group
As noted above, most ligands
in the library, including those with substitutions at R3, bind more
strongly in the flipped orientation. In the flipped orientation, the
R3 side group is accommodated in a side pocket lined by GLN 500 and
SER 499. Due to steric constraints, this binding mode is accessible
only by some of the atropisomers of the ligand (see, for example, Figure 7). To probe the benefits of forming ligand–receptor
interactions on both sides of the tropolone ring, we have tested the
possibility of adding substituents both at R3 and at the symmetric
opposite position, which we named R4, resulting in ligand 80 (Figure 7). In this ligand,
the R3 and R4 symmetric positions are occupied by phenyl-ketone groups
and the R1 and R2 symmetric positions by methyl groups. The two methyl
groups are responsible for the atropisomerism, as they hinder free
rotation around the carbonyl-tropolone ring. The specific atropisomer
capable of binding has the phenyl groups on opposite sides of the
tropolone ring (Figure 7). The predicted gain of affinity over β-thujaplicinol is very
significant (−16.6 kcal/mol), albeit most likely overestimated.
One of the phenyl-ketone groups is found in the small pocket lined
by GLN 500 and SER 499. Although this group occupies the general region
occupied by the R2 group in the flipped pose, it is far more sterically
constrained. Hence, we predict that strong inhibitors will have asymmetric
R3/R4 substitutions in which one group will be fairly small (a phenyl-ketone
substituent being close to the maximum size), whereas the other will
be able to assume a variety of sizes and shapes.

Figure 7 Representative structure
of the complex with ligand 80. The SER
499, GLN 500, and ARG 557 residues are shown in licorice representation.

Discussion
Modeling
work in the context of medicinal chemistry applications,69−71 including RNase H inhibition,3,72 is most often based
on molecular docking and scoring. We have recently shown that large-scale
free energy-based ligand screening, while computationally more involved,
can offer greater discriminatory potential in challenging cases like
the present.33 Due to the rather feature-less
binding site, in this work, docking scores did not show clear binding
trends. Starting from structures predicted by molecular docking, we
have scored the binding of the ligands in the library by a binding
free energy computational protocol, which yields relative thermodynamic
dissociation constants directly comparable, in principle, to experimental
measurements.

The greater resolution power of binding free energy
models rests
on their capacity to model reorganization and entropic thermodynamic
driving forces not easily accessible by other means. Reorganization
refers to the energetic and thermodynamic changes that accompany the
remodeling of the conformations of the ligand and the receptor to
enable binding. This process, often referred to as “induced
fit” or “conformational selection”, is characterized
by free energy changes caused by intramolecular strain and entropic
losses, that oppose binding. In addition, as here, the enzyme–ligand
complex can have substantial conformational variability and cannot
be fully described by any single representative conformation. Conventional
models of binding based on static structures, which do not incorporate
these thermodynamic signatures, are less likely to fully discriminate
favorable from less favorable chemical modifications33,53 and are therefore less informative in difficult cases like the present.

The binding free energy calculations have identified the R3 side
group as the most promising handle to achieve high-affinity binding.
The receptor pockets predicted to be occupied by the R3 groups are
not apparent in the crystal structure of RNase H bound to β-thujaplicinol.
When considering the crystallographic orientation, binding of the
R3 group is predicted to critically depend on the recruitment of ARG
557, which is otherwise removed from the binding site region. Similarly,
placement of the R3 group in the SER 499-adjacent pocket follows an
overall expansion of this region and repositioning of side chains
to optimize ligand–receptor interactions. The thermodynamic
consequences of these and other key reorganization processes are taken
into account by the model to discriminate favorable modifications,
to be targeted by further investigations, from less promising ones.

The ligand design opportunities at the R3 position indicated by
the present computational modeling efforts are supported by the available
experimental data. Murelli et al. have measured the potencies of ligands
1 through 22 in terms of receptor thermal shift (ΔTm) and IC50 values.18 In that study, it was observed that, whereas increasing the size
of the R1 substituent had consistently negative effects on activity,
substitutions at R3 could accommodate a range of side groups without
loss of affinity. For example ligands 5 and 6 (Table 2), which differ only in the presence of the
bromine atom at R3, have similar ΔTm and IC50 values (2.48 vs 2.70 °C and 0.13 vs 0.16
μM, respectively). Ligand 1, which has a bulkier R3 substituent,
is as potent as ligand 5. Hence, both calculations and experiments
indicate that the R3 position can represent a useful handle for the
design of side groups leading to increased potency. The simulations
identified that the R3 side group induces the formation of a binding
groove sandwiched between ARG 557 and HIS 539, the latter being a
key participant to the nuclease function of RNase H. Specific modifications
of R3 are predicted to lock HIS 539 through strong electrostatic and
π–π interactions, as seen, for example, in the
optimized ligand 81 (Figure 8). The simulations have also indicated substantial
potential benefits in adding substituents at the symmetric opposite
position to R3 (the position labeled R4 in Figure 1) as seen, for example, in the optimized
ligand 80 (Figure 7). Doing so accesses a small pocket near the TYR 501 and SER 499
residues. It is unclear whether the pocket is actually available in
the presence of a substrate (see below); nevertheless, it might be
worthwhile to investigate small substituents such as methyl or bromide
at this position.

Figure 8 Representative structure of the complex with ligand 81.
The HIS
539 and ARG 557 residues are shown in licorice representation.

Crystallographic structures4,7 show that α-hydroxytropolones,
similar to other RNase H active site inhibitors,8−10 coordinate
the two metal ions with the tropolone ring placed in the same plane
as the metal ions. This configuration is preserved in the simulations
of all of the ligands we investigated. The metal coordination geometries
and the approximate C2 symmetry of the α-hydroxytropolones allows
for two distinct binding modes, related by a 180° rotation (Figure 2), which were individually
investigated for each ligand. In general, stronger affinity was obtained
when the ligand was flipped relative to the crystal structure of β-thujaplicinol
and manicol. When considering the flipped binding orientation, many
ligands in the library are predicted to bind better than the reference
compound (β-thujaplicinol). This is in contrast to the recently
acquired experimental inhibition data on 22 of the 77 ligands investigated
here,18 which showed relatively small variations
in potency which were for the most part unfavorable relative to β-thujaplicinol.
The observed binding trends are reproduced when flipped binding modes
are excluded from the computational model. When both binding orientations
are considered, a majority of ligands are predicted to bind significantly
better than β-thujaplicinol (17 out of 22 with a −2 kcal/mol
cutoff, see Table S1). When, however, only
the crystallographic orientation is considered, the range of binding
free energies is substantially reduced, and only eight ligands show
significantly better binding than β-thujaplicinol. Overall,
these comparative data suggest that, under the conditions of the experimental
inhibition assay, the flipped conformation is not available to the
inhibitors.

The computational model does not take into account
the nucleic
acid substrate present in the inhibition assay. It is known35 that β-thujaplicinol displays noncompetitive
inhibitory behavior consistent with the hypothesis that an inhibitor
and a substrate can bind the enzyme at the same time, possibly forming
direct interactions, as for example in the homology model shown in Figure 9. This structural
model is consistent with the observation that modifications at the
R1 position are severely limited sterically and that modifications
at R2 (more removed from the assumed position of the substrate) are
also sterically disfavored but to a smaller extent.18 According to this structural model, the flipped binding
mode is not accessible by the ligands, as it would cause clashes with
the substrate. Hence, the computational data obtained here, which
are consistent with experimental evidence only when the flipped binding
mode is ruled out, further support the model that displacement of
the nucleic acid substrate from the active site does not cause dissociation
of the substrate, which remains in the proximity of the RNase H active
site. The model also explains why substitutions at the R3 position,
which is the farthest from the substrate, can accommodate a larger
variety of side groups. The evidence collected here suggests that
inhibitor design strategies would benefit from taking into account
interactions with the substrate, and that inclusion of the nucleic
acid substrate in computational models would lead to more reliable
computational predictions.

Figure 9 Homology model of the RNase H domain of HIV-1
RT (green surface)
bound to the RNA/DNA hybrid substrate (blue and brown ladders) and
ligand 1 (blue carbon atoms).

Conclusions
In this work, we have conducted a large-scale
binding free energy-based
virtual screening campaign of a library of 77 α-hydroxytropolone
derivatives against the active site of the RNase H active site of
the RT enzyme of HIV-1. Lead compounds emerging from the screening
process were subjected to targeted optimization, which resulted in
the identification of compounds with significantly increased potency.
The work involved 280 individual absolute binding free energy calculations
when multiple protonation states, multiple binding modes, and individual
rotamer states of each ligand were considered. The computational effort
for this work (over 1 million aggregate CPU hours) has been made feasible
by automated protocols and the use of heterogeneous high performance
computing resources at XSEDE and the WEB computational grid at Brooklyn
College. The thermodynamic and structural measures obtained in this
work rationalize a series of characteristics of this system useful
for guiding future synthetic and biochemical efforts. Specifically,
our calculations support the model that the nucleic acid substrate
limits the range of binding modes available to the inhibitors and
that it likely plays other key roles in the recruitment of inhibitors
to the active site. The computational model further confirms that
small or rigid side groups at R2, which point mostly to the solvent,
have minor effects on affinity. On the other hand, larger and more
flexible R2 side groups can lead to intramolecular hydrophobic interactions,
which significantly decrease affinity. Substitutions at the R3 position
emerge as more promising. Specific side groups here can have the effect
of recruiting ARG 557 (which is otherwise disordered) to form a hydrophobically
shielded ionic interaction with the ligand. Further targeted modifications
at R3 (exemplified by ligand 81, Figure 8) are predicted to also induce the recruitment
of HIS 539, a key residue involved in the nuclease reaction, forming
a complex stabilized by a network of hydrogen bond, hydrophobic and
π–π interactions. Future synthetic and biochemical
work will focus on exploiting the ligand design strategies emerging
from this work. Overall, the results presented here show that modern
binding free energy models, when intelligently integrated into interdisciplinary
chemistry efforts, can offer useful insights and contribute in useful
ways to early-stage drug-discovery programs.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.6b00123.Chemical structures
of the 279 ligand models investigated,
ranked by ligand identification number (ligand-ID) (Table S1) (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao6b00123_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
∥ Department of
Chemistry, CUNY Brooklyn College, 2900 Bedford Avenue, Brooklyn, New
York 11210, United States (E.G.).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
E.G. acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation
(SI2-SSE 1440665). R.M. acknowledges support from the National Institutes
of Health (SC1-GM111158). REMD simulations were carried out on the
Supermic cluster of XSEDE (supported by project TG-MCB150001 to E.G.
and B.Z.) and the WEB computational grid at Brooklyn College of the
City University of New York. The authors acknowledge invaluable computing
support from James Roman and John Stephen at Brooklyn College.
==== Refs
References
Sarafianos S. G. ; Marchand B. ; Das K. ; Himmel D. M. ; Parniak M. A. ; Hughes S. H. ; Arnold E. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2009 , 385 , 693 –713 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.10.071 .19022262 
Tisdale M. ; Schulze T. ; Larder B. A. ; Moelling K. 
J. Gen. Virol. 
1991 , 72 , 59 –66 . 10.1099/0022-1317-72-1-59 .1703563 
Felts A. K. ; Labarge K. ; Bauman J. D. ; Patel D. V. ; Himmel D. M. ; Arnold E. ; Parniak M. A. ; Levy R. M. 
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2011 , 51 , 1986 –1998 . 10.1021/ci200194w .21714567 
Himmel D. M. ; Maegley K. A. ; Pauly T. A. ; Bauman J. D. ; Das K. ; Dharia C. ; Clark A. D. Jr.; Ryan K. ; Hickey M. J. ; Love R. A. ; Hughes S. H. ; Bergqvist S. ; Arnold E. 
Structure 
2009 , 17 , 1625 –1635 . 10.1016/j.str.2009.09.016 .20004166 
Himmel D. ; Sarafianos S. ; Dharmasena S. ; Hossain M. ; McCoy-Simandle K. ; Ilina T. ; Clark A. Jr.; Knight J. ; Julias J. ; Clark P. ; Krogh-Jespersen K. ; Levy R. ; Hughes S. ; Parniak M. ; Arnold E. 
ACS Chem. Biol. 
2006 , 1 , 702 –712 . 10.1021/cb600303y .17184135 
Shaw-Reid C. ; Munshi V. ; Graham P. ; Wolfe A. ; Witmer M. ; Danzeisen R. ; Olsen D. ; Carroll S. ; Embrey M. ; Wai J. ; Miller M. ; Cole J. ; Hazuda D. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
2003 , 278 , 2777 –2780 . 10.1074/jbc.C200621200 .12480948 
Su H.-P. ; Yan Y. ; Prasad G. S. ; Smith R. F. ; Daniels C. L. ; Abeywickrema P. D. ; Reid J. C. ; Loughran H. M. ; Kornienko M. ; Sharma S. ; Grobler J. A. ; Xu B. ; Sardana V. ; Allison T. J. ; Williams P. D. ; Darke P. L. ; Hazuda D. J. ; Munshi S. 
J. Virol. 
2010 , 84 , 7625 –7633 . 10.1128/JVI.00353-10 .20484498 
Costi R. ; Métifiot M. ; Chung S. ; Crucitti G. C. ; Maddali K. ; Pescatori L. ; Messore A. ; Madia V. N. ; Pupo G. ; Scipione L. ; Tortorella S. ; Saverio Di Leva F. ; Cosconati S. ; Marinelli L. ; Novellino E. ; Le Grice S. F. J. ; Corona A. ; Pommier Y. ; Marchand C. ; Di Santo R. 
J. Med. Chem. 
2014 , 57 , 3223 –3234 . 10.1021/jm5001503 .24684270 
Himmel D. M. ; Myshakina N. S. ; Ilina T. ; Van Ry A. ; Ho W. C. ; Parniak M. A. ; Arnold E. 
J. Mol. Biol. 
2014 , 426 , 2617 –2631 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.05.006 .24840303 
Esposito F. ; Tramontano E. 
Antiviral Chem. Chemother. 
2014 , 23 , 129 –144 . 10.3851/IMP2690 .
Lansdon E. ; Liu Q. ; Leavitt S. ; Balakrishnan M. ; Perry J. ; Lancaster-Moyer C. ; Kutty N. ; Liu X. ; Squires N. ; Watkins W. ; Kirschberg T. 
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2011 , 55 , 2905 –2915 . 10.1128/AAC.01594-10 .21464257 
Fowler B. J. ; Gelfand B. D. ; Kim Y. ; Kerur N. ; Tarallo V. ; Hirano Y. ; Amarnath S. ; Fowler D. H. ; Radwan M. ; Young M. T. ; Pittman K. ; Kubes P. ; Agarwal H. K. ; Parang K. ; Hinton D. R. ; Bastos-Carvalho A. ; Li S. ; Yasuma T. ; Mizutani T. ; Yasuma R. ; Wright C. ; Ambati J. 
Science 
2014 , 346 , 1000 –1003 . 10.1126/science.1261754 .25414314 
Gallant J. ; Gerondelis P. ; Wainberg M. ; Shulman N. ; Haubrich R. ; St Clair M. ; Lanier E. ; Hellmann N. ; Richman D. 
Antiviral Ther. 
2003 , 8 , 489 –506 .
Barreca M. L. ; Ferro S. ; Rao A. ; Luca L. D. ; Zappalá M. ; Monforte A.-M. ; Debyser Z. ; Witvrouw M. ; Chimirri A. 
J. Med. Chem. 
2005 , 48 , 7084 –7088 . 10.1021/jm050549e .16250669 
McColl D.J. ; Chen X. 
Antiviral
Res. 
2010 , 85 , 101 –118 . 10.1016/j.antiviral.2009.11.004 .19925830 
Davies J. ; Hostomska Z. ; Hostomsky Z. ; Jordan S. ; Matthews D. 
Science 
1991 , 252 , 88 –95 . 10.1126/science.1707186 .1707186 
Chung S. ; Himmel D. M. ; Jiang J.-K. ; Wojtak K. ; Bauman J. D. ; Rausch J. W. ; Wilson J. A. ; Beutler J. A. ; Thomas C. J. ; Arnold E. ; Le Grice S. F. J. 
J. Med. Chem. 
2011 , 54 , 4462 –4473 . 10.1021/jm2000757 .21568335 
Murelli R. P. ; D’Erasmo M. P. ; Hirsch D. R. ; Meck C. ; Masaoka T. ; Wilson J. A. ; Zhang B. ; Pal R. K. ; Gallicchio E. ; Beutler J. A. ; Grice S. F. J. L.  Med. Chem. Commun. 2016 , advance article
Goodsell D. S. ; Morris G. M. ; Olson A. J. 
J. Mol. Recognit. 
1996 , 9 , 1 –5 . 10.1002/(SICI)1099-1352(199601)9:1<1::AID-JMR241>3.0.CO;2-6 .8723313 
Shoichet B. K. ; McGovern S. L. ; Wei B. ; Irwin J. J. 
Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 
2002 , 6 , 439 –446 . 10.1016/S1367-5931(02)00339-3 .12133718 
Forli S. ; Olson A. J. 
J. Med. Chem. 
2012 , 55 , 623 –638 . 10.1021/jm2005145 .22148468 
Perryman A. L. ; Santiago D. N. ; Forli S. ; Santos-Martins D. ; Olson A. J. 
J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2014 , 28 , 429 10.1007/s10822-014-9709-3 .24493410 
Hogues H. ; Sulea T. ; Purisima E. O. 
J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 
2016 , 56 , 955 –964 . 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00278 .26282162 
Jorgensen W. L. 
Science 
2004 , 303 , 1813 –1818 . 10.1126/science.1096361 .15031495 
Wang L. ; Wu Y. ; Deng Y. ; Kim B. ; Pierce L. ; Krilov G. ; Lupyan D. ; Robinson S. ; Dahlgren M. K. ; Greenwood J. ; Romero D. L. ; Masse C. ; Knight J. L. ; Steinbrecher T. ; Beuming T. ; Damm W. ; Harder E. ; Sherman W. ; Brewer M. ; Wester R. ; Murcko M. ; Frye L. ; Farid R. ; Lin T. ; Mobley D. L. ; Jorgensen W. L. ; Berne B. J. ; Friesner R. A. ; Abel R. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 2695 –2703 . 10.1021/ja512751q .25625324 
Boresch S. ; Tettinger F. ; Leitgeb M. ; Karplus M. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2003 , 107 , 9535 –9551 . 10.1021/jp0217839 .
Young T. ; Abel R. ; Kim B. ; Berne B. J. ; Friesner R. A. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2007 , 104 , 808 –813 . 10.1073/pnas.0610202104 .17204562 
Zhou H.-X. ; Gilson M. K. 
Chem. Rev. 
2009 , 109 , 4092 –4107 . 10.1021/cr800551w .19588959 
Gallicchio E. ; Lapelosa M. ; Levy R. M. 
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2010 , 6 , 2961 –2977 . 10.1021/ct1002913 .21116484 
Gallicchio E. ; Levy R. M. 
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
2011 , 21 , 161 –166 . 10.1016/j.sbi.2011.01.010 .21339062 
Gallicchio E. ; Levy R. M. 
Adv. Prot. Chem. Struct.
Biol. 
2011 , 85 , 27 –80 . 10.1016/B978-0-12-386485-7.00002-8 .
Gallicchio E. ; Chen H. ; Chen H. ; Fitzgerald M. ; Gao Y. ; He P. ; Kalyanikar M. ; Kao C. ; Lu B. ; Niu Y. ; Pethe M. ; Zhu J. ; Levy R. M. 
J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2015 , 29 , 315 –325 . 10.1007/s10822-014-9795-2 .25726024 
Gallicchio E. ; Deng N. ; He P. ; Perryman A. L. ; Santiago D. N. ; Forli S. ; Olson A. J. ; Levy R. M. 
J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2014 , 28 , 475 –490 . 10.1007/s10822-014-9711-9 .24504704 
Piettre S. R. ; Ganzhorn A. ; Hoflack J. ; Islam K. ; Hornsperger J.-M. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1997 , 119 , 3201 –3204 . 10.1021/ja9634278 .
Budihas S. ; Gorshkova I. ; Gaidamakov S. ; Wamiru A. ; Bona M. ; Parniak M. ; Crouch R. ; McMahon J. ; Beutler J. ; Le Grice S. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2005 , 33 , 1249 –1256 . 10.1093/nar/gki268 .15741178 
Klumpp K. ; Hang J. Q. ; Rajendran S. ; Yang Y. ; Derosier A. ; Wong Kai In P. ; Overton H. ; Parkes K. E. B. ; Cammack N. ; Martin J. A. 
Nucleic Acids
Res. 
2003 , 31 , 6852 –6859 . 10.1093/nar/gkg881 .14627818 
Gallicchio E. ; Paris K. ; Levy R. M. 
J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 
2009 , 5 , 2544 –2564 . 10.1021/ct900234u .20419084 
Gallicchio E. ; Levy R. M. ; Parashar M. 
J. Comput. Chem. 
2008 , 29 , 788 –794 . 10.1002/jcc.20839 .17876761 
Hamelberg D. ; McCammon J. A. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 7683 –7689 . 10.1021/ja0377908 .15198616 
Madhavi
Sastry G. ; Adzhigirey M. ; Day T. ; Annabhimoju R. ; Sherman W. 
J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2013 , 27 , 221 –234 . 10.1007/s10822-013-9644-8 .23579614 
Poongavanam V. ; Steinmann C. ; Kongsted J. 
PLoS One 
2014 , 9 , e98659 10.1371/journal.pone.0098659 .24897431 
Zhao H. ; Lin Z. ; Lynn A. Y. ; Varnado B. ; Beutler J. A. ; Murelli R. P. ; Grice S. F. J. L. ; Tang L. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 
2015 , 43 , 11003 –11016 . 10.1093/nar/gkv1018 .26450964 
Li P. ; Song L. F. ; Kenneth M. ; Merz J. 
J.
Phys. Chem. B 
2015 , 119 , 883 –895 . 10.1021/jp505875v .25145273 
Gardner J. ; Baron G. ; MacLean H. 
Can. J. Chem. 
1957 , 35 , 1039 –1048 . 10.1139/v57-141 .
Martin S. F. ; Follows B. C. ; Hergenrother P. J. ; Franklin C. L. 
J. Org. Chem. 
2000 , 65 , 4509 –4514 . 10.1021/jo9915731 .10959851 
Greenwood J. R. ; Calkins D. ; Sullivan A. P. ; Shelley J. C. 
J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2010 , 24 , 591 –604 . 10.1007/s10822-010-9349-1 .20354892 
Mobley D. L. ; Chodera J. D. ; Dill K. A. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
2006 , 125 , 08490210.1063/1.2221683 .16965052 
Lapelosa M. ; Gallicchio E. ; Levy R. M. 
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2012 , 8 , 47 –60 . 10.1021/ct200684b .22368530 
Gilson M. K. ; Given J. A. ; Bush B. L. ; McCammon J. A. 
Biophys. J. 
1997 , 72 , 1047 –1069 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(97)78756-3 .9138555 
Gallicchio E. ; Levy R. M. 
J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2012 , 26 , 505 –516 . 10.1007/s10822-012-9552-3 .22354755 
Gallicchio E. 
Comput. Mol. Biosci. 
2012 , 2 , 7 –22 . 10.4236/cmb.2012.21002 .22708073 
Tan Z. ; Gallicchio E. ; Lapelosa M. ; Levy R. M. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 136 , 14410210.1063/1.3701175 .22502496 
Wickstrom L. ; He P. ; Gallicchio E. ; Levy R. M. 
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2013 , 9 , 3136 –3150 . 10.1021/ct400003r .25147485 
Pohorille A. ; Jarzynski C. ; Chipot C. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2010 , 114 , 10235 –10253 . 10.1021/jp102971x .20701361 
Shirts M. R. ; Chodera J. D. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
2008 , 129 , 12410510.1063/1.2978177 .19045004 
Feig M. ; Brooks C. 
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
2004 , 14 , 217 –224 . 10.1016/j.sbi.2004.03.009 .15093837 
Qiu D. ; Shenkin P. S. ; Hollinger F. P. ; Still C. W. 
J. Phys. Chem. A 
1997 , 101 , 3005 –3014 . 10.1021/jp961992r .
Gallicchio E. ; Levy R. 
J.
Comput. Chem. 
2004 , 25 , 479 –499 . 10.1002/jcc.10400 .14735568 
Mobley D. L. ; Dill K. A. 
Structure 
2009 , 17 , 489 –498 . 10.1016/j.str.2009.02.010 .19368882 
Kaminski G. A. ; Friesner R. A. ; Tirado-Rives J. ; Jorgensen W. L. 
J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2001 , 105 , 6474 –6487 . 10.1021/jp003919d .
Banks J. ; Beard J. ; Cao Y. ; Cho A. ; Damm W. ; Farid R. ; Felts A. ; Halgren T. ; Mainz D. ; Maple J. ; Murphy R. ; Philipp D. ; Repasky M. ; Zhang L. ; Berne B. ; Friesner R. ; Gallicchio E. ; Levy R. 
J.
Comput. Chem. 
2005 , 26 , 1752 –1780 . 10.1002/jcc.20292 .16211539 
Gallicchio E. ; Xia J. ; Flynn W. F. ; Zhang B. ; Samlalsingh S. ; Mentes A. ; Levy R. M. 
Comput. Phys.
Commun. 
2015 , 196 , 236 –246 . 10.1016/j.cpc.2015.06.010 .27103749 
Sarafianos S. G. ; Das K. ; Tantillo C. ; Clark A. D. ; Ding J. ; Whitcomb J. M. ; Boyer P. L. ; Hughes S. H. ; Arnold E. 
EMBO J. 
2001 , 20 , 1449 –1461 . 10.1093/emboj/20.6.1449 .11250910 
Bauman J. D. ; Patel D. ; Dharia C. ; Fromer M. W. ; Ahmed S. ; Frenkel Y. ; Vijayan R. S. K. ; Eck J. T. ; Ho W. C. ; Das K. ; Shatkin A. J. ; Arnold E. 
J. Med. Chem. 
2013 , 56 , 2738 –2746 . 10.1021/jm301271j .23342998 
Lapkouski M. ; Tian L. ; Miller J. T. ; Le Grice S. F. ; Yang W. 
Nat. Struct. Mol.
Biol. 
2013 , 20 , 230 –236 . 10.1038/nsmb.2485 .23314251 
Biebricher A. S. ; Heller I. ; Roijmans R. F. H. ; Hoekstra T. P. ; Peterman E. J. G. ; Wuite G. J. L. 
Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 7304 10.1038/ncomms8304 .26084388 
Christen M. T. ; Menon L. ; Myshakina N. S. ; Ahn J. ; Parniak M. A. ; Ishima R. 
Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 
2012 , 80 , 706 –716 . 10.1111/cbdd.12010 .22846652 
Gustafson J. L. ; Lim D. ; Miller S. J. 
Science 
2010 , 328 , 1251 –1255 . 10.1126/science.1188403 .20522769 
Friesner R. A. ; Banks J. L. ; Murphy R. B. ; Halgren T. A. ; Klicic J. J. ; Mainz D. T. ; Repasky M. P. ; Knoll E. H. ; Shelley M. ; Perry J. K. ; Shaw D. E. ; Francis P. ; Shenkin P. S. 
J. Med. Chem. 
2004 , 47 , 1739 –1749 . 10.1021/jm0306430 .15027865 
Cosconati S. ; Forli S. ; Perryman A. L. ; Harris R. ; Goodsell D. S. ; Olson A. J. 
Expert Opin. Drug Discovery 
2010 , 5 , 597 –607 . 10.1517/17460441.2010.484460 .
Singh N. ; Warshel A. 
Proteins 
2010 , 78 , 1705 –1723 . 10.1002/prot.22687 .20186976 
Poongavanam V. ; Olsen J. M. H. ; Kongsted J. 
Integr. Biol. 
2014 , 6 , 1010 –1022 . 10.1039/C4IB00111G .

