
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3164624910.1021/acsomega.9b02618ArticleEffects of Hydrodynamic Interactions on the Near-Surface
Diffusion of Spheroidal Molecules Czajka Paweł †Antosiewicz Jan M. ‡Długosz Maciej *‡† Faculty
of Physics, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 5, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland‡ Division
of Biophysics, Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 5, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland* E-mail: Maciej.Dlugosz@fuw.edu.pl. Phone: +48 22 55 32 229.03 10 2019 15 10 2019 4 16 17016 17030 14 08 2019 12 09 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We investigated diffusion of spheroidal
molecules near a planar
surface, accounting for spatially dependent translational and rotational
mobilities of molecules resulting from their hydrodynamic interactions
with the plane. Rigid-body Brownian dynamics simulations of prolate
ellipsoids of revolution of an axial ratio in the range of 1.5 to
3.0, suspended in a viscous fluid, with a no-slip flat boundary confining
the suspension were employed. Mobility tensor matrices of molecules
were evaluated as functions of spheroids’ distance and orientation
with respect to the plane. Hydrodynamic interactions with the surface
lead to substantial changes of spheroids’ translational diffusion
coefficients both in the direction perpendicular and parallel to the
plane when compared with the values characterizing the bulk diffusion.
Moreover, the short-time translational diffusion of molecules, measured
in the laboratory frame, both in an unbounded fluid and under the
confinement, is non-Gaussian, with much larger deviations from Gaussianity
observed in the latter case. In an unbounded fluid, distributions
of translational displacements of molecules deviate from those expected
for a simple Brownian motion as a result of shape anisotropy. In the
presence of the plane, spheroids experience an additional anisotropic
drag, and consequently, their mobilities depend on their positions
and orientations. Therefore, anomalies in the short-time dynamics
observed under confinement can be explained in terms of the so-called
diffusing-diffusivity mechanism. Our findings have implications for
understanding of a wide range of biological and technological processes
that involve diffusion of anisotropic molecules near surfaces of natural
and model cell membranes, biosensors and nanosensors, and electrodes.

document-id-old-9ao9b02618document-id-new-14ao9b02618ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
In the biological setting, diffusion of molecules is a major determinant
of transport phenomena, signaling, and metabolism.1−7 It is also a key mechanism of transport in numerous sensing applications.8−11 The problem of diffusion and adsorption of molecules on surfaces
of different origins and of different physicochemical properties,
for example, model and natural cell membranes,12,13 metals,14,15 minerals,16,17 and synthetic
materials,18 attracts considerable attention
due to its ubiquity and fundamental importance in many research areas
such as cell biology, physics and biophysics, chemistry, medicine,
and biotechnology.19−22 Diffusion of proteins toward biological interfaces, such as the
cytoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane, and their interactions with
receptors located on those interfaces are important steps in a diverse
array of cellular processes, from cell signaling to membrane trafficking.23 Studies on the mechanism of redox enzymes involve
interactions of proteins with surfaces of electrodes.24,25 In surface-based biosensors, diffusion of target molecules to the
sensor may govern the kinetics of binding and ultimately the performance
of the sensor.26 Protein fouling of processing
surfaces is of importance in food and pharmaceutical industries,27 whereas protein adsorption on biomedical implants
that are in contact with the bloodstream may lead to formation of
clots.28

Brownian motions of a body
suspended in a viscous fluid near a
boundary or a surface are slowed down due to hydrodynamic interactions
of the diffusing body with the surface. Moreover, the presence of
the boundary introduces anisotropy of Brownian motions of otherwise
isotropic particles.19−32 This phenomenon was described theoretically for spherical molecules,
whose translational diffusivities depend on the molecule’s
position relative to the boundary,29,30 and verified
in various experiments conducted for nanoparticles.33−35 For a nonspherical
molecule, hydrodynamic interactions with the confining surface result
in a mobility tensor matrix, which, even for the simplest case of
an axisymmetric shape, is a complicated function not only of the position
but also of the orientation of the molecule.36−40

Here, we employ the rigid-body Brownian dynamics
technique41−43 to investigate how hydrodynamic interactions with
a planar boundary
affect local translational dynamics of anisotropic molecules. We consider
prolate spheroids of axial ratios falling between 1.5 and 3.0. Such
a choice was made because, among the menagerie of known globular proteins,
there is an abundance of those whose hydrodynamic shapes can effectively
be approximated by an ellipsoid, either triaxial or axisymmetric.44−46 A few examples among many are hen egg white lysozyme,47,48 bovine serum albumin,49 the Fab′
domain of the human IgG class proteins,50 or bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor.51 Typically, the degree of nonsphericity of such proteins is rather
moderate. We should note that, while axial ratios of considered model
molecules were derived based on hydrodynamic calculations52 that we performed for a number of globular proteins,
these models lack any protein-specific properties and are essentially
no different than, for example, hard spheroidal colloids. Hydrodynamic
interactions between diffusing spheroids and the plane are accounted
for in simulations by introducing position- and orientation-dependent
mobility tensor matrices calculated at each step of the simulation.

We evaluated orientation-averaged translational diffusion coefficients
of spheroidal molecules in directions parallel and perpendicular to
the flat boundary as functions of the molecule–plane separation
and molecule’s size. Diffusion of spheroids in the presence
of the surface is drastically slowed down in comparison with that
occurring in an unbounded fluid, both in the direction perpendicular
and parallel to the plane, in the former case more so than in the
latter. Moreover, the short-time translational diffusion of spheroids
in an unbounded fluid, measured in the laboratory frame, is non-Gaussian,
which is an effect stemming from their anisotropy.53 A similar effect was previously observed in experiments
conducted for uniaxial polymethyl methacrylate ellipsoids of axial
ratio 8 that were suspended in water and confined to two dimensions.54 Variation of spheroids’ mobilities with
their position and orientations resulting from the presence of the
planar surface further amplifies deviations of translational short-time
dynamics of molecules from the simple Brownian picture due to Einstein55 and von Smoluchowski,56 which can be explained in terms of the diffusing-diffusivity mechanism.57,58

2 Theory
2.1 Near-Wall Mobility Tensor
of a Prolate Ellipsoid
of Revolution
For an arbitrarily shaped rigid body suspended
in an incompressible fluid and influenced by external forces (F) and torques (T), which result in the body’s
translational (u) and rotational (ω) velocities, the following linear relation holds, provided that
the Reynolds number is low59 and the creeping
flow equations are applicable 1  The symmetric positive-definite
matrix60 that appears in the above equation
represents the resistance (or friction) tensor of the body, Ξ. Its four blocks correspond to the body’s translations
(TT) and rotations (RR) and their
couplings (TR and RT). The inverse
of the resistance tensor matrix results in a symmetric positive-definite
matrix of a similar block structure that represents the mobility tensor M 2   3  The mobility tensor is related
to the diffusion tensor D by the fluctuation-dissipation
theorem61 4  with kB being the Boltzmann
constant and T being
the temperature. When an arbitrarily shaped body is suspended near
a boundary, such as the planar surface considered here, its resistance
and mobility tensor matrices become dependent on the distance and
orientation of the body relative to the boundary.36,62,63 Recently, analytical expressions for the
dominant correction to the bulk (i.e., in the unbounded fluid) resistance
tensor of an axisymmetric body of a particular shape (such as a rod
or a prolate ellipsoid of revolution) due to the presence of a nearby
no-slip wall have been derived by Lisicki and coauthors,37 allowing calculations of position- and orientation-dependent
resistance and mobility tensors. These expressions are given in eqs S8–S21 (Supporting Information). Further
in the text, we present plots of different components of the mobility
tensor matrix of an axisymmetric prolate ellipsoid as functions of
the elevation above the surface and the inclination angle. Correction
is evaluated using coordinate frames depicted in Figure 1. The laboratory frame of reference
consists of three basis vectors, pointing in Cartesian directions x, y, and z (the basis
set consists of three unit vectors {êx, êy, êz}), with the z axis normal to the surface
(which is located in the z = 0 plane). The body-wall
frame consists of three unit vectors, {v̂1, v̂2, v̂3}, with v̂3 pointing
along the long axis of the particle, v̂1 = (êz × v̂3)/ | êz × v̂3|, and v̂2 = v̂3 × v̂1. In the body-wall frame, the resistance and mobility
tensors depend on the elevation of the body above the plane (z) and the inclination angle θ, with cos θ = êz · v̂3 (see Figure 1).

Figure 1 Left: Schematic representation of a prolate ellipsoid (shown in
green) near a planar surface (shown in blue) and of coordinate systems
employed. Right: Positions of an ellipsoid may be restricted in simulations
to a finite domain (shown in gray) with the plane either present or
absent. The latter situation is described in the text as bulk diffusion
or diffusion in an unbounded fluid.

The resistance tensor matrix in the body-wall frame {v̂1, v̂2, v̂3} is constructed as a sum of the resistance tensor matrix Ξo of the body suspended in an unbounded
fluid and the correcting matrix ΔΞ, whose
components, which depend on the shape of the body, are calculated
for a given z and θ using analytical expressions
that can be found in37 5  The bulk resistance tensor Ξo is independent
of the position and orientation
of the body relative to the plane. Its matrix is diagonal 6  and its components are defined
as64 7   8   9   10   11  where η is the fluid
viscosity, a is the long semi-axis, and b is the short semi-axis of the ellipsoid. The mobility tensor matrix
in the body-wall frame can be calculated by inverting Ξ(z, θ). The mobility tensor in the laboratory
frame can be then computed using an appropriate change of basis matrix.
For a body residing in the laboratory frame in the xz plane (Figure 1),
the four blocks of the mobility tensor matrix are of forms37,38 12   13   14  

2.2 Rigid-Body Brownian Dynamics
The
following Brownian dynamics
propagation scheme for a rigid body, in the absence of external forces,
in the laboratory coordinate frame was implemented in-house and employed
in the current work41−43 15  In the above expression,
Δt is the time step, and  is the vector describing the position and
orientation of the body 16  x, y, and z are
the positions of the center
of the ellipsoid, and Ω1, Ω2, and
Ω3 are its orientation.  is a random displacement vector during
a time step Δt due to the Brownian noise 17  satisfying the following
relations 18   19   is the
position- and orientation-dependent
mobility tensor matrix, evaluated in the laboratory frame, and ∇X· denotes the divergence operator.

A step of a Brownian dynamics simulation involves updating the
three coordinates of the diffusing body’s center of rotation,
which is a straightforward operation. Rotational moves are performed
using the unbiased protocol described previously by Beard and Schlick,65 in which a finite rotation Ω = (Ω1, Ω2, Ω3) is represented with the operator U 20  where 21  If we
denote some body-fixed
vector after and before rotation, respectively, by v and vo, then their relation can be expressed as66 22  where the unit vector 23  defines the axis of rotation.
This expression is equivalent to applying the matrix U to rotate vo.65

Generation of Brownian motions (eq 15) of the body in the presence of the plane
requires
calculation of translational and orientational divergence terms, which
result in correct distributions of body’s positions and orientations
at equilibrium.67 The former are evaluated
as standard spatial divergences, whereas the latter are computed using
the  operator, with v being a body-fixed
unit vector.38,68 In both cases, the random finite
difference algorithm (RFD)38,69 is applied, which,
for a position- and orientation-dependent mobility tensor matrix M(r, Ω) (or when orientation
is described in terms of the body-fixed vector v, M(r, v)), allows the calculation
of translational and orientational divergence terms as38 24   25  In the above expressions,
Δs is a Gaussian random variable defined by the
moments 26   27  where I3×3 is the identity matrix. Averages in eqs 24 and 25 are
computed over a finite set of Δs (or a predefined
number of random steps). Some of the tests that we performed to validate
the Brownian dynamics algorithm employed in the current work are described
in the Supporting Information.

3 Methods
3.1 Parametrization of Spheroids
To derive
parameters of spheroidal molecules, we considered several proteins
of varying shape anisotropy, whose structures are deposited in the
Protein Data Bank.70 Hydrodynamic properties,
that is, sizes and shapes, of these proteins were evaluated directly
from their three-dimensional atomic structures using the HullRad package.52 HullRad uses a convex hull model that accounts
for hydration to estimate the hydrodynamic volume of a molecule, calculates
the shape factor correction based on a prolate ellipsoid of revolution,
and provides the user with parameters such as the hydrodynamic radius,
axial ratio, translational and rotational diffusion coefficients,
and the intrinsic viscosity of the molecule. Considered proteins,
together with their hydrodynamic ellipsoids and axial ratio values,
are shown in Figure 2. Based on results of hydrodynamic calculations, we decided to simulate
diffusion of seven ellipsoids. The long semi-axis length of each ellipsoid
was set to 73.1Å̊ (which is the length obtained for the
most elongated protein from the set presented in Figure 2, that is, the Zika virus envelope
protein (PDB ID: 5JHM)71). The length of the short semi-axis
was varied between ellipsoids to obtain axial ratio values distributed
uniformly in the range of 1.5–3.0.

Figure 2 Exemplary proteins and
their hydrodynamic prolate ellipsoids of
revolution calculated using the HullRad package.52 (A) Hen egg white lysozyme (PDB ID: 6LYZ;72 axial ratio: 1.48). (B) Antibody Fab fragment from Jel
103 (PDB ID: 1MRD;73 axial ratio: 1.56). (C) F(ab′)2 fragment of the human antibody IgG1 b12 (PDB ID: 1HZH;74 axial ratio: 1.96). (D) Outer surface protein
A from Borrelia burgdorferi (PDB ID: 2OL7;75 axial ratio: 2.33). (E) Chemokine CCL5/RANTES (PDB ID: 2L9H;76 axial ratio: 2.40). (F) Chlamydial outer protein N from Chlamydia pneumoniae (PDB ID: 4P3Z;77 axial ratio: 2.61). (G) Secreted chlamydial protein PGP3
(PDB ID: 4JDM;78 axial ratio: 2.64). (H) Zika virus
envelope protein (PDB ID: 5JHM;71 axial ratio: 2.82).
Drawings were done using the UCSF Chimera package.79 Proteins are not shown to scale.

3.2 Evaluation of Translational Diffusion Coefficients
Translational diffusion coefficients of ellipsoids in directions
parallel and perpendicular to the surface were calculated as follows.
For an ellipsoid of a given axial ratio and for a given value of the
ellipsoid–plane distance in the range from a to 11a, an ensemble of 5 × 106 ellipsoids’
orientations in the laboratory frame was generated using uniformly
distributed random rotation matrices80 (so
that the molecules are distributed uniformly over a sphere). Next,
for each orientation of the molecule in the generated ensemble, a
mobility tensor matrix in the laboratory frame was calculated using
analytical expressions given in ref (37), and then all matrices were averaged. Orientation-averaged
translational diffusion coefficients in directions x, y, and z of the laboratory coordinate
frame, for a given elevation of the ellipsoid above the plane, were
calculated from diagonal components of the TT block
of the average mobility tensor matrix based on the fluctuation-dissipation
theorem given in eq 4. Our model lacks atomic details of both the molecule and the surface,
as well as short-range specific and nonspecific interactions, that
would affect the dynamics of the molecule very close to the plane.
One may also expect that the continuum description of the solvent
breaks for small molecule–surface separations where the granularity
of the solvent becomes important.81 Moreover,
as shown in ref (37), the analytical correction to the bulk resistance tensor underperforms
for small body-wall separations. Therefore, we decided to consider
here only ellipsoid–plane separations above a so that rotations of ellipsoids are not hindered. If, however, one
would aim at, for example, studying ordering effects in the presence
of planar obstacles,82 all sterically allowed
positions and orientations of molecules should be considered.

3.3 Brownian Dynamics Simulations
Short-time
diffusion of spheroids, either in the bulk or near the planar surface,
was evaluated based on BD simulations using five different setups.

First, for an ellipsoid of a given axial ratio, we generated 3.5
× 106 Brownian dynamics trajectories of 5 × 105 steps each, with Δt (eq 15) set to 5 × 10–4. At the beginning of each trajectory, the ellipsoid was so oriented
that its long axis was parallel to the z axis of
the laboratory coordinate frame. Elevation of the ellipsoid (i.e.,
the z coordinate of the ellipsoid’s center
in the laboratory coordinate frame, Figure 1) above the xy plane was
chosen randomly, with an equal probability, from the interval (a,5a) (Figure 1). During the simulation, the z coordinate of the molecule’s center was restricted to this
interval. Restriction on ellipsoid’s translations in the direction
normal to the xy plane is imposed using an algorithm
described previously38,83 by rejecting BD steps that result
in values of z outside the predefined interval. No
restrictions were imposed on coordinates x and y and the molecule’s orientation. Positions and orientations
of the ellipsoid along the Brownian dynamics trajectory were collected
at different times. As a result, for each considered point in time,
we obtained an ensemble of 3.5 × 106 of configurations
(positions and orientations) in the laboratory frame. Next, starting
from each configuration, a single Brownian dynamics step was performed,
with Δt again set to 5 × 10–4. Resulting translational displacements of the ellipsoid in directions x, y, and z of the laboratory
coordinate frame, Δx, Δy, and Δz, were collected; their distributions
were analyzed as functions of the ensemble evolution time.

Second,
for an ellipsoid of a given axial ratio and for the z coordinate of its center fixed at a given value in the
range from a to 11a, an ensemble
of 108 ellipsoid’s orientations in the laboratory
frame was generated using uniformly distributed random rotation matrices.80 Starting from each configuration, a single Brownian
dynamics step was performed, and resulting Δx, Δy, and Δz were collected.

Third, for an ellipsoid of a given axial ratio and for a given
fixed value of the inclination angle, in the range from 0° to
90° (with the molecule residing in the xz plane, Figure 1), an ensemble of
108 ellipsoid’s positions in the laboratory frame
was generated, with the z coordinate of the ellipsoid
center chosen randomly, with and equal probability, from the interval
(a,5a). Starting from each configuration,
a single Brownian dynamics step was performed, and resulting Δx, Δy, and Δz were collected.

Fourth, for an ellipsoid of a given axial
ratio, an ensemble of
5 × 108 configurations, with the z coordinate of the ellipsoid center chosen randomly, with an equal
probability, from the interval (a,5a), and orientations in the laboratory frame generated using uniformly
distributed random rotation matrices, was generated. Starting from
each configuration, a single Brownian dynamics step was performed,
and resulting Δx, Δy, and Δz were collected.

Fifth, for
an ellipsoid of a given axial ratio, a single Brownian
dynamics step was performed repeatedly 108 times, starting
from a given fixed value of the inclination angle in the range from
0° to 90° and a given fixed value of the z coordinate of the ellipsoid center in the range from a to 11a. Resulting Δx, Δy, and Δz were collected.

3.4 Distributions of Brownian Displacements
Distributions
of translational displacements (Δx, Δy, Δz) collected
from Brownian dynamics simulations of spheroids suspended either in
an unbounded fluid or near the surface were analyzed in terms of the
second (κ2) and fourth (κ4) cumulants
(for the Gaussian distribution, all κi’s for i > 2 equal zero), defined respectively
as 28   29  with q = x, y, z. Additionally,
we calculated the non-Gaussian parameter (or excess kurtosis)54,57 30  which approaches
zero in
the case of the Gaussian distribution and assumes values greater than
zero for distributions that are heavy-tailed relative to the Gaussian
distribution.

4 Results and Discussion
4.1 Dynamics near the Planar Surface
In Figures 3–5, we show, using three-dimensional
plots and heat maps, the dependence of the mobility tensor matrix
of an axisymmetric prolate ellipsoid suspended in a fluid confined
by a planar boundary on the position and orientation of the ellipsoid.
The mobility tensor matrix is evaluated in the laboratory frame as
a function of the molecule’s elevation and inclination angle,
as described above, with the long axis of the ellipsoid lying in the xz plane (Figure 1). A similar depiction of the mobility tensor matrix of an
axisymmetric prolate ellipsoid of the axial ratio 8, under the planar
confinement, was presented by De Corato et al.38 Those authors used the more accurate, numerical approach,
namely, the 3D finite element method,38 whereas in the current work, we evaluate mobility tensors based
on analytical expressions for the dominant correction to the bulk
friction tensors,37 as described above.
It is thus of interest whether we are able to recover the near-surface
dynamics of the ellipsoid described previously. Even more so, as in
the original work introducing the correction,37 the authors compare results of their approach with those of precise
multipole simulations only for a case of a rigid rod of the aspect
ratio 10 for a set of rod–plane distances and a single value
of the inclination angle. Plots presented in the current work are
based on calculations performed for an ellipsoid of the axial ratio
4.

Figure 3 Components of the MTT block
of the mobility tensor matrix as functions of the ellipsoid’s
elevation above the surface and its inclination angle.

Figure 4 Components of the MRR block
of the mobility tensor matrix as functions of the ellipsoid’s
elevation above the surface and its azimuthal angle.

Figure 5 Components of the MRT block
of the mobility tensor matrix as functions of the ellipsoid’s
elevation above the surface and its azimuthal angle. (A) MxyRTηa2, (B) MyxRTηa2, (C) MyzRTηa2, and (D) MzyRTηa2.

4.1.1 Translations and Rotations
Nonzero
components of the TT block of the mobility tensor
matrix (eq 12) are shown
in Figure 3. We report
values of MTT elements calculated
for the inclination angle θ in the range of 0° to 180°
and elevation z in the range of 1 to 10 (in units
of a, with a being the long semi-axis
of the ellipsoid). Diagonal components MxxTT, MyyTT,
and MzzTTare symmetric around
θ = 90°, whereas MxzTT, representing the translational coupling in directions x and z (see Figure 1), is antisymmetric around θ = 90°.

For any given value of the inclination angle, all diagonal components
decrease monotonically with the decreasing elevation, with the motion
in the direction perpendicular to the wall (MzzTT) being the most affected by hydrodynamic interactions.
We note that, for configurations in which the ellipsoid nearly touches
the plane, that is, z approaching 1 and θ equal
to either 0° or 180°, nonzero mobility values are observed,
which is clearly a shortcoming of the analytical approximation as
one would expect zero mobility in the limit of the ellipsoid touching
the plane.38 The off-diagonal component MxzTTchanges only slightly with
the varying ellipsoid–plane distance. MxzTTequals 0 for θ equal to 0°, 90°,
and 180°, regardless of elevation. For other inclination angles,
a modest increase in absolute values of MxzTTcan be observed close to the plane. Similarly, an
increase with the decreasing body–plane distance was observed
in the case of the rod described in ref (37), whereas De Corato and coauthors showed essentially
no variation in MxzTTof an ellipsoid
for elevation values above a.38 Overall, however, the off-diagonal MTT elements assume rather small values.

Nonzero components of the RR block of the mobility
tensor matrix (eq 13) are presented in Figure 4. We choose to report MRR components calculated for the inclination angle in the range of
0° to 180° and elevation in the range of 1 to 4. Similarly,
as in the case of MTT, diagonal
components of MRR are symmetric
around θ = 90°, whereas MxzRRrepresenting the rotational coupling in directions x and z is antisymmetric around θ
= 90°. For any given value of θ, changes observed in all
components of MRR upon varying
the ellipsoid–plane distance between 1 and 4 are only marginal.
The inclination angle has only a small influence on MyyRR, whereas significant variations with θ
are observed for MxxRR, MzzRR, and MxzRR.

Dependencies on θ of all components of MRR (as well as all components
of MTT), evaluated in the
laboratory frame
of reference defined in Figure 1, for large molecule–plane separations converge to
those observed in an unbounded fluid. Overall, for the range of ellipsoid–plane
distances and inclination angle values considered here, a qualitatively
similar behavior has been described in ref (38).

4.1.2 Roto-Translation Couplings
In Figure 5, elements
of the RT block of the mobility tensor (eq 14) are depicted. Those
exhibit rather complicated
behavior close to the surface when θ varies in the range of
0° to 180°.

The MxyRTcomponent (Figure 5A) that couples the rotation around x to
the force applied along y (eqs 3 and 14) is always negative
and symmetric around θ = 90°. Therefore, when the ellipsoid
is dragged toward y (Figure 1), it rotates around x clockwise.
The largest absolute values of MxyRTare observed close to the plane for θ approaching either
0° or 180°. In the whole range of ellipsoid–plane
distances considered, MxyRTapproaches
zero for θ approaching 90°. Rotations around y are coupled with forces acting along x via MyxRT(Figure 5B). Close to the plane, MyxRTis positive for θ approaching either
0° or 180° and negative when θ approaches 90°.
This mobility component is also symmetric around 90°. Rotations
around y, resulting from the force applied along x, are clockwise for θ, resulting in negative values
of MyxRT, and counterclockwise
otherwise. Rotations around y are coupled with forces
acting along z via MyzRT(Figure 5C). This component of the mobility tensor is antisymmetric
around 90°, with negative values obtained for θ below 90°
and positive values for θ above 90°. Maximal absolute values
of MyzRTare observed close
to the plane for θ near 45° or 135°. When the force
is applied to the center of the ellipsoid lying in the xz plane in the z direction, the ellipsoid rotates
around y either clockwise (for θ ∈ (0°,90°))
or counterclockwise(for θ ∈ (90°,180°)). The
last nonzero component of MRT, MzyRT(Figure 5D), couples forces acting along y with rotations around z. MzyRTis antisymmetric around 90°, with positive
values obtained for θ ∈ (0°,90°) and negative
values above 90°. Consequently, the ellipsoid dragged along y rotates around z either counterclockwise
(for θ below 90°) or clockwise (for θ above 90°).
All components of MRT vanish
far from the plane (in the considered case of the ellipsoid of the
axial ratio 4, they are practically zero when the molecule–plane
distance is above 10a), which is consistent with
the fact that, in the unbounded fluid, forces acting on the center
of the ellipsoid do not induce rotations; that is, there is no roto-translation
coupling.

Comparison of the above results, with results of the
detailed analysis
presented in ref (38), allows us to conclude that, overall, the near-plane dynamics of
an axisymmetric prolate ellipsoid resulting from the application of
the analytical approximation37 employed
in the current work is, in a qualitative sense, no different than
that resulting from finite element calculations.

4.1.3 Translational Drift Velocities
Hydrodynamic interactions
between the diffusing spheroidal molecule
and the plane result in a quite complex position and orientation dependence
of the molecule’s mobility tensor matrix (Figures 3–5). This, in turn, causes the molecule diffusing near the plane to
experience a net drift velocity, which is proportional to the divergence
of the mobility tensor matrix.67,84 Therefore, nonvanishing
divergence terms are present in the equation describing the Brownian
dynamics algorithm (eq 15). In Figure 6, we
show translational drift velocities in directions x () and z () (calculated using the random finite difference
method,38,69eq 24), again assuming that the long axis of the ellipsoid lies
in the xz plane (Figure 1), as functions of the inclination angle
and for four values of the ellipsoid–plane distance. The absence
of the translational drift in the y direction stems
from the choice of the ellipsoid’s orientation in the laboratory
coordinate frame.

Figure 6 Dimensionless drift velocities in directions x (top) and z (bottom) as functions of the ellipsoid’s
inclination angle and the ellipsoid–surface distance. Results
obtained for an ellipsoid of the axial ratio 4.

For a given distance of the molecule from the plane,  displays nonmonotonic
character.  is negative for θ ∈ (0°,90
° ) and positive for θ ∈ (90°,180°); it
equals zero for inclination angles 0°, 90°, and 180°;
and its absolute value decreases with increasing ellipsoid–plane
distance. Moreover, for any given distance, the integral of the  over θ from 0° to 180°
equals zero, which means that translational drift in directions parallel
to the plane vanishes, as previously described,38 when averaged over molecule’s orientations.

The z-component of the translational drift velocity
is symmetric around 90°, where it reaches a maximum. Close to
the plane,  is positive for all values of θ in
the range from 0° to 180°. However, when greater ellipsoid–plane
distances are considered, z > 2a,  displays a different behavior. It initially
drops below zero, then increases and becomes positive (for θ
equal to ∼15°), and then drops below zero again (for θ
equal to ∼165°). This means that, very close to the wall,
the molecule experiences the translational drift velocity regardless
of orientation, whereas for greater distances, for some values of
the inclination angle, the z-component of the velocity
vanishes. Absolute values of  decrease with increasing distance. More
importantly, the z-component of the translational
velocity does not have an orientation average of zero.

Our findings
regarding the translational drift velocity experienced
by an axisymmetric prolate ellipsoid suspended near a plane, while
less pronounced, are in a qualitative agreement with those described
previously.38

4.2 Diffusion
Coefficients
Recently,
diffusion of different-sized proteins (fluorescently labeled antibodies,
antibody fragments, and antibody complexes of hydrodynamic radii in
the range of ∼29 to ∼237 Å) near surfaces of substrate-supported
planar phospholipid bilayers has been studied with the total internal
reflection with fluorescence correlation spectroscopy.12,85 The authors aimed to answer the question whether membranes affect
local dynamics of proteins and therefore also the kinetics of binding
of proteins to their membrane-associated receptors. They analyzed
results of experiments employing the analytical expression for the
diffusion coefficient of a spherical particle in the direction normal
to the wall proposed by Brenner30 and concluded
that membrane surfaces slow down diffusion of proteins in a size-dependent
manner and that the dependence of translational diffusion on the hydrodynamic
radius of proteins is stronger than that predicted based on the Stokes–Einstein
equation for the diffusion in an unbounded fluid. The authors were
able to observe hydrodynamic effects at an evanescent depth length
that was several times greater than the hydrodynamic radius of the
largest protein considered12,85 and thus concluded
that observed hydrodynamic effects are of long range. We note that
diffusion in the direction parallel to membrane surfaces was not considered
in the aforementioned studies, and the authors regarded motion of
proteins as effectively one-dimensional.

Orientation-averaged
diffusion coefficients of spheroidal molecules, in directions parallel
(x,y) and perpendicular (z) to the planar surface, evaluated as described above,
are given in Figure 7 as functions of the spheroid–plane distance.

Figure 7 Orientation-averaged
diffusion coefficients of ellipsoids of different
axial ratios as functions of the ellipsoid–surface distance
for motions in directions parallel (x, y: indistinguishable) and perpendicular (z) to the
surface. Left: dimensionless values; right column: values scaled by
isotropic coefficients of an ellipsoid with a similar axial ratio,
suspended in an unbounded fluid. Error bars are comparable with symbol
sizes. Continuous curves are obtained for a sphere with a radius equivalent
to the hydrodynamic radius of an ellipsoid with a given axial ratio,
based on the expression given by Brenner.30

Brownian motions of molecules
are significantly slowed down near
the plane with motions in the perpendicular direction being more affected
than motions in parallel directions. Close to the boundary, parallel
diffusion coefficients of ellipsoids are decreased to 40–50%
of values of bulk isotropic diffusion coefficients, whereas perpendicular
diffusion coefficients are decreased to 20–30% of bulk values.
Molecules with a larger hydrodynamic radius diffuse slower (ellipsoids
have equal long axis; therefore, their hydrodynamic radius decreases
with the increasing axial ratio). Even for molecule–plane distances
that are 10 times greater than the long axis of ellipsoids, values
of diffusion coefficients are below those observed in an unbounded
fluid.

Hydrodynamic effects on diffusion in considered here
model systems
are of long range (especially when compared with the effective range
of electrostatic interactions that, at physiological salt conditions,
is only a few Å), in line with results described in refs (12) and (85), due to the leading inverse
dependence of translational diffusion coefficients on the distance
from the plane.37

Brenner considered
a sphere moving toward (or away from) a single
planar non-slip surface30 and derived the
following expression for the diffusion coefficient of the sphere in
the direction normal to the plane, Dz(z) 31  where 32  RH is
the hydrodynamic radius of the sphere, Do is its bulk diffusion coefficient, and z is the
distance of the sphere from the plane. In Figure 7, we show numerical values
resulting from the Brenner formula applied to spherical molecules
of similar hydrodynamic radii as considered ellipsoids. Diffusion
of spheres is less affected by the presence of the plane.

In
an unbounded fluid, the isotropic diffusion coefficient of a
Brownian molecule is linearly dependent on the inverse of the molecule’s
hydrodynamic radius. As evidenced in Figure 8, for any given molecule–plane distance,
also orientation- and direction-averaged diffusion coefficients of
spheroids suspended near a planar boundary show such a dependence.
However, unlike in the case of the bulk diffusion, intercept values
of linear fits shown in Figure 8 are below zero and only increase toward zero with the increasing
spheroid–plane distance. Slopes of fits also vary with the
varying distance from the plane and decrease near the boundary. Moreover,
linear dependence on the inverse of the hydrodynamic radius is observed
for the orientation-, direction-, and distance-averaged diffusion
coefficient.

Figure 8 Orientation- and direction-averaged diffusion coefficient
of a
spheroidal molecule as a function of molecule’s hydrodynamic
radius for different values of the elevation above the surface. For
a comparison, a dependence of the diffusion coefficient of a spheroid
suspended in an unbounded fluid on the hydrodynamic radius and a similar
dependence of the diffusion coefficient averaged over the orientation,
direction, and spheroid–surface distance (⟨D⟩z) are also shown. In all cases,
error bars are comparable with symbol sizes. Continuous lines result
from linear regressions.

4.3 Non-Gaussian
Diffusion of Spheroids in the
Bulk and near the Planar Surface
Short-time translational
diffusion of spheroids is evaluated in terms of cumulants (eqs 28 and 29) and the excess kurtosis (eq 30) that characterize distributions of displacements
of the molecule, in directions parallel (Δx, Δy) and perpendicular (Δz) to the plane in a predefined time interval, Δt.

We begin by considering displacements Δx, Δy, and Δz measured
at different times on an ensemble of molecules whose positions and
orientations evolve in time. In Figure 9, second cumulants of translational displacements distributions,
κ2 (eq 28), are shown as functions of the time elapsed from the beginning
when all molecules in the ensemble are so oriented that their long
axes are parallel to the z axis of the laboratory
coordinate frame and their positions above the xy plane are chosen randomly with an equal probability from the interval
(a, 5a) (as described above in Section 3).

Figure 9 Second cumulants of distributions
of displacements of ellipsoids
in directions x (similar results, obtained for the y direction, are not shown for clarity) and z as a function of the ensemble evolution time. Top: ellipsoids suspended
in an unbounded fluid; bottom: ellipsoids suspended near the planar
surface. Error bars are comparable with symbol sizes.

For any given axial ratio of the ellipsoid, the time to reach
plateau
that is observed in the case of bulk diffusion is somewhat shorter
than in the near-plane diffusion case, which is a consequence of the
fact that rotational dynamics of molecules is slowed down by hydrodynamic
interactions with the plane. This is consistent with depictions of
the MRR block components
in Figure 4 showing
a modification resulting from the presence of the planar boundary
when compared with corresponding bulk values. As ⟨Δx⟩, ⟨Δy⟩, and
⟨Δz⟩ are close to zero, regardless
of the elapsed time, that is, the translational drift barely manifests
itself in short time intervals during which displacements are measured
(in the case of bulk diffusion, average displacements are obviously
exactly zero as the divergence of the mobility matrix tensor vanishes),
κ2’s are a measure of average squared displacements
(eq 28) or short-time
diffusion coefficients (via eqs 4 and 19). In both cases, diffusion in
direction z is initially (when the long axis of molecules
is oriented parallel to the z axis of the laboratory
coordinate system) faster than the diffusion in direction x (or y). In the case of the bulk diffusion,
the short-time diffusion coefficient in direction x increases, the short-time diffusion coefficient in direction z decreases with the ensemble evolution time, and finally,
both reach the same value. Orientation-averaged short-time diffusion
is thus isotropic. In the case of the near-surface diffusion, a similar
behavior of short-time diffusion coefficients for motions parallel
and perpendicular to the plane is observed. There is however one important
distinction. Short-time diffusion coefficients for motions parallel
and perpendicular to the surface converge to different values, with
diffusion in the z direction being slower than that
in direction x (or y). Short-time
orientation-averaged diffusion is thus anisotropic. Ratios of plateau
values of κ2 time dependencies, for motions in directions x and z, are in the order of an increasing
molecule’s axial ratio (Figure 9): 1.45, 1.35, 1.30, and 1.30.

Dependencies of
fourth cumulants, κ4 (eq 29), of translational displacements
distributions on the ensemble evolution time are depicted in Figure 10. In the bulk,
Gaussian diffusion is initially observed, and κ4 vanishes
for motions in both x (y) and z directions for short ensemble evolution times.

Figure 10 Fourth cumulant
of the distribution of displacements of ellipsoids
in directions x (similar results obtained for the y direction are not shown for clarity) and z as a function of the ensemble evolution time. Left: ellipsoids suspended
in an unbounded fluid; right: ellipsoids suspended near the planar
surface.

As the ensemble evolution time
increases and the coherence of orientations
of molecules dissipates, values of κ4 also increase,
signifying that the short-time diffusion becomes non-Gaussian. For
any given value of the molecule’s axial ratio, κ4’s obtained for distributions of Δx (Δy) and Δz converge
to the same value. Moreover, κ4’s increase
with an increasing axial ratio of the spheroid. In the presence of
the plane, short-time diffusion is non-Gaussian even at the initial
moment when the coherence of molecules’ orientations is absolute
and values of κ4 are then nonzero (Figure 10). This is true for both parallel
(x, y) and perpendicular motions
(z). As the decoherence of orientations progresses
in time, κ4’s increase; however, unlike in
the case of the bulk diffusion, for any given value of the molecule’s
axial ratio, κ4’s of Δx (Δy) and Δz distributions
converge to different values. Values of κ4 obtained
for Δz distributions are larger than those
obtained for distributions of displacements in directions parallel
to the plane.

In Figure 11, non-Gaussian
parameters (p, excess kurtosis) for distributions
of translational displacements are shown. Clearly, Gaussian diffusion
is observed only in the bulk and only for short ensemble evolution
times when orientations of spheroids are coherent. As the decoherence
progresses, larger p values are observed. In all
cases depicted in Figure 11, excess kurtosis increases monotonically with the progress
of the orientational decoherence. Overall, larger p values are observed for molecules diffusing near the plane than
for molecules in the bulk. An increase of nearly one order in magnitude
is observed for Δx (Δy) displacements and nearly two orders of magnitude in the case of
Δz displacements.

Figure 11 Values of the non-Gaussian
parameter as functions of the ensemble
evolution time for distributions of displacements of ellipsoids suspended
either in an unbounded fluid (top) or near the planar surface (bottom)
in directions x (similar results obtained for the y direction are not shown for clarity) and z.

In the case of the bulk diffusion,
the non-Gaussian parameter converges
to zero for short times and increases with an increasing molecule’s
axial ratio for moderate and long times. Moreover, plots of p obtained for a given axial ratio for Δx (Δy) and Δz distributions
are similar (Figure 11).

In the case of the near-plane diffusion, the non-Gaussian
parameter
decreases with increasing molecule’s axial ratio, for motions
in directions parallel to the boundary, for all times. For the perpendicular
motion, p decreases with the increasing molecule’s
axial ratio for short and long ensemble evolution times. For moderate
times, p decreases with increasing axial ratio, which
is a consequence of the fact that rates of rotational relaxation of
spheroids are different; the faster the rate, the more slender the
spheroid.

After a sufficiently long ensemble evolution time,
all orientations
and positions of a spheroidal molecule in the laboratory frame, within
the considered diffusion domain (Figure 1) become equally probable, as the distribution
over different configurations reaches the stationary Boltzmann distribution.
Consequently, time dependencies of p presented in Figure 11 reach plateaus.
Let us now consider short-time diffusion evaluated over a subset of
molecules at a particular fixed elevation above the xy plane and with orientations distributed uniformly over a sphere.
Values of non-Gaussian parameters calculated for corresponding distributions
of displacements are given in Figure 12. In the case of bulk diffusion (Figure 12, top), p is independent on the position of a spheroid relative to the xy plane. Non-Gaussian parameters characterizing distributions
of Δx and Δz (and Δy, not shown in the figure) are equal as orientation-averaged
short-time bulk diffusion is isotropic. p increases
with increasing molecule’s axial ratio in accordance with data
presented in Figure 11 (top). In the case of the near-surface diffusion (Figure 12, center), p is a decreasing function of the molecule–surface distance.
Overall, for a given elevation, distributions of displacements in
directions parallel (values of excess kurtosis of Δx and Δy distributions are again equal) to
the surface are characterized by smaller p values
than the distribution of displacements in the perpendicular direction.
In both cases, p depends only weakly on the molecule’s
axial ratio. Plateau values observed in Figure 11 are smaller than maximal values of excess
kurtosis observed in Figure 12 (center) for the spheroid–surface distance approaching a.

Figure 12 Values of the non-Gaussian parameter calculated for distributions
of displacements of molecules in directions x and z. Top: Ellipsoids suspended in an unbounded fluid. Displacements
obtained for subsets of configurations in which the z coordinate of molecules’ center is fixed at a given value
and their orientations are distributed uniformly over a sphere. Center:
Ellipsoids suspended near the planar surface. Displacements obtained
subsets of configurations in which the z coordinate
of molecules’ center is fixed at a given value and their orientations
are distributed uniformly over a sphere. Bottom: Ellipsoids suspended
near the planar surface. Displacements obtained for subsets of configurations
in which the position of molecules is chosen randomly, with an equal
probability, from the interval (a,5a) and their inclination angle θ is fixed at a given value.

We may also consider short-time displacements of
molecules near
the surface, evaluated over a subset of configurations characterized
by a uniform distribution of distance from the plane, with the inclination
angle fixed at a particular value. An angular dependency of p is clearly visible in Figure 12 (bottom). As expected, values of p that characterize distributions of displacements at short
ensemble evolution times (Figure 11, bottom) converge to values obtained for θ =
0°.

On the other hand, the short-time diffusion of ellipsoids
near
the planar surface, evaluated for a particular fixed ellipsoid–boundary
distance and for a particular fixed value of the inclination angle,
is clearly Gaussian, as evidenced in Figure 13.

Figure 13 Non-Gaussian parameters calculated for distributions
of displacements
in directions x, y, and z of ellipsoids suspended near the planar surface. z coordinate of molecules’ center is fixed at 1.25a, and their inclination angle is fixed at a given value.

Exemplary distributions of displacements in directions
parallel
and perpendicular to the xy plane resulting from
Brownian dynamics simulations are shown in Figure 14 (together with Gaussian fits). Apart from
the case depicted in Figure 14C, those have fatter tails than Gaussian distributions.

Figure 14 Distributions
of displacements in directions x and z of an ellipsoid of axial ratio 3. (A) Ellipsoid
suspended near the planar surface. Displacements obtained for the
subset of configurations in which the elevation of the molecule is
fixed at 1.25a and its orientations are uniformly
distributed over a sphere. (B) Ellipsoid suspended near the planar
surface. Displacements obtained for the stationary ensemble of configurations
in which the z coordinate of the molecule’s
center is chosen randomly, with an equal probability, from the interval
(a,5a) and its orientations are
uniformly distributed over a sphere. (C) Ellipsoid suspended near
the planar surface. The molecule’s elevation is fixed at 1.25a, and its inclination angle is fixed at 30°. (D) Ellipsoid
in an unbounded fluid. Displacements obtained for the stationary ensemble
of configurations in which the z coordinate of the
molecule’s center is chosen randomly, with an equal probability,
from the interval (a,5a) and its
orientations are uniformly distributed over a sphere.

Non-Gaussianity observed in the case of bulk diffusion originates
in anisotropy of molecules (bulk diffusion of isotropic molecules
is always Gaussian). In Figure 11 (top), for evolution times close to zero, all molecules
in the ensemble have the same orientation with ellipsoids’
axes pointing along axes of the laboratory coordinate frame. Therefore,
the mobility tensor matrix of each molecule, evaluated in the laboratory
frame, is diagonal. Moreover, it does not depend on the molecule’s
position. Translational displacements Δx, Δy, and Δz of each molecule adhere
to Gaussian distributions 33  where q = x, y, z, and
the variance
depends on diagonal components of the mobility tensor matrix,  (eq 19). As the evolution time goes by, the coherence of orientations
of molecules vanishes. Also, while translational displacements of
a given molecule with a given orientation in the laboratory frame
are still Gaussian, distributions that characterize the whole ensemble
at a given time, resulting effectively from the mixing of differently
oriented molecules whose displacements adhere to Gaussian distributions
with different variances (as mobilities in directions of the laboratory
coordinate frame axes depend on the orientation of the molecule),
are not. Non-Gaussianity increases with the evolution time, with the
progressing decoherence. Finally, it reaches a plateau for evolution
times that are sufficiently long to allow for the orientational relaxation.
Bulk short-time diffusion of anisotropic molecules is thus always
non-Gaussian, and largest deviations from Gaussianity are observed
for the ensemble of molecules with uniformly distributed orientations,
as evidenced in Figure 12 (top). Moreover, increasing values of excess kurtosis are
observed for an increasing anisotropy of spheroids. Our findings are
in line with results described by Prager,53 who solved analytically the problem of Brownian motions of axisymmetric
molecules that are initially distributed uniformly in a plane and
oriented randomly, taking into account the unequal rates of diffusion
parallel and perpendicular to the molecular axis of symmetry, and
rotational diffusion. Prager concluded that, at times resulting in
displacements comparable with sizes of molecules, their diffusion
is not strictly Gaussian. Han and coauthors,54 who investigated Brownian motions of isolated ellipsoids in water
confined to two dimensions through digital video microscopy, described
that the short-time diffusion of particles is non-Gaussian. Those
authors also noted that the short-time non-Gaussian effects should
be more pronounced in two than in three dimensions. This is the consequence
of the fact that, in three dimensions, the ratio of diffusion coefficients
in directions parallel and perpendicular to ellipsoid’s axes
saturates at 2 when the ellipsoid’s axial ratio goes to infinity,
whereas the ratio of parallel and perpendicular diffusion coefficients
saturates at a much larger value under 2D conditions.54 Indeed, even though non-Gaussian parameters that characterize
short-time diffusion in the bulk are distinguishably greater than
zero (Figures 11,
top, and 12, top), actual deviations of displacement
distributions from Gaussians are rather small (Figure 14D).

Short-time diffusion of spheroids
near the planar boundary shows
much larger deviations from the simple Brownian motion than that in
an unbounded fluid (Figures 10–12 and 14). As values of excess kurtosis calculated for different ensemble
evolution times are all positive (Figure 11, bottom), all distributions of translational
displacements have tails that decay more slowly than Gaussian. Such
a behavior was observed experimentally, for instance, in the case
of colloid beads diffusing either along phospholipid bilayers or through
entangled F-actin networks86,87 and nanoparticles (polystyrene)
suspended in a solution of polymers (poly(ethylene oxide)),88 and described theoretically in terms of the
diffusing-diffusivity model.57,58 This model predicts
that, in environments in which diffusivity of molecules varies in
space, time, or both,57 the distribution
of displacements measured on an ensemble of molecules, in which different
molecules have different local diffusivities, becomes non-Gaussian.
As we have illustrated above (Figures 3–5) and as it was described
before,37,38 the mobility of an ellipsoid near a planar
surface is a complicated function of its position and orientation
relative to the plane. In Figure 11 (bottom), we show that, even at time zero when all
molecules in the ensemble are oriented in the same way, values of
excess kurtosis characterizing distributions of their displacements
are greater than zero, unlike in the case of bulk diffusion. This
is a consequence of the fact that positions of spheroids in the ensemble
are different and thus their mobilities are different due to distance-dependent
hydrodynamic interactions with the plane. As evidenced in Figure 12, both the distance
and orientation dependence of hydrodynamic interactions gives rise
to non-Gaussian diffusion of molecules evaluated over the ensemble,
while displacements of molecules with a given fixed position and orientation
are Gaussian (Figure 13). As described previously,57,58,86 non-Gaussian distributions of short-time displacements evaluated
over an ensemble of molecules are generated due to distribution of
diffusivities, which in our case, are position- and orientation-dependent
(in Figure S4 of the Supporting Information,
we show that the distribution of short-time displacements evaluated
over an ensemble containing two equal populations of ellipsoids characterized
by two different local diffusion coefficients in the (z, θ) space is non-Gaussian, while Gaussian displacements are
observed for each population separately). Without such dependence,
no excess kurtosis is observed (Figure 13). Recently, single particle tracking measurements
in a bright-field microscope of spherical colloids diffusing near
a planar substrate in gravitational and electrostatic potentials were
performed to validate the diffusing-diffusivity mechanism.57 The authors observed non-Gaussian diffusion
in the direction normal to the surface of the substrate; however,
they concluded that, in their system, non-Gaussian effects are too
small to be seen in displacements parallel to the surface.

5 Conclusions
We investigated the Brownian motion of
spheroidal molecules suspended
in a fluid bounded by a planar surface, focusing on effects of nonsphericity
of molecules’ shapes and their hydrodynamic interactions with
the plane. Confinement introduces anisotropy in motions of spheroids
and substantially slows down their diffusion both in the direction
parallel and perpendicular to the boundary. Mobilities of molecules
depend on their position and orientation relative to the surface,
which results in a complicated dynamics near the plane. Distributions
of short-time translational displacements of spheroids are non-Gaussian,
with tails that decay more slowly than Gaussian, as evidenced by the
excess kurtosis analysis. This is a clear deviation from the simple
Brownian motion. We observe a similar deviation, although to a much
lesser extent, in the case of the short-time diffusion of aspherical
molecules in an unbounded fluid. An explanation of these phenomena
is presented. Our work provides what we believe is an important insight
into a fundamental phenomenon of the Brownian motion of anisotropic
molecules under geometric confinement. Moreover, our findings are
of interest to a wide audience as diffusion of molecules near various
surfaces and boundaries plays a pivotal role in many biological and
technological processes.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02618.Full set of expressions
for components of the near-wall
correction for the bulk resistance tensor of an axisymmetric particle
derived by Lisicki and coauthors,37 results
of some of the tests performed to validate the Brownian dynamics algorithm
employed in the current work, and generation of non-Gaussian displacements
in an ensemble containing two population of molecules characterized
by two different diffusion coefficients (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02618_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The
authors acknowledge the support from National
Science Centre, Poland (UMO-2016/23/B/ST4/03273).
==== Refs
References
von
Hippel P. H. ; Berg O. G. 
Facilitated Target Location in Biological
Systems . J. Biol. Chem. 
1989 , 264 , 675 –678 .2642903 
Berg O. G. ; von Hippel P. H. 
Diffusion-Controlled Macromolecular
Interactions . Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem. 
1985 , 14 , 131 –160 . 10.1146/annurev.bb.14.060185.001023 .3890878 
Berg O. G. 
Orientation
Constraints in Diffusion-Limited Macromolecular Association. The Role
of Surface Diffusion as a Rate-Enhancing Mechanism . Biophys. J. 
1985 , 47 , 1 –14 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(85)83870-4 .3978183 
Berg O. G. ; Ehrenberg M. 
Microscopic
Diffusion-Reaction Coupling in Steady-State
Enzyme Kinetics . Biophys. Chem. 
1983 , 17 , 13 –28 . 10.1016/0301-4622(83)87010-0 .6824760 
Wong W. 
Signaling
by Diffusion . Sci. Signal. 
2010 , 3 , ec80 10.1126/scisignal.3113ec80 .
Nguyen H. ; Dayan P. ; Goodhill G. J. 
How Receptor Diffusion Influences
Gradient Sensing . J. R. Soc., Interface 
2015 , 12 , 20141097 10.1098/rsif.2014.1097 .25551145 
Fradin C. 
On the Importance
of Protein Diffusion in Biological Systems: The Example of the Bicoid
Morphogen Gradient . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
2017 , 1865 , 1676 –1686 . 10.1016/j.bbapap.2017.09.002 .
Kötelhön E. ; Sokolov S. V. ; Compton R. G. 
Near-Wall Hindered Diffusion: Implications
for Surface-Based Sensors . Sens. Actuators,
B 
2016 , 234 , 420 –425 . 10.1016/j.snb.2016.05.016 .
Świerczewska M. ; Liu G. ; Lee S. ; Chen X. 
High-Sensitivity Nanosensors for
Biomarker Detection . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 2641 –2655 . 10.1039/C1CS15238F .22187721 
Wulf V. ; Knoch F. ; Speck T. ; Sönnichsen C. 
Gold Nanorods
as Plasmonic Sensors for Particle Diffusion . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 7 , 4951 –4955 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b02165 .27934054 
Keng D. ; McAnanama S. R. ; Teraoka I. ; Arnold S. 
Resonance Fluctuations
of a Whispering Gallery Mode Biosensor by Particles Undergoing Brownian
Motion . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2007 , 91 , 103902 10.1063/1.2778351 .
Pero J. K. ; Haas E. M. ; Thompson N. L. 
Size Dependence
of Protein Diffusion
Very Close to Membrane Surfaces: Measurement by Total Internal Reflection
with Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 10910 –10918 . 10.1021/jp056990y .16771344 
Smith E. M. ; Hennen J. ; Chen Y. ; Mueller J. D. 
In Situ Quantification
of Protein Binding to the Plasma Membrane . Biophys.
J. 
2015 , 108 , 2648 –2657 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.04.021 .26039166 
Ozboyaci M. ; Kokh D. B. ; Wade R. C. 
Three Steps
to Gold: Mechanism of
Protein Adsorption Revealed by Brownian and Molecular Dynamics Simulations . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 10191 –10200 . 10.1039/C6CP00201C .27021898 
Williams R.
L. ; Williams D. F. 
Albumin
Adsorption on Metal Surfaces . Biomaterials 
1988 , 9 , 206 –212 . 10.1016/0142-9612(88)90085-3 .3408789 
Starzyk A. ; Cieplak M. 
Proteins in the Electric
Field near the Surface of
Mica . J. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 139 , 04510210.1063/1.4813854 .23902027 
Mereghetti P. ; Wade R. C. 
Diffusion of Hydrophobin Proteins in Solution and Interactions
with a Graphite Surface . BMC Biophys. 
2011 , 4 , 9 10.1186/2046-1682-4-9 .21595866 
Fair B. D. ; Jamieson A. M. 
Studies of Protein Adsorption on Polystyrene Latex
Surfaces . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
1980 , 77 , 525 –534 . 10.1016/0021-9797(80)90325-2 .
Nakanishi K. ; Sakiyama T. ; Imamura K. 
On the Adsorption of
Proteins on
Solid Surfaces, a Common but Very Complicated Phenomenon . J. Biosci. Bioeng. 
2001 , 91 , 233 –244 . 10.1016/S1389-1723(01)80127-4 .16232982 
Rabe M. ; Verdes D. ; Seeger S. 
Understanding
Protein Adsorption
Phenomena at Solid surfaces . Adv. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2011 , 162 , 87 –106 . 10.1016/j.cis.2010.12.007 .21295764 
Petros R. A. ; DeSimone J. M. 
Strategies in the
Design of Nanoparticles for Therapeutic
Applications . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2010 , 9 , 615 –627 . 10.1038/nrd2591 .20616808 
Squires T. M. ; Quake S. R. 
Microfluidics: Fluid Physics at the Nanoliter Scale . Rev. Mod. Phys. 
2005 , 77 , 977 –1026 . 10.1103/RevModPhys.77.977 .
Hynes N. E. ; Ingham P. W. ; Lim W. A. ; Marshall C. J. ; Massagué J. ; Pawson T. 
Signalling Change: Signal Transduction through the
Decades . Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
2013 , 14 , 393 –398 . 10.1038/nrm3581 .23636498 
Léger C. ; Bertrand P. 
Direct Electrochemistry of Redox Enzymes as a Tool
for Mechanistic Studies . Chem. Rev. 
2008 , 108 , 2379 –2438 . 10.1021/cr0680742 .18620368 
Jeuken L. J. C.  Biophotoelectrochemistry:
From Bioelectrochemistry to Biophotovoltaics ; Jeuken L. J. C.  , Ed.; Springer
International Publishing , 2016 ; pp 43 –73 .
Squires T. M. ; Messinger R. J. ; Manalis S. R. 
Making It Stick: Convection, Reaction
and Diffusion in Surface-Based Biosensors . Nat.
Biotechnol. 
2008 , 26 , 417 –426 . 10.1038/nbt1388 .18392027 
Htwe E. E. ; Nakama Y. ; Imanaka H. ; Ishida N. ; Imamura K. 
Influence
of an External Electric Field on Removal of Protein Fouling on a Stainless
Steel Surface by proteolytic Enzymes . Colloids
Surf., B 
2017 , 159 , 118 –124 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2017.07.074 .
Xu L.-C. ; Bauer J. W. ; Siedlecki C. A. 
Proteins,
Platelets, and Blood Coagulation
at Biomaterial Interfaces . Colloids Surf., B 
2014 , 124 , 49 –68 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2014.09.040 .
Goldman A. J. ; Cox R. G. ; Brenner H. 
Slow Viscous
Motion of a Sphere Parallel
to a Plane Wall - I. Motion through a Quiescent Fluid . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
1967 , 22 , 637 –651 . 10.1016/0009-2509(67)80047-2 .
Brenner H. 
The Slow Motion
of a Sphere Through a Viscous Fluid Towards a Plane Surface . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
1961 , 16 , 242 –251 . 10.1016/0009-2509(61)80035-3 .
Holmqvist P. ; Dhont J. K. G. ; Lang P. R. 
Anisotropy
of Brownian Motion Caused
Only by Hydrodynamic Interaction with a Wall . Phys. Rev. E 
2006 , 74 , 02140210.1103/PhysRevE.74.021402 .
Huang P. ; Breuer K. S. 
Direct Measurement
of Anisotropic Near-Wall Hindered
Diffusion Using Total Internal Reflection Velocimetry . Phys. Rev. E 
2007 , 76 , 04630710.1103/PhysRevE.76.046307 .
Banerjee A. ; Kihm K. D. 
Experimental Verification
of Near-Wall Hindered Diffusion
for the Brownian Motion of Nanoparticles Using Evanescent Wave Microscopy . Phys. Rev. E 
2005 , 72 , 04210110.1103/PhysRevE.72.042101 .
Kihm K. D. ; Banerjee A. ; Choi C. K. ; Takagi T. 
Near-Wall Hindered
Brownian Diffusion of Nanoparticles Examined by Three-Dimensional
Ratiometric Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy (3-D
R-TIRFM) . Exp. Fluids 
2004 , 37 , 811 –824 . 10.1007/s00348-004-0865-4 .
Lin B. ; Yu J. ; Rice S. A. 
Direct Measurements of Constrained
Brownian Motion
of an Isolated Sphere Between two Walls . Phys.
Rev. E 
2000 , 62 , 3909 10.1103/PhysRevE.62.3909 .
Russel W. B. ; Hinch E. J. ; Leal L. G. ; Tieffenbruck G. 
Rods Falling
near a Vertical Wall . J. Fluid Mech. 
1977 , 83 , 273 –287 . 10.1017/S0022112077001190 .
Lisicki M. ; Cichocki B. ; Wajnryb E. 
Near-Wall
Diffusion Tensor of an
Axisymmetric Colloidal Particle . J. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 145 , 03490410.1063/1.4958727 .27448903 
De
Corato M. ; Greco F. ; D’Avino G. ; Maffettone P. L. 
Hydrodynamics and Brownian Motions of a Spheroid near
a Rigid Wall . J. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 142 , 194901 10.1063/1.4920981 .26001478 
Cheong F.
C. ; Grier D. G. 
Rotational
and Translational Diffusion of Copper Oxide
Nanorods Measured with Holographic Video Microscopy . Opt. Express 
2010 , 18 , 6555 –6562 . 10.1364/OE.18.006555 .20389679 
Mukhija D. ; Solomon M. J. 
Translational and
Rotational Dynamics of Colloidal
Rods by Direct Visualization with Confocal Microscopy . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2007 , 314 , 98 –106 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2007.05.055 .17560590 
Ermak D. L. ; Mccammon J. A. 
Brownian Dynamics with Hydrodynamic
Interactions . J. Chem. Phys. 
1978 , 69 , 1352 –1360 . 10.1063/1.436761 .
Fernandes M. X. ; García de la Torre J. 
Brownian Dynamics Simulation of Rigid
Particles of Arbitrary Shape in External Fields . Biophys. J. 
2002 , 83 , 3039 –3048 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(02)75309-5 .12496076 
Allison S. A. 
A Brownian
Dynamics Algorithm for Arbitrary Rigid Bodies. Application to Polarized
Dynamic Light Scattering . Macromolecules 
1991 , 24 , 530 –536 . 10.1021/ma00002a029 .
Taylor W. R. ; Thornton J. M. ; Turnell W. G. 
An Ellipsoidal Approximation
of Protein
Shape . J. Mol. Graphics 
1983 , 1 , 30 –38 . 10.1016/0263-7855(83)80001-0 .
Harding S. E. ; Rowe A. J. 
Modelling Biological Macromolecules
in Solution: 1.
The Ellipsoid of Revolution . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
1982 , 4 , 160 –164 . 10.1016/0141-8130(82)90046-0 .
Harding S. E. ; Horton J. C. ; Jones S. ; Thornton J. M. ; Winzor D. J. 
COVOL:
An Interactive Program for Evaluating Second Virial Coefficients from
the Triaxial Shape or Dimensions of Rigid Macromolecules . Biophys. J. 
1999 , 76 , 2432 –2438 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(99)77398-4 .10233060 
Dubin S. B. ; Clark N. A. ; Benedek G. B. 
Measurement
of the Rotational Diffusion
Coefficient of Lysozyme by Depolarized Light Scattering: Configuration
of Lysozyme in Solution . J. Chem . Phys. 
1971 , 54 , 5158 –5164 . 10.1063/1.1674810 .
Mckenzie H. A. ; White F. H.  Lysozyme and α-Lactalbumin:
Structure, Function, and Interrelationships ; Anfinsen C. , Richards F. M. , Edsall J. T. , Eisenberg D. S.  , Eds.; Advances in
Protein Chemistry ; Academic Press , 1991 ; Vol. 41 ; pp 173 –315 .
Roosen-Runge F. ; Hennig M. ; Zhang F. ; Jacobs R. M. J. ; Sztucki M. ; Schober H. ; Seydel T. ; Schreiber F. 
Protein Self-Diffusion
in Crowded Solutions . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 
2011 , 108 , 11815 –11820 . 10.1073/pnas.1107287108 .21730176 
Carrasco B. ; de la Torre J. G. ; Davis K. G. ; Jones S. ; Athwal D. ; Walters C. ; Burton D. R. ; Harding S. E. 
Crystallohydrodynamics
for Solving the Hydration Problem for Multi-Domain Proteins: Open
Physiological Conformations for Human IgG . Biophys.
Chem. 
2001 , 93 , 181 –196 . 10.1016/S0301-4622(01)00220-4 .11804725 
Appavou M.-S. ; Gibrat G. ; Bellissent-Funel M.-C. 
Influence
of Pressure on Structure
and Dynamics of Bovine Pancreatic Trypsin Inhibitor (BPTI): Small
Angle and Quasi-Elastic Neutron Scattering Studies . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
2006 , 1764 , 414 –423 . 10.1016/j.bbapap.2006.01.010 .16513440 
Fleming P. J. ; Fleming K. G. 
HullRad: Fast Calculations
of Folded and Disordered
Protein and Nucleic Acid Hydrodynamic Properties . Biophys. J. 
2018 , 114 , 856 –869 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2018.01.002 .29490246 
Prager S. 
Interaction
of Rotational and Translational Diffusion . J.
Chem. Phys. 
1955 , 23 , 2404 –2407 . 10.1063/1.1741890 .
Han Y. ; Alsayed A. M. ; Nobili M. ; Zhang J. ; Lubensky T. C. ; Yodh A. G. 
Brownian Motion
of an Ellipsoid . Science 
2006 , 314 , 626 –630 . 10.1126/science.1130146 .17068256 
Einstein A. 
Über
die von der Molekularkinetischen Theorie der Wärme Geforderte
Bewegung von in Ruhenden Flüssigkeiten Suspendierten Teilchen . Ann. Phys. 
1905 , 322 , 549 –560 . 10.1002/andp.19053220806 .
von
Smoluchowski M. 
Zur Kinetischen Theorie der Brownschen Molekularbewegung
und der Suspensionen . Ann. Phys. 
1906 , 326 , 756 –780 . 10.1002/andp.19063261405 .
Matse M. ; Chubynsky M. V. ; Bechhoefer J. 
Test of the
Diffusing-Diffusivity
Mechanism Using Near-Wall Colloidal Dynamics . Phys. Rev. E 
2017 , 96 , 04260410.1103/PhysRevE.96.042604 .29347613 
Chubynsky M. V. ; Slater G. W. 
Diffusing Diffusivity:
A Model for Anomalous, yet Brownian,
Diffusion . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2014 , 113 , 09830210.1103/PhysRevLett.113.098302 .25216011 
Purcell E. M. 
Life at
Low Reynolds Number . Am. J. Phys. 
1977 , 45 , 3 –11 . 10.1119/1.10903 .
Happel J. ; Brenner H.  Low Reynolds Number Hydrodynamics:
With Special Applications to Particulate Media ; Martinus Nijhoff Publishers : The
Hague , 1983 ; pp 177 –178 .
Kubo R. 
The Fluctuation-Dissipation
Theorem . Rep. Prog. Phys. 
1966 , 29 , 255 –284 . 10.1088/0034-4885/29/1/306 .
Mitchell W. H. ; Spagnolie S. E. 
Sedimentation of Spheroidal Bodies
Near Walls in Viscous
Fluids: Glancing, Reversing, Tumbling and Sliding . J. Fluid Mech. 
2015 , 772 , 600 –629 . 10.1017/jfm.2015.222 .
Katz D. F. ; Blake J. R. ; Paveri-Fontana S. L. 
On the
Movement of Slender Bodies
Near Plane Boundaries at Low Reynolds Number . J. Fluid Mech. 
1975 , 72 , 529 –540 . 10.1017/S0022112075003126 .
Kim S. ; Karrila S. J.  Microhydrodynamics.
Principles and Selected Applications ; Dover
Publications, Inc. : Mineola, New York , 2005 ; pp 63 –65 .
Beard D. A. ; Schlick T. 
Unbiased Rotational
Moves for Rigid-Body Dynamics . Biophys. J. 
2003 , 85 , 2973 –2976 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(03)74717-1 .14581199 
Goldstein H. ; Poole C. ; Safko J.  Classical
Mechanics , Third  Ed.; Addison-Wesley : San Francisco, CA , 2002 ; pp 161 –174 .
Lau A. W. C. ; Lubensky T. C. 
State-Dependent
Diffusion: Thermodynamic Consistency
and its Path Integral Formulation . Phys. Rev.
E 
2007 , 76 , 01112310.1103/PhysRevE.76.011123 .
Doi M. ; Edwards S. F.  The Theory
of Polymer
Dynamics ; Clarendon Press : Oxford , 1986 ; pp 290 –295 .
Delong S. ; Usabiaga F. B. ; Delgado-Buscalioni R. ; Griffith B. E. ; Donev A. 
Brownian Dynamics
without Green’s Functions . J. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 140 , 134110 10.1063/1.4869866 .24712783 
Berman H. ; Westbrook J. ; Feng Z. ; Gilliland G. ; Bhat T. ; Weissig H. ; Shindyalov I. N. ; Bourne P. 
The Protein Data Bank . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2000 , 28 , 235 –242 . 10.1093/nar/28.1.235 .10592235 
Dai L. ; et al. Structures of the Zika
Virus Envelope Protein and Its Complex with
a Flavivirus Broadly Protective Antibody . Cell
Host Microbe 
2016 , 19 , 696 –704 . 10.1016/j.chom.2016.04.013 .27158114 
Diamond R. 
Real-Space
Refinement of the Structure of Hen Egg-White Lysozyme . J. Mol. Biol. 
1974 , 82 , 371 –391 . 10.1016/0022-2836(74)90598-1 .4856347 
Pokkuluri P. R. ; Bouthillier F. ; Li Y. ; Kuderova A. ; Lee J. ; Cygler M. 
Preparation, Characterization
and Crystallization of
an Antibody Fab Fragment that Recognizes RNA. Crystal Structures of
Native Fab and Three Fab-Mononucleotide Complexes . J. Mol. Biol. 
1994 , 243 , 283 –297 . 10.1006/jmbi.1994.1654 .7523684 
Saphire E. ; Parren P. W. ; Pantophlet R. ; Zwick M. B. ; Morris G. M. ; Rudd P. M. ; Dwek R. A. ; Stanfield R. L. ; Burton D. R. ; Wilson I. A. 
Crystal Structure
of a Neutralizing
Human IGG against HIV-1: A Template for Vaccine Design . Science 
2001 , 293 , 1155 –1159 . 10.1126/science.1061692 .11498595 
Makabe K. ; Yan S. ; Tereshko V. ; Gawlak G. ; Koide S. 
Beta-Strand Flipping
and Slipping Triggered by Turn Replacement Reveal the Opportunistic
Nature of Beta-Strand Pairing . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 14661 –14669 . 10.1021/ja074252c .17985889 
Wang X. ; Watson C. ; Sharp J. S. ; Handel T. M. ; Prestegard J. H. 
Oligomeric
Structure of the Chemokine CCL5/RANTES from NMR, MS, and SAXS Data . Structure 
2011 , 19 , 1138 –1148 . 10.1016/j.str.2011.06.001 .21827949 
Nawrotek A. ; Guimarães B. G. ; Velours C. ; Subtil A. ; Knossow M. ; Gigant B. 
Biochemical
and Structural Insights into Microtubule
Perturbation by CopN from Chlamydia Pneumoniae . J. Biol. Chem. 
2014 , 289 , 25199 –25210 . 10.1074/jbc.M114.568436 .25056950 
Galaleldeen A. ; Taylor A. B. ; Chen D. ; Schuermann J. P. ; Holloway S. P. ; Hou S. ; Gong S. ; Zhong G. ; Hart P. J. 
Structure of the Chlamydia Trachomatis
Immunodominant
Antigen Pgp3 . J. Biol. Chem. 
2013 , 288 , 22068 –22079 . 10.1074/jbc.M113.475012 .23703617 
Pettersen E. F. ; Goddard T. D. ; Huang C. C. ; Couch G. S. ; Greenblatt D. M. ; Meng E. C. ; Ferrin T. E. 
UCSF Chimera – a Visualization
System for Exploratory Research and Analysis . J. Comput. Chem. 
2004 , 25 , 1605 –1612 . 10.1002/jcc.20084 .15264254 
Arvo J.  Graphics Gems III (IBM
Version) ; Kirk D.  , Ed.; Morgan Kaufmann : San Francisco , 1992 ; pp 117 –120 .
Skolnick J. 
Perspective:
On the Importance of Hydrodynamic Interactions in the Subcellular
Dynamics of macromolecules . J. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 145 , 100901 10.1063/1.4962258 .27634243 
Fernandes M. X. ; Bernadó P. ; Pons M. ; García de la Torre J. 
An Analytical
Solution to the Problem of the Orientation of Rigid Particles by Planar
Obstacles. Application to Membrane Systems and to the Calculation
of Dipolar Couplings in Protein NMR Spectroscopy . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2001 , 123 , 12037 –12047 . 10.1021/ja011361x .11724612 
Zhou H. X. 
Kinetics
of Diffusion-Influenced Reactions Studied by Brownian Dynamics . J. Phys. Chem. 
1990 , 94 , 8794 –8800 . 10.1021/j100388a010 .
Lançon P. ; Batrouni G. ; Lobry L. ; Ostrowsky N. 
Drift Without
Flux: Brownian Walker with a Space-Dependent Diffusion Coefficient . Europhys. Lett. 
2001 , 54 , 28 –34 . 10.1209/epl/i2001-00103-6 .
Starr T. E. ; Thompson N. L. 
Local Diffusion
and Concentration of IgG near Planar
Membranes: Measurement by Total Internal Reflection with Fluorescence
Correlation Spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2002 , 106 , 2365 –2371 . 10.1021/jp012689f .
Wang B. ; Anthony S. M. ; Bae S. C. ; Granick S. 
Anomalous yet Brownian . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2009 , 106 , 15160 –15164 . 10.1073/pnas.0903554106 .19666495 
Wang B. ; Kuo J. ; Bae S. C. ; Granick S. 
When Brownian Diffusion is not Gaussian . Nat. Mater. 
2012 , 11 , 481 –485 . 10.1038/nmat3308 .22614505 
Xue C. ; Zheng X. ; Chen K. ; Tian Y. ; Hu G. 
Probing Non-Gaussianity
in Confined Diffusion of Nanoparticles . J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 7 , 514 –519 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02624 .26784864

