
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145965110.1021/acsomega.8b03511ArticleImproved Smart Microgel Carriers for Catalytic Silver
Nanoparticles Brändel Timo Sabadasch Viktor Hannappel Yvonne Hellweg Thomas *Department of Physical and
Biophysical Chemistry, Bielefeld University, Universitätsstrasse 25, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany* E-mail: thomas.hellweg@uni-bielefeld.de.04 03 2019 31 03 2019 4 3 4636 4649 14 12 2018 12 02 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Acrylamide-based,
thermoresponsive core–shell microgels
with a linear phase transition region are used as improved carriers
for catalytically active silver nanoparticles in the present study.
In this context, we investigated the swelling behavior of the carriers
and the stability of the silver nanoparticles inside the polymer network
with photon correlation spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy,
and by following the surface plasmon resonance of the nanoparticles.
Depending on the cross-linker content of the microgel core, we observed
very good stability of the nanoparticles inside the microgel network,
with nearly no bleeding or aggregation of the nanoparticles over several
weeks for core cross-linker contents of 5 and 10 mol %. The architecture
of the hybrid particles in the swollen state was investigated with
cryogenic transmission electron microscopy. The particles exhibit
a core–shell structure, with the silver nanoparticles located
mainly at the interface between the core and shell. This architecture
was not used before and seems to grant advanced stability to the nanoparticles
inside the network in combination with good switchability of the catalytic
activity. This was measured by following the reduction of 4-nitrophenole,
which is a well-studied model reaction. The obtained Arrhenius plots
show that similar to previous works, the swelling of the core and
shell can influence the catalytic activity of the silver nanoparticles.
As mentioned before, the cross-linker content of the core seems to
be a very important parameter for the switchability of the catalytic
activity. A higher cross-linker content of the core seems to be connected
to a stronger influence of the carrier swelling degree on the catalytic
activity of the silver nanoparticles.

document-id-old-9ao8b03511document-id-new-14ao-2018-03511cccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
During
the last decade, hybrid materials combining the properties
of metal nanoparticles and soft matter templates or carriers have
become one of the most studied topics in different fields of science.1 The applications of these hybrid systems range
from magnetic resonance imaging2−4 to plasmonics,5−9 emulsifiers,10,11 drug targeting,12−15 medical applications,16 and catalysis.17−24 A very interesting class of catalytically active hybrid systems
is silver nanoparticles embedded in stimuli-responsive microgels because
silver nanoparticles are not only outstanding catalysts25−27 but also considered to be antimicrobial.28 Moreover, the polymer carrier prevents the silver nanoparticles
from aggregating, and the use of a stimuli-responsive support may
grant the possibility to tune the catalytic activity of the nanoparticles
by triggering the respective stimulus in the microgel.29

In this study, thermoresponsive microgels
are used as carriers
for the silver nanoparticles. At a certain temperature, the so-called
volume phase transition temperature (VPTT), the particles undergo
a remarkable change in size due to the release of solvent.30,31 The most popular examples for thermoresponsive microgels are based
on N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM),31−33 but microgels
prepared from N-isopropylmethacrylamide (NIPMAM)
have generated considerable attention as well.34,35 In fact, another very interesting class of microgels is based on
the monomer N-n-propylacrylamide
(NNPAM), which leads to particles with a very steep phase transition
at a rather low VPTT of 22 °C.36 The
chemical composition of the microgel is not the only point that has
to be considered. The particle architecture also plays an important
role in the properties of microgels.37 Zeiser
et al.38 and Berndt et al.39 showed that core–shell microgels, with different
VPTTs in the core and in the shell, may exhibit a linear phase transition
region between the respective VPTTs of the homopolymer microgels,
and additionally the concentration of the cross-linker N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide (BIS) has an important
influence on the particle morphology and the microgel properties.40 Also, Jones et al.37 showed that core–shell microgels based on PNIPAM-co-AAc cores and PNIPAM shells show a different swelling
behavior than simple copolymer microgels. The present study focuses
on the mentioned core–shell approach as carriers for silver
nanoparticles using different acrylamides compared to previous hybrid
materials. The catalytic activity is followed exploiting the reduction
of p-nitrophenole as a model reaction. We use core–shell
microgels with different VPTTs of core and shell as templates to achieve
two objectives. First, the stability of the nanoparticles inside the
carrier particles should be improved and bleeding of the silver nanoparticles
should be prevented even over several weeks. This point is very important
because the long-term stability of the nanoparticles inside the microgel
network ensures the reusability of the hybrid systems as a catalyst
over several cycles. The second aim is to use the different temperature
responses of the core and shell to enhance the switchability of the
catalytic activity. By adjusting the temperature above or below the
VPTT of the shell, we expect an additional contribution to the catalytic
activity of the silver nanoparticles, which could not be realized
in templates with only one temperature response.29 A variation of the VPTT of the core also offers the possibility
to adjust the swelling behavior of the microgel template and will
therefore allow to tailor the response of the carriers in a very specific
fashion.

To achieve the mentioned objectives, it is important
that the nanoparticles
are located mainly in the core part of the microgel. In our present
study, we try to achieve a preferred localization of the nanoparticles
by following
the concept of Zhang et al.,41 where carboxylic
groups inside the microgel particles serve as a complex forming groups
for added silver ions, which are subsequently reduced to silver nanoparticles.
After the reduction, these groups may also act as anchors for the
nanoparticles. The introduction of carboxylic groups is done by copolymerization
of the core base polymer with acrylic acid (AAc). Since high amounts
of acrylic acid not only influence the volume phase transition of
microgels but also affect the structure of the microgels toward a
lower network density, especially on the edges of the microgel particles,42,43 we use 5 mol % acrylic acid as a comonomer in the core synthesis.
Therefore, the hybrid systems will have an architecture that is schematically
presented in Figure 1 after the synthesis of the silver nanoparticles.

Figure 1 Schematic representation
of the targeted architecture of the core–shell
microgel/silver nanoparticle hybrids. The silver nanoparticles are
located primarily inside the microgel core (blue), whereas the shell
(orange) should improve the nanoparticle stability and switchability
of the hybrid systems.

To develop a full set of different catalysts, we investigate
the
influence of two different parameters on the capability of core–shell
microgels to serve as silver nanoparticle carriers. First, we varied
the monomer that was used as the main core monomer between NIPAM,
NIPMAM, and NNPAM, whereas the shell always consisted of the low-VPTT
polymer PNNPAM; second, we varied the cross-linker content of the
microgel core from 5 to 15 mol %, whereas the cross-linker content
of the shell was kept at 5 mol %. The core–shell microgel templates
are characterized by photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS), scanning
electron microscopy, and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The hybrid
systems with silver nanoparticles are characterized by different transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) techniques, including cryogenic TEM (cryo-TEM),
and by following the plasmon resonance of the silver nanoparticles
to investigate the stability and size of the nanoparticles. Finally,
the catalytic activity will be investigated at different temperatures
and related to the swelling of the microgel template.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Microgel Characterization
We successfully
synthesized the microgel particles listed in Table 1 with their respective sample compositions.

Table 1 Sample Composition and Sample Names
for all Core–Shell Microgels, which Were Investigated in the
Present Study
sample name	core composition	shell composition	
PNI5@PNN	NIPAM-co-AAc 5 mol % BIS	NNPAM 5 mol % BIS	
PNI10@PNN	NIPAM-co-AAc 10 mol % BIS	NNPAM 5 mol % BIS	
PNI15@PNN	NIPAM-co-AAc 15 mol % BIS	NNPAM 5 mol % BIS	
PMAM5@PNN	NIPMAM-co-AAc 5 mol % BIS	NNPAM 5 mol % BIS	
PMAM10@PNN	NIPMAM-co-AAc 10 mol % BIS	NNPAM 5 mol % BIS	
PMAM15@PNN	NIPMAM-co-AAc 15 mol % BIS	NNPAM 5 mol % BIS	
PNN5@PNN	NNPAM-co-AAc 5 mol % BIS	NNPAM 5 mol % BIS	
PNN10@PNN	NNPAM-co-AAc 10 mol % BIS	NNPAM 5 mol % BIS	
PNN15@PNN	NNPAM-co-AAc 15 mol % BIS	NNPAM 5 mol % BIS	
After the synthesis of all core–shell
microgels, the particles
were investigated with atomic force microscopy (AFM). Figure 2 shows three representative
images of the microgels in the dry state.

Figure 2 Representative AFM images
of three different core–shell
microgels PNI5@PNN (a), PMAM5@PNN (b), and PNN5@PNN (c) spin-coated
on a silicon wafer. The measurements were performed in semicontact
mode in the dry state.

In Figure 2, all
images show particles with a circular cross section. The radius of
the particles was analyzed with free software ImageJ and depends strongly
on the core material. While the particles PNI5@PNN have an average
radius of 275 nm, the particles PMAM5@PNN are much bigger with an
average radius of 440 nm. The smallest particles are the PNN5@PNN
core–shell microgels with an average radius of 160 nm. These
size differences are caused by the use of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)
during the core synthesis. Wedel et al.44 and von Nessen et al.34 discussed the
different influences of SDS on the size of acrylamide-based microgels
earlier. In principle, SDS usage during the synthesis has a strong
influence on the size of PNNPAM microgels; the influence on PNIPAM
microgels is rather moderate and for PNIPMAM microgels the influence
of the surfactant is smaller.

Additionally, we investigated
the swelling behavior of all core–shell
microgels with photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS). The obtained
swelling curves are shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3 PCS swelling curves of all core–shell microgel
templates
with core cross-linker contents of 5 mol % (black squares), 10 mol
% (red circles), and 15 mol % (blue triangles). The microgel composition
varies from PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM (a) over PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM (b) to PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM
(c).

The swelling curves in Figure 3a,b are typical examples
of the swelling behavior of
core–shell microgels composed of core microgels with a high
volume phase transition temperature (VPTT) and shell material, which
exhibits a low VPTT. According to the work by Zeiser et al.,38 two main phase transition regions can be identified.
At ca. 22 °C, which corresponds to the VPTT of PNNPAM, a steep
decrease in the hydrodynamic radius is observable. This corresponds
to the deswelling process of the shell. After that, a large linear
phase transition region is observable. In our case, the broad linear
region is probably caused by an interpenetration of the shell inside
the core–corona structure of the acrylamide–acrylic
acid copolymer microgel cores.37,43 This assumption is
strongly supported by the fact that the shell size directly depends
on the cross-linker content of the core for all PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels. The higher the cross-linker content of the
core, the bigger the PNNPAM shell, which is due to a limited penetration
depth of the PNNPAM inside the core microgel. Interestingly, the fully
collapsed state of the microgel is only reached for the PNI15@PNN
core–shell microgel. We suppose that the reason for this is
that the charge density inside the microgel particles is the lowest
because of the high cross-linker content. Another important point
is that the cross-linker content of the core influences the slope
of the linear phase transition region in a way that the slope decreases
with increasing cross-linker content. This effect was already described
by Zeiser et al.38and can be attributed
to a “corsett” effect. This term was introduced by Berndt
et al.39

However, for the PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels,
the cross-linker dependency of the shell size is not observable. At
this point, it is to be mentioned that the scattering intensity of
the PNIPMAM-based core–shell microgels was very low at temperatures
between 10 and 22 °C because the measured angle of 60° is
very close to the form factor minimum of the particles with a radius
of 450–500 nm. Therefore, the determination of the hydrodynamic
radius is not very accurate at these temperatures. However, the cross-linker
content dependency of the slope of the linear phase transition region
is also observable for the PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM
microgels. In the case of the PNIPMAM-based core–shell microgels,
the fully collapsed state is not reached in the investigated temperature
range, which is due to the high VPTT of the core microgels.

Interestingly, the swelling curves of all PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels show a clearly different behavior than the
other core–shell microgels. In this case, the size of the shell
seems to be less pronounced compared to the PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels and also no dependence of the core cross-linker
content is observable for the volume phase transition. For all PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels, the swelling behavior is clearly
dominated by the deswelling process of the shell at approximately
22 °C. The influence of the core transition is only observable
in a broadening of the volume phase transition in general. But all
in all, no significant change in the swelling behavior is observable
between all different PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM core–shell
microgels with changing BIS contents. Finally, it should be mentioned
that due to the lower VPTT of PNNPAM, the fully collapsed state is
reached for all core cross-linker contents in this case.

To
summarize the previous part, a strong dependency of the swelling
curves on the core material of the microgels was observed. While PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM and PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM
core–shell microgels show a linear phase transition region,
PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels do not exhibit a comparable
swelling behavior. We suppose that the appearance of the mentioned
linear region is not only determined by a difference in the VPTT,
but also strongly influenced by the particle architecture, which seems
to be different if the core material is varied between the acrylamides.
This can be supported by the findings of Jones et al.,37 who did not observe a linear phase transition
for core–shell microgels with a PNIPAM-co-AAc
core and a PNIPAM shell. They found a two-step phase transition for
those microgels. However, the differences in the swelling behavior
are not necessarily transferable and/or problematic for the use of
the core–shell microgels as smart carriers for silver nanoparticles.
This subject is addressed in the following section.

2.2 Characterization of Microgel/Nanoparticle
Hybrids
2.2.1 PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM Microgels
After the synthesis of the microgel/nanoparticle hybrids, we performed
cryogenic transmission
electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) measurements on the system PNI10@PNN
to check if the targeted particle architecture could be realized.
To investigate the swollen state of the core and shell, the temperature
was adjusted to 20 °C. The cryo-TEM image is displayed in Figure 4.

Figure 4 Cryo-transmission electron
microscopy image of PNI10@PNN decorated
with silver nanoparticles. The preparation of the sample was performed
at 20 °C to display the swollen state of the core–shell
microgel/silver nanoparticle hybrids. The dashed circles indicate
the microgel core (black) and the microgel shell (white).

The cryo-TEM image in Figure 4 shows that the particles in the swollen
state retain
their circular shapes, unaffected by the decoration with silver nanoparticles.
The nanoparticle formation was successful, and the nanoparticles seem
to be located on the interface between the microgel core, which is
clearly visible with a high contrast, and the microgel shell, which
is represented by the light gray corona around the microgel cores.
The location of the nanoparticles at the interface between the core
and shell is actually expected if the structural properties of the
microgel support are taken into account. It was shown that PNIPAM-co-AAc microgels, which were synthesized via the classical
procedure introduced by Pelton, have the carboxylic functional groups
located mainly in the outer region of the microgel particle.43,45 Consequently, if an interpenetration between the PNNPAM shell and
the PNIPAM-co-AAc core would occur, the carboxylic
groups would be located at the interface between the core and shell.
Since these carboxylic groups are intended to favor the formation
of silver nanoparticles inside the microgel network, the nanoparticles
are also formed at the interface between the core and shell. The high
density caused by the interpenetration in combination with the electrostatic
interaction with the carboxylic groups fixes the nanoparticles in
the respective regions during and after their formation. Obviously,
the silver nanoparticle/core–shell microgel hybrids exhibit
the intended structure, which is presented as a concept in Figure 1. This makes them
interesting candidates for the measurement of catalytic activity of
the nanoparticles, which is presented in Section 2.3.

To ensure the success of the silver
nanoparticle synthesis for
the other PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM-based hybrid materials,
we performed TEM measurements in the dry state for all samples. The
resulting TEM images are shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5 Transmission electron microscopy images of PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM core–shell microgel/silver nanoparticle
hybrid
systems in the dry state. The cross-linker content of the PNIPAM-co-AAc core varies from 5 mol % (a) over 10 mol % (b) to
15 mol % (c) BIS with respect to the thermoresponsive material.

The TEM images in Figure 5 show that the nanoparticle
synthesis was successful for all
PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels. It has to be mentioned
that the PNNPAM shell is not visible in the TEM measurements because
of the low contrast of the very thin polymer shell in the fully collapsed
and dried state. Furthermore, the cross-linker content of the core
seems to have an influence on the stability of the silver nanoparticles
inside the core–shell microgels. In the case of PNI5@PNN (a),
a varying nanoparticle load of the three microgels is observable,
but no nanoparticles on the outside of the microgel particles are
visible. When the core cross-linker content increases to PNI10@PNN
(b), the nanoparticle load is nearly constant, but in this case, some
of the nanoparticles seem to bleed from the network during the drying
process of the microgel on the TEM grid. In contrast to the dry TEM
images, there are no nanoparticles outside of the microgels in Figure 4, but some nanoparticles
seem to be located inside the shell and not at the core–shell
interface. We suppose that these nanoparticles, which are not located
in the interfacial region of the core–shell microgels, get
detached during the drying process. The particles with the highest
cross-linker content of the core PNI15@PNN (c) seem to exhibit a drastically
increased nanoparticle load, but here also a very strong bleeding
of the nanoparticles during the drying process can be observed. Additionally,
the aggregation tendency of the silver nanoparticles is significantly
higher in the last TEM image (c) than in the previous ones. Hence,
it seems straightforward to conclude that the nanoparticle stability
inside the microgel network decreases with increasing cross-linker
content of the core. The number of nanoparticles per microgel and
the mean size of the silver nanoparticles were analyzed
for all samples. The information is given in the Supporting Information (SI).

Since bleeding of the silver
nanoparticles occurred during the
drying process, it is necessary to investigate the nanoparticle stability
inside the microgel network in solution. Because of that, we analyzed
the surface plasmon resonance of the microgel/silver hybrids over
one month in a time interval of 2 weeks. The results are presented
in Figure 6.

Figure 6 Surface plasmon
resonance measurements of silver nanoparticles
inside PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels. The measurements
were performed directly after the purification of the hybrid systems
(black curves) and after storage times of 14 days (red curves) and
28 days (blue curves). The samples were stored at room temperature.

All samples in Figure 6 show the typical plasmon resonance
band of silver nanoparticles
at around 400 nm, which corresponds to a mean size of 15 nm. For the
samples based on PNI5@PNN and PNI10@PNN, no change in the peak position
or overall intensity is observable within the error of the measurements,
but the hybrid system based on PNI15@PNN shows substantial aging effects
as expected based on the TEM measurements. The higher nanoparticle
load directly after the purification of the core–shell microgels
results in a higher absorbance, but the overall intensity of the plasmon
resonance decreases over time, which corresponds to the bleeding of
the material, and the peak is shifted toward higher wavelengths, which
corresponds to aggregation of small silver nanoparticles. From both
observations, the TEM measurements and the plasmon resonance measurements,
we conclude that for the PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM core–shell
microgels, only the samples with 5 and 10 mol % cross-linker contents
in the core are suitable templates for silver nanoparticles. If the
core cross-linker content is increased further to 15 mol %, the silver
nanoparticles are not stabilized inside the microgel network very
well and therefore tend to aggregate and bleed. Consequently, an advanced
switchability of the catalytic activity is only to expect for the
hybrid systems based on PNI5@PNN and PNI10@PNN.

2.2.2 PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM Microgels
Also
for the PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM-based hybrid
materials, TEM measurements were performed in the dry state. This
was done to show the success of the nanoparticle synthesis and to
study the influence of the cross-linker content of the core. The results
are shown in Figure 7.

Figure 7 Transmission electron microscopy images of PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM core–shell microgel/silver nanoparticle hybrid
systems in the dry state. The cross-linker content of the PNIPMAM-co-AAc core varies from 5 mol % (a) over 10 mol % (b) to
15 mol % (c) BIS with respect to the thermoresponsive material.

In Figure 7 mostly
the same trends that were found for the PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM-based hybrids are observable. The nanoparticle synthesis
was successful for all three core cross-linker contents, but the nanoparticle
stability and the grade of the nanoparticle load vary between the
different microgels. In general, the nanoparticle load of the PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels seems to be higher compared to the
PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM-based hybrid systems. This increase
could be caused by the increase in size of the template nanoparticles.
However, the growing number of nanoparticles seems to be associated
with an increase of the polydispersity. Additionally, a lot more aggregates
are observable in the TEM images in Figure 7 compared to Figure 5. These observations can be verified when
the mean radius of the silver nanoparticles in all TEM images is analyzed
(see SI). In this case, especially the
systems with 10 mol % BIS and 15 mol % BIS in the core show an increased
tendency to bleed out during the drying process. Here, many nanoparticles
are observable, which lay at the interface between adjacent core–shell
microgels. Again in the TEM measurements, only the core–shell
microgels with 5 and 10 mol % BIS in the core seem to be suitable
catalyst carriers as the nanoparticles are only distributed on the
edges of the core–shell microgels in the case of 15 mol % BIS
in the core. Hence, this trend is preserved for both types of monomers.
To investigate the silver nanoparticle stability inside the microgel
network in the swollen state, also surface plasmon resonance measurements
were performed for the PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM-based
hybrid systems and are shown in Figure 8.

Figure 8 Surface plasmon resonance measurements of silver nanoparticles
inside PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels. The measurements
were performed directly after the purification of the hybrid systems
(black curves) and after storage times of 14 days (red curves) and
28 days (blue curves). The samples were stored at room temperature.

Figure 8 shows that
the surface plasmon resonance of the silver nanoparticles incorporated
in the PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels differs significantly
from the surface plasmon resonance in the PNIPAM-co-AAc-based core–shell microgels (see Figure 6). Most prominently, an enormous decrease
in the absorbance is observable after a storage time of 28 days. This
is connected not only to an increased bleeding of the silver nanoparticles
out of the polymer network, but also to aggregation phenomena of the
microgels themselves since the scattering background of the microgels
is also reduced drastically. The precipitation of large microgel aggregates
can be observed by eye too, as the photograph in Figure 9 shows. Nevertheless, for shorter
storage times, the surface plasmon resonance of the silver nanoparticles
does not change significantly, especially for the samples based on
PMAM5@PNN and PMAM10@PNN. In the case of the hybrid system based on
the core–shell microgels with 15 mol % BIS in the core, a broadening
of the plasmon resonance is observable. This is connected to an increased
fraction of the nanoparticles in the water phase, which means the
nanoparticles are likely to detach from the microgel surface. This
observation is in line with the increased bleeding tendency of the
silver nanoparticles in the TEM measurements. Therefore, it seems
that comparable to the PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM-based
core–shell microgels, a cross-linker content of 15 mol % in
the core is not suitable to design a carrier for silver nanoparticles.

Figure 9 Photograph
of PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels
decorated with silver nanoparticles after a storage time of 28 days.
The cross-linker content of the PNIPMAM-co-AAc core
varies between 5 mol % (left), 10 mol % (middle), and 15 mol % (right).
The photograph was taken by Brändel.

In the photograph in Figure 9, some precipitated material is observable on the bottom
of
the samples. This precipitation is not only silver nanoparticles,
which bled from the core–shell microgel hybrids, but seems
to be composed of microgel hybrid systems too. This is supported by
the fact that the precipitate can be redispersed very easily just
by gently shaking the sample. Obviously, the decoration of the microgels
with the silver nanoparticles seems to increase the aggregation tendency
of the PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels. This can
also be seen in the TEM measurements of the dried particles in Figure 7, where the nanoparticles
form interconnections between the core–shell microgels. This
different behavior compared to the PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM-based
hybrid materials could be caused by a change in the silver nanoparticle
distribution inside of the polymer network.

2.2.3 PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM Microgels
In the temperature-dependent
PCS measurements in Figure 3, a different behavior of the
PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels was observed compared
to the other core–shell microgels. To investigate if the PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels also show a different capability
for nanoparticle stabilization, we performed TEM measurements in the
dry state. The results can be seen in Figure 10.

Figure 10 Transmission electron microscopy images of
PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM core–shell microgel/silver
nanoparticle hybrid
systems in the dry state. The cross-linker content of the PNNPAM-co-AAc core varies from 5 mol % (a) over 10 mol % (b) to
15 mol % (c) BIS with respect to the thermoresponsive material.

In contrast to the PCS swelling
curves, a very similar behavior
of the PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgel/nanoparticle
hybrids is observable. The synthesis of silver nanoparticles was successful.
However, the nanoparticle load still varies between the microgel particles
for all cross-linker contents, and the bleeding tendency still increases
with increasing BIS content. Obviously, the cross-linker content of
the microgel core plays the most important role concerning the stability
of nanoparticles in the core–shell microgels as all microgels
show the same tendency to lose nanoparticles when the cross-linker
content is increased. This is a rather important fact because it means
that the monomer composition of the core–shell microgels can
easily be tailored toward many different conditions regarding the
VPTT, length of the linear phase transition region, and size of the
carrier particles without influencing the ability to stabilize the
nanoparticles drastically. This makes the core–shell microgel/silver
nanoparticle hybrids very flexible for use under many different application
conditions.

Finally, surface plasmon resonance measurements
were also performed
for the PNNPAM-co-AAc-based hybrid materials to investigate
the nanoparticle stability in the swollen state. The results are shown
in Figure 11.

Figure 11 Surface plasmon
resonance measurements of silver nanoparticles
inside PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM microgels. The measurements
were performed directly after the purification of the hybrid systems
(black curves) and after storage times of 14 days (red curves) and
28 days (blue curves). The samples were stored at room temperature.

The surface plasmon resonance
of the silver nanoparticles in Figure 11 seems to be rather
comparable to the measurements that were performed for the PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM (see Figure 6)-based hybrid systems. The resonance band is slightly
broadened compared to these measurements, but the general tendencies
are preserved. There seems to be no significant bleeding for all microgels
after 14 days, and only slight changes are observable for the measurements,
which were performed after 28 days. In contrast to the PNIPMAM-based
hybrid systems, no aggregation and flocculation of the particles can
be observed. Therefore, we suggest that the colloidal stability of
the hybrid systems based on PNNPAM-co-AAc is higher,
which seems to be connected to a lower microgel particle size. However,
in the case of the PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM-based hybrid
systems, it seems that particles with all three cross-linker contents
in the core microgel are appropriate to serve as nanoparticle carriers.
No aging of the nanoparticles is observed, and the bleeding of the
particles is nearly negligible. But in the TEM measurements, we found
the same trends that were observed for all other microgels, and therefore
we are going to concentrate on the analysis of the catalytic activity
on the nanoparticles attached to the microgels PNN5@PNN and PNN10@PNN.

2.3 Catalytic Activity of Microgel/Nanoparticle
Hybrids
In the previous section, it was shown that only core–shell
microgels with a maximum core cross-linker content of 10 mol % seem
to be appropriate to be used as smart catalyst carriers. Therefore,
we only investigated hybrid systems based on the samples PNI5@PNN,
PNI10@PNN, PMAM5@PNN, PMAM10@PNN, PNN5@PNN, and PNN10@PNN with respect
to their catalytic activity. As a model reaction, we used the reduction
of 4-nitrophenole to 4-aminophenole and followed the reaction by UV–vis
spectroscopy. The reaction scheme is presented in Figure 12.

Figure 12 Reduction of 4-nitrophenole
to 4-aminophenole is catalyzed by silver
nanoparticles and can be used as a model reaction to investigate their
catalytic activity.

This well-known reaction
is often exploited to study the influence
of smart carrier systems on catalytic nanoparticles.24,46 Furthermore, Roa et al.47 and Angioletti
et al.48 recently developed a model to
describe the influence of the volume phase transition of PNIPAM on
the catalytic activity of metal nanoparticles. In their work, they
considered different architectures, which allow one to compare the
results that were obtained in the present study with the theoretical
model. In principle, Roa et al. observed a decrease in the catalytic
activity of the nanoparticles in the region of the VPTT of the polymer
network, which can be explained by hindered diffusion of the reactants
through the network because of the decreasing mesh size. Upon further
increase of the temperature, the catalytic activity should increase
again. This effect is caused by a change in the Gibbs free energy
of solvation of the reactants inside the polymer network. From the
TEM and especially the cryo-TEM measurements, the hybrid systems based
on the samples PNI10@PNN, PMAM10@PNN, and PNN10@PNN seem to be the
most promising candidates regarding an advanced switchability of the
catalytic activity. Figure 13 shows the Arrhenius plots of these systems in comparison
with the temperature-dependent hydrodynamic radius of the carrier
systems. Systems with a passive carrier, for example, a spherical
polyelectrolyte brush, would exhibit a fully linear relation of the
reaction’s logarithmic apparent rate constant and 1/T.49 Deviations from the linear
behavior are related to changes in the environment of the nanoparticles
due to the response of the microgel network to the temperature.

Figure 13 Arrhenius
plot of the apparent rate constant of the reduction of p-nitrophenole (black squares). The catalytic activity is
given for the hybrid systems based on PNI10@PNN (top), PMAM10@PNN
(middle), and PNN10@PNN (bottom). For comparison, the swelling curves
of the respective core–shell microgels are given (blue squares).
The dashed lines serve as guide to the eye.

Figure 13 shows
that at least two types of core–shell microgels exhibit a deviation
from the standard Arrhenius behavior. The difference shows a distinct
intensity for each of the systems. For the hybrid systems based on
the sample PNI10@PNN, we observe two deviations from the expected
linear behavior. The first one is very small and is connected to the
VPTT of the PNNPAM shell at around 22 °C. The other deviation,
which exactly follows the theoretically predicted behavior by Roa
et al.,47 is connected to the VPTT of PNIPAM.
However, the observed deviation from the Arrhenius-like behavior is
still quite small compared to the core–shell microgels based
on polystyrene spheres with a PNIPAM shell, which were used by Lu
et al.50 Lu et al.50 observed changes of about 1 or 2 orders of magnitude. The changes
in the catalytic activity of our silver nanoparticle hybrids are less
pronounced and are in the order of a factor of 5. So the PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM-based hybrids exhibit a slightly smaller tunability
of the catalytic activity compared to the PS@PNIPAM core–shell
microgels, but we still observe a deviation from the linear dependency,
which is not realized by comparable spherical polyelectrolyte brushes.51,52 The general catalytic efficiency of the silver nanoparticles inside
the microgel carriers is comparable to other microgel/silver nanoparticle
hybrid systems synthesized, for example, by Farooqi et al.,27 but lower compared to the SPBs published by
Lu et al.51 Contrary to the previous systems,
the hybrids based on the sample PMAM@PNN obviously do not provide
a significant deviation from the Arrhenius-like behavior. We suggest
that this is connected to a difference in the mesh size of the copolymer
core due to different copolymerization ratios between NIPAM and acrylic
acid and NIPMAM and acrylic acid. The NIPMAM-based core–shell
microgels seem to exhibit a less dense network, which reduces the
capability to hinder the diffusion of the reactants toward the catalysts.
The most interesting deviations from the Arrhenius-like behavior are
observed for the hybrid system based on the sample PNN10@PNN. Just
as expected from the PCS measurements, we observe a completely different
course of catalytic activity compared to the other systems. After
the typical plateau where the catalytic activity stays very low, a
jump in the catalytic activity is observable right after the VPTT
of PNNPAM. It seems like the reaction could be switched on and off
nearly totally by crossing the VPTT of the system. We suggest that
this behavior is connected to the unusual steep phase transition of
PNNPAM microgels, which can almost be described as discontinuous.36 Possibly the change from the hydrophilic network
toward a hydrophobic network increases the concentration of the reactants
near the catalysts and therefore allows a strong increase in the catalytic
activity. Afterward, we observe a deviation from the Arrhenius-like
behavior, which could also be described by the theoretical model developed
by Roa et al.47 Hence, the change in the
mesh size of the core–shell particles also plays an important
role here.

To investigate the influence of the cross-linker
content of the
core, we also measured the catalytic activity of the hybrid systems
based on the samples PNI5@PNN, PMAM5@PNN, and PNN5@PNN. The respective
curves can be found in Figure 14.

Figure 14 Arrhenius plot of the apparent rate constant of the reduction
of p-nitrophenole (black squares). The catalytic
activities
are given for the hybrid systems based on PNI5@PNN (top), PMAM5@PNN
(middle), and PNN5@PNN (bottom). For comparison, the swelling curves
of the respective core–shell microgels are given (blue squares).
The dashed lines serve as guide to the eye.

At first, it is to be mentioned that the data for the hybrid
microgels
shown in Figure 14 exhibit different trends as the systems based on PNI10@PNN and PNN10@PNN,
but the deswelling of the carrier shows less influence on the catalytic
activity and a comparable trend as the system PMAM10@PNN. Additionally,
the catalytic activity of the hybrid microgels seems to be lower,
which is in good agreement with the lower nanoparticle load observed
in the TEM measurements. For the sample PNI5@PNN, an increase in the
catalytic activity is observed after the collapse of the PNNPAM shell.
Afterward, the catalytic activity follows almost the classical Arrhenius-like
behavior. The decrease in the catalytic activity, which was observed
for the hybrid system based on PNI10@PNN, is not realized for this
sample. In contrast to that, the course of the catalytic activity
of the hybrid systems based on PMAM5@PNN is very comparable to the
sample PMAM10@PNN. The change in the catalytic activity after the
VPTT of PNNPAM seems to be stronger than for the other sample, but
the lower overall catalytic intensity has to be considered. Therefore,
we suppose that the catalytic activity here also almost follows the
Arrhenius law. For the hybrid system based on PNN5@PNN, a difference
in the course of the catalytic activity occurs when it is compared
to the sample with 10 mol % cross-linker content in the core. The
sample PNN5@PNN shows almost no deviation from the classical Arrhenius-like
behavior, so the switchability of the PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM
microgels seems to disappear in this case. This may be connected to
the difference in particle architecture, which was observed in the
PCS experiments.

To sum up this part, it can be stated that
the cross-linker content
of the core is a very important parameter for the switchability of
the core–shell microgel/silver nanoparticle hybrids. The cross-linker
content of the core shows the strongest influence for the PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM and PNIPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM-based
materials. In both cases, switchability could only be realized with
core-cross-linker contents of 10 mol %. In the case of PNIPMAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM carriers, the switchability of the catalytic
activity seems to be limited for all cross-linker contents. Interestingly,
all microgel/nanoparticle hybrids show a drastic increase of the catalytic
activity after the collapse of the PNNPAM shell, which is in good
agreement with theoretical descriptions in the literature47,48 and could be related to a better solubility of the reactants in
the collapsed shell of the core–shell microgels.

3 Conclusions
The present study shows that various acrylamide-based
core–shell
microgels are suitable carriers for silver nanoparticles. The targeted
particle architecture, consisting of a microgel core with silver nanoparticles
inside a microgel shell without nanoparticles, could be realized by
copolymerization of the microgel core with acrylic acid. TEM measurements
and surface plasmon resonance measurements show that the synthesis
of silver nanoparticles was successful, and cryo-TEM images reveal
that the nanoparticles are located mainly at the interface between
the core and shell, which can be related to the typical fuzzy structure
of acrylic acid containing copolymer microgels. For the nanoparticle
stability, the cross-linker density of the core is an important parameter
since only microgel templates with a cross-linker-content of 10 mol % or lower do not show loss
of nanoparticles.
By following the reduction of p-nitrophenole, it
was shown that the volume phase transitions of the shell and the core
can influence the catalytic activity of the silver nanoparticles.
The fact that different types of monomers like NIPAM, NIPMAM, or NNPAM
can be used as the core material increases the temperature range that
can be addressed in catalytic processes, although the switchability
of the system is influenced by the choice of the core monomer as well.
The cross-linker content of the core plays the most important role
in the hybrid systems based on PNNPAM-co-AAc@PNNPAM
when the catalytic activity is investigated. This seems to be related
to a difference in the architecture of the core–shell particles.
The use of non-NIPAM-based core–shell microgel/silver nanoparticle
hybrid systems is a promising step in the direction toward switchable
catalysts.

4 Experimental Section
4.1 Materials
N-isopropylacrylamide
(NIPAM) (97% TCI Germany GmbH, Eschborn, Germany) and N-isopropylmethacrylamide (NIPMAM) (97%, Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany)
were recrystallized from n-hexane (p.a., VWR International,
Darmstadt, Germany). N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide
(BIS) (99%, Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany), ammonium persulfate (APS)
(99%, Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)
(99%, Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany), acrylic acid (99%, Sigma-Aldrich,
Munich, Germany), polyethyleneimine (branched, 99%, Sigma-Aldrich,
Munich, Germany), ethanol (HPLC grade, VWR International, Darmstadt,
Germany), silver nitrate (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany),
4-nitrophenole (99%, Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany), and sodium borohydride
(98.0% Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany) were used as obtained. The
synthesis of N-n-propylacrylamide
(NNPAM) was performed via a Schotten–Baumann reaction as described
by Hirano et al.53 Water was purified and
deionized using an Arium pro VF system (Satorius Stedim Systems GmbH,
Göttingen, Germany).

4.2 Synthesis of Core–Shell
Microgels
A two-step precipitation polymerization following
the procedure
established by Zeiser et al.38 was employed
to synthesize all core–shell microgels in this work. First,
nine different core microgels were synthesized via the following procedure.
The exact amounts of the compounds are presented in Table 2. The respective monomer (11.55
mmol) and the cross-linker BIS were dissolved in purified water. The
solution was heated up to 70 °C and purged with nitrogen under
constant stirring for 60 min. Acrylic acid (0.58 mmol, 5 mol %) and
SDS (0.103 mmol) were added 10 min before the initiation. The polymerization
was started by adding APS (0.41 mmol, 3.5 mol %). The complete reaction
volume was 150 mL. The purification was performed by five consecutive
centrifugation (25 000 rpm, 45 min), decantation, and redispersion
cycles with purified water.

Table 2 Nominal Cross-Linker
and Comonomer
Amounts for All Synthesized Core Microgels
number	core monomer	BIS (mol %)	AAc (mol %)	
1	NIPAM	5	5	
2	NIPAM	10	5	
3	NIPAM	15	5	
4	NIPMAM	5	5	
5	NIPMAM	10	5	
6	NIPMAM	15	5	
7	NNPAM	5	5	
8	NNPAM	10	5	
9	NNPAM	15	5	
For the second step of the core–shell synthesis,
a dispersion
of the respective core microgel (0.15 wt %, 50 mL) was equilibrated
with NNPAM (2.06 mmol) and BIS (0.104 mmol, 5 mol % with respect to
NNPAM) analogous to the core synthesis. Shortly before the initiation
with
APS (0.14 mmol, 3.5 mol % with respect to NNPAM), SDS (0.055 mmol)
was added to the solution. The purification process for the core–shell
microgels was analogous to the purification
of the core microgels. The sample names for the nine resulting core–shell
microgels and their exact compositions are presented in Table 1.

4.3 Synthesis
of Silver Nanoparticles Inside Microgel
Templates
For the synthesis of silver nanoparticles, 50 mL
of a 0.02 wt % microgel suspension was mixed with 0.28 mL of a 0.1
M silver nitrate solution. The reaction mixture was cooled with an
ice bath under constant nitrogen flux and stirring for 1 h. After
that, 5 mL of a freshly prepared, aqueous sodium borohydride solution
(0.1 M) was added slowly to the reaction mixture. The mixture was
allowed to reach room temperature directly after the addition of the
sodium borohydride. For the purification, 15 mL of the reaction solution
was dialyzed against 5 L of water for 48 h to remove the excess of
sodium borohydride and the free silver nanoparticles. The water was
exchanged two times during the dialysis procedure.

4.4 Atomic Force Microscopy
The sample
preparation was performed via spin-coating (rotation speed 1000 rpm)
of 100 μL of a 0.05 wt % microgel solution on a silicon wafer
(Siegert Wafer GmbH, Aachen, Germany). Before spin-coating, the wafer
was successively cleaned with ethanol (HPLC) in a plasma cleaner (O2 plasma, Zepto, Diener electronics, Ebhausen, Germany) and
coated with a polyethylene imine solution (0.25 wt %). The measurements
were performed on FlexAFM (Nanosurf GmbH, Langen, Germany) at room
temperature in semicontact mode with a cantilever frequency of 200
kHz and a spring constant of 40 N/m (Tap300 ALG, Budget Sensors, Innovative
Solutions Bulgaria Ltd., Sofia, Bulgaria). The resulting images were
analyzed using the free software packages GWYDDION54 and ImageJ.55

4.5 Transmission Electron Microscopy
TEM images were taken
with a JEOL JEM-2200FS electron microscope
(JEOL, Freising, Germany) equipped with a cold field emission electron
gun. The microscope was operated at an acceleration voltage of 200
kV. For standard room-temperature TEM, carbon-coated copper grids
(ECF200-Cu, 200 mesh, Science Services, Munich, Germany) were used.
Next, 3 μL of a diluted sample solution was dropped on the copper
grid, and after 1 min, the residual water was blotted off with a filter
paper.

All images were recorded digitally by a bottom-mounted
camera (Gatan OneView, Gatan, Pleasanton) and processed with a digital
imaging processing system (Digital Micrograph GMS 3, Gatan, Pleasanton).
To achieve good statistics, several positions on each grid were imaged.
For the analysis of the TEM images, free software ImageJ55 was used.

For cryo-TEM, the samples were
vitrified on TEM holey carbon grids
(Qantifoil R2/1, 200 mesh, Plano GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) using a Leica
blotting and plunging device (Leica EM GP, Leica Mikrosysteme Vertrieb
GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany). The grids were plunged into liquid ethane
cooled with liquid nitrogen to achieve sufficiently fast cooling.
Subsequently, the grids were transferred to a cryo transfer and tomography
holder (Fischione Model 2550, E.A. Fischione Instruments, Pittsburgh).

4.6 PCS Measurements
For the particle
size determination, all microgel suspensions were highly diluted with
a 10 mM, pH = 7 buffer solution (cMG < 0.002 wt %). For the investigation of
the particle sizes as a function of temperature, a fixed-angle PCS
setup with a HeNe-Laser (HNL210L, Thorlabs Inc., Newton, NJ) and an
ALV-6010 multiple-τ correlator (ALV GmbH, Langen, Germany) was
used. The scattered light was collected at an angle of 60° by
a single-mode fiber connected to an ALV-detection unit. Temperature
control was performed by a thermostated decaline bath. At each temperature,
the equilibration time was 25 min, and five measurements were performed.
The resulting autocorrelation functions were analyzed via inverse
Laplace transformation using CONTIN.56 The
resulting mean relaxation rates Γ̅ can be used to calculate
the translational diffusion coefficient (see eq 1). 1  Here, q is the magnitude
of the scattering vector, which can be calculated from the wavelength
λ of the scattered light, the refractive index n of the sample, and the scattering angle θ. 2  The hydrodynamic radius Rh of the microgel particles can be subsequently computed
by using the Stokes–Einstein equation, with the temperature T, the Boltzmann constant kb, and the solvent viscosity η. 3  

4.7 UV–Vis Measurements
The absorption
spectra of the silver nanoparticle/microgel hybrid systems were acquired
on an Agilent 8453 UV–vis spectrometer (Agilent Technologies
Germany, Ratingen, Germany) equipped with a diode array detector and
an eight-position sample holder. Temperature was set to 20 °C
and controlled by a thermostat (Haake Phoenix II, Thermo Haake GmbH,
Karlsruhe, Germany). The samples were measured in Hellma cuvettes
(Hellma GmbH, Mühlheim, Germany). The plasmonic resonance of
the silver nanoparticles was measured directly after the purification
of the hybrid microgels after 2 weeks and 4 weeks to investigate the
aging of the material.

4.8 Measurements of Catalytic
Activity
An aqueous mixture of 4-nitrophenole (0.13 mM, 0.75
mL) and the respective
microgel/silver nanoparticle hybrid (0.02 wt %, 0.2 mL) was prepared
and equilibrated at the respective measurement temperature for at
least 25 min. The reaction was started by adding aqueous sodium borohydride
solution (100 mM, 50 μL). After the addition of sodium borohydride,
the absorption spectra of 4-nitrophenole were recorded from 190 to
1100 nm every 6.4 s by an Agilent spectrometer (see Section 4.8). Every measurement of
kinetics lasted 2400 s. The temperature was controlled by a thermostat
(Haake Phoenix II, Thermo Haake GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany). The temperature
of the reaction solution was measured by a PT100-temperature sensor.
Three measurements were performed for every temperature, and the samples
were measured in Hellma cuvettes (Hellma GmbH, Mühlheim, Germany).
The analysis of the measured absorption spectra was performed by following
the absorption band of 4-nitrophenole at 400 nm. The absorption was
analyzed by using a pseudo-first-order approach and to determine the
apparent reaction constant kapp. 4  

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b03511.PCS relaxation
rate distributions of the samples PNI5@PNN,
PMAM5@PNN, and PNN5@PNN; polydispersities of all core–shell
templates obtained from fixed-angle PCS measurements; exemplaric size
distribution of the silver nanoparticles in the sample PNI15@PNN;
nanoparticle load and mean radii of the silver nanoparticles in all
samples extracted from dry-state TEM measurements (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b03511_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Ina Ehring, Meike Adolph, and Jonna Bookhold
are acknowledged
for the monomer synthesis. The authors thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) for financial support (Grants HE2995/6-1 and INST215/444-1).
The Nanoanalytic center OWL is acknowledged for the provision of measurement
time at the TEM in Bielefeld. We acknowledge support for the Article
Processing Charge by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Open
Access Publication Fund of Bielefeld University.
==== Refs
References
Welsch N. ; Ballauff M. ; Lu Y.   In Chemical Design of Responsive Microgels ; Pich A. , Albrecht K.  , Eds.; Advances in
Polymer Science; Springer-Verlag : Berlin, Heidelberg , 2011 ; Vol. 234 ; pp 129 –163 .
Bridot J.-L. ; Faure A.-C. ; Laurent S. ; Rivière C. ; Billotey C. ; Hiba B. ; Janier M. ; Josserand V. ; Coll J.-L. ; Elst L. V. ; Muller R. ; Roux S. ; Perriat P. ; Tillement O. 
Hybrid gadolinium oxide nanoparticles:
multimodal contrast agents for in vivo imaging . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 5076 –5084 . 10.1021/ja068356j .17397154 
Hifumi H. ; Yamaoka S. ; Tanimoto A. ; Citterio D. ; Suzuki K. 
Gadolinium-based
hybrid nanoparticles as a positive MR contrast agent . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 15090 –15091 . 10.1021/ja066442d .17117851 
Kryza D. ; Taleb J. ; Janier M. ; Marmuse L. ; Miladi I. ; Bonazza P. ; Louis C. ; Perriat P. ; Roux S. ; Tillement O. ; Billotey C. 
Biodistribution study of nanometric
hybrid gadolinium oxide particles as a multimodal SPECT/MR/optical
imaging and theragnostic agent . Bioconjugate
Chem. 
2011 , 22 , 1145 –1152 . 10.1021/bc1005976 .
Karg M. ; Jaber S. ; Hellweg T. ; Mulvaney P. 
Surface plasmon spectroscopy
of gold-poly-N-isopropylacrylamide core-shell particles . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 820 –827 . 10.1021/la1039249 .21155547 
Dulle M. ; Jaber S. ; Rosenfeldt S. ; Radulescu A. ; Förster S. ; Mulvaney P. ; Karg M. 
Plasmonic
gold-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
core–shell colloids with homogeneous density profiles: A small
angle scattering study . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 17 , 1354 –1367 . 10.1039/C4CP04816D .25425290 
Fukushima D. ; Sk U. H. ; Sakamoto Y. ; Nakase I. ; Kojima C. 
Dual stimuli-sensitive
dendrimers: Photothermogenic gold nanoparticle-loaded thermo-responsive
elastin-mimetic dendrimers . Colloids Surf.,
B 
2015 , 132 , 155 –160 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2015.05.012 .
Das M. ; Sanson N. ; Fava D. ; Kumacheva E. 
Microgels
loaded with gold nanorods: photothermally triggered volume transitions
under physiological conditions . Langmuir 
2007 , 23 , 196 –201 . 10.1021/la061596s .17190504 
Suzuki D. ; Kawaguchi H. 
Hybrid microgels with reversibly changeable multiple
brilliant color . Langmuir 
2006 , 22 , 3818 –3822 . 10.1021/la052999f .16584261 
Brugger B. ; Richtering W. 
Magnetic, Thermosensitive Microgels as Stimuli-Responsive
Emulsifiers Allowing for Remote Control of Separability and Stability
of Oil in Water-Emulsions . Adv. Mater. 
2007 , 19 , 2973 –2978 . 10.1002/adma.200700487 .
Wang X. ; Shi Y. ; Graff R. W. ; Lee D. ; Gao H. 
Developing recyclable
pH-responsive magnetic nanoparticles for oil-water separation . Polymer 
2015 , 72 , 361 –367 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2014.12.056 .
Schmid A. J. ; Dubbert J. ; Rudov A. A. ; Pedersen J. S. ; Lindner P. ; Karg M. ; Potemkin I. I. ; Richtering W. 
Multi-Shell
Hollow Nanogels with Responsive Shell Permeability . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 2273610.1038/srep22736 .26984478 
Turcu R. ; Craciunescu I. ; Garamus V. M. ; Janko C. ; Lyer S. ; Tietze R. ; Alexiou C. ; Vekas L. 
Magnetic microgels
for drug targeting applications: Physical-chemical properties and
cytotoxicity evaluation . J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 
2015 , 380 , 307 –314 . 10.1016/j.jmmm.2014.08.041 .
Chai S. ; Zhang J. ; Yang T. ; Yuan J. ; Cheng S. 
Thermoresponsive
microgel decorated with silica nanoparticles in shell: Biomimetic
synthesis and drug release application . Colloids
Surf., A 
2010 , 356 , 32 –39 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2009.12.026 .
Estelrich J. ; Escribano E. ; Queralt J. ; Busquets M. A. 
Iron oxide nanoparticles
for magnetically-guided and magnetically-responsive drug delivery . Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2015 , 16 , 8070 –8101 . 10.3390/ijms16048070 .25867479 
Kirch J. ; Schneider A. ; Abou B. ; Hopf A. ; Schaefer U. F. ; Schneider M. ; Schall C. ; Wagner C. ; Lehr C.-M. 
Optical
tweezers reveal relationship between microstructure and nanoparticle
penetration of pulmonary mucus . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2012 , 109 , 18355 –18360 . 10.1073/pnas.1214066109 .23091027 
Pich A. ; Karak A. ; Lu Y. ; Ghosh A. K. ; Adler H.-J. P. 
Preparation
of Hybrid Microgels Functionalized by Silver Nanoparticles . Macromol. Rapid Commun. 
2006 , 27 , 344 –350 . 10.1002/marc.200500761 .
Mei Y. ; Lu Y. ; Polzer F. ; Ballauff M. ; Drechsler M. 
Catalytic
Activity of Palladium Nanoparticles Encapsulated in Spherical Polyelectrolyte
Brushes and Core–Shell Microgels . Chem.
Mater. 
2007 , 19 , 1062 –1069 . 10.1021/cm062554s .
Lu Y. ; Proch S. ; Schrinner M. ; Drechsler M. ; Kempe R. ; Ballauff M. 
Thermosensitive core-shell
microgel
as a “nanoreactor” for catalytic active metal nanoparticles . J. Mater. Chem. 
2009 , 19 , 3955 –3961 . 10.1039/b822673n .
Naik B. ; Hazra S. ; Muktesh P. ; Prasad V. S. ; Ghosh N. N. 
A Facile
Method for Preparation of Ag Nanoparticle Loaded MCM-41 and Study
of Its Catalytic Activity for Reduction of 4-Nitrophenol . Sci. Adv. Mater. 
2011 , 3 , 1025 –1030 . 10.1166/sam.2011.1231 .
Tang Y. ; Wu T. ; Hu B. ; Yang Q. ; Liu L. ; Yu B. ; Ding Y. ; Ye S. 
Synthesis of thermo- and pH-responsive
Ag nanoparticle-embedded hybrid microgels and their catalytic activity
in methylene blue reduction . Mater. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 149–150 , 460 –466 . 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2014.10.045 .
Jia H. ; Roa R. ; Angioletti-Uberti S. ; Henzler K. ; Ott A. ; Lin X. ; Möser J. ; Kochovski Z. ; Schnegg A. ; Dzubiella J. ; Ballauff M. ; Lu Y. 
Thermosensitive Cu2O–PNIPAM
core–shell nanoreactors with tunable photocatalytic activity . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2016 , 4 , 9677 –9684 . 10.1039/C6TA03528K .
Jia H. ; Cao J. ; Lu Y. 
Design and
fabrication of functional hybrid materials
for catalytic applications . Curr. Opin. Green
Sustainable Chem. 
2017 , 4 , 16 –22 . 10.1016/j.cogsc.2017.02.002 .
Satapathy S. S. ; Bhol P. ; Chakkarambath A. ; Mohanta J. ; Samantaray K. ; Bhat S. K. ; Panda S. K. ; Mohanty P. S. ; Si S. 
Thermo-responsive
PNIPAM-metal hybrids: An efficient nanocatalyst for the reduction
of 4-nitrophenol . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2017 , 420 , 753 –763 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.05.172 .
Khan S. R. ; Farooqi Z. H. ; Ajmal M. ; Siddiq M. ; Khan A. 
Synthesis,
Characterization, and Silver Nanoparticles Fabrication in N-isopropylacrylamide-Based
Polymer Microgels for Rapid Degradation of p-Nitrophenol . J. Dispersion Sci. Technol. 
2013 , 34 , 1324 –1333 . 10.1080/01932691.2012.744690 .
Farooqi Z. H. ; Siddiq M. 
Temperature-Responsive Poly(N-Isopropylacrylamide-Acrylamide-Phenylboronic
Acid) Microgels for Stabilization of Silver Nanoparticles . J. Dispersion Sci. Technol. 
2014 , 36 , 423 –429 . 10.1080/01932691.2014.911106 .
Farooqi Z. H. ; Begum R. ; Naseem K. ; Rubab U. ; Usman M. ; Khan A. ; Ijaz A. 
Fabrication of silver
nanoparticles
in pH responsive polymer microgel dispersion for catalytic reduction
of nitrobenzene in aqueous medium . Russ. J.
Phys. Chem. A 
2016 , 90 , 2600 –2608 . 10.1134/S0036024416130239 .
Thomas V. ; Yallapu M. M. ; Sreedhar B. ; Bajpai S. K. 
A versatile strategy
to fabricate hydrogel-silver nanocomposites and investigation of their
antimicrobial activity . J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2007 , 315 , 389 –395 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2007.06.068 .17707388 
Lu Y. ; Ballauff M. 
Thermosensitive core-shell
microgels: From colloidal
model systems to nanoreactors . Prog. Polym.
Sci. 
2011 , 36 , 767 –792 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2010.12.003 .
Kratz K. ; Eimer W. 
Swelling properties
of colloidal poly(N-Isopropylacrylamide) microgels
in solution . Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem. 
1998 , 102 , 848 –854 . 10.1002/bbpc.19981020610 .
Pelton R. 
Temperature-sensitive
aqueous microgels . Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2000 , 85 , 1 –33 . 10.1016/S0001-8686(99)00023-8 .10696447 
Lyon L. A. ; Meng Z. ; Singh N. ; Sorrell C. D. ; St John A. 
Thermoresponsive
microgel-based materials . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2009 , 38 , 865 –874 . 10.1039/b715522k .19421566 
Nayak S. ; Lyon L. A. 
Soft Nanotechnology with Soft Nanoparticles . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2005 , 44 , 7686 –7708 . 10.1002/anie.200501321 .
von
Nessen K. ; Karg M. ; Hellweg T. 
Thermoresponsive poly-(N-isopropylmethacrylamide)
microgels: Tailoring particle size by interfacial tension control . Polymer 
2013 , 54 , 5499 –5510 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2013.08.027 .
Cors M. ; Wrede O. ; Genix A.-C. ; Anselmetti D. ; Oberdisse J. ; Hellweg T. 
Core-Shell Microgel-Based
Surface
Coatings with Linear Thermoresponse . Langmuir 
2017 , 33 , 6804 –6811 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b01199 .28628746 
Wedel B. ; Hertle Y. ; Wrede O. ; Bookhold J. ; Hellweg T. 
Smart Homopolymer
Microgels: Influence of the Monomer Structure on the Particle Properties . Polymers 
2016 , 8 , 16210.3390/polym8040162 .
Jones C. D. ; Lyon L. A. 
Synthesis and Characterization
of Multiresponsive Core–Shell
Microgels . Macromolecules 
2000 , 33 , 8301 –8306 . 10.1021/ma001398m .
Zeiser M. ; Freudensprung I. ; Hellweg T. 
Linearly thermoresponsive core–shell
microgels: Toward a new class of nanoactuators . Polymer 
2012 , 53 , 6096 –6101 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2012.10.001 .
Berndt I. ; Pedersen J. S. ; Richtering W. 
Temperature-sensitive
core-shell
microgel particles with dense shell . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2006 , 45 , 1737 –1741 . 10.1002/anie.200503888 .
Karg M. ; Prévost S. ; Brandt A. ; Wallacher D. ; Klitzing R. ; Hellweg T.   In Intelligent
Hydrogels ; Sadowski G. , Richtering W.  , Eds.; Progress in
Colloid and Polymer Science; Springer : Cham , 2013 ; pp 63 –76 .
Zhang J. ; Xu S. ; Kumacheva E. 
Polymer Microgels: Reactors for Semiconductor, Metal,
and Magnetic Nanoparticles . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 7908 –7914 . 10.1021/ja031523k .15212539 
Snowden M. J. ; Chowdhry B. Z. ; Vincent B. ; Morris G. E. 
Colloidal copolymer
microgels of N-isopropylacrylamide and acrylic acid: PH, ionic strength
and temperature effects . J. Chem. Soc., Faraday
Trans. 
1996 , 92 , 5013 –5016 . 10.1039/ft9969205013 .
Brändel T. ; Wiehemeier L. ; Kottke T. ; Hellweg T. 
Microphase separation
of smart double-responsive copolymer microgels studied by local fluorescence
probes . Polymer 
2017 , 125 , 110 –116 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2017.07.074 .
Wedel B. ; Brändel T. ; Bookhold J. ; Hellweg T. 
Role of Anionic
Surfactants
in the Synthesis of Smart Microgels Based on Different Acrylamides . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 84 –90 . 10.1021/acsomega.6b00424 .31457211 
Hyatt J. S. ; Douglas A. M. ; Stanley C. ; Do C. ; Barker T. H. ; Fernandez-Nieves A. 
Charge segregation in weakly ionized
microgels . Phys. Rev. E 
2017 , 95 , 01260810.1103/PhysRevE.95.012608 .28208440 
Rehman S. U. ; Siddiq M. ; Al-Lohedan H. ; Sahiner N. 
Cationic microgels
embedding metal nanoparticles in the reduction of dyes and nitro-phenols . Chem. Eng. J. 
2015 , 265 , 201 –209 . 10.1016/j.cej.2014.12.061 .
Roa R. ; Angioletti-Uberti S. ; Lu Y. ; Dzubiella J. ; Piazza F. ; Ballauff M. 
Catalysis by Metallic
Nanoparticles
in Solution: Thermosensitive Microgels as Nanoreactors . Z. Phys. Chem. 
2018 , 232 , 773 –803 . 10.1515/zpch-2017-1078 .
Angioletti-Uberti S. ; Lu Y. ; Ballauff M. ; Dzubiella J. 
Theory of Solvation-Controlled Reactions
in Stimuli-Responsive Nanoreactors . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 15723 –15730 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b03830 .
Gu S. ; Wunder S. ; Lu Y. ; Ballauff M. ; Fenger R. ; Rademann K. ; Jaquet B. ; Zaccone A. 
Kinetic Analysis of
the Catalytic Reduction of 4-Nitrophenol by Metallic Nanoparticles . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 18618 –18625 . 10.1021/jp5060606 .
Lu Y. ; Mei Y. ; Drechsler M. ; Ballauff M. 
Thermosensitive core-shell particles
as carriers for Ag nanoparticles: Modulating the catalytic activity
by a phase transition in networks . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2006 , 45 , 813 –816 . 10.1002/anie.200502731 .
Lu Y. ; Mei Y. ; Schrinner M. ; Ballauff M. ; Möller M. W. ; Breu J. 
In Situ Formation of
Ag Nanoparticles in Spherical Polyacrylic Acid
Brushes by UV Irradiation . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2007 , 111 , 7676 –7681 . 10.1021/jp070973m .
Wunder S. ; Polzer F. ; Lu Y. ; Mei Y. ; Ballauff M. 
Kinetic Analysis
of Catalytic Reduction of 4-Nitrophenol by Metallic Nanoparticles
Immobilized in Spherical Polyelectrolyte Brushes . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 8814 –8820 . 10.1021/jp101125j .
Hirano T. ; Nakamura K. ; Kamikubo T. ; Ishii S. ; Tani K. ; Mori T. ; Sato T. 
Hydrogen-bond-assisted
syndiotactic-specific
<tep-common:author-query>AQ6: Please provide a DOI number for
ref
53 or indicate if one doesn&amp;#x2019;t exist.</tep-common:author-query>radical
polymerizations of N-alkylacrylamides: The effect of the N-substituents
on the stereospecificities and unusual large hysteresis in the phase-transition
behavior of aqueous solution of syndiotactic poly(<italic>N</italic>-<italic>n</italic>-propylacrylamide) . J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 
2008 , 46 , 4575 –4583 . 10.1002/pola.22797 .
Nečas D. ; Klapetek P. 
Gwyddion: An open-source
software for SPM data analysis . Open Phys. 
2012 , 10 , 181 –188 . 10.2478/s11534-011-0096-2 .
Rueden C. T. ; Schindelin J. ; Hiner M. C. ; DeZonia B. E. ; Walter A. E. ; Arena E. T. ; Eliceiri K. W. 
ImageJ2: ImageJ for the next generation
of scientific image data . BMC Bioinf. 
2017 , 18 , 52910.1186/s12859-017-1934-z .
Provencher S. W. 
CONTIN:
A general purpose constrained regularization program for inverting
noisy linear algebraic and integral equations . Comput. Phys. Commun. 
1982 , 27 , 229 –242 . 10.1016/0010-4655(82)90174-6 .

