
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3157286110.1021/acsomega.9b02063ArticleCompact Steam-Methane Reforming for the Production
of Hydrogen in Continuous Flow Microreactor Systems Chen Junjie *Song Wenya Xu Deguang Department of Energy and Power Engineering,
School of Mechanical and Power Engineering, Henan Polytechnic University, 2000 Century Avenue, Jiaozuo, Henan 454000, P. R. China* E-mail: comcjj@163.com, cjj@hpu.edu.cn..11 09 2019 24 09 2019 4 13 15600 15614 05 07 2019 03 09 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

The
implementation of fuel cell deployment requires efficient conversion
of fuels into hydrogen in a distributed energy system. Fortunately,
continuous flow and microreactor technology provide unique opportunities
for the portable production of hydrogen. This study focuses on determining
the operation space for a thermally integrated methane reforming system,
thereby providing a theoretical basis for the design and optimization
of such systems. The steam-methane reforming over rhodium coupled
with methane combustion over platinum in a thermally integrated microchannel
reactor arranged with rectangular-shaped protuberances was studied
numerically in order to improve its operability and stability. Computational
fluid dynamic simulations were carried out with detailed reaction
mechanisms to identify conditions for the maximum hydrogen yield and
the highest output power. Various operating lines were presented,
and various performance metrics were evaluated accordingly. The results
indicated that the efficient production of hydrogen is made possible
through improving transport performance for highly active catalysts.
The flow disturbance elements designed for the reactor are of great
benefit to intensification of the reforming process. There exists
a trade-off between fuel utilization and output power. Autothermal
operation advantages from improved transport performance in small
physical dimensions were demonstrated for the system, but careful
thermal management is always necessary to ensure its efficient and
stable operation. The thermal conductivity of the wall separating
the exothermic and endothermic reactions plays a significant role
in determining the performance of the system. Highly active catalysts
are required to intensify the overall reforming process and to achieve
efficient thermal management. Adjustment of fluid velocities can serve
as a convenient means to achieve efficient operation of the system.

document-id-old-9ao9b02063document-id-new-14ao-2019-02063hccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Flow chemistry,1,2 the science of running a reaction
in continuous mode, has become increasingly important in the field
of chemical production. When reactions are highly exothermic or endothermic,
chemical processes are inherently limited by heat transfer. Microchannel
reactors have received significant attention due to potential advantages
they offer over conventional process equipment in terms of improved
transport performance.3,4 Small physical dimensions associated
with very high surface area-to-volume ratios can significantly enhance
heat and mass transport in a microchannel reactor, thereby enabling
compact operations.5,6 This transport characteristic
also has the advantage of promoting the application of new reaction
pathways and catalysts to reduce capital and operating costs, and
to improve the energy efficiency and product yield.7,8

Microreactor technology is becoming increasingly available commercially,
thanks to microfabrication technology providers such as Velocys, Microinnova,
mikroglas, Ehrfeld, Siemens, Heatric, IMM, IMT, FZK, CPC, and Dai
Nippon Screen. This list is by no means exhaustive. Microchannel reactors
may offer distinct advantages in process development and chemical
production.1,2 Such microchemical systems are usually a
continuous flow reactor.9,10 Microchannel reactors
involve microfabricated structures to allow flow chemistry to be performed
at the microscale.11,12 Continuous flow technology can
offer a number of advantages for chemical production.13,14 Microchannel reactors can benefit from such technology to allow
chemical reactions to be conducted in a safer and more efficient way.15,16

The production of hydrogen can be achieved through a number
of
reforming and partial oxidation reactions.17−20 Most of these reactions have
been carried out in microchannel reactors.21,22 The steam-methane reforming route is particularly attractive for
fuel cells.23,24 Such a chemical route now accounts
for nearly half of hydrogen production.20 Microreactors have emerged as one of the most promising technologies
for hydrogen production. Microchannel reactors can be particularly
effective for the highly endothermic steam-methane reforming reaction.
Furthermore, the efficiency of the overall process can be improved
by closely coupling this reaction with an exothermic catalytic oxidation
reaction due to the enhanced transport performance.25−28 In this approach, exothermic
and endothermic reactions are carried out in adjacent channels, making
possible a highly efficient system.29,30 Such a design
offers a number of advantages for hydrogen production such as increased
productivity, processing windows, operational flexibility, and process
control.31,32 These benefits can effectively eliminate
cost and distribution issues that often constrain operation. In addition,
the inherent flame quenching properties of microchannel reactors could
effectively eliminate safety concerns.31,32

Continuous
flow and microreactor technology are now creating new
opportunities for the portable production of hydrogen by steam reforming
of methane.33,34 The high transport performance
possible in microfluidic systems allows the reaction to proceed under
more aggressive conditions, thereby offering higher hydrogen yields
than can be achieved by existing conventional approaches. However,
this chemical process is a complex multiple reaction system, and the
overall efficiency depends heavily on the thermally integrated scheme
employed for such a microchemical system. Consequently, the yield
of hydrogen depends in a complex manner upon the design parameters
such as catalysts, physical dimensions, and wall thermal conductivity,
and on the process variables such as feed composition, fluid velocity,
temperature, and pressure. To improve the yield of hydrogen, there
is a need to further explore the effect of these design parameters
and process variables on the performance of a thermally integrated
microchannel reactor conducting the steam-methane reforming reaction
and an exothermic catalytic oxidation reaction simultaneously. The
first step in understanding such an effect is usually to determine
the operation space for a thermally integrated system in order to
improve its operability and stability. The system will operate effectively
within the operation space which varies based on the device function
and application context. Outside the operation space, the system may
fail. It is therefore of great significance to determine the operation
space for a thermally integrated methane reforming system in order
to provide a theoretical basis for the design and optimization of
such systems.

The primary focus of this research is on determining
the operation
space for a thermally integrated microchannel reactor through identifying
conditions for the maximum yield of hydrogen produced by the steam-methane
reforming reaction conducted in the reactor. Another dominant design
objective is to maximize output power of such microfabricated chemical
systems for portable applications such as fuel cells. This is in contrast
to the primary concern raised for commercial-scale hydrogen production
plants, for which the main focus is on maximizing the energy conversion
efficiency of hydrogen production and minimizing its capital and operating
costs. This fundamental difference in development objectives leads
to drastically different approaches to efficient operation and optimal
design of reactors. In developing continuous flow and microreactor
technology for hydrogen production through the steam-methane reforming
reaction, it is therefore essential to focus on the operating characteristics
of thermally integrated microchannel reactors, as well as to evaluate
the benefits and disadvantages associated with such a design.

In the current study, steam-methane reforming over rhodium coupled
with catalytic oxidation of methane over platinum in a thermally integrated
microchannel reactor was investigated numerically. The thermally integrated
system was arranged with flow disturbance elements in the channels.
Such a design allows the endothermic and exothermic reactions to take
place in close proximity, and the reforming and oxidation processes
to be intensified with improved momentum, heat, and mass transport
performance of the reactor. A two-dimensional computational fluid
dynamics model was developed to gain insights into the operating characteristics
of the system. Numerical simulations were performed to identify conditions
of the steam-methane reforming reaction conducted in thermally integrated
microchannel reactors for the maximum hydrogen yield and the highest
output power. The effect of design parameters and process variables
on the performance of the system was evaluated in detail. The objective
of this study is to determine the theoretical limits on hydrogen yield
and output power for a thermally integrated methane reforming system
under various operating conditions. Emphasis is placed on determining
the operation space for the portable hydrogen production system so
as to improve its operability and stability. Of particular interest
is how flow disturbance elements arranged in the channels affect the
performance of transport and the yield of products in the system.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Description of the System
The system
considered in the present work is a thermally coupled microchannel
reactor with alternating reforming and combustion channels, wherein
endothermic and exothermic reactions are conducted simultaneously
without mixing the two streams. The heat required for an endothermic
reaction is supplied directly through dividing walls from an exothermic
reaction occurring on the two opposing sides. The channels within
which reactions occur are operated in parallel, and such a reaction
system used for hydrogen production is illustrated schematically in Figure 1. The reactor comprises
a plurality of plates in a stack, as a full-scale design usually includes
hundreds to many thousands of parallel flow channels. The thermally
integrated reacting system is particularly suitable for portable hydrogen
production by the steam-methane reforming reaction. Furthermore, the
structure design can make the system operate more efficiently due
to strategic positioning of catalysts within the reactor. For example,
a combination of two or more of catalysts is possible for each of
the channels, and a clean-up catalyst may be used downstream of the
combustion channel to control the exhaust gas emissions and thereby
promote the desired operating limits.

Figure 1 Schematic illustration of a thermally
integrated microchannel reactor
in flat plate geometry in a parallel flow arrangement. The solid arrows
indicate the direction in which fluid flows, and the dotted arrows
indicate the direction in which heat flows. The shaded region represents
the computational domain in terms of boundary condition imposition
and geometrical representation. Unless otherwise specified, the reactor
operated in a parallel flow arrangement. It is worth noting that the
schematic diagram is not drawn to scale in the streamwise direction.

The reactants in the combustion channel comprise
methane and air,
whereas the reactants in its adjacent reforming channel comprise methane
and water vapor. The reforming channel in turn is adjacent to another
combustion channel wherein an exothermic reaction occurs, which in
turn is adjacent to another reforming channel wherein an endothermic
reaction occurs, and so forth. The exothermic process comprises a
catalytic oxidation reaction, whereas the endothermic process comprises
a steam-methane reforming reaction forming a mixture of hydrogen and
carbon monoxide. In the present work, a rhodium-based catalyst and
a platinum-based catalyst are coated onto the inner walls of each
reforming channel and of each combustion channel, respectively. Note
that rhodium and platinum in this context are both highly active catalysts.

Each of the channels has the same length, width, and height. The
width and height are both perpendicular to the direction of the bulk
flow of fluid in the channels. The width or height is referred to
as the gap between opposed internal walls of a channel. Unless specifically
stated otherwise, the reactor is 50.0 mm long. Each of the combustion
or reforming chambers has a height of 0.8 mm, and the dividing wall
has a height of 0.2 mm. The reactor is operated at an internal pressure
above atmospheric pressure, for example, a pressure up to 2.0 MPa
being considered herein. Nevertheless, the difference in pressure
between the two sides of the reactor is not considered in order to
simplify the computational process involved in the problem. The thickness
of the catalyst washcoats is 0.08 mm, and the length of the reactor
is 50.0 mm. It is worth noting that the schematic diagram presented
in Figure 1 is not
drawn to scale in the streamwise direction. Rectangular-shaped protuberances
are arranged on wall surfaces in five columns. The distance between
two adjacent protuberances is 6.0, 9.0, 12.0, and 15.0 mm, respectively.
The length and height of each flow disturbance element are 1.0 and
0.08 mm, respectively. The protuberances enhance mass transfer to
catalytic surfaces by serving as static mixers.

Although catalytic
oxidation of methane by air with a fuel–air
equivalence ratio of 0.8 is used as the exothermic reaction in the
combustion channel, steam reforming of methane with a steam-to-carbon
ratio of 3.0 is used as the endothermic reaction in the reforming
channel. Although countercurrent flow or cross-flow of exothermic
and endothermic reaction streams is an option, parallel flow is preferred.35,36 The reactor is assumed to be made of a highly conductive wall material
in order to meet material temperature constraints by rapid heat removal
from the combustion region, and subsequently to enable better thermal
management of the small-scale system.35,36 In the present
work, the thermal conductivity of the wall material used is 200 W/(m·K).
The structure described for the system is represented as a two-dimensional
steady-state model, thereby greatly simplifying the problem. In general,
the width of such channels is significantly larger than their height.5,6 As a consequence, a two-dimensional representation of the system
is reasonable. As the physical geometry of interest is symmetric,
only half of each channel and the corresponding dividing wall is modeled.

2.2 Device Characteristics
There are
considerable modeling efforts to intensify the process of steam-methane
reforming in thermally integrated systems for the production of hydrogen
using microreactor technology.37,38 However, the mechanism
responsible for transfer of heat with such a thermally coupled arrangement
is rather complicated, and the operating characteristics of small-scale
catalytic devices are poorly understood accordingly. As a result,
further research is necessary for these topics.

Typical contour
plots of temperature, methane concentration, methane conversion, and
fluid velocity in a parallel flow arrangement are illustrated in Figure 2 for each side of
the reactor. The results presented here demonstrate autothermal operation
of the system with efficient fuel conversion in both the combustion
and reforming processes. Some of the key features of the behavior
exhibited by the system are discussed herein. The catalytic oxidation
reaction is conducted in the combustion catalyst washcoat to generate
heat by feeding a gas stream comprising the fuel and air. Exothermic
heat is transferred from the combustion catalyst washcoat to its adjacent
reforming catalyst washcoat across the dividing wall to increase the
temperature of the reactants in the reforming channel. The steam-methane
reforming reaction is conducted in the reforming catalyst washcoat
to produce a synthesis gas product. A hydrogen enriched stream can
be produced by flowing synthesis gas produced in such a system through
a membrane separator positioned downstream from the reactor. The fuel-air
equivalence ratio may change in order to control the amount of heat
released by the exothermic reaction conducted in the combustion channel.

Figure 2 Contour
plots of temperature, methane concentration, conversion,
and fluid velocity for the reactor. The velocity of the combustible
fluid inlet flow is 3.0 m/s. The velocity of the process fluid inlet
flow is 2.0 m/s. The steam-to-carbon ratio is 3.0, and the equivalence
ratio of the combustible mixture at the inlets is 0.8. The thermal
conductivity of the material of the dividing wall is 200 W/(m·K).

The temperature contour plot in Figure 2 indicates that the highly
conducting wall
enables upstream transport of the heat released by the exothermic
reaction toward the two streams near the entrance to the reactor.
The two streams are then heated by the dividing wall with such a heat
transfer mechanism. The dividing wall is nearly isothermal due to
efficient heat transfer caused by its very high thermal conductivity.
Most of the fuel is converted before the two fluid streams exit the
reactor, as shown from the concentration and conversion contour plots
in Figure 2. Surface
and gas-phase reactions may both have significant contribution to
the combustion process that occurred in the reactor, but, apparently,
the small physical dimension of the device will favor surface reactions
and reduce the contribution of gas-phase reactions, as shown from
the temperature and conversion contour plots in Figure 2. This will also enhance safety by ensuring
that the device is within its specified operating temperature range.
It is expected that the effect of inhibition of gas-phase reactions
becomes more pronounced in the combustion process with decreasing
the physical dimension of the reactor. In this context, excellent
thermal uniformity and improved mass transfer rates can be achieved
in the reactor. However, small physical dimensions can cause the problem
of very large pressure drops and the nonuniform distribution of flow
field in the system.

Transverse temperature and methane conversion
profiles are illustrated
in Figure 3 at various
axial distances of the reactor. Near the entrance to the reactor,
steep gradients of both temperature and fuel conversion can be found
in the transverse direction. Such gradients necessitate a two-dimensional
computational fluid dynamics model to represent the structure described
for the system. The magnitude of temperature and conversion gradients
decreases rapidly in the transverse direction. Specifically, over
half the length of the reactor, the temperature profile is relative
uniform in the transverse direction, as shown in Figure 3a. Similar behavior can also
be found for the fuel conversion profile in the transverse direction
near the exit of the reactor, as shown in Figure 3b. Steep gradients exist in the transverse
direction for temperature and fuel conversion within the fluid phase,
but near-zero gradients of temperature can be found within the solid
phase due to the excellent heat transfer performance by the dividing
wall made from a highly conductive material.

Figure 3 (a) Temperature and (b)
methane conversion profiles in the transverse
section at various axial distances of the reactor. The dashed lines
represent various interfaces between two spatial regions occupied
by different matter. The parameters used here are the same as those
given in Figure 2.

The steam-to-carbon ratio is usually higher than
reaction stoichiometry
so as to reduce the formation of carbon or coke.39 The influence of the steam-to-carbon ratio on the conversion
of methane in the reforming channel and the maximum temperature of
the dividing wall is investigated, and the results are presented in Figure 4. It is clear that
methane conversion increases with increasing the steam-to-carbon ratio.
However, the rate of the reforming reaction is expected to decrease
with increasing the steam-to-carbon ratio because the partial order
is 1.0 with respect to methane and 0 with respect to steam.40 Under the conditions studied here, however,
the factor determining the performance of the reactor is the amount
of methane in the feed, when the amount of heat available from the
combustion channel is kept constant. As the steam-to-carbon ratio
increases, the amount of methane in the feed decreases. As a consequence,
the maximum temperature of the dividing wall increases, which leads
to an increase in the conversion of methane in the reforming channel.

Figure 4 Effect
of the steam-to-carbon ratio on the methane conversion for
the reforming reaction as well as the maximum temperature of the dividing
wall. All other parameters used here are the same as those given in Figure 2.

2.3 Effect of Flow Disturbance Elements
The engineering science issue around heterogeneous catalytic flow
systems is that they are notoriously mass transfer limited,41 whether in turbulent flow or laminar flow, because
of the formation of boundary layers near the catalytic surface, making
the transfer of both heat and mass limited by slow diffusive and conductive
mechanisms. One potential solution to this problem is the disruption
of boundary layers by producing wakes, particularly transient vortex
shedding due to the flow around obstacles, suitably placed. Wakes
introduce convection, but also crucially periodic wakes that disrupt
the formation of boundary layers. Periodic vortex shedding, with a
period shorter than the time scale for the establishment of the boundary
layer,42 will result in the dominance of
transient convection as the mass transfer mechanism, accelerating
the limiting step, potentially resulting in a kinetics limited regime
for the heterogeneous catalysis. This is important as the whole role
of catalyst design is to increase the activity of the catalyst chosen
for a heterogeneous catalytic flow system, which is wasted if the
overall transformation is mass transfer limited. In this research,
the above hypothesis is tested by the introduction into the design
of a thermally integrated methane steam reformer of two adjacent protuberances,
with varying geometries, and studied by a computational fluid dynamics
model with the heterogeneous reaction tracked, so as to assess the
effectiveness of wake disruption of boundary layers for the increase
in predicted reactive flux. The first step in designing and optimizing
the structure of protuberances is usually to understand the effect
of such flow disturbance elements on reactor performance, so as to
assess their effectiveness from the point of view of fluid mechanics.

Protuberances are employed for the reactor to fulfil design requirements
in terms of both stability and reliability for the system. By utilizing
such a design method, transport performance can be significantly improved
for the reactor, as shown from the fluid velocity contour plot in Figure 2. Specifically, the
rectangular-shaped protuberances arranged in the channels can cause
hydrodynamic instability of fluid flow by forming local flow field
disturbances. The cold reforming reaction stream encompasses catalyst
surfaces, accompanied by the absorption of energy in the form of heat
from the hot combustion reaction stream flowing in its adjacent channel.
In this context, the protuberances arranged in the channels can achieve
better transport performance within the system, but there is no significant
increase in pressure drop. Such flow disturbance elements designed
for the reactor may also have a beneficial effect on the stability
of flame in the combustion channel. This unique geometry also increases
the contact area between different phases, in addition to improving
reactor performance by increasing transport rates within the system.

The design with flow disturbance elements allows reforming and
combustion reactions to be increased in rate by enhancing transport
within the system, as discussed above. To further illustrate how such
flow disturbance elements can increase the effectiveness of the performance
of transport within the system, a comparison of temperature and methane
concentration fields is made between reactors with and without flow
disturbance elements. Typical contour plots of temperature and methane
concentration are illustrated in Figure 5 in the absence of flow disturbance elements.
Autothermal operation is also feasible for reactors without flow disturbance
elements. However, there exists a noticeable difference in temperature
and methane concentration fields between the two types of reactors
as shown in Figures 2 and 5, which verifies the effectiveness of
the flow disturbance elements arranged in the channels. This indicates
that the protuberances arranged in the channels will be of benefit
to the performance of heat and mass transport within the system. In
addition, higher temperatures and conversion can be achieved for reactors
with flow disturbance elements as shown in Figure 2 due to notably increased rates of transport
within the system. Furthermore, the ignition delay time is shortened
in the gas phase. Overall, flow disturbance elements are of great
importance to the improvement of the performance of transport within
the system. In the presence of flow disturbance elements, the enhanced
mass transport within the system is attributable, in part, to the
increased contact area between different phases. Flow disturbance
elements have also certain regulatory function of flow field distribution
along the length of the reactor, as illustrated in Figure 2.

Figure 5 Contour plots of temperature
and methane concentration for the
reactor in the absence of flow disturbance elements. The parameters
used here are the same as those given in Figure 2.

The primary bottleneck in the development of a heterogeneous catalytic
flow system is caused by the diffusive transport within its boundary
layer. Rectangular-shaped protuberances are introduced into the design
of a thermally integrated microchannel reactor to disrupt the boundary
layer and thereby to increase the effectiveness of the performance
of heat and mass transport within the system. To examine how such
flow disturbance elements can enhance transport performance, the effectiveness
of wake disruption of boundary layers for the increase in heat and
mass transfer rates is assessed herein. Typical contour plots of the
fluid velocity in the transverse direction of the reforming channel
are illustrated in Figure 6 for the reactor in a parallel flow arrangement. Rectangular-shaped
protuberances can serve as a vortex generator to enhance heat and
mass transfer within the system. External flow over a stationary rectangular-shaped
protuberance exhibits periodic vortex shedding,43,44 with a period shorter than the time scale for the establishment
of the boundary layer, eventually leading to the dominance of transient
convection as the heat and mass transport mechanisms. The transport
of heat and mass in the reforming channel is enhanced by utilizing
the vortex shedding mechanism from rectangular-shaped protuberances
subjected to the wake disruption of boundary layers in the transverse
direction, potentially resulting in a kinetics limited regime for
the reforming process. It can be expected that the effectiveness of
the improvement in heat and mass transport is related closely to vortex
dynamics, which depends to a great degree on complex vortex shedding
patterns and their interplay with the boundary layers. As a result,
the flow disturbance elements arranged in the system may be effective
in reducing the resistance to the transport of heat and mass within
the boundary layer.

Figure 6 Contour plots of the fluid velocity in the transverse
direction
of the reforming channel. The parameters used here are the same as
those given in Figure 2.

2.4 Effect
of Fluid Velocity
One of the
main objectives of the thermally coupled system is to utilize energy
released by the catalytic oxidation reaction to maximize the yield
of hydrogen from the steam-methane reforming reaction performed in
the reactor, that is, the total amount of hydrogen obtained in the
reforming process. To make the system more efficient, the effect of
fluid velocity is evaluated herein, and critical velocities are also
determined for the process fluid inlet flow.

The temperature
profiles in the streamwise direction are depicted in Figure 7 for various velocities of
the process fluid inlet flow. Under low fluid velocity conditions,
a small amount of energy released by the exothermic catalytic oxidation
reaction is removed from the combustion channel by the endothermic
steam reforming reaction in its adjacent channel, making the device
temperature very high. Because the traditional catalysts used for
the two chemical reaction processes are not stable at high temperatures,
the heat released from the thermally coupled device needs to be removed
at a rate sufficient to keep local temperatures low enough to avoid
catalyst deactivation. As the device generates heat during operation,
the reactor requires careful thermal management to ensure that it
is within the specified range of operating temperatures. Specifically,
high temperatures are the primary issue that requires careful thermal
management, and the device should be operated below the maximum allowable
operating temperature.

Figure 7 Temperature profiles in the streamwise direction along
the centerline
of the combustion channel, the reforming channel, and the dividing
wall at various velocities of the process fluid inlet flow. All parameters
used here are the same as those given in Figure 2, except the velocity of the process fluid
inlet flow.

On the other hand, under high
fluid velocity conditions, a large
amount of energy released by the exothermic catalytic oxidation reaction
is removed from the combustion channel, making the device temperature
very low, as shown in Figure 7. This will lead to slower preheating of the fluid in the
combustion channel to the ignition temperature, which in turn shifts
the catalytic oxidation reaction downstream. As the combustion chamber
is in direct thermal contact to the reforming chamber for the endothermic
reaction, extinction could occur on the exothermic side and the microdevice
may fail when the velocity of the fluid in the reforming channel is
very high. The term “extinction” refers to a process
by which the catalytic oxidation reaction is terminated in the combustion
chamber of the reactor. Consequently, particular attention must be
paid to the actual flow rate of the reforming reaction stream in order
to achieve self-sustained operation for the system.

2.5 Critical Fluid Velocity
It has been
found that high fluid velocities in the reforming channel could serve
a double purpose of producing high flow rates of hydrogen for use
in fuel cells, while simultaneously reducing the temperature of a
thermally integrated microchannel reactor to satisfy the requirement
of stability of the catalysts and materials used by such a device.32 The maximum fluid velocity in the reforming
channel allowed for self-sustained operation of a thermally coupled
system is hereafter termed as “maximum critical fluid velocity”.
Similarly, the minimum fluid velocity in the reforming channel allowed
to meet the requirement of stability of the catalysts and materials
used by a thermally coupled system is hereafter termed as “minimum
critical fluid velocity”. To provide clear guidance as to what
materials can be used for the reactor, critical velocities of the
process fluid inlet flow are shown in Figure 8 for a countercurrent flow exchange system
and a parallel flow exchange system at various thermal conductivities
of the dividing wall. Each of the shaded regions in Figure 8 represents the operation window
determined within the limits of stability of combustion as well as
the limits of stability of the catalysts and materials used within
the context of practical applications.

Figure 8 Effect of the thermal
conductivity of the dividing wall on the
critical velocity of the process fluid inlet flow for the reactor
operated in a countercurrent flow arrangement and in a parallel flow
arrangement. The shaded region represents the operation window determined
within the limits of stability of combustion as well as the limits
of stability of the catalysts and materials used for the reactor.
The parameters used are given as follows. The velocity of the combustible
fluid inlet flow is 3.0 m/s. The steam-to-carbon ratio is 3.0, and
the equivalence ratio of the combustible mixture at the inlets is
0.8.

The reactor will operate effectively
when the velocity of the process
fluid inlet flow is lower than the critical point determined by extinction
as shown in Figure 8. The critical fluid velocity varies based on the wall thermal conductivity
used. When the velocity of the process fluid inlet flow is higher
than such a critical point, autothermal operation cannot be sustained,
and the reactor will no longer function. Higher thermal conductivities
of the dividing wall will lead to improved heat recirculation within
the system, making possible higher velocities of the process fluid
inlet flow, irrespective of the flow arrangement designed for the
reactor, as shown in Figure 8. There is a decrease in both critical fluid velocities when
the system is operated in a parallel flow arrangement, especially
for highly insulating materials. For highly conductive materials,
interestingly, the difference in critical fluid velocity between the
two flow arrangements becomes less pronounced.

Low velocities
of the process fluid inlet flow will lead to high
temperatures of the dividing wall and of the catalysts used. In contrast,
high velocities of the process fluid inlet flow may result in loss
of stability of the system. The shaded regions in Figure 8 allow stable operation of
the device in terms of the stability of both combustion and materials.
The upper boundary of the reacting flow represents the high inlet
fluid velocity limit determined by loss of stability of combustion
due to extinction. In contrast, the lower boundary of the reacting
flow represents the low inlet fluid velocity limit determined by loss
of stability of materials, and it is assumed that a reasonable threshold
temperature of 1500 K is the limit of materials stability. Between
the two boundaries of these inlet fluid velocities, stable operation
is allowed for the system. However, stable operation is not available
outside of the inlet fluid velocity envelope. The countercurrent flow
configuration has a slight advantage over the parallel flow configuration
in terms of the criterion used for assessing the stability of the
system due to extinction, as shown in Figure 8. However, the parallel flow configuration
offers a wider choice of wall materials for practical applications.

The output power generated from the system is one of the most important
performance metrics, as the main objective of the device is to maximize
the yield of hydrogen as much as possible.5,18 The
value of output power is determined from the lower heating value of
hydrogen, at a temperature of 298.15 K available in the literature.45,46 To obtain the out power generated from the system, the width of
the reactor is assumed to be 10.0 mm in the third dimension. The output
power generated from the reactor with various wall thermal conductivities
is shown in Figure 9 for a countercurrent and a parallel flow exchange system. Each of
the shaded regions in Figure 9 represents the operation window determined within the limits
of stability of combustion as well as the limits of stability of the
catalysts and materials used. The upper boundary of each shaded region
represents the maximum critical velocity of the process fluid inlet
flow, determined by loss of stability of combustion due to extinction.
The maximum output power line represents the maximum yield of hydrogen
produced in the system. However, such an operating line is within
the regime of incomplete conversion for the reforming reaction. Any
further increase in the velocity of the process fluid inlet flow beyond
the maximum output power line will extinguish both reactions. The
maximum output power line presented in Figure 9 has similar feature compared with the critical
velocity of the process fluid inlet flow shown in Figure 8, leading to the same preference
regarding the choice of flow arrangement.

Figure 9 Effect of the thermal
conductivity of the dividing wall on the
output power from the reactor operated in a countercurrent flow arrangement
and in a parallel flow arrangement. The shaded region represents the
operation window determined within the limits of stability of combustion
as well as the limits of stability of the catalysts and materials
used for the reactor. All parameters used here are the same as those
given in Figure 8.

The primary focus here is on the critical fluid
velocity in terms
of the stability of both combustion and materials. However, careful
attention should also be paid to other physical and mechanical properties,
such as mechanical strength, stiffness, and threshold temperatures
of the structure of a continuous flow microreactor system designed
for the production of hydrogen.

2.6 Effect
of Wall Thermal Conductivity
Hot spots may be formed within
the dividing wall under low wall-thermal-conductivity
conditions.47,48 In hot spots, the temperature
is locally very high, and its gradient is steep in the streamwise
direction. Clearly, such a situation is undesirable. It is therefore
of considerable interest to evaluate the effect of the thermal properties
of the dividing wall on the behavior of the system in order to optimize
the design required to implement the reforming process.

To clarify
the effect of the thermal conductivity of the dividing wall, the results
obtained for the maximum temperature are presented in Figure 10 for various velocities of
the process fluid inlet flow, while the velocity of the combustible
fluid inlet flow is kept constant. The maximum temperature of the
dividing wall depends strongly on its thermal conductivity. It is
clear that the thermal conductivity of the dividing wall is a key
factor determining the thermal performance of the system. The maximum
temperature of the dividing wall decreases with increasing wall thermal
conductivity. A high velocity of the process fluid inlet flow will
cause an increase in the amount of the heat transferred in the reactor
from the combustion side to the reforming side, but a decrease in
the maximum temperature of the dividing wall as shown in Figures 7 and 10.

Figure 10 Effect of the thermal conductivity of the dividing wall on its
maximum temperature for various velocities of the process fluid inlet
flow. The shaded region represents the operation window determined
by the maximum critical velocity of the process fluid inlet flow and
the maximum allowable temperature of the dividing wall. The parameters
used are given as follows. The velocity of the combustible fluid inlet
flow is 3.0 m/s. The steam-to-carbon ratio is 3.0, and the equivalence
ratio of the combustible mixture at the inlets is 0.8.

The shaded region in Figure 10 represents the operation window obtained for wall
thermal conductivity of 200 W/(m·K), determined within the limits
of stability of combustion and of the catalysts and materials used.
Clearly, the choice of catalysts, materials, and the velocity of the
process fluid inlet flow is restricted to a particular, narrow operation
window, as depicted in Figure 10. In most cases, only fast reacting flows are allowed
for the reforming reaction stream, and the system would need to be
designed with highly conductive materials for the dividing wall. The
reactor should also be carefully designed to ensure that the velocity
of the process fluid inlet flow is lower than its critical value,
as discussed earlier. However, such an operation window will depend
on the catalysts used as well as the velocity of the combustible fluid
inlet flow to a certain extent.

2.7 Effect
of Reforming Catalyst
In industry,
the steam-methane reforming reaction is conducted in the presence
of a nickel–alumina catalyst under high-temperature and high-pressure
conditions.49,50 The influence of reforming catalyst
on methane conversion and the maximum temperature of the dividing
wall is shown in Figure 11 for different velocities of the process fluid inlet flow.
Specifically, a comparison of the two performance parameters of the
reactor is carried out between a rhodium-based catalyst and a nickel-based
catalyst. The steam-methane reforming reaction over nickel is modeled
using the kinetic mechanism proposed by Maier et al.51 Each of the kinetic mechanisms has its applicable temperature
range.41,51 Any results presented herein at temperatures
above 1273 K are adjusted by extrapolation. The change of washcoat
properties caused by such a nickel-based catalyst may have an influence
on system performance52 but is not considered
in the present work, that is, the same washcoat structure is modeled
herein for the two reforming catalysts.

Figure 11 Effect of reforming
catalyst on the methane conversion for the
reforming reaction as well as the maximum temperature of the dividing
wall at various velocities of the process fluid inlet flow. The velocity
of the process fluid inlet flow varies from 0.38 to 4.0 m/s. The other
parameters used here are the same as those given in Figure 2.

The horizontal dashed line in Figure 11 represents the threshold temperature as
defined early, that is, the limit of materials stability. The shaded
region represents the available range of methane conversion in the
case of nickel at temperatures below the limit specified. When the
system is operated at low velocities of the process fluid inlet flow,
the conversion of the fuel and the maximum temperature of the dividing
wall are both high, as shown in Figure 11. In addition, the two parameters decrease
with increasing the velocity of the process fluid inlet flow. Clearly,
rhodium has performance advantages relative to nickel in this regard.
Such advantages are derived from improved catalytic activity, resulting
in increased conversion for the reforming reaction. In the presence
of a nickel-based catalyst, the realization of the reforming process
with a high conversion will require lower velocities of the process
fluid inlet flow or higher velocities of the combustible fluid inlet
flow. Unfortunately, the stability of the materials used will be a
critical issue in the design of the system. Overall, the use of a
reforming catalyst with high catalytic activity provides the potential
for conducting the steam-methane reforming reaction, making possible
an efficient hydrogen production device.

2.8 Hydrogen
Yield and Output Power
To
further assess the performance of the system, the attainable operation
space for the reactor is discussed based on the power generated from
the hydrogen produced by the steam-methane reforming reaction. Full
efficiency is assumed for a downstream processing device. A two-parameter
continuation algorithm is implemented to trace three main metrics
of reactor performance: hydrogen yield, the methane conversion for
the reforming reaction, and the maximum temperature of the dividing
wall.

The influence of the velocity of the combustible fluid
inlet flow on the output power generated from the reactor as well
as the maximum temperature of the dividing wall is shown in Figure 12. The output power
that can potentially be generated from the system is one of the most
important metrics of reactor performance.53,54 This performance metric is therefore used as an indicator of the
total amount of hydrogen produced from the system by the steam-methane
reforming reaction per unit time. This parameter is especially valuable
for portable power applications such as fuel cells. The theoretical
limits of maximum and minimum allowable output power are also given
in Figure 12 as a
function of the velocity of the combustible fluid inlet flow.

Figure 12 Effect of
the velocity of the combustible fluid inlet flow on (a)
the output power from the reactor as well as (b) the maximum temperature
of the dividing wall. The nearly complete conversion line represents
90% conversion of the fuel used for the reforming reaction. The parameters
used are given as follows. The steam-to-carbon ratio is 3.0, and the
equivalence ratio of the combustible mixture at the inlets is 0.8.
The thermal conductivity of the material of the dividing wall is 200
W/(m·K).

For a given velocity of the combustible
fluid inlet flow, the output
power increases first and then decreases with increasing the velocity
of the process fluid inlet flow, as shown in Figure 12a. The cause of decrease in output power
is due to the loss of stability of the system such as extinction.
When the velocity of the combustible fluid inlet flow is kept constant,
however, the maximum temperature of the dividing wall decreases monotonically
with increasing the velocity of the process fluid inlet flow, as shown
in Figure 12b. There
exist three operating lines for the system: materials stability line,
nearly complete conversion line, and maximum output power line, as
shown in Figure 12. The materials stability line represents the maximum allowable wall
temperature as discussed earlier, beyond which the device may fail.
Lower velocities of the process fluid inlet flow may lead to very
high temperatures, which appears to be an unfavorable situation for
the system. The nearly complete conversion line represents 90% conversion
of the fuel used for the reforming reaction. Any further increase
in the velocity of the process fluid inlet flow beyond such an operating
line would make it impossible to achieve nearly complete conversion,
and lower temperatures in the reactor; however, the output power increases
until a certain point. In the intermediate regime between the above
two operating lines, conversion is nearly complete for the reforming
reaction and temperatures are moderate in the reactor. The maximum
output power line represents the maximum yield of hydrogen produced
in the reactor. However, such an operating line is within the regime
of incomplete conversion for the reforming reaction. Any further increase
in the velocity of the process fluid inlet flow beyond the maximum
output power line will extinguish the reforming reaction occurring
in the reactor. There exists a trade-off between fuel utilization
and output power. It is worth noting that fuel utilization can be
indicated by the conversion of methane in the reforming channel. It
may be desirable to operate the system along the nearly complete conversion
line or the maximum output power line.

The ratio of the velocity
of the process fluid inlet flow to that
of the combustible fluid inlet flow is shown in Figure 13 for the system operated along
the materials stability line, nearly complete conversion line, and
maximum output power line. The operation space for the reactor is
relatively large under low fluid velocity conditions, but shrinks
significantly under high fluid velocity conditions. There is a considerable
range in the velocity of the fluid inlet flow within which conversion
is nearly complete for the reforming reaction and temperatures are
moderate in the reactor. In such a range, there is a good thermal
balance between the endothermic and exothermic reactions conducted
in the reactor, thus reducing the gradient of temperature within the
system.

Figure 13 Ratio of the velocity of the process fluid inlet flow to that of
the combustible fluid inlet flow for the reactor operated along the
materials stability line, nearly complete conversion line, and maximum
output power line, respectively. The ratio obtained from a theoretical
energy balance for the system is 0.58 at the maximum velocity of the
combustible fluid inlet flow studied herein, as indicated by the horizontal
arrow. The parameters used here are the same as those given in Figure 12.

The horizontal arrow in Figure 13 denotes the ratio obtained from a theoretical
energy
balance for the system in the case of complete conversion of the fuel
used for the exothermic and endothermic reactions. The theoretical,
global energy balance for the system in a steady state dictates that
the net heat liberated by the reactor is absorbed as sensible heat
by the process fluid and the combustible fluid. The overall balance
of energy in the system can be expressed as 1  

In the above equation, the enthalpy change of the exothermic and
endothermic reactions at constant pressure is computed at a reference
temperatures of 300 and 400 K, respectively. The results based on
the above theoretical, global energy balance formula indicate that
the ratio of the velocity of the process fluid inlet flow to that
of the combustible fluid inlet flow is 0.58 when the system is operated
at the maximum velocity of the combustible fluid inlet flow given
in Figure 13. Overall,
the above formula provides a convenient tool for initial assessment
of such a ratio.

3 Conclusions
Numerical
simulations were performed for a portable hydrogen production
system to gain insights into its operating characteristics and to
provide an effective method for design. The system was designed in
a thermally integrated manner, and its channels were arranged with
rectangular-shaped protuberances. The effectiveness of wake disruption
of boundary layers for the increase in transport performance was assessed.
The effect of design parameters and process variables on various performance
metrics was evaluated. Some of the key features of the behavior exhibited
by the thermally integrated system were presented. The operating window
in terms of various design parameters and process variables was determined.

The results indicated that continuous flow and microreactor technology
have great potential for the development of portable hydrogen production
systems. Autothermal operation of the thermally integrated system
is feasible provided that its geometry structure, design parameters,
and process variables are well designed. The flow disturbance elements
arranged in the channels are of great benefit to the performance of
the system. Such a design is effective in reducing the resistance
to transport within the boundary layer, thereby enhancing transport
within the system. There exists a trade-off between fuel utilization
and output power. Output power should be evaluated in the context
of a constraint imposed by a minimum acceptable yield of hydrogen.
The high temperatures generated by catalytic combustion of methane
make it feasible to operate the system effectively. Careful thermal
management is always necessary for small-scale, thermally integrated
reacting systems to preserve operational safety and device integrity.
In particular, it is critical to ensure an effective thermal balance
between the exothermic and endothermic reactions conducted in adjacent
channels to avoid both reactor extinction and severe temperature excursions.
Adjustment of fluid velocities affords an effective way of balancing
the thermally coupled exothermic and endothermic reactions and of
mitigating the formation of hot spots. Efficient and stable operation
of a thermally integrated reacting system is favored by materials
with high thermal conductivities. The catalytic activity of reforming
catalysts must be high enough to achieve the desired level of fuel
conversion with a lower temperature peak.

4 Computational
Methods
Computational fluid dynamics has become an important
tool for the
analysis of chemically reacting flows to provide a fundamental understanding
of the coupling between physical and chemical processes,55,56 especially at the micro-scale.57,58 The definition
of computational fluid dynamics has expanded from its original emphasis
on fluid dynamics to include heat and mass transport and detailed
chemical reactions.59,60 The continued growth of computational
power will make it possible to solve more and more complex problems
associated with chemically reacting flows. Microchannel reactor modeling
is usually performed using such a methodology because computational
fluid dynamics can serve as a means for treating reacting flows by
solving the spatial distribution of the temperature, concentration,
and velocity fields.61,62 In thermally coupled microchemical
systems, reacting flows offer many difficult challenges and require
specialized models to describe the coupling between chemical reactions
and transport processes as well as between endothermic and exothermic
reactions. In this study, a computational fluid dynamics model is
developed to guide reactor design and analysis. The model includes
all hydrodynamic effects, mass transfer, heat transfer, and surface
and gas-phase reaction mechanisms.

4.1 Modeling of the System
To understand
the fundamental characteristics of a thermally integrated microchannel
reactor, a simple system will be of significance for design and optimization,
with which valuable insights could be gained. Thermal radiation is
negligible in the gas phase. Homogeneous reactions are negligible
in the reforming channel due to their insignificant contributions
even at very high temperatures. Furthermore, a laminar reacting flow
is considered for the system, given that the reactants flow in the
channels to produce a Reynolds number, based on the height of the
channels and the velocities of the fluid inlet flow, up to about 280.
The governing equations of fluid dynamics are described in detail
in standard textbooks on transport phenomena63 for such a chemical reacting system. The commercial computational
fluid dynamics code ANSYS Fluent64 is applied
to simulate the system and subsequently to obtain steady-state solutions
of the problem.

The steady-state balance of mass can be expressed
for each fluid phase as 2  

The balance of momentum can be written
for each fluid phase as 3   4  

The balance of energy is given for
each fluid phase by 5  

The balance of mass for each gaseous species takes the following
form 6  

The diffusion velocity
of gaseous species k is
defined by 7  

Density is defined
for the mixture as 8  

The total number of active
surface sites is conserved as described
by 9  

The balance of energy is given for the solid phase by 10  

The balance of mass at each interface
between phases is given for
each gaseous species by 11  

This surface species coverage equation is solved for each
interface
between phases.

The washcoat structure is modeled as porous
media wherein chemical
reactions occur. As internal pore diffusional effects can be significant,
the effectiveness factor is used to account for65 12  where the Thiele modulus can be expressed
as 13  

Large values of the
Thiele modulus represent slow diffusion with
fast reactions, whereas small values of the Thiele modulus represent
fast diffusion with slow reactions. The Thiele modulus and the effectiveness
factor can be determined with the user-defined species such as methane.

The exposed catalyst area per unit of volume can be formulated
as 14  

Both the bulk and Knudsen diffusion are assumed to contribute
to
the mass transfer rate in the washcoat. The effective diffusivity
of species i in the washcoat can be expressed as
follows66 15  where the Knudsen diffusivity is defined for
species i as 16  

The effective thermal conductivity of the catalyst washcoats
can
be formulated as 17  

Continuity in heat flux and temperature is
applied at each interface
between phases. The balance of energy at each interface between phases
can be expressed as 18  

The net radiation
method for diffuse-gray areas is used to solve
the equation of radiative heat transfer between surfaces. The discrete
ordinates radiation model is used to evaluate the internal radiation
flux. The internal emissivity is specified to be 0.8.

The rate
of heat loss from the dividing wall to its surroundings
can be expressed as 19  

The view
factor for solid-ambient, Fs–∞, is introduced into the equation to account for radiative loss of
heat, which is assumed to be at unity. In addition, the external heat
loss coefficient, h′, is assumed to be 20
W/(m2·K).

4.2 Chemical Kinetic Model
The conservation
equations described above are solved for the model with specified
reaction kinetics. Detailed reaction mechanisms, coupled with computational
fluid dynamics, are often necessary for describing complex reacting
flows.67 In the present work, a full set
of surface reactions involved in the steam-methane reforming process
is considered.

The reforming process is modeled using the kinetic
mechanism proposed by Karakaya et al.68 The kinetic mechanism is thermodynamically consistent only in a
temperature range from 273 to 1273 K. This limitation will become
very critical when temperatures are very high in the system. Many
possible reaction processes in the reactor being modeled are included
in the kinetic mechanism. For example, steam and dry reforming reactions,
partial and total oxidation reactions, the water–gas shift
reaction, and the reverse methanation reaction are all accounted for.

An important consideration in the catalytic oxidation process is
the thermal and chemical coupling between the surface and gas-phase
reactions involved. In general, surface reactions occurring at the
interfaces between phases and gas-phase reactions occurring in the
fluid phase must be both accounted for.69 Surface and gas-phase reaction processes are modeled simultaneously.
The surface reaction process is modeled using the kinetic mechanism
developed by Deutschmann et al.70 The gas-phase
reaction process is modeled using the kinetic mechanism GRI-Mech 3.0,71 which is widely used in the field of combustion
modeling.72

Detailed reaction mechanisms
are included in the model. Most of
the reaction mechanisms used in the model involve hundreds of elementary
reaction steps, and thus these steps are not included herein for the
sake of simplicity. However, full details of the surface reaction
mechanisms68,70 used in the model are freely
available for download on the website: https://www.detchem.com/home.73 Full details of the gas-phase reaction
mechanism, GRI-Mech 3.0, used in the model are freely available for
download on the website: http://www.me.berkeley.edu/gri-mech/.71

In the present work, gas-phase
and surface reaction rates are handled
by the CHEMKIN74 and Surface-CHEMKIN75 codes, respectively. Variable transport properties
are determined by the CHEMKIN transport database.76

4.3 Numerical Approach
A nonuniform grid
is used with more nodes accumulated near the protuberances. Computations
are conducted using grids with various node densities to determine
the optimum node density and spacing that would give the desired accuracy
and minimize computation time. The typical grid used consists of 20 000
nodes in total, and the grid independence of the solution is verified.
A uniform, flat velocity profile is used at the inlets to the channels.
Zero Neumann boundary conditions are applied for both temperature
and fluid velocity at the outlets of the channels. The second-order
upwind scheme is used for discretization, and the SIMPLE algorithm
is used for pressure–velocity coupling in steady flows. The
residuals of the conservation equations are used to check the convergence
of the solution. The convergence criterion used is 10–6 for all conservation equations. Note that the most significant drawbacks
of the model developed herein are its limitation in terms of Reynolds
number and of geometrical complexity.

4.4 Validation
of the Model
To demonstrate
that the implemented model is a reasonable representation of the system
being modeled, validation is carried out by comparing the results
obtained from the model with the experimental data available in the
literature.77,78

To validate the combustion
model, the measurement data available in the literature77 are utilized. Numerical simulations are conducted
under exactly the same conditions as the combustion system designed
in the literature.77 The length, width,
and height of the combustion channel used in the system are 250.0,
100.0, and 7.0 mm, respectively. Because of the high width-to-height
ratio, the combustion channel can be modeled as a two-dimensional
system. The material of the walls used in the combustion channel is
silicon carbide. Platinum is used as a catalyst in the combustion
process, as reported in the literature.77 In comparison with the experimental data, the centerline concentration
profiles of hydroxyl radicals in the streamwise direction are shown
in Figure 14a. Results
are presented in the figure for three cases, which are denoted as
(a–c). The temperature, fluid velocity, and equivalence ratio
at the inlet to the combustion channel are given as follows: case
(a): 750 K, 1.0 m/s, and 0.37; case (b): 729 K, 2.0 m/s, and 0.37;
case (c): 754 K, 1.0 m/s, and 0.31. The centerline concentration profiles
of hydroxyl radicals predicted by the model are shifted longitudinally
to match the peak positions of hydroxyl radicals measured by planar
laser-induced fluorescence. The relative longitudinal position is
the position of hydroxyl radicals relative to the homogeneous ignition
in the gas phase in the longitudinal direction. The results produced
by the model are close to the measurement data available in the literature.77 There is a rapid increase in the concentration
of hydroxyl radicals along the length of the combustion channel, which
is an important indicator of the initialization of homogeneous ignition
in the gas phase. As the results obtained from the model coincide
with the experimental data, it may be taken as evidence that the model
behaves correctly with respect to the combustion system.

Figure 14 (a) Comparison
of the centerline concentration profiles of hydroxyl
radicals in the streamwise direction after the initialization of the
homogeneous ignition in the gas phase with the experimental data available
in the literature.77 The centerline concentration
profiles of hydroxyl radicals predicted by the model are shifted longitudinally
to match the peak positions of hydroxyl radicals measured by planar
laser-induced fluorescence. (b) Comparison of the selectivity to carbon
dioxide and the conversion of methane during the steam-methane reforming
process in the presence of a rhodium catalyst with the experimental
data available in the literature.78

To validate the reforming model, the experimental
data available
in the literature78 are utilized. The catalysts
contained therein are rhodium and nickel, and the study is focused
primarily on the catalytic performance of a steam-methane reforming
process.78 The length, width, and height
of the reforming channel are 30.0, 18.0, and 0.5 mm, respectively.
Because of the very high width-to-height ratio, the reforming channel
can also be modeled as a two-dimensional system. The results obtained
for rhodium are used to validate the reforming scheme described above.
The temperature at the inlet of the reforming channel is 900 K, and
the steam-to-carbon ratio is 3.0. The material of the walls used in
the reforming channel is Fecralloy. The Fecralloy is coated with α-alumina
and γ-alumina in sequence. Computational fluid dynamics simulations
are conducted with the model under exactly the same conditions as
the reforming system designed in the literature77 to determine whether or not the model is reasonable and
correct. In comparison with the experimental data, the selectivity
to carbon dioxide and the conversion of methane during the steam-methane
reforming process in the presence of a rhodium catalyst are shown
in Figure 14b. The
results obtained from the model coincide with the experimental data.

Validation of the model has been conducted against the measurement
data available in the literature77,78 to check the
accuracy and credibility of the model. Overall, the implemented model
can be assumed to be a valid representation of the system being modeled.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported
by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (no. 51506048).

Notations
Ciconcentration of species i at an interface
between phases, eq 13

DTthermal
diffusivity, eq 7

Deffeffective
diffusivity, eq 13

Dmdiffusivity, eq 7

Fview factor, eq 19

ΔrHenthalpy of a reaction at constant
pressure, eq 1

Kgnumber
of gaseous species, eq 5

Ksnumber
of surface species, eq 9

Rideal gas constant, eq 8

Ttemperature, eq 1

Vdiffusion velocity, eq 6

Wmolecular weight, eq 6

W̅average molecular
weight, eq 7

Ymass fraction, eq 1

c̅pspecific average heat capacity at constant pressure, eq 1

dporemean
pore diameter, eq 16

henthalpy, eq 5

h′external
heat loss coefficient, eq 19

mtotal number of species
in a mixture, eq 9

ṁmass flow
rate, eq 1

ppressure, eq 3

qheat flux, eq 18

ṡsurface reaction
rate, eq 9

ṡeffeffective surface reaction rate, eq 12

ufluid velocity in
the streamwise direction, eq 2

vfluid velocity in
the transverse direction, eq 2

xstreamwise coordinate, eq 2 and Figure 1

ytransverse coordinate, eq 2 and Figure 1

Greek Letters
Γsurface site density, eq 9

ΦThiele modulus, eq 12

αactive catalyst area per unit
volume, eq 11

γexposed catalyst
area per unit
of volume, eq 13

δthickness of a washcoat, eq 13

εemissivity of the wall surface, eq 19

εpporosity, eq 15

ηeffectiveness factor, eq 11

λthermal conductivity, eq 5

λeffeffective thermal
conductivity, eq 17

μdynamic viscosity, eq 3

ρdensity of fluid phase, eq 2

σStefan–Boltzmann constant, eq 19

θsurface coverage, eq 9

τptortuosity factor, eq 15

ω̇gas-phase reaction rate, eq 6

Subscripts
ggas, eq 5

ispecies index, eq 12

kgaseous species index, eq 5

msurface species index, eq 9

ssolid, eq 10

xstreamwise component, eq 5

ytransverse component, eq 5

∞surroundings, eq 19
==== Refs
References
Vilé G. 
Flow Chemistry
& Catalysis - Where do we stand and where do we need to go? . Catal. Today 
2018 , 308 , 1 –2 . 10.1016/j.cattod.2018.03.008 .
Plutschack M. B. ; Pieber B. ; Gilmore K. ; Seeberger P. H. 
The hitchhiker’s
guide to flow chemistry . Chem. Rev. 
2017 , 117 , 11796 –11893 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00183 .28570059 
Suryawanshi P. L. ; Gumfekar S. P. ; Bhanvase B. A. ; Sonawane S. H. ; Pimplapure M. S. 
A review
on microreactors: Reactor fabrication, design, and cutting-edge applications . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
2018 , 189 , 431 –448 . 10.1016/j.ces.2018.03.026 .
Kolb G. 
Review: Microstructured
reactors for distributed and renewable production of fuels and electrical
energy . Chem. Eng. Process. 
2013 , 65 , 1 –44 . 10.1016/j.cep.2012.10.015 .
Tonkovich A. Y. ; Perry S. ; Wang Y. ; Qiu D. ; LaPlante T. ; Rogers W. A. 
Microchannel process technology for
compact methane
steam reforming . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
2004 , 59 , 4819 –4824 . 10.1016/j.ces.2004.07.098 .
Tonkovich A. L. Y. ; Yang B. ; Perry S. T. ; Fitzgerald S. P. ; Wang Y. 
From seconds to milliseconds to microseconds
through tailored microchannel
reactor design of a steam methane reformer . Catal. Today 
2007 , 120 , 21 –29 . 10.1016/j.cattod.2006.07.022 .
Pennemann H. ; Kolb G. 
Review: Microstructured
reactors as efficient tool for the operation
of selective oxidation reactions . Catal. Today 
2016 , 278 , 3 –21 . 10.1016/j.cattod.2016.04.032 .
Wang K. ; Li L. ; Xie P. ; Luo G. 
Liquid-liquid microflow reaction
engineering . React. Chem. Eng. 
2017 , 2 , 611 –627 . 10.1039/c7re00082k .
Zhang J. ; Gong C. ; Zeng X. ; Xie J. 
Continuous flow chemistry:
New strategies for preparative inorganic chemistry . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2016 , 324 , 39 –53 . 10.1016/j.ccr.2016.06.011 .
Rossetti I. ; Compagnoni M. 
Chemical reaction
engineering, process design and scale-up
issues at the frontier of synthesis: Flow chemistry . Chem. Eng. J. 
2016 , 296 , 56 –70 . 10.1016/j.cej.2016.02.119 .
Rossetti I. 
Continuous
flow (micro-)reactors for heterogeneously catalyzed reactions: Main
design and modelling issues . Catal. Today 
2018 , 308 , 20 –31 . 10.1016/j.cattod.2017.09.040 .
Newman S. G. ; Jensen K. F. 
The role of flow
in green chemistry and engineering . Green Chem. 
2013 , 15 , 1456 –1472 . 10.1039/c3gc40374b .
Jensen K. F. 
Flow chemistry-Microreaction
technology comes of age . AIChE J. 
2017 , 63 , 858 –869 . 10.1002/aic.15642 .
Yue J. 
Multiphase
flow processing in microreactors combined with heterogeneous catalysis
for efficient and sustainable chemical synthesis . Catal. Today 
2018 , 308 , 3 –19 . 10.1016/j.cattod.2017.09.041 .
Mallia C. J. ; Baxendale I. R. 
The use
of gases in flow synthesis . Org. Process Res.
Dev. 
2016 , 20 , 327 –360 . 10.1021/acs.oprd.5b00222 .
Westermann T. ; Mleczko L. 
Heat management in
microreactors for fast exothermic
organic syntheses-first design principles . Org.
Process Res. Dev. 
2016 , 20 , 487 –494 . 10.1021/acs.oprd.5b00205 .
Nikolaidis P. ; Poullikkas A. 
A comparative
overview of hydrogen production processes . Renewable
Sustainable Energy Rev. 
2017 , 67 , 597 –611 . 10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.044 .
Sengodan S. ; Lan R. ; Humphreys J. ; Du D. ; Xu W. ; Wang H. ; Tao S. 
Advances in reforming
and partial oxidation of hydrocarbons for hydrogen
production and fuel cell applications . Renewable
Sustainable Energy Rev. 
2018 , 82 , 761 –780 . 10.1016/j.rser.2017.09.071 .
Zhang X. ; Shi C. ; Chen B. ; Kuhn A. N. ; Ma D. ; Yang H. 
Progress in
hydrogen production over transition metal carbide catalysts: Challenges
and opportunities . Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng. 
2018 , 20 , 68 –77 . 10.1016/j.coche.2018.02.010 .
Ewan B. ; Allen R. 
A figure of merit assessment
of the routes to hydrogen . Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy 
2005 , 30 , 809 –819 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2005.02.003 .
Iulianelli A. ; Ribeirinha P. ; Mendes A. ; Basile A. 
Methanol steam reforming
for hydrogen generation via conventional and membrane reactors: A
review . Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 
2014 , 29 , 355 –368 . 10.1016/j.rser.2013.08.032 .
Holladay J. D. ; Wang Y. ; Jones E. 
Review of
developments in portable
hydrogen production using microreactor technology . Chem. Rev. 
2004 , 104 , 4767 –4790 . 10.1021/cr020721b .15669168 
Peighambardoust S. J. ; Rowshanzamir S. ; Amjadi M. 
Review of the proton exchange membranes
for fuel cell applications . Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy 
2010 , 35 , 9349 –9384 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2010.05.017 .
Edwards P. P. ; Kuznetsov V. L. ; David W. I. F. ; Brandon N. P. 
Hydrogen and fuel
cells: Towards a sustainable energy future . Energy Policy 
2008 , 36 , 4356 –4362 . 10.1016/j.enpol.2008.09.036 .
Palo D. R. ; Holladay J. D. ; Dagle R. A. ; Rozmiarek R. T.  Compact integrated
combustion reactors, systems and methods of conducting integrated
combustion reactions . U.S. Patent 8,696,771 B2 , 2014 .
Holladay J. D. ; Wang Y. ; Chin Y.-H. ; Phelps M.  Microcombustors,
microreformers,
and methods involving combusting or reforming liquids . U.S. Patent 8,197,777 B2 , 2012 .
Tonkovich A. L. ; Roberts G. ; Perry S.
T. ; Fitzgerald S. P. ; Wegeng R. S. ; Wang Y. ; Vanderwiel D. ; Marco J.
L.  Integrated reactors,
methods of making same, and methods of conducting simultaneous exothermic
and endothermic reactions . U.S. Patent 9,452,402 , 2016 .
Mathias J. A. ; Chadwell G. B. ; Tonkovich A. Y. ; Perry S. T. ; Schmidt M. B. ; Fitzgerald S. P. ; Hesse D. J. ; Yuschak T. D. ; Yang B.  Multi-stream microchannel
device . U.S. Patent 8,685,365 , 2014 .
Leveson P. D.  Thermally coupled
monolith reactor . U.S. Patent 20,100,133,474 , 2010 .
Perry S. T. ; Arora R. ; Twigg M. ; Yang B. ; Yuschak T. ; Jarosch K. T. P. ; Drescher E. H. ; Letellier F. ; Gabrielsson A.  Process and apparatus for conducting
simultaneous endothermic and exothermic reactions .
U.S. Patent 9,676,623 , 2017 .
Holladay J.
D. ; Wang Y. 
A review of
recent advances in numerical simulations of microscale
fuel processor for hydrogen production . J. Power
Sources 
2015 , 282 , 602 –621 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.01.079 .
Deshmukh S. R. ; Vlachos D. G. 
CFD simulations
of coupled, countercurrent combustor/reformer microdevices
for hydrogen production . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2005 , 44 , 4982 –4992 . 10.1021/ie0490987 .
Coppens M.-O. ; Tsotsis T. T. 
New frontiers in reaction and catalysis engineering . Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng. 
2013 , 2 , 302 –303 . 10.1016/j.coche.2013.07.003 .
Al-Rifai N. ; Cao E. ; Dua V. ; Gavriilidis A. 
Microreaction technology aided catalytic
process design . Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng. 
2013 , 2 , 338 –345 . 10.1016/j.coche.2013.05.004 .
Deshmukh S. R. ; Vlachos D. G. 
Effect of flow configuration
on the operation of coupled
combustor/reformer microdevices for hydrogen production . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
2005 , 60 , 5718 –5728 . 10.1016/j.ces.2005.04.082 .
Zanfir M. ; Gavriilidis A. 
Influence of flow arrangement in catalytic plate reactors
for methane steam reforming . Chem. Eng. Res.
Des. 
2004 , 82 , 252 –258 . 10.1205/026387604772992846 .
Ghareghashi A. ; Sarrafi A. ; Ghader S. 
The effect
of heat transfer on products
of a thermally coupled shell and tube reactor consisting of two processes:
Steam reforming of methane and oxidative coupling of methane . Chem. Eng. Process. 
2018 , 133 , 263 –277 . 10.1016/j.cep.2018.09.008 .
Chompupun T. ; Limtrakul S. ; Vatanatham T. ; Kanhari C. ; Ramachandran P. A. 
Experiments,
modeling and scaling-up of membrane reactors for hydrogen production
via steam methane reforming . Chem. Eng. Process. 
2018 , 134 , 124 –140 . 10.1016/j.cep.2018.10.007 .
Bartholomew C. H. 
Carbon
deposition in steam reforming and methanation . Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng. 
1982 , 24 , 67 –112 . 10.1080/03602458208079650 .
Maestri M. ; Vlachos D. ; Beretta A. ; Groppi G. ; Tronconi E. 
Steam and
dry reforming of methane on Rh: Microkinetic analysis and hierarchy
of kinetic models . J. Catal. 
2008 , 259 , 211 –222 . 10.1016/j.jcat.2008.08.008 .
Jensen K. F. 
Microreaction
engineering - is small better? . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
2001 , 56 , 293 –303 . 10.1016/s0009-2509(00)00230-x .
Schlichting H.  Boundary-Layer
Theory , 7 th ed.; McGraw-Hill Series
in Mechanical Engineering ; McGraw-Hill Education : New York, United States , 1979 , ISBN 978-0-070-55334-7.
Celik B. ; Raisee M. ; Beskok A. 
Heat transfer
enhancement in a slot
channel via a transversely oscillating adiabatic circular cylinder . Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 
2010 , 53 , 626 –634 . 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2009.10.034 .
Beskok A. ; Raisee M. ; Celik B. ; Yagiz B. ; Cheraghi M. 
Heat transfer
enhancement in a straight channel via a rotationally oscillating adiabatic
cylinder . Int. J. Therm. Sci. 
2012 , 58 , 61 –69 . 10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2012.03.012 .
Rumble J.  CRC Handbook of Chemistry
and Physics , 99 th ed.; CRC Press : Boca Raton, Florida, United
States , 2018 , ISBN 978-1-1385-6163-2.
Linstrom P. J. ; Mallard W. G.  NIST Chemistry WebBook,
NIST Standard Reference Database Number 69 ; National Institute of Standards and Technology : Gaithersburg, Maryland, United States , 2018 .
Zanfir M. ; Gavriilidis A. 
Modelling
of a catalytic plate reactor for dehydrogenation-combustion
coupling . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
2001 , 56 , 2671 –2683 . 10.1016/s0009-2509(00)00522-4 .
Moreno A. ; Murphy K. ; Wilhite B. A. 
Parametric study
of solid-phase axial
heat conduction in thermally integrated microchannel networks . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2008 , 47 , 9040 –9054 . 10.1021/ie8001638 .
National Research Council and
National Academy of Engineering  . The
Hydrogen Economy: Opportunities, Costs, Barriers, and R&D Needs ; The National Academies Press : Washington, D.C., United States , 2004 .
Rostrup-Nielsen J. R. 
Steam reforming
and chemical recuperation . Catal. Today 
2009 , 145 , 72 –75 . 10.1016/j.cattod.2008.06.019 .
Maier L. ; Schädel B. ; Herrera Delgado K. ; Tischer S. ; Deutschmann O. 
Steam reforming
of methane over nickel: Development of a multi-step surface reaction
mechanism . Top. Catal. 
2011 , 54 , 845 –858 . 10.1007/s11244-011-9702-1 .
Cao C. ; Zhang N. ; Cheng Y. 
Numerical analysis on steam methane
reforming in a plate microchannel reactor: Effect of washcoat properties . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2016 , 41 , 18921 –18941 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.09.034 .
Yun T. M. ; Kottke P. A. ; Anderson D. M. ; Fedorov A. G. 
Power density assessment
of variable volume batch reactors for hydrogen production with dynamically
modulated liquid fuel introduction . Ind. Eng.
Chem. Res. 
2014 , 53 , 18140 –18151 . 10.1021/ie500990d .
Nami H. ; Akrami E. 
Analysis of a gas turbine
based hybrid system by utilizing
energy, exergy and exergoeconomic methodologies for steam, power and
hydrogen production . Energy Convers. Manage. 
2017 , 143 , 326 –337 . 10.1016/j.enconman.2017.04.020 .
Leal L. G. 
4 Challenges
and Opportunities in Fluid Mechanics and Transport Phenomena . Adv. Chem. Eng. 
1991 , 16 , 61 –79 . 10.1016/s0065-2377(08)60145-3 .
Pearson J. R. A. 
6 Fluid
Mechanics and Transport Phenomena . Adv. Chem.
Eng. 
1991 , 16 , 97 –107 . 10.1016/s0065-2377(08)60147-7 .
Arzamendi G. ; Diéguez P. M. ; Montes M. ; Odriozola J. A. ; Sousa-Aguiar E. F. ; Gandía L. M. 
Methane steam reforming in a microchannel
reactor for GTL intensification: A computational fluid dynamics simulation
study . Chem. Eng. J. 
2009 , 154 , 168 –173 . 10.1016/j.cej.2009.01.035 .
Ngo S. I. ; Lim Y.-I. ; Kim W. ; Seo D. J. ; Yoon W. L. 
Computational
fluid dynamics and experimental validation of a compact steam methane
reformer for hydrogen production from natural gas . Appl. Energy 
2019 , 236 , 340 –353 . 10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.11.075 .
Blazek J.  Computational Fluid Dynamics:
Principles and Applications , 3 rd ed.; Elsevier Ltd. : Oxford, United Kingdom , 2015 , ISBN: 978-0-08-099995-1.
Tu J. ; Yeoh G.-H. , Liu C.  Computational Fluid Dynamics: A Practical
Approach , 3 rd ed.; Elsevier
Ltd. : Oxford, United Kingdom , 2019 , ISBN: 978-0-08-101127-0.
Yang Q. ; Zhao P. ; Ge H. 
reactingFoam-SCI: An open source
CFD platform for reacting flow simulation . Comput.
Fluids 
2019 , 190 , 114 –127 . 10.1016/j.compfluid.2019.06.008 .
Shah J. J. ; Fox R. O. 
Computational Fluid
Dynamics Simulation of Chemical
Reactors: Application of in Situ Adaptive Tabulation to Methane Thermochlorination
Chemistry . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
1999 , 38 , 4200 –4212 . 10.1021/ie990125g .
Bird R. B. ; Stewart W. E. ; Lightfoot E. N.  Transport Phenomena,
Revised , 2 nd ed.; John
Wiley & Sons, Inc. : Hoboken, New
Jersey, United States , 2007 , ISBN: 978-0-470-11539-8.
ANSYS FLUENT User’s Guide, Release 16.0 , ANSYS Inc. , Canonsburg, Pennsylvania,
United States , 2014 .
van Santen R. A.  Modern
Heterogeneous Catalysis: An Introduction ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc. : Hoboken,
New Jersey, United States , 2017 , ISBN:
978-3-527-69450-1.
Daïan J.-F.  Equilibrium
and Transfer in Porous Media 2: Transfer Laws ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc. : Hoboken,
New Jersey, United States , 2014 , ISBN:
978-1-118-93126-4.
Deutschmann O. 
Modeling of
the interactions between catalytic surfaces and gas-phase . Catal. Lett. 
2015 , 145 , 272 –289 . 10.1007/s10562-014-1431-1 .
Karakaya C. ; Maier L. ; Deutschmann O. 
Surface reaction
kinetics of the
oxidation and reforming of CH4 over Rh/Al2O3 catalysts . Int. J. Chem.
Kinet. 
2016 , 48 , 144 –160 . 10.1002/kin.20980 .
Balakotaiah V. ; Alam I. ; West D. H. 
Heat and
mass transfer coefficients
and bifurcation analysis of coupled homogeneous-catalytic reactions . Chem. Eng. J. 
2017 , 321 , 207 –221 . 10.1016/j.cej.2017.02.142 .
Deutschmann O. ; Maier L. I. ; Riedel U. ; Stroemman A. H. ; Dibble R. W. 
Hydrogen assisted catalytic combustion
of methane on
platinum . Catal. Today 
2000 , 59 , 141 –150 . 10.1016/s0920-5861(00)00279-0 .
Smith G. P. ; Golden D. M. ; Frenklach M. ; Moriarty N. W. ; Eiteneer B. ; Goldenberg M. ; Bowman C. T. ; Hanson R. K. ; Song S. ; Gardiner W. C. Jr.; Lissianski V. V. ; Qin Z.  GRI-Mech
3.0 . http://www.me.berkeley.edu/gri-mech/ 2000 (accessed Aug 11, 2019 ).
Westbrook C. K. ; Mizobuchi Y. ; Poinsot T. J. ; Smith P. J. ; Warnatz J. 
Computational
combustion . Proc. Combust. Inst. 
2005 , 30 , 125 –157 . 10.1016/j.proci.2004.08.275 .
Deutschmann O. ; Tischer S. ; Correa C. ; Chatterjee D. ; Kleditzsch S. ; Janardhanan V. M. ; Mladenov N. ; Minh H. D. ; Karadeniz H. ; Hettel M.  DETCHEM  software package, 2.5 ed., https://www.detchem.com/home, 2014, Karlsruhe , (accessed Aug 11, 2019 ).
Kee R. J. ; Rupley F. M. ; Meeks E. ; Miller J. A.  CHEMKIN-III: a FORTRAN
Chemical Kinetics Package for the Analysis of Gasphase Chemical and
Plasma Kinetics, Report No. SAND96-8216 ; Sandia National Laboratories : Livermore,
CA, United States , 1996 .
Coltrin M. E. ; Kee R. J. ; Rupley F. M. ; Meeks E.  SURFACE CHEMKIN-III:
a FORTRAN Package for Analyzing Heterogeneous Chemical Kinetics at
a Solid-Surface-Gas-Phase Interface, Report No. SAND96-8217 ; Sandia National Laboratories : Livermore, CA, United States , 1996 .
Kee R. J. ; Dixon-lewis G. ; Warnatz J. ; Coltrin M. E. ; Miller J. A. ; Moffat H. K.  A FORTRAN
Computer
Code Package for the Evaluation of Gas-Phase, Multicomponent Transport
Properties, Report No. SAND86-8246B ; Sandia
National Laboratories : Livermore,
CA, United States , 1998 .
Dogwiler U. ; Mantzaras J. ; Benz P. ; Kaeppeli B. ; Bombach R. ; Arnold A. 
Homogeneous ignition of methane-air mixtures over platinum:
Comparison of measurements and detailed numerical predictions . Symp. (Int.) Combust. 
1998 , 27 , 2275 –2282 . 10.1016/s0082-0784(98)80077-5 .
Zhai X. ; Cheng Y. ; Zhang Z. ; Jin Y. ; Cheng Y. 
Steam reforming
of methane over Ni catalyst in micro-channel reactor . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2011 , 36 , 7105 –7113 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.03.065 .

