
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145770510.1021/acsomega.7b00990EditorialACS Omega: The Inaugural Year in Perspective Ganesh Krishna Liz-Marzán Luis Zhang Deqing Bohne Cornelia 28 07 2017 31 07 2017 2 7 4030 4031 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.document-id-old-9ao7b00990document-id-new-14ao-2017-00990wccc-price
==== Body
ACS Omega was launched in April
2016 as an open-access global journal for publication of
original research articles of any length that describe new findings
in chemistry and interfacing areas of science, without any evaluation
of perceived immediate impact. The scientific scope of ACS
Omega encompasses topics covered by all ACS journals, including
interfacing areas between chemistry and other fields of science. The
open-access mandate of ACS Omega makes the published
knowledge immediately available to academic researchers, industry,
media, policy makers, and the general public, thereby returning scientific
outcomes to society. This ensures inclusiveness of researchers in
the global scientific effort, by making every article accessible to
anyone upon publication and in perpetuity, thereby permitting authors
to reach a broad readership beyond the traditional academic environment.
In addition to direct submissions, an important benefit of ACS Omega is the full consideration of manuscripts transferred
from other peer-reviewed sister ACS journals, where immediate impact
is often evaluated, offering authors the opportunity to stay within
the ACS portfolio.

ACS Omega strongly recognizes
the value of new
and original science in areas without established significance or
apparent lack of immediate impact, thus encouraging authors to venture
into innovative research, without enforced conventional boundaries
for publication acceptance. The editorial line developed by ACS Omega thus supports inventive science based on concepts
not previously described; such originality is central to innovation
and advancing the frontiers of science. ACS Omega is intended to emerge as a home for various forms of research such
as methods, algorithms, comprehensive data, interdisciplinary research,
and negative results that point to further areas of inquiry. Stating
the reasoning behind the research reported in the manuscript in an
explicit and justifiable manner is vital for readers to comprehend
the motivation of the work described.

By virtue of the fact
that ACS Omega encourages
manuscripts with connections to other fields beyond chemistry, many
of the submitted papers are interdisciplinary in nature. The wide
range of topics covered by ACS Omega, with chemical
relevance and covering the scope of all ACS journals, is reflected
in the composition of our team of Associate Editors and Editorial
Advisory Board members, with a broad expertise drawn from as many
as 18 countries around the globe. To meet the expectations of the
global chemistry community,
the journal has put in place a transparent and simple submission process
and expedites fair decision-making workflows that take into account
previous reviews for transferred manuscripts from sister ACS journals.
Interdisciplinary publications demand upholding quality metrics for
the reported science of each of the constituted disciplines, conforming
to the expectation for scientific rigor associated with ACS journals.

ACS Omega initially published exclusively research
articles of any length, in recognition that research work without
justification for either rapid publication or of immediate impact,
but presenting valid and useful data, is valuable for the growth of
science and deserves to be published. In addition to research articles, ACS Omega has recently initiated invited Guest Editorials
on topics of current relevance, such as Open Access: Principles, Practice, and Potential, and Perspectives on emerging scientific fields, for example, Recent Progress in the Photocatalytic Reduction of Carbon Dioxide. While the editorials are written by scientific thought
leaders and intended to make readers aware of various scientific issues,
perspectives by established authors focus on the most recent developments
in emerging areas with pointers to future directions.

The author
diversity of articles submitted to ACS Omega meets
our objective of attracting science from around the world
(Figure 1). We are
also proud to note our reviewer pool is similarly broad and representative
of our author base. ACS Omega is now indexed in both
Web of Science and Scopus, which is an indication of a credible editorial
policy, excellent relevance of the content, timely publication, and
easy online accessibility. With these inclusions, the journal visibility
in various scientific search engines is bound to increase, consequently
leading to an increase in readership and citations.

Figure 1 Country-wide distribution
of published authors to ACS Omega (data April 2016–June
2017).

The classification of papers of
interdisciplinary nature is bound
to overlap in one or more subtopics. Tellingly, the 475 papers listed
in the Lexicon on the journal’s Web site: physical chemistry
(466) is on the top of the list, followed by materials science (272),
inorganic (214), bioorganic and medicinal chemistry (162), analytical
(152), polymer (148), organic (137), organometallic (113), nanoscience
(102), theory and computational chemistry (73), energy (52), chemical
engineering and industrial chemistry (48), earth, space and environment
chemistry (37) and others (agricultural/food, catalysis, etc.). It
is encouraging to see that a significant fraction of the publications
are in interdisciplinary areas with connections to chemistry (e.g.,
biochemistry, bioorganic and medicinal chemistry, nanoscience, materials
science, computational chemistry, polymer science), apart from those
in traditional areas such as analytical, organic, inorganic, and physical
chemistry. This early topical breadth is definitely encouraging for
an interdisciplinary journal, and we strive to continue broadening
the topical scope of the journal.

ACS Omega publishes research articles in different
formats. One example is Library of Cationic Organic Dyes for Visible-Light-Driven Photoredox
Transformations, representative of a “collection
of data for a purpose” type of article. This article presents
the spectroscopic, kinetic, and electrochemical characterization of
a series of dyes with the purpose of making available to researchers
the complete set of parameters that can be used for the design of
photoredox systems. This compilation of parameters facilitates the
use of organic dyes, which are not used as prevalently as inorganic
dyes for studies of such photoredox systems.

ACS Omega publishes articles ranging from fundamental
research to applications or methods development, and the work does
not need to have perceived immediate significance. An example of very
fundamental work is Implicit Analytic Solution of Michaelis–Menten–Monod
Kinetics, which describes the mathematical framework
for an analytical solution of the Michaelis–Menten–Monod
kinetics with no need for numerical integration or iterative solvers.

ACS Omega articles cover both core chemistry fields
and interfacing areas with materials science, nanoscience, bioscience,
and environmental science and technology. The paper Spatial Control of Photoluminescence at Room Temperature by Ferroelectric
Domains in Monolayer WS2/PZT Hybrid Structures is a representative article from materials science with
connection to chemistry, whereas the article entitled Ru(II)-Catalyzed Regiospecific C–H/O–H Oxidative Annulations
to Access Isochromeno[8,1-ab]phenazines: Far-Red Fluorescence and
Live Cancer Cell Imaging describes the synthesis
of new functional molecules involving C–H activation, photophysical
studies, and application in bioimaging.

The usage of content
published in ACS Omega is
strong, global, and growing. Users come both from ACS’ existing
subscriber base but also gratifyingly from those who do not currently
subscribe or have access. These statistics speak to our success already
in engaging a new audience for the ACS. The most viewed articles are
an important additional indication of the breadth of readership interest: Light-Assisted Solvothermal Chemistry Using Plasmonic Nanoparticles (Physical, Inorganic) was the most viewed article, followed
by Humic Acid as a Sensitizer in Highly Stable Dye Solar Cells: Energy
from an Abundant Natural Polymer Soil Component (Applied chemistry), Synthesis of Nanovesicular Glutathione Peroxidase Mimics with a Selenenylsulfide-Bearing
Lipid (Biochemistry), and Converting Light Energy to Chemical Energy: A New Catalytic Approach
for Sustainable Environmental Remediation (Physical,
Inorganic). Many other areas are also seeing strong usage including
applied chemistry (such as Improving the Sunscreen Properties of TiO2 through an
Understanding of Its Catalytic Properties), organic
chemistry (such as Design, Synthesis and Evaluation of Bifunctional Acridinine–Naphthalenediimide
Redox-Active Conjugates as Antimalarials (Organic),
and interdisciplinary work like Library of Cationic Organic Dyes for Visible-Light-Driven Photoredox
Transformations which involves physical, inorganic,
and analytical chemistry. These representative examples show the increasingly
high visibility of ACS Omega articles in different
subdiscipline domains. Four articles published in ACS Omega have been selected as Editor’s Choice by ACS: Spatial Control of Photoluminescence at Room Temperature by Ferroelectric
Domains in Monolayer WS2/PZT Hybrid Structures, Defect Engineering, a Path toward Exceeding Perfection, Singlet Oxygen Generation with Chemical Excitation of an Erythrosine–Luminol
Conjugate, and Ru(II)-Catalyzed regiospecific C–H/O–H Oxidative Annulation
to Access Isochromeno[8,1-ab]phenazines: Far-Red Fluorescence and
Live Cancer Cell Imaging.

ACS Omega has evolved within the short span of
its inaugural year into a chemistry-centered cross-disciplinary open
access global journal for publishing scientific articles conforming
to the standards of ACS quality metrics. With a combination of full
articles, thought provoking editorials, and authoritative, future
directed perspectives, ACS Omega aims to globally
promote chemistry to the fore as a central discipline nucleating other
areas of science, bordering biology, material, earth, space, environmental,
and engineering sciences.

Views expressed
in this editorial are those of the authors and not necessarily the
views of the ACS.

Acknowledgments
We thank Frank Quina
and Dean Tantillo for helpful discussions.

