
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03013Mini-ReviewChemistry of Biotin–Streptavidin
and the Growing
Concern of an Emerging Biotin Interference in Clinical Immunoassays Luong John H. T. *†Vashist Sandeep K. ‡§† School
of Chemistry and Analytical & Biological Chemistry Research Facility, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland‡ Pictor
Diagnostics, 311 Juelicherstr, 52070 Aachen, Germany§ Pictor
Limited, 24 Balfour Road, Parnell, Auckland 1052, New Zealand* E-mail: luongprof@gmail.com.18 12 2019 14 01 2020 5 1 10 18 15 09 2019 04 12 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Overconsumption of biotin (5–100 mg daily) as
a supplement
by the general population poses a significant problem for clinical
immunoassays (IAs) based on biotin–streptavidin (SA) interactions.
This affinity pair has been exploited in immunoassays because of its
avidity, sensitivity, specificity, and stability. The elevated biotin
level in plasma varies from patient to patient, and its severe interference
cannot easily be predicted and quantified. Thus, immunoassay manufacturers
must investigate the biotin interference in the developed immunoassays
to satisfy the threshold of 3510 ng/mL (14 367 nM), as stipulated
by the FDA. There is no concrete solution to circumvent the biotin
interference without extra costs and technical difficulties, albeit
different strategies have been attempted. They include the IA format
with biotinylated reagents prebound to streptavidin, the removal of
biotin from the specimen, sample treatment, and biotin interference-free
assays. The general public has been instructed to stop taking biotin
supplements for 48 h or even weeks before the test, depending on the
specific test, dose, and frequency of biotin uptake. As lab-based
techniques cannot accommodate an enormous number of public samples,
a rapid analytical procedure for biotin is urgently needed to quantify
for its interference in immunoassays.

document-id-old-9ao9b03013document-id-new-14ao9b03013ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Immunoassays (IAs) play
a critical role in hospital settings, which
cover both small and large biomolecules of clinical significance in
oncology, cardiology, bone metabolism, hepatic fibrosis, anemia, infectious
diseases, sepsis/inflammation, toxicology, forensics, drug screening/therapeutic
drug monitoring, diabetes (fructosamine and hemoglobin A1c), reproductive
endocrinology (hCG), specific proteins, etc. Assays for large molecules
include thyroid-stimulating hormone, pituitary glycoprotein hormones,
human chorionic gonadotropin, parathyroid hormone, insulin-like growth
factor-1, insulin, thyroglobulin, C-peptide, ferritin, N-terminal
proB-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), prolactin, prostate-specific
antigen, etc. Example assays for small molecules encompass free triiodothyronine
(T3), free thyroxine (T4), total T3, total T4, cortisol, 25 hydroxyvitamin
D, etc. Beyond the above biomolecules and organic molecules, IAs have
been extended for analysis of heavy metals, an emerging area, which
is known as heavy metal immunoassays (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17168306).

IAs involve the specific binding of an antibody to its antigen,
i.e., the target analyte. There are two popular formats, known as
“competitive” and “sandwich” IAs for small
molecules and large compounds, respectively. In the competitive format,
the antibody (Ab), defined as the capture Ab, is anchored on a solid
substrate, e.g., magnetic beads. The target analyte if any in the
assay sample will compete with the labeled analyte to diminish the
signal response. The sandwich format involves a second Ab, i.e., detection
Ab, which is labeled with an enzyme or molecule to provoke a signal
response. For enhanced detection sensitivity and reproducibility,
the capture Ab must be firmly attached to the solid surface with high
loading, and biotin–SA chemistry fulfills these requirements.

Elevated biotin in the plasma due to its very high uptake interferes
with diagnostic assays that use biotin–streptavidin technology
for clinical analytes and biomarkers, e.g., thyroid-stimulating hormone,
cardiac troponin, etc. Other clinical analyzers do not involve biotin–SA
chemistry; i.e., they are not susceptible to the biotin interference
(Table 1).

Table 1 Biotin Effect on the Performance of
Some Representative Commercial Immunoassay Analyzersa
target analyte	biotin interference (+)	biotin interference (−)	
pituitary ACTH pg/mL	sandwich IA, Roche Cobas e601	 	
FSH mIU/mL	sandwich IA, OCD Vitros5600	 	
LH mIU/mL	sandwich
IA, OCD Vitros5600	 	
prolactin ng/mL	sandwich IA, OCD Vitros5600	 	
TSH mIU/mL	sandwich IA, OCD Vitros5600	 	
TSH mIU/mL	 	sandwich IA, Beckman Coulter UniCel DXI 800	
free T3 pg/mL	 	sandwich IA, OCD Vitros5600	
free T4 ng/dL	 	sandwich IA, OCD Vitros5600	
adrenal cortisol mg/dL	competitive IA, OCD Vitros5600	 	
DHEA–sulfate mg/dL	competitive IA, OCD Vitros5600	 	
total testosterone ng/dL	 	competitive IA, Immulite 2000	
SHBG nmol/L (nM)	 	sandwich IA, Immulite 2000	
a Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH;
follicle-stimulating hormone (FHS); luteinizing hormone (LH); thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH); triiodothyronine (T3); thyroxine (T4); dehydroepiandrosterone
sulfate (DHEA); sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG).

Biotin supplementation has drastically expanded over
the last years
as prescribed therapies and vitamin complex preparations for nonmedical
purposes. Biotin is an essential vitamin and serves as a cofactor
for five carboxylases that catalyze critical steps in the metabolism
of fatty acids, glucose, and amino acids. Propionyl-coenzyme A (CoA)
carboxylase, pyruvate carboxylase, and methylcrotonoyl-CoA carboxylase
are located in mitochondria, whereas acetyl-CoA carboxylase is found
in the cytoplasm. Other physiological roles of biotin encompass histone
modifications, gene regulation (by modifying the activity of transcription
factors), and cell signaling. Out of the eight different stereoisomers,
only d-biotin (which is simply referred to as biotin)
exhibits biological activity and is abundant in nature. Biotin (vitamin
B7, vitamin H, or coenzyme R with MW 244.31 g/mol) binds SA irreversibly
with a dissociation constant (Kd) in the
order of ≈10–14 M, perhaps one of the strongest
noncovalent interactions known in nature.1 The binding is very rapid, and the biotin–SA complex is unaffected
by extremes of pH, temperature, organic solvents, and other denaturing
agents. In immunoassays, streptavidin (pI = 6.8–7.5, MW 52.8
kDa), a tetramer protein purified from Streptomyces avidinii, is favored over avidin (pI = 10, MW 67 kDa, Kd ≈ 10–15 M), originally isolated
from the hen egg white. This protein is glycosylated and positively
charged with pseudocatalytic activity and nonspecific binding. NeutrAvidin
(pI = 6.3, more neutral than native avidin, MW ∼ 60 Ka),1 deglycosylated avidin, is similar to streptavidin
in terms of the size, pI (pI ∼ 5 of streptavidin), and nonspecific
binding but still preserves the same biotin-binding properties because
the carbohydrate plays no role in biotin binding. SA has four binding
sites for biotin, which can be easily tagged to biomolecules without
significantly altering the host biological activity. Avidin has a
lower binding affinity than streptavidin when biotin is conjugated
to another molecule, i.e., biotinylated molecule. Therefore, the interactions
of SA and biotinylated molecules have been exploited in various applications
including IAs to detect and target biological analytes in a complex
sample matrix. Indeed, biotin–SA chemistry is the core of many
commercial platforms such as the Beckman Coulter Access/DXI, Siemens
Centaur, the Roche Elecsys; Immulite 2000; Ortho Clinical Diagnostics
Vitros; and Dimension. In the USA, about 59% of the surveyed IAs are
based on biotin–streptavidin chemistry.2 Almost all the commercial IAs developed by Roche and Beijing UniDiag
Technology and Diasorin are based on biotin–SA interactions.
Similarly, many IAs from Siemens and other IVD companies are also
based on biotin–SA interactions. The biotin interference has
effectuated in a large number of recalls and clinical reports available
online from many healthcare laboratories and authorities during the
last two years.

Like any analytical technique, IAs based on
biotin–SA chemistry
still lack specificity and accuracy stemming from the Ab binding property,
the sample matrix, reagent components, and the IA format. In particular,
the interference of biotin in the assay sample becomes very pronounced
when the sample is introduced together with the capture Ab and the
labeled analyte (competitive IA) or the labeled detection Ab (sandwich
IA). This format is advocated for “high-throughput”
assays, as it reduces the number of steps and costs. The concept of
“load and go” has been promoted by several IA providers
to process a few hundred samples per hour (40 000–80 000
tests per year) with a minimum of 40–60 samples onboard. The
Abbott ARCHITECT i2000 SR can process up to 200 tests/h with a capacity
of 135 samples (https://www.corelaboratory.abbott/int/en/offerings/brands/architect/architect-i2000SR). Doubtlessly, the sample capacity will be increased drastically
with micro-/nanofabrication technology. In the past, the interference
of biotin in IAs based on biotin–SA interactions was very rare
considering the normal biotin in blood plasma was significantly below
the threshold level that causes interference, and the general population
was not consuming the high-dose biotin OTC supplements. This review
will highlight the emerging threat of biotin in IAs, the physiological
role of biotin, and plausible strategies to circumvent biotin interference.

2 Assay Formats and the Mechanism of Biotin Interference
Over the past 25 years, the SA–biotin interactions have
played a significant role in the development of clinical IAs.3,4 Commercial IA systems, i.e., clinical analyzers, are fully automated,
which contain slots for the storage of ancillaries and reagents in
addition to mechanisms for loading of multiple patient samples. They
employ a simple and rapid IA procedure for the high-throughput automated
quantitative determination of analytes. In competitive IA, the sample
is mixed with the biotinylated Ab, SA-coated magnetic particles (MPs),
and the labeled analyte (competitor) in one or two IA process steps.
Of interest is the labeling of the analyte with a ruthenium complex
for electroluminescence detection (ECL) or with acridinium derivatives
for chemiluminescence detection (CL). However, the ECL and CL immunoassays
are still being developed based on conventional biotin–SA chemistry
by many manufacturers including Beijing Unidiag Technology and Immunodiagnostic
Systems. Roche is still using biotin–SA interactions for its
commercial IAs. Siemens and Diasorin have already changed or are in
the process of changing their IAs to biotin interference-free formats.
The development of biotin interference-free formats would require
a change in IA chemistry, intensive clinical validation, and regulatory
approvals.

Both competitive and sandwich assays are used in
immunoassays.
If no analyte is present in the sample, the biotinylated Ab binds
the labeled analyte and forms a stable complex with SA–MPs,
thereby resulting in a strong signal. However, if the analyte is present,
it will compete with the labeled analyte and bind to some of the biotinylated
Ab that leads to a decreased signal. Therefore, the analyte concentration
is inversely proportional to the signal intensity. The competitive
IA format is very susceptible to excess biotin in the sample as the
free biotin will compete with the biotinylated Ab for biotin-binding
sites of SA. In a “sandwich” IA, excess biotin in the
sample binds strongly to the SA–MP that prevents the formation
of sandwich immune complexes, which result in falsely low results
(Figure 1b).

Figure 1 Mechanism of
the biotin interference in a competitive (a) and sandwich
IA (b). The excess biotin in the sample leads to an overestimation
of analyte (positive error) in the case of a competitive IA and an
underestimation (negative error) in a sandwich IA.

Therefore, as the biotin interference threshold
of SA-biotin based
IAs is low, excess biotin in the patient sample interferes with the
IA when its concentration in the sample is higher than the reported
biotin interference threshold of the IA. The erroneous analyte determination
due to biotin interference is critical for the emergency department
where it can lead to inappropriate medical intervention including
surgery due to wrong clinical diagnosis.

In some IAs, where
the biotin interference threshold is low, the
low levels of biotin in the sample of 40.9 nM5 can interfere with the IAs. In contrast, in IAs with a high biotin
interference threshold, the biotin interference is only observed at
818 nM of biotin.6 However, most of the
IAs based on SA–biotin interactions have been unable to reach
the biotin interference threshold of 1160 ng/mL (4748 nM), which is
the maximum level reported so far in multiple sclerosis and inherited
metabolic diseases with high biotin uptake, up to 300 mg of biotin/day.
The discrepancy between the results obtained by biotin-based assays
and nonbiotin-based assays is shown in Table 2. In some cases, the difference is very significant,
e.g., a 315-fold difference for progesterone between the two different
methods.7 A well-known case is the misdiagnosis
of children with metabolic diseases subjected to high-dose biotin
treatment. Due to biotin interference in immunoassays, such patients
were misdiagnosed with Graves’ disease, as the clinical results
indicated elevated levels of free thyroxine (T4) and total triiodothyronine
(T3) together with low levels of thyrotropin and high levels of antithyrotropin
receptor antibodies.8

Table 2 Some Selected Biotin-Based Assays
That Are Highly Susceptible to Elevated Biotin
analyte	nonbiotin-based assay (Architect/Abbott)	biotin-based assay (Roche)	bias (+) positive/(− negative)	
progesterone	0.4 nM	125.4 nM	(+) 315-fold increase	
FT4	11.3 pM	>100 pM	(+) >8.8-fold increase	
TSH	1.30 mIU/L	0.02 mIU/L	(−) 65-fold decrease	
FSH	8.5 IU/L	0.4 IU/L	(−) 21.3-fold decrease	
3 Uptake and Pharmacokinetics of Biotin
Biotin is a water-soluble B-complex vitamin that is essential for
the metabolism of proteins, fats, carbohydrates, and glucose as it
is an essential coenzyme for several carboxylases. It occurs in every
living cell mainly bound to proteins or polypeptides but is abundant
in the liver, kidney, and pancreas. The recommended daily requirement
for biotin intake is 30 μg, as recommended by the US Department
of Agriculture. However, there is no need to take biotin OTC supplements
as biotin is abundant in common foods such as egg yolk, whole cereals,
soybeans, avocado, cauliflower, leafy greens, pork, liver, etc. The
normal dietary intake of biotin in western populations is 35–70
μg/day. A higher dose of biotin is used to treat patients with
biotinidase deficiency (5–10 mg/day), holocarboxylase synthetase
deficiency (30–40 mg/day), biotin-thiamine-responsive basal
ganglia disease (100–300 mg/day), and multiple sclerosis (MS)
(300 mg/day).9,10 Biotin is absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract and reaches its peak level in the blood after about 2 h of oral
intake. Another study (biotin dose of 75, 150, and 300 μg) confirmed
the peak level occurred after 2 h of ingestion, fell between 2 and
4 h, and was only slightly higher than predosing levels after 24 h.11 Only a limited amount of catabolism of biotin
occurs, whereas excess biotin is discharged in urine.

Biotin
is nonmutagenic, nontoxic, and 100% bioavailable as biotin
absorption and excretion are rapid. Therefore, it is one of the topmost
selling nutritional supplements worldwide. As the plasma half-life
of biotin is 110 min, biotin should be cleared from the circulation
within five half-lives, i.e., about 9 h. However, the washout period
of biotin is impacted by impaired renal function.

The biotin
concentration in serum or plasma of healthy subjects
with a normal dietary intake of biotin is less than 2.05 nM (0.5 ng/mL),
compared to 4748 nM (1160 ng/mL), the peak level of biotin that has
been observed after an intake of a biotin megadose of 300 mg in multiple
sclerosis patients. The reported value of plasma biotin in the literature
only reflects the concentration of free biotin in plasma. Indeed,
biotin binds proteins reversibly; ∼12% of total biotin in plasma
is covalently bound; 7% is reversibly bound; and 81% is free biotin
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1636621).

Biotin doses of 5 mg, 10 mg, and 20 mg typically result
in biotin
peak levels of 168 nM (41 ng/mL), 372 nM (91 ng/mL), and 753 nM (184
ng/mL), respectively. Peak biotin levels vary between patients, depending
on renal function, age, sex, and frequency of dosing. Serum biotin
concentrations reach a plateau after a few days of constant dose ingestion.
Subjects with four uptakes per day of 20 mg of biotin will have their
biotin level fall below 40.9 nM after 73 h. As most of the first generation
of IAs from IVD giants had a lower biotin threshold of about 30 nM,
the biotin levels above this concentration have been shown to provoke
noticeable interference in such IAs.12

4 Strategies for the Prevention of Biotin Interference
High-dose biotin OTC supplements have been consumed by the general
population for various nonmedical reasons. This is a serious health
concern as such overconsumption of biotin could lead to potential
errors in analyte determination that could lead to the wrong clinical
diagnosis, undesirable medical interventions, and adverse events.
Therefore, there is a need to implement effective strategies to obviate
biotin interference in clinical IAs.

4.1 Biotin Prebound to Streptavidin
At
first glance, IAs based on the SA–biotin pair are thought to
be susceptible to interference from excess biotin in blood samples.
This truism might be valid if the sample is introduced together with
the required soluble reagents. The SA-biotinylated Ab interaction
enables the separation of the immune complex from the reaction. Therefore,
any substance that interferes with this process will affect both IA
formats. Excess biotin in the blood sample interferes with this process,
thus causing erroneous laboratory results as mentioned earlier. Biotin-based
assays can be easily designed with biotinylated antibody prebound
to SA before the sample is introduced, so they are not vulnerable
to biotin interference.13 This expectation
stems from the formation of a highly stable SA-biotinylated Ab complex,
which cannot be dissociated by free biotin. Of course, this protocol
requires a longer analysis time and increases the costs associated
with testing. However, the reagent manufacturers will be obliged to
redesign the current format with soluble biotinylated reagents to
mitigate the risk of biotin interference. The SA and biotinylated
reagents must be combined during the manufacturing process.14 All IA methods based on biotinylated reagents
and biotin-binding proteins must be tested and proved to be free from
biotin interference. The Siemens ADVIA Centaur TnI-Ultra assays (cardiac
troponin) exhibited a greater than 10% change in results in samples
with biotin levels up to 10 ng/mL (41 nM) (https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/JRC105914/kjna28571enn2.pdf). The company has been improving the assay procedure to circumvent
the biotin interference up to 1000 ng/mL or 4093 nM. A typical example
is the “Intact PTH Assay on the ADVIA Centaur CP, XP, and XPT
Systems” for parathyroid hormone (PTH), the most important
endocrine regulator of circulating calcium and phosphorus concentrations.
This system is claimed to be free from biotin interference up to 1000
ng/mL (https://static.healthcare.siemens.com/siemens_hwem-hwem_ssxa_websites-context-root/wcm/idc/groups/public/@global/@clinicalspec/documents/download/mda2/njgz/~edisp/advia_centaur_intact_pth_assay_a91dx-cai-161031-xc1-4a00_final-03665267.pdf). However, a large number of other IAs from Siemens are also affected
by biotin interference, such as dehydroepiandrosterone, cyclosporine,
HBc IgM, Hepatitis A total Ab, Hepatitis B core IgM, total testosterone,
estradiol, hepatitis B surface antigen, Free T3, Free T4, TSH, progesterone,
sex hormone-binding globulin, thyroglobulin, troponin I, vitamin B12,
NT-proB-type natriuretic peptide, latex allergen, wheat allergen,
creatine kinase MB, etc. However, it is a formidable task to overcome
the FDA-desired high biotin interference threshold of 3510 ng/mL (14 367
nM) as stated in the CLSI guideline EP37 first edition for interference
testing in clinical chemistry. This high biotin threshold deserves
a brief discussion here, as it has been implemented for patient safety.
This level is indeed 3 times higher than 1170 ng/mL, the highest physiological
biotin concentration observed in patients with high dose biotin uptake.
The new CLSI guideline is being strictly followed and referred to
by FDA and healthcare authorities. Therefore, this requirement is
a new challenge for immunoassay platforms based on biotin–SA
chemistry. Thus, the manufacturers have devoted serious efforts and
put effective strategies in place to fulfill this requirement. Moreover,
it is an essential requirement for global clinics and hospitals. The
IVD manufacturers have been approached by hospitals to issue customer
notifications on the biotin interference. To date, none of the IVD
manufacturers with commercial IAs based on biotin–SA interactions
have been able to achieve the desired high biotin interference threshold
of 3510 ng/mL, as mentioned in the recent CLSI guidelines. Accordingly,
several IAs have already been shifted to biotin-interference-free
formats in hospital and clinic settings to ensure patient safety.

From a practical and economic viewpoint, it could be unwise or even
mistaken to switch platforms every time an issue of interference like
biotin arises. This solution is cost-prohibitive, especially for small
clinics and hospitals, and the new platform might not solve the issue
of mitigating all interferences or provoke a new interference as blood
and blood plasma contain various compounds and unknown drug metabolites.

4.2 Removal of Biotin
Another obvious
solution is the removal of biotin from the specimen by passing the
sample through a small column, prepacked with SA-bound insoluble beads
or polymers, e.g., SA–agarose beads. The removal of biotin
using SA–MPs is an alternative. The major advantage of magnetic
MPs in IAs is ease of separation of free biotin in the sample by adsorption
to SA–MPs. MPs can be prepared in any wet chemistry laboratories
using well-established procedures, and they are also commercially
available. They are made of nanometric-sized iron oxide particles
decorated with polymers with diameters ranging from 35 nm up to 4.5
μm with the component MPs from 5 to 50 nm. They exhibit a unique
quality referred to as superparamagnetism in the presence of an external
magnetic field.

Magnetic beads can be coated with a carboxylated
polymer or stearic acid to facilitate bioconjugation. The amino groups
of biomolecules are covalently coupled to the COOH group on the surface
of magnetic particles by well-known carbodiimide chemistry. Roche’s
SA–MPs have a mean diameter of 1 μm with a density of
1.1–1.4 g/cm3. According to the supplier, SA is
coupled to carboxyl groups on the surface of superparamagnetic polystyrene
particles via a linker molecule. The binding capacity of these particles
for free biotin is 1.8 nmol/mg but considerably lower for biotin-labeled
oligonucleotide (0.150 nmol/mg) and only 10 pmol/mg for biotin-labeled
dsDNA fragments. The adsorption kinetics depends upon the initial
biotin in blood/blood plasma, which varies from specimen to specimen.
The kinetics of biotin removal also depends on the quantity of streptavidin-coated
beads, the average diameter of beads, the density of SA on beads,
and the available binding sites for biotin. To date, there is no sufficient
kinetic data on this subject, and the quoted incubation time is a
conservative number. This pretreatment might be up to a 1 h incubation
of the sample with the SA–MPs.15 Streptavidin–biotin affinity interaction is instantaneous
as indicated from the work of Schrapp et al.16 in the assay of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T. A complete
suppression of biotin interference is achieved following mixing the
sample and streptavidin-coated microparticles without incubation,
ranging from 0 to 60 min. It is technically feasible to remove biotin
within a very short time, but the cost is also a deciding factor because
SA is very expensive. Furthermore, the centrifugation step of 10 min
is still required to provide the biotin-free supernatant for subsequent
analysis. This requirement might be problematic as the IA systems
are designed to provide the first result within 30 min and cannot
accommodate the centrifugation step. Carboxyl magnetic beads with
free carboxyl groups can also be prepared and even commercially available
(https://www.raybiotech.com/carboxyl-magnetic-beads/). These beads are ready to couple with proteins/Ab and other ligands
using various simple procedures reported in the literature. Such beads,
a ferric oxide core functionalized with various silane groups, are
nonporous with an average diameter of ∼0.5 μm.

A novel approach being tried by Roche is the use of a proprietary
monoclonal Ab against free biotin for the scavenging of free biotin
in the patient sample.17 The developed
Ab is specific only to the free biotin and does not bind to the biotin–Ab
conjugate. The effort to remove biotin from the specimen by Roche
is not surprising because Roche has utilized biotin in almost all
its assays. However, this novel approach is expected to incur high
costs and could not obviate completely the biotin interference from
the sample. In this context, synthetic biotin-binding polymers were
prepared by molecular imprinting based on the polymerization of methacrylic
acid and ethylene glycol dimethacrylate in the presence of biotin
methyl ester.17 The binding of biotin methyl
ester by the imprinted was demonstrated; however, the assay was performed
in acetonitrile or chloroform.

As mentioned earlier, the typical
biotin concentration in serum
or plasma is less than 21 nM, but the patients with a mega-dose of
300 mg might have the peak biotin concentration above 4834 nM in their
blood. Thus, this upper limit must be used to tailor the quantity
of SA–MPs and the adsorption kinetics of biotin. Plausible
nonspecific adsorption of the target analyte on SA–MPs must
be tested and established accordingly. The extra steps in IAs will
increase the costs associated with testing and the potential financial
burden of high-dose biotin on the health care system. The Clinical
Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) has recommended that testing
for biotin interference is now performed by manufacturers at biotin
concentrations up to 3510 ng/mL (14 367 nM). However, this
step is difficult to implement in an automated clinical analyzer and
must be performed externally. Most IA methods in clinical settings
use specimens without any pretreatment and are run on fully automated,
continuous, high-throughput, and random-access systems. The IA manufacturers
might need to redesign their assay procedures and hardware to accommodate
the addition of biotin to the assay sample.

4.3 Platform without the Biotin–Streptavidin
Pair
It is quite possible to eliminate the biotin–SA
pair and chemistry in IAs by employing functionalized MPs. The capture
Ab can be directly bound covalently to the surface of MPs via different
chemistries. It is very unlikely that biotin will bind to such MPs.
Such functionalized MPs are commercially available. An alternative
is commercial polystyrene-coated paramagnetic particles that are simply
activated by 1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)carbodiimide and N-hydroxy-2,5-pyrrolidinedione. Functionalized MPs then
serve as a versatile platform for bioconjugation with a pertinent
Ab. An example is Abbott ARCHITECT assays that are based on direct
Ab-coated MPs without employing any biotin–SA interactions.
Thus, the assay is free from biotin interference (https://www.corelaboratory.abbott/us/en/offerings/assays/biotin-laboratorians.html). Currently, all assays marketed by Abbott Laboratories do not use
biotin in the assay design. Of course, a new technology requires intensive
development efforts, extensive validation, a change in manufacturing
procedures, and new regulatory approvals due to the involved design
changes.

4.4 Sample Treatment
Nonlinearity during
dilution is an indication of biotin interference. However, serial
dilution may not eliminate biotin interference. This common practice
is also limited by the concentrations of the target analyte and biotin
in the assay sample, i.e., the detection limit of the assay platform.
As an example, the concentration of cardiac troponin I (cTnI) in blood
plasma ranges from 11 to 79 ng/L, whereas biotin can be up to 1160
ng/mL (1.16 mg/L).19 Some biotin metabolites
do not bind to biotin-binding sites of SA. At least two of them are
identified as tetranorbiotin and tetranorbiotin d,l-sulfoxide.20 They are originated from
oxidation, sulfur oxidation, or a combination. The treatment is a
subject of future endeavors as it requires intensive efforts and resources.
The treatment must be performed under mild conditions, and enzymatic
oxidation is a distinct possibility. There will be high extra costs
associated with the pertinent enzymes and technical difficulties to
implement this step into automated IA systems. It is unknown whether
the procedure will change the analyte in the sample or impact the
analytical performance of IAs.

4.5 Biotin Washout
Biotin has a circulating
half-life of 1.5–2 h, and it should be cleared from the circulation
within 5 half-lives. However, the clearance period is also dependent
upon doses and the frequency of uptake.21 Based on the half-life of biotin in human beings, a washout of 8–10
h is considered sufficient to mitigate the risk of biotin interference
in subjects taking up to 5 mg of biotin twice a day or 10 mg of biotin
once a day. The washout period ensures the biotin level falls back
to within the physiological levels (<21 nM), which causes no interference
with the IAs. Biotin exhibits linear pharmacokinetics over the range
of doses studied (5–20 mg). It is rapidly absorbed with a serum
half-life of 15 h and only reaches a steady state after 3 days.21 Several other studies unravel a washout period
up to 73 h for multiple sclerosis patients on 300 mg/day biotin doses.
Therefore, there is insufficient evidence to support recommendations
for safe testing in patients, taking high levels of biotin on a daily
basis.

5 Detection of Biotin
Considering the
potential interference of biotin in IAs and its
sample-dependent concentration, it is desirable to screen biotin together
with other target analytes in IAs. As biotin is a small molecule,
it is detected by competitive IA. The commercial ELISA kit (mdbioscienes.com) for biotin
is based on the competitive binding between biotin and peroxidase-labeled
biotin (biotinylated peroxidase) for the biotin-binding sites of avidin,
obtained from microorganisms. The literature unravels that dimeric
members of the avidin family are found in some bacteria, whereas avidin
isolated from the egg whites is a tetramer. The commercial ELISA detects
biotin (∼400 ng/L or 1.64 nM) in blood, blood plasma, and urine
samples. The biotin level in urine is about 30–40 times higher
than the respective serum concentration. Similarly, there are other
commercial ELISA test kits employing SA–biotin chemistry.

In addition to manual ELISA, biotin can also be detected via an
automated ECL- or CL-based IA via competitive IA, where biotin can
be labeled with a ruthenium complex or an acridinium ester. The ECL-based
IAs are employed by IVD companies such as Roche and UniDiag, whereas
CL-based immunoassays are being used by other IVD players such as
Siemens, DiaSorin, Abbott, and Immunodiagnostic Systems.

Miniaturized
biosensors with high detection sensitivity, low cost,
and multiplexing have the potential to detect biotin in blood. Similarly,
lateral flow IA formats and POC tests such as those based on electrochemical
sensing would also be highly prospective for the rapid detection of
biotin at the point of need. Electroanalysis with low cost, ease of
fabrication/miniaturization, and high detection sensitivity might
be useful for the detection of biotin in blood. However, the development
in this area is very limited with a few literature reports related
to electroanalysis/electrocatalysis of biotin. Nevertheless, it is
feasible to oxidize biotin by boron-doped diamond as electrode materials22 and the use of captavidin with low affinity
to streptavidin toward the development of a reusable sensor for biotin
in electrochemistry.23

6 Conclusions and Outlooks
Supraphysiologic
biotin intake (10–40 mg daily) in the form
of supplements will not be diminished any time soon due to its nontoxicity
and availability. In some cases, the patient might consume 300 mg
of biotin daily (https://www.endocrine-abstracts.org/ea/0063/ea0063p1173.htm). Biotin sales increased 58% from $219,599,798 in 2014 to $349,101,078
in 2018, and this figure does not include the sales through online
retailers. Biotin is formulated in multivitamins, prenatal vitamins,
and supplements for hair, skin, and nails. In the USA, about 17% of
patients surveyed consume biotin-containing supplements (https://betastatic.fishersci.com/content/dam/fishersci/en_US/documents/programs/healthcare/technical-documents/data-sheets/abbott-biotin-fact-data-sheet.pdf), whereas 7.7% of the 1944 Mayo Clinic surveyed patients took biotin.
The market of biotin has been covered rather extensively in the literature
(corelaboratory.abbott/us/en/offerings/assays/biotin-laboratorians.html;
transparencymarketresearch.com/biotin-market.html; and brandessenceresearch.biz/Chemicals-and-Materials/Biotin-Supplements-Market-Research-on-Global-Analysis-to-2025/Summary).

Thus, the interference of high-dose biotin on IAs in the clinical
laboratory is an emerging issue. Biotin interference could lead to
serious clinical consequences, such as the misdiagnosis of diseases
and surgical interventions. The revised guideline from the Clinical
and Laboratory Standards Institute in April 2018, i.e., EP 37 first
Edition, mentions the biotin interference threshold testing at 3510
ng/mL (14 367 nM), which is difficult to achieve by any IA
developer unless they obviate the biotin–SA interactions.

The simplest and most effective practice must come from the patients
and their cooperation. Unless the subjects are prescribed biotin for
medical reasons, they should discontinue several days before providing
their blood samples for clinical testing. The biotin washout period
differs widely among IAs, the dose, and frequency of biotin uptake
as well as the patient’s renal function. Patients should stop
the intake of biotin supplementation at least 48 h before the test,
in agreement with the guidelines issued by many health settings including
the Mayo Clinic. However, in patients on high-dose biotin therapy,
the clearance period could be up to 73 h or even longer, which corroborates
with the findings on multiple sclerosis patients that take a very
high biotin dose of 300 mg/day. Clearance also takes longer in patients
with poor renal function and high doses of biotin uptake, so the washout
period can be several days or weeks for thyroid function tests (TFTs)
or months in other cases. For patients with long-term biotin uptake,
a washout period of 12 weeks is required for hormone testing except
TSH using immunoassays based on biotin–SA chemistry.24

Of course, this scenario is not applicable
to emergency department
patients who might have taken a high dose of biotin. The ordering
physician should consult local laboratory staff to understand that
the test menu may be affected by biotin, the magnitude, and the direction
of interference (falsely negative or positive). In such cases, the
test must be done by an IA that does not have any biotin interference.
Lab-based procedures including HPLC-MS can process the samples from
MS patients and for patients with other inherited metabolic diseases.
Miniaturization of HPLC columns has gained significant progress with
the column diameter decreased from 4.6 mm to 7.5 μm. Several
clinical and hospital settings have deployed reliable miniaturized
LC systems for small-molecule drugs and metabolites, and this technology
can be easily adapted for analysis of biotin in emergency situations.

The IA protocols using soluble SA and biotinylated Ab are very
susceptible to elevated biotin in the specimen, and such protocols
require a major overhaul. The simplest solution for the IAs based
on SA–biotin chemistry is to “prebind” reagents
to saturate biotin-binding sites of streptavidin before sample addition.
This modified protocol should be resistant to biotin interference,
but it is still challenging to meet the biotin interference threshold
of more than 3510 ng/mL (14 626 nM), as stated in the recent
CLSI guidelines for interference testing in clinical IAs. Thorough
investigation and validation are still needed to address this issue,
which is an essential clinical requirement but a huge burden for IA
equipment manufacturers.

The removal of biotin in the specimen
by SA–MPs should be
effective, but its implementation will add some extra costs and technical
issues. The sample volume in automated clinical immunoassays is about
50 μL, which must accommodate the presence of MPs with very
high biotin-binding capacity. The incubation time for the removal
of biotin is at least 1 h, whereas high-throughput commercial IA systems
are designed to provide the first result within 30 min. Nonspecific
adsorption of target analytes on functionalized MPs is hard to predict
and must be subject to extensive validation for each target analyte.
Nonspecific binding of the target analyte and other endogenous species
with SA-coated carriers might diminish both detection reproducibility
and sensitivity. This step must be validated using the IAs that do
not employ biotin–SA chemistry. The use of functionalized MPs
for the direct binding of Ab, as employed in IAs by Abbott, makes
the IA completely free from biotin interference.

Interference
by biotin metabolites deserves a brief discussion
here since some of them also bind biotin-binding sites of SA with
high efficiency compared to biotin.18 They
are bisnorbiotin methyl ketone (81.4%), bisnorbiotin (61.2%), biotin
sulfone (33.2%), and bisnorbiotin d,l-sulfoxide
(3.8%). Two other known metabolites do not bind SA:tetranorbiotin d,l-sulfoxide (0.3%) and tetranorbiotin (N/D). In urine,
biotin only accounts for 32 ± 12%, compared to 52 ± 15%
for bisnorbiotin, 7.9 ± 6 5.8% for bisnorbiotin methyl ketone,
4.0 ± 3.2% for biotin-d,l-sulfoxide, and 3.6
± 1.9% for biotin sulfone. In biotin interference studies, blood
plasma is simply spiked by pure biotin, and the interference of its
metabolites has not been investigated. This is not trivial considering
biotin accounts for only half of the total avidin-binding substances
in human serum.25 Perhaps, this is a subject
of future endeavors, which requires extensive investigation and resources.
In this context, the manufacturers of IVDs might have shifted the
developments of all new assays to biotin-free formats.

A prospective
strategy is the development of a fully automated
IA for the quantitative determination of free biotin in the patient
sample in the range of 5–3510 ng/mL (20.5–14 367
nM). The determination of biotin in the sample would rule out the
possibility of wrong clinical diagnosis due to biotin interference,
as it will allow the healthcare professionals to choose the most appropriate
IAs for the determination of clinical analytes. Albeit biotin concentration
in serum can be accurately measured using ultra-HPLC (UHPLC) combined
with tandem MS (UHPLC-MS/MS), this lab-based method is not suitable
for processing a very large number of public blood samples.

The recent public health safety alerts issued by the FDA and many
international authorities have triggered the healthcare authorities
and industries to take the necessary measures to tackle this critical
global concern. There is no easy solution to overcome biotin interference
in IAs to satisfy the new regulatory guidelines. Some key players
in the IA business have tried different solutions to mitigate the
risk of biotin interference. Further, there is an extensive need for
more communication among laboratory personnel, health care providers,
and patients. The patients must be advised to stop biotin uptake for
several days before blood testing. Laboratory personnel must be trained
to process samples with plausible elevated biotin by selecting the
right analytical tools. Lastly, health care providers must be aware
of the severe biotin interference in several IAs. The FDA is alerting
the public, health care providers, lab personnel, and lab test developers
that biotin can significantly interfere with certain lab tests and
cause incorrect test results which may go undetected. There is also
considerable public awareness bulletins and newsletters being issued
to the general public and additional stringent norms by the healthcare
and hospital authorities in all developed countries. The biotin interference
is a big issue for the IA manufacturers and has become an emerging
theme of several clinical congresses/events including AACC (American
Association of Clinical Chemistry).

IAs for blood are frequently
encountered with various interfering
species, which cause false-positive and false-negative results from
endogenous and exogenous compounds. In general, they can cross-react
with IA reagents and skew IA results. Elevated biotin in the blood
is an emerging interferent for the IAs based on SA–biotin interaction.
Biotin–SA interactions are used by more than 50% of the clinical
laboratories worldwide. However, the current regulatory and IVD trend
is strongly inclined toward the development of biotin-interference
free IAs and obviates the use of biotin–SA interactions. The
identification of biomarkers in urine is a subject of future endeavors.
Without homeostasis mechanisms, their presence in urine can be used
for early diagnosis, prevention, treatment, and prognosis of diseases.
The biotin concentration in urine is 30–40-fold higher than
the respective plasma concentration; therefore, biotin-based assays
are very unlikely to be considered as the prime platform for this
special task.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.



John H. T. Luong is associated with University College
Cork, School
of Chemistry, Cork, Ireland. He has been credited with over 350 published
papers, over 20,000 citations, 10 US patents, and 4 books. His
current interests include nanotechnology, biosensor technology, immunoassays,
POCT, sepatation technology, nanomaterials, and biomaterials.



Sandeep K. Vashist is the Global IVD Director at Pictor
Diagnostics
and has worked for several large IVD companies in the senior management
role. He has developed many CE and FDA approved clinical immunoassays
and pioneered several IVD/POCT technologies and devices. He has over
250 manuscripts in journals and conferences, 8 patents, and 3 books.
His current interests include IVD, immunoassays, POCT, smart technologies,
and multiplex detection.
==== Refs
References
https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/31000, accessed December 11, 2019.
Holmes E. W. ; Samarasinghe S. ; Emanuele A. ; Meah F. 
Biotin interference
in clinical immunoassay: a cause for concern . Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 
2017 , 141 , 1459 –1460 . 10.5858/arpa.2017-0107-LE .29072950 
Wilchek M. ; Bayer E.
A.  Avidin-biotin mediated
immunoassays: overview . In Avidin-Biotin Technology:
Methods Enzymology ; Wilchek M. , Bayer E. A.  , Eds.; Academic Press : New York , 1990 ; Vol. 184 , pp 467 –469 .
Avery G. 
Biotin Interference
in Immunoassay: A review for the laboratory scientist . Ann. Clin. Biochem. 
2019 , 56 , 424 –430 . 10.1177/0004563219842231 .31023057 
NACB
Dietary
Reference Intakes for Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate,
Vitamin b12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline. www.nap.edu/catalog/6015.html (accessed 17 June 2018).
Samarasinghe S. ; Meah F. ; Singh V. ; Basit A. ; Emanuele N. ; Emanuele M. A. ; Mazhari A. ; Holmes E. W. 
Biotin interference
with routine clinical immunoassays: understand the causes and mitigate
the risks . Endocr. Pract. 
2017 , 23 , 989 –998 . 10.4158/EP171761.RA .28534685 
Dasgupta A.  Effect of biotin
on clinical laboratory test results: how to avoid such interferences . In Biotin and Other Interferences in Immunoassays: A Concise
Guide , 1 st ed.; Dasgupta A.  , Ed.; Elsevier
BV : Amsterdam, Netherlands , 2019 ; pp 51 –73 .
Kummer S. ; Hermsen D. ; Distelmaier F. 
Biotin treatment
mimicking Graves’
disease . N. Engl. J. Med. 
2016 , 375 , 704 –706 . 10.1056/NEJMc1602096 .
Trambas C. ; Lu Z. ; Yen T. ; Sikaris K. 
Characterization of the scope and
magnitude of biotin interference in susceptible Roche Elecsys competitive
and sandwich immunoassays . Ann. Clin. Biochem. 
2018 , 55 , 205 –215 . 10.1177/0004563217701777 .28875734 
Piketty M. ; Polak M. ; Flechtner I. ; Gonzales-Briceno L. ; Souberbielle J. C. 
False biochemical diagnosis of hyperthyroidism
in streptavidin-biotin
based immunoassays: the problem of biotin intake and related interferences . Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. 
2017 , 55 , 780 –788 . 10.1515/cclm-2016-0606 .27732554 
Clevidence B. A. ; Marshall M. W. ; Canary J. J. 
Biotin levels in plasma and urine
of healthy adults consuming physiological doses of biotin . Nutr. Res. (N. Y., NY, U. S.) 
1988 , 8 , 1109 –1118 . 10.1016/S0271-5317(88)80112-X .
Katzman B. M. ; Lueke A. J. ; Donato L. J. ; Jaffe A. S. ; Baumann N. A. 
Prevalence
of biotin supplement usage in outpatients and plasma biotin concentrations
in patients presenting to the emergency department . Clin. Biochem. 
2018 , 60 , 11 –16 . 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2018.07.004 .30036510 
Kirkwood J.  Meeting the biotin
challenge . Am. Ass. Clin. Chem. 2018 . https://www.aacc.org/publications/cln/articles/2018/janfeb/meeting-the-biotin-challenge. Published January 1, 2018 (Accessed September 09 and Nov. 27, 2019).
Siemens
Healthcare   Diagnostics I. Customer Bulletin
078D1052–01 Rev. A. Siemens Advia Centaur XP: Availability
of an Enhanced Intact PTH (iPTH) Assay (US), 2011 .
McEnroe R. J. ; Dimeski G. ; Miller W. G. ; Sonntag O.  Supplementary tables
for interference testing in clinical chemistry , 1 st ed. CLSI EP37; Clinical Laboratory
Standards Institute : Wayne, PA , 2017 .
Schrapp A. ; Fraissinet F. ; Hervouet C. ; Girot H. ; Brunel V. 
Biotin and
high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T assay . Biochem.
Med. 
2018 , 28 , 030901 10.11613/BM.2018.030901 .
Gerg M. ; Heindl D. ; Hillringhaus L. ; Hirzel K. ; Hojer C.
D. ; Huber F. ; Josel H.-P. ; Meier T. ; Schraeml M. ; Voss E.  Novel biotin-specific monoclonal antibody and use
thereof . WO2018122205A2 , 2018 .
Leary T. P. ; Gutierrez R. A. ; Muerhoff A. S. ; Birkenmeyer L. G. ; Desai S. M. ; Dawson G. J. 
A chemiluminescent, magnetic particle-based
immunoassay for the detection of hepatitis C virus core antigen in
human serum or plasma . J. Med. Virol. 
2006 , 78 , 1436 –1440 . 10.1002/jmv.20716 .16998880 
Venge P. ; Johnston N. ; Lindahl B. ; James S. 
Normal plasma levels
of cardiac troponin I measured by the high-sensitivity cardiac troponin
I access prototype assay and the impact on the diagnosis of myocardial
ischemia . J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 
2009 , 54 , 1165 –1172 . 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.05.051 .19761938 
Zempleni J. ; Mock D. M. 
Advanced analysis
of biotin metabolites in body fluids
allows a more accurate measurement of biotin bioavailability and metabolism
in humans . J. Nutr. 
1999 , 129 , 494S –497S . 10.1093/jn/129.2.494S .10064316 
Grimsey P. ; Frey N. ; Bendig G. ; Zitzler J. ; Lorenz O. ; Kasapic D. ; Zaugg C. E 
Population
pharmacokinetics of exogenous
biotin and the relationship between biotin serum levels and in vitro
immunoassay interference . Int. J. Pharmacokinet. 
2017 , 2 , 247 –256 . 10.4155/ipk-2017-0013 .
Buzid A. ; McGlacken G. P. ; Glennon J. D. ; Luong J. H. T. 
Electrochemical
sensing of biotin using nafion modified boron-doped diamond electrode . ACS Omega 
2018 , 3 , 7776 –7782 . 10.1021/acsomega.8b01209 .30087922 
Buzid A. ; Hayes P. E. ; Glennon J. D. ; Luong J. H. T. 
Captavidin
as
a regenerable biorecognition element on boron-doped diamond for biotin
sensing . Anal. Chim. Acta 
2019 , 1059 , 42 –48 . 10.1016/j.aca.2019.01.058 .30876631 
Stieglitz H. M. ; Korpi-Steiner N. ; Katzman B. ; Mersereau J. E. ; Styner M. 
Suspected testosterone-producing
tumor in a patient
taking biotin supplements . J. Endo. Soc. 
2018 , 2 , 563 –569 . 10.1210/js.2018-00069 .
Mock D. M. ; Lankford G. L. ; Mock N. I. 
Biotin
accounts for only half of
the total avidin-binding substances in human serum . J. Nutr. 
1995 , 125 , 941 –946 .7722698

