
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02201ArticleDesign of a Helical-Stabilized, Cyclic, and Nontoxic
Analogue of the Peptide Cm-p5 with Improved Antifungal Activity Vicente Fidel
E. Morales †∥∇González-Garcia Melaine §Diaz Pico Erbio ∥Moreno-Castillo Elena ‡Garay Hilda E. ∥Rosi Pablo E. #Jimenez Asiel Mena ‡Campos-Delgado Jose A. ∇Rivera Daniel G. ‡Chinea Glay ∥Pietro Rosemeire C. L.
R. ○Stenger Steffen ⊥Spellerberg Barbara ⊥Kubiczek Dennis ¶Bodenberger Nicholas ¶Dietz Steffen ¶Rosenau Frank ¶Paixão Márcio Weber *∇Ständker Ludger *◆Otero-González Anselmo J. *§†General
Chemistry Department, Faculty of Chemistry and ‡Center for Natural Products Research,
Faculty of Chemistry, University of Havana, Zapata y G, 10400 La Habana, Cuba§ Center
for Protein Studies, Faculty of Biology, University of Havana, 25 and I, 10400 La Habana, Cuba∥ Synthetic
Peptides Group, Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, P.O. Box 6162, 10600 La Habana, Cuba⊥ Institute
of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University
Clinic of Ulm, Robert Koch Str. 8, Ulm D-89081, Germany# Department
of Inorganic Chemistry, Analytical and Physical Chemistry, Facultad
de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad
de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires C1428EGA, Argentina∇ Center
of Excellence for Research in Sustainable Chemistry (CERSusChem),
Department of Chemistry, Federal University
of São Carlos-UFSCar, São Paulo 13565-905, Brazil○ Laboratory
of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Department of Drugs and Medicines,
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, UNESP, Araraquara 14800-900, Brazil◆ Core
Facility for Functional Peptidomics, Ulm Peptide Pharmaceuticals (U-PEP),
University Ulm, Faculty of Medicine, Ulm
University, 89081 Ulm, Germany¶ Institute
of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ulm University, James-Frank-Ring N27, 89081 Ulm, Germany* E-mail: marelloweber@gmail.com (W.P.).* E-mail: ludger.staendker@uni-ulm.de (L.S.).* E-mail: aotero@fbio.uh.cu (A.J.O.-G.).05 11 2019 19 11 2019 4 21 19081 19095 24 07 2019 04 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Following the information obtained
by a rational design study,
a cyclic and helical-stabilized analogue of the peptide Cm-p5 was
synthetized. The cyclic monomer showed an increased activity in vitro
against Candida albicans and Candida parapsilosis, compared to Cm-p5. Initially,
14 mutants of Cm-p5 were synthesized following a rational design to
improve the antifungal activity and pharmacological properties. Antimicrobial
testing showed that the activity was lost in each of these 14 analogues,
suggesting, as a main conclusion, that a Glu–His salt bridge
could stabilize Cm-p5 helical conformation during the interaction
with the plasma membrane. A derivative, obtained by substitution of
Glu and His for Cys, was synthesized and oxidized with the generation
of a cyclic monomer with improved antifungal activity. In addition,
two dimers were generated during the oxidation procedure, a parallel
and antiparallel one. The dimers showed a helical secondary structure
in water, whereas the cyclic monomer only showed this conformation
in SDS. Molecular dynamic simulations confirmed the helical stabilizations
for all of them, therefore indicating the possible essential role
of the Glu–His salt bridge. In addition, the antiparallel dimer
showed a moderate activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and a significant activity against Listeria monocytogenes. Neither the cyclic monomer nor the dimers were toxic against macrophages
or THP-1 human cells. Due to its increased capacity for fungal control
compared to fluconazole, its low cytotoxicity, together with a stabilized
α-helix and disulfide bridges, that may advance its metabolic
stability, and in vivo activity, the new cyclic Cm-p5 monomer represents
a potential systemic antifungal therapeutic candidate.

document-id-old-9ao9b02201document-id-new-14ao9b02201ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
It
has become apparent that an urgent need for developing new therapeutic
principles and/or cures for infectious diseases exist, seeing the
lack of new class of conventional antibiotics.1 Bacterial and fungal resistance to antibiotic is a great issue for
medicine nowadays, and the expected consequences of microbial resistant
strains2 may include detrimental effects
in the brain, neurons (Alzheimer’s disease and multiple sclerosis),3 and biofilm formation in ear canal and teeth.4

In addition, abuse in the usage of antibiotics
has been proposed
as a drawback for natural microbiote, causing many and unexpected
immunological, gastric, neurological, and opportunist microorganism
disorders. In the same sense, antifungal or antibacterial drugs for
systemic treatment are always accompanied by many side effects, making
medical follow-ups of each case necessary.5

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have been found in a wide range
of
organisms. They can act as part of the innate defense system of plants,
vertebrates, and invertebrates against infections.6 In general, they have the ability to directly kill microbes.
However, in recent years, the concept for this heterogeneous group
has been extended to host defense peptides. This is due to their abilities
to disturb growth and also to modulate the immune system.7 Immunomodulation and, in some cases, “beneficial
immunogenicity” are extraordinary features that are not reachable
by traditional antibiotics because their chemical nature is functionally
incompatible with the immune system.

Notably, most AMPs are
very hemolytic and toxic to mammalian cells
(mellitin,8 guavanin 2,9 etc.), avoiding their use orally; therefore, only topical
formulation is possible in the majority of cases (commercial triple
antibiotics).10

The design of new
and less toxic peptide drugs, for oral and systemic
administration, is desired. Although there are many publications about
AMPs as the antibiotics of the future, they do not have the expected
impact yet. New roads must be accessed in order to improve this.5

In recent years, peptides have received
increasing attention as
pharmaceuticals despite their intrinsic drawbacks in terms of pharmacological
properties. The attractiveness of peptides as drugs is mainly due
to their high degree of specificity in comparison with conventional
chemical drugs. Furthermore, massive peptide synthesis can be performed
in a cost–benefit manner and more effective ADME (administration,
distribution, metabolism, and excretion) parameters can be obtained
with rationally designed peptide derivatives.11

Peptide drugs are quite common nowadays;12 however, their usage is limited due to their low metabolic
stability,
oral absorption, rapid excretion through the kidney and liver, low
immunogenicity, and high hemolytic activity.13

Cm-p5 (SRSELIVHQRLF-NH2) is a peptide derived from
a
coastal tropical snail, Cenchritis muricatus (Gastropoda: Littorinidae), that showed antifungal
activity against the human pathogens Candida albicans, Candida parapsilosis, Cryptococcus neoformans, Trichophyton
mentagrophytes, and Trichophyton rubrum. This peptide did not exhibit any toxicity against
a mammalian cell line in vitro and was structurally characterized
by circular dichroism polarimetry and NMR spectroscopy,14 revealing an α-helical structure under
conditions that mimic a cellular environment and a tendency to a random
structure in aqueous solutions.15

Cm-p5 is not a suitable therapeutic agent due to its easy proteolytic
degradation. The presence of two Arg residues in the structure probably
facilitates trypsin degradation, and the free N-terminal
can be targeted by aminopeptidase action. The covalent modification
of this peptide could improve its metabolic stability once the importance
of each amino acid residue for its biological activity was dertermined.12

Cm-p5 showed a fungistatic action in the
10–40 μg/mL
range against Candida albicans. This
is a similar effect to that observed for the conventional antifungal
fluconazole16 but different than amphotericin
B, which exhibited a fungicidal character, eliminating the microbial
population in 24 h.16

In a plethora
of cationic AMPs existing today, we selected Cm-p5
due to its low hemolytic and cytotoxic activity,16 the simplicity of its synthesis and some covalent modification,
and its similar antifungal activity compared to conventional fungistatics
like fluconazole (MIC = 8–16 μg/mL, against Candida albicans).17

The biological mechanism of action of Cm-p5 is currently unknown.
However, this molecule interacts preferentially with fungal phospholipids
and does not interact with ergosterol (unlike amphotericin B), and
to our knowledge, there is no information regarding whether it is
present in the cytoplasm. Based on the previous aspects, four action
mechanisms can be hypothesized: (i) destabilization of the cellular
membrane,18 (ii) inhibition of cell wall
synthesis (like echinocandins),19 (iii)
inhibition of ergosterol synthesis20 (like
clotrimazole and fluconazole), and (iv) intracellular enzymatic inhibition.21 In any case, helical stabilization of Cm-p5
may play an essential role in its biological activity.

In this
article, we present a general study of the relevance of
several amino acids in the biological activity of Cm-p5. This revealed
the essential role of Glu and His residues in the helix stabilization
and allowed us to synthesize a mutant by changing them for Cys. The
mutant and the two unexpected dimers presented an improved antimicrobial
activity and possibly enhanced pharmacological properties.

Results
and Discussion
Design of Mutants of Cm-p5
Normally
alanine scanning
is conducted for estimating the relative importance of each amino
acid in the biological activity of peptides.22 However, a simpler and faster approach is the rational change of
amino acids23 according to the natural
structures currently found in AMPs, like the presence of many Arg,
Lys, Cys, and Trp residues (His in the case of histatins),24 and alternated positive charges to form a facial
amphiphilic α-helix or β-sheet. This is a fundamental
structural principle that works well in many cases, possess a shape
in which cationic and hydrophobic amino acids organize spatially in
discreet sectors of the molecule, forming an amphipathic pattern.25

Tryptophan is frequently found in interaction
with the interfacial region of the lipid membrane;26 Arg and Lys have positive charges at physiological pH,
permitting the selective interaction with microbial membranes; and
Cys, in certain conditions, stabilizes secondary structures by forming
disulfide bridges.27

Based on a simple
electrostatic interaction model between cationic
AMPs and negatively charged bacterial/fungal membranes, several specific
structural features in the helix projection of Cm-p5 are notable.
This peptide presents hydrophobic residues at the C-terminus, a free
N-terminus (positively charged), and an amphipathic helical structure
with positive charges concentrated toward one side of the helix but
a less defined hydrophobic region.

Analyzing the Schiffer–Edmundson
projection of Cm-p5 (Figure 1d), it is possible
that the polar side of the helix contains an unexpected hydrophobic
Ile residue. In addition, polar residues, such as Glu and His, are
curiously present in the putative hydrophobic face.

Figure 1 Schiffer–Edmundson
projections of the antifungal peptides
(a) Cm-p1, (b) Cm-p3, (c) Cm-p4, and (d) Cm-p5.

Previous research13 has demonstrated
that inserting Arg-Cys (forming Cm-p3) or Met-Lys (forming Cm-p4)
in the C-terminus of the mollusk-derived peptide Cm-p1 did not improve
the antimicrobial activity; however, Leu-Phe (forming Cm-p5) insertion
furnishes a high antifungal activity (Figure 1).

Using the online server http://heliquest.ipmc.cnrs.fr/cgi-bin/ComputParams.py, helical parameters28 of helicoidal peptides
were obtained. Hydrophobicity (H; intrinsic capability of a peptide
to move from an aqueous into a hydrophobic phase), frequency of polar
residues (Freq. Polar), relative hydrophobic moment (μHrel;
quantitative measure of peptide amphipathicity29 defined as the vector sum of the hydrophobicities of the
individual amino acids), and the angle moment (angleM; angle in radians
between the horizontal plane and direction of μHrel) are listed
in Table 1.30

Table 1 Helical Parameters
for Nonamidated
Cm-p1, Cm-p3, Cm-p4, and Cm-p5a
peptide	helix	H	μHrel	z	FreqPolar	angleM	
Cm-p1	SRSELIVHQR	0.18900	0.05685	1	0.700	5.18806	
Cm-p3	SRSELIVHQRRC	0.20167	0.21172	2	0.667	5.35967	
Cm-p4	SRSELIVHQRMK	0.17750	0.09499	2	0.667	1.98272	
Cm-p5	SRSELIVHQRLF	0.44833	0.19215	1	0.583	0.24380	
a H: hydrophobicity, μHrel:
relative dipole moment of hydrophobicity, z: total charge, FreqPolar:
frequency of polar groups, angleM: angle in radians between the horizontal
plane and direction of μHrel.

All calculations were realized supposing the α-helical
structure
and as an explication of the loss of antifungal activity for all these
analogues of Cm-p5.

When analyzing the effect of these C-terminal
modifications in
the Cm-p1 activity in detail, we observed that the addition of Arg-Cys
(forming Cm-p3) does not change the frequency of polar groups considerably,
hydrophobicity, or orientation (arrow in Figure 1b) of the relative hydrophobic moment but
significantly alters the μHrel magnitude (Table 1). In contrast, the insertion of Met-Lys
(forming Cm-p4) turns the direction of μHrel (arrow in Figure 1c) but poorly increases
its magnitude (Table 1). Addition of Leu-Phe (forming Cm-p5) greatly modifies all parameters,
especially H and μHrel (arrow in Figure 1d and Table 1). In this case, Phe is located in a i,i+4 position in relation to His; therefore, there
may occur a π–π interaction between the phenyl
and imidazole groups of these residues, which could have some effect
in helix stabilization. Based on a previous article,15 Cm-p4 is a more active version of Cm-p1 than Cm-p3, which
may indicate that the variation of the direction of μHrel is
more relevant than the variation of its magnitude, particularly in
Cm-p5, where μHrel is almost directed from the hydrophilic to
the hydrophobic face (arrow in Figure 1d).

These previous results apparently suggest
that magnitudes of H,
μHrel, or its direction are fundamental for activity, favoring
sequences with elevated H (intrinsic capability of a peptide to move
from an aqueous into a hydrophobic phase) or μHrel (quantitative
measure of peptide amphipathicity) and direction of μHrel from
the hydrophobic to hydrophilic phase to promote membrane interaction.

Considering these suggestions, 14 analogues of Cm-p5 (Figure 2 and Tables 2 and 3) were designed based on SAR (structure–activity relationship).
The experimental strategy of this work, with a minimal use of resources,
was to gain an insight into how the antifungal activity of the Cm-p5
is affected by the change of amino acid sequence. Arg residues remained
in almost all cases since positive charges are supposed to be likely
in the polar face of the helix and are essential for membrane interaction
and biological activity.

Figure 2 Schiffer–Edmundson projection of peptides
analogues of Cm-p5.

Table 2 Helical
Parameters of Cm-p5 Analogues
peptide	helix	H	μHrel	z	FreqPolar	angleM	
Cm-p5	SRSELIVHQRLF	0.44833	0.19215	1	0.583	0.24380	
Change of His	
1	SRSELIVRQRLF	0.35333	0.09818	2	0.583	0.14196	
Change of Glu	
2	SRSDLIVHQRLF	0.43750	0.18479	1	0.583	0.20159	
3	SRSQLIVHQRLF	0.48333	0.21791	2	0.583	0.35966	
4	SRSALIVHQRLF	0.52750	0.25359	2	0.500	0.47042	
5	SRSβALIVHQRLF	 	 	 	 	 	
Change of Ile	
6	SRSELRVHQRLF	0.21417	0.41547	2	0.667	0.49375	
7	SRSELKVHQRLF	0.21583	0.41384	2	0.667	0.49293	
Change of Leu	
8	SRSEKIVHQRLF	0.22417	0.19104	2	0.667	1.49355	
Truncated and change of Leu by
Lys	
9	SRSE-IVHQRLF	0.33455	0.18199	1	0.636	2.44770	
10	SRSEKIVHQ-LF	0.33636	0.46847	1	0.636	2.52341	
11	-RS-LIVHQRLF	0.6060	0.33231	2	0.500	3.41529	
12	SRSE-IV-QRLF	0.35500	0.42451	1	0.600	4.21201	
Additional variants	
13	Ac-SRSELIVHQRLF	 	 	 	 	 	
14	(SRSELIVHQRLF)2K	 	 	 	 	 	
Table 3 Biological Activity Measured as Minimal
Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) against Different Bacteria and Fungi
for Each Synthesized Peptidea
 	 	MIC (μg/mL)	
no.	peptide	Sa	Ec	Ca	Cp	Tr	
1	SRSELIVRQRLF-NH2	>400	>400	>400	>400	>400	
2	SRSDLIVHQRLF-NH2	>400	>400	>400	>400	>400	
3	SRSQLIVHQRLF-NH2	>400	>400	>400	>400	>400	
4	SRSALIVHQRLF-NH2	>400	>400	>400	>400	>400	
5	SRSβALIVHQRLF-NH2	>400	>400	>400	>400	>400	
6	SRSELRVHQRLF-NH2	NT	NT	>400	>400	NT	
7	SRSELKVHQRLF-NH2	NT	NT	>400	>400	NT	
8	SRSEKIVHQRLF-NH2	>400	>400	>400	>400	>400	
9	SRSE--IVHQRLF-NH2	>400	>400	>400	>400	>400	
10	SRSEKIVHQ--LF-NH2	>400	>400	>400	>400	>400	
11	-RS--LIVHQRLF-NH2	>400	>400	>400	>400	>400	
12	SRSE--IV--QRLF-NH2	>400	>400	>400	>400	>400	
13	Ac-SRSELIVHQRLF-NH2	NT	NT	10	10	10	
14	(SRSELIVHQRLF)2K-NH2	NT	NT	>400	>400	NT	
 	ampicillin	0.02	0.1953	NT	NT	NT	
 	amphotericin B	NT	NT	0.25	0.25	0.125	
a Ca = Candida albicans, Cp = Candida parapsilosis, Tr = Trichophyton
rubrum, Sa = Staphylococcus aureus, Ec = Escherichia coli; NT = not tested.

The fundamental modifications introduced in the sequence
of Cm-p5,
based on amino acid charge at physiological pH were as follows: (i)
change of the negative Glu residue, (ii) introduction of another positive
charge by mutation of Lys or Arg by Ile, (iii) change of His by a
positively charged Arg, (iv) change of Leu5 by another positively
charged residue (Lys), and (v) truncated versions, where residues
such as Leu, Arg, Ser, Glu, or His were eliminated.

All the
performed changes will assist in evaluating the contribution
of each mutated residue to the helical stabilization and therefore
to the biological activity of the peptide. Glu was modified by the
similar but neutral Gln (peptide 3 in Table 2); in the case of Asp (peptide 2 in Table 2), the negative charge
was maintained but the length of the lateral chain was modified. The
charge was also eliminated by the mutations of Ala (peptide 4 in Table 2) and β-Ala
(peptide 5 in Table 2), simulating the classical alanine scanning.
Changing His for Arg (peptide 1 in Table 2), we will assess the role of the neutral
His residue at physiological pH and the effect of a permanent positive
charge. Further changes like Ile for Lys (peptide 7 in Table 2) or Arg (peptide 6 in Table 2) will introduce another
positive charge within the hydrophilic face. Truncated analogues could
indicate, for example, if the activity is influenced by the interaction
of Glu and His in i+3 (peptide 9 in Table 2) or Glu and Lys in i+2 (peptide 10 in Table 2).

Dimeric MAP (multiple antigenic peptides)-type
peptide was synthesized
since activity improvement in these cases was reported.31 N-terminal acetylated Cm-p5 was produced to
evaluate if the positively charged free N-terminus contributes to
the antifungal activity.

Chemical synthesis is a valuable tool
to obtain analogues of biologically
active peptides found in natural sources. The experimental feasibility
of SPPS (solid phase peptide synthesis) allowed us to introduce rational
changes to the peptide sequence in order to generate several diverse
structures. Fmoc/tBu chemistry is preferred and more useful if the
peptides do not aggregate. Rink-MBHA-Resin is useful for the production
of amidated peptides, and a first-generation polystyrene support is
adequate for short sequences.

Results and Discussion
regarding Cm-p5 Peptide Mutants
Fourteen peptides were synthesized
based on the previous design (Table 2). C-terminals of
all the peptides were amidated (−NH2) since an Fmoc-Rink-MBHA
resin was used. The Rink linker and the side-chain protecting groups,
as expected, resulted in a stable (orthogonal) functional group toward
Fmoc elimination treatment (piperidine 20% in DMF) and coupling conditions.
DIC/Oxyma combination (less than 1% of racemization) was used for
each manual coupling, showing an excellent efficiency due to the simplicity
of synthetized sequences. Final cleavage and side-chain deprotection,
ether precipitation, centrifugation, and lyophilization produced the
crude product, ready for analytical mass determination and the purification
process.

Functional screening of the designed peptides based
on antibacterial and antifungal activities are listed in Table 3. Amphotericin B and
ampicillin were used as controls for fungal and bacterial strains,
respectively.

To our surprise, no amino acid changes maintain
or improve the
antimicrobial activity of Cm-p5, indicating an essential sequence
characteristic needed to exert the biological activity.

Substitution
of His by Arg (peptide 1 in Table 2) involved a change in the protonation state
of the amino acid in position eight, increasing the lateral chain
length (reduce distance to the negative Glu), μHrel decreases
to half, and its direction changed slightly with respect to Cm-p5
(Table 2 and Figure 2). Decrement of μHrel,
change in the length of the lateral chain, and/or the presence of
permanent positive charge at the His position is not good for the
activity.

Similarly, modification of Glu residue to either Gln,
Ala, βAla,
or Asp (peptides 2–5 in Table 2) resulted in the loss of antimicrobial activity. Apparently,
the negative charge in the Glu residue (changing Glu by Gln) and the
distance to that (changing Glu by Asp) are essential for the activity,
even more if we consider that the magnitude of μHrel and values
of Hare practically the same when Gln or Asp is present instead of
Glu. Modification to Ala (peptide 4 in Table 2), as expected, alters the H and magnitude
of μHrel but especially its direction, indicating some additional
effects. β-Ala (peptide 5 in Table 2) has a similar behavior.

In order
to increase the amphipathicity, we added a positive residue
(Arg or Lys) in the hydrophilic face instead of Ile. In these cases,
the change in the direction of μHrel is higher (augmented angle
between the horizontal plane and direction of μHrel), compared
to any previous analogue, while H is half, but μHrel doubles
(as expected, increase the amphipathicity). However, the original
Arg apparently generates such repulsion with the additional Arg or
Lys (peptides 6 and 7 in Table 2) residues located in the same face, which may destroy the
helical conformation.

Peptide 8 in Table 2 was also inactive. In this, the change of
Leu5 by Lys produces a
major increase in the angle between the horizontal plane and the μHrel,
but its magnitude is maintained and H is reduced by half. In addition,
unfavorable electrostatic interaction between Glu and Lys residues
could be implicated in the inactivation of this analogue.

The
behavior of truncated versions of Cm-p5 in terms of biological
activity was mostly random and more difficult to understand, but remarkably,
all these peptides change the direction of μHrel dramatically
when compared with Cm-p5.

The direction of μHrel can be
more important for the correct
interaction with the membranes than its magnitude (amphipathicity),
considering that during Arg contact with a negative phospholipid,
only the vertical component of this vector, which splits in half the
helix from Arg to the opposed face (helix axis), is in cooperation
with the dipole moment vector of the membrane.

If the μHrel
direction has more horizontal components (perpendicular
to the axis of the helix), then its real magnitude is neglected, and
repulsive forces are implicated in an augmented instability of the
peptide bounded to the membrane system even if positively charged
residues, concentrated in one face, are present (Figure S1a, Supporting Information).

Acetylated Cm-p5
maintains fungistatic properties (peptide 13 in Table 2); therefore, free
N-terminal is not needed for activity, enabling the total protection
of peptide toward aminopeptidase degradation in future research.

The dimeric version (peptide 14 in Table 2), like MAP (multiple antigenic peptides),
did not show any activity. This may be due to steric hindrance between
C-terminal joined chains, which would imply helix destruction.

In general, our results suggest four determinant structure factors
in order to maintain the biological activity of Cm-p5. Glu and His
residues must be in the i,i+4 positions,
μHrel vector must be close to a parallel direction with respect
to the membrane pointing in the opposite direction of the hydrophilic
face (Arg residues), and any repulsive interaction that could interfere
in helicity should be avoided.

Salt Bridge and Helical
Stabilization
Based on the
previous modifications (Table 3), we consider that the most remarkable finding was the relative
position of His and Glu (pKaR = 4.25,
α dissociation grade = 99.97%) (analytical calculation based
on a concentration of 10 μg/mL of Cm-p5 and physiological pH
= 7.4) in Cm-p5. These residues could be participating in helical
stabilization by forming salt bridges (defined as the combination
of two noncovalent interactions: electrostatic interaction and hydrogen
bonding).32 For Cm-p5, the modification
of these residues (peptides 1–5 in Table 2) or the distance between them (peptide 9
in Table 2) involves
the loss in biological activity. Recently, the role of salt bridge
interaction in secondary structure stabilization of single α-helix
of peptides has been revealed.33

In proteins, such as T4 lysozyme, a salt bridge was identified between
Asp (pKaR = 3.65, α = 99.93%, supposing
10 μg/mL) at residue 70 and a His at 31. Although the imidazole
ring of His31 is not protonated at physiological pH (pKaR = 6.8, α = 79.85%, supposing 10 μg/mL),
it demonstrated a shift in its pKaR (protonated
imidazole) to 9.05 (α = 2.19% at 10 μg/mL) in the folded
protein that simulates a protonated His at pH = 7.4 due to salt bridge
formation.34

Cm-p5 changes to a helical
conformation only by interacting with
membranes. In internal protein media or under membranolytic conditions,
water content is low,35 solvation of negative
Asp or the imidazole ring is not effective, and the salt bridge can
be formed spontaneously by negative enthalpy and entropy (hydrophobic
effect). A possible mechanism, by which this process could take place,
is the formation of a hydrogen bond between the neutral imidazole
(pKaR = 13.1)36 and the negatively charged Asp residue. This donation of negative
charge by Asp to the imidazole ring increases its basicity, in consequence
the pKbR (from 7.2 to 4.95) (pKaR: from 6.8 to 9.05) and its protonation grade
from 20.25 to 97.81%.34 In principle, the
hydrolysis pKhR = pKbR of imidazole decrease (pKaR increases)
because of the effect of the negative charge of Asp at pH = 7.4 (Figure S1b, Supporting Information). Weak acids
or anions such as phosphate, water solvation, or monopositive cations
(Na+ or K+) do not favor salt bridge formation
(Figure S1c, Supporting Information). On
the other hand, di-positive cations (Ca2+ or Mg2+, perform as counter ions of phosphate in membranes) could reinforce
the interaction (Figure S1d, Supporting
Information). This is the first time that a salt bridge between His
and Glu in the i,i+4 position is
proposed and further investigation is needed to confirm its role in
helical stabilization and, consequently, in the biological activity
of Cm-p5.

If this salt bridge is essential for the antifungal
activity of
Cm-p5, in environments such as mucosa, skin, or tumors, where pH =
5–6, then the biological effect will be enhanced due to alteration
in the dissociation grade of Glu (85% at pH = 5) or protonation grade
of His (96.89% at pH = 5). Also, the influence of the ionic strength
or type of ions may alter these noncovalent interactions.24,31 We assumed that covalent cyclization between these residues by substituting
them with Cys should stabilize the helical secondary structure, energetically
favoring the action mechanism. A disulfide bridge (or any other covalent
stabilization) should overcome all drawbacks related with the physiological
behavior of this salt bridge and make peptides more resistant to proteolysis.

It is currently known that cyclization in i,i+3 or i,i+4 positions
can stabilize an α-helix.37 In order
to know whether Cys residue has the suitable length for maintaining
a helical conformation without further deformation, we made a molecular
dynamic study of mutated Cm-p5 (E4C and H8C) to estimate the covalent
distance between thiol groups in the i,i+4 position. Analysis of the distance between sulfur nuclei shows
that they are located on the edge (2–10 Å) of the sulfur
covalent radius (1.05 Å) This result also shows that using homo-cysteine
(Hcy) residues or a combination of Cys and Hcy could improve the cyclization
process and, consequently, helical stabilization.

With this
aim in mind, we synthesized three new peptides, placing
two Cys, two Hcy or one Cys, and one Hcy instead of the Glu and His
pair (Figure 3). It
is important to note that, like in Cm-p5, these analogues have doubled
the H value, μHrel magnitudes, and its direction totally opposed
to Arg residues, without any horizontal component that can repel the
membrane relative dipole moment (Figure 3).

Figure 3 Designed cyclic analogues of Cm-p5, helical
wheel projection of
CysCys-Cm-p5, and helical parameters.

Results and Discussion regarding Salt Bridge and Helical Stabilization
The synthetic procedure for Cm-p5 cyclic analogues is presented
in Scheme 1. Following
the Fmoc/t-Bu peptide strategy, cleavage in the presence
of EDT, three new acyclic analogues were produced with high purity
and yield (Scheme 2).

Scheme 1 Synthesis of Disulfide-Bridged Analogues of Cm-p5
Scheme 2 Synthesis of CysCysCm-p5 Parallel Dimer Using the
Orthogonality between
Acm and Trt Protecting Groups
The three di-thiolated peptides were submitted to the cyclization
process by means of in-water oxidations with air oxygen, showing some
specificity for each compound. Usually, in similar transformations
with other peptides, all acyclic starting materials are consumed in
2–3 h. In the case of the CysCysCm-p5 analogue, more time (6
h) was needed for the consumption of all starting materials, and coincidently,
acyclic and cyclic monomers have the same retention time; therefore,
only mass analysis or Elman test could confirm the total conversion
(Figures S17 and S18, Supporting Information).
In a first attempt, desulfured impurity was produced due to increased
pH (above 9). However, this problem was corrected by maintaining the
pH strictly around 8–8.5. Surprisingly, in the standard cyclization
conditions used for commercial peptides in our laboratory (0.5 mM),
the CysCysCm-p5 analogue produced considerable quantities of dimeric
byproduct (Figures S17 and S18, Supporting
Information), considered as parallel and antiparallel dimers (Figure 4). Similar dimers
were reported as impurities of CIGB-300 anticancer peptide.38 Peak 4 (Figure S17, Supporting Information) represents a conformer of peak 3, a dimer,
as can be seen in the ESI-HRMS spectrum (Figure S18, Supporting Information) and due to coalescence between
peaks 3 and 4 if the sample is previously stabilized for 2 h at room
temperature.

Figure 4 Antiparallel dimeric CysCysCm-p5.

Only at 0.03 mM the production of the cyclic monomer without the
formation of dimeric byproducts (Figure S21, Supporting Information) is guaranteed. However, this concentration
is not actually applicable to industrial processes, and a better strategy
would be to perform the cyclization on resin and final cleavage of
the cyclic monomer as a crude product.

In order to identify
which peak in the RP-HPLC corresponds to the
parallel or antiparallel dimer, we decided to change the orthogonality
of Cys protection, using Cys(Acm) for the His mutation and Cys(Trt)
for the Glu. With these new protecting groups, peptide cleavage from
resin produced an acyclic monomer containing Cys(Acm) and a free Cys
residue. Dimerization of this compound at concentrated conditions
(5 mM) (Figure S23, Supporting Information),
solvent evaporation, lyophilization, and finally Acm deprotection
with iodine and further cyclization guaranteed the production of the
parallel dimer only. This unequivocal parallel dimer has the same
retention time compared to the first dimer produced in the CysCysCm-p5
peptide cyclization (Figure S24, Supporting
Information), confirming the identification of the parallel dimer
and the antiparallel counterpart.

As a comparison, cyclization
of the peptide containing both Cys
and Hcy has less tendency to form both dimeric products under the
same conditions (Figures S26 and S27, Supporting
Information). In the case of the analogue with two Hcy, only the cyclic
monomer is obtained at 0.5 mM (Figure S30, Supporting Information).

In conclusion, intrachain disulfide
bridge between i,i+4 (residues 4
and 8) positions in Cm-p5 are more
feasibly accessible when two Hcy or Hcy-Cys combinations are introduced.
On the contrary, inter-chain disulfide bridge when Cys-Cys combination
is introduced are clearly limited by steric hindrance. This type of
inter-chain disulfide bridge is similar to the ones that are present
in insulin and defensins. However, this is the first report, to our
knowledge, of disulfide dimers between i,i+4 positions.

Circular Dichroism Analysis
The
following peptides
were submitted to CD analysis in water and 10% SDS–water mixture:
Cm-p5 (CysCysCm-p5 cyclic monomer), HcyHcyCm-p5 (cyclic monomer),
and the parallel and antiparallel dimers of CysCysCm-p5. It is evident
that a better helical stabilization was obtained for the cyclic monomers
in a 10% SDS solution when compared with Cm-p5 (Chart 1). At 10% SDS (micellar critic concentration
of SDS) and despite the difference in surface curvature, these types
of micelles are similar or mimic biological membranes of bacteria
and fungus and are also negatively charged. Remarkably, in the case
of dimeric compounds (Chart 1), interaction with micelles is not needed for helicity induction;
these compounds are predominantly α-helices in water.

Chart 1 CD Analysis
in Water and 10% SDSa
a Secondary structure content
(in percentage) calculated with the online program Bestsel (http://bestsel.elte.hu). hCys:
cyclic HcyHcyCm-p5, Cyclic: cyclic CysCysCm-p5, Dimer 1: parallel
dimer, Dimer 2: antiparallel dimer.



Interestingly,
the CysCysCm-p5 cyclic monomer showed a major percentage
of antiparallel β-structures in water than in the case of HcyHcyCm-p5.
It is important to note that dimer 1 (parallel) does not show an antiparallel
β-strand structure under aqueous or SDS conditions if compared
to dimer 2 (antiparallel). Also, the latter has the same behavior
in water or SDS, which may be an indication of the double repulsion
between the free positive N-terminal (with hydrophilic
interactions) and the hydrophobic Leu-Phe at the C-terminus (with
hydrophobic interactions) for this antiparallel construction (acetylated
version of CysCysCm-p5 could totally avoid this drawback). Based on
the results shown in Chart 1, it is possible to conclude that, for the dimers, the interchain
disulfide bridge is responsible for maintaining 25% of the helical
structure in water. Only in the case of the parallel dimer (dimer
1) water molecules are excluded by SDS, and additionally, hydrophilic
and hydrophobic interactions at the N- and C-terminal contribute to
considerably increase (up to 49%) the total segment of the helix (Chart 1).

Molecular Dynamic
Study of Helical Stabilization
Molecular
dynamic simulations of the CysCysCm-p5 dimers and monomers were performed
with the aim to determine helical stabilization in different solvents.
It is known that TFE is a membranolytic solvent capable of inducing
helical structures in peptides. Our idea was to find a behavior similar
to CD analysis in which we could demonstrate that a disulfide bridge
in the i,i+4 position of Cm-p5 stabilizes
the helical structure in water or TFE/water (40%) mixtures. Simulations
were performed using a helix as the initial structure and evolution
was followed over 50 ns (Table 4).

Table 4 Composition of the Simulated Systems
and α-Helix or Turn Content (%) Calculated during the Last 10
Ns (of the Total 50 ns)
simulated
systemsa	SPCb/TFE	NCIc	α-Helixd	turn	coil	others	
Cm-p5w	1886/0	–2	53 (75)	8	33	5	
Cm-p5mix	1302/126	–2	71 (75)	3	25	1	
CysCysCm-p5w	2078/0	–3	37 (75)	15	39	9	
CysCysCm-p5mix	1433/139	–3	61(75)	13	19	7	
parallel dimerw	3022/0	–6	74 (72)	1	21	4	
parallel dimermix	1556/253	–6	68 (72)	3	25	4	
antiparallel dimerw	3515/0	–6	74 (72)	1	20	4	
antiparallel dimermix	1856/267	–6	60 (72)	2	34	4	
a w: water and mix: TFE/water.

b SPC: simple point charge (water
model used).

c NCI: number
of counter ions (Cl–); the sign indicates the charge
of the ion.

d Initial α-helix
structure
content is reported in parentheses.

In Figure 5A, the
total helix length (a typical helix property) for the native Cm-p5
peptide in both pure water and TFE/water mixture as a function of
time is reported. It is evident that this peptide maintains a stable
helix structure in the TFE/water mixture during the whole simulation,
in contrast to that in pure water. Furthermore, according to the secondary
structure analysis, based on the Dictionary of Secondary Structure
of Proteins criteria, this peptide is defined as a 53% α-helix
in water and 71% in TFE/water (Table 4). This type of behavior is common to helical peptides
in membrane-mimetic conditions.15,39 The effect of TFE on
peptides has been reported previously, where TFE excludes water by
aggregating around the peptide, favoring the formation of intramolecular
hydrogen bonds and promoting the formation of a secondary structure.40 Of note, the CysCysCm-p5 monomer has 15% of
turn in the last 10 ns, indicating the tendency of this to form both
helical structure and β-structure (Table 4).

Figure 5 Total helix length (nm) over time (ns) of (A)
native peptide and
(B) one chain from the parallel dimer. (C) RMSF of each residue from
one chain of the parallel dimer. (D) Solvent accessible surface area
per residue over the last 10 ns of the trajectory.

We also constructed a mutated parallel dimer of Cm-p5 to
evaluate
its behavior in pure water and TFE/water mixture. This biomolecule
manifests a higher tendency to the helical structure in water (Chart 1). The fact that this
molecule maintains its helicity in water can be visualized through
MD (molecular dynamic) simulations. In Figure 5B, it is clear that this peptide maintains
a stable helix structure in both solvents. In fact, it behaves in
a similar fashion when placed in water compared to the native peptide
in TFE/water according to the RMSF pattern (Figure 5C) and α-helix percentage (Table 4). In this case, a
large deviation occurs for the charged N-terminus (Figure 5C) due to its favorable interaction
with water molecules and that it possesses a high degree of freedom.
An N-acetylated modification would be suited to decrease the N-terminus
from fraying.

Overall, the parallel dimer is stable in water,
conserving its
characteristic α-helix (Table 4 and Figure 5B). This may be because of the decrease in solvent accessible
area of nonpolar residues (Cys4, Cys8, Leu5, Val7, Leu11, and Phe12),
which can be embedded between the monomers shielding them from water
molecules and exposing polar residues (Ser1, Arg2, and Arg10) to the
solvent (Figure 5D).
The effect that one monomer has over the other could be similar to
that of TFE when excluding water molecules (hydrophobic effect). Similar
helical packing is present in globins or insulin, in which, as predicted
by these parallel dimers, the angle between helix is 52°.41 The angles between helix42 in the parallel and antiparallel dimer were predicted as
approximately 68° and 59° in the last 25 ns in water, respectively.
The behavior of the antiparallel dimer was similar to the parallel
dimer and is in accord with the ridges and grooves model of helix
packing. Furthermore, our molecular dynamic simulations suggest that
the antiparallel dimer helix is less stable than the parallel in the
TFE/water mixture, and as shown in the CD experiment, dimer 2 has
the same helical character in water or SDS (Chart 1), another indication that this compound
is the antiparallel dimer.

In Vitro Anticandidal and Antibacterial Activity
of cm-p5 and
Its Derivatives
Antifungal activity was evaluated for Cm-p5,
Hcy and Cys cyclic monomers (HcyHcy-Cm-p5 and CysCysCm-p5, respectively),
and the two dimers (dimer 1 (parallel) and dimer 2 (antiparallel))
against three fungal and two bacterial species of clinical relevance
(Table 5).

Table 5 Minimal Inhibitory Concentration (MIC)
(μg/mL) of Cm-p5 and Its Derivatives against Three Candida and
Gram-Positive and Gram-Negative Bacterial Speciesa
sample	Cm-p5	cyclic	dimer 1	dimer 2	Hcy	
Candida species	
C. auris	11	27	30	31	NT	
C. parapsilosis	32	14	39	>100	10	
C. albicans	10	5	48	29	10	
Bacterial
species	
Listeria monocytogenes	>100	100	50	12.5	NT	
Pseudomonas aeruginosa	>100	>100	>100	>100	NT	
a Cyclic: cyclic
CysCysCm-p5, Dimer
1: parallel dimer, Dimer 2: antiparallel dimer, Hcy: cyclic HcyHcyCm-p5.

The antifungal Cm-p5 peptide
kept its expected anticandidal activity
against C. albicans and C. parapsilosis, as previously described.15 Interestingly, a relevant activity was also
observed in the case of C. auris, an
emerging nosocomial pathogen. The Hcy-Hcy cyclic monomer not only
maintained the activity against C. albicans but also increased it against C. parapsilosis. The Cys cyclic monomer, even though it was not so effective against C. auris, it was able to decrease the MIC value against Candida albicans. The two dimers were the least effective
against Candida species, showing MIC values around
30 μg/mL or even higher (Table 5).

To assess if these antifungal peptides also
exert antibacterial
activity, Cm-p5, the Cys cyclic monomer, and the two dimers were also
analyzed in an agar diffusion assay (Table S1, Supporting Information) and by determination of the minimal inhibitory
concentration (MIC). Table 5 shows the antibacterial MIC of Cm-p5 and its derivatives
against the Gram-positive species Listeria monocytogenes and the Gram-negative species Pseudomonas aeruginosa confirmed the increased antibacterial activity of Cm-p5 dimers against Listeria monocytogenes. Cm-p5 exhibited a moderate
antibacterial activity against L. monocytogenes at 1000 and 100 mg/L but had only minor effects against P. aeruginosa (Table S1, Supporting Information) at 1000 mg/L. The activity increased for
the cyclic monomer and was highest for the two dimers, which showed
a significant activity at 20 mg/L (Table S1, Supporting Information).

In Vitro Toxicity of Cm-p5 Analogues against
Human Cells
Cytotoxicity of the cyclic monomer and the two
dimers of Cm-p5 against
macrophages and THP-1 human cells were also tested. At 300 μg/mL
of each compound (a higher concentration than the one used to determine
MIC against fungal or bacterial species), no toxicity effects were
observed in terms of cell viability (Chart 2).

Chart 2 In Vitro Cytotoxicity of CysCysCm-p5 Cyclic
Monomer and Dimers against
Macrophages and THP-1 Human Cells
Discussion regarding Biological Activity
The cyclic
monomer derived from the Cm-p5 antifungal peptide by an intrachain
disulfide bond improved its anticandidal activity against C. albicans down to 5 μg/mL compared to the
native Cm-p5 peptide (MIC = 10 μg/mL).15 A similar improvement was observed against C. parapsilosis (from 32 to 14 μg/mL), and a decreased activity was observed
against C. auris (from 11 to 27 μg/mL).

Possibly, the duplicated H value, μHrel magnitudes, and its
direction totally opposed to Arg residues of the cyclic CysCysCm-p5
(Figure 3) together
with the salt bridge substitution by a disulfide bond favored the
antifungal activity. In general, these results represent a significant
improvement, taking in consideration that this derivative has a stable
α-helix structure, which is less dependent on a membrane-mimetic
environment, and, consequently, a more effective approach to the fungal
membrane.

This peptide has the ability to change between a β-sheet
and a helical conformation (according to CD spectra); therefore, it
may have the chameleonic possibility to penetrate the membrane as
a helix and/or interact with another membrane receptor as a β-sheet.
Since the original Cm-p5 acts in a fungistatic manner against Candida albicans,16 a
possible complementary therapeutic approach could be conceived and
implemented, similar to the combination of fluconazole and amphotericin
B,43 taking into account that resistance
to fluconazole increased dramatically in the past years.44

Antimicrobial peptides are prone to proteolytic
degradation,45 and MIC determination in
standard Mueller-Hinton
broth may not always lead to optimal results regarding the determination
of their antimicrobial activity.46 To assess
the activity of Cm-p5 and its derivatives, we used a modified agar
overlay assay47 and standard MIC determinations
(Table 5). In these
experiments, we observed a marked increase in the antibacterial activity
against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria mostly for the antiparallel
derivative.

While the strains included in this investigation
(L. monocytogenes and P. aeruginosa) are not multidrug-resistant
microorganisms, it should be noted that L. monocytogenes is a major problem in food production due to its ability to multiply
at 4 °C and tolerance of high salt concentrations. It can reproduce
inside eukaryotic cells and is one of the most serious foodborne pathogens.
The 20–30% of listeriosis cases are produced by food, and fatality
for high-risk individuals is not uncommon.48 On the other hand, P. aeruginosa is an opportunistic
microorganism causing dangerous infection most often in immune-compromised
patients or patients with pre-existing diseases like severe burns.
In these patients, severe infections and sepsis may frequently be
fatal.49

Other antibacterial peptides
increased their activity when contained
in a cycled structure. Bactenecin is a natural antibacterial peptide
from bovine neutrophils, which contains a disulfide bond due to two
Cys residues.50 This peptide with such
a cycled structure showed a relevant activity against the Gram-negative
bacteria Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Salmonella
typhimurium. When linear analogues were generated,
the antibacterial (Gram-negative) activity decreased substantially,
whereas against Gram-positive microorganisms (Staphylococcus
epidermidis and Enterococcus faecalis), these peptide versions displayed a positive interaction. Another
example of cyclic peptides with antibacterial activity is gramicidin
S, a cationic cyclic decapeptide with primary structure cyclo-(Val-Orn-Leu-D-Phe-Pro)2, which is secreted by the bacterium Brevibacillus
brevis, is a potent antimicrobial agent at micromolar
concentrations, exhibiting high killing activity against a broad spectrum
of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and pathogenic fungi.51

The CysCysCm-p5 cyclic monomer and the
two related dimers resulted
nontoxic in terms of cell viability, as previously evaluated on human
cells (Chart 2). Primary
macrophages52 and the cell line THP-153 have been previously used as in vitro cellular
models for testing the toxicity of antimicrobial peptides, and they
have been proved to be sensitive enough to assess the availability
of these molecules as potential anti-infectious drugs in humans. Further
experiments with fetal lung cells and determination of cell vitality
certainly will improve this analysis, but, for now, it is notable
that even at the highest tested concentration, the new compound is
not cytotoxic for human cells. Besides Cm-p5 proved nonhemolytic for
human and rabbit erythrocytes,16 the absence
of such activity for the CysCysCm-p5 cyclic monomer and the two related
dimers, in terms of pharmacological and therapeutic standards for
a possible anti-infective candidates, remains to be confirmed.

Conclusions
Fourteen mutants of the Cm-p5 peptide were synthesized. If other
factors such as repulsion of positive charges or loss of noncovalent
interaction are present, then maintaining H, μHrel, or the direction
of μHrel is not sufficient for maintaining the biological activity.
Notable examples constitute all the variants where either Glu4 or
His8 was mutated, in which antifungal activity was lost. Substitution
of these two residues with Cys allowed us to synthesize a new cyclic
analogue and two dimers that showed helix stabilization as indicated
by CD analysis and molecular dynamic simulations, suggesting the essential
role of the Glu–His salt bridge. For the first time, to our
knowledge, it is proposed that a salt bridge can be used as a stabilizing
factor for an antimicrobial peptide. CysCysCm-p5 and related dimers
were not toxic for human macrophages. The cyclic monomer showed an
increased activity in vitro against C. albicans and C. parapsilosis but not against C. auris compared to Cm-p5. In addition, the antiparallel
dimer (dimer 2) showed a moderate antibacterial activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and a significant activity
against Listeria monocytogenes.

It is important to note that helical stabilization
is necessary
for biological activity but not sufficient since dimers (more helical
character) have lower antifungal activity than Cm-p5 and the parallel
version (the most helical-stabilized compound) did not show any antibacterial
activity against the tested microbes. The cyclic monomer changes between
β-strand and helical conformation when submitted to a membranolytic
environment, and the antiparallel dimer (dimer 2) has an equal population
of molecules as the β-strand besides having a stabilized α-helix
(as judged by CD). Apparently, a constricted helix is not recommended,
and a β-strand/α-helix equilibrium in cyclic monomers
is needed for antifungal activity. This suggests that an induced-fit
model of action mechanism could be better than the old key-lock model
to explain the antifungal activity. These peptides may need several
conformations to be active because they have several stages in their
mechanism of action: interact, penetrate and/or leave the membrane,
and interact with the active site of several macromolecular targets.

Finally, the increased capacity of cyclic CysCysCm-p5 for fungal
control compared to fluconazole,17 low
cytotoxicity, together with a stabilized α-helix and disulfide
bridges, that could advance the metabolic stability, and in vivo activity
improve the prospect of this new compound as a potential antifungal
systemic therapeutic candidate. Direct application of cyclic CysCysCm-p5
or in synergy with amphotericin B should diminish the doses of this
fungicidal compound and is highly toxic but fundamental for the treatment
of internal infections.

Experimental Section
Materials
All
reagents and solvents were obtained from
commercial suppliers and used without further purification. Fmoc-Rink-MBHA-Polystyrene
and Fmoc-Rink-ChemMatrix resins were prepared by reaction of Fmoc-Rink-OH
linker with commercial MBHA-Polystyrene or ChemMatrix resins following
controlled acetylation after 0.53 or 0.43 mmol/g substitution, respectively.
All the Fmoc-amino acids, DIEA, I2, ascorbic acid, Ac2O, and resins were purchased from Merck. Organic solvents
(analytical grade) (DMF, CH2Cl2, MeOH, Et2O, and CH3CN) were purchased from Merck. RP-HPLC
quality acetonitrile (CH3CN) and ultrapure water quality
were used for RP-HPLC analysis and purification.

Peptide Synthesis
All reactions were carried in polypropylene
plastic syringes (10 mL) fitted with polypropylene frits at room temperature
with mechanical shaking, and excess of solvent and reagent was eliminated
by vacuum filtration. The side chain of amino acids was protected
with Pbf for Arg, Trt for Gln, Cys and His, tBu for Ser and Glu, and
Acm for Cys in the synthesis of the parallel dimer (dimer 1).

Solid phase peptide synthesis was carried out using Fmoc/t-Bu chemistry on rink amide resin based on polystyrene
or PEG (ChemMatrix). The resin was washed with DMF (2 × 2 mL,
1 min), DCM (2 × 2 mL, 1 min), MeOH (2 × 2 mL, 1 min), DCM
(2 × 2 mL, 1 min), and DMF (2 × 2 mL, 1 min). Fmoc removal
was achieved with 20% piperidine in DMF (2 × 10 min), and the
subsequent amino acids were added using the following coupling condition:
Fmoc-Aa-OH/DIC/Oxyma (4 equiv of each) in DMF after negative ninhydrin
test (approximately 30 min). Between the different steps, the resin
was washed with DMF (4 × 1 min). Acetylation was achieved using
the following condition: Ac2O/DIEA (8 equiv) in DMF for
10 min.

After the last coupling reaction, Fmoc is eliminated,
and peptide-resin
is washed subsequently with DMF (4 × 1 min), MeOH (4 × 1
min), and Et2O (4 × 1 min). Peptide-resin is dried
in a desiccator for 3 days and finally frozen at −20 °C
for 30 min before cleavage.

All peptides were obtained with
more than 95% of purity as ascertained
by analytical RP-HPLC. The molecular mass determined experimentally
by ESI-MS corresponded with the theoretically calculated monoisotopic
mass for each peptide.

Peptide Cleavage
Cleavage from the
resin and global
deprotection, (i) analogues 1–17: TFA/TIS/H2O (95:2.5:2.5;
5 mL/g of resin) and (ii) thiolated analogues: TFA/TIS/EDT/H2O (94:1:2.5:2.5; 5 mL/g of resin), was added to the frozen peptide-resin
and left for 2 h with shaking. Cleavage mixture was filtered and added
over cold Et2O (50 mL and −70 °C), mixed in
a vortex, and centrifuged. The supernatant was discarded, and the
operation was repeated two more times. The solid residue was re-dissolved
in H2O/CH3CN (7:3), frozen at −70 °C,
and lyophilized (LABCONCO, EUA).

Approximately 70% of crude
peptide with respect to substitution resin is obtained. Working with
0.3 g of resin, at 0.53 mmol/g substitution for polystyrene resin,
and taking into account approximately the range of molar mass of all
peptide (1400–1500 g/mol), 160 mg of crude peptides was produced.

In the case of ChemMatrix dimer synthesis, we used 0.15 g of resin
and yields of crude are only about 60%, and given the doubleCm-p5
molar mass of product, plus Lys residue (3092 g/mol), 119 mg of crude
was produced.

Peptide Cyclization and Dimerization
Cyclization was
conducted by dissolving the peptides crude (approximately 160 mg)
in H2O (0.1% TFA)/CH3CN/i-PrOH
(1:1:1) at 0.5 mM guaranteeing the major cone of agitation and ball
filled only halfway to guarantee a high contact of air (O2)/solvent. Normally, 250 mL of solvent mixture was used in a necked
flask of 1 L.

NH3 (ac) (25%) was added until pH 8–9,
and the reaction was stirred for 4–12 h (after consumption
of the staring material, checked by RP-HPLC or HR-MS-ESI) at room
temperature. The pH was brought to 7, the H2O/CH3CN/i-PrOH mixture was removed by a rotary evaporator,
and the residue was lyophilized (LABCONCO, EUA).

Cyclization
of the Parallel Dimer (Dimer 1) Using Cys(Acm)
Peptides (150
mg) containing Cys(Acm) and free Cys in the first
or the second Cys residue were submitted to dimerization at high concentrations
in 30 mL of DMF/H2O (1:1) for 72 h (as ascertained by analytical
RP-HPLC) in which the formation of white suspension is observed. Subsequently,
H2O (0.1% TFA)/MeOH (1:1) (VT = 250 mL) was added after
(0.5 mM). Finally, 1.5 equiv of HCl (37%) (pH = 3,78) and 5 equiv
of I2 (dissolved in MeOH) by the Acm group were supplemented,
and stirring was maintained over 3 h or until no dimeric staring material
remaining by RP-HPLC. Iodine was removed by adding 1 M aq sodium thiosulfate
dropwise until the mixture is colorless or by treatment with activated
charcoal and centrifugation. The pH was brought to 7 and the H2O/MeOH
mixture was removed by rotary evaporator and residue was lyophilized
(LABCONCO, EUA).

Analytical RP-HPLC
Analytical HPLC
was performed on
an WellChrom HPLC (KNAUER, Germany) using the EZChrom-Elite chromatography
software ChromGate v3.1 from Agilent (USA) using a Zorbax RP-C18 (5
μm, 4.6 × 150 mm) column with a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min
and UV detection at 226 nm. The mobile phase with a gradient of 5%
to 60% B in 35 min was used (solvent A: 0.1% TFA in H2O;
solvent B: 0.1% TFA in CH3CN). Chromatograms were obtained
at 226 nm and processed by the UNICORN 4.11 (GE Healthcare USA) software
package.

HR-ESI-MS
Low-energy HR-ESI-MS spectra were obtained
by using a hybrid quadrupole time-of-flight QTOF-2 instrument (Waters,
Milford, MA, USA) fitted with a nanospray ion source at the CIGB in
positive ion mode. Peptide solutions were collected from RP-HPLC,
dissolved in 1 mL of 60% (v/v) acetonitrile/water solution containing
0.2% formic acid, and loaded into a metal-coated borosilicate capillary
nanotip (Proxeon, Denmark) inserted into the Z-spray nanoflow electrospray
ion source and slightly pressured with nitrogen to guarantee their
stable spray during the measurement. The capillary and cone voltage
were set to 900 to 1200 and 35 V, respectively. Mass spectra were
acquired in the m/z range of 400–2000
Th. Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry spectra was processed
using the MassLynx version 4.1 program (Micromass, England).

Semipreparative
RP-HPLC
Crude peptides (directly cleaved
or cyclized) (50 mg for run or 100 mg in the case cyclized crude because
it contains approximately 50% of NH4CF3COO)
were dissolved in DMSO (3 mL) and purified on a LaChrom (Merck Hitachi,
Germany) HPLC system using an RP C18 column (Vydac, 25 × 250
mm, 25 μm). A linear gradient from 15 to 60% over 55 min or
25 to 60% of solvent B over 65 min and a flow rate of 5 mL/min were
used for linear peptides and cyclic and dimeric analogues, respectively.
Detection was accomplished at 226 nm. Solvent A: 0.1% (v/v) of TFA
in water. Solvent B: 0.05% (v/v) of TFA in acetonitrile.

Fractions
of high HPLC homogeneity and with the expected mass were combined,
lyophilized, and submitted to antimicrobial testing. All peptides
synthesized showed a purity of >95% by HPLC (see the Supporting Information for chromatograms). Purity,
HRMS, and
RP-HPLC data are presented in the Supporting Information.

CD Spectroscopy
The CD measurements were made on a
J-1500 CD spectrometer (Jasco, Tokyo, Japan) at 24 °C in a thermally
controlled quartz cell with a 1 mm path length over 190 to 250 nm.
The samples were prepared by dissolving the peptides in water and
10% SDS/water mixture. The final peptide concentration for the CD
measurements was ∼35–70 μM (100 μg/mL).
Data were collected every 0.1 nm, the bandwidth was set at 1.0 nm,
and the sensitivity was 10,000 mdeg. The data integration time was
1 s, and the scanning speed was 100 nm/min. The number of accumulations
was 18% of the secondary structure calculated with the Bestsel online
program, which is available at the http://bestsel.elte.hu server.54

Microorganism Strains and Growth Conditions
Three Candida
species were used: Candida albicans (ATCC 24433) was obtained from the Institute of Medical Microbiology
and Hygiene, University Clinic of Ulm, Germany. Candida
parapsilosis (ATCC 22019) was obtained from the laboratory
of Medical Mycology, “Pedro Kourí” Institute
of Tropical Medicine, Havana Cuba; Candida auris (DSMZ-No. 21092, CBS 10913, and JCM 15448)55 was obtained from the Leibniz Institute DSMZ-German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures.

Yeast extract–peptone–dextrose
(YPD) medium (liquid) was used for pre-culture inoculum at 70 rpm
agitated conditions at 37 °C for 24 hours.

Trichophyton rubrum (ATCC 28189)
was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and cultured
in potato dextrose agar and for inoculums in Roswell Park Memorial
Institute (RPMI) 1640 Medium.

Two bacteria genera were used: Listeria monocytogenes (ATCC BAA-679/EGD-e) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (ATCC 27853). Bacteria were
cultured at 37 °C/5%CO2 overnight as pre-culture inoculum
in culture media.

In Vitro Antimicrobial Testing
For Candida species and T. rubrum, the minimal
inhibitory concentration (MIC) of Cm-p5 derivatives (cyclic monomer
and the two dimers) was determined according to the “Clinical
and Laboratory Standards Institute” guidelines M27-A3 broth
microdilution assay56 with modifications
(turbidimetric detection). Based on cell density measurements, the
MIC was derived from a Lambert–Pearson plot.57 Flat-bottomed sterile 96-well plates (SARSTEDT, AG &
Co KG, N̈mbrecht), RPMI 1640 without sodium bicarbonate, MOPS-buffered
(Sigma-Aldrich-Merck, Darmstadt) were used for the test, and readings
were performed at λ = 600 nm with a TECAN infinite M200 microplate
reader (Tecan Group Ltd., Männedorf). For filamentous fungi,
the minimal inhibitory concentration was determined according to CLSI
guidelines M38-A2.48

For bacteria
genera:1. Agar
overlay assay: Bacteria were cultured
at 37 °C/5%CO2 overnight, pelleted by centrifugation,
and washed in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer. Following resuspension
in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer, optical density was determined at
600 nm. Bacteria (2 × 107) were seeded into a Petri
dish in 1% agarose and 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer. After cooling
at 4 °C for 30 min, 3–5 mm holes were punched into the
1% agarose. Peptides adjusted to the desired concentration in 10 μL
of buffer were filled into the agar holes. Following and incubation
at 37 °C in ambient air for 3 h, plates were overlaid with 1%
agarose and tryptic soy solved in 10 mM phosphate buffer. Inhibition
zones in mm were determined following 16–18 h incubation time
at 37 °C/5% CO2.47

2. Minimal inhibitory concentration
(MIC)
determination: MIC determinations were performed in Mueller Hinton
broth according to CLSI reference method M7A9 with modifications for
bacteria.49 All tests were performed in
triplicate.



Human Cells and Culture
Conditions
For hMDMs (human
monocyte-derived macrophages), peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) were isolated from human buffy coat via high density gradient
centrifugation (Ficoll-Paque Plus; GE Healthcare, Munich). Monocytes
were then purified from the PBMCs through adherence. Then, the cells
were stimulated with granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF) (10 ng/mL; MiltenyiBiotec, BergischGladbach) for 6 days at
37 °C and 5% CO2 in RPMI 1640 medium (GIBCO, Invitrogen,
Munich) supplemented with 2 mM l-glutamine (PAN Biotech,
Aidenbach), 10 mM HEPES (Biochrom, GmbH, Berlin), and penicillin/streptomycin
(100 U mL–1/100 μg mL–1 (Biochrom,
GmbH, Berlin).

For the THP-1 cell line (ECACC, Porton Down,
UK, 88081201), human monocytic cell line derived from an acute monocytic
leukemia patient was differentiated to macrophage-like cells in the
cell culture medium. Mercaptoethanol (0.05 mM; Sigma, Merck KGaA,
Darmstadt), 10% FCS (Biochrom, GmbH, Berlin), and phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA) (1 μg/mL; Sigma, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt) were
used as supplemented at 36 °C/5%CO2 overnight.

Toxicity
Assay
macrophages/THP-1 cells per well (1
× 105) were distributed into a microplate (Nunclon
Delta 96-well MicroWell Plates, sterile, Thermo Scientific, Germany)
in the cell culture medium supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated human
serum (PAN Biotech, Aidenbach). Controls were media control, heat-inactivated
cells, and diluent control, dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO; Carl Roth, Karlsruhe).
Cells were then stimulated with the Cm-p5 derivatives in different
concentrations overnight. A 20 μL PrestoBlue Cell Viability
Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Technologies GmbH, Darmstadt)
per well was added for 20 min at 37 °C/ 5%CO2. The
fluorescence was measured at an excitation of 560 nm and emission
of 600 nm with the TECAN infinite M200 microplate reader (Tecan Group
Ltd., Männedorf). The optical density (OD) of the media control
was then subtracted from other results. Unstimulated cells were set
to 100% viability.

Molecular Dynamic Simulations
Distance
between S–S
was determined for the N-terminal acetylated peptide Ac-SRSCLIVCQRLF-NH2 in order to avoid electrostatic effects of the amine group,
and the molecule was fully solvated in an octahedral box of TIP3P
water model with periodic boundary conditions. The MDS was performed
using AM-BER 11 (http://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/150146/files/Amber11.pdf?version=1).58 The model was prepared with a three-step
protocol. We first ran 2000 steps of side-chain optimization, then
50,000 steps of thermalization at 300 K with a Berendsen thermostat
at constant volume, and third, 50,000 steps at the same temperature
with constant pressure (isotropic position scaling) of 1 atm. Finally,
we performed a 50 ns of MDS under the NPT ensemble condition.

Estimation of α-helix contents were performed for the native
peptide Cm-p5 (2MP9) and the cyclic and dimers of CysCysCm-p5 (Supplementary
Data 2). For each system, two 50 ns simulations, at 310 K, were performed
using the GROMOS96 force field;59 one in
pure water and one in 40% (v/v) TFE/water. In Table 4, the composition of the simulated systems
is reported.

α-Helix content calculations were computed
with DSSP.60 The percentage of α-helix
is calculated
on all peptide residues.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02201.Experimental procedures,
RP-HPLC chromatograms, and
ESI-HRMS spectra of all final compounds (SD1) and molecular dynamic
simulation description (SD2) (PDF)

Molecular formula strings (CSV)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02201_si_001.pdf

 ao9b02201_si_002.csv

 Author Contributions
The authors
contributed equally to this paper. The manuscript was written through
contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the
final version of the manuscript.

This work was
funded in part by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF) project (DLR CUB 17WTZ-014/01DN18009), the German Research
Society (DFG) project CRC1279 (Exploiting the Human Peptidome for
Novel Antimicrobial and Anticancer Agents), and CAPES Funding Sources,
Brazil.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Laboratory
of Synthetic Peptides,
Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, La Habana, Cuba,
and Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Department of Drugs
and Medicines, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, UNESP, Araraquara,
Brazil.
==== Refs
References
Amábile-Cuevas C. 
Society must
seize control of the antibiotics crisis: pressure from the public
could force firms to develop new drugs that treat resistant infections . Nature 
2016 , 533 , 439 10.1038/533439a .27225081 
Arias C. A. ; Murray B. E. 
Antibiotic-Resistant
Bugs in the 21st Century —
A Clinical Super-Challenge . N. Engl. J. Med. 
2009 , 360 , 439 –443 . 10.1056/NEJMp0804651 .19179312 
a Alonso R. ; Pisa D. ; Marina A. I. ; Morato E. ; Rábano A. ; Rodal I. ; Carrasco L. 
Evidence for
Fungal
Infection in Cerebrospinal Fluid and Brain Tissue from Patients with
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis . Int. J. Biol.
Sci. 
2015 , 11 , 546 –558 . 10.7150/ijbs.11084 .25892962  b Alonso R. ; Pisa D. ; Fernández-Fernández A. M. ; Rábano A. ; Carrasco L. 
Fungal Infection in neural tissue
of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . Neurobiol Dis. 
2017 , 108 , 249 –260 . 10.1016/j.nbd.2017.09.001 .28888971  c Alonso R. ; Pisa D. ; Fernández-Fernández A. M. ; Carrasco L. 
Infection of Fungi and Bacteria in Brain Tissue From
Elderly Persons and Patients With Alzheimer’s Disease . Front. Aging Neurosci. 
2018 , 10 , 159 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00159 .29881346 
a Huang R. ; Li M. ; Gregory R. L. 
Bacterial
interactions
in dental biofilm . Virulence 
2014 , 2 , 435 –444 . 10.4161/viru.2.5.16140 . b Akyıldız İ. ; Take G. ; Uygur K. ; Kızıl Y. ; Aydil U. 
Bacterial Biofilm Formation in the Middle-Ear Mucosa of Chronic Otitis
Media Patients . Indian J. Otolaryngol. Head
Neck Surg. 
2013 , 65 , 557 –561 . 10.1007/s12070-012-0513-x .24427714 
Cunha B. A. 
Antibiotic
side effects . Medical Clinics of North America 
2001 , 85 , 149 –185 . 10.1016/S0025-7125(05)70309-6 .11190350 
Kumar P. ; Kizhakkedathu J. ; Straus S. 
Antimicrobial Peptides: Diversity,
Mechanism of Action and Strategies to Improve the Activity and Biocompatibility
in Vivo . Biomolecules 
2018 , 8 , 4 10.3390/biom8010004 .
Hancock R. E. W. ; Haney E. F. ; Gill E. E. 
The immunology
of host defence peptides:
beyond antimicrobial activity . Nat. Rev. Immunol. 
2016 , 16 , 321 –334 . 10.1038/nri.2016.29 .27087664 
Hossen M. S. ; Gan S. H. ; Khalil M. I. 
Melittin, a Potential
Natural Toxin
of Crude Bee Venom: Probable Future Arsenal in the Treatment of Diabetes
Mellitus . J. Chem. 
2017 , 1 –7 . 10.1155/2017/4035626 .
Porto W. F. ; Irazazabal L. ; Alves E. S. F. ; Ribeiro S. M. ; Matos C. O. ; Pires Á. S. ; Fensterseifer I. C. M. ; Miranda V. J. ; Haney E. F. ; Humblot V. ; Torres M. D. T. ; Hancock R. E. W. ; Liao L. M. ; Ladram A. ; Lu T. K. ; de la Fuente-Nunez C. ; Franco O. L. 
In silico optimization of a guava antimicrobial peptide
enables combinatorial exploration for peptide design . Nat. Commun. 
2018 , 9 , 1490 10.1038/s41467-018-03746-3 .29662055 
Vijayaraghavan R. ; Mathian V. M. ; Sundaram A. M. ; Karunakaran R. ; Vinodh S. 
Triple antibiotic paste in root canal
therapy . J. Pharm. BioAllied Sci. 
2012 , 4 , S230 –S233 . 10.4103/0975-7406.100214 .23066258 
Henninot A. ; Collins J. C. ; Nuss J. M. 
The Current State
of Peptide Drug
Discovery: Back to the Future ? . J. Med. Chem. 
2018 , 61 , 1382 –1414 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00318 .28737935 
Sewald N. ; Jakubke H. D.  Peptides: Chemistry
and Biology . Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &
Co. KGaA : Weinheim, Germany , 2002 .
López-Abarrategui C. ; Alba A. ; Silva O. N. ; Reyes-Acosta O. ; Vasconcelos I. M. ; Oliveira J. T. A. ; Migliolo L. ; Costa M. P. ; Costa C. R. ; Silva M. R. R. ; Garay H. E. ; Dias S. C. ; Franco O. L. ; Otero-González A. J. 
Functional characterization
of a synthetic hydrophilic antifungal peptide derived from the marine
snail Cenchritis muricatus . Biochimie 
2012 , 94 , 968 –974 . 10.1016/j.biochi.2011.12.016 .22210491 
Sun Z. J. ; Heffron G. ; Mcbeth C. ; Wagner G. ; Otero-González A. J. ; Starnbach M. N.  , Solution
structure of a potent antifungal peptide Cm-p5 derived from C. muricatus . Deposit PDB: 2014-05-14, Status HPUB, entrance code 2MP9, 2014 .
López-Abarrategui C. ; McBeth C. ; Mandal S. M. ; Sun Z. J. ; Heffron G. ; Alba-Menéndez A. ; Migliolo L. ; Reyes-Acosta O. ; García-Villarino M. ; Nolasco D. O. ; Falcão R. ; Cherobim M. D. ; Dias S. C. ; Brandt W. ; Wessjohann L. ; Starnbach M. ; Franco O. L. ; Otero-González A. J. 
Cm-p5:
an antifungal hydrophilic peptide derived from the coastal mollusk
Cenchritis muricatus (Gastropoda: Littorinidae) . FASEB J. 
2015 , 29 , 3315 –3325 . 10.1096/fj.14-269860 .25921828 
González-Garcia M. ; Valdés M. E. ; Freitas C. G. ; Menéndez A. A. ; López-Abarrategui C. ; San Juan-Galán J. ; Campos Diaz S. ; Luiz Franco O. ; Otero-González A. J. 
In vitro
complementary biological activity of the antifungal peptide Cm-p5
and in silico prediction of its functional regions . Rev Cubana Med Tropical 
2017 , 69 , 1 –15 .
a Clancy C. J. ; Yu V. L. ; Morris A. J. ; Snydman D. R. ; Nguyen M. H. 
Fluconazole MIC and the Fluconazole
Dose/MIC Ratio Correlate with Therapeutic Response among Patients
with Candidemia . Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2005 , 49 , 3171 –3177 . 10.1128/AAC.49.8.3171-3177.2005 .16048920  b Szabó Z. ; Sóczó G. ; Miszti C. ; Hermann P. ; Rozgonyi F. 
In vitro activity of fluconazole and amphotericin B
against Candida inconspicua clinical isolates as determined by the
time-kill method . Acta. Microbiol. Immunol.
Hung. 
2008 , 55 , 53 –61 . 10.1556/AMicr.55.2008.1.4 .18507151 
Schmidt N. W. ; Mishra A. ; Lai G. H. ; Davis M. ; Sanders L. K. ; Tran D. ; Garcia A. ; Tai K. P. ; McCray P. B. Jr.; Ouellette A. J. ; Selsted M. E. ; Wong G. C. L. 
Criterion
for Amino Acid Composition of Defensins and Antimicrobial Peptides
Based on Geometry of Membrane Destabilization . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 6720 –6727 . 10.1021/ja200079a .21473577 
Vazquez J. A. 
Anidulafungin:
A new echinocandin with a novel profile . Clin
Ther. 
2005 , 27 , 657 –673 . 10.1016/j.clinthera.2005.06.010 .16117974 
Ghannoum M. A. ; Rice L. B. 
Antifungal Agents:
Mode of Action, Mechanisms of Resistance,
and Correlation of These Mechanisms with Bacterial Resistance . Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 
1999 , 12 , 501 –517 . 10.1128/CMR.12.4.501 .10515900 
Elewski B. E. 
Mechanisms
of action of systemic antifungal agents . J.
Am. Acad. Dermatol. 
1993 , 28 , S28 –S34 . 10.1016/S0190-9622(09)80305-8 .8496409 
Edelheit O. ; Hanukoglu I. ; Dascal N. ; Hanukoglu A. 
Identification
of the roles of conserved charged residues in the extracellular domain
of an epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) subunit by alanine mutagenesis . Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 
2011 , 300 , F887 –F897 . 10.1152/ajprenal.00648.2010 .21209000 
Marcos J. F. ; Muñoz A. ; Pérez-Payá E. ; Misra S. ; López-García B. 
Identification and
Rational Design
of Novel Antimicrobial Peptides for Plant Protection . Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 
2008 , 46 , 273 –301 . 10.1146/annurev.phyto.121307.094843 .18439131 
Helmerhors E. J. ; Breeuwer P. ; Van‘t
Hof W. ; Walgreen-Weterings E. ; Oomeni L. C. J. M. ; Veerman E. C. I. ; Amerongen A. V. N. ; Abee T. 
The Cellular Target
of Histatin 5 onCandida albicansIs
the Energized Mitochondrion . J. Biol. Chem. 
1999 , 274 , 7286 –7291 . 10.1074/jbc.274.11.7286 .10066791 
Epand R. M. ; Vogel H. J. 
Diversity of antimicrobial peptides
and their mechanisms
of action . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1999 , 1462 , 11 –28 . 10.1016/S0005-2736(99)00198-4 .10590300 
Chan D. I. ; Prenner E. J. ; Vogel H. J. 
Tryptophan- and
arginine-rich antimicrobial
peptides: Structures and mechanisms of action . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
2006 , 1758 , 1184 –1202 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.04.006 .16756942 
Van
Loon L. C. ; Rep M. ; Pieterse C. M. J. 
Significance
of inducible defense-related proteins in infected plants . Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 
2006 , 44 , 135 –162 . 10.1146/annurev.phyto.44.070505.143425 .16602946 
Dathe M. ; Wieprecht T. 
Structural
features of helical antimicrobial peptides:
their potential to modulate activity on model membranes and biological
cells . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1999 , 1462 , 71 –87 . 10.1016/S0005-2736(99)00201-1 .10590303 
Eisenberg D. ; Weiss R. M. ; Terwilliger T. C. 
The helical
hydrophobic moment: a
measure of the amphiphilicity of a helix . Nature 
1982 , 299 , 371 –374 . 10.1038/299371a0 .7110359 
Gautier R. ; Douguet D. ; Antonny B. ; Drin G. 
HELIQUEST: a web server
to screen sequences with specific -helical properties . Bioinformatics 
2008 , 24 , 2101 –2102 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn392 .18662927 
Tam J. P. ; Lu Y. A. ; Yang J. L. 
Antimicrobial dendrimeric peptides . Eur. J. Biochem. 
2002 , 269 , 923 –932 . 10.1046/j.0014-2956.2001.02728.x .11846794 
Dougherty D. A. 
Modern
Physical Organic Chemistry . J. Chem. Educ. 
2006 , 83 , 387 10.1021/ed083p387 .
Baker E. G. ; Bartlett G. J. ; Crump M. P. ; Sessions R. B. ; Linden N. ; Faul C. F. J. ; Woolfson D. N. 
Local and macroscopic electrostatic
interactions in single α-helices . Nat.
Chem. Biol. 
2015 , 11 , 221 –228 . 10.1038/nchembio.1739 .25664692 
a Anderson D.
E. ; Becktel W. J. ; Dahlquist F. W. 
pH-Induced
Denaturation of Proteins: A Single Salt Bridge Contributes 3-5 kcal/mol
to the Free Energy of Folding of T4 Lysozyme . Biochemistry 
1990 , 29 , 2403 –2408 . 10.1021/bi00461a025 .2337607  b Horovitz A. ; Serrano L. ; Avron B. ; Bycroft M. ; Fersht A. R. 
Strength and Co-operativity of Contributions of Surface
Salt Bridges to Protein Stability . J. Mol. Biol. 
1990 , 216 , 1031 –1044 . 10.1016/S0022-2836(99)80018-7 .2266554 
Mihailescu E. ; Worcester D. ; Castro-Roman F. ; Fernandez-Vidal M. ; White S. H. 
Determining the
Water Content of Lipid Membranes by
Neutron Diffraction . Biophys. J. 
2010 , 98 , 286A 10.1016/j.bpj.2009.12.1561 .
Liang M.-K. ; Patwardhan S. V. ; Danilovtseva E. N. ; Annenkov V. V. ; Perry C. C. 
Imidazole
catalyzed silica synthesis: Progress toward understanding the role
of histidine in (bio) silicification . J. Mater.
Res. 
2009 , 24 , 1700 –1708 . 10.1557/jmr.2009.0223 .
Henchey L. K. ; Jochim A. L. ; Arora P. S. 
Contemporary
strategies for the stabilization
of peptides in the α-helical conformation . Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 
2008 , 12 , 692 –697 . 10.1016/j.cbpa.2008.08.019 .18793750 
Garay H. ; Espinosa L. A. ; Perera Y. ; Sánchez A. ; Diago D. ; Perea S. E. ; Besada V. ; Reyes O. ; González L. J. 
Characterization of low-abundance
species in the active
pharmaceutical ingredient of CIGB-300: A clinical-grade anticancer
synthetic peptide . J. Pep. Sci. 
2018 , 24 , e308110.1002/psc.3081 .
a Hong D.-P. ; Hoshino M. ; Kuboi R. ; Goto Y. 
Clustering
of Fluorine-Substituted Alcohols as a Factor Responsible
for Their Marked Effects on Proteins and Peptides . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1999 , 121 , 8427 –8433 . 10.1021/ja990833t . b Vymětal J. ; Bednárová L. ; Vondrášek J. 
Effect of TFE on the Helical Content
of AK17 and HAL-1 Peptides: Theoretical Insights into the Mechanism
of Helix Stabilization . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2016 , 120 , 1048 –1059 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.5b11228 .26786280 
Roccatano D. ; Colombo G. ; Fioroni M. ; Mark A. E. 
Mechanism
by which
2,2,2-trifluoroethanol/water mixtures stabilize secondary-structure
formation in peptides: A molecular dynamics study . PNAS 
2002 , 99 , 12179 –12184 . 10.1073/pnas.182199699 .12196631 
a Gimpelev M. ; Forrest L. R. ; Murray D. ; Honig B. 
Helical Packing Patterns in Membrane and Soluble Proteins . Biophys. J. 
2004 , 87 , 4075 –4086 . 10.1529/biophysj.104.049288 .15465852  b Walters R. F. S. ; DeGrado W. F. 
Helix-packing motifs
in membrane proteins . PNAS 
2006 , 103 , 13658 –13663 . 10.1073/pnas.0605878103 .16954199 
Dalton J. A. R. ; Michalopoulos I. ; Westhead D. R. 
Calculation of helix
packing angles in protein structures . Bioinformatics 
2003 , 19 , 1298 –1299 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg141 .12835278 
Larsen R. A. ; Bauer M. ; Thomas A. M. ; Graybill J. R. 
Amphotericin B and
Fluconazole, a Potent Combination Therapy for Cryptococcal Meningitis . Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2004 , 48 , 985 –991 . 10.1128/AAC.48.3.985-991.2004 .14982793 
Richardson M. D. 
Changing
patterns and trends in systemic fungal infections . J. Antimicrob. Chemoter. 
2005 , 56 , i5 –i11 . 10.1093/jac/dki218 .
Sieprawska-Lupa M. ; Mydel P. ; Krawczyk K. ; Wójcik K. ; Puklo M. ; Lupa B. ; Suder P. ; Silberring J. ; Reed M. ; Pohl J. ; Shafer W. ; McAleese F. ; Foster T. ; Travis J. ; Potempa J. 
Degradation of human
antimicrobial peptide LL-37 by Staphylococcus aureus-derived proteinases . Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2004 , 48 , 4673 –4679 . 10.1128/AAC.48.12.4673-4679.2004 .15561843 
Steinberg D. A. ; Lehrer R. I. 
Designer assays
for antimicrobial peptides. Disputing
the ″one-size-fits-all″ theory . Methods Mol. Biol. 
1997 , 78 , 169 –186 . 10.1385/0-89603-408-9:169 .9276304 
Turner J. ; Cho Y. ; Dinh N.-N. ; Waring A. J. ; Lehrer R. I. 
Activities of LL-37,
a Cathelin-Associated Antimicrobial Peptide of Human Neutrophils . Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
1998 , 42 , 2206 –2214 . 10.1128/AAC.42.9.2206 .9736536 
Ramaswamy V. ; Cresence V. M. ; Rejitha J. S. ; Lekshmi M. U. ; Dharsana K. S. ; Prasad S. P. ; Vijila H. M. 
Listeria–review of epidemiology
and pathogenesis . J. Microbiol. Immunol. Infect. 
2007 , 40 , 4 –13 .17332901 
Balcht A. ; Smith R. 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
Infections and Treatment . Informa Health Care 
1994 , 2 , 83 –84 .
Wu M. ; Hancock R. E. W. 
Improved derivatives
of bactenecin, a cyclic dodecameric
antimicrobial cationic peptide . Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 
1999 , 43 , 1274 –1276 . 10.1128/AAC.43.5.1274 .10223951 
Ashrafuzzaman M. ; Andersen O. S. ; McElhaney R. N. 
The antimicrobial
peptide gramicidin
S permeabilizes phospholipid bilayer membranes without forming discrete
ion channels . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
2008 , 1778 , 2814 –2822 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2008.08.017 .18809374 
Koyama Y. ; Motobu M. ; Hikosaka K. ; Yamada M. ; Nakamura K. ; Saido-Sakanaka H. ; Asaoka A. ; Yamakawa M. ; Isobe T. ; Shimura K. ; Kang C. B. ; Hayashidani H. ; Nakai Y. ; Hirota Y. 
Cytotoxicity
and antigenicity of
antimicrobial synthesized peptides derived from the beetle Allomyrina
dichotoma defensin in mice . Int. Immunopharmacol. 
2006 , 6 , 1748 –1753 . 10.1016/j.intimp.2006.06.007 .16979131 
Pick N. ; Cameron S. ; Arad D. ; Av-Gay Y. 
Screening of Compounds
Toxicity against Human Monocytic cell line-THP-1 by Flow Cytometry . Biol. Proced. Online 
2004 , 6 , 220 –225 . 10.1251/bpo92 .15472722 
Micsonai A. ; Wien F. ; Kernya L. ; Lee Y.-H. ; Goto Y. ; Réfrégiers M. ; Kardos J. 
Accurate secondary
structure prediction and fold recognition for circular dichroism spectroscopy . PNAS 
2015 , 112 , E3095 –103 . 10.1073/pnas.1500851112 .26038575 
Satoh K. ; Makimura K. ; Hasumi Y. ; Nishiyama Y. ; Uchida K. ; Yamaguchi H. 
Candida auris
sp. nov., a novel ascomycetous
yeast isolated from the external ear canal of an inpatient in a Japanese
hospital . Microbiol. Immunol. 
2009 , 53 , 41 –44 . 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2008.00083.x .19161556 
Clinical
and Laboratory Standards
Institute  Reference method
for broth dilution antifungal susceptibility testing of yeasts; approved
standard  In CLSI document M27-A3 ; Wayne: Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute Third  edition 2008 ; pp 1 –25 .
Lambert R.
J. W. ; Pearson J. 
Susceptibility
testing: Accurate and reproducible minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) and non-inhibitory concentration (NIC)
values . J. Appl. Microbiol. 
2000 , 88 , 784 –790 . 10.1046/j.1365-2672.2000.01017.x .10792538 
Case D. A. ; Darden T. A. ; Cheatham T. E. ; Simmerling C. L. ; Wang J.  AMBER11 ; University of California : San Francisco , 2010 .
Schmid N. ; Eichenberger A. P. ; Choutko A. ; Riniker S. ; Winger M. ; Mark A. E. ; Van Gunsteren W. F. 
Definition and testing of the GROMOS
force-field versions 54A7 and 54B7 . Eur. Biophys.
J. 
2011 , 40 , 843 –856 . 10.1007/s00249-011-0700-9 .21533652 
a Kabsch W. ; Sander C. 
Dictionary of protein
secondary structure: Pattern recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical
features . Biopolymers 
1983 , 22 , 2577 –2637 . 10.1002/bip.360221211 .6667333  b Touw W. G. ; Baakman C. ; Black J. ; te Beek T. A. H. ; Krieger E. ; Joosten R. P. ; Vriend G. 
A series of PDB-related
databanks for everyday needs . Nucl. Acids Res. 
2015 , 43 , D364 –D368 . 10.1093/nar/gku1028 .25352545

