
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145732110.1021/acsomega.7b00805ArticleInitial Structural Models of the Aβ42 Dimer
from Replica Exchange Molecular Dynamics Simulations Blinov Nikolay *†‡Khorvash Massih §Wishart David S. ∥Cashman Neil R. §Kovalenko Andriy ‡†† Department
of Mechanical Engineering, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 1H9, Canada‡ National
Institute for Nanotechnology, National Research
Council of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2M9, Canada§ Department
of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 2B5, Canada∥ Departments
of Computing Science and Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2E8, Canada* E-mail: nblinov@ualberta.ca. Phone: +1 (780)641 1719. Fax: +1 (780) 641
1601.07 11 2017 30 11 2017 2 11 7621 7636 16 06 2017 26 10 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Experimental
characterization of the molecular structure of small
amyloid (A)β oligomers that are currently considered as toxic
agents in Alzheimer’s disease is a formidably difficult task
due to their transient nature and tendency to aggregate. Such structural
information is of importance because it can help in developing diagnostics
and an effective therapy for the disease. In this study, molecular
simulations and protein–protein docking are employed to explore
a possible connection between the structure of Aβ monomers and
the properties of the intermonomer interface in the Aβ42 dimer.
A structurally diverse ensemble of conformations of the monomer was
sampled in microsecond timescale implicit solvent replica exchange
molecular dynamics simulations. Representative structures with different
solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues and secondary structure content
were selected to build structural models of the dimer. Analysis of
these models reveals that formation of an intramonomer salt bridge
(SB) between Asp23 and Lys28 residues can prevent the building of
a hydrophobic interface between the central hydrophobic clusters (CHCs)
of monomers upon dimerization. This structural feature of the Aβ42
dimer is related to the difference in packing of hydrophobic residues
in monomers with the Asp23–Lys28 SB in on and off states, in
particular, to a lower propensity to form hydrophobic contacts between
the CHC domain and C-terminal residues in monomers with a formed SB.
These findings could have important implications for understanding
the difference between aggregation pathways of Aβ monomers leading
to neurotoxic oligomers or inert fibrillar structures.

document-id-old-9ao7b00805document-id-new-14ao-2017-00805gccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Soluble
oligomers composed of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides
are currently considered as neurotoxic agents in Alzheimer’s
disease (AD).1−7 Aβ peptides of different length (mostly made of 37–43
residues) originate from proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid precursor
protein (APP). Under certain conditions, they can aggregate into amyloid
fibrils, a pathological hallmark of AD, and neurotoxic Aβ oligomers
are formed as intermediates or off-path products of fibrillization.8 The high resolution molecular structure of Aβ
oligomers remains mostly unknown and there is no consensus on the
mechanisms of oligomerization. Inhibition of initial misfolding and
aggregation of Aβ peptides is considered as one of the most
promising therapeutic targets for AD.8−13 In this context, resolving the atomic structure of aggregation-prone
states of Aβ peptides and small oligomers, as well as identification
of initial events in oligomerization pathways is of great importance.

Although high resolution molecular models of monomeric14−27 and fibrillar28−30 Aβ species have been resolved under different
conditions, no such information is available for Aβ oligomers,
mostly because of their transient nature. Also, there is no agreement
on the conformational properties of monomeric species involved in
initial aggregation. Solution NMR experiments revealed that Aβ
monomers in aqueous solutions adopt mostly random/collapsed/extended
coil conformations,14,16,19,24,25,31 whereas in nonpolar environments (such as mimicking
lipid membranes), their structures are characterized by substantial
α-helical content.18,20,26,27 This suggests that Aβ monomers
in coiled or α-helical conformations may be involved in the
initial stages of oligomerization (e.g., dimerization), with following
structural conversion into β-rich structures in larger Aβ
species.32−34 Experimental data confirm that structural changes
occur in initially unstructured Aβ1–40 (Aβ40) monomers
upon oligomerization, with a substantial increase in β-sheet
content already in dimers and its gradual increase in larger oligomers.33 The possibility of β-sheet structural
organization of Aβ oligomers, including antiparallel cross-β
sheet arrangements, was demonstrated experimentally for different
oligomer preparations.33,35 Although it is not clear whether
soluble Aβ monomers with β-sheet structure are involved
in the formation of oligomers in vivo, such a possibility was explored
in theoretical studies.36−38 Structural models of Aβ
dimers or larger oligomers were built with β-sheet monomers
extracted from the experimental models of amyloid fibrils38 or obtained with molecular dynamics (MD) conformational
sampling.36,37 Experimentally, the presence of Aβ
dimers in the brain was first reported a few years ago,39 and their possible toxicity has been confirmed
recently.40,41 Although it still remains controversial
whether the Aβ dimer exists in vivo and is a smallest neurotoxic
agent in AD, resolving its molecular structure remains an important
(and challenging) task because such information can provide molecular
details of the oligomerization pathway and can be further utilized
in the rational development of anti-AD drugs targeting the initial
stages of aggregation of Aβ peptides.

Molecular simulations
and modeling complement experiment, and can
provide important insight into dynamical and structural properties
of different Aβ species in situations where experimental information
is not readily available, such as in the case of Aβ oligomers
(see, for example, a recent review42).
Aβ dimers were studied in all-atom explicit and implicit solvent
MD simulations with and without ligands (such as inhibitors of aggregation
or metal ions).36−38,43−49 Larger oligomeric species, as well as different stages of aggregation/fibrillization
of Aβ monomers and other amyloidogenic proteins, were mostly
investigated with coarse-grained MD and Monte Carlo simulations.45,50−54 Most of the computational studies of Aβ dimers were focused
on prediction of their structural properties,36−38,48,49,54−56 dimerization pathways under different conditions,
including in the presence of metal ions,36,46 and on possible inhibitory mechanisms of various ligands.43,44,47 In most of these works, initial
structures of the Aβ dimer were modeled based on the experimental
solution or solid state NMR data,43,44,49 or were built from Aβ monomer conformations
with different structural features (such as extended β-sheet
structural content) sampled in MD simulations.36,37,54

Because of the intrinsically disordered
nature of Aβ peptides7,14 characterized by conformational
diversity, it is very likely that
multiple distinct conformations with an elevated propensity for aggregation
will be involved in the formation of initial dimeric constructs (or
larger oligomers), which will possibly further undergo major conformation
changes along different aggregation pathways to form metastable (e.g.,
oligomeric) or thermodynamically stable (e.g., fibrillar) Aβ
species. This is in line with the “conformational selection”
paradigm for molecular recognition57,58 recently used
to model Aβ dimers48 and ring-shaped
Aβ1–42 (Aβ42) oligomers.48,59

In the current study, we build structural models of the Aβ42
dimer based on the hypothesis of the initial hydrophobic association
of monomers and conformational selection mechanism of the first step
of dimerization. The Aβ42 constructs were chosen because they
constitute a major component of amyloid plaques in AD and are characterized
by a higher propensity for aggregation compared to the more abundant
Aβ40 monomeric species. This could make misfolding and aggregation
of Aβ42 monomers a better target for therapeutic intervention
in AD. Conformational space of the Aβ42 monomer was sampled
with generalized Born/solvent area (GBSA) implicit solvent replica
exchange molecular dynamics (REMD) simulations, and then representative
conformations with different propensity for aggregation were selected
by clustering time series of a solvent exposed surface area (SASA)
of hydrophobic residues. Initial structural models of the Aβ42
dimer were built with ZDOCK protein–protein docking software60,61 from the representative conformations of Aβ42 monomers characterized
by different SASA of hydrophobic residues and secondary structure
content. We also consider other structural features of monomers, such
as propensity to form the Asp(D)23–Lys(K)28 salt bridge (SB).
This (intra- or interpeptide) SB was observed in most of the structural
models of Aβ40 and Aβ42 amyloid fibrils,62 and it may be disrupted in neurotoxic oligomers, as follows
from experimental data on 5E3 conformational antibody specificity
toward oligomeric Aβ species.63,64 It is worth
noting that the antioligomer conformational antibodies do not recognize
dimeric Aβ species, possibly because the antibody-specific epitopes
of the toxic Aβ oligomers have some distinctive structural features
not present in the dimeric structures, in addition to solvent exposed
Lys28.

Analysis of structural models of the Aβ42 dimer
proposed
in this study suggests possible correlations between formation of
the interpeptide interface between the central hydrophobic clusters
(CHCs) and such structural characteristics of monomers as secondary
structure content and propensity to form the D23–K28 SB. In
particular, the CHC–CHC interface in α-helical rich models
of the Aβ dimer is formed only for monomers with a disrupted
D23–K28 SB and thus solvent exposed Lys28. No such interface
is observed for most of the dimer models with a formed D23–K28
SB or in the dimers with β-sheet structural content. Molecular
dynamics simulations were carried out to demonstrate the stability
of the interpeptide CHC–CHC interface at the microsecond (μs)
timescale.

2 Results
2.1 Structural Ensemble of
the Aβ42 Monomer
In the course of MD simulations, the
initial fully extended conformation
of the Aβ42 monomer collapses toward compact structures on the
timescale of a few nanoseconds. The resulting structural ensemble
has a narrow distribution of the radius of gyration peaked at approximately
9.7 Å (Figure S1 of Supporting Information
(SI)), compared to the 43.52 Å value of the extended conformation.
The structural ensemble of the Aβ42 monomer is characterized
by a high structural diversity, as expected for this intrinsically
disordered system. The monomer samples a range of conformational states
with different secondary structure contents and extent of solvent
exposure of hydrophilic and hydrophobic residues (Figures S2 and S3 of SI). There is also a difference in propensity
to form intrapeptide salt bridges between charged residues for different
parts of the MD trajectory. In the context of the current study, formation
of a salt bridge between Asp(D)23 and Lys(K)28 residues is of special
interest (Figure S4 of SI). The experimental
data on recognition of toxic Aβ oligomers by a conformational
antibody suggest that Lys28 is solvent exposed in oligomers.63,64 This indicates that the D23–K28 SB may be disrupted in the
toxic oligomeric species. In contrast, Lys28 forms an interpeptide
SB with Asp2330 or intrapeptide SB with
Ala42 in the experimental models of the Aβ42 amyloid fibril.28,29 Because the conformational antibody specific to toxic oligomers
does not recognize both the fibrillar and monomeric Aβ species,
Lys28 may form favorable electrostatic contacts with other residues
in the Aβ42 monomer, similar to what is observed in the fibrillar
Aβ structures.

The analysis of time evolution of the distance
between Asp23 and Lys28 residues reveals that the MD trajectory has
segments characterized by a different propensity to form the D23–K28
SB (Figure 1). In particular,
the last part of the production run (>2.5 μs) has a higher
propensity
compared to that of the rest of the trajectory. Because the solvent
exposure of Lys28 may be one of the structural signatures of the toxic
Aβ oligomers as discussed above, two segments of the MD trajectory
with different propensity to form the D23–K28 SB are used in
the next section to identify representative conformations of the Aβ42
monomer for building initial structural models of the dimer.

Figure 1 Time evolution
of the distance between CG atomic site of Asp23
and NZ site of Lys28 in the REMD simulation of the Aβ42 monomer.
The gray areas show two production segments of the trajectory used
for selection of representative conformations for modeling the Aβ42
dimer. A segment on the left is characterized by the D23–K28
SB mostly in the off state. The right segment features transitions
between on and off states, with a relatively high population of the
D23–K28 SB on state. Here and below, the data are shown for
the REMD replica corresponding to 25 °C.

Despite the fact that the radius of gyration quickly relaxes
to
a quasi-stationary state, a root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of atomic
positions is characterized by relatively large fluctuations at the
microsecond timescale (Figure 2). The time series of RMSD features two distinctive domains
separated by a 4.7 Å threshold (indicated by the red dashed line
in Figure 2; see also Figure S5 of SI), with a “large RMSD”
domain dominating in a long run (Figure S6 of SI). The ensemble of conformations from this domain is characterized
by a broader distribution of SASA for different residue groups. The
SASA distribution of the hydrophobic residues, for example, is shifted
toward a higher exposure compared to that of the “small RMSD”
domain (Figure S7 of SI). Because of the
large-scale fluctuations of RMSD at the microsecond timescale, it
is not obvious whether the small RMSD domain features will reoccur
in a longer simulation. On the other hand, there is a much better
agreement between calculated and experimental J-coupling
values if only the conformations from the large RMSD domain are used
(see the discussion in the Material and Methods section). This suggests that this domain may describe the conformational
properties of the Aβ42 monomer more accurately, and thus it
is used for selection of representative structures of the monomer
in the next section.

Figure 2 Time evolution of the Cα RMSD in the REMD simulation
of the
Aβ42 monomer. As a reference structure for the RMSD calculation,
a structure closest to the centroid of the most populated cluster
from clustering of time series of the radius of gyration was used.
The radius of gyration of this structure is 9.72 Å, which is
close to the value corresponding to the maximum of the radius of gyration
distribution calculated for different parts of the trajectory (Figure S1 of SI). The gray areas show two segments
of the trajectory used for selection of representative conformations
for modeling the Aβ42 dimer.

It is important to emphasize that using MD sampling based
on the
implicit solvent GBSA model may provide a conformational bias due
to overestimation of specific electrostatic interactions and a higher
tendency (compared to explicit solvent simulations) to form α-helical
structures.65,66 Thus, the conformational ensemble
generated in this study is characterized by an elevated α-helical
and a reduced random coil content (Figure S2 of SI), compared to what was observed in previous all-atom explicit
solvent MD studies of different Aβ monomeric species (see, for
example, a recent review67). At the same
time, the current REMD protocol predicts regions with a higher propensity
to form different elements of secondary structures, including α-helices,
turns, and β-strands (Figure S8 of
SI), in agreement with some previous MD simulations of Aβ peptides
that sampled the conformational properties of Aβ peptides in
agreement with experimental data.68 Along
with reasonable J-coupling data, this suggests that
monomeric constructs selected for building initial models of the Aβ42
dimer may represent physiologically relevant conformations of the
Aβ42 monomer. This is further supported by the fact that implicit
solvent models can perform well in predicting structural properties
of biomolecules,66,69,70 including intrinsically disordered peptides and folded small peptides.66

2.2 Selection of Representative
Conformations
of the Aβ42 Monomer
Solvent exposure of hydrophobic
residues is one of the most important factors defining aggregation
propensity of amyloidogenic proteins and peptides. An increase in
the extent of exposure due to changes in solvent environmental conditions
(such as the level of pH, salt concentration, solvent composition,
or intra-cellular crowding) may affect conformational equilibrium
between different Aβ structural states by shifting the balance
toward oligomeric species. Initial hydrophobic association of Aβ
peptides can be followed by structural rearrangement caused by formation
of specific interactions, including hydrogen bonds and salt bridges,
between constituting monomers. Formation of such interactions at the
earlier stages of an aggregation pathway may be impeded by a high
cost of desolvation of polar and charged residues, which can be reduced
after initial hydrophobic association.

In the current study,
conformations of the Aβ42 monomer with a high solvent exposure
of hydrophobic residues and their potential interaction partners are
used to build initial models of the Aβ42 dimer. These conformations
were identified by clustering time series of the hydrophobic SASA
(Figure 3) from the
two production segments of the MD trajectory. Clustering was performed
with the hierarchical agglomerative (bottom-up) technique71 implemented in the cpptraj program
from the Amber molecular dynamics package.72 Five structural clusters were identified for each production segment
of the MD trajectory. Representative structures with the smallest
RMSDs of Cα atomic positions relative to the centroids of clusters
with the largest hydrophobic SASA and the most populated clusters
were selected for building initial structural models of the Aβ42
dimer. These structures are characterized by a substantial α-helical
content. This is a consequence of a relatively high population of
such structures in the structural ensemble of the Aβ42 monomer
sampled with the implicit solvent GBSA model. To include in the analysis
conformations with other structural features, clustering of hydrophobic
SASA was performed for a subset of MD frames with β-strand content.
Selected representative structures were used to build initial models
of the Aβ42 dimer, along with the α-helical structures.

Figure 3 Time evolution
of solvent exposed surface area (SASA) of hydrophobic
(the upper panel) and hydrophilic (the bottom panel) residues of the
Aβ42 monomer. The gray areas show two production segments of
the trajectory.

It is worth noting that
due to the substantial memory allocation
required for calculation of the matrix of pairwise distances in the
parameter space, clustering could not be performed for the entire
production trajectory without skipping a substantial portion of MD
frames. With every second frame omitted, clustering with the protocol
described above results in identification of five representative structures
with none of them having a formed D23–K28 SB. With a modified
protocol set to identify 10 structural clusters, only 2 out of 10
representative structures belong to the second production section,
and both of them are characterized by a formed D23–K28 SB.
Among the other eight structures, there are no structures with an
elevated hydrophobic SASA and a disrupted SB. Clustering of the entire
trajectory may provide a more accurate representation of the population
distribution of different structures in the conformational ensemble,
compared to a separate clustering of two production segments of the
trajectory adopted here. At the same time, using trajectory segments
with different propensity to form the D23–K28 SB guarantees
a structural diversity of representative conformations that are of
high relevance in the context of the current study. In particular,
the approach allows us to select representative structures with a
high solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues with the SB both in
the off and on states.

2.2.1 Representative Conformations
of the Aβ42
Monomer with α-Helical Structure Content
Conformations
of the Aβ42 monomer representing the structural cluster with
a large hydrophobic SASA and the most populated cluster from the first
production segment of the trajectory with a low propensity to form
the D23–K28 SB are shown in the top panel of Figure 4. A distinctive feature of
these structures is a hydrophobic interface between the central hydrophobic
cluster (residues Leu17, Val18, Phe19, and Phe20) and C-terminal hydrophobic
Val40 and Ile41. It is worth noting that such contacts are absent
in the Aβ40 monomer, which may partially explain differences
in conformational properties and propensity for aggregation between
Aβ42 and Aβ40 peptides.

Figure 4 Representative conformations of the Aβ42
monomer with a large
solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues (the left column) and from
the most populated structural clusters (the right column). Top panel:
structures from the first production segment of the MD trajectory
characterized by a low propensity to form the D23–K28 salt
bridge. Middle panel: structures from the second production segment
of the trajectory characterized by a high propensity to form the salt
bridge. Bottom panel: structural models of the Aβ42 monomer
with β-sheet content. Asp23 and Lys28 residues are drawn in
stick representation and colored according to their atom names. Hydrophobic
residues from the central hydrophobic cluster (CHC), and hydrophobic
Ile32, Val36, Val40, and Ile41 residues from the C-terminal part of
the monomer are shown in stick representation. Transparent molecular
surfaces of residues from the CHC (white color), as well as of Val40
and Ile41 residues (blue color) are also shown.

The large hydrophobic SASA of the structure in the top-left
panel
of Figure 4 (1942 Å2 compared to 1134 Å2 value for the structure
from the most populated cluster shown in the right panel) can be attributed
to a partial solvent exposure of residues in the central hydrophobic
cluster (CHC) as well as to solvent accessibility of hydrophobic Ile32
and Val36. For the structure representing the most populated cluster
(the top right panel of Figure 4), residues from the CHC form hydrophobic contacts with Ile32
and Val36, which results in a decreased hydrophobic SASA. Despite
a relatively small exposure of hydrophobic residues, this conformation
can be considered as a good candidate to model initial hydrophobic
association because of a possible reduction of the entropic penalty
toward association. This a consequence of a relatively good packing
of the hydrophobic residues, which may result in reduced flexibility
of this structure. Also, hydrophobic patches formed by the CHC and
Ile32–Val36 domains, which are disconnected in the structure
with the large hydrophobic SASA, are now merged in a large continuous
patch, creating favorable conditions for hydrophobic association of
monomers.

We also note that Lys28 residue, which may form an
intra- or interpeptide
SB in experimental models of the Aβ42 amyloid fibril and is
implicated in the conformational antibody recognition of toxic oligomers,63,64 is solvent exposed in all representative structures from the first
production segment of the trajectory. Asp23 residue, a SB partner
of Lys28 in some fibrillar structures, is solvent exposed in the most
populated cluster, and is buried inside the peptide fold for the structure
with the large solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues where it forms
a SB with Arg5. The latter is characterized by a high propensity to
form SBs with multiple residues, including Asp1, Glu3, Glu11, Glu22,
and Asp23, in the representative structures from both production segments
of the trajectory.

In contrast to the case of the first production
segment of the
trajectory where none of the representative structures had the D23–K28
SB, two out of five representative conformations from the second segment
are characterized by a formed SB. These two structures belong to the
least populated structural clusters and have a relatively high solvent
exposure of hydrophobic residues. In all other structures, the D23–K28
SB is disrupted and Lys28 is mostly solvent exposed. Asp23 residue
is partially buried in these structures and may form a SB with Arg5,
similar to the case of the first segment of the trajectory.

The representative structures from the cluster characterized by
a large hydrophobic SASA and the most populated cluster from the second
production part of the trajectory are shown in the middle panel of Figure 4. Their hydrophobic
SASA is 2150 and 1462 Å2 , respectively. Similar to
the first segment, the structure with the D23–K28 SB off state
from the most populated cluster has the hydrophobic contacts between
the CHC domain and the C-terminal hydrophobic residues (the middle
right panel of Figure 4). What is new is that there is no hydrophobic interface between
the CHC domain and C-terminal Val40 and Ile41 for the structure with
the largest hydrophobic SASA. This structure is characterized by a
formed D23–K28 SB (the middle left panel of Figure 4). Inspection of all representative
structures from both production segments of the trajectory suggests
that formation of the D23–K28 SB correlates with disruption
of the hydrophobic interface between the CHC domain and C-terminal
residues of the monomer.

It is worth noting that the structures
with the largest hydrophobic
SASA belong to the least populated structural clusters. This agrees
with the notion that in aqueous environments, burying of hydrophobic
residues is a thermodynamically favorable process resulting in optimization
of the solvation part of a system’s free energy.

2.2.2 Representative Conformations of the Aβ42
Monomer with β-Sheet Structure Content
The structural
models of the Aβ42 monomer discussed above are characterized
by a substantial α-helical content. Most probably, this is a
consequence of under-sampling of the conformational ensemble of the
monomer with the implicit solvent GBSA model, resulting in a reduced
population of random coil and β-strand structures. To address
this problem in the context of probing possible dimerization pathways,
and to further explore the diversity of the conformational space of
the Aβ42 monomer, representative structures were also selected
from a subset of MD frames characterized by an elevated β-strand
structure content. As in the previous section, these structures were
identified with clustering of time series of the hydrophobic SASA.
Most of the selected conformations are characterized by a relatively
high solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues, with the exception
of one structure with a large α-helical content. This structure
was excluded from the following analysis because of its similarity
to the structures discussed in the previous section.

The representative
conformations of the Aβ42 monomer with β-strand content
have a different pattern in packing of hydrophobic residues compared
to that of most of the α-helical structures characterized by
a disrupted D23–K28 SB. In particular, there is no hydrophobic
interface between the CHC domain and C-terminal hydrophobic residues,
which was observed only for the α-helical structures with the
intrapeptide D23–K28 SB. It is worth noting that in all structures
with β-strand content, Lys28 is solvent exposed and it does
not establish a SB with Asp23. Similar to what was observed for some
α-helical structures, Asp23 can form a SB with Arg5.

All
β-strand representative structures are characterized
by the antiparallel β-sheet structural motif. The structure
with the largest hydrophobic SASA (the bottom-left panel of Figure 4) has a β-hairpin
formed by Ser26, Asn27 and Ala30, Ile31 residues. In the structure
representing the most populated cluster, β-strands are formed
by His14, Gln15 and Met35, Val36 residues (the bottom-right panel
of Figure 4). The conformation
with the largest exposure of hydrophobic residues (with the hydrophobic
SASA of 1887 Å2 compared to 1777 Å2 for the structure from the most populated cluster) belongs to the
third (out of five) most populated structural cluster, not to the
least populated one as was observed for the α-helical conformations
in the previous section. This can be explained by the fact that MD
frames with a particular structural feature (β-strand content
in this case) were preselected for clustering analysis, which may
affect a population balance linked to the system’s free energy
in unbiased ensembles.

2.3 Structural Models of the
Aβ42 Dimer
All models of the Aβ42 dimer discussed
below were generated
with the ZDOCK protein–protein docking software.60,61 The top 10 structures from docking simulations for each dimer model
were optimized and rescored with the Amber molecular dynamics package,72 as discussed in the Material
and Methods section.

2.3.1 Models of the Aβ42
Dimer Built from
Monomeric Constructs with a High Solvent Exposure of Hydrophobic Residues
By utilizing the hypothesis of initial hydrophobic association,
in this section, structural models of the Aβ42 dimer were built
from the monomeric constructs representing the structural clusters
with a large hydrophobic SASA. For both production segments of the
MD trajectory, monomers with a high solvent exposure of hydrophobic
residues belong to the least populated clusters. This indicates that
these monomeric constructs are unlikely to form initial aggregates
at low physiological concentrations, but probability of dimerization
may increase with increasing monomer concentration. The equilibrium
balance between different monomeric structures can also be shifted
toward constructs with a higher exposure of hydrophobic residues as
a consequence of a change in the environmental conditions. This can
make initial hydrophobic association of monomers a more likely event,
as supported by some experimental data. In another scenario, monomers
with a large hydrophobic SASA interact in the process of dimerization
with more abundant conformations representing highly populated structural
clusters characterized by a lower solvent exposure of hydrophobic
residues. This possibility will be discussed in the next sections.

The top-ranked structural models of the Aβ42 dimer constructed
from the monomers with a high solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues
from both production segments of the trajectory are shown in Figure 5 (see also Figures S9 and S10 of SI where three top-ranked
models of the dimer for each trajectory segment are shown). The interpeptide
interface in all top-ranked models built with the monomer from the
first segment characterized by a disrupted D23–K28 SB includes
hydrophobic contacts between the CHC domains and contacts between
the CHC domain of one monomer and the C-terminal hydrophobic residues
of the other (the left panel of Figure 5 and Figure S9 of SI). For
the second-ranked structure, there is an additional hydrophobic contact
between C-terminal Ile41 residues of the monomers (the middle panel
of Figure S9 of SI). The three top-ranked
models represent structural properties of 8 out of 10 top-ranked dimer
models built with the ZDOCK software, with the third-ranked structure
(the right panel of Figure S9 of SI) representing
the largest structural cluster (4 out of 10 structural models).

Figure 5 First-ranked
models of the Aβ42 dimer built from the monomeric
constructs with a high solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues from
the first (the left panel) and the second (the right panel) production
segments of the trajectory. Residues in the central hydrophobic clusters
are shown by their molecular surface, hydrophobic Ile32 and Val36
and C-terminal Val40 and Ile41 are shown in stick representation,
with white and blue colors used for different monomers. For the Ile32
and Val36 residues, transparent molecular surfaces are also shown.

Along with the hydrophobic interactions,
there are favorable electrostatic
intermonomer contacts between Asp7 and Lys16 residues for all three
top-ranked structures. This may result in the formation of SBs between
these residues. For the first-ranked structure, all other ionizable
residues with the exception of Asp23, which may form an intrapeptide
SB with Arg5, are solvent exposed and are not involved in the formation
of favorable electrostatic intra- or interpeptide contacts. For the
third-ranked structure, Lys16 from both monomers in the dimer can
alternatively form favorable electrostatic contacts with either Glu3
or Asp1. For the second-ranked structure, there is also unfavorable
electrostatic contact between Asp1 and Glu22. This indicates that
this model may undergo structural changes after initial association
to optimize the electrostatic interactions.

It is worth noting
that the hydrophobic residues from the CHC domains
and C-termini are only partially buried in the interpeptide interface
in the dimer models discussed above. Residues that are not involved
in formation of the interpeptide interface may form relatively large
continuous hydrophobic patches. This can potentially result in further
association of dimers with formation of Aβ42 tetrameric constructs
and other larger oligomers.

The representative structure of
the Aβ42 monomer with a high
solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues from the last production
segment of the trajectory is characterized by a formed D23–K28
SB. Dimer models built with this monomeric construct do not have the
hydrophobic interpeptide CHC–CHC interface (the right panel
of Figure 5 and Figure S10 of SI). This is different from the
case of the models without the intrapeptide D23–K28 SB discussed
above. Still, the top-ranked models have multiple interpeptide hydrophobic
contacts. The first-ranked model, for example, has a relatively good
hydrophobic interface (Figure S11 of SI)
formed by a Phe20–Val24–Val24–Phe20 “sandwich”
of hydrophobic residues, as well as a hydrophobic interface between
Val12, Ile31, Ile32, and Leu34 residues from both monomers.

To quantify contributions of individual residues to the interpeptide
interface in dimeric constructs, we calculated average desolvation
profiles of the monomers for all dimer models obtained with the ZDOCK
software. A desolvation profile is defined as the difference between
normalized SASAs of residues in constituting monomers and a dimer,
averaged over 10 top-ranked structures for each dimer model. The dimer
models with the intrapeptide D23–K28 SB in the off state (the
top panel of Figure 6) are characterized by a larger decrease in solvent exposure of hydrophobic
residues from the CHC domain compared to that of the models with the
formed D23–K28 SB (the bottom panel of Figure 6). This suggests that there is a correlation
between formation of the D23–K28 SB and a propensity to form
the interpeptide CHC–CHC interface not only for the top-ranked
models, but also for a structurally diverse ensemble of dimeric structures
identified in docking experiments.

Figure 6 Changes in solvent accessible surface
area (SASA) of individual
residues upon dimerization of the Aβ42 monomer with a high solvent
exposure of hydrophobic residues. The top and bottom panels are for
the dimer models built with the monomers from the first and second
production segments of the trajectory with the D23–K28 SB in
the off and on states, respectively. The SASAs of individual residues
are normalized relative to their values in the Gly–X–Gly
tripeptide structure in a fully extended conformation. Vertical lines
give standard error of means for the ten top-ranked dimer models.
Contributions of residues from the CHC domain are shown with a lighter
color.

2.3.2 Models
of the Aβ42 Dimer Built with
Monomeric Constructs from the Most Populated Structural Clusters
To verify whether a hydrophobic interface between the CHC domains
can form upon aggregation of monomers with a relatively low exposure
of hydrophobic residues, structural models of the Aβ42 dimer
were built with the monomeric constructs representing the most populated
structural clusters. For these monomers with a disrupted D23–K28
SB, all top-ranked dimer models have interpeptide contacts between
the CHC domains (Figure 7 and Figures S12 and S13 of SI). This
is consistent with the previous observation that monomers with a disrupted
D23–K28 SB have a high propensity to form the interpeptide
CHC–CHC interface. This is further confirmed by inspection
of the corresponding desolvation profiles (Figure S14 of SI).

Figure 7 Same as in Figure 5, but for the Aβ42 dimer models built with the monomers
representing
the most populated structural clusters.

Dimers originating from the first segment of the trajectory
are
characterized by additional interactions between hydrophobic residues
from the CHC domain of one monomer and the C-terminal domain of the
other (the left panel of Figure 7 and Figure S12 of SI),
which is similar to what was observed for the dimer models built from
the monomer with a large hydrophobic SASA. The interpeptide interface
of the first-ranked structure can be further stabilized by π-stacking
interactions between Phe19 residues from the CHC domains. For the
second-ranked structure, there is an additional hydrophobic contact
between C-terminal Ile41 residues of the monomers. All of these models
are characterized by a relatively high solvent exposure of hydrophilic
residues and reduced exposure of hydrophobic residues, and, in contrast
to the case of the dimer models built with the monomer structure with
a large hydrophobic SASA, they do not have favorable interpeptide
SBs.

For the final production segment of the trajectory, most
of the
top-ranked dimer models belong to two distinctive structural groups
covering 7 out of 10 top-ranked structures (the right panel of Figure 7 and Figure S13 of SI). In addition to the hydrophobic
interpeptide CHC–CHC interface, the first-ranked structure
may have hydrophobic contacts between Val36 residues, and the second-ranked
one between the CHC domain of one monomer and the C-terminal hydrophobic
residues of the other. The latter structure can be also stabilized
by π-stacking interactions between Phe19 and Phe20 for both
monomers.

2.3.3 “Heterogeneous”
Models of
the Aβ42 Dimer
Aβ monomers interacting at the
initial stage of dimerization most probably have different structural
properties. In a likely scenario, one of the monomers with an elevated
propensity for aggregation (such as resulting from a high solvent
exposure of hydrophobic residues) may belong to a low-populated structural
cluster, whereas its interaction partner from a highly populated cluster
will have a reduced propensity for aggregation. To describe such a
situation, models of the Aβ42 dimer were built with monomers
having a different degree of solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues,
such as that characterized by a large hydrophobic SASA and representing
the most populated structural clusters. The monomers with the large
hydrophobic SASA from both production segments of the trajectory belong
to the least populated structural clusters, and the monomers from
the most populated clusters have a reduced hydrophobic SASA.

The dimer models originating from the first and second segments of
the trajectory are compared in Figure 8 (see also Figures S15 and S16 of SI). In the case of the first segment, both constituting monomers
do not have the D23–K28 SB. Most of the corresponding dimer
models (9 out of 10 top-ranked models, with the exception of the structure
ranked second) are characterized by the interpeptide CHC–CHC
interface. The first-ranked model has additional hydrophobic contacts
between C-terminal hydrophobic residues of one monomer and the CHC
domain of the other (the left panel of Figure 8). The model ranked third has a good packing
of hydrophobic residues, with the hydrophobic interface formed between
the CHC domains, and the CHC domain and C-terminal residues for both
monomers (the right panel of Figure S15 of SI). The structure ranked second has a few hydrophobic contacts,
such as between the C-terminal domains, and the C-terminal residues
of one monomer and the CHC domain of the other (the middle panel of Figure S15 of SI). Most of the models, including
all three top-ranked ones, do not have favorable interpeptide electrostatic
contacts.

Figure 8 First-ranked models of the Aβ42 dimer built with the monomeric
constructs representing the most and the least populated structural
clusters from the first (the left panel) and the second (the right
panel) production segments of the trajectory. The monomers from the
least populated clusters are characterized by a highest solvent exposure
of hydrophobic residues among all the representative structures. These
monomers have the D23–K28 SB in the off and on states for the
dimer models shown in the left and right panels of the figure, respectively.
Notations are the same as in Figure 5.

The representative structures
of the monomer from the last segment
of the trajectory corresponding to the most populated cluster and
having a high solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues are characterized
by the D23–K28 SB in the off and on state, respectively. Most
of the dimer models built with these monomeric constructs (8 out of
10, including all three top-ranked models) do not have hydrophobic
contacts between the CHC domains of the monomers, in agreement with
the assumption that the D23–K28 SB protects from formation
of the interpeptide CHC–CHC interface. The above confirms this
hypothesis for dimers in which only one of the constituting monomers
has the D23–K28 SB. Even without CHC–CHC interactions,
the top-ranked dimer models have multiple hydrophobic contacts between
residues from other parts of the monomers. For the first-ranked model
(Figure S16 of SI), for example, there
are hydrophobic interactions between Leu31, Val36, and Val39 residues
of the monomer from the most populated cluster, and Leu34, Met35,
Val36, and Val40 residues from the monomer with a high solvent exposure
of hydrophobic residues from the least populated cluster. All three
top-ranked structures belong to the same structural cluster and thus
show a similar pattern in hydrophobic interactions.

2.3.4 Structural Models of the Aβ42 Dimer
Built from Monomeric Constructs with β-Sheet Content
To explore possible structural features of the interpeptide interface
in dimers made of monomers with β-sheet content, corresponding
models were built by docking both identical and distinctive monomeric
β-sheet constructs, similar to what was done in the previous
sections for the α-helical structures. Most of the top-ranked
dimeric constructs with β-sheet content do not have the interpeptide
CHC–CHC interface (Figure 9 and Figures S17 and S18 of SI). This is different from the case of the models with a high
α-helical content and the intrapeptide D23–K28 SB off
state. It is worth noting that the β-sheet monomers are characterized
by a disrupted D23–K28 SB.

Figure 9 First-ranked models of the Aβ42
dimer built from the β-sheet
monomers representing the structural cluster characterized by a large
hydrophobic SASA (the left panel) and the most populated cluster (the
right panel). Notations are the same as in Figure 5.

For the dimer model built from the monomeric construct with
a large
SASA of hydrophobic residues, all three top-ranked structures belong
to the same structural cluster. These structures are characterized
by multiple hydrophobic contacts (such as between Ile31 and Leu34
residues of one monomer and Phe20, Val24, and Ile32 residues of the
other), and they can be further stabilized by the interpeptide SB
between Asp1 and Lys28. The dimer model built with the monomer from
the most populated cluster is probably the least stable construct
among all the structures considered in the current study. Although
some hydrophobic contacts are observed for low ranking structures,
all three top-ranked structures do not have any hydrophobic or favorable
electrostatic contacts. Moreover, some acidic residues from both constituting
monomers are located close enough to provide an electrostatic penalty
for aggregation.

In the case of “heterogeneous”
dimer models built
with the monomers characterized by a high solvent exposure of hydrophobic
residues and representing the most populated cluster, all three top-ranked
structures do not have the interpeptide CHC–CHC interface.
A structure ranked first (Figure S18 of
SI) has a relatively good hydrophobic contact between multiple residues,
such as between Phe4 and Val18 of one monomer and C-terminal Val40–Ala42
of the other, and between Val12 and Val36 of one monomer, and Phe20,
Val24, Ile32, Met35, and Val36 of the other. There are no interpeptide
SBs formed for this structure. The other two top-ranked structures
belong to the same structural cluster. These structures do not have
a good hydrophobic interface, but they can be stabilized by interpeptide
SBs between Asp1 and Lys28, and between Lys16 and Asp1.

2.4 Structural Relaxation and Dynamic Stability
of Initial Dimer Models
In solution, Aβ peptides exist
in dynamic equilibrium between different conformational states, as
well as between monomeric and aggregated species. Because of the long
timescales involved, this cannot be directly modeled with all-atom
explicit solvent simulations. In a simplified picture, formation of
low-order oligomers, such as dimers, can be described as a two stage
process that includes initial conformational selection with following
structural relaxation and reorganization of stable oligomeric species
(induced fit), and possible dissociation of less stable structures.
The models of the Aβ42 dimer from the previous section provide
structural information on the initial interpeptide interface that
is consistent with the conformational selection mechanism of peptide
association. To model structural relaxation of initial aggregates
and assess their dynamic stability, we carried out MD simulations
of selected dimeric constructs (the protocol is explained in the Material and Methods section).

Simulations
were performed for all three top-ranked models for each of the following
systems: (i) the dimer built from the monomers with a large hydrophobic
SASA and the D23–K28 SB off state (the left panel of Figure 5 and Figure S9 of SI); (ii) the dimer built from the
monomers with a large hydrophobic SASA and the D23–K28 SB on
state (the right panel of Figure 5 and Figure S10 of SI);
(iii) the dimer built from the monomers with β-sheet content
characterized by a large hydrophobic SASA (the left panel of Figure 9). In total, nine
simulations were carried out. In the case of the dimer with the intrapeptide
D23–K28 SB and the β-sheet dimer, there is no hydrophobic
interface between the CHC domains of the monomers, which is formed
in the α-helical models without the SB.

In all MD simulations,
no dissociation events were observed at
the microsecond timescale. The arrangement of monomers in the dimer
models is mostly preserved in the course of simulations, however a
significant relaxation of the initial structures and large fluctuations
of the secondary structure content occur, which is indicative of a
high level of structural flexibility of the Aβ dimer. Interestingly,
the extent of changes (relative to the initial structure) in propensity
to form different secondary structure elements depends on a particular
model of the dimer (Figures S19–S21 of SI). Thus, there is a significant increase in the β-strand/β-bridge
content for the dimers with the CHC–CHC interpeptide interface
(the α-helical models with a large hydrophobic SASA and no D23–K28
SB) (Figure 10 and
the top-left panel of Figure S19 of SI).
In contrast, there is no such increase for the other two dimeric models:
in the case of the α-helical dimer with the D23–K28 SB,
the content remains negligible during the simulation (the top-left
panel of Figure S20 of SI), and for the
β-sheet dimer, it mostly fluctuates around its initial value
(the top-left panel of Figure S21 of SI).
Experimental data suggest that even low-order Aβ aggregates,
including dimers, are characterized by an elevated β-sheet structural
content.33 The above finding may indicate
that initial association of Aβ peptides involves α-helical
constructs with a disrupted D23–K28 SB, with following relaxation
to β-sheet rich structures. Alternatively, there could be an
equilibrium between different dimeric species under physiological
conditions with the structural balance shifted (compared to the monomeric
ensemble) toward β-sheet structures.

Figure 10 Number of residues involved
in the β-strand/β-bridge
structural content as a function of simulation time. The results are
for the Aβ42 dimer model built from the monomers with a large
hydrophobic SASA and a disrupted D23–K28 SB. The initial structure
does not have any β-strand/β-bridge content.

For two out of three simulated dimer models with
the initial interpeptide
CHC–CHC interface (the α-helical dimer with the D23–K28
SB off state), the interface was present by the end of the simulations.
Interestingly, disruption of the interface in the model ranked third
correlates with establishing the intrapeptide D23–K28 SB in
one of the constituting monomers (Figure 11). This suggests that the SB not only prevents
formation of the initial interface between the CHC domains as discussed
in the previous section, but may also control its stability in dimers
after initial relaxation. It is worth noting that for the dimer models
with an initially disrupted D23–K28 SB, the SB was formed only
for one monomer from the third-ranked α-helical dimer model.

Figure 11 Time
evolution of the interpeptide CHC–CHC distance (the
upper panel) and the distance between Asp23 and Lys28 residues for
one of the constituting monomers (the bottom panel) in the course
of MD simulation of the Aβ42 dimer. As an initial structure,
the dimer model built from the monomers with a large hydrophobic SASA
and the D23–K28 SB off state was used. The distances are measured
between geometric centers of the CHC domains, and between the CG site
of Asp23 and NZ site of Lys28.

For the first-ranked model with the initial CHC–CHC
contacts
between the monomers, this interface was disrupted and then re-formed
at the timescale of a few hundreds of nanoseconds. Analysis of the
inter-residue distance map for this model indicates optimization of
the interpeptide CHC–CHC interface in the course of simulation
(Figure 12). Also,
the CHC domain and adjacent residues from one of the monomers establishes
better contacts with most parts of the other. Some of the initial
interpeptide contacts are lost by the end of simulation, mostly between
monomer termini. At the same time, constituting monomers are surprisingly
stable as seen from the contact map. Thus, one of the two monomers
show only minor changes in “native” contacts (the right
bottom block of the distance map from Figure 12) with better packing of residues in the
final structure. For the second monomer, some contacts are lost predominately
between residues in termini segments and between N-terminal residues
and residues 28–32. The dimer built with the β-sheet
monomers is also characterized by a stability of the initial interpeptide
interface and optimization of both inter- and intrapeptide interactions
in the course of simulation (Figure 13). In contrast, for the top-ranked α-helical
dimer model without the CHC–CHC interface, there is a significant
decrease in the initial intra- and interpeptide contacts (Figure 14). The interpeptide
D23–K28 SB in these models of the α-helical dimer without
the CHC–CHC interface is quite stable. Its disruption was observed
only for two constituting monomers from the dimer models ranked second
and third. These simulations provide insight into the relative stability
of structural models of the Aβ42 dimer with and without the
initial interpeptide CHC–CHC interface and also characterized
by different secondary structure contents.

Figure 12 Inter-residue distance
map for the first-ranked dimer model with
the interpeptide CHC–CHC interface. The constituent monomers
for this model characterized by a disrupted D23–K28 SB are
from the first production segment of the trajectory. Left panel: the
distance map for the initial structure. Right panel: the distance
map averaged over the last 5 ns of 1 μs simulation. Distances
are measured between Cα atoms for each residue. Diagonal and
off diagonal 42 × 42 residue blocks give the intra- and interpeptide
maps, respectively.

Figure 13 Same as in Figure 12, but for the dimer
model built from the monomers with β-sheet
content.

Figure 14 Same as in Figure 12, but for the dimer model built with the
monomers from the second
production segment of the trajectory. These monomers do not have the
interpeptide CHC–CHC interface and are characterized by a formed
D23–K28 SB.

3 Discussion
After being released from a lipid membrane as a product of proteolytic
cleavage of APP, Aβ peptides most probably lose their α-helical
transmembrane conformation, as supported by solution NMR experimental
data for different monomeric Aβ species in aqueous and nonpolar
solutions.14−27 The experimental studies have also demonstrated that soluble Aβ
monomers can be classified as intrinsically disordered proteins7,14 and their structural properties are characterized by transitions
between multiple conformational states. It is very unlikely that under
normal physiological conditions, the equilibrium in the conformational
ensemble of Aβ peptides is shifted toward neurotoxic oligomeric
species. In a more plausible scenario, the pathological conversion
is triggered by Aβ peptide overproduction, impaired clearance,
or changes in environmental conditions (such as pH level, salt concentration,
or presence of lipids or other substrates) caused by currently unknown
pathological conditions, or a combination of these factors. The conformational
equilibrium of the structural ensemble of Aβ peptides may first
be shifted from mostly unstructured to α-helical and/or β-sheet
rich structures, which will further nucleate oligomerization. Such
structures can be more aggregation-prone because of multiple factors,
including reduced (compared to unstructured conformations) entropic
penalty, a higher solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues, a favorable
charge state, among others.

In this study, monomeric constructs
with a potentially high propensity
for aggregation were selected from the structural ensemble of the
Aβ42 monomer sampled in implicit solvent REMD simulations. These
structures are characterized by different secondary structure content,
state of the D23–K28 SB, and solvent exposure of hydrophobic
residues. Structural analysis suggests that there may be a correlation
between secondary structure content and propensity to form the D23–K28
SB on the one hand, and a pattern in packing of hydrophobic residues
in the Aβ42 monomer in the other. In particular, a contact between
the CHC domain and C-terminal Val40 and Ile41 residues was observed
in α-helical rich structures only for a disrupted D23–K28
SB. Also, there is a reduced propensity to form such contacts for
structures with β-sheet content. These structural features of
the monomer are reflected in a propensity to form the interpeptide
interface between the CHC domains in models of the Aβ42 dimer
generated with the ZDOCK protein–protein docking software.60,61 There is a higher tendency to form such an interface for α-helical
monomers with a disrupted D23–K28 SB, compared to that of monomers
with a formed SB or monomers with β-sheet structure content.
The results of this study suggest that if the dimerization pathway
involves initial association of monomers with a substantial α-helical
content, such monomers may have a disrupted D23–K28 SB. In
this case, relaxation of initial aggregates will be accompanied by
an increase in β-sheet content of dimers, in agreement with
experimental data. Thus, formation of the intrapeptide D23–K28
SB in Aβ monomers may affect both the propensity to establish
a hydrophobic interface between CHC domains of monomers and the propensity
to adopt a β-sheet rich conformation in dimers.

The interpeptide
CHC–CHC and CHC–C-terminal domain
interfaces as well as interactions between C-terminal hydrophobic
residues in Aβ dimers have been observed in previous modeling
studies.37,43,44,51,54 What is new is that
formation of such structural patterns may correlate with a propensity
to form an intrapeptide D23–K28 SB and secondary structure
of a monomer. This could have potential implications for better understanding
of oligomerization pathways of Aβ peptides. Interactions between
the CHC domain and hydrophobic Val40–Ala42 in the Aβ42
monomer with the D23–K28 SB off state can facilitate formation
of a large continuous hydrophobic patch, which could result in an
elevated propensity for aggregation compared to that of Aβ40
constructs and Aβ42 monomers with a formed D23–K28 SB,
or monomers with a substantial β-sheet structural content. Further,
the difference in packing of hydrophobic residues between monomeric
constructs with solvent exposed and protected Lys28 (such as in the
case of a formed D23–K28 SB) could be a factor discriminating
between aggregation pathways leading to toxic aggregates or inert
fibrillar structures, as supported by the fact that solvent exposure
of Lys28 is an important structural feature of the epitope recognized
by the conformational antibody in the toxic oligomeric Aβ species.63,64

4 Conclusions
The interplay between structural
features of the Aβ42 monomer,
such as secondary structure content and a propensity to form the D23–K28
SB, and properties of the interpeptide interface in the Aβ42
dimer identified in the current study provides a new insight into
the possible oligomerization pathways of Aβ peptides. These
findings are also of potential practical importance because they reveal
structural features of Aβ constructs that can be utilized in
development of drug candidates for inhibition of formation of toxic
Aβ oligomers. In particular, they could help to identify monomeric
constructs characterized by both an elevated tendency for aggregation
(such as with a high solvent exposure of hydrophobic residues) and
specific structural features that may be responsible for formation
of toxic oligomers. These constructs can be used as receptor models
for structure-based drug design or virtual screening of large libraries
of druglike compounds to target pathological aggregation of Aβ
peptides.

For practical applications, the above structural hypotheses
need
to be verified with conformational sampling covering a larger conformational
space of the Aβ42 monomer (for example, with all-atom explicit
solvent MD simulations and multiple force fields to produce statistically
meaningful results) combined with a combinatorial analysis of a larger
number of diverse monomeric structures to build initial models of
the dimer, with following assessment of dynamic and thermodynamic
stability of suggested dimer models. This work is currently underway
and results will be reported in forthcoming publications.

5 Materials and Methods
5.1 Molecular Dynamics Simulations
A
conformational ensemble of the Aβ42 monomer was sampled in GBSA
implicit solvent REMD simulations. A fully extended conformation of
the monomer was used as input for MD simulations to avoid a possible
bias due to an arbitrary choice of initial structure. This structure
was prepared with the tleap program from the Amber14
molecular dynamics package.72 Charge states
of ionizable residues were assigned with the PROPKA program.73−75 Residues with basic side chains have pKa values greater than 10 and thus are protonated at the neutral pH
conditions modeled in this study. All acidic residues are considered
deprotonated because their predicted pKa values are less than 5. PROPKA assigned the pKa value of 6.35 to histidine residues, which provides some
flexibility in assignment of their protonation states. It is very
unlikely that peptides with a substantial noncompensated charge will
aggregate to form a dimer. Thus, in this study focusing on building
initial molecular models of the Aβ42 dimer, all histidine residues
were single-protonated at Nϵ sites, which guaranteed electrical
neutrality of monomers.

In the REMD simulations, 12 replicas
spanning the temperature range 298.15–579.90 K were used. The
number of replicas and temperature series were selected with the temperature
generator for REMD-simulations server (http://folding.bmc.uu.se/remd/)76 to set the replica exchange probability
to 0.2. Simulations were performed with the Amber12 molecular dynamics
package77 and the Amber ff12SB force field.78,79 A modified version of the GB solvation model80 (igb = 5) was used with the mbondi2 set
of van der Waals radii.80 The ionic strength
of solvent was set to 0.2 M (saltcon = 0.2) to mimic physiological
conditions. To control temperature, Langevin dynamics was used with
the collision frequency of 5 ps–1. All bonds that
include hydrogen atoms were constrained with the SHAKE algorithm.81 The cutoff parameters for non-bonded interactions
and pairwise summation for calculating the effective Born radii were
set to 999.0 Å.

The REMD simulations were preceded by structure
optimization to
relax possible steric clashes, followed by thermalization and equilibration
runs. Minimization was performed with 250 steepest descent steps followed
by 250 conjugate gradient minimization steps. In the thermalization
run, temperature of the system was gradually increased to target temperatures
for each replica during 50 000 MD steps. Thermalization was
followed by 50 000 MD equilibration steps. In the equilibration
and thermalization runs, the same MD parameters were used as in the
production simulations with the exception of the time step which was
set to 1 fs in the thermalization and equilibration runs, and to 2
fs in the production runs. In the production REMD simulations, the
number of MD steps between attempted replica exchanges was 2500. To
avoid possible chirality inversions at high temperatures, chirality
restraints generated with the makeCHIR_RST program from the Amber molecular dynamics package were imposed in
the REMD simulations. All other parameters were set to their default
values.72

A similar MD setup was
used to assess dynamical stability of select
models of the Aβ42 dimer. These models were built and optimized
as explained in the next section. To avoid dissociation of the dimers
at high temperatures accessible in REMD simulations, their stability
was tested with conventional MD at a temperature of 25 °C.

Before it was used to sample a conformational ensemble of the Aβ42
monomer, the REMD protocol described above was validated by folding
the Trp-cage miniprotein82 starting from
a fully extended initial conformation. The miniprotein was successfully
folded on the nanosecond timescale (Figures S22 and S23 of SI) with the same set of REMD parameters as that
used for simulation of the Aβ monomer (with the exception of
the number of replicas, which was set to 10 to insure the same exchange
rates for the 20-residue long miniprotein).

In silico conformational
sampling of intrinsically disordered peptides
is a challenging problem. Sampling results are very sensitive to the
choice of a force field model,83 and it
is not clear whether explicit solvent simulations can be fully converged
(such as to reproduce physiological ensembles of Aβ peptides)
at the microsecond timescale accessed in most studies carried out
so far. Here, REMD is used to generate a structurally diverse ensemble
of conformations of the Aβ42 monomer for modeling a possible
initial interpeptide interface in the Aβ42 dimer. In this context,
it is more important to produce Aβ conformations with structural
characteristics related to a high propensity for aggregation rather
than to achieve a converged conformational sampling. Still, it is
interesting to verify whether the sampling protocol from this study
generates a conformational ensemble of Aβ monomers in agreement
with experimental data. With that in mind, we compare predicted 3JHNHα-coupling values with
the recent experimental solution NMR data.14 The calculation was carried out based on the modified Vuister and
Bax parametrization84 of the Karplus equation85−87 by averaging J-coupling values for individual MD
frames. The agreement between the experimental and predicted data
is reasonably good for a subset of frames from the last 2 μs
of the trajectory corresponding to the large RMSD structural domain
discussed above (Figure S24 of SI). Thus,
the correlation coefficient between the calculated and experimental J-coupling values is 0.529, which is comparable to the previously
reported results obtained with explicit solvent REMD simulations.22

5.2 Postprocessing of Molecular
Dynamics Data
and Building Models of the Aβ42 Dimer
The conformational
space of the Aβ monomer is quite complex. Thus, different criteria
may be needed to identify conformers with a potentially high tendency
for aggregation. In the current study, solvent exposure of hydrophobic
residues was chosen as a major descriptor of the monomer’s
propensity for aggregation. To model an initial interpeptide interface
in the Aβ dimer, representative conformations of the Aβ42
monomer were selected with clustering of time series of solvent accessible
surface area of hydrophobic residues. SASA of different residue groups
and secondary structure content of peptides were obtained with Kabsch
and Sander’s DSSP algorithm.88 All
other postprocessing tasks, including clustering analysis and calculations
of RMSD of atomic positions, radius of gyration, and the distance
between salt-bridge forming residues, were performed with the cpptraj program from the Amber molecular dynamics package.

Molecular models of the Aβ42 dimer were built from the representative
conformations of the monomer with the ZDOCK protein docking server
(http://zdock.umassmed.edu/).60 The server is based on the protein–protein
rigid-body docking programs ZDOCK and M–ZDOCK.61,89,90 The top 10 structures from each
docking simulation were further optimized and rescored with the Amber
molecular dynamics package and the Amber ff14SB force field.79 Minimization was performed with 500 steepest
descent steps followed by 500 conjugate gradient minimization steps.
Minimization and rescoring of dimer models built with the ZDOCK server
were performed with the same set of parameters as that used for REMD
simulations.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00805.Time evolution
and distribution of the radius of gyration
of the Aβ42 monomer from implicit solvent REMD simulations;
solvent accessible surface area of hydrophobic residues of the Aβ42
monomer plotted versus number of residues forming different secondary
structure elements, the distance between salt-bridge forming Asp23
and Lys28 residues, and hydrophilic SASA; population distributions
of Cα RMSD for different trajectory segments; time series of
Cα RMSD split into two structural domains, and distribution
of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic SASA of the Aβ42 monomer
for different RMSD domains; per-residue secondary structure propensity
of the Aβ42 monomer; top-ranked models of the Aβ42 dimer
built from different monomeric constructs; changes in SASA of individual
residues upon dimerization of the Aβ42 monomers from the most
populated clusters; number of residues forming different secondary
structure elements as a function of simulation time for different
dimer models; time series of Cα RMSD from REMD folding simulation
of the Trp-cage miniprotein; representative structures of the Trp-cage
miniprotein folded in REMD simulations; comparison between calculated
and experimental J-coupling data for the Aβ42
monomer (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00805_si_001.pdf

 The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported
by the Alberta Prion Research Institute,
Alzheimer Society of Alberta and Northwest Territories (Alberta Alzheimer
Research Program grants ABIBS AARP 201500003 and 201600005), and the
National Research Council of Canada. Computational resources were
provided by WestGrid (www.westgrid.ca) and Compute Canada - Calcul Canada (www.computecanada.ca).
==== Refs
References
Hardy J. ; Selkoe D. J. 
The Amyloid Hypothesis of Alzheimer’s Disease:
Progress and Problems on the Road to Therapeutics . Science 
2002 , 297 , 353 –356 . 10.1126/science.1072994 .12130773 
Walsh D. M. ; Selkoe D. J. 
Aβ Oligomers
- a decade of discovery . J. Neurochem. 
2007 , 101 , 1172 –1184 . 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.04426.x .17286590 
Benilova I. ; Karran E. ; De Strooper B. 
The toxic
Aβ oligomer and Alzheimer’s
disease: an emperor in need of clothes . Nat.
Neurosci. 
2012 , 15 , 349 –357 . 10.1038/nn.3028 .22286176 
Kayed R. ; Lasagna-Reeves C. A. 
Molecular
Mechanisms of Amyloid Oligomers Toxicity . J.
Alzheimer’s Dis. 
2013 , 33 , S67 –S78 . 10.3233/JAD-2012-129001 .22531422 
Haass C. ; Selkoe D. J. 
Soluble protein
oligomers in neurodegeneration: lessons
from the Alzheimer’s amyloid β-peptide . Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
2007 , 8 , 101 –112 . 10.1038/nrm2101 .17245412 
Glabe C. G. 
Structural
Classification of Toxic Amyloid Oligomers . J.
Biol. Chem. 
2008 , 283 , 29639 –29643 . 10.1074/jbc.R800016200 .18723507 
Hubin E. ; van Nuland N. A. J. ; Broersen K. ; Pauwels K. 
Transient dynamics
of Aβ contribute to toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease . Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 
2014 , 71 , 3507 –3521 . 10.1007/s00018-014-1634-z .24803005 
Necula M. ; Kayed R. ; Milton S. ; Glabe C. G. 
Small Molecule Inhibitors
of Aggregation Indicate That Amyloid β Oligomerization and Fibrillization
Pathways Are Independent and Distinct . J. Biol.
Chem. 
2007 , 282 , 10311 –10324 . 10.1074/jbc.M608207200 .17284452 
Walsh D. M. ; Townsend M. ; Podlisny M. B. ; Shankar G. M. ; Fadeeva J. V. ; Agnaf O. E. ; Hartley D. M. ; Selkoe D. J. 
Certain Inhibitors
of Synthetic Amyloid β-Peptide (Aβ) Fibrillogenesis Block
Oligomerization of Natural Aβ and Thereby Rescue Long-Term Potentiation . J. Neurosci. 
2005 , 25 , 2455 –2462 . 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4391-04.2005 .15758153 
Wang Z. ; Chang L. ; Klein W. L. ; Thatcher G. R. J. ; Venton D. L. 
Per-6-substituted-per-6-deoxy
β-cyclodextrins Inhibit the Formation of β-Amyloid Peptide
Derived Soluble Oligomers . J. Med. Chem. 
2004 , 47 , 3329 –3333 . 10.1021/jm034224e .15189029 
Fradinger E. A. ; Monien B. H. ; Urbanc B. ; Lomakin A. ; Tan M. ; Li H. ; Spring S. M. ; Condron M. M. ; Cruz L. ; Xie C.-W. ; et al. C-terminal peptides coassemble into Aβ42 oligomers and protect
neurons against Aβ42-induced neurotoxicity . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2008 , 105 , 14175 –14180 . 10.1073/pnas.0807163105 .18779585 
Yang F. ; Lim G. P. ; Begum A. N. ; Ubeda O. J. ; Simmons M. R. ; Ambegaokar S. S. ; Chen P. P. ; Kayed R. ; Glabe C. G. ; Frautschy S. A. ; et al. Curcumin Inhibits Formation of Amyloid β
Oligomers and Fibrils, Binds Plaques, and Reduces Amyloid in Vivo . J. Biol. Chem. 
2005 , 280 , 5892 –5901 . 10.1074/jbc.M404751200 .15590663 
Feng B. Y. ; Toyama B. H. ; Wille H. ; Colby D. W. ; Collins S. R. ; May B. C. H. ; Prusiner S. B. ; Weissman J. ; Shoichet B. K. 
Small-molecule
aggregates inhibit amyloid polymerization . Nat.
Chem. Biol. 
2008 , 4 , 197 –199 . 10.1038/nchembio.65 .18223646 
Roche J. ; Shen Y. ; Lee J. H. ; Ying J. ; Bax A. 
Monomeric
Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 Peptides in Solution Adopt Very Similar
Ramachandran Map Distributions That Closely Resemble Random Coil . Biochemistry 
2016 , 55 , 762 –775 . 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b01259 .26780756 
Ball K. A. ; Phillips A. H. ; Nerenberg P. S. ; Fawzi N. L. ; Wemmer D. E. ; Head-Gordon T. 
Homogeneous
and Heterogeneous Tertiary Structure Ensembles
of Amyloid-β Peptides . Biochemistry 
2011 , 50 , 7612 –7628 . 10.1021/bi200732x .21797254 
Yamaguchi T. ; Matsuzaki K. ; Hoshino M. 
Transient formation of intermediate
conformational states of amyloid-β peptide revealed by heteronuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy . FEBS Lett. 
2011 , 585 , 1097 –1102 . 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.03.014 .21402073 
Vivekanandan S. ; Brender J. R. ; Lee S. Y. ; Ramamoorthy A. 
A partially
folded structure of amyloid-beta(1-40) in an aqueous environment . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
2011 , 411 , 312 –316 . 10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.06.133 .21726530 
Tomaselli S. ; Esposito V. ; Vangone P. ; van Nuland N. A. J. ; Bonvin A. M. J. J. ; Guerrini R. ; Tancredi T. ; Temussi P. A. ; Picone D. 
The α-to-β Conformational
Transition of Alzheimer’s Aβ-(1-42) Peptide in Aqueous
Media is Reversible: A Step by Step Conformational Analysis Suggests
the Location of β Conformation Seeding . ChemBioChem 
2006 , 7 , 257 –267 . 10.1002/cbic.200500223 .16444756 
Hou L. ; Shao H. ; Zhang Y. ; Li H. ; Menon N. K. ; Neuhaus E. B. ; Brewer J. M. ; Byeon I.-J. L. ; Ray D. G. ; Vitek M. P. ; et al. Solution NMR Studies
of the Aβ(1-40)
and Aβ(1-42) Peptides Establish that the Met35 Oxidation State
Affects the Mechanism of Amyloid Formation . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 1992 –2005 . 10.1021/ja036813f .14971932 
Crescenzi O. ; Tomaselli S. ; Guerrini R. ; Salvadori S. ; D’Ursi A. M. ; Temussi P. A. ; Picone D. 
Solution structure
of the Alzheimer amyloid β-peptide (1-42) in an apolar microenvironment . Eur. J. Biochem. 
2002 , 269 , 5642 –5648 . 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.03271.x .12423364 
Yan Y. ; Wang C. 
Aβ42 is More Rigid than Aβ40 at the C Terminus: Implications
for Aβ Aggregation and Toxicity . J. Mol.
Biol. 
2006 , 364 , 853 –862 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.09.046 .17046788 
Rosenman D. J. ; Connors C. R. ; Chen W. ; Wang C. ; García A. E. 
Aβ
Monomers Transiently Sample Oligomer and Fibril-Like Configurations:
Ensemble Characterization Using a Combined MD/NMR Approach . J. Mol. Biol. 
2013 , 425 , 3338 –3359 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.06.021 .23811057 
Hoyer W. ; Grönwall C. ; Jonsson A. ; StÅhl S. ; Härd T. 
Stabilization of a β-hairpin in monomeric Alzheimer’s
amyloid-β peptide inhibits amyloid formation . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2008 , 105 , 5099 –5104 . 10.1073/pnas.0711731105 .18375754 
Zhang S. ; Iwata K. ; Lachenmann M. ; Peng J. ; Li S. ; Stimson E. ; Lu Y. ; Felix A. ; Maggio J. ; Lee J. 
The Alzheimer’s Peptide Aβ Adopts a Collapsed Coil Structure
in Water . J. Struct. Biol. 
2000 , 130 , 130 –141 . 10.1006/jsbi.2000.4288 .10940221 
Lee J. P. ; Stimson E. R. ; Ghilardi J. R. ; Mantyh P. W. ; Lu Y.-A. ; Felix A. M. ; Llanos W. ; Behbin A. ; Cummings M. ; Crielunge M. V. ; et al. 1H NMR of Aβ Amyloid Peptide Congeners
in Water Solution. Conformational Changes Correlate with Plaque Competence . Biochemistry 
1995 , 34 , 5191 –5200 . 10.1021/bi00015a033 .7711039 
Talafous J. ; Marcinowski K. J. ; Klopman G. ; Zagorski M. G. 
Solution Structure
of Residues 1-28 of the Amyloid β-Peptide . Biochemistry 
1994 , 33 , 7788 –7796 . 10.1021/bi00191a006 .7516706 
Barrow C. J. ; Zagorski M. 
Solution structures
of β peptide and its constituent
fragments: relation to amyloid deposition . Science 
1991 , 253 , 179 –182 . 10.1126/science.1853202 .1853202 
Xiao Y. ; Ma B. ; McElheny D. ; Parthasarathy S. ; Long F. ; Hoshi M. ; Nussinov R. ; Ishii Y. 
Aβ(1-42)
fibril structure illuminates
self-recognition and replication of amyloid in Alzheimer’s
disease . Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
2015 , 22 , 499 –505 . 10.1038/nsmb.2991 .25938662 
Wälti M. A. ; Ravotti F. ; Arai H. ; Glabe C. G. ; Wall J. S. ; Böckmann A. ; Güntert P. ; Meier B. H. ; Riek R. 
Atomic-resolution
structure of a disease-relevant Aβ(1-42) amyloid fibril . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2016 , 113 , E4976 –E4984 . 10.1073/pnas.1600749113 .27469165 
Lührs T. ; Ritter C. ; Adrian M. ; Riek-Loher D. ; Bohrmann B. ; Döbeli H. ; Schubert D. ; Riek R. 
3D structure
of Alzheimer’s amyloid-β(1-42) fibrils . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2005 , 102 , 17342 –17347 . 10.1073/pnas.0506723102 .16293696 
Riek R. ; Güntert P. ; Döbeli H. ; Wipf B. ; Wüthrich K. 
NMR studies
in aqueous solution fail to identify significant conformational differences
between the monomeric forms of two Alzheimer peptides with widely
different plaque-competence, Aβ(1-40)ox and Aβ(1-42)ox . Eur. J. Biochem. 
2001 , 268 , 5930 –5936 . 10.1046/j.0014-2956.2001.02537.x .11722581 
Kirkitadze M. D. ; Condron M. M. ; Teplow D. B. 
Identification and characterization
of key kinetic intermediates in amyloid β-protein fibrillogenesis . J. Mol. Biol. 
2001 , 312 , 1103 –1119 . 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4970 .11580253 
Ono K. ; Condron M. M. ; Teplow D. B. 
Structure-neurotoxicity relationships
of amyloid β-protein oligomers . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2009 , 106 , 14745 –14750 . 10.1073/pnas.0905127106 .19706468 
Misra P. ; Kodali R. ; Chemuru S. ; Kar K. ; Wetzel R. 
Rapid α-oligomer
formation mediated by the Aβ C terminus initiates an amyloid
assembly pathway . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 1241910.1038/ncomms12419 .27546208 
Stroud J. C. ; Liu C. ; Teng P. K. ; Eisenberg D. 
Toxic fibrillar oligomers of amyloid-β
have cross-β structure . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2012 , 109 , 7717 –7722 . 10.1073/pnas.1203193109 .22547798 
Xu L. ; Shan S. ; Chen Y. ; Wang X. ; Nussinov R. ; Ma B. 
Coupling of Zinc-Binding
and Secondary Structure in Nonfibrillar
Aβ40 Peptide Oligomerization . J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 
2015 , 55 , 1218 –1230 . 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00063 .26017140 
Tarus B. ; Tran T. T. ; Nasica-Labouze J. ; Sterpone F. ; Nguyen P. H. ; Derreumaux P. 
Structures
of the Alzheimer’s Wild-Type Aβ1-40
Dimer from Atomistic Simulations . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2015 , 119 , 10478 –10487 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.5b05593 .26228450 
Yano A. ; Okamoto A. ; Nomura K. ; Higai S. ; Kurita N. 
Difference
in dimer conformation between amyloid-β(1-42) and (1-43) proteins:
Replica exchange molecular dynamics simulations in water . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2014 , 595–596 , 242 –249 . 10.1016/j.cplett.2014.02.017 .
Shankar G. M. ; Li S. ; Mehta T. H. ; Garcia-Munoz A. ; Shepardson N. E. ; Smith I. ; Brett F. M. ; Farrell M. A. ; Rowan M. J. ; Lemere C. A. ; et al. Amyloid-β
protein dimers isolated directly
from Alzheimer’s brains impair synaptic plasticity and memory . Nat. Med. 
2008 , 14 , 837 –842 . 10.1038/nm1782 .18568035 
O’Malley T. T. ; Oktaviani N. A. ; Zhang D. ; Lomakin A. ; O’Nuallain B. ; Linse S. ; Benedek G. B. ; Rowan M. J. ; Mulder F. A. A. ; Walsh D. M. 
Aβ dimers differ from monomers in structural
propensity, aggregation paths and population of synaptotoxic assemblies . Biochem. J. 
2014 , 461 , 413 –426 . 10.1042/BJ20140219 .24785004 
Yang T. ; Li S. ; Xu H. ; Walsh D. M. ; Selkoe D. J. 
Large Soluble Oligomers
of Amyloid β-Protein from Alzheimer Brain Are Far Less Neuroactive
Than the Smaller Oligomers to Which They Dissociate . J. Neurosci. 
2017 , 37 , 152 –163 . 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1698-16.2016 .28053038 
Nasica-Labouze J. ; Nguyen P. H. ; Sterpone F. ; Berthoumieu O. ; Buchete N.-V. ; Coté S. ; De Simone A. ; Doig A. J. ; Faller P. ; Garcia A. ; et al. Amyloid
β Protein and Alzheimer’s Disease: When Computer Simulations
Complement Experimental Studies . Chem. Rev. 
2015 , 115 , 3518 –3563 . 10.1021/cr500638n .25789869 
Zhang T. ; Xu W. ; Mu Y. ; Derreumaux P. 
Atomic and Dynamic Insights into
the Beneficial Effect of the 1,4-Naphthoquinon-2-yl-l-tryptophan Inhibitor
on Alzheimer’s Aβ1-42 Dimer in Terms of Aggregation and
Toxicity . ACS Chem. Neurosci. 
2014 , 5 , 148 –159 . 10.1021/cn400197x .24246047 
Zhang T. ; Zhang J. ; Derreumaux P. ; Mu Y. 
Molecular Mechanism
of the Inhibition of EGCG on the Alzheimer Aβ1-42 Dimer . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2013 , 117 , 3993 –4002 . 10.1021/jp312573y .23537203 
Xu L. ; Chen Y. ; Wang X. 
Assembly of
Amyloid β Peptides
in the Presence of Fibril Seeds: One-Pot Coarse-Grained Molecular
Dynamics Simulations . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2014 , 118 , 9238 –9246 . 10.1021/jp505551m .25050788 
Pan L. ; Patterson J. C. 
Molecular Dynamics Study of Zn(Aβ) and Zn(Aβ)2 . PLoS One 
2013 , 8 , e7068110.1371/journal.pone.0070681 .24086248 
Sun Y. ; Qian Z. ; Wei G. 
The inhibitory mechanism of a fullerene
derivative against amyloid-β peptide aggregation: an atomistic
simulation study . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 12582 –12591 . 10.1039/C6CP01014H .27091578 
Tsigelny I. F. ; Sharikov Y. ; Kouznetsova V. L. ; Greenberg J. P. ; Wrasidlo W. ; Gonzalez T. ; Desplats P. ; Michael S. E. ; Trejo-Morales M. ; Overk C. R. ; et al. Structural Diversity
of Alzheimer’s Disease Amyloid-β Dimers and Their Role
in Oligomerization and Fibril Formation . J.
Alzheimer’s Dis. 
2014 , 39 , 583 –600 . 10.3233/JAD-131589 .24240640 
Blinov N. ; Dorosh L. ; Wishart D. ; Kovalenko A. 
Association
Thermodynamics and Conformational Stability of β-Sheet Amyloid
β(17-42) Oligomers: Effects of E22Q (Dutch) Mutation and Charge
Neutralization . Biophys. J. 
2010 , 98 , 282 –296 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2009.09.062 .20338850 
Morriss-Andrews A. ; Shea J.-E. 
Computational Studies of Protein
Aggregation: Methods
and Applications . Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 
2015 , 66 , 643 –666 . 10.1146/annurev-physchem-040513-103738 .25648485 
Chiricotto M. ; Tran T. T. ; Nguyen P. H. ; Melchionna S. ; Sterpone F. ; Derreumaux P.  Coarse-grained
and All-atom Simulations towards the Early and Late Steps of Amyloid
Fibril Formation . Isr. J. Chem.  [Online] 2016 . http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ijch.201600048 (accessed July 17,
2017).
Meral D. ; Urbanc B. 
Discrete Molecular
Dynamics Study of Oligomer Formation
by N-Terminally Truncated Amyloid β-Protein . J. Mol. Biol. 
2013 , 425 , 2260 –2275 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.03.010 .23500806 
Urbanc B. ; Betnel M. ; Cruz L. ; Bitan G. ; Teplow D. B. 
Elucidation
of Amyloid β-Protein Oligomerization Mechanisms: Discrete Molecular
Dynamics Study . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 4266 –4280 . 10.1021/ja9096303 .20218566 
Côté S. ; Laghaei R. ; Derreumaux P. ; Mousseau N. 
Distinct Dimerization
for Various Alloforms of the Amyloid-Beta Protein: Aβ1-40, Aβ1-42,
and Aβ1-40(D23N) . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2012 , 116 , 4043 –4055 . 10.1021/jp2126366 .22409719 
Takeda T. ; Klimov D. K. 
Interpeptide interactions induce helix to strand structural
transition in Aβ peptides . Proteins: Struct.,
Funct., Bioinf. 
2009 , 77 , 1 –13 . 10.1002/prot.22406 .
Kim S. ; Takeda T. ; Klimov D. K. 
Mapping
Conformational Ensembles
of Aβ Oligomers in Molecular Dynamics Simulations . Biophys. J. 
2010 , 99 , 1949 –1958 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2010.07.008 .20858441 
Boehr D. D. ; Nussinov R. ; Wright P. E. 
The role
of dynamic conformational
ensembles in biomolecular recognition . Nat.
Chem. Biol. 
2009 , 5 , 789 –796 . 10.1038/nchembio.232 .19841628 
Carlson H. A. 
Protein
flexibility and drug design: how to hit a moving target . Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 
2002 , 6 , 447 –452 . 10.1016/S1367-5931(02)00341-1 .12133719 
Tran L. ; Basdevant N. ; Prévost C. ; Ha-Duong T. 
Structure of ring-shaped
Aβ42 oligomers determined by conformational selection . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 2142910.1038/srep21429 .26868929 
Pierce B. G. ; Wiehe K. ; Hwang H. ; Kim B.-H. ; Vreven T. ; Weng Z. 
ZDOCK server: interactive
docking prediction of protein-protein complexes
and symmetric multimers . Bioinformatics 
2014 , 30 , 1771 –1773 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu097 .24532726 
Pierce B. G. ; Hourai Y. ; Weng Z. 
Accelerating
Protein Docking in ZDOCK
Using an Advanced 3D Convolution Library . PLoS
One 
2011 , 6 , e2465710.1371/journal.pone.0024657 .21949741 
Tycko R. 
Molecular
Structure of Aggregated Amyloid-β: Insights from Solid-State
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance . Cold Spring Harbor
Perspect. Med. 
2016 , 6 , a02408310.1101/cshperspect.a024083 .
Silverman J. ; Gibbs E. ; Rezaei H. ; Grznarova K. ; Guest W. ; Song W. ; Robin Hsiung G.-Y. ; Deslys J.-P. ; Roucou X. ; Wellington C. ; et al. An immunological epitope specific for toxic oligomeric Aβ in
Alzheimer’s disease . Alzheimer’s
Dementia 
2012 , 8 , P625 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.05.1666 .
Silverman J. M. ; Gibbs E. ; Balducci C. ; Cowan C. ; Lamour G. ; Forloni G. ; Robin Hsiung G.-Y. ; Saward L. ; Wellington C. ; Cashman N. R. 
An amyloid-beta
oligomer epitope specific for toxic
assemblages in Alzheimer’s disease . Alzheimer’s
Dementia 
2015 , 11 , P136 –P137 . 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.07.054 .
Zhou R. 
Free energy
landscape of protein folding in water: Explicit vs. implicit solvent . Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
2003 , 53 , 148 –161 . 10.1002/prot.10483 .
Maffucci I. ; Contini A. 
An Updated Test of AMBER Force Fields and Implicit
Solvent Models in Predicting the Secondary Structure of Helical, β-Hairpin,
and Intrinsically Disordered Peptides . J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 
2016 , 12 , 714 –727 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b01211 .26784558 
Tran L. ; Ha-Duong T. 
Exploring the Alzheimer
amyloid-β peptide conformational
ensemble: A review of molecular dynamics approaches . Peptides 
2015 , 69 , 86 –91 . 10.1016/j.peptides.2015.04.009 .25908410 
Yang M. ; Teplow D. B. 
Amyloid β-Protein
Monomer Folding: Free-Energy
Surfaces Reveal Alloform-Specific Differences . J. Mol. Biol. 
2008 , 384 , 450 –464 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.09.039 .18835397 
Kleinjung J. ; Fraternali F. 
Design and
Application of implicit solvent models in
biomolecular simulations . Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol. 
2014 , 25 , 126 –134 . Theory and Simulation/Macromolecular Machines 10.1016/j.sbi.2014.04.003 .24841242 
Chopra G. ; Summa C. M. ; Levitt M. 
Solvent dramatically
affects protein
structure refinement . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
2008 , 105 , 20239 –20244 . 10.1073/pnas.0810818105 .19073921 
Rokach L. ; Maimon O.   In Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery Handbook ; Maimon O. , Rokach L.  , Eds.; Springer , 2005 ; pp 321 –352 .
Case D. A. ; Babin V. ; Berryman J. ; Betz R. M. ; Cai Q. ; Cerutti D. S. ; Cheatham T. E. III; Darden T. A. ; Duke R. ; Gohlke H.  ; AMBER 14 ; University of California : San Francisco , 2014 ,
Olsson M. H. M. ; Søndergaard C. R. ; Rostkowski M. ; Jensen J. H. 
PROPKA3: Consistent Treatment of
Internal and Surface
Residues in Empirical pKa Predictions . J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 
2011 , 7 , 525 –537 . 10.1021/ct100578z .26596171 
Li H. ; Robertson A. D. ; Jensen J. H. 
Very fast empirical prediction and
rationalization of protein pKa values . Proteins:
Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
2005 , 61 , 704 –721 . 10.1002/prot.20660 .
Bas D. C. ; Rogers D. M. ; Jensen J. H. 
Very fast
prediction and rationalization
of pKa values for protein-ligand complexes . Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
2008 , 73 , 765 –783 . 10.1002/prot.22102 .
Patriksson A. ; van der Spoel D. 
A temperature predictor for parallel tempering simulations . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2008 , 10 , 2073 –2077 . 10.1039/b716554d .18688361 
Case D. A. ; Darden T. A. ; Cheatham T. E. I; Simmerling C. L. ; Wang J. ; Duke R. E. ; Luo R. ; Walker R. ; Zhang W. ; Merz K.
M.  ; AMBER 12 ; University of California : San Francisco , 2012 .
Hornak V. ; Abel R. ; Okur A. ; Strockbine B. ; Roitberg A. ; Simmerling C. 
Comparison of multiple Amber force
fields and development of improved protein backbone parameters . Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
2006 , 65 , 712 –725 . 10.1002/prot.21123 .
Maier J. A. ; Martinez C. ; Kasavajhala K. ; Wickstrom L. ; Hauser K. E. ; Simmerling C. 
ff14SB: Improving the Accuracy of
Protein Side Chain and Backbone Parameters from ff99SB . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2015 , 11 , 3696 –3713 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00255 .26574453 
Onufriev A. ; Bashford D. ; Case D. A. 
Exploring protein native states and
large-scale conformational changes with a modified generalized born
model . Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
2004 , 55 , 383 –394 . 10.1002/prot.20033 .
Ryckaert J.-P. ; Ciccotti G. ; Berendsen H. J. 
Numerical integration of the Cartesian
equations of motion of a system with constraints: molecular dynamics
of n-alkanes . J. Comput. Phys. 
1977 , 23 , 327 –341 . 10.1016/0021-9991(77)90098-5 .
Neidigh J. W. ; Fesinmeyer R. M. ; Andersen N. H. 
Designing a 20-residue
protein . Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
2002 , 9 , 425 –430 . 10.1038/nsb798 .
Rauscher S. ; Gapsys V. ; Gajda M. J. ; Zweckstetter M. ; de Groot B. L. ; Grubmüller H. 
Structural Ensembles of Intrinsically
Disordered Proteins Depend Strongly on Force Field: A Comparison to
Experiment . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2015 , 11 , 5513 –5524 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00736 .26574339 
Vuister G. W. ; Bax A. 
Quantitative J correlation: a new
approach for measuring homonuclear
three-bond J(HNHα) coupling
constants in 15N-enriched proteins . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1993 , 115 , 7772 –7777 . 10.1021/ja00070a024 .
Karplus M. 
Vicinal Proton
Coupling in Nuclear Magnetic Resonance . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
1963 , 85 , 2870 –2871 . 10.1021/ja00901a059 .
Karplus M. 
Contact Electron-Spin
Coupling of Nuclear Magnetic Moments . J. Chem.
Phys. 
1959 , 30 , 11 –15 . 10.1063/1.1729860 .
Karplus M. ; Anderson D. H. 
Valence-Bond Interpretation
of Electron-Coupled Nuclear
Spin Interactions; Application to Methane . J.
Chem. Phys. 
1959 , 30 , 6 –10 . 10.1063/1.1729943 .
Kabsch W. ; Sander C. 
Dictionary of protein
secondary structure: Pattern
recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical features . Biopolymers 
1983 , 22 , 2577 –2637 . 10.1002/bip.360221211 .6667333 
Chen R. ; Weng Z. 
Docking unbound proteins
using shape complementarity, desolvation,
and electrostatics . Proteins: Struct., Funct.,
Bioinf. 
2002 , 47 , 281 –294 . 10.1002/prot.10092 .
Mintseris J. ; Pierce B. ; Wiehe K. ; Anderson R. ; Chen R. ; Weng Z. 
Integrating statistical
pair potentials into protein complex prediction . Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
2007 , 69 , 511 –520 . 10.1002/prot.21502 .

