
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145880510.1021/acsomega.8b01039ArticleChemically Enhanced Polymer-Coated Carbon Nanotube
Electronic Gas Sensor for Isopropyl Alcohol Detection Ngo Yen H. †‡Brothers Michael †‡Martin Jennifer A. †Grigsby Claude C. †Fullerton Kathy †Naik Rajesh R. †Kim Steve S. *†† 711th
Human Performance Wing, Air Force Research
Laboratory, Wright-Patterson
AFB, Ohio 45433, United States‡ UES
Inc., Beavercreek, Ohio 45432, United
States* E-mail: steve.kim.13@us.af.mil.11 06 2018 30 06 2018 3 6 6230 6236 21 05 2018 31 05 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Breathing-air quality within commercial airline cabins has come
under increased scrutiny because of the identification of volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) from the engine bleed air used to provide
oxygen to cabins. Ideally, a sensor would be placed within the bleed
air pipe itself, enabling detection before it permeated through and
contaminated the entire cabin. Current gas-phase sensors suffer from
issues with selectivity, do not have the appropriate form factor,
or are too complex for commercial deployment. Here, we chose isopropyl
alcohol (IPA), a main component of de-icer spray used in the aerospace
community, as a target analyte: IPA exposure has been hypothesized
to be a key component of aerotoxic syndrome in pre, during, and postflight.
IPAs proposed mechanism of action is that of an anesthetic and central
nervous system depressant. In this work, we describe IPA sensor development
by showing (1) the integration of a polymer as an IPA capture matrix,
(2) the adoption of a redox chemical additives as an IPA oxidizer,
and (3) the application of carbon nanotubes as an electronic sensing
conduit. We demonstrate the ability to not only detect IPA at 100–10 000
ppm in unfiltered, laboratory air but also discriminate among IPA,
isoprene, and acetone, especially in comparison to a typical photoionization
detector. Overall, we show an electronic device that operates at room
temperature and responds preferentially to IPA, where the increase
in the resistance corresponds directly to the concentration of IPA.
Ultimately, this study opens up the pathway to selective electronic
sensors that can enable real-time monitoring in a variety of environments
for the force health prevention and protection, and the potential
through future work to enable low parts-per-million and possibly high
parts-per-billion selective detection of gas-phase VOCs of interest.

document-id-old-9ao8b01039document-id-new-14ao-2018-01039wccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The degree of exposure to the volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
gases, and airborne particles for a human subject can significantly
vary from others because of his/her differences in work, recreational,
and residential settings. Breathing-air quality within commercial
airline cabins has come under increased scrutiny because of the identification
of VOC contaminants from the engine bleed air used to provide oxygen
to cabins. Ideally, a sensor would be placed within the bleed air
pipe itself, enabling detection before it permeated through and contaminated
the entire cabin.

We chose isopropyl alcohol (IPA), a main component of de-icer spray
used in the aerospace community, as a target analyte that has to be
selectively detected; IPA exposure has been hypothesized to contaminate
breathing air and to be a key component of aerotoxic syndrome pre,
during, and postflight.1 Moreover, IPA
has been shown to act as an anesthetic and central nervous system
depressant, resulting in symptoms that can deter the cognitive ability
of the individual.2 Thus, it is imperative
to be able to monitor IPA content and accumulative exposure level.

Commercial alcohol sensors do not fit the requirement for selective
IPA sensing.3 More explicitly, competing
technologies, primarily semiconductor platforms, infrared (IR) detectors,
and photoionization detectors (PIDs) lack any recognition element
specific for IPA. Photoionization detectors rely on the ionization
of hydrocarbons but provide no selectivity or specificity for any
functional groups. Semiconductor- and/or absorbance-based sensors
use a heating element in conjunction with a metal oxide with preferential
binding to specific chemical classes and lack the ability of selectively
discriminating IPA from the ambience. Finally, most miniaturized IR
systems only provide feedback at one wavelength, being vulnerable
to the interferences from the gas compounds with similar absorption
peaks. Even when obtaining true Fourier-transform infrared spectra,
the ability of selectively identifying a compound of interest among
a complex mixture is near impossible because of the overlap in the
chemical structure of many volatile compounds, including water.

In addition to their lack of specificity, these gas sensors often
have one or more of the following negative characteristics: (1) they
are bulky, (2) they suffer from sensor drift, (3) they are chemically
unstable, (4) they require optical/electrical components (cost/size),
and/or (5) they have a slow response time.4 Thus, it is necessary to develop a noiseless, low-power, and selective
IPA-sensing platform for wearable or attachable personal air-quality
monitors.

The unique electrical, chemical, structural, and mechanical properties
of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) make them ideal candidates for chemical
sensors.5,6 The single-atom thin cylindrical semiconductor/semimetal/metal
CNTs change their resistance as a function of ion concentration, doping
level, and solvent conditions with unmatched sensitivity compared
to those of the most bare metal-oxide or inorganic semiconductors,
offering ultimate sensitivity as nanoelectronic sensors.7 CNTs often serve as p-type semiconductors in
ambience, and thus their resistance should change as a function of
ionic content and/or redox ambience. The chemical oxidation of alcohol
is a way of converting alcohol absorption to electron/proton products
that changes the CNT electronic density of states, enabling a measurable
sensing signal.8 Previous work has identified
ultrathin, polymeric coatings covalently bound to carbon nanotubes
as a way to disperse them and enable easy assembly of networks; however,
thicker layers have been demonstrated to serve as recognition elements
on the basis of the polarity of the compound.9

Lee et al. demonstrated IPA absorption into the poly(vinylpyrrolidone)
(PVP)-coating matrix, followed by subsequent absorption into the base
layer solvatochromic sensor. The solvatochromic 10,12-tricosadynoic
acid/polydiacetylene copolymer was selective for alcohols, making
this particular solvent-gated solvatochromic sensor highly selective
to IPA.

The above solvatochromic assays have only been demonstrated for
liquid-phase IPA, which require optics that are difficult for integration
and may have long regeneration times or be irreversible.10 Therefore, using PVP polymers as surface modifications
to single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) has a potential to improve
sensing performance to IPA as a suitable molecular recognition element.11 Moreover, other work demonstrated that the PVP–SWCNT
interaction was proven to form molecular level interactions that could
produce an individually dispersed carbon nanotube solution, in which
the nanotubes overcame their immense inter-tube cohesive (bundling)
energy.9 Therefore, we were motivated to
look into an electronic field-effect transistor (FET)-sensor based
off of this methodology, where upon the concentration of gas-phase
IPA can thus be correlated directly to the transconductance of the
carbon nanotubes embedded within the PVP matrix, resulting in a shift
in the source–drain voltage operating at constant drain current
mode.

In addition to using PVP polymer as a SWCNT dispersant and recognition
elements,10 we further looked into improving
the IPA sensor response by incorporating a doped matrix to trigger
a chemical reaction originally used in breathalyzers and measured
the reaction progression using a field-effect transistor (FET) (Figure S1). By coupling these elements together,
we have formulated a platform that results in a change in electrical
output corresponding to a specific analyte concentration. In summary,
in this work, we describe an IPA sensor development process that we
believe can be applied to a wide range of analytes. Figure 1a shows the sensor development
process that consists of (1) forming carbon nanotube FETs, where the
source–drain voltage necessary to maintain a constant current
changes as a function of ion content/concentration, (2) applying a
polymer matrix that serves as an analyte capture matrix,10 and (3) adding oxidizing agents that react with
isopropanol.12 Through this process, we
analyzed and modified various components to improve the quality of
the sensor, including how best to fabricate the carbon nanotubes as
well as apply the solvent-selective coatings. As a result, we formulated
an electronic device that responds preferentially to IPA, where the
increase in the resistance corresponds directly to the concentration
of IPA. We demonstrated the detection of IPA using the sensor in unadulterated,
ambient laboratory air in ranges relevant to Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) limits. Later, we provide an insight
into future work to enable lowering the limit of detection from 100
to 1 ppm and potentially parts-per-billion levels of IPA. Each component
was carefully selected to optimize sensor performance as described
below.

Figure 1 (a) Scheme showing IPA sensor fabrication process based on dielectrophoresis
(DEP)-SWCNT device using PVP polymer matrix and chromic acid (CA)-based
chemical enhancement. (b) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) topography
image showing the bare interdigitated electrode (IDE) and DEP-SWCNT
assembled on the IDE.

Results
and Discussion
SWCNT
Channels Generated by Dielectrophoresis
The carbon nanotubes
employed in our device are the main sensing modality, as carbon nanotubes
are known to have changes in resistance as a function of surface charge
density.12 Therefore, coming up with a
consistent methodology for generating SWCNT matrices between our IDEs
is imperative for sensor performance. We used DEP because of the ability
to tune the deposition of SWCNTs among electrodes as a function of
the applied voltage and frequency. We found that an alternating current
(AC) voltage of 6 Vp–p at 10 MHz
frequency applied for 1 min to the electrode pair in a probe station
yielded repeatable 1.5 ± 0.88 kΩ resistance SWCNTFET at
0 Vg. The 1.5 ± 0.88 kΩ DEP-SWCNT
assembly was used for further experiments in formulating and testing
IPA sensors. The AFM images obtained from bare IDE and DEP-SWCNT IDE,
shown in Figure 1b,
confirmed that the DEP effectively assembled carbon nanotubes onto
the 10 μm gap gold electrodes.

Polymer
Coating on DEP-SWCNTFET
Solvent semiselective polymer films
have been demonstrated in the liquid phase to act as a diffusion barrier
for solvatochromic solvent sensors. Both the poly(acrylic acid) and
PVP coatings served as a solvent-selective gate, whereupon only solvents
with the correct polarity would reach the colorimetric reagent, as
described in the Introduction section.10 To simplify the fabrication, as well as to likely
enhance response times, we attempted to optimize the polymer composition
by adding co-polymers and determining the ideal coating thickness
to maximize the sensitivity and reproducibility of the sensors. We
believed that not only film composition but also film thickness will
impact sensor performance. Therefore, device sensitivity is greatly
affected by film preparation techniques.17 When exposed to a VOC, the vapor penetrates into the polymer layer
and causes the film to expand; absorption of the solvent of interest
by itself oftentimes changes charge density and therefore influences
the electrical resistance of the device.18 As the solvent must be in close proximity to the single-walled nanotube
(SWNT) to generate a sensor response, a thicker polymer film may impose
a larger diffusion barrier, reducing sensitivity and providing a time-lag
in sensing a response. Meanwhile, a thinner film may exhibit pin-hole
and provide problems with reproducibility, and possibly selectivity/sensitivity
if the entire CNT is not coated and/or coated evenly. Therefore, film
homogeneity and film thickness need to be controlled to produce conductive
polymer films.19 To test the impact of
film thickness and composition, we deposited various films using both
dip coating and tested how the composition of the polymer, as well
as the film thickness impacted deposition properties, and eventually
sensor performance. As indicated in Supporting Information (SI) Table S2, 0.25 and 0.55 wt % poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-vinyl-acetate) dip-coated samples resulted in film thickness
of 35 and 53 nm, respectively. Dip coating with 0.08 wt % poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-2-dimethylaminoethyl-methacrylate) resulted in a film
thickness of 15 nm and 0.152 wt % with 20 nm (Figure 2). Because of the viscosity of poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-styrene), the majority of the film thickness was 75 nm
or higher regardless of the weight percentage concentration used.
Of the polymers previously mentioned, PVP (40k MW) provided the thinnest
uniform coating (15 nm at 0.2 wt % concentration). As expected, higher
PVP concentrations resulted in higher film thickness. On the basis
of these, using PVP in the dip-coating technique emerged as the method
of choice for producing better film results and sensor responses (Figure 2).

Figure 2 Dip-coated PVP film thickness profile as a function of the polymer
weight percentage in water.

To verify that coating did not break the electrical connection
or harm the SWCNTs, we tested the IDEs pre/post polymer coating. The
aligned PVP–SWCNT combination displayed consistent device conductivity
following coating using PVP (MW = 40 000) and the subsequent
CA treatment process (Figure 3). This implies that the device operates as a general resistor
mode, enabling its use in a sensor to detect changes in the ion composition.

Figure 3 Representative drain current vs drain–source voltage gram
at Vg = 0 V for bare IDE, DEP-deposited
SWCNTFET, and the DEP-SWCNTFET exposed to CA.

Polymer-Coated
SWCNTFET with CA Dopant
Selectivity based solely on polymer
absorption of solvent is limited because many solvents have similar
dielectric constants and/or polarities, that is, one polymer can absorb
many solvents. We sought to introduce selectivity using a dopant that
can react with the isopropanol, which would result in creating a change
in the ionic environment. On the basis of the known breathalyzer chemistry,20 we decided to dope PVP with a CA mixture containing
1 M sulfuric acid. Oxidizers prepared from the CA chemistry have been
studied extensively and most commonly used for the detection of the
reducing agents.21 The putative reaction
for IPA is as follows  Using CA as the dopants,
the hydroxyl functional groups are oxidized first to aldehydes and
then sometimes to carboxylic acids in the presence of potassium dichromate,
sulfuric acid, and silver nitrate catalyst.20 In the case of IPA, which is a secondary alcohol, the reaction can
only progress to the ketone, resulting in the generation of acetone,
water, and chromium sulfate. The net result is a modification of the
ion concentration (reduction in sulfuric acid content), modification
of the ion content, and change in the solvent composition that can
possibly be exploited for measurement. In this article, it is presumed
that the IPA molecule absorbs into the PVP, reacts with the immobilized
dichromate and sulfuric acid, and causes a decrease in the concentration
of protons. The decrease in protons immobilized within the PVP matrix,
in theory, should result in an increase in the resistance for the
p-doped SWCNT.12 As predicted, we have
observed upon the exposure of our sensor to IPA, a decrease of nearby
protons as indicated by resistance increase of IPA sensor responses.

IPA Sensor
Testing
After device fabrication, the IPA sensor as well
as the commercial PID was placed in a static high concentration chamber
for their parallel testing of VOC exposure at the various injections
points of 100, 1000, and 10 000 ppm for IPA, acetone, and isoprene,
respectively. We chose 100–10 000 ppm as the range of
interest because of Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) permissible exposure limit for IPA being 400 ppm. Prior to
the VOC testing, sensors were equilibrated for 10 min or until the
drift in applied voltage was less than 0.01 V/min. The source–drain
voltage was then collected in real time with 1 s intervals and used
as the sensor response data.22

Poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-2-dimethylaminoethyl-methacrylate), poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-vinyl-acetate), and poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-styrene) did not give noticeable responses to the IPA vapors regardless
of the concentration (Figures S3–S5). Even with poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-2-dimethylaminoethyl-methacrylate)
being the thinnest film (approximately 15 nm), there is no signal
response detected upon exposure to IPA. Both poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-vinyl-acetate) and poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-styrene) displayed identical no response behavior. Meanwhile, it
was determined that PVP was the better candidate vs its copolymer
counterparts in responding to IPA. A nearly instantaneous response
was observed from the PVP-coated SWCNTFET at gate voltage of 0 V just
after adding the IPA into the chamber. Therefore, we proceeded with
all further tests only using the optimized PVP coating.

To test the impact of CA on IPA sensing, we compared the DEP-SWCNTFET
sensors in the presence and the absence of the chromic acid dopants.
A commercial PID was used as a control in both experiments. A less
than 5% change in resistance was observed in the absence of CA even
at 10 000 ppm IPA (Figure 4a). However, upon addition of CA dopants, a greater
than 100% change in resistance was observed at the highest concentrations
of IPA (Figure 4b),
supporting the CA chemical reaction as the key mechanism for achieving
a high-sensitivity SWCNT IPA sensor, which when combined with the
semiselective polymeric PVP coating, confers both enhanced selectivity
and reasonable sensitivity compared to that of the traditional SWCNT
sensors. Subsequent repeated additions of 100 ppm IPA into the chamber
after a 10 000 ppm IPA test and a complete purge exhibited
similar sized responses to the first 100 ppm additions. Although the
putative CA oxidation is irreversible, this repetitive sensor response
indicates the sensor works in a reversible fashion. One proposed mechanism
is as follows: (1) PVP is diffusion-limiting the IPA to the embedded
CA reaction sites; (2) SWNTFET sensor (gate voltage = 0) responds
to the IPA oxidation to the highest extreme; (3) diffusion replenishes
the CA at sites close to the SWCNT. Overall, these provide a potential
tool to enhance the sensor lifetime and accuracy by systematically
investigating the target VOC diffusion mechanism and redox reagent chemistry.

Figure 4 Drain–source resistance changes from the PVP-coated SWCNTFET
sensors exposed to IPA vapor, showing the effect of CA treatment.
The PVP-coated SWCNTFET IPA sensor displayed a greater signal response
change upon the application of CA as compared to the pre-CA treatment.

Sensor
Performance Comparison with a Commercial PID
Using the key
parameters identified to generate an IPA sensor on a hard glass IDE
substrate, we preceded to triplicate-test the protocol to a commercial
PID. The PID was used off the shelf according to instructions. CA-treated
SWCNTFET showed a higher response to IPA compared with that of the
other VOCs (acetone and isoprene), and outperformed the PID with regards
to selectivity in all trials (Figure 5a,b). It is obvious that PIDs use only the absorption
of UV light to generate ions that can be detected, which is inherently
selective only toward aromatic or conjugated moieties that would absorb
UV light. The sensor response time it requires to reach saturation
for IPA was less than 2 min for 100 ppm concentration and less than
3 min for 1000 ppm.

Figure 5 a) CA–PVP–SWCNTFET and (b) commercial PID sensor
responses at various chemical concentration point injections. CA–PVP–SWCNTFET
shows higher responses to IPA as compared to the equivalent concentrations
of acetone and isoprene gases. Commercial PID displays no specificity
to IPA.

Conclusions
Recent work demonstrating a colorimetric output upon solvent binding10 provided a novel proof of the principle assay;
however, colorimetric techniques are difficult for quantitation and/or
real-time detection because of the need to integrate an optical sensor
and the difficulty in regeneration due to the irreversibility.

Electronic/electrochemical techniques have the promise for real-time
data because resistance can be measured continuously and translated
by a program to provide real-time alerts of solvent contamination.
Here, we examined how polymer composition and coating, SWCNT deposition,
and CA chemical additives impact the performance of a sensor designed
to be selective for IPA.

More specifically, we explore (1) fabricating carbon nanotube-based
electronic sensor in a polymer matrix deposited via spin-coating and/or
the dipping process, (2) enhancing the sensor selectivity to IPA using
PVP, a polymer that has been previously used as an IPA-selective solvatochromic
sensor, and (3) amplifying the sensor response signal to IPA target
by integrating a redox chemical agent. We demonstrated that proper
control of the surface chemistry and the SWCNTs are highly important
for semiconducting CNT-based sensors.

In summary, the development of a novel sensor platform, coupling
polymeric solvatoselective capture elements coating for IPA into a
carbon nanotube electronic sensor, has been demonstrated. We have
successfully constructed a sensor on the basis of the protocol described
above and determined that drastically improved sensor performance
while distinguishing IPA from other VOCs. We have established the
basic foundation to further develop a sensor that is specific to IPA
detection. The results showed improved signal responses demonstrating
that the device is selective enough to detect IPA, exceeding the level
of performance from a commercial PID. Although much progress has been
done to display selective responses to high-parts-per-million-level
IPA, there are still challenges that need to be addressed being precise
control of CA concentration, increasing signal-to-noise ratio, miniaturization
of sensor, multiplexing data acquisition, and more detailed chemical
vapor chamber work. Future research needs to be done to optimize the
chemistry and the device geometry to further improve the limit of
detection to the low parts-per-million/parts-per-billion level. Additional
studies will also look toward additional polymeric gating that should
provide enhanced selectivity at the potential expense of time resolution
and/or sensitivity. Finally, in the future, this approach can also
be applied to other gaseous compounds of interest using orthogonal
chemistries for the specific detection of VOCs or classes of VOCs.
Regardless, this proof of principle demonstration opens up the pathway
to sensitive and selective electronic sensors that can enable real-time
monitoring in a variety of environments.

Experimental
Methods
Interdigitated
Electrode (IDE) Preparation
IDEs with 10 μm gap, 20
μm width on 28 × 5 mm glass supported with 150 nm Au layer
were purchased from NanoSPR (Chicago, IL), and used as the base electronic
structure. The devices were soldered onto the surfboard mounts with
silver rosin and electrical contacts were made. Assembly of nanotubes
was performed via dielectrophoresis following the process described
below.

SWCNTFET
Preparation
The SWCNT (Southwest Nanotechnologies, Norman,
OK) purchased were special grade 90% purity with 0.83 nm mean diameter.
SWCNTs were ultrasonicated into a water-based suspending medium of
PVP or PVP–copolymer solution at 2 wt % concentration. Prior
to depositing the SWCNT, the solution was carefully left out to let
large CNT bundles settle to the bottom before use. The sensor was
then placed in a probe station, and the electrical contact was made
through the Au electrodes. Using the top layer of the PVP–SWCNT
suspension, 5 μL was pipetted and the droplet was placed over
the area of interest. Because of the nature of the process being solution
based, the solution should be aligned across the gap between the pair
of electrodes.13 AC electrophoresis retains
CNT bundles in the electron gap thus enabling them to serve as good
candidates for gas-sensing elements14 using
dielectrophoretic forces to propagate the CNT along the electric field
lines onto the electrodes.15 Various voltages
and frequencies were used to test the conductivity of the DEP process.
Parameters with either 1 or 10 peak-to-peak voltages (Vp–p) did not result in conductive current vs voltage
measurements (SI Table S1 and Figure S2). We concluded that optimal conditions were 60 s deposition time
at a frequency of 10 MHz with a Vp–p of 6 V. After the DEP step, the substrates were rinsed with distilled
water and then dried with house air. Reproducibility of the CNT arrangements
is determined by the electrode dimensions and deposition conditions.16

Polymer
Coating to SWCNTFET
Commercial grade polymer coatings such
as poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP), poly(vinyl alcohol), poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-styrene), poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-vinyl-acetate), and poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-2-dimethylaminoethyl-methacrylate)
were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Dip coating
was used to cast a polymer film onto the SWCNT device. The dip coating
comprised of hand dipping the sensor into the polymer solution for
10 min followed by drying inside a heated vacuum chamber (<60 °C)
for 5 min. The thickness of the polymer coatings was then characterized
using Bioscope II (Bruker, Billerica, Massachusetts) atomic force
microscopy (AFM).

Chromic
Acid Treatment of Polymer-Coated SWCNTFET
After the polymer-coating
process, water-based chromic acid (CA) solution was added to the polymer
coating to enhance device sensitivity. The CA was prepared by making
an aqueous solution containing potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7) in distilled water with 1 M sulfuric
acid (H2SO4). The PVP-coated CNT devices were
then placed in the solutions for 1 min and allowed to dry via air.

SWCNTFET
Sensor Testing
These sensors were mounted onto a breadboard
inside of the custom built chamber (17.43L) and electrically connected
to a Keithley (4200SCS, Tektronix, Inc, OR) semiconductor analyzer
instrument. The chamber contained a gas inlet/outlet along with a
hole for sample injection. The sensors were placed inside of the chamber
filled with ambient house air. Acetone, IPA, and isoprene were injected
with a syringe, and the air circulated in the static chamber at differing
concentrations ranges 100, 1000, and 10 000 ppm. Source–drain
voltage changes were measured in real time with constant source–drain
current and gate voltage of 1 μA and 0 V, respectively. In addition,
linear baseline adjustments were applied for each collected data set
based on measuring the linear source–drain voltage drift in
the sensor’s equilibrated state. A blank reference SWCNTFET
sensor coated with poly(vinyl alcohol) was used to subtract the variation
of the background the PVP-coated CNT IPA sensor signal.

Commercial
Sensor Testing
The SWCNTFET IPA sensors were simultaneously
tested with a commercial off the shelf piD-TECH plus photoionization
detector (PID, MOCON Inc., Brooklyn Park, MN). PIDs are general-use
detectors that, in summary, rely on the ionization of the sample by
UV light to ionize the sample, increasing the electron flow across
the detector when subject to an electric field. Using a manufacturer-provided
table that accounts for the degree of ionization, the PID output was
calibrated using the gas samples from a standard 100 ppm IPA gas cylinder.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b01039.SWCNTFET DEP parameters; PVP film thickness; DEP-assembled
SWCNTFET drain current vs gate voltage; drain current vs drain–source
voltage characteristics from DEP SWNTFET; SWCNT sensor exposed to
IPA, acetone, and isoprene for PVP-DAM copolymer, PVP-VA copolymer,
and PVP-S copolymer coating; raw data from SWCNTFET IPA sensor devices
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b01039_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The funding from the Defense Health Program is greatly acknowledged.
The authors thank Capt Suarez, C. for helping early stage IPA-sensing
demonstration using printed SWCNT electrodes.
==== Refs
References
Linakis M. W. ; Job K. M. ; Liu X. ; Collingwood S. C. ; Pangburn H. A. ; Ott D. K. ; Sherwin C. M. T. 
Riding (High)
into the Danger Zone: A Review of Potential Differences in Chemical
Exposures in Fighter Pilots Resulting from High Altitude and G-Forces . Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol. 
2017 , 13 , 925 –934 . 10.1080/17425255.2017.1360867 .28772091 
Center for Disease control
and Prevention  . Isopropyl Alcohol. https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/npgd0359.html (accessed Oct 8, 2017 ).
Liu X. ; Cheng S. ; Liu H. ; Hu S. ; Zhang D. ; Ning H. 
A Survey on Gas Sensing Technology . Sensors 
2012 , 12 , 9635 –9665 . 10.3390/s120709635 .23012563 
Patel S. V. ; Mlsna T. E. ; Fruhberger B. ; Klaassen E. ; Cemalovic S. ; Baselt D. R. 
Chemicapacitive Microsensors for Volatile Organic Compound
Detection . Sens. Actuators, B 
2003 , 96 , 541 –553 . 10.1016/S0925-4005(03)00637-3 .
Wang J. 
Carbon-Nanotube
Based Electrochemical Biosensors: A Review . Electroanalysis 
2005 , 17 , 7 –14 . 10.1002/elan.200403113 .
Fennell J. ; Hamaguchi H. ; Yoon B. ; Swager T. 
Chemiresistor Devices
for Chemical Warfare Agent Detection Based on Polymer Wrapped Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes . Sensors 
2017 , 17 , 982 10.3390/s17050982 .
Liu Y. ; Dong X. ; Chen P. 
Biological and Chemical Sensors Based
on Graphene Materials . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 2283 10.1039/C1CS15270J .22143223 
Li J. ; Lu Y. ; Ye Q. ; Cinke M. ; Han J. ; Meyyappan M. 
Carbon Nanotube
Sensors for Gas and Organic Vapor Detection . Nano Lett. 
2003 , 3 , 929 –933 . 10.1021/nl034220x .
Yoon B. ; Liu S. F. ; Swager T. M. 
Surface-Anchored Poly(4-Vinylpyridine)-Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotube-Metal Composites for Gas Detection . Chem. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 5916 –5924 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b02453 .
Lee J. ; Chang H. T. ; An H. ; Ahn S. ; Shim J. ; Kim J. M. 
A Protective Layer Approach to Solvatochromic Sensors . Nat. Commun. 
2013 , 4 , 246110.1038/ncomms3461 .24025981 
Sarkar T. ; Srinives S. ; Sarkar S. ; Haddon R. C. ; Mulchandani A. 
Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotube-Poly(porphyrin) Hybrid for Volatile Organic Compounds
Detection . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 1602 –1610 . 10.1021/jp409851m .
Bushmaker A. W. ; Oklejas V. ; Walker D. ; Hopkins A. R. ; Chen J. ; Cronin S. B. 
Single-Ion Adsorption and Switching in Carbon Nanotubes . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 1047510.1038/ncomms10475 .26805462 
Banerjee S. ; White B. E. ; Huang L. ; Rego B. J. ; O’Brien S. ; Herman I. P. 
Precise Positioning of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
by AC Dielectrophoresis . J. Vac. Sci. Technol.,
B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct. 
2006 , 24 , 3173 10.1116/1.2387155 .
Suehiro J. ; Zhou G. ; Hara M. 
Fabrication of a Carbon Nanotube-Based
Gas Sensor Using Dielectrophoresis and Its Application for Ammonia
Detection by Impedance Spectroscopy . J. Phys.
D: Appl. Phys. 
2003 , 36 , L109 10.1088/0022-3727/36/21/L01 .
Xue W. ; Li P.  Dielectrophoretic Deposition
and Alignment of Carbon Nanotubes . In Carbon
Nanotubes—Synthesis, Characterization, Applications ; Yellampalli S.  , Ed.; InTech : Vancouver , 2011 ; pp 171 –190 .
Monica A. H. ; Papadakis S. J. ; Osiander R. ; Paranjape M. 
Wafer-Level
Assembly of Carbon Nanotube Networks Using Dielectrophoresis . Nanotechnology 
2008 , 19 , 08530310.1088/0957-4484/19/8/085303 .21730724 
Li B. ; Sauvé G. ; Iovu M. C. ; Jeffries-El M. ; Zhang R. ; Cooper J. ; Santhanam S. ; Schultz L. ; Revelli J. C. ; Kusne A. G. ; et al. Volatile
Organic Compound Detection Using Nanostructured Copolymers . Nano Lett. 
2006 , 6 , 1598 –1602 . 10.1021/nl060498o .16895342 
Arshak K. ; Moore E. ; Lyons G. M. ; Harris J. ; Clifford S. 
A Review of
Gas Sensors Employed in Electronic Nose Applications . Sens. Rev. 
2004 , 24 , 181 –198 . 10.1108/02602280410525977 .
Moradi M. A. ; Larrakoetxea Angoitia K. ; Van Berkel S. ; Gnanasekaran K. ; Friedrich H. ; Heuts J. P. A. ; Van
Der Schoot P. ; Van Herk A. M. 
Bimodal Latex Effect on Spin-Coated
Thin Conductive Polymer-Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Layers . Langmuir 
2015 , 31 , 11982 –11988 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b02756 .26491888 
Borkenstein R. F.  Method for Rapid Quantitative Analysis of Ethyl Alcohol . US3208827A , 1965 .
Hassan M. ; Al-Hakimi A. ; Alahmadi M. 
Kinetics of Oxidation of Aliphatic
Alcohols by Potassium Dichromate in Aqueous and Micellar Media . South African J. Chem. 
2011 , 64 , 237 –240 .
Hulanicki A. ; Glab S. ; Ingman F. 
Chemical Sensors: Definitions and
Classification . Pure Appl. Chem. 
1991 , 63 , 1247 –1250 . 10.1351/pac199163091247 .

