
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02074ArticleNMR and Computational Studies on the Reactions of
Enamines with Nitroalkenes That May Pass through Cyclobutanes Castro-Alvarez Alejandro Carneros Héctor Calafat Jaume Costa Anna M. *Marco Cristian Vilarrasa Jaume *Organic Chemistry Section,
Facultat de Química, Universitat
de Barcelona, Diagonal 645, 08028 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain* E-mail: amcosta@ub.edu (A.M.C.).* E-mail: jvilarrasa@ub.edu (J.V.).25 10 2019 05 11 2019 4 19 18167 18194 06 07 2019 10 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
addition of aldehyde enamines to nitroalkenes affords cyclobutanes
in all solvents, with all of the pyrrolidine and proline derivatives
tested by us and with all of the substrates we have examined. Depending
on the temperature, concentration of water, solvent polarity, and
other factors, the opening and hydrolysis of such a four-membered
ring may take place rapidly or last for several days, producing the
final Michael-like adducts (4-nitrobutanals). Thirteen new cyclobutanes
have now been characterized by NMR spectroscopy. As could be expected,
s-trans-enamine conformers give rise to all-trans-(4S)-4-nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidines,
while s-cis-enamine conformers afford all-trans-(4R)-4-nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidines.
These four-membered rings can isomerize to adduct enamines, which
should be hydrolyzed via their iminium ions. MP2 and M06-2X calculations
predict that one iminium ion is more stable than the other iminium
species, so that protonation of the adduct enamines can be quite stereoselective;
in the presence of water, the so-called syn adducts (e.g., OCH–*CHR–*CHPh–CH2NO2, with R and Ph syn) eventually become the major
products. Why one syn adduct is obtained with aldehydes, whereas cyclic
ketones (the predicted ring-fused cyclobutanes of which isomerize
to their enamines more easily) produce the other syn adduct, is also
explained by means of molecular orbital calculations. Nitro-Michael
reactions of aldehyde enamines that “stop” at the nitrocyclobutane
stage and final enamine stage do not work catalytically, as known,
but those of cyclic ketone enamines that do not work stop at the final
enamine stage (if their hydrolysis to the corresponding nitroethylketones
is less favorable than expected). These and other facts are accounted
for, and the proposals of the groups led by Seebach and Hayashi, Blackmond,
and Pihko and Papai are reconciled.

document-id-old-9ao9b02074document-id-new-14ao9b02074ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
It is well known that
many aminocatalytic reactions1 do not progress
at all or require several days for completion—we
will call this the first general issue—while others afford
random stereoselectivities, depending strongly on features of the
substrate and catalyst—the second general issue. Long series
of trials are very often carried out to find appropriate catalysts
and conditions. Hundreds of Michael-like reactions, catalyzed by proline,
prolinol, or pyrrolidine derivatives, between enolizable carbonyl
compounds and activated double bonds have thus been reported, mostly
with (E)-PhCH=CHNO2, β-nitrostyrene,
as the acceptor.1 Indeed, the reaction
of cyclohexanone with β-nitrostyrene has become the reference
test for the performance of any new catalyst that is reported, i.e.,
it is the paradigm of the so-called nitro-Michael reaction.

Despite the fact that formation of cyclobutane derivatives from
enamines and electron-withdrawing group (EWG)-substituted alkenes
has been reported since the 1960s (for representative instances see Figure 1),2 most papers seldom mention the role or involvement of cyclobutanes
as intermediates. The more recent works of the groups of Seebach,
Hayashi, Blackmond, Pihko, and Papai are the exception.3 Our eclectic view of their mechanistic proposals,
for a large substituent at pyrrolidine C2, is shown in Figure 2. Whereas Seebach, Hayashi,
and co-workers3a proposed that nitrocyclobutanes
are off-cycle intermediates and may be considered “resting
states” of the catalyst, Burés et al.3c,3f indicated that the stereochemical outcome can be determined by these
“downstream intermediates” (nitrocyclobutanes), which
may either enhance or reduce the selectivity established in the initial
steps. Földes et al.3g concluded
that the stereoselectivity can be controlled at the first step even
though the reaction rates may be dictated by the protonation steps
of the intermediates.

Figure 1 Examples of cyclobutanes resulting from enamines and EWG-activated
double bonds. Brackets indicate that the cyclobutane intermediate
was proposed but not detected.

Figure 2 Main chemical
entities involved in the reactions between aldehydes
and nitroalkenes catalyzed by chiral secondary amines. The substituent
on the pyrrolidine ring is usually CPh2OTMS [the Jørgensen–Hayashi
(JH) catalyst].

The starting enamine is formed
by the reaction of the aldehyde
with a secondary amine (such as the Jørgensen–Hayashi
catalyst, henceforward JH),1 as in Figure 2. The first reaction
intermediate, the hemiaminal (N,O-acetal), which in polar solvents may be in equilibrium with its
ionic counterpart, an iminium hydroxide, is rarely depicted. The enamine
reacts with an (E)-nitroalkene.
Although single arrows are used in much of Figure 2 for the sake of simplicity, we should stress
that most steps if not all are equilibria. Intermediates such as zwitterions zw, cyclobutanes cb (formal 2 + 2-cycloadducts),
dihydrooxazine-N-oxides (2 + 4-cycloadducts, dh),4 and adduct enamines en (that is, the enamines of the final Michael products) have
been proposed or detected.3 Seebach et
al. have characterized up to 17 cyclobutanes of the cb type, all from the JH catalyst or related diphenylprolinols.3d They were even able, for R′ = tBu, to obtain crystals that were good and stable
enough for X-ray analysis. Two of those nitrocyclobutanes, that from
propanal and β-nitrostyrene and that from 2-methylpropanal and
β-nitrostyrene, were studied by NMR by Burés et al.;3e they also examined the conversion of the first
into its (E)-enamine (see en in Figure 2). The equilibrium
between adduct enamines (Z)-en and (E)-en, where these last isomers usually predominate,
is not detailed in Figure 2. Seebach et al. have reported3d up to 12 enamines [(E)-en, JH type].

The relative thermodynamic and/or kinetic stability of these intermediates
may explain the poor conversion percentages or disappointingly low
rates often observed in several catalytic nitro-Michael reactions.
Common sense suggests that, in the last steps of the process, if the
secondary amine is not rapidly released by hydrolysis, the reaction
stops. It may work if stoichiometric amounts of the starting secondary
amine are used but not under catalytic conditions. We will not deal
in depth with the dihydrooxazine-N-oxide intermediates
(dh in Figure 2) for two main reasons: they have been clearly analyzed2g,3d,4 and they only predominate in the
equilibrium mixtures when the nitroalkene is α-substituted and/or
in very polar solvents. Here, we will focus our attention on nitrocyclobutane
intermediates (cb) and 4-nitroenamine intermediates (en). We may well ask what factors make some cb particularly stable to ring opening or to hydrolysis. The answer
will help solve the first general issue mentioned above.

If
species zw and im+A– are not rapidly hydrolyzed,
if equilibria with (Z)-en and (E)-en are quickly established, in which case
the C2 stereocenter may partially epimerize, and if the protonation
of these enamines is not very stereoselective (by the rear face),
the so-called syn adducts of the 4-nitrobutanals (R and R′
syn) in Figure 2 may
be contaminated with variable amounts of the corresponding anti adducts.
In other words, the diastereomeric ratio (dr) may be reduced. To avoid
this is key to solving the second issue mentioned above. In passing,
we should recall that each nitro-Michael adduct, by rotation around
single bonds, may exist as 3n conformations.
The huge number of conformers of close energy that can be present
in many aminocatalytic reactions were remarked by us5 and by Seebach, Reiher, and co-workers.6

In this context, this work is an acknowledgement
of the contributions
of the authors mentioned so far,1−4 but we planned to go even further. We wish to account
for the cases in which the stoichiometric reactions are feasible but
do not work under catalytic conditions, as well as for the differences
in the stereochemical outcome using aldehydes and ketones as Michael
donors. Thus, we aim to answer question (a) and to find an explanation
for points (b)–(d):(a) Can cyclobutanes be formed in all
reactions between enamines and polarized C–C double bonds?

(b) When reacting with β-nitrostyrene
in the presence of appropriate secondary amines, aldehydes afford
syn adducts (usually 2R,3S) in excellent yields and stereoselectivities,
whereas ketones afford the other syn adducts (usually 2S,3R),1,7−10 with exceptions in special cases;11 this
is known since the pioneering works on this Michael reaction.8 However, poor results are obtained with (S)-proline, often with disappointing enantiomeric ratios
(er’s), as shown in Figure 3, eqs 1 and 2. The possible stereodirecting role of
the COOH in these nitro-Michael reactions has therefore been questioned;9 nevertheless, the corresponding nitronate ions
and nitronate-containing intermediates may strongly interact with
acidic protons (of thioureas, for example) or with Lewis acids.

(c) α-Branched aldehydes
such as
isobutyraldehyde, plus β-nitrostyrene, give poor yields (in
relation to non-α-branched aldehydes)1 with the JH catalyst.3c,3f Recourse to special catalysts is necessary for
partial improvement (Figure 3, eq 3).12 Excellent enantiomeric
excess (ee)% values were only reported by using pyrrolidine–thiourea
catalysts.12h−12k

(d) The non-α-branched
aliphatic
nitroalkenes investigated to date afford lower stereoselectivities
than aromatic nitroalkenes (β-nitrostyrene and congeners) and
α-branched nitroalkenes.1

We
too, several years ago, were faced with the two above-mentioned general
issues when attempting to develop new prolinol derivatives13 related to that of Peng et al. (catalyst A).14 We hoped that some of the
catalysts (B–I, Figure 4) might be applied to both
aldehydes and ketones, as well as to aliphatic nitroalkenes (not only
to β-nitrostyrene and its derivatives), and would therefore
enjoy a wider use in total synthesis. Many of them gave excellent
results with cyclohexanone and β-nitrostyrene (see the Supporting Information, SI). However, with an
aldehyde such as 3-phenylpropanal and β-nitrostyrene, they afforded
disappointing syn/anti diastereomeric ratios (ca. 65:35) and enantiomeric
ratios (38–70% ee).13 Since the
reactions were rapid, we assumed that the aldehyde enamines were readily
formed and the Michael additions were also feasible and exergonic,
but since the stereoselectivities were poor, we thought that the steric
effects of the silylated substituents were not enough to distinguish
one face of the enamine group from another. Apparently, there was
no solution: with pyrrolidines containing sterically crowded substituents
(such as the popular JH catalyst), the aldehydes afforded nitro-Michael
adducts with excellent stereoselectivities but ketones did not react
(enamines were formed in trace amounts5); with less crowded pyrrolidines A–I, ketones worked well, but aldehydes produced mixtures of stereoisomers.

With cyclohexanone and β-nitrostyrene, the best results were
obtained with D and E (Figure 5, eq 1), which turned out to
be slightly better than A (100% conversions in few hours,
with >90% syn and >90% ee values). B and F were worse than D/E/A (see
the SI).

More surprising was the
fact that other nitro-Michael reactions
did not progress under catalytic conditions (for examples, see Figure 5, eqs 2 and 3). These
disappointing results cannot be related to very different equilibrium
constants for the formation of the initial enamines among the A–I series, since we had determined by 1H NMR spectroscopy that they were of the same order, but to
a halt in the process during later steps.

Thus, we would like
to address some further issues concerning nitro-Michael
reactions to explain:

(e) Why aldehydes (in contrast to cyclohexanone)
give nitro-Michael adducts with low stereoselectivities by using chiral
pyrrolidines A–I.

(f) Why the nitro-Michael reactions of
cyclopentanone and 2,2-dimethyl-1,3-dioxan-4-one did not progress
under catalytic conditions. For completion within 24 h, substoichiometric
amounts (>40 mol %) of our best catalysts (D or E) were required for the cyclopentanone case and stoichiometric
amounts for the above-mentioned dioxanone. This is in sharp contrast
with the reactivity of cyclohexanone, 4-thiacyclohexanone, 4-oxacyclohexanone,
and 4,4-dimethylcyclohexanone, which only needed 20 mol % catalyst
and few hours of reaction for a complete conversion, with excellent
syn/anti ratios and excellent ee%. In fact, cyclohexanone is the best
among the commercially available ketones tested by us, as far as the
stereoselectivity of these aminocatalytic reactions is concerned.



Figure 3 Representative examples of bizarre results concerning
catalytic
nitro-Michael reactions.

Figure 4 Silylated prolinediols
(B–I) examined and compared
to the JH catalyst and Peng’s catalyst (A).

Figure 5 Catalysts of choice (among those of Figure 4) for the paradigmatic nitro-Michael reaction
(eq 1) and bizarre results for similar nitro-Michael reactions (eqs
2 and 3).

To understand these experimental results (points a–f),
we
followed by 1H NMR spectroscopy3,15 the
progress of the reactions using higher than catalytic amounts of the
secondary amines. The nitrocyclobutanes formerly reported3a−3d had been described with the JH catalyst or closely related pyrrolidine
derivatives, in deuterated benzene3 (C6D6). Thus, we were interested in elucidating first
whether nitrocyclobutanes can be generated with other catalysts and
in other solvents or not.

Results and Discussion
Preparation of the Starting
Enamines
Under catalytic
conditions, the concentration of the starting enamines is often very
low, since their formation equilibria are not shifted to the right
in most solvents5 and/or they rapidly react
with the nitroalkene; it is then difficult to detect the changes by 1H NMR spectroscopy, although small doublets of doublets or
triplets characteristic of the all-trans-nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidine
derivatives are often detected.3a Under
stoichiometric conditions, the complex mixtures of several intermediates
(those shown in Figure 2) and final products, together with remaining starting materials,
prevent to reliably follow the reaction progress, although several
hours later the final aldehydes predominate. To increase the chances
of detecting all of the main intermediates, when they have shorter
half-lives than those derived from the JH catalyst3a−3d and/or when operating with solvents
more polar than C6D6 or toluene-d8, we increased as much as possible the concentration
of the starting enamine in situ. We proceeded as follows: (a) the
simple aldehydes were treated at room temperature (rt) with equivalent
amounts of pyrrolidine, (S)-proline, or derivatives,
in different solvents, in the presence of a crushed 3 Å molecular
sieve (MS); (b) except for the experiments with proline, powdered
CaH2 was then added in portions and stirring was maintained
until no more hydrogen bubbles were observed; (c) after filtering,
the 1H NMR spectra (adding a drop of C6D6 or two drops of CDCl3 when nondeuterated solvents
were used) were registered, indicating that the initial enamines were
now formed in appreciable amounts (<1 h, overall); (d) nearly equivalent
amounts of β-nitrostyrene or of (E)-3-methyl-1-nitrobutene
were slowly added, and the spectra were registered. This protocol
did not ensure a completely anhydrous medium during the process (since
the absolute formation of the starting enamines from the precursors
in different solvents is impossible under these conditions), but the
main intermediates were easily observed by NMR. With proline, as known,1 the major tautomers in the equilibria are the
corresponding oxazolidinones, but the reactions progressed despite
the low concentrations of the starting enamines present in the medium.

Generality of the Formation of Nitrocyclobutanes
The 1H, 13C, and two-dimensional [heteronuclear single-quantum
correlation (HSQC), correlated spectroscopy (COSY), nuclear Overhauser
enhancement spectroscopy (NOESY)] NMR spectra, which are given as SI, clearly showed that on mixing the enamines
and nitroalkenes just mentioned, all-trans isomers of nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidine
derivatives 1–15 (1-cb–15-cb, Figure 6) appeared first and became the major compounds. The
first six compounds in Figure 6 are racemic, and the remaining nine compounds are enantiopure.
The first 13 are reported here for the first time. Coupling constants
(3JHH = 7–9 Hz) indicate
that all of the cyclobutane methine hydrogens are in a trans arrangement
and appear as characteristic doublets of doublets or as triplets.
Thus, the substituents are trans to one another (hence the trivial,
nonsystematic name of all-trans-cyclobutanes). Chemical
shifts (δH and δC) agree with those reported by Seebach,
Hayashi, et al.3a,3d for the known compounds 14-cb and 15-cb. What matters here is that in
all cases nitrocyclobutanes were the predominant species in the reaction
mixtures. Thus, in any solvent, with any secondary amine, a formal
[2 + 2] cycloaddition always takes place, via a special stepwise mechanism,
with retention of the relative trans configuration of both double
bonds.

Figure 6 Nitrocyclobutanes characterized by NMR spectroscopy in the present
work, starting from the corresponding enamines, previously prepared.
The 1H chemical shifts for the cyclobutane protons of structures 3-cb and 4-cb are those noted in the first of
the solvents indicated.

Some nitrocyclobutanes
isomerized slowly to a mixture of enamines,
where the E adduct predominated.3b For example, Figure 7 shows how a sample of the racemic compound 1-cb in C6D6, which we had prepared and stored
at ca. 5 °C, spontaneously isomerized when the NMR tube was introduced
into the spectrometer, at ca. 25 °C, to (Z)-1-en (minor) and (E)-1-en (major):
the signal at δ 4.74 (dd, J = 8.3 and 7.1 Hz)
disappeared, whereas broad singlets in a 1:9 final ratio appeared
at δ 5.55 and 5.82 (CH olefinic proton by HSQC, δC at
137.6). The configurations were confirmed by NOESY.

Figure 7 Spontaneous conversion,
in C6D6 at 25 °C,
of nitrocyclobutane 1-cb into adduct enamines, 1-en, in the absence of water. Relative percentages as obtained
from the integration of the proton signals in the 1H NMR
spectra.

Nitrocyclobutane 2-cb was also transformed to adduct
or final enamines [mainly (E)-2-en]
at the usual temperature of the NMR probe. We interpreted these ring-opening
isomerizations in the simplest way (principle of least motion), as
depicted in Figure 8. Calculations will be commented on below. We should indicate that
in parallel reactions carried out in the more polar solvent dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO)-d6, we did not detect
cyclobutanes 1-cb and 2-cb, but the corresponding
final enamines; slowly, due to the moisture, the expected adducts
(final aldehydes) appeared.

Figure 8 Within a few hours at rt, 2-cb underwent
a ring-opening
reaction to afford a 1:9 Z/E final
mixture of its isomeric enamines; the plausible mechanism.

Other nitrocyclobutanes were more stable than 1-cb and 2-cb and could be characterized in DMSO-d6 at rt, such as 3-cb to 8-cb. With 3 and 4, we used several
solvents, with identical success. The solutions in nonpolar solvents
could even be carefully evaporated under vacuum, and the oily residue
dissolved in anhydrous DMSO-d6 without
the appearance of new NMR signals due to ring opening and/or hydrolysis.
In the presence of an equimolar amount of PhCOOH, nitrocyclobutanes 1-cb, 2-cb, and 3-cb were also immediately
formed. The difference was that, at rt, 1-cb and 2-cb isomerized to their enamines more rapidly than in the
absence of PhCOOH; cyclobutane 3-cb survived for hours.

To summarize, with 1-cb and 2-cb, we
were unable to detect nitrocyclobutanes in wet solvents. With substrates
less susceptible to hydrolysis, under substoichiometric conditions,
in the presence or not of PhCOOH, we had observed by NMR that some
or part of the intermediate species immediately disappeared to afford
the final aldehyde, while the major part were nitrocyclobutanes that
disappeared quite slowly.

Some authors3c attributed the relatively
high stability of 2,2-dimethyl-4-nitrocyclobutyl derivatives from
2-methylpropanal, the JH catalyst, and β-nitrostyrene (see 4-cb but with CPh2OTMS at the pyrrolidine ring)
to the lack of proton H2 in such a gem-dimethyl derivative,
since no enamine can be formed by prototropy from C2 to C4. This is
absolutely true, but in our hands 2,2-dimethylcyclobutanes 4-cb and 6-cb did not survive purification by chromatography
on silica gel, either with CH2Cl2–hexane
or EtOAc–hexane as the eluents. We only recovered from the
column the final aldehyde (nitro-Michael adduct). These gem-dimethyl cyclobutanes could have been purified on other more anhydrous
supports, but it was beyond the two objectives of the present work.
What matters here is that gem-dimethylcyclobutylpyrrolidine
derivatives are also hydrolyzable, probably via the zwitterions (Figure 8) or via iminium
salts (see below).

When (S)-proline was used
instead of pyrrolidine
in the reaction between 3-methylbutanal and β-nitrostyrene,
a mixture of two diastereomeric nitrocyclobutanes was obtained (7-cb + 8-cb, Figure 6) in a 55:45 ratio. Treatment of this mixture
with PhCOOH/D2O afforded the final aldehyde with a poor
er (as expected, see Figure 3). With methyl (S)-prolinate, the same substrates
also afforded a mixture of two nitrocyclobutanes (9-cb + 10-cb).

When the substituents on the pyrrolidine
ring were larger, one
nitrocyclobutane stereoisomer (11-cb, 12-cb, and 13-cb) was predominant but the other was still
detected; after hydrolysis, these samples gave the corresponding final
aldehydes with good, but not excellent, er values. Only in the last
two examples (14-cb and 15-cb, from the
JH catalyst) we observed a single stereoisomer, as reported.3d The five nitrocyclobutanes just mentioned were
more stable with respect to ring opening and hydrolysis than the previous
members of our series. In general, we noted that the larger the substituents
of the cyclobutane ring, the more resistant the reaction intermediates
to ring opening and hydrolysis, for a given solvent.

In short,
cyclobutanes are always observed monitoring by 1H NMR the
reaction of any aldehyde enamines and nitroalkenes, in
several solvents. They are the predominant species. In general, they
disappear (a) when the temperature rises; (b) in the presence of dissolved
water (in polar solvents) or presumably if there is water solvating
the polar intermediates (in apolar solvents); and (c) in the presence
of appropriate organic acids (HA) and moisture.

General Relevance
of the All-trans-cyclobutane
Arrangement
According to Figure 2,1,3 it is probable that
the dr (syn/anti ratio) of the final adduct is controlled by the relative
thermodynamic stability of (and kinetic preference for) the all-trans-cyclobutanes in relation to the other cyclobutane
isomers. Since C2-R and C3-R′ are trans, these groups (R and
R′) will be syn in the final adduct after cleavage of the C1–C4
bond and rotation. However, if epimerization occurs during the last
steps, the syn/anti ratios (the diastereomeric ratios, dr’s)
will be lower.

First, with a simple model, we compared the relative
energies of all of the possible stereoisomeric nitrocyclobutanes,
by means of molecular orbital (MO) calculations (Figure 9) with the Gaussian 16 program
package.16 All-trans-nitrocyclobutane 16-cb, henceforward often called 16 for simplicity’s
sake, with the four substituents of the cyclobutane ring in an equatorial
arrangement, or almost equatorial, was calculated to be thermodynamically
more stable than the other seven isomers (Figure 9A), in which one or more groups must be axial,
almost axial, or pseudoaxial. Some of these stereoisomers could be
generated by epimerization of the CHNO2 stereocenter via
its nitronate (i.e., in the presence of any base, relatively strong
such as pyrrolidine or moderate such as the tertiary N atom of any
nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidine or enamine group). Other stereoisomers
might be generated: (1) if the cycloaddition reaction was produced
without retention of configuration of the partners; (2) if either
the starting (E)-enamine or (E)-nitroalkene
was impure, containing some percentages of their Z isomers (which is seldom the case), and no Z-to-E isomerization occurred during or after the cycloaddition.
Particularly interesting is isomer 17, since it is the
product of the alternative approach between the enamine and nitroalkene,
with configuration retention: substituents at C1 and C2 of the cyclobutane
are in trans; substituents at C3 and C4 are also in trans. However,
under equilibrium conditions, Figure 9A suggests that 17 would be converted
into 16 (with calculated ΔG°
values between −3.0 and −4.2 kcal/mol).

Figure 9 Relative energies (kcal/mol)
of stereoisomers and conformers of
a nitrocyclobutane model (A). Reaction energies calculated for the
formation of cyclobutane 16 at different levels of theory
(B). Conformational analysis of N-(4-nitrocyclobutyl)pyrrolidine 16 (C).

Figure 9B indicates
that the cycloaddition reaction for this model is exothermic, with
ΔE values between −33.8 and −24.8
kcal/mol. The mean value between the MP2/6-31G(d) and M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p)
results is close to the higher-level CCSD(T) value, as it is the mean
of the first six values. The reaction is also exergonic or exoergic:
approximate ΔG° values lie between −7
and −14.5 kcal/mol (depending on the method, assuming that
from ΔE to ΔG°
ca. 17 kcal/mol must be added) in apolar solvents and between −5.5
and −14 kcal/mol in polar solvents (see footnotes in Figure 9). Also, there is
free rotation around the N–C1 bond, but the conformer with
both rings almost coplanar has the lowest energy. Conformer 16′ deserves comment, since a clear stereoelectronic
effect appears, due to the arrangement of the N lone pair, the C1–C4
bond, and the NO2 group: N–C1 is shorter, C1–C4
is longer, and C4–NO2 is shorter. The relevant interatomic
distances given in Figure 9C are those obtained at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level, for the
sake of simplicity, but the same effect was observed at all levels
of theory, as expected.

Relevance of the Size of Groups R (Enamine)
and R′ (Nitroalkene)
Model 16 is too
simple, so that we calculated other
cyclobutanes closer to 1-cb–4-cb. Figure 10 summarizes only
the lowest-energy conformers relevant for each case, among a plethora5,6 of conformations that we examined. The gap between 1-cb and 18 (Figure 10A) is larger than that between 16 and 17. The gap between 3-cb and 19 is
even larger (and all of the remaining forms, not shown to save space,
are 5.0–14.0 kcal/mol above 3-cb). When the steric
crowding between C2-R and C3-R′ increases more, the gap (ΔE) significantly increases (compare 20 and 21). In other words, the use of β-branched aldehydes
and nitroethenes substituted by aryl groups or branched chains increases
the energy difference between the approach of the substrates or reactants
to give one all-trans-nitrocyclobutane (we will call
it antiperiplanar or ap approach) or the alternative one (the synclinal
or sc approach). See below for further details, where it will be demonstrated
that the dr will depend on these gaps. In other words, the sizes of
groups R (enamine chain) and R′ (nitroalkene) are significant
for the diastereoselectivity.

Figure 10 Lowest-energy conformers of 1-cb, 3-cb, and 20. Relative energies of their
isomers 18, 19, and 21 (A);
predicted total electronic
energies (au) in small letter. Relative energies in kcal/mol, in bold,
on the right side, for the reactions leading to these cyclobutanes
(B).

This explains “point or
problem (d)” of the Introduction. The
larger or more branched the R
and R′ groups at C2 and C3, respectively, of the N-(4-nitrocyclobutyl)pyrrolidines, the higher the gap between each
all-trans-cyclobutane and its isomers and, thus,
the higher the diastereoselectivity (dr) of the final 4-nitrobutanal.

The NO2 and Ph groups were predicted to be perpendicular
to the approximate plane of the cyclobutane and pyrrolidine rings
in most of the minimum-energy conformers. The situation is more complex
in the case of 3-cb, where the rotation of the isopropyl
group gives rise to unfavorable van der Waals (vdW) interactions with
the pyrrolidine ring and/or with Ph. Here, conformer 3′-cb turned out to be slightly favored over 3-cb. When the
substituents at C2 and C3 are tBu, both
rotamers (20 and 20′) were predicted
to have a similar energy (as far as possible, we always take the mean
values between the MP2 and M06 results for the comparisons).

The reaction energies shown in Figures 9B and 10B also indicate
that the formation of racemic compounds 16, 1-cb, 3-cb, and 20 is exothermic. In other
words, the formation of nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidines from enamines
and nitroalkenes can be general. The steric hindrance may slow the
rate of formation of 20, but in principle, even this
reaction is thermodynamically feasible. Nevertheless, the predicted
ΔG° value at the M06 level is only −5.9
kcal/mol, that is, 3 kcal/mol less favorable than the other two cases
shown in Figure 10. It is likely that starting from pyrrolidines with large substituents,
branched aldehydes and branched nitroalkenes, the ΔG° values are even less favorable.

The corollary here is
that reactions between aldehyde enamines
and nitroalkenes can go through formal [2 + 2] cycloadditions. When
reactions of aldehydes, secondary amines, and nitroalkenes are carried
out in wet polar solvents at >20 °C, the cyclobutanes have
less
chance to be detected, as will be explained below.

Cyclobutanes
Can Be Formed with All Double Bonds Conjugated
with EWGs
The two preceding paragraphs may be general. The
experimental examples shown in Figure 1 suggest that the reaction of any enamine with any
EWG-activated double bond may afford a cyclobutane, as a more or less
stable product or intermediate, depending on the reaction conditions.
We calculated the series of reactions shown in Figure 11. All were predicted to be exothermic.

Figure 11 Predicted
reaction energies (in kcal/mol) for a variety of EWG-activated
alkenes that lead to cyclobutanes.

If the formation of all-trans-3,4-dimethyl-4-N-pyrrolidinocyclobutanenitrile, 22, is compared
to those of E-substituted nitroalkenes in Figures 9 and 10, the parallelism is clear; e.g., ΔE values between −31.5 and −24.8 (Figure 9) can be compared to ΔE between −28.1 and −21.4 (Figure 11). The ΔG° values
for the formation of 22 are predicted to still be negative,
at all of the levels of theory examined, even for the formation of
the alternative isomer, 23 (which is formed with retention
of configuration of the two reactants).

With groups such as
CHO, COOH, and COOMe, it was noted that the
values of ΔE were less negative, but we would
still expect values of ΔG° slightly negative.
See the SI (Figure S1) for additional details. In contrast, cyclobutanes from
conjugated sulfones, from a methylthio derivative of nitropropene,
and from H2C=C(Me)NO2 were calculated
to be even more favored than our standard nitrocyclobutanes. In short,
all types of double bonds conjugated with EWGs, not only β-nitrostyrene,
have a tendency to yield cyclobutanes, in agreement with Figure 1. The stronger the
EWG, the more exothermic the cyclobutane formation appears. Other
details such as steric hindrance and the contribution of group Y seem
to modulate this effect, as could be expected. The real chances of
isolating these cyclobutanes again will probably depend on the thermodynamic
or kinetic stability of each structure in the medium at a given temperature.

The preceding paragraphs answer “question (a)” posed
in the Introduction: cyclobutanes are formed
in all of the reactions reported here (Figure 6) and/or are predicted at different levels
of theory to be thermodynamically more stable (Figure 11) than their precursors. The formation of
cyclobutanes is more general than previously thought.

The isomer
alternative to 22 (see 23)
was found 3.6 kcal/mol above the corresponding all-trans-cyclobutane. The gaps, for the cases that we examined in Figures 11 and S1, were 3.6, 3.3, 3.6, and 2.2 kcal/mol. These
isomers (also see 17–19 and 21) are always predicted to lie a few kcal/mol above. In short,
the fact that the R and R′ substituents and, on the other hand,
the pyrrolidino and EWG groups are cis implies a penalty of ca. 3
kcal/mol as a mean value, which increases if these substituents are
larger.

Approaches between the Two Reactants
As the preceding
paragraph suggests, the reaction of the two achiral reactants will
mainly lead to the all-trans-(±)-cb, over its alternative isomer. What matters is the trans/cis ratio
between the R and R′ groups of nitrocyclobutanes, which by
ring opening and hydrolysis can give rise, after rotation through
the C2–C3 bond, to the final syn/anti ratio or dr of the nitro-Michael
adducts. It relies on the greater thermodynamic stability of the all-trans-cyclobutanes, as already established in the preceding
sections, but the key question is whether the all-trans isomer is,
also and always, kinetically favored or not. In this regard, we studied
the mechanism of the possible cycloaddition between our simple models
computationally, i.e., the reaction of pyrrolidine–propanal
enamine (in its largely predominant form E,s-trans)
with (E)-1-nitropropene to give nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidine 16 or its alternative isomer 17 (Figure 12).

Figure 12 Two main possible approaches
of a simple nitroalkene to a simple
aldehyde enamine and the corresponding transition states (TSs). Gibbs
free energy profiles (free enthalpies, ΔG in
kcal/mol) optimized at the M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p) level including DMSO/solvent
model density (SMD).

Optimization of the
equilibrium geometries of TSs and intermediates,
for the approaches between the reactants that go to all-trans-cyclobutane 16 and to the alternative cyclobutane 17, was attempted at different levels of theory. In the gas
phase, we were unable to locate zwitterionic intermediates (zw, which are relatively much higher in energy, as expected).
Even in polar solvents, it was hard to locate some zw species, but eventually we were able to obtain the representative
reaction profiles shown in Figure 12, with M06-2X geometries optimized in DMSO/SMD. In
the first transition state (TS), the C2–C3 distance is around
2.15 Å, while C4 is almost equidistant from C1 and N, at ca.
2.95 Å. Later, the C2–C3 covalent bond was already formed,
while C4 was still far from C1 and N, that is, there is an ionic bond
between an iminium cation and a nitronate anion (16-zw is formed). Afterward, a small shortening of the C1–C4 distance
produced the collapse to cyclobutane 16 (while a small
rotation of the C–NO2 bond angle caused the collapse
to the six-membered ring, 16-dh). It is likely that the
relative energy values of zw species are higher in nonpolar
solvents and lower in water. In fact, the calculated total energies
for 16-zw and 16′ at M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p)
in tetrahydrofuran (THF)/conductor-like polarizable continuum model
(CPCM) were −651.63529 and −651.64333 au, respectively,
that is, 16-zw was predicted to be 5.0 kcal/mol above 16′; at the same level, in water and in DMF, 16-zw was calculated to lie only 2.0 ± 0.2 kcal/mol above 16′.

In all of the methods examined, in agreement
with Figure 9, cyclobutane 16 was predicted to have a lower energy than its stereoisomer 17. The corresponding first TS was also predicted to have
a lower energy than the first TS, leading to 17. The
gap was calculated to be 2.2 kcal/mol (ΔΔG‡, Figure 12) at the indicated M06-2X level. Similarly, the gaps were
4.4, 2.1, 3.2, and 3.5 kcal/mol by single-point calculations from
B3LYP geometries optimized in DMSO at MP2/6-31G(d), ωB97X-D/6-311+G(d,p),
M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p), and M08-HX/6-311+G(d,p), respectively. In short, 16 is favored over 17 from both the thermodynamic
and kinetic points of view. The factors that make 16 more
stable than 17 make the barrier to 16 of
lower energy than that to 17. This was intuitive, but
not previously evaluated. With other R and R′, obviously larger
than simple methyl groups, it is likely that these gaps will be much
larger.

It is also worth noting that the ΔG‡ value calculated for the first step (in DMSO, Figure 12) is quite small
(only 14.9 kcal/mol): the reaction between simple preformed enamines
and nitroalkenes can be very rapid at rt, as happens experimentally.
In benzene at the M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p) level, the calculated value
of ΔG‡ was 17.6 kcal/mol.
At the other levels mentioned in the preceding paragraph, the ΔG‡ values in DMSO oscillated between 16.0
and 12.8 kcal/mol.

A final note of caution is required. We should
take into account
all of the possible approaches between the nitroalkene and enamine
models (Figure 13),
in which the bonds between C2 and C3 are being formed. The three drawings
in the top row may lead to cyclobutane 16-cb; the three
drawings in the bottom row may lead to 17-cb. In some
cases, as in the two central approaches, the positive and negative
charges of the resulting zw intermediates are more separated.
As expected, these chemical species were found much above those examined
in Figure 12. However,
the energy differences among all of the possible intermediates were
reduced when very polar solvents were introduced in the implicit-solvent
calculations (see Figure 13). Nevertheless, 16-zw (and then zw/16ap), which leads to the thermodynamically more stable cyclobutane, 16-cb, is favored in relation to those zwitterions that lead
to 17-cb, as well.

Figure 13 Possible approaches of (E)-1-nitropropene to the
enamine model, (E)-N-(1-propenyl)pyrrolidine.
M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p) results in DMF/CPCM (first row) and in H2O/CPCM (second row) for the zwitterionic species. Relative energy
values (kcal/mol) are in bold.

Effect of the Size of the Substituent at the Pyrrolidine C2
Atom on the Relative Percentages of s-trans- and
s-cis-Aldehyde Enamines
So far, achiral
substrates and trans/cis ratios of substituents at C2 and C3 (and
hence syn/anti final ratios or dr values) have only been discussed.
With a substituent on the pyrrolidine ring, enantiopure intermediates
and products may be obtained instead of racemic compounds. The enantiomeric
ratio (er) or the ee% of the nitrocyclobutane can depend on the approach
of the nitroalkene through one face or another of the chiral aldehyde
enamine. As is well known,1,3 the larger the substituent
at C2 of the pyrrolidine ring, the higher the probability that the
reaction occurs through the opposite face of the pyrrolidine (Figure 14) and consequently
the higher the enantioselectivity. We aimed to evaluate how the size
of the C2-pyrrolidine substituent and its electronic features may
affect enantioselectivity.

Figure 14 Relative energies of the main conformers of
chiral enamines and
all-trans-nitrocyclobutanes. The s-trans-enamines yield (4′S)-nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidines
and the s-cis-enamines their diastereomers (4′R), respectively. For (S)-2-tert-butylpyrrolidine derivatives, in each case, the more stable enamine
conformer—the more abundant in the very rapid equilibrium between
the enamine forms—affords the nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidine highlighted
in green, the more stable form of each cyclobutane.

To simplify matters, we will consider that only all-trans-cyclobutanes are generated, without any trace of
the other isomers.
The two major cyclobutane stereoisomers can then be those depicted
in Figure 14, where
the lowest-energy conformer for each chemical entity is represented.
It is noted that the s-trans conformers give rise to 4-nitrocyclobutanes
of configuration 4S, whereas the s-cis conformers afford those of
configuration 4R, according to the mechanism shown in the preceding
sections. Before any discussion, we should recall that the s-trans/s-cis-enamine equilibria are very
rapidly established, since the barriers for aldehyde enamines are
often around 5 kcal/mol and always, even for sterically crowded enamines,
below 10 kcal/mol.5

When the enamine
chirality is due to a methyl group on the C2 of
the pyrrolidine ring (as in Figure 14, left column), the gap between the main conformation
of the s-trans-enamine and that of the s-cis-enamine is small (ΔE = 0.2 kcal/mol,
ΔG° = 0.6 kcal/mol). It is also predicted
that the diastereomeric nitrocyclobutanes, in which they are respectively
converted, may have very close energy. It is thus expected that, for
this case, the stereoselectivity is poor or nil and that, after ring
opening and hydrolysis, the enantiomeric ratio (er) of the final adducts
will also be poor.

However, when there is a tert-butyl instead of
a methyl group, the steric clashes may be more significant. It is
predicted that the s-trans-enamine (the conformer
of the (E),s-trans-enamine shown
in the second, third, and fourth columns in Figure 14) will largely predominate (Keq > 10). This more abundant enamine is transformed,
according
again to the mechanism discussed above, to a nitrocyclobutane with
the NO2 group on the right side in the structures depicted.
One conformer of this (4S)-nitrocyclobutane is thermodynamically
favored in relation to its other conformers and with respect to all
of the conformers of its 4R isomer (see Figure S3 for additional details). In simple words, the most abundant
s-trans-enamine, in reacting with a nitroalkene,
selectively affords one nitrocyclobutane, which is furthermore the
thermodynamically stable isomer. The preferred conformation of the
pyrrolidine ring of these enamines—usually between 4E and 4T3, which we call C4-up for the sake
of simplicity, but sometimes 3T4, which we call
C4-down—is not relevant, as the energy gap for each pair is
generally very low (≤0.6 kcal/mol) and within the calculation
error.

Seebach et al.3a,3d and Burés et
al.3b,3c have demonstrated, by means of exchange
reactions, that the formation
of nitrocyclobutanes containing the JH catalyst is reversible. In
other words, the formation of JH-derived cyclobutanes, even at rt,
is under thermodynamic control. In spite of this irrefutable argument,
we have calculated the first of the TSs for the s-trans- and s-cis-enamines of our model (with tBu). We planned to evaluate whether, for the formation
of these cyclobutane derivatives, the energy barriers were similar
or not and whether they were as low as in Figure 12. At the M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p) level, the
transition state from the s-trans-enamine (C4-up)
was located at −808.81374 au and that for s-cis-enamine (C4-up) at −808.81291 (0.5 kcal/mol above); including
single-point calculations in DMSO, the difference was larger (1.6
kcal/mol) and the two ΔG‡ values were calculated to be 14.4 and 14.3 kcal/mol (close to the
value given in Figure 12). At the ωB97X-D/6-31G(d) level, the four TSs (from s-trans/C4-up,
s-trans/C4-down, s-cis/C4-up, and s-cis/C4-down conformers) could
be located; the M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p)/H2O//ωB97/6-31G(d)
total energies were −808.83691 (0.0), −808.83589 (0.6),
−808.83464 (1.4), and −808.83429 au (1.6 kcal/mol),
respectively. In summary, the barriers are very low and almost identical
for the different conformers (ΔH‡ ≈ 1 kcal/mol, ΔG‡ ≈ 16 kcal/mol, lower values in polar solvents). This could
be expected as both reactions take place through the face opposite
to the tBu group. Therefore, the calculations
again suggest that the most abundant enamine tautomer is converted
into the most stable cyclobutane derivative via a low-energy TS or
the lowest-energy TS (and likely the lowest-energy zw). The reactions are reversible (thermodynamic control), and there
is no need to resort to the Curtin–Hammett principle.

With three tBu groups as substituents,
one on C2 of the pyrrolidine and the other two on C2′ and C3′
(C2 and C3 of the cyclobutane ring), the energy gaps between the two
series of stereoisomers and among their conformers are still higher
than those shown in Figure 14. See Figure S4 for an explanation
based on the van der Waals (vdW) repulsions of the substituents. Again,
one or two conformers with the NO2 group on the right (configuration
2S,4′S of the cycloadduct) are more stable than any other isomer
and conformer.

A last question is whether, as indicated by one
reviewer, the results
obtained with the tBu group, which is
a too simple model of a large substituent, may be extrapolated to
the special case of the popular JH catalyst. An exhaustive study of
all of the conformational space at high levels of theory would require
months of additional work, but there are earlier calculations of simple
JH enamines3d,3f,3g,5,6,15b,17 upon which we can rely.
For the sake of brevity, we will only compare the lowest-energy conformers
of each species for the cases CPh2OTMS (JH) and CPh3 (trityl, Tr), as shown in Figure 15. Due to the crowded structure of these
molecules, we also carried out geometry calculations with ωB97X-D
(that is, with a functional that includes long-range dispersion corrections);16c the stability order of the plethora of conformations
was more reliable than using B3LYP and the MP2 and M06 single-point
total energies improved (Figure 15, top), but the relative energies did not change. In
comparing Figure 15 to Figure 14, it
appears that the gaps between the pairs of related stereoisomers are
larger now than in the tBu case, as could
be expected due to the larger size of both groups and the special
features of CPh2OTMS, but the “rule” is maintained:
the more stable the s-trans starting enamine, the more stable the
cyclobutane with NO2 at the right. Starting from branched
aldehydes and from β-nitrostyrene or branched nitroalkenes (that
is, with larger substituents at C2′ and C3′), the gaps
would be even higher, as predicted for other examples in preceding
sections.

Figure 15 Cases of the JH catalyst and 2-tritylpyrrolidine. Effect on the
model reaction (propanal + 1-nitropropene).

Calculations of Further Aldehyde Enamines
Calculations
of aldehyde enamines that pose more difficulties (than 2-tBu and 2-Tr-pyrrolidine) from the viewpoint of the
conformational analysis, due to the huge number of possible conformers,
and their formal [2 + 2] cycloadditions are summarized in Figure 16. Only the lowest-energy
minima of each species are drawn in Figure 16.

Figure 16 Energies calculated for the lowest-energy conformers
of representative
s-trans- and s-cis-enamines of silylated
prolinols and of the corresponding all-trans-cyclobutanes
(A). The proline case (B). The case of prolinate enamines (C). Relative
energies are in kcal/mol, as always, and in bold.

The three examples in Figure 16A showed that the gaps between the lowest-energy conformers
of s-trans- and s-cis-enamines are
minimal. The differences between the lowest-energy (4S)- and (4R)-nitrocyclobutanes were
also minimal. We calculated other cases, from other silylated prolinediols
and other nitroalkenes, with similar results. These prolinol derivatives
are the models of catalysts A, C/D/E, and G/H shown in Figure 4. We recognize that
the models are simple, but the tendency is clear: these substituents
are not sufficiently large to discriminate the two options. This happens
experimentally, since in the trials with aldehydes and A–I, we had obtained poor er values.

This
explains “point or issue (e)” mentioned in the Introduction. If the gaps between s-trans- and s-cis-enamine conformers are small (which
means that the substituents on the chiral pyrrolidines do not favor
sufficiently the s-trans conformers), a mixture of two all-trans-nitrocyclobutanes will be formed. The all-trans arrangement
only ensures an excellent dr (that is, a good or excellent final syn/anti
ratio, provided that no epimerization occurs during the following
steps). The ring opening and hydrolysis of a mixture of two diastereomeric
nitrocyclobutanes cannot afford a good er or ee%. A chiral pyrrolidine
with a large α-branched substituent at C2 is required to obtain
an excellent enantioselectivity.1

The fourth example (Figure 16B) poses the problem of proline, which in practice
is one of the worst catalysts for enantioselective nitro-Michael reactions
(e.g., a 55:45 mixture of 7-cb and 8-cb was
obtained in the lab; see Figure 6). Moreover, the gap between the pair of enamines is
so small that a change of solvent polarity may favor one or the other.
Thus, despite the fact that the natural amino acid (S)-proline was the trigger of the organocatalysis field and itself
or its surrogates are essential for aldol reactions, it is the most
complex case to study in silico and to account for in vitro because
of (1) its insolubility in most organic solvents that almost only
permits the use of DMSO or DMF (and/or an excess of wet aldehydes);
(2) the features of the COOH group (inappropriate for exerting a significant
steric effect but good for hydrogen bonding or intramolecular proton
transfer); (3) the possibility that the s-cis forms of the COOH groups
of enamines, which are not far away in energy, form well-known dimers
(either homo, hetero, or with unreacted proline) in the reaction medium
by intermolecular hydrogen bonding; (4) the large predominance of
bicyclic oxazolidinones in the equilibria, not only those from the
starting aldehydes but also those from the intermediate zwitterions
and nitrocyclobutanes (only the more stable exo forms are depicted
in Figure 16B); and
(5) the disparate reactivity of prolinate anions, always potentially
present in the medium (in polar solvents with basic properties, due
to the tertiary nitrogen atoms of oxazolidinones or to the exchange
of protons with other carboxylate ions).

Regarding this last
point, the COO– groups may
behave differently from the COOH groups, as expected; for example,
they can afford much better anchimeric assistance to electrophilic
attacks18 to the enamine double bond than
a carboxyl group, of course. Among the prolinate enamines, one s-trans
conformation predominates (see Figure 16C), but calculations in DMSO with geometry
optimization and single-point calculations in H2O (data
not shown) revert the order in such a way that the abundance of both
s-cis forms is predicted to increase. Thus, the reactivity and stereochemical
outcome of proline enamines may dramatically depend on the presence
of catalytic amounts of bases in the medium and on the solvent polarity.

From N-(4-Nitro-1-cyclobutyl)pyrrolidines to
4-(Nitroethyl)enamines and 4-Nitrobutanals: Plausible Mechanisms
Mechanistically, the hydrolysis that leads to nitrobutanals may
take place from the zwitterions and the iminium salts. From zwitterions,
as soon as zw is formed as an intermediate (Figure 12), some hydrolysis
may occur, before the formation of the nitrocyclobutane (see Figure 17A, first row).
The nitronate group would capture a proton from water, and the resulting
iminium hydroxide would be spontaneously cleaved.

Figure 17 Plausible hydrolyses
of nitrocyclobutanes through zwitterions and
iminium salts (A). MP2/6-31G(d)//B3LYP/6-31G(d) energies are in au;
relative energies are in kcal/mol, in bold. Protonation of species zw gives im+ and that
of zw′ affords im′+, but im+ and im′+ are in rapid equilibrium
by a simple rotation. Protonation of (Z)-en may give im+ and epi-im+ while that of (E)-en may give im′+ and epi-im′+. M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p) energies are also compared (B)
for the iminium ions of R = R′ = Me (16) including
single-point implicit-solvent calculations.

Figure 17 also
indicates that hydrolysis can occur when cyclobutanes are formed,
after ring opening. This may take place from the conformer with the
pyrrolidine ring perpendicular to the plane of cyclobutane (e.g., 16-cb′), in which the N lone pair is antiperiplanar
to the C1–C4 bond (Figure 9C). In the light of Figure 12, 16-zw is found only 6.7 kcal/mol
above 16-cb′ in DMSO and the barrier to “come
back” is only of ca. 13 kcal/mol. The ring opening may be triggered
by an increase of the polarity of the medium—zwitterions will
be favored as far as the medium becomes more polar—and by the
temperature because of the term T·ΔS, as we observed and already commented on. In fact, cyclobutanes cb can be considered covalent forms of zwitterions zw, the ionic forms, as mentioned above.

Hydrolysis can also
occur from iminium salts im+ and im′+ (Figure 17A, second row on the right), which is a
standard step for the hydrolysis
of any enamine, in the presence, from the very beginning, of catalytic
amounts of any proton source (HA = ArCOOH, phenols with EWGs, H3O+ or solvated protons in general, appropriate
pyrrolidinium ions, thioureas with EWGs, etc.), capable of partially
or fully neutralizing the nitronate moiety of zw as soon
as it is formed.

It is known3 that
some nitrocyclobutanes
spontaneously isomerize to the adduct enamines (final enamines); we
have provided additional examples of this transformation (Figures 7 and 8) occurring at the NMR probe temperature, without any additive.
Our calculations indicate that there is a set of conformations for
(E)-en of very close energy, in which
there is some favorable interaction between the polar groups (the
enamine double bond and NO2, which is located either above
or below the enamine plane). The aldehyde enamines with a 2-nitroethyl
substituent seem to be more stable and less sensitive to water than
enamines of standard aliphatic aldehydes. Hydrolysis of enamines (E)-en and (Z)-en must occur according to standard mechanisms, via their iminium salts.
The reasonable equilibria are shown in Figure 17, which includes a comparison of the relative
energies of these iminium intermediates.

Figure 17 shows
that adduct enamines E [(E)-en] are predicted to be slightly more stable than the corresponding Z enamines (in polar solvents, see below, even more). Figure 17 also indicates
that one (im+) of the four iminium
ions is more stable than the others, after a careful conformational
analysis of these cations, without its counterion. Even though the
structure is open, it seems as if a six-membered arrangement was favored
(see 16-im+), with
interactions between the polar groups [the (RCH2)2N+=CH moiety and NO2] and with R and
R′ in pseudoequatorial positions (i.e., H1 and H2 as well as
H2 and H3 antiperiplanar). Zigzag conformers of im+ and im′+ were not favored, even in polar solvents (results not included).
Since all of the iminium ions are in equilibrium, by rotation around
the C1–C2 single bond and through the enamines by deprotonation
and protonation (general acid catalysis), it may appear that the protonation
step is rather stereoselective.3 At least
in apolar solvents, all of the iminium species fall down to im+. In other words, the calculations
suggest that the hydrolysis of the final enamines goes through this
iminium ion.

This is a plausible explanation for the fact that
many nitro-Michael
reactions, even though being multistep, occur with high stereoselectivity.
For simple aldehydes, the opening of the four-membered ring and/or
the C-protonation step of the adduct enamines can reasonably be the
rate-limiting steps, at least in nonpolar solvents.3 As deduced from Figure 17, since enamines E (with the pyrrolidine
ring and the more branched substituent in trans, to be more precise)
are the most abundant intermediates detected by NMR, it may also be
assumed that their hydrolyses, when they are not sufficiently shifted
to the right and/or when they are slow, will affect the overall reaction
rate. Again, it suggests that the C-protonation step of such enamines
may then become the rate-limiting step.3g It requires a very selective protonation of (E)-en from below the double bond (the lower or α face in Figure 17, to give im′+ and hence the most stable im+), by any proton source. It must
be the pathway, when (E)-en is predominant
but no epimerization occurs.

In contrast, in very polar solvents,
especially for epi-16-im′+ (Figure 17, bottom), the
conformers with R and R′ in antiperiplanar orientation, i.e.,
with H2 and H3 ap, turned out to be close to the lowest-energy minimum.
It suggests that in very polar solvents epimerization is possible
through epi-16-im′+.

Further comparisons of representative ring
opening and hydrolysis
reactions are shown in Figure 18. Nitrocyclobutanes (cb), the resulting
enamines (en), and 4-nitrobutanals were predicted to
have similar Gibbs free energy values. Only the M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p)-calculated
relative ΔG° values are shown in Figure 18A, but the complete
figure is given as SI (Figure S5). It implies that in the absence of a sufficient
concentration of water the equilibria will not be fully shifted to
the right. For the first two compounds in Figure 18A, we can observe that the nitrobutanals
are found 0.6–0.7 kcal/mol below the corresponding nitrocyclobutanes,
whereas for the last two cases, with branched aldehydes and larger
substituents, each nitrobutanal is predicted to lie 1.3–1.7
kcal/mol above each nitrocyclobutane. Thus, the cyclobutane intermediates
are predicted to be ≥2 kcal/mol relatively more stable than
the final adducts in the last two cases (that is, the overall equilibria
may be less shifted to the right, so the release of pyrrolidine may
be less favored, probably slower, and hence the entire aminocatalytic
process may be slower as well, as it happens).

Figure 18 Relative M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p)-calculated
Gibbs free energies, unless
otherwise indicated, in kcal/mol, for representative sequences of
reactions from pyrrolidine enamines (A) and for models from 2-tert-butylpyrrolidine and the JH catalyst (B). Column B
also includes the relative total electronic energies (ΔE, numbers in black) of the same intermediates and of the
lowest-energy conformers of the two possible cations arising from
the protonation of the predominant (E),s-trans-enamines.

These last results explain “point (c)” of the Introduction, regarding nitro-Michael reactions
that involve isobutyraldehyde and related α-branched aldehydes,
which seem to stop at the nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidine stage. They are
probably hydrolyzed via their zw partners, but the hydrolysis
equilibria are not shifted so far to the right in this case as in
other cases. This would explain why the more highly substituted or
branched the starting aldehyde, the relatively easier the detection
of the corresponding cyclobutane. Branched starting aldehydes may
eventually be converted into even more crowded final aldehydes, which
are not particularly favored in relation to the cyclobutanes. Thus,
another rule of thumb would be that the more crowded the final aldehydes,
the higher the chances of the catalytic process to stop at the nitrocyclobutane
stage. As indicated, the corresponding all-trans-cyclobutanes
with large substituents, far to each other, are relatively more stable
than expected.

When the energies shown in Figure 18A were systematically recalculated
for the model compounds
(16, first row) in benzene and in DMSO by single-point
calculations with the SMD method, slight changes were noted. These
results are as follows: forms cb, (Z)-en, (E)-en, and the
indicated 4-nitrobutanal moved up 1.4/1.4 (benzene/DMSO), 1.5/2.3,
0.8/0.0, and 0.9/1.4 kcal/mol, respectively. Thus, in relation to
nitrocyclobutane and 4-nitrobutanal, (Z)-en is slightly destabilized, while (E)-en is stabilized, mainly in DMSO. This solvent effect may be quite
general. It explains why (E)-en is the
intermediate with a longer half-life in several experiments reported
to date3 and others described above. It
also agrees with the experimental data, in the sense that the aminocatalyzed
nitro-Michael reactions take place at rt in most organic solvents,
although they often stop at intermediates cb or (E)-en, with ratios that are different from
one solvent to another.

To go further, Figure 18B shows the effect of medium-large (tBu) and very large (CPh2OTMS)
groups at C2 of the
pyrrolidine ring on the reaction model. Only the lowest-energy minimum
of each form is indicated. Relatively, both (E),s-trans-enamines of the adducts were calculated to be even
more stable than that of the model: their hydrolysis equilibria were
less shifted to the right. Thus, these enamines may have a long half-life,
so that the corresponding catalytic processes may be quite slow. It
is also worthwhile that the protonation of these major enamines from
the α face (from below the double bond) is preferred over the
protonation that would produce the undesired epimer. Our computational
capability did not allow us to calculate all of the cyclobutanes and
adduct enamines that we detected by 1H NMR, but the tendencies
are clear. It is likely that, for those catalytic nitro-Michael reactions
in which nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidines and adduct enamines are generated
in significant amounts, one or another intermediate may be involved
in the rate-limiting step (depending on the substituents; see examples
in Figures 18 and S5).

In summary, Figures 17 and 18 show that
nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidine
derivatives may be hydrolyzed via their zwitterionic isomers and via
their isomeric enamines to yield the corresponding nitrobutanals (final
Michael adducts). The intermediates have similar free energies (free
enthalpies) to the final aldehydes. Thus, the equilibria are not shifted
very far to the right at rt, in general, depending on the substituents.
Protonation of pyrrolidines can help, but higher than equivalent amounts
of water in the organic solution can be required for a complete hydrolysis.
For further plausible mechanisms of the ring opening of nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidine
derivatives, see the SI.

Reaction of
Cyclic Ketones with Nitroalkenes
The enamines
of ketones are different from those of aldehydes examined until now.
As mentioned, the formation equilibria are, with few exceptions, less
shifted to the right,5 since as known (1)
they are less reactive against nucleophilic attacks, as it is well
known, since there are two chains on the carbonyl group and (2) in
the corresponding enamines there are more steric clashes between the
α-positions of the pyrrolidine ring and the alkenyl or cycloalkenyl
substituents.

We were interested in identifying the possible
intermediates of reactions of cycloalkanones with β-nitrostyrene
and analogues. We prepared representative enamines of cyclohexanone,
in the presence of CaH2 as a dehydrating agent, as shown
in Figure 19; after
filtering, the C6D6 solutions, which are relatively
concentrated in the corresponding enamine but obviously contained
starting materials, were treated with approximately equimolar amounts
of β-nitrostyrene at 5–10 °C. Consecutive NMR spectra
were then registered under typical conditions, at the probe temperature.
The olefinic proton of the initial enamine at 4.44 ppm disappeared
in few minutes, and several other peaks appeared between 4 and 5 ppm.
The main signals were attributed to the adduct enamine shown in Figure 19 (eq 1, see 24-en), with the less substituted double bond. However, no
cyclobutane signals—bicyclo[4.2.0]octane derivatives—were
detected.

Figure 19 Examples of intermediates detected during the reactions of nitroalkenes
with some enamines of cyclohexanone (eqs 1 and 2) and cyclopentanone
(eq 3) (n.d. = plausible intermediates not detected). Spectra registered
in C6D6.

In the reaction shown in eq 2, we also observed the initial or
starting enamine and rapidly the resulting adduct enamine (the final
enamine) with a trisubstituted double bond (25-en). Furthermore,
a direct adduct of the secondary amine to the β-nitrostyrene
was also present (26). We explain this last fact as follows:
since the formation of the starting enamine was not shifted as far
to the right as in eq 1, there was an excess of the secondary amine
in the medium, which underwent an obvious conjugated addition to β-nitrostyrene.
This interpretation was independently confirmed by mixing Peng’s
catalyst14 and an excess of β-nitrostyrene
in C6D6 in a NMR tube, and only one diastereomer
was formed; calculations of model analogues suggested that the conformer
of the S,R-stereoisomer indicated in Figure 19 may largely predominate. However, what
matters is that in these and other trials we were unable to detect
any trace of a cyclobutane derivative at the temperature of the NMR
probe.

Starting from cyclopentanone enamines, which were formed
in larger
proportions than cyclohexanone enamines5 operating under identical conditions, we obtained similar results
by treating the resulting solutions with β-nitrostyrene in C6D6 at 5 °C. However, more complex mixtures
of adduct enamines were obtained (the chemical equations are not depicted
to save space). For example, from cyclopentanone–pyrrolidine
enamine and β-nitrostyrene, three of the possible enamines were
detected, two of them with the double bond at the less substituted
position, with typical enamine signals at δ 4.17/99.3 and 4.23/98.2
(by HSQC). Reactions in CD3CN at −40 °C gave
similar mixtures of adduct enamines when the spectra were registered
at rt. Only in one experiment with a non-aromatic nitroalkene (Figure 19, eq 3) were we
able to detect a cyclobutane-derived intermediate (27-cb) at the probe temperature; it appeared 3 min after mixing but disappeared
15 min later at the same time as the typical signals of the adduct
enamine 27-en′ grew (see Figure S75).

Calculations of Cycloadducts from Cyclopentanone
Let
us assume as a working hypothesis, by analogy with the aldehydes,
that the initial Michael-type zwitterionic species (zw) are partially or fully converted into fused nitrocyclobutanes (fused cb) in the reactions just mentioned. Anyway, the energies
of these hypothetical intermediates can be calculated, to evaluate
their possible participation in the reaction mechanism(s). Species
hardly detected or not detected by 1H NMR are depicted
within brackets.

A summary of our calculations for representative
achiral and chiral enamines of cyclopentanone is shown in Figure 20. The reaction
energies, to give the corresponding fused cyclobutanes, are between
−30 and −25 kcal/mol, with the mean value between MP2/6-31G(d)
and M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p) = −27 kcal/mol (very close to the CCSD
value of −27.5 kcal/mol) and −ΔG° < −6 kcal/mol. These values are quite similar to
those of aldehydes. However, none of these fused cyclobutanes were
detected by 1H NMR spectroscopy at rt. We suspected that
the cause was not the rapid hydrolysis of the corresponding zw—the overall process would then be unusually rapid,
which is absolutely not the case—but the easier conversion
of zw (the “ionic partner”) and cb (the “covalent partner”) to the adduct enamines. In
fact, attempts to locate in silico a minimum for zw (from
suitable geometries) failed, as the structures collapsed to the fused cb, except when optimization was carried out in polar solvents
and a large basis set. The lowest-energy zw-like and cb conformers (Figure 20A) were then found to have similar free energies.

Figure 20 Calculated
reaction energies for the model reaction between the
pyrrolidine–cyclopentanone enamine and (E)-1-nitropropene
(A). Fused cyclobutanes that may be formed from the 2-tert-butylpyrrolidine–cyclopentanone enamine and (E)-1-nitropropene (B, left) or β-nitrostyrene (B, right). Comparison
of cyclobutanes from cyclopentanone with those from propanal (C).
Relative energies of isomers (in bold) are in kcal/mol, as always.

The detection of fused cyclobutanes (from ketones)
may be more
difficult than that of simple cyclobutanes (from aldehydes), since
the ring strain is higher in the former, which inevitably contain
one methylene group in an axial position and other methylenes over
the cyclobutane ring; also, the entropy term should benefit the open-chain
isomers. In the fused cyclobutanes shown in Figure 20A, the C2 methylene of the bicyclo[3.2.0]
system has a preference for the endo arrangement as it avoids steric
clashes. Other examples, with larger or additional substituents, confirm
this observation, although they are not depicted to save space. The
NO2 group, which turned out to be perpendicular to the
plane of the cyclobutane ring in the more stable conformers of the
simple nitrocyclobutanes depicted in preceding sections, is skewed,
due to the presence of the CH2 axially positioned at C1.

The analysis of the most plausible approaches between the ketone
enamines and simple (E)-nitroalkenes clearly indicates
that the case is more complicated than that for the aldehyde enamines
examined so far. If we assume that bicyclo[3.2.0]heptanes may be formed,
intermediates with the fused rings in trans were expected to be highly
disfavored (and have not been calculated). The so-called alternative
or HH sc approaches are also disfavored (see Figure S6).

Let us focus attention on the central part of Figure 20 (Figure 20B). The calculations suggested
that the
main s-cis conformer of the starting enamine, from cyclopentanone
and 2-(S)-tert-butylpyrrolidine,
highlighted in yellow, had lower energy (or energies) than the s-trans
conformer (i.e., than the lowest-energy form of the s-trans conformer).
This is in sharp contrast with aldehyde enamines (Figure 14), where the s-trans conformers
largely predominated in the conformational equilibrium. It is, however,
reasonable since the steric effects to be compared, considering the
cyclopentenyl group, are one methylene group (CH2) vs the
methine or methyne of a double bond (=CH group). This methine
implies fewer or lower vdW repulsions (only one H atom) with the 2-CHtBu group and slightly favorable π–CH3 interactions.

If the mechanism is similar to that elucidated
for aldehydes, the
s-cis-enamine will give rise to the bicyclo[3.2.0]
derivative with the NO2 group on the left, as depicted
in Figure 20B (i.e.,
with the R configuration), whereas the s-trans-enamine
will afford the derivative with the NO2 group on the right.
The rule of thumb advanced in Figures 14 and 15 is maintained:
if the double bond of the starting enamine is mainly on the right,
in the figures in this work, the NO2 group of the nitrocyclobutane
(or of the folded conformer of its ionic precursor, zw, in very polar solvents) appears predominantly on the left, when
depicted as throughout this paper, and vice versa. Calculations indicate
that the lowest-energy conformer of all of the bicyclic species for
the reaction of the s-cis-enamine with 1-nitropropene
(left) is that highlighted in green; also for the reaction with β-nitrostyrene
(right), it is highlighted in green in Figure 20B. Again, the most abundant initial enamine
is transformed to a cyclobutane (or to its ionic equivalent, zw) that turns out to be the most stable. It may be assumed
that the approach of reactants and the activation free energies are
similar (although not identical).

The explanation for the calculated
greater stability of the fused
cyclobutanes with the NO2 group on the left is based on
the new steric interactions generated by the presence of the additional
ring, which introduces a chain at C1. Thus, the conformers in which
the tBu group and/or the pyrrolidine methylenes
are close to the cyclopentane ring are clearly destabilized. The less-affected
conformer is highlighted in yellow and green in Figure 20, where tBu is as far as possible from the fused system. This changes
the order: the R configuration of the NO2 group is preferred,
whereas the S configuration was favored in the case
of cyclobutanes from aldehydes shown in Figures 14 and 15. Moreover,
the N lone pair is properly oriented for the interaction with the
CH–CH–NO2 moiety. In other words, the issue,
if cyclobutanes are wanted, is that such a conformer is prone to ring
opening (the C–C bond between N and NO2 is longer).

We also studied computationally the adduct enamines, adduct iminium
salts, and final nitroketones from the above-mentioned reaction of
cyclopentanone, pyrrolidine, and β-nitrostyrene, as examples.
The results are shown in Figure 21A. The adduct enamines were more stable than their
fused cyclobutane precursors (and consequently than their associated zw). The calculations predicted the ring opening affording
the less substituted enamines to be quite favorable. The diastereoselectivity
was envisaged to be higher than with simple aliphatic nitroalkenes
(results not included for the sake of brevity), again as was observed
experimentally. However, once the hydrolysis was accomplished, the
lowest-energy syn and anti adducts were predicted to have practically
identical energies. Epimerization may be feasible at such a stage.
This could explain why the diastereoselectivity of nitro-Michael reactions
with cyclopentanone is lower than that of parallel reactions with
cyclohexanone (see below).

Figure 21 Relative energies, within each set of isomers,
of the lowest-energy
conformers of plausible intermediates involved in the reaction of
cyclopentanone–pyrrolidine enamine and β-nitrostyrene
and of the final products (A). Relative stability of tri- vs tetrasubstituted
enamine models (highlighted in yellow) and of the possible iminium
ions, where the substituents on pyrrolidine and cyclopentene are represented
by tBu groups (B).

Our next worry was to evaluate whether epimerization can occur
during the intermediate steps or not. Figure 21B includes the protonation equilibria of
an enamine model, from a chiral pyrrolidine with a tBu group and a substituted cyclopentanone, with another tBu group instead of the CH(Ph)CH2NO2 group. This decreased by a factor of 3n the number of conformations to be calculated. The
lowest-energy enamine shown in Figure 21B is a non-epimerized trisubstituted enamine,
with both the tBu groups in the lower
face. Our calculations also indicate that two iminium-like non-epimerized
intermediates, especially those highlighted in yellow, would largely
predominate. Fortunately, after hydrolysis, they would afford the
same product. Epimerizations, if they actually occur, should take
place toward the end of the processes, from the substituted cyclopentanones.

Calculations of Cycloadducts from Cyclohexanones
In
parallel, we studied the reactions of cyclohexanone, pyrrolidine(s)
and (E)-1-nitropropene or β-nitrostyrene,19 as examples (Figure 22). They may pass through the corresponding zw (in very polar media) and through fused cyclobutane–cyclohexane
rings (fused cb, Figure 22A), although, as we mentioned in a preceding section,
we were unable to detect these plausible intermediates under standard
conditions. If this hypothesis becomes inconsistent in the light of
the MO calculations, it will be rejected. We were able to locate such
a zw only when polar solvents were included in the calculations;
otherwise, zw collapsed to the fused cb.
For example, optimizations with the M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p)/CPCM method
located the lowest-energy zw 3.6 kcal/mol above the corresponding cb in THF and only 0.7 kcal/mol in DMF; in water, the free
energies of zw and cb were estimated to
be similar.

Figure 22 Calculated reaction energies for the formation of cyclobutanes
from cyclohexanone (A). Relative energies, within each set, of the
plausible intermediates of the reaction of cyclohexanone, pyrrolidine,
and β-nitrostyrene (B); only the lowest-energy conformers are
represented. Relative energies of models of enamines (with tBu groups) and of the corresponding iminium ions
(C). Total energies are in au and, in bold numbers, relative energies
are in kcal/mol.

These formal cycloadditions
are again predicted to be very exothermic
and exergonic or exoergic. However, there is a feature that did not
appear in the fused cyclobutane–cyclopentane systems: the strong
tendency of the cyclohexane ring to adopt chair conformations forces
the pyrrolidine ring to acquire conformations that avoid the additional
vdW repulsions. There is only one further exo-methylene,
but it introduces significant steric hindrance. The fact is that the
conformer with the pyrrolidine ring perpendicular to the bicyclic
system—the one that is highly prone to ring opening—predominates
more than in Figure 21.

With chiral pyrrolidines, s-trans-enamine
conformers
should go to bicyclic systems with the CHNO2 carbon atom
of configuration S, while s-cis-enamine conformers
should go to (R)-CHNO2. Now, once again
as in the cyclopentanone case, the (R)-CHNO2 isomer is the most stable bicyclic system. In other words, the bicyclic
structures with the NO2 group on the left, in the drawings
of this work, are always preferred (highlighted in Figure 22A).

Therefore, there
is a simple consistent explanation for “point
(b)” mentioned in the Introduction.
Cyclopentanone and cyclohexanone, in the presence of chiral pyrrolidines,
react with nitroalkenes to afford different “syn” adducts
to those afforded by aldehydes due to the fact that the most stable
of the two assumed all-trans fused bicyclic nitrocyclobutanes (or
presumably of its open, ionic form, zw) has not the same
configuration at C–NO2 than the most stable of the
two simple nitrocyclobutanes. We have explained this in preceding
paragraphs. That the fused cyclobutanes are less stable at rt, with
respect to their zwitterions and enamines, than the simple nitrocyclobutanes
is another story, although it is understandable on the basis of the
additional steric repulsions that appear in the fused systems (see
below).

For cyclohexanone, the relative stabilities of the intermediates
arising from the ring opening and hydrolysis of the hypothetical but
computationally plausible fused systems are included in Figure 22B. We note that
(1) both enamines, particularly that with the trisubstituted double
bond, are more stable than the lowest-energy fused system (the steric
strain of the fused systems is released during ring opening); (2)
the pyrrolidine ring in the equilibrium geometry of the enamine with
the tetrasubstituted double bond (a half-chair conformer with a short
double bond between the two “substituents”) is not coplanar
with the cyclohexenyl moiety, in contrast to the cyclopentenyl case,
a fact that can be related to the well-known concept of the inhibition
of resonance (that is, any cyclohexenyl derivative exerts higher steric
hindrance on the neighboring pyrrolidine group than its related cyclopentenyl
derivative would); (3) the expected iminium ion (with its lowest-energy
conformer showing the NO2 group closest to the iminium
substructure) is more stable than its epimer; and (4) the syn adduct,
particularly its conformer with an ap arrangement and an O–H
distance at the C=O···HCHNO2 moiety
that resembles that of a hydrogen bond, is more stable than any conformer
of its epimerized adduct (anti). The respective gaps between the two
rows (expected vs epimerizable/epimerized intermediates) are larger
than in the cyclopentanone case. The features of the six-membered
rings—equilibrium between two preferred chair conformations, 1C4 and 4C1, with substituents
clearly axial or equatorial, as well as bond angles close to 120°
in half-chair conformations of cyclohexenyl derivatives in comparison
with bond angles close to 108° for cyclopentenyl analogues—are
responsible of these gaps. Thus, epimerization during the intermediate
steps of the process is predicted to be less probable than in the
case of cyclopentanone, as happens in practice.

For a chiral
pyrrolidine model with a second tBu group
on the cyclohexenyl ring, shown in Figure 22C, non-epimerized iminium
ions were predicted, as in Figure 21B, to be more stable than those epimerized.

Adduct
Enamines from Cyclopentanone Are More Resistant to Hydrolysis
Than Those from Cyclohexanone
The fact that completion of
the nitro-Michael reactions of cyclopentanone requires larger amounts
of catalyst than those of cyclohexanone (Figure 5) cannot be explained on the basis of a great
stability of the nitrobicyclo[3.2.0] systems with regard to the nitrobicyclo[4.2.0]
systems. Calculations indicate that the additional CH2 in
the cyclohexane ring, which has a strong tendency to adopt the well-known
chair conformation, causes further destabilizing vdW interactions
with the pyrrolidine ring or with the substituents of the pyrrolidine
ring. Thus, the [4.2.0] systems may be relatively less stable than
the [3.2.0] systems. Nevertheless, we had experimentally observed
that, at least above 5 °C, both bicyclic systems, if formed,
open spontaneously to afford enamines, even in apolar solvents and
in the absence of moisture. Therefore, the ring opening cannot be
the rate-limiting step of the process, in either case.

As the
2-tert-butylcyclohexanone–pyrrolidine enamine
was calculated to be relatively less stable than the 2-tert-butylcyclopentanone–pyrrolidine enamine, the respective hydrolyses
might not be equally shifted to the right, independently of the intermediates
involved. Figure 23 shows the calculations. Both hydrolyses (eqs 1 and 2) are exothermic,
as expected, but what matters is the difference between them; in other
words, if the concentration of water in the organic layer is very
low, which hydrolysis will be less affected. It is observed that eq
3, which is obtained by the subtraction of eq 2 from eq 1, is shifted
to the left, that is, the hydrolysis of the enamine of the cyclohexenyl
derivative is predicted to be around 2 kcal/mol, as a mean value,
more favored than that of enamine of the cyclopentenyl derivative.

Figure 23 Hydrolysis
of enamines from pyrrolidine and 2-tert-butylcyclopentanone
(eq 1) and from pyrrolidine and 2-tert-butylcyclohexanone
(eq 2). Equilibrium 3 (eq 3 = eq 1 – eq
2). Exchange of 2-tert-butylpyrrolidine between 2-tBu-substituted cycloalkanones (eq 4). Exchange
of 2-tert-butylpyrrolidine involving cycloalkanone−β-nitrostyrene
adducts (eq 5). Exchange of the JH catalyst between cycloalkanone−β-nitrostyrene
adducts (eq 6); the lowest-energy conformers are compared, with their
relative energies (kcal/mol) indicated in bold.

The steric repulsion between the tBu
group and pyrrolidine ring was higher when they were neighbors on
the cyclohexene ring than on the cyclopentene. Actually, the C2N1C1′C6′
dihedral angle of the cyclohexene derivative was predicted to be larger
than the C2N2C1′C5′ dihedral of the cyclopentene derivative.
Thus, some steric inhibition of resonance occurs again, mainly in
the cyclohexene case.

When the steric hindrance increased (eqs
4–6), the values
of ΔE also increased. Conformers were located
for each N-cyclopentenylpyrrolidine in which resonance
between the N atom and the double bond is still possible. For the
analogous N-cyclohexenylpirrolidines, the steric
inhibition of resonance was comparatively higher. As known1,3,5 and mentioned in preceding sections,
with large substituents on C2 of the pyrrolidine ring, aminocatalytic
reactions do not work in practice—starting enamines are hardly
formed, but these imaginary cases can also be computationally investigated,
as we have done in Figure 23 (eq 6), to find a general explanation of the differences
between cyclopentanone and cyclohexanone enamines.

For the isomer
of the example shown in eq 4 with the tetrasubstituted
double bond, the ΔE values were ≈1.5
kcal/mol higher; for the enamine from 2-tritylpyrrolidine with the
tetrasubstituted double bond, the predicted ΔE values were ≈5 kcal/mol higher than those given in eq 4.
These data are not included in Figure 23 but indicate again that the larger and
closer the substituents, the lower the stability of cyclohexanone
enamines in relation to cyclopentanone enamines.

To summarize,
in the same way as the equilibrium constants for
the formation of the initial enamines are very disparate,5 the hydrolysis of the final enamines to afford
the final adducts with release of the secondary amine may have quite
different equilibrium constants. If the water concentration in the
organic solution is low, some of these hydrolyses may not be completely
shifted to the right.

The last paragraphs and figures explain
the anomalous fact indicated
as “point (f)” (Figure 5) in the Introduction. Since
the hydrolysis of the final cyclopentanone enamines is not shifted
so far to the right as that of the final cyclohexanone enamines, the
overall nitro-Michael reaction will hardly proceed with really catalytic
amounts of chiral pyrrolidines in the first case since these (the
catalysts) are less easily released.

The corollary is that,
before ruling out disappointing aminocatalytic
trials as unfeasible, they should be attempted with substoichiometric
amounts of the chiral secondary amine and a little water or, if economically
possible, with stoichiometric amounts of the chiral amines, in solvents,
mixtures of solvents, or media that do not exclude water from the
organic phase.

Conclusions
When enamines from simple
aldehydes and pyrrolidine or chiral pyrrolidines
were treated with nitroalkenes and the reactions were followed by 1H NMR spectroscopy, all-trans-cyclobutanes cb were the major compounds in many organic solvents. Different
computational methods predicted that these cb are the
most stable isomers. The initial Michael-type zwitterionic intermediates
with the ionic groups close together (zw, Figures 12 and 13) were not detected by NMR and were even difficult to locate in silico,
except in polar solvents, due to their tendency to collapse to cb. Each zw may be viewed as the ionic form of
a tautomer with a C1–C4 covalent bond (cb).

Calculations indicated how the s-trans conformers of the starting
chiral enamines predominated in the equilibria and that their corresponding cb (Figures 14–16) were also thermodynamically favored.
The first barriers, calculated for model compounds, were very small
and similar for the different enamine conformers.

We have confirmed
that cyclobutanes cb (if not 2,2-disubstituted)
are slowly converted into adduct enamines, with a reaction rate depending
on the temperature, substituents, and solvent polarity. The relative
energies of these species have been calculated (Figures 7, 8, 17, and 18).

All of the species
mentioned [zw, cb,
and (E)-en] can be hydrolyzed to the
final adducts. As shown in Figure 17, part of the zw-like intermediates can
directly react with H2O or with H2O/HA; however,
if this route was predominant, as the chiral pyrrolidine would be
immediately released, almost all of the aminocatalytic reactions of
aldehydes would be very quick, which is absolutely not the case. Cyclobutanes
(cb), which are in equilibrium with zw,
can be hydrolyzed via such a route or through the adduct enamines
[(E)-en]. These adduct enamines should
be hydrolyzed via the corresponding iminium ions, by general acid
catalysis. This is the point where the stereoselectivity may be lost.
However, the calculations predicted that, for pyrrolidine-derived
enamines, iminium ions folded as the cyclic structures of the precursors,
here called im+, with favorable
electrostatic interactions between the polar groups and with H1, H2,
and H3 in ap arrangements, were the lowest-energy cations. For the
chiral enamines of the adducts, the protonation turned out also to
be stereoselective (Figure 18B). Thus, the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of any adduct enamine
can go through non-epimerized cations. In other words, it does not
matter if a percentage of zw (possible) and of cb (demonstrated) is converted into (E)-en, as the enamine–iminium protonation/deprotonation
equilibrium is very stereoselective.

Cyclopentanone and cyclohexanone
pose different problems. As a
working hypothesis, we assumed that the fused cyclobutanes derived
from the starting enamines were also formed as intermediates, although
at rt we had only detected one transient species. Again, the corresponding
zwitterions (zw, the initial adducts, undetectable) may
cyclize to fused cb (their covalent tautomers). The hypothesis
is supported by calculations. Zw may also afford the
corresponding adduct enamines (E)-en by prototropy. The predominant intermediates detected by NMR were
the adduct enamines with a trisubstituted double bond, in agreement
with the calculations. Again, all of these intermediates—zw, fused cb, and (E)-en—are eventually converted into the final ketones.
Actually, our calculations predict that fused cyclobutanes can be
formed but the ring opening is more favored than in cyclobutanes from
aldehyde enamines, due to the mutual steric hindrance of the fused
rings. From the point of view of stereoselectivity, this is an advantage
if the very major adduct enamine is the least substituted isomer,
but also if some of the more substituted adduct enamine is also formed
but its protonation and hydrolysis occur stereoselectively. This may
be the case of cyclohexanone, since we have calculated that there
is always one preferred iminium ion. It seems that, for this reason
as well, cyclohexanone has turned out to be the substrate of choice
for the comparison of the performance of a series of catalysts.

The main problematic points are graphically summarized in Figure 24. A moderate reactivity
of aldehydes, which with catalysts other than proline is due to a
lack of turnover, is explained by the well-known stability of some cb (which we have calculated for the first time) and by the
resistance to hydrolysis of the resulting enamines. For many ketones,
the lack of reactivity is explained by the low concentration of starting
enamines, as well as by the relative resistance to hydrolysis of some
final enamines (as calculated here).

Figure 24 Graphical summary from the starting enamines.
Preferred stereoisomers
of nitrocyclobutanes and relative stability of the main conformers
of 4-nitrobutanals (left column) and 2-(2-nitroethyl)cycloalkanones
(right).

Therefore, for those nitro-Michael
reactions that go mainly through
cyclobutanes, the rate-limiting step may be the ring opening of these
nitrocyclobutylpyrrolidines and/or the hydrolysis of the resulting
enamines (depending on the substituents; see Figures 18 and S5 for the
relative energies of these intermediates). That the preference of
cyclobutane substituents for the trans arrangement controls the stereoselectivity
is not incompatible with the existence of subsequent equilibrium steps,
more or less shifted to the right, more or less slow. The different
points of view are thus reconciled.

Figure 25 summarizes
our calculations (see ΔG° for the different
steps). All of the steps are equilibrium reactions, but the cycloaddition
is the most shifted to the right. For cases with large substituents
and the JH catalyst, the relative stability of nitrocyclobutanes with
respect to the precursors may not be so high, but such a step is still
exoergic or exergonic.

Figure 25 Updated version of Figure 2 in the light of the new experiments and
calculations, for
the reaction of aldehydes with nitroalkenes. The ΔG° values, from cb to en and from en to nitrobutanal, are those predicted for the case of pyrrolidine,
simple aliphatic aldehydes, and β-nitrostyrene by the M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p)
method.

A similar but not identical catalytic
cycle could be depicted for
cyclic ketones (not included). The changes or modifications should
be that (1) the s-cis conformers of the starting ketone enamines are
not only the productive species, but also, as the calculations predict,
the most abundant in the equilibria and give rise to the most stable
intermediates and final adducts; (2) the calculations explain why
the configurations of the two newly created stereocenters of the consecutive
intermediates and final nitro-Michael adducts are the opposite to
those from aldehydes and/or how much is the gap between the two series
of intermediates; (3) the suspected or hypothetical fused cyclobutanes
or their ionic forms (zw), which are more crowded than
the cyclobutanes arising from aldehydes, are not resting states, as
we have demonstrated in one case and calculated in many others that
they easily isomerize to the adduct enamines; (4) consequently, the
difficult formation of the starting enamines of crowded catalysts
(with release of water), or the hydrolysis by general acid catalysis
of the final enamines of less crowded catalysts (which requires the
released water), can be the rate-limiting step of the process.

In short, the computational results reported here are in accordance
with the experimental data and self-consistent. They can help to explain
further possible bizarre results other than cases (a)–(f) and
to choose appropriate catalysts and conditions when novel aminocatalyzed
reactions of carbonyl compounds with activated alkenes are envisaged.

Experimental
Section and Methods
Detection of Reaction Intermediates by NMR
Spectroscopy
The starting enamines (0.06–0.10 mmol)
were prepared in a
vial under Ar from approximately equivalent amounts (unless otherwise
indicated) of the carbonyl compound and pyrrolidine or pyrrolidine
derivative in the deuterated solvent (0.7 mL), in the presence of
powdered 3 Å MS and, except for the experiments with proline,
of CaH2 powder (ca. 75 mg). When no more bubbles were observed
(when CaH2 was used), the content was filtered and transferred
to an NMR tube. The spectra indicated an almost complete formation
of the desired initial enamine (with aldehydes) and residual amounts
of reactants. After cooling the tube to 5 °C, the nitroalkene
(1.0 equiv) was slowly added and the reaction was monitored by 1H NMR spectroscopy at the probe temperature (ca. 25 °C).
Some attempts of purification or isolation in a pure condition of
the following nitrocyclobutane intermediates were unsuccessful as
they were progressively converted into enamines at rt and these enamines
were gradually hydrolyzed on silica gel. The main NMR parameters are
given below [δ values in parts per million (ppm), coupling constants
in hertz, and multiplicities as usual]. For the full 1H
and 13C{1H} NMR spectra, as well as for COSY,
NOESY, and HSQC experiments, see the SI.

1-cb: 1H NMR (400 MHz, C6D6) δ 7.1–6.9 (m, 5H), 4.74 (dd, J = 9.0, 7.6, 1H), 3.20 (t, J = 9.0, 1H),
3.01 (t, J = 7.6, 1H), 2.36 (m, 2H), 2.26 (m, 2H),
1.90 (m, 1H), 1.48 (br s, 4H), 0.93 (d, J = 6.6,
3H).

2-cb: 1H NMR (400 MHz, C6D6) δ 7.1–6.9 (m, 5H), 4.74 (dd, J = 9.0, 7.1, 1H), 3.30 (t, J = 9.1, 1H),
3.20 (m,
1H), 2.40 (m, 2H), 2.30 (m, 2H), 1.95 (m, 1H), 1.48 (br s, 4H), 1.30
(m, 2H), 0.67 (t, J = 7.5, 3H); 13C NMR
(100.6 MHz, C6D6) δ 129.0, 127.5, 127.3,
84.4, 66.9, 50.5, 46.4, 42.9, 27.5, 23.8, 11.4.

3-cb: 1H NMR (400 MHz, C6D6) δ
7.1–6.9 (m, 5H), 4.79 (triplet-like dd, J ≈
8, 1H), 3.53 (triplet-like dd, J ≈ 8, 1H),
3.37 (t, J = 9.0, 1H), 2.47 (m,
2H), 2.36 (m, 2H), 1.93 (m, 1H), 1.55 (m, 1H), 1.48 (m, 4H), 0.81
(d, J = 6.7, 3H), 0.67 (d, J = 6.7,
3H); 1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 5.15 (dd, J = 8.4, 7.0, 1H), 3.63 (dd, J = 8.9, 7.0, 1H), 3.33 (d, J = 8.4, 7.3,
1H), 2.11 (m, 1H); 13C NMR (100.6 MHz, C6D6) δ 83.1, 65.2, 49.5, 44.8, 33.2, 23.9, 20.4, 20.0;
HRMS (ESI+) calcd for C17H25N2O2+ [M + H]+ 289.1911, found 289.1914.

4-cb: 1H NMR (400 MHz, C6D6) δ 7.1–6.9 (m, 5H), 5.04 (dd, J = 9.7, 7.6, 1H), 3.45 (d, J = 9.7, 1H), 2.95 (d, J = 7.6, 1H), 2.25 (m, 4H), 1.46 (m, 4H), 1.02 (s, 3H),
0.59 (s, 3H); 1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 5.52 (dd, J =
9.8, 7.6, 1H), 3.52 (d, J = 9.8, 1H), 3.02 (d, J = 7.6, 1H); 13C NMR (100.6 MHz, C6D6) δ 135.9, 128.8, 127.3, 82.1, 71.5, 52.3, 51.2,
38.9, 23.5, 18.2.

5-cb: 1H NMR (400
MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 4.90 (dd, J = 7.6, 6.6, 1H),
3.44 (dd, J = 8.2, 6.6, 1H), 2.13 (m, 1H), 1.75 (m,
1H).

6-cb: 1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 4.71 (t, J = 8.0,
1H), 2.68
(d, J = 8.0, 1H), 1.84 (br t, J ≈
8.0, 1H).

Proline-derived cyclobutanes 7-cb + 8-cb (a 55:45 mixture). Characteristic 1H NMR signals
of 7-cb (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ
5.27 (dd, J = 8.8, 7.5, 1H), 3.81 (dd, J = 9.0, 7.5, 1H), 3.67 (dd, J = 8.6, 5.7, 1H), 3.25
(br t, J ≈ 9.0, 1H), 2.07 (m, 1H). Characteristic 1H NMR signals of 8-cb (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 5.13 (dd, J = 8.4,
7.5, 1H), 3.76 (dd, J = 9.0, 7.5, 1H), 3.51 (dd, J = 9.1, 3.2, 1H), 3.20 (br t, J ≈
9.0, 1H), 2.14 (m, 1H).

Methyl prolinate-derived cyclobutanes 9-cb + 10-cb. Major isomer: 1H NMR
(400 MHz, C6D6) δ 4.76 (dd, J = 8.3, 7.4, 1H),
3.96 (dd, J = 9.0, 7.4, 1H), 3.66 (dd, J = 8.5, 5.2, 1H), 3.28 (dd, J = 9.0, 8.3, 1H), 1.93
(m, 1H). Minor isomer: δ 5.00 (dd, J = 8.4,
7.4, 1H), 3.77 (dd, J = 9.0, 7.4, 1H), 3.50 (dd, J = 8.1, 3.0, 1H), 3.19 (dd, J = 9.0, 8.4,
1H), 2.07 (m, 1H).

11-cb: 1H NMR (400
MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 5.30 (t, J = 8.0, 1H), 3.94
(t, J = 8.0, 1H), 3.21 (m, 3H), 2.05 (m, 2H). Some
signals of a minor stereoisomer were detected (see the SI).

12-cb: 1H
NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 5.71 (dd, J = 9.0, 8.0, 1H),
3.48 (overlapped, 1H), 3.30 (overlapped, 1H). Some signals of a minor
stereoisomer were detected (see the SI).

13-cb: 1H NMR (400 MHz, C6D6) δ 4.88 (dd, J = 8.2, 7.3, 1H), 4.23
(dd, J = 9.2, 7.3, 1H), 4.13 (m, 1H), 3.81 (dd, J = 9.8, 6.9, 1H), 3.62 (dd, J = 9.8, 5.4,
1H), 3.42 (t, J = 9.2, 1H), 3.28 (m, 1H), 2.93 (m,
1H), 2.70 (dd, J = 9.4, 5.1, 1H), 1.92 (m, 1H), 1.88
(m, 1H), 1.69 (m, 1H), 1.56 (m, 1H), 1.03 (d, J =
6.7, 3H), 0.69 (d, J = 6.7, 1H); 13C NMR
(100.6 MHz, C6D6) δ 82.2, 71.3, 68.1,
65.9, 61.6, 56.8, 47.8, 44.7, 38.3, 34.3, 20.6, 18.6. Signals of the
minor stereoisomer are observed, e.g., at δ 4.79 (dd, J = 8.4, 7.3 Hz, 1H). See the SI.

The smooth hydrolysis of these nitrocyclobutanes allowed
us to
correlate the configuration of each major stereoisomer with the known
major product of the reactions carried out under catalytic conditions
(the corresponding nitro-Michael reactions).

NMR spectra of 14-cb and 15-cb were coincident
with those reported.3d Only one stereoisomer
was detected in these cases (i.e., with the JH catalyst).

Enamine
(E)-1-en: 1H NMR
(400 MHz, C6D6) δ 7.10–6.90 (m,
5H), 5.82 (s, 1H), 4.31 (dd, J = 11.5, 9.8, 1H),
4.17 (dd, J = 11.5, 6.4, 1H), 3.99 (dd, J = 9.8, 6.4, 1H), 2.80 (m, 4H), 1.49 (s, 3H), 1.38 (m, 4H); 13C NMR (100.6 MHz, C6D6) δ 137.7,
128.7, 127.6, 127.1, 109.3, 78.0, 53.0, 51.0, 25.5, 13.3. NOESY indicated
that the Me group and the olefinic proton are trans.

Enamine
(E)-2-en: 1H NMR
(400 MHz, C6D6) δ 7.10–6.90 (m,
5H), 5.73 (s, 1H), 4.16 (dd, J = 11.8, 7.2, 1H),
4.08 (m, 1H), 2.81 (m, 4H), 2.06 (dt, J = 14.9, 7.4,
4H), 1.82 (td, J = 14.9, 7.5, 1H), 1.40 (m, J = 7.5, 2H), 0.87 (t, J = 7.5, 3H); 13C NMR (100.6 MHz, C6D6) δ 136.2,
115.7, 78.8, 52.9, 51.1, 49.2, 25.5, 23.4, 14.1. NOESY indicated that
the methylene of the Et group and the olefinic proton are trans.

Representative NMR spectra of reaction intermediates from cyclic
ketones are included and commented in the SI.

Computational Methods
The Gaussian 16 package was used
everywhere.16 All of the stationary points
were characterized as usual.16 In previous
works,5,17a we had noted that the order of stabilities
between enamines was not always properly described by B3LYP calculations
and that the minimum level of theory at which isomers were reliably
compared was MP2/6-31G(d)//B3LYP/6-31G(d). Thus, we have used this
relatively “low-cost” approach for the calculation of
hundreds of chemical entities. We then recalculated the corresponding
molecules at other levels of theory, mainly through full geometry
optimizations with M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p), but also with single-point
calculations from B3LYP geometries with MP2/6-311+G(d,p) (although
it tends to overestimate the dispersion forces), ωB97X-D/6-311+G(d,p)
(a functional including long-range dispersion corrections),16c M08-HX/6-311+G(d,p), MN15/6-311+G(d,p), CCSD(T)/6-31+G(d),
and/or CCSD(T)/6-311+G(d,p). For large molecules, to save computing
time, we compared the M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p)//ωB97X-D/6-31G(d)
energies, which appeared to be very close to the M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p)
values. The calculations of G° values were carried
out with the scaling factor of 0.9804 for B3LYP/6-31G;20 the correction (from E to G°) was added to the MP2/6-31G(d) energy to obtain
an approximate G° value at this level. With
the M06-2X/6-311+G(d,p) method, no correction was used (for the sake
of simplicity).20b For the cases in which
a huge number of conformations was possible, to ensure that no reasonable
conformers were discarded, OPLS2005 (MacroModel)21a and MMFF21b were used in the
initial searches; all of the relative minima up to 20 kcal/mol above
the lowest minimum were afterward submitted to MP2/6-31G(d)//B3LYP/6-31G(d)
calculations, as always. The calculations of the solvent effects,
with the CPCM and/or SMD models,16b were
also carried out with the Gaussian 16 suite of programs. When these
disparate approaches led to similar results regarding the relative
stability of isomers and conformers, the conclusions were deemed reliable.

Supporting Information Available
The
Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02074.Reaction energies
predicted for a variety of EWG-activated
alkenes that lead to cyclobutanes, approaches between the two reactants
(with simple models), relative energies of the conformers of chiral
enamines and all-trans-nitrocyclobutanes, effect
of tBu groups on pyrrolidine/aldehyde/nitroalkene,
alternative approaches of the reactants (cyclopentanone case), other
plausible pathways for the ring opening of nitrocyclobutanes, conformational
analysis of the nitro-Michael adducts (4-nitrobutanals), comparison
of fused cyclobutanes from cyclopentanone with cyclobutanes from propanal,
relative stability of iminium ions from cyclopentanone and cyclohexanone,
acyclic ketones, general experimental methods, preparation of prolinol
derivatives B–I, reactions of cyclohexanone
with β-nitrostyrene, selection of NMR spectra (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02074_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank the
Spanish government for financial support (CTQ2015-71506R,
FEDER). A.C.-A. is grateful to the Fundació Privada Cellex
de Barcelona for a fellowship during 2016 and 2017. H.C. received
a studentship from the Spanish government for the 2013–2017
period (CTQ2012-39230, FEDER). Al·lot J.C. was an undergraduate
and master’s student in our lab (2017–2018). Erasmus
student Vanessa Wandelt (Leibniz Universität Hannover, autumn
2014) carried out preliminary experiments, while Albert Pla, as an
undergraduate, and afterward as a post-master, ran preliminary calculations
during 2017. The senior author (J.V.) dedicates this work (a) to the
chemist and entrepreneur Dr. Pere Mir (in memoriam, 1919–2017),
who after his retirement from Derivados Forestales S. A. created the
Fundació Privada Cellex of Barcelona to provide funds to hospitals,
research institutes, and the Col·legi de Químics de Catalunya,
as well as special studentships and fellowships; (b) to the ETH emeritus
Prof. Dieter Seebach, a reference in the field of organic chemistry
for decades; and (c) to one of his best undergraduate and doctorate
students, the Manchester University lecturer Jordi Burés, who
also was a fellow student of the Fundació Cellex for 1 year.
==== Refs
References
a Reyes-Rodríguez G. J. ; Rezayee N. M. ; Vidal-Albalat A. ; Jørgensen K. A. 
The Prevalence
of Diarylprolinol Silyl Ethers in Total
Synthesis and Patents . Chem. Rev. 
2019 , 119 , 4221 –4260 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00583 .30747525  b Liu J. ; Wang L. 
Recent Advances in Asymmetric Reactions
Catalyzed by Proline and Its Derivatives . Synthesis 
2017 , 49 , 960 –972 . 10.1055/s-0036-1588901 . c Renzi P. ; Hioe J. ; Gschwind R. M. 
Enamine/Dienamine and Brønsted
Acid Catalysis: Elusive Intermediates, Reaction Mechanisms, and Stereoinduction
Modes Based on in Situ NMR Spectroscopy and Computational Studies . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2017 , 50 , 2936 –2948 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.7b00320 .29172479  d Heravi M. M. ; Zadsirjan V. ; Dehghani M. ; Hosseintash N. 
Current Applications of Organocatalysts
in Asymmetric Aldol Reactions: An Update . Tetrahedron:
Asymmetry 
2017 , 28 , 587 –707 . 10.1016/j.tetasy.2017.04.006 . e Chauhan P. ; Mahajan S. ; Enders D. 
Achieving Molecular
Complexity via Stereoselective Multiple Domino Reactions Promoted
by a Secondary Amine Organocatalyst . Acc. Chem.
Res. 
2017 , 50 , 2809 –2821 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.7b00406 .29125741  f Halskov K. S. ; Donslund B. S. ; Paz B. M. ; Jørgensen K. A. 
Computational
Approach to Diarylprolinol-Silyl Ethers in Aminocatalysis . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2016 , 49 , 974 –986 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00008 .27128200  g Lam Y. ; Grayson M. N. ; Holland M. C. ; Simon A. ; Houk K. N. 
Theory and Modeling of Asymmetric Catalytic Reactions . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2016 , 49 , 750 –762 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00006 .26967569  h Hayashi Y. 
Pot Economy and One-Pot Synthesis . Chem. Sci. 
2016 , 7 , 866 –880 . 10.1039/C5SC02913A .28791118 i Šebesta R. ; Sorádová Z.  Prolinol
Silyl Ethers as Asymmetric Organocatalysts . In Sustainable Catalysis: Without Metals or Other Endangered Elements,
Part 1 ; North M.  , Ed.; Green Chemistry Series ; Royal Society of
Chemistry , 2016 ; Vol. 40 , pp 166 –199 . j Reyes E. ; Uria U. ; Vicario J. L. ; Carrillo L. 
The Catalytic, Enantioselective
Michael Reaction . Org. React. 
2016 , 90 , 1 –898 . 10.1002/0471264180.or090.01 .
a Brannock K. C. ; Bell A. ; Burpitt R. D. ; Kelly C. A. 
Reactions
of Isobutenylamines. I. Cyclobutane Formation . J. Org. Chem. 
1961 , 26 , 625 –626 . 10.1021/jo01061a074 . b Brannock K. C. ; Bell A. ; Burpitt R. D. ; Kelly C. A. 
Enamine
chemistry. IV. Cycloaddition Reactions of Enamines Derived from Aldehydes
and Acyclic Ketones . J. Org. Chem. 
1964 , 29 , 801 –812 . 10.1021/jo01027a009 . c Brannock K. C. ; Burpitt R. D. ; Goodlett W. V. ; Thweatt J. G. 
Enamine Chemistry.
V. Cycloaddition Reactions of Enamines Derived from Alicyclic Ketones . J. Org. Chem. 
1964 , 29 , 813 –817 . 10.1021/jo01027a010 . d Kuehne M. E. ; Foley L. 
Reaction of Enamines with Nitro Olefins . J. Org. Chem. 
1965 , 30 , 4280 –4284 . 10.1021/jo01023a066 . e Colonna F.
P. ; Valentin E. ; Pitacco G. ; Risaliti A. 
Vinylamines. XIV. Nitroalkylation
of Enaminic Equilibrium Mixtures . Tetrahedron 
1973 , 29 , 3011 –3017 . 10.1016/S0040-4020(01)93436-2 . f Seebach D. ; Beck A. K. ; Golinski J. ; Hay J. H. ; Laube T. 
Steric Course of the Conversion of Enamines from Open-Chain Aldehydes
and Ketones with Nitro Olefins to 2,3-Disubstituted 4-Nitro Ketones . Helv. Chim. Acta 
1985 , 68 , 162 –172 . 10.1002/hlca.19850680120 . g Felluga F. ; Nitti P. ; Pitacco G. ; Valentin E. 
Carbo- and
Heterocyclization Reactions of 2-(4-Morpholinyl)-1-phenylpropene and
Nitro Olefins . Tetrahedron 
1989 , 45 , 5667 –5678 . 10.1016/S0040-4020(01)89509-0 . h Felluga F. ; Nitti P. ; Pitacco G. ; Valentin E. 
N-(2-Phenylprop-1-enyl)proline
Methyl Ester: Equilibrium between the Enamine and the Aza Methine
Ylide Form . J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1 
1992 , 2331 –2335 . 10.1039/p19920002331 . i Sheldrake H. M. ; Wallace T. W. ; Wilson C. P. 
Functionalized Cyclobutenes via Multicomponent
Thermal [2 + 2] Cycloaddition Reactions . Org.
Lett. 
2005 , 7 , 4233 –4236 . 10.1021/ol051675f .16146395  j Korotaev V. Y. ; Barkov A. Y. ; Slepukhin P. A. ; Kodess M. I. ; Sosnovskikh V. Y. 
Uncatalyzed Reactions of α-(Trihaloethylidene)nitroalkanes
with Push–Pull Enamines: a New Type of Ring–Ring Tautomerism
in Cyclobutane Derivatives and the Dramatic Effect of the Trihalomethyl
Group on the Reaction Pathway . Tetrahedron Lett. 
2011 , 52 , 5764 –5768 . 10.1016/j.tetlet.2011.08.109 . k Dobi Z. ; Holczbauer T. ; Soos T. 
Schreiner’s
Thiourea Promoted [2+2] Cycloaddition of Captodative Azetidinones
and Nitroolefins . Eur. J. Org. Chem. 
2017 , 1391 –1395 . 10.1002/ejoc.201601524 .
a Patora-Komisarska K. ; Benohoud M. ; Ishikawa H. ; Seebach D. ; Hayashi Y. 
Organocatalyzed Michael Addition
of Aldehydes to Nitro Alkenes – Generally Accepted Mechanism
Revisited and Revised . Helv. Chim. Acta 
2011 , 94 , 719 –745 . 10.1002/hlca.201100122 . b Burés J. ; Armstrong A. ; Blackmond D. G. 
Mechanistic Rationalization of Organocatalyzed
Conjugate Addition of Linear Aldehydes to Nitro-olefins . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 8822 –8825 . 10.1021/ja203660r .21568340  c Burés J. ; Armstrong A. ; Blackmond D. G. 
Curtin–Hammett Paradigm for Stereocontrol
in Organocatalysis by Diarylprolinol Ether Catalysts . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 6741 –6750 . 10.1021/ja300415t .22452319  d Seebach D. ; Sun X. ; Ebert M.-O. ; Schweizer W. B. ; Purkayastha N. ; Beck A. K. ; Duschmalé J. ; Wennemers H. ; Mukaiyama T. ; Benohoud M. ; Hayashi Y. ; Reiher M. 
Stoichiometric Reactions of Enamines Derived from Diphenylprolinol
Silyl Ethers with Nitro Olefins and Lessons for the Corresponding
Organocatalytic Conversions – a Survey . Helv. Chim. Acta 
2013 , 96 , 799 –852 . 10.1002/hlca.201300079 . e Mukaiyama T. ; Ishikawa H. ; Koshino H. ; Hayashi Y. 
One-Pot Synthesis
of (−)-Oseltamivir and Mechanistic Insights into the Organocatalyzed
Michael Reaction . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2013 , 19 , 17789 –17800 . 10.1002/chem.201302371 .24249709  f Burés J. ; Armstrong A. ; Blackmond D. G. 
Explaining Anomalies in Enamine Catalysis:
“Downstream Species” as a New Paradigm for Stereocontrol . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2016 , 49 , 214 –222 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00394 .26830669  g Földes T. ; Madarász A. ; Révész A. ; Dobi Z. ; Varga S. ; Hamza A. ; Nagy P. R. ; Pihko P. M. ; Pápai I. 
Stereocontrol
in Diphenylprolinol Silyl Ether Catalyzed Michael Additions: Steric
Shielding or Curtin–Hammett Scenario? . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 17052 –17063 . 10.1021/jacs.7b07097 .29088911 (also see refs cited therein for other relevant
calculations)

 h Arpa E. M. ; Aguilar-Galindo F. ; Díaz-Tendero S. 
Unravelling the Mechanism of Non-Photoactivated [2+2]
Cycloaddition Reactions: Relevance of Orbital Interactions and Zwitterionic
Intermediates . ChemistrySelect 
2017 , 2 , 1089 –1093 . 10.1002/slct.201601743 .
a Chinchilla R. ; Bäckwall J. E. 
Cycloadditions
of 2-Nitro 1,3-Dienes
to Enamines. Asymmetric Induction and Synthesis of Unsaturated Nitroketones
and Diels–Alder Adducts via [4+2] Heterocyloadditions . Tetrahedron Lett. 
1992 , 33 , 5641 –5644 . 10.1016/S0040-4039(00)61168-1 . b Seebach D. ; Sun X. ; Sparr C. ; Ebert M.-O. ; Schweizer W. B. ; Beck A. K. 
1,2-Oxazine N-Oxides as Catalyst Resting
States in Michael Additions of Aldehydes to Nitro Olefins Organocatalyzed
by α,α-Diphenylprolinol Trimethylsilyl Ether . Helv. Chim. Acta 
2012 , 95 , 1064 –1078 . 10.1002/hlca.201200283 . c Sahoo G. ; Rahaman H. ; Madarasz A. ; Papai I. ; Melarto M. ; Valkonen A. ; Pihko P. M. 
Dihydrooxazine
oxides as key intermediates in organocatalytic Michael additions of
aldehydes to nitroalkenes . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 13144 –13148 . 10.1002/anie.201204833 . d Gurubrahamam R. ; Chen Y. M. ; Huang W.-Y. ; Chang Y.-T. ; Chan H.-K. ; Tsai M.-K. ; Chen K. 
Dihydrooxazine N-Oxide Intermediates as Resting States in Organocatalytic
Kinetic Resolution of Functionalized Nitroallylic Amines with Aldehydes . Org. Lett. 
2016 , 18 , 3046 –3049 . 10.1021/acs.orglett.6b00493 .27280336  e Maillard L. T. ; Park H. S. ; Kang Y. K. 
Organocatalytic
Asymmetric Addition of Aldehyde to Nitroolefin by H-D-Pro-Pro-Glu-NH2: A Mechanistic Study . ACS Omega 
2019 , 4 , 8862 –8873 . 10.1021/acsomega.9b00465 .31459974 
Castro-Alvarez A. ; Carneros H. ; Costa A. M. ; Vilarrasa J. 
Computer-Aided
Insight into the Relative Stability of Enamines . Synthesis 
2017 , 49 , 5285 –5306 . 10.1055/s-0036-1590909 .(an account requested by the Editor)


Husch T. ; Seebach D. ; Beck A. K. ; Reiher M. 
Rigorous Conformational
Analysis of Pyrrolidine Enamines with Relevance to Organocatalysis . Helv. Chim. Acta 
2017 , 100 , e170018210.1002/hlca.201700182 .
a Gorde A. B. ; Ramapanicker R. 
d-Prolyl-2-(trifluoromethylsulfonamidopropyl)pyrrolidine:
An Organocatalyst for Asymmetric Michael Addition of Aldehydes to β-Nitroalkenes at Ambient Conditions . J. Org. Chem. 
2019 , 84 , 1523 –1533 . 10.1021/acs.joc.8b02945 .30609351  b Mahato C. K. ; Mukherjee S. ; Kundu M. ; Pramanik A. 
Pyrrolidine-Oxadiazolone Conjugates
as Organocatalysts in Asymmetric Michael Reaction . J. Org. Chem. 
2019 , 84 , 1053 –1063 . 10.1021/acs.joc.8b02393 .30577689  c Llopis S. ; García T. ; Cantin A. ; Velty A. ; Díaz U. ; Corma A. 
Chiral Hybrid Materials Based on Pyrrolidine Building Units to Perform
Asymmetric Michael Additions with High Stereocontrol . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2018 , 8 , 5835 –5847 . 10.1039/C8CY01650J .30713656 
a Seebach D. ; Golinski J. 
Synthesis of Open-Chain 2,3-Disubstituted
4-Nitroketones by Diastereoselective Michael-Addition of (E)-Enamines to (E)-Nitroolefins. A Topological
Rule for C,C-Bond Forming Processes between Prochiral Centers . Helv. Chim. Acta 
1981 , 64 , 1413 –1423 . 10.1002/hlca.19810640518 .b Ref 2f

 c List B. ; Pojarliev P. ; Martin H. J. 
Efficient Proline-Catalyzed Michael Additions of Unmodified
Ketones to Nitro Olefins . Org. Lett. 
2001 , 3 , 2423 –2425 . 10.1021/ol015799d .11483025  d Betancort J. M. ; Barbas C. F. 
Catalytic Direct Asymmetric Michael Reactions: Taming
Naked Aldehyde Donors . Org. Lett. 
2001 , 3 , 3737 –3740 . 10.1021/ol0167006 .11700126  e Enders D. ; Seki A. 
Proline-Catalyzed Enantioselective Michael Additions of Ketones to
Nitrostyrene . Synlett 
2002 , 26 –28 . 10.1055/s-2002-19336 . f Alexakis A. ; Andrey O. 
Diamine-Catalyzed Asymmetric Michael
Additions of Aldehydes and Ketones to Nitrostyrene . Org. Lett. 
2002 , 4 , 3611 –3614 . 10.1021/ol026543q .12375900 
a Ref 3d,
footnote 28

b Yang H. ; Wong M. W. 
(S)-Proline-Catalyzed
Nitro-Michael Reactions: Towards a Better Understanding of the Catalytic
Mechanism and Enantioselectivity . Org. Biomol.
Chem. 
2012 , 10 , 3229 –3235 . 10.1039/c2ob06993h .22402630 
Xiao J. ; Xu F.-X. ; Lu Y.-P. ; Loh T.-P. 
Chemzimes: A New
Class of Structurally Rigid Tricyclic Amphibian Organocatalyst Inspired
by Natural Product . Org. Lett. 
2010 , 12 , 1220 –1223 . 10.1021/ol9029758 .20158252 
a Donadío L. G. ; Galetti M. A. ; Giorgi G. ; Rasparini M. ; Comin M. J. 
Anti-Selective Organocatalytic
Michael Addition between Phenylacetaldehyde and Nitrostyrene . J. Org. Chem. 
2016 , 81 , 7952 –7957 . 10.1021/acs.joc.6b01061 .27442526  b Roytman V. A. ; Karugu R. W. ; Hong Y. ; Hirschi J. S. ; Vetticatt M. J. 
13C Kinetic Isotope Effects as a Quantitative Probe To Distinguish
between Enol and Enamine Mechanisms in Aminocatalysis . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2018 , 24 , 8098 –8102 . 10.1002/chem.201801748 .29654709 
a Refs
7a and 7c.

b Wujkowska Z. ; Zawisza A. ; Lesniak S. ; Rachwalski M. 
Phosphinoyl-Aziridines as a New Class of Chiral Catalysts
for Enantioselective Michael Addition . Tetrahedron 
2019 , 75 , 230 –235 . 10.1016/j.tet.2018.11.052 . c Szőllősi G. ; Gombkötő D. ; Mogyorós A. Z. ; Fülöp F. 
Surface-Improved Asymmetric Michael
Addition Catalyzed by Amino Acids Adsorbed on Laponite . Adv. Synth. Catal. 
2018 , 360 , 1992 –2004 . 10.1002/adsc.201701627 . d Avila-Ortiz C. G. ; Díaz-Corona L. ; Jiménez-González E. ; Juaristi E. 
Asymmetric Michael Addition Organocatalyzed by α,β-Dipeptides under Solvent-Free Reaction Conditions . Molecules 
2017 , 22 , 132810.3390/molecules22081328 . e Szcześniak P. ; Staszewska-Krajewska O. ; Furman B. ; Młynarski J. 
Asymmetric Synthesis of Cyclic Nitrones
via Organocatalytic Michael Addition of Aldehydes to Nitroolefins
and Subsequent Reductive Cyclization . ChemistrySelect 
2017 , 2 , 2670 –2676 . 10.1002/slct.201700448 . f Kumar T. P. ; Sattar M. A. ; Prasad S. S. ; Haribabu K. ; Reddy C. S. 
Enantioselective Michael Addition of Aldehydes to Nitroolefins
Catalyzed by Pyrrolidine–HOBt . Tetrahedron:
Asymmetry 
2017 , 28 , 401 –409 . 10.1016/j.tetasy.2017.02.005 . g Ma Z.-W. ; Liu X.-F. ; Sun B. ; Huang X.-H. ; Tao J.-C. 
Chiral Primary Amine–Squaramide Catalyzed Highly
Enantioselective Michael Addition of Isobutyraldehyde to Nitroolefins . Synthesis 
2017 , 49 , 1307 –1314 . 10.1055/s-0036-1588090 . h Wang W.-H. ; Abe T. ; Wang X.-B. ; Kodama K. ; Hirose T. ; Zhang G.-Y. 
Self-Assembled Proline–Amino
Thioureas as Efficient Organocatalysts for the Asymmetric Michael
Addition of Aldehydes to Nitroolefins . Tetrahedron:
Asymmetry 
2010 , 21 , 2925 –2933 . 10.1016/j.tetasy.2010.11.025 . i Bai J.-F. ; Xu X.-Y. ; Huang Q.-C. ; Peng L. ; Wang L.-X. 
Highly Asymmetric Michael Additions of α,α-Disubstituted Aldehydes to β-Nitroalkenes
Promoted by Chiral Pyrrolidine–Thiourea Bifunctional Catalysts . Tetrahedron Lett. 
2010 , 51 , 2803 –2805 . 10.1016/j.tetlet.2010.03.039 . j Chen J.-R. ; Cao Y.-J. ; Zou Y.-Q. ; Tan F. ; Fu L. ; Zhu X.-Y. ; Xiao W.-J. 
Novel Thiourea–Amine Bifunctional Catalysts
for Asymmetric Conjugate Addition of Ketones/Aldehydes to Nitroalkenes:
Rational Structural Combination for High Catalytic Efficiency . Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2010 , 8 , 1275 –1279 . 10.1039/b925962g .20204193  k Cao C.-L. ; Ye M.-C. ; Sun X.-L. ; Tang Y. 
Pyrrolidine-Thiourea as a Bifunctional Organocatalyst: Highly Enantioselective
Michael Addition of Cyclohexanone to Nitroolefins . Org. Lett. 
2006 , 8 , 2901 –2904 . 10.1021/ol060481c .16805512 
a Carneros H.  Organocatàlisi: addicions de
Michael i formació
d’enamines . Master Thesis, Universitat de Barcelona , 2012 .b Carneros H.  Organocatálisis
asimétrica. Desarrollo de catalizadores y estudio de los mecanismos
implicados . Ph.D. Thesis, Universitat
de Barcelona , 2018 .
Liu F. Y. ; Wang S. W. ; Wang N. ; Peng Y. G. 
Prolinol tert-Butyldiphenylsilyl
Ether as Organocatalyst for the Asymmetric Michael Addition of Cyclohexanone
to Nitroolefins . Synlett 
2007 , 2415 –2419 . 10.1055/s-2007-985581 .
a Lokesh N. ; Seegerer A. ; Hioe J. ; Gschwind R. M. 
Chemical
Exchange Saturation Transfer in Chemical Reactions:
A Mechanistic Tool for NMR Detection and Characterization of Transient
Intermediates . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2018 , 140 , 1855 –1862 . 10.1021/jacs.7b12343 .29336150  b Renzi P. ; Hioe J. ; Gschwind R. M. 
Enamine/Dienamine
and Brønsted Acid Catalysis: Elusive Intermediates, Reaction
Mechanisms, and Stereoinduction Modes Based on in Situ NMR Spectroscopy
and Computational Studies . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2017 , 50 , 2936 –2948 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.7b00320 .29172479 (and references cited therein)

 c Łągiewka B. ; Albrecht L. 
Studies on the Formation
of Dienamine and Trienamine Intermediates by 1H NMR Spectroscopy . Asian J. Org. Chem. 
2017 , 6 , 516 –519 . 10.1002/ajoc.201600616 .
a Frisch M. J.  Gaussian 16 ; Gaussian,
Inc. : Wallingford, CT , 2016 ; www.gaussian.com/gaussian16see the SI for
the full reference.

b Marenich A. V. ; Cramer C. J. ; Truhlar D. G. 
Universal
Solvation Model Based on Solute Electron Density and on a Continuum
Model of the Solvent Defined by the Bulk Dielectric Constant and Atomic
Surface Tensions . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2009 , 113 , 6378 –6396 . 10.1021/jp810292n .19366259  c Grimme S. 
Density Functional Theory with London Dispersion Corrections . Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci. 
2011 , 1 , 211 –228 . 10.1002/wcms.30 .
a Castro-Alvarez A. ; Carneros H. ; Sánchez D. ; Vilarrasa J. 
Importance of the Electron Correlation and Dispersion
Corrections in Calculations Involving Enamines, Hemiaminals, and Aminals.
Comparison of B3LYP, M06-2X, MP2, and CCSD Results with Experimental
Data . J. Org. Chem. 
2015 , 80 , 11977 –11985 . 10.1021/acs.joc.5b01814 .26556606  b Zhao J.-Q. ; Gan L.-H. 
Transition States of the Asymmetric
Michael Reactions of Aldehydes Catalyzed by Trimethylsilyl-Protected
Diphenylprolinol . Eur. J. Org. Chem. 
2009 , 2661 –2665 . 10.1002/ejoc.200900051 . c Shinisha C. B. ; Sunoj R. B. 
Unraveling High Precision Stereocontrol
in a Triple Cascade Organocatalytic Reaction . Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2008 , 6 , 3921 –3929 . 10.1039/b810901j .18931798 
a Seebach D. ; Beck A. K. ; Badine D. M. ; Limbach M. ; Eschenmoser A. ; Treasurywala A. M. ; Hobi R. ; Prikoszovich W. ; Lindner B. 
Are Oxazolidinones
Really Unproductive, Parasitic Species in Proline Catalysis? –
Thoughts and Experiments Pointing to an Alternative View . Helv. Chim. Acta 
2007 , 90 , 425 –471 . 10.1002/hlca.200790050 . b Blackmond D. G. ; Moran A. ; Hughes M. ; Armstrong A. 
Unusual Reversal
of Enantioselectivity in the Proline-Mediated α-Amination of Aldehydes Induced by Tertiary Amine Additives . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 7598 –7599 . 10.1021/ja102718x .20465280  c Mayr H. ; Lakhdar S. ; Maji B. ; Ofial A. R. 
A Quantitative Approach to Nucleophilic Organocatalysis . Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 
2012 , 8 , 1458 –1478 . 10.3762/bjoc.8.166 .23019481 
a Refs
1f, 1g, 4e, 5, and 8c (and papers cited therein)

b Bhaskararao B. ; Sunoj R. B. 
Two Chiral Catalysts in Action: Insights
into Cooperativity and Stereoselectivity in Proline and Cinchona-Thiourea
Dual Organocatalysis . Chem. Sci. 
2018 , 9 , 8738 –8747 . 10.1039/C8SC03078B .30627394  c Tafida U. I. ; Uzairu A. ; Abechi S. E. 
Mechanism and Rate
Constant of Proline-Catalysed Asymmetric Aldol Reaction of Acetone
and p-Nitrobenzaldehyde in Solution Medium: Density-Functional
Theory Computation . J. Adv. Res. 
2018 , 12 , 11 –19 . 10.1016/j.jare.2018.03.002 .30013799  d Ruiz-Olalla A. ; Retamosa M. G. ; Cossío F. P. 
Densely
Substituted L-Proline Esters as Catalysts for Asymmetric Michael Additions
of Ketones to Nitroalkenes . J. Org. Chem. 
2015 , 80 , 5588 –5599 . 10.1021/acs.joc.5b00495 .25974363  e Hubin P. O. ; Jacquemin D. ; Leherte L. ; Vercauteren D. P. 
Quantum
Mechanical Investigations on the Role of Neutral and Negatively Charged
Enamine Intermediates in Organocatalyzed Reactions . Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 434 , 30 –36 . 10.1016/j.chemphys.2014.02.012 . f Fu A. ; Zhao C. ; Li H. ; Tian F. ; Yuan S. ; Duan Y. ; Wang Z. 
Density Functional
Study of Organocatalytic Cross-Aldol Reactions between Two Aliphatic
Aldehydes: Insight into Their Functional Differentiation and Origins
of Chemo- and Stereoselectivities . J. Phys.
Chem. A 
2013 , 117 , 2862 –2872 . 10.1021/jp3126363 .23442005  g Hut’ka M. ; Poláčková V. ; Marák J. ; Kaniansky D. ; Šebesta R. ; Toma S. 
Enantioselective Organocatalytic Michael Additions of Oxyacetaldehydes
to Nitroolefins . Eur. J. Org. Chem. 
2010 , 6430 –6435 . 10.1002/ejoc.201001032 . h Groselj U. ; Seebach D. ; Badine D. M. ; Schweizer W. B. ; Beck A. K. ; Krossing I. ; Klose P. ; Hayashi Y. ; Uchimaru T. 
Structures of the Reactive Intermediates in Organocatalysis
with Diarylprolinol Ethers . Helv. Chim. Acta 
2009 , 92 , 1225 –1259 . 10.1002/hlca.200900179 .
a Curtiss L. A. ; Raghavachari K. ; Redfern P. C. ; Pople J. A. 
Investigation of the Use of B3LYP
Zero-Point Energies and Geometries in the Calculation of Enthalpies
of Formation . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
1997 , 270 , 419 –426 . 10.1016/S0009-2614(97)00399-0 . b Alecu I. M. ; Zheng J. ; Zhao Y. ; Truhlar D. G. 
Computational
Thermochemistry: Scale Factor Databases and Scale Factors for Vibrational
Frequencies Obtained from Electronic Model Chemistries . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2010 , 6 , 2872 –2887 . 10.1021/ct100326h .26616087 (cf. https://comp.chem.umn.edu/freqscale/190107_Database_of_Freq_Scale_Factors_v4.pdf, last update 2018)


a MacroModel,
OPLS_2005 force field. https://www.schrodinger.com/macromodel).b MMFF
(Merck Molecular Force Field), as implemented in Spartan and in MacroModel,
see: Halgren T. A. 
Merck Molecular
Force Field. I. Basis, Form, Scope, Parameterization, and Performance
of MMFF94 . J. Comput. Chem. 
1996 , 17 , 490 –519 . 10.1002/(SICI)1096-987X(199604)17:5/6<490::AID-JCC1>3.0.CO;2-P .

