
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03427ArticleElectrostatic Investigation
of 4-Dicyanomethylene-2,6-dimethyl-4H-pyran (DDP) Dye with Amide Derivatives in Water Somasundaram Gayathri Rajaraman Vasanthi Mahalingam Vanjinathan Rajendran Kumaran *Department of Chemistry, Dwaraka Doss. Goverdhan Doss. Vaishnav College (Autonomous)
(Affiliated to University of Madras, Chennai), 833, Gokul Bagh, E.V.R. Periyar
Road, Arumbakkam, Chennai 600106, Tamil Nadu, India* E-mail: kumaranwau@rediffmail.com. Phone: 091-44-2475 6655. Fax: 091-44-2475 4349.26 12 2019 14 01 2020 5 1 751 757 15 10 2019 16 12 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Cyclic voltammetry (CV) studies of 4-dicyanomethylene-2,6-4H-pyran (DDP) dye with alkyl-substituted amides were carried
out in an aqueous solution. Formamide and substituted amide interaction
with DDP dye were characterized by fluorescence spectral techniques
in an aqueous solution, but the electrochemical nature and the interaction
at the interface region between dye–amide remains largely unexplored.
The introduction of formamide to DDP dye exhibits an increase in the
peak current accompanied with potential values gradually shifting
more toward a less positive region. A large variation in the current–potential
characteristics is observed in alkyl-substituted amides. The cyclic
voltammograms of alkyl amides are found to be entirely different from
each other. The role of alkyl substitution in the amide molecular
framework influences the reduction potential of the dye in an aqueous
medium. The mode of interaction of the dye with alkyl-substituted
amides is predominantly due to the electrostatic behavior, even though
hydrogen-bonding interactions coexist throughout the aqueous phase.
The binding constant parameter (K), free-energy changes
(ΔG), and the variation in the potential behavior
of the dye in the presence of formamide and alkyl amides authenticate
that the nature of interaction operates by both hydrogen-bonding mode
and electrostatic interactions. Electrochemical techniques when coupled
with fluorescence methods provide an efficient method of determining
the interaction at the bulk and the interface regions of a water-soluble
dye with nonfluorophoric solutes.

document-id-old-9ao9b03427document-id-new-14ao9b03427ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
4-Dicyanomethylene-2,6-4H-pyran (DDP) dye belongs
to the family of 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-(4-dimethylaminostyryl)-4H-pyran (DCM) type dye. DDP dye is classified as intermolecular
charge-transfer (ICT)-based dye. The structure of DDP dye has a strong
acceptor group dicyanomethylene −C(CN)2 in the fourth
position and a donor moiety (methyl) substituted in second and sixth
positions, as shown in Figure 1. DDP dye possesses a striking advantage over DCM dye1−5 due to better solubility in water.

Figure 1 Schematic representation of DDP dye.

DCM dye has been widely employed as a fluorescent
material in optoelectronic
devices6 (high-performance organic electroluminescent
devices). Further, the electroluminescent and photophysical properties
are significantly enhanced7 by varying
the structure of the electron-donating groups. The major disadvantage
with DCM dye over DDP dye is attributed to its solubility in water.
DDP dye has better solubility in water and it also serves as a light-emitter
organic material. It also possesses the property of not crystallizing
easily when coated upon polymeric surfaces, which portrays DDP dye
as a useful probe molecule to study the electroluminescent properties
in an aqueous solution.

The spectroscopic and electrochemical
nature of many surface-bound
fluorescent probes are found to be highly sensitive to the local microenvironment
formed by the adlayer around the close vicinity, and the electronic
interface provides valuable information on the electrochemical properties
of these probes. Considering the high sensitivity of fluorescence
and the salient structural information that it can provide, photophysical
techniques are predominantly confined to the bulk region wherein the
structure of the solvent and solvent-induced properties govern the
absorption and emission phenomena. On the other hand, although redox
reactions can be carried out in bulk solution, this technique provides
very little control and idea about the processes taking place to a
larger area. Cyclic voltammetry is an important analytical technique
and also a powerful tool commonly employed to investigate the reduction
and oxidation processes of molecular species. This technique also
provides in depth information in studying and analyzing the electron
transfer (ET)-initiated chemical reactions, which also includes catalysis.
Electrochemistry provides a much easier and cleaner way to carry out
redox reactions when the area of study is limited to a very small
dimension. By monitoring the potential applied to a working electrode,
it is possible to study the ET occurring between the electrode interface
and dye in the presence of solute. Further, the kinetics of the reaction
mechanisms involved could also be well established based on the current–potential
characteristics. This technique, when coupled with spectroscopic outcomes
provides better knowledge for understanding the nature of the interaction.

Electrochemical investigation and photophysical studies of a well-known
water-soluble nonfluorophoric solute like guanidine hydrochloride
(GuHCl) with DDP dye have been carried out in an aqueous phase8 wherein oxidation potential properties of DDP
dye are largely governed by the solute and solute–solvent interactions.
Like GuHCl, amides are classified as water-soluble hydrogen-bonding
solutes, and a thorough investigation of the absorption, steady state
emission, and time-resolved fluorescence lifetime properties of DDP
dye interaction with amides was carried out in water but that of electrochemical
aspects and the nature of the interaction at the interface of dye
with amides was not carried out. The electrochemistry of amides has
been explored in depth based on the carbonyl oxygen reduction electrochemically
using lead and mercury cathodes in acidic catholytes,9,10 and several substituted amides11−14 (predominantly aromatic) were
converted electrochemically into aldehydes and alcohols. The electrochemistry
concerned with these amides depends upon the pH, nature of the electrolyte,
and the substituent’s in the amide molecular framework.

In our present study, the possibility of DDP dye acting as an electroluminescent
material in the presence of hydrogen-bonding solutes like formamide,
dimethylformamide (DMF), and dimethylacetamide were investigated in
water and the electrochemical studies were correlated to the fluorescence
spectral studies, as reported in the literature.4 Soluble nonfluorescent solutes like amides can provide
a basis for photoluminescence properties applicable in low-cost deposition
in optoelectronic applications. DDP dye exhibits oxidation and reduction
peaks in water, which provides a platform to understand the electrochemical
properties in the presence of guest molecules. The combination of
studies relating to the bulk and interface regions has a significant
edge in establishing the influence of amides on the electrical and
luminescent behavior in an aqueous solution in particular since very
less information is available in the literature concerned. Further,
the binding constant (K) and free-energy change (−ΔG) obtained for DDP dye with formamide, acetamide (ACM),
dimethylformamide (DMF), and dimethlyacetamide (DMAC) through cyclic
voltammetry provides a better approach on the nature of interaction
in comparison with fluorescence methods.

Results and Discussion
Cyclic Voltammograms of DDP Dye
Cyclic voltammogram
of DDP dye at a scan rate of 0.1 V s–1 is shown
in Figure 2 wherein
Ag/AgCl is taken as the reference electrode and the supporting electrolyte4 used in the present study was 0.01 M KCl. The
voltammogram recorded at various scan rates of DDP dye is shown in Figure 3. Cyclic potential
sweeps that impose a current response on an electrode give information
about the thermodynamics and kinetics of ET at the electrode–solution
interface. The cyclic voltammograms of DDP dye exhibit a reduction
and an oxidation peak. The anodic and cathodic peaks of DDP dye are
almost similar to those observed for DCM dye, as reported in the literature.1,2

Figure 2 Cyclic
voltammogram of (7.1 × 10–4 M) DDP
dye with Ag/AgCl as reference electrode and 0.01 M KCl as supporting
electrolyte at scan rate of 0.1 V s–1.

Figure 3 Cyclic voltammogram of (7.1 × 10–4 M) DDP
dye at various scan rates.

The Randles–Sevcik equation generally provides
a clear indication
of whether an analyte is freely diffusing in a solution or not. A
phenomenon of a diffusion or absorption process between free dye solution–electrode
interface was obtained using the Randles–Sevcik15 equation (a plot of the peak current (I) versus the square root of the scan rate, ν1/2), as provided in eq 1 1  where ip is the
peak current (A), A is the surface area of the working
electrode (cm2), C0* is the
bulk concentration (mol mL–1) of the electroactive
species (DDP dye), and D0 is the diffusion
coefficient (cm2 s–1). The number of
electrons involved in the rate-determining step is given by n, and ν is the scan rate (V s–1). The cyclic voltammogram of DDP dye (7.1 × 10–4 M) at different scan rates (from 0.10–0.5 mV s–1) in a potential range between 1.5 and −1.6 V was recorded
(Figure 3). With an
increase in the scan rate, the peak current also increases with the
cathodic peak potential shifting toward a more negative value and
the anodic peak potential shifting toward a positive value. The shift
in peak potential and increase in peak current provides information
about the mode of interaction and nature of binding of DDP dye in
an aqueous solution. With increase in large potential separation and
the information ascertained based on the Randles–Sevcik plots
(Figure 4), we authenticate
that DDP dye exhibits an absorption-controlled quasi reversible behavior15−18 in the absence of hydrogen-bonding solutes. If the plot is completely
linear at any scan rate, we can authenticate that the adsorbed species
vary linearly with the applied potential. However, we observe a slight
deviation from linearity, which suggests that there could be either
an electrochemical quasi reversibility or electron transfer phenomenon
that may occur by surface adsorbed species. At different scan rates,
it is evident that the peak separation shifts considerably, which
suggests that DDP dye exhibits an electrochemically quasi reversible
process rather than adsorbing on the electrode surface.

Figure 4 Plot of the
peak current (I) versus square root
of the scan rate, ν1/2 of DDP dye at various scan
rates.

Voltammetric Interaction of DDP Dye with Amides
Cyclic
voltammogram of DDP dye with formamide and other alkyl-substituted
amides was recorded at a scan rate of 0.1 V s–1.
The phenomena of shift in peak potential values accompanied either
with a decrease or increase in the peak current implies that there
exists an interaction between DDP dye–amide at the electrode
interface. This was correlated to an electrostatic interaction between
DDP dye and amide. Interestingly, Carter and Bard16−18 studies on
DNA complexes reveals that an electrostatic binding is more predominant
if the potential shifts to a more negative value. On the contrary,
if the potential had been shifted to a more positive value, the mode
of interaction was found to be intercalative binding.

Amides
were mostly used as a solvent for nonaqueous medium, and to the best
of our knowledge it was considered as a nonfluorophoric hydrogen-bonding
solute only in the case of photophysical studies of certain photoinduced
electron transfer-based dyes19 and in the
interaction of tryptophan residues in bovine serum albumin.20 All amides used in the present investigation
are liquids except ACM, which is a solid. These amides belong to an
important class of solvents that are attributed to their large variation
in their viscosity and dielectric constant. Further, the hydrogen-bonding
acceptor and donor numbers are entirely different with alkyl group
substitution in the amide molecular framework and these properties
influence the microenvironment of the electroactive species and its
close vicinity. Very recently amides and other urea derivatives were
employed as hydrogen-bonding solutes to probe the photophysical properties
of DDP in aqueous solutions wherein the presence of several hydrophobic
moieties in combination with hydrogen-bonding interactions governs
and influence the ground- and excited-state properties. Photophysical
properties are completely categorized as a bulk phase phenomenon that
has the presence of several forces and interactions. DDP dye exhibits
a different current response behavior, which is predominantly occurring
in a microenvironment, and how the presence of hydrophobic moieties
(methyl group) and hydrophilic groups in the amide structural framework
influences the current–potential curves is discussed in depth.

The cathodic peak potential of DDP dye shifts toward a negative
value, and the peak current also increases gradually on the addition
of formamide (Figure 5), which illustrates that the current flows through the electrode
to the dye. The current passage increases with an increase in the
concentration of formamide. The shift in the potential is attributed
to the introduction of formamide such that the redox potential properties
are influenced by the presence of solute molecules near the interface.
Formamide as such does not exhibit any reduction or oxidation peak
in the absence of DDP dye, which clearly reveals that the cathodic
peak potential of the electroactive species (DDP dye) in an aqueous
solution is governed and influenced by the number of formamide molecules.
The cyclic voltammogram of formamide alone in water is provided in
Supporting Information Figure S1.

Figure 5 Cyclic voltammogram
of (7.1 × 10–4 M) DDP
dye with formamide at a scan rate of 0.1 V s–1.
(1) DDP dye, (2) DDP dye + 1.0 M formamide, (3) DDP dye + 2.0 M formamide,
(4) DDP dye + 4.0 M formamide, (5) DDP dye + 6.0 M formamide, and
(6) DDP dye + 8.0 M formamide. Inset: Langmuir adsorption isotherm
of 7.1 × 10–4 M DDP- (x) formamide,
1.0 M ≥ x ≤ 8.0 M from the relationship
of [formamide] M vs ipc/μA.

The interface region in this regard is considered
as a microenvironment
compared with the bulk phase region (macroenvironment), which is found
to be entirely different. Through ground state studies, a photophysical
approach resulted in an isosbestic point, which was confined mainly
to the bulk phase region properties only. The formation of an isosbestic
point through absorption spectral studies implies a ground state complex
formation, and this is completely a bulk phase phenomenon. This varies
significantly from the electrode–dye interface region. The
variation in the oxidation potential and current of DDP dye associated
with amide is not as pronounced compared to that of the reduction
potential. Addition of formamide results in a large variation in the
microenvironment such that the reduction potential of the dye shifts
gradually to a less positive value in a definite proportion, which
is in accordance with the absorption spectral studies.4 This signifies that the water molecules initially at the
interface of dye–electrode are displaced on the addition of
formamide such that formamide definitely involves in hydrogen bonding
with water molecules. Apart from this, formamide also forms self-assemblies
of chains/sheets or rings to form an extended hydrogen-bonding network
and induces a hydrophobic environment throughout the bulk phase and
presumably near the electrode region also. This results in a considerable
variation in the presence of water and formamide molecules around
DDP dye, resulting in a variation in the reduction potential values
of dye.

Interestingly, the reduction potential of DDP dye increases
drastically
with a remarkable shift toward the less negative region on the addition
of DMF and DMAC. Further addition of DMF and DMAC to DDP dye results
in a decrease in the current, and the potential variation toward the
positive side becomes predominant, and this pattern was not observed
in formamide. The cyclic voltammograms of DDP dye with DMF and DMAC
are provided in Figures 6 and 7 respectively. Acetamide addition also
results in a significant shift toward the less positive region similar
to that of other alkyl amides. The cyclic voltammogram of DDP dye
with acetamide is provided in the Supporting Information Figure S2.

Figure 6 Cyclic voltammogram of (7.1 × 10–4 M) DDP
dye with DMF at a scan rate 0.1 V s–1. (1) DDP dye,
(2) DDP dye + 2.0 M DMF, (3) DDP dye + 4.0 M DMF, (4) DDP dye + 6.0
M DMF, (5) DDP dye + 8.0 M DMF. Inset: Langmuir adsorption isotherm
of 7.1 × 10–4 M DDP- (x) DMF,
1.0 M ≥ x ≤ 8.0 M from the relationship
of [DMF] M vs ipc/μA.

Figure 7 Cyclic voltammogram of (7.1 × 10–4 M) DDP
dye with DMAC at a scan rate of 0.1 V s–1. (1) DDP
dye, (2) DDP dye + 1.0 M DMAC, (3) DDP dye + 2.0 M DMAC, (4) DDP dye
+ 4.0 M DMAC, (5) DDP dye + 6.0 M DMAC, (6) DDP dye + 8.0 M DMAC.
Inset: Langmuir adsorption isotherm of 7.1 × 10–4 M DDP- (x) DMAC, 1.0 M ≥ x ≤ 8.0 M from the relationship of [DMAC] M vs ipc/μA.

The structure of DMF with water and DMAC with water
hydrogen-bonding
modes is found to be entirely different from that of hydrogen bonding
of formamide with water. This phenomenon is presumably attributed
to the absence of hydrogen-bonding donor sites in DMF and DMAC compared
to that of formamide. On the initial addition of DMF, a steep increase
in the current and shift of the reduction potential toward the negative
region results and this is accompanied with an increase in the current
and shift in the oxidation potential toward less positive values.
Even though this shift in the reduction potential toward the negative
potential was almost similar to that of formamide, no clear illustration
on the behavior of the oxidation potential of DDP dye on the amides
could be ascertained. Interestingly, the subsequent addition of DMF
resulted in a decrease in the current (reduction potential), which
was an entirely different phenomenon compared to that of formamide.
This is presumably attributed to the variation in the properties of
amide–water hydrogen bonding and the extent of hydrophobic
influences near the interface. With an increase in the concentration
of formamide, the peak current corresponding to the reduction potential
increases gradually, which describes the adsorption process. The shift
in the peak potential toward a negative value indicates electrostatic
binding and no large effect of hydrophobic influences on the current–potential
characteristics. A similar pattern of a nonsignificant shift in the
emission spectra of DDP dye on the addition of formamide was observed
through steady state emission spectral studies.4 The variation between formamide and DMF results from the
unavailability of the N–H hydrogen in the amide framework such
that the hydrophobic influences predominate over hydrogen-bonding
interactions around the vicinity of the dye in the interface region
in the case of alkyl-substituted amides. The current–potential
characteristics of DDP dye vary significantly for formamide and DMF,
and this provides an explanation that the nature of interaction and
the functional groups involved in hydrogen-bonding with DDP dye and
water molecules are entirely different. Interestingly, the current
response becomes entirely different in the case DMAC (Figure 7) such that the reduction peak
current of DDP dye decreases gradually on the addition of DMAC wherein
no significant shift or characteristic change was observed in the
peak potential values compared to that of formamide. Further, the
oxidation potential diminishes and ceases to be insignificant on the
introduction of DMAC molecules. This behavioral pattern was not observed
in formamide and DMF. On the basis of the alkyl-substituted amides
taken in the present study, the C=O oxygen atom readily forms
hydrogen bonding with water and not with the dye molecule. If dye–amide
direct hydrogen bonding would have been more predominant, a similar
pattern on the electrochemical behavior of DDP dye would have been
observed irrespective of the nature of amides, which was rather found
to be strikingly different from each amide. The electrochemical behavior
of DDP dye in host–guest interaction in an aqueous solution
produces a new contemporary in the electrochemistry when various alkyl-substituted
groups are present in the amide framework.

The cyclic voltammograms
of DDP dye with DMF and DMAC reveal that
the current response parameters of DDP dye are largely governed by
the presence of methyl group substitution in the amide framework such
that the microenvironment of DDP dye in the aqueous phase is completely
disrupted such that several micro amide–water and amide–dye
interactions operate that could not be quantified exactly. The peak
current shift toward more negative and positive values illustrates
that the microenvironment surrounding the dye changes based on the
concentration of the amides, and the most predominant interaction
is hydrogen bonding, which is competitive with the hydrophobic influences
imparted by the methyl group substitution in the case of alkyl-substituted
amides.

On the basis of the electrochemical nature of DDP dye
in the presence
of amides, we postulate that the shift in the peak current and peak
potential toward a negative valve suggests the mode of interaction
between DDP dye amides is presumably also through electrostatic interaction
(at the interface region) apart from hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic
interactions. The hydrogen-bonding arrangement of dye–water–amide
is confined throughout the bulk region. The electrostatic force originates
from hydrogen-bonding formation in DDP dye with amides and the methyl
moieties impart an inductive effect in the amide molecular structure
that results in a difference in the electrochemical behavior. The
methyl group attached to carbonyl group of amide does show variation
in current response when compared with hydrogen atom attached to carbonyl
group in amides. The electrostatic binding with the adsorption process
was observed with an increasing order of the hydrophobic nature of
amides. Similarly, the pattern of fluorescence enhancement and the
variation in the excited-state characteristics of DDP dye4 is of the order formamide < ACM < DMF <
DMAC. DDP dye with amides shows an irreversible system of cathodic
current response with shift toward a more negative value indicating
electrostatic binding and hydrogen bonding.

Binding Nature of DDP Dye with Amides
For quantitative
comparison of the binding constant K between DDP
dye with amides, the Langmuir equation21,22 was used. 2  

From eq 2, we assume m = 1, ΔIp represents ΔIp, ΔIpmax represents ΔImax, where ΔIp = Ip0 – Ip, where Ip0 and Ip represent the cathodic peak current of DDP dye in the
absence and presence of amide, respectively. Figure 8 exhibits the plot of 1/[formamide] M vs
1/I0 – I plot
for determining binding interaction between DDP dye and formamide.
The plots of 1/[amides] M vs 1/I0 – I of DMF and DMAC are provided in Figures S3 and S4, respectively.

Figure 8 1/[formamide] M vs 1/I0 – I binding plot for determination
of the binding constant K. (I0 and I are the difference in peak currents
before and after addition of
amide, respectively).

The fit obtained from the binding plot clearly
illustrates and
authenticates that the binding of amide with DDP dye does not form
any true complex. DDP dye exists in multi microenvironment in the
aqueous phase and exhibits more than one binding site such that no
confined site of interaction could be ascertained. The existence of
different hydrogen-bonding arrangements in a solution paves the way
in the creation of a new microenvironment. This was authenticated
and established from fluorescence lifetime studies and electrochemical
impedance studies of amides with DDP dye.4

Further, the existence of several hydrogen-bonding networks
is
authenticated by the existence of different fluorescence lifetimes
of varying amplitudes of DDP dye in the presence of amides. DDP dye
definitely forms self-assemblies with the amides in water through
hydrogen-bonding, and the combination of hydrophobic and hydrogen-bonding
influences the fluorescence lifetime of the dye.4 The relationship of [formamide] M vs ipc/μA is provided in the inset of Figure 5, and those for DMF and DMAC
are provided in the inset of the Figures 6 and 7, respectively.
These plots exhibit a typical behavior of an adsorption-controlled
process, as expected from a Langmuir adsorption behavior. A linear
fit is not observed in any of the substituted amides, which clearly
reveals that the reaction at the interface is completely governed
by the concentration and the nature of the amides such that a multiheterogeneous
environment exists near the dye–electrode region and the current–potential
variation results from the number of solute molecules that influence
the direct binding to the dye molecule. The binding constant (K) and regression co-efficient (R2) for various concentrations of amides were obtained from the slope
and intercept of the resulting curve (Table 1).

Table 1 Binding Constant (K) and the Free Energy (−ΔG) of (7.1
× 10–4 M) DDP Dye with Different Concentrations
of Amides 1.0 M ≥ x ≤ 8.0 M Arrived
at from Cyclic Voltammetry
S. no.	DDP–amide	K × 104 (L mol–1)	–ΔG × 103 (kJ mol–1)	
1	DDP–formamide	1.7082	12.12	
2	DDP–DMF	2.1351	15.41	
3	DDP–DMAC	1.1581	16.33	
4	DDP–ACM	2.5456	32.76	
Binding Free Energy
The free energy (−ΔG) was calculated from eq 3 to show the spontaneity of binding between DDP dye
with amides in the aqueous phase, where R is the
gas constant, T is the temperature in Kelvin, and K is the binding constant obtained from the binding plot,
respectively. 3  

Binding free energy is calculated to
check the spontaneity of the process between DDP dye–amide
interaction. The calculated binding constant (K)
and free energy (−ΔG) from the cyclic
voltammetry current response are shown in Table 1. The free-energy changes and the binding
constant were almost similar in all amides except in the case of acetamide.
All amides except acetamide exhibit solvent-induced properties, like
dipole moment, refractive index, viscosity, and induced polarity,
and the redox properties of the dye varies in different medium. Cyclic
voltammogram of DDP dye in acetonitrile also exhibits oxidation and
reduction peaks as observed in water, but the shift in the potential
and the peak current varies (Supporting Information Figure S5). Similar to photophysical properties that are governed
by the nature of the solvent, the cathodic and anodic peaks are influenced
by the presence of amides that exist as liquids. These properties
influence the dye in aqueous medium, thereby resulting in a large
variation in the microenvironment at the interface region, which is
highly sensitive to the current–potential characteristics compared
with the bulk phase region. These factors could not be selectively
ascertained to the behavior of DDP dyes in the presence of amides
in an aqueous phase, and this article provides a new outlook for the
comparison of bulk characteristics that are predominantly solvent–solute
governed compared with the changes at the microlevel around the close
vicinity of the dye.

Conclusions
Cyclic voltammetric techniques were employed
as an efficient tool
in establishing the binding nature of DDP dye with formamide and alkyl
amides. These techniques are used to evaluate the binding nature as
well as the preferred mode of interaction of DDP dye in the presence
of amide in an aqueous solution. The shift in the peak potential and
peak current of the DDP dye decreases and increases with the increasing
hydrophobic nature of amides. The calculated binding constant K and free energy −ΔG value
help to conclude that the microenvironment surrounding the DDP dye
molecule interaction with amides is due to hydrogen bonding. Moreover,
we also observed that the interaction is also through electrostatic
mode apart from hydrogen-bonding interaction. These investigations
reveal that electrochemistry techniques certainly provide a convenient
way to characterize both the binding mode and the electrostatic interaction
of DDP dye with different concentrations of amides in an aqueous solution.

Experimental Section
Materials
Formamide, acetamide (ACM), dimethylformamide
(DMF), dimethylacetamide (DMAC), 2,6-dimethyl-4-pyrone, malononitrile,
acetic anhydride, and potassium chloride (KCl) were obtained from
Merck chemicals and used as procured. DDP dye was synthesized as reported
in the literature.6

Experimental Techniques
Cyclic voltammogram studies
were recorded using a CH INSTRUMENT CH1604E electrochemical analyzer.
A platinum electrode with surface area of 0.0314 cm2 was
employed as the working electrode and Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode.
Platinum wire was employed as the auxiliary electrode. A supporting
electrolyte (0.01 M KCl) was used in all our electrochemical experiments
for recording voltammogram. The voltammograms of DDP dye (7.1 ×
10–4 M) with varying concentration of amides (ranging
from 1.0 to 8.0 M) were recorded at various scan rates (50 ≥
ν ≤ 500 mV s–1). The solution of amides
was prepared using triple distilled water. The bulk concentration
of amides involved in our studies was used up to 10.0 M. The concentration
of DDP dye was fixed at 7.1 × 10–4 M and was
diluted with 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 6.0, and 8.0 M amide solutions, respectively.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.9b03427.Cyclic voltammogram of formamide in the absence of DDP
dye, DDP dye with ACM, binding constant of dye with DMF and DMAC,
and that of dye in acetonitrile is provided in Figures S1–S5
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b03427_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors are thankful to Shri Ashok Kumar Mundra, Secretary
and Dr. R. Ganesan, the Principal, Dwaraka Doss Goverdhan Doss Vaishnav
College, Arumbakkam, Chennai-600 106 for their support and encouragement.
The authors are thankful to Dr. S. Ilangovan, former Head of the Department,
Department of Chemistry for providing the use of electrochemical work
station.
==== Refs
References
Hammond P. R. 
Laser dye
DCM, Its Spectral Properties, Synthesis and Comparison with Other
Dyes in the Red . Opt. Commun. 
1979 , 29 , 331 –333 . 10.1016/0030-4018(79)90111-1 .
Marason E. G. 
Laser dyes
DCM: CW, Synchronously Pumped, Cavity Pumped and Single-Frequency
Performance . Opt. Commun. 
1981 , 37 , 56 –58 . 10.1016/0030-4018(81)90176-0 .
Meyer M. ; Mialocq J. C. 
Ground State and Singlet Excited
Stat of Laser Dye
DCM: Dipole Moments and Solvent Induced Spectral Shifts . Opt. Commun. 
1987 , 64 , 264 –268 . 10.1016/0030-4018(87)90390-7 .
Gayathri S. ; Vasanthi R. ; Vanjinathan R. M. ; Kumaran R. 
Photophysical and Electrochemical
studies of 4-dicyanomethylene 2,6-dimethyl-4H-pyran (DDP) dye with
amides in water . J. Fluoresc. 
2018 , 28 , 1379 –1388 . 10.1007/s10895-018-2303-7 .30276611 
Woods L. L. 
Some Further
Reactions of 2, 6-Dimethyl-4-pyrone . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
1958 , 80 , 1440 –1442 . 10.1021/ja01539a041 .
Yao Y.-S. ; Zhou Q.-X. ; Wang X.-S. ; Wang Y. ; Zhang B.-W. 
A DCM-Type
Red-Fluorescent Dopant for High-Performance Organic Electroluminescent
Devices . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2007 , 17 , 93 –100 . 10.1002/adfm.200600055 .
Yao Y.-S. ; Zhou Q.-X. ; Wang X.-S. ; Wang Y. ; Zhang B.-W. 
Fine tuning
of the photophysical and electroluminescent properties of DCM-type
dyes by changing the structure of the electron-donating group . J. Mater. Chem. 
2006 , 16 , 3512 10.1039/b604563d .
Gayathri S. ; Vasanthi R. ; Vanjinathan R. M. ; Kumaran R. 
Spectroelectrochemical
Investigation of 4-Dicyanomethylene 2,6-Dimethyl-4H-Pyran (DDP) Dye
with Guanidine Hydrochloride (GuHCl) in Water . J. Mater. Sci. Res. 
2019 , 8 , 6 –17 . 10.5539/jmsr.v8n3p6 .
Lund H.  Organic Electrochemistry:
An Introduction and a Guide , 4 th ed.; Marcel Dekker , 2001 .
Coleman J. P.  Acid Derivatives (1979) ; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. , 2010 ; pp 781 –824 .
Lund H. 
Electroorganic
Preparations. XIII. Reduction of Isonicotinic Amide and Related Compounds . Acta Chem. Scand. 
1963 , 17 , 2325 –2340 . 10.3891/acta.chem.scand.17-2325 .
Marín
Galvín R. ; Rodríguez Mellado J. M. 
On the electrochemical
reduction of nicotinamide in an acid medium . J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 
1989 , 260 , 101 –111 . 10.1016/0022-0728(89)87102-5 .
Benkeser R. A. ; Watanabe H. ; Mels S. J. ; Sabol M. A. 
New electrochemical
method for the selective reduction of aliphatic amides to aldehydes
or alcohols . J. Org. Chem. 
1970 , 35 , 1210 –1211 . 10.1021/jo00829a089 .
Horner L. ; Neumann H. 
Reduktive Spaltung von Säureamiden und Estern
mit Tetramethylammonium. Benzoyl-und Tosylrest als Schutzgruppe bei
Peptidsynthesen . Chem. Ber. 
1965 , 98 , 3462 10.1002/cber.19650981105 .
Randles J. E. B. 
A cathode
ray polarograph. Part II.—The current-voltage curves . Trans. Faraday Soc. 
1948 , 44 , 327 –338 . 10.1039/TF9484400327 .
Bard A. J. ; Faulkener L. R.  Electrochemical Methods;
Fundamentals and Applications ; Wiley : New York , 1980 .
Carter M. T. ; Bard A. J. 
Voltammetric studies of the interaction
of tris(1,10-phenanthroline)cobalt(III)
with DNA . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1987 , 109 , 7528 –7530 . 10.1021/ja00258a046 .
Carter M. T. ; Rodriguez M. ; Bard A. J. 
Voltammetric studies of the interaction
of metal chelates with DNA. 2. Tris-chelated complexes of cobalt (III)
and iron(II) with 1,10-phenanthroline and 2,2′-bipyridine . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1989 , 111 , 8901 –8911 . 10.1021/ja00206a020 .
Kumaran R. ; Ramamurthy P. 
Photophysical Studies on the Interaction of Formamide
and Alkyl Substituted Amides with Photoinduced Electron Transfer (PET)
Based Acridinedione Dyes in Water . J. Fluoresc. 
2011 , 21 , 2165 –2172 . 10.1007/s10895-011-0918-z .21769603 
Kumaran R. ; Ramamurthy P. 
Photophysical
studies on the interaction of amides
with Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) in aqueous solution: Fluorescence
quenching and protein unfolding . J. Lumin. 
2014 , 148 , 277 –284 . 10.1016/j.jlumin.2013.12.016 .
Qin D.-A. ; Cai X. Q. ; Miao Q. ; Wang Z.-H. ; Hu M.-L. 
Cyclic
Voltammetry and Molecular Docking Study of the Interactions of Two
Derivatives of 5-fluorouracil with DNA . Int.
J. Electrochem. Sci. 
2014 , 9 , 1608 –1620 .
Qu F. ; Li N. Q. ; Jiang Y. Y. 
Electrochemical studies of NiTMpyP
and interaction with DNA . Talanta 
1998 , 45 , 787 –793 . 10.1016/s0039-9140(97)00154-9 .18967062

