
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American
Chemical
Society 3145806110.1021/acsomega.8b01026ArticleFunctional Carboxymethylcellulose/Zein Bionanocomposite
Films Based on Neomycin Supported on Sepiolite or Montmorillonite
Clays Rebitski Ediana
P. †§Alcântara Ana C. S. *†‡Darder Margarita §Cansian Rogério L. ⊥Gómez-Hortigüela Luis ∥Pergher Sibele B. C. †† Laboratório
de Peneiras Moleculares—LABPEMOL, Instituto de Química, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, 59078-970 Natal, RN, Brazil‡ Grupo
de Pesquisa em Materiais Híbridos e Bionanocompósitos
- Bionanos, Departamento de Química, Universidade
Federal do Maranhão, 65080-805 São Luís, MA, Brazil§Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid and ∥Instituto de Catálisis y
Petroleoquímica, CSIC, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain⊥ Laboratório
de Biotecnologia, Universidade Regional
Integrada do Alto Uruguai e das Missões, 99700-000 Erechim, RS, Brazil* E-mail: ana.alcantara@ufma.br. Phone: +559832729243.18 10 2018 31 10 2018 3 10 13538 13550 16 05 2018 14 08 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
present work introduces new functional bionanocomposite materials
based on layered montmorillonite and fibrous sepiolite clays and two
biopolymers (carboxymethylcellulose polysaccharide and zein protein)
to produce drug-loaded bionanocomposite films for antibiotic topical
delivery. Neomycin, an antibiotic indicated for wound infections,
was employed as the model drug in this study. The physical properties
and the antimicrobial activity of these materials were evaluated as
a function of the type of hybrid and the amount of zein protein incorporated
in the bionanocomposite films. In addition, the interfacial and physicochemical
properties of these new clay–drug hybrids have been studied
through a combination of experimental and computational methodologies,
where the computational studies confirm the intercalation of neomycin
into the montmorillonite layers and the possible penetration of the
drug in the tunnels of sepiolite, as pointed out by N2 adsorption
and X-ray diffraction techniques. The antimicrobial activity of these
bionanocomposite materials show that the films based on montmorillonite–neomycin
display a more pronounced inhibitory effect of the bacterial growth
than those prepared with the sepiolite–neomycin hybrid. Such
effect can be related to the difficult release of neomycin adsorbed
on sepiolite due to a strong interaction between both components.

document-id-old-9ao8b01026document-id-new-14ao-2018-010264ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The
design of novel materials in biomedical science has experienced
a rapid growth in the last decades. Within this field, nanocarriers
based on hybrid materials for pharmaceutical nanotechnology purposes
are becoming particularly attractive due to the possibility of manipulation
of structures at the nanometer scale, providing unique properties,
such as high interfacial area, efficient drug loading, and high biocompatibility
and bioavailability, which can contribute to minimize the required
dose of medicines.1,2

Within the hybrid materials
family, there is a special focus on
bionanocomposite materials,3−5 which is a new generation of nanostructured
materials derived from the combination at the nanoscale of inorganic
solids with biopolymers, showing desired properties for the biomedical
area, such as biocompatible and biodegradable character, besides improved
thermal, mechanical, and chemical properties. Regarding the drug release
area, the preparation of bionanocomposites as drug-delivery systems
becomes a versatile strategy for the development of optimized pharmaceutical
formulations. Several organic–inorganic hybrid materials based
on clays have been developed recently within this topic, including
clay minerals combined with drugs intended for targeted purposes.6−8 Clay minerals have been used as popular remedies for a long time,
as antidiarrheal, in blood clotting and wound healing, curing ulcers,
preventing infections, and even treating some allergies in the body.9−11 Besides, clays have been added to enhance the pharmaceutical properties
depending on the required medical application.12 Among the clay minerals that can be used as excipient in
pharmaceutical formulations, layered montmorillonite (MMT) is one
of the most widely employed. It is an expandable 2:1 phyllosilicate
composed of a central sheet of octahedrally coordinated aluminum,
which is sandwiched between two sheets of tetrahedral silicons coordinated
with oxygen atoms (Figure 1a). In addition to provide a controlled, sustained, or delayed
release,8,9,13 the incorporation
of drug molecules into layered clay minerals has received great attention
for biomedical applications because these active organic molecules
are stabilized in the interlayer space improving also the photo, dispersion,
and thermal stabilities required for fragile bioactive compounds.
In this sense, diverse drug molecules were already immobilized in
sodium montmorillonite as, for example, gentamicin for antibacterial
activity against Escherichia coli,14 the antidiabetic metformin,15 the neuroleptic drug chlorpromazine,16 or praziquantel used for the treatment of human schistosomiasis.17 In some cases, the resulting drug–clay
hybrids are combined with polymers to form a nanocomposite drug-delivery
system for oral or topical administration with increased release control,
as in the case of chlorhexidine–MMT–chitosan for the
treatment and prevention of microbial colonization in wounds,18 the drug olanzapine used in the treatment of
schizophrenia, which was intercalated in MMT and processed as beads
through a combination of the drug–clay moiety with a biopolymer
blend based on alginate and xanthan gum polysaccharides,19 donepezil–MMT used for the symptomatic
treatment of mild and moderate Alzheimer’s disease that are
protected with the polymer Eudragit E-100,20 phytochemicals such as curcumin with anticancer potential assembled
to poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) and MMT,21 MMT–chitosan–silver sulfadiazine
nanocomposites for topical treatment of chronic skin lesions,22 or polymer films loaded with carvacrol/clay
hybrids (MMT, halloysite, and palygorskite) for the treatment of infected
skin ulcer.23 Various factors can be related
with the dissociation of the drug molecules from these hybrid systems.
In the case of (bio)nanocomposite systems based on clays, ionic exchange,15 sensitive pH stimuli,19,24 or diffusion and erosion mechanisms25 can take place in the drug release process.

Figure 1 Representations of (a)
montmorillonite and (b) sepiolite (Sep)
structures from different planes. In montmorillonite (a), Si and Al
atoms are displayed as polyhedra in yellow and pink, respectively,
whereas in sepiolite (b), Si and Mg atoms are displayed as polyhedra
in yellow and green, respectively. In both structures, O atoms are
displayed as red balls. (c) Molecular structure and approximate dimensions
of neomycin B, as taken from the RCSB protein data bank database (NMY
experimental model). H, C, O, and N atoms are displayed in white,
gray, red, and blue, respectively.

Although less used than montmorillonite in the biomedical
sector,
fibrous clays such as sepiolite are also suitable for pharmaceutical
applications.26−28 This fibrous clay is a hydrated magnesium silicate
that belongs to the phyllosilicate group of clay minerals with a 2:1
ribbon structure, with external tetrahedral sheets of silicon and
a central octahedral sheet containing magnesium. However, there is
a periodic discontinuity of these TOT layers, giving rise to a peculiar
structure consisting of alternated blocks and tunnels, as well as
structural channels in the external surface (Figure 1b). As a result, this clay mineral exhibits
high specific surface area (around 320 m2 g–1)29−31 as well as high number of silanol groups (≡Si–OH)
located at the edges of the external blocks. Due to the presence of
silanol groups on the external surface, this clay becomes amenable
to assembly with a wide variety of organic species, like drugs and
polymer matrices, through hydrogen or covalent bonding, allowing the
preparation of different hybrid and bionanocomposite materials.32 Although sepiolite does not show properties
of lamellar expansion, such as montmorillonite, it is known that small
molecules like pyridine can be confined in the sepiolite tunnels.
It has been shown that sepiolite–pyridine is formed by the
coordination of pyridine directly with the Mg cations present in the
sepiolite tunnels.29,33−35 It was also
studied the adsorption of organic dyes, e.g., methylene blue,35 or the possible penetration of polymers such
as poly(ethylene oxide) into the sepiolite tunnels, forming stable
nanocomposites.36 The interesting adsorption
properties of this silicate at the external surface, together with
the possibility of penetration of some molecules in its tunnels, make
sepiolite a versatile inorganic unit in the design of bionanocomposite
materials. In fact, the use of sepiolite in bionanocomposite materials
has been growing rapidly in recent years in diverse research areas.
Apart from some pioneering studies on sepiolite–collagen materials
for tissue engineering in the 1980s and the 1990s,37,38 the use of this inorganic solid for controlled release applications
is just beginning, and only a few reports can be found in the literature.
In this context, we can mention the preparation of ternary systems
based on (oxaprozin–cyclodextrin) clay by the high ability
of sepiolite in the effective adsorption of the drug,27 its use in the controlled storage and release of nitric
oxide,39 as inorganic support of Influenza
virus in xanthan gum-based bionanocomposites40 or as support of bioactive substances in antibacterial formulations.26 In addition, recent studies show that sepiolite
does not affect the cell viability at moderate concentrations, and
it can be even considered as an effective anti-inflammatory agent,
displaying higher edema inhibition compared to tubular halloysite
clay.28 These works open new possibilities
for the effective use of this clay in pharmaceutical science.

With this purpose in mind, clay–drug hybrid materials based
on montmorillonite and sepiolite were synthesized employing the antibiotic
neomycin (Neo) (Figure 1c) as drug model. These clay–neomycin hybrid materials were
properly characterized and combined with a biopolymer mixture prepared
from carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) and zein (Z), resulting in bionanocomposite
films for topical delivery of neomycin. The carboxymethylcellulose
(CMC) is a hydrophilic anionic polysaccharide (based on the β-(1,4)-d-glucopyranose cellulose), which is obtained by inserting COOH
groups in the molecular chains of cellulose. On the other hand, zein
(Z) is a hydrophobic protein from maize. Both biopolymers show nontoxicity
and biodegradability, which allow their use in tissue engineering
(bone, cartilage), or as a carrier system for drugs either alone or
in combination with other polymers. Their different solubility in
physiologic media can be exploited for controlled release applications.
The physical properties, as well as the antimicrobial activity of
these neomycin-loaded bionanocomposite films were evaluated as a function
of the incorporated hybrid. In addition, these new clay–drug
hybrids were studied through a combination of experimental and computational
methodologies, to investigate important factors that may influence
the performance of these hybrids regarding the antimicrobial activity.
Thus, to the best of our knowledge, the bionanocomposite films in
this study have not been reported in the literature, and this study
was the first to evaluate their antimicrobial activities.

Results and Discussion
Clay–Neomycin
Hybrid
Montmorillonite (MMT) and
sepiolite (Sep) clay minerals were employed as substrate of the antibiotic
drug neomycin. The formation of these hybrid materials was carried
out by adsorption in aqueous phase, where a clay suspension was added
slowly in a neomycin solution. To study the affinity between the oligosaccharide
and Sep, the adsorption isotherm of neomycin on the silicate at 25
°C was investigated. According to the adsorption isotherm curve
(Figure 2a), the neomycin
molecules are progressively adsorbed on the fibrous silicate, following
the typical L-type curve,41 where the amount
of drug adsorbed becomes practically constant giving a plateau from
an equilibrium concentration of 90 mg L–1 onward,
reaching maximum adsorption values of approximately 2.2 g of drug
per 100 g of clay. Although the data for neomycin adsorption on sepiolite
can be adjusted to the Langmuir equation,42 the Sep–Neo isotherm is better adjusted by the Freundlich
equation43 since higher correlation coefficient
(R) was obtained for this model (R = 0.9581 and 0.9896 for Langmuir- and Freundlich-type isotherm models,
respectively), which indicates that the adsorption is favorable throughout
the range of concentrations studied (Figure S1). ζ-Potential measurements carried out in neat sepiolite showed
a value of −24.5 mV. However, in Sep–Neo material, the
ζ-potential value is altered toward more positive values (−0.71
mV) due to neutralization of the negative charge in sepiolite by the
adsorbed positively charged neomycin molecules.

Figure 2 (a) Adsorption isotherm
of neomycin on Sep and (b) X-ray diffraction
(XRD) patterns of pure neomycin, pristine MMT, and MMT–Neo
hybrids prepared by ion-exchange reaction with Neo for 24, 48, and
72 h.

On the other hand, the adsorption
of neomycin into MMT clay was
studied as a function of reaction time by XRD, using an amount of
neomycin about 6 times higher than the CEC of the clay to ensure the
adsorption of the maximum amount of antibiotic. From the diffractograms
shown in Figure 2b,
it is evidenced that the first diffraction peak (001 reflexion at
7.4° 2θ) is displaced toward lower 2θ values, which
indicates that neomycin is incorporated in the interlayer region of
the MMT. The basal spacing increases with reaction time, reaching
a value of 1.40 nm for the hybrid material obtained after 72 h of
reaction (Figure 2b).
Taking into account that the thickness of the silicate layer is 0.96
nm,44 the calculated interlayer distance
(ΔdL) in these MMT–Neo hybrids varies gradually
from 0.39 to 0.44 nm. However, the amount of neomycin adsorbed in
these MMT–Neo hybrids, which was deduced from CHNS chemical
analysis, revealed that the neomycin content practically does not
change with time (10.0 g of drug per 100 g of MMT). This result suggests
that the increase of basal distance observed by XRD measurements is
not due to a kinetic effect of the incorporation of drug, but rather
due to a possible progressive reorganization of the neomycin molecule
confined in the intracrystalline space of montmorillonite. Considering
that the MMT–Neo hybrid prepared by ion-exchange reaction for
72 h showed the highest interlayer distance, and likely, a more stable
structural conformation, this sample was selected for further studies.

The possible interactions taking place during the adsorption process
of neomycin on SEP and MMT were investigated by Fourier transform
infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy (Figure 3). The spectrum of neomycin (Figure 3a) shows a broad band at approximately 3100
cm–1 corresponding to the overlapped νNH and νOH stretching bands. In addition,
vibration bands assigned to νCH, νCO of C=O from amide I groups and νCN of C–N–H
from amide II can be appreciated in 2890, 1620, and 1523 cm–1, respectively.45 MMT clay shows the characteristic
vibration modes at 3627, 1636, and 989 cm–1 of the
νOH, δHOH, and νSiOSi bands, respectively.46 Apart from the
typical bands from MMT, the MTT–Neo spectrum (Figure 3a) shows also bands associated
with the intercalated drug. In this case, the bands at 1620 and 1523
cm–1 corresponding to amine groups from neomycin
are displaced to higher wavenumbers, due to the interaction between
the protonated amine groups from neomycin and the negatively charged
sites of the MMT structure.

Figure 3 Infrared spectra (4000–500 cm–1) for (a)
MMT–Neo and (b) Sep–Neo hybrids. The insets in (b) show
magnified spectra in the 3800–3600 cm–1 range.

It is well known that the sepiolite
fibers are not expandable,
and therefore, the intercalation properties are scarce, being its
outer surface the preferential site for the adsorption of the most
diverse molecules.47 Analyzing in more
detail the 3800–3600 cm–1 spectral zone of
sepiolite (inset in Figure 3b), it is possible to observe that the band attributed to
OH stretching vibrations from the Mg–OH groups at 3688 cm–1 remains practically unaltered in the Sep–Neo
material. An important fact observed in the Sep–Neo spectrum
is that the bands associated with the νOH of free
silanol groups, which are located at the external surface of the sepiolite,
are not appreciable in the spectrum of the hybrid material. Similar
results were evidenced by other studies involving microfibrous clays,48,49 and in this case, it was attributed to the perturbations at the
outer surface of the silicate through hydrogen bonding between the
silanol groups from the sepiolite and functional groups of the drug,
displacing this band toward lower frequency values, which makes it
barely visible. Although these results point out to the drug interaction
with the external surface of the mineral, a possible inclusion of
the drug into sepiolite tunnels should not be discarded since neomycin
shows suitable dimensions to be accessible to the intracrystalline
tunnels of silicate, as discussed below based on computational results.
According to the literature, the penetration of organic molecules
into the tunnels of sepiolite can affect those IR bands related to
both zeolitic and crystal water.50 Analyzing
the crystal water zone (3700–3000 cm–1),
it is possible to observe the band attributed to νCO of amide I group from neomycin at 1620 cm–1, which
seems to be overlapping the δHOH vibration mode from
the sepiolite (1657–1617 cm–1). This fact
makes the interpretation of the possible interactions between these
groups very difficult, being necessary additional techniques to elucidate
the possibility of inclusion of the drug in the tunnels of sepiolite.

Differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric (TG)
curves recorded in airflow conditions (Figure 4) confirm the thermal stability of clay–neomycin
materials in comparison with the drug alone. The DTA corresponding
to the pristine neomycin (Figure 4a) shows three endothermic processes at 81, 249, and
290 °C and one exothermic event at 682 °C. The first one,
associated with a weight loss of 10% in TG curve, is attributed to
the elimination of adsorbed water, while the other two endothermic
processes from 245 until approximately 300 °C and the exothermic
event at 682 °C (total weight loss of 90%) can be related to
a pyrolytic decomposition, followed by the combustion process of the
drug, respectively. The thermogram of MMT–Neo hybrid (Figure 4b) showed a significant
change in the thermal behavior of the drug after the intercalation
in MMT. Thus, three main stages of thermal decomposition of the intercalation
compound are observed in the DTA curve. The first one is related to
a unique and discrete exothermic process centered at 245 °C,
which can be attributed to the partial elimination of neomycin located
between the lamellae of the host matrix; the second and third ones
correspond to the decomposition of species derived from neomycin and
to the dehydroxylation process of the residual montmorillonite (Figure 4c),51 which are associated with endothermic and exothermic events
at 708 and 817 °C, respectively. The higher decomposition temperature
of neomycin on the hybrid MTT is a consequence of the confinement
effect provided by MTT.

Figure 4 TG (black lines) and DTA curves (green lines)
obtained for (a)
neomycin, (b) MMT–Neo, (c) MMT, (d) Sep–Neo, and (e)
Sep.

Analogously, the Sep–Neo
material (Figure 4d)
shows an enhanced thermal stability profile
compared to the neat neomycin (Figure 4a). In this case, in addition to elimination of adsorbed
water at 63 °C, another endothermic peak related to decomposition
of neomycin in a single step at 270 °C can be also observed.
Although the thermogram of the Sep–Neo hybrid (Figure 4d) is quite similar to that
of the pristine sepiolite, the endothermic event at 682 °C, which
is associated with the decomposition of derived compounds of neomycin
(see DTA curve in Figure 4a), is not appreciated, neither the endothermic process at
533 °C related to loss of Mg-coordinated water molecules located
within the structural tunnels of pristine sepiolite (dehydration process)
(Figure 4e), being
observed in the Sep–Neo sample only an endothermic event at
768 °C. This behavior suggests that sepiolite causes a protective
effect of the drug shifting its decomposition toward higher temperature
values and, at the same time, that the adsorption of neomycin seems
to have a clear effect on the dehydroxylation process of sepiolite,
contributing to its occurrence at temperatures above 540 °C,
enhancing the thermal stability of the mineral. These facts could
be explained by a possible penetration of neomycin into tunnels of
sepiolite, which would increase the thermal stability of both drug
and silicate in the Sep–Neo hybrid. The exothermic peak at
846 °C in the DTA curve corresponds to the internal recrystallization
of the dehydroxylated phase to become protoenstatite (MgSiO3).52

To investigate the possibility
of occlusion of neomycin into sepiolite
tunnels, a study of the thermal evolution of the system Sep–Neo
was carried out through XRD (Figure 5). For this assay, the hybrid sample and neat sepiolite
were heated under nitrogen flow (5 °C min–1) at 550 and 900 °C. XRD patterns of the materials display a
considerable decrease in the intensity of the peak corresponding to
the (110) reflection of the clay heated at 550 °C. According
to the literature,52 a structural change
(crystal folding) of neat sepiolite occurs approximately at 450 °C,
which is associated with the displacement of (110) reflection from
1.20 nm in the original sepiolite up to 1.16 in the so-called “anhydrous
sepiolite”.30,36 In the Sep–Neo diffractogram
heated at 550 °C (Figure 5c), the peak corresponding to (110) reflection is slightly
better preserved than in the unmodified sepiolite treated at the same
temperature (Figure 5b), although it shows also a decrease in intensity compared to the
pristine clay (Figure 5a). These results corroborate the conclusions from the TG/DTA analysis
of the Sep–Neo hybrid (Figure 5c), where the typical endothermic event at 550 °C
related to dehydroxylation of the silicate was not observed, and provides
additional support to the hypothesis that the neomycin could partially
penetrate in the tunnels of silicate, most likely at the tunnel endings,
retarding as a consequence the structural collapse of the clay. This
interpretation can be supported by the analogous results where molecular
species, such as indigo, methylene blue, pyridine, quaternary amines,
or polyacrylonitrile, can access the tunnels of sepiolite delaying
the folding of the structure.36,50 As expected, the stronger
structural changes take place at higher calcination temperatures (900
°C), resulting in the formation of the protoenstatite phase and
the (110) reflection disappears in both neat sepiolite and Sep–Neo
diffractograms (Figure 5d,e).

Figure 5 XRD patterns of (a) pristine Sep, (b) Sep, and (c) Sep–Neo
calcined samples at 550 °C and (d) Sep and (e) Sep–Neo
calcined samples at 900 °C.

Table 1 lists
the
textural properties of the neat sepiolite and Sep–Neo hybrid
obtained from adsorption–desorption N2 isotherms
(Figure S2). The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
specific surface area determined from N2 adsorption of
starting sepiolite (342 m2 g–1) was reduced
in the hybrid material due to the drug adsorption, reaching a value
of 245 m2 g–1. Given that this clay exhibits
structural micropores that can be accessible to neomycin, the micropore
area of the samples was calculated as the difference between the BET
and external surface area. As shown in Table 1, the neomycin adsorption on sepiolite (Sep–Neo
material) causes a significant decrease of 76 m2 g–1 in the micropore area in comparison to the starting
clay (calculated values of 195 m2 g–1 in pristine sepiolite and 119 m2 g–1 in Sep–Neo). In contrast, external surface area values of
hybrid material suffer only a small variation of 24 m2 g–1 in comparison to starting sepiolite, decreasing from
147 to 123 m2 g–1 in the hybrid sample.
These results indicate that neomycin could be partially adsorbed into
the nanosize tunnels, also supported by XRD of the calcined hybrid,
although most of the drug molecules seem to be located at the external
surface of the mineral as pointed out by FTIR studies.

Table 1 Textural Parameters of the Pristine
Sepiolite and Sepiolite–Neomycin Hybrid
sample	SBET (m2 g–1)	Smicro (m2 g–1)	Sext (m2 g–1)	maximum pore
volume (cm3 g–1)	
sepiolite	342	195	147	0.65	
Sep–Neo	245	119	123	0.57	
Computational
Simulations
The structures of the MMT–Neo
and Sep–Neo hybrids were investigated through a computational
study based on molecular mechanics. The goal of this study is to understand
the hybrid structure formed, considering the possible location and
interaction energies between the neomycin and the different clay structures.

MTT–Neo
The relative stability of the neomycin
molecules within the interlayer space of the MMT framework as a function
of the interlayer distance is shown in Figure S3 in the Supporting Information (SI); results are shown for
two force fields. Very similar results are observed for the two force
fields, consistent valence force field (CVFF, in blue) and Dreiding
(in red): a sharp increase of the stability (decrease of the relative
energy) with increasing interlayer space up to a distance from which
a softer continuous decrease of stability is observed, only slightly
differing the two force fields in the most stable interlayer distance,
being 13.2 Å for CVFF and 13.6 Å for Dreiding. The experimentally
observed values for the interlayer distances are in the range of 13.5–14.0
Å, showing a very good agreement with the results predicted by
the computational model, being the results predicted by the Dreiding
force field slightly better. In any case, these results show that
the computational model performs reasonably well for simulating the
swelling of the montmorillonite framework upon inclusion of the neomycin
molecules. Hereafter, only results obtained with the Dreiding potential
will be discussed.

A very unstable situation is observed when
the molecule is loaded in the original montmorillonite framework,
with a “c” parameter of 12.4 Å
(see Figure S3). At this interlayer space
of the original framework, there is not enough space as to accommodate
the bulky neomycin molecules (see Figure 6A). Radial distribution function (RDF) analysis
of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations suggests that the main reason
for such instability seems to be a too close location of the more
hydrophobic H–C atoms with the framework of O atoms, which
locate at too short distances (2.2 Å) (green line in Figure S4, top left). This clearly explains the
swelling of the MMT framework upon inclusion of the neomycin molecules,
as experimentally observed.

Figure 6 Most stable location (as obtained with the Dreiding
model) of neomycin
molecules as a function of the interlayer space: the unstable original
montmorillonite framework 12.4 Å (A), the most stable case with c = 13.6 Å (B), and unstable cases with too large interlayer
distance of 15.0 Å (C).

An increase of the interlayer space involves a progressive
stabilization
of the occlusion of the neomycin molecules (Figure S3) since there is a larger space to accommodate the guest
species. The best interlayer space, as calculated by the Dreiding
force field, is found for a c value of 13.6 Å;
as previously mentioned, this is in very good agreement with the experimental
observations (which give c parameters between 13.6
and 14.0 Å, depending on the contact time). We should note that
the model does not take into account several other species that site
within the interlayer space, such as exchangeable cations or water
molecules. However, results are in very good agreement with the experiments.
In the most stable case (c = 13.6 Å) (Figure 6B), the interlayer
space is such as to enable a good accommodation of the molecules,
preventing steric repulsions (now the distance of the H-bonded-to-C
atoms is larger, 2.6 Å, green line in Figure S4, middle left) while enabling a simultaneous strong interaction
between the different H atoms bonded to polar groups (O and N) and
the framework O atoms of the two consecutive layers, establishing
strong O(mont)···HX(neo) H-bonds with interatomic distances
of 2.0 and 2.2 Å (with HO and HN, respectively) (blue and red
lines in Figure S3). If the interlayer
space is further increased, the stability starts to decrease again
(Figure S3). As an example, we will focus
on the system with c = 15.0 Å (Figure 6C); in this case, the interlayer
distance is too large to enable a strong interaction of the H atoms
of neomycin with the two layers. Indeed, RDF results (Figure S4, bottom left) show that only the H–N
atoms interact with the O framework atoms; H(O) and H(C) atoms are
too far to interact with the layers, thus resulting in a lower stability
of the system. Hence, these results clearly explain the experimental
observations of the swelling of montmorillonite in the presence of
neomycine.

Sep–Neo
In the case of Sep–Neo
hybrid,
the docking of one neomycin molecule in the molecular structure experimentally
determined (Figure 1) through the Monte Carlo (MC) simulations was unsuccessful since
the molecule does not fit within the sepiolite channels in this particular
molecular conformation. This is probably due to the shortest (∼5
Å) dimension being too large to fit within the shortest (∼7
Å) dimension of the sepiolite channels (see Figure 1). A set of different molecular
conformations of neomycin were then generated by simulated annealing
calculations of the molecule in vacuo, with different molecular dimensions,
and none of them was able to dock within the sepiolite channels through
the MC simulations.

A different molecular structure was then
manually built, where the molecule is in a quasi-planar configuration,
giving a shortest dimension considerably smaller (∼3.5 Å)
(Figure S5a). In this case, the MC simulations
did lead to the incorporation of a molecule within the sepiolite channels
(Figure S5b). Worth is noting that optimization
of this planar molecular structure of neomycin in vacuo led to a slightly
different conformation that in this case was not able to fit within
the molecule after MC simulations. This result suggests that neomycin
does not seem to be able to enter the sepiolite channels in its most
stable conformation and therefore needs to rearrange its molecular
structure to a quasi-planar and elongated shape to be able to enter
the channels. Such energy penalty could be compensated for by the
interaction developed with sepiolite framework (Figure 7). The molecules locate with the longest
molecular axis aligned with the tunnel direction. The NH3+ groups develop H-bond interactions with the O atoms
of the sepiolite framework walls (dashed blue lines in Figure 7a). Hydroxyl groups are involved
in both intramolecular H-bonds to stabilize the molecular conformation
and also with the framework walls. The interactions of the neomycin
molecules with the framework were studied by analyzing RDFs between
relevant sets of atoms during NVT molecular dynamics simulations (Figure 7d). Results show
that the strongest interactions are developed between H(O) atoms of
hydroxyl groups and the O1 framework atoms (on the top and bottom
walls of the tunnels, see Figure 7b), where strong H-bonds at 1.7 Å are established
(solid blue lines). The H atoms of the ammonium groups also develop
strong and abundant H-bond interactions, at distances of around 2.2
Å (solid red lines). In both cases, the interactions with O1
atoms are stronger than those with the lateral O2 framework atoms
(dashed lines). Thus, through this study, we can conclude that the
dimensions of the sepiolite tunnels are large enough to host the neomycin
molecule, as long as this adopts a particular conformation with a
quasi-planar shape, which is not its most stable conformation in vacuo
and therefore might be kinetically impeded.

Figure 7 Three views of the most
stable location of neomycin within the
sepiolite tunnels after simulated annealing calculations (a–c)
(dashed blue lines indicate H-bonds), and interatomic RDFs between
relevant atoms (d) (ho and hn refer to H atoms bonded to O and N in
neomycin, respectively; O1 and O2 are sepiolite framework O atoms
in the tunnel walls, as defined in (b)).

Clay–Neomycin-Based Bionanocomposite Films
Bionanocomposite
films for antibiotic topical delivery were prepared by the incorporation
of neomycin from MMT–Neo or Sep–Neo hybrids into a carboxymethylcellulose-zein
(CMC-Z) matrix. For this purpose, the polysaccharide CMC was combined
with different amounts of the protein zein (0, 10, and 50% w/w) to
optimize the ratio of biopolymers aiming at improving neomycin delivery.

The pristine biopolymers CMC-Z prepared with 50% of zein (CMC-Z50)
and the bionanocomposite films containing MMT–Neo and Sep–Neo
were analyzed by FTIR spectroscopy (Figure 8). Films prepared from the direct incorporation
of neomycin into CMC-Z50 matrix were also studied for comparison purposes.
The spectrum of CMC (Figure 8a) shows characteristic absorptions at 3313, 1588, 1414, and
1037 cm–1, assigned to the νOH,
νassCO (COO−), νsimCO (COO−),
and νCO (O–C–O) vibrations, respectively.
The zein spectrum (Figure 8b) is characterized by the presence of a broad band centered
at 3290 cm–1 related to the NH stretching vibration
mode of amide A associated with the peptide groups of the protein.
Bands at 1641 and 1522 cm–1 are attributed to νCO and νCN, which correspond to C=O
of amide I and C–N–H of amide II from peptide groups.53 However, in the spectrum of the CMC-Z50 blend
(Figure 8c), the νCO band at 1641 cm–1 attributed to amide
I groups of zein seems to be overlapped by the CMC characteristic
band at 1588 cm–1, being evident only a single band
at 1634 cm–1. Analogously, as reported for biopolymer
systems based on zein combined with the polysaccharide alginate,54 this effect can be a consequence of possible
interactions between the protonated amino groups from zein and the
carboxylate groups from the cellulose derivative. The band corresponding
to the amide II in zein is shifted toward higher wavenumber values
by 14 cm–1, showing up now at 1536 cm–1. All of these displacements suggest the establishment of interactions
between the protein and the polysaccharide.

Figure 8 Infrared spectra (4000–650
cm–1 region)
of (a) CMC, (b) zein, (c) CMC-Z50 blend, (d) CMC-Z50/Neo, (e) CMC-Z50/MMT–Neo,
and (f) CMC-Z50/Sep–Neo films.

Concerning the material prepared from the direct incorporation
of neomycin into biopolymer matrix (CMC-Z50/Neo) (Figure 8d), it is possible to appreciate
a broad band between 1600 and 1590 cm–1 which can
be related to an envelope of the amide I bands from both protein and
neomycin, as well as the carboxylic groups from the polysaccharide
structure. Otherwise, in the spectrum of the bionanocomposite film
that incorporates neomycin from the MMT–Neo intercalation compound,
CMC-Z50/MMT–Neo (Figure 8e), the characteristic band of the layered silicate at 993
cm–1 associated with υSi–O–Si vibrations appears overlapped by the υCO vibration
from CMC biopolymer, appearing as a single band at 1010 cm–1. However, in the spectral zone at higher wavenumbers (ca. 3600 cm–1), it is possible to evidence the presence of a holder
at 3630 cm–1, which is related to the υOH of Al, Mg(OH) regarding MMT in the hybrid material incorporated
to biopolymer matrix. Similarly to the system discussed above, the
system that incorporates Sep–Neo hybrid (Figure 8f), due to an overlap of bands from the polysaccharide
and Si–O–Si groups of the mineral, only a single band
near 1000 cm–1 is observed in the CMC-Z50/Sep–Neo
bionanocomposite film. On the other hand, in the same spectrum, a
low-intensity band at 3960 cm–1 can be an appreciable
characteristic of the υOH corresponding to −OH
groups linked to Mg atoms located on the block structure of the sepiolite.
The presence of this band confirms the incorporation of the Sep–Neo
material into the biopolymeric matrix.

Table S1 reports the Young’s
moduli (E) and elongation at break (Eb) of the films as a function of the amounts of zein as
well as of the type of hybrid incorporated into the biopolymer matrix.
Pure CMC film shows the Young’s modulus and elongation at break
of 3.72 GPa and 4.61%, respectively. The incorporation of zein in
CMC decreases E, while an increase of the Eb moduli is observed, showing values of 2.36
GPa and 5.51%, for CMC-Z films prepared with high zein content (50%).
This feature is typical for materials based on zein,4,54 which is attributed to the plasticizing effect of this protein and
indicates an intensification of the mobility of the chains of the
CMC polysaccharide after addition of zein. In contrast, CMC films
prepared with MMT–Neo and Sep–Neo hybrids in the absence
of zein show a significant improvement of the Young’s modulus
values (4.57 and 6.25 GPa, respectively), revealing the role of these
hybrid compounds as reinforcing agents (fillers) increasing the material
stiffness. This reinforcing effect is also observed when zein is present
in the film. Although the Young’s moduli of the CMC-Z/MMT–Neo
and CMC-Z/Sep–Neo systems decrease with the increase of zein
in the film, these values are still higher than those obtained for
CMC-Z films containing the same amount of zein. On the other hand,
as expected, due to the plasticizing effect of zein, an enhancement
of the plastic behavior is evidenced with the increase of this protein
in all of the studied bionanocomposites, which was accompanied by
an increase of the Eb values.

Regarding
the kind of hybrid material incorporated into the biopolymer
matrix, the improved properties displayed for the CMC-Z/Sep–Neo
bionanocomposites in comparison to analogous films based on MMT–Neo
is remarkable. This good level of reinforcement in the films containing
Sep–Neo was already reported by other studies involving sepiolite-based
bionanocomposites,30,48,49,55 and can be attributed to the high elastic
modulus of single sepiolite crystals,22 as well as to the strong interactions between the zein protein and
sepiolite, as reported by Alcântara et al.,4 improving the mechanical properties of the final material.
Nonetheless, all of the bionanocomposites prepared in this work showed
superior Young’s moduli than those of analogous films for drug
delivery,56 resulting in materials with
suitable mechanical resistance for topical drug-delivery purposes.

Taking into account that zein has a hydrophobic character and that
this feature can have some effect on the bionanocomposite films, and
consequently in the release of neomycin from the prepared films, water
vapor sorption properties were also evaluated in these materials (Figure S6). In fact, the hydrophilicity of the
CMC film decreases up to 60% for the CMC films loaded with 50% of
zein (Figure S6a). Lower values of moisture
sorption compared to those achieved by the CMC-Z films are still obtained
with the incorporation of the MMT–Neo and Sep–Neo hybrids
in the biopolymer matrix (Figure S6b),
where it is observed that the incorporation of Sep–Neo did
not show a significant decrease of the moisture sorption with the
increase of zein in the matrix compared to analogous films based on
MMT–Neo (Figure S6b). These different
behaviors in water vapor sorption reveal that the affinity toward
water is not only associated with the amount of zein in the biopolymer
matrix, but also the kind of hybrid incorporated in the film system
is determinant of such property. In all cases, the increase of zein
content in these films results in materials with reduced water sorption
together with improved resistance toward the high-humidity conditions
in the bacteriological tests carried out with these materials.

Antimicrobial
Activity Assays
Ointments, gels, foams,
and films are pharmaceutical forms suitable for topical application,
with systemic or local action. The bionanocomposite materials prepared
in this study exhibited good ability to form self-supported films,
providing a viable pharmaceutical form for topical delivery of antibiotics.
For this evaluation, we selected four microorganisms: two Gram-positive
bacteria (Listeria monocytogenes and Staphylococcus aureus) and two Gram-negative bacteria
(E. coli and Salmonella
choleraesuis). Figure 9 reports the set of images of the microbial population
growth after 24 h in the presence of the different films, while the
measurements of the halos or inhibition zones are summarized in Table S2. First, the antimicrobial activity of
the CMC-Z biopolymer films without neomycin was tested as control,
showing no detectable inhibitory activity against the tested pathogens
(Figure 9A-a). CMC-Z
films that incorporate neomycin directly in the biopolymer matrix
(CMC-Z/Neo) (Figure 9A-b) showed clear antibacterial activity, with Gram-negative bacteria
producing the beginning of halo formation in approximately 2 h after
contact, while Gram-positive bacteria started halo formation after
4 h of contact with the film. In CMC-Z-Neo films containing 50% (w/w)
of zein, the release of neomycin was retarded around 60 min with respect
to those CMC-Z/Neo films containing 0 or 10% (w/w) of protein, which
show halo formation after 3 h of contact with Gram-negative bacteria.
This behavior indicates that the presence of zein in the CMC film
causes a more controlled release effect compared to the pure CMC films.
After measuring the halos formed up to 10 h, the test dishes were
maintained in incubation for an additional 14 h period, not being
observed any increase in the inhibition halo after this time. Table S2 shows a large halo formation for Gram-negative
bacteria compared to Gram-positive bacteria. This result agrees with
the literature,57 and because this drug
presents a greater selectivity to Gram-negative bacteria, and only
to some Gram-positive bacteria. Figure 9A-c shows the inhibition halo formation in CMC-Z/MMT–Neo
bionanocomposite films. As expected, these systems showed also a higher
inhibition zone for Gram-negative bacteria. Nevertheless, the measurement
of the halo formed in the presence of CMC-Z/MMT–Neo bionanocomposites
is slightly lower than that formed around the CMC-Z-Neo films after
24 h incubation (Table S2). This behavior
could be attributed to the fact that not all of the drug present between
the lamellae of MMT has been released during the test time, which
suggests a more sustained release of neomycin in this system compared
to those CMC-Z systems that incorporate the drug directly in the biopolymer
matrix. Besides the halo measurements, this hypothesis can be supported
by the fact that the starting of halo formation with the CMC-Z/MMT–Neo
films containing 0, 10, and 50% (w/w) of zein began approximately
30 min, 45 min, and 1 h 20 min after the beginning of the halo associated
with the CMC-Z/Neo materials that incorporate equivalent amounts of
zein, respectively. In any case, it should be remarked that the efficiency
of antimicrobial effect of these bionanocomposites was maintained,
and we can consider that this property was not strongly affected by
the drug immobilization into the MMT galleries. In contrast, the antimicrobial
activity seems to be meaningfully affected when neomycin is immobilized
in sepiolite in the bionanocomposite films (Figure 9B). In this case, CMC-Z/Sep–Neo systems
showed the formation of a minor inhibition zone for both groups of
bacteria of approximately 3 times smaller (Table S2) compared to CMC-Z/MMT–Neo bionanocomposite films
discussed above. Taking into account that the amount of neomycin is
the same for all of the film systems prepared in this work, it can
be considered that this behavior is directly associated with the structure
of the Sep–Neo hybrid itself. Hence, this performance could
be related to two main factors, which would make the diffusion of
the adsorbed drug from the matrix difficult, and consequently resulting
in a very slow release of neomycin into the medium of assay: (i) strong
interaction between the pharmacologically active compound and the
silicate and (ii) penetration of the drug into the tunnels of sepiolite,
as suggested by N2 adsorption and FTIR experimental techniques
and molecular simulations. However, these studies reveal that although
neomycin could be encapsulated into the inorganic solid, all of the
bionanocomposite films synthesized are still biologically active against
the tested bacteria, varying the degree of inhibition efficacy according
to the clay mineral host.

Figure 9 (A) Microbial population growth after 24 h in
(a) CMC-Z control,
(b) CMC-Z/Neo, and (c) CMC-Z50/MMT–Neo films. (B) Microbial
population growth after 24 h in (a) CMC-Neo, (b) CMC/Sep–Neo,
(c) CMC-Z10/Neo, (d) CMC-Z10/Sep–Neo, (e) CMC-Z50/Neo, and
(f) CMC-Z50/Sep–Neo films.

Conclusions
The use of montmorillonite and sepiolite
clay minerals as support
of neomycin antibiotic drug in bionanocomposite films based on carboxymethylcellulose
polysaccharide and zein protein is reported here. Through a combination
of experimental and computational methodologies, it was possible to
confirm the intercalation of neomycin into the montmorillonite layers
producing an increase of the interlayer space. The probable penetration
of the drug in the tunnels of sepiolite may take place as pointed
out by molecular simulations, N2 adsorption, and XRD experimental
techniques. The antimicrobial activity of these bionanocomposite materials
showed that the release of neomycin can be modulated according to
the amount of zein protein incorporated in the bionanocomposite films,
where high amounts of zein can impart hydrophobicity, making the film
more resistant in high-humidity environments and delaying the drug
release. On the other hand, the bionanocomposite films based on montmorillonite–neomycin
displayed a more pronounced inhibitory effect of the bacterial growth
than those films prepared with the sepiolite–neomycin hybrid.
Such effect can be attributed to the difficult release of neomycin
adsorbed on sepiolite due to a strong interaction between both components.
Thus, since both MMT–Neo- and Sep–Neo-based bionanocomposite
films showed a delay in antibiotic release, compared to a biopolymer
matrix incorporating the drug directly, such materials can be considered
as efficient systems to protect the drug and allow its sustained release
for a longer time, avoiding possible side effects and discomforts
from a topical administration.

Experimental Section
Materials
Pangel
S9, a rheological product manufactured
from sepiolite obtained from deposits in Vallecas-Vicálvaro
(Madrid, Spain), was provided by Tolsa S.A. This microfibrous silicate
has the theoretical formula [Si12O30Mg8(OH,F)4](H2O)4·8H2O. Sodium montmorillonite with ideal formula (Na)0.33(AlMg)2(Si4O10)(OH)2·nH2O and commercialized as Cloisite Na+ was provided from Southern Clay Products. This commercial product
is a homoionic sodium clay obtained after treatment of the raw Wyoming
bentonite. Neomycin trisulfate salt hydrate (Neo) (C23H46N6O13), carboxymethylcellulose, and
zein from corn were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Brazil) and absolute
ethanol P.A. (C2H5OH) from Merck. Ultrapure
water was obtained from Milli-Q Merck water purification system.

Preparation of the MTT–Neo and Sep–Neo Hybrids
MMT and Sep suspensions (20 g L–1) were prepared
in ultrapure water by vigorous magnetic stirring for approximately
30 min to disperse the clays. Thereafter, the Neo solution (0.04 mol
L–1) was added dropwise on each clay suspension.
In both cases, the pH of the drug solution was adjusted to around
6 to obtain the protonation of amine groups. This pH value was selected
based on computational pKa information
for Neo molecule obtained from MarvinSketch software version 6.1.5.

For the formation of the montmorillonite–neomycin hybrid
(MMT–Neo), after the complete addition of neomycin, the suspension
was kept under magnetic stirring for 24, 48, and 72 h at room temperature,
to evaluate the influence of the ion-exchange reaction time. In the
case of the sepiolite–neomycin hybrid (Sep–Neo), different
concentrations of drug were added to the sepiolite suspension to verify
the maximum adsorption capacity of the clay. Thus, after the addition
of drug, the resulting single batch was kept under magnetic stirring
for 48 h at room temperature. After the reaction, the solids were
isolated in both systems by centrifugation, washed three times to
remove the nonadsorbed drug, and dried overnight at 60 °C.

Preparation of Bionanocomposite Films
Bionanocomposite
films based on carboxymethylcellulose-zein (CMC-Z) that incorporate
MMT–Neo or Sep–Neo were prepared by adding the required
amount of MTT–Neo or Sep–Neo hybrid material containing
0.5 g of Neo in a solution of CMC (2% w/v), which was previously dissolved
in 80 mL of water heated at 60 °C. Then, to achieve final contents
of 0, 10, and 50% (w/v) with respect to the biopolymer mass, the required
amount of zein was solubilized in 20 mL of ethanol–water (80%
v/v) and gradually added to the CMC–hybrid solution, forming
a single batch, which was maintained under constant stirring for approximately
30 min. After total homogenization, the resulting bionanocomposite
dispersions were placed on Petri dishes and dried at room temperature.
For comparison (blank), CMC-Z films containing pure Neo, which was
directly incorporated into the biopolymer matrix, were also prepared.
The bionanocomposite films prepared from MTT–Neo and Sep–Neo
were denoted as CMC-Z/MTT–Neo and CMC-Z/Sep–Neo, respectively,
while those that incorporate the pure Neo drug were denoted as CMC-Z/Neo
films.

Characterization
Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) was
performed with a Bruker D2-PHASER diffractometer using a Cu Kα
source, with a scan step of 0.3 s over the 2θ range of 2–70°.
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded with a PerkinElmer
spectrophotometer, model SPECTRUM 65 FTIR, using the attenuated total
reflection method with 2% transmittance limit. Some samples based
on sepiolite were analyzed with an FTIR spectrophotometer Shimadzu
IR-Prestige, in the range of 4000–500 cm–1 and a resolution of 1 cm–1 (16 scans). The amount
of organic matter in the hybrid compounds was determined by elemental
chemical analysis CHN using a LECO CHNS-932 equipment. The thermal
behavior of the synthesized materials was analyzed from the simultaneously
recorded thermogravimetric (TG) and differential thermal analysis
(DTA) curves in a Shimadzu DTG-60AH equipment. These analyses were
performed under synthetic airflow (100 mL min–1)
from room temperature to 900 °C at 10 °C min–1 heating rate. The surface areas were obtained using the BET method,
and the micropore volumes and external areas were calculated by the t-plot method using the Harkins–Jura–de Boer t-equation. The total pore volume was calculated at a partial
pressure (p/p0) of 0.98.
The micropore area was calculated as the difference between the BET
and external surface areas.

Mechanical Properties
The mechanical
properties, such
as tensile modulus and percentage of the break elongation of the film
samples, were evaluated with a 3345 model Instron Universal Testing
Machine (Instron Engineering Corporation, Canton, MA) using the standard
method ASTM D 882-88. The specimens with rectangular shape (ca. 40
mm × 10 mm) were mounted between the grips with an initial separation
of 25 mm, and the speed was set at 5 mm min–1. Three
replicates were run for each film sample.

In Vitro Antimicrobial
Activities of Neomycin Released from
Bionanocomposite Films
The in vitro antibacterial activity
of the samples was evaluated by the disk diffusion method using Mueller–Hinton
agar (MHA) (Sigma-Aldrich, India) with inhibition zones determined
in millimeters (mm). Gram-positive bacteria (L. monocytogenes ATCC 7644, S. aureus ATCC 25923)
and Gram-negative bacteria (Escherichia coli ATCC 25922, Salmonella enterica subsp.
enterica serovar choleraesuis ATCC 10708) previously grown in Luria
Bertani (10 g L–1 tryptone, 5 g L–1 yeast extract, and 5 g L–1 NaCl) for 24 h at 36
± 1 °C were used for the antibacterial effect assay. Each
bacterial suspension (100 μL, 108 CFU mL–1) was inoculated on MHA and spread with a sterile Drigalski handle.
Bionanocomposites disks (CMC-Zein/Neo, CMC-Zein/MMT–Neo, and
CMC-Zein/Sep–Neo with 0, 10, and 50% zein, respectively) together
with a negative control (CMC-Z film without neomycin) were placed
on previously inoculated MHA and incubated at 36 ± 1 °C
for 24 h. During the incubation, the diameter of the growth inhibition
zones was measured every 2 h. All tests were performed in triplicate.

Computational Study
The computational methodology employed
to study the intercalation of neomycine on the inorganic clays was
based on molecular mechanics simulations, as implemented in Forcite
module in Materials Studio software.58 The
details of the computational study methods are shown in the Supporting
Information (SI).

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b01026.Adsorption isotherm
for Sep–Neo (fitting); adsorption–desorption
N2 isotherms of neat Sep and Sep–Neo hybrid; complementary
graphics of dynamic molecular studies; and tensile properties, moisture
sorption, and antimicrobial activity of bionanocomposite films (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b01026_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge financial support from CNPq
project
406184/2013-5, FAPEMA (UNIVERSAL 01118/16), and MINECO (Spain, project
MAT2015-71117-R). E.P.R. and A.C.S.A. acknowledge the CAPES and CNPq
for providing funding for master and postdoctoral fellowships, respectively.
==== Refs
References
Ribeiro L. N. M. ; Alcântara A. C. S. ; Darder M. ; Aranda P. ; Araújo-Moreira F. M. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Pectin-coated
chitosan–LDH bionanocomposite beads as potential systems for
colon-targeted drug delivery . Int. J. Pharm. 
2014 , 463 , 1 –9 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2013.12.035 .24374607 
Ribeiro L. N. M. ; Franz-Montan M. ; Breitkreitz M. C. ; Alcântara A. C.
S. ; Castro S. R. ; Guilherme V. A. ; Barbosa R. M. ; de Paula E. 
Nanostructured
lipid carriers as robust systems for topical lindocaine-prilocaine
release in dentistry . Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 
2016 , 93 , 192 –202 . 10.1016/j.ejps.2016.08.030 .27543066 
Darder M. ; Aranda P. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Bionanocomposites:
A New Concept
of Ecological, Bioinspired, and Functional Hybrid Materials . Adv. Mater. 
2007 , 19 , 1309 –1319 . 10.1002/adma.200602328 .
Alcântara A. C.
S. ; Darder M. ; Aranda P. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Zein-fibrous
Clays Biohybrid Materials . Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 
2012 , 2012 , 5216 –5224 . 10.1002/ejic.201200582 .
Mousa M. H. ; Dong Y. ; Davies I. 
Recent advances in
bionanocomposites:
preparation, properties and applications . Int.
J. Polym. Mater. Polym. Biomater. 
2016 , 65 , 225 –254 . 10.1080/00914037.2015.1103240 .
Wang R. ; Zhang Y. ; Lu D. ; Ge J. ; Liu Z. ; Zare R. N. 
Functional protein-organic/inorganic hybrid nanomaterials . Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 
2013 , 5 , 320 –328 . 10.1002/wnan.1210 .23362008 
Ruiz-Hitzky E. ; Aranda P. ; Darder M. ; Rytwo G. 
Hybrid materials based
on clays for environmental and biomedical applications . J. Mater. Chem. 
2010 , 20 , 9306 –9321 . 10.1039/c0jm00432d .
Kim M. H. ; Choi G. ; Elzatahry A. ; Vinu A. ; Choy Y. B. ; Choy J.-H. 
Review of Clay-Drug
Hybrid Materials for Biomedical
Applications: Administration Routes . Clays Clay
Miner. 
2016 , 64 , 115 –130 . 10.1346/CCMN.2016.0640204 .
Aguzzi C. ; Cerezo P. ; Viseras C. ; Caramella C. 
Use of clays
as drug delivery systems: Possibilities and limitations . Appl. Clay Sci. 
2007 , 36 , 22 –36 . 10.1016/j.clay.2006.06.015 .
Alavi M. ; Totonchi A. ; Okhovat M. A. ; Motazedian M. ; Rezaei P. ; Atefi M. 
The effect of a new
impregnated gauze
containing bentonite and halloysite minerals on blood coagulation
and wound healing . Blood Coagulation Fibrinolysis 
2014 , 25 , 856 –859 . 10.1097/MBC.0000000000000172 .25004023 
Fernandes A. C. ; Pinto M. L. ; Antunes F. ; Pires J. 
Clay based materials
for storage and therapeutic release of nitric oxide . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2013 , 1 , 3287 –3294 . 10.1039/c3tb20535e .
Carretero M. I. ; Pozo M. 
Clay and non-clay
minerals in the pharmaceutical industry Part I.
Excipients and medical applications . Appl. Clay
Sci. 
2009 , 46 , 73 –80 . 10.1016/j.clay.2009.07.017 .
Lvov Y. M. ; Shchukin D. G. ; Möhwald H. ; Price R. R. 
Halloysite Clay
Nanotubes for Controlled Release of Protective Agents . ACS Nano 
2008 , 2 , 814 –820 . 10.1021/nn800259q .19206476 
Rapacz-Kmita A. ; Bućko M. M. ; Stodolak-Zych E. ; Mikołajczyk M. ; Dudek P. ; Trybus M. 
Characterisation,
in vitro release
study, and antibacterial activity of montmorillonite-gentamicin complex
material . Mater. Sci. Eng., C 
2017 , 70 , 471 –478 . 10.1016/j.msec.2016.09.031 .
Rebitski E. P. ; Aranda P. ; Darder M. ; Carraro R. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Intercalation
of metformin into montmorillonite . Dalton Trans. 
2018 , 47 , 3185 –3192 . 10.1039/C7DT04197G .29445806 
Djebbi M. A. ; Boubakri S. ; Bouaziz Z. ; Elayachi M. S. ; Namour P. ; Jaffrezic-Renault N. ; Amara A. B. H. 
Extended-release of chlorpromazine
intercalated into montmorillonite clays . Microporous
Mesoporous Mater. 
2018 , 267 , 43 –52 . 10.1016/j.micromeso.2018.03.017 .
Borrego-Sánchez A. ; Carazo E. ; Aguzzi C. ; Viseras C. ; Sainz-Díaz C. I. 
Biopharmaceutical
improvement of praziquantel by interaction with montmorillonite and
sepiolite . Appl. Clay Sci. 
2018 , 160 , 173 –179 . 10.1016/j.clay.2017.12.024 .
Ambrogi V. ; Pietrella D. ; Nocchetti M. ; Casagrande S. ; Moretti V. ; De Marco S. ; Ricci M. 
Montmorillonite–chitosan–chlorhexidine
composite films with antibiofilm activity and improved cytotoxicity
for wound dressing . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2017 , 491 , 265 –272 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2016.12.058 .28049050 
Oliveira A. S. ; Alcântara A. C. S. ; Pergher S. B. C. 
Bionanocomposite
systems based on montmorillonite and biopolymers for the controlled
release of olanzapine . Mater. Sci. Eng., C 
2017 , 75 , 1250 –1258 . 10.1016/j.msec.2017.03.044 .
Park J. K. ; Choy Y. B. ; Oh J. M. ; Kim J. Y. ; Hwang S. J. ; Choy J. H. 
Controlled release
of donepezil intercalated in smectite
clays . Int. J. Pharm. 
2008 , 359 , 198 –204 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2008.04.012 .18502063 
Karataş D. ; Tekin A. ; Bahadori F. ; Çelik M. S. 
Interaction
of curcumin in a drug delivery system including a composite with poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid) and montmorillonite: a density functional theory and molecular
dynamics study . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2017 , 5 , 8070 –8082 . 10.1039/C7TB01964E .
Sandri G. ; Bonferoni M. C. ; Ferrari F. ; Rossi S. ; Aguzzi C. ; Mori M. ; Grisoli P. ; Cerezo P. ; Tenci M. ; Viseras C. ; Caramella C. 
Montmorillonite-chitosan-silver sulfadiazine
nanocomposites for topical treatment of chronic skin lesions: In vitro
biocompatibility, antibacterial efficacy and gap closure cell motility
properties . Carbohydr. Polym. 
2014 , 102 , 970 –977 . 10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.10.029 .24507371 
Tenci M. ; Rossi S. ; Aguzzi C. ; Carazo E. ; Sandri G. ; Bonferoni M. C. ; Grisoli P. ; Viseras C. ; Caramella C. M. ; Ferrari F. 
Carvacrol/clay hybrids loaded into in situ gelling
films . Int. J. Pharm. 
2017 , 531 , 676 –688 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.06.024 .28619454 
Ribeiro L. N. M. ; Alcântara A. C.
S. ; Darder M. ; Aranda P. ; Herrmann P. S. P. ; Araújo-Moreira F. M. ; García-Hernández M. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Bionanocomposites
containing magnetic graphite as potential
systems for drug delivery . Int. J. Pharm. 
2014 , 477 , 553 –563 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2014.10.033 .25455784 
dos
Santos E. C. ; Rozynek Z. ; Hansen E. L. ; Hartmann-Petersen R. ; Klitgaard R. N. ; Løbner-Olesen A. ; Michels L. ; Mikkelsen A. ; Plivelic T. S. ; Bordallo H. N. ; Fossum J. O. 
Ciprofloxacin intercalated
in fluorohectorite clay: identical pure drug activity and toxicity
with higher adsorption and controlled release rate . RSC Adv. 
2017 , 7 , 26537 –26545 . 10.1039/C7RA01384A .
Ohta S. ; Nagai K. ; Maruyama M. ; Inoue H. ; Katsuyama Y. ; Atobe O. ; Ogata H. ; Yamato S. ; Tachikawa E. ; Zenda H. 
Preparation and characteristics
of antibacterial sepiolite containing
povidone-iodine as a useful pharmaceutical product for patient care . Biol. Pharm. Bull. 
1999 , 22 , 42 –47 . 10.1248/bpb.22.42 .9989660 
Mura P. ; Maestrelli F. ; Aguzzi C. ; Viseras C. 
Hybrid systems based
on “drug - in cyclodextrin - in nanoclays” for improving
oxaprozin dissolution properties . Int. J. Pharm. 
2016 , 509 , 8 –15 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2016.05.028 .27188644 
Cervini-Silva J. ; Nieto-Camacho A. ; Ramirez-Apan T. ; Gómez-Vidales V. ; Palacios E. ; Montoya A. ; Jesús E. R. 
Anti-inflammatory,
anti-bacterial, and cytotoxic activity of fibrous clays . Colloids Surf., B 
2015 , 129 , 1 –6 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2015.03.019 .
Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Molecular
access to intracrystalline tunnels of sepiolite . J. Mater. Chem. 
2001 , 11 , 86 –91 . 10.1039/b003197f .
Fernandes F. M. ; Manjubala I. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Gelatin renaturation and the interfacial
role of fillers in bionanocomposites . Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 13 , 4901 –4910 . 10.1039/C0CP00882F .21103587 
Fernandes F. M. ; Vázquez L. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. ; Carnicero A. ; Castro M. 
Elastic properties
of natural single nanofibres . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 11225 –11231 . 10.1039/c3ra47452f .
Ruiz-Hitzky E. ; Darder M. ; Fernandes F. M. ; Wicklein B. ; Alcântara A. C. S. ; Aranda P. 
Fibrous clays based bionanocomposites . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2013 , 38 , 1392 –1414 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2013.05.004 .
Kuang W. ; Facey G. A. ; Detellier C. ; Casal B. ; Serratosa J. M. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Nanostructured Hybrid Materials Formed by Sequestration
of Pyridine Molecules in the Tunnels of Sepiolite . Chem. Mater. 
2003 , 15 , 4956 –4967 . 10.1021/cm034867i .
Facey G. A. ; Kuang W. ; Detellier C. 
Multinuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy
studies of the structuration of the tunnels of sepiolite in the presence
of intracrystalline pyridine molecules . J. Phys.
Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 22359 –22365 . 10.1021/jp053832y .16853912 
Karataş D. ; Tekin A. ; Çelik M. S. 
Density
Functional Theory Computation
of Organic Compound Penetration into Sepiolite Tunnels . Clays Clay Miner. 
2017 , 65 , 1 –13 . 10.1346/CCMN.2016.064043 .
Fernández-Saavedra R. ; Aranda P. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Templated Synthesis of Carbon Nanofibers
from Polyacrylonitrile using Sepiolite . Adv.
Funct. Mater. 
2004 , 14 , 77 –82 . 10.1002/adfm.200305514 .
Herrera J. I. ; Olmo N. ; Turnay J. ; Sicilia A. ; Bascones A. ; Gavilanes J. G. ; Lizarbe M. A. 
Implantation of sepiolite-collagen
complexes in surgically created rat calvaria defects . Biomaterials 
1995 , 16 , 625 –631 . 10.1016/0142-9612(95)93860-G .7548613 
Olmo N. ; Lizarbe M. A. ; Gavilanes J. G. 
Biocompatibility
and degradability
of sepiolite-collagen complex . Biomaterials 
1987 , 8 , 67 –69 . 10.1016/0142-9612(87)90033-0 .3030456 
Fernandes A. C. ; Antunes F. ; Pires J. 
Sepiolite
based materials for storage
and slow release of nitric oxide . New J. Chem. 
2013 , 37 , 4052 –4060 . 10.1039/c3nj00452j .
Ruiz-Hitzky E. ; Darder M. ; Aranda P. ; del Burgo M. A. M. ; del Real G. 
Bionanocomposites as New Carriers for Influenza Vaccines . Adv. Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 4167 –4171 . 10.1002/adma.200900181 .
Giles C. H. ; MacEwan T. H. ; Nakhwa S. N. ; Smith D. 
Studies in Adsorption.
Part XI. A System of Classification of Solution Adsorption Isotherms,
and Its Use in Diagnosis of Adsorption Mechanisms and in Measurement
of Specific Surface Areas of Solids . J. Chem.
Soc. 
1960 , 846 , 3973 10.1039/jr9600003973 .
Langmuir I. 
The constituition
and fundamental properties of solids and liquids. II Liquids . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1917 , 39 , 1848 –1906 . 10.1021/ja02254a006 .
Freundlich H. M. F. 
Over
the Adsorption in Solution . J. Phys. Chem. 
1906 , 57 , 385 –471 .
Aranda P. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Poly(ethylene
oxide)/NH+-smectite nanocomposites . Appl. Clay Sci. 
1999 , 15 , 119 –135 . 10.1016/S0169-1317(99)00015-0 .
Leach B. E. ; DeVries W. H. ; Nelson H. A. ; Jackson W. G. ; Evans J. S. 
Neamine,
an Antibacterial Degradation Product of Neomycin . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1951 , 73 , 2797 10.1021/ja01150a108 .
Belver C. ; Aranda P. ; Martín-Luengo M. A. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
New silica/alumina–clay
heterostructures: Properties as acid catalysts . Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 
2012 , 147 , 157 –166 . 10.1016/j.micromeso.2011.05.037 .
García-Romero E. ; Suárez M. 
Sepiolite–palygorskite:
Textural study and genetic
considerations . Appl. Clay Sci. 
2013 , 86 , 129 –144 . 10.1016/j.clay.2013.09.013 .
Alcântara A. C. S. ; Darder M. ; Aranda P. ; Tateyama S. ; Okajima M. K. ; Kaneko T. ; Ogawa M. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Clay-bionanocomposites
with sacran megamolecules for the selective uptake of neodymium . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2014 , 2 , 1391 –1399 . 10.1039/C3TA14145D .
Darder M. ; Lopez-Blanco M. ; Aranda P. ; Aznar A. J. ; Bravo J. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Microfibrous
Chitosan–Sepiolite Nanocomposites . Chem.
Mater. 
2006 , 18 , 1602 –1610 . 10.1021/cm0523642 .
Karataş D. ; Tekin A. ; Çelik M. S. 
Adsorption
of Quaternary Amine Surfactants
and their Penetration into the Intracrystalline Cavities of Sepiolite . New J. Chem. 
2013 , 37 , 3936 –3948 . 10.1039/c3nj00752a .
Aguzzi C. ; Sandri G. ; Bonferoni C. ; Cerezo P. ; Rossi S. ; Ferrari F. ; Caramella C. ; Viseras C. 
Solid state characterisation
of silver sulfadiazine loaded on montmorillonite/chitosan nanocomposite
for wound healing . Colloids Surf., B 
2014 , 113 , 152 –157 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2013.08.043 .
Serna C. ; Ahlrichs J. L. ; Serratosa J. M. 
Folding
in Sepiolite Crystals . Clays Clay Miner. 
1975 , 23 , 452 –457 . 10.1346/CCMN.1975.0230607 .
Alcântara A. C.
S. ; Darder M. ; Aranda P. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Effetive intercalation
of zein into Na-montmorillonite: role of the protein components and
use of the developed biointerfaces . Beilstein
J. Nanotechnol. 
2016 , 7 , 1772 –1782 . 10.3762/bjnano.7.170 .28144527 
Alcântara A. C.
S. ; Darder M. ; Aranda P. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Bionanocomposites
based on alginate-zein/layered double hydroxide materials as drug
delivery systems . J. Mater. Chem. 
2010 , 20 , 9495 –9504 . 10.1039/c0jm01211d .
Alcântara A. C. S. ; Darder M. ; Aranda P. ; Ruiz-Hitzky E. 
Polyssacharide-fibrous
clay bionanocomposites . Appl. Clay Sci. 
2014 , 96 , 2 –8 . 10.1016/j.clay.2014.02.018 .
Boateng J. S. ; Stevens H. N. ; Eccleston G. M. ; Auffret A. D. ; Humphrey M. J. ; Matthews K. H. 
Development and
mechanical characterization of solvent-cast
polymeric films as potential drug delivery systems to mucosal surfaces . Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 
2009 , 35 , 986 10.1080/03639040902744704 .19365780 
Nitanan T. ; Akkaramongkolporn P. ; Rojanarata T. ; Ngawhirunpat T. ; Opanasopit P. 
Neomycin-loaded
poly(styrene sulfonic acid-co-maleic
acid) (PSSA-MA)/polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) ion exchange nanofibers for
wound dressing materials . Int. J. Pharm. 
2013 , 448 , 71 –78 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2013.03.011 .23510799 
BIOVIA
Materials Studio  . Forcite and Sorption
Modules , Material
Studio 7.0; Accelrys Inc. , 2017 ; R2 .

