
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3002373010.1021/acsomega.7b00241ArticleA Method for Investigation of Size-Dependent Protein
Binding to Nanoholes Using Intrinsic Fluorescence of Proteins Malekian Bita †∥⊥Maximov Ivan †∥Timm Rainer §∥Cedervall Tommy ‡∥Hessman Dan *†∥†Solid
State Physics, ‡Biochemistry and Structural Biology, §Synchrotron Radiation Research, and ∥NanoLund, Lund University, P.O. Box 118, 221 00 Lund, Sweden* E-mail: dan.hessman@ftf.lth.se.22 08 2017 31 08 2017 2 8 4772 4778 01 03 2017 03 05 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We
have developed a novel method to study the influence of surface
nanotopography on human fibrinogen adsorption at a given surface chemistry.
Well-ordered arrays of nanoholes with different diameters down to
45 nm and a depth of 50 nm were fabricated in silicon by electron
beam lithography and reactive ion etching. The nanostructured chip
was used as a model system to understand the effect of size of the
nanoholes on fibrinogen adsorption. Fluorescence imaging, using the
intrinsic fluorescence of proteins, was used to characterize the effect
of the nanoholes on fibrinogen adsorption. Atomic force microscopy
was used as a complementary technique for further characterization
of the interaction. The results demonstrate that as the size of the
nanoholes is reduced to 45 nm, fibrinogen adsorption is significantly
increased.

document-id-old-9ao7b00241document-id-new-14ao-2017-00241qccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The interaction of
proteins with artificial materials is of great
importance in different areas, such as medical applications and nanosafety.
The biocompatibility of implanted materials largely depends on the
first interactions occurring at the interface between the material’s
surface and a biological system.1 Protein
adsorption, which takes place spontaneously, is the first event in
a series of biological responses that occur when an artificial material
comes into contact with biological environments.1,2 The
adsorbed protein layer on the surface of the material is often important
in determining subsequent biological responses, such as cell adhesion
and immunological response.2,3 It is well known that
the surface nanotopography of artificial materials influences protein
adsorption when the size of the nanostructures is comparable to protein
dimensions.1,4 Therefore, more knowledge of the effect
of surface nanotopography on protein binding is needed to better understand
the interaction between surface nanotopography and protein binding
in situations when the human body is, unintentionally, exposed to
nanomaterials in the lab, or from the use of commercial products,
or when nanomaterials and medical implants are used intentionally
as a tool for diagnosis or treatment.

Different nanoscale features
can be intentionally present on the
surface of artificial materials, or be present due to materials defects,
or because the biological environment with time changes the surface.
These nanoscale features can have both positive and negative curvatures.
The effect of positive curvature on protein response has been extensively
studied using spherical nanoparticles, demonstrating that protein
binding increases with the diameter of nanoparticles.5−7 However, much less attention has been paid in the literature to
the effect of negative curvature or nanoholes on protein binding.
Therefore, more systematic studies are required to better understand
the influence of negative curvature on protein adsorption.

Nanofabrication
technology, developed originally for the electronics
industry, enables the creation of well-defined and highly reproducible
nanostructured surfaces and opens up the possibility of studying the
influence of such surfaces on protein behavior. Specifically, introducing
nanoscale features onto the materials surfaces provides the opportunity
to create new types of nanoscale features, not readily available when
using spherical nanoparticles. In particular, this approach allows
for the creation of negative curvatures, such as nanoholes, nanogrooves,
and nanopyramids.8,9 Moreover, constructing nanostructured
surfaces on macroscopic substrates provides a more convenient platform
to employ and combine surface sensitive characterization techniques,
such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), atomic force microscopy
(AFM), and fluorescence spectroscopy in a new manner.

This article
describes a novel method to investigate the effect
of surface nanotopography on protein binding. Our approach includes
the fabrication of highly controllable nanostructured surfaces, deposition
of a monolayer of proteins on the nanostructured area and characterization
using fluorescence and AFM techniques. We have used state-of-the-art
nanofabrication techniques to produce well-ordered arrays of nanoholes
in silicon (Si) substrates with high reproducibility to study the
effect of size/diameter of the nanoholes on protein binding. Arrays
of nanoholes with different diameters down to 45 nm and a depth of
50 nm were created in Si substrates by electron beam lithography (EBL)
and reactive ion etching (RIE). In this study, we have used human
fibrinogen and, in particular, used the intrinsic fluorescence of
the proteins to obtain information about the influence of size of
the nanoholes on protein adsorption. Fluorescence imaging using the
intrinsic fluorescence of proteins, instead of labeling with fluorophores,
provides us the opportunity to observe how protein behavior is influenced
by surface nanotopography without being affected by the presence of
fluorophores. In addition, the same label-free proteins can be used
in different characterization techniques by avoiding extrinsic fluorophores.
The distribution of the adsorbed fibrinogen molecules onto the nanostructured
area was also probed by AFM. The result of this initial study reveals
a stronger binding tendency of human fibrinogen to the smallest nanoholes
compared with the flat surface around and also compared to other sizes
of nanoholes. Our results suggest that using intrinsic fluorescence
of proteins combined with AFM is a promising approach to study the
influence of surface nanotopography on protein binding.

Results and Discussion
We have fabricated Si model substrates consisting of arrays of
nanoholes, deposited a monolayer of protein molecules on the model
substrates, and used fluorescence and AFM techniques to characterize
the influence of nanoholes with different diameters on protein adsorption.
EBL and RIE were used to produce the nanostructured Si substrates.
The diameter and depth of the arrays of nanoholes were characterized
by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and AFM, respectively.

Figure 1a shows
the SEM image of the four arrays of nanoholes, which were patterned
on the Si substrate by EBL. The four distinct nanostructured regions
were fabricated on the Si substrate by EBL and RIE, each region containing
an array of nanoholes with a specific diameter. The four arrays of
nanoholes were created with diameters of typically 45, 75, 115, and
160 nm and pitches of 60, 75, 85, and 140 nm, respectively. The array
of nanoholes with a certain diameter, for example, 45 nm, was fabricated
in an area of 20 × 20 μm2 (Figure 1). The space between two adjacent
nanostructured regions was 10 μm. The sizes of the nanoholes
are small enough to expect an influence on the protein used in this
study because the sizes are comparable to the hydrodynamic diameter
of the proteins. In this work, we have used human fibrinogen with
a hydrodynamic diameter of 22 nm.10

Figure 1 SEM images
of (a) the arrays of nanoholes fabricated in four distinct
regions in the Si substrate before etching, each region containing
an array of nanoholes with a specific diameter. (b, c) The magnified
views of the array of 45 nm holes after etching in the edge and in
the center of the array, respectively.

Figure 1b,c
displays
SEM images of the nanoholes close to the edge and in the center of
the array of 45 nm holes after etching and removing the e-beam resist.
There is a variation of 12 nm in diameter in the arrays of the 45
nm holes from the edges of the region toward the center, which might
be due to the proximity effect in the EBL process.11 The minimum diameter (at the top and bottom of the array
of 45 nm holes) and the maximum diameter (at the center of the array)
were 36 and 49 nm, respectively. There was no difference in the diameter
obtained by SEM imaging before and after the etching (and removing
the e-beam resist). Therefore, to prevent the possible contamination
of the substrate surface with carbon deposition during the SEM imaging,
the nanostructured substrates, which were used for protein coating
were characterized by SEM only before the etching.

Fluorescence
imaging, using intrinsic fluorescence of proteins,
is the main characterization technique in our work, revealing size-dependent
fibrinogen adsorption to the nanoholes. In this work, it is essential
to form only a monolayer of proteins on the Si surface because only
the interaction of protein molecules that are in direct contact with
the surface is of interest. Furthermore, to compare protein adsorption
between the arrays of nanoholes with different diameters, the protein
coverage should be homogeneous, at least in the nanostructured area.

We could deposit a uniform monolayer of fibrinogen molecules on
the flat/unprocessed Si surface by immersing the Si substrates in
a protein solution with suitable incubation and rinsing times. The
5 min’ incubation of the Si substrate in the fibrinogen solution,
followed by 1 min rinsing in water, and drying with nitrogen gas,
resulted in deposition of a homogeneous monolayer of human fibrinogen
on the flat Si surface. XPS data analysis of the unprocessed Si substrate
with deposited fibrinogen molecules indicated a thickness of 4–5
nm, which corresponds to monolayer coverage by the fibrinogen molecules
(see Supporting Information 1). The typical
dimensions of the rodlike shaped fibrinogen molecules, when in solution,
are 45 nm × 9 nm × 6 nm.12 Consequently,
the thickness obtained by XPS indicates that fibrinogen molecules
are lying down on the unprocessed Si surface.

The distribution
of the adsorbed fibrinogen molecules in the nanostructured
regions was investigated by AFM. The AFM measurements were conducted
in tapping mode using super sharp tips. Using tips with high aspect
ratio reduces the tip convolution artefacts and was critical for this
work.13 Because the smallest diameter of
the nanoholes is 45 nm, the tip should have a high aspect ratio to
reach the bottom of the nanoholes and provide a reliable profile.
The depth measured by the AFM was about 50 nm for all different sizes
of the nanoholes with a variation of 5 nm between different positions
in the nanostructured area. Probing nanoholes by super sharp tips
allowed us to compare the sidewall profile of the nanoholes before
and after protein deposition. Because the measured nanohole profile
is influenced by the shape of the AFM tip, the nanoholes were probed
before and after fibrinogen deposition by the same tip to ensure that
any differences before and after protein coating are due to the presence
of the protein molecules and not due to the difference between different
AFM tips. It should be mentioned, that based on the half-cone angle
of the super sharp AFM tip, the tip is sharper than the measured slope
of the nanohole sidewalls. Therefore, it can be expected that the
slope of the nanohole sidewalls in AFM cross-sectional cuts is close
to the actual shape of the nanoholes.

Figure 2a–d
displays AFM images of the regions containing 45 nm (Figure 2a,c) and 160 nm (Figure 2b,d) nanoholes before (Figure 2a,b) and after (Figure 2c,d) protein deposition.
The corresponding cross-sectional measurements are shown in Figure 2e,g. It was not possible
to find the same nanohole with the AFM before and after protein coating.
Therefore, the cross-sectional cuts in, for instance, Figure 2f were obtained from two different
nanoholes but with the same nominal size. Note that there is no absolute
height scale in the cross-sectional measurements shown in Figure 2e–g.

Figure 2 AFM images
and cross-sectional cuts through random nanoholes. (a–d)
AFM images of the regions containing the arrays of 45 nm (a, c) and
160 nm (b, d) holes before (a, b) and after (c, d) firbrinogen deposition.
The white line passing through the nanoholes corresponds to the cross-sectional
cuts shown in (e) and (g). (e, f, g) AFM cross-sectional cuts through
random nanoholes (the corresponding nanoholes shown in (a)–(d))
before and after protein deposition with arbitrary shift (e) 45 nm
holes, (f) 75 nm holes, and (g) 160 nm holes. Note that different
nanoholes were scanned before and after protein coating.

The cross-sectional measurements in Figure 2e–g clearly display
rounded corners
at the top of the nanoholes after protein coating, which is due to
the effect of bound fibrinogen molecules. In other words, there is
a strong interaction at the top corner of the nanoholes with proteins,
which seems to be independent of the nanoholes’ size. Comparing
AFM cross-sectional measurements before and after protein deposition
also indicates that fibrinogen molecules are present inside the nanoholes.
The cross-sectional measurements in Figure 2 show that the width of the nanoholes is
reduced after protein deposition indicating that fibrinogen molecules
were adsorbed to the sidewalls, particularly to the sidewalls of the
arrays of the 45 and 75 nm holes (Figure 2e,f) (see Supporting Information 2). On average, the cross-sectional measurements
show a similar depth before and after protein deposition, demonstrating
the same amount of protein binding to the bottom of the nanoholes
as to the flat area in between the nanoholes. The difference in depth
between the cross sections in Figure 2 is attributed to the 5 nm variation in the etched
depth discussed before.

Control measurements were performed
with a standard AFM tip, where
the same tip was used to first image nanoholes after protein coating,
showing a reduced nanohole width with rounded corners, and then image
a reference sample without proteins, showing a larger nanohole width
with steeper corners. Thus, we can be sure that the change in AFM
cross section observed after protein deposition is due to the protein
molecules attached to the surface and not due to contamination of
the tip. It should be noted that the interaction of proteins with
the AFM tip is very complex, which should be considered in all AFM
data interpretation.

It seems in Figure 2e that the AFM tip could not reach the bottom
of the 45 nm holes
after protein coating, apparently due to the interaction with the
fibrinogen molecules adsorbed to the sidewalls. However, cross-sectional
measurements in other nanoholes with the same nominal size show that
the tip could scan the bottom of the 45 nm holes (see Supporting Information 2). In conclusion, AFM
cross-sectional measurements demonstrate that the width of the nanoholes
is significantly reduced after protein coating in the array of 45
and 75 nm holes, indicating that fibrinogen molecules were adsorbed
to the sidewalls of the nanoholes. In addition, no significant difference
in the height of the nanoholes is observed before and after protein
deposition. The same height difference before and after protein coating
also indicates that the same amount of fibrinogen molecules is adsorbed
at the bottom of the nanoholes as to the flat area in between the
nanoholes.

We have used fluorescence imaging using the intrinsic
fluorescence
of proteins to compare the amount of fibrinogen molecules adsorbed
in the nanoholes with different diameters. The intrinsic fluorescence
is the fluorescence emitted by many proteins when excited with UV
light.14 Among the 20 amino acids in proteins,
only 3 of them, tryptophan (Trp), tyrosine (Tyr), and phenylalanine
(Phe), provide fluorescence emission upon exposure to UV light.15 The emission spectrum of Trp is often changed
in response to changes in its local environment, such as conformational
transitions and substrate binding.15 Therefore,
variation in the intensity of Trp emission or observation of any shift
in the Trp peak provides information about the influence of nanoholes
on protein binding. We used the emission intensity of Trp as an indication
of the proteins’ presence on the surface. The emission maximum
of Trp occurs at 350 nm when it is excited at 280 nm.16 We have designed a fluorescence setup sensitive enough
to detect the Trp emission of a monolayer of fibrinogen molecules
adsorbed on the Si surface under dry conditions. Figure 3 shows the fluorescence emission
of the fibrinogen layer adsorbed to the Si substrate recorded by our
setup. It should be noticed that the Trp emission typically dominates
the intrinsic fluorescence spectra even though Tyr is also excited
at 280 nm. This is true also for fibrinogen despite fibrinogen containing
30 tyrosine and only 16 Trp residues.17 The fluorescence spectrum of fibrinogen in solution is shown for
comparison in Supporting Information 3.
Therefore, we focused on detecting Trp fluorescence emission around
350 nm. In addition to the Trp peak, a broad peak in the range of
400–550 nm is almost always observed (Figure 3). Although the origin of the broad peak
is not fully clear, we speculate that it is related, at least partly,
to water molecules in accordance with the report by Belovolova et
al.18 Indeed, the fluorescence spectra
obtained from dried water exhibit the same broad peak, see Supporting Information 4. It should be noted
that the fluorescence signal in this article refers to the Trp peak.

Figure 3 Fluorescence
spectrum from the adsorbed fibrinogen molecules on
the flat Si substrate, recorded by our setup at 280 nm excitation
wavelength.

Figure 4 shows the
obtained fluorescence spectra of the fibrinogen molecules adsorbed
to the arrays of nanoholes with four different diameters. There is
no detectable wavelength shift of the Trp emission peak between the
different spectra with the present signal to noise ratio, which makes
it impossible to extract information about the conformational changes
in fibrinogen molecules due to interaction with the nanoholes.

Figure 4 Fluorescence
spectra of a monolayer of fibrinogen molecules adsorbed
to the four nanostructured regions, the arrays of nanoholes with diameters
of 45, 75, 115, and 160 nm. The brown curve indicates the obtained
fibrinogen fluorescence spectrum from the flat area around the nanostructured
regions.

Although there was no shift in
the Trp peak, the influence of nanoholes
of different sizes on the fibrinogen binding can still be investigated
by comparing the intensities of the Trp peak in different regions
of the nanoholes. In other words, the fluorescence intensity in our
measurements (Trp peak intensity) is assumed to be proportional to
the amount of fibrinogen adsorption, that is, higher Trp peak intensity
represents more fibrinogen adsorption. Therefore, we can observe relative
changes in fibrinogen adsorption by comparing fluorescence intensities
from different arrays of nanoholes, measured under identical conditions.

The fluorescence measurements in Figure 4 demonstrate that fibrinogen adsorption is
influenced by the surface nanotopography. Fibrinogen molecules tend
to bind more to the regions containing the arrays of 45 and 75 nm
holes compared with the flat area around. An incremental trend in
fibrinogen adsorption is observed as the diameter of the nanoholes
is decreased, with the adsorption being significantly increased in
the array of 45 nm holes compared with the array of 75 nm holes.

To explain the origin of the different binding tendencies of the
fibrinogen molecules to nanoholes with different diameters, we discuss
three possible hypotheses. First, the etched areas, which are the
nanoholes, might have different surface properties compared with the
unprocessed areas. However, the fluorescence signal enhancement, and
thus the fibrinogen adsorption, does not scale with the amount of
etched area.

The amount of sidewalls in the arrays is increased
as the diameter
of the nanoholes is decreased. Our second hypothesis, therefore, is
that there might be a correlation between fibrinogen adsorption and
the amount of sidewalls available for proteins to bind to. According
to the AFM cross-sectional measurements, fibrinogen molecules clearly
bind to the sidewalls of the arrays of 45 and 75 nm holes, in addition
to the bottom and the flat space between nanoholes. Thus, we speculate
that the additional fluorescence observed in the arrays of 45 and
75 nm holes might be correlated to the proteins attached to the sidewalls.
To quantify the additional fluorescence, due to proteins bound to
the sidewalls, we have therefore subtracted the fluorescence spectrum
of the flat area from the spectrum of each specific region. The result
is shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5 Fluorescence spectra of a monolayer of fibrinogen molecules adsorbed
to the arrays of 45, 75, 115, and 160 nm holes with subtracted background
fluorescence (background fluorescence refers to the fluorescence spectrum
of the flat area in between two adjacent nanostructured regions).

Although the fluorescence signal
is enhanced, as more sidewalls
are available for the proteins to bind (as the diameter of the nanoholes
is decreased), the increase in fluorescence signal is much larger
than the increase in the amount of sidewalls. For instance, there
is a 30% increase in the amount of sidewalls available in the array
of 45 nm holes compared with the array of 75 nm holes, however, the
fluorescence intensity is increased by at least a factor of 2. In
other words, the Trp peak intensity is changed faster than the amount
of available sidewalls. Therefore, it seems that other factors affect
fibrinogen adsorption in smaller nanoholes, in addition to more available
sidewalls in these regions.

We suggest the main reason for the
enhanced fluorescence signal
in smaller nanoholes is that fibrinogen adsorption is influenced by
the curvature of the nanoholes when the diameter of the nanoholes
is reduced to 45 and 75 nm. A tentative explanation is that as the
diameter decreases, and thereby the negative curvature increases,
the possible contact area in between the protein molecule and the
sidewalls of the nanoholes increases, leading to stronger protein
binding. In the case of fibrinogen, it is unlikely that the rod is
bent horizontally on
the sidewalls, but rather is adsorbed standing upto the sidewalls.
The diameter of the protein is then 6–9 nm, which is similar
to the diameter of, for example, serum albumin. An opposite size dependence
has been seen in the interaction between nanoparticles and proteins,
in which case, an increased diameter of the nanoparticles leads to
an increased contact area.8

Conclusions
We have developed a method to study the influence of nanostructured
surfaces on protein binding. Constructing well-defined nanostructured
surfaces, development of a monolayer of proteins on the surface (confirmed
by XPS), and employment of fluorescence spectroscopy, using the intrinsic
fluorescence of proteins, combined with AFM is a promising approach
to investigate the effect of nanoscale surface topography on protein
binding. Using the intrinsic fluorescence of proteins provides direct
observation of the effect of surface nanotopography on the proteins.
Our results demonstrate that fibrinogen adsorption is significantly
increased as the diameter of the nanoholes is decreased to 75 nm and
specifically to 45 nm.

Experimental Section
Substrate Fabrication
Si wafers, as a starting material,
were used to create the arrays of nanoholes. Prior to any processing,
Si⟨100⟩ wafers were cut into pieces of 1 × 1 cm2 in size. The Si substrates were cleaned by immersing in acetone
for 4 min in an ultrasonic bath, soaking in isopropanol (IPA) for
1 min, and drying by nitrogen gas. ZEP 520 A7 electron beam resist
was spin-coated onto the Si substrate at 9000 rpm for 60 s. The samples
were then baked on a hot plate at 160 °C for 10 min. The resist
coating resulted in a thickness of 180 nm, as measured by ellipsometry.

The arrays of nanoholes with different diameters were written in
the e-beam resist coated Si substrates using an EBL Raith 150 with
a 10 kV electron beam. The exposed areas of the e-beam resist were
developed in o-xylene for 2 min and rinsed in IPA
for 30 s at room temperature. The patterns of well-ordered arrays
of nanoholes were then transferred to the underlying Si substrate
by an RIE process (Oxford Instrument) in which the resist acted as
a mask. We have used the RIE method due to its ability to create an
anisotropic etch profile, keeping the diameter from the aperture to
the bottom of the nanoholes constant. Because protein adhesion to
the nanoholes is being investigated, clean nanostructured Si substrates
are critical. Therefore, chlorine was used as the etching gas because
it does not leave any traces of organic compounds on the sample. However,
there is a risk of depositing organic compounds when, for instance,
fluorine-based gases are used in etching process. The flow rate of
the chlorine was 20 sccm and the pressure was 5 mTorr during the RIE
process. The arrays of nanoholes with different diameters were etched
to a depth of 50 nm with the RIE process described above.

After
the RIE, the e-beam resist was removed by soaking the Si
substrates in remover 1165 for 30 min on the hot plate at 90 °C.
The Si substrates were then rinsed in running highly purified water
(using Milli-Q system) for 5 min. To remove all of the resist residues
from the Si surface, the oxygen plasma ashing was performed 6 times,
each time for 1 min.

AFM
The depth of the nanoholes,
which is referred to
as the height difference between the bottom of the nanoholes and the
flat surface in between the nanoholes, was measured by AFM. The measurements
were performed by using a Digital Instruments Dimension 3100 AFM in
tapping mode using super sharp silicon tips (SSS–NCHR AFM probe
from Nanosensors) and standard AFM tips (PPP-RT-NCHR AFM probe from
Nanosensors). AFM was also used to ensure the nanostructured substrates
are clean and that there was no resist residue on the Si surface.

Fluorescence Setup
Fluorescence measurements were carried
out using a spectrometer with 0.27 m focal length, connected with
an UV enhanced charge-coupled device camera. The camera was cooled
to −110 °C during the measurements. A 150 W Xenon lamp
was used as the excitation source. A 280 nm band pass and a short
pass filter were used to remove the undesired wavelengths. The emission
light from the sample was collected by a NUV 50× objective (numerical
aperture, NA = 0.42) and guided through lenses and mirrors to reach
the spectrometer. The spectrometer slit was set to 0.5 mm. The emission
spectrum was detected in the range of 250–600 nm for 300 grooves
per millimeter (g/mm) grating and with 280 nm excitation light. The
exposure time was set to 20 s.

Preparation of Protein
Solution
Human fibrinogen (Sigma-Aldrich),
purified from serum, was used for this study. We have dissolved the
lyophilized proteins in highly purified water (Milli-Q) to a concentration
of 1 mg/mL. The protein solutions were then stored in aliquots at
−20 °C until use.

Sample Preparation
The nanostructured Si substrate
was incubated with fibrinogen dissolved in water (Milli-Q) for 5 min,
and immersed immediately in water (Milli-Q), for 1 min to remove the
excess proteins. The sample was dried with nitrogen gas.

Fluorescence
Measurement of Fibrinogen in Solution
The fluorescence emission
spectrum between 250 and 600 nm of fibrinogen,
approximately 50 μg/mL in H2O, was obtained on a
LS 50B spectrometer, Perkin Elmer. The excitation wavelength was 280
nm, slits 2.5 nm, and the scanning speed 50 nm/min. The reported data
is the average of 10 scans, see Supporting Information 3.

Quantification of the Adsorbed Protein Molecules by XPS
XPS, a surface-sensitive analysis technique, was used to measure
the thickness of the adsorbed fibrinogen layer on the flat Si substrate.
Si 2p core-level spectra were acquired at synchrotron beamline I311
of the MAX IV Laboratory in Lund, Sweden. By comparing the intensity
of the Si signal for photon energies varying between 200 and 700 eV,
the attenuation due to the thickness of the fibrinogen layer could
be determined. For this, we assumed that the value for the inelastic
mean free path of human fibrinogen should be similar to that of methionine
or a C107H197N29O49S2 protein19 (see Supporting Information 1). The measured value of the thickness
of the adsorbed fibrinogen to the flat Si surface was 4–5 nm.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00241.X-ray photoemission
spectroscopy results and data analysis;
additional AFM cross-sectional profiles; fluorescence spectrum of
fibrinogen in H2O; fluorescence spectrum of air-dried water;
fluorescence spectrum of bare Si (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00241_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
⊥ Applied Surface Chemistry, Chalmers University
of Technology, 412
96 Göteborg, Sweden (B.M.).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge financial
support from NanoLund to
use the Lund Nano Lab facility. Part of the work was supported by
the Swedish Research Council (VR). The authors would like to thank
K. Thanell for support at beamline I311 of the MAX IV Laboratory.
==== Refs
References
Galli C. ; Coen M. C. ; Hauert R. ; Katanaev V. ; Gröning P. ; Schlapbach L. 
Creation of nanostructures to study the topographical
dependency of protein adsorption . Colloids Surf.,
B 
2002 , 26 , 255 –267 . 10.1016/S0927-7765(02)00015-2 .
Lord M. S. ; Foss M. ; Besenbacher F. 
Influence
of nanoscale surface topography
on protein adsorption and cellular response . Nano Today 
2010 , 5 , 66 –78 . 10.1016/j.nantod.2010.01.001 .
Hulander M. ; Lundgren A. ; Berglin M. ; Ohrlander M. ; Lausmaa J. ; Elwing H. 
Immune complement activation
is attenuated
by surface nanotopography . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2011 , 6 , 2653 10.2147/IJN.S24578 .
Koegler P. ; Clayton A. ; Thissen H. ; Santos G. N. C. ; Kingshott P. 
The influence
of nanostructured materials on biointerfacial interactions . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2012 , 64 , 1820 –1839 . 10.1016/j.addr.2012.06.001 .
Dobrovolskaia M. A. ; Patri A. K. ; Zheng J. ; Clogston J. D. ; Ayub N. ; Aggarwal P. ; Neun B. W. ; Hall J. B. ; McNeil S. E. 
Interaction
of colloidal gold nanoparticles with human blood: effects on particle
size and analysis of plasma protein binding profiles . Nanomedicine 
2009 , 5 , 106 –117 . 10.1016/j.nano.2008.08.001 .19071065 
Jiang W. ; Kim B. Y. ; Rutka J. T. ; Chan W. C. 
Nanoparticle-mediated
cellular response is size-dependent . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2008 , 3 , 145 –150 . 10.1038/nnano.2008.30 .18654486 
Lundqvist M. ; Sethson I. ; Jonsson B.-H. 
Protein adsorption
onto silica nanoparticles:
conformational changes depend on the particles’ curvature and
the protein stability . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 10639 –10647 . 10.1021/la0484725 .15544396 
Song W. ; Chen H. 
Protein adsorption on materials surfaces with nano-topography . Chin. Sci. Bull. 
2007 , 52 , 3169 –3173 . 10.1007/s11434-007-0504-6 .
Riedel M. ; Müller B. ; Wintermantel E. 
Protein adsorption and monocyte activation
on germanium nanopyramids . Biomaterials 
2001 , 22 , 2307 –2316 . 10.1016/S0142-9612(01)00011-4 .11456071 
Armstrong J. K. ; Wenby R. ; Meiselman H. ; Fisher T. 
The hydrodynamic radii
of macromolecules and their effect on red blood cell aggregation . Biophys. J. 
2004 , 87 , 4259 –4270 . 10.1529/biophysj.104.047746 .15361408 
Chang T. 
Proximity
effect in electron-beam lithography . J. Vac.
Sci. Technol. 
1975 , 12 , 1271 –1275 . 10.1116/1.568515 .
Hemmersam A. G. ; Foss M. ; Chevallier J. ; Besenbacher F. 
Adsorption
of fibrinogen on tantalum oxide, titanium oxide and gold studied by
the QCM-D technique . Colloids Surf., B 
2005 , 43 , 208 –215 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2005.04.007 .
Baró A. M. ; Reifenberger R. G.  Atomic
Force Microscopy in Liquid: Biological Applications ; Wiley-VCH : Weinheim , 2012 .
Eftink M. R.  Intrinsic Fluorescence
of Proteins . In Topics in Fluorescence Spectroscopy ; Lakowicz J. R.  , Ed.; Kluwer Academic : New York , 2000 ; Vol. 6 , pp 1 –15 .
Lakowicz J. R.  Principles of Fuorescence
Spectroscopy ; Springer : New York , 2007 .
Reynolds D. M. 
Rapid and
direct determination of tryptophan in water using synchronous fluorescence
spectroscopy . Water Res. 
2003 , 37 , 3055 –3060 . 10.1016/S0043-1354(03)00153-2 .14509692 
Teale F. 
The ultraviolet
fluorescence of proteins in neutral solution . Biochem. J. 
1960 , 76 , 381 10.1042/bj0760381 .13837240 
Belovolova L. ; Glushkov M. ; Vinogradov E. ; Babintsev V. ; Golovanov V. 
Ultraviolet fluorescence of water and highly diluted
aqueous media . Phys. Wave Phenom. 
2009 , 17 , 21 –31 . 10.3103/S1541308X0901004X .
Tan Z. ; Xia Y. ; Zhao M. ; Liu X. 
Electron stopping power
and inelastic
mean free path in amino acids and protein over the energy range of
20–20 000 eV . Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 
2006 , 45 , 135 –143 . 10.1007/s00411-006-0049-0 .16733724

