
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145938210.1021/acsomega.8b03104ArticleInfluence of Diameter on the Templated Crystallization
of Polyethylene/Carbon Material Fiber Composites under Intense Shear
Flow Xia Xiaochao *†Zhang Xi ‡Xie Dandan §Huang Yanhao §Li Youbing †Yang Mingbo *§† School
of Materials Science and Engineering, and Chongqing Key Laboratory
of Mold Technology, Chongqing University
of Technology, Chongqing 400054, China‡ Graduate
School of Advanced Science and Technology, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 1-1 Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan§ College
of Polymer Science & Engineering, and the State Key Laboratory
of Polymer Materials Engineering, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610065, Sichuan, PR China* E-mail: xiaxiaoc@cqut.edu.cn (X.X.).* E-mail: yangmb@scu.edu.cn (M.Y.).14 01 2019 31 01 2019 4 1 1060 1067 07 11 2018 25 12 2018 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In this study, carbon fibers (CFs)
and carbon nanofibers (CNFs)
were introduced into polyethylene (PE) and intensive shear flow was
imposed on the melt during the melt second flow caused by gas penetrating
the melt during the gas-assisted injection molding (GAIM). The effect
of fiber diameter on crystalline morphologies of obtained composites
was deeply studied. The results revealed the fact that no matter whether
CFs or CNFs were introduced into the PE matrix or not, the orientation
degree of PE lamellae would increase during the melt second flow.
Hybrid shish-kebab structures were difficult to be formed in GAIM
CF/PE composites and only a few oriented PE lamellae overgrew on the
local surface of CFs. However for GAIM CNF/PE composites, the formation
of hybrid shish-kebab structures was clearly observed in the entire
thickness. The structural diversity was mainly ascribed to the difference
of CF diameter, showing obvious size-dependent effect.

document-id-old-9ao8b03104document-id-new-14ao-2018-031043ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
In all the polymer composite
material systems, the interfacial
adhesion between the polymer matrix and the embedded fibers is the
key to building high-performance polymer-based composites.1,2 A common method to enhance the interfacial bonding is the surface
functionalization of inorganic fibers. Current strategies to decorate
the surface of inorganic fibers mainly include oxidation treatment,3 grafting-to,4 grafting-from,5 and so on. However, to a certain extent, these
methods would destroy the surface structure of inorganic fibers and
be adverse to the entire properties of composites.

It is well
known that interfacial crystalline morphology has a
significant influence on the interfacial adhesion between the polymer
matrix and fibers.6 Inorganic fibers are
apt to attract molecular chains and template the growth of polymer
crystals. By using different crystalline ways, a connection between
the polymer lamellae and fiber surface can be established, leading
to the development of new crystalline morphology. A fascinating morphology
is the “hybrid shish-kebab” (NHSK) structure reported
by Li et al.,7 in which certain semicrystalline
polymers such as polyethylene (PE), polyvinylidene fluoride, and nylon-6,6
(PA66) formed periodic, dis-shaped crystal on the surface of carbon
nanotubes (CNTs).8,9 Therewith, the structure was constructed
with the aid of supercritical CO2 instead of solution crystallization.10−12 Fu et al. found that a rough surface of NHSK could greatly promote
the interfacial interaction between CNTs and polymer matrix.13 On the basis of this, the control of interfacial
crystalline morphology is regarded as a noncovalent method to improve
the interfacial adhesion between the polymer matrix and fibers.

The formation mechanism of hybrid shish-kebab structure was studied
by Li et al.,14 and they proposed a “size-dependent
soft epitaxy” theory. As described by this theory, CNTs could
be considered as rigid macromolecules because of the small diameter,
thereby, geometric confinement was the major factor when polymer chains
started to crystallize on the surface and these polymer chains preferred
to align along the long axis of CNTs regardless of the lattice matching.
However, the diameter of carbon nanofibers (CNFs) was much larger
than Rg of a typical polymer chain, as
a result, polymer behaved as though it was on a flat surface. Because
a variety of graphitic sheet orientations exist for CNFs, epitaxial
growth of the polymer crystals would lead to different orientations
of the polymer chains/lamellar normal, which abided by the strict
lattice matching. Based on the study of Li et al., we are inspired
to explore whether larger diameter fibers can also induce the hybrid
shish-kebab structure following the “size-dependent soft epitaxy”
mechanism under an intense shear field and if there exists a critical
diameter to form the hybrid shish-kebab structure.

In our previous
studies,15 the hybrid
shish-kebab structure was formed massively in the entire thickness
by the incorporation of CNFs, where CNFs acted as the stable “shish”
and PE lamellae periodically decorated on its surface. In the melt
second flow process, an intense shear caused by gas penetration was
imposed on the melt and drove PE chains to stretch or orient along
the CNF axis, which largely reduced the configurational and/or conformational
entropy of the polymer before the extended chains deposited on the
fiber surface. In this case, the entropy penalty of extended PE chains
adsorbed on the CNF surface was much less than the random chains deposited
on the surface because of the effect of shear flow. Even though the
van der Waals interaction between the polymer and CNF surface was
weak, the extended PE chains could successfully be adsorbed on the
CNF surface because of the vast decrease of the entropy penalty to
form a polymer underlayer crystal. Subsequently, a subglobule was
formed and it acted as the crystal nucleus. Finally, other oriented
PE chains began to epitaxially grow from the subglobules in the form
of folded chains to reduce the polymer surface energy and form kebabs
perpendicular to the CNF axis, complying with the “soft epitaxy”
crystallization mechanism regardless of the strict lattice match.
This study encourages us to further study whether the fiber with larger
diameter, such as carbon fibers (CFs), can also induce the hybrid
shish-kebab structure.

In this paper, two kinds of CFs with
quite different diameters
were introduced into the PE matrix to further explore the effect of
fiber diameter on the formation of hybrid structures under the intense
shear. To clearly observe the crystalline morphologies and distribution
of oriented crystalline structures across the thickness direction
of gas-assisted injection molding (GAIM) CFs/PE composites, the composites
were characterized by a scanning electron microscope and two-dimensional
small-angle X-ray scattering (2D-SAXS).

2 Results
and Discussion
2.1 Phase Morphologies of CF/PE
and CNF/PE Composites
For fiber-reinforced polymer composites,
the dispersion of fibers
in the polymer matrix has a great importance for the properties and
the uniform dispersion of fibers is the prerequisite to further study
the relationship between the structure and performance of composites.
In general, fibers possess large aspect ratio and strong van der Waals
forces, as a result, they are easily to agglomerate and the uniform
dispersion is difficult to be achieved. However, it can be clearly
observed in our study (Figure 1) that both CFs and CNFs were uniformly dispersed in the PE
matrix and no agglomerates presented in the whole observing area.
This result indicated that solution premixing was conducive to the
good dispersion of CNFs and CFs in the PE matrix.

Figure 1 SEM images of cryo-fractured
surfaces of CF/PE (a–c) and
CNF/PE (a′–c′) composites.

2.2 Nonisothermal Crystallization of Neat PE,
CF/PE, and CNF/PE Composites
As shown in Figure 2, the onset crystallization
temperature (To) of neat PE was about
116.4 °C, whereas it increased to 117.3 and 122.7 °C for
CF/PE and CNF/PE composites, respectively, which indicated that the
crystallization ability of PE was improved after adding CFs and CNFs.
The improvement of crystallization ability was resulted from the heterogeneous
nucleating effect of CFs and CNFs. However, it should be noticed that
the heterogeneous nucleating ability of CNFs was more remarkable for
PE crystallization compared with CFs. This was mainly ascribed to
the fact that CNFs possessed a larger specific surface area and it
resulted in high-density active sites of heterogeneous nucleation.
Besides, CNFs with higher surface energy contributed to stronger interfacial
interaction between the fiber and surrounding polymer matrix than
CFs with a low surface energy. In addition, the nucleating effect
could be further enhanced under the shear field because of the shear-induced
crystallization.

Figure 2 Differential scanning calorimetry cooling curves of neat
PE, CF/PE,
and CNF/PE composites.

2.3 Relaxation Behavior of Neat PE, CF/PE, and
CNF/PE Composites
The relaxation behavior of PE and composites
is characterized by the continuous relaxation spectrum which is obtained
by ARES software. The nonlinear regularization program developed by
Weese and Honerkamp is used.16,17Figure 3 exhibits the continuous relaxation spectra
of the PE and composites. The value of corresponding maximum peak
reflects the approximating relaxation behavior of the system. By comparison
with neat PE, there was an obvious increase of the relaxation time
after the addition of CFs and CNFs and the relaxation time of CNF/PE
composites presented the highest value. The existence of fibers could
hinder the relaxation of stretched polymer chains, leading to the
increase of relaxation time. Compared with CFs, the interaction between
CNFs and polymer was stronger because of its much smaller diameter,
which could provide more effective inhibiting effect on the relaxation
of stretched polymer chains. As a consequence, it was difficult for
the stretched PE chains, caused by the intense shear during the melt
second flow, to relax into the random coil in the CNF/PE composite,
and then more stretched PE chains would be preserved in the cooling
stage to form a large number of oriented crystalline structures.

Figure 3 H(τ) vs τ for the characterization
time of PE, CF/PE, and CNF/PE composites.

2.4 Crystalline Morphologies of GAIM CF/PE and
CNF/PE Composites
To better exhibit the crystalline morphologies
of GAIM composites subjected to the melt second flow, the amorphous
phase of PE was selectively extracted and the crystalline morphologies
along the thickness of GAIM samples were studied by scanning electron
microscopy (SEM). It can be seen in Figure 4 that CFs were parallel to the flow direction,
whereas the PE crystal lamellae were orientated in the direction perpendicular
to the flow direction. These morphologies were ascribed to the effect
of intense shear field caused by the melt second flow. In previous
studies,18,19 highly oriented crystal morphologies could
be observed only at a depth of about 500 μm to the outmost surface
of the GAIM samples. However, the scale of the highly oriented crystal
morphologies was greatly broadened in this study by the introduction
of fibers, and these morphologies were even formed in the gas channel
layer (Figure 4c).
It can be also observed that the degree of orientation and regularity
of PE lamellae was the highest in the subskin layer (Figure 4b) and it decreased in areas
close to the gas channel layer (Figure 4c), through careful observation, a distinct interspace
between CFs and PE lamellae could be found (shown as the insets in Figure 4) and only a small
amount of PE lamellae overgrew on the local surface of CFs.

Figure 4 Crystalline
morphologies of GAIM CF/PE composites in different
parts: (a) skin layer; (b) subskin layer; (c) gas channel layer. The
flow direction is vertical.

For GAIM CNF/PE composites, as shown in Figure 5, hybrid shish-kebab structures
can be clearly
observed in the entire thickness direction. Significantly, the long
axis of CNFs was parallel to the melt flow direction, and the PE crystal
lamellas was decorated on the surface of CNFs and perpendicular to
the axis of CNFs, indicating a strong epitaxial growth of PE chains
on the surface of CNFs under intense shear effect. Combined with aforementioned
results, it was reasonable to conclude the formation process of hybrid
shish-kebab structure as the following steps. First, the stretched
PE chain bundles around CNFs were adsorbed on the surface to form
a polymer underlayer and this layer could subsequently induce the
folded PE chains to overgrow on the surface and finally evolve into
the hybrid shish-kebab structure.

Figure 5 Crystalline morphologies of GAIM CNF/PE
composites in different
parts: (a) skin layer; (b) subskin layer; (c) gas channel layer. The
flow direction is vertical.

From the discussion above, it can be known that the complete
hybrid
shish-kebab structure could be formed only when small-diameter fillers
(CNFs) were introduced. In the case of CF with much bigger diameter,
only some local hybrid crystal structures were induced. In addition,
the oriented PE lamellae in GAIM CNF/PE composites were closely stacked
in the entire cross-section and they were more compact and regular
than GAIM CF/PE composites. These visible distinctions resulted from
the difference in the diameter of incorporated CFs. Under this consideration,
we proposed that the formation of hybrid shish-kebab structure abide
by size-dependent effect.

2.5 Orientation and Distribution
of the Crystalline
Structures for GAIM CF/PE and CNF/PE Composites
2D-SAXS measurement
was employed to study the oriented crystalline structures and their
distribution along the thickness direction of injection molding parts.
As shown in Figure 6, for GAIM CF/PE composites, two sharp triangular streaks in the
equatorial direction were observed from the skin layer to the gas
channel layer, indicating the fiber aligned along the melt flow direction.
Besides, two-spot pattern in the meridional direction appeared in
all the different zones of CF/PE composites and this demonstrated
that the oriented PE lamellae was perpendicular to the shear flow
direction. For GAIM CNF/PE composites, two sharp triangular streaks
in the equatorial direction and the two-spot pattern in the meridional
direction can be simultaneously observed in all the zones, which can
further confirm that the extended PE chains were adsorbed on the CNF
surface and then these folded PE chains crystallized to kebabs perpendicular
to the fiber axis. In other words, the highly oriented crystalline
structures distributed across the entire thickness of GAIM CNF/PE
composites. It can be also clearly seen in Figure 6 that the scattering signals of 2D-SAXS patterns
of GAIM CNF/PE composites were more intense than that of GAIM CF/PE
composites in all the different zones. This result is well in accordance
with the above SEM results.

Figure 6 2D-SAXS patterns in various zones of GAIM CF/PE
and CNF/PE composites.

To further quantitatively study the highly oriented crystalline
structures of GAIM samples, the azimuthal scans of 2D-SAXS patterns
and the orientation parameter were investigated. As presented in Figure 7a,b, the intensity
peaks integrated from the equatorial scattering signal were very high
in all the zones from the skin layer to gas channel layer for both
GAIM CF/PE and CNF/PE composites, indicating the highly oriented crystalline
structures were distributed in the entire thickness direction. Additionally,
the subskin layers exhibited relatively stronger scattering peak compared
to other zones in both GAIM CF/PE and CNF/PE composites. This was
because the largest shear and fast melt cooling rate were generated
in the subskin layer. To determine the distribution of oriented crystal
lamellae, the degree of crystal orientation in different layers of
GAIM CF/PE and CNF/PE composites was calculated by Herman’s
orientation function quantitatively, and the results are displayed
in Figure 8. It was
found that all the layers in these two composites showed high oriented
degree, indicating that highly oriented structures were formed in
the whole layers. Furthermore, in comparison with GAIM CF/PE composites,
the value of orientation degree at each layer of GAIM CNF/PE composites
was higher. Apparently, these results demonstrate that the introduction
of CNFs was more efficient than CFs for the formation of highly oriented
crystalline structures. The distribution angle of both CFs and CNFs
was further calculated by the butterfly pattern of 2D-SAXS. The distribution
angle of both CFs and CNFs is ranged from −40° to 40°,
and the most of fibers are within range from −20° to 20°,
in which the angle of shear flow direction is set as 0°.

Figure 7 Intensity distribution
along the azimuthal angle of different layers
of GAIM parts: (a) CF/PE composites; (b) CNF/PE composites.

Figure 8 Degree of orientation in the different regions
of GAIM CF/PE and
CNF/PE composites.

Figure 9a presents
the one-dimensional scattering intensity distribution profiles of
GAIM CF/PE and CNF/PE composites. The scattering peaks shifted to
smaller q from the skin layer to gas channel layer
for both composites, indicating the increase of long spacing. The
resultant correlation functions were presented as a function of the
different layers and the inset expressed how the average thickness
of the amorphous layers da and long spacing dac were derived by the correlation function.20 The value of long spacing (dac), the thickness of lamellae (dc), and the thickness of amorphous layer (da) are listed in Figure 10. Apparently, all the values of dac, dc, and da increased along the thickness direction from the external
surface to the gas channel layer for both GAIM CF/PE and CNF/PE composites,
which is induced by the decreased cooling rate of the melt from the
skin to gas channel layer. Compared with GAIM CF/PE composites, the
values of dac, dc, and da in all the zones of GAIM
CNF/PE composites reduced slightly. It can be known from the discussion
in abovementioned parts that the heterogeneous nucleating ability
of CNFs inducing PE crystallization was stronger than that of CFs
inducing PE crystallization, and thereby, more nucleation sites and
smaller crystals were formed. Just because of the formation of these
smaller crystals, dac, dc, and da presented decreased
values.

Figure 9 One-dimensional scattering intensity profiles (a) and the resultant
correlation function curves of GAIM CF/PE and CNF/PE composites (b).

Figure 10 Values of dac, dc, and da in different regions
of GAIM CF/PE and CNF/PE composites.

2.6 Formation Mechanism of Hybrid Structures in
GAIM CF/PE and CNF/PE Composites
The larger-diameter fibers
(CNFs) induced the polymer chains to overgrew on the surface to form
the hybrid shish-kebab structure in solution crystallization under
the static state, where epitaxial nuclei were formed directly on the
substrate. This process follow the principle of strict lattice match
and epitaxy.14 However, it has been reported
in our previous study that the CNFs would be coated by a homogeneous
polymer underlayer prior to the periodical PE lamellae overgrowth
on the surface of CNFs. The homogenous polymer underlayer acted as
a key role in the formation of hybrid shish-kebab structures and nucleation
in epitaxial growth abides by the two-dimensional mode.

In this
study, it can be confirmed that the introduction of CNFs inducing
PE crystallization to form the complete hybrid shish-kebab structure
in the entire thickness direction of GAIM CNF/PE composites. Although
for GAIM CF/PE composites, only a few local hybrid structures were
formed on the surface of CFs. Through careful analysis, it can be
speculated that the main reason for the difference in crystalline
morphologies was originated from diameter diversity of the CFs, in
other words, the formation of hybrid shish-kebab depended on fiber
size, showing significant size-dependence. To better understand the
formation of the hybrid structures, a schematic representation was
presented in Figure 11. During the melt second flow, an intense shear acting as assistant
driving force was imposed on the melt to make random coil PE chains
stretch or orient along the fiber axis, which was equivalent to improve
the ordered degree and meanwhile reduced the entropy of PE chains.
As a result, the entropy penalty of subsequent oriented PE chains
deposited on the fiber surface decreased drastically and could be
overcome even by the weak van der Waals interaction to achieve the
adsorption. Additionally, because of the effective improvement of
relaxation time by incorporation of fibers, it was difficult for many
oriented PE chains to relax at the following cooling and crystallization
stage. Subsequently, the neighboring oriented PE chains were adsorbed
on the fiber surface to form a polymer underlayer. For the CNFs, it
possessed high-density active sites of heterogeneous nucleation and
high surface energy because of their small diameter. Therefore, CNFs
had a stronger van der Waals interaction with the PE matrix and could
adsorb the surrounding oriented chains on the surface to form a homogeneous
polymer underlayer. Subsequently, a subglobule appeared and acted
as the crystal nucleus. Finally, other oriented PE chains began to
epitaxially grow from the subglobules in the form of folded chains
to decrease the total interfacial energy and grew perpendicular to
the CNF axis, complying with the “soft epitaxy” mechanism
regardless of the lattice match. Resultantly, a hybrid shish-kebab
structure was formed, where the fiber aligned along the flow direction
and the periodical PE kebabs were perpendicular to the CNF axis. Although
for CFs, because of its large diameter, the van der Waals interaction
between the CF surface and polymer chains was too weak to make the
oriented chains adsorbed on the surface even if the entropy penalty
was dramatically reduced. Nevertheless, because of the energetically
heterogeneous of CFs, there was a high surface energy of local surface
enough to achieve the adsorption to form a local polymer underlayer
and then the folded PE chains overgrew on the surface to form the
local hybrid structure.

Figure 11 Schematic representation of the highly oriented
structure formation
of GAIM CNF/PE and CF/PE composites subjected to the melt second flow.

In summary, CNFs and CFs induced
the PE chains epitaxial crystallization
to form different hybrid structures in the entire thickness direction
of GAIM composites and the crystalline structure formation has a size-dependence.
Besides, we believed that there was a critical diameter of CF for
the formation of the hybrid shish-kebab structure and this specific
diameter will be deeply explored in the subsequent research.

3 Conclusions
In this study, it was found that the introduction
of either CFs
or CNFs could significantly increase the orientation degree of crystal
structures subjected to the melt second flow. However, the oriented
crystal structures presented an obvious difference in composites with
various diameters of CFs. CNFs can efficiently induce PE epitaxial
crystallization on its surface to form a hybrid shish-kebab structure;
nevertheless, only some local hybrid structures could be formed in
the presence of CFs. Based upon serious analysis, we suggested that
the structural diversity resulted from the difference of CF diameter,
namely, the formation of crystalline structure has a size-dependent
characteristic. During the melt second flow, the intense shear drove
PE chains to stretch or orient along the fiber axis, which drastically
reduced the entropy of the polymer. Then, a low entropy penalty of
oriented PE chains deposited on the fiber surface and it acted as
a main role in determining the polymer–surface interaction.
Meanwhile, the van der Waals interaction between the polymer and the
fibers also played a crucial function to adsorb the polymer chains
on the fiber surface. Therefore, CNFs could adsorb the neighboring
oriented PE chains on its surface to form a homogeneous polymer underlayer
because of the synergistic effect of the entropy penalty decrease
and the van der Waals interaction. Subsequently, the folded PE chains
epitaxially grew to form the subglobules on the surface and finally
formed the hybrid shish-kebab structure. While, because of the large
diameter of CFs, the van der Waals interaction between the CF surface
and polymer chains was too weak to adsorb the oriented chains on its
surface even with a low entropy penalty. However, because of the energetically
heterogeneous of CFs, there was a local surface with a high surface
energy to adsorb the oriented chains and then the folded PE chains
overgrew on the local surface to form the local hybrid crystal structure.
Furthermore, we propose that there was a critical size of fiber diameter
for the formation of the hybrid shish-kebab structure.

Through
this study, massive highly oriented crystal structures
were obtained in all regions of CFs reinforced PE composites subjected
to the melt second flow. More importantly, the effect of different
diameters of CFs on the formation of the hybrid crystal structures
was deeply explored, which can provide some guidance for the preparation
of high-performance polymer composites in industrial processing.

4 Experiment Section
4.1 Materials
A commercial
HDPE (6098)
was produced by Qilu Petrochemical Co., China. It has a weight-average
molecular weight of 5.09 × 105 g/mol and a melt flow
rate of 0.1 g/10 min (190 °C/2.16 kg, ASTM D1238), and the value
of molecular weight distribution is 8.2. CNF, Pyrograf-III, was obtained
from Applied Sciences, Inc. (Cedarville, OH). CF (T300) was purchased
from Toray, Japan. Figure 12 shows the morphologies of CFs and CNFs, it can be clearly
observed that the surface of CFs exists apparent longitudinal streaks
and the surface of CNF is fairly smooth. Additionally, the diameter,
surface roughness, and surface energy of the fibers are listed in Table 1.

Figure 12 SEM surface morphology
of CFs and CNFs, (a,b) CF; (c,d) CNF.

Table 1 Property Parameters of CNFs and CFs22,23
materials	diameter
(nm)	length (μm)	surface roughness
(nm)	surface energy (mJ/m2)	
CNF	100	200	10	94.7	
CF	7000	1000	98.8	48.8	
4.2 Sample Preparation
In order to uniformly
disperse CFs in the PE matrix, solution mixing method was employed.
First, a certain amount of CNFs and CFs was, respectively, dissolved
in n-butanol, and then treated for 30 min by ultrasonication.
At the same time, a given mass of PE was dissolved in xylene (145
°C). Subsequently, the dispersed CNF and CF solutions were mixed
adequately with PE solution, and then removed the solvent via vacuum
suction filtration. After drying, the obtained blends were further
mixed with PE (the content of CFs is 5 wt %) in a torque rheometer
(XSS-300, Shanghai, China) at 200 °C. After being pelletized,
the pellets were molded by GAIM. During the processing of GAIM, short
shot melt (vol. 70%) was pushed and penetrated by high pressure gas
(nitrogen). During the processing, a strong shear field was imposed
on the polymer melt, and flow of the high pressure gas could increase
a cooling rate of polymer, which were in favor of the orientation
of polymer molecular chains and could hinder the relaxation of oriented
molecular chains.21 The temperature profiles
of the injection molding machine were 170, 190, 200, and 200 °C
from the hopper to nozzle, and other processing parameters for GAIM
included gas delay time (1 s), gas pressure (10 MPa), and mold temperature
(30 °C).

4.3 Measurements
4.3.1 Scanning Electron Microscopy Observations
Selective
etching was employed as an appropriate technique to get
a clear observation of the crystalline morphology in GAIM samples.
Before etching, a small block was cut from the middle part of the
sample and then cryo-fractured along the flow direction after immersion
in liquid nitrogen for 1 h. The smooth fracture surface was etched
in a mixed acid solution containing 49.7 wt % concentrated sulfuric
acid (H2SO4), 49.7 wt % concentrated nitric
acid (HNO3), and 0.6 wt % potassium permanganate (KMnO4) for 3–4 h to remove the amorphous region of PE. After
careful cleaning and drying, the surface was covered with a thin layer
of gold and the crystalline morphologies in different zones of the
composite were observed by FEI Inspect F SEM (Inspect F, FEI Company,
USA) with an acceleration voltage of 20 kV.

4.3.2 Differential
Scanning Calorimetry Measurements
A different scanning calorimeter
(model Q-20, TA Instruments, USA)
was used to investigate the crystallization behavior of the materials.
Samples of 5.0–7.0 mg were heated from 40 to 190 °C at
40 °C/min, maintained the temperature for 5 min to eliminate
the thermal history, and then cooled to 40 °C at a constant rate
of 10 °C/min under a nitrogen atmosphere to prevent thermal degradation.

4.3.3 Rheological Experiment Measurements
The
viscoelastic properties of neat PE, CF/PE, and CNF/PE composites
were examined by a stress-controlled dynamic rheometer AR2000-EX (TA,
USA) in a parallel-plate geometry. All the samples for rheological
measurements were compression molded to disks with a diameter of 25
mm and a thickness of 1 mm at 190 °C and 10 MPa. Then, frequency
sweep was conducted in an oscillation frequency range from 0.01 to
100 Hz at 200 °C and the applied strain was 1% (in the linear
viscoelastic region of the composite melts). Creep testing was performed
under the shear stress of 10 Pa at 200 °C. The measurement would
stop when the strain is greater than 40% for ensuring the test was
in the LVE zone. To minimize the thermal degradation of the matrix,
all the rheological experiments were conducted in a nitrogen atmosphere
and a new sample was used for each run.

4.3.4 2D-SAXS
Measurements
To characterize
the crystalline structures and the orientation in GAIM composites,
2D-SAXS measurements were implemented at room temperature on a Rigaku
Denki RAD-B diffraction meter at the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation
Facility (SSRF, Shanghai, China). The sample-to-detector distance
was held at 1960 mm, and wavelength of the monochromatic X-ray from
Cu Kα radiation is 0.124 nm. Samples were placed with the orientation
(flow direction) perpendicular to the projection beams. 2D-SAXS images
were recorded through MAR165 CCD, and the data were processed by FIT2D
software. The orientation parameter of PE crystals was calculated
by the Herman’s orientation, which is defined as. 1  where (cos2 ϕ) is
the orientation
factor defined as 2  where I(ϕ) is the scattering
intensity at ϕ which is the angle between the normal of a given
(hk0) crystal plane and the shear flow direction.
For our samples, the orientation parameter was calculated mathematically
using Picken’s method.24

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully
acknowledge the financial
support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant
nos. 21174092 and 51473105), Basic research and frontier exploration
projects of Chong Qing (grant no. cstc2018jcyjAX0063). Education commission
project of Chong Qing (grant no. KJQN201801116). Shanghai Synchronous
Radiation Facility is gratefully acknowledged for providing 2D-SAXS.
==== Refs
References
Xu H. ; Xie L. ; Chen J.-B. ; Jiang X. ; Hsiao B. S. ; Zhong G.-J. ; et al. Strong
and tough micro/nanostructured poly(lactic acid) by mimicking
the multifunctional hierarchy of shell . Mater.
Horiz. 
2014 , 1 , 546 –552 . 10.1039/c4mh00085d .
Xia X.-C. ; Xie D.-D. ; Huang Y.-H. ; Yang M.-B. 
Formation of the
three-dimensional (3D) interlinked hybrid shish-kebabs in injection-molded
PE/PE-g-CNF composite by ″structuring″ processing . Compos. Sci. Technol. 
2018 , 157 , 209 –216 . 10.1016/j.compscitech.2018.01.043 .
Zhang X. ; Sreekumar T. V. ; Liu T. ; Kumar S. 
Properties and Structure
of Nitric Acid Oxidized Single Wall Carbon Nanotube Films . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2004 , 108 , 16435 –16440 . 10.1021/jp0475988 .
Qin S. ; Qin D. ; Ford W. T. ; Resasco D. E. ; Herrera J. E. 
Functionalization
of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes with Polystyrene via Grafting to
and Grafting from Methods . Macromolecules 
2004 , 37 , 752 –757 . 10.1021/ma035214q .
Karousis N. ; Tagmatarchis N. ; Tasis D. 
Current Progress on the Chemical
Modification of Carbon Nanotubes . Chem. Rev. 
2010 , 110 , 5366 –5397 . 10.1021/cr100018g .20545303 
Mandelkern L. 
The relation
between structure and properties of crystalline polymers . Polym. J. 
1985 , 17 , 337 –350 . 10.1295/polymj.17.337 .
Li C. Y. ; Li L. ; Cai W. ; Kodjie S. L. ; Tenneti K. K. 
Nanohybrid Shish-Kebabs:
Periodically Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes . Adv. Mater. 
2005 , 17 , 1198 –1202 . 10.1002/adma.200401977 .
Liang Y. ; Zheng G. ; Han W. ; Liu C. ; Chen J. ; Li Q. ; et al. Nano-hybrid shish-kebab:
Isotactic polypropylene epitaxial
growth on electrospun polyamide 66 nanofibers via isothermal crystallization . Mater. Lett. 
2011 , 65 , 653 –656 . 10.1016/j.matlet.2010.11.034 .
Li L. ; Li B. ; Hood M. A. ; Li C. Y. 
Carbon nanotube induced polymer crystallization:
The formation of nanohybrid shish-kebabs . Polymer 
2009 , 50 , 953 –965 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2008.12.031 .
Zheng X. ; Xu Q. 
Comparison Study of
Morphology and Crystallization Behavior of Polyethylene
and Poly(ethylene oxide) on Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2010 , 114 , 9435 –9444 . 10.1021/jp103932b .20593889 
Zheng X. ; Xu Q. ; Li Z. 
Supercritical
CO2-driven, periodic patterning
on one-dimensionals carbon nanomaterials . Sci.
China: Chem. 
2010 , 53 , 1525 –1533 . 10.1007/s11426-010-3106-0 .
He L. ; Zheng X. ; Xu Q. ; Chen Z. ; Fu J. 
Comparison
study of PE epitaxy on carbon nanotubes and graphene oxide and PE/graphene
oxide as amphiphilic molecular structure for solvent separation . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2012 , 258 , 4614 –4623 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2012.01.040 .
Mai F. ; Wang K. ; Yao M. ; Deng H. ; Chen F. ; Fu Q. 
Superior reinforcement
in melt-spun polyethylene/multiwalled carbon
nanotube fiber through formation of a shish-kebab structure . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2010 , 114 , 10693 –10702 . 10.1021/jp1019944 .20677770 
Li L. ; Li C. Y. ; Ni C. 
Polymer crystallization-driven,
periodic
patterning on carbon nanotubes . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 1692 –1699 . 10.1021/ja056923h .16448143 
Xia X.-C. ; Yang W. ; Liu Z.-Y. ; Zhang R.-Y. ; Xie D.-D. ; Yang M.-B. 
Strong shear-driven
large scale formation of hybrid
shish-kebab in carbon nanofiber reinforced polyethylene composites
during the melt second flow . Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 30452 –30461 . 10.1039/c6cp04901j .27781215 
Wang L. ; Yang B. ; Sun N. ; Zhang K. ; Feng J.-M. ; Yang M.-B. 
Role of gas delay
time on the hierarchical crystalline
structure and mechanical property of HDPE molded by gas-assisted injection
molding . Colloid Polym. Sci. 
2012 , 290 , 1133 –1144 . 10.1007/s00396-012-2610-5 .
Wu G. ; Asai S. ; Sumita M. ; Yui H. 
Entropy penalty-induced
self-assembly in carbon black or carbon fiber filled polymer blends . Macromolecules 
2002 , 35 , 945 –951 . 10.1021/ma0104940 .
Guo H.  Characterization of Surface
Energy, Surface Roughness and Chemical Component of Carbon ; Harbin University of Technology , 2010 .
Picken S.
J. ; Aerts J. ; Visser R. ; Northolt M. G. 
Structure and rheology
of aramid solutions: X-ray scattering measurements . Macromolecules 
1990 , 23 , 3849 –3854 . 10.1021/ma00218a021 .
Yoo T. W. ; Yoon H. G. ; Choi S. J. ; Kim M. S. ; Kim Y. H. ; Kim W. N. 
Effects
of compatibilizers on the mechanical properties
and interfacial tension of polypropylene and poly(lactic acid) blends . Macromol. Res. 
2010 , 18 , 583 –588 . 10.1007/s13233-010-0613-y .
Honerkamp J. ; Weese J. 
Determination of the
relaxation spectrum by a regularization method . Macromolecules 
1989 , 22 , 4372 –4377 . 10.1021/ma00201a036 .
Zheng G.-Q. ; Huang L. ; Yang W. ; Yang B. ; Yang M.-B. ; Li Q. ; et al. Hierarchical
crystalline structure of HDPE molded by
gas-assisted injection molding . Polymer 
2007 , 48 , 5486 –5492 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2007.05.047 .
Wang L. ; Yang M.-B. ; Zhang Q.-P. ; Zhang R.-Y. ; Wu J.-J. ; Feng J.-M. 
Hierarchical crystalline
structures and dynamic mechanical
properties of injection-molded bars of HDPE: attributes of temperature
field . Polym. Adv. Technol. 
2013 , 24 , 541 –550 . 10.1002/pat.3114 .
Xia X.-C. ; Yang W. ; He S. ; Xie D.-D. ; Zhang R.-Y. ; Tian F. ; et al. Formation of various crystalline structures in a polypropylene/polycarbonate
in situ microfibrillar blend during the melt second flow . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 14030 –14039 . 10.1039/c6cp01426g .27157694

