
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145755510.1021/acsomega.6b00447ArticleRemarkable Facet Selective Reduction of 4-Nitrophenol
by Morphologically Tailored (111) Faceted Cu2O Nanocatalyst Aditya Teresa †Jana Jayasmita †Singh Navin Kumar †Pal Anjali ‡Pal Tarasankar *††Department
of Chemistry and ‡Department of Civil Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 721302, India* E-mail: tpal@chem.iitkgp.ernet.in.10 05 2017 31 05 2017 2 5 1968 1984 30 11 2016 28 04 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical
Society2017American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In this work, we have disclosed the
facile syntheses of morphologically
diverse Cu2O nanoparticles using our laboratory designed
modified hydrothermal reactor employing low-cost copper (II) acetate
precursor compounds. The reaction conditions dovetail the effect of
ethylene glycol (EG) and glucose to exclusively evolve the morphology
tuned Cu2O nanomaterial at different pHs. The morphology
tuning produces octahedron (Oh), dwarf hexapod (DHP), and elongated
hexapod (EHP) Cu2O structures only with the optimized reagent
concentrations. Interestingly, all of them were bestowed with a (111)
facet, a superlative facet for facile nitroarene reduction. Thus,
the morphology reliant catalytic reaction becomes evident. However,
when used individually, EG and glucose evolve ill-defined CuO/Cu2O and Cu2O structures, respectively. We have observed
that a change in pH of the medium at the onset of the reaction is
obligatory for the evolution of tailor-made morphologically diverse
Cu2O nanoparticles. However, preformed Cu2O
particles do not suffer further structure/morphology changes under
deliberate pH (6.0–9.0) change. With the as-obtained Oh, DHP,
and EHP Cu2O structures, we further delve into the realm
of catalysis to understand the splendor of the nanocatalyst, morphology
and surface area dependence, facet selective reactivity, and other
factors affecting the catalytic efficiency. The remarkable rate of
catalysis of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP), evident from the catalyst activity
parameter (ka = 123.6 g–1 s–1), to produce 4-aminophenol in the presence
of a reducing agent like sodium borohydride (NaBH4) of
the as-prepared catalysts is evidence of the collaborative effects
of the effective surface area, surface positive charge, and active
(111) facet of the Cu2O nanocatalyst. We have also studied
the effect of other common anions, namely, Cl–,
NO2–, NO3–, CO32–, and SO42– on the reduction process. To obtain a general consensus about facets,
we compared (100) and (111) faceted Cu2O nanocatalysts
not only for 4-NP reduction but also for the reduction of toxic chromium
Cr(VI) in the presence of formic acid to further emphasize the importance
of facet selectivity in catalysis and the versatility of the morphology
tuned as-prepared Cu2O.

document-id-old-9ao6b00447document-id-new-14ao-2016-00447wccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
In contemporary science,
the morphology of nanomaterials has been
instrumental in improving properties and catalytic efficiency.1 Nanomaterials not only have novel electronic,
optical, magnetic, chemical, and mechanical properties2−4 in comparison with their bulk counterparts but these properties
are also intimately related to their obtained morphology. This has
attracted much attention focussing on new synthetic strategies, especially
those for metal oxides. Cuprous oxide, a p-type semiconductor with
a band gap of 2.2 eV, is available as the robust but only naturally
occurring monovalent copper compound on earth.5 A large amount of water insoluble Cu2O is discarded after
Fehling’s test in academic and pathological laboratories. It
has been widely exploited for catalysis, magnetic storage media, solar
energy conversion, electrodes for lithium ion batteries, and gas sensors.
To date, various structures of crystalline Cu2O have been
reported exploiting various reducing and capping agents resulting
in fascinating octahedral, flowerlike, rod, cubic, and multipod structures.6−14 In this work, we have judiciously employed glucose as a growth directing
agent, ethylene glycol (EG) as the stabilizing agent, and both act
collaboratively to reduce Cu(II) in a solution of copper acetate,
in various proportions, to yield octahedral (Oh), dwarf hexapod (DHP)
and elongated hexapod (EHP) structures under different pHs. This synergistic
effect of EG and glucose was studied systematically. Thereby, the
adept catalyst was then exploited in catalyzing various reactions,
namely, nitroarene reduction and the reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III),
to show its versatility. An insignificant amount of the as-synthesized
Cu2O catalyst was responsible for carrying out effective
progress and completion of the reactions. Of the three morphologies,
the Oh structure delivered the best catalysis owing to its greater
surface area and surface charge. Facet selective theories were established
with a comparative study of the two different reduction reactions
by evaluation of the efficiency of the (111) facet in comparison to
a (100)15 facet.

Nitroaromatic compounds
are an environmentally redundant material
that are hazardous to living organisms. Pesticides containing nitroaromatic
compounds show a hydrophobic nature and are not miscible in water,
accumulating in sediments resulting in potential contamination. In
environmental legislation, 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) has been recorded
as a carcinogenic, teratogenic, and mutagenic element and hence is
perilous to human life. The catalytic hydrogenation of nitroaromatic
compounds has considerable significance as the aromatic amines produced
are important intermediates and precursors required for production
of different pharmaceuticals, polymers, herbicides, agrochemicals,
pigments, and dyes.16,17 The benchmark reaction of 4-NP
reduction to test the catalytic efficiency of metal nanoparticles
is widely used and was proposed by our group.18−22 The convenience of the model reaction lies in the
fact that the reaction proceeds at an infinitesimally slow rate without
suitable catalyst and the progress of the reaction can be monitored
with a UV–vis spectrophotometer when a suitable catalyst is
introduced into the reaction mixture. It remains a challenging task
to reduce nitro compounds in the presence of other reducible groups
in the moiety. The reduction is initiated by NaBH4 in the
presence of noble metal catalysts.23−26 The expense and low availability
of such metals convinced us to meticulously design a suitable catalyst
which is cost effective, earth-abundant, and nontoxic. However, to
the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a tailor-made
synthesis of octahedral and hexapod nanostructures of Cu2O from the combined effect of EG and glucose under a modified hydrothermal
treatment (MHT)27,28 but from variable pH. Herein,
we reveal a high yielding green synthesis of Cu2O nanostructures
utilizing EG as the stabilizer and glucose as the growth directing
agent individually, however both also work cooperatively as the reducing
agent in the system at variable pH conditions. Thereafter, the remarkable
efficiency of the as-synthesized proficient catalyst was attested
from nitroarene reduction. We also found a linear relation between
surface area and the rate constants for the three morphologies. Various
anions (Cl–, NO2–,
NO3–, CO32–, and SO42–), five times diluted with
respect to 4-NP, were introduced into the reaction mixture to observe
the adeptness of the as-prepared catalyst to reduce 4-NP and to study
the anion effect on the reaction rate. Our as-synthesized (111) faceted
Oh Cu2O nanocatalyst showed nitroarene reduction in a very
short time span of 4–15 min, an unprecedented observation for
a ∼10–4 M concentration of nitroarenes, leaving
aside the morphologically different (111) or (100) faceted Cu2O. The plausible mechanism instrumental in bringing about
4-NP reduction (ka = 123.6 g–1 s–1) was the collaborative effort of particle
size, active surface area, facet, and surface potential. Catalysis
for Cr(m, mVI) reduction (ka = 2.0 g–1 s–1) was also viable due to the
efficiency and versatility of this unique inexpensive catalyst and
the preferential activity of the (111) facet toward specific reactions.

Results
and Discussion
Analytical Instruments
Details are
provided in the Supporting Information.

X-ray Diffraction (XRD) Analysis
The phase structure
and purity of the as-prepared Cu2O nanoparticles of the
three different morphologies, namely, Oh, DHP, and EHP, obtained from
the combined effect of glucose and EG were analyzed by X-ray diffraction
study (Figure 1). The
peaks at 2θ = 29.9, 36.5, 42.2, 52.6, 61.4, 73.8, and 77.4°
can be indexed to the (110), (111), (200), (211), (220), (311), and
(222) reflection peaks (JCPDS file 77-0199) attesting that the cubic
Cu2O crystal structure formed is phase pure. In all three
cases, the (111) plane shows the most intense diffraction peak revealing
the exposure of the (111) plane. From the 3D model, it was noted that
the EG stabilizer exclusively stabilizes the (111) plane and hence
a slow growth rate is the consequence. On the basis of the Gibbs–Wulff’s
theorem, the facets bestowed with higher surface energies always grow
promptly and finally decrease or disappear from the eventual morphologies,
whereas the crystal facets with lower surface energies grow in a sluggish
pathway and are conserved in the ultimate structure.29 Only the facet with a slower growth rate gets exposed to
a large extent and shows an intense diffraction peak in the XRD pattern.30 The predominant facet exposed in Oh is (111)
due to the diminished growth on this plane and thus it shows a much
higher diffraction intensity than that of the (200) planes in all
three cases. In the spectra, the diffraction intensity ratios of (111)/(200)
progressively increased in the following order Oh < DHP < EHP
as a result of increasing (111) facets. In comparison, in the Cu2O cube, the (100) plane is more exposed and hence the ratio
is less, as is evident from Figure S1a in
the Supporting Information. Cu2O consists of a cuprite
crystal structure with a body-centered cubic packing of oxygen atoms
with a copper atom occupying half of the tetrahedral site. From the
crystal model, it has been reported that (100) planes have oxygen
atoms present in the unit cell, whereas slicing along the (111) plane
exposes the Cu atoms with dangling bonds.31 Hence, the (111) plane with Cu atoms exposed has a greater positive
surface in comparison with that of the neutral (100) faces of the
cube.32 The growth mechanism was also studied
with the help of time-dependent XRD (Figure S2) and it was confirmed that Cu2O nuclei are formed that
gradually evolve into various morphologies.

Figure 1 XRD patterns of Cu2O: (a) Oh, (b) DHP, (c) EHP morphologies
of Cu2O.

X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
(XPS) Analysis
The
oxidation state and surface atomic composition of the Oh, DHP, and
EHP Cu2O nanomaterials were investigated by wide range
and high-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, as shown in Figure 2. The observed symmetrical
peaks are indicative of more than one chemical state of copper. Peaks
of Cu 2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2 at 932.6 and 952.7
eV, respectively, have been reported for Oh Cu2O.33 Apart from the main peak of Cu(I), a few shakeup
satellite peaks are observed in the spectra in a higher binding energy
range at around 940.6 and 943.3 eV, which can be attributed to Cu(II)34,35 states in CuO incorporated due to surface oxidation. Hence, this
shows the presence of CuO on the surface of Cu2O, although
the XRD analysis proved only the presence of Cu2O. In the
case of DHP, the main peaks are at 931.2 and 951.8 eV; whereas, in
the case of EHP they are at 930.7 and 951.2 eV. Hence, this change
and decrease in binding energy suggests that with a decrease in alkalinity
and increase in acidity, there is less CuO on the surface of the nanoparticle.
Hence, in a more alkaline medium there is the possibility of more
CuO by surface oxidation than that in acidic media. The corresponding
O 1s peak for DHP and EHP at ∼530.3 eV matched well with the
literature value.38 For the Oh sample,
the main O 1s peak is centered at a higher binding energy value of
531.5 eV. This was assigned to the adsorbed O on the surface on Cu2O due to the presence of hydroxyl groups, which may be due
to the precursor NaOH added during the synthesis. The Auger spectral
analysis [Figure S3a] after surface cleaning
shows a peak at 916.9 eV which is a clear indication of the Cu(I)
present in the as-synthesized samples.36,37 Also, to confirm
this, we further applied XPS to our Oh catalyst after sputtering and
observed that the peak of the CuO satellites vanished with intense
Cu2O peaks confirming the presence of CuO is on the surface
only [Figure S3b].

Figure 2 XPS spectra of the prepared
Oh, DHP, and EHP (a) for Cu 2p and
(b) for O 1s.

Fourier Transform Infrared
(FTIR) Analysis
The FTIR
spectra of the as-prepared Cu2O synthesized from its precursor
glucose and copper acetate are shown in Figure 3. The FTIR spectra show an infrared active
Cu(I)–O vibrational band at 620 cm–1 for
Oh. A small shift in the characteristic Cu(I)–O band from 620
to 614 cm–1 in the case of DHP and 610 cm–1 in the case of EHP was observed due to the crystallization and growth
process.15 The band at 1550 cm–1 is typical of a carboxylate group obtained from the corresponding
acid which remains adsorbed on the surface of the metal oxide after
the reaction of the precursor. These peaks are most pronounced in
the case of the Cu2O nanoparticles obtained from the basic
medium, lesser for the case of neutral medium, and negligible for
the acidic medium, which shows the extent of deprotonation of the
carboxylate group, that is, the medium effect.

Figure 3 FTIR spectra of the three
as-prepared Cu2O morphologies.

Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM), Transmission
Electron Microscopy (TEM), and High-Resolution (HR) TEM Analysis
The tailored morphology of the Cu2O nanoparticles was
carefully investigated under FESEM and TEM, as represented in Figures 4 and 5, respectively. Each Oh was made of triangular faces, the
height of which was around 800 nm, the apex was around 300 nm in width
and the base around 1 μm. Each DHP had six triangular shaped
pods attached at the center, each triangle was around 2 μm in
height from the center. Each pod was triangular in shape, around 500
nm in width toward the apex, and 2 μm at the base. In the case
of EHP, each hexapod had a length of 20 μm, the apex was around
2 μm, and the base around 2.5 μm. The six hexapods were
loosely attached at the center and a few broken pods were also observable.
Eight (111) faces were exposed in the Oh structure of Cu2O and twenty four such faces in the case of the hexapod.31 This crystallographic orientation shows a higher
catalytic activity. Hence, the higher the number of (111) faces present
in the catalyst, the greater should be its activity, along with other
factors evident to some extent from the nitroarene reductions carried
out. It was observed that in basic NaOH medium, only the Oh structure
was synthesized, whereas in acetic acid medium, the EHP structure
was produced. It can be concluded that in strongly basic medium, growth
of the (100) plane takes place and stops at Oh, whereas in very low
basic medium, further DHP structures are formed, and with increasing
acidity, the hexapod becomes elongated. However, in the presence of
EG, the (100) planes do not seem to be visible. Crystal growth is
also closely related to the surface energy of the crystal face. A
crystal grows rapidly in the direction perpendicular to the face that
has the highest surface energy.39 The higher
growth rate of six equivalent dipolar unstable facets leads to the
six branches of the extended hexapod40 of
Cu2O when the reaction medium changes from basic to acidic.
From the TEM and HRTEM images (Figure 5), the fringe was calculated with a d-spacing of around 2.53, 2.57, and 2.65 nm, respectively for Oh,
DHP, and EHP, which can be indexed to the (111) plane, and was confirmed
by SAED pattern. They also proved the presence of pure Cu2O. FESEM images of the growth mechanism of the arrested reaction
at different time intervals of all three morphologies were also studied
[Figure 6a–c].
FESEM, TEM, and HRTEM analysis of the Cu2O cube nanoparticle
is also provided and clearly shows the cube morphology with fringe
spacing in accordance with the Cu2O compound [Figure S1b,c].

Figure 4 Low and high magnification FESEM images
of Oh (a, a1), DHP (b,
b1), and EHP(c, c1) morphologies of Cu2O.

Figure 5 TEM and HRTEM images and SAED (inset) pattern, respectively,
of
(a, a1) Oh, (b, b1) DHP, and (c, c1) EHP morphologies of Cu2O.

Figure 6 Growth steps taken at 3, 6, 10 h, and final
product, respectively,
for (a) Oh, (b) DHP, and (c) EHP morphologies of Cu2O.

Energy-dispersive X-ray
(EDX) Analysis
From EDX analysis,
we confirmed the presence of copper and oxygen (Figure S4), the Cu peak is almost double the peak of O proving
the probable composition of the nanoparticles synthesized to be Cu2O.

Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET)
Analysis
The FESEM and TEM images clearly display a disparity
in surface area
of the three different morphologies. The smaller the size of a particle,
the greater the surface area. Measurements acquired from nitrogen
adsorption–desorption isotherms corroborate the surface area. Figure S5a–c represents the nitrogen adsorption–desorption
isotherms of the Oh, DHP, and EHP Cu2O nanocatalysts, and
the calculated BET surface areas obtained were 26.9, 11.3, and 4.3
m2 g–1, respectively. The Barrett–Joyner–Halenda
method was implemented for pore volume/diameter distribution, and
this was found to be 0.056, 0.008, and 0.007 cc g–1, with pore diameters of 14.8, 15.6, and 15.6 Å for Oh, DHP,
and EHP, respectively. Hence, the surface area of Oh was higher than
that of DHP and EHP. The order of surface area established was Oh
> DHP > EHP. Again, when compared with the cube, we observed
that
the surface area was close to the Oh samples, 20.6 m2 g–1, the pore diameter being 15.6 Å [Figure S5d].

Synthesis of Cu2O
Our work combines the
effects of EG and glucose to form hierarchical structures at variable
pH due to a medium effect. On carrying out the synthesis with EG and
glucose, the optimum concentration was evaluated for the Oh, DHP,
and EHP structure evolution. The Cu(II) precursor salt was stirred
for an hour with a stabilizer, EG, with no change in pale blue aqua
complex color proving that reduction does not occur here with the
free hydroxyl groups, and only the Cu(II)–EG complex is formed.
We carried out the reaction in basic (pH ∼ 9.0), neutral (pH
∼ 7.0), and acidic (pH ∼ 6.0) media. No other copper
salts were able to give the product in neutral and acidic media under
similar conditions. The reduction potential of the Cu2+/Cu+ system is E0 = 0.158
V and that of the gluconic acid/glucose system is E0 = 0.05 V. Hence, in view of the reduction potential
values, glucose is predicted to reduce the cupric state to cuprous,
and in turn, glucose is oxidized to gluconic acid.41 The probable steps of the reaction are schematically represented
in Scheme 1.

Scheme 1 Schematic
Representation of the Synthesis of Cu2O from
Copper Acetate Solution in the Presence of EG and Glucose under MHT
Conditions
Temperature control
and autogenic pressure are vital for the unique
morphology evolution. The combination of EG, glucose, and cupric acetate
facilitates the structures with exposed (111) facets such as Oh and
hexapod. Also, heating the mixture with only EG yielded both CuO and
Cu2O, and with only glucose yielded Cu2O solely,
as validated by the XRD patterns (Figure S6), but all with ill-defined structures. This proves that EG helps
in forming the Cu(II)–EG complex and in the absence of glucose
being a weak reducing agent, it forms CuO upon dehydration of the
Cu(OH)2 species42 and also reduces
some Cu(II) to Cu2O under MHT. However, in the presence
of glucose, which is a stronger reducing agent, Cu(OH)2 is directly reduced to Cu2O, without any trace of CuO.
In the absence of glucose, the products formed are ill-defined, whereas
in the absence of EG, the structures are distorted and not fully formed
at the end of the stipulated time. In the absence of the optimum amount
of EG and glucose, the product is precluded from being synthesized
in neutral and acidic medium. It is also pertinent to mention that
when the Oh is treated with acidic pH, when the EHP is treated in
a basic pH, or when the DHP is treated with the respective concentration
of NaOH and acetic acid, no interchange of structures took place in
any of the cases. Hence, the prerequisite for the three different
morphology evolutions is their respective pH at the commencement of
the reaction. After the product is formed, a change in pH does not
cause an interconversion of morphology. A synergy exists between EG
and glucose to bring about the reduction of Cu(II) and the specific
uniform morphology of Cu2O.

Mechanistic Insight into
the Growth of the Structures
In our prescribed pH (9.0–6.0)
conditions, Cu(OAc)2 converts to Cu2O via Cu(OH)2 formation. Under
MHT, dehydration and reduction of the Cu(OH)2 species takes
place and Cu2O is obtained.42 The evolution of Cu(OH)2 nuclei is more prevalent in
at higher pH. Anyway, Cu(OH)2 is the initial product of
the hydrolysis of Cu(OAc)2 for all three cases. At higher
pH, oriented attachment defines the Oh particles because of the higher
number of available Cu2O nanoparticles. The presence of
Cu2O nanoparticles at 5 and 10 h was confirmed by XRD analysis,
as shown in Figure S2. Hence, this authenticates
our presumption that a Cu2O nucleus is the beginning of
the growth mechanism in each of the reaction mixtures and gradually
evolves to different morphologies in different pH media. In the neutral
to acidic conditions, fewer Cu2O particles are generated
as a result of the slow kinetics of the hydrolysis of Cu(OAc)2. Thus Ostwald ripening,43 even
though already in force, and the coalescence and oriented attachment44 mechanisms become more pronounced, and as a
result of which, the DHP structure is obtained. It is worth mentioning
that no other copper salts gave Cu2O in neutral and acidic
media, proving that Cu(OAc)2 has an inherent tendency to
ionize into Cu(OH)2 species in solution, which is an intermediate
in the reaction. The products obtained from MHT were all withdrawn
after 18 h, however the parity in kinetics of the hydrolysis of Cu(OAc)2 results in the rapid formation of fully molded Oh in basic
medium within 14 h and slower rates of formation of perfectly shaped
DHP and EHP at 17 and 18 h, respectively. Maintaining the reaction
for longer (48 h) did not alter any of their morphologies.

The
final product formation was accompanied by a number of transient steps
which led gradually to the hierarchical morphology, as evident from Figure 6a–c. In the
case of Oh, from 3 h under MHT, there starts a gradual evolution of
Cu2O nuclei that take up the Oh shape by Ostwald ripening
from within the solution. They further modify to become spherical-shaped
with emerging edges and gradually form perfect Oh structures of around
800 nm size at 14 h. There lies four apexes at the four corners of
the XY plane and two other apexes at the positive and negative end
of the Z axis that define a perfect Oh. In the case
of DHP, Ostwald ripening causes small particles to evolve from the
reaction mixture and the ill-defined structures of Cu2O
nuclei begin to coalesce and undergo oriented attachment, a common
clue for crystal growth, at 3 h. Through constant growth and surface
reconstruction, larger hexapods with smooth faces grew. Then, there
occurred the simultaneous evolution of structures that vaguely form
six attached Oh shapes at 6 h, which gradually extended their apexes
at 10 h, and meticulously formed the symmetrical DHP structure at
around 17 h. The structure’s faces are a further development
of the octahedral framework. Of the six hexapods, four heads lie in
the XY plane and can be accounted back to the four
apexes in the case of a pure Oh. The other two are extensions of the
two apexes in the Z axis in the positive and negative
directions. In the case of EHP, at around 3 h product formation initializes.
Primarily short hexapod structures are formed by Ostwald ripening,
coalescence, and oriented attachment of the pods, which is observable
between 6 and 10 h. These transitory morphologies with time gradually
etch, extend and mold into EHP structures at 18 h. In this case also,
the six pods can be attributed to the six apexes of the Oh framework,
which elongate further to give rise to the EHP. Hence, the formation
of the hierarchical structures can be attributed to Ostwald ripening,
coalescence, and orientated attachment, as represented in Figure S7. The orientation and growth along the
axes are elucidated in the schematic representation in Figure 7a–c.

Figure 7 Schematic representation
of growth along X, Y, and Z axes of (a) Oh, (b) DHP, and (c)
EHP morphologies.

Catalytic Performance of
the Cu2O Nanostructures
A popular line of investigation
of a catalyzed chemical reaction
is its correlation with morphology45−49 and facet-selection.50−55 Bulk Cu2O is a p-type semiconductor with a band gap value
of 2.2 eV. The catalytic activity of the as-synthesized Cu2O nanoparticles and different chemically etched products has a close
relationship with the exposed particle size, surface area, crystal
planes, and surface charge. To study the efficiency and ability of
the as-prepared Cu2O Oh, DHP, and EHP nanostructures, we
performed hydrogenation reactions of six nitro compounds using NaBH4 as the reducing agent and source of hydrogen, and the reduction
of Cr(VI) to Cr(III) in the presence of FA.

Nitroarene Reduction
Nitroarenes are toxic, making
it necessary to improvise methods for their transformation.56 The reduction of nitrophenol to aminophenol
has been executed directly with noble metals.57−59 The reaction
does not proceed favorably in the absence of a suitable catalyst (Figure S8). However, noble metals are not only
expensive but also scarce in nature. Hence, designing alternative,
low cost, abundantly available catalysts is necessary for the reaction.
This has been pursued by a number of groups who have synthesized noble
metal-free60 and also metal-free catalysts.61 Our work is the first report where morphologically
variable Cu2O using Cu(OAc)2, EG, and glucose
under definite pH, has been judiciously employed to reduce nitroarenes
at a momentous rate. Comparative catalytic analysis of the time-dependent
absorption spectra of the reduction of 4-NP to 4-aminophenol (4-AP)
using NaBH4 as reducing agent and adding morphologically
different Cu2O into an identical reaction medium, as the
active catalyst, was performed.

First, we studied the reaction
of 4-NP in solution. In an aqueous medium, a pale yellow-colored 4-NP
solution shows an absorption peak at ∼317 nm (Figure S9). However, in the presence of freshly prepared NaBH4, the solution becomes bright yellow and shows a strong red-shifted
absorption peak at ∼400 nm due to the formation of an extended
conjugation of nitrophenolate anions in alkaline medium. In the presence
of catalyst as the reduction progresses, the band at 400 nm diminishes
and a concomitant characteristic peak rises at ∼300 nm, which
is that of colorless 4-AP. Two isosbestic points are observed at ∼311
and ∼280 nm, which confirm a clean conversion and yield of
a single product.62 To testify this, we
also collected 1H NMR data of the product obtained after
the catalytic reduction of 4-NP (Figure S10). The reaction can be monitored conveniently with a UV–vis
spectrophotometer. To conduct a comparative investigation of the different
morphologies of Cu2O, we separately employed the catalyst
in individual identical reaction media. In each case, we obtained
absorption spectra that can be further modified to obtain the rate
constant from a ln(A/A0) versus time graph, which demonstrates a straight line with a negative
slope. We studied the time-dependent reduction kinetics by systematically
preparing the reaction medium with a respective amount of catalyst
(0.1 mg quantity for Oh, 1 mg quantity for DHP, EHP, bulk and cube
Cu2O), 5 × 10–5 M 4-NP, and 1.6
× 10–3 M freshly prepared NaBH4 in
a quartz cuvette at room temperature. The reducing agent NaBH4 was added in excess (almost ∼102 times
higher in concentration than that of the substrate, 4-NP). Hence,
the reaction follows pseudo-first-order reaction kinetics with a very
negligible induction period. Figure 8a–c represents the UV–vis absorption
spectra of the 4-NP reduction employing Oh, DHP, and EHP nanostructures,
respectively. The absorption spectra of bulk Cu2O and cubic
Cu2O nanomaterials for comparative study are given in Figure S11a,b. The plot of ln(A/A0) versus time [Figure 8d] reveals a straight line with a negative
slope, where A is the absorbance of the nitrophenolate
during the progress of the reaction and A0 is the initial absorbance of nitrophenolate before the onset of
the reduction reaction. From this plot, comparative rate constants
were found to be 0.742 min–1 (R2 = 0.99) for 0.1 mg Oh catalyst, and 0.335 min–1 (R2 = 0.98), 0.197 min–1 (R2 = 0.97), 0.071 min–1 (R2 = 0.96), and 0.658 min–1 (R2 = 0.97) for 1 mg of the DHP, EHP,
bulk, and previously reported cubic15 Cu2O catalyst, respectively. We can also define the catalytic
efficiency by the catalyst activity parameter (ka) [ratio of rate constant (k) in s–1 and catalyst dose (m) in g, i.e., ka = k/m], which is 123.6,
5.59, 3.28, 0.81, and 10.97 g–1 s–1 for the Oh, DHP, EHP, bulk, and cubic Cu2O catalysts.
Hence, the order of efficiency is Oh > cube > DHP > EHP >
bulk. From Figure 8d, the marked increase
in catalytic activity is observable moving from bulk to micrometer
to nanometer scale particles making the catalytic efficiency in the
nanoregime more evident in comparison to that of the bulk Cu2O. The superiority of our as-prepared (111) faceted Oh Cu2O is evident from the comparative study of previous reports, as shown
in Table 1. The activation
energy for the reaction carried out with the Oh Cu2O nanocatalyst,
which catalyzes the reaction best, was as low as 22.186 kJ mol–1 (Figure S12) calculated
from the Arrhenius equation k = A e–Ea/(RT), where k is the temperature-dependent rate
constant, A is the pre-exponential factor, Ea is the activation energy of the reaction, R is the gas constant 8.314 J K–1 mol–1, and T is the temperature in kelvin.

Figure 8 UV–vis
absorption spectra of 4-NP reduction with (a) 0.1
mg of Oh and 1 mg of (b) DHP and (c) EHP morphologies of the as-prepared
Cu2O nanocatalysts. (d) Graph of ln(A/A0) vs time giving the comparative rate constants
of the three morphologies along with bulk Cu2O and cube
morphology with the (100) facet.

Table 1 Comparative Study of the Pseudo-First-Order
Rate Constants for 4-NP Reduction with As-Prepared Cu2O
and Other Reported Nanomaterials
entry	catalyst	rate constant
(k) s–1	catalytic
activity parameter (ka = k/m) g–1 s–1	reference	
1	co-carbon composite	7.0 × 10–3	25.9	(63)	
2	Pd–graphene nanohybrid	2.33 × 10–3	11.65	(64)	
3	Cu2O–Cu–CuO	10.4 × 10–3	20.7	(65)	
4	Au–Fe3O4	10.1 × 10–3	11.22	(66)	
5	Ag-nanoparticle/C	1.69 × 10–3	1.69	(67)	
6	Fe3O4–Au	1.05 × 10–2	5.25	(66)	
7	Pd–rGO	4.5 × 10–3	15.0	(68)	
8	EHP Cu2O	3.28 × 10–3	3.28	this work	
9	DHP Cu2O	5.59 × 10–3	5.59	this work	
10	Oh Cu2O	1.236 × 10–2	123.6	this work	
The mechanisms proposed in previous reports18 explain that the catalysis of 4-NP occurs in two steps,
first, adsorption of the substrate and second, desorption of the product,
involving the catalyst. In this respect, the factors indispensable
for elucidating the efficiency of a catalyst are the morphology of
the nanocatalyst, active surface area for catalysis, facets involved,
and the existing surface charge. Hence, a fine tuning of the morphology,
facet, and increase in the surface area of a nanoparticle consequently
increases the active site of the catalyst in the reaction medium,
which has a direct effect on the catalytic activity. The surface area
of a particle increases with its decreasing size. From the FESEM and
TEM images, and BET analysis, the difference in the surface area of
the nanoparticles is undisputable, and is highest for the smaller
sized Oh when compared to that of DHP, which is lower, and EHP, which
is least. Figure 9 establishes
a linear relationship of rate constants with the surface areas of
the morphologies, as obtained from BET analysis (Figure S5), proving that the greater the surface area of the
catalyst, the better the efficiency, thereby validating the adeptness
of the Oh Cu2O nanocatalyst over the DHP and EHP Cu2O nanocatalysts, all bearing the (111) facet. Because of the
variance in the surface area of the three different morphologies,
the same (111) faceted Oh Cu2O nanocatalyst with 26.9 m2 g–1 surface area has a higher number of
catalytically active Cu(I) sites, with respect to DHP with 11.3 m2 g–1 and EHP with 4.3 m2 g–1 surface areas. The increased active sites increases
the surface area of reaction to a great extent for the Oh, a lesser
extent for the DHPm and least for the EHP morphology. Also, the higher
the rate of adsorption of the substrate on the surface of the catalyst,
the greater the expected rate. This was also validated by turn over
frequency calculated for ∼65% conversion of 5 × 10–5 M 4-NP solution using the Oh, DHP, and EHP nanocatalysts
individually, the values obtained being 0.325 × 10–5, 0.271 × 10–6, and 0.181 × 10–6 mol g–1 s–1, respectively. Thereafter,
we observed that the surface area of cubic Cu2O (20.6 m2 g–1), though close to that of the Oh, still
shows less efficiency. Hence, the significance of facet and surface
charge is manifested in the comparison of the rate constants of Oh
and cubic Cu2O. In a typical Cu2O body-centered
cube (BCC) unit, each oxygen atom is surrounded by tetrahedron Cu
atoms, whereas each Cu atom is surrounded by two oxygen atoms. On
slicing the BCC unit diagonally, in the exposed (111) plane, every
two Cu atoms have a dangling bond perpendicular to the plane, which
leads to unsaturated Cu in the facet, which is highly active, providing
a positive surface, in comparison to the (100) facet which has almost
a neutral surface. The zeta potential (ζ) data of the three
as-prepared morphologies, along with the cube, support the above statement
and follow the order Oh (∼+30.9 mV) > DHP (∼+22.1
mV)
> EHP (∼+9.53 mV) > cube (∼+2.04 mV), performed
with
very low (0.025 mg per 1 mL) concentration of Cu2O in a
well-dispersed ethanol medium. The positive ζ potential of the
(111) facet agrees well with the crystal plane analysis, whereas a
mildly positive to neutral charge is expected for the (100) facet.
The surface charge of the Oh is highest, whereas that of the DHP,
EHP, and cube are lower.47 From the data,
it is evident that all of the structures formed in the presence of
copper acetate, EG, and glucose under MHT, but differing in active
surface area and surface charge have (111) faces exposed. The exposed
active Cu(I) site, surface charge, and active surface area are instrumental
in bringing about the remarkable catalytic behavior of the (111) faceted
Oh Cu2O due to favorable and enhanced adsorption of nitroarene.
Next, we explain explicitly how the catalytic activity of the (111)
plane is greater when compared to that of the (100)69−71 plane in specific
reactions. A comparative account of the experimental results provides
another vital illustration, as the (111) faceted Oh Cu2O catalyzed the reduction with greater propensity when compared to
catalysis by the (100) faceted cube [FESEM, TEM, and HRTEM images
in Figure S1b,c] of similar size, that
is, ∼500–800 nm. The point of zero charge (PZC) of the
Oh Cu2O nanoparticle was calculated to be at pH 10.85 [PZC
graph in Figure S13], which is evidence
of the positive surface charge of the nanoparticle and its high adsorbing
tendency toward anionic species. The rich copper exposed (111) facet
facilitates the formation of a highly active positive surface in alkaline
solution,72 as is the condition prevailing
in the nitrophenol reduction reaction with NaBH4. The high
adsorption of the anionic deprotonated nitrophenolate on the surface
of the positively charged and more accessible Cu atom of the Cu2O nanoparticle is complimentary for the formation of the Cu–nitrophenolate
active species and hence an increase in reaction rate is irrefutable
in the case of the Oh morphology. The greater the positive surface
charge and number of active sites of (111) facets, the more competent
the catalyst is. 4-NP reduction on this selected facet has been proved
unequivocally from the above discussion. Additionally, to evaluate
the efficiency of the catalyst toward 4-NP reduction in the presence
of other anions, we introduced Cl–, NO2–, NO3–, CO32–, and SO42– (Figure 10), at 5 times lower
concentration than that of 4-NP, into the reaction medium. The movement
of an anion in a solution is dependent on the size of the ion and
its effective charge. Hence, if the ion is small, then it will diffuse
at a faster rate and adsorb on the surface of the catalyst. Again,
the greater the effective charge of the ion, the higher its affinity
toward the positively charged surface of the catalyst. The smaller
ions, due to their size, easily move through the solution to reach
the positively charged surface, thereby retarding the adsorption of
nitrophenolate. However, the decrease in the rate of the reaction
was not very high due to the strong affinity of the resonance stabilized
nitrophenolate on the (111) facet. The SO42– ion is the largest among all of the other ions and hence, in spite
of having a more effective charge it is incapable of diffusing to
the surface of the catalyst. However, in this case, the rate is increased
considerably. This is similar to the “salting out” phenomenon
and the rate enhancement is observed because of the relatively stronger
attachment caused by the forced confinement of the nitrophenolate
ion on the surface of the catalyst due to bulky anions in the vicinity.
Therefore, the observed result conveys two occurrences: (i) the diffusibility
of the smaller ions causing retardation of the reaction rate due to
competitive adsorption of the small anions on the positively charged
surface of the nanocatalyst, and (ii) the bulky ions which diffuse
at a slower rate but assist in supporting the 4-NP adsorbed on the
surface of the nanocatalyst enhancing the reaction rate, in comparison
to the controlled reaction.

Figure 9 Linear relationship between the surface area
of the as-prepared
catalysts and the catalyst activity parameter.

Figure 10 Effect of anions on 4-NP reduction with NaBH4 in aqueous
medium.

Hereafter, we used the Oh catalyst
for further studies. For an
insightful investigation into the contribution of the catalyst, we
varied the catalyst amount, NaBH4 concentration, and 4-NP
concentration, as shown in Figure S14a,a1,b,b1,c,c1. The optimized reaction conditions were determined from Figure S14d.

Hence, it is noteworthy that
a low-cost catalyst with a highly
active facet is most complimentary in bringing about the facile reduction
of nitrophenol. To extend this explanation to the case of other nitroarenes,
we selected five compounds with structurally divergent groups with
substitutions at different positions in the ring, keeping all of the
conditions unaltered. As the order of reactivity of the different
morphologies was noted to be Oh > DHP > EHP, the rest of the
reductions
were performed with a minimal quantity of 0.1 mg of the nanocatalyst
with the Oh structure, for feasibility of measurement, and to study
in detail the effects of the catalyst on the reduction reaction. We
observed that the nitroarene reduction occurred rapidly within 3–7
min keeping all other conditions unchanged, as shown in Figure 11. On comparing
the compounds it was observed that 3-nitroaniline showed the maximum
reactivity. As we have found previously, the reaction goes through
the nitrophenolate ion, which is stabilized by resonance21 due to the presence of an electron-withdrawing
nitro group. Hence, we can assume that 4-NP is more stable with respect
to 2-nitrophenol due to steric effects. A similar explanation holds
well for 2-nitroaniline and 4-nitroaniline, which are both stabilized
by resonance, but the former is less stable than the latter due to
steric effects. However, 3-nitroaniline is the least stable as there
is no resonance stabilization. The nitroarene ions that have the least
stability have the highest reactivity, which is evident from the very
small reduction time required, as is evident from the absorption spectra.
For the present study, it is important to comprehend the chemistry
executed on the surface of the metal oxide catalyst. It may be inferred
from the observations described that not only the surface area but
also the facets providing active sites for reaction and the surface
charge collectively bestow upon the catalyst its efficiency. As per
the crystal structure, the active surface area estimation from BET
analysis, PZC, and ζ potential values, it can be assumed that
the Cu atoms with dangling bonds are active toward the negatively
charged molecules. From previous reports it can be presumed that the
nitroarene reduction takes place on the surface of the active catalyst
and the mechanism proposed is that whereby the reducing agent NaBH4 and the substrate get attached on the surface of the catalyst.
The Cu2O molecules produce an in situ Cu(0) species which
is highly active toward the reduction reaction.65 The negatively charged species of borohydride and nitrophenolate
adsorb on the surface of the catalyst rapidly and immediate onset
of the reduction process occurs, which can be attributed to the lack
of or negligible induction time, when the catalyst amount is 1 mg.
However, with a decrease in the catalyst quantity to as low as 0.1
mg, a visible induction period in the absorption spectra is witnessed.
The borohydride ion interacts with Cu(0) and transfers a surface hydrogen
molecule, along with electrons, to it, causing the reduction of the
−NO2 group of nitroarene to an −NH2 group. The role of the active surface area, facet, and the surface
charge are pertinent for facile reactivity. The Cu2O produces
Cu(0) and presumably it is also oxidized to form CuO73 in the alkaline medium (pH ∼ 9.84) of the reaction,
which gradually causes a diminished efficiency. On adsorption of the
molecules on the surface of the catalyst, the scaffold for a facile
hydrogenation process is improvised and as a result of which, the
nitrophenol gets reduced by the hydrogen produced in situ from borohydride
in the vicinity. The catalytic performance of the as-prepared Cu2O was investigated by repeating the same reaction under similar
conditions with the preused catalyst. NaBH4 is a strong
reducing agent and was present in excess in the reaction medium, hence
the catalytic cycle of the as-prepared catalyst is hampered after
some cycles of reaction. The XRD patterns [Figure 12a] of the used catalyst show peaks of Cu2O with the (111) peak becoming stronger and more eminent with
respect to the other peaks which confirms the reduction of Cu2O to Cu(0) metal and back to Cu2O after catalyzing
the reduction in alkaline medium. However, new peaks of Cu(0) are
also evident due to a gradual reduction of Cu2O to Cu(0)
due to the usage of a strong reducing agent like NaBH4.
The remarkable catalysis was completed without any change in morphology
of the catalyst proving its stability and robustness, as evident from Figure 12b, after 20 cycles.
The catalyst retains its efficiency to a great extent, even after
20 cycles, with a weight loss of ∼45% of 1 mg catalyst taken,
as evident from the ln(A/A0) versus time graph (Figure S15).

Figure 11 UV–vis
absorption spectra of (a) 2-nitroaniline, (b) 3-nitroaniline,
(c) 4-nitroaniline, (d) 2-nitrophenol, and (e) nitrobenzene.

Figure 12 (a) XRD pattern and (b) FESEM images
of the as-synthesized Oh Cu2O nanocatalyst after the completion
of 4-NP reduction reaction.

Cr(VI) Reduction
Cr(VI) is one of those heavy metals
that are a potential threat to the ecosystem, additionally being a
carcinogen and mutagen too.74,75 Disposal of highly
soluble Cr(VI) ions from industrial waste, such as that from leather
and dye manufacturing factories, into water directly causes a fatal
scenario for terrestrial life.76,77 However, Cr(III), being
a less toxic element, can be conveniently precipitated out from solution
and easily adsorbed into the soil.78 The
elimination of Cr(VI) to produce Cr(III) by adsorption or reduction79,80 is of great importance to contemporary chemists and environmentalists.
The simplistic protocol using FA is generally preferred in the presence
of various metal nanocatalysts, as this technique does not produce
any harmful pollutants from its byproducts.81,82 In the absence of any catalyst, FA is unable to reduce Cr(VI) (Figure S16). The absorbance at 350 nm is the
evidence of a ligand-to-metal charge transfer, which diminishes with
time due to progress of the reduction reaction. The color of the solution
changes from yellow to colorless at the experimental concentration
range indicating the successful conversion to Cr(III)83 with effective reduction in the presence of catalyst and
reaches its completion in almost 50 min. We also calculated and compared
the rate constant of the reaction with the Oh and cube Cu2O nanocatalysts from the ln(A/A0) versus time plot for the absorbance taken at 350 nm
[Figure 13]. As the
FA concentration is excessively higher (∼3600 times) than that
of K2Cr2O7, the reaction is expected
to follow pseudo-first order kinetics. The successful reduction confirms
the effective decomposition of FA which helps in the reduction of
Cr(VI). The facet selectivity of reactions can effectively define
the activity of the nanocatalyst in this case. There was an upsurge
in the decrease of Cr(VI) ions in the solution for the cube rather
than Oh Cu2O nanocatalysts, the calculated activity parameters
(ka) being 4.1 g–1 s–1 (R2 = 0.98) and 2.0 g–1 s–1 (R2 = 0.99), respectively. We can observe a difference in the rate constants
of our Oh Cu2O nanocatalyst and cube Cu2O, which
clearly proves the facet selective reactivity. Presumably, Cr(VI)
is preferentially adsorbed on the (100) facet of Cu2O rather
than the (111) facet. Hence, the (100) facet of cube, being neutral,
consolidates the reduction of Cr(VI) more efficiently than does the
(111) facet of the Oh. This explanation is valid as long as undissociated
dichromic acid remains present in the FA medium. So, the formic acid
can reduce Cr(VI) to Cr(III) through the Cu2O surface,
which forms in situ Cu(0) and reverts back to Cu(I). However, this
conversion is not as facile in acid medium as in basic medium, like
that prevailing in 4-NP reaction. As a result, the catalyst gets exhausted
after its use for about four cycles. The XRD pattern and FESEM images
[Figure 14a,b] are
provided and prove that Cu2O is gradually reduced to Cu(0)
after prolonged use of the catalyst in FA medium. Though the rate
constant is low, being an inexpensive material our nanocatalyst is
economically favorable when compared to costly Pd nanocatalysts.84 Hence, the catalyst stands out as an effective
robust catalyst for the reduction of toxic Cr(VI) to less toxic Cr(III)
ions. The low rate constant value is indicative of the low efficiency
of the (111) facet toward the removal of dichromate, thus advocating
the reaction specificity of the (111) facet of Cu2O as
inferred from the investigation.

Figure 13 Comparative plot of ln(A/A0) vs time, at 350 nm wavelength of
Cr(VI) using the Oh and
cube Cu2O nanocatalysts.

Figure 14 (a) XRD pattern and (b) FESEM images of the as-synthesized Oh Cu2O nanocatalyst after the completion of the Cr(VI) reduction
reaction.

We can circumscribe the observations
from both reactions to being
due to a facet specific phenomenon. As the surface area of the Oh
and cube Cu2O are comparable, the rapid reactivity of the
Oh catalyst can only be justified through its facet. The zeta potential
values and PZC are indicative of the rapid reaction of the negatively
charged molecules on the surface of the (111) plane, whereas the effect
is not significant for positively charged molecules. Hence, the (111)
facet is a better scaffold for nitrophenol reduction, whereas the
(100) facet facilitates Cr(VI) reduction. A plausible cause for such
an observation could also be the structure of the substrates. Nitrophenolate
formed in basic medium, as NaBH4 is in excess, is an anionic
species with its electron density delocalized along the extended conjugation
making the molecule more likely to be adsorbed on the positive surface
of the (111) facet with respect to the neutral (100) facet. Now, in
the case of Cr(VI) degradation, the medium for the reaction is acidic
and hence the O– ends of the two bound tetrahedral
units of the dichromate molecule are saturated with H+ in
the vicinity. The only available Cr6+ in the dichromate
species is therefore adsorbed on the electronegative O atoms of the
exposed (100) facet. In the case of the (111) facet, the Cu atoms
are exposed, hence the surface is already positive and the adsorption
of a Cr(VI) center is not considerably facile. Hence, the reaction
specific efficiency of the facet is well manifested in the experimental
observations.

Conclusions
In a nutshell, we have
synthesized three different hierarchical
morphologies of Cu2O with the (111) facet, using EG as
a stabilizing agent, and glucose as a growth directing agent. However,
both are instrumental, collaboratively, for reduction under different
pH conditions and exert a synergy that is absolutely necessary to
bring about the unique morphologies of a Cu2O nanomaterial
of different particle sizes but with the same (111) facet. The synthetic
process generates the tailored growth of the Cu2O nanoparticles
systemically directing the size, morphology, and exclusively exposed
facet. All of the prepared nanomaterials demonstrated excellent catalytic
activity toward nitroarene reduction without any additive or promoter
for the reaction. We have also illustrated that in the nanoregime,
apart from the particle size, the active facet and its surface potential
are contributory for the high efficiency of the catalyst. The combined
effect of the size, surface area, catalytically active (111) facet,
and surface charge are the key features for the simplistic reduction
of nitroarenes by NaBH4. The efficiency of the reduction
reaction was assessed in the presence of other interfering anions
that were 5 times lower in concentration than that of 4-NP. We concluded
that the bulky anions promote the reaction due to their inability
to diffuse toward the catalyst surface and their ability to confine
the already adsorbed nitrophenolate species for facile reaction. However,
the smaller ions deter it due to their high diffusibility in the solution
and affinity for the positively charged (111) facet of the Oh Cu2O. The versatility of the catalyst lies in the fact that it
is able to catalyze two different reactions effectively; that of 4-NP
by NaBH4 and Cr(VI) in the presence of FA. The manifestation
of the surface charge of the nanocatalyst and their inveterate facet
selectivity were established by the difference in rate constants of
both reactions when compared using the dissimilar (111) and (100)
faceted Cu2O. The ease of operation of the catalyst, brief
reaction period, convenient reaction conditions, and aqueous medium
present the catalyst as an economical, green, and eco-friendly material
for promoting a myriad of reactions. Further, a tailored facet could
bestow increasing efficacy to the same nanocatalyst by many folds
for predictable specific reactions. The remarkable efficiency of the
as-prepared Cu2O nanocatalyst consorted with its morphological
stability makes it an ace nanocatalyst for contemporary applications
in nanotechnology.

Experimental Section
Chemicals
All
chemicals used were of AR grade. Details
are provided in the Supporting Information.

Synthesis of Cu2O Oh, DHP, and EHP
In a
typical synthesis, 7.5 mL of 0.1 M copper (II) acetate was stirred
with 2.5 mL of EG for 1 h in a magnetic stirrer at 500 rpm. From this
mixture, an 8 mL aliquot was withdrawn and poured separately into
a screw capped test tube. Then, 2 mL of water and 1 mL of 0.1 M glucose
solution were also added to the mixture. The screw capped test tubes
were sealed properly with Teflon tape after being capped. They were
then kept under our laboratory designed MHT reactor under 200 W electric
bulb illumination for 18 h of heating at a temperature of about 120
°C. The brown precipitate of obtained DHP was washed several
times with water and then with ethyl alcohol. It was then dried and
used for further characterization.

Two more sets of reactions
were prepared in basic (with respect to NaOH, pH ∼ 9.0) and
acidic (with respect to acetic acid, pH ∼ 5.0) media. The concentrations
of all of the reagents were identical to those mentioned above, only
in one of the screw capped test tubes, 0.1 M NaOH was added whereas
in the other, 0.1 M acetic acid was added, to maintain the basic and
acidic conditions, respectively. The screw capped test tubes were
then wrapped properly with Teflon tape. They were then kept in the
MHT reactor under 200 W electric bulb illumination for 18 h at a temperature
of about 120 °C. The former yielded the dark brown Oh and the
latter yielded dark brown EHP Cu2O nanomaterial. All of
these brown precipitates were also washed with water and ethanol,
and dried for further characterization.

Catalytic Reduction of
4-NP
In a typical reaction,
1.5 mL of 10–4 M aqueous solution of nitroarene
and 500 μL of freshly prepared 10–2 M NaBH4, which resulted in concentrations of 5 × 10–5 and 1.6 × 10–3 M, respectively, in the solution,
were mixed in a quartz cuvette under ambient conditions. Then, a respective
amount of as-prepared Cu2O nanomaterial (0.1 mg quantity
for Oh, 1 mg quantity for DHP, EHP, bulk, and cube Cu2O)
was introduced individually in the reaction medium and the disappearance
of the yellow color of the solution was monitored using a UV–vis
spectrophotometer. This experiment was individually conducted with
each of the three catalysts, namely, Oh, DHP, EHP synthesized by our
novel strategy, cubic Cu2O from the literature,15 and bulk Cu2O for comparative study
of the 4-NP reduction. To study the effect of other common anions,
we added 1.0 × 10–5 M NaCl, NaNO2, NaNO3, Na2CO3, and Na2SO4 solutions. We carried out the rest of the detailed
study on the reduction reaction parameters and other nitroarene reductions
with a minimal amount of 0.1 mg of as-obtained Oh Cu2O
nanocatalyst for an insightful investigation in five sets of reactions.
The recyclability test was performed with 1 mg of Oh Cu2O nanocatalyst for 20 cycles. All of the kinetic tests were performed
and the results were provided without the influence of diffusion.

Catalytic Reduction of Cr(VI)
The catalytic proficiency
of the (111) faceted Cu2O was also studied toward the reduction
of hexavalent chromium, Cr(VI), using FA at room temperature. In a
typical procedure, 10 mL of reaction mixture was prepared with potassium
dichromate (K2Cr2O7, 5 × 10–4 M), 1.8 M FA and 0.01 mL of Cu2O catalyst
(1 mg per 1 mL of Oh and cube Cu2O nanocatalyst) dispersed
in water and stirred magnetically at 500 rpm at room temperature.
Then, a 2 mL aliquot was put in a quartz cuvette after centrifuging
and separating out the present catalyst. The absorbance at 350 nm
was monitored at definite time intervals to study the progress of
the reaction for five sets.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.6b00447.Analytical instruments,
chemicals used, XRD analysis,
FESEM, TEM, and HRTEM images, Auger spectra, XPS spectra, EDX analysis,
N2-adsorption–desorption plot (with pore size diameter),
absorption spectra, 1H NMR data, linear calibration plots,
PZC plot (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao6b00447_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors are thankful for financial support from
the DST,
UGC, and CSIR New Delhi, India, MHRD and IIT Kharagpur for financial
support and research facilities, and we are also thankful to Prof.
G. M. Rao (IISc Bangalore, India) for their support in XPS characterization
and Prof. D. Dhara (Dept. of Chemistry, IIT Kharagpur, India) for
the zeta potential measurements of the nanomaterials. The authors
are also thankful to Dr. Vinod C Prabhakaran (Catalysis Division and
Center of Excellence on Surface Science, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory,
Pune, India) for helpful discussions on Auger Spectroscopy.
==== Refs
References
Astruc D.  Transition-Metal
Nanoparticles in Catalysis: From Historical Background to the State-of-the
Art . In Nanoparticles and Catalysis ; Wiley-VCH : New
York , 2008 .
Kazes M. ; Lewis D. Y. ; Banin U. 
Method for Preparation of Semiconductor
Quantum-Rod Lasers in a Cylindrical Microcavity . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2004 , 14 , 957 –962 . 10.1002/adfm.200400018 .
Xu C. ; Xie J. ; Ho D. ; Wang C. ; Kohler N. ; Walsh E. G. ; Morgan J. R. ; Chin Y. E. ; Sun S. 
Au-Fe3O4 Dumbbell
Nanoparticles as Dual-Functional Probes . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 173 –176 . 10.1002/anie.200704392 .
Choi J.-S. ; Jun Y.-W. ; Yeon S.-I. ; Kim H. C. ; Shin J.-S. ; Cheon J. 
Biocompatible Heterostructured
Nanoparticles for Multimodal Biological
Detection . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 15982 –15983 . 10.1021/ja066547g .17165720 
Feng L. ; Zhang C. ; Gao G. ; Cui D. 
Facile Synthesis of
Hollow Cu2O Octahedral and Spherical Nanocrystals and Their
Morphology- Dependent Photocatalytic Properties . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2012 , 7 , 27610.1186/1556-276X-7-276 .22647408 
Sui Y. ; Fu W. ; Yang H. ; Zeng Y. ; Zhang Y. ; Zhao Q. ; Li Y. ; Zhou X. ; Leng Y. ; Li M. ; Zou G. 
Low Temperature
Synthesis of Cu2O Crystals: Shape Evolution and Growth
Mechanism . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2010 , 10 , 99 –108 . 10.1021/cg900437x .
Kuo C. H. ; Huang M. H. 
Morphologically controlled synthesis of Cu2O nanocrystals and their properties . Nano Today 
2010 , 5 , 106 –116 . 10.1016/j.nantod.2010.02.001 .
Ahmed A. ; Gajbhiye N. S. 
Room temperature
ferromagnetism in Mn, Ni and Co ions
doped Cu2O nanorods . J. Solid State
Chem. 
2010 , 183 , 3100 –3104 . 10.1016/j.jssc.2010.09.040 .
Zhang D.-F. ; Zhang H. ; Guo L. ; Zheng K. ; Han X.-D. ; Zhang Z. 
Delicate Control of
Crystallographic Facet-Oriented Cu2O Nanocrystals and the
Correlated Adsorption Ability . J. Mater. Chem. 
2009 , 19 , 5220 –5225 . 10.1039/b816349a .
Sui Y. M. ; Fu W. Y. ; Zeng Y. ; Yang H. B. ; Zhang Y. Y. ; Chen H. ; Li Y. X. ; Li M. H. ; Zou G. T. 
Synthesis
of Cu2O Nanoframes and Nanocages by Selective Oxidative
Etching at Room Temperature . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2010 , 49 , 4282 –4285 . 10.1002/anie.200907117 .
Panigrahi S. ; Kundu S. ; Ghosh S. K. ; Nath S. ; Praharaj S. ; Basu S. ; Pal T. 
Selective
one-pot synthesis of copper
nanorods under surfactantless condition . Polyhedron 
2006 , 25 , 1263 –1269 . 10.1016/j.poly.2005.09.006 .
Veeramania V. ; Sivakumara M. ; Chen S.-M. ; Madhu R. ; Daia Z.-C. ; Miyamotob N. 
A facile electrochemical
synthesis strategy for Cu2O (cubes, sheets and flowers)
microstructured materials for
sensitive detection of 4-Nitrophenol . Anal.
Methods 
2016 , 8 , 5906 –5910 . 10.1039/C6AY01388K .
Li S.-K. ; Guo X. ; Wang Y. ; Huang F.-Z. ; Shen Y.-H. ; Wang X.-M. ; Xie A.-J. 
Rapid Synthesis
of Flower-Like Cu2O Architectures
in Ionic Liquids by the Assistance of Microwave Irradiation with High
Photochemical Activity . Dalton Trans. 
2011 , 40 , 6745 –6750 . 10.1039/c0dt01794a .21625672 
Kuo C.-H. ; Huang M. H. 
Fabrication of Truncated Rhombic Dodecahedral Cu2O Nanocages and Nanoframes by Particle . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 12815 –12820 . 10.1021/ja804625s .18761449 
Pal J. ; Ganguly M. ; Mondal C. ; Roy A. ; Negishi Y. ; Pal T. 
Crystal-Plane-Dependent Etching of
Cuprous Oxide Nanoparticles of
Varied Shapes and Their Application in Visible Light Photocatalysis . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 24640 –24653 . 10.1021/jp409271r .
Tafesh A.
M. ; Weiguny J. 
A Review of
the Selective Catalytic Reduction of Aromatic
Nitro Compounds into Aromatic Amines, Isocyanates, Carbamates, and
Ureas Using CO . Chem. Rev. 
1996 , 96 , 2035 –2052 . 10.1021/cr950083f .11848820 
Shi Q. ; Lu R. ; Lu L. ; Fu X. ; Zhao D. 
Efficient Reduction
of Nitroarenes over Nickel-Iron Mixed Oxide Catalyst Prepared from
a Nickel-Iron Hydrotalcite Precursor . Adv. Synth.
Catal. 
2007 , 349 , 1877 –1881 . 10.1002/adsc.200700070 .
Aditya T. ; Pal A. ; Pal T. 
Nitroarene
reduction: a trusted model reaction to test
nanoparticle catalysts . Chem. Commun. 
2015 , 51 , 9410 –9431 . 10.1039/C5CC01131K .
Pradhan N. ; Pal A. ; Pal T. 
Catalytic Reduction of Aromatic Nitro Compounds by
Coinage Metal Nanoparticles . Langmuir 
2001 , 17 , 1800 –1802 . 10.1021/la000862d .
Sarkar S. ; Sinha A. K. ; Pradhan M. ; Basu M. ; Negishi Y. ; Pal T. 
Redox Transmetalation of Prickly Nickel Nanowires for Morphology
Controlled Hierarchical Synthesis of Nickel/Gold Nanostructures for
Enhanced Catalytic Activity and SERS Responsive Functional Material . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 1659 –1673 . 10.1021/jp109572c .
Wunder S. ; Polzer F. ; Lu Y. ; Mei Y. ; Ballauff M. 
Kinetic Analysis
of Catalytic Reduction of 4-Nitrophenol by Metallic Nanoparticles
Immobilized in Spherical Polyelectrolyte Brushes . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 8814 –8820 . 10.1021/jp101125j .
Layek K. ; Kantam M. L. ; Shirai M. ; Nishio-Hamane D. ; Sasakid T. ; Maheswarana H. 
Gold Nanoparticles
Stabilized on
Nanocrystalline Magnesium Oxide as an Active Catalyst for Reduction
of Nitroarenes in Aqueous Medium at Room Temperature . Green Chem. 
2012 , 14 , 3164 –3174 . 10.1039/c2gc35917k .
Khalavka Y. ; Becker J. ; Sönnichsen C. 
Synthesis
of Rod- Shaped Gold Nanorattles
with Improved Plasmon Sensitivity and Catalytic Activity . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 1871 –1875 . 10.1021/ja806766w .19154114 
Johnson J.
A. ; Makis J. J. ; Marvin K. A. ; Rodenbusch S. E. ; Stevenson K. J. 
Size-Dependent
Hydrogenation of p-Nitrophenol with
Pd Nanoparticles Synthesized with Poly(amido)amine Dendrimer Templates . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 22644 –22651 . 10.1021/jp4041474 .
Kalekar A.
M. ; Sharma K. K. K. ; Lehoux A. ; Audonnet F. ; Remita H. ; Saha A. ; Sharma G. K. 
Investigation into the Catalytic
Activity of Porous Platinum Nanostructures . Langmuir 
2013 , 29 , 11431 –11439 . 10.1021/la401302p .23947652 
Antonels N. C. ; Meijboom R. 
Preparation of Well-Defined
Dendrimer Encapsulated
Ruthenium Nanoparticles and Their Evaluation in the Reduction of 4-Nitrophenol
According to the Langmuir–Hinshelwood Approach . Langmuir 
2013 , 29 , 13433 –13442 . 10.1021/la402885k .24087990 
Mondal C. ; Sasmal A. K. ; Yusuf S. M. ; Mukadam M. D. ; Pal J. ; Ganguly M. ; Pal T. 
Modified hydrothermal
reaction (MHT)
forCoV2O6$4H2O nanowire formation and the transformation to CoV2O6$2H2O
single-crystals for antiferromagnetic ordering and spin-flop†our
lab paper . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 56977 –56983 . 10.1039/C4RA09976A .
Sahoo R. ; Roy A. ; Dutta S. ; Ray C. ; Aditya T. ; Pal A. ; Pal T. 
Liquor ammonia mediated V(V) insertion in thin Co3O4 sheets for improved
pseudocapacitors with high energy density and high specific capacitance
value . Chem. Commun. 
2015 , 51 , 15986 –15989 . 10.1039/C5CC06005B .
Liu G. ; Jimmy C. Y. ; Lu G. Q. M. ; Cheng H.-M. 
Crystal facet engineering
of semiconductor photocatalysts: motivations, advances and unique
properties . Chem. Commun. 
2011 , 47 , 6763 –6783 . 10.1039/c1cc10665a .
Xiong Y. ; Xia Y. 
Shape-Controlled Synthesis of Metal Nanostructures: The Case of Palladium . Adv. Mater. 
2007 , 19 , 3385 –3391 . 10.1002/adma.200701301 .
Shang Y. ; Guo L. 
Facet-Controlled Synthetic
Strategy of Cu2O-Based Crystals
for Catalysis and Sensing . Adv. Sci. 
2015 , 2 , 150014010.1002/advs.201500140 .
Ho J.-Y. ; Huang M. H. 
Synthesis of Submicrometer-Sized
Cu2O Crystals
with Morphological Evolution from Cubic to Hexapod Structures and
Their Comparative Photocatalytic Activity . J.
Phys. Chem. C 
2009 , 113 , 14159 –14164 . 10.1021/jp903928p .
Liu X.-W. ; Wang F.-Y. ; Zhen F. ; Huang J.-R. 
In Situ Growth of
Au Nanoparticles on the Surfaces of Cu2O Nanocubes for
Chemical Sensors with Enhanced Performance . RSC Adv. 
2012 , 2 , 7647 –7651 . 10.1039/c2ra20789c .
Zheng Z. ; Huang B. ; Wang Z. ; Guo M. ; Qin X. ; Zhang X. ; Wang P. ; Dai Y. 
Crystal Faces
of Cu2O and Their Stabilities in Photocatalytic Reactions . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2009 , 113 , 14448 –14453 . 10.1021/jp904198d .
Yin M. ; Wu C. K. ; Lou Y. ; Burda C. ; Koberstein J. T. ; Zhu Y. ; O’Brien S. 
Copper Oxide
Nanocrystals . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 127 , 9506 –9511 . 10.1021/ja050006u .15984877 
Wang W. ; Wang G. ; Wang X. ; Zhan Y. ; Liu Y. ; Zheng C. 
Synthesis and Characterization of Cu2O Nanowires by a
Novel Reduction Route . Adv. Mater. 
2002 , 1 , 67 –69 . 10.1002/1521-4095(20020104)14:1<67::AID-ADMA67>3.0.CO;2-Z .
Sohn Y. ; Pradhan D. ; Zhao L. ; Leung K. T. 
Anomalous Oxidation
Resistance of “Core-Only” Copper Nanoparticles Electrochemically
Grown on Gold Nanoislands Prefunctionalized by 1,4-phenylene Diisocyanide . Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 
2012 , 15 , K35 –K39 . 10.1149/2.006205esl .
Sung M. M. ; Sung K. ; Kim C. G. ; Lee S. S. ; Kim Y. 
Self-Assembled
Monolayers of Alkanethiols on Oxidized Copper Surfaces . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2000 , 104 , 2273 –2277 . 10.1021/jp992995h .
Gasparotto A. ; Barreca D. ; Maccato C. ; Tondello E. 
Manufacturing of inorganic
nanomaterials: concepts and perspectives . Nanoscale 
2012 , 4 , 2813 –2825 . 10.1039/c2nr12083f .22434486 
Xu H. ; Wang W. ; Zhu W. 
Shape Evolution and Size-Controllable
Synthesis of Cu2O Octahedra and Their Morphology-Dependent
Photocatalytic Properties . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 13829 –13834 . 10.1021/jp061934y .16836330 
Muralikrishna S. ; Sureshkumar K. ; Yan Z. ; Fernandez T. ; et al. Non-Enzymatic Amperometric Determination of Glucose by CuO Nanobelt
Graphene Composite Modified Glassy Carbon Electrode . J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 26 , 1632 –1641 . 10.5935/0103-5053.20150134 .
Basu M. ; Sinha A. K. ; Pradhan M. ; Sarkar S. ; Pal A. ; Mondal C. ; Pal T. 
Methylene Blue–Cu2O Reaction Made Easy in Acidic Medium . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 25741 –25747 . 10.1021/jp308095h .
Ostwald W. 
Über
die vermeintliche Isomerie des roten und gelben Quecksilberoxyds und die Oberflächenspannung
fester Körper . Z. Phys. Chem. 
1900 , 34 , 495 –503 .
Thanh N. T. K. ; Maclean N. ; Mahiddine S. 
Mechanisms
of Nucleation and Growth
of Nanoparticles in Solution . Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 7610 –7630 . 10.1021/cr400544s .25003956 
Zhang Y. ; Deng B. ; Zhang T. ; Gao D. ; Xu A.-W. 
Shape Effects
of Cu2O Polyhedral Microcrystals on Photocatalytic Activity . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 5073 –5079 . 10.1021/jp9110037 .
Hua Q. ; Cao T. ; Bao H. ; Jiang Z. ; Huang W. 
Crystal-Plane- Controlled
Surface Chemistry and Catalytic Performance of Surfactant-Free Cu2O Nanocrystals . ChemSusChem 
2013 , 6 , 1966 –1972 . 10.1002/cssc.201300376 .24106201 
Aditya T. ; Jana J. ; Sahoo R. ; Roy A. ; Pal A. ; Pal T. 
Silver Molybdates with Intriguing Morphology and as
a Peroxidase
Mimic with High Sulfide Sensing Capacity . Cryst.
Growth Des. 
2017 , 17 , 295 –307 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.6b01532 .
Huang W. 
Oxide Nanocrystal
Model Catalysts . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2016 , 49 , 520 –527 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00537 .26938790 
Li L. ; Nan C. ; Peng Q. ; Li Y. 
Selective Synthesis
of Cu2O Nanocrystals as Shape-Dependent Catalysts for Oxidative
Arylation
of Phenylacetylene . Chem. Eur. J. 
2012 , 18 , 10491 –10496 . 10.1002/chem.201200567 .22806953 
Chanda K. ; Rej S. ; Huang M. H. 
Facet-Dependent
Catalytic Activity of Cu2O Nanocrystals in the One-Pot
Synthesis of 1,2,3- Triazoles by Multicomponent
Click Reactions . Chem. Eur. J. 
2013 , 19 , 16036 –16043 . 10.1002/chem.201302065 .24127396 
Bao H. ; Zhang W. ; Shang D. ; Hua Q. ; Ma Y. ; Jiang Z. ; Yang J. ; Huang W. 
Shape-Dependent Reducibility
of Cuprous Oxide Nanocrystals . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2010 , 114 , 6676 –6680 . 10.1021/jp101617z .
Hua Q. ; Shang D. ; Zhang W. ; Chen K. ; Chang S. ; Ma Y. ; Jiang Z. ; Yang J. ; Huang W. 
Morphological Evolution
of Cu2O Nanocrystals in an Acid Solution: Stability of
Different Crystal Planes . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 665 –671 . 10.1021/la104475s .21158400 
Hua Q. ; Chen K. ; Chang S. ; Ma Y. ; Huang W. 
Crystal Plane-
Dependent Compositional and Structural Evolution of Uniform Cu2O Nanocrystals in Aqueous Ammonia Solutions . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 20618 –20627 . 10.1021/jp206966f .
Huang W.-C. ; Lyu L.-M. ; Yang Y.-C. ; Huang M. H. 
Synthesis of Cu2O Nanocrystals from Cubic
to Rhombic Dodecahedral Structures
and Their Comparative Photocatalytic Activity . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 1261 –1267 . 10.1021/ja209662v .22257266 
Bao H. ; Zhang W. ; Hua Q. ; Jiang Z. ; Yang J. ; Huang W. 
Crystal-Plane-Controlled
Surface Restructuring and Catalytic Performance
of Oxide Nanocrystals . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 12294 –12298 . 10.1002/anie.201103698 .
Vaidya M. J. ; Kulkarni S. M. ; Chaudhari R. V. 
Synthesis
of p- Aminophenol by Catalytic
Hydrogenation of p-Nitrophenol . Org. Process
Res. Dev. 
2003 , 7 , 202 –208 . 10.1021/op025589w .
Hervés P. ; Pérez-Lorenzo M. ; Liz-Marzán L.
M. ; Dzubiella J. ; Lu Y. ; Ballauff M. 
Catalysis by Metallic Nanoparticles in Aqueous Solution:
Model Reactions . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 5577 –5587 . 10.1039/c2cs35029g .22648281 
Pozun Z. D. ; Rodenbusch S. E. ; Keller E. ; Tran K. ; Tang W. ; Stevenson K. J. ; Henkelman G. 
A Systematic Investigation of p-
Nitrophenol Reduction by Bimetallic Dendrimer Encapsulated Nanoparticles . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 7598 –7604 . 10.1021/jp312588u .
Hayakawa K. ; Yoshimura T. ; Esumi K. 
Preparation of Gold- Dendrimer Nanocomposites
by Laser Irradiation and Their Catalytic Reduction of 4-Nitrophenol . Langmuir 
2003 , 19 , 5517 –5521 . 10.1021/la034339l .
Su Y. ; Lang J. ; Li L. ; Guan K. ; Du C. ; Peng L. ; Han D. ; Wang X. 
Unexpected Catalytic
Performance in Silent Tantalum Oxide through Nitridation and Defect
Chemistry . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 11433 –11436 . 10.1021/ja404239z .23883401 
Kong X. K. ; Sun Z. Y. ; Chen M. ; Chen Q. W. ; et al. Metal-Free
Catalytic Reduction of 4-Nitrophenol to 4-Aminophenol by N-Doped Graphene . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2013 , 6 , 3260 –3266 . 10.1039/c3ee40918j .
Sarkar S. ; Sinha A. K. ; Pradhan M. ; Basu M. ; Negishi Y. ; Pal T. 
Redox Transmetalation
of Prickly Nickel Nanowires for Morphology
Controlled Hierarchical Synthesis of Nickel/Gold Nanostructures for
Enhanced Catalytic Activity and SERS Responsive. Functional Material . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 1659 –1673 . 10.1021/jp109572c .
Hasan Z. ; Cho D.-W. ; Chon C.-M. ; Yoon K. ; Song H. 
Reduction
of p-nitrophenol by magnetic Co-carbon composites
derived from metal organic frameworks . Chem.
Eng. J. 
2016 , 298 , 183 –190 . 10.1016/j.cej.2016.04.029 .
Wang Z. ; Xu C. ; Gao G. ; Li X. 
Facile synthesis of well-dispersed
Pd–graphene nanohybrids and their catalytic properties in 4-Nitrophenol
reduction . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 13644 –13651 . 10.1039/c3ra47721e .
Sasmal A. K. ; Dutta S. ; Pal T. 
A ternary Cu2O–Cu–CuO
nanocomposite: a catalyst with intriguing activity . Dalton Trans. 
2016 , 45 , 3139 –3150 . 10.1039/C5DT03859F .26776952 
Lin F.-H. ; Doong R.-a. 
Bifunctional Au–Fe3O4
Heterostructures for magnetically
recyclable catalysis of nitrophenol reduction . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 6591 –6598 . 10.1021/jp110956k .
Tang S. ; Vongehr S. ; Meng X. 
Carbon Spheres
with Controllable
Silver Nanoparticle Doping . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 977 –982 . 10.1021/jp9102492 .
Bramhaiah K. ; John N. S. 
Hybrid films of reduced graphene oxide with noble metal
nanoparticles generated at a liquid/liquid interface for applications
in catalysis . RSC Adv. 
2013 , 3 , 7765 –7773 . 10.1039/c3ra23324c .
Xu H. ; Wang W. ; Zhu W. 
Shape Evolution and Size-Controllable
Synthesis of Cu2O Octahedra and Their Morphology-Dependent
Photocatalytic Properties . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 13829 –13834 . 10.1021/jp061934y .16836330 
Xu Y. ; Wang H. ; Yu Y. ; Tian L. ; Zhao W. ; Zhang B. 
Cu2O Nanocrystals: Surfactant-Free Room-Temperature Morphology-Modulated
Synthesis and Shape-Dependent Heterogeneous Organic Catalytic Activities . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 15288 –15296 . 10.1021/jp204982q .
Leng M. ; Liu M. ; Zhang Y. ; Wang Z. ; Yu C. ; Yang X. ; Zhang Z. ; Wang C. 
Polyhedral 50-Facet Cu2O Microcrystals Partially Enclosed
by {311} High-Index Planes: Synthesis
and Enhanced Catalytic CO Oxidation Activity . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 17084 –17087 . 10.1021/ja106788x .21073152 
Liu X. ; Sui Y. ; Yang X. ; Lina Jiang L. ; Wang F. ; Wei Y. ; Bo Zou B. 
A feasible
approach to synthesize Cu2O microcrystals
and their enhanced non-enzymatic sensor performance . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 59099 –59105 . 10.1039/C5RA08586A .
Pal J. ; Mondal C. ; Sasmal A. K. ; Ganguly M. ; Negishi Y. ; Pal T. 
Account of Nitroarene
Reduction with Size- and Facet-Controlled CuO–MnO2
Nanocomposites Reduction of p-nitrophenol by magnetic Co-carbon composites
derived from metal organic frameworks . ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 9173 –9184 . 10.1021/am502866t .24873420 
Wise S. S. ; Shaffiey F. ; LaCerte C. ; Goertz J. ; Caroline E. C. ; Dunn J. L. ; Gulland F. M. D. ; Aboueissa A.-M. ; Zheng T. ; Wise J. P. Sr.
Particulate and
soluble hexavalent chromium are cytotoxic and genotoxic to Steller
sea lion lung cells . Aquat. Toxicol. 
2009 , 91 , 329 –335 . 10.1016/j.aquatox.2008.12.004 .19157580 
Stearns D. M. ; Kennedy L. J. ; Courtney K. D. ; Giangrande L. P. H. ; Phieffer S. ; Wetterhahn K. E. 
Reduction
of Chromium(VI) by Ascorbate
Leads to Chromium-DNA Binding and DNA Strand Breaks in Vitro . Biochemistry 
1995 , 34 , 910 –919 . 10.1021/bi00003a025 .7827049 
Prabhakaran K. ; Vijayaraghavan K. ; Balasubramanian R. 
Removal of Cr(VI) Ions by Spent Tea
and Coffee Dusts: Reduction to Cr(III) and Biosorption . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2009 , 48 , 2113 –2117 . 10.1021/ie801380h .
Mondal C. ; Ganguly M. ; Pal J. ; Roy A. ; Jana J. ; Pal T. 
Morphology Controlled Synthesis of
SnS2 Nanomaterial for
Promoting Photocatalytic Reduction of Aqueous Cr(VI) under Visible
Light . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 4157 –4164 . 10.1021/la500509c .24649847 
Djouider F. 
Radiolytic
formation of non-toxic Cr(III) from toxic Cr(VI) in formate containing
aqueous solutions: A system for water treatment . J. Hazard. Mater. 
2012 , 223–224 , 104 –109 . 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2012.04.059 .
Sarkar S. ; Dutta S. ; Bairi P. ; Pal T. 
Redox-Responsive Copper(I)
Metallogel: A Metal–Organic Hybrid Sorbent for Reductive Removal
of Chromium(VI) from Aqueous Solution . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 7833 –7841 . 10.1021/la501309m .24926619 
Bhaumik M. ; Maity A. ; Srinivasu V. V. ; Onyango M. S. 
Enhanced removal
of Cr(VI) from aqueous solution using polypyrrole/Fe3O4 magnetic nanocomposite . J. Hazard.
Mater. 
2011 , 190 , 381 –390 . 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.03.062 .21497438 
Gong K. ; Wang W. ; Yan J. ; Han Z. 
Highly reduced molybdophosphate
as a noble-metal-free catalyst for the reduction of chromium using
formic acid as a reducing agent . J. Mater. Chem.
A 
2015 , 3 , 6019 –6027 . 10.1039/C4TA06830K .
Zhang R. ; Liu H. ; Wang B. ; Ling L. 
Insights into the Preference of CO2 Formation from HCOOH
Decomposition on Pd Surface: A Theoretical
Study . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 22266 –22280 . 10.1021/jp211900z .
Huang Y. ; Ma H. ; Wang S. ; Shen M. ; Guo R. ; Cao X. ; Zhu M. ; Shi X. 
Efficient Catalytic Reduction of Hexavalent Chromium
Using Palladium Nanoparticle-Immobilized Electrospun Polymer Nanofibers . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2012 , 4 , 3054 –3061 . 10.1021/am300417s .22591166 
Celebi M. ; Yurderi M. ; Bulut A. ; Kaya M. ; Zahmakiran M. 
Palladium
nanoparticles supported on amine-functionalized SiO2 for
the catalytic hexavalent chromium reduction . Appl. Catal., B 
2016 , 180 , 53 –64 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2015.06.020 .

