
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145724010.1021/acsomega.7b00972ArticleStraightforward Processing Route for the Fabrication
of Robust Hierarchical Zeolite Structures Besser Benjamin †Häuser Luca †Butzke Lukas †Kroll Stephen *†‡Rezwan Kurosch †‡† Advanced
Ceramics, University of Bremen, Am Biologischen Garten 2, 28359 Bremen, Germany‡ Center
for Materials and Processes (MAPEX), University
of Bremen, Bibliothekstraße
1, 28359 Bremen, Germany* E-mail: stephen.kroll@uni-bremen.de. Phone: +49 421 218 64933. Fax: +49 421 218
64932 (S.K.).04 10 2017 31 10 2017 2 10 6337 6348 11 07 2017 29 08 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Strong
hierarchical porous zeolite structures are prepared by a
sol–gel method using freeze gelation. Instead of conventional
binders in powder form, such as bentonite or kaolin, it has been proven
that using a freeze gelation method based on a colloidal silica sol
is a more straightforward and easier-to-use-approach in fabricating
highly mechanically stable zeolite monoliths. The resulting zeolite
slurries possess superior rheological properties (not being pseudoplastic)
and show low viscosities. This low viscosity of the slurry enables
an increase in the solid content without compromising the extraordinary
good flow behavior for casting applications. Additionally, in comparison
to conventional powdery binders, zeolite samples prepared by using
a colloidal silica sol exhibit a significantly higher mechanical strength.
This mechanical strength can be further improved by either increasing
the zeolite content or increasing the silica to zeolite ratio. Increasing
the zeolite content leads to an increased volumetric adsorption capacity
for CO2 as the test gas, resulting from the increased amount
of zeolite particles per unit volume. In addition, a higher solid
content of the zeolite monoliths leads to higher compression strengths,
while showing the same elastic deformation and brittle failure characteristics.
In turn, increasing the silica to zeolite ratio does not affect the
volumetric adsorption capacity for CO2. Nevertheless, higher
silica contents lead to a significant increase in the elastic deformation
and absorbed work until failure. Therefore, the proposed processing
route based on freeze gelation presents an easy and unique tool to
tune the mechanical and gas adsorptive properties of hierarchically
structured zeolite monoliths, according to the application requirements.

document-id-old-9ao7b00972document-id-new-14ao-2017-009724ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Hierarchically
ordered structures offer superior properties to
overcome mass-transfer limitations.1,2 Therefore,
hierarchy in material systems is intensively investigated for processes
that are limited or characterized by mass-transfer, for example, in
catalytic or cyclic swing adsorption applications. In particular,
to increase the efficiency of swing adsorption processes, zeolite
powders are colloidal-processed to form monoliths with a hierarchical
porosity.3−9 Porous-structured monoliths feature superior heat-transfer properties
for nonadiabatic processes and fast mass-transfer kinetics because
diffusion on small scales is reduced to small path lengths.10−13

Hierarchical porous zeolite 13X monoliths are often fabricated
by casting techniques, using sacrificial templates as pore creators
or by freeze-casting methods. For example, Akhtar et al. added carbon
spheres and whiskers with dimensions between 5 and 40 μm to
a colloidal zeolite 13X slurry serving as a sacrificial template.4 This results in porous monoliths with a highly
hierarchical pore structure after the burnout of the template. The
different levels of hierarchy are created by (i) the pores generated
by the burnout of the templates, (ii) the interparticular pores between
the zeolite primary particles, and (iii) the micropores derived from
the zeolite material itself. Furthermore, Ojuva et al. used the freeze-casting
technique to fabricate porous zeolite 13X monoliths.5 In this case, the hierarchical structure is formed by the
ice-crystal-like freeze-cast lamellas (∼10 μm), the interparticular
pores between the zeolite primary particles (∼1 μm),
and the micropores of the zeolite (∼0.7 nm). They showed that
this pore system features high mass-transfer kinetics and that the
prepared monoliths show a rapid uptake of carbon dioxide (CO2) in cyclic adsorption processes. Our previous study on hierarchical
porous zeolite structures for pressure swing adsorption applications
presents a combination of freeze casting with the sacrificial template
technique.9 In addition to the lamellar
pore channels generated by freeze casting, a polymeric foam is used
as a sacrificial template providing a highly interconnected network
of pores between 100 and 200 μm, depending on the type of polymeric
foam (i.e., polyurethane foams with varying pore sizes from 10 to
35 pores per inch). This results in superior mass-transfer kinetics
with a very high and rapid volumetric uptake of CO2.

Besides a rapid CO2 uptake, a high volumetric adsorption
capacity, and good heat-transfer properties, one of the key challenges
for monolithic adsorbents is their mechanical stability, especially
when developing real applications. In practice, reactors for catalytic
applications are filled by pouring the adsorbent monoliths into the
reactor columns, which requires a sufficient mechanical strength.
Even when the superior properties of large monoliths may enforce a
change in the reactor design from a “top-down” filling
of the reactor column to a more “bottom-up” stacking
of monolithic elements, high pressure differences, for example, in
pressure swing adsorption applications of 1000 kPa (10 bar) and more,
still require an appropriate level of mechanical stability.

In general, there are three different ways for the fabrication
of mechanically stable zeolite monoliths: (i) binderless sintering,
(ii) binder conversion and (iii) conventional sintering. Binderless
sintering is a relatively new approach, where the zeolite monolith
is prepared without an inorganic binder. The final mechanical stability
is obtained by material consolidation using spark plasma sintering,
induced by an alternating electrical current.3,14 Another
possibility is related to binder conversion. This process is based
on the hydrothermal transformation of an inorganic binder, usually
clays such as kaolin, metakaolin, or silica.7,15,16 Because of the hydrothermal treatment, the
binder material is transformed into the zeolite matter, which intergrows
with the primary zeolite particles to form a stable bond.15 Compared to the other two fabrication techniques,
this processing route usually requires a comparably high amount of
chemicals and produces a notable amount of waste water, which is not
environmentally friendly. The most simple and straightforward approach
to fabricate mechanically stable zeolite monoliths is conventional
sintering. Here, typical zeolite slurries for casting processes consist
of the zeolite powder as the matrix, water as the solvent, and organic
as well as inorganic binder additives. Organic additives are usually
added to increase the green body strength, whereas inorganic binders,
for example, bentonite5,9 or kaolin,4 are added to provide mechanical stability after heat treatment.

In application, the mechanical requirements and specifications
for zeolite monoliths are very complex and depend on different processing
parameters. For instance, pouring monoliths into a reactor column
highly depends on the column height and usually requires a high amount
of mechanical stability in all directions. When the adsorbents are
not poured, the requirements for mechanical strength are different,
where high mechanical strength is only required at regions with high
mass-transfer, thereby highly depending on the pressure drop and pore
structure. However, even though inorganic binders are added, most
zeolite monoliths prepared by conventional sintering lack the sufficient
mechanical stability needed for application.4,5,8,9 In practice,
the prepared monoliths are usually mechanically stable enough for
careful sample handling and standard analyses for characterization.
For instance, zeolite monoliths with graded pore size prepared in
our previous study9 (mechanical properties
comparable to those in refs (5) and (8))
show sufficient mechanical stability for sample handling and withstand
stresses of gas permeation and cyclic adsorption/desorption measurements
with pressure differences of around 140 kPa (1.4 bar), but the obtained
mechanical stability of around 0.05–0.15 MPa is not high enough
to maintain shape when, for example, the sample is dropped from a
table.

For this reason, we propose a straightforward processing
route
based on a sol–gel transition during freeze casting as a promising
alternative for the preparation of highly stable, hierarchically structured
zeolite monoliths, opening up the door to get closer to real applications.
Different binder types are compared, and their influence on the rheological
properties of the zeolite slurry as well as the mechanical stability
of the prepared samples is investigated. Comparing the influence of
sintering at 780 °C under air and nitrogen, the sintered zeolite
monoliths are characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM),
mercury intrusion porosimetry, standardized compression tests, and
finally volumetric CO2 adsorption. In this case, volumetric
CO2 adsorption is used as a measurement technique to evaluate
the monolith performance with regard to the amount of active sites
available. Although our previous study focused on cyclic adsorption
applications, it is pointed out that this publication focuses on fabrication
and mechanical stability of monoliths. Therefore, the results and
the application of the knowledge is not limited to gas or cyclic adsorption
and can be transferred to other fields of research, where strong zeolite
bodies are required.

2 Experimental Section
2.1 Materials
To prepare a zeolite slurry
for freeze casting, zeolite 13X powder with a primary particle size
of around 2 μm was used as the ceramic material (molecular sieves
13X, Lot. MKBV6417V, Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH, Germany), and deionized
water (Seradest SD 2000, USF SERAL, Austria) was used as the solvent.
Two different inorganic binders available in powder form, namely bentonite
(nanoclay, hydrophilic bentonite, Lot. MKBR9459V) and kaolin (halloysite
nanoclay, Lot. MKBW6030V), as well as poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)
used as a dispersant and an organic temporary binder (BioUltra 8000,
Lot. BCBP8378V) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH (Germany).
In addition, a colloidal silica sol with a primary particle size ranging
from 5 to 10 nm (BegoSol K, Lot. 0116K 0216, BEGO GmbH & Co. KG,
Germany) served as the inorganic binder and freezing agent. To initiate
the sol–gel transition before molding, poly(acrylic acid) (PAA,
Syntran 8220, batch number 101021W41, Interpolymer GmbH, Germany)
was used to shift the pH value and served as a temporary binder to
enhance the green body strength.

2.2 Processing
Route
The slurries used
for the fabrication of zeolite monoliths are prepared in two different
ways, depending on the binder type. The additional amount of binder
is always chosen depending on the amount of zeolite and presented
in dry weight basis (dwb %). For the powdery binders, namely bentonite
and kaolin, the processing route based on our previous study9 is used, as schematically shown in Figure 1A. First, PEG serving as the
dispersant and organic temporary binder is dissolved in deionized
water. Then, the zeolite as well as the powdery binder type are coarsely
dispersed in deionized water using a mechanical stirrer (RW20DZM,
IKA LABORTECHNIK, Germany) for 30 min. The hydrophilic zeolite particles
can be easily dispersed in water, but the used binder additives in
powder form, especially bentonite, form agglomerates and disperse
poorly. Therefore, the mixture is milled for 6 h in a ball mill to
achieve a homogeneous slurry. By contrast, when using the colloidal
silica sol as a representative for an inorganic binder, this ball-milling
step is not necessary because the binder particles are already dispersed,
as schematically shown in Figure 1B. Here, the zeolite powder is dispersed in deionized
water using a magnetic stirrer, followed by addition of the silica
sol. It is important to note that the amount of silica given in dwb
% represents the dry amount of silica particles within the silica
sol (∼30 wt %) related to the dry amount of zeolite powder.
The mixture is stirred for 1 h to cool down until it reaches room
temperature because dispersing the zeolite particles generates heat.
Prior to molding, pH is shifted from around 10 to 7 using PAA to initiate
the sol–gel transition. After successful preparation of the
zeolite slurries, they are poured into aluminum molds with an inner
diameter of 20 mm and a height of 60 mm. The bottom plates of the
molds are made of a plastic material (polyvinyl chloride) with a low
thermal conductivity to enforce the freezing of the ice crystals in
the radial direction. As already indicated in Figure 1, the two different processes are referred
to as freeze casting (A) and freeze gelation (B), when using powder
binders or colloidal sol, respectively. Both freeze casting as well
as freeze gelation are carried out at −150 °C for at least
30 min (Sanyo Ultra Freezer, MDF-1155, Sanyo, Japan). After demolding,
the samples are subsequently placed in a freeze dryer (P8K-E-80, Dieter
Piatkowski—Forschungsgeräte, Germany) and dried at −30
°C at a reduced pressure of around 50 μbar for at least
4 d. The dried monoliths are cut to their final height of 40 mm before
the heat treatment, using a disc cutter (CUTO 1, Jean Wirtz, Germany).
To ensure a homogeneous pore structure throughout the monoliths and
to avoid boundary effects, both the top and bottom of the cylindrical
samples are cut, each about 10 mm. Afterward, the zeolite monoliths
are heat-treated up to 780 °C, following a temperature profile
similar to our previous study,9 operating
in air as well as under a nitrogen atmosphere. The conventional heat
treatment in air is performed in a furnace from the company Nabertherm,
model HT 04/17 (Nabertherm GmbH, Germany). By contrast, the heat treatment
under the nitrogen atmosphere is carried out in another furnace from
the company Thermal Technology (model 1000, Thermal Technology LLC,
USA). To ensure high purity of nitrogen in the sintering atmosphere,
the furnace is evacuated three times and refilled with nitrogen. During
heat treatment, the whole furnace is constantly streamed with nitrogen.

Figure 1 Schematic
overview of the processing routes using powdery binders
(A) and colloidal silica sol (B) as representatives for inorganic
binders. Processing steps involve dispersing of the zeolite particles,
ball-milling or rather pH-shift, molding, a freezing step, freeze
drying, and final heat treatment mediated by sintering at 780 °C
under air (A) and nitrogen atmospheres (B). Parts of this figure are
adapted from ref (9).

2.3 Characterization
Methods
To investigate
the slurry behavior, rheological measurements were performed using
a Kinexus pro+ rotational rheometer (Malvern Instruments, Germany).
For this, viscosimetry shear rate ramp measurements were carried out
from 0.01 to 1000 s–1, with a cone-plate setup (50
mm in diameter).

The heat-treated zeolite monoliths were finally
characterized by determining the bulk density, total porosity, pore
size distribution, compressive strength, as well as their adsorption
capacity for CO2. For the determination of the bulk density
and total porosity, the geometrical method is applied. During our
studies, we revealed that conventionally sintered samples (in air)
are exposed to humid-rich air of the environment during the final
cool-down step, which immediately results in water adsorption, compromising
the total sample weight that leads to higher bulk densities (i.e.,
overestimation). Until now, we have not been able to dry the relatively
large samples after sintering in an adequate way (e.g. at 350 °C
and vacuum) without destroying them or risking a sample damage and
hence affecting their structural properties. Thus, the only results
of samples sintered under nitrogen are presented. Here, the cool-down
phase is performed under an inert atmosphere, inhibiting water adsorption.
To allow the measurement of the sample weight in their completely
dry stage, the samples are directly transferred from the furnace into
a desiccator after heat treatment for transportation and storage.
The geometrical density and total porosity are determined by subsequently
measuring the sample weight and dimensions (six times height and six
times diameter at the top and bottom). To ensure high reproducibility,
the measurements are performed on 12 different samples derived from
3 individual processing batches. For the visualization of the pore
structure and morphology, SEM is performed using a field emission
SEM SUPRA 40 (Zeiss, Germany). The pore size distribution is determined
by mercury (Hg) intrusion porosimetry using a Pascal 140 and 440 mercury
porosimeter (Porotec GmbH, Germany). For this, the cylindrical zeolite
samples are broken into pieces to fit into the measurement cell.

A reliable determination of the mechanical stability of the prepared
zeolite monoliths is very important for accurate evaluation. Therefore,
compression tests are carried out following the ASTM C773-88 using
a ProLine table-top Z005 testing machine (Zwick/Roell, Germany). Following
the standard testing procedure, n = 10 samples are
tested for each formula to obtain reliable results. The 10 samples
are obtained from 3 individual processing batches. The cylindrical
samples have a height to diameter ratio of 2 (40 mm height, 20 mm
diameter), and the testing speed is set to 0.5 mm min–1 to ensure monolith failure within the first 30 s, preventing subcritical
crack growth.

To evaluate the gas adsorption performance of
the zeolite monoliths,
volumetric CO2 adsorption measurements are carried out
at 30 °C using a BELSORP-Max instrument (BEL Japan Inc., Japan).
For this, the samples are broken into pieces to fit into the measurement
cell. Three samples derived from three individual processing batches
are tested for each formula. Prior to adsorption measurements, the
samples are thermally activated at 350 °C under vacuum (≤2
Pa) for 16 h. Different slurry compositions, for example, different
zeolite to binder ratios, will affect the adsorption capacity, when
relating the adsorbed amount of CO2 to the sample mass.
To ensure comparable results, the volumetric adsorption capacity is
presented instead. For this, the measurement data are recalculated
to mmol cm–3 using the bulk density. Please note
that in this case, the (volumetric) adsorption capacity is defined
as the maximum adsorbed amount of CO2 at 100 kPa (1 bar)
on a thermally activated sample.

3 Results
and Discussion
3.1 Freeze Casting versus Freeze
Gelation: The
Right Choice of Inorganic Binder
One of the biggest challenges
for casting processes is related to the handling of the rheological
behavior of the slurry. In our last study, the rheological properties
of the slurry were the limiting factor in increasing the zeolite content
aiming at high volumetric CO2 capacities of zeolite monoliths.9 In fact, the highly viscous slurries could only
be processed by applying a degassing step to remove air bubbles before
molding, and the molding step itself could only be achieved by pushing
the slurries through a small syringe (needle diameter 120 μm,
injection speed 1.35 ± 0.17 mL s–1), utilizing
the effects of shear-thinning and thixotropy and leading to lower
viscosities for a short period of time. Figure 2 shows the representative results of the
shear rate ramp measurements with zeolite slurries containing 35 wt
% zeolite and different inorganic binder types as additives (each
10 dwb %), referring to bentonite, kaolin, and silica.

Figure 2 Shear rate ramp for 35
wt % zeolite slurries with 10 dwb % of different
inorganic binder types.

The zeolite slurry with bentonite as the binder has the same
composition,
compared to the “optimum” slurry used in our previous
work, and serves as the reference.9 Clearly,
the slurry consisting of 35 wt % zeolite and 10 dwb % of bentonite
shows a high viscosity and shear-thinning behavior (pseudoplastic)
compared to slurries containing kaolin or silica as inorganic additives.
Here, the viscosity can be as high as 100 Pa s for small shear rates,
which decreases to 0.1–0.2 Pa s for high shear rates. For comparison,
honey usually has viscosities between 10 and 20 Pa s,17 and water at 20 °C has a viscosity of around 0.001
Pa s.18 Kaolin when used as the inorganic
binder reduces the overall viscosity to around 0.01–0.05 Pa
s, and the slurry does not show shear-thinning behavior. Because of
this rheological behavior, the filling of the mold does not require
an additional syringe, and the slurry can easily be poured into the
molds. However, a degassing step before the molding is still necessary
to remove existing air bubbles. In contrast to bentonite and kaolin,
using silica as the inorganic binder results in slurries with a very
low viscosity, usually between 0.003 and 0.01 Pa s. The silica particles
are already dispersed and available as a colloidal sol, stabilized
at an elevated pH of around 10. At this pH, the silica particles show
a negative zeta potential because of the isoelectric point (IEP) of
SiO2 being at a pH of around 2.19,20 Our measurements show that the zeolite particles also have a negative
zeta potential at this pH value (IEP of ∼5, see Figure S1 in
the Supporting Information). Furthermore,
when dispersing zeolite 13X particles in water, pH shifts drastically
to around 10 because of their strong surface charges. Therefore, when
mixing the colloidal silica solution with zeolite particles dispersed
in water, two very well-dispersed and highly stable solutions with
identical pH and negatively charged particles are homogenized. This
results in a stable slurry system with very low viscosities.

Because of the very fast and easy way of slurry preparation when
using the silica sol, the processing route can be significantly shortened,
as already indicated in Figure 1. Zeolite 13X is highly hydrophilic and can easily be dispersed
in water. In practice, dispersing the zeolite powder and adding the
silica sol to obtain a homogeneous slurry take merely about 5–10
min. Here, the applied total time of 1 h for dispersion is used only
for the slurry to cool down to room temperature. This step can be
speeded up by actively cooling the slurry during dispersion, which
reduces the preparation time to about 15 min (data not shown). In
this study, the slurry is not actively cooled for the sake of simplicity,
but it demonstrates the potential of using colloidal sols as the binder.
In addition, the homogenization step (also for solid loadings as high
as 40 wt %) can be performed by using a magnetic stirrer instead of
a mechanical stirrer, which is needed for binders in powder form.
In summary, using a colloidal silica sol as the inorganic binder significantly
simplifies the processing route and reduces the processing time from
about 6–7 h to around 1 h, while obtaining comparably low slurry
viscosities.

To evaluate the performance of the different binder
types, hierarchical
zeolite monoliths are prepared by freeze casting and freeze gelation.
Aiming at a straightforward processing route, a common heat treatment
is used similar to other working groups3,5,8,9 without further treatment
steps, for example, binder transformation. In general, structures
prepared by freeze-casting techniques are near-net shaped, showing
a very high shape accuracy combined with a low shrinkage of 20%. For
the freeze-casted zeolite samples, a very high shape accuracy with
relative standard deviations of height and diameter <0.2% and low
total shrinkage of <1% are achieved.

Figure 3A presents
the results of compression tests performed on zeolite monoliths with
a height to diameter ratio of 2, containing different binder types,
finally heat-treated at 780 °C in air and nitrogen (N2). Figure 3B shows
the representative stress–strain curves for samples treated
in N2. All monoliths are prepared from slurries with 35
wt % zeolite, whereas samples containing bentonite heat-treated in
air serve as the reference from our previous study.9

Figure 3 Compression strength of zeolite monoliths prepared with different
inorganic binder additives, heat-treated at 780 °C in air or
nitrogen (N2) atmosphere (A). Exemplary stress–strain
curves obtained from compression tests and a representative photograph
of a broken zeolite sample prepared with silica as the additive and
sintered under a N2 atmosphere showing its fracture pattern
(B). Initial cylindrical dimensions of zeolite samples: 40 mm height
and 20 mm diameter. For better visualization, the obtained cracks
are traced by a black dashed line.

It is important to point out that the compression strengths
obtained
from the hierarchical porous monoliths presented in our previous study
as well as this study are significantly smaller than the compression
strength stated in the literature for zeolite monoliths. For instance,
Ojuva et al. reported compression strength levels of 0.69 MPa for
freeze-casted zeolite monoliths equivalent to 30 wt % zeolite with
10 dwb % of bentonite as the binder.5 For
the explanation of the differences in the compression strength, two
reasons can be indicated: (i) the geometrical sample size dimensions
and (ii) the orientation of the freeze-cast lamellas. In contrast
to our studies, Ojuva et al. as well as other literature dealing with
compression tests of zeolite monoliths used samples with height to
diameter ratios (h/D) of 1 or even
less.3,5,8,14 It is commonly known that the height to diameter
ratio of the samples used in compression tests significantly influences
the obtained compression strength, showing higher strength values
for smaller h/D ratios, which asymptotically
decrease with increasing h/D ratio.21,22 This seems to be even more present for freeze-casting structures,
and within our studies, we found around 3 times higher compression
strength (0.49 ± 0.05 MPa) for zeolite samples with a ratio of h/D = 1 (35 wt % zeolite, 10 dwb % bentonite,
heat-treated in air, data not shown). For this reason, the samples
are prepared according to the suggestions from the ASTM C773-88, which
recommends a ratio of h/D between
1.9 and 2.1. According to our findings, this ratio is highly recommended
for all studies dealing with applicability. Furthermore, in most studies
dealing with zeolite monoliths prepared by freeze casting, the freezing
direction is usually chosen from the bottom to the top of the sample.5,8,23 This leads to significantly higher
compression strengths because of the orientation of the freeze-cast
lamellas parallel to the direction of the applied force, with the
usual mode of failure being buckling.23 Referring to our studies, we found that the compression strength
is 4–5 times higher for samples with freeze-cast lamellas oriented
in parallel to the applied force vector (axial freezing) in comparison
to samples with lamellas oriented in the perpendicular direction (radial
freezing); data not shown. In this study, the chosen freezing direction
is radial instead of axial (Figure 1) because we determined an anisotropic pore structure
with lamellar pore channels of increasing diameter from the bottom
to the top, when the sample height is as large as 40 mm. Presumably,
this derived from the lower thermal conductivity of the formed ice
crystals compared to the metal material of the used mold, limiting
heat-transfer with increasing height of the freezing front. Therefore,
aiming at high reproducibility and reliability of the results, radial
freezing is chosen to prepare the zeolite samples, ensuring a highly
homogeneous pore structure throughout the samples. Accordingly, the
usual modes of failure observed within this study are shearing (Figure 3) and splitting.

In accordance with our previous work using bentonite as an inorganic
binder,9 the zeolite monoliths possess
a compression strength of 0.15 ± 0.01 MPa, suitable for careful
sample handling. The compression strength increases to 0.2 ±
0.02 MPa (factor of 1.3) when sintering under a N2 atmosphere.
By contrast, the samples are significantly weaker on using kaolin
as the binder, independent of the sintering atmosphere (<0.03 MPa).
The mechanical stability of such zeolite monoliths with kaolin as
the binder is not suitable for sample handling and hence not recommended
for real applications. Please note that although operating with extreme
care, only 9 out of 12 samples could be tested because of sample destruction
while handling.

Besides simplifying the processing route, the
colloidal silica
sol used as the binder significantly increases the compression strength
of the zeolite monoliths to values of around 0.36 ± 0.06 MPa.
Furthermore, changing the sintering atmosphere from air to N2 leads to an additional increase in the compression strength (0.42
± 0.04 MPa), showing smaller standard deviations (significance
confirmed with a student’s t test, data not
shown). The silica particles used as the binder are comparably small
ranging from ∼5 to 10 nm, according to the manufacturer. These
small nanoscaled particles have a high surface area to volume ratio
and in turn offer a high surface energy. The thermodynamic driving
force of “sintering” is the reduction in the Gibbs free
energy of the system.24 Accordingly, this
driving force is much higher for small particles compared to large
particles, and neck formation due to surface diffusion can start at
lower temperatures. In addition, the sol–gel transition of
the slurry system is initiated before freezing by adding PAA for shifting
the pH value to 7. The silica particle distribution in the slurry
will then be transformed from a random distribution to a short-order
distribution by agglomeration and formation of silica chains (gelation).
Therefore, the silica particles are already arranged in a closed order,
providing a high interconnectivity when the slurry is subsequently
frozen. Both the high surface energy of the small particles as well
as the high interconnectivity due to gelation are possible explanations
for the determined higher mechanical stability in comparison to monoliths
prepared with conventional binders in powder form.

3.2 Robust Hierarchical Zeolite Monoliths by Freeze
Gelation: Increasing the Solid Content
On the basis of the
rheological behavior of the slurry system, combined with simple and
fast processing as well as the obtained superior mechanical stability,
the freeze-gelation process based on the colloidal silica sol and
heat treatment under a N2 atmosphere is further used for
all experiments. In the context of fabricating robust zeolite monoliths,
the influence of the zeolite and the binder (silica) amount is investigated
by independently varying the zeolite content and the silica to zeolite
ratio, where corresponding results are marked for better visualization
by a color code using green and purple, respectively. The resulting
monolithic structures are characterized in terms of structural properties
in relation to the bulk density, total porosity, pore morphology,
and pore size as well as their performance regarding mechanical strength
and CO2 adsorption capacity. Figure 4 shows the SEM micrographs of the fractured
surfaces of hierarchical-structured zeolite monoliths with increasing
zeolite content from 35 to 40 wt % (part A) and increasing silica
to zeolite ratio from 10 to 50 dwb % silica, using a constant zeolite
amount of 35 wt % (part B). In contrast to our previous study,9 it is possible to increase the zeolite content
up to 40 wt % because of the low viscosity of the slurry, when using
colloidal silica sol as the binder. Consequently, the micrographs
presented in Figure 4A show an increasing strut thickness and a decreasing amount of freeze-casting
pores with increasing zeolite content.

Figure 4 SEM micrographs of the
fractured surface of freeze-cast monoliths
with varying zeolite contents (A) and varying silica to zeolite ratios
(B).

These tendencies can also be confirmed
by the increasing bulk density
and decreasing total porosity presented in Table 1. Increasing the silica to zeolite ratio
for a constant amount of zeolite also increases the bulk density and
reduces the total porosity. In contrast to increasing the zeolite
content, increasing the amount of silica results in neither increasing
the strut size nor decreasing the amount of freeze-casting pores.
Instead, the silica nanoparticles predominantly arrange between the
zeolite particles to fill up the interparticular pore space between
them (Figure 4B). For
moderate amounts of silica (10 dwb %), the porous structure is characterized
by the zeolite primary particles, which are interconnected and held
together by the silica acting as the inorganic binder. By contrast,
for high amounts of silica (≥25 dwb %), the microstructure
is different, and the silica content seems to serve as a matrix incorporating
the zeolite particles.

Table 1 Bulk Density and
Total Porosity for
Varying Zeolite and Silica Contents
zeolite content
in wt %	silica content
in dwb %	bulk density
in g cm–3	total porosity
in %	
35	10	0.475 ± 0.002	79.73 ± 0.10	
37.5	10	0.514 ± 0.002	77.92 ± 0.08	
40	10	0.570 ± 0.003	75.52 ± 0.12	
35	25	0.513 ± 0.002	77.90 ± 0.10	
35	50	0.590 ± 0.004	73.95 ± 0.18	
Figure 5 shows the
results of exemplary mercury intrusion porosimetry measurements performed
on hierarchical porous zeolite monoliths with varying zeolite contents
(A) and varying silica to zeolite ratios (B). Analyzing all measurements
performed within this study, considerable differences regarding the
open porosities for samples with identical composition and even for
measurements performed twice on a single sample are obtained. Two
examples for such measurement outliers are represented by “37.5
wt % zeolite, 10 dwb % silica” in Figure 5A and “35 wt % zeolite 50, dwb % silica”
in Figure 5B. These
outliers always show a high deviation beginning from large pore diameters
(20–100 μm). One possible explanation can be related
to artifacts when Hg starts to penetrate into the sample, maybe due
to surface effects caused by the sample preparation (the samples are
crushed to fit into the measurement cell). Therefore, the mercury
porosimetry measurements are only used for qualitative analysis.

Figure 5 Pore size
distribution and open porosity determined by mercury
intrusion porosimetry of freeze-cast monoliths with varying zeolite
contents (A) and varying silica to zeolite ratios (B). The illustrations
between the graphs show schematically the hierarchically ordered pore
structures and morphologies in relation to their predominant pore
size.

For all measured samples, trimodal
pore size distributions are
obtained, and the individual peaks can be clearly identified. The
first peak with the highest pore volume is obtained at pore diameters
of around 10–20 μm and belongs to the lamellas derived
from the ice crystals during freezing, which can also be confirmed
by the corresponding SEM micrographs (Figure 4A). The next peak is attributed to pore diameters
that are 1 order of magnitude smaller, showing values of around 1–2
μm. Such pores can be assigned to the interparticular pore volume
between the zeolite primary particles, which is in accordance with
the SEM results (Figure 4B). The third increase in the relative pore volume can be addressed
to very small pores <10 nm belonging to the interparticular pore
volume between the silica nanoparticles.

In general, mercury
porosimetry measurements confirm the relation
between the solid content and pore structure, as expected from the
SEM analysis shown in Figure 4. When increasing the zeolite content, the pore structure
mostly remains the same, showing that the amount of freeze-cast lamellas
is decreased and that the amount of interparticular pores between
the zeolite particles is increased. These tendencies are confirmed
by the mercury intrusion porosimetry measurements presented in Figure 5A, showing similar
pore structures. Bearing in mind the deviations of open porosities
at relatively large pores (20–100 μm), the relative pore
volume of interparticular pores is subsequently increased with increasing
zeolite content. Figure 4 further shows that the silica nanoparticles are predominately arranged
between the zeolite particles in the interparticular pore volume,
subsequently filling it when the amount of silica is increased. This
trend can be confirmed by the mercury porosimetry measurements presented
in Figure 5B. Here,
the relative pore volume between 1 and 2 μm is significantly
decreased when increasing the silica to zeolite ratio, while the relative
pore volume below 10 nm is increased. In addition, the peak in relation
to pore diameters between 10 and 20 μm (freeze-casting pores)
is independent of the amount of silica, giving the proof that the
silica nanoparticles mostly arrange in between the zeolite particles
without affecting the channel-like pore structure created by freeze
casting. However, the higher amount of silica particles significantly
decreases the interparticular pore volume in between the zeolite particles,
limiting one level of hierarchy, as shown in Figure 5B. A high level of hierarchy is a key requirement
for zeolite monoliths, when aiming at a rapid uptake of gaseous species.5,9 Therefore, this “pore-filling effect” by the silica
binder may compromise a fast uptake of gas because of limiting the
gas diffusion from the freeze-casting pores to primary zeolite particles.
However, when using commercially available zeolite powders, the limiting
step of mass-transfer is the gas diffusion into the primary particles.1,25,26 It is assumed that only when
the primary zeolite particles feature a very rapid gas uptake, for
example, due to a hierarchical porosity,2,27 the pore-filling
by the silica particles will result in a diffusion limitation.

To evaluate the influence of the zeolite content and the silica
to zeolite ratio on the mechanical stability, compression tests are
carried out. Figure 6 shows the results of compression tests performed on hierarchical
zeolite monoliths with various zeolite amounts from 35 to 40 wt %
(A) and different silica amounts from 10 to 50 dwb % (B). The compression
strength values are presented in mean values with standard deviations
(Figure 6A1,B1) and
representative stress strain curves are shown (Figure 6A2,B2).

Figure 6 Compression strength and representative
stress–strain curves
of zeolite monoliths with varying zeolite contents (A) and varying
silica to zeolite ratios (B). For better understanding, illustrations
are given presenting a suggestion of the interaction of the zeolite
and silica particles.

The results show that increasing the zeolite content as well
as
increasing the amount of silica result in an increase in the compression
strength from 0.42 ± 0.04 to 1.06 ± 0.33 and 1.38 ±
0.2 MPa, respectively (Figure 6A1,B1). Both increasing the amount of zeolite as well as increasing
the silica to zeolite ratio for a constant amount of zeolite lead
to an increase in the “total” solid content of the slurry
from 37.45 wt % to 44 (A1) and 52.5 wt % (B1), respectively, which
is in agreement with a decrease in the total porosity of the zeolite
monoliths (Table 1).
The influence of porosity (and density) on the mechanical properties
of ceramics is widely known and has been intensively studied for various
material systems.28−30 In general, a decreased porosity (and thereby increased
bulk density) leads to an increase in the mechanical strength, which
is confirmed by the determined compressive strength values in this
study. Because of the increase in the zeolite as well as silica content,
the compression strength is increased to values of 1.06 ± 0.33
and 1.38 ± 0.2 MPa, respectively. The samples consisting of 40
wt % zeolite showed signs of crack formation after sintering, resulting
in comparably high standard deviations. Presumably, the cracks were
derived from desorption of a relatively large amount of water adsorbed
within the samples during the heat treatment between 100 and 200 °C.
A possible strategy to avoid these cracks for samples with high solid
contents is related to the introduction of additional dwell times
at, for example, 100 and 200 °C, guaranteeing more sensitive
removal of residual water.

Figure 6A2,B2 shows
the representative stress–strain curves obtained from compression
tests performed on samples with varying zeolite and silica contents,
respectively. For a higher amount of zeolite, at a constant silica
to zeolite ratio, the stress–strain curves feature a steeper
increase (i.e., higher Young’s modulus for compression) until
the samples finally crack leading to a higher compressive strength.
The maximum strain at the time of fracture is between 0.5 and 1% and
independent of the zeolite content (Figure 6A2). This is a common behavior of ceramics
with an identical material composition and different porosity. By
contrast, increasing the silica to zeolite ratio from 10 to 25 dwb
% leads to a decrease in the Young’s modulus for compression;
a further increase has no effect. Here, the higher compressive strength
is derived from the increased maximum strain until a failure of about
2% (Figure 6B2). Apparently,
changing the silica to zeolite ratio leads to a transition in the
material behavior when a load is applied. Increasing the silica content
leads to a significant increase in the amount of silica nanoparticles
present to form chains and bonds in between the zeolite particles,
as schematically illustrated in Figure 6. One hypothesis aiming to explain the change in mechanical
behavior is that the zeolite particles are no longer interconnected
by silica nanoparticles but embedded into a matrix of silica particles,
as already indicated by the corresponding SEM micrographs in Figure 4. This matrix consists
of a highly interconnected network of silica particles formed by the
silica gel, which is only partially sintered, leading to a porous
matrix (Figure 5).
The decrease in the Young’s modulus for compression for samples
with 25 dwb % of silica represents this transition from an interconnected
zeolite particle system to a system where zeolite particles are embedded
into a porous silica matrix. Accordingly, the Young’s modulus
for compression will be defined by the silica matrix, independent
of the amount of silica particles within this matrix. But, a higher
amount of silica particles will result in a higher degree of interconnection
and a larger quantity of bonds, leading to a material system capable
of elastically storing more energy.

For a better comparison, Figure 7 shows the compressive
strength (part A) and the work
until failure (part B) depending on the bulk density of the samples.
In this case, the work until failure represents the area under the
stress–strain curve until the maximum force is reached. When
comparing the compression strength with the geometrical density for
samples with varying zeolite and silica contents, both variations
show a clear dependency with a similar trend. In turn, the work until
failure presents a different behavior. The average area under the
stress–strain curves increases linearly with increasing zeolite
content. Samples with 37.5 wt % zeolite and 10 dwb % of silica show
a very similar bulk density than samples with 35 wt % zeolite and
25 dwb % of silica, and also the work until failure is very similar.
By contrast, samples with 50 dwb % of silica show a significantly
increased work until failure behavior.

Figure 7 Compression strength
(A) and work until failure (B) depending on
the bulk density for monoliths with varying zeolite and silica contents.

In summary, both increasing the
zeolite as well as the silica contents
of the slurry lead to an increase in the bulk density as well as the
compression strength of the zeolite monoliths. The increase in the
final compression strength is independent of this variation, but the
overall mechanical behavior against an external load shows differences.
Increasing the zeolite content leads to an increase in the Young’s
modulus for compression, and increasing the silica content leads to
a compression behavior characterized by a significantly larger work
until failure. In swing adsorption processes using solid sorbents,
the adsorption capacity for gases is one of the most important material
properties. For this reason, CO2 is used as a representative
for gas adsorption studies to investigate the influence of the zeolite
as well as silica content on the adsorption capacity of the prepared
zeolite monoliths.

It is worth pointing out that the adsorption
capacity is mainly
influenced by the zeolite primary particles and is not influenced
by the binder type (see Figure S2 in the Supporting Information). Although the adsorption capacity related to the
sample mass may change depending on the density and relative amount
of the binder, the volumetric adsorption capacity is completely independent
of the binder type and amount (see also Figure 8). Figure 8 shows the results of CO2 adsorption measurements
performed on monoliths with varying zeolite (A) and silica (B) contents.
The adsorbed amount of CO2 is presented with respect to
the sample mass (mmol g–1) as well as volume (mmol
cm–3). Keeping the amount of silica constant (10
dwb %), increased zeolite contents result in a similar material composition
of the monoliths. Therefore, when relating the adsorbed amount of
CO2 to the sample mass, it remains constant at around 5
mmol g–1 (Figure 8A1), which is in agreement with the results of our
previous study using bentonite as the binder.9 Relating the amount of CO2 per unit volume, the increase
in the zeolite content of the slurry directly leads to an increase
in the volumetric adsorption capacity (Figure 8A2) because of the higher amount of zeolite
primary particles per unit volume of monoliths. By contrast, when
increasing the silica to zeolite ratio, the material composition of
the monoliths is changed, more precisely, a higher amount of material
with a significantly smaller adsorption capacity is added. This leads
to a decrease in the CO2 adsorption, when related to the
sample mass (Figure 8B1). In turn, when the zeolite content is kept constant at the same
time, the amount of zeolite particles per sample volume remains the
same, and therefore, the CO2 adsorption per unit volume
almost remains constant at nearly 2.5 mmol cm–3 (Figure 8B2). There seems
to be a slight decrease in the adsorption capacity for higher silica
to zeolite ratios, but the differences in the mean values are within
the standard deviations, and therefore no statistical significance
is present. Nevertheless, a slight decrease in the adsorption capacity
is plausible, when assuming that the amount of silica particles forming
sintering necks on the surface of the zeolite particles is significantly
increased. However, no significant effect can be statistically shown,
and therefore it is assumed that the volumetric adsorption capacity
is mainly independent of the amount of silica.

Figure 8 CO2 adsorption
capacity per unit mass and unit volume
of zeolite monoliths with varying zeolite contents (A) and varying
silica to zeolite ratios (B) measured at 30 °C.

In summary, preparing hierarchically structured
zeolite monoliths
by freeze gelation using silica sol as the binder results in a straightforward
and fast processing route. The slurry is highly stable, and the rheological
properties outrun the performance of conventionally used compositions
for the application in a casting or molding process. Because of the
low viscosity of the slurry, it is possible to prepare slurries with
a significantly higher amount of solid content. Both the increase
in the zeolite content and the increase in the silica content result
in an increase in the mechanical stability of the zeolite monoliths.
In turn, while leading to comparable compression strengths, the increase
in the zeolite content further results in an increase in the volumetric
working capacity, and the increase in the silica content leads to
an increase in the absorbed work until failure.

4 Conclusions
Hierarchically structured zeolite monoliths
are prepared by a straightforward
processing route based on a commercially available zeolite 13X powder.
Different, commonly used binder types are applied to investigate their
influence on the rheological behavior of the slurry and the final
properties of the zeolite monoliths, focusing especially on the mechanical
strength and the adsorption capacity for CO2. The results
show that a processing route based on freeze gelation using silica
sol as the binder significantly decreases the effective processing
time from around 7 to 1 h. This leads to the conclusion that a sol–gel
based preparation route offers unique possibilities for a time- and
cost-effective processing. At the same time, such prepared zeolite
monoliths present superior mechanical stability, possessing a compressive
strength level that is 3 times higher than the reference structures
using bentonite as the binder, making the silica sol route an easier
to use and a better suitable alternative when aiming at a higher mechanical
stability.

Additionally, the rheological properties of the resulting
slurry
allowed easy handling and a further increase in the solid content
of the slurry. Both the zeolite (40 wt % zeolite, 10 dwb % silica)
and the silica contents (35 wt % zeolite, 50 dwb % silica) could be
increased leading to significantly higher compression strength values
above 1 MPa in both cases. In practice, the prepared samples featured
mechanical stability, which allowed them to withstand a drop from
a table without breaking or falling apart. While showing a similar
relation between the bulk density and compression strength, both sample
types show differences regarding other properties. With an increase
in the zeolite content, a significant increase in the volumetric adsorption
capacity for CO2 can be achieved. In turn, increasing the
silica content does not lead to an increase in the adsorption capacity,
but the absorbed work until failure is significantly increased, making
the monoliths more resistant against applied mechanical forces. Of
course, there will always be a tradeoff between the desired material
properties and what can be achieved in practice. For example, for
casting processes, the slurry viscosity is one major limiting factor.
As shown in this particular case, the large difference in the particle
size between the binder and primary zeolite particles allows comparably
high solid contents, but both cannot be increased without limits.
In the end, the choice of the “total” solid content
and the silica to zeolite ratio will depend on the requirements of
the envisaged application and is a part of optimization, but the results
presented in this work can be used as general guidelines. For instance,
in the particular case of swing adsorption processes, the volumetric
adsorption capacity for gases is very important, and therefore, high
zeolite contents are often desired. High zeolite contents with a comparable
low amount of binder provide an appropriate amount of mechanical stability
for temperature swing adsorption processes, whereas a higher amount
of binder may be needed to provide higher mechanical strength levels
for pressure swing adsorption where pressure drops can be as high
as 1000 kPa (10 bar) or when the adsorbents need to be poured into
a column. Here, the proposed processing route provides an easy way
to adjust the monoliths’ properties according to the requirements
of the envisaged application. Furthermore, the processing route is
transferable to other materials, which can be processed in aqueous
solutions and can withstand a heat treatment up to 780 °C in
the nitrogen atmosphere to fabricate stable and hierarchically structured
monoliths.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00972.Zeta-potential
measurement for zeolite 13X and CO2 adsorption isotherms
of zeolite 13X monoliths (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00972_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported
by the German Research Foundation
(DFG) within the Research Training Group GRK 1860 “Micro-,
meso- and macroporous nonmetallic Materials: Fundamentals and Applications”
(MIMENIMA). The support of Petra Witte (University of Bremen, Department
of Geosciences) for her work with SEM is gratefully acknowledged.
We thank Marieke Hoog Antink from the University of Bremen for the
fruitful discussions and critical feedback, which helped to improve
this work. Furthermore, we thank Tina Kühn from the University
of Bremen for all support in the laboratory.
==== Refs
References
Pérez-Ramírez J. ; Christensen C. H. ; Egeblad K. ; Christensen C. H. ; Groen J. C. 
Hierarchical zeolites: enhanced utilisation of microporous
crystals in catalysis by advances in materials design . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2008 , 37 , 2530 –2542 . 10.1039/b809030k .18949124 
Schwieger W. ; Machoke A. G. ; Weissenberger T. ; Inayat A. ; Selvam T. ; Klumpp M. ; Inayat A. 
Hierarchy
concepts: classification
and preparation strategies for zeolite containing materials with hierarchical
porosity . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2016 , 45 , 3353 –3376 . 10.1039/c5cs00599j .26477329 
Akhtar F. ; Bergström L. 
Colloidal Processing and Thermal Treatment of Binderless
Hierarchically Porous Zeolite 13X Monoliths for CO2 Capture . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2011 , 94 , 92 –98 . 10.1111/j.1551-2916.2010.04044.x .
Akhtar F. ; Andersson L. ; Keshavarzi N. ; Bergström L. 
Colloidal
processing and CO2 capture performance of sacrificially templated
zeolite monoliths . Appl. Energy 
2012 , 97 , 289 –296 . 10.1016/j.apenergy.2011.12.064 .
Ojuva A. ; Akhtar F. ; Tomsia A. P. ; Bergström L. 
Laminated
Adsorbents with Very Rapid CO2 Uptake by Freeze-Casting of Zeolites . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 2669 –2676 . 10.1021/am400122r .23484540 
Hedin N. ; Andersson L. ; Bergström L. ; Yan J. 
Adsorbents for the
post-combustion capture of CO2 using rapid temperature swing or vacuum
swing adsorption . Appl. Energy 
2013 , 104 , 418 –433 . 10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.11.034 .
Akhtar F. ; Andersson L. ; Ogunwumi S. ; Hedin N. ; Bergström L. 
Structuring
adsorbents and catalysts by processing of porous powders . J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 
2014 , 34 , 1643 –1666 . 10.1016/j.jeurceramsoc.2014.01.008 .
Ojuva A. ; Järveläinen M. ; Bauer M. ; Keskinen L. ; Valkonen M. ; Akhtar F. ; Levänen E. ; Bergström L. 
Mechanical performance and CO2 uptake of ion-exchanged
zeolite A structured by freeze-casting . J. Eur.
Ceram. Soc. 
2015 , 35 , 2607 –2618 . 10.1016/j.jeurceramsoc.2015.03.001 .
Besser B. ; Tajiri H. A. ; Mikolajczyk G. ; Möllmer J. ; Schumacher T. C. ; Odenbach S. ; Gläser R. ; Kroll S. ; Rezwan K. 
Hierarchical Porous Zeolite Structures
for Pressure Swing Adsorption Applications . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 3277 –3286 . 10.1021/acsami.5b11120 .26760054 
Heck R. M. ; Gulati S. ; Farrauto R. J. 
The application of monoliths for
gas phase catalytic reactions . Chem. Eng. J. 
2001 , 82 , 149 –156 . 10.1016/s1385-8947(00)00365-x .
Tronconi E. ; Groppi G. ; Visconti C. G. 
Structured
catalysts for non-adiabatic
applications . Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng. 
2014 , 5 , 55 –67 . 10.1016/j.coche.2014.04.003 .
Rezaei F. ; Webley P. 
Optimum structured
adsorbents for gas separation processes . Chem.
Eng. Sci. 
2009 , 64 , 5182 –5191 . 10.1016/j.ces.2009.08.029 .
Rezaei F. ; Webley P. 
Structured adsorbents
in gas separation processes . Sep. Purif. Technol. 
2010 , 70 , 243 –256 . 10.1016/j.seppur.2009.10.004 .
Akhtar F. ; Liu Q. ; Hedin N. ; Bergström L. 
Strong and binder free structured
zeolite sorbents with very high CO2-over-N2 selectivities and high
capacities to adsorb CO2 rapidly . Energy Environ.
Sci. 
2012 , 5 , 7664 –7673 . 10.1039/c2ee21153j .
Schumann K. ; Unger B. ; Brandt A. ; Scheffler F. 
Investigation
on the pore structure of binderless zeolite 13× shapes . Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 
2012 , 154 , 119 –123 . 10.1016/j.micromeso.2011.07.015 .
Silva J. A. C. ; Schumann K. ; Rodrigues A. E. 
Sorption
and kinetics of CO2 and
CH4 in binderless beads of 13X zeolite . Microporous
Mesoporous Mater. 
2012 , 158 , 219 –228 . 10.1016/j.micromeso.2012.03.042 .
Yanniotis S. ; Skaltsi S. ; Karaburnioti S. 
Effect of
moisture content on the
viscosity of honey at different temperatures . J. Food Eng. 
2006 , 72 , 372 –377 . 10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2004.12.017 .
Kestin J. ; Sokolov M. ; Wakeham W. A. 
Viscosity
of liquid water in the
range −8°C to 150°C . J. Phys.
Chem. Ref. Data 
1978 , 7 , 941 –948 . 10.1063/1.555581 .
Carter C. B. ; Norton M. G.  Ceramic Materials
Science and Engineering ; Springer , 2013 .
Deville S. 
Freeze-Casting
of Porous Ceramics: A Review of Current Achievements and Issues . Adv. Eng. Mater. 
2008 , 10 , 155 –169 . 10.1002/adem.200700270 .
Seko S. ; Suzuki S. ; Ito Y. ; Kage T.  Effect of Fracture Behavior
and Height-to-Diameter
Ratio on High-Strength Concrete Core Specimens’ Compressive
Strength . Fracture Mechanics of Concrete and
Concrete Structures ; Korea Concrete Institute , 2010 ; pp 724 –729 .
Güneyli H. ; Rüşen T. 
Effect of
length-to-diameter ratio on the unconfined
compressive strength of cohesive soil specimens . Bull. Eng. Geol. Environ. 
2016 , 75 , 793 –806 . 10.1007/s10064-015-0835-5 .
Seuba J. ; Deville S. ; Guizard C. ; Stevenson A. J. 
Mechanical
properties and failure behavior of unidirectional porous ceramics . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 24326 10.1038/srep24326 .27075397 
Boch P. ; Niepce J.-C.  Ceramic
Materials:
Processes, Properties and Applications ; Wiley , 2010 .
Groen J. C. ; Zhu W. ; Brouwer S. ; Huynink S. J. ; Kapteijn F. ; Moulijn J. A. ; Pérez-Ramírez J. 
Direct Demonstration
of Enhanced
Diffusion in Mesoporous ZSM-5 Zeolite Obtained via Controlled Desilication . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 355 –360 . 10.1021/ja065737o .17212415 
Mitchell S. ; Michels N.-L. ; Pérez-Ramírez J. 
From powder
to technical body: the undervalued science of catalyst scale up . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 6094 –6112 . 10.1039/c3cs60076a .23648466 
Verboekend D. ; Mitchell S. ; Pérez-Ramírez J. 
Hierarchical
Zeolites Overcome all Obstacles: Next Stop Industrial Implementation . Chimia 
2013 , 67 , 327 –332 . 10.2533/chimia.2013.327 .23863266 
Ryshkewitch E. 
Compression
Strength of Porous Sintered Alumina and Zirconia . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
1953 , 36 , 65 –68 . 10.1111/j.1151-2916.1953.tb12837.x .
Rice R. W. 
Comparison
of stress concentration versus minimum solid area based mechanical
property-porosity relations . J. Mater. Sci. 
1993 , 28 , 2187 –2190 . 10.1007/bf00367582 .
Liu D.-M. 
Influence
of porosity and pore size on the compressive strength of porous hydroxyapatite
ceramic . Ceram. Int. 
1997 , 23 , 135 –139 . 10.1016/s0272-8842(96)00009-0 .

