
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3032028010.1021/acsomega.8b01437ArticleStar-Graft Quarterpolymer-Based Polymersomes as Nanocarriers
for Co-Delivery of Hydrophilic/Hydrophobic Chemotherapeutic Agents Iatridi Zacharoula †Angelopoulou Athina ‡Voulgari Efstathia ‡Avgoustakis Konstantinos ‡§Tsitsilianis Constantinos *††Department
of Chemical Engineering and ‡Department of Pharmacy, Medical
School, University of Patras, 26500 Patras, Greece§ Biomedical
Research Foundation of Academy of Athens (BRFAA), Athens 11527, Greece* E-mail: ct@chemeng.upatras.gr (C.T.).25 09 2018 30 09 2018 3 9 11896 11908 25 06 2018 11 09 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We report the fabrication
of polymersomes, using as building blocks
star-graft quarterpolymers, composed of hydrophobic polystyrene and
pH-sensitive poly(2-vinylpyridine)-b-poly(acrylic
acid) (P2VP-b-PAA) arms, emanated from a common nodule,
enriched by thermosensitive poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
grafts covalently bonded on the PAA block-arms. These multicompartmental
polymersomes were evaluated as nanocarriers for the encapsulation
and controlled co-delivery of doxorubicin (hydrophilic) and paclitaxel
(hydrophobic) chemotherapeutic agents. The polymersomes can load these
drugs in different compartments and can efficiently be internalized
in the human lung adenocarcinoma epithelial cells, delivering their
cargo and inducing high cell apoptosis. The release kinetics of both
anticancer agents was controlled differently by the environmental
conditions (pH and temperature). Enhanced release was observed at
the acidic pH 6.0 and under physiological temperature (37 °C).
At the same total drug level, co-delivery of these drugs with the
polymersomes caused enhanced cytotoxicity and induced significantly
higher cell apoptosis in the cancer cell line compared to the polymersomes
loaded with either of the two drugs.

document-id-old-9ao8b01437document-id-new-14ao-2018-01437hccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Star-shaped amphiphilic
copolymers, exhibiting well-defined 3D
architectures with various linear polymer arms emanating from a central
core, constitute a unique class of macromolecular topology with exceptional
functionality.1,2 One of the most interesting properties
of these amphiphilic macromolecules is that they can adopt the morphology
of polymeric micelles in aqueous media, namely unimolecular micelles,
by internal segregation of their hydrophobic block/arms. The advantage
of the unimolecular micelles versus polymolecular ones is that they
never dissociate making them suitable nanocarriers of therapeutic
agents under sink conditions. Moreover, stars with high number of
arms and hence bearing high number of functional end-groups, enabling
thus conjugations with targeting molecules, diagnostics, and drugs,
exhibit additional potentials for biomedical applications.3−9

Water-soluble star-shaped terpolymers bearing three kinds
of block/arms,
some of which exhibiting responsive properties, have been designed
previously, aiming to offer novel, more advanced potentials for uses
as “smart” nanocarriers.10−13 Two are the main novel properties
integrated to these star terpolymers, that is, compartmentalization
of the star unimolecular nanostructure and responsiveness to pH. The
first one enables encapsulation of different molecules in the different
compartments of the star terpolymer and the second one allows controlled
delivery upon varying pH.

Another strategy to take advantage
of the compartmentalized responsive
stars is to incorporate them, through layer-by-layer (LbL) techniques,
into higher order assemblies, namely multicompartmental microcapsules,
facilitating the ability for concurrent storage of hydrophobic and
hydrophilic species in the hydrophobic compartments of the shells
and in the aqueous lumen of the microcapsule respectively.14−18 Additionally, the hydrophilic weak polyelectrolyte segments of the
star building blocks of the microcapsule allow the pH-controlled loading
and release of the different cargos by controlling the permeability
of the microcapsule shell.

Among hollow nanocarrier systems
used in co-delivery of multiple
drugs, polymersomes composed of amphiphilic block copolymers and providing
a bilayered membrane are favorable self-assembled polymeric systems,
similar to lipids.19,20 Because of their structure, polymersomes
are characterized as advantageous systems affording the simultaneous
encapsulation of hydrophilic compounds in their aqueous cavities and
hydrophobic compounds in their membranes, such as drugs, genes, proteins,
and diagnostic probes.21−24 Furthermore, polymersomes facilitate selective tumor targeting by
incorporating pH- and/or thermosensitive segments in the building
copolymer. Stimuli-responsive polymersomes with pH25−32 or thermosensitive33,34 polymer blocks have been extensively
studied as delivery systems of hydrophobic or hydrophilic therapeutic
and diagnostic agents. Specifically, the variations of pH or temperature
of the surrounding environment lead to changes on the conformation
and/or integrity of the polymersome permitting the site-selective
release of the polymersome-entrapped bioactive agent.25−34 Li et al., developed recently glucose oxidase (GOD)-loaded vesicular
nanoreactors based on a diblock copolymer, which could be activated
by tumor acidity to produce H2O2 increasing
tumor oxidative stress. High levels of H2O2 also
induced self-destruction of the vesicles releasing quinone methide
to deplete glutathione and suppress the antioxidant ability of cancer
cells. This synergistic effect of the nanoreactors resulted in tumor
ablation.35 Also, GOD was efficiently loaded
in polymersomes formed from diblock copolymers of poly(ethylene glycol)
(PEG) and copolymer of camptothecin (CPT) and methacrylate modified
with piperidine groups. In the environment of tumor tissues, the acidity
of the tumor triggered the generation of H2O2, and as a consequence the release of CPT. The cancer cells were
killed and the growth of tumor due to oxidation/chemotherapy was suppressed
through the synergistic action of high oxidative stress of the tumor
as well as the released drugs of CPT.36

In a previous work, our group reported the synthesis and characterization
of novel star-graft quarterpolymers (SGQPs). These multiarmed and
multiresponsive PSn[P2VP-b-(PAA-g-PNIPAM)]n macromolecules
consisted of two types of arms, short hydrophobic polystyrene (PS)
arm, and pH-responsive hydrophilic poly(2-vinylpyridine)-b-poly(acrylic acid) (P2VP-b-PAA) block copolymer
arm with grafted poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM)
chains on the PAA outer block.37 The SGQP
polymers exhibited stimuli-responsive behavior in aqueous media owing
to the pH-responsive weak P2VP and PAA polyelectrolyte segments as
well the thermoresponsive PNIPAM grafting chains. Recently, PSn[P2VP-b-(PAA-g-PNIPAM)]n was used for the development
of polymeric microcapsules of a few micrometer size for the co-delivery
of hydrophobic and hydrophilic molecules.38 In these microcapsules, the star-graft unimolecular micelles formed
the multilayered shell, through the LbL technique, using tannic acid
for H-bonding interconnection of the polymer layers. The compartmentalized
layers served as the host area for incorporating the hydrophobic compound,
while the hydrophilic macromolecules were encapsulated in the aqueous
lumen of the microcapsules. The results obtained for the dual-loaded
microcapsules justified further investigation on the potential of
the PSn[P2VP-b-(PAA-g-PNIPAM)]n polymer to be used
in designing stimuli-sensitive delivery systems for the co-delivery
of chemotherapeutics agents.

The aim of the present work was
to evaluate the capability of these
SGQPs to be integrated in stimuli-responsive vesicular assemblies
(polymersomes) of nanometer size, in order to take advantage of the
enhanced permeability and retention effect (EPR), which permits the
accumulation of drug nanocarriers to inflammation and tumor sites
following intravenous administration.39,40 This multisegmental
SGQP bears various segments conferring specific functionalities to
the formed polymersomes such as amphiphilicity (hydrophobic and hydrophilic
compartments) along with pH/thermo-sensitivity. The polymersomes were
explored for their capability of loading simultaneously two anticancer
drugs, namely doxorubicin (DOX) and paclitaxel (PCT). Co-delivery
of these two anticancer agents using advanced nanocarrier systems
has been shown to achieve enhanced anticancer efficacy.41,42 The synergistic effect may result from the combination of individual
antitumor mechanism of DOX and PCT.41 DOX
binds to DNA by intercalation, inhibiting further DNA and RNA biosynthesis,
whereas PCT stabilizes microtubules preventing cell division. Both
DOX and PCT lead finally to cancer cell apoptosis.21,41 The hydrophilic DOX and the hydrophobic PCT chemotherapeutic agents
were efficiently incorporated in the aqueous lumen and the membrane
hydrophobic pockets of the polymersomes, respectively. Drug release
from these polymersomes was controlled by pH and temperature. Interestingly,
the drug-loaded polymersomes were readily internalized by human lung
adenocarcinoma epithelial cells, inducing a high degree of cell apoptosis.

Results
The integration of the star-graft, polymeric species in polymersome
assemblies was not obvious because of the complex topology of the
building blocks. Hence, a number of methods used for polymersome and/or
liposome preparation were attempted, namely, step dialysis, film hydration,
phase transfer from immiscible solvent (CHCl3) to H2O, evaporation of immiscible solvent (CHCl3) from
H2O using vacuum pump (see Figure S2), and miscible solvent evaporation [tetrahydrofuran (THF)/H2O] (see Figure S3). The latter
method yielded nearly well-defined polymersomes as observed by transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) and was adopted accordingly.

Physicochemical
Characterization of Polymersomes
The
size of the polymersomes was evaluated by dynamic light scattering
and TEM microscopy and the morphology by TEM (Figure 1). In Figure 1a, a characteristic autocorrelation function along
with the intensity weighted distribution of the hydrodynamic diameter
of the as-prepared polymersomes is demonstrated. A mean diameter was
estimated at 122 nm (PDI 0.515). TEM verified the spherical or “ring-shaped”
hollow morphology of the polymersomes, with no aggregates or clustered
polymersomes being formed (Figures 1b and S3). In the schematic
representation of the SGQP PSn[P2VP-b-(PAA-g-PNIPAM)]n (left of Figure 1c), it can be seen that the SGQP has two kinds of arms: one is the
PS arm, whereas the other is the P2VP-b-PAA block
copolymer, where the PAA blocks are grafted with PNIPAM chains. In
basic conditions, PAA is deprotonated and behaves as a negatively
charged polyelectrolyte, while the P2VP segments become hydrophobic
and tend to collapse close to the PS/poly(divinylbenzene) (PDVB) core
of the star. Segregation of the various blocks of the SGQP occurs
during polymersome formation with the hydrophobic PS/P2VP (basic conditions)
and the hydrophilic PAA/PNIPAM (room temperature) blocks forming the
membrane and the inner/outer hydrophilic layers (shell), respectively
(right of Figure 1c).

Figure 1 (a) Correlation
function and intensity weighted hydrodynamic diameter
of the SGQP polymersomes, (b) TEM micrographs of polymersomes formed
by the SGQP (black scale bar 100 nm, blue scale bar 50 nm), and (c)
schematic illustration of the involved star-graft polymers (left)
and their segmental segregation in the wall of polymersomes, at physiological
pH with the uncharged P2VP being hydrophobic (right). The different
colors denote different arm segments: dark red PS, red P2VP, brown
PAA, and blue PNIPAM grafts.

Colloidal Stability of Polymersomes
The size of the
polymersomes (Figure 2a) did not change appreciably upon storage at ambient temperature
for a period of 30 days. However, the ζ-potential exhibited
some alteration with time suggesting possible charge surface rearrangements
(Figure 3a). The size
characteristics of the polymersomes during incubation in electrolyte
(NaCl) solutions did not change significantly, even in high electrolyte
concentrations (Figure 2a). The observed slight decrease should be attributed to the shrinkage
of the shell of the polymersomes because of the electrostatic screening
of the repulsive interactions among the PAA segments. However, the
influence of pH is more pronounced. As can be observed in Figure 2b, the diameter of
polymersomes decreased about 21% from pH 7.4 (94.81 ± 4.88 nm),
to pH 6 (73.59 ± 0.76 nm). This might be ascribed to the conformational
shrinkage of the corona PAA chain segments due to lowering of their
degree of ionization. This might also be corroborated by attractions
between the PAA negatively charged segments and the positively P2VP
segments that have been partially protonated at pH 6. The ζ-potential
of polymersomes initially increased (became less negative) and stabilized
at low negative values (from −7.10 ± 0.66 mV up to −8.90
± 0.36) at higher NaCl concentrations (Figure 3a), which justifies the size reduction (Figure 2a). Evidence for
a steric stabilization mechanism is provided because the polymersomes
did not aggregate even at high electrolyte levels wherein their ζ-potentials
exhibit slightly negative values, probably due to repulsive interactions
from the nonscreened, ionized AA moieties, preserved on the surface
of the vesicle. The polymersomes after incubation at different pH
for 24 h exhibited less negative values at pH 6 (−17.30 ±
0.82 mV) than pH 7.4 (−39.50 ± 3.29 mV) (Figure 3b). This effect should be attributed
to the partially protonation of the deprotonated carboxylic groups
(AA units), located on the surface of the polymersomes, upon lowering
pH. We mention here that the same effect was observed for the same
reason for the star-graft unimers (Figure 3b). The higher ζ-potential of the polymersome
self-assemblies with respect to their unimers is reasonable because
of the different surface area.

Figure 2 Size stability test of polymersomes at
various conditions: (a)
diameter vs time (magenta squares) and as a function of NaCl concentration
(blue squares) and (b) in two different PB solutions (pH 6 and pH
7.4).

Figure 3 ζ-Potential stability test of polymersomes
at various conditions:
(a) ζ-potential vs time (magenta squares) and as a function
of NaCl concentration (blue squares) and (b) ζ-potential in
two different PB solutions (pH 6 and pH 7.4). Darker blue bars correspond
to the ζ-potential of non-associated SGQP unimers.

Loading Drugs to the Polymersomes
The drug loading
characteristics of the polymersomes are presented in Table 1. As can be seen, the polymersomes
displayed DOX loading capacity 2.57% (w/w) for a theoretical (feed)
loading 9.92% (w/w) and PCT loading capacity 5.98% (w/w) for a theoretical
loading 10% (w/w). The loading capacity of the dual DOX/PCT polymersomes
was nearly 4% (w/w) for both drugs for a theoretical loading of 9%
(w/w). From TEM observation of the DOX- or PCT-loaded SGQP polymersomes,
it was confirmed that the drug loading procedure (rotary vacuum evaporation,
centrifugation, and redispersion in water) did not affect the formation
of polymeric vesicles (Figure S4).

Table 1 Loading Characteristics of the DOX-Loaded,
PCT-Loaded, and DOX/PCT-Loaded Polymersomes
sample	theoretical
loading (%)	loading capacity
(%)	entrapment
efficiency (%)	
SGQP-DOX	9.92	2.57 ± 0.98	23.95 ± 2.69	
SGQP-PCT	10	5.98 ± 1.26	57.28 ± 3.48	
 	theoretical loading (%)	loading capacity (%)	entrapment efficiency (%)	
sample	DOX	PCT	DOX	PCT	DOX	PCT	
SGQP-DOX/PCT	9.08	9.1	3.89 ± 0.59	3.68 ± 0.79	36.5 ± 0.48	34.42 ± 0.86	
Indeed, both the DOX-loaded (Figure S4a,b) and PCT-loaded (Figure S4c,d) SGQPs
self-assembled in a vesicular nanostructure. The average size of the
DOX-loaded and the PCT-loaded polymersomes was 133.9 ± 13.7 and
175.7 ± 14.7 nm, respectively.

Drug Release Profiles from
Polymersomes
In Figure 4, the release profiles
of DOX and PCT are demonstrated for 0–6 h (Figure S5 also presents the data up to 48 h). Sustained drug
(DOX or PCT) release from the single- or dual-loaded polymersomes
was observed, which was influenced by the pH and temperature experimental
conditions. The results of DOX release in the first 3 h, in both single-
and dual-loaded polymersomes, show some burst effect. Because of ionic
interactions between the positively charged DOX (amino group; pK, 8.6) and the negatively charged PAA,43 a portion of DOX seems to be trapped in the outer shell
of the polymersomes, which is delivered rapidly. The change of ζ-potential
between the blank polymersomes (−39.50 ± 3.29 mV) and
the DOX-loaded ones (−22.1 ± 1.69 mV) is consistent with
this assumption. At longer time (see also Figure S5), DOX was released faster at pH 6 than at pH 7.4, especially
at 37 °C (Figure 4a,c). At pH 7.4, DOX release was faster at 25 °C than at 37
°C, especially with the single-loaded system, whereas at pH 6
the temperature did not affect DOX release (Figure 4a,c). PCT release from the single-loaded
polymersomes was faster at pH 6 than at pH 7.4 at both temperatures
and faster at 37 °C in both pHs (Figure 4b). PCT release was slower in the case of
the dual-loaded polymersomes compared to the single-loaded ones (Figure 4b,c). The pH affected
significantly PCT release form the dual-loaded polymersomes only in
the case of 37 °C, with the pH 7.4 leading to much slower release
compared to pH 6 (Figure 4b,c).

Figure 4 (a) Release profiles of DOX from the single-loaded polymersomes
at PB of pH 7.4 and 6 at 37 and 25 °C, (b) release profiles of
PCT from single-loaded polymersomes at PB of pH 7.4 and 6 at 37 and
25 °C, and (c) co-release profiles of DOX (solid symbols) and
PCT (open symbols) from dual-loaded polymersomes at PB of pH 7.4 and
6 at 37 and 25 °C.

Cytotoxicity and Cellular Uptake
The viability of A549
cancer cells was assessed after 24 and 48 h of incubation with blank
(without drug) and drug-loaded polymersomes. With the blank polymersomes,
high cell viability values were obtained at all concentrations tested
(almost 100% at 24 h and above 80% at 48 h) (Figure S6). The drug-loaded polymersomes exhibited dose- and time-dependent
cytotoxicity against the A549 cancer cells (Figure 5). Τhe cytotoxicity of free DOX and
DOX-loaded polymersomes was increased with DOX concentration and incubation
time (Figure 5). The
DOX-loaded polymersomes exhibited higher cytotoxicity than free DOX
in equivalent drug concentrations, the difference in cytotoxicity
being more pronounced at 24 h (Figure 5, Table 3). In the case of PCT, the cytotoxicity of both the free and polymersome-entrapped
drug was significantly increased with incubation time (Figure 5), but the effect of drug concentration
was less pronounced than in the case of DOX for the range of concentrations
tested here. At both incubation times, the free and polymersome-entrapped
PCT exhibited comparable cytotoxicities at equivalent PCT levels (Figure 5, Table 3). At equivalent drug concentrations,
the dual drug-loaded polymersomes exhibited higher cytotoxicity than
the mixture of the two drugs (free DOX plus free PCT) at both 24 and
48 h (Figure 5, Table 3). At relatively high
concentrations, the dual drug-loaded polymersomes, that is, those
carrying both DOX and PCT, exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity compared
to the single drug-loaded polymersomes (Figure 5). The cytotoxicity differences between the
dual drug-loaded polymersomes and the respective single drug-loaded
polymersomes were statistically significant (p <
0.05) at drug concentrations higher than 5 μg/mL for the 24
h incubation and higher than 1 μg/mL for the 48 h incubation.

Figure 5 Viability
of A549 cancer cells following incubation with different
concentrations of free (a,b) and polymersome (c,d) entrapped drugs
for 24 (a,c) and 48 h (b,d).

The induction of A549 cell apoptosis by the drug-loaded polymersomes
was assessed at a total drug concentration of 5 μg/mL (Figure 6). The dual drug-loaded
polymersomes (DOX/PCT 1:1 by weight) induced apoptosis in more than
double population (%) of cells compared to the single drug-loaded
polymersomes at the same total drug concentration. The differences
in the degree of apoptosis between the dual-loaded polymersomes and
the single-loaded polymersomes were highly significant (p < 0.01). As might have been expected from the lack of cytotoxicity
(Figure S6), the blank polymersomes did
not induce cell apoptosis (Figure 6). The concentration of the blank polymersomes in the
apoptosis test was 80 μg/mL, that is, equal to the carrier concentration
used to generate the respective drug concentration of 5 μg/mL
in the case of the drug-loaded polymersomes.

Figure 6 Apoptosis of A549 cells
after 24 h of incubation with blank polymersomes,
dual drug-loaded polymersomes (DOX/PCT 1:1 by weight), DOX-loaded
polymersomes, and PCT-loaded polymersomes at a total drug concentration
of 5 μg/mL. The concentration of blank nanoparticles was 80
μg/mL and corresponded to the carrier concentration used to
generate the drug concentration tested in the case of the drug-loaded
polymersomes.

The uptake of DOX-loaded
polymersomes which had been labeled with
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC content 3.21 ± 0.36%, DOX content
2.57 ± 0.98%) by the A549 cancer cells was evaluated at 1, 4,
and 24 h by FACS (Figure 7a). The uptake of polymersomes by the cancer cells was increased
from 30% at 1 h to 40% at 24 h. As the cell uptake of total DOX was
measured at the different incubation times, that is, both the leaked
from the carrier fraction of DOX and the (still) entrapped in the
carrier fraction of DOX, cell uptake of DOX was faster than the carrier
(FITC-labeled polymersomes) (Figure 7a). This effect suggests that part of DOX has been
entrapped in the outer PAA layer of the polymersomes (ionic interactions),
which is released before the nanocarriers enter into the cell. This
is in consistent with the DOX release profiles in the first 3 h. For
the incubation times tested, an inverse linear correlation between
DOX uptake and cell viability was observed (Figure 7b).

Figure 7 Cellular uptake of DOX (DOX) and DOX-loaded
polymersomes labeled
with FITC (FITC) by A549 cells after 1, 4, and 24 h of incubation
(a) and relation of A549 cells viability with the uptake of the DOX-loaded
polymersomes by these cells (b).

The uptake of the FITC-labeled, DOX-loaded polymersomes was
visualized
by confocal laser microscopy (Figure 8). At early times (1 h), red and green colors were
mostly co-localized in the merged picture, indicating that the main
fraction of DOX (red) still remained within the polymersomes (green),
which were localized in the area around the nuclei of the cells. At
longer incubation times (4 and 24 h), the polymersomes were surrounding
the nuclei of the cells. At 4 h, a portion of DOX (liberated from
the polymersomes) was surrounding cell nuclei or was within the nuclei.
At 24 h a higher amount of DOX can be seen intracellularly compared
to 4 h, with the DOX located mainly around cell nuclei and only a
small part of it being within cell nuclei (Figure 8). For clarity, the confocal images of FITC
label and DOX are also given separately in Supporting Information (Figures S7 and S8).

Figure 8 Confocal fluorescence
microscopy images of the uptake of FITC-labeled
DOX-polymersomes by the A549 cancer cells at 1, 4, and 24 h. From
left to right, the panels in each row show fluorescence from DAPI
(nuclei stained blue), FITC-polymersomes (polymersomes stained green),
DOX (red fluorescence of the drug), and merged images. In merged pictures,
co-localization of FITC and DAPI gives yellow-green color, co-localization
of DOX and DAPI gives red-purple color, and co-localization of FITC,
DOX, and DAPI gives orange color. The scale bars are 20 μm.

Discussion
Lately,
the combination therapy has been recognized as an efficient
strategy in cancer treatment, as more than one drug is applied with
different action sites. Among the advantages of combination therapy,
the most important is the diminution of side effects of drugs because
decreased doses are required, and in most cases, a synergistic therapeutic
effect is achieved, which has resulted in suspending cancer cell mutations
and cancer adjustment process.41,44−47 However, an optimum synergistic anticancer activity is difficult
to be achieved as the therapeutic result of a combination of two or
more free drugs is highly affected by the varied biochemical activities
and pharmacokinetic behavior of drugs.42,48 Thus, the
simple combination of free drugs commonly resulted in severe toxic
adverse effects in cancer patients making their clinical application
problematic.49 To address this problem,
advanced nanomedicine can be utilized for the co-administration of
different drugs into tumor cells with a delivery system, such as nanoparticles,
micelles, and polymersomes.41,45−47

Polymersomes exhibit larger mechanical stability and lower
permeability
than their structural lipid analogues, the liposomes. Their more robust,
less leaky, and tunable membrane is very useful for improved stability
in circulation.24 In this work, pH- and
temperature-sensitive polymersomes of the SGQP PSn[P2VP-b-(PAA-g-PNIPAM)]n for the co-delivery of DOX and PCT were
prepared and characterized. The aim is to evaluate these (multi)stimuli-responsive
polymersomes as nanocarriers to co-deliver two anticancer agents of
different pharmacological activity mechanisms with a predefined releasing
profile. These polymersomes can simultaneously encapsulate hydrophilic
and hydrophobic compounds at different compartments and release their
drug selectively under the effect of varied pH and temperature conditions.
Co-delivery of PCT and DOX has been also investigated using PLA–PEG
nanoparticles41 and a PEG-polypeptide nanovehicle,42 and the co-delivery nanosystems have been found
to exhibit higher antitumor efficiency in reducing tumor size compared
to free drug combination or single drug-loaded nanoparticles.

The SGQP polymersomes were prepared by the organic solvent evaporation
method.50 This method provided polymeric
vesicles of average sizes of 120 nm (depending on the environment)
with a bilayered membrane and the ability to dual-encapsulate hydrophilic
DOX in their aqueous lumens and hydrophobic PCT in their membranes
(Scheme 1). The relative
small size of the polymersomes (Figure 1) and their hydrophilic coating may represent suitable
requirements for their accumulation in the tumor area following intravenous
administration. Tumor accumulation of long-circulating nanocarriers
is based on the EPR effect (passive targeting).39,40

Scheme 1 Schematic Representation of the DOX/PCT Dual-Loaded Polymersome and
the Different Migration Pathways of the Hydrophobic/Hydrophilic Drug
Transmembrane Diffusion
Colloidal stability, that is, the avoidance of aggregation
on storage
or in the physiological environment, is a prerequisite for nanocarriers
intended for drug delivery applications. The SGQP polymersomes synthesized
here showed an exceptional colloidal stability during storage and,
in the presence of high concentration of electrolyte (Figures 2 and 3), much higher than the physiological one of 0.15 M.

The release
of DOX or PCT from the single-loaded polymersomes exhibited
different kinetics owing to their different hydrophilicity and in
turn to their encapsulation in different compartments of the polymersomes.
More importantly, their release profiles depend on environmental conditions
such as pH (6 or 7.4) and temperature (25 or 37 °C) (Figure 4a,b). Concerning
pH, both drugs display enhanced release at lower pH 6.0, which could
be attributed mainly to the pH-sensitive P2VP segments, incorporated
in the hydrophobic membrane. The ionic interactions between the positively
charged DOX and the negatively charges of PAA segments do not change
between 7.4 and 6,43 and thus, they are
not taken into consideration as far as the pH effect on the DOX release
behavior is concerned.51 Thus, slight protonation
(ionization) of the 2VP moieties at the lower pH 6 likely induces
partial swelling of the membrane, increasing thus its permeability.30,31 The effect of temperature on release kinetics appears more complicated
for the different drugs and depends on pH. DOX release at pH 7.4 slowed
down upon heating to 37 °C (Figure 4a). At this temperature, PNIPAM segments
turn into hydrophobic. However, because of the charged PAA arms, on
where they are grafted, they do not exhibit intermolecular association.37,38 At 37 °C, therefore, DOX seems to meet another obstacle to
overcome during its diffusion out of the wall. This is probably due
to the creation of hydrophobic domains in the inner and outer hydrophilic
layers of the polymersome walls. On the other hand, no appreciable
temperature effect was observed at pH 6, which might be attributed
to the fact that the determining factor for delivery of DOX (which
is more hydrophilic in this pH) is the permeability of the hydrophobic
P2VP membrane, which is mainly affected by pH. The hydrophobic PCT
follows different migration pathways (Figure 4b). It is already located within the hydrophobic
membrane and upon heating its delivery seems to be facilitated by
the creation of the PNIPAM hydrophobic domains. Thus, the PCT release
was enhanced upon heating and this appears independent of the pH of
the release medium (Figure 4b). This result is in very good agreement with the heating-induced
fast release of a hydrophobic probe (Nile red) from microcapsules
fabricated by the same SGQP building blocks.38

In the dual DOX/PCT-loaded polymersomes, the release of the
hydrophilic
DOX follows profiles similar to those of single-loaded polymersomes
(Figure 4c). On the
other hand, PCT release was restrained when released from the DOX/PCT-polymersomes,
suggesting possible antagonistic effects between the two different
drugs (Figure 4c).21,42,52 As we have mentioned above, it
may also be possible that DOX, interacting via ionic interactions
with the hydrophilic PAA blocks of the polymersome shell, will pose
an additional obstacle in the diffusion of hydrophobic PCT through
the membrane. The release rate of both drugs from the dual-loaded
polymersomes was much higher at pH 6 than in pH 7.4 under physiological
temperature (37 °C) (Figure 4c), and this is encouraging because it indicates that
the dual system would not lose a significant fraction of its drug
load in the blood, that is, before it reaches the tumor site where
the pH is lower than the physiologic one, and even more so before
being internalized within the acidic compartments (lysosomes) of the
cancer cells in the tumor. That is, the system would exhibit a degree
of selectivity of drug release in the site of drug action.53,54

The blank polymersomes did not affect the viability (Figure S6) and did not induce apoptosis of A549
cancer cells (Figure 6), which is suggestive of the cytocompatibility of the nanocarrier,
under the experimental conditions applied and the polymer concentrations
used. At the same total drug level, the dual-loaded polymersomes (i.e.,
those carrying DOX and PCT) exhibited higher cytotoxicity against
the A549 cancer cells compared to the single-loaded polymersomes (i.e.,
those carrying only DOX or only PCT) (Figure 5, Table 3) and induced a significantly higher degree of cell
apoptosis (Figure 6), suggesting an enhanced anticancer effect due to the co-delivery
of the two drugs.21,42,52,55,56 DOX and PCT
have been found to induce apoptosis in A549 cell line,57,58 and our results show that the polymersome-entrapped DOX and/or PCT
can also induce A549 cells apoptosis (Figure 6). The combination index values for 50% cells
survival CI50, estimated based on the cells viability data
presented in Figure 5, suggest that co-delivery to cells of DOX and PCT, either as free
drugs or polymersome-entrapped, does not result to synergistic effect
between the two drugs (Table 3). Hahn et al. also observed that exposure of A549 cells to
DOX and PCT produced a less-than-additive effect and related it with
the effects of these drugs on cells cycle.59 It becomes apparent that the time and dose schedule of DOX/PCT co-delivery
has to be optimized in order to obtain synergistic anticancer activity.

Cell uptake experiments showed that the SGQP polymersomes were
capable of entering the A549 cancer cells (Figures 7 and 8). The cytotoxicity
of the drug-loaded polymersomes, either single- or dual-loaded, increased
with incubation time (Figure 5), probably because of the increasing internalization within
the cells of the drug with time, as the cell uptake experiment with
the DOX-loaded polymersomes shows (Figure 7). The confocal studies (Figures 8, S7 and S8) indicated that the polymersomes accumulated with time around
cell nuclei and that their drug load (DOX) was liberated from the
carrier with time, accumulating in the nuclei of the cells where it
exerts its pharmacological activity.

Lack of the biodegradability
of the nanocarrier is a drawback.
For instance, we could replace PAA arms with the corresponding poly(aspartic
acid) which is a biodegradable polypeptide. Thus, retro-design of
the polymer building blocks is suggested before investigating the
system further toward potential dual-anticancer drug delivery applications.

Conclusions
In this work, pH/thermosensitive amphiphilic PS9(P2VP-b-PAA-g-PNIPAM)9 SGQPs were
used as building blocks to form hollow vesicles (polymersomes) attempting
various preparation methods. To the best of our knowledge, we show
for the first time that such topologically complex multisegmented
SGQPs can be integrated to polymersomes, bearing complex pH-sensitive
(P2VP block arms) hydrophobic membrane and thermosensitive (PNIPAM
grafts) hydrophilic inner and outer corona.

The as-prepared
polymersomes were evaluated as nanocarriers to
carry anticancer model drugs (DOX and PCT) to human lung adenocarcinoma
epithelial cells (A549). The polymersomes exhibited satisfactory single
and dual drug loading efficiency and excellent colloidal stability.
Drug release showed pH and temperature dependencies manifested differently
for the hydrophobic and hydrophilic drugs, carried at different compartments.
For the single-loaded and dual-loaded polymersomes, enhanced release
was observed at low pH 6 and
at physiological temperature (37 °C).

In the dual DOX/PCT-loaded
polymersomes, although the release of
the hydrophilic DOX follows profiles similar to those of single-loaded
polymersomes, the PCT release was restrained. However, at the same
total drug level, the dual-loaded polymersomes exhibited higher cytotoxicity
and induced significant higher degree of cell apoptosis (about 125%
enhancement in 24 h) in the A549 cancer cell line compared to the
single-loaded polymersomes.

The obtained results indicate the
potential of the SGQP polymersomes
to be simultaneously loaded with two anticancer drugs (hydrophobic/hydrophilic
carried at different compartments) and release them slowly and in
a pH-dependent fashion in cancer cells, provoking a high degree of
cell apoptosis.

Experimental Section
Materials
N-Ethyl-N′-(3-dimethyl aminopropyl)carbodiimide
hydrochloride (EDC·HCl,
>98%, Mw: 191.7 g/mol) and FITC (>90%
HPLC) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. PCT was purchased from LC
Laboratories, USA. DOX hydrochloride (DOX·HCl) was purchased
from Pfizer. All other chemicals and solvents were of analytical grade.
Ultrapure 3D-water was obtained by means of an ELGA MEDICA apparatus.

Polymer Synthesis
The synthesis of the SGQP polymer
[PS9(P2VP-b-PAA-g-PNIPAM)9] with nine heteroarms has been described in a previous work.37 Briefly, the star terpolymer precursor, PS9(P2VP-b-PtBA)9, was synthesized through a one-pot/four-step sequential “living”
anionic polymerization method.12,13,60 Initially, the PS arms were synthesized in THF using sec-BuLi as
the initiator and the “living” PS chains were used to
polymerize a small quantity of DVB. Polymerization of 2-vinyl pyridine
(2VP) was initiated from the active sites in the PDVB core of the
“living” star precursors (PS9) leading to
a PS9P2VP9 star polymer. Finally, tert-butyl acrylate (tBA) was polymerized at the end
sites of the P2VP arms. The PS9(P2VP-b-PAA)9 terpolymer was obtained after acidic hydrolysis
of the PtBA blocks in 1,4-dioxane with a 6-fold excess
of HCl at 80 °C. The synthesis of the PS9(P2VP-b-PAA-g-PNIPAM)9 SGQP was performed
according to the following steps. First, the PS9(P2VP-b-PAA)9 star terpolymer was dissolved in dimethylformamide
(DMF), and aqueous HCl solution (0.01 M) was added until a 3/7 volume
ratio of DMF/H2O. The solution was dialyzed against HCl
solution (0.01 M) to remove DMF [dialysis membrane; molecular weight
cutoff (MWCO): 12 000 Da]. Further dialysis of the resulting
solution with a pH 2 was followed using aqueous solutions of pH 8.
At the next stage, the grafting of amine-terminated PNIPAM chains
onto the neutralized PAA of the star terpolymer was achieved through
carbodiimide chemistry, using EDC as a condensing agent. Nongrafted
PNIPAM chains and excess of EDC were removed by dialysis against H2O (dialysis membrane; MWCO: 25 000 Da). Finally, the
SGQP was recovered by freeze drying. Detailed characterization of
the polymer is reported elsewhere,37 and
the basic molecular characteristics of the SGQP are presented in Table 2.

Table 2 Molecular Characteristics of the Heteroarm
SGQP
polymera	Mw of star precursorb (g mol–1)	Mw of SGQPc (g mol–1)	average PNIPAM
chains per PAA armd	PNIPAM weight
fractiond	
SGQP:S339(V126-b-A69-g-N484.5)9	199 000	426 194	4.48	0.53	
a The numbers next to the letters
denote the degree of polymerization of each block. The subscripts
symbolize the number of arms and/or the grafted chains per arm.

b Calculated by light scattering of
the heteroarm PS9(P2VP-b-PtBA)9 precursor and assuming quantitative deprotection
of tBA monomer units.

c Calculated from the Mw of
the PS9(P2VP-b-PAA)9 and the
PNIPAM weight fraction.

d Calculated by 1H NMR.

Synthesis and Characterization of Polymersomes
Polymersomes
were prepared by the organic solvent evaporation method.50 In brief, predetermined amounts of the heteroarm
SGQP polymer (9 mg) were added in 0.5 mL of THF and stirred for 24
h. Then, the mixture was added dropwise in 5.5 mL of ultrapure water
under gentle agitation. Next, the organic solvent was evaporated in
a rotary vacuum evaporator (35 °C) for 2 h, wherein the polymersomes
were hardened. Then, mild centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 5 min was
followed in order for the aggregates to be precipitated and the supernatant
was collected. The purified polymersomes were stored at room temperature
until further use. The yield was determined by freeze-drying of purified
polymersomes and weighing the solid residues obtained.

The morphology
of polymersomes was characterized by TEM using a JEOL JEM-2100 microscope
at an acceleration potential of 200 kV, equipped with a GATAN camera
Erlanashen ES500W, model 782. For TEM specimens, an aqueous polymersomes
sample of 0.16 mg/mL was spread onto a carbon-coated cooper MS200
grid and air-dried before observation. A ZetaSizer Nano series Nano-ZS
(Malvern Instruments Ltd, Malvern, UK) equipped with a He–Ne
Laser beam at a wavelength of 633 nm and a fixed backscattering angle
of 173° was used for the study of hydrodynamic diameter and ζ-potential
of the polymersomes in water.

The colloidal stability of the
polymersomes was assessed by recording
the average size and ζ-potential with time (for 30 days) and
the resistance of the polymersomes to aggregation induced by increasing
concentrations of electrolyte (NaCl) and by phosphate buffer (PB)
solutions of pH 6 and 7.4.

Synthesis and Characterization of FITC-Labeled
Polymersomes
In order to prepare FITC-polymersomes, the SGQP
polymer was labeled
with the fluorescent dye FITC prior polymersomes preparation. The
conjugation of FITC on the polymer was implemented between the carboxyl
groups of the PAA arms and the amine moieties of FITC in the presence
of EDC as the coupling agent. Particularly, 5 mg of the polymer (1.17
× 10–8 mol SGQP) was dissolved in 4 mL of ultrapure
water, and 1.5 mg of EDC predissolved in 0.2 mL of cold ultrapure
water (4 °C) was added dropwise. The mixture was sonicated in
an ice bath for 1 h, and the pH was adjusted to 8.0 with Et3N (100
μL of 0.35% solution). Then, FITC 0.1 mg (2.6 × 10–7 mol FITC) from a stock solution (1 mg/mL in ultrapure
water) was added dropwise in the dark, and the reaction solution was
left under stirring at ambient temperature for 24 h in shade. The
final ratio of FITC/SGQP was 22 (in moles).
The product was purified by extended dialysis against 3D-H2O. The purified FITC-SGQP polymer was freeze-dried, in order to obtain
the final product, and stored in a desiccator until further use. The
amount of FITC label on SGQP was evaluated spectrophotometrically
(excitation 480 nm, emission 520 nm) using a Shimadzu UV-1800 UV spectrophotometer.
For the measurement, a standard curve within a range of FITC concentrations
5–50 μg/mL (R2 = 0.983) was
constructed and a modification rate of 3.01 ± 0.89% w/w was achieved.

For the FITC-polymersomes, the FITC-SGQP polymer was used and the
process was followed as described above (in section Synthesis and Characterization of Polymersomes).

Loading of
Polymersomes with DOX and PCT
For DOX-loaded
polymersomes, the above method was used. The hydrophilic DOX (1 mg)
was added in the aqueous phase of 5.5 mL ultrapure water and gently
agitated in the dark for 30 min to completely homogenize. Then, the
mixture of the polymer (9 mg) in THF (0.5 mL) was added dropwise in
the dark and left under gentle agitation for 30 min. The ratio of
DOX/SGQP was 1/9 (in mg). The dispersion was rotary vacuum-evaporated
(35 °C) for 2 h. In order to remove free (not encapsulated) DOX,
the dispersion was centrifuged at 15 000 rpm for 1 h at 8 °C,
the precipitate with the DOX-loaded polymersomes was resuspended in
the initial water volume, and the supernatant with the free DOX was
discarded. The purified DOX-loaded polymersomes were stored in a fridge
(4 °C).

In order to prepare PCT-loaded polymersomes, the
SGQP (9 mg) was dissolved in THF (0.5 mL) and to this mixture PCT
(1 mg) dissolved in 0.1 mL of ethanol was added to an analogy of PCT/SGQP
1/9 (in mg). The mixture was stirred for 24 h in the dark and then
added dropwise in 5.5 mL of ultrapure water under gentle agitation.
The dispersion was rotary vacuum-evaporated (35 °C) for 2 h to
remove organic solvents (THF and ethanol). Then, in order to remove
PCT aggregates and free PCT, the mixture was centrifuged (3000 rpm
for 15 min at 8 °C). The supernatant dispersion, of PCT-loaded
polymersomes in water, was kept, while free PCT and PCT aggregates
were precipitated and the precipitate was discarded. The purified
product was stored in the fridge (4 °C).

The dual DOX/PCT-loaded
polymersomes were prepared by a combination
of the above processes. In detail, 9 mg of SGQP was dissolved in THF
(0.5 mL), and 1 mg of PCT dissolved in 0.1 mL of ethanol was added.
The PCT/SGQP mixture was allowed to stir for 24 h in the dark. Then,
DOX (1 mg) was added in 5.5 mL of ultrapure H2O under gentle
agitation for 30 min in the dark and then the mixture of PCT/SGQP
was added dropwise. The reaction mixture was left under gentle stirring
for 30 min. The ratio of DOX/PCT/SGQP was 1/1/9 (in mg). The dispersion
was rotary vacuum-evaporated (35 °C) for 2 h. In order to remove
free (not encapsulated) PCT and possible PCT aggregates, the mixture
was centrifuged at (3000 rpm, 15 min, 8 °C) and the supernatant
was kept. In order to remove free (not encapsulated) DOX, the supernatant
was centrifuged (15 000 rpm, 1 h, 8 °C). After this centrifugation,
the precipitate with the DOX/PCT-loaded polymersomes was resuspended
in the initial water volume and the supernatant with the free DOX
was discarded. The purified DOX/PCT-loaded polymersomes were stored
in the fridge (4 °C).

The quantity of drug loaded in polymersomes
was determined by UV–vis
spectroscopy, in a UV-1800 Shimadzu spectrophotometer. The DOX-loaded
polymersomes were analyzed at 495 nm. The blank polymersomes (with
no drug) at 495 nm had zero absorbance; thus, the DOX signal was clear
and not overlapped. The amount of loaded DOX in the polymersomes was
calculated based on a calibration curve (R2 = 0.9989). The limit of quantification was 0.1 μg/mL, and
the linear part of the standard curve used for DOX assay was from
0.1 to 50 μg/mL.

For the PCT-loaded polymersomes, freeze-dried
samples were dissolved
in 1 mL of a 60:40 (v/v) mixture of acetonitrile/water and analyzed
using a UV-1800 Shimadzu spectrophotometer at 229 nm. The absorbance
of blank polymersomes (with no drug) at 229 nm was extracted before
every measurement. The amount of loaded PCT in the polymersomes was
calculated based on a calibration curve (R2 = 0.9988). The limit of quantification was 1 μg/mL, and the
linear part of the standard curve used for PCT assay was from 1 to
50 μg/mL.

In the dual drug-loaded samples, the DOX loading
was first determined
by UV–vis analysis at 495 nm. Then, the polymersomes were freeze-dried
and the PCT loading was determined at 229 nm as described above. The
DOX and PCT contents were calculated based on separate calibration
curves under the conditions described above.

The loading capacity
(LC %), entrapment efficiency (EE %), and
theoretical (feed) loading (Lth %) of
DOX and PCT in polymersomes were calculated from the equations: 1   2   3  where W, WC, and W0 were the amount
(mg) of entrapped drug according to the UV–vis spectroscopy,
the amount of polymersomes, and the amount of initially added drug,
respectively.

In Vitro Drug Release
The drug release
from the polymersomes
(DOX, PCT, and DOX/PCT) was evaluated under sink conditions in PB
solutions (10 mM, pH = 7.4 and pH = 6) at 37 and at 25 °C. The
ionic strength of the PB was 154 mM, similar to the 149.5 mM of human
blood plasma.61 The polymersomes were enclosed
in dialysis membranes (MWCO of 12 kDa) and dialyzed against 7 mL of
PB buffer for both pHs (pH = 7.4 and pH = 6) at 37 and at 25 °C
(ambient temperature) in a water bath under gentle agitation. At predetermined
time intervals (30 min, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 h), the release medium
was completely removed and replaced with fresh buffer of 37 or 25
°C. The release medium containing DOX was assayed by UV–vis
spectroscopy at 495 nm. The amount of released DOX for each release
medium (pH = 7.4 and pH = 6) was calculated based on separate calibration
curves (for pH = 7.4: R2 = 0.9990 and
for pH = 6: R2 = 0.9981). The limit of
quantification for pH = 7.4 was 0.1 μg/mL and for pH = 6 was
0.05 μg/mL. The linear part of the standard curve used for DOX
assay for pH = 7.4 was from 0.1 to 50 μg/mL and for pH = 6 was
from 0.05 to 50 μg/mL.

The release medium containing PCT
for both buffers was treated with 2 mL of dichloromethane (DCM) in
order to extract the drug. Then, the dichloromethane was collected
and allowed to evaporate at room temperature, and the solid residue
was dissolved in 1 mL of a 60:40 (v/v) mixture of 3D-H2O/MeOH. The samples of released PCT were assayed by UV–vis
spectroscopy at 229 nm. The PCT content was calculated based on a
calibration curve (R2 = 0.9999), wherein
the limit of quantification was 1 μg/mL and the linear part
of the standard curve was from 1 to 50 μg/mL.

The release
medium containing both DOX and PCT was first assayed
by UV–vis spectroscopy at 495 for DOX release, as described
above. Then, PCT was extracted from the samples following the above
extraction process.

Cellular Studies
The human lung
adenocarcinoma epithelial
cells A549 (ATCC) were cultured routinely in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented
with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS) and a mixture of antibiotic
agents (1.1% v/v penicillin/streptomycin and 0.15% v/v amphotericin).
Cultures were retained at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere with
5% (v/v) CO2. The culture medium was changed every 48 h
and cells were harvested with 0.25% (v/v) trypsin in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS).

Viability
The cytotoxicity of blank
polymersomes, drug-loaded
(DOX, PCT, and dual DOX/PCT) polymersomes, and free drug (DOX, PCT,
and dual DOX/PCT) against the A549 human lung cancer cells was investigated
by the MTT assay.62 A549 cells were seeded
into 24-well plates at a density of 5 × 104 cells/well
and allowed to grow and proliferate as a monolayer under standard
conditions for 24 h. Then, the supernatant in each well was completely
removed and replaced with 500 μL of fresh medium comprising
different concentrations of free or polymersome-entrapped drug. The
concentrations were 1, 5, 10, and 15 μg/mL of DOX, PCT, or a
physical mixture of DOX and PCT (DOX/PCT ratio approx 1:1 by weight).
The cytotoxicity of blank (without drug) polymersomes (carrier) was
also tested at concentrations corresponding to the concentrations
of carrier used in the case of drug-loaded polymersomes in order to
generate the drug concentrations mentioned above in the cells incubation
medium. The concentrations of blank (without drug) polymersomes were
(8, 40, 80, and 120 μg/mL) evaluated as control to the drug-loaded
polymersomes. After the predetermined time periods (24 and 48 h) of
incubation at 37 °C, the supernatant was removed and the cells
were washed with PBS. Then, 200 μL of MTT solution (10% v/v
in PBS, pH 7.4) was added in each well and plates were incubated at
37 °C for 2 h in order the formazan crystals to be formed. The
medium was completely removed, and 200 μL of DMSO was added
in each well and incubated at 37 °C for 15 min to fully dissolve
the formazan crystals. The fluorescence of the crystals (corresponding
to cell viability) was determined with a UV spectrophotometer at a
wavelength of 490 nm. The experiments were performed in triplicate
and repeated three times. To calculate the background fluorescence
of the cells, unlabeled cells without addition of any polymersomes
or drug were used as a negative control in every measurement. Cytotoxicity
was expressed as reduction in cell viability (%). The IC50 values (Table 3) were calculated from the % cell viability
versus concentration data by fitting the dose–effect curves
according to a four-parameter logistic model with OriginPro 8 software
(Origin Lab Corp, Northampton, MA). To discriminate synergistic, additive,
or antagonistic cytotoxic effects,63 the
next equation was used  where (Dx)1 and (Dx)2 represent
the ICx value of drug 1 (free DOX) and
drug 2 (free PCT) alone, respectively. (D)1 and (D)2 represent the concentration of drug 1 (DOX) and drug 2 (PCT)
in the combined delivery (free DOX/PCT or polymersome-entrapped DOX/PCT)
at the ICx value. CI > 1 indicates
antagonism,
CI = 1 indicates additive effects, and CI < 1 indicates synergism.

Table 3 Estimated IC50 Values of
Free Drugs and Drug-Loaded Polymersomes and CI Values of the Combined
Free Drugs (Free DOX/PCT) and DOX/PCT-Polymersomes at 24 and 48 h
at 50% of Viability
 	24 h	48 h	
sample	DOX IC50 (μg/mL)	PCT IC50 (μg/mL)	DOX/PCT IC50 (μg/mL)	CI50	DOX
IC50 (μg/mL)	PCT IC50 (μg/mL)	DOX/PCT IC50 (μg/mL)	CI50	
free DOX	10.000	 	 	 	2.120	 	 	 	
free PCT	 	3.180	 	 	 	0.140	 	 	
free DOX/PCT	 	 	14.500	0.940	 	 	0.750	2.385	
DOX-polymersomes	1.340	 	 	 	1.190	 	 	 	
PCT-polymersomes	 	14.350	 	 	 	0.120	 	 	
DOX/PCT-polymersomes	 	 	4.960	1.028	 	 	0.610	1.790	
In Vitro Cellular
Uptake
The uptake of FITC-labeled
DOX-polymersomes by A549 cells was quantitatively evaluated by flow
cytometry.64 A549 cells, following the
above seeding process, were grown as a monolayer, harvested by trypsinization
(0.25% w/v trypsin), plated in 24-well plates (density of 5 ×
104 cells per well), and incubated. After 24 h, the supernatant
in each well was completely removed and substituted with fresh medium
containing FITC-labeled DOX-polymersomes at a DOX concentration of
1 μg/mL (8 μg/mL polymersomes) and incubated for 1, 4,
and 24 h. Then, the supernatant was removed; the cells were washed
twice with PBS and harvested with 0.25% (w/v) trypsin. The fluorescence
was measured by flow cytometry using appropriate filters for FITC
(excitation λ = 495 nm, emission λ = 519 nm) and DOX (excitation λ
= 550 nm, emission λ = 573 nm) in a FACS Calibur, Coulter Epics
XL-MCL apparatus. To calculate the background fluorescence of unlabeled
cells, cells without any addition of studied particles were used as
a negative control in every measurement. Data analysis was performed
with the WinMDI cytometry analysis software.

In order to visualize
cellular uptake of the FITC-labeled DOX-polymersomes, confocal laser
microscopy was used with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride
(DAPI) for the nuclear, DOX for the drug and FITC for the polymersomes
staining.65 A549 cells were grown on coverslips
seeded in 6-well plates. Sterilized cover slips (Borosilicate Glass,
VWR) were placed in each well followed by the addition of cell suspensions
(5 × 104 cells/mL). After 24 h, the cells were incubated
with FITC-labeled DOX-polymersomes (1 μg/mL DOX content) for
1, 4, and 24 h. The cells were washed thrice with PBS and fixed directly
onto the glass coverslips using 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) dissolved
in PBS (300 μL) and incubated for 15 min. After washing the
cells thrice with PBS, 300 nM DAPI stain solution (nucleic acid staining)
was added to cover the cells. The cells were then washed with PBS
to remove the stain solution. The slides were drained and mounted
with Mowiol 4-88. The obtained specimens were imaged using a Leica
SP5 confocal microscope (Germany) using appropriate filters for DAPI
(excitation 359 nm, emission 457 nm), FITC (excitation λ = 495
nm, emission λ = 519 nm), and DOX (excitation λ = 550
nm, emission λ = 573 nm).

Apoptosis
In brief,
phosphatidylserine externalization
follows the loss of cellular membrane integrity, which is related
with apoptotic or necrotic processes leading to the later stages of
cell death.66 Annexin V protein (FITC Annexin
V, BD Pharmingen) was used to detect the externalization of phosphatidylserine
as a marker of apoptosis. A549 cells were seeded into 24-well plates
(density 5 × 104 cells/well) and allowed to grow and
proliferate as a monolayer, for 24 h. The supernatant in each well
was then replaced with medium containing 40 μg/mL blank, PCT-loaded,
DOX-loaded, and DOX/PCT-loaded polymersomes (in the case of the drug-loaded
polymersomes, the total drug concentration was 5 μg/mL). After
24 h incubation, the supernatant in each well was completely removed,
the cells were washed with PBS, detached with trypsin (0.25% w/v trypsin),
delivered to FACS tubes, and centrifuged (1600 rpm for 5 min); the
obtained pellet was washed and resuspended in 1 mL 1× Annexin
V binding buffer. Then, the cells were centrifuged (1600 rpm for 5
min), and the obtained pellet was resuspended in 100 μL of 1×
Annexin V binding buffer. The cells were incubated with 5 μL
of FITC-Annexin V in the dark for 15 min at room temperature. At the
end of the incubation, the cells were washed with 0.5 mL Annexin V
binding buffer. Cell fluorescence due to Annexin V (% cell apoptosis)
was determined by flow cytometry (excitation λ = 495 nm, emission λ
= 519 nm), in a FACS Calibur, Coulter Epics XL-MCL apparatus. The
background fluorescence of unlabeled cells was determined and used
as negative control. Data analysis was performed with the WinMDI cytometry
analysis software.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b01437.Characterization
with 1H NMR; methods attempted
for the preparation of polymersomes; TEM images of blank and loaded
polymersomes; drug delivery profiles up to 48 h; viability of A549
cancer cells following incubation with blank (without drug) SGQP polymersomes;
and confocal fluorescence microscopy images of the uptake of FITC-polymersomes
and DOX (loaded) by A549 cancer cells (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b01437_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The
authors thank Dr Maria Kollia from the Lab of
Electron Microscopy and Microanalysis at the University of Patras
for the TEM images and the Advanced Light Microscopy Facility of the
Medical School at the University of Patras for the Confocal Microscopy
images. The authors would like to thank the Advanced Light Microscopy
facility of the Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University
of Patras, especially Dr. Argiro Kalogeropoulou and Professor Stavros
Taraviras, for their help with the confocal microscopy.
==== Refs
References
Iatridi Z. ; Tsitsilianis C. 
Water-soluble stimuli responsive star-shaped segmented
macromolecules . Polymers 
2011 , 3 , 1911 –1933 . 10.3390/polym3041911 .
Ren J. M. ; McKenzie T. G. ; Fu Q. ; Wong E. H. H. ; Xu J. ; An Z. ; Shanmugam S. ; Davis T. P. ; Boyer C. ; Qiao G. G. 
Star Polymers . Chem. Rev. 
2016 , 116 , 6743 –6836 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00008 .27299693 
Aryal S. ; Prabaharan M. ; Pilla S. ; Gong S. 
Biodegradable and biocompatible
multi-arm star amphiphilic block copolymer as a carrier for hydrophobic
drug delivery . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2009 , 44 , 346 –352 . 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2009.01.007 .19428465 
Ayen W. Y. ; Garkhal K. ; Kumar N. 
Doxorubicin-Loaded
(PEG)3-PLA Nanopolymersomes:
Effect of Solvents and Process Parameters on Formulation Development
andIn VitroStudy . Mol. Pharm. 
2011 , 8 , 466 –478 . 10.1021/mp1003256 .21288047 
Yang Y. Q. ; Zhao B. ; Li Z. D. ; Lin W. J. ; Zhang C. Y. ; Guo X. D. ; Wang J. F. ; Zhang L. J. 
pH-sensitive micelles
self-assembled from multi-arm star triblock co-polymers poly(ε-caprolactone)-b-poly(2-(diethylamino)ethyl
methacrylate)-b-poly(poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate)
for controlled anticancer drug delivery . Acta
Biomater. 
2013 , 9 , 7679 –7690 . 10.1016/j.actbio.2013.05.006 .23669619 
Soliman G. M. ; Redon R. ; Sharma A. ; Mejía D. ; Maysinger D. ; Kakkar A. 
Miktoarm Star Polymer
Based Multifunctional
Traceable Nanocarriers for Efficient Delivery of Poorly Water Soluble
Pharmacological Agents . Macromol. Biosci. 
2014 , 14 , 1312 –1324 . 10.1002/mabi.201400123 .24903981 
Pramod P. S. ; Shah R. ; Chaphekar S. ; Balasubramanian N. ; Jayakannan M. 
Polysaccharide nano-vesicular multidrug
carriers for
synergistic killing of cancer cells . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 11841 –11855 . 10.1039/c4nr03514c .25171376 
Zhou P. ; Liu Y.-Y. ; Niu L.-Y. ; Zhu J. 
Self-assemblies of
the six-armed star triblock ABC copolymer: pH-tunable morphologies
and drug release . Polym. Chem. 
2015 , 6 , 2934 –2944 . 10.1039/c4py01804d .
Wu W. ; Wang W. ; Li J. 
Star polymers: Advances in biomedical
applications . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2015 , 46 , 55 –85 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2015.02.002 .
Triftaridou A. I. ; Vamvakaki M. ; Patrickios C. S. ; Stavrouli N. ; Tsitsilianis C. 
Synthesis
of Amphiphilic (ABC)nMultiarm Star Triblock
Terpolymers . Macromolecules 
2005 , 38 , 1021 –1024 . 10.1021/ma0487709 .
Stavrouli N. ; Triftaridou A. I. ; Patrickios C. S. ; Tsitsilianis C. 
Multi-Compartment
Unimolecular Micelles from (ABC)n Multi-Arm Star Triblock Terpolymers . Macromol. Rapid Commun. 
2007 , 28 , 560 –566 . 10.1002/marc.200600738 .
Iatridi Z. ; Roiter Y. ; Stavrouli N. ; Minko S. ; Tsitsilianis C. 
Phase behavior
and self-assembly of PSn(P2VP-b-PAA)n multiarmed multisegmented star
terpolymers with ampholytic arms . Polym. Chem. 
2011 , 2 , 2037 –2044 . 10.1039/c1py00090j .
Iatridi Z. ; Tsitsilianis C. 
pH responsive self assemblies from an An-core-(B-b-C)n
heteroarm star block terpolymer bearing oppositely charged segments . Chem. Commun. 
2011 , 47 , 5560 –5562 . 10.1039/c0cc05507g .
Choi I. ; Malak S. T. ; Xu W. ; Heller W. T. ; Tsitsilianis C. ; Tsukruk V. V. 
Multicompartmental
microcapsules from Star copolymer
micelles . Macromolecules 
2013 , 46 , 1425 –1436 . 10.1021/ma302483j .
Kim B.-S. ; Park S. W. ; Hammond P. T. 
Hydrogen-Bonding Layer-by-Layer-Assembled
Biodegradable Polymeric Micelles as Drug Delivery Vehicles from Surfaces . ACS Nano 
2008 , 2 , 386 –392 . 10.1021/nn700408z .19206641 
Chandrawati R. ; van Koeverden M. P. ; Lomas H. ; Caruso F. 
Multicompartment Particle
Assemblies for Bioinspired Encapsulated Reactions . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2011 , 2 , 2639 –2649 . 10.1021/jz200994n .
Xu W. ; Ledin P. A. ; Plamper F. A. ; Synatschke C. V. ; Müller A. H. E. ; Tsukruk V. V. 
Multiresponsive
Microcapsules Based
on Multilayer Assembly of Star Polyelectrolytes . Macromolecules 
2014 , 47 , 7858 –7868 . 10.1021/ma501853c .
Erwin A. J. ; Korolovych V. F. ; Iatridi Z. ; Tsitsilianis C. ; Ankner J. F. ; Tsukruk V. V. 
Tunable
Compartmentalized Morphologies
of Multilayered Dual Responsive Star Block Polyampholytes . Macromolecules 
2018 , 51 , 4800 –4812 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.8b00744 .
Antonietti M. ; Förster S. 
Vesicles and Liposomes: A Self-Assembly Principle Beyond
Lipids . Adv. Mater. 
2003 , 15 , 1323 –1333 . 10.1002/adma.200300010 .
Ahmed F. ; Photos P. J. ; Discher D. E. 
Polymersomes as Viral Capsid Mimics . Drug Dev. Res. 
2006 , 67 , 4 –14 . 10.1002/ddr.20062 .
Ahmed F. ; Pakunlu R. I. ; Brannan A. ; Bates F. ; Minko T. ; Discher D. E. 
Biodegradable polymersomes
loaded with both paclitaxel
and doxorubicin permeate and shrink tumors, inducing apoptosis in
proportion to accumulated drug . J. Controlled
Release 
2006 , 116 , 150 –158 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2006.07.012 .
Tanner P. ; Baumann P. ; Enea R. ; Onaca O. ; Palivan C. ; Meier W. 
Polymeric Vesicles:
From Drug Carriers to Nanoreactors and Artificial
Organelles . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2011 , 44 , 1039 –1049 . 10.1021/ar200036k .21608994 
Jain J. P. ; Ayen W. Y. ; Kumar N. 
Self Assembling Polymers as Polymersomes
for Drug Delivery . Curr. Pharm. Des. 
2011 , 17 , 65 –79 . 10.2174/138161211795049822 .21342115 
Lee J. S. ; Feijen J. 
Polymersomes for drug
delivery: Design, formation and
characterization . J. Controlled Release 
2012 , 161 , 473 –483 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.10.005 .
Lomas H. ; Canton I. ; MacNeil S. ; Du J. ; Armes S. P. ; Ryan A. J. ; Lewis A. L. ; Battaglia G. 
Biomimetic
pH Sensitive Polymersomes for Efficient DNA Encapsulation and Delivery . Adv. Mater. 
2007 , 19 , 4238 –4243 . 10.1002/adma.200700941 .
Lomas H. ; Du J. ; Canton I. ; Madsen J. ; Warren N. ; Armes S. P. ; Lewis A. L. ; Battaglia G. 
Efficient Encapsulation of Plasmid
DNA in pH-Sensitive PMPC-PDPA Polymersomes: Study of the Effect of
PDPA Block Length on Copolymer-DNA Binding Affinity . Macromol. Biosci. 
2010 , 10 , 513 –530 . 10.1002/mabi.201000083 .20491130 
Zheng C. ; Yao X. ; Qiu L. 
Novel Polymeric
Vesicles with pH-Induced Deformation
Character for Advanced Drug Delivery . Macromol.
Biosci. 
2011 , 11 , 338 –343 . 10.1002/mabi.201000333 .21104880 
Du J. ; Fan L. ; Liu Q. 
pH-Sensitive
Block Copolymer Vesicles with Variable
Trigger Points for Drug Delivery . Macromolecules 
2012 , 45 , 8275 –8283 . 10.1021/ma3015728 .
Jeong I. K. ; Gao G. H. ; Li Y. ; Kang S. W. ; Lee D. S. 
A Biodegradable
Polymersome with pH-Tuning On-Off Membrane Based on Poly(β-amino
ester) for Drug Delivery . Macromol. Biosci. 
2013 , 13 , 946 –953 . 10.1002/mabi.201200468 .23696500 
Popescu M.-T. ; Tsitsilianis C. 
Controlled Delivery of Functionalized
Gold Nanoparticles
by pH-Sensitive Polymersomes . ACS Macro Lett. 
2013 , 2 , 222 –225 . 10.1021/mz300637c .
Popescu M.-T. ; Korogiannaki M. ; Marikou K. ; Tsitsilianis C. 
CBABC terpolymer-based
nanostructured vesicles with tunable membrane permeability as potential
hydrophilic drug nanocarriers . Polymer 
2014 , 55 , 2943 –2951 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2014.04.034 .
Wang L. ; Liu G. ; Wang X. ; Hu J. ; Zhang G. ; Liu S. 
Acid-Disintegratable
Polymersomes of pH-Responsive Amphiphilic Diblock Copolymers for Intracellular
Drug Delivery . Macromolecules 
2015 , 48 , 7262 –7272 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.5b01709 .
Qin S. ; Geng Y. ; Discher D. E. ; Yang S. 
Temperature-Controlled
Assembly and Release from Polymer Vesicles of Poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) . Adv. Mater. 
2006 , 18 , 2905 –2909 . 10.1002/adma.200601019 .
Liu F. ; Kozlovskaya V. ; Medipelli S. ; Xue B. ; Ahmad F. ; Saeed M. ; Cropek D. ; Kharlampieva E. 
Temperature-Sensitive
Polymersomes for Controlled Delivery of Anticancer Drugs . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 7945 –7956 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b03048 .
Li J. ; Dirisala A. ; Ge Z. ; Wang Y. ; Yin W. ; Ke W. ; Toh K. ; Xie J. ; Matsumoto Y. ; Anraku Y. ; Osada K. ; Kataoka K. 
Therapeutic
Vesicular
Nanoreactors with Tumor-Specific Activation and Self-Destruction for
Synergistic Tumor Ablation . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2017 , 56 , 14025 –14030 . 10.1002/anie.201706964 .
Li J. ; Li Y. ; Wang Y. ; Ke W. ; Chen W. ; Wang W. ; Ge Z. 
Polymer Prodrug-Based
Nanoreactors Activated by Tumor Acidity for
Orchestrated Oxidation/Chemotherapy . Nano Lett. 
2017 , 17 , 6983 –6990 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b03531 .28977746 
Iatridi Z. ; Lencina M. M. S. ; Tsitsilianis C. 
PNIPAM-based
heteroarm star-graft
quarterpolymers: synthesis, characterization and pH-dependent thermoresponsiveness
in aqueous media . Polym. Chem. 
2015 , 6 , 3942 –3955 . 10.1039/c5py00393h .
Xu W. ; Ledin P. A. ; Iatridi Z. ; Tsitsilianis C. ; Tsukruk V. V. 
Multicompartmental Microcapsules with Orthogonal Programmable
Two-Way Sequencing of Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Cargo Release . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 4908 –4913 . 10.1002/anie.201600383 .
Maeda H. 
The enhanced
permeability and retention (EPR) effect in tumor vasculature: the
key role of tumor-selective macromolecular drug targeting . Adv. Enzyme Regul. 
2001 , 41 , 189 –207 . 10.1016/s0065-2571(00)00013-3 .11384745 
Prabhakar U. ; Maeda H. ; Jain R. K. ; Sevick-Muraca E. M. ; Zamboni W. ; Farokhzad O. C. ; Barry S. T. ; Gabizon A. ; Grodzinski P. ; Blakey D. C. 
Challenges and Key Considerations
of the Enhanced Permeability and Retention Effect for Nanomedicine
Drug Delivery in Oncology . Cancer Res. 
2013 , 73 , 2412 –2417 . 10.1158/0008-5472.can-12-4561 .23423979 
Wang H. ; Zhao Y. ; Wu Y. ; Hu Y.-l. ; Nan K. ; Nie G. ; Chen H. 
Enhanced anti-tumor
efficacy by co-delivery of doxorubicin
and paclitaxel with amphiphilic methoxy PEG-PLGA copolymer nanoparticles . Biomaterials 
2011 , 32 , 8281 –8290 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.07.032 .21807411 
Lv S. ; Tang Z. ; Li M. ; Lin J. ; Song W. ; Liu H. ; Huang Y. ; Zhang Y. ; Chen X. 
Co-delivery of doxorubicin
and paclitaxel by PEG-polypeptide nanovehicle for the treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer . Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 6118 –6129 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.04.034 .24794923 
Kitaeva M. V. ; Melik-Nubarov N. S. ; Menger F. M. ; Yaroslavov A. A. 
Doxorubicin–Poly(acrylic
acid) Complexes: Interaction with Liposomes . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 6575 –6579 . 10.1021/la0497144 .15274557 
von
Minckwitz G. ; Raab G. ; Caputo A. ; Schütte M. ; Hilfrich J. ; Blohmer J. U. ; Gerber B. ; Costa S. D. ; Merkle E. ; Eidtmann H. ; Lampe D. ; Jackisch C. ; du Bois A. ; Kaufmann M. 
Doxorubicin with cyclophosphamide
followed by docetaxel every 21 days compared with doxorubicin and
docetaxel every 14 days as preoperative treatment in operable breast
cancer: the GEPARDUO study of the German Breast Group . J. Clin. Oncol. 
2005 , 23 , 2676 –2685 . 10.1200/jco.2005.05.078 .15837982 
Moulder S. L. ; Symmans W. F. ; Booser D. J. ; Madden T. L. ; Lipsanen C. ; Yuan L. ; Brewster A. M. ; Cristofanilli M. ; Hunt K. K. ; Buchholz T. A. ; Zwiebel J. ; Valero V. ; Hortobagyi G. N. ; Esteva F. J. 
Phase I/II study of G3139 (Bcl-2
antisense oligonucleotide) in combination with doxorubicin and docetaxel
in breast cancer . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2008 , 14 , 7909 –7916 . 10.1158/1078-0432.ccr-08-1104 .19047121 
Han M. ; Lv Q. ; Tang X.-J. ; Hu Y.-L. ; Xu D.-H. ; Li F.-Z. ; Liang W.-Q. ; Gao J.-Q. 
Overcoming drug resistance of MCF-7/ADR
cells by altering intracellular distribution of doxorubicin via MVP
knockdown with a novel siRNA polyamidoamine-hyaluronic acid complex . J. Controlled Release 
2012 , 163 , 136 –144 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.08.020 .
Duan X. ; Xiao J. ; Yin Q. ; Zhang Z. ; Yu H. ; Mao S. ; Li Y. 
Smart pH-sensitive
and temporal-controlled polymeric
micelles for effective combination therapy of doxorubicin and disulfiram . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 5858 –5869 . 10.1021/nn4010796 .23734880 
Hu C.-M. J. ; Aryal S. ; Zhang L. 
Nanoparticle-assisted
combination
therapies for effective cancer treatment . Ther.
Delivery 
2010 , 1 , 323 –334 . 10.4155/tde.10.13 .
Zhao Y. ; Alakhova D. Y. ; Kabanov A. V. 
Can nanomedicines
kill cancer stem
cells? . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2013 , 65 , 1763 –1783 . 10.1016/j.addr.2013.09.016 .
Marsden H. R. ; Gabrielli L. ; Kros A. 
Rapid preparation of polymersomes
by a water addition/solvent evaporation method . Polym. Chem. 
2010 , 1 , 1512 –1518 . 10.1039/c0py00172d .
Manocha B. ; Margaritis A. 
Controlled
Release of Doxorubicin from Doxorubicin/γ-Polyglutamic
Acid Ionic Complex . J. Nanomater. 
2010 , 2010 , 1 –9 . 10.1155/2010/780171 .
Chen Y. ; Zhang W. ; Huang Y. ; Gao F. ; Sha X. ; Fang X. 
Pluronic-based functional polymeric mixed micelles for co-delivery
of doxorubicin and paclitaxel to multidrug resistant tumor . Int. J. Pharm. 
2015 , 488 , 44 –58 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.04.048 .25899286 
Sethuraman V. A. ; Bae Y. H. 
TAT peptide-based
micelle system for potential active
targeting of anti-cancer agents to acidic solid tumors . J. Controlled Release 
2007 , 118 , 216 –224 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2006.12.008 .
Kato Y. ; Ozawa S. ; Miyamoto C. ; Maehata Y. ; Suzuki A. ; Maeda T. ; Baba Y. 
Acidic extracellular
microenvironment
and cancer . Cancer Cell Int. 
2013 , 13 , 89 10.1186/1475-2867-13-89 .24004445 
Xu S. ; Wang W. ; Li X. ; Liu J. ; Dong A. ; Deng L. 
Sustained release of PTX-incorporated
nanoparticles synergized by
burst release of DOX·HCl from thermosensitive modified PEG/PCL
hydrogel to improve anti-tumor efficiency . Eur.
J. Pharm. Sci. 
2014 , 62 , 267 –273 . 10.1016/j.ejps.2014.06.002 .24931190 
Lee W. L. ; Guo W. M. ; Ho V. H. B. ; Saha A. ; Chong H. C. ; Tan N. S. ; Tan E. Y. ; Loo S. C. J. 
Delivery of doxorubicin
and paclitaxel from double-layered microparticles: The effects of
layer thickness and dual-drug vs. single-drug loading . Acta Biomater. 
2015 , 27 , 53 –65 . 10.1016/j.actbio.2015.08.051 .26340886 
Nasser M. W. ; Datta J. ; Nuovo G. ; Kutay H. ; Motiwala T. ; Majumder S. ; Wang B. ; Suster S. ; Jacob S. T. ; Ghoshal K. 
Down-regulation of
Micro-RNA-1 (miR-1) in Lung Cancer . J. Biol.
Chem. 
2008 , 283 , 33394 –33405 . 10.1074/jbc.m804788200 .18818206 
Zhang X.-Y. ; Zhang Y.-D. 
Enhanced antiproliferative
and apoptosis effect of
paclitaxel-loaded polymeric micelles against non-small cell lung cancers . Tumor Biol. 
2015 , 36 , 4949 –4959 . 10.1007/s13277-015-3142-7 .
Hahn S. M. ; Liebmann J. E. ; Cook J. ; Fisher J. ; Mitchell J. B. ; Kaufman D. ; Goldspiel B. ; Venzon D. 
Taxol in Combination
with Doxorubicin or Etoposide Possible Antagonism In Vitro . Cancer 
1993 , 72 , 2705 –2711 . 10.1002/1097-0142(19931101)72:9<2705::aid-cncr2820720930>3.0.co;2-k .8104682 
Xu W. ; Ledin P. A. ; Iatridi Z. ; Tsitsilianis C. ; Tsukruk V. V. 
Multiresponsive Star-Graft Quarterpolymer
Monolayers . Macromolecules 
2015 , 48 , 3344 –3353 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.5b00401 .
Tas A. C.  Use of biomineralization
media in biomimetic synthesis of hard tissue substitutes . In Advances in Bioceramics and Biotechnologies II ; McKittrick J. M. , Narayan R.  , Eds.; Wiley : USA , 2014 ; p 92 .
Mosmann T. 
Rapid colorimetric
assay for cellular growth and survival: Application to proliferation
and cytotoxicity assays . J. Immunol. Methods 
1983 , 65 , 55 –63 . 10.1016/0022-1759(83)90303-4 .6606682 
Chou T.-C. 
Theoretical
basis, experimental design, and computerized simulation of synergism
and antagonism in drug combination studies . Pharmacol. Rev. 
2006 , 58 , 621 –681 . 10.1124/pr.58.3.10 .16968952 
Yuan H. ; Miao J. ; Du Y. ; You J. ; Hu F. ; Zeng S. 
Cellular uptake of solid lipid nanoparticles
and cytotoxicity of
encapsulated paclitaxel in A549 cancer cells . Int. J. Pharm. 
2008 , 348 , 137 –145 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2007.07.012 .17714896 
Koutsiouki K. ; Angelopoulou A. ; Ioannou E. ; Voulgari E. ; Sergides A. ; Magoulas G. E. ; Bakandritsos A. ; Avgoustakis K. 
TAT Peptide-Conjugated
Magnetic PLA-PEG Nanocapsules for the Targeted Delivery of Paclitaxel:
In Vitro and Cell Studies . AAPS PharmSciTech 
2017 , 18 , 769 –781 . 10.1208/s12249-016-0560-9 .27301873 
Foldbjerg R. ; Dang D. A. ; Autrup H. 
Cytotoxicity
and genotoxicity of
silver nanoparticles in the human lung cancer cell line, A549 . Arch. Toxicol. 
2011 , 85 , 743 –750 . 10.1007/s00204-010-0545-5 .20428844

