
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146024710.1021/acsomega.9b01412ArticleColor Source for the First Argentinian Flags Picone A. Lorena Romano Rosana M. Della Védova Carlos O. *CEQUINOR (UNLP, CCT-CONICET
La Plata, associated with CIC), Departamento de Química, Facultad
de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional
de La Plata, Boulevard 120 N° 1465, 1900 La Plata, República Argentina* E-mail: carlosdv@quimica.unlp.edu.ar.01 07 2019 31 07 2019 4 7 11424 11432 15 05 2019 20 06 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In this work, a historical
controversy of more than 200 years is
settled by the study of the oldest preserved Argentinian flag. The
results of the present work reinforce the hypothesis of a number of
historians who consider it to be the first flag that was originally
hoisted on February 27, 1812, on the banks of the Paraná River.
The work consists of a study of the original textile. Through chemical
analysis and implementation of different types of analyses, techniques,
and spectroscopies such as UV–vis, UV–vis diffuse reflectance
spectroscopy, attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy–energy-dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy, and resonance Raman, the original characteristics
of the flag of Macha were determined. The flag was colored with indigotin
from Europe (from Isatis tinctoria) and made of silk; it is white,
blue, and white in a horizontal arrangement. It was not treated with
tin, and its blue color was subsequently adopted by the Central American
Confederation and later by various states of Central America. According
to related contemporaneous stories, its preservation was due to the
watchfulness of the patriots.

document-id-old-9ao9b01412document-id-new-14ao-2019-014122ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The oldest preserved Argentinian flag,
which for many historians
may be the first flag raised by its creator, Manuel José Joaquín
del Corazón de Jesús Belgrano y González, on
February 27, 1812, on the banks of the Paraná River, is preserved
in the House of Freedom “Casa de la Libertad” in Sucre,
Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia. The so-called Flag of Macha is in
this unique location guarded by the remains of Doña Juana Azurduy
de Padilla (Figure 1). This flag, the Flag of Macha, was found in the year 1883 in the
vicinity of the town of Macha, in the church of Titiri by the village
priest Martín Castro, and 2 years later, in 1885, his
successor, the parish priest Primo Arrieta, transferred this insignia
to the city of Sucre. A sister flag, called the Flag of Ayohuma, in
reference to the battle of the same name in which the royalist army
of Joaquín de la Pezuela defeated Belgrano’s army,
was also found in the same church under a painting of Santa Teresa.
It is currently located in the National Historical Museum of Argentina.
Both of these flags, carried by Belgrano, were preserved after the
battles since they would have been delivered for protection by Colonel
Cornelio Zelaya, a soldier who was under orders from Belgrano, to
the parish priest of the Titiri church, Juan de Dios Aranívar.
According to the historical records, there were signs that the result
of the battle would not be favorable to Belgrano’s army. In
accordance with the testimonies of prominent soldiers of this period,
a flag captured by enemy hands had a negative connotation in several
dimensions that reached finally its exhibition in a European museum.1 The environmental preservation of both banners
was differentiated according to the different climatic conditions
of the conservation sites, much more favorable to the city of Sucre.

Figure 1 Flag of
Macha. House of Freedom, Casa de la Libertad, Sucre, Bolivia.

Our recent spectral-historical
work linked the connection between
the 1814 Governor of the Tucumán Province, General Bernabé
Aráoz, with the creator of the Argentinian Flag, Manuel Belgrano.2 It was in a small place of the department of
Burruyacú, in La Encrucijada, where Bernabé Aráoz,
who later ordered the construction of the blue and white ceremony
flag of 1814 for the Temple of San Francisco in Tucumán, blue
due to lapis lazuli pigment,2 convinced
Belgrano, who was on his way to Córdoba after the legendary
Jujeño Exodus (Éxodo Jujeño), to challenge the
commands of the central government of Buenos Aires and to face in
Tucumán the once invincible Pío Tristán.
On September 24, 1812, the so-called Battle of Tucumán took
place, and after his victory, Manuel Belgrano pushed the royalist
army by directing its troops in a northward direction toward the city
of Salta.3 The resonance of this achievement
was notorious. The government of Buenos Aires, the First Triumvirate,
resigned and, for instance, the flux of the oriental population was
reversed. In October 1811, another exceptional event was recorded
after the armistice was promulgated between the Buenos Aires government
and the royalist Viceroy of Montevideo, Francisco de Elío.
That was when the entire population of Montevideo accompanied their
leader, José Gervasio de Artigas, to the province of Entre
Ríos, currently Argentina, to the place of Ayuí.
This event is known as the exodus of Montevideo or “la redota”,
a Río de la Plata word meaning defeat, “derrota”.
Some historians estimate that the number of people involved in that
event may have reached 50 000.4 The “redota” symbolized the
unhappy feeling of the population toward the displacement of General
Artigas, as ordered by the Government of Buenos Aires. This order
originated his migration, but he was also accompanied by the entire
population and his army.

On February 13, 1813, and days before
the battle of Salta, all
of the soldiers of the Army of the North swore allegiance to the flag
on the banks of the Pasaje River, and from that moment on called the
River Juramento (jurar is the Spanish verb swear and Juramento means
oath), and so, one by one sealed his commitment to the flag with a
kiss that today is again the center of our attention.

In relation
to our previous work that covered several interesting
questions to be continued, the current work focuses its objective
on the determination of the dye that gave rise to this flag, which
accompanied the beginning of the Argentine fatherland. There are dozens
of publications, interviews, discussions, and conferences originated
in the present subject that had as their central thesis the determination
of the color of the Argentinian Flag, which, in historical terms,
goes far beyond a mere discussion on coloration and goes back to issues
already discussed by an eyewitness soldier of the Paso de los Andes
of General San Martín in 1817, General Gerónimo
Espejo.1 This is how we propose in the
present work: (i) the determination of the composition of the base
fabric on which the ensign was made; (ii) a study of the presence
or absence of Sn salts that contribute additional weight to silk or
that could act as a preservative; (iii) revealing the original color
of the insignia will be one of the fundamental questions to be addressed;
(iv) the origin of either the dye or the pigment used for the preparation
of the Belgrano flag will also be studied. The facts thus determined
would provide information regarding the origin of the emblem, assuming
the hypothesis that it may be the same flag raised for Belgrano the
first time on the banks of the Paraná River on February 27,
1812. On the way to Alto Perú, Belgrano would have sworn allegiance
to this flag on the Pasaje River, later known as the Juramento River;
(v) in relation to the coloration, a correlation of the color of the
pennant with that of the flags of the Central American countries will
be mentioned, whose fights for independence were supported by the
French-Argentine corsair Hipólito Bouchard in command of the
frigate La Argentina, who under the orders of the government of the
United Provinces of the Río de la Plata had a significant
role in the contests for their Independence; and (vi) finally, another
issue under debate is the contribution of this work to discuss some
indication of the assertion of the “anguish” that being
experienced would have caused the Argentine heroes to declare independence.5

With these objectives in mind, we used
chemical methods, techniques,
and those forms of spectroscopy that fall within this discipline whose
name can be amalgamated in the spectral-historical topic, a remarkable
tool to settle historical discussions with the central intervention
of one of the branches of science, namely, spectroscopy.

Results and Discussion
To begin analyzing the questions raised, data and the analysis
of a piece of a sample corresponding to Macha’s flag are presented.
For this, a piece of the flag, a crisp, smooth, plain interlaced fabric
(Figure 2), was analyzed
by attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
(ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy, as shown in Figure 3. Figure 2 shows an image of the colored part of the flag taken
with different amplifications and measured experimentally with backscatter
electron detector (BSED). According to Figure 2, the right-side part, the diameter of the
fiber used reaches a value of approximately 12 μm in agreement
with, for example, the expected value for Bombyx mori silk. It should
be noted that the cross section of this particular silk is approximately
triangular.6

Figure 2 Images taken during the
scanning electron microscopy–energy-dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy (SEM–EDX) experiment using the BSED mode
with different amplifications of the colored region of the Flag of
Macha.

Figure 3 ATR-FTIR spectra of the colored region (blue
trace), of the white
region (black trace) of the Flag of Macha, and of a silk sample (red
trace).

As already mentioned, Figure 3 shows the results
of the ATR-FTIR technique used to
analyze the flag samples. The following measurements were made: (a)
a piece of the colored Flag of Macha sample, (b) a piece of the white
Flag of Macha sample, and (c) a piece of a silk sample. The same spectra
are also reproduced with a piece of silk dyed with indigo in our laboratory
and with the reported silk sample of the Aráoz flag.2 These spectra including both the colored and
white regions of the Flag of Macha are conveniently compared with
that of the original silk, evidencing a perfect agreement and reproducing
the data published in the literature.7

Through the comparison of the ATR spectra, it is evident that the
signals from the samples of the flag correspond to silk. The comparison
of the respective spectra of the flag, colored and white, does not
show any observable indications of differences attributable to the
dye used to tint the central part of the flag. Moreover, silk has
very intense absorptions in the same areas where indigo has the most
prominent bands. This dye will be revealed as the cause of the coloration
with future analysis. This result indicates a dye concentration lower
than that detectable by the present method of analysis in the flag
made more than 200 years ago. Only signals corresponding to fibroin
are observed in the three spectra of Figure 3. This type of a polypeptide or protein presents
in evolved organisms and is synthesized by combining up to 19 monomeric
amino acids (−NH–CHR1–CO−) and one imino
acid monomer (−NR1–CHR2–CO−), bonded through
peptide bonds between the monomers. In evolved organisms, only the
L-form of the amino acids is the one used, while in nonevolved bacteria
or plants, the amino acid monomer D can be incorporated.8

Although there is evidence of photoevolution
and phototendering
processes (see below), the texture of the silk fiber of the flag under
study is very well preserved, as demonstrated by the microscopic images
taken with the SEM–EDX instrument with a BSED detector shown
in Figure 2.

The SEM–EDX allows high-resolution images to be obtained
that permit the study of the shape of an object and the elemental
analysis of its surface. Figure 4 depicts the abundance of the chemical elements found
in the white part (upper part of the figure) and colored part (lower)
of the Flag of Macha as a function of the energy values (keV) for
the transitions related to the K level of the given elements when
external electrons, mostly of level L, reoccupy the vacant hole produced
by the ionization of the respective K level. It is interesting to
note that the ratios of C:N:O are approximately the same, within certain
differences, for the two parts of the flag. This is an expected result
since with this technique, the composition of the surface of the samples
is basically observed. The differences can arise from the different
compositions of the impurities, such as dust, deposited in each part
of the surfaces analyzed. A joint evaluation of the results listed
in Figure 4 with the
chemical composition of fibroin and sericin also offers comparable
results, moreover, taking into account the dust deposition on the
flag evidenced for the presence of metals on the surface. Their weight
(wt) % for C, N, and O are 47.6, 18.3, and 27.7 for fibroin and 46.5,
16.5, and 31.0 for sericin, respectively. Unlike the previously analyzed
Aráoz flag, no presence of Sn has been found, which, in that
case, could have been used as a salt, for example, to increase the
weight of the silk or to protect that flag from deterioration.2

Figure 4 EDX spectra in keV of samples corresponding to the white
(top)
and colored (bottom) parts of the Flag of Macha. The elements and
the corresponding abundances are tabulated on the right-hand side.

Other evidence confirming the
composition of the sample as belonging
to taffeta silk can be found through the microscopic images of enlarged
areas of the Flag of Macha discriminated through different colorations
presented in Figure 5 for the different elements as found in the EDX spectrum. While the
elements C, N, and O present in the fibroin define the contour of
the fibers, the other elements are homogeneously distributed and are
due to the atmospheric dust. On the other hand, through this analysis,
no evidence was found regarding the origin of the flag’s coloration.
As is plausible, the concentration of the dyes still existing in the
colored part of the flag is below the detection limit of this technique.

Figure 5 SEM–EDX
microscopic images of the Flag of Macha flag according
to the presence of the elements C, N, and O present in fibroin and
other selected elements (Al, Si, and Ca). As already determined, the
diameter of each fiber reaches a value of approximately 12 μm.

To determine specifically the
chemical species used to give coloration
to the central strip of the Flag of Macha, additional forms of spectroscopy
more sensitive than those already described were used. Figure 6 shows the UV–vis DRS
spectra. With this information about the origin of the superficial
absorption of the flag sample, indigo becomes a candidate employed
as a tincture of the textile used to make the colored part of the
Flag of Macha. The coincidence of the absorption maxima of the colored
part of the Macha’s flag with those of the commercial indigo
is significant. Also, the difference in coloration between the current
Macha’s flag and the Aráoz flag is evident.2

Figure 6 UV–vis diffuse reflectance spectrum of the colored
part
of the Flag of Macha (blue trace), of the colored sample of the Aráoz
flag (magenta trace),2 of pure indigo (orange
trace), and of the white part of the Flag of Macha (black trace).
This last spectrum is also enlarged in the upper part of the figure.
The violet color line spectrum corresponds to a reference of Teflon
between quartz windows.

The Flag of Macha, although well preserved, also suffered
some
temporary photoevolution given the specific climatic conditions of
the area where it was stored. The photoevolution of silk by the absorption
of the broad solar spectrum is linked to the presence of these amino
acids among which tyrosine is considered the most important, given
its abundance (greater than 4% wt), toward the formation of yellow
chromophores generated by the bathochromic shift to red of the integrated
absorption maximum, which for fresh silk is in the region of 280 nm.
Tryptophan has a similar effect but its abundance in silk is less
than 0.5%.9 This process is the one that
gives an intense yellow coloration to the piece of cloth of the white
part of the flag under investigation and, for example, coloring the
blue part of the flag in green color as in the case of the Aráoz
flag recently studied, by the mixture of the blue and yellow colors.2 It should be noted that the photoyellowing process
is accompanied by phototendering, a process in which the phenomena
spread from the surface to the interior of the silk by diffusion.
Thus, the evaluation of the spectrum corresponding to the white part
of the Macha flag clearly shows that the photoevolution process occurred,
mainly through the red shift of the UV–vis band with a displacement
of the original silk signal from 280 to greater than 300 nm (Figure 6, upper part).

Taking into account all of the evidence so far collected and to
continue approaching the answer to one of the questions produced in
this work, a colored fiber of the Flag of Macha was subjected to a
typical reduction reaction for the hypothetical dye used. The observed
changes can be interpreted through the equation explained in Scheme 1. The discolored
leuco form is the one used to fix the reduced indigo species to the
textile fiber.

Scheme 1 Oxidation–Reduction Reactions between the Diketo
and Leuco
Forms of Indigo
Its coloration on
the fiber is greenish yellow, and by later oxidation
of the leuco form in the fiber by means of the oxygen of the air,
the blue color of the diketo indigo form is reconstituted. This is
practically conclusive evidence of the use of indigo as an agent for
dyeing the Macha flag. With this confidence, the possibility of using
a nondestructive and sensitive technique such as Raman spectroscopy
to confirm the previous analysis is raised. The bluish coloration
of the flag is especially favorable for the use of the Kr+ laser line, which has a wavelength of 647.1 nm and would enhance
the signal of the dye through the resonance Raman effect. Figure 7 shows this spectrum
that undoubtedly agrees with that originated by indigo. The answer
to the question of the original color of the banner is that the Flag
of Macha was seen in 1813 with the colors white, blue, and white due
to the dye indigo used in its coloration (Scheme 2).

Figure 7 Resonance Raman spectrum of the colored part
of the Flag of Macha.
The color is due to the presence of indigo according to the observed
bands. Excitation: 647.1 nm, 50 mW. Blue trace, spectrum without correction.
Green trace, spectrum corrected by subtraction of the fluorescence
found in the measurement by means of a polynomial function.

Scheme 2 Flag of Macha
Red,
green, blue combination
of 9, 31, 146 (Isatis tinctoria); the size of the pavilion is 2.25
m × 1.60 m. The samples corresponding to the extreme and central
strips of the Flag of Macha used for this work are also depicted in
the diagram.

Table 1 compares
the Raman wavenumber values reported for synthetic indigo, extracted
indigotin, and indirubin and those obtained in this work for the pigment
giving coloration for the Flag of Macha. The origin of the indigo
can also be traced through the spectroscopic data.

Table 1 Comparison of Fourier Transform and
Dispersive Raman Wavenumbers of Indigo, Indigotin, and Indirubin with
the Dye Present in the Flag of Macha
synthetic
indigo FT Ramana,10	FT Raman
of natural indigo dyes from Isatis tinctoria and Indigofera tinctoriab,10	indirubin
Ramanc,11	indirubin
Ramand,12	flag
of Macha
Ramane	
1700 m	1703/1701	1700	1690	 	
 	 	 	1651	 	
1622 m	1621/1624	1636	1627	 	
 	 	 	1607	 	
1581s	 	1578	1578	1586	
1571vs	1573/1573	 	 	1571	
1481 m	1482/1482	 	1472	 	
1459 m	1461/1460	1463	1453	 	
 	 	1402	1391	 	
1363s	1363/1363	1355	 	1368	
1309s	1311/1310	 	1309	1310	
 	 	 	1281	 	
1247w	1248/1247	 	1265	1249	
1224 m	1225/1224	 	 	1226	
 	 	1215	1204	 	
 	 	 	1171	 	
 	 	 	1144	 	
 	 	 	1132	 	
1014 m	1014/1014	1006	1013	1011	
 	 	 	997	 	
 	 	 	952	 	
 	 	 	885	 	
 	 	 	865	 	
756w	758/757	 	792	759	
 	 	 	770	 	
 	 	 	711	 	
674 m	674/674	 	669	674	
 	 	 	659	 	
 	 	 	622	 	
598	598/598	585	575	598	
544	545/544	 	527;524f	545	
 	 	 	486	 	
 	 	 	462	 	
 	 	 	393	 	
 	 	 	373g	 	
 	 	 	358g	 	
 	 	 	 	279	
 	 	 	259	255	
 	 	 	243	 	
 	 	 	211	 	
 	 	 	169	175	
 	 	 	 	137	
a vs: very strong,
s: strong, m: medium,
w: weak.

b Indigotin from
Isatis tinctoria
and Indigofera tinctoria.

c Raman spectrum measured with 514.5
nm.

d Raman spectrum measured
with 785
nm.

e Raman spectrum measured
with 647.1
nm.

f Table and figure values,
respectively.

g Figure value.

The indigo of the early 19th
century could have been extracted
from different variants of plants, including those of the Indigofera,
Isatis, Strobilanthes, and polygonum. The dyes originating from these
plants can contain indigotin (indigo) and its structural isomer (indirubin).
The published studies indicate that indirubin is found naturally in
a greater proportion in the crops of South America and Asia. Indirubin
originates only from indigo plants (Indigofera) and not from woad
whose synonyms are Isatis tinctoria or glastum. Another reported result
indicates that this fact may be due not only to the origin of the
plants used for the extraction of the dye but also to the dying process
that involves the obligatory stages of alkalization and reduction
to solubilize the indigoid dye.13 A work,
which also reports the FT Raman spectra of the indigotin and indirubin
substances, shows perceptible differences in the spectra of both species.14 A mixture of indigotin and indirubin was also
detected in Leeds collections, as well as in pre-Colombian Peruvian
textiles.15 Both the wavenumbers observed
and the comparison of the spectral characteristics reported in the
literature and mentioned in Table 1 indicate that the dye found in the flag of Macha is
only indigotin. To perform a complementary spectroscopy study of the
origin of the dye, the appropriate measurement conditions to record
preresonance or resonance Raman spectra must be found. The maximum
absorption of the UV–vis spectra reported for the indigotin
species solubilized in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is 619 nm, while
its structural isomer, the reddish indirubin species, has a hypsochromic
effect and absorbs in the 550 nm region.15 With this indication, it is expected that the detection of resonance
Raman signals corresponding to the chromophore of the red substrate
indirubin present in lower concentration will be favored by Raman
measurements obtained with the green line of 514.5 nm of an Ar+ laser. Due to its absorption and fluorescence, indigo is
a problematic dye when explored with Raman spectroscopy. When the
reported FT Raman intensities of the dye are compared with those obtained
in our work with excitation at 647.1 nm, a close correlation is observed
in the detection of the bands of greater intensity. However, relatively
weak bands observed in the
FT Raman spectrum are also observed in our case due to the resonance
Raman effect despite the low concentration of the detected species.
For example, in the FT Raman spectrum, the weak bands that appear
at 1247 and 756 cm–1 are attributed, among other
contributions, to the CN stretching of the indigo molecule, which
is part also of the chromophore of the molecule. When 647.1 nm radiation
is used for excitation, these Raman bands are enhanced by several
orders of magnitude. This is known as the resonance Raman effect,
due to the process that originates them. It is a transition from the
electronic fundamental state to the excited one, with the CN group
being part of the indigo chromophore.

This spectrum did not
show the presence of the vibrational signals
corresponding to indirubin. To irrefutably confirm this conclusive
result to establish the origin of the dye used to make the Flag of
Macha, a small piece of the blue part of Macha’s flag was used
to dissolve its dye in d-DMSO for 20 days. Figure 8 shows the UV–vis spectrum of the
solution of the extracted dye that can be identified as indigotin.
A piece of the colored part of the flag of approximately 5 mm ×
5 mm was contacted with 1 mL of d-DMSO (the DMSO cutoff is 268 nm).
After 20 days of contact, the piece of the flag was separated from
the d-DMSO solution and a UV–vis spectrum was measured (region
900–190 nm), evidencing a band with an absorbance of 0.02 at
620 nm. In addition, the presence of a shoulder at approximately 575
nm was observed. For the sake of comparison, a DMSO solution of synthetic
indigo was also measured. The results reproduce the UV–vis
spectrum of the Flag of Macha.

Figure 8 UV–vis spectrum (blue trace) of
the solution obtained after
a small piece of the Flag of Macha extracted for 20 days in 1 mL of
d-DMSO and its comparison with the spectrum of an 8 ppm solution of
indigo in DMSO (orange trace).

After extraction with the d-DMSO solvent, the flag fragment
that
still had some remnants of the blue color was reduced by means of
dithionite in an alkaline aqueous medium. The reduced product was
again dried and oxidized in the air. The solid residues were dissolved
in d-DMSO solution. The resulting spectrum is entirely similar to
that found in Figure 8.

The bands that are clearly resolved in the spectrum of Figure 8 in the region of
617 and 572 nm compare perfectly with those obtained from commercial
indigo dissolved in the same solvent d-DMSO. The entire extraction
process was carried out in d-DMSO with the hope of being able to perform
complementary NMR studies. However, the low concentration of extracted
indigo (∼0.4 mg/L) is far from sufficient to obtain NMR spectra
given the relatively low sensitivity of this technique.

It is
concluded that the origin of the only tincture found, the
indigotin (without an appreciable amount of indirubin), does not come
from the Andean zone of Peru (or from Asia) and that therefore the
taffeta dyed with colorant from Europe probably had to enter through
the port of Buenos Aires. This traceability would also coincide with
the fact that the Flag of Macha (and that of Ayohuma) may have been
the one that was originally raised for Belgrano for the first time
on February 27, 1812, on the banks of the Paraná River and
made by María Catalina Echevarría de Vidal.

Regarding the color of the Argentinian flag, the present conclusion
agrees with the testimony of Gerónimo Espejo, a soldier who
finally reached the rank of general and who witnessed the Paso de
los Andes (the march of General San Martín to Chile through
the Cordillera de los Andes).1 He documented
that during the year 1878 “was agitated by the press of this
capital (Buenos Aires) a long controversy on the Argentinian flag”.
The author states that “the typical colors of the pavilion
were, as they are, blue and white”, mentioning the decree of
1813 of the National Assembly, the Congress of Tucumán in 1816,
and the revalidation in Buenos Aires during the year 1818. This law
under the number 62 of the Gazeta de Buenos Aires, dated 18 March,
was promulgated in the following terms and adds that with the title
War Department it has been sanctioned “That serving for all
national flag the two colors blue and white in the way and form until
now accustomed, be distinctive peculiar of the flag of war, a sun
painted in the middle of it -It is copy- Irigoyen”. Gerónimo
Espejo also mentioned in his book that the Flag of the Paso de los
Andes was blue and white as was the Flag of Macha, in agreement with
the present work.

With these arguments, General Espejo also
describes the blue color
of the banner that sheltered the patriotic forces during the Paso
de los Andes. The explanation of the vertical shape of the Paso de
los Andes Flag is interesting because of its forcefulness. General
Espejo argues with credibility that “The shops of a poor town
as Mediterranean as Mendoza, poorly stocked with effects as one might
imagine, unlike those of the coast of La Plata, had no silk goods
in which to choose the necessary for the projected flag. However,
fortunately they found themselves in a white twill and Turkish blue
tent, from which the poles were bought, enough for two strips that
joined perpendiculars, the white one in the part that is linked to
the antler, and the blue one at the end”.

He also comments
that he does not know why the flag of three strips
was not made “but we were inclined to believe that it was because
there were no more strands of the blue genre, when, to a greater extent,
the authorities of 1813 and 1816 had just designated the colors and
not the form”.

The amalgam of these results is linked
to another singular fact
for that time. According to the official website of the government
of El Salvador, the blue and white colors of the Central American
Federation Flag were suggested by Manuel José de Arce y Fagoaga,
when the Central American militiamen was named El Salvador’s
chief of forces, opposing the annexation to Mexico during 1822.16

Thus, he expressed his gratitude to the
Homeland of San Martín
and Belgrano and to the libertarian crusade that came from the south
of the continent centered in the French-Argentine corsair Hipólito
Bouchard who at the command of the frigate “La Argentina”
contributed to breaking the Royalist block in Centromérica.17 According to the explanation of Felipe Pigna,
it was Miguel Ángel de Marco who gave an account of the hypothesis
of Julián Manrique according to which Hipólito Bouchard
aspired to rescue Napoleón Bonaparte from his prison in Santa
Elena.18 When Bouchard discarded this idea,
he continued with his trip to America. There, on November 24, 1818,
under the command of the Frigates Chacabuco and La Argentina, he disembarked
in Monterrey. Thus, for some days, the blue and white Argentinian
flags waved in the city of Monterrey. On his way to the south to join
the liberating army of General San Martín and with a
final destination of Valparaiso, Bouchard was present in Acapulco
and El Salvador. His action has been witnessed by the amalgam of blue
banners of the countries of Central America (Scheme 3), all derived from the original banner that
sheltered the United Provinces of Central America.

Scheme 3 Blue Amalgam of the
Flags of Central America Influenced by the Argentinian
Flag
Throughout this whole spectral-historical
study begun in the determination
of the color of the Argentinian flag, we have, in several instances,
traveled into the past. During the oath of another remarkable pavilion,
the Flag of the Andes, Gerónimo Espejo states that San Martín
pronounced the following words: “Soldiers: this is the first
flag that has been raised in America: he beat it three times when
the troops and the people responded with a Viva la Patria...”
“...What a set of emotions the troops and the contest offered
in those solemn moments” expressed Espejo in his story. As
seen from this description, we cannot speak of anguish here either.

Recently, the debate on the color of the Argentine flag was further
developed when the study of the color of the Aráoz flag of
1814 was presented. There, it was noted that it was Sarmiento, the
president of Argentina (1868–1874), who introduced the light
blue tone on the flag.4 Fray Luis Cano
was very incisive in his assertions referring to the attitude of the
historian (and also the president of the Republic (1862–1868))
Bartolomé Mitre.19 Although Mitre
in his narrative about San Martín had Espejo as an eyewitness
to the passage of the Andes, he dismissed his undoubted story, referring
to the blue color of the flag of the army of San Martín.20

Belgrano, who was born rich and died very
poor on June 20, 1820,
indicated—in the regulation for the four schools of the North
(Tarija, Jujuy, Tucumán, and Santiago del Estero) that he intended
to build with his donation of the 40 000 gold pesos assigned
to him by the Assembly of Year XIII (Asamblea del año 1813)
in gratitude for his victories in the Battles of Tucumán and
Salta—that the teacher will try with his/her conduct and in
all his/her expressions and ways to inspire his/her students love
of order; respect for religion; moderation and sweetness in treatment;
feelings of honor; love of virtue and the sciences; disdain for vice;
inclination to work; detachment from interest; contempt for everything
related to abundance and luxury in eating, dressing, and other needs
of life; and a national spirit, qualities that make them prefer public
good and esteem more the American qualities rather than foreign—in
relation to our entire continent.

The color of Belgrano’s
flag has been revealed in this work,
along with the origin of the dye used to make it. Belgrano has forever
left us his convictions, his love for the country, and his beliefs
based on his actions and behavior. He also left us the uncertainty
about his choice of blue color. He could have had only one reason
or all of the hypothetical reasons at the same time. We believe that
Belgrano had more than a single motive in the election of the blue
color for the flag of divine origin.2,21 Blue is the
color of the mantle of the Virgin Mary, and Belgrano was a fervent
Catholic. Blue is also adopted by many other religions as the color
of their deities, and it is the color of the Bourbon dynasty; that
is, it was blue and not light blue, meaning justice, obedience, loyalty,
piety, and prudence, qualities always exalted by Belgrano.22 Blue is also one the colors of the French flag,
and it is the color of the sky. Toward the serene blue flies the injured
eagle of the poet José Martí, and blue is the
color of the legendary flower forget-me-not (No me olvides).2

In addition, the protagonists of history
were vigilant and alert
in the use of the flag. Their legacy was that the anguish was only
to preserve their and our emblem. Gerónimo Espejo clearly expresses
the reason and meaning for the alert and the need to not expose the
flag to the adversary, like Macha’s flag that was found in
Titiri several decades after the battles that occurred there: “it
was not strange to fear the din of the fighting, it was not strange
that a pitched battle or partial action some of patriot soldiers would
be defeated and lose their flag, honorary trophy that, taking it the
adversary hands, would lead it proud to perpetuate its triumph in
some of the cathedrals of the Spanish monarchy”.1

Conclusions
This article concludes
that the Flag of Macha had a blue coloration
originating from European indigo tincture. This work infers that in
consequence, their textiles entered through the port of Buenos Aires.
Therefore, it is also deduced that the Flag of Macha is probably the
same one that was raised for the first time on the banks of the Paraná
River in Rosario and that it was produced with silk that was not weighted
with Sn. It is the emblem that the patriots defended and hid in 1813
in a secluded place at 4350 masl below a picture of Santa Teresa in
the chapel of Titiri, Macha, Bolivia, Figure 9.

Figure 9 Titiri Chapel in Macha, Bolivia, at 4350 masl.
There, under a painting
of Santa Teresa, the flags of Macha and of Ayohuma were hidden between
the years 1813 and 1885.

Experimental Section
The samples of the flag were small
pieces that were not used in
the manual restoration work. They were made available by the Director
of the House of Liberty of Sucre, Bolivia, Lic. Mario Linares Urioste,
following the interest from the Ambassador of the Estado Plurinacional
de Bolivia en Buenos Aires, Ing. Santos Javier Tito Véliz.

When the spectroscopic indications suggested the presence of indigo,
a piece of the fiber of the colored part of the flag was reduced with
Na2S2O4 (Sigma-Aldrich) in an alkaline
NaOH medium. Its subsequent oxidation in the air returns the species
from its leuco to the diketo form of Scheme 1.

Samples were conveniently analyzed
by nondestructive techniques
using ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy (UV–vis), UV–vis
diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (UV–vis DRS), attenuated total
reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR-ATR), scanning
electron microscopy with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM–EDX),
and resonance Raman spectroscopy.

The UV–vis spectra
were collected using a Shimadzu UV-2600
spectrometer. The choice of d-DMSO as a solvent for the dye extraction
was related to the intention to carry out 1H- and 13C NMR spectra. A Bruker Avance Neo 500 instrument was employed
for that purpose. However, the low concentration of the solution did
not allow reliable NMR spectra to be obtained.

The UV–vis–DRS
reflectance measurements were carried
out by adding an integrating sphere attachment model ISR-2600 coated
with BaSO4 to the UV–vis equipment described above.
For the purpose of comparison, the spectra of synthetic indigo (Sigma-Aldrich)
diluted in BaSO4, a silk textile dyed with indigo, and
of the Flag of Macha sample were measured. These two last samples
were placed between two glass slides. The slide located under the
fabric portion (approximately a 10 mm × 10 mm dyed silk and a
5 mm × 5 mm flag sample) was conveniently conditioned with BaSO4. The BaSO4 was used as a reference in all measurements
performed by reflectance. The range of the measurements was between
900 and 190 nm. When glass was used, the cutoff is in the region of
400 nm. These measurements were repeated using a quartz sample holder.
However, the use of the quartz sample holder still did not allow the
observation of the behavior of the dyes of the fabrics in the region
lower than 400 nm due to the high absorption of the components of
the textiles.

The FTIR spectra were taken on a Nexus Nicolet
instrument equipped
with an MCTB detector for the range of 4000–400 cm–1. The solid synthetic indigo sample was measured in a KBr pellet
with resolutions of 2 cm–1 and 64 scans.

The
textiles were also measured by reflection using the ATR-FTIR
technique. For these determinations, an Agilent Cary 630 FTIR spectrometer
was used. The spectral region was 4000–650 cm–1 with resolutions of 2 cm–1 and 64 scans.

The SEM was used to determine the morphology of the portions of
the flag (white and colored) through the use of an SEM-FEI Quanta
200 instrument. Mappings of the samples were performed for elemental
analysis through EDX spectroscopy. An acceleration voltage of 15 kV
was used to collect the images, and a 20 kV voltage was used for the
mappings. In these images, it will become clear whether an LFD image
(secondary electrons, large-field detector) or backscatter electron
detector (BSED) was used.

Raman spectra were recorded using
a Horiba Jobin Yvon T64000 Raman
spectrometer equipped with a confocal microscope. A liquid N2-cooled back-thinned charge-coupled device detector was used. The
samples were excited with light of different wavelengths provided
by coherent Ar and Kr multiline lasers. An objective of 50× was
used, and the sample experienced an energy of approximately 0.36 mW
of a Kr+ laser. The wavenumbers were calibrated with the
459 cm–1 band of CCl4.

Author Contributions
R.M.R.
and
C.O.D.V. conceived the project; A.L.P. and R.M.R. conducted the experiments;
C.O.D.V. wrote the manuscript; and all authors discussed and commented
on the results and the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We would like
to deeply thank the Embassy in Buenos Aires
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia for its commitment and support
and, especially, María Nélida Acuña Segovia.
Without her attitude and assistance in support, it would not have
been possible to travel to Bolivia with the certainty of obtaining
the two little pieces of the Flag of Macha so well preserved in the
Casa de la Libertad in Sucre. In the Casa de la Libertad, we are very
grateful to its Director Lic. Mario Linares Urioste, its Researcher
Lic. Roberto Salinas Izurza, with C. Lic. Roger E. Churata Villegas
and Lourdes Quispe Vedia. The SEM–EDX measurements have been
possible thanks to the unique work of Lic. María Alejandra
Floridia Addato under the supervision of Dr Alberto Caneiro of Y-TEC-CONICET.
We also thank Prof. Dr Gerardo Burton, the director of the UMYFOR
(CONICET-FCEN-UBA), for his disinterested and valuable efforts to
obtain NMR spectra; to Dr María Laura DelĺArciprete
and Prof. Dr Mónica González (INIFTA-UNLP-CONICET) for
their professional help in obtaining the ATR-FTIR spectra; and to
Pablo Donadelli on behalf of all of those who in our research centre
CEQUINOR (UNLP-CONICET and associated with CIC) collaborated to obtain
the present results. We would like to thank the Facultad de Ciencias
Exactas of the Universidad Nacional de La Plata and Consejo Nacional
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET)
for their financial support. ANPCYT is also gratefully acknowledged
for the grants PICT 2014-2957 and PICT 2017-3230.

Dedication
This work is dedicated
to all libertarian women and men of our America, who despite having
their shoes ruined and their shirts soiled were able to keep their
minds bright and their ideas intact.
==== Refs
References
Espejo G.  Crónica histórica
de las operaciones del Ejército de los Andes para la restauración
de Chile en 1817 ; Imprenta y librería
de Mayo : Buenos Aires , 1882 .
Romano R. M. ; Stephani R. ; Cappa de
Oliveira L.
F. ; Della Védova C. O. 
The Colour
of the Argentinean Flag . ChemistrySelect 
2017 , 2 , 2235 –2240 . 10.1002/slct.201700284 .
Aráoz de La Madrid G.  Memorias,
Tomo I ; Buenos Aires , 1895 .
Rosa J. M.  El revisionismo responde ; Pampa
y Cielo : Buenos Aires , 1964 .
Clarín D.  Bicentenario
Macri defendió su gestión y condenó la herencia
de la corrupción K , 2016 . https://www.clarin.com/politica/bicentenario-macri-defendio-herencia-corrupcion_0_HJMrOe1P.html.
Gupta V. B. ; Rajkowa R. ; Kothari V. K. 
Physical
characteristics and structure
of Indian silk fibres . Indian J. Fibre Text.
Res. 
2000 , 25 , 14 –19 .
Shao J. ; Zheng J. ; Liu J. ; Carr C. M. 
Fourier Transform
Raman and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy Studies of Silk
Fibroin . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2005 , 96 , 1999 –2004 . 10.1002/app.21346 .
Hardy J. G. ; Römer L. M. ; Scheibel T. R. 
Polymeric materials based on silk
proteins . Polymer 
2008 , 49 , 4309 –4327 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2008.08.006 .
Dyer J. M. ; Bringans S. D. ; Bryson W. G. 
Characterisation
of photo-oxidation
products within photoyellowed wool proteins: tryptophan and tyrosine
derived chromophores . Photochem. Photobiol.
Sci. 
2006 , 5 , 698 –706 . 10.1039/b603030k .16820857 
Baran A. ; Fiedler A. ; Schulz H. ; Baranska M. 
In situ Raman and IR
spectroscopic analysis of indigo dye . Anal.
Methods 
2010 , 2 , 1372 –1376 . 10.1039/c0ay00311e .
Coupry C. ; Sagon G. ; Gorguet-Ballesteros P. 
Raman Spectroscopic
Investigation
of Blue Contemporary Textiles . J. Raman Spectrosc. 
1997 , 28 , 85 –89 . 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4555(199702)28:2/3<85::AID-JRS64>3.0.CO;2-4 .
Doherty B. ; Nowik W. ; Miliania C. ; Clementi C. 
Tyrian purple in archaeological
textiles: DMF extraction and recrystallization for the Raman identification
of precursors and derivative . J. Raman Spectrosc. 
2017 , 48 , 744 –749 . 10.1002/jrs.5096 .
Splitstoser J. C. ; Dillehay T. D. ; Wouters J. ; Claro A. 
Early pre-Hispanic
use of indigo blue in Peru . Sci. Adv. 
2016 , 2 , e150162310.1126/sciadv.1501623 .27652337 
Nyström I. ; Wilken S. ; Thomas J. 
FT-Raman Analyses of
Blue Dyes Stuff
Common in Swedish Folk Art from Hälsingland during 18th and
19th Century . Chem. Sci. J. 
2016 , 7 , 1 –4 . 10.4172/2150-3494.1000123 .
Wouters J. ; Verhecken A. 
High-performance
liquid chromatography of blue and
purple indigoid natural dyes . J. Soc. Dyers
Colour. 
1991 , 107 , 266 –269 . 10.1111/j.1478-4408.1991.tb01351.x .
http://www.presidencia.gob.sv/simbolos-patrios/.
De Marco M. Á.  Los corsarios
argentinos ; Ed Planeta : Buenos Aires , 2003 .
Pigna F.  Los Mitos de la Historia
Argentina 2 ; Lectulandia , 2005 .
Bustos Thames J. P.  La Bandera
del Templo de San Francisco (XII Parte) ; Diario el Siglo , 2014 , p 4 . https://issuu.com/luispalacio/docs/diario_el_siglo_n4709.
Mitre B.  Historia de San Martín
y de la emancipación sudamericana ; Ed. Eudeba : Buenos Aires , 1968 .
Heller E.  Wie Farben auf Gefühl
und Verstand wirken ; Ed. Droemer Verlag : München , 2000 .
ÓDonnell P.  El G20 y
nuestra bandera azul y blanca ; Diario Perfil , 2018 . https://www.perfil.com/noticias/columnistas/el-g20-y-nuestra-bandera-azul-y-blanca.phtml.

