
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03912Mini-ReviewConstructing Mechanochemical Durable and Self-Healing
Superhydrophobic Surfaces Zhang Chengjiao †Liang Fanghua †Zhang Wei †Liu Hui ‡Ge Mingzheng *†Zhang Yanyan §Dai Jiamu †Wang Hailou †Xing Guichuan §Lai Yuekun *∥Tang Yuxin *§† National
& Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Technical Fiber Composites
for Safety and Health, School of Textile & Clothing, Nantong University, Nantong 226019, P. R. China‡ College
of Textile and Clothing Engineering, Soochow
University, Suzhou 215123, P. R. China§ Institute
of Applied Physics and Materials Engineering, University of Macau, Macau 999078, P. R. China∥ National
Engineering Research Center of Chemical Fertilizer Catalyst (NERC−CFC),
College of Chemical Engineering, Fuzhou
University, Fuzhou 350116, P. R. China* E-mail: mzge1990@ntu.edu.cn.* E-mail: yklai@fzu.edu.cn.* E-mail: yxtang@um.edu.mo.07 01 2020 21 01 2020 5 2 986 994 15 11 2019 23 12 2019 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Bioinspired
superhydrophobic surfaces have attracted great interest
due to their special functions and wide applications. However, it
is still a big challenge to construct a durable superhydrophobic coating
for large-scale applications due to its easy destruction by the mechanochemical
attack. In this mini-review, we present the state-of-the-art developments
in the rational design of mechanochemical durable and self-healing
superhydrophobic surfaces. First, the mechanically durable superhydrophobic
surfaces are constructed to endure mechanical damage by adjusting
the surface morphology and increasing the binding force between the
substrates and the modified materials. Second, chemical damages also
have been taken into consideration to develop chemically robust superhydrophobic
surfaces, such as chemical etching, ultraviolet (UV)-light irradiation,
and bioerosion, etc. Third, endowing superhydrophobic coatings with
self-healing function can effectively improve the durability and prolong
the lifespan of the coatings by releasing low-surface-energy agents
or regenerating topographic structures. Finally, the challenges and
future perspectives in developing super durable bioinspired superhydrophobic
surfaces by structure design and chemistry control are discussed.
The innovative points provided in this mini-review will provide deep
fundamental insight for prolonging the lifetime of the superhydrophobic
surfaces and enable their practical applications in the near future.

document-id-old-9ao9b03912document-id-new-14ao9b03912ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
By mimicking the natural organisms, such
as lotus leaves and gecko
feet, bioinspired surfaces with special wettability have been successfully
constructed by rational design, which exhibit a high water contact
angle exceeding 150° and a sliding angle lower than 10°.
As we know, superhydrophobic surfaces should have two features: (i)
appropriate hierarchical micro-/nanostructures and (ii) low surface
energy.1 Due to the unique superhydrophobicity
and oleophobicity, the superwetting surfaces have been widely used
in self-cleaning, anti-icing, water collection, and oil–water
separation, etc.2

Recently, superhydrophobic
surfaces have been fabricated not only
by “top-down” or “bottom-up” methods on
bulk materials but also by multiple steps via creating rough surfaces
first and then modified with low-surface-energy materials.3 The fabrication techniques include the solvothermal/hydrothermal
method, chemical vapor deposition, dip/spray-coating technique, electrospinning,
etc. However, the development of artificial superhydrophobic surfaces
for real-world applications is severely limited by the poor mechanical
and chemical stability. The superhydrophobic surfaces usually lose
their special wettability due to the destruction of topographic structures
and depletion of low-surface-energy agents when subjecting to scratch,
washing, and abrasion, or working in an acid/alkali/salt environment,
high temperature, and under UV-light irradiation. For example, a facile
one-step approach was adopted to fabricate superhydrophobic coatings
via the sol–gel processing of long-chain fluoroalkylsilane.4 However, the coating was easily damaged by a
pencil scratch due to the low adhesion between fluoroalkylsilane and
glass. Therefore, it is essential to construct mechanochemical robust
superhydrophobic coatings by increasing the adhesion with the substrates.

As an alternative to the design of mechanochemical durable surfaces,
superhydrophobic surfaces with intelligent self-healing functions
have been developed to overcome durability challenges and prolong
the lifespan of the superhydrophobic coatings.5 Inspired by living organisms, releasing low-surface-energy agents
and reforming topographic structures are two main techniques to fabricate
self-healing superhydrophobic surfaces. The former method can be easily
realized by storing the low-surface-energy components inside the rough
structures and then releasing them onto the damaged  surface
during the self-healing process, while the latter method can be carried
out by regenerating the hierarchical micro-/nanostructures again by
some catalysts or triggers, which is comparatively difficult and not
normally used.6 However, how to accelerate
the migration speed of low-surface-energy components onto the damaged
surface and regenerate topographic structures via a facile method
is still a critical challenge.

In this mini-review, we present
the state-of-the-art developments
in the rational design of mechanochemical durable and self-healing
superhydrophobic surfaces (Figure 1), including dip/spray coating, electrospinning, wet
chemical method, a layer-by-layer assembly technique, 3D printing,
and phase separation technique, etc. First, the physical and chemical
methods, such as a combination of micro- and nanostructure design,
cross-linking technique, forming covalent bonds, and introducing elastic
and soft materials, are introduced to synthesize mechanically durable
superhydrophobic surfaces. Second, chemical robust superhydrophobic
coatings have been developed to endure chemical etching, such as UV-light
irradiation, bioerosion, and high-temperature attack, etc. Third,
two main strategies to endow superhydrophobic coatings with self-healing
function by releasing low-surface-energy agents and regenerating topographic
structures are summarized, which can effectively enhance the durability
and prolong the lifetime of the superhydrophobic coatings. Finally,
the challenges and future perspectives in developing super durable
bioinspired superhydrophobic surfaces for practical applications are
discussed. This mini-review will provide fundamental insight into
understanding the working mechanism of fabricating mechanochemical
robust superhydrophobic surfaces, thus inspiring researchers to explore
advanced methods for improving the durability and prolonging the lifetime
of superhydrophobic surfaces at a low cost.

Figure 1 Rational design of mechanochemical
durable and self-healing superhydrophobic
surfaces by different strategies.

Mechanically
Durable Superhydrophobic Surfaces
With the rapid development
of nanotechnology and materials science,
superhydrophobic surfaces have been widely used in our daily life.
When compared to low-surface-energy factors, surface roughness is
a more vital element to construct mechanically durable superhydrophobic
surfaces, which can be destroyed by mechanical attack. Therefore,
keeping the hierarchical structure intact and improving the adhesion
with the substrates are two effective ways to endure mechanical damage.
It can be realized by adjusting the surface morphology and increasing
the binding force between modified materials and substrates via cross-linking,
forming covalent bonds, and introducing elastic/soft materials.

Adjusting
the Surface Morphology
Encapsulating nanocomposite coatings
with a polymer
film is an important way to enhance the durability of superhydrophobic
surfaces. The incorporated nanoparticles provide rough structures,
while the hydrophobic polymers act as nanoparticle binding and provide
low tension surface.7 This process can
be easily realized by a simple layer-by-layer assembly technique,
dip-/spray-coating, and a wet chemical method. When the nanostructures
are fixed stably on the substrate, the combination of superhydrophobicity
with the smart surface texture brings a mechanical robust coating
(Figure 2a).

Figure 2 (a) Mechanical
durability of nanocomposite coating surface, (b)
optimized rough micro-/nanostructure surface, (c) creating micro-/nanostructures
on a bulk surface, and (d) filling hydrophobic particles into bulk
materials. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref (7). (d) Reproduced with permission
from ref (10).

Since microstructures can stand more pressure than
nanostructures,
many researchers have fabricated hierarchical micro-/nanostructures
by using the nanostructures to enhance the roughness and/or lower
the surface energy and microroughness as a cushion and shelter to
improve the mechanical stability and protect fragile nanoscaled topographies.
As displayed in Figure 2b, optimizing the hierarchical micro-/nanostructures can effectively
enhance their mechanical stability. Our group has fabricated raspberry-like
hierarchical structures consisting of micro-/nanoscaled particles
by an aerosol-assisted chemical vapor deposition.8 It displayed superior robustness and retained a similar
structure even after tape-peeling and sandpaper abrasion. Benefitting
from this design, it can be applied on various substrates to resist
chemical damage in any harsh environment.

Besides, creating
micro-/nanostructures on inherent bulk materials
and filling hydrophobic micro-/nanoparticles into bulk materials are
also effective means to endure the mechanical attack. Roughness could
be directly grown on the surface of bulk materials by chemical etching,
electrochemical anodization, template method, and 3D printing method.
The roughness comes from the substrate matrix as a whole, which avoids
the interfacial problems, leading to good adhesion with the substrate
and excellent mechanical durability when compared to the nanocoatings
deposited on the substrate (Figure 2c). For example, a biomimetic superhydrophobic surface
with eggbeater structure was innovatively developed by a 3D printing
technique.9 This method can introduce hierarchical
roughness and low-surface-energy agents simultaneously, which is promising
for large-scale production with low cost and high speed. Similarly,
the modified bulk materials exhibit superior durability of superhydrophobicity
and long lifetime because the encapsulated particles inside are difficult
to be removed by mechanical abrasion (Figure 2d), such as electrospinning nanofibers, graphene-based
aerogels, etc.10,11

Increasing the Binding
Force between the Modified Materials
and the Substrate
Compared to adjusting the surface morphology,
increasing the binding
force between the coating layer and substrate is a more facile and
promising strategy to improve the mechanical durability of superhydrophobic
coatings for commercialization, which can be divided into three routes:
forming covalent bonds between the coating layer and substrate, cross-linking
with the coating layer, and introducing elastic/soft materials into
the coating layer.

Forming Covalent Bonds between the Coating
Layer and the Substrate
Compared to van der Waals forces,
forming covalent bonds between
the coating layer and substrate is much stronger to endure the mechanical
and chemical attack. However, it requires both the substrate (usually
fabric, glass, stone, etc.) and the modified micro-/nanoparticles
(usually inorganic such as TiO2, SiO2, etc.)
to
have chemical reactive groups. Cellulose-based fabric, such as cotton,
silk fabric, etc., with hydroxyl groups can react with silanol, epoxide,
or azide groups to form covalent bonds first and then are decorated
by hydrophobic low-surface-energy agents, resulting in superhydrophobicity,
while for glass, metal, and other synthetic fabrics, they inherently
have less reactive groups on their surfaces and must be pretreated
by chemical and plasma etching treatment, etc., or be predecorated
by mussel-inspired dopamine to form amino and hydroxyl groups on its
surface. For example, our group has prepared superhydrophobic cellulose-based
fabrics (silk, cotton, and wool fabric) by an environmentally friendly
enzyme-etching approach, followed by modification with methyltrichlorosilane
via a chemical bond (Figure 3a).12 It was demonstrated that
the superhydrophobic cellulose-based fabrics exhibited excellent mechanical
durability against the long cycling abrasion and laundering tests.
In short, the covalent bonds can effectively enhance the adhesion
with the substrate, making the superhydrophobic surfaces endure a
more severe mechanochemical attack than that of the superhydrophobic
coating on the substrate only with physical contact.

Figure 3 Schematic illustration
for fabricating mechanochemical durable
superhydrophobic (a) enzyme-etching fabric with a covalent bond, (b)
cross-linked fluoropolymers/epoxy/PTEE superhydrophobic coating, and
(c) PDMS-modified cotton fabric, respectively. (a) Reproduced with
permission from ref (12). (b) Reproduced with permission from ref (1). (c) Reproduced with permission from ref (17).

Cross-Linking
with the Coating Layer
In addition to forming covalent bonds,
cross-linking with the coating
layer has been considered as another promising technique to improve
the durability of superhydrophobic coatings.13 This method can be used for both polymer coating and polymeric nanocomposite
coating, which can be realized by the addition of cross-linking agents
and catalysts or induced by UV-light irradiation and heating treatment,
etc. After cross-linking, the polymer can form a stable network, and
the micro-/nanoparticles are encapsulated by the network with a strong
bond, improving the adhesion between the network and the substrate
simultaneously. For example, Liu et al. successfully constructed superhydrophobic
coatings on glasses with a three-dimensional continuous network and
low-surface-energy hierarchical structure by a facile UV-induced cross-linking
vinyltriethoxysilane with silica particles.14 Making full use of the 3D continuous superhydrophobic network, the
robust coating exhibited outstanding stability to both mechanical
damage (sandpaper abrasion) and chemical damage (strong acid/alkali/salt
solutions). Besides, Tiwari’s group synthesized a robust superhydrophobic
all-organic nanocomposite coating by cross-linking fluoropolymers
with epoxy backbone, followed by incoporating polytetrafluoroethylene
(PTEE) nanoparticles, which not only possessed mechanical and chemical
stability but also exhibited excellent resistance to high-speed liquid
impact due to the high adhesion with the substrate (Figure 3b).1 The cross-linking technique can not only increase the binding force
between the micro-/nanoparticles and polymer by embedding them inside
the network but also enhance the adhesion between the network and
the substrate, exhibiting promising prospects in practical applications.

Introducing
Elastic/Soft Materials into the Coating Layer
Compared to
brittle materials, the nanocomposite coating by incorporating
the micro/nanoparticles into elastic and soft materials can endure
mechanical damage, and the adhesion with the substrate can even be
improved via dispersing energy with deformation.15 The nanocomposite coating with elastic and soft materials
is like a spring. When loaded force is released, the superhydrophobic
rough surfaces can recover their morphology as the pristine state.
At the same time, the elastic and soft materials are compatible with
various substrates, such as fabric, metal, and stone. Benefitting
from these advantages, large quantities of elastic and soft materials
have been developed to construct mechanical robust superhydrophobic
surfaces by a dip-/spray-coating technique, such as PDMS, resin, and
polyurethane, etc.16 Among them, PDMS is
the most widely used fluorine-free elastic polymer binder because
of its wonderful mechanochemical stability and high adhesion with
the substrate, which was widely used to synthesize superhydrophobic
coatings by phase separation. For example, our group synthesized superhydrophobic
cotton fabrics by first decorating a silica aerogel film, followed
by PDMS top-coating via a simple dip-coating technique (Figure 3c).17 Due to the high binding strength between the superhydrophobic coating
and cotton fabric, it can withstand 100 cycles of abrasion and 5 cycles
of accelerated machine wash, without any morphology changes. Besides,
it was very stable in strongly acidic and alkaline solutions. Recently,
an unstable system for creating hierarchical micro-/nanostructures
via phase separation is also raised for constructing superhydrophobicity.
Kang et al. successfully fabricated a superhydrophobic coating driven
by Marangoni instability and photopolymerization of PDMS.18 Under UV irradiation, the uneven evaporation
and cluster formation of the polymer surfaces in ethanol formed micro-
and nanoscale roughness. PDMS acted as a binder and provided low-surface-energy
agents simultaneously. This approach provides a rapid and efficient
route to the generation of superhydrophobic surfaces, which may be
extended to a wide variety of polymers. It is also promising for commercialization
of superhydrophobic surfaces with an eco-friendly approach without
using any toxic organic solvent solutions.

Chemically Robust Superhydrophobic
Surfaces
In addition to the physical resistance against mechanical
damage,
chemical attack should also be taken into consideration in the real-world
applications, which destroys the rough structures and exhausts the
low-surface-energy agents, resulting in loss of superhydrophobicity.
The UV-light irradiation resistance, corrosion resistance, and thermal
resistance will be discussed in the following sections.

UV-Light Irradiation
Resistance
The superhydrophobic surfaces outdoors are prone
to be destroyed
by UV-light irradiation, especially for outdoor-wearing textiles,
tents, canopy covers, etc. The UV-light irradiation not only accelerates
the aging process of the substrate but also destroys the structure
of the superhydrophobic components. Therefore, employing UV-light
absorption and inert inorganic micro-/nanoparticles (TiO2, ZnO, SiO2, etc.) has been adopted to resist UV-light
damage. Titanium dioxide has been widely used to fabricate superhydrophobic
surfaces with UV-light irradiation resistance due to its excellent
UV-light absorption property, chemical stability, and high bond energy
between hydrophobic substrates and agents. For example, our group
decorated cotton fabric with flower-like TiO2 nanoparticles
by a facile hydrothermal method first, followed by fluoroalkylsilane
modification (Figure 4a).19 The TiO2@fabric not only
exhibited excellent resistance to abrasion but also displayed effectiveness
in shielding UV radiation due to high ultraviolet absorbance and the
scattering characteristics of flower-like TiO2 nanostructures
(Figure 4b).

Figure 4 (a) Schematic
illustration of the procedure to construct superhydrophobic
TiO2 particle-decorated cotton fabric. (b) UV transmission
measurements for various deposition durations of TiO2 nanoparticles
coated onto cotton fabric samples. (c) A fluorine-free superhydrophobic
coating with high flexibility on different substrates. (d) Water contact
angle (CA) and sliding angle (SA) on the superhydrophobic surface
after the treatment at different conditions. (a,b) Reproduced with
permission from ref (19). (c,d) Reproduced with permission from ref (22).

Apart from inorganic micro-/nanoparticles, some polymers (like
polypyrrole) and carbon materials (like graphene, CNT) also have the
ability to resist UV-light irradiation. For example, robust superhydrophobic
poly(ethylene terephthalate) fabrics were successfully synthesized
by coating with CNT and PDMS by an immersing technique.20 The as-obtained fabrics possess remarkable mechanical
durability to washing and abrasion and chemical stability against
different pH solutions and UV light. However, the color of the bulk
materials will become black and may not be suitable for fabrics.

Corrosion
Resistance
For corrosion resistance, acid, alkaline, and
salt environments
have a great influence on the durability and lifetime of the superhydrophobic
surfaces. When exposed directly to the corrosive solution, the superhydrophobic
molecules can easily be destroyed, and the superhydrophobic coating
would detach from the substrate due to the hydrolysis of chemical
interfacial bonding. Up to now, stabilizing the superhydrophobic coating
and keeping a stable air layer between the rough structures and solution
are the two main approaches to resist various kinds of chemical damages.
For example, our group coated fabrics with polydopamine first and
then modified them with the stearic acid to synthesize superhydrophobic
surfaces, exhibiting chemical stability in alkali and salt solutions
due to the stability and strong binding force of the superhydrophobic
coatings.21 Besides, a fluorine-free superhydrophobic
coating was prepared by functionalized silica nanoparticles and polystyrene-b-poly(ethylene-co-butylene)-b-polystyrene, which has been applied on different substrates by a
facile dip/spray-coating technique, such as glass, metal, and polymeric
matrix (Figure 4c).22 The as-created surfaces displayed strong resistance
not only to chemical corrosions (immersed in acid, alkaline, and salt
solution for a long time) but also to high/low temperature and UV
irradiation, without losing superhydrophobic property (Figure 4d).

What’s more,
the bioerosion (like fungus and bacteria) is
also noteworthy. It will destroy the intrinsic structure of the materials,
resulting in metal rusting and degradation of cellulose-based fabrics.
Therefore, constructing superhydrophobic coatings and incorporating
transition metals or noble metals are effective and efficient for
bioerosion resistance. Li’s group fabricated superhydrophobic
cotton-derived carbon fibers modified with nanocopper by a facile
and scalable method.23 It exhibited outstanding
antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus
aureus with antibacterial ratios of >92% due to the superhydrophobicity
and strong oxidizing ability of the oxygen reactive radicals by introduction
of Cu. Similarly, a superhydrophobic fabric with durable photo-, bio-,
and magneto-activities was also developed by in situ synthesis of
TiO2@Fe3O4@Ag nanocomposites on its
surface.24 These facile methods are effective
and efficient for fabricating superhydrophobic surface with bioerosion
property.

Thermal Resistance
In addition to UV-light irradiation
and corrosion damage, thermal
resistance has been widely investigated to prolong the lifespan of
the superhydrophobic surfaces because the structure and chemical interfacial
bonds can be easily destroyed at high temperatures. Recently, modifying
the surface coating with inorganic materials, Cl–-containing materials, graphene, CNT, and other novel materials has
been adopted to construct fire-resistant superhydrophobic surfaces.
For example, our group has synthesized 3D superhydrophobic aluminum
hydroxide nanoparticle-coated cellulose composite aerogels.25 Due to the existence of the inorganic nanoparticles
in the bulk materials, the cellulose composite aerogels exhibited
remarkable mechanical stability, thermal stability, and fire retardancy.

Except for the aforementioned harsh environmental conditions, some
other extreme conditions, such as low temperature, low/high pressure,
high humidity, etc., should also be paid much attention to construct
chemically robust superhydrophobic surfaces.

Intelligent Self-Healing
Superhydrophobic Surfaces
Inspired by the naturally superhydrophobic
insect wings and plant
leaves, always keeping special wettability throughout their lifetime,
endowing artificial superhydrophobic surfaces with intelligent self-healing
function has been proposed to maintain mechanochemical durability.
They are meaningful and promising in practical applications to stand
much more severe destructions, such as knife-cut, scratch, etc. The
self-healing process can be realized by two means: releasing low-surface-energy
agents and regenerating topographic structures.

Releasing Low-Surface-Energy
Agents
When the hydrophobic leaves are damaged, they can
regenerate the
hydrophobic epicuticular wax layer and maintain superhydrophobicity
throughout its lifetime. By mimicking this phenomenon, releasing low-surface-energy
agents inside is the most commonly used technique to construct artificial
robust and self-healing superhydrophobic surfaces. Generally speaking,
large quantities of low-surface-energy agents (usually fluoroalkylsilane,
PDMS, etc.) are injected into the inner space of the rough matrix
by the dip-/spray-coating method. Once the superhydrophobic coating
is decomposed or degraded by mechanochemical attack (abrasion, washing,
plasma damage, etc.), the superhydrophobic molecules will migrate
to the damaged surface when triggered by mechanical force, high temperature,
and UV-light, which exhibits higher self-healing speed than longtime
placement at room temperature. Recently, we fabricated a mechanochemically
robust superhydrophobic cotton fabric with intelligent self-healing
nature by a “PDMS-in-water” emulsion approach via phase
separation (Figure 5a).26 After dip-coating and drying, PDMS
was uniformly dispersed in cotton fiber and grafted on the bulk surface
of cotton fabric via a strong interfacial binding force, enhancing
inherent hierarchical microstructures and decreasing the surface energy
simultaneously. Therefore, the superhydrophobic coatings not only
displayed superior chemical stability but also could repair the superhydrophobicity
throughout the whole lifetime though damaged by machine washing or
abrasion, due to the self-diffusion process of PDMS molecules from
the inner part to the outer surface of the cotton fibers to minimize
surface free energy (Figure 5b–e). This environmentally friendly and cost-effective
method can be employed on various materials in the nanoscience field
for environment and energy applications. Besides, Zhang et al. first
fabricated totally waterborne, mechanically robust, and self-healing
superhydrophobic coatings by a combination of polyurethane adhesive
and hexadecyl polysiloxane-modified SiO2.27 Except for the high mechanical stability and chemical stability
against corrosive liquids and UV irradiation, the coatings also showed
fast and stable self-healing capability owing to migration of the
healing agent (hexadecyl polysiloxane) to the damaged surface. However,
when the low-surface-energy components are exhausted, the superhydrophobicity
cannot be recovered any more. From this view, self-healing superhydrophobic
surfaces can be achieved by modifying the rough surfaces with the
superhydrophobic agents again via the dip-/spraying-coating method.

Figure 5 (a) Schematic
illustration of the procedure to construct superhydrophobic
PDMS@cotton fabric and (b) working mechanism of self-healing process
by releasing low-surface-energy agents. (c) Line scan results of content
changes of C, O, and Si elements and (d) wide and (e) narrow XPS spectra
of PDMS@cotton fabric before abrasion, after abrasion, and after heating
treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref (26).

Regenerating
Topographic Structures
Traditionally, hierarchical micro-/nanoparticles
have low adhesion
with the substrate, and they can easily peel off from the substrate
after mechanical or chemical destruction. Therefore, regenerating
topographic structures is another important strategy for constructing
robust self-healing superhydrophobic surfaces. Chen’s group
synthesized a self-healing superhydrophobic surface containing polystyrene,
fluorinated SiO2 nanoparticles, low-surface-energy agents,
and TiO2 nanoparticles.28 When
the micro-/nanostructures were destroyed by mechanical abrasion, polystyrene
was decomposed to regenerate the roughness by the photocatalysis of
TiO2 nanoparticles under UV-light irradiation to maintain
superhydrophobicity. Recently, shape-memory polymers have appeared
to fabricate the mechanochemical robust and self-healing superhydrophobic
surfaces.29 Though it was damaged by mechanical
force and the surface became flat, it would recover its original roughness
due to the memory effect. However, there are little works on regenerating
rough structures. Therefore, it is still a big challenge to be addressed,
and more efforts should be put in this area.

Conclusions and Outlook
In summary, the state-of-the-art fabrication methods on mechanochemical
durable and self-healing superhydrophobic surfaces are presented in
this mini-review. The strategies of adjusting surface morphology and
increasing the adhesion with the substrate are firstly introduced
to synthesize mechanically durable superhydrophobic surfaces. Then,
chemically robust superhydrophobic surfaces have been developed to
endure chemical etching, such as UV-light irradiation, bioerosion,
and high temperature, etc. Endowing superhydrophobic coatings with
self-healing function by releasing low-surface-energy agents and reforming
topographic structures can also enhance the durability and prolong
the lifetime of the superhydrophobic coatings. These strategies all
contribute to constructing mechanochemical robust superhydrophobic
surfaces and enable them in practical applications in the following
decades.

Though great progress has been achieved in constructing
durable
and self-healing superhydrophobic surfaces, there still exist some
critical challenges. First, the superhydrophobic coatings usually
contain fluorine-containing compounds and are often synthesized by
the wet chemical method using organic solvent, which is toxic
and harmful to human beings. It is essential to construct artificial
robust and self-healing superhydrophobicity via an environmentally
friendly technique. Second, though the adhesion with the substrate
has been improved by cross-linking or forming covalent bonds, it can
only stand mild mechanical damage, such as abrasion, washing, etc.
In order to adapt the real-world usage, it is meaningful to construct
durable superhydrophobic surfaces against severe mechanical damages
(deep scratch, knife-cut, etc.) by forming much stronger interfacial
chemical bonds. Third, most of the self-healing processes can be realized
by longtime placement or triggered by mechanical force, heating, and
UV-light irradiation, etc. Thus, how to accelerate the speed of the
migration/mobility of low-surface-energy molecules onto the damaged
surface is still a big challenge. Fourth, the traditional methods
for fabricating mechanochemical durable and self-healing superhydrophobic
materials are limited to large-scale production and cannot meet the
industrial requirements. The novel techniques should be developed
for mass production by creating roughness and providing low-surface-energy
simultaneously, such as 3D/4D printing, an unstable system for constructing
superhydrophobicity via phase separation, etc. Finally, various testing
methods have been conducted to evaluate the mechanical and chemical
stability of the superhydrophobicity, making it difficult to compare
the efficiency of different fabrication techniques. Therefore, the
testing methods should be unified according to the actual applications,
such as abrasion standard, washing standard, etc. We believe that
with more efforts put in this field the artificial mechanochemical
durable superhydrophobic surfaces can be successfully constructed
with multifunctions within a short time. It can also be applied in
various environmental and energy applications, such as textile finishing,
oil–water separation, anti-icing, catalysis, and lithium-ion
batteries, etc.

Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through the contributions of all authors.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.



Mingzheng
Ge is
a full professor at the School of Textile & Clothing in Nantong
University in 2019. He received his Ph.D. degree from the College
of Textile and Clothing Engineering in Soochow University in 2018.
During 2016-2017, he was a visiting scholar in Nanyang Technological
University (NTU, Singapore). His research interests include intelligent
surfaces/interfaces with special wettability, advanced materials for
photocatalysis, and wearable energy storage electronics.



Yuekun
Lai is a Fujian province “Minjiang Scholar”
chair professor at the College of Chemical Engineering at Fuzhou University,
China. He received his Ph.D. degree from the Department of Chemistry,
Xiamen University. During 2009–2011, he worked as a research
fellow at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. In July 2011, he moved to Muenster
University with Prof. Harald Fuchs and Prof. Lifeng Chi. During 2013–2018,
he was a Professor at the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering
in Soochow University. He was selected as the 2018, 2019 Highly Cited
Researchers (Clarivate) and the recipient of the 2016 Journal of Materials
Chemistry A (RSC) Emerging Investigators and 2019 Advanced Materials
Interfaces (Wiley) Hall of Fame awards. His current research topics
are bioinspired intelligent materials with special wettability, multifunctional
fabrics, and TiO2 nanostructures for energy and environmental
applications.



Yuxin Tang is an Assistant
Professor in the Institute of Applied
Physics and Materials Engineering (IAPME) at the University of Macau.
He obtained his B.S. and M.S. degrees at the Nanjing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2006 and 2009, respectively, and graduated
from Nanyang Technological University (NTU, Singapore) with a Ph.D.
in materials science (2013). After his postdoctoral fellow training
at NTU, he joined IAPME as Assistant Professor in 2018. His research
interest is rational design of advanced functional materials for energy
conversion and storage and environmental remediation.

Acknowledgments
This work
was supported by the National Key Research
and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2016YFB0303101), the National
Nature Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 21501127 and 21875040),
and Nantong Science and Technology Project (No. JC2018105). This work
was also supported by the Open Project Program of Key Laboratory of
Eco-textiles, Ministry of Education, Jiangnan University (No. KLET1803),
the Large Instruments Open Foundation of Nantong University (No. KBJN1927),
and Science and Technology Development Fund, Macau SAR (file nos.
FDCT-0057/2019/A1 and 0092/2019/A2).
==== Refs
References
Peng C. ; Chen Z. ; Tiwari M. K. 
All-Organic Superhydrophobic Coatings
with Mechanochemical Robustness and Liquid Impalement Resistance . Nat. Mater. 
2018 , 17 , 355 –360 . 10.1038/s41563-018-0044-2 .29581573 
Zhang Y. ; Tang Y. ; Deng J. ; Li W. ; Xia H. ; Zhu Z. ; Lv Z. ; Wei J. ; Li W. ; Persson C. ; Malyi O. I. ; Antonietti M. ; Chen X. 
Correlating the Peukert’s
Constant with Phase Composition of Electrode Materials in Fast Lithiation
Processes . ACS Materials Lett. 
2019 , 1 , 519 –525 . 10.1021/acsmaterialslett.9b00320 .
Chen K. ; Wu Y. ; Zhou S. ; Wu L. 
Recent Development of Durable and
Self-Healing Surfaces with Special Wettability . Macromol. Rapid Commun. 
2016 , 37 , 463 –485 . 10.1002/marc.201500591 .26833559 
Liu S. ; Liu X. ; Latthe S. ; Gao L. ; An S. ; Yoon S. ; Liu B. ; Xing R. 
Self-Cleaning Transparent Superhydrophobic Coatings
through Simple Sol-Gel Processing of Fluoroalkylsilane . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2015 , 351 , 897 –903 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.06.016 .
Dalawai S. ; Aly Saad Aly M. ; Latthe S. ; Xing R. ; Sutar R. ; Nagappan S. ; Ha C. ; Kumar Sadasivuni K. ; Liu S. 
Recent Advances in Durability of Superhydrophobic Self-Cleaning Technology:
A Critical Review . Prog. Org. Coat. 
2020 , 138 , 105381 10.1016/j.porgcoat.2019.105381 .
Kobina
Sam E. ; Kobina Sam D. ; Lv X. ; Liu B. ; Xiao X. ; Gong S. ; Yu W. ; Chen J. ; Liu J. 
Recent Development
in the Fabrication of Self-Healing Superhydrophobic Surfaces . Chem. Eng. J. 
2019 , 373 , 531 –546 . 10.1016/j.cej.2019.05.077 .
Xue C. H. ; Ma J. Z. 
Long-Lived Superhydrophobic Surfaces . J. Mater.
Chem. A 
2013 , 1 , 4146 –4161 . 10.1039/c2ta01073a .
Li S. ; Page K. ; Sathasivam S. ; Heale F. ; He G. ; Lu Y. ; Lai Y. ; Chen G. ; Carmalt C. J. ; Parkin I. P. 
Efficiently
Texturing Hierarchical Superhydrophobic Fluoride-Free Translucent
Films by AACVD with Excellent Durability and Self-cleaning Ability . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2018 , 6 , 17633 –17641 . 10.1039/C8TA05402A .
Yang Y. ; Li X. ; Zheng X. ; Chen Z. ; Zhou Q. ; Chen Y. 
3D-Printed
Biomimetic Super-Hydrophobic Structure for Microdroplet Manipulation
and Oil/Water Separation . Adv. Mater. 
2018 , 30 , 1704912 10.1002/adma.201704912 .
Jing X. ; Guo Z. 
Biomimetic Super Durable
and Stable Surfaces with Superhydrophobicity . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2018 , 6 , 16731 –16768 . 10.1039/C8TA04994G .
Wan C. ; Lu Y. ; Jiao Y. ; Jin C. ; Sun Q. ; Li J. 
Ultralight
and Hydrophobic Nanofibrillated Cellulose Aerogels from Coconut Shell
with Ultrastrong Adsorption Properties . J. Appl.
Polym. Sci. 
2015 , 132 , 42037 10.1002/app.42037 .
Cheng Y. ; Zhu T. ; Li S. ; Huang J. ; Mao J. ; Yang H. ; Gao S. ; Chen Z. ; Lai Y. 
A Novel Strategy for Fabricating
Robust Superhydrophobic Fabrics by Environmentally-Friendly Enzyme
Etching . Chem. Eng. J. 
2019 , 355 , 290 –298 . 10.1016/j.cej.2018.08.113 .
Su X. ; Li H. ; Lai X. ; Chen Z. ; Zeng X. 
3D Porous Superhydrophobic
CNT/EVA Composites for Recoverable Shape Reconfiguration and Underwater
Vibration Detection . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2019 , 29 , 1900554 10.1002/adfm.201900554 .
Liu M. ; Luo Y. ; Jia D. 
Facile, Solvent-Free
Fabrication of A Robust 3-Dimensional
Continuous Superhydrophobic Coating with Wettability Control and Abrasion
Healing . Chem. Eng. J. 
2019 , 368 , 18 –28 . 10.1016/j.cej.2019.02.162 .
Tian T. ; Sharma C. S. ; Ahuja N. ; Varga M. ; Selvakumar R. ; Lee Y. T. ; Chiu Y. C. ; Shih C. J. 
An Elastic Interfacial
Transistor Enabled by Superhydrophobicity . Small 
2018 , 14 , 1804006 10.1002/smll.201804006 .
Jung K. K. ; Jung Y. ; Choi C. J. ; Ko J. S. 
Highly Reliable
Superhydrophobic Surface with Carbon Nanotubes Immobilized on a PDMS/Adhesive
Multilayer . ACS Omega 
2018 , 3 , 12956 –12966 . 10.1021/acsomega.7b01872 .31458019 
Cao C. ; Ge M. ; Huang J. ; Li S. ; Deng S. ; Zhang S. ; Chen Z. ; Zhang K. ; Al-Deyab S. S. ; Lai Y. 
Robust Fluorine-Free
Superhydrophobic PDMS-Ormosil@Fabrics for Highly Effective Self-Cleaning
and Efficient Oil-Water separation . J. Mater.
Chem. A 
2016 , 4 , 12179 –12187 . 10.1039/C6TA04420D .
Kang S. ; Hwang S. ; Jin S. ; Choi C. ; Kim J. ; Park B. ; Lee D. ; Lee C. 
A Rapid One-Step Fabrication
of Patternable Superhydrophobic Surfaces Driven by Marangoni Instability . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 2828 –2834 . 10.1021/la500266f .24564739 
Huang J. Y. ; Li S. H. ; Ge M. Z. ; Wang L. N. ; Xing T. L. ; Chen G. Q. ; Liu X. F. ; Al-Deyab S. S. ; Zhang K. Q. ; Chen T. ; Lai Y. K. 
Robust Superhydrophobic TiO2@Fabrics for UV Shielding, Self-cleaning and Oil-Water Separation . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 2825 –2832 . 10.1039/C4TA05332J .
Guo X. ; Xue C. ; Li M. ; Li X. ; Ma J. 
Fabrication of Robust,
Superhydrophobic, Electrically Conductive and UV-Blocking Fabrics
via Layer-by-Layer Assembly of Carbon Nanotubes . RSC Adv. 
2017 , 7 , 25560 –25565 . 10.1039/C7RA02111A .
Dong X. ; Gao S. ; Huang J. ; Li S. ; Zhu T. ; Cheng Y. ; Zhao Y. ; Chen Z. ; Lai Y. 
A Self-Roughened and
Biodegradable Superhydrophobic Coating with UV Shielding, Solar-Induced
Self-Healing and Versatile Oil-Water Separation Ability . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2019 , 7 , 2122 –2128 . 10.1039/C8TA10869B .
Wang F. ; Pi J. ; Song F. ; Feng R. ; Xu C. ; Wang X. ; Wang Y. 
A Superhydrophobic Coating to Create Multi-Functional Materials with
Mechanical/Chemical/Physical Robustness . Chem.
Eng. J. 
2020 , 381 , 122539 10.1016/j.cej.2019.122539 .
Jiao Y. ; Wan C. ; Zhang W. ; Bao W. ; Li J. 
Carbon Fibers Encapsulated
with Nano-Copper:A Core-Shell Structured Composite for Antibacterial
and Electromagnetic Interference Shielding Applications . Nanomaterials 
2019 , 9 , 460 10.3390/nano9030460 .
Harifi T. ; Montazer M. 
Photo-, Bio-, and Magneto-Active
Colored Polyester
Fabric with Hydrophobic/Hydrophilic and Enhanced Mechanical Properties
through Synthesis of TiO2/Fe3O4/Ag
Nanocomposite . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2014 , 53 , 1119 –1129 . 10.1021/ie403052m .
He C. ; Huang J. ; Li S. ; Meng K. ; Zhang L. ; Chen Z. ; Lai Y. 
Mechanically
Resistant and Sustainable
Cellulose-Based Composite Aerogels with Excellent Flame Retardant,
Sound-Absorption, and Superantiwetting Ability for Advanced Engineering
Materials . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2018 , 6 , 927 –936 . 10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b03281 .
Ge M. ; Cao C. ; Liang F. ; Liu R. ; Zhang Y. ; Zhang W. ; Zhu T. ; Yi B. ; Tang Y. ; Lai Y. 
A “PDMS-in-water”
Emulsion Enables Mechanochemically Robust Superhydrophobic Surfaces
with Self-Healing Nature . Nanoscale Horiz. 
2020 , 5 , 65-73 10.1039/C9NH00519F .
Li Y. ; Li B. ; Zhao X. ; Tian N. ; Zhang J. 
Totally Waterborne,
Nonfluorinated, Mechanically Robust, and Self-Healing Superhydrophobic
Coatings for Actual Anti-Icing . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 39391 –39399 . 10.1021/acsami.8b15061 .30351901 
Chen K. ; Zhou S. ; Wu L. 
Facile Fabrication of Self-Repairing
Superhydrophobic Coatings . Chem. Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 11891 –11894 . 10.1039/C3CC49251F .
Lv T. ; Cheng Z. ; Zhang E. ; Kang H. ; Liu Y. ; Jiang L. 
Self-Restoration of
Superhydrophobicity on Shape Memory Polymer Arrays
with Both Crushed Microstructure and Damaged Surface Chemistry . Small 
2017 , 13 , 1503402 10.1002/smll.201503402 .

