
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145719610.1021/acsomega.6b00325ArticleSynthesis of Glycerol-Based Biopolyesters as Toughness
Enhancers for Polylactic Acid Bioplastic through Reactive Extrusion Valerio Oscar †‡Pin Jean Mathieu ‡Misra Manjusri †‡Mohanty Amar K. *†‡† School
of Engineering, University of Guelph, Thornbrough Building, 50 Stone Road
East, Guelph N1G 2W1, Ontario, Canada‡ Bioproducts
Discovery and Development Centre, Department of Plant Agriculture, University of Guelph, Crop Science Building, 50 Stone Road East, Guelph N1G 2W1, Ontario, Canada* E-mail: mohanty@uoguelph.ca (A.K.M.).19 12 2016 31 12 2016 1 6 1284 1295 19 10 2016 30 11 2016 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society2016American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
synthesis of polyesters based on glycerol, succinic acid [poly(glycerol
succinate), PGS] and/or maleic anhydride [poly(glycerol succinate-co-maleate), PGSMA] was investigated aiming to produce a
green product suitable for toughening of polylactic acid (PLA) using
melt blending technologies. The molar ratio of reactants and the synthesis
temperature were screened to find optimum synthesis conditions leading
to the highest toughness enhancement of PLA. It was found that a molar
ratio of reactants of 1:1 glycerol/succinic acid increases the effectiveness
of PGS as a toughening agent for PLA, which correlates with the achievement
of a higher molecular weight on the synthesis of PGS. The introduction
of maleic anhydride as a comonomer for the synthesis of the partial
replacement of succinic acid was advantageous for making PGS suitable
for reactive extrusion (REX) mediated by free radical initiators.
The tensile toughness of the REX PLA/PGSMA blends was improved by
392% compared with that of neat PLA, which was caused by the simultaneous
cross-linking of PGSMA within the PLA matrix, and the in situ formation
of PLA-g-PGSMA graft copolymers acting as interfacial
compatibilizers. Two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance and Fourier
transform infrared analysis confirmed the formation of PLA-g-PGSMA species on REX experiments. This in turn caused
a decrease in the diameter of the PGS particles dispersed within the
PLA matrix from >10 μm to approximately 2 μm as observed
using scanning electron microscopy. A further increase of 1600% in
the toughness of the blends was achieved by lowering the synthesis
temperature of PGSMA from 180 to 150 °C. The optimum synthesis
conditions for PGSMA leading to the highest increase in the toughness
of 80/20 PLA/PGSMA blends were found to be 1:0.5:0.5 mol glycerol/succinic
acid/maleic anhydride synthesized at a temperature of 150 °C
for 5 h.

document-id-old-9ao6b00325document-id-new-14ao-2016-003257ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Polylactic acid (PLA),
or polylactide, is a semicrystalline compostable
polyester produced industrially from renewable resources that are
fermented to form lactic acid and subsequently polymerized to
yield high-molecular-weight products.1 This
polymer presents high tensile strength and modulus but inherent brittleness
manifested as a low elongation at break (∼3%) and an impact
resistance that limits its adoption for flexible plastic parts. Overcoming
the inherent brittleness of PLA to expand its application field has
been the subject of intensive research over the past decade, with
several review articles published on the ways of turning PLA from
a stiff and brittle material to a ductile one.2−4 Successful toughening
of PLA has been achieved by melt blending with several commercial
and noncommercial polymers including synthetic polyesters, natural
and epoxidized rubbers, thermoplastic elastomers, acrylic copolymers,
and so forth.5 Although the successful
modification of PLA to yield a tough blend has been achieved, a limiting
factor for the introduction of such blends to commercial applications
is usually the high cost of the secondary polymer used for the toughening
of PLA. An ideal toughening agent for PLA should be synthesized using
inexpensive synthesis routes and preferentially from bio-based monomers
produced industrially at a low cost.

Glycerol and succinic acid
are both bio-based monomers that gather
the aforementioned requisites. Glycerol (1,2,3-propanetriol) is the
major coproduct of biodiesel industries with a production capacity
that has steadily grown in the last decade, reaching over 2 million
tonnes per year.6 Because of this fact,
new applications for glycerol are desired to expand the biorefinery
concept in the biodiesel sector.7 This
inexpensive molecule is a trifunctional alcohol suitable for performing
polycondensation reactions in the presence of dicarboxylic acids yielding
hyperbranched polyesters. Among the dicarboxylic acids produced industrially,
succinic acid (1,4-butanedioic acid) is currently one of the few dicarboxylic
acids produced in a commercial scale from biomass resources through
fermentation technologies. The sustainable production of bio-based
succinic acid from biomass resources represents a major breakthrough
toward the establishment of a bio-based economy. The usage of bio-based
molecules such as biodiesel-derived glycerol and fermentation-derived
succinic acid for the synthesis of products of commercial interest
is in line with the principles of green chemistry.8 Hence, the development of a glycerol- and succinic acid-based
toughening agent for PLA can open the possibility for creating new
toughened bio-based blends of PLA with reduced cost and increased
sustainability compared with blends prepared from PLA and petroleum-based
polymeric additives. Biodegradable polyesters can be synthesized using
glycerol and succinic acid in bulk polycondensations in the absence
of a solvent and a catalyst.9−11 These polyesters can be called
“green” polyesters because they are synthesized using
renewable resources under environmentally favorable reaction conditions
and produce no toxic wastes as outlined in green chemistry principles.12,13 Synthesizing a hyperbranched polyester using glycerol and succinic
acid and tuning these polyester properties for an effective toughening
of PLA appears as an advantageous strategy toward the creation of
sustainable materials with an improved cost/performance balance.

In earlier literature, two examples of PLA toughened by melt blending
with glycerol polyesters can be found. The first reported attempt
of developing a PLA/glycerol polyester tough material belongs to Gu
and co-workers.14 In this pioneering work,
the authors synthesized a polyester using glycerol and sebacic acid
as the starting materials and used this polyester for melt blending
with PLA. Upon the addition of 15 and 30 wt % glycerol polyester,
the elongation at break of PLA was increased from 7 to 155% and 143%,
respectively. A second example of the usage of glycerol-based polyesters
for the modification of PLA has been recently reported by Coativy
and co-workers.15 In this study, the starting
monomers for synthesizing polyesters were glycerol, sebacic acid,
and stearic acid, and the reaction was performed using microwave heating.
The synthesized polyester material was blended with PLA at different
mass ratios, and the optimum mechanical performance was achieved in
the blend ratio of 90/10 PLA/glycerol polyester. In this case, the
elongation at break of the system was increased from 2.3% for pure
PLA to 93% in the 90/10 PLA/glycerol polyester blend. It is noteworthy
to mention that in both of these publications, the diacid of choice
was not succinic acid and that the reaction conditions were fixed
for synthesizing the polyester. To the best of our knowledge, no study
has been conducted on the behavior of the PLA/glycerol polyester blend
system using a glycerol polyester synthesized using succinic acid
as the acid monomer. Moreover, there is no available literature correlating
the synthesis conditions of the glycerol polyester with the mechanical
performance of the PLA/glycerol polyester blends.

The bulk polycondensation
of glycerol and dicarboxylic acids can
yield a wide range of products depending on the reaction conditions
used. This system leads to elastomeric gel polyesters if enough time
is given for the reaction to achieve gelation.16,17 If the reaction is stopped before the gelation occurs, the polyesters
synthesized are recovered as highly viscous liquids with a low molecular
weight and a high polydispersity index.17,18 The monomer
ratio and the synthesis temperature can affect the molecular weight
and architecture of the products. This in turn can affect the important
properties of these glycerol-based polyesters, such as their solubility
properties and the mechanical behavior.9,19 For the development
of a polyester material that could be used as a toughness enhancer
for PLA using melt blending technology, it is of interest to investigate
how the synthesis conditions for the glycerol-based polyester can
affect the mechanical behavior of the blend system. Therefore, the
objective of the present research work is to investigate the correlations
between the reaction conditions used for the synthesis of glycerol-based
polyesters and the mechanical behavior of PLA/glycerol polyester blends,
aiming to select synthesis conditions that ensure a successful toughening
of PLA.

Results and Discussion
Synthesis of Glycerol-Based Polyesters
Table 1 presents
the polyester products
synthesized in this study. When glycerol (gly) and succinic acid (succ)
were used as monomers for the synthesis, the resultant product was
poly(glycerol succinate) (PGS). When maleic anhydride (mah) was used
in addition to glycerol and succinic acid as monomers, the product
was termed poly(glycerol succinate-co-maleate) (PGSMA).
The reaction parameters were chosen to produce a wide range of products
with different molecular features. First, a gel material was synthesized
(PGS gel), which was obtained as an elastomeric material insoluble
in common solvents such as tetrahydrofuran (THF) and acetone because
of extensive cross-linking.17 Subsequently,
liquid polyesters were synthesized by stopping the reaction before
the occurrence of cross-linking. The molar ratio of the reactants
was changed around the stoichiometric balance of the reactants (1:1
gly/succ) to produce polyesters with different terminal groups (hydroxyl
or carboxyl) according to polymerization theory.20 Three different liquid products synthesized from glycerol
and succinic acid were produced (PGS1, PGS2, and PGS3) with increasing
molar ratio of reactants in the range of 0.6:1 to 1.2:1. Finally,
polyesters were synthesized using maleic anhydride as a comonomer
in addition to glycerol and succinic acid. These polyesters (PGSMA1
and PGSMA2) possess unsaturations on its polymer backbone as a result
of the usage of maleic anhydride as the comonomer.21

Table 1 PGS Formulations Used
sample ID	monomers	molar ratio	temp (°C)	reaction
time (h)	yield (g PGS/g reactants)	Mw (Da)	Mn (Da)	Mw/Mn	
PGS gel	gly/succ	0.6:1	180	1.57	0.78	ND	ND	ND	
PGS1	gly/succ	0.6:1	180	1.06	0.74	3119	938	3.3	
PGS2	gly/succ	0.9:1	180	2.93	0.75	2569	1011	2.5	
PGS3	gly/succ	1.2:1	180	5.27	0.79	1234	754	1.6	
PGSMA1	gly/succ/mah	1:0.5:0.5	180	2.5	0.89	4379	1119	3.9	
PGSMA2	gly/succ/mah	1:0.5:0.5	150	5	0.86	4442	1138	3.9	
The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the
synthesized
polyesters are shown in Figure 1. A broad peak appears at 3422 cm–1, which
corresponds to OH functional groups in the polyester backbone. As
the molar ratio of glycerol to succinic acid is increased in the PGS
products, the peak at 3422 cm–1 becomes more visible
suggesting that the polyesters are hydroxyl-terminated. The peaks
at 1716 and 1153 cm–1 correspond to the C=O
and C–O–C groups found commonly in polyesters.22 When maleic anhydride is incorporated to the
polyester formulations (PGSMA), a new peak appears at 1644 cm–1 corresponding to the C=C unsaturation in the
polymer backbone. In fact, previous researchers observed peaks corresponding
to C=C bonds at 1637 cm–1 in methacrylate
derivatives.23 The C=C double bonds
in the PGSMA backbone could be used as a site for cross-linking of
the polymers in a reactive extrusion (REX) mode using free radical
initiators.

Figure 1 Infrared spectra of the polyesters synthesized.

Effect of Addition of Gel Versus Liquid PGS
on the Mechanical
Behavior of PLA/PGS Blends
As a first approach for the toughening
of PLA by PGS, the blending of PLA and gel PGS was performed using
a weight ratio of 80/20 PLA/PGS. The gel PGS was dispersed in particles
of approximately 6–15 μm in diameter (Figure S1), and the tensile strength and modulus were decreased
by 40 and 26%, respectively (Table S1),
which was expected from the addition of amorphous PGS to the semicrystalline
PLA. Regarding tensile elongation at break and notched Izod impact
results, which are indicative of toughness of the system, the elongation
at break raised from 4% for pure PLA to 11% for the 80/20 PLA/gel
PGS blend, whereas the impact resistance remained unchanged. The limited
increase in the ductility of the system was due to the poor dispersion
of cross-linked PGS onto the PLA matrix and a weak interfacial adhesion
of the blend components. In fact, the cross-linked nature of gel PGS
impedes the dispersion of this material onto smaller diameter rubbery
particles within the PLA matrix, which has been proven to be one of
the key points for the effective toughening of PLA.24−27

Aiming to improve the dispersion
of PGS within the PLA matrix during the extrusion process, we synthesized
a series of liquid PGS by stopping the reaction before the gelation
occurrence, as suggested by previous researchers.18 PGS products synthesized using three different molar ratios
of reactants were produced and blended with PLA at a mass ratio of
90/10 PLA/PGS. The mechanical behavior of the system is presented
in Table S2. Interestingly, the tensile
behavior of PLA/PGS blends varies significantly according to the molar
ratio of monomers used for the synthesis of PGS (Figure 2). This phenomenon is a result
of differences in molecular interactions between blend components
because of changes in the molecular weight and the branching architecture
of PGS, which arise by changing the molar ratio of the reactants.9 The elongation at break of the PLA/PGS blends
revealed relevant information about the source of the differences
observed in the mechanical behavior. In fact, the elongation at break
of the system was maximum when the molar ratio of the reactants used
for the synthesis of PGS was closer to the stoichiometric balance
of the monomers (PGS2, 0.9:1 mol glycerol/mol succinic acid) (Figure 2a). Gel permeation
chromatography traces of the PGS synthesized showed that these hyperbranched
condensation products are composed of different molecular weight species
ranging from a few hundred to several thousand daltons (Figure 2b). Elongation at break in
a PLA blend system is closely related to the ability of the secondary
polymer to establish molecular bonding interactions and entanglements
with the PLA matrix. The ability of entanglement of both polymers
in the blend is in turn related to their molecular weights and molecular
conformations. In particular, for linear PLA, the chain molecular
weight required for entanglement occurrence has been reported earlier
as 9000 g/mol, whereas the distance between entanglements was of 4000
g/mol.28 Additionally, it has been reported
that for branched PLA, the ability for entanglement is higher due
to the higher volume occupied by the branched structures in comparison
with that for linear ones.29 In the hyperbranched
PGS synthesized in our study, there are oligomers with a molecular
weight superior to 4000 g/mol, particularly, in the products PGS1
and PGS2, whereas in the PGS3 product most of the oligomers have a
molecular weight below this value. Accordingly, the elongation at
break of the system was higher for blends of PLA with PGS1 and PGS2.
This suggests that the molecular weight of the PGS synthesized plays
a crucial role in the ability of these oligomers to interact and entangle
effectively with PLA to raise the elongation at break of the blend.
Because of the hyperbranched nature of PGS polyesters, it is reasonable
to expect that these dendrimer-like molecules can entangle with PLA
chains if they reach a molecular weight close to the molecular weight
between entanglements reported for PLA. In fact, the maximum elongation
at break for the PLA/PGS blend was obtained when the number-average
molecular weight of PGS was maximum (Table 1) and the presence of oligomers of a lower
molecular weight (Mn < 1000 g/mol)
was minimum (Figure 2b), indicating that a higher degree of polymerization was achieved.

Figure 2 (a) Mechanical
properties of 90/10 PLA/PGS blends and (b) gel permeation
chromatography traces of the PGS synthesized. Calibration curve employed
is shown above with molecular weight values.

Interestingly, the impact strength of the PLA/PGS blends
increases
in average with the increasing molar ratio of monomers (Figure 2a). The effect of the glass
transition temperature of the PGS phase on the blend offers an explanation
for this mechanical behavior. In fact, the glass transition temperatures
(Tg) of the synthesized PGS determined
using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) were −15.2, −14.8,
and −29.9 °C for PGS1, PGS2, and PGS3, respectively. This
could be attributed to the lower molecular weight of the PGS3 synthesized
compared with that of PGS1 and PGS2 (Figure 2b). A lower Tg of the included phase is recognized as one of the factors leading
to a higher impact strength in thermoplastic-elastomer blends because
the capability of the elastomer for absorbing the impact energy increases
when used at room temperature.30

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations of the PLA/PGS
blends were performed at the fracture site on notched Izod impact
tested specimens (Figure 3). The observations seem to be in agreement with the trend
observed in the mechanical properties, where the elongation at break
was maximized when using PGS2. In this PLA/PGS blend (Figure 3b), the fracture site surface
shows roughness and there is evidence of plastic deformation of the
material upon stress, which is commonly seen in ductile materials
(Figure 3b, inset).
On the other hand, blends of PLA/PGS synthesized at different molar
ratios of reactants displayed a smoother fracture surface indicating
a higher brittleness of the material and there was no evidence of
formation of plastic fibrils as seen in the PLA/PGS2 case. Similar
morphological observations have been provided by previous studies
on PLA and hyperbranched polymer blends.31 These results confirm that while using a stoichiometric balance
of monomers for the synthesis of PGS, a higher toughness of the PLA/PGS
blend can be achieved. This phenomenon apparently is caused by reaching
a higher Mn of the PGS synthesized, which
enables molecular entanglements with PLA to occur.

Figure 3 SEM pictures at the fracture
site of PLA/PGS notched Izod impact
tested samples. PLA blends with (a) PGS1, (b) PGS2, and (c) PGS3.

Reactive Blends of PLA
and PGS
In PLA blend systems,
previous researchers showed that REX involving the simultaneous cross-linking
of the secondary polymer as well as the graft copolymer formation
of PLA and the secondary polymer could efficiently increase the ductility
of PLA.27,32 In PGS polyesters, a way to turn them into
reactive molecules suitable for REX with PLA is the incorporation
of C=C double bonds in their backbones by using maleic anhydride
as a comonomer for the PGS synthesis, as demonstrated by previous
researchers.21 In the present work, liquid
glycerol-based polyesters were synthesized using a combination of
1:0.5:0.5 mol of glycerol/succinic acid/ maleic anhydride as monomers
(PGSMA1 entry, Table 1). Although maleic anhydride is currently industrially obtained from
petroleum-based resources that decrease the bio-based content in glycerol
polyesters, there is scientific interest in the production of bio-based
maleic acid and anhydride and thus these molecules could be obtained
from bio-based resources in the future.33 The PGSMA synthesized showed similar molecular weight and polydispersity
as PGS synthesized using only succinic acid as the COOH-bearing monomer
at an equal molar ratio of glycerol/diacid monomers (Table 1, entries PGS2 and PGSMA1),
but possesses reactive C=C bonds in its backbone as shown in
the FTIR spectra (Figure 1).

Upon REX of PLA and unsaturated polymers (polymers
bearing C=C bonds in their backbones) using peroxides as free
radical initiators, there are two simultaneous and competitive mechanisms
taking place, as proposed by previous researchers and depicted in Figure 4.23,27,32,34 The first
phenomenon corresponds to the cross-linking of the secondary polymer
within itself by an addition mediated by free radical initiation (Figure 4, right). The second
phenomenon is the formation of graft copolymers of PLA and the secondary
polymer created upon hydrogen abstraction in the PLA chain and the
addition of secondary polymer free radicals (Figure 4, left). A third reaction could take place
during the REX with the free radical initiator corresponding to the
PLA–PLA self-cross-linking or branching after the formation
of PLA macroradicals (not shown in Figure 4). Although this reaction is possible, previous
researchers demonstrated that because the reactivity of C=C
bearing molecules is higher than the reactivity of tertiary hydrogen
in PLA chains, this reaction is not favored at the concentration of
the free radical initiator
used in the present study (0.2 phr).27,32 The simultaneous
occurrence of these phenomena ultimately results in the formation
of a tough PLA blend system with a secondary cross-linked phase within
and with enhanced interfacial adhesion mediated by the graft copolymers
that are located primarily at the interface. In our case, these mechanisms
could allow for an enhanced toughening of PLA by the creation of secondary
cross-linked structures of PGSMA embedded onto the PLA matrix and
compatibilized by in situ-formed graft copolymers of PLA-g-PGSMA. The concentration of the free radical initiator used in the
REX process can affect the mechanical behavior of the system because
of an enhanced formation of PLA graft copolymers at higher initiator
concentrations.27 In the present study,
this parameter was fixed to 0.2 phr based on previous literature,
where optimum mechanical behavior was achieved at similar initiator
loadings.27 Nevertheless, a more detailed
analysis of the initiator loading effect in the present system will
be provided in a future work.

Figure 4 Possible routes of reaction in the REX of PLA
and PGSMA mediated
by free radical initiators. (I) Grafting of PGSMA onto the PLA backbone
and/or (II) PGSMA cross-linking.

The mechanical behavior and the percentage of crystallinity
of
the PLA reactive blends with PGS and PGSMA are shown in Figure 5 and Table S3, where reactive blends compounded in the presence of a free
radical initiator are denoted as RPLA. For a proper analysis of REX
effects, the PLA matrix was blended both with saturated glycerol polyesters
containing no C=C double bonds in their backbones (PGS2) and
with unsaturated glycerol polyesters containing reactive C=C
bonds in their backbones (PGSMA1). Also, both blend systems were processed
with and without the addition of a free radical initiator to properly
analyze the different effects contributing to the mechanical behavior
of the system. Upon addition of glycerol polyesters (either PGS2 or
PGSMA1) to PLA, the tensile strength and the modulus decreased by
approximately 40 and 30%, respectively as observed in the previous
section by the addition of the soft liquid PGS to the semicrystalline
PLA (Table S3). Figure 5 displays the results of elongation at break
of the reactive and unreactive blends of 80/20 wt% PLA/PGS or 80/20
wt% PLA/PGSMA,
where the most illustrative results of mechanical behavior could be
observed. First, it was seen that the addition of the free radical
initiator to PLA itself did not significantly change its strain at
break (Figure 5, entry
RPLA) and thus this effect is not considered in the analysis of the
mechanical behavior of the reactive blend samples. Not surprisingly,
in the saturated glycerol polyester case (PLA/PGS2 blend), the ductility
of the material that manifested as elongation at break remained unchanged
when comparing the nonreactive extrusion and REX cases because of
the absence of C=C double bonds in the PGS2 backbone. On the
other hand, when unsaturated polyester (PGSMA1) was blended with PLA,
the mechanical behavior of the system showed clear differences between
the nonreactive extrusion and REXs. The elongation at break of the
system was dramatically increased more than 50% when comparing the
nonreactive extrusion and REX cases. The increased elongation at break
of the reactive PLA/PGSMA1 blend can be attributed to the simultaneous
formation of PGSMA cross-linked particles within the PLA matrix and
to the formation of PLA-g-PGSMA copolymers, as depicted
in Figure 4. Similar
behavior has been observed in reactive PLA blends and has been attributed
to an effective stress transfer to the secondary soft phase within
PLA mediated by the presence of graft copolymers formed in situ during
the extrusion process.27,32,35 The role of crystallinity of the PLA phase on the blend samples
was also investigated by calculating the percentage of crystallinity
of the PLA phase based on DSC analysis of the first melting cycle
of the samples (Figure S2 and Table S4). The addition of PGS or PGSMA to PLA
causes an increase in the crystallinity percentage of the PLA phase
of nearly 10% at the most, according to DSC results (Figure 5). The increase in the crystallinity
of the PLA phase after the addition of PGS or PGSMA could be attributed
to PGS droplets acting as heterogeneous nucleating sites, which could
enhance the ability of PLA for initiating crystallization. In fact,
the cold crystallization temperature of the PLA/PGS and PLA/PGSMA
blends was lower than that of neat PLA in all cases, indicating that
PLA can initiate crystallization at a lower temperature in the melting
cycle as a result of the nucleation sites provided by PGS particles.
This effect has been observed previously in PLA blends with amorphous
branched additives and attributed to heterogeneous nucleation mechanisms
and enhanced mobility of PLA chains because of the presence of the
secondary polymer.32,36 Regarding the effects of crystallinity
of the PLA phase on the mechanical behavior of the blend samples,
the increase in crystallinity caused by the addition of PGS does not
seem to correlate with the elongation at break of the system. In fact,
previous researchers have demonstrated that increases in crystallinity
of the PLA phase in the range of 10% such as those reported in the
present work have a negligible effect on the mechanical behavior of
PLA blends.32 These findings suggest that
the enhanced elongation at break obtained in the REX of PLA and PGSMA
is a result of an efficient stress transfer from PLA to the PGSMA
phase rather than a change of nature of the PLA phase itself from
brittle to ductile such as in plasticization strategies. In fact,
as pointed out by previous researchers in PLA REX strategies involving
the cross-linking of the secondary polymer within PLA, the tensile
toughening achieved is mainly due to a stress concentration effect
on the rubbery particles created in the extrusion process.26,35 These soft particles act as stress concentrators inducing multiple
crazing on the material. The increase in the crazing volume causes
a decrease in the actual stress in each individual craze, which allows
for a stable void growing.35 Upon further
tensile load, particle debonding and elongation is achieved, preventing
early failure. Thus, the amount of energy dissipated in multiple crazes
is higher than in a single craze, which explains the increased tensile
toughness observed in the PLA blends studied.

Figure 5 Elongation at break and
the percentage of crystallinity of reactive
and unreactive blends of PLA and glycerol polyesters [80/20 wt% PLA/PGS
or 80/20 wt% PLA/PGSMA].

Another parameter used commonly to evaluate the toughness
of materials
is impact resistance. This parameter is related to the energy absorption
capability until failure of a material under a sudden load, unlike
in the tensile testing where the load is usually applied at much lower
strain rates.30 When comparing the PLA
toughened materials from the present study with previously reported
PLA reactive blends, we could observe that in numerous cases, the
impact resistance is also remarkably enhanced in the final material
(>500 J/m).24,25,37−39 In our case, the impact resistance remained statistically
unchanged with respect to PLA even in the blends displaying a high
elongation at break (24 ± 8.5 vs 22.9 ± 6.3 J/m for RPLA/PGSMA1
and RPLA, respectively). A similar observation was made by Zhang et
al. in reactive blends of PLA and unsaturated thermoplastic polyurethane
achieving a high elongation at break but unchanged impact resistance.27 These authors have attributed the low impact
resistance of the materials to the thickness of the PLA ligament between
dispersed rubbery phases (interparticle distance). In fact, several
researchers have emphasized the existence of a critical ligament thickness
of PLA of around 1 μm as a necessary condition for achieving
impact resistance in PLA.25,26,40 Our future research will be directed toward achieving a higher impact
resistance of the PLA-based materials developed by increasing the
amount of PGS content maintaining a small PGS particle size aiming
to decrease the PLA ligament thickness in the system.

Further
evidence supporting the findings of increased ductility
on the reactive blends of PLA and PGSMA was provided by SEM observations
of the fracture site on notched Izod impact tested specimens (Figure 6). In these photographs,
it was observed that when saturated glycerol polyesters (PGS2) were
blended with PLA both in nonreactive and reactive modes, the PGS material
was distributed within the PLA matrix as droplets of varying sizes,
where some of the particles showed diameters smaller than 1 μm
and others displayed larger diameters in the 5–15 μm
range. This suggests that when the blend is compounded, the PGS material
is distributed as small submicronic droplets on the molten PLA matrix
by the action of shear in the extrusion process but upon cooling,
the PGS particles coalesce due to low compatibility of the phases
forming larger PGS droplets within the solid PLA matrix. In the case
of unsaturated glycerol polyester (PGSMA1), a clear difference can
be observed between the nonreactive and reactive PLA blends (Figure 6c,d). In the nonreactive
case, PGSMA droplets of large diameters greater than 10 μm can
be observed indicating that spreading and coalescence of PGSMA also
occur upon extrusion of the materials. In the reactive case, the PGSMA
droplets showed a significantly lower diameter in the range of 1–3
μm and less and in fact, no PGSMA particles with a large diameter
(∼10 μm) were observed as in previous blends. This interesting
observation indicates that there was a decrease in surface tension
between both components, leading to the decrease of coalescence of
the PGSMA phase, which in turn resulted in smaller PGSMA particles
uniformly distributed onto the PLA matrix. The decreased surface tension
between the blend components can be attributed to the formation of
PLA-g-PGSMA copolymers that would be mainly located
at the interface of PLA and PGSMA domains acting as a compatibilizer,
which prevents the occurrence of coalescence of PGSMA droplets (Figure 4). Similar decrease
in the diameter of the secondary polymer phase has been reported by
previous researchers upon the in situ formation of PLA graft copolymers
in REX studies.34,41

Figure 6 SEM pictures at the fracture site in notched
Izod impact tested
80/20 wt% PLA/PGS or 80/20 wt% PLA/PGSMA blend samples. (a) PLA/PGS2
nonreactive blend, (b) RPLA/PGS2 reactive blend, (c) PLA/PGSMA1 nonreactive
blend, and (d) RPLA/PGSMA1 reactive blend.

Direct evidence about the formation of graft copolymers PLA-g-PGSMA was provided by two-dimensional nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) analysis of both nonreactive and reactive PLA/PGSMA1
blends (Figure 7).
Heteronuclear multiple bond correlation (HMBC) NMR has proven to be
useful in the identification of PLA graft copolymers formed in situ
during REX.41 In this study, the HMBC maps
of the PLA/PGSMA nonreactive and reactive blends clearly showed the
formation of PLA-g-PGSMA copolymers. In fact, new
cross peaks correlating 1H and 13C at 1.52 and
71.6 ppm and at 1.52 and 172.8 ppm could be observed in the blend
prepared in the presence of a free radical initiator (H1C2′
and H1C3′ in Figure 7). These new correlations can be assigned to the new chemical
shifts of the carboxylic and methine groups in PLA as a result of
the grafting of PGSMA to the PLA backbone. The formation of graft
copolymers of PLA and unsaturated polymers through REX in the presence
of free radical initiators has also been reported by previous researchers
under similar processing conditions.23,27,32,34

Figure 7 HMBC spectra of 80/20
PLA/PGSMA blends prepared with and without
initiators.

To further demonstrate
the formation of graft copolymers of PLA
and PGSMA, the blends were fractionated selectively in solvents. Results
obtained for the fractionation are presented in Table S5. It is worth mentioning that only the reactive blend
of RPLA/PGSMA1 processed in the presence of a free radical initiator
showed a gel fraction significantly higher than zero (6.9 wt %), which
indicates that the proposed mechanism of reaction depicted in Figure 4 is correct. That
is, a portion of PGSMA cross-links and forms a gel fraction within
the PLA matrix, whereas another portion is grafted onto the PLA backbone.
Moreover, the absence of a gel fraction on the PLA samples processed
in the presence of a free radical initiator (RPLA) confirms that the
PLA–PLA cross-linking reactions are not favored and the dominant
reactions are the ones depicted in Figure 4 (PGSMA cross-linking and PLA-g-PGSMA copolymer formation), as suggested by previous researchers.27,32 The exact amount of PGSMA grafting onto PLA is very difficult to
determine precisely using NMR because these polyesters are not uniform
in molecular weight. Nevertheless, an estimation of the grafting percentage
was obtained from the fractionation in the solvents of the blends.
In the unreactive PLA/PGSMA blends, 18.1 wt % of the initial load
of PGSMA was recovered as soluble PGSMA in acetone. This indicates
that most of the PGSMA remains unreacted after the extrusion process.
In the reactive blend of PLA and PGSMA, a total of 16.6 wt % PGSMA
was recovered as a gel and an extracted fraction. The difference between
the PGSMA recovery in the unreactive and reactive cases is thought
to correspond to the percentage of PGSMA converted onto PLA-g-PGSMA copolymers (1.5 wt %). Previous researchers have
reported similar values of 0.6 wt % of conversion of secondary polymer
to PLA graft copolymers in PLA reactive binary blend studies.41 After drying of the samples dissolved in THF
to evaporate the residual solvent, both the soluble and gel fractions
were scanned using infrared spectroscopy. Figure 8a shows the collected spectra in the region
of carboxylic and ester functionalities (1700–1750 cm–1) for the RPLA/PGSMA1 blend. The full wavenumber range spectra can
be seen in Figure S3. RPLA showed a distinctive
peak at 1747 cm–1 corresponding to both ester groups
and carboxylic acid terminal groups in the molecule. PGSMA, on the
other hand, shows a peak at 1716 cm–1 also corresponding
to terminal carboxylic groups and ester bonds and a peak at 1644 cm–1 corresponding to C=C double bonds within its
backbone. The gel fraction recovered from the blend shows absence
of the peak at 1644 cm–1 indicating consumption
of the C=C double bonds via cross-linking or grafting, as depicted
in Figure 4. This observation
is in agreement with previous researchers who have observed the disappearance
of C=C double bonds at 1637 cm–1 in free
radical-mediated REXs of PLA with methacrylate derivatives.23 Additionally, the major carboxylic peak in the
gel fraction appears at 1728 cm–1 where a shoulder
in the region of 1747 cm–1 can be observed. In fact,
this peak was deconvoluted into two peaks at 1726 and 1758 cm–1 (Figure 8b) corresponding to PGSMA and PLA carboxylic functionalities,
which indicates that this fraction is composed of both PLA and PGSMA
molecules. Considering that the gel fraction of PLA/PGS blends was
significant only for the RPLA/PGSMA blend and that the gel recovered
from this sample was washed several times with fresh solvent after
dissolution, this fraction is free of any un-cross-linked PLA and
PGSMA. Therefore, the presence of both PLA and PGSMA ester peaks in
the gel fraction suggests that some PLA molecules are grafted onto
PGSMA as the free radical-mediated reactions take place. Upon cross-linking
of PGSMA, these PLA segments are retained in the gel fraction of the
blend, which causes the double peak observed at 1728 cm–1. Previous researchers have found similar observations on the infrared
spectroscopy analysis of PLA blends with unsaturated polymers performed
in REX mediated by free radical initiators.27 This result is in agreement with the results obtained in the 2D
NMR analysis.

Figure 8 FTIR spectra of the fractionated RPLA/PGSMA1 blend. (a)
Zoomed-in
carboxylic acid-ester region of neat polymers and blend fractions
and (b) deconvolution of the carboxylic peak on the gel fraction extracted.

Effect of the Synthesis
Temperature
The effect of the
synthesis temperature on the mechanical properties of PLA/PGS was
investigated by synthesizing another PGSMA formulation at 150 °C
as opposed to the first PGSMA synthesized at 180 °C (Table 1, entries PGSMA1 and
PGSMA2). Subsequently, the reactive blending of PLA and PGSMA2 was
performed under identical conditions as those for the blend of PLA
and PGSMA1 (180 °C, 2 min extrusion, 100 rpm, 0.2 phr free radical
initiator). Tensile testing results were similar for both blends regarding
tensile strength and modulus (Table S6).
Elongation at break data presented a very significant difference as
shown in the representative curve of stress versus strain for both
blend systems (Figure 9). In fact, the elongation at break of the system was remarkably
enhanced from 58.6% in RPLA/PGSMA1 to 150% in the blend of PLA and
PGSMA synthesized at a lower temperature (PGSMA2 synthesized at 150
°C). Consequently, the toughness of the blend (measured as area
under the stress–strain curve) was increased fourfold from
10.2 to 41.6 MJ/m3 comparing both blend systems and increased
16-fold comparing PLA and RPLA/PGSMA2 blends. On the basis of molecular
weight determinations (Table 1), the difference in the molecular weight between both PGSMA1
and PGSMA2 synthesized seems to be not large enough for causing such
a dramatic change in the mechanical behavior (Mn equal to 1119 and 1138 for PGSMA1 and PGSMA2, respectively).
The increased toughness of RPLA/PGSMA2 is likely to be caused by changes
in the architecture of the PGSMA molecule because of the differences
in the synthesis temperature. In fact, several researchers have demonstrated
that in the glycerol-based polyester synthesis, the temperature of
the synthesis can significantly affect the topology of the hyperbranched
molecules. Li et al. showed that in glycerol and sebacic acid polycondensations,
the reactivity of the secondary hydroxyl group on glycerol is lower
than the reactivity of primary hydroxyl groups.42 Another study dealing with the polymerization of glycerol
and sebacic acid showed that a decrease in the reaction temperature
from 140 to 120 °C decreased the conversion of carboxylic acid
groups at gelation from 0.999 to 0.994.19 These findings indicate that because of the lower reactivity of
secondary hydroxyl groups on glycerol monomers, an increase in the
reaction temperature will likely cause an increase in the esterification
of secondary hydroxyl groups and thus lead to more branched products,
as suggested by previous researchers.17 Thus, in our study, it is reasonable to expect products with longer
branches and a lower degree of branching when decreasing the synthesis
temperature from 180 to 150 °C. In polymeric systems, the ability
of the polymer chains to entangle with each other is inversely proportional
to their branching degrees.43 The increased
toughness of the RPLA/PGSMA2 reactive blend could be attributed to
a higher level of entanglement between both blend components because
of a lower branching degree and longer linear segments produced by
decreasing the esterification on secondary hydroxyl groups when the
synthesis temperature is decreased.

Figure 9 Stress vs strain curves indicating fracture
toughness (UT) and appearance of (A) neat
PLA, (B) 80/20
RPLA/PGSMA1, and (C) 80/20 RPLA/PGSMA2.

The toughened PLA/PGSMA materials developed in the present
study
via REX are comparable in terms of tensile toughness with PLA/poly(glycerol
sebacate) (PGSeb) blends reported previously (155% elongation at break
in the 85/15 PLA/PGSeb blend)14 and superior
to PLA/poly(glycerol sebacate-co-stearate) (PGSebSt)
(90% elongation at break in the 90/10 PLA/PGSebSt blend).15 Interestingly, these previous PLA blends were
developed by conventional unreactive extrusion as opposed to the REX
strategy illustrated in this study. In unreactive blends presented
in this study with a similar addition of PGS (80/20 PLA/PGS), the
elongation at break achieved was much lower (11.7%) than that in previous
PLA/PGSeb unreactive blends. PGSeb presents a higher hydrophobic character
compared to PGS because of the longer aliphatic chain on sebacic acid
as compared with that of succinic acid. An increase in aliphatic chains
in the diacid comonomer in the glycerol polyester could increase the
compatibility with PLA as predicted by the solubility parameter theory.44 This could contribute in achieving a better
interface between the blend components mimicking the effect of the
graft copolymer formation observed in reactive blends in the present
study and enhancing the stress transfer between blend components to
achieve a high elongation at break.

Conclusions
The
synthesis of glycerol-based polyesters (PGS) oriented to the
application of these biomacromolecules as toughness enhancers for
PLA has been investigated. The effect of the molar ratio of reactants,
the monomer type, and the temperature of synthesis on PGS physicochemical
properties and its impact on the suitability of PGS as a toughening
agent for PLA has been established. It was found that the utilization
of liquid polyesters synthesized at a stoichiometric ratio of monomers
yielded tougher PLA blends because of achieving a higher molecular
weight of the synthesized PGS. The usage of maleic anhydride as a
comonomer for the synthesis of PGS can turn these polyesters into
reactive species, which is advantageous for the compatibilization
of the PLA/PGS blends producing a significant improvement in their
toughness. Upon REX in the presence of free radical initiators, an
in situ compatibilization effect was realized involving simultaneous
cross-linking of PGS within the PLA matrix and the formation of PLA-g-PGSMA copolymers, which act as interfacial compatibilizers
in the system increasing the toughness of the system by 392% (from
2.6 to 10.2 MJ/m3). Furthermore, a decrease in the temperature
of the synthesis of PGS from 180 to 150 °C led to a higher improvement
in the toughness of the blends of 1600% (from 2.6 to 41.6 MJ/m3), which was attributed to a decrease in the branching degree
of the synthesized polyesters. For an effective toughening of PLA
by reactive melt blending with glycerol-based polyesters, the optimum
synthesis conditions found were 1:0.5:0.5 mol glycerol/succinic acid/maleic
anhydride synthesized at a temperature of 150 °C for 5 h.

Experimental
Section
Materials
Technical glycerol (gly) was obtained from
a local distributor (BIOX Corporation, Canada), specified as purified
glycerol from biodiesel production. The average glycerol content of
this source was 95 wt %.16 Pure succinic
acid (succ) (99+ wt %, KIC chemicals, UK) and maleic anhydride (mah)
(99 wt %, Sigma Aldrich, Canada) were purchased and used as received.
THF, acetone (99.8 wt %, Fisher Scientific, Canada), and deuterated
THF ([D8] THF, ≥99.5 atom % D, contains 0.03% (v/v) TMS, Sigma
Aldrich, Canada) were used as received. Polylactic acid (Ingeo 3251D),
a product of Nature Works, as white pellets with a melting point of
155–170 °C and a melt flow index of 30–40 g/10
min (190 °C, 2.16 kg) according to the supplier was used in this
study. 2,5-Bis(tert-butyl-peroxy)-2,5-dimethylhexane
(Luperox 101) with a technical grade of 90% was used as a free radical
initiator for REXs (Sigma Aldrich, Canada).

Synthesis of Glycerol-Based
Polyesters
Polyesters were
synthesized using a one-pot polycondensation procedure without the
addition of a solvent or a catalyst to the system. For the reactions,
a mixture of 200 g of monomers (glycerol, succinic acid, and maleic
anhydride) was put together in a 1 L glass reactor equipped with a
stirrer and a Dean–Stark apparatus to collect the water formed
during the condensation reaction. The temperature was fixed at a certain
value, and the mixture was agitated at a fixed speed (250 rpm). When
glycerol and succinic acid were used as monomers for the synthesis,
the product was called PGS. When maleic anhydride was added as a third
monomer to the formulations, the synthesis product was termed PGSMA.
For the synthesis of PGS gel materials, the reaction was continued
until the material changed from a viscous liquid to an insoluble gel
because of extensive cross-linking. For the synthesis of PGS liquid
materials, the time for gelation was recorded on an initial screening
experiment as the time passed from the monomers reaching the reaction
temperature setpoint (180 or 150 °C) and the material changing
to a rubbery state. At this point, the material wrapped around the
mechanical stirrer, making it impossible to continue the reaction
in melt conditions.15 In hyperbranched
polymer synthesis by polycondensation, the molecular weight of the
products is increased exponentially in the later stages of polymerization
until the gelation is achieved.18,19 With this in mind,
the synthesis reaction was repeated and stopped 5 min before the previously
recorded gel time by removing the vessel from the heating element
and stopping the mechanical stirring to obtain non-cross-linked liquid
PGS polymers of the highest possible molecular weight before gelation.
Although the selection of quenching 5 min before gelation is arbitrary,
this synthesis strategy has been commonly used as an end point for
gel-forming hyperbranched polymers.45 The
polyesters synthesized using this approach were fully soluble in THF,
indicating the absence of gel macromolecules.

Blending of PLA and PGS
or PGSMA Materials
The blends
of PLA and PGS or PGSMA materials were fabricated using extrusion.
A twin screw extruder (Xplore, DSM, the Netherlands) was used with
a processing temperature of 180 °C at a screw speed of 100 rpm.
For the extrusion, 10 g of materials were weighed in a preselected
ratio of the blend components and added to the extrusion chamber simultaneously.
For gel PGS, the materials were cut to a desired weight using a knife,
whereas for liquid PGS or PGSMA, the material was kept in a plastic
syringe that was heated to 80 °C using a temperature-controlled
syringe heater (New Era, NY, USA) to melt PGS for weighing the desired
amount. In REXs, the free radical initiator was added simultaneously
with PLA and PGS or PGSMA at a fixed concentration of 0.2 phr. This
concentration of initiator was selected based on previous studies
for PLA reactive blends showing an optimum performance at initiator
concentrations in the range of 0.1–0.3 phr.27,32 After 2 min of extrusion, the material was collected in an injection
device preheated to 180 °C and injected into molds kept at 30
°C for obtaining specimens for mechanical testing.

Mechanical
Testing
Tensile and flexural testing of
polymer samples were performed on an Instron universal testing machine
(Instron, Canada). Tensile testing was carried at a crosshead speed
of 5 mm/min following the procedure described on the ASTM D638 standard.
Flexural testing was performed at a crosshead speed of 1.4 mm/min
following the procedure outlined on the ASTM D790 standard. For each
test, five specimens were tested, and results reported are the average
and standard deviation of the original data. Notched Izod impact testing
was performed on an impact testing machine equipped with a hammer
of 0.5–5 ft lbs following the procedure from the ASTM D256
standard. The impact samples were notched 48 h before conducting the
testing. The impact results reported are the average of six specimens
tested.

Fractionation of PLA Blends in Solvents
The blends
of PLA and PGS or PGSMA were subjected to fractionation in organic
solvents to determine the soluble and gel contents. To determine the
gel content, a sample of approximately 200 mg (mi) was dissolved in 30 mL of THF at 40 °C for 2 h. THF
was able to dissolve both PLA and the un-cross-linked fraction of
PGS or PGSMA materials. The cross-linked insoluble fraction was recovered
by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 10 min and washed twice with 30
mL of THF. After drying for 5 h at 80 °C, the recovered fraction
was weighed (mf) and the gel fraction
was calculated as  

To determine the PGS or PGSMA un-cross-linked
fraction in the PLA/PGS or PLA/PGSMA blends, a sample of approximately
200 mg (wi) was immersed in 30 mL of acetone
and kept under agitation for 24 h at room temperature. Acetone can
dissolve PGS or PGSMA un-cross-linked materials but does not dissolve
PLA or cross-linked PGS or PGSMA materials. In this way, the un-cross-linked
PGS or PGSMA fraction was extracted from the blends. After filtration
and washing twice with 30 mL of acetone, the samples subjected to
extraction were dried at 80 °C for 5 h and weighed (wf). The extracted fraction was calculated as  

Characterization
Molecular weight was determined using
gel permeation chromatography in a Viscotek GPCmax system (Malvern
Instruments, UK) equipped with a refractive index detector. Two Styragel
columns (HR1 and HR2, Waters Corporation, USA) and one PLgel-Mixed
E column (Agilent Technologies, USA) were connected in series for
the injection of samples. THF was employed as a solvent at a flow
rate of 0.3 mL/min and a temperature of 40 °C. Before injecting
the PGS samples, a calibration curve was constructed using a series
of eight polyethylene glycol standards with molecular weights (Mn) in the range of 106–7830 Da (Easy
Vial, Agilent Technologies, USA). FTIR spectra were collected using
a Thermo Scientific Nicolet 6700 FTIR spectrometer equipped with an
attenuated total reflection (ATR) accessory. For each sample, 64 scans
were collected with a resolution of 4 cm–1. Scanning
electron images were obtained from fractured impact specimens using
an Inspect S50 scanning electron microscope (FEI, USA). The samples
were coated with a thin layer of gold before imaging to prevent deformation
of the samples upon observation. DSC traces were obtained under a
nitrogen flow of 50 mL/min (DSC Q200, TA instruments) using samples
of 10–20 mg. For the neat PGS or PGSMA, the materials were
equilibrated at 100 °C following a ramp of 10 °C/min to
−80 °C and a final temperature ramp of 5 °C/min to
100 °C, where the glass transition temperature (Tg) was observed. For the PGS or PGSMA reactive and unreactive blends, the samples
were subjected to an initial heating cycle at 10 °C/min from
40 to 180 °C followed by a cooling cycle at 5 °C/min to
−60 °C and a final heating cycle at 10 °C/min to
180 °C. The crystallinity percentage of the samples was calculated
using the data from the first heating cycle as  where ΔHm and ΔHcc correspond to the enthalpies
of melting and cold crystallization and ΔH100 corresponds to the theoretical melting enthalpy of a 100%
crystalline PLA (93 J/g).36

NMR experiments
were recorded in [D8] THF. The blend samples were dissolved in [D8]
THF and filtered through a nylon syringe filter of 0.2 μm pore
size before injection to remove the gel fraction from the samples.
The residual solvent signal at δ = 1.72 and 67.2 ppm, for 1H and 13C nuclei, respectively, were used as a
standard reference. Experiments were conducted using a Bruker AVANCE
III spectrometer with a 1H operating frequency of 600.0
MHz and a 13C operating frequency of 150 MHz, using a 5
mm TCI cryoprobe. The sample temperature was regulated at 22 °C.
HMBC spectra (8 Hz coupling) were collected in PLA/PGSMA blends extruded
in the absence and presence of free radical initiators to investigate
the formation of the PLA-g-PGSMA copolymer.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.6b00325.Mechanical properties,
DSC analysis, SEM images, and
results from fractionation of blends in solvents (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao6b00325_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The first author acknowledges
the Chilean National
Scholarship Program for Graduate Studies from CONICYT-Chile for its
financial support. The authors are thankful to the Ontario Ministry
of Agriculture Food and Rural Affairs (OMAFRA)-University of Guelph
Bioeconomy-Industrial Uses Research Program (Projects #200001, 030054);
OMAFRA—New Directions & Alternative Renewable Fuels Research
program (Project # 050155); the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council (NSERC), Canada, for the Discovery Grants (Individual) (Project
# 401111); and the Ministry of Economic Development and Innovation
(MEDI), Ontario Research Fund—Research Excellence, Round—4
program (Project # 050289) for their financial support to carry out
this research work. The authors are also thankful to BIOX Corporation,
Ontario, Canada, for providing refined crude glycerol samples.
==== Refs
References
Södergȧrd A. ; Stolt M.  Industrial production
of high molecular weight poly (lactic acid) . In Poly(lactic acid): Synthesis, Structures, Properties, Processing,
and Applications ; Auras R. A. , Lim L.-T. , Selke S. E. M. , Tsuji H.  , Eds.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc. , 2010 ; pp 27 –41 .
Anderson K. S. ; Schreck K. M. ; Hillmyer M. A. 
Toughening
polylactide . Polym. Rev. 
2008 , 48 , 85 –108 . 10.1080/15583720701834216 .
Kfoury G. ; Raquez J.-M. ; Hassouna F. ; Odent J. ; Toniazzo V. ; Ruch D. ; Dubois P. 
Recent advances in
high performance
poly(lactide): From “green” plasticization to super-tough
materials via (reactive) compounding . Front.
Chem. 
2013 , 1 , 1 –46 . 10.3389/fchem.2013.00032 .24790931 
Liu H. ; Zhang J. 
Research Progress in
Toughening Modification of Poly(lactic acid) . J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 
2011 , 49 , 1051 –1083 . 10.1002/polb.22283 .
Nagarajan V. ; Mohanty A. K. ; Misra M. 
Perspective on Polylactic Acid (PLA)
based Sustainable Materials for Durable Applications: Focus on Toughness
and Heat Resistance . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2016 , 4 , 2899 –2916 . 10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b00321 .
Ciriminna R. ; Pina C. D. ; Rossi M. ; Pagliaro M. 
Understanding the glycerol
market . Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol. 
2014 , 116 , 1432 –1439 . 10.1002/ejlt.201400229 .
Behr A. ; Eilting J. ; Irawadi K. ; Leschinski J. ; Lindner F. 
Improved utilisation of renewable resources: New important
derivatives of glycerol . Green Chem. 
2008 , 10 , 13 –30 . 10.1039/B710561D .
Sheldon R. A. 
Green and
sustainable manufacture of chemicals from biomass: State of the art . Green Chem. 
2014 , 16 , 950 –963 . 10.1039/C3GC41935E .
Agach M. ; Delbaere S. ; Marinkovic S. ; Estrine B. ; Nardello-Rataj V. 
Characterization,
stability and ecotoxic properties of readily biodegradable branched
oligoesters based on bio-sourced succinic acid and glycerol . Polym. Degrad. Stab. 
2012 , 97 , 1956 –1963 . 10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2012.03.026 .
Agach M. ; Delbaere S. ; Marinkovic S. ; Estrine B. ; Nardello-Rataj V. 
Synthesis,
characterization, biodegradability and surfactant properties of bio-sourced
lauroyl poly(glycerol-succinate)oligoesters . Colloids Surf., A 
2013 , 419 , 263 –273 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2012.12.006 .
Agach M. ; Marinkovic S. ; Estrine B. ; Nardello-Rataj V. 
Acyl Poly(glycerol-succinic
acid)oligoesters: Synthesis, Physicochemical and Functional Properties,
and Biodegradability . J. Surfactants Deterg. 
2016 , 19 , 933 –941 . 10.1007/s11743-016-1853-4 .
Sarkar A. ; Santra S. ; Kundu S. K. ; Hajra A. ; Zyryanov G. V. ; Chupakhin O. N. ; Charushin V. N. ; Majee A. 
A decade update on
solvent and catalyst-free neat organic reactions: A step forward towards
sustainability . Green Chem. 
2016 , 18 , 4475 –4525 . 10.1039/C6GC01279E .
Tang S. L. Y. ; Smith R. L. ; Poliakoff M. 
Principles of green chemistry: Productively . Green Chem. 
2005 , 7 , 761 10.1039/b513020b .
Gu L. ; Li Y. ; Cheng S. 
Modification
of Poly(l-lactide) by Poly(glycerol-sebacate) . J. Funct. Polym. 
2008 , 21 , 343 –348 .
Coativy G. ; Misra M. ; Mohanty A. K. 
Microwave
Synthesis and Melt Blending
of Glycerol Based Toughening Agent with Poly(lactic acid) . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2016 , 4 , 2142 –2149 . 10.1021/acssuschemeng.5b01596 .
Valerio O. ; Horvath T. ; Pond C. ; Misra M. ; Mohanty A. 
Improved utilization
of crude glycerol from biodiesel industries: Synthesis and characterization
of sustainable biobased polyesters . Ind. Crops
Prod. 
2015 , 78 , 141 –147 . 10.1016/j.indcrop.2015.10.019 .
Wyatt V. T. 
Lewis Acid-Catalyzed
Synthesis of Hyperbranched Polymers Based on Glycerol and Diacids
in Toluene . J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 89 , 313 –319 . 10.1007/s11746-011-1910-0 .
Stumbé J.-F. ; Bruchmann B. 
Hyperbranched polyesters based on
adipic acid and glycerol . Macromol. Rapid Commun. 
2004 , 25 , 921 –924 . 10.1002/marc.200300298 .
Maliger R. ; Halley P. J. ; Cooper-White J. J. 
Poly(glycerol-sebacate)bioelastomers-kinetics
of step-growth reactions using Fourier transform (FT)-Raman spectroscopy . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2013 , 127 , 3980 –3986 . 10.1002/app.37719 .
Odian G.  Step Polymerization . In Principles of Polymerization , 4 th ed.; Wiley-Interscience : New York , 2004 ; pp 39 –197 .
Medeiros E. S. ; Offeman R. D. ; Klamczynski A. P. ; Glenn G. M. ; Mattoso L. H. C. ; Orts W. J. 
Synthesis, Characterization and Nanocomposite Formation
of Poly(glycerol succinate-co-maleate) with Nanocrystalline
Cellulose . J. Polym. Environ. 
2014 , 22 , 219 –226 . 10.1007/s10924-014-0643-1 .
Tang J. ; Zhang Z. ; Song Z. ; Chen L. ; Hou X. ; Yao K. 
Synthesis and characterization of elastic aliphatic
polyesters from
sebacic acid, glycol and glycerol . Eur. Polym.
J. 
2006 , 42 , 3360 –3366 . 10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2006.09.008 .
Kfoury G. ; Hassouna F. ; Raquez J.-M. ; Toniazzo V. ; Ruch D. ; Dubois P. 
Tunable and Durable
Toughening of Polylactide Materials
via Reactive Extrusion . Macromol. Mater. Eng. 
2014 , 299 , 583 –595 . 10.1002/mame.201300265 .
He Y.-S. ; Zeng J.-B. ; Liu G.-C. ; Li Q.-T. ; Wang Y.-Z. 
Super-tough
poly(l-lactide)/crosslinked polyurethane blends with tunable
impact toughness . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 12857 10.1039/c4ra00718b .
Liu H. ; Song W. ; Chen F. ; Guo L. ; Zhang J. 
Interaction
of Microstructure and Interfacial Adhesion on Impact Performance of
Polylactide (PLA) Ternary Blends . Macromolecules 
2011 , 44 , 1513 –1522 . 10.1021/ma1026934 .
Yu R.-l. ; Zhang L.-s. ; Feng Y.-h. ; Zhang R.-y. ; Zhu J. 
Improvement
in toughness of polylactide by melt blending with bio-based poly(ester)urethane . Chin. J. Polym. Sci. 
2014 , 32 , 1099 –1110 . 10.1007/s10118-014-1487-9 .
Zhang L. ; Xiong Z. ; Shams S. S. ; Yu R. ; Huang J. ; Zhang R. ; Zhu J. 
Free radical competitions in polylactide/bio-based
thermoplastic polyurethane/free radical initiator ternary blends and
their final properties . Polymer 
2015 , 64 , 69 –75 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2015.03.032 .
Dorgan J. R. ; Janzen J. ; Clayton M. P. ; Hait S. B. ; Knauss D. M. 
Melt rheology
of variable l-content poly(lactic acid) . J. Rheol. 
2005 , 49 , 607 10.1122/1.1896957 .
Nouri S. ; Dubois C. ; Lafleur P. G. 
Synthesis and characterization of
polylactides with different branched architectures . J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 
2015 , 53 , 522 –531 . 10.1002/polb.23665 .
Perkins W. G. 
Polymer
toughness and impact resistance . Polym. Eng.
Sci. 
1999 , 39 , 2445 –2460 . 10.1002/pen.11632 .
Lin Y. ; Zhang K.-Y. ; Dong Z.-M. ; Dong L.-S. ; Li Y.-S. 
Study of
hydrogen-bonded blend of polylactide with biodegradable hyperbranched
poly(ester amide) . Macromolecules 
2007 , 40 , 6257 –6267 . 10.1021/ma070989a .
Liu G.-C. ; He Y.-S. ; Zeng J.-B. ; Li Q.-T. ; Wang Y.-Z. 
Fully biobased
and supertough polylactide-based thermoplastic vulcanizates fabricated
by peroxide-induced dynamic vulcanization and interfacial compatibilization . Biomacromolecules 
2014 , 15 , 4260 –4271 . 10.1021/bm5012739 .25287757 
Wojcieszak R. ; Santarelli F. ; Paul S. ; Dumeignil F. ; Cavani F. ; Gonçalves R. V. 
Recent
developments in maleic acid
synthesis from bio-based chemicals . Sustainable
Chem. Processes 
2015 , 3 , 1 –11 . 10.1186/s40508-015-0034-5 .
Kfoury G. ; Raquez J.-M. ; Hassouna F. ; Leclère P. ; Toniazzo V. ; Ruch D. ; Dubois P. 
Toughening
of poly(lactide)
using polyethylene glycol methyl ether acrylate: Reactive versus physical
blending . Polym. Eng. Sci. 
2015 , 55 , 1408 –1419 . 10.1002/pen.24085 .
Bhardwaj R. ; Mohanty A. K. 
Modification of brittle polylactide by novel hyperbranched
polymer-based nanostructures . Biomacromolecules 
2007 , 8 , 2476 –2484 . 10.1021/bm070367x .17605464 
Nerkar M. ; Ramsay J. A. ; Ramsay B. A. ; Kontopoulou M. 
Dramatic Improvements
in Strain Hardening and Crystallization Kinetics of PLA by Simple
Reactive Modification in the Melt State . Macromol.
Mater. Eng. 
2014 , 299 , 1419 –1424 . 10.1002/mame.201400078 .
Chen Y. ; Yuan D. ; Xu C. 
Dynamically
Vulcanized Biobased Polylactide/Natural
Rubber Blend Material with Continuous Cross-Linked Rubber Phase . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 3811 –3816 . 10.1021/am5004766 .24621374 
Fang H. ; Jiang F. ; Wu Q. ; Ding Y. ; Wang Z. 
Supertough
Polylactide Materials Prepared through in Situ Reactive Blending with
PEG-Based Diacrylate Monomer . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 13552 –13563 . 10.1021/am502735q .25105468 
Lu X. ; Wei X. ; Huang J. ; Yang L. ; Zhang G. ; He G. ; Wang M. ; Qu J. 
Supertoughened Poly(lactic acid)/Polyurethane
Blend Material by in Situ Reactive Interfacial Compatibilization via
Dynamic Vulcanization . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2014 , 53 , 17386 –17393 . 10.1021/ie503092w .
Anderson K. S. ; Lim S. H. ; Hillmyer M. A. 
Toughening of polylactide by melt
blending with linear low-density polyethylene . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2003 , 89 , 3757 –3768 . 10.1002/app.12462 .
Spinella S. ; Cai J. ; Samuel C. ; Zhu J. ; McCallum S. A. ; Habibi Y. ; Raquez J.-M. ; Dubois P. ; Gross R. A. 
Polylactide/Poly(ω-hydroxytetradecanoic
acid) Reactive Blending: A Green Renewable Approach to Improving Polylactide
Properties . Biomacromolecules 
2015 , 16 , 1818 –1826 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.5b00394 .25848833 
Li Y. ; Cook W. D. ; Moorhoff C. ; Huang W.-C. ; Chen Q.-Z. 
Synthesis,
characterization and properties of biocompatible poly(glycerol sebacate)
pre-polymer and gel . Polym. Int. 
2013 , 62 , 534 –547 . 10.1002/pi.4419 .
d’Arcy R. ; Burke J. ; Tirelli N. 
Branched polyesters: Preparative
strategies and applications . Adv. Drug Delivery
Rev. 
2016 , 10.1016/j.addr.2016.05.005 .
Ruellan A. ; Guinault A. ; Sollogoub C. ; Ducruet V. ; Domenek S. 
Solubility
factors as screening tools of biodegradable toughening agents of polylactide . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2015 , 132 , 42476 (1−11) 10.1002/app.42476 .
Chen H. ; Kong J. 
Hyperbranched polymers
from A2 + B3 strategy:
Recent advances in description and control of fine topology . Polym. Chem. 
2016 , 7 , 3643 –3663 . 10.1039/C6PY00409A .

