
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145718410.1021/acsomega.6b00331ArticleIntegrated Experimental and Theoretical Study of Shape-Controlled
Catalytic Oxidative Coupling of Aromatic Amines over CuO Nanostructures Singuru Ramana †⊥Trinh Quang Thang *‡⊥Banerjee Biplab §Govinda Rao Bolla †Bai Linyi ∥Bhaumik Asim §Reddy Benjaram Mahipal †Hirao Hajime *∥Mondal John *†† Inorganic
and Physical Chemistry Division, CSIR-Indian
Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500607, India‡ Cambridge
Centre for Advanced Research and Education in Singapore, Nanyang Technological University, 1 Create Way, Singapore 138602, Singapore§ Department
of Materials Science, Indian Association
for the Cultivation of Science, 2A & 2B Raja S C Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata 700032, India∥ Division
of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and Mathematical
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371, Singapore* E-mail: qttrinh@ntu.edu.sg (Q.T.T.).* E-mail: hirao@ntu.edu.sg (H.H.).* E-mail: johncuchem@gmail.com (J.M.).06 12 2016 31 12 2016 1 6 1121 1138 20 10 2016 24 11 2016 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical Society2016American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We have synthesized
CuO nanostructures with flake, dandelion-microsphere,
and short-ribbon shapes using solution-phase methods and have evaluated
their structure–performance relationship in the heterogeneous
catalysis of liquid-phase oxidative coupling reactions. The formation
of nanostructures and the morphological evolution were confirmed by
transmission electron microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, X-ray
diffraction analysis, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy,
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, elemental mapping analysis,
and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. CuO nanostructures with
different morphologies were tested for the catalytic oxidative coupling
of aromatic amines to imines under solvent-free conditions. We found
that the flake-shaped CuO nanostructures exhibited superior catalytic
efficiency compared to that of the dandelion- and short-ribbon-shaped
CuO nanostructures. We also performed extensive density functional
theory (DFT) calculations to gain atomic-level insight into the intriguing
reactivity trends observed for the different CuO nanostructures. Our
DFT calculations provided for the first time a detailed and comprehensive
view of the oxidative coupling reaction of benzylamine over CuO, which
yields N-benzylidene-1-phenylmethanamine as the major
product. CuO(111) is identified as the reactive surface; the specific
arrangement of coordinatively unsaturated Cu and O sites on the most
stable CuO(111) surface allows N–H and C–H bond-activation
reactions to proceed with low-energy barriers. The high catalytic
activity of the flake-shaped CuO nanostructure can be attributed to
the greatest exposure of the active CuO(111) facets. Our finding sheds
light on the prospective utility of inexpensive CuO nanostructured
catalysts with different morphologies in performing solvent-free oxidative
coupling of aromatic amines to obtain biologically and pharmaceutically
important imine derivatives with high selectivity.

document-id-old-9ao6b00331document-id-new-14ao-2016-00331accc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Incredible
change in electronic structure arises when nanostructured
metal oxides are formed, as a result of alteration in bond percolation
networks, coordination modes, electron–lattice coupling, and
atomic arrangement on surfaces, giving rise to chemical and physical
properties distinctly different from their bulk properties. Various
nanostructured materials even on atomic or molecular scales have been
designed and developed for a variety of catalytic applications to
deliver fine organic chemicals with high atomic efficiency and diminished
formation of unwanted by-products.1−3 In recent years, morphology-dependent
nanocatalysis has attracted increasing attention in the areas of surface
science and catalysis, because the chemical reactivity and selectivity
of a catalytic reaction can be controlled effectively by changing
the shape and interface of solid nanostructured catalysts.4−6 According to Xia et al.,6 shape control
of nanocatalysts helps to optimize the catalytic applicability and
reduce the cost of materials. Examples include the morphology-dependent
catalytic activity of spinel LiMn1.5Ni0.5O4 for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) investigated by Manthiram
et al.,7 who showed that the OER activity
increased in the order truncated octahedral < cubic < spherical
< octahedral. Different morphologies of Co3O4 nanocrystals also exhibited different catalytic activities in the
oxidative decomposition of formaldehyde, which decreased in the order
nanobelts > nanoplates > nanosheets.8 Outstanding
electrochemical performance with high lithium storage capacity was
found by Wang and co-workers for single crystalline CuO having a nanoplatelet
morphology,9 and a superior catalytic performance
of octahedral o-Cu2O compared to that
of cube c-Cu2O was also observed in CO
oxidation.10

There are two possible
reasons underlying the different catalytic
activities of different morphologies. First, different morphologies
could expose different reactive crystal facets (with high density
of atomic steps, edges, kinks, and dangling bonds), resulting in different
modes and strengths of interactions between organic molecules and
crystal surfaces.6,11−13 For example,
Pt cubic nanoparticles that mainly expose the (100) facet showed better
catalytic performance in catalytic hydrogenation of benzene compared
to that of Pt cuboctahedral nanoparticles that expose the (100) and
(111) facets.14 The catalytic activity
of different crystal planes of Co3O4 nanocrystals
changed significantly and decreased in the order (112) > (011)
≫
(001) in methane combustion.15 Hua et al.
showed that different morphologies of Cu2O gave very different
selectivity in propylene oxidation because of differently exposed
active facets.16 In that study, the octahedral
morphology of Cu2O exposing (111) facets was the most selective
in the formation of acrolein, Cu2O cubes with exposed (100)
facets were the most active for complete oxidation to CO2, and Cu2O rhombic dodecahedra with exposed (110) facets
gave the highest selectivity for propylene oxide instead. Similarly,
Vilé et al. showed that CeO2 nanocubes with exposed
(100) facets and conventional polyhedral CeO2 with (111)
crystal surfaces were active in CO oxidation and C2H2 hydrogenation, respectively.17 Varghese et al. theoretically evaluated the catalytic activity of
the experimentally observed CuO(111), CuO(1̅11), CuO(110), CuO(011̅),
and CuO(010) facets in activating the C–H bond of methane,
revealing that the energy barriers for C–H activation on these
facets differ significantly and that the synergistic effect of adjacently
situated unsaturated Cu and O atoms on the surface constitutes a main
reason for the significantly reduced activation barrier.18 Quasicubic Fe2O3 nanoparticles
exhibited enhanced catalytic CO oxidation activity compared to that
of flower-like nanoparticles featuring exclusive exposure of the (110)
crystalline planes,19 and strong facet-dependence
of propene hydrogenation activity over ceria catalysts was also reported.20

The second factor that contributes to
the different activities
of different morphologies is the extent to which an active facet is
exposed, and this is important especially when the active facet is
known. The catalytic activity decreased in the order nanobelts >
nanoplates
> nanosheets in the formaldehyde oxidative decomposition on different
morphologies of Co3O4 nanocrystals, and this
trend was explained in terms of different specific surface areas and
different abundance of active surface-situated oxygen in these morphologies.8 The same trend was observed in an integrated
experimental and theoretical study conducted by Amaniampong et al.,
who showed that the regenerative nanoleave-shaped CuO catalyst with
dominant (111) facets activated the formyl C–H bond in glucose
effectively by use of the surface lattice oxygen, to give gluconic
acid in high yield (∼87%), whereas CuO nanocubes were much
less active (∼50%) because of much less exposure of the active
CuO(111) surface.21 Stereoselectivity in
deoxygenation of aromatic epoxides was significantly affected by the
morphology (wires, plates, or cubes) of Cu catalysts with different
degrees of exposed Cu(100) facets.22 The
highest specific surface area also resulted in maximum activity of
the star-shaped structure of CuO in the catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol;
the activity was higher than that of the rod-, sphere-, and flower-shaped
CuO morphologies.23 As was demonstrated
in these reports, nanostructured metal oxides act as effective catalysts
when appropriate crystalline facets are exposed and used.

Herein,
we report that the catalytic activity of CuO nanostructures
depends on the morphology (flake, dandelion, or short ribbon) and
that they can catalyze the oxidative coupling of aromatic amines to
deliver imines. This organic transformation plays an indispensable
role in constructing highly valuable building blocks for a variety
of molecules of pharmaceutical significance. However, conventional
methods have problems such as the low selectivity in the condensation
of primary aliphatic aldehydes and amines, the low reaction efficiency,
and the need for harsh reaction conditions, which have hampered versatile
applications of these procedures. The oxidative coupling of amines
to produce imines, which uses benign and readily available molecular
O2 or air as an oxidant, has drawn widespread attention.
There are strong incentives to use heterogeneous catalysts in producing
imines, because their high stability, high activity, reusability,
and ease of product separation potentially reduce the cost of the
process.24,25 Among the various catalysts studied so far,
Cu-based ones appear promising because of the high abundance and low
price of copper. However, although many Cu-based homogeneous catalysts
have been developed, the number of Cu-based heterogeneous catalysts
is still limited.25 Cu(0) has been considered
for use in this reaction under aerobic conditions, but despite the
high activity attained, leakage of copper to the reaction media was
detected, and the structure of the catalyst changed drastically after
the reaction.26−28 There are also reports that Cu could be easily converted
to the copper oxide phase in O2 atmosphere.18,21,29,30 CuO catalysts have also been tested for oxidative coupling of amines
to imines; however, their activities have not been optimized to a
satisfactory level.31 In addition, our
mechanistic understanding of the formation of imines over these heterogeneous
catalysts is insufficient, which impedes efficient development of
better catalysts. It is important to note that the surfaces of metal
oxides are much more complex than pure metal surfaces, because they
have many different active sites (saturated coordination and undercoordination
sites), making detailed mechanistic studies of the reaction on CuO
challenging but warranted.18,21,30,32 These apparent problems motivated
us to examine the potential of CuO as the catalyst and optimize the
reaction conditions, particularly for the oxidative coupling of aromatic
amines. Our findings demonstrate the prospective utility of CuO nanostructured
catalysts with different morphologies for the catalysis of solvent-free
oxidative coupling of aromatic amines to deliver imines with high
activity and high selectivity. We found that the catalytic activity
of the flake-shaped CuO nanostructure is higher than that of the dandelion-
and short-ribbon-shaped CuO nanostructures. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first example of nanocatalysis that utilizes different
morphologies of CuO for shape-controlled oxidative coupling of aromatic
amines. Furthermore, by performing extensive density functional theory
(DFT) calculations, we were able to delineate a detailed mechanism
of the oxidative coupling reaction on the CuO surface for the first
time. DFT calculations also helped us understand the different catalytic
activities of different CuO morphologies in terms of how significantly
the active facets are exposed. Thus, the research outcomes in this
study provide a compelling rationale for the structure–performance
relationship of CuO nanostructures.

2 Results
and Discussion
2.1 Synthesis and Characterization
of CuO Nanostructures
Uniform flake (Cu-1)-, dandelion-microsphere
(Cu-2)-, and short-ribbon
(Cu-3)-shaped CuO nanostructures were synthesized by following conventional
solution-phase methods (Scheme S1, Supporting
Information (SI)). To synthesize the CuO nanostructure with a flake
shape (Cu-1), a facile template-free solution-phase method was adopted
that involves precipitation of copper acetate with an aqueous sodium
hydroxide solution to generate a copper hydroxide acetate precursor,
followed by thermal decomposition of the metal hydroxide salt. A hierarchical
dandelion-like CuO nanostructure (Cu-2) was prepared by a facile hydrothermal
method in the presence of ethanol and ethylene glycol. Here, ethylene
glycol played a crucial role as a structure-directing agent to initiate
the self-assembly through nucleation and aggregation processes, which
eventually led to the formation of microspheres. The CuO nanostructure
with short-ribbon morphology (Cu-3) was prepared with co-precipitation
of a Cu(OH)2 precursor, followed by thermal decomposition
of Cu(OH)2 at a lower temperature and then calcination
at a higher temperature. The copper content in each of these CuO nanostructured
materials was determined by using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS),
which predicted that the Cu-1, Cu-2, and Cu-3 materials include 23.0
wt % (0.362 mol %), 22.8 wt % (0.358 mol %), and 21.5 wt % (0.338
mol %) of copper, respectively. Morphological evolution in the three
CuO nanostructures was investigated by performing transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1 Field emission SEM (FE-SEM) images of flake-shaped CuO (Cu-1) (A–C),
dandelion-shaped CuO (Cu-2) (D–F), and short-ribbon-shaped
CuO (Cu-3) (G–I).

Figure 2 TEM images of flake-shaped CuO (Cu-1) (A–C). HR-TEM image
of Cu-1 (D); selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of
Cu-1 (E). TEM images of dandelion-microsphere-shaped CuO (Cu-2) (F–H).
HR-TEM image of Cu-2 (I); SAED pattern of Cu-2 (J). TEM images of
short-ribbon-shaped CuO (Cu-3) (K–M). HR-TEM image of Cu-3
(N); SAED pattern of Cu-3 (O). FFT patterns of Cu-1, Cu-2, and Cu-3
are shown in the insets of D, I, and N, respectively.

The as-synthesized Cu-1 material had flakelike
morphology (Figure 1A–C) with
the average diameter in the range of 3.1–4.7 μm. It is
quite clear from the images obtained from FE-SEM analysis that the
interior of the flake-shaped CuO (Cu-1) is composed of small spherical
particles that make the surface rough in nature (Figure S1).33Figure 1B displays a close-up view
of Figure 1A, which
reveals that every nanosheet has a thickness in the range of ∼307–384
nm. Close inspection of the regions marked by blue arrows in Figure 1B shows that each
nanosheet consists of two to three well-defined nanoflakes that make
the composite very bulky. The SEM image in Figure 1D shows that the dandelion-type CuO microspheres
(Cu-2), which have varying sizes (5.2–6.4 μm), are homogeneously
distributed throughout the sample. Figure 1E,F demonstrates that nanoneedles with sizes
of 3–5 nm are self-assembled to develop each dandelion microsphere
of CuO.34 The short-ribbon-like morphology
of Cu-3 with a mean particle length of ∼225 nm can be seen
in Figure 1G–H.35

TEM images of Cu-1 (Figure 2A–C) demonstrate that the black-colored
small nanograins
are fused together to give flake-shaped morphology. Black-colored
nanograins are clearly visible in Figure 2C; they are self-assembled to give flakelike
morphology to the Cu-1 material. TEM images of Cu-2 (Figure 2F–H) show distinct microspheres,
congruent with the SEM results. The diameter was calculated as ∼172
nm for the microsphere in Figure 2F. Short-ribbon-like morphology of Cu-3 is also seen
in Figure 2K–M. Figure 2L is a magnified
image of the marked portion (red) of Figure 2K, in which short ribbons with a length of
around 203–221 nm are clearly visible. In the high-resolution
TEM (HR-TEM) image of the Cu-1 material (Figure 2D), the crystalline lattice fringes zone
is marked with a red frame. Fast Fourier transform (FFT) analysis
of this marked area (inset of Figure 2D) showed that it contained (111) and (110) crystal
planes.36 The similar crystalline lattice
fringes in HR-TEM images were captured and marked with red frames
for the Cu-2 and Cu-3 materials (Figure 2I,N), and FFT was also carried out at these
specified regions, which yielded (111) and (110) crystal planes for
the dandelion CuO (inset of Figure 2I) and (111), (110), and (021) reflections for the
short-ribbon CuO material (inset of Figure 2N). SAED patterns of all CuO nanostructures
(Figure 2E,J,O) imply
a polycrystalline nature, and diffraction rings can be indexed to
the monoclinic CuO phases.

Wide-angle powder X-ray diffraction
(XRD) patterns of the CuO nanostructures
with different morphologies presented in Figure 3A inform us about the crystalline nature
of the as-synthesized CuO samples. The XRD patterns can be readily
indexed to the matched crystalline planes, corresponding to the monoclinic
arrangement of CuO with the JCPDS card No. (80-1917). In fact, some
shifts in the XRD peak positions were observed in the higher 2θ
region in the wide-angle powder XRD patterns of the CuO materials
presented in Figure 3A. This shifting could be explained in terms of thermal expansion
or change of the structure. Peak widths can vary as a result of changing
the crystallite size and microstrain. There may be redistribution
of peak intensities arising from change in crystallographic preferred
orientation, texture, or increasingly poor grain statistics upon grain
growth, which could cause shifting of XRD peaks.37 No other impurity peaks can be observed, which indicates
entire conversion of the as-synthesized Cu precursors into crystalline
CuO.38 Cu 2p XPS spectra of all CuO nanostructured
materials are provided in Figure 3B. The binding energy peak of Cu 2p3/2 in
the CuO nanostructure centered at 933.7 eV and the characteristic
satellite peak at 942.2 eV can be attributed to the presence of Cu
in the +2 oxidation state.39 A higher binding
energy peak of the Cu 2p1/2 core level of the CuO materials
appeared at 953.6 eV along with a shakeup satellite at 961.9 eV. The
Cu 2p3/2 binding energy peak for metallic copper, Cu(0),
and Cu2O, Cu(I), should be observed at 932.5 eV, which
is about 1.3 eV lower than the peak for the main Cu 2p3/2 core level transition of Cu(II)O.40 Therefore,
from the Cu 2p X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data, we can
conclude that neither Cu(0) nor Cu(I) was produced in this case. In
addition, the prominent satellite peaks mentioned above are hardly
noticeable for Cu(I) in XPS. O 1s XPS spectra are shown in Figure 3C–E, and deconvolution
of these spectra shows that the binding energy peaks are situated
at 529.6 eV (attributable to the presence of lattice oxygen) and 531.6
eV (attributable to the presence of surface oxygen).41,42 The presence of another peak around 528.8 eV could be assigned to
other O–Cu bonds.43Figure 3C displays the Raman spectra
of the CuO nanostructures. Three main stretching vibration one-photon
modes are found at 282, 337, and 613 cm–1, which
can be assigned to the Ag and two Bg modes, respectively,
arising from the vibrational motions of Cu–O bonds.43 Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy and
elemental mapping data for all CuO nanostructures (Figure S4) reveal the presence of Cu and O elements with no
other impurities. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of all
CuO-based materials (Figure S5) suggest
the presence of characteristic Cu–O stretching vibrations.44

Figure 3 Wide-angle powder XRD patterns (A), XPS spectra of Cu
2p region
(B), O 1s region for Cu-1 (C), Cu-2 (D), and Cu-3 (E), and Raman spectra
(F) of all CuO materials.

2.2 Catalytic Activity of CuO Nanostructures for
Oxidative Coupling of Aromatic Amines
Catalytic performance
of the CuO nanostructured materials was evaluated by carrying out
oxidative coupling of aromatic amines under solvent-free conditions
at 100 °C (oil bath) with an O2 balloon; benzylamine
(0.2 mL, 1.8 mmol) was used as a model substrate. We observed remarkable
differences in catalytic performance when the three CuO catalysts
with different shapes were used for the reaction. Initially, low catalytic
conversion (only 5% at 4 h) could be observed when Cu-1 (flake shape)
was used as the catalyst for this oxidative coupling reaction (Table 1, entry 1). Only 23%
conversion was achieved after 10 h of the reaction using the Cu-1
material (Table 1,
entry 3). Surprisingly, however, the catalytic conversion with Cu-1
could be improved to 98%, and the reaction was completed within 12
h (Table 1, entry 4).
In contrast, by using Cu-2 (dandelion microsphere) and Cu-3 (short
ribbon) catalysts under identical reaction conditions, 55 and 72%
product conversions, respectively, were reached after 12 h (Table 1, entries 5 and 6).
Notably, catalytic reactions using Cu-2 (dandelion microsphere) and
Cu-3 (short ribbon) catalysts both led to 98% conversions (Table 1, entries 7 and 8)
after 17 and 15 h, respectively. A comparison study was performed
using bulk CuO (Table 1, entry 9) and commercial CuO catalysts (Table 1, entry 10); neither of them was as active
as Cu-1, and the commercial CuO catalyst exhibited lower selectivity
(91%). Our methodology using the Cu-1 nanocatalyst is also effective
for a large-scale reaction (2 mL, 18.3 mmol), with consistent product
conversion of 98% observed (Table 1, entry 11).

Table 1 Oxidative Coupling
of Benzylamine
Promoted by Various CuO Nanostructuresa
entry	catalyst	temperature
(°C)	time (h)	conv (%)	
1	Cu-1 flake	100	4	5	
2	Cu-1 flake	100	6	8	
3	Cu-1 flake	100	10	23	
4	Cu-1 flake	100	12	98	
5	Cu-2 dandelion	100	12	55	
6	Cu-3 short ribbon	100	12	72	
7	Cu-2 dandelion	100	17	98	
8	Cu-3 short ribbon	100	15	98	
9	CuO bulk	100	12	3	
10	Com-CuO	100	12	14	
11b	Cu-1 flake	100	12	98	
a Reaction conditions: benzylamine
(0.2 mL, 1.83 mmol), CuO nanostructures (0.3619 mol % of Cu), O2 balloon (1 atm pressure), determined by gas chromatography
(GC) using diphenyl as the internal standard and confirmed by GC-(mass
spectrometry) MS.

b Reaction
was performed with benzylamine
(2 mL, 18.3 mmol).

The effect
of atmosphere on this catalytic oxidative coupling reaction
was investigated by performing this reaction in O2 (1 atm),
air, N2, and Ar atmospheres using benzylamine as the model
substrate for the CuO nanostructures of different shapes (Figure 4A). The catalytic
performance of all CuO nanostructured materials with different shapes
was enhanced in an O2 atmosphere compared to that for the
reaction in air. Noticeable differences in catalytic activity of the
three CuO nanostructures with different shapes were observed under
both O2 and air conditions. To investigate the intrinsic
activity of the catalyst, the turnover frequency (TOF) values were
calculated using the expression “biphenyl converted per gram
of catalyst per hour”. This is a convenient choice for comparing
the activities of different morphologies of the same catalyst, and
it was also applied in other studies.23,45 As catalysis
is a surface phenomenon, we have investigated the morphology-dependence
of TOF assuming that all of the exposed surface atoms are accessible
and act as catalytically active sites for these nanostructured catalysts.
CuO with the flake shape (Cu-1) exhibited superior catalytic performance
(with TOF values of 2.06 and 1.79 h–1) compared
to that of Cu-2 (with TOF values of 1.15 and 1.01 h–1) and Cu-3 (with TOF values of 1.51 and 1.2 h–1) under O2 and aerobic conditions, respectively. Substantial
decreases in the TOF (h–1) values were observed
upon introduction of N2 and Ar atmospheres, indicating
that oxygen is essential for this oxidative coupling reaction of amine.
Changes over time in catalytic performance of all three CuO nanostructured
catalysts with different shapes were examined for solvent-free oxidative
coupling of benzylamine under optimized reaction conditions at 100
°C (Figure 4B),
by monitoring samples in GC at 1 h intervals. Initially, the rates
of the catalytic reactions for all three CuO nanocatalysts were very
low, indicating that there is an initiation period before the catalysts
acquire full activity. After 10 h of the reaction, conversion was
only 25%; however, within 2 h after that, the Cu-1, Cu-2, and Cu-3
catalysts provided 98, 55, and 72% conversions of benzylamine, respectively.
Thus, some induction period is necessary for this catalytic process,
which may be attributed to poor surface–substrate interactions
in the initial stage, activation of the nanocatalyst during the reaction
time by heating the solvent from room temperature to the optimum higher
temperature, catalyst wetting processes, or the presence of excess
amine that causes poisoning of the catalyst.

Figure 4 (A) Effect of atmosphere
on shape-controlled catalytic oxidative
coupling of benzylamine over CuO nanostructures. Activity expressed
in terms of TOF (h–1). (B) Conversion of benzylamine
over the flake (Cu-1)-, dandelion (Cu-2)-, and short-ribbon (Cu-3)-shaped
CuO nanostructures against time. Reaction condition: benzylamine (0.2
mL, 1.83 mmol), CuO nanocatalyst (0.3619 mol % of Cu), O2 balloon (1 atm pressure), temperature 100 °C. (C) Influence
of the reaction temperature on shape-controlled catalytic oxidative
coupling of benzylamine over flake (Cu-1)-, dandelion (Cu-2)-, and
short-ribbon (Cu-3)-shaped CuO nanostructures (0.3619 mol % of Cu);
time 12 h. Each reaction was carried out for 12 h. (D) Comparison
of the desired product selectivity in the oxidative coupling reaction
of benzylamine over CuO nanostructures of different shapes in different
atmospheres. (E) Effect of the CuO catalyst dose on oxidative coupling
of benzylamine. Reaction condition: benzylamine (0.2 mL, 1.83 mmol),
CuO nanocatalyst, O2 balloon (1 atm pressure), temperature
100 °C, time 12 h. (F) TOF h–1 of the CuO nanostructures
against the catalyst surface area.

We also examined the influence of the reaction temperature
on the
shape-dependent catalytic performance of the CuO catalysts in solvent-free
oxidative coupling of benzylamine at different temperatures (Figure 4C). All of the reactions
were carried out at a particular temperature for 12 h. The catalytic
activity expressed in terms of TOF (h–1) at different
temperatures clearly signifies that temperature plays a crucial role
in this reaction. When the temperature was increased gradually from
40 to 100 °C, significant enhancement in TOF was observed for
all of the CuO nanocatalysts, whereas the desired imine was obtained
as a sole product with good selectivity. This may be because the catalyst
is activated effectively at higher reaction temperatures. The products
selectivity obtained under various reaction conditions and with different
CuO nanostructures are compared in Figure 4D. N-Benzylidene-1-phenylmethanamine
is obtained as a major product, along with a small amount of benzonitrile
(ca. 5–10% selectivity), in the oxidative coupling of benzylamine
under O2 and aerobic conditions. The same trend was not
noticed when the reaction was conducted under an inert atmosphere.
The formation of benzonitrile and N-benzylidene-1-phenylmethanamine
as the minor and major products, respectively, can be attributed to
the successive oxidative dehydrogenation of an in-situ-generated imine
derivative and a self-coupling reaction between the unreacted benzylamine
and the in-situ-formed benzylimine. The effect of the catalyst dose
(mol % of Cu) was investigated for the oxidative coupling of benzylamine
under optimized reaction conditions using all CuO nanocatalysts (Figure 4E). Obvious improvement
in catalytic performance was observed with increasing mol % of Cu
in the catalyst, but the selectivity for the desired imine product
was not diminished (∼98% selectivity). This result suggests
that the selectivity is independent of catalyst loading. In addition,
saturation in the catalytic performance (∼60–99% conversion)
was observed when the catalyst dose was increased from 0.072 to 0.108
mmol. This observation indicates that the catalytic performance is
independent of the mol % of Cu loading after reaching a certain amount.
Our efforts to establish structure–activity relationships for
the nanostructured catalysts led us to find a correlation between
the activity and the surface area. TOF (h–1) is
plotted as a function of the surface area in Figure 4F; the data in the figure imply that the
catalytic performance gradually decreases with the decreasing external
active surface area or the decreasing number of catalytically active
sites of the CuO nanostructures. A similar linear correlation between
the activity and the Cu surface area has been observed by Natesakhawat
et al.46

With the optimized conditions
in hand, we then examined the substrate
scope using the Cu-1 nanocatalyst and amines bearing a variety of
functional groups (Table 2). In general, our newly developed methodology works fine
for substrates having either an electron-donating or an electron-withdrawing
functional group on the aromatic ring; in either case, good conversion
and high selectivity could be achieved (Table 2, entries 1–4). Ortho-substituted
benzylamines underwent the oxidative coupling reaction very smoothly
despite possible steric hindrance effects. Similarly, 2-aminobenzyl
amine and 2-chlorobenzyl amine could be transformed into the corresponding
imines with excellent conversion efficiency (Table 2, entries 9 and 10). The reaction of 4-tert-butyl benzylamine also proceeded efficiently (Table 2, entry 6), with 97%
conversion and 96% selectivity after 12 h. The position of substitution
on the aromatic ring did not have much effect on the reaction outcomes
(Table 2, entries 5
and 7). 3,4,5-Trimethoxy benzylamine also underwent the
oxidative coupling reaction (Table 2, entry 8), providing the corresponding imine with
only 86% selectivity. In the case of an aliphatic (hexyl) amine, 51%
conversion was obtained after 12 h (Table 2, entry 11). This poor conversion could be
due to the presence of an inactive α-hydrogen. 3-Picolylamine,
a heterocyclic amine, could be transformed into the corresponding
imine (Table 2, entry
13), with moderate conversion efficiency, good selectivity, and no
poisoning of the catalyst observed. Surprisingly, however, 2-furfuryl
amine delivered the imine product with 100% conversion and 100% selectivity
after 14 h (Table 2, entry 12). We also examined the catalytic efficiency of our nanocatalyst
for the oxidation of a secondary amine (1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline)
and obtained 100% conversion to the corresponding imine (Table 2, entry 14). Similarly,
indoline underwent the oxidative coupling reaction to furnish an imine
derivative with 100% conversion after 16 h (Table 2, entry 15). However, when the reaction was
performed with dibenzylamine (Table 2, entry 16), only 65% conversion was observed after
20 h with the formation of the corresponding benzaldehyde and benzonitrile
as by-products.

Table 2 Oxidative Coupling of Various Amines
Catalyzed by the Cu-1 Nanocatalysta
a Reaction conditions: amine (1.83
mmol), Cu-1 nanocatalyst (0.3619 mol % of Cu), O2 balloon
(1 atm pressure), 100 °C temperature, conversion was determined
by GC using diphenyl as the internal standard and confirmed by GC-MS.

In Table S1, the catalytic performance
of the CuO nanostructured catalysts is compared to that of other catalysts
in the literature, for oxidative coupling of several challenging amines
such as aliphatic amine, heterocyclic amines, and dibenzylamine. The
NHPI/Fe(BTC) metal-organic-framework-based catalyst afforded no conversion
of the aliphatic amine and very poor conversions for heterocyclic
amine and dibenzylamine (Table S1, entry
1).47 In addition, aliphatic amine and
heterocyclic amine underwent only 13.1 and 73.4% conversions, respectively,
when the Pc-Ludox-8 catalyst (Table S1,
entry 2) was used.48 The Cu/graphene catalyst
was also inefficient for the aliphatic amine and dibenzylamine transformations,
for which only poor conversions and low desired product selectivity
were observed under photocatalytic irradiation conditions (Table S1, entry 3).49 Base acid treated GO (ba-GO) was tested for oxidative coupling of n-butyl amine under solvent-free conditions (Table S1, entry 5), which provided only 9% product
yield after 12 h.50 Compared to these results,
notable increases in conversion and selectivity could be achieved
for oxidative coupling of an aliphatic amine and a heterocyclic amine
with optimized reaction conditions and a Cu-1 nanocatalyst (Table S1, entry 4).

We have investigated
the influence of the concentration of benzylamine
(Figure 5A) on the
nitrile selectivity and the catalytic activity expressed in terms
of TOF (h–1). We observed that with decreasing concentration
of benzylamine, selectivity for the nitrile product (doubly dehydrogenated
product) increased despite the decrease in the TOF value. This result
can be rationalized by considering the coupling reaction between an
in-situ-generated imine intermediate and benzylamine, which is favored
in the presence of additional amine substrates over a second dehydrogenation
process leading to the formation of a benzonitrile derivative. The
trend observed for our reactions is consistent with the activity trend
experimentally observed by Hermans et al.51 To assess whether our CuO nanocatalyst is indeed heterogeneous in
nature, we carried out hot filtration tests by performing oxidative
coupling of benzylamine under optimized reaction conditions for 10
or 14 h using the Cu-1 nanocatalyst (Figure 5B). In one test, after 10 h of the catalytic
reaction, the catalyst was separated by centrifugation, and the reaction
was continued; however, conversion did not go beyond 25%. This experimental
result clearly signifies that no leaching of catalytically active
species took place in the reaction mixture. In the other test, after
14 h of the reaction, we found that a trace amount of Cu leached into
the reaction mixture (lightblue solution), which was confirmed by
the AAS analytical technique. After completion of the reaction, we
removed the catalyst, and excess benzylamine was added into the filtrate
with the leached homogenous Cu species, and the reaction was continued
for another 24 h. However, only 2–3% product conversion was
obtained after 24 h, which proved that leached copper species contributed
to the oxidative coupling of amine but did not catalyze this reaction
up to full conversion. The Cu content in the Cu-1 nanocatalyst after
14 h of the catalytic run was found to be 3.523 mmol g–1, as determined by the AAS analysis, which is still analogous to
that of the fresh one (3.619 mmol g–1). The efficacy
of all of the CuO nanocatalysts was evaluated in terms of the recyclability
and reusability by carrying out catalytic oxidative coupling of benzylamine
using the nanostructured catalysts under optimized reaction conditions.
The catalysts were recovered from the reaction mixture by the centrifugation
technique and washed with ethanol and acetone to remove organic substrates
adsorbed on the surface, followed by drying at 80 °C before its
use in the next catalytic run. No special technique like addition
of acid or base or calcination at a higher temperature was applied
for the reactivation of our catalyst. To examine the durability of
the nanocatalysts, the catalytic reactions were continued for 5 successive
catalytic runs (12 h); the conversion and TOF values dropped gradually
but were maintained relatively well during this period (Figure 5C,D). We also performed the
FE-SEM analysis for the three catalysts after the catalytic cycles
(Figure S12), which indicates that their
morphologies are still retained.

Figure 5 (A) Effect of benzylamine concentration
on the selectivity toward
benzonitrile and activity expressed in terms of TOF (h–1). (B) Hot-filtration experiments in which the Cu-1 catalyst was
removed after 10 or 14 h, followed by addition of 0.2 mL of benzylamine
in the filtrate, and the reaction was continued for another 24 h.
(C) Recyclability of all CuO nanocatalysts for oxidative coupling
of benzylamine. Reaction conditions: benzylamine (0.2 mL, 1.83 mmol),
CuO nanocatalyst (20 mg), O2 balloon (1 atm pressure),
temperature 100 °C. (D) TOF during the recyclability test of
oxidative coupling of benzylamine catalyzed by CuO nanostructures.

2.3 Mechanistic
Study of the Oxidative Coupling
of Amine on the CuO(111) Surface
Because the CuO(111) surface
is the most stable surface of CuO,30,32 it will be
the dominant exposed facet of the CuO nanocatalysts. Indeed, the CuO(111)
surface was observed in other morphologies of CuO such as nanoleaves,21 nanocubes,21 nanowires,32,52 and nano thin-flims,53,54 and the predominance of this
surface was also evidenced from XRD and HR-TEM images for all CuO
morphologies examined in this study. Therefore, the mechanism of oxidative
coupling of amine was evaluated computationally using the CuO(111)
surface. There are two different types of Cu sites, Cu3 and Cu4, and also two types of oxygen sites, O3 and O4; these are named after the coordination numbers
of Cu or O18,21,30,32 (Figure S6).
Previous computational studies showed that unsaturated Cu3 and O3 sites act as active sites in C–H bond activation
of the formyl group of glucose21 and methane.18 It is widely accepted that the essential role
of the catalyst in producing the desired secondary imine is to facilitate
the generation of the key benzylimine intermediate from benzylamine.27,28,50,55 A complete mechanism based on this assumption is shown in Scheme 1, which consists
of two competing pathways that could be responsible for this oxidative
coupling of amine for the formation of desired product N-benzylidene-1-phenylmethanamine. The first pathway involves three
stages. Stage 1 is associated with the dehydrogenation of amine to
form imine, and stage 2 is for subsequent coupling between amine and
imine. In stage 3, an ammonia molecule dissociates to yield the secondary
imine product. In the second pathway, the generated benzylimine intermediate
could be hydrolyzed to aldehyde, and rapid coupling between aldehyde
and amine leads to the final product.31,56 In addition,
further dehydrogenation of the imine intermediate to the benzonitrile
by-product is also possible (Scheme 1). To determine the most plausible reaction pathway,
we performed the GC-MS analysis while quenching the reaction mixture
at different time intervals (Figure S13). However, no signal of the hydrolyzed benzaldehyde product was
detected in the GC-MS spectra, although a small amount of the benzonitrile
by-product was observed. These results show that the hydrolysis pathway
is unfavorable and thus can be ruled out. We also note that this conclusion
is in full agreement with the recent work of Gao and co-workers on
oxidative coupling of amines to imines over mesoporous carbon.48 Therefore, we examined the three-stage pathway
that proceeds through coupling between amine and imine in our simulation
studies. It should be noted that, although this kind of mechanism
is sometimes proposed, the detailed mechanism has not been probed
in the literature, especially for the CuO-catalyzed reactions. The
lack of precise mechanistic understanding makes it difficult to design
and engineer more efficient catalysts. Therefore, we here addressed
this issue by performing DFT calculations. The DFT-calculated energy
profile and the structures of transition states are shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6 (A) Full reaction energy
profile. Relative energies are calculated
with respect to the sum of the energies of a clean surface and a reactant
in the gas phase. The reaction energy for the reaction XY →
X + Y is calculated assuming that generated fragments X and Y are
adsorbed in infinite separation on different slabs. (B) Adsorption
of benzylamine on the CuO(111) surface. (C–G) Structures of
transition states formed along the reaction. Adsorption energy (ΔEads) and activation barriers (Ea) are shown in kcal/mol. The system contains copper (peach),
oxygen (red), carbon (gray), hydrogen (white), and nitrogen (blue)
atoms.

Scheme 1 Possible Mechanisms for the Oxidative
Coupling of Amine on the CuO
Catalyst
In stage 1, benzylamine
is adsorbed on the CuO(111) surface by
coordination of the −NH2 group to a Cu3 site; the computed adsorption energy for this process is −23.5
kcal/mol (Figure 6B).
Other adsorbed configurations are much less stable and detailed in Figure S7. Adsorbed amine is initially activated
by N–H dissociation, which has a barrier of 15.8 kcal/mol (Figure 6C). If C–H
activation occurs instead in the first step, the barrier is significantly
higher (24.9 kcal/mol, Figure 7C); therefore, this alternative scenario is less likely than
the mechanism that starts with N–H activation. Interestingly,
if the first step is N–H activation, the subsequent C–H
dissociation in step 2 is well feasible because the activation barrier
(19.9 kcal/mol, Figure 6D) is lower than the above-mentioned C–H activation barrier
for another pathway (Figure 7B–D) and the barrier for second N–H dissociation
(23.2 kcal/mol, Figure S8) in a pathway
involving sequential N–H activation steps. Importantly, both
the initial N–H activation in step 1 and the subsequent C–H
activation in step 2 are facilitated by the O3 site on
the surface (Figure 6C,D), demonstrating its critical role in activating both of these
bonds. Another possible pathway, in which N–H and C–H
bonds are activated by a Cu3 site, has much higher barriers
of 62.7 and 47.2 kcal/mol, respectively (Figure 7A,B). This observation is consistent with
the previous findings on the role of the O3 site of C–H
bond dissociation of other substrates on the CuO(111) surface.18,21 The essential role of surface chemisorbed oxygen on Cu-based catalysts
in facilitating the generation of imine has also been demonstrated
in other experimental studies.27,28

Figure 7 (A) Initial activation
of N–H by a Cu3 site.
(B) Initial C–H bond activation by only a Cu3 site.
(C) Initial C–H bond activation by both Cu3 and
O3 sites, but without any coordination between the NH2 group and the surface in the transition state. (D) Initial
C–H bond activation by only an O3 site, with the
transition state having a coordination bond between the amine and
a Cu3 site. Activation barriers (Ea) are given in kcal/mol, and surface sites are indicated (Cu3 and O3).

The generated imine intermediate subsequently couples with
the
reactant amine to form an intermediate in stage 2 (Scheme 1). However, the uncatalyzed
pathway has a very high barrier of 46.1 kcal/mol (Figure S9), demonstrating the essential role of the CuO catalyst
not only in forming the key imine intermediate but also in the coupling
reaction. Indeed, the barrier for the coupling between amine and imine
is much lower, that is, 15.9 kcal/mol, when the reaction proceeds
on the CuO(111) surface (Figure 6E). The coupling between amine and imine follows a
concerted pathway, in which C–N coupling occurs concomitantly
with H-transfer from the NH2 group of amine to the NH group
of imine. Finally, intramolecular deammoniation in stage 3 may form
a secondary amine product (Scheme 1). However, as in the case of stage 2, the uncatalyzed
concerted reaction in stage 3 has a very high barrier (49.8 kcal/mol, Figure S9) and is therefore unlikely to proceed
without the catalyst. Instead, the deammoniation on the surface of
the heterogeneous CuO catalyst should proceed through a two-step pathway:
the first step is N–H activation by the lattice O3 site on the surface, which has a barrier of 13.6 kcal/mol (Figure 6F), and the second
step is C–N dissociation to form adsorbed NH2 and
the final product, which has a barrier of 12.1 kcal/mol (Figure 6G). In the latter
reaction, C–N scission could also take place through a direct
deammoniation assisted by a surface hydrogen, but this process has
a much higher barrier of 40.0 kcal/mol and is therefore much less
likely to occur (Figure S10).

2.4 Roles of Surface Cu3 and O3 Sites in N–H
Activation
It is of utmost importance
to identify the active facet of nanocatalysts. In this study, we investigated
the characteristics of different facets in detail to better understand
the origin of different catalytic activities observed for different
CuO morphologies. The above DFT calculations confirmed that the CuO(111)
surface is a very active facet and that all of the N–H and
C–H bonds of aromatic amines can be activated on this surface,
specifically at the O3 site, while maintaining the coordination
bond of the amine moiety with the Cu3 site (Figure 6C,D,F). This implies that,
to activate X–H (X = C, N) bonds efficiently, both of the adjacently
situated Cu3 and O3 sites on the CuO(111) surface
must be used. Varghese et al.18 reported
that there is a synergistic effect between the Cu3 and
O3 sites on the CuO(111) surface when activating the C–H
bond of methane through a “four-center mechanism”, by
which the activation barrier is lowered significantly. To gain clearer
insights, we studied other N–H and C–H bond activation
pathways on different sites of the CuO(111) surface as well as on
two other facets: CuO(1̅11) and CuO(110)_O (where
“CuO(110)_O” stands for the CuO(110) surface
terminated by oxygen atoms). CuO(1̅11) is the second most stable
surface after CuO(111).30,32 In addition, the signal
of the CuO(1̅11) surface also appeared strongly in the XRD patterns
of CuO nanoleaves,21 nanowires,52 nano thin-films,53 and all as-synthesized CuO morphologies examined in this study (Figure 3A). In addition,
there is some similarity in how Cu3 and O3 sites
are arranged on the CuO(1̅11) and CuO(111) surfaces.18,32 The CuO(110) surface has a much higher surface energy and is therefore
much less stable.18,30,32 However, the O2 atmosphere can stabilize the CuO(110)
surface by terminating it by oxygen atoms (denoted as CuO(110)_O),30,32 and this facet could be detected
in HR-TEM images for all as-synthesized CuO morphologies (Figure 2), although the XRD
patterns show that the ratio of this surface is much smaller than
the ratios of the CuO(111) and CuO(1̅11) surfaces (Figure 3A). There are only
O3 sites, and no Cu3 sites, on the CuO(110)_O surface; thus, evaluation of CuO(110)_O can validate
our hypothesis regarding the necessity of both Cu3 and
O3 sites in activating X–H bonds (X = C, N). The
results are shown in Figure 8.

Figure 8 (A–C) Adsorption of benzylamine onto a Cu4 site
of CuO(111), a Cu3 site of CuO(1̅11), and a Cu4 site of CuO(110)_O, respectively. (D–F)
N–H activation by an O3 site, in which amine first
coordinates to a Cu4 site of CuO(111), a Cu3 site of CuO(1̅11), and a Cu4 site of CuO(110)_O, respectively. (G) Correlation between the adsorption energies
and corresponding N–H activation barriers. Adsorption energy
(ΔEads) and activation barriers
(Ea) are given in kcal/mol.

The amine moiety of the substrate binds strongly
to a Cu3 site of the CuO(111) surface (Figure 6B), and the initial N–H
bond activation occurs
at a nearby O3 site with a barrier of only 15.8 kcal/mol
(Figure 6C). However,
if the reactant is bound to a Cu4 site instead of a Cu3 site (Figure 8A), the activation barrier for N–H dissociation by an adjacent
O3 site is much higher (37.4 kcal/mol, Figure 8D). The Cu4 site
is a saturated site that resembles the Cu site in the bulk CuO,18,21 and therefore its affinity to the reactant is much lower than that
to the Cu3 site. This also affects the extent of transition-state
stabilization. More specifically, the adsorption energy of benzylamine
on the Cu4 site of the CuO(111) surface is only −7.1
kcal/mol (Figure 8A),
which is much smaller in magnitude than the adsorption energy for
the Cu3 site (−23.5 kcal/mol, Figure 6B). It is clear from these analyses that
both Cu3 and O3 sites are needed to reduce the
barrier for N–H activation, in which the O3 site
abstracts the hydrogen atom, whereas the Cu3 site binds
strongly to the nitrogen to stabilize the transition state. This argument
also holds for the reaction on the CuO(1̅11) surface; the transition
state of this reaction is shown in Figure 8E. Because the arrangement of Cu3 and O3 sites on the CuO(1̅11) surface is somewhat
similar to that on the CuO(111) surface, the barrier for N–H
activation is not too high (20.1 kcal/mol). Nevertheless, the adsorption
is weaker (ΔEads = −19.9
kcal/mol) than in the case of the CuO(111) surface (ΔEads = −23.5 kcal/mol); hence, the barrier
for the reaction on the CuO(1̅11) surface is higher. There are
no Cu3 sites on the CuO(110)_O surface; thus,
the adsorption energy of benzylamine on a Cu4 site is only
−9.8 kcal/mol (Figure 8C), which results in a very high barrier for N–H activation
(32.5 kcal/mol, Figure 8F). The barrier is high not only for the N–H activation, but
also for the initial C–H bond activation on CuO(110)_O (33.9 kcal/mol, Figure S11), showing
that the CuO(110)_O surface is not an active facet. For
the four different cases examined, we can see a good correlation between
the adsorption energy and the N–H activation barrier (Figure 8G). We also found
that the same argument regarding the necessity of both Cu3 and O3 sites holds true for the initial C–H bond
activation. The barrier for C–H activation by only a Cu3 site is 47.2 kcal/mol (Figure 7B) and is significantly higher than the barrier for
the C–H bond activation by an O3 site (24.9 kcal/mol, Figure 7D), demonstrating
that O3 is the catalytically relevant site for C–H
activation. It is important to note that the transition state shown
in Figure 7D is stabilized
by a coordination bond between the amine and a Cu3 site.
If the transition state is not stabilized by the Cu3 site,
the activation barrier is still very high (46.3 kcal/mol, Figure 7C), even though the
C–H bond is activated by an O3 site. This observation
demonstrates that the arrangement of adjacently situated Cu3 and O3 sites is a key catalytic factor for C–H
bond activation, as in the case of N–H activation.

2.5 Origin of the Different Catalytic Activities
and the Role of the O2 Atmosphere
As pointed out
above, judiciously arranged Cu3 and O3 atoms
play synergistic roles in activating N–H and C–H bonds
of the substrate. The CuO(111) surface has such Cu3 and
O3 atoms and is the most stable of all the CuO surfaces.30,32 The CuO(111) surface is also the dominant exposed surface for all
three as-synthesized CuO morphologies. Therefore, it is likely that
each of the CuO morphologies uses this surface for the catalysis.
Nevertheless, this surface will be exposed to varying extents in different
morphologies, and this difference could render their catalytic activity
different. Indeed, Amaniampong et al.21 showed that CuO nanoleaves (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
(BET) area, 23 m2/g) was more active than nanocubes (BET
area, 4.07 m2/g) in the glucose oxidation. The BET surface
areas for all of the CuO morphologies examined in this study are measured
and summarized in Table 3. As can be seen in the table, the larger the surface area, the more
reactive the morphology. For example, the flake-shaped CuO catalyst
has the largest surface area; thus, the CuO(111) facet will be exposed
most significantly, thereby leading to the highest activity. By contrast,
the dandelion-microsphere-shaped CuO catalyst has the smallest surface
area, and therefore its activity is the lowest.

Table 3 Comparison of BET Surface Area for
Different CuO Morphologies
sample name	morphology	BET surface
area (m2/g)	
Cu-1	flake	42.0	
Cu-2	dandelion microsphere	10.6	
Cu-3	short ribbon	26.0	
Experiments show that the conversion in an O2 atmosphere
is much more efficient than that in an inert atmosphere (N2, Ar) (Figure 4A).
We also sought to identify the origin of this discrepancy. During
the X–H activation (X = C, N), all of the produced hydrogen
atoms are bound to lattice O3 sites (Figure 7C,D,F), which could lead to reduction of
the CuO state to Cu. In fact, it was previously shown that CuO was
reduced to Cu in a hydrogen atmosphere29,30 and by other
reductants such as glucose,57 but Cu could
be recovered to CuO in an O2 atmosphere.21 To confirm the validity of this notion, we examined the
structures of the flake-shaped CuO catalyst (Cu-1) before and after
the reaction in an O2 atmosphere and in a N2 atmosphere. The XRD pattern data clearly show that CuO retains the
same structure after the reaction, when the reaction is carried out
in an O2 atmosphere (Figure 9A). By contrast, in a N2 atmosphere (in
the absence of O2), the structure of CuO was reduced to
Cu (Figure 9B). The
intact CuO structure in an O2 atmosphere could be due to
the chemical looping effect, in which O2 compensates the
consumed lattice oxygen during the reaction.45,58−60 Finally, we evaluated the activity of the Cu(111)
surface. Amine is adsorbed weakly on the Cu(111) surface with a computed
adsorption energy of −11.3 kcal/mol (Figure 9C). As expected from the lack of active O3 sites, the N–H activation barrier is very high (46.7
kcal/mol) (Figure 9D). This computational result substantiates the important role of
O2 atmosphere in restoring the CuO catalyst. It is our
hope that the mechanistic principles established in this study facilitate
the design of nanostructured materials with different shapes for performing
various chemical reactions.61−63

Figure 9 (A) XRD pattern of a Cu-1 sample after
reaction in an O2 atmosphere. (B) XRD patterns of a Cu-1
sample before and after the
reaction in a N2 atmosphere; a comparison of the patterns
shows that CuO has been reduced to Cu after the reaction. (C) Adsorption
and (D) N–H activation of benzylamine on the Cu(111) surface.
Adsorption energy (ΔEads) and activation
barriers (Ea) are given in kcal/mol.

3 Conclusions
In this work, we have demonstrated for the first time the shape-controlled
catalytic activity of CuO nanostructures for oxidative coupling of
aromatic amines to deliver biologically and pharmaceutically important
imine derivatives under solvent-free conditions with high selectivity
for desired products. Morphological evolution of all CuO nanostructures
was investigated by performing FE-SEM and TEM analyses. An improved
catalytic performance of the flake-shaped CuO nanostructure in the
oxidative coupling of aromatic amine was observed compared to that
of the dandelion- and short-ribbon-shaped CuO nanostructures. DFT
calculations provided detailed insights into the reaction mechanism
and identified the reason why three different CuO morphologies show
different catalytic trends. The specific arrangement of Cu3 and O3 sites on the CuO(111) surface is the most suitable
for activating N–H and C–H bonds, and this surface is
always the dominant one regardless of the morphology, although this
facet is exposed to different extents in different morphologies. Thus,
the observed high catalytic activity of the flake-shaped CuO nanostructure
is attributable to its greatest exposure of active CuO(111) facets,
which can be used to drive N–H and C–H bond activations.
The O2 molecules in the atmosphere play an indispensable
role in compensating for the loss of the consumed lattice oxygen and
thereby keeping the CuO structure intact during the reaction. Theoretical
insights obtained in this study not only shed light on the microscopic
aspects of the complex coupling reaction and the observed shape-dependence
activity, but also pave the way for the design and engineering of
more efficient catalysts for other reactions.

4 Experimental
and Computational Methods
4.1 Synthesis of CuO Nanocatalysts
with Different
Morphologies
4.1.1 Synthesis of the Cu-1
Material with a Flake
Shape
A copper hydroxide acetate precursor was synthesized
by adding an aqueous solution of NaOH (0.25 M, 25 mL) to an aqueous
solution of copper acetate (0.2 M, 25 mL) at room temperature under
continuous stirring for 10 min. A pale-green-colored product was isolated
by centrifugation and washed with water and then with ethanol and
then dried at room temperature. The CuO nanostructured material (Cu-1)
was prepared by annealing the pale-green solid at 300 °C for
3 h in a furnace.

4.1.2 Synthesis of the Cu-2
Material with a Dandelion-Microsphere
Shape
Cu(OAc)2·H2O (0.5 g) was
mixed in EtOH (20 mL) with ethylene glycol (6 mL). Subsequently, NH3·H2O (15 mL) and 5 mL aqueous NaOH (200 mg)
were added to the previous reaction mixture. The resulting mixture
was autoclaved at 130 °C for 16 h. The isolated black-colored
material was washed with ethanol and acetone.

4.1.3 Synthesis of the Cu-3 Material with a Short-Ribbon
Shape
CuCl2·2H2O (1 mmol) was
dissolved in EtOH (5 mL) and H2O (10 mL). Solid NaOH (22.0
mmol) was added, followed by addition of H2O (25 mL) to
the mixture. A blue precipitate appeared after 10 min. The blue precipitate
was isolated and heated at 50 °C for 10 h, and the color turned
black. The black-colored solid was calcined at 200 °C for 6 h
to obtain the desired material.

4.1.4 Characterization
The as-synthesized
CuO nanocatalysts were then carefully characterized by TEM, SEM, XRD,
XPS, Raman spectroscopy, EDX, elemental mapping, and FT-IR analyses.
XRD patterns were recorded on a Bruker D-8 Advance SWAX diffractometer
operated at a 40 kV voltage and a 40 mA current. The instrument was
calibrated with a standard silicon sample using Ni-filtered Cu Kα
(α = 0.15406 nm) radiation. A JEOL JEM 6700F FE-SEM was used
for determining the morphology of the samples. EDX and elemental mapping
analyses were carried out with this JEOL JEM 6700F machine. HR-TEM
images were recorded in a JEOL JEM 2010 transmission electron microscope.
Cu loading in the sample was estimated by using a Perkin-Elmer Optima
2100 DV Inductive Coupled Plasma Mass Spectroscopy. Raman spectra
on a cleaned silicon substrate were measured with a Raman microscope
(LabRAM HR, Horiba Yvon). The excitation wavelength of the irradiated
light was 632.8 nm (He–Ne Laser, Melles Griot, laser excitation
0.1 mW), and signals were collected by using 50× objective lens.
XPS analysis was carried out with a SPECS I3500 plus spectrometer
using a Mg X-ray source. FT-IR spectra of the samples were recorded
using a Nicolet MAGNA-FT-IR 750 Spectrometer Series II. Nitrogen adsorption/desorption
isotherms were obtained using a Quantachrome Autosorb 1C at 77 K.
The quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometer equipped with Thermo Accela
LC and the Agilent 6890 GC system equipped with a flame ionization
detector were used for the analysis of catalytic reactions.

4.2 Catalytic Testing
4.2.1 Oxidative
Coupling of Aromatic Amines Catalyzed
by CuO Nanostructures under Solvent-Free Conditions
In a
typical catalytic oxidative coupling reaction, a 10 mL Schlenk tube
with a magnetic bar was charged with benzylamine (0.2 mL, 1.8 mmol)
and the CuO nanostructured material (0.3619 mol %), which was vacuumed
and equipped with an O2 balloon. Oxygen gas was continuously
bubbled and thereby slowly introduced into the mixture. The reaction
mixture was magnetically stirred at 600 rpm and heated at 100 °C
for a desired period. After completion of the reaction, the catalyst
was separated from the reaction mixture by centrifugation. The progress
of the reaction was monitored periodically by analyzing the reaction
mixture with GC-MS until full conversion of the substrate was attained.
The products were characterized by using the GC-MS analysis technique.
The conversion (%) of the product was determined by using biphenyl
as the internal standard. We carried out catalytic measurements under
kinetically limited conditions, avoiding transport limitations. In
our reaction, the measurement was performed with vigorous magnetic
stirring (600 rpm) under liquid-phase conditions. The mass transfer
phenomenon could also be overcome under the vigorous magnetic stirring
conditions, which can make the reaction mixture essentially quasihomogeneous.
Therefore, we considered a diffusion limitation negligible for our
catalyst. This assumption can only be applicable to cases with small
particles and rapid stirring rates.64 Under
these conditions, we can assume that all catalytic reactions in the
liquid phase were conducted in a kinetically limited regime.

4.2.2 Hot-Filtration Test
In this test,
a mixture of the Cu-1 nanocatalyst (20 mg) and benzylamine (0.2 mL,
1.83 mmol) in a 15 mL dry Schlenk tube was heated at 100 °C for
10 h with vigorous magnetic stirring. The Cu-1 nanocatalyst was separated
from the hot reaction mixture after 10 h using the centrifugation
technique. Only 25% conversion was achieved. The reaction was continued
with the filtrate for another 24 h at the same reaction temperature.
The reaction mixture turned blue, and a trace amount (below 2 ppm
level) of copper was detected by the AAS analysis; however, no improvement
in conversion was observed after 24 h, as confirmed by the GC analysis,
which suggests that leached homogeneous copper species did not catalyze
this reaction up to full conversion. This experiment clearly proved
that our CuO-based nanocatalyst is truly heterogeneous in nature.

4.3 Computational Procedure
All DFT calculations
were performed using Vienna ab-initio simulation program (VASP) software
developed at the Fakultät für Physik of the Universität
Wien.65,66 Spin-polarized periodic DFT calculations
were performed with the Perdew–Burke–Enzerhof functional,67 the plane-wave basis set with a kinetic energy
cutoff of 450 eV, and the projector-augmented wave method68 as implemented in VASP. To correctly describe
the semiconducting properties and optimize the bulk lattice constants
for the CuO crystal structure while correcting the Coulomb interaction
within CuO,30 Dudarev’s GGA+U approach
with the Hubbard term (U – J) = 7.0 eV was utilized.69 This correction
predicted the bulk properties (band gap and magnetic momentum) of
CuO accurately30 and was successfully applied
to evaluate the activity of CuO in glucose oxidation and methane activation
previously.18,21

To gain insight into the
reaction mechanism and the different activities of different morphologies,
we examined three different surfaces of CuO: CuO(111), CuO(1̅11),
and CuO(110). These surfaces were modeled as periodic three-layer
(4 × 2) slabs, with each layer containing 16 Cu atoms and 16
O atoms. A vacuum region of 20 Å was included above the top layer,
which is large enough to avoid the interaction between repeated unit
cells. The bottom layer was fixed at the optimized bulk lattice parameters,
as was done in earlier studies.18,21 This constraint reduces
the computational cost without compromising the accuracy of simulations
critically.3,70−74 The structures of these surfaces are presented in Figure S6 in the SI. In addition, to assess the
catalytic activity of a reduced catalyst that is formed in an inert
atmosphere, a four-layer p(4 × 4) Cu(111) slab, with an optimized
lattice constant of 3.635 Å and a vacuum region of 20 Å
above the top layer, was used. The Brillouin zone was sampled with
a 3 × 3 × 1 Monkhorst–Pack grid for all calculations.
Transition states were located using the nudged elastic band method,
and subsequent frequency calculations confirmed the nature of transition
states.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.6b00331.Synthetic schemes,
FE-SEM images, EDX analysis and the
corresponding elemental mapping of Cu and O, FT-IR spectra of all
CuO materials with different morphologies, GC–MS data to rule
out the mechanism involving a benzaldehyde intermediate, additional
DFT simulation results, and comparison of the catalytic performance
of various catalysts (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao6b00331_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
⊥ R.S. and
Q.T.T. contributed equally to this work.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
J.M. and
R.S. thank a DST-INSPIRE project grant (GAP-0522)
in CSIR-IICT for carrying out this research. H.H. acknowledges financial
support from the Nanyang Assistant Professorship, JST-PRESTO, and
the Global Research Network Program and computer resources at the
NTU-HPCC. B.G.R. and B.B. thank CSIR for their respective CSIR-junior
and SPM Fellowships. A.B. wishes to thank DST, New Delhi for providing
funding through DST-SERB and DST-UKIERI project research grants and
DST Unit on Nanoscience for providing instrumental facilities at IACS.
Q.T.T. acknowledges funding from the National Research Foundation
(NRF), Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under its Campus
for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) program.
==== Refs
References
Wu Y. ; Wang D. ; Li Y. 
Nanocrystals from Solutions: Catalysts . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 2112 –2124 . 10.1039/c3cs60221d .24154631 
Polshettiwar V. ; Baruwati B. ; Varma R. S. 
Self-Assembly of Metal Oxides into
Three-Dimensional Nanostructures: Synthesis and Application in Catalysis . ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 , 728 –736 . 10.1021/nn800903p .19209927 
Mondal J. ; Trinh Q. T. ; Jana A. ; Ng W. K. H. ; Borah P. ; Hirao H. ; Zhao Y. 
Size-Dependent
Catalytic Activity
of Palladium Nanoparticles Fabricated in Porous Organic Polymers for
Alkene Hydrogenation at Room Temperature . ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 15307 –15319 . 10.1021/acsami.6b03127 .27258184 
Li Y. ; Shen W. 
Morphology-Dependent
Nanocatalysts: Rod-Shaped Oxides . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 1543 –1574 . 10.1039/C3CS60296F .24356335 
Nadagouda M. N. ; Polshettiwar V. ; Varma R. S. 
Self-Assembly of Palladium Nanoparticles:
Synthesis of Nanobelts, Nanoplates and Nanotrees Using Vitamin B1,
and Their Application in Carbon-Carbon Coupling Reactions . J. Mater. Chem. 
2009 , 19 , 2026 –2031 . 10.1039/b817112b .
Ruditskiy A. ; Peng H.-C. ; Xia Y. 
Shape-Controlled
Metal Nanocrystals
for Heterogeneous Catalysis . Annu. Rev. Chem.
Biomol. Eng. 
2016 , 7 , 327 –348 . 10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-080615-034503 .27023659 
Maiyalagan T. ; Chemelewski K. R. ; Manthiram A. 
Role of the Morphology and Surface
Planes on the Catalytic Activity of Spinel LiMn1.5Ni0.5O4 for Oxygen Evolution Reaction . ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4 , 421 –425 . 10.1021/cs400981d .
Wang Z. ; Wang W. ; Zhang L. ; Jiang D. 
Surface Oxygen Vacancies
on Co3O4 Mediated Catalytic Formaldehyde Oxidation
at Room Temperature . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2016 , 6 , 3845 –3853 . 10.1039/C5CY01709B .
Su D. ; Xie X. ; Dou S. ; Wang G. 
Cuo Single Crystal with Exposed {001}
Facets - a Highly Efficient Material for Gas Sensing and Li-Ion Battery
Applications . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 575310.1038/srep05753 .25169039 
Bao H. ; Zhang W. ; Hua Q. ; Jiang Z. ; Yang J. ; Huang W. 
Crystal-Plane-Controlled Surface Restructuring and Catalytic Performance
of Oxide Nanocrystals . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 12294 –12298 . 10.1002/anie.201103698 .
Bell A. T. 
The Impact
of Nanoscience on Heterogeneous Catalysis . Science 
2003 , 299 , 1688 –1691 . 10.1126/science.1083671 .12637733 
An K. ; Somorjai G. A. 
Size and Shape Control of Metal Nanoparticles for Reaction
Selectivity in Catalysis . ChemCatChem 
2012 , 4 , 1512 –1524 . 10.1002/cctc.201200229 .
Ertl G. 
Reactions
at Surfaces: From Atoms to Complexity (Nobel Lecture) . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 3524 –3535 . 10.1002/anie.200800480 .
Bratlie K. M. ; Lee H. ; Komvopoulos K. ; Yang P. ; Somorjai G. A. 
Platinum Nanoparticle
Shape Effects on Benzene Hydrogenation Selectivity . Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 3097 –3101 . 10.1021/nl0716000 .17877408 
Hu L. ; Peng Q. ; Li Y. 
Selective
Synthesis of Co3O4 Nanocrystal with Different
Shape and Crystal Plane
Effect on Catalytic Property for Methane Combustion . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 16136 –16137 . 10.1021/ja806400e .18998643 
Hua Q. ; Cao T. ; Gu X.-K. ; Lu J. ; Jiang Z. ; Pan X. ; Luo L. ; Li W.-X. ; Huang W. 
Crystal-Plane-Controlled Selectivity
of Cu2O Catalysts in Propylene Oxidation with Molecular
Oxygen . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2014 , 53 , 4856 –4861 . 10.1002/anie.201402374 .
Vilé G. ; Colussi S. ; Krumeich F. ; Trovarelli A. ; Pérez-Ramírez J. 
Opposite Face Sensitivity of CeO2 in Hydrogenation and Oxidation Catalysis . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2014 , 53 , 12069 –12072 . 10.1002/anie.201406637 .
Varghese J. J. ; Trinh Q. T. ; Mushrif S. H. 
Insights into the Synergistic Role
of Metal-Lattice Oxygen Site Pairs in Four-Centered C–H Bond
Activation of Methane: The Case of CuO . Catal.
Sci. Technol. 
2016 , 6 , 3984 –3996 . 10.1039/C5CY01784J .
Zheng Y. ; Cheng Y. ; Wang Y. ; Bao F. ; Zhou L. ; Wei X. ; Zhang Y. ; Zheng Q. 
Quasicubic
α-Fe2O3 Nanoparticles with Excellent Catalytic
Performance . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 3093 –3097 . 10.1021/jp056617q .16494314 
Zhao E. W. ; Zheng H. ; Zhou R. ; Hagelin-Weaver H. E. ; Bowers C. R. 
Shaped Ceria Nanocrystals Catalyze Efficient and Selective
Para-Hydrogen-Enhanced Polarization . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 14270 –14275 . 10.1002/anie.201506045 .
Amaniampong P. N. ; Trinh Q. T. ; Wang B. ; Borgna A. ; Yang Y. ; Mushrif S. H. 
Biomass Oxidation:
Formyl C–H Bond Activation
by the Surface Lattice Oxygen of Regenerative Cuo Nanoleaves . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 8928 –8933 . 10.1002/anie.201503916 .
Xiao B. ; et al. Copper Nanocrystal Plane Effect on Stereoselectivity of Catalytic
Deoxygenation of Aromatic Epoxides . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 3791 –3794 . 10.1021/jacs.5b01391 .25778784 
Konar S. ; Kalita H. ; Puvvada N. ; Tantubay S. ; Mahto M. K. ; Biswas S. ; Pathak A. 
Shape-Dependent
Catalytic Activity
of CuO Nanostructures . J. Catal. 
2016 , 336 , 11 –22 . 10.1016/j.jcat.2015.12.017 .
Albonetti S. ; Mazzoni R. ; Cavani F.  Chapter 1 Homogeneous,
Heterogeneous and Nanocatalysis . In Transition
Metal Catalysis in Aerobic Alcohol Oxidation ; The Royal Society of Chemistry , 2015 ; pp 1 –39 .
Chen B. ; Wang L. ; Gao S. 
Recent Advances in Aerobic Oxidation
of Alcohols and Amines to Imines . ACS Catal. 
2015 , 5 , 5851 –5876 . 10.1021/acscatal.5b01479 .
Srimani D. ; Feller M. ; Ben-David Y. ; Milstein D. 
Catalytic Coupling
of Nitriles with Amines to Selectively Form Imines under Mild Hydrogen
Pressure . Chem. Commun. 
2012 , 48 , 11853 –11855 . 10.1039/c2cc36639h .
Patil R. D. ; Adimurthy S. 
Copper(0)-Catalyzed Aerobic Oxidative Synthesis of
Imines from Amines under Solvent-Free Conditions . RSC Adv. 
2012 , 2 , 5119 –5122 . 10.1039/c2ra20339a .
Wang J. ; Lu S. ; Cao X. ; Gu H. 
Common Metal of Copper(0) as an Efficient
Catalyst for Preparation of Nitriles and Imines by Controlling Additives . Chem. Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 5637 –5640 . 10.1039/c4cc01389a .
Kim J. Y. ; Rodriguez J. A. ; Hanson J. C. ; Frenkel A. I. ; Lee P. L. 
Reduction
of CuO and Cu2O with H2: H Embedding and Kinetic
Effects in the Formation of Suboxides . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125 , 10684 –10692 . 10.1021/ja0301673 .12940754 
Maimaiti Y. ; Nolan M. ; Elliott S. D. 
Reduction
Mechanisms of the CuO(111)
Surface through Surface Oxygen Vacancy Formation and Hydrogen Adsorption . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 16 , 3036 –3046 . 10.1039/c3cp53991a .24394338 
Al-Hmoud L. ; Jones C. W. 
Reaction Pathways
over Copper and Cerium Oxide Catalysts
for Direct Synthesis of Imines from Amines under Aerobic Conditions . J. Catal. 
2013 , 301 , 116 –124 . 10.1016/j.jcat.2013.01.027 .
Hu J. ; Li D. ; Lu J. G. ; Wu R. 
Effects on Electronic Properties
of Molecule Adsorption on CuO Surfaces and Nanowires . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 17120 –17126 . 10.1021/jp1039089 .
Ganga B. G. ; Santhosh P. N. 
Facile Synthesis
of Porous Copper Oxide Nanostructure
Using Copper Hydroxide Acetate Precursor . Mater.
Lett. 
2015 , 138 , 113 –115 . 10.1016/j.matlet.2014.09.116 .
Zhang Z. ; Che H. ; Wang Y. ; Song L. ; Zhong Z. ; Su F. 
Preparation
of Hierarchical Dandelion-Like CuO Microspheres with Enhanced Catalytic
Performance for Dimethyldichlorosilane Synthesis . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2012 , 2 , 1953 –1960 . 10.1039/c2cy20199b .
Wang L. ; Gong H. ; Wang C. ; Wang D. ; Tang K. ; Qian Y. 
Facile Synthesis of
Novel Tunable Highly Porous CuO Nanorods for
High Rate Lithium Battery Anodes with Realized Long Cycle Life and
High Reversible Capacity . Nanoscale 
2012 , 4 , 6850 –6855 . 10.1039/c2nr31898a .23034730 
Huang H. ; Zhang L. ; Wu K. ; Yu Q. ; Chen R. ; Yang H. ; Peng X. ; Ye Z. 
Hetero-Metal Cation
Control of CuO Nanostructures and Their High Catalytic Performance
for CO Oxidation . Nanoscale 
2012 , 4 , 7832 –7841 . 10.1039/c2nr32729e .23151539 
Wang Y. ; Li L. ; Huang X. ; Li Q. ; Li G. 
New Insights into Fluorinated
TiO2 (Brookite, Anatase and Rutile) Nanoparticles as Efficient
Photocatalytic Redox Catalysts . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 34302 –34313 . 10.1039/C4RA17076H .
Yu X.-Y. ; Xu R.-X. ; Gao C. ; Luo T. ; Jia Y. ; Liu J.-H. ; Huang X.-J. 
Novel 3d Hierarchical Cotton-Candy-Like
CuO: Surfactant-Free Solvothermal Synthesis and Application in As(III)
Removal . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2012 , 4 , 1954 –1962 . 10.1021/am201663d .22458408 
Poreddy R. ; Engelbrekt C. ; Riisager A. 
Copper Oxide as Efficient Catalyst
for Oxidative Dehydrogenation of Alcohols with Air . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2015 , 5 , 2467 –2477 . 10.1039/C4CY01622J .
Xu J. F. ; Ji W. ; Shen Z. X. ; Tang S. H. ; Ye X. R. ; Jia D. Z. ; Xin X. Q. 
Preparation
and Characterization of CuO Nanocrystals . J.
Solid State Chem. 
1999 , 147 , 516 –519 . 10.1006/jssc.1999.8409 .
Svintsitskiy D. A. ; Kardash T. Y. ; Stonkus O. A. ; Slavinskaya E. M. ; Stadnichenko A. I. ; Koscheev S. V. ; Chupakhin A. P. ; Boronin A. I. 
In Situ XRD, XPS, TEM, and TPR Study of Highly Active
in CO Oxidation CuO Nanopowders . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2013 , 117 , 14588 –14599 . 10.1021/jp403339r .
Wang Y. ; Lu Y. ; Zhan W. ; Xie Z. ; Kuang Q. ; Zheng L. 
Synthesis
of Porous Cu2O/CuO Cages Using Cu-Based Metal-Organic Frameworks
as Templates and Their Gas-Sensing Properties . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 12796 –12803 . 10.1039/C5TA01108F .
Goldstein H. F. ; Kim D.-s. ; Yu P. Y. ; Bourne L. C. ; Chaminade J. P. ; Nganga L. 
Raman Study of CuO
Single Crystals . Phys. Rev. B 
1990 , 41 , 7192 –7194 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.41.7192 .
Kliche G. ; Popovic Z. V. 
Far-Infrared Spectroscopic Investigations
on CuO . Phys. Rev. B 
1990 , 42 , 10060 –10066 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.42.10060 .
Le M. T. ; Do V. H. ; Truong D. D. ; Bruneel E. ; Van Driessche I. ; Riisager A. ; Fehrmann R. ; Trinh Q. T. 
Synergy
Effects
of the Mixture of Bismuth Molybdate Catalysts with SnO2/ZrO2/MgO in Selective Propene Oxidation and the Connection
between Conductivity and Catalytic Activity . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2016 , 55 , 4846 –4855 . 10.1021/acs.iecr.6b00019 .
Natesakhawat S. ; Lekse J. W. ; Baltrus J. P. ; Ohodnicki P. R. ; Howard B. H. ; Deng X. ; Matranga C. 
Active Sites and Structure–Activity
Relationships of Copper-Based Catalysts for Carbon Dioxide Hydrogenation
to Methanol . ACS Catal. 
2012 , 2 , 1667 –1676 . 10.1021/cs300008g .
Dhakshinamoorthy A. ; Alvaro M. ; Garcia H. 
Aerobic Oxidation of Benzyl Amines
to Benzyl Imines Catalyzed by Metal–Organic Framework Solids . ChemCatChem 
2010 , 2 , 1438 –1443 . 10.1002/cctc.201000175 .
Chen B. ; Wang L. ; Dai W. ; Shang S. ; Lv Y. ; Gao S. 
Metal-Free and Solvent-Free
Oxidative Coupling of Amines to Imines
with Mesoporous Carbon from Macrocyclic Compounds . ACS Catal. 
2015 , 5 , 2788 –2794 . 10.1021/acscatal.5b00244 .
Zhai Z.-Y. ; Guo X.-N. ; Jin G.-Q. ; Guo X.-Y. 
Visible Light-Induced
Selective Photocatalytic Aerobic Oxidation of Amines into Imines on
Cu/Graphene . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2015 , 5 , 4202 –4207 . 10.1039/C5CY00395D .
Su C. ; et al. Probing the Catalytic Activity of Porous Graphene Oxide and the Origin
of This Behaviour . Nat. Commun. 
2012 , 3 , 129810.1038/ncomms2315 .23250428 
Hammond C. ; Schümperli M. T. ; Hermans I. 
Insights into the Oxidative Dehydrogenation
of Amines with Nanoparticulate Iridium Oxide . Chem. Eur. J. 
2013 , 19 , 13193 –13198 . 10.1002/chem.201301596 .23939827 
Jiang X. ; Herricks T. ; Xia Y. 
CuO Nanowires
Can Be Synthesized
by Heating Copper Substrates in Air . Nano Lett. 
2002 , 2 , 1333 –1338 . 10.1021/nl0257519 .
Bayansal F. ; Kahraman S. ; Çankaya G. ; Çetinkara H. A. ; Güder H. S. ; Çakmak H. M. 
Growth of Homogenous CuO Nano-Structured
Thin Films by a Simple Solution Method . J. Alloys
Compd. 
2011 , 509 , 2094 –2098 . 10.1016/j.jallcom.2010.10.146 .
Bari R. H. ; Patil S. B. ; Bari A. R. 
Spray-Pyrolized
Nanostructured CuO
Thin Films for H2S Gas Sensor . Int.
Nano Lett. 
2013 , 3 , 1210.1186/2228-5326-3-12 .
Qiu X. ; Len C. ; Luque R. ; Li Y. 
Solventless Oxidative Coupling of
Amines to Imines by Using Transition-Metal-Free Metal–Organic
Frameworks . ChemSusChem 
2014 , 7 , 1684 –1688 . 10.1002/cssc.201301340 .24801486 
Atanassova V. ; Ganno K. ; Kulkarni A. ; Landge S. M. ; Curtis S. ; Foster M. ; Török B. 
Mechanistic Study on the Oxidative
Coupling of Amines to Imines on K-10 Montmorillonite . Appl. Clay Sci. 
2011 , 53 , 220 –226 . 10.1016/j.clay.2010.12.034 .
Wang F. ; Wang Y. ; Jin F. ; Yao G. ; Huo Z. ; Zeng X. ; Jing Z. 
One-Pot Hydrothermal
Conversion of
Cellulose into Organic Acids with CuO as an Oxidant . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2014 , 53 , 7939 –7946 . 10.1021/ie404311d .
Rydén M. ; Jing D. ; Källén M. ; Leion H. ; Lyngfelt A. ; Mattisson T. 
CuO-Based
Oxygen-Carrier Particles
for Chemical-Looping with Oxygen Uncoupling – Experiments in
Batch Reactor and in Continuous Operation . Ind.
Eng. Chem. Res. 
2014 , 53 , 6255 –6267 . 10.1021/ie4039983 .
Imtiaz Q. ; Hosseini D. ; Müller C. R. 
Review
of Oxygen Carriers for Chemical
Looping with Oxygen Uncoupling (CLOU): Thermodynamics, Material Development,
and Synthesis . Energy Technol. 
2013 , 1 , 633 –647 . 10.1002/ente.201300099 .
Arjmand M. ; Leion H. ; Mattisson T. ; Lyngfelt A. 
ZrO2-Supported
CuO Oxygen Carriers for Chemical-Looping with Oxygen Uncoupling (CLOU) . Energy Procedia 
2013 , 37 , 550 –559 . 10.1016/j.egypro.2013.05.141 .
Tang J. ; Salunkhe R. R. ; Liu J. ; Torad N. L. ; Imura M. ; Furukawa S. ; Yamauchi Y. 
Thermal Conversion
of Core–Shell
Metal–Organic Frameworks: A New Method for Selectively Functionalized
Nanoporous Hybrid Carbon . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 1572 –1580 . 10.1021/ja511539a .25580699 
Li C. ; Jiang B. ; Imura M. ; Malgras V. ; Yamauchi Y. 
Mesoporous
Pt Hollow Cubes with Controlled Shell Thicknesses and Investigation
of Their Electrocatalytic Performance . Chem.
Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 15337 –15340 . 10.1039/C4CC07071B .
Zakaria M. B. ; et al. Controlled Synthesis
of Nanoporous Nickel Oxide with Two-Dimensional
Shapes through Thermal Decomposition of Metal–Cyanide Hybrid
Coordination Polymers . Chem. Eur. J. 
2015 , 21 , 3605 –3612 . 10.1002/chem.201404895 .25639533 
Vannice M. A.  Modeling Reactions
on Uniform (Ideal) Surfaces . In Kinetics of
Catalytic Reactions ; Springer : Boston, MA , 2005 ; pp 141 –207 .
Kresse G. ; Furthmüller J. 
Efficiency of Ab-Initio Total Energy Calculations for
Metals and Semiconductors Using a Plane-Wave Basis Set . Comput. Mater. Sci. 
1996 , 6 , 15 –50 . 10.1016/0927-0256(96)00008-0 .
Kresse G. ; Furthmüller J. 
Efficient
Iterative Schemes for Ab Initio Total-Energy
Calculations Using a Plane-Wave Basis Set . Phys.
Rev. B 
1996 , 54 , 11169 –11186 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.54.11169 .
Perdew J. P. ; Burke K. ; Ernzerhof M. 
Generalized
Gradient Approximation
Made Simple . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1996 , 77 , 3865 –3868 . 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865 .10062328 
Blöchl P. E. 
Projector
Augmented-Wave Method . Phys. Rev. B 
1994 , 50 , 17953 –17979 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.50.17953 .
Dudarev S. L. ; Botton G. A. ; Savrasov S. Y. ; Humphreys C. J. ; Sutton A. P. 
Electron-Energy-Loss Spectra and
the Structural Stability
of Nickel Oxide: An LSDA+U Study . Phys. Rev.
B 
1998 , 57 , 1505 –1509 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.57.1505 .
Trinh Q. T. ; Yang J. ; Lee J. Y. ; Saeys M. 
Computational and Experimental
Study of the Volcano Behavior of the Oxygen Reduction Activity of
PdM@PdPt/C (M = Pt, Ni, Co, Fe, and Cr) Core–Shell Electrocatalysts . J. Catal. 
2012 , 291 , 26 –35 . 10.1016/j.jcat.2012.04.001 .
Trinh Q. T. ; Tan K. F. ; Borgna A. ; Saeys M. 
Evaluating the Structure
of Catalysts Using Core-Level Binding Energies Calculated from First
Principles . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 1684 –1691 . 10.1021/jp3089758 .
Nandula A. ; Trinh Q. T. ; Saeys M. ; Alexandrova A. N. 
Origin
of Extraordinary Stability of Square-Planar Carbon Atoms in Surface
Carbides of Cobalt and Nickel . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 5312 –5316 . 10.1002/anie.201501049 .
Trinh Q. T. ; Chethana B. K. ; Mushrif S. H. 
Adsorption
and Reactivity of Cellulosic
Aldoses on Transition Metals . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2015 , 119 , 17137 –17145 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b03534 .
Trinh Q. T. ; Nguyen A. V. ; Huynh D. C. ; Pham T. H. ; Mushrif S. H. 
Mechanistic
Insights into the Catalytic Elimination of Tar and the Promotional
Effect of Boron on It: First-Principles Study Using Toluene as a Model
Compound . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2016 , 6 , 5871 –5883 . 10.1039/C6CY00358C .

