
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146047910.1021/acsomega.9b01806ArticleFunctionalized Nanoparticles for the Dispersion of
Gas Hydrates in Slurry Flow Zhang Xianwei †§Gong Jingjing ‡§Yang Xingfu ‡Slupe Britanny ‡Jin Janice ‡Wu Ning *‡Sum Amadeu K. *††Phases
to Flow Laboratory, The Department of Chemical & Biological
Engineering and ‡The Department of Chemical & Biological Engineering, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, Colorado 80401, United States* E-mail: ningwu@mines.edu (N.W.).* E-mail: asum@mines.edu (A.K.S.).09 08 2019 20 08 2019 4 8 13496 13508 18 06 2019 29 07 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Gas hydrates are
crystals that can form in oil and gas production.
Their agglomeration in flowlines may disrupt the normal production.
One current strategy of hydrate management is to inject an anti-agglomerant,
a type of low-dosage hydrate inhibitor that prevents hydrate agglomeration.
Concerns in the use of these chemicals include their toxicity, cost,
and environmental impacts. In this study, we exploited functionalized
nanoparticles in place of anti-agglomerants to produce hydrate slurry,
with the potential benefit of nanoparticles to be more environmentally
friendly and conveniently recyclable. We coated 256 nm spherical silica
nanoparticles with different hydrophobicity and evaluated their performance
for the hydrate dispersion at atmospheric and high pressure. Nanoparticles
with moderate hydrophobicity stabilized oil-in-water (O/W) or water-in-oil
(W/O) emulsions. Direct visualization of the cyclopentane hydrate
formation from the nanoparticle-stabilized emulsions revealed different
morphologies of hydrate particles depending on whether the nanoparticles
prevented agglomeration. We also measured the apparent viscosity of
a hydrate–nanoparticle mixture using a high-pressure rheometer.
Nanoparticles with moderate hydrophobicity during hydrate formation
slowed the viscosification, reduced the maximum viscosity, increased
the water conversion, and ultimately helped to maintain a low steady-state
viscosity. Increasing nanoparticle or salt concentrations also improved
the gas hydrate dispersion. Our study demonstrated the great potential
of using nanoparticles in preventing agglomeration of gas hydrates
under realistic pipeline flow conditions.

document-id-old-9ao9b01806document-id-new-14ao-2019-018067ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Gas
hydrates are solid crystalline compounds where small guest
molecules are contained in cages of water molecules.1 Gas hydrate formation usually requires relatively high
pressure and low temperature. At constant pressure, a hydrate forms
when the temperature drops below the hydrate equilibrium temperature.
Depending on the composition and formation condition, hydrates in
nature have been considered potential energy sources,2,3 and hydrate-based technologies have been proposed and tested for
gas storage,4−6 gas separation,7 and water
treatment.8

In the oil and gas industry,
hydrate formation is often undesirable
because it can bring detrimental consequences to hydrocarbon production.9,10 For example, hydrates can increase the fluid viscosity and the pressure
drop along the flowline and in the worst scenario block the flowline.
Hydrate agglomeration can lead to production interruption, economic
loss, and safety hazards. Therefore, hydrate management has been a
crucial component in the flow assurance of hydrocarbon production.
Traditionally, the industry uses thermodynamic hydrate inhibitors
such as methanol and monoethylene glycol to prevent hydrate formation
by keeping the pressure-temperature conditions out of the hydrate
forming region. In recent years, the industry has turned the focus
on a more cost-effective method, that is, using low-dosage hydrate
inhibitors such as anti-agglomerant (AA) chemicals that do not inhibit
hydrate formation but prevent hydrate aggregation.11 In recent years, a few field tests using AAs have been
reported with promising results.12 Appropriately
designed AAs can form a transportable hydrate slurry, effectively
reducing or eliminating the hydrate blockage risks and ensuring a
continuous production stream.

AA chemicals consist of a wide
variety of compounds. While most
of the currently used AAs have proprietary trademarks, a generic class
of chemicals, that is, quaternary ammonium salt surfactants, has shown
to be effective although the mechanisms are not well understood.11 The surfactant-type AAs typically showed much
better performance when the head group contains n-butyl, n-pentyl, or i-pentyl structures.13 One hypothesis is that these alkyl groups can
penetrate into the open cages on existing hydrate surfaces, preventing
further growth of hydrate and reducing agglomeration. Molecular simulations14,15 suggested that the adsorption of AAs on the hydrate interface may
be important. The AA molecules may need a strong binding onto the
hydrate surface with their hydrophobic tails pointing outward to achieve
a good performance. However, no experimental verification has been
reported. The simulations were also insufficient to explain the AA
performance under different flowing conditions or the synergetic effects
when AAs are combined with other additives such as salts. Another
factor that may contribute to the performance of surfactant-type AAs
is their amphiphilicity. AA chemicals, as well as other surfactants,
may promote the dispersion of water in oil. Several studies showed
that good dispersion through mechanical mixing can be helpful to form
a slurry even without addition of surfactants.16,17

Besides molecular surfactants, solid nanoparticles (NPs) are
known
to promote dispersion and stabilize emulsions, that is, the Pickering
emulsions.18 Appropriately functionalized
NPs tend to be adsorbed at the oil/water interface, forming a protective
layer that prevents the coalescence of emulsion droplets. Therefore,
it is possible that such a particulate layer reduces or prevents the
agglomeration of hydrate particles during the formation of hydrates
from Pickering emulsions. In fact, some previous studies are supportive
to this hypothesis. Min et al.,19 Cha et
al.,20 and Baek et al.21 reported that the silica-NP-laden oil/water interface was
less penetrable by hydrate particles and the activated carbon NPs
could kinetically prevent hydrate formation by preventing the seeding
hydrate penetration into the water phase. The results suggested that
the NPs may prevent the coalescence between liquid water droplets
and hydrate particles. Hydrate formation from Pickering emulsions
has also been reported by others.6,22 One interesting
observation by Wang et al.6 and Farhang
et al.22 is that hydrates that formed a
Pickering emulsion have very high water conversion possibly due to
the increased surface area. Since high water conversion is generally
associated with the formation of hydrate slurry, NPs may exhibit some
anti-agglomeration effect under certain conditions. Baek et al.23 showed that NPs can delay the hydrate kinetics
at low concentrations possibly by increasing the resistance among
the droplets but increase the kinetics at high concentration possibly
by promoting water bridges. Raman et al.24 showed that NPs with proper hydrophilicity can remain at the hydrate
surface after hydrate formation. Even though not mentioned by the
authors, such particle existence may weaken the hydrate–hydrate
adhesion in their experiments. In the study by Ahuja et al.,25 however, the AA effect of NPs was not observed.
In fact, the system jammed with 2 wt % NPs (based on oil) during hydrate
formation, whereas the system without nanoparticles was flowable.
The authors did not investigate the reasons. Because the NPs in all
these studies were directly from the suppliers, the wettability was
not tuned, specified, or characterized. Considering the importance
of particle wettability, it is possible that different conclusions
can be reached due to the variation of particle wettability between
different studies.

There are other studies about the effects
of NPs on the hydrate
formation,26−30 focusing on hydrophilic NPs (metal, metal oxide, silica, and graphite)
suspended in water. The kinetics of hydrate formation was measured
in an impeller-mixed autoclave with only gas and water. The general
observation is that NPs can accelerate the hydrate formation, reducing
the induction time by a few folds.

Overall, previous work mostly
focused on the impacts of NPs on
the inhibition or promotion of hydrate crystallization. The potential
of NPs to prevent gas hydrate agglomeration has not been studied.
With the rationale that NPs may stay at the water–oil interface,
change the interfacial properties, and promote the dispersion of hydrates,
we investigated for the first time the potential of using NPs as dispersing
agents that may effectively function as AAs in a multiphase system
with and without shear. Specifically, we functionalized silica particles
approximately 256 nm in diameter with different amounts of n-octadecyl silanes so that they exhibited different degrees
of hydrophobicity. We then tested the stability of emulsions formed
by a mixture of water, oil, and NPs in glass vials. Stable water-in-oil
(W/O) Pickering emulsion was then chosen to run in situ optical microscopy
experiments with the formation of cyclopentane hydrates under static
conditions. We found that NPs with intermediate hydrophobicity can
greatly reduce hydrate agglomeration. To corroborate our observations,
we further tested the performance of NPs in a n-decane/water
(60/40 vol %) system with a high-pressure rheometer. We found that
NPs with intermediate hydrophobicity can slow the viscosification,
reduce the maximum viscosity, increase the water conversion, and ultimately
assist the formation of a hydrate slurry. In addition, we found that
the presence of 10 mM sodium chloride can significantly enhance the
ability of NPs for hydrate stabilization. Our proposed mechanism is
that the NPs form a protective layer at the water–oil interface,
which significantly reduces adhesion between hydrate particles and
effectively prevents hydrate agglomeration.

2 Results
Table 1 shows a
summary of the NP characterization and the hydrate formation and dispersion
experiments. After surface functionalization, we characterized the
NPs using SEM (NP shape, size), FTIR, TGA (coated silane molecule
amount), and gel-trapping method (contact angle at water–n-decane interface). We tested the stability of Pickering
emulsions in glass vials. We then conducted static cyclopentane hydrate
formation tests using optical microscopy and dynamic gas hydrate formation
tests in the high-pressure rheometer.

Table 1 Summary
of the Experiments Performed
system	NPs	comments	
SEM,
FTIR, TGA, gel-trapping method	0X, 0.25X, 0.5X, 1X, 2X, 4X, 8X	NP characterization	
glass vial	0X, 0.25X, 0.5X, 1X, 2X, 4X, 8X, 1XSa	emulsion stability	
microscope	1X, 2X	cyclopentane
hydrates under static conditions	
rheometer	0X, 0.25X, 0.5X, 1X, 2X, 4X, 8X	methane/ethane gas hydrates; effect of NP hydrophobicity	
rheometer	1XSa	effect of NP concentration; effect of salt concentration	
a The 1XS NPs were coated with 1X
silane molecules for 1 h instead of 24 h for all other NPs.

2.1 Particle Characterization
Figure 1a shows
the SEM image
of unmodified (0X) and modified silica NPs (1X). It can be seen that
the surface modification does not noticeably change the particle size
and the NP diameter was determined as 256 ± 14 nm. The FTIR spectra
of the NPs in Figure 1b show peaks at 2917 and 2849 cm–1 resulting from
−CH2– asymmetric stretching and indicate
successful coupling of octadecylsilane onto the NPs.31,32 The peak intensities became stronger as a higher amount of silane
molecules was used.

Figure 1 Characterization of the functionalized NPs. (a) SEM images
of NPs
before modification (0X) and after modification (1X). (b) FTIR spectra.
(c) TGA results.

The attachment of silanes
can be further confirmed by the TGA results
shown in Figure 1c.
In our experiments, the weight-loss events result from the loss of
absorbed moisture and trapped solvent (at relatively low temperature),
the silanol dehydration, and the pyrolysis of the alkyl chains for
silane-functionalized NPs (at relatively high temperature).33 To exclude the weight loss from the absorbed
moisture and the solvent, we only counted the weight loss from 150
to 600 °C. The initial fast weight loss from room temperature
inflects at 150 °C, indicating the end of the solvent vaporization.
The weight loss stabilizes at 600 °C, indicating the end of the
pyrolysis of the alkyl chains. Although the choice of 150 °C
may appear arbitrary, as there is no clear distinction between two
weight loss events, our conclusions about the increasing trend of
weight loss with increasing silane amount in the modification, however,
do not change if we choose 200 or 250 °C as the starting point.
The weight loss from 150 to 600 °C increases with the silane
amount used in the conjugation reaction. The weight loss, however,
was smaller than the expected silane amount, indicating that the reaction
did not proceed stoichiometrically.

Based on the TGA measurement,
we can calculate the mass ratio of
coated silane to the NPs and the number of silanes coated on the NPs
based on the following formula 1  where the
weight loss % is the relative weight loss percentage from 150 to 600
°C compared to the 0X NPs, mNP is
the mass of one pristine silica NP, mC18H37Si3 is the total mass of silane molecules
attached on the surface of one modified NP, and mC18H37 is the mass of the C18H37 functional groups on the same NP. Based on
the mass ratio, we can further calculate the number of silane molecules
coated per unit surface area by assuming that the surface area occupied
by one silane molecule is 0.13 nm2.34,35Table 2 summarizes
the average weight loss of each NP batch relative to the unmodified
NPs and the calculated silane molecules per nm2. The detection
limit of the TGA equipment is approximately 0.001% in this study.
The results overall show that the number of silane molecules per unit
surface area increased with the amount of silane molecules used in
the conjugation reaction. However, with the large standard deviations
(SDs), the relative weight losses of the 0.25X and 0.5X NPs were insignificant,
suggesting that the TGA could only partially quantify the silane amount
and the wettability. Much convincing evidence of the successful silane
coupling and the different wettability of the 0.25X and 0.5X NPs was
reported by the three-phase contact angle measurement and the emulsion
stability tests discussed later.

Table 2 Amount of Silane
Molecules Coated
on the NP Surface Based on TGA Results
 	relative
weight loss (%)	number
of silane molecules per nm2	
NPs	average	SD	average	SD	
0.25X	0.0026	0.0037	0.47	0.66	
0.5X	0.0025	0.0028	0.46	0.51	
1X	0.0045	0.0035	0.82	0.64	
2X	0.0081	0.0016	1.47	0.30	
4X	0.0181	0.0032	3.30	0.61	
8X	0.0269	0.0003	4.99	0.06	
Since particle wettability can be very important in
governing the
stabilization of water-in-oil droplets and gas hydrates, we further
characterized the three-phase contact angle (θ) of silica NPs
at the water–n-decane interface by using the
gel-trapping method,36−38 as we described in the Materials
and Methods section. Figure 2a shows a schematic representation of the position
of a modified silica NP embedded in the PDMS in two scenarios: θ
> 90° and θ < 90°. The height of protrusion h can be determined from the contact radius d and particle radius r via the geometric relationship.
When θ < 90°, we can measure d accurately
from the SEM images of the NPs embedded in PDMS. However, it is difficult
to be determined from SEM when θ ≥ 90° unless we
tilt the sample by a very large angle. Therefore, we also used AFM
to directly measure the height of protrusion.

Figure 2 Three-phase contact angles
of functionalized silica NPs at water–n-decane
interface. (a) Schematic representation of the
position of a modified silica NP embedded in the PDMS for θ
> 90° and θ < 90°. (b) Measured heights of protrusion h and contact angles θ of modified silica NPs (0.25X,
0.5X, 1X, 2X, 4X, 8X).

Figure S1 shows the SEM images of functionalized
silica NPs embedded in PDMS. Before SEM imaging, 2 min of gold sputtering
was performed to make the PDMS-particle surface more conductive. The
effective contact radii d’s for 0.25X, 0.5X,
1X, 2X, 4X, and 8X silica NPs embedded in PDMS were 105 ± 6,
114 ± 10, 103 ± 8, 107 ± 9, 86 ± 6, and 88 ±
10 nm, respectively. Since d’s for 0.25X,
0.5X, 1X, and 2X NPs were relatively similar and close to the particle
radius, it is possible that their contact angles were close to 90°;
therefore, we further used AFM to measure their protrusion heights h directly, which are shown in Figure S2. The open-source software Gwyddion was used to process the
images.39 Briefly, a line was first drawn
across the center of the silica NP, then the height profile along
this line was obtained, line correction function was applied to flat
the baseline, and the height of protrusion h was
obtained by comparing the height difference between the peak and the
baseline. Once we determined the height of protrusion h, we can calculate the three-phase contact angle θ = arccos
(1 – h/r). Figure 2b shows the measured and calculated
heights of protrusion and three-phase contact angles for functionalized
NPs with different amounts of silanes. It shows that, when they were
placed at the water–n-decane interface, 0.25X,
0.5X, and 1X silica NPs have contact angles smaller than or close
to 90°; however, 2X, 4X, and 8X silica NPs have contact angles
larger than 90°.

2.2 Emulsion Stability
After the characterization
of particles, we further examined the stability of emulsions decorated
by the NPs. Although a stable W/O emulsion prior to hydrate formation
is not a necessary condition to for hydrate dispersion, it is generally
considered a positive factor for generating a flowable hydrate slurry.11,40 To examine the emulsion stability, a mixture of water, n-decane, and NPs was homogenized at 13500 rpm for 2 min. The water/decane
ratio is 20/80 vol %, and the NP concentration is 1 wt % based on
the water amount.

Figure 3a shows that the NP hydrophobicity influences the emulsion
types. 0.25X NPs yielded O/W emulsions due to their relatively small
contact angle, while 0.5X, 1X, and 2X NPs yielded stable W/O emulsions.
Both 4X and 8X NPs yielded W/O emulsions but with a noticeable amount
of free water since they were highly hydrophobic. Figure 3b,c shows the microscopic images
of these two types of emulsions. Interestingly, the O/W emulsions
were spherical, while irregular and nonspherical shapes were observed
for the W/O emulsions. The irregular emulsion droplets are not uncommon
since they have been reported in the literature,41,42 which are usually due to either jamming of the trapped colloidal
particles at the liquid–liquid interface or the buckling and
crumpling of the particle layer.

Figure 3 Pickering emulsion stabilized by the NPs.
(a) Pickering emulsions
prepared with 13500 rpm homogenization speed for 2 min. (b) Microscopic
image of the O/W emulsions. (c) Microscopic image of the W/O emulsions.
Scale bar: 200 μm.

Regardless of their types,
the emulsions decorated by 0.25X, 0.5X,
1X, and 2X NPs remained stable for weeks, similar to the stable Pickering
emulsions reported in the literature.18 The average sizes of all emulsion droplets measured from optical
images are summarized in Table S1. Those
stabilized by 0.5X, 1X, and 2X NPs were of similar sizes, while the
O/W emulsions stabilized by 0.25X and W/O emulsions stabilized by
4X NPs were much smaller and larger, respectively, indicating their
very different hydrophobicity, which was confirmed by our contact
angle measurement. The time for silane coating did not affect much
the particle hydrophobicity and the emulsion stability. For example,
the W/O emulsions stabilized by 1XS NPs, that is, the particles coated
by 1X silane molecules for 1 h instead of 24 h, remained stable after
four weeks (Figure S3).

2.3 Cyclopentane Hydrates Stabilized by NPs
Based on the
emulsion stability test, we chose 1X and 2X NPs to
study their impacts on the stabilization of cyclopentane hydrates
using optical microscopy since both types of particles form stable
water-in-decane (W/O) emulsions. We put the emulsions in a customized
cooling cell filled by a mixture of cyclopentane and decane (20/80
vol %) and followed the temperature change protocol illustrated in Figure 10b. In brief, we
first converted the W/O Pickering emulsions into ice particles at
−15 °C. We then melted and converted them into cyclopentane
hydrates at 0.5 °C. Finally, the hydrates were dissociated at
10 °C. We formed hydrates from melted ice because the hydrate
formation time is shorter than directly from the W/O emulsion.

Figure 4 shows the
microscopic images of the emulsions decorated by 1X NPs at different
temperatures. The emulsion droplets were first added in the cooling
cell at 21 °C (Figure 4a). The temperature was then decreased to −15 °C
(Figure 4b). Water
droplets started to crystallize within 10 min, and most of the emulsion
droplets converted into ice particles in ∼30 min, as evidenced
by the change of light intensity from Figure 4a,b due to the refractive index difference
between water and ice. During the ice formation, we did not observe
any coalescence between neighboring droplets and the boundaries between
them were sharp and clear (indicated by the red arrows in Figure 4e). The temperature
was then increased to 0.5 °C (Figure 4c), ice melted, and cyclopentane hydrates
formed gradually from the water–oil interface. Compared with
ice particles, the hydrate particles were visually more transparent
but rougher on the surfaces (Figure 4c,f). Again, during the hydrate formation, we did not
observe any coalescence between neighboring droplets. 30 min after
the hydrate formation, we used a glass fiber with a ∼5 μm
tip to disturb the hydrate particles and confirmed that they were
separated from each other without any noticeable aggregation (Movie S1). When we raised the temperature to
10 °C, the hydrates dissociated and most of the emulsions remained
in their shapes (Figure 4d). Coalescence of the emulsion droplets was very limited. We also
observed the appearance of small oil droplets within the water phase
of the emulsion (Figure 4f). Since n-decane is immiscible with water, these
oil droplets were likely the trapped cyclopentane from hydrate dissociation.
This explanation was further confirmed by the observation of no trapped
oil droplets by replacing the oil to pure n-decane
and applying the same temperature change. Clearly, 1X NPs showed excellent
anti-agglomeration properties for W/O emulsion droplets, ice crystals,
and cyclopentane hydrates at different temperatures.

Figure 4 Optical images of the
W/O emulsions decorated by 1X NPs in a mixture
of n-decane and cyclopentane at (a) 21, (b) −15,
(c) 0.5, and (d) 10 °C. The dark region is the area outside of
the cell. Scale bar: 200 μm. High-resolution micrographs of
(e) the ice particles at −15 °C and (f) the cyclopentane
hydrate particles at 0.5 °C. Scale bar: 100 μm. The red
arrows indicate the boundaries between contacting particles.

In comparison, Figure 5 shows the microscopic images of the W/O
emulsions decorated
by 2X NPs. While the emulsions were also stable at 21 °C (Figure 5a), they aggregated
during the conversion into ice particles (Figure 5b,e). When we attempted to disturb them using
the glass fiber, we found that the aggregates typically consist of
2–8 ice particles (Movie S2). Note
that the surfaces of the ice particles also appeared hairy. When the
temperature was increased to 0.5 °C, ice particles melted and
cyclopentane hydrates started to form (Figure 5c). The aggregation between hydrate particles
became more severe as necks formed between neighboring particles (Figure 5f and Movie S3). The formation of necks likely resulted
from the ice and hydrate crystallization process where liquid water
protruded out of droplets and bridged with neighboring droplets.

Figure 5 Optical
images of the W/O emulsions decorated by 2X NPs in a mixture
of n-decane and cyclopentane at (a) 21, (b) −15,
(c) 0.5, and (d) 10 °C. The dark region is the area outside of
the cell. Scale bar: 200 μm. High-resolution micrographs of
(e) the ice particles at −15 °C and (f) the cyclopentane
hydrate particles at 0.5 °C. Scale bar: 100 μm. The red
arrows indicate the boundaries between contacting particles. (g) Schematic
of agglomeration degree β = L/(r1 + r2).

The degree of agglomeration between two contacting hydrate particles
can be quantitatively characterized as in Figure 5g by the parameter β = L/(r1 + r2), where L is the neck width and r1 and r2 are the radii of
two particles. As the actual particles were not perfectly circular,
we avoided the minority of the extreme irregular particles and used
the effective radius for each particle ,
where reff is the effective radius and S is the area of the
particle in the 2D optical images. As a comparison, β = 0.036
± 0.061 for 27 pairs of hydrate particles stabilized by 1X NPs,
while β = 0.23 ± 0.12, 1 order of magnitude larger, for
22 pairs of hydrate particles stabilized by 2X NP. This qualitative
method showed again that the 2X NPs did not prevent hydrate agglomeration
as effective as the 1X.

Span 80 is a common nonionic surfactant
used to stabilize W/O emulsions.
We also tested the W/O emulsions stabilized with Span 80 to see whether
such an emulsion can help reduce hydrate agglomeration at static conditions.
The tested Span 80 concentration was adjusted to be 1 wt % based on
the water amount. Representative images of the emulsions at different
temperatures are shown in Figure S4. Compared
with Pickering emulsions stabilized by NPs, the Span 80 emulsions
were smaller (34.33 ± 10.40 μm) and they were not as stable
as the Pickering emulsions at 21 °C. At −15 °C, severe
aggregation between ice particles can be seen. Hydrate particles were
also fused together at 0.5 °C. As hydrates dissociated at 10
°C, the W/O emulsions became unstable and the droplet sizes increased
to 48.90 ± 14.06 μm.

2.4 Rheology
of Methane/Ethane Gas Hydrate Stabilized
by NPs
Our observations using optical microscopy revealed
the striking difference between 1X and 2X NPs for stabilizing the
cyclopentane hydrates under static conditions. Whether they behave
differently in gas hydrates under dynamic shear conditions is the
next question that we aimed to address. We used a high-pressure rheometer
to induce shear flow and studied the impacts of NP hydrophobicity,
NP concentration, and salt concentration on dispersing gas hydrates.
Different from the optical microscopy experiments, we did not pre-form
Pickering emulsions. Instead, the mixture of water or brine (10 mL), n-decane (15 mL), methane/ethane (75/25 mol %), and variable
amounts of NPs was subjected to a constant rotation rate of the impeller
(200 rpm) at 70 bar and 8 °C with a subcooling of 8.5 °C.
Considering the stochastic nature of hydrate formation, we adjusted
the time zero to be the onset time of hydrate formation, the moment
when the torque experienced by the rheometer increased rapidly.

Figure 6 shows the
apparent viscosity of the mixture of gas hydrates and NPs (2.5 wt
% based on the water amount) coated by different amounts of silanes.
The apparent viscosity is a good indicator of hydrate aggregation.
As expected, when we did not add any NP, the system viscosity increased
so quickly that the rheometer reached its maximum torque (0.2 N m)
∼15 min after the onset of hydrate formation, indicating severe
hydrate agglomeration. Interestingly, the addition of unmodified hydrophilic
NPs (0X) significantly delayed the catastrophic increase of viscosity.
The system remained dispersed and flowable for 2 h before it eventually
jammed the rheometer. On the other hand, the systems with 0.25X, 0.5X,
and 1X NPs exhibited a finite viscosity rise (spikes around 1–3
h) after the onset of hydrate formation. The viscosities, however,
then decreased dramatically and reached much lower values at the steady
state, suggesting that hydrates were well dispersed in the oil phase
and formed a flowable slurry. Comparing the steady-state viscosity,
1X NPs showed a better performance than 0.5X and 0.25X NPs. At 6 h,
the apparent viscosity of the 1X-NP system was 330 cP, whereas those
of the 0.25X- and 0.5X-NP systems were 10450 and 3692 cP, respectively.
When more silanes were coated on the NPs (2X, 4X, and 8X), the system
viscosity again increased rapidly and was jammed within 30 min. Our
results here are consistent with our previous observations that 1X
NPs stabilized cyclopentane hydrates very well but 2X NPs did not
prevent hydrate agglomeration.

Figure 6 Apparent viscosity of gas hydrates without
and with NPs coated
by different amounts of hydrophobic silanes. The NP concentration
is 2.5 wt % based on the amount of water.

Figure 7 shows the
impacts of NP and salt (NaCl) concentrations on the apparent viscosity
of the gas hydrates. These experiments were performed at 70 bar with
a methane/ethane (75/25 mol %) mixture. The temperatures were held
at 1 and 10 °C, resulting in subcooling of 15.5 and 6.5 °C,
respectively. The NPs investigated were coated by 1X silanes for 1
h, that is, 1XS NP. As before, the time zero in these figures was
adjusted to the onset time of hydrate formation when the torque increased
rapidly. The systems tested with NaCl and NP jammed at 1 °C but
remained flowable at 10 °C. When no salt or NPs were added (Figure 7a,d), the system
viscosity increased rapidly indicating hydrate formation and agglomeration.
The initial increase in apparent viscosity was more rapid at 1 °C
than at 10 °C, reflecting that hydrate formation is positively
correlated to the subcooling. At 1 °C, the apparent viscosity
increased so fast that the system stopped within approximately 10
min. At 10 °C, the system eventually jammed the rheometer ∼1.7
h after the onset. By contrast, for the system at 1 °C with 5.0
wt % 1XS NPs, it plugged at a longer time after the hydrate onset,
indicating that the NPs might have slowed the agglomeration and the
viscosification. For the system with 1XS NPs at 10 °C, we also
observed spikes in viscosities that indicated significant hydrate
formation. The viscosities eventually decreased to the steady values
of 149 and 233 cP for 2.5 and 5.0 wt % NPs, respectively. This confirms
the NP abilities in dispersing hydrates under realistic hydrate formation
conditions.

Figure 7 Apparent viscosity and water conversion of the gas hydrates and
1XS NPs. Temperature: (a–c) at 1 °C, (d–f) at 10
°C. NaCl concentrations: (a,d) 0, (b,e) 1, (c,f) 10 mM.

In addition to the apparent viscosity, another
parameter of interest
from these experiments is the water conversion. With 0, 2.5, and 5.0
wt % NPs at 10 °C and no NaCl, the water conversion reached 51,
50, and 54% at 2 h, respectively. The 50% water conversion at the
jamming point for 0 wt % NP agrees well with the previous study.43 The water conversion appeared to approach a
plateau after ∼2 h, while the apparent viscosity kept decreasing
until 6 h. These results suggested that, during the later stage of
the hydrate formation, the hydrate particles redistributed in size
under shear and the apparent viscosity further reduced with little
additional hydrate formation.

At 10 °C, however, adding
1 mM NaCl (Figure 7e) led to about a 2-fold increase compared
to the no-salt system in the apparent viscosity during hydrate formation
(2–6 h after the onset), but the steady-state apparent viscosity
remained small. The water conversion of 1 mM NaCl systems at 2 h was
approximately 50%, similar to the no-salt system. More interestingly,
the presence of 10 mM NaCl in water reduced the viscosities of all
systems dramatically (Figure 7f). Even the one without any addition of NPs at 10 °C
could maintain its apparent viscosity at a finite level (2806 cP at
8 h). The salt also helped to improve the performance of NPs as the
spikes in the apparent viscosity were much smaller. At 10 mM NaCl
and 10 °C, the apparent viscosities at 8 h were 23 and 50 cP
at 2.5 and 5.0 wt % NPs, respectively. Compared to that without NaCl,
the apparent viscosities at 8 h were 160 and 180 cP at 2.5 and 5.0
wt % NPs, respectively. Consistent with previous cases, the water
conversion of the 10 mM NaCl systems was ∼50% after 2 h. Clearly,
there appeared a synergetic effect between NPs and high concentration
of NaCl. Similar experiments at 1 °C (subcooling of 15.5 °C)
showed the same salt effect; that is, the flowability increased with
increasing NaCl concentration (Figure 7a–c). The system with 10 mM NaCl and 5.0 wt
% NPs remained flowable rather than jamming. This series of experiments
demonstrated that NPs can effectively prevent hydrate agglomeration
especially at high salt concentrations, which is typical in oil and
gas production pipelines.

The maximum apparent viscosity can
represent the moment when hydrate
agglomeration is the most severe. Figure 8 summarizes the maximum apparent viscosity
at different NP and salt concentrations of the 10 °C experiments.
Most experiments resulted in flowable slurries at the steady state.
For all tested NaCl concentrations, the maximum apparent viscosity
decreased with increasing NP concentrations. For example, at 10 mM
NaCl, the maximum viscosity on average decreased from 27960 cP without
NP to 2106 cP with 5.0 wt % NPs.

Figure 8 Maximum apparent viscosities of gas hydrates
measured at different
NP and salt concentrations of 10 °C 1XS-NP experiments.

3 Discussion
In this
study, we investigated the potential of using functionalized
NPs as colloidal dispersants for hydrates. We performed a series of
experiments in three different types of tests: the vial tests for
emulsion stability, the optical microscopic tests for cyclopentane
hydrates, and the high-pressure rheometer tests for methane-ethane
gas hydrates. We also investigated the impact of NP hydrophobicity,
NP concentration, and salt concentration on the stabilization of hydrate
particles. Overall, our results suggest that the addition of properly
functionalized NPs can greatly reduce the extent of hydrate agglomeration,
leading to much improved hydrate slurry flowability. We find that
NPs with intermediate hydrophobicity (0.5X and 1X) and in the presence
of salt (10 mM) perform the best. On the other hand, the particle
concentration does not appear to play a significant role within the
range that we have tested (2.5–5 wt %).

Based on our
results, here, we propose a possible mechanism for
the NPs to prevent ice and hydrate agglomeration. Overall, the particle
hydrophobicity increased from the 0X to the 8X NPs. As shown in Figure 9a, NPs with different
hydrophobicity prefer different relative positions at the oil–water
interface and resulted in different stability of the emulsions.18 NPs with proper functionalization and intermediate
hydrophobicity, that is, 0.5X, 1X, and 2X NPs, can result in the best
dispersive effect in terms of liquid emulsions. NPs with too little
silane coatings, such as 0X and 0.25X NPs, or too much silane coatings,
such as 4X and 8X NPs, cannot form stable W/O emulsions. As depicted
in Figure 9b,c, before
hydrate formation, the mixing of the oil, water, and NPs can result
in stable W/O Pickering emulsions, while water droplets without any
NP or AA will be unstable. At the beginning of hydrate formation,
the guest molecules (cyclopentane or gas) diffuse onto the water droplets,
gradually converting water into hydrates from the oil–water
interface. Since there is still a significant amount of unconverted
water droplets in the system, if without NPs, the water can easily
attach to hydrates or other droplets via collision especially under
shear. Even at the latter stage of hydrate formation, a thin layer
of wetting water on the surface of hydrate particles can result in
very strong capillary attractions between hydrates and causes their
agglomeration (Figure 9d). The NPs, however, reduce the agglomeration by forming a physical
coating (Figure 9e).
They may not only stay at the water–oil interface but can also
remain at the solid–liquid interface after hydrate formation.
The reduced adhesion force between water droplets and hydrates or
between hydrates themselves was also reported by Min et al.19

Figure 9 Illustration of the proposed mechanism for the prevention
of hydrate
agglomeration by properly functionalized NPs. (a) Positions of NPs
with different hydrophobicity at the oil–water interface. Before
hydrate formation, the water droplets (b) tend to coalesce, but (c)
the properly functionalized NP stabilized Pickering emulsions can
effectively prevent droplet merging. After hydrate formation, (d)
the hydrate particles without NPs can aggregate due to capillary attraction
caused by unconverted water connecting neighboring hydrates. In comparison,
(e) the properly functionalized NP stabilized hydrates do not allow
the formation of wetting water layers on them, effectively reducing
or eliminating adhesion between hydrate particles.

The performance of the NPs is related to their hydrophobicity,
or equivalently, the three-phase contact angle. Only NPs with intermediate
hydrophobicity may stabilize W/O emulsions, have enough penetration
depth into water, stay at the solid–liquid interface, and reduce
agglomeration. Our results also demonstrate that the ability to form
stable W/O emulsions can be helpful for dispersing hydrates but is
neither necessary nor sufficient for satisfactory anti-agglomeration,
a phenomenon that has been observed for molecular AAs.16,17 Our in situ observation via optical microscopy shows the leakage
of water and protrusion of solid out of the emulsions during both
ice and hydrate formation, which eventually leads to the formation
of necks between neighboring hydrates. This is likely related to the
surface coverage and stability of NPs at the interface during hydrate
formation whose conditions are typically quite different from the
ambient conditions tested for emulsion stability.

The observed
effects of the NP and salt concentrations may also
be explained by the NP coverage and stability at the water–oil
or hydrate–oil interfaces.44−47 Generally, a higher NP concentration
can form a more compact layer at the interface with fewer voids, which
helps in preventing the leakage of water and protrusion of an ice/hydrate
crystal from the interface. Studies44,48 have shown
that the salt effect on Pickering emulsions is complex and its impact
on hydrate stabilization is much less understood. Salts can affect
the interactions between NPs. A moderate amount of electrolytes can
reduce the electrostatic (between charges or dipoles) repulsion between
NPs at the water–oil interface, making NPs more closely packed
at the interface and increasing the stability of Pickering emulsions.
It is possible that the 10 mM NaCl in this study yielded much better
packing of NPs at the interface than without NaCl. However, to confirm
this hypothesis, studies using confocal microscopy may be needed.

A high-pressure rheometer was used to study the formation and stabilization
of gas hydrates, which provided us quantitative rheological measurement.
There are, however, a few limitations in our measurement. First, due
to the need to increase the mass transfer rate for gas hydrate formation,
we used a hollow-vane impeller for which the shear rate profile is
not well defined. Therefore, we obtained the torque–viscosity
correlation using standard oil samples. This method assumes that the
actual hydrate forming system would follow the same correlation.43 Second, when a high-pressure cell is used, it
is often challenging to directly visualize the system inside and determine
the distribution of different phases. For example, the apparent viscosity
increase may be partially caused by the hydrate agglomeration on the
impeller instead of the viscosification of hydrates themselves. Without
confirming the distribution of hydrates, the apparent viscosity values
reported here need to be treated with caution to avoid overexplanations.
Last but not the least, the maximum torque tolerated by our rheometer
sets the upper limit of our experimentally determined jamming state,
making direct comparison among other jammed systems in the literature
difficult.

It is interesting to notice that the dispersive effects
of NPs
on hydrates are different from those reported in the previous literature.6,22,24,25 Though the previous researchers did not intentionally study the
dispersive effect, they observed severe agglomeration during hydrate
formation from Pickering emulsions. Two possible reasons for the discrepancy
can be the NP size and hydrophobicity. Both factors have been reported
to significantly affect the properties of Pickering emulsions.18 Most previous studies6,22,24,25 used commercially
available NPs around 10 nm, while NPs in this study are much larger
(∼256 nm). The energy of desorption of a particle from the
interface scales with the particle surface area. Therefore, our particles
will be much harder to desorb provided that the hydrophobicity of
two particles is similar. In addition, previous studies did not attempt
to tune the particle hydrophobicity over a wide range, which appears
to be an important factor. Because of the different approaches used,
currently it is difficult to make any direct comparison. Future studies
need to address these issues to better understand the mechanism of
NPs in preventing agglomeration of hydrates.

4 Conclusions
In this study, we have, for the first time, tested and demonstrated
the promising potential of using NPs to disperse gas hydrates and
reduce the tendency for hydrate agglomeration. The tested NPs were
silica particles 256 nm in diameter coated with different amounts
of hydrophobic alkyl chains. The performance of the NPs was tested
in a customized cooling cell for cyclopentane hydrates at ambient
pressure and a high-pressure rheometer for methane/ethane hydrates.
The impacts of NP and salt concentrations on hydrate agglomeration
were also investigated. We found that NPs with moderate hydrophobicity
can significantly reduce the apparent viscosity of gas hydrates, increase
water conversion, and help to form flowable hydrate slurries. Higher
NP and salt concentrations further helped to reduce the steady-state
apparent viscosity values of the gas hydrates.

Based on the
experimental results, we further proposed a hypothesis
of the underlying mechanism for the NPs in preventing hydrate agglomeration.
NPs with moderate hydrophobicity can pack closely at the liquid–liquid
and liquid–solid interfaces with a large particle-desorption
energy barrier. As a result, they can stabilize the emulsion droplets
before hydrate formation. Once hydrates are formed, the hydrophobic
surfaces of the NPs can also help prevent the formation of a wetting
water layer on hydrates, reducing the adhesion force between hydrate
particles or free water droplets. Increased NP and salt concentrations
may further limit the degree of hydrate agglomeration due to a dense
packing of NPs with fewer voids at the interface. Our results show
great potential of using functionalized NPs in the management of hydrates.

5 Materials and Methods
5.1 Materials
The
following materials
and chemicals were used: n-octadecyltrimethoxysilane
(OTMOS, C21H46O3Si, Gelest), silica
nanoparticles (Fiber Optic Center Inc.), n-decane
(n-C10H22, Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous,
≥99%), deionized water, ethanol (C2H5OH, Sigma-Aldrich, ACS reagent, ≥99.5%), ammonium hydroxide
solution (NH3 in H2O, Aristar, ACS reagent,
28–30 wt %), polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, Sylgard 184, Dow Corning),
gelatin (from porcine skin, type A, Sigma-Aldrich), cyclopentane (C5H10, Sigma-Aldrich, reagent grade, ≥98%),
sodium chloride (NaCl, Sigma-Aldrich, ACS reagent, ≥99%), and
methane/ethane gas mixture (75/25 mol %, General Air).

5.2 Silica NP Functionalization and Characterization
The
procedures for functionalization of the silica NPs were similar
to those described in the literature.49−51 Briefly, the amorphous
plain silica NP powders were dispersed into water under sonication
for 30 min; silica NPs were then treated with 0.1 M NaOH aqueous solution
24 h for rehydroxylation.52,53 They were then mixed
with OTMOS and NH4OH (as catalyst) in ethanol for 24 h
to coat the silane molecules on their surfaces. The amount of OTMOS
required to attach one silane molecule per nm2 of the silica
NP surface was labeled as 1X. Accordingly, silica NP surfaces modified
by other amounts of silane were labeled as 0.25X, 0.5X, 2X, 4X, and
8X. 0X referred to the pristine silica NPs treated by NaOH, which
were highly hydrophilic due to abundant silanol functional groups
on the particle surface. In a typical surface modification experiment
(1X silica NPs), 40 mL of silica NPs in DI water suspension (0.05
g/mL) was mixed with 4.5 mL of 1 M NaOH aqueous solution in a 50 mL
centrifuge tube. The tube was placed on a rotator to ensure good mixing
for 24 h. After that, these silica NPs were cleaned three times via
centrifugation (1800g, 20 min, IEC HT Centrifuge)
with DI water to remove residual NaOH, and resuspended in 40 mL of
ethanol. 128 μL of OTMOS in ethanol (10 v/v %) and 2 mL of ammonium
hydroxide were added to the particle suspension. The tube was placed
on a rotator for 24 h. The surface-modified particles were cleaned
three times via centrifugation (1800g, 20 min, IEC
HT Centrifuge) with ethanol to remove residue reactants. Then they
were cleaned one more time via centrifugation (1800g, 20 min, IEC HT Centrifuge) with n-decane and resuspended
in n-decane to a final particle concentration of
0.1 g/mL.

Small fractions of the functionalized NPs were dried
at room temperature (RT) for characterization, including scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
(FTIR), and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). SEM images were obtained
using a JEOL 7000F FE-SEM operated at 20 kV accelerating voltage.
FTIR spectra were obtained with a Thermo Electron Nicolet 4700 FTIR
spectrometer. A background measurement was taken before loading the
NP sample. TGA was carried out under air using a Q50 TGA (TA Instruments).
Measurements were obtained by adding 15 mg of NPs to a ceramic pan.
The samples were heated from RT to 600 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min.
The TGA measurements were run three times for each NP batch.

The three-phase contact angle of the modified silica NPs at the
water–n-decane interface was measured with
a gel-trapping technique.36−38 In brief, 12 mL of hot 2 wt %
gelatin solution (50 °C) and 10 mL of n-decane
were sequentially added into a glass dish (80 mm in diameter). 100
μL of 1 mg/mL modified silica NPs in ethanol was then carefully
added to the water–oil interface with a micropipette. The silica
NPs spread over the water–oil interface as ethanol evaporates.
The gelatin solution started gelling after cooling the glass dish
to room temperature for 3 h, and the silica NPs were immobilized at
the gel–oil interface. Then n-decane was gently
removed, and a mixture of PDMS and curing agent (10:1 ratio, degassed
in a vacuum chamber for 1 h) was poured over the gelatin gel. The
PDMS was left to cure at room temperature for 48 h. The solidified
PDMS was then peeled off the gel surface and immersed in a DI water
bath at 50 °C for 10 min to dissolve any residual gelatin. The
PDMS was rinsed thoroughly with DI water and blown dry. A small piece
of the PDMS sample was cut for FE-SEM and atomic force microscopy
(AFM, tapping mode, Asylum Research) imaging. The contact radius d and the height of protrusion h of silica
NPs at the interface were obtained.

The stabilization of oil/water
emulsions by NPs was tested in glass
vials. The emulsions were prepared by homogenizing a mixture of DI
water, n-decane, and NPs. For a typical experiment,
2 mL of DI water, 7.8 mL of n-decane, 200 μL
of modified NPs in n-decane suspension, and 40 μL
of oil-soluble blue dye were added into a 22 mL glass vial. The mixture
was vigorously stirred by an Ultra-Turrax homogenizer (IKA T25) at
13500 rpm for 2 min. The type of emulsion was then examined by adding
one drop of the emulsions into n-decane and water.
Oil-in-water (O/W) emulsions will remain as a drop in oil but disperse
in water and vice versa.54

5.3 Experimental Apparatus for Hydrate Testing
Figure 10 shows the customized cooling cell built for in situ
observation of cyclopentane hydrate formation under an optical microscope.
The cooling cell consisted of a 1/4 in. thick copper bar with a hole
1/2 in. in diameter. A clean 0.17 mm glass coverslip was glued at
the bottom of this copper bar with epoxy. The cold side of a Peltier
cooling plate (154 W) was attached to the copper bar to achieve fast
cooling. An aluminum coolant block was integrated to the hot side
of the Peltier, and a mixture of chilled ethylene glycol and water
was circulated to remove the heat transferred to and generated by
the Peltier plate. A resistance temperature detector (RTD) was inserted
in the cooling cell to monitor the liquid temperature inside. The
RTD, Peltier plate, and power supply were integrated with a temperature
controller to maintain constant temperature inside the cell. The whole
cooling cell was placed on the microscope stage for in situ observation.

Figure 10 Illustration
of the experimental apparatus used for in situ observation
of cyclopentane hydrate formation. (a) Schematics of the cooling cell.
(b) Protocol of temperature change during the in situ experiments
on an optical microscope.

Figure 11 illustrates
the experimental apparatus to test the effect of NPs on gas hydrate
formation and dispersion in a high-pressure rheometer. The major components
of the system include a rheometer (TA Instruments, HR-2), a syringe
pump (Teledyne, USA), and a circulating chiller. The rheometer includes
a high-pressure cell that is used for in situ hydrate formation. The
cell is 57 mm in height and 28 mm in inner diameter. The total volume
of the cell is 35 mL, while 25 mL of liquid is sufficient to cover
the vanes of the impeller. The rheometer uses a customized hollow
vane for stirring, which is 40 mm in height and 26 mm in diameter.
The rationale for choosing a hollow vane is to promote shear force
and increase gas–liquid mixing while minimizing hydrate accumulation
in dead zones close to the shaft. The syringe pump has a capacity
of 100 mL to maintain the system pressure constant up to 250 bar.
The chiller is connected to the cooling jacket of the high-pressure
cell to control the temperature ranging from −20 to 40 °C.

Figure 11 Illustration
of a high-pressure rheometer system for studying the
impacts of NPs on the formation and dispersion of gas hydrates. The
syringe pump controls the system pressure and the chiller provides
cooling to the pressure cell.

5.4 Cyclopentane Hydrate Formation Tests
The
NP performance was first evaluated through the in situ observation
of cyclopentane hydrate formation with an optical microscope. A typical
experiment started with adding 800 μL of a mixture of cyclopentane
and n-decane (20/80 vol %) into the cooling cell
followed by gently adding 50 μL of W/O Pickering emulsions stabilized
by NPs. The emulsion droplets were spread on the bottom glass slide,
and a coverslip was placed on top of the cell to minimize the evaporation
of cyclopentane and n-decane. Static images were
acquired using a color charge-coupled device (CCD) camera (Qimaging,
Retiga 2000R) that was connected to an inverted microscope (IX71,
Olympus). The agglomeration of hydrates was tested by attempting to
disturb the hydrate particles with a glass fiber, and the process
was recorded using a high-speed monochrome CCD camera (SV643M, EPIX)
connected to the microscope.

Hydrate formation is a stochastic
process, and direct conversion of liquid water into hydrates can take
hours to days depending on the subcooling temperature, hydrate former,
stirring speed, and purity of water. Figure 10b shows the protocol of temperature control
to promote hydrate growth.55 The temperature
in the cell was first lowered to −15 °C for 30 min to
convert most of the water droplets into ice. Then the cell temperature
was ramped up to 0.5 °C to melt the ice and induce hydrate formation
and growth for 30 min. Finally, the cell temperature was raised to
10 °C for 10 min to dissociate the cyclopentane hydrate completely.

5.5 Rheological Measurement for Gas Hydrates
In the gas hydrate formation tests with the rheometer, a hollow-vane
impeller was used for mixing and promoting the formation of gas hydrates.
For such a kind of impeller, the shear profile is not well-defined,
and as such, a torque–viscosity correlation was developed using
standard silicone oils with known viscosity at 20 °C. The procedure
for this calibration was previously reported.43 Briefly, 25 mL of standard silicone oil with different viscosities
was measured in the pressure cell for different settings of the rotational
speed of the impeller. The correlation obtained between the torque T (μN m) and viscosity μ (cP) is 2  for a rotational speed of
200 rpm. This correlation was used throughout this study to convert
the measured torque to the reported apparent viscosity for gas hydrates.

The rheometer experiments were run at a constant pressure of 70
bar using a syringe pump. The hydrate gas former was chosen to be
a methane/ethane (75/25 mol %) gas mixture. The hydrate equilibrium
temperature was 16.5 °C (PVTSim Nova 3.1.117), and the expected
hydrate structure was sII. The experiments were run at 8 and 10 °C,
giving 8.5 and 6.5 °C subcooling, respectively. Subcooling is
defined as the difference between the running temperature and the
hydrate equilibrium temperature, which characterizes the driving force
for hydrate formation. Each set of experimental conditions was repeated
three times to ensure reproducibility. The behavior of the hydrate
formation was repeatable with major variation in the onset time for
hydrate formation. At 1 and 10 mM sodium chloride (NaCl), the hydrate
equilibrium temperature of the initial system is predicted to differ
by less than 0.1 °C (as calculated by PVTsim Nova 3.1.117). Therefore,
such depression in equilibrium temperature is negligible. Salts have
been reported to change hydrate crystal growth morphology,34 but its impact on hydrate agglomeration has
not been reported.

In each experiment, 15 mL of NP-n-decane suspension
was mixed with 10 mL of DI water or brine solution, making the total
liquid volume 25 mL in the rheometer, which was enough to immerse
the vanes of the impeller. The system was then charged with the methane/ethane
gas mixture. The syringe pump was started to maintain the pressure
at 70 bar. The chiller was first started to maintain the cell temperature
at 20 °C. The rotational speed of the impeller was set at 200
rpm throughout the experiments. However, if the torque experienced
by the impeller remained close to a maximum of 0.2 N m for a prolonged
time (e.g., 1 h) or goes beyond the maximum, it would cease to rotate
to prevent mechanical damage to the rheometer. When the initial temperature
and impeller rotational speed stabilized for 1 h, the chiller temperature
was decreased to the set temperature (8 or 10 °C) to form gas
hydrate. After hydrate formation, the impeller will either stop rotating
because the torque reaches the maximum due to jamming by hydrates
or rotate continuously with a constant shear.

During the experiments,
the torque, pressure, temperature of the
cooling jacket, ambient temperature, and the syringe pump volume were
recorded. The gas consumed for hydrate formation was calculated from
the above data. Assuming a hydration number of 6 (mol of water/mol
of gas), the actual hydrate amount and water conversion could be obtained.
The latter was defined as the percentage water that is converted into
hydrate.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01806.Average size of
emulsions stabilized by different NPs;
list of supporting movie files; SEM images of modified silica NPs
embedded in PDMS; AFM height scan of modified silica NPs embedded
in PDMS; images of the W/O emulsion stabilized by 1XS NPs; optical
images of the W/O emulsions stabilized by Span 80 in a mixture of n-decane and cyclopentane (PDF)

Dispersed hydrate particles with 1X
NPs (AVI)

Agglomerated ice particles with 2X NPs (AVI)

Agglomerated hydrate particles with
2X NPs (AVI)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01806_si_001.pdf

 ao9b01806_si_002.avi

 ao9b01806_si_003.avi

 ao9b01806_si_004.avi

 Author Contributions
§ X.Z. and
J.G. contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
J.G. and N.W. acknowledge the support by
the National
Science Foundation (CBET-1454095).
==== Refs
References
Sloan E. D. 
Fundamental
principles and applications of natural gas hydrates . Nature 
2003 , 426 , 353 –359 . 10.1038/nature02135 .14628065 
Makogon Y. F. 
Natural
gas hydrates - A promising source of energy . J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng. 
2010 , 2 , 49 –59 . 10.1016/j.jngse.2009.12.004 .
Kerr R. A. 
Gas Hydrate
Resource: Smaller But Sooner . Science 
2004 , 303 , 946 –947 . 10.1126/science.303.5660.946 .14963301 
Gudmundsson J. S. ; Parlaktuna M. ; Khokhar A. A. 
Storage of Natural Gas as Frozen
Hydrate . SPE Prod. Facil. 
1994 , 9 , 69 –73 . 10.2118/24924-PA .
Lee H. ; Lee J.-W. ; Kim D. Y. ; Park J. ; Seo Y.-T. ; Zeng H. ; Moudrakovski I. L. ; Ratcliffe C. I. ; Ripmeester J. A. 
Tuning clathrate hydrates for hydrogen storage . Nature 
2005 , 434 , 743 –746 . 10.1038/nature03457 .15815624 
Wang W. ; Bray C. L. ; Adams D. J. ; Cooper A. I. 
Methane Storage
in Dry Water Gas Hydrates . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 11608 –11609 . 10.1021/ja8048173 .18683923 
Xu C.-G. ; Li X.-S. 
Research progress of hydrate-based CO2 separation and
capture from gas mixtures . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 18301 –18316 . 10.1039/C4RA00611A .
Song Y. ; Dong H. ; Yang L. ; Yang M. ; Li Y. ; Ling Z. ; Zhao J. 
Hydrate-based heavy metal separation
from aqueous solution . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 21389 10.1038/srep21389 .26887357 
Zhang X. ; Lee B. R. ; Sa J.-H. ; Kinnari K. J. ; Askvik K. M. ; Li X. ; Sum A. K. 
Hydrate Management in Deadlegs: Effect of Header Temperature
on Hydrate Deposition . Energy Fuels 
2017 , 31 , 11802 –11810 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b02095 .
Kinnari K. ; Hundseid J. ; Li X. ; Askvik K. M. 
Hydrate Management
in Practice . J. Chem. Eng. Data 
2014 , 60 , 437 –446 . 10.1021/je500783u .
Kelland M. A. 
History
of the Development of Low Dosage Hydrate Inhibitors . Energy Fuels 
2006 , 20 , 825 –847 . 10.1021/ef050427x .
Frostman L. M. ; Przybylinski J. L.  Successful
Applications of Anti-agglomerant Hydrate Inhibitors . In SPE International Symposium on Oilfield Chemistry ; Society of Petroleum Engineers : Houston, TX, USA , 2001 .
Klomp U. C. ; Kruka V. R. ; Reijnhart R. ; Weisenborn A. J.  Method for
inhibiting the plugging of conduits by gas hydrates . US Patent 5,460,728 , 24 Oct., 1995 .
Bellucci M. A. ; Walsh M. R. ; Trout B. L. 
Molecular Dynamics Analysis of Anti-Agglomerant
Surface Adsorption in Natural Gas Hydrates . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2018 , 122 , 2673 –2683 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b09573 .
Phan A. ; Bui T. ; Acosta E. ; Krishnamurthy P. ; Striolo A. 
Molecular mechanisms
responsible for hydrate anti-agglomerant performance . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 24859 –24871 . 10.1039/C6CP03296F .27436688 
Lachance J.
W. ; Talley L. D. ; Shatto D. P. ; Turner D. J. ; Eaton M. W. 
Formation
of Hydrate Slurries in a Once-Through Operation . Energy Fuels 
2012 , 26 , 4059 –4066 . 10.1021/ef3002197 .
Talley L. D. ; Turner D. J. ; Priedeman D. K.  Method of generating
a non-plugging hydrate slurry . US Patent 8,436,219 B2 , 2013 .
Chevalier Y. ; Bolzinger M. A. 
Emulsions
stabilized with solid nanoparticles: Pickering
emulsions . Colloids Surf., A 
2013 , 439 , 23 –34 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2013.02.054 .
Min J. ; Baek S. ; Somasundaran P. ; Lee J. W. 
Anti-Adhesive Behaviors
between Solid Hydrate and Liquid Aqueous Phase Induced by Hydrophobic
Silica Nanoparticles . Langmuir 
2016 , 32 , 9513 –9522 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b02729 .27564571 
Cha M. ; Baek S. ; Morris J. ; Lee J. W. 
Hydrophobic particle
effects on hydrate crystal growth at the water–oil interface . Chem. – An Asian J. 
2014 , 9 , 261 –267 . 10.1002/asia.201300905 .
Baek S. ; Min J. ; Lee J. W. 
Inhibition effects of activated carbon particles on
gas hydrate formation at oil–water interfaces . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 58813 –58820 . 10.1039/C5RA08335D .
Farhang F. ; Nguyen A. V. ; Sewell K. B. 
Fundamental
Investigation of the
Effects of Hydrophobic Fumed Silica on the Formation of Carbon Dioxide
Gas Hydrates . Energy Fuels 
2014 , 28 , 7025 –7037 . 10.1021/ef5009133 .
Baek S. ; Min J. ; Ahn Y.-H. ; Cha M. ; Lee J. W. 
Effect of hydrophobic
silica nanoparticles on the kinetics of methane hydrate formation
in water-in-oil emulsions . Energy Fuels 
2018 , 33 , 523 –530 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.8b03210 .
Raman A. K. Y. ; Koteeswaran S. ; Venkataramani D. ; Clark P. ; Bhagwat S. ; Aichele C. P. 
A comparison
of the rheological behavior of hydrate
forming emulsions stabilized using either solid particles or a surfactant . Fuel 
2016 , 179 , 141 –149 . 10.1016/j.fuel.2016.03.049 .
Ahuja A. ; Iqbal A. ; Iqbal M. ; Lee J. W. ; Morris J. F. 
Rheology
of Hydrate-Forming Emulsions Stabilized by Surfactant and Hydrophobic
Silica Nanoparticles . Energy Fuels 
2018 , 32 , 5877 –5884 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.8b00795 .
Li H. ; Wang L. 
Hydrophobized particles
can accelerate nucleation of clathrate hydrates . Fuel 
2015 , 140 , 440 –445 . 10.1016/j.fuel.2014.10.005 .
Mohammadi A. ; Manteghian M. ; Haghtalab A. ; Mohanmmadi A. H. ; Rahmati-Abkenar M. 
Kinetic study
of carbon dioxide hydrate formation in
presence of silver nanoparticles and SDS . Chem.
Eng. J. 
2014 , 237 , 387 –395 . 10.1016/j.cej.2013.09.026 .
Najibi H. ; Shayegan M. M. ; Heidary H. 
Experimental
investigation of methane
hydrate formation in the presence of copper oxide nanoparticles and
SDS . J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng. 
2015 , 23 , 315 –323 . 10.1016/j.jngse.2015.02.009 .
Wang J. ; Wang R. ; Yoon R.-H. ; Seol Y. 
Use of Hydrophobic
Particles as Kinetic Promoters for Gas Hydrate Formation . J. Chem. Eng. Data 
2014 , 60 , 383 –388 . 10.1021/je5006455 .
Zhou S.-D. ; Yu Y.-S. ; Zhao M.-M. ; Wang S.-L. ; Zhang G.-Z. 
Effect
of Graphite Nanoparticles on Promoting CO2Hydrate Formation . Energy Fuels 
2014 , 28 , 4694 –4698 . 10.1021/ef5000886 .
Maddah B. ; Shamsi J. 
Extraction and preconcentration
of trace amounts of
diazinon and fenitrothion from environmental water by magnetite octadecylsilane
nanoparticles . J. Chromatogr. A 
2012 , 1256 , 40 –45 . 10.1016/j.chroma.2012.07.085 .22885050 
Wang R. ; Baran G. ; Wunder S. L. 
Packing and Thermal
Stability of
Polyoctadecylsiloxane Compared with Octadecylsilane Monolayers . Langmuir 
2000 , 16 , 6298 –6305 . 10.1021/la000206d .
Dargahi-Zaboli M. ; Sahraei E. ; Pourabbas B. ; Korgel B. A. 
A simplified synthesis
of silica Colloids with tunable hydrophobicity . Colloid Polym. Sci. 
2017 , 295 , 925 –932 . 10.1007/s00396-017-4079-8 .
Kishimoto M. ; Iijima S. ; Ohmura R. 
Crystal Growth
of Clathrate Hydrate
at the Interface between Seawater and Hydrophobic-Guest Liquid: Effect
of Elevated Salt Concentration . Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res. 
2012 , 51 , 5224 –5229 . 10.1021/ie202785z .
Arkles B.  Silane Coupling Agents:
Connecting Across Boundaries (3rd Edition) ; Gelest, Inc. : Morrisville, PA , 2014 .
Paunov V.
N. 
Novel method
for determining the three-phase contact angle of colloid particles
adsorbed at air– water and oil– water interfaces . Langmuir 
2003 , 19 , 7970 –7976 . 10.1021/la0347509 .
Cayre O. J. ; Paunov V. N. 
Contact angles of
colloid silica and gold particles
at air– water and oil– water interfaces determined with
the gel trapping technique . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 9594 –9599 . 10.1021/la0489615 .15491191 
Arnaudov L. N. ; Cayre O. J. ; Stuart M. A. C. ; Stoyanov S. D. ; Paunov V. N. 
Measuring
the three-phase contact angle of nanoparticles at fluid interfaces . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2010 , 12 , 328 –331 . 10.1039/B917353F .20023808 
Nečas D. ; Klapetek P. 
Gwyddion: an open-source
software for SPM data analysis . Open Phys. 
2012 , 10 , 181 –188 . 10.2478/s11534-011-0096-2 .
Tian J. ; Walker C.  Non-Emulsifying,
New Anti-Agglomerant Developments . In Offshore
Technology Conference , Houston, Texas, USA, 2012 .
Tang M. ; Wu T. ; Xu X. ; Zhang L. ; Wu F. 
Factors that affect
the stability, type and morphology of Pickering emulsion stabilized
by silver nanoparticles/graphene oxide nanocomposites . Mater. Res. Bull. 
2014 , 60 , 118 –129 . 10.1016/j.materresbull.2014.08.019 .
Binks B. P. ; Olusanya S. O. 
Pickering emulsions
stabilized by coloured organic
pigment particles . Chem. Sci. 
2017 , 8 , 708 –723 . 10.1039/C6SC03085H .28626551 
Charin R. M. ; Sum A. K. 
Steady-State and Transient Studies of Gas Hydrates
Formation in Non-emulsifying Oil Systems . Energy
Fuels 
2017 , 31 , 2548 –2556 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b02868 .
Dishon M. ; Zohar O. ; Sivan U. 
From Repulsion
to Attraction and
Back to Repulsion: The Effect of NaCl, KCl, and CsCl on the Force
between Silica Surfaces in Aqueous Solution . Langmuir 
2009 , 25 , 2831 –2836 . 10.1021/la803022b .19437699 
Park B. J. ; Pantina J. P. ; Furst E. M. ; Oettel M. ; Reynaert S. ; Vermant J. 
Direct Measurements
of the Effects of Salt and Surfactant
on Interaction Forces between Colloidal Particles at Water-Oil Interfaces . Langmuir 
2008 , 24 , 1686 –1694 . 10.1021/la7008804 .18201109 
Park B. J. ; Furst E. M. 
Attractive interactions
between colloids at the oil-water
interface . Soft Matter 
2011 , 7 , 7676 –7682 . 10.1039/c1sm00005e .
Horozov T. S. ; Binks B. P. ; Gottschalk-Gaudig T. 
Effect of electrolyte in silicone
oil-in-water emulsions stabilised by fumed silica particles . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2007 , 9 , 6398 –6404 . 10.1039/b709807n .18060170 
Metin C. O. ; Lake L. W. ; Miranda C. R. ; Nguyen Q. P. 
Stability of aqueous
silica nanoparticle dispersions . J. Nanopart.
Res. 
2011 , 13 , 839 –850 . 10.1007/s11051-010-0085-1 .
Wang Y. ; Wang Y. ; Zheng X. ; Yi G.-R. ; Sacanna S. ; Pine D. J. ; Weck M. 
Three-Dimensional
Lock and Key Colloids . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 6866 –6869 . 10.1021/ja502699p .24785203 
Rahman I. A. ; Padavettan V. 
Synthesis of silica nanoparticles by sol-gel: size-dependent
properties, surface modification, and applications in silica-polymer
nanocomposites—a review . J. Nanomater. 
2012 , 8 10.1155/2012/132424 .
Liu X. ; Ma Z. ; Xing J. ; Liu H. 
Preparation and characterization
of amino–silane modified superparamagnetic silica nanospheres . J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 
2004 , 270 , 1 –6 . 10.1016/j.jmmm.2003.07.006 .
Zhuravlev L. T. 
The surface
chemistry of amorphous silica. Zhuravlev model . Colloids Surf., A 
2000 , 173 , 1 –38 . 10.1016/S0927-7757(00)00556-2 .
Nawrocki J. 
The silanol
group and its role in liquid chromatography . J. Chromatogr. A 
1997 , 779 , 29 –71 . 10.1016/S0021-9673(97)00479-2 .
Binks B. P. ; Lumsdon S. O. 
Influence of particle
wettability on the type and stability
of surfactant-free emulsions . Langmuir 
2000 , 16 , 8622 –8631 . 10.1021/la000189s .
Li M. ; Dong S. ; Li B. ; Liu C. 
Effects of a naturally
derived surfactant on hydrate anti-agglomeration using micromechanical
force measurement . J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 
2018 , 67 , 140 –147 . 10.1016/j.jiec.2018.06.024 .

