
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3055598710.1021/acsomega.8b01600ArticleMechanism of Tetramer Dissociation, Unfolding, and
Oligomer Assembly of Pneumovirus M2-1 Transcription
Antiterminators Esperante Sebastián A. *Alvarez-Paggi Damián Salgueiro Mariano Prat Gay Gonzalo de *Protein Structure, Function
and Engineering Laboratory, Fundación
Instituto Leloir, IIBBA, Avenida Patricias Argentinas 435, 1405 CABA, Argentina* E-mail: sesperante@leloir.org.ar (S.A.E.).* E-mail: gpg@leloir.org.ar (G.d.P.G.).02 11 2018 30 11 2018 3 11 14732 14745 10 07 2018 17 10 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Among Mononegavirales, the Pneumovirus
family stands out by its
RNA polymerase processivity that relies on a transcription antiterminator,
the M2-1 protein, which also plays a key role in viral particle assembly.
Biophysical and structural evidence shows that this RNA-binding tetramer
is strongly modulated by a CCCH Zn2+ binding motif. We
show that while the global dissociation/unfolding free energy is 10
kcal mol–1, more stable for the respiratory syncytial
virus M2-1, the human metapneumovirus (HMPV) counterpart shows a 7
kcal mol–1 higher intersubunit affinity. Removal
of Zn2+ from both homologues leads to an apo-monomer of
identical secondary structure that further undergoes a slow irreversible
oligomerization. Mutation of the histidine residue of the Zn2+ motif to cysteine or alanine leads directly to large oligomers,
strongly suggesting that metal coordination has an exquisite precision
for modulating the quaternary arrangement. Zn2+ removal
is very slow and requires subdenaturing concentrations of guanidine
chloride, suggesting a likely local folding energy barrier. Exploring
a broad combination of denaturant and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
conditions, we showed that the metapneumovirus protein has to overcome
a higher energy barrier to trigger Zn2+ removal-driven
dissociation, in concordance with a slower dissociation kinetics.
In silico modeling of open and close conformations for both M2-1 tetramers
together with interaction energy calculations reveals that the gradual
opening of protomers decreases the number of intersubunit contacts.
Half of the interaction energy holding each protomer in the tetramer
comes from the CCCH motif, while HMPV-M2-1 harbors additional contacts
between the CCCH motif of one subunit and the core domain of a protomer
located in trans, allowing the rationalization of the experimental
data obtained. Overall, the evidence points at a key role of the CCCH
motif in switching between structural and consequently functional
alternatives of the M2-1 protein.

document-id-old-9ao8b01600document-id-new-14ao-2018-016005ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Pneumoviridae family (Mononegaviridae order) includes human respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) and human
metapneumovirus (HMPV), which are an important cause of acute lower
respiratory tract infections and pneumonia mortality during the first
year of life, especially in developing countries.1−3 Both viruses
share similar structural genomic organizations and transcription/replication
mechanisms. The single-stranded negative RNA genome tightly wrapped
around the nucleocapsid N protein is used as a template
for transcription and replication. Genomic RNA replication is driven
by the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase L protein together
with the essential cofactor phosphoprotein P. An
additional cofactor, the M2-1 protein unique to pneumovirus, is required
for efficient subgenomic mRNA transcription. M2-1 acts as a transcription
antiterminator and processivity factor, preventing the premature transcriptional
termination of long mRNAs and improving the synthesis of polycistronic
readthrough mRNAs.4 It also participates
in post-transcriptional mRNA trafficking and transient accumulation
of viral mRNAs in membraneless organelles, before releasing mRNAs
into the cytosol for translation.5 Consequently,
M2-1 is of significant interest for understanding Pneumovirus life
cycle and infection. In addition to participating in mRNA transcription,
it has been also associated with viral particle assembly, mediating
the interactions between the N nucleocapsid and Matrix M protein.6 Moreover, electron
cryotomographic characterization of RSV particles showed a layer of
M2-1 between M and N ribonucleoprotein,
supporting a role of M2-1 in viral morphogenesis.7 The multiple critical functions of M2-1 suggest the existence
of alternative conformations, each compatible with specific functions.
In this scenario, conformational switching should be finely tuned
and could be susceptible to stimuli such as post-translational modifications,
interactions, or changes occurring in the cellular environment such
as pH or oxidative stress.

The X-ray crystallographic structures
of M2-1 from RSV and HMPV
have been obtained and both homologous proteins share a similar fold
and structural arrangement, with a tetrameric quaternary structure
(Figure 1).8,9 The M2-1 protomer displays a modular architecture characterized
by three distinct regions linked by unstructured or flexible sequences
(Figure 1): the N-terminal
CCCH Zn2+-binding domain (ZBD. residues 1–30), the
tetramerization helix (residues 30–52), and the core domain
(residues 66–170). A flexible linker (residues 53–65)
that harbors phosphorylation sites connects the tetramerization helix
with the core domain.

Figure 1 Structural arrangement of tetrameric RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 proteins. RSV-M2-1 (A) (protein data bank (PDB) id 4C3D) and HMPV-M2-1 (B)
(PDB id 4CS7). Left panel: tetramer with N-terminal face. Each subunit is presented
in a different color code. Center panel: side face, with a single
subunit colored red, to highlight the differences between the open
and closed conformations. Right panel: a protomer of M2-1 with its
structural regions indicated. W30 and Zn2+ coordinating
residues, C7, C15, C21, and H25 are indicated. HMPV presents an additional
W residue, W28, not present in RSV. All figures were prepared using
YASARA.10

Although similar in overall fold and structure, with oligomerization
driven by a four helix bundle at its center and stabilized by contacts
between the N-terminal ZBD interacting with adjacent protomers, the
crystal structure of HMPV-M2-1 tetramer reveals an asymmetric unit
with three protomers displaying a closed conformation and one with
an open conformation.8 Interestingly, molecular
dynamics simulations and small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) experiments
of HMPV-M2-1 demonstrated a dynamic equilibrium between open and closed
conformations in solution that is sensitive to the buffer composition.
This equilibrium can be probed by the addition of denaturing agents
such as guanidinium hydrochloride (Gdm.HCl) or the Zn2+-chelating agent ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) that tends
to favor the open conformations, while RNA binding elicits the fully
closed conformation.8 Crystal soaking experiments
of HMPV-M2-1 with the DNA sequence AGTT revealed atomic contacts with
the ZBD and the open-core domain, suggesting that both participate
in the simultaneous recognition of RNA sequences.8 Altogether, these results show that the M2-1 tetramer constantly
explores various conformations that are directly linked to physiological
roles. The RNA-binding surface of RSV-M2-1 was located by mutational
analysis, NMR chemical shift perturbation experiments, and RNA-binding
assays,9,11 and was revealed to consist of a surface
of positively charged residues within the core region of the tetramer
and the N-terminal residues R3 and R4.

RSV-M2-1, HMPV-M2-1,
and other related proteins such as ebola VP30
contain a CCCH ZBD located upstream of the oligomerization helix that
adopts a fold with low secondary structure content. Zn2+ binding to the RSV-M2-1 CCCH motif was shown to induce homointeractions
to form a highly stable tetramer with RNA-binding ability, as well
as processivity and antiterminator transcriptional activities. The
tetrameric arrangement of RSV-M2-1 was shown to be essential to bind
RNA molecules in a cooperative manner with high affinity and a loose
sequence specificity.12 Moreover, RSV-M2-1
binds the tetrameric P phosphoprotein with a singular
tetramer–tetramer interface,13 suggesting
that multiple RNA- or P-binding sites are simultaneously interacting
and outcompeting to exert its function. Consideration of its additional
role during viral morphogenesis suggests that M2-1 adopts different
conformations to perform its multiple activities interacting with
different counterparts. The molecular determinants or signals switching
these conformational/functional behaviors of M2-1 are still unknown,
despite proposals for the CCCH motif of M2-1 as a pH sensor.14

In the present work, we assess the stability,
alternative conformations,
and oligomerization states of RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 proteins, analyzing
the molecular basis of the thermodynamic and kinetic parameters derived
for the studied transitions. We demonstrate that the CCCH Zn2+ binding motif is not accessible in the fully closed conformation
and that displacement toward the open tetramer conformations drastically
increases its accessibility, rendering it susceptible to react with
EDTA. We show that HMPV-M2-1 presents a higher energy barrier for
triggering tetramer dissociation induced by Zn2+ removal,
consistent with the slower dissociation kinetics observed. Performing
in silico structural analysis allowed us to dissect the energetic
contributions that stabilize the tetrameric arrangement in open and
closed states. Altogether, these results lead us to propose a novel
interaction surface in the HMPV tetramer, not found in RSV, which
could explain the higher affinity and slower dissociation kinetics
observed. Finally, we show that impairment of Zn2+ binding
leads to the formation of higher-order oligomeric species, which could
be crucial in viral assembly. These results highlight a plausible
key role of the CCCH motif modulating structural/functional alternatives
of M2-1 protein.

Results
HMPV-M2-1 Tetramer Exhibited
Higher Affinity Than the RSV-M2-1
Counterpart
To compare the conformational stability of the
closely related HMPV- and RSV-M2-1 tetramers, we carried out Gdm.HCl-induced
equilibrium denaturation experiments monitored by far-UV circular
dichroism (CD) and tryptophan fluorescence emission measurements (Figure 2). At 10 μM
HMPV-M2-1 concentration, the secondary and tertiary structure signal
changes are coupled showing stable baselines for the tetrameric (within
0–2.0 M Gdm.HCl) and monomeric unfolded states, with a cooperative
transition exhibiting an estimated denaturation midpoint [D]50 of 2.5 M Gdm.HCl (Figure 2A). Denaturation curves performed at 1 μM
(Figure S1) shifted the transition midpoint
to lower Gdm.HCl concentrations, indicating that unfolding is coupled
to tetramer dissociation. The far-UV CD and fluorescence denaturation
curves at 1 and 10 μM were globally fit to a three-state equilibrium
model as was previously described for RSV-M2-1,15 and the thermodynamic parameters derived from the fits
are summarized in Table 1 and Figure S1. Although the conformational
stability of RSV-M2-1 has been previously studied,15 we performed additional equilibrium denaturation experiments
of RSV-M2-1 for comparison purposes. Despite the fact that the global
free energy of the dissociation/denaturation process (ΔGTH20) is higher for RSV-M2-1, the
HMPV-M2-1 tetramer displays higher intersubunit affinity (ΔGDISSH20). The three-state model allows
for the dissection of the global process into two equilibria. The
first equilibrium is characterized by the free energy of dissociation
(ΔGDISSH20) from native
tetramer to a partially folded monomeric intermediate, while the second
one is described by the free energy of unfolding of the monomeric
intermediate (ΔGU-IH20). Comparison of ΔGDISSH20 between both variants show values of 42.3 kcal mol–1 for HMPV-M2-1 and 35.3 kcal mol–1 for RSV-M2-1,
in agreement with previous results.15 These
values correspond to dissociation constants (KD) of 1.0–31 and 1.0–28 M3 for HMPV- and RSV-M2-1 proteins, respectively. The
7.0 kcal mol–1 free-energy difference observed suggests
either stronger or additional interactions stabilizing the HMPV-M2-1
tetrameric interface which are non-negligible.

Figure 2 Gdm.HCl-induced equilibrium
denaturation of HMPV-M2-1 protein at pH 7.0. Unfolding
transition was followed by changes
in molar ellipticity at 222 nm (○) and Trp center of spectral
mass (CSM) (●). The samples at 10 μM protein concentration
were incubated in the absence (A) or presence (C) of 1 mM EDTA. (B)
Superimposition of the molar ellipticity changes at 222 nm in the
absence (●) or presence (○) of 1 mM EDTA. (D) Denaturation
curves of HMPV (●) and RSV (○) M2-1 proteins monitored
by far-UV-CD in the presence of 1 mM EDTA. The CD data were fit to
a two-state unfolding model (see Material and Methods), and the fits are plotted as solid lines. The 10 μM samples
were incubated for 24 h at 20 °C in 20 mM sodium phosphate pH
7.0, 0.3 M NaCl and the indicated [Gdm.HCl].

Table 1 Thermodynamic Parameters Estimated
from the Fit Using a Three-State Unfolding Model, Which Assumes the
Population of Native Tetramer, a Partially Folded Monomeric Intermediate
and Unfolded Monomera
 	 	N4 ⇔ 4D, global equilibrium	N4 ⇔ 4I, equilibrium 1	I ⇔ D, equilibrium 2	
N4 ⇔ 4I ⇔ 4D,	ΔGTH20 (kcal mol–1)	mT (kcal mol–1 M–1)	ΔGDISSH20 (kcal mol–1)	mDISS (kcal mol–1 M–1)	ΔGU-IH20 (kcal mol–1)	mU (kcal mol–1 M–1)	
ΔGDISSH20	ΔGU-IH20	 	 	 	 	 	 	
mDISS	mU	 	 	 	 	 	 	
HMPV-M2-1	 	46.8 ± 0.5	10.01 ± 0.1	42.3 ± 0.1	7.65 ± 0.06	1.2 ± 0.1	0.59 ± 0.01	
RSV-M2-1	 	54.1 ± 0.9	14.08 ± 0.06	35.3 ± 0.1	5.52 ± 0.02	4.7 ± 0.2	2.14 ± 0.01	
a The equilibria
and thermodynamic
parameters that characterize each equilibrium are indicated. Global
equilibrium thermodynamic parameters calculations were performed as
follows:    

Gdm.HCl denaturation curves performed in the presence
of 1 mM EDTA
exhibit uncoupling of CD and fluorescence signals (Figure 2B), as previously reported
for RSV-M2-1, where Zn2+ removal induces tetramer dissociation
to a stable apo-monomer.14 In contrast
to RSV, the center of spectral mass (CSM) of the samples incubated
with 1 mM EDTA displayed two transitions. The first one takes place
at 0–0.5 M Gdm.HCl with an initial CSM value of 28.400 cm–1, compatible with tetrameric species. Interestingly,
this transition is also observed in the absence of EDTA, albeit with
a smaller amplitude that could be explained by changes in fluorescence
of the additional Trp residue present in HMPV-M2-1, or alternatively,
a small population undergoing an equilibrium, which is completely
shifted in the presence of EDTA. The second transition occurs between
0.5 and 3.0 M Gdm.HCl with low cooperativity and likely corresponds
to changes in the tryptophan environment due to unfolding of the apo-monomeric
HMPV-M2-1. The CSM signal stabilizes at 3.0 M Gdm.HCl, and this value
(27.600 cm–1) corresponds to the unfolded monomer
with its tryptophan residues completely exposed to the solvent. The
secondary structure transitions for both HMPV-M2-1 tetramer and apo-monomer
are similar (Figure 2C), suggesting a stable fold of HMPV-M2-1 monomer and supporting
the fact that Gdm.HCl-induced tetramer dissociation is coupled to
monomer unfolding at this protein concentration.

It was shown
that in the presence of subdenaturing Gdm.HCl concentrations
and EDTA, the major resulting species is the folded apo-monomer.14 Thus, we compared the conformational stability
of RSV and HMPV-M2-1 apo-monomers by fitting the CD data to a two-state
model, considering an equilibrium folded to unfolded monomer transition
(Figure 2D). While
the apo-monomers show similar stability for each protein (ΔGU-MH20 = 8.0 kcal mol–1 for HMPV and 6.2 kcal mol–1 for
RSV-M2-1), the HMPV monomeric folding intermediate species is less
stable (ΔGU-IH20 = 1.2 vs 4.7 kcal mol–1 for RSV). The lower stability
of HMPV-M2-1 monomeric intermediate could be explained by the higher
tetramer affinity, which couples dissociation to monomer unfolding
at these protein concentrations. The thermodynamic parameters estimated
from the fits are summarized in Table 2.

Table 2 Thermodynamic Parameters Estimated
from the Fit Using Two-State Unfolding Model (See Materials and Methods)a
 	N ⇔ D equilibrium	
N ⇔ D,	ΔGU-MH20 (kcal mol–1)	mU-M (kcal mol–1 M–1)	
ΔGU-MH20	 	 	
mU-M	 	 	
apo-HMPV-M2-1	8.0 ± 0.9	3.06 ± 0.34	
apo-RSV-M2-1	6.2 ± 0.4	2.80 ± 0.16	
a ΔGU-MH20: global free energy
of unfolding of the monomer.

HMPV-M2-1 Is More Resilient to Gdm.HCl-Induced Conformational
Changes That Expose the Zn2+-Binding Domain
In
addition to the usual use of tryptophan fluorescence to monitor tertiary
structural changes,16 previous results
from our lab show that the single Trp30 of RSV-M2-1 renders it an
ideal probe for assessing its oligomerization state.14 In the tetrameric state, Trp30 is buried in a hydrophobic
environment showing a wavelength maximum of 325 nm (center of spectral
mass, CSM = 29.400 cm–1), while in the folded apo-monomeric
state, it shifts to 346 nm (CSM = 28.000 cm–1).
To study the EDTA-induced dissociation of RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 tetramers,
protein samples were incubated at two different concentrations (2
and 20 μM) in subdenaturing Gdm.HCl conditions in the absence
and presence of EDTA and subjected to fluorescence spectroscopy and
dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements. RSV-M2-1 showed a CSM
of 29.400 cm–1 and diameters, as assessed by DLS,
compatible with tetrameric species, at 0 and 0.8 M Gdm.HCl (Figure 3A,B). The hydrodynamic
diameter at 0.8 M Gdm.HCl is compatible with that of an extended tetramer,
as was reported for RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 in the presence of subdenaturing
Gdm.HCl concentrations.8,15 Incubation of RSV-M2-1 with 1
mM EDTA shifted the tryptophan emission CSM to 28.000 cm–1, suggesting a monomeric state along the Gdm.HCl range tested (Figure 3A). DLS measurements
of RSV-M2-1 samples further confirm its monomeric nature (Figure 3B). As the accuracy
of DLS for determining the difference between the hydrodynamic diameter
of tetramer and monomer is low, the results were confirmed by glutaraldehyde
cross-linking and sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE), which showed that apo-monomers populate at low concentrations
of Gdm.HCl (Figure S2A).

Figure 3 Protein concentration
dependence on HMPV-M2-1 oligomerization state
in the presence of EDTA. RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 proteins at 2 μM
(filled symbols) or 20 μM (open symbols) were incubated for
16 h at 20°C with increasing subdenaturing [Gdm.HCl] in the presence
or absence of 1 mM EDTA. RSV (A) and HMPV (C) M2-1 fluorescence center
of spectra mass as a function of [Gdm.HCl] were determined in the
presence (circles) or absence (triangles) of 1 mM EDTA. RSV (B) and
HMPV (D) M2-1 hydrodynamic diameters measured by DLS at 20 μM
as a function of [Gdm.HCl] in the presence (circles) or absence (triangles)
of 1 mM EDTA. Samples were incubated in 20 mM sodium phosphate pH
7.0.

In addition to the conserved buried
Trp30, HMPV-M2-1 harbors an
additional tryptophan at position 28 (Trp28), which is partially solvent-exposed
(Figure 1B). Both Trp
residues are located within the CCCH motif and the α-helical
oligomerization region, and its fluorescence emission spectrum in
the native state exhibits a maximum emission wavelength of 340 nm
(CSM of 28.400 cm–1). HMPV-M2-1 was incubated at
2 and 20 μM in increasing Gdm.HCl concentrations with 1 mM EDTA.
Surprisingly, tryptophan fluorescence CSM transitions differed between
both protein concentrations suggesting that a concentration-dependent
dissociation process is taking place (Figure 3C). DLS measurements of the HMPV-M2-1 samples
showed hydrodynamic diameters compatible with tetramers or extended
tetramers from 0 to 0.2 M Gdm.HCl, while the sample incubated at 0.8
M Gdm.HCl exhibited a lower diameter, indicative of a monomeric species
(Figure 3C,D). Glutaraldehyde
cross-linking and SDS-PAGE confirmed that the major species populating
the reaction at low Gdm.HCl concentrations are tetramers, whereas
monomers populate above 0.4 M Gdm.HCl (Figure S2B).

To confirm these results, serial dilutions of RSV
and HMPV-M2-1
tetramers were performed in 0.1 M Gdm.HCl, in the absence or presence
of 1 mM EDTA and subjected to fluorescence spectroscopy. In the absence
of EDTA, both RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 samples showed CSM compatible with
tetrameric species (Figure S3), whereas
in the presence of EDTA, RSV-M2-1 showed monomer-compatible CSM values
at all protein concentrations. In contrast, HMPV-M2-1 gradually shifted
its CSM upon protein dilution, compatible with tetrameric and monomeric
states, respectively (Figure S3).

The experiments described above were performed with a 50–500-fold
molar excess of EDTA relative to the available Zn2+ linked
to each monomer. To assess the effect of EDTA on the quaternary structure,
RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 tetramers were incubated at a fixed subdenaturing
Gdm.HCl concentration with increasing EDTA and subjected to fluorescence
spectroscopy after 24 and 48 h incubation. At low EDTA concentrations,
a stable tetrameric CSM baseline was observed before the onset of
a transition to a monomeric stable CSM baseline (Figure 4). The transition shape was
highly dependent on Gdm.HCl concentration and differed for both M2-1
homologue proteins. HMPV-M2-1 reached equilibrium after 24 h incubation
at 1.5 M Gdm.HCl, showing a steep transition between the conformational
states populating the equilibrium. Interestingly, RSV-M2-1 CSM signal
reached equilibrium after 24 h incubation at 0.5 M Gdm.HCl, indicating
that it required lower denaturant concentration to facilitate EDTA-mediated
Zn2+ removal and the concomitant tetramer-to-monomer dissociation
(Figure 4B).

Figure 4 Influence of
EDTA and subdenaturing [Gdm.HCl] on the oligomerization
state of M2-1 homologous proteins; 2 μM of HMPV (A) and RSV
(B) M2-1 proteins were incubated for 24 and 48 h in 50 mM sodium phosphate
pH 7.0 containing different subdenaturing [Gdm.HCl] (0.25; 0.5; 1.0,
and 1.5 M) and increasing EDTA concentrations (from 0 to 5 mM). After
incubation, tryptophan fluorescence emission spectra were measured,
and the center of spectral mass is represented as a function of EDTA
concentration. The dashed line indicates the position of 2 μM
EDTA in the x axis and the influence over the CSM
signal at this fixed EDTA concentration depending on [Gdm.HCl].

We have previously shown that
lower pH values result in RSV-M2-1
tetramer destabilization.15 Therefore,
the experiments were also performed in the absence of Gdm.HCl at pH
5.0. Under these conditions, RSV-M2-1 fluorescence emission spectra
remained unchanged at all of the EDTA concentrations tested. DLS measurement
of a RSV-M2-1 sample incubated at pH 5.0 with 1 mM EDTA showed a hydrodynamic
diameter of 37 ± 12 nm (data not shown) with a CSM of 28.500
cm–1 (Figure S4), suggesting
that the apo-monomer is not stable in solution in the absence of Gdm.HCl
and self-assembly of M2-1 into higher-order oligomeric species takes
place. Interestingly, upon incubation of HMPV-M2-1 at pH 5.0, fluorescence
emission spectra showed an intensity transition in the EDTA range
spanning 0.1–10 μM, suggesting that, below 0.1 μM
EDTA, the intensity signal corresponds to Zn2+-bound M2-1
species, while above 10 μM, the stable intensity is indicative
of the apo-species (Figure S4). Considering
that the first coordination sphere of Zn2+ ion is identical
in both protein species, these results strongly hint at the pH modulation
of the CCCH through the protein matrix acting as a second (and higher)
coordination sphere.17 Several histidine
residues proximal to coordinating cysteines in the CCCH binding motif
of RSV-M2-1 not present in HMPV-M2-1 (Figure S4E) are likely candidates for exerting this pH-dependent modulation.
It seems likely that the additional HMPV-M2-1 Trp30 is able to sense
Zn2+ binding to the CCCH motif. Incubation of 40 μM
HMPV-M2-1 at pH 5.0, in the presence or absence of EDTA, leads to
protein aggregation that precludes the determination of the hydrodynamic
diameter of the apo-species.

Mutations That Affect Zn2+ Coordination
to CCCH Motif
Lead to the Formation of Higher-Order Apo-Oligomeric RSV-M2-1 Species
Zn2+ removal mediated by EDTA leads to tetramer dissociation,
yielding an apo-M2-1 monomer that is stabilized in solution with subdenaturing
concentrations of Gdm.HCl. However, in the absence of denaturant,
apo-monomers exhibit a strong tendency to form higher-order oligomers.
We next assessed the structural and conformational effect of mutations
in the CCCH motif that could hinder Zn2+ binding. RSV-M2-1
His residue 25, which is one of the Zn2+ coordinating residues,
was mutated either to Ala or Cys. Size exclusion chromatography (SEC)
in a Superdex 200 column showed that both mutants, namely, H25A and
H25C RSV-M2-1, eluted at the void volume, indicating that the CCCH
histidine mutations impaired tetrameric assembly and promoted the
formation of higher-order oligomeric species (Figure 5A), with a hydrodynamic diameter of 19 ±
4 nm. The amount of Zn2+ bound to each monomer was determined
spectrophotometrically by the metallochromic indicator 4-(2-pyridylazo)resorcinol
(PAR) (see Materials and Methods for details)15,18 and neither H25A nor H25C displayed bound Zn2+, indicating
that (i) a single substitution to Ala of the fourth coordinating residue
impaired Zn2+ binding and (ii) most interestingly, the
geometry of a CCCC motif in this protein context is not able to coordinate
Zn2+, suggesting that a structural reorganization should
take place for successful coordination.

Figure 5 Characterization of RSV-M2-1 higher-order oligomeric
species induced by CCCH mutations. (A) Size exclusion chromatography
in a preparative grade Superdex 200 column of WT-, H25A-, and H25C-M2-1
proteins. The void volume (Vo) and the elution volume of WT-M2-1 tetramer
are indicated. (B) Gdm.HCl-induced equilibrium denaturation of H25A-
and H25C RSV-M2-1 proteins, followed by the changes in the Trp center
of spectral mass (left axis, circles) and changes in the fluorescence
emission intensity at 325 nm (right axis, triangles). Filled symbols
(H25C-M2-1) and open symbols (H25A-M2-1). (C) Far-UV-CD spectra of
WT-, H25A-, and H25C-M2-1 proteins in 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.0
and 0.3 M NaCl. The spectrum of each protein is indicated in the graph.
(D) Gdm.HCl equilibrium denaturation of H25A- (open symbol) and H25C-
(closed symbol) RSV-M2-1 proteins followed by the changes in molar
ellipticity at 222 nm.

To characterize the apo-RSV-M2-1 oligomers, we next studied
the
conformational stability of both mutants by Gdm.HCl-induced equilibrium
denaturation experiments. The tryptophan CSM showed a gradual transition
with low cooperativity from 0 to 3.0 M Gdm.HCl (Figure 5B). The initial CSM value corresponded to
the tryptophan environment of apo-RSV-M2-1 oligomeric species, and
in contrast to the tetramer-to-monomer denaturation experiments, the
fluorescence intensity did not change along the denaturation curve
(Figure 5B). The far-UV
CD spectra of the mutants at 0 M Gdm.HCl were slightly different related
to wild-type tetrameric RSV-M2-1 (Figure 5C). The minima at 208 and 222 nm characteristic
of rich α-helical conformation decreased, suggesting a lower
content of α helical structure of the oligomeric M2-1 species
(Figure 5C). The conformational
changes followed at 222 nm as a function of Gdm.HCl concentration
displayed a transition that starts at low denaturant concentrations
with an endpoint at 2.5 M Gdm.HCl (Figure 5D). It is worth mentioning that the denaturation
transition midpoint for both WT-RSV apo-monomer (10 μM) or tetramer
(2.5 μM) is 2.5 M Gdm.HCl after a stable folded baseline. The
absence of a stable folded baseline together with the fact that the
molecule was fully unfolded at 2.5 M Gdm.HCl, strongly suggesting
that the apo-monomer, which self-assembles to yield higher-order M2-1
apo-oligomers, adopts a different fold.

M2-1 Tetramer Dissociation
Kinetics Triggered by EDTA Zn2+ Removal
EDTA-mediated
Zn2+ removal from
peptides harboring ZBDs (CCCC or CCHH motifs) have been described
to occur within milliseconds or seconds, with the formation of a ternary
complex between EDTA, Zn2+ ion, and protein ZBD.19 RSV-M2-1 was incubated in the absence of denaturant
with 5 mM EDTA, and aliquots at selected time points were subjected
to fluorescence spectroscopy and size exclusion chromatography. The
Zn2+ content of the isolated species was determined by
the colorimetric PAR-p-hydroxymercuriphenylsulfonate
(PMPS) assay.18 Fluorescence measurements
showed that the tryptophan CSM slowly decreased from 29.400 to 29.000
cm–1 along 5 h incubation, and samples subjected
to SEC showed that within this time range, all of the samples remained
in the tetrameric conformation (Figure S5). Zn2+ content determined from the purified tetramers
after SEC revealed that up to 5 h incubation, every M2-1 monomer conserved
a bound Zn2+ ion. These results hinted at a conformational
barrier preventing EDTA from accessing the CCCH motif that hindered
Zn2+ removal. Addition of 1.0 M Gdm.HCl shifted the fluorescence
CSM to that compatible with monomeric species within 30 min incubation
(Figure S5). Therefore, increasing concentrations
of Gdm.HCl were needed to facilitate EDTA accessibility, Zn2+ removal, and tetramer dissociation.

A fixed volume of EDTA
was added to samples incubated at increasing Gdm.HCl concentrations,
and tetramer dissociation kinetics were followed by tryptophan fluorescence
intensity changes (Figure 6A). No burst phase was observed for both tetramers upon the
addition of EDTA by manual mixing (dead time 20 s). The Trp fluorescence
intensity decreased concomitantly with the exposure of the Trp residue
to the solvent upon dissociation. As expected, at a fixed EDTA concentration,
increasing subdenaturing concentrations of Gdm.HCl accelerated the
dissociation reaction, and interestingly, RSV-M2-1 tetramer dissociation
occurred faster than HMPV-M2-1 at the same incubating condition. To
extract quantitative data of dissociation kinetics, the decrease in
fluorescence intensity was fit to an exponential decay model. RSV-M2-1
fluorescence intensity changes were best fit to a biexponential whereas
HMPV-M2-1 fluorescence data fitted well to a monoexponential decay
model (Figure 6). Residuals
to the fits and the estimated amplitudes and rate constants are shown
in Figures S6 and S7. To compare the dissociation
kinetics of both tetramers, the apparent rate decay constant of RSV-
and HMPV-M2-1 (k) were plotted as a function of Gdm.HCl
concentration. We observed a lineal dependency between Gdm.HCl concentrations
and apparent rate constants from 0.5 to 1.25 M Gdm.HCl. Linear regression
showed slopes of 0.007 for RSV and 0.001 for HMPV, reflecting a higher
sensitivity to Gdm.HCl-induced dissociation at a fixed EDTA concentration
(Figure 6A, right panel).
At 1.5 M Gdm.HCl and 2 μM protein concentration, dissociation
to monomeric species is coupled to some extent of unfolding. Therefore,
we excluded this point for the linear correlation analysis described
above.

Figure 6 Dissociation kinetics of RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 proteins
induced by EDTA and subdenaturing [Gdm.HCl]. (A) Fluorescence intensity
changes produced after mixing 5 mM EDTA and 2 μM M2-1 proteins
in 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.0, containing increasing [Gdm.HCl]
(0.5; 0.75; 1.0; 1.25; and 1.5 M). Left panel: RSV-M2-1; middle panel:
HMPV-M2-1; right panel: comparison of apparent rate constants as a
function of [Gdm.HCl]. Linear fit: HMPV: y = 0.001x – 0.0005; R2: 0.986.
RSV: y = 0.007x – 0.0024; R2: 0.988. The k values at 1.5
M Gdm.HCl were excluded from the linear fit as some extent of monomer
unfolding occurs at this concentration. (B) Fluorescence intensity
changes produced after mixing increasing concentrations of EDTA (0.62;
1.25; 2.5; 5.0; and 10 mM) and M2-1 proteins at 2 μM in 50 mM
sodium phosphate pH 7.0 containing 1.0 M Gdm.HCl. Left panel: RSV-M2-1;
middle panel: HMPV-M2-1; right panel: comparison of apparent rate
constants as a function of EDTA concentrations at 1.0 M Gdm.HCl. Linear
fit: RSV: y = 0.0007x – 0.0014; R2: 0.996. HMPV: y = 0.0003x – 0.0005; R2: 0.96.
The fluorescence changes along time were fit to a single exponential
(HMPV-M2-1) or double exponentials (RSV-M2-1). The residuals from
fits, fitted apparent rate constants, and amplitudes of each phase
are shown in Figures S6 and S7.

Based on these results, we speculate that subdenaturing
Gdm.HCl
concentrations favor transitions to a partially or fully open conformation,
exposing the Zn2+ bound to the CCCH motif. Therefore, M2-1
samples were incubated at a fixed subdenaturing Gdm.HCl concentration
and EDTA was added to trigger dissociation, followed by fluorescence
intensity changes along time (Figure 6B). The reaction traces were fitted to biexponential
(RSV-M2-1) or monoexponential functions (HMPV-M2-1) as described above.
All of the phases depended linearly on EDTA concentrations in the
tested range, and the slopes observed were 0.007 for RSV and 0.003
for HMPV. Assuming a similar Zn2+ binding affinity for
both CCCH motifs, the lower HMPV-M2-1 dissociation rate could be explained
as a higher energy barrier to overcome to expose the CCCH motif for
Zn2+ removal. Or another possibility, in concordance with
the results shown above, is a higher interaction energy stabilizing
the tetramer interface of HMPV-M2-1

In Silico Modeling of Open
and Closed M2-1 Tetramers Revealed
Additional Contacts That Stabilize Further the HMPV-M2-1 Tetramer
Molecular dynamics simulations and SAXS experiments of HMPV-M2-1
tetramer revealed a rigid tetramerization domain and dynamic protomers
fluctuating between open and closed states.8 To understand the structural and energetic contributions modulating
the equilibrium between closed and open states, which might determine
whether or not the tetramers expose the CCCH Zn2+ binding
motif, we constructed in silico molecular models of the following
RSV and HMPV-M2-1 conformers: fully closed and one-, two-, three-,
and four-open subunits (see Figure 8). The interaction network of each closed tetramer
and the contacts that are lost in the fully open state were analyzed
using CMView.20

Interestingly, we
found that the HMPV-M2-1 tetramer presents additional interacting
regions relative to RSV. The CCCH ZBD of HMPV establishes contacts
not only with the adjacent protomer but also with the core domain
of the protomer located in trans. The interaction map of subunit A
versus subunits B, C, and D in the closed and fully open states is
depicted in Figure 7A. Comparing HMPV- with RSV-M2-1, the region comprising the CCCH
motif of subunit C displays additional contacts with the core domain
of subunit A. A close-up inspection of this contact region reveals
that the side chains of residues Cys 7, Cys 15, Cys 21, and His25
of subunit C interact with residues spanning from Val 108 to Asp 115
of subunit A (Figure 7B). A key residue of this interaction surface is Arg 111 that displays
multiple contacts with all of the Zn2+ coordinating residues
and some additional contacts within the CCCH motif. This striking
difference between both tetramers may explain, in part at least, the
differences in affinity and tetramer dissociation kinetics observed.

Figure 7 Comparison
of the interaction maps between residues of the closed
vs the fully open tetramer. (A) Interaction map of subunit A vs subunits
A, B, C, and D is represented for RSV-M2-1 (left side) and HMPV-M2-1
(right side). The contacts present in both the closed and fully open
states are shown in black. The contacts that are lost when the tetramer
is fully open are shown in pink. Regions corresponding to the CCCH
ZBD (red color bars), oligomerization region (yellow color bars),
and core domain (green color bars) are indicated in each panel. The
vertical dashed lines delineate the different regions of subunit A.
Additional contacts observed for HMPV-M2-1 tetramer are circled in
the C–A interaction panel. Interaction map was performed using
the software tool CMView.20 (B) Close-up
inspection of the interaction map showing contacts between the CCCH
ZBD of subunit C and residues from the core domain of subunit A for
RSV- (left panel) and HMPV- (right panel) M2-1 tetramers. Filled pink
squares represent predicted contacts. The residues of the CCCH motif
of subunit C are shown at the left-hand side of the contact map, while
the residues spanning from 105 to 118 of the core domain of subunit
A are indicated above the contact map.

To gain further insight into the interaction network that
stabilizes
the open/closed tetrameric arrangement, we calculated the interaction
energy of one protomer against the three remaining protomers using
FoldX,21 and the results are summarized
in Figure 8. For both closed tetramers, the interaction energies
required to dissociate one protomer against the remaining subunits
are similar for each subunit (Figure 8A,B). An in silico deletion of the CCCH Zn2+ binding domain allowed us to dissect the contribution of this motif
and resulted in a 2-fold decrease of the energy required to dissociate
each closed protomer from the rest (Figure S8, closed tetramers). These results clearly indicate that almost half
of the energy contribution that stabilizes one subunit in the closed
state is provided by the ZBD. Comparison of the average energy required
to dissociate one subunit from the rest, in the closed versus the
open state, reveals that it is 3-fold higher for RSV-M2-1 (−98.82
vs −29.98 kcal mol–1) and 1.8-fold higher
for HMPV-M2-1 (−81.93 vs −45.48 kcal mol–1). In other words, the interaction energy calculations indicate that
it is easier to dissociate an open RSV protomer rather than an open
HMPV protomer. In both cases, deletion of the ZBD (or disruption as
we hypothesize in the absence of Zn2+) decreases the interaction
energy further (Figure S8). When one subunit
is opened, the intersubunit contacts are lost while the oligomerization
and ZBD domain of this subunit remain unaffected. The loss of intersubunit
contacts decreases the interaction energy of the opened subunit almost
2-fold, whereas the absence of the ZBD decreases it further, strongly
suggesting that an open apo-protomer would be a highly destabilized
species. A single open protomer also decreases the interaction energies
of its neighbors while the subunit located in trans is not affected.
It is noteworthy that an open protomer increases the solvent surface
accessible area of the ZBD of its adjacent protomer to an average
of 500 A2 (see Table S1), and
this could explain the EDTA accessibility and Zn2+ removal
that was favored with Gdm.HCl.

Figure 8 Interaction energies of each protomer
against the remaining subunits
of in silico modeled RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 tetramer
conformers with open and closed subunits. RSV-M2-1 (A) and HMPV-M2-1
(B) tetramer conformers were constructed in silico, as detailed in Materials and Methods. The interaction energy of
each protomer was calculated against the remaining three other subunits
using FoldX. The interaction energy calculated for each protomer (kcal
mol–1) is indicated close to the subunits depicted
for each modeled tetramer. Red (a), green (b), blue (c), and yellow
(d) subunits.

When two subunits are
opened, either in cis or trans, they decrease
not only the interaction energies of the open protomers but also those
of the closed ones. The conformers with three- or four-open subunits
show a decrease in the interaction energy of each subunit, and the
absence of the ZBD further destabilized the open subunits.

Discussion
Binding of zinc to proteins is an important regulatory mechanism
for protein structure–function, and different Zn2+-binding domains have been involved in nucleic acid–protein
and protein–protein interactions.22,23 RSV and HMPV-M2-1 antiterminators contain a CCCH ZBD located upstream
of the oligomerization region that stabilize the tetrameric arrangement
in the holo-state. Tryptophan residues, located between the CCCH motif
and the oligomerization region, are packed in a hydrophobic core,
and when the tetramers dissociate, they become solvent-exposed leading
to a red shift and fluorescence quenching. In the present work, we
use the Trp fluorescence emission CSM to probe the tetrameric assembly
and monitor equilibrium dissociation and dissociation kinetics triggered
by a combination of EDTA and Gdm.HCl. The conformational behavior
of RSV-M2-1 in solution was previously studied and consists of a tight
tetramer with an estimated dissociation constant (KD) of 10–28 M3 that is highly
sensitive to pH changes. Lowering the pH from 7.0 to 5.0 destabilizes
the tetramer, and incubation of the protein at pH 3.0 led to the formation
of higher order soluble oligomeric species.15 Gdm.HCl equilibrium denaturation curves of HMPV-M2-1 studied herein
show a higher intersubunit affinity with a KD of 10–31 M3, suggesting either
additional or stronger interactions stabilizing the HMPV-M2-1 tetrameric
state. As was described for RSV-M2-1, the addition of EDTA led to
uncoupling of signals probing the secondary and quaternary structural
changes, due to tetramer dissociation to apo-monomeric species. However,
higher subdenaturing Gdm.HCl concentrations were needed to completely
dissociate the HMPV tetramer in the presence of EDTA.

In many
reported cases, binding of Zn2+ to a CCCH motif
induces and stabilizes the native fold, and addition of EDTA leads
to unfolding, such as human muscleblind-like protein.24 In both M2-1 tetramers, Zn2+ coordination was
not necessary for the proper folding of the core domain but was essential
to maintain the tetrameric arrangement. The measurement of the intrinsic
Zn2+-binding affinity to a 59 residues peptide containing
a CCCH motif revealed a dissociation constant of 1 × 10–15 M–1.25 Interestingly,
this short peptide retains the same fold in the apo and holo states,
thus allowing for the calculation of the free-energy contribution
of Zn2+ binding to the CCCH motif at pH 7.0 that is −21.1
kcal mol–1. Considering this evidence in addition
to our findings, binding of Zn2+ to the CCCH motif induces
M2-1 tetramerization and it seems plausible that the energy cost of
tetramerization (−42.2 kcal mol–1 for HMPV-M2-1)
is provided by Zn2+ binding.

Supporting this notion,
mutations of the His25 residue to alanine
of the CCCH motif of RSV-M2-1 impaired Zn2+ binding, which
led to the formation of higher-order oligomeric species (Figure 5). Previous mutational
analysis of the Zn2+-coordinating residues of the RSV-M2-1
CCCH motif had shown that these residues were essential for antiterminator
activity in minigenome assays and also impaired phosphorylation of
M2-1.26 Moreover, mutations of C21 and
H25 of the HMPV-M2-1 CCCH motif abolished Zn2+ binding
activity and viruses harboring these mutations had delayed replication
in cell culture and were highly attenuated in cotton rats.27 We show that Zn2+-binding incapacity
is coupled to the formation of higher-order M2-1 oligomeric species,
which likely play a different role in infection rather than the tetrameric
antiterminator RSV-M2-1 factor.

In the present work, a direct
transfer of Zn2+ ion from
M2-1-Zn2+ to metal-free EDTA has been studied and the CSM
provides a useful measure of the burial of Trp in the tetrameric state
and an ideal probe for assessing dissociation to monomeric species
along time. Several studies of Zn2+ finger motifs showed
picomolar to femtomolar binding affinities.28 The kinetics of Zn2+ removal from two zinc-binding peptides
(CCCC and CCHH motifs) by EDTA have been studied and showed a biphasic
behavior.19 The first phase, independent
of EDTA concentration, is completed within milliseconds, and the second
phase, dependent on EDTA concentrations, proceeds in a time scale
of seconds. The rapid association/dissociation kinetics upon Zn2+ removal has been explained by the formation of a transient
intermediary ternary Zn2+-bridged complex between EDTA
and Zn2+-binding motifs.19 Thus,
despite the fact that Zn2+–ZBD complexes are thermodynamically
stable, with picomolar or femtomolar affinities, the complexes are
kinetically unstable in competition situations, consistent with a
rapid dissociation/association regulatory mechanism.19 When RSV-M2-1 tetramer is incubated with a large excess
of EDTA in buffers without Gdm.HCl, the Zn2+ finger was
not easily accessible to EDTA and we were able to isolate tetramers
containing Zn2+ after several hours of incubation. Subdenaturing
concentrations of Gdm.HCl were thus needed to facilitate EDTA accessibility
and Zn2+ removal, and thereby to promote dissociation of
monomeric species. One possible explanation for this observation is
based on a comprehensive structural characterization of HMPV-M2-1
using X-ray crystallography data, SAXS, and molecular dynamic simulations
that showed the presence of HMPV-M2-1 open conformers induced by increasing
subdenaturant concentrations of Gdm.HCl.8 The polar nature of the interactions that stabilizes the core domain
in a closed state is consistent with low concentrations of Gdm.HCl
shifting a dynamic equilibrium to the open state.8 We speculate that when the tetramer is fully closed, the
ZBD is buried and not accessible to the solvent, while the addition
of subdenaturing concentrations of Gdm.HCl disrupts the polar interactions
stabilizing the closed state and might favor the accessibility of
EDTA to the ZBD, leading to Zn2+ removal and tetramer dissociation.
In this context, comparing RSV and HMPV-M2-1 tetramers, we observed
a striking difference in the EDTA-induced dissociation kinetics and
the concentration of Gdm.HCl needed to facilitate EDTA accessibility
and Zn2+ removal (Figures 4 and 6). A dynamic conformational
barrier shields the CCCH motif in both cases and higher concentration
of Gdm.HCl was required to favor EDTA-mediated Zn2+ removal
and dissociation of HMPV-M2-1. This could be in agreement with the
higher tetramer affinity observed.

Tetramer dissociation kinetic
studies showed an initial lag phase
in the intensity signal, at a fixed EDTA concentration, which was
dependent on Gdm.HCl concentrations (Figure 6). M2-1 has the ability to explore in solution
different open/closed conformations, and this equilibrium is shifted
to the open conformers adding increasing Gdm.HCl concentrations. The
open conformers increase the solvent surface accessible area, favoring
EDTA-mediated Zn2+ removal that prompted dissociation.
While it is not entirely known how many Zn2+ ions are necessary
to remove to induce tetramer dissociation, when apo-RSV monomer is
titrated with Zn2+ and followed by the changes in the fluorescence
CSM, three Zn2+ ions per tetramer are required to get a
CSM signal compatible with tetrameric species (unpublished data).
Therefore, it is likely that when two Zn2+ ions are removed
from an open tetramer conformation, the tetramer is thus highly destabilized
and dissociate to folded apo-monomeric species.

The in silico
tetrameric M2-1 models, displaying open and closed
conformations, support the notion that an open conformation destabilizes
the tetramer due to loss of intersubunit contacts. Furthermore, an
open protomer increases the solvent surface accessible area of the
ZBD of its adjacent protomer an average of 500 A2, and
this likely exposes the Zn2+ bound to the CCCH motif to
react with competitors. Modeling of the conformers not only allowed
the dissection of the interaction energy contributions, but also highlighted
the importance of an intact ZBD stabilizing the tetrameric arrangement.
When the ZBD was deleted in silico, a quantitative estimate of the
energetic contribution of this motif stabilizing each subunit in a
tetrameric arrangement was possible. The deletion of the ZBD and how
the absence of this motif destabilizes the tetramer is a plausible
scenario of the disruption of the CCCH motif induced by Zn2+ removal. The crystallographic structures showed that the CCCH motif
bound to Zn2+ folds with low secondary structure content
forming a planar ring that interacts through opposite faces with the
oligomerization domain and the adjacent protomer.8,9 The
disruption of its planar structure by Zn2+ removal could
lead to a structural rearrangement and loss of interaction surfaces
stabilizing the tetrameric structure. Detailed inspection of the interaction
network of the open and closed tetramers reveals additional interactions
in HMPV-M2-1, which stabilizes the closed tetramer, and this could
rationalize the difference in tetramer affinity observed and the higher
energy barrier needed to overcome to trigger dissociation, which resulted
in a slower dissociation kinetics. By in silico modeling, we found
that the HMPV-M2-1 CCCH motif not only interacts with the adjacent
protomer but also contacts the core domain of a protomer located in
trans, and we propose Arg 111 of the core domain as a key residue
of this interaction surface, which is less extensive in RSV-M2-1.

A dynamic open and close conformation of RSV and HMPV tetramers,
modulated by different factors, such as ionic strength, molecular
crowding, phosphorylation, ligand binding, or other unknown cellular
signals, is compatible with the exposure of the key regulatory CCCH
motif, which likely senses either pH or oxidative changes depending
on the stage of viral infection. This, in turn could modulate the
equilibrium between the processivity-antiterminator tetrameric M2-1
factor or higher-order M2-1 species that may be involved in late stages
of infection, either in stress granules or during virion assembly.
Further evidence would be needed to confirm this hypothesis, but the
particular CCCH motif present in RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 proteins and also
VP30 ebola protein suggests the presence of a key module sensing cellular
environment, leading to structural and functional changes of the proteins,
depending on the stage of infection. Previous reports proposed that
higher-order oligomeric forms of RSV- or HMPV-M2-1 could be involved
in viral morphogenesis7,8 and our findings support this
hypothesis and shed light into a feasible mechanism driven by reversible
Zn2+ binding to the CCCH motif, which allows M2-1 to interchange
into structural/functional alternatives.

Materials and Methods
Expression
and Purification of M2-1 Proteins
The human
RSV strain A and HMPV strain CAN97-83 M2-1 proteins were recombinantly
expressed and purified as previously described for RSV-M2-1 protein
(12). Briefly, nonfused versions of RSV and HMPV-M2-1 proteins were
expressed in C41(DE3) cells harboring the open reading frames of each
protein cloned into pRSETA plasmid. Expression was induced by adding
0.3 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside at OD600nm of 0.6–0.8, and cells were incubated overnight
in a luria broth at 37 °C. The soluble protein was precipitated
with 40% ammonium sulfate, resuspended, dyalized, and purified with
a combination of Heparin-Ceramic HyperD column and preparative gel
filtration (S200) chromatographies. Protein concentration was determined
spectrophotometrically using a molar extinction coefficient ε280nm = 13.200 and ε280nm = 22.920 M–1 cm–1 for RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 proteins, respectively.
The protein concentration is expressed as monomer concentration.

Spectroscopic Determination of Zn2+ Bound to M2-1
Bound zinc was determined by spectrophotometric measurement of
the metallochromic indicator 4-(2-pyridylazo)resorcinol (PAR) as previously
described.18 A standard Zn2+ calibration curve was measured at 500 nm using 1–10 μM
zinc standard for atomic absorption spectroscopy (Sigma-Aldrich) in
a solution containing 100 μM PAR. Protein samples (2–8
μM) were added to solutions containing 100 μM PAR to measure
weakly bound zinc. Tightly bound zinc was tested by the addition of
100 μM p-hydroxymercuriphenylsulfonate (PMPS).

Fluorescence Spectroscopy and Far-UV Circular Dichroism (CD)
Tryptophan fluorescence emission spectra were recorded on a Jasco
FP-6500 spectrofluorometer with an excitation wavelength of 295 nm,
and the emission spectrum was recorded from 310 to 450 nm. Spectra
were taken in a 5 mm path length quartz cuvette with excitation/emission
slits of 5/5. Fluorescence emission data were analyzed by subtracting
the buffer background, and the center of spectral mass of the emission
spectrum was quantified as follows:  where Fi is the
fluorescence emission at wavenumber υi, and the summation
is carried out over the range of measured values of F. Far-UV CD measurements were conducted on a Jasco J-810 spectropolarimeter
using a Peltier temperature-controlled cell. Spectra were recorded
between 200 and 260 nm at a standard sensitivity, at a rate of 200
nm min–1, a response time of 2 s, 0.2 nm data pitch,
and a bandwidth of 2 nm. All spectra were an average of at least four
scans. Spectra were taken on a 0.1 cm path length cell. The ellipticity
at 260 nm was subtracted from the other ellipticities as a baseline
value. Raw data were converted to molar ellipticity using the following
equation:  where deg is the raw signal in millidegrees,
[c] is protein concentration in molar units, #bonds is the number
of peptide bonds (number of amino acids – 1), and L is the path length in centimeter.

Determination of the Oligomeric
State of M2-1 Protein
Size exclusion chromatography and dynamic
light scattering (DLS)
measurements were used to determine the hydrodynamic volume of monomeric,
tetrameric, and higher-order oligomeric species of M2-1 protein. Size
exclusion chromatography was carried out on a preparative Superdex
200 column (120 mL) column (GE Healthcare). The void volume (Vo) and
total volume (Vo + Vi) were determined by loading Blue Dextran and
acetone, respectively. The buffers used in the runs are indicated
in each case. The determination of the hydrodynamic size distribution
of M2-1 oligomeric species was measured by dynamic light scattering
(DLS) on a Zetasizer Nano S DLS device from Malvern Instruments (Malvern).
The solutions were centrifuged at 14 000g for
10 min before measurements.

Guanidinium Chloride (Gdm.HCl)-Induced Denaturation
Experiments
Gdm.HCl denaturation curves were performed incubating
RT M2-1 samples
for 24 h at either 1 or 10 μM in 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.0
containing increasing concentrations of Gdm.HCl. Denaturation curves
at 10 μM protein concentration were also performed in the presence
of 1 mM EDTA. After incubation, the samples were measured by far-UV
CD and fluorescence spectroscopy at 20 °C.

Data Analysis
and Fittings of Gdm.HCl Denaturation Curves
Gdm.HCl-induced
denaturation curves of HMPV- and RSV-M2-1 proteins
were fitted to a three-state equilibrium model, as previously detailed
for RSV-M2-1 protein.15 The species that
populate the equilibrium are the native tetramer (N4),
monomeric intermediate (I), and denatured monomer (D). KDISS is the tetramer dissociation constant, and KU-I is the unfolding constant of the monomeric
intermediate  The free energy of each transition was considered
to depend linearly on Gdm.HCl concentration and is related to theequilibrium
constants KDISS and KU-I by   where R is the gas constant; T is the temperature; KDISS, KU-I, ΔGDISSH20, and ΔGU-IH20 are the equilibrium constants
and free energies of
dissociation and monomeric intermediate unfolding, respectively; and
the m-values, mDISS and
mU-I, are the denaturant dependence of the free
energy of dissociation and unfolding, respectively. Far-UV CD and
fluorescence CSM equilibrium denaturation data performed at 1 and
10 μM monomer concentration were globally fitted to a three-state
model to estimate the thermodynamic parameters involved.

When
1 mM EDTA is added to the denaturation reaction, M2-1 dissociates
to apo-monomeric species that is stabilized in solution with low concentrations
of Gdm.HCl. Therefore, the CD denaturation data collected in the presence
of 1 mM EDTA correspond to the secondary structural changes of monomer
unfolding. The CD denaturation data collected at 10 μM monomer
concentration was fitted to a two-state unfolding model that considers
the equilibrium native (N) to unfolded (U) monomer.14  where KU is the
unfolding constant that is related to the free energy of unfolding
by  where R is the gas constant; T is the temperature; KU and
ΔGU-MH20 are the
equilibrium unfolding constant and free energy of unfolding, respectively;
and m is the denaturant dependence of the free energy
of dissociation. For further details of the three-state and two-state
models used, see refs (13, 14). Fitting was carried out using the software program Profit (Quantum
Soft, Uetikon am See, Switzerland) to obtain parameters and their
standard deviations. It is worth mentioning that the free energy of
unfolding of the apo-monomer (ΔGU-MH20) is a global unfolding process that includes the free
energy of unfolding of the monomeric intermediate described above
(ΔGU-IH20).

Kinetic of Tetramer Dissociation Triggered by EDTA
M2-1
protein samples at 2 μM monomer concentration were incubated
in 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.0 containing subdenaturing concentrations
of Gdm.HCl (indicated in each case). Thryptophan emission fluorescence
changes at 325 nm (RSV-M2-1) or 340 nm (HMPV-M2-1) were followed along
time upon the addition of different concentrations of EDTA. The Trp
residues are located in an hydrophobic environment in the tetrameric
state and exposed to the solvent upon dissociation, with a red shift
and decrease in the fluorescence intensity. The fluorescence traces
along time were fitted to mono- or biexponential decay models  where A1 and A2 are the amplitudes and kobs1 and kobs2 are the observed rate constants. The signal drift was taken into
account by a linear time-dependent term (c).

In Silico
Modeling of RSV- and HMPV-M2-1 Open/Closed Tetrameric
Conformers
The primary structure of RSV-M2-1 strain A2 was
used to model with SWISS-MODEL29,30 the fully closed RSV-M2-1
tetramer using as template the pdb 4C3B.1.a. The tetrameric structure of HMPV-M2-1
was modeled by structural homology with pdb 4SC7.1.a. The resulting
HMPV-M2-1 tetrameric structure contains one open protomer with its
core domain (B subunit) packed against the adjacent closed protomer
(D subunit). We selected the AC dimer to model a closed symmetric
HMPV-M2-1 tetramer using visual molecular dynamics (VMD)31 and perform an energy minimization of the resulting
closed tetramer using the YASARA force field.32 Based on the crystallographic structure of the open protomer (B),
we changed the torsion angle using VMD31 to avoid steric clashes with the adjacent protomers and performed
an energy minimization of the open subunit using YASARA force field.32 We perform structural alignment of residues
1–50 (that includes the ZBD and oligomerization domain) between
the open protomer and each of tetramer subunits to position the open
protomer into the coordinates of the tetrameric assembly. We modeled
six conformers for each tetramer (see Figure 8) and repair the structures using the FoldX
repair command.21 The interaction energies
of each protomer against the remaining three protomers (A vs BCD;
B vs ACD; C vs ABD; and D vs ABC) were calculated using the FoldX
AnalyseComplex command.21 The results obtained
are summarized in Figure 8.

Deletions of the N terminal 30 residues (Met1_Trp30del)
were performed in silico over the four subunits of each pdb structure
modeled to eliminate the ZBD contribution for the tetramer stability.
All of the conformers have an intact oligomerization (residues 32–49)
and core regions (residues 69–172). Therefore, the interactions
that stabilize the N-terminal deleted tetramers result from the oligomerization
domain contacts and interprotomer contacts. The resulting tetrameric
open/closed conformers lacking the ZBDs were used to calculate the
interaction energies of each protomer against the three remaining
protomers without the contribution of the ZBD. The FoldX AnalyseComplex
was used to calculate the interaction energy of each protomer, and
the results are summarized in Figure 8.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b01600.Global fitting
of denaturation data; influence of Gdm.HCl and
EDTA; dilution-induced tetramer dissociation; influence of pH, Gdm.HCl,
and EDTA; slow RSV-M2-1 tetramer dissociation kinetics; parameters
and residuals of HMPV-M2-1 and RSV-M2-1 dissociation kinetics; interaction
energies (Figures S1–S8); and solvent accessible surface area
(Table S1) (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b01600_si_001.pdf

 This work was
supported by grant: PICT-2016-4605 from ANPCyT. M.S. holds a graduate
fellowship from Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas
y Técnicas (CONICET); S.A.E., D.A.-P. and G.d.P.G. are CONICET
Career Investigators.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
thank Fernando Goldbaum for assistance with DLS
measurements and Salvador Ventura for assistance and helpful discussions
with in silico modeling and interaction energy calculations using
FoldX.
==== Refs
References
Scheltema N. M. ; et al. Global respiratory syncytial virus-associated mortality in young
children (RSV GOLD): a retrospective case series . Lancet Global Health 
2017 , 5 , e984 –e991 . 10.1016/S2214-109X(17)30344-3 .28911764 
Shi T. ; et al. Global, regional, and
national disease burden estimates of acute
lower respiratory infections due to respiratory syncytial virus in
young children in 2015: a systematic review and modelling study . Lancet 
2017 , 390 , 946 –958 . 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30938-8 .28689664 
Panda S. ; Mohakud N. K. ; Pena L. ; Kumar S. 
Human metapneumovirus:
review of an important respiratory pathogen . Int. J. Infect. Dis. 
2014 , 25 , 45 –52 . 10.1016/j.ijid.2014.03.1394 .24841931 
Fearns R. ; Collins P. L. 
Role of the M2-1
transcription antitermination protein of respiratory
syncytial virus in sequential transcription . J. Virol. 
1999 , 73 , 5852 –5864 .10364337 
Rincheval V. ; Lelek M. ; Gault E. ; Bouillier C. ; Sitterlin D. ; Blouquit-Laye S. ; Galloux M. ; Zimmer C. ; Eleouet J. F. ; Rameix-Welti M. A. 
Functional
organization of cytoplasmic
inclusion bodies in cells infected by respiratory syncytial virus . Nat. Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 56310.1038/s41467-017-00655-9 .28916773 
Li D. ; Jans D. A. ; Bardin P. G. ; Meanger J. ; Mills J. ; Ghildyal R. 
Association of respiratory
syncytial virus M protein
with viral nucleocapsids is mediated by the M2-1 protein . J. Virol. 
2008 , 82 , 8863 –8870 . 10.1128/JVI.00343-08 .18579594 
Liljeroos L. ; Krzyzaniak M. A. ; Helenius A. ; Butcher S. J. 
Architecture of
respiratory syncytial virus revealed by electron cryotomography . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2013 , 110 , 11133 –11138 . 10.1073/pnas.1309070110 .23776214 
Leyrat C. ; Renner M. ; Harlos K. ; Huiskonen J. T. ; Grimes J. M. 
Drastic changes in conformational dynamics of the antiterminator
M2-1 regulate transcription efficiency in Pneumovirinae . elife 
2014 , 3 , e0267410.7554/eLife.02674 .24842877 
Tanner S. J. ; Ariza A. ; Richard C. A. ; Kyle H. F. ; Dods R. L. ; Blondot M. L. ; Wu W. ; Trincao J. ; Trinh C. H. ; Hiscox J. A. ; Carroll M. W. ; Silman N. J. ; Eleouet J. F. ; Edwards T. A. ; Barr J. N. 
Crystal
structure of the essential
transcription antiterminator M2-1 protein of human respiratory syncytial
virus and implications of its phosphorylation . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2014 , 111 , 1580 –1585 . 10.1073/pnas.1317262111 .24434552 
Krieger E. ; Vriend G. 
YASARA View - molecular graphics for all devices -
from smartphones to workstations . Bioinformatics 
2014 , 30 , 2981 –2982 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu426 .24996895 
Blondot M. L. ; Dubosclard V. ; Fix J. ; Lassoued S. ; Aumont-Nicaise M. ; Bontems F. ; Eleouet J. F. ; Sizun C. 
Structure and functional
analysis of the RNA- and viral phosphoprotein-binding domain of respiratory
syncytial virus M2-1 protein . PLoS Pathog. 
2012 , 8 , e100273410.1371/journal.ppat.1002734 .22675274 
Molina I. G. ; Esperante S. A. ; Marino-Buslje C. ; Chemes L. B. ; de Prat-Gay G. 
Cooperative
RNA Recognition by a Viral Transcription Antiterminator . J. Mol. Biol. 
2018 , 430 , 777 –792 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.01.018 .29414675 
Esperante S. A. ; Paris G. ; de Prat-Gay G. 
Modular unfolding
and dissociation
of the human respiratory syncytial virus phosphoprotein p and its
interaction with the m(2-1) antiterminator: a singular tetramer-tetramer
interface arrangement . Biochemistry 
2012 , 51 , 8100 –8110 . 10.1021/bi300765c .22978633 
Esperante S. A. ; Noval M. G. ; Altieri T. A. ; de Oliveira G. A. ; Silva J. L. ; de Prat-Gay G. 
Fine modulation of the respiratory
syncytial virus M2-1 protein quaternary structure by reversible zinc
removal from its Cys(3)-His(1) motif . Biochemistry 
2013 , 52 , 6779 –6789 . 10.1021/bi401029q .23984912 
Esperante S. A. ; Chemes L. B. ; Sanchez I. E. ; de Prat-Gay G. 
The respiratory
syncytial virus transcription antiterminator M(2-1) is a highly stable,
zinc binding tetramer with strong pH-dependent dissociation and a
monomeric unfolding intermediate . Biochemistry 
2011 , 50 , 8529 –8539 . 10.1021/bi200661k .21877705 
Lakowicz J. R.  Principles of Fluorescence
Spectroscopy ; Springer US : Baltimore , 2006 .
Alvarez-Paggi D. ; Abriata L. A. ; Murgida D. H. ; Vila A. J. 
Native
Cu(A) redox
sites are largely resilient to pH variations within a physiological
range . Chem. Commun. 
2013 , 49 , 5381 –5383 . 10.1039/c3cc40457a .
Hunt J. B. ; Neece S. H. ; Ginsburg A. 
The use of 4-(2-pyridylazo)resorcinol
in studies of zinc release from Escherichia coli aspartate transcarbamoylase . Anal. Biochem. 
1985 , 146 , 150 –157 . 10.1016/0003-2697(85)90409-9 .3887984 
Heinz U. ; Kiefer M. ; Tholey A. ; Adolph H. W. 
On the competition
for available zinc . J. Biol. Chem. 
2005 , 280 , 3197 –3207 . 10.1074/jbc.M409425200 .15536071 
Vehlow C. ; Stehr H. ; Winkelmann M. ; Duarte J. M. ; Petzold L. ; Dinse J. ; Lappe M. 
CMView: interactive
contact map visualization
and analysis . Bioinformatics 
2011 , 27 , 1573 –1574 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr163 .21471016 
Schymkowitz J. ; Borg J. ; Stricher F. ; Nys R. ; Rousseau F. ; Serrano L. 
The FoldX web server: an online force
field . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2005 , 33 , W382 –W388 . 10.1093/nar/gki387 .15980494 
Hall T. M. 
Multiple
modes of RNA recognition by zinc finger proteins . Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
2005 , 15 , 367 –373 . 10.1016/j.sbi.2005.04.004 .15963892 
Gamsjaeger R. ; Liew C. K. ; Loughlin F. E. ; Crossley M. ; Mackay J. P. 
Sticky
fingers: zinc-fingers as protein-recognition motifs . Trends Biochem. Sci. 
2007 , 32 , 63 –70 . 10.1016/j.tibs.2006.12.007 .17210253 
Park S. ; Phukan P. D. ; Zeeb M. ; Martinez-Yamout M. A. ; Dyson H. J. ; Wright P. E. 
Structural Basis
for Interaction
of the Tandem Zinc Finger Domains of Human Muscleblind with Cognate
RNA from Human Cardiac Troponin T . Biochemistry 
2017 , 56 , 4154 –4168 . 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00484 .28718627 
Reddi A. R. ; Pawlowska M. ; Gibney B. R. 
Evaluation of the Intrinsic Zn(II)
Affinity of a Cys3His1 Site in the Absence of Protein Folding Effects . Inorg. Chem. 
2015 , 54 , 5942 –5948 . 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.5b00718 .26016528 
Hardy R. W. ; Wertz G. W. 
The Cys(3)-His(1)
motif of the respiratory syncytial
virus M2-1 protein is essential for protein function . J. Virol. 
2000 , 74 , 5880 –5885 . 10.1128/JVI.74.13.5880-5885.2000 .10846068 
Cai H. ; Zhang Y. ; Ma Y. ; Sun J. ; Liang X. ; Li J. 
Zinc binding activity of human metapneumovirus
M2-1 protein is indispensable
for viral replication and pathogenesis in vivo . J. Virol. 
2015 , 89 , 6391 –405 . 10.1128/JVI.03488-14 .25855728 
Outten C. E. ; O’Halloran T. V. 
Femtomolar
sensitivity of metalloregulatory proteins
controlling zinc homeostasis . Science 
2001 , 292 , 2488 –2492 . 10.1126/science.1060331 .11397910 
Biasini M. ; Bienert S. ; Waterhouse A. ; Arnold K. ; Studer G. ; Schmidt T. ; Kiefer F. ; Cassarino T. G. ; Bertoni M. ; Bordoli L. ; Schwede T. 
SWISS-MODEL:
modelling
protein tertiary and quaternary structure using evolutionary information . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , W252 –W258 . 10.1093/nar/gku340 .24782522 
Bienert S. ; Waterhouse A. ; de Beer T. A. ; Tauriello G. ; Studer G. ; Bordoli L. ; Schwede T. 
The SWISS-MODEL Repository-new
features and functionality . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2017 , 45 , D313 –D319 . 10.1093/nar/gkw1132 .27899672 
Humphrey W. ; Dalke A. ; Schulten K. 
VMD: visual molecular
dynamics . J. Mol. Graphics 
1996 , 14 , 33 –38 . 10.1016/0263-7855(96)00018-5 .
Krieger E. ; Joo K. ; Lee J. ; Lee J. ; Raman S. ; Thompson J. ; Tyka M. ; Baker D. ; Karplus K. 
Improving physical
realism, stereochemistry, and side-chain accuracy in homology modeling:
Four approaches that performed well in CASP8 . Proteins 
2009 , 77 , 114 –122 . 10.1002/prot.22570 .19768677

