
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03515Mini-ReviewSingle Atom on the 2D Matrix: An Emerging Electrocatalyst
for Energy Applications Mohanty Bishnupad †Jena Bikash Kumar *†‡Basu Suddhasatwa *†‡§† Materials
Chemistry Department, CSIR-Institute of
Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar 751013, India‡ Academy
of Scientific & Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad 201002, India§ Department
of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute
of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016, India* E-mail: sbasu@chemical.iitd.ernet.in (S.B.).* E-mail: bikash@immt.res.in (B.K.J.).10 01 2020 28 01 2020 5 3 1287 1295 21 10 2019 30 12 2019 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical
Society2020American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The electrochemical energy conversions
play an essential role in
the production of sustainable and renewable energy. However, the performance
is not up to the mark due to the absence of highly efficient and stable
electrocatalysts. Recently, both 2D-matrix and single-atom catalysts
(SACs) are two intense research topics in the field of electrocatalysis
due to the high activity and stability and to maximize the utilization
efficiency. Engineering the materials from 3D to 2D and modification
from nanoparticles to single atoms have created a significant enhancement
in the electrocatalytic activity. Hybridizing both the 2D matrix and
SACs (2DM@SACs) creates a new electronic state in the materials, and
that bequeaths with enhancing potentials toward the electrocatalytic
activity. The strong covalent interaction between the 2D matrix and
SACs tunes the intrinsic activity of the electrocatalysts. In this
mini-review, we have discussed the different synthesis methods of
2DM@SACs with a focus on their electrochemical energy applications
such as hydrogen evolution, oxygen evolution, oxygen reduction, and
carbon dioxide reduction. This mini-review appraises the contribution
to the rational proposal for the synthesis of perfect 2DM@SAC catalysts
with their electrochemical properties toward energy conversion applications.

document-id-old-9ao9b03515document-id-new-14ao9b03515ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The exhaustion of fossil fuels and increasing environmental concern
demand a sustainable and clean energy technology but remain a significant
challenge. For the past few decades, considerable progress has been
made to produce a clean and sustainable energy cycle. Among them,
electrochemical energy conversion (EEC) is considered as the most
promising and environmentally friendly energy cycle.1,2 In EEC, the natural sources such as water, oxygen, methanol, and
carbon dioxide are converted into fuels, and it is crucial for many
advanced technologies such as fuel cells, metal air batteries, water
electrolyzers, etc. EEC required highly efficient, active, and stable
catalysts such as Pt, Ir, Ru, etc. However, the high cost and scarcity
of these catalysts hamper the widespread use of EEC technology.3 Significant effort has been made for developing
and designing catalysts by adapting a different amazing strategy.
Reducing the particle size is the most efficient method for maximizing
the catalytic activity.4 For noble metal
catalysts, reduction of size is the critical factor for enhancing
the electrocatalytic activity. By reducing the particle size from
bulk materials to single-atom catalysts (SACs) via nanoparticles or
nanoclusters, the catalytic activity increases subsequently.5 Reducing the particle size enhances the exposed
surface atoms, modifies the surface electronic and atomic structure,
and creates the defects. All these activities also offer excellent
potential for electrocatalytic activity. The catalytic efficiency
of Pt nanoparticles is increased from 9.5 to 26% by reducing the size
from 11.7 to 3.9 nm.6 Reducing the particle
size enhances the electrocatalytic activity and reduces the use of
precious noble metal catalysts. By decreasing the particle size, the
surface energy will increase; as a result, aggregation takes place,
and the particle becomes unstable. Small size particles like clusters
and SACs are unstable at room temperature. Thus, to synthesize stable
clusters and SACs, solid support materials having high surface area
are required, and they play an important role.

SACs also exist
in nature and play a vital role in the natural
catalytic process. For example, Mg single atoms present in chlorophyll
involve photosynthesis reactions, and other single metal atoms like
Fe, Mo, Zn, and Cu, etc. are present in the enzyme and are involved
in the biocatalytic process.7−9 Very recently, SACs are a very
emerging and hot research topic in the field of electrocatalytic applications.
The SAC consists of an isolated specific atom coordinated or firmly
anchored with surface atoms of the support materials, and it is different
from conventional electrocatalysts. SACs provide an alternative path
for maximizing the utilization efficiency of the expensive noble metal
catalysts and tuning the intrinsic catalytic activity of the inert
support catalysts. The intrinsic catalytic activity of the support
materials is increased in the presence of SACs. The catalytic performance
of SACs depends on size, distributions, interaction with support surface
atoms, and structural modification. Moreover, its tunable atomic size
modifies the energy level (HOMO–LUMO gap), and homogeneous
distributions increase the surface effect and change the physicochemical
property. Their strong chemical interactions transfer the electron
from d-orbital to adjacent surface atoms of the support materials
and modulate the structural and electronic property. All these unique
properties of SACs have attracted attention as highly efficient and
active catalysts for electrochemical applications.1,2,10,11 Support materials
also play an important role in enhancing the electrocatalytic applications.
Recently different support materials such as a carbon matrix, metal
oxides, metal sulfides, metal nitrides, metal–organic frameworks
(MOFs), etc. are used. Among the different support materials, a 2D
matrix such as graphene, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), layered
double hydroxides (LDHs), Mxene, and 2D metal–organic frameworks
(MOFs), etc. are most auspicious.12−15 2D matrices are the most promising
and widely used materials in the fields of electrocatalysis, and this
is due to their unique structural and electronic properties, strong
interaction with metal atoms, and tunable physicochemical properties.
Additionally, the 2D matrix is a perfect catalyst for analyzing the
catalytic activity and understanding the surface mechanism by both
experimental and theoretical methods.1,2 Thus, both
the 2D matrix and SACs are the frontier research topics in the field
of electrocatalysis and have been rapidly developed in the last couple
of years. The hybridization of both the 2D matrix and SACs (2DM@SACs)
will give unique electrocatalysts with high catalytic activity and
stability. Due to the strong covalent interaction of single atoms
and the coordination environment of the 2D matrix, SACs will be stabilized
in 2D-matrix support. The strong interactions will create a new electronic
state, and unsaturated coordinations will generate new active sites
in the catalysts.1,11 In this mini-review, we discuss
the several recent novel synthetic strategies of novel SACs on 2D-matrix
catalysts. Then, their electrochemical energy conversion applications
such as hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction
(OER), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), and carbon dioxide reduction
reaction (CO2RR) are discussed. The method of synthesis
and energy applications of 2D-matrix-confined SACs are illustrated
in Figure 1. Finally,
we highlight the major challenges and opportunities of SAC electrocatalysts
for future research.

Figure 1 Illustration of synthesis and energy applications of 2D
materials
confining SACs.

2 Synthesis of Catalysts
Synthesizing and controllable fabrication of stable and highly
dispersed 2DM@SAC catalysts is a quite tricky and challenging task
because of the thermodynamic instability and aggregation tendency
during the synthesis process. There is a strong tendency of a single
metal atom agglomerate to form clusters or nanoparticles. To prevent
the agglomerations, the metal atom and 2D-matrix support interaction
is the vital factor. Recently, a number of synthetic processes have
been developed for the fabrication of SACs on the 2D matrix, and these
are atomic layer deposition (ALD), acid leaching, photochemical, ball
milling, wet chemical, solvothermal, impregnation method, electrodeposition,
and MOF-derived method. The most adopted synthesis methods are discussed
here.

2.1 Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD)
Atomic
layer deposition (ALD) is a gas-phase chemical deposition technique
and is used for the fabrication of atomic layer thin-film catalysts
with the atomically precise design and control. The major features
of the ALD technique are its self-limiting control to forming materials
in a layer-by-layer mode. So, in the ALD technique, it is easy to
control the development of exact layers of materials to form composites.16 Thus, ALD methods have been used for synthesizing
precise control and homogeneous distribution of SACs on the 2D matrix.
The size, morphology, and loading amount of the SACs are precisely
controlled by the number of ALD cycles. By increasing the number of
ALD cycles, there is a possibility for the formation of a cluster
or nanoparticle, and for SACs the ideal loading is below 2%. By using
this technique, a single atom of the platinum metal group is deposited
on a carbon 2D-matrix support. The size and density of the atoms are
controlled by varying the number of ALD cycles. With the increasing
number of cycles, the size of the atoms and atomic wt % increases.
The Pt-SACs are single crystalline, and its structure is cubic close-packed
(CCP). The ALD method is highly precise in controlling the formation
of SACs, but it is not suitable for large-scale production of the
catalysts due to the high cost of the instrument and scalability issues.

2.2 Electrodeposition Method
SACs can
be easily synthesized on the catalyst support by the electrodeposition
method from the metal ions dissolved in electrolyte solutions. The
slow diffusion rate of metal ions is favorable for the growth of isolated
atoms on the catalytic support, and the rate of diffusion can be controlled
by varying the concentration of the metal ion precursor. The size
and density of distributions can be precisely controlled by optimizing
the deposition time and concentration of metal ions. For the deposition
of Pt single atoms on the catalytic supports, Pt foil is used as a
metal source instead of the Pt precursor. Pt foil can be oxidized
and dissolved in the electrolyte under strong electrochemical environments.
When a high oxidative potential is applied to the Pt counter electrode
in a three-electrode system, Pt is oxidized and dissolved in the electrolyte.
The continuous potential cycles redeposited the Pt as a single atom
or cluster on the surface of catalytic support.12,17,18 The dissolution and redeposition of Pt are
most significant in the acidic medium in comparison to the alkaline
medium. The percentage of Pt loading on the surface is higher in comparison
to bulk. The size and density of the Pt single atoms depend on several
potential cycles. The electrochemical process has been utilized to
synthesize Mxene, LDH, WS2, MoS2, and graphdiyne-decorated
noble metal SACs. Zhang et al. synthesized a Pt single atom anchored
on the monolayers of Mxene (Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA).12 Similarly, Tang et al. decorated Pt single atoms on the WS2 surface. The strong covalent interaction between negatively charged
S22– species and positively charged Pt
atoms facilitates the formation of SACs. The formation of SACs also
depends on the structure of the catalyst support. The size and dispersion
of SACs are controlled by modulating the anodic potential and deposition
time. The electrodeposition method has several advantages like being
eco-friendly, cost-effective, and time-saving processes compared to
other methods.

2.3 Wet-Chemical Method
The wet-chemical
method is the most promising and widely accepted route for the synthesis
of SACs that is due to their easy operation and likelihood to be synthesized
on a large scale. The strong interaction between SACs and catalytic
support safeguards from migration and accumulation of SACs. The proper
selection of catalyst support and optimizing the concentration of
metal ion precursors play a key role in regulating the metal–support
interaction and stabilizing the SACs.18,19 The catalytic
support has the limited ability to accumulate the metals ions. The
higher concentration of metal ion precursors results in the formation
of clusters or nanoparticles. Thus, the formation of SACs by the wet-chemical
method needs an extremely lower concentration of metal ion precursors.
Also, the strong interaction between metal ions and catalytic support
is the key point in avoiding accumulation and forming SACs. This process
involves more than one step for the synthesis of SACs.20 It involves the coprecipitation/impregnation
of the metal precursor and reduction and calcination of the support
catalysts. The metal atom loading in this method is usually lower
than 1%. The wet-chemical method has many advantages over other methods,
such as that this method does not require any high-cost specialized
instruments and can be easily synthesized by any wet-chemical laboratory.

2.4 Metal–Organic Framework (MOF) Derived
Method
Generally, MOFs have been considered as a novel template
for the development of different carbon nanostructures. The MOF derived
carbon nanostructure has unique surface properties. All these properties
are responsible for synthesizing stable SACs. The high surface area
helps for the uniform distribution of the metal ion precursor. The
tunable porous morphology encapsulates the metal ions and prevents
migration, and the presence of heteroatoms provides strong anchoring
sites to stabilize the single atoms. Thus, the MOF-derived carbon
nanostructure is the best support material for SACs, as well as MOFs,
which is also used as a precursor for SACs. Recently, MOF-derived
carbon-based SACs with different metal sites were developed and confirmed
as highly efficient catalysts for energy conversion reactions. The
heteroatoms containing organic ligands form a bridge with isolated
metal atoms and confirm the atomic dispersion of metal atoms all over
the MOFs.2 Also, the 2D MOF has potential
anchoring sites, and its porous nature prevents the migrations of
atoms and plays as an ideal support to anchor single atoms. Recently,
Zuo et al. developed the Pt single atoms on an ultrathin 2D MOF by
the surfactant-assessed synthesis method,15 the 2D-MOF-anchored ultrahigh loading of 12 wt % of Pt single atoms.

3 Energy Applications
In the past few years,
2D-matrix-supported SACs have been used
for electrocatalysis and photocatalysis and chemical and environmental
applications and so forth. For the energy conversion reaction, electrocatalysts
play an important role, and it is important for the production of
chemicals and next-generation energy devices. For energy conversion
reaction, noble metal catalysts such as Pt, Pd, Ir, and Ru are the
benchmark catalysts because of their high intrinsic catalytic activity
and stability, but scarcity and high cost limit their practical applications.
The best method is synthesizing the 2D-matrix-supported SACs of these
noble metals to overcome the cost issues. The 2D-matrix-supported
SACs provide excellent catalytic activity. The high density of exposed
catalytic sites increases the conductivity of the surrounding atoms
by transferring the electron, and strong chemical interactions that
stabilize the SACs during the electrocatalytic process play a pivotal
role for high catalytic activity. In this section, we have discussed
the electrocatalytic activity for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER),
oxygen evolution reaction (OER), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR),
and carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR). The synthesis
methods and applications of recently developed 2D-matrix-supported
SACs are briefly highlighted (Table 1).

Table 1 Summary of the Synthesis Method and
Applications of 2D-Matrix-Supported SACs
single-atom
catalysts (SACs)	2D support	synthesis
methods	application	ref	
Pt	MoS2	hydrothermal	HER	(17)	
Pt	Mxene	electrochemical	HER	(12)	
Pt	N-doped graphene	ALD	HER	(16)	
Pd	GDY	electrochemical	HER	(13)	
Ru	CoFe-LDH	precipitation	OER	(14)	
Au	LDH	electrochemical	OER	(21)	
Ni, Co, Fe	NHGFs	annealing	OER	(22)	
Ru	N-doped carbon	pyrolysis	ORR	(23)	
Pt	N-doped carbon	pyrolysis	ORR	(19)	
Fe	N-doped carbon	pyrolysis	ORR	(20)	
Ni	N-doped carbon	pyrolysis	CO2RR	(24)	
Nb	MoS2	CVD	CO2RR	(25)	
3.1 Hydrogen
Evolution Reaction (HER)
Electrochemical hydrogen evolution
is the most efficient and sustainable
process to produce high-quality molecular hydrogen. Noble metal Pt-based
catalysts are the benchmark catalyst for HER; however, high cost and
scarcity limit the practical application. Thus, the synthesis of Pt-SACs
on catalytic support is the alternative to maximize the utilization
efficiency of the Pt. Pt-SACs have been synthesized by taking different
2D-matrix catalytic support such as nitrogen-doped graphene (NG),
Mxene, MoS2, WS2, etc. and studied the HER activity.
For example, by using the ALD method, Cheng et al. synthesized isolated
Pt atoms and clusters on the surface of N-doped graphene nanosheets
(NGNs).16 Modulating the ALD cycle, the
size and density of SACs are precisely controlled. With the increase
in the number of ALD cycles, the size of the particle increases from
the atomic level to cluster. The catalysts exhibit size-dependent
HER activity; i.e., with increasing the atomic size, HER activity
decreases. SACs and clusters show much higher activity than Pt nanoparticles.
The DFT calculations reveal strong interaction between nitrogen sites
and Pt-SACs. That modifies the electronic state by transferring the
electron to adjacent N atoms and increases the vacant 5d density of
states of the Pt atoms. Therefore, it increases HER activity. Using
the electrochemical deposition method, Zhang et al. synthesized Pt
single atoms on Mxene support (Figure 2a).12 First, Mo vacancies
are created by the electrochemical method, and then vacancies are
filled by Pt single atoms. The HAADF-STEM image confirms the distribution
and coordination of Pt single atoms (Figure 2b). By using Pt as counter electrode, the
HER activity of Mo2TiC2Tx is continuously increasing up to 1000 potential cycles (Figure 2c). Pt-SAC-decorated
Mxenes (Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA) exhibit excellent HER activity and are comparable
with benchmark catalyst Pt/C. The catalysts achieve the current density
of 10 100 and 200 mA/cm2 at the lower overpotentials
of 30, 77, and 104 mV, respectively. The overpotential value of Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA is lower than Pt/C (Figure 2d). The mass activity of Mxene-Pt is 40 times higher
than commercial Pt/C. The catalyst also exhibits long-term durability
up to 10 000 cycles and 100 h (Figure 2e). Graphdiyne (GDY) is another carbon 2D
matrix having sp2 carbon atoms that are of rings bonded
to sp carbon atoms of diacetylenic groups. The presence of unhybridized
orbitals of carbon has a strong interaction with SACs. Thus, GDY is
good support material for the synthesis of SACs. By using GDY as a
catalytic support, Li and co-workers synthesized Pd-SACs.13 The synthesized catalysts exhibit excellent
catalytic activity toward HER, and catalytic activity is comparable
with commercial Pt/C. Unsaturated S atoms on the edges of the MoS2 or WS2 are highly active toward HER in comparison
to the basal plane. Various efforts have been made to enhance the
number of active sites, and confining the SACs is the most efficient
process to enhance HER activity. In the case of MoS2 or
WS2, SACs do not directly act as a catalytic center, but
it acts as a highly efficient enhancer. Deng et al. confined the Pt-single
atoms on the lattice of MoS2 by removing the Mo atoms.17 The synthesized catalysts exhibit excellent
HER activity and stability. The DFT calculation suggests that the
Pt atom is active for modifying the chemisorption of H atoms on neighboring
S atoms and hence enhances the HER activity. Thus, the synthesis of
the single-atom-decorated 2D matrix is the best approach to use the
maximum catalytic efficiency of the noble metal catalysts and increase
the catalytic activity and stability toward HER. The noble-metal-based
single atom modifies the electronic arrangement of adjacent atoms
and decreases the adsorption free energy of H atoms.

Figure 2 (a) Schematic presentation
of electrochemical synthesis of Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA. (b) HAADF-STEM image
of Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA. (c) LSV curve of
Mo2TiC2Tx with different
potential cycles by Pt counter electrode. (d) HER polarization curves
for different synthesized catalysts. (e) Corresponding Tafel slopes.
(f) Durability test of Mo2TiC2Tx–PtSA. Reprinted with permission
from ref (12).

3.2 Oxygen Evolution Reaction
(OER)
Oxygen
evolution reaction (OER) involves a four-step proton-coupled electron-transfer
process. That makes the sluggish kinetics and needs higher overpotentials
to produce O2. Thus, OER needs highly efficient and robust
catalysts for stepping over the energy barrier. Recently, 2D-matrix-decorated
SACs have been explored for advanced OER catalysis. LDHs are considered
as excellent electrocatalysts for OER among the different 2D matrices.
This is due to the unique 2D structure and excellent physicochemical
properties. Recently, SACs confining LDHs have been extensively studied
for OER. Li et al. developed the Ru-SACs on CoFe-LDH (Ru/CoFe-LDH)
support by the hydrolysis-deposition method (Figure 3a).14 The distribution
and anchoring of Ru single atoms on CoFe-LDH were confirmed by the
HAADF-STEM analysis (Figure 3b). Ru/CoFe-LDH exhibits excellent OER activity and stability
(Figure 3c,d). The
catalysts required only 198 mV to achieve the current density of 10
mA/cm2 with a smaller Tafel slope of 39 mV/dec The presence
of Ru single atoms also increased the working stability of the catalysts.
The Ru/CoFe-LDH catalysts exhibit 99% retention of current density
up to 24 h, whereas bare CoFe-LDH exhibits 90% retention of current
density within 12 h (Figure 3d). similarly, Zhang et al. developed Au SACs on NiFe-LDH
support (Au/NiFe-LDH) by an electrodeposition method.21 DFT study suggests that Fe sites are highly active toward
OER, and further introduction of Au SACs reduces the overpotential.
Au/NiFe-LDH requires the overpotential of 237 mV to achieve the current
density of 10 mA/cm2 which is 26 mV lower than NiFe-LDH.
Only 0.4 wt % decoration of Au atoms enhances the OER activity up
to six times. The formation of oxyhydroxide during OER acts as active
sites, and its formation was also confirmed by the in situ Raman study.
Further, Au SACs transfer electrons to support catalysts and as a
result modify the distribution of surface charge and enhance the catalytic
OER activity. Along with LDH, a carbon 2D matrix such as graphene
and carbon nitride is also a support catalyst for OER applications.
Transition metal elements such as Ni-, Co-, and Fe-based SACs decorated
on the carbon 2D matrix have been extensively studied for OER. For
example, Fei et al. synthesized Ni, Co, and Fe SACs anchored on an
N-doped holey graphene matrix (M-NHGFs) and studied the OER activity.22 Ni-NHGFs exhibit higher OER activity and achieve
a current density of 10 mA/cm2 at the overpotential of
331 mV in an order of activity as Ni-NHGFs > Co-NHGFs > Fe-NHGFs.
In this catalyst, the M-N4C4 site acts as an
active center for OER. Thus, different transition-metal-based single
atoms such as Ru, Ir, Au, Ni, Co, Fe, etc. anchored on the surface
of 2D matrix have successfully enhanced the OER activity by lowering
the overpotential and increased the catalytic durability. The experimental
predictions are also valid by the theoretical calculations.

Figure 3 (a) Schematic
illustration showing the hydrolysis deposition to
form Ru/CoFe-LDHs. (b) HAADF-STEM image of as-synthesized Ru/CoFe-LDHs
(scale bar, 2 nm). (c) HER polarization curves of synthesized catalysts.
(d) Durability test of the catalysts. Reprinted with permission from
ref (14).

3.3 Oxygen Reduction Reaction (ORR)
The
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is an important half-reaction for
energy conversion devices such as fuel cells and metal-air batteries.
Electrochemical ORR proceeds through both a two-electron and four-electron
path and operates in both acidic and basic conditions. The four-electron
process is highly efficient in comparison to the two-electron process
because the former avoids the generation of H2O2 in the reaction process that causes the degradation membrane and
catalyst. The paths of ORR depend on the tendency of the catalysts
to break the O–O bond. The heteroatom-doped 2D-carbon matrix
is verified as the best catalyst for ORR. Also, the SACs decorated
on the 2D-carbon matrix conspicuously boosted the ORR activity. The
heteroatom-doped 2D-carbon matrix is the best support for anchoring
SACs. The strong interaction between the heteroatoms and metal ions
stabilizes the SACs on the 2D matrix. The heteroatoms present on the
2D matrix act as active sites for electrocatalytic activity. Usually,
atomically dispersed M–N–C species follow the four-electron
path for ORR, whereas Pt-SACs follow the two pathways. By using the
microporous metal–organic framework (MOFs) confined strategy,
Xiao et al. synthesized a Ru–N–C single-site catalyst
(Ru-SSC) and studied the ORR activity. In Ru-SSC, Ru atoms are confined
with both N and O atoms of the compounds.23 The HADDF-STEM image confirmed the formations of a Ru single atom
without the formation of Ru small clusters or nanoparticles (Figure 4a). However, by increasing
the Ru content, the size of the particle continues to increase. The
ICP-OES result confirms that the maximum Ru content in Ru–N
sites is 0.4188 wt %. The ORR activity of Ru-SSC was compared with
Fe-SSC, Pt/C, Ru-NC, and Ru/C (Figure 4b). Ru-SSC exhibits the half-wave potentials and Tafel
slope of 0.824 V and 54.2 mV/dec, respectively, which is lower than
the Pt/C and Fe-SSC. The Ru-SSC follows the four-electron pathways
toward ORR. The catalyst also exhibits higher mass activity, specific
activity, and turnover frequency (TOF) in comparison to the benchmark
catalysts Pt/C. The Ru-SSC shows higher durability property in comparison
to Pt/C. After 20 000 cycles, only 17 mV positive shifts on
halfwave potentials were observed in Ru-SSC, whereas Pt/C exhibited
a 32 mV positive shift (Figure 4c). The DFT study suggests that in situ generated OH species
act as a ligand and modify the electronic structure of the d orbital
in Ru that tailors the free energy of the adsorption–desorption
reaction intermediates and enhances the ORR activity (Figure 4d). Liu et al. reported the
preparation of Pt-SACs dispersed on N-doped black carbon (Pt–N/BP)
of 0.4 wt %.19 The as-synthesized catalyst
shows excellent ORR activity with methanol tolerance. DFT calculation
reveals that the coordination between Pt-SACs and the pyridinic-nitrogen
atom acts as catalytic sites for ORR. Other than noble metal SACs,
the transition metal SACs anchored on the 2D-carbon matrix are also
extensively studied for ORR. For example, Zeng et al. invented an
ORR catalyst in which Fe atomic clusters are embedded in an Fe-SAC-supported
nitrogen-doped carbon matrix (FeAC@FeSA–N–C).20 The synthesized catalysts exhibit higher ORR
activity and lower Tafel slope than the commercial Pt/C. The Fe–N4 species is the leading active site, and the cluster boosts
the activity. Thus, the ORR activity of the electrocatalysts increases
from nanoparticle to SACs, and both noble and non-noble metal-based
SACs having M–N4 or M–S4 species
and M–N–C sites are dominant active species to increase
the ORR activity and stability.

Figure 4 (a) HAADF-STEM images of Ru-SSC catalysts.
The red circle indicates
the Ru single atom decorated on the carbon framework. (b) ORR activity
of different synthesized catalysts. (c) ORR stability plots. (d) Gibbs
free energy diagram for different catalysts. Reprinted wit permission
from ref (23).

3.4 Carbon Dioxide Reduction
Reactions (CO2RRs)
Electrochemical CO2 reduction is
a renewable process to convert CO2 into fuels and essential
organic compounds. In the presence of transition-metal-based catalysts,
CO2 is converted to carbon monoxide or formate ions. However,
in the presence of Cu and carbon-based catalysts, CO2 is
converted to a hydrocarbon. Recently 2D-carbon matrix-supported SACs
have great potentials for CO2RR. Li et al. adopted the
topochemical transamination method to produce Ni-SACs on N-doped carbon
(Ni–N4–C) support (Figure 5a).24 The formation
of Ni–N4 species in the catalytic support helps
to avoid the accumulation of Ni-SACs to Ni nanoparticles, and this
is confirmed by the HAADF-STEM image (Figure 5b). The synthesized Ni–N4–C catalysts exhibit excellent electrocatalytic activity toward
CO2RR. The catalysts achieve the current density of 36.2
mA cm–2 at −0.91 V, which is much higher
than bare N–C catalysts (Figure 5c). The reduction product of this reaction is CO and
H2 with a larger amount of CO. The Faradaic efficiency
for the CO is 90% at the wide potential window of −0.5 to −0.9
eV. At the potential of −0.81 V (vs RHE), the Faradaic efficiency
is 99% with a current density of 28.6 mA/cm2 (Figure 5d). The catalysts
Ni–N4–C also exhibit a long-term CO2 reduction process up to 30 h, suggesting the high durability of
the catalysts. In the case of the Ni–N4–C
catalyst, the Ni–N4 species act as active sites
for CO2RR. The theoretical calculation reveals that the
formation energy of COOH* for Ni–N4–C is
lower in comparison to bare nitrogen-doped carbon (N–C). Other
than the 2D-carbon matrix, 2D-metal dichalcogenide (MoS2) decorated SACs are also used for the CO2RR to form CO.
Abbasi et al. synthesized Nb-doped MoS2 (Nb-MoS2) by a chemical vapor deposition method.25 Nb-MoS2 shows higher CO2RR activity in comparison
to bare MoS2. The catalysts achieve the CO Faradaic efficiency
of 82% at a potential of −0.8 V vs RHE and produce the current
density of 237 mA/cm–2. The theoretical calculation
reveals that the formation of CO species is beneficial in MoS2, but its removal is difficult. The introduction of the Nb
atom increases the electron density around the Mo atom and reduces
the binding energy of CO. The binding energy of CO also depends on
the position of the Nd atom. Thus, the unique structures of SACs have
revealed the exclusive performances in CO2 reductions.
Ni-SACs are extensively studied for CO2RR due to their
unique structural active sites. For CO2RR, the M-Nx species
(M = Ni, Co, Fe, etc.) act as an active center and exhibiting an excellent
selectivity toward the formation of CO over a wide potential range.

Figure 5 (a) Schematic
illustration of the topochemical synthesis of Ni–N4–C catalysts. (b) HAADF-STEM image of Ni–N4–C catalysts. (c) CO2RR polarization curve
of as-synthesized catalysts. (d) Faradaic efficiencies for the formation
CO. Reprinted with permission from ref (25).

4 Conclusion
and Outlook
For clean and sustainable energy applications,
highly efficient
and stable electrocatalysts are of great interest. SACs are a bridge
between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalytic systems. Both the
2D matrix and SACs are an independent research topic in the field
of catalysis and have achieved significant attention in the last couple
of years. Benefiting from the unique advantage of 2D-matrix support
compared to the 1D and 3D, the 2DM@SACs symbolized a unique class
of electrocatalysts. The high surface area and planar surface of the
2D matrix facilitate the adsorption and dispersion of SACs, and its
strong covalent interactions stabilize the SACs. The 2DM@SACs are
a new emerging material with a new electronic state and homogeneously
precise geometric structure that has unimitated potential applications
in the field of electrocatalysis. The 2DM@SACs have been synthesized
by various methods such as ALD, pyrolysis, electrode deposition, etc.
by taking the 2D matrix such as N-doped graphene, g-C3N4, MoS2, WS2, LDH, Mxene, graphdiyne,
etc. The characterization techniques like HAADF-STEM, EXFAS, and XANES
analysis are powerful tools for analysis of 2DM@SACs.

Furthermore,
to understand the relationship between the structure
and electrocatalytic property of 2DM@SACs, several experimental and
theoretical studies have been performed. In this mini-review, first,
we have discussed the importance and development of SACs on the 2D
matrix and their different synthesis procedures. In the application
part, the electrochemical energy conversion reactions such as HER,
OER, ORR, and CO2RR are discussed. For future research,
the focus on the following point may be considered.2D-carbon matrix-supported SACs,
mostly N-doped carbon,
are widely studied for electrocatalytic applications. However, the
inadequate variety of support catalysts causes the lowering in the
catalytic active sites. For N-doped carbon, M-N4 acts as
the catalytic active site for SACs, and catalytic activity depends
on the structure of the active sites. Thus, to increase the number
of active sites or synthesize different active site structures, different
heteroatoms should be doped to the 2D-carbon matrix or by synthesizing
new catalytic supports.

Until now, very
minimal research articles have been
reported on 2D-matrix-supported SACs for electrocatalytic energy applications.
The 2D matrices, such as carbon-based, LDH, and TMDs, are reported
so far, whereas a newly developed 2D matrix such as Mxene, Xene, black
phosphorus (BP), and BN-decorated SACs has not been explored so far.
These 2D matrix-supported SACs are highly active toward electrochemical
applications, and also theoretical calculations suggest that these
catalytic supports show activity to stabilize the SACs.



The authors
declare no competing financial interest.



Bishnupad Mohanty received
a Master’s Degree in Chemistry
from Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, India. In 2014, he joined Dr.
Bikash Kumar Jena’s group in the Department of Materials Chemistry,
CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar,
India, for a Ph.D. program. His current research interests focus on
the development of nanostructures for various electrocatalytic energy
conversion applications such as hydrogen evolution reactions (HERs)
and oxygen evolution reactions (OERs).



Dr. Bikash Kumar Jena
is presently working as a Principal Scientist
for the CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar,
India, and Associate Professor, Academy of Scientific & Innovative
Research (AcSIR), India. He received his Ph.D. degree from the Indian
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India. He worked as a postdoctoral
fellow at the University of Washington, USA. He worked at the Technical
University of Munich, Germany, as a visiting scientist with Prof.
Dr. Hubert A. Gasteiger’s group. His scientific interests include
development of nanostructures for electrochemical applications such
as water splitting, fuel cells, supercapacitors, sensings, etc. His
contribution earned him recognition (Young Scientist Awards) from
the National Academy of Sciences, India (NASI), CSIR, Indian Science
Congress Association, Indian Society of Electroanalytical Chemistry,
Odisha Bigyan Academy, etc. He has published in more than 60 international
journals (>3000 citations, H index:30) and filed more than 2 patents.



Prof. Dr. Suddhasatwa Basu (FNASc, FICS) is a Professor of Chemical
Engineering, Department of Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India,
and Director of CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology,
Bhubaneswar, India. He is a Fellow of the National Academy of Science
of India and Indian Chemical Society. He received his Ph.D. degree
in 1993 from the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. His
research interests focus on SOFC, PEMFC, and CO2 as chemical
fuel by electrochemical and photoelectrochemical reduction cells,
non-PGM ORR and OER catalysts, microfluidics-microplant, lab on a
chip, glucose fuel cells as the power source for body implants, direct
hydrocarbon SOFC, anode development, and Cu-ceria, Sr-titanate, Ni-YDC,
and electrolyte (GDC, LDC, SDC, and carbonates) for low-temperature
solid oxide fuel cells. Prof. Basu is an Associate Editor of Wiley
Journal WIRES: Energy & Environment. He has published in more
than 170 international journals ((>5000 citations, H index:33)
and
4786 conference papers and filed more than 5 patents.

Acknowledgments
The authors
thank the CSIR, India, for financial support.
==== Refs
References
Wang Y. ; Mao J. ; Meng X. ; Yu L. ; Deng D. ; Bao X. 
Catalysis
with Two-Dimensional Materials Confining Single Atoms: Concept, Design,
and Applications . Chem. Rev. 
2019 , 119 , 1806 –1854 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00501 .30575386 
Zhang B. ; Fan T. ; Xie N. ; Nie G. ; Zhang H. 
Versatile Applications
of Metal Single-Atom @ 2D Material Nanoplatforms . Adv. Sci. 
2019 , 6 , 1901787 10.1002/advs.201901787 .
Bhanja P. ; Mohanty B. ; Patra A. K. ; Ghosh S. ; Jena B. K. ; Bhaumik A. 
IrO2 and Pt Doped Mesoporous
SnO2 Nanospheres
as Efficient Electrocatalysts for the Facile OER and HER . ChemCatChem 
2019 , 11 , 583 –592 . 10.1002/cctc.201801312 .
Mohanty B. ; Ghorbani-Asl M. ; Kretschmer S. ; Ghosh A. ; Guha P. ; Panda S. K. ; Jena B. ; Krasheninnikov A. V. ; Jena B. K. 
MoS2 Quantum Dots as Efficient Catalyst
Materials for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction . ACS Catal. 
2018 , 8 , 1683 –1689 . 10.1021/acscatal.7b03180 .
Han L. ; Liu X. ; Chen J. ; Lin R. ; Liu H. ; Lü F. ; Bak S. ; Liang Z. ; Zhao S. ; Stavitski E. ; et al. Atomically Dispersed Molybdenum Catalysts for Efficient Ambient Nitrogen
Fixation . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2019 , 58 , 2321 –2325 . 10.1002/anie.201811728 .
Zhang L. ; Roling L. T. ; Wang X. ; Vara M. ; Chi M. ; Liu J. ; Choi S.-I. ; Park J. ; Herron J. A. ; Xie Z. ; Mavrikakis M. ; Xia Y. ; et al. Platinum-Based Nanocages
with Subnanometer-Thick Walls and Well-Defined, Controllable Facets . Science 
2015 , 349 , 412 –416 . 10.1126/science.aab0801 .26206931 
Black J. R. ; Yin Q. ; Rustad J. R. ; Casey W. H. 
Magnesium Isotopic Equilibrium in
Chlorophylls . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 8690 –8691 . 10.1021/ja072573i .17580871 
Nam W. 
High-Valent
Iron(IV)–Oxo Complexes of Heme and Non-Heme Ligands in Oxygenation
Reactions . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2007 , 40 , 522 –531 . 10.1021/ar700027f .17469792 
Burgess B. K. ; Lowe D. J. 
Mechanism of Molybdenum
Nitrogenase . Chem. Rev. 
1996 , 96 , 2983 –3012 . 10.1021/cr950055x .11848849 
Qiu Y. ; Peng X. ; Lü F. ; Mi Y. ; Zhuo L. ; Ren J. ; Liu X. ; Luo J. 
Single-Atom
Catalysts for the Electrocatalytic
Reduction of Nitrogen to Ammonia under Ambient Conditions . Chem. - Asian J. 
2019 , 14 , 2770 –2779 . 10.1002/asia.201900793 .31290592 
Lü F. ; Zhao S. ; Guo R. ; He J. ; Peng X. ; Bao H. ; Fu J. ; Han L. ; Qi G. ; Luo J. ; et al. Nitrogen-Coordinated Single Fe Sites for Efficient Electrocatalytic
N2 Fixation in Neutral Media . Nano Energy 
2019 , 61 , 420 –427 . 10.1016/j.nanoen.2019.04.092 .
Zhang J. ; Zhao Y. ; Guo X. ; Chen C. ; Dong C.-L. ; Liu R.-S. ; Han C.-P. ; Li Y. ; Gogotsi Y. ; Wang G. 
Single Platinum Atoms Immobilized
on an MXene as an Efficient Catalyst
for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction . Nat. Catal. 
2018 , 1 , 985 –992 . 10.1038/s41929-018-0195-1 .
Yu H. ; Xue Y. ; Huang B. ; Hui L. ; Zhang C. ; Fang Y. ; Liu Y. ; Zhao Y. ; Li Y. ; Liu H. ; et al. Ultrathin
Nanosheet of Graphdiyne-Supported Palladium Atom Catalyst for Efficient
Hydrogen Production . iScience 
2019 , 11 , 31 –41 . 10.1016/j.isci.2018.12.006 .30584958 
Li P. ; Wang M. ; Duan X. ; Zheng L. ; Cheng X. ; Zhang Y. ; Kuang Y. ; Li Y. ; Ma Q. ; Feng Z. ; Liu W. ; Sun X. ; et al. Boosting
Oxygen Evolution of Single-Atomic Ruthenium through Electronic Coupling
with Cobalt-Iron Layered Double Hydroxides . Nat. Commun. 
2019 , 10 , 1711 10.1038/s41467-019-09666-0 .30979899 
Zuo Q. ; Liu T. ; Chen C. ; Ji Y. ; Gong X. ; Mai Y. ; Zhou Y. 
Ultrathin Metal–Organic
Framework Nanosheets with Ultrahigh
Loading of Single Pt Atoms for Efficient Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalytic
H2 Evolution . Angew. Chem. 
2019 , 131 , 10304 –10309 . 10.1002/ange.201904058 .
Cheng N. ; Stambula S. ; Wang D. ; Banis M. N. ; Liu J. ; Riese A. ; Xiao B. ; Li R. ; Sham T.-K. ; Liu L.-M. ; Botton G. A. ; Sun X. ; et al. Platinum
Single-Atom and Cluster Catalysis of the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 13638 10.1038/ncomms13638 .27901129 
Deng J. ; Li H. ; Xiao J. ; Tu Y. ; Deng D. ; Yang H. ; Tian H. ; Li J. ; Ren P. ; Bao X. 
Triggering
the Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution Activity of the Inert Two-Dimensional
MoS2 Surface via Single-Atom Metal Doping . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2015 , 8 , 1594 –1601 . 10.1039/C5EE00751H .
Zhang L. ; Han L. ; Liu H. ; Liu X. ; Luo J. 
Potential-Cycling Synthesis
of Single Platinum Atoms for Efficient Hydrogen Evolution in Neutral
Media . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2017 , 56 , 13694 –13698 . 10.1002/anie.201706921 .
Liu J. ; Jiao M. ; Lu L. ; Barkholtz H. M. ; Li Y. ; Wang Y. ; Jiang L. ; Wu Z. ; Liu D. ; Zhuang L. ; et al. High Performance Platinum
Single Atom Electrocatalyst
for Oxygen Reduction Reaction . Nat. Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 15938 10.1038/ncomms15938 .28737170 
Ao X. ; Zhang W. ; Li Z. ; Li J.-G. ; Soule L. ; Huang X. ; Chiang W.-H. ; Chen H. M. ; Wang C. ; Liu M. ; Zeng X. C. ; et al. Markedly Enhanced Oxygen Reduction Activity
of Single-Atom Fe Catalysts via Integration with Fe Nanoclusters . ACS Nano 
2019 , 13 , 11853 10.1021/acsnano.9b05913 .31461618 
Zhang J. ; Liu J. ; Xi L. ; Yu Y. ; Chen N. ; Sun S. ; Wang W. ; Lange K. M. ; Zhang B. 
Single-Atom Au/NiFe
Layered Double Hydroxide Electrocatalyst: Probing the Origin of Activity
for Oxygen Evolution Reaction . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2018 , 140 , 3876 –3879 . 10.1021/jacs.8b00752 .29518310 
Fei H. ; Dong J. ; Feng Y. ; Allen C. S. ; Wan C. ; Volosskiy B. ; Li M. ; Zhao Z. ; Wang Y. ; Sun H. ; et al. General
Synthesis and Definitive Structural Identification
of MN4C4 Single-Atom Catalysts with Tunable
Electrocatalytic Activities . Nat. Catal 
2018 , 1 , 63 –72 . 10.1038/s41929-017-0008-y .
Xiao M. ; Gao L. ; Wang Y. ; Wang X. ; Zhu J. ; Jin Z. ; Liu C. ; Chen H. ; Li G. ; Ge J. ; et al. Engineering
Energy Level of Metal Center: Ru Single-Atom Site for Efficient and
Durable Oxygen Reduction Catalysis . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2019 , 141 , 19800 10.1021/jacs.9b09234 .31763837 
Li X. ; Bi W. ; Chen M. ; Sun Y. ; Ju H. ; Yan W. ; Zhu J. ; Wu X. ; Chu W. ; Wu C. ; et al. Exclusive
Ni–N4 Sites Realize Near-Unity CO Selectivity for Electrochemical
CO2 Reduction . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 14889 –14892 . 10.1021/jacs.7b09074 .28992701 
Abbasi P. ; Asadi M. ; Liu C. ; Sharifi-Asl S. ; Sayahpour B. ; Behranginia A. ; Zapol P. ; Shahbazian-Yassar R. ; Curtiss L. A. ; Salehi-Khojin A. 
Tailoring
the Edge Structure of Molybdenum
Disulfide toward Electrocatalytic Reduction of Carbon Dioxide . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 453 –460 . 10.1021/acsnano.6b06392 .27991762

