
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145964410.1021/acsomega.9b00129ArticleAdhesion of Epoxy Resin with Hexagonal Boron Nitride
and Graphite Tsuji Yuta †Kitamura Yasuhiro †Someya Masao ‡Takano Toshihiko ‡Yaginuma Michio ‡Nakanishi Kohei ‡Yoshizawa Kazunari *†† Institute
for Materials Chemistry and Engineering and IRCCS, Kyushu University, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan‡ Mitsubishi
Gas Chemical Company Inc., Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100-8324, Japan* E-mail: kazunari@ms.ifoc.kyushu-u.ac.jp.01 03 2019 31 03 2019 4 3 4491 4504 14 01 2019 11 02 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Adhesion
interaction of epoxy resin with the basal surfaces of
h-BN and graphite is investigated with the first-principles density
functional theory calculations in conjunction with the dispersion
correction. The h-BN/epoxy and graphite/epoxy interfaces play an important
role in producing nanocomposite materials with excellent thermal dissipation
properties. The epoxy resin structure is simulated by using four kinds
of fragmentary models. Their structures are optimized on the h-BN
and graphite surfaces after an annealing simulation. The distance
between the epoxy fragment and the surface is about 3 Å. At the
interface between h-BN and epoxy resin, no H-bonding formation is
observed, though one could expect that the active functional groups
of epoxy resin, such as hydroxyl (−OH) group, would be involved
in a hydrogen-bonding interaction with nitrogen atoms of the h-BN
surface. The adhesion energies for the two interfaces are calculated,
showing that these two interfaces are characterized by almost the
same strength of adhesion interaction. To obtain the adhesion force–separation
curve for the two interfaces, the potential energy surface associated
with the detachment of the epoxy fragment from the surface is calculated
with the help of the nudged elastic band method and then the adhesion
force is obtained by using either the Morse-potential approximation
or the Hellmann–Feynman force calculation. The results from
both methods agree with each other. The maximum adhesion force for
the h-BN/epoxy interface is as high as that for the graphite/epoxy
interface. To better understand this result, a force-decomposition
analysis is carried out, and it has been disclosed that the adhesion
forces working at both interfaces mainly come from the dispersion
force. The trend of increase in the C6 parameters used for the dispersion correction for the atoms included
in the h-BN or graphite surface is in the order: N < C < B,
which reasonably explains why the strengths of the dispersion forces
operating at the two interfaces are similar. Also, the electron localization
function analysis can explain why the h-BN surface cannot form an
H bond with the hydroxyl group in epoxy resin.

document-id-old-9ao9b00129document-id-new-14ao-2019-00129gccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Polymer
nanocomposites technology has found a broad range of applications
in industry, including structural materials,1 coating,2 medical products,3 and electronic devices.4 They are generated by mixing two components, namely, polymer matrix
and nanofiller. Epoxy resin is one of the most commonly used polymer
matrices of nanocomposites because of its high modulus, chemical resistance,
and good processability.5 When nanofillers
are homogeneously dispersed in the epoxy matrix, the mechanical, optical,
thermal, electronic, or magnetic properties of the resin will be improved
dramatically.4,6 Though researchers speculate that
the size, shape, aspect ratio, chemical composition, and surface modification
of the fillers should have a significant impact on the properties
of nanocomposite materials, the detailed mechanism of how the filler
properties influence the properties of the epoxy matrix through the
interaction between them remains unclear.6 Generally, the compatibility between the host matrix and the filler
can be regarded as a key factor that should be taken into account
when one designs a new composite material. Thus, the community has
been active in scrutinizing the interfacial interaction between the
constitutive phases of nanocomposite materials.7,8

In this paper, we present a comparative study on the interfacial
interaction in two types of epoxy nanocomposites: one uses hexagonal
boron nitride (h-BN) as a nanofiller and the other adopts graphite
or graphene layers.

The h-BN/epoxy composites can pave the way
for thermally conductive
composites with excellent electronically insulating behavior.9 Owing to the recent advancement in the field
of the electronic information technology, there has been a constant
demand for heat-dissipating polymer materials that can be applied
to the substrate or package for integrated electronic devices that
emit large amount of heat.10 So high thermal
conductivity and low electrical conductivity are the necessary conditions.
And, the h-BN/epoxy composites can meet the requirements.11,12 In addition, by the addition of h-BN, one can also improve the mechanical
properties of epoxy resin, such as elastic modulus, ultimate tensile
strength, and toughness.6

For the
case of graphite/epoxy composites (or graphene/epoxy composites),
similarly to the h-BN/epoxy composites, one can observe the improvement
of thermal conductivity13,14 and mechanical strength.15,16 An important difference between the two composites is that the graphite/epoxy
composites show an increasing electrical conductivity as the filler
load increases.17 Besides, the electromagnetic
interference shielding behavior18 and electric
heating behavior19 emerge in the composites.

To enhance the thermal conductivity of h-BN/epoxy and graphite/epoxy
nanocomposites, one needs to improve the dispersion and affinity between
the epoxy matrix and the nanofillers. For this purpose, it is indispensable
to understand the dominant interacting force between them on a molecular
scale. Herein, we intend to provide insight into the adhesive interaction
at the graphite/epoxy and h-BN/epoxy interfaces in nanocomposites
by means of first-principles quantum chemical calculations.

Recently, the theoretical modeling of the interface between adhesive
and adherend has become an important research area because it can
provide us with a molecular-level insight into the interfacial adhesion
interaction, which is of significant importance in industrial applications
of adhesives, such as an anticorrosive coating for metallic surfaces.
Lee et al. studied the interactions of epoxy resin with pure iron
and Fe2O3 surfaces using the density functional
theory (DFT) computation,20,21 and Ramezanzadeh et
al. studied the interaction of epoxy resin with various iron oxides,
cerium oxide, lanthanum oxide, and praseodymium oxide using a molecular
dynamics simulation.22−25

Both h-BN and graphite are two-dimensional materials consisting
of hexagonal ring layers (see Figure 1). Although they are isoelectronic and share common
structural features, their optical and electronic properties are very
different. Owing to the difference in electronegativity between B
and N, electrons are expected to be localized on the N atoms, leading
to polarized B–N bonds having partial ionic character.26 That is why h-BN is an insulator. Since the
B atoms are positively charged, whereas the N atoms are negatively
charged, the B atoms interact with the N atoms directly above and
below them in adjacent layers (so-called AA′ stacking mode).
The interlayer interactions are likely to come from electrostatic
forces as well as van der Waals forces.27

Figure 1 Crystal
structures of (a) graphite and (b) h-BN.

In graphite, on the other hand, the honeycomb layers are
stacked
in the AB stacking mode, in which half of the C atoms interact with
the C atoms directly above and below them in adjacent layers. The
C–C bond in the graphite layer is nonpolar and the overlap
between adjacent C 2pz orbitals makes
π-electrons delocalized over the entire layer. The interlayer
bonding can work mainly through van der Waals forces. Also, orbital
interactions between the adjacent layers should contribute to the
interlayer bonding to some extent.28 However,
the electrostatic forces are not important.

When one considers
the interaction of a polymer matrix with h-BN
or graphite sheets at the molecular level, it is reasonable to assume
the interaction can essentially be explained by functional groups
in the side chains or in the polymer–matrix main chain and
the basal or (001) surface of h-BN or graphite. Chen and co-workers
studied the interactions between graphene sheets and a polymer matrix
by measuring the Raman spectra, finding a signature that is consistent
with the formation of noncovalent π–π stacking
between phenyl rings included in the polymer matrix and the basal
planes of graphene.29 In a molecular dynamics
(MD) study on interfacial thermal conductance of h-BN–polymer
composites, Luo and co-workers adopted a model of the basal plane
of h-BN because they assumed that the majority of the interfaces are
between the basal plane of h-BN and the polymer matrices.30

Yoshizawa and co-workers have carried
out an energy decomposition
analysis to an epoxy/graphene interface modeled by a fragmentary structure
of epoxy resin and the basal plane of graphene.31 It was found that the electrostatic and charge-transfer
interactions are canceled by the exchange–repulsion interactions,
and hence only dispersion interactions work at the interface. Also,
the study demonstrated that the dispersion interaction does not vary
with the surface type. So, it is reasonable to speculate that the
epoxy resin would be more strongly bound by the h-BN surface than
to the graphite surface because dispersion interaction is expected
to exist at both epoxy/graphene and epoxy/h-BN interfaces, but the
electrostatic one would only work at the epoxy/h-BN interface. In
this paper, we intend to clarify this point theoretically.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Bulk Structure Optimization
The crystallographic
data for h-BN and graphite bulk structures were taken from the literature.32,33 We need to optimize the bulk structures using DFT. However, a general
drawback of widely used DFT functionals is that they cannot properly
describe dispersion interactions,34 which
should play an important role in determining the interlayer distance
of h-BN and graphite. To resolve this problem, one can add a correction
term, Edisp, to the conventional Kohn–Sham
DFT energy, EDFT, as follows:35 1  We checked
the reproducibility of the interlayer
distances of h-BN and graphite using several dispersion correction
methods available in VASP, finding that the Tkatchenko–Scheffler
(TS) dispersion correction36 is a suitable
for reproducing the experimentally observed interlayer distances.
The detailed results of the benchmark test are summarized in the Supporting Information (SI) of this paper.

2.2 Slab Model Construction
To construct
slab models for the basal planes of h-BN and graphite, one needs to
decide how many layers should be included in the model. For this purpose,
we calculated the surface energy, γ, which is the energy needed
to cleave the bulk crystal and is obtained from a slab calculation
using the following equation:37 2  where Esurf is
the total energy of the surface slab, Ebulk is the total energy of bulk, and n is the ratio
of the number of atoms in bulk, Nbulk,
to that in the surface slab, Nslab, so n = Nslab/Nbulk. The surface energy is related to the affinity of
surfaces to adsorbates, describing the adhesion properties of a surface
to a range of adhesives.38,39 Also, since the higher
the surface energy of a surface, the more energy is gained upon bringing
the surface into contact with adhesive materials,39 the surface energy should be a good measure of the adhesion
energy. We then calculated the surface energies of two-monolayer (2-ML),
4-ML, and 6-ML slab models for h-BN and graphite. Their plots are
shown in the SI. Owing to the layered nature
of the structures and a large interlayer separation, the surface energies
obtained are not so large when compared with metal surfaces.40 The surface energy seems not to be affected
by the number of layers when one moves from the 2-ML slab to larger-numbered
layers (see the SI). Thus, we adopted the
2-ML slab models of h-BN and graphite.

In our previous studies,
we have investigated the effects of surface water on the adhesion
properties because we have dealt with the hydrophilic surfaces, such
as alumina41 and silica.42 Since the h-BN and graphite surfaces are hydrophobic and
water slippage has been theoretically predicted on such surfaces,43 as a first approximation, we neglect surface
water molecules in our model.

2.3 Modeling
of Epoxy Resin
As shown
in Figure 2a, epoxy
resin is usually formed from the polymerization of the diglycidylether
of bisphenol A (DGEBA), which is the product of the reaction between
epichlorohydrin and bisphenol-A.44 To model
epoxy resin, we cut out four different units of the polymer chain
from the structure shown in Figure 2a. The resultant fragment models are shown in Figure 2b. When the fragment
is cut out, we need to break a covalent bond, so newly formed terminal
C and O atoms are passivated by H and CH3, respectively.

Figure 2 Chemical
structure of (a) epoxy resin and (b) its fragment models.

2.4 Determining Adhesion Structures
of Fragment
Models on h-BN and Graphite Basal Surfaces
Given the size
of epoxy fragments, we estimated that a 5 × 5 supercell of the
slab model constructed in Section 2.2 is large enough to accommodate the fragment structure
on the surface in the unit cell. A top view of the surface model used
is presented in the SI. The polymer fragments
were randomly placed above the h-BN and graphite surfaces and then
optimized. But there is no guarantee that the structures obtained
from the initial optimization correspond to the global minimum. One
should notice that the initial configuration of the optimization could
affect the extent of attachment to the surface as well as adhesion
properties. We are blessed with a wide variety of optimization algorithms,
and among them the simulated annealing method is thought to be a powerful
tool to find the global minimum structure of complicated systems with
high probability.45,46 Here, to find the energetically
most stable adhesion structure, we employed the annealing method combined
with ab initio Born–Oppenheimer molecular dynamics, which is
implemented in VASP. Starting at 300 K, the temperature was gradually
decreased down to 0 K. By scaling the velocities of the atoms, a continuous
decrease of the kinetic energy is achieved. The interval between velocity
scaling events is simulated in a microcanonical ensemble. For each
annealing simulation, a total of 5000 molecular dynamics steps with
a time step of 1 fs were conducted. We carried out further static
geometry optimizations at 0 K for the final annealed structures.

The adhesion structures of the fragments (1–4) on the h-BN surface obtained by using the annealing simulation
were found to be over 10 kcal/mol more stable than before the annealing.
On the other hand, though the annealing simulation was carried out
two times for the fragments 1 and 2 on the
graphite surface, we could not obtain a more stable structure. Thus,
we assume that the adhesion structures of the fragments 1 and 2 on the graphite surface have already been located
at the global minima. The energies of the structures of the fragments 3 and 4 adhered on the graphite surface became
lower than before the annealing by 1.9 and 7.9 kcal/mol, respectively.
In Figure 3, we show
the determined adhesion structures of fragments 1, 2, 3, and 4 on the basal planes
of h-BN and graphite.

Figure 3 Top and side views of the adhesion structures of the fragments 1, 2, 3, and 4 on the
basal plane of (a) h-BN or (b) graphite. Ivory, blue, gray, red, and
white balls represent B, N, C, O, and H atoms, respectively. The height
of an atom in each epoxy fragment that is the closest to the surface
is shown in units of Å. The fragment models are shown by a thick
ball-and-stick model, whereas the surfaces are represented as a thin
ball-and-stick model. Only the topmost layer is shown.

Our way of regarding each fragment as relaxed freely
from other
fragments might be an ideal limit. The fragments can be assumed to
mutually interact with each other through the covalent bond as well
as the intra/intermolecular steric, vdW, and long-range Coulomb interactions.
The adhesion strength could be affected substantially by such mutual
interactions in the real system, as demonstrated recently by a large-scale
DFT-based calculation.47 However, the primary
purpose of this study is to gain a qualitative insight into the governing
interaction working at the interface between epoxy resin and the h-BN
or graphite surface rather than the interaction working inside the
epoxy resin or the one between the fragmentary structures. Thus, we
believe our small, freely relaxed fragments will do.

As shown
in Figure 3, an H atom
bonded to a C atom is located in the closest proximity
to the h-BN or graphite surface in all the adhesion structures. This
observation hints at the presence of the so-called CH/π interaction.48 The distances between the H atom and the surface
are close to those found in molecular calculations for CH/benzene
(C6H6) or CH/borazine (B3N3H6) complexes.49,50 Usually, experimentally
observed CH/π distances have been found to be shorter than 3.05
Å.51 Given that the distance between
the H atom of the CH bond and the ring of benzene or borazine falls
in a range between 2.25 and 2.44 Å,49 we can expect that there should be the CH/π interaction in
the optimized adhesion structures.

Except the fragment 3, the benzene rings in the epoxy
fragment are not parallel to the surface so that we cannot expect
the existence of the π–π stacking interaction.
This is because the benzene rings, in the fragments 1, 2, and 4, are adjacent to the isopropyl
group, which imposes steric hindrance and prevents the formation of
the π–π stacking interaction with the surface.
One benzene ring in the fragment 3 is not adjacent to
the isopropyl group, so it can form the π–π stacking
interaction52 and one can see the parallel
alignment of the benzene ring to the surface. However, it comes from
the artificial fragmentation of the polymer into a monomeric unit.
We may not need to take this observation seriously for now.

There may be some ways to analyze the adhesion structures, though
they are inherently complicated. In this paper, we adopt two of them:
one is the mass density profile and the other is the radial distribution
function.

Figure 4 shows the
mass density profile normal to the h-BN or graphite (001) surface
along the z axis for the four fragment models. The
horizontal axis of the graph corresponds to the height measured from
the topmost layer of h-BN or graphite. On the left side of the graphs,
one can see the tails of the peaks, which correspond to the mass density
due to the atoms included in the topmost layer of h-BN or graphite.
Of course, the shape of profiles differs from model to model, but
a few common features can be found. For example, in both h-BN and
graphite cases, the peaks corresponding to the epoxy fragment start
to grow at around 2.5 Å and their first high peaks are located
between 3 and 4 Å.

Figure 4 Mass density profiles of the fragments 1, 2, 3, and 4 along
the z-axis on (a) the h-BN or (b) graphite (001)
surface. The bin size
of the horizontal axis, which determines the resolution of the profiles,
is set to 0.25 Å.

Let us move on to a scrutiny of atom–atom separations
at
the interface between the adhesive and adherend. For this purpose,
we employ the radial distribution function (RDF), g(r), as shown in Figure 5. Since Figure 4 implies that the variation from fragment
to fragment is not so significant, the RDF plots for the adhesion
interface shown in Figure 5 are represented by those calculated for the fragment 1/h-BN or the fragment 1/graphite interface.
The RDF plots for the other fragments are shown in the SI.

Figure 5 Radial distribution function (RDF), g(r), calculated for a single optimized
structure of the fragment 1/h-BN interface (a) and that
of the fragment 1/graphite interface (b). In (a), the
separations of the C, H, and
O atoms in the epoxy fragment from the B or N atoms of the h-BN surface
are sampled, whereas in (b), the separations of the C, H, and O atoms
in the epoxy fragment from the C atoms of the graphite surface are
sampled, where C(g) and C(e) mean the C atoms of graphite and those
of the epoxy fragment, respectively. The upper limit of sampled distances
is set to 6.5 Å (but here they are shown up to 4 Å). The
resolution of the histogram is set to 0.05 Å.

The RDF plots for the B–H, N–H, and
C(g)–H
atomic pairs are characterized by relatively broaden peaks, which
start to grow at around r = 2.5 Å. Here, C(g)
means the C atoms of graphite. This observation agrees well with the
distances measured in Figure 3. By contrast, the RDF plots for the B–O, N–O,
and C(g)–O atomic pairs are characterized by sharp peaks. This
feature may have roots in the fact that there are limited number of
O atoms in the structures. The first peaks for the B–O, N–O,
and C(g)–O atomic pairs are located between r = 3 and 3.5 Å. Of course, the peaks associated with the separations
of the C atoms of the epoxy fragment from the surface atoms are found
at further distances.

In the literature,53−55 one can find
some intermolecular N–H and B–O
interactions as exemplified by the ones shown in Scheme 1. An acid–base interaction
can be found between the B atom and the O atom of alcohol or ether.
Such an interaction is characterized by a relatively short intermolecular
distance of around 1.5 Å. A hydrogen bond can be found between
the N atom and the hydroxyl group. Such an interaction is characterized
by a much shorter intermolecular distance of 1.25 Å.

Scheme 1 Structures
of 1:1 Molecular Complexes Bonded by a B–O or N–H
Intermolecular Interaction
The B–O and
N–H
distances are indicated in Angstrom. The structures shown in (a),
(b), and (c) are taken from the crystal structures presented in refs60, 61, and (62), respectively.

Given the intermolecular
B–O and N–H distances found
in Scheme 1, one cannot
expect any specific intermolecular interactions at the interface between
the epoxy fragment and the h-BN(001) surface on the basis of the RDF
plots shown in Figure 5. Also, the RDF plots for the epoxy/h-BN structure look very much
akin to those for the epoxy/graphite structure. This observation makes
us think that one might not be able to find any significant difference
in the adhesion energy or force between the epoxy/h-BN and epoxy/graphite
interfaces. This motivated us to theoretically probe the adhesion
force acting on the interfaces as well as adhesion energies. This
is what we will present in the subsequent sections.

2.5 Adhesion Energy
One can gauge the
adhesion energy between the epoxy fragments and the h-BN or graphite
surface using the following equation:56,57 3  where E(adhesive+adherend) is the total
energy of the surface–resin complex shown in Figure 3 and Eadhesive and Eadherend are,
respectively, the energies of the epoxy fragments and the h-BN or
graphite surface optimized separately. Calculated adhesion energies
are shown in Table 1. Mostly, the adhesion energies of the fragments on the h-BN surface
are slightly larger than those on the graphite surface, but the difference
is very tiny (about 0.1 eV). This difference may be traced back to
the difference in charge separation between the h-BN and graphite
surfaces. Our Hirshfeld-charge analysis58 for the surface models shows that the B and N atoms of the h-BN
surface bear charges of +0.21|e| and −0.21|e|, respectively, whereas the C atoms of the graphite surface
have no charge. Thus, the electrostatic interaction between the epoxy
fragments and the h-BN surface is expected to exist, resulting in
a little bit larger adhesion energy.

Table 1 Adhesion
Energies of the Fragments 1, 2, 3, and 4 on the
h-BN or Graphite Surface in Units of eV
 	fragment 1	fragment 2	fragment 3	fragment 4	
h-BN	1.53	1.57	1.73	1.51	
graphite	1.42	1.45	1.76	1.43	
As for fragment 3, one
can see the opposite trend.
The contribution from the π–π stacking to the adhesion
energy in the case of fragment 3 might make a difference.
We are planning to theoretically design an epoxy adhesive whose affinity
to the graphite or h-BN surface is reinforced through π–π
stacking.

The adhesion energy can be decomposed into the interaction
energy
and the distortion energies of the adherend and the surface.59 Such a scheme of energy decomposition can be
traced back to the distortion/interaction model of Houk and co-workers60,61 or the activation strain model of Bickelhaupt and co-workers.62,63 The distortion energies of the epoxy fragments and the h-BN or graphite
surface are presented in the SI. The distortion
energies of the h-BN and graphite surfaces are at most 0.02 eV, whereas
those of the fragment models are at most 0.05 eV. This difference
may reflect the flexibility of the epoxy fragments and the robust
nature of h-BN and graphite. However, these energies can generally
be regarded as a tiny number. So, we can expect that the adhesion
energies tabulated in Table 1 mainly come from the interaction between the surface and
the adherend, and the effects of distortion can be negligible.

2.6 Adhesion Force
Here, we turn to how
large is the adhesion force during the detachment of the epoxy fragments
from the h-BN or graphite surface. In our previous studies, we proposed
a way of estimating the adhesion force.41,56,57 The main points of the methodology are summarized
as follows: First, one needs to obtain the interaction potential energy
curve with respect to separation between the adhesive molecule and
the adherend surface, and then one can convert the potential curve
to the adhesion–force curve by using the derivative of the
potential curve with respect to the displacement of the adhesive molecule
from the position of stable equilibrium.

There may be some ways
to probe the potential energy curve associated with the detachment
of the adhesive molecule; for example, one could increase the displacement
of the adhesive molecule in the direction perpendicular to the surface
step by step and perform a single-point calculation or a partial optimization
at each step, resulting in a potential-energy plot as a function of
the displacement, i.e., energy–distance curve.41,56,57

The last 2 decades have
witnessed a significant development of
the computational methods for the potential-surface search or the
search for the minimum-energy path (MEP), such as the nudged-elastic-band
(NEB) method,64 which is what we adopted
for the purpose of the calculation of the potential-energy curve,
which, thus obtained, is sometimes termed the NEB chain.

The
NEB method is implemented in VASP and available, though the
computational cost for the NEB calculation is usually large. But our
computational resource is enough for conducting it. An advantage of
the NEB calculations is that we do not need to impose artificial constraints
on the adhesive structure. We need such constraints in the MEP search
with the partial optimization. Therefore, the MEP or the distance–energy
curve obtained from the NEB computation is likely to be more plausible.

To carry out an NEB calculation, one needs to locate two local
minima: the initial state and the final state. In our simulation,
the initial state corresponds to the structure in which the adhesive
molecule is attached on the adherend surface. The structures shown
in Figure 3 were used
as the initial state. As for the final-state structure, we used a
structure in which the adhesive molecule is well separated from the
surface. To obtain such a structure, the epoxy fragments were displaced
in the direction perpendicular to the surface by 3 Å, and then
the whole structure was optimized without any constraints except for
the lowermost layer of the h-BN or graphite slab.65 Using these initial-state and final-state structures, we
performed an NEB calculation with 16 images for the fragments 1, 2, 3, and 4 on the
h-BN and graphite surfaces.

Figure 6 shows the
MEP or energy–distance curve associated with the detachment
of the epoxy fragments 1, 2, 3, and 4 from the h-BN or graphite surface. Notice that
there are 18 points on each potential curve: two of them correspond
to the initial and the final states and the other 16 points correspond
to the intermediate images of the NEB chain.

Figure 6 Energy–distance
curves or the NEB chains associated with
the detachment of the epoxy fragments from (a) the h-BN or (b) graphite
surface. The horizontal axis indicates the displacement of the center
of gravity of the epoxy fragment from the position of stable equilibrium.
The lines are least-squares fitting to the Morse potential (see the
text for more detail).

The calculated plots of the energy versus distance were approximated
by a Morse potential curve by using the least-squares method.41,56,57 The Morse potential used is written
as follows 4  where De is the
binding energy or the adhesive energy, a is a constant
specific to a system, and Δr is the displacement
of the epoxy fragment. The approximated Morse potential curves are
also shown in Figure 6. It is clear from this figure that the potential curves are perfectly
fitted by the Morse function, where the R2 value of the fitting is no smaller than 0.98.

The fitting
parameters De and a are
tabulated in the SI. One
could get something out of them, as can be seen in the literature,42 but here the variation from fragment to fragment
or that from surface to surface appears not so large. Nevertheless,
we note that there is a good correspondence between the De values and the adhesion energies.

The derivative
of eq 4 with respect
to the displacement produces a force–displacement
curve as follows 5  Figure 7 shows calculated adhesion forces exerted on the fragments 1, 2, 3, and 4 upon
the detachment from the h-BN or graphite surface. On both surfaces,
the adhesion forces take their maximum values, Fmax, when the displacement approaches 0.6 Å. The Fmax values are summarized in Table 2. The Fmax value of the fragment 3 is about 1.6 nN in
both cases, and this is the largest of the four fragments. The other
three fragments have almost the same Fmax value, which falls in a range from 1.3 to 1.5 nN. This trend is
almost consistent with that found in the adhesion energy (see Table 1).

Figure 7 Adhesion force–displacement
curves for the four fragments
on (a) the h-BN or (b) graphite surface calculated from eq 5.

Table 2 Maximum Adhesion Forces of the Fragments 1, 2, 3, and 4 onto
the h-BN or Graphite Surface in Units of nN
 	fragment 1	fragment 2	fragment 3	fragment 4	
h-BN	1.44	1.46	1.58	1.39	
graphite	1.36	1.42	1.62	1.37	
2.7 Hellmann–Feynman
Force as Adhesion
Force
When it comes to interatomic forces in general, putting
aside our convention of the derivative of the Morse potential, one
may apply a remarkable theorem named after Hellmann and Feynman.66,67 From this theorem, the z-component of the force
on the Ith nucleus can be calculated as68,69 6  where ZI is the z-coordinate of the Ith nucleus, Ψ is the normalized wave function, and V is the potential energy that consists of electronic repulsion,
nuclear repulsion, and electron–nuclear interaction. The magnitude
of the sum of the z-component of the Hellmann–Feynman
force on a nucleus over all atoms included in the epoxy fragment leads
to another measure of the adhesion force as follows 7  VASP provides us with the value of FIZ on each atom so that we
can evaluate the adhesion force working on the fragments using this
equation. Here, one should notice that since we turn on the dispersion
correction in our computation, the van der Waals force acting on each
atom is also included in FIZ.

Figure 8 shows the adhesion force–displacement plots calculated from eq 7 (Hellmann–Feynman
force). For comparison, the adhesion force–displacement curves
obtained from the Morse-potential approximation are also shown. We
do not see any significant inconsistency between them. The difference
in the maximum adhesion force between these two methods is no larger
than 0.2 nN. Since the two different methods predict almost the same
adhesion force, the numbers listed in Table 2 can be viewed as reliable. However, it is
a pity that we do not find any experimental values to be compared
in the literature.

Figure 8 Hellmann–Feynman adhesion forces acting on the
fragments 1 (blue diamonds), 2 (orange square), 3 (gray triangle), and 4 (yellow square) evaluated
at
each image of the NEB chain using eq 7 on the h-BN (a) or graphite (b) surface. For comparison,
they are plotted on the adhesion force–displacement curves
obtained from the Morse-potential approximation, which are the same
as those shown in Figure 7.

2.8 Force-Decomposition
Analysis
In previous
sections, we have calculated the adhesion energies and the adhesion
forces for the epoxy/h-BN and epoxy/graphite interfaces; we have not
perceived any notable difference between them. This observation is
actually a bit of a surprise to us. In this section, we will probe
the origin of the adhesion forces in both interfaces and try to understand
why both surfaces have almost the same affinity to the epoxy fragments.
To this end, we conduct a force–decomposition analysis.

In this study, we adopt the dispersion correction scheme of Tkatchenko–Scheffler.
As shown in eq 1, the
whole energy can be separated into the contributions from the DFT
term and the dispersion–correction one. The derivative of each
term with respect to the displacement results in the decomposition
of the whole adhesion force–displacement curve into two force
curves: one is due to the PBE-functional-based force, denoted as FDFT, and the other is due to the dispersion
force, denoted as Fdisp, as expressed
by 8  Up to this point, we have not seen any significant
variation from fragment to fragment, and hence we only perform the
force–decomposition analysis for the fragment 1 on the h-BN or graphite surface.

As shown in Figure 9, we decompose the energies
of the images in the NEB chain corresponding
to the detachment process of fragment 1 from the h-BN
or graphite surface into the contributions from the DFT energy and
the dispersion–correction one. In contrast with Figure 6, where the energy of the initial
image of the NEB chain is set to the origin of energy, the energy
of the final image of the NEB chain is set to the origin of energy
in this figure. As such, here the positive energy corresponds to repulsion,
whereas the negative one corresponds to attraction.

Figure 9 For all images in the
NEB chain used for the simulation of the
detachment process of fragment 1 from (a) the h-BN or
(b) graphite surface, the potential energy at each point is decomposed
into the contributions from the DFT energy (denoted by red diamonds)
and dispersion–correction one (denoted by blue squares). The
points of the DFT and dispersion energies are well fitted to 6th order
polynomials, which are drawn by the red and blue curves, respectively.

Comparing Figures 9a,b, we notice that both graphs show a similar
trend that the contribution
from the PBE functional of DFT is very small but the effect of dispersion
force is significant. As the epoxy fragment gets closer to the surface,
the potential energy coming from the dispersion force goes down, whereas
the DFT energy goes up. Thus, we come to a conclusion that epoxy resin
can be adhered to both surfaces of h-BN and graphite mainly through
dispersion interaction, so the inclusion of the dispersion correction
in the DFT calculation of adhesion is essential.

Let us convert Figure 9 to the adhesion
force–displacement curve. To this
end, we need to calculate the derivatives of the curves in this figure.
When we made Figure 7, the energy–displacement plots were nicely approximated by
the Morese potential, but now we cannot use it for the dispersion
energy–displacement curves because the shapes of the curves
appear different from the Morse potential. Therefore, for now, we
use a polynomial regression: two plots in each panel in Figure 9 are fitted to 6th order polynomials
with an R2 value of 1.00. The exact forms
of the approximated polynomial equations and their derivatives are
shown in the SI.

The derivatives
of the approximated polynomial functions are plotted
in Figure 10. It is
clear from this figure that the main attractive force acting at the
two interfaces is the dispersion force, whereas the DFT contribution
acts as a repulsive force in a region where the separation of the
resin from the surface is small. The attractive contribution of the
DFT force can be found in a range of displacement from 0.8 to 2.4
Å, but its magnitude is very small.

Figure 10 Adhesion force–displacement
curve for fragment 1 on (a) the h-BN or (b) graphite
surface is decomposed into contributions
from the DFT (red) and dispersion (blue) parts.

2.9 Origin of Dispersion Force
As shown
in Figure 10, the
dispersion force working at the epoxy/h-BN interface is as large as
that at the epoxy/graphite interface, and the dispersion force is
the dominant intermolecular force resulting in the adhesion force.
In this section, we intend to pursue the reason why the magnitudes
of the dispersion forces at the two interfaces are almost the same.
To this end, we need to trace back to the original formulation of
the dispersion correction by Tkatchenko and Scheffler (TS),36 which was used in our study. The general formulation
used in this method is formally identical to that of Grimme’s
D2 method,70 where a pairwise interatomic C6R–6 term
is added to the DFT energy. The added term reads35 9  where C6ij is the C6 coefficient for the
atomic pair (i and j), rij is the distance between the ith and jth atoms, and fd,6(rij) is the short-ranged damping function that scales the force
field so as to avoid the singularity. The summations run over all N atoms. Also, all translations of the unit cell have to
be included in the summation, but this is not indicated explicitly
in eq 9. From the form
of this equation, the dispersion energy is significantly affected
by the C6 parameter.

In Grimme’s
formulation, C6ij is
calculated from the geometric mean of the element-specific C6 parameters for the ith and jth atoms. Grimme proposed a simple computational scheme
for the C6 parameters based on the London
formula for dispersion, where C6 can be
regarded to be proportional to the atomic ionization potential and
the static dipole polarizability. In this method, however, the parameter is only dependent on the element, fixed during the
calculation, and not sensitive to the particular chemical environment.

On the other hand, in the TS method, the C6 parameter is dependent on the atomic charge density so that
variation in the local chemical environment can be taken into account.
The C6 parameter for the ith atom can be calculated from 10  where C6ifree is the C6 parameter for the free atom and νi is the effective atomic volume estimated
from the partitioning of the total electron density proposed by Hirshfeld.58 νi can be
written as 11  where r is the distance from
the nucleus of the atom i, ρ is the total electron
density, ρifree is the electron density of the neutral
free atom i, and wi is the Hirshfeld atomic partitioning weight for the atom i. The partitioning weight wi can be estimated from 12  Once the parameters C6i and C6j are determined using eqs 10–12, one can evaluate
the pairwise parameter C6ij using the following equation 13  where αi is the free-atomic reference
value for the static polarizability
of the ith atom.

As far as the interfacial
dispersion interaction goes (cf. Figure 9), the formulation
of the dispersion correction (eq 9) may be rewritten as 14  where i runs over all the
atoms included in the surface, whereas j runs over
all the atoms in the epoxy fragment. The contributions of the dispersion
energy coming from the atom pairs inside the surface or the epoxy
fragment also exist, but the amplitudes of such contributions are
not expected to change in the process of detachment more or less because
the structural deformation of the adherend surface and the epoxy resin
was found to be small; their contributions are likely to be canceled
when one calculates the energy difference ΔEdisp.

When compared between the epoxy/h-BN and epoxy/graphite
interfaces,
the epoxy fragment is common. Thus, the C6 parameters for the atoms included in the h-BN or graphite surface
should be investigated closely. Table 3 summarizes the average values of the C6 parameters in the TS scheme for the B and N atoms in
the h-BN surface and the one for the C atoms in the graphite surface.
Note that the C6 parameter in the TS scheme
varies from atom to atom even if they are the same element because
of different chemical environment. Thus, we calculated the average
value as listed in Table 3.

Table 3 Average Values of the C6 Parameters for the B and N Atoms in the h-BN Surface
and the One for the C Atoms in the Graphite Surface in Units of Jnm6 mol–1
B	N	C	
3.68	1.07	1.97	
The C6 parameter increases
in the order:
N < C < B. Hence, we come to a conclusion that at the epoxy/h-BN
interface, the B atoms result in a strong dispersion force, but the
N atoms result in a weak dispersion force; therefore, the total dispersion
force is moderate, whereas the C6 parameter
for the C atoms in the epoxy/graphite interface has a middle value
between the C6 parameters for the B and
N atoms, so the total dispersion force for this interface is also
moderate. We believe this should be a possible reason why the two
interfacial interactions end up with almost the same dispersion force.

2.10 Missing Hydrogen Bond
We had expected
a hydrogen bond formation between the OH group in the epoxy fragment
and the N atoms on the h-BN surface, but such a hydrogen bond is not
observed. When it comes to the N···H–O type
H-bonding, the two-orbital–two-electron interaction is expected
to exist between the lone-pair orbital of the N atom and the unoccupied
antibonding orbital of the O–H bond (σO-H*).31 We hypothesized that a lone-pair
orbital could be found on the N atoms of the h-BN surface, but that
has proven not to be true, as delineated below.

We carried out
the calculation of the electron localization function (ELF)71,72 for the h-BN surface to identify whether or not the lone pair exists
on the N atoms in the h-BN surface. For comparison, the ELF for the
graphite surface was also calculated. They are plotted in Figure 11. The ELF takes
a value ranging from 0 to 1. High ELF values, approaching 1, correspond
to paired electrons, such as lone pairs, bonds, and core electrons,
whereas the ELF values around 0.5 correspond to a uniform electron
gas.73

Figure 11 Isosurface (yellow) of the electron localization
function (ELF)
with the value of 0.85 for (a) the h-BN and (b) graphite (001) surfaces.
Gray balls indicate N, green balls indicate B, and brown balls indicate
C.

In Figure 11a,
we cannot find any ELF isosurface corresponding to N’s lone
pair, which could be a potential H acceptor of H bond. This finding
should be important for understanding the absence of H-bonding in
epoxy/h-BN interface. If the ELF is calculated for an NH3 molecular crystal, a clear lobe corresponding to the lone pair can
be observed on the N atom in the ELF isosurface plot (see the SI). Thus, the absence of N’s lone pair
is likely to be an inherent feature of h-BN. This may also be a key
to the inertness of the h-BN surface.

Instead, high ELF values
are found in the middle of the B–N
bonds and the C–C bonds in Figures 11a,b, respectively. These two plots look
alike in that the high-ELF regions are centered on the bonds, implying
that electrons are mainly localized in bonds. Such ELF plots reflect
the covalent nature of the B–N and C–C bonds. If h-BN
was ionic, high ELF values would be observed only near N atoms, but
that is not true.

3 Summary and Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented a theoretical study on the interfacial
interaction between epoxy resin and h-BN or graphite with applications
to nanocomposite materials in mind. h-BN and graphite share a structural
feature that they consist of the stacking of hexagonal honeycomb layers;
however, the C–C bonds in graphite and the B–N bonds
in h-BN have quite a different electronic character. For example,
the former has delocalized π-electrons and is characterized
as a conductor, whereas the latter is an insulator due to the polarity
of the B–N bonds. We expected that such a difference in the
electronic structure would result in different adhesion interaction
with epoxy resin. But that has not proven to be true. Both h-BN and
graphite surfaces have almost the same affinity to epoxy resin, which
is found to be governed by dispersion interaction.

To investigate
the interfacial interaction of the basal surfaces
of h-BN and graphite with epoxy resin, we used fragment models of
epoxy resin, which can reproduce a local interaction between the surface
and resin. The adhesion structures formed between the fragment structure
and the surface slab were obtained from the first-principles simulated
annealing method followed by geometry optimization. The adhesion structures
were analyzed by using the mass density profile and the radial distribution
function, but we have not seen a significant variation between the
epoxy/h-BN and epoxy/graphite models. No H-bonding was observed in
the two kinds of interfaces. However, we have found a structure that
hints at the importance of the π–π stacking between
the benzene ring of the epoxy fragment and the h-BN or graphite surface
for the reinforcement of adhesion. The above-mentioned observation
is almost consistent with the calculated adhesion energies of the
investigated interfaces.

We have simulated the adhesion force–separation
distance
curves in two different methods: one is based on the Morse-potential
approximation and the other is evaluated from the Hellmann–Feynman
force. In both of them, the potential-energy surface associated with
the detachment of the epoxy fragment from the surface is sampled by
using the NEB method. The results of the calculations for the two
interfaces coincide with each other. Very similar adhesion–force
curves were obtained for the two interfaces. To understand this feature,
we conducted a force-decomposition analysis, in which the total adhesion
force is separated into the contributions from the DFT force and the
dispersion force due to the Tkatchenko–Scheffler dispersion
correction. As a result, we found that most of the attractive force
working at both epoxy/h-BN and epoxy/graphite interfaces is dominated
by the dispersion force and its magnitude is comparable between them.
The contribution from the DFT force to attraction was found to be
negligible, and hence it is inevitable to include the dispersion correction
when one wants to calculate adhesion interfaces with DFT.

The
fact that the adhesion force between the epoxy/h-BN and epoxy/graphite
interfaces is the same originates from the C6 parameters of the B, N, and C atoms used for the dispersion
correction. At the epoxy/h-BN interface, the C6 parameter of the B atoms is larger but that of the N atoms
is smaller, resulting in a moderate dispersion force. In the case
of the epoxy/graphite interface, the C6 parameter of the C atoms of graphite is larger than that of the
N atoms but smaller than that of the B atoms, resulting a moderate
dispersion force. This is why the two interfaces end up with almost
the same adhesion interaction. As for the absence of the H-bonding
in epoxy/h-BN interfaces, which we had anticipated, our ELF calculation
has revealed that there is no lone-pair orbital on the N atoms, so
the N atoms in the h-BN surface cannot act as an H acceptor of H bond.

4 Computational Methods
In this study, all of the periodic
density functional theory (DFT)
calculations were carried out by using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation
Package (VASP 5.4.1).74−76 The generalized gradient approximation of Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof
(GGA-PBE)77 was adopted for the exchange–correlation
functional. The electron–ion interactions were treated within
the projector-augmented wave scheme.78,79 A plane-wave
basis set cutoff of 600 eV, self-consistent field tolerance of 1.0
× 10–5 eV, Brillouin zone sampling on a grid
of spacing 2π × 0.05 Å–1, and 0.05
eV/Å threshold of forces on atoms guaranteed good convergence.
The structure graphics were produced by using VESTA.80

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00129.Benchmark test
of the dispersion–correction methods,
effects of layers included in the slab model on the surface energy,
top view of the surface slab model, radial distribution function plots,
the distortion energies of the epoxy fragments and the h-BN or graphite
surface, fitting parameters for the Morse potential, exact forms of
the approximated polynomial equations, ELF isosurface for an NH3 crystal structure, coordinates of the optimized structures,
and supplementary references (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b00129_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by
KAKENHI grant numbers JP15K13710,
JP17K14440, and JP17H03117 from Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
and Technology of Japan (MEXT), the MEXT Projects of “Integrated
Research Consortium on Chemical Sciences”, “Cooperative
Research Program of Network Joint Research Center for Materials and
Devices”, “Elements Strategy Initiative to Form Core
Research Center”, and JST-CREST “Innovative Catalysts”.
The computation was mainly carried out using the computer facilities
at Research Institute for Information Technology, Kyushu University.
Y.T. thanks JSPS Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative
Areas “Discrete Geometric Analysis for Materials Design”:
Grant Number JP18H04488.
==== Refs
References
Mai Y.-W. ; Yu Z.-Z.   Eds. Polymer Nanocomposites ; CRC : Boca Raton , 2006 .
Thakur V. K. ; Thakur M. K.  Eco-Friendly
Polymer Nanocomposites: Chemistry and Applications . Advanced Structured Materials ; Springer : New Delhi , 2015 .
Pandey J. K. ; Takagi H. ; Nakagaito A. N. ; Kim H.-J.  Processing,
Performance and Application: Polymer Nanocomposites of Cellulose Nanoparticles . Handbook of Polymer Nanocomposites ; Springer : Berlin , 2014 ; Vol. C.
Han Z. ; Wood J.
W. ; Herman H. ; Zhang C. ; Stevens G. C.  Thermal Properties of Composites Filled with
Different Fillers ; IEEE International Symposium
on Electrical Insulation : Vancouver , 2008 .
Pissis P. ; Kotsilkova R.  Thermoset Nanocomposites
for Engineering Applications ; Smithers Rapra
Technology Limited : Shawbury , 2007 .
Lee D. ; Song S. H. ; Hwang J. ; Jin S. H. ; Park K. H. ; Kim B. H. ; Hong S. H. ; Jeon S. 
Enhanced Mechanical
Properties of Epoxy Nanocomposites by Mixing Noncovalently Functionalized
Boron Nitride Nanoflakes . Small 
2013 , 9 , 2602 –2610 . 10.1002/smll.201203214 .23457081 
Rittigstein P. ; Torkelson J. M. 
Polymer–Nanoparticle Interfacial
Interactions
in Polymer Nanocomposites: Confinement Effects on Glass Transition
Temperature and Suppression of Physical Aging . J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 
2006 , 44 , 2935 –2943 . 10.1002/polb.20925 .
Zare Y. ; Garmabi H. 
Modeling of Interfacial Bonding between Two Nanofillers
(Montmorillonite and CaCO3) and a Polymer Matrix (PP) in
a Ternary Polymer Nanocomposite . Appl. Surf.
Sci. 
2014 , 321 , 219 –225 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2014.09.156 .
Yung K. C. ; Liem H. 
Enhanced Thermal Conductivity
of Boron Nitride Epoxy-Matrix Composite
through Multi-Modal Particle Size Mixing . J.
Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2007 , 106 , 3587 –3591 . 10.1002/app.27027 .
Barzic A. I. , Ioan S.  , Eds. Multiphase Polymer
Systems: Micro-to Nanostructural Evolution in Advanced Technologies ; CRC Press : Boca
Raton , 2016 .
Zhu B. L. ; Ma J. ; Wu J. ; Yung K. C. ; Xie C. S. 
Study on the Properties
of the Epoxy-Matrix Composites Filled with Thermally Conductive AlN
and BN Ceramic Particles . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2010 , 118 , 2754 –2764 . 10.1002/app.32673 .
Lin Z. Y. ; McNamara A. ; Liu Y. ; Moon K. S. ; Wong C. P. 
Exfoliated
Hexagonal Boron Nitride-Based Polymer Nanocomposite with Enhanced
Thermal Conductivity for Electronic Encapsulation . Compos. Sci. Technol. 
2014 , 90 , 123 –128 . 10.1016/j.compscitech.2013.10.018 .
Teng C.-C. ; Ma C.-C. M. ; Lu C.-H. ; Yang S.-Y. ; Lee S.-H. ; Hsiao M.-C. ; Yen M.-Y. ; Chiou K.-C. ; Lee T.-M. 
Thermal
Conductivity and Structure of Non-Covalent Functionalized Graphene/Epoxy
Composites . Carbon 
2011 , 49 , 5107 –5116 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2011.06.095 .
Li Q. ; Guo Y. ; Li W. ; Qiu S. ; Zhu C. ; Wei X. ; Chen M. ; Liu C. ; Liao S. ; Gong Y. ; Mishra A. K. ; Liu L. 
Ultrahigh Thermal Conductivity of
Assembled Aligned Multilayer Graphene/Epoxy Composite . Chem. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 4459 –4465 . 10.1021/cm501473t .
Tang L. C. ; Wan Y. J. ; Yan D. ; Pei Y. B. ; Zhao L. ; Li Y. B. ; Wu L. B. ; Jiang J. X. ; Lai G. Q. 
The Effect
of Graphene Dispersion on the Mechanical Properties of Graphene/Epoxy
Composites . Carbon 
2013 , 60 , 16 –27 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2013.03.050 .
Naebe M. ; Wang J. ; Amini A. ; Khayyam H. ; Hameed N. ; Li L. H. ; Chen Y. ; Fox B. 
Mechanical
Property
and Structure of Covalent Functionalised Graphene/Epoxy Nanocomposites . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 437510.1038/srep04375 .24625497 
Jović N. ; Dudic D. ; Montone A. ; Antisari M. V. ; Mitric M. ; Djokovic V. 
Temperature Dependence
of the Electrical Conductivity
of Epoxy/Expanded Graphite Nanosheet Composites . Scr. Mater. 
2008 , 58 , 846 –849 . 10.1016/j.scriptamat.2007.12.041 .
Liang J. ; Wang Y. ; Huang Y. ; Ma Y. ; Liu Z. ; Cai J. ; Zhang C. ; Gao H. ; Chen Y. 
Electromagnetic Interference
Shielding of Graphene/Epoxy Composites . Carbon 
2009 , 47 , 922 –925 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2008.12.038 .
An J. E. ; Jeong Y. G. 
Structure and Electric
Heating Performance of Graphene/Epoxy
Composite Films . Eur. Polym. J. 
2013 , 49 , 1322 –1330 . 10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2013.02.005 .
Lee J. H. ; Kang S. G. ; Choe Y. ; Lee S. G. 
Mechanism of Adhesion
of the Diglycidyl Ether of Bisphenol A (DGEBA) to the Fe(100) Surface . Compos. Sci. Technol. 
2016 , 126 , 9 –16 . 10.1016/j.compscitech.2016.02.002 .
Lee J. H. ; Choe Y. ; Lee S. G. 
Adhesion
Mechanism of Bisphenol A
Diglycidyl Ether (BADGE) on an α-Fe2O3 (0001) Surface . J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 
2017 , 53 , 62 –67 . 10.1016/j.jiec.2017.03.047 .
Bahlakeh G. ; Ghaffari M. ; Saeb M. R. ; Ramezanzadeh B. ; De Proft F. ; Terryn H. 
A Close-up of the Effect
of Iron
Oxide Type on the Interfacial Interaction between Epoxy and Carbon
Steel: Combined Molecular Dynamics Simulations and Quantum Mechanics . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 11014 –11026 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b03133 .
Bahlakeh G. ; Ramezanzadeh B. 
A Detailed Molecular Dynamics Simulation and Experimental
Investigation on the Interfacial Bonding Mechanism of an Epoxy Adhesive
on Carbon Steel Sheets Decorated with a Novel Cerium–Lanthanum
Nanofilm . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 17536 –17551 . 10.1021/acsami.7b00644 .28480713 
Bahlakeh G. ; Ramezanzadeh B. ; Saeb M. R. ; Terryn H. ; Ghaffari M. 
Corrosion
Protection Properties and Interfacial Adhesion Mechanism of an Epoxy/Polyamide
Coating Applied on the Steel Surface Decorated with Cerium Oxide Nanofilm:
Complementary Experimental, Molecular Dynamics (MD) and First Principle
Quantum Mechanics (QM) Simulation Methods . Appl.
Surf. Sci. 
2017 , 419 , 650 –669 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.05.070 .
Bahlakeh G. ; Ramezanzadeh B. ; Ramezanzadeh M. 
New Detailed Insights on the Role
of a Novel Praseodymium Nanofilm on the Polymer/Steel Interfacial
Adhesion Bonds in Dry and Wet Conditions: An Integrated Molecular
Dynamics Simulation and Experimental Study . J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 
2018 , 85 , 221 –236 . 10.1016/j.jtice.2018.01.013 .
Chen Y. I.   Ed. Nanotubes and
Nanosheets: Functionalization and Applications of Boron Nitride and
Other Nanomaterials ; CRC Press : Boca Raton , 2015 .
Marom N. ; Bernstein J. ; Garel J. ; Tkatchenko A. ; Joselevich E. ; Kronik L. ; Hod O. 
Stacking and Registry
Effects in Layered Materials: The Case of Hexagonal Boron Nitride . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2010 , 105 , 04680110.1103/PhysRevLett.105.046801 .20867872 
Yoshizawa K. ; Yumura T. ; Yamabe T. ; Bandow S. 
The Role of Orbital
Interactions in Determining the Interlayer Spacing in Graphite Slabs . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2000 , 122 , 11871 –11875 . 10.1021/ja994457o .
Wu H. ; Zhao W. ; Hu H. ; Chen G. 
One-Step In Situ Ball
Milling Synthesis of Polymer-Functionalized Graphene Nanocomposites . J. Mater. Chem. 
2011 , 21 , 8626 –8632 . 10.1039/c1jm10819k .
Ma R. ; Wan X. ; Zhang T. ; Yang N. ; Luo T.  Interfacial Thermal Transport in Boron
Nitride-Polymer
Nanocomposite . arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.11201, 2017 .
Yoshizawa K. ; Semoto T. ; Hitaoka S. ; Higuchi C. ; Shiota Y. ; Tanaka H. 
Synergy of Electrostatic
and van der Waals Interactions
in the Adhesion of Epoxy Resin with Carbon-Fiber and Glass Surfaces . Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 
2017 , 90 , 500 –505 . 10.1246/bcsj.20160426 .
Klesnar H. P. ; Rogl P. 
Phase Relations in
the Ternary Systems Rare-Earth Metal (RE)-Boron-Nitrogen,
Where RE = Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Lu, Sc, and Y . High Temp. High Press. 
1990 , 22 , 453 –457 .
Zhao Y. X. ; Spain I. L. 
X-Ray Diffraction Data for Graphite to 20 GPa . Phys. Rev. B 
1989 , 40 , 993 10.1103/PhysRevB.40.993 .
Tuma C. ; Sauer J. 
Treating Dispersion
Effects in Extended Systems by Hybrid MP2: DFT
Calculations—Protonation of Isobutene in Zeolite Ferrierite . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2006 , 8 , 3955 –3965 . 10.1039/B608262A .17028686 
Kresse G. ; Furthmüller J.  VASP the
Guide . http://cms.mpi.univie.ac.at/vasp/vasp/vasp.html.
Tkatchenko A. ; Scheffler M. 
Accurate Molecular
van der Waals Interactions from
Ground-State Electron Density and Free-Atom Reference Data . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2009 , 102 , 07300510.1103/PhysRevLett.102.073005 .19257665 
Wu Z. ; Overbury S. H.  ; Eds. Catalysis by
Materials with Well-Defined Structures , 1 st ed.; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 2015 .
Cherkaoui M. ; Capolungo L.  Atomistic and Continuum
Modeling of Nanocrystalline Materials ; Springer-Verlag : New York , 2009 .
Chung J. ; Ryu B. 
Crystallization Behavior of Phosphate
Glasses with Hydrophobic Coating
Materials . J. Nanomater. 
2015 , 2015 , 98172010.1155/2015/981720 .
Sholl D. S. ; Steckel J. A.  Density Functional
Theory: A Practical Introduction ; Wiley : Hoboken , 2009 .
Semoto T. ; Tsuji Y. ; Yoshizawa K. 
Molecular
Understanding of the Adhesive
Force between a Metal Oxide Surface and an Epoxy Resin: Effects of
Surface Water . Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 
2012 , 85 , 672 –678 . 10.1246/bcsj.20120028 .
Higuchi C. ; Tanaka H. ; Yoshizawa K. 
Molecular
Understanding of the Adhesive
Interactions between Silica Surface and Epoxy Resin: Effects of Interfacial
Water . J. Comput. Chem. 
2019 , 40 , 164 –171 . 10.1002/jcc.25559 .30306594 
Tocci G. ; Joly L. ; Michaelides A. 
Friction of Water on Graphene and
Hexagonal Boron Nitride from Ab Initio Methods: Very Different Slippage
despite Very Similar Interface Structures . Nano
Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 6872 –6877 . 10.1021/nl502837d .25394228 
Bai J.  ; Ed. Advanced Fibre-Reinforced
Polymer (FRP) Composites for Structural Applications ; Woodhead Publ. Oxford , 2013 .
Prodhomme P. Y. ; Raybaud P. ; Toulhoat H. 
Free-Energy Profiles Along Reduction
Pathways of MoS2 M-Edge and S-Edge by Dihydrogen: A First-Principles
Study . J. Catal. 
2011 , 280 , 178 –195 . 10.1016/j.jcat.2011.03.017 .
Bedolla P. O. ; Feldbauer G. ; Wolloch M. ; Gruber C. ; Eder S. J. ; Dörr N. ; Mohn P. ; Redinger J. ; Vernes A. 
Density Functional
Investigation of the Adsorption of Isooctane, Ethanol, and Acetic
Acid on a Water-Covered Fe(100) Surface . J.
Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 21428 –21437 . 10.1021/jp504695m .
Ogata S. ; Uranagase M. 
Unveiling
the Chemical Reactions Involved in Moisture-Induced
Weakening of Adhesion between Aluminum and Epoxy Resin . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2018 , 122 , 17748 –17755 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b03549 .
Nishio M. ; Hirota M. ; Umezawa Y.  The CH/π Interaction.
Evidence, Nature and Consequences ; Wiley : New York , 1998 .
Khanh P. N. ; Ngan V. T. ; Man N. T. H. ; Nhung N. T. A. ; Chandra A. K. ; Trung N. T. 
An Insight into Csp–H···
π Hydrogen Bonds and Stability of Complexes Formed by Acetylene
and Its Substituted Derivatives with Benzene and Borazine . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 10666210.1039/C6RA21557B .
Tsuzuki S. ; Fujii A. 
Nature and Physical
Origin of CH/π Interaction: Significant
Difference from Conventional Hydrogen Bonds . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2008 , 10 , 2584 –2594 . 10.1039/b718656h .18464973 
Novoa J.  , Ed. Intermolecular Interactions
in Crystals: Fundamentals of Crystal Engineering ; The Royal Society of Chemistry : Cambridge , 2017 .
The
distances measured from the benzene ring
of the fragment 3 to the h-BN and graphite surfaces are
3.3 and 3.4 Å, respectively. These values are very close to the
typical value of the π-π stacking separation and the interlayer
distances of h-BN and graphite shown in Figure 1.


Mootz D. ; Steffen M. 
Fluoride und Fluorosäuren.
IV. Kristallstrukturen
von Bortrifluorid und seinen 1: 1-Verbindungen mit Wasser und Methanol,
Hydroxo-und Methoxotrifluoroborsäure . Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
1981 , 483 , 171 –180 . 10.1002/zaac.19814831222 .
Wagner T. ; Eigendorf U. ; Herberich G. E. ; Englert U. 
From Crystal to Crystal:
A Reconstructive Solid-State Reaction . Struct.
Chem. 
1994 , 5 , 233 –237 . 10.1007/BF02275496 .
Steiner T. ; Majerz I. ; Wilson C. C. 
First O–H···N
Hydrogen Bond with a Centered Proton Position Obtained by Thermally
Induced Proton Migration . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. Engl. 
2001 , 40 , 2651 –2654 . 10.1002/1521-3773(20010716)40:14<2651::AID-ANIE2651>3.0.CO;2-2 .
Semoto T. ; Tsuji Y. ; Yoshizawa K. 
Molecular
Understanding of the Adhesive
Force between a Metal Oxide Surface and an Epoxy Resin . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 11701 –11708 . 10.1021/jp202785b .
Semoto T. ; Tsuji Y. ; Tanaka H. ; Yoshizawa K. 
Role of Edge
Oxygen Atoms on the Adhesive Interaction between Carbon Fiber and
Epoxy Resin . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 24830 –24835 . 10.1021/jp407835d .
Hirshfeld F. L. 
Bonded-Atom
Fragments for Describing Molecular Charge Densities . Theor. Chim. Acta 
1977 , 44 , 129 –138 . 10.1007/BF00549096 .
Tsuji Y. ; Yoshizawa K. 
Adsorption
and Activation of Methane on the (110) Surface
of Rutile-Type Metal Dioxides . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2018 , 122 , 15359 –15381 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b03184 .
Ess D. H. ; Houk K. N. 
Distortion/Interaction
Energy Control of 1,3-Dipolar
Cycloaddition Reactivity . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 10646 –10647 . 10.1021/ja0734086 .17685614 
Liu F. ; Paton R. S. ; Kim S. ; Liang Y. ; Houk K. N. 
Diels–Alder
Reactivities of Strained and Unstrained Cycloalkenes with Normal and
Inverse-Electron-Demand Dienes: Activation Barriers and Distortion/Interaction
Analysis . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 15642 –15649 . 10.1021/ja408437u .24044412 
Bickelhaupt F. M. 
Understanding
Reactivity with Kohn–Sham Molecular Orbital Theory: E2–SN2
Mechanistic Spectrum and Other Concepts . J.
Comput. Chem. 
1999 , 20 , 114 –128 . 10.1002/(SICI)1096-987X(19990115)20:1<114::AID-JCC12>3.0.CO;2-L .
Diefenbach A. ; Bickelhaupt F. M. 
Oxidative
Addition of Pd to C–H, C–C
and C–Cl Bonds: Importance of Relativistic Effects in DFT Calculations . J. Chem. Phys. 
2001 , 115 , 4030 –4040 . 10.1063/1.1388040 .
Mills G. ; Jonsson H. 
Quantum and Thermal
Effects in H2 Dissociative
Adsorption: Evaluation of Free Energy Barriers in Multidimensional
Quantum Systems . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1994 , 72 , 1124 10.1103/PhysRevLett.72.1124 .10056623 
If the displacement is 1 or 2 Å,
the
subsequent optimization leads to the structure which is the same as
the initial-state structure. However, such a situation does not happen
if the displacement is 3 Å. So, we adopted a displacement of
3 Å.


Hellmann H.  Einführung in
die Quantenchemie ; F. Deuticke : Leipzig , 1937 .
Feynman R. P. 
Forces
in Molecules . Phys. Rev. 
1939 , 56 , 340 –343 . 10.1103/PhysRev.56.340 .
Chandra A. K.  Introductory Quantum
Chemistry ; Tata McGraw Hill New Delhi , 1994 .
Finnis M.  Interatomic Forces in
Condensed Matter ; Oxford University Press : New York , 2003 .
Grimme S. 
Semiempirical
GGA-Type Density Functional Constructed with a Long-Range Dispersion
Correction . J. Comput. Chem. 
2006 , 27 , 1787 –1799 . 10.1002/jcc.20495 .16955487 
Becke A. D. ; Edgecombe K. E. 
A Simple Measure of Electron Localization in Atomic
and Molecular Systems . J. Chem. Phys. 
1990 , 92 , 5397 –5403 . 10.1063/1.458517 .
Silvi B. ; Savin A. 
Classification of Chemical Bonds Based on Topological Analysis of
Electron Localization Functions . Nature 
1994 , 371 , 683 –686 . 10.1038/371683a0 .
Kurzydłowski D. ; Ejgierd-Zaleski P. ; Grochala W. ; Hoffmann R. 
Freezing in Resonance
Structures for Better Packing: XeF2 Becomes (XeF+)(F–) at Large Compression . Inorg. Chem. 
2011 , 50 , 3832 –3840 . 10.1021/ic200371a .21438503 
Kresse G. ; Hafner J. 
Ab Initio Molecular
Dynamics for Liquid Metals . Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys. 
1993 , 47 , 558 –561 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.47.558 .
Kresse G. ; Hafner J. 
Ab Initio Molecular-Dynamics
Simulation of the Liquid-Metal-Amorphous-Semiconductor-Transition
in Germanium . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys. 
1994 , 49 , 14251 –14269 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.49.14251 .
Kresse G. ; Furthmüller J. 
Efficiency
of Ab-Initio Total Energy Calculations for
Metals and Semiconductors Using a Plane-Wave Basis Set . Comput. Mater. Sci. 
1996 , 6 , 15 –50 . 10.1016/0927-0256(96)00008-0 .
Perdew J. P. ; Burke K. ; Ernzerhof M. 
Generalized
Gradient Approximation
Made Simple . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1996 , 77 , 3865 –3868 . 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865 .10062328 
Kresse G. ; Joubert D. 
From Ultrasoft Pseudopotentials
to the Projector Augmented-Wave
Method . Phys. Rev. B 
1999 , 59 , 1758 –1775 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.59.1758 .
Adolph B. ; Furthmüller J. ; Beckstedt F. 
Optical Properties
of Semiconductors
Using Projector-Augmented Waves . Phys. Rev.
B 
2001 , 63 , 12510810.1103/PhysRevB.63.125108 .
Momma K. ; Izumi F. 
VESTA 3 for Three-Dimensional
Visualization of Crystal, Volumetric
and Morphology Data . J. Appl. Crystallogr. 
2011 , 44 , 1272 –1276 . 10.1107/S0021889811038970 .

