
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145761810.1021/acsomega.7b00707EditorialGuest Editorial: Open Access: Principles, Practice,
and Potential Curry Stephen 19 06 2017 30 06 2017 2 6 2803 2804 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.document-id-old-9ao7b00707document-id-new-14ao-2017-007075ccc-price
==== Body
“Open Access is simply a way to express the cross-fertilization
of the very culture of science with new technologies to create the
optimal communication system science needs,” wrote Jean-Claude
Guédon in a recent and fascinating article1 that surveyed the origins and future of open access. But
as the length of Guédon’s 38-page essay implies, and
as anyone familiar with the debates on the topic will attest, open
access is anything but simple.

To many it represents a beguiling and natural fusion of digital
technology with the long-standing amateur ethos of scholarly communication.2 However, the erratic and often fractious progress
toward a fully open-access world over the past two decades also bears
witness to the collision of its ideals with the economic realities
of 21st century academic publishing and with the tides of metricization
that have swept through the processes of research evaluation.3 The arguments are as much about values as about
value and are not merely for academic consumption. Openness is about
facing outward. At a time when political populists have succeeded
beyond many people’s imagination in the US and the UK, at least
in part through a reckless disregard for expertise and evidence, researchers
need to reconsider whether we are doing enough to communicate the
importance of discovering and verifying truths about the world.

By this point you may be wondering what all this has got to do
with ACS Omega, an open-access journal that aims
to publish high quality and technically sound research from chemistry
and closely related disciplines. For many chemists, the heavy demands
of research, teaching, administration, and all the other obligations
of a life in research are more than sufficient to load up the working
week. But I make no apology for calling attention to the fundamentals.
In a fast-changing world, is it important for us to keep hold of the
principles that first brought us to a life in science.

For researchers, I see those principles operating at three different
but interacting levels: the personal, the academic (or scientific),
and the public. On a personal level, it is pure curiosity, often allied
with a desire to understand the world so as to make it a better place,
that inspires many people to launch a career in research. “We
have purposes greater than ourselves,” as surgeon and public
health researcher Atul Gawande observed in his book, Being
Mortal.

As working scientists, many of us become imbued (by processes of
which few are conscious) with the principles articulated by Robert
Merton that hold science to be a collective and cumulative activity
in which the core responsibility is to communicate knowledge—even
if it is distorted by career incentives that focus less on the substance
of our accomplishments than where they are published. The duty of
communication is primarily to other scholars, but from the formation
of the very first learned societies the scientific community has a
sense of its public obligations.

That sense of duty has been sharpened by the arrival of open access
and extended by governments seeking better returns on public investment
in research. The Finch report’s statement in 2012 that “The
principle that the results of research that has been publicly funded
should be freely accessible in the public domain is a compelling one,
and fundamentally unanswerable” captured the zeitgeist and
was accepted without demur by the UK government.4 Similar proclamations have been made by administrations
in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere.

Of course, words are cheaper than actions, and open access has
yet to deliver fully on the promise of providing faster, fairer, and
cheaper access to research information. In part this is due to historical
baggage. The entanglement of the principles of scholarly communication
with increased commercializm in publishing and with rising managerialism
in university governance has intensified our preoccupation with journal-based
measures of prestige. That has retarded the dissemination of knowledge
as authors chase impact factors and locked in the market advantages
of the largest publishers.2

The transformation to open access is also complicated—in
many cases for good reason—by differing perspectives between
disciplines, disagreements over the balance between academic freedom
and responsibility, concerns about cost and quality raised by author-pays
business models of publishing, and broader debates about how to empower
researchers in the global south. The process is evolutionary and revolutionary—too
slow for some, but too radical for others.

We should not be surprised by such turbulence. To me it is a healthy
sign because it means these are matters that people care about. These
issues need to be addressed, but we should be in no doubt about the
direction of travel. The past 20 years have brought a slew of innovations
in practice that have been very positive. I include here the invention
of open-access mega-journals, of which ACS Omega is
the latest incarnation, where soundness matters more than predicted
impact, and the recent growth in preprint servers5 and journals with open peer-review processes,6 which are both now enjoying strong support from
funding agencies. These developments, which focus attention on the
content of research papers, have helped to spark necessary discussions
on how to reconfigure our processes of research evaluation and how
to address growing concerns about the reliability and reproducibility
of science, a matter that impacts on public trust.7

Open access is just one part of the digital tapestry that is transforming
access and attitudes to the processes of creation and dissemination
of information by stakeholders within and without the research community.
On the fringes, initiatives such as the Open Access Button, Unpaywall,
and even the illegal and controversial Sci-Hub, are offering options
to those wanting access from outside well-funded universities. Increasingly,
those on the outside include the enthusiastic participants in citizen
science in fields as diverse as astronomy, environmental science,
genetics, and structural biology.8 In the
mainstream, recent moves such as the opening-up of innovation in the
pharmaceutical industry and the announcement of a National Open Science
Plan in The Netherlands are all clear signs that while the landscape
of research communication is still far from settled it is stretching
further into the distance—and into the public domain—than
many had imagined.

This is a guest
editorial by invitation by the journal’s Editors. Views expressed
in this editorial are those of the author and not necessarily the
views of the ACS.
==== Refs
References
Guédon J.-C.   (2017 ) Open Access: Toward the Internet of the Mind . http://www.budapestopenaccessinitiative.org/open-access-toward-the-internet-of-the-mind (Retrieved: May 30, 2017).
Fyfe A.  ,  (2017 ) Untangling Academic Publishing: a history of the
relationship between commercial interests, academic prestige and the
circulation of research . https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.546100.
Wilsdon J.  ,  (2015 ) The Metric Tide: Report of the Independent Review
of the Role of Metrics in Research Assessment and Management . http://www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/rereports/year/2015/metrictide/.
Report of the Working Group on Expanding Access to Published Research
Findings – the Finch Group  (2012 ). https://www.acu.ac.uk/research-information-network/finch-report (Retrieved: May 30, 2017).
Berg J. M. ; et al. Science 
2016 , 352 , 899 –901 . 10.1126/science.aaf9133 .27199406 
Pöschl U. 
Multi-stage
open peer review: scientific evaluation integrating the strengths
of traditional peer review with the virtues of transparency and self-regulation . Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience 
2012 , 6 , 1 –15 . 10.3389/fncom.2012.00033 .22291635 
Moore S. 
Excellence R Us:
University Research and the Fetishisation of Excellence 
2016 , 3 , 16105 10.1057/palcomms.2016.105 .
Curry S.   (2016 ) Open Access: the beast that no-one could – or should –
control ? https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.3422956.v2.

