
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146028710.1021/acsomega.8b03360ArticleSalt and pH-Induced Attractive Interactions on the
Rheology of Food Protein-Stabilized Nanoemulsions Patel Aakash Longmore Natalie Mohanan Athira Ghosh Supratim *Department of Food and Bioproduct Sciences, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon S7N5A8, Saskatchewan, Canada* E-mail: supratim.ghosh@usask.ca. Phone: (306) 966-2555. Fax: (306) 966-8898.08 07 2019 31 07 2019 4 7 11791 11800 30 11 2018 08 04 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

This research aimed to investigate
the possibility of forming gelled
nanoemulsions (NEs) by inducing attractive interactions among the
nanodroplets. The effect of salt concentration and changes in pH on
the stability and gelation behavior of 2, 4, and 5% sodium caseinate
(SC) and whey protein isolate (WPI)-stabilized 40% canola oil-in-water
NEs were investigated. For the effect of salt, sodium chloride was
added in a concentration of 0.1, 0.5, and 1 M in the continuous phase
of the NEs at neutral pH, whereas to study the effect of acidification,
the pH of the NEs was adjusted to the isoelectric point (pI) of the
proteins. The addition of salt led to attractive gelation in WPI NEs
because of a screening of charge. In contrast, the gel strength of
SC-stabilized NEs was reduced with salt, which was attributed to the
loss of close packing of droplets and their surrounding repulsive
barriers because of charge screening and to the steric barrier of
interfacial SC preventing droplet aggregation. All the NEs with pH
at the pI of proteins transformed into strong attractive gels made
of droplet aggregates irrespective of the type or concentration of
protein because of the complete charge neutralization. The strength
of the acidified NE gels increased with a decrease in droplet size
and the type of protein used. Overall, research on the effect of different
environmental factors on the stability and gelation behavior of protein-stabilized
NEs could be useful for possible applications of these nanoscale materials
in various food systems.

document-id-old-9ao8b03360document-id-new-14ao-2018-03360hccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The emulsion is an
integral part of many foods and related soft
materials. Milk, coffee creamer, and mayonnaise are some of the typical
examples of oil-in-water (O/W) emulsions that we use in daily life.
In conventional food emulsions, dispersed phase droplet sizes are
generally in the range of 1–100 μm. Nanoemulsions (NEs),
whose average droplet size is less than 200 nm (0.2 μm), have
recently caught the attention of researchers because of their advantages
over conventional emulsions.1,2 NEs are unique because
of their significantly higher stability and decreased opacity. Researchers
have also shown that merely a reduction of average droplet size of
emulsions to the nanoscale (<200 nm) converts them into NE gels.
Gelation in NEs happens at a lower oil droplet volume fraction than
that of conventional emulsions.3,4 Wilking & Mason
showed that a decrease in droplet radius below ∼75 nm could
transform a sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-stabilized 40% silicone oil
monodisperse NE into a strong NE gel. The authors attributed the gelation
to an increase in effective droplet volume fraction (ϕeff) owing to the surrounding repulsive charge cloud leading to a close-packed
structure.4 Erramreddy & Ghosh3 have also reported similar findings for polydisperse
SDS-stabilized canola oil-in-water NEs made, which showed an increase
in viscosity and gel strength when the surface average droplet size
(d32) was reduced to less than 200 nm.
Depending on SDS concentration, these were repulsive nanogels formed
because of droplet random jamming or attractive nanogels formed by
micelle-induced depletion attraction.5

Recently, we have shown that even protein can be used to form repulsive
NE gels. For example, sodium caseinate (SC)-stabilized emulsions have
shown an increase in storage moduli (G′) with
a decrease in average droplet size.6,7 SC-stabilized
NEs (SC NEs) prepared with 5% SC and 40% oil transformed into a nanogel
at an average droplet size of ∼150 nm. The gelation at 40%
dispersed phase is significantly lower than 64% needed for close packing
in monodisperse emulsions.8 The gelation
in this SC NE at a lower oil volume fraction was attributed to the
combined contribution of the thickness of the protein steric layer
and the repulsive charge cloud around them leading to an increase
in ϕeff to more than 0.7, which was higher than the
random jamming volume fraction (ϕMRJ). However, when
the NEs were formed with whey protein isolate (WPI), no gelation was
observed with 40% oil and 5% WPI, even if the average droplet size
was less than 200 nm.7 The lack of gelation
in WPI-stabilized NEs (WPI NEs) was ascribed to the significantly
shorter steric layer (∼2 nm9) owing
to the compact globular structure of WPI compared to a much longer
steric layer of the flexible casein molecule (∼10 nm10−12) leading to a low ϕeff. The lower ϕeff was responsible for the lack of droplet random jamming and resulted
in flowable liquid-like to weak gel behavior in most of the NEs. This
led us to the aim of this study, to investigate the possibility of
forming NE gels by inducing attractive interactions among the protein-coated
nanodroplets. Two different approaches were used to induce attractive
interactions among the nanodroplets: addition of salt to screen the
repulsive charge cloud around the droplets and altering the pH to
produce an attractive interaction at the protein isoelectric point
(pI). The gelation behavior of the attractive NEs was investigated
as a function of protein type (SC and WPI) and concentration.

Results
and Discussion
Effect of Salt Concentration on the Gelation
in NEs
Influence of Salt Concentration on Droplet Size, Charge, and
Interdroplet Interactions
Figure 1 shows the average droplet size of all NEs
at different salt concentrations in the aqueous phase. When no salt
was present, the average droplet size was smaller for 4 and 5% protein-stabilized
emulsions compared to 2% protein, which could be due to the greater
lowering of interfacial tension at higher emulsifier concentration
and availability of more protein to cover the increased surface area
of smaller droplets. A very different effect of salt on SC and WPI
NEs can be seen, where a noticeable increase in the average droplet
size was observed with the addition of salt for the WPI NEs but not
for SC NEs. For example, for 5% WPI NEs, the droplet size increased
from 0.16 ± 0.02 μm for no salt to 22.8 ± 0.3 μm
with 1 M salt. However, SC NEs did not show much change with the increase
in salt concentration beyond 0.1 M. For example, for 5% SC NEs, from
no salt to 0.1 M salt, droplet size increased from 0.15 ± 0.01
to 0.21 ± 0.01 μm; however, thereafter it only increased
to 0.24 ± 0.04 μm when 1 M salt was added. It should be
mentioned here that the average droplet size of salt-added NEs reported
here are not the true size of the oil droplets, rather the size of
polydisperse aggregates of droplets with various shapes. This is a
drawback of laser diffraction analysis, which measures the size of
the whole aggregate diffracting laser. Nevertheless, these results
indicate that the addition of salt has a profound effect on WPI NEs,
whereas it is virtually ineffective on SC NEs in the present concentration
range. This variation of droplet size also resonates with the droplet
size distributions of the salt-added NEs (Figure 2). In SC NEs, the addition of salt led to
a slight increase in the peak above 1 μm, whereas the peak below
1 μm showed a slight decrease (Figure 2A,C,E). For 5% SC, however, a significant
increase in the large droplet size peak was observed (Figure 2E). For WPI NEs with 2% protein,
the droplet size distribution moved toward a bigger size range even
upon addition of 0.1 M salt (Figure 2B). For NEs with 4% WPI, addition of 0.1 M salt did
not significantly change the droplet size distribution, but 0.5 and
1 M salt led to multimodal droplet size distribution with a couple
of large peaks at higher droplet sizes (1–500 μm), whereas
the peak below 1 μm was significantly reduced (Figure 2D). For 5% WPI, the changes
were even more significant, with the large droplet size peak reaching
beyond 600 μm when 1 M salt was added (Figure 2F). Such an increase in size distribution
could be due to coalescence or aggregation, as aggregated droplets
act as one large droplet in the laser diffraction particle size analyzer.
To determine the exact mechanism of the increase in droplet size,
0.5% SDS solution was gently mixed with the emulsion in a 1:5 ratio
to break any flocs before droplet size analysis (see Supporting Information Figure S1). The results demonstrated
a significant shift in droplet size distribution to smaller sizes
upon SDS addition, which indicates that the increase in droplet size
was mostly due to extensive droplet aggregation upon addition of salt.

Figure 1 Effect
of salt concentration in the aqueous phase on the mean droplet
size (d32) of (A) sodium caseinate (SC)
and (B) WPI-stabilized NEs made with 2% (open circles), 4% (filled
circles), and 5% (open triangles) protein concentration. Note: The
data are presented in log scale to properly show the change over a
wide range of droplet sizes.

Figure 2 Effect of addition of different concentrations of salt (0–1
M) on the droplet size distribution of various NEs prepared with 2,
4, and 5% SC (A,C,E) and WPI (B,D,F).

The effect of salt addition on the screening of the droplet
charge
was confirmed by measuring the zeta potential (a measure of charge
on droplets) of the NEs. The results shown in Figure 3 support the hypothesis about the decrease
in zeta potential of emulsions with the addition of salt irrespective
of the protein type and concentration. The control NEs (without any
salt) had a zeta potential ranging from −50 to −70 mV.
With the addition of only 0.1 M salt, the zeta potential decreased
to values ranging from −10 to −30 mV. With further increase
in salt concentration up to 1 M, only a slight decrease in zeta potential
was observed, and the minimum zeta potential was reported to be about
−10 mV. From Figure 3, almost similar values of zeta potential for SC and WPI-stabilized
NEs were observed at high salt concentrations, although extensive
droplet aggregation was only observed for WPI NEs. This could be due
to the difference in the structure of the proteins. As for SC, even
after screening of charge by the addition of salt, the strong steric
barrier by the hydrophilic tail of SC (which extends toward the aqueous
phase for about 10 nm) would create enough steric repulsion between
the droplets to stop them from causing attractive aggregation.13 The stability of SC-stabilized emulsions against
salt-induced aggregation has also been reported and explained by Dickinson
in the late 1990s.14,15 Casanova and Dickinson15 showed the excellent stability of mixed αs1-casein- and β-casein-stabilized emulsion against flocculation
at an ionic strength as high as 2 M NaCl when about 40% of the adsorbed
protein consisted of β-casein and up to 1 M NaCl (highest salt
conc. in our samples) when 30% of the adsorbed protein consisted of
β-casein. It was also shown that the emulsion stabilized with
only αs1-casein was extensively flocculated above
0.1 M NaCl, whereas β-casein-stabilized droplets were not affected.
It was proposed that the emulsions prepared with αs1-casein were stabilized by high surface charge density, whereas the
main stabilization mechanism of β-casein was steric repulsion.
Hence, in the presence of salt, a net attraction prevails for αs1-casein-stabilized emulsions, whereas strong steric repulsion
prevented flocculation among the β-casein-stabilized droplets.
Sodium caseinate is known to contain a roughly equal amount of both
αs1 and β-casein; hence, the NEs in the present
research were stable against salt-induced flocculation.14 WPI, on the other hand, forms a compact globular
structure at the oil droplet surface, extending only about 2 nm in
the aqueous phase, which is probably not enough to prevent them from
aggregation.9 Increase in the average droplet
size of WPI-stabilized conventional emulsions owing to the addition
of salt at neutral pH has also been reported by many researchers and
was attributed to the inability of WPI to prevent the close approach
of the droplet because of salt-induced charge screening.16,17

Figure 3 Change
in zeta potential of (A) SC- and (B) WPI-stabilized NEs
made with 2% (open circles), 4% (filled circles), and 5% (open
triangles) protein concentration as a function of increase in salt
concentration in the aqueous phase.

A better understanding of the effect of salt concentration
on the
droplet aggregation behavior can be obtained from their DLVO interdroplet
pair potential. Details of the calculation and the plots of overall
interaction potential as a function of interdroplet distance is given
in the Supporting Information (Figure S3).18−20 The major findings from the interdroplet pair potential are that
the addition of just 0.1 M salt significantly shifted the interdroplet
potential from strongly repulsive to weakly attractive with the curve
going through secondary minima in an attractive interaction. The depth
of the minima and the strength of the attractive interaction increased
with increase in salt concentration, which could lead to droplet aggregation.
Beyond the secondary minima, on further approach, the droplets face
a strong electrostatic repulsion but at a much shorter interdroplet
separation compared to no-salt-added emulsions. Of all the NEs at
all salt concentrations, attractive interaction was maximum for 2%
WPI NEs (Figure S3B) followed by 2% SC
NEs (Figure S3A), which could be due to
their larger initial droplet size compared to NEs with 4 and 5% protein
(Figure 2). Among the
three WPI NEs, 2% WPI showed a substantial increase in droplet aggregation
upon addition of just 0.1 M salt (Figure 2B), which matches with their higher attractive
secondary minima as shown in Figure S3B. The initial droplet size of the NEs plays a vital role in salt-induced
aggregation where larger droplets (NEs with 2% proteins) led to more
depth in the secondary minima and a higher probability of droplet
aggregation. Salt-induced attractive interaction decreased with an
increase in protein concentration because of the lowering of oil droplets’
size. However, no significant difference in attractive interactions
can be seen between the SC and WPI-stabilized NEs with 4 and 5% protein
concentrations (Figure S3C–F), despite
the significantly higher droplet aggregation seen in WPI NEs (Figure 2D,F) compared to
SC NEs (Figure 2C,E).
It should be noted that in the calculation of the DLVO interaction,
the effective droplet size was considered as the actual droplet size
plus the steric layer of interfacial protein. Hence, although the
DLVO attractive interaction appeared similar for SC and WPI NEs, because
of the more extended steric layer of SC-coated droplets, SC NEs were
stable against droplet aggregation. In contrast, a small steric layer
of WPI could not prevent the close approach of the droplets and subsequent
aggregation.

Visual Observation of Flow Behavior
Photographs of
visual representation of the NEs in a glass beaker are provided in
the Supporting Information (Figure S2).
The SC NEs with 2 and 4% protein were flowable, and the addition of
salt did not change their flow behavior. SC NEs with 5% protein and
without salt were a strong gel and did not flow under gravity. However,
addition of just 0.1 M salt broke the gel into a flowable liquid.
In contrast, all WPI NEs without salt were flowable liquids; however,
with the addition of salt, they form a nonflowable gel with a self-supporting
structure.

Influence of Salt Concentration on Viscoelasticity
The viscoelasticity of the NEs was measured as a function of strain
at a constant frequency to understand the effect of salt concentration
on their gel strength. Figure 4 shows the G′ (storage modulus) and G″ (loss modulus) of SC NEs with 2, 4, and 5% protein
at a different concentration of salt. Figure 5 shows similar data for WPI NEs. A higher G′ compared to G″ in the
low-strain regime indicates the presence of a gel structure (both
weak and strong gelation), whereas the appearance of a linear viscoelastic
region (LVR), where G′ remain unchanged as
a function of strain, indicates strong gelation. For all SC NEs, G′ > G″ in the low-strain
regime; however, except for 4 and 5% SC NEs without salt, none of
them showed any LVR, indicating weak gelation. For 5% SC NE without
salt (Figure 4I) the
presence of a firm LVR and the values of G′
≈ 650 Pa indicates a strong NE gel, which also matches well
with their restricted flow behavior (no flow according to Figure S2). For 4% SC NE (Figure 4E), although an LVR was observed, the G′ values were ∼77 Pa, indicating weak gelation
(flow under gravity according to Figure S2). The weak versus strong gelation behavior was confirmed by frequency
sweep analysis at a constant strain (0.1%) within the LVR (data not
sown). Beyond the low-strain regime (until 1% strain), the values
of G′ dropped at a critical yield strain,
followed by a crossover of G′ and G″. The crossover indicates a breakdown of the gel
structure, beyond which both the G′ and G″ dropped linearly and G″
remain higher than G′, indicating a liquid-like
behavior. For the samples without any salt, G″
showed a peak at the crossover, which indicates structural relaxation
of the repulsive gel where the close-packed nanodroplets break away
from the cage. However, with the addition of salt, specifically with
0.5 M salt and higher, the peak in G″ disappeared,
which could be attributed to the reduction of the packed structure
because of the salt-induced lowering of repulsive electrostatic interactions
among the nanodroplets.

Figure 4 Effect of salt concentration (0–1 M)
on the storage (G′, filled) and loss (G″,
open) moduli as a function of % strain at a constant 1 Hz frequency
for SC-stabilized NEs with 2% (circle, A–D), 4% (triangle,
E–H), and 5% (square, I–L) protein.

Figure 5 Effect of salt concentration (0–1 M) on the storage (G′, filled) and loss (G″,
open) moduli as a function of % strain at a constant 1 Hz frequency
for WPI-stabilized NEs with 2% (circle, A–D), 4% (triangle,
E–H), and 5% (square, I–L) protein.

For the NE with 4 and 5% SC without salt (Figure 4E,I), the LVR in the low strain
regime disappeared
upon addition of just 0.1 M salt (Figure 4F,J), indicating a weakening of the gel structure
with salt-induced lowering of Debye screening length and effective
oil volume fraction. The strong to weak gel conversion upon addition
of salt was also confirmed by frequency sweep analysis (data not shown).
This phenomenon of the decrease in gel strength with the addition
of salt was called “melting” of the gel structure and
observed in the case of SDS-stabilized nanogels (Fryd & Mason
2012). This effect can be attributed to the weakening of the repulsive
gel structure by the screening of droplet charge, which led to a reduced
effective volume fraction and elimination of close-packed structure.
With the increase in salt concentration, the repulsive interaction
further decreased, but as SC-stabilized droplets were stable against
aggregation because of its more extended steric barrier, no significant
change in viscoelasticity was observed even with 1 M salt (Figure 4H,L).

Contrary
to the SC NEs, WPI NEs showed an opposite behavior with
the addition of salt (Figure 5). The control WPI NEs without salt were either weak gel (2%
WPI NE, Figure 5A)
or liquid-like (4 and 5% WPI NEs, Figure 5E,I). However, with the addition of salt,
the gel strength increased and at 0.5 M salt concentration, a clear
LVR appeared for all WPI NEs, thereby converting a weak gel and liquid-like
NEs into a strong gel (Figure 5C,G,K). Salt-induced gelation because of a screening of electrostatic
repulsion is a well-known phenomenon, and in this case, unlike SC,
the lower steric barrier of WPI could not prevent the droplets against
aggregation.19

In order to better compare the effect of salt concentration
on
the gel strength of the various SC and WPI NEs, their plateau storage
moduli (Gp′) values at 0.15% strain (within the
LVR) from the strain sweep data from Figures 4 and 6 were re-plotted
against the salt concentration (Figure 6A,B). For the SC NEs with 4 and 5% protein, a drop
in Gp′ was observed with the addition of 0.1 M salt. For
example, 4% SC NE showed a decrease in G′
from 77.6 ± 24.8 with no salt to 23.7 ± 6.2 Pa upon addition
of 0.1 M salt (p > 0.05) and 5% SC NE showed a
drop
in G′ from 624.7 ± 7.7 with no salt to
112.4 ± 11.8 Pa upon addition of 0.1 M salt, both of which indicate
the gel-melting behavior as discussed before. In contrast, for WPI
NEs, Gp′ increased drastically with salt concentration till
0.5 M salt followed by a plateau to 1 M. The values of gel strength
with 0.5 M salt and higher were much higher for WPI NEs compared to
SC NEs. This behavior indicates that the addition of salt affects
WPI NEs more profoundly and leads to stronger gel formation at a higher
salt concentration, whereas SC NEs showed a drop in the gel strength
at low salt concentrations and are quite unaffected by the presence
of a high level of salt in the aqueous phase.

Figure 6 (A,B) Plateau storage
modulus (Gp′) at 0.15% strain and (C,D)
crossover strain (%) for all NEs with different salt concentrations
prepared with SC (A,C) or WPI (B,D) with 2% (open circles), 4% (filled
circles), and 5% (open triangles) protein concentration.

From zeta potential measurement, we have seen that
the reduction
in droplet charge with the addition of salt was very similar for all
NEs (Figure 3). Therefore,
it is not due to the charge, rather the stronger steric repulsion
from the SC molecules on the oil droplet surface, which extends toward
the aqueous phase for about 10 nm,10−12 that prevented aggregation
of the oil droplets.15 For WPI, the steric
barrier is much smaller, reported to be about 2 nm in length;9 hence the droplets, in the absence of a strong
electrostatic repulsion (as shown in Figure 4) were able to form stronger aggregates,
as evident from their droplet size distribution reported in Figure 2. The strong attractive
aggregates of WPI-stabilized nanodroplets in the presence of salt
led to a substantial increase in gel strength compared to the SC NEs.
Cold gelation in WPI-stabilized conventional emulsion (average droplet
size > 1 μm) has previously been reported by many authors.21,22 However, in most cases, a heat-denatured protein was used to make
emulsions, followed by the addition of salt to induce gelation. Heat
denaturation opened up whey protein molecules and improved the formation
of intermolecular and interdroplet interactions which led to strong
gelation. An excess amount of proteins (9.5 wt %) was also used, which
facilitated network formation in the continuous phase, and the protein-covered
oil droplets acted as an active filler, thereby increasing the overall
gel strength.21 In the present case, no
heat treatment was used, and the formation of extremely small nanodroplets
(and the corresponding high surface area) led to the lower amount
of excess WPI in the continuous phase. Together, these two factors
led to lower values of gel strength compared to the Line et al.21 and Rosa et al.22 Nevertheless, formation of self-supporting nanogels from WPI NEs
in the presence of salt and without using any heat treatment and acidification
could be a novel way to utilize these materials in food and related
applications.

The G′ and G″ crossover
strain is the force required to break a gel and hence gives further
indication of the strength of a gel to withstand the applied force
before breakdown. For comparison, the crossover strain of all NEs
was also plotted from Figures 4 and 5 into Figures 6C and 7D as a function
of the salt concentration. The crossover strain mostly follows a similar
pattern to the Gp′ values. A large increase in crossover
strain was observed for 5% SC NE with 1 M salt compared to the other
NEs, whereas for WPI NEs with 5% protein, a substantial increase in
crossover strain was observed with an increase in salt concentration
to 0.5 M. Without any salt, no crossover was observed for 5% WPI NE.
A high value of crossover strain indicates that the gels were stretchy
under applied shear, which could be due to the presence of stronger
droplet aggregates or the presence of smaller droplets with excess
proteins in the emulsion continuous phase.

Figure 7 Average droplet size
(d32) of (A) SC
and (B) WPI NEs containing different protein concentrations at pH
7.0 and pH = pI of protein. Isoelectric point of protein (pI) was
considered as 4.6 for SC and 5.0 for WPI NEs.

pH-Induced Attractive Gelation in NEs
Influence of the Protein
Isoelectric Point on NE Droplet Size
and Charge
Attractive gelation in the SC and WPI NEs was
induced by changing the pH to the protein’s isoelectric point
(pH = pI), where the charge on the droplets would be neutralized.
The pIs used for SC and WPI NEs were pH 4.6 and pH 5.0, respectively.
The droplet size analysis of NEs was carried out at pH = pI. As shown
in Figure 7, for all
samples, a steep increase in the surface average droplet diameter
(d32) was observed at pH = pI of the proteins
compared to pH 7 (pH > pI). The droplet size distribution is also
essential to understand the shift in droplet size upon a change in
pH (see Supporting Information Figure S3).
For the NEs at pH = pI, droplet distribution shifted to significantly
larger multimodal peaks at droplet size ranging from 10 to more than
1000 μm. This change in size distribution justifies the difference
in average droplet size upon changing the pH to pI, where the droplets
lost their charge and repulsive interaction. The zeta potential of
the NEs at pH = pI was also measured to confirm the change in droplet
charge and understand the mechanism of droplet aggregation or gelation
in the NEs. As reported in Figure 3, all NEs had a high negative zeta potential at pH
7 between −50 and −65 mV for SC NEs and between −47
and −60 mV for WPI NEs. The zeta potential reached near zero
for NEs with pH = pI (ranging from 0.06 to 0.5 mV for all NEs), indicating
cancellation of charge upon bringing the pH to the pI of the protein.
Therefore, significant electrostatic repulsive interaction among the
droplets at a pH away from pI was cancelled at pH = pI. The cancellation
of the repulsive charge over the droplet makes them susceptible to
aggregation owing to hydrophobic interactions leading to attractive
gelation in the NEs. Extensive droplet aggregation in acidified protein-stabilized
emulsions near the pI was also reported by others.23,24

Visual Observation of the NEs at pH = pI
When the pH
of the NEs reached the pI of the proteins, strong gels were formed,
which did not flow upon tilting the beakers (see Supporting Information Figure S4). All SC NEs at pH = pI showed
a grainy and coarse texture, whereas the samples at pH away from pI
showed a viscous liquid-like flow behavior, except 5% SC NE, which
formed a strong repulsive gel with a soft and smooth texture (Figure 8). In contrast, all
WPI NEs at pH 7 were liquid and when the pH reached the pI of WPI,
they formed strong gels, but with a smooth texture, unlike the grainy
texture of SC NEs.

Figure 8 Photos of repulsive NE at pH 7 and attractive aggregated
NE gel
at pH = pI for 5% SC and WPI NEs. SC NE at pH 7 formed repulsive NE
gel, whereas the WPI NE remained liquid. The attractive SC NE gel
formed at pH = pI had a grainy and coarse texture, whereas the WPI
NE gel at pH = pI had a smooth texture. SC NE Photograph courtesy
of Aakash Patel, Copyright 2018. WPI NE Photograph courtesy of Athira
Mohanan, Copyright 2018.

Compression Analysis of the NEs at the Protein’s Isoelectric
Point
The viscoelasticity of the NEs at pH = pI could not
be measured as the strongly aggregated attractive gels could not be
uniformly compressed into the required gap between
the two plates in the rheometer. The acidified gels were hard, self-standing,
and nonflowing, which made it difficult to achieve the desired gap
for the rheological measurement. Therefore, we have performed compression
analysis for these samples using a texture analyzer to compare the
firmness of the aggregated gels made by both the SC and WPI NEs at
pH values equal to the pI of the protein (Figure 9.
The results of the compression analysis report the maximum force needed
to compress the aggregated gels up to a certain distance, thereby
indicating the firmness of the NE gels. For 2 and 4% protein containing
NEs (which were liquid to weak gel at pH 7), the peak force of compression
was significantly higher for WPI NEs than their SC counterparts (p < 0.05). However, at 5% protein, the peak force for
SC NE (180.1 ± 8.3 g) (which formed a strong repulsive gel at
pH 7) was significantly higher than that of the WPI NE (112.1 ±
18.5 g) (p < 0.05). Among the SC NEs, no significant
difference (p > 0.05) in the peak force was observed
for 2 and 4% SC NEs, but it was much higher for 5% SC NEs. However,
for WPI NEs, the peak force of compression increased with increase
in the WPI concentration from 2 to 4%, after that no significant change
was observed for 5% WPI NE (p > 0.05).

For
SC NEs, attractive gels induced by acidification were much stronger
compared to the repulsive NE gel developed with 5% SC NE at pH 7.
For comparison, the peak force for the repulsive SC NE gel was also
determined and is shown in Figure 9. The peak compression force for the repulsive gel
was only 8.9 ± 3.6 g, which was about 20 times lower than that
of the acidified attractive gel. Such a substantial change in gel
strength could be attributed to the 3D network of strongly attractive
droplets compared to the random jamming of repulsive droplets. In
the acidified gels, the charged amino acid side chain of casein molecules
are neutralized, and the steric barrier collapsed, leading to stronger
attractive interactions among the SC-stabilized droplets and a stronger
ability to hold the aqueous phase within the aggregated droplet structure.24

Compression analysis of attractive WPI
emulsion gel has been studied
before.22,25 Rosa, et al.22 investigated the formation and rheology of emulsion-filled gels
by first preparing heat-induced whey protein aggregates followed by
mixing with native whey protein-stabilized emulsions and finally acidification
to induce gelation at the protein isoelectric point. The authors proposed
that heating the whey protein solution was essential to form a self-supporting
gel. Recently,1 Mantovani et al.25 reported that acidification of a 5% WPI-stabilized
30% oil-in-water emulsion did not form a gel, whereas mixing with
a heat-treated 5% WPI before acidification led to a self-supporting
gel. In contrast, Ye and Taylor26 were
able to form whey protein-stabilized emulsion gel by heating an emulsion
followed by acidification, without the need for adding additional
heat-treated protein to form an emulsion-filled gel. In the present
work, no heat treatment was used; still, a strong self-supporting
gel was formed by acidification of WPI NEs to pH 5. The improvement
in firmness of the gel could be attributed to the nanoscale droplet
size of our NEs compared to microscale droplets of both Rosa et al.22 and Mantovani et al.’s25 emulsions. Ye and Taylor26 also
showed that the storage modulus of a WPI emulsion gel, made by acidification
of a preheated WPI emulsion, increased with a decrease in the average
droplet size. Similarly, in the present case, the higher gel strength
for 4 and 5% WPI NEs could be attributed to their significantly lower
initial droplet size (recorded at pH 7) compared to 2% WPI NEs (Figure 7). Formation of many
smaller droplets would lead to a better aggregated network of three-dimensional
structure necessary for gelation compared to a lesser number of large
oil droplets.25 The presence of higher
interfacial WPI could also be responsible for more attractive interactions
between the droplets, leading to a stronger gel.22

One of the major differences between the acidified
SC versus WPI
NE gel was their appearance (Figure 8) and gel compression strength (Figure 9). At 2 and 4% protein concentration, WPI
NE gels were stronger than the SC NE gels. However, it was opposite
for 5% protein. It is possible that a compact interfacial structure
of WPI compared to SC could lead to stronger attractive interactions
among the nanodroplets and higher gel strength. However, at 5% protein
concentration and pH 7, the SC NE formed repulsive nanogels where
the droplets randomly jammed owing to the combined effect of nanoscale
droplet size and interfacial shell layer thickness. In contrast, 5%
WPI NE at pH 7 was liquid-like owing to a lower interfacial shell
layer thickness. During acidification, perhaps the initial jammed
structure of the SC NE formed a more space-filling network, efficiently
trapping more aqueous phase compared to the corresponding WPI NE.
However, more research is needed to better understand the mechanisms
and nanostructure of these two attractive NE gels.

Figure 9 Peak compression force
of SC and WPI NEs with different protein
concentrations at pH = pI of the protein. For comparison, the peak
force for repulsive 5% SC NE is also reported.

Conclusions
Salt and pH-induced
attractive interactions in SC and WPI-NEs were
investigated with the aim to convert repulsive NEs into attractive
NE gels. The addition of salt (up to 1 M) showed repulsive gel “melting”
for 4 and 5% SC NEs, whereas no significant effect was observed for
2% SC NEs. The gel breakdown was ascribed to the screening of surface
charge that caused a decrease in effective droplet volume fraction
and close packing. In contrast, WPI NEs showed gelation due to droplet
aggregation upon addition of salt and increasing gel strength with
increase in salt concentration. In contrast, SC NEs did not show the
aggregation or formation of attractive gels despite similar charge
screening owing to the stronger steric repulsion among the SC-coated
droplets.

Changing the pH to the pI of the protein resulted
in the formation
of aggregated attractive gels for both SC and WPI NEs owing to a loss
of repulsive interaction among the droplets (both electrostatic and
steric). The acidified NE gels were much stronger than the repulsive
5% SC NE gel and salt-induced attractive gels. Acidified SC gels formed
a grainy and coarse texture, whereas the acidified WPI gels had a
smoother texture. The strength of the acidified gels increased with
a decrease in oil droplet size and is dependent on the type of protein
used to stabilize them. For 2 and 4% proteins, WPI gels were stronger
than the SC gels; however, the opposite was true for the NE with 5%
protein, which could be due to the pre-formed jammed structure of
the SC-stabilized droplets at pH 7. Similar to salt, pH-induced gelation
without the aid of any heat treatment could be attributed to the nanoscale
droplets responsible for forming a stronger three-dimensional structure.
Overall, research on the effect of different environmental factors
on the stability and gelation behavior of protein-stabilized NEs could
be useful in food and related soft material applications as changes
in these conditions are frequently observed during processing, storage,
and consumption of these materials.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Canola oil (No Name brand) was purchased
from a local grocery store. Milli-Q water (Millipore Corporation,
MA, USA) was used for the preparation of the continuous aqueous phase.
SC was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, ON, Canada. WPI was a gift from
Fonterra (USA) Inc., IL, USA. SDS was purchased from Fisher Scientific
(Nepean, ON, Canada). All the other chemicals were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich (ON, Canada).

Preparation and Treatment of NEs
Protein solutions
with three different concentrations (2, 4, and 5% w/w) of either SC
or WPI were prepared by mixing overnight on a benchtop magnetic stirrer.
Sodium azide (0.02% w/w) was added to the aqueous phase to inhibit
microbial growth. The protein solutions were mixed with 40% canola
oil, and a coarse oil-in-water emulsion was prepared using a rotor/stator
mixer (Polytron, Brinkmann Instruments, ON, Canada) for 1 min at 20 000
rpm. NEs were then prepared by passing these coarse emulsions through
a high-pressure homogenizer (EmulsiFlex-C3, Avestin Inc., Ottawa,
ON, Canada) at 20 000 psi (137.9 MPa) for eight cycles. Homogenization
was carried out at room temperature (24 ± 1 °C); however,
during the process, the temperature of emulsions reached 55–60
°C toward the final cycle. Emulsions were stored at room temperature.
All quantities discussed in the paper are by weight basis and was
termed with “%” instead of “% w/w”.

Preparation
of Samples to Study the Effect of Salt
NEs (10 g) were transferred
to plastic centrifuge tubes. Different
quantities of salt (NaCl) were directly added to the NEs to obtain
a final salt concentration of 0.1, 0.5, or 1 M in the aqueous phase
of the NEs. The two lower levels of salt concentration can be typically
seen in many different food applications, for example, in various
types of mayonnaise and salad dressings. Samples were stirred with
a vortex mixer to properly mix salt in the NEs. The samples were analyzed
for droplet size, zeta potential, rheology, and visual observation
for flowability after overnight storage (∼15 h) at room temperature.

Preparation of Samples to Study the Effect of Change in pH
NEs (10 g) were transferred to centrifuge tubes, and different
quantities of HCl solutions (1 M) were added to the vials to obtain
NEs with pH at the isoelectric points (pI) of the proteins used (pH
4.6 for SC and pH 5.0 for WPI). The original NEs at pH 7 were also
equally diluted with deionized water for comparison. The final oil
concentration after dilution of 40% oil containing NEs was 39%. The
samples were analyzed for droplet size, zeta potential, texture, and
visual observation for flowability after overnight storage (∼15
h) at room temperature.

Droplet Size Distribution
The droplet size distribution
and the surface mean diameter (d32) of
the NEs were determined using a static laser diffraction particle
size analyzer (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern Instruments, Montreal, QC,
Canada) with a relative refractive index of 1.465 for canola oil and
1.33 for water. The samples were gently mixed before their addition
to the sampling cell to obtain a uniform sample, and few drops were
added to the measuring cell, mixed to get the desired dilution for
proper laser diffraction before starting the analysis.

Zeta Potential
Zeta potential measurements were carried
out by Zetasizer Nano-ZS90 (Malvern Instruments, Westborough, MA,
USA) by determining the electrophoretic mobility of the protein-coated
droplets under a particular electric field. The samples were diluted
(2 drops of sample in 50 mL DI water/salt solution/pH buffer) and
filled in the electrode cell, which was loaded into the Zetasizer
for analysis. For salt-added NEs, the samples were diluted with respective
salt solutions. For the NEs at different pH values, dilution was done
with specific pH buffer solutions.

Visual Observation of Gelation
For visual inspection,
samples of NEs with different ionic strengths and pHs were stored
in 30 mL glass beakers. After overnight storage (∼15 h), the
beakers were tilted at a 45° angle, and the flow behavior of
the samples was recorded with a digital camera.

Determination
of Viscoelasticity
The viscoelastic behavior
of the NEs was determined using an AR-G2 rheometer (TA Instruments,
Montreal, QC, Canada). A 40 mm cross-hatched parallel plate geometry
was used to avoid wall-sleep. The viscoelasticity was determined by
applying an oscillatory strain sweep from 0.01 to 100% strain at a
constant frequency of 1 Hz at 25 °C. The analysis provided storage
modulus (G′) and loss modulus (G″) as functions of the applied strain. To eliminate any effect
of sample history and loading, a pre-shear was applied at a 2 s–1 shear rate for 10 s before the strain sweep analysis.

Large Deformation Compression Analysis
The pH-adjusted
NEs at the pI of the protein had a too firm gel texture to analyze
using the rheometer. For these samples, compression analysis was carried
out by a TA-XT plus Texture Analyzer (Stable Micro System, England)
at room temperature with a 1/2 in. diameter cylindrical probe. Samples
were placed in a beaker (20 mm in height and 15 mm in diameter), and
the probe was set to penetrate 5 mm from the surface of the gel at
a rate of 10 mm/s to measure the peak force of gel compression.

Statistics
All the samples were prepared, and the experiments
were performed with at least three replicates (n ≥
3). Statistical significance of the data was analyzed at a 95% confidence
level using a single factor ANOVA function available in Microsoft
Excel (Microsoft Canada Co, Mississauga, ON, Canada).

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b03360.Effect of SDS
addition on droplet size distribution
of WPI NEs; visual observation of flow behavior of SC and WPI NEs
at different salt and protein concentrations; DLVO interdroplet pair
potential for all NEs; droplet size distribution of SC WPI NEs at
pH 7.0 and pH = pI of the protein; and visual observation of flow
behavior of SC and WPI NEs at pH 7 and pH = pI of the proteins (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b03360_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Financial support for this work is
provided by the
NSERC Discovery Grant, Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI) Leaders
Opportunity Fund, and the Saskatchewan Innovation and Science Fund
(ISF).
==== Refs
References
Mason T. G. ; Wilking J. N. ; Meleson K. ; Chang C. B. ; Graves S. M. 
Nanoemulsions:
formation, structure, and physical properties . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2007 , 19 , 079001 10.1088/0953-8984/19/7/079001 .
Tadros T. ; Izquierdo R. ; Esquena J. ; Solans C. 
Formation and stability
of nano-emulsions . Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2004 , 108-109 , 303 –318 . 10.1016/s0001-8686(03)00157-x .15072948 
Erramreddy V. V. ; Ghosh S. 
Influence of Emulsifier
Concentration on Nanoemulsion Gelation . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 11062 –11074 . 10.1021/la502733v .25137632 
Wilking J. N. ; Mason T. G. 
Irreversible shear-induced vitrification of droplets
into elastic nanoemulsions by extreme rupturing . Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 
2007 , 75 , 041407 10.1103/physreve.75.041407 .
Erramreddy V. V. ; Ghosh S. 
Influence of droplet size on repulsive and attractive nanoemulsion
gelation . Colloids Surf., A 
2015 , 484 , 144 –152 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2015.07.027 .
Patel A. ; Kadiya K. ; Ghosh S. 
The effect
of emulsifier type on
the formation and stability of nanoemulsion gels . Lipid Technol. 
2017 , 29 , 111 –114 . 10.1002/lite.201700030 .
Patel A. ; Mohanan A. ; Ghosh S.  , Effect of protein
type, concentration
and oil volume fraction on the formation and long-term stability of
nanoemulsion gels . Soft Matter 2018 , Submitted.
Berryman J.
G. 
Random
close packing of hard spheres and disks . Phys.
Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 
1983 , 27 , 1053 –1061 . 10.1103/physreva.27.1053 .
Nylander T. ; Hamraoui A. ; Paulsson M. 
Interfacial properties of whey proteins
at air/water and oil/water interfaces studied by dynamic drop tensiometry,
ellipsometry and spreading kinetics . Int. J.
Food Sci. Technol. 
1999 , 34 , 573 –585 . 10.1046/j.1365-2621.1999.00327.x .
Atkinson P. J. ; Dickinson E. ; Horne D. S. ; Richardson R. M. 
Neutron
reflectivity of adsorbed β-casein and β-lactoglobulin
at the air/water interface . J. Chem. Soc., Faraday
Trans. 
1995 , 91 , 2847 –2854 . 10.1039/ft9959102847 .
Dalgleish D. G. 
The sizes
and conformations of the proteins in adsorbed layers of individual
caseins on latices and in oil-in-water emulsions . Colloids Surf., B 
1993 , 1 , 1 –8 . 10.1016/0927-7765(93)80011-m .
Dickinson E. ; Horne D. S. ; Phipps J. S. ; Richardson R. M. 
A neutron
reflectivity study of the adsorption of .beta.-casein at fluid interfaces . Langmuir 
1993 , 9 , 242 –248 . 10.1021/la00025a046 .
Dickinson E. 
Caseins in
emulsions: interfacial properties and interactions . Int. Dairy J. 
1999 , 9 , 305 –312 . 10.1016/s0958-6946(99)00079-5 .
Dickinson E. ; Semenova M. G. ; Antipova A. S. 
Salt stability
of casein emulsions . Food Hydrocolloids 
1998 , 12 , 227 –235 . 10.1016/s0268-005x(98)00035-6 .
Casanova H. ; Dickinson E. 
Influence
of Protein Interfacial Composition on Salt
Stability of Mixed Casein Emulsions . J. Agric.
Food Chem. 
1998 , 46 , 72 –76 . 10.1021/jf970600q .10554198 
Kim H.-J. ; Decker E. A. ; McClements D. J. 
Influence
of Protein Concentration
and Order of Addition on Thermal Stability of β-Lactoglobulin
Stabilizedn-Hexadecane Oil-in-Water Emulsions at Neutral pH . Langmuir 
2005 , 21 , 134 –139 . 10.1021/la048019t .15620294 
Demetriades K. ; Coupland J. N. ; McClements D. J. 
Physical
properties of whey protein
stabilized emulsions as related to pH and NaCl . J. Food Sci. 
1997 , 62 , 342 –347 . 10.1111/j.1365-2621.1997.tb03997.x .
Berli C. L. A. ; Quemada D. ; Parker A. 
Modelling
the viscosity of depletion
flocculated emulsions . Colloids Surf., A 
2002 , 203 , 11 –20 . 10.1016/s0927-7757(01)01050-0 .
Kim H.-J. ; Decker E. A. ; McClements D. J. 
Impact
of Protein Surface Denaturation
on Droplet Flocculation in Hexadecane Oil-in-Water Emulsions Stabilized
by β-Lactoglobulin . J. Agric. Food Chem. 
2002 , 50 , 7131 –7137 . 10.1021/jf020366q .12428972 
Ghosh P.  Colloid and interface
science ; PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. : New Delhi, India , 2009 .
Line V. L. S. ; Remondetto G. E. ; Subirade M. 
Cold gelation of beta-lactoglobulin
oil-in-water emulsions . Food Hydrocolloids 
2005 , 19 , 269 –278 . 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2004.06.004 .
Rosa P. ; Sala G. ; Van Vliet T. ; Van De Velde F. 
Cold gelation
of whey protein emulsions . J. Texture Stud. 
2006 , 37 , 516 –537 . 10.1111/j.1745-4603.2006.00066.x .
Surh J. ; Decker E. ; McClements D. 
Influence
of pH and pectin type on
properties and stability of sodium-caseinate stabilized oil-in-water
emulsions . Food Hydrocolloids 
2006 , 20 , 607 –618 . 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2005.07.004 .
Chen J. ; Dickinson E. ; Edwards M. 
Rheology of Acid-induced
Sodium Caseinate
Stabilized Emulsion Gels . J. Texture Stud. 
1999 , 30 , 377 –396 . 10.1111/j.1745-4603.1999.tb00226.x .
Mantovani R. A. ; Cavallieri Â. L. F. ; Cunha R. L. 
Gelation of oil-in-water
emulsions stabilized by whey protein . J. Food
Eng. 
2016 , 175 , 108 –116 . 10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2015.12.011 .
Ye A. ; Taylor S. 
Characterization of
cold-set gels produced from heated
emulsions stabilized by whey protein . Int. Dairy
J. 
2009 , 19 , 721 –727 . 10.1016/j.idairyj.2009.06.003 .

