
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b00405ArticlePhysicochemical Investigation into Major League Baseballs in the Era of Unprecedented
Rise in Home Runs Beals Nathan †§Zhang Liping †Law Meng ‡Hwang Darryl ‡Acharya Jay ‡Basu Soumitra *†† Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Kent State
University, Kent, Ohio 44242, United States‡ Department
of Radiology, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Keck Medical Center of USC, Los
Angeles, California 90033, United States* E-mail: sbasu@kent.edu.21 11 2019 03 12 2019 4 23 20109 20117 12 02 2019 13 08 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A major attraction of baseball is the home run. Throughout baseball’s
history, some seasonal increases in home run numbers have been tied
to external influences, such as lowering the pitching mound or a change
in the ball manufacturer. In Major League Baseball, a recent surge
in home runs has led to speculation about the baseball being “juiced”
or altered in a way to make it fly farther. To support multiple academic
and journalistic studies, which have attempted to find evidence of
the changes in the flight of the baseball, a systematic chemical analysis
has been reported on the multicomponent baseballs. Thus, we undertook
a study where we analyzed the core of the baseball using various chemical
and physical techniques. Studies using computed tomography scans revealed
that there is a drastic 56.7% difference in the density of the core
of the baseballs used during the 2014 and pre-All-Star Game 2015 versus
2017 season in the Major League. Increased material porosity was observed
using electron microscopy. Thermogravimetric and elemental analyses
of the pill material showed a 7% difference in the ratio of organic
to inorganic material and almost a 10% decrease in silicon, respectively.
Overall, the data indicates a difference in the core of the baseballs
between the two time periods, leaving the contribution of these measured
differences in the explosion of home runs open to interpretation.

document-id-old-9ao9b00405document-id-new-14ao9b00405ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
It is called “America’s pastime,” but baseball
has a reach that spans the entire globe. It is a multibillion-dollar
industry, where scores on the field or the number of home runs hit
often drive the revenue and entertainment value.1,2 For
this reason, in different professional leagues, changes are made from
time to time to manipulate offensive production, specifically home
runs. After the 1968 season, for example, Major League Baseball (MLB)
lowered the pitching mound and openly acknowledged their intent to
improve the offense. The 1969 MLB season saw the number of home runs
per game increased by 31.1%, and the change was generally lauded.3 In a more questionable move from 2011, officials
from Japan’s Nippon Professional Baseball (NPB) league secretly
asked the baseball manufacturer Mizuno to tamper with the ball, also
in an effort to improve offensive production. Home runs soared by
47%, but both the players and the public were confused as to why.
When the conspiracy was eventually revealed, the NPB commissioner
resigned after being pressured to step down.4

Other times, the players have changed not the game parameters.
During what’s been called the MLB’s “P.E.D. Era,”
the illicit use of performance-enhancing drugs (PED) or steroids became
prevalent for professional baseball players. Although MLB had banned
steroids in 1991 and the choice to use PED was ultimately the individual’s,
the goal was nonetheless, to increase performance which in turn could
lead to increasing home run production and scoring. It was successful
between 1996 and 2003, multiple individuals and team home run records
were broken. This era came to a close in 2007, when more than 80 former
and current professional baseball players were named in The Mitchell
Report, an investigation led by former United States Senator George
Mitchell that examined the use of steroids in professional baseball.5

These examples highlight instances when increased offensive production
can be linked to a specific change to the game, such as a difference
to the ball, mound, or player physiology. This is why a recent surge
in MLB home run production has generated some suspicion. Unlike previous
offensive explosions, there is seemingly no one change to the game
that can explain this phenomenon. Home run numbers began to rise after
the 2015 MLB All-Star Game, a time when teams typically replenish
their baseball supply and has continued through the 2019 season. In
2019, the MLB is on pace to yet again break the record for home runs
in a season, which was last done in 2017, when there were almost 50%
more home runs per game in the MLB than during the 2014 season. Asked
in 2017 by C&EN, “If the ball is the same as it was before,
why are players hitting noticeably more home runs these days,”
Alan Nathan, an academic expert on the physics of baseball, stated
“I would say that’s still a mystery”.6

Although the Physics of the baseball and the biomechanics of the
players have been studied reasonably well, the chemistry of the baseballs
is a rather unknown entity. To investigate the chemical composition
of the baseball, we analyzed a set of baseballs that have been used
in MLB games between the years 2014/pre-All-Star Game (ASG) 2015 and
2017. Our data shows that there is a noticeable change in the physicochemical
properties of the baseballs between the years 2014/pre-ASG 2015 and
2017. Differences in the amount of certain elements present were also
found to be changed between the two sets of balls that were analyzed.
This to our knowledge provides the first glimpse into the differences
in chemical compositions between the balls from 2014/pre-ASG 2015
to 2017, which may contribute to their differences in performance.

Materials and Methods
Baseballs
Two sets of certified game-used baseballs
were used for the studies, which were from before the 2015 ASG (pre-2015
ASG) and the 2017 season (post-2015 ASG). Game-used baseballs have
a short lifespan accordingly to the MLB. The average baseball is in
the use for a duration of 6 pitches. All experiments were done with
at least 3 different baseballs from each group.

CT Scans
The game-used baseballs were scanned utilizing
a 320 detector row Toshiba Aquilion One scanner (Canon Medical Systems,
CA). The baseballs were placed on the scanner gantry, with two different
scans performed. On the first scan, single-game-used baseballs from
2014/pre-ASG 2015 to 2017 were placed next to each other. On the second
scan, four-game-used baseballs from 2014/pre-ASG 2015 and four-game-used
baseballs from 2017 were placed next to each other. Measurement of
the density of the internal components of the baseballs was performed
by evaluating the Hounsfield units. These measurements were conducted
on the Synapse Picture Archive and Communication System (PACS) (Fujifilm
Medical Systems, Japan). Regions of interest were placed on the different
layers of the baseball components, with particular interest on the
Hounsfield units in the different layers of the baseball pill. A visual
“heat map” of the 2014/pre-ASG 2015 and 2017 baseballs,
based on the internal radiodensity as measured by Hounsfield units,
was created by processing the CT data on Synapse 3D (Fujifilm Medical
Systems, Stamford, CT).

SEM Microscopy
The rubber from the outermost pill layer
(pink layer) was sliced into small parts, and then the samples were
loaded on the conductive carbon adhesive tabs for scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) imaging (Electron Microscopy Sciences, PA). The SEM
measurements were conducted on a Hitachi S-2600N microscope of various
regions of each sample, where the figures display the average of those
measurements

Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS)
Energy-dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) spectra were recorded by a Hitachi S-2600N
microscope equipped with a semiconductor detector of SEM-loaded samples
and analyzed by using a Quartz XOne X-Ray Microanalysis System (Quartz
Imaging Corporation). EDS measurements were taken in triplicates of
each baseball sample (n = 3).

Thermogravimetric Analysis
Samples were isolated from
the pink layer of the pill from various baseballs from 2014/pre-ASG
2015 to 2017. High-resolution thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was
performed on a TA Instrument TGA Q500 thermal gravimetric analyzer.
The TG profiles were recorded up to 800 °C in the flowing air
with a heating rate of 6 °C·min–1. Samples
from three baseballs from each year were repeated twice, and the results
were averaged.

Carbon Composition Analysis
Total %C was determined using a Costech EA CHN Analyzer. Roughly, a 10–50
mg of rubber from the out-pill sample of three baseballs from each
pre-2015 ASG and post-2015 ASG was assessed using the elemental analyzer
(Costech Analytical Model 4010, Valencia, CA). The average of the
samples was taken.

Results
Beginning in 2015, Major League Baseball has Witnessed More
Home Run than Ever Before
The analysis of year-to-year home
run (HR) ratios was first compiled to understand how the current trend
compares within the last 26 years (Figure 1, left panel). Season statistics were obtained
from baseball-reference.com, mlb.com, and foxsports.com. To account for
the differences in gameplay over the years, HR per game was calculated
since the beginning of the PED era (1994–2004) to 2019. The
2015 season registered a noticeable trend that started in the MLB
when HRs began increasing dramatically and continued through the 2019
season. This is contradictory to the regression observed starting
from the 2004 season and ending in 2014, when 2014 registered a 26
year minimum. What makes this trend more interesting is that the 2016
season was just shy of breaking the all-time major league record for
cumulative single-season HRs, whereas in 2017, the reigning league
HR record, achieved in 2000, was surpassed by 9%. This is a stark
difference compared to the aforementioned 26 year minimum observed
just a few years back in 2014, resulting in overall a whopping 46.5%
difference in the number of HRs hit in the short time frame of the
2014 and 2017 seasons.

Figure 1 Among all of the US professional baseball leagues, only in MLB
did the seasonal league home records exceeded yearly average. MLB
home runs exceeded yearly averages since the 2016 season. Annual home
run records were collected for professional baseball leagues (top
left) MLB (top right) and Minor League Divisions from 1994 to 2019.
The PED era is referenced from 1994 to 2003 where PED testing started
in 2003. The 2019 AAA season was circled in green to indicate the
initial use of the MLB baseball compared to the minor league baseball
that has been used the 25 seasons before where a 52% increase in home
runs has occurred. (Bottom) A tabulated version of A and B showing
the 20 year average; post-PED era average (2004–2015); the
2016–2019 seasons home run per game totals.

Professional baseball in the United States has a number of professional
development leagues that serve as a farm system for MLB. The company
Rawlings produces all of the baseballs that are used in the Major
and Minor League systems, but the Major League uses balls entirely
from the manufacturing unit in Costa Rica, whereas the Minors use
balls produced in China.7 When the year-to-year
averages across the different leagues are examined, it became rather
clear that the unusual surge in HRs was observed only in the MLB may
be linked to the baseballs. Extrapolating HR per game across the last
26 years in the Minors, as in Figure 1 with the Majors, we see similar trends up to 2014,
but clearly, the recent surge in HRs exceeding historical records
was not observed in the analysis (except in 2019 for the AAA). All
Minor league divisions registered peaks of HR per game during the
PED era and regressions from 2004 to 2015 (specifically a 3% reduction
in AAA and AA, which was identical to the MLB) following the trend
in MLB, highlighting the consistency between the four professional
leagues. All three minor league divisions also showed an upward trend
of HRs in recent years, but the HR/game ratios were are all equal
or less than the 20 year average and similar to the 2004–2015
average, as shown in Figure 1 (bottom). Interestingly, as of the 2019 season, the AAA Minor
League started using the MLB-issued baseball. As of May 16th of 2019,
AAA players were hitting 1.34 HR/Game, which was a 52% increase from
the previous year. This stark difference with the addition of the
MLB baseball and the lack of difference in similar HRs trends in the
other minor league systems only further emphasized the tremendous
increase in HRs observed in the MLB and indicated the first possible
sign correlating this occurrence to the baseballs. Other statistical
factors were assessed to ensure that the increase in HRs was not the
product of a gameplay factor. Figure S1 plots the average hits per game in the MLB across the same time
span, showing that the last 8 years have seen a 5–7% decrease
in hits per game compared to the 18 years. This is also consistent
with an increase in strikeout rates, which indicate that pitching
improved as time went on, possibly making hitting HRs more difficult
(Figure S2). When hits per HR was normalized,
the same trend was observed in Figure 1, indicating an enormous increase in the frequency
of HRs (Figure S3). The number of at-bats
(or offensive attempts of a baseball player) per HR was also assessed
to account for a small season to season deviations of at-bats due
to extra-inning games or an increase in hits. The same trend existed
in at-bats per HR as with the frequency of overall HR. The number
of HRs hit increased in frequency, from on average every 37.5 at-bats
to below every 30 at-bats starting in 2017 (Figure S4).

One of the most common explanations used for the increase in HRs
is a difference in the approach of batters attributed to analytics
deprioritizing strikeouts. Hitters are thought to be intentionally
trying to lift or raise the trajectory of the baseball more and hit
more fly balls, in turn, resulting in more HRs. To investigate this
theory, the relative ratio of HR per fly ball hit was again plotted
over the last 26 years (Figure 2, left). From 1994 to 2014, the HR to fly ball ratio almost
remained the same with a slight increase during the PED era, as would
be expected. But contradictory to the 0.106 average ratio, during
the 2017–2019 seasons, there were 47, 68, and 93% increase
in the chance of a fly ball to be hit as a HR compared to the 20 years
prior to the 2014 season. This is noteworthy as the variation between
the highest and lowest statistical points was only 9% compared to
the average from 1994 to 2014.

Figure 2 Despite fewer fly balls hit more home runs were being scored during
the last 26 years. (Left) Year-to-year ratios of home runs to fly
balls were plotted from 1994 to 2019. (Right) MLB batters groundball
(GB) to fly ball (FB) ratio from 2002 to 2019 are plotted. The 18
year average ratio is 1.24 GB/FB (GB and FB stats acquired by FanGraphs,
which started recording team GB and FB stats in 2002).

The numbers reported here as well as reported by other baseball
analysis writers show a drastic change in global MLB HR production
that was sparked almost immediately in 2015. Interestingly, the recent
50% increase in AAA HR with the addition of the MLB baseball only
strengthen the argument that the baseball can be the catalyst of these
unprecedented HR numbers. But it should also be noted that the average
pitch velocity has increased almost 4 MPH since the early 1990s and
over 1 MPH in the last 6 years.8 Pitchers
are also exceeding 95 MPH roughly 22% of the time, which represents
more than 50% increase since 2008.8 Along
with the already mentioned strikeout rates steadily increasing, these
are reasons why it is thought that pitcher performance is driving
causation in increase of HRs as well. This is shown in Figure 2 (right panel) where the ratio
of groundballs to fly balls has dropped from 1.32 to 1.2 from 2014
to 2019 as players have had tendencies to lift the ball more. This
similar trend was seen at the end of the PED era as well where players
hit at 18 year minimum of 1.14 groundball to fly ball ratio in 2007.
The ability to hit a HR is thought to be a better gameplay strategy
by some analysts in terms of scoring runs than getting multiple hits
in a row based on the improved performance of the average pitcher.
This all speaks to the complexity of the dynamics on what goes behind
hitting a HR and the reasons why there is such a drastic change in
HR scored, but it still does not explain the suddenness of the change.

CT Scans of Baseballs Showed Differences in Density between
the Pills
Although the physics of the baseball has been studied
in some detail, to our knowledge there are no published peer-reviewed
data available on the systematic analysis of the chemical composition
and the characteristics of the internal components of a baseball.
To assess the density of the baseballs from the two different time
periods, CT scans were performed without needing to break or open
the balls. The measurements were obtained using Hounsfield units (HU).
By definition, the HU scale is effectively a measure of the linear
attenuation coefficient of X-rays passing through an object, which
has been converted to a scale at which the measured radiodensity of
distilled water at standard temperature and pressure is defined to
be zero HU. The HU of air is measured to be −1000. For example,
human lipomatous (fatty) tissue measures approximately −120
to −90 HU, as it is less dense than water and would, therefore,
float on water. Denser materials such as metal, stone, and glass measure
much higher (from 500 to 20 000 HU) depending on the composition
and atomic number of their internal contents. The radiodensity of
the different components of the inner pill of the baseballs clearly
differs when comparing the two time periods. Furthermore, the measured
HU also demonstrate a significant difference (Figures 3 and S5–S7). Specifically, the outermost layer of the inner pill of baseballs
from before the 2015 All-Star game was 56.7% denser on average. Other
parts of the pill did not seem to be affected as the cork interior
and inner rubber layer had relatively the same densities in baseballs
before the 2015 All-Star game and in 2017.

Figure 3 CT scans show a change in the radiodensity of the inner pill of
the baseball. MLB baseballs from 2014/pre-ASG 2015 (left) and 2017
(right) were observed for changes in radiodensity using CT, as measured
using Hounsfield Units. (A) Heat map representing the difference in
HU and (B) CT scan of baseballs from 2014/pre-ASG 2015 (left) and
the 2017 season (right). This experimentation allowed for each component
of the baseball to be visualized, allowing us to determine which portion
of the materials displayed any variation from 2014/pre-ASG 2015 to
2017. The inner pill, made of 3 components (pink rubber outer layer,
black rubber inner layer, and a cork center) saw a 56.7% decrease
in radiodensity between the two baseballs. (C) Compiled Hounsfield
Units observed from CT scans of various game-used baseballs from the
2014/pre-ASG 2015 and 2017 season. Statistical significance of the
outermost layer of the pill is P < 0.001.

Chemical Analysis Shows Differences in Material Composition
The CT scans established a narrower target for the potential area
that showed a distinct difference between the new and the old baseballs.
As mentioned earlier, the inner pill of a baseball is made up of three
components, an outer pink rubber layer, an inner black rubber layer,
and a cork center (Figure 4A). Whole pills were first weighed to measure the average
mass. A 0.5 g difference was observed, the new balls weighed less
compared to the old balls (Figure 4B). It was referenced in a recent FiveThirtyEight article
that the total mass of the whole baseball was also measured to half
of a gram less, but this change in context of the whole baseball is
deemed insignificant and within the acceptable range of the baseball
weight (5.00–5.25 ounces according to rule 3.01 of 2017 Official
Baseball Rules).9 But in the context of
the pills, the weight is significantly different and provided further
evidence that the pill between the years had changed.

Figure 4 Inner pill of the baseballs displays physical differences. (A)
Deconstructed pill showing the inside of the pill of a major league
baseball. The pill of baseball from 2014/pre-ASG 2015 and 2017. The
pill is made of 3 components, an outer pink rubber layer, a middle
black rubber layer, and an inner cork (gray). For chemical experimentation,
portions were taken from the specific layer to assess potential differences
from baseballs used in 2014/pre-ASG 2015 and 2017. (B) The pills of
new baseballs weigh 0.5 g less on average than older pills. The pill
of baseballs from 2014/pre-ASG 2015 and 2017 was weighed and averages
were calculated. Baseballs from 2017 were observed to weigh approximately
0.5 g less. Three pill samples from each 2014/pre-ASG 2015 and 2017
game-used baseballs were assessed.

Since the CT scans demonstrated that only the outer pink layer
was significantly different, the material from the layer was examined
using various experiments to determine potentially what chemical changes
could have occurred. It should be noted that there is an observable
difference in the color of the balls. All of the new baseballs contained
a lighter shade of pink. Apart from concluding a difference based
on color, thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed to investigate
if the chemical composition of the balls changed, particularly the
amount of the inorganic material used. Across a temperature range
of 25–800 °C, five distinct regions were examined for
material changes based on differences in the mass percentage of loss
of the material versus starting material (Figure 5A,B). Most notably, there was a 7% difference
in the mass left over after the high-temperature gradient, accounting
for a difference in the inorganic and organic composition of the new
and old pills (Figure 5C). Previous reports that analyzed silicon-containing polymeric material
determined that mass left over after 800 °C was Si since the
inorganic constituents cannot decompose at 800 °C.10,11 This 7% difference was highly reproducible and significant as the
difference from ball to ball within a year was extremely small. The
first of the temperature ranges examined (190–270 °C)
also had a 7% increase in mass percent (Figure S8). Of the other three discernable regions examined, variations
were found in lower mass percent differences of 4, 3, and 1% changes
between new and old baseballs (Figures S9–S11). A reason for these differences is harder to conclude as there
can be a slight variation from ball to ball within the same year.
We can only make a logical assumption, but the changes observed in
TGA from ball to ball could potentially be a result of changes in
the material composition that could produce differences in packing.
This may result from different amounts of intermolecular interactions
that the varying material compositions could possess.

Figure 5 Differences in the material content were observed using thermal
gravimetric analysis. (A) Representative thermal gravimetric analysis
(TGA) trace of the material of the pink layer of the pill of a 2017
MLB baseball. The red line notes the weight% loss in relation to the
increase in temperature. The blue is the first derivative of the weight%
loss in relation to the increase in temperature. (B) Representative
thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) of the material of the pink layer
of the pill from a 2014/pre-ASG 2015 MLB baseball. The red line denotes
the weight% loss in relation to the increase in temperature. The blue
is the first derivative of the weight% loss in relation to the increase
in temperature. (C) A 7% difference was found due to differences in
inorganic material composition between the new and old baseballs.
The leftover weight, or nondecomposed material, was found to be significantly
higher in older baseballs than new. The leftover material is referenced
to be the inorganic material that cannot be decomposed below temperatures
of 800 °C, most likely silicon in this case.

To learn more details about potential differences in the chemical
composition of the baseballs, infrared spectrometry (IR) was used
to determine if the chemical functionalities are different within
the pink rubber layer. We reasoned that chemical shifts based on the
functional group difference within IR could potentially detect composition
difference of the type of the polymer material used. Figure S12 shows only slight increases in intensity at peaks
of 700, 1540, and 1570 nm in the new ball compared to that of the
old baseballs. The rubber pills were later dissolved in various solvents
with different chemical properties in an effort to obtain a better
understanding of the potential changes in the material. The IRs of
the pills soaked in chloroform showed the same difference observed
earlier with the additional absorbance at 1540 nm. The observed changes
are only minor increases, which are thought to be concentration dependent,
although may not be linear. The vast majority of the IR spectra across
four different solvents and the raw material showed extremely similar
results indicating that from the perspective of chemical functionalities,
there is no significant difference between the old and new balls.
Overall, this suggests that the nature of the material used in the
outer layer of the rubber is the same and that no new material was
added to the rubber between the old and new baseballs.

As mentioned earlier, the CT scans signified a 56.7% difference
in radiodensity between the outer pink layer in the new and old baseballs.
Changes in these densities could be explained by the porosity of the
material. The mass decrease seen in Figure 4B could be a result of increased pore formation
and, therefore, less mass in a constant volume from pills of different
years. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the new and old
balls were obtained and they showed that the new balls had more pores
in the material compared to the old (Figure 6). The pores were visually larger, and these
images were indicative of the entire body of the material. SEM-coupled
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS–SEM) of multiple
regions of old and new balls displayed that identity and number of
elements were unchanged. SEM-coupled X-ray diffraction elemental mapping
(EDS–SEM) of multiple regions of old and new balls displayed
that identity and number of elements were unchanged. However, the
amount of certain elements changed significantly (Figure 7). Particularly, the largest
change was observed in relative Si percentage, which decreased by
10%. This further explains that the reduction of the inorganic material
confirmed in the early TGA experiments as Si is observed to be the
dominant inorganic species within the pink rubber. Sulfur within the
pink layer of the new baseballs exhibited a 2% decrease. Carbon composition
was experimentally determined to increase 5% in the new baseballs
through elemental decomposition analysis. This change can be further
explained by the increase in the polymer content seen in Figure 5B. The polymer within
the shell was thought to be the dominant supplier of carbon. Together,
the elemental analysis further concluded that less inorganic material
and more polymer is present within the pink pill of the new baseballs.

Figure 6 Material of new baseballs (2017) was displayed to be more porous.
(A) SEM was used to view the pink rubber layer of the new (2017) and
old baseballs (2014/pre-ASG 2015). Larger pores at a higher number
were observed across the entirety of the material of the new baseballs.
The increased porosity of the new baseballs specifically correlates
with the CT findings that demonstrate a 56.7% higher density in the
core of the 2014/pre-ASG 2015 baseballs compared to the 2017 baseballs.

Figure 7 Elemental composition changes dramatically between the new and
old baseballs. (A) Silicon composition decreased 8% in new baseballs.
EDS–SEM was used to observe the elemental composition. Multiple
positions (n = 3) within the material of old and
new baseballs were subjected to the EDS and those numbers were averaged
to gain the composition for a single baseball. Multiple baseballs
(n = 3) were used to get an average comparison among
new and old baseballs. (B) Sulfur composition decreased 2 fold in
new baseballs. EDS–SEM was used to observe the elemental composition.
Multiple positions (n = 3) within the material of
old and new baseballs were subjected to the EDS and those numbers
were average to gain the composition for a single baseball. Multiple
baseballs (n = 3) were used to get an average comparison
among new and old baseballs. (C) Carbon composition increased 5% in
new baseballs. Elemental decomposition analysis was used to quantify
the carbon composition within the new and old baseballs. Multiple
baseballs (n = 3) were used to get an average comparison
among new and old baseballs. The increased carbon could be an indication
of increased polymer content.

Discussion
In recent years, the home run rates in MLB have increased at a
staggering rate, prompting the entirety of the baseball world (from
fan to player) to look for plausible reasons behind it. The most common
explanations have consisted of changes in philosophy (specifically
more fly balls), improved technologies that result in improved training,
and a changed baseball. Increasing HR/Fly ball rates and the sudden
5 year surge in HRs are thought to have rendered the first two options
unlikely or secondary factors, as they would have resulted in a constant,
subtle increase year to year. This recent dramatic difference is similar
to what was observed during the PED era when an external factor improved
player performance. CT scans looked into each component of the baseballs,
initially confirming a change of radiodensity of the inner, central
pill (specifically the outermost layer) of the baseballs from 2014/pre-ASG
2015 to 2017. The chemical analysis further resolved the outermost
pink layer, defining significant differences in porosity, weight,
and relative Si and polymer contents, marking an alteration in the
sampled balls.

The work performed here does not directly compare the chemical
composition to the dynamics of the baseball’s flight and collision
dynamics; however, a number of reports have examined how these new
baseballs in theory and practice have shown significant performance
alterations. Physics of the ball–bat collision is highly variable,
as countless factors can manipulate ball flight. One such possible
change could occur based on the change in the density, which has shown
to result directly in a significant decrease in the mass of the pill.
This 0.5 g difference has mirrored a similar decrease in the overall
weight of the baseballs, but this change is within the error of measurement
deemed acceptable by the MLB. One thought is that the subtle difference
in ball weight could change the ball exit speed off the bat. Ball
exit speed ratio (BESR) is used primarily in National Collegiate Athletic
Association (NCAA) and youth baseball as a safety measurement where
we can see the effect of baseball mass on ball exit speed off the
bat.12,13 As mass decreases, BESR increases. If consistent,
even a 0.5 g change can increase the exit ball velocity off the bat,
but it is unknown if this weight difference would be enough solely
to make a large change in the flight distance. But as average pitch
speed has also increased in recent years, the two can complement each
other for improved bat exit speed velocities. Also, it should be noted
that although a less massive ball will come off the bat at a higher
speed, it will be affected more by the air resistance. The coefficient
of restitution (COR) or bounciness is another characteristic of the
baseball that could have been changed. An article by The Ringer in 2017 explained that newer baseballs, from 2016 to 2017, had a
“noticeably higher” COR than baseballs from 2014.14 Further investigation could be done to establish
if there is a possible connection between a more porous pill and baseball
COR. Finally, an investigative piece by Fivethirtyeight.com reported that baseballs have become less air resistant as well.
Also, Nathan et al. in 2017 investigated how the baseball carried
at Tropicana Field, an enclosed complex where the atmospheric effects
can be assumed to remain constant.15 The
results concluded that an aerodynamic change in the baseball could
account for the significant difference in HR pre and post the 2015
all-star game (comparing the 2015 and 2016 seasons). However, this
aerodynamic effect could not be attributed to the constant increase
seen in 2017. Other factors can be plausible for the difference in
HRs, in which the MLB has already looked into. Nathan et al. highlighted
a humidor effect where the flight of the baseball is consistently
altered by the environment in which the balls are stored in, specifically
the humidity.16 Reducing moisture from
the baseball can increase the COR of the baseball and, therefore,
increase home run potential of the baseball. This has been a stated
problem with ballparks located in such dryer, lower humidity climates
like Arizona and Denver. The MLB commissioner has called for the standardization
of ball storage across the MLB for this reason and mandated that ballparks
create controlled rooms in 2018.

In the Spring of 2018, a committee of scientists was formed in
an effort to better understand the causation behind increasing HR
rates in reference to the baseball. Their findings within the “Report
of the Committee Studying Home Run Rates in Major League Baseball”
concluded that baseballs manufactured in recent years (2016 and 2017)
have a reduced drag compared to baseball manufactured from earlier
years (2012–2015), whereas other factors such as possible material
changes, COR, seam height, and launch angles did not make a significant
difference.17 But the report did mention
that Rawlings verified a difference in the manufacturing process of
the pill where new molds were used starting in 2015 due to the older
molds becoming worn out. This can very likely be the reasoning behind
the differences in pill composition found within our study, which
even highlights the improved reproducibility of the new molds as the
variations found in the new pills were smaller compared to the older
pills across all chemical tests done. The MLB report further stated
that more tests are being performed but “does not rule out
the possibility that manufacturing advances have contributed to the
reduced drag by creating a more spherically symmetrical ball with
a more properly centered pill (which would in theory lead to a lower
drag)”. This MLB report may not directly confirm the changes
we found within the pill attributes toward increases in HR, but it
does highlight the change in the manufacturing process of the pill
that is thought to be an underlining reason for changes in drag and
carry, and the manufacturing process created a different pill as seen
by our chemical study.

Conclusions
Through this investigation, specific changes to game-used baseballs
before and after the 2015 All-Star game were found. Initially, CT
scans were able to observe each of the larger components of the baseballs
to narrow down a reoccurring difference in density of the outermost
layer of the baseballs’ core. This rubber component was then
put through numerous chemical experimentations demonstrating that
the material’s inorganic/organic composition changed creating
a more porous structure, but the specific components remained the
same. As the compiled results demonstrated that an empirical change
had occurred between the cohorts of baseballs from 2014/pre-ASG 2015
to 2017, the potential reason behind such change cannot be ascertained
from our studies. But a 2018 report does conclude changes in the manufacturing
process leading to a different pill during 2015, aligning with the
data in this report. Potentially the chemical tests done can have
a role in determining future indications of the ball performance going
forward. Previous changes to a professional baseball, for a multitude
of reasons, have resulted in a number of different performance outcomes,
as previously stated.16 As thousands of
baseballs are put into play every year, we believe that this study
should be taken as a potential starting point for a larger study in
an effort to understand these changes in the pill and the baseball
as a whole, to create new targets, which can be tested to observe
the ball performance.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.9b00405. .S1, hits per game average in MLB; S2, strikeouts per
game in MLB; S3, hits per home run in the MLB; S4, at-bats per home
run in the MLB; S5, CT scans of MLB baseballs from 2017; S6, CT scans
of MLB baseballs from 2014 to 2015; S7, raw images of CT of MLB game-used
baseballs; S8, TGA of outer core of the MLB baseballs at 240 °C;
S9, TGA of outer core of the MLB baseballs from 300 to 500 °C;
S10, TGA of outer core of the MLB baseballs at 500 °C; S11, TGA
of outer core of the MLB baseballs at 600 °C; S12, IR spectrometry
of the outer core of MLB baseballs (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b00405_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
§ Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology,
New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016,
United States. E-mail: nathan.beals@nyulangone.org.

Author Contributions
Experiments
were performed by N.B., L.Z., M.L., and J.A. Data analysis was performed
by N.B., L.Z., M.L., D.H., J.A., and S.B. The manuscript was written
by N.B., L.Z., M.L., J.Z., and S.B.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by Kent State University and University.
We thank the Liquid Crystal Institute at Kent State University for
helping with SEM experiments. We thank Dr. Mietek Jaroniec for the
assistance with the thermogravimetric analysis. We thank Dr. Chris
Blackwood and Anthony Minerovic for the help with carbon analysis
of the baseballs. Tim Dix was instrumental in creating a research
plan and developing the investigation into the potential material
change into the MLB baseballs.

Abbreviations
CTcomputed tomography

MLBMajor League Baseball

PEDperformance-enhancing
drugs

ASGAll-Star
Game

SEMscanning
electron microscopy

PACSSynapse Picture Archive and Communication System

EDSenergy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy

TGAthermogravimetric
analysis

HRhome
run

HUhounsfield
units

IRinfrared
spectrometry

EDS–SEMenergy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy

BESRball exit speed ratio

NCAANational Collegiate
Athletic Association

CORcoefficient of restitution
==== Refs
References
Baade R. A. ; Tiehen L. J. 
An Analysis of Major League Baseball Attendance, 1969
- 1987 . J. Sport Soc. Issues 
1990 , 14 , 14 –32 . 10.1177/019372359001400102 .
Schmidt M. B. ; Berri D. J. 
Competitive Balance and Attendance: The Case of Major
League Baseball . J. Sports Econ. 
2001 , 2 , 145 –167 . 10.1177/152700250100200204 .
Clair M.   Why was the Mound Lowered in 1968 . https://www.mlb.com/cut4/why-was-the-mound-lowered-in-1968/c-158689966.
Jaffe J.   A Juiced Baseball Scandal in
Japan. https://www.si.com/mlb/strike-zone/2013/06/12/japan-juiced-baseballs.
Peterson A. M. ; Jung W. S. ; Stanley H. E. 
On the distribution of career longevity
and the evolution of home-run prowess in professional baseball . Europhys. Lett. 
2008 , 83 , 5001010.1209/0295-5075/83/50010 .
Davenport M. 
What’s
in baseballs, and can materials explain a spike in scoring? . C&EN 
2018 , 95 , 28 –29 .
Laurila D.   Four Perspectives: How Do MLB
and MiLB Balls Differ? https://www.fangraphs.com/blogs/four-perspectives-how-do-mlb-and-milb-balls-differ/.
Sullivan J.   The Velocity Surge Has Plateaued. https://blogs.fangraphs.com/the-velocity-surge-has-plateaued/.
Arthur R. ; Dix T.   We X-Rayed Some MLB Baseballs. Here’s
What We Found. FiveThirtyEight. https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/juiced-baseballs/.
Naskar A. K. ; Bi Z. ; Li Y. ; Akato S. K. ; Saha D. ; Chi M. ; Bridges C. A. ; Paranthaman M. P. 
Tailored recovery of carbons from
waste tires for enhanced performance as anodes in lithium-ion batteries . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 3821310.1039/C4RA03888F .
Kim Y.-J. ; Kim J.-H. ; Ha S.-W. ; Kwon D. ; Lee J.-K. 
Polyimide
nanocomposites with functionalized SiO2 nanoparticles: enhanced processability,
thermal and mechanical properties . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 4337110.1039/C4RA04952G .
James Ashton-Miller M. C. ; Johnson K. ; Nathan A.  Todd
Petr, Ty Halpin, The BESR (Ball Exit Speed Ratio) NCAA Baseball Research Panel 2018 , 1 6 .
Nathan A. M. 
Dynamics
of the baseball–bat collision . Am. J.
Phys. 
2000 , 68 , 979 –990 . 10.1119/1.1286119 .
Lindbergh B.   The Juiced Ball Is Back. https://www.theringer.com/2017/6/14/16044264/2017-mlb-home-run-spike-juiced-ball-testing-reveal-155cd21108bc.
Nathan A.   Fly Ball Carry and the Home Run
Surge. https://www.fangraphs.com/tht/fly-ball-carry-and-the-home-run-surge/.
Nathan A. M. ; Smith L. V. ; Faber W. L. ; Russell D. A. 
Corked bats, juiced
balls, and humidors: The physics of cheating in baseball . Am. J. Phys. 
2011 , 79 , 575 –580 . 10.1119/1.3554642 .
Albert J. ; Bartroff J. ; Blandford R. ; Brooks D. ; Derenski J. ; Goldstein L. ; Hosoi A. ; Lorden G. ; Nathan A. ; Smith L.   Report of the Committee Studying Home Run Rates in
Major League Baseball 2018 , pp. 1 –84 . https://www.mlb.com/news/mlb-report-on-baseballs-home-run-rates/c-278120310.

