
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146027110.1021/acsomega.9b00162ArticleComputational and Experimental Druggability Assessment
of Human DNA Glycosylases Michel Maurice *†∇Visnes Torkild †‡∇Homan Evert J. †Seashore-Ludlow Brinton §Hedenström Mattias ∥Wiita Elisée †Vallin Karl †Paulin Cynthia B. J. †Zhang Jiaxi ⊥Wallner Olov †Scobie Martin †Schmidt Andreas ⊥Jenmalm-Jensen Annika §Warpman Berglund Ulrika †Helleday Thomas *†#† Science
for Life Laboratory, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, S-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden‡ Department
of Biotechnology and Nanomedicine, SINTEF
Industry, N-7465 Trondheim, Norway§ Chemical
Biology Consortium Sweden, Science for Life Laboratory, Division of
Translational Medicine and Chemical Biology, Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska
Institutet, S-171 21 Stockholm, Sweden∥ Department
of Chemistry, Umeå University, S-901 87 Umeå, Sweden⊥ Institute
of Organic Chemistry, Clausthal University
of Technology, Leibnizstrasse
6, D-38678 Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany# Sheffield
Cancer Centre, Department of Oncology and Metabolism, University of Sheffield, S10 2RX Sheffield, U.K.* E-mail: maurice.grube@scilifelab.se (M.M.).* E-mail: t.helleday@sheffield.ac.uk (T.H.).05 07 2019 31 07 2019 4 7 11642 11656 17 01 2019 21 05 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Due
to a polar or even charged binding interface, DNA-binding proteins
are considered extraordinarily difficult targets for development of
small-molecule ligands and only a handful of proteins have been targeted
successfully to date. Recently, however, it has been shown that development
of selective and efficient inhibitors of 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase
is possible. Here, we describe the initial druggability assessment
of DNA glycosylases in a computational setting and experimentally
investigate several methods to target endonuclease VIII-like 1 (NEIL1)
with small-molecule inhibitors. We find that DNA glycosylases exhibit
good predicted druggability in both DNA-bound and -unbound states.
Furthermore, we find catalytic sites to be highly flexible, allowing
for a range of interactions and binding partners. One flexible catalytic
site was rationalized for NEIL1 and further investigated experimentally
using both a biochemical assay in the presence of DNA and a thermal
shift assay in the absence of DNA.

document-id-old-9ao9b00162document-id-new-14ao-2019-00162vccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The
concept of inflicting damage to DNA in tumor cells to treat
cancer, e.g., by radiation therapy or chemotherapeutics such as antimetabolites
and DNA intercalators, has formed the foundation of modern clinical
oncology.1,2 The success of these first-line cancer treatments
have prompted increased attention toward enzymes that repair damaged
bases and to the development of corresponding small-molecule inhibitors
for cancer therapy. We and others have shown that Mut T homolog 1
(MTH1) inhibition leads to incorporation of oxidized bases such as
7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) into DNA and selectively kills cancer
cells.3−7 Despite the unclear underlying biology of MTH1 inhibition,8 it is evident that cancer cells depend on protective
repair pathways to tolerate increased oxidative stress. Therefore,
we argue that further inhibition of the main DNA repair pathways for
repair of oxidized nucleobases, in particular the base excision repair
proteins 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (OGG1), Mut Y homolog (MUTYH),
or NEIL1, could lead to powerful combination therapies.9−15 OGG1, the DNA glycosylase responsible for repairing the bulk of
8-oxoG in mammals,16,17 has recently been validated preclinically
as a drug target by us and others, proving druggable with selective
small molecules.18,19 The importance of managing 8-oxoG
levels is also facilitated by MUTYH, which removes adenine misincorporated
opposite to 8-oxoG.20 This initiates recycling
of the damaged DNA strand back to OGG1, which otherwise fails to recognize
8-oxoG unless it is base-paired with cytosine. NEIL1, on the other
hand, has a unique substrate range, removing all products formed from
further oxidation and fragmentation of 8-oxoG, but also thymine glycol
(Tg), oxidized cytosine and uracil.12,22−25 Mice devoid of these DNA glycosylases are viable and grow old, suggesting
that potential inhibitors would show little on-target toxicity in
a rodent model.26,27

DNA glycosylases exist
in DNA-bound and -unbound conformations.19,29−34 It is of interest whether a DNA-bound or -unbound state facilitates
or restricts the binding of small molecules. Thus, one major challenge
is to be able to target one population of a DNA glycosylase with a
small molecule, given that this is a requirement for conveying a certain
phenotype.19 Computational binding-site
prediction, for example, is a suitable method to investigate chemotype
preference of DNA glycosylases using available crystal structures
of single isolated protein species. However, literature concerning
druggability of any DNA glycosylase is nonexistent and reported findings
are only applicable in the broadest sense by transferring knowledge
from glycosylases and RNA-, DNA-, nucleotide-, and carbohydrate-binding
proteins.3,35−38 Additionally, these previous
studies based on crystal structures have considered the relevant proteins
to be rigid and not flexible, a scenario that is not applicable to
DNA glycosylases.

Druggability is defined as the ability of
a protein to specifically
bind rule-of-five-compliant small molecules with high affinity.39−41 A high druggability score and the induction of a therapeutic effect
by small-molecule binding in a living system are characteristics of
a good drug target. Several computational and empirical methods to
assess protein druggability have been reported over the past years.42−44 Computational druggability predictions are less time-consuming and
relatively cheap compared to experimental methods. Given the availability
of structural information, i.e., high-resolution crystallographic
data, they allow for the rapid evaluation of target suitability for
a drug discovery campaign. A number of computational methods predicting
protein-binding sites and their druggability are available,35,45−48 spanning the entire spectrum from geometric to energy-based and
from rigid proteins to systems allowing for high flexibility.

High-throughput screening (HTS) of large druglike compound libraries
has yielded a number of hits for NEIL1 and OGG1 with micromolar (μM)
potency.18,49,50 However, target
screening using rule-of-three-compliant fragment libraries may be
more productive, since it can assess the target’s druggability.
Furthermore, fragment screening also covers a larger chemical space
and typically yields hits with higher ligand efficiencies, which are
often more amenable for further lead generation than μM druglike
hits.37,51−53 Techniques commonly
used for fragment screening are biophysical methods such as surface
plasmon resonance (SPR), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), differential
scanning fluorimetry (DSF), and X-ray crystallography.54

Here, we performed a computational binding-site
prediction and
druggability assessment of available high-resolution structures of
human DNA glycosylases using different algorithms and experimentally
assessed the computationally derived druggability scores for NEIL1.
We show structures identified in the biochemical HTS, assess their
target engagement in DSF, and importantly, suggest a broadly applicable
adaptation of DSF for DNA-binding proteins.

Results and Discussion
Sequence
Alignment Reveals Low Sequence Conservation of DNA
Glycosylases
Initially, we compiled a list of all available
high-resolution crystal structures of human DNA glycosylases (Table 1) and assessed consensus
protein sequence by alignment of FASTA at Clustal Omega at EMBL.3,29−32,55−66 Sequence similarity was extraordinary low, with an average of 15.5%
(Figure 1B).67 This is in accordance with earlier reports that
assort the low sequence similarity of especially the uracil-binding
glycosylases to the major role of uracil flipping.68 This seems to be due to a conformational strain caused
by the enzyme on uracil-containing DNA, which is much bigger compared
to the catalytic action of individual polar residues. Thus, it was
observed that despite their low sequence similarity, bacterial uracil–DNA
glycosylase and mismatch-specific uracil–DNA glycosylase exhibit
an almost identical global folding. Even so, two different groups
can be distinguished by the phylogenetic tree (Figure 1A,B): NEIL1, NEIL2, and NEIL3 with a similarity
between 19.6 and 26.1%, and MPG, UNG, SMUG1, MUTYH, NTH1, and OGG1
with a similarity between 11.9 and 24.1%. Furthermore, the root-mean-square
deviation (RMSD) of atomic (Cα) positions for the pairs available
for NEIL1 (0.84 Å), UNG (1.05 Å), MBD4 (0.88 Å), and
OGG1 (0.85 Å) are small and suggest that possible protein flexibility
is either caused by conformational changes of the amino acid side
chains or by existence of only a few higher-valued amino acids.

Figure 1 Phylogenetic
tree (A) and sequence alignment (B) of human DNA glycosylases.
Despite recognizing damaged DNA by flipping out the corresponding
base, human DNA glycosylases have a surprisingly low sequence similarity
even among those classified in the same protein family such as the
endonuclease VIII-like members.

Table 1 List of Analyzed Crystal Structures
of Human DNA Glycosylasesa
protein name	PDB code	w/DNA	w/o DNA	apo	reference	
MBD4	4E9E	 	 	X	Moréra et al.58	
MBD4	4OFA	X	 	 	Ouzon-Shubeita
et al.59	
MBD4	4OFA	 	X	 	Ouzon-Shubeita
et al.59	
MPG	1EWN	X	 	 	Lau et al.66	
MPG	1EWN	 	X	 	Lau et al.66	
MUTYH	3N5N	 	 	X	Luncsford et al.64	
NEIL1	1TDH	 	 	X	Doublié
et al.32	
NEIL1	5ITY	X	 	 	Zhu et al.31	
NEIL1	5ITY	 	X	 	Zhu et al.31	
NEIL3	3W0F	 	 	X	Liu et al.63	
OGG1	5AN4	 	 	X	Zander et al.29	
OGG1	2XHI	X	 	 	Dalhus et al.30	
OGG1	2XHI	 	X	 	Dalhus et al.30	
TDG	5HF7	X	 	 	Coey et al.62	
TDG	5HF7	 	X	 	Coey et al.62	
UNG	2HXM	 	 	X*	Krosky et al.61	
UNG	1EMH	X	 	 	Parikh et al.60	
UNG	1EMH	 	X	 	Parikh et al.60	
MTH1	3Q93	 	 	X	Tresauges et al.71	
PTP1B	2HNP	 	 	X	Barford et al.78	
a MTH1 and PTP1B
were included as
reference proteins; * ligand removed.

Computational Binding-Site Analysis by DogSite Predicts Good
Druggability
We then predicted binding pockets and assessed
druggability of the high-resolution crystal structures. Generally,
hydrophilic sites are considered less druggable than more hydrophobic
sites. This effect should in theory yield low scores for DNA-binding
regions of the proteins. We identified between 1 and 11 potential
binding sites for each DNA glycosylase. Except for DNA-bound MBD4
(4OFA),59 at least two sites were found to be druggable
by the definition of DogSite (drug score > 0.5). For all structures
except apo MBD4 (4E9E),58 DNA-bound NEIL1 (5ITY),31 apo OGG1 (5AN4),29 and DNA-bound TDG (5HF7),62 the active site with catalytic amino acid residues was
identified as the top-ranking binding pocket. Apo NEIL1 (1TDH)32 was the only structure where two distinct binding pockets
were identified close to amino acid residues involved in the catalytically
active site. Finally, closely situated binding sites in apo, DNA-bound,
and DNA-stripped structures scored differently and, in addition, were
found to have different size and altered amino acid composition.

Although therapeutically targeting DNA glycosylases with small molecules
requires inhibition of DNA–protein complex formation, this
may be achieved without direct ligand binding to the active site.
Despite possible involvement in protein regulation or allosteric sites,
inhibition of remote sites is not generally considered a requisite
for eliciting a therapeutic effect.69 We
therefore assigned the predicted binding sites to one of four categories:
Active site with catalytic amino acid residue I, active-site adjacent
pocket II, DNA-binding groove III, and remote binding sites IV (Figure 2A). For each protein,
the single, top-ranking pocket for the categories I, II, and III was
used to calculate a mean druggability score. With a druggability score
of 0.80, DNA glycosylases were identified as favorably druggable.
The druggable reference protein MTH1 (3Q93)3,7,70,71 was found to score slightly higher
with 0.81. The protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) was included
as a negative control. PTP1B is widely accepted as a potential therapeutic
target for type 2 diabetes and obesity,72−74 and for this reason,
numerous potent and structurally diverse PTP1B inhibitors have been
discovered over the last two decades.75−77 Most of the inhibitors
incorporate phosphotyrosine (pTyr) mimetics and bind to the enzyme’s
catalytic site. However, the highly conserved and polar nature of
the PTP1B catalytic site in combination with a catalytically active
cysteine renders development of PTP1B inhibitors with good selectivity
and permeability a challenging task. So far, only three small-molecule
PTP1B inhibitors, including allosteric drugs, have progressed into
clinical trials.77 The catalytic site of
PTP1B (2HNP)78 scored 0.72 by combination of two small sites,
which separately scored 0.41 and 0.56. Interestingly, OGG1 (2XHI),30 TDG (5HF7),62 and UNG (1EMH)60 show especially
high drug scores of >0.85 for the catalytic site, while 0.66 for
apo
MBD4 (4E9E)58 was the only one indicating a challenging drug
discovery campaign (Figure 2B). In contrast to DNA-, RNA-, and carbohydrate-binding proteins
and based on remarkably high DogSite generated druggability scores,
this indicates that DNA glycosylases are indeed druggable.35−38

Figure 2 (A)
DogSite was used to predict binding sites in available high-resolution
crystal structures of human DNA glycosylases. Each predicted binding
site was further assessed for its DrugScore, i.e., computational derived
druggability score. Values between 0.5 and 1.0 define a pocket as
druggable, of which values closer to 1.0 are considered the best.
Identified binding sites of DNA glycosylases can be sorted into four
categories: I catalytic site (green); II catalytic adjacent site (yellow);
III part of DNA groove (orange); IV other remote sites (black). Except
for apo MBD4, DNA-bound NEIL1, apo OGG1, and DNA-bound TDG, the algorithm
identified the catalytic sites as the highest ranking pocket. Surprisingly,
most high scoring sites reached a DrugScore as high as the binding
site of MTH1, a well-characterized and druggable protein. (B) To induce
a therapeutic effect, perturbation of DNA binding is a sufficient
mode of action for a prospective small-molecule drug. Therefore, for
each protein, only the single highest ranking DrugScore of category
I, II, or III was used to calculate a mean druggability score for
human DNA glycosylase. With an average DrugScore of 0.80, DNA glycosylases
identify as favorably druggable targets (MTH1 0.81, PTP1B 0.72).

Binding-Site Assessment
with SiteMap Identifies Dependency of
Pocket Polarity on the Presence of DNA
Schrödingers
SiteMap is commonly used to assess protein surfaces for binding pockets
and their druggability, i.e., Dscore. The Dscore favors proteins with
more hydrophobic binding pockets, and proteins reaching Dscores higher
than 1.108 are considered excellent drug targets, while proteins with
values up to 0.871 are considered difficult.79,80 For comparison, the largest identified site for the undruggable
PTP1B (2HNP)78 showed a Dscore of 0.77, while MTH1 (3Q93)71 scored 1.02. Between one and eight sites were found for
DNA glycosylases by SiteMap, with Dscores ranging from nondruggable
to druggable (Figure 3A). The single highest scoring sites of categories I, II, and III
reached a mean Dscore of 0.89, scoring below the Dscore of MTH1 (3Q93)71 of 1.02, but clearly above PTP1B (2HNP).78 The range of Dscores between 0.59 and 1.11 on the other
hand reflects a rather distributed picture of the different target
proteins. Although slightly lower than in DogSite, these results confirm
the finding of good druggability of human DNA glycosylases.

Figure 3 (A) As a second
algorithm, SiteMap of Maestro from Schrödinger
was used to predict binding sites and calculate the corresponding
Dscores. Values below 0.871 reflect a challenging nature of the target,
while proteins reaching values larger than 1.108 are considered excellent
drug targets. With the highest ranking pocket of category I, II, or
III, DNA glycosylases yield an average DScore of 0.89 (MTH1 1.020,
PTP1B 0.770) and are predicted to be druggable targets. (B) Polarity
of active sites are a main concern when targeting DNA-binding proteins.
Indeed, DNA glycosylases bound to DNA tend to exhibit higher hydrophilicity
than apo structures. These values, however, do not reflect a general
trend that excludes druggability of DNA glycosylases judging by pocket
polarity. (C) Venn diagram illustrating that all proteins considered
druggable by SiteMap are also considered druggable by DogSite. A large
percentage of these show sufficient polarity or hydrophobic/hydrophilic
ratio to be targeted by classic rule-of-five-compliant small molecules.
(D) Docking scores generated during in silico screening of a subset
of the ZINC library to the highest ranking site are an additional
measure to estimate the druggability of a target. Here, the top-1000
ranked fragments against every DNA glycosylase cover a broad spectrum
with docking scores as low as those reached against MTH1 and higher
scores for the hydrophobic site of apo NEIL1 and beyond PTP1B.

One important characteristic of
a druggable binding pocket is a
favorable hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance. This is the main point
of concern regarding druggability of DNA-binding proteins, since high-affinity
DNA binding requires a network of polar amino acid residues. Thus,
it was of interest to determine whether the polarity of the highest
ranking sites allows for the binding of druglike molecules, which
are usually more hydrophobic than DNA. When investigated for these
parameters using the incorporated function in SiteMap, the single
highest scoring sites of human DNA glycosylases score on average 0.49,
respectively, 0.69 for MTH1 (3Q93)71 and 0.05 for PTP1B (2HNP),78 with a range of 0.07–2.90 (Figure 3B). Apo structures tend to be higher ranking,
as only UNG with bound DNA (1EMH)60 reaches hydrophobicity
levels higher than MTH1 (3Q93).71 As an extreme example,
apo NEIL1 (1TDH)32 scored a hydrophobic/hydrophilic ratio
of 2.90. In contrast, the corresponding DNA-bound proteins score substantially
lower (0.16–0.38), suggesting major conformational changes
upon DNA binding. In total, only MUTYH (3N5N),64 NEIL1
(1TDH),32 NEIL1 w/DNA (5ITY),31 OGG1 (5AN4),29 TDG w/DNA (5HF7),62 and UNG w/DNA (1EMH)60 are feasible drug targets judging by a pocket polarity
over 0.5 (Figure 3B).

In Silico Docking of ZINC Fragments to Human DNA Glycosylases
As an additional method to investigate the obtained druggability
scores and pocket polarities, we performed virtual screens of a subset
of the open-access ZINC database against the highest scoring binding
site of each DNA glycosylase, as identified by SiteMap.81,82 An obvious advantage of this screening campaign is that top-ranked
fragments could provide potential starting points for hit expansion
and lead generation. We hypothesized that the docking score profiles
of the top-ranked 1000 fragments would reflect the druggability of
the respective sites, i.e., protein pockets with good druggability
scores should yield lower average fragments scores. By applying a
cascade of docking steps with increasing scoring precision, the top-ranked
1000 fragments against each DNA glycosylase were retained and the
median Glide XP docking scores for each of the top-ranked 1000 fragment
sets were calculated. Figure 3C summarizes the docking score profiles and shows the scores
of the 1000 top-ranked fragments against human DNA glycosylases. The
fragment docking profile of MTH1 (3Q93)71 clearly
stands out with the top-1000 fragments scoring between −10.7
and −15.7 kcal/mol, and median docking score of −11.4
kcal/mol, supporting the in silico druggability assessments and experimental
data of MTH1 being highly druggable. In support of this are results
obtained from our in-house fragment screen against purified MTH1 using
DSF, which yielded a hit rate of 10% (unpublished results) and the
high DSF fragment screen hit rate of 23% obtained by Rahm et al.83 Furthermore, the enzymatic HTS resulting in
the TH588 series of MTH1 inhibitors showed a hit rate of 4%.3 In contrast, PTB1B (2HNP),78 known
to be a challenging target for small-molecule intervention at the
catalytic site, displayed a median docking score of −6.7 kcal/mol,
with scores for the top-1000 fragments ranging from −6.2 to
−8.5 kcal/mol. For the DNA glycosylases, median fragment docking
scores are found between −4.8 and −9.0 kcal/mol, and
with an average median docking score of −7.1 kcal/mol. Importantly,
a clear difference in docking score profiles for apo and DNA-bound
structures of the same protein, e.g., NEIL1, MBD4, OGG1, and UNG,
can be observed. This effect can mostly be attributed to the slightly
different location of the binding sites identified by SiteMap and
used for docking in this experiment. Interestingly, DNA-bound structures
of DNA glycosylases tend to perform better than apo structures, as
the five poorest scoring proteins are apo structures. Apo NEIL1 (1TDH)32 showed a poor docking score profile with a median docking
score of −5.3 kcal/mol. This stands in sharp contrast to the
earlier observation of its high druggability scores obtained in all
algorithms. The high Dscore (1.11) of the largest pocket, adjacent
to the catalytic site in the DNA-bound structure, is primarily caused
by the highly favorable hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance of 2.90. The
ZINC fragment subset, however, was tailored toward fragments with
good H-bond formation possibilities. This may explain the suboptimal
complementarity of a large proportion of fragments with this hydrophobic
site.

Arg242 Flexibility Alters NEIL1 Binding-Site Polarity
In an attempt to structurally rationalize the findings from above
for NEIL1, we inspected both the highest ranking binding sites in
apo (1TDH)32 and DNA-bound (5ITY)31 forms.
A major difference can be observed in close proximity, as inward movement
of a flexible loop brings the terminal guanidine group of Arg242 in
position to coordinate the tautomerized lactim moiety of the former
lactam thymine glycol substrate in the DNA-bound structure, allowing
for energetically favored stabilization (Figure 4).31 This conformation
is absent in the apo structure where Arg242 points outward, rendering
this particular region a hydrophobic site. This observation is further
supported by the presence of three glycine residues in the direct
vicinity of Arg242 (motif GGRGY), as glycine in higher numbers are
known to enhance flexibility of protein active sites.84,85 Taken together, the microenvironment of Arg242 suggests possible
application in inhibitor design, where prevention of Arg242 inward
movement allows for the required hydrophobicity to target NEIL1 with
small molecules. Considering this importance of Arg242 and the large
substrate specificity of NEIL1, we decided to perform a binding site
prediction allowing for amino acid flexibility in DNA glycosylases.

Figure 4 Superimposed
structures of apo NEIL1 (turquoise, 1THD) and DNA-bound NEIL1
(purple, 5ITY) close to the catalytic pocket show little conformational flexibility
of the peptide backbone (RMSD 0.84 Å). However, during DNA-binding
events, the hydrophobic patch (yellow) in the apo state is occupied
by the flexible (motif GGRGY) and polar guanidine side chain of Arg242.
This inward directed movement enables coordination of the lactim group
of thymine glycol and highlights DNA binding by NEIL1 as a process
under allosteric control in a conformationally active pocket.

Catalytic Sites Are Conformationally
Flexible
The process
of predicting binding sites and their druggability with DogSite and
SiteMap is solely based on the proteins’ crystal structure
and thus cannot compensate for the conformational flexibility, which
DNA glycosylases in general and NEIL1 in particular seem to require
upon DNA binding. CryptoSite is a web-based server, which can detect
holo sites in apo structures of proteins by interrogating flexibility
of single amino acid residues.46 A cryptic
value above 0.10 identifies a position of a potential cryptic network,
i.e., cryptic site. The structures of human DNA glycosylases yield
an average of 0.30 with values from 0.12 to 0.46 for their respective
catalytically active sites (Figure 5A, left). Furthermore, an extended network of amino
acids around these pockets shows the same tendency of elevated cryptic
values (Figure 5A,
right). On average, 39 residues are involved in an anticipated movement,
ranging from 15 for MPG devoid of DNA (1EWN)66 to 69 residues
for MUTYH (3N5N).64 This confirms the good observed druggability
of the space surrounding the catalytic sites in DNA glycosylases from
above and indicates a concerted movement of a three-dimensional amino
acid network during DNA binding. These findings, taken together with
the results obtained with DogSite and SiteMap indicate a rather good
druggability of human DNA glycosylases and, in addition, suggest DNA
binding to occur in conformationally active sites (Figure 5B). Based on our DogSite and
SiteMap results, these often highest scoring pockets may therefore
be targeted with small molecules that initiate a number of conformational
changes.86,87 Earlier investigations of bacterial formamidopyrimidine
DNA glycosylase (Fpg) suggest that syn- and anti-orientation of 8-oxo-guanine
nucleobase and furanose are not discriminated during base recognition
in a living system. This observation and our recent investigation
of inhibitor binding to mOGG1 (6G3Y)19 confirm
the obtained inducible flexibility in the present study and stand
in sharp contrast to earlier reports based on rigid protein conformation.19,35−38 The contrast in druggability scores provided by the pair apo NEIL1
(1TDH)32 and DNA-bound NEIL1 (5ITY)31 most likely
reflects the broad substrate specificity of NEIL1 and possible syn-
and anti-orientation of each substrate.88,89 Considering
DogSite, SiteMap, and polarity, NEIL1 is among the most promising
proteins in the family of DNA glycosylases (Figure 3). For these reasons, we decided to investigate
NEIL1 for its experimental druggability using several experimental
screening methods.

Figure 5 (A) Druggability assessment by CryptoSite allows for interrogation
of single amino acid flexibility that in the form of larger clusters
in close proximity causes formation of allosteric sites. Each amino
acid is considered to be a cryptic site when reaching CryptoSite values
above 0.10. Most identified cryptic sites in human DNA glycosylases
are positioned close to the catalytic site (values in green) or pocket
and form a comprehensive three-dimensional network with one another
(number of amino acids participating in black), supporting the hypothesis
of allosteric sites controlling DNA binding. (B) Illustration of identified
highest ranking cryptic sites in apo NEIL1 (1THD; increasing CryptoSite
value from blue to red) confirms the sites to be part of the catalytically
active pocket.

NEIL1 Activity Assay Development
and HTS
NEIL1 is a
bifunctional DNA glycosylase with comparatively broad substrate specificity,
excising oxidized pyrimidines followed by an associated β- and
δ-lyase activity acting on the apurinic (AP) site.23 Thus, to develop a biochemical activity assay,
a duplex oligonucleotide containing an internally quenched fluorophore
was used. A NEIL1 substrate nucleobase in the form of thymine glycol
(Tg) was positioned six base pairs from the 5′-terminal fluorophore.
Excision of thymidine glycol, followed by incision at the AP site
by the associated lyase activity of NEIL1 led to a localized melting
of the DNA helix, causing the fluorophore to be released from the
quencher.90 Both NEIL1 and E. coli endonuclease VIII (Nei) enzymes were able
to cause release of fluorescence from the oligo duplex containing
Tg. No such increase was observed for the control oligonucleotide
containing a normal thymine instead of thymine glycol. Importantly,
a NEIL1 concentration-dependent increase in signal with a signal-to-noise
ratio at around ∼20 was observed (Figure 6A). The assay was used to perform a high-throughput
screen, as an orthogonal method for small-molecule hit confirmation
and for determination of IC50 values.

Figure 6 (A) Fluorigenic biochemical
assay. An oligonucleotide (10 nM) containing
thymine glycol or canonical thymine opposite adenine (Tg/A and T/A,
respectively) was incubated with the indicated concentations of NEIL1,
or 0.5 units of the E.coli ortholog
endonuclease VIII (EndoVIII). Enzymatic treatment caused a concentration-dependent
increase in fluorescence for Tg/A, but not T/A substrate. (B) High-throughput
screen for NEIL1 inhibitors; 20 nM Tg/A substrate was incubated with
10 nM NEIL1, in the presence of 10 μM test compounds (light
blue circles), 0.1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (white circles), or
100 μM positive control inhibitor CGP-74514A50 (red circles). A total of 64 compounds inhibited NEIL1
> 36%; 49 compounds are excluded from the diagram due to excessive
autofluorescence (<−200% apparent NEIL1 inhibition). (C)
Selected chemotypes found in the high-throughput screen. (D) Representative
IC50 curves of control compound CGP-74514A and confirmed
hits.

A total of 30 114 compounds
were screened to identify potential
inhibitors. As positive control for inhibition, the previously identified
NEIL1 inhibitor analogue CGP-74514A was employed at 100 μM concentration.50 Using this setup, an average Z′ factor of 0.69 (n = 86 plates) was achieved,
indicating that the assay was sufficiently robust to identify inhibitors.
Indeed, 64 compounds (an initial hit rate of 0.21%) were found to
inhibit the enzymatic reaction by 36% or more (Figure 6B); 12 of these were excluded from further
analysis due to structural frequent hitter behavior and pan-assay
interference alerts. The remaining 52 compounds were then tested in
three-dose confirmation assays and counterscreened for DNA intercalation.
Here, 14 compounds failed to produce a dose-dependent inhibition and
17 compounds were found to intercalate DNA to some extent. The remaining
21 compounds were subjected to dose–response assays, where
the chemotypes of TH8187 and TH6319, as well as adenine analogues
of CGP-74514A were confirmed to be low μM inhibitors of NEIL1
(Figure 6C).50,91

DSF Fails to Validate Target Engagement of Biochemical Activity
Screen Hits
Differential scanning fluorimetry92,93 is a fast and readily available method to experimentally assess
protein druggability and target engagement in vitro. In addition,
the advantages of fragment-based drug design render DSF the ideal
tool to add complementary chemical starting points to a medicinal
chemistry campaign. Initially, the hits from HTS and their analogues
were used to perform validation of target engagement. The melting
temperature Tm of NEIL1 was found to be
below physiological temperatures. Furthermore, earlier reported ligands
for NEIL150 and chemotypes obtained in
the screen above failed to significantly stabilize NEIL1Δ56
(Figure 7A). Only TH8187
and TH6319 and analogues thereof were able to stabilize about 1.3
°C at 200 μM in a 96-well plate setup.

Figure 7 In vitro target engagement
confirmation using differential scanning
fluorimetry. (A) Hits from the HTS were incubated with NEIL1Δ56
at 200 μM concentration in the absence of DNA, and thermal stabilization
was assessed. However, NEIL1Δ56 was only marginally stabilized
by hit compounds. (B) Thermal stabilization of NEIL1 Δ56 by
undamaged double-stranded DNA is dose-dependent and peaks above physiological
temperature at >40 °C. (C) The same effect is observed for
longer
DNA oligos (50 bp, 100 bp) and for damaged DNA modifications known
to be recognized by NEIL1 (Tg, AP). (D–G) NEIL2, OGG1, APE1,
and TDG are thermally stabilized by DNA in the same substrate- and/or
length-dependent manner. (H) DNA does not stabilize NEIL1Δ56
in the presence of hit compounds. An adapted version of the target
engagement assay with DNA being added after incubating NEIL1Δ56
with the HTS hits confirms target engagement.

DNA-Binding Proteins Are Thermally Stabilized by DNA
NEIL1
interacts with DNA in a mechanism where a nucleobase is “flipped
out” and continuously interrogates the respective DNA strand
for damaged nucleobases.94 This process
should stabilize NEIL1 through the formation of several interaction
patterns. Possible phosphate–amino group salt bridges and multiple
hydrogen bonds are readily observed when inspecting the respective
thymine glycol-bound crystal structure (5ITY). Indeed, when added to the DSF assay,
DNA stabilized NEIL1 to higher melting temperatures (Figure 7B). Furthermore, this effect
was enhanced, when thymine glycol or a THF analogue of an abasic site
was incorporated into DNA oligonucleotides (Figure 7C). We then investigated whether this effect
was applicable to other DNA-binding proteins. OGG1, APE1, NEIL2, and
TDG were stabilized in a length-dependent manner by DNA. Additionally,
OGG1 showed increased Tm in the presence
of 8-OxoG and the abasic-site analogue, while NEIL2 and APE1 were
stabilized by the abasic-site analogue (Figure 7C–F).

Modified DNA–DSF
Assay Validates Target Engagement by
NEIL1 HTS Hits
Based on the observation from above, a compound
that inhibits thymine glycol excision in a biochemical activity assay
should also result in a different Tm for
NEIL1 in the presence of DNA. Consequently, the HTS hits were incubated
with NEIL1 and, in a second step, DNA was added. The HTS hits induced
a Tm shift between 5.0 and 7.1 K and on
average 6.1 K relative to the Tm of 40.0
°C measured for the NEIL1Δ56-DNA control (Figure 7H). These results indicate
a reduced formation of a DNA–protein complex in the presence
of inhibitor and confirm target engagement in a category I, II, or
III pocket. In summary, we suggest DSF in the presence of DNA as an
additional alternative method for assessment of in vitro target engagement
of DNA-binding proteins.

DSF Fragment Screen against NEIL1 and OGG1
In contrast
to the biochemical activity screen, a fragment screen in the absence
of DNA relies on an unbiased protein–binder interaction and
should in principle pick up hits that bind all available binding sites
on the protein. In fragment screens, observed hit rates are usually
much higher compared to conventional HTS and typically lie between
3 and 10%. We performed a DSF-based fragment screen of NEIL1 in the
absence of DNA using a library that consists of 1000 fragments covering
diverse chemical space (Figure 8), and 200 hand-picked nucleobase-like fragments. In this
particular screen, we defined a hit as stabilizing more than the positive
control TH8187 or 3 times the standard deviation of all DMSO controls.
Using these definitions, a screen of the 1200 fragment library (average Tm 36.4 °C with a standard deviation of
0.94 °C) gave an initial hit rate of 4.3%, or 52 fragments. After
revalidation in DSF, purity confirmation by liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry, and, if required, identity confirmation by NMR, a final
set of 25 confirmed hits remained, corresponding to a hit rate of
2.1%. Next, validation of these fragments was performed in the orthogonal
biochemical activity assay using a concentration series; 10 compounds
or 40% of identified fragment hits showed inhibition of NEIL1-mediated
Tg repair in the low μM range and thus confirmed interaction
with pocket categories I, II, or III.

Figure 8 Comparison of the 200 K member virtual
fragment library selected
from ZINC Fragments Now (ZFN, gray), the laboratory for chemical biology
at Karolinska Institutet (LCBKI) DSF fragment library (DSF, blue),
and the Maybridge Ro3 NMR library (NMR, red) with respect to: (A)
polarity and hydrophobicity, expressed as calculated polar surface
area versus cLogP; (B) physicochemical property coverage and diversity,
expressed as the first two principal components (pc1 and pc2) obtained
from a principal component analysis (PCA) on six Lipinski-type properties.

This hit rate is at the lower
end of commonly observed fragment
screening hit rates and stands in contrast to the computational assessment
of NEIL1. To investigate whether this observation is reproduced for
other DNA glycosylases, we expanded our fragment screening campaign
to OGG1. We and others have recently shown that OGG1 can be specifically
inhibited by druglike small molecules.18,19Tm of OGG1 in DSF was 43.2 °C, a hit was considered
to stabilize at least 1 °C, and TH548719 was used as a positive control. The corresponding fragment screen
(average Tm of 43.1 °C and a standard
deviation of 0.82 °C) initially yielded 62 fragment hits or a
hit rate of 5.2%. After revalidation in DSF, and purity and identity
confirmation, 35 molecules or 2.9% of the initial library remained.
These compounds, occupying different chemical space as previously
published OGG1 inhibitors,18,19 were then tested in
the biochemical OGG1 activity assay, where 16 fragments (46%) showed
inhibition of 8-oxoG excision. Despite the slightly higher hit rate
compared to NEIL1, these results indicate that DNA glycosylases show
lower hit rates than expected by computational assessment.

NEIL1
NMR Fragment Screen
Fragment screens performed
in different assays, such as DSF, SPR, and saturation transfer difference
(STD)-NMR, may yield a different number of binder and not necessarily
confirm small-molecule binding of a different method. To assess whether
the experimental druggability scores identified for NEIL1 and OGG1
in DSF could be confirmed by a different biophysical screening method,
an STD-NMR screen was performed against NEIL1 in the absence of DNA.
In STD-NMR, small-molecule binders to the surface of the target protein
are identified after differencing the pure protein NMR spectra from
a spectrum with small molecules added to the same protein. Due to
little spectral overlapping of small molecules, typical samples contain
between 5 and 10 individual compounds. This approach allows for the
rapid screen of larger-fragment libraries. In the present case, using
an 800-member subset of the commercially available Maybridge Ro3 fragment
library, 75 fragment hits or an initial hit rate of 9.4% were found
to bind NEIL1 with mostly weak signal responses. Hit validation was
performed with the 10 compounds giving the strongest signal. Eight
molecules (hit rate, 1.0%) were confirmed to engage NEIL1 and subsequently
tested in the biochemical assay. Here, four compounds or 50% showed
inhibition of NEIL1-mediated Tg repair. This confirms the findings
of the DSF screens, as 40–50% of binders are inhibitors of
DNA-binding events. Questioning whether unsuitable library chemotype
composition could account for the values at the lower end of typically
observed hitrates, the screening libraries from LCBKI for DSF and
Maybridge Ro3-1000 for NMR were compared to the exhaustive ZINC fragment
library subset (Figure 8). The observed overlap in chemical space suggests no chemotype bias
for the performed screens. In summary, experimental hit rates are
lower than expected by our initial computational assessment. Nonetheless,
a large percentage of indentified binders are inhibitors of catalytic
activity and thus are suitable chemical starting points for an ongoing
drug discovery campaign against NEIL1.

Summary
Here,
we described a comprehensive computational druggability assessment
of human DNA glycosylases. We then assessed these findings in an experimental
setting using NEIL1 and attempted to rationalize the difficulties
in developing selective and potent druglike inhibitors for DNA-binding
proteins. Recently, DNA glycosylases have been drawing considerable
attention, with the report of a first-in-class OGG1 inhibitor,18 followed subsequently by a comprehensive study
for the application of other OGG1 inhibitors in inflammation.19 Despite these results, and to the best of our
knowledge, no articles explicitly reporting on the druggability assessment
of DNA binding molecules are available. Hajduk et al. consider proteins,
which bind DNA or RNA, and carbohydrate-binding glycosylases as representatives
of highly challenging target families.35,37 The findings
reported in the present article suggest that this conclusion is not
valid for DNA glycosylases. In contrast, when interrogated by computational
measures, DNA glycosylases in general appear to be feasable drug targets
and OGG1, MUTYH, NEIL1, UNG, and TDG, in particular, were found to
be favorable drug-binding proteins (Figures 2, 3, and 5). Our study further confirms that DNA-binding proteins
are difficult to assess with regard to which protein state is investigated.
Multiple examples were found to be contradictory when DNA was either
removed from or retained in the same high-resolution structure of
a protein. Finally, our computational assessment suggests that catalytic
sites of DNA glycosylases are conformationally active, which is yet
unsupported by a number of high-resolution crystal structures of the
same protein (Figure 5). This observation allows for flexible and dynamic DNA binding,
enabling multiple protein conformations that also allow small-molecule
binding. These mechanisms, which were rationalized for NEIL1 (Figures 4 and 5), allow for differences in binding of certain chemotypes
in the different stages, i.e., the presence or absence of DNA.

By employing several screening methods, we carried out an experimental
investigation of our NEIL1 druggability assessment to determine if
it was verifiable in vitro. Initially, a biochemical assay using a
NEIL1 substrate was applied in a HTS to screen for small-molecule
inhibitors (Figure 6). Here, identified inhibitors failed to stabilize NEIL1 in the absence
of DNA when evaluated using DSF. In the presence of DNA, thermal stabilization
was observed for several DNA binding proteins. Furthermore, compared
to the Tm observed in these scenarios,
biochemically active compounds inhibited thermal stabilization by
DNA and thus were confirmed as binders of NEIL1 (Figure 7). To identify binders of NEIL1,
we performed a DSF screen using 1200 rule-of-three-compliant fragments.
We identified 25 compounds (2.1%), of which 40% were confirmed to
inhibit NEIL1 enzyme activity in the biochemical assay. To investigate
whether this low hit rate was typical for DNA glycosylases, we performed
a DSF screen against OGG1. Here, 35 compounds (2.9%) were confirmed
as binders, of which 46% were inhibitors of 8-oxoG excision. Furthermore,
an NMR fragment screen was performed against NEIL1; 8 fragments were
identified to bind NEIL1, of which 50% inhibited NEIL1-mediated Tg
removal. Overall, the hit rates at the lower end of the range typically
observed for fragment screening reflect the challenges with screening
DNA glycosylases for starting points of a prospective medicinal chemistry
campaign. This stands in contrast to the computational druggability
assessments in this article. Nevertheless, DNA glycosylases emerge
as novel drug targets,18,19,95 as they are involved in increased DNA repair necessary in a number
of diseases and general inflammation. The present study and its findings
lay the foundations as a basis for how to address this challenging
family of enzymes and to exploit them as potential drug targets.

Materials
and Methods
Computational Protein Preparation
Available crystal
structures of human DNA glycosylases with the highest resolution were
imported into Maestro (Schrödinger Suite 2018-1, Schrödinger,
LLC, New York, NY, 2018). NEIL1, OGG1, MBD4, and TDG were accessible
in DNA-bound and DNA-unbound states. MPG and UNG were only available
as co-crystals with DNA. Crystal structures of SMUG1, NTHL1, and NEIL2
have not yet been disclosed by the scientific community. Human MUTYH
and mouse NEIL3 are available as deletion mutants in DNA-unbound state
only. MTH1 (NUDT1), a well-characterized nucleotide-binding protein,
was included as positive control in its apo state. PTP1B was added
as a negative control. The structures were then prepared using the
Protein Preparation Wizard96−98 as implemented in Schrödinger
Suite 2018-1. Briefly, protein data bank (pdb) structures were processed
by automatically assigning bond orders, adding hydrogens, creating
zero-order bonds to metals, creating possible disulfide bridges, adding
missing side chains, deleting waters beyond 5.0 Å of hetero groups
(if present), and generating hetero states at pH 7.0. Protonation
and metal charge states were then generated for the hetero groups
and visually inspected, and the most likely states based on hydrogen-bonding
pattern and state penalty were selected. The hydrogen-bonding networks
were optimized automatically, by sampling water orientations and optimization
of hydroxyls, Asn, Gln, and His states using ProtAssign. Subsequently,
all waters with less than four H bonds to nonwaters were removed,
and finally, the structures were submitted to a restrained minimization
in the optimized potentials for liquid simulations (OPLSs) 3 force
field,99−102 until the heavy-atom positions had converged to a root-mean-square
deviation (RMSD) of atomic positions of 0.30 Å. If present, DNA
was removed in a copy of the structure and both protein states were
kept. Depending on their online availability, protein sets comprising
apo, DNA-bound, and DNA-stripped structures were submitted to SiteMap
or exported as protein data bank (pdb) files and imported to DogSite47 and CryptoSite46 for
subsequent computational binding-site prediction and druggability
assessment. Sequence alignment was performed at Clustal Omega at the
EMBL and phylogenetic trees were generated using Dendroscope.103

In Silico Fragment Screening
(1) Fragment subset
selection: a subset
of the ZINC Frags Now set81 was created
by applying a number of filters implemented in a Knime workflow (Knime
3.5.2104,105). Foremost, only fragments available from
a list of 19 preferred suppliers, composed of a team of experienced
medicinal chemists, were considered. These were then filtered using
a cascade of structural filters, including REOS,106 PAINS,107 and a set of in-house
filters (ScrapFilter). Lipinski-type descriptors (SlogP, TPSA, AMW,
NumLipinskiHBA, NumLipinskiHBD, NumRotatableBonds, NumHeavyAtoms,
NumRings, NumAromaticRings) were then calculated using the RDKit Descriptor
Calculation node. An additional descriptor HetRatio was then calculated
as the ratio of NumLipinskiHBA and NumHeavyAtoms, and fragments with
HetRatio <0.2 or >0.5 were filtered out. Finally, remaining
outliers
were removed by applying Gaussian Z-score normalization
on the descriptor space, filtering fragments with descriptor values
deviating more than 3 units from the mean. The entire filtering cascade
reduced the original input file of 704 041 structures as downloaded
from ZINC to 205 891 fragments.

(2) Ligand preparation: the selected fragment
subset was then prepared for docking using LigPrep (Schrodinger):
the OPLS3 force field was used for minimizations; possible ionization
states at pH 7.0 ± 2.0 were generated using Epik,108,109 metal-binding states were added, and tautomers were generated; specified
chiralities were retained and at most four stereoisomers were generated
per structure. This yielded 345 044 structures for docking.

(3) Docking grid generation:
Glide docking
grids110−112 were generated for each target protein by
focusing the grid box on the center of the site with the highest Dscore
as determined by SiteMap.79,80

(4) Virtual screening: The virtual screening
workflow as implemented in Schrödinger Suite was used for docking,
scoring, and ranking of the top-1000 fragments against the sites with
the highest Dscore as determined by SiteMap. The workflow comprised
a cascade of docking steps with increased accuracy (Glide HTVS →
SP → XP), where the top-10% ranked ligands were passed on to
the next step. After Glide XP docking, the top-1000 ranked fragments
were retained for druggability assessment based on docking scores.



Fragment Library Comparison
The
205 K fragment subset
selected from ZINC Fragments Now, DSF fragment library, and the NMR
fragment library were compared with respect to physicochemical properties
coverage. To this effect, the structures were imported into DataWarrior
4.7.2113 and six Lipinski-type properties
were calculated: molecular weight, cLogP, H-bond acceptor count, H-bond
donor count, polar surface area, and rotatable bond count. Principal
component analysis (PCA) was then applied to the descriptor matrix
to be able to visualize this six-dimensional space and compare the
libraries in two dimensions.

Recombinant Proteins
APE1 was expressed
from pET14b,
and OGG1 from pNIC28a with N-terminal histidine tags. TDG, NEIL1,
and NEIL2 were expressed from pET-28a. NEIL1 and NEIL2 contained C-terminal
histidine tags, whereas TDG contained an N-terminal histidine tag.
The pET-28a-NEIL1Δ56 expression construct was generated using
FastCloning.114 APE1 and OGG1 were expressed
and purified as described here.19 Full-length
NEIL1 and NEIL2, NEIL1Δ56, and TDG were purified by the Protein
Science Facility at Karolinska Institutet. Escherichia
coli endonuclease VIII were purchased from New England
Biolabs (M0299).

HTS Compound Library
Screening for
inhibitors of NEIL1
was performed at the Laboratories of Chemical Biology Karolinska Institutet
(LCBKI), part of Chemical Biology Consortium Sweden, using a compound
concentration of 10 μm in 384-well microtiter plates (black
OptiPlates, PerkinElmer). Rule-of-five-compliant, quality-controlled
compounds originating from Enamine were screened, along with an LCBKI
in-house compound library (donated by Biovitrum AB). All assay plates
contained test compounds in columns 1–22, whereas negative
and positive controls in columns 23 and 24 were used for normalization.
In this layout, the negative controls represent the uninhibited enzyme,
corresponding to empty wells or wells with the equivalent amount of
DMSO as the compound containing wells, whereas the positive controls
represent the completely inhibited enzyme, owing to the presence of
100 μM of the previously discovered NEIL1 inhibitor CGP-74514A50

HTS-Compatible DNA Glycosylase Activity Assays
The
NEIL1 activity assay was performed at room temperature in black 384-well
plates (black OptiPlates, PerkinElmer) using final concentrations
of 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 20 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.1% bovine
serum albumin, 0.0025% Tween-20, 10 nM NEIL1 enzyme, and 20 nM Tg/A
substrate in a final volume of 25 μL. The Tg/A substrate was
a duplex oligonucleotide where 5′-(dT-FAM)CTG CCA YCA CTG CGT CGA CCT G-3′ was annealed to a 25%
surplus of 5′-CAG GTC GAC GCA GTG CTG GCA G(dT-DABCYL)-3′.
“Y” signifies thymidine glycol, and “dT-FAM”
and “dT-DABCYL” signify fluorescein and dabcyl, respectively,
both coupled to dT (TriLink BioTechnologies). Briefly, compounds dissolved
in DMSO were dispensed using an Echo 550 (Labcyte), followed by transfer
of enzyme and substrate solutions by a MultiDrop (PerkinElmer), followed
by centrifugation at 1000 g to remove bubbles. The reactions were
read after 20 min in an Envision plate reader using a 485 nm filter
with a bandwidth of 14 nm for excitation and a 535 nm filter with
a bandwidth of 25 nm for emission. OGG1 activity was measured as described
here.19

DNA Intercalation Counterscreen
DNA intercalation was
measured by incubating 20 nM unlabeled, undamaged oligonucleotides
in NEIL1 reaction buffer (excluding bovine serum albumin) in the presence
of 100 nM Thiazole Orange (Sigma-Aldrich 390 062) as described
in ref (115).

DSF Fragment
Library
The laboratory for chemical biology
at Karolinska Institutet (LCBKI)-based fragment library consists of
1200 rule-of-three-compliant substances, which have been filtered
for undesirable functionalities and PAINS. Along with a versatile
set of chemotypes, the library also contains a population of small-molecule
nucleotide analogues for specifically targeting DNA-, nucleotide-,
and nucleoside-binding proteins. All substances were obtained commercially
from different vendors (Enamine, Activate Scientific, Combi-Blocks,
Sigma-Aldrich, Fisher Scientific, AK Scientific, abcr Chemie, Fluorochem,
Spirochem, KeyOrganics, 1Click Chemistry, VWR, TCI, ChemBridge, Carbosynth)
or from the NCI Developmental Therapeutics Program and are stored
at 4 °C as 50 mM DMSO stock solutions.

DSF Fragment Screen
White BioRad 384-well plates with
duplicates of each compound, DMSO, and positive control were prepared.
Next, 9.8 μL of protein buffer, containing 25 mM Tris-acetate
pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 5X SYPRO Orange, and
4 μM NEIL1, lacking 56 amino acids dispensable for activity
at the disordered C-Terminus, was added to each well, yielding a final
protein concentration of 3.92 μM and a final compound concentration
of 1 mM. Similarly, 4 μM OGG1 was screened in 25 mM Tris-acetate
pH 7.5, 50 mM CaCl2, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 5X SYPRO Orange.
The plates were sealed with BioRad MicroSeal ‘B’ and
subjected to a temperature gradient from 20 to 95 °C in a Roche
Light Cycler 480 II. The resulting fluorescence at 465–580
nm with an excitation wavelength of 465 nm was measured. Visual quality
control of each graph was performed, and the resulting data were processed
and imported to a GraphPad Prism template provided by Niesen et al.92 For optimization and DNA experiments not concerning
the fragment screens, black BioRad Hard-Shell PCR 96-well thin-wall
plates were used in a BioRad C1000 Touch Thermal Cycler with 510 nm
excitation wavelength and measurement at 465 nm. NEIL2, APE1, and
TDG were prepared in a protein buffer containing 4 μm protein,
25 mM Tris-acetate pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, and
5X SYPRO Orange.

DNA Oligo Preparation and DSF Use
DNA oligos of different
sequences were obtained from IDT and TriLink: 50 base pairs: (5′-TAC
GCT AGT ATG CGT TCT TCC TTC CAG GGG TAT GTG GCT GCG TGG TCA AA-3′
and 5′-TTT GAC CAC GCA GCC ACA TAC CCC TGG AAG GAA GAA CGC
ATA CTA GCG TA-3′), 100 base pairs: (5′-CCT GAC GCT
AGT GCA AAA CAC CCA AGC GAC CCT GAC AGT GCG AAT TGG CGA GCC TTA AGC
TCT TTC GTT TGC TGA CGA GCG TTG CTG CGA GAC TGG CTT G-3′ and
5′-CAA GCC AGT CTC GCA GCA ACG CTC GTC AGC AAA CGA AAG AGC
TTA AGG CTC GCC AAT TCG CAC TGT CAG GGT CGC TTG GGT GTT TTG CAC TAG
CGT CAG G-3′), APE abasic-site analogue, 29 base pairs: (5′-TGT
ATC GAT ACC XTC AAC CTC GAG GAA TT and AAT
TCC TCG AGG TTG AGG TAT CGA TAC A-3′, where X signifies tetrahydrofuran),
100 base pairs: (5′-CTT CAA CCT CGA GGA ATG TAT CGA TAC CTT
CAA CCT CGA GGA ATG TAT CGA TAC CTT CAA CCT CGA GGA ATG TAT CGA TAC
CTT CAA CCT CGA GGA ATT-3′ and 5′-AAT TCC TCG AGG TTG
AAG GTA TCG ATA CAT TCC TCG AGG TTG AAG GTA TCG ATA CAT TCC TCG AGG
TTG AAG GTA TCG ATA CAT TCC TCG AGG TTG AAG-3′), thymine glycole
control, 29 base pairs: (5′-TGT ATC GAT ACC TTC AAC CTC GAG
GAA TT and 5′-AAT TCC TCG AGG ATG ACG GTA TCG ATA CA-3′),
8-oxo G, 29 base pairs: (5′-TGT ATC GAT ACC YTC AAC CTC GAG GAA TT and 5′-AAT TCC TCG AGG TTG ACG GTA TCG
ATA CA-3′, where Y signifies 8-oxoG), thymine glycol, 29 base
pairs: (5′-TGT ATC GAT ACC ZTC AAC CTC
GAG GAA TT-3′ and 5′-AAT TCC TCG AGG TTG AAG GTA TCG
ATA CA-3′, where Z signifies thymine glycol); 200 μM
DNA oligo stock solutions were prepared in a buffer system containing
25 mM Tris-acetate pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 10% glycerol and stored
at −20 °C. The required amounts of the complementary strands
were combined in a 1:1 ratio and heated to 90 °C for 1 min. Storing
at room temperature for 1 h and then cooling on ice allows for DNA
double-strand generation in a 200 μM stock solution. After optimization
of DNA concentration, 8 μM DNA was used for a standard experiment.

Statistical Analysis DSF Fragment Screen
Statistical
analysis of all graphs was performed with the DSF template provided
by Niesen et al.92 The nonlinear fit performed
by GraphPad Prism considers half the difference between a pretransitional
minimum and a post-transitional maximum to be the melting temperature
of the protein.

NMR Fragment Screen
NEIL1 in 20
mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl,
10% glycerol, 2 mM TCEP, pH 7.5 was dialyzed against 1× PBS,
pH 7.4 overnight, and added to fragment mixtures containing 10 compounds,
each leading to a final concentration of 10 μm NEIL1 and 100
μM of compound. The fragment mixtures were prepared from 100
mM DMSO-d6 stock solutions, diluted in
1× PBS pH 7.4 containing 10% D2O and 50 μm trimethylsilylpropanoic
acid (TMSP-d4) as a chemical shift reference.
A Bruker SamplePro liquid handling system with cooling was used to
transfer samples to 3 mm NMR tubes. A total of 800 compounds, selected
from the Maybridge Ro3 1000 fragment library (www.maybridge.com), were used
in the screening. Both T2-filtered spectra116 and saturation transfer difference (STD) spectra117 were recorded on all samples. A Carr–Purcell–Meiboom–Gill
(CPMG) spin-lock of 200 ms was used in the T2-filtered
experiment, and in the STD experiment, on- and off-resonance saturations
at 0.85 and −40 ppm were achieved with 40 and 50 ms Gaussian-shaped
pulses, respectively. A total of 64 scans were recorded for both experiments.
Reference spectra on fragment mixtures without NEIL1 were recorded
separately. The NMR screen was performed within the NMR for Life (www.nmrforlife.se) initiative
at the Swedish NMR Centre, Umeå, Sweden. All spectra were recorded
on a Bruker 600 MHz Avance III HD spectrometer equipped with a 5 mm
TCI cryoprobe and a SampleJet sample changer with cooling option.
Spectral processing and analysis was performed in Topspin 4.0.1 (www.bruker.com). Hit validation
was performed by repeating the experiments described above on individual
compounds instead of mixtures.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00162.Raw data of protein
assessment by DogSite, SiteMap,
CryptoSite, as well as HTS data (PDF)

SiteMap and DogSite results; CryptoSite;
IC 50; top
1000 zinc scores; DSF (XLSX)



Supplementary Material
ao9b00162_si_001.pdf

 ao9b00162_si_002.xlsx

 Author Contributions
∇ M.M. and T.V. contributed equally to the work.

The
authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): T.V., O.W., and T.H. are
listed as inventors on a provisional patent application No. 62/636983,
covering OGG1 inhibitors. The patent is fully owned by a non-profit
public foundation, the Helleday Foundation, and T.H. and U.W.B. are
member of the foundation board developing OGG1 inhibitors towards
the clinic. An inventor reward scheme is under discussion. The remaining
authors declare no competing financial interests.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge LCBKI for supplying the
DSF fragment library and help during development of the glycosylase
assay and the HTS for NEIL1, NMR for Life for the NMR screen using
the Maybridge Ro3 fragment library (provided by Umeå Centre for
Microbial Research (UCMR) and Laboratories for Chemical Biology Umeå
(LCBU)), the Protein Science Facility of Karolinska Institutet for
expressing and purifying NEIL1Δ56 and NEIL1. They thank the
operators of CryptoSite at the University of California, San Francisco;
DogSite at the Zentrum für Bioinformatik, University of Hamburg;
and Clustal Omega at the EMBL in Heidelberg for using their infrastructure
and computing setup. Olga Loseva is acknowledged for expressing and
purifying OGG1. Dana Michel is acknowledged for her critical discussion
and proofreading of the manuscript. Funding was obtained from the
Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (T.H.), Swedish Cancer Society
(T.H.), the Swedish Children’s Cancer Foundation (T.H.), ERC
Tarox-695376 (T.H.) and Swedish Pain Relief Foundation (T.H.).
==== Refs
References
Curtin N. J. 
DNA Repair
Dysregulation from Cancer Driver to Therapeutic Target . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2012 , 12 , 801 –817 . 10.1038/nrc3399 .23175119 
Helleday T. ; Petermann E. ; Lundin C. ; Hodgson B. ; Sharma R. A. 
DNA Repair
Pathways as Targets for Cancer Therapy . Nat.
Rev. Cancer 
2008 , 8 , 193 –204 . 10.1038/nrc2342 .18256616 
Gad H. ; Koolmeister T. ; Jemth A.-S. ; Eshtad S. ; Jacques S. A. ; Ström C. E. ; Svensson L. M. ; Schultz N. ; Lundbäck T. ; Einarsdottir B. O. ; et al. MTH1 Inhibition Eradicates Cancer by Preventing
Sanitation of the DNTP Pool . Nature 
2014 , 508 , 215 –221 . 10.1038/nature13181 .24695224 
Narwal M. ; Jemth A.-S. ; Gustafsson R. ; Almlöf I. ; Warpman Berglund U. ; Helleday T. ; Stenmark P. 
Crystal Structures
and Inhibitor Interactions of Mouse and Dog MTH1 Reveal Species-Specific
Differences in Affinity . Biochemistry 
2018 , 57 , 593 –603 . 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b01163 .29281266 
Pudelko L. ; Rouhi P. ; Sanjiv K. ; Gad H. ; Kalderén C. ; Höglund A. ; Squatrito M. ; Schuhmacher A. J. ; Edwards S. ; Hägerstrand D. ; et al. Glioblastoma and Glioblastoma
Stem Cells Are Dependent on Functional MTH1 . OncoTargets 
2017 , 8 , 84671 –84684 . 10.18632/oncotarget.19404 .
Warpman
Berglund U. ; Sanjiv K. ; Gad H. ; Kalderén C. ; Koolmeister T. ; Pham T. ; Gokturk C. ; Jafari R. ; Maddalo G. ; Seashore-Ludlow B. ; et al. Validation and Development
of MTH1 Inhibitors for Treatment of Cancer . Ann. Oncol. 
2016 , 27 , 2275 –2283 . 10.1093/annonc/mdw429 .27827301 
Huber K. V. M. ; Salah E. ; Radic B. ; Gridling M. ; Elkins J. M. ; Stukalov A. ; Jemth A.-S. ; Göktürk C. ; Sanjiv K. ; Strömberg K. ; et al. Stereospecific Targeting
of MTH1 by (S)-Crizotinib as an Anticancer Strategy . Nature 
2014 , 508 , 222 –227 . 10.1038/nature13194 .24695225 
Samaranayake G. J. ; Huynh M. ; Rai P. 
MTH1 as a
Chemotherapeutic Target:
The Elephant in the Room . Cancers 
2017 , 9 , 4710.3390/cancers9050047 .
Oka S. ; Ohno M. ; Tsuchimoto D. ; Sakumi K. ; Furuichi M. ; Nakabeppu Y. 
Two Distinct Pathways of Cell Death Triggered by Oxidative
Damage to Nuclear and Mitochondrial DNAs . EMBO
J. 
2008 , 27 , 421 –432 . 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601975 .18188152 
Ohno M. ; Sakumi K. ; Fukumura R. ; Furuichi M. ; Iwasaki Y. ; Hokama M. ; Ikemura T. ; Tsuzuki T. ; Gondo Y. ; Nakabeppu Y. 
8-Oxoguanine
Causes Spontaneous de Novo Germline Mutations in
Mice . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 4 , 468910.1038/srep04689 .
Eshtad S. ; Mavajian Z. ; Rudd S. G. ; Visnes T. ; Boström J. ; Altun M. ; Helleday T. 
HMYH and HMTH1
Cooperate for Survival
in Mismatch Repair Defective T-Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia . Oncogenesis 
2016 , 5 , e27510.1038/oncsis.2016.72 .27918552 
Dou H. ; Mitra S. ; Hazra T. K. 
Repair
of Oxidized Bases in DNA Bubble
Structures by Human DNA Glycosylases NEIL1 and NEIL2 . J. Biol. Chem. 
2003 , 278 , 49679 –49684 . 10.1074/jbc.M308658200 .14522990 
Krokeide S. Z. ; Laerdahl J. K. ; Salah M. ; Luna L. ; Cederkvist F. H. ; Fleming A. M. ; Burrows C. J. ; Dalhus B. ; Bjørås M. 
Human NEIL3
Is Mainly a Monofunctional DNA Glycosylase Removing Spiroimindiohydantoin
and Guanidinohydantoin . DNA Repair 
2013 , 12 , 1159 –1164 . 10.1016/j.dnarep.2013.04.026 .23755964 
Liu M. ; Bandaru V. ; Bond J. P. ; Jaruga P. ; Zhao X. ; Christov P. P. ; Burrows C. J. ; Rizzo C. J. ; Dizdaroglu M. ; Wallace S. S. 
The Mouse Ortholog
of NEIL3 Is a Functional DNA Glycosylase
in Vitro and in Vivo . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
2010 , 107 , 4925 –4930 . 10.1073/pnas.0908307107 .20185759 
Hu J. ; de Souza-Pinto N. C. ; Haraguchi K. ; Hogue B. A. ; Jaruga P. ; Greenberg M. M. ; Dizdaroglu M. ; Bohr V. A. 
Repair of Formamidopyrimidines
in DNA Involves Different Glycosylases ROLE OF THE OGG1, NTH1, AND
NEIL1 ENZYMES . J. Biol. Chem. 
2005 , 280 , 40544 –40551 . 10.1074/jbc.M508772200 .16221681 
Klungland A. ; Rosewell I. ; Hollenbach S. ; Larsen E. ; Daly G. ; Epe B. ; Seeberg E. ; Lindahl T. ; Barnes D. E. 
Accumulation of
Premutagenic DNA Lesions in Mice Defective in Removal of Oxidative
Base Damage . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
1999 , 96 , 13300 –13305 . 10.1073/pnas.96.23.13300 .10557315 
Souza-Pinto N. C. de ; Eide L. ; Hogue B. A. ; Thybo T. ; Stevnsner T. ; Seeberg E. ; Klungland A. ; Bohr V. A. 
Repair of 8-Oxodeoxyguanosine
Lesions in Mitochondrial DNA Depends on the Oxoguanine DNA Glycosylase
(OGG1) Gene and 8-Oxoguanine Accumulates in the Mitochondrial DNA
of OGG1-Defective Mice . Cancer Res. 
2001 , 61 , 5378 –5381 .11454679 
Tahara Y. ; Auld D. ; Ji D. ; Beharry A. A. ; Kietrys A. M. ; Wilson D. L. ; Jimenez M. ; King D. ; Nguyen Z. ; Kool E. T. 
Potent and Selective
Inhibitors of 8-Oxoguanine DNA
Glycosylase . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2018 , 140 , 2105 –2114 . 10.1021/jacs.7b09316 .29376367 
Visnes T. ; Cázares-Körner A. ; Hao W. ; Wallner O. ; Masuyer G. ; Loseva O. ; Mortusewicz O. ; Wiita E. ; Sarno A. ; Manoilov A. ; et al. Small-Molecule
Inhibitor of OGG1 Suppresses Proinflammatory Gene Expression and Inflammation . Science 
2018 , 362 , 834 –839 . 10.1126/science.aar8048 .30442810 
Ohtsubo T. ; Nishioka K. ; Imaiso Y. ; Iwai S. ; Shimokawa H. ; Oda H. ; Fujiwara T. ; Nakabeppu Y. 
Identification of Human MutY Homolog
(HMYH) as a Repair Enzyme for 2-Hydroxyadenine in DNA and Detection
of Multiple Forms of HMYH Located in Nuclei and Mitochondria . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2000 , 28 , 1355 –1364 . 10.1093/nar/28.6.1355 .10684930 
Hazra T. K. ; Izumi T. ; Boldogh I. ; Imhoff B. ; Kow Y. W. ; Jaruga P. ; Dizdaroglu M. ; Mitra S. 
Identification and
Characterization of a Human DNA Glycosylase for Repair of Modified
Bases in Oxidatively Damaged DNA . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2002 , 99 , 3523 –3528 . 10.1073/pnas.062053799 .11904416 
Bandaru V. ; Sunkara S. ; Wallace S. S. ; Bond J. P. 
A Novel Human DNA
Glycosylase That Removes Oxidative DNA Damage and Is Homologous to
Escherichia Coli Endonuclease VIII . DNA Repair 
2002 , 1 , 517 –529 . 10.1016/S1568-7864(02)00036-8 .12509226 
Takao M. ; Kanno S.-I. ; Kobayashi K. ; Zhang Q.-M. ; Yonei S. ; van der Horst G. T. J. ; Yasui A. 
A Back-up Glycosylase in Nth1 Knock-out
Mice Is a Functional Nei (Endonuclease VIII) Homologue . J. Biol. Chem. 
2002 , 277 , 42205 –42213 . 10.1074/jbc.M206884200 .12200441 
Fleming A. M. ; Burrows C. J. 
Formation and Processing of DNA Damage Substrates for
the HNEIL Enzymes . Free Radicals Biol. Med. 
2017 , 107 , 35 –52 . 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.030 .
Rolseth V. ; Luna L. ; Olsen A. K. ; Suganthan R. ; Scheffler K. ; Neurauter C. G. ; Esbensen Y. ; Kuśnierczyk A. ; Hildrestrand G. A. ; Graupner A. ; et al. No Cancer Predisposition
or Increased Spontaneous Mutation Frequencies in NEIL DNA Glycosylases-Deficient
Mice . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 438410.1038/s41598-017-04472-4 .28663564 
Sampath H. 
Oxidative
DNA Damage in Disease—Insights Gained from Base Excision Repair
Glycosylase-deficient Mouse Models . Environ.
Mol. Mutagen. 
2014 , 55 , 689 –703 . 10.1002/em.21886 .25044514 
Zander U. ; Hoffmann G. ; Cornaciu I. ; Marquette J. P. ; Papp G. ; Landret C. ; Seroul G. ; Sinoir J. ; Röwer M. ; Felisaz F. ; et al. Automated
Harvesting
and Processing of Protein Crystals through Laser Photoablation . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D: Struct. Biol. 
2016 , 72 , 454 –466 . 10.1107/S2059798316000954 .27050125 
Dalhus B. ; Forsbring M. ; Helle I. H. ; Vik E. S. ; Forstrøm R. J. ; Backe P. H. ; Alseth I. ; Bjørås M. 
Separation-of-Function
Mutants Unravel the Dual-Reaction Mode of Human 8-Oxoguanine DNA Glycosylase . Structure 
2011 , 19 , 117 –127 . 10.1016/j.str.2010.09.023 .21220122 
Zhu C. ; Lu L. ; Zhang J. ; Yue Z. ; Song J. ; Zong S. ; Liu M. ; Stovicek O. ; Gao Y. Q. ; Yi C. 
Tautomerization-Dependent
Recognition and Excision of Oxidation Damage in Base-Excision DNA
Repair . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2016 , 113 , 7792 –7797 . 10.1073/pnas.1604591113 .27354518 
Doublié S. ; Bandaru V. ; Bond J. P. ; Wallace S. S. 
The Crystal
Structure
of Human Endonuclease VIII-like 1 (NEIL1) Reveals a Zincless Finger
Motif Required for Glycosylase Activity . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 
2004 , 101 , 10284 –10289 . 10.1073/pnas.0402051101 .15232006 
Bruner S. D. ; Norman D. P. ; Verdine G. L. 
Structural
Basis for Recognition
and Repair of the Endogenous Mutagen 8-Oxoguanine in DNA . Nature 
2000 , 403 , 859 –866 . 10.1038/35002510 .10706276 
Sharma N. ; Chakravarthy S. ; Longley M. J. ; Copeland W. C. ; Prakash A. 
The C-Terminal
Tail of the NEIL1 DNA Glycosylase Interacts with the Human Mitochondrial
Single-Stranded DNA Binding Protein . DNA Repair 
2018 , 65 , 11 –19 . 10.1016/j.dnarep.2018.02.012 .29522991 
Hajduk P. J. ; Huth J. R. ; Tse C. 
Predicting
Protein Druggability . Drug Discovery Today 
2005 , 10 , 1675 –1682 . 10.1016/S1359-6446(05)03624-X .16376828 
Hajduk P. J. ; Huth J. R. ; Fesik S. W. 
Druggability
Indices for Protein
Targets Derived from NMR-Based Screening Data . J. Med. Chem. 
2005 , 48 , 2518 –2525 . 10.1021/jm049131r .15801841 
Aretz J. ; Wamhoff E.-C. ; Hanske J. ; Heymann D. ; Rademacher C. 
Computational
and Experimental Prediction of Human C-Type Lectin Receptor Druggability . Front. Immunol. 
2014 , 5 , 32310.3389/fimmu.2014.00323 .25071783 
Rampazzo C. ; Tozzi M. G. ; Dumontet C. ; Jordheim L. P. 
The Druggability
of Intracellular Nucleotide-Degrading Enzymes . Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 
2016 , 77 , 883 –893 . 10.1007/s00280-015-2921-6 .26614508 
Hopkins A. L. ; Groom C. R. 
The Druggable Genome . Nat. Rev.
Drug Discovery 
2002 , 1 , 727 –730 . 10.1038/nrd892 .12209152 
Cheng A. C. ; Coleman R. G. ; Smyth K. T. ; Cao Q. ; Soulard P. ; Caffrey D. R. ; Salzberg A. C. ; Huang E. S. 
Structure-Based
Maximal Affinity Model Predicts Small-Molecule Druggability . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2007 , 25 , 71 –75 . 10.1038/nbt1273 .17211405 
Chen I.-J. ; Hubbard R. E. 
Lessons for Fragment
Library Design: Analysis of Output
from Multiple Screening Campaigns . J. Comput.-Aided
Mol. Des. 
2009 , 23 , 603 –620 . 10.1007/s10822-009-9280-5 .19495994 
Barril X. 
Druggability
Predictions: Methods, Limitations, and Applications . Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci. 
2013 , 3 , 327 –338 . 10.1002/wcms.1134 .
Vidler L. R. ; Brown N. ; Knapp S. ; Hoelder S. 
Druggability Analysis
and Structural Classification of Bromodomain Acetyl-Lysine Binding
Sites . J. Med. Chem. 
2012 , 55 , 7346 –7359 . 10.1021/jm300346w .22788793 
Kozakov D. ; Hall D. R. ; Napoleon R. L. ; Yueh C. ; Whitty A. ; Vajda S. 
New Frontiers in Druggability . J. Med. Chem. 
2015 , 58 , 9063 –9088 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b00586 .26230724 
Fauman E. B. ; Rai B. K. ; Huang E. S. 
Structure-Based
Druggability Assessment—Identifying
Suitable Targets for Small Molecule Therapeutics . Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 
2011 , 15 , 463 –468 . 10.1016/j.cbpa.2011.05.020 .21704549 
Cimermancic P. ; Weinkam P. ; Rettenmaier T. J. ; Bichmann L. ; Keedy D. A. ; Woldeyes R. A. ; Schneidman-Duhovny D. ; Demerdash O. N. ; Mitchell J. C. ; Wells J. A. ; et al. CryptoSite:
Expanding
the Druggable Proteome by Characterization and Prediction of Cryptic
Binding Sites . J. Mol. Biol. 
2016 , 428 , 709 –719 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2016.01.029 .26854760 
Volkamer A. ; Kuhn D. ; Rippmann F. ; Rarey M. 
DoGSiteScorer:
A Web
Server for Automatic Binding Site Prediction, Analysis and Druggability
Assessment . Bioinformatics 
2012 , 28 , 2074 –2075 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts310 .22628523 
Kozakov D. ; Grove L. E. ; Hall D. R. ; Bohnuud T. ; Mottarella S. E. ; Luo L. ; Xia B. ; Beglov D. ; Vajda S. 
The FTMap Family of
Web Servers for Determining and Characterizing Ligand-Binding Hot
Spots of Proteins . Nat. Protoc. 
2015 , 10 , 733 –755 . 10.1038/nprot.2015.043 .25855957 
Donley N. ; Jaruga P. ; Coskun E. ; Dizdaroglu M. ; McCullough A. K. ; Lloyd R. S. 
Small Molecule Inhibitors of 8-Oxoguanine
DNA Glycosylase-1 (OGG1) . ACS Chem. Biol. 
2015 , 10 , 2334 –2343 . 10.1021/acschembio.5b00452 .26218629 
Jacobs A. C. ; Calkins M. J. ; Jadhav A. ; Dorjsuren D. ; Maloney D. ; Simeonov A. ; Jaruga P. ; Dizdaroglu M. ; McCullough A. K. ; Lloyd R. S. 
Inhibition of DNA
Glycosylases via
Small Molecule Purine Analogs . PLoS One 
2013 , 8 , e8166710.1371/journal.pone.0081667 .24349107 
Aretz J. ; Kondoh Y. ; Honda K. ; Anumala U. R. ; Nazaré M. ; Watanabe N. ; Osada H. ; Rademacher C. 
Chemical Fragment
Arrays for Rapid Druggability Assessment . Chem.
Commun. 
2016 , 52 , 9067 –9070 . 10.1039/C5CC10457B .
Aretz J. ; Baukmann H. ; Shanina E. ; Hanske J. ; Wawrzinek R. ; Zapol’skii V. A. ; Seeberger P. H. ; Kaufmann D. E. ; Rademacher C. 
Identification
of Multiple Druggable Secondary Sites by Fragment Screening against
DC-SIGN . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2017 , 56 , 7292 –7296 . 10.1002/anie.201701943 .
Edfeldt F. N. B. ; Folmer R. H. A. ; Breeze A. L. 
Fragment Screening
to Predict Druggability
(Ligandability) and Lead Discovery Success . Drug Discovery Today 
2011 , 16 , 284 –287 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2011.02.002 .21315179 
Erlanson D. A. ; Fesik S. W. ; Hubbard R. E. ; Jahnke W. ; Jhoti H. 
Twenty Years
on: The Impact of Fragments on Drug Discovery . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2016 , 15 , 605 –619 . 10.1038/nrd.2016.109 .27417849 
Goujon M. ; McWilliam H. ; Li W. ; Valentin F. ; Squizzato S. ; Paern J. ; Lopez R. 
A New Bioinformatics
Analysis Tools
Framework at EMBL–EBI . Nucleic Acids
Res. 
2010 , 38 , W695 –W699 . 10.1093/nar/gkq313 .20439314 
Larkin M. A. ; Blackshields G. ; Brown N. P. ; Chenna R. ; McGettigan P. A. ; McWilliam H. ; Valentin F. ; Wallace I. M. ; Wilm A. ; Lopez R. ; et al. Clustal W and Clustal X Version 2.0 . Bioinformatics 
2007 , 23 , 2947 –2948 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm404 .17846036 
Xu C. ; Tempel W. ; Wernimont A. K. ; Bountra C. ; Arrowsmith C. H. ; Edwards A. M. ; Min J.  Crystal Structure
MBD4 MBD Domain in Complex with Methylated CpG DNA 2013 , 10.2210/pdb4lg7/pdb .
Moréra S. ; Grin I. ; Vigouroux A. ; Couvé S. ; Henriot V. ; Saparbaev M. ; Ishchenko A. A. 
Biochemical
and Structural Characterization of the Glycosylase Domain of MBD4
Bound to Thymine and 5-Hydroxymethyuracil-Containing DNA . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2012 , 40 , 9917 –9926 . 10.1093/nar/gks714 .22848106 
Ouzon-Shubeita H. ; Lin Y.-L. ; Lee S.  Structure of MBD4
Bound to G:T Mispair DNA .10.2210/pdb4ofa/pdb .
Parikh S. S. ; Walcher G. ; Jones G. D. ; Slupphaug G. ; Krokan H. E. ; Blackburn G. M. ; Tainer J. A. 
Uracil-DNA Glycosylase–DNA
Substrate and Product Structures: Conformational Strain Promotes Catalytic
Efficiency by Coupled Stereoelectronic Effects . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2000 , 97 , 5083 –5088 . 10.1073/pnas.97.10.5083 .10805771 
Krosky D. J. ; Bianchet M. A. ; Seiple L. ; Chung S. ; Amzel L. M. ; Stivers J. T. 
Mimicking Damaged DNA with a Small Molecule Inhibitor
of Human UNG2 . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2006 , 34 , 5872 –5879 . 10.1093/nar/gkl747 .17062624 
Coey C. T. ; Malik S. S. ; Pidugu L. S. ; Varney K. M. ; Pozharski E. ; Drohat A. C. 
Structural Basis of Damage Recognition by Thymine DNA
Glycosylase: Key Roles for N-Terminal Residues . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2016 , 44 , 10248 –10258 . 10.1093/nar/gkw768 .27580719 
Liu M. ; Imamura K. ; Averill A. M. ; Wallace S. S. ; Doublié S. 
Structural
Characterization of a Mouse Ortholog of Human NEIL3 with a Marked
Preference for Single-Stranded DNA . Structure 
2013 , 21 , 247 –256 . 10.1016/j.str.2012.12.008 .23313161 
Luncsford P. J. ; Chang D.-Y. ; Shi G. ; Bernstein J. ; Madabushi A. ; Patterson D. N. ; Lu A.-L. ; Toth E. A. 
A Structural
Hinge in Eukaryotic MutY Homologues Mediates Catalytic Activity and
Rad9–Rad1–Hus1 Checkpoint Complex Interactions . J. Mol. Biol. 
2010 , 403 , 351 –370 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.08.045 .20816984 
Svensson L. M. ; Jemth A.-S. ; Desroses M. ; Loseva O. ; Helleday T. ; Högbom M. ; Stenmark P. 
Crystal Structure of Human MTH1 and
the 8-oxo-dGMP Product Complex . FEBS Lett. 
2011 , 585 , 2617 –2621 . 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.07.017 .21787772 
Lau A. Y. ; Wyatt M. D. ; Glassner B. J. ; Samson L. D. ; Ellenberger T. 
Molecular
Basis for Discriminating between Normal and Damaged Bases by the Human
Alkyladenine Glycosylase, AAG . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2000 , 97 , 13573 –13578 . 10.1073/pnas.97.25.13573 .11106395 
Aravind L. ; Koonin E. V. 
The Alpha/Beta Fold
Uracil DNA Glycosylases: A Common
Origin with Diverse Fates . Genome Biol. 
2000 , 1 , RESEARCH0007.110.1186/gb-2000-1-4-research0007 .11178247 
Barrett T. E. ; Savva R. ; Panayotou G. ; Barlow T. ; Brown T. ; Jiricny J. ; Pearl L. H. 
Crystal
Structure of a G:T/U Mismatch-Specific
DNA Glycosylase: Mismatch Recognition by Complementary-Strand Interactions . Cell 
1998 , 92 , 117 –129 . 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80904-6 .9489705 
Baptiste B. A. ; Katchur S. R. ; Fivenson E. M. ; Croteau D. L. ; Rumsey W. L. ; Bohr V. A. 
Enhanced Mitochondrial
DNA Repair of the Common Disease-Associated
Variant, Ser326Cys, of HOGG1 through Small Molecule Intervention . Free Radical Biol. Med. 
2018 , 124 , 149 –162 . 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2018.05.094 .29879444 
Ellermann M. ; Eheim A. ; Rahm F. ; Viklund J. ; Guenther J. ; Andersson M. ; Ericsson U. ; Forsblom R. ; Ginman T. ; Lindström J. ; et al. Novel Class of Potent and Cellularly Active
Inhibitors Devalidates MTH1 as Broad-Spectrum Cancer Target . ACS Chem. Biol. 
2017 , 12 , 1986 –1992 . 10.1021/acschembio.7b00370 .28679043 
Tresaugues L. ; Siponen M. I. ; Arrowsmith C. H. ; Berglund H. ; Bountra C. ; Collins R. ; Edwards A. M. ; Ekblad T. ; Flodin S. ; Flores A.  Crystal Structure
of Human 8-Oxo-DGTPase (MTH1) . 2011 , 10.2210/pdb3q93/pdb .
Cho H. 
Protein Tyrosine
Phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) and Obesity . Vitam. Horm. 
2013 , 91 , 405 –424 . 10.1016/B978-0-12-407766-9.00017-1 .23374726 
Tamrakar A. K. ; Maurya C. K. ; Rai A. K. 
PTP1B Inhibitors
for Type 2 Diabetes
Treatment: A Patent Review (2011 - 2014) . Expert
Opin. Ther. Pat. 
2014 , 24 , 1101 –1115 . 10.1517/13543776.2014.947268 .25120222 
Vieira M. N. N. ; Lyra e Silva N. M. ; Ferreira S. T. ; De Felice F. G. 
Protein
Tyrosine Phosphatase 1B (PTP1B): A Potential Target for Alzheimer’s
Therapy? . Front. Aging Neurosci. 
2017 , 9 , 7 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00007 .28197094 
Krishnan N. ; Konidaris K. F. ; Gasser G. ; Tonks N. K. 
A Potent,
Selective,
and Orally Bioavailable Inhibitor of the Protein-Tyrosine Phosphatase
PTP1B Improves Insulin and Leptin Signaling in Animal Models . J. Biol. Chem. 
2018 , 293 , 1517 –1525 . 10.1074/jbc.C117.819110 .29217773 
Zhang S. ; Zhang Z.-Y. 
PTP1B as a Drug Target: Recent Developments in PTP1B
Inhibitor Discovery . Drug Discovery Today 
2007 , 12 , 373 –381 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2007.03.011 .17467573 
Mullard A. 
Phosphatases
Start Shedding Their Stigma of Undruggability . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2018 , 17 , 847 –849 . 10.1038/nrd.2018.201 .30482950 
Barford D. ; Flint A. J. ; Tonks N. K. 
Crystal
Structure of Human Protein
Tyrosine Phosphatase 1B . Science 
1994 , 263 , 1397 –1404 . 10.1126/science.8128219 .8128219 
Halgren T. 
New Method
for Fast and Accurate Binding-Site Identification and Analysis . Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 
2007 , 69 , 146 –148 . 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2007.00483.x .17381729 
Halgren T. A. 
Identifying
and Characterizing Binding Sites and Assessing Druggability . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2009 , 49 , 377 –389 . 10.1021/ci800324m .19434839 
Irwin J. J. ; Sterling T. ; Mysinger M. M. ; Bolstad E. S. ; Coleman R. G. 
ZINC: A
Free Tool to Discover Chemistry for Biology . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2012 , 52 , 1757 –1768 . 10.1021/ci3001277 .22587354 
Irwin J. J. ; Shoichet B. K. 
ZINC – A
Free Database of Commercially Available
Compounds for Virtual Screening . J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 
2005 , 45 , 177 –182 . 10.1021/ci049714+ .15667143 
Rahm F. ; Viklund J. ; Trésaugues L. ; Ellermann M. ; Giese A. ; Ericsson U. ; Forsblom R. ; Ginman T. ; Günther J. ; Hallberg K. ; et al. Creation
of a Novel
Class of Potent and Selective MutT Homologue 1 (MTH1) Inhibitors Using
Fragment-Based Screening and Structure-Based Drug Design . J. Med. Chem. 
2018 , 61 , 2533 –2551 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b01884 .29485874 
Yan B. X. ; Sun Y. Q. 
Glycine
Residues Provide Flexibility for Enzyme Active
Sites . J. Biol. Chem. 
1997 , 272 , 3190 –3194 . 10.1074/jbc.272.6.3190 .9013553 
Saavedra H. G. ; Wrabl J. O. ; Anderson J. A. ; Li J. ; Hilser V. J. 
Dynamic
Allostery Can Drive Cold Adaptation in Enzymes . Nature 
2018 , 558 , 324 –328 . 10.1038/s41586-018-0183-2 .29875414 
Blank I. D. ; Sadeghian K. ; Ochsenfeld C. 
A Base-Independent Repair Mechanism
for DNA Glycosylase—No Discrimination Within the Active Site . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 1036910.1038/srep10369 .26013033 
Kreppel A. ; Blank I. D. ; Ochsenfeld C. 
Base-Independent
DNA Base-Excision
Repair of 8-Oxoguanine . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2018 , 140 , 4522 –4526 . 10.1021/jacs.7b11254 .29578340 
Banerjee A. ; Yang W. ; Karplus M. ; Verdine G. L. 
Structure
of a Repair
Enzyme Interrogating Undamaged DNA Elucidates Recognition of Damaged
DNA . Nature 
2005 , 434 , 612 –618 . 10.1038/nature03458 .15800616 
Sung R.-J. ; Zhang M. ; Qi Y. ; Verdine G. L. 
Sequence-Dependent
Structural Variation in DNA Undergoing Intrahelical Inspection by
the DNA Glycosylase MutM . J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 18044 –18054 . 10.1074/jbc.M111.313635 .22465958 
Madhusudan S. ; Smart F. ; Shrimpton P. ; Parsons J. L. ; Gardiner L. ; Houlbrook S. ; Talbot D. C. ; Hammonds T. ; Freemont P. A. ; Sternberg M. J. E. ; et al. Isolation of a Small Molecule Inhibitor
of DNA Base Excision Repair . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2005 , 33 , 4711 –4724 . 10.1093/nar/gki781 .16113242 
Zhang J. ; Hübner E. G. ; Namyslo J. C. ; Nieger M. ; Schmidt A. 
Purine-Substituted
Imidazolium Mesomeric Betaines and Their Tautomeric N-Heterocyclic
Carbenes. Formation of a Cyclic Borane Adduct . Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2018 , 16 , 6801 –6808 . 10.1039/C8OB01916A .30203828 
Niesen F. H. ; Berglund H. ; Vedadi M. 
The Use of
Differential Scanning
Fluorimetry to Detect Ligand Interactions That Promote Protein Stability . Nat. Protoc. 
2007 , 2 , 2212 –2221 . 10.1038/nprot.2007.321 .17853878 
Chilton M. ; Clennell B. ; Edfeldt F. ; Geschwindner S. 
Hot-Spotting
with Thermal Scanning: A Ligand- and Structure-Independent Assessment
of Target Ligandability . J. Med. Chem. 
2017 , 60 , 4923 –4931 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00208 .28537726 
Lee A. J. ; Wallace S. S. 
Hide and Seek: How
Do DNA Glycosylases Locate Oxidatively
Damaged DNA Bases amidst a Sea of Undamaged Bases? . Free Radicals Biol. Med. 
2017 , 107 , 170 –178 . 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.024 .
Visnes T. ; Grube M. ; Fekry Hanna B. M. ; Benitez-Buelga C. ; Cázares-Körner A. ; Helleday T. 
Targeting BER Enzymes
in Cancer Therapy . DNA Repair 
2018 , 71 , 118 10.1016/j.dnarep.2018.08.015 .30228084 
Madhavi
Sastry G. ; Adzhigirey M. ; Day T. ; Annabhimoju R. ; Sherman W. 
Protein and Ligand Preparation: Parameters, Protocols,
and Influence on Virtual Screening Enrichments . J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2013 , 27 , 221 –234 . 10.1007/s10822-013-9644-8 .23579614 
Jacobson M. P. ; Friesner R. A. ; Xiang Z. ; Honig B. 
On the Role of the
Crystal Environment in Determining Protein Side-Chain Conformations . J. Mol. Biol. 
2002 , 320 , 597 –608 . 10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00470-9 .12096912 
Jacobson M. P. ; Pincus D. L. ; Rapp C. S. ; Day T. J. F. ; Honig B. ; Shaw D. E. ; Friesner R. A. 
A Hierarchical
Approach to All-Atom
Protein Loop Prediction . Proteins: Struct.,
Funct., Bioinf. 
2004 , 55 , 351 –367 . 10.1002/prot.10613 .
Harder E. ; Damm W. ; Maple J. ; Wu C. ; Reboul M. ; Xiang J. Y. ; Wang L. ; Lupyan D. ; Dahlgren M. K. ; Knight J. L. ; et al. OPLS3: A Force Field
Providing Broad Coverage
of Drug-like Small Molecules and Proteins . J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 
2016 , 12 , 281 –296 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00864 .26584231 
Shivakumar D. ; Williams J. ; Wu Y. ; Damm W. ; Shelley J. ; Sherman W. 
Prediction of Absolute
Solvation
Free Energies Using Molecular Dynamics Free Energy Perturbation and
the OPLS Force Field . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2010 , 6 , 1509 –1519 . 10.1021/ct900587b .26615687 
Jorgensen W. L. ; Tirado-Rives J. 
The OPLS [Optimized Potentials for
Liquid Simulations] Potential Functions for Proteins, Energy Minimizations
for Crystals of Cyclic Peptides and Crambin . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1988 , 110 , 1657 –1666 . 10.1021/ja00214a001 .27557051 
Jorgensen W. L. ; Maxwell D. S. ; Tirado-Rives J. 
Development
and Testing of the OPLS All-Atom Force Field on Conformational Energetics
and Properties of Organic Liquids . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
1996 , 118 , 11225 –11236 . 10.1021/ja9621760 .
Huson D. H. ; Richter D. C. ; Rausch C. ; Dezulian T. ; Franz M. ; Rupp R. 
Dendroscope: An Interactive
Viewer
for Large Phylogenetic Trees . BMC Bioinf. 
2007 , 8 , 46010.1186/1471-2105-8-460 .
Berthold M. R. ; Cebron N. ; Dill F. ; Gabriel T. R. ; Kötter T. ; Meinl T. ; Ohl P. ; Sieb C. ; Thiel K. ; Wiswedel B.  KNIME:
The Konstanz Information Miner . In Data Analysis,
Machine Learning and Applications ; Studies in Classification,
Data Analysis, and Knowledge Organization ; Springer : Berlin, Heidelberg , 2008 ; pp 319 –326 .
Berthold M. R. ; Cebron N. ; Dill F. ; Gabriel T. R. ; Kötter T. ; Meinl T. ; Ohl P. ; Sieb C. ; Thiel K. ; Wiswedel B.  . KNIME: The
Konstanz Information Miner. 2007 .
Walters W. P. ; Murcko M. A. 
Prediction of “Drug-Likeness” . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2002 , 54 , 255 –271 . 10.1016/S0169-409X(02)00003-0 .
Baell J. B. ; Holloway G. A. 
New Substructure
Filters for Removal
of Pan Assay Interference Compounds (PAINS) from Screening Libraries
and for Their Exclusion in Bioassays . J. Med.
Chem. 
2010 , 53 , 2719 –2740 . 10.1021/jm901137j .20131845 
Shelley J. C. ; Cholleti A. ; Frye L. L. ; Greenwood J. R. ; Timlin M. R. ; Uchimaya M. 
Epik: A Software Program
for PK<Subscript><Emphasis
Type = “Italic”>a</Emphasis></Subscript>
Prediction
and Protonation State Generation for Drug-like Molecules . J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2007 , 21 , 681 –691 . 10.1007/s10822-007-9133-z .17899391 
Greenwood J. R. ; Calkins D. ; Sullivan A. P. ; Shelley J. C. 
Towards
the Comprehensive, Rapid, and Accurate Prediction of the Favorable
Tautomeric States of Drug-like Molecules in Aqueous Solution . J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2010 , 24 , 591 –604 . 10.1007/s10822-010-9349-1 .20354892 
Friesner R. A. ; Murphy R. B. ; Repasky M. P. ; Frye L. L. ; Greenwood J. R. ; Halgren T. A. ; Sanschagrin P. C. ; Mainz D. T. 
Extra Precision Glide: Docking and Scoring Incorporating
a Model of Hydrophobic Enclosure for Protein–Ligand Complexes . J. Med. Chem. 
2006 , 49 , 6177 –6196 . 10.1021/jm051256o .17034125 
Friesner R. A. ; Banks J. L. ; Murphy R. B. ; Halgren T. A. ; Klicic J. J. ; Mainz D. T. ; Repasky M. P. ; Knoll E. H. ; Shelley M. ; Perry J. K. ; et al. Glide: A New Approach
for Rapid, Accurate Docking and Scoring. 1. Method and Assessment
of Docking Accuracy . J. Med. Chem. 
2004 , 47 , 1739 –1749 . 10.1021/jm0306430 .15027865 
Halgren T. A. ; Murphy R. B. ; Friesner R. A. ; Beard H. S. ; Frye L. L. ; Pollard W. T. ; Banks J. L. 
Glide: A New Approach
for Rapid, Accurate Docking and Scoring. 2. Enrichment Factors in
Database Screening . J. Med. Chem. 
2004 , 47 , 1750 –1759 . 10.1021/jm030644s .15027866 
Sander T. ; Freyss J. ; von Korff M. ; Rufener C. 
DataWarrior: An Open-Source Program For Chemistry Aware
Data Visualization And Analysis . J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 
2015 , 55 , 460 –473 . 10.1021/ci500588j .25558886 
Li C. ; Wen A. ; Shen B. ; Lu J. ; Huang Y. ; Chang Y. 
FastCloning: A Highly Simplified,
Purification-Free, Sequence- and
Ligation-Independent PCR Cloning Method . BMC
Biotechnol. 
2011 , 11 , 92 10.1186/1472-6750-11-92 .21992524 
Tse W. C. ; Boger D. L. 
A Fluorescent Intercalator Displacement
Assay for Establishing DNA Binding Selectivity and Affinity . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2004 , 37 , 61 –69 . 10.1021/ar030113y .14730995 
Hajduk P. J. ; Olejniczak E. T. ; Fesik S. W. 
One-Dimensional
Relaxation- and Diffusion-Edited NMR Methods for Screening Compounds
That Bind to Macromolecules . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1997 , 119 , 12257 –12261 . 10.1021/ja9715962 .
Mayer M. ; Meyer B.  Characterization of Ligand
Binding by Saturation Transfer Difference NMR Spectroscopy . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 38  (), 1784 –1788 . 10.1002/(SICI)1521-3773(19990614)38:12<1784::AID-ANIE1784>3.0.CO;2-Q .

