
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145866110.1021/acsomega.8b00123ArticlePrediction of Accurate Binding Modes Using Combination of Classical and
Accelerated Molecular Dynamics and Free-Energy Perturbation Calculations:
An Application to Toxicity Studies Fratev Filip *†‡Steinbrecher Thomas §Jónsdóttir Svava Ósk ∥† Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, The University of Texas at El Paso, 1101 N Campbell Street, El Paso, Texas 79902, United
States‡ Micar21
Ltd., Persenk 34B, 1407 Sofia, Bulgaria§ Schrödinger
GmbH, Dynamostrasse 13, 68165 Mannheim, Baden-Württemberg, Germany∥ insilTox
ApS, Sverigesvej 20B, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark* E-mail: fratev@micar21.com.20 04 2018 30 04 2018 3 4 4357 4371 21 01 2018 04 04 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Estimating the correct
binding modes of ligands in protein–ligand
complexes is crucial not only in the drug discovery process but also
for elucidating potential toxicity mechanisms. In the current paper,
we propose a computational modeling workflow using the combination
of docking, classical molecular dynamics (cMD), accelerated molecular
dynamics (aMD) and free-energy perturbation (FEP+ protocol) for identification
of possible ligand binding modes. It was applied for investigation
of selected perfluorocarboxyl acids (PFCAs) in the PPARγ nuclear
receptor. Although both regular and induced fit docking failed to
reproduce the experimentally determined binding mode of the ligands
when docked into a non-native X-ray structure, cMD and aMD simulations
successfully identified the most probable binding conformations. Moreover,
multiple binding modes were identified for all of these compounds
and the shorter-chain PFCAs continuously moved between a few energetically
favorable binding conformations. On the basis of MD predictions of
binding conformations, we applied the default and also redesigned
FEP+ sampling protocols, which accurately reproduced experimental
differences in the binding energies. Thus, the preliminary MD simulations
can also provide helpful information about correct setup of the FEP+
calculations. These results show that the PFCA binding modes were
accurately predicted and that the FEP+ protocol can be used to estimate
free energies of binding of flexible ligands that are not typical
druglike compounds. Our in silico workflow revealed the specific ligand–residue
interactions within the ligand binding domain and the main characteristics
of the PFCAs, and it was concluded that these compounds are week PPARγ
partial agonists. This work also suggests a common pipeline for identification
of ligand binding modes, ligand–protein dynamics description,
and relative free-energy calculations.

document-id-old-9ao8b00123document-id-new-14ao-2018-00123qccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The field of computer-aided
drug discovery comprises a large variety
of simulation techniques (molecular docking to free-energy perturbations
(FEPs)) with different capabilities and complexities. These approaches
have proven their usefulness in other research areas than in silico
drug design, such as toxicology studies, but have not been applied
extensively within this field to date. Such atomic-level simulations
can significantly improve our understanding on how interactions between
chemical compounds and proteins play a role regarding various adverse
effects. Moreover, the combined use of different computational tools
to form general pipelines is not well established. Both these aspects
are addressed in the present work.

Although docking techniques
have proven to be highly useful for
predicting realistic ligand binding modes within specific protein
targets, such approaches can, however, fail to identify relevant binding
modes mainly within large and flexible ligand binding domains (LBDs),
where the protein dynamics cannot be neglected,1−4 for instance, in cases where conformations
of individual amino acid residues within the LBD are determining whether
a specific binding mode is possible or not. In contrast to docking
methods, classical molecular dynamics (cMD), as well as advanced sampling
methods, such as accelerated molecular dynamics (aMD) and metadynamics,
provide atomic-level description of both the protein and ligand dynamics.
These MD methods have shown to be reliable tools for exploring the
free-energy conformational space of the ligand–protein complex.
In particular, such methods model the structural and dynamical properties
of the protein receptor at a submillisecond time scale, thereby offering
much better sampling of the possible binding modes and identification
of the most energetically favorable ligand–protein complex
conformations.4

The prediction of
a most probable binding mode is also a critical
step in preparing free-energy calculations, and in particular, calculations
using the FEP+ protocol.5 Due to increased
GPU computational power, the applications of FEP have become very
popular in both conventional lead and fragment optimization during
the last couple of years.5,6 Generally, published
FEP calculations have showed highly significant correlation between
calculated and experimental binding free energies with average errors
in the range of 1 kcal/mol.5 The FEP+ calculations
are based on MD simulations and therefore explicitly consider both
the enthalpy and entropy effects of the conformational flexibility
of the ligand, as well as desolvation effects within the LBD. This
is done through the use of a molecular mechanics (MM) force field
(FF) to describe the molecular interactions on the atomic scale and
to model realistic environment of the protein binding site through
the inclusion of explicit water solvent molecules. Such calculations
are powerful tools for improving estimation of the docking scoring
functions, which are often used for binding affinity predictions,
as they are highly computational efficient compared to traditional
molecular dynamics (MD)-based approaches such as molecular mechanics/generalized
born surface area (MM/GBSA). However, detection of the most probable
binding mode of one compound is a crucial step for the correct setup
of the FEP calculations.5,6 This is because typically
all compounds are aligned prior to the FEP execution. Thus, without
some knowledge of the possible binding modes, the FEP calculations
are often impossible to perform. In cases where the binding modes
of the ligands are unknown, preliminary MD studies can provide a helpful
tool for both refinement of the docking protocol and the starting/alignment
pose for FEP simulations, i.e., better bridging the docking and FEP
calculations. Moreover, knowledge about the protein dynamics, such
as the identification of residues that are significant for, e.g.,
ligand–flexible loop interactions within the LBD, may further
improve the FEP+ protocol, for example, by including these residues
in the so-called replica exchange solute tempering (REST) region,
where more detailed sampling is made.7 If
multiple stable possible binding poses are known for a series of compounds,
free-energy calculations can be set up to rigorously treat their contributions
to the binding free energy as well.8

Perfluorinated carboxyl acids (PFCAs) are an important group of
perfluorinated substances, as well as highly persistent degradation
products of polyfluorinated substances.9,10 Poly- and
perfluorinated substances have a wide spectrum of industrial and consumer
applications due to their excellent surfactant properties and resistance
to degradation. These substances are, for instance, used in coatings
that keep food from sticking to food packaging material made of paper
and board; in fabrics, furniture, carpets, and leather to make them
repellent to stains; as well as in some firefighting foams and pesticides.9 Due to their wide application, high persistence,
and affinity for biomolecules, these compounds are widely found in
humans and biota.10−12 Studies have explicitly shown a variety of adverse
effects related to perfluorinated substances. Perfluorooctanoic acid
(PFOA) and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS), the two most applied
compounds among these substances, are documented to be toxic to liver,
kidney, and neurons; to induce tumors; and to affect fetal development,
the hormonal system, immune responses, and regulation of fatty acid
storage and glucose metabolism.9,12−15 Both PFOS and PFOA are documented to potentially cause nongenotoxic
carcinogenesis.15

The PFCAs and other
perfluorinated alkylic acids (PFAAs) are documented
to bind to and/or interact with many proteins, potentially interfering
with their normal physiological function. This includes serum albumin
that acts as blood fatty acid transporter system,16 and proteins highly expressed in the liver, such as liver
fatty acid binding protein, which is responsible for fatty acid uptake,
transport, and metabolism17 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors α and γ (PPARα
and PPARγ).18−21 PPARα is highly important in the regulation of fatty acid
metabolism in the liver, whereas PPARγ regulates glucose metabolism
and storage of fatty acids. Through regulation of physiological processes,
the three PPAR subtypes, PPARα, β/δ, and γ,
have impact not only on lipid homeostasis and adipogenesis but also
on inflammation, carcinogenesis, reproduction, and fetal development.14,15,22 Interactions with these proteins
are potentially linked to the observed liver toxicity and the influence
on fatty acid storage and glucose metabolism caused by PFAAs, as well
as the large accumulation of such compounds in liver tissue.

Various studies have documented that using different in silico
methodologies in concert for identifying possible binding modes and
for generating more accurate binding energy predictions has in many
cases provided significantly improved understanding of the molecular
mechanisms of action as well as provided better basis for interpretation
of available experimental data.4,23−28

In the present study, we propose a workflow for identification
of ligand binding modes, ligand–protein dynamics description,
and relative free-energy calculations for proteins with flexible LBDs
(Figure 1). The proposed
workflow combines several computational tools, such as docking, classical
MD (cMD), accelerated MD (aMD), and the free-energy perturbations
(FEP+ protocol). This workflow was used to investigate possible binding
modes and characteristics of the interactions of PFCAs within the
PPARγ receptor. The PPARγ receptor has a large and flexible
ligand binding domain (LBD) and is associated with various adverse
effects,29 and PFCAs have been identified
as weak PPARγ binders.12 PFCAs, like
PFAAs in general, are nondrug-like compounds causing a wide variety
of adverse effects9 that are highly persistent
within the human organism.10

Figure 1 Illustration
of the proposed workflow, highlighting each step of
the computational protocol and the information provided by each computational
method.

Different binding conformations
have been observed in the large
LBD of PPARγ receptor. Decanoic acid (DA) and rosaglitazone
bind in different parts of the LBD, as observed by X-ray crystallographic
studies. Multiple ligand binding modes are also possible.3,4,30 On the other hand, the interactions
of PFCA compounds within protein targets are poorly understood. Both
ligand flexibility and solvation/desolvation effects may play an important
role for PFCAs, as these compounds contain a long fluorinated tail
that does not form hydrogen bonds with the protein residues within
the LBD. In this way, PFCAs differ significantly from typical druglike
molecules. Thus, one of the goals of this study was also to explore
whether a rigorous free-energy approach, such as FEP+, is suitable
to describe such ligands.

Results and Discussion
Binding Pocket and Docking
Analyses
The PPARγ
ligand binding domain (LBD) X-ray structures with protein data bank
(pdb) codes 3U9Q and 1FM6 were
downloaded and prepared for modeling. The two X-ray structures, co-crystallized
with decanoic acid (DA) and rosiglitazone, respectively, suggest two
possible binding modes for ligands within the PPARγ LBD despite
their highly similar protein conformations (root-mean-square deviation
(RMSD) of 1.2 Å). In both binding modes, ligands are H-bonded
to the His323 protein residue. Among these two ligands, only the smaller
DA fits into the lipophilic cavity surrounded by protein residues
Phe363, Phe360, Phe282, Ile281, Leu356, and Leu353, whereas the rosiglitazone
molecule adopts a kinked binding mode occupying the channel connecting
the binding pocket to the solvent medium.

The X-ray structure
analysis suggests a size limit for compounds that can adopt a DA-like
binding mode. This was further investigated for a series of PFCAs
by conducting ligand docking calculations. Flexible re-docking of
the DA molecule into the PPARγ LBD of pdb structure 3U9Q reproduced the observed
ligand binding geometry of DA with high accuracy (all-atom RMSD 1.7
Å). Flexible docking of the PFCAs with chain lengths of 6–8
carbon atoms yielded binding modes in which the ligands occupied the
same position as DA; these results agree with the previous docking
experiments by Zhang et al.12 The docked
poses for PFCAs with chain lengths of 9–12 carbon atoms superimposed
better with the rosiglitazone ligand. For PFCA chain lengths of 14,
16, and 18 carbon atoms, which are PPARγ binders, no docked
poses were found and they were not included in the further analysis.
A special treatment of the LBD is required to accommodate these larger
ligands, which is interesting but out of the scope of the current
study topic. If the PFCAs were docked using constrained placement
of the first 6 carbon atoms to within 1 Å of those of DA, docked
poses could only be obtained for PFCAs with chain length of 6–10
carbon atoms.

When docking the PFCAs in the binding pocket of
the pdb structure 1FM6 (rosiglitazone),
the docked poses obtained for PFCAs of chain lengths of 6–12
and 14 carbon atoms, all superimpose well with a position similar
to the observed position of the rosiglitazone ligand. Furthermore,
the experimentally known binding mode of DA was not reproduced when
DA was docked into the 1FM6 pdb structure. Furthermore, the binding energies of
DA and the PFCAs were not scored correctly.

It was observed
that PFOA, with a chain length of 8 carbon atoms,
showed a much more negative Glide XP score than perfluoroundecanoic
acid (PFuDA), with a chain length of 11 carbon atoms, which does not
correspond to available experimental data for the binding energies
for these compounds.12 This suggests that
ligand binding modes of PFCAs within PPARγ can vary depending
on not only ligand size but also small but significant changes in
the receptor structure, causing the ligand to bind in an alternative
site within the LBD. In particular, the conformation of the Phe363
residue within the 1FM6 pdb structure LBD was seen to restrict the DA binding pocket from
being occupied. Hence, it seems that the flexibility of the individual
amino acid residues within the LBD is an important factor that cannot
be neglected when investigating binding modes within PPARγ.
Similar results have been obtained previously for several partial
agonists as well as for antagonists.3,4,30

In an attempt to overcoming this problem, we
used the induced fit
docking approach (IFD)31 to dock DA into
the 1FM6 pbd
structure. Despite that the flexibility of the Phe363 residue was
considered and several conformations for this residue were obtained,
all 18 docking poses retrieved failed to reproduce the experimentally
observed binding mode of DA. The same problem using IFD has recently
been described for another set of PPARγ ligands, and in such
cases, the combination of IFD and an advanced sampling approach, metadynamics,32 was suggested to overcome the problem and to
find the most probable ligand binding modes.33

Considering that the experimentally observed binding mode
of DA
was only reproduced when DA was docked into the 3U9Q pdb structure, but
not when docked into the 1FM6 pbd structure, these results strongly suggest that
the application of docking techniques alone is not sufficient to identify
the most probably binding modes of the studied PFCAs within the PPARγ
LBD. This is an example where the docking approach has a problem not
only with the ligands scoring but also in the reproduction of the
compounds’ correct binding poses.

Binding Mode Identification
by Classical Molecular Dynamics
(cMD)
Six PFCAs containing 6–11 carbon atoms were
selected for further analysis. These six ligands and DA are listed
in Table S1 and their two-dimensional (2D)
molecular structures and key physical parameters can be also found.

In an attempt to identify the binding modes of the ligands in Table S1 more accurately, a set of classical
molecular dynamics (cMD) simulations were made. As an input for these
runs, we used the conformations of the ligands as docked into the
non-native structure (the LBD structure as co-crystallized with rosiglitazone
(pdb id: 1FM6)) for all of the MD simulations. This was done to avoid any bias
toward the DA binding mode and also to correctly reproduce a scenario
where only one X-ray structure might be available. In addition, cMD
simulations were carried for DA and the computed binding mode of DA
was compared to the experimentally observed binding conformation within
the 3U9Q X-ray structure.

Initially, two independent 100 ns
long simulations were executed
for each of the studied ligands (1.4 μs simulation time in total),
in each case referred to as MD runs 1 and 2, respectively. We focused
particularly on exploring the binding mode and dynamics of the PFuDA
ligand as an example of a PFCA, for which the docking results, using
both the X-ray structures with pdb id 3U9Q and 1FM6, indicated a binding mode similar to
the one of rosiglitazone and not to the one of DA. Also, PFuDA exhibited
the strongest experimental binding affinity in the human PPARγ-LBD
according to the study by Zhang et al.12

In contrast to the docking studies using the 1FM6 pdb structure, the
experimental binding conformation of DA was reproduced well by these
simulations. The averaged structure of the PFuDA–PPARγ
complex obtained by the cMD simulations has an RMSD of 1.8 Å
compared to the experimental X-ray structure of DA co-crystallized
in PPARγ. It was noted that in both MD runs 1 and 2 for PFuDA,
the Phe363 residue did shift its conformation. Consequently, for a
large part of the simulation time, the PFuDA ligand adopted a binding
mode similar to the binding mode observed for the co-crystallized
DA within the 3U9Q pdb structure, labeled binding mode 1 (see Figure S1). For periods of the simulation time, PFuDA even overlapped
with the experimentally observed position of the DA skeleton.

During MD run 1, the PFuDA ligand changed its initial orientation
and after about only 20 ns approached an intermediate state, named
binding mode 2, and then after the 50 ns of the simulation entered
a relatively stable position in binding mode 1 (Figures 2A and S2A). An
RMSD of PFuDA about 2.7 Å compared to the initial docking position
was observed during MD run 1. In MD run 2, the ligand adopted the
DA binding mode (binding mode 1) faster than that in MD run 1, and
this binding mode was the only stable one observed during almost all
MD run 2. However, during the last 20 ns of this run, PFuDA adopted
a new conformation and a binding mode, similar to the one of rosiglitazone,
labeled herein as binding mode 3 (Figure S2B).

Figure 2 (A) Binding modes for PFuDA detected by cMD simulations. Binding
modes 1, 2, and 3 are displayed in green, orange, and blue, respectively.
(B) Difference in free energies between detected conformations of
PFuDA in kcal/mol, determined by cMD simulations (2 × 130 ns),
which also represents their populations and probability of existence. D1 and D2 coordinates are the distances
in angstrom between the carbon atom of the CF3 group (the
end of ligand) and the Cα atoms of Phe282 (helix 3) and Tyr473
(helix 5), respectively.

The simulations performed for the ligands listed in Table S1 showed that the shorter-chain PFCAs
of 6–8 carbon atoms (PFHxA, PFHpA, and PFOA) were much more
flexible than PFuDA and continuously moved from one binding mode to
another (Figures 3 and S3). The initial cMD simulations indicate that
these three ligands do not establish a stable complex in the DA binding
pocket, nor at the rosiglitazone binding site. On the other hand,
the dynamics of PFNA and PFDA were more similar to the dynamics of
PFuDA. Like PFuDA, PFNA and PFDA did predominantly bind in the same
cavity as DA (binding mode 1).

Figure 3 Difference in free energies between detected
conformations of PFHpA
(in kcal/mol) determined by performed cMD simulations, which also
represents their populations and probability of existence. D1 and D2 coordinates are the distances
in angstrom between the carbon atom of the CF3 group (the
end of ligand) and the Cα atoms of Phe282 (helix 3) and Tyr473
(helix 5), respectively. Note that the difference in free energies
between detected PFHpA conformations is less than 1 kcal/mol.

Thus, according to these cMD simulations,
all six PFCA ligands
exhibit significant dynamical behavior and ability to change from
one binding mode to another. This is particularity the case for the
shorter-chain PFCAs. Also, the carboxyl group and adjacent atoms have
a relatively constant position for all six PFCAs, but the fluorinated
chain moves significantly within the LBD.

Detailed Study of the PFuDA
Ligand–Protein Interactions
The observed dynamic behavior
of fluctuating periodically between
binding modes 1 and 3 was investigated in greater detail for two of
the ligands, PFuDA and PFHpA. These two binding modes and the intermediate
binding mode 2 are illustrated for PFuDA in Figure 2A. To investigate whether other conformations
might be possible, as well as to estimate the probability of the identified
binding modes and estimate the difference in their free energies,
a new set of cMD (2 × 130 ns) additional runs were executed for
each of these two PFCAs.

Free-energy plots were constructed
based on these simulations. To describe the movement of PFuDA in the
PPARγ LBD, we choose as coordinates the distances between the
C atom of the CF3 group (the end of ligand) and the Cα
atoms of Phe282 (helix 3) and Tyr473 (helix 5). To compare the results
obtained for PFuDA to the dynamics of the carbon atom of the CF3 group of a PFCA with shorter chain length, corresponding
analysis was made for PFHpA.

The free-energy plot shown in Figure 2B confirms that in
principle three possible
binding modes are possible for the PFuDA ligand. The most populated
binding mode is binding mode 1, which is similar to the binding mode
observed for DA. Binding mode 3 was much less populated and has free
energy that is 1.8 kcal/mol higher than that of binding mode 1 according
to the simulation results. The intermediate state, binding mode 2,
displays a spread position range movement with free energy of about
2.0 kcal/mol higher than that of binding mode 1. Also, two highly
similar conformations, separated by 0.5 kcal/mol, were observed inside
the lowest free-energy well for binding mode 1.

Thus, the conclusion
of these calculations is that PFuDA, as other
PPARγ partial agonists and antagonists,3,4,30 does not have a unique binding mode, but
instead multiple binding conformations representing the ligand dynamics
within the LBD. Indeed, according to the simulation results, the PFuDA
ligand spent most of the time in the lower free-energy state (about
91.5% of the simulation time in binding mode 1, vs 3.6 and 4.9% of
the time in binding modes 2 and 3, respectively). These data are in
agreement to our previous studies on other ligand–PPARγ
complexes3,4 as well as to NMR experiments.30

According to the simulation results, the
PFHpA ligand had much
higher probability of entering binding mode positions 2 and 3, and
all binding modes were equally populated and no significant energy
barriers were seen between binding modes 1, 2, and 3 in our analysis
(see Figure 3).

On the basis of the above results, binding mode 1 was identified
as the most probable PFuDA conformation within the PPARγ LBD
and the ligand–residue interactions were described in detail.
Similarly to DA and many other PPARγ agonists the carboxyl group
forms a salt bridge with Ser289, His323, Tyr473, and His449. Averaged
life times of these bonds, assessed on the basis of the combination
of the two MD trajectories, were 64, 92, 39, and 94%, respectively.
One of the main differences between the two MD runs was that PFuDA
formed very stable bond with Ser289 in the first 130 ns MD run (Figure S4), but the H-bond with His449 was predominant
in the second MD 130 ns run (Figure 4A,B). In both simulations, the hydrogen bonds with
Tyr473 and His323 were very stable. The remaining ligand–protein
interactions were almost identical in the two MD runs (see Figures 4B and S4).

Figure 4 Representation of detected PFuDA–receptor
interactions in
the most populated binding mode (binding mode 1) determined by a cMD
simulation (second 130 ns run) illustrated by (A) three-dimensional
(3D) and (B) 2D illustrations. The H-bonds are marked with dotted
lines, and the blue and green spheres show the areas of electrostatic
and hydrophobic interactions, respectively.

These results also demonstrate that for the PFCAs investigated
the docking scoring function cannot rank compounds correctly, due
to not only some insufficiency in the scoring, but because in docking,
at least with presently used techniques, only one docking pose is
used for the scoring and thus the dynamics is neglected.

Finally,
to measure the contribution of the individual residues,
the MM/GBSA decomposition analysis was performed for PFuDA (Figure 5). Although the analyses
of the ligand–residue interactions in the above section are
based on the trajectory averaged and minimized, i.e., on static PFuDA
conformations, the MD-based decomposition considers the contribution
of protein residues in all possible binding modes. As one can expect,
the residues involved in the salt bridge (Ser289, His323, Tyr473,
and His449) have the largest negative contributions to the free energy,
−4.8, −3.7, −5.2, and −2.5 kcal/mol, respectively.
However, interactions with the Cys285, Tyr327, Phe363, and Met364
residues also contribute favorably to the binding, with contributions
between −2 and −3 kcal/mol. It is interesting to note
that the Lys367 residue has a contribution of +1.5 kcal/mol and thus
this interaction has a negative contribution with respect to binding.
This explains why the DA binding mode (binding mode 1) is the preferable
one, especially for the ligands with longer chains, where the repulsive
interactions with Lys367 are more significant and restrict the frequency
of the realization of binding modes 2 and 3.

Figure 5 Most significant interactions
between PFuDA and receptor residues
in binding mode 1, presented as free energies (in kcal/mol), as they
were detected by MM/GBSA decomposition approach during all executed
cMD runs.

Multiple Binding Mode Study
by Accelerated Molecular Dynamics
(aMD) Study
Above results clearly suggest multiple binding
modes for the studied compounds; thus, to study in detail the possible
conformational changes of both the ligands and the LBD at a microseconds
time range, we used the accelerated molecular dynamics (aMD) enhanced
sampling approach. Two 300 ns long aMD simulations were executed for
PFuDA and PFOA, which represent the ligands with longer and middle
chain length.

As an aMD simulation carried out for 100–200
ns provides information on the dynamics of a system that corresponds
to a cMD simulation of 1 μs, the aMD method gives us the opportunity
to study the dynamics of the two ligands within the LBD on a much
longer time scale than is possible when only using cMD. A drawback
is that the free energies estimated with the aMD simulation method
are significantly less accurate than those obtained with cMD. As a
result, some error in the free energy can be seen in an aMD simulation,
and this needs to be considered in the interpretation of the obtained
results.

In the case of PFuDA, two large free-energy minima
and an intermediate
state were sampled, where each of the two large free-energy minima
contain two separate minima (Figure 6). Considering the uncertainty associated with the
aMD simulation technique, it was concluded that the binding modes
1–3 in Figure 6 correspond to the binding modes identified by the cMD simulation
(Figure 2B). The additional
energy minima, binding modes 1′ and 3′, identified in
the aMD simulation were not sampled in the cMD simulations. This can
be illustrated by dividing the free-energy map in Figure 6 into two parts, areas A and
B, where it can be seen that area A is similar to the map obtained
in the cMD simulations (Figure 2B).

Figure 6 Binding modes detected for the PFuDA ligand retrieved by aMD calculations
and corresponding reweighted free energies (in kcal/mol) obtained
by these simulations. D1 and D2
coordinates are the distances in angstrom between the carbon atom
of the CF3 group (the end of ligand) and the Cα atoms
of Phe282 (helix 3) and Tyr473 (helix 5), respectively. Note that
some deviations between both D1 and D2 coordinates can be expected during the aMD simulations due to the
larger variations in the receptor structure.

The free-energy difference between binding modes 3′
and
3 determined based on the aMD simulations was less than 1 kcal/mol.
The free-energy difference between these two binding modes is thus
insignificant, considering the uncertainty of the aMD simulations.
The conformations of binding modes 1′ and 3′ within
area B in Figure 6 are
similar to the corresponding conformations of binding modes 1 and
3, respectively, but shifted by 1–2 Å in their positions.
In binding mode 1′, PFuDA adopted more planar conformation,
which is similar to the one observed for DA, but the ligand was moved
away from helix 12 (H12) to the other end of the DA pocket. Binding
mode 3′ was situated in the opposite corner of the LBD in a
surface cavity between helices 3 and 5, which is close to a possible
entrance/exit gate to the LBD (see Figure 6). It has been shown in previous studies
that the enhanced sampling methods are capable, without any guidance,
of recovering the binding path of a ligand entering an LBD.34 Thus, we consider it likely that the accelerated
dynamics sampled the movement of the PFuDA ligand, thereby not only
capturing the binding modes of PFuDA, but also detecting a likely
path that the ligand follows to reach the LBD or to move from one
binding mode to another. For PFuDA, we suggest that conformation 3′
located at the receptor surface between helices 3, 4, and 5 describes
the binding path the ligand follows when entering the LBD, but not
a real binding mode within the LBD.

According to the aMD simulation
results, H12 of the PPARγ
LBD was not stabilized in its full agonist conformation. The detected
conformations of H12 were more similar to those in the apo receptor,
as seen both in X-ray data and in our previous aMD simulations.4,35 The same has also been observed for other partial agonists.30 However, in contrast to the apo form, where
the agonist and antagonist H12 conformations were almost equally populated,35 no antagonist-like H12 orientations were captured
during the present aMD simulation of the PFuDA–PPARγ
complex. Thus, according to the aMD results, the PFuDA movement affected
the LBD secondary structure, and the PPARγ receptor was partially
stabilized by the PFuDA ligand, probably due to the ligand’s
weak binding capability. This observation is supported by experimental
data, which have shown that the ligand PFuDA affects the protein structure.12

PFOA exhibited a similar behavior to PFHxA,
PFHpA, and PFOA in
the cMD simulations, where these ligands constantly flip between binding
modes 1, 2, and 3 (see Figure S5). The
free-energy map generated by the cMD simulation for PFHpA (Figure 3) and the free-energy
map obtained from the aMD simulation for PFOA (Figure S5) are similar.

For PFOA, which is a weak binder,
H12 entered a conformation similar
to that of the apo form and adopted an antagonist conformation as
well (see Figure S6). However, according
to the simulation, the antagonist conformation is less populated than
was seen in previous aMD studies for other ligands,4,35 demonstrating
that even weak ligand binding provides some PPARγ stability.
According to the aMD enhanced sampling in an antagonist receptor conformation
or the apo from, the PFOA ligand can form stable H-bonds also with
Tyr327 and Lys367 due to disruption of the typical hydrogen bond network
that is seen for all agonists.

The results for both compounds
studied showed that the receptor
dynamics is similar to that of the apo form, i.e., the compounds did
not stabilize the PPARγ in a full agonist state, which agrees
well with the experimentally observed transactivation energies.37 For instance, it has been shown that DA has
no effect on the hydrogen/deuterium exchange of PPARγ despite
its binding within the LBD, providing experimental evidence that DA
does not have the same ability as rosiglitazone to stabilize the AF-2
receptor region. As a consequence, DA has reduced ability to act as
a full agonist.36 Similarly, the above
observations for PFuDA and PFOA provide atomic-level data that can
explain why the PFCA-mediated transactivation of human PPARγ
was only detected at concentrations of 18 μM and higher.37

Free-Energy Calculations (FEP+)
Only compounds with
overall known binding modes can be studied in free-energy calculations
by the FEP+ (free-energy perturbation) methodology. On the basis of
our cMD and aMD results, the 3U9Q pdb structure for the PPARγ LBD and the DA binding
mode was initially selected for these calculations. An FEP map was
prepared for the seven ligands listed in Tables 1 and S1, i.e.,
the PFCAs with 6–11 carbon atoms (PFHxA, PFHpA, PFOA, PFNA,
PFDA, and PFuDA), as well as DA. All of the selected PFCAs can fit
into the same binding pocket and enter similar binding mode to DA
according to the cMD simulations presented above.

Table 1 FEP+ Calculation Resultsa
ligand name
abbreviation	ligand name	experimental activity (μM)	experimental ΔG values	predicted ΔG values	
PFHxA	perfluorohexanoic
acid	n.d.	 	–1.76	
PFHpA	perfluoroheptanoic acid	1330	–3.92	–2.92	
PFOA	perfluorooctanoic acid	300	–4.80	–4.22	
PFNA	perfluorononaic acid	155	–5.20	–6.01	
PFDA	perfluorodecanoic acid	84	–5.56	–6.26	
PFuDA	perfluoroundecanoic acid	58	–5.78	–5.93	
DA	decanoic acid	1521	–3.84	–3.77	
a Experimental activity (Kd) data taken
from ref (12). Predicted
ΔG values
were obtained by shifting the calculated ΔΔG values by a uniform constant to minimize mean unsigned error (MUE)
to experiment.

The six PFCA
ligands were prealigned with their heavy atoms on
top of the corresponding heavy atoms in the co-crystallized structure
of DA (pdb id: 3U9Q). The FEP+ protocol was run on the resulting transformation map,
and the resulting relative ΔΔG values
(with respect to an arbitrary zero) were shifted by a uniform constant
to minimize their mean unsigned error with the experimental values,
yielding estimated ΔG values. This shift does
not change the obtained information and only serves for easier comparison
of computed and experimental data.

The computed ΔG values agree well with experimental
free energies computed from the Kd values
from Zhang et al.,12 with a correlation
coefficient (R2 value) of 0.86 and a root-mean-square
error (RMSE) of 1.0 kcal/mol between the experimental and predicted
values (Figure 7A,B
and Table 1). The estimated
prediction errors lie in the range of 0.2–0.5 kcal/mol, and
the average hysteresis over all free-energy cycles is 0.5 kcal/mol
(Table 1). The FEP+
calculations correctly predict the trend of increasing ligand free
energy of binding with increasing chain length, as well as the gain
in the free energy due to perfluoration.

Figure 7 (A) FEP transformation
map for seven ligands. Each line represents
one free-energy calculation conducted in both solvated and receptor-bound
states. Connections have been automatically created with multiple
pathways connecting each pair of compounds to obtain redundancy in
the calculations as well as connecting compounds that have the largest maximum common substructure
possible. (B) Correlation obtained by comparing FEP+ and experimental
results with linear regression line.

Next, we run an FEP+ calculation based on the rosiglitazone
binding
mode and the 1FM6 pdb structure, but it was not possible to reproduce the experimental
binding affinities by these calculations. In particular, this was
noted for transformations from DA to both shorter- and longer-chain
PFCA transformations. The gain in the free energy due to perfluoration
was also overestimated. The mean unsigned error (MUE) was higher than
1.3 kcal/mol, and the RMSE was 1.8 kcal/mol (Figure S7). We carefully examined the obtained MD trajectories and
found that the conformation of the Phe363 residue could not change,
which restricted the longer-chain ligands (PFNA, PFDA, and PFuDA)
from entering the DA binding mode. On the other hand, the FEP+ predications
for the shorter-chain PFCAs (PFHxA, PFHpA, and PFOA) were similar
to those retrieved from the FEP+ simulation for the 3U9Q structure.
These results illustrate that the three shorter-chain ligands are
less sensitive to the alignment into the DA mode (binding mode 1)
than the longer-chain ligands. Our interpretation is that this is
due to the lower-energy barriers between and consequently frequent
shifts between binding modes 1, 2, and 3 observed in the cMD and aMD
simulations.

A new set of calculations was made with the same
seven ligands
and the same parameters, but using the center of the clustered PFuDA
ligand–PPARγ structure obtained in the cMD runs as a
template instead of the experimental DA–PPARγ complex.
It was examined whether basing the FEP+ calculations on the simulated
PFuDA binding mode, which is similar to the experimentally observed
DA conformation, can reproduce the experimental free energies accurately.
The standard FEP+ protocol (0.24 ns pre-REST and 5 ns REST simulations)
could not describe the individual permutations giving errors up to
7 kcal/mol (Figure S8). This was mainly
due to the significant changes in receptor structure provoked by the
conformational change of PFuDA from the rosiglitazone binding mode
(binding mode 3) to the DA binding mode (binding mode 1) (Figure S1). Thus, the FEP+ procedure was modified
and the pre-REST and REST steps were increased to 2 × 10 and
8 ns/λ, respectively. The FEP+ results obtained by these calculations
provided a reasonable RMSE value of 1.23 kcal/mol (MUE = 0.96 kcal/mol)
and R2 = 0.96 (Figure 8A,B). It is also notable that six of six
ligands were correctly ranked, and for all perturbations, the signs
of calculated ΔG values were in agreement to
the experimental data.

Figure 8 FEP+ results based on the cMD-derived structure of the
PFuDA–PPARγ
complex and redesigned FEP+ protocol. (A) Predicted ΔΔG values for each individual permutation used. The ligand
similarity and experimental and computed ΔΔG (kcal/mol) values are written in green, black, and blue, respectively.
The similarity was calculated with the FEP+ mapper tool. (B) Linear
regression between the experimental and predicted ΔG values.

We are currently working on the
improvement of FEP+ sampling protocol
for FEP calculations based on MD-derived and flexible structures,
and a paper about this topic is in preparation. Moreover, the use
of MD-retrieved structures after simulation of the shorter-chain ligands
showed that they do not significantly affect the LBD residues conformations
and were well handled by the regular FEP+ protocol (data not shown).

Mechanism of Action
According to the results presented
in the paper by Zhang et al.,12 which were
based only on docking analysis, the PFCAs with chain lengths of 4–10
carbon atoms bind within the same binding cavity as DA, thus occupying
binding mode 1. Instead, the fluorinated chain of PFCAs containing
11 or more carbon atoms is mostly located outside this cavity. In
contrast, our simulations revealed that more than one binding mode
are possible for the six PFCAs studied herein within the large PPARγ
LBD. The longer-chain ligands (PFNA, PFDA, and PFuDA containing 9–11
carbon atoms) did predominantly occupy a binding mode similar to the
one experimentally observed for DA (binding mode 1) and to a lesser
degree a binding mode similar to the one experimentally observed for
rosiglitazone (binding mode 3). For the shorter-chain ligands studied
(PFHxA, PFHpA, and PFOA containing 6–8 carbon atoms), the fluorinated
tail moved quite flexibly within the LBD during the simulations. Consequently,
these compounds shifted continuously from one binding mode to another.

Further, in the docking studies by Zhang et al.,12 the hydrophilic heads of PFCAs up to the chain length of
14 carbon atoms all formed hydrogen bonds (H-bonds) with the Ser289,
His449, and Tyr473 residues, and like DA, PFDA and PFuDA formed a
H-bond with His323 as well. PFHxDA and PFOcDA, with chain lengths
of 16 and 18 carbon atoms, respectively, only formed H-bonds with
His449 and Tyr473. The cMD studies made for PFCAs with 6–11
carbon atoms as a part of this study gave corresponding results, and
a detailed analysis of the free-energy contribution of the PFuDA ligand
interactions with LBD residues by the MM/GBSA approach identified
Ser289, Tyr473, and His323 to be the residues with the strongest contribution
to the free energy of binding for PFuDA (Figure 5). Thus, both the docking and the cMD simulations
confirm that the position of the hydrophilic head is stable within
the human PPARγ LBD due the hydrogen bonding.

The flexibility
of the fluorinated tails of the PFCAs, and particularly
of those with shorter chain length, within the LBD, and the tendency
of PFHxA, PFHpA, and PFOA to flip continuously between different binding
modes observed in the cMD and aMD simulations must be interpreted
such that no one binding mode is significantly more energetically
favorable for these compounds and that the energy barrier to flip
from one binding mode to another is low. The fluorinated tails have
a strong internal symmetry, and the fluorine atoms do not form H-bonds
with the surrounding protein residues. The interactions between the
fluorinated tails and the LBD are thus probably highly governed by
an entropic factor, which might be the driving force governing the
rapid shift from one binding mode to another observed in the MD simulations.
The energy barriers between the binding modes of PFHpA and PFOA are
low according to the free-energy diagrams generated by the MD simulations
(Figures 3 and S5) but clearly visible on the corresponding
diagram for PFuDA (Figure 2B). Our hypothesis is that PFuDA fits tightly into the DA
binding pocket, resulting in a higher-energy barrier to flip the fluorinated
tail into the other binding modes.

Detailed analysis of the
binding modes of PFuDA and PFOA based
on the aMD simulations revealed that helix 12 (H12) was not stabilized
in a full agonist position but adopted conformations more similar
to those in the apo form.35 Thus, according
to our results, these compounds should only have some partial agonist
activity, which agrees well with the experimental transactivation
data. The limited data available on transactivation on human PPARγ
caused by PFCA showed that PFOA and perfluorinated dodecanoic acid
(PFDDA) have the strongest transactivation (c20% values of 20 and
18 μM, respectively) among the studied PFCAs.37 No data were given for PFuDA. The experimental c20% values
for PFHxA, PFHpA, and PFDA are in the range of 43–57 μM,
and for PFNA, the test result was >100 μM; according to these
results, these four PFCAs do not activate the human PPARγ transcription
factor. PFOA and PFDDA are classified as weak PPARγ activators,
both of which have similar potency. This is in contrast to the human
PPARα, where PFOA and PFHpA cause the strongest transactivation
among these compounds (c20% values of 0.9 and 5.3 μM, respectively),37,38 but the PPARα receptor has a significantly smaller binding
cavity than PPARγ.

Conclusions
The results from the
current study demonstrate that the use of
molecular dynamics simulations and enhanced sampled techniques is
highly recommended after ligand docking procedure when searching for
relevant ligand binding modes within large and flexible LBDs. Recent
studies document that ligands show multiple binding modes within LBDs,
such as the PPARγ receptor. In addition to the PFCAs studied
herein, this is the case for several other PPARγ partial agonists
and antagonists.4,30 Approaches such as aMD, metadynamics,
etc. can capture these binding conformations, detail their populations,
and describe the dynamics of both the ligand and the receptor. However,
more detailed studies should be performed on the barostat choice because
according to our preliminary results one should employ the Monte Carlo
(MC) barostat, which is presently the default choice in the Amber
software, with caution.

The use of free-energy calculations
like the FEP+ protocol in combination
with cMD and aMD can distinguish the most probable binding modes and
score the ligands adequately, given that the ligands can be aligned
in a correct way during the design of the FEP computations. Thus,
the MD simulations are highly desirable before the execution of FEP+
calculations, as demonstrated for the PFCAs studied (chain length
of 6–11 carbon atoms). Moreover, in the current work, we showed
that the FEP+ approach works well for PFCAs, which are compounds with
physical–chemical properties that are very different from typical
druglike molecules and where the interactions by the fluorinated tail
is governed by entropic rather than enthalpic forces.

Using
the proposed in silico workflow for ligand binding mode searching,
ligand–protein dynamics description, and relative free-energy
calculations, the most probable PFCA binding conformations and ligand–residue
interactions were determined. It was illustrated that the fluorinated
tail shows highly dynamic behavior for the shorter-chain PFCAs studied
(6–8 carbon atoms) and that the flexibility becomes less pronounced
for the PFCAs of 9–11 carbon atoms, which fill out the binding
pocket, where DA is known to bind.

The influence of two of the
PFCAs (PFOA and PFuDA) on the secondary
structure of the PPARγ LBD was investigated by aMD, and according
to that analysis, these two ligands partly stabilized the conformation
of helix 12, thus potentially acting as partial rather than full agonists.
The partial agonist activity of PFOA has been confirmed in a transactivation
study, PFuDA was not tested, but perfluorododecanoic acid (PFDDA)
showed transactivation activity as well.37 The partial agonist potential is likely to contribute to some of
the adverse effects related to lipid homeostasis, adipogenesis, inflammation,
and liver toxicity that are observed for chemicals such as PFOA. PPARγ
is known to be involved in the regulation of glucose metabolism and
storage of fatty acids and to be significantly expressed in the liver.
Although PFCAs are only weak binders and some of them are weak activators,
the accumulation of such compounds in the human organism increases
their concentration level in different protein receptors. In turn,
this can increase the probability of these compounds being present
in sufficiently high concentrations to cause adverse effects, for
example, by hindering fatty acids to enter these proteins for transport
and other physiological functions.

Computational Methods
Protein
Preparation and Ligand Docking
Protein structures
were downloaded from protein data bank (pdb).39 In this study, both the DA (pdb id: 3U9Q) and rosiglitazone (pdb id: 1FM6) structures were
used. The X-ray structure preparation for subsequent modeling was
conducted with the protein preparation wizard,40 which adds missing atoms and optimizes the H-bond network
by assigning tautomer/ionization states, sampling water orientations,
and flipping Asn, Gln, and His residues in the plane of their π-systems.
Finally, restrained energy minimizations were conducted to conclude
the system preparation. All resolved crystal water molecules were
maintained. Ligand 3D structures were sketched manually and transformed
into low-energy 3D structures using LigPrep version 3.5. Docking calculations
to place compounds into the PPARγ ligand binding domain were
performed with Glide version 6.4 with default parameters. Induced
fit docking (IFD)31 was also performed
using both the default settings and either an increased accuracy to
XP docking mode or enhanced sampling option. This was done to investigate
if other docking poses were obtained when using a docking method where
the flexibility of specific residues could be considered.

Note about
Force Field (FF) and Barostat Choice for the Sampling
of Ligand Binding Modes during MD Simulations
The FEP+ tools
in this work are implemented in the software that uses the OPLS3 FF,
and the enhanced MD-based sampling tools used are implemented in the
Amber suite that uses the Amber14SB FF. The Amber14SB and OPLS3 FFs
are supposed to offer reasonably similar descriptions ligand–protein
interactions. Also the main objective of the study is to develop a
workflow that uses different computational tools in concert for identifying
relevant binding modes and determining free energies of the ligand–protein
complexes. It should be noted that all of the ligand–protein
structures obtained by the Amber FF were reoptimized and then well
equilibrated by the OPLS3 FF before carrying out the FEP calculations.

To obtain the constants needed for the aMD boost parameters, the
averaged dihedral and potential energies, one needs initially to perform
a regular cMD simulation. In Amber 14 and latter versions, a new Monte
Carlo (MC) barostat has been implemented, which speeds up calculations
up to 20% and is considered to be more rigorous. However, during these
cMD runs, we observed different ligands dynamics behavior. For the
PPARγ ligands studied in this work (Table S1), and in particular for DA and PFuDA, the DA binding mode
was not obtained with the MC barostat method when using the non-native
LBD structure (as co-crystallized with rosiglitazone (pdb id: 1FM6)) as a starting
point. In six additional 100 ns long cMD runs for the PFuDA ligand
using both the MC and Berendsen barostats, e.g., three runs for each
barostat, the DA binding mode was obtained for PFuDA when applying
the Amber14SB FF with the Berendsen barostat. However, all simulations
performed with the MC barostat failed to reproduce the DA binding
mode and indicated that the rosiglitazone binding mode (which was
the initial conformation) is energetically more favorable. A similar
behavior was observed when we employed OPLS3 FF in a frame of the
Desmond software using the default simulation protocol.

One
possible explanation of this is that the pmemd.cuda (the GPU
version of Amber 14 software) does not compute the virial when using
the MC barostat. As a consequence of these observations, the Amber14SB
FF was used along with the Berendsen barostat in all of the MD simulations
presented in the work.

Classical Molecular Dynamics (cMD)
Classical molecular
dynamics (cMD) was carried out using the Amber 14 program and the
Amber14SB force field.41 Initially, the
systems were energy-minimized in two steps. First, only the water
molecules and ions were minimized in 6000 steps while keeping the
protein and ligand structures restricted by weak harmonic constrains
of 2 kcal/mol Å2. Second, a 6000 step minimization
with the conjugate gradient method on the whole system was performed.
Furthermore, the simulated systems were gradually heated from 0 to
310 K for 50 ps (NVT ensemble) and equilibrated for 3 ns (NPT ensemble).
The production runs were performed at 310 K in an NPT ensemble. Temperature
regulation was done by using a Langevin thermostat with a collision
frequency of 2 ps–1, and pressure regulation via
Berendsen barostats. The time step of the simulations was 2 fs with
a nonbonded cutoff of 8 Å using the SHAKE algorithm42 and the particle-mesh Ewald method.43 For each of the studied PFCAs and for DA (seven
compounds listed in Table S1 in the Supporting Information), two independent 100
ns long simulations were executed (1.4 μs total simulation time
for all of the systems). Moreover, for two of the ligands, 2 ×
130 ns additional runs were also performed (see Results
and Discussion for details).

Accelerated Molecular Dynamics (aMD)
Accelerated molecular
dynamics (aMD) simulations provide the possibility to sample the conformational
space in much greater detail and to detect the local energy minima
that remain hidden in the cMD calculations.44,45 Moreover, aMD simulations can boost the sampling by up to 2000 times
compared to cMD.44 Thus, one can consider
that the sampling performed by a 300 ns aMD trajectory might be equal
to that of several microseconds of cMD simulation. aMD modifies the
energy landscape by adding a boost potential ΔV(r) to the original potential energy surface when V(r) is below a predefined energy level E, as defined in eq 1. 1  In general, this approach also allows the
canonical average of an observable calculated from configurations
sampled and the modified potential energy surface to be fully mapped.46,47

All of the aMD calculations were performed using the Amber
14 molecular modeling package and the Amber14SB force field.41 The production runs were performed at 310 K
in an NPT ensemble. Temperature regulation was done using a Langevin
thermostat with a collision frequency of 2 ps–1,
and pressure regulation via Berendsen barostat. The time step of the
simulations was 2 fs with a nonbonded cutoff of 8 Å using the
SHAKE algorithm42 and the particle-mesh
Ewald method.43

To simultaneously
enhance the sampling of the internal and diffusive
degrees of freedom, a dual-boosting approach based on separate dihedral
and total boost potentials was employed.44−46 This method
may be compromised by the increased statistical noise, but was also
successfully applied in similar studies.4,35,48 The selections of the boost parameters E and α for the dihedral boost (Ed and αd) and for the total boost (Ep and αp) were based on the corresponding
average dihedral energy and total potential energy obtained from the
combined cMD production runs (2 × 100 ns for each ligand). The
dihedral boost parameter, Ed, was set
equal to the average dihedral energy obtained from the cMD simulation
plus an approximate energy contribution of Nsr × 3.5 kcal/mol residue to account for the degrees of
freedom, where Nsr is the number of protein
residues. The αd parameter was then set equal to
0.2 × Nsr ×
3.5 kcal/mol/residue. For the total boost parameter, Ep, the value was set to be equal to the average total
potential energy obtained from the cMD simulation plus 0.2 × Ntot, where Ntot is
the total number of atoms in the simulated system. The αp parameter was simply set equal to 0.2 × Ntot.41

Two 300 ns long
production aMD runs were performed on both the
PFuDA and PFOA ligand–receptor complexes.

Reweighting
of biased aMD frames is an important procedure and
was performed based on the Maclaurin series expansion scheme up to
the tenth order. The reweighting procedure has been recently discussed
and described in several studies.46,47 For the free-energy
plots, the distances between the carbon atom of the CF3 group (the end of ligand) and the Cα atoms of Phe282
(helix 3) and Tyr473 (helix 5) were chosen as coordinates. As the
fluorinated tail of these compounds was seen to move quite flexibly
within the LBD, the carbon in the CF3 group at the end
of the fluorinated tail was seen as the best choice to describe the
flexibility of these ligands.

Finally, convergence analyses
were performed by the RMS average
correlations method49 and the Kullback–Leibler
divergence50 in the way that was well documented
in previous works.4,35,48−50

MM/GBSA Calculations
The ligand–residue
free
energies of binding calculations were performed by the molecular mechanics/generalized
born surface area (MM/GBSA) method using the MMPBSA.py script included
in the AmberTools 15 package.41,51 This method was successfully
used in numerous studies and the methodology was widely described
previously.3,48,51−53 In this study, the free energies were calculated
for each frame extracted from the MD trajectory with an interval of
10 ps. The entropy term was neglected. The binding free energy of
a ligand can of course not rigorously be decomposed into atomic or
residue contributions. Nevertheless, MM/GBSA approaches offer an approximate
energy decomposition that, despite being somewhat arbitrary, can offer
qualitative insights when a series of highly similar ligands are analyzed
using the same decomposition scheme.

Free-Energy Calculations
(FEP+)
All calculations have
been conducted using the Schrödinger molecular modeling suite.54 Free-energy perturbation calculations were performed
using the FEP+ methodology, which combines the accurate modern OPLS3
force field,55 GPU-enabled high-speed molecular
dynamics simulations with Desmond version 3.9,56 the REST algorithm for locally enhanced sampling,57 a cycle-closure correction58 to incorporate redundant information into free-energy estimates,
and the FEP Mapper tool to automate setup and analysis of the calculations.
The force-field builder tool was used to test if accurate OPLS3 force-field
torsional parameters for all molecules were available.

The FEP+
calculations based on the X-ray structures, performed with the pdb
id structures 3U9Q and 1FM6,
were conducted using the default protocols: The systems were solvated
in an orthogonal box of SPC water molecules with buffer widths (minimum
distance between box edge and any solute atom) of 5 Å for the
complex and 10 Å for the solvent simulations. The full systems
were relaxed and equilibrated using the default Desmond relaxation
protocol, consisting of an energy minimization with restraints on
the solute and then 12 ps length simulations at 10 K using an NVT
ensemble, followed by an NPT ensemble. After that, the restrained
system was equilibrated at room temperature using the NPT ensemble.
Finally, a 240 ps room-temperature NPT ensemble simulation was conducted.
Production simulations in the NPT ensemble lasted 5 ns for both the
complex and the solvent systems. A total of 12 λ windows were
used for all of the 5 ns long FEP/REST calculations. Replica exchanges
between neighboring λ windows were attempted every 1.2 ps. For
a more detailed description of the free-energy calculation protocol
employed, see the Supporting Information of Wang et al.5

For the FEP+ calculations based on MD-derived
structures, an improved
and new protocol was employed, which is described in detail in a different
study. Briefly, we used the structures obtained with the help of cluster
analysis and the most populated PFuDA conformation identified in the
cMD simulations based on pdb id 1FM6, which was minimized by the OPLS3 FF
and used as a template for all other ligands during the design of
the FEP+ procedure. For these FEP+ simulations, we employed 2 ×
10 ns/λ pre-REST and 8 ns/λ REST calculations.

The
convergence was closely monitored. No significant changes in
the free energy were observed after 3 and 5 ns simulation times for
templates derived from X-ray analyses and MD-generated structures,
respectively. More details and discussions are found in the Free-Energy Calculations (FEP+) section of Results and Discussion section. All calculations
were run on Nvidia Kepler and Pascal architecture GPUs.

Supporting Information Available
The
Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00123.Ligand names,
2D graphs (Table S1); comparison between the binding mode of DA and
PFuDA (Figure S1); RMSD of the PFuDA ligand (Figure S2); free energy
map of the PFOA (Figure S3); PFuDA ligand–receptor interactions
for cMD (Figure S4); reweighted free energy map of the PFOA (Figure
S5); antagonist H12 conformation (Figure S6); FEP+ results (Figures
S7 and S8) (PDF)

Structural files (regular and induced fit docking outputs,
first and last MD frames from cMD run 1 on PFuDA) (PDB)(PDB)(PDB)(PDB)

Movement of PFuDA ligand (Movie S1) (AVI)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00123_si_001.pdf

 ao8b00123_si_002.pdb

 ao8b00123_si_003.pdb

 ao8b00123_si_004.pdb

 ao8b00123_si_005.pdb

 ao8b00123_si_006.avi

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. Suman Sirimulla for helpful
advices
and discussions.
==== Refs
References
Hou T. ; Wang J. ; Li Y. ; Wang W. 
Assessing the performance
of the MM/PBSA and MM/GBSA methods. 1. The accuracy of binding free
energy calculations based on molecular dynamics simulations . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2011 , 51 , 69 –82 . 10.1021/ci100275a .21117705 
Kouskoumvekaki I. ; Petersen R. K. ; Fratev F. ; Taboureau O. ; Nielsen T. E. ; Oprea T. I. ; Sonne S. B. ; Flindt E. N. ; Jonsdottir S. O. ; Kristiansen K. 
Discovery
of a novel selective PPARγ
ligand with partial agonist binding properties by integrated in silico/in
vitro work flow . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2013 , 53 , 923 –937 . 10.1021/ci3006148 .23432662 
Fratev F. ; Tsakovska I. ; Al Sharif M. ; Mihaylova E. ; Pajeva I. 
Structural and dynamical insight into PPARγ antagonism:
in silico study of the ligand-receptor interactions of non-covalent
antagonists . Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2015 , 16 , 15405 –15424 . 10.3390/ijms160715405 .26184155 
Fratev F. 
PPARγ
non-covalent antagonists exhibit mutable binding modes with a similar
free energy of binding: a case study . J. Biomol.
Struct. Dyn. 
2017 , 35 , 476 –485 . 10.1080/07391102.2016.1151830 .26872742 
Wang L. ; Wu Y. ; Deng Y. ; Kim B. ; Pierce L. ; Krilov G. ; Lupyan D. ; Robinson S. ; Dahlgren M. K. ; Greenwood J. ; et al. Accurate and reliable
prediction of relative ligand binding potency
in prospective drug discovery by way of a modern free-energy calculation
protocol and force field . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 2695 –2703 . 10.1021/ja512751q .25625324 
Steinbrecher T. B. ; Dahlgren M. ; Cappel D. ; Lin T. ; Wang L. ; Krilov G. ; Abel R. ; Friesner R. ; Sherman W. 
Accurate binding
free energy predictions in fragment optimization . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2015 , 55 , 2411 –2420 . 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00538 .26457994 
Lim N. M. ; Wang L. ; Abel R. ; Mobley D. L. 
Sensitivity in Binding
Free Energies Due to Protein Reorganization . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2016 , 12 , 4620 –4631 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00532 .27462935 
Kaus J. W. ; Harder E. ; Lin T. ; Abel R. ; McCammon J. A. ; Wang L. 
How to deal with multiple
binding poses in alchemical relative protein–ligand
binding free energy calculations . J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 
2015 , 11 , 2670 –2679 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00214 .26085821 
Posner S. ; Roos S. ; Brunn
Poulsen P. ; Jörundsdottir H. Ó.  Per and Polyfluorinated
Substances in the Nordic Countries: Use,
Occurence and Toxicology ; Nordic Council
of Ministers , 2013 ; Vol. 542 , p 183 .
Han X. ; Nabb D. L. ; Russell M. H. ; Kennedy G. L. ; Rickard R. W. 
Renal elimination
of perfluorocarboxylates (PFCAs) . Chem. Res.
Toxicol. 
2012 , 25 , 35 –46 . 10.1021/tx200363w .21985250 
Pérez F. ; Nadal M. ; Navarro-Ortega A. ; Fàbrega F. ; Domingo J. L. ; Barceló D. ; Farré M. 
Accumulation
of perfluoroalkyl substances in human tissues . Environ. Int. 
2013 , 59 , 354 –362 . 10.1016/j.envint.2013.06.004 .23892228 
Zhang L. ; Ren X. ; Wan B. ; Guo L. 
Structure-dependent binding and activation
of perfluorinated compounds on human peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor γ . Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
2014 , 279 , 275 –283 . 10.1016/j.taap.2014.06.020 .24998974 
Kärrman A. ; Domingo J. L. ; Llebaria X. ; Nadal M. ; Bigas E. ; van Bavel B. ; Lindström G. 
Biomonitoring perfluorinated compounds
in Catalonia, Spain: concentrations and trends in human liver and
milk samples . Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 
2010 , 17 , 750 –758 . 10.1007/s11356-009-0178-5 .19458971 
Abbott B. D. ; Wolf C. J. ; Das K. P. ; Zehr R. D. ; Schmid J. E. ; Lindstrom A. B. ; Strynar M. J. ; Lau C. 
Developmental toxicity
of perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) is not dependent on expression
of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-alpha (PPARα)
in the mouse . Reprod. Toxicol. 
2009 , 27 , 258 –265 . 10.1016/j.reprotox.2008.05.061 .18595657 
Klaunig J. E. ; Hocevar B. A. ; Kamendulis L. M. 
Mode of
action analysis of perfluorooctanoic
acid (PFOA) tumorigenicity and human relevance . Reprod. Toxicol. 
2012 , 33 , 410 –418 . 10.1016/j.reprotox.2011.10.014 .22120428 
Chen Y.-M. ; Guo L.-H. 
Fluorescence study
on site-specific binding of perfluoroalkyl
acids to human serum albumin . Arch. Toxicol. 
2009 , 83 , 255 –261 . 10.1007/s00204-008-0359-x .18854981 
Zhang L. ; Ren X. ; Guo L. 
Structure-based
investigation on the interaction of
perfluorinated compounds with human liver fatty acid binding protein . Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2013 , 47 , 11293 –11301 . 10.1021/es4026722 .24006842 
Vanden
Heuvel J. P. ; Thompson J. T. ; Frame S. R. ; Gillies P. J. 
Differential
activation of nuclear receptors by perfluorinated fatty acid analogs
and natural fatty acids: a comparison of human, mouse, and rat peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-alpha, -beta, and -gamma, liver X
receptor-beta, and retinoid X receptor-alpha . Toxicol. Sci. 
2006 , 92 , 476 –489 . 10.1093/toxsci/kfl014 .16731579 
Wolf C. J. ; Takacs M. L. ; Schmid J. E. ; Lau C. ; Abbott B. D. 
Activation
of mouse and human peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha
by perfluoroalkyl acids of different functional groups and chain lengths . Toxicol. Sci. 
2008 , 106 , 162 –171 . 10.1093/toxsci/kfn166 .18713766 
Watkins A. M. ; Wood C. R. ; Lin M. T. ; Abbott B. D. 
The effects of perfluorinated
chemicals on adipocyte differentiation in vitro . Mol. Cell. Endocriol. 
2015 , 400 , 90 –101 . 10.1016/j.mce.2014.10.020 .
Yamamoto J. ; Yamane T. ; Oishi Y. ; Kobayashi-Hattori K. 
Perfluorooctanoic
acid binds to peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ and
promotes adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes . Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 
2015 , 79 , 636 –639 . 10.1080/09168451.2014.991683 .25516096 
Szanto A. ; Nagy L. 
The many faces of PPARc: Anti-inflammatory
by any means? . Immunobiology 
2008 , 213 , 789 –803 . 10.1016/j.imbio.2008.07.015 .18926294 
Alonso H. ; Bliznyuk A. A. ; Gready J. E. 
Combining docking
and molecular dynamic
simulations in drug design . Med. Res. Rev. 
2006 , 26 , 531 –568 . 10.1002/med.20067 .16758486 
Mori M. ; Manetti F. ; Botta M. 
Predicting the Binding Mode of Known
NCp7 inhibitors to Facilitate the Design of Novel Modulators . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2011 , 51 , 446 –454 . 10.1021/ci100393m .21171587 
Mey A. S. J. S. ; Juárez-Jiménez J. ; Hennessy A. ; Michel J. 
Blinded predictions
of binding modes and energies of HSP90-α ligands for the 2015
D3R . Bioorg. Med. Chem. 
2016 , 24 , 4890 –4899 . 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.07.044 .27485604 
Bucher D. ; Grant B. J. ; Markwick P. R. ; McCammon J. A. 
Accessing
a Hidden
Conformation of the Maltose Binding Protein Using Accelerated Molecular
Dynamics . PLoS Comput. Biol. 
2011 , 7 , e100203410.1371/journal.pcbi.1002034 .21533070 
Lill M. A. 
Efficient
incorporation of protein flexibility and dynamics into molecular docking simulations . Biochemistry 
2011 , 50 , 6157 –6169 . 10.1021/bi2004558 .21678954 
Orgován Z. ; Ferenczy G. G. ; Steinbrecher T. ; Szilágyi B. ; Bajusz D. ; Keserű G. M. 
Validation
of tautomeric and protomeric
binding modes by free energy calculations. A case study for the structure
based optimization of D-amino acid oxidase inhibitors . J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2018 , 32 , 331 –345 . 10.1007/s10822-018-0097-y .29335871 
Bortolini M. ; Wright M. B. ; Bopst M. ; Balas B. 
Examining
the Safety
of PPAR Agonists . Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 
2013 , 12 , 65 –79 . 10.1517/14740338.2013.741585 .23134541 
Hughes T. S. ; Chalmers M. J. ; Novick S. ; Kuruvilla D. S. ; Chang M. R. ; Kamenecka T. M. ; Rance M. ; Johnson B. A. ; Burris T. P. ; Griffin P. R. ; Kojetin D. J. 
Ligand and receptor
dynamics contribute to the mechanism of graded PPARγ agonism . Structure 
2012 , 20 , 139 –150 . 10.1016/j.str.2011.10.018 .22244763 
Sherman W. ; Day T. ; Jacobson M. P. ; Friesner R. A. ; Farid R. 
Novel procedure for
modeling ligand/receptor induced fit effects . J. Med. Chem. 
2006 , 49 , 534 –553 . 10.1021/jm050540c .16420040 
Laio A. ; Parrinello M. 
Escaping free-energy
minima . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2002 , 99 , 12562 –12566 . 10.1073/pnas.202427399 .12271136 
Clark A. J. ; Tiwary P. ; Borrelli K. ; Feng S. ; Miller E. B. ; Abel R. ; Friesner R. A. ; Berne B. J. 
Prediction
of protein–ligand
binding poses via a combination of induced fit docking and metadynamics
simulations . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2016 , 12 , 2990 –2998 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00201 .27145262 
Miao Y. ; McCammon J. A. 
Unconstrained Enhanced Sampling for
Free Energy Calculations
of Biomolecules: A Review . Mol. Simul. 
2016 , 42 , 1046 –1055 . 10.1080/08927022.2015.1121541 .27453631 
Fratev F. 
PPARγ
helix 12 exhibits an antagonist conformation . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 9272 –9280 . 10.1039/C5CP06729D .26975214 
Malapaka R.
R. ; Khoo S. ; Zhang J. ; Choi J. H. ; Zhou X. E. ; Xu Y. ; Gong Y. ; Li J. ; Yong E. L. ; Chalmers M. J. ; Chang L. ; Resau J. H. ; Griffin P. R. ; Chen Y. E. ; Xu H. E. 
Identification and mechanism of 10-carbon fatty acid as modulating
ligand of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors . J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 183 –195 . 10.1074/jbc.M111.294785 .22039047 
Buhrke T. ; Kibellus A. ; Lampen A. 
In vitro toxicological
characterization
of perfluorinated carboxylic acids with different carbon chain lengths . Toxicol. Lett. 
2013 , 218 , 97 –104 . 10.1016/j.toxlet.2013.01.025 .23391484 
Buhrke T. ; Krüger E. ; Pevny S. ; Rößler M. ; Bitter K. ; Lampen A. 
Perfluorooctanoic
acid (PFOA) affects
distinct molecular signalling pathways in human primary hepatocytes . Toxicology 
2015 , 333 , 53 –62 . 10.1016/j.tox.2015.04.004 .25868421 
Berman H. M. ; Westbrook J. ; Feng Z. ; Gilliland G. ; Bhat T. N. ; Weissig H. ; Shindyalov I. N. ; Bourne P. E. 
The Protein Data Bank . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2000 , 28 , 235 –242 . 10.1093/nar/28.1.235 .10592235 
Sastry G. M. ; Adzhigirey M. ; Day T. ; Annabhimoju R. ; Sherman W. 
Protein and ligand preparation: parameters,
protocols,
and influence on virtual screening enrichments . J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2013 , 27 , 221 –234 . 10.1007/s10822-013-9644-8 .23579614 
Case D. A. ; Cerutti D. S. ; Cheatham T. E. III; Darden T. A. ; Duke R. E. ; Giese T. J. ; Gohlke H. ; Goetz A. W. ; Greene D. ; Homeyer N. ; Izadi S. ; Kovalenko A. ; Lee T. S. ; LeGrand S. ; Li P. ; Lin C. ; Liu J. ; Luchko T. ; Luo R. ; Mermelstein D. ; Merz K. M. ; Monard G. ; Nguyen H. ; Omelyan I. ; Onufriev A. ; Pan F. ; Qi R. ; Roe D. R. ; Roitberg A. ; Sagui C. ; Simmerling C. L. ; Botello-Smith W. M. ; Swails J. ; Walker R. C. ; Wang J. ; Wolf R. M. ; Wu X. ; Xiao L. ; York D. M. ; Kollman P. A.  AMBER , 2014 .
Ryckaert J. ; Ciccotti G. ; Berendsen H. J. 
Numerical
integration of the Cartesian
equations of motion of a system with constraints: molecular dynamics
of n-alkanes . J. Comput. Phys. 
1977 , 23 , 327 –341 . 10.1016/0021-9991(77)90098-5 .
Petersen H. G. 
Accuracy
and efficiency of the particle mesh Ewald method . J. Chem. Phys. 
1995 , 103 , 3668 –3679 . 10.1063/1.470043 .
Pierce L. C. T. ; Salomon-Ferrer R. ; de Oliveira C. A. F. ; McCammon J. A. ; Walker R. C. 
Routine access to
millisecond time
scale events with accelerated molecular dynamics . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2012 , 8 , 2997 –3002 . 10.1021/ct300284c .22984356 
Markwick P.
R. ; McCammon J. A. 
Studying
functional dynamics in bio-molecules using
accelerated molecular dynamics . Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 13 , 20053 –20065 . 10.1039/c1cp22100k .22015376 
Miao Y. ; Sinko W. ; Pierce L. ; Bucher D. ; Walker R. C. ; McCammon J. A. 
Improved reweighting
of accelerated molecular dynamics
simulations for free energy calculation . J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 
2014 , 10 , 2677 –2689 . 10.1021/ct500090q .25061441 
Jing Z. ; Sun H. 
A comment on the reweighting
method for accelerated molecular dynamics
simulations . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2015 , 11 , 2395 –2397 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00236 .26575539 
Fratev F. 
Activation
helix orientation of the estrogen receptor is mediated by receptor
dimerization: Evidence from molecular dynamics simulations . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 17 , 13403 –13420 . 10.1039/C5CP00327J .25927714 
Galindo-Murillo R. ; Roe D. R. ; Cheatham T. E. 
Convergence and reproducibility in
molecular dynamics simulations of the DNA duplex d (GCACGAACGAACGAACGC) . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj. 
2015 , 1850 , 1041 –1058 . 10.1016/j.bbagen.2014.09.007 .
Bergonzo C. ; Henriksen N. M. ; Roe D. R. ; Swails J. M. ; Roitberg A. E. ; Cheatham T. E. III
Multidimensional
replica exchange
molecular dynamics yields a converged ensemble of an RNA tetranucleotide . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2014 , 10 , 492 –499 . 10.1021/ct400862k .24453949 
Miller B. R. III ; McGee T. D. Jr.; Swails J. M. ; Homeyer N. ; Gohlke H. ; Roitberg A. E. 
MMPBSA.py:
an efficient program for
end-state free energy calculations . J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 
2012 , 8 , 3314 –3321 . 10.1021/ct300418h .26605738 
Fratev F. ; Mihaylova E. ; Pajeva I. 
Combination of genetic screening
and molecular dynamics as a useful tool for identification of disease-related
mutations: ZASP PDZ domain G54S mutation case . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2014 , 54 , 1524 –1536 . 10.1021/ci5001136 .24730657 
Fratev F. ; Jónsdóttir S. Ó 
The
phosphorylation specificity of
B-RAFWT, B-RAFD594V, B-RAFV600E and
B-RAFK601E kinases: an in silico study . J. Mol. Graphics Modell. 
2010 , 28 , 598 –603 . 10.1016/j.jmgm.2009.12.005 .
Schrödinger Suite , 2015-3; Schrödinger, LLC : New York, NY , 2015 .
Harder E. ; Damm W. ; Maple J. ; Wu C. ; Reboul M. ; Xiang J. Y. ; Wang L. ; Lupyan D. ; Dahlgren M. K. ; Knight J. L. ; et al. OPLS3: a force field
providing broad coverage
of drug-like small molecules and proteins . J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 
2016 , 12 , 281 –296 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00864 .26584231 
Bowers K. J. ; Chow E. ; Xu H. ; Dror R. O. ; Eastwood M. P. ; Gregersen B. A. ; Klepeis J. L. ; Kolossvary I. ; Moraes M. A. ; Sacerdoti F. D.   In Scalable Algorithms
for Molecular
Dynamics Simulations on Commodity Clusters , Proceedings of
the 2006 ACM/IEEE conference on Supercomputing; ACM , 2006 , p 84 .
Liu P. ; Kim B. ; Friesner R. A. ; Berne B. J. 
Replica exchange with solute tempering:
a method for sampling biological systems in explicit water . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2005 , 102 , 13749 –13754 . 10.1073/pnas.0506346102 .16172406 
Wang L. ; Deng Y. ; Knight J. L. ; Wu Y. ; Kim B. ; Sherman W. ; Shelley J. C. ; Lin T. ; Abel R. 
Modeling local
structural rearrangements using FEP/REST: application to relative
binding affinity predictions of CDK2 inhibitors . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2013 , 9 , 1282 –1293 . 10.1021/ct300911a .26588769

