
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145974610.1021/acsomega.9b00144ArticleDevelopment of Coarse-Grained Models for Polymers
by Trajectory Matching Kempfer Kévin †‡Devémy Julien †Dequidt Alain *†Couty Marc ‡Malfreyt Patrice *†† Université
Clermont Auvergne, CNRS, SIGMA Clermont, Institut de Chimie de Clermont-Ferrand, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France‡ Manufacture
Française des Pneumatiques Michelin, 23, Place des Carmes, 63040 Clermont-Ferrand, France* E-mail: Alain.Dequidt@uca.fr (A.D.).* E-mail: Patrice.Malfreyt@uca.fr (P.M.).28 03 2019 31 03 2019 4 3 5955 5967 16 01 2019 18 03 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Coarse-grained
(CG) models allow for simulating the necessary time
and length scales relevant to polymers. However, developing realistic
force fields at the CG level is still a challenge because there is
no guarantee that the CG model reproduces all the properties of the
atomistic model. A recent promising method was proposed for small
molecules using statistical trajectory matching. Here, we extend this
method to the case of polymeric systems. As the quality of the final
model
crucially depends on the model design, we study and discuss the effect
of the modeling choices on the structure and dynamics of bulk polymers
before a quantitative comparison is made between CG methods on different
properties and polymers.

document-id-old-9ao9b00144document-id-new-14ao-2019-001442ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
From
a physicist point of view, polymers may be described as one-dimensional,
flexible, long molecules. It has been recognized long ago that many
properties of polymers are generic and follow scaling laws with the
chain length,1 so they can in principle
be described by simple models. Simple models of polymers have thus
been developed for simulations like the bead-spring model2 which typically includes generic features such
as bonds and excluded volume, with more or less refinement like finite
extension of the bonds, bending potentials, van der Waals attraction...

On the other hand, from a physico-chemist point of view, the chemical
nature of the monomers matters, and one wishes to be able to explain
or predict the properties of specific polymers with more realism.
Standard molecular dynamics (MD) simulations can accomplish a good
enough degree of realism but are far from reaching space and time
scales relevant to the slow dynamics of large molecules.3 There is therefore a need for reducing the computational
cost while maintaining a high degree of realism. Some effort was made
to developing realistic coarse-grained (CG) models of dissipative
dynamics from bottom up. Several methods have been proposed,4 the most common of which are iterative Boltzmann
inversion (IBI)5,6 and force matching (FM).7−9

The former aims at reproducing the structure, namely, radial
distribution
functions (RDFs). It can perform this task very well and is the most
commonly used method but has a few limitations:It is not easily transferable to heterogeneous systems
with interfaces.10,11

It focuses on structure and gives no clue about dynamics.

The optimized model is not unique in practice
despite
Henderson’s theorem.12

Density is not well reproduced without expert hand-tuning.13



The FM method analyses
the distribution of instantaneous forces
on the grains. It uses least square minimization for defining the
average conservative interactions. Trajectories with constrained dynamics
can be used to optimize the nonconservative (random and dissipative)
part of the interactions.14,15

Recently, a new
pragmatic method has been proposed, which aims
at finding the parameters of a CG model, which will allow to reproduce
a reference trajectory with highest probability. This Bayesian method
has proven efficient for pentane,16,17 and the aim
of this work is to adapt it for polymers requiring to consider the
intramolecular interactions such as bonding and bending interactions
within the polymer chains.

We will recall that the common hopes
of all these optimization
methods is that a CG model exists, which is simple enough so that
the computational cost remains as low as possible, while being accurate
enough to reach the desired degree of realism. All these bottom-up
methods define grains and choose a formal description of the interactions,
for example, harmonic bonds, radial nonbonded interactions... The
free parameters of the model are then optimized so that the model
is the best possible. However, the best model is not always a good
model. Indeed, if a key physical feature is lacking in the grain definition
or in the formal description of the interactions, the final model
will never have a realistic behavior. For instance, it was shown recently
that grain isotropy may be an essential feature for the realistic
description of polymers.15

In this
article, we will focus on the impact of design choices
on the realism of CG models of polymers on the example of cis-1,4-polybutadiene (cPB). Realistic models of cPB are
of particular interest for the tyre industry, as cPB is a component
of tyre rubbers. Indeed, we will investigate how to model the intramolecular
interactions, select
the cutoff radii and the time step, and choose the degree of coarse
graining affecting the thermodynamic and dynamic properties of the
polymer melts with the Bayesian method. The conclusions of this study
are critical before considering a comparison of the Bayesian method
with existing methods on the properties of polymer melts.

The
paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the procedure is described. The principles
of Bayesian trajectory matching are recalled and details are given
about the production of the reference trajectories. In Section 3, the choice of the functional
form of the interactions is discussed. In Section 4, the choice of the grain definition is studied,
focusing on the degree of coarse graining and on the relevance of
isotropic grain models.

2 Trajectory Matching Applied
to Polymers
2.1 Bayesian Optimization
Let us briefly
recall the Bayesian method for optimizing CG models of dissipative
particle dynamics (DPD).16−20 CG models are deduced from higher resolution models by discarding
or grouping degrees of freedom together, which effectively reduces
their number. The Bayesian method for optimizing CG models assumes
that some CG DPD model exists, which behaves like the higher resolution
model regarding the conserved degrees of freedom. Because the discarded
degrees of freedom do interact with the conserved ones, it is usually
not possible to exactly reproduce the same dynamics at both levels
of description, unless a random contribution of hidden degrees of
freedom is taken into account. The faithfulness of the CG model to
the higher resolution model is then estimated statistically. The main
idea of the Bayesian method is to define the optimal (most likely)
model as the model which has the highest probability to follow exactly
the same dynamics as the higher resolution model.

The workflow
is thus given in the following:1 Run a trajectory at high resolution,
recording the system state at regular intervals Δt. Extract at each time the relevant (conserved) degrees of freedom.
This way a reference trajectory  is obtained.

2 Choose the kind of interactions
which
rules the dynamics of the CG model. Infer from the trajectory  the (generalized)
forces fi(t) that are necessary between the coarse degrees
of freedom for the
CG model to produce exactly this trajectory.

3 For given values of the free parameters x of the CG model, compute the probability to generate the fi(t) for all grains at all steps of the trajectory. Vary the free parameters x so as to maximize this probability.



We will assume that the coarse degrees of freedom are the
centers
of mass of groups of atoms and the volume of the system (or box shape).
Recording the volume fluctuations of  allows for
the optimization of the linear
parameters of the CG model, which gives the correct density in NPT ensemble. We refer the reader to the original paper
of the Bayesian method for a more detailed discussion about this topic.16 We furthermore assume that the random contribution
of the hidden degrees of freedom is a pairwise random force following
a normal distribution with no correlation between pairs nor between
time steps.

By grouping all the forces fi(t) in a single
3N vector Ft, the DPD equations can be expressed as 1  with FC(Rt,x) the conservative
force, FtR the random force at time t, and Γ(Rt,x) the global friction matrix. Rt and Vt are 3N vectors containing, respectively, all positions
and all velocities at time t. Vt contains the effective velocity of each
grain during a CG time step Δt defined by . Ft contains the effective total force applied on each
grain during
a CG time step Δt defined by . Rt is directly read from the reference trajectory,
while Vt and Ft are computed accordingly.

For consistency, the fluctuation–dissipation theorem implies
that the random force is characterized by 2  

The probability that a given model does yield the trajectory  is the probability
that at each time step
the total random force on each grain is the required fi(t). By assuming that random forces follow a normal distribution, this
probability can be expressed as 3  where FtR is deduced from eq 1 and the symbol + is used
to denote pseudoinverse and pseudodeterminant.16 As noted by several authors, the equations of trajectory
matching bear some similarity with the FM methods.16,19,21 There are however important differences:
the present method aims at reproducing time-averaged forces, whereas
FM methods are based on instantaneous forces.22 In addition, trajectory-based Bayesian methods take into account
the friction and the distribution of random forces and thus provide
dynamical information. On the other hand, the present method does
not ensure transferability in time step. This implies that the optimal
parameters of the conservative interaction should be time-step-dependent
so that the interaction potential does not strictly coincide with
the unique (thermodynamic) potential of mean force. This is a distinctive
feature of trajectory matching, which differentiates this method from
standard FM, IBI, and relative entropy methods.23,24 For this reason, it is not guaranteed a priori that the structure
will be well described using the present method.4,25,26 In practice, it turns out that the structure
is nevertheless reasonably described for the present systems.

If the conservative force FC can be
expressed as a linear combination of basis functions, then the coefficients xC of the linear combination can be calculated
easily because  is then a quadratic form
of xC. In this case, as for other FM-like
methods, the optimum
is unique and analytic.27 Important examples
are listed in Table 1. The scale of the friction matrix can also be optimized analytically.

Table 1 Important Basis Functions for Which
an Analytic Optimization Can Be Performeda
model	basis function	Examples	
power laws	1/rn	Lennard-Jones	
polynomials	rk	harmonic bonds or angles	
tabulated	Constant	fitted to any potential	
trigonometric	cos kϕ	Fourier dihedral potentials	
a Note that the coefficients
of the
linear combination may not be the usual parameters of the standard
force fields, but the conversion is straightforward. For example,  can be written  with a = 4ϵσ12 and b =
−4ϵσ6.

On the other hand, some of the model parameters which
we shall
call nonlinear cannot be optimized so simply. These include interaction
cutoffs, ratios of friction between different types of grains, and
partial screening between neighboring grains in a molecule. For such
parameters, we have to maximize the likelihood iteratively. Shell
and co-workers have also studied the influence of nonlinear parameters
using maximum likelihood methods (relative entropy28), especially interaction range or cutoff.29,30 The linear parameters are still optimized analytically for each
choice of the nonlinear parameters. The iterative optimization was
implemented using brute force or particle swarms.31

2.2 Atomistic Simulations and
Coarse-Graining
Procedure
The high-resolution atomistic reference trajectories  were obtained
from MD simulations of bulk
cPB. These simulations were carried out using the LAMMPS software.32 The simulation box consists of a periodic amorphous
cell of 90 polymer chains of length 240 united atoms (UAs), meaning
that one polymer chain holds 60 cPB repeating units (4 UAs per repeating
unit). The chains are long enough to exhibit self-similarity. Hence,
the simulation box conveniently represents a polymer melt, and its
structural properties such as its normalized squared end-to-end vector
can be compared to experimental results. The commonly accepted force
field developed by Smith and Paul33 and
Tsolou et al.34 was taken to model the
polymer. The force field parameters are provided in Table S1 in the Supporting Information. The cutoff of the Lennard-Jones
interactions was set at 14 Å. Newton’s equations of motion
were integrated using the standard velocity-Verlet integrator with
a time step of 2 fs. The pressure was controlled using the Berendsen
algorithm35 with a relaxation time of 1
ps and a bulk modulus of 100 MPa. The temperature was maintained using
a Langevin thermostat36,37 with a relaxation time of 10
ps.

The initial configuration is first relaxed for 20 ns following
a three-step procedure. After thermalization at a high temperature
of 500 K in the constant-NVT ensemble for 10 ns,
the system is cooled down with a linear temperature gradient of 100
K ns–1 during 2 ns to reach the target temperature
300 K. The final equilibration step consists of an 8 ns run in the
constant-NPT ensemble at 300 K and 0.1 MPa. The high-resolution
atomistic reference trajectory  is then
produced in the constant-NPT ensemble with independent
control of the x, y, and z components of the external
barostat stress tensor. We remind that the volume fluctuations are
also taken into account as one of the degrees of freedom,16 thereby ensuring the correct pressure behavior
of the optimized CG potentials. The trajectory is recorded every 50
fs, which is the desired DPD time step Δt.
In practice, only few hundred configurations are required, typically
500, as the Bayesian optimization method converges very fast as already
mentioned in a previous paper.16

The coarse-graining procedure takes the same route as recent work
by Lemarchand et al.15 One, two, three,
four, or five monomers are grouped together to build one mesoscopic
bead as described in Figure 1. The degree of coarse-graining λ refers to the number
of monomers per grain. For example, a degree of coarse graining of
λ = 3 means that each CG bead contains three monomers, that
is, 12 UA. The position of the bead matches with the center of mass
of the group of considered atoms all along the reference trajectory . Another more
sophisticated approach will
be presented at the end of this paper. The velocity of the CG bead
is computed from the difference between two consecutive positions
separated by Δt. In the same way, the total
force acting on a CG grain at each DPD time step is derived from its
acceleration using Newton’s equation of motion. Furthermore,
a bond between two UAs belonging to two different CG grains is kept
in the CG model by adding one mesoscopic bond between the center of
mass of the corresponding two CG beads.

Figure 1 Coarse-graining procedure
of a cPB polymer chain. From top to bottom,
a CG bead is built from 1, 3, or 5 monomers, corresponding to a degree
of coarse-graining λ of 1, 3, or 5, respectively.

3 Choice of the Functional
Form for the Interactions
Conservative nonbonded interactions
were modeled by a pairwise
potential depending only on the distance between grains. Grains are
therefore considered spherical, although they may represent an elongated,
flexible portion of a polymer chain. For this reason, the centers
of mass of two grains may come close to each other. Lennard-Jones
interactions would prevent such a behavior because of the divergence
at r → 0. In addition, it is desirable to
allow for more flexibility in the shape of the interaction potential
by using more than two free parameters. A tabulated potential is an
interesting alternative, for which we opted at first because it works
well for pentane. Basis functions for the force were then chosen to
be regularly spaced triangular functions, which amounts to a linear
interpolation between tabulated points. The drawback of this functional
form is that at r → 0, there is a considerable
uncertainty on the force because such small distances are too rare
in the reference trajectory (see Figure 2a). The
problem is that the density is very sensitive to the errors on the
force even at r → 0. Therefore, we decided
to try smoother functions, namely, piecewise polynomials as was done
by Das and Andersen.38 To be more specific,
we split the distance range into two regions r ≤ rm and rm ≤ r ≤ rc, where the force
is built as a piecewise polynomial obtained from a combination of
Bernstein polynomials.39 The continuity
and differentiability at the boundaries of each region are ensured
by a linear combination of Bernstein basis functions as well. Using
two regions allows to choose independent enough function shapes for
the attractive (shallow minimum) and repulsive parts, which is possible
to adjust by adequately choosing the position of the intermediate
cutoff rm and the degree of the polynomial
in each region.

Figure 2 Optimized pairwise nonbonded conservative force (a) and
potential
(b) for cPB at a degree of coarse graining of λ = 5. The red
circles refer to the optimized model using a linear combination of
triangular basis functions, effectively corresponding to tabulated
force and potential. The blue lines result from the linear combination
of the weighted Bernstein basis polynomials plotted in Figure 3. Note that Guenza and co-workers
have obtained a similar shape of the potential, with only a weak attractive
part at the long range using the integral equation method for high
coarse-graining levels.40,41

The force exerted by bead j on i is thus expressed as 4  with xk the weighting factor of the
Bernstein basis polynomial Pk as presented in Figure 3, r = |ri – rj|, eij the unit vector in
the direction ri – rj, and rc the conservative cutoff.

Figure 3 Typical
set of Bernstein basis polynomials. rm delimits the two regions used to define these functions.
Their weighted sum corresponds to the optimized pairwise nonbonded
conservative force to model cPB with a degree of coarse graining of
5 as drawn in Figure 2. The functional forms of the basis functions represented in this
figure are given in the Supporting Information.

The main advantages of using analytic
Bernstein basis polynomials
instead of tabulated potentials for the nonbonded pairwise interaction
are given in the following:The extrapolation where no statistics exists, for instance,
at r → 0, is straightforward.

It is easy to manage the continuity and differentiability
of Bernstein functions.

No mathematical
artifact due to interpolation (linear,
spline, bit-mapping, ...) or smoothening, especially because these
kinds of soft CG potentials are highly sensitive to small fluctuations.

Few parameters (one per basis function)
are required.



Bonded interaction is a
key feature for polymers, which was absent
in the model for pentane. We chose to include bond as well as angle
potential in order to allow for a bending stiffness. It seems overkilling
to include also a dihedral potential, although a subtle dihedral structure
can be observed in the reference trajectories at the smallest coarse-graining
level. We opted for harmonic bond and angle potentials because no
noticeable improvement was gained by using higher-order polynomials. 5   6  

By expanding the bonding and bending potentials, we get four additional
conservative terms to optimize x6 = kb, x7 = kbr0, x8 = ka, and x9 = kaθ0.
Thus, we end with a typical set of conservative parameters to optimize xC = {x0, x1, ..., x9}.

With regard to the nonconservative interactions, we use the standard
pairwise DPD form with the following dissipative interaction between
beads i and j: 7  

The parameter γ is optimized
analytically and is the same
for all pairs of grains including bond neighbors. vij is the relative velocity vi – vj. rd is the cutoff beyond which the nonconservative interaction
vanishes and eij is the unit vector from bead i to bead j.

In addition to the aforementioned parameters, several
nonlinear
parameters can be optimized. Figure 4 shows for a degree of coarse graining of λ =
1 how the likelihood of the reference trajectory changes with the
intermediate cutoff rm defined in Figure 3. It can be seen
that the optimal value is close to 5.5 Å. On the other hand,
test DPD runs were performed with the models optimized at all values
of rm. The density of the DPD runs in
the NPT ensemble was calculated. Although all values
are within a few percent of the MD target, the agreement is better
for 6 < rm < 8. Therefore, the parameters
that give the highest probability to reproduce the reference trajectory
may not be the parameters for which density is better reproduced.
Our interpretation is that the Bayesian optimization tries to reproduce
the full trajectory and has to compromise between all the potentially
contradictory observables. This leaves us with the option of choosing
either the “best” value of the parameters or a suboptimal
value but favoring a specific target property such as density. We
suggest to take the latter option because we could not identify which
other observable was harmed in this case. We recall that all the linear
parameters are still optimized for the highest .

Figure 4 λ = 1 (a) likelihood of the best set of unknown model parameters
as a function of the delimiter rm between
the Bernstein basis functions as described in Figure 3. Other nonlinear parameters were maintained
constant rd = rc = 20 Å, and the screening factors for conservative interaction
1–2 bond, 1–3 angle, and 1–4 dihedral partners
were set at 0, 0.5, and 1, respectively. The optimal value of rm corresponds to the minimum around 5.5 Å.
(b) Equilibrium density obtained after running a DPD simulation. rm = 5.5 Å, although quite good (without
hand-tuning), is not the optimal value for reproducing density.

The other nonlinear parameters
were as follows:The conservative
cutoff rc. The optimal value is beyond
50 Å for λ = 5. However,
we decided not to increase rc more than
this value for computational efficiency.

The dissipative cutoff rd. The optimal
value for λ = 1 is about 9 Å, which also
corresponds to the best reproduction of the diffusion coefficient
of the monomers.

The screening (or weighting)
factors. They determine
how much of the nonbonded interaction is applied between grains that
already interact through bonded interactions either directly (1–2
bond) or through intermediate bonds (1–3 angle and 1–4
dihedral partners). The 1–2 bond weighting factor has only
minor impact on the quality of the CG model whatever the degree of
coarse graining chosen. Yet, for λ ≥ 2, the 1–3
angle and 1–4 dihedral weighting factors have a huge impact
on the final behavior of the CG model. Low values allow better reproduction
of the density but cause bad control of the structure of the polymer
chains, which tend to fold back on themselves. With regard to these
findings, the best choice for these two screening coefficients is
1 except for the lowest degree of coarse graining λ = 1 where
the optimal 1–3 angle factor is strongly coupled with the choice
of rm and was found to be more suited
at 0.5. These conclusions are also true according to the highest .

The DPD time step Δt.



4 Choice of the Grain Definition
4.1 Impact of the Degree of Coarse Graining
4.1.1 Main
Results
Henderson42 demonstrated
in 1974 that “two pair potentials
which give rise to the same RDF cannot differ by more than a constant”.
Yet, Potestio12 illustrated the nonapplicability
in practice of Henderson’s theorem. Indeed, because of numerical
accuracy, there is no way to predict the response of a given system
from the mere knowledge of its potential energy function. Consequently,
the faithfulness of a CG model to the underlying high-resolution MD
model has to be evaluated by running a simulation.

Therefore,
every single newly optimized CG model was tested by running a 10 ns
DPD simulation (5 ns equilibration and 5 ns production) in the constant-NPT ensemble starting from a well-equilibrated initial state
obtained by coarse graining of a relaxed atomistic configuration.
Even though the DPD simulations are much faster than MD (by a factor
20 at λ = 1 for rd = rc = 20 Å; by a factor 100 at λ = 5 for rd = rc = 40 Å),
such a short DPD run is sufficient to evaluate the quality of the
CG model because few nanoseconds are enough to see if the thermodynamic
and structural properties are preserved or not (see Figure S1 in the Supporting Information). Of course, longer runs
would be more precise but are not affordable considering the large
number of tests (thousands). Several criteria were measured to check
the validity of the model parameters. These results were compared
to their respective targets obtained beforehand from the analysis
of CG MD (MDCG) trajectories for the five degrees of coarse-graining
λ. The target functions were averaged over five 50 ns long statistically
independent MDCG trajectories to account for slow decorrelation of
the polymer chains at 300 K and ensure a convenient description of
the phase space. Thermodynamic properties (density, pressure, and
temperature) were followed over time. Local structure was also investigated
by computing the following distribution functions: the nonbonded RDF gnb(r) between two beads of
different polymer chains or belonging to the same molecule but not
directly connected together through a mesoscopic bond, the 1–2,
1–3, and 1–4 bonding distributions gbond(r) between two beads connected through
1, 2, or 3 bonds in the polymer chain, and the bending distribution gbend(θ) between three consecutive beads.
At the scale of the polymer chain, the evolution of the mean-square
end-to-end distance ⟨Ree2⟩, the mean-square radius of gyration ⟨Rg2⟩, and their
ratio were also tracked over time as well as their distribution. From
a dynamic point of view, we also studied the decorrelation of the
end-to-end vector and the mean-square displacements (MSDs) of both
the center of mass of a polymer chain and the CG grain.

Figure 5 summarizes
our work. The equilibrium DPD density is plotted versus 6⟨Rg2⟩/M. In other words, one thermodynamic property is plotted
against one long-range structural characteristic. These two properties
were chosen among others (diffusion coefficient, ...) because of their
high importance to explicitly model cPB melts. One point on this map
represents the result of the DPD run in the constant-NPT ensemble using one given optimized CG model. The MD target is represented
by the intersection of the dashed lines. While the target density
remains constant equal to 0.917 g cm–3 regardless
of the degree of coarse graining, the target 6⟨Rg2⟩/M slightly changes with λ. Indeed, the coarse-graining procedure
of a polymer chain entails the loss of part of its tails. The typical
loss is about the size of one mesoscopic bond between two consecutive
CG beads given by the bonding distribution gbond(r), resulting in a target normalized
mean-square radius of gyration of 0.69(14) Å2 mol
g–1 at λ = 5, while the target value 0.72(15)
Å2 mol g–1 at λ = 1 is only
faintly lower than the target 0.73(15) Å2 mol g–1 before coarse graining.

Figure 5 Equilibrium density vs
six times the normalized mean-square radius
of gyration measured over 5 ns of a DPD simulation as a function of
the degree of coarse-graining λ. Each point on this map corresponds
to the trial of one optimized CG potential for various rm (between 3 and 15 Å) and rc (between 18 and 50 Å). The screening factors for conservative
interaction between 1–3 angle and 1–4 dihedral partners
were set to 1 for λ ≥ 2.

At λ = 1, the optimized CG model is always good because
both
the density and 6⟨Rg2⟩/M do not exceed 8% error with
respect to MD, and this whatever the choice of the functional form
for the interactions between the CG grains. When λ increases,
the
CG models become less and less accurate. To put it in another way,
the higher the λ, the further the distance from the MD counterpart.
Das and Andersen43 and Dunn and Noid44,45 have noticed the same tendency and proposed to add a volume potential
independent of the grain configuration. This could surely improve
the reproduction of density but is limited to homogeneous isotropic
systems without interfaces. Another option would be to introduce many-body
interactions based on the local density.30,46−48 For λ ≥ 2, the equilibrium density in
the constant-NPT ensemble is underestimated although
pressure optimization is included in the Bayesian optimization method,
meaning that the CG potentials are not enough attractive (or too much
repulsive) to maintain the volume. This deviation is higher with λ
reaching about 20% underestimation for λ = 5. On the other hand,
we verified that the ratio of ⟨Ree2⟩ over ⟨Rg2⟩ approximately equals 6 whatever
the degree of coarse graining or the CG model chosen, meaning that
the polymer chains follow the expected Gaussian behavior.49 However, their packing differs depending on
the degree of coarse graining chosen. For λ ≥ 3, 6⟨Rg2⟩/M = 0.52(6) Å2 mol g–1, traducing collapsing of the polymer molecules. Interestingly, both
the density and the packing of the polymer chains do not change that
much with the CG model at given λ. This result indicates that
the initial choice of the nonlinear parameters we played with, that
is, the conservative cutoff rc, the dissipative
cutoff rd, and the functional form of
the Bernstein polynomials, does not impact as much as the final result.
The Bayesian method adapts the linear parameters in consequence. For
instance, a shorter conservative cutoff rc implies a shift of the attractive part of the nonbonded CG potential
to smaller distance.

We note here, and this is a recurring feature
in the following,
that the CG model is better at small coarsening levels. This is unexpected
because the Markovian approximation of our DPD model and the assumption
of pairwise additive stochastic forces50 are better found14 at higher degree of
coarsening, where the separation of time scales should be more marked.

4.1.2 Thermodynamic Properties
From now,
we only consider the “best” CG model for each λ
according to the distance from target MD as described in Figure 5. Each CG model was
taken to run 110 ns DPD simulations (10 ns equilibration and 100 ns
production) in the constant-NPT ensemble. In the
same spirit, an additional 110 ns DPD run in the constant-NVT ensemble at the target density 0.917 g cm–3 was carried out. Both the equilibrium density and pressure are presented
in Table 2. Unsurprisingly,
at λ = 1, there is no huge difference between the NVT and the NPT simulations, reflecting the equivalence
of statistical ensembles. At λ = 2, the average pressure necessary
to maintain the correct volume is about 100 times higher than the
target 0.1 MPa. As λ increases, this average pressure decreases
again, reaching only 30 times the target for λ = 5. Therefore,
for large λ, even though the NPT DPD density
is farther below the MD target, the average pressure necessary for
recovering the correct density is smaller because the model is more
compressible. Indeed, as expected, the larger the degree of coarse
graining, the softer the potential and the higher the sensitivity
of the CG model to pressure.

Table 2 Equilibrium Density
and Pressure Measured
over 100 ns of DPD Simulation Performed in the Constant-NVT and Constant-NPT Ensembles Using the “Best”
CG Potential for Each Degree of Coarse-Graining λa
 	NVT (T = 300 K)	NPT (P = 0.1 MPa, T = 300 K)	
 	Pmeasured [MPa]	ρ [g cm–3]	Pmeasured [MPa]	ρ [g cm–3]	
λ = 1	0.24 ± 0.077	0.917	0.09 ± 0.10	0.917	
λ = 2	9.7 ± 1.7	0.917	0.14 ± 0.09	0.852	
λ = 3	7.4 ± 2.6	0.917	0.07 ± 0.03	0.780	
λ = 4	5.5 ± 1.5	0.917	0.12 ± 0.60	0.724	
λ = 5	2.9 ± 1.0	0.917	0.12 ± 0.13	0.726	
a The target density is 0.917 g cm–3 at 300 K and 0.1 MPa.

4.1.3 Structural Properties
The nonbonded
RDF gnb(r) (RDF) obtained
in DPD in the NVT and NPT ensembles
is compared with their respective MDCG targets in Figure 6. At λ = 1, the agreement
between the three RDFs is outstanding, even though the optimization
protocol is not based on it in contrast with other methods as already
mentioned in the Introduction. At λ = 2, the RDFs produced in
the NVT and NPT ensembles are almost
perfectly matching, although the equilibrium density in the NPT ensemble is 7% lower than the MD reference (Table 2). This demonstrates
again that exclusively looking at the RDF is not sufficient to get
a good CG model, especially if considering the pressure behavior.
For higher degree of coarse graining, the difference between the two
RDFs obtained in DPD becomes more visible. The RDF produced in the NPT ensemble is shifted to larger distances than the one
produced in the NVT ensemble in accordance with the
thermodynamic measurements. Moreover, these two RDFs are systematically
shifted to further distances with respect to the MDCG target. At λ
= 5, the RDF at short distance is above the MDCG reference, meaning
that the soft CG beads are interpenetrating each other much more than
they should. This behavior is balanced by a repulsive slope more gentle
than in the MDCG reference.

Figure 6 Nonbonded RDFs produced in the constant-NVT and
the constant-NPT ensembles at T =
300 K and P = 0.1 MPa using the “best”
CG model for various degrees of coarse graining, respectively. (a)
λ = 1. For a better view, a small vertical offset of 0.05 is
added to the RDF produced in the NVT ensemble. (b)
λ = 2. (c) λ = 3. (d) λ = 4. (e) λ = 5.

The intramolecular structure of
the polymer chain has also been
investigated as a function of the degree of coarse graining. The bonding
distributions gbond(r) between two consecutive beads are given in Figure 7a. We also report in Figure 7b the bending distribution gbend(θ) between three consecutive beads for λ
= 1, λ = 2, and λ = 5. As before, the agreement between
DPD and MD is excellent for the smallest degree of coarse graining.
For λ ≤ 3, both the reference bonding and bending distributions
exhibit two highly superimposed peaks that disappear when increasing
λ, whereas the distributions produced with DPD only present
one peak shifted to smaller distances/angles. The local structure
of the polymer chain is thus too much packed. Replacing the harmonic
bonds/angles by quadratic or cosine-based potentials did not really
improve our observations.

Figure 7 Bonding (a) and bending (b) distributions as
a function of the
degree of coarse-graining λ. The full and dotted lines represent
the MDCG and DPD results, respectively. The two bonding distributions
at λ = 1 were trimmed for greater clarity. For the same reason,
the bending distributions obtained for λ = 3 and λ = 4
are not represented.

We now focus on the long-range structural properties of the
polymer
chains. Figure 8 shows
the computed distribution of the end-to-end vector in DPD using the
“best” CG models for λ = 1, λ = 2, and λ
= 5. The distribution of the end-to-end vector obtained at λ
= 1 matches very well with MD. By the way, the target distribution
function is slightly different depending on the degree of coarse graining
because of the loss of the tails of the CG polymer chain as discussed
before. For clarity, only the MD end-to-end vector distribution is
plotted. When increasing λ, we notice a shift of the end-to-end
vector to smaller distance. This effect is a direct repercussion at
long distance of the local packing of the bonds and angles of the
polymer chain (see Figure 7).

Figure 8 Distributions of the end-to-end distance in MD (black) and for
various degrees of coarse graining (colors). The dotted lines correspond
to the direct application of eq 8 using the measured ⟨Ree2⟩ for each MD and DPD simulation.

In a polymer melt, Flory’s
theorem states that the polymer
chains are nearly ideal.51 In this case,
it can be shown49 that the probability
distribution function of the end-to-end distance p(Ree) is a Gaussian distribution given
by 8  

Figure 8 confirms
the validity of this law for absolutely all our models. Another confirmation
comes from the ratio ⟨Ree2⟩/⟨Rg2⟩ that equals 6 in all cases as detailed
in Table 3. While the
structural properties of our different CG models do not reproduce
exactly the MD, especially for large λ, the polymer chains are
still Gaussians as expected when considering a polymer melt.

Table 3 Average Structural Properties of cPB
in MD and DPD Using the “Best” CG Potential at Each
λ
 	⟨Ree⟩ [Å]	⟨Rg⟩
[Å]	⟨Ree2⟩/⟨Rg2⟩	
MD	45.9 ± 0.9	19.3 ± 0.2	6.2 ± 0.1	
λ = 1	45.4 ± 0.9	19.7 ± 0.1	5.9 ± 0.2	
λ = 2	40.1 ± 0.7	17.2 ± 0.2	6.0 ± 0.1	
λ = 3	38.2 ± 0.5	16.4 ± 0.1	6.0 ± 0.1	
λ = 4	36.7 ± 0.4	15.9 ± 0.1	5.9 ± 0.1	
λ = 5	37.9 ± 0.5	16.5 ± 0.1	5.8 ± 0.1	
4.1.4 Dynamics
In this section, we present
some dynamical properties. The five “best” CG potentials
were taken again to run 1 μs long simulations in the NVT ensemble at the target density ρ = 0.917 g cm–3 in order to avoid any undesired box size effects
as for instance faster dynamics because of low density.

The
end-to-end vector autocorrelation function has been computed in MD
and using the different CG models. Results are plotted in Figure 9a. In the reference
MD trajectory, the end-to-end vector completely loses its initial
orientation after a few hundred of nanoseconds, whereas this time
is reduced to about 10 ns for λ = 5. For completeness, the characteristic
relaxation time τ of the polymer chains has been computed for
each λ by integrating the fit of these autocorrelation functions
using the Kohlrausch–Williams–Watts stretched exponential
form.52 9  

Figure 9 (a)
Decorrelation of the end-to-end vector in MD (black dots) and
DPD (dotted colors). The full lines correspond to the fit using Kohlrausch–Williams–Watts
stretched exponentials. (b) MSD of the center of mass of the polymer
chain in MD (black) and DPD (colors). The dashed and dotted lines
represent slopes of 2 (ballistic regime) and 1 (diffusion regime),
respectively.

In MD, τ equals
107 ns, whereas its value is only around
2 ns for the highest degree of coarse graining (Table 4). As it is often seen in DPD simulations,53 the higher the degree of coarse graining, the
faster the decorrelation of the end-to-end vector.

Table 4 Relaxation Time τ of the End-to-End
Vector and Diffusion Coefficient  of the Center
of Mass of the Polymer Chain
Computed Using Eqs 9 and 10a
 	τ [ns]	 [10–12 m2 s–1]	
MD	107	9.9 ± 0.3	
λ = 1	39	18 ± 1	
λ = 2	10	63 ± 4	
λ = 3	4	141 ± 12	
λ = 4	3	185 ± 6	
λ = 5	2	244 ± 9	
a Both values were
measured in the
constant-NVT ensemble in MD and using the “best”
CG potential at each λ.

The MSD of the center of mass of the polymer chains is presented
in Figure 9b. The self-diffusion
coefficient of the polymer chains  can be derived
from the MSD using the classical
formula 10  

As we can see in Figure 9b and Table 4, we found that the diffusion of the polymer chains
becomes faster
when increasing λ. This is contrary to the recent work of Lemarchand
et al.15 using the FM method. Yet, in contrast
to their work, the dynamics at short time in the ballistic regime
(scaling as t2) is apparently well reproduced.
We will discuss this in detail in the following section. Moreover,
Dequidt and Canchaya16 already showed the
strong dependence of  with
the initial choice of the dissipative
cutoff rd. Because of the numerous amount
of nonlinear parameters, we decided to keep rd = rc in most of our trials. We
only performed one iterative optimization of rd for λ = 1 with fixed other nonlinear parameters, that
is, quadratic bonds, harmonic angles, rm = 7 Å, rc = 20 Å. In this
case, the optimal dissipative cutoff rd was found to be more suited at around 9 Å instead of 20 Å,
both according to  and in terms of monomer
subdiffusive motion.49

4.2 Choice of the DPD Time Step
Figure 10 displays the MSD
of the CG grains for λ = 1 obtained in DPD using a time step
of Δt = 50 fs. At t = 50 fs,
that is, the first DPD step, we notice that the local dynamics of
the bead is already too fast with respect to the reference MDCG MSD.
Let us first underline that in our simulations, temperature and velocity
obey the theorem of equipartition of energy expressed as 11  where R is the universal
gas constant, T is the temperature, M is the molar mass of the CG bead, and ⟨v2⟩ is the mean-square velocity of the group of
beads. Additionally, with the help of the velocity-Verlet algorithm,
it is easy to prove that the MSD at twice the simulation time step
2Δt can be predicted before running any simulation
whatever the thermostat, that is, 12  

Figure 10 MSD of the CG beads
at λ = 1 obtained from the CG reference
trajectory MDCG (black) and from DPD (blue and red) with a DPD time
step Δt = 50 fs. In the inset, the dotted lines
represent the theoretical ballistic regime  with R the universal gas
constant, T = 300 K, and M the molar
mass (with/without mass correction) of one CG bead. The full circles
effectively correspond to the MSD obtained in DPD. In blue, the real
CG bead mass M = 54.090 g mol–1 is used. In red, the mass of the grain is corrected according to eq 13, resulting in M = 82.235 g mol–1 as given in Table 5.

This equation is verified in the inset of Figure 10 because the MSD obtained
in DPD crosses
perfectly at t = 2Δt with
the theoretical ballistic straight line MSD = 3RT/Mt2. Because of both the integration
algorithm and the theorem of equipartition of energy, we propose the
use of an effective molar mass in order to be able to reproduce the
dynamics of the bead at short time scales, in particular, at 2Δt. By combining eqs 11 and 12, we obtain the effective molar
mass of the grain 13  

A summary of the required mass correction for various choices
of
Δt and λ is given in Table 5. For Δt = 50 fs, the mass of the bead
needs to be enhanced by 52% for λ = 1, whereas only 12% increase
is required for λ = 5. The larger the degree of coarse graining,
the higher the DPD time step is allowed before mass adjustment becomes
critical.

Table 5 Required Mass Correction as a Function
of the Degree of Coarse-Graining λ and the Desired DPD Time
Step Δt
 	Δt [fs]	50	100	200	500	1000	
 	molar mass [g mol–1]	effective
molar mass [g mol–1]	
λ = 1	54.09	82.2	108.1	178.2	483.7	1263.4	
λ = 2	108.2	135.1	165.5	251.6	627.2	1587.5	
λ = 3	162.3	189.9	226.4	330.5	778.9	1925.4	
λ = 4	216.4	248.2	292.1	418.2	951.6	2265.0	
λ = 5	270.4	304.0	354.4	499.6	1112.2	2603.3	
Once the mass correction
is done, the linear parameters are optimized
accordingly using the Bayesian method. Using this new CG model, we
observe a better agreement at short time between DPD and the reference
MDCG MSD as shown in Figure 10. This result also confirms the good setting of γ, as
supplied by the Bayesian method. The matching of the mass-corrected
model with its MDCG counterpart is also improved at long time scales.
For λ = 2, the mass correction (see Table 5) leads to lowering of the dynamics with  with mass adjustment instead of  without. We could have improved
these results
even more by optimizing again the full set of nonlinear parameters,
in particular, the dissipative cutoff rd, taking into account the mass correction.

To go further, the
DPD time step Δt can
be optimized as well. Note that the CG models should be used at the
time step for which they were optimized. A priori, using them with
a different time step will yield different results unless time steps
are below 10–20 fs.54 However, using
longer time steps is more interesting to reach the relevant time scales
for which CG models are developed. Figure 11 shows how the choice of Δt affects the MSD of the CG grains for the highest degree
of coarse-graining λ = 5. At this level, large time steps are
allowed, thanks to the softness of the corresponding CG potentials. Figure S2 displays the corresponding optimized
pairwise nonbonded conservative potentials. Interestingly, the dynamics
is improved as Δt increases. For Δt = 1 ps, the diffusion coefficient  of the center
of mass of the polymer chain
is slowed down to 40.1 ± 1.1 × 10–12 m2 s–1, which is still faintly too high with
respect to MD, but is much better than for Δt = 50 fs without mass correction (see Table 4). We verified that the thermodynamic properties
and the structural properties remain roughly unchanged whatever the
choice of Δt (see Figure S3 in the Supporting Information). In particular, the equilibrium
density obtained from a DPD simulation in the constant-NPT ensemble is systematically around 0.72 ± 0.02 g cm–3 as observed before for λ = 5 (Figure 5). Nevertheless, without mass adjustment,
both the dynamical and the structural properties deteriorate as Δt increases.

Figure 11 MSD of the CG beads at λ = 5 obtained
from the CG reference
trajectory MDCG (black) and from DPD (colors) for various DPD time
steps Δt. Mass adjustment is included as given
in Table 5.

4.3 Shape of the CG Beads
In order to
understand why the CG model is better at the small coarsening level,
we investigated the conformations adopted by the CG beads at the different
levels of coarse graining from 1 to 5 monomers per bead. Should the
shape and the orientation of the grains be used as additional degrees
of freedom in the CG model?29 The high-resolution
MD trajectory  was taken
to compute the gyration tensor Rgbead of each bead
defined such as 14   15  where N is the number of
UA inside the considered grain, wi = mi/∑j=1Nmj is
the weight fraction of atom i in the grain, ri is the position
of the atom i, and rg is the position of the center of mass of the considered
grain. The gyration tensor describes the shape adopted by the grain
at the lowest relevant order. By construction, this tensor is a real
symmetric matrix. Such a matrix possesses three positive eigenvalues
λ1, λ2, λ3 and
their corresponding three eigenvectors v1, v2, v3 form an orthonormal basis.
The eigenvector corresponding to the largest eigenvalue represents
the principal axis of the bead. As introduced by previous authors,55,56 we compute the asphericity  given
by the formula 16  

This quantity ranges
from 0 to 1. The
asphericity of a spherical conformation is zero, while it reaches
1 for a stick. The distribution of the asphericity averaged over all
CG beads across the trajectory is drawn for each λ in Figure 12. Whatever the
degree of coarse graining, the shape of the distribution is the same
if considering one random CG grain in the middle of a polymer chain
or one at the tail. This confirms that all beads follow the same evolution
rule. At low degree of coarse graining λ = 1, that is, one monomer
per bead, the distribution of the asphericity exhibits a sharp peak
at 0.52, traducing a well-defined structure. In fact, from a geometrical
point of view, the repeating unit of the cPB looks like a thin cuboid
because of the rigid carbon–carbon double bond in its middle.
In addition, still for λ = 1, the distribution width is directly
related to the small bond and angle fluctuations at the atomistic
level. At λ = 2, the distribution of  is mainly
divided into two strongly overlapped
peaks centered at 0.52 and 0.73. A slight bump at 0.3 also appears.
Two consecutive repeating units of the cPB are connected by a flexible
sigma bond. Thus, the resulting CG bead becomes flexible as well.
At higher degree of coarse graining, the distribution of the asphericity
gets broader ranging from 0.2 to 0.9. Indeed, the CG bead holds λ
– 1 sigma bonds connecting the repeating units together, leading
to more and more flexibility.

Figure 12 Distribution of the asphericity as a
function of the degree of
coarse graining. The cPB repeating unit is drawn for comparison.

We now focus on the dynamical
behavior of the shape of the CG beads
over time in the reference trajectory. First, we consider the square
root of the three positive eigenvalues λ1, λ2, and λ3 denoted as a, b, and c, respectively. We report in Figure 13a the time evolution
of these three characteristic lengths for one CG bead at λ =
5. At t = 0 ps, the bead is elongated along one principal
direction as a ≫ b,c. Then, the principal length a steadily
decreases for the benefit of b. From t = 110 ps to t = 280 ps, the shape of the grain
remains stable. An abrupt change occurs at t = 280
ps with a typical characteristic time of 1 ps. This kind of scarce
event correlates well with the unfolding of a dihedral angle at the
atomistic level. Therefore, a CG model that aims to take into account
both the shape of the bead and its time evolution will have to include
these short and long time scale phenomena.

Figure 13 Shape (a) and orientation
(b) of one bead at a degree of coarse
graining of λ = 5, that is, containing five repeating units
as drawn in Figure 12. (a) Time evolution of the three characteristic lengths a, b, c. (b) Time evolution
of the three coupled deviation angles θ = arccos(v(t + Δt)·v(t)) of the eigenvectors
with themselves.

Second, we consider
the orientation of the bead over time. We compute
the deviation angle of an eigenvector with itself after one DPD time
step, that is, between v1(t) and v1(t + Δt) (the same relation
can be written for the other two directions). Figure 13b displays the evolution of the three deviation
angles. By construction, they form an orthonormal basis. The rotation
of one vector implies the rotation of another vector by the same amount,
leading to two-by-two symmetrical results. Strikingly, the deviation
angle reaches sometimes very high values up to 90°. These events
occur when two characteristic lengths are nearby as we can see in Figure 13a, leading to the
loss of two principal orientations. Reproducing such a trajectory
including bead orientation is a challenge because of these rotational
“jumps” of the principal axes. The other option is to
use not only the orientation but the whole gyration tensor as a degree
of freedom of the CG model, with specific evolution equations (to
be specified) describing the dynamics of the grain shape.

The
shape of the CG bead is an intrinsic characteristic of the
chemical microstructure. In classical CG models as we used in this
study, one bead is only represented by its center of mass and the
beads interact with each other through pairwise interactions. Consequently,
all the information about the shape of the CG grain is lost. In practice,
the fine analysis of the high-resolution reference trajectory  shows that
the CG grains are almost never
spherical ( does not reach
0 in Figure 12), as
they represent flexible portions of
a linear polymer chain. Considering this, a second-order approximation
is used to model the CG grain as a flexible ellipsoid. Figure 14 gives an idea of the difference
between these two visions for λ = 5.

Figure 14 Two visions of coarse
graining of a polymer chain at a degree of
coarse-graining λ = 5. At the top, one bead is represented by
a sphere with twice (for better view) its radius of gyration as the
radius; at the bottom, one bead is represented by an ellipsoid with
twice (for better view) the square root of the eigenvalues of its
tensor of gyration as the three characteristic lengths.

5 Conclusions and Perspectives
In this paper, we have successfully applied the recent Bayesian
optimization approach to cPB polymer melts. Effective CG models are
derived from the analysis of CG atomistic reference trajectories . The conservative
interactions were modeled
using analytical forms, namely, harmonic potentials for the bonding
and bending terms and piecewise polynomials for the nonbonded terms.
The dissipative interactions were modeled using the standard pairwise
dissipative force where the friction parameter γ was obtained
using the Bayesian method.

The faithfulness of the CG models
to the higher resolution model
has been quantified for various choices of the functional form for
the interactions between CG beads. The choice of the intermediate rm and conservative rc cutoffs does not impact that much the thermodynamic and the structural
properties of the polymer chains for a given coarse-graining level,
as the Bayesian method adapts the linear parameters accordingly. For
λ ≥ 2, a strong coupling was found between the setting
of the intramolecular nonbonded screening factors and the ability
of the CG model to conveniently reproduce either the density or the
structure of the polymer chain.

Our CG models are able to reproduce
reasonably well the thermodynamic,
the structural, and the dynamic properties of cPB melts. The polymer
chains were found to follow Gaussian behavior as predicted by the
theory for polymer melts. At λ = 1, the agreement between MD
and DPD simulations is excellent for all properties of interest. Nevertheless,
as the degree of coarse-graining λ increases, the properties
obtained by running a DPD simulation using our CG models deviate more
and more from their MDCG counterparts. The reason for this still needs
to be elucidated. For example, at λ ≥ 2, the local structure
is too packed with respect to MDCG, leading to a slight collapse of
the polymer chains. From a dynamic point of view, the decorrelation
of the end-to-end vector and the diffusion of the polymer chain become
faster than MD as λ increases. We introduced the concept of
effective mass to properly reproduce the dynamics at short times by
keeping classical molecular simulation considerations (equipartition
of energy, velocity-Verlet algorithm). This mass adjustment becomes
crucial if one wants to use large DPD time steps. As far as we know,
this has never been highlighted. At long time scales, the diffusion
of the beads depends on the choice of the dissipative cutoff rd and the DPD time step Δt.

The higher the degree of coarse graining, the higher the
compressibility
of the resulting CG models, which results in lowering the equilibrium
density, although the pressure has been taken into account in the
optimization process. This effect is attributed to the choice of the
grain definition. As already mentioned in previous work, the Bayesian
optimization provides the “best” parameters of a given
CG model in order to reproduce the full trajectory and not especially
one individual observable among others. If the degrees of freedom
(coarse-graining level, isotropy), the CG functional form (conservative
and dissipative interactions), and the DPD time step are not well
chosen, then the resulting CG force field will be poor. Especially,
if a key physical feature is missing in the CG model, the final CG
force field will never be appropriate. The radial pairwise approximation
assumes that the interaction between CG beads depends only on their
distance from each other, thus assuming that the beads are spherical.
However, as the degree of coarse graining increases, the beads become
more and more flexible and adopt a broad range of conformations. We
also pointed out a strong anisotropy of the shape of the bead over
long time ranges with respect to typical DPD time steps.

At
λ = 1, the radial pairwise approximation is sufficient
as we were able to obtain outstanding CG potentials. This result is
attributed to the following reason. At this level, the CG bead, which
corresponds to the repeating unit of the polymer, is rigid. We will
provide in a forthcoming paper a detailed description of a refined
realistic CG model for cPB at λ = 1 obtained by taking this
bottom-up route based on trajectory matching. In particular, the transferability
in temperature, pressure, and in terms of chain length will be addressed.
In the future, we expect to be able to better model this system at
large coarse-graining levels by considering the CG beads as flexible
ellipsoids interacting with each other through anisotropic potentials.
In this case, we believe in a better reproduction of the compressibility
for the highest coarse-graining levels.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00144.Atomistic force
field parameters for cPB; time evolution
of the density and the ratio 6⟨Rg2⟩/M during a 10 ns
DPD simulation using the “best” CG model for various
degrees of coarse-graining λ; optimized pairwise nonbonded conservative
potentials for cPB at a degree of coarse-graining of λ = 5 for
various choices of DPD time step Δt; and nonbonded
RDFs produced in the constant-NPT ensembles at T = 300 K and P = 0.1 MPa using the mass-adjusted
CG models developed at Δt = 5 for various DPD
time steps Δt (PDF)

Time evolution of the bead size (AVI)



Supplementary Material
ao9b00144_si_001.pdf

 ao9b00144_si_002.avi

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was partially funded by the Investissements
d’Avenir program ”Développement de l’Economie
Numérique” through SMICE project.
==== Refs
References
de Gennes P.-G.  Scaling Concepts in
Polymer Physics , 1 st ed.; Cornell University Press , 1979 .
Gerroff I. ; Milchev A. ; Binder K. ; Paul W. 
A new off-lattice
Monte
Carlo model for polymers: A comparison of static and dynamic properties
with the bond-fluctuation model and application to random media . J. Chem. Phys. 
1993 , 98 , 6526 –6539 . 10.1063/1.464793 .
Harmandaris V. A. ; Kremer K. 
Predicting
polymer dynamics at multiple length and
time scales . Soft Matter 
2009 , 5 , 3920 10.1039/b905361a .
Noid W. G. 
Perspective:
Coarse-grained models for biomolecular systems . J. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 139 , 090901 10.1063/1.4818908 .24028092 
Müller-Plathe F. 
Coarse-Graining
in Polymer Simulation: From the Atomistic to the Mesoscopic Scale
and Back . ChemPhysChem 
2002 , 3 , 754 –769 . 10.1002/1439-7641(20020916)3:9<754::aid-cphc754>3.0.co;2-u .
Reith D. ; Pütz M. ; Müller-Plathe F. 
Deriving effective
mesoscale potentials from atomistic simulations . J. Comput. Chem. 
2003 , 24 , 1624 –1636 . 10.1002/jcc.10307 .12926006 
Ercolessi F. ; Adams J. B. 
Interatomic potentials
from first-principles calculations:
the force-matching method . Europhys. Lett. 
1994 , 26 , 583 –588 . 10.1209/0295-5075/26/8/005 .
Izvekov S. ; Parrinello M. ; Burnham C. J. ; Voth G. A. 
Effective force
fields for condensed phase systems from ab initio molecular dynamics
simulation: A new method for force-matching . J. Chem. Phys. 
2004 , 120 , 10896 10.1063/1.1739396 .15268120 
Li Z. ; Bian X. ; Yang X. ; Karniadakis G. E. 
A comparative
study of coarse-graining methods for polymeric fluids: Mori-Zwanzig
vs. iterative Boltzmann inversion vs. stochastic parametric optimization . J. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 145 , 044102 10.1063/1.4959121 .27475343 
Bayramoglu B. ; Faller R. 
Modeling of polystyrene
under confinement: exploring
the limits of iterative boltzmann inversion . Macromolecules 
2013 , 46 , 7957 –7976 . 10.1021/ma400831g .
Maurel G. ; Goujon F. ; Schnell B. ; Malfreyt P. 
Multiscale Modeling
of the Polymer-Silica Surface Interaction: From Atomistic to Mesoscopic
Simulations . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 4817 –4826 . 10.1021/jp510979d .
Potestio R. 
Is Henderson’s
theorem practically useful? . JUnQ 
2013 , 3 , 13 –15 .
Maurel G. ; Goujon F. ; Schnell B. ; Malfreyt P. 
Prediction of structural
and thermomechanical properties of polymers from multiscale simulations . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 14065 –14073 . 10.1039/c4ra16417b .
Hijón C. ; Español P. ; Vanden-Eijnden E. ; Delgado-Buscalioni R. 
Mori-Zwanzig
formalism as a practical computational tool . Faraday Discuss. 
2010 , 144 , 301 –322 . 10.1039/b902479b .20158036 
Lemarchand C. A. ; Couty M. ; Rousseau B. 
Coarse-grained
simulations of cis-
and trans-polybutadiene: A bottom-up approach . J. Chem. Phys. 
2017 , 146 , 074904 10.1063/1.4975652 .28228020 
Dequidt A. ; Canchaya J. G. S. 
Bayesian parametrization
of coarse-grain dissipative
dynamics models . J. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 143 , 084122 10.1063/1.4929557 .26328833 
Canchaya J. G. S. ; Dequidt A. ; Goujon F. ; Malfreyt P. 
Development of DPD
coarse-grained models: From bulk to interfacial properties . J. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 145 , 054107 10.1063/1.4960114 .27497539 
Goujon F. ; Malfreyt P. ; Tildesley D. J. 
Interactions
between polymer brushes
and a polymer solution: mesoscale modelling of the structural and
frictional properties . Soft Matter 
2010 , 6 , 3472 –3481 . 10.1039/c002204g .
Español P. ; Zúñiga I. 
Obtaining fully dynamic coarse-grained models from
MD . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 13 , 10538 10.1039/c0cp02826f .21442096 
Ghoufi A. ; Malfreyt P. 
Recent advances in
many body dissipative particles
dynamics simulations of liquid-vapor interfaces . Eur. Phys. J. E 
2013 , 36 , 10 10.1140/epje/i2013-13010-7 .23361618 
Harmandaris V. ; Kalligiannaki E. ; Katsoulakis M. ; Plecháč P. 
Path-space
variational inference for non-equilibrium coarse-grained systems . J. Comput. Phys. 
2016 , 314 , 355 –383 . 10.1016/j.jcp.2016.03.021 .
Izvekov S. ; Voth G. A. 
A multiscale coarse-graining
method for biomolecular
systems . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 2469 –2473 . 10.1021/jp044629q .16851243 
Chaimovich A. ; Shell M. S. 
Coarse-graining errors and numerical optimization using
a relative entropy framework . J. Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 134 , 094112 10.1063/1.3557038 .21384955 
Rudzinski J. F. ; Noid W. G. 
Coarse-graining entropy, forces, and structures . J. Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 135 , 214101 10.1063/1.3663709 .22149773 
Noid W. G. ; Chu J.-W. ; Ayton G. S. ; Krishna V. ; Izvekov S. ; Voth G. A. ; Das A. ; Andersen H. C. 
The multiscale coarse-graining
method. I. A rigorous bridge between atomistic and coarse-grained
models . J. Chem. Phys. 
2008 , 128 , 244114 10.1063/1.2938860 .18601324 
Dunn N. J.
H. ; Foley T. T. ; Noid W. G. 
Van der Waals perspective on coarse-graining:
progress toward solving representability and transferability problems . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2016 , 49 , 2832 –2840 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00498 .27993007 
Shell M. S.   In Advances in Chemical
Physics ; Rice S. A. , Dinner A. R.  , Eds.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc. : Hoboken, NJ, USA , 2016 ; pp 395 –441 .
Shell M. S. 
The relative
entropy is fundamental to multiscale and inverse thermodynamic problems . J. Chem. Phys. 
2008 , 129 , 144108 10.1063/1.2992060 .19045135 
Chaimovich A. ; Shell M. S. 
Anomalous waterlike
behavior in spherically-symmetric
water models optimized with the relative entropy . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 11 , 1901 10.1039/b818512c .19280001 
Sanyal T. ; Shell M. S. 
Coarse-grained models
using local-density potentials
optimized with the relative entropy: Application to implicit solvation . J. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 145 , 034109 10.1063/1.4958629 .27448876 
Poli R. ; Kennedy J. ; Blackwell T. 
Particle swarm
optimization . Swarm Intell. 
2007 , 1 , 33 –57 . 10.1007/s11721-007-0002-0 .
Plimpton S. 
Fast parallel
algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics . J. Comput. Phys. 
1995 , 117 , 1 –19 . 10.1006/jcph.1995.1039 .
Smith G. D. ; Paul W. 
United atom force field
for molecular dynamics simulations of 1,4-polybutadiene
based on quantum chemistry calculations on model molecules . J. Phys. Chem. A 
1998 , 102 , 1200 –1208 . 10.1021/jp9730858 .
Tsolou G. ; Mavrantzas V. G. ; Theodorou D. N. 
Detailed Atomistic Molecular Dynamics
Simulation of cis -1,4-Poly(butadiene) . Macromolecules 
2005 , 38 , 1478 –1492 . 10.1021/ma0491210 .
Berendsen H. J. C. ; Postma J. P. M. ; van Gunsteren W. F. ; DiNola A. ; Haak J. R. 
Molecular
dynamics with coupling to an external bath . J. Chem. Phys. 
1984 , 81 , 3684 10.1063/1.448118 .
Schneider T. ; Stoll E. 
Molecular-dynamics
study of a three-dimensional one-component model
for distortive phase transitions . Phys. Rev.
B 
1978 , 17 , 1302 –1322 . 10.1103/physrevb.17.1302 .
Dünweg B. ; Paul W. 
Brownian dynamics simulations
without Gaussian random numbers . Int. J. Mod.
Phys. C 
1991 , 02 , 817 –827 . 10.1142/s0129183191001037 .
Das A. ; Andersen H. C. 
The multiscale coarse-graining
method. III. A test
of pairwise additivity of the coarse-grained potential and of new
basis functions for the variational calculation . J. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 131 , 034102 10.1063/1.3173812 .19624176 
Natanson I. P.  Constructive Function
Theory I: Uniform Approximation ; Ungar Pub
Co , 1964 ; Vol. I .
Clark A. J. ; Guenza M. G. 
Mapping of polymer melts onto liquids
of soft-colloidal
chains . J. Chem. Phys. 
2010 , 132 , 044902 10.1063/1.3292013 .20113061 
Dinpajooh M. ; Guenza M. G. 
Coarse-graining
simulation approaches for polymer melts:
the effect of potential range on computational efficiency . Soft Matter 
2018 , 14 , 7126 –7144 . 10.1039/c8sm00868j .30070292 
Henderson R. L. 
A uniqueness
theorem for fluid pair correlation functions . Phys. Lett. A 
1974 , 49 , 197 –198 . 10.1016/0375-9601(74)90847-0 .
Das A. ; Andersen H. C. 
The multiscale coarse-graining
method. V. Isothermal-isobaric
ensemble . J. Chem. Phys. 
2010 , 132 , 164106 10.1063/1.3394862 .20441257 
Dunn N. J.
H. ; Noid W. G. 
Bottom-up
coarse-grained models that accurately describe
the structure, pressure, and compressibility of molecular liquids . J. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 143 , 243148 10.1063/1.4937383 .26723633 
Dunn N. J. H. ; Noid W. G. 
Bottom-up coarse-grained
models with predictive accuracy
and transferability for both structural and thermodynamic properties
of heptane-toluene mixtures . J. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 144 , 204124 10.1063/1.4952422 .27250296 
Sanyal T. ; Shell M. S. 
Transferable Coarse-Grained Models of Liquid-Liquid
Equilibrium Using Local Density Potentials Optimized with the Relative
Entropy . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2018 , 122 , 5678 –5693 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b12446 .29466859 
DeLyser M. R. ; Noid W. G. 
Extending pressure-matching to inhomogeneous
systems
via local-density potentials . J. Chem. Phys. 
2017 , 147 , 134111 10.1063/1.4999633 .28987122 
Wagner J. W. ; Dannenhoffer-Lafage T. ; Jin J. ; Voth G. A. 
Extending the range
and physical accuracy of coarse-grained models: Order parameter dependent
interactions . J. Chem. Phys. 
2017 , 147 , 044113 10.1063/1.4995946 .28764380 
Rubinstein M. ; Colby R. H.  Polymer Physics ; Oxford University Press : USA , 2003 .
Izvekov S. 
Mori-Zwanzig
theory for dissipative forces in coarse-grained dynamics in the markov
limit . Phys. Rev. E 
2017 , 95 , 013303 10.1103/physreve.95.013303 .28208451 
Flory P. J. 
The configuration
of real polymer chains . J. Chem. Phys. 
1949 , 17 , 303 –310 . 10.1063/1.1747243 .
Milano G. ; Müller-Plathe F. 
Mapping atomistic simulations to mesoscopic models:
a systematic coarse-graining procedure for vinyl polymer chains . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 18609 –18619 . 10.1021/jp0523571 .16853395 
Depa P. K. ; Maranas J. K. 
Speed up of dynamic
observables in coarse-grained molecular-dynamics
simulations of unentangled polymers . J. Chem.
Phys. 
2005 , 123 , 094901 10.1063/1.1997150 .
Winger M. ; Trzesniak D. ; Baron R. ; van Gunsteren W. F. 
On using
a too large integration time step in molecular dynamics simulations
of coarse-grained molecular models . Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 11 , 1934 –1941 . 10.1039/b818713d .19280004 
Rudnick J. ; Gaspari G. 
The shapes of random
walks . Science 
1987 , 237 , 384 –389 . 10.1126/science.237.4813.384 .17794340 
Sciutto S. J. 
Study of
the shape of random walks. II. Inertia moment ratios and the two-dimensional
asphericity . J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 
1995 , 28 , 3667 –3679 . 10.1088/0305-4470/28/13/012 .

