
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02949ArticleStructure and Dynamics of Cinnamycin–Lipid
Complexes: Mechanisms of Selectivity for Phosphatidylethanolamine
Lipids Vestergaard Mikkel ‡Berglund Nils Anton ‡Hsu Pin-Chia ‡Song Chen †§∥Koldsø Heidi †⊥Schiøtt Birgit *‡Sansom Mark S. P. *†† Department
of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, OX1 3QU Oxford, United Kingdom‡ Center
for Insoluble Protein Structures (inSPIN), Interdisciplinary Nanoscience
Center (iNANO), Department of Chemistry, Aarhus University, Langelandsgade 140, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark* E-mail: birgit@chem.au.dk. Phone +45 29826882 (B.S.).* E-mail: mark.sansom@bioch.ox.ac.uk. Phone: +44 (0)1865 613212 (M.S.P.S.).28 10 2019 12 11 2019 4 20 18889 18899 10 09 2019 11 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Cinnamycin
is a lantibiotic peptide, which selectively
binds to and permeabilizes membranes containing phosphatidylethanolamine
(PE) lipids. As PE is a major component of many bacterial cell membranes,
cinnamycin has considerable potential for destroying these. In this
study, molecular dynamics simulations are used to elucidate the structure
of a lipid–cinnamycin complex and the origin of selective lipid
binding. The simulations reveal that cinnamycin selectively binds
to PE by forming an extensive hydrogen-bonding network involving all
three hydrogen atoms of the primary ammonium group of the PE head
group. The substitution of a single hydrogen atom with a methyl group
on the ammonium nitrogen destabilizes this hydrogen-bonding network.
In addition to binding the primary ammonium group, cinnamycin also
interacts with the phosphate group of the lipid through a previously
uncharacterized phosphate-binding site formed by the backbone Phe10-Abu11-Phe12-Val13
moieties (Abu = 1-α-aminobutyric acid). In addition, hydroxylation
of Asp15 at Cβ plays a role in selective binding of PE due to
its tight interaction with the charged amine of the lipid head group.
The simulations reveal that the position and orientation of the peptide
in the membrane depend on the type of lipid to which it binds, suggesting
a reason for why cinnamycin selectively permeabilizes PE-containing
membranes.

document-id-old-9ao9b02949document-id-new-14ao9b02949ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Antimicrobial
peptides present a solution to the major problem
that multiresistant bacteria pose to human health.1 Peptides such as nicin2,3 and ε-polylysine4 have long been used for food preservation due
to their antimicrobial abilities, and related peptides are being explored
for clinical applications.1,5 An exact relationship
between the amino acid sequences of these peptides and their antimicrobial
action(s) has yet to be established, hindering rational optimization
of their properties for both clinical and preservative use. Therefore,
it is of considerable importance to elucidate the relationship between
peptide sequence/structure and their function and mechanism of action.

Cinnamycin is a 19-residue tetracyclic peptide (see Figure 1a), which selectively binds
to lipid molecules with a phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) head group
with a 1:1 stoichiometry,6 which, subsequently,
results in permeation of PE-containing membranes.7 In contrast, cinnamycin shows a much lower binding affinity
for, and limited permeabilization of, vesicles consisting of other
lipids [e.g., phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylserine (PS), and N-methyl PE (mPE)].7,8 When cinnamycin binds
to a membrane, it also induces nonselective lipid flip-flops, which
may be related to its antimicrobial ability.8

Figure 1 Primary
structure of cinnamycin. (a) The sequence of cinnamycin
showing the cross-links. (b) Chemical structure of the four uncommon
amino acids present in cinnamycin: meso-lanthionine
(Lan), (2S,3S,6R)-3-methyllanthionine (MeLan), (2S,8S)-lysinoalanine (LysAla), and erytho-3-hydroxy-l-aspartic acid (HyAsp). The two backbone moieties of Lan will
be referred to as Ala(S)X and Ala(S)Y, while the corresponding moieties
of MeLan will be referred to as Abu(S)X and Ala(S)Y, where X and Y
specify the positions in the sequence. The two moieties of LysAla19/6
will be referred to as Lys19 and Ala(N)6. Abu = 1-α-aminobutyric
acid.

Cinnamycin is a part of the lantibiotic
family, which is defined
by the presence of the thioether amino acids meso-lanthionine (Lan) and (2S,3S,6R)-3-methyllanthionine (MeLan) that are formed through side-chain
cross-linking of a cysteine residue with either serine or threonine,
respectively (see Figure 1b).9 Due to the presence of these
amino acids, lantibiotics are highly cross-linked internally, and
the presence of three such cross-links together with a (2S,8S)-lysinoalanine (LysAla) bridge makes cinnamycin
one of the smallest peptides with a well-defined three dimensional
structure.10 Based on NMR experiments,
a pocket in the cinnamycin molecule formed by residues 7–14
has been suggested to be the binding site for PE molecules.6 Furthermore, cinnamycin has an erytho-3-hydroxy-l-aspartic acid (HyAsp) at residue 15, the function
of which is unknown. Together with the highly homologous peptides,
the duramycins and ancovenin, cinnamycin defines a family of cinnamycin-like
peptides.11 In addition to their hemolytic12 and antimicrobial properties,13 cinnamycin-like peptides also inhibit angiotensin-I converting
enzyme,14 the activity of phospholipase
A2,15 and herpes simplex virus,16 and, thus, these peptides have potential applications
in the treatment of blood pressure regulation, inflammation, and viral
infection.17 Its ability to selectively
bind to PE lipids makes cinnamycin a potential probe for determining
the location of PE lipids in cell membranes and for disrupting PE-containing
membranes such as those of cancer cells and of bacteria.10,18,19

Based on NMR studies, it
has been suggested that the selectivity
of cinnamycin for PE is due to the binding of the primary ammonium
(i.e., charged amine) group of the PE head group into a small binding
pocket on the peptide surface that cannot encompass larger head groups
such as that of e.g., PC.20 However, some
observations are difficult to accommodate within this model: e.g.,
preincubation of cinnamycin with alkyl-phosphopropanolamine cannot
inhibit its hemolytic activity, indicating that molecules with a larger
distance between the ammonium group and the phosphate group than that
in the head group of PE fail to bind to cinnamycin.12 Cinnamycin and the related peptide duramycin, which only
differ in a few residues, have been found to induce general lipid
flip–flop in the presence of PE lipids8 and during vesicle tubulation,21 permeation,7 and fusion.8 The focus
of the current study is, thus, to characterize the selectivity of
cinnamycin for PE and to investigate how cinnamycin may perturb PE-containing
membranes.

We use molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to optimize
a previously
published NMR-derived structural model of cinnamycin (PDB ID: 2DDE, model 1)20 and to characterize its interaction with different
lipid species, thereby providing an understanding of its selectivity
for PE. Simulations of cinnamycin with one molecule of 1,2-dilauroyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (DLPE) bound in different
solvents are analyzed, providing an optimized model of the PE–cinnamycin
complex. Simulations of cinnamycin embedded in a bilayer of 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPC) and a range of different
lipids reveal the effect of the lipid species on the stability of
the cinnamycin–lipid complex. The function of the Cβ hydroxylation of Asp15 is investigated by simulating the HyAsp15Asp
mutant. Finally, the accommodation of the cinnamycin–PE complex
in both POPC and 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(POPE)/1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol) (POPG) bilayers (the latter mimicking a bacterial
membrane) is examined.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Cinnamycin–DLPE Complex Structure
An NMR structure
of cinnamycin bound to a lysophosphatidylethanolamine
(LPE)20 was used as a starting structure
for our simulations. To evaluate the stability of this NMR structure,
the fragment of LPE resolved in the PDB ID: 2DDE (model 1) coordinate
set was converted into DLPE and the system was solvated in water,
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), or ethanol. The systems were then energy
minimized, equilibrated, and simulated for at least 0.3 μs using
atomistic resolution (Table 1). To ensure that we obtained a reasonable protein model,
the ϕ and ψ angles of the amino acid residues of cinnamycin
in DMSO were calculated (Figure S2) following
the same protocol presented by Hosoda et al.,20 and a comparison of nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) distances between
NMR and the simulated structures was done (Figure S3) following the restraint distance presented by Hosoda et
al.20

Table 1 Atomistic Simulations
of DLPE Bound
to Cinnamycin in Different solvents
simulation
namea	simulation
time (μs)	solvent	HyAsp15 rotatedb	NOE rest.
eq.c	
DNMR	0.3	DMSO	no	no	
ENMR	0.3	ethanol	no	no	
WNMR	0.3	water	no	no	
Dunflip	1.0	DMSO	no	yes	
Dflip	1.0	DMSO	yes	yes	
Eunflip	1.0	ethanol	no	yes	
Eflip	1.0	ethanol	yes	yes	
Dflip_Wd	0.65	water	yes	yes	
a The initial letter indicates the
solvent used, while the subscript indicates the starting conformation
and equilibration protocol used: NMR if the NMR model was used and
no NOE restraints were applied; unflip if NOE restraints were used;
and flip if restraints were applied and an initial rotation of the
HyAsp15 side chain was performed.

b Specifies whether or not the χ1 angle of HyAsp15
was rotated by 200° to position it
in the gauche(+) orientation (specified as flip). In this orientation,
the negatively charged HyAsp carboxylate points toward the LysAla19/6
secondary ammonium bridge, which allows for an attractive electrostatic
interaction between them.

c Specifies whether or not the NOE-derived
restraints were applied during the equilibration period of the simulation.

d The equilibrated complex from Dflip was resolvated in water and equilibrated
with distance restraints.

The distance between the ammonium group of the lipid and the back
of the binding pocket, defined by the sulfur atom of MeLan5/11, was
used to monitor the interactions of DLPE with cinnamycin (Figure 2). It was seen that
in the simulations started from the NMR model equilibrated without
NOE restraints (DNMR, ENMR, and WNMR), the ammonium
group of the lipid always moved out of the binding pocket during the
initial equilibration of the simulations, as indicated by the distance,
which is much greater than the initial value of 3.4 Å. The initial
complex was, thus, not stable, regardless of the solvent environment
(the NMR structure was determined in DMSO) as the lipid always moved
out of the binding pocket during the energy minimization or within
a few picoseconds of MD simulation [also see Figure S4a,b in the Supporting Information (SI)].

Figure 2 Distance between the
binding pocket and the ammonium group of the
lipid as a function of time for simulations of DLPE bound to cinnamycin
in different solvents. See Table 1 in Section 4 for details of the simulations.

We attempted to optimize the model to form a stable lipid–peptide
complex. A series of equilibration simulations of the DLPE–cinnamycin
complex were conducted. Distance restraints between atoms of the lipid
and the peptide molecules were derived from the published NMR data6 (see methods, Figure 11), and simulations with decreasing force
constants were conducted to obtain a well-relaxed structure obeying
the NOE measurements. Two starting conformations varying in the orientation
of the HyAsp15 rotamer were employed to ensure that both rotamers
were sampled adequately. These two rotamers were: (1) the NMR model
(simulations marked unflip) and (2) a model in which the HyAsp15 side
chain was oriented into the binding pocket (simulations marked flip).
Simulations of both models were undertaken in three different solvents
(DMSO, water, and ethanol). These simulations were intended to elucidate
which orientation of the HyAsp side chain leads to the most stable
complex.

In simulations of Dunflip, the HyAsp15
side chain rotated into the binding pocket. As a result, both of the
simulated structures in DMSO (Dunflip and Dflip) yielded similar conformations at the end
of the restrained simulations with a backbone root-mean-square deviation
(RMSD) of 0.7 Å (see Figure 3). When changing the solvent to ethanol, however, this
flip was not observed, resulting in the structures yielded by Eunflip and Eflip being quite different at the end of the simulations, with a backbone
RMSD of 2.2 Å. In Eunflip, cinnamycin
became distorted after a few hundred nanoseconds of unrestrained simulation
indicating that this complex was not stable. Cinnamycin from Eflip had a low backbone RMSD with respect to
both Dunflip and Dflip (below 0.8 Å) indicating that the differences between
the two solvents did not affect the structure of the complex much.
In water, the restrained simulations did not result in complex formation,
as the lipid did not remain bound during the equilibration (Figure S4c in the SI). To assess the stability
of a cinnamycin–DLPE complex in water, the complex formed in
DMSO (from the Dflip-simulation) was resolvated in water (named Dflip_W). The lipid, however, diffused away
from the binding site after ∼590 ns (as shown in Figure 2) suggesting that the hydrophobic
environment of the membrane is needed for a stable interaction between
cinnamycin and the lipid. This may explain why long-tailed lipids
bind more strongly to cinnamycin than short-tailed lipids in a membrane
environment,22 as lipids with shorter tails
are more likely to be outside a membrane bilayer environment because
they are more soluble in water, as previously stated by Gao et al.23 We conclude that the complexes formed in Dunflip, Dflip, and Eflip represent the same conformation, as also
observed from the overlay in Figure 3a, and we will from now on refer to this as the MD
model. However, the model does not match the NMR model, as we will
discuss next.

Figure 3 Backbone alignment (aligned on Cα, N, C, and O atoms)
of
(a) the structures obtained after the equilibration of simulations Dflip (yellow), Dunflip (orange), and Eflip (cyan) is compared
with (b) an alignment of the Dflip (yellow), Eunflip (green), and NMR (gray) structures. Only
the nonhydrogen atoms of the backbone of residues 5–15 and
the side chain of HyAsp15 are shown. The locations where the N- and
the C-termini have been truncated from the images for clarity are
shown as blue and red spheres, respectively.

Although the lowest-energy NMR model (2DDE, model 1) fulfilled most of the NMR restraints
applied in this study, careful comparison revealed that fewer close
interactions were observed between the peptide and the lipid in the
NMR model (Figure 4a) than in the MD model (Figure 4b). In particular, in the NMR model, the phosphate
group of the lipid was not in contact with the peptide and the hydroxyl
group was the only part of HyAsp15 interacting with the lipid ammonium
group, while the carboxylate of HyAsp15 pointed away from the binding
pocket. Furthermore, no hydrogen bonds were observed between the peptide
and the lipid. A slightly different binding pattern was found in the
MD models, as the lipid phosphate group remained bound in a pocket
in the MD model (Figure 4b,c), making it possible for the amide hydrogens of residues 10–13
to form hydrogen bonds with oxygen atoms of the lipid phosphate. Furthermore,
the ammonium group of the lipid formed stable hydrogen bonds to the
backbone carbonyl groups of Phe7 and Val13 as well as a bifurcated
hydrogen bond to the carboxylate and hydroxyl groups of HyAsp15. This
led to a much tighter binding than in the NMR model and, thus, a more
stable complex, as indicated from the much shorter and less variable
distance between the lipid ammonium group and the binding pocket observed
in Figure 3 for Dunflip (3.7 ± 0.8 Å), Dflip (3.6 ± 0.7 Å), and Eflip (3.8 ± 0.9 Å) compared to DNMR (9.1 ± 1.4 Å), ENMR (15.4 ± 1.7 Å), and WNMR (18.1
± 6.4 Å). Another indication of the validity of the rotated
HyAsp15 form is the location of the carboxylate group and hydroxyl
group in this conformation. The negatively charged carboxylate of
HyAsp15 was positioned much closer to the positively charged ammonium
group of the lipid, which again is a clear indication of a stronger
peptide–lipid interaction. The hydroxyl group was at the same
time positioned close to the ethyl part of the ethanolamine group
(e.g., 3.5 ± 0.7 Å for Dflip), thus still fitting well with the observed NMR cross-peaks between
these two groups.6 Interestingly, one of
the 10 NMR models (model 10) showed a similar orientation of the HyAsp15
side chain, thus confirming that the orientation also matches the
NMR restraints used by Hosoda et al. to develop the NMR model.20 To conclude, this optimized conformation in
which the HyAsp15 side chain as well as Phe7(O) and Val13(O) are pointing
into the binding pocket seems to represent a more likely model of
the PE–cinnamycin complex and was, thus, used for the subsequent
simulations in lipid bilayers.

Figure 4 NMR structure and the MD-optimized cinnamycin–PE
complex.
(a) The NMR and (b) the MD models of the PE–cinnamycin complex
with the surface of the peptide shown in gray and the bound lipid
colored green. For clarity, the peptide is visualized as its main
chain and its modified side chains (excluding nonpolar hydrogens),
while the lipid is shown without its hydrophobic tails (a figure with
the tails shown is found in Figure S4d in
the SI). (c) Schematic drawing of the optimized binding mode. The
peptide is illustrated in black, the lipid head group in green, and
the hydrogen bonds in red. Wavy lines indicate that backbone atoms
have been omitted for clarity. All side chain atoms excluding HyAsp15
and LysAla19/6 have been omitted for clarity. Numbers on the Cα-carbons
specify the residue numbers.

2.2 Binding of Different Lipids
The selectivity
of cinnamycin for PE lipids has been suggested to be due to the exact
fit between the size of the ammonium-binding pocket of cinnamycin
and the substituents on the ammonium group of the lipid, making it
impossible to fit larger groups into the binding pocket.20 However, the peptide is dynamic and it is possible
that the binding pocket may adapt to the larger size of other lipid
types. Furthermore, it is not known how the hydrogen-bonding network
is affected by the presence of groups other than the primary ammonium
group of PE lipids. We, therefore, conducted several simulations with
POPE, N-methyl 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (POmPE), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine (POPS), and POPC
bound to a cinnamycin molecule embedded in a POPC bilayer to determine
the source of the selective binding of PE lipids (Figure 5).

Figure 5 Simulations of cinnamycin–lipid
complexes in a bilayer membrane.
(a) The four lipids investigated in the binding study, R1 and R2,
representing palmitoyl and oleoyl groups, respectively. (b) A snapshot
from a simulation with cinnamycin (orange) bound to a PE lipid (green)
embedded in a POPC bilayer (gray/white/red/bronze). Water and ions
are shown as a transparent blue surface. The simulation box was approximately
6 × 6 × 10 nm3.

Initially, the dynamics of the PE–cinnamycin complex was
investigated. It was clear from root mean square fluctuation of the
backbone dihedral angles (Figure S5 in
the SI) and from visual inspection of the simulation trajectories
that the main flexibility in the binding pocket of cinnamycin was
located around the side chain of HyAsp15 and the backbone near Phe7.
Thus, the orientations of the HyAsp15 side chain, Phe7(O), and Phe7(NH)
were plotted together with the distance between the lipid and the
binding pocket and the number of hydrogen bonds between them (see
the SI for details). Figure 6 shows the temporal evolution of these structural
features during a simulation of the wild-type (wt) cinnamycin with
the aspartate hydroxylated and POPE bound (PE_HyAsp). Plots for all
of the simulations can be found in the Figure S6, Supporting Information. It is apparent from the figure
that both the side chain of HyAsp15 (HyAsp in Figure 6) and the backbone of Phe7 (Phe(NH) and Phe(O))
were quite dynamic as they exchange between pointing into the pocket
(gray) and out of the pocket (white) several times during the simulation.
The figure shows a direct correlation between the orientation of Phe7(O)
and the number of hydrogen bonds to the ammonium group of the lipid;
when Phe7(O) rotates out of the pocket, the number of hydrogen bonds
decreases (blue line) as one of the hydrogen bonds formed between
cinnamycin and the ammonium is via this functional group. Although
four hydrogen bonds were observed in the simulations, the maximum
number of hydrogen bonds on the plot never reached this level due
to the time averaging. Most often, the rotation of the Phe7(O) and
the loss of the related hydrogen bond were also related to the lipid
ammonium moving out of the binding pocket as exemplified by the increased
distance to the binding pocket (red curve) e.g., observed at 50 ns
in Figure 6. Histograms
showing the distance to the binding pocket observed over the last
400 ns of all simulations are plotted in Figure 7. By fitting Gaussian functions to these
data, two populations of distances can be characterized: a tightly
bound mode located at a distance of 3.5 ± 0.2 Å from the
back of the binding pocket and a more loosely bound conformation at
4.3 ± 0.4 Å, as indicated by the larger standard deviation
(see the dark purple line in Figure 7a). These two populations probably represent two submodes
of binding, as also observed from the red line in Figure 6.

Figure 6 Temporal evolution of
a simulation of cinnamycin bound to one POPE
molecule embedded in a POPC bilayer (simulations named PE_HyAsp).
The plot shows the change in the orientation of the HyAsp15 side chain,
Phe7(O), and Phe7(NH) over time (gray when the given group points
into the binding pocket and otherwise white), the distance between
the ammonium group of the lipid and the binding pocket (red line),
and the number of hydrogen bonds between the ammonium group of the
lipid and cinnamycin (blue line). The left y axis
describes the gray and white coloring, while the right y axis describes the red and blue curves. Above the plot, snapshots
of the complex are shown. It is interesting to notice how the HyAsp15
rotated in the 85 ns snapshot was followed by the Phe(NH) rotating
out of the binding pocket, as shown in the snapshot at 120 ns. The
lipid ammonium group has moved out of the ammonium-binding pocket
at 60 ns and has rebound again in the snapshot at 160 ns.

Figure 7 Distributions of the distance between the lipid head group and
the binding pocket, measured from the nitrogen of the lipid ammonium
to the sulfur of meLan5/11. The names refer to the simulations described
in Table 2 in Section 4. Plotted for (a)
the wild-type cinnamycin and (b) the hyAsp15Asp mutant.

After the ammonium moved out of the pocket, the HyAsp15 rotated
at ∼70 ns, such that the carboxylate pointed toward the lipid
ammonium, followed by the Phe(NH) orienting out of the binding pocket
at ∼90 ns in the simulation shown in Figure 6. The flip of the HyAsp15 was likely induced
by the attraction between the negatively charged carboxylate of HyAsp15
and the positively charged ammonium group of the lipid. In the MD
model, the carboxylate of HyAsp15 makes a hydrogen bond with Phe7(NH)
(see Figure 4). This
hydrogen bond stabilizes the orientation of both HyAsp15 and Phe7
backbone, and the movement of one or the other may, therefore, make
the orientation observed in the MD model for these residues less stable.
This is likely why Phe7(NH) rotates after the HyAsp15 has rotated.
It should be noted that the order of the movements of the residues
varies in individual simulations (see Figure S6 in the SI), so only the correlation between these movements can
be deducted but not the cause–effect relation. Furthermore,
rotating the HyAsp15, such that the carboxylate points toward the
lipid ammonium, does not preclude the lipid binding as observed at
∼150 ns where the lipid rebinds to the ammonium-binding pocket.

In the published NOE measurements, cross-peaks were observed between
the hydroxyl group of HyAsp15 and the ethanolamine group of the lipid
(see Figure 11).6 Upon rotation of the HyAsp15 side chain in the
MD model, the carboxyl group points toward the lipid (e.g., at 85
ns in Figure 6) leading
to the hydroxyl group pointing away from the ethanolamine. We, therefore,
restrained the χ1 angle of HyAsp15 such that its
carboxylate pointed toward the LysAla19/6 ammonium bridge (as observed
in the MD model) to get a better sampling of the state fitting the
NMR data the best (simulations named PE_HyAsp_HyAsp+).
Interestingly, this resulted in a much more stable interaction between
cinnamycin and the lipid, since the lipid stayed tightly bound at
a distance of 3.4 ± 0.2 Å in these simulations (the light
purple line in Figure 7a). A figure equivalent to Figure 6 is shown in Figure 8a for one of these simulations where hyAsp15 is restrained.
It is apparent from the figure that both Phe7(NH) and Phe7(O) remained
in their initial orientations, and the number of hydrogen bonds was
high throughout the simulation. This indicates that fixing the orientation
of the HyAsp15 side chain stabilizes both the orientation of Phe7
and lipid binding.

Figure 8 Relation between the dynamic behavior of the binding pocket
and
the stability of the lipid binding over time shown for a representative
simulation of cinnamycin with (a) POPE bound with the HyAsp15 side
chain restrained (PE_HyAsp_HyAsp+), (b) POmPE bound (mPE_HyAsp),
(c) POmPE bound with HyAsp15 side chain restrained (mPE_HyAsp_HyAsp+), (d) POPS bound (PS_HyAsp), and (e) POPC bound (PC_HyAsp).
Color coding and axes are the same as in Figure 6.

To investigate whether the stabilization was due to some very specific
interactions related to the HyAsp15 or if it was mainly due to an
overall stabilization of the binding pocket, simulations were conducted
restraining the rotation of either Phe7(NH) (simulation named PE_HyAsp_Ala(N)6)
or Phe7(O) (simulation named PE_HyAsp_Gly8). Both these restraints
lead to a stabilization of the binding although to a slightly lower
extent than when restraining HyAsp15 (see Figure S7a,e and Figure S7b,f in the SI, respectively). When the bound
lipid did move out of the binding pocket with either Phe7(O) or Phe7(NH)
restrained, it was always correlated to the rotation of both the HyAsp15
side chain and the Phe7 backbone angle not retrained. These findings
indicate that the orientation of the Phe7 backbone is important and
that HyAsp15 stabilizes the optimal binding conformation when its
carboxylate group points toward the lysinoalanine. To test this hypothesis,
simulations were conducted where the HyAsp15 side chain was restrained
away from this conformation (by inverting the potential used to restrain
the HyAsp15 into the position) to investigate if the stabilization
was related to this specific conformation (simulation PE_HyAsp_HyAsp–). These simulations did not lead to a stable binding
mode, as indicated by the fact that the lipid moved in and out of
the binding pocket (see Figure S7c,g in
the SI). However, simulations where the orientation of both Phe7(NH)
and Phe7(O) were restrained to point into the pocket while the HyAsp15
side chain was kept away from its MD model orientation lead to a quite
stable binding of the lipid (simulation PE_HyAsp_Ala(N)6Gly8HyAsp– shown in Figure S7d,h in
the SI). Thus, orienting the HyAsp15 carboxylate toward the LysAla19/6
bridge is likely to be important for stable binding of PE lipids.
Furthermore, it may be possible to improve the binding stability by
decreasing the flexibility near Phe7. This may be done experimentally
by directly reducing the flexibility of the backbone, e.g., by mutating
Gly8 to a d-amino acid, or by fixating the HyAsp15 orientation,
which also reduces the flexibility of the Phe7 backbone.

Having
characterized the dynamic nature of the interactions of
cinnamycin with its optimal binding partner, PE, binding of other
lipid species may also be investigated and compared (Table 2). As cinnamycin-producing organisms
modify their PE lipids to mPE for immunity, the interaction with mPE
is of particular interest to study.24 Simulations
of cinnamycin with POmPE in the binding pocket (mPE_HyAsp) revealed
only the less-stable binding mode characterized by a rather long binding
distance of 4.5 ± 0.4 Å (Figure 7a, dark green curve). Another difference,
apparent from Figure 8b, is that the correlation observed for POPE, between the number
of hydrogen bonds to the lipid ammonium and the orientation of Phe7(O),
was not found for POmPE (see Figure 8b, blue curve). This suggests that Phe7 probably forms
the weakest hydrogen bond with the lipid since it is broken when changing
the type of the lipid bound from POPE to POmPE, while the hydrogen
bonds with Val13(NH) and the HyAsp15 side chain were all conserved
throughout the simulations (see Figure S8 in the SI). Restraining HyAsp15 (simulations named mPE_HyAsp_HyAsp+) did not lead to a stable binding of POmPE (Figure 8c).

Cinnamycin with POPS
bound (PS_HyAsp) (Figure 9d) was remarkably stable at a distance of
3.5 ± 0.2 Å (red in Figure 7a), similar to the distance observed for the tightly
bound mode of POPE. This suggests that the observed selectivity for
PE over PS is not due to steric clash between the peptide and the
carboxylate group of the bound PS lipid head group. Instead the selectivity
may be due to differences in the orientation and interaction with
the membrane (see Section 2.4). It should be noted that bacterial membranes typically contain
insignificant amounts of PS,25,26 whereas mammalian plasma
membranes contain PS primarily in the inner leaflet but is present
at the surface of the cell during apoptosis.27

Figure 9 Relation
between the orientation of specific functional groups
and the stability of the binding over time for cinnamycin with the
HyAsp15Asp mutation. The simulations were conducted with (a) POPE
bound to cinnamycin HyAsp15Asp (PE_Asp), (b) as (a) but with the orientation
of the side chain of Asp restrained (PE_Asp_Asp+), (c)
POmPE bound to cinnamycin HyAsp15Asp (mPE_Asp), and (d) as (c) but
with the orientation of Asp restrained (mPE_Asp_Asp+).
Color coding and axes are the same as in Figure 6.

Starting the simulation with POPC in the binding pocket of cinnamycin
(PC_HyAsp) led to an even less-stable binding than observed with POmPE
bound, and the lipid was released after ∼300 ns in the simulation
shown in Figure 8e.
The release of the lipid indicates that the lipids need to interact
with the ammonium-binding site to exhibit a high affinity for cinnamycin.

2.3 Function of HyAsp15
Cinnamycin has
five post-translational modifications: one Lan, two MeLan, one LysAla,
and one HyAsp. The Lan, MeLan, and LysAla residues crosslink cinnamycin,
which results in a relatively rigid peptide with a well-defined structure,
while the function of HyAsp15 is not similarly clear. HyAsp15 was
observed in the simulations to make a hydrogen bond with the ammonium
of the PE lipid. However, it is uncertain if this is needed for a
stable binding of the lipids. To investigate this further, HyAsp15
was mutated in silico to an Asp, and simulations were conducted with
POPE bound (PE_Asp), with POPE bound and the orientation of Asp15
restrained (PE_Asp_Asp+), with POmPE bound (mPE_Asp), and
with POmPE bound and the orientation of Asp15 restrained (mPE_Asp_Asp+). A plot equivalent to Figure 6 of the correlation between the orientation of Phe7(O),
Phe7(NH), and the side chain of Asp15, the number of hydrogen bounds
to the ammonium group of the lipid, and the distance between the ammonium
and the binding pocket are given in Figure 9 for representative simulations.

With
POPE located in the binding site of the mutated cinnamycin (PE_Asp),
the distance between the lipid ammonium and the binding pocket was
found to change substantially indicating that the interaction was
unstable (Figure 9a).
Rather the lipid moved between the bound state located at a distance
of 3.5 ± 0.2 Å and a weakly bound state at 4.3 ± 0.4
Å similar to what was observed for the wild-type (wt) cinnamycin
(dark purple lines in Figure 7b). Unlike the wt cinnamycin, two peaks, located at 3.3 ±
0.1 and 3.8 ± 0.3 Å, were still observed in the distance
histogram after restraining Asp15 (PE_Asp_Asp+, the light
purple line in Figure 7b). The conformation located at 3.8 Å was not observed for the
wt cinnamycin (Figure 7a) indicating that the hydroxyl group hinders the accessibility of
this state hereby stabilizing the binding of PE lipids when compared
to the cinnamycin HyAsp15Asp mutant. Furthermore, while restraining
the HyAsp15 in the wt cinnamycin stabilized the orientation of Phe7
backbone (PE_HyAsp_HyAsp+), it was still flexible in the
mutant even with Asp15 restrained (PE_Asp_Asp+, Figure 9b). The increased
flexibility of the Phe7 in the mutant indicates that the tight binding
of PE in the wt cinnamycin decreases the flexibility of the backbone
near Phe7. Likewise, the number of hydrogen bonds is decreased compared
to wt cinnamycin (compare the blue line in Figures 9b and 7a), which destabilized
the binding. With POmPE bound (mPE_Asp), a single peak was observed
at 4.5 ± 0.4 Å (the dark green line in Figure 7b) and the Phe7 was quite flexible
(Figure 9c) equivalent
to what was observed for the wt peptide (mPE_HyAsp). Restraining the
Asp15 side chain also failed to generate a stable bound conformation
(mPE_Asp_Asp+, Figure 9d), and the number of hydrogen bonds decreased when
compared to both the wt cinnamycin and the unrestrained HyAsp15Asp
mutant. This is because mPE can only bind in the less-stable binding
mode exemplified for PE at the 60 and 85 ns snapshots in Figure 6. Thus, when the
Asp15 side chain orientation is restrained, no hydrogen bonds can
be made with Asp15 and the lipid ammonium only forms a hydrogen bond
to Val13.

Overall, it may be concluded that the function of
the hydroxyl
group mainly is to fix the PE lipid in the binding pocket, which stabilizes
the binding site, and to act as a hydrogen bond acceptor to form a
hydrogen-bonding network fitting the tetrahedral shape of the ammonium
group, as illustrated in Figure 4c. Furthermore, the small ammonium-binding pocket only
allows the PE head group to bind tightly while disallowing the binding
of larger head groups such as mPE, independent of whether the Asp15
is hydroxylated or not. Finally, the binding mode of POPS is very
similar to that of POPE indicating that the selectivity for POPE over
POPS cannot be explained by the interactions between cinnamycin and
the lipid head group. Instead, the selectivity could be related to
the orientation of the peptide in the membrane, which we will be explaining
next.

2.4 Orientation of Cinnamycin Relative to the
Membrane
Interactions of cinnamycin with different lipid
species also affected the orientation and the insertion depth of the
peptide in the membrane, as apparent from Figure 10 (the roll angle and the distance to the
membrane center are defined in Figure S9 in the SI).

Figure 10 Position and orientation of cinnamycin relative to the
membrane
are dependent on the lipid bound and the composition of the membrane.
(a) The roll angle (see the text for definition) with respect to the
bilayer of the peptide when POPE (PE_HyAsp), POmPE (mPE_HyAsp), POPS
(PS_HyAsp), or POPC (PC_HyAsp) is bound to cinnamycin in a POPC bilayer
and with POPE bound to cinnamycin in a 4:1 POPE/POPG bilayer (PE_PEPG).
An angle of ∼0° indicates that the binding pocket is oriented
into the solvent, while an angle between 90 and 270° indicates
that the binding pocket is oriented toward the membrane. (b) The distance
above the bilayer center of: the center of mass (COM) of cinnamycin
(circles), ester oxygens of the bound lipid and nonbound PE and PG
lipids (squares), and ester oxygens of the nonbound PC lipids (the
black line is mean and the shaded area is standard deviation). Error
bars specify standard deviation of the measured distances.

With POPE or POmPE lipids bound (simulations PE_HyAsp and
mPE_HyAsp,
respectively), the roll angle of the peptide shown in Figure 10a was ∼230° indicating
that the binding pocket was pointing into the membrane. However, with
POPS bound (PS_HyAsp), the binding pocket was rotated to an angle
of 300° such that it was oriented toward the solvent. The difference
in the orientation is a consequence of the charged carboxylate group
of the POPS head group; the carboxylate projects out of the binding
pocket and its highly hydrophilic character makes it favorable to
position itself in the solvent instead of being embedded in the membrane,
which is fulfilled by rotating the peptide. As previously stated,
the POPC–cinnamycin complex was not stable, and in one of the
simulations, the lipid fully dissociated (Figure 8e). The release also affected the orientation
of the peptide in the membrane since two populations are observed:
one at 90° and the other at about 240°. The one at 240°
is approximately the same orientation as observed for POPE and POmPE,
while the other at 90° occurred due to the release of the lipid
from the binding pocket. The release resulted in the negatively charged
HyAsp15 side chain flipping out of the binding pocket because the
charged carboxylate group was no longer interacting with the positively
charged ammonium group of the lipid. The flip hereby made it necessary
for the peptide to rotate in the membrane to position the carboxylate
group of HyAsp15 toward the solvent and the positively charged head
groups of the membrane.

Besides the roll of the peptide, its
insertion depth was also found
to depend on the lipid-type bound (see circles in Figure 10b). The peptide was situated
deepest in the membrane with POPE bound (PE_HyAsp). Increasing the
size of the head group from PE (PE_HyAsp) over mPE (mPE_HyAsp) to
PC (PC_HyAsp) led to a gradual increase in the distance between the
center of mass (COM) of the peptide and the hydrophobic interface
of the bilayer. Restraining the HyAsp15 side chain to point into the
pocket as in the MD model led to a deeper insertion of the peptide
(comparing X_HyAsp_HyAsp+ with X_HyAsp in Figure 10b), while mutating HyAsp15
to Asp (comparing X_HyAsp with X_Asp in Figure 9b) resulted in the peptide being located
higher in the membrane. These data correlate with the stability of
peptide–lipid interactions: when the peptide was in complex
with a lipid that showed less-stable binding, the peptides seemed
to be located higher in the membrane. An explanation for this correlation
could be that if the lipids do not fulfill the hydrogen bond donors
and acceptors of cinnamycin, the peptide is located higher in the
membrane to satisfy these missing hydrogen bonds by interaction with
the polar part of the lipids or the solvent. Cinnamycin with POPS
bound (PS_HyAsp) was located highest in the membrane possibly due
to the hydrophilic character of the carboxyl group of the POPS head
group, which was, consequently, observed to be solvated in the simulations.

Investigating the position of the bound lipid along the bilayer
normal (squares in Figure 9b) also shows that, when POPE was bound (PE_HyAsp), the ester
oxygens of the bound lipid were pushed further into the membrane compared
to the nonbound lipids (the shaded area in Figure 9b). This shift of the bound lipid compared
to the other lipids demonstrates that deep insertion of the peptide
also led the hydrophilic part of the bound lipid being placed far
into the hydrophobic part of the membrane. This effect was much smaller
with POPS bound (the red square in Figure 9b) in accordance with the need for placing
the carboxylate group of the PS lipid head group in the solvent. Similar
to the peptide position, the distance between the bound lipid and
the bilayer center increased when going from PE over mPE to PC signifying
that the higher positioning of the peptide in the bilayer results
in less insertion of the polar head group of the bound lipid in the
hydrophobic part of the bilayer.

A bilayer with a lipid composition
of 20:80 POPG/POPE was also
modeled, to mimic a bacterial membrane.28 In these simulations, two different populations of orientations
were observed (Figure 10a), one at about 60° (i.e., the pocket pointing toward the solvent)
and the other at approximately 230° (i.e., the pocket oriented
into the membrane). The conformations giving rise to the peak at 60°
all originate from the same simulation in which interactions between
POPG lipids in the bilayer and the two positively charged residues,
Arg2 and LysAla19/6, are observed. These two residues are placed at
opposite sides of the peptide with respect to the binding pocket.
The electrostatic interactions, therefore, orient the peptide such
that these residues point toward the bilayer, thus exposing the binding
pocket and the bound head group of the bound lipid to the solvent.
The simulation with the pocket oriented toward the solvent furthermore
resulted in two peaks in the pocket distance histogram located at
3.5 ± 0.4 and 4.3 ± 0.8 Å (the black curve in Figure S10d in the SI) indicating that orienting
the binding pocket into the solvent leads to a much less-stable binding
of the bound lipid compared to when the pocket is oriented toward
the bilayer center. For comparison, only one was observed at 3.5 Å
± 0.4 Å in the two other repeats wherein the binding pocket
is oriented into the bilayer (orange and light blue lines in Figure S10d in the SI). The electrostatic interaction
observed between Arg2 and LysAla19/6 is likely reduced in vivo by
the higher ion concentration present, and we, thus, regard the single
simulation showing these interactions to be less abundant in vivo
and, therefore, do not expect the orientation of the peptide to be
significantly affected by the PG lipids. Furthermore, the ester oxygens
specifying the hydrophobic interface are located further from the
bilayer center for the POPE/POPG bilayer as compared to the POPC bilayers
(brown squares compared to the black line in Figure 10b), indicating a higher hydrophobic thickness.
This is consistent with the higher lipid tail order and lower head
group area previously found for POPE bilayers compared to POPC bilayers.29−32 This could be one of the reasons for cinnamycin being positioned
higher in the PE/PG bilayer compared to that in the POPC bilayer in
the simulations.

2.5 Membrane Effects
Within the timescale
simulated, with only one cinnamycin molecule present, we do not observe
any changes in the biophysical properties of the membrane that is
indicative of early stages of membrane disruption, even after we extended
three simulations to 1 μs (one PE_HyAsp, one PE_HyAsp_HyAsp+, and one PS_HyAsp. Changes in water penetration and membrane
thickness are shown in Figure S11). It
is likely that both a higher concentration of cinnamycin is required
as well as an extended simulation time. This is, however, beyond the
scope of this paper.

2.6 Discussion
We
have shown that cinnamycin
binds to PE lipids via a tight hydrogen-bonding network formed between
the lipid ammonium and the backbone carbonyls of Val13 and Phe7 alongside
the side chain of HyAsp15. Further stabilization of the lipid binding
is obtained through binding of the lipid phosphate to a binding site
formed by the backbone amides of residues 10–13. Besides showing
more extensive favorable interactions between the lipid and the peptide
than observed in the DMSO-solution NMR structure,20 this new model can explain previously puzzling experimental
findings. First of all, two peaks were observed in the NMR spectrum
for the LysAla19/6 side chain ammonium when the peptide was lipid-bound,
while no peaks were present when the peptide was studied in the solution.6 Such a difference indicates that the binding
of a lipid results in changes in the protein structure or dynamics
that causes the two hydrogen atoms to experience different environments
and which, furthermore, slows the hydrogen exchange with water. These
findings were initially thought to be due to interactions with the
phosphate group of the lipid,6 however,
with the publication of the NMR model, it became apparent that the
phosphate group is too far away to affect the environment of the LysAla19/6
side chain and no obvious explanation was evident from the NMR model.20 Our new model shows that the HyAsp15 side chain
needs to be oriented into the pocket for optimal lipid binding. Such
orientation of the carboxylate group of HyAsp15 results in hydrogen
bond formation between the HyAsp15 and the ammonium of the LysAla19/6,
the lipid ammonium, as well as the backbone amide of Ser6 and Phe7
(see Figure 4). This
interaction between the HyAsp15 and the LysAla19/6 fixes the LysAla19/6
bridge, hereby slowing the hydrogen exchange and making the environment
of the two ammonium hydrogen atoms different, thus explaining how
two individual peaks can appear in the NMR measurements upon lipid
binding.

Another result from the current study is that, in the
MD model, the lipid phosphate makes hydrogen bonds with the amide
hydrogens of residues 10–13. These interactions are in accordance
with several studies: Wakamatsu et al. used NMR to show that Val13
loses its contacts with Gly8 and Pro9 when a lipid binds.6 This is consistent with phosphate binding at
this site. Furthermore, studies have shown that phosphatidylethanolamine
binds to cinnamycin, while phosphatidylpropanolamine does not.12 The fact that the major difference between these
two lipids is the distance between the ammonium and the phosphate
group indicates that both functional groups bind to the peptide and
that the distance between them is important. Both of these experimental
findings indicate the existence of a phosphate-binding site in cinnamycin.

How cinnamycin kills bacterial cells remains poorly understood.
The simulations presented here indicate that cinnamycin inserts itself
deep in the membrane when PE is bound thereby drawing the bound PE
head group far into the hydrophobic part of the membrane. This is
consistent with the high electron density inside the hydrophobic region
of the bilayer observed by small-angle X-ray scattering measurements.21 While the phosphoethanolamine moiety of the
lipid is screened by interactions with cinnamycin, the glycerol group
is not. The embedding of this hydrophilic group may, therefore, introduce
a local polar environment in the hydrophobic part of the lipid bilayer,
which can be speculated to be necessary for permeabilization, since
the glycerol linker group has been found essential for permeabilization
of vesicles but not for lipid binding.7 Since cinnamycin has been observed to transport not only PE lipids
across the membrane but also other lipids present in the membrane,
such as PC lipids,8 it is unlikely that
it is only the bound lipid that moves over the membrane during these
lipid flip-flops.

The binding of POPS to cinnamycin was remarkably
stable in the
simulations; however, the peptide was at the same time located much
higher in the membrane compared to having PE bound. Experimentally,
the binding affinity of cinnamycin-like peptides for PS lipids has
been found to be much lower than for PE but higher than for other
lipids such as PC.8,19 An explanation for this difference
in binding affinity may be that by forcing cinnamycin to be positioned
higher in the membrane, PS hinders the peptide from forming interactions
with the hydrophobic core of the membrane equally favorable as when
PE is bound.8,19 Furthermore, isothermal titration
calorimetry data show that hydrophobic interactions contribute significantly
in the binding of cinnamycin to PE-containing membranes indicating
a deep insertion in the membrane.22,33

PC lipids
were found to interact only with the phosphate-binding
site, because the choline group was too large to fit in the amine
binding site in addition to being unable to form hydrogen bonds at
this site. The binding affinity of cinnamycin for POPC, which is rather
low,33 may, therefore, be attributed to
hydrophobic interactions and the interaction with the phosphate-binding
site.

3 Conclusions
In summary, the binding
conformation of the PE–cinnamycin
complex was optimized, the binding of different lipids was characterized,
the function of the hydroxyl group of HyAsp15 was investigated, and
the location of the peptide/lipid complex in a membrane was examined.
The selectivity of cinnamycin for PE lipids is suggested to be caused
by a hydrogen-bonding network formed between the lipid ammonium and
the backbone carbonyl of Phe7 and Val13 in addition to the hydroxyl
and the carboxylate groups of HyAsp15 (Figure 4c). Beside this ammonium-binding site, the
backbone amide hydrogens of residues 10–13 were found to interact
with the lipid phosphate. Mutating HyAsp15 to Asp in silico resulted
in an unstable binding conformation of PE indicating that the hydroxylation
of Asp15 is also important for lipid binding.

Cinnamycin was
found to bind deeply in the bilayer when PE was
present, while binding of PS leads the peptide being positioned higher
in the membrane and with the binding pocket oriented into the solvent
instead of into the membrane (see Figure 10a). The selectivity for PE over PS may,
therefore, be attributed to the stronger hydrophobic interaction obtained
between cinnamycin and the bilayer when PE is bound since no significant
difference in interactions was observed between cinnamycin and the
bound PS or PE lipid head group.

In accordance with experiments,
cinnamycin and mPE were found to
form a less stable complex compared to PE interacting with cinnamycin.
This selectivity for PE over mPE was mainly due to the secondary ammonium
group of mPE not being able to fit in the binding pocket and the hydrogen
bond with the Phe7 amide being lost. The loss of this specific hydrogen
bond is in accordance with the observation that it is the most dynamic
area of the binding pocket due to the flexibility of the Gly8 backbone
placed next to it (see Figure 1). Restricting the motion around Phe7, e.g., by mutating Gly8
to a d-amino acid, could, therefore, potentially stabilize
PE lipid binding further, increasing the efficiency of the peptide.

In summary, our results shed further light on the lipid–cinnamycin
complexes, and the insights obtained from this study may be used to
improve the lipid binding affinity of the peptide or even in the design
of novel peptides with increased lipid binding affinity that could
aid in the targeting of mPE-rich membranes. Furthermore, this study
represents an initial step toward elucidating the membrane perturbation
mechanism, since the structure obtained can be used to simulate how
multiple peptides will interact with and perturb the membrane.

4 Methods
Simulations of the cinnamycin–DLPE complex
in different
solvents (see Table 1) were used to elucidate the optimal structure of the complex. DLPE
was chosen to allow for efficient sampling of the bound conformation
by keeping the size of the simulations to a minimum, as it has short
acyl tails and a PE head group (and is represented in the CHARMM36
force field.34) Because none of the simulations
initiated directly from the NMR model resulted in stable complex formation
(see Section 2.1),
simulations were equilibrated with restraints derived from the NMR
data (see Figure 11) as specified in Table 1, and the production runs were conducted without restraints.

Figure 11 Distance
restraints between cinnamycin and the lipid corresponding
to the reported NOEs6 were applied to obtain
a stable complex. The black arrows are restraints applied to keep
the distance below 5 Å, while the red arrow specifies a restraint
applied to keep that distance below 4 Å. These distances were
chosen on the basis of the distances observed in the 10 NMR models
(PDB code 2DDE) and their relative intensity described in the manuscript.

Besides the simulations of a cinnamycin–lipid
complex in
different solvents, we also simulated cinnamycin bound to lipids and
embedded in a lipid bilayer membrane environment to investigate the
origin of the selectivity of cinnamycin for PE lipids. The lipids
bound to cinnamycin, thus, explored were 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (POPE), N-methyl 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(POmPE), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine (POPS), and POPC. Coarse-grained (CG) simulations with
the MARTINI CG force field22,23 were used to assemble
lipid bilayers around cinnamycin, thus generating configurations from
which the atomistic simulations were initiated (see Table 2). The production runs were
conducted without the use of the NMR restraints. All time-evolution
plots derived from these simulations are running averages with a window
size of 100 frames (1 ns). A fuller description of the methods used
is provided in the SI.

Table 2 Atomistic Simulations of Cinnamycin–Lipid
Complexes in a Bilayer
simulation
namea	simulation
time (μs)	lipid bound	bilayer type	mutation	restrained
residuesb	
PE_HyASP	4 × 0.5	POPE	POPC	 	 	
PE_HyASP_HyASP	2 × 0.5	POPE	POPC	 	HyAsp15	
PE_HyASP_Ala(N)6Gly8HyAsp	2 × 0.5	POPE	POPC	 	Ala(N)6, Gly8, HyAsp15	
PE_HyAsp_HyAsp	2 × 0.5	POPE	POPC	 	HyAsp15	
PE_Asp	2 × 0.5	POPE	POPC	Asp15	 	
PE_Asp_Asp	2 × 0.5	POPE	POPC	Asp15	Asp15+	
PE_HyAsp_Ala(N)6	2 × 0.5	POPE	POPC	 	Ala(N)6	
PE_HyAsp_Gly8	2 × 0.5	POPE	POPC	 	Gly8	
mPE_HyAsp	6 × 0.5	POmPE	POPC	 	 	
a Simulations are
named lipid_residue_setup,
in which the lipid refers to the lipid in complex with cinnamycin,
the residue denotes the amino acid at position 15 of cinnamycin, and
the setup reflects either the restraints applied or changes in the
bilayer.

b Restraints applied
in the simulations.
Restraints specified with a + or – superscript denoting whether
the side chain χ1 angle is restrained in or away
from the gauche(+) conformation, respectively, while the Ala(N)6 and
Gly8 labels specify restraints put on the backbone to fix the backbone
orientation of Phe7(HN) and Phe7(O) to fit the optimized structure
(see details in the SI).

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02949.Methods section
including the used
simulation parameters; bond parameters, angle parameters, dihedral
parameters; atom types and charges of the residues; CG parameters;
distribution of ϕ and ψ; NOE analysis; DLPE; root-mean-square
fluctuation of cinnamycin; relation between different interactions
and the stability of the binding over time; PE–cinnamycin complex
with different residues restrained; hydrogen bonds between the lipid
amine and the binding pocket; definition of the orientation of the
peptide with respect to the bilayer; distance histogram; plot comparing
early and final mass densities (Tables S1–S4 and Figures S1–S11)
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02949_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
⊥ Schrödinger,
120 West 45th Street, 17th Floor, New York,
New York 10036, United States (H.K.).

Author Present Address
∥ Peking-Tsinghua
Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced
Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People’s
Republic of China (C.S.).

Author Present Address
§ Center
for Quantitative Biology, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary
Studies, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People’s Republic
of China (C.S.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Danish Council for Independent
Research | Technology and Production Sciences (FTP-0602-01778B), the
Danish National Research Foundation (DNRF59) and the Danish Centre
for Scientific Computing (CSCAA). H.K. was supported by an Alfred
Benzon Fellowship. C.S. was supported by a Marie Curie Intra European
Fellowship within the 7th European Community Framework Program. Research
in MS’s group is supported by grants from the Wellcome Trust,
BBSRC, EPSRC, and the Leverhulme Trust.
==== Refs
References
Dischinger J. ; Chipalu S. B. ; Bierbaum G. 
Lantibiotics:
Promising Candidates
for Future Applications in Health Care . Int.
J. Med. Microbiol. 
2014 , 304 , 51 –62 . 10.1016/j.ijmm.2013.09.003 .24210177 
European Economic Community Commission Directive . Official J. European Union 1983 , 255 , 1 −6  83/463/EEC.
Cotter P. D. ; Hill C. ; Ross R. P. 
Bacteriocins: Developing
Innate Immunity
for Food . Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 
2005 , 3 , 777 –788 . 10.1038/nrmicro1273 .16205711 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration GRAS Notice No. GRN 000135 Agency Response Letter , 2004 .
Cotter P. D. ; Ross R. P. ; Hill C. 
Bacteriocins - a Viable
Alternative
to Antibiotics? . Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 
2013 , 11 , 95 –105 . 10.1038/nrmicro2937 .23268227 
Wakamatsu K. ; Choung S. Y. ; Kobayashi T. ; Inoue K. ; Higashijima T. ; Miyazawa T. 
Complex Formation of
Peptide Antibiotic Ro09-0198 with
Lysophosphatidylethanolamine:1H NMR Analyses in Dimethyl Sulfoxide
Solution . Biochemistry 
1990 , 29 , 113 –118 . 10.1021/bi00453a013 .2157477 
Choung S.-Y. ; Kobayashi T. ; Takemoto K. ; Ishitsuka H. ; Inoue K. 
Interaction of a Cyclic Peptide, Ro09-0198, with Phosphatidylethanolamine
in Liposomal Membranes . Biochim. Biophys. Acta,
Biomembr. 
1988 , 940 , 180 –187 . 10.1016/0005-2736(88)90193-9 .
Makino A. ; Baba T. ; Fujimoto K. ; Iwamoto K. ; Yano Y. ; Terada N. ; Ohno S. ; Sato S. B. ; Ohta A. ; Umeda M. ; et al. Cinnamycin
(Ro 09-0198) Promotes Cell Binding and Toxicity
by Inducing Transbilayer Lipid Movement . J.
Biol. Chem. 
2003 , 278 , 3204 –3209 . 10.1074/jbc.M210347200 .12446685 
Ökesli A. ; Cooper L. E. ; Fogle E. J. ; van der Donk W. A. 
Nine Post-Translational
Modifications during the Biosynthesis of Cinnamycin . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 13753 –13760 . 10.1021/ja205783f .21770392 
Zhao M. 
Lantibiotics
as Probes for Phosphatidylethanolamine . Amino
Acids 
2011 , 41 , 1071 –1079 . 10.1007/s00726-009-0386-9 .21573677 
Bierbaum G. ; Sahl H.-G. 
Lantibiotics: Mode
of Action, Biosynthesis and Bioengineering . Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 
2009 , 10 , 2 –18 . 10.2174/138920109787048616 .19149587 
Choung S.-Y. ; Kobayashi T. ; Inoue J. ; Takemoto K. ; Ishitsuka H. ; Inoue K. 
Hemolytic Activity of a Cyclic Peptide Ro09-0198 Isolated from Streptoverticillium . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
1988 , 940 , 171 –179 . 10.1016/0005-2736(88)90192-7 .
Lindenfelser L. A. ; Pridham T. G. ; Kemp C. E. 
Antibiotics against Plant Disease. V. Activity
of Cinnamycin against Selected Microorganisms . Antibiot. Chemother. 
1959 , 9 , 690 –695 .
Kido Y. ; Hamakado T. ; Yoshida T. ; Anno M. ; Motoki Y. 
Isolation
and Characterization of Ancovenin, a New Inhibitor of Angiotensin-i
Converting Enzyme, Produced by Actinomycetes . J. Antibiot. 
1983 , 36 , 1295 –1299 . 10.7164/antibiotics.36.1295 .6315666 
Märki F. ; Hänni E. ; Fredenhagen A. ; van Oostrum J. 
Mode of Action
of the Lanthionine-Containing Peptide Antibiotics Duramycin, Duramycin
B and C, and Cinnamycin as Indirect Inhibitors of Phospholipase A2 . Biochem. Pharmacol. 
1991 , 42 , 2027 –2035 . 10.1016/0006-2952(91)90604-4 .1741778 
Naruse N. ; Tenmyo O. ; Tomita K. ; Konishi M. ; Miyaki T. ; Kawaguchi H. ; Fukase K. ; Wakamiya T. ; Shiba T. 
Lanthiopeptin,
a New Peptide Antibiotic - Production, Isolation and Properties of
Lanthiopeptin . J. Antibiot. 
1989 , 42 , 837 –845 . 10.7164/antibiotics.42.837 .2544544 
Cotter P. D. ; Hill C. ; Ross R. P. 
Bacterial Lantibiotics:
Strategies
to Improve Therapeutic Potential . Curr. Protein
Pept. Sci. 
2005 , 6 , 61 –75 . 10.2174/1389203053027584 .15638769 
Yao S. ; Hu K. ; Tang G. ; Liang X. ; Du K. ; Nie D. ; Jiang S. ; Zang L. 
Positron Emission Tomography Imaging
of Cell Death with [18F]FPDuramycin . Apoptosis 
2014 , 19 , 841 –850 . 10.1007/s10495-013-0964-x .24464510 
Hou S. ; Johnson S. E. ; Zhao M. 
A One-Step
Staining Probe for Phosphatidylethanolamine . ChemBioChem 
2015 , 16 , 1955 –1960 . 10.1002/cbic.201500127 .26224023 
Hosoda K. ; Ohya M. ; Kohno T. ; Maeda T. ; Endo S. ; Wakamatsu K. 
Structure
Determination of an Immunopotentiator Peptide,
Cinnamycin, Complexed with Lysophosphatidylethanolamine by 1H-NMR1 . J. Biochem. 
1996 , 119 , 226 –230 . 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a021226 .8882709 
Iwamoto K. ; Hayakawa T. ; Murate M. ; Makino A. ; Ito K. ; Fujisawa T. ; Kobayashi T. 
Curvature-Dependent
Recognition of
Ethanolamine Phospholipids by Duramycin and Cinnamycin . Biophys. J. 
2007 , 93 , 1608 –1619 . 10.1529/biophysj.106.101584 .17483159 
Machaidze G. ; Seelig J. 
Specific Binding of
Cinnamycin (Ro 09-0198) to Phosphatidylethanolamine.
Comparison between Micellar and Membrane Environments . Biochemistry 
2003 , 42 , 12570 –12576 . 10.1021/bi035225b .14580203 
Gao J. ; Zheng H. 
Illuminating the Lipidome
to Advance Biomedical Research: Peptide-Based
Probes of Membrane Lipids . Future Med. Chem. 
2013 , 5 , 947 –959 . 10.4155/fmc.13.66 .23682570 
O’Rourke S. ; Widdick D. ; Bibb M. 
A Novel Mechanism of Immunity Controls
the Onset of Cinnamycin Biosynthesis in Streptomyces
cinnamoneus DSM 40646 . J. Ind.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
2017 , 44 , 563 –572 . 10.1007/s10295-016-1869-9 .27858169 
Zhang Y.-M. ; Rock C. O. 
Membrane Lipid Homeostasis
in Bacteria . Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 
2008 , 6 , 222 –233 . 10.1038/nrmicro1839 .18264115 
Epand R. M. ; Epand R. F. 
Bacterial Membrane Lipids in the Action of Antimicrobial
Agents . J. Pept. Sci. 
2011 , 17 , 298 –305 . 10.1002/psc.1319 .21480436 
Frey B. ; Gaipl U. 
The Immune Functions of Phosphatidylserine in Membranes of Dying
Cells and Microvesicles . Semin. Immunopathol. 
2011 , 33 , 497 –516 . 10.1007/s00281-010-0228-6 .20941495 
Epand R. F. R. M. ; Epand R. F. R. M. 
Domains in
Bacterial Membranes and
the Action of Antimicrobial Agents . Mol. Biosyst. 
2009 , 5 , 580 –587 . 10.1039/b900278m .19462015 
Lafleur M. ; Cullis P. R. ; Bloom M. 
Modulation of the Orientational Order
Profile of the Lipid Acyl Chain in the Lα Phase . Eur. Biophys. J. 
1990 , 19 , 55 –62 . 10.1007/BF00185086 .2073890 
Fenske D. B. ; Jarrell H. C. ; Guo Y. ; Hui S. W. 
Effect of Unsaturated
Phosphatidylethanolamine on the Chain Order Profile of Bilayers at
the Onset of the Hexagonal Phase Transition. A Deuterium NMR Study . Biochemistry 
1990 , 29 , 11222 –11229 . 10.1021/bi00503a010 .2271708 
Kučerka N. ; van Oosten B. ; Pan J. ; Heberle F. A. ; Harroun T. A. ; Katsaras J. 
Molecular Structures
of Fluid Phosphatidylethanolamine
Bilayers Obtained from Simulation-to-Experiment Comparisons and Experimental
Scattering Density Profiles . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2015 , 119 , 1947 –1956 . 10.1021/jp511159q .25436970 
Kučerka N. ; Nieh M.-P. ; Katsaras J. 
Fluid Phase
Lipid Areas and Bilayer
Thicknesses of Commonly Used Phosphatidylcholines as a Function of
Temperature . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2011 , 1808 , 2761 –2771 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.07.022 .
Machaidze G. ; Ziegler A. ; Seelig J. 
Specific Binding
of Ro 09-0198 (Cinnamycin)
to Phosphatidylethanolamine: A Thermodynamic Analysis . Biochemistry 
2002 , 41 , 1965 –1971 . 10.1021/bi015841c .11827543 
Klauda J. B. ; Venable R. M. ; Freites J. A. ; O’Connor J. W. ; Tobias D. J. ; Mondragon-Ramirez C. ; Vorobyov I. ; MacKerell A. D. ; Pastor R. W. 
Update of the CHARMM
All-Atom Additive Force Field
for Lipids: Validation on Six Lipid Types . J.
Phys. Chem. B 
2010 , 114 , 7830 –7843 . 10.1021/jp101759q .20496934

