
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145756110.1021/acsomega.7b00355ArticleQuantifying Gauche Defects and Phase Evolution in
Self-Assembled Monolayers
through Sessile Drops Chen Jiahao †‡§Chang Boyce †‡Oyola-Reynoso Stephanie †Wang Zhengjia †Thuo Martin *†§∥† Department
of Materials Science and Engineering, Iowa
State University, 2220 Hoover Hall, Ames, Iowa 50011, United
States‡ Division
of Materials Science and Engineering, Ames
Laboratory, Ames, Iowa 50011, United
States§ Micro-Electronic
Research Center, Iowa State University, 133 Applied Sciences Complex I,
1925 Scholl Road, Ames, Iowa 50011, United States∥ Biopolymer
and Biocomposites Research Team, Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites, Iowa State University, 1041 Food Sciences Building, Ames, Iowa 50011, United States* E-mail: mthuo@iastate.edu. Phone: +1-515-294-8581.15 05 2017 31 05 2017 2 5 2072 2084 30 03 2017 04 05 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical
Society2017American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs)
are widely used in surface modifications,
specifically in tuning the surface chemistry of materials. The structure
and properties of SAMs have been extensively studied often with sophisticated
tools, even for the simplest n-alkanethiolate SAMs.
In SAMs, especially in linear n-alkanethiolates,
the properties are dependent on the chain length, which is best manifested
in the so-called odd–even effect, a simple yet not fully understood
phenomenon. One main challenge is fully delineating the origin of
length-dependent properties, which can be due to the structure (ideal
SAMs), defect evolution, or substrate-molecule effects. This study
demonstrates that utilizing the wetting behavior of polar (water)
and nonpolar (hexadecane (HD)) solvents on n-alkanethiolate
SAMs formed on ultraflat gold and silver surfaces, the evolution of
chain-length-dependent gauche defects can be revealed and parameterized
through a newly defined dimensionless number (χ). The observation
of the odd–even effect in hydrophobicity, however, depends
on the thiol chain length, and it was only observed on longer-chain
(>C8) molecules. The trend in this odd–even effect
demonstrates that there are three main transitions in the nature of
wetting, hence structure, across n-alkanethiols.
From wetting with HD, the role of dispersive components in wetting
reveal that the SAMs are dynamic, which we attribute to rotations
associated with previously reported evolution in gauche defects and
changes in packing density. Therefore, from re-expression of the Young–Dupre
equation, we define a new dimensionless number associated with molecular
conformations, whose periodicity mirrors the energetics of Goodman’s
conformations of n-alkanes in unbound states and
associated four- or two-twist turns. Therefore, we infer that the
evolution in surface energy is largely due to molecular conformations
and associated relaxations of the bound thiolates.

document-id-old-9ao7b00355document-id-new-14ao-2017-003559ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Self-assembled monolayers
(SAMs) are two-dimensional materials
that have shown potential for broad applications in surface science
and nanotechnology. These applications include sensing, molecular
electronics, plasmonics, and surface modifications.1−7 Alkanethiolate SAMs have a simple molecular structure and chemical
composition; hence, they are experimentally8−13 and theoretically14−18 well studied. Understanding the structure and properties of SAMs
has been plagued by some inconsistencies19−21 or has suffered
under some generalized “truths” that, in part, has hampered
the application of this rather potentially useful technology. Recent
advances in re-characterization of n-alkanethiolate
SAMs through either fundamental wetting studies21−25 or functional devices1,26,27 has brought to light the need to re-assess the assumed
“facts” about SAMs. Fundamental properties of interest
include: (i) hydrophobicity and the associated odd–even effect,
(ii) nature of the unbound (surface-exposed) interface upon SAM formation,
(iii) coupling between surface and bulk properties in defining SAM
properties, (iv) effect of a substrate (chemistry, faceting, roughness,
etc.) on the nature of the SAMs, (v) role of defects and the effect
of molecular length on defect density—especially those related
to molecular conformations, like gauche defects (a type of defect
caused by molecular rotation into its corresponding gauche conformer),2,28 and (vi) phase evolution (liquid-like or solid-like) with increase
in the size of the molecules forming the SAMs.2,28 The
observed overinterpretation or generalization about the properties
of the SAM was, in part, due to the lack of state-of-the-art tools
in characterization and/or fabrication, coupled with an inability
to fabricate ultraflat surfaces (and/or surfaces with tunable morphologies
at low roughness), more than two decades ago. Recently, new approaches
and tools have emerged that allow for improved surface fabrication
and characterization. Improved methods of modeling or processing surface-generated
data, coupled with multipronged experimental and theoretical tools,
have led to the improved understanding of surface and interface. With
advances in the quality of substrates, we believe that this is an
opportune time to revert back to simplicity and deploy fundamentally
simple and basic tools to expand our understanding of SAMs, hence
extend their adoption as a platform technology.

We25,29 and Nijhuis27 have recently demonstrated
that there are, potentially, multiple
transition points in the properties of monolayers, albeit using different
approaches. Where the substrates are ultraflat and molecules pure,
the transitions in physical properties like wetting can only be translated
to be due to changes in the nature of the SAM. There are three main
sources of structural changes in a SAM, viz.: (i) the SAM formation
process—because this is an equilibration process, lack of ample
time for the system to interrogate the free-energy space during SAM
formation can lead to nonequilibrium structures. The SAMs are therefore
always formed in solutions in which the solubility of the thiol is
not very high (low ΔGm) to drive/promote
surface attachment. (ii) The size of the molecule— SAMs’
packing depends on both primary (substrate-molecule) and secondary
(interchain) bonds. The latter, though weak (∼1 kJ/mol for
van der Waals interactions), affects the nature of defects, phase/crystallinity,
and stability of the SAM.8,16,30 (iii) The substrate—the morphology and chemistry of the substrate
affect the quality of the SAM. The effect of surface morphology has
recently been shown to be dependent on the size of the defects (primarily
grain boundaries in ultraflat surfaces) and the size of the molecules
forming the SAM.27,25,31

Background
A SAM is composed of three parts, namely,
the terminal (surface-exposed) moiety, a spacer (often alkyl chains),
and an anchoring/head group (often a thiol that forms a bond with
the Au/Ag substrate), as schematically shown (Figure 1a). Owing to the varying number of repeat
units in the molecules making up the SAMs, the tilt angles of the
terminal CH3 (or CH2CH3) groups are
different between SAMs with odd (SAMO) or even (SAME) numbers of non-H atoms along the chain (for brevity and
clarity, these are abbreviated as total number of C for n-alkanethiolate SAMs). Therefore, this difference in the tilt angle
can result in the odd–even oscillation in SAM properties, such
as wetting, charge transport, thermal, and mechanical properties.15−17,21−23,26,32,33

Figure 1 Background
data on the progress in understanding SAMs. Schematics
of an n-alkanethiolate SAM formed on an Au(111) surface.
(a) Oversimplified illustration of SAMs assuming that n-alkanethiol molecules were directly adsorbed onto high-symmetry
sites on Au (111). (b) Widely acknowledged (√3 × √3)R30°
structure of alkanethiolate SAMs on Au(111). (c) Roughness-dependent
limit to the odd–even effect as captured by hydrophobicity.23 (d) Dependence of the odd–even effect
on the nature of the probe liquid; wetting with apolar liquids shows
odd–even oscillation even with rough surfaces.24 (e) Substrate effects on the odd–even effect oscillation
in wetting for n-alkanethiolates are dominated by
SAMs with odd number of carbons and show convergence at propanethiolate
SAM.25 (f) Spectroscopic evidence (sum-frequency
generation (SFG)) shows no odd–even oscillations for the vibration
peak intensities on rough surfaces, although a disappearing inverse
zigzag oscillation is observed for peak width on both rough and smooth
surfaces.29 This captures the differences
in the evolving interface and bulk structures.

Wetting, a characteristic equilibria-based surface/interface
property,
often captures subtle differences in properties of surface-exposed
moieties, like their conformations or the overall packing density
of an SAM.12,34−37 Wetting depends on both surface
texture and chemistry. It is, therefore, imperative that differences
in the orientation of terminal moieties in SAMO and SAME will manifest as a zigzag oscillation in the contact angles
with increasing molecular length, in part due to changes in surface
topology. The odd–even effect in SAMs wetting, however, is
highly dependent on the identity and/or texture of the substrate on
which the SAMs are fabricated.21,23

n-Alkanethiolate SAMs on an Au surface show a
close-packed lattice of (√3 × √3)R30° at saturation
coverage (1/3 monolayer) (Figure 1b).2 With more complex substrate-molecule
structures being observed from experiments and models,38−40 a secondary structure, c(4 × 2)/(3 ×
√3), has been reported for shorter-chain n-alkanethiolates. Because the length of the molecule (number of carbons
in the chain, n) also affects the structure and hence
properties of the SAMs,8,41 there must be differences in
properties that are chain-length dependent14,16 and therefore some phase changes. Guo and Li,8 for example, proposed a unified model to address the phase
transition from propanethiol (C3) to butanethiol (C4). They claimed that, as expected, van der Waals interactions
increase with the molecular length, leading to a rearrangement of
the alkyl chains and hence a phase change. They also explained that
the ability to tilt and twist with longer-chain molecules (at least
≥C9) gave rise to the formation of the commonly
acknowledged (√3 × √3)R30° top surface structure.
Fenter and Eisenberger,42 however, reported
two distinct regimes, viz., SAMs with n > 14 and n < 14, through structure and phase changes. They also
observed a temperature-dependent coexistence between “solid”
and “liquid” phases of SAMs. In a related study, Jabbarzadeh
and co-workers,16 through molecular dynamics
simulations, noted that gauche defects are more likely in short chains, n ≤ 7, than in the longer homologues. This chain-length-dependent
evolution of gauche defects showed an odd–even effect for molecules
with 12 ≤ n ≤ 15. This chain-length
dependence in gauche defects, however, plateaus out for longer chains, n ≥ 15, with defect densities diminishing at this
point.

Despite the reported chain-length dependence of SAM structures,
various studies characterized the surface and/or bulk properties of
monolayers across all molecular length scales and compared the properties
assuming these SAMs are members of the same structural homologues.
Prato et al.43 observed from optical characterization
(optical spectroscopic ellipsometry) that the thickness of alkanethiolate
SAMs (C6, C12, and C18) does not
scale up with the chain length. With a longer chain length, the thickness
scales more rapidly with an alkyl chain, indicating a chain-length
dependence in the general SAM structure. Recently, however, Nijhuis
and co-workers27 have shown that the charge
transport properties of SAMs with n > 10 are significantly
different than those of shorter homologues. Interestingly, a C10n-alkanethiolate SAM is ∼1 nm thick,
which is equivalent to the recently reported roughness-dependent limit
to observation of the odd–even effect in n-alkanethiolate SAM hydrophobicity (Figure 1c). We inferred that the equivalence in the
SAM thickness (Nijhuis) and the roughness-dependent limit is not a
coincidence but rather a manifestation of a compliance limit in the
SAMs’ ability to dominate the interface properties, which may
in turn indicate either loss of the liquid-like property or a structural
phase transition in the SAM. The difference in the SAM structure,
however, would best manifest in phase changes as reported by Guo and
Li.8

We recently showed that the
spectroscopic (SFG) signals of the
terminal CH3 in n-alkanethiolate SAMs
differ for SAMs with n < 13 and n > 13 (Figure 1f).29 This SFG transition coincides with
the Jabbarzadeh’s
transition16 in the manifestation of the
gauche defects in SAMs. We inferred that a phase transition may be
occurring at this chain length, even though others44 have inferred that C9–C18 SAMs
are solid-like. In a recent report, we25 have also demonstrated that substrate-driven odd–even differences
in SAM hydrophobicity across Au and Ag disappear at chain lengths
≤C3, which suggests that at this chain length, the
interface properties are not solely dictated by the SAM (Figure 1d). We noted that
at such low chain lengths, the SAMs are no longer hydrophobic but
they wet with water (static contact angle <90°). Guo and Li8 had also noted that the structures of the propanethiol
and butanethiol SAMs are different, and as such, the change in wetting
properties and loss of substrate-dependent odd–even effects
attests to the difference across this C3–C4 transition. In a series of reports,21,23−25 we showed that the wetting properties of SAMs not only depend on
the substrate identity and morphology but also on the probe liquid.
We noted that roughness dependence of the odd–even effect shows
a transition at 1 nm for hydrophobicity (Figure 1c),23 but we did
not observe any transitions for oleophobicity (Figure 1d).24 This suggests
that the SAM interfaces can yield a significant amount of information
when probed with liquids with polar and nonpolar contributors to their
surface tension. The dichotomy in the n-hexadecane
(HD) and water wetting properties also points to the need for specificity
and/or a reference parameter, in defining stereo-structure properties
like the odd–even effect.

A comprehensive re-evaluation
of the nature and properties of SAMs
across all chain lengths is therefore needed, to better advance the
utility of this fundamental platform. We hypothesize that on the basis
of the observed structure and properties of SAM, the nature of the
interface created by short-chain (≥C4) SAMs, assuming
an equilibrium, should be significantly different from those derived
from medium-sized (C9–C14) or longer
(≥C15) SAMs. To evaluate the nature of the created
interface, we desired to deploy simplicity and therefore measured
static contact angles on short-chain SAMs. The static contact angle,
a capture of the equilibrium wetting state, is information rich, where
the nature of an interface is desired. Herein, we report a comparative
study of the static wetting properties of n-alkanethiolate
SAMs in the C3–C16 chain length range.

Results and Discussion
Because the quality of the SAM and
hence its corresponding properties
are highly dependent on the substrate (identity, roughness, and morphology),2,27,31,45 all SAMs were fabricated on ultraflat surfaces. The well-studied
ultraflat template-stripped gold and silver surfaces (AuTS and AgTS) were used as substrates.46 These two substrates were characterized by atomic force
microscopy (AFM), as shown in Figure 2a. The root-mean-square roughness (RRMS) is thus estimated, with AuTSRRMS = 0.41 ± 0.04 nm and AgTSRRMS = 0.64 ± 0.06 nm. The power spectra
density (PSD), a parameter used in characterizing the surface topology,47,48 is also estimated as 0.14 and 0.25 nm2 for AuTS and AgTS, respectively, whose values are comparable to
those of previous reports.21,23 The three-dimensional
(3D) view of the surface from AFM (Figure 2b) also shows that both surfaces are ultraflat
with AgTS slightly rougher than AuTS. Back-scattering
SEM images (Figure 2c) indicate that both the Au and Ag surfaces are polycrystalline.
Wide-angle X-ray diffraction patterns (Figure 2d), however, show that both Au and Ag have
one significant peak, indicating that the faceting for both surfaces
is dominated by the (111) direction.

Figure 2 Surface characterization of the substrates
used for SAM formation.
(a) AFM images of the substrates, from which the rms roughness and
PSD were estimated. (b) 3D demonstration of the surface texture from
AFM. (c) Back-scattering SEM images of the template-stripped gold
surface (AuTS) and silver (AgTS) surface. (d)
Wide-angle X-ray diffraction patterns of the two substrates, indicating
a dominance of the (111) orientation.

Overview: Comparison of Hydrophobicity between Short- and Long-Chain
SAMs
Short-chain alkanethiol molecules, S(CH2)2CH3–S(CH2)8CH3 (abbreviated as C3–C9), were
used to form SAMs. Static contact angles (θs) of
water drops (1 μL) on the SAMs were then obtained. For both
AgTS and AuTS, a rapid drop in the contact angle
was observed at the C3–C4 chain length
(Figure 3). Figure 3 shows that the average
contact angles on short-chain (C4–C8)
SAMs formed on AuTS increase linearly and show no odd–even
oscillation unlike in the homologous longer (C10–C16) SAMs.23,24 An analogous study on AgTS showed a slightly different behavior, in that the data are
not fully linear, although the slight variations in odds and evens
is within the resolution of contact angle measurements. Besides the
lack of an odd–even effect for short-chain SAMs (C3– C8/C9), the contact angles are relatively
lower than those derived from longer-chain SAMs. The contact angle on AgTS, as expected, is relatively lower than that on AuTS, especially on short-chain SAMs, despite the fact that the packing
density of molecules on Ag is slightly larger than that on Au.21 We note that in lieu of the odd–even
effect, the contact angles increase with the increase in the chain
length, and for C4–C9, a linear trend
is observed.

Figure 3 Water contact angle on SAMs formed on template-stripped
gold (AuTS) and silver (AgTS) surfaces. (a)
Contact angle
measured on short-chain SAMs (C3–C9)
formed on AuTS compared to that on long-chain (C10–C16) SAMs, derived from ref (23). (b) Contact angle measured
on C3–C9 SAMs formed on AgTS compared to that on long-chain (C10–C16) SAMs from ref (24).

Chain-Length Dependence
in Hydrophobicity of SAMs
On
both substrates, the contact angle in general increases with the chain
length of the molecules (Figure 3) but seems to asymptote on longer-chain molecules,
albeit with emergence of the odd–even zigzag oscillation. The
contact angle data can be broken down into three regimes, viz.: (i)
the hydrophilic region (contact angle <90°); (ii) the linear
regime with no odd–even effect (C4/C5–C8 for AuTS and C4–C9 for AgTS); (iii) the odd–even regime (C9/C10–C16).

Understanding
the Three Regimes
Surface wetting and
hence the static contact angle (θs) are dependent
on two main forces, the dispersion force (γd) and
polar force (γp).23,49 On the basis
of the Owens–Wendt–Kaelble model for work of adhesion,50 the cosine of the static contact angle in Young–Dupre’s
equation51 can be expressed in terms of
the liquid surface tension and the liquid- or surface-specific γd and γp (eq 1). 1   2  where LG and
SG refer to the liquid–gas
and solid–gas interfaces, respectively, and γ is the
surface tension. By simplifying the equations using energy proportionality
parameters for dispersive  and polar  interactions,
we obtain eq 2, which
relates the contact angle
to a dimensionless term.

For wetting with polar probe liquids
like water, the contact angle (θs) increases with
a decrease in Ed* or Ep*, that is, a decrease in overall
surface tension. The surface normal dipole in n-alkanethiolate
SAMs generally increases with the molecular chain length,16,18 leading to an increase in Ep* with the molecular chain length.21,23 In contrast, the dispersive component, Ed*, in SAMs decreases with the molecular
chain length due to constrained molecular vibrations induced by the
increased interchain secondary bonds and decreased gauche defects
in longer-chain molecules,44,52 that is, the SAM becomes
more rigid.

Zone 1: Short Chain Length ≤ S(CH2)2CH3
The ability to isolate
this region from the
rest stems from three separate sets of evidence and, as such, is a
prediction rather that is solely supported by data provided herein.
The evidence supporting this inference is: (i) from Figure 2, SAMs of C3 on
both AuTS and AgTS significantly deviate from
the linear trend of the preceding homologues by showing a significantly
lower contact angle than longer ones (≥C4). Of note
also is the fact that hydrocarbons are generally hydrophobic, but
C3 SAMs are hydrophilic. This switch in wetting properties
can only be rationalized from either poorly formed SAM or changes
in the electrostatic potential of the terminal CH3 due
to inductive effects from the metal–S bond or analogous effects
(like σ–σ* hyperconjugation or metal–molecule
orbital mixing extending up to the C3). (ii) In addition,
and as we previously reported,25 the values
of the contact angle from C3 SAMs on AuTS and
AgTS are comparable, and any substrate-dependent wetting
properties disappear at ≤C3. (iii) The structures
of C3 and C4 thiolate SAMs on Au show a significant
difference in their organization and packing density.8 Higher adsorption energy of C3 to the substrate
relative to the longer congeners14 and
the lack of considerable contribution from the interchain van der
Waals force8 can give rise to poorly formed
SAMs and hence ill-defined interfaces. This unusual behavior of very
short chains (≤C3) is in good agreement with the
previously predicted structural phase change from C3 to
C4 SAMs.8,14 From the observed hydrophobic–hydrophilic
switch in wetting, the disappearance of the odd–even effect,
and the physical characterization studies, lead us to hypothesize
that the structure of the SAM changes across the C3–C4 chain length.

Intermolecular dipolar repulsive interactions
in SAMs arise from interactions between the permanent dipole of molecules
and the bond to the metal substrate.53,54 When the chain
length is limited (here <C3), the disordered molecular
assemblies have fairly significant dipolar repulsive interactions,
which can dominate SAM properties over the limited van der Waals interactions
in short-chain molecules. As a result, contrary to the long-range
re-organization of tail groups into a densely packed surface structure
in long-chain SAMs,40 the short-chain molecules
are adsorbed almost without “through space” interactions
and therefore are not able to form well-defined interfaces. Ulman
and co-workers observed that terminal moieties from short-chain SAMs
were “masked” by conformational instabilities.54 Besides, it has been observed that the highly
mobile/unstable features in short-chain SAMs facilitate surface migration
(diffusion), where the molecules in these SAMs can “walk”
or “hop”.55 In light of this
behavior, we postulate that the water molecules can also imbibe into
the SAMs in the absence of a stable interface leading to improved
wetting. Besides these studies, the nature of the thiol–metal
bond has been hypothesized to bear a strong dipole, which could lead
to a significant inductive effect. Alternatively, and owing to the
covalent nature of the thiol–metal bond, σ–σ*
hyperconjugation between the S-metal σ* orbital and the C2–C3 σ bond can be envisioned. Hyperconjugation
between σS–M* and σC2–C3 orbitals
in SAMs is possible, in part due to the syn-periplanarity between
σS–M* and σC2–C3 bonds.
This syn-periplanarity is independent of the substrate (Au vs Ag)
and can account for the previously predicted21,23−25 and now empirically confirmed loss of substrate dependence
of the odd–even effect for n ≤ 3 SAMs.
For these reasons, we infer that n ≤ 3 SAMs
do not bear analogous interface characteristics to the longer homologues,
and as such, they are not analogues to their longer congeners.

Besides poorly formed SAMs, proximity to the metal–S bond
can lead to significant inductive effects, leading to enhanced polar
interactions across the C3 SAM–water interface.
Ratner and co-workers56 theoretically showed
that there is significant orbital mixing between the metal and the
molecule upon thiolate binding on Au, and the large electronegativity
differences between the metal and thiol can lead to significant inductive
effects either near the surface or may significantly extend into the
molecule. Although these inductive effects are a possibility (and
have been inferred from theoretical studies as mentioned above), we
exercise caution in inferring that they are the major contributor
to the C3 SAM hydrophilicity as more direct evidence is
needed to ascertain this.

Zone 2: Medium Chain Length SAMs (C4–C8/C9)
The increasing contact
angle in the
region of chain length C4–C8/C9 suggests that there is probably a gradual increase in the rigidity
of the SAM, albeit not sufficient to induce a phase change. The low enthalpic gain upon
self-assembly is not sufficient to overcome molecular vibrations under
ambient conditions; hence, there are higher gauche defects in short-chain
(C4–C8/C9) SAMs16 and therefore a likely less-dense packing leading
to a liquid-like SAM. From this argument, we can infer that higher
degrees of freedom allow for maximizing dipole–dipole (polar–polar)
interactions between the SAM and water droplets and hence the ability
for water to spread on an otherwise chemically hydrophobic surface
(i.e., interface dominated by hydrocarbons). We observe that as the
number (hence, the total enthalpic gain) of possible interchain interactions
increases (increase in the number of H atoms), a decrease in hydrophobicity
is observed, which eventually renders the surface more hydrophobic
with increasing chain length. To further support this argument, evaluation
of oleophilicity shows a similar trend, suggesting that a similar
structure–property evolution is also possible for apolar interactions
between the SAM and a nonpolar solvent, HD. HD-derived θs shows a linear increase for short-chain SAMs, followed by
an odd–even oscillation with increasing chain length. From
SFG spectroscopic studies, it has been shown that the intensity of
asymmetric stretching of the terminal CH3 group increases
generally with the chain length, which is mostly due to a decreasing
density of the gauche defect.29,44

We infer that
these results, at a minimum, suggest that (i) the interface in medium
chain length SAMs is evolving with the increase in the length, (ii)
these SAMs are likely conformal, that is, they can deform in response
to the liquid contacting them (i.e., these SAMs are dynamic, hence
liquid-like), (iii) the interfacial properties of these short-chain
SAMs are significantly different from those of higher chain lengths.
We therefore infer that SAMs of medium-length molecules are liquid-like
as previously suggested.16

Zone 3: Transition
Regime (C8/C10–C13)
A substrate dependence transition is observed
in this zone, with Au transitioning at C8 and Ag transitioning
at C10. A clear odd–even effect emerges at C8/C10. Although one can argue that for Ag the oscillation
starts at C6, the slight differences between the SAMO and SAME are stochastic in nature and statistically
indistinguishable (C6 ≈ C7 and C8 ≈ C9), therefore not indicative of a reliable
zigzag oscillation. A clearer zigzag oscillation emerges from C8 (for Au) and C10 (for Ag), albeit showing asymmetric
gain with transition from SAMO to SAME compared
to that of SAME to SAMO, as previously described.21,23−25 We infer that this region represents a transition
zone bearing characteristics of the preceding regime and the one ahead
of it. In that case, the gradual increase in contact angles is indicative
of the continued evolution of the interactive effects captured in
the preceding zone (zone 2), whereas the odd–even oscillation
is indicative of what happens with increasing chain length (zone 4).
It can be observed that the differences between two consecutive molecules
in the series is larger among the shorter analogues and declines with
the increase in the molecular length. An elaborate discussion on this
behavior has been given in preceding works.23−25 Within this
region, spectroscopic data indicate that the local environment of
the CH3 terminal group changes with changes in the molecular
length and shows an odd–even oscillation irrespective of the
degree of order or disorder (based on the nature of substrate morphology),
suggesting that the molecules are dictating how they group on the
surface irrespective of the limitations to the nature of the surfaces—that
is, the molecule is dictating the nature of the interface. In an analogous
study, Nijhuis and co-workers demonstrated that a C10n-alkanethiol is sufficient to overcome surface defects,
an observation that is in line with our inference.

Zone 4: Symmetric
Odd–Even Regime (≥C14)
Beyond the
transition zone, the zigzag odd–even
oscillation in contact angles asymptotes and becomes symmetric, as
previously observed.23,24 We infer that this asymmetry
is due to the SAMs becoming crystalline/well-ordered; hence, the only
differences in their interfaces are the orientation of the terminal
CH3. In an earlier spectroscopic study,29 this enhanced order manifested as a gradual linear decay
in the peak width and a loss of the odd–even oscillation in
the peak width. We believe that the change from a gradual increase
in the odd–even oscillation in the SFG signal peak width reported
previously is a manifestation of the increased order, which leads
to increased homogeneity in the local chemical environment of the
terminal CH329 and manifests
here as a symmetric odd–even zigzag oscillation in wetting.

Odd–Even Effect, Dispersive Forces versus Molecular Chain
Length
The contact angle of a nonpolar liquid, HD, was measured
on all molecules on gold substrates and was also compared with the
water contact angle, as shown in Figure 4. The contact angle gradually increases
then asymptotes, and shows an odd–even effect, with increase
in the molecular length (Figures 3 and 4). A close look at zone
3, however, reveals that the contact angle gradually increases when
the probe liquid is water23,24 and starts to plateau
when the chain length is >C13. From eq 2, it is known that the contact angle
depends
on both the dispersive and the polar components of surface tension;
hence, the interaction energy (or wetting behavior) can be captured
by the contact angle (θs). We infer that this gradual
and reproducible increase19−25,57 is due to a change in the interaction
energy between the SAMs and water, which in this case would indicate
a change in the nature of the molecules with increasing molecular
length. As stated, however, eq 2 fails to parameterize the changing dynamics at the interface,
partly due to its focus on energy. A dimensionless number is therefore
needed to qualitatively capture the molecular changes associated with
these SAMs.

Figure 4 Contact angle of HD compared to that of water on SAMs formed on
AuTS. Contact angles of C10–C16 are obtained from ref (23).

From eqs 1 and 2, by
rearranging the Young–Dupre equation,
we define a new parameter (a dimensionless number), χc, on the basis of proportional energetic contributions (both polar
(Ep*) and dispersive (Ed*) components of surface tension) of the surface–liquid
interactions (eq 3). 3  For nonpolar
HD, the polar component is negligible
(γLGp =
0); hence, contribution to wetting by polar–polar interactions
is zero, Ep* = 0, as such . Neglecting the polar component
in the
equation above, we can re-express it for HD as shown below (eq 4). Because both γLGd and γLG are constant for any apolar liquid, for brevity and clarity,
we represent them as a constant, α, to illustrate that only
proportional contributions of dispersive forces in the SAM (γSGd) affect the extent
of wetting (eq 4); hence,
any asymmetry in wetting can only result from changes in the surface
energy. 4  Evolution in contact angles with increase
in the molecular chain length would therefore imply that the dispersive
component of the surface energy of these SAMs is a function of the
number of repeat units (carbons in n-alkanethiols),
that is, γSGd = f(n).23,24 We can, therefore, re-express eq 4 as χc2 α · f(n). A plot of χc2 against the chain length can help delineate the evolution
of the dispersive component of the surface energy in SAMs with increasing
molecular length, and this is captured in Figure 5. The correlation between the chain length
(n) and dispersive interactions shows that, as expected,
SAMO and SAME segregates into two groups, in
which χc2 exponentially decays with increase
in the chain length (the lines are a guide to the eye and not a fit
to a model). C13 is off the fits, either due to the compound
(C13 is synthesized in-house but the rest are purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received) or due to the different nature
of C13 SAMs (C13 is the transition point between
waxy to crystalline and hence small temperature perturbations can
lead to a change in the nature of the interface). We have also spectroscopically
observed that a transition occurs across the C13 chain
length,29 and this transition may lead
to an interface that is more sensitive to the dispersive forces compared
with the polar forces, hence the difference in the odd–even
effect between water and HD (Figure 4). From the trends, however, we observe that the contribution
to the surface dispersive forces are inversely proportional to the
chain length and can be summarized as (eq 5) 5  where A, t, and ε0 are fitting parameters,
and from this expression, it can be observed that χc2 ≠ 0 at any point (i.e., no x axis intercept because it requires that , an invalid mathematical solution). It
therefore follows that, from a theoretical point and on the basis
of preceding arguments, at n = 0, χc2 = A + ε0 (a constant)
in the absence of any carbon atoms. Re-expressing eq 5 into a log scale gives 6  Figure 5b, as expected from eq 6, shows a linear chain-length
dependence of the χc2, indicating that
the evolution in dispersive
(van der Waals-type) interactions at the liquid–SAM interfaces
have a linear logarithmic relation. An odd–even oscillation
in the dispersive interactions component of surface tension is observed
for SAMs derived from n-alkanethiols, whose magnitude
increases with the increasing molecular length. From the linear fits
in Figure 5b, the two
lines merge at approximately 3, indicating the disappearance of the
odd–even effect at C3, which correlates well with
early predictions25 and our inference that
SAMs (≤C3) belong to a different regime.

Figure 5 Dispersion
interactions in wetting is correlated to the chain length
of the molecules. (a) For HD, the dispersion interactions are fitted,
showing a correlation with the chain length of the molecules and exhibiting
an odd–even effect. (b) In the log scale, the dispersion energy
minus a constant that is derived from the above fits show a linear
relation with the chain length of the molecules.

In addition, we also observed that χc2 seems to plateau beyond C14 in Figure 5a,b. We attribute this to increased
SAM crystallinity;
therefore, owing to a decrease in rotational degrees of freedom, an
increase in the chain length has an insignificant effect on the van
der Waals interaction and hence the wetting properties. A recent report
on a spectroscopic (SFG) study of the odd–even effect in n-alkanethiolate SAMs29 shows
that evolution of the amplitude of the terminal CH3 stretch
for SAME was significantly smaller than that for SAMO, which indicated a less rigid orientation of the dipole moment
at the interface (hence, a less rigid SAM), in line with the observed
odd–even trends in the dispersive interactions observed here
(Figure 5a). In addition,
the two distinct regimes in peak width (<C13 and >C13) from SFG studies also correlate well with the observed
plateau at C14 in dispersive interactions. Because the
contribution of dispersive interactions decreases with an increase
in the molecular chain length, in general, we can infer that the molecules
get more rigid (reduced degrees of freedom) and hence a convergence
occurs in the orientation states of the terminal CH3, leading
to a significant difference in the orientation of these groups at
the interface for SAMO and SAME. Increased rigidity,
in turn, allows for easier differentiation between SAMO and SAME through wetting. We therefore infer that attenuated
molecular vibrations lead to minimization of interfacial coupling,
hence poor coupling in the dispersive components of the interfacial
surface energy (molecular vibration-dependent secondary bonding) and
hence more defined differences in γSG versus γLG. By definition, Gibbsian surface tension (free energy per
unit area) is the difference between surface energy and surface entropy
(γ = Usurface – Ssurface),58 and as such, increased
molecular vibrations or orientation states (total number of conformations
possible) will increase the entropy at the interface leading to a
decrease in the overall surface tension. This basic definition of
surface tension allows us to further infer that the unbound surface
of shorter SAMs (higher vibrations and larger number of conformational
states) is, therefore, less ordered (supported by SFG studies); otherwise,
a decrease in θswater and a concomitant increase in θsHexadecane are expected. The gradual
decline in contact angles for both polar and nonpolar probe liquids
suggests that there are other changes occurring in the system besides
interfacial entropy. This inference is further supported by an increase
in contact angle distributions (standard deviations) as the chain
length decreases.

The fits in Figure 5b demonstrate two different rates of decay
in the χc with the chain length for SAMO and SAME. The
(χc2 – ε0) term
captures the structural deviation of an SAM from the ideal well-ordered
defect free state and allows us to infer that defects density decays
logarithmically with an increase in the molecular chain length. We
can infer that, in general, SAM structural properties (such as thickness)
are highly dependent on the chain length of molecules used to fabricate
them. We can also infer that with longer chain lengths, the molecules
are likely to be trans extended; hence, longer-chain SAMs are thicker,
as previously observed by Prato and co-workers.43

In addition, Figure 5b demonstrates that the odd–even effect is not
symmetric,
and more importantly, the dependence of dispersive interactions/surface
properties on the molecular chain length is different for odds and
evens. In other words, the addition of one methyl group to the spacer
(alkyl chain) can contribute differently to the nature of secondary
bonding in SAMO versus SAME, which, as we inferred,
is attributed to the stereostructural variance of the hydrocarbon
tail. These findings correlate well with previous reports about other
properties of n-alkanethiolate SAMs. In charge transport
behavior of SAM-based molecular junctions, the injection current (J0) and the contact resistance of the SAM and
the electrode (RC) are different due to
different orientations of the terminal groups.18,26,32,59 Similarly,
in charge transport and friction studies, the decay constants, β,
for SAMO and SAME are different,18,26,32,59 wherein the conformational disorder (gauche defects) of the molecules
affect the local chemical environment of the terminal moiety, as confirmed
through spectroscopic (SFG) studies.29 Similarly,
theoretic work in charge transport behavior across alkanethiolate
junctions predicted that the odd–even effect is prominent within
a certain chain length (10 < n < 19) on silver
substrates.18

Serendipitous Correlation
of χc with Conformation
Dynamics or a Solid Association?
We observe that, although
the plots in Figure 5 are not fitted to a specific model, the associated decay (exponential)
equations bear a 3- (derived from en/3) or 4- (derived from en/4) geometric
progression (i.e., χ rises by an order of 1) for SAMO and SAME, respectively. This observation is not unique
to SAMs but has previously been associated with two global minima
in the conformational relaxation of linear hydrocarbons.60 In his seminal theoretical work on conformational
stability of free hydrocarbons, Goodman observed that C17 (C11 by PM3 simulations) is the longest possible linear
hydrocarbon as predicted in the gas phase. The presence of a solvent
changes this dynamic on the basis of the solvent used, with a mismatch
in solubility parameters favoring more intramolecular interactions
and hence folding. Longer-chain hydrocarbons adopt different (folded/rotated)
conformations to allow for favorable intramolecular interactions.
When the molecules are long enough, they can fully fold back via two
main approaches: (i) a four-twist turn that involves maximized intrachain
van der Waals interactions across four carbons, allowing the molecules
to fully bend onto themselves, and, (ii) the two-twist turn that involves
three carbons and two gauche rotations. Goodman demonstrated that
the two-twist turn precedes the four-twist turn in the evolution as
the chain length increases. In line with Goodman’s observations,
we inferred that if the origin of the observed progress is a probabilistic
chain relaxation, then embedded within the four-carbon progression
are the more accessible two-twist turns (three carbons). The SAME were, therefore, separated into two groups, in which the
series follows a four-carbon progression (see Figure S3 in the Supporting Information (SI)).
When the two four-carbon progression groups are further evaluated,
the lower energy three-carbon progression series is observed, as indicated
by the fitting parameter, t, and predicted by Goodman
on the basis of thermodynamic stability. Therefore, we infer that
the decay in χc, and associated changes in θs are likely due to conformational changes in the hydrocarbon
chains, the basis of the widely reported gauche defects. Therefore,
we can deduce that χc is a gauche defect-associated
surface energy parameter. On the basis of this observation, and the
strong correlation with Goodman’s study, we also infer that
the substrate-independent odd–even oscillations in SFG peak
widths can be attributed to these changes in conformations with increasing
chain length and is the basis of the observed differences in wetting
properties.

Evolution of Hydrophobicity with χc
Unlike hexanes or other nonpolar liquids, most molecules
bear both
polar and nonpolar contributors to their surface tension. Hence, for
water,  because both polar and
dispersion interactions
contribute to wetting. As shown in Figure 6, chain-length dependency of χc2 with water for SAMs on AuTS shows
an asymmetric decay segregating into two different regions. The odd–even
effect was only observed when n > 8, similar to
the
observation from the contact angle. For n < 8,
a linear decrease in χc2 was observed,
and as previously noted, data from the C3 SAM did not follow
a similar trend. The small odd–even oscillation coupled with
low dependence of the wetting behavior on the molecular chain length
(despite the associated entropic changes upon chemisorption) implies
that, as expected, the dispersive component of surface tension is
not the dominating influence in the wetting behavior of water. Because
the polar component of surface tension is larger than the dispersive
component, we can infer that any SAM property that perturbs polar–polar
interactions would have a large effect on the wetting properties of
water and is the subject of a different study.

Figure 6 Chain-length dependence
of interactions (χc2) in wetting for polar
liquids (water).

Big Picture: Understanding
Structure versus Chain Length Relations
in SAMs
Having gained insights into the role of nonpolar
surface interactions in wetting, observing the evolution of wetting
with the chain length, and borrowing from earlier studies, a better
understanding of SAM properties has been realized. The SAMs’
structures vary with the chain length, as revealed in ellipsometry
(thickness),43 STM (the packing structure),8 and as simulated in studies of gauche defects
(conformational structure).16 From contact
angle measurement, it was demonstrated that the interface properties
of the SAMs were significantly chain-length dependent irrespective
of whether a polar or nonpolar probe liquid was used. The observed
trends in wetting with water and HD are likely due to the structural
changes of SAMs with the increase in the molecular chain length.

Therefore, we are able to differentiate four regions in n-alkanethiolate SAMs on the basis of changes in wetting (particularly
hydrophobicity) with changing molecular chain lengths (Figure 7). We identify these regions
as: (i) pseudoformed interface from SAMs with n ≤
3, where the limited intermolecular interactions, and potentially
inductive or hyperconjugative effects, lead to poorly formed hydrophilic
CH3-terminated interfaces. (ii) Liquid-like SAMs with chain
lengths within C4–C8/C9: The
van der Waals force gradually increases with the chain length and,
with an increase in the molecular length, isolates the interface from
any inductive effects that may arise due to the metal–thiol
bond. With limited degrees of freedom, and decreasing gauche defects,
a more static hydrophobic interface emerges. The emergence of the
odd–even effects with longer chain lengths further corroborates
this inference, in that, a more defined orientation of the terminal
moiety is only attained with longer chains. (iii) Transitional “waxlike”
SAMs with the chain length ranging from C9/C11–C13: SAMs within this range show a clear odd–even
effect, although a gradual increase in the contact angle is observed.
The contact angles plateau off into a static value for SAMO and SAME. The gradual increase in the contact angles
is due to asymmetry in the odd–even oscillation, with changes
in contact angles from evens to odds (ΔθsE-O) being less than those from odds to evens (ΔθsO-E) on Au substrates and vice versa on
Ag. As previously observed, this asymmetry is due to changes in the
contribution of the dispersive component (γd) to
the SAM interface and has been associated with increased order/rigidity
(Figure 5a).24 (iv) Crystal-like SAMs with chain length >C14: In this region, the contact angles do not change with increasing
chain length, although an odd–even oscillation is observed.

Figure 7 SAM structure,
and associated interfaces, varies with chain-length,
segregating into four chain length dependent regions (for n-alkanethiolate
SAMs) as inferred from wetting behavior. The four regions are associated
with degree of order in the SAMs and can be associated with chain-length
dependent evolution in molecular conformations.

Conclusions
In n-alkanethiolate monolayers,
molecular chain
length significantly affects SAM packing, structure and hence properties.
Wetting behaviors of n-alkanethiolate SAMs on ultraflat
template-stripped surfaces, as captured in a static contact angle
in this article, are dependent on the chain length, which is presumed
to be due to different interface properties of the SAMs. We infer
that the observed differences are due to intermolecular interactions,
molecule–substrate interactions, and molecular conformational
freedom (hence, gauche defects). From this work, we draw the following
inferences:(i) The odd–even effect in water
contact angle on short-chain SAMs (<C9) is not observed
on the AuTS surface or the AgTS surface. The
presence of significant gauche defects and limited enthalpic driving
force toward more order, due to the limited number of favorable interchain
van der Waals interactions, renders molecules in these SAMs more mobile
(we term this as liquid-like) and hence there is no clear distinction
between the packing and terminal group orientations in SAMO and SAME. This lack of distinction manifests as disappearance
of the odd–even effect with decreasing chain lengths.

(ii) For brevity and clarity,
we define
a new simplified dimensionless number, χc: This new
parameter correlates well with rotational/conformational changes in
the molecule and, as such, indicates the evolution of gauche defects
in the SAM. This new parameter was deduced from interfacial dispersive
forces and is characteristic of the surface under investigation and
the length of the chemisorbed molecule. We believe that this new constant
will help extend the characterization and hence definitions of various
surfaces, allowing comparison of data across different platforms.

(iii) The dispersion interactions,
hence
wetting, correlate with surface entropy and not just chemical properties
of the terminal group in the SAM: Although all SAMs are derived from n-alkanethiols, which would manifest as CH3-terminated
interfaces, wetting (with HD or water) is more favorable with shorter
chains. From the simplified Gibbsian definition of surface tension,
that is, surface tension is the difference between surface energy
and surface entropy (γ = Usurface – Ssurface), we can infer that
an increase in the rotational freedom and hence the ability to alter
the orientation of the terminal moiety under different probe liquids,
will affect the entropic term to minimize the resultant interfacial
surface tension. This thermodynamically favorable “relaxation”
at the interface manifests as hydrophilicity for the much shorter n-alkanethiolates. The more upright molecules (SAMs on Ag)
show a lower surface energy even with a higher packing density (molecules
per unit area); hence, C3–C5 SAMs are
hydrophilic on Ag, whereas only C3 is hydrophilic on Au.

(iv) SAMs of molecules with
various chain
lengths show up to four possible different structural phases. Evaluating
the progress in SAM wetting properties across C3–C16, and borrowing from recent studies from us22−24,29 and others,27 we observe that (i) C3 is an isolated case and
does not align with the rest. There are two main possibilities, viz.,
either the SAMs are poorly formed (only seven H atoms, hence low enthalpic
gain from secondary interactions) or there are significant inductive
effects due to the proximity to the metal–thiol bond. At the moment, we cannot ascertain
which of these two hold good in this case, but it is likely that both
are contributing. More studies are needed, but on the basis of the
substrate dependence studies,23−25 the literature,8,14 and current studies, we can infer that ≤C3 SAMs
are different than their longer homologs. (ii) A linear regime in
the dependence of the contact angle with the molecular length is observed
for C4–C8/9. We infer that this could
be attributed to surface entropy changes due to a gradual linear increase
in the enthalpic gain from interchain secondary interactions with
the increase in the number of CH2 moieties. This inference
is in line with the decrease in gauche defects observed by Jabbarzadeh
and co-workers.16 (iii) A transition zone
between the more liquid-like to the crystalline SAMs, which we refer
to waxlike. Inference from wetting and SFG data indicates that C9/10–C13 SAMs show different properties than
the preceding or following homologues. We refer this region as waxlike
as it shows properties across the other phases, that is, a gradual
increase in the contact angles (albeit nonlinear) and an odd–even
effect (albeit asymmetric to account for the increase in contact angles)
are observed. (iv) Finally, the increase in the contact angle asymptotes
into a linear regime, and the odd–even oscillation is symmetric,
indicating that the orientation of the terminal moiety is the main
contributor to the Gibbsian surface energy, suggesting insignificant
changes in the surface entropy (distribution of the orientation state
of the terminal moiety). Therefore, we infer that there are four main
phases in SAMs: (1) the pseudoformed/substrate bonding dominated phase
(≤C3 SAMs), (2) the gauche defect dominated liquid-like
phase (C4–C8/9 SAMs), (3) the transitional
waxlike phase (C9/10–C13), and (4) the
well-ordered solid-like phase (≥C14 SAMs). These
observations, therefore, should inform recent works using SAMs that
compare properties across all length cases, while supporting recently
developed theories in understanding discrepancies across earlier works
in SAM characterization.

(v) Simplicity, and thermodynamics, as
manifested in sessile drop wetting is an ample tool to delineate complex
interfacial properties. In this, and preceding papers, we demonstrated
that by felicitous choice of probe liquids and experimental variables,
properties of an otherwise complex system can be delineated through
physical-organic studies. We demonstrate that wetting and associated
interfacial energy relations are a powerful and reliable tool in the
study of surfaces and, with appropriate measures, can generate complex
information as obtained by advanced tools like sum-frequency-generation
spectroscopy. By introducing the “gauche-defect density”-correlated
dimensionless parameter, χc, we provide a direct
empirical route to evaluate SAM quality without the need for advanced
tools.



Experimental Analysis
Chemicals and Materials
Alkanethiol reagents were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich. Ethanol, 200 proof, was purchased from Decon Laboratories,
Inc. All chemicals and reagents were used as received. Nitrogen and
argon gas were purchased from Airgas and used as supplied.

Substrate
Preparation and Characterization
Both Ag
and Au (99.99%) films were evaporated in a Temescal BJD-1800 e-beam
evaporator. Au and Ag films of 200 nm were evaporated onto 3 in. silicon
wafers. Afterward, template stripping was performed to obtain the
ultraflat surfaces, as previously reported.21,23,32,46 In general,
glass pieces, on which 8 μL of the optical adhesive (Norland
Optical Adhesive 61) was applied, were place on top of a metal film.
After 12 h of UV light curing, the glass with the metal film glued
to it was stripped from the silicon wafer using a razor blade. Surface
characterization details (AFM, SEM, and XRD) are available in the SI.

Preparation of Monolayers
Freshly
template-stripped
AgTS and AuTS were cleaned with ethanol and
dried with nitrogen gas. As previously reported,4,22,23,32 SAMs were
prepared by placing the template-stripped metal surface into a vial
containing 3 mmol alkanethiol in 5 mL of 200 proof ethanol. The surface
and thiol solution were incubated for at least 3 h under an inert
atmosphere. The SAM was rinsed with copious ethanol and dried with
a stream of nitrogen gas.

Measuring the Contact Angle
Static
contact angles formed
between the SAMs and probe liquids, deionized water, and HD were measured
using the Ramé-Hart Goniometer (model 100-00) with a tilting
base. A droplet of the probe liquid (1.0 μL) was dispensed onto
the SAMs through an integrated syringe pump. Images of the droplets
generated on SAMs were analyzed with the DropImage software.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00355.Additional experimental
section, results, and analysis
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00355_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
was supported by Iowa State University through startup
funds. M.T. acknowledges support through a “Black and Veatch
building a world of difference” faculty fellowship. M.T. and
J.C. were supported in part by a Catron fellowship from the Engineering
Research Institute. S.O.-R. was supported by a GMAP fellowship. We
thank Dr. Brett Vanveller and Yen Nguyen for the synthesis of tridecanethiol.
==== Refs
References
Du W. ; Wang T. ; Chu H.-S. ; Wu L. ; Liu R. ; Sun S. ; Phua W. K. ; Wang L. ; Tomczak N. ; Nijhuis C. A. 
On-Chip
Molecular Electronic Plasmon Sources Based on Self-Assembled Monolayer
Tunnel Junctions . Nat. Photonics 
2016 , 10 , 274 –280 . 10.1038/nphoton.2016.43 .
Love J. C. ; Estroff L. A. ; Kriebel J. K. ; Nuzzo R. G. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Self-Assembled
Monolayers of Thiolates on Metals as a Form of Nanotechnology . Chem. Rev. 
2005 , 105 , 1103 –1170 . 10.1021/cr0300789 .15826011 
Akkerman H. B. ; Blom P. W. ; De Leeuw D. M. ; De Boer B. 
Towards Molecular Electronics
with Large-Area Molecular Junctions . Nature 
2006 , 441 , 69 –72 . 10.1038/nature04699 .16672966 
Sporrer J. ; Chen J. ; Wang Z. ; Thuo M. M. 
Revealing
the Nature
of Molecule–Electrode Contact in Tunneling Junctions Using
Raw Data Heat Maps . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2015 , 6 , 4952 –4958 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02300 .26618717 
de
Boer B. ; Hadipour A. ; Mandoc M. M. ; van Woudenbergh T. ; Blom P. W. 
Tuning of Metal Work Functions with Self-Assembled
Monolayers . Adv. Mater. 
2005 , 17 , 621 –625 . 10.1002/adma.200401216 .
DiMilla P. A. ; Folkers J. P. ; Biebuyck H. A. ; Haerter R. ; Lopez G. P. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Wetting and Protein Adsorption on Self-Assembled Monolayers
of Alkanethiolates Supported on Transparent Films of Gold . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1994 , 116 , 2225 –2226 . 10.1021/ja00084a105 .
Ciracì C. ; Hill R. ; Mock J. ; Urzhumov Y. ; Fernández-Domínguez A. ; Maier S. ; Pendry J. ; Chilkoti A. ; Smith D. 
Probing the
Ultimate Limits of Plasmonic Enhancement . Science 
2012 , 337 , 1072 –1074 . 10.1126/science.1224823 .22936772 
Guo Q. ; Li F. 
Self-Assembled Alkanethiol Monolayers on Gold Surfaces:
Resolving
the Complex Structure at the Interface by STM . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 16 , 19074 –19090 . 10.1039/C4CP00596A .24777119 
De
Renzi V. ; Di Felice R. ; Marchetto D. ; Biagi R. ; del Pennino U. ; Selloni A. 
Ordered (3 × 4)
High-Density Phase of Methylthiolate on Au (111) . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2004 , 108 , 16 –20 . 10.1021/jp0365054 .
Chaudhuri A. ; Lerotholi T. ; Jackson D. ; Woodruff D. ; Jones R. G. 
(2√3
× 3) Rect. Phase of Alkylthiolate Self-Assembled Monolayers on
Au (111): A Symmetry-Constrained Structural Solution . Phys. Rev. B 
2009 , 79 , 19543910.1103/PhysRevB.79.195439 .
Chidsey C. E. ; Liu G. Y. ; Rowntree P. ; Scoles G. 
Molecular Order at
the Surface of an Organic Monolayer Studied by Low Energy Helium Diffraction . J. Chem. Phys. 
1989 , 91 , 4421 –4423 . 10.1063/1.456776 .
Atre S. V. ; Liedberg B. ; Allara D. L. 
Chain Length
Dependence of the Structure
and Wetting Properties in Binary Composition Monolayers of OH- and
CH3-Terminated Alkanethiolates on Gold . Langmuir 
1995 , 11 , 3882 –3893 . 10.1021/la00010a045 .
Heister K. ; Rong H.-T. ; Buck M. ; Zharnikov M. ; Grunze M. ; Johansson L. 
Odd-Even Effects
at the S-Metal Interface
and in the Aromatic Matrix of Biphenyl-Substituted Alkanethiol Self-Assembled
Monolayers . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 6888 –6894 . 10.1021/jp010180e .
Löfgren J. A. ; Grönbeck H. ; Moth-Poulsen K. ; Erhart P. 
Understanding the Phase
Diagram of Self-Assembled Monolayers of Alkanethiolates on Gold . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 12059 –12067 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b03283 .
Yang Y. ; Jamison A. C. ; Barriet D. ; Lee T. R. ; Ruths M. 
Odd–Even
Effects in the Friction of Self-Assembled Monolayers of Phenyl-Terminated
Alkanethiols in Contacts of Different Adhesion Strengths . J. Adhes. Sci. Technol. 
2010 , 24 , 2511 –2529 . 10.1163/016942410X508253 .
Ramin L. ; Jabbarzadeh A. 
Odd–Even Effects on the Structure, Stability,
and Phase Transition of Alkanethiol Self-Assembled Monolayers . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 9748 –9759 . 10.1021/la201467b .21749126 
Ramin L. ; Jabbarzadeh A. 
Effect of
Compression on Self-Assembled Monolayers:
A Molecular Dynamics Study . Model. Simul. Mater.
Sci. Eng. 
2012 , 20 , 085010 10.1088/0965-0393/20/8/085010 .
Nurbawono A. ; Liu S. ; Nijhuis C. A. ; Zhang C. 
Odd–Even Effects in Charge
Transport through Self-Assembled Monolayer of Alkanethiolates . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 5657 –5662 . 10.1021/jp5116146 .
Laibinis P.
E. ; Whitesides G. M. ; Allara D. L. ; Tao Y. T. ; Parikh A. N. ; Nuzzo R. G. 
Comparison
of the Structures and Wetting Properties
of Self-Assembled Monolayers of N-Alkanethiols on the Coinage Metal
Surfaces, Copper, Silver, and Gold . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
1991 , 113 , 7152 –7167 . 10.1021/ja00019a011 .
Walczak M. M. ; Chung C. ; Stole S. M. ; Widrig C. A. ; Porter M. D. 
Structure
and Interfacial Properties of Spontaneously Adsorbed N-Alkanethiolate
Monolayers on Evaporated Silver Surfaces . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
1991 , 113 , 2370 –2378 . 10.1021/ja00007a004 .
Newcomb L. B. ; Tevis I. D. ; Atkinson M. B. ; Gathiaka S. M. ; Luna R. E. ; Thuo M. 
Odd–Even Effect
in the Hydrophobicity of N-Alkanethiolate
Self-Assembled Monolayers Depends Upon the Roughness of the Substrate
and the Orientation of the Terminal Moiety . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 11985 –11992 . 10.1021/la5032569 .25233063 
Wang Z. ; Chen J. ; Oyola-Reynoso S. ; Thuo M. 
The Porter-Whitesides
Discrepancy: Revisiting Odd-Even Effects in Wetting Properties of
N-Alkanethiolate SAMS . Coatings 
2015 , 5 , 1034 –1055 . 10.3390/coatings5041034 .
Chen J. ; Wang Z. ; Oyola-Reynoso S. ; Gathiaka S. M. ; Thuo M. 
Limits to
the Effect of Substrate Roughness or Smoothness on the Odd–Even
Effect in Wetting Properties of N-Alkanethiolate Monolayers . Langmuir 
2015 , 31 , 7047 –7054 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b01662 .26065482 
Wang Z. ; Chen J. ; Oyola-Reynoso S. ; Thuo M. M. 
Empirical Evidence
for Roughness-Dependent Limit in Observation of Odd–Even Effect
in Wetting Properties of Polar Liquids on N-Alkanethiolate Self-Assembled
Monolayers . Langmuir 
2016 , 32 , 8230 –8237 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b02159 .27448027 
Wang Z. ; Chen J. ; Gathiaka S. M. ; Oyola-Reynoso S. ; Thuo M. 
Effect of Substrate Morphology on the Odd–Even Effect in Hydrophobicity
of Self-Assembled Monolayers . Langmuir 
2016 , 32 , 10358 –10367 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b01681 .27642814 
Jiang L. ; Sangeeth C. S. ; Nijhuis C. A. 
The Origin
of the Odd–Even
Effect in the Tunneling Rates across Egain Junctions with Self-Assembled
Monolayers (SAMs) of N-Alkanethiolates . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 10659 –10667 . 10.1021/jacs.5b05761 .26230732 
Jiang L. ; Sangeeth C. S. ; Yuan L. ; Thompson D. ; Nijhuis C. A. 
One-Nanometer
Thin Monolayers Remove the Deleterious Effect of Substrate Defects
in Molecular Tunnel Junctions . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 6643 –6649 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b02481 .26340232 
Ulman A. 
Formation
and Structure of Self-Assembled Monolayers . Chem. Rev. 
1996 , 96 , 1533 –1554 . 10.1021/cr9502357 .11848802 
Chen J. ; Liu J. ; Tevis I. ; Andino R. S. ; Miller C. M. ; Ziegler L. D. ; Chen X. ; Thuo M. M. 
Spectroscopic Evidence for the Origin
of Odd-Even Effects in Self-Assembled Monolayers and Effects of Substrate
Roughness . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2017 , 19 , 6989 –6995 . 10.1039/C6CP07580K .28244512 
Nerngchamnong N. ; Yuan L. ; Qi D.-C. ; Li J. ; Thompson D. ; Nijhuis C. A. 
The Role of Van Der Waals Forces in the Performance
of Molecular Diodes . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 8 , 113 –118 . 10.1038/nnano.2012.238 .23292010 
Yuan L. ; Jiang L. ; Thompson D. ; Nijhuis C. A. 
On the
Remarkable
Role of Surface Topography of the Bottom Electrodes in Blocking Leakage
Currents in Molecular Diodes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 6554 –6557 . 10.1021/ja5007417 .24738478 
Thuo M. M. ; Reus W. F. ; Nijhuis C. A. ; Barber J. R. ; Kim C. ; Schulz M. D. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Odd– Even Effects in Charge
Transport across Self-Assembled Monolayers . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 2962 –2975 . 10.1021/ja1090436 .21323319 
Tao F. ; Bernasek S. L. 
Understanding Odd-Even
Effects in Organic Self-Assembled
Monolayers . Chem. Rev. 
2007 , 107 , 1408 –1453 . 10.1021/cr050258d .17439290 
Graupe M. ; Takenaga M. ; Koini T. ; Colorado R. ; Lee T. R. 
Oriented
Surface Dipoles Strongly Influence Interfacial Wettabilities . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1999 , 121 , 3222 –3223 . 10.1021/ja983582h .
Lee S. ; Puck A. ; Graupe M. ; Colorado R. ; Shon Y.-S. ; Lee T. R. ; Perry S. S. 
Structure,
Wettability, and Frictional
Properties of Phenyl-Terminated Self-Assembled Monolayers on Gold . Langmuir 
2001 , 17 , 7364 –7370 . 10.1021/la0111497 .
Srivastava P. ; Chapman W. G. ; Laibinis P. E. 
Odd-Even
Variations in the Wettability
of N-Alkanethiolate Monolayers on Gold by Water and Hexadecane: A
Molecular Dynamics Simulation Study . Langmuir 
2005 , 21 , 12171 –12178 . 10.1021/la051535e .16342989 
Rong H.-T. ; Frey S. ; Yang Y.-J. ; Zharnikov M. ; Buck M. ; Wühn M. ; Wöll C. ; Helmchen G. 
On the Importance of the Headgroup Substrate Bond in
Thiol Monolayers: A Study of Biphenyl-Based Thiols on Gold and Silver . Langmuir 
2001 , 17 , 1582 –1593 . 10.1021/la0014050 .
Woodruff D. P. 
The Interface
Structure of N-Alkylthiolate Self-Assembled Monolayers on Coinage
Metal Surfaces . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2008 , 10 , 7211 –7221 . 10.1039/b813948b .19060964 
Samanta D. ; Sarkar A. 
Immobilization of Bio-Macromolecules on Self-Assembled
Monolayers: Methods and Sensor Applications . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2011 , 40 , 2567 –2592 . 10.1039/c0cs00056f .21264402 
Vericat C. ; Vela M. ; Benitez G. ; Carro P. ; Salvarezza R. 
Self-Assembled
Monolayers of Thiols and Dithiols on Gold: New Challenges for a Well-Known
System . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2010 , 39 , 1805 –1834 . 10.1039/b907301a .20419220 
Munuera C. ; Barrena E. ; Ocal C. 
Chain-Length Dependence of Metastable
Striped Structures of Alkanethiols on Au (111) . Langmuir 
2005 , 21 , 8270 –8277 . 10.1021/la047065q .16114931 
Fenter P. ; Eisenberger P. ; Liang K. 
Chain-Length Dependence of the Structures
and Phases of Ch 3 (Ch 2) N– 1 Sh Self-Assembled on Au (111) . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1993 , 70 , 2447 10.1103/PhysRevLett.70.2447 .10053564 
Prato M. ; Moroni R. ; Bisio F. ; Rolandi R. ; Mattera L. ; Cavalleri O. ; Canepa M. 
Optical Characterization of Thiolate
Self-Assembled Monolayers on Au (111) . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2008 , 112 , 3899 –3906 . 10.1021/jp711194s .
Nishi N. ; Hobara D. ; Yamamoto M. ; Kakiuchi T. 
Chain-Length-Dependent
Change in the Structure of Self-Assembled Monolayers of N-Alkanethiols
on Au (111) Probed by Broad-Bandwidth Sum Frequency Generation Spectroscopy . J. Chem. Phys. 
2003 , 118 , 1904 –1911 . 10.1063/1.1531098 .
Godin M. ; Williams P. ; Tabard-Cossa V. ; Laroche O. ; Beaulieu L. ; Lennox R. ; Grütter P. 
Surface Stress,
Kinetics, and Structure
of Alkanethiol Self-Assembled Monolayers . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 7090 –7096 . 10.1021/la030257l .15301492 
Weiss E. A. ; Kaufman G. K. ; Kriebel J. K. ; Li Z. ; Schalek R. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Si/Sio2-Templated Formation of Ultraflat Metal Surfaces
on Glass, Polymer, and Solder Supports: Their Use as Substrates for
Self-Assembled Monolayers . Langmuir 
2007 , 23 , 9686 –9694 . 10.1021/la701919r .17696377 
Elson J. M. ; Bennett J. M. 
Calculation of the Power Spectral Density from Surface
Profile Data . Appl. Opt. 
1995 , 34 , 201 –208 . 10.1364/AO.34.000201 .20963105 
Xu C. ; Tian H. ; Reece C. E. ; Kelley M. J. 
Enhanced Characterization
of Niobium Surface Topography . Phys. Rev. Accel.
Beams 
2011 , 14 , 12350110.1103/PhysRevSTAB.14.123501 .
Jańczuk B. ; Białopiotrowicz T. ; Wójcik W. 
The Components
of Surface Tension of Liquids and Their Usefulness in Determinations
of Surface Free Energy of Solids . J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 
1989 , 127 , 59 –66 . 10.1016/0021-9797(89)90007-6 .
Owens D. K. ; Wendt R. 
Estimation of the Surface
Free Energy of Polymers . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
1969 , 13 , 1741 –1747 . 10.1002/app.1969.070130815 .
Schrader M. E. 
Young–Dupre
Revisited . Langmuir 
1995 , 11 , 3585 –3589 . 10.1021/la00009a049 .
Iimori T. ; Iwahashi T. ; Kanai K. ; Seki K. ; Sung J. ; Kim D. ; Hamaguchi H.-o. ; Ouchi Y. 
Local Structure at the Air/Liquid
Interface of Room-Temperature Ionic Liquids Probed by Infrared-Visible
Sum Frequency Generation Vibrational Spectroscopy: 1-Alkyl-3-Methylimidazolium
Tetrafluoroborates . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2007 , 111 , 4860 –4866 . 10.1021/jp067162n .17428082 
Krüger D. ; Fuchs H. ; Rousseau R. ; Marx D. ; Parrinello M. 
Interaction
of Short-Chain Alkane Thiols and Thiolates with Small Gold Clusters:
Adsorption Structures and Energetics . J. Chem.
Phys. 
2001 , 115 , 4776 –4786 . 10.1063/1.1386806 .
Liao S. ; Shnidman Y. ; Ulman A. 
Adsorption
Kinetics of Rigid 4-Mercaptobiphenyls
on Gold . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2000 , 122 , 3688 –3694 . 10.1021/ja9905804 .
Rouhana L. L. ; Moussallem M. D. ; Schlenoff J. B. 
Adsorption of Short-Chain Thiols
and Disulfides onto Gold under Defined Mass Transport Conditions:
Coverage, Kinetics, and Mechanism . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 16080 –16091 . 10.1021/ja2041833 .21834581 
Xue Y. ; Ratner M. A. 
Microscopic Study
of Electrical Transport through Individual
Molecules with Metallic Contacts. II. Effect of the Interface Structure . Phys. Rev. B 
2003 , 68 , 115407 10.1103/PhysRevB.68.115407 .
Biebuyck H. A. ; Bain C. D. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Comparison
of Organic Monolayers
on Polycrystalline Gold Spontaneously Assembled from Solutions Containing
Dialkyl Disulfides or Alkanethiols . Langmuir 
1994 , 10 , 1825 –1831 . 10.1021/la00018a034 .
Birdi K.  Handbook of Surface and
Colloid Chemistry ; CRC Press , 2015 .
Baghbanzadeh M. ; Simeone F. C. ; Bowers C. M. ; Liao K.-C. ; Thuo M. ; Baghbanzadeh M. ; Miller M. S. ; Carmichael T. B. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Odd–Even
Effects in Charge Transport across
N-Alkanethiolate-Based SAMs . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 16919 –16925 . 10.1021/ja509436k .25380500 
Goodman J. M. 
What Is
the Longest Unbranched Alkane with a Linear Global Minimum Conformation? . J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 
1997 , 37 , 876 –878 . 10.1021/ci9704219 .

