
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145972110.1021/acsomega.9b00339ArticleInteraction Forces on Polyampholytic Hydrogel Gradient
Surfaces Tai Feng-I †Sterner Olof ‡Andersson Olof §Ekblad Tobias ∥Ederth Thomas *Division of Molecular Physics,
Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden* E-mail: thomas.ederth@liu.se. Phone: 0046 13 281247.21 03 2019 31 03 2019 4 3 5670 5681 05 02 2019 06 03 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Rational design and informed development
of nontoxic antifouling
coatings requires a thorough understanding of the interactions between
surfaces and fouling species. With more complex antifouling materials,
such as composites or zwitterionic polymers, there follows also a
need for better characterization of the materials as such. To further
the understanding of the antifouling properties of charge-balanced
polymers, we explore the properties of layered polyelectrolytes and
their interactions with charged surfaces. These polymers were prepared
via self-initiated photografting and photopolymerization (SIPGP);
on top of a uniform bottom layer of anionic poly(methacrylic acid)
(PMAA), a cationic poly(2-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA)
thickness gradient was formed. Infrared microscopy and imaging spectroscopic
ellipsometry were used to characterize chemical composition and swelling
of the combined layer. Direct force measurements by colloidal probe
atomic force microscopy were performed to investigate the forces between
the polymer gradients and charged probes. The swelling of PMAA and
PDMAEMA are very different, with steric and electrostatic forces varying
in a nontrivial manner along the gradient. The gradients can be tuned
to form a protein-resistant charge-neutral region, and we demonstrate
that this region, where both electrostatic and steric forces are small,
is highly compressed and the origin of the protein resistance of this
region is most likely an effect of strong hydration of charged residues
at the surface, rather than swelling or bulk hydration of the polymer.
In the highly swollen regions far from charge-neutrality, steric forces
dominate the interactions between the probe and the polymer. In these
regions, the SIPGP polymer has qualitative similarities with brushes,
but we were unable to quantitatively describe the polymer as a brush,
supporting previous data suggesting that these polymers are cross-linked.

document-id-old-9ao9b00339document-id-new-14ao-2019-00339rccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Hydrogels are water-soluble
polymers with a certain degree of crosslinking.
Their potentially large water content and structural properties similar
to those of tissue frequently yield high biocompatibility, and they
are therefore widely developed for biomedical and biomaterial applications.1−5 By applying hydrogel-like thin-film coatings onto substrates or
supporting materials, the interfacial advantages of hydrogels can
be preserved, whereas the geometry or dimensions can be adapted and
structural properties also improved. Thus, they may be designed to
meet many different needs in biologically oriented surface and interfacial
science. In particular, surface-bound hydrogels which provide a permanent
surface modification to various substrates are commonly utilized in
cell adhesion applications,6−8 tissue engineering,9 and as models for extracellular matrices.10 Hydrogels resistant to nonspecific adsorption
are of particular interest in antifouling applications for biomedical6,11 or marine12,13 applications. End-grafted polymer
brushes have been widely studied and used for the latter purposes14,15 and have certain similarities with hydrogels, though they are not
cross-linked. Furthermore, it has been observed that charge-balanced
systems, such as zwitterionic materials16−20 and other polyampholytes21−23 can also show
good fouling resistance. Although steric or structural repulsion is
the dominating mechanisms maintaining the protein resistance of neutral
polymers or brushes,11,12,24−26 charge-balanced systems may interact with bio-objects
in more complex ways. Electrostatic interactions with the surface
are likely to attract proteins, but under charge-balanced conditions,
this attraction is minimized, and the strong hydration due to the
presence of many ionizable groups could add considerably to the steric
contributions through much enhanced surface hydration, providing additional
resistance to protein adsorption. At high salt concentrations, antipolyelectrolyte
behavior contributes to increased hydration, with ensuing improvements
in fouling resistance.27 Most charge-balanced
polymers are prepared via polymerization of zwitterionic monomers28 or by copolymerization of anionic and cationic
monomers,22 but we have reported that charge-balanced
hydrogels can be created also by polymerizing two polyelectrolyte
layers with opposite charges on top of each other.21,29 P(AEMA−CEA) hydrogel films, composed of a thickness gradient
of anionic poly(2-carboxyethyl acrylate), PCEA, on top of a uniform
layer of cationic poly(2-aminoethyl methacrylate hydrochloride), PAEMA,
had a region of near-zero protein adsorption, as monitored by imaging
surface plasmon resonance.21 In these gradients,
the net charge was balanced in the protein-resistant region, whereas
proteins adsorbed to the oppositely charged regions on either side
of the charge-balanced portion of the gradient. Later, we also demonstrated
that the location of this charge-balanced region, and hence also the
protein adsorption, can be controlled via the pH of the surrounding
solution.29 The mechanisms behind the antifouling
properties of these systems are thought to be similar to fouling-resistant
zwitterionic polyelectrolytes.18 Direct
force measurements by colloidal probe atomic force microscopy (AFM)
to determine the surface charge distribution on these films revealed
a charge-balanced area around the zero protein adsorption region and
opposite surface charge on either side of this region.21,29 These gradient structures are useful in the exploration of materials
and surfaces suitable for pH-controllable adsorption and/or desorption,
and can be used to further our understanding of protein adhesion processes,
and also to clarify protein resistance mechanisms in zwitterionic
polymers. In these hydrogel film architectures, the charges from the
thickness gradient layer are distributed on top of a homogeneous background
of opposite charge. However, the resulting surface charge, and specifically,
the charge perceived by an AFM probe or an approaching protein will
be affected by several parameters, among these are the volume distribution
of charges between the two sequentially polymerized layers, any association
between oppositely charged groups, and screening by the intervening
electrolyte. A complication in the characterization of the charge
distribution on these gradients is that the swelling of the two materials
can be very different. In the case of P(AEMA−CEA), the swelling
of the anionic component is much greater than that of the cationic
component,29 with the result that unambiguous
interpretation of the direct force measurement results in terms of
electrostatic interactions becomes problematic since steric contributions
to the total interaction will be difficult to separate from the electrostatic
interactions. From this follows that correlations between surface
properties and, for example, protein resistance or other phenomena
along the gradient become uncertain, and this motivates more detailed
studies of the surface properties on these gradients, in particular,
a clarification of how steric and electrostatic interactions contribute
to the total force acting on a particle approaching different parts
of the gradient.

To the extent that zwitterionic materials rely
on charge-neutrality
for antifouling efficiency, these materials will also be more susceptible
to variations in environmental properties for their continued fouling
resistance than nominally uncharged materials, such as poly(ethylene
glycol) (PEG)-based polymers. Most surfaces acquire some charge upon
immersion in aqueous environments due to preferential adsorption of
ions. This can be very difficult to control or predict in complex
physiological, marine, or freshwater environments with low, but highly
variable, concentrations of metal ions. The adsorption of, for example,
multivalent ions, with potentially high affinity to the surface, and
possibly causing charge reversal, might alter the interfacial properties
of the material, as well as interactions between charged residues
within the polyelectrolyte. Furthermore, zwitterionic materials will
have acidic and basic groups with different strengths, resulting in
a pH-dependent net charge, with additional secondary effects from
the exact composition of the ionic environment. Thus, understanding
charging, as well as electrostatic and steric interactions at polyelectrolyte
interfaces, is of immediate relevance to the understanding of all
charge-balanced materials.

The properties of adsorbed and dissolved
polyelectrolytes have
been investigated by direct force measurements using a number of methods
and in a multitude of systems.30,31 After the pioneering
work by Luckham using poly-l-lysine adsorbed from solution,32 have followed a multitude of reports on forces
in systems with adsorbed polymers,33,34 multilayers,35,36 brushes,37−40 comb-type,41 bottle-brush,42 or more complex43 polyelectrolytes. This interest stems from, for example, the widespread
industrial use of polyelectrolytes for control of colloidal stability
and the importance of charged biopolymers such as DNA and polysaccharides.
For weak polyelectrolytes, pH and ionic strength can significantly
change the charge distribution and swelling,44−46 which is ultimately
the reason why in charge-balanced hydrogels formed from weak electrolytes,
the surface charge distribution, and thus also the protein resistance,
can be controlled.29 Among weak polyelectrolytes,
poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) and poly(2-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate)
(PDMAEMA) are frequently used and well-studied materials.47−51 The self-initiated photografting and photopolymerization (SIPGP)
fabrication method can be used to grow polymer films on a wide range
of organic materials,12,52 and works well with many different
monomers, including MAA and DMAEMA. The characteristics and performance
of hydrogels formed from these materials are described in the literature,46−48 and this also makes them interesting candidates for further studies
as components in two-layer hydrogel gradients.

In this work,
we extend the previous work on P(AEMA−CEA)
hydrogel gradient films to other combinations of anionic and cationic
polyelectrolytes, in this case, P(MAA–DMAEMA). To improve our
understanding of the mechanisms governing the protein resistance around
the charge-neutral region and to clarify the contributions from steric
and electrostatic forces to the interactions with an approaching particle,
we carry out direct force measurements using colloidal probe AFM to
study the interaction forces between such gradients and both charged
and (nominally) uncharged probes, to better understand how electrostatic
and steric forces, swelling, and polymer composition are related along
these thickness gradients. Ultimately, we anticipate that better understanding
of these parameters will enable the rational design of more efficient
and robust fouling-resistant polymers.

Results and Discussion
Infrared
Spectra
Long gradients on gold substrates
were characterized by infrared microspectroscopy for chemical identification
in a nitrogen-purged dry state. IR spectra were collected along the
gradient and subsequently reassembled into three-dimensional (3D)-representations
of the absorbance over the sample surface. Figure 1a,b shows 3D spectra of a long P(MAA–DMAEMA)
gradient and a PDMAEMA gradient (without the PMAA bottom layer), respectively
(see the Supporting Information for detailed
spectra and peak assignments). In both panes of Figure 1, the peak at 1733 cm–1 is identified as the carbonyl C=O stretching band, to which
both the PMAA and PDMAEMA layers contribute. Since the PMAA layer
is uniform, the increasing intensity is assigned to the thickness/mass
increase of PDMAEMA,50 as is evident in Figure 1b, in particular.
The band near 1266 cm–1 is assigned to C–C–O
stretching and the band around 1184 cm–1 is C–O
stretching coupled with O–H in-plane bending.53 Contributions from COO– groups, expected
to appear approximately in the range of 1580–1590 cm–1 (asymmetric stretching) or near 1400 cm–1 (symmetric
stretching) are absent from the spectra in Figure 1, indicating that the PMAA layer was not
ionized in the dry state under N2 purging. Tertiary ammonium
groups are difficult to resolve in IR spectra, so the same cannot
be stated with certainty about the PDMAEMA layer, though the absence
of carboxylates nevertheless indicates that the association of amines
with carboxylates in the dry film is limited. In general, the IR spectra
of both P(MAA–DMAEMA) and PDMAEMA gradients confirm that gradients
with continuously changing mass and chemical composition are formed
during polymerization.

Figure 1 IR spectra of long gradients of (a) P(MAA–DMAEMA)
and (b)
PDMAEMA. Increasing carbonyl peak near 1733 cm–1 indicates the presence of the PDMAEMA gradient.

Swelling Profiles
Imaging ellipsometry offers a nondestructive
optical method to monitor the swelling of surface-grafted polymers
under various conditions, notably as the pH is varied in this case. Figure 2 shows the swelling
profile of P(MAA–DMAEMA), plotted as thickness against the
surface position along a short gradient, in water as well as in buffers
over a pH range from 4.3 to 7.2. The thickness profile in air shows
a monotonous thickness increase with position, confirming the presence
of a polymer thickness gradient. When changing the medium from air
to water, the contrast between the polymer and the medium decreases.
For the swollen film, this is particularly important, and the water
content affects the refractive index of the hydrogel which also varies
in the direction of the surface normal. The degrees of crosslinking
or interpenetration in these SIPGP hydrogels are unknown, although
there is evidence that crosslinking does occur.52,54 Since the degree of crosslinking influences both the polymer architecture
and the charge distribution,21,55−57 the interpretation of results from highly swollen polymer films
should be made with care. Based on previous work,21,29 we hypothesize that the reduction of the total thickness of around
0.6 mm on the sample position as shown in Figure 2 is a charge-balanced region where the two
layers are interpenetrated and the opposite charges in the two polymers
neutralize each other, resulting in reduced electrostatic repulsion
within the film.

Figure 2 Swelling profiles of a short gradient of P(MAA–DMAEMA)
in
air, water (Milli-Q (MQ)), and in buffers with various pH values.
PMAA forms a bottom uniform layer and PDMAEMA is the gradient on top
of PMAA. From the left to the right there is a gradual increase in
PDMAEMA thickness.

The swelling in the thicker
region of the PDMAEMA gradient does
not respond to variations in pH as much as the region dominated by
PMAA, on the left side of Figure 2. The strong dependence of pH in the thin region of
the gradient can be understood in terms of protonation of the carboxylic
groups. First, the thickness of the PDMAEMA layer is thin here, and
the properties of the polymer film can safely be assumed to be dominated
by the PMAA layer. At low pH, carboxylic groups are protonated (neutralized)
to a greater extent, resulting in less electrostatic repulsion within
the polymer film, permitting the chains to adopt an entropically more
favorable, relaxed state. As the pH is increased, more carboxylic
groups are deprotonated and the electrostatic repulsion within the
film results in swelling and an increase in the total thickness of
the hydrogel.

The swelling up to pH 6 is considerably smaller
at the thicker
end of the gradient (to the right in Figure 2) as the amount of PDMAEMA increases along
the gradient. This may be explained either by increased crosslinking
between the PMAA and PDMAEMA layers or by attractive electrostatic
interactions between the ionized carboxylic and amine groups. Crosslinking
induces a higher elastic resistance to expansion, and the charge neutralization
effect minimizes the amount of counterions in the film which lowers
the osmotic pressure; both effects would result in less swelling.
The whole gradient swells significantly at pH 7.2 and uniformly in
the region of high PDMAEMA content. This is probably due to a high
degree of deprotonation of the carboxylic groups in the PMAA layer,
in combination with a low ionization of the PDMAEMA layer. However,
we emphasize that the thicknesses obtained from spectroscopic ellipsometry
measurements on highly swollen polymers must be considered with care
and the uncertainties in absolute terms increase with layer thickness,
as described above.

The pKa values
of the charged residues
in polyelectrolytes are strongly dependent on the local environment,
and the exact pKa values in the SIPGP-prepared
layers remain unknown.

The pKa values
of PMAA have been estimated
to be ca. 5–6,58,59 and the pKa values of DMAEMA have been found to decrease from ca. 8.3–8.6
to 7.4 in PDMAEMA,60,61 but these values will all be
modified in the presence of counterions. Taking the pKa data at face value, it would appear that from pH 4.3
up to 7.2, the charging of the PMAA layer is more affected than that
of the PDMAEMA layer, in agreement with the observations in Figure 2.

Direct Force
Measurements
Figure 3 shows force curves obtained on seven different
positions along a P(MAA–DMAEMA) gradient, using an 11-mecaptoundecanoic
acid (MUA)-coated colloidal probe in 10 mM phosphate buffer (PB) at
pH 6.0. The data are plotted as force/radius versus separation. Data
for long and short gradients are qualitatively comparable to each
other (not shown), indicating that the polymer structure and charge
distribution does not change significantly when the fabrication protocols
are applied to different gradient lengths. The Debye screening length
in 10 mM mono-PB is 3.04 nm, which is due to the bulk ionic atmosphere,
and thus depends solely on the liquid. The surface potential of the
MUA probe in the symmetric MUA–MUA system, as measured in 10
mM PB was found to be −91 mV, resulting in a surface charge density of −0.0323
C m–2 or 4.7 nm2 per surface charge (the
corresponding results for experiments in 10 mM NaCl are −88
mV, −0.0319 C m–2, or 4.8 nm2 per
charge). These are higher charge densities than were obtained in previous
studies,62 though the experimental conditions
were not identical, so the comparison should not be taken too far.

Figure 3 (a) Cartoon
showing the geometry of the experiment (not to scale;
note that in reality, some degree of interpenetration of the two polymer
layers occurs). The P(MAA–DAMEMA) gradient is probed by an
MUA self-assembled monolayer (SAM)-coated probe and arrows indicate
the positions of the obtained force curves at 500 μm intervals.
Position A is bare PMAA and the PDMAEMA gradient starts from curve
B, increasing in thickness toward G. (b) Force curves on a P(MAA–DMAEMA)
gradient, obtained in 10 mM PB buffer at pH 6.0, upon approach. (c)
shows the same data as in (b), plotted on a log scale (curves D–G
with an opposite sign). Solid black line in (c) is the decay of the
electrostatic repulsion for the used buffer ionic strength, adjusted
to coincide with curves B and C at short separation.

In Figure 3, the
curve at position A was obtained on the uniform PMAA layer and the
PDMAEMA gradient starts at position B, with the increasing thickness
toward curve G. Figure 3b,c shows the same data but plotted on a log scale in Figure 3c. In the latter, the curves
showing net attraction (D–G) were plotted with an opposite
sign. The solid black line in (c) indicates an exponential decay with
a Debye length of the used electrolyte, showing the expected contribution
from electrostatic repulsion to the total interaction in curves B
and C.

Considering first the qualitative changes in the curves
in Figure 3b, curve
A obtained
on the negatively charged PMAA is repulsive over the whole range of
interaction, as expected for an MUA SAM probe interacting with a negatively
charged surface. The reduced repulsion for B and C and the switch
to increasing net attraction from curves D to G reflect the presence
of increasing amounts of PDMAEMA, making the polymer film net positive
as the gradient of PDMAEMA becomes thicker. Due to the transition
from net repulsion to net attraction between positions C and D, it
is also clear that the results are consistent with the presence of
a charge-balanced region with a low net surface charge, as has been
suggested previously.21,29

In Figure 3c, the
force curves are plotted on a log scale and the attractive force curves
(D–G) are plotted with an opposite sign. The two force contributions
dominating the total interaction are the electrostatic forces and
steric repulsion arising from the interaction of the probe with the
swollen polymer networks. If we consider the force profile at position
A, it is seen in Figure 3c that the repulsion decays nearly exponentially with separation
but the decay exceeds by far the Debye screening length (indicated
as the solid black line adjusted to coincide with the data at close
separation). Thus, the repulsion in position A is dominated by steric
interaction with the swollen PMAA layer. There may well be an electrostatic
contribution to the repulsion, but considering the highly swollen
conditions of the PMAA film at pH 6 (see Figure 2), even if the carboxylic groups in the PMAA
layer are fully deprotonated, most of the charges in the film would
be much further from the probe than the Debye screening length (approximately
3 nm), and thus not directly affecting the probe as it interacts sterically
with the polymer layer. Thus, the effective charge of the film which
is probed by the MUA SAM-coated particle is only a fraction of the
total number of ionizable groups in the PMAA layer. However, there
may be an indirect contribution to the steric force from electrostatic
interactions within the polymer layer, as charges are brought closer
together upon compression of the hydrogel film.

The functional
form of the attractive interaction in curves D–G
is difficult to establish; at separations around 40 nm, the decay
of the force with the distance has a slope which is similar to the
Debye length observed for the repulsive curves B and C but the reduced
noise level at shorter separations suggests that the probe is hydrodynamically
damped and that the approach rate here is limited by the viscosity
of the intervening buffer during jump-in of the probe, in a range
where the stiffness of the cantilever is smaller than the force gradient.
Hence, the range of distances over which the electrostatic attraction
dominates the interaction and the separation where steric forces start
contributing significantly, cannot be determined in the attractive
regime from these data.

In an effort to simplify the interpretation
of the interaction
of the MUA probe with the PDMAEMA gradient and to clarify the steric
contribution to the interaction, a single PDMAEMA gradient was investigated
using an MUA probe without interference from a PMAA bottom layer (see
the Supporting information). However, little
useful information could be extracted from the data, and instead,
it was decided to study how an uncharged probe interacts with the
hydrogel gradient, to understand the role of steric contributions
to the total forces. We chose a 16-thiohexadecanol (C16OH) SAM to
represent a neutral probe for studying the steric interaction of the
probe with the P(MAA–DMAEMA) gradient.

However, a surface
rarely stays completely charge neutral in aqueous
solution, for example, as a result of preferential adsorption of ions
from the solution, and the charge of the C16OH probe was thus characterized
in a symmetric system, using a C16OH SAM also as the substrate. In
10 mM PB, the surface potential was found to be −22 mV and
the surface charge density was −0.00514 C m–2, equivalent to an area of 29.5 nm2 per charge, which
is considerably lower than what is observed on the carboxyl-terminated
SAM. The absence of pH-dependence in the interactions of hydroxylated
surfaces (and notably the difference between hydroxylated and carboxylated
surfaces in this respect) has been demonstrated by others.63 In Figure 4 (as in Figure 3), curve A represents probing on PMAA only and points B–G
represent probing on increasingly thicker portions of the P(MAA–DMAEMA)
gradient. In Figure 4b, the long-range attraction seen in Figure 3b is considerably reduced and appears only
very weakly for curves C–F, which is explained by the much
weaker negative surface charge on the C16OH probe compared to the
MUA probe. The electrostatic contribution to the Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek
(DLVO) force (again using the 3.04 nm Debye screening length in 10
mM monophosphatic PB buffer) fits the decay of the repulsion very
well for the curves B, E, and F (Figure 4c). Since the Debye length sets an upper
limit for the range of electrostatic forces, we conclude that curves
A and G represent cases where the long-range interaction is dominated
by steric repulsion. Similarly, in the force profiles obtained on
C and D, the total force is very weak, and then also by necessity
the electrostatic contributions, and in C, the jump into contact due
to the van der Waals attraction indicates that both electrostatic
and steric contributions are weak and/or short-ranged, and the fact
that the van der Waals attraction is not present further along the
gradient (at point D, for example) also confirms the presence of a
little-swollen charge-balanced region at C, surrounded by more swollen
domains on either side. Comparing the results from A and G with the
swelling characteristics in Figure 2, we also note that the swelling is greatest at either
end of the gradient sample, in full agreement with the observation
that long-range steric repulsion dominates A and G. The data in Figures 3 and 4 also clearly confirm that there is a region of charge neutralization
between a positively and a negatively charged end of the gradient.

Figure 4 (a) Experimental
geometry. P(MAA–DAMEMA) gradient is probed
by a C16OH SAM-coated probe and the arrows indicate the positions
where the force curves were obtained. Position A is bare PMAA, and
the PDMAEMA gradient starts from curve B, increasing in thickness
toward G. (b) Force curves obtained in 10 mM PB buffer at pH 6.0,
and (c) the same data plotted on a log scale, and the solid line in
(c) is the exponential decay obtained from the Debye length of the
buffer, adjusted to coincide with curves B, E, and F at short separations.

Modeling the Steric Interaction
Numerous force studies
in polymer systems describe the behavior of the adsorbed polymers
as well as grafted polymer brushes on surfaces.45,56,64−66 Dilute polymer systems,
either polyelectrolytes or neutral polymers, may be modeled as brushes
with reasonable accuracy. This, however, will not work for densely
grafted or cross-linked, branched systems.21,52 The classic Alexander–de Gennes (AdG) model67,68 is a good model for neutral polymer brushes,69 it has been successfully applied, developed, and expanded
to many related systems.44,45,64,65,70 As a first approximation, we assume that our systems can be modeled
as salted neutral polymer brushes.65 When
the bulk ionic strength is high and the thickness of the polymer layer
exceeds the Debye length, charged polymer brushes can behave in a
way similar to that of neutral brushes.65 Within the AdG model, Butt et al.64 demonstrate
that the force between two brushes can be written as F = A e–D/λ, where the two fit parameters A and λ are
the amplitude (dependent on the grafting density and the molecular
weight) and the decay length, respectively, and D is the separation between the surfaces. This relation is valid when
0.2 < D/L < 0.9, where L is the polymer thickness in equilibrium. However, when
this model was applied to the P(MAA–DAMEMA) gradient interacting
with neutral C16OH (see Figure 5), good fits could be obtained, but these did not result in
physically reasonable parameters: the total thickness of the polymer
layer in the gradient will be reduced due to intra- and interchain
interactions between the oppositely charged groups at the interface
between the two polymer layers and thus not directly comparable to
the brush height as yielded from the model. Also, if the brush height
as obtained from the ellipsometric swelling profile is used together
with any molecular weight chosen in the range permitted by the model,
the obtained grafting density will be far too small to fall in the
brush regime, which is not in agreement with structural investigations
of SIPGP hydrogels by other methods.54,71

Figure 5 Force curves
A and G of P(MAA–DMAEMA) gradient are probed
by a C16OH-SAM-modified probe, which fitted by single exponential
decay curves (red and blue) according to the Alexander–de Gennes
model. Pink curve is Dunlop’s model and the green curve is
Kamiyama’s model. Both the expected electrostatic contributions
determined by the Debye length (orange) and the hydrodynamic force
at the used approach rate (dark yellow) are considerably smaller than
the measured forces.

The shortcomings of the AdG model in our systems are related
to
the range of the steric forces. For the AdG model to yield reasonable
parameters from the fitting, the range of steric interaction needs
to be considerably shorter than that in our data. To account for such
discrepancies in polyelectrolyte systems, the AdG model has been extended
by, for example, Kamiyama and Israelachvili,45 and later also modified by Dunlop et al.65 The two major contributions to the force as discussed by Kamiyama,
are steric interactions of the brushes in the “overlap region”
at D < 2L, where L is the brush height and electrostatic forces for D > 2L. The total force was  where s is the mean distance
between the molecules and D is the separation. Dunlop
et al. described surface-grafted brushes as a Pincus brush72,73 which cannot quantitatively fit; therefore, the effective charges
on the polyelectrolytes were relocated on a nominal plane, which was
at a distance δLcharge = (1/2k) ln(A/Amax) above the substrates, where Amax is
the constant of the linear Poisson–Boltzmann equation: 128πkBTρ0/k. In Dunlop’s work, the forces between the surfaces F(D) were eventually reconstructed by applying
five parameters into the total free energy and using the Derjaguin
approximation, the force is  γ1 and γ2 are constants of order
unity and B = 2παkBTN/s2. L0 is the uncompressed brush
height that contains all its counterions and given by L0 ≅ α1/2Na, where N is the degree of polymerization, a is
the Kuhn step length, α is the fraction of charged monomers,
and s is the distance between the adjacent polymer
chain anchor points. For the above formula to be physical, it must
be ensured that γ2 ≥ 2γ1.

The fitting parameters of both Dunlop’s and Kamiyama’s
models were constrained to remain physically realistic. The fit to
Dunlop’s model shown in Figure 5 was performed using these parameters: N = 110, s = 9, α = 0.09, γ1 = 0.75, γ2 = 1.5, and L0 = 70 nm, which we deem realistic, from our previous knowledge of
these types of polymer films, viz. the largest measured thickness
of the film and estimates based on our available information on the
structure and density of SIPGP-prepared polymers.21,74 The (mathematical) agreement between the model and the data could
be further improved, however, this would lead to very low grafting
densities. Also, variations in γ1 and γ2 could be used to adjust the fitting, though the physical
implications of this are unclear.

The qualitative agreement
indicates that our hydrogel gradient
may have similarities to the polymers used by Dunlop et al. in terms
of polymer structures and charge distribution. However, when we tried
to fit our data to Kamiyama’s model, using s = 5 to bring the fitted curve close to data sets A and G (see Figure 5), the force predicted
by the model at small separations is 1 order of magnitude larger than
the data, which indicates that the decay of this model is rather fast
and probably due to smaller steric forces in dense polymers (low s value), but the slope of the long electrostatic tail appears
to fit better than in Dunlop’s model. Dunlop’s system
was a grafted strong polyelectrolyte brush containing quaternary amine,
whereas Kamiyama’s system was gelatin adsorbed onto mica, presumably
exposing loops and tails of the polymer chains, containing both positive
and negative charges. Even though SIPGP does not produce well-defined
brushes in the way atom transfer radical polymerization does, it seems
probable that our P(MAA–DAMEMA) films are closer to Dunlop’s
system, in terms of the way the steric and electrostatic forces contribute
to the interaction.

The similarities between the force curves
at position A as obtained
with the different probes (curves A in Figures 3 and 4, respectively,
as probed by MUA and C16OH probes) demonstrate that the interaction
at this point is dominated by steric forces. As inferred from the
fits to the AdG model, the range of the steric forces exceeds those
expected for a neutral brush. This may be because of branching or
crosslinking of the polymer during polymerization, but we would also
expect an intrachain contribution from the ionizable groups in the
polymer. The curves at position A as obtained with the MUA and C16OH
probes are of similar magnitude but differ in that the former has
a clearly distinguishable tail extending to farther separations, perhaps
as a result of electrostatic interactions between the charged probe
and charges on polymer chains extending into the solution. This contribution
to the total force is small and only significant at large separations
where the net force is small.

Curves A and G are of similar
magnitude as probed with the neutral
probe. This does neither imply that the compressibility of the polymer
at these positions are similar nor that the range of steric forces
is similar. The amount of dry material is very different at these
positions, and with the AFM the point of zero separation is not absolute,
and at point G there will be a much thicker layer of compressed polymer
remaining at high compressive load, effectively offsetting the separation
scale, with an amount approximately equal to the difference in dry
thicknesses of the polymer at these two positions. Comparing the forces
at points A and G, as obtained with the negatively charged probe,
MUA, it is clear that the negative PMAA layer has very few charges
contributing to electrostatic repulsion. The PMAA has a very thin
dry thickness, but when it swells in wet-state the thickness can increase
up to 3–5 times, distributing the negative charges into a large
volume, whose thickness by far exceeds the Debye length, and few of
the charges on the PMAA chains will be sensed by an approaching probe
before steric forces dominate the interaction.

In summary, failure
to fit the obtained data with a number of polyelectrolyte
brush models in the highly swollen regions, far from the charge-balanced
region, provides some support to the view that the polymer in these
regions are not brushes, in agreement with previous data suggesting
that crosslinking occurs in the preparation of these hydrogel films.21,52

Bulk and Surface Charge, Structure, and Swelling
The
swelling profiles of P(MAA–DMAEMA) in Figure 2, in combination with the force profiles
in Figures 3 and 4 (and, additionally, in Figure S3) provide excellent complementary information that informs
us about the polymer structure. Figures 3 and 4 (and Figure S3) show that PDMAEMA effectively adds
a continuously increasing density of positive charges along the gradients.
However, the swelling of PDMAEMA did not respond much to pH changes
and was overall very small, indicating that PDMAEMA has a rather dense
structure compared to the highly swollen PMAA, so that the MUA probe
interacts with a greater net charge density at the surface of PDMAEMA,
compared to the more dilute distribution of negative charges (see
curve A in Figure 3) in the more swollen PMAA. In PMAA, the charges in the polymer will,
on average, be farther from the probe at a given probe–polymer
distance due to the swelling. This may also explain that in the AdG
model, we cannot obtain reasonable grafting densities that satisfy
neutral brushes: the elasticity of PDMAEMA appears to be significantly
lower than that of neutral brushes, therefore, the total mean grafting
density is much underestimated, whereas the stiffness is beyond the
range expected for brushes. Dunlop’s and Kamiyama’s
models both describe their systems as salted brushes by modified AdG
models, however, from the swelling profiles of our gradient P(MAA–DMAEAM),
we recognize that the polymer structure in our case is much more complex.
In principle, PMAA, which is highly swollen, may be described as a
salted brush, but PDMAEMA with its ionizable groups confined within
a dense distribution, particularly at the thicker end of the gradient
(see Figures 2 and S3), cannot be described as a brush, but more
likely as a branched or cross-linked polymer. This can also be seen
as a low elasticity of PDMAEMA where the attractive electrostatic
forces are not present (compare curves A and G in Figure 4). In addition to this, the
charge neutralization between PMAA and PDMAEMA is significant in that
the total thickness of the gradient reduces at the charge-balanced
area, and which limits the swelling at the interface.

The complex
swelling profiles and the nontrivial variation of the force curves
of P(MAA–DMAEMA) gradients are the combined result of steric
and electrostatic interactions both within the polymer and between
the probes and the gradients. We have not been able to quantitatively
describe the interactions within a model of swollen polyelectrolytes,
but are able to qualitatively describe how swelling and charging of
the polymer contribute both to the structural properties and to the
formation of a charge-neutral region. We anticipate that ongoing and
future work using neutron reflectometry will reveal further details
about the swollen state of such SIPGP-grafted layers.54,71,75 Although it is of great interest
how both the surface potential (and charge density) and the steric
contributions vary along the gradient, this information cannot be
unambiguously extracted from the current AFM data but will require
further work, also involving other methods. Previous work has demonstrated
that protein fouling onto the hydrogel gradients occur primarily outside
the charge-neutral region.21,29 The data presented
here demonstrate that these charged regions are the most swollen and
that the interactions with charged and neutral probes are very similar
in these areas, suggesting that the surface charge is weak and that
the swelling is caused by electrostatic interactions within the polymer
layers. This implies that, to the extent that electrostatic interactions
are responsible for the nonspecific adsorption of proteins, this might
be a result of proteins diffusing into the swollen polymer, rather
than adsorption onto the polymer surface. Considering the interesting
antifouling properties of these hydrogel gradients, and in particular,
the ability to control surface charge and protein resistance via pH,29 we are convinced that further studies of these
materials have the potential to provide fundamental and general information
about the antifouling properties of charge-balanced and/or zwitterionic
polymers.

Conclusions
Samples fabricated by
SIPGP with a PDMAEMA gradient on top of a
PMAA uniform bottom layer were characterized by infrared microscopy
and imaging ellipsometry to verify the chemical composition and swelling
along the gradients under different pH conditions. Colloidal probe
AFM, with probes chemically modified by SAMs of either 11-mercaptoundecanoic
acid or 16-thiohexadecanol, was used to measure the interaction forces
with the gradient surfaces, at several positions along the gradients,
to facilitate separation of electrostatic and steric contributions
to the total interaction.

Combining these methods, we confirm
the presence of a charge-balanced
and less swollen region in the thin hydrogel gradient. The PDMAEMA
gradient layer adds a continuously increasing positive charge contribution,
resulting in a shift from the net negative surface charge where the
PDMAEMA layer is thin, over the charge-neutral region where electrostatic
forces are canceled, or small, due to charge neutralization and where
also steric forces are small due to the reduction of internal electrostatic
repulsion between ionizable groups within the polymers. Further along
the gradient, the interaction is dominated by a positive surface charge,
which is attractive when probed by MUA. However, as the film becomes
thicker, the electrostatic attraction is reduced in favor of increasing
steric repulsion, where the range of the measured repulsive forces
extends far beyond the projected range of electrostatic interaction.
We conclude that the charge-neutral region is highly condensed with
virtually no long-range steric contribution to the interaction. Previous
work has shown that this region is highly protein-resistant,21,29 and our current findings of its structure stands in sharp contrast
to protein-resistant neutral polymer brushes, such as PEG, which are
generally highly compressible and whose fouling resistance is conferred
via strong hydration, causing swelling of the layer and considerable
chain flexibility.76 Thus, the protein
resistance of this charge-neutral region appears to stem from short-range
steric repulsion provided by strong hydration of charged residues.
Furthermore, the weak surface charge of the swollen ends of the gradient
suggests that charge-driven protein adsorption in these regions, that
was observed previously,29 occurs by diffusion
of proteins into the swollen polymer, rather than by adsorption on
top of the polymer film. However, the inconclusive modeling of the
polymer structure precludes quantitative separation of steric and
electrostatic forces, and thus neither diffuse layer potentials nor
steric contributions versus position or composition along the gradients
can be provided.

These results are useful for understanding
the effects of, for
example, pH-dependent charging and responses of zwitterionic, or otherwise
charge-balanced, polymers, and their interactions with proteins. In
view of the current interest in this class of polymers for potential
antifouling properties, it will also contribute to supporting knowledge-driven
development of coatings for marine, freshwater or biomedical uses.

Materials
and Methods
Materials
The monomers methacrylic acid (MAA, 99%)
and 2-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA 98%) were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification, their structures
are shown in Scheme 1. MAA monomers were polymerized in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS:
10 mM sodium hydrogen phosphate, 10 mM potassium dihydrogen phosphate,
150 mM NaCl) and adjusted to pH 6.0 with HCl. DMAEMA monomers were
polymerized in 10 mM acetate buffer at pH 4.5. 0.1–10 mM monophosphate
buffers (PBs), adjusted from pH 8.0 to 6.1 with HCl, 10 mM 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (Calbiochem) buffer from
pH 5.3 to 7.2 adjusted by NaOH, and 10 mM acetate buffer at pH 4.5
were used in all wet-state measurements to cover a wide pH range.
11-Mecaptoundecanoic acid (MUA) (99%, Sigma-Aldrich) and 16-thiohexadecanol
(C16OH) (99.5%, gift from Biacore AB, Uppsala (now GE Healthcare))
were used for probe modification.

Scheme 1 Gradient Fabrication
Due to experimental constraints,
the gradients were prepared in two different dimensions. Short gradients,
with a total length of 2 mm, were prepared to fit into the field of
view of the imaging ellipsometer, which was used to investigate the
swelling behavior of the thin films under different solution conditions,
and 15 mm long gradients were prepared to provide sufficient spatial
resolution along the length of the gradient in the infrared microscope,
which was used to verify the chemical composition of the gradients.
The samples for infrared microscopy were prepared on gold-coated substrates
to increase the total reflectivity of the samples. Both gradient types
were characterized by the colloidal probe atomic force measurements
to confirm that they had similar properties.

Short Gradients
Short P(MAA–DMAEMA) gradient
samples (2 mm gradient length), with a homogeneous PMAA bottom layer
and a PDMAEMA gradient on top,77 were made
for imaging ellipsometry and for colloidal probe AFM force measurements.
Before grafting the hydrogels, a silane monolayer was formed on a
silicon substrate (Si(110), Topsil Semiconductor Materials A/S, Denmark)
by incubation in a mixture of 5 mL 95% ethanol, 5 mL Milli-Q (MQ)
water (Millipore), 4 μL acetic acid, and 40 μL methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane
(PlusOne Bind-Silane, Amersham Bioscience) for 5 min. The surface
was then dried in N2 gas and baked at 115 °C for 10
min, ultrasonicated for 10 s in 95% ethanol and then stored in 95%
ethanol. To form the first uniform anionic layer, The MAA monomer
was diluted in PBS buffer to a concentration of 5% (v/v). The monomer
solution was placed between a UV-transparent quartz disc and the sample
surface, which is suspended beneath the disc and held in place by
the surface tension, as described by Larsson et al.,52 and then polymerized for 5 min under a UV lamp (Philips
TUV PL-L, 18 W) with the main emission peak at 254 nm (see Scheme 2). The surface was
then sonicated for 1 min in PBS. The cationic PDMAEMA gradient was
created in a similar manner, but by using a moving shutter above the
sample. The monomers were diluted in 10 mM acetate buffer at pH 4.5
to a concentration of 15% (v/v). The moving speed of the shutter was
0.5 mm min–1 with 4 min exposure time, which results
in a 2 mm long gradient. Finally, the surface was rinsed by ultrasonication
in a mixture of MQ water and 95% ethanol for 1 min and finally rinsed
and stored in MQ water.

Scheme 2 Long Gradients
Long P(MAA–DMAEMA) gradients
(15 mm gradient length) were made primarily for infrared microscopy
but were also subjected to AFM measurements. Pieces of silicon were
coated with 25 Å chromium (99.9%, Balzers, Liechtenstein) followed
by 200 nm gold (99.99%, Nordic High Vacuum AB, Sweden) in a custom-made
resistive evaporation system. The clean gold substrates were then
spin-coated by 0.25% polystyrene in xylene at 1250 rpm for 30 s using
a spin-coater (WS-400B-6NPP/Lite, Laurell Technologies Corp.). PMAA
and PDMAEMA layers were polymerized as described above, but the irradiation
time and speed of the shutter were adjusted to provide a longer gradient
with the same total maximum thickness: PMAA was polymerized for 3
min and PDMAEMA was polymerized for 5 min with the shutter moving
at a speed of 3 mm min–1. To study the properties
of the PDMAEMA thickness gradient alone, PDMAEMA was also polymerized
directly onto polystyrene-coated gold without a PMAA layer, but otherwise
according to the protocol above.

Infrared Microscopy
A Bruker Hyperion 3000 IR microscope,
with light supplied from a Tensor 27 IR spectrometer (Bruker) and
equipped with a motorized and computer-controlled sample stage for
accurate positioning of the sample was used for collecting the infrared
reflection–absorption spectra. The objective used double surface
reflection with angles between 52 and 80° relative to the surface
normal. A nitrogen-cooled single-element mercury cadmium telluride
detector was used and the resolution was 4 cm–1.
Two-hundred interferograms were recorded at each measurement point
through a 100 × 200 μm2 aperture window with
the longer side perpendicular to the gradient direction when mapping
the samples by 250 μm intervals. Thirty spectra were taken under
N2 purging and all spectra were background corrected by
a concave rubberband method with 64 baseline points. This procedure
was used for the characterization of long P(MAA–DMAEMA) and
PDMAEMA gradients, as has also been described in more detail previously.21,78

Imaging Null Ellipsometry
An EP3 imaging spectroscopic
ellipsometer (Nanofilm Surface Analysis, Germany) equipped with a
flow cell having windows at an angle of 60° from the sample surface
normal was assembled to carry out the in situ ellipsometric measurements.
The data were collected at 40 wavelengths between 350 and 850 nm,
whereas the buffer exchange was made with a peristaltic pump operating
at a flow rate of 0.78 mL min–1. The total liquid
volume in the system was approximately 3 mL, including the cell and
pipe tubing. The pump was running for 12 min at each buffer exchange,
but during the measurements, the flow was halted. The total area of
simultaneous measurement was 1.2 × 0.8 mm2, and Δ
and Ψ pairs were averaged over 50 regions along the gradients.
The measurements were carried out in the following order: air, MQ,
and then in buffers starting from low toward high pH.

A four-zone
measurement was made to collect data, under the assumption that the
system did not change significantly during the 50 min required to
carry out the measurement. This stability was confirmed by both ellipsometry
and QCM-D (data not shown).77 The obtained
Δ and Ψ pairs at different wavelengths were used to model
the thickness profiles by EP3.3 View software (supplied with the ellipsometer),
where dispersion functions for silicon, silica, and water were taken
from an internal database. The refractive indices of the polymers
were evaluated on the dry films using a Cauchy function,77 finally, the standard deviations for modeled
film thicknesses were obtained by the software. In air, these ranged
between 0.1 and 0.2 nm. In water, and for the swollen film, this was
increased to 3–5 nm. A Bruggeman effective medium approximation,
which models the medium as consisting of randomly arranged spherical
particles of different compositions,79 was
used to account for the refractive index change due to the mixing
of liquid with the polymer.

Force Measurement by Colloidal Probe AFM
The force
measurements were performed with a NanoScope IVa Dimension 3100 SPM
(Veeco Instruments, Inc., now Bruker) equipped with a liquid cell.
The gold-coated glass colloidal probes with 10 μm diameter were
purchased from NovaScan, individually calibrated with the Sader method,
and all with spring constants near 0.19 N m–1 (exact
values for each probe were used in the data processing). The probes
were modified to be either negatively charged, using an 11-mercaptoundecanoic
acid (MUA) self-assembled monolayer (SAM) or nearly neutral by 16-thiohexadecanol
(C16OH) SAMs. SAMs were formed by incubation in 1 mM thiol solutions
in ethanol, for at least 24 h at room temperature. To determine the
surface potential and the surface charge of the MUA and C16OH probes,
force curves were obtained in symmetric systems with MUA or C16OH
SAMs covering both the probe and the flat substrate. These measurements
were carried out in monophosphate buffer (PB) solutions from 0.1 to
10 mM, and the results averaged over four probes and eight flat substrates
for each SAM. Force data were fitted to DLVO theory using numerical
solutions to the nonlinear Poisson–Boltzmann equation under
both constant potential and constant charge conditions, according
to the procedure described by Chan,80 and
using a Hamaker constant of 4 × 10–20 J (ignoring
retardation81). The surface charge was
calculated using the Grahame equation.82 The presented force measurements were obtained in 10 mM PB buffers;
the choice of a 10 mM electrolyte is a compromise between conflicting
requirements. Ultimately, we are interested in the behavior and properties
of these coatings under physiological and/or marine conditions, in
which the total electrolyte concentrations are much higher than 10
mM. However, at relevant physiological or marine electrolyte levels,
the Debye screening lengths become extremely short, and the measurement
of electrostatic forces, and thus also the determination of surface
charge, becomes very difficult. Ten millimolar was deemed the highest
concentration, where the relevant features of the electrostatic properties
are still reproduced and measurable with reasonable accuracy and was
also used in our previous study.29 In the
force measurements, the probe was approaching the gradient surface,
whereas the cantilever deflection was recorded as a function of the
piezoelectric actuator displacement (in total 2 μm), with a
frequency of 0.1 Hz per cycle. Force curves were converted from deflection-position
to force/radius-separation data by assuming a zero separation in the
constant compliance region. Forces are shown as normalized by the
probe radius according to the Derjaguin approximation82 which yields F/R = 2πG, where G is the total free energy of
interaction for planar surfaces. At least five approaches (force curves)
were recorded at every point; the gradients were very robust, with
the curves acquired at the same point consistently being similar,
as would be expected with the large (10 μm) probe particle.
When probing the short gradients (data not shown), force curves were
collected and averaged at 10 positions with 200 μm pitch along
the gradient. When probing the long gradients, force curves were recorded
and averaged at each position, with 500 μm separation at 10
positions along the gradients. Force measurements on short and long
gradients were consistent throughout the experiments. For clarity
in presentation, results from only seven adjacent positions are shown
in the following; the excluded data obtained at the peripheries of
the gradients are similar and provide no additional information. In
total, three MUA and two C16OH probes were used to investigate 10
different gradients.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00339.Infrared spectra
and peak assignments for MAA–DMAEMA
and DMAEMA gradients; interaction forces between a negatively charged
probe and a single cationic gradient layer (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b00339_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
∥ Present
address: MariboHilleshög Research AB, 261 23 Landskrona,
Sweden (T.E.).

Author Present Address
§ Present
address: Insplorion AB, Medicinaregatan 8A, 413 90 Göteborg,
Sweden (O.A.).

Author Present Address
‡ Present
address: Susos AG, Lagerstrasse 14, 8600 Dübendorf,
Switzerland (O.S.).

Author Present Address
† Present
address: Kagaku Analys AB, Sven Hultins gata 9A, 412 88
Göteborg, Sweden (F.-I.T.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported
by the European Commission’s
Sixth Framework Program Integrated Project AMBIO (Advanced Nanostructured
Surfaces for the Control of Biofouling, NMP-CT-2005-011827) and the
European Community’s Seventh Framework Program under Grant
Agreement number 237997 (SEACOAT). T.E. acknowledges financial support
from the Swedish Government Strategic Research Area in Materials Science
on Advanced Functional Materials at Linköping University (Faculty
Grant SFO-Mat-LiU No. 2009-00971).
==== Refs
References
Seliktar D. 
Designing
Cell-Compatible Hydrogels for Biomedical Applications . Science 
2012 , 336 , 1124 –1128 . 10.1126/science.1214804 .22654050 
Malmsten M. 
Antimicrobial
and antiviral hydrogels . Soft Matter 
2011 , 7 , 8725 –8736 . 10.1039/c1sm05809f .
Laftah W. A. ; Hashim S. ; Ibrahim A. N. 
Polymer Hydrogels: A Review . Polym.-Plast. Technol. Eng. 
2011 , 50 , 1475 –1486 . 10.1080/03602559.2011.593082 .
Nonoyama T. ; Gong J. P. 
Double-network hydrogel and its potential
biomedical
application: A review . Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng.,
Part H 
2015 , 229 , 853 –863 . 10.1177/0954411915606935 .
Utech S. ; Boccaccini A. R. 
A review
of hydrogel-based composites for biomedical
applications: enhancement of hydrogel properties by addition of rigid
inorganic fillers . J. Mater. Sci. 
2016 , 51 , 271 –310 . 10.1007/s10853-015-9382-5 .
Ekblad T. ; Faxälv L. ; Andersson O. ; Wallmark N. ; Larsson A. ; Lindahl T. L. ; Liedberg B. 
Patterned
Hydrogels for Controlled
Platelet Adhesion from Whole Blood and Plasma . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2010 , 20 , 2396 –2403 . 10.1002/adfm.201000083 .
Faxälv L. ; Ekblad T. ; Liedberg B. ; Lindahl T. L. 
Blood compatibility
of photografted hydrogel coatings . Acta Biomater. 
2010 , 6 , 2599 –2608 . 10.1016/j.actbio.2009.12.046 .20045090 
Ino J. M. ; Chevallier P. ; Letourneur D. ; Mantovani D. ; Le Visage C. 
Plasma functionalization
of poly(vinyl alcohol) hydrogel
for cell adhesion enhancement . Biomatter 
2013 , 3 , e2541410.4161/biom.25414 .23989063 
Drury J. L. ; Mooney D. J. 
Hydrogels for tissue engineering: scaffold design variables
and applications . Biomaterials 
2003 , 24 , 4337 –4351 . 10.1016/S0142-9612(03)00340-5 .12922147 
Tibbitt M. W. ; Anseth K. S. 
Hydrogels as extracellular
matrix mimics for 3D cell
culture . Biotechnol. Bioeng. 
2009 , 103 , 655 –663 . 10.1002/bit.22361 .19472329 
Lewis A. L. 
Phosphorylcholine-based
polymers and their use in the prevention of biofouling . Colloids Surf., B 
2000 , 18 , 261 –275 . 10.1016/S0927-7765(99)00152-6 .
Ekblad T. ; Bergström G. ; Ederth T. ; Conlan S. L. ; Mutton R. ; Clare A. S. ; Wang S. ; Liu Y. L. ; Zhao Q. ; D’Souza F. ; Donnelly G. T. ; Willemsen P. R. ; Pettitt M. E. ; Callow M. E. ; Callow J. A. ; Liedberg B. 
Poly(ethylene
glycol)-Containing Hydrogel Surfaces for Antifouling Applications
in Marine and Freshwater Environments . Biomacromolecules 
2008 , 9 , 2775 –2783 . 10.1021/bm800547m .18759475 
Xie L. ; Hong F. ; He C. ; Ma C. ; Liu J. ; Zhang G. ; Wu C. 
Coatings with a self-generating hydrogel
surface for antifouling . Polymer 
2011 , 52 , 3738 –3744 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2011.06.033 .
Thérien-Aubin H. ; Chen L. ; Ober C. K. 
Fouling-resistant polymer brush coatings . Polymer 
2011 , 52 , 5419 –5425 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2011.09.017 .
Yang W. J. ; Neoh K.-G. ; Kang E.-T. ; Teo S. L.-M. ; Rittschof D. 
Polymer brush
coatings for combating marine biofouling . Prog.
Polym. Sci. 
2014 , 39 , 1017 –1042 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2014.02.002 .
Holmlin R. E. ; Chen X. X. ; Chapman R. G. ; Takayama S. ; Whitesides G. M. 
Zwitterionic
SAMs that resist nonspecific adsorption of protein from aqueous buffer . Langmuir 
2001 , 17 , 2841 –2850 . 10.1021/la0015258 .
Ladd J. ; Zhang Z. ; Chen S. ; Hower J. C. ; Jiang S. 
Zwitterionic
Polymers Exhibiting High Resistance to Nonspecific Protein Adsorption
from Human Serum and Plasma . Biomacromolecules 
2008 , 9 , 1357 –1361 . 10.1021/bm701301s .18376858 
Cheng G. ; Li G. Z. ; Xue H. ; Chen S. F. ; Bryers J. D. ; Jiang S. Y. 
Zwitterionic carboxybetaine polymer surfaces and their
resistance to long-term biofilm formation . Biomaterials 
2009 , 30 , 5234 –5240 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.05.058 .19573908 
Jiang S. ; Cao Z. 
Ultralow-Fouling, Functionalizable,
and Hydrolyzable Zwitterionic
Materials and Their Derivatives for Biological Applications . Adv. Mater. 
2010 , 22 , 920 –932 . 10.1002/adma.200901407 .20217815 
Schlenoff J. B. 
Zwitteration:
Coating Surfaces with Zwitterionic Functionality to Reduce Nonspecific
Adsorption . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 9625 –9636 . 10.1021/la500057j .24754399 
Ekblad T. ; Andersson O. ; Tai F. I. ; Ederth T. ; Liedberg B. 
Lateral Control
of Protein Adsorption on Charged Polymer Gradients . Langmuir 
2009 , 25 , 3755 –3762 . 10.1021/la803443d .19708252 
Schroeder M. E. ; Zurick K. M. ; McGrath D. E. ; Bernards M. T. 
Multifunctional
Polyampholyte Hydrogels with Fouling Resistance and Protein Conjugation
Capacity . Biomacromolecules 
2013 , 14 , 3112 –3122 . 10.1021/bm4007369 .23947943 
Zhang W. ; Yang Z. ; Kaufman Y. ; Bernstein R. 
Surface and
anti-fouling properties of a polyampholyte hydrogel grafted onto a
polyethersulfone membrane . J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2018 , 517 , 155 –165 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2018.01.106 .29421675 
Jeon S. I. ; Andrade J. D. 
Protein surface
interactions in the presence of polyethylene
oxide. 2. Effect of protein size . J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 
1991 , 142 , 159 –166 . 10.1016/0021-9797(91)90044-9 .
Jeon S. I. ; Lee J. H. ; Andrade J. D. ; Degennes P. G. 
Protein surface
interactions in the presence of polyethylene oxide. 1. Simplified
theory . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
1991 , 142 , 149 –158 . 10.1016/0021-9797(91)90043-8 .
Leckband D. ; Sheth S. ; Halperin A. 
Grafted poly(ethylene
oxide) brushes
as nonfouling surface coatings . J. Biomater.
Sci., Polym. Ed. 
1999 , 10 , 1125 –1147 . 10.1163/156856299X00720 .10591136 
Chang Y. ; Yandi W. ; Chen W.-Y. ; Shih Y.-J. ; Yang C.-C. ; Chang Y. ; Ling Q.-D. ; Higuchi A. 
Tunable Bioadhesive
Copolymer Hydrogels of Thermoresponsive Poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide)
Containing Zwitterionic Polysulfobetaine . Biomacromolecules 
2010 , 11 , 1101 –1110 . 10.1021/bm100093g .20201492 
Jiang S. Y. ; Cao Z. Q. 
Ultralow-Fouling, Functionalizable, and Hydrolyzable
Zwitterionic Materials and Their Derivatives for Biological Applications . Adv. Mater. 
2010 , 22 , 920 –932 . 10.1002/adma.200901407 .20217815 
Tai F.-I. ; Sterner O. ; Andersson O. ; Ekblad T. ; Ederth T. 
pH-control
of the protein resistance of thin hydrogel gradient films . Soft Matter 
2014 , 10 , 5955 –5964 . 10.1039/C4SM00833B .24987939 
Claesson P. M. ; Poptoshev E. ; Blomberg E. ; Dedinaite A. 
Polyelectrolyte-mediated
surface interactions . Adv. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2005 , 114–115 , 173 –187 . 10.1016/j.cis.2004.09.008 .
Szilagyi I. ; Trefalt G. ; Tiraferri A. ; Maroni P. ; Borkovec M. 
Polyelectrolyte
adsorption, interparticle forces, and colloidal aggregation . Soft Matter 
2014 , 10 , 2479 –2502 . 10.1039/c3sm52132j .24647366 
Luckham P. F. ; Klein J. 
Forces between mica
surfaces bearing adsorbed polyelectrolyte, poly-L-lysine,
in aqueous media . J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans.
1 
1984 , 80 , 865 –878 . 10.1039/f19848000865 .
Ruths M. ; Sukhishvili S. A. ; Granick S. 
Static and Dynamic Forces between
Adsorbed Polyelectrolyte Layers (Quaternized Poly-4-vinylpyridine) . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 6202 –6210 . 10.1021/jp010182z .
Kirwan L.
J. ; Maroni P. ; Behrens S. H. ; Papastavrou G. ; Borkovec M. 
Interaction and Structure
of Surfaces Coated by Poly(vinyl
amines) of Different Line Charge Densities† . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2008 , 112 , 14609 –14619 . 10.1021/jp802366p .18717544 
Lowack K. ; Helm C. A. 
Molecular Mechanisms
Controlling the Self-Assembly
Process of Polyelectrolyte Multilayers . Macromolecules 
1998 , 31 , 823 –833 . 10.1021/ma9614454 .
Bosio V. ; Dubreuil F. ; Bogdanovic G. ; Fery A. 
Interactions between
silica surfaces coated by polyelectrolyte multilayers in aqueous environment:
comparison between precursor and multilayer regime . Colloids Surf., A 
2004 , 243 , 147 –155 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2004.06.011 .
Kelley T. W. ; Schorr P. A. ; Johnson K. D. ; Tirrell M. ; Frisbie C. D. 
Direct
Force Measurements at Polymer Brush Surfaces by Atomic Force Microscopy . Macromolecules 
1998 , 31 , 4297 –4300 . 10.1021/ma971571n .
Abraham T. ; Giasson S. ; Gohy J. F. ; Jérôme R. 
Direct Measurements
of Interactions between Hydrophobically Anchored Strongly Charged
Polyelectrolyte Brushes . Langmuir 
2000 , 16 , 4286 –4292 . 10.1021/la991195v .
Kurihara K. 
Polyelectrolyte
brushes studied by surface forces measurement . Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2010 , 158 , 130 –138 . 10.1016/j.cis.2010.03.004 .20452568 
Murakami D. ; Takenaka A. ; Kobayashi M. ; Jinnai H. ; Takahara A. 
Measurement
of the Electrostatic Interaction between Polyelectrolyte Brush Surfaces
by Optical Tweezers . Langmuir 
2013 , 29 , 16093 –16097 . 10.1021/la404133e .24325298 
Whitby C. P. ; Scales P. J. ; Grieser F. ; Healy T. W. ; Kirby G. ; Lewis J. A. ; Zukoski C. F. 
PAA/PEO comb polymer effects on rheological
properties and interparticle forces in aqueous silica suspensions . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2003 , 262 , 274 –281 . 10.1016/S0021-9797(03)00179-6 .16256604 
Naderi A. ; Iruthayaraj J. ; Vareikis A. ; Makuška R. ; Claesson P. M. 
Surface Properties of Bottle-Brush Polyelectrolytes
on Mica: Effects of Side Chain and Charge Densities . Langmuir 
2007 , 23 , 12222 –12232 . 10.1021/la701716t .17958385 
An J. ; Dėdinaitė A. ; Nilsson A. ; Holgersson J. ; Claesson P. M. 
Comparison of a
Brush-with-Anchor and a Train-of-Brushes
Mucin on Poly(methyl methacrylate) Surfaces: Adsorption, Surface Forces,
and Friction . Biomacromolecules 
2014 , 15 , 1515 –1525 . 10.1021/bm500173s .24654998 
Biesheuvel P. M. 
Ionizable
polyelectrolyte brushes: brush height and electrosteric interaction . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2004 , 275 , 97 –106 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2004.02.024 .15158386 
Kamiyama Y. ; Israelachvili J. 
Effect of pH and salt on the adsorption
and interactions
of an amphoteric polyelectrolyte . Macromolecules 
1992 , 25 , 5081 –5088 . 10.1021/ma00045a039 .
Kusumo A. ; Bombalski L. ; Lin Q. ; Matyjaszewski K. ; Schneider J. W. ; Tilton R. D. 
High capacity, charge-selective protein
uptake by polyelectrolyte brushes . Langmuir 
2007 , 23 , 4448 –4454 . 10.1021/la063660b .17358090 
Schuwer N. ; Klok H. A. 
Tuning the pH Sensitivity of Poly(methacrylic acid)
Brushes . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 4789 –4796 . 10.1021/la200347u .21425827 
Parnell A. J. ; Martin S. J. ; Dang C. C. ; Geoghegan M. ; Jones R. A. L. ; Crook C. J. ; Howse J. R. ; Ryan A. J. 
Synthesis,
characterization and swelling behaviour of poly(methacrylic acid)
brushes synthesized using atom transfer radical polymerization . Polymer 
2009 , 50 , 1005 –1014 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2008.11.051 .
Biesalski M. ; Johannsmann D. ; Ruhe J. 
Synthesis and swelling behavior of
a weak polyacid brush . J. Chem. Phys. 
2002 , 117 , 4988 –4994 . 10.1063/1.1490924 .
Sanjuan S. ; Perrin P. ; Pantoustier N. ; Tran Y. 
Synthesis and swelling
behavior of pH-responsive polybase brushes . Langmuir 
2007 , 23 , 5769 –5778 . 10.1021/la063450z .17425342 
Xu Y. Y. ; Bolisetty S. ; Drechsler M. ; Fang B. ; Yuan J. Y. ; Ballauff M. ; Muller A. H. E. 
pH and salt responsive poly(N,N-dimethylaminoethyl
methacrylate) cylindrical brushes and their quaternized derivatives . Polymer 
2008 , 49 , 3957 –3964 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2008.06.051 .
Larsson A. ; Ekblad T. ; Andersson O. ; Liedberg B. 
Photografted poly(ethylene
glycol) matrix for affinity interaction studies . Biomacromolecules 
2007 , 8 , 287 –295 . 10.1021/bm060685g .17206819 
Tajiri T. ; Morita S. ; Ozaki Y. 
Hydration
mechanism on a poly(methacrylic
acid) film studied by in situ attenuated total reflection infrared
spectroscopy . Polymer 
2009 , 50 , 5765 –5770 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2009.09.060 .
Ederth T. ; Ekblad T. 
Swelling of Thin Poly(ethylene glycol)-Containing
Hydrogel
Films in Water Vapor—A Neutron Reflectivity Study . Langmuir 
2018 , 34 , 5517 –5526 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.8b00177 .29672068 
Eichenbaum G. M. ; Kiser P. F. ; Dobrynin A. V. ; Simon S. A. ; Needham D. 
Investigation
of the swelling response and loading of ionic microgels with drugs
and proteins: The dependence on cross-link density . Macromolecules 
1999 , 32 , 4867 –4878 . 10.1021/ma981945s .
Melzak K.
A. ; Mateescu A. ; Toca-Herrera J. L. ; Jonas U. 
Simultaneous Measurement
of Mechanical and Surface Properties in Thermoresponsive, Anchored
Hydrogel Films . Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 12871 –12878 . 10.1021/la3019666 .22867267 
Toomey R. ; Freidank D. ; Ruhe J. 
Swelling behavior of thin, surface-attached
polymer networks . Macromolecules 
2004 , 37 , 882 –887 . 10.1021/ma034737v .
Zhang J. ; Peppas N. A. 
Synthesis and Characterization of pH- and Temperature-Sensitive
Poly(methacrylic acid)/Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) Interpenetrating
Polymeric Networks . Macromolecules 
2000 , 33 , 102 –107 . 10.1021/ma991398q .
Gil E. S. ; Hudson S. M. 
Stimuli-reponsive polymers and their bioconjugates . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2004 , 29 , 1173 –1222 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2004.08.003 .
van
de Wetering P. ; Zuidam N. J. ; van Steenbergen M. J. ; van der Houwen O. A. G. J. ; Underberg W. J. M. ; Hennink W. E. 
A Mechanistic Study of the Hydrolytic Stability of
Poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) . Macromolecules 
1998 , 31 , 8063 –8068 . 10.1021/ma980689g .
Laurence J. S. ; Nelson B. N. ; Ye Q. ; Park J. ; Spencer P. 
Characterization
of Acid-Neutralizing Basic Monomers in Co-Solvent Systems by NMR . Int. J. Polym. Mater. Polym. Biomater. 
2014 , 63 , 361 –367 . 10.1080/00914037.2013.845192 .
Ederth T. ; Claesson P. M. 
Forces between carboxylic acid surfaces
in divalent
electrolyte solutions . J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2000 , 229 , 123 –128 . 10.1006/jcis.2000.6961 .10942549 
Vezenov D. V. ; Noy A. ; Rozsnyai L. F. ; Lieber C. M. 
Force Titrations and Ionization State
Sensitive Imaging of Functional Groups in Aqueous Solutions by Chemical
Force Microscopy . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1997 , 119 , 2006 –2015 . 10.1021/ja963375m .
Butt H. J. ; Kappl M. ; Mueller H. ; Raiteri R. ; Meyer W. ; Ruhe J. 
Steric forces measured with the atomic force microscope at various
temperatures . Langmuir 
1999 , 15 , 2559 –2565 . 10.1021/la981503+ .
Dunlop I. E. ; Briscoe W. H. ; Titmuss S. ; Jacobs R. M. J. ; Osborne V. L. ; Edmondson S. ; Huck W. T. S. ; Klein J. 
Direct Measurement
of Normal and Shear Forces between Surface-Grown Polyelectrolyte Layers . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2009 , 113 , 3947 –3956 . 10.1021/jp807190z .19236005 
Liberelle B. ; Giasson S. 
Friction and
normal interaction forces between irreversibly
attached weakly charged polymer brushes . Langmuir 
2008 , 24 , 1550 –1559 . 10.1021/la702367f .18225926 
Alexander S. 
Adsorption
of chain molecules with a polar head a-scaling description . J. Phys. 
1977 , 38 , 983 –987 . 10.1051/jphys:01977003808098300 .
De
Gennes P. G. 
Conformations of polymers attached to an interface . Macromolecules 
1980 , 13 , 1069 –1075 . 10.1021/ma60077a009 .
Milner S. T. ; Witten T. A. ; Cates M. E. 
Theory of the grafted polymer brush . Macromolecules 
1988 , 21 , 2610 –2619 . 10.1021/ma00186a051 .
De S. K. ; Aluru N. R. ; Johnson B. ; Crone W. C. ; Beebe D. J. ; Moore J. 
Equilibrium
swelling and kinetics of pH-responsive hydrogels: Models,
experiments, and simulations . J. Microelectromech.
Syst. 
2002 , 11 , 544 –555 . 10.1109/JMEMS.2002.803281 .
Ekblad T. ; Nagy B. ; Ederth T.  Hydrated Structure of UV-Polymerized
Hydrogels on Gold and Silicon Substrates . in preparation, 2019 .
Pincus P. 
Colloid stabilization
with grafted polyelectrolytes . Macromolecules 
1991 , 24 , 2912 –2919 . 10.1021/ma00010a043 .
Israels R. ; Leermakers F. A. M. ; Fleer G. J. ; Zhulina E. B. 
Charged
polymeric
brushes - structure and scaling relations . Macromolecules 
1994 , 27 , 3249 –3261 . 10.1021/ma00090a018 .
Andersson O. ; Larsson A. ; Ekblad T. ; Liedberg B. 
Gradient Hydrogel
Matrix
for Microarray and Biosensor Applications: An Imaging SPR Study . Biomacromolecules 
2009 , 10 , 142 –148 . 10.1021/bm801029b .19067607 
Kilbey S. M. ; Ankner J. F. 
Neutron reflectivity
as a tool to understand polyelectrolyte
brushes . Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2012 , 17 , 83 –89 . 10.1016/j.cocis.2011.08.007 .
Chen S. ; Li L. ; Zhao C. ; Zheng J. 
Surface hydration: Principles and
applications toward low-fouling/nonfouling biomaterials . Polymer 
2010 , 51 , 5283 –5293 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2010.08.022 .
Sterner O.  Swelling and Protein
Adsorption Characteristics of Stimuli-Responsive Hydrogel Gradients . Student thesis, Linköping University , 2010 .
Larsson A. ; Liedberg B. 
Poly(ethylene glycol)
gradient for biochip development . Langmuir 
2007 , 23 , 11319 –11325 . 10.1021/la700729q .17900155 
Bruggeman D. A. G. 
Berechnung
verschiedener physikalischer Konstanten von heterogenen Substanzen.
I. Dielektrizitätskonstanten und Leitfähigkeiten der
Mischkörper aus isotropen Substanzen . Ann. Phys. 
1935 , 416 , 636 –664 . 10.1002/andp.19354160705 .
Chan D. Y. C. ; Pashley R. M. ; White L. R. 
A simple
algorithm for the calculation
of the electrostatic repulsion between identical charged surfaces
in electrolyte . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
1980 , 77 , 283 –285 . 10.1016/0021-9797(80)90445-2 .
Ederth T. 
Computation
of Lifshitz–van der Waals Forces between Alkylthiol Monolayers
on Gold Films . Langmuir 
2001 , 17 , 3329 –3340 . 10.1021/la001607w .
Israelachvili J. N.  Intermolecular
and Surface Forces , 2 nd ed.; Academic Press , 1992 ; p 480 .

