
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03690Mini-ReviewCharge Matters: Electrostatic Complexation As a Green
Approach to Assemble Advanced Functional Materials Otoni Caio G. †‡Queirós Marcos V. A. †Sabadini Julia B. †Rojas Orlando J. ‡§Loh Watson *†† Institute
of Chemistry, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), P.O. Box 6154, Campinas, SP 13083-970, Brazil‡ Department
of Bioproducts and Biosystems, School of Chemical Engineering, Aalto University, P.O. Box 16300, Espoo FI-00076, Finland§ Departments
of Chemical & Biological Engineering, Chemistry, and Wood Science, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada* Tel.: +55
19 35213148. Fax: +55 19 35213023. E-mail: wloh@unicamp.br.10 01 2020 28 01 2020 5 3 1296 1304 31 10 2019 30 12 2019 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We
report on electrostatically complexed materials bearing advanced
functions that are not possible for other assemblies. The fundamentals
of electrostatic association between oppositely charged polyelectrolytes
and colloidal particles are introduced together with the conditions
needed for complexation, including those related to ionic strength,
pH, and hydration. Related considerations allow us to control the
properties of the formed complexes and to develop features such as
self-healing and underwater adhesion. In contrast to assemblies produced
by typical hydrophobic and chemical interactions, electrostatic complexation
leads to reversible systems. A state-of-the-art account of the field
of electrostatically complexed materials is provided, including those
formed from biomolecules and for salt-controlled rheology, underwater
adhesiveness, and interfacial spinning. Finally, we present an outlook
of electrostatic complexation from the colloidal chemistry perspective.

document-id-old-9ao9b03690document-id-new-14ao9b03690ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Our society strives to
adopt the concepts of the circular bioeconomy,
which implies the emergence of new materials and green processing
routes. Related breakthroughs are escorted by a systemic understanding
of the matching between resources and products, from the macroscale
to the molecular dimensions. In this respect, colloidal systems are
expected to be important contributors because their assembly can be
governed by noncovalent interactions. They allow structures to be
tailored toward fine-tuned properties and novel functions.

Generally,
“colloidal” material assembly exploits
(i) hydrophobic (e.g., self-assembled liquid crystals and mesophases),
(ii) chemical (e.g., covalent and coordinative), and (iii) physical
(e.g., electrostatic complexation) interactions. The latter is ubiquitous
in nature; e.g., it is involved in membraneless organelles and adhesive
sandcastle worms. Electrostatic complexation also stands out for being
greener. In fact, it can be carried out in aqueous media, does not
require harsh chemicals, and is easy for scale up. These characteristics
are in line with the ever-growing demand for large-scale production
of sustainable materials. The layer-by-layer technique (LbL), for
instance, is a relevant method for assembling and functionalizing
materials for a number of applications, from batteries and solar cells
to functional fabrics and tissue engineering.1 Importantly, electrostatic complexation is reversible and facilitates
stimuli-responsive phenomena, as we discuss henceforth in a concise,
though contentwise comprehensive overview. We place electrostatic
complexation in perspective by weighing its advantages and drawbacks
over hydrophobic and chemical routes. We discuss the most relevant
electrostatically complexed materials and offer an outlook from a
colloidal chemistry perspective.

2 Electrostatic
Complexation
Electrostatic complexation involves strong association
of species
bearing opposite electrostatic charges, sometimes accompanied by phase
separation, in aqueous solutions or suspensions. This is applicable
to fully extended macromolecules (e.g., polyelectrolytes) or colloidal
particles (e.g., hard nanoparticles, soft micelles, nanofibers, etc.)—or
virtually any combination of these—carrying ionic or ionizable
groups.

Although this complexation can be considered as purely
electrostatic
in its origin, the free energy of complex formation in water has been
demonstrated to be actually driven by other factors: enthalpic—via
the strong Coulombic attraction between unlike charges as well as
local water perturbations—and entropic—by the release
of counterions that take part in the electrical double layers of the
previously unbound species as well as the diminished degrees of freedom
in the bound state.2 While entropy drives
the complexation among strong (poly)electrolytes (i.e., those that
are completely ionized when in solution), enthalpy dominates in the
case of their weak analogues (i.e., those whose ionization extent
is controlled by pH and ionic strength, just to mention a few factors).3

The dependency of the charge of weak (poly)electrolytes
on the
condition of the surrounding medium allows their electrostatic complexations
to be inherently responsive to external variables (or stimuli) and
also tunable. To exemplify, if the association between polyelectrolytes
is weak, the formed polyelectrolyte complexes (PECs) may remain soluble.
On the other hand, if the complexation is strong, one would expect
a macroscopic phase separation into a polyelectrolyte-poor phase and
a polyelectrolyte-rich counterpart, the latter being traditionally
referred to as coacervate. This latter system refers to an associative
liquid–liquid phase separation of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes.
The associative complex coacervates are spontaneously formed, provide
microcompartmentalization to selectively encapsulate biomolecules,
and, for this reason, can be used for confined biochemical reactions.
Due to the ability of coacervates to sequestrate RNA, they have been
hypothesized to play an important role in the origin of life, as was
postulated as prebiotic membraneless compartments.4

3 Electrostatic versus Covalent Assemblies
Compared to covalent chemistries, reversibility and responsiveness
to stimuli (e.g., ionic strength, hydration level, and pH) are the
main features of electrostatic assemblies. For instance, electrostatic
complexes (ECs) arise from the chemical nature of the complexed species
as well as electrostatic interactions. Understanding the role played
by different variables is crucial for tailoring the EC properties
and to achieve the best conditions for EC preparation, opening up
a wide range of applications, as detailed below.

3.1 Role
of Ionic Strength/Doping Level
Ionic strength is certainly
the most important variable affecting
the properties of ECs, regardless of the chemical nature of the constituents.
Such an effect originates from the charge screening promoted by small
counterions that break the ion pairs of the macro ions. Among the
studies on the role played by the ionic strength on PECs, the effect
of KBr in solution has been investigated for poly(styrenesulfonate)
(PSS)/poly(diallyldimethylammonium) (PDADMA) PECs.5 The association between these polyelectrolytes leads to
a solid precipitate that can be made tough and dense after extrusion.
NaCl, the residual salt resulting from complexation, can be washed
out by water prior to “doping” with KBr. The fraction
of ion pairing between the small ions and the charged groups of the
poly ions defines the doping level. Therefore, after washing, i.e.,
in the absence of counterions, the PECs are termed undoped. An alternative
protocol to prepare PECs, without counterions, is by direct titration
of acid and basic forms of the poly ions, followed by water removal.
This procedure was proposed by Picullel et al.6 for the preparation of polymer–surfactant complex salts and
can be extended for PECs.

An interesting feature is the hydration
level with the extent of PEC doping. As the concentration increases,
salt breaks the ion pairs of poly ions, making the PEC increasingly
more hydrated, until complete dissolution. Changes in the appearance
and rheological behavior of the polyelectrolyte assemblies are also
relevant: at low salt concentrations, the PEC is opaque and has a
soft rubber-like consistency, whereas at higher salt concentration
it displays clearer appearance and a fluid-like behavior (see Figure 1 for PSS and PDADMA).
This trend has been widely observed not only for PECs but also for
polyelectrolyte/surfactant complexes.

Figure 1 Effect of doping level on the properties
of a polyelectrolyte complex
(PEC) formed by poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS)/poly(diallyldimethylammonium)
(PDADMA): (a) macroscopic and (b) proposed molecular evolution from
a solid- to a liquid-like PEC upon sequential KBr additions, followed
by solubilization. Reprinted with permission from Wang, Q.; Schlenoff,
J. B. Macromolecules2014, 47 (9), 3108–3116.5 Copyright (2014)
American Chemical Society. Further permissions related to the material
excerpted should be directed to the American Chemical Society.

By plotting the doping level as a function of salt
concentration,
different regions can be used to describe the given morphologies:
initially, in the solid region, the doping level increases almost
linearly (but slightly) with salt concentration. In this region, the
precipitate is glassy. Subsequently, as salt concentration increases,
the precipitate undergoes a glassy-to-rubbery transition (although
there is no clear threshold) until it is converted into a coacervate,
i.e., an elastic liquid that is accompanied by an abrupt increase
in the doping level. Finally, upon further salt addition, the PEC
becomes completely soluble.

An important question that Wang
and Schlenoff addressed is whether
a critical transition exists between the solid-like precipitate and
the liquid-like coacervate (Figure 1). It was observed that the mechanical properties of
complexes were remarkably affected by the doping level. For the studied
complex, rheological measurements (0.1 Hz and shear stress of 25 Pa)
showed decreased storage (G′) and loss (G′′) moduli as well as viscosity at increased
salt concentrations. Although no critical transition was observed,
compared to the selection of a certain viscosity, the crossover point
(i.e., the concentration at which G′ is equal
to G′′) was suggested as a more suitable
means of defining the boundary between a solid precipitate and a liquid
coacervate.

We will discuss below how the changes in rheological
behavior affect
the processability of these so-called saloplastics. The observations
highlight the importance of controlling the properties of PECs by
varying the ionic strength. The PSS/PDADMA pair discussed so far is
particularly relevant because of the variation in the appearance and
rheology observed upon salt addition or removal. Of course, not all
PECs behave like the PSS/PDADMA pair because many of them are not
strong enough and phase separate as liquid coacervates, requiring
lower salt concentrations to completely dissolve. In fact, the amount
of electrolyte required for PEC dissolution is proposed as a parameter
to assess the strength of interaction between poly ions.7

3.2 Relationship between Electrolyte
and Hydration
Levels
Assemblies resulting from electrostatic interactions
generally do not phase separate as dry precipitates. Because they
continue interacting with the ion pairs, water molecules may act as
plasticizers and, as such, change their thermal behavior, as indicated
by changes in their glass transition temperatures (Tg).8 In an analogy to the aforementioned
relationship between salt and hydration levels and the properties
of PECs, there are important implications of salt and hydration levels
on the plasticization of PECs. To shed light on this, PSS/PDADMAC
multilayer complexes were investigated through molecular dynamic simulations
and modulated differential scanning calorimetry (MDSC).9

A decreased number of contacts between
the ionic charges of PECs, hydration level of PSS (measured by the
connections between oxygen from PSS and hydrogen from water), and
water mobility (as shown through diffusion coefficient calculations)
were demonstrated upon increasing salt content. These results revealed
a dual effect of small ions: they weaken the binding between the ion
pairs, a behavior that favors plasticization, and on the other hand,
small ions attract water molecules to their hydration shells, reducing
the plasticization by water.

Experimentally, MDSC measurements
indicated Tg values at varying hydration
levels and salt concentrations
(one of the factors was kept constant, while the other was changed
and vice versa) and showed that the hydration level plays an important
role in anticipating the Tg, i.e., in
providing the poly ions with increased mobility. However, Tg does not vary significantly for different
salt concentrations for a single hydration level, suggesting that,
as far as plasticization is concerned, water is more important than
salt. Although salt doping could negatively contribute to plasticization,
this effect is compensated by hydration.5 Put in another way: salt is suppressing the plasticizing influence
of water when the hydration level is low, whereas this suppression
does not seem to be relevant at high hydration levels.

3.3 Role of pH
Many of the species involved
in the electrostatic complexation are sensitive to pH because of the
presence of acidic or basic groups. As a result, the formed aggregates
present distinct properties at different pH values because charged
groups favor complexation, which would be much weaker otherwise. To
illustrate how relevant the role of pH is, the complexation between
two weak polyelectrolytes, poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) and poly(allylamine
hydrochloride) (PAH), was investigated.10 The PEC was prepared at a charge stoichiometry of 1:1, pH 7, and
0.6 M NaCl. Charge imbalance was induced by changing the pH to 3,
4.5, 7, and 9 (anything beyond this range would lead to dissolution).
Two hypotheses for the restoration of the change balance were given:
(i) PEC composition is changed through the release of polymer chains
and (ii) both the morphology and concentration of counterions are
modified.

Attenuated total reflectance Fourier-transform infrared
(ATR-FTIR) spectra of the PECs evidenced excess PMAA at pH 3 and excess
PAH at pH 9; i.e., the polyanion is more abundant at acidic pH, whereas
the polycation dominates in alkaline conditions. This observation
implies deviations from charge equimolarity due to the release of
polymer chains, supporting the first hypothesis. On the other hand,
should chain release be strong enough to preserve the charge balance,
one would expect that the COO–/NH3+ ratio within the PECs remains constant regardless of pH.
Indeed, the results show a wide variation, suggesting a counterion
compensation within the PECs. This observation, in turn, agrees with
the second hypothesis. Na+ concentration followed the same
trend of COO–/NH3+ ratio;
i.e., it was progressively increased as carboxylate groups were in
excess. Such a behavior suggests that Na+ ions compensate
the negative charges from the PEC. Differential scanning calorimetry
(DSC) profiles show that the Tg values
of the PECs are smaller at extreme pH values; i.e., the polymer chains
are more mobile when the functional groups are not completely ionized.
Such results are important evidence on how chain mobility is related
to cross-linking density promoted by polyelectrolyte ionization.

PECs have been imaged by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and
their pores are found to be remarkably dependent on pH: pore-rich
cross sections were obtained at lower pH, while no porosity was observed
at higher pH values. Controlling both porosity and pore size is essential
in purification membranes and adsorption of transition metal ions
at acidic pH—for the latter, the high specific surface area
provided by pores at low pH is compatible with both adsorption phenomena,
which take place essentially at surfaces or interfaces, and with the
fact that many metal ions precipitate at higher pH values. Altogether,
pH can be conveniently used to modulate the microscopic and macroscopic
properties of PMAA/PAH complexes and PECs in general, which can therefore
be made sensitive to environment acidity and to produce materials
featuring responsiveness to pH. Pore confinement, in particular, has
been correlated with the surface chemistry of functional porous polyelectrolyte-assembled
materials.11

3.4 Self-Healing
Ability
Self-healing
soft materials formed by electrostatic complexation can potentially
overcome the limitations of soft matter such as the lack of mechanical
robustness. The self-healing property derives from ion pairs that
form reversible cross-links in such a way that a deformation is restored
to the initial state. An example is the biomass-derived sodium lignosulfonate
(L-SO3Na), which complexes with three polycations, PDADMAC,
poly(ethylenimine) (PEI), and poly(allylamine) (PAA).12 The L-SO3Na/PDADMAC complex displays the highest
toughness, and after splitting it into two pieces, they self-heal
after 24 h at 60% relative humidity (RH), with total recovery of the
original mechanical strength after equilibration at 50% RH. This example
also highlights an additional feature of electrostatically assembled
materials, which according to Ushimaru et al. have prolonged lifetime.
Based on the same concept, Merindol et al.13 produced nanocomposite LbL films using cellulose nanofibrils (CNF)
and cationic poly(vinyl amine) that display reversible mechanical
properties and self-healing ability. The self-healing property will
be discussed later in light of adhesion phenomena.

4 State-of-the-Art in Electrostatically Complexed
Materials
4.1 Complexation Involving Biomolecules
The associative separation of polyelectrolytes into coacervates enables
a compartmentalization tool, which in turn leads to increased local
concentration of various biomolecules due to the high partitioning
level. As an example, biomolecules (e.g., enzymes and substrates)
are compartmentalized, and this confinement favors enzymatic reactions
for increased local concentration.4 Besides
the ability to sequestrate RNA, membraneless compartments support
polymerization, enhancing ribozyme reactions. However, RNA is negatively
charged, and its interactions with polycations may lead to decreased
activity. Raghav et al.14 hypothesized
that, as other polyanions also complex with polycations, there ought
to be a competition between polyanions and RNA for polycation sites,
which could eventually enhance ribozyme catalysis. To support this
hypothesis, Raghav et al. studied different polyanions and ribozymes
and demonstrated the universal characteristic of polyanions to increase
ribozyme reaction in complex coacervates. They also optimized ribozyme
catalysis by choosing the specific size, amount, and identity of polyanions
in complex coacervates, culminating in a reaction rate that was increased
by 12-fold. This systematic investigation enabled establishing a set
of compositions that influenced reactions involving ribozymes and
served as a starting point for the use of other polyanions present
in organisms.

Proteins and other biomolecules can also be encapsulated
within complex coacervates. This is an area of increasing interest
due to the potential applications, such as biocatalysis, compartmentalization,
drug delivery, and biosensing. Electrostatic complexation between
polymers and proteins, for instance, has been successfully used to
encapsulate biomolecules with the advantage of not involving covalent
modification. Furthermore, encapsulation is likely to increase protein
stability, preserving its biofunctionality at varying conditions.
However, as proteins are weak polyelectrolytes, the encapsulation
process requires a minimum quantity of net charge to favor complexation.

McTiguea et al.15 reported a ternary
system comprising oppositely charged polyelectrolytes (namely, poly(l-lysine) and poly(d,l-glutamate)) and one
of the following proteins: bovine serum albumin, human hemoglobin,
or hen egg white lysozyme. The combinations between these species
allowed testing a wide range of molecular weights and electrostatic
charges in addition to ionic strength and pH. Based on the obtained
results, relevant general guidelines for encapsulating proteins into
PECs were proposed, as summarized below.

Both salt and pH influence
the complexation and therefore are important
parameters to modulate encapsulation. It has been demonstrated that
the charge density of an interacting protein and a polymer, which
can be modulated by the solution pH, plays an important role in protein
uptake, although complex coacervates are able to encapsulate even
weakly charged proteins.15 In addition
to the net charge, the charge distribution over the protein surface
has a huge influence on its complexation and encapsulation. McTiguea
et al.15 verified that proteins with patchy
charge distribution present higher levels of encapsulation in comparison
to those featuring homogeneously distributed charges.

The encapsulation
of biomolecules is also feasible with the use
of ionic-neutral diblock copolymers. In this case, the formation of
complex coacervate core micelles (C3M) is involved, associated with
high protein uptake and increased thermal and chemical stability.16 Thus, enzyme immobilization has a great utility
to enhance protein lifetime. The encapsulation strategy can also be
applied for catalysis. The activity of biomolecules is associated
with several factors, including shape and structure. Lindhoud et al.17 reported a higher lipase activity, involved
in reactions of water-insoluble substrates, when incorporated into
C3M compared to that of the free molecule.

The active sites
of most lipases are hidden by a lid that can be
opened by several factors. Generally, in a hydrophilic system, this
lid is maintained closed, and lipase is inactive. However, the lid
is opened in the presence of an interface between hydrophobic and
hydrophilic phases or compounds. Following this, Lindhoud et al.17 hypothesized that micelles induce lid opening
and enzyme activation. Therefore, it was postulated that the activity
of complexed lipase may increase because of the substrate accumulation.
Additionally, it was demonstrated that both ionic strength and PEC
composition also influence the enzymatic activity. As the ionic strength
is increased, enzymes are released, and their activities are lessened.

Surface immobilization is a typical approach to produce biocatalysts
and biosensors. Sureka et al.16 developed
an insoluble biocatalytic film through a two-step protocol: coating
to form a charged copolymer–protein complex and photoinduced
chemical cross-linking, producing an insoluble film (Figure 2). Alkaline phosphatase was
used as a model enzyme/protein for incorporation into the C3M structure.
To enhance the aggregation, the biomolecule was genetically modified
in order to produce a protein with higher anionic character. The authors
found that the complex was sensitive to Zn2+ at very low
concentrations (50 ppm), even in the presence of other cations, making
the material suitable for application as a Zn2+ sensor.
The sensor presented low leaching and sensing response for almost
one month. The generality of this C3M immobilization method, which
has been demonstrated for proteins, can be extended to a wide range
of charged biomolecules, reducing the need for any chemical or genetic
modifications.

Figure 2 Insoluble biocatalytic film of complex coacervate core
micelles
(C3M) prepared by using a coating and photo-cross-linking. Adapted
with permission from Sureka, H. V.; Obermeyer, A. C.; Flores, R. J.;
Olsen, B. D. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces2019, 11 (35), 32354–32365.16 Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. Further permissions
related to the material excerpted should be directed to the American
Chemical Society.

LbL assembly represents
an alternative method to immobilize biostructures
and increase their uptake and mobility by using a three-dimensional
matrix rather than a two-dimensional surface. LbL assemblies are hierarchical
structures formed by functional polyelectrolyte multilayers that allow
the incorporation and delivery of different guest molecules, such
as drugs. LbL provides great versatility as a biocompatible platform
that can be applied, for example, to protect and guide cargo substances
to a specific target. This platform can also be constructed around
a charged polymeric core substrate, forming nanoparticles (LbL-NPs).
This colloidal structure has been recently used as a simple, precise
means for loading and delivering siRNA to hematologic cancer cells,
both in vitro and in vivo.18 The delivered siRNA stops the expression of
some specific genes of B-cell lymphoma (BCL-2), a pro-survival protein,
by degrading them. However, to reach an efficient delivery of siRNA,
the LbL-NP is required to protect nucleic acids from bloodstream enzymes.
This platform also allows the selective delivery and access of siRNA
to a specific cell to stop the evolution of hematologic cancer. Polyelectrolyte
nanolayers were sequentially deposited onto the negatively charged
and polymeric core. BCL-2 siRNA molecules were placed as a negative
polyelectrolyte layer on the top of a positively charged amino acid
polymer. The outermost layer was formed by hyaluronic acid, acting
as a CD44 ligand covalently bonded to CD20 antibodies. CD20/CD44 dual
targeting provided a specific binding to blood cancer cells, and it
successfully facilitated the uptake and delivery of BCL-2 siRNA molecules.
Overall, LbL-NP has been demonstrated as an important and general
tool for targeted siRNA technology as a way to treat hematologic cancer.
It is important to emphasize that these results can also be applied
as a support for targeting other diseases, establishing LbL as a versatile
strategy for transporting therapeutics into different hematopoietic
cells.

4.2 Materials with Salt-Controlled Rheology (CoPEC)
In an analogy to thermoplastics, which are traditionally processed
in the molten state upon heating, compacted PECs, named by Schlenoff
and co-workers as “saloplastics”, stand out as interesting
materials whose rheological properties are modulated by salt loading.
As discussed above, saloplastics can be plasticized by salt addition,
similar to the response of thermoplastics to temperature. PECs display
saloplasticity due to their ion-pairing cross-links that could be
broken by salt and combined with an increased water content,19 making them suitable for many applications.

An important breakthrough in PEC processing was brought about by
extrusion (Figure 3),20 the most common technique to process
thermoplastics. Extruding PECs enables reconformation because, unlike
chemical cross-links that typically undergo nonreversible breakdown,
disrupted electrostatic cross-links can be restored. Shamoun at al.20 reported that, although temperature is not essential
to extrude PECs, it is possible to optimize it with salt and hydration
levels to obtain high-quality materials with improved cost-effectiveness.

Figure 3 Schematic
illustration of the extrusion of a polyelectrolyte complex
(PEC) into different geometries (e.g., flat or tubular film, solid
or hollow filament)—depending on dye shape—and properties—as
affected by pH, hydration, and doping levels.

In order to be formed homogeneously, PECs are required to be stoichiometric
and to be devoid of porosity. Fortunately, extrusion is an efficient
means of producing highly compacted, pore-free complexes, allowing
shaping of PECs into different morphologies, such as tapes, rods,
and tubes. Once extruded, PECs are still responsive to ionic strength
by showing increased hydration levels, length contraction, and decreased
equilibrium modulus as salt content increases. An interesting point
is that multiple extrusions do not lead to losses in equilibrium moduli,
enabling PECs to be recycled with virtually no degradation. We envisage
that PEC extrusion is a promising approach for the development of
new materials, including nanoparticle-, nanofiber-, and carbon-filled
composites. Additionally, PECs are manufactured and processed in aqueous
environments, making them suitable for biological applications. A
series of studies on extruded saloplastics have been carried out recently
to develop several properties and applications as well as to shed
light on fundamental questions.5

4.3 Underwater Adhesives
Contrary to
the trade-off between adhesion and hydration, numerous situations
can be listed where adhesiveness is observed in moist environments,
including those involving living organisms such as marine mussels
(Mytilus edulis) and sandcastle worms (Phragmatopoma
californica). The secretion from the latter binds mineral
particles to form a protective shell, while the feet of the former
secrete a glue to attach to surfaces. In the case of mussels, movable
organisms, it is particularly interesting that the cohesive forces
are suppressed at a certain point. Led by electrostatic complexation,
a range of noncovalent interactions give rise to strong, yet reversible,
adhesion to surfaces in order to allow motility.

The adherence
of these organisms is a successful example of interfacial chemistry.
Stewart et al.21 suggested that the major
mechanism enabling adhesiveness to low-energy (due to adsorbed water,
ions, ionic complexes, polymers, and biofilms) underwater native surfaces
is the displacement of adsorbed species by the side chains of adhesive
proteins through an ion/ligand exchange process. Indeed, removal of
weak boundary layers is required for a good adhesion, which then involves
adhesive proteins comprising mostly histidine, phosphoserine, and l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) residues. Interestingly,
these proteins play surface-adsorbing roles mainly through electrostatic
complexation with the negatively charged submarine surfaces, whose
anionic character is brought about by biogenic polymers that serve
as organic preprimers, such as humic and fulvic acids.21 In this phenomenon, instead of jeopardizing
cohesive forces, water becomes actually essential for allowing species
to attain electrical charges and to complex.

Inspired by nature,
several biomimetic efforts have been made toward
the formulation of underwater adhesives based on different supramolecular
interactions, as reviewed elsewhere.22 These
include electrostatic complexation-based adhesives, which have been
achieved by the following strategies: (i) adhesion of mfp-3 protein
isolated from mussels onto hydroxyapatite in mica; (ii) complex coacervation
between hyaluronic acid and the mfp-5 protein isolated from recombinant Escherichia coli or the mimicking proteins mfp-151 and mfp-131
(recombinant and synthetic mfp proteins were converted into DOPA by
added tyrosinase, an enzyme that is naturally present in mussels);
and (iii) PECs formed by a range of synthetic polycations and polyanions
and even polyampholytes and toughened by ions (mostly divalent metals).
The natural occurrence of several polyelectrolytes (e.g., the polyanion
hyaluronic acid) in the human body offers an opportunity. Related
biomimetic strategies have led to advanced medical materials serving
as adhesives for sealing urinary fistula and uterine fetoscopic defects
as well as bone graft binding.

4.4 Interfacial
Complexation in Filaments
Filaments have been produced via
the interfacial polyelectrolyte
complexation (IPC) using numerous combinations of polyelectrolytes.
At this point, it is clear that most of the literature on electrostatically
complexed materials relies on the association of polyelectrolytes.
Particles, in the context of complexation, are different from true
polyelectrolytes since they do not bear the quasi-infinite aspect
(i.e., length-to-width) ratio, for example, of a fully extended polymer
chain. In the latter case, a high degree of freedom and mobility coexist.
Although challenging, complexes of polyelectrolytes and colloidal
particles or between particles have been demonstrated.

Grande
et al.23 and Toivonen et al.24 produced filaments through the interfacial complexation
between cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs) subjected to 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl
(TEMPO)-mediated oxidation—to impart carboxylic functionality
and therefore anionic character—and a polycation, either chitosan
(both studies) or PDADMAC (second study). The spinning setups are
illustrated in Figure 4. This approach is particularly relevant because the produced filaments
could benefit from the structural role of the multilevel hierarchical
assembly of the cellulose fibrils. Indeed, the obtained mechanical
properties were quite competitive, with an ultimate tensile strength
of 200–220 MPa and Young’s modulus of 15–22 GPa.
These attributes were further increased upon predrying stretching.24

Figure 4 Setups for interfacial complexation into filaments following
a
scheme (a) and actual photo (b) with a suspension of TEMPO-oxidized
cellulose nanofibrils (TO-CNFs), in blue, going through complexation
with polycations in solution (chitosan or poly(diallyldimethylammonium)),
in pink. The complex is spun into filaments by moving the stage in
a direction opposite to the drawing tweezers. Interaction between
the protonated primary amino groups of chitosan and the deprotonated
carboxyl groups of TO-CNF is shown in (c). The complexation between
cationic cellulose nanocrystals (GT-CNCs), in blue, and negatively
charged carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), TO-CNF, and dicarboxylated
cellulose nanocrystals (DC-CNC) upon contact of droplets of suspensions
or solutions of oppositely charged species, followed by drawing with
a pair of tweezers (d). (a) and (b) Reprinted with permission from
Toivonen, M. S.; Kurki-Suonio, S.; Wagermaier, W.; Hynninen, V.; Hietala,
S.; Ikkala, O. Biomacromolecules2017, 18 (4), 1293–1301.24 Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. (c) Reprinted with permission
from Grande, R.; Trovatti, E.; Carvalho, A. J. F.; Gandini, A. J. Mater. Chem. A2017, 5 (25),
13098–13103.23 Copyright (2017)
Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reprinted in part with permission
from Zhang, K.; Liimatainen, H. Small2018, 14 (38), 1801937.25 Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons. Further permissions related
to the material excerpted should be directed to the copyright owners.

More recently, a similar approach was used to produce
polymer/particle
and particle-only IPC filaments.25 Cationized
cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs), obtained via Girard’s reagent
T chemistry, were complexed with different anionic celluloses, namely:
carboxymethyl cellulose (soluble anionic cellulose derivative), TEMPO-oxidized
CNF (anionic cellulose particle of high aspect ratio and intermediate
crystallinity), and 2,3-dicarboxylated CNC (anionic cellulose particle
of intermediate aspect ratio and high crystallinity).25 Droplets of suspensions or solutions of oppositely charged
systems were put in contact, and the interface was continuously drawn
into a filament. The produced filaments presented a cross-sectional
diameter of 20–45 μm. The highest and lowest ultimate
tensile strengths and Young’s moduli were, respectively, (+)CNC/(−)CNF
(ca. 153 MPa and 8 GPa) and (+)CNC/CMC (ca. 115 MPa and 5 GPa), with
(+)CNC/(−)CNC showing intermediate performance. As expected,
filament extensibility followed the descending order of cationic CNC
combined with anionic CMC > CNF > CNC. Finally, the role of
particle
aspect ratio was demonstrated in filaments formed by particle–polyelectrolyte
complexation using chitin nanofibers (+) and alginate (−).26 These investigations shed light on the electrostatic
complexation of oppositely charged colloidal systems and pave the
route for assemblies into materials other than filaments.

5 Final Remarks and Outlook
We discussed complexation
as a means to build systems by exploiting
electrostatic interactions. They apply to polyelectrolytes that self-assemble
into larger structures but can also consider colloids, including renewable
particles and fibrils. A question that remains for further consideration
is the role of counterions and water structuring. Such topics, at
least to a large extent, remain largely unexplored. However, they
are quite important if one thinks about the nature of materials relevant
to the future bioeconomy and green chemistries. They include plant-based
polymers and their supramolecular constructs, which extend to those
derived from other renewable resources. Among these, cellulose, chitin,
heteropolysaccharides, and lignins are quite important. As far as
the design of advanced materials, another consideration is the process
itself: how to scale up and make any process continuous, for example,
by exploiting electrostatic complexation? LbL assembly, coacervate
formation, and dry spinning are just a few examples that relate to
such efforts, which have found little impact in scale-up manufacturing.
Any attempt of practical significance needs to factor in aspects related
to the time scale, e.g., the diffusion, mass transport, and kinetics.
They are all relevant in manufacturing and better classified within
the framework of nanomanufacturing. Finally, charge matching and molecular
architecture are quite relevant too. Both aspects apply to proteins
and other biomolecules, which offer an excellent opportunity to fine-tune
stimuli-responsive systems.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.



Caio
G. Otoni is a Food Engineer (2013; UFV, Brazil) by training
and holds a PhD in Materials Science and Engineering (2017; UFSCar,
Brazil). Dr. Otoni has been with the USDA, USA (2010–2011);
Embrapa Instrumentação, Brazil (2013–2017); and
Aalto University, Finland (2019). Currently, he holds a postdoc position
at the Department of Physical Chemistry/UNICAMP, Brazil (since 2017).
Dr. Otoni’s research is devoted to biobased multifunctional
materials, biocolloids, nanocomposites, nanocelluloses, and active
packaging.



Marcos V. A. Queirós achieved his BSc (2016) and
MSc (2018)
degrees in Chemistry at the Federal University of Ceará, Brazil.
In 2018, he joined the PhD program of the Institute of Chemistry at
the University of Campinas/UNICAMP, Brazil, under the supervision
of Prof. Watson Loh. Nowadays, his PhD deals with the phase behavior
and structure of electrostatic complexes involving polyelectrolytes
and surfactants.



Júlia B. Sabadini graduated
in Chemistry at the University
of São Paulo (USP), Brazil. As of 2019, she enrolled in the
MSc program of the Institute of Chemistry at the University of Campinas/UNICAMP,
Brazil, supervised by Prof. Watson Loh. Her project relates to the
evaluation of the equilibrium state and structure of polyelectrolyte
complexes formed by block copolymers and homopolymers.



Prof. Orlando
J. Rojas is a Canada Excellence Research Chair and
Director of the UBC BioProducts Institute. He shares an affiliation
with the Departments of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Chemistry,
and Wood Science at The University of British Columbia and maintains
part of his research group (BiCMat) in Aalto University, Finland,
in the Departments of Bioproducts and Biosystems and Applied Physics.
He has been the Chair of the Materials Platform, co-PI of HYBER, an
Academy of Finland Center of Excellence, and Director of FinnCERES,
a materials research cluster. Prof. Rojas is the recipient of the
2018 Anselme Payen and the 2015 Tappi Nanotechnology awards. He is
a Distinguished Professor of Nanjing Forestry University and was elected
Fellow of the ACS and of the Finnish Academy of Science and Letters.
The core of his research deals with nanostructures from renewable
materials and their utilization in multiphase systems.



Prof. Watson
Loh obtained his BSc in Chemistry from the Federal
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil (1986), and his PhD in Chemistry
from the University of Campinas/UNICAMP, Brazil (1992). He is Professor
at the Institute of Chemistry of the University of Campinas, and since
1994 he has led a research group devoted to studying the structural
and energetic aspects of polymer and surfactant colloids (including
nanocellulose, metallic nanoparticles, and petroleum colloids) using
techniques such as light and X-ray scattering, scanning, and titration
calorimetry among others.

Acknowledgments
The authors are thankful for the funding from the
São Paulo Research Foundation – FAPESP (grants 2015/25406-5,
2017/07013-1, 2018/09099-3, 2018/25041-5, and 2019/00370-9), the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and the European
Research Council (ERC; under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme, ERC Advanced Grant agreement No.
788489, “BioElCell”).
==== Refs
References
Richardson J. J. ; Bjornmalm M. ; Caruso F. 
Technology-Driven Layer-by-Layer
Assembly of Nanofilms . Science (Washington,
DC, U. S.) 
2015 , 348  (6233 ), aaa2491 –aaa2491 . 10.1126/science.aaa2491 .
Fu J. ; Schlenoff J. B. 
Driving Forces for Oppositely Charged Polyion Association
in Aqueous Solutions: Enthalpic, Entropic, but Not Electrostatic . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138  (3 ), 980 –990 . 10.1021/jacs.5b11878 .26771205 
Rathee V. S. ; Sidky H. ; Sikora B. J. ; Whitmer J. K. 
Role of Associative
Charging in the Entropy–Energy Balance of Polyelectrolyte Complexes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2018 , 140  (45 ), 15319 –15328 . 10.1021/jacs.8b08649 .30351015 
Poudyal R. R. ; Pir Cakmak F. ; Keating C. D. ; Bevilacqua P. C. 
Physical
Principles and Extant Biology Reveal Roles for RNA-Containing Membraneless
Compartments in Origins of Life Chemistry . Biochemistry 
2018 , 57  (17 ), 2509 –2519 . 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00081 .29560725 
Wang Q. ; Schlenoff J. B. 
The Polyelectrolyte
Complex/Coacervate Continuum . Macromolecules 
2014 , 47  (9 ), 3108 –3116 . 10.1021/ma500500q .
Piculell L. ; Norrman J. ; Svensson A. V. ; Lynch I. ; Bernardes J. S. ; Loh W. 
Ionic Surfactants with
Polymeric Counterions . Adv. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2009 , 147–148 , 228 –236 . 10.1016/j.cis.2008.09.009 .
Farhat T. R. ; Schlenoff J. B. 
Ion Transport and Equilibria in Polyelectrolyte
Multilayers . Langmuir 
2001 , 17  (4 ), 1184 –1192 . 10.1021/la001298+ .
Zhang Y. ; Batys P. ; O’Neal J. T. ; Li F. ; Sammalkorpi M. ; Lutkenhaus J. L. 
Molecular Origin of the Glass Transition
in Polyelectrolyte
Assemblies . ACS Cent. Sci. 
2018 , 4  (5 ), 638 –644 . 10.1021/acscentsci.8b00137 .29806011 
Zhang R. ; Zhang Y. ; Antila H. S. ; Lutkenhaus J. L. ; Sammalkorpi M. 
Role of Salt and Water in the Plasticization
of PDAC/PSS
Polyelectrolyte Assemblies . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2017 , 121  (1 ), 322 –333 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b12315 .27960054 
Rydzek G. ; Pakdel A. ; Witecka A. ; Awang Shri D. N. ; Gaudière F. ; Nicolosi V. ; Mokarian-Tabari P. ; Schaaf P. ; Boulmedais F. ; Ariga K. 
PH-Responsive Saloplastics
Based on Weak Polyelectrolytes: From Molecular Processes to Material
Scale Properties . Macromolecules 
2018 , 51  (12 ), 4424 –4434 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.8b00609 .
Zhang W. ; Zhao Q. ; Yuan J. 
Porous Polyelectrolytes: The Interplay
of Charge and Pores for New Functionalities . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2018 , 57  (23 ), 6754 –6773 . 10.1002/anie.201710272 .
Ushimaru K. ; Morita T. ; Fukuoka T. 
Moldable and
Humidity-Responsive
Self-Healable Complex from Lignosulfonate and Cationic Polyelectrolyte . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2018 , 6  (11 ), 14831 –14837 . 10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b03361 .
Merindol R. ; Diabang S. ; Felix O. ; Roland T. ; Gauthier C. ; Decher G. 
Bio-Inspired Multiproperty
Materials: Strong, Self-Healing,
and Transparent Artificial Wood Nanostructures . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9  (2 ), 1127 –1136 . 10.1021/nn504334u .25590696 
Poudyal R. R. ; Keating C. D. ; Bevilacqua P. C. 
Polyanion-Assisted Ribozyme Catalysis
Inside Complex Coacervates . ACS Chem. Biol. 
2019 , 14  (6 ), 1243 –1248 . 10.1021/acschembio.9b00205 .31181897 
Blocher
McTigue W. C. ; Perry S. L. 
Design Rules for Encapsulating Proteins
into Complex Coacervates . Soft Matter 
2019 , 15  (15 ), 3089 –3103 . 10.1039/C9SM00372J .30916112 
Sureka H.
V. ; Obermeyer A. C. ; Flores R. J. ; Olsen B. D. 
Catalytic Biosensors
from Complex Coacervate Core Micelle (C3M) Thin Films . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2019 , 11  (35 ), 32354 –32365 . 10.1021/acsami.9b08478 .31441305 
Lindhoud S. ; Norde W. ; Cohen Stuart M. A. 
Effects
of Polyelectrolyte Complex
Micelles and Their Components on the Enzymatic Activity of Lipase . Langmuir 
2010 , 26  (12 ), 9802 –9808 . 10.1021/la1000705 .20387819 
Choi K. Y. ; Correa S. ; Min J. ; Li J. ; Roy S. ; Laccetti K. H. ; Dreaden E. ; Kong S. ; Heo R. ; Roh Y. H. ; et al. Binary Targeting of SiRNA to Hematologic Cancer
Cells
In Vivo Using Layer-by-Layer Nanoparticles . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2019 , 29  (20 ), 1900018 10.1002/adfm.201900018 .31839764 
Porcel C. H. ; Schlenoff J. B. 
Compact Polyelectrolyte Complexes: “Saloplastic”
Candidates for Biomaterials . Biomacromolecules 
2009 , 10  (11 ), 2968 –2975 . 10.1021/bm900373c .19835412 
Shamoun R.
F. ; Reisch A. ; Schlenoff J. B. 
Extruded Saloplastic Polyelectrolyte
Complexes . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2012 , 22  (9 ), 1923 –1931 . 10.1002/adfm.201102787 .
Stewart R. J. ; Ransom T. C. ; Hlady V. 
Natural Underwater Adhesives . J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 
2011 , 49  (11 ), 757 –771 . 10.1002/polb.22256 .
Hofman A. H. ; van Hees I. A. ; Yang J. ; Kamperman M. 
Bioinspired
Underwater Adhesives by Using the Supramolecular Toolbox . Adv. Mater. 
2018 , 30  (19 ), 1704640 10.1002/adma.201704640 .
Grande R. ; Trovatti E. ; Carvalho A. J. F. ; Gandini A. 
Continuous Microfiber
Drawing by Interfacial Charge Complexation between Anionic Cellulose
Nanofibers and Cationic Chitosan . J. Mater.
Chem. A 
2017 , 5  (25 ), 13098 –13103 . 10.1039/C7TA02467C .
Toivonen M. S. ; Kurki-Suonio S. ; Wagermaier W. ; Hynninen V. ; Hietala S. ; Ikkala O. 
Interfacial Polyelectrolyte Complex Spinning of Cellulose
Nanofibrils for Advanced Bicomponent Fibers . Biomacromolecules 
2017 , 18  (4 ), 1293 –1301 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.7b00059 .28262019 
Zhang K. ; Liimatainen H. 
Hierarchical
Assembly of Nanocellulose-Based Filaments
by Interfacial Complexation . Small 
2018 , 14  (38 ), 1801937 10.1002/smll.201801937 .
Grande R. ; Bai L. ; Wang L. ; Xiang W. ; Ikkala O. ; Carvalho A. J. F. ; Rojas O. J. 
Nanochitins
of Varying Aspect Ratio and Properties
of Microfibers Produced by Interfacial Complexation with Seaweed Alginate . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2019 , 10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b06099 .

