
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145847810.1021/acsomega.7b01498ArticleSustainable Catalytic Activity of Ag-Coated Chitosan-Capped
γ-Fe2O3 Superparamagnetic Binary
Nanohybrids (Ag-γ-Fe2O3@CS) for the Reduction
of Environmentally Hazardous Dyes—A Kinetic Study of the Operating
Mechanism Analyzing Methyl Orange Reduction Kaloti Mandeep †‡Kumar Anil *†‡† Centre
of Excellence—Nanotechnology, Indian
Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee-247667, India‡ Department
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology
Roorkee, Roorkee-247667, India* E-mail: anilkfcy@iitr.ac.in; akmshfcy@gmail.com. Tel: +91-1332-285799.06 02 2018 28 02 2018 3 2 1529 1545 06 10 2017 19 01 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
formation of binary nanohybrids consisting of environmentally
benign components, γ-Fe2O3, chitosan (CS),
and Ag (Ag-γ-Fe2O3@CS) (CSIOAg), containing
very low concentration of Ag NPs (≤1.2 μM), has been
reported. In the as-synthesized nanohybrids, the presence of γ-Fe2O3 (8.5 ± 0.8 nm) and Ag (5.9 ± 0.5 nm)
are revealed by optical, XRD, TEM, and XPS analyses, and their presence
in cubic phase is determined by XRD and SAED measurements. The catalytic
activity of CSIOAg has been analyzed by performing the reduction of
certain toxic dyes. Under all kinetic conditions, the reaction is
attended by an induction period, which is reduced upon increasing
[Ag] and [Dye] in a specific concentration range, as well as temperature,
suggesting restructuring of the surface prior to reduction. In case
of methyl orange (MO), the reduction results in its cleavage to produce N,N-dimethyl-1,4-phenylenediamine and sodium
sulfanilate in a significantly higher (>97%) yield in a bimolecular
reaction between MO and BH4–. The duration
of induction period is regularly decreased and the rate of reduction
(kapp) increases linearly with increasing
Ag in the wide concentration range (0.03–2.4 μM). The
reduction takes place with a second-order rate constant of 2.7 ×
104 dm3 mol–1 s–1, which is >3.5-fold higher than that in the absence of chitosan
(IOAg) under identical experimental conditions. The kinetics of reduction
of MO is controlled by the nature and extent of its adsorption on
the catalyst surface. The weaker binding between MO and Ag catalyst
only allows its effective reduction. The XPS analysis of CSIOAg and
IOAg containing the same amount of Ag (1.2 μM) showed its higher
amount on the surface of CSIOAg (0.12%) as compared to that of IOAg
(0.09%). Detailed kinetic analysis of MO reduction, performed under
pseudo-kinetic conditions for both the nanohybrids revealed them to
follow Langmuir–Hinshelwood kinetic model and exhibited the
recyclability up to 10 cycles with fairly high reaction efficiency
and TOF, suggesting it to be a sustainable green nanosystem.

document-id-old-9ao7b01498document-id-new-14ao-2017-01498eccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Heterogeneous catalysis
plays an important role for the production
of more than 80% of the valuable chemicals in the chemical industries,
the most of which are synthesized by catalytic organic transformations.1 A variety of materials such as metal sulfides,2,3 metal chalcogenides,4,5 metal oxides6 and noble metals have been employed extensively to carry
out these reactions. The noble metal based nanosystems comprising
metals like Pt,7 Pd,7,8 Au,9,10 Cu11 and Ag7,12 have drawn
great attention due to their electron relay properties, which allow
to accomplish multielectron transfer processes conveniently.7,9,12 As the use of bare metal nanoparticles
(NPs) demonstrate a tendency to undergo agglomeration, therefore,
to achieve stable metal nanosystems for catalysis, it envisages their in situ generation on an entity/support such as polymers,
surfactants or inorganic materials.

Among different metals,
Ag NPs have been investigated extensively
as a catalyst for industrial synthesis1 because of their efficiency and cost viability. In these reactions,
Ag NPs have been loaded on a variety of organic and inorganic supports.13,14 The reusability of such nanohybrids requires the catalyst to be
integrated/fixed on a support/matrix, which should be easily regenerated,
separable, and recyclable. In most of the previous studies significantly
higher amount of silver has been loaded in such nanosystems.7,12,15 It might form aggregates on the
surface of the nanocatalyst causing a reduction in their catalytic
efficiency,15 besides posing serious environmental
and health issues.16 In this reference,
the in situ generation of the Ag NPs on the surface of nontoxic superparamagnetic
nanosized support is conceived as it would provide additional functionalities
for the binding of substrate. Moreover, it is expected to bring homogeneous
dispersion of Ag on its surface, thereby controlling the size and
limit their aggregation, besides allowing their convenient magnetic
separation.

Lately, it is perceived that further enhancement
in the catalytic
efficiency necessitates to select a coating material on the magnetic
surface, such as organic and inorganic moieties,17−19 which could
provide an unhindered accessibility to the catalyst without blocking
its catalytic activity. In this regard, environmentally benign natural
polymers, such as alginic acid, chitin, and chitosan20 associated with hydrophilicity and multiple functionalities,
having strong chelation ability with metal ions could serve a better
purpose. In the present study, the chitosan (CS), an abundant natural
polymer with large functionalities, has been employed for coating
of γ-Fe2O3 NPs. For these characteristic
features it has been extensively used in the past in a number of forms
like NPs,20 coacervates,21 films,22 hydrogels,23 as well as support matrix for the capping of
various nanostructures. Owing to its excellent chelation ability,
chitosan could also act as reducing agent for Ag+ ions
to generate in situ Ag NPs.

Dyes constitute one of the major
effluents from various industries,
such as paper, plastic, paint, cosmetic, food, textiles, printing,
drug, leather, and mining industries.24 The catalytic reduction of the toxic dyes using metal NPs in the
presence of reductant resulting in the formation of a useful/less
harmful product is a preferred task.24,25 Industrial
dyes, such as 4-nitrophenol (4-Nip),9,19 methylene
blue (MB), rhodamine B (RhB),12 and methyl
orange (MO), the last three dyes being present in the effluents from
textile industry,24 have been identified
as harmful priority/industrial pollutants because of their cytotoxic
and mutagenic nature.26,27 We have come across only a few reports on the catalytic reduction
of MO using Ag NP-based nanosystems.15,28,29 In all these studies, a fairly high concentrations
of Ag has been employed, and they all lacked the in-depth kinetic
study for the occurring reaction.

Recently, we had reported
the synthesis of chitosan-mediated Ag-γ-Fe2O3@CS binary nanohybrids consisting of environmentally
benign components like γ-Fe2O3, CS, and
Ag and also some preliminary observations about their multifunctional
applications including catalytic, SERS, and biomedical.30

In the present Article, we have reported
the synthesis of chitosan-capped
binary nanohybrids (Ag−γ-Fe2O3@CS)
at fairly low concentration(s) of Ag (≤1.2 μM), and we
have employed the same to perform a hitherto unreported in-depth kinetic
analysis for the catalytic reduction of dyes. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the lowest [Ag] used for investing catalytic reduction mechanism.
These reactions follow complex kinetic path involving an induction
period, followed by the reduction of dye. The role of the CS, used
for functionalization of the catalyst, has been analyzed by comparing
the kinetic results obtained for the reduction of MO by using Ag-γ-Fe2O3@CS with that of other binary nanohybrids prepared
in the absence of chitosan, that is, Ag-γ-Fe2O3, and also by analyzing the adsorption of reactants on the
surface of these catalysts. Both the prereduction and reduction steps
have been investigated and their thermodynamic parameters have been
evaluated. A comparison of kinetic data reveals that the Ag-γ-Fe2O3@CS binary nanohybrids exhibited relatively higher
catalytic rate of reduction and could effectively reduce MO for a
significantly lower amount of Ag (30 nM) as compared to that of Ag-γ-Fe2O3 (150 nM). Under the pseudo-kinetic conditions
used, the reduction of MO for both the binary nanohybrids takes place
at the interface of iron oxide–Ag NPs, following the Langmuir–Hinshelwood
mechanism. Notably, both the nanosystems used are superparamagnetic
with fairly high magnetization, which allowed their magnetic separation,
and they could be recycled up to 10 cycles while displaying high catalytic
efficiency at fairly low concentration of Ag and demonstrating high
turnover frequency. Because they are efficient, the as-synthesized
nanohybrids meet all the criteria of a green nanosystem.

Results
XRD
The diffraction patterns of the samples, IO, CSIO,
and CSIOAg (containing 0.6 μM Ag NPs), are shown in Figure 1. The XRD pattern
obtained for IO was observed to match the reflections due to planes:
(220), (311), (400), (422), (511), and (440), corresponding to either
of Fe3O4 or γ-Fe2O3 phases (JCPDS file no. 19-0629 or 39-1346).31 The diffraction due to CSIO nanohybrids exhibited reduced intensity
of all the peaks, matching that of IO without showing any extra peaks.
The XRD pattern of CSIOAg demonstrated a further reduction in the
intensity of peaks with respect to bare IO besides showing some additional
peaks analogous with the reflections (111) and (200) matching to the
cubic phase of Ag (JCPDS file no. 001-1167).

Figure 1 XRD patterns of (a) IO,
(b) CSIO, and (c) CSIOAg.

Applying Scherrer equation, we estimated the size of the
IO NPs
in the IO, CSIO, and CSIOAg samples from different prominent peaks
to be 11.2 ± 1.1, 10.0 ± 1, and 8.5 ± 0.8 nm, respectively,
while the size of Ag NPs in CSIOAg was found to be 5.9 ± 0.5
nm. Thus, the analysis of XRD patterns due to CSIO and CSIOAg evidently
showed the presence of IO but it could be that of either γ-Fe2O3 or Fe3O4.

Optical Measurements
Figure S1 demonstrates the electronic
spectra of IO, CSIO, and CSIOAg in UV–visible
region (200–800 nm). The electronic spectrum of IO shows a
broad absorption band depicting shoulders at 428 and 490 nm (Figure S1B). The IO matrix-coated with chitosan
demonstrated a blue-shifted broad peak having relatively higher absorbance
in the entire recorded region resulting in the formation of CSIO nanohybrids.
The in situ production of Ag (0.6 μM) on CSIO yields CSIOAg,
which increases the absorption around 400 nm and further blue-shifts
the entire absorption of the broad band because of CSIO in the visible
region. These observations suggest an increasing reduction in the
size of IO nanoclusters in CSIO and CSIOAg, respectively.

FESEM
FESEM images of CSIO and CSIOAg and their respective
EDAX analyses were very similar to those observed earlier (Figure S2). The addition of Ag in CSIO reduced
the size of the IO clusters in CSIOAg. The presence of certain elements:
Fe, N, and C in CSIO and Fe, N, C, and Ag in CSIOAg were identified
by performing their EDAX analysis (Figure S2a′ and b′).

TEM
The TEM images, EDAX analyses,
and SAED patterns
of CSIO and CSIOAg are given in Figure 2.

Figure 2 TEM images of (a) CSIO and (b) CSIOAg, EDAX analyses of
(a′)
CSIO and (b′) CSIOAg, and SAED patterns (a″) CSIO and
(b″) CSIOAg.

The TEM micrograph of
CSIO demonstrates the presence of organized
chains of the particles, whereas the in situ generation of Ag on CSIO
(CSIOAg) results in an increased organization of NPs associated with
a reduction in the size of the cluster (Figure 2a and b).

The presence of Fe, C, O,
and N in CSIO and Fe, C, O, N, and Ag
in CSIOAg were further verified by their EDAX analyses (Figure 2a′ and b′). The
SAED patterns due to CSIO and CSIOAg show a number of homocentric
rings masked with spots (Figure 2a″ and b″). Their indexing in CSIO and
CSIOAg contained the common reflections corresponding to (220), (311),
(400), (422), (511), and (440) planes corresponding to γ-Fe2O3 phase (JCPDS no. 39-1346). Whereas, in CSIOAg,
two additional planes, that is (111) and (200), were observed matching
to that of Ag in the cubic phase (JCPDS file no 001-1167), as was
noted above in XRD analysis (Figure 1).

Surface Analysis
The surface of
CSIO nanohybrids and
CSIOAg binary nanohybrids was also analyzed by XPS to evaluate the
presence of different elements and their bonding environments in the
binding energy range of 0–800 eV by recording their survey
scan spectra (CSIO, Figure 3a; CSIOAg, Figure 3a′). These spectra revealed the presence of Fe 2p,
C 1s, O 1s, and N 1s in both the samples. CSIOAg showed the additional
presence of Ag.

Figure 3 XPS spectra of (A) CSIO and (B) CSIOAg: Survey scan (a,
a′),
narrow scans of Fe 2p (b, b′), O 1s (c, c′), C 1s (d,
d′), N 1s (e, e′), and Ag 3d (f′) respectively.

These elements were further analyzed
by recording their high-resolution
spectra in the narrow energy range and are shown in Figure 3b–e and b′–f′
for CSIO and CSIOAg, respectively.

Panels b and b′ exhibited
doublet peaks at 710.6 and 724.2
eV and 710.7 and 724.3 eV, respectively, with a spin–orbital
coupling separation of 13.6 eV corresponding to Fe 2p3/2 and Fe 2p1/2, along with a satellite peak situated at
8.5 eV higher energy compared to that of the Fe 2p3/2 peak.31 The appearance of a satellite peak in both the
samples evidently point out the presence of iron in 3+ oxidation state,
thus indicating the absence of Fe3O4 phase in
these nanohybrids. It, thereby, confirms the iron oxide to be present
in γ-Fe2O3 phase in the as-synthesized
nanohybrids.35 The panel (d and d′)
demonstrates the deconvolution of C 1s of CSIO and CSIOAg, which displays
four different components at the binding energies (eV) of 283.45,
284.9, 285.7, and 287.15 and 283.35, 284.6, 285.2, and 287.8, which
have been attributed to C–H, C–C, C–O/C–N,
and C–O–C/C=O, respectively.30 A small shift in the binding energies due to different
functionalities is considered to arise due to the interaction of chitosan
through these group with the Ag NPs.

The N 1s peak for CSIOAg
(panel e′) displays three bands
at 397.70, 398.50, and 399.70 eV, which are shifted to a little higher
binding energies in contrast to those of in CSIO, which reveals a
difference in the interaction of Ag with bound −NH2 and free −NH2 groups of chitosan. The two peaks
at 366.4 and 372.5 eV with a separation of 6.1 eV (panel (f′))
matches to that of Ag 3d spectrum36 and
is thus consistent with the presence of Ag in CSIOAg.

A small
reduction in the values of binding energies due to Ag in
contrast to those observed for bulk indicates it is through coordinate
linkage with N and thus supports the observed increase in the value
of N 1s binding energy.36 Further, for
different elements, a slightly higher values of binding energies observed
for CSIOAg as compared to that of CSIO clearly suggests an interaction
of Ag with both the γ-Fe2O3 NPs and chitosan
in the former.

Magnetic Measurements
The magnetic
nature of all the
samples, that is, IO, CSIO, and CSIOAg were analyzed by recording
their M–H loops at an interval of 200 Oe at 300 K. For all
these samples, M–H plots were found to be fairly reversible
with relatively higher values of saturation magnetization (MS), that is, 70.4, 67.4, and 70 emu/g, respectively
(Figures 4 and S3). The low values of magnetic remanence (MR) and coercivity (HC) suggest that they are superparamagnetic (Table 1). A slightly lower value of MS for CSIO compared to that of IO indicates that the coating
of chitosan on IO results in a decrease in its MS value. From the recorded M–H curves, the observed
values for magnetic remanence (MR <
2.5 emu/g) and coercivity (HC < 25
Oe) suggests that the as-synthesized nanohybrids are superparamagnetic
(Figure 4, inset, and Table 1).

Figure 4 M–H curves for
CSIO and CSIOAg at 300 K. Inset: Magnified
images of CSIO and CSIOAg containing [Ag] = 0.6 μM.

Table 1 Magnetic Data Details of IO, CSIO,
and CSIOAg at 300 K
sample	saturation magnetization (MS) (emu/g)	remanence (MR) (emu/g)	coercivity (HC)
(Oe)	
IO	70.4	1.54	14.94	
CSIO	67.4	2.46	23.35	
CSIOAg	70.0	2.41	22.03	
A slightly
lower value of MS for CSIO,
compared to that of IO, is understood to have been the result of the
chitosan coating for the following reasons: the dilution of the IO
and the chitosan–IO interaction bringing a change in the spin
orientation of IO, along with a reduction in cluster size. Even the
lower amount of Ag (0.6 μM) resulted in an increase in the value
of MS by >3.7% for CSIOAg (70.0 emu
g–1) compared to that of CSIO (67.4 emu g–1), without influencing appreciably the MR and HC values (Figure 4 and Table 1). Thus, an increase in MS by addition of Ag in CSIOAg can be attributed to the change in the
surface spin orientation of IO core upon binding with Ag.

Kinetic Parameters
for the Catalytic Reduction of Dyes
The catalytic activity
of the Ag-γ-Fe2O3@CS binary nanohybrids
(CSIOAg) was evaluated by carrying out the
kinetic analysis of the reduction of above-mentioned dyes, 4-Nip,
MB, RhB, and MO, involving their reduction at the surface of the catalyst
using NaBH4 as the reducing agent. The kinetic traces for
these systems under optimized experimental conditions are presented
in Figure S4. All these traces exhibited
very similar kinetic behavior, indicating the presence of an induction
period, followed by the reduction of dye.37 In these experiments, the concentration range of NaBH4 (68.2 mM), and MO (161 μM) were kept such that these were
>10 times higher than that of the Ag NPs so as to maintain the
pseudo-kinetic
conditions.

The operating mechanism in these reactions was understood
by performing the detailed kinetic analysis for the reduction of MO,
a toxic textile azo dye.

The catalytic activity of the synthesized
CSIOAg was analyzed spectrophotometrically
by performing the reduction of MO. In these experiments the amount
of matrix CSIO was kept constant. The role of chitosan in CSIOAg was
examined by designing the catalytic reduction of MO in the absence
of chitosan, that is, by performing the reduction of MO using Ag-γ-Fe2O3 binary nanohybrids (IOAg).

In most of
the kinetic studies, we have made use of CSIOAg (0.6
μM), but wherever the concentration of Ag has been varied it
has been mentioned specifically. All the kinetic experiments were
carried out in a quartz cuvette of 1 cm path length. The MO solution
(0.1 mL) of varied concentrations (2–6 mM) was added to 1.98
mL of deionized water (DIW), followed by the addition of freshly prepared
1 mL of 0.2 mol dm–3 NaBH4. To this reaction
mixture, 10 μL of MO or 20 μL of 4-Nip, MB, or RhB and
Ag (0.03–6.4 μM) was added, and then, the total volume
was made up to 3.1 mL. The reaction progress was followed by monitoring
the decrease in absorbance due to the consumption of 4-nitrophenolate
ions, MB, RhB, and MO at λmax = 400, 664, 545, and
470 nm, respectively, with time. After the addition of the catalyst,
the time immediately after the induction period was considered to
be t = 0 and is denoted as t0. The thermodynamic parameters for these reactions were determined
by designing the kinetic experiments in the temperature range of 293–323
K.

The reusability of the CSIOAg was probed by repetitive use
of the
same catalyst for the reduction of MO. The binary nanohybrids were
separated magnetically, washed twice with DIW, and reused repetitively
up to ten times to perform the reduction.

The turnover frequency
of the catalysts was determined by  

Catalytic Reduction of
MO Using CSIOAg
The kinetics
of the reduction of MO was studied spectrophotometrically by varying
the concentration of Ag in CSIOAg from 0.03–6.4 μM and
maintaining the pseudo-kinetic conditions wrt other reactants. For
the typical reaction conditions, Ag NPs (0.6 μM), NaBH4 (68.2 mM) and MO (161 μM), the spectral changes were measured
using absorbance as a function of time in the wavelength range of
200–650 nm (Figure 5a). A digital image recorded before and after the completion
of reaction is shown in Figure 5c. The spectrum due to MO simply decays around 470 nm and
resulted in the production of a gradually blue-shifted spectrum in
the UV region to eventually develop a new band at 249 nm.

Figure 5 (a) Absorption
spectra depicting the catalytic reduction of MO
as a function of time containing as-synthesized CSIOAg at [Ag] = 0.6
μM and in (b) absence of the chitosan (IOAg) with [Ag] = 0.6
μM containing [MO] = 161 μM and [NaBH4] = 68.2
mM at 30 °C. (c) Digital image exhibiting the reduction of MO
to DMPD and SSA in the presence of the nanohybrids.

This reaction gets almost completed in about 3
min using CSIOAg.
This reaction was also performed by employing IOAg in the absence
of chitosan under identical conditions, that is, having Ag NPs (0.6
μM), NaBH4 (68.2 mM) and MO (161 μM). This
reaction, however, takes a much longer period of time, >8 min,
to
be completed (Figure 5b). In both cases, the observed spectral changes exhibited the consumption
of MO associated with a simultaneous development of a new peak in
the vicinity of 249 nm, suggesting that it involves the reduction
of the azo group of the dye to yield the cleavage products. It was
clearly indicated by recording the spectra of the expected cleavage
products, sodium sulfanilate (SSA) and N,N-dimethyl-1,4-phenylenediamine (DMPD), which exhibited
the λmax at 247 and 240 nm, respectively (Figure S5).

This possibility was further
probed by designing LC/LC-MS experiments.
The LC separation of the reactants and the possible products was performed
employing a capillary column, RP-18 e (diameter (4 mm), length (250
mm)) at room temperature under isocratic conditions using spectrophotometric
detector. In these experiments the mobile phase containing acetonitrile:
0.01 M ammonium acetate buffer (60:40) was used and the flow rate
was maintained at 0.7 mL/min. The separation was monitored at 260
nm. The LC chromatogram of the reaction mixture (Figure 6(panel A(a)) exhibited two
peaks having retention times of 2.5 and 4.57 min. In a control experiment
under identical conditions, the LC separation of the mixture of the
authentic samples containing the reactant (MO) and the expected products
(SSA and DMPD) at 1.61 × 10–4 M each was run
and the chromatogram obtained is shown in the Figure 6(panel A(b)). A comparison of the chromatogram
in panel A(a) to that with in panel A(b) clearly shows that, during
the reduction reaction, MO (component 2) is fully consumed and two
products formed have identical retention time matching with those
of authentic samples of SSA (component 1) and DMPD (component 3).

Figure 6 (A) LC
chromatograms depicting the (a) two products formed by reduction
of MO using CSIOAg. (b) Chromatograms of the authentic samples of
SSA, MO, and DMPD. (B) LC-MS chromatogram of the (a) component 1 (SSA)
and (b) component 3 (DMPD).

From the calibration curve drawn for these components the
yield
of both the products is estimated to be at >97% (Figure S6a). Their formation were further examined by designing
LC-MS experiments. The fragments corresponding to the reaction products
are shown in Figure 6B(a) and (b).

The parent peaks (component 1, m/z 173; component 3, m/z 138), as
well as the fragmentation pattern of these samples are identical to
those of the authentic samples recorded under identical conditions
(Figure S6b and c), suggesting the formation
of SSA (pKa 3.25) and DMPD to be the products
of the reduction of MO.

It may be mentioned that DMPD has pKa of 6.59 and at pH 7.00 (pH of mobile phase)
and will have its fairly
large fraction protonated, resulting in the parent peak at m/z of 138. Thus, on the basis of the above
LC/LC-MS, the plausible reaction scheme is presented in Scheme 1. To elucidate the operating
mechanism, these reactions were further analyzed kinetically under
varied experimental conditions.

Scheme 1 Reaction Scheme Exhibiting the Reduction
of MO in the Presence of
CSIOAg or IOAg
Effect of [Ag] on the Kinetics
of the Reduction
The
effect of the concentration of Ag on the kinetics of the MO reduction
was analyzed by varying the [Ag] from 0.03–6.4 μM, by
maintaining the pseudo-kinetic conditions (Figure 7A(a)). The decay curves reveal the reaction
to become fairly fast beyond 1.2 μM (Figure 7A(a)). The representative kinetic traces
exhibiting the decay of absorption at a typical Ag concentrations
of 0.3 and 3.2 μM are shown in Figure 7A(b) and (c), respectively. In both cases,
the reaction is attended by an induction period, and thereafter, the
absorbance due to MO decays following the first-order kinetics. In
the entire studied concentration range of Ag, the induction period
was found to decrease regularly with increase in Ag concentration.
For the typical variation of Ag ranging from 0.03–6.4 μM,
it is reduced from 350 to 2 s. However, beyond 2.4 μM Ag concentration,
2 s induction period could be detected, the decay of absorbance though
fitted well in first-order kinetics in the entire concentration range.

Figure 7 Kinetic
traces depicting the catalytic reduction of MO using CSIOAg
recorded at varied Ag concentration range: (A) (a) 0.03–6.4
μM; a typical trace at (b) 0.3 μM (low Ag) and (c) 3.2
μM (high Ag) having [NaBH4] = 68.2 mM and [MO] =
161 μM at 30 °C. (B) IOAg at [Ag] (a) range of 0.15–1.2
μM; a typical trace at (b) 0.3 μM (low Ag) and (c) 3.2
μM (high Ag) having [NaBH4] = 68.2 mM and [MO] =
161 μM at 30 °C. Inset: Linear fit of the trace for the
respective first-order or zero-order reaction.

A careful examination of these data reveal that the rate
constant
(kapp) varies linearly with [Ag] up to
2.4 μM (Figure 8A(a)). Thereafter, it begins to plateau (Figure 8A(b)). From this plot, the second-order rate
constant for the reduction of MO was computed to be 2.7 × 104 dm3 mol–1 s–1. In the absence of chitosan, the reduction of MO was also studied
employing the IOAg under identical kinetic conditions as were used
above with CSIOAg.

Figure 8 (A) kapp of CSIOAg as a function
of
(a) [Ag] = (0.03–2.4 μM) and (b) [Ag] = (2.4–6.4
μM). (B) kapp′ of IOAg as a function of (a) [Ag] =
(0.15–1.2 μM) and (b) [Ag] = (1.2–6.4 μM),
having [MO] = 161 μM and [NaBH4] = 68.2 mM at 30
°C.

An analysis of these curves revealed
the following changes in the
kinetics (Figure 8B(a)
and (b)): Throughout the investigated concentration range of Ag (0.15–6.4
μM), an induction period was noted in each case though its duration
is decreased regularly with increasing Ag from 250 to 5 s (Figure 7B(a)), which were
significantly higher as compared to those for CSIOAg (95 and 2 s).
Beyond 6.4 μM Ag, the reaction rate becomes appreciably faster,
and were not monitored in the present work.

In case of IOAg
in the initial concentration range of Ag (0.15–1.2
μM) (Figure 8 B(a)), the decay followed pseudo-first-order behavior, whereas at
higher Ag (>1.2 μM) the decay traces obeyed zero-order kinetics
(Figure 8 B(b)). From
these plots, the second- and zero-order rate constants for the reduction
of MO were computed to be 0.95 × 104 and 2.7 ×
104 dm3 mol–1 s–1.

The above observed catalytic effect of Ag NPs for the reduction
of MO was further probed by designing control experiments, that is,
the reduction of MO was performed in the absence of Ag using (i) CSIO
nanohybrids and NaBH4, (ii) only NaBH4, (iii)
IO NPs and NaBH4, and (iv) NaBH4 alone under
identical experimental kinetic conditions to those used in the presence
of Ag (Figure S7). In all the cases, there
was a virtually negligible reduction of MO within 180 min suggesting
the requirement of Ag for affecting the reduction of MO.

Effect of
Variation in [NaBH4]
The effect
of change in the concentration of NaBH4 (61 to 119 mM)
on the kinetics of reduction of MO was examined both at low (0.6 μM)
(Figure 9A(a)) as well
as high (3.2 μM) Ag (Figure 9A(b)) using CSIO matrix, keeping rest of the conditions
identical by maintaining the pseudo-kinetic conditions. Similar experiments
were also designed with IOAg binary nanohybrids in the absence of
chitosan (Figure 9B(a)
and (b)). It may be mentioned that a reduction in [BH4–] below 55 mM resulted in a significant increase in
the induction period. Therefore, the limiting [BH4–] in these experiments is arrived to be >55 mM.

Figure 9 Kinetic
plots depicting the effect of [NaBH4] on the
rate constant of the reaction using (A) CSIOAg as a function of [NaBH4] = (51.2–119 mM) having [MO] = 161 μM with (a)
low [Ag] = 0.6 μM and (b) high [Ag] = 3.2 μM; and (B)
IOAg at (a) low [Ag] = 0.6 μM and (b) high [Ag] = 3.2 μM
having [MO] = 161 μM at 30 °C.

These experiments evidently reveal that a variation in [NaBH4] from 61 to 119 mM, virtually did not change the rate constant
appreciably neither in the presence or absence of chitosan maintaining
the same kinetic behavior as observed above, suggesting that under
the used experimental conditions the reaction is independent of the
[BH4–] for both the binary nanohybrids.

Effect of Variation in [MO] on the Rate of the Reaction Using
CSIOAg
The effect of the [MO] on the reduction kinetics was
investigated by varying its concentration from 64.5–177 μM
at 0.3 μM Ag under pseudo-kinetic conditions keeping all other
conditions constant (Figure 10 A). An increase in the [MO] from 72.6 up to 129.0 μM
resulted in an increase in the kapp from
5.3 × 103–33.1 × 103 s–1, and thereafter, an increase in its concentration
up to 177 μM resulted in decrease in the kapp (Figures 10A(a) and S8a).

Figure 10 (A) Variation of kapp as a function
of [MO] = 72.6–177 μM having [NaBH4] = 68.2
mM and [Ag] = 0.3 μM for CSIOAg and (B) variation of kapp′ using IOAg for [MO] = 64.5–177 μM, at (a) low [Ag]
= 0.6 μM and (b) high [Ag] = 3.2 μM having [NaBH4] = 68.2 mM at 30 °C.

Similar effect was observed for IOAg by varying [MO] from
64.5–177
μM. The observed variation in kapp′ as a
function of concentration of MO at low (0.6 μM) and high Ag
(3.2 μM) are shown in Figure 10B(a) and (b). At low Ag, kapp′ increases
with an increase in the MO concentration from 64.5 to 129 μM,
and thereafter, it showed a sharp decreasing trend. For 129.0 μM
MO, kapp′ was measured to be 18.1 × 103 s–1. Under identical experimental conditions, using CSIOAg, kapp was measured to be 68.9 × 103 s–1, which is more than 3.8 times than that of
IOAg, suggesting this nanosystem to display much better catalytic
activity.

Whereas at high Ag (3.2 μM) for IOAg nanosystem,
the reduction
followed zero-order kinetics, and the k′app virtually remained constant with a variation in [MO].
As expected at 3.2 μM Ag concentration, the reduction of MO
gets over efficiently in <5 min excluding the induction period
(Figure S8b). These traces follow zero-order
kinetics and suggests that the reaction is independent of the [MO]
under the used experimental conditions. Since in these experiments
[BH4–] used is in large excess (68.2
mM) as compared to that of MO (129 μM), at low [Ag], the observed
kinetics follows pseudo-first-order behavior wrt MO. Therefore, the
observed rate constant has been considered to be the apparent first-order
kinetic rate constant (kapp′).

The decrease in reduction
rate with increase in MO concentration
was further analyzed by designing control experiments in which the
MO was allowed to get adsorbed on the surface of Ag in CSIOAg and
IOAg binary nanohybrids by adding it prior to BH4–, and then, under identical conditions, the reaction was monitored
kinetically (Figure S9a and b).

Under
these conditions, the reaction is slowed down significantly
(Figure S9), and even up to about 50 min
after the initiation of the reaction, no appreciable change in the
[MO] could be detected. It clearly suggests a relatively much higher
binding constant of MO as compared to that of BH4– with Ag, thereby disallowing its reduction. In other words, the
higher concentrations of MO somehow deactivate the catalytic sites
by preventing the binding of BH4–.

This finding is in line with the previous report on the binding
of 4-Nip on the surface of Au, in which the binding constant for 4-Nip
on the surface of Au has been reported to be (K4-Nip= 7800 L/mol), which is higher by about 2 orders
of magnitude to that of BH4– [KBH4– = 87 L/mol].38 These observations clearly account for a decrease
in a rate constant at higher concentrations of dyes. Although the
highest reaction rate was observed at 129.0 μM of MO, but the
kinetic studies have been performed at higher MO (161 μM) concentrations,
which allowed us to study the effect of temperature in the wider temperature
range.

Effect of Temperature on the MO Reduction Using CSIOAg
The kinetic decay curves for MO (161 μM) reduction at varied
temperature ranging from 293–323 K at an increment of 5 K with
0.6 μM Ag are shown in Figure S10a. An examination of these traces shows a decrease in induction period
with an increase in temperature, and thereafter, the decrease in absorbance
due to MO followed first-order kinetics. From the Arrhenius plots
(ln k vs 1/T), the energy of activation
for this reaction was determined to be 76.1 kJ mol–1 (Figure 11A(a)).
The other thermodynamic parameters Δ‡H°, Δ‡G°,
and Δ‡S° were also computed,
as derived from the absolute reaction rate theory39 (Table 2).

Figure 11 (A)(a) Plot of ln k versus (1/T) for MO reduction in the presence of CSIOAg in the temperature range
293–323 K containing [NaBH4] = 68.2 mM, [Ag] = 0.6
μM, and [MO] = 161 μM. (B) Plot of ln k versus (1/T) for the MO reduction in the presence
of IOAg under varied temperature (298–313 K) containing (a)
[Ag] = 0.6 μM and (b) [Ag] = 3.2 μM having [NaBH4] = 68.2 mM and [MO] = 161 μM.

Table 2 Calculated Thermodynamic Parameters
of CSIOAg at Low Ag and IOAg for Low and High Concentrations of Ag
NPs
sample	[Ag] (μM) (order of reaction)	EA (kJ mol–1)	Δ‡G° (kJ mol–1)	Δ‡H° (kJ mol–1)	Δ‡S° (J mol–1 K–1)	
CSIOAg	0.6 (first-order)	76.1 ± 0.7	84.9	73.6	–29.2	
IOAg	0.6 (first-order)	102.4 ± 1.5	87.4	99.9	+ 41	
3.2 (zero-order)	27.5 ± 0.5	83.8	25.0	–194	
A control experiment under identical
conditions were carried out
using IOAg binary nanohybrids in the absence of chitosan (Figures S10b and 11B(a)
and B(b)). For the studied reaction, the thermodynamic parameters
were recorded by analyzing the effect of temperature on the kinetics
of MO reduction for a typical low (0.6 μM) and high (3.2 μM)
concentrations of Ag by keeping the concentrations of NaBH4 and MO dye constant under pseudo-kinetic conditions and are shown
in Figure 11B(a) and
B(b), respectively.

These experiments were performed in the
temperature range of 293–323
K. At low Ag (0.6 μM), the decrease in absorbance due to MO
followed the first-order kinetics, whereas, at high Ag concentration
(3.2 μM), the kinetic decay of absorption followed the zero-order
kinetics. The values of energy of activation for the reduction of
MO were determined from their respective Arrhenius plots (Figure 11B(a) and B(b))
and were found to be 102.4 and 27.5 kJ mol–1 for
low and high Ag, respectively.

From the above kinetic data other
thermodynamic parameters (Δ‡H°, Δ‡G°, and Δ‡S°) were also determined using
the thermodynamic formulations
(Table 2).

Effect of
Temperature on the Induction Period (t0) of MO Reduction Using CSIOAg
For the reduction
of MO using CSIOAg binary nanohybrids, the effect of variation in
temperature on the duration of induction period (t0) was used to work out the activation energy. In these
calculations the inverse of induction period has been considered to
be the rate constant for the process. The plots of ln (1/t0) vs 1/T exhibited a linear plot (Figure 12A(a)). From this
plot, the value of the energy of activation for this process was found
to be 55.5 kJ mol–1 (Table 3).

Figure 12 Plot of ln (1/t0) vs (1/T) using (A(a)) CSIOAg containing [NaBH4] = 68.2 mM; [MO]
= 161 μM having [Ag] = 0.6 μM and (B) using IOAg containing
(a) low [Ag] = 0.6 μM and (b) high [Ag] = 3.2 μM having
[MO] = 161 μM; and [NaBH4] = 68.2 mM.

Table 3 Activation Energies for the Reduction
of MO Using CSIOAg (at 0.6 μM Ag) Concentration and IOAg for
Low (0.6 μM) and High Concentrations (3.2 μM) of Ag NPs
Derived from the Induction Period Data
binary nanohybrids	[Ag] (μM) (order of reaction)	EA (kJ mol–1)	
CSIOAg	0.6 (first-order)	55.5 ± 0.4	
IOAg	0.6 (first-order)	120.3 ± 2.2	
3.2 (zero-order)	75.6 ± 1.4	
Similarly, for IOAg matrix,
the effect of change in temperature
on the induction period at low (0.6 μM) and high (3.2 μM)
silver were used to derive activation energy (Figure 12 B(a) and (b)) and were found to be 120.3
and 75.6 kJ mol–1, respectively (Table 3).

Discussion
The
in situ generation of fairly low Ag at ≤1.2 μM
at the interface of chitosan coated γ-Fe2O3 NPs results in the formation of stable superparamagnetic binary
nanohybrids (CSIOAg), as is well evidenced by optical (Figure S1), XRD (Figure 1), electron microscopy (Figures 2 and S2), zeta potential (−29 mV), and magnetic (Figure 4) measurements and by their
recyclability observed in kinetic investigations (vide infra Figure 14). The presence
of Ag on the surface of the binary nanohybrids could be confirmed
by XPS analysis (Figure 3).

The above kinetic data invariably show that in all the runs
the
reduction starts after a certain induction period and the values of
induction period decreases regularly with increasing concentration
of the catalyst, Ag and temperature (Figures 7 and S10). A comparison
of the induction period observed in the reactions carried out using
CSIOAg as compared to that of IOAg (Figure 7) having the same amount of Ag, exhibited
much lower induction period for the former. The induction period is
also influenced by changing the [MO] in a complex manner, it initially
increased with increasing MO and, thereafter, started to decrease
at higher MO (Figure S8). On the contrary,
the induction period did not vary appreciably by changing the [BH4–] in a fairly wide concentration range
(61–119 mM). Since, an increase in [Ag] results in a decrease
in the induction period by keeping the concentrations of MO and BH4– constant, it evidently suggests that an
increase in [Ag] on the surface of the matrix increasingly provides
additional active sites for the occurrence of reduction. A similar
effect is noted with increasing the temperature (Figure S10). These variations thus seems to be controlled
by the extent of the interactions and binding constant of MO in the
presence of BH4– with Ag and induces
the restructuring of the active sites influencing the rate of reduction.
It is also supported by the lower energy of activation of the process
of induction period for CSIOAg catalyst as compared to that of IOAg
(Figure 12, Table 3), which can be assigned
to the increased functionalities of chitosan coated on the matrix
contributing to this aspect.

The presence of Ag on the surface
of the binary nanohybrids and
its binding with the chitosan moiety is revealed by performing XPS
analysis of different elements (atomic %) in CSIO and CSIOAg containing
1.2 μM Ag, which were found to be Fe 2p (24.5), C 1s (18.2),
O 1s (56.3), and N 1s (1) and Fe 2p (21.2), C 1s (21.5), O 1s (55.5),
N 1s (1.6), and Ag 3d (0.12), respectively. Evidently, the atomic
% of Fe, C, and O in both the samples are very similar except that
the percent of N is increased in CSIOAg from 1 to 1.6%. It suggests
that the binding of Ag in CSIOAg causes more of N to be present on
the surface of CSIOAg as compared to that of CSIO by binding through
−NH group. An analysis of the amount of Ag in CSIOAg also suggested
that the added Ag largely remains on the surface of the matrix in
the binary nanohybrids. These observations are also supported by the
elemental analysis (wt %) in CSIOAg containing 3.2 μM Ag (Fe
2p (18.5), C 1s (20.9), O 1s (56.5), N 1s (3.8), and Ag 3d (0.3)),30 in which the percentage of N and Ag are higher
by 3.8-fold to CSIO and more than 2.4-fold to CSIOAg, respectively.

The higher amount of Ag on the surface of CSIOAg (0.12%) to that
of IOAg (0.09%) in XPS measurements (Figure 3)31 also provided
the evidence for this hypothesis. In fact Ag bound to the chitosan
provides more active sites, distributed homogeneously on the surface
of CSIOAg, than that on the surface of IOAg. The above kinetic data
reveals that the reduction of MO by BH4– takes place only in the presence of the silver catalyst for both
the used binary nanohybrids (Figure S7)

In a control experiment, the sequence for the addition of reactants
was probed. These experiments demonstrated that the occurring reaction
is feasible only when NaBH4 is added prior to that of the
dye followed by the addition of Ag (Figure S7). The reverse protocol in which dye is added to prior to that of
BH4– followed by Ag, it retarded the
reaction significantly (Figure S9). It
was further analyzed by designing another control experiment for the
adsorption of MO on the surface of the catalyst, in which the dye
was equilibrated with CSIOAg and IOAg at room temperature and, thereafter
the amount of the adsorbed dye was monitored spectrophotometrically.

In both cases, MO at its lower concentrations exhibited type I
adsorption behavior following Langmuir equation (Figure 13). From these plots, the binding
constants of MO with Ag for CSIOAg and IOAg were found to be the almost
the same (2.1 × 105 L/mol). The value of binding constant
is several orders of magnitude higher than that of BH4– (87 L/mol). These observations suggest that the higher
binding constant of MO with Ag does not allow the binding of BH4–, if the latter is added afterward. These
experiments also indicate that a particular mole ratio of BH4–/MO is required for the effective reduction of
MO. Specifically, it is only the weakly bound MO with Ag that undergoes
reduction on its surface efficiently.

Figure 13 (A) Adsorption isotherms
obtained for the adsorption of MO on CSIOAg
and IOAg in the absence of BH4–. (B)
Langmuir plots for the adsorption of MO on CSIOAg and IOAg obtained
from the adsorption data shown in A.

The reactions essentially involve the bimolecular reaction
between
MO and BH4–. Thus, there could be two
possible mechanisms controlling the reactions:39 Langmuir–Hinshelwood and Langmuir–Rideal
(also named as Rideal–Eley mechanism).

The Langmuir–Hinshelwood
mechanism required the two reactants
to be adsorbed on the neighboring surface sites to allow the reduction
to occur, whereas in the latter mechanism only one of the reactants
is needed to be adsorbed. This difference has been analyzed by investigating
the effect of the concentration of MO on the rate of reaction (Figure 10).

At low
Ag concentration, it was observed that an increase in MO
concentration initially resulted in an increase in the rate constant
and after a certain concentration, the apparent rate concentration
started decreasing. At its lower concentrations MO can bind more effectively
to the free surface of the catalyst, therefore causing a decrease
in the induction period and thus enhances the rate of its reduction.
But at higher concentrations of MO the free sites on the surface of
the catalyst are no more available as it would replace BH4– bound to the surface, it therefore results in
an increase in the induction period and reduces the rate of reduction.

These observations clearly reveal the operation of the Langmuir–Hinshelwood
mechanism in this case. Had the Langmuir–Rideal mechanism been
operative, the apparent rate constant should have attained the limiting
values, which is not the case in the present system, thereby ruling
out the same.

In these experiments, the surface of CSIOAg (X)
contained adsorbed
BH4– and is denoted as SX.
Since the reaction is initiated only in the presence of Ag NPs, obviously
CSIO does not contribute to the reaction. The reduction of MO is conceived
to occur in a bimolecular reaction by the donation of an electron
from BH4–, which initially transfers
the electrons to Ag NPs. The stored electrons result in the effective
reduction of adsorbed MO on its surface to yield the identified reduction
products (Scheme 2).

Scheme 2 Mechanism for the Reduction of MO into Products (DMPD and SSA) Using
CSIOAg
The above discussion evidently
indicate that an interaction between
the MO and Ag induces the restructuring of the surface to make it
suitable for accomplishing the reduction.

The mechanism for
the occurring reaction may be presented as 1  The rate of reaction will be 2  where θX represents the fraction
of bare sites on the matrix and [MO–SX] denotes
the concentration of the species consisting of MO bound to the surface
sites. kapp denotes the apparent rate
constant for the reduction of MO. 3  KMO, KSSA, and KDMPD represent the
equilibrium constants between: MO, SSA, and DMPD and the surface for
CSIOAg, respectively.

In the above rate law (eq 3), the rate constant will show a
dependence on (KMO[MO]), (KSSA[SSA]), and
(KDMPD[DMPD]). The high yield of the products
experimentally suggests all of them to be weakly bound to the surface
(Figure 6A). The weak
binding of MO at low concentrations of Ag in the transition state
is also suggested by thermodynamic parameters in which the Δ‡S° value is −29.2 J mol–1 K–1. Therefore, in this equation,
the value of {(KMO[MO]) + ((KSSA[SSA] + (KDMPD[DMPD]))}
≪ 1. Thus, under these conditions the reduction of MO follows
the pseudo-first-order behavior as is observed kinetically in the
present system in the entire studied concentration range of Ag (Figures 7A and 8A).

A comparison of the kinetic data of CSIOAg and IOAg
nanohybrids
clearly revealed that a very similar kinetic behavior is followed
for both the nanohybrids in the lower concentration range, but in
contrast to CSIOAg at higher Ag, the reduction follows zero-order
kinetics for the later system (Figure 7B and 8B). This behavior is
understood from the surface interactions of MO with the catalyst.
It is likely that in case of IOAg, the adsorption of MO on the catalyst
surface is relatively stronger than those of the products. The occurrence
of the above reaction could be best explained in terms of the Langmuir–Hinshelwood
model, where KMO′[MO] ≫ {((KDMPD′[DMPD])
+ KSSA′[SSA])) + 1}. The operation of the Langmuir–Hinshelwood
model is also evidenced by the adsorption measurements, where the
very high binding constant for MO was evaluated suggesting that the
presence of both reactants on the surface of the catalyst Ag requires
the prior adsorption of BH4– on its surface
because of its much lower binding constant. In other words, weakly
bound MO, that is, simply the diffusion of MO to Ag surface, leads
to its efficient reduction.

This hypothesis is very well supported
by the significantly higher
Δ‡S° values (−194
J mol–1 K–1) in contrast to slightly
positive value of Δ‡S°
(41 J mol–1 K–1) in the lower
concentration range of Ag (Table 3). Further, the positive value of Δ‡H° for both the systems suggests them to be
the enthalpy driven process.

At lower Ag concentration, the
kinetic behavior of CSIOAg for the
reduction of MO was very similar to that of IOAg except that a variation
in the amount of Ag did not reveal any change in kinetic behavior
and the values of second-order rate constant for this process was
found to be more than 3.5 times higher. It is understood in terms
of creation of relatively more active sites on the surface of the
catalyst possibly due to the restructuring of the surface more rapidly
in the presence of chitosan as compared to that of bare nanohybrids.

It may be noted that this amount is even much lower compared to
those of different bare-metal NPs, such as Ag, Pt, and Pd,7 which exhibited more than an order of magnitude
lower catalytic reduction activity. Moreover, the higher rates for
Ag NPs to those of other novel NPs, such as Pt and Pd, have been considered
due to smaller work function of Ag.

Recyclability of the CSIOAg
The possibility for reuse
of the CSIOAg was examined by removing the reactants and products
after completion of the reduction reaction, and it was reused repetitively
for performing the same reaction. A digital photograph of the separated
catalyst for large scale reactions by applying an external magnetic
field is shown in Figure 14A(b).

Figure 14 Reusability of the catalyst during the
reduction of MO up to 10
cycles using (A) CSIOAg at (a) 2.4 μM [Ag] and digital image
showing the (b) easy separation of the CSIOAg nanohybrids for reusability
of the catalyst employing external magnetic field for large scale
reactions. Reusability of the catalyst during the reduction of MO
up to 10 cycles (B) using IOAg at (a) low [Ag], 1.2 μM, and
(b) high [Ag], 3.2 μM, under optimized conditions.

A typical data of reusability of the nanohybrids
containing 2.4
μM Ag catalyst for the reduction of MO is presented in Figure 14A(a). It exhibited
more than 97% of conversion efficiency and the time taken for the
completion of the reaction does not vary in the initial cycles, and
thereafter, a slight increase in time is observed. Similar observation
were made with IOAg at lower (1.2 μM) and higher (3.2 μM)
concentrations of Ag. These results clearly reveals that the as synthesized
binary nanohybrids maintain its catalytic efficiency even after ten
cycles without any catalytic loss (Figure 14B(a) and (b)).

The sustainability
of both nanohybrids was further examined by
recording TOF value (Table 4).

Table 4 TOF of CSIO and CSIOAg for the Reduction
of MO
binary nanohybrids	[Ag] (μM) (order
of reaction)	TOF	
CSIOAg	0.6 (first-order)	6452	
IOAg	0.6 (first-order)	3092	
The entire kinetic process demonstrating the reduction of MO by
BH4– adsorbed on CSIOAg/IOAg binary nanohybrids,
the formation of reduction products, the kinetics of these reactions,
and the recyclability of the nanohybrids is presented in Scheme 3. A comparison of
the present binary nanohybrids for the reduction of MO with somewhat
related systems investigated previously15,29 is presented
in Table 5 as regards
to their synthetic and characteristic features.

Scheme 3 Diagrammatic Representation
of the Catalytic Reduction of MO by BH4– Adsorbed on CSIOAg/IOAg Binary Nanohybrids
into Products (SSA and DMPD), Also Demonstrating the Recyclability
of the Binary Nanohybrids
Table 5 Comparison of the Synthetic Protocols
and Characteristic Features of the of the Ag-γ-Fe2O3@CS Binary Nanohybrids for the Catalytic Reduction of
MO
nanosystem (polymer/biomolecule)	Ag (wt %)	method of preparation	size (nm)	magnetization (emu/g)	kapp (×10–3 s–1) at RT	recyclability (no. of cycles)	mechanism	ref.	
Fe3O4@His@Ag (histidine)	0.43	Fe3O4@His, hydrothermal method; Ag reduction-NaBH4	composite-25	40.0	4.2	5	not analyzed	(15)	
Fe3O4@Nico-Ag (nicotinic acid)	0.43	Fe3O4@Nico, reflux method;
Ag reduction-NaBH4	Ag, 3–4; Fe3O4, 20	52.4	10.7	5	not analyzed	(29)	
Ag-γ-Fe2O3@CS (chitosan)	0.01 (30 nM)	coprecipitation; Ag reduction-glucose	CSIOAg, 10	72.5	0.6	10	Langmuir–Hinshelwood	this work	
0.675 (3.2 μM)	CSIOAg, 8.7; Ag, 6	75.5	64.3	10	Langmuir–Hinshelwood	this work	
An examination of the data in Table 5 reveals several characteristic features of the as-synthesized
binary nanohybrids employed in the present work as compared to other
nanosystems, (i) consisting of γ-Fe2O3 phase, which is very stable demonstrating about 1.5 times higher
magnetization, and (ii) makes use of relatively much smaller amount
of Ag NPs exhibiting higher catalytic activity for the rapid reduction
of MO as compared to most of the other reported studies.

The
higher magnetization also allowed repeated recycling up to
10 cycles without significantly losing the catalytic conversion efficiency
with a fairly high turnover frequency. Thus, the chitosan acts as
an effective stabilizer, providing biocompatible coating on the surface
of matrix for its effective integration with IO, Ag, and MO through
its functionalities. The superparamagnetic behavior and a fairly high
value of MS of these nanohybrids at room temperature allowing
the convenient recyclability of the catalytic system. The occurring
reaction obeyed first-order behavior in the wide Ag concentration
range due to its homogeneous dispersion unlike to that of IOAg, which
demonstrated a change in kinetic behavior at higher Ag. The reduction
of MO for both the binary nanohybrids though followed the Langmuir–Hinshelwood
mechanism.

Thus, the increased catalytic efficiency of CSIOAg
over IOAg is
understood for the following reasons: (i) there seems to be homogeneous
coating of chitosan on IO involving its functionalities and (ii) the
coated chitosan provides increased number of sites for Ag atom distribution
on its surface. The enhanced supramolecular interactions of Ag with
γ-Fe2O3 and chitosan in CSIOAg allows
a large amount of Ag and N to be present on the surface of binary
nanohybrids, as has been revealed by XPS analysis (Figure 3, Table S1). These features evidently reveal the role of chitosan in
making CSIOAg to be very effective for performing the catalytic reduction
of MO at its significantly lower concentration (30 nM).

This
work presents an interesting finding about a qualitative correlation
involving the extent of adsorption of the dye on the catalyst surface
in CSIOAg, controlling its catalytic reduction efficiency. A critical
analysis of data shows that on the one hand an increasing addition
of dye to the reaction mixture containing the catalyst and reductant
causes the restructuring of the surface of the catalyst such that
it results in a decrease in the duration of induction period, which
in turn results in the efficient reduction, as is also apparent by
a significant decrease in the energy of activation for this step (Table 3). But, on the other
hand, when the dye was allowed to interact with the catalyst surface
prior to the addition of the reductant, there is relatively a strong
binding of dye with Ag surface, which does not allow the reduction
to proceed upon the addition of BH4– (Figure S9). This is also supported due to much
higher binding constant of MO with the catalyst as compared to BH4–. These findings though appear to be contradictory
but are very well corroborated with the operating Langmuir–Hinshelwood
mechanism, where an initial increase in [MO] resulted in increase
in the value of kapp′ (up to 129 μM), but, thereafter,
it retarded the reduction rate at its higher concentration(s) (kapp′) (Figure 10A). Although
a very similar mechanism is followed in the absence of coating of
chitosan on γ-Fe2O3, that is, with IOAg,
but it exhibited relatively poor reduction efficiency of MO. It evidently
demonstrates the importance of coating of chitosan in improving the
reduction efficiency.

Thus, there are two important outcomes
from this work. First, the
chitosan biopolymer provides a stable and biocompatible coating material
for the homogeneous distribution of the catalyst (Ag) on the surface
of the support (γ-Fe2O3) while retaining
its higher magnetization. Second, it is the loosely bound dye molecule,
MO with the catalyst (Ag) through the functional groups of chitosan
coated on the surface of γ-Fe2O3 (CSIO)
that allows the reduction to occur efficiently by lowering the energy
of activation.

Conclusions
The superparamagnetic
binary nanohybrids (Ag-γ-Fe2O3@CS), consisting
of environmentally benign components
γ-Fe2O3, chitosan (CS) and Ag, could be
stabilized at fairly low concentration of Ag (≤1.2 μM).
As synthesized CSIOAg demonstrated fairly high catalytic efficiency
for the reduction of MO by BH4–. The
role of chitosan in enhancing the reduction is arrived by comparing
the reduction process in the absence of chitosan, which is about four
times higher than that of employing IOAg under identical conditions
for MO. Relatively higher amount of Ag on the surface of CSIOAg these
nanohybrids as compared to IOAg makes it more effective catalyst as
is indicated by XPS technique. The existence of induction period preceding
the reduction essentially involves the restructuring of the surface
so as to orient the reactants (BH4– and
MO) suitably for the initiation of reaction possibly creating more
active sites. An increase in [Ag] and [MO] as well as temperature
are observed to promote the process of restructuring of the surface.
In the entire employed Ag concentration range in Ag-γ-Fe2O3@CS the reduction follows pseudo-first-order
kinetic behavior unlike Ag-γ-Fe2O3 nanohybrids,
which obeyed zero order kinetics at higher [Ag] (>1.2 μM).
On
the basis of kinetic and adsorption studies, it is arrived that only
weak binding of MO to the surface of the Ag catalyst facilitate the
reduction efficiently. Although both the nanosystems (CSIOAg and IOAg)
obeyed the Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanism but the presence
of chitosan in CSIOAg significantly improves the reduction efficiency.
The higher catalytic efficiency of CSIOAg has been attributed to relatively
more homogeneous distribution of the catalyst on the surface of nanohybrids,
arising due to enhanced supramolecular binding through the functionalities
of chitosan and IO. The increasing Ag essentially provides more active
sites for binding of BH4– and MO, thereby
providing more reactive sites facilitating the reduction.

Thus,
the as synthesized binary nanohybrids containing all environmentally
benign components (γ-Fe2O3, chitosan and
Ag) and Ag NPs at its extremely low concentration (≥30 nM,
<1.2 μM), being superparamagnetic with high magnetization
(70 emu/g) at room temperature, accomplishing the rapid catalytic
reduction of the toxic dye, methyl orange by BH4– into useful products and recyclable up to 10 cycles with remarkable
efficiency with high TOF, suggesting it to be a novel sustainable
green nanosystem. To the best of our knowledge this is the first report,
making use of Ag coated γ-Fe2O3 based
nanosystems with such a lower concentration of Ag catalyst, presenting
exhaustive kinetic analysis for the effective reduction of toxic MO
while demonstrating the excellent sustainable reduction efficiency.
Such a study will be useful for designing catalytic nanosystems for
the treatment of industrial dye effluents.

Experimental Section
Reagents
Ferric sulfate hydrate (Thomas Baker), ferrous
sulfate heptahydrate, sodium borohydride, glacial acetic acid, and
ammonium hydroxide (25%) (Merck), sodium hydroxide, silver nitrate,
and glucose (BDH), chitosan (low mol.wt.) (Sigma-Aldrich), 4-nitrophenol
(99%) (SISCO research lab Pvt. Ltd.), methylene blue (Thomas Baker),
rhodamine B (Sigma Aldrich), and methyl orange (Belami Fine Chemicals)
were of analytical grade. All experiments were carried out using deionized
water (Millipore).

Equipment
The Shimadzu UV–vis
1601S spectrophotometer
equipped with the temperature controller was used for recording all
the kinetic studies for the MO reduction. The X-ray diffraction pattern
of sample was carried out using Cu Kα radiation (1.5418 Å)
as the source of X-rays on a Bruker AXS D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer.
The morphology of the surfaces and their respective elemental analyses
were analyzed using field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM,
FEI-QUANTA 200-FEG) equipped with charge-coupled device (CCD) and
an energy-dispersion X-ray spectrometer from Oxford, AMETEK analysis
division, Agtec energy analysis, using an accelerating voltage of
20 kV. Transmission electron micrographs were obtained on a transmission
electron microscope (FEI-TECNAI G2 20 S-TWIN) at an accelerating
voltage of 200 kV. The surface analysis of the samples were performed
on a PHI 5000 Versa Probe II equipped with monochromatic Al Kα
945 radiation source, supplied by ULVAC-PHI Inc., Japan. Magnetic
measurements of the samples was carried out at 300 K up to applied
field of 1.5 T on the Quantum Design MPMS-XL superconducting quantum
interference device (SQUID) magnetometer. All the samples were dried
at 60 °C in the vacuum oven procured from Labtech, Daihan Labtech
Co. Ltd. The reduction of the methyl orange into its products was
observed by HPLC (LC-2010AHT, Shimadzu) and LC-MS (LCMS-8030, Shimadzu)
analyses using a RP 18e column (5 μm, 250 × 4 mm) at 260
nm absorbance.

Methodology
Synthesis of IO (γ-Fe2O3) NPs
The γ-Fe2O3 NPs (IO) were synthesized
following the earlier reported method.30 Briefly, the pH of the reaction mixture containing 2.7 × 10–2 M ferrous sulfate and 1.15 × 10–2 M ferric sulfate at 40 °C was maintained at 3 using liquid
NH4OH (25%), and the mixture was stirred for 0.5 h. Thereafter,
the pH of the reaction mixture was further increased to 10.5, and
it was stirred for another 0.5 h, leading to the formation of IO NPs.
These particles were washed at least four times before further use.

Synthesis of Chitosan-Capped γ-Fe2O3 NPs
(γ-Fe2O3@CS or CSIO) Nanohybrids
and Silver-Coated Chitosan-Capped γ-Fe2O3 NPs (Ag-γ-Fe2O3@CS or CSIOAg) Binary
Nanohybrids
IO and other nanohybrids have been synthesized
following the experimental protocol reported earlier30 and are discussed here briefly. IO NPs were added slowly
to 2% glacial acetic acid solution containing 3 mg/mL chitosan, and
the mixture was stirred for 3 h at 50 °C, resulting in the formation
of CSIO (chitosan-capped γ-Fe2O3 binary
nanohybrids, γ-Fe2O3@CS).

Synthesis
of Silver-Coated γ-Fe2O3 NPs (Ag-γ-Fe2O3) Binary Nanohybrids
in the Absence of Chitosan
The Ag-coated γ-Fe2O3 NPs (Ag-γ-Fe2O3) binary
nanohybrids containing the varied amount of AgNO3 ranging
from 0.15–6.4 μM, in the absence of chitosan were synthesized
as reported earlier.31

Sample Preparation
for Various Analyses
For XRD, XPS,
and SQUID analyses, the powdered samples were obtained by drying the
samples in vacuum oven for 2 h at 50 °C. For FESEM and TEM analyses,
a diluted drop of freshly prepared sample was applied to a glass slide
and to a carbon-coated copper 3.1 mm grid having 200 mesh size, respectively.
These samples were then dried overnight at room temperature.

The above-synthesized samples were characterized in respect of their
size, morphology, magnetization, and structure. The detailed characterization
of CSIOAg at higher amount of Ag (containing ≥3.2 μM
Ag NPs) has been reported earlier.30 In
this Article, the characterization will be confined to CSIOAg containing
relatively smaller [Ag] NPs (≤1.2 μM), and some of these
data have been presented herein. When a different concentration of
Ag was used, it was mentioned specifically. As regards to the stability
of Ag in aqueous solution of CSIOAg, it was observed to be fairly
stable for more than a month, as was revealed by the absence of any
change in its absorption spectra over this period.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01498.UV–visible
spectra of IO, CSIO, and CSIOAg; FESEM
images and EDAX analyses of CSIO and CSIOAg; XPS peak details for
CSIO and CSIOAg; magnetic measurements of IO and CSIO at 300 K; kinetic
reduction of 4-Nip, MB, RhB, and MO; UV–visible spectra of
authentic SSA and DMPD; LC-MS spectra of authentic SSA and DMPD; catalytic
reduction of MO in absence of catalyst and in the presence of CSIO
and IO simultaneously; effect of addition of excess MO prior to the
addition of BH4– on the surface of the
catalyst; effect of variation of [MO] on the kinetic traces of reaction
catalyzed by CSIOAg and IOAg; and effect of variation of temperature
on the kinetic traces of MO reduction catalyzed by CSIOAg and IOAg
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b01498_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The financial support of CSIR, New Delhi (Grant no. 01/2758/13/EMR-II)
to undertake this work is gratefully acknowledged. M.K. thanks CSIR
for RAship in this project, and we also thank Head IIC, IIT Roorkee
for providing the facilities of FESEM, AFM, TEM, TGA, SQUID, and XRD.
==== Refs
References
Dong X.-Y. ; Gao Z.-W. ; Yang K.-F. ; Zhang W.-Q. ; Xu L.-W. 
Nanosilver
as a new generation of silver catalysts in organic transformations
for efficient synthesis of fine chemicals . Catal.
Sci. Technol. 
2015 , 5  (5 ), 2554 –2574 . 10.1039/C5CY00285K .
Wang G. ; Li C. ; Shan H. 
Highly efficient metal sulfide catalysts for selective
dehydrogenation of isobutane to isobutene . ACS
Catal. 
2014 , 4  (4 ), 1139 –1143 . 10.1021/cs5000944 .
Zhang K. ; Guo L. 
Metal sulphide semiconductors for photocatalytic hydrogen production . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2013 , 3  (7 ), 1672 –1690 . 10.1039/c3cy00018d .
Mabayoje O. ; Shoola A. ; Wygant B. R. ; Mullins C. B. 
The role of anions
in metal chalcogenide oxygen evolution catalysis: Electrodeposited
thin films of nickel sulfide as “Pre-catalysts . ACS Energy Lett. 
2016 , 1  (1 ), 195 –201 . 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00084 .
Falkowski J. M. ; Surendranath Y. 
Metal chalcogenide
nanofilms: Platforms for mechanistic
studies of electrocatalysis . ACS Catal. 
2015 , 5  (6 ), 3411 –3416 . 10.1021/acscatal.5b00449 .
Wang S. ; Wang Z. ; Zha Z. 
Metal nanoparticles or metal oxide
nanoparticles, an efficient and promising family of novel heterogeneous
catalysts in organic synthesis . Dalton Trans. 
2009 , 43 , 9363 –9373 . 10.1039/b913539a .
Das S. K. ; Parandhaman T. ; Pentela N. ; Maidul Islam A. K. M. ; Mandal A. B. ; Mukherjee M. 
Understanding
the biosynthesis and
catalytic activity of Pd, Pt, and Ag nanoparticles in hydrogenation
and Suzuki coupling reactions at the nano–bio interface . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118  (42 ), 24623 –24632 . 10.1021/jp508211t .
Bhandari R. ; Knecht M. R. 
Effects of the material
structure on the catalytic
activity of peptide-templated Pd nanomaterials . ACS Catal. 
2011 , 1  (2 ), 89 –98 . 10.1021/cs100100k .
Zhang Y. ; Liu S. ; Lu W. ; Wang L. ; Tian J. ; Sun X. 
In situ green
synthesis of Au nanostructures on graphene oxide and their application
for catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol . Catal.
Sci. Technol. 
2011 , 1  (7 ), 1142 –1144 . 10.1039/c1cy00205h .
Fountoulaki S. ; Daikopoulou V. ; Gkizis P. L. ; Tamiolakis I. ; Armatas G. S. ; Lykakis I. N. 
Mechanistic studies of the reduction
of nitroarenes by NaBH4 or hydrosilanes catalyzed by supported
gold nanoparticles . ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4  (10 ), 3504 –3511 . 10.1021/cs500379u .
Soomro R.
A. ; Nafady A. ; Sirajuddin ; Sherazi S. T. H. ; Kalwar N. H. ; Shah M. R. ; Hallam K. R. 
Catalytic reductive
degradation of methyl orange using
air resilient copper nanostructures . J. Nanomater. 
2015 , 2015 , 136164 10.1155/2015/136164 .
Ma Y. ; Wu X. ; Zhang G. 
Core-shell
Ag@Pt nanoparticles supported on sepiolite
nanofibers for the catalytic reduction of nitrophenols in water: Enhanced
catalytic performance and DFT study . Appl. Catal.,
B 
2017 , 205  (Suppl C ), 262 –270 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2016.12.025 .
Jiang Z. ; Jiang D. ; Showkot Hossain A. M. ; Qian K. ; Xie J. 
In situ synthesis
of silver supported nanoporous iron oxide microbox hybrids from metal-organic
frameworks and their catalytic application in p-nitrophenol reduction . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 17  (4 ), 2550 –2559 . 10.1039/C4CP04594G .25493638 
Shin K. S. ; Choi J.-Y. ; Park C. S. ; Jang H. J. ; Kim K. 
Facile synthesis
and catalytic application of silver-deposited magnetic nanoparticles . Catal. Lett. 
2009 , 133  (1 ), 1 10.1007/s10562-009-0124-7 .
Amir M. ; Kurtan U. ; Baykal A. 
Rapid color degradation
of organic
dyes by Fe3O4@His@Ag recyclable magnetic nanocatalyst . J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 
2015 , 27 , 347 –353 . 10.1016/j.jiec.2015.01.013 .
Stensberg M. C. ; Wei Q. ; McLamore E. S. ; Porterfield D. M. ; Wei A. ; Sepúlveda M. S. 
Toxicological
studies on silver nanoparticles: challenges and opportunities in assessment,
monitoring and imaging . Nanomedicine 
2011 , 6  (5 ), 879 –898 . 10.2217/nnm.11.78 .21793678 
Laurent S. ; Forge D. ; Port M. ; Roch A. ; Robic C. ; Vander Elst L. ; Muller R. N. 
Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles:
synthesis, stabilization, vectorization, physicochemical characterizations,
and biological applications . Chem. Rev. 
2008 , 108  (6 ), 2064 –2110 . 10.1021/cr068445e .18543879 
Granitzer P. ; Rumpf K. ; Gonzalez-Rodriguez R. ; Coffer J. L. ; Reissner M. 
The effect
of nanocrystalline silicon host on magnetic properties of encapsulated
iron oxide nanoparticles . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7  (47 ), 20220 –20226 . 10.1039/C5NR05232G .26575478 
Karakas K. ; Celebioglu A. ; Celebi M. ; Uyar T. ; Zahmakiran M. 
Nickel nanoparticles
decorated on electrospun polycaprolactone/chitosan nanofibers as flexible,
highly active and reusable nanocatalyst in the reduction of nitrophenols
under mild conditions . Appl. Catal., B 
2017 , 203  (Suppl C ), 549 –562 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2016.10.020 .
Muzzarelli R. A. A.  Natural
Chelating Polymers: Alginic Acid, Chitin, and Chitosan , 1 st ed.; Pergamon Press : New York , 1973 ; pp 182 –210 .
Kaloti M. ; Bohidar H. B. 
Kinetics of coacervation transition versus nanoparticle
formation in chitosan–sodium tripolyphosphate solutions . Colloids Surf., B 
2010 , 81  (1 ), 165 –173 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2010.07.006 .
Elsabee M. Z. ; Abdou E. S. 
Chitosan based edible
films and coatings: A review . Mater. Sci. Eng.,
C 
2013 , 33  (4 ), 1819 –1841 . 10.1016/j.msec.2013.01.010 .
Karimi A. R. ; Khodadadi A. 
Mechanically robust 3D nanostructure
chitosan-based
hydrogels with autonomic self-healing properties . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8  (40 ), 27254 –27263 . 10.1021/acsami.6b10375 .27643708 
Muthu K. ; Priya S. 
Green synthesis, characterization
and catalytic activity of silver
nanoparticles using Cassia auriculata flower extract separated fraction . Spectrochim. Acta, Part A 
2017 , 179 , 66 –72 . 10.1016/j.saa.2017.02.024 .
Xie Y. ; Yan B. ; Xu H. ; Chen J. ; Liu Q. ; Deng Y. ; Zeng H. 
Highly regenerable
mussel-inspired Fe3O4@Polydopamine-Ag
core–shell microspheres as catalyst and adsorbent for methylene
blue removal . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6  (11 ), 8845 –8852 . 10.1021/am501632f .24787615 
Cao H.-L. ; Huang H.-B. ; Chen Z. ; Karadeniz B. ; Lü J. ; Cao R. 
Ultrafine silver nanoparticles
supported
on a conjugated microporous polymer as high-performance nanocatalysts
for nitrophenol reduction . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2017 , 9  (6 ), 5231 –5236 . 10.1021/acsami.6b13186 .28165717 
Chung K.-T. ; Fulk G. E. ; Andrews A. W. 
The mutagenicity of methyl orange
and metabolites produced by intestinal anaerobes . Mutat. Res., Genet. Toxicol. Test. 
1978 , 58  (2 ), 375 –379 . 10.1016/0165-1218(78)90033-2 .
Zheng L.-Q. ; Yu X.-D. ; Xu J.-J. ; Chen H.-Y. 
Reversible catalysis
for the reaction between methyl orange and NaBH4 by silver
nanoparticles . Chem. Commun. 
2015 , 51  (6 ), 1050 –1053 . 10.1039/C4CC07711C .
Kurtan U. ; Amir M. ; Baykal A. 
Fe3O4@Nico-Ag
magnetically recyclable nanocatalyst for azo dyes reduction . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2016 , 363 , 66 –73 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.11.214 .
Kaloti M. ; Kumar A. 
Synthesis of chitosan-mediated silver
coated γ-Fe2O3 (Ag−γ-Fe2O3@Cs)
superparamagnetic binary nanohybrids for multifunctional applications . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120  (31 ), 17627 –17644 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b05851 .
Kaloti M. ; Kumar A. ; Navani N. K. 
Synthesis
of glucose-mediated Ag-γ-Fe2O3 multifunctional
nanocomposites in aqueous medium
- a kinetic analysis of their catalytic activity for 4-nitrophenol
reduction . Green Chem. 
2015 , 17  (10 ), 4786 –4799 . 10.1039/C5GC00941C .
Wang J. ; Wang X. ; Song Y. ; Wang J. ; Zhang C. ; Chang C. ; Yan J. ; Qiu L. ; Wu M. ; Guo Z. 
A platinum anticancer theranostic
agent with magnetic targeting potential
derived from maghemite nanoparticles . Chem.
Sci. 
2013 , 4  (6 ), 2605 –2612 . 10.1039/c3sc50554e .
Wang Z.-Z. ; Zhai S.-R. ; Zhang F. ; Xiao Z.-Y. ; Zhai B. ; An Q.-D. 
Green” synthesis of magnetic core–shell Fe3O4@SN–Ag towards efficient reduction of 4-nitrophenol . J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol. 
2015 , 73  (2 ), 299 –305 . 10.1007/s10971-014-3534-y .
Gao S. ; Zhang Z. ; Liu K. ; Dong B. 
Direct evidence of
plasmonic enhancement on catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol over
silver nanoparticles supported on flexible fibrous networks . Appl. Catal., B 
2016 , 188  (Suppl C ), 245 –252 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2016.01.074 .
Bingwa N. ; Meijboom R. 
Evaluation of catalytic
activity of Ag and Au dendrimer-encapsulated
nanoparticles in the reduction of 4-nitrophenol . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2015 , 396 , 1 –7 . 10.1016/j.molcata.2014.09.019 .
Laidler K. J.  Chemical Kinetics ; Pearson , 2004 ; pp 114 –116 .

