
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3002353510.1021/acsomega.7b00741ArticleDifatty Acyl-Conjugated Linear and Cyclic Peptides
for siRNA Delivery Do Hung Sharma Meenakshi El-Sayed Naglaa Salem Mahdipoor Parvin Bousoik Emira Parang Keykavous *Montazeri Aliabadi Hamidreza *Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Center For Targeted Drug Delivery, Chapman University School of Pharmacy, Harry and Diane Rinker Health Science Campus, Irvine, California 92618, United States* E-mail: parang@chapman.edu. Phone: (714) 516-5489.
Fax: (714) 516-5481 (K.P.).* E-mail: montazer@chapman.edu. Phone: (714) 516-5492. Fax: (714) 516-5481 (H.M.A.).19 10 2017 31 10 2017 2 10 6939 6957 06 06 2017 05 10 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A number of amphiphilic
difatty acyl linear and cyclic R5K2 peptide
conjugates were synthesized by solid-phase
peptide methods to enhance the interaction with the hydrophobic cellular
phospholipid bilayer and to improve siRNA delivery and silencing.
Binding to siRNA molecules was significantly less for the cyclic peptide
conjugates. A gradual decrease was observed in the particle size of
the complexes with increasing peptide/siRNA ratio for most of the
synthesized peptides, suggesting the complex formation. Most of the
complexes showed a particle size of less than 200 nm, which is considered
an appropriate size for in vitro siRNA delivery. A number of fatty
acyl-conjugated peptides, such as LP-C16 and LP-C18, displayed near
complete protection against serum degradation. Flow cytometry studies
demonstrated significantly higher internalization of fluorescence-labeled
siRNA (FAM-siRNA) in the presence of LP-C16, LP-C18, and CP-C16 with
1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (DOPE) addition. Confocal
microscopy confirmed the cellular internalization of fluorescence-labeled
siRNA in the presence of LP-C16 and LP-C18 with DOPE when compared
with cells exposed to DOPE/FAM-siRNA. While C16- and C18-conjugated
peptides (especially linear peptides) showed silencing against kinesin
spindle protein (KSP) and janus kinase 2 (JAK2) proteins, the addition
of DOPE enhanced the silencing efficiency significantly for all selected
peptides, except for CP-C16. In conclusion, C16 and C18 difatty acyl
peptide conjugates were found to enhance siRNA delivery and generate
silencing of targeted proteins in the presence of DOPE. This study
provides insights for the design and potential application of optimized
difatty acyl peptide/lipid nanoparticles for effective siRNA delivery.

document-id-old-9ao7b00741document-id-new-14ao-2017-00741yccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
RNA interference (RNAi)
is an alternative approach to traditional
medicine, which usually uses small molecules to target specific molecules
and/or aims to control symptoms of a disorder. RNAi research has attracted
significant interest since the dawn of the century. This approach
is based on post-transcriptional interference with the expression
of a specific protein (or in some cases, a family of proteins) that
could be involved in the pathology of the disorder. The possibility
of this “silencing” mechanism was reported in late 1990s
by Fire et al. who reported interference with the protein expression
at the mRNA level by delivering an exogenous double-stranded RNA.1 Among different approaches to RNAi, small-interfering
RNA (siRNA) is the closest to the small-molecule approach because
it does not alter the genetic information of the cell, does not require
incorporation into the chromosome, and creates a dose-dependent and
transient effect.

Although siRNA silencing is temporary and
the effect is limited
to the number of RNA strands delivered to the cell, the siRNA approach
to RNAi offers several advantages, which include the following: (i)
unlike short hairpin RNAs and micro-RNAs, siRNA is ready to use and
does not require intracellular processing; (ii) it is only needed
in the cytoplasm and not in the nucleus, which eliminates the need
for intranuclear delivery; (iii) it is highly specific, which is specifically
advantageous in basic research, by eliminating off-target effect and
enabling researchers to evaluate the functionality of the targeted
protein; and (iv) as mentioned before, among different RNAi approaches,
siRNA is the closest to a traditional “drug”, which
is feasible in vivo and can be applicable to clinical settings. Despite
these advantages, however, the use of siRNA in clinical settings has
been marred by a few challenges for efficient siRNA delivery. Whereas
in vivo delivery of siRNA is shown to be a daunting task, even in
vitro siRNA delivery has been challenging and inconsistent because
of the hydrophilic nature of the siRNA molecule (which minimizes its
interaction with the cell membrane) and its negative electronic charge
(due to the presence of phosphate groups on the backbone of the nucleotides,
which is repulsed by the negatively charged cell membrane).2 In vitro siRNA delivery has been studied extensively
for a variety of purposes, including evaluating the efficiency of
a novel delivery system, investigating the intracellular functions
of a specific protein, and determining the potential therapeutic effect
of silencing specific proteins.

Many different categories of
carriers have been studied for siRNA
delivery, which include polymers, lipids, and peptides. Short sequences
of amino acids (less than 30) have been studied as delivery systems
since the late 20th century. Specifically, cell-penetrating peptides
(CPPs) are 5–40 amino acid-long peptides that are known for
their ability to internalize their cargo into the cell and have been
used for siRNA delivery as well.3,4 The exact mechanism
of cellular uptake has been a subject of debate; however, macropinocytosis,
signal-activated endocytosis, and “inverted micelle”
model have been suggested.5 Positively
charged amino acids, for example, arginine and lysine, are required
for complex formation with siRNA,6 and
it has been suggested that intracellular delivery could be optimized
by adjusting the number of arginines in the peptide.7 Recent reports indicate the in vitro use of folate-poly(ethylene
glycol) PEG-appended dendrimer/α-cyclodexdrin conjugates for
delivering siRNA to keratin-forming tumor cell line, HeLa (KB) cells
(ATCC CCL-17),8 polyelectrolyte-gold nanoassemblies
to deliver β-site APP cleaving enzyme1 siRNA to murine neuronal
cell lines,9 polycation liposome-encapsulated
calcium phosphate nanoparticles for vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) siRNA delivery to the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line,10 and folic acid-modified mesoporous silica nanocarriers
to deliver VEGF siRNA to HeLa cells over-expressing folic acid.11 The most recent developments in siRNA delivery
include stable nucleic acid lipid particles (SNALPs) and N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc). SNALPs are multicomponent liposome-like
particles that use neutral and cationic lipids for a more effective
siRNA delivery12,13 and has reached clinical trials
for a few formulations.14 GalNAc, on the
other hand, is a liver-targeting moiety with high affinity for asialoglycoprotein
receptor, which has been studied as a direct conjugation to siRNA
or a component in the delivery system.15,16

We have
reported the application of cyclic CPPs containing arginine
(R) and tryptophan (W) residues or fatty acyl chains for delivery
of different cargo molecules including negatively charged phosphopeptides.17,18 Cyclic peptides are more rigid and expected to be more stable toward
degradation. The cyclic nature of the peptides provides higher stability
versus the linear counterparts and a more efficient cell penetration.
Recently, we also reported that [WR]5 and [WR]5-capped gold nanoparticles improved the cellular delivery of siRNA
in HeLa cells by 2- and 3.8-fold, respectively.19

Our earlier work also showed that short linear peptide
amphiphiles
containing arginine and lysine that conjugated with two fatty acyl
groups of hexadecanoyl groups were able to act as a molecular transporter
of negatively charged phosphopeptide (PEpYLGLD) intracellularly.17 We have previously reported monofatty acyl conjugates
of cyclic peptides containing five and six arginine residues.20 Two conjugates, dodecanoyl-[R5] and
dodecanoyl-[R6], improved the cellular uptake of a cell-impermeable
negatively charged phosphopeptide (GpYEEI) by 3.4-fold and 5.5-fold,
respectively, in human ovarian cancer cells, suggesting that a combination
of peptide cyclization and fatty acylation can be used to improve
the intracellular uptake of compounds with limited cell permeability.

On the basis of the previous data on the importance of the presence
of fatty acyl chains and positively charged peptides for cellular
delivery efficiency, we report here the design, synthesis, characterization,
and evaluation of linear and cyclic peptides conjugated with two fatty
acyl chains for siRNA delivery. To the best of our knowledge, no cyclic
and linear peptides containing two fatty acyl chains and five arginine
residues have been reported previously for siRNA delivery. We hypothesized
that the combination of two fatty acids and positively charged peptides
will enhance the interaction with the two hydrophobic chains and negatively
charged phosphate in the cellular phospholipid bilayer, respectively,
and enhance the cellular delivery of siRNA and siRNA silencing. Two
lipid tails of the peptide are expected to increase the hydrophobic
interior interactions with the cellular membrane. One of the objectives
of this research was to determine whether the side chain length of
the fatty acyl conjugates and the linear or cyclic nature of the peptides
can affect the cellular internalization. For this purpose, a variety
of linear and cyclic peptides were synthesized with various fatty
acyl conjugations with different lengths (from C2 to C18) and degrees
of saturation. Both linear and cyclic peptides had the same amino
acid sequence of R5K2 as the backbone (Figure 1). (R5K2) and [R5K2] represent the number
and presence of five arginine and two lysine residues in linear and
cyclic peptides, respectively. The sequences are KRKR4 and
[KRKR4] for linear and cyclic peptides, respectively. For simplicity,
the backbone of both group of peptides is shown as R5K2. For convenience, square brackets [ ] and parentheses ( )
were used to represent cyclic and linear peptides, respectively.

Figure 1 Chemical
structures of difatty acyl linear and cyclic peptide conjugates.

The diversity in hydrophobicity
of the compounds allows studying
the interactions with siRNA and transfection efficiency. We analyzed
the amount of peptide required for 50% binding to siRNA (BC50, as
an indirect method of estimating “binding affinity”)
to determine the effect of lipid conjugation and the size of the conjugate
on the interionic interaction. The ability of the peptides in protecting
siRNA against early enzymatic degradation was investigated by exposing
the complexes to fetal bovine serum (FBS), and the toxicity of the
peptides was explored in different human cancer cell lines. We characterized
the size and surface electrical charge of the complexes formed via
ionic interaction between the peptides and siRNA to confirm complex
formation and neutralization of siRNA negative charge and to evaluate
the physical characteristics of the complex. Finally, the efficiency
of the peptide libraries in internalizing siRNA into different human
cancer cells was studied, which was confirmed by the silencing efficiency
for a model protein.

Results
Chemistry
Fmoc
solid-phase peptide synthesis was used
to synthesize the cyclic and linear difatty acyl conjugates of the
designed peptides with five arginines and two lysines (R5K2) (Schemes 1 and 2). Protected Arg(Pbf)-Wang resin
was used as a solid support for the linear peptide synthesis, and
Fmoc-Arg(Pbf)-OH and Fmoc-Lys(Dde)-OH or Boc-Lys(Fmoc)-OH were used
as building block amino acids. After deprotection of the Fmoc group
and activation of the amino group, Dde groups of lysine residues were
selectively deprotected in the presence of hydrazine in dimethylformamide
(DMF, 2:98 v/v). Prior to the final cleavage of the linear peptide
conjugates, the fatty acid conjugations were carried out with the
resin-attached linear peptide. Fatty acid conjugation was performed
in the presence of 2-(1H-benzotriazole-1-yl)-1,1,3,3-tetramethyluronium
hexafluorophosphate (HBTU) and N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA). The final cleavage was performed
in the presence of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/anisole/thioanisole/dithiothreitol
(DTT) (94:2:2:2 v/v/v/v) (Scheme 1).

Scheme 1 (A) Synthesis of Linear N-Free Amino Difatty Acyl
Conjugates of R5K2; (B) Synthesis of Linear N-Acetylamino
Difatty Acyl Conjugates of R5K2
Scheme 2 Synthesis of Cyclic Difatty Acyl Conjugates of R5K2
2-Chlorotrityl arginine resin was used as a solid support
for the
synthesis of difatty acyl cyclic peptide conjugates. Fmoc-Arg(Pbf)-OH
and Fmoc-Lys(Boc)-OH were used as the building block amino acids.
After assembly of the peptide on the solid phase, the resin was cleaved
in the presence of dichloromethane (DCM)/trifluoroethanol/AcOH (1:2:7
v/v/v). N- to C-cyclization was accomplished in the solution phase
and in the presence of 1-hydroxy-7-azabenzotriazole (HOAT)/DIPEA.
After deprotection of side chains in the presence of TFA/anisole/thioanisole/DTT
(94:2:2:2 v/v/v/v), fatty acid conjugation was accomplished in the
presence of HBTU and DIPEA to afford difatty acyl cyclic peptide conjugates
(Scheme 2).

Fatty
acids were (CH3(CH2)n–COOH) and dicarboxylic acids were (HOOC(CH2)n–COOH), where n varied
from 2 to 16. Also, linoleic acid was chosen as the fatty
acid to incorporate an analogue with an unsaturated bond in the library.
The structures of all conjugated linear and cyclic peptides can be
found in Figures S1 and S2 (Supporting Information), respectively. The crude linear and cyclic difatty acyl peptide
conjugates were purified by reversed-phase high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) and characterized by matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF). During the purification process,
it was discovered that the polarity of the solvents affected the purification
process of the conjugates. For example, isopropanol alcohol and methanol
worked more efficiently when purifying the hydrophobic C18 linear
and cyclic conjugates.

BC50 for siRNA Binding
To evaluate
the capability of
linear and cyclic peptides to form complexes with siRNA via interionic
interaction, a binding experiment was designed based on the quantification
of bound siRNA using SYBR Green II, and the data were used to calculate
BC50 for each peptide. Figure 2 summarizes the siRNA-binding of both libraries. The fluorescent
signal quantified for the positive control was not significantly different
from the signal recorded for SYBR Green added to siRNA-free saline
(data not shown), which confirmed the reliability of the binding data.
Among linear peptides, the unmodified linear peptide (R5K2) showed the lowest BC50 for binding to siRNA (BC50
= 0.7; n = 3). Hydrophobically modified linear peptides
showed two different patterns for siRNA binding; whereas most modified
peptides showed a strong siRNA-binding affinity, LP-C2, LP-C4, LP-C6,
and LP-C10 did not follow this trend, and in fact, complete complex
formation was not observed even with the highest ratio studied for
these modified peptides. Among this group of peptides, LP-C10 showed
the lowest BC50 to form complexes with siRNA, with almost no siRNA
binding detected at any of the studied peptide/siRNA ratios. The common
theme among the fatty acid-conjugated peptides with low affinity for
siRNA binding is the terminal −COOH group at the end of the
dicarboxylic fatty acid used for conjugation. The only other modified
peptide with the −COOH group at the end of the conjugated fatty
acid was LP-C8, which showed ∼84% complex formation at an nitrogen/phosphate
(N/P) ratio of 7.0, with a relatively lower BC50 (1.18) compared to
other peptides (Figure 2A). The final ranking of the BC50 values calculated for peptides
with near-complete complex formation was LP (0.70) > LP-C12 (0.97)
= LP-C18 (1.0) > LP-C8 (1.2) = LPC16 (1.2) > LP-C14 (1.4) =
LP-C18*
(1.4) > LP-C8* (2.6).

Figure 2 BC50 of difatty acyl linear and cyclic peptides
to siRNA. Representative
line graph of siRNA binding of linear (A) and cyclic peptides (B)
to scrambled siRNA, indicating the percentage of siRNA bond to the
peptide as a function of peptide/siRNA N/P ratios of 0–8 and
0–90 (compared to free siRNA as control), respectively.

The cyclic-modified peptides showed
a more versatile profile. Only
unmodified cyclic [R5K2] and four modified peptides
achieved complete complexation with siRNA at the highest N/P ratio.
The BC50 value of the unmodified cyclic peptide was very similar to
that of the linear counterpart (BC50 = 0.73); however, modified cyclic
peptides generally showed a higher BC50. Whereas CP-C2, CP-C4, CP-C8,
CP-C14, and CP-C18* showed negligible affinity to siRNA (less than
20% complex formation at a w/w ratio of 80:1), CP-C6 and CP-C16 showed
some affinity and achieved ∼77 and ∼40% complex formation
at the highest studied peptide/siRNA ratio, respectively (Figure 2B). The final ranking
of BC50 values among the peptides that did show complete complexation
was CP (0.73) > CP-C10 (1.3) > CP-C12 (18) > CP-C8* (37)
> CP-C18
(38).

Size and Electrical Charge of Peptide/siRNA Complexes
The in vitro and in vivo performances of siRNA delivery systems largely
depends on the size and overall surface electrical charge of the siRNA-associated
carrier. We used a dynamic light scattering method to determine the
size of the peptide/siRNA complexes at four different w/w ratios.
For most of the linear and cyclic peptides, a decline in the size
of the peptide/siRNA complexes was observed on increasing the peptide/siRNA
w/w ratio. This was specifically significant for LP-C2 (3171 vs 210
nm for ratios of 1:1 [N/P ratio of 1.12] and 20:1 [N/P ratio of 22.4],
respectively), LP-C8* (2590 vs 152 nm), CP-C14 (3349 vs 400 nm), CP-C16
(5020 vs 646 nm), and CP-C18 (2633 vs 168 nm). On the other hand,
some of the other peptides showed a rather steady size regardless
of the peptide/siRNA ratio (including LP, LPC4, LP-C6, CP-C2, CP-C6,
CP-C10, and CP-C12). Overall and at the highest ratio studied in this
experiment, most of the peptide/siRNA ratios showed a hydrodynamic
diameter of 200 nm or less. Among these peptides, LP-C16 (57.47 nm),
LP-C18 (92.78 nm), and CP-C8 (103.12 nm) were the smallest complexes
observed (all sizes were measured in triplicates). However, some of
the peptide/siRNA complexes showed a hydrodynamic diameter larger
than 400 nm at this ratio, which included LP, CP-C12, CP-C16, and
CP-C18 (Figure 3A,B).

Figure 3 Particle
size and electrical surface charge of peptide/siRNA complexes.
Hydrodynamic diameter of the linear (A) and cyclic (B) peptides/siRNA
complexes at different w/w ratios. The particle size for most of the
complexes at the peptide/siRNA w/w ratio of 20:1 (N/P ratios of 10.2–29.5
for modified peptides) was about 200 nm or less. ζ-Potential
of linear (C) and cyclic (D) peptides/siRNA complexes at different
w/w ratios. Whereas most of the linear peptides showed a steady increase
in the ζ-potential with a positive value for the 20:1 peptide/siRNA
w/w ratio, many cyclic peptides failed to show a similar trend, and
a few reached a positive ζ-potential at the highest peptide/siRNA
ratio studied in this experiment. The error bars represent the standard
deviation.

The ζ-potential of the nonmodified
peptide/siRNA nanoparticles
showed a steady increase on increasing the peptide/siRNA w/w ratio
(−0.83, 0.371, 2.4, and 3.3 for 1:1, 5:1, 10:1, and 20:1 ratios
equivalent to N/P ratios of 2.2, 11.0, 21.9, and 43.9, respectively).
Most of the fatty acid-conjugated linear peptides showed a similar
pattern with a gradual increase in the ζ-potential of the complexes.
The only exception was LP-C4, which after an initial increase (−0.701,
1.01, and 1.93 for peptide/siRNA ratios of 1:1, 5:1, and 10:1 equivalent
to N/P ratios of 0.51, 2.55, and 5.1, respectively) demonstrated a
negative ζ-potential for the 20:1 peptide/siRNA w/w ratio (N/P
ratio of 10.2). LP-C14 was the only other modified peptide that (despite
a gradual increase in ζ-potential values) demonstrated a negative
value at the w/w ratio of 20:1 (equivalent to N/P ratio of 22.4; ζ-potential
= −1.21). LP-C12, LP-C16, LP-C18, and LP-C18* were the only
peptides that showed positive ζ-potential values for all studied
peptide/siRNA ratios and a significant increase in the ζ-potential
compared to the unmodified linear peptide (Figure 3C). The unmodified cyclic peptide also showed
an increase in the ζ-potential on increasing the peptide/siRNA
ratio (−5.39, −3.7, −1.9, and 0.101 for ratios
of 1:1, 5:1, 10:1, and 20:1 equivalent to N/P ratios of 2.23, 11.2,
22.3, and 44.6, respectively). A similar pattern, however, was not
observed for all of the peptides in this library. CP-C12, CP-C16,
and CP-C18 demonstrated negative ζ-potential values for all
peptide/siRNA w/w ratios studied and showed a drop in the ζ-potential
with the highest ratio studied (e.g., −3.90, −0.58,
−6.77, and −12.40 were recorded as the average ζ-potential
at different N/P ratios studied). Other modified cyclic peptides showed
a gradual increase in the ζ-potential; however, they never achieved
any values more than 4.5 (ζ-potential = 4.22 for CP-C6 at a
w/w ratio of 20:1, equivalent to an N/P ratio of 15.3; Figure 3D).

Serum Stability of Complexes
To determine the capability
of the complexes to protect the siRNA against enzymatic degradation,
we exposed different study groups to a diluted FBS solution, with
“naked” siRNA as the positive control and siRNA exposed
to saline as the negative control, and the results are summarized
in Figure 4. Although
in vitro experiments are performed in cell culture media containing
10% FBS, a higher concentration of FBS (25%) was used to determine
the stability of siRNA under a harsher condition and a more biologically
relevant environment. After 24 h exposure to serum, we did not observe
any bands for siRNA in the positive control groups, which indicated
complete degradation of “naked” siRNA under these conditions
and validated the method. Considering the negative control band as
100% intact siRNA, we calculated the percentage of siRNA that remained
intact in each study group. Although only ∼25% of the siRNA
was protected by the unmodified linear peptide at the peptide/siRNA
w/w ratio of 10:1, LP-C16 and LP-C18 were able to protect siRNA almost
completely after 24 h of incubation with the serum in 37 °C.
The level of protection was not significantly different for the three
different peptide/siRNA w/w ratios studied for LP-C18; however, it
showed significant improvement for LP-C16 on increasing the w/w ratio
from 2.5:1 to 5:1. Other modified linear peptides showed minimum to
no protection against enzymatic degradation (Figure 4A). The cyclic unmodified peptide, on the
other hand, showed significant protection that approached 100% on
increasing the peptide/siRNA w/w ratio to 80:1. The only modified
peptides that showed noticeable protection against enzymatic degradation
were CP-C16 and CP-C18, with 48 and 35% intact siRNA detected after
incubation of the complexes formed at a peptide/siRNA ratio w/w of
80:1 (Figure 4B).

Figure 4 Serum
stability of siRNA after complex formation. Representative
image of gel electrophoresis and a bar graph summarizing the percentage
of intact siRNA after 24 h of exposure to serum at 37 °C for
linear (A) and cyclic (B) peptide/siRNA complexes at peptide/siRNA
w/w ratios of 2.5–10 and 20–80, respectively. PC and
NC represent positive control (scrambled siRNA exposed to saline for
24 h at 37 °C, quantified as 100%) and negative control (representing
“naked” siRNA incubated with serum for 24 h at 37 °C),
respectively. Linear and cyclic peptides conjugated with C16 and C18
fatty acids as well as the unconjugated cyclic peptide showed the
most protection against enzymatic degradation of siRNA. Data are presented
as mean, n = 3, and the error bars represent standard
deviation.

Cytotoxicity
The
effect of peptide libraries on the
viability of human cell lines was evaluated using two approaches:
exposing the cell lines to different concentrations of peptide solution
and exposing the cells to peptide/siRNA complexes prepared with different
peptides at various peptide/siRNA ratios. We duplicated this study
in human cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 (Figure 5). The viability of cells followed
a similar pattern after exposure to peptide solutions and peptide/siRNA
complexes in both the cell lines. In MDA231 cells, LP-C12 showed significant
cytotoxicity at a peptide/siRNA w/w ratio of 20:1 (N/P ratio of 23.3),
both alone and incorporated in the siRNA complex. Some toxicity was
also observed with LP-C16 and LP-C18 at this peptide/siRNA ratio,
which was more significant with the peptide/siRNA complexes for LP-C16
(52.9% viability after peptide exposure vs 35.8% after peptide/siRNA
exposure). Interestingly, a similar toxicity was not observed for
C12-conjugated cyclic peptide in this cell line; however, a similar
toxicity was observed for CP-C16 both as peptide solution and peptide/siRNA
complex (Figure 5A).
LP-C12, LP-C16, and LP-C18 showed similar toxicity levels in MDA-MB-435
cells as well. For some of the fatty acid-conjugated cyclic peptides,
however, the toxicity was more significant when the MDA-MB-435 cells
were treated with peptide/siRNA complexes as compared to the peptide
solution (68.6% vs 50.1% viability for CP-C12, 77.5% vs 52.4% viability
for CP-18; Figure 4B). The other peptides showed minimum or no significant toxicity
in any of the study groups in either of the cell lines.

Figure 5 Safety profiles
of the peptide libraries and the peptide/siRNA
complexes in human cell lines. The viability of MDA-MB-231 (A) and
MDA-MB-435 (B) cell lines after 72 h of exposure to different peptide
concentrations (left panels) and peptide/siRNA complexes in a range
of peptide/siRNA ratios (right panels) are presented for linear (upper
panels) and cyclic (lower panels) peptide libraries. Linear peptide
conjugated with C12 fatty acid showed the most significant toxicity
in both cell lines. Data are presented as mean, n = 3, and the error bars represent standard deviation. The asterisks
represent a significant difference (p < 0.05)
compared to “no treatment” cells (representing 100%
viability; data for which is not included in the figure).

Cellular Internalization
The ability
of peptide libraries
to deliver siRNA into the cells was evaluated using FAM-labeled scrambled
siRNA and analysis by flow cytometry and fluorescent microscopy. The
siRNA uptake pattern was similar for both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435
cell lines. The internalization of siRNA was minimum with most of
the linear library in both cell lines. However, LP-C16 and LP-C18
were exceptions and showed a significant siRNA uptake, which was significantly
higher at a peptide/siRNA ratio of 20:1 (N/P ratios of 21.6 and 20.8,
respectively) compared to the ratio of 10:1 (N/P ratios of 10.8 and
10.4, respectively) (43.8 vs 17.1% siRNA-positive cells for LP-C16
and 52.4 vs 19.1% for LP-C18) in MDA-MB-231 cells. The siRNA internalization
followed a similar trend in MDA-MB-435 cells for these two modified
linear peptides; however, a higher level of efficiency was achieved
for LP-C16 at both peptide/siRNA ratios studied compared to the MDA-MB-231
cells (82.3% vs 43.8% siRNA-positive cells at a w/w ratio of 20:1
[N/P ratio of 21.6] and 48.7% vs 17.1% at a ratio of 10:1; Figure 6A, left panels).
However, a different pattern was observed for cyclic peptides. None
of the cyclic peptides achieved siRNA internalization in more than
20% of the cells in either of the cell lines included in the study.
In the MDA-MB-231 cells, CP-C18, CP-C16, and CP-C8* internalized siRNA
into 12.5, 11.7, and 9.8% of the cells, respectively, at a peptide/siRNA
w/w ratio of 120:1 (N/P ratios of 126, 131, and 154, respectively).
The level of siRNA uptake was slightly higher in MDA-MB-435 cells,
and the same peptides achieved 19.3, 14.9, and 14.2% siRNA-positive
cells at the same ratios(Figure 6A, right panels). The mean fluorescence results confirmed
a similar pattern in both cell lines (Figure 6B). The siRNA uptake with other peptides
was not statistically different from “naked siRNA”.

Figure 6 Cellular
uptake of FAM-siRNA by human cancer cell lines. The internalization
of FAM-labeled siRNA into MDA-MB-231 (the upper panels in each set)
and MDA-MB-435 (the lower panels in each set) cells for linear (left
panels in each set) and cyclic (right panels in each set) peptides
is presented as percentage of the cells positive for siRNA uptake
(A) and average of the fluorescence in the cell population (B). The
cells were transfected by two different peptide/siRNA w/w ratios (20:1
and 40:1 for linear and 80:1 and 120:1 for cyclic peptides). Linear
peptide conjugated with C16 and C18 fatty acids demonstrated the most
efficient intracellular siRNA delivery. Data are presented as mean, n = 3, and the error bars represent standard deviation.

To enhance the siRNA internalization
capacity, we added another
lipophilic component to the delivery system and compared the siRNA
uptake in MDA-MB-231 cells with and without incorporating 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(DOPE) in selected peptide/siRNA complexes using peptide/siRNA w/w
ratios of 20:1 and 40:1 for linear peptides and 80:1 and 120:1 for
cyclic peptides (Figure 7A,B). The addition of DOPE to the delivery system increased the siRNA-positive
cells from 53 to 96% and from 85 to 98% for 20:1 and 40:1 ratios of
LP-C16/siRNA (N/P ratios of 21.6 and 43.2), respectively. A similar
increase (from 51 to 78%) was observed for the LP-C18/siRNA w/w ratio
of 20:1 (N/P ratio of 20.8). The increase was not statistically significant
for the w/w ratio of 40:1 (N/P ratio of 41.6) for this peptide (82–84%; Figure 7B). The role of DOPE
in improving the delivery performance of the selected linear peptides,
however, was more noticeable with analyzing the mean fluorescence
of the cells treated with peptide/DOPE/siRNA complexes. The mean fluorescence
of the treated cells increased from 281 to 3693 and from 893 to 11 861
for LP-C16/siRNA w/w ratios of 20:1 and 40:1, respectively. A similar
pattern was observed for the LP-C18-modified peptide (increasing the
mean fluorescence from 329 to 5040 and from 824 to 1855 for ratios
of 20:1 and 40:1, respectively, Figure 7A). Different fatty acid-conjugated cyclic peptides
responded slightly differently to DOPE addition. Whereas CP-C4, CP-C10,
and CP-C18 demonstrated a significant increase in the percentage of
cells internalizing siRNA at both peptide/siRNA ratios, CP-C16 only
showed a significant improvement in efficacy with DOPE addition at
a w/w ratio of 120:1 (N/P ratio of 131) (at a w/w ratio of 80:1 [N/P
ratio of 87.4], 17.6 and 17.1% of cells internalized siRNA with and
without DOPE addition to the delivery system). Adding DOPE did not
improve siRNA delivery at either of the ratios for CP-C8* (Figure 7B). Mean fluorescence
results confirmed the same trends for cyclic peptides, except CP-C16,
which showed a significant improvement in siRNA internalizing efficiency
at a CP-C16/siRNA w/w ratio of 120:1 (582–1016 without and
with DOPE, respectively, Figure 7A). Delivering FAM-labeled siRNA using only DOPE (with
no peptide) with the lowest and highest final concentration used in
this study did not result in a significant cellular internalization
of siRNA. Figure 7C
illustrates examples of the fluorescence recordings of flow cytometry
for different peptides with and without DOPE compared to nontreated
(NT) cells. The fluorescent microscope images confirmed our findings
using flow cytometry. Although DOPE/FAM-labeled siRNA did not show
any internalization into MDA-MB-231 cells, both LP-C16 and LP-C18
peptides demonstrated cell uptake that increased significantly with
the addition of DOPE.

Figure 7 Effect of incorporation of DOPE in the siRNA complexes
on siRNA
intracellular delivery. The cellular uptake studies were repeated
with selected peptides to investigate the effect of addition of an
additional lipophilic component, and the results are presented as
the average of quantified fluorescence (A) and percentage of the cells
positive for FAM-labeled siRNA uptake (B). Addition of DOPE to the
siRNA complexes enhanced intracellular delivery of siRNA significantly
for most of the selected peptides. Data are presented as mean, n = 3, and the error bars represent standard deviation.
The asterisks indicate significant difference in cellular internalization
as a result of DOPE incorporation into each complex. DOPE (low) and
(high) indicate the siRNA uptake of the cells exposed to complexes
of siRNA and DOPE (with no peptide) using the lowest (for complexes
with peptide/siRNA w/w ratio of 20:1 and the highest (for complexes
with peptide/siRNA w/w ratio of 120:1) DOPE final concentration used
in the other study groups included in the experiment. (C) Samples
of flow cytometry results for siRNA uptake: the uppermost row represents
the fluorescence pattern of cells transfected with linear peptide/siRNA
w/w ratio of 20:1 or 40:1, with or without DOPE incorporated into
the carrier. The middle and bottom rows represent samples of fluorescence
pattern of cells transfected with cyclic peptide/siRNA w/w ratio of
80:1 or 120:1, with or without DOPE. The gate P2 represents fluorescence
of cells considered siRNA-free, whereas the cells in the P3 region
are positive for siRNA uptake. (D) Fluorescent microscope images showing
individual channels (green, blue, and red), and an overlay for each
treatment group as well as “No treatment” cells as the
negative control.

Silencing Efficiency
Two model proteins were selected
to demonstrate the in vitro silencing efficiency of the designed modified
peptides. LP-C16, LP-C18, CP-C4, CP-C10, CP-C16, and CP-C18 were selected
for delivering siRNAs targeting kinesin spindle protein (KSP) or Janus
kinase 2 (JAK2), and the mRNA levels were directly compared to cells
treated with scrambled siRNA. Each peptide was tested with and without
incorporation of DOPE into the carrier. Between the selected linear
peptides, LP-C18 showed a higher efficiency [relative quantity (RQ)
of 0.52 compared to 0.79 for LB-C16] in silencing KSP (Figure 8A). The efficiency difference
between the two peptides was not as much against JAK2 (0.55 vs 0.65; Figure 8B). None of the cyclic
peptides showed an RQ lower than 0.75 for KSP without DOPE. However,
delivering JAK2 siRNA, CP-C18 demonstrated an RQ of ∼0.7. Overall,
without adding DOPE to the carriers, the highest silencing efficiency
was achieved with the selected linear peptides delivering JAK2 siRNA.
Incorporating DOPE to the carrier had a similar enhancing effect observed
in cellular internalization studies. All selected peptides (except
CP-C16) showed a higher silencing efficiency against both selected
proteins with the addition of DOPE. The DOPE enhancing effect was
more noticeable in silencing KSP, where the CP-C10 (0.47 with DOPE
vs 0.97 without it), LP-C16 (0.40 with DOPE vs 0.79 without it), and
LP-C18 (0.18 with DOPE vs 0.53 without it) showed the most significant
response to the addition of DOPE to the delivery system.

Figure 8 Quantification
of downregulation of mRNA levels of selected targeted
proteins. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with peptide/siRNA complexes
with peptide/siRNA w/w ratios of 40:1 and 120:1 for linear and cyclic
peptides, respectively, while the effect of incorporation of DOPE
in the delivery system was also evaluated. Lipofectamine 2000 (Lipo.)
was used as the positive control. The mRNA levels of KSP (A) and JAK2
(B) was quantified after 48 h of exposure to siRNA complexes using
quantitative PCR. Data are presented as mean of RQ compared to cells
exposed to saline (normalized using mRNA levels of β-actin), n = 3, and the error bars represent standard deviation.
The asterisks identify the study groups that demonstrated a significant
increase in silencing efficiency as a result of DOPE incorporation.
DOPE (low) and (high) indicate the siRNA uptake of the cells exposed
to DOPE (with no peptide) using the lowest and highest DOPE final
concentrations used in the other study groups included in the experiment.
(C) Correlation between silencing efficiency for the two selected
targets: RQs presented in (A) and (B) are plotted on x and y axes, respectively, and the correlation factor
(R) was calculated. The silencing data show significant
correlation (p < 0.01) between the two selected
targets.

Overall, with the addition of
DOPE, the highest silencing efficiency
against KSP and JAK2 was achieved by LP-C18 (RQ of 0.18) and LP-C16
(RQ of 0.32), respectively (Figure 8A,B). DOPE alone (with no peptide) did not induce significant
silencing for either of the selected proteins, even with the highest
final concentration of DOPE used in this study. The silencing efficiency
of delivered siRNA against KSP and JAK2 showed a strong correlation
(R = 0.82; p < 0.01), as illustrated
in Figure 8C.

Discussion
The therapeutic possibilities with RNAi via siRNAs have not been
utilized to the full potential, mostly because of the underperformance
of the carriers. Cationic lipids or polymers are among the commonly
studied nonviral carriers for nucleic acids because of their spontaneous
tendency to interact with the cargo via interionic interaction. Neutralization
of the siRNA electric charge in the process also enhances cell internalization
by compacting nucleic acid and reducing the hydrophilicity of this
type of molecule. Short (around 30 amino acids or less) CPPs have
also been used as an alternative approach, either by covalently binding
the peptide to siRNA or by complex formation using positively charged
peptides.2 In 2013, van Asbeck et al. reported
a study on siRNA complex formation with a small library of arginine-
or lysine-rich linear peptides and demonstrated that using a stearyl
group to replace the acetyl group could enhance the silencing efficiency
against the luciferase reporter gene in a leukemia cell line,21 which the authors contributed to induced amphipathic
characteristics. In this study, we used a variety of fatty acids with
a wide range (C2–C18) to modify linear and cyclic peptides
composed of five arginine and two lysines.

Herein, we designed
two libraries of linear and cyclic peptides
with similar amino acid compositions and studied the effect of hydrophobic
modification of synthesized peptides with fatty acids with a wide
range of chain lengths. We hypothesized that the cyclic structure
of the second library could offer higher cell-penetrating ability
and stability and less toxicity over linear counterparts. In our synthesized
peptides, no inter- and/or intra-dicarboxylate cross-linked products
were observed because 3 equiv of fatty acids was used in the coupling
reactions in a very dilute solution in DMF that minimizes coupling
of both carboxylic acids in each fatty acid in the intramolecular
or intermolecular reactions. Furthermore, all final products were
purified by HPLC as described in the manuscript. MALDI spectral data
did not exhibit the presence of intermolecular or intramolecular products.

To evaluate the ability of synthesized peptides to bind to siRNA,
we performed a binding assay we had previously reported using the
SYBR Green dye to quantify the free siRNA.22 Among the linear-modified peptides, LP-C2, LP-C4, LP-C6, and LP-C10
did not achieve a complete siRNA binding in the range of peptide/siRNA
w/w ratio studies. In addition to a relatively smaller fatty acid
conjugation, these peptides have another common characteristic, the
dicarboxylic conjugated fatty acid, which means a −COOH group
that exists at the free end of the fatty acid could be partially ionized
in a neutral pH and create a negatively charged group. This ionization
could potentially interfere with the interionic interaction with negatively
charged siRNA and therefore limit the extent of binding. The only
other linear peptides conjugated with dicarboxylic fatty acids in
the library is LP-C8, which demonstrated one of the highest BC50 values
among the linear peptides that achieved complete binding. Cyclic peptides
showed a higher BC50. In fact, in addition to the unmodified cyclic
peptide, only CP-C8*, CP-C10, CP-C12, and CP-C18 showed complete binding
at the highest peptide/siRNA w/w ratio studied (80:1) (Figure 2). Cyclic peptides are more
rigid and expected to be more stable toward degradation. However,
this rigidity of the molecular structure could hinder the interionic
interaction with siRNA molecules, which could explain the higher BC50
for this library. A significant correlation between the BC50 values
and the length of the conjugation was not observed for either of the
libraries (data not shown).

Difatty acyl peptide conjugates
have different physicochemical
properties. A number of factors are involved in interactions with
siRNA, such as charge, hydrophobicity, size, overall structure, and
conformation of the conjugates. The level of hydrophobicity/charge
ratio is a key factor for the binding of amphiphilic conjugates to
siRNA. The chain length and its flexibility are postulated to generate
highly condensed positively charged amphiphilic particles for efficient
interactions with siRNA. However, our data indicate that the enhanced
hydrophobicity of the delivery system (both by increasing the chain
length in the fatty acid structure and by addition of DOPE as an extra
hydrophobic component) plays a significant role in the level of interaction
of the delivery system with the cell membrane.

The size and
electric surface charge of siRNA carriers are crucial
characteristics for the efficiency of delivery, and we used a Zetasizer
to analyze both the hydrodynamic diameter and ζ-potential of
the peptide/siRNA complexes. The ability of a carrier to condense
the nucleic acid cargo is considered one of the important factors
in protecting siRNA and internalizing it into the target cells.23 We observed a gradual decrease in the particle
size of the complexes with increasing peptide/siRNA w/w ratio from
1:1 to 20:1 for most of the synthesized peptides (Figure 2A,B), which could indicate
complex formation. Most of the complexes showed a particle size of
less than 200 nm, which is considered the proper size for in vitro
siRNA delivery.24 We previously reported
a similar range of particle sizes for hydrophobically modified low-molecular-weight
polyethyleneimine (PEI),22 which was shown
effective for in vitro and in vivo delivery of siRNA to a variety
of cell lines.25,26 The presence of a positive surface
charge seems to be important for the cellular uptake and limits the
risk of particle aggregation. It has been suggested that a slightly
positive surface charge (+2 to +10) is the ideal surface charge to
optimize cell surface interactions while minimizing nontarget carrier
binding.27,28 The ζ-potential of siRNA complexes
is expected to move toward positive values as the peptide/siRNA ratio
is increased. This gradual increase was observed for most of the linear
peptides (except LP-C4 and LP-C14, which showed negative values for
the peptide/siRNA w/w ratio of 20:1) and a few of the cyclic peptides
(Figure 3C,D). A negative
value suggests incomplete binding, which confirms our observations
in the binding study.

One of the major hurdles in siRNA delivery
is the susceptibility
to enzymatic degradation, which limits siRNA in vivo half-life to
a few minutes.29 A gel electrophoresis
method was used to quantify intact siRNA after exposure of peptide/siRNA
complexes to serum. Whereas positive and negative controls confirmed
the validity of the method, most of the peptides failed to protect
siRNA for 24 h. Only C16- and C18-conjugated peptides showed protection
against enzymatic degradation, which could be due to the maximum hydrophobicity
of these modified peptides. This protection potentially limits the
interaction of siRNA with the enzymatic components in the aqueous
surrounding medium (Figure 4). A near complete protection was also provided by the unmodified
cyclic peptide, which could be explained by the high affinity for
siRNA binding (the highest among the cyclic library) and a small positive
ζ-potential at a ratio of peptide/siRNA ratio of 20:1 (N/P ratio
of 44.7). Higher peptide/siRNA w/w ratios were used for the cyclic
library (up to 80:1) because of limited serum stability and BC50 observed
in this study and previous experiments.

We selected two approaches
to evaluate the toxicity of the delivery
system: exposure of the cells to different concentrations of peptides
and treatment with peptide/scrambled siRNA with corresponding peptide
concentrations. Both approaches were evaluated based on the speculations
that positively charged carriers enhance cellular uptake via the whole
formation in the cell membrane.30 Because
complex formation changes the overall charge of the peptide, the cytotoxicity
of the peptide alone and as a complex with siRNA could potentially
be different. LP-C12 showed an unusual toxicity compared to other
synthesized peptides in both cell lines used (Figure 5). LP-C16 and LP-C18 were the other peptides
that showed a higher toxicity compared to other peptides in the highest
concentration examined. Whereas the higher toxicity of the C16- and
C18-conjugated peptides could be explained by a closer interaction
with the cell membrane because of increased hydrophobicity of the
peptide, the unusual toxicity of LP-C12 might be due to an incomplete
purification process that could expose the cells to impurities remaining
in peptide solution. The trend of toxicity was similar for both approaches,
which indicates that the toxicity mechanism might be independent of
the electrical charge of the peptide. Most synthesized peptides were
nontoxic in the selected concentration range, and overall, the cyclic
library was less toxic than the linear equivalents.

In general,
conjugation with C18* demonstrated a safer toxicity
profile compared to conjugation with C18. Whereas these two conjugations
showed a comparable safety profile for the cyclic peptide in MDA-MB-231
cells, LP-C18 and CP-C18 showed a more significant effect on cell
viability in both selected cell lines both as peptide alone (in the
concentration range of 5–20 μg/mL) and as a peptide/siRNA
complex, especially at peptide/siRNA w/w ratios of 20:1 and 40:1,
compared to LP-C18* and CP-C18*, respectively. These differences suggest
that the conjugation of the peptide with unsaturated linoleic acid
in C18* (compared to saturated stearic acid in C18) reduces the interaction
with the cell membrane, which was confirmed by a significantly higher
cellular internalization in the subsequent experiments for C18. The
cytotoxicity data also indicated an unusual toxicity for LP-C12, which
was not seen in the cyclic peptide counterpart. This might be an indication
of an impurity in the synthesis product that was not detected in our
analysis of the peptide. However, we did not investigate this unusual
effect further because LP-C12 did not show promising siRNA delivery
characteristics in the selected cell lines.

Our cellular internalization
studies confirmed our results from
our particle characterization studies. Linear peptide conjugated with
C16 and C18 fatty acids showed the highest efficiency in internalizing
FAM-labeled siRNA into both human cancer cell lines studied. The average
fluorescence signal, however, was significantly higher in MDA-MB-231
triple-negative breast cancer cells (Figure 6B). This was surprising because in one of
our previous studies, we observed the opposite (more efficient delivery
to MDA-MB-435 cells using fatty acid-conjugated low-molecular-weight
PEI).26 The average fluorescence signal
and the percentage of cells showing siRNA uptake were both lower for
the cyclic peptides. CP-C16 and CP-C18 showed the highest delivery
efficiency in this library. This was not surprising because we perform
our uptake studies in serum-rich media, and the binding affinity,
ζ-potential of complexes, and protection against enzymatic degradation
all play important roles in the cellular internalization of siRNA.
Whereas the cyclic peptide library showed an overall lower affinity
to bind to siRNA and demonstrated a lower ζ-potential for most
of the cyclic peptides and a lower serum stability of siRNA, only
the most hydrophobic cyclic peptides (C16- and C18-conjugated peptides)
showed some promising results in those characterization experiments.
Noticing the role of hydrophobicity of the carriers in internalizing
siRNA, we repeated the cell internalization study with selected peptides,
adding a new hydrophobic component to the delivery system. DOPE has
been commonly used as a component in different liposomal and polymeric
siRNA delivery systems.31−34 We investigated the effect of incorporating DOPE
into the peptide/siRNA complexes and used DOPE/siRNA as a control
group to evaluate the effect of DOPE alone in siRNA delivery. In our
studies, DOPE did not show a significant siRNA uptake; however, the
addition of DOPE to peptide/siRNA complexes had a significant effect
on the siRNA delivery efficiency of all selected peptides (except
caprylic acid-conjugated cyclic peptide and CP-C16 at the lower selected
peptide/siRNA ratio). The enhancing effect of DOPE was specifically
significant on LP-C16, where the average of the fluorescence signal
increased more than 10-fold (from 893 to 11861) for a peptide/siRNA
w/w ratio of 40:1 (N/P ratio of 43.2) (Figure 6). Lipids have been extensively used as the
individual carrier of siRNA (cationic lipids as lipoplexes) or as
a hydrophobic modifier or component in other delivery systems. It
is speculated that they enhance cellular internalization by enhancing
the interaction of the particle with the cell membrane, which in turn
could trigger a cellular uptake. On the basis of observations on the
effect of fatty acid chain length on the efficiency of siRNA delivery,
we believe this hydrophobic interaction is the main mechanism involved
in the internalization of these particles. Our microscopic images
(Figure 7D) confirmed
the impact of DOPE addition to the delivery system.

Cell internalization
of siRNA is only the first step in protein
silencing. The ability to escape endosomes and the timely release
from the complexes are the other necessary steps in successful mRNA
targeting and degradation. To demonstrate the silencing efficiency
of our hydrophobically modified peptides, we targeted two unrelated
proteins that have been extensively studied for their roles in cell
proliferation and survival. KSP is a member of kinesin superfamily
of microtubule motors involved in mitosis and has been targeted by
small-molecule drugs35,36 and siRNA37,38 as an anticancer strategy. JAK2, on the other hand, is a pivotal
component of the JAK/STAT pathway that has been studied extensively
for its key role in development, proliferation, differentiation, and
survival of cancer cells.39 JAK inhibitors,
for example, ruxolitinib and tofacitinib, are used in clinics.40 We have previously reported JAK2 silencing via
siRNA delivery and its impact on inhibiting the growth of human cancer
cells.25,26,41 Our silencing
experiments in this project confirmed our observations in the cell
internalization studies. Whereas C16- and C18-conjugated peptides
(especially linear peptides) showed silencing against both the targeted
proteins, the addition of DOPE enhanced the silencing efficiency significantly
for all selected peptides, except CP-C16. This is consistent with
our observations in the uptake study and confirms that the addition
of DOPE not only increases the cellular uptake but this uptake also
translates to efficient protein silencing. Maybe even more significantly,
the significant correlation between the silencing efficiency against
two selected proteins indicates the efficiency of this approach regardless
of the expression level of the targeted protein or its role in intracellular
mechanisms. Our experiments also demonstrated a silencing efficiency
that was comparable, and even superior in some cases, to commercially
available Lipofectamine 2000. Whereas the RQ of ∼0.5 was observed
for siRNAs delivered by Lipofectamine, LP-C18 reduced the mRNA levels
of KSP and JAK2 to RQs of 0.18 and 0.32, respectively (Figure 8).

These data indicate
that an optimal fatty acyl chain length is
required for efficient interaction with the cell membrane and internalization,
as observed for both cyclic and linear peptides. The difatty acyl
linear peptides, LP-C16 and LP-C18, are more efficient siRNA carriers
when compared with the corresponding difatty acyl cyclic peptides,
CP-C16 and CP-C18, possibly because of the more efficient interactions
of positively charged amino acids and fatty acyl chains with the cell
membrane and siRNA in more flexible linear conjugates versus the cyclic
ones. It was also noticed that the presence of more rigid unsaturated
linoleic acid in both LP-C18* and CP-C18* significantly reduced siRNA
stability and siRNA internalization when compared with the corresponding
more flexible stearic acid analogues LP-C18 and CP-C18 peptides, respectively.
These data indicate that the fatty acid chain length and peptide and
fatty acid flexibility are the determinant factors for optimal interactions
with the membrane and siRNA and cellular internalization.

Conclusions
Peptides have shown promising efficiency as cell-penetrating components
in siRNA delivery. We hypothesized that synthesizing hydrophobically
modified cationic peptides can be an effective approach in forming
stable complexes with siRNA that are capable of internalizing into
the target cells and target any mRNA in the cytoplasm. Our results
showed that the level of hydrophobicity is a key factor in the efficiency
of the carriers. In fact, the addition of an extra hydrophobic element
significantly enhanced the performance of designed peptides as shown
in C16 and C18 peptides. This study reveals the promising potential
of a number of peptide/lipid nanoparticles, such as C16 and C18 peptides,
for effective siRNA delivery that justifies further evaluation in
vivo.

Experimental Section
Materials
For the list of materials
used in this project,
please see the Supporting Information.

Methods
Assembly of Amino Acids on Resins for the Synthesis of Resin-Attached
Linear and Cyclic Peptides
The synthesis of R5K2 peptides was achieved by using 0.50 mmol Fmoc-L-Arg(Pbf)-Wang
or H-Arg(Pbf)-2-ClTrt resins for linear and cyclic peptides, respectively.
The resin was added to a reusable fritted glass reaction vessel and
placed on the Tribute peptide synthesizer. Each vial was filled with
3 equiv of amino acids (Fmoc-Arg(Pbf)-OH and Fmoc-Lys(Dde)-OH for
linear peptides and Fmoc-Arg(Pbf)-OH and Fmoc-Lys(Boc)-OH for cyclic
peptides) and 2.5 equiv of HBTU as the coupling reagent. All of the
solvent bottles were pressurized with nitrogen, while the reaction
vessel was also pressurized and mixed by the nitrogen inlet and was
vacuum-sealed. The deprotection of the Fmoc group was performed by
addition of piperidine in DMF (20 v/v %). The program configured to
remove the Fmoc-protecting group of the resin-attached amino acid
before coupling the first amino acid residue. Once the first amino
acid residue was coupled, the remaining residues were added to the
reaction vessel by single coupling. The poor coupling of the hydrophobic
fatty acids for linear and cyclic peptides was mostly likely because
of some aggregation, possibly due to the interactions between hydrophobic
residues during the fatty acid coupling. To overcome the aggregation,
double-coupling was used for the linear peptide fatty acid conjugation.
In regard to the fatty acid conjugations for the cyclic peptide, the
reactions were performed under solution phase air-free peptide synthesis.
A percentage yield of approximately 60–70% was observed for
most of the linear peptide compared to 40–50% for cyclic peptide
conjugations.

Synthesis of Difatty Acyl Linear Peptide
Conjugates
Fmoc-protecting group was removed from the Fmoc-L-Arg(Pbf)-Wang
resin
(0.50 mmol) in the presence of piperidine in DMF (20 v/v %). For the
synthesis of linear peptides with capped N-acetyl
amino group (LP-C2 and LP-C4), two Fmoc-Lys(Dde)-OH amino acids were
used in coupling; then, the N-terminal Fmoc group was removed first
in the presence of piperidine (20%) in DMF followed by capping with
acetic anhydride before removal of the Dde group and fatty acid (C2
or C4) conjugation as described below. For the remaining linear peptides,
two kinds of lysines were used: Fmoc-Lys(Dde)-OH and Boc-Lys(Fmoc)-OH.
The Boc group was removed after the fatty acid conjugation described
below and after the final cleavage. Once the peptide sequence was
assembled on the resin and completed by the Tribute, the side chain
Dde of the first lysine and the Fmoc group of the second lysine were
removed by addition of hydrazine (2%, 1 mL) and DMF (98%, 49 mL).
The mixture of 2% hydrazine was mixed with the resin for 2 h at room
temperature under nitrogen. The resin was drained and washed with
DMF three times (3 × 3 mL). The coupling of the fatty acid was
carried out after the deprotection of lysines. The reaction was accomplished
by mixing 3 equiv of the fatty acid with 2.5 equiv of HBTU and 6 equiv
of DIPEA in DMF. The fatty acid coupling was repeated to ensure maximum
coupling to the unprotected peptide. The fatty acids used for both
libraries included acetic anhydride (C2), succinic acid (C4), adipic
acid (C6), suberic acid (C8), caprylic acid (saturated eight carbon
chain, C8*), sebacic acid (C10), lauric acid (C12), myristic acid
(C14), palmitic acid (C16), stearic acid (C18), and linoleic acid
(unsaturated 18 carbon chain, C18*). The final cleavage of the linear
peptide was performed by adding a cocktail of TFA, anisole, thioanisole,
and DTT. A cleavage cocktail (20 mL) was prepared by adding 18 mL
of TFA, 0.50 mL of anisole, 0.50 mL of thioanisole, and 50 mg of DTT,
and it was added to the linear peptide assembled on the Wang resin.
The mixture was then stirred for 4 h to afford crude difatty acyl
linear peptide conjugates.

Synthesis of Difatty Acyl Cyclic Peptide
Conjugates
H-Arg(Pbf)-2-ClTrt (0.5 mmol) was swelled in DMF.
Fmoc-Arg(Pbf)-OH
and Fmoc-Lys(Boc)-OH were used as building blocks. After assembly
of the peptide sequence, the cleavage of the peptide from the 2-chlorotrityl
resin was performed manually from the resin with acetic acid/trifluoroethanol/DCM
(1:2:7 v/v/v) for 2 h at room temperature. The solution was filtered
and washed with DCM to remove acetic acid. The cleavage solution was
diluted with n-hexane and evaporated four times.
The remaining acetic acid was evaporated overnight by vacuum. To cyclize
the peptide, HOAT (122.50 mg, 0.3 mmol, 3 equiv) was added to the
dried linear peptide in a 500 mL flask. The mixture of DCM and DMF
(1:4) was added to the flask, followed by addition of 140 μL
of N,N′-diisopropylcarbodiimide
into the solution under dry nitrogen. The reaction was continued for
24 h to complete. Once the cyclization was complete, deprotection
was carried out with reagent R (TFA/anisole/thioanisole/DTT), followed
by the coupling of fatty acid in the presence of HBTU and DIPEA, according
to the method described above for linear peptides. The same selected
fatty acids that were used for the generation of the difatty acyl
linear peptide library were also utilized to afford the crude difatty
acyl cyclic peptide conjugates.

Analysis and Purification
Method
All of the crude peptide
fatty acid conjugates were purified by using the preparative HPLC
to achieve the minimum purity of 90%. The dicarboxylic fatty acid
cyclic and linear conjugates were dissolved in 2:1 water/acetonitrile
(v/v), and the solution was filtered before injection to the HPLC.
The HPLC system included an XBridge BEH130 reversed-phase C18 column
(19 × 250 mm, 10 μm particle size, Waters Corp., Milford,
MA, USA) maintained at 50 °C, LC-20AD pumps (Shimadzu Corp.,
Kyoto, Japan), an FRC-10A fraction collector, and an SPD-M20A diode
array detector. For shorter chain difatty acyl conjugates, gradient
elution was performed at a flow rate of 10 mL/min with mobile phase
composition ranging from 95:5 water/acetonitrile (v/v) to 5:95 water/acetonitrile
(v/v) throughout the 60 min run. The mobile phase contained 0.1% TFA
throughout the gradient. Hydrophobic difatty acyl peptides, containing
longer fatty acid chains, were dissolved in a mixture of methanol/isopropanol
alcohol (1:1, v/v), and a gradient system of methanol/isopropanol
alcohol with 0.1% TFA was used for dilution. The detector monitored
the absorbance of the amide bond at the given wavelength of 215 nm.42,43 Mass spectra were collected from m/z 900 to 3500 using the positive reflective mode of MALDI mass spectrometer
to characterize the molecular weight, using freshly prepared α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic
acid (5 mg/mL) in acetonitrile (0.1% TFA) and water (0.1% TFA) (1:1,
v/v) as the matrix. Using the FlexControl software (Bruker Corp.),
the retention times for the peak tops of the chromatograph were determined
from the ion chromatograms of the protonated difatty acyl peptide
conjugates. MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry data for difatty acyl linear
and cyclic peptides are shown in Table S1 (Supporting Information).

Complex Formation
with Modified Peptides and siRNA
The peptide/siRNA complexes
were formed in different w/w ratios for
the variety of in vitro studies conducted for this project. The complexes
formed spontaneously based on the ion/ion interaction in normal saline.
For each formulation, the required amount of siRNA stock solution
(10 μM) was added to normal saline, and then the calculated
amount of peptide stock solution (1 mg/mL) was added to the solution.
The mixture was gently mixed and was incubated at room temperature
for 30 min to ensure complete complexation. The peptide/siRNA ratios
used in complex formations are reported as weight/weight ratios as
well as N/P ratios. The N/P ratios were calculated using the following
formula  

All siRNAs used
in this project contain
21 base pairs in each strand, with a 2 nucleotide overhang on each
strand, which represents 20 phosphodiester linkages for each siRNA
molecule. The siRNA targeting JAK2 (Qiagen catalogue # SI02659657)
represented the following sequence: sense: 5′-CCAUCAUACGAGAUCUUAATT-3′;
antisense: 5′UUAAGAUCUCGUAUGAUGGCT-3′). The sequence
for other siRNAs used in this study was not provided to the authors
as they were considered proprietary information. The number of protonable
nitrogen atoms differed among the peptides, and the net positive charge
varied between 2 and 7. Table S2 summarizes
the N/P ratios for some of the w/w ratios reported in this manuscript.

Amount of Peptide Required for 50% siRNA Binding (BC50)
To evaluate the effect of hydrophobic modification of the linear
and cyclic peptides on their ability to bind to siRNA, a previously
reported SYBR Green II dye exclusion assay was performed using a wide
range of N/P ratios. This method has been extensively used for DNA44 and has been shown to correlate with the results
of the electrophoretic mobility shift assay for quantification of
siRNA binding.45 Complexes were formed
using scrambled siRNA and all modified peptides in both libraries
with N/P ratios up to 8 for linear library and N/P ratios up to 90
for cyclic library. After completion of complex formation, SYBR Green
II dye solution (1:10 000 dilution in double-distilled water)
was immediately added to each complex solution, and the fluorescence
of the solution was quantified in a 96-well plate at a λ excitation
of 485 nm and a λ emission of 527 nm. Free siRNA (with similar
concentration to complexes) was used as the control to determine the
unbound siRNA in each complex formulation, using the following equation  

A
completely bond siRNA sample was
also prepared as a positive control using a previously reported hydrophobically
modified, low-molecular-weight PEI.22 To
determine the ratio required for 50% siRNA binding (BC50) for each
hydrophobically modified peptide, the percentage of siRNA bond to
each peptide versus the peptide/siRNA ratios was plotted, and BC50
was calculated based on the linear portion of the curve for each experiment.

Light Scattering for Size and ζ-Potential of siRNA Complexes
The hydrodynamic diameter and surface charge of the complexes were
analyzed using a Malvern Nano ZS Zetasizer (Westborough, MA) at 25
°C in disposable cuvettes and folded capillary cells, respectively.
The peptide/siRNA complexes were prepared with a variety of peptide/siRNA
w/w ratios ranging from 1:1 to 20:1 using scrambled siRNA to study
the effect of the composition of the complex on these physical characteristics.
The ζ-potential of the complexes was determined at 40 V, using
Smoluchowski approximation.

Protection of siRNA against
Enzymatic Degradation
To
study the capability of the fatty acid-conjugated linear and cyclic
peptides to enhance the stability of siRNA in biological environments,
samples of unprotected scrambled siRNA (positive control) and peptide/siRNA
complexes at different peptide/siRNA ratios, ranging from 2.5:1 to
10:1 for linear and from 20:1 to 80:1 for cyclic peptides, were exposed
to FBS solutions. After completion of complex formation for each formulation,
each sample was added to a 25 v/v % FBS solution in Hank’s
balanced salt solution (HBSS), and the mixture was incubated at 37
°C for 24 h. A sample of unprotected siRNA in HBSS was used as
the negative control, representing 100% intact siRNA. After incubation,
the complexes were dissociated using a 2:3 mixture of heparin (5%
solution in normal saline) and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (0.5
mM), and the samples were analyzed using 1% agarose gel (with 1 μg/mL
ethidium bromide) at 70 V for 20 min. Ultraviolet illumination (Gel-Doc
system, Bio-Rad; Hercules, CA) was used to visualize the gel, and
the intensity of the bands (representing remaining intact siRNA) was
quantified by Image J software.

Cell Lines
The
human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231
and the human cell line MDA-MB-435 were purchased from American Type
Culture Collection (ATCC; Manassas, VA). MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435
were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
and in Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 medium, respectively.
Both media were supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin,
and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. Cells were maintained under a normal
condition of 37 °C and 5% CO2 under a humidified atmosphere
and were subcultured when 80–100% confluent.

Toxicity
of the Difatty Acyl Peptides and Peptide/siRNA Complexes
The safety profiles of the linear and cyclic peptide libraries
were evaluated in two different human cancer cell lines by exposing
the cells to the peptides alone and in peptide/siRNA complexes. Confluent
cultures (∼800 000 cells/mL) of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435
human cancer cell lines were seeded in 96-well plates. After 24 h,
the cells were exposed to different concentrations of peptide solutions
or peptide/siRNA complexes. Linear peptide solutions were added to
both cell lines to create final concentrations of 2.5, 5, 10, and
20 μg/mL, whereas cyclic peptides were added to the final concentrations
of 5, 10, 20, and 40 μg/mL. Peptide/siRNA complexes were prepared
with different peptide/siRNA w/w ratios of 5:1, 10:1, 20:1, and 40:1
(translating to 2.5, 5, 10, and 20 μg/mL peptide final concentration)
for linear and 10:1, 20:1, 40:1, and 80:1 (equivalent to 5, 10, 20,
and 40 μg/mL peptide final concentration) for cyclic peptides.
The final concentration of scrambled siRNA was 36 nM in all cytotoxicity
studies performed with peptide/siRNA complexes. The cells were then
incubated for 72 h at 37 °C with controlled CO2 and
humidity. A standard 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide assay was performed after the incubation period to determine
the cell viability as a percentage of NT cells.

Internalization
of siRNA into Human Cancer Cell Lines
The capability of difatty
acyl linear and cyclic peptide libraries
in internalizing siRNA into human cells was evaluated using FAM-labeled
scrambled siRNA and flow cytometry and fluorescent microscopy. Both
MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 cell lines were used for these studies and
were seeded in 24-well plates (∼200 000 cells per well).
Peptide/siRNA complexes were prepared in ratios of 10:1 and 20:1 for
the linear peptide library and 80:1 and 120:1 for the difatty acyl
cyclic peptide library, with a final concentration of 36 nM for the
fluorescent-labeled scrambled siRNA. After addition of the siRNA complexes
to the cell culture media, the cells were incubated in 37 °C
and standard growth conditions for 24 h. After the incubation period,
for flow cytometry studies, the cells were washed with clear HBSS
(×2), trypsinized, and fixed using 3.7% formaldehyde solution.
The suspended cells were analyzed with a BD-FACSVerse flow cytometer
(BD Biosciences; San Jose, CA) using the fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC) channel to quantify cell-associated fluorescence. To investigate
the effect of the addition of DOPE to the delivery system, DOPE was
added to the complexes in a peptide/DOPE molar ratio of 3:2. After
each flow cytometry analysis, the percentage of cells with a fluorescence
signal and the mean fluorescence of the cell population were calculated
based on the calibration of the signal gated with NT cells (as the
negative control), so that the autofluorescence would be ∼1%
of the population.

To obtain fluorescent images of the siRNA
cellular uptake, cells were seeded on a glass slide in a 6-well plate
(at ∼400 000 cells/mL), and after 24 h, they were exposed
to FAM-labeled siRNA complexes. After 24 h of exposure to FAM-labeled
siRNA, the cells were washed with clear HBSS and fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde
solution for 30 min at room temperature. The cell membrane and nucleus
were stained with Texas Red Phalloidin (Invitrogen) (1:250 in HBSS)
and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), respectively. A KEYENCE
BZ-X700 all-in-one fluorescence microscope (KEYENCE Corp. of America,
Itasca, IL) was used to produce fluorescence images using the 40×
objective and different filters for DAPI, FITC, and Texas Red. NT
cells were used as negative controls.

In Vitro Silencing of Selected
Proteins
The efficacy
of siRNA delivered by selected peptides in silencing specific proteins
was studied in the MDA-MB-231 cell line. Confluent cells were seeded
in 6-well plates (∼400 000 cells/mL) and were treated
with scrambled siRNA (CsiRNA) or targeted siRNAs (final concentration
of 54 nM) delivered with selected peptides with or without DOPE. After
48 h of incubation at 37 °C and under normal cell culture conditions,
the cells were lysed with TRIzol (1 mL for each 1 × 106 cells) for cDNA synthesis and real-time polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). The cell lysates were incubated at room temperature for
5 min, before chloroform (with a 1:5 v/v ratio to TRIzol) was added
to the lysates. The tubes were mixed and incubated for 2–3
min at room temperature, before the aqueous phase was collected. Isopropanol
was added to the precipitate and pellet RNA using centrifuge (12 000g for 10 min in 4 °C). The pellet was then washed with
75% ethanol, and the extracted RNA was then dissolved in RNase-free
water. The total extracted RNA in each sample was determined by BioSpec-Nano
spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Columbia, MD). To synthesize cDNA, 0.5
μg of RNA was reverse-transcribed using an iScriptTM reverse
transcription supermix and a C1000 Touch thermocycler (Bio-Rad, Hercules,
CA), following the manufacturer’s guidelines. A CFX96TM optical
module (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) was used for the RT-PCR analysis, where
human β-actin was used as the endogenous gene to normalize the
mRNA level of targeted proteins. Primers were designed using primer
Blast software available at The National Center for Biotechnology
Information website (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and were synthesized with the following sequences by IDT Technologies
(Coralville, Iowa): β-actin (forward: 5′-CCA CCC CAC
TTC TCT CTA AGG A-3′; reverse: 5′-AAT TTA CAC GAA AGC
AAT GCT-3′), KSP (forward: 5′-TCA CAA AAG CAA TGT GGA
AAC CTA-3′; reverse: 5′-TCT GTC CAA AGA TTCA TTA ACT
TGC A-3′), and JAK2 (forward: 5′-AAC TGC AGA TGC ACA
TCA TTA CCT-3′; reverse: 5′-TCG AAA TTG GGC CAT GAC
A-3′). Primers were validated to assure equal efficiency at
different cDNA concentrations (−0.1 < slope < 0.1 for
the ΔCT vs cDNA dilution graph) and selectivity for the protein
of interest (by gel electrophoresis and determination of the length
of the resulting DNA). The mRNA levels were determined by calculating
ΔCT, ΔΔCT, and RQ using the endogenous gene and
“no treatment” group as reference points.

Statistical
Analysis
The significance of the differences
observed reported values (including siRNA uptake, mRNA levels, and
cell viability) were evaluated using Student’s t test (p < 0.05). Standard deviations were calculated
for all data and are represented by the error bars in all figures.
Pearson’s correlation coefficient was calculated where indicated,
and its significance was determined by the t test,
according to the following equation  where r and n are the correlation coefficient and the number
of samples, respectively.
The calculated value of t was compared to p values for each degree of freedom to determine the significance
of the correlation.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00741.Chemical structures
of linear and peptide fatty acid
conjugates; MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry data for difatty acyl linear
and cyclic peptides; N/P ratio for selected w/w peptide/siRNA ratios
used in this project; MALDI-TOF mass spectra; and materials (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00741_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
H.D. and M.S.
contributed equally.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial
support for this research from the Chapman University School of Pharmacy.
==== Refs
References
Fire A. ; Xu S. ; Montgomery M. K. ; Kostas S. A. ; Driver S. E. ; Mello C. C. 
Potent
and specific genetic interference by double-stranded
RNA in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature 
1998 , 391 , 806 –811 . 10.1038/35888 .9486653 
Aliabadi H. M. ; Landry B. ; Sun C. ; Tang T. ; Uludağ H. 
Supramolecular
assemblies in functional siRNA delivery: where do we stand? . Biomaterials 
2012 , 33 , 2546 –2569 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.11.079 .22209641 
Lehto T. ; Ezzat K. ; Wood M. J. A. ; Andaloussi S. E. 
Peptides
for nucleic acid delivery . Adv. Drug Delivery
Rev. 
2016 , 106 , 172 –182 . 10.1016/j.addr.2016.06.008 .
Tai W. ; Gao X. 
Functional peptides
for siRNA delivery . Adv.
Drug Delivery Rev. 
2016 , 110–111 , 157 –168 . 10.1016/j.addr.2016.08.004 .
Järver P. ; Mäger I. ; Langel Ü. 
In vivo biodistribution and efficacy
of peptide mediated delivery . Trends Pharmacol.
Sci. 
2010 , 31 , 528 –535 . 10.1016/j.tips.2010.07.006 .20828841 
Adami R. C. ; Rice K. G. 
Metabolic stability
of glutaraldehyde cross-linked
peptide DNA condensates . J. Pharm. Sci. 
1999 , 88 , 739 –746 . 10.1021/js990042p .10430535 
Futaki S. ; Suzuki T. ; Ohashi W. ; Yagami T. ; Tanaka S. ; Ueda K. ; Sugiura Y. 
Arginine-rich peptides. An abundant
source of membrane-permeable peptides having potential as carriers
for intracellular protein delivery . J. Biol.
Chem. 
2001 , 276 , 5836 –5840 . 10.1074/jbc.m007540200 .11084031 
Ohyama A. ; Higashi T. ; Motoyama K. ; Arima H. 
In Vitro and In Vivo
Tumor-Targeting siRNA Delivery Using Folate-PEG-appended Dendrimer
(G4)/α-Cyclodextrin Conjugates . Bioconjugate
Chem. 
2016 , 27 , 521 –532 . 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.5b00545 .
Chaudhary A. ; Garg S. 
siRNA delivery using
polyelectrolyte-gold nanoassemblies in neuronal
cells for BACE1 gene silencing . Mater. Sci.
Eng., C 
2017 , 80 , 18 –28 . 10.1016/j.msec.2017.05.101 .
Chen J. ; Sun X. ; Shao R. ; Xu Y. ; Gao J.-q. ; Liang W.-q. 
VEGF siRNA
delivered by polycation liposome-encapsulated calcium phosphate nanoparticles
for tumor angiogenesis inhibition in breast cancer . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2017 , 12 , 6075 –6088 . 10.2147/ijn.s142739 .
Zheng G. ; Shen Y. ; Zhao R. ; Chen F. ; Zhang Y. ; Xu A. ; Shao J. 
Dual-Targeting Multifuntional Mesoporous Silica Nanocarrier
for Codelivery of siRNA and Ursolic Acid to Folate Receptor Overexpressing
Cancer Cells . J. Agric. Food Chem. 
2017 , 65 , 6904 –6911 . 10.1021/acs.jafc.7b03047 .28771340 
Campani V. ; Salzano G. ; Lusa S. ; De Rosa G. 
Lipid Nanovectors
to
Deliver RNA Oligonucleotides in Cancer . Nanomaterials 
2016 , 6 , 131 10.3390/nano6070131 .
Yin H. ; Kanasty R. L. ; Eltoukhy A. A. ; Vegas A. J. ; Dorkin J. R. ; Anderson D. G. 
Non-viral vectors for gene-based therapy . Nat. Rev. Genet. 
2014 , 15 , 541 –555 . 10.1038/nrg3763 .25022906 
Titze-de-Almeida R. ; David C. ; Titze-de-Almeida S. S. 
The Race
of 10 Synthetic RNAi-Based
Drugs to the Pharmaceutical Market . Pharm. Res. 
2017 , 34 , 1339 –1363 . 10.1007/s11095-017-2134-2 .28389707 
Huang Y. 
Preclinical
and Clinical Advances of GalNAc-Decorated Nucleic Acid Therapeutics . Mol. Ther.—Nucleic Acids 
2017 , 6 , 116 –132 . 10.1016/j.omtn.2016.12.003 .28325278 
Smekalova E. M. ; Kotelevtsev Y. V. ; Leboeuf D. ; Shcherbinina E. Y. ; Fefilova A. S. ; Zatsepin T. S. ; Koteliansky V. 
lncRNA in
the liver: Prospects for fundamental research and therapy by RNA interference . Biochimie 
2016 , 131 , 159 –172 . 10.1016/j.biochi.2016.06.007 .27318030 
Shirazi A. N. ; Oh D. ; Tiwari R. K. ; Sullivan B. ; Gupta A. ; Bothun G. D. ; Parang K. 
Peptide amphiphile
containing arginine and fatty acyl
chains as molecular transporters . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2013 , 10 , 4717 –4727 . 10.1021/mp400539r .
Shirazi A. N. ; Tiwari R. K. ; Oh D. ; Banerjee A. ; Yadav A. ; Parang K. 
Efficient delivery of cell impermeable phosphopeptides
by a cyclic peptide amphiphile containing tryptophan and arginine . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2013 , 10 , 2008 –2020 . 10.1021/mp400046u .
Shirazi A.
N. ; Paquin K. L. ; Howlett N. G. ; Mandal D. ; Parang K. 
Cyclic peptide-capped
gold nanoparticles for enhanced siRNA delivery . Molecules 
2014 , 19 , 13319 –13331 . 10.3390/molecules190913319 .25170952 
Oh D. ; Shirazi A. N. ; Northup K. ; Sullivan B. ; Tiwari R. K. ; Bisoffi M. ; Parang K. 
Enhanced cellular uptake of short
polyarginine peptides through fatty acylation and cyclization . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2014 , 11 , 2845 –2854 . 10.1021/mp500203e .
van
Asbeck A. H. ; Beyerle A. ; McNeill H. ; Bovee-Geurts P. H. M. ; Lindberg S. ; Verdurmen W. P. R. ; Hällbrink M. ; Langel Ü. ; Heidenreich O. ; Brock R. 
Molecular parameters
of siRNA–cell penetrating peptide nanocomplexes for efficient
cellular delivery . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 3797 –3807 . 10.1021/nn305754c .23600610 
Aliabadi H. M. ; Landry B. ; Bahadur R. K. ; Neamnark A. ; Suwantong O. ; Uludağ H. 
Impact of lipid substitution on assembly and delivery
of siRNA by cationic polymers . Macromol. Biosci. 
2011 , 11 , 662 –672 . 10.1002/mabi.201000402 .21322108 
Boussif O. ; Lezoualc’h F. ; Zanta M. A. ; Mergny M. D. ; Scherman D. ; Demeneix B. ; Behr J. P. 
A versatile vector
for gene and oligonucleotide
transfer into cells in culture and in vivo: polyethylenimine . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
1995 , 92 , 7297 –7301 . 10.1073/pnas.92.16.7297 .7638184 
Howard K. A. ; Rahbek U. L. ; Liu X. ; Damgaard C. K. ; Glud S. Z. ; Andersen M. Ø. ; Hovgaard M. B. ; Schmitz A. ; Nyengaard J. R. ; Besenbacher F. ; Kjems J. 
RNA interference in vitro and in
vivo using a novel chitosan/siRNA nanoparticle system . Mol. Ther. 
2006 , 14 , 476 –484 . 10.1016/j.ymthe.2006.04.010 .16829204 
Aliabadi H. M. ; Mahdipoor P. ; Bisoffi M. ; Hugh J. C. ; Uludağ H. 
Single and
Combinational siRNA Therapy of Cancer Cells: Probing Changes in Targeted
and Nontargeted Mediators after siRNA Treatment . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2016 , 13 , 4116 –4128 . 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00711 .
Aliabadi H. M. ; Maranchuk R. ; Kucharski C. ; Mahdipoor P. ; Hugh J. ; Uludağ H. 
Effective
response of doxorubicin-sensitive
and -resistant breast cancer cells to combinational siRNA therapy . J. Controlled Release 
2013 , 172 , 219 –228 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.08.012 .
Cao N. ; Cheng D. ; Zou S. ; Ai H. ; Gao J. ; Shuai X. 
The synergistic effect of hierarchical
assemblies of siRNA and chemotherapeutic
drugs co-delivered into hepatic cancer cells . Biomaterials 
2011 , 32 , 2222 –2232 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.11.061 .21186059 
Convertine A. J. ; Benoit D. S. W. ; Duvall C. L. ; Hoffman A. S. ; Stayton P. S. 
Development
of a novel endosomolytic diblock copolymer for siRNA delivery . J. Controlled Release 
2009 , 133 , 221 –229 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2008.10.004 .
Raemdonck K. ; Vandenbroucke R. E. ; Demeester J. ; Sanders N. N. ; De Smedt S. C. 
Maintaining
the silence: reflections on long-term RNAi . Drug Discovery Today 
2008 , 13 , 917 –931 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2008.06.008 .18620073 
Hong S. ; Leroueil P. R. ; Janus E. K. ; Peters J. L. ; Kober M.-M. ; Islam M. T. ; Orr B. G. ; Baker J. R. Jr.; Holl M. M. B. 
Interaction of
polycationic polymers with supported
lipid bilayers and cells: nanoscale hole formation and enhanced membrane
permeability . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2006 , 17 , 728 –734 . 10.1021/bc060077y .
Dakwar G. R. ; Braeckmans K. ; Ceelen W. ; De Smedt S. C. ; Remaut K. 
Exploring
the HYDRAtion method for loading siRNA on liposomes: the interplay
between stability and biological activity in human undiluted ascites
fluid . Drug Delivery Transl. Res. 
2017 , 7 , 241 –251 . 10.1007/s13346-016-0329-4 .
Gu L. ; Nusblat L. M. ; Tishbi N. ; Noble S. C. ; Pinson C. M. ; Mintzer E. ; Roth C. M. ; Uhrich K. E. 
Cationic amphiphilic
macromolecule (CAM)–lipid complexes for efficient siRNA gene
silencing . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 184 , 28 –35 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.04.005 .
Hattori Y. ; Hara E. ; Shingu Y. ; Minamiguchi D. ; Nakamura A. ; Arai S. ; Ohno H. ; Kawano K. ; Fujii N. ; Yonemochi E. 
siRNA delivery into tumor cells by
cationic cholesterol derivative-based nanoparticles and liposomes . Biol. Pharm. Bull. 
2015 , 38 , 30 –38 . 10.1248/bpb.b14-00526 .25744455 
Rezaee M. ; Oskuee R. K. ; Nassirli H. ; Malaekeh-Nikouei B. 
Progress in
the development of lipopolyplexes as efficient non-viral gene delivery
systems . J. Controlled Release 
2016 , 236 , 1 –14 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.06.023 .
Perez-Melero C. 
KSP inhibitors
as antimitotic agents . Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 
2014 , 14 , 2286 –2311 . 10.2174/1568026614666141130095532 .25434354 
Sarli V. ; Giannis A. 
Targeting the kinesin
spindle protein: basic principles
and clinical implications . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2008 , 14 , 7583 –7587 . 10.1158/1078-0432.ccr-08-0120 .19047082 
Marra E. ; Palombo F. ; Ciliberto G. ; Aurisicchio L. 
Kinesin spindle
protein SiRNA slows tumor progression . J. Cell.
Physiol. 
2013 , 228 , 58 –64 . 10.1002/jcp.24103 .22552964 
Tabernero J. ; Shapiro G. I. ; LoRusso P. M. ; Cervantes A. ; Schwartz G. K. ; Weiss G. J. ; Paz-Ares L. ; Cho D. C. ; Infante J. R. ; Alsina M. ; Gounder M. M. ; Falzone R. ; Harrop J. ; White A. C. S. ; Toudjarska I. ; Bumcrot D. ; Meyers R. E. ; Hinkle G. ; Svrzikapa N. ; Hutabarat R. M. ; Clausen V. A. ; Cehelsky J. ; Nochur S. V. ; Gamba-Vitalo C. ; Vaishnaw A. K. ; Sah D. W. Y. ; Gollob J. A. ; Burris H. A. 3rd
First-in-humans trial of an RNA interference
therapeutic targeting VEGF and KSP in cancer patients with liver involvement . Cancer Discovery 
2013 , 3 , 406 –417 . 10.1158/2159-8290.cd-12-0429 .23358650 
Kisseleva T. ; Bhattacharya S. ; Braunstein J. ; Schindler C. W. 
Signaling
through the JAK/STAT pathway, recent advances and future challenges . Gene 
2002 , 285 , 1 –24 . 10.1016/s0378-1119(02)00398-0 .12039028 
Dymock B. W. ; See C. S. 
Inhibitors of JAK2
and JAK3: an update on the patent
literature 2010–2012 . Expert Opin. Ther.
Pat. 
2013 , 23 , 449 –501 . 10.1517/13543776.2013.765862 .23367873 
Zhu P. ; Aliabadi H. M. ; Uludağ H. ; Han J. 
Identification of Potential
Drug Targets in Cancer Signaling Pathways using Stochastic Logical
Models . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 23078 10.1038/srep23078 .26988076 
Goldfarb A.
R. ; Saidel L. J. ; Mosovich E. 
The ultraviolet absorption spectra
of proteins . J. Biol. Chem. 
1951 , 193 , 397 –404 .14907727 
Zinieris N. ; Leondiadis L. ; Ferderigos N. 
Nα-Fmoc
removal from resin-bound
amino acids by 5% piperidine solution . J. Comb.
Chem. 
2005 , 7 , 4 –6 . 10.1021/cc049872d .15638471 
Saxena V.  Preparation and
Physical Characterization of DNA-Binding Cationic Liposomes . Liposomes ; Methods in Molecular Biology ; Humana Press , 2017 ; Vol. 1522 , pp 245 –250 .
Neamnark A. ; Suwantong O. ; Bahadur K. C. R. ; Hsu C. Y. M. ; Supaphol P. ; Uludağ H. 
Aliphatic
lipid substitution on 2 kDa polyethylenimine
improves plasmid delivery and transgene expression . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2009 , 6 , 1798 –1815 . 10.1021/mp900074d .

