
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145776410.1021/acsomega.7b00344ArticlePath from Reaction Control to Equilibrium Constraint
for Dissolution Reactions Crundwell Frank K. *CM Solutions (Pty) Ltd., 89J Victoria Drive, London SW19 6PT, U.K.* E-mail: frank.crundwell@cm-solutions.co.za.23 08 2017 31 08 2017 2 8 4845 4858 08 05 2017 09 08 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical
Society2017American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Although dissolution reactions are
widespread and commonplace,
our understanding of the factors affecting the rate of dissolution
is incomplete and consequently the kinetics of these reactions appear
complicated. The focus in this work is on the behavior of the rate
as conditions approach equilibrium. The reverse reaction is often
treated in terms of chemical affinity, or saturation state. However,
the implementation of the chemical affinity model fails, requiring
arbitrary empirical adjustments. In this study, a mechanism of dissolution
is proposed that describes both the fractional orders of reaction
with respect to H+ and OH– and correctly
describes the approach to equilibrium. The mechanism is based on the
separate removal of anions and cations from the surface, which are
coupled to one another through their contribution to and dependence
on the potential difference across the interface. Charge on the surface,
and hence potential difference across the interface, is caused by
an excess of ions of one sign and is maintained at this stationary
state by the rate of removal of cations and anions from the surface.
The proposed model is tested using data for NaCl (halite), CaCO3 (calcite), ZnS (sphalerite), NaAlSi3O8 (albite), and KAlSi3O8 (K-feldspar). An important
feature of the proposed model is the possibility of “partial
equilibrium”, which explains the difficulties in describing
the approach to equilibrium of some minerals. This concept may also
explain the difficulties experienced in matching rates of chemical
weathering measured in laboratory and field situations.

document-id-old-9ao7b00344document-id-new-14ao-2017-00344uccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The dissolution of solids represents one
of the most important
reactions in chemistry. Applications are so abundant, from the etching
of semiconductors to the dissolving of common household salt, that
it is easy to take this class of reactions for granted. Yet, on closer
examination, it is evident that there is a large gap in our knowledge
of these reactions: there is no general kinetic mechanism for dissolution
that can clearly elucidate the factors that influence the rate of
reaction. Consequently, the kinetics of dissolution reactions appears
complicated, with explanations that often seem contradictory or that
provide incomplete explanations of the observed phenomena (see Appendix A for a brief overview of these models).

One of these complications is that the order of reaction with respect
to H+ or OH– is often fractional. In
particular, these orders of reaction seem to follow the series 0,
1/2, 1, 3/2, ..., n/2, a pattern that has proven
difficult to describe.1−6,37 Another complication, although
not the only one, is the approach to equilibrium. The path from reaction
control to equilibrium constraint is not well understood and in many
cases does not follow the behavior expected from an appreciation of
the thermodynamics of the overall reaction (as will be discussed further
in this Introduction).

Our previous
work has focused on the first complication, that is,
the fractional orders of reaction with respect to H+ or
OH– often reported for dissolution reactions.1−6,37 This is a complication because
fractional orders of reaction are difficult to explain in terms of
a combination of elementary reactions each of which must have orders
of reaction that are whole numbers. Our previous work proposed a mechanism
of dissolution that accounts for these fractional orders of reaction
for both dissolution1−6,37 and crystallization7 by accounting for the development of charge on
the surface.

The purpose of this study is to address the second
complication,
that of the approach to equilibrium. It is shown here that the proposed
theory describes the path from reaction control to equilibrium. At
the same time, it is shown that the proposed theory admits an unexpected
condition referred to as “partial equilibrium” that
may account for some puzzling results in dissolution science. Although
the approach taken is that of chemical kinetics, the topic itself
is of interest in both classical and irreversible thermodynamics.

Consider the reaction between reactants to become products. As
the concentrations of the products increases, the reverse reaction
becomes increasingly important and the rate of reaction approaches
equilibrium. The rate of dissolution can be written as the combination
of forward and reverse reactions in terms of a “chemical affinity”, A, as shown in eq 1.8,9 1  The symbols r⃗ and r⃖ refer to the rates of the forward
and reverse
reactions, respectively, and R and T are the universal gas constant and the absolute temperature, respectively.

Inspection of eq 1 confirms that the chemical affinity is defined by eq 2,10,11 which is sometimes
referred to as the De Donder equation.12 2  The chemical
affinity can be interpreted as
a driving force for chemical reactions in irreversible thermodynamics
and has units of kJ/mol. Large negative values mean the dissolution
reaction is far from equilibrium, whereas equilibrium occurs at a
chemical affinity of 0.

For an elementary reversible reaction,
the ratio of the rates of
the forward to the reverse reaction is equal to the activity quotient
(Q) divided by the equilibrium constant (K) so that the chemical affinity can also be written as eq 3.10−12 Elementary
reactions by definition must obey the Guldberg and Waage mass action
kinetics,13,14 in which the orders of reaction are equal
to the absolute value of the stoichiometric coefficients written as
positive integers. 3  Thus, the combination of eqs 1 and 3 describes the
path between reaction control and equilibrium constraint for an elementary
reversible reaction. At equilibrium, Q/K is equal to 1, A is equal 0, and the net rate of
dissolution is 0. Under condition of reaction control, far from equilibrium, Q/K is much less than 1, A is a large negative number, and the rate of dissolution is governed
only by the rate of the forward reaction, r⃗.

Consider the application of this chemical affinity model
to the
dissolution of common table salt (NaCl, halite), whose equilibrium
reaction is given by eq 4. 4  The
rate of the forward reaction for the dissolution
of NaCl is not dependent on any species in solution other than water
so that the rate of the forward reaction is constant, r⃗ = k⃗. The combination of this rate expression
and eq 1 yields eq 5 with the chemical affinity
given by eq 6. 5   6  The symbol k⃗ represents
the rate constant for the forward reaction, and the symbol Ksp represents the solubility product. As the
solubility product is determined by independent means, eqs 5 and 6 represent
a one-parameter model (i.e., the only parameter is k⃗).

This model of the approach to equilibrium can be tested.
It is
shown as the black line marked chemical affinity in Figure 1. Somewhat surprisingly, the
comparison of the model with data reported by Alkattan et al.15 shows that the model does not fit the data (given
by the circular points in Figure 1). The line for the model is the best fit to the data,
which means that changing the rate constant k⃗ cannot yield a better fit of the model to the data than that shown
in Figure 1. The deviation
between the model and the data indicates that the model fails. This
failure of models based on the overall reaction is common for dissolution
reactions. Clearly, our understanding of dissolution reactions, even
the simplest of these reactions, is lacking.

Figure 1 Comparison of two
models of the approach to equilibrium with the data for the dissolution
of NaCl at 25 °C. The chemical affinity model is a combination
of eqs 5 and 6. The model represented by the line marked “Temkin’s
ASN = 2” is a combination of eqs 6 and 7 with a value of 2 for
ω. The values of k⃗ used for the chemical
affinity model and Temkin’s average stoichiometry number model
are 0.23 and 0.2566 mol/m2 s, respectively.

An alternative approach is to modify the affinity/equilibrium
model
by adding empirical parameters to eq 5.16 Such a model might be
similar to that given in eq 7, which is referred to as “Temkin’s average
stoichiometric number”.16 7  The parameter ω, the
“average
stoichiometric number”, provides a second parameter that can
be varied to allow the model to fit the data. The value of 2 for ω
provides a good fit to the data, as shown by the gray line in Figure 1.

This approach
is somewhat arbitrary in the context of this reaction.
Temkin’s derivation17 of the average
stoichiometric number is obtained from a series of elementary reactions
in a complex mechanism. Two difficulties arise with the use of this
approach for the dissolution of NaCl: (i) it is difficult to conceive
of the dissolution of NaCl as a series of steps—dissolution
of NaCl occurs by the parallel removal of Na+(aq) and Cl–(aq) ions from the surface, and (ii) it is difficult
to conceive that the dissolution of a salt will have a stoichiometric
number above 1, which is required to obtain an average of 2 for NaCl,
as discussed earlier. In other words, Temkin’s derivation is
only applicable to a series mechanism, whereas dissolution is clearly
a parallel mechanism; furthermore, to get to an average value for
the stoichiometry of 2, several steps need to have stoichiometric
numbers significantly higher than 2, which does not seem possible
with a reaction as simple as eq 4.

From the point of view of developing a kinetic mechanism,
the approach
of using the chemical affinity and the average stoichiometric coefficient
obfuscates the orders of reaction. If eq 6 is substituted into eq 7 with the value of ω taken as 2, the rate of
dissolution is given by eq 8. 8  This result is interesting because
the orders
of reaction for the reverse reaction (crystallization) are one-half.
Thus, the search for a kinetic mechanism returns to the first complication
associated with dissolution reactions referred to earlier in this Introduction, that is, dissolution reactions yield
orders of reaction that are fractional. The fundamentals of the kinetics
of dissolution are revealed by these half-orders for both forward
and reverse reactions.

This example of NaCl is not an exception.
The reverse reactions
for ZnS, CdS, and CaCO3 all show analogous kinetic laws
for the reverse reactions.18−20 Specifically, their orders of
reaction for the reverse reaction (precipitation) are one-half in
a manner analogous to eq 8.

Another approach to the affinity/equilibrium model might
be to
relate the rate of dissolution to the supersaturation ratio, S, which is given by . In this case, S is given
by c/ceq, where c is the concentration of salt, NaCl. The rate of dissolution
of NaCl is plotted against the supersaturation in Figure 2.

Figure 2 Rate of dissolution of
NaCl(s) at 25 °C as a function of the saturation ratio, S. Data from Alkattan et al.15

The straight line shown in Figure 2 suggests that the
rate of the reverse reaction is
proportional to the concentration of the salt, which in turn suggests
that the reaction should be written as NaCl(s) ⇌ NaCl(aq) instead
of as eq 4. This suggestion
is entirely unsatisfactory because dissolution occurs by the formation
of ionized species in solution, not by the formation of neutral NaCl
species in solution. If it is argued that the salt dissolves by forming
ions and crystallizes by depositing the neutral NaCl as a molecular
species, then the reaction appears to violate the principle of microscopic
reversibility. Thus, the reverse reaction poses a difficult problem:
the kinetics of the reverse reaction are a half-order, but using traditional
arguments from crystallization science, it appears that the neutral
NaCl species is the one that crystallizes.

Of course, Figure 2 is entirely consistent
with eq 8 because the
concentration of the ions is the same as the
salt, that is, [Na+(aq)] = [Cl–(aq)]
= [NaCl(aq)], and the equilibrium concentration of the salt is the
square root of the solubility product, that is, ceq = Ksp1/2. However, the use of supersaturation, S (or chemical affinity, A), as the independent
variable obscures the half-order dependence on the concentrations
of Na+(aq) and Cl–(aq), given in eq 8, in both dissolution and
crystallization research.

The deviation of the data from the
reversible elementary form shown
in Figure 1 (the deviation
between the line marked chemical affinity and the data) might seem
slight, but it is significant. It suggests that our knowledge of dissolution
of a solid such as NaCl, which is an iconic textbook example of the
formation of ions in solution from the solid, is far from complete.

The failure of the affinity/equilibrium model is much more severe
for more complex solids, such as albite (NaAlSi3O8) and K-feldspar (KAlSi3O8). The approach to
equilibrium of these solids has been studied in some detail because
they form the most common mineral series found in the crust of the
earth. The data shown in Figure 3 indicate that the shape of the curve is not even correct,
which means that simply adding another arbitrary parameter like the
average stoichiometric number will not provide a fit to the data.
Researchers have instead extended the functional form and added several
additional empirical parameters.21 For
example, eq 9 provides
four additional parameters, none of which have any theoretical basis.
While an equation such as eq 9 might fit the data, it has limited value in assisting researchers
develop a kinetic mechanism. 9  

Figure 3 Dissolution of albite, NaAlSi3O8, as a function
of chemical affinity at 80 °C and pH 8.8. Data from Burch et
al.21

Indeed, although eq 9 retains the notion that the chemical affinity is the independent
variable as equilibrium is approached, the experimental data suggest
that it is not. Multiple values of the dissolution rate have been
measured for the same value of the chemical affinity,22,24 demonstrating that the chemical affinity as written for the overall
reaction is not an independent variable.

Thus, all of the models
used currently for the approach of a dissolution
reaction to equilibrium are empirical in nature and have failed to
describe the fundamental kinetics of dissolution reactions. All attempts
to describe the approach to equilibrium have been based on either eq 1 or an empirical equation
using chemical affinity as the independent variable, such as eq 9. Although such an empirical
approach might on some occasions lead to insight, it is no substitute
for a fundamental mechanism based on a clear understanding of the
elementary processes in this mechanism.

The purpose of this
work is to show that the novel mechanism of
dissolution and crystallization developed recently1−7,37 can describe the entire path
from reaction control to equilibrium. This mechanism, which is derived
from elementary steps, leads to a rate law that is applicable to a
wide range of experimental data, including cases like those of moderate
deviation from eq 1,
like NaCl, and those of severe deviation from eq 1, like NaAlSi3O8. Specifically,
we show in this study that the “S”-shaped curves with
respect to chemical affinity shown in Figure 3 are a consequence of the separate reactions
for the removal of anions and cations from the surface. As we show
in this study, both the data and the proposed mechanism indicate that
the use of the chemical affinity, A, or the supersaturation
ratio, S, is not appropriate for the description
of the approach to equilibrium of dissolution reactions. This invalidates
all previous work based on measures of equilibrium of the overall
reaction.

The proposed mechanism is shown in this study to describe
the transition
from reaction control to equilibrium in a general manner. No mechanism
based on elementary reactions has been previously proposed. In this
way, this work contributes to the closing of the gap in our knowledge
of the kinetics and mechanisms of dissolution reactions.

The
proposed theory is presented in the next section. After the
development of the theory, the proposed model is compared with data
from the following sources: data for halite (NaCl) from Alkattan et
al.;15 data for albite (NaAlSi3O8) from Burch et al.,21 Oelkers
and Schott,22 and Hellmann and Tisserand;23 and finally data for K-feldspar from Gautier
et al.24

Proposed Theory for the
Dissolution near Equilibrium
Overview of the Novel Approach
Dissolution
occurs by
the formation of aqueous ions from the constituents of the solid.
It is proposed that the removal of these ions from the surface leads
to the formation of a charged surface,1−6 as shown in Figure 4. Specifically, the removal of an anion leaves a positively charged
vacancy on the surface. In like fashion, the removal of a cation leaves
a negatively charged vacancy.

Figure 4 Dissolution of anions and cations from the surface
of solid MA,
showing the development of excess surface charge due to vacancies.
Each partial reaction has its own reverse reaction.

The overall charge on the surface is not neutral
but is related
to the difference between the concentration of anionic and cationic
sites on the surface.1−7 The excess charge on the surface is dynamic in the sense that it
is dependent on the rate of dissolution.7 This excess charge gives rise to a potential difference across the
Helmholtz layer (Stern layer).1−7 However, the potential difference across the Helmholtz layer gives
rise to a feedback mechanism because the potential difference affects
the rate of removal of anions and cations. Specifically, the rate
of removal of cations will be exponentially enhanced by a positive
change in potential, whereas the rate of removal of anions will be
exponentially retarded.7 The potential
difference across the Helmholtz layer is thus created by the removal
of ions from the surface, and the rate of removal of these ions is
in turn affected by the potential difference.

To describe the
approach to equilibrium, the reverse reaction for
the removal of the anions and cations must be considered. By accounting
for the effects of surface charge and potential on the rates of removal
and deposition of ions, the proposed model provides a general expression
for the rate of dissolution both near to and far from equilibrium.
This general expression is derived in the subsections that follow.

Development of Surface Charge by Removal of Ions from the Surface
Consider a solid MA, where M and A are the constituents that form
cations and anions upon dissolution, respectively. Further consider
that the dissolution occurs by the independent removal of M and A
from the surface (in parallel “partial reactions”),
as shown in Figure 4. The removal of these components leaves charged vacancy sites on
the surface. The excess surface charge, σ, arising at any time
due to these vacancies is proportional to the difference in the concentration
of anionic and cationic vacancies on the surface, which is expressed
in eq 10.7,25 10  The symbols nc and na represent the surface
concentration
of cationic and anionic vacancies, respectively, νc and νa represents the absolute charge number on
the cationic and anionic vacancies, respectively, and F is the Faraday constant (see Nomenclature).

The difference between the concentrations of cationic and
anionic vacancies on the surface is small, but gives rise to a large
electrical effect, particularly in terms of field strength. This concentration
difference and field strength can be calculated. Given that the interfacial
capacitance is typically found to be in the range of 0.01–0.2
F/m2 (ref (25)), a reasonable value is 0.05 F/m2. For this capacitance,
a change in the potential difference at the surface of 0.1 V results
in an increase in charge of 0.1 V × 0.05 F/m2 = 0.005
C/m2. This increase in charge is correspondingly caused
by an increase in the concentration of anion vacancies over cation
vacancies of (0.005 C/m2)/(96 500 C/mol) = 5.2 ×
10–8 mol/m2, assuming a single charge
on each of the vacancies. Most of this potential difference occurs
across the narrow Helmholtz layer, which is the distance between the
surface and the plane of closest approach of a hydrated ion because
the ionic strength in dissolution experiments is usually high. The
thickness of the Helmholtz layer is on the order of the size of a
water molecule, about 3 × 10–10 m (ref (26)). Thus, the field strength
is 0.1 V/3 × 10–10 = 3 × 109 V/m, which is extremely high.

Therefore, these considerations
show that even a minuscule excess
of anions over cations (or the other way around) leads to a significant
potential difference and a high field strength. Such a high field
strength would be expected to dominate the rate of removal of charged
species from the surface. As will be shown later, the effect of this
potential difference across the interface will accelerate the dissolution
of cations from the surface by a factor of 7 (calculated from exp(0.5
× 0.1 V × 96 500 C/mol/8.314 J/mol/298 K) = 7.01).

Furthermore, this surface charge has been measured using ζ
potential or electrophoresis. It is well known that the surface charge
or potential difference of minerals is dependent on the pH.25 What is less well known is that salts in solutions
of their own ions are charged. Miller and Yalamanchili, using laser
Doppler electrophoresis, measured the surface charge of a wide range
of chloride, iodide, fluoride, and bromide salts in their saturated
solutions.39 Indeed, surface charge has
been the basis for the industrial separation of KCl from NaCl in saturated
brines for the last 50 years.40 Crundwell
has argued that the source of this charge is the surface vacancies
caused by dissolution.25 That such a charge
has been measured adds further weight to the arguments presented here.

The potential difference, Δϕ, across the Helmholtz
layer is related to the excess surface charge, σ, by eq 11,7 where the symbol Cd represents the capacity
of the Helmholtz layer. 11  The rate of change of the potential difference
with time, which is obtained from eq 6 by taking derivatives of both sides, is related to
the rate of change of the concentration of surface vacancies, as shown
in eq 12.7 12  Equation 12 relates the electrical conditions of the surface to
the dissolution kinetics because the rate of change of the surface
concentration of cationic vacancies is equal to the rate of removal
of anionic species, that is, dnc/dt is equal to r–. Similarly,
dna/dt is equal to r+. Because the charge number of the departing
ion is the absolute value of the vacancy left behind, νa is the same as ν+. Similarly, νc is the same as ν–. The substitution
of these relationships into eq 12 yields eq 13. 13  Equation 13 describes the dynamic charging of the surface
by the
dissolution reaction itself and, as shown in the next section, leads
to the condition for stoichiometry.

Condition for Stoichiometric
Dissolution
Consider the
general dissolution reaction Mν–Aν+ → ν–Mν+ + ν+A–ν–. Stoichiometry requires that the rates of removal of cations and
anions are related by eq 14. We note that both ν+ and ν– in this notation are absolute numbers. 14  Inspection of eq 13 reveals that it admits
a possible stationary
state when the left-hand side is approximately 0. This stationary
state is described by eq 15. 15  Comparison
of eqs 14 and 15 yields that
the condition for stoichiometric dissolution is the requirement that
the stationary state is achieved. It is important to realize that
this stationary state is with respect to the surface potential difference.
In other words, stoichiometry is only achieved once dΔϕ/dt approaches 0. Thus, the approach proposed here can inherently
describe the condition of nonstoichiometric dissolution. The approach
to stoichiometric dissolution is related to the stabilization of the
surface potential difference.

Requirement for Stability
Reveals a Hidden Variable
For the stationary state to be
approached and stoichiometric dissolution
to occur in a stable manner, the rates of removal of both cations
and anions must be dependent on the potential difference across the
Helmholtz layer, Δϕ. If they are not, the attainment of
stoichiometric dissolution will be a random event, which it is not.
Instead, stoichiometric dissolution is usually achieved after an initial
nonstoichiometric period (which is the result of the stabilization
of the surface potential governed by eq 13). This argument means that the surface potential
difference, Δϕ, is a hidden variable in dissolution; hidden
in the sense that it is not immediately apparent from the macroscopic
variables for the kinetics or thermodynamics of dissolution.7

Kinetics of Dissolution
Consider
the dissolution of
a solid MA, possibly with the consumption of acid, by the overall
reaction given in eq 16. 16  The reaction occurs as parallel partial reactions
for the removal of anions, A–, and cations, M+, as shown in Figure 4. These partial reactions are given as eqs 17 and 18. 17   18  The symbols ≡M and ≡A represent
the M and A constituents of the solid at the surface, respectively,
and the symbols ≡– and ≡+ represent anionic and cationic vacancies on the surface, respectively.
The symbol t is a stoichiometric coefficient.

For eqs 17 and 18 to be elementary reactions in the sense of Guldberg–Waage
mass action kinetics,13,14 by definition the following conditions
must hold: (i) the orders of each of the partial reaction must be
the same as the stoichiometric coefficients and (ii) these stoichiometric
coefficients must be written as positive integers because a fraction
of an ion or molecule cannot be the reacting entity. Thus, t must take on values from the series 0, 1, 2, ..., n, for eq 18 to be an elementary reaction step.

As mentioned previously,
the rates of removal of the anions and
cations must be dependent on the surface potential difference. The
proposed functional form is a Boltzmann-like dependence so that the
rates of the removal of cations and anions are given by eqs 19 and 20,
respectively. 19   20  The first term on the right-hand
side of eqs 19 and 20 refers to the rate of dissolution of the surface
to form
the respective ion, whereas the second term represents the rate of
deposition of the respective ion. The symbols k⃗– and k⃗+ represent
the rate constants for the removal of anions and cations, respectively.
Likewise, the symbols k⃖– and k⃖+ represent the rate constants
for the deposition of anions and cations, respectively. The symbol y represents the dimensionless factor 0.5FΔϕ/RT, which includes the surface potential
difference, Δϕ. The terms exp(y) and
exp(−y) are Boltzmann-like factors that account
for the effect of surface potential on the rate of removal or deposition
of anions and cations. These Boltzmann-like factors arise from the
effect that changes in the surface potential have on the height of
the activation barrier and hence on the rate of removal or deposition
of ions on the surface.26 The factor 0.5
arises because the activated state (transition state) occurs halfway
between the surface and the outer Helmholtz plane.1−7

Equations 15, 19, and 20 represent
three equations
in the following three unknowns: r+, r–, and y. These equations
can be easily solved by substituting both eqs 19 and 20 into eq 15 and solving for y. This yields eq 21. 21  The rate of dissolution is obtained by substituting eq 21 into either eq 19 or 20. This yields eq 22, which can be simplified
algebraically to give eq 23. 22   23  Equation 23 is the generic rate expression for dissolution
under
conditions both near to and far from equilibrium. The numerator of
the right-hand side of eq 23 is an expression that might have been written directly from eq 16 without an in-depth
examination of the data because it can be written as k[H+]t(1 – Q/K), where Q and K are the activity quotient and the equilibrium constant written for
the overall reaction (eq 16), respectively.

The denominator of the term on the
right-hand side of eq 23 is the “unconventional”
term that we will show later in this study gives rise to the unexpected
behavior between reaction control and equilibrium discussed in Introduction. Specifically, it gives rise to the
S-shaped curves like that given in Figure 3. Equation 23 allows four different scenarios, as shown in Figure 5. Far from equilibrium,
only the forward reaction of both partial reactions occurs at an appreciable
rate (Figure 5a). At
full equilibrium, the forward and reverse reactions for both partial
reactions occur (Figure 5d). Between these limiting cases, there are two intermediate scenarios
in which the reverse reaction of only one of the partial reactions
occurs at an appreciable rate. These scenarios are called partial
equilibrium.

Figure 5 Four limiting cases in the proposed model: (a) kinetic
control
due to the removal of M and A from the surface of MA; (b) “partial”
equilibrium due to the metal ion reaching equilibrium conditions before
the anion; (c) partial equilibrium due to the anion reaching equilibrium
conditions before the metal ion; and (d) full equilibrium, where both
metal ion and anion are at equilibrium.

The implications of each of these four scenarios will be
examined
in the sections that follow. The limiting forms for reaction control
and equilibrium are presented next.

Rate Expression under Conditions
of Reaction Control
When the concentrations of M+ and A+ in solution
are low, eq 23 reduces
to eq 24. 24  Equation 24 shows that the orders of reaction with respect to
H+ follow the series 0, 1/2, 1, 3/2, ..., n/2 because t takes on values from the series 0, 1, 2, 3, ..., n. Thus,
this rate expression explains the fractional orders with respect to
H+ that are found in many dissolution reactions, as discussed
in Introduction. Consequently, this model
of dissolution explains one of the enduring complications of dissolution
kinetics.

Equilibrium
At equilibrium, the rate is zero. Setting
the right-hand side of eq 23 to zero reduces to eq 25, which is the condition at equilibrium. 25  Equation 25 represents the equilibrium expression for the reaction
given by eq 16. Thus,
the mechanism of dissolution proposed here meets the requirement that
it should also describe the condition of equilibrium at zero rate.

With the model having passed the tests for the limits of reaction
control and equilibrium constraint, the behavior of the proposed model
between these two limits is examined in the next section.

Characteristic
Behavior between Rate Control and Equilibrium
The behavior
of the rate of dissolution between the limits of reaction
rate control and equilibrium constraint is given by eq 23, which can be rearranged to form eq 26. The symbols k1 represents (k⃗+k⃗–)1/2 and k2 represents k⃖+/k⃗–. The corresponding
term k⃖–/k⃗+ can be obtained from the definition of the equilibrium
constant K and k2, as
shown in eq 26. 26  Inspection of eq 26 clarifies that the rate of the forward reaction
has orders of reaction with respect to H+ that are t/2.

Further inspection of eq 26 reveals that the term [M+][HtAt–1]/[H+]t is the concentration or activity
quotient Q. Thus, the term [M+][HtAt–1]/[H+]t/K is equal
to Q/K that is related to the chemical
affinity by eq 3. The
unconventional behavior
of the proposed model is therefore associated with the denominator
of the right-hand side of eq 26, which is governed by the parameter k2.

The rate of dissolution as a function of the chemical
affinity
is shown in Figure 6 for different values of the parameter k2 for a reaction such as the dissolution of a salt in which there
is no consumption of acid, that is, t = 0. The chemical
affinity is calculated using eq 3 and was varied in these calculations by changing the values
of the concentrations of M+ and A– while
maintaining the condition that [M+] = [A–]. The effect of this unconventional behavior is shown in Figure 6 for different values
of the parameter k2.

Figure 6 Effect of the chemical
affinity on the rate of dissolution as a
function of the parameter k2. The other
parameters had the following values: K = 1, k1 = 1, t = 0. The chemical
affinity was varied by simultaneously changing the value of the concentrations
of M+ and A– so that [M+]
= [A–] at each position on the curve.

It is immediately apparent and somewhat remarkable
that eq 26 reproduces
the shape
of the curve for the experimental data shown in Figures 1 and 3. Equation 26 has the capability of describing
the variety of shapes of rate–chemical affinity curves seen
in the data presented in Introduction.

The effect of varying the concentration of one of the constituent
ions, in this case A–, while holding the other constant
is shown in Figure 7. This result indicates that if the proposed theory is correct, then
the chemical affinity for the overall reaction is not a unique independent
variable. Experimental results for albite and K-feldspar are presented
later in this study that support this contention. The reason that
the chemical affinity for the overall reaction is not a unique independent
variable is due to the structure of the dissolution reaction. Essentially,
dissolution occurs as (at least) two partial reactions, one for each
of the removal of the oppositely charged ions from the surface. These
two partial reactions are independent of one another in the sense
that the removal of Na+ from the surface does not require
the simultaneous removal of Cl– from an adjacent
site. Although these partial reactions are independent in this sense,
they are electrically coupled to each other.

Figure 7 Effect of the chemical
affinity on the rate of dissolution as a
function of the concentration of A–.

If these two partial reactions are independent,
the obvious question
arises as to what governs the stoichiometry of the overall reaction.
This question has already been answered. The stoichiometry of the
overall reaction is predicated on the basis of the electrical stability
of the surface charge, and as such is not guaranteed. An unrealized
assumption of this electrical stability of the surface is made when
writing eqs 1–3 for dissolution.
During the initial stages of dissolution, the surface may not have
attained the stationary-state charge. Under these conditions, nonstoichiometric
dissolution will occur until the stationary state is achieved, at
which point stoichiometric dissolution will occur.

In the next
section, the proposed theory is compared with experimental
data.

Comparison of the Proposed Theory with Experimental Results
Dissolution of Halite (NaCl)
The dissolution of halite
occurs by the two partial reactions given in eqs 27 and 28. The rate of
dissolution can be obtained directly from eq 26 and is given by eq 29. 27   28   29  The value of the equilibrium constant can
be obtained from the concentration of salt in solution at saturation.
At 25 °C, the concentration of salt at equilibrium is 5.416 mol/L
(see ref (15)) so that
the value of K is (5.416)2 = 29.33 mol2/L2. This means that eq 29 is a two-parameter model in the parameters k1 and k2. These
parameters were fitted to the data of Alkattan et al.15 by nonlinear least squares (see Computational Methods), and the results are shown in Figure 8. The model, shown
by the line in Figure 8, is an excellent fit to the data. The goodness of fit is also shown
in Figure 9, which
emphasizes that the proposed theory is an excellent fit to the data.

Figure 8 Comparison
of the proposed model, represented by the line, with
the data for the dissolution of NaCl (halite) at 25 °C, represented
by the points. The model is represented by eq 29, whereas the data are those of Alkattan
et al.15 The values of the parameters k1 and k2 are 0.264
mol/m2 s and 0.185 L/mol, respectively.

Figure 9 Goodness of fit of the proposed model, given by eq 29, with the data of Alkattan
et
al.15 The equivalent R2 value is 0.988.

When the concentration of Na+ ions is much less
than
1/k2 = 1/0.185 = 5.4 mol/L, the reverse
reaction for eq 27 (the
partial reaction for Na+) is unimportant because k2[Na+] is much less than 1. However,
as the concentration of Na+ increases, this reverse partial
reaction begins to influence the rate of dissolution. Similarly, when
the concentration of Cl– ions is much less than
1/K/k2 = 1/29.33/0.185
= 5.42 mol/L, the reverse reaction for eq 28 is unimportant. As the concentration of
Cl– approaches this value, the reverse reaction
influences the rate of dissolution. Interestingly, these critical
parameters have similar values, which indicates that the effects of
Na+ and Cl– are symmetrical.

The
value of the constant k2 is relatively
small (compared with the concentrations of Na+ and Cl– ions in solution), so the deviation from eq 5 is small and does not change the
shape of the rate versus affinity plot (see Figure 6).

The proposed mechanism can be further
tested by adding another
salt containing either Na+ or Cl–.

Dissolution of CaCO3 and ZnS
As mentioned
in Introduction, the experimental results
for NaCl, ZnS, and CaCO3 all display the same half-order
kinetics for the reverse reaction.18−20 The experimental method
for evaluating the reverse reaction is to measure the equilibrium
condition, as explained by Crundwell and Verbaan.19 Under these conditions, the concentrations of the products
are high, and eq 26 readily
reproduces the half-order kinetics seen experimentally. In other words,
the rate of the reverse reaction for CaCO3 is given by eq 30. 30  Equation 30 corresponds exactly with the kinetics of
the reverse
reaction reported by Sjöberg.20 A
similar expression was reported by Locker and deBruyn18 for ZnS and CdS and confirmed by Crundwell and Verbaan19 for ZnS from a variety of different origins. Therefore,
the generality of eq 26 is established because it successfully applies to a variety of dissolution
systems.

Initial Rate of Dissolution of ZnS
An interesting prospect
posed by eq 26 is that
in which the reaction products may influence the initial rate of reaction.
This condition holds when k2 is very large
so that even at the very low concentrations of M+ found
at the beginning of the reaction, the value of k2[M+]/[H+]t approaches or exceeds 1. A set of results, experimentally obtained
by Verbaan,36 show exactly this characteristic.
Verbaan36 showed that the initial rate
of the dissolution of ZnS is affected by the concentration of Zn2+ ions in solution. These results, shown in Figure 10, are somewhat perplexing,
and no explanation was or has been attempted.

Figure 10 Effect of the concentration
of Zn2+ ions in solution
on the initial rate of dissolution of museum-grade sphalerite, ZnS.
The model line represents eq 31. The values of parameters k1 and k2 in eq 31 are 7.11 mol0.5/L0.5 s and 0.0603 (unitless),
respectively.

In spite of these perplexing
results, they are readily understood
in terms of eq 26. If k2 is large, the initial rate of dissolution
for ZnS (using a value of 2 for t) is given by eq 31. 31  This model is represented by the line in Figure 10, demonstrating
that the model of dissolution proposed in this study agrees with the
experimental data.

Dissolution of Albite (NaAlSi3O8)
The dissolution of albite is an example of
a significantly more complex
solid than NaCl. The overall dissolution reaction in alkaline solutions
is given by eq 32. 32  Our previous
work27,28 suggested that the initial rate-determining
steps in the dissolution
mechanism in alkaline solutions can be envisaged as resulting in the
formation of AlOH2+(aq) and Si3O84–(aq), as shown in eq 33. The anion Si3O84–(aq) and cation AlOH2+(aq) react further
with hydroxide ions and water to form the products given in eq 32. 33  The work of Dietzel29 provides support for the proposal that the polysilicic
form Si3O84–(aq) is the initial
product.
Both product species given in eq 33 react to form the final products in solution, given
in eqs 34 and 35. 34   35  The
dissolution step, given by eq 33, can be envisaged as occurring
by the partial reactions given in eqs 36 and 37. (It is important to
note that the removal of sodium should be taken as a separate step
because it is much faster than the removal of aluminum or silica,
as discussed by Crundwell.27,28 The removal of Na+ may occur by an ion-exchange reaction with H+.
It is combined with the removal of silica here to simplify the analysis
to more clearly illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed model
to describe the nonlinear curves for rate against chemical affinity.) 36   37  The application of the method
presented earlier
with respect to eqs 19–23 leads to the derivation of the rate
expression given by eq 38. 38  The proposed
mechanism here is essentially
the same as that of NaCl; although albite appears chemically more
complex, the basic dissolution steps are no more complex than NaCl.

The experiments of Burch et al.21 and
Hellmann and Tisserand23 were both conducted
at constant pH, which means the effect of the concentration of OH– in eq 38 can be incorporated into the rate constant. If the dissociation
of the polysilicic species Si3O84–(aq) is accounted for using eq 35, eq 38 can be simplified to give eq 39. 39  The proposed model, given by eq 39, can be tested by comparing it
to the experimental data of Burch et al.21 and Hellmann and Tisserand,23 as shown
in Figures 11 and 12. The data of Hellmann and Tisserand23 show more scatter at values for the chemical
affinity of less than −60 kJ/mol, indicating that a variable
affecting dissolution was not effectively controlled under conditions
far from equilibrium.

Figure 11 Comparison of the proposed model with the data from Burch
et al.21 at 25 °C. The data are represented
by circles
and the model by squares. The values of the parameters in eq 39 are as follows: k1, 2.26 × 10–10 mol/m2 s; K, 3.15 × 10–12; k2, 8.12 × 1014 L/mol; k3, 3.5 × 106 L4/mol4.

Figure 12 Comparison of the proposed model with
the data of Hellmann and
Tisserand23 for the dissolution of albite
at 150 °C and pH 9. The data are represented by circles and the
model by squares. The values of the parameters in eq 39 are as follows: k1, 1.03 × 10–8 mol/m2 s; K, 9.09 × 10–12; k2, 4.95 × 1011 L/mol; k3, 0.0 × 106 L4/mol4.

Both these figures indicate that
the proposed model is a good representation
of the data. The correspondence between the shape of the rate–chemical
affinity curve for the proposed theory and the data is significant.

Oelkers et al.22 investigated the effect
of the concentrations of Al and Si on the approach to equilibrium
of albite in more detail. Their results are shown as circles in Figure 13. The data are
grouped in three broad areas, depending on the concentrations of Al
and Si in the inlet to their continuous reactor. The proposed model,
fitted to their data, is represented by squares in Figure 13. The correspondence between
the model and the data is good, as shown in Figure 14.

Figure 13 Comparison of the proposed model with the data
of Oelkers et al.22 for the dissolution
of albite at 150 °C
and pH 9. The data are represented by circles and the model by squares.
The values of the parameters in eq 39 are as follows: k1, 4.83
× 10–13 mol/cm2 s; K, 5.0 × 10–12; k2, 4.84 × 109 L/mol; k3, 5.69 × 104 L4/mol4.

Figure 14 Goodness of fit of the proposed model,
given by eq 39, with
the data of Oelkers et al.22R2 = 0.858.

The results of Oelkers et al.22 demonstrate
that the chemical affinity is not a unique variable in the description
of the path between reaction control and equilibrium constraint because
different rates are obtained at the same value of the chemical affinity.
In contrast, the proposed model is consistent with their data.

High values of the constants k2 and k3 lead to the S-shaped curves with respect to
chemical affinity (compare with Figure 6). More importantly, the significant difference in
the values of these two parameters means that the partial reactions
do not attain equilibrium at similar concentrations. In other words,
the partial reaction for aluminum reaches equilibrium at lower concentrations
than those of silica. This could also explain why it might be difficult
to precipitate these solids in the laboratory. Asymmetry in the rates
of the deposition reactions might make it difficult to achieve a viable
rate of crystallization under conditions that seem to be conducive
to crystallization.

Dissolution of K-Feldspar (KAlSi3O8)
K-feldspar is a mineral similar to albite.
The model given by eq 39 can also be used to
describe the dissolution of K-feldspar, with the substitution of K+ for Na+. The experimental data from Gautier et
al.24 are shown as circles in Figure 15. These values
indicate that under conditions of increased concentrations of Al3+ or Si in solution (labeled as either “excess Si”
or “excess Al”), there is significant deviation from
the main data sets, in which no additional Al or Si was present in
the experiment (labeled as “stoichiometric”). As mentioned
before, these results provide striking evidence that the chemical
affinity is not a unique independent variable for the description
of the rate dissolution as equilibrium is approached.

Figure 15 Comparison of the proposed
model with the data of Gautier et al.24 for the dissolution of K-feldspar at 150 °C
and pH 9. The data are represented by circles and the model by squares.
The values of the parameters in eq 39 are as follows: k1, 2.888 × 10–12 mol/cm2 s; K, 1.29 ×
10–13; k2, 1.10 ×
1010 L/mol; k3, 1.14 ×
106 L4/mol4.

The values for the model are shown in Figure 15 as squares. This figure indicates that
the model is a good description of the data, both for the data when
the concentrations of Al and Si are equal (stoichiometric) and when
either Al or Si is in excess. The goodness of fit of the model to
the experimental data is shown in Figure 16. This plot indicates that the model is
a good description of the data.

Figure 16 Goodness of fit of the proposed model,
given by eq 39, with
the data of Gautier et al.24R2 = 0.936.

Although the parameters k2 and k3 for the data of Oelkers et al.22 for albite suggest that the partial reaction
for aluminum reaches equilibrium at concentrations of aluminum lower
than those of silica, the data of Gaultier et al.24 for K-feldspar suggest the opposite, that is, the partial
reaction for silica reaches equilibrium at concentrations of silica
lower than those of aluminum. This difference in the behavior of the
reverse reactions under different conditions explains the differences
seen in the rate behavior of these minerals.

The analysis of
the data for albite and K-feldspar is significant.
It demonstrates that the model can describe the dissolution of (seemingly)
more complex solids than NaCl. It also demonstrates a prime contention
of this study, that is, the chemical affinity is not the correct independent
variable for the discussion of the approach to equilibrium of dissolution
reactions. This is not a fault of irreversible thermodynamics, but
rather the incorrect analysis of dissolution reactions. Dissolution
reactions occur as partial reactions, each of which has its own equilibrium
conditions. These partial reactions are coupled due to their contribution
to and dependence on the surface potential difference. Failing to
account for the correct reaction mechanism makes these reactions appear
more complicated than they really are.

Possibility of Partial
Equilibrium
The possibility
exists that one of the partial reactions reaches equilibrium at concentrations
lower than the other. This situation is referred to as partial equilibrium.
For example, partial equilibrium can occur if the concentration of
M+ in solutions is close to its equilibrium value and the
concentration of A– is solution is still sufficiently
far from its equilibrium value, as shown in eqs 40 and 41. 40   41  The derivation of the rate equation for this
situation yields eq 42, which cannot be related to the equilibrium of the overall reaction
because the overall reaction is not at equilibrium. At the same time,
the overall reaction is not fully under reaction control either. Thus, eq 42 describes a situation
unique to dissolution (and crystallization) reactions,7 which is termed partial equilibrium. 42  Obviously,
if the partial reaction for the
A– component reaches equilibrium and that for the
M+ component is still reaction controlled, partial equilibrium
due to A– holds, and eq 43 applies. 43  This feature of partial equilibrium is unique
to the proposed theory of dissolution. Partial equilibrium is significant
because it represents an unexpected thermodynamic constraint on the
rate of reaction that is not anticipated by thermodynamic considerations
of the overall reaction. The effect of the partial equilibrium constraint
is illustrated in Figure 17. In this calculation, the concentration of HtAt–1 is sufficiently
low that the overall reaction is far from equilibrium and ostensibly
under reaction control. In other words, Q/K for the overall reaction is much less than 1. However,
the partial equilibrium for eq 42 is dependent only on the concentration of M+,
and increasing the concentration of M+ limits the overall
rate of reaction, as indicated by eq 42. This limitation might reduce the rate by several
orders of magnitude.

Figure 17 Reduction in the rate of dissolution as a function of
the concentration
of M+ in solution. The reaction is ostensibly under reaction
control, but is neither under reaction control nor equilibrium constraint
for the entire reaction.

It is emphasized that this situation is unique to the proposed
model for the dissolution of solids (and incidentally for crystallization
reactions7). One of the partial reactions
(see eqs 11–13) that comprise
the overall reaction is at equilibrium, whereas the others are not.
This is not the same as saying that the overall reaction is between
reaction control and thermodynamic constraint.

Such an unexpected
constraint on the rate of reaction might be
the reason for several unexplained phenomena in dissolution sciences.
Industrial experience with the dissolution of CuS in sulfate solutions
has shown that the rate is adversely affected by high concentrations
of Cu2+ in solution. This cannot be due to an equilibrium
constraint because no S2– is present in the solution
as it is all oxidized to sulfate. However, it can be due to partial
equilibrium, as indicated in eqs 40 and 41.

A long-standing
question in geochemistry that has persistently
resisted the efforts of researchers concerns the difference between
the rate of weathering measured in the laboratory and in the field.
Rates measured in the field are significantly lower than those measured
in the laboratory.30 The reason for this
discrepancy may be that one of the partial reactions is at equilibrium
in the field, exerting a partial thermodynamic constraint on the rate
of dissolution that is unexpected by experiments in the laboratory
designed to test the thermodynamics of the overall reaction. Such
a reduction in rate might not be recognized as being a result of partial
equilibrium and hence the long-standing difficulties experienced with
resolving this question.

Conclusions
In dissolution sciences,
the reverse reaction is frequently treated
using chemical affinity or saturation state, in accordance with the
concepts of thermodynamics. However, the chemical affinity for the
overall reaction is clearly not a unique independent variable, as
shown by the experimental data shown in Figures 13 and 15. There is
a paucity of ideas to account for this. As a result, arbitrary parameters
and functional forms without theoretical backing have been proposed.
In this study, we have clearly shown that this lack of correspondence
is not due to a failure of irreversible thermodynamics, but due to
the failure to recognize that dissolution occurs as the separate removal
of ions of different charge from the surface. Dissolution occurs in
separate parallel partial reactions for the removal of cationic and
anionic material from the surface of the solid that are coupled electrically
to one another. These partial reactions might approach equilibrium
separately, called partial equilibrium, a situation which causes the
failure of the approaches based on chemical affinity or saturation
state. This novel proposal is shown to describe the experimental data
for the dissolution of NaCl (halite), CaCO3, ZnS, NaAlSi3O8 (albite), and KAlSi3O8 (K-feldspar) as equilibrium is approached. The possibility of partial
equilibrium is a unique feature of the proposed mechanism. Partial
equilibrium may be the primary reason for the persistent problem of
the difference between measurements of laboratory and field rates
of chemical weathering and for some industrial observations.

Computational
Methods
The method used in this paper is to compare the proposed
theoretical
model with sources of data from peer-reviewed published sources. The
sources of data are as follows: data for halite (NaCl) from Alkattan
et al.;15 data for albite (NaAlSi3O8) from Burch et al.,21 Oelkers
and Schott,22 and Hellmann and Tisserand;23 and finally data for K-feldspar from Gautier
et al.24

The functional form of the
kinetic expression that is here is nonlinear.
The parameters are estimated by minimizing the sum of squared differences, χ2, given by eq 44.31 44  The symbol yi is the data point at the coordinate xi and y is the predicted
value at that same point given the parameters a0 ... aM–1. There are N data points and M parameters. The minimization is performed iteratively, using a numerical
minimization routine and implemented in Excel.

Appendix 1
Brantley32 and
Crundwell1 have reviewed much of the literature
on dissolution reactions.
These models can be divided into the following categories: (i) the
adsorption model, initially proposed by Warren and Devuyst,33 (ii) the surface complexation model,34,35 and (iii) the precursor model (a special version of the surface
complexation model).22 Crundwell1,6 briefly highlighted the main shortfalls of these models as follows.
The adsorption model does not predict orders that are close to one-half
unless isotherms with arbitrarily adjustable parameters are used.
The surface complexation model posits that the rate of dissolution
is proportional to the concentration of a species on the surface,
which needs to be raised to an arbitrary power to produce the observed
dependence on H+ ions. Recognizing this shortfall, the
precursor model assumes that prior to the formation of the surface
complex, a precursor species forms. Unfortunately, Oelkers et al.22 made the fundamental mistake of using fractional
stoichiometry in an elementary reaction to obtain the required fractional
orders of reaction. This is a fundamental error in chemical kinetics.
A true mechanism in chemical kinetics is made up of elementary reactions
whose stoichiometric coefficients must be whole numbers by the principle
of molecularity and whose orders of reactions match these stoichiometric
numbers. These requirements stem from the kinetic law of mass action
dating back to Guldberg and Waage in 1867.38

The author
declares no competing financial interest.

Nomenclature
aiactivity of the ith ion, unitless

Achemical
affinity,
kJ/mol

k⃖+, k⃖–rate constants for deposition of
ions onto the surface, mol/s m2

k⃗+, k⃗–rate constants for removal of ions
from the surface, mol/s m2

n+, n–surface concentrations of cations
and anions, respectively, mol/m2

na, ncsurface concentrations of cationic and
anionic vacancies, respectively, mol/m2

ratenet rate of dissolution, mol/m2 s

r⃗, r⃖rates of forward and reverse
reactions, respectively,
mol/m2 s

r+, r–net rates of cation and anion deposition
onto the surface, respectively, mol/s m2

Cddifferential
capacity of the Stern layer, F/m2

FFaraday’s
constant, C/mol

Kequilibrium constant
for the overall reaction, unitless

Kspsolubility
product, unitless

MAsalt composed of cations and anions
of equal charge

Qactivity quotient

Runiversal gas constant,
J/mol K

Tabsolute temperature,
K

tstoichiometric coefficient
with respect to H+

yFΔϕ/2RT

ν+, ν–charge numbers on cation
and anion, respectively, unitless

σexcess surface charge, C/m2

ωaverage stoichiometric
number,
unitless

[...]concentration
in solution, mol/m3, or activity

Δϕpotential difference
across Helmholtz/Stern layer, V

≡MM site on the solid surface

≡AA site on the solid
surface

≡+cationic vacancy
on surface created by removal of anionic material

≡–anionic
vacancy on surface created by removal of cationic material
==== Refs
References
Crundwell F. K. 
The Mechanism
of Dissolution of Minerals in Acidic and Alkaline Solutions: Part
I – A New Theory of Non-Oxidation Dissolution . Hydrometallurgy 
2014 , 149 , 252 –264 . 10.1016/j.hydromet.2014.06.009 .
Crundwell F. K. 
The Mechanism
of Dissolution of Minerals in Acidic and Alkaline Solutions: Part
II – Application to silicates . Hydrometallurgy 
2014 , 149 , 265 –275 . 10.1016/j.hydromet.2014.07.003 .
Crundwell F. K. 
The Mechanism
of Dissolution of Minerals in Acidic and Alkaline Solutions: Part
III – Application to oxides and sulfides . Hydrometallurgy 
2014 , 149 , 71 –81 . 10.1016/j.hydromet.2014.06.008 .
Crundwell F. K. 
The mechanism
of dissolution of minerals in acidic and alkaline solutions: Part
IV – Equilibrium and near equilibrium behaviour . Hydrometallurgy 
2015 , 153 , 46 –57 . 10.1016/j.hydromet.2015.01.012 .
Crundwell F. K. 
The mechanism
of dissolution of minerals in acidic and alkaline solutions: Part
V – Surface charge and zeta potential . Hydrometallurgy 
2016 , 161 , 174 –184 . 10.1016/j.hydromet.2016.01.031 .
Crundwell F. K. 
The Mechanism
of Dissolution of Minerals in Acidic and Alkaline Solutions: Part
VI – A molecular Viewpoint . Hydrometallurgy 
2016 , 161 , 34 –44 . 10.1016/j.hydromet.2016.01.011 .
Crundwell F. K. 
Concerning
the influence of surface charge on the growth of crystal surfaces . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2016 , 16 , 5877 –5886 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.6b00939 .
Prigogine I. ; Outer P. ; Herbo C. L. 
Affinity and reaction rate close
to equilibrium . J. Phys. Chem. 
1948 , 52 , 321 –331 . 10.1021/j150458a004 .
Prigogine I. ; Kondepudi D.  Modern Thermodynamics.
From Heat Engines to Dissipative Structures ; Wiley : New York , 1999 .
Helgeson H. C. ; Murphy W. M. ; Aagaard R. 
Thermodynamic
and kinetic constraints
on reaction rates among minerals and aqueous solutions. II. Rate constants,
effective surface area, and the hydrolysis of feldspar . Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 
1984 , 48 , 2405 –2432 . 10.1016/0016-7037(84)90294-1 .
Pekař M. 
Affinity and
reaction rates: Reconsideration of theoretical background and modelling
results . Z. Naturforsch., A: Phys. Sci. 
2009 , 64 , 289 –299 . 10.1515/zna-2009-5-602 .
Boudart M. 
Thermodynamic
and chemical coupling of chain and catalytic reactions . J. Phys. Chem. 
1983 , 87 , 2786 –2789 . 10.1021/j100238a018 .
Lengyel S. 
Chemical kinetics
and thermodynamics. A history of their relationship . Comput. Math. Appl. 
1989 , 17 , 443 –455 . 10.1016/0898-1221(89)90173-9 .
Lengyel S. 
Deduction
of the Guldberg–Waage mass action law from Gyarmati’s
governing principle of dissipative processes . J. Chem. Phys. 
1988 , 88 , 1617 –1621 . 10.1063/1.454140 .
Alkattan M. ; Oelkers E. H. ; Dandurand J.-L. ; Schott J. 
Experimental studies
of halite dissolution kinetics, 1 The effect of saturation state and
the presence of trace metals . Chem. Geol. 
1997 , 137 , 201 –219 . 10.1016/S0009-2541(96)00164-7 .
Schott J. ; Pokrovsky O. S. ; Oelkers E. H. 
The link between mineral dissolution/precipitation
kinetics and solution chemistry . Rev. Mineral.
Geochem. 
2009 , 70 , 207 –258 . 10.2138/rmg.2009.70.6 .
Levchencko V. V. ; Fleming R. ; Qian H. ; Beard D.
A.  An Annotated English
Translation of “Kinetics of Stationary Reactions  [Temkin M. I.  , Dolk.
Akad. Nauk. SSSR 1963 , 152 , 156 ]. https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1001/1001.2861.pdf.
Locker L. D. ; deBruyn P. L. 
The kinetics of
the dissolution of II–VI semiconductor
compounds in non-oxidizing acids . J. Electrochem.
Soc. 
1969 , 116 , 1659 –1665 . 10.1149/1.2411654 .
Crundwell F. K. ; Verbaan B. 
Kinetics of the non-oxidative
dissolution of sphalerite
(zinc sulphide) . Hydrometallurgy 
1987 , 17 , 369 –384 . 10.1016/0304-386X(87)90065-X .
Sjöberg E. L. 
A fundamental
equation for calcite dissolution kinetics . Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta 
1976 , 40 , 441 –447 . 10.1016/0016-7037(76)90009-0 .
Burch T. E. ; Nagy K. L. ; Lasaga A. C. 
Free energy
dependence of albite
dissolution kinetics at 80 °C and pH 8.8 . Chem. Geol. 
1993 , 105 , 137 –162 . 10.1016/0009-2541(93)90123-Z .
Oelkers E. H. ; Schott J. ; Devidal J.-L. 
The effect
of aluminium, pH, and
chemical affinity on the rates of aluminosilicate dissolution rates . Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 
1994 , 58 , 2011 –2024 . 10.1016/0016-7037(94)90281-X .
Hellmann R. ; Tisserand D. 
Dissolution kinetics as a function
of the Gibbs free
energy of reaction: an experimental study based on albite feldspar . Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 
2006 , 70 , 364 –383 . 10.1016/j.gca.2005.10.007 .
Gautier J.-M. ; Oelkers E. H. ; Schott J. 
Experimental study
of K-feldspar
dissolution rates as a function of chemical affinity at 150 °C
and pH 9 . Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 
1994 , 58 , 4549 –4560 . 10.1016/0016-7037(94)90190-2 .
Crundwell F. K. 
On the
mechanism of flotation of oxides and silicates . Miner. Eng. 
2016 , 95 , 185 –196 . 10.1016/j.mineng.2016.06.017 .
Bard A. J. ; Faulkner L. R.  Electrochemical Methods:
Fundamentals and Applications ; John Wiley
and Sons : New York , 1980  (see eqs 3.3.3 and 3.3.4 on p 95).
Crundwell F. K. 
The mechanism
of the dissolution of the feldspars: Part I. Dissolution at conditions
far from equilibrium . Hydrometallurgy 
2015 , 151 , 151 –162 . 10.1016/j.hydromet.2014.10.006 .
Crundwell F. K. 
The mechanism
of the dissolution of the feldspars: Part II. Dissolution at conditions
close to equilibrium . Hydrometallurgy 
2015 , 151 , 163 –171 . 10.1016/j.hydromet.2014.10.004 .
Dietzel M. 
Dissolution
of silicates and the stability of polysilicic acid . Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 
2000 , 64 , 3275 –3281 . 10.1016/S0016-7037(00)00426-9 .
Velbel M. A. 
Effect
of chemical affinity on feldspar hydrolysis rates in two natural weathering
systems . Chem. Geol. 
1989 , 78 , 245 –253 . 10.1016/0009-2541(89)90061-2 .
Press W. H. ; Teukolsky S. A. ; Vetterling W. T. ; Flannery B. P.  . Numerical Recipes:
The Art of Scientific Computing ; Cambridge
University Press : 2007 .
Brantley S. L.  Kinetics of
Mineral Dissolution . In Kinetics of Water–Rock
Interaction ; Brantley S. , Kubicki J. , White A.  , Eds.; Springer : New York , 2008 .
Warren I. H. ; Devuyst E.   In Leaching of Oxide ; Evans D. I. J. , Shoemaker R. S.  , Eds.; International
Symposium on Hydrometallurgy, Chicago; AIME : NY , 1973 ; pp 229 –264 .
Furrer G. ; Stumm W. 
The coordination chemistry of weathering: I. Dissolution kinetics
of δ-Al2O3 and BeO . Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 
1986 , 50 , 1847 –1860 . 10.1016/0016-7037(86)90243-7 .
Wieland E. ; Wehrli B. ; Stumm W. 
The coordination chemistry of weathering:
III. A generalization in the dissolution rates of minerals . Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 
1988 , 52 , 1969 –1981 . 10.1016/0016-7037(88)90178-0 .
Verbaan B.  A Kinetic Study of the
Dissolution of Natural and Synthetic Sphalerite in Aqueous Sulphuric
Acid and Acidic Ferric Sulphate Media ; University
of Natal : Durban , 1977 .
Crundwell F. K. 
On the
mechanism of the dissolution of quartz and silica in aqueous solutions . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 1116 –1127 . 10.1021/acsomega.7b00019 .31457494 
Guldberg C. M. ; Waage P.  Études sur les
Affinités Chimiques ; Brøgger
et Christie : Christiania , 1867  cited in ref 13.
Miller J. D. ; Yalamanchili M. R. ; Kellar J. J. 
Surface charge of alkali halide particles
as determined by laser-Doppler electrophoresis . Langmuir 
1992 , 8 , 1464 –1469 . 10.1021/la00041a036 .
Roman R. J. ; Fuerstenau M. C. ; Seidel D. C. 
Mechanisms of soluble salt flotation. Part I . Trans. AIME 
1968 , 241 , 56 –64 .

