
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145996910.1021/acsomega.9b00304ArticleGreen Nanotechnology-Driven Drug Delivery Assemblies Kanwar Rohini Rathee Jyoti Salunke Deepak B. Mehta Surinder K. *Department of Chemistry and
Center of Advanced Studies in Chemistry, Panjab University, Chandigarh U.T. 160014, India* E-mail: skmehta@pu.ac.in.22 05 2019 31 05 2019 4 5 8804 8815 07 02 2019 09 05 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Green nanotechnology incorporates
the principles of green chemistry
and green engineering to fabricate innocuous and eco-friendly nanoassemblies
to combat the problems affecting the human health or environment.
Subsequently, amalgamation of green nanotechnology with drug delivery
area has actually commenced a new realm of “green nanomedicine”.
The burgeoning demand for green nanotechnology-driven drug delivery
systems has led to the development of different types of delivery
devices, like inorganic (metallic) nanoparticles, quantum dots, organic
polymeric nanoparticles, mesoporous silica nanoparticles, dendrimers,
nanostructured lipid carriers, solid lipid nanoparticles, etc. The
present article deals with a brief account of delivery devices produced
from green methods and describes site-specific drug delivery systems
(including their pros and cons) and their relevance in the field of
green nanomedicine.

document-id-old-9ao9b00304document-id-new-14ao-2019-003047ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Drug delivery systems
(DDS) are extensively studied and proliferated
to ameliorate the efficacy and administration of active pharmaceutical
compounds, such as drugs, vaccines, antibodies, enzymes, peptides,
proteins, etc.1 The exigency to develop
an advanced type of DDS lies in the limitations associated with conventional
DDS (emulsions, suspensions, and solutions), e.g., first pass effect,
instability, intolerance, fluctuations in plasma drug levels, no sustained
effect, limited effectiveness, lack of selectivity, poor bioavailability,
high dosage, etc.2,3 To achieve targeted delivery and
to avoid rapid degradation of drugs or protection from clearance,
a plethora of controlled DDS have been developed. During the years
1950–1980, the first generation of DDS was developed, dedicated
toward transdermal and orally sustained release systems. However,
between 1980 and 2010, the second generation (2G) of DDS came into
being, which majorly focused on green nanotechnology.4 The third generation (from 2010) of DDS will have to be
advanced much beyond 2G to overcome both physiochemical (poor water
solubility, controlled drug release kinetics) and biological (specific
target site delivery) barriers with the help of nontoxic excipients.

“Nanotechnology” is the term coined by Taniguchi
in 1974, but its conceptual foundation was laid down by the Nobel
laureate Richard Feynman in his well-known lecture “There’s
Plenty of Room at the Bottom” on Dec 29, 1959. It involves
manipulation, reduction, and fabrication of materials on a nanoscale
with dimensions between 1 and 100 nm and characteristic properties,
like improved stability, good strength, cost effectiveness, biocompatibility,
definite and specific targeting, etc. It is predominantly the very
small size and a large surface-to-volume ratio of nanoparticles (NPs)
that accounts for significant differences in their chemical and physical
properties. The importance of exploiting NPs as potent DDS (for the
prevention and therapy of different diseases) resides in their improved
bioavailability; controlled and sustained drug release; high drug
loading capacity; prolonged circulation time; enhanced intracellular
penetration and targeted delivery to specific sites or organs; protection
of the active ingredient against physiological pH, enzymes, and moisture;
usage of various ways of administration, including parenteral, oral,
nasal, intraocular; and many more.5

To date, a variety of nanocarriers, such as metal/metal oxide NPs,
nonmetal NPs, quantum dots, polymeric NPs, silica NPs, carbon nanomaterials,
liposomes, dendrimers, nanostructured lipid carriers, solid lipid
nanoparticles, etc., have been designed to carry diverse molecules,
such as drugs, peptides and proteins, DNA/RNA, antibodies, etc.5Figure 1 shows the structures of different nanovectors and types of
pharmaceutical ingredients that can be efficiently targeted and delivered.

Figure 1 Structures
of different assemblies of colloidal systems designed
to carry diverse molecules, such as drugs, enzymes, peptides, proteins,
DNA, etc.

In the light of enhancing the
quality of NPs for making them application
specific with a sustained process of production, it became a prerequisite
to synthesize the NPs using a green approach by taking into account
the 12 principles of green chemistry.6 The
green synthesis employs simple, cost-effective, eco-friendly, and
readily available raw materials, with no harmful chemicals, no toxic
by-products, and less steps in the procedure. The present article
provides a succinct overview of different nanovectors (because of
their unique properties, such as biocompatibility, biodegradability,
amended cellular uptake, long shelf life with minimum drug loss, and
minute toxicity) employed in drug delivery applications to address
issues associated with traditional dosage forms in recent years. A
brief account of NPs (namely, inorganic and organic NPs) has been
outlined ahead, including their green synthesis and drug delivery
applications.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Drifting from Classical to Greener Methods
for Nanomaterial Synthesis
Over past decades, NPs have been
synthesized using nongreen methods, the prominent ones being the chemical
methods, which frequently employed hazardous chemicals and engendered
serious concerns due to their toxicity. In traditional chemical methods,
reducing and stabilizing agents were exploited for the reduction of
metal ions and to prevent undesired agglomeration of produced NPs,
respectively, but being bio-incompatible, they pose a threat to the
environment. In the literature,7−10 classic cases have been documented that frequently
report on the use of harmful reducing agents for the fabrication of
silver (Ag), gold (Au), palladium (Pd), copper (Cu), and other NPs.7

Dhas and co-workers8 synthesized Cu NPs using thermal reduction method by reducing copper(II)
hydrazine carboxylate in an aqueous solution. The fabrication of Ag
NPs was carried out in micellar solutions using organic solvents and
toxic surfactants. Chou et al.9 formulated
spherical Ag NPs by chemical reduction method using formaldehyde as
the reducing agent. Nickel and co-workers10 formulated Ag colloids of size 40–70 nm showcasing long-term
stability in the presence of hydrazine hydrochloride (as a reducing
agent).

Further, despite a great performance of quantum dots
prepared using
organometallic synthesis, the process requires the use of nongreen
conditions, high-energy input, and toxic chemicals [dimethylcadmium
(Cd(Me)2), hydrogen telluride (H2Te)], and harmful
solvents [tri-n-octylphosphine oxide, hexadecyl amine,
and trioctylphosphine as coordinating agents].11

Emulsion polymerization being one of the fastest
methods has been
often used for the preparation of polymeric NPs. Polyacrylamide NPs
fabricated by emulsion polymerization method involved the use of toxic
surfactants, monomers, initiators, and hazardous organic solvents
(toluene, chloroform, and n-hexane),12,13 which need to be subsequently eliminated from the NPs.14

In recent years,15,16 it was realized by the scientific
community that there is a need to develop simpler and greener methodologies
in which exceptionally dangerous and unstable antecedents can be replaced
by a nonpoisonous source. Moreover, to circumvent the negative drawbacks
associated with conventional chemicals, integrating NPs by green nanotechnology
seems to be a far better approach as it not only eliminates the use
of toxic and expensive chemicals but also consumes lesser energy and
generates environmentally benign products and by-products. For example,
for synthesizing Ag and Au NPs, green reducing agents, like citrate,
ascorbic acid, and many more, have been explored regularly. Even greener
synthesis of Ag NPs on the surface of mesoporous silica nanoparticles
have been reported17 using the simple and
environment-friendly approach with tyrosine as the reducing agent.
Palem et al.18 fabricated Rhubarb-based
Ag NPs and chitosan cross-inked Ag nanocomposites using eco-friendly
in situ synthesis in which active ingredients from the Rhubarb extract
were attached to Ag NPs. The greener methodology in the QD arrangement
includes the utilization of plant/microorganisms-interceded biosynthesis,
a field that is able to produce highly fluorescent QDs under ambient
conditions via a sustainable process.11 Moreover, the preparation of lipid NPs, such as solid lipid nanoparticles
and nanostructured lipid carriers, has been carried out using greener
methods, such as microemulsion, phase-inversion temperature, high-pressure
homogenization, ultrasonication, and many other methods.19−22 These environment-friendly approaches do not require the use of
organic solvents. Thus, synthesis of NPs utilizing natural constituents
and greener methods has become a superior alternative with numerous
advantages over classical chemical methods.

2.2 Inorganic
NPs for Drug Delivery Applications
2.2.1 Metallic
NPs and Their Oxides
Metallic
NPs are widely exploited in the arena of biomedical science and engineering
owing to their various advantages, such as the large surface area
that allows the guest molecules (drug, probes, or protein) to bind,
absorb, or entrap within the surface of the particles. Metallic NPs,
such as Ag, Au, platinum (Pt), Pd, Cu, selenium (Se), iron (Fe), and
their oxides, such as zinc oxide (ZnO), iron oxide (Fe2O3/Fe3O4), etc. have drawn significant
attention as potential DDS because of their emerging applications
in the field of clinical diagnostics and therapy.23 They are extensively used in the formulation of products
ranging from pharmaceuticals and cosmetics to medical, e.g., Au NPs
have been widely exploited in biomedical applications,24 disease diagnostics,25 and pharmaceuticals.26,27 Ag NPs have found widespread
utilization in wound dressings, pharmaceutics, and medical implant
coatings28,29 due to anti-inflammatory and antibacterial
properties that pace up the wound healing process. Pt and Pd NPs have
gained importance in biomedical30 and antibacterial
applications,31 respectively. Cu NPs32 and Se NPs33 are
largely utilized in antibacterial applications, cosmetic formulations,
and medical treatments. ZnO NPs have never ceased to interest the
researchers due to their good antimicrobial, antibacterial, and disinfectant
properties, which led to the development of dermatological substances
for curing inflammation and itching.34

Several methods, such as chemical methods, sol gel, and laser ablation,
are reported in the literature,35,36 for the synthesis of
metallic NPs, but these methods are not sustainable since the chemicals
(formaldehyde, toluene, and many more) used are highly reactive and
known to pose a potential threat to the environment. With the rising
demand of metallic NPs in nanomedicine, it has become even more important
to synthesize these NPs using benign, reliable, and environment-friendly
green methods. There exist several routes for the synthesis of metal/metal
oxide NPs from their corresponding metal salts. The approaches used
for the synthesis of metallic NPs mainly involves the following: (a)
top-down approach (NPs are formed by size reduction from a suitable
starting material) and (b) bottom-up approach (NPs are synthesized
from the smaller things, and the nanostructured building blocks of
NPs are formed at the initial stage that further leads to the formation
of final NPs).37

Metallic NPs have
been studied as efficient pharmaceutical drug
carriers for more than 30 years to improve the antitumor efficiency.
Chen et al.38 fabricated methotrexate (MTX,
a first-generation anticancer drug)-loaded Au NPs and evaluated the
anticancer effect of the drug in Lewis lung carcinoma (LL2) and verified
that the anticancer efficiency of MTX-Au NPs in LL2 cells was higher
(more than 17-fold sensitive) than that of the free MTX drug solution.

Au NPs were also prepared by Bhumkar et al.26 for the transmucosal delivery of insulin drug and demonstrated
a significant reduction of the blood glucose level via a transmucosal
route in diabetic rats. In addition, the efficiency of functionalized
3-mercaptopropionic acid-capped Au NPs in drug delivery against K562/ADM
cells was evaluated by Li and co-workers.39

Thirumurugan et al.40 reported
the biological
synthesis of noble-metal NPs (Pt and Ag NPs) using curry leaves and
neem extracts. Doxorubicin (DOX), an anticancer drug, was encapsulated
in synthesized NPs and its in vitro study was assessed against MCF-7
cell lines. On comparison of DOX-coated Ag NPs with the DOX-coated
Pt NPs in terms of the percent inhibition against the MCF-7 cell line,
a better inhibition value (IC50) was found for Ag NPs over
Pt NPs. The concentration-dependent toxicity of both the drug-coated
NPs in MCF-7 cell lines was observed.

Thambiraj et al.41 fabricated functionalized
Au NPs by the chemical reduction method (using sodium citrate as the
reducing and the capping agent) and obtained spherical shape NPs of
the size of 21.75 nm. Docetaxel (DTX), an anticancer drug, was loaded
in Au NPs, and cell culture studies were carried out using A549 cell
line (lung cancer cell line) to evaluate the cytotoxicity effect of
Au NPs and DTX at different intervals of time and at different concentrations.
Excellent cell death by Au NPs was achieved as compared with DTX.

Mehnath et al.42 formulated poly(biscarboxyphenoxy)phosphazene-stabilized
Au NPs for entrapment of Camptotheca (CPT, a quinolone alkaloid),
and the release behavior of CPT as well as in vitro cytotoxicity effects
were studied toward human breast cancer cells. The results show that
the CPT@PCPP Au NPs were readily internalized by cancer cells owing
to a charge reversal behavior as compared to the CPT drug alone. After
internalization, the CPT released within the cytoplasm further enhanced
the therapeutic effect through intercellular binding to Topoisomerase-1
and showed antiproliferative activities with respect to MDA-MB-231
cells.

Polyethylene-glycolylated Au NPs conjugated with Arg-Gly-Asp
(RGD)
peptide were fabricated by Wu et al.43 with
the objective of targeting the cancer cells expressing RGD-binding
integrins like α5 and αv integrins. These cells that were
subjected to radiation treatment showed much lower invasion in the
presence of Au NPs and suggested that the use of the integrin-tagged
Au NPs could be a potential clinical route to arrest breast cancer
development.

Banu et al.44 focused
on Phoenix dactylifera pollen extract
to synthesize
Ag and Au NPs and screened their toxicity on MCF-7 breast cancer cell
line and showed signs of apoptotic cell death. A significant level
of dose-dependent cytotoxicity of metallic NPs as compared with pollen
extract (no cytotoxicity) was shown due to the presence of anticancerous
bioflavonoids on the surface of metallic NPs. Wang et al.45 synthesized cobalt ferrite (CoFe2O4) in the presence of l-cysteine (Lys) for encapsulation
of DOX that exhibited a superb drug loading capacity and pH-sensitive
drug release behavior. 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay results showed an insignificant level of cytotoxicity
of Lys-coated-CoFe2O4 NPs over 24 h, making
them a suitable carrier for drug delivery applications.

Metallic
NPs prepared using green methods are being used to act
as a potential DDS owing to their chemical surface properties and
different morphology in the field of pharmaceutics.

2.2.2 Quantum Dots (QDs)
QDs have proven
themselves as an indispensable tool in the field of biological imaging,
sensing, and detection, which has further encouraged scientists to
develop entities for translational and clinical research. Being potent
fluorescent probes, QDs are frequently employed in quantitative imaging
and detection.46 QDs with therapeutic functionalities
and assimilated targeting have become outstanding materials to study
the drug delivery in cells and small animals.

To date, a broad
range of QDs have been fabricated, such as carbon dots (C-QDs), silicon
QDs (Si-QDs), graphene QDs (G-QDs), nitrogen-doped QDs (N-QDs), Ag2Se, Ag2S, ZnS, InP, etc. because of their good
biocompatibility and excellent optical properties. Numerous drugs
have been effectively incorporated within QDs to deliver them at the
specific target site. Moreover, synthesis of QDs carried out by traditional
methods requires the use of heavy metal precursor and organic solvents
that pose a potential hazard to the atmosphere. In this field, the
only way to make the process “greener” is to adapt benign
synthetic approaches that include the use of environmentally renewable
raw materials as coordinating solvents, such as oleic acid, castor
oil, and olive oil.

Lee et al.47 fabricated
the DOX-loaded
green C-dots from cyanobacteria using an eco-friendly approach and
reported a good loading efficiency (95%). Upon in vitro and in vivo
delivery of DOX, the DOX-loaded C-QDs induced the death of MCF-7 and
HepG2 cancer cells as well as tumor cells of mice, showcasing the
improved anticancer efficiency of the drug-loaded QDs as compared
to that of the free DOX injection. The first exploration of mitochondria
as a drug delivery system in C-QDs for administration of the DOX showed
that mitochondria as carriers are compatible with the C-QDs (prepared
by the hydrothermal method) and preserve the properties of C-QDs.48 Moreover, the mitochondria delivery system not
only increased the retention time but also improved the C-QDs’
biodistribution in organs. The mitochondria-based approach to deliver
the DOX was found to be nontoxic, as mitochondria do not have the
bacterial virulence that could be dangerous to cancer patients. The
present pattern in the advancement of nanotheranostic platforms requires
the perfect nanomaterials to ought to have great fluorescence, higher
security, low poisonous quality, and be environmentally friendly.
Excellent magnetic and fluorescent properties of gallium, nitrogen,
sulfur, and gadolinium elements lead to the formation of magnetofluorescent
C-QDs (GdNS@C-QDs) that can be functionalized with folic acid for
targeting dual modal fluorescence/magnetic resonance imaging. DOX
was incorporated within the functionalized C-QDs and high entrapment
efficiency (>80%) with a pH-sensitive drug release was reported.49

Olerile and group50 fabricated paclitaxel
(PTX)-loaded CdTe/CdS/ZnS QDs by emulsion evaporation method, which
displayed a biphasic pattern of drug release with a 75% growth inhibition
rate and then exploited them in target detection of the H22 tumor.
Khodadadei et al.51 synthesized MTX-loaded
N-QDs (of size 10 nm) by the hydrothermal method (using urea as a
nitrogen source and pyrolysis of citric acid as a carbon source) and
used as an effective anticancer drug delivery system. By using the
hydrothermal technique, Fe3O4–Ag2O QD/cellulose nanofibers (of size 62.5 nm) for encapsulation
of two types of medicines (etoposide and methotrexate) were fabricated
by Fakhri et al.52 for anticancer application.
Drugs were found equally distributed on the surface and showed a slow
and steady release with the total amount of release of 78.94% for
etoposide and 63.84% for methotrexate. The QDs synthesized during
hydrothermal carbonization method exhibited attractive properties,
such as low cost and nontoxicity.

The effectiveness of 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU), an anticancer drug,
was increased by using a suitable nanocarrier system that targeted
the folate receptors of malignant tumor tissues. Yaghini et al.53 synthesized the Mn-ZnS QDs conjugated with folic
acid (FA) and chitosan (CS) biopolymer for the encapsulation of 5-FU.
The formed 5-FU@FACSMn/ZnS QDs showed the selective antitumor effect
in 4TI breast cancer cell line and MDA-MB231 breast cancer line. Thakur
et al.54 exploited the green chemistry
protocol for the fabrication of aqueous soluble G-QDs (of size 5 nm)
using one-pot microwave-assisted heating (cow milk as a precursor)
method followed by encapsulation of anticancer drug-Berberine hydrochloride
(BHC) for simultaneous imaging and drug delivery. Further, the theranostic
G-QD@Cys-BHC complex showed a higher cytotoxic effect on different
cancerous cell lines, such as 50% cell death obtained on MDA-MB-231
cell line and L929 cell line in 24 and 48 h, respectively. An eco-friendly
and green route was adopted by Sarkar et al.55 to fabricate C-QDs using aloe vera gel via the pathway of carbonization,
and its applicability in delivering vancomycin in presence or absence
of β-CD, aiming to eliminate its complicacy of poor absorption
in the gastrointestinal tract, was demonstrated. Fluorescent C-dots
were synthesized by hydrothermal method via pasteurized milk (as a
carbon source) that exhibited several advantages, such as good biocompatibility,
environment friendliness, small size, excitation-dependent fluorescence
property, and multifunctional groups (−NH2, −OH,
C=O, and COOH). Mehta and co-workers56 reported that the MTT assay of bare CQs and Lis-loaded C-QD nanoassembly
effectively targets the Hela cells whereas the bare C-QDs displayed
a significant survival rate of Hela cells, suggesting the biocompatibility
of the C-QDs.

As a potent imaging probe, QDs have played a significant
role in
in vitro drug release diagnostics and fundamental biology (due to
their flexible drug linking, tunable and uniform size, doping mechanisms,
and a large surface-to-volume ratio) that has supported new avenues
of research.

2.3 Organic Nanoparticles for
Drug Delivery Application
2.3.1 Polymeric Nanoparticles
(PNPs)
PNPs have
gained significant
attention owing to their unique optical, electrical, and optoelectrical
qualities, as well as interesting applications in biomedical sciences,
sensing, drug delivery, and many more. PNPs are the solid nanoparticulates
in the size range 10–1000 nm synthesized from the biodegradable
and biocompatible polymers.57 Preparation
of PNPs mainly includes two steps: (1) preparation of the NPs either
by gelation or polymerization of monomers and (2) preparation of emulsified
system (emulsions, microemulsion, and nanoemulsion). Commonly used
natural polymers exploited for the fabrication of the PNPs are gelatin,
chitosan, sodium alginate, albumin, and synthetic polymers, such as
polyactides, polyaniline, polyglycolides, poly(lactic-co-glycolides), polyorthoesters, polycaprolactone, poly(vinyl alchohol),
polyglutamic acid, poly(vinyl alcohol), poly(methyl methacrylate),
and many more.58 Polymers show a drastic
chemical and physical change in response to the physical stimuli (pH,
temperature), chemical stimuli (numerous signaling molecules), or
biological stimuli (enzyme) that makes them potent drug delivery vehicles
(Figure 2).

Figure 2 Description
of stimuli-responsive polymers and their responses.
Reproduced with permission from ref (41).

Green synthesis of PNPs is an area of intense scientific
and technological
interest. PNPs prepared using natural ingredient as a stabilizing
agent play an important role in preventing the agglomeration during
storage. Several environmental-friendly reagents (poly(ethylene glycol)
(PEG), poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) etc.) have been used in preparation
of PNPs to prevent aggregation in emulsion polymerization process.
Saini and co-workers59 demonstrated that
surface alteration of PNPs with hydrophilic polymers, like poly(ethylene
glycol) (PEG), poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), and Tween 80, increases
the prolonged circular time of the drug and decreases the opsonization
of drug in the body. Electroresponsive polymers have been studied
as a smart nanomaterial for drug delivery as they can shrink, swell,
or bend in response to the electric field.60 A novel acid responsive PNP, i.e., Bi (PEG-PLA) Pt(IV), was fabricated
by using ring-opening polymerization (ROP with drug cisplatin) method
by which cisplatin analogue prodrug was covalently linked to the hydrophobic
segment of two PEG–PLA copolymer chains through the pH-sensitive
hydrazone bond for effective drug delivery applications.61

In the field of cancer nanotechnology,
a variety of polymeric micelle-based
anticancer drugs have been well-known to attain high and selective
accumulation at the tumor site. Du et al.62 fabricated a drug conjugated nanoparticulate system (pH sensitive)
to deliver the anticancer drug DOX. The polymeric drug carrier responds
to the tumor by intracellular and extracellular pH gradients by chemically
defined mechanisms that simultaneously promote drug accumulation at
the tumor site through the enhanced permeability and retention effect
and enhance the drug delivery efficiency.

Nystatin (an antifungal
drug), having a very short time at the
target tissue, was incorporated in the bio adhesive PNPs by Roque
et al.63 and obtained a high adhesion capacity
to oral mucosa and a prolonged drug release profile in the in vitro
and in vivo studies, respectively. A modified version of the solvent
evaporation method for the preparation of d,l-lactide/glycolide
NPs for delivery of water soluble and insoluble drugs (5-fluorouracil
and Indomethacin) prospectively was developed by Niwa et al.64 The entrapment efficiency of formed submicron
size PNPs for indomethacin was found to be up to 75% with an initial
burst release profile. In the region of multidrug resistance in chemotherapy,
triblock copolymer of poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(l-lysine)-block-polyaspartyl(N-(N′,N′-diisopropylaminoethyl))
(PEG-PLL-PAsp) was synthesized for the first time to enable the code
delivery of BCL-2siRNA and DOX in hepatic carcinoma therapy. As obtained
in in vitro and in vivo studies, the nanosized complex regulates the
antiapoptotic gene (BCL-2) to the cells and finally, obtains a synergistic
anticancer effect using PNPs.65

2.3.2 Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles (MSNs)
MSNs are usually
proposed as drug delivery matrices recognized
by their morphological characterstics, such as pore volume, large
surface area, and easily modifiable surface properties. The most common
mesoporous silica material includes MCM-48, MCM-41, and SBA-15 with
the pore size of 2–10 nm, which have two/three-dimensional
cubic characteristic features.66 Initially,
Mann et al. reported the fabrication of MSNs; however, after the work
of Victor Lin, the term MSN became more popular.67 In 2001, for the first time, mesoporous silica material
MCM-41 was reported as a drug delivery system. Many hydrophobic drugs
have limited applications due to their poor water solubility, which
makes the adsorption of drug in the gastrointestinal tract poor. Zhang
and co-workers68 fabricated the MSNs and
reported an improved dissolution rate of telmisartan (TEL) as compared
to that of the crude TEL powder.

The channel in MSNs keeps the
drug within the pores in an amorphous/noncrystalline state that facilitates
the drug dissolution. Site-specific administration and long-term release
are prerequisite to achieve sustainable drug delivery in the body.
MSNs employed for sustained drug delivery have been divided into two
groups:(a) unmodified
silica materials (where
interaction with the drug molecules and functional group delays drug
dissolution and enables a sustained drug release) and

(b) modified silica NPs (includes the
regulated pore size).



Application of
nanomaterials in the era of plant sciences has been
extensively investigated to overcome the negative impact to environment
caused by the toxic solvents used in the preparation of the silica
nanoparticles. Qu et al.69 synthesized
the MSNs using nontoxic surfactants (didodecyldimethylammonium bromide
(DDAB) and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB)) and proved that
the drug release behavior is related to the size of particles, i.e.,
related to the pore channel length. Modification of MSNs with the
functional groups, such as −Cl, −NH2, −CN,
or −SH, or by polymers affects the rate of the drug release
profile. Chitosan (biodegradable and environment-friendly polymer)-functionalized
MSNs were developed by Sun and co-workers,70 and the ability of the chitosan to shrink (in an alkaline medium
and swell in an acidic medium) was shown to regulate the drug release
in a simulated gastrointestinal fluid. MSNs based on stimuli-responsive
controlled drug delivery systems were developed by applying controls
such as gatekeepers over the pore entrance due to which the drug cannot
escape out from silica carriers unless the carriers are exposed to
external stimuli (redox potential, temperature, and pH). The different
types of gatekeepers developed by researchers are shown in Figure 3. Type I gatekeepers
include solid NPs (ZnO, CdS, and Fe3O4) attached
by the covalent bond to the pore opening, type III are attached to
the pore openings by the covalent/noncovalent interactions, whereas
the linear molecule (type II) and multilayer (type IV) gatekeepers
are attached to the surface by covalent bonds or absorbed on it. Macrocyclic
β-cyclodextrin (β-CD)-capped MSN-based drug delivery systems
offer a typical pH-responsive sustained release.71

Figure 3 Different gatekeepers of MSNs on the pore outlets for stimuli-responsive
controlled drug delivery systems. Reproduced with permission from
ref (53).

Lidocaine, an anesthetic drug, has low bioavailability.
To overcome
this shortcoming, lidocaine was loaded into MCM-41 and amine-modified
MCM-41 (the inclusion complex) using various components (CTAB, tetraethyl
orthosilicate) by Nafisi et al.72 Higher
drug release and skin permeation were obtained for the functionalized
complex over pure lidocaine and lido/MSM41 that can be
attributed to the electrostatic interaction of positively charged
lido/MCM41-NH2 with the negatively charged skin
membrane cells. In addition, novel MSNs having the hierarchical sievelike
structure of NPs were synthesized by Gao and co-workers73 using the centrifugal method at room temperature.
The developed approach lead to the formation of MSNs of size 40–100
nm and a higher drug loading efficiency with a sustained release of
the DOX.

Methotrexate was loaded within the MSNs, a multifunctional
nanotheranostic
system based on MCM-41 and functionalized with peptides, by Farooq
et al.74 Titana-coated MSNs for improving
the bioavailability of sodium nitroprusside (SNP) were synthesized,
and the effect of coating was observed on the biocompatibility and
drug release profile. The MSNs were prepared by the surfactant template-directed
method at a rate of dilution of 0.08% per min over 2.5 h for TiMSN–SNP
conjugate (as compared with uncoated SNP).

Szewczyk et al.75 fabricated the amino-modified
MSNs as a potential bifunctional drug delivery system for cefazolin
(an antibiotic drug). The MSNs (SBA-15) were formed via the greener
sol–gel method, and further, the surface functionalization
was carried out by postgrafting synthesis and higher encapsulation
with a slow and sustained release over 7 days was demonstrated.

2.3.3 Dendrimers
Dendrimers derived their
name from the Greek word “dendron” meaning “reminiscent
of a tree”. Dendrimers are unimolecular, micellar nanostructures
of the size of around 10 nm, with a well-defined, highly branched,
three-dimensional symmetrical structure with a pattern resembling
a tree branching out from a central point. These are polymeric molecules
(having a compact spherical shape) consisting of three distinct architectural
regions: a focal core having two or more reactive groups, interior
layers of branched repeating units (generations) covalently attached
to the core, and a high density of terminal functional groups at the
periphery.76 To serve as potential drug
carriers in DDS, the above mentioned three domains can be tailored.
It is their branching and dendritic nature that facilitates the drug
encapsulation onto the outside surface of dendrimers despite their
small sized polymeric structure.77

Frequently used dendrimers in the drug delivery studies typically
incorporate one or more of the mentioned polymers: melamine, polyamidoamine
(PAMAM), poly(l-glutamic acid) (PG), polypropyleneimine,
polyethyleneimine, poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), chitin, etc. The drug
loading potential of the dendrimers can be increased by controlling
the association of the guest (drug) molecule with the terminal groups
of the dendrimers. Convergence and divergence are the two approaches
using which dendrimers can be synthesized.78 A divergent approach is also termed as an ascending approach that
involves construction of the dendrimers from the core and building
of the core toward the periphery using two basic operations. Most
often, the one-pot divergent approach is exploited to synthesize water
soluble, photoluminescent, biocompatible, and biodegradable “green”
bifunctional dendrimers like polyurea dendrimers synthesized in supercritical
carbon dioxide (scCO2). In contrast to the divergent synthesis,
the convergent method initiates at the periphery and proceeds toward
the core through one-to-one coupling of polymers. The dendritic assembly
formulated using the convergent approach is poly(aryl ether) framework,
also known as the Frechet-type framework. The modes responsible for
the interaction of the dendrimers with drugs are represented in Figure 4.

Figure 4 Different ways of drug
interaction: (a) physical entrapment of
drugs, (b) adsorption of drug molecules on the surface by intermolecular
interaction, and (c) conjugation of drug molecules to the surface
groups of dendrimer. Reproduced with permission from ref (60).

Wang et al.79,80 reported that the electrostatic
interaction occurs between the PAMAM dendrimers and the carboxyl group
of the ibuprofen (drug) and assessed that at pH 10.5, ibuprofen molecules
were attached with the PAMAM dendrimers, which results in the enhancement
of solubility of the drug. The covalent bonding of the dendrimers
to the terminal groups of the dendrimers can be done with the help
of chemical inserts, such as PEG, p-nitrobenzoic
acid, etc. Yang and co-workers81 reported
that penicillin V(XII) conjugation with the dendrimers occurs through
the ester and amide linkages via the PEG spacer. In addition, amide
linkage results in the amide bond stability and the ester linkage
between the drug and dendrimers provides the controlled release. Two
types of mechanisms are documented in the literature82 with regard to dendrimer drug delivery. On the basis of
the first mechanism, the in vivo cleavage of the covalent bond between
the dendrimers and drug in the presence of enzymes leads to drug release
whereas the second mechanism states that the drug release occurs due
to the alteration of physical conditions, like temperature and pH.

Ma et al.83 described the fabrication
of polyester dendrimers using the protocatechuic acid (as a repeating
unit), which could serve as an efficient anticancer drug delivery
vehicle. Similarly, Abedi-gaballu et al.84 prepared the PAMAM-based dendrimers, which exhibited higher potential
for the targeted cancer therapy. To overcome the poor rates of transcutaneous
delivery, PAMAM dendrimers were complexed with the drug (Ketoprofen,
Diflunisal), which improved the drug penetration through the skin.85 Further, PAMAM dendrimers were fabricated to
deliver dexamethasone (DEX) for the treatment of diabetic retinopathy
(DR). Formulations were assessed in terms of cell permeability and
cytotoxicity, and results showed that the anionic dendrimers have
no significant toxicity for human corneal cells in comparison with
the DEX solution alone at a concentration of 1 mg/mL.86 Du et al.87 synthesized the
hyaluronic acid (HA) and poly(lactide) (PLA) co-modified half-generation
PAMAM dendrimers by using the divergent method to enhance the delivery
of docetaxel. In this study, PLA was coupled with the hydroxyl group
within the core of the PAMAM and HA (ionic linear polysaccharides)
and used to protect the positive charge of the PAMAM that reduced
the toxicity and improved the bioavailability of the drug. Surface
modification of PAMAM dendrimers is one of the important steps to
reduce the hemolytic as well as cytotoxic nature of the PAMAM due
to presence of the positively charged amino groups. Modification of
the PAMAM by the natural or anionic functional groups prevents the
interaction of the PAMAM dendrimers with the biological membrane and
helps them to become nontoxic, biocompatible, and environment friendly.

2.4 Nanoparticles Based on Solid Lipids
2.4.1 Solid Lipid Nanoparticles (SLNs)
SLNs are at the forefront
of nanocarriers having numerous potential
applications in research and clinical medicine, drug delivery, etc.88 SLNs are termed as submicron colloidal carriers,
which are made up of a solid lipid core matrix stabilized in an aqueous
solution of emulsifier. The ability of the SLNs to encapsulate the
drugs within nanocarriers offers a new prototype (having unique size-dependent
properties) that can be used for secondary and tertiary levels of
drug targeting.89

In 1990, Gasco
and co-workers actively engaged in developing SLNs of the size range
10–1000 nm. The commonly exploited solid lipids for preparing
SLNs are triacylglycerols, acylglycerols, triglycerides, fatty acids,
and waxes. The lipophilic moiety of SLNs within the lipid matrix as
well as in nanoparticulate matrix provides protection to chemically
labile drugs.89 Owing to their large surface
area and small size, SLNs can be functionalized with ligands, antibodies,
moieties, and other functional groups to target the specific locations
or cells within the body.

For the first time, the SLNs were
employed to encapsulate the peptide
drugs (thymopentin,([D-Trp-6] LHRH)) by using the W/O/W microemulsion-based
method.90,91 Further, Ugazio and co-workers92 incorporated hydrophobic peptide using the w/o
microemulsion technique. SLNs consisting of the excipients stearic
acid, emulsifying wax, octadecyl alcohol, and cetyl palmitate were
synthesized and employed for the delivery of the anticancer drugs.
Baek et al.93 fabricated the surface-modified
PTX-loaded SLNs with hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin (to prevent
the oxidation of the lipids and solubilize the drugs) by using the
emulsification solvent evaporation method that showed an average size
of 251 nm with 71% loading capacity. Further, Pooja et al.94 prepared SLNs coated with wheat germ agglutinin
to improve the oral drug delivery of paclitaxel and studied the in
vitro anticancer activity against A549 lung cancer cells. SLNs coated
with the d-α-tocopherol poly(ethylene glycol) succinate
or Tween 80 were synthesized by the solvent diffusion method to enhance
the oral delivery of the DTX. In cardiovascular-related disorders,
SLNs have been used to increase the drug plasma concentration and
extend the circulation time in the body. Nimodipine-loaded SLNs were
synthesized using high-pressure homogenization method using poloxamer
188 (surfactant), soya lecithin (co surfactant), and palmitic acid
(lipid).95 The stability test displayed
no significant changes in the shape and polydispersity of SLNs for
3 months, and the oral bioavailability of nimodipine (8 mg/kg) was
found to be 2-fold greater as compared to that of free drug solution
in rats. Lipid-based nanosystems stand out due to their nontoxic,
biocompatible, and environment-friendly composition that includes
stearic acid, cetyl palmitate, glyceryl mono stearate, soya lecithin,
and many more.

Chitosan biopolymer has been widely used in the
pharmaceutical
field as it exhibits a number of interesting properties, such as greener nanotechnology, nontoxicity,
and biodegradability. Chitosan-coated SLNs were prepared by Zariwala
et al.96 to deliver iron supplements using
double emulsion solvent evaporation process (consists of stearic acid),
and particle sizes of a submicron range (300–500 nm) were obtained.
Iron adsorption was evaluated in vitro by using Caco-2 cell line on
which equal doses of iron formulations were added to determine intracellular
ferritin protein concentration. Results showed that the iron adsorption
from SLN-Fe (containing 589.98 ± 40.83 mg/mg cell protein) and
SLN–Fe–chitosan (containing 642.77 ± 29.67 mg/mg
cell protein) was found to be 13.42 and 24.9%, respectively, as compared
with ferrous sulfate.

SLNs functionalized with chitosan and
PEG polymers were prepared
by Matthias et al.97 using nanoprecipitation
method for the delivery of the PTX for lung tumor therapy. Coated
SLNs significantly decreased the in vitro inhibitory concentration
of PTX in M109-HiFR cells. Olmesartan medoxomil (a BCS class II drug)-loaded
SLNs were prepared by a hot homogenization process to increase their
oral bioavailability. The in vivo pharmakinetic studies revealed that
the olmesartan medoxomil-loaded SLNs showed a higher Cmax of 1610 mg/mL and increased the relative bioavailability
by almost 2.3-fold than the marketed formulation.98 Mehrad and co-workers99 reported
SLNs of size <220 nm with spherical morphology using microemulsification
method. They employed palmitic acid as the solid lipid and stabilized
them with a protein isolate for increasing the physiochemical stability
of β-carotene by encapsulating it in SLNs. Kanwar et al.100 formulated SLNs by solvent injection method
and achieved a high entrapment efficiency and loading efficiency for
antileprosy drugs, namely, rifampicin and dapsone. A lower toxicity
and optimal size stability of the prepared SLNs with a sustained release
was demonstrated.

2.4.2 Nanostructured Lipid
Carriers (NLCs)
NLCs are the second-generation lipid nanocarriers,
developed by Muller
et al.89 in the year 1999. NLCs comprise
a mixture of liquid lipid and solid lipid matrix (to create more imperfection
in the matrix of NLCs) stabilized in an aqueous surfactant solution.
NLCs were formulated to overcome the problems associated with the
first-generation SLNs by increasing the loading capacity and preventing
the drug expulsion (Figure 5). The lipidlike glyceryl dibehenate, glyceryl palmitostearate,
tripalmitin, and stearic acid (as solid lipids); caprylic/capric triglycerides,
vitamin E and derivatives, lauryl polyoxylglycerides, soya lecithin,
and squalene (liquid lipids); and polysorbates, poloxamers (188, 407),
macrogol-15-hydroxy stearate, and polyoxylcastor oil (as surfactants)
are generally used in the preparation of the NLCs.101,102 The NLCs can be used in the form of particulate by the intestine
and transferred to various organs of lymphatic systems. Drug can be
encapsulated within the NLCs and administered through different routes,
such as pulmonary (celecoxib, dexamethasone, and montelukast), oral
(etoposide, lovastatin, and spironolactone), intravenous (artemether,
bufadienolides, and β-elemene), and ocular (cyclosporine A,
flurbiprofen, ibuprofen, and oxofloxacin).103

Figure 5 Pictorial
differentiation of SLN and NLC structures, highlighting
the advantages of NLCs over SLNs. Reproduced with permission from
ref (82).

A number of physical methods (ultrasonication,
high-pressure homogenization,
supercritical fluid technique, and many more) with reasonable modification
in their methodology have been carried out for the controlled synthesis
of NPs owing to their energy requirements, less usage of hazardous
chemicals, and higher yield.104Figure 6 displays that the
absorption mechanisms of a drug from the NLCs can be elaborated stepwise
starting from degradation of lipid by enzymes within the gut that
further leads to the formation of micelles in bile salts.105 Beloqui et al.106 fabricated the saquinavir-loaded NLCs by a high-pressure homogenization
technique [Precirol ATO-5, (solid lipid), Miglyol 812 (liquid lipid),
Tween 80, and poloxamer 188 (as surfactants)] and showcased that dextran–protamine
coating significantly enhanced the permeability of saquinavir across
Caco-2 monolayers in comparison with the uncoated NPs.

Figure 6 Absorption mechanisms
of a drug from NLCs in the gastrointestinal
tract. Reproduced with permission from ref (83).

In another study, Khan et al.107 targeted
the tacrolimus-loaded NLCs by using capmul MCM C8 and compritol 888
ATO (lipid phase) for oral delivery and observed a slow and sustained
release in the body. Kaithwas et al.108 loaded olmesartan medoxomil (OLM, BCS class II drug) within the
NLCs and carried out its in vitro cellular uptake study and in vivo
pharmokinetic study. Results demonstrated that the cellular uptake
was 5.2-fold higher as compared to that of the free drug (when incubated
with Caco-2) cells and AUCtotal and Cmax values
obtained by the pharmacokinetic study of OLM-NLC were found to be
significantly higher than those with free drug suspension.

Fathi
et al.109 fabricated NLCs loaded
with Simvastatin (SIM, an antiperlipidemic drug) by emulsification
solvent evaporation method followed by ultrasonication, and in vivo
pharmodynamics and in vitro pharmokinetic studies were carried out.
Results showed a 4-fold increase in bioavailability as compared with
the SIM suspension in in vivo studies. Further, for ocular drug delivery
purposes, NLCs loaded with curcumin were synthesized by Lakhani and
co-workers110 using the hot emulsification
technique and NLCs of a particle size of 66 nm with a higher entrapment
efficiency (>96%) were obtained and further, their ex vivo trans
corneal
permeability was examined. The trans corneal permeation and the flux
of synthesized curcumin-loaded NLCs were found to be 2.5-fold higher
as compared with the curcumin-based suspension.

Moreover, the
potential of the NLC for antifungal delivery of voriconazole
(VOR) to deeper regions of the nail plate was shown by Rocha and co-workers.111 Results obtained demonstrated the high loading
capacity (74.52 ± 2.13%) of VOR-NLC, and the permeation data
established that the VOR amount extracted was similar for all formulations,
i.e., 2.42 ± 0.26 μg/cm2 (unloaded VOR), 2.52
± 0.36 μg/cm2 (VOR-NLC), and 2.41 ± 0.60
μg/cm2 (VOR-NLC-Ur). Successive extractions showed
that the amount of VOR retained in deeper regions was significantly
higher for VOR-NLC, or VOR-NLC-Ur demonstrated the potential of NLCs
as a topical delivery system. Further, Kelidari et al.112 prepared the fluconazole-loaded NLCs using
the ultrasonication method and investigated the efficiency of the
optimized formulation on Candida species. NLCs having
spherical morphology of the size of 126.4 nm and an entrapment efficiency
of 93.6% were reported. Oral bioavailability of an antipsychotic drug
Olanzapine (BCS class II drug) was enhanced through NLCs prepared
by Jawahar et al.113 NLCs were prepared
by using the solvent diffusion method consisting of olanzapine, stearyl
amine, soya lecithin, glyceryl tripalmitate, and castor oil in the
organic phase and Pluronic F-68 in the aqueous phase. A 5-fold increase
in the oral bioavailability of NLCs was reported compared with the
olanzapine suspension, from which it can be inferred that NLCs provide
a sustained release of the drug.

Overall, the biocompatible
and biologically nontoxic nature of
various lipids is responsible for the development of NLCs as a promising
and sustained drug delivery vehicle.

3 Conclusions
Current research in the synthesis of NPs using plant extracts has
opened a new era of development of nontoxic methods for preparation
of NPs. The formation of NPs using natural substances has a major
edge over methods in terms of its interaction and effect on the environment.
Green chemistry has appeared as a new concept in the implementation
of chemical processes to avoid the use of hazardous substances. Various
reports showed the superiority of green synthesized NPs from natural
and biological sources over chemical methods. The biological reagents
and biocompatible processes do not require the use of harsh chemicals.
Several reports demonstrated that the nanomaterials synthesized using
green methods are found to be more stable as compared to those using
classical methods.

In the present review, a brief description
of inorganic NPs, metallic
NPs and quantum dots, and organic NPs, polymeric NPs, mesoporous silica
NPs, dendrimers, SLNs, etc., has been highlighted, comprising their
preparation and applications. Most of these syntheses have been carried
out in research laboratories at a small scale, but researchers are
engaged in scaling up these processes so as to explore the potential
and applications of nanomaterials in health science, environment,
and many more to fulfill future demands. Although innumerable reports
are available for the fabricated nanoassemblies that are employed
in the drug delivery applications, the inbuilt potential of these
exuberant nanocarriers/nanomedicine has not been exploited completely
to treat a wide range of diseases in a safe and effective manner.

In today’s scenario, plant-mediated eco-friendly protocols
and surfactants provide a green tool for the synthesis of nanomaterials.
It is necessary to adopt safer alternative methods to synthesize different
nanoassemblies. Recent trends of developing green-triggered technologies
for the fabrication of the nanomaterial depict their enormous importance
in science and nanotechnology.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
R.K.
gratefully acknowledges CSIR and DAAD for the fellowship.
J.R. is grateful to UGC for the junior research fellowship, S.K.M.
acknowledges DST-PURSE II. D.B.S. is grateful to DBT New Delhi for
the award of the Ramalingaswami fellowship.
==== Refs
References
Anselmo A. C. ; Mitragotri S. 
An Overview
of Clinical and Commercial Impact of Drug
Delivery Systems . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 190 , 15 –28 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.03.053 .
Hans M. ; Lowman A. 
Biodegradable Nanoparticles
for Drug Delivery and Targeting . Curr. Opin.
Solid State Mater. Sci. 
2002 , 6 , 319 –327 . 10.1016/S1359-0286(02)00117-1 .
Kumar B. ; Jalodia K. ; Kumar P. ; Gautam H. K. 
Recent Advances
in Nanoparticle-Mediated Drug Delivery . J. Drug
Delivery Sci. Technol. 
2017 , 41 , 260 –268 . 10.1016/j.jddst.2017.07.019 .
Park K. 
Controlled
Drug Delivery Systems: Past Forward and Future Back . J. Controlled Release 
2014 , 190 , 3 –8 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.03.054 .
Khosa A. ; Reddi S. ; Saha R. N. 
Nanostructured
Lipid Carriers for
Site-Specific Drug Delivery . Biomed. Pharmacother. 
2018 , 103 , 598 –613 . 10.1016/j.biopha.2018.04.055 .29677547 
Jahangirian H. ; Lemraski E. G. ; Webster T. J. ; Rafiee-Moghaddam R. ; Abdollahi4 Y. 
A Review of Drug Delivery Systems
Based on Nanotechnology
and Green Chemistry: Green Nanomedicine . Int.
J. Nanomed. 
2017 , 12 , 2957 –2978 . 10.2147/IJN.S127683 .
Reverberi A. P. ; Kuznetsov N. T. ; Meshalkin V. P. ; Salerno M. ; Fabiano B. 
Systematical
Analysis of Chemical Methods in Metal Nanoparticles Synthesis . Theor. Found. Chem. Eng. 
2016 , 50 , 59 –66 . 10.1134/s0040579516010127 .
Dhas N. A. ; Raj C. P. ; Gedanken A. 
Synthesis, Characterization,
and
Properties of Metallic Copper Nanoparticles . Chem. Mater. 
1998 , 10 , 1446 –1452 . 10.1021/cm9708269 .
Chou K. ; Ren C. 
Synthesis of Nanosized
Silver Particles by Chemical Reduction Method . Mater. Chem. Phys. 
2000 , 64 , 241 –246 . 10.1016/S0254-0584(00)00223-6 .
Nickel U. ; Castell A. ; Po K. ; Schneider S. 
A Silver Colloid
Produced by Reduction with Hydrazine as Support for Highly Sensitive
Surface-Enhanced Raman . Langmuir 
2000 , 16 , 9087 –9091 . 10.1021/la000536y .
Martínez
Bonilla C. A. ; Kouznetsov V. V. 
“Green” Quantum Dots: Basics, Green Synthesis,
and Nanotechnological Applications . Green Nanotechnol. 
2016 , 173 –192 .
Peng Z. A. ; Peng X. 
Formation of High-Quality CdTe, CdSe, and CdS Nanocrystals Using
CdO as Precursor . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2001 , 123 , 183 –184 . 10.1021/ja003633m .11273619 
Ge C. ; Xu M. ; Liu J. ; Lei J. ; Ju H. 
Facile Synthesis and
Application of Highly Luminescent CdTe Quantum Dots with an Electrogenerated
Precursor . Chem. Commun. 
2008 , 19 , 450 –452 . 10.1039/B714990E .
Ekman B. O. 
Improved
Stability of Proteins Immobilized in Microparticles Prepared by modified emulsion
polymerisation technique . J. Pharma. Sci. 
1976 , 38 , 1975 –1978 .
Lowe P. J. ; Temple C. S. 
Calcitonin and Insulin
in Isobutylcyanoacrylate Nanocapsules:
Protection Against Proteases and Effect on Intestinal Absorption in
Rats . J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 
1994 , 1251 , 547 –552 . 10.1111/j.2042-7158.1994.tb03854.x .
Nagavarma B. V. N. ; Yadav H. K. S. ; Ayaz A. ; Vasudha L. S. ; Shivakumar H. G. 
Different
techniques for preparation of polymeric nanoparticles—A Review . Asian J. Pharm. Clin. Res. 
2012 , 5 , 16 –23 .
Ratirotjanakul W. ; Sioloetwong T. ; et al. Green Synthesis of AgNPs Coated Mesoporous
Silica Nanoparticles Using Tyrosine as Reducing/Stabilising Agent . Mater. Sci. Forum 
2018 , 928 , 89 –93 . 10.4028/www.scientific.net/MSF.928.89 .
Palem R. R. ; Ganesh S. D. ; Kronekova Z. ; Sláviková M. ; Saha N. ; Saha P. 
Green Synthesis
of Silver Nanoparticles
and Biopolymer Nanocomposites: A Comparative Study on Physico-Chemical,
Antimicrobial and Anticancer Activity . Bull.
Mater. Sci. 
2018 , 41 , 1 –11 . 10.1007/s12034-018-1567-5 .
Malik P. ; Shankar R. ; Malik V. ; Sharma N. ; Mukherjee T. K. 
Green Chemistry
Based Benign Routes for Nanoparticle Synthesis . J. Nanopart. Res. 
2014 , 2014 , 30242910.1155/2014/302429 .
Bevilacqua A. ; Cibelli F. ; Corbo M. R. ; Sinigaglia M. 
Effects of
High-Pressure Homogenization on the Survival of Alicyclobacillus
acidoterrestris in a Laboratory Medium . Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 
2007 , 45 , 382 –386 . 10.1111/j.1472-765X.2007.02219.x .17897380 
Rehman M. ; Khan M. A. ; Khan W. S. ; Shafique M. 
Fabrication of Niclosamide Loaded Solid Lipid Nanoparticles: In Vitro
Characterization and Comparative in Vivo Evaluation . Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol. 
2017 , 46 , 1 –9 . 10.1080/21691401.2017.1396996 .
Gao S. ; Mcclements D. J. 
Formation and Stability of Solid
Lipid Nanoparticles
Fabricated Using Phase Inversion Temperature Method . Colloids Surf., A 
2016 , 499 , 79 –87 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2016.03.065 .
Shah M. ; Fawcett D. ; Sharma S. ; Tripathy S. K. ; Poinern G. E. J. 
Green
Synthesis of Metallic Nanoparticles via Biological Entities . Materials 
2015 , 8 , 7278 –7308 . 10.3390/ma8115377 .28793638 
Sperling R. A. ; Rivera Gil P. ; Zhang F. ; Zanella M. ; Parak W. J. 
Biological
Applications of Gold Nanoparticles . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2008 , 37 , 1896 –1908 . 10.1039/b712170a .18762838 
Torres-Chavolla E. ; Ranasinghe R. J. ; Alocilja E. C. 
Characterization and Functionalization
of Biogenic Gold Nanoparticles for Biosensing Enhancement . IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol. 
2010 , 9 , 533 –538 . 10.1109/TNANO.2010.2052926 .
Bhumkar D. R. ; Joshi H. M. ; Sastry M. ; Pokharkar V. B. 
Chitosan
Reduced Gold Nanoparticles as Novel Carriers for Transmucosal Delivery
of Insulin . Pharm. Res. 
2007 , 24 , 1415 –1426 . 10.1007/s11095-007-9257-9 .17380266 
Cai W. ; Gao T. ; Hong H. ; Sun J. 
Applications of Gold
Nanoparticles
in Cancer Nanotechnology . Nanotechnol., Sci.
Appl. 
2008 , 1 , 17 –32 . 10.2147/NSA.S3788 .24198458 
Mirzajani F. ; Ghassempour A. ; Aliahmadi A. ; Esmaeili M. A. 
Antibacterial Effect
of Silver Nanoparticles on Staphylococcus aureus . Res. Microbiol. 
2011 , 162 , 542 –549 . 10.1016/j.resmic.2011.04.009 .21530652 
Pollini M. ; Paladini F. ; Catalano M. ; Taurino A. ; Licciulli A. ; Maffezzoli A. ; Sannino A. 
Antibacterial Coatings
on Haemodialysis
Catheters by Photochemical Deposition of Silver Nanoparticles . J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med. 
2011 , 22 , 2005 –2012 . 10.1007/s10856-011-4380-x .21691829 
Hrapovic S. ; Liu Y. ; Male K. B. ; Luong J. H. T. 
Electrochemical
Biosensing Platforms
Using Platinum Nanoparticles and Carbon Nanotubes . Anal. Chem. 
2004 , 76 , 1083 –1088 . 10.1021/ac035143t .14961742 
West P. R. ; Ishii S. ; Naik G. V. ; Emani N. K. ; Shalaev V. M. ; Boltasseva A. 
Searching
for Better Plasmonic Materials Paul . Laser Photonics
Rev. 
2010 , 4 , 795 –808 . 10.1002/lpor.200900055 .
Lee H.-J. ; Lee G. ; Jang N. R. ; Yun J. H. ; Song J. Y. ; Kim B. S. 
Biological Synthesis of Copper Nanoparticles
Using Plant Extract . Nanotechnology 
2011 , 1 , 371 –374 .
Prasad K. S. ; Patel H. ; Patel T. ; Patel K. ; Selvaraj K. 
Biosynthesis
of Se Nanoparticles and Its Effect on UV-Induced DNA Damage . Colloids Surf., B 
2013 , 103 , 261 –266 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.10.029 .
Basnet P. ; Inakhunbi Chanu T. ; Samanta D. ; Chatterjee S. 
A Review on
Bio-Synthesized Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles Using Plant Extracts as Reductants
and Stabilizing Agents . J. Photochem. Photobiol.,
B 
2018 , 183 , 201 –221 . 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2018.04.036 .29727834 
Kim M. ; Osone S. ; Kim T. ; Higashi H. ; Seto T. 
Synthesis
of Nanoparticles by Laser Ablation: A Review . Materials 
2016 , 1 –11 . 10.14356/kona.2017009 .
Ahlawat D. S. ; Kumari R. 
Synthesis and Characterization of
Sol–Gel Prepared
Silver Nanoparticles . Int. J. Nanosci. 
2014 , 13 , 1 –8 . 10.1142/S0219581X14500045 .
Thakkar K. N. ; Mhatre S. S. ; Parikh R. Y. 
Biological
Synthesis of Metallic
Nanoparticles . Nanomedicine 
2010 , 6 , 257 –262 . 10.1016/j.nano.2009.07.002 .19616126 
Chen Y. H. ; Tsai C. Y. ; Huang P. Y. ; Chang M. Y. ; Cheng P. C. ; Chou C. H. ; Chen D. H. ; Wang C. R. ; Shiau A. L. ; Wu C. L. 
Methotrexate Conjugated to Gold Nanoparticles
Inhibits Tumor Growth
in a Syngeneic Lung Tumor Model . Mol. Pharm. 
2007 , 4 , 713 –722 . 10.1021/mp060132k .17708653 
Li J. ; Wang X. ; Wang C. ; Chen B. ; Dai Y. ; Zhang R. ; Song M. ; Lv G. ; Fu D. 
The Enhancement
Effect of Gold Nanoparticles in Drug Delivery and as Biomarkers of
Drug-Resistant Cancer Cells . ChemMedChem 
2007 , 2 , 374 –378 . 10.1002/cmdc.200600264 .17206735 
Thirumurugan A. ; Blessy V. ; Karthikeyan M.  Comparative
Study on Doxorubicin Loaded Metallic Nanoparticles in Drug Delivery
Against MCF-7 Cell Line , Applications of Nanomaterials; Elsevier Ltd , 2018 ; pp 303 –313 .
Thambiraj S. ; Hema S. ; Shankaran D. R. 
Functionalized Gold Nanoparticles
for Drug Delivery Applications . Mater. Today:
Proc. 
2018 , 5 , 16763 –16773 . 10.1016/j.matpr.2018.06.030 .
Mehnath S. ; Arjama M. ; Rajan M. ; Arokia M. 
Polyorganophosphazene
Stabilized Gold Nanoparticles for Intracellular Drug Delivery in Breast
Carcinoma Cells . Process Biochem. 
2018 , 72 , 152 –161 . 10.1016/j.procbio.2018.06.006 .
Wu P. H. ; Onodera Y. ; Ichikawa Y. ; Rankin E. B. ; Giaccia A. J. ; Watanabe Y. ; Qian W. ; Hashimoto T. ; Shirato H. ; Nam J.-M. ; et al. Targeting Integrins
with RGD-Conjugated Gold Nanoparticles in Radiotherapy Decreases the
Invasive Activity of Breast Cancer Cells . Int.
J. Nanomed. 
2017 , 12 , 5069 –5085 . 10.2147/IJN.S137833 .
Banu H. ; Renuka N. ; Faheem S. M. ; Ismail R. ; Singh V. ; Saadatmand Z. ; Khan S. S. ; Narayanan K. ; Raheem A. ; Premkumar K. ; et al. Gold and Silver Nanoparticles
Biomimetically Synthesized Using Date Palm Pollen Extract-Induce Apoptosis
and Regulate P53 and Bcl-2 Expression in Human Breast Adenocarcinoma
Cells . Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 
2018 , 186 , 122 –134 . 10.1007/s12011-018-1287-0 .29552710 
Wang G. ; Zhou F. ; Li X. ; Li J. ; Ma Y. ; Mu J. ; Zhang Z. ; Che H. ; Zhang X. 
Controlled Synthesis
of L-Cysteine Coated Cobalt Ferrite Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery . Ceram. Int. 
2018 , 44 , 13588 –13594 . 10.1016/j.ceramint.2018.04.193 .
Ghasemi Y. ; Peymani P. ; Afifi S. 
Quantum Dot: Magic Nanoparticle for Imaging,
Detection and Targeting . Acta Bio Med. Atenei
Parmensis 
2009 , 80 , 156 –165 .
Lee H. U. ; Park S. Y. ; Park E. S. ; Son B. ; Lee S. C. ; Lee J. W. ; Lee Y. ; Kang K. S. ; Kim M. Il ; Park H. G. ; et al. Photoluminescent Carbon
Nanotags from Harmful Cyanobacteria
for Drug Delivery and Imaging in Cancer Cells . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 466510.1038/srep04665 .24721805 
Li W. Q. ; Wang Z. ; Hao S. ; Sun L. ; Nisic M. ; Cheng G. ; Zhu C. ; Wan Y. ; Ha L. ; Zheng S. Y. 
Mitochondria-Based Aircraft Carrier Enhances in Vivo
Imaging of Carbon Quantum Dots and Delivery of Anticancer Drug . Nanoscale 
2018 , 10 , 3744 –3752 . 10.1039/C7NR08816G .29411807 
Chiu S. H. ; Gedda G. ; Girma W. M. ; Chen J. K. ; Ling Y. C. ; Ghule A. V. ; Ou K. L. ; Chang J. Y. 
Rapid Fabrication
of Carbon Quantum Dots as Multifunctional Nanovehicles for Dual-Modal
Targeted Imaging and Chemotherapy . Acta Biomater. 
2016 , 46 , 151 –164 . 10.1016/j.actbio.2016.09.027 .27662808 
Olerile L. D. ; Liu Y. ; Zhang B. ; Wang T. ; Mu S. ; Zhang J. ; Selotlegeng L. ; Zhang N. 
Near-Infrared Mediated Quantum Dots
and Paclitaxel Co-Loaded Nanostructured Lipid Carriers for Cancer
Theragnostic . Colloids Surf., B 
2017 , 150 , 121 –130 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2016.11.032 .
Khodadadei F. ; Safarian S. ; Ghanbari N. 
Methotrexate-Loaded
Nitrogen-Doped
Graphene Quantum Dots Nanocarriers as an Efficient Anticancer Drug
Delivery System . Mater. Sci. Eng., C 
2017 , 79 , 280 –285 . 10.1016/j.msec.2017.05.049 .
Fakhri A. ; Tahami S. ; Nejad P. A. 
Preparation
and Characterization
of Fe3O4-Ag2O Quantum Dots Decorated Cellulose Nanofibers as a Carrier
of Anticancer Drugs for Skin Cancer . J. Photochem.
Photobiol., B 
2017 , 175 , 83 –88 . 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2017.08.032 .28865318 
Yaghini E. ; Turner H. D. ; Le Marois A. M. ; Suhling K. ; Naasani I. ; MacRobert A. J. 
In Vivo
Biodistribution Studies and Ex Vivo Lymph Node
Imaging Using Heavy Metal-Free Quantum Dots . Biomaterials 
2016 , 104 , 182 –191 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.07.014 .27454064 
Thakur M. ; Mewada A. ; Pandey S. ; Bhori M. ; Singh K. ; Sharon M. ; Sharon M. 
Milk-Derived
Multi-Fluorescent Graphene
Quantum Dot-Based Cancer Theranostic System . Mater. Sci. Eng., C 
2016 , 67 , 468 –477 . 10.1016/j.msec.2016.05.007 .
Sarkar N. ; Sahoo G. ; Das R. ; Prusty G. ; Swain S. K. 
Carbon
Quantum Dot Tailored Calcium Alginate Hydrogel for PH Responsive Controlled
Delivery of Vancomycin . Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 
2017 , 109 , 359 –371 . 10.1016/j.ejps.2017.08.015 .28821436 
Mehta V. N. ; Chettiar S. S. ; Bhamore J. R. ; Kailasa S. K. ; Patel R. M. 
Green Synthetic
Approach for Synthesis of Fluorescent Carbon Dots for Lisinopril Drug
Delivery System and Their Confirmations in the Cells . J. Fluoresc. 
2017 , 27 , 111 –124 . 10.1007/s10895-016-1939-4 .27679993 
Vauthier C. ; Bouchemal K. 
Expert Review
Methods for the Preparation and Manufacture
of Polymeric Nanoparticles . Pharma Res. 
2009 , 26 , 1025 –1058 . 10.1007/s11095-008-9800-3 .
Nagavarma B. V. N. ; Yadav H. K. S. ; Ayaz A. ; Vasudha L. S. ; Shivakumar H. G. 
Different
Techniques for Preparation of Polymeric Nanoparticles - A Review . Asian J. Pharm. Clin. Res. 
2012 , 5 , 16 –23 .
Saini R. K. ; Bagri L. P. ; Bajpai A. K. ; Mishra A.  Responsive Polymer Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery Applications . Stimuli Responsive Polymeric Nanocarriers for Drug Delivery
Applications ; Woodhead Publishing , 2018 ; Vol. 1 , pp 289 –320 .
Yoon S. G. ; Kim I. Y. ; Kim S. I. ; Kim S. J. 
Swelling and Electroresponsive
Characteristics of Interpenetrating Polymer Network Hydrogels . Polym. Int. 
2005 , 54 , 1169 –1174 . 10.1002/pi.1825 .
Aryal S. ; Hu C. J. ; Zhang L. 
Polymer-Cisplatin
Conjugate Delivery . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 251 –258 . 10.1021/nn9014032 .20039697 
Du J. Z. ; Du X. J. ; Mao C. Q. ; Wang J. 
Tailor-Made Dual PH-Sensitive
Polymer-Doxorubicin Nanoparticles for Efficient Anticancer Drug Delivery . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 17560 –17563 . 10.1021/ja207150n .21985458 
Roque L. ; Castro P. ; Molpeceres J. ; Viana A. S. ; Roberto A. ; Reis C. ; et al. Bioadhesive
Polymeric Nanoparticles as Strategy to
Improve the Treatment of Yeast Infections in Oral Cavity: In-Vitro
and Ex-Vivo Studies . Eur. Polym. J. 
2018 , 104 , 19 –31 . 10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2018.04.032 .
Niwa T. ; Takeuchi H. ; et al. Preparations
of Biodegradable Nanospheres of
Water-Soluble and Insoluble Drugs with D,L-Lactide/Glycolide Copolymer
by a Novel Spontaneous Emulsification Solvent Diffusion Method, and
the Drug Release Behavior . J. Controlled Release 
1993 , 25 , 89 –98 . 10.1016/0168-3659(93)90097-O .
Sun W. ; Chen X. ; Xie C. ; Wang Y. ; Lin L. ; Zhu K. ; Shuai X. 
Co-Delivery
of Doxorubicin and Anti-BCL-2 SiRNA by
PH-Responsive Polymeric Vector to Overcome Drug Resistance in In Vitro
and In Vivo HepG2 Hepatoma Model . Biomacromolecules 
2018 , 19 , 2248 –2256 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.8b00272 .29690766 
Kao K. C. ; Mou C. Y. 
Pore-Expanded Mesoporous
Silica Nanoparticles with
Alkanes/Ethanol as Pore Expanding Agent . Microporous
Mesoporous Mater. 
2013 , 169 , 7 –15 . 10.1016/j.micromeso.2012.09.030 .
Mehmood A. ; Ghafar H. ; Yaqoob S. ; Gohar U.
F. ; Ahmad B.  Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles:
A Review . J. Dev. Drugs 2017 , 06 .10.4172/2329-6631.1000174 .
Zhang Y. ; Jiang T. ; Zhang Q. ; Wang S. 
Inclusion
of Telmisartan
in Mesocellular Foam Nanoparticles: Drug Loading and Release Property . Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 
2010 , 76 , 17 –23 . 10.1016/j.ejpb.2010.05.010 .20685333 
Qu F. ; Zhu G. ; Lin H. ; Zhang W. ; Sun J. ; Li S. ; Qiu S. 
A Controlled Release of Ibuprofen by Systematically
Tailoring the
Morphology of Mesoporous Silica Materials . J.
Solid State Chem. 
2006 , 179 , 2027 –2035 . 10.1016/j.jssc.2006.04.002 .
Sun L. ; Wang Y. ; Jiang T. ; Zheng X. ; Zhang J. ; Sun J. ; Sun C. ; Wang S. 
Novel Chitosan-Functionalized Spherical
Nanosilica Matrix As an Oral Sustained Drug Delivery System for Poorly
Water-Soluble Drug Carvedilol . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 103 –113 . 10.1021/am302246s .23237208 
Wang Y. ; Zhao Q. ; Han N. ; Bai L. ; Li J. ; Liu J. ; Che E. ; Hu L. ; Zhang Q. ; Jiang T. ; et al. Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles
in Drug Delivery and Biomedical Applications . Nanomedicine 
2015 , 11 , 313 –327 . 10.1016/j.nano.2014.09.014 .25461284 
Nafisi S. ; Samadi N. ; Houshiar M. ; Maibach H. I. 
Mesoporous Silica
Nanoparticles for Enhanced Lidocaine Skin Delivery . Int. J. Pharm. 
2018 , 550 , 325 –332 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2018.08.004 .30081227 
Gao Q. ; Xie W. ; Zhao L. ; Wang Y. ; Zhang W. ; Cai Q. 
Synthesis
of Hierarchical Sieve-like Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticle Aggregates
via Centrifugal Method for Drug Delivery System . Chin. Chem. Lett. 
2018 , 29 , 1804 –1810 . 10.1016/j.cclet.2018.09.006 .
Dumas A. ; Couvreur P. 
Palladium: A Future
Key Player in the Nanomedical Field? . Chem.
Sci. 
2015 , 6 , 2153 –2157 . 10.1039/C5SC00070J .28694948 
Szewczyk A. ; Prokopowicz M. 
Amino-Modified
Mesoporous Silica SBA-15 as Bifunctional
Drug Delivery System for Cefazolin: Release Profile and Mineralization
Potential . Mater. Lett. 
2018 , 227 , 136 –140 . 10.1016/j.matlet.2018.05.059 .
Huang D. ; Wu D. 
Biodegradable Dendrimers for Drug
Delivery . Mater. Sci. Eng., C 
2018 , 90 , 713 –727 . 10.1016/j.msec.2018.03.002 .
De
Jong W. H. ; Borm P. J. A. 
Drug Delivery and Nanoparticles:
Applications and Hazards . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2008 , 3 , 133 –149 . 10.2147/IJN.S596 .
Sherje A. P. ; Jadhav M. ; Dravyakar B. R. ; Kadam D. 
Dendrimers: A Versatile
Nanocarrier for Drug Delivery and Targeting . Int. J. Pharm. 
2018 , 548 , 707 –720 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2018.07.030 .30012508 
Wang F. ; Cai X. ; Su Y. ; Hu J. ; Wu Q. ; Zhang H. ; Xiao J. ; Cheng Y. 
Reducing Cytotoxicity
While Improving
Anti-Cancer Drug Loading Capacity of Polypropylenimine Dendrimers
by Surface Acetylation . Acta Biomater. 
2012 , 8 , 4304 –4313 . 10.1016/j.actbio.2012.07.031 .22842039 
Wang X. ; Guerrand L. ; Wu B. ; Li X. ; Boldon L. ; Chen W. R. ; Liu L. 
Characterizations of
Polyamidoamine
Dendrimers with Scattering Techniques . Polymers 
2012 , 4 , 600 –616 . 10.3390/polym4010600 .
Yang H. ; Lopina S. T. 
Penicillin V-Conjugated PEG-PAMAM
Star Polymers . J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed.. 
2003 , 14 , 1043 –1056 . 10.1163/156856203769231556 .14661878 
Kesharwani P. ; Cairul M. ; Mohd I. ; Giri N. ; Jain A.  Dendrimers in Targeting
and Delivery of Drugs ; Elsevier Inc. , 2017 ; pp 363 –388 .
Ma X. ; Tang J. ; Shen Y. ; Fan M. ; Tang H. ; Radosz M. 
Facile Synthesis of Polyester Dendrimers
from Sequential
Click Coupling of Asymmetrical Monomers . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 14795 –14803 . 10.1021/ja9037406 .19772342 
Abedi-gaballu F. ; Dehghan G. ; Ghaffari M. ; Yekta R. ; et al. PAMAM
Dendrimers as Efficient Drug and Gene Delivery Nanosystems for Cancer
Therapy . Appl. Mater. Today 
2018 , 12 , 177 –190 . 10.1016/j.apmt.2018.05.002 .30511014 
Cheng Y. ; Xu Z. ; Ma M. ; Xu T. 
Dendrimers
as Drug Carriers: Applications
in Different Routes of Drug Administration . J. Pharm. Sci. 
2008 , 97 , 123 –143 . 10.1002/jps.21079 .17721949 
Yavuz B. ; Pehlivan S. B. ; Vural I. ; Ünlü N. 
In Vitro/In
Vivo Evaluation of Dexamethasone - PAMAM Dendrimer Complexes for Retinal
Drug Delivery . J. Pharm. Sci. 
2015 , 104 , 3814 –3823 . 10.1002/jps.24588 .26227825 
Du X. ; Yin S. ; Wang Y. ; Gu X. ; Wang G. ; Li J. 
Hyaluronic
Acid-Functionalized Half-Generation of Sectorial Dendrimers for Anticancer
Drug Delivery and Enhanced Biocompatibility . Carbohydr. Polym. 
2018 , 202 , 513 –522 . 10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.09.015 .30287030 
Kanwar R. ; Bhar R. ; Kumar S. 
Designed Meso-Macroporous
Silica
Framework Impregnated with Copper Oxide Nanoparticles for Enhanced
Catalytic Performance . ChemCatChem 
2018 , 10 , 2087 –2095 . 10.1002/cctc.201701630 .
Müller R. H. ; Mäder K. ; Gohla S. 
Solid Lipid Nanoparticles
(SLN) for
Controlled Drug Delivery - a Review of the State of the Art . Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 
2000 , 50 , 161 –177 . 10.1016/S0939-6411(00)00087-4 .10840199 
Morel S. ; Rosa Gasco M. ; Cavalli R. 
Incorporation in Lipospheres
of [d-Trp-6]LHRH . Int. J. Pharm. 
1994 , 105 , R1 –R3 . 10.1016/0378-5173(94)90466-9 .
Morel S. ; Ugazio E. ; Cavalli R. ; Gasco M. R. 
Thymopentin
in Solid
Lipid Nanoparticles . Int. J. Pharm. 
1996 , 132 , 259 –261 . 10.1016/0378-5173(95)04388-8 .
Ugazio E. ; Cavalli R. ; Gasco M. R. 
Incorporation
of Cyclosporin A in
Solid Lipid Nanoparticles (SLN) . Int. J. Pharm. 
2002 , 241 , 341 –344 . 10.1016/S0378-5173(02)00268-5 .12100861 
Baek J. S. ; So J. W. ; Shin S. C. ; Cho C. W. 
Solid Lipid Nanoparticles
of Paclitaxel Strengthened by Hydroxypropyl-β-Cyclodextrin as
an Oral Delivery System . Int. J. Mol. Med. 
2012 , 30 , 953 –959 . 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1086 .22859311 
Pooja D. ; Kulhari H. ; Kuncha M. ; Rachamalla S. S. ; Adams D. J. ; Bansal V. ; Sistla R. 
Improving Efficacy,
Oral Bioavailability, and Delivery of Paclitaxel Using Protein-Grafted
Solid Lipid Nanoparticles . Mol. Pharm. 
2016 , 13 , 3903 –3912 . 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00691 .27696858 
Chalikwar S. S. ; Belgamwar V. S. ; Talele V. R. ; Surana S. J. ; Patil M. U. 
Formulation
and Evaluation of Nimodipine-Loaded Solid Lipid Nanoparticles Delivered
via Lymphatic Transport System . Colloids Surf.,
B 
2012 , 97 , 109 –116 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.04.027 .
Zariwala M. G. ; Elsaid N. ; Jackson T. L. ; Corral F. ; Farnaud S. ; Somavarapu S. ; Renshaw D. 
A Novel Approach to Oral Iron Delivery
Using Ferrous Sulphate Loaded Solid Lipid Nanoparticles . Int. J. Pharm. 
2013 , 456 , 400 –407 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2013.08.070 .24012860 
Rosière R. ; Van Woensel M. ; Gelbcke M. ; Mathieu V. ; Hecq J. ; Mathivet T. ; Vermeersch M. ; Van Antwerpen P. ; Amighi K. ; Wauthoz N. 
New Folate-Grafted
Chitosan Derivative
to Improve Delivery of Paclitaxel-Loaded Solid Lipid Nanoparticles
for Lung Tumor Therapy by Inhalation . Mol. Pharm. 
2018 , 15 , 899 –910 . 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.7b00846 .29341619 
Pandya N. T. ; Jani P. ; Vanza J. ; Tandel H. 
Solid Lipid Nanoparticles
as an Efficient Drug Delivery System of Olmesartan Medoxomil for the
Treatment of Hypertension . Colloids Surf., B 
2018 , 165 , 37 –44 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2018.02.011 .
Mehrad B. ; Ravanfar R. ; Licker J. ; Regenstein J. M. ; Abbaspourrad A. 
Enhancing the Physicochemical Stability
of β-Carotene
Solid Lipid Nanoparticle (SLNP) Using Whey Protein Isolate . Food Res. Int. 
2018 , 105 , 962 –969 . 10.1016/j.foodres.2017.12.036 .29433295 
Kanwar R. ; Gradzielski M. ; Mehta S. K. 
Biomimetic Solid
Lipid Nanoparticles of Sophorolipids Designed for Antileprosy Drugs . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2018 , 122 , 6837 –6845 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.8b03081 .29874078 
Kanwar R. ; Gradzielski M. ; Prevost S. ; Kaur G. ; Clemens D. ; Appavou M. ; Kumar S. 
Effect of Lipid Chain
Length on Nanostructured Lipid Carriers: Comprehensive Structural
Evaluation by Scattering Techniques . J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 
2019 , 534 , 95 –104 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2018.08.066 .30216837 
Kanwar R. ; Kaur G. ; Mehta S. K. 
Revealing
the Potential
of Didodecyldimethylammonium Bromide as Efficient Scaffold for Fabrication
of Nano Liquid Crystalline Structures . Chem.
Phys. Lipids 
2016 , 196 , 61 –68 . 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2016.02.006 .26896840 
Khosa A. ; Reddi S. ; Saha R. N. 
Nanostructured
Lipid
Carriers for Site-Specific Drug Delivery . Biomed.
Pharmacother. 
2018 , 103 , 598 –613 . 10.1016/j.biopha.2018.04.055 .29677547 
Kanwar R. ; Rathee J. ; Patil M.
T. ; Mehta S.
K.  Microemulsions as Nanotemplates:
A Soft and Versatile Approach . In Microemulsion—Chemical
Nanoreactor , 2019 .
Beloqui A. ; del Pozo-Rodríguez A. ; Isla A. ; Rodríguez-Gascón A. ; Solinís M. Á. 
Nanostructured Lipid Carriers as
Oral Delivery Systems for Poorly
Soluble Drugs . J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol.. 
2017 , 42 , 144 –154 . 10.1016/j.jddst.2017.06.013 .
Beloqui A. ; Solinís M. Á. ; Rieux A. D. ; Préat V. ; Rodríguez-Gascón A. 
Dextran-Protamine
Coated Nanostructured
Lipid Carriers as Mucus-Penetrating Nanoparticles for Lipophilic Drugs . Int. J. Pharm. 
2014 , 468 , 105 –111 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2014.04.027 .24746410 
Khan S. ; Shaharyar M. ; Fazil M. ; Hassan Q. ; Baboota S. ; Ali J. 
Tacrolimus-Loaded
Nanostructured
Lipid Carriers for Oral Delivery- in Vivo Bioavailability Enhancement . Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 
2016 , 109 , 149 –157 . 10.1016/j.ejpb.2016.10.011 .27793753 
Kaithwas V. ; Dora C. P. ; Kushwah V. ; Jain S. 
Nanostructured
Lipid Carriers of Olmesartan Medoxomil with Enhanced Oral Bioavailability . Colloids Surf., B 
2017 , 154 , 10 –20 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2017.03.006 .
Fathi H. A. ; Allam A. ; Elsabahy M. ; Fetih G. ; El-Badry M. 
Nanostructured Lipid Carriers for
Improved Oral Delivery
and Prolonged Antihyperlipidemic Effect of Simvastatin . Colloids Surf., B 
2018 , 162 , 236 –245 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2017.11.064 .
Lakhani P. ; Patil A. ; Taskar P. ; Ashour E. ; Majumdar S. 
Curcumin-Loaded Nanostructured Lipid
Carriers for Ocular
Drug Delivery: Design Optimization and Characterization . J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol. 
2018 , 47 , 159 –166 . 10.1016/j.jddst.2018.07.010 .
Rocha K. A. D. ; Krawczyk-Santos A. P. ; Andrade L. M. ; Souza L. C. ; Marreto R. N. ; Gratieri T. ; Taveira S. F. 
Voriconazole-Loaded
Nanostructured Lipid Carriers (NLC) for Drug Delivery in Deeper Regions
of the Nail Plate . Int. J. Pharm. 
2017 , 531 , 292 –298 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.08.115 .28859937 
Kelidari H. R. ; Moazeni M. ; Babaei R. ; Saeedi M. ; Akbari J. ; Parkoohi P. I. ; Nabili M. ; Gohar A. A. ; Morteza-Semnani K. ; Nokhodchi A. 
Improved Yeast
Delivery of Fluconazole
with a Nanostructured Lipid Carrier System . Biomed. Pharmacother. 
2017 , 89 , 83 –88 . 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.02.008 .28222399 
Jawahar N. ; Kumar P. ; Arun R. ; Selvaraj J. ; Anbarasan A. ; Sathianarayanan S. ; Nagaraju G. 
International Journal
of Biological Macromolecules Enhanced Oral Bioavailability of an Antipsychotic
Drug through Nanostructured Lipid Carriers . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2018 , 110 , 269 –275 . 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.01.121 .29402457

