
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145898610.1021/acsomega.8b00995ArticleHydrophilic Ionic Liquid Mixtures of Weakly and Strongly
Coordinating Anions with and without Water Macchieraldo Roberto †Esser Lars †Elfgen Roman †‡Voepel Pascal §Zahn Stefan ∥Smarsly Bernd M. §Kirchner Barbara *†† Mulliken
Center for Theoretical Chemistry, University
of Bonn, Beringstr. 4+6, D-53115 Bonn, Germany‡ Max
Planck Institute for Chemical Energy Conversion, Stiftstr. 34-36, D-45413 Mülheim an der Ruhr, Germany§ Institute
of Physical Chemistry and Center for Materials Research (LaMa), Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Heinrich-Buff Ring 17+16, D-35392 Giessen, Germany∥ Leibniz
Institute of Surface Engineering, Permoserstr. 15, D-04318 Leipzig, Germany* E-mail: kirchner@thch.uni-bonn.de.01 08 2018 31 08 2018 3 8 8567 8582 14 05 2018 20 07 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

With
the aid of ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, we investigate
an ionic liquid (IL) mixture composed of three components 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium
[C4C1Im]+, tetrafluoroborate [BF4]−, and chloride [Cl]− without and with water. In the pure IL mixture, we observe an already
complex network of interactions between cations and anions, and addition
of water to the system even extends the complexity. Observed number
integrals show that the coordination number between cations and anions
is reduced in the system with water compared to that in the pure system.
Further studies show that the Coulombic network of the strongly coordinating
anion [Cl]− is disturbed by water, while that of
the weakly coordinating anion [BF4]− is
not. These observations can also be confirmed by the Voronoi polyhedra
analysis, which shows that the polar network of microheterogeneous
IL collapses by the introduction of water. Hydrogen-acceptor interactions
revealed that the [Cl]− anions are transferred from
being situated in the IL to the water continuum, while [BF4]− is almost unperturbed; these effects mainly
influence the interplay of the ionic liquid network.

document-id-old-9ao8b00995document-id-new-14ao-2018-00995fccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Over
the years ionic liquids (ILs) have gained distinct attraction
for several purposes due to their unique characteristics. The applications
range from being components of energy devices1,2 like
fuel cells3 and electric double-layer capacitors4−6 over to electrolytes in electrodeposition7 or extractants.8 ILs were investigated
as reaction media for chemical processes, such as material synthesis,
leading to alternative reaction paths or even to the formation of
kinetically stabilized products, which could not be obtained otherwise.9−15 Experimental approaches performed from the group of Balducci also
show that ILs are promising candidates as electrolytes for supercapacitors
to obtain high cycling stability and high stable capacitance.16−21 Theoretical investigation on related subjects is carried out by
Salanne and co-workers. They study for example the order obtained
on the interface of ILs and electrochemical interfaces.4,5,22−25 The knowledge obtained by using
ILs in capacitors might lead to the viability of those as electrolytes
for batteries under different conditions for the upcoming future.19,26−29

Due to the high variety of different cations and anions and
the
sheer amount of possible additional functionalizations, the combinations
for ILs are immense,30 showing a great
opportunity, by simply modifying the properties of those for specific
demands. However this task is nontrivial. In fact, the mere modification
of an IL itself is not the only way to tune its properties, but the
same result can be obtained by mixing the parent IL with molecular
liquids or other ILs.31−33

In this regard, water represents the most common,
accessible, and
environmentally benign solvent. Therefore, a straightforward approach
is to combine ILs with water, as diverse syntheses are based on the
hydrolysis of metal compounds. Although the solubility of water in
ILs is strongly dependent on the hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity of
the IL, water is almost always present in ILs (e.g., impurities).
It is known that even small amounts can influence the physicochemical
properties of ILs significantly.33−35 Consequently, many studies
have been carried out to understand the influence of water on the
properties of ionic liquids and also, conversely, by observing an
altered reactivity of water in the presence of ILs.36 For example, the reaction of water with phosphorus chlorides
is prevented in imidazolium-based liquids, making these ILs unique
media for phosphorous chemistry. Other examples consist of accurate
thermodynamics studies on the uptake of water vapor and on the liquid–liquid
equilibria.34,37 Further studies also have shown
that viscosity and density depend on the temperature and the water
content of ILs.38,39 Water was found to decrease the
viscosity, while the overall density only slightly changed (1–2%).38,39 Such studies made possible to recognize the reason for deviations
between many experimental data, which was mainly due to the differences
in the sample purities. Studies of solubility and miscibility40,41 were also conducted and revealed that ILs can generally be subdivided
into two groups: hydrophobic and hydrophilic ILs. Hydrophilic ILs,
such as 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
[C2C1Im][NTf2], possess anions with
a low Lewis basicity, while hydrophilic ILs possess anions that can
even abstract hydrogen atoms from imidazolium, such as 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium
acetate [C2C1Im][OAc]. These specific properties
make ILs uniquely suited for extraction processes. However, it must
be individually selected which kind of IL group should be chosen.42 In a recent work of Kohno and Ohno, this concept
is evolved. ILs were successfully designed where the hydrophilic or
hydrophobic behavior can be controlled reversibly by external criteria
such as temperature. These IL/water mixtures can further be classified
as upper critical solution temperature (UCST) phase transition and
lower critical solution temperature (LCST) phase change mixtures.
Mixtures of the UCST-type experience an increasing solubility between
IL and water with rising temperature, whereas LCST types reverse these
trends.43 A main objective of many theoretical
studies has been the observation of structural features such as the
association behavior in general, the microphase segregation, and the
hydrogen bond (HB) networks of IL/water mixtures. Through this kind
of studies, we gain a deeper understanding at the molecular level
of this class of substances, which then lead to a confirmed macroscopic
characteristic of those obtained by experimental approaches.33,44−51However, these goals have also been pursued through experimental
and even joint attempts.45−47,52−57

Such a joint approach was used by Raos et al. by combining
molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
to describe the aggregation of water occurring in IL/water mixtures.56 They identified two hydration regimes: The first
was defined at low water contents, where water molecules strongly
interact with both ions, disrupting the IL network. The second was
defined at higher water contents, in which the interaction between
water molecules and ions behaves nonselectively. This shows that most
of the effects are due to the swelling of the water clusters. Canongia
Lopes et al. extended these concepts based on an investigation of
1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium ethylsulfate [C2C1Im][C2SO4]–water mixtures for which
four structural regimes were observed:481. isolated water
molecules (xH2O < 0.5)

2. chainlike water aggregates
(0.5 < xH2O < 0.8)

3. bicontinuous system (0.8
< xH2O < 0.95)

4. isolated ions or small
ion clusters
(xH2O > 0.95)



This distinction includes two different percolation
limits: that
of water in the ionic liquid network (xH2O ≈ 0.8) and that of the ionic liquid in water
(xH2O ≈ 0.95). However,
it should also be noted that studies on dynamical properties are also
made on the basis of theoretical and practical experiments. In this
regard, it was observed that compared with the structuring and dynamics
within the pure IL, the addition of water to [C2C1Im][OAc] modifies and widely disturbs the dipole moment of the ions
and the hydrogen bond network of the IL. Furthermore, it hinders a
possible carbene formation, besides the fact that a free carbene is
not likely.33,58,59 Feng and Voth investigated the effect of the side chain length of
the cation and the effect of the anion, for the IL–water mixtures
of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([C4C1Im][BF4]), 1-octyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
([C8C1Im][BF4]), and 1-octyl-3-methylimidazolium
chloride ([C8C1Im][Cl]) with water mole fractions
ranging from 0.2 to 0.9615, on the mixture dynamics and structures.51 While replacing [C4C1Im]+ by [C8C1Im]+ only leads
to an increasing microheterogeneity due to a stronger agglomeration
of the cations, exchanging [BF4]− for
[Cl]− results in a decrease in the diffusion due
to stronger electrostatic interactions between [Cl]− and water as compared with the relatively weakly coordinating anion
[BF4]−. It is stated that at low water
concentrations the water structure within the mixtures depends on
the strength of the water–anion interactions: In [C4C1Im][BF4] and [C8C1Im][BF4], formation of water clusters connected by hydrogen bonds
is observed, which does not occur in [C8C1Im][Cl].
Further structural characterization of geminal dicationic and monocationic
imidazolium-based ionic liquids with halides in mixtures with water
was performed by D’Angelo et al. and Serva et al.60,61 Extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy and MD simulations
were combined to investigate IL–water mixtures ranging from
1:1 to 1:400. In all of these solutions, H2O favored coordination
to the halide ion. Although a complex interaction among cations, anions,
and water occurred, ion pairing was still evidenced up to a ratio
of 1:12. Even for the highly concentrated solutions, the existence
of long-range structural correlations for the 1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium
iodide [C6C1Im][I]/water mixture was observed.
It should also be noted that the local environment of the halides
changes by increasing the water concentration, resulting in a growing
accumulation of water molecules in the first solvent shell of the
anions. Sharma and Ghorai examined the effect of water on the structure
and dynamics of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate ([C4C1Im][PF6]) via all-atom MD simulations.35 The study showed that the addition of water
does not affect the number of dissociated ions compared to that in
the pure state, which simultaneously results in similar self-diffusion
coefficients for both the cation and the anion. However, Voronoi polyhedra
analysis revealed a significant change of the ILs’ local structure
if water is present. Void and neck distributions in Voronoi tessellation
showed that particularly for high water concentrations an increase
in void space and neck size leads to a facilitation in ionic motion
and therefore decreases dynamical heterogeneity and IL reorientation
time, while increasing self-diffusion coefficients. Ludwig by means
of a combined approach of Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
and density functional theory (DFT) calculation has shown that water
can be used as a sensitive probe for measuring the polarity of ionic
liquids when other conventional methods fail. Using the same approach,
he studied the structure and occurrence of ion-pair formation as a
function of temperature and concentration. Furthermore, he investigated
the influence of highly directional H-bonds, finding an opposite effect
of the hydrogen bindings on ionic liquids. H-bonds can, in fact, introduce
“defects” into the Coulomb network, resulting in a fluidized
ionic liquid.62−70

In this work, we continue the previous studies of binary ionic
liquids interacting with water by investigating mixtures composed
of [C4C1Im]+, [BF4]−, and [Cl]− with water by ab initio
molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations. This mixture was recently used
as a reaction medium to synthesize peculiar titanium oxide structures
such as bronze-type TiO2.9 Therein,
it was shown that the ratio of [BF4]− and [Cl]− as well as the content of water had
a significant impact on the formed crystal structure. However, before
such a complex system is established, many variables must be considered.
For instance, the choice of compositions is nontrivial because the
individual component might be solid, leading to a heterogeneous system.
For the pure IL system, we observe a very complex network of interactions
between cations and anions, and addition of water to the system even
extends the complexity. The motivation of this work is on the one
hand to understand why this particular combination works so well for
the different material synthesis9−14 carried out in such systems. On the other hand, it is interesting
to understand whether the combination of a weakly and strongly coordinating
anion with water leads to such a powerful solvent system such as those
obtained for binary mixtures by adding antagonistic salts,71 i.e., systems in which cations and anions are
preferentially dissolved in different microphases. This idea can be
extended by selecting such ternary systems as extractants for heavy
elements, like lanthanoids or actinoids, due to their capability of
showing high resistance to strong oxidizing or reducing agents. For
upcoming future projects, the evolved concept introduced by Kohno
and Ohno, as discussed above,43 might lead
to other perspectives, taking into account UCST, LCST, or even addition
of kosmotropic salts to ILs.

Computational Details
AIMD Simulations
To study the effect of water onto
an ionic liquid mixture as it is applied in material synthesis,9,10 the ionic liquid mixture composed of the three components [C4C1Im]+, [BF4]−, and [Cl]− without and with water was chosen.
We carried out AIMD simulations to discuss effects on the electronic
structure level. This is not possible in force-field simulations because
the intermolecular forces are fitted to reproduce some experimental
quantities. Thus, our study allows the observation of specific interactions
(in particular the differentiation between direct hydrogen atom contacts)
that are unbiased in our simulation but only rely on the particular
choice of electronic structure method. For example, the atomic specific
interactions are obtained under explicit accounting of polarization.
We can access the varying partial charges on the ions and atoms considering
charge transfer and polarization effects, which are fixed in force-field
simulations. Furthermore, we are able to calculate vibrational spectra.
These are all quantities that are not or only poorly accessible in
force-field simulations. Table 1 lists the number of components in system A and system B.
The ratio among the number of components of [C4C1Im]+, [Cl]−, and [BF4]− is the same for every system and is chosen according
to the material synthesis.9,10

Table 1 Compositions of Simulated AIMD Systems
Chosen According to Experimental Reaction Conditions of Refs (9, 10)a
system	[C4C1Im]+	[Cl]−	[BF4]−	H2O(w/w %)	
A	32	10	22	0(0)	
B	32	10	22	211(36)	
a The numbers refer to the number
of compounds in each system. For water, the mass percentage is shown
in brackets.

The initial
configurations of the simulated cubic boxes were performed
using PACKMOL, the chosen densities referred to the experimental values
of the material synthesis mentioned before (e.g., Figure 1).72 AIMD simulations have been performed using the CP2K73 code and the built-in QUICKSTEP74 module at a DFT approximation level. The QUICKSTEP method uses hybrid
Gaussian and plane wave approaches to build the wave function and
calculates the potential energy surface and the energy gradient acting
on the atoms. The molecularly optimized double-ζ basis set (MOLOPT-DZVP-SR-GTH)75 was chosen for all atoms with the revPBE functional
and the corresponding PBE Goedecker–Teter–Hutter pseudopotentials
for core electrons.76−78 A 400 Ry density CUTOFF criterion with the finest
grid level was employed, together with multigrids number 5 (NGRID
5 and REL_CUTOFF 30) using the smoothing for the electron density
(NN10_SMOOTH) and its derivative (NN10).74 A correction for dispersion interactions has been added by using
the DFT-D3-type pair potential.79,80 1.0 × 10–6 has been chosen as the target accuracy threshold for the self-consistent
field (SCF) convergence evaluation criteria. The DIIS minimizer was
used to reach a faster orbital transformation via direct inversion
in the iterative subspace.73 The maximum
number of SCF iterations to be performed for one iteration was set
to 100, while a maximum of 10 iterations were performed for outer
SCF loops. Periodic boundary conditions were applied to avoid boundary
effects. With the aid of Nosé–Hoover chain thermostats
with a time constant of the thermostat chain of 50 fs, the canonical
(NVT) ensemble was used. A equilibration/relaxation over 5 ps has
been performed defining the keyword REGION MASSIVE, so that for every
degree of freedom of each single atom, a thermostat is used individually
to achieve a faster equilibration. After the equilibration/relaxation
part, this keyword was excluded. The production run was performed
at a given temperature of 380 K and cover 190 ps for system A and
96 ps for system B. The time step was chosen to be 0.5 fs. During
the production run, the Mulliken population analysis and the Blöchl
method were applied every 200 steps to assign the partial charges
on atoms.81,82

Figure 1 Simulation box for system A (left) and system
B (right). Representation
in licorice, color code: [C4C1Im]+, green; [BF4]−, orange; [Cl]−, red; and water, blue.

Analysis
Our open source program trajectory analyzer
and visualizer (TRAVIS) was used to process the output trajectories
of all of the simulations.83 This tool
offers different kinds of functions allowing the analysis of the interaction
among the components of the systems. Intra- and intermolecular interactions
can be taken into account. In this work, radial distribution functions
(RDFs), number integrals (NIs), combined distribution functions (CDFs,
as a combination of for example RDFs and angular distribution functions
(ADFs)), Voronoi analysis, and calculated power spectra will have
a main role to describe the interactions in play. The NI is obtained
as integral of g(r) 1  with Nc being
the number of particles within the first solvation shell (from 0 to rmin, the first minimum of g(r)) and ρ the density. It allows us to determine
the number of neighbors around a central atom, fragment, or virtual
site (e.g., center of mass/ring/geometry). The integral to the first
minimum of g(r) gives the coordination
number of the first shell neighbors, the second minimum, the number
of second shell neighbors, and so on. TRAVIS allows the user to choose
a specific site of a structure (atom, center of the mass, or center
of a ring (CoR)) to generate the distribution functions, enabling
the user to discern between different interactions of the same pair
of molecules. This feature is used to distinguish the three different
hydrogen atoms on the imidazolium ring, the imidazolium center of
the ring, and the different carbons of the imidazolium side chains.
The nomenclature of the imidazolium cation atoms is shown in the labeling
of Figure 2. All of
the data obtained have been processed with either XMGRACE84 or GNUPLOT85 for
the generation of the figures. To give a more specified insight into
the structural behavior of our systems, domain analysis and radical
Voronoi tessellation were performed.86,87

Figure 2 Labeling of
different interaction sites on [C4C1Im]+.

Results
Ion Interplay
First insight into the behavior of the
IL mixture under the influence of water can be gained by considering
the interactions of ions in the two investigated systems, namely,
the water-free system A and the water-containing system B. We will
focus on interactions between counter ions because the like-ion-RDFs
show the usual alternating pattern and thus were moved to the Supporting Information (SI).

We calculated
the RDFs between the center of imidazolium ring (CoR) and the chloride
atom (Cl) as well as the boron atom (B(BF4)) of the tetrafluoroborate
anion. Obviously, we expect the two anions to behave differently since
the latter is weakly coordinating and the former is strongly coordinating.
Furthermore, the [Cl]− is strongly hydrophilic,
while the [BF4]− anion can be characterized
as less hydrophilic than [Cl]−. Additionally, [BF4]− can undergo hydrolysis.88

Figure 3 shows that
in system A (dashed line) for CoR-[Cl]− (black)
the first peak is twice as high as the one of the CoR-[BF4]− (red) RDF, indicating a very directed interaction
between [Cl]− and the cation. Furthermore, the cation–anion
network is tighter when considering the [Cl]− anions
as compared to the [BF4]− anions, which
is reflected in a much shorter location (40 pm) of the first peak;
see Figure 3 and Table 2. In system B, the
relations change such that the peak heights approach each other, with
CoR-[BF4]− being slightly higher, which
is a typical effect of dilution. The chloride anion is still closer
to the cation than the center of mass of the [BF4]− anion.

Figure 3 RDFs of the interaction between the center of imidazolium
ring
(CoR) and the anions in system A (dashed) and B (solid). Please note,
for the [BF4]− anion, the central boron
atom is chosen to observe the overall polar (P) structure.

Table 2 Distance of the First RDF Maximum
and Minimum as Well as the Value of NIs at the First Minimuma
 	X	r(X-Cl)max	r(X-Cl)min	NI		
A	H2	239	455	0.5	1.7	
A	H4	250	405	0.4	1.4	
A	H5	251	405	0.4	1.4	
A	CoR	452	700	1.8	5.6	
B	H2	259	402	0.2	0.6	
B	H4	270	402	0.1	0.4	
B	H5	270	402	0.1	0.4	
B	CoR	458	700	0.9	2.9	
B	H(H2O)	221	 	 	 	
 	X	r(X-F)max	r(X-B)min	NI		
A	H2	233	355	2.0	0.7	
A	H4	235	355	1.5	0.6	
A	H5	236	355	1.6	0.6	
A	CoR	492*	700	3.6	5.3	
B	H2	232	330	0.9	0.3	
B	H4	236	330	0.8	0.3	
B	H5	241	330	0.8	0.3	
B	CoR	502*	700	2.5	3.7	
B	H(H2O)	209	 	 	 	
a  gives the value for
the atom combination
the other way around; * indicates that X-B is used instead of X-F.

Table 2 lists also
the values of the NI and the  at the first RDF minimum.
Approximately,
5.6 and 5.3 cations surround the anions ([Cl]− and
[BF4]−, respectively) in the water-free
mixture. Addition of water leads to a reduction of the cation–anion
coordination to 2.9 and 3.7; see Table 2 but also Figure 4. In the water-free system A, the cation is surrounded
by twice as many [BF4]− anions (3.6)
as [Cl]− anions (1.8), which is exactly what one
would expect with respect to the composition of the mixture. However,
this is not the case in the moist mixture, where the cation is surrounded
by 2.7 times more [BF4]− than [Cl]− (2.5 vs 0.9). Interestingly, [Cl]− is surrounded by slightly more cations than [BF4]− in system A; see the gray dashed curve compared to
the orange dashed curve (Figure 4, upper panel). The opposite is the case in the moist
mixture of system B with a reduced coordination number of approximately
2.9 and 3.7 for the cations surrounding the anions (Figure 4, lower panel).

Figure 4 NIs (upper panel: system
A and lower panel: system B) of the interaction
between the center of imidazolium ring (CoR) and the anions. In the
NI, the first atom (site) is surrounded by the amount of second atom
(site), i.e., CoR-Cl indicates that the cation is surrounded by that
many chlorides at a certain distance.

Overall, it is apparent that the coordination number between
the
cation and the anion is reduced by water through interference of the
cation–anion network. Note that, with respect to the four different
water regimes in ionic liquids identified by Canongia Lopes,48 the composition of this study lies in the bicontinuous
system. The present xH2O is
0.87 calculated as in ref (48) from nH2O/(nH2O + nIP) with nIP being the number of ion pairs.
The authors emphasize that xH2O = 0.8 can be considered as a threshold since many processes happen
around that value, e.g., the average number of neighbors rapidly falls
from ∼4 to just 2, indicating significant structural modifications
in the polar network.

To further understand the perturbation
of the Coulombic network,
we also plot the anion–anion interaction in Figure 5. We observe almost no changes
for the [BF4]− anion RDF with itself.
Most significant is a slightly reduced interionic distance. In contrast
to [BF4]−, the distance between the [Cl]− anions is increased significantly by water. This effect
is also visible in the RDF characterizing the interplay of both anion
types.

Figure 5 RDFs between the anion systems A (dashed line) and B (solid line).

Hydrogen Bond Acceptor
Interaction
The hydrogen bond
acceptor capabilities of imidazolium-based ILs play a crucial role
for physicochemical properties. The RDFs (Figure 6) show that water increases the distance
between the hydrophilic [Cl]− anion and H2, H4,
and H5 (also shown in Table 2 and the SI for H4 and H5), while
the peak position of the hydrogen bond donor atom of the hydrophobic
anion (F) is barely affected. The large peak height in system A indicates
that the contact in the ionic liquid without water is very strong
and thus directional (Figure 6), which is not the case for [BF4]−. This indicates that the [Cl]− anions transfer
from being situated in the ionic liquid, in hydrogen bonds (HBs) with
the cations, to the water continuum, while the [BF4]− anion–cation interaction is almost unperturbed,
and in the water mixture, this interplay majorly contributes to the
ionic liquid network.

Figure 6 RDFs between
the H2 hydrogen atoms and the contact atoms of the
anions in systems A (dashed line) and B (solid line). The RDF for
H(H2O) is also shown in blue.

Figure 7 NI of system A (upper panel) and system B (lower panel) between
the H2 hydrogen atoms and the contact atoms of the anions in systems
A (dashed line) and B (solid line). Coordination has to be read like
in Figure 4.

Interestingly, the shortest HB
acceptor distance can be observed
for the proton of the “uncharged” water molecule with
the anions and not between the counter ions. Since the HB distance
is often linked to the hydrogen bond strength,89 this indicates that the strongest hydrogen bond donor capabilities
are displayed by water, which strongly reflect in the charge spreading;
see section Spectroscopy for the detailed
discussion. Please note that the distance between H(H2O)
and F is shortest. However, [Cl]− possesses a larger
van der Waals radius and, thus, a comparison of the HB distance between
[Cl]− and F cannot be related to the HB length or
directionality. This is supported by the first maximum of the F-H(H2O)-RDF, which is below the statistical average and, thus,
indicates overall poor HB interactions between water and the weakly
coordinating anion.

According to the NIs (Table 2 and Figure 7), the H2 ring hydrogen atoms are surrounded in the
first solvent
shell by approximately 0.5 chloride anions and 2.0 fluor atoms of
the [BF4]− anions. This is reduced in
water to values of 0.2 for the chloride anions and 0.9 for the fluor
atoms of the [BF4]− anions. Therefore,
the strongest HB interactions between counter ions are reduced by
60% for the strong coordinating anion, while it is only reduced by
45% for the weak coordinating one.

It is known89 that a strong hydrogen
bond as in the water dimer can be more or less directional, i.e.,
the donor-H···acceptor angles assume values of approximately
180°. The directionality of the hydrogen bond can be investigated
by considering both acceptor atom–proton distance and the donor
atom–proton–acceptor atom angle in combined distribution
functions (CDFs). Figure 8 plots for the x axis the acceptor–proton
distance and for the y axis the hydrogen bond angle.
In system A, there are much more distinct areas for the H2···[Cl]− hydrogen bond than for the H2···F(BF4) hydrogen bond, indicated by the red area close to 180°
for the [Cl]−-CDF. In the presence of water, the
situation changes such that the areas in the [Cl]−-CDF are more smeared out and resemble much more the [BF4]− map, showing that the linear hydrogen bond becomes
less likely. Also, the on-top position (green area close to 0°
and 600 pm) also losses probability, while the in-between regions
are now more populated than in system A.

Figure 8 CDFs of the RDFs (x axis) and ADFs (y axis) for the hydrogen
bond C2–H2···Cl (left)
and C2–H2···F (right) in systems A (water-free,
above) and B (water-containing, below). The RDF is calculated between
H2 and the atom of the anion, while the angle is taken among C2, H2,
and the atom of the anion.

Solvation Structure of Water
So far we highlighted
the influence of water on the interplay of ions and hydrogen bonds.
This section will focus on the solvation structure of water, which
is depicted in Figure 9 and Table 3.

Figure 9 RDFs (upper
panel) and NIs (lower panel) between the water oxygen
and the center of ring, the chloride atom of the [Cl]− anion, and the boron atom of the [BF4]− anion.

Table 3 Location of First
Maximum (rmax), Minimum (rmin), and Number Integrals (NI/) at the First Minimuma
 	rmax	rmin	NI		
CoR	430	522	6.5	1.0	
Cl	318	398	5.2	0.2	
B(BF4)	374	510	6.2	0.6	
O(H2O)	286	400	4.6	 	
H(H2O)	186	254	 	 	
a The first compound “sees”
the amount of the water oxygen (NI) and vice versa ().

Water is closest to other water
molecules (blue curve in Figure 9a) and assumes the
usual hydrogen bonds, i.e., H···O of 186 pm and O···O
distance of 286 pm; see Table 3. For the ions, the following order can be observed: the [Cl]− anion approaches water more and causes a much higher
peak than the [BF4]− anion, although
it has to be kept in mind that the contact fluor atoms are able to
assume shorter distances with the hydrogen atoms of water than the
chlorine atoms; see Table 2. Below 400 pm, water sees more [Cl]− anions
than cations or the other [BF4]− anions,
which can be attributed to the size of the ions; see the dark green
curve in Figure 9,
lower panel. That the strong coordinating [Cl]− anions
are heavily solvated by water is apparent from the light green curve
in Figure 9, bottom.
Furthermore, the cation and the [BF4]− anion are exposed to the water and share similar solvent shells
of approximately six water molecules. Within the ionic liquid mixture,
water shows a coordination number with respect to itself of 4.6; see Table 3. Therefore, water
interacts strongly with all components as highlighted by the large
NI.

Side Chain Behavior
To obtain a comprehensive picture,
we also consider the behavior of the cation side chains. Long side
chains in ionic liquids are known to induce microheterogeneity,30,90 i.e., the nanosegregation between polar and nonpolar (NP) parts
of the ionic liquids. Although these effects are usually only observed
for side chains larger than a butyl side chain, first indications
for the side chain aggregation can also be observed with a butyl side
chain.

In Figure 10 (upper panel), the RDFs for system A show stronger interaction
for the terminal carbon atom of the butyl chain with their own species
(dark green curve) than for the carbon atoms of the methyl groups
with themselves (black curve) or the mixed interaction (red function).
This is also reflected in the NIs (Figure 10, lower panel) which show that the terminal
carbon atoms of the butyl group share more terminal carbon atom neighbors
than the mixed interplay followed by the methyl group interaction
with itself. Thus, in system A, the interaction between the butyl
chains is the most favored. The situation changes slightly in the
water-containing system, which shows that even the nonpolar parts
of the ionic liquids are affected by the water addition, of course
not to such a degree as the polar part of the ionic liquid. Interestingly,
the interplay of the butyl chains with itself (Ct–Ct) is slightly
reduced, which is visible in the RDF (Figure 10, upper panel), and the coordination numbers
are sizably decreased, as indicated by the NIs (see Figure 10, lower panel), which is counterintuitive
as one would assume that water makes the hydrophobic parts stick more
together. The interaction between butyl chains and methyl groups become
slightly more pronounced in the moist system than in system A. The
methyl interaction with its own kind is strongly reduced so that the
peak even assumes values smaller than 1.

Figure 10 RDFs (upper panel) and
NIs (lower panel) between different carbon
atoms. Cm: methyl group; Ct: terminal carbon of the butyl chain in
systems A (water-free) and B (water-containing). Please note that  of Ct–Cm meets
exactly Cm–Ct
and therefore is not shown.

Due to the small size of the anions, π–π
stacking
seems possible. This enables the interaction of the methyl groups.
The addition of water to the system leads to a weaker aggregation
between cations and anions; consequently, the interaction between
the cations is hindered. Figure 11 shows the CDF of the CoR–CoR distance and the
angle between the two normal vectors of neighbored imidazolium planes
(as described in detail in the caption of the figure). A unique cation
arrangement is highlighted by the red area for system A in this figure.
The short CoR–CoR distance between 400 and 500 pm in combination
with the parallel orientation of the N1–N2 vectors indicates
π–π stacking of the cations, already observed by
means of NMR spectroscopy and theoretical approaches.91,92 Furthermore, each nonpolar side chain prefers the contact to itself
in this arrangement. There are a few high probable entries at 180°,
which become more pronounced in the water-containing system B. Moreover,
large changes can be observed for the parallel orientation in system
B, i.e.; see lack of red area around 0–30° and 400–500
pm in Figure 11.

Figure 11 CDFs
of the RDFs (x axis) and ADFs (y axis) for the cation orientation with respect to another cation
in systems A (upper panel) and B (lower panel). The RDF is calculated
between CoR and CoR, while the angle is taken between N1 and N2 vectors
(see labels in Figure 2).

To further understand the water
effect on the side chain of the
cation in the ionic liquid mixture, we plot the intramolecular distance
distribution of N1–Ct. This analysis reveals which conformation
the side chain assumes; see Figure 12.93 The conformation is
determined by the arrangement of two units, namely, the N1–C6–C7–C8
unit and the C6–C7–C8–Ct unit. Both segments
can hold a trans (t) or gauche (g) alignment, resulting in four different
conformations tt, tg, gt, and gg. These conformations can be distinguished
directly by the intramolecular N1–Ct distance. The little shoulder
at 325 pm can be assigned as a conformation where the terminal carbon
atom group sits on top of the imidazolium ring. Previously, we observed
that this distribution is nearly anion-independent and that the gt
and tg conformations are most probable.93 This is in agreement with our system A simulation. Interestingly,
we loss tt conformations and gain gg due to the addition of water.
Thus, water crumbles the butyl side chains. This unexpected behavior
might be a result of the preferred parallel orientation of the N1–N2
vectors in the pure IL system, which pushes the butyl chain into the
linear arrangement. In a gg arrangement, the alkyl chain above the
imidazolium plane is in competition with a π–π
stacking structure. However, the major contribution to the structure
of the pure ionic liquid system is the Coulombic interactions, while
the van der Waals interactions of the nonpolar chains play a minor
role. Therefore, the addition of water allows a higher mobility of
the nonpolar butyl chain facilitated by a more flexible cation arrangement
to each other. This must have severe consequences when considering
such mixtures with water in extraction processes in which the nonpolar
nanophase plays a role.

Figure 12 Side chain conformations of the cation. gg
= gauche–gauche
(orange), gt = gauche–trans (green), tg = trans–gauche
(blue), and tt = trans–trans (purple) conformation. Assignment
of histogram peaks and histogram of intramolecular N1–Ct distance
of the cation. Solid lines: system B; dashed line: system A.

Voronoi Analysis
With the aid of our Voronoi analysis,86,87 we can dissect
the molecules of a condensed system into subsets
and check connectivities and neighborhood relations within the system.
Small numbers indicate a very connected microphase with number 1 pointing
to completely connected subgroups. Larger numbers indicate that this
kind of subset is dispersed in the liquid rather than connected. Turning
next to this Voronoi analysis, we show in Table 4 the number of domains. The liquids are divided
into polar (P: all polar parts) and nonpolar (NP: the propyl rest
of the butyl chain) subsets as well as into polar ionic (Pion), nonpolar (NP), and water (H2O) subsets. Furthermore,
we include a subset in which we add the [Cl]− anion
to the water subset (H2O + Cl) and consider both separately
from polar ionic (Pion) and the nonpolar (NP) group to
find out whether the [Cl]− anions migrate into the
water microphase.

Table 4 Domain Voronoi Analysis for Systems
A and B, First Columna
 	P	NP	Pion	NP	H2O	Pion-Cl	NP	H2O + Cl	
A	1.0	1.0	1.0	1.0	 	1.0	1.0	8.7	
B	1.0	5.3	1.2	5.3	1.2	1.0	5.3	1.2	
a Next block: dissection into polar
(P: ring, methyl group, anion, water) and nonpolar (NP: butyl chain)
subsets. Middle block: the dissection into polar ionic (Pion: ring, methyl group, anions), nonpolar (NP: butyl chain), and water
(H2O). Last block: [Cl]− is subtracted
from the polar subset and included in the water subset.

As previously observed for several
pure imidazolium-based ionic
liquids,30,86,87,90 dissecting the liquid into polar and nonpolar subsets
leads to one connected polar domain in system A as well as in system
B; see Table 4. While
the nonpolar domain also forms one connected domain (this is next
to the chain length dependent on the spacer between side chain and
ring) in system A, the complete connection between nonpolar subsets
is broken in the moist system, clearly indicating the intrusion or
mixing of water with the ionic structure. More insight is provided
by the dissection into ionic polar, nonpolar, and water subsets. This
reveals a polar ionic microphase that is perturbed by water. Interestingly,
the “one domain” behavior of the ionic part is recovered
if [Cl]− is considered as a part of the water domain.
This indicates that the Cl anions are taken up in a water environment.

Complementary insight is obtained from the surface coverage in Table 5. In many cases, there
is a relatively high surface coverage by the side chain, which results
from the side chain being chemically bonded to the polar part of the
cation and the cation being the most abundant ionic species. Accounting
for both anions together in system A, it is obvious that the anions
mostly spread over the surface of the ring. The [BF4]− anions cover more of the ring than the [Cl]− anions. This even exceeds the factor two of the anion ratio and
is related most likely to the size. The side chain is mainly covered
by the ring (covalent bond), which is followed by other side chains
to 28.9%. There is some sizable amount of [BF4]− anions (19%) in the proximity of the butyl chain, while the chloride
anion is rather absent (2.3%), reflecting the stronger hydrophobic
behavior of [BF4]−. The anions are largely
covered by the polar part of the cation with a higher coverage of
the [Cl]− anions (81%) than that of the [BF4]− anion (65.3%). Side chain coverage does
play a role with a higher priority for the [BF4]− anion.

Table 5 Surface Coverage from Voronoi Analysis
for Systems A and Ba
 	ring*	C3H7*	BF4*	Cl*	H2O*	
System A	
ring	27.8	49.8	65.3	81.0	 	
C3H7	35.7	28.9	31.3	16.8	 	
BF4	28.4	19.0	3.0	1.8	 	
Cl	8.1	2.3	0.4	0.4	 	
System B	
ring	12.3	36.5	39.0	25.5	20.0	
C3H7	25.9	15.9	17.4	10.7	12.0	
BF4	16.8	10.5	2.2	0.6	8.4	
Cl	2.5	1.5	0.1	0.0	2.9	
H2O	42.5	35.6	41.3	63.2	56.7	
a The subsets are
ring (ring of the
cation plus methyl group plus the CH2 space of the butyl
side chain), C3H7 (the propyl rest of butyl
side chain), BF4 (atoms of [BF4]−), Cl ([Cl]−), and water. * Indicates referred
coverage, columns = observed surface (values given are in percentages).

Addition of water changes the
situation drastically. Water covers
each subset by more than 35% and, thus, each part of the IL network
is perturbed significantly. Due to the high proportion of water, the
coverage of each IL subset by the IL is reduced noticeably. The side
chain coverage by other side chain subsets is reduced as well. The
[BF4]− anion suffers a similar reduction
of the ionic liquid subset coverage as the polar part of the cation
(ring). Although the overall coverage of the [BF4]− anion with the cation is reduced, in the moist system,
it is now more covered by the cation (39.0%) than the chloride anion
(25.5%). In fact, the most pronounced changes can be observed for
the [Cl]− anions: the 81% surface coverage by the
ring subset is reduced to 25.5%, while the coverage of the anions
by water is 63.2%.

Dynamical Properties
While structural
information is
important with respect to arrangements in the liquids, dynamical properties
help to estimate availability and mobility. Insight into the lifetime
of certain aggregates can be obtained in terms of continuous autocorrelation
functions.94

In Figure 13, we display the continuous
autocorrelation functions.94 Obviously,
all investigated dynamical properties are significantly accelerated
by water, which is visible by the faster decay of the autocorrelation
functions. In the water-free IL mixture, the strongly coordinating
Cl– anion center of the ring aggregate decays more
slowly than the weakly coordinating [BF4]− anion aggregate, which also indicates that in the competition of
the anions for the cation, the strongly coordinating anion succeeds.
The situation changes when water is added. In the water-free system,
the strongest hydrogen donor site constitutes the H2 position at the
cation, see Figures 6 and 8, and in the water-containing system,
this role is taken by the proton from H2O. This is the
reason why not only the aggregates decay faster in general but also
the CoR-anion groups reverse their order. While the CoR-Cl clusters
possess a longer lifetime than the CoR-BF4-aggregates in
the water-free system, this trend is reversed by the addition of water.
Keeping in mind that water is a fluctuating network of hydrogen bonds,
it is not surprising that the aggregates formed with water show this
order of mobility. It is well-known that an intermittent function95 or even one based on the reactive flux theory96,97 would describe the process with the fluctuating water better. Unfortunately,
the accessible simulation runtime is too short for this kind of analysis.94

Figure 13 Continuous autocorrelation of the aggregates based on
a distance
criterion of 700 pm for CoR-anions. The other aggregate was determined
at approximately their first minimum in the RDF, which is 400 pm for
O–O and O–Cl and 500 pm for O–B(BF4).

To analyze the effect of water
addition on the transport properties
of ILs, we determined the mean square displacement (msd) of the CoR
of the cations and the central atoms of the anions. Figure 14 shows that the msd for both
anions and cations is similar, within the uncertainty of the calculations
as previously observed in AIMD. Due to the fact that the sampling
for this property is too short and the system size too small, we obviously
do not calculate diffusion constants.98,99 Nevertheless,
trends with respect to adding water on the msd curves can be considered.
While the CoR’s of the cation and the chloride anion diffuse
similarly in system A, the [BF4]− anions
seem to be more mobile. This order changes in the moist system B in
which the chloride anions seem to be much more mobile than the [BF4]− anions and the cation. While the order
of the mobility could still be a result of insufficient sampling,
the acceleration of the ion dynamics by water is too strong and clearly
an effect of water, confirmed by experimental observations. Of course,
water is much more mobile than any other compound in the system. These
conclusions are also in line with a previous work by Maginn and co-workers,100 in which they study the influence of water
on different neat ionic liquids, showing that water has different
effects depending on the nature of the anions.

Figure 14 Mean square displacement
of the ions and water in system A (dashed
lines) and in system B (solid line).

Charge Analysis
In the following section, we carry
out a charge analysis. The obtained absolute values depend on many
criteria, some of them already arise from the setup of our simulations,
but most important is of course the method for the charge calculation
itself. Therefore, our main objective is not to get absolute numbers
for our partial charges, but the distribution of these. Through this
approach, we are able to observe the influence of the polarization
effects on the electron density of our system and as a result on our
partial charges. As mentioned before, two different methods have been
used for the assignment of the charges (the Blöchl and Mulliken
methods). Hereby, we report the charges derived using the Blöchl
method as it can deal with dense systems and periodic boundary conditions.101 However, it is important to note that Mulliken
and Blöchl are in agreement with each other. Figure 15 shows the charge distributions
for the cations, anions, and water molecules, in systems A and B.
In system A, the total average charge on the cation is 0.62e, on [Cl]− is −0.41e, and on [BF4]− is −0.71e. In system B, the total average charge on the cation is
0.57e, on [Cl]− is −0.27e, on [BF4]− is −0.59e, and on H2O is −0.01e. The perk of this visualization is that it allows us to appreciate
that charges are not fixed but they vary along the simulation and
that they fluctuate, following a distribution, which recall the Gaussian
one. It is noteworthy that at half-height of the Gaussian, the values
can still vary in a range of 0.4e in the case of
the cations and 0.2e in the case of the anions and
water molecules. Those ranges of “freedom” are reduced
to about half when the Mulliken method is taken into account (SI). Concerning the position of the maximum of
those distributions, we see that considering system B instead of system
A reduces the absolute value of the charge of the cations and the
anions; see Figure 15. In other words, cations and anions are losing their charge (which
is especially evident in the case of the anions), which is originated
by the charge transfer to water molecules. The charge transfer is
also confirmed by the position and shape of the charge distribution
of the water molecules. In fact, the water charge distribution exhibits
a shoulder on the negative side, which implies that part of the charge
of the anions has been shifted on the water molecules. Another fascinating
fact is given by the relative position of the charge distributions
of the anions. In both analysis (Blöchl and Mulliken), [Cl]− is more positive than [BF4]−, which is in line with the already described stronger interaction
of this anion with the cations and which consequently leads to a more
pronounced charge transfer. Noteworthy is that compared to the cation
charge distributions, the anion charge distributions are more influenced
by the presence of water molecules.

Figure 15 Comparison of the total charge distribution
of the cations, anions,
and water molecules in systems A and B.

Figure 17 depicts
the charge distribution of different groups, belonging to the side
chains of the cations. Although a significant difference between systems
A and B is not observable, the wide distribution of the overall charge
of these groups is interesting. In fact, when we compare the overall
charges of the same groups in classical the molecular dynamics force
field, we find some differences (see Figure 16). Such a comparison is made to underline
how much those values change once polarization and charge transfer
have occurred and to guide future force field developments. In Canongia
Lopes and Pádua force fields, which are among the most used,
the methyl group carries an overall charge of 0.22e and the first methylene of the butyl chain carries a charge of 0.09e. In our evaluation, those two charges are nearly identical
(see Figure 17, black and purple distributions, charge
= 0.06e). When we consider the second methylene group
of the butyl chain, the overall charge of the force field is 0.13e, slightly higher than that of the first methylene group
(0.09e). Compared with the Canongia Lopes and Pádua
force field, our results are clearly different. In fact, for the second
methylene group, the average total charge is 0.01e, which is lower than the charge on the first methylene group (0.06e). The third methylene group and the terminal methyl group
of the butyl chain in the force field are described by means of the
opls-aa charges, and the overall charge for both of them is 0. The
calculated charges for these groups are, respectively, 0.03e and −0.06e. Nevertheless, those
qualitative differences are not surprising when one takes into account
that to obtain the charges for the force field, static quantum chemical
calculations have been used. Those calculations are typically performed
on single optimized molecules (or ions in this case) in vacuum, and
they do not take into account the solvation of the molecules.

Figure 16 Charges on
the groups (methylene and methyl) of the side chain
of the cation. In black are shown the charges from Canongia Lopes
and Pádua force field, and in red are shown the average charges
in system A calculated by means of the Blöchl method.

Figure 17 Comparison of the partial charge distribution
of different groups
belonging to the side chains of the cations in systems A and B.

Spectroscopy
It
is possible to obtain the vibrational
density of states (VDOSs) from an MD trajectory as the power spectrum
(Fourier transform of the time autocorrelation function of the atomic
velocities, VACF). Figure 18 compares the VDOSs obtained from the VACF of the two systems
A and B (upper panel) with experimentally obtained Raman spectra of
pure [C4C1Im][Cl] and [C4C1Im][BF4] (middle panel).

Figure 18 Upper panel: complete power spectrum
calculated for system A (gray)
and system B (black). Middle panel: experimental Raman spectrum of
pure [C4C1Im][Cl] and [C4C1Im][BF4]. Lower panel: experimental Raman spectrum of
pure [C16C1Im][Cl] and [C16C1Im][BF4].

The observed results with (black) and without (gray) water
content
are quite close, and the general shape of the spectrum is similar
in both cases. Nevertheless, three features with respect to water
should be specially mentioned: first, the spectrum obtained from the
trajectory with water gains intensity in the low-wavenumber region
due to the modes related to the movement of the heavy atoms; see also Figure 19 in which the spectra
are decomposed with respect to the different compounds. Second, it
has one additional peak at around 1640 cm–1, which
is due to the water bending motion. Third, there are some entries
above 3300 cm–1, which are related to the O–H
stretch modes. However, there are also changes with respect to the
ionic liquid ions. Up to 1200 cm–1, the [BF4]− anion shows entries; see Figure 19 (upper panel, orange spectrum).
Upon water addition, there is a loss of intensity, and below 300 cm–1, the modes are shifted to lower wavenumbers. In the
low-wavenumber region, the cation features ring breathing. Between
500 and 1000 cm–1, the modes originating from vibrations
involving carbon atoms are visible. The peaks between 2800 and 3000
cm–1 stem from the butyl chain attached to the imidazolium
ring,98,102 which are attributed to the stretching and
Fermi resonance modes of CH2 and CH3. Features
between 3000 and 3200 cm–1 are attributed to the
C–H vibration modes of the imidazolium ring.98,102

Figure 19 Power spectrum decomposed for the particular ions.

It is possible to compare the predictions of our
calculations with
the experimental Raman spectrum. The agreement is satisfactory: the
global form of the experimental spectrum is well reproduced from the
DFT calculations. The calculated spectrum shows a red shift of the
modes in the high wavenumbers when compared with the experimental
data.

Conclusions
By means of ab initio molecular dynamics
simulations, in this article,
we have studied the ionic liquid mixture composed of three components
[C4C1Im]+, [BF4]−, and [Cl]− without and with water to understand
the effect of water on an ionic liquid mixture as it is applied in
material synthesis.9,10 This is the first AIMD study
investigating the effect of water on an ionic liquid mixture.

For our particular composition (i.e., 0.87 mole fraction xH2O), we observe a strong perturbation
of the ionic liquid network by water in which the cation–anion
coordination numbers are strongly reduced. While the [BF4]− anion interplay with itself remains almost the
same when adding water, the other like-ion interactions ([Cl]− with itself and interacting with the [BF4]− anion) change such that these become less probable.
The strong directional coordination between the ring hydrogen atoms
and chloride is tremendously reduced, and chloride forms strong hydrogen
bonds with water, while the weakly coordinating [BF4]− anions though being in contact with water show almost
no particular hydrogen bond contacts to water. The amount of water
added even influences the side chain behavior, though to a lesser
extent. The side chain crumbles more compared with the pure mixture,
and the orientation of the cation with respect to other cations is
now more random. An interesting insight is obtained from the Voronoi
tessellation analysis of the domain count and the surface coverage.
As usual, in ionic liquids, the polar network in the IL mixture without
water is one connected domain and the nonpolar side chains also form
one domain, which generally depends on the spacer and the chain length.
Addition of water disperses the side chain aggregation, independently
whether water is counted as extra subset or added to the polar part
of the IL mixture. Dispersed nonpolar groups usually can be found
when short side chains are chosen or when large anions form the ionic
liquids. Additionally, the polar ionic groups are now slightly dispersed,
which usually is never observed for a water-free ionic liquid. The
distinction of a polar ionic and the water subset clearly shows that
the [Cl]− anions are “pulled” into
the water continuum. Similar conclusions can be drawn from the surface
coverage. While in the pure mixture, the dominance of the cation coverage
by the [BF4]− anion is only a factor
of 3.5, it changes when water is added to a factor of 6.7. In the
pure mixture, the coverage of the strongly coordinating [Cl]− anion is to 81% by the polar part (ring) of the cation and it is
only to 65.3% for the [BF4]− anion. This
coverage is reduced in total, and the priority is changed when water
is added. Even more strikingly, the ring coverage of the water-containing
system (25.5%) is much less than that of the water coverage (63.2%)
of the [Cl]− anion.

Addition of water to ionic
liquids might in principle lead to an
increase in nanosegregation and domain formation for the nonpolar
part of the ionic liquid. However, in this particular system, water
strongly interacts with the [Cl]− anions and “pulls”
them out of the polar ionic liquid network. The side chain is thus
more exposed to an IL network with large anions and thus becomes more
dispersed in the system. The charge analysis, which reflects the electronic
structure of our systems, yields further insights into the dynamical
situation of our investigated systems and the crucial role of polarization
effects of those. Noteworthy is the charge transfer from the anions
to the water molecules and the different arrangement and shape of
the charge distribution of [BF4]− and
[Cl]− with respect to their coordination behavior.
These observations have large impacts on the applications of ILs to
all of the different fields: they show how different modifications
of nanostructuring can be obtained by adding the right components
to a mixture and how they can be dissolved. They also show that different
components can be made available by transferring them from one microcontinuum
to the other. These possibilities have to be thoroughly understood
to make them optimal for material synthesis, in energy devices, or
in separation processes. Furthermore, our study has impacts on systems
with added salting-out or coordinating agents. As shown in this study,
if one chooses an ionic liquid mixture in which components of the
IL already play this role, the addition of such agents might be redundant
because those can be contained in the solvent itself.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00995.Like-ion RDFs;
acidic hydrogen atom competition; partial
charge analysis, Mulliken (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00995_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the priority program 1708 under
the
project KI 768/15-1 and SM 199/11-1. Furthermore B.K. and R.M. greatly
thank the ETN Socrates (http://etn-socrates.eu/) because this project has received funding from the European Union’s
EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation Horizon 2020 under
Grant Agreement No 721385.
==== Refs
References
Armand M. ; Endres F. ; MacFarlane D. R. ; Ohno H. ; Scrosati B. 
Ionic-liquid
materials for the electrochemical challenges of the future . Nat. Mater. 
2009 , 8 , 621 –629 . 10.1038/nmat2448 .19629083 
Navarra M. A. ; Fujimura K. ; Sgambetterra M. ; Tsurumaki A. ; Panero S. ; Nakamura N. ; Ohno H. ; Scrosati B. 
New Ether-functionalized
Morpholinium- and Piperidinium-based Ionic Liquids as Electrolyte
Components in Lithium and Lithium-Ion Batteries . ChemSusChem 
2017 , 10 , 2496 –2504 . 10.1002/cssc.201700346 .28407378 
Díaz M. ; Ortiz A. ; Ortiz I. 
Progress in
the use of ionic liquids
as electrolyte membranes in fuel cells . J. Membr.
Sci. 
2014 , 469 , 379 –396 . 10.1016/j.memsci.2014.06.033 .
Salanne M. 
Ionic Liquids
for Supercapacitor Applications . Top. Curr.
Chem. 
2017 , 375 , 63 10.1007/s41061-017-0150-7 .
Lin Z. ; Goikolea E. ; Balducci A. ; Naoi K. ; Taberna P. ; Salanne M. ; Yushin G. ; Simon P. 
Materials for supercapacitors:
When Li-ion battery power is not enough . Mater.
Today 
2018 , 21 , 419 –436 . 10.1016/j.mattod.2018.01.035 .
Lewandowski A. ; Galinski M. 
Carbon-ionic liquid
double-layer capacitors . J. Phys. Chem. Solids 
2004 , 65 , 281 –286 . 10.1016/j.jpcs.2003.09.009 .
Abbott A. P. ; McKenzie K. J. 
Application of ionic
liquids to the electrodeposition
of metals . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2006 , 8 , 4265 –4279 . 10.1039/b607329h .16986069 
Binnemans K. 
Lanthanides
and Actinides in Ionic Liquids . Chem. Rev. 
2007 , 107 , 2592 –2614 . 10.1021/cr050979c .17518503 
Voepel P. ; Seitz C. ; Waack J. M. ; Zahn S. ; Leichtweiss T. ; Zaichenko A. ; Mollenhauer D. ; Amenitsch H. ; Voggenreiter M. ; Polarz S. ; Smarsly B. M. 
Peering into the
Mechanism of Low-Temperature Synthesis of Bronze-type TiO2 in Ionic Liquids . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2017 , 17 , 5586 –5601 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.7b01231 .
Santner S. ; Yogendra S. ; Weigand J. J. ; Dehnen S. 
Exploring
the Chemical
Reaction Space at the Formation of Chalcogenidometalate Superspheres
in Ionic Liquids . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2017 , 23 , 1999 –2004 . 10.1002/chem.201605988 .28009490 
Groh M. F. ; Mueller U. ; Ahmed E. ; Rothenberger A. ; Ruck M. 
Substitution of conventional high-temperature syntheses of inorganic
compounds by near-room-temperature syntheses in ionic liquids . Z. Naturforsch. B 
2013 , 68 , 1108 –1122 . 10.5560/znb.2013-3141 .
Elfgen R. ; Hollóczki O. ; Ray P. ; Groh M. F. ; Ruck M. ; Kirchner B. 
Theoretical Investigation of the Te4Br2 Molecule in Ionic Liquids . Z. Anorg.
Allg. Chem. 
2017 , 643 , 41 –52 . 10.1002/zaac.201600342 .
Hallett J. P. ; Welton T. 
Room-Temperature Ionic
Liquids: Solvents for Synthesis
and Catalysis. 2 . Chem. Rev. 
2011 , 111 , 3508 –3576 . 10.1021/cr1003248 .21469639 
Holbrey J. D. ; Seddon K. R. 
Ionic Liquids . Clean Technol.
Environ. Policy 
1999 , 1 , 223 –236 . 10.1007/s100980050036 .
Wessel C. ; Zhao L. ; Urban S. ; Ostermann R. ; Djerdj I. ; Smarsly B. M. ; Chen L. ; Hu Y.-S. ; Sallard S. 
Ionic-Liquid Synthesis Route of TiO2(B)
Nanoparticles for Functionalized Materials . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2011 , 17 , 775 –779 . 10.1002/chem.201002791 .21226090 
Balducci A. ; Bardi U. ; Caporali S. ; Mastragostino M. ; Soavi F. 
Ionic liquids for hybrid supercapacitors . Electrochem.
Commun. 
2004 , 6 , 566 –570 . 10.1016/j.elecom.2004.04.005 .
Balducci A. ; Henderson W. A. ; Mastragostino M. ; Passerini S. ; Simon P. ; Soavi F. 
Cycling stability
of a hybrid activated
carbon//poly(3-methylthiophene) supercapacitor with N-butyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium
bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide ionic liquid as electrolyte . Electrochim. Acta 
2005 , 50 , 2233 –2237 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2004.10.006 .
Balducci A. ; Dugas R. ; Taberna P.-L. ; Simon P. ; Plee D. ; Mastragostino M. ; Passerini S. 
High temperature carbon-carbon supercapacitor
using ionic liquid as electrolyte . J. Power
Sources 
2007 , 165 , 922 –927 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2006.12.048 .
Appetecchi G. B. ; Montanino M. ; Balducci A. ; Lux S. F. ; Winterb M. ; Passerini S. 
Lithium insertion
in graphite from ternary ionic liquid-lithium
salt electrolytes: I. Electrochemical characterization of the electrolytes . J. Power Sources 
2009 , 192 , 599 –605 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.12.095 .
Pohlmann S. ; Lobato B. ; Centeno T. A. ; Balducci A. 
The influence of pore
size and surface area of activated carbons on the performance of ionic
liquid based supercapacitors . Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 17287 –17294 . 10.1039/c3cp52909f .24019082 
Béguin F. ; Presser V. ; Balducci A. ; Frackowiak E. 
Carbons and
electrolytes for advanced supercapacitors . Adv.
Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 2219 –2251 . 10.1002/adma.201304137 .24497347 
Tazi S. ; Salanne M. ; Simon C. ; Turq P. ; Pounds M. ; Madden P. A. 
Potential-induced
ordering transition of the adsorbed
layer at the ionic liquid/electrified metal interface . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2010 , 114 , 8453 –8459 . 10.1021/jp1030448 .20527944 
Merlet C. ; Salanne M. ; Rotenberg B. ; Madden P. A. 
Imidazolium ionic
liquid interfaces with vapor and graphite: interfacial tension and
capacitance from coarse-grained molecular simulations . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 16613 –16618 . 10.1021/jp205461g .
Merlet C. ; Rotenberg B. ; Madden P. A. ; Salanne M. 
Computer simulations
of ionic liquids at electrochemical interfaces . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 15781 –15792 . 10.1039/c3cp52088a .23985966 
Pean C. ; Daffos B. ; Merlet C. ; Rotenberg B. ; Taberna P.-L. ; Simon P. ; Salanne M. 
Single electrode
capacitances
of porous carbons in neat ionic liquid electrolyte at 100 C: a combined
experimental and modeling approach . J. Electrochem.
Soc. 
2015 , 162 , A5091 –A5095 . 10.1149/2.0151505jes .
Rupp B. ; Schmuck M. ; Balducci A. ; Winter M. ; Kern W. 
Polymer electrolyte
for lithium batteries based on photochemically crosslinked poly(ethylene
oxide) and ionic liquid . Eur. Polym. J. 
2008 , 44 , 2986 –2990 . 10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2008.06.022 .
Lux S. F. ; Schmuck M. ; Appetecchi G. B. ; Passerini S. ; Winter M. ; Balducci A. 
Lithium insertion in
graphite from
ternary ionic liquid-lithium salt electrolytes: II. Evaluation of
specific capacity and cycling efficiency and stability at room temperature . J. Power Sources 
2009 , 192 , 606 –611 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2009.02.066 .
Lux S. F. ; Schmuck M. ; Jeong S. ; Passerini S. ; Winter M. ; Balducci A. 
Li-ion anodes in air-stable
and hydrophobic
ionic liquid-based electrolyte for safer and greener batteries . Int. J. Energy Res. 
2010 , 34 , 97 –106 . 10.1002/er.1557 .
Vogl T. ; Menne S. ; Kühnel R.-S. ; Balducci A. 
The beneficial effect
of protic ionic liquids on the lithium environment in electrolytes
for battery applications . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2014 , 2 , 8258 –8265 . 10.1039/C3TA15224C .
Kirchner B. ; Hollóczki O. ; Canongia Lopes J. N. ; Pádua A. A. H. 
Multiresolution
calculation of ionic liquids . Wiley Interdiscip.
Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci. 
2014 , 202 –214 . 10.1002/wcms.1212 .
Niedermeyer H. ; Hallett J. P. ; Villar-Garcia I. J. ; Hunt P. A. ; Welton T. 
Mixtures of
ionic liquids . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 7780 10.1039/c2cs35177c .22890419 
Brüssel M. ; Brehm M. ; Pensado A. S. ; Malberg F. ; Ramzan M. ; Stark A. ; Kirchner B. 
On the ideality of binary mixtures
of ionic liquids . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 14 , 13204 10.1039/c2cp41926b .22910970 
Brehm M. ; Weber H. ; Pensado A. S. ; Stark A. ; Kirchner B. 
Proton transfer
and polarity changes in ionic liquid-water mixtures: a perspective
on hydrogen bonds from ab initio molecular dynamics at the example
of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate-water mixtures—Part
1 . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 14 , 5030 10.1039/c2cp23983c .22389030 
Seddon K.
R. ; Stark A. ; Torres M.-J. 
Influence of chloride, water, and
organic solvents on the physical properties of ionic liquids . Pure Appl. Chem. 
2000 , 72 , 2275 –2287 . 10.1351/pac200072122275 .
Sharma A. ; Ghorai P. K. 
Effect of water on structure and dynamics of [BMIM][PF6]
ionic liquid: An all-atom molecular dynamics simulation investigation . J. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 144 , 11450510.1063/1.4944083 .27004885 
Amigues E. ; Hardacre C. ; Keane G. ; Migaud M. ; O’Neill M. 
Ionic liquids—media
for unique phosphorus chemistry . Chem. Commun. 
2006 , 72 –74 . 10.1039/B509248E .
Anthony J. L. ; Maginn E. J. ; Brennecke J. F. 
Solution thermodynamics of imidazolium-based
ionic liquids and water . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 10942 –10949 . 10.1021/jp0112368 .
Jacquemin J. ; Husson P. ; Pádua A. A. ; Majer V. 
Density and viscosity
of several pure and water-saturated ionic liquids . Green Chem. 
2006 , 8 , 172 –180 . 10.1039/B513231B .
Kelkar M. S. ; Maginn E. J. 
Effect of temperature
and water content on the shear
viscosity of the ionic liquid 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
as studied by atomistic simulations . J. Phys.
Chem. B 
2007 , 111 , 4867 –4876 . 10.1021/jp0686893 .17408255 
Deschamps J. ; Costa Gomes M. F. ; Pádua A. A. 
Molecular simulation study of interactions
of carbon dioxide and water with ionic liquids . ChemPhysChem 
2004 , 5 , 1049 –1052 . 10.1002/cphc.200400097 .15298395 
Nockemann P. ; Binnemans K. ; Thijs B. ; Parac-Vogt T. N. ; Merz K. ; Mudring A.-V. ; Menon P. C. ; Rajesh R. N. ; Cordoyiannis G. ; Thoen J. ; Leys J. ; Glorieux C. 
Temperature-Driven
Mixing-Demixing Behavior of Binary Mixtures of the Ionic Liquid Choline
Bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide and Water . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2009 , 113 , 1429 –1437 . 10.1021/jp808993t .19133739 
Wang H. ; Gurau G. ; Kelley S. P. ; Myerson A. S. ; Rogers R. D. 
Hydrophobic
vs. hydrophilic ionic liquid separations strategies in support of
continuous pharmaceutical manufacturing . RSC
Adv. 
2013 , 3 , 10019 –10026 . 10.1039/c3ra41082j .
Kohno Y. ; Ohno H. 
Ionic liquid/water
mixtures: from hostility to conciliation . Chem.
Commun. 
2012 , 48 , 7119 –7130 . 10.1039/c2cc31638b .
Canongia
Lopes J. N. ; Costa Gomes M. F. ; Pádua A. A. 
Nonpolar,
polar, and associating solutes in ionic liquids . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 16816 –16818 . 10.1021/jp063603r .16927967 
Schröder C. ; Rudas T. ; Neumayr G. ; Benkner S. ; Steinhauser O. 
On the collective
network of ionic liquid/water mixtures. I. Orientational structure . J. Chem. Phys. 
2007 , 127 , 23450310.1063/1.2805074 .18154396 
Annapureddy H. V. ; Hu Z. ; Xia J. ; Margulis C. J. 
How does water affect the dynamics
of the room-temperature ionic liquid 1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate
and the fluorescence spectroscopy of coumarin-153 when dissolved in
it? . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2008 , 112 , 1770 –1776 . 10.1021/jp077623k .18198862 
Spickermann C. ; Thar J. ; Lehmann S. ; Zahn S. ; Hunger J. ; Buchner R. ; Hunt P. ; Welton T. ; Kirchner B. 
Why are ionic
liquid ions mainly associated in water? A Car-Parrinello study of
1-ethyl-3-methyl-imidazolium chloride water mixture . J. Chem. Phys. 
2008 , 129 , 10450510.1063/1.2974098 .19044922 
Bernardes C. E. ; Minas da Piedade M. E. ; Canongia Lopes J. N. 
The structure of aqueous solutions
of a hydrophilic ionic liquid: The full concentration range of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium
ethylsulfate and water . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2011 , 115 , 2067 –2074 . 10.1021/jp1113202 .21322619 
Ab
Rani M. A. ; Brant A. ; Crowhurst L. ; Dolan A. ; Lui M. ; Hassan N. H. ; Hallett J. P. ; Hunt P. A. ; Niedermeyer H. ; Perez-Arlandis J. M. ; Schrems M. ; Welton T. ; Wilding R. 
Understanding the polarity
of ionic liquids . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 13 , 16831 –16840 . 10.1039/c1cp21262a .21858359 
Niedermeyer H. ; Hallett J. P. ; Villar-Garcia I. J. ; Hunt P. A. ; Welton T. 
Mixtures of
ionic liquids . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 7780 –7802 . 10.1039/c2cs35177c .22890419 
Feng S. ; Voth G. A. 
Molecular dynamics simulations of imidazolium-based
ionic liquid/water mixtures: alkyl side chain length and anion effects . Fluid Phase Equilib. 
2010 , 294 , 148 –156 . 10.1016/j.fluid.2010.02.034 .
Baldelli S. 
Influence
of water on the orientation of cations at the surface of a room-temperature
ionic liquid: A sum frequency generation vibrational spectroscopic
study . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2003 , 107 , 6148 –6152 . 10.1021/jp027753n .
Rivera-Rubero S. ; Baldelli S. 
Influence of water on the surface of hydrophilic and
hydrophobic room-temperature ionic liquids . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 11788 –11789 . 10.1021/ja0464894 .15382902 
Bowers J. ; Butts C. P. ; Martin P. J. ; Vergara-Gutierrez M. C. ; Heenan R. K. 
Aggregation behavior of aqueous solutions
of ionic
liquids . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 2191 –2198 . 10.1021/la035940m .15835670 
Consorti C. S. ; Suarez P. A. ; de Souza R. F. ; Burrow R. A. ; Farrar D. H. ; Lough A. J. ; Loh W. ; da Silva L. H. ; Dupont J. 
Identification
of 1,3-dialkylimidazolium salt supramolecular aggregates in solution . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 4341 –4349 . 10.1021/jp0452709 .16851500 
Moreno M. ; Castiglione F. ; Mele A. ; Pasqui C. ; Raos G. 
Interaction
of Water with the Model Ionic Liquid [bmim][BF4]: Molecular Dynamics
Simulations and Comparison with NMR Data . J.
Phys. Chem. B 
2008 , 112 , 7826 –7836 . 10.1021/jp800383g .18537287 
Fazio B. ; Triolo A. ; Di Marco G. 
Local organization
of water and its
effect on the structural heterogeneities in room-temperature ionic
liquid/H2O mixtures . J. Raman Spectrosc. 
2008 , 39 , 233 –237 . 10.1002/jrs.1825 .
Gehrke S. ; Hollóczki O. 
Are There Carbenes in N-Heterocyclic Carbene Organocatalysis? . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2017 , 56 , 16395 –16398 . 10.1002/anie.201708305 .
Gehrke S. ; Hollóczki O. 
Treten in der N-heterozyklischen Carben-Organokatalyse
wirklich Carbene auf? . Angew. Chem. 
2017 , 129 , 16613 –16617 . 10.1002/ange.201708305 .
D’Angelo P. ; Serva A. ; Aquilanti G. ; Pascarelli S. ; Migliorati V. 
Structural Properties and Aggregation
Behavior of 1-Hexyl-3-methylimidazolium
Iodide in Aqueous Solutions . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2015 , 119 , 14515 –14526 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.5b08739 .26479331 
Serva A. ; Migliorati V. ; Lapi A. ; Aquilanti G. ; Arcovito A. ; D’Angelo P. 
Structural
properties of geminal
dicationic ionic liquid/water mixtures: a theoretical and experimental
insight . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 16544 –16554 . 10.1039/C6CP01557C .27272477 
Köddermann T. ; Wertz C. ; Heintz A. ; Ludwig R. 
The association of
water in ionic liquids: a reliable measure of polarity . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2006 , 45 , 3697 –3702 . 10.1002/anie.200504471 .
Köddermann T. ; Wertz C. ; Heintz A. ; Ludwig R. 
Ion-Pair Formation
in the Ionic Liquid 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium Bis(triflyl)imide
as a Function of Temperature and Concentration . ChemPhysChem 
2006 , 7 , 1944 –1949 . 10.1002/cphc.200600034 .16881083 
Köddermann T. ; Paschek D. ; Ludwig R. 
Molecular
dynamic simulations of
ionic liquids: A reliable description of structure, thermodynamics
and dynamics . ChemPhysChem 
2007 , 8 , 2464 –2470 . 10.1002/cphc.200700552 .17943710 
Fumino K. ; Wulf A. ; Ludwig R. 
The Cation–Anion Interaction
in Ionic Liquids Probed by Far-Infrared Spectroscopy . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 3830 –3834 . 10.1002/anie.200705736 .
Fumino K. ; Wulf A. ; Ludwig R. 
Strong, localized, and directional
hydrogen bonds fluidize ionic liquids . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 8731 –8734 . 10.1002/anie.200803446 .
Fumino K. ; Wulf A. ; Ludwig R. 
Hydrogen bonding
in protic ionic
liquids: reminiscent of water . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 3184 –3186 . 10.1002/anie.200806224 .
Fumino K. ; Wulf A. ; Ludwig R. 
The potential
role of hydrogen bonding
in aprotic and protic ionic liquids . Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 11 , 8790 –8794 . 10.1039/b905634c .20449024 
Wulf A. ; Fumino K. ; Ludwig R. 
Spectroscopic
evidence for an enhanced
anion-cation interaction from hydrogen bonding in pure imidazolium
ionic liquids . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2010 , 49 , 449 –453 . 10.1002/anie.200905437 .
Stange P. ; Fumino K. ; Ludwig R. 
Ion Speciation of Protic
Ionic Liquids
in Water: Transition from Contact to Solvent-Separated Ion Pairs . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 2990 –2994 . 10.1002/anie.201209609 .
Bier M. ; Mars J. ; Li H. ; Mezger M. 
Salt-induced microheterogeneities
in binary liquid mixtures . Phys. Rev. E 
2017 , 96 , 02260310.1103/PhysRevE.96.022603 .28950527 
Martínez L. ; Andrade R. ; Birgin E. G. ; Martínez J. M. 
A package
for building initial configurations for molecular dynamics simulations . J. Comput. Chem. 
2009 , 30 , 2157 –2164 . 10.1002/jcc.21224 .19229944 
CP2k,
A General Program to Perform Molecular Dynamics Simulations. CP2k
Developers Group under the Terms of the GNU General Public License. http://cp2k.berlios.de/.
VandeVondele J. ; Krack M. ; Mohamed F. ; Parrinello M. ; Chassaing T. ; Hutter J. 
QUICKSTEP: Fast and Accurate Density
Functional Calculations Using a Mixed Gaussian and Plane Waves Approach . Comput. Phys. Commun. 
2005 , 167 , 103 –128 . 10.1016/j.cpc.2004.12.014 .
VandeVondele J. ; Hutter J. 
Gaussian Basis Sets
for Accurate Calculations on Molecular
Systems in Gas and Condensed Phases . J. Chem.
Phys. 
2007 , 127 , 11410510.1063/1.2770708 .17887826 
Goedecker S. ; Teter M. ; Hutter J. 
Separable Dual-Space Gaussian Pseudopotentials . Phys. Rev. B 
1996 , 54 , 1703 –1710 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.54.1703 .
Hartwigsen C. ; Goedecker S. ; Hutter J. 
Relativistic Separable Dual-Space
Gaussian Pseudopotentials from H to Rn . Phys.
Rev. B 
1998 , 58 , 3641 –3662 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.58.3641 .
Krack M. 
Pseudopotentials
for H to Kr Optimized for Gradient-Corrected Exchange-Correlation
Functionals . Theor. Chem. Acc. 
2005 , 114 , 145 –152 . 10.1007/s00214-005-0655-y .
Grimme S. ; Antony J. ; Ehrlich S. ; Krieg H. 
A consistent and accurate
ab initio parametrization of density functional dispersion correction
(DFT-D) for the 94 elements H-Pu . J. Chem. Phys. 
2010 , 132 , 15410410.1063/1.3382344 .20423165 
Grimme S. ; Ehrlich S. ; Goerigk L. 
Effect of the damping function in
dispersion corrected density functional theory . J. Comput. Chem. 
2011 , 32 , 1456 –1465 . 10.1002/jcc.21759 .21370243 
Blöchl P. E. 
Electrostatic
decoupling of periodic images of plane wave expanded densities and
derived atomic point charges . J. Chem. Phys. 
1995 , 103 , 7422 –7428 . 10.1063/1.470314 .
Mulliken R. S. 
Electronic
Population Analysis on LCAO-MO Molecular Wave Functions. I . J. Chem. Phys. 
1955 , 23 , 1833 –1840 . 10.1063/1.1740588 .
Brehm M. ; Kirchner B. 
TRAVIS - A Free Analyzer
and Visualizer for Monte Carlo
and Molecular Dynamics Trajectories . J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 
2011 , 51 , 2007 –2023 . 10.1021/ci200217w .21761915 
GRACE  . http://plasma-gate.weizmann.ac.il/Grace/, http://plasma-gate.weizmann.ac.il/Grace/.
Gnuplot
developers group  . http://www.gnuplot.info/.
Brehm M. ; Weber H. ; Thomas M. ; Hollóczki O. ; Kirchner B. 
Domain Analysis in Nanostructured Liquids: A Post-Molecular
Dynamics Study at the Example of Ionic Liquids . ChemPhysChem 
2015 , 16 , 3271 –3277 . 10.1002/cphc.201500471 .26386251 
Hollóczki O. ; Macchiagodena M. ; Weber H. ; Thomas M. ; Brehm M. ; Stark A. ; Russina O. ; Triolo A. ; Kirchner B. 
Triphilic
Ionic-Liquid Mixtures: Fluorinated and Non-fluorinated Aprotic Ionic-Liquid
Mixtures . ChemPhysChem 
2015 , 16 , 3325 –3333 . 10.1002/cphc.201500473 .26305804 
Freire M. G. ; Neves C. M. S. S. ; Marrucho I. M. ; Coutinho J. A. P. ; Fernandes A. M. 
Hydrolysis
of Tetrafluoroborate and Hexafluorophosphate Counter Ions in Imidazolium-Based
Ionic Liquids . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2010 , 114 , 3744 –3749 . 10.1021/jp903292n .20235600 
Wendler K. ; Thar J. ; Zahn S. ; Kirchner B. 
Estimating the Hydrogen
Bond Energy . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2010 , 114 , 9529 –9536 . 10.1021/jp103470e .20707378 
Elfgen R. ; Hollóczki O. ; Kirchner B. 
A Molecular Level Understanding of
Template Effects in Ionic Liquids . Acc. Chem.
Res. 
2017 , 50 , 2949 –2957 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.7b00436 .29131941 
Mele A. ; Romanò G. ; Giannone M. ; Ragg E. ; Fronza G. ; Raos G. ; Marcon V. 
The Local Structure of Ionic Liquids:
Cation-Cation NOE Interactions and Internuclear Distances in Neat
[BMIM][BF4] and [BDMIM][BF4] . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2006 , 45 , 1123 –1126 . 10.1002/anie.200503745 .
Matthews R. P. ; Welton T. ; Hunt P. A. 
Competitive pi interactions and hydrogen
bonding within imidazolium ionic liquids . Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 16 , 3238 –3253 . 10.1039/c3cp54672a .24407103 
Weber H. ; Hollóczki O. ; Pensado A. S. ; Kirchner B. 
Side chain fluorination
and anion effect on the structure of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium ionic
liquids . J. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 139 , 08450210.1063/1.4818540 .24007013 
Gehrke S. ; von Domaros M. ; Clark R. ; Holloczki O. ; Brehm M. ; Welton T. ; Luzar A. ; Kirchner B. 
Structure
and lifetimes in ionic liquids and their mixtures . Faraday Discuss. 
2018 , 206 , 219 –245 . 10.1039/C7FD00166E .28933482 
Rapaport D. C. 
Hydrogen
bonds in water . Mol. Phys. 
1983 , 50 , 1151 –1162 . 10.1080/00268978300102931 .
Luzar A. ; Chandler D. 
Hydrogen-bond kinetics in liquid
water . Nature 
1996 , 379 , 55 –57 . 10.1038/379055a0 .
Luzar A. ; Chandler D. 
Effect of Environment on Hydrogen Bond Dynamics in
Liquid Water . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1996 , 76 , 928 –931 . 10.1103/PhysRevLett.76.928 .10061587 
Pensado A. S. ; Brehm M. ; Thar J. ; Seitsonen A. P. ; Kirchner B. 
Effect of Dispersion on the Structure and Dynamics
of the Ionic Liquid 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium Thiocyanate . ChemPhysChem 
2012 , 13 , 1845 –1853 . 10.1002/cphc.201100917 .22383333 
Gabl S. ; Schroeder C. ; Steinhauser O. 
Computational studies of ionic liquids:
Size does matter and time too . J. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 137 , 09450110.1063/1.4748352 .22957575 
Sheridan Q. R. ; Schneider W. F. ; Maginn E. J. 
Anion Dependent
Dynamics and Water Solubility Explained by Hydrogen Bonding Interactions
in Mixtures of Water and Aprotic Heterocyclic Anion Ionic Liquids . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2016 , 120 , 12679 –12686 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b10631 .27973835 
Dommert F. ; Schmidt J. ; Krekeler C. ; Zhao Y. Y. ; Berger R. ; Site L. D. ; Holm C. 
Towards multiscale
modeling of ionic liquids: From electronic structure to bulk properties . J. Mol. Liq. 
2010 , 152 , 2 –8 . Part of Molten Salts and
Ionic Liquids Special issue of the EUCHEM – Conference, Kopenhagen,
2008 10.1016/j.molliq.2009.06.014 .
Lehmann S. B. C. ; Roatsch M. ; Schöppke M. ; Kirchner B. 
On the physical origin of the cation-anion intermediate
bond in ionic liquids Part I. Placing a (weak) hydrogen bond between
two charges . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2010 , 12 , 7473 –7486 . 10.1039/b921246a .20532355

