
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 3145983210.1021/acsomega.9b00488ArticleStereo-Aware Extension of HOSE Codes Kuhn Stefan *†Johnson Sean R. ‡§† School
of Computer Science and Informatics, De
Montfort University, The Gateway LE1 9BH, Leicester, U.K.‡ Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, United States* E-mail: stefan.kuhn@dmu.ac.uk.23 04 2019 30 04 2019 4 4 7323 7329 21 02 2019 02 04 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Descriptions
of molecular environments have many applications in
chemoinformatics, including chemical shift prediction. Hierarchically
ordered spherical environment (HOSE) codes are the most popular such
descriptions. We developed a method to extend these with stereochemistry
information. It enables distinguishing atoms which would be considered
identical in traditional HOSE codes. The use of our method is demonstrated
by chemical shift predictions for molecules in the nmrshiftdb2 database.
We give a full specification and an implementation.

document-id-old-9ao9b00488document-id-new-14ao-2019-004886ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
A
long-standing problem in chemoinformatics is the accurate encoding
of the environment of an atom in a molecule. This task can be considered
the equivalent problem to the accurate encoding of a molecule. Established
techniques for encoding molecules include naming conventions like
the IUPAC naming1 or various line notations.
The most common of these is the simplified molecular-input line-entry
system (SMILES).2 This has been extended
over time, in particular, there is a version containing chirality
information. A good notation should contain all informations about
a molecule which is found in a typical molecular depiction, such as
the atoms and their elements, charges, isotopes, etc. and their connectivity,
i.e., the graph structure, including the bond order.

In a similar
fashion, an atom environment encoding should contain
information about an atom, the atoms in its environment, and how they
are connected. Hierarchically ordered spherical environment (HOSE)
codes are most commonly used for this purpose.3 The HOSE codes do not contain stereochemistry information.

Since a stereochemical extension of SMILES has been suggested and
successfully applied, we suggest extending the HOSE codes in a similar
fashion to encode stereochemistry. This system keeps the advantages
of the HOSE code notation and combines it with the established stereochemistry
encoding of SMILES. As opposed to other methods, we need no information
separate from the HOSE code, and all existing systems based on HOSE
codes can use the extended version without any modification in the
algorithm. We provide a full specification of the extended HOSE code
and also supply a reference implementation.

Examples from the
field of chemical shift prediction in nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) show the strength of our approach.

Background
The need for compact line notations of molecules emerged as soon
as computers were used to handle chemical information. An early system
is represented by the Wiswesser line notation (WLN).4 This was followed interalia by the SYBYL line notation
(SLN)5 and the simplified molecular-input
line-entry system (SMILES). There are also various standards for naming
schemes, the most successful of which is probably the IUPAC naming.
A recent development is the International Chemical Identifier (InChI).6 These are to varying degrees, compact, human-readable,
machine-processable, canonically specified, and supported by software
implementations. A full discussion of their advantages and disadvantages
is out of scope here.

SMILES is of particular interest for us,
because it has been extended
to contain stereochemistry information.2 The extension uses local chirality representation (as opposed to
absolute chirality) and enables partial specifications. This is relevant
because frequently stereochemistry is not fully specified in publications.

SMILES, WLN, SLN, and InChI notations encode the whole of a molecule.
In some cases, it is useful to encode the environment of a particular
atom in a molecule. This second kind of encoding could be used for
database searches,7,8 drug design,9,10 or
chemical shift prediction. For this purpose, the Hierarchical Organization
of Spherical Environments (HOSE) code is a classic method.

The
HOSE code encodes the atoms around a center in a sphere-wise
manner. The spheres in the code are defined by the distance in bonds
from the atom to be described. So, atoms are listed in a hierarchical
manner starting with atoms one bond away from the selected center,
proceeding to atoms two bonds away, etc. Bond orders and aromaticity
are also included. A graphical explanation of the HOSE code is provided
in Kuhn et al.11

Chemical shift prediction
is done using HOSE codes by generating
the HOSE code for an atom in the molecule for which the prediction
is done. In a database, all atoms with the same HOSE code are searched.
The shift, or, if several are found, the average of the shifts, of
the atoms found, gives the predicted shift. Since the HOSE code disregards
stereochemistry, for stereochemically different atoms, the same shifts
will be predicted.

Several methods for encoding atomic environments
have previously
been proposed, each with particular disadvantages when compared to
stereo-HOSE codes. MNA descriptors12 encode
neighboring atoms in a hierarchical fashion but do not account for
stereochemistry. An approach for encoding stereochemical information
in the encoding of atomic environments has been suggested by Schütz
et al.,13 but they do not give an actual
algorithm. It is unclear from the paper exactly how the stereochemical
interactions mentioned are calculated but they depend somehow on an
external library of ring skeletons. Spanton and Whittern14 suggest combining HOSE codes with the InChI
descriptor for stereochemistry. Again, it is unclear how this is exactly
done, and it requires a separate descriptor. In our approach, the
stereo description is part of the HOSE code itself.

Extended
connectivity fingerprints (ECFP)15 are
hashed substructure fingerprints. They can include stereochemical
features and could be used in a similar way to our encoding for database
searches. Due to the hashing, it is impossible to reconstruct molecules
from the fingerprints without a database look up. Also, there is the
possibility of collisions, and they are not human-readable. On the
other hand, they are very compact and memory-efficient. A major disadvantage
is that they cannot handle partial stereo matches or incompletely
defined stereochemistry. Finally, Yamashita et al.16 used atom environments for calculating molecular similarity.
These environments provide similarity, not exact matches, and do not
take stereochemistry into account.

The approach of using artificial
intelligence methods, e.g., neural
networks, for predicting molecular properties has been widely used.a Typically, these methods work on three-dimensional
structures, thereby also including stereochemistry. A major drawback
of such methods is that three-dimensional coordinates are not known
and must be calculated. This supposes a degree of accuracy in the
training data, which is typically not there: The actual sample was
probably a mixture of conformers.

Results
and Discussion
The stereo HOSE code can show chemical situations
not represented
by standard HOSE codes. In Table 1, two stereoisomers of the molecule in Figure 5 are shown with the HOSE codes
for each atom. It should be noted that in this molecule, atom 1 is
a chiral center. The standard HOSE code is identical for equivalent
atoms in the two isomers, whereas the stereo HOSE code distinguishes
the isomers.

Table 1 Comparison of the Standard and Stereo
HOSE Codes of
Two Stereoisomers
We demonstrate the power of our approach with two
examples of chemical
shift predictions from nmrshiftdb2.21 The
stereo HOSE code, following the specification given here, has been
implemented in nmrshiftdb2. The usefulness of the encoding is demonstrated
by Figures 1 and 2. Figure 1 shows a 13C NMR prediction done in nmrshiftdb2
for a compound with a chiral center and diastereotopic methyl groups.
Atom 14 is a chiral center; the HOSE codes for its neighbors (e.g.,
9) include stereochemistry information and would be different for
another isomer. Atoms 1 and 2 are diastereotopic. For them, we get
different shift values predicted, which would not be the case with
conventional HOSE codes, since they could not distinguish these two
atoms. Note that a stereo SMILES would not include stereochemical
information here, whereas for the stereo-enhanced HOSE code, we use
it. In the example, nmrshiftdb2 also informs us that for atom 1 there
is an unusually wide range of possible values (from 19.7 to 33.35
ppm). Using the HOSE code, we can look up the values used for the
prediction and get the structures in the left inset in Figure 1. Looking at these, it is clear
that 19.7 is a suspicious assignment for atom 1. The same way, 31.7
is identified as suspicious for atom 2.

Figure 1 13C prediction
done in nmrshiftdb2 for a compound with
several chiral centers, using the stereo HOSE code. The predictions
for atoms 1 and 2 are different. For atom 1, nmrshiftdb2 warns about
an unusually wide range of possible values, indicating a wrong assignment.
The four compounds which are used for the prediction are shown inset.
The HOSE code used for atom 1 is C–4; HHHC(@CCC/HCC,HHC,HHH/@CCC,HHC,HH&), for atom 2 it is C–4; HHHC(@CCC/HCC,HHH,HHC/@CCC,HHC,HH&). The atoms marked with the red circles
are used for the prediction. They are chemically equivalent, and the
value 19.7 on the left and 31.7 on the right is not in line with the
other assignments.

Figure 2 13C prediction
done in nmrshiftdb2 for a compound with
several chiral centers, using the standard HOSE code. The predictions
for atoms 1 and 2 are identical. For atoms 1 and 2, nmrshiftdb2 warns
about an unusually wide range of possible values. This is due to the
inclusion of shifts for both positions and does not reveal the wrong
assignment. Some of the compounds used for the prediction are shown
inset, altogether 76 structures are found. The HOSE code used for
the search is C–4; C(CCC/HCC,HHC,HHH/CCC,HHC,HH&).
They include the structures from Figure 1, in which two atoms are considered equivalent.
More compounds are found, including (third row) compounds with no
stereospecification, where both atoms are used for the prediction.

It should be noted that in this
example it was specifically the
stereo extension, which made the prediction possible. A standard HOSE
code (or any other nonstereo aware encoding) would have encoded atoms
1 and 2 in the structure to be predicted identically. It would, therefore,
also have performed an identical database search for both and would
have predicted both atoms to have indistinguishable shifts. In contrast,
we could predict 28.85 and 25.75, respectively. This is due to different
encodings. Also due to the different encodings, the search shown in Figure 1 is with the encoding
of atom 1 or atom 2 and, therefore, gives only those values assigned
to the equivalent atoms in the database. A search with a nonstereo
specific encoding would have yielded more results, including eight
from the four compounds found with the chiral HOSE code, four of them
around 33.5 and four around 19.5. This situation is shown in Figure 2. It would not have
been clear that one of them is misassigned, it could only have been
concluded that the situation is not properly captured since the values
found clearly fall in two groups. To our knowledge, no other encoding
system currently used would have captured this situation.

The
assignment of 19.7 was most likely either mistranscribed into
nmrshiftdb2 or it was misassigned in the original paper.22 A check of this paper reveals that the assignment
there is as currently reported in nmrshiftdb2. A NOESY experiment,
which would have revealed the wrong assignment, was not done. A database
check not using stereochemistry would also not have revealed the problem.
In contrast, the error would have been uncovered by a stereo-aware
HOSE code prediction, as provided by nmrshiftdb2.

In Figure 3, we
show how the double-bond configuration encoding helps with matching
identical structures. Again, we see an nmrshiftdb2 13C
NMR prediction. Looking at the HOSE code for atom 26, we can see the
| and \ elements in the second sphere, so only molecules where the
configuration is identical will be matched. It also works in higher
spheres, for example, the HOSE code for atom 8 shows the symbols in
a higher sphere.

Figure 3 Prediction for a compound with an E/Z configuration around bond 22 to 25. The HOSE code for
atom 26 contains
the | and \ elements in the second sphere. For atom 8, they are found
in a higher sphere.

To show that there is
a systematic improvement and the given examples
are not isolated cases, we have used all 13C and 1H chemical shifts contained in nmrshiftdb2 as reference values and
predicted a chemical shift for the atom they are assigned to using
the stereo HOSE code and the normal HOSE code. For the prediction,
we used all of the spectra in nmrshiftdb2 except for the spectrum
which contains the reference value (technically, this performs leave-one-out
cross-validation). We then calculated the mean error and the root
mean squared error for both methods. The values are given in Table 2. There is a clear
improvement of the error in all cases. We have only included those
predictions where there is a stereochemical situation in the molecule
and where a stereochemically matching situation was found for the
prediction. If we would have included the other cases, there would
have been no difference between the two predictions in this case,
and the overall improvement would have been smaller, but still significant.

Table 2 Comparison of the Prediction Results in nmrshiftdb2
Using Standard and Stereo HOSE Codes
 	 	number of examples	mean
error	RMSE	
13C	standard HOSE code	2703	3.52	0.21	
 	stereo HOSE code	2703	2.82	0.14	
1H	standard HOSE code	1622	0.29	0.03	
 	stereo HOSE code	1622	0.25	0.02	
Our method also allows for the partial
specification of stereochemistry.
It follows closely the way stereochemistry is normally depicted by
chemists. Therefore, the stereo HOSE code can be generated from structure
diagrams alone with no additional information or generation of three-dimensional
coordinates needed. We assume that stereochemistry is specified in
diagrams following the rules in Brecher,23 where a drawing is indicating the most specific structure possible,
and no additional labels are used. This may in some cases leads to
wrong interpretations, but we assume a certain type of encoding here
and leave the physical interpretation of drawings to other software
or humans.

In a stereo-enhanced HOSE code, the higher spheres
are different
depending on stereochemistry in lower spheres. This can make it difficult
to use interpolation by comparing higher spheres. A possible solution
for this would be to store a standard HOSE code in parallel. Furthermore,
since NMR shifts are generally more affected by stereochemistry in
rigid molecules than in flexible molecules, the advantages of using
stereo-HOSE codes will be greater for predicting shifts of rigid molecules.

When applying stereo HOSE codes to chemical shift prediction, we
also trace back exactly where our values come from and spot inconsistencies
in the database, as demonstrated in the chirality example. This would
be difficult to do with machine-learning methods, e.g., neural networks,
since with these it is normally not possible to understand how the
result was calculated. On the other hand, the method only finds identical
fragments, whereas a machine-learning approach can potentially produce
good results by finding similarities and implicit rules.

Our
approach can also distinguish diastereotopic hydrogens, if
they are marked with wedge bonds. Otherwise, a distinction may be
made, for example, as part of a shift prediction software, but it
is not the part of a structure encoding algorithm, which we discuss
here.

In our example, we have shown the utility of stereo-HOSE
codes
in predicting the NMR shifts of individual atoms within molecules.
In addition, stereo-HOSE codes may find a use in similarity searches
or property prediction of entire molecules, by converting the stereo-HOSE
codes into molecular fingerprints. Although formally specifying a
fingerprinting algorithm is beyond the scope of the present work,
we can sketch an outline based on previous work including the LINGO24 algorithm, which counts the frequency of substrings
of (nonstereo) SMILES strings, and the ECFP algorithm which is based
on connectivity shells centered at each atom in the molecule. Drawing
on these algorithms, a (stereo-) HOSE-fingerprint could be as simple
as a tabulated count of all HOSE codes from level 1 to N in a molecule. In such an algorithm, there would be a substantial
difference between fingerprints generated from HOSE codes with stereochemistry
assigned fully, partially, or not at all, due to the rearrangement
of substrings during the encoding of stereochemistry. The impact of
these differences on the quality of search results and structure prediction
would depend on the size and quality of the reference database. As
mentioned earlier, a simple adaptation would be to store fingerprints
from standard and stereo-HOSE codes in parallel.

Conclusions
HOSE
codes are an established tool for describing atom environments
and for chemical shift prediction. We have extended the HOSE code
to include stereochemical information. The principles are adopted
from the well-known stereo-enhanced SMILES notation. Our extended
HOSE codes can be generated from the structure without reference to
external libraries. They allow specification of partial stereochemistry,
similar to how chemical structure diagrams are drawn. Since structure
diagrams are still the most common way to communicate compounds in
publications, this enables encoding of mainstream chemical information.
Using our new stereo-extended HOSE code, we can distinguish atoms
which would be encoded identically with traditional HOSE codes. Better
chemical shift prediction is a benefit of the approach. The deterministic
nature of the algorithms sets it apart from machine-learning approaches.
A disadvantage of our approach is that it is affected by a lack of
standards in structure drawing and interpretation. The code for generating
the extended HOSE codes is available under an open-source licence.

Method
The Daylight Theory Manual2 uses two
syntax elements to encode stereochemical information. We use both
of these in a similar fashion.

First, configuration around double
bonds is specified by the characters
/ and \. The two compounds in Figure 4 would be represented by the SMILES F/C=C/F, respectively, F/C=C\F. Alternatively, F\C=C\F, respectively, F\C=C/F are possible.
For the first compound, the slashes are always identical, for the
second, they are opposite. A three-sphere stereo HOSE code of the
fluorine atom in the left structure in Figure 4 would be F;C(=C/\F and for the right structure
it would be F;C(=C/|F. The rule is to follow the bonds through
the molecule (as it is done for HOSE codes) and to notice when we
cross a double bond. In front of each of the atoms at the other end
of the double bond, we put a \ or | depending on if they are opposite
or same side of the double bond seen from where we came from. In the
left structure, in Figure 4, the other fluorine is the opposite of where we came from,
so we put a \ in front of it. In the right structure, the fluorine
is on the same side, so it gets a | (the / character is used in HOSE
codes for separating spheres, so we use | instead of / to avoid confusion).
Note that in contrast to SMILES, only one version is allowed, so our
HOSE code is canonical. If the hydrogen on the carbon would be included
in the HOSE code (we do not make assumptions about valencies or explicit
hydrogens, just like the original HOSE code), then the codes would
be F;C(=C/|H\F and F;C(=C/\H|F, respectively.

Figure 4 Two possible configurations around a double
bond.

Second, for chiral centers, SMILES
uses a specification based on
local chirality. For this, the order in which neighbors occur in the
SMILES string, seen from a certain atom, is used. When building a
HOSE code, a “point of view” is provided, since the
encoding starts with the center atom and proceeds outward. Therefore,
the principle of stereo SMILES naturally extends to HOSE codes. In Figure 5, there is a tetrahedral configuration around the carbon atom
with number 2. If we want to build a stereo HOSE, for example, for
atom number 3, we get C-4;CC(@CNC,/O,,/)// (spheres
beyond the third are empty). As in ordinary HOSE codes, we start with
the atom for which the HOSE code is built and encode it as C-4. We
then get in the first sphere two single carbon atoms (written as CC).
The second sphere contains the atoms around the chiral center, therefore
we put an @. When specifying chirality, we look along the axis from
the atom in the previous sphere to the chiral center (atom 3 to atom
4 in this case), giving @CNC. The first atom
in the list is the atom which would be first in the standard HOSE
code. Notice that in the second sphere, the two carbon atoms are not
distinguished, but in the third sphere, one of the carbon atoms has
an oxygen atom attached. Consequently, C-4;CC(@CNC,/,,O/)// would indicate a different chiral configuration. Note that we do
not allow (as opposed to the SMILES specification) the use of @@ with reverse atom order. This is to keep the HOSE
codes canonical. The ring closure symbol & is treated like an
atom and put wherever the atom in the ring would be from the point
of view. If the chiral center is encountered in a higher sphere, we
put the @ in a higher sphere as well, ordering
the atoms according to the same rule. If we want to generate a stereo-HOSE
code focused at an atom which is itself a chiral center, the rule
is to put the @ at the start of the first sphere. In this case, the
first atom following the @ is the atom which would come first in the
standard HOSE code and the second is the atom which would come second
in the standard HOSE code. The point of view is the axis from the
focus atom to the first atom after the @. The other atoms follow in
the order they are seen, going counterclockwise starting with the
second atom after the @. The encoding of atom 2 in Table 1 is an example for this.

Figure 5 Tetrahedral
configuration around a carbon atom.

We use the same principle to transfer the encoding of the
other
types of chirality given in Section 3.3.4 of the Daylight Theory Manual:2 Only @ allowed, the point
of view is the atom in the previous shell, the first atom to list
is given by the HOSE code specification. For square-planar chiralities,
only SP1 is allowed. In all other cases, the
default class with a single @ is used.

If a chemical structure is to be encoded in, e.g., a SMILES string,
stereochemistry is only considered around chiral centers. Even if
wedge bonds are used somewhere else in a depiction of the structure,
they cannot be relevant for the identification of the structure and
are, therefore, disregarded. For the stereo-enhanced HOSE codes, we
encode also wedge bonds on diastereotopic atoms, since they are chemically
different and have to be encoded differently in an atom-centric encoding.
We have shown an example of this in section Results
and Discussion.

We require all hydrogens to be explicitly
specified. This is necessary
around chiral centers, but since the space taken up by hydrogen information
is not a problem nowadays, we stipulate explicit hydrogens everywhere
to generate the stereo HOSE code.

Finally, there are cases where
the priority in the sphere is only
relevant due to stereochemistry in a higher sphere. In Figure 6, stereochemistry is partially
defined. If a standard HOSE code would be built for atom 3, it would
read C-4;CCC(CY,CY,//) (note that bromine is
represented by Y in HOSE codes). Here, the
first two carbons in the first sphere can represent atom 2 or 4, since
they cannot be distinguished in the higher spheres and are, therefore,
equivalent. Considering stereochemistry, the higher spheres are different.
The HOSE code generated by our method would be C-4;CCC(@HCY,@HYC,//) (with hydrogens around the chiral centers). Notice that in the second
sphere, the atoms attached are different. We, therefore, need a rule
for priority here. For this, we take the atoms attached to the two
carbons, for which we need a priority, in the order they appear in
the next sphere. The first atom H in both cases,
the next is C respectively Br. Since C takes priority, the HCY group takes priority before the HYC group.
This example also shows a partial specification of stereochemistry,
since there is none given around atom 3. If there would be one, this
would give priorities and the HOSE codes would start with an @ in the first sphere and be different depending on the
stereochemistry around atom 3.

Figure 6 Structure where stereochemistry influences
priority.

Author Present Address
§ Conagen
Inc., 15 Deangelo Drive, Bedford, MA 01730, United States
(S.R.J.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Notes
Java code for generating
stereo-aware HOSE
codes is available under https://sourceforge.net/p/nmrshiftdb2/code/HEAD/tree/trunk/nmrshiftdb2/src/java/org/openscience/nmrshiftdb/util/ExtendedHOSECodeGenerator.java as part of the nmrshiftdb2 project. It is based on the HOSECodeGenerator
class of the Chemistry Development Kit and is licenced under the GNU
Affero General Public License.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank all contributors
to the nmrshiftdb2 database
and software for their cooperation over many years. Special thanks
go to Nils Schlörer and the NMR facility at the Chemistry Department
of Universität zu Köln for hosting and advice. Part
of the work by S.K. was funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft,
Grant Numbers: LI 2858/11, SCHL 580/31.

a Ref (17) is a good overview, refs (11, 18−20) are some papers in the
area.
==== Refs
References
Favre H. A. ; Powell W. H.  Nomenclature of Organic
Chemistry ; The Royal Society of Chemistry , 2014 ; pp P001 –P1568 .
Daylight Theory Manual . http://www.daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/.
Bremser W. 
Hose –
a novel substructure code . Anal. Chim. Acta 
1978 , 103 , 355 –365 . 10.1016/S0003-2670(01)83100-7 .
Wiswesser W. J. 
The Wiswesser
Line Formula Notation . Chem. Eng. News 
1952 , 30 , 3523 –3526 . 10.1021/cen-v030n034.p3523 .
Ash S. ; Cline M. A. ; Homer R. W. ; Hurst T. ; Smith G. B. 
SYBYL Line
Notation (SLN): A Versatile Language for Chemical Structure Representation . J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 
1997 , 37 , 71 –79 . 10.1021/ci960109j .
InChI and InChIKeys for chemical structures . https://www.inchi-trust.org/.
Hähnke V. D. ; Bolton E. E. ; Bryant S. H. 
PubChem
atom environments . J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 
2015 , 7 , 1 –37 . 10.1186/s13321-015-0076-4 .
Bender A. ; Mussa H. Y. ; Glen R. C. ; Reiling S. 
Similarity Searching
of Chemical Databases Using Atom Environment Descriptors (MOLPRINT
2D): Evaluation of Performance . J. Chem. Inf.
Comput. Sci. 
2004 , 44 , 1708 –1718 . 10.1021/ci0498719 .15446830 
Wasko M. J. ; Pellegrene K. A. ; Madura J. D. ; Surratt C. K. 
A Role for Fragment-Based
Drug Design in Developing Novel Lead Compounds for Central Nervous
System Targets . Front. Neurol. 
2015 , 6 , 19710.3389/fneur.2015.00197 .26441817 
Rogers D. ; Brown R. D. ; Hahn M. 
Using extended-connectivity
fingerprints
with Laplacian-modified Bayesian analysis in high-throughput screening
follow-up . J. Biomol. Screening 
2005 , 10 , 682 –686 . 10.1177/1087057105281365 .
Kuhn S. ; Egert B. ; Neumann S. ; Steinbeck C. 
Building blocks
for automated elucidation of metabolites: machine learning methods
for NMR prediction . BMC Bioinf. 
2008 , 9 , 400 10.1186/1471-2105-9-400 .
Filimonov D. ; Poroikov V. ; Borodina Y. ; Gloriozova T. 
Chemical Similarity
Assessment through Multilevel Neighborhoods of Atoms: Definition and
Comparison with the Other Descriptors . J. Chem.
Inf. Comput. Sci. 
1999 , 39 , 666 –670 . 10.1021/ci980335o .
Schütz V. ; Purtuc V. ; Felsinger S. ; Robien W. 
CSEARCH-STEREO: A new
generation of NMR database systems allowing three-dimensional spectrum
prediction . Fresenius’ J. Anal. Chem. 
1997 , 359 , 33 –41 . 10.1007/s002160050531 .
Spanton S. G. ; Whittern D. 
The development of an NMR chemical
shift prediction
application with the accuracy necessary to grade proton NMR spectra
for identity . Magn. Reson. Chem. 
2009 , 47 , 1055 –1061 . 10.1002/mrc.2512 .19725074 
Rogers D. ; Hahn M. 
Extended-Connectivity Fingerprints . J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 
2010 , 50 , 742 –754 . 10.1021/ci100050t .20426451 
Yamashita H. ; Higuchi T. ; Yoshida R. 
Atom Environment
Kernels on Molecules . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2014 , 54 , 1289 –1300 . 10.1021/ci400403w .24802375 
Zupan J. ; Gasteiger J.  Neural Networks in Chemistry
and Drug Design: An Introduction , 2 nd
ed.; Wiley : New York , 1999 .
Bernazzani L. ; Duce C. ; Micheli A. ; Mollica V. ; Sperduti A. ; Starita A. ; Tiné M. R. 
Predicting Physical–Chemical
Properties of Compounds from Molecular Structures by Recursive Neural
Networks . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2006 , 46 , 2030 –2042 . 10.1021/ci060104e .16995734 
CSEARCH-NMR-Server . https://nmrpredict.orc.univie.ac.at/.
Meiler J. 
PROSHIFT:
protein chemical shift prediction using artificial neural networks . J. Biomol. NMR 
2003 , 26 , 25 –37 . 10.1023/A:1023060720156 .12766400 
Kuhn S. ; Schlorer N. E. 
Facilitating quality
control for spectra assignments
of small organic molecules: nmrshiftdb2-a free in-house NMR database
with integrated LIMS for academic service laboratories . Magn. Reson. Chem. 
2015 , 53 , 582 –589 . 10.1002/mrc.4263 .25998807 
Marrero J. G. ; Andres L. S. ; Luis J. G. 
Semisynthesis
of rosmanol and its
derivatives. Easy access to abietatriene diterpenes isolated from
the genus Salvia with biological activities . J. Nat. Prod. 
2002 , 65 , 986 –989 . 10.1021/np010565o .12141857 
Brecher J. 
Graphical
representation of stereochemical configuration (IUPAC Recommendations
2006) . Pure Appl. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 1897 –1970 . 10.1351/pac200678101897 .
Vidal D. ; Thormann M. ; Pons M. 
LINGO, an Efficient Holographic Text
Based Method To Calculate Biophysical Properties and Intermolecular
Similarities . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2005 , 45 , 386 –393 . 10.1021/ci0496797 .15807504

