
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American
Chemical
Society 3145899710.1021/acsomega.8b01051ArticleAu-CGKRK Nanoconjugates
for Combating Cancer through
T-Cell-Driven Therapeutic RNA Interference Gulla Suresh
Kumar †§∥Kotcherlakota Rajesh †§∥Nimushakavi Sahithi †§Nimmu Narendra Varma ‡Khalid Sara ‡Patra Chitta Ranjan *†§Chaudhuri Arabinda *†§⊥†Division
of Applied Biology and ‡Analytical & Mass Chemistry Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal Road, Tarnaka, Hyderabad 500007, Telangana, India§ Academy
of Scientific and Innovative Research, CSIR
Campus, CSIR Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113, Tamil Nadu, India* E-mail: crpatra@iict.res.in, patra.chitta@gmail.com. Phone: 040-27191480. Fax: +91-40-27160387 (C.R.P.).* E-mail: arabinda@iict.res.in, arabindachaudhuri@gmail.com. Tel: 91-4027156755, 91-9440040582 (A.C.).03 08 2018 31 08 2018 3 8 8663 8676 18 05 2018 23 07 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Numerous
prior studies on fighting cancer have been based on using
inhibitors of JAK-STAT pathway (signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) inhibitor in particular), a signaling pathway
responsible for progression of many types of cancer cells. However,
recent studies have shown that STAT3 activation leads to upregulation
of program death receptor-ligand 1 (PD-L1, an immune checkpoint protein
that plays a major role behind evasion of immune systems by growing
tumors) expression levels in tumor cells, leading to enhanced immune
suppression. This is why global efforts are being witnessed in combating
cancer through use of immune checkpoint inhibitors. Herein, we report
on the design, synthesis, physicochemical characterizations, and bioactivity
evaluation of novel tumor- and tumor-vasculature-targeting noncytotoxic
Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates (17–80 nm) for combating tumor. Using
a syngeneic mouse tumor model, we show that intraperitoneal (i.p.)
administration of the Au-CGKRK nanoparticles (NPs) complexed with
both PD-L1siRNA (the immune checkpoint inhibitor) and STAT3siRNA (the
JAK-STAT pathway inhibitor) results in significant (>70%) enhancement
in overall survivability (OS) in melanoma-bearing mice (n = 5) when compared to the OS in the untreated mice group. The expression
levels of CD8 and CD4 proteins in the tumor lysates of differently
treated mice groups (by Western blotting) are consistent with the
observed OS enhancement being a T-cell-driven process. Biodistribution
study using near-infrared dye-loaded Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates revealed
selective accumulation of the dye in mouse tumor. Notably, the overall
survival benefits were significantly less (∼35%) when melanoma-bearing
mice were treated (i.p.) with Au-CGKRK NPs complexed with only PD-L1siRNA
or with STAT3siRNA alone. The presently described Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates
are expected to find future use in therapeutic RNA-interference-based
cancer immunotherapy.

document-id-old-9ao8b01051document-id-new-14ao-2018-01051rccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Many
of the contemporary cancer treatment modalities including
chemotherapy, radiation therapy, surgery, etc. suffer from severe
toxic side effects. They not only kill cancer cells but also, due
to their nonselective nature, kill noncancerous healthy body cells.
Global efforts are being witnessed toward developing tumor-cell-selective
treatment strategies for combating cancer. High-affinity ligands for
receptors overexpressed on tumor cells are being covalently tethered
to the exosurfaces of various biocompatible drug carriers (with loaded
drugs) such as biodegradable and injectable polymer-based sustained
release microparticles,1−3 cyclodextrin-based systems,4−6 dendrimers,7,8 gold-mesoporous silica hybrid theranostics,9 silk-fibroin nanoparticles,10 liposomes,11−17 and metal-based nanoparticles.18,19

The
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)
is a transcription factor that plays a pivotal role in tumor cell
proliferation20 being constitutively activated
(phosphorylated) in numerous cancer cells. In consequence, STAT3 is
emerging as an important target in cancer therapy either through use
of RNA interference (RNAi, using STAT3siRNA) or using small-molecule
inhibitors of STAT3 phosphorylation such as SU54, WP1066, AG490, curcumin,
and analogues of curcumin.20−24

Our immune cells fail to eliminate tumor cells because growing
tumors develop strategies to evade our immune system. Such immune
evasion happens through immune checkpoint interactions between programmed
death receptor 1-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expressed on tumor cells and programmed
death receptor 1 (PD-1) on the surface of T-cells (an interaction
that inhibits proliferation of cytotoxic T-cells).25,26 This is why unprecedented global efforts are being witnessed in
combating cancer through use of immune checkpoint inhibitors.27−31 Recent findings are throwing important new mechanistic insights
into why STAT3 inhibitors often fail in fighting cancer. STAT3 activation
leads to upregulation of PD-L1 expression levels in tumor cells, leading
to enhanced immune suppression by tumor cells.32−36 In anti-angiogenic cancer therapy, the nutrient and
oxygen supply to tumor cells are shut down by inhibiting angiogenesis,
sprouting of new blood vessels (tumor endothelial cells) from pre-existing
vessels.14,37−41 In consequence, the tumor cells die out of starvation.
A promising anti-angiogenetic cancer therapeutic modality of combating
cancer targets potent cytotoxic drugs/siRNAs selectively to both tumor
and tumor endothelial cells by covalent grafting of phage display-study-derived
CGKRK ligand onto the nanoparticle surfaces42,43

Taking the above-mentioned upregulation of PD-L1 by STAT3
activation
into account, we hypothesized that simultaneous delivery of STAT3siRNA
and PD-L1siRNA to tumor tissues using gold-nanoparticle-based delivery
systems might be a potent therapeutic RNA interference modality for
fighting cancer. Herein, we report on the design, synthesis, physicochemical
characterization, and bioactivity evaluation of novel tumor- and tumor-vasculature-targeting
noncytotoxic Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates (17–80 nm) for combating
tumor. We show that intraperitoneally (i.p.) administration of the
Au-CGKRK nanoparticles complexed with both PD-L1siRNA (the immune
checkpoint inhibitor) and STAT3siRNA (the JAK-STAT pathway inhibitor)
results in significant enhancement of the overall survivability (OS)
in melanoma-bearing mice when compared to the OS in the untreated
mice group. The expression levels of CD8 and CD4 proteins in the tumor
lysates of differently treated mice groups (by Western Blotting) are
consistent with OS enhancement for the mice group treated with both
PD-L1siRNA and STAT3siRNA owing to its origin from a T-cell-driven
process. The presently described Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates are expected
to find future use in combating cancer through therapeutic RNA interference.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Synthesis of CGKRK Ligand
Phage display
library derived tumor and tumor endothelial cells targeting CGKRK
penta peptide ligand was synthesized using Fmoc strategy-based solid-phase
peptide chemistry (as shown in Figure 1). The structure of the tumor-/tumor-vasculature-targeted
CGKRK pentapeptide was confirmed by high-resolution mass spectrometry
(HRMS), matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI), and 1H NMR, and its purity was confirmed by reversed-phase analytical
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using two different
mobile phases (Figures S1–S4, Supporting
Information).

Figure 1 Synthetic scheme of the CGKRK pentapeptide.

2.2 Fabrication and Characterization
of Au-CGKRK
Nanoconjugates
The first step in constructing Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates
is synthesis of AuNPs. The characteristic surface plasmon resonance
peak at 512 nm confirmed the formation of spherical AuNPs. CGKRK peptide
conjugation on the surface of the AuNPs was confirmed by change in
the absorbance of the nanoconjugates after incubation with increasing
concentrations of the CGKRK peptide. The absorbances of the Au-CGKRK
nanoconjugates were observed to be increasing till the concentration
of added CGKRK reached 10 μg/mL. Notably, the absorbance of
the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates was found to decrease when the concentration
of the added CGKRK was more than 10 μg/mL (Figure 2). Thus, 10 μg/mL was
taken as the saturation point for the synthesis of Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates
(saturation point is defined as the maximum concentration of the peptide
required to saturate the surface of nanoparticles). Such saturation
phenomena are routinely studied by observing the increases in the
absorbances as well as the increases in the wavelength maxima (popularly
known as “red shift”) of the nanoconjugates (compared
to those of bare nanoparticles). The increased absorbance of the Au-CGKRK
nanoconjugate and the observed red shift at the saturation point (Figure 2) were fully consistent
with a recently reported red shift of protein-conjugated AuNPs.44 The percent of added CGKRK peptide (at the saturation
point, 10 μg/mL) conjugated to the surface of the AuNPs was
found to be 42% by quantitative HPLC analysis of the supernatant after
separating the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates by centrifugation (using the
standard HPLC calibration graph for CGKRK, data not shown).

Figure 2 Physicochemical
charaterization of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates
by UV–vis spectroscopy. The saturation point was determined
by adding increasing concentrations of the CGKRK peptides (2–20
μg/mL) to a fixed concentration of AuNP (0.4 μg/μL).
The saturation was attained at 10 μg/mL CGKRK. The inset shows
the picture of bare AuNP (left) and Au-CGKRK nanoconjugate (right).

2.3 Size
and Surface Potential of the Nanoconjugates
The size and
charge of the nanoconjugates were measured by the
dynamic light scattering (DLS) method. The hydrodynamic diameter of
free gold nanoparticles was found to be 17 nm, which increased to
75 nm upon addition of the CGKRK ligand (Figure 3a). Interestingly, the hydrodynamic diameter
of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates was found to be significantly decreased
(42 nm) upon complexation with siRNA presumably due to electrostatic
compaction of the positively charged Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates induced
by the added negatively charged siRNA. The surface charge of the free
gold nanoparticles was found to be −21 mV, which increased
to +24 mV upon conjugation with cationic CGKRK (Figure 3b). These findings support the notion that
electrostatic interaction between the negatively charged bare AuNPs
and the positively charged CGKRK ligand might play an important role
behind the formation of Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates. The surface charge
(ζ potential) of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates was further reduced
to +15 mV upon complexation with siRNA (Figure 3b) possibly due to additional electrostatic
interaction between the negatively charged siRNA and the positively
charged Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates.

Figure 3 Size, charge, and morphological characterizations
of Au-nanoconjugates
by DLS and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The sizes (a) and
surface charges (b) of bare AuNPs (blue), Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates
(black), and Au-CGKRK-scrambled siRNA nanoconjugates (red) were measured
by DLS. The morphology of the negatively charged bare AuNPs (c), positively
charged Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates (d), and positively charged Au-CGKRK-siRNA
nanoconjugates (e) studied by TEM.

2.4 X-ray Diffraction (XRD) and TEM Analyses of
Nanoconjugates
The surface crystallinity of nanoconjugates
was confirmed by XRD analysis. The similar XRD patterns observed for
both Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates and bare AuNPs (Figure S5) clearly showed that the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates maintained
their integrity as to their nanoparticular nature. The data also corroborates
with the earlier published literature. The morphology of nanoconjugates
was studied by TEM analysis. The electron micrographs depicted in Figure 3c–e suggest
spherical morphology for all of the Au-nanoconjugates. Importantly,
these TEM pictures (Figure 3c–e) revealed the nanoconjugates to be well dispersed
in nature as was the case for bare AuNPs (∼5 nm size nanoparticles
free from aggregation). It is worth mentioning at this point of discussion
that the size of the AuNPs and Au-nanoconjugates measured by the DLS
method differed significantly from that measured by TEM analysis.
Notably, these two techniques measure different aspects of nanoparticles.
DLS measures the hydrodynamic diameter of the nanoparticles in solution,
whereas TEM gives the exact size of the dried nanoparticles without
the presence of water of hydration. Because the positively charged
CGKRK ligand is expected to bring lots of water molecules on the surface
of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates, the hydrodynamic diameters of these
nanoconjugates measured by the DLS method are found to be significantly
higher than the nanoconjugate sizes measured by TEM. Stated differently,
under systemic settings, water molecules (and possibly other biomolecules)
adhere to the surface of Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates forming hydrated
NPs, the average sizes of which are obtained by DLS measurements.
Thus, the hydrodynamic diameters of metal-based NPs obtained by DLS
measurements provide information on the size of inorganic core along
with adhered water and other systemic molecules as the particles move
under the influence of Brownian motion. However, such hydration layers
are not taken into account while measuring sizes of NPs by TEM. In
TEM, we obtain information about only the inorganic core size. This
is presumably why the presently described Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates
(with sizes ∼5 nm as measured by TEM and ∼42 nm as measured
by DLS) are not cleared by kidney when administered systemically.
Such size difference of AuNPs measured by DLS and TEM has also been
reported in our earlier study.44

2.5 siRNA Binding, Serum Compatibility, RNase-1
Sensitivity, and Cell Viability Studies
Conjugation of the
cationic CGKRK peptide on the surface of AuNPs imparted a positive
charge on the surface of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates. The siRNA-binding
properties of the positively charged Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates were
assessed by the native gel-binding assay (GBA) using increasing amounts
of added nonsilencing siRNAs and a constant amount (17.8 μg)
of Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates. The observed gel pattern revealed 1.5
μg of siRNA as the optimal amount that binds completely with
the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates (Figure 4a). Use of 2.5 μg of siRNA clearly showed the
presence of a noncomplexed free siRNA band in the gel (Figure 4a). Notably, whereas 1.5 μg
of siRNA was found to be completely bound to 185.8 μg of Au-CGKRK
nanoconjugates (containing 17.8 μg of Au), siRNA did not bind
significantly even with a high amount (22.3 μg) of bare AuNPs
(Figure S6a,b). From this gel-binding assay,
we found that 1.5 μg of siRNA was completely bound to 185.8
μg of the Au-CGKRK conjugate. Thus, the loading efficiency of
siRNA was 0.8% (w/w).

Figure 4 siRNA binding, serum compatibility, RNase sensitivity,
and cellular
cytotoxicity profiles of Au-nanoconjugates. The siRNA binding properties
of the nanoconjugates (a) were performed using native polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and using the same concentration of Au-CGKRK
(17.8 μg in 40 μL) and varying concentrations of siRNA
(0.5–2.5 μg). Complete binding was observed at 1.5 μg
of added scrambled siRNA (fourth lane from the right). The increase
in the sizes of the Au-nanoconjugates (measured by DLS) with time
(0–100 h) were higher in 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) compared
to those in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (b). siRNA (1.5 μg)
complexed with Au-CGKRK (17.8 μg in 40 μL) was stable
in the presence of RNase (0.5 μg/mL) as determined by native
PAGE (c). The cellular cytotoxicity profiles by the conventional 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay in B16F10 cells (d) revealed noncytotoxic nature
of the Au-nanoconjugates up to 10 μL of added nanoconjugtes
(nanoconjugate stock 446 μg/mL of gold).

Taken together, these findings support electrostatic nature
of
the binding interactions between the negatively charged siRNA and
positively charged Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates.

The sizes of the
Au-CGKRK + siRNA nanoconjugates were found to
be fairly stable in PBS buffer for up to 100 h (40–50 nm, Figure 4b). In the presence
of 10% added serum, the sizes of the Au-CGKRK + siRNA nanoconjugates
were found to be somewhat increased within the same time period (40–70
nm, Figure 4b). Such
less than 100 nm sizes in the presence of added serum indicated in
vivo compatibility of the presently described Au-CGKRK-siRNA nanoconjugates.

The findings in the gel-binding assay (GBA) using native PAGE showed
the absence of any free siRNA band (Figure 4c). Notably, uncomplexed naked siRNA was
completely destroyed in the presence of RNase-1 (Figure 4c). Collectively, these findings
demonstrated strong siRNA-binding characteristics of the presently
described positively charged Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates. The cellular
cytotoxicities of the bare AuNPs and Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates, if any,
were examined by the conventional MTT assay in B16F10 cells. Importantly,
both AuNPs and Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates were found to be noncytotoxic
even when 10 μL of the nanoconjugates (containing 446 μg/mL
of gold) was incubated with cells (Figure 4d). These findings are consistent with priorly
disclosed noncytotoxic natures of other gold nanoconjugates.45−49 In the present study, we used the CGKRK peptide that specifically
targets the tumor cells. The lesser uptake of nanoparticles in NIH3T3
compared to that in B16F10 cells may be due to the presence of the
CGKRK peptide. Recent studies also strengthen our observation that
CGKRK-conjugated nanoparticles specifically internalize into cancer
cells. For example, Sharma et al. developed siRNA delivery using fatty
acyl-CGKRK peptide conjugates. The authors demonstrated that these
conjugates specifically internalize into cancer cells due to the presence
of CGKRK.50

2.6 Cellular
Uptake and Subcellular Localization
Studies Using Confocal Microscopy
With a view to examine
the degree of cellular uptake as well as subcellular localization
for the Au-CGKRK-siRNA nanoconjugates in tumor (B16F10) cells, we
performed a time-dependent cellular uptake experiment using confocal
microscopy. In this experiment, we used a fluorescently (green) labeled
FAMsiRNA and we prelabeled the lysosomes of the cells with a commercially
available acidotropic LysoTracker (red) dye. Cell nuclei were labeled
with Hoechst-33258 (blue). The absence of any significant yellow color
even at 6 h post nanoconjugate incubation with cells (Figure 5) revealed the lysosome escaping
efficacy of the presently described Au-CGKRK-siRNA nanoconjugates.
Presumably, siRNA was released rapidly from the endosomally uptaken
Au-CGKRK + siRNA nanoconjugates. Such a rapid release of endosomally
trapped siRNA evading lysosomal fusion has also been observed by other
groups.51−53 However, the mechanistic origin of such a fast endosomal
release of siRNA into the cell cytoplasm remains elusive at this point
of investigation. Because our primary objective was combating tumor
using both STAT3siRNA and PD-L1siRNA in complexation with the presently
described Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates, we first examined their dual siRNA
delivery efficacy in tumor cells. To this end, as a model experiment,
we used FAMsiRNA (green) and Cy5siRNA (red) both simultaneously complexed
with the positively charged Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates. Importantly,
confocal images of B16F10 cells taken after 4 h of incubation of such
nanoconjugates (containing dual siRNAs) revealed colocalization of
both the siRNAs (Figure S7). This finding
demonstrated dual siRNA delivery efficacy of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates.
The findings summarized in Figure S7 demonstrated
colocalization of both the siRNAs. Toward confirming the cytoplasmic
localization of the siRNA, we performed an additional confocal microscopic
experiment for taking the transmitted light differential interference
contrast images (TD image) 4 h postincubation of B16F10 cells with
the Au-CGKRK + FAMsiRNA nanoconjuate. The TD image depicted in Figure S9 (Supporting Information) clearly demonstrated
the cytoplasmic localization of the siRNA.

Figure 5 FAMsiRNA (green) delivered
to melanoma cells (B16F10) with the
Au-CGKRK nanoconjugate avoids fusion with lysosome (red), as revealed
in the cellular uptake study by confocal microscopy. Cells were incubated
with Au-CGKRK-FAMsiRNA nanoconjugates for 30 min, 1 h, 3 h, and 6
h. Lysosomes of the incubated cells were labeled with LysoTracker
(red). Merged panels (fourth column) clearly showed that the nanoconjugates
avoid lysosomes even at 6 h postincubation. Green fluorescence from
FAM-labeled siRNA was monitored using excitation and emission wavelengths
of 490 and 520 nm, respectively. Red fluorescence from LysoTracker
Red was monitored using excitation and emission wavelengths of 650
and 670 nm, respectively. The cell nucleus was labeled with Hoechst-33258
(exλ 352 nm/emλ 461 nm). Magnification:
40×. Scale bar 50 μm.

Toward confirming that the nanoparticle-associated siRNA
did not
get localized within the lysosomes, we have performed an additional
confocal microscopy experiment for taking the three-dimensional (3D)-z-stack images of the lysosome-labeled (with commercially
available LysoTracker, red) treated cells. The 3D-z-stack images of lysosome-labeled B16F10 cells treated with the Au-CGKRK
+ FAMsiRNA nanoconjuate (Figure S10) clearly
demonstrated that the delivered siRNA did not fuse with lysosomes.

2.7 Cellular Uptake Study by Flow Cytometry
The degree of cellular uptake of Au-CGKRK-FAMsiRNA nanoconjugates
was assessed quantitatively by flow cytometry. Both cancer cells (B16F10)
and noncancerous healthy cells (NIH3T3) were separately treated with
(1) Au-CGKRK + FAMsiRNA nanoconjugates, (2) CGKRK + FAMsiRNA complex
(without gold), and (3) naked FAMsiRNA. Results summarized in Figure 6a revealed Au-CGKRK
nanoconjugates to be the most efficient in delivering siRNA to cancer
cells. Notably, the degree of cellular uptake was significantly less
in NIH3T3 cells (Figure 6b), thereby demonstrating tumor-cell-selective siRNA delivery efficacy
of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates. Prior in vivo phage display studies
demonstrated that cell-penetrating peptide CGKRK is highly selective
for entering tumor and tumor endothelial cells (and not healthy noncancerous
cells) presumably via heparan sulfate receptors.50,54 The findings summarized in Figure 6 are consistent with these prior reports. However,
in-depth studies need to be carried out in future to gain further
mechanistic insights into whether or not poorly expressed heparan
sulfate receptor profiles could be playing an important role behind
the observed significantly less cellular internalization of the Au-CGKRK
nanoconjugates in the healthy noncancerous NIH3T3 cells.

Figure 6 Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates
deliver siRNA selectively to cancer cells.
In vitro cellular uptake experiments were performed by flow cytometry
using fluorescently labeled FAMsiRNA (green) in both cancer (B16F10,
melanoma) and noncancerous healthy NIH3T3 (mouse fibroblast) cells.
Significantly higher cellular uptake was observed only for cancer
cells (B16F10) (a) treated with Au-CGKRK-FAMsiRNA (pink) when compared
with healthy cells (NIH3T3), (b) treated with the same nanoconjugate.
Notably, degrees of cellular uptake were significantly less in both
the cells when treated either with CGKRK-FAMsiRNA (without AuNP, blue)
or with naked FAMsiRNA (violet).

2.8 Biodistribution Studies
Tumor-cell-selective
siRNA delivery efficacy of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates (Figure 6a,b) in the in vitro study
described above prompted us to carry out an in vivo biodistribution
study in melanoma-bearing C57BL/6J mice (n = 2) involving
i.p. administration of both near-infrared (NIR) dye (Dil)-loaded Au-CGKRK
and Au-CGKRK + Cy5siRNA nanoconjugates. The representative noninvasive
images (PerkinElmer IVIS spectrum animal imager) showed tumor-tissue-selective
accumulation of the Au-CGKARK nanoconjugate-associated NIR dye 24
h post i.p. administration (Figure 7a). Next, to further confirm tumor-selective in vivo
delivery of the Au-CGKARK nanoconjugate-loaded NIR dye, we sacrificed
the mice 24 h post i.p. administration and recorded the ex vivo images
of different organs. The ex vivo images of different organs (Figure 7b) also confirmed
the tumor-tissue-selective biodistribution profile of the i.p. administered
Au-CGKARK nanoconjugate-loaded NIR dye. Next, with a view to confirm
the efficacy of Au-CGKRK nanoconjugate in delivering siRNA to mouse
tumor, melanoma-bearing C57BL/6J mice (n = 2) were
i.p. administered with Au-CGKRK + Cy5siRNA nanoconjugates. Fixed tumor
tissues were cryosectioned (10 μm) 24 h post i.p. treatment.
Confocal images of the representative tumor cryosection (Figure 7c) revealed significant
accumulation of Cy5siRNA (red) in tumor tissue.

Figure 7 Nanoconjugates of Au-CGKRK
and near-infrared (NIR) dye (Dil, red)
and Au-CGKRK and fluorescently labeled siRNA (Cy-siRNA, red), upon
i.p. administration in tumor (melanoma)-bearing mice, get selectively
delivered to tumor tissues. The tumor-selective biodistribution profiles
of the Au-CGKRK and NIR dye nanoconjugates were initially confirmed
by noninvasive in vivo imaging of mice (n = 2) at
2 and 24 h i.p. post-administration (a). With a view to further confirm
the tumor-selective biodistribution profile, mice were sacrificed
after 24 h and different organs were isolated and ex vivo imaged.
The representative ex vivo images (b) further confirmed the tumor-selective
biodistribution of the i.p. administered Au-CGKRK-NIR nanoconjugates.
The tumor tissue accumulation of the i.p. administered Au-CGKRK-cy5siRNA
nanoconjugates was confirmed by the confocal image of the fixed 10
μm tumor cryosection (c) using excitation and emission wavelengths
of 650 and 670 nm, respectively. The nuclei were stained by 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) using excitation and emission wavelengths of 351 and 461 nm,
respectively. Magnification 60×. Scale bar 50 μm.

2.9 Tumor-Vasculature-Targeting
Property of Au-CGKRK
Nanoconjugates
Despite significant progresses in the field
of therapeutic RNA interference (RNAi) for combating cancer, clinical
success of RNAi remains critically dependent on (a) the use of efficient
delivery of systemically administered RNAi therapeutics selectively
to tumor cells (by protecting them from assault by systemic RNases,
by preventing their rapid renal filtration, and by evading their phagocytotic
uptake); (b) successful crossing of vascular barrier followed by efficient
internalization of RNAi therapeutics in cancer cells; and (c) efficient
endosomal escape of therapeutic siRNA payload into the cell cytoplasm
form RNA-induced silencing complex.55,56 Large-sized
drug-/siRNA-delivery vehicles are more susceptible to phagocytosis.
Presumably, the small size (∼42 nm) of the presently described
siRNA and Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates prevented their phagocytosis. Furthermore,
this size range, being much larger than the pore size of the glomerular
filtration barrier (∼8 nm), is likely to play a key role in
preventing their fast renal clearance. The tumor-tissue-selective
biodistribution of the siRNA and Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates was accomplished
by the use of priorly reported tumor- and tumor-vasculature-targeting
CGKRK ligands in the molecular architecture of the nanoconjuate. Because
prior studies demonstrated tumor endothelial-cell-targeting properties
of the CGKRK ligand,57,58 we carried out an additional
immunohistochemical staining study toward examining such tumor-vasculature-targeting
property of the presently described Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates. Melanoma-bearing
C57BL/6J mice (n = 3) were i.p. administered with
Au-CGKRK + Cy5siRNA nanoconjugates. Fixed tumor cryosections (prepared
24 h post i.p. treatment) were immunostained with mAb against CD31
(a widely used marker for tumor endothelial cells) using a fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled secondary antibody. Significant colocalization
of Cy5siRNA and tumor endothelial cells (Figure 8) clearly demonstrated the tumor-vasculature-targeting
nature of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates.

Figure 8 Intraperitoneally administered
Cy5siRNA (red)-Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates
get targeted to mouse tumor vasculature. Tumor cryosections prepared
24 h post i.p. administration of the nanoconjugates were stained first
with the FITC-labeled CD31 antibody (green, widely used marker for
tumor endothelial cells). The fixed cryosections were then observed
by a confocal microscope. The nuclei were stained with DAPI. The tumor
endothelial cells were imaged using excitation and emission wavelengths
of 490 and 520 nm, respectively; Cy5siRNA-Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates
were imaged using excitation and emission wavelengths of 650 and 670
nm, respectively. Magnification 60×. Scale bar 50 μm.

2.10 Tumor
Growth Inhibition Studies
Tumor-selective biodistribution
profile of the i.p. administered
Au-CGKRK-NIR nanoconjugate (Figure 7a,b) as well as the dual siRNA delivery efficacy of
the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugate under in vivo conditions (Figure S7) finally prompted us to examine its therapeutic
promise in inhibiting established tumor through RNAi. To this end,
we envisaged that i.p. administration of both STAT3siRNA and PD-L1siRNA
in complexation with tumor- and tumor-endothelial-cell-targeting Au-CGKRK
nanoconjugate might harness synergistic therapeutic effect in inhibiting
established mouse melanoma tumor growth. The rationale behind this
hypothesis is based on two important earlier findings: (i) inhibition
of STAT3 activation pathways through use of STAT3 inhibitors has been
well studied in the past for the treatment of many kinds of cancers;
and (ii) STAT3 activation leads to upregulation of PD-L1 expression
levels in tumor cells, which in turn leads to enhanced immune suppression.32−36 Thus, simultaneous delivery of both STAT3siRNA and PD-L1siRNA to
tumor cells will not only inhibit tumor cell growth but also shut
down the immune evasion mechanism due to downregulation of immune
checkpoint protein PD-L1. Importantly, significant tumor growth inhibition
was observed in established melanoma-bearing C57BL/6j mice (n = 5) upon i.p. administration of Au-CGKRK + PD-L1siRNA
+ STAT3siRNA nanoconjugates (Figure 9a). Notably, tumor growth inhibition in mice was not
accomplished through i.p. administration of (i) only 5% aqueous glucose
(vehicle control group) and (ii) STAT3siRNA and PD-L1siRNA in complexation
with the bare CGKRK peptide (Figure 9a). Tumor growth inhibition was found to be significantly
less in mice i.p. administered with only Au-CGKRK + STAT3siRNA and
only Au-CGKRK + PD-L1siRNA nanoconjugates (Figure S8a). As expected, no tumor growth inhibition was observed
in mice i.p. administered with only Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates (Figure 9a) and Au-CGKRK +
nonsilencing scrambled siRNA nanoconjugates (Figure S8a). Most importantly, the overall survivability (OS) benefit
was ∼75% higher in mice treated with Au-CGKRK + PD-L1siRNA
+ STAT3siRNA nanoconjugates compared to that in all of the control
mice groups mentioned above (Figures 9b and S8b). An issue is
worth discussing at this point. The in vivo research findings summarized
in Figure 9a revealed
that free siRNA combinations (group II) were much less efficient in
inhibiting tumor growth compared to that by Au-CGKRK (group III),
whereas in the in vitro MTT assay (Figure 4d), Au-CGKRK demonstrated almost no cytotoxicity.
The dose-dependent in vivo toxicity of AuNPs has been reported.59 A similar slight in vivo toxicity of the presently
described positively charged Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates (showing nontoxic
nature under the in vitro MTT assay) may not be ruled out at this
point of investigation. Such slight in vivo toxicity of the Au-CGKRK
nanoconjugates may play some role behind the observed difference between
the tumor growth inhibition properties of i.p. administered Au-CGKRK
nanoconjugates and that of i.p. administered free siRNA and CGKRK
combination.

Figure 9 Intraperitoneally administered Au-CGKRK + PD-L1siRNA +
STAT3siRNA
nanoconjugates elicit enhanced overall survivability of melanoma tumor-bearing
mice. (a) Relative tumor growth inhibition profiles observed in tumor-bearing
mice (n = 5) i.p. treated with 5% aqueous glucose
(UT, pink, group I); CGKRK + PD-L1 + STAT3 (without any AuNPs, green,
group II); Au-CGKRK (red, without using any therapeutic siRNA; group
III); and Au-CGKRK + PD-L1siRNA + STAT3siRNA nanoconjugates (blue,
group IV). Arrows underneath the x axis indicate
the days of total 5 i.p. injections post-tumor inoculations. The inset
shows the average weights of the tumors excised from these differently
treated mice groups. ** P < 0.005 compared to
untreated control group I. (b) After the last i.p. injection on day
20 post-tumor inoculation, mice were observed for overall survivability
(OS) from day 21. Group IV mice treated with Au-CGKRK + PD-L1siRNA
+ STAT3siRNA nanoconjugates showed significantly enhanced OS compared
to that of other mice groups.

2.11 Expression Profiles of PD-L1, STAT3, CD4,
and CD8 Proteins in Tumor Tissues
The observed significant
established melanoma growth inhibition and overall survivability enhancement
described above are likely to originate from (i) simultaneous downregulation
of STAT3 and PD-L1 expression levels in the tumor tissue of mice treated
with Au-CGKRK + PD-L1siRNA + STAT3siRNA nanoconjugates and (ii) enhanced
accumulation of T-cells in the tumor microenvironment due to blockade
of immune checkpoint protein PD-L1. With a view to gain some mechanistic
insights to this end, we performed a Western blotting experiment with
tumor lysates prepared from differently treated mice groups using
antibodies against STAT3 and PD-L1 as well as antibodies against CD4
and CD8 (two distinguishing markers for T-cells). Findings in the
Western blotting experiment (Figure 10) clearly revealed pronounced downregulation of STAT3
and PD-L1 in the tumor lysate prepared from mice treated with Au-CGKRK
+ PD-L1siRNA + STAT3siRNA nanoconjugates compared to that in the other
control mice groups. Consistent with the observed downregulation of
PD-L1, significant upregulations of CD8 and CD4 expression levels
were also observed (Figure 10), indicating that the established melanoma growth inhibition
in mice treated with Au-CGKRK + PD-L1siRNA + STAT3siRNA nanoconjugates
is likely to be T-cell-driven. The possible role of interleukin 6
(IL6) behind trafficking of T-cells in the tumor microenvironment
cannot be ruled out. Prior studies demonstrated IL6 to play the role
of a double sword. On one hand, IL6 promotes proliferation of tumor
cells (tumorigenesis) by upregulating the STAT3 activation pathway,
whereas it also promotes T-cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment.60,61 Use of STAT3siRNA in the present study is likely to inhibit IL6-mediated
tumorigenesis. The findings in the Western blotting experiments (Figure 10) are consistent
with enhanced accumulation of CD8+ and CD4+ T-cells in the tumor microenvironment.
IL6 may play some role behind such increased T-cell infiltration in
the tumor tissue. Clearly, further in-depth mechanistic studies need
to be carried out in future for obtaining more insights into the role
of IL6 in the observed tumor growth inhibition mediated by Au-CGKRK
+ PD-L1siRNA + STAT3siRNA nanoconjugates. Accumulation of T-regulatory
(Treg) cells in the tumor microenvironment has been shown to deactivate
tumor-killing efficiencies of CD8+ cells, and migration of Treg cells
in tumor tissues has been shown to be blocked by the use of STAT3
inhibitors.62,63 Thus, less accumulation of Treg
cells in the tumor microenvironment might also play a crucial mechanistic
role behind the presently observed tumor growth inhibition.

Figure 10 PD-L1siRNA
(the immune checkpoint inhibitor) and Stat3siRNA (the
JAK-STAT pathway inhibitor) harness T-cell-driven synergistic therapeutic
effects upon i.p. delivery with Au-CGKRK NPs. Expression levels of
the indicated proteins in the tumor lysates prepared from differently
treated mice groups were measured by Western blotting. The house-keeping
protein β-actin was used as a control in the experiment. Lane
1, mice treated with 5% aqueous glucose; lane 2, mice treated with
CGKRK; lane 3, mice treated with AuNP-CGKRK; lane 4, mice treated
with AuNP-CGKRK + scrambled siRNA; lane 5, mice treated with AuNP-CGKRK
+ PD-L1siRNA; lane 6, mice treated with AuNP-CGKRK + STAT3siRNA; and
lane 7, mice treated with AuNP-CGKRK + PD-L1 + STAT3siRNA.

Clearly, further in-depth mechanistic investigations
need to be
undertaken in future toward understanding the exact nature of such
T-cell-driven tumor growth inhibition.

3 Conclusions
In summary, we have reported herein on the design, physicochemical
characterization, and bioactivities of an effective tumor- and tumor
endothelial-cell-targeting positively charged Au-CGKRK nanoconjugate
system for combating cancer via therapeutic RNA interference. The
nanometric size range (17–80 nm) of the presently described
system was confirmed by dynamic light scattering and transmission
electron microscopy. Findings in the degree of cellular uptake by
both confocal microscopy and flow cytometry experiments showed tumor-cell-selective
targeting properties of Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates. Biodistribution studies
involving i.p. administration of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugate-associated
NIR dye revealed significant accumulation of the dye in tumor tissues
in established melanoma-bearing C57BL/6J mice. Importantly, co-delivery
(i.p.) of both STAT3siRNA (as an inhibitor of tumor and tumor endothelial
cell progression) and PD-L1siRNA (as an immune checkpoint inhibitor)
in complexation with the presently described Au-CGKRK nanoconjugate
significantly inhibited the growth of established mouse melanoma.
The treatment strategy also led to significant (>70%) enhancement
in the overall survivability (OS) of the tumor-bearing mice compared
to the OS of untreated tumor-bearing mice. Notably, i.p. administration
of single siRNA (i.e., either only STAT3siRNA or only PD-L1siRNA in
complexation with Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates) was found to be less effective
in inhibiting the growth of established mouse melanoma. Findings in
the Western blotting experiments with tumor lysates support the notion
that the observed tumor growth inhibition is a T-cell-driven process.
The Au-CGKRK nanoconjugate system described herein opens a new door
for simultaneously targeting therapeutic siRNA against tumor growth
and siRNA against immune checkpoint to tumor and tumor endothelial
cells. The present approach is expected to find future use in the
emerging field of cancer immunotherapy.

4 Materials
and Methods
4.1 Reagents
H-Lys(Boc)-2-ClTrt resin,
Fmoc-Arg(Pbf)-OH, Fmoc-Lys(Boc)-OH, Fmoc-Gly-OH, Boc-Cys(Trt)-OH,
Cl ion exchange Amberlyst resin, O-(benzotriazol-1-yl)-N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate (HBTU), N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA), piperidine,
dimethylformamide (DMF), trifluoroacetyl (TFA), thioanisole, ethanedithiol,
anisole, sodium borohydride (NaBH4), chloroauric acid (HAuCl4), Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM),
trypsin from bovine pancreas, radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA)
buffer, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide
(MTT), protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC), Hoechst-33258, and fluoroshield
with DAPI mounting medium were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).
Mouse PD-L1siRNA, mouse STAT3siRNA, nonsilencing siRNA (scrambled
siRNA), carboxy fluorescein (FAM), and Cy5-labeled siRNAs were purchased
from Eurogenetic, Belgium. CD8 (Cat# SC-1177) were purchased from
Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc. CD4 (Cat# 14-9766-82), CD31 (Cat# MA5-13188)
monoclonal antibodies, goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin G (IgG) (H +
L) FITC (Cat# 31569) secondary antibodies, and super signal west pico
chemiluminescent substrate (Cat# 34077) were purchased from Thermo
Fisher Scientific. STAT3 (Cat# 9139), PD-L1 (Cat# 29122), β-actin
(Cat# 4967), and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-linked anti-mouse IgG
(Cat# 7076) and anti-rabbit IgG (Cat# 7074) antibodies were purchased
from Cell Signalling Technology.

4.2 Cell
Lines
B16F10 and NIH3T3 cell
lines were procured from the National Centre for Cell Science (Pune,
India). These cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10%
FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 mg/mL streptomycin.

4.3 Stock Solution Preparation
Gold stock:
10–2 (M) chloroauric acid solution was prepared
by dissolving 1 g of chloroauric acid in 294 mL of Milli-Q water and
stored at 4 °C. Peptide stock: 1 mg of CGKRK was dissolved in
1 mL of Milli-Q water and stored at 4 °C.

4.4 Animals
Female C57BL/6J mice (6–8
week old, each weighing 20–22 g) were procured from the animal
house of our Institute. All animals were maintained in filtered-top
autoclavable cages provided with sterilized water, food, and bedding.
All of the experiments were conducted in accordance with the protocols
approved by our Institutional Animal Ethics committee vide approval
(IICT/52/2016) of the Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (CSIR-IICT),
Hyderabad, India.

4.5 Synthesis of the CGKRK
Pentapeptide
The Fmoc solid-phase peptide synthesis strategy
(as shown schematically
in Figure 1) was used
to synthesize the CGKRK pentapeptide. Briefly, 500 mg of H-Lys(Boc)-2-ClTrt
resin (I) (Nε-Boc-Lysine preloaded 2-chlorotrityl
resin, 0.72–0.77 mmol/g loading) in the peptide synthesizer
(CS Bio) vessel was first allowed to swell in 5 mL of DMF for 30 min.
The α-COOH group of the Fmoc-Arg(Pbf)-OH arginine (3 equiv)
residue was then coupled with the α-NH2 group of
the resin-attached lysine, HBTU (3 equiv), and DIPEA (6 equiv) in
dry DMF (10 mL) by agitating the peptide synthesizer vessel under
nitrogen for 40 min. The same coupling method was repeated twice to
ensure complete conjugation. The resin was then washed with DMF (2
× 5 mL) for 5 min, and the Fmoc group of the resulting intermediate II was removed by stirring with a solution of piperidine/DMF
(1:4, v/v, 10 mL) under nitrogen for 10 min (2×). The same peptide
coupling strategy was repeated by sequentially coupling with Fmoc-Lys(Boc)-OH,
Fmoc-Gly-OH, and Boc-Cys(Trt)-OH (3 equiv each) using HBTU (3 equiv)
and DIPEA (6 equiv) in dry DMF (10 mL) under nitrogen for 40 min.
As before, the coupling at each stage was repeated two times to ensure
completion of reaction, which eventually provided the resin-bound
intermediate V via intermediates III and IV (Figure 1). The resin-bound intermediate was then washed thoroughly with dry
dichloromethane (DCM) (2 × 10 mL) for 5 min and dried well. The
resulting dried resin-bound intermediate (V) upon treatment
with 0.5% TFA in dry DCM (100 mL) for 3 h at 0 °C afforded the
resin-free CGKRK pentapeptide intermediate VI in the
reaction mixture. The solvent was evaporated in the rotary evaporator
at 30 °C, and the residue was dried under high vacuum for 30
min. The dried intermediate VI (60 mg) was treated with
TFA–thioanisole–ethanedithiol–anisole (90:5:3:2,
v/v, 1 mL) for 3 h at 0 °C. Dry ether (10 mL) was added to the
reaction mixture until a white precipitate separated. The precipitate
upon chloride ion exchange chromatography over Amberlyst IRA-400 and
repeated precipitation from MeOH/acetone afforded the pure CGKRK pentapeptide
(VII) as a white fluffy solid (15 mg, 60% yield based
on intermediate VI; Rf =
0.2 in 15% MeOH/CHCl3, v/v). The purified CGKRK pentapeptide
was found to be essentially insoluble in chloroform and was dissolved
in 3:1 (v/v) methanol/chloroform. The structural characterization
was performed using high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS), matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization (MALDI), and 1H NMR (Figures S1–S3, respectively). The purity
of the peptide was confirmed by reverse-phase HPLC analysis (Figure S4) using two mobile phases (methanol
and 95:5 methanol/water, v/v). 1H NMR characterization
of compound VII (400 MHz, CDCl3 + CD3OD): δ/ppm = 1.5 (m, 4H, a + a′), 1.6–1.9 (m, 12H, b + b′ + b″ and c + c′ + c″), 2.9 (m, 4H, d + d′), 3.2 (m, 2H, e), 3.4 (m, 2H, f), 3.8
(m, 2H, g), 4.2–4.5 (m, 4H, h + h′ + h″ + h‴).

HRMS and MALDI of compound VII: m/z = 591 [M + 1]+ for C23H46N10O6S.

4.6 Synthesis
of Gold Nanoparticles (AuNPs) and
Conjugation of the CGKRK Peptide
The gold nanoparticles were
synthesized by a previously described sodium borohydride reduction
method.64 Briefly, 1 mL of HAuCl4 stock solution (10–2 M) was diluted to 100 mL
with sterile Milli-Q water (18.2 mΩ), 50 mL of sodium borohydride
solution (0.05 mg/mL) was added, and the reaction mixture was stirred
overnight. The tumor-targeting CGKRK peptide was conjugated to the
resulting AuNPs as follows: briefly, series of 1 mL AuNP solutions
(freshly prepared) were separately incubated with increasing amounts
of CGKRK peptides (2–20 μg) for 10 min at room temperature.
The changes in both the absorbances and the wavelength maxima (λmax) of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates and bare AuNPs were monitored
using a spectrophotometer (JASCO dual-beam spectrophotometer, model
V-650). The saturation curve constructed using the absorbance versus
wavelength provided the maximum CGKRK concentration (10 μg/mL, Figure 2) for preparing the
tumor-targeting Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates described below.

4.7 Preparation of Nanoconjugates
The
CGKRK peptide (10 μg/mL) was added to 30 mL of AuNPs and was
first centrifuged using an Eppendorff centrifuge (12 000 rpm
at 20 °C) for 1 h. The resulting intense red pellet upon further
ultracentrifugation (20 000 rpm, Beckman Coulter) at 4 °C
for 1 h afforded 30 μL of Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates. The amount
of CGKRK peptide conjugated to AuNPs was measured by HPLC analysis,
and the concentration of gold in the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates (loose
pellet) was determined by the inductively coupled plasma optical emission
spectrometry method. The loose pellet (Au-CGKRK) was used for all
characterization and biological studies.

4.8 XRD Analysis
The surface crystallinity
of the nanoconjugates was characterized by the XRD method. Briefly,
both bare AuNPs and Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates were separately coated
on the same place of a glass slide at regular time intervals to allow
formation of thin films. The dried coated glass slides were used for
XRD studies with a Bruker D8 Advance Powder X-ray diffractometer.

4.9 TEM Analysis
The size and morphological
features of the gold nanoconjugates were analyzed by TEM. Briefly,
5 μL of diluted (1:200) nanoconjugates was placed on a carbon-coated
copper grid (glow-discharged for 45 s using a Tolaron Hivac Evaporator)
for 10 min. The excess sample was blotted with Whatman filter paper.
The dried coated grids were vacuum-dried, and the electron micrographs
of the gold nanoconjugates were recorded with a FEI Tecnai 12 TEM
instrument.

4.10 DLS Measurements (Size
and Surface Charge)
The hydrodynamic diameter and surface
charges (ζ potentials)
of various nanoconjugates including AuNPs, Au-CGKRK, and Au-CGKRK-siRNA
were measured by photon correlation spectroscopy and electrophoretic
mobility using an Anton-Paar Litesizer 500 instrument and using diluted
(1:200) samples. Each experiment was carried out in triplicate. For
studying the stability of the nanoconjugates in the presence of added
serum, nanoconjugates were dissolved in 10% FBS and size measurements
were carried out every 25–100 h.

4.11 siRNA
Binding Studies and RNase Sensitivity
Assay
The siRNA binding properties of the nanoconjugates
were studied by the gel-binding assay using native PAGE. Briefly,
increasing amounts (2.2–22.3 μg) of freshly prepared
nanoconjugates were incubated with 0.5 μg of nonsilencing siRNA
for 30 min at room temperature and the resulting electrostatic complexes
were electrophoresed (native PAGE) for 1 h at 80 V in TAE (1×)
buffer. siRNA binding properties of bare AuNPs were studied as control.
Similar native PAGE was also carried out by incubating the same amount
(17.8 μg) of Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates with increasing amounts
(0.5–2.5 μg) of nonsilencing siRNA. After electrophoresis,
the gels were stained with EtBr and observed under a gel docking system
(Vilber Lourmart). Naked nonsilencing siRNA (0.5 μg) was used
as a control. With a view to evaluate the RNase sensitivity of the
presently described Au-CGKRK-siRNA nanoconjugates, the Au-CGKRK-siRNA
nanoconjugates containing 1.5 μg of siRNA were incubated with
RNase-1 (0.5 μg/mL) for 1 h at room temperature. Nanoconjugates
were then extracted with phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1,
v/v, 1 mL), and siRNA from the supernatant was precipitated with ice-cold
isopropyl alcohol (1 mL). The siRNA pellet was dissolved in RNase-free
water and loaded on the native gel. Samples of naked siRNA and siRNA
incubated with RNase-1 were used as controls.

4.12 In Vitro
Cytotoxicity Assay
The
cellular cytotoxicities of the nanoconjugates were measured using
the conventional MTT assay. Briefly, B16F10 cells were seeded in 96-well
plates at a density of 4 × 103 cells/well and incubated
overnight. Cells were then treated with increasing volumes (1, 2.5,
5, 7.5, and 10 μL) of the nanoconjugate stock solution (446
μg/mL of gold) of AuNPs and Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates for 48 h.
The stock 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide
(MTT) reagent (10 μL, 3 mg/mL) was added to each well and incubated
for 4 h under dark. The purple formazan crystals were dissolved in
50 μL of dimethyl sulfoxide/methanol (1:1, v/v), and absorbances
of the resulting clear solutions at 575 nm were recorded using a microplate
reader (Biotek Synergy). The results were expressed as percent cell
viability using the following formula: % cell viability = [A575 (treated cells) – background/A575 (untreated cells) – background] ×
100. Each experiment was performed in triplicate.

4.13 Cellular Uptake Study Using Confocal Microscopy
The
degrees of cellular uptake for the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates
in cancer cells were studied qualitatively by confocal microscopy.
Briefly, 1 × 105 B16F10 cells were seeded in 35 mm
coverglass-bottom (SPL Life Sciences Co., Ltd., Korea) confocal dishes
with 1 mL of growth medium 12 h prior to treatment. To monitor the
extent of lysosomal release of gold nanoconjugates, lysosomes of cells
were first labeled with LysoTracker Red DND-99 (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
for 1 h. Cells were then incubated with Au-CGKRK-FAMsiRNA (2 μg)
nanoconjugates for increasing time periods (30 min, 1 h, 3 h, and
6 h) and washed thoroughly with PBS (3 × 1 mL). Fresh culture
media were added to each well and cells were observed with a confocal
microscope (Nikon Ti Eclipse) after staining cell nuclei with Hoechst-33258.
With a view to examine the efficiency of the gold nanoconjugates for
dual siRNA delivery, 1 × 105 B16F10 cells were treated
with Au-CGKRK-FAMsiRNA (2 μg) and Au-CGKRK-Cy5siRNA (2 μg)
nanoconjugates in 35 mm Petri dishes for 2.5 h at 37 0 °C. Cell
nuclei were then stained with Hoechst-33258, incubated for additional
30 min, and washed with PBS (3 × 1 mL). Fresh culture medium
(1 mL) was added, and images were taken with a confocal microscope.
Green fluorescence from FAM-labeled siRNA (exλ 490
nm/emλ 520 nm), red fluorescence from Cy5-labeled
siRNA (exλ 650 nm/emλ 670 nm), and
blue fluorescence from Hoechst-33258 (exλ 352 nm/emλ 461 nm) were obtained using a 40× objective. The
results were analyzed using Nikon A1 software. Similarly, confocal
images of the untreated cells and cells treated with either naked
siRNA or free AuNPs were also recorded.

4.14 Quantitative
Cellular Uptake Study with Flow
Cytometry
The degree of cellular uptake was also studied
quantitatively using flow cytometry. To examine the cancer cell selective
internalization, both cancer (B16F10) and normal (NIH3T3) cells were
cultured in six-well plates at a density of 1 × 106 cells overnight. The cells were then incubated with Au-CGKRK-FAMsiRNA
(2 μg), CGKRK + FAMsiRNA (2 μg), and free FAMsiRNA (2
μg) for 4 h. Cells were harvested by trypsinization, washed
with PBS (3 × 1 mL) to remove unbound conjugates, and analyzed
using a flow cytometer (BD FACSCanto II) under an FITC channel. The
shift of the fluorescently labeled cells was compared with that of
untreated cells using FCS software.

4.15 Establishment
of the Syngenic Mouse Melanoma
Tumor Model
Female C57BL/6J mice (6–8 week old, each
weighing 20–22 g, n = 5) were subcutaneously
(s.c.) injected with 1 × 105 B16F10 cells in the left
flank. On day 12, when tumor became palpable, the treatment was initiated
for either biodistribution or tumor regression studies.

4.16 Biodistribution Study
The biodistribution
pattern of the nanoconjugates was monitored by the noninvasive imaging
method. Dil (25 μg; a near-infrared dye) was added to 320 μL
of the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugate (containing 143 μg of gold). The
solution was centrifuged at 20 000 rpm and 4 °C for 1
h to obtain the NIR-dye-labeled nanoconjugates. The resulting 320
μL of NIR-dye-labeled Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates was divided into
two equal parts. Two B16F10 tumor-bearing 6–8 week old female
C57BL/6J (each weighing 20–22 g) mice were i.p. administered
with NIR-labeled nanoconjugates (each mouse received 160 μL
of NIR-labeled nanoconjugates). Animals were anesthetized with ketamine–xylazine
2 h post i.p. treatment of NIR-labeled nanconjugates, and the biodistribution
profile of the NIR dye in mice was monitored using a PerkinElmer IVIS
spectrum animal imager. Such biodistribution profile was also measured
24 h post i.p. treatment. With a view to further confirm the biodistribution
patterns, mice were sacrificed after the completion of noninvasive
imaging 24 h post i.p. treatment, vital organs (including brain, heart,
lungs, liver, kidney, spleen, and tumor tissue) were collected, and
ex vivo imaged with the same imager. In addition, with a view to confirm
accumulation of i.p. administered fluorescently labeled Au-CGKRK +
Cy5siRNA nanoconjugates in melanoma-bearing mice, tumor tissues were
cryosectioned (10 μm) at 24 h post i.p. treatment and observed
under a confocal microscope at 60× magnification using DAPI for
nucleus staining.

4.17 Tumor-Vasculature-Targeting
Property of Au-CGKRK
Nanoconjugates
Tumor-vasculature-targeting properties of
the Au-CGKRK nanoconjugate were evaluated by CD31 (one of the most
widely used markers for tumor endothelial cells) staining of tumor
endothelial cells. Au-CGKRK + Cy5siRNA nanoconjugates were i.p. administered
to melanoma tumor-bearing mice (n = 3). After 24
h, mice were sacrificed, and tumors were excised. Tumor cryosections
(10 μm thick) were prepared on glass slides using a cryostat
instrument (Leica). The slides were fixed in isopropyl alcohol (15
mL) for 15 min and washed with PBS (2 × 5 mL). The fixed slides
were incubated in citrate buffer at 65 °C for 10 min for antigen
retrieval and blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin in TBST for 1 h.
Slides were washed with TBST (2 x 5 mL) and incubated with CD31 monoclonal
primary antibody (1:100 dilution) overnight at 4 °C. All of the
slides were washed thoroughly with TBST buffer and incubated with
the FITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody (1:200
dilution) at room temperature for 30 min to mark the tumor endothelial
microvessels. Slides were mounted with DAPI mounting media and analyzed
by a confocal microscope under a 60× objective.

4.18 Tumor Growth Inhibition Study
Female
C57BL/6J mice (6–8 week old; each weighing 20–22 g, n = 5) were s.c. inoculated in the left flanks with 1 ×
105 B16F10 cells in 200 μL of Hank’s buffer
salt solution. On day 12, melanoma tumor-bearing mice were randomly
divided into four groups and were then i.p. administered with 5% aqueous
glucose (group I); CGKRK + PD-L1siRNA + STAT3siRNA (each siRNA 3 μg)
(group II); Au-CGKRK nanoconjugate (160 μL) containing 71.3
μg of gold (group III); and Au-CGKRK + PD-L1siRNA + STAT3siRNA
containing 3 μg of each siRNA (group IV) on days 12, 14, 16,
18, and 20. In addition, with a view to check the therapeutic efficacy
of Au-CGKRK nanoconjugates in complexation with only STAT3siRNA or
only PD-L1siRNA, melanoma tumor-bearing mice (n =
5) were i.p. administered with 5% aqueous glucose (group I); Au-CGKRK
+ scr.siRNA containing 6 μg of scr.siRNA (group II); Au-CGKRK
+ PD-L1siRNA containing 6 μg of PD-L1siRNA (group III); and
Au-CGKRK + STAT3siRNA containing 6 μg of STAT3siRNA (group IV)
on days 12, 14, 16, 18, and 20. Animals were monitored during the
entire course of the experiment. The tumor volumes (V = 1/2·ab2, where “a” represents the maximum length of the tumor and
“b” represents minimum length of the
tumor measured perpendicular to each other) were measured with a slide
caliper for up to 24 days. Results represent the means ± standard
deviation (SD, n = 5).

4.19 In Vivo
Expression Profiles of PD-L1, STAT3,
CD4, and CD8 by Western Blotting
The tumor tissues were collected
in ice-cold PBS 24 h post i.p. treatment and lysed by homogenization
in RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC). The lysate
was centrifuged at 12 000 rpm for 30 min, and the protein concentrations
were estimated by the Bradford reagent. Total proteins (50 μg)
were dissolved in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-PAGE sample buffer,
and the components were separated using 12% SDS-PAGE. Proteins were
transferred to the poly(vinylidene difluoride) membrane by wet blotting,
and membranes were blocked for 2 h at room temperature with 5% nonfat
milk in PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20 (PBS-T). The blots were incubated
with monoclonal antibodies against β-actin, PD-L1, STAT3, CD8,
and CD4 (using dilution factors mentioned in the manufacturer’s
instructions) overnight at 4 °C, washed with PBS-T (3 ×
10 mL), and incubated with the HRP-conjugated secondary antibody for
1 h at room temperature. The membranes were developed using the enhanced
chemiluminescent method in Vilber Lourmat.

4.20 Statistical
Analysis
Error bars
represent mean values ± SD. For comparison between two treatment
groups, two-tailed Student’s t-test was used.
For the in vivo experiments, * P < 0.05 was considered
significant.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b01051.HRMS electrospray
ionization spectrum of the CGKRK pentapeptide,
MALDI mass spectrum, 1H NMR spectrum, HPLC chromatograms,
the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the Au-CGKRK conjugate, siRNA
binding properties, confocal imaging studies, tumor volumes and survivability
of nanoconjugates, Au-CGKRK-FAMsiRNA nanoconjugate uptake in B16F10
cells, 3D-z-stack images of Au-CGKRK-FAMsiRNA nanoconjugates
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b01051_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
⊥ Superannuated
from CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology
on January 31, 2018 (A.C.).

Author Contributions
∥ S.K.G.
and R.K. contributed equally to this article.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Harikrishna from CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular
Biology for his kind help in taking TEM images. S.K.G and R.K. thank
the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Government
of India, New Delhi, for their doctoral research fellowship. A.C.
and C.R.P. thank CSIR for sponsoring this research work (project codes:
CSC0302 and BSC0123). IICT manuscript communication number is IICT/Pubs./2018/233.
==== Refs
References
Guan J. ; Zhou Z. Q. ; Chen M. H. ; Li H. Y. ; Tong D. N. ; Yang J. ; Yao J. ; Zhang Z. Y. 
Folate-conjugated
and pH-responsive polymeric micelles for target-cell-specific anticancer
drug delivery . Acta Biomater. 
2017 , 60 , 244 –255 . 10.1016/j.actbio.2017.07.018 .28713015 
Shao S. ; Zhu Y. ; Meng T. ; Liu Y. ; Hong Y. ; Yuan M. ; Yuan H. ; Hu F. 
Targeting
High Expressed α5β1
Integrin in Liver Metastatic Lesions To Resist Metastasis of Colorectal
Cancer by RPM Peptide-Modified Chitosan-Stearic Micelles . Mol. Pharm. 
2018 , 15 , 1653 –1663 . 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.8b00013 .29533631 
Park J. E. ; Chun S. E. ; Reichel D. ; Min J. S. ; Lee S. C. ; Han S. ; Ryoo G. ; Oh Y. ; Park S. H. ; Ryu H. M. ; Kim K. B. ; Lee H. Y. ; Bae S. K. ; Bae Y. ; Lee W. 
Polymer micelle formulation
for the proteasome inhibitor drug carfilzomib:
Anticancer efficacy and pharmacokinetic studies in mice . PLoS One 
2017 , 12 , e017324710.1371/journal.pone.0173247 .28273121 
Davis M. E. ; Zuckerman J. E. ; Choi C. H. ; Seligson D. ; Tolcher A. ; Alabi C. A. ; Yen Y. ; Heidel J. D. ; Ribas A. 
Evidence of
RNAi in humans from systemically administered siRNA via targeted nanoparticles . Nature 
2010 , 464 , 1067 –1070 . 10.1038/nature08956 .20305636 
Guo J. ; Russell E. G. ; Darcy R. ; Cotter T. G. ; McKenna S. L. ; Cahill M. R. ; O’Driscoll C.
M. 
Antibody-Targeted Cyclodextrin-Based
Nanoparticles for siRNA Delivery in the Treatment of Acute Myeloid
Leukemia: Physicochemical Characteristics, in Vitro Mechanistic Studies,
and ex Vivo Patient Derived Therapeutic Efficacy . Mol. Biopharm. 
2017 , 14 , 940 –952 . 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b01150 .
Chen X. ; Qiu Y. K. ; Owh C. ; Loh X. J. ; Wu Y. L. 
Supramolecular
cyclodextrin nanocarriers for chemo- and gene therapy towards the
effective treatment of drug resistant cancers . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 18876 –18881 . 10.1039/C6NR08055C .27819368 
Shen Z. ; Li B. ; Liu Y. ; Zheng G. ; Guo Y. ; Zhao R. ; Jiang K. ; Fan L. ; Shao J. 
A self-assembly nanodrug
delivery system based on amphiphilic low generations of PAMAM dendrimers-ursolic
acid conjugate modified by lactobionic acid for HCC targeting therapy . Nanomedicine 
2018 , 14 , 227 –236 . 10.1016/j.nano.2017.10.007 .29128661 
Wong P. T. ; Tang S. ; Mukherjee J. ; Tang K. ; Gam K. ; Isham D. ; Murat C. ; Sun R. ; Baker J. R. ; Choi S. K. 
Light-controlled active release of
photocaged ciprofloxacin
for lipopolysaccharide-targeted drug delivery using dendrimer conjugates . Chem. Commun. 
2016 , 52 , 10357 –10360 . 10.1039/C6CC05179K .
Ramya A. N. ; Joseph M. M. ; Maniganda S. ; Karunakaran V. ; Sreelekha T. T. ; Maiti K. K. 
Emergence of Gold-Mesoporous
Silica
Hybrid Nanotheranostics: Dox-Encoded, Folate Targeted Chemotherapy
with Modulation of SERS Fingerprinting for Apoptosis Toward Tumor
Eradication . Small 
2017 , 13 , 170081910.1002/smll.201700819 .
Mao B. ; Liu C. ; Zheng W. ; Li X. ; Ge R. ; Shen H. ; Guo X. ; Lian Q. ; Shen X. ; Li C. 
Cyclic cRGDfk peptide
and Chlorin e6 functionalized silk fibroin nanoparticles for targeted
drug delivery and photodynamic therapy . Biomaterials 
2018 , 161 , 306 –320 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2018.01.045 .29427926 
Bhunia S. ; Radha V. ; Chaudhuri A. 
CDC20siRNA
and paclitaxel co-loaded
nanometric liposomes of a nipecotic acid-derived cationic amphiphile
inhibit xenografted neuroblastoma . Nanoscale 
2017 , 9 , 1201 –1212 . 10.1039/C6NR07532K .28045167 
Kurosaki T. ; Kawakami S. ; Higuchi Y. ; Suzuki R. ; Maruyama K. ; Sasaki H. ; Yamashita F. ; Hashida M. 
Kidney-selective gene
transfection using anionic bubble lipopolyplexes with renal ultrasound
irradiation in mice . Nanomedicine 
2014 , 10 , 1829 –1838 . 10.1016/j.nano.2014.06.009 .24954382 
Dasa S. S. K. ; Suzuki R. ; Mugler E. ; Chen L. ; Jansson-Lofmark R. ; Michaelsson E. ; Lindfors L. ; Klibanov A. L. ; French B. A. ; Kelly K. A. 
Evaluation
of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles
of liposomes for the cell type-specific delivery of small molecule
drugs . Nanomedicine 
2017 , 13 , 2565 –2574 . 10.1016/j.nano.2017.07.005 .28754465 
Mondal G. ; Barui S. ; Saha S. ; Chaudhuri A. 
Tumor growth
inhibition through targeting liposomally bound curcumin to tumor vasculature . J. Controlled Release 
2013 , 172 , 832 –840 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.08.302 .
Bathula S. R. ; Sharma K. ; Singh D. K. ; Reddy M. P. ; Sajja P. R. ; Deshmukh A. L. ; Banerjee D. 
siRNA Delivery
Using a Cationic-Lipid-Based
Highly Selective Human DNA Ligase I Inhibitor . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 1616 –1622 . 10.1021/acsami.7b19193 .29256581 
Nakamura T. ; Miyabe H. ; Hyodo M. ; Sato Y. ; Hayakawa Y. ; Harashima H. 
Liposomes loaded with a STING pathway ligand, cyclic
di-GMP, enhance cancer immunotherapy against metastatic melanoma . J. Controlled Release 
2015 , 216 , 149 –157 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.08.026 .
Saha S. ; Venu Y. ; Bhattacharya D. ; Kompella S. D. ; Madhusudana K. ; Chakravarty S. ; Ramakrishna S. ; Chaudhuri A. 
Combating
Established Mouse Glioblastoma through Nicotinylated-Liposomes-Mediated
Targeted Chemotherapy in Combination with Dendritic-Cell-Based Genetic
Immunization . Adv. Biosyst. 
2017 , 1 , 160000910.1002/adbi.201600009 .
Patra C. R. ; Bhattacharya R. ; Mukhopadhyay D. ; Mukherjee P. 
Fabrication
of gold nanoparticles for targeted therapy in pancreatic cancer . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2010 , 62 , 346 –361 . 10.1016/j.addr.2009.11.007 .
Ding Y. ; Jiang Z. ; Saha K. ; Kim C. S. ; Kim S. T. ; Landis R. F. ; Rotello V. M. 
Gold nanoparticles
for nucleic acid
delivery . Mol. Ther. 
2014 , 22 , 1075 –1083 . 10.1038/mt.2014.30 .24599278 
Yu H. ; Pardoll D. ; Jove R. 
STATs in cancer inflammation and
immunity: a leading role for STAT3 . Nat. Rev.
Cancer 
2009 , 9 , 798 –809 . 10.1038/nrc2734 .19851315 
Hussain S. F. ; Kong L.-Y. ; Jordan J. ; Conrad C. ; Madden T. ; Fokt I. ; Priebe W. ; Heimberger A. B. 
A Novel
Small Molecule Inhibitor of Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription
3 Reverses Immune Tolerance in Malignant Glioma Patients . Cancer Res. 
2007 , 67 , 9630 –9636 . 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1243 .17942891 
Iwamaru A. ; Szymanski S. ; Iwado E. ; Aoki H. ; Yokoyama T. ; Fokt I. ; Hess K. ; Conrad C. ; Madden T. ; Sawaya R. ; Kondo S. ; Priebe W. ; Kondo Y. 
A novel inhibitor
of the STAT3 pathway induces apoptosis in malignant glioma cells both
in vitro and in vivo . Oncogene 
2007 , 26 , 2435 –2444 . 10.1038/sj.onc.1210031 .17043651 
Kong L. Y. ; Abou-Ghazal M. K. ; Wei J. ; Chakraborty A. ; Sun W. ; Qiao W. ; Fuller G. N. ; Fokt I. ; Grimm E. A. ; Schmittling R. J. ; Archer G. E. ; Sampson J. H. ; Priebe W. ; Heimberger A. B. 
A Novel Inhibitor of STAT3 Activation Is Efficacious
Against Established Central Nervous System Melanoma and Inhibits Regulatory
T Cells . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2008 , 14 , 5759 –5768 . 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0377 .18794085 
Zhang X. ; Yue P. ; Page B. D. ; Li T. ; Zhao W. ; Namanja A. T. ; Paladino D. ; Zhao J. ; Chen Y. ; Gunning P. T. ; Turkson J. 
Orally bioavailable
small-molecule inhibitor of transcription
factor Stat3 regresses human breast and lung cancer xenografts . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2012 , 109 , 9623 –9628 . 10.1073/pnas.1121606109 .22623533 
Tumeh P. C. ; Harview C. L. ; Yearley J. H. ; Shintaku I. P. ; Taylor E. J. ; Robert L. ; Chmielowski B. ; Spasic M. ; Henry G. ; Ciobanu V. ; West A. N. ; Carmona M. ; Kivork C. ; Seja E. ; Cherry G. ; Gutierrez A. J. ; Grogan T. R. ; Mateus C. ; Tomasic G. ; Glaspy J. A. ; Emerson R. O. ; Robins H. ; Pierce R. H. ; Elashoff D. A. ; Robert C. ; Ribas A. 
PD-1 blockade induces responses by
inhibiting adaptive immune resistance . Nature 
2014 , 515 , 568 –571 . 10.1038/nature13954 .25428505 
Gubin M. M. ; Zhang X. ; Schuster H. ; Caron E. ; Ward J. P. ; Noguchi T. ; Ivanova Y. ; Hundal J. ; Arthur C. D. ; Krebber W. J. ; Mulder G. E. ; Toebes M. ; Vesely M. D. ; Lam S. S. ; Korman A. J. ; Allison J. P. ; Freeman G. J. ; Sharpe A. H. ; Pearce E. L. ; Schumacher T. N. ; Aebersold R. ; Rammensee H. G. ; Melief C. J. ; Mardis E. R. ; Gillanders W. E. ; Artyomov M. N. ; Schreiber R. D. 
Checkpoint
blockade cancer immunotherapy targets tumour-specific mutant antigens . Nature 
2014 , 515 , 577 –581 . 10.1038/nature13988 .25428507 
Alsaab H. O. ; Sau S. ; Alzhrani R. ; Tatiparti K. ; Bhise K. ; Kashaw S. K. ; Iyer A. K. 
PD-1 and
PD-L1 Checkpoint Signaling Inhibition for
Cancer Immunotherapy: Mechanism, Combinations, and Clinical Outcome . Front. Pharmacol. 
2017 , 8 , 561 10.3389/fphar.2017.00561 .28878676 
Fife B. T. ; Pauken K. E. ; Eagar T. N. ; Obu T. ; Wu J. ; Tang Q. ; Azuma M. ; Krummel M. F. ; Bluestone J. A. 
Interactions
between PD-1 and PD-L1 promote tolerance by blocking the TCR-induced
stop signal . Nat. Immunol. 
2009 , 10 , 1185 –1192 . 10.1038/ni.1790 .19783989 
Karwacz K. ; Bricogne C. ; MacDonald D. ; Arce F. ; Bennett C. L. ; Collins M. ; Escors D. 
PD-L1 co-stimulation contributes
to ligand-induced T cell receptor down-modulation on CD8+ T cells . EMBO Mol. Med. 
2011 , 3 , 581 –592 . 10.1002/emmm.201100165 .21739608 
Hodi F. S. ; Hwu W. J. ; Kefford R. ; Weber J. S. ; Daud A. ; Hamid O. ; Patnaik A. ; Ribas A. ; Robert C. ; Gangadhar T. C. ; Joshua A. M. ; Hersey P. ; Dronca R. ; Joseph R. ; Hille D. ; Xue D. ; Li X. N. ; Kang S. P. ; Ebbinghaus S. ; Perrone A. ; Wolchok J. D. 
Evaluation
of Immune-Related Response Criteria and RECIST v1.1 in Patients With
Advanced Melanoma Treated With Pembrolizumab . J. Clin. Oncol. 
2016 , 34 , 1510 –1517 . 10.1200/JCO.2015.64.0391 .26951310 
Hamanishi J. ; Mandai M. ; Matsumura N. ; Abiko K. ; Baba T. ; Konishi I. 
PD-1/PD-L1 blockade
in cancer treatment: perspectives
and issues . Int. J. Clin. Oncol. 
2016 , 21 , 462 –473 . 10.1007/s10147-016-0959-z .26899259 
Chen J. ; Jiang C. C. ; Jin L. ; Zhang X. D. 
Regulation
of PD-L1:
a novel role of pro-survival signalling in cancer . Ann. Oncol. 
2016 , 27 , 409 –416 . 10.1093/annonc/mdv615 .26681673 
Marzec M. ; Zhang Q. ; Goradia A. ; Raghunath P. N. ; Liu X. ; Paessler M. ; Wang H. Y. ; Wysocka M. ; Cheng M. ; Ruggeri B. A. ; Wasik M. A. 
Oncogenic
kinase NPM/ALK induces
through STAT3 expression of immunosuppressive protein CD274 (PD-L1,
B7-H1) . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2008 , 105 , 20852 –20857 . 10.1073/pnas.0810958105 .19088198 
Fang W. ; Zhang J. ; Hong S. ; Zhan J. ; Chen N. ; Qin T. ; Tang Y. ; Zhang Y. ; Kang S. ; Zhou T. ; Wu X. ; Liang W. ; Hu Z. ; Ma Y. ; Zhao Y. ; Tian Y. ; Yang Y. ; Xue C. ; Yan Y. ; Hou X. ; Huang P. ; Huang Y. ; Zhao H. ; Zhang L. 
EBV-driven
LMP1 and IFN-γ up-regulate PD-L1 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma:
Implications for oncotargeted therapy . Oncotarget 
2014 , 5 , 12189 –12202 . 10.18632/oncotarget.2608 .25361008 
Ma C. ; Horlad H. ; Pan C. ; Yano H. ; Ohnishi K. ; Fujiwara Y. ; Matsuoka M. ; Lee A. ; Niidome T. ; Yamanaka R. ; Takeya M. ; Komohara Y. 
Stat3 inhibitor abrogates
the expression of PD-1 ligands on lymphoma cell lines . J. Clin. Exp. Hematopathol. 
2017 , 57 , 21 –25 . 10.3960/jslrt.17006 .
Bu L. L. ; Yu G. T. ; Wu L. ; Mao L. ; Deng W. W. ; Liu J. F. ; Kulkarni A. B. ; Zhang W. F. ; Zhang L. ; Sun Z. J. 
STAT3 Induces Immunosuppression by Upregulating PD-1/PD-L1
in HNSCC . J. Dent. Res. 
2017 , 96 , 1027 –1034 . 10.1177/0022034517712435 .28605599 
Mondal G. ; Barui S. ; Chaudhuri A. 
The relationship
between the cyclic-RGDfK
ligand and αvβ3 integrin receptor . Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 6249 –6260 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.04.065 .23702147 
Folkman J. 
Angiogenesis:
an organizing principle for drug discovery? . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2007 , 6 , 273 –286 . 10.1038/nrd2115 .17396134 
Weis S. M. ; Cheresh D. A. 
Tumor angiogenesis:
molecular pathways and therapeutic
targets . Nat. Med. 
2011 , 17 , 1359 –1370 . 10.1038/nm.2537 .22064426 
Desgrosellier J. S. ; Cheresh D. A. 
Integrins in cancer: biological implications and therapeutic
opportunities . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2010 , 10 , 9 –22 . 10.1038/nrc2748 .20029421 
Barui S. ; Saha S. ; Mondal G. ; Haseena S. ; Chaudhuri A. 
Simultaneous
delivery of doxorubicin and curcumin encapsulated in liposomes of
pegylated RGDK-lipopeptide to tumor vasculature . Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 1643 –1656 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.10.074 .24239109 
Agemy L. ; Friedmann-Morvinski D. ; Kotamraju V. R. ; Roth L. ; Sugahara K. N. ; Girard O. M. ; Mattrey R. F. ; Verma I. M. ; Ruoslahti E. 
Targeted nanoparticle
enhanced proapoptotic peptide as potential therapy for glioblastoma . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2011 , 108 , 17450 –17455 . 10.1073/pnas.1114518108 .21969599 
Hu Q. ; Gao X. ; Kang T. ; Feng X. ; Jiang D. ; Tu Y. ; Song Q. ; Yao L. ; Jiang X. ; Chen H. ; Chen J. 
CGKRK-modified nanoparticles for dual-targeting drug delivery to
tumor cells and angiogenic blood vessels . Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 9496 –9508 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.09.001 .24054848 
Kotcherlakota R. ; Srinivasan D. J. ; Mukherjee S. ; Haroon M. M. ; Dar G. H. ; Venkatraman U. ; Patra C. R. ; Gopal V. 
Engineered fusion protein-loaded
gold nanocarriers for targeted co-delivery of doxorubicin and erbB2-siRNA
in human epidermal growth factor receptor-2+ ovarian cancer . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2017 , 5 , 7082 –7098 . 10.1039/C7TB01587A .
Alkilany A.
M. ; Murphy C. J. 
Toxicity
and cellular uptake of gold nanoparticles:
what we have learned so far? . J. Nanopart. Res. 
2010 , 12 , 2313 –2333 . 10.1007/s11051-010-9911-8 .21170131 
Murphy C. J. ; Gole A. M. ; Stone J. W. ; Sisco P. N. ; Alkilany A. M. ; Goldsmith E. C. ; Baxter S. C. 
Gold nanoparticles in biology: beyond
toxicity to cellular imaging . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2008 , 41 , 1721 –1730 . 10.1021/ar800035u .18712884 
Connor E. E. ; Mwamuka J. ; Gole A. ; Murphy C. J. ; Wyatt M. D. 
Gold nanoparticles
are taken up by human cells but do not cause acute cytotoxicity . Small 
2005 , 1 , 325 –327 . 10.1002/smll.200400093 .17193451 
Giljohann D. A. ; Seferos D. S. ; Daniel W. L. ; Massich M. D. ; Patel P. C. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Gold nanoparticles
for biology and medicine . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2010 , 49 , 3280 –3294 . 10.1002/anie.200904359 .
Shukla R. ; Bansal V. ; Chaudhary M. ; Basu A. ; Bhonde R. R. ; Sastry M. 
Biocompatibility of
gold nanoparticles and their endocytotic
fate inside the cellular compartment: a microscopic overview . Langmuir 
2005 , 21 , 10644 –10654 . 10.1021/la0513712 .16262332 
Sharma M. ; El-Sayed N. S. ; Do H. ; Parang K. ; Tiwari R. K. ; Aliabadi H. M. 
Tumor-targeted delivery
of siRNA using fatty acyl-CGKRK
peptide conjugates . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 609310.1038/s41598-017-06381-y .28733622 
Perez A. P. ; Cosaka M. L. ; Romero E. L. ; Morilla M. J. 
Uptake
and intracellular
traffic of siRNA dendriplexes in glioblastoma cells and macrophages . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2011 , 6 , 2715 –2728 . 10.2147/IJN.S25235 .
Guo S. ; Huang Y. ; Jiang Q. ; Sun Y. ; Deng L. ; Liang Z. ; Du Q. ; Xing J. ; Zhao Y. ; Wang P. C. ; Dong A. ; Liang X. J. 
Enhanced
gene delivery
and siRNA silencing by gold nanoparticles coated with charge-reversal
polyelectrolyte . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 5505 –5511 . 10.1021/nn101638u .20707386 
Zhang W. ; Liu J. ; Tabata Y. ; Meng J. ; Xu H. 
The effect of serum
in culture on RNAi efficacy through modulation of polyplexes size . Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 567 –577 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.09.102 .24120041 
Järvinen T. A.
H. ; Ruoslahti E. 
Molecular
changes in the vasculature of injured tissues . Am. J. Pathol. 
2007 , 171 , 702 –711 . 10.2353/ajpath.2007.061251 .17600129 
Tatiparti K. ; Sau S. ; Kashaw S. K. ; Iyer A. K. 
siRNA Delivery Strategies: A Comprehensive
Review of Recent Developments . Nanomaterials 
2017 , 7 , 77 10.3390/nano7040077 .
Kim H. J. ; Kim A. ; Miyata K. ; Kataoka K. 
Recent progress in development of
siRNA delivery vehicles for cancer therapy . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2016 , 104 , 61 –77 . 10.1016/j.addr.2016.06.011 .
King A. ; Ndifon C. ; Lui S. ; Widdows K. ; Kotamraju V. R. ; Agemy L. ; Teesalu T. ; Glazier J. D. ; Cellesi F. ; Tirelli N. ; Aplin J. D. ; Ruoslahti E. ; Harris L. K. 
Tumor-homing peptides as tools for
targeted delivery
of payloads to the placenta . Sci. Adv. 
2016 , 2 , e160034910.1126/sciadv.1600349 .27386551 
Hoffman J. A. ; Giraudo E. ; Singh M. ; Zhang L. ; Inoue M. ; Porkka K. ; Hanahan D. ; Ruoslahti E. 
Progressive
vascular changes in a transgenic mouse model of squamous cell carcinoma . Cancer Cell 
2003 , 4 , 383 –391 . 10.1016/S1535-6108(03)00273-3 .14667505 
Chen Y. S. ; Hung Y. C. ; Liau I. ; Huang G. S. 
Assessment of the
In Vivo Toxicity of Gold Nanoparticles . Nanoscale
Res. Lett. 
2009 , 4 , 858 –864 . 10.1007/s11671-009-9334-6 .20596373 
Fisher D. T. ; Appenheimer M. M. ; Evans S. S. 
The two faces of IL-6 in the tumor
microenvironment . Semin. Immunol. 
2014 , 26 , 38 –47 . 10.1016/j.smim.2014.01.008 .24602448 
Hodge D. R. ; Hurt E. M. ; Farrar W. L. 
The role of IL-6
and STAT3 in inflammation
and cancer . Eur. J. Cancer 
2005 , 41 , 2502 –2512 . 10.1016/j.ejca.2005.08.016 .16199153 
Ha T.-Y. 
The Role
of Regulatory T Cells in Cancer . Immune Network 
2009 , 9 , 209 –235 . 10.4110/in.2009.9.6.209 .20157609 
Priceman S. J. ; Shen S. ; Wang L. ; Deng J. ; Yue C. ; Kujawski M. ; Yu H. 
S1PR1 Is Crucial for Accumulation
of Regulatory T Cells in Tumors via STAT3 . Cell
Rep. 
2014 , 6 , 992 –999 . 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.02.016 .24630990 
Sau S. ; Agarwalla P. ; Mukherjee S. ; Bag I. ; Sreedhar B. ; Pal-Bhadra M. ; Patra C. R. ; Banerjee R. 
Cancer cell-selective
promoter recognition accompanies antitumor effect by glucocorticoid
receptor-targeted gold nanoparticle . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 6745 –6754 . 10.1039/c4nr00974f .24824564

