
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3002367510.1021/acsomega.7b00004ArticleCharacterizing Slow Photochemical
Reaction Kinetics by Enhanced Sampling
of Rare Events with Capillary Optical Fibers and Kramers’ Theory Nome René A. *†Costa Amanda F. †Lepkoski Jessica †§Monteiro Gabriel A. †Hayashi Juliano G. ‡∥Cordeiro Cristiano M. B. ‡† Institute
of Chemistry, State University of Campinas, Campinas, SP 13083-970, Brazil‡ Institute
of Physics Gleb Wataghin, State University
of Campinas, Campinas, SP 13083-859, Brazil* E-mail: nome@iqm.unicamp.br.16 06 2017 30 06 2017 2 6 2719 2727 03 01 2017 17 05 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical
Society2017American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Characterization of slow chemical
reactions is essential for assessing
catalytic efficiency in chemistry and biology. Traditionally, chemical
reaction rates are obtained from population relaxation kinetics measurements
and the Arrhenius equation. Unfortunately, it is difficult to use
this approach to characterize reactions wherein concentrations change
slowly. Thus, it is interesting to see whether a dynamical view of
chemical reactions may be used to obtain the reaction rates of slow
processes. In the present work, we perform Brownian dynamics simulations
of an asymmetric double-well potential to investigate how enhanced
sampling of barrier crossing at transition states improves the characterization
of reaction rate constants. We then present the design of a liquid-filled
capillary optical fiber-based fluorescence spectrometer, which, like
rare events, is also based on Poissonian statistics. We use the instrument
to characterize the slow photochemical degradation kinetics of poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene]
(MEH-PPV) in o-dichlorobenzene. We have employed
in situ optical microscopy measurements and electrodynamics simulations
to characterize the excitation beam profile inside a liquid-filled
capillary fiber. We compare the cuvette and capillary fiber sample
holders and show that the MEH-PPV fluorescence line shape is independent
of the sample holder, as expected. We characterize the photochemical
degradation kinetics of MEH-PPV in o-dichlorobenzene
solutions placed in the cuvette versus that in the capillary fiber.
We observe small and slow changes in the time-dependent fluorescence
spectra when the degradation reaction is performed in the cuvette.
On the other hand, we are able to characterize reactant-concentration
decay and product-concentration buildup from the time-dependent fluorescence
spectra recorded during photochemical degradation of MEH-PPV performed
inside the capillary optical fiber. Ultrafast optically heterodyne-detected
optical Kerr effect spectroscopy and multimode Brownian oscillator
analysis provide further insights into the role of bath oscillator
modes of friction in the mechanism of MEH-PPV photochemical degradation.
Overall, the work presented herein shows that slow photochemical degradation
kinetics of MEH-PPV can be successfully and efficiently assessed in
the capillary fiber fluorescence spectrometer.

document-id-old-9ao7b00004document-id-new-14ao-2017-00004vccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Characterizing the
long-time kinetics of molecular events is an
interesting problem that has received considerable attention over
the past few years. For instance, in bimolecular reactions, which
are of fundamental importance in chemistry, three rare (Poissonian)
events must occur simultaneously for successful detection by spectroscopic
methods: both reactants must diffuse through the optically probed
volume, and there must be a reactive encounter between them within
that volume.1,2 Slow reactions rates are especially
challenging in this regard because very few barrier-crossing events
occur per unit time. Initial-rate methods are commonly employed to
estimate slow first-order rates, whereas no such simple method is
currently available to characterize slow second-order reactions.

Experimental characterization of slow kinetics is of fundamental
importance in basic and applied research. For example, an understanding
of enzymatic activity3 requires experimental
characterization of both catalyzed and uncatalyzed reaction rate constants.
Although many enzymatic reactions occur on the microsecond to millisecond
time scale, the corresponding uncatalyzed reactions are estimated
to exhibit half-life values ranging from hours to billions of years.
Similarly, organic polymers employed in solar cells and light-emitting
diodes face similar challenges for the understanding of active material
photodegradation mechanisms.4 Thus, it
would be desirable to design new tools that probe all of the reactant
molecules all of the time. Although there have been many approaches
designed to detect single molecules in solution, on surfaces, or under
confinement,5−14 characterization of the entire sample with single-molecule techniques
in solution has not been reported so far.

The present work describes
the design of a liquid-filled capillary
optical fiber-based fluorescence spectrometer and its application
in the characterization of the slow photochemical degradation kinetics
of poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV)
in o-dichlorobenzene. We have employed in situ optical
microscopy measurements and electrodynamics simulations to characterize
the excitation beam profile inside the liquid-filled capillary fiber.
Next, we compare the cuvette and capillary fiber sample holders and
show that the MEH-PPV fluorescence line shapes are independent of
the sample holder. Finally, we characterize the photochemical degradation
kinetics of MEH-PPV in o-dichlorobenzene solutions
placed in the cuvette versus that in the capillary fiber. Small changes
in the time-dependent fluorescence spectra are observed during the
photochemical reaction in the cuvette. On the other hand, we characterize
both reactant-concentration decay and product-concentration buildup
from the time-dependent fluorescence spectra during photochemical
degradation of MEH-PPV inside the capillary optical fiber. Overall,
the work presented herein shows that the slow photochemical degradation
kinetics of MEH-PPV can be successfully and efficiently characterized
by simply inserting the solution of interest into the capillary fiber
fluorescence spectrometer.

Results and Discussion
To gain insights
into why enhanced sampling of chemical kinetics
may improve characterization of reaction rates, we have numerically
solved the Langevin equation of motion (eqs 1 and 2) for an overdamped
Brownian particle in an asymmetric double-well potential separated
by a barrier (Figure 1A). The potential shown in Figure 1A is perhaps the simplest chemical reaction model that
can be used to calculate reaction rates from a dynamical simulation
(eqs 3 and 4). In our experimental results, shown in Figure 3, we study the photochemical
polymer degradation kinetics, so it is important to consider why a
two-state model can be used to study systems with multiple degrees
of freedom, such as polymers. In the Supporting Information, we describe a polymer model with multiple configurations
and energies in terms of a free-energy function that maps onto the
two-state model shown in Figure 1A, and then, we present a mathematical model that can
used to describe both rugged and simple two-state energy landscapes
on the same footing. Thus, we believe that enhanced sampling of reaction
rates can be useful for describing reaction rates not only for the
model shown in Figure 1A but also as a useful reduced description of models with three or
more states.

Figure 1 Langevin dynamics simulations in an asymmetric double
well. (A)
Energy landscape as a function reaction coordinates used in the simulations;
(B) sample particle position time series trajectory obtained from
the numerical simulations; (C) reactant and product dwell-time distributions
as a function of time; (D) Kramers’ theory barrier frequency
as a function of simulation time. Simulation parameters: time step
= 10–3 s; product/reactant coordinates at ±0.5
μm; particle size R = 1 μm; η =
10–3 Pa s.

Figure 1B
shows
a typical particle position time series trajectory obtained by solving eq 1. Given the stochastic
nature of the simulations, each simulation run will yield a different
trajectory. Nonetheless, overall, the trajectories exhibit features
that depend on the specific parameters used to describe the energy
landscape. For spontaneous reactions at equilibrium, described by
the energy landscape shown in Figure 1A, the system spends most its time in three regions:
the reactant and product wells and the barrier-crossing region. The
trajectories are characterized by longer dwell times in the product
state, and the number of barrier-crossing events per unit time decreases
for slower reactions compared to that for faster reactions. Within
this context, for a given chemical reaction, enhanced sampling improves
determination of dwell and transition times, which are used to calculate
reaction rates from transition state theory and Kramers’ theory,
respectively. Additionally, we note that dwell and transition times
are related to well and barrier frequencies, respectively, in an energy-landscape
perspective. We study these two perspectives in Figure 1C,D.

Figure 1C shows
the dwell-time distributions for reactant and product states as a
function of simulation time from our numerical simulation results.
To calculate the curves shown in Figure 1C, we first sort the reactant and product
state trajectory segments from individual trajectories. Dwell-time
distributions, calculated using eq 5, give the fraction of molecules that occupy each state
as a function of time. Because the reactant and product distributions
fit well to single-exponential functions, we find that individual
trajectories obey the two-state kinetics governed by the energy landscape
shown in Figure 1A.
Overall, the results shown in Figure 1C demonstrate that analysis of averaged individual
trajectories can be used to extract information about population relaxation
kinetics. Thus, we can use our numerical results to investigate how
reaction rate determination can be improved by enhanced sampling of
individual particle trajectories.

We have also used particle
position probability distributions obtained
numerically to extract potential energy curves and reaction rates
from eqs 3 and 4, respectively. Thus, Figure 1D shows Kramers’ theory barrier frequencies
as a function of simulation time. Our approach thus provides a simple
assessment of how enhanced sampling of thermally activated barrier
crossing may be used to determine reaction rates. When we fitted reactant
and barrier wells early on in the simulation, the resulting parameters
converged to the equilibrium result as the simulation time increased.
That is, the well frequency converges faster, which is consistent
with the fact that the particle remains in the reactant well during
a large fraction of the simulation time, especially for higher activation
energies and slower reaction kinetics. As the number of transitions
increases, the barrier frequency also converges quickly, presumably
due to its linear dependence on the rate. As a result, we achieve
an upper bound for the reaction rate well before the activation energy
has converged to the value consistent with the underlying Boltzmann
probability distribution.

Overall, the dynamical simulation
results shown in Figure 1 demonstrate how enhanced sampling
of rare events improves reaction rate characterization. We note that
single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy has been used recently to
investigate barrier-crossing dynamics.11 The experiments reported in ref (11) probed time series trajectories of individual
states and state-to-state barrier-crossing events; data analysis showed
how to extract both transition state theory and Kramers’ theory
rate constants from the measured time series. On the other hand, the
main point of the present work was to improve reaction rate constant
determination during slow kinetic processes employing typical reactant
concentrations (e.g., millimolar). Thus, we aim at designing a simple
apparatus capable of comparing sampling approaches without necessarily
resorting to single-molecule techniques. Poissonian statistics governs
the dynamics of both (i) rare events in chemical kinetics and (ii)
reactant diffusion through the excitation volume in photochemistry
and photophysics. In the simulations shown in Figure 1, we have increased the sampling of rare
events by decreasing the simulation time step. In our experiments
shown in Figures 2 and 3, we increase the sampling
of rare events by replacing the sample holder from the cuvette to
a liquid-filled capillary fiber such that the excitation volume becomes
the entire sample volume. Figure 2A shows the apparatus used in the present work; we
have performed single-molecule detection (Figure 2D) as well as simpler detection schemes (Figure 3).

Figure 2 Liquid-filled capillary
optical fiber fluorescence spectrometer.
(A) Layout of the setup employed for the capillary optical fiber apparatus.
APD: single-photon-counting detector; Spec: spectrometer; Obj: objective.
(B) Experimentally measured spatial profile along the capillary fiber.
(C) Calculated energy fluxes along the optical fiber axis for the
capillary optical fiber system employed in the present work. Simulation
parameters: external diameter = 125 μm; internal diameter =
25 μm; excitation wavelength λ = 470 nm; nDMSO = 1.478. (D) Photon-counting rate as a function of
time for fluorescein in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO): 10 nM solution
in the cuvette (black curve), 1 pM solution in the cuvette (green),
and 1 pM inside the capillary optical fiber (red).

Figure 3 Photochemical degradation of MEH-PPV in o-dichlorobenzene.
Time-dependent fluorescence spectra of the MEH-PPV/o-dichlorobenzene solution placed (A) in the cuvette and (B) inside
the capillary fiber. (C) Franck–Condon analysis of the fluorescence
spectrum of MEH-PPV/o-dichlorobenzene at t = 1500 s. (D) Photoluminescence intensity as a function
of time for MEH-PPV (black squares) and the MEH-PPV photoproduct (blue
circles). MEH-PPV concentration: 1 × 10–5 monomer
mol L–1.

As shown in Figure 2A, the apparatus presented in this work is essentially a horizontal
fluorescence microspectrometer employing a liquid-filled capillary
optical fiber as the sample holder. Capillary optical fibers can be
filled with any liquid/solution of interest; waveguiding throughout
the capillary is achieved as long as the refractive index of the core
liquid/solution is higher than that of the cladding. As a result,
the excitation volume in solution-filled capillary optical fibers
is the same as the entire sample volume, enabling more efficient fluorescent
spectroscopy measurements. The capillary fiber sample holder also
reduces the background and out-of-focus fluorescence when compared
to those of the cuvette sample holder, thereby also improving the
signal-to-noise ratio. On the other hand, the fluorescence cone associated
with emission angles smaller than the critical angles for total internal
reflection inside the fiber limits the total detected intensity. Overall,
the solution-filled capillary fiber is expected to enable spectroscopic
and kinetic measurements by fluorescence spectroscopy with improved
sensitivity. Related sample holders, whereby the solution of interest
flows through a hollow-core optical fiber, have been described previously
in the context of bulk solution fluorescence detection15−18 and photochemical kinetics.19−21 However, we note that in the
present work we do not use flowing solutions and our sample volume
is the same as the entire observation volume, as shown in Figure 2A.

Figure 2B shows
an optical microscopy image of the transverse spatial profile of light
transmitted through a liquid-filled capillary optical fiber. Given
the fiber length of 10 cm, the image shown in Figure 2B corresponds to the average transverse spatial
profile integrated over the longitudinal propagation direction. Figure 2B shows light intensity
predominantly at the fiber core, with negligible light in the cladding,
thereby confirming waveguide action. The complex beam profile in the
cladding suggests that higher-order modes also couple to the capillary
fiber nucleus, consistent our with electrodynamics simulation results
(see below). Replacement of the solvent-filled capillary fiber with
a MEH-PPV solution-filled capillary fiber leads to similar beam spatial
profiles (Supporting Information).

Figure 2C shows
the calculated contour plots of the transverse spatial distribution
of the electric-field intensities inside the liquid-filled capillary
optical fiber. The electrodynamics numerical simulations employed
experimental parameters to model light–matter interactions:
fiber external diameter, 125 μm; fiber internal diameter, 25
μm; silica cladding refractive index, 1.458; liquid core refractive
index, 1.478 (DMSO),22 and incident light
field wavelength, 470 nm. The simulation results shown in Figure 2C indicate that the
fundamental mode inside the optical fiber exhibits a Gaussian intensity
distribution, consistent with direct imaging of the beam profile inside
the fiber shown in Figure 2B. Similar conclusions were reached when we tested other solvents
as the core pure liquid: toluene (n = 1.496) and o-dichlorobenzene (n = 1.551).22 Thus, single-mode coupling to the fiber is believed
to be predominant under the current experimental conditions because
we employ a short, mechanically unstrained fiber excited by a plane
wave. Nonetheless, the simulations also show that higher-order modes
are supported as well (Supporting Information), exhibiting a more complex, refractive index-dependent transverse
spatial profile. The fundamental mode is the most confined and thus
has the largest effective index among all modes, whereas higher-order
modes have smaller refractive indexes, thus leading to light spatial
intensities in the cladding as well.

Focusing laser light with
objectives typically employed in fluorescence
microscopy gives approximately 1 fL excitation volumes.23 By contrast, the excitation volume in the present
solution-filled capillary optical fiber is the same as the entire
sample volume. In the present work, we used a 25× objective and
a capillary fiber with a 12.5 μm inner radius and 10 cm length;
thus, our sample/excitation volume is approximately 10 nL, which is
10 000 times higher than the excitation volume commonly employed
in single-molecule or bulk fluorescence microscopy instruments. To
test the advantages and limitations of the capillary optical fiber
design for characterization of slow reaction kinetics, in principle,
any sample can be employed. In the present work, we have tested two
systems: fluorescein in DMSO was used to verify the gain in sensitivity
(Figure 2D), whereas
MEH-PPV in o-dichlorobenzene (Figure 3) was used to compare reaction kinetics in
the fiber versus the cuvette.

We have measured the single-photon
count rate as a function of
time for 10 nM and 1 pM solutions of fluorescein in DMSO (Figure 2D). The count rate
measurements were performed both in the cuvette (black and green lines
in Figure 1D) and inside
the fiber (red line in Figure 1D) so that a direct comparison can be made. Solution concentrations
of 10 nM are commonly employed in single-molecule fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy, whereas 1 pM concentrations are more challenging. As
shown by the black curve in Figure 1D, the 10 nM solution placed in a cuvette yielded an
average of 950 kcounts s–1. On the other hand, the
1 pM solution gave a signal of approximately 1 kcounts s–1, close to the background noise level of our apparatus (green curve
in Figure 1D). The
red curve in Figure 1D is the count rate as a function of time measured when placing the
1 pM solution inside the optical fiber. Interestingly, the count rate
was nearly 950 kcounts s–1, which is similar to
the signal level obtained with the 1 nM fluorescein solution placed
in the cuvette. Thus, we observe a gain in sensitivity of approximately
1000 in going from the 1 pM solution in the cuvette to the 1 pM solution
in the capillary fiber, presumably due to the larger excitation volume
afforded by placing the sample of interest inside the optical fiber.
Despite signal intensity losses due to the fluorescence cone associated
with emission angles smaller than the critical angles for total internal
reflection in the capillary optical fiber, we still observe a significant
gain in sensitivity afforded by probing the entire sample volume with
a liquid-filled capillary fiber.

We note that this simple technique
may also be applied to bimolecular
reactions other than photochemical processes and that spectroscopic
techniques other than fluorescence may be used as well, such as transmission/absorption
spectroscopy in the visible or infrared regions. Nonetheless, we emphasize
that the main point of this article is to study the connection between
enhanced sampling and the characterization of chemical reaction rates.
In connection with the simulation results presented in Figure 1, for a given observation time,
sampling a larger portion of the trajectory at a higher rate yields
more information for reaction rate determination. Likewise, Figure 2 describes a simple
apparatus that is capable of extracting more data (emitted photons)
in the same amount of time when compared to similar setups employing
cuvette sample holders. The aforementioned alternative techniques
would also benefit from enhanced sampling to characterize reaction
rates.

To test whether the apparatus shown in Figure 2 can be useful in the characterization
of
slow chemical reaction kinetics, we have chosen to study the photochemical
degradation of MEH-PPV. Photodegradation of MEH-PPV involves largely
the reaction of the polymer with singlet oxygen, generated by sensitization
involving the conjugated polymer triplet state. We note that photochemical
degradation of MEH-PPV is a complex yet extensively studied reaction.
However, we emphasize that the purpose of the kinetic studies shown
in Figure 3 is to assess
how enhanced sampling can help in the characterization of reaction
rates, in connection with our results presented in Figures 1 and 2.

Figure 3 shows
the
time- and frequency-resolved photochemical degradation of a solution
of MEH-PPV in o-dichlorobenzene. At time zero, we
observe very good agreement between the MEH-PPV solution fluorescence
line shapes obtained in the cuvette and capillary fiber sample holders
(Supporting Information). Both spectra
are consistent with previously reported MEH-PPV emission spectra24 and will be further discussed below. We have
compared the time-resolved fluorescence spectra of MEH-PPV in o-dichlorobenzene in the cuvette and placed inside the capillary
fiber, respectively (Figure 3A,B). Inside the capillary fiber, we have observed time-dependent
changes in both the reactant and product concentrations during photochemical
degradation of MEH-PPV solution, as shown in Figure 3B. Specifically, three spectral features
characterize MEH-PPV photochemical degradation in the capillary fiber:
(i) increase in emission intensity centered at 524 nm as a function
of time, (ii) decrease in the integrated intensity associated with
unreacted MEH-PPV emission, and (iii) an isosbestic point observed
at 538 nm. As shown in Figure 3A, in the control experiment performed in a cuvette while
otherwise keeping the same experimental conditions as those in Figure 3B, we observe only
a small decrease in emission intensity after ∼25 min of photochemical
reaction time.

We quantify MEH-PPV photochemical degradation
kinetics in the cuvette
versus that in the capillary fiber. We employ the same incident light
power and reaction time conditions so that a direct comparison of
cuvette versus capillary fiber can be made. MEH-PPV photochemical
degradation clearly proceeds at a much faster rate inside the capillary
fiber (Figure 3B) when
compared to that of the reaction performed in the cuvette (Figure 3A) under the same
experimental conditions as those in Figure 3A. Bimolecular photochemical kinetics is
dependent on the number of light–matter interaction processes
and on collisions among reactants. Inside the capillary fiber, we
excite the entire sample volume, thereby, in principle, sampling all
reactive encounters.

Spectroscopic analysis of the spectra shown
in Figure 3A clearly
reveals that we need
an additional Gaussian line shape centered at 524 nm to adequately
fit the MEH-PPV emission spectrum once the photochemical degradation
reaction has begun (Figure 3C). The blue-shifted emission spectra of the degradation product
relative to the MEH-PPV 0–0 emission band suggests a light-induced
decrease in the polymer conjugation length, which lowers the exciton
diffusion length and increases electronic energy-level spacing, as
discussed previously.24 Thus, we assign
the emission peaks centered at 524 and 560 nm to the photodegradation
product and unreacted MEH-PPV, respectively. Our results reported
in Figure 3B,C are
consistent with the spectroscopic changes described in previous reports
on the photochemical oxidation of MEH-PPV and structurally related
PPV derivatives. During oxidation, the increasing concentration of
carbonyl groups and concomitant decrease in the number of double bonds
both lead to a decrease in polymer conjugation length, thereby resulting
in the observed blueshift and fluorescence quenching shown in Figure 3B,C.25−29 Full analysis of the time-dependent line shapes is consistent with
this interpretation (see below).

Figure 3D shows
the emission intensity as a function of reaction time for unreacted
MEH-PPV (black points) and the photochemical degradation product (blue
circles), where we have assigned both species in Figure 3C. Both increasing photoproduct
intensity and decreasing MEH-PPV intensity occur as a function of
reaction time, and after nearly 25 min, both the reactant and product
emission intensities asymptotically reach equilibrium. Although photochemical
MEH-PPV degradation is observed when the reaction is performed in
the cuvette (Figure 3A), the corresponding reactant and product kinetics is much slower.
The MEH-PPV photochemical degradation reaction times reported previously
range from 5 min to several hours, depending on both sample preparation
and illumination conditions.25−29

Overall, the results presented in Figure 3 show that it is possible to extract more
useful information during the same amount of time using the capillary
fiber sample holder when compared with the cuvette sample holder.
Thus, the results presented in Figure 3 are consistent with the simulations presented in Figure 1. Although such an
advantage in the collection efficiency of capillary fibers over the
sample holder had been reported previously,14−21 to the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of
the capillary fiber design improving the chemical reaction rate characterization
by enhanced sampling of rare events.

In the present work, we
use ultrafast spectroscopy to parameterize
(constrain) time-domain correlation functions, which are then used
to calculate line shape functions and steady-state fluorescence spectra
via the multimode Brownian oscillator (MBO) model. Thus, to further
investigate the line shape changes shown in Figure 3B, we employ the correlation function formalism
of molecular spectroscopy to extract frequency-domain information
(frequencies and linewidths) from time-domain measurements and simulations.30 Although ultrafast coherent Raman spectroscopy
is a time-domain third-order nonlinear laser spectroscopy technique,
it has found widespread application in the characterization of steady-state
vibrational resonances in chemistry and biology.31,32 Similarly, relaxation rates measured directly in the time domain
parameterize correlation function-based line shape functions used
to calculate steady-state fluorescence spectra.30 Thus, within the context of the present work aimed at investigating
oversampling in chemical kinetics, we assess whether measuring the
full spectra (Figure 3A–C) rather than population-level changes (Figure 3D) can add to our understanding
of the nature of system–bath interactions in this reaction.

We have performed ultrafast optically heterodyne-detected optical
Kerr effect (OHD-OKE) spectroscopy measurements. OHD-OKE spectroscopy
is an off-resonant transient birefringence technique that measures
the polarizability correlation function. Thus, this technique can
also be used to obtain low-frequency spectral densities.33 Moreover, OHD-OKE spectroscopy is most sensitive
to solvent nuclear motions; thus, differences in the OHD-OKE decay
profiles between the solvent and solution were interpreted as being
due to solute-induced changes in the bath spectral density. Importantly,
the bath spectral density retrieved from OHD-OKE can be used to calculate
fluorescence line shapes using the MBO model that incorporates coupling
of nuclear motions to optical transitions. That is, ultrafast OHD-OKE
measurements are formally related to fluorescence line shapes by way
of the correlation function formalism of molecular spectroscopy.30

Our ultrafast OHD-OKE spectroscopy measurements
for o-dichlorobenzene as well as 1E-6M MEH-PPV dissolved
in chlorobenzene
are shown in Figure 4A. The time profiles shown in Figure 4A are typical of ultrafast OHD-OKE spectroscopy of
simple chlorobenzene derivatives.34 At
time zero, the instantaneous liquid response is associated with electronic
nonlinear polarizability. This main peak is followed by beats and
overdamped relaxation arising from coherently driven librational motion
(<150 fs), “interaction-induced” intermolecular response
(∼200–600 fs), and diffusive reorientation (>1 ps).
The data shown in Figure 4A was fitted by convolution of the instrument response function
with the material response employing nonlinear least-squares fitting.
The fit parameters for the transients shown in Figure 4A are summarized in the Supporting Information. The OHD-OKE signal of the MEH-PPV/o-dichlorobenzene solution also exhibits a prominent contribution
from the electronic hyperpolarizability near time zero and a librational
motion decay time (80 fs) similar to that of pure o-dichlorobenzene. However, the remaining decay components and corresponding
amplitudes differ from those of the pure solvent. In particular, the
interaction-induced decay time for the solution (250 fs) is faster
than that for the pure solvent (500 fs). Similarly, diffusive reorientation
also decreases for the solution (1 ps) compared to that for the pure
solvent (6 ps). The faster response times in solution compared to
those in the solvent indicate stronger solvent-induced damping of
solute nuclear modes.

Figure 4 (A) Ultrafast OHD-OKE dynamics of MEH-PPV in o-dichlorobenzene (red curve) and pure solvent (black curve). (B)
Spectral densities for the MBO model with ωj = 1126 cm–1 and dj = 4. The solid lines correspond to different values of
damping (in units of cm–1), γj: 150 (black), 350 (red), 550 (blue), 750 (pink),
and 950 (green). (C) Linear fluorescence line shapes calculated from
the Brownian oscillator Hamiltonian using the same spectral densities
and parameters as those in (B). T = 300 K.

To further assess solute–solvent
coupling, we calculate
time-correlation functions and spectral densities for a single-mode
Brownian oscillator as a function of damping frequency. On the basis
of the results presented in Figures 3 and 4, we employ a single oscillator
at 1180 cm–1 and vary the bath oscillator frequency
from 150 to 950 cm–1. The spectral densities and
fluorescence spectra are shown in Figure 4B,C, respectively. As expected, the modeled
time-correlation functions decay faster with increasing bath frequency;
this trend is also consistent with the ultrafast OHD-OKE data shown
in Figure 4A. Accordingly,
the spectral densities obtained by Fourier transformation of the calculated
time-correlation functions shown in Figure 4B indicate stronger coupling of the solute
to the solvent degrees of freedom over a larger spectral range as
the bath frequency increases. Likewise, we have calculated the fluorescence
line shapes shown in Figure 4C employing the MBO model with the same line shape function
parameters and spectral densities as those shown in Figure 4B. As the damping frequency
increases from 150 to 950 cm–1, the line shapes
change from Lorentzian curves with clear vibronic coupling to broad
and featureless Gaussian curves. We note that the fluorescence line
shape calculated with damping frequency = 550 cm–1 is similar to the starting fluorescence spectra of MEH-PPV/o-dichlorobenzene solutions. Furthermore, by further increasing
the bath frequency from 550 to 950 cm–1, we note
that the calculated fluorescence line shape exhibits both spectral
broadening and blueshift. Thus, the line shapes calculated with the
MBO model bear qualitative resemblance with the time-dependent fluorescence
spectra shown in Figure 3.

Overall, the results shown in Figure 4 show how ultrafast spectroscopy and MBO
calculations can be useful for investigating processes occurring in
slower timescales (e.g., as shown in Figure 3A). The formal connection between ultrafast
time-domain OKE spectroscopy and frequency-domain fluorescence is
well-known.30 Nonetheless, the time-domain
correlation function formalism of molecular spectroscopy is normally
employed to study dynamics. In the present work, we explore the ability
of ultrafast OKE spectroscopy to measure frequency-domain spectral
densities, which, with the MBO model, are used in the calculation
of full fluorescence line shapes. Our investigation of line-broadening
mechanisms presented in Figure 4 shows how the system–bath interaction strength parameter
obtained from ultrafast spectroscopy measurements and simulations
(Figure 4A,B) is manifested
in the calculated fluorescence spectra. We note that the connection
between time-dependent line-broadening mechanisms shown in Figure 3C and the ultrafast
spectroscopy/MBO model has not been described previously.

In
summary, we have investigated how enhanced sampling may be used
to study chemical kinetics. Brownian dynamics simulations of an asymmetric
double well showed how oversampling enables characterization of rate
constants on the basis of transition state and Kramers’ theory,
thereby leading to a more accurate characterization of chemical reaction
rates. A liquid-filled capillary optical fiber-based fluorescence
spectrometer is used to characterize the photochemical degradation
kinetics of MEH-PPV in o-dichlorobenzene. Only small
changes in the time-dependent fluorescence spectra are observed when
the degradation reaction is performed in the cuvette (control experiment),
whereas photochemical MEH-PPV degradation kinetics was characterized
when the degradation reaction was performed inside the capillary optical
fiber. In addition to population-level changes, the fluorescence line
shape was investigated employing the correlation function formalism
of molecular spectroscopy. Whereas enhanced sampling has been shown
previously to provide further insights into single-molecule dynamics,
chemistry, and biology,11,35,36 the work presented herein illustrates how it can also be of interest
in chemical and photochemical kinetics.

Methods
Liquid-Filled
Capillary Fiber Fabrication and Characterization
The capillary
fiber was fabricated from an ultrapure silica tube
(Heraeus) using a fiber-drawing tower. The electric current flowing
through a graphite nucleus controls the drawing temperature, which
in the present work was held constant at 1950 °C. We control the
internal and external diameters of the capillary fiber (25 and 125
μm, respectively) during fabrication through (i) a preformed
tuning speed inside the oven, (ii) the fiber-drawing speed, and (iii)
the nitrogen pressure applied inside the tube. During fiber drawing,
we add the acrylate polymer to the external side of the fiber to improve
its mechanical resistance.

To fill the capillary fiber with
the liquid of interest, we insert one of the fiber ends into a syringe
needle. The fiber was then cleaved and glued to the syringe needle.
Each capillary fiber was individually inspected with a fiber optic
microscope (Thorlabs) to assess cleavage quality. Liquid insertion
into the fiber nucleus was then performed by pressurizing the syringe
filled with the solution of interest. The capillary fibers thus prepared
were placed in the optical setup for spectroscopy and microscopy experiments
(Figure 2). Each liquid-filled
capillary fiber was used only once and disposed of afterward, and
a freshly prepared liquid-filled capillary fiber was employed for
each experiment.

Light propagation inside the capillary fiber
was characterized
experimentally and compared with electrodynamics simulations employing
the finite element method performed using COMSOL Multiphysics modeling
software.37 Optical alignment inside the
capillary fiber was investigated by observing the capillary fiber
(i) side-on and (ii) end-on. In approach (i), top-view images of the
capillary fiber were obtained by employing a conventional upright
microscope with a 10× objective and a digital camera (Paxcam
5); the images were analyzed quantitatively with ImageJ.38 In approach (ii), we first focus the incident
laser light at the fiber/air interface. Then, the objective is moved
along the optical axis with a micrometer-resolution linear translation
stage until a two-dimensional Gaussian spatial beam profile centered
at the fiber nucleus is observed. End-on images were obtained by sending
light output from the fiber end to a CCD camera coupled to a 60×
objective (Laser Beam Profiler, Newport). The alignment procedure
just described was used in all measurements described in the present
work. All measurements were performed at 21 °C and 50% relative
humidity.

Fluorescence Spectroscopy Inside Hollow-Core Liquid-Filled Capillary
Optical Fibers
A 470 nm laser (PicoQuant) operating in the
CW mode is sent to the capillary optical fiber employing a pair of
mirrors and a dichroic mirror coupled with a color filter (Chroma).
Laser intensity was controlled with a variable neutral density filter
wheel, and the results shown in the present work employed 20 μW
incident light power on the sample. A beam splitter sends a small
portion of the excitation light to a single-photon avalanche photodiode
(Perkin Elmer) to monitor alignment and laser intensity fluctuations.
Light coupling into the capillary optical fiber is performed with
a three-axis platform (Thorlabs) equipped with 25× microscope
objective (Newport). The liquid-filled capillary optical fiber is
mounted on the platform employing a V-Groove fiber holder and magnetic
clamps. Emission from the sample injected into the capillary optical
fiber is collected in backward-fluorescence geometry and sent to a
single-photon avalanche photodiode (Perkin Elmer) or spectrometer
(Ocean Optics) for photon-counting and photoluminescence spectral
measurements, respectively. Throughout the experiments described below,
transmitted light was sent to a photodiode (Thorlabs) and CCD (Newport)
for throughput and beam-profiling measurements, respectively. A schematic
view of the apparatus is shown in Figure 2A. MEH-PPV (American Dye Source), dimethylsulfoxide,
and o-dichlorobenzene (Sigma-Aldrich) were used as
received.

Ultrafast OHD-OKE Spectroscopy
We have performed ultrafast
spectroscopy experiments as described previously.39 Briefly, femtosecond pulses are split into pump (95%) and
probe (5%) beams. Pulse polarization is 90 and 45° for the pump
and probe, respectively. Additionally, a quarter waveplate set to
±1° was added in the probe beam path. We combine the Kerr
transients recorded at both +1 and −1° to remove the homodyne
signal component. A motorized delay stage controls the time delay
between pump and probe pulses arriving at the sample. The typical
time resolution of our apparatus is 70 fs, as measured by cross-correlation
frequency-resolved optical gating. We employ short time windows of
4 ps because our main purpose is to investigate intermolecular vibrational
dynamics rather than overdamped orientational relaxation. We employ
optical heterodyning to enhance the sensitivity of signal detection
using lock-in amplification with an optical chopper operating at 90
Hz.

Langevin Dynamics Simulations
We model reaction kinetics
as diffusive motion on an asymmetric double-well potential energy
surface by solving the Langevin equation of motion for this potential
using 1  where x is the particle
position, m is the particle mass, γ is the
friction coefficient,
δF(t) is a random force with
zero mean and variance 2  where kB is Boltzmann’s
constant. The resulting trajectories were used to build particle distribution
histograms, which were then fit to a Boltzmann distribution for x 3  From the numerically retrieved energy landscapes,
rate constants are calculated using 4  where ω0 is the reactant
well frequency and ωb is the barrier frequency.

In addition, we calculate dwell-time distributions using 5  where N is the total number
of dwell times and p(ti) are the number of dwell times with length ti.

Line shape Analysis
We consider
a two-electronic-level
system coupled to a general MBO model with arbitrary damping.30 The fluorescence line shape is 6  where ωeg is the energy gap
frequency, 2λ is the Stokes shift, and the complex line shape
function g(t) is 7  where β = (kBT)−1. We
note that g*(t) is the complex conjugate
of line shape function g(t). The
Brownian oscillator Hamiltonian
includes an explicit treatment of the bath oscillators and their coupling
to the primary oscillators. Thus, the spectral density for the jth oscillator is 8  where ωj and γj are the bath oscillator
frequency and coupling, respectively. The full spectral density is
then given by 9  where mj is the jth
nuclear mode mass and dj is the jth mode equilibrium configuration
displacement between the two electronic states.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00004.Optical microscopy
and electrodynamics simulations characterization,
results of control experiments, polymer energy landscape, and ultrafast
spectroscopy fitting parameters (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00004_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
∥ School of Physics, The University of Sydney, Sydney,
NSW 2006,
Australia (J.G.H.).

Author Present Address
§ Department
of Biology, Centro Universitário Claretiano de
Batatais, Batatais, SP 14300-000, Brazil (J.L.).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
CNPq, SAE-UNICAMP, and FAPESP for undergraduate research
fellowships awarded to A.F.C., J.L., and G.A.M. Financial support
from CNPq, CAPES, FAPESP, INCT-Cat is gratefully acknowledged. We
thank the reviewers for their comments and suggestions.
==== Refs
References
Nitzan A.  Chemical Dynamics in
Condensed Phases—Relaxation, Transfer, and Reactions in Condensed
Molecular Systems ; Oxford University Press : New York , 2010 ; pp 483 –533 .
Chandler D.  Introduction to Modern
Statistical Mechanics ; Oxford University
Press : New York , 1987 ; pp 234 –265 .
Holfelder F. ; Kirby A.
J.  From Enzyme Models to
Model Enzymes ; Oxford University Press : Oxford , 2009 ; pp 29 –41 .
Turro N. J.  Modern Molecular Photochemistry . University Science Books : Herndon, VA , 1991 ; pp 362 –413 .
Betzig E. ; Chichester R. J. 
Single
molecules observed by near-field scanning optical
microscopy . Science 
1993 , 262 , 1422 –1425 . 10.1126/science.262.5138.1422 .17736823 
Xie X. S. ; Dunn R. C. 
Probing single-molecule dynamics . Science 
1994 , 265 , 361 –364 . 10.1126/science.265.5170.361 .17838036 
Xie X. S. 
Single-molecule
spectroscopy and dynamics at room temperature . Acc. Chem. Res. 
1996 , 29 , 598 –606 . 10.1021/ar950246m .
Nome R. A. ; Guffey M. J. ; Scherer N. F. ; Gray S. K. 
Plasmonic Interactions
and Optical Forces between Au Bipyramidal Nanoparticle Dimers . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2009 , 113 , 4408 –4415 . 10.1021/jp811068j .19267445 
Kou S. C. ; Cherayil B. J. ; Min W. ; English B. P. ; Xie X. S. 
Single-molecule
Michaelis-Menten equations . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 19068 –19081 . 10.1021/jp051490q .16853459 
Krichevsky O. ; Bonnet G. 
Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy: the technique
and its applications . Rep. Prog. Phys. 
2002 , 65 , 251 –297 . 10.1088/0034-4885/65/2/203 .
Chung H. S. ; Eaton W. A. 
Single-molecule
fluorescence probes dynamics of barrier
crossing . Nature 
2013 , 502 , 685 –688 . 10.1038/nature12649 .24153185 
Qu X. ; Wu D. ; Mets L. ; Scherer N. F. 
Nanometer-localized multiple single-molecule
fluorescence microscopy . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
2004 , 101 , 11298 –11303 . 10.1073/pnas.0402155101 .15277661 
Fields A. P. ; Cohen A. E. 
Electrokinetic trapping
at the one nanometer limit . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2011 , 108 , 8937 –8942 . 10.1073/pnas.1103554108 .21562206 
Levene M. J. ; Korlach J. ; Turner S. W. ; Foquet M. ; Craighead H. G. ; Webb W. W. 
Zero-mode waveguides
for single-molecule analysis at
high concentrations . Science 
2003 , 299 , 682 –686 . 10.1126/science.1079700 .12560545 
Wang S.-L. ; Huang X.-J. ; Fang Z.-L. ; Dasgupta P. K. 
A miniaturized liquid
core waveguide-capillary electrophoresis system with flow injection
sample introduction and fluorometric detection using light-emitting
diodes . Anal. Chem. 
2001 , 73 , 4545 –4549 . 10.1021/ac010341a .11575805 
Dasgupta P. K. ; Genfa Z. ; Poruthoor S. K. ; Caldwell S. ; Dong S. ; Liu S. Y. 
High-sensitivity gas sensors based on gas-permeable
liquid core waveguides and long-path absorbance detection . Anal. Chem. 
1998 , 70 , 4661 –4669 . 10.1021/ac980803t .
Dasgupta P. K. ; Zhang G. F. ; Li J. Z. ; Boring C. B. ; Jambunathan S. ; Al-Horr R. 
Luminescence detection
with a liquid core waveguide . Anal. Chem. 
1999 , 71 , 1400 –1407 . 10.1021/ac981260q .21662963 
Dallas T. ; Dasgupta P. K. 
Light at the end of the tunnel: recent analytical applications
of liquid-core waveguides . TrAC, Trends Anal.
Chem. 
2004 , 23 , 385 –392 . 10.1016/S0165-9936(04)00522-9 .
Schmidt M. ; Cubillas A. M. ; Taccardi N. ; Euser T. G. ; Cremer T. ; Maier F. ; Steinruck H. P. ; Russell P. S. ; Wasserscheid P. ; Etzold B. J. M. 
Chemical and
(Photo)-Catalytical Transformations in
Photonic Crystal Fibers . ChemCatChem 
2013 , 5 , 641 –650 . 10.1002/cctc.201200676 .
Cubillas A. M. ; Schmidt M. ; Scharrer M. ; Euser T. G. ; Etzold B. J. M. ; Taccardi N. ; Wasserscheid P. ; Russell P. S. 
Ultra-low concentration
monitoring of catalytic reactions in photonic crystal fiber . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2012 , 18 , 1586 –1590 . 10.1002/chem.201102424 .22237963 
Chen J. S. Y. ; Euser T. G. ; Farrer N. J. ; Sadler P. J. ; Scharrer M. ; Russell P. S. 
Photochemistry in Photonic Crystal Fiber Nanoreactors . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2010 , 16 , 5607 –5612 . 10.1002/chem.201000496 .20391563 
Lande D. R.  , Ed. Handbook of Chemistry
and Physics ; CRC , 2010 .
Lakowicz J. R.  Principles of Fluorescence
Spectroscopy ; Springer : New York , 2006 ; pp 757 –795 .
Hagler T. W. ; Pakbaz K. ; Voss K. F. ; Heeger A. J. 
Enhanced order and
electronic delocalization in conjugated polymers oriented by gel processing
in polyethylene . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys. 
1991 , 44 , 8652 –8666 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.44.8652 .
Scurlock R. D. ; Wang B. ; Ogilby P. R. ; Sheats J. R. ; Clough R. L. 
Singlet
oxygen as a reactive intermediate in the photodegradation of an electroluminescent
polymer . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1995 , 117 , 10194 –10202 . 10.1021/ja00146a004 .
Cumpston B. H. ; Jensen K. F. 
Photooxidative stability of substituted poly(phenylene
vinylene) (PPV) and poly(phenylene acetylene) (PPA) . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
1998 , 69 , 2451 –2458 . 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4628(19980919)69:12<2451::AID-APP16>3.0.CO;2-# .
Bianchi R. F. ; Balogh D. T. ; Tinani M. ; Faria R. M. ; Irene E. A. 
Ellipsometry
study of the photo-oxidation of poly[(2-methoxy-5-hexyloxy)-p-phenylenevinylene] . J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 
2004 , 42 , 1033 –1041 . 10.1002/polb.10734 .
Neugebauer H. ; Brabec C. J. ; Hummelen J. C. ; Janssen R. A. J. ; Sariciftci N. S. 
Stability
studies and degradation analysis of plastic solar cell materials by
FTIR spectroscopy . Synth. Met. 
1999 , 102 , 1002 –1003 . 10.1016/S0379-6779(98)01184-9 .
Brabec C. J. ; Johannson H. ; Padinger F. ; Neugebauer H. ; Hummelen J. C. ; Sariciftci N. S. 
Photoinduced
FT-IR spectroscopy and
CW-photocurrent measurements of conjugated polymers and fullerenes
blended into a conventional polymer matrix . Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
2000 , 61 , 19 –33 . 10.1016/S0927-0248(99)00093-8 .
Mukamel S.  Principles of Nonlinear
Optical Spectroscopy ; Oxford University Press : New York , 1995 ; pp 227 –252 .
Moran A. M. ; Nome R. A. ; Scherer N. F. 
Field-resolved coherent Raman spectroscopy
of high frequency vibrational resonances . J.
Phys. Chem. A 
2006 , 110 , 10925 –10928 . 10.1021/jp0645061 .16986825 
Prince R. C. ; Frontiera R. R. ; Potma E. O. 
Stimulated Raman Scattering: From Bulk to Nano . Chem.
Rev. 
2016 , 117 , 5070 –5094 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00545 .27966347 
Kalanoor B. S. ; Ronen M. ; Oren Z. ; Gerber D. ; Tischler Y. R. 
New Method
to Study the Vibrational Modes of Biomolecules in the Terahertz Range
Based on a Single-Stage Raman Spectrometer . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 1232 –1240 . 10.1021/acsomega.6b00547 .28393138 
Lotshaw W. T. ; McMorrow D. ; Kalpouzos C. ; Kenney-Wallace G. A. 
Femtosecond
dynamics of the optical Kerr effect in liquid nitrobenzene and chlorobenzene . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
1987 , 136 , 323 –328 . 10.1016/0009-2614(87)80260-9 .
Thompson M. A. ; Lew M. D. ; Moerner W. E. 
Extending
Microscopic Resolution
with Single-Molecule Imaging and Active Control . Annu. Rev. Biophysics 
2012 , 41 , 321 –342 . 10.1146/annurev-biophys-050511-102250 .
Miller E. D. ; Jones M. L. ; Jankowski E. 
Enhanced Computational
Sampling of
Perylene and Perylothiophene Packing with Rigid-Body Models . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 353 –362 . 10.1021/acsomega.6b00371 .31457236 
COMSOL
Multiphysics  . Home Page. http://www.comsol.com (accessed
May 12, 2017 ).
ImageJ  . Home Page. http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/ (accessed May 12, 2017 ).
Loiola P. T. C. ; Dias W. D. ; Souza M. S. ; Ferbonink G. F. ; Zaniolo M. G. ; Cerini M. F. ; Atvars T. D. Z. ; Nome R. A. 
Ethyl stearate:ethanol
binary mixtures investigated by ultrafast OKE spectroscopy, optical
microscopy, dynamic light scattering, and rheology . J. Phys. Org. Chem. 
2014 , 27 , 316 –321 . 10.1002/poc.3248 .

