
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146006010.1021/acsomega.8b03660ArticleSupramolecular Similarity in Polymorphs: Use of Similarity
Indices (IX) Salbego Paulo R. S. *†Bender Caroline R. †Orlando Tainára †Moraes Guilherme A. ‡Copetti João P. P. †Weimer Gustavo H. †Bonacorso Helio G. †Zanatta Nilo †Hoerner Manfredo ‡Martins Marcos A. P. *††Núcleo de Química
de Heterociclos (NUQUIMHE) and ‡Núcleo
de Investigação de Triazenos e Complexos (NITRICO),
Department of Chemistry, Federal University
of Santa Maria (UFSM), 97105-900 Santa Maria, RS, Brazil* E-mail: paulosalbego@gmail.com (P.R.S.S.).* E-mail: marcos.nuquimhe@gmail.com (M.A.P.M).03 06 2019 30 06 2019 4 6 9697 9709 28 12 2018 08 05 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A systematic
investigation to assess the degree of similarity between
polymorphs was carried out. A similarity indices (IX) approach
was applied in ten series of polymorphs with different characteristics
and number of molecules in the asymmetric unit. Geometric (ID), contact area (IC), and stabilization energy (IG) parameters were used. It was possible to situate each comparison
in different regions of similarity within the polymorphism phenomenon
and determine the boundaries between quasi-isostructural polymorphs
and polymorphs of low similarity. The multiparameter IDCG index was used as a robust tool to determine the total similarity
within the polymorphism phenomenon. The highest contribution of the
stabilization energy parameter (45%) toward the final value of similarity
(IDCG) was observed, followed by the contact area index
(32%). The geometric index contributed approximately 23% to the final
value of IDCG. This information reinforces the importance
of the contact area and stabilization energy in assessing the degree
of similarity between crystalline structures. A new descriptor (IQ) based on the comparison of the energetic contribution of
intermolecular interaction types present in each crystal structure
is presented. IQ can be a versatile tool and applicable
even for systems that do not share any similarity.

document-id-old-9ao8b03660document-id-new-14ao-2018-03660xccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The main definitions
used to describe similarity in complete structures
use a geometric parameter, mainly indicating concepts of isostructurality.
Kálmán et al.1 (1993) defined
isostructurality as the similarity of spatial arrangements of molecules
of different compounds in their crystals and the IUCr definition2 follows the same line. This is a phenomenon that
can be interpreted in three dimensions (isostructurality), and it
is also possible to extend into one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional
(2D) directions. The capability to compare sets of crystal structures
to identify degrees of similarity can find applications for a wide
range of studies, such as polymorphs3−5 and multicomponent crystals.6,7 However, there is a lack of reliable tools to compare and classify
complete crystal structures to indicate the existence of boundaries
between high and low similarity.

Polymorphs were defined by
McCrone in 1965 as a solid crystalline
form of a given compound, resulting from the possibility of at least
two crystalline arrangements of molecules of the same solid-state
compound.8 As the properties of a material
in the solid state depend on its crystalline form, polymorphs usually
have different physicochemical properties.9 Thus, polymorphism is well known for its impact on properties such
as melting temperature, solubility, dissolution rate, stability, bioavailability,
and mechanical properties.9−11

In this sense, polymorphism
is a phenomenon in which significant
differences between crystalline forms are expected, while high geometric
similarity is expected in isostructurality. However, these two antagonistic
concepts are entangled, since polymorphs that share a certain degree
of similarity have been reported, even being included in a classification
of quasi-isostructural polymorphism.12

Katrusiak et al.4 (2007) reported isostructurality
in polymorphs of ethynylbenzene that presents a Z′ value higher than one, which is generated by cooling under
pressure. Dey et al.12 (2016) presented
high-Z′ polymorphs of (Z)-2-fluoro-N′-phenyl-benzamidamide, in which these systems were
observed to produce very similar characteristics of packing and intermolecular
interactions, where the interaction, C–H···F,
played a significant role. For this case, the authors classified these
polymorphs as quasi-isostructural supramolecular architectures. The
authors indicated a nearly isostructural behavior for crystal structures
formed under ambient conditions. Moreover, the authors also used the
“energy framework” method to qualitatively indicate
structural similarities in the interactions of crystalline forms.
Coles et al.13 (2014) showed a high level
of geometric similarity in 3-chloromandelic acid polymorphs obtained
by a temperature-dependent phase transition. The study was performed
mainly using the XPac program. The authors reported an isostructural
behavior for this kind of polymorphs.

From the studies that
describe the interpretation of structure
similarity, we are brought to the “problem of induction”
formulated by Hume14 in the mid-18th century.
The most notable response to the problem of induction was formulated
by Popper15 two centuries later. Popper’s
concept about the falsifiability of the proposed claims and their
validity to verifiable evidence supports the basis of the modern definition
of science. Thus, it is the most accepted answer for the problem of
demarcation between science and non-science. The studies published
in this area fall into the hypothesis of induction and mainly present
a lack of demarcation for the system to be studied. Some studies have
considered the average energy data of the crystalline network (energy
framework analysis), which reproduces the unit cell “x” number of times and does not clearly identify
which molecules are interacting. On the other hand, other studies
that consider supramolecular constructs (or subclusters) neglect important
information regarding the whole crystal structure.

In this sense,
our research group recently proposed quantitative
similarity indices IX (X = D, C, or G)16—based on geometric (ID), contact area
(IC), and stabilization energy (IG) parameters5,17−22— using nine 5-aryl-1-(1,1-dimethylethyl)-1H-pyrazoles as a model to assess the packing similarity of complete
crystal structures. The proposed indices demonstrated that the similarity
between two crystalline structures can be estimated and classified
into three different regions of similarity.16 Results indicated that supramolecular structures with high similarity
must have high values for all three indices (ID, IC, and IG). Recently, these indices have been used
to compare crystalline structures of [2]rotaxanes.23 The normalized data used allow the results to be compared
between distinct crystalline structures. A multiparameter index (Imp) was shown to be a quantitative index to assess the contribution
of more than one considered parameter, e.g., a multiparameter index
using geometry and contact area will be IDC.16

In this context, the main goal of this
study is to investigate
and quantitatively identify different degrees of similarity between
polymorphs. For this, four new crystalline structures are reported:
two 1,3-diphenyltriaz-1-ene polymorphs (2D geometric similarity) and
two polymorphs of a triazene N-oxide copper complex (1D geometric
similarity). Together, a systematic analysis of eight representative
series of already reported polymorphs was used to identify similarities
between supramolecular structures and ensure that a whole range of
similarities in polymorphs is covered. The similarity indices approach
was employed to assess the comparison between clusters in a quantitative
and comparable manner. A new descriptor (IQ) based on the
comparison of the stabilization energy contribution of intermolecular
interaction types present in each crystal structure is presented.

Results
and Discussion
Several models are presented in this investigation
to better understand
the different degrees of similarity between polymorphic systems. The
structures used in this investigation were named in a form such that
the representation of the crystalline phase and molecule in the asymmetric
unit (Z′) is inferred. In this sense, the
structure code is defined as shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1 Representation of crystalline structure codes
used in this investigation.

The first model presented in this investigation is compound 1 (Figure 2a), which is a 1,3-diphenyltriaz-1-ene with two crystalline structures:
the α and β forms. This model was chosen because the crystal
structures presented qualitative geometric similarity in their crystalline
lattice. Each polymorphic form is classified as I and II and, in both cases, there is only one molecule in the asymmetric
unit, named as molecule A. Therefore, the polymorphs
received the codes, 1IA and 1IIA, and will
now be addressed this way.

Figure 2 Representation of the
molecular structure of compound 1 (a) and oak ridge thermal
ellipsoid plot (ORTEP) diagram of polymorph 1IIA. Ellipsoids
are drawn at the 50% probability level (b).

The 1IA form has already been reported,24 but there are several “A” alerts
in its checkCIF report. The 1IIA form has no viable structure
deposited in the CCDC database. For this reason, both polymorphs were
obtained and reported with new improved quality data suitable for
supramolecular investigations. Relevant crystallographic data for
the polymorphs of compound 1 is presented in Table 1 (for complete crystallographic
data, see Supporting Information (SI), Figure S1 and Table S1).

Table 1 X-ray Crystallographic
Data for 1IA and 1IIA Polymorphs
polymorph	crystal system	space group	cell volume
(Å3)	Z	
1IA	monoclinic	P21	522.70	2	
1IIA	monoclinic	P21/c	1048.63	4	
Both structures crystallize in the monoclinic crystal system. The
asymmetric unit contains one molecule in each crystalline phase, and
molecular conformations are virtually identical and found to be flat
in both forms (Figure 3). As a result, this polymorph is not classified as a conformational
polymorph9 but as a packing polymorph.

Figure 3 Molecular
overlay of 1IA (red) and 1IIA (green) phases.
Overlay using N1-N2-N3 atoms (RMS: 0.008).

Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) is commonly used to identify
polymorphic
forms of polycrystalline samples.25,26 This method
was applied to identify which is the predominant form or whether there
is more than one crystalline phase in the polycrystalline sample (bulk).
This was carried out by comparing with the simulated pattern from
the single crystal X-ray diffraction (SC-XRD) data (Figure 4). In this manner, it is observed
that the bulk sample has a diffraction pattern with probable predominance
of crystalline phase 1IA.

Figure 4 PXRD patterns for the
experimental bulk sample and simulated patterns
from SC-XRD data for forms 1IA and 1IIA.

Raman spectroscopy provides information
on molecular structures
and their crystal lattice, which is an effective technique to characterize
polymorphs.27,28 Geometric structural changes
in the crystal can cause band shifts in the spectra, as recently reported
by our research group, in an example of rotaxane polymorphs.5 In this sense, Raman spectroscopy was performed
to characterize forms 1IA and 1IIA at wavelengths
of 532 and 785 nm (see SI, Figures S2 and S3). However, this technique could not be used as a screening tool
to distinguish between the polymorphs formed due to high resemblance
of the crystalline packing. Some differences were observed at low
wavenumbers, although this is not a reliable region to distinguish
between crystalline phases. The Raman spectra showed very similar
profiles for all forms (1IA, 1IIA, and bulk),
without the clear possibility of distinguishing the forms by unique
peaks.

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis assessed
the thermal
profile of these polymorphs (Figure S4).
Enthalpy data, and temperatures of melting and crystallization were
obtained for both forms and bulk (Table 2). The overlap of the first cycle of each
of the three analyses was demonstrated for comparison purposes and
can be seen in the SI (Figure S5). From
the melting temperature values observed in the crystal forms, the
bulk phase was more similar to polymorph 1IIA (Table 2). The cooling cycle
of the bulk sample demonstrated a crystallization event (Tc) more similar to 1IA.

Table 2 Thermal Analysis Data Obtained by
DSC for the Single Crystals of Polymorphs 1IA, 1IIA, and Bulk Form
form	Tma	ΔHmb	Tcc	ΔHcd	
bulk	97.65	4.79	50.68	3.68	
1IA	92.62	5.95	51.54	4.06	
1IIA	96.57	5.47	75.17	5.43	
a Melting temperature (°C).

b Melting enthalpy (kcal mol–1).

c Crystallization temperature
(°C).

d Crystallization
enthalpy (kcal mol–1).

A subtle difference in melting temperatures and melting
enthalpy
values between the two polymorphic phases was observed (Table 2), although it is not possible
to distinguish between the crystalline phases only by this technique.
Moreover, these data reveal behavior similar to the study by Dey et
al. (2016),12 who showed that polymorphs
with high packing similarity have very similar thermal properties.
In this scenario, the authors suggested that this may be quasi-isostructural
behavior.

The difference in melting enthalpy is only 0.48 kcal
mol–1 in the single crystal samples (1IA and 1IIA) (Table 2), evidencing
the high level of similarity between structures and demonstrating
that thermal analysis does not clearly identify these crystalline
phases. The crystallization temperatures of 1IA and 1IIA presented different values probably due to different
organization adopted during the crystallization cycle.

Fingerprint
plots29 using Hirshfeld
surfaces were generated for polymorphs 1IA and 1IIA (see SI, Figure S7). In general,
both fingerprint plots are almost identical (isostructural) and do
not furnish quantitative insights regarding the subtle differences
in crystal packing. Two sharp spikes were observed for both forms,
which shows the presence of hydrogen bonds (N–H···N).
In this sense, this technique, which is widespread in the literature,30−33 did not provide definitive quantitative data regarding the differences
in the crystalline packing of these two polymorphs. Since the highly
qualitative similarity data of both polymorphs persisted in almost
all characterizations, it was necessary to go further with a supramolecular
approach to acquire additional quantitative data to observe the subtle
differences.

Supramolecular Comparison
Our previously reported interpretation
of the crystal16,17,20 considers both a linear interpretation of parts (dimers) and a systemic
interpretation of the whole structure (supramolecular cluster). In
previous studies,18−23 we showed that the supramolecular cluster can be defined as the
smallest portion of the crystalline lattice in which all necessary
energetic and contact area information is represented to understand
the whole crystal.

In this sense, the supramolecular cluster
of each polymorph was constructed to evaluate the differences between
polymorphs (for additional information, see Supporting Information). The clusters demonstrated a high level of resemblance
between both polymorphs. The contact area and energetic parameters
were obtained for both polymorphic phases. Voronoi–Dirichlet
polyhedral (VDP) analysis in the ToposPro software was used34 to construct the supramolecular cluster and
obtain the molecular coordination number (N) for
each polymorphic phase. The supramolecular cluster for forms 1IA and 1IIA presented N = 18
(see SI, Figures S17, S18 and Table S3).
The VDP analysis was used to determine the contact area between the
M1 molecule and MN molecules (CM1···MN) from the clusters.
Then, crystal energy stability was determined based on the stabilization
energy of the different dimers formed between the M1 and MN molecules by using quantum mechanical calculations. Results
for polymorphs 1IA and 1IIA are shown in Table 3 (for further information,
see Supporting Information).

Table 3 Contact Area and Stabilization Energy
of the Dimers that Constitute the Supramolecular Clusters of Polymorphs 1IA and 1IIA
 	1IA	1IIA	
dimer	CM1···MNa	GM1···MNb	CM1···MNa	GM1···MNb	
M1···M2	43.18	–9.48	43.50	–9.60	
M1···M3	43.18	–9.48	43.50	–9.60	
M1···M4	12.66	–2.15	13.01	–2.26	
M1···M5	12.66	–2.15	13.39	–2.33	
M1···M6	13.20	–1.54	12.84	–1.50	
M1···M7	16.40	–2.15	16.04	–2.18	
M1···M8	16.40	–2.15	16.04	–2.18	
M1···M9	13.20	–1.54	12.84	–1.50	
M1···M10	10.14	–1.79	10.20	–1.93	
M1···M11	4.12	–0.40	4.11	–0.41	
M1···M12	13.49	–2.41	13.01	–2.26	
M1···M13	13.49	–2.41	13.39	–2.33	
M1···M14	11.40	–1.66	11.60	–1.69	
M1···M15	18.68	–6.19	19.04	–6.29	
M1···M16	18.68	–6.19	19.04	–6.29	
M1···M17	11.40	–1.66	11.60	–1.69	
M1···M18	4.12	–0.40	3.89	–0.40	
M1···M19	10.14	–1.79	10.16	–1.81	
Cclusterc	286.54	 	287.20	 	
Gclusterd	 	–55.52	 	–56.25	
Gcluster/Cclustere	–0.19	 	–0.20	
a Determined using software Topos
through VDP analysis, in Å2.34

b The energies (kcal mol–1) were determined using the equation, GM1···MN = GM1+MN – (GM1 + GMN).

c Sum of all contact areas (Å2).

d Sum of all interaction
energies
(kcal mol–1).

e In kcal mol–1 Å–2.

A strong linear correlation between GM1···MN and CM1···MN was
observed (r = 0.94 for 1IA and r = 0.94 for 1IIA),
which shows the narrow relationship between these two parameters.
Therefore, the stabilization energy between the molecules of the crystal
may be directly related to the contact area (surface complementarity).
A subtle difference between phases 1IA and 1IIA was observed in the Gcluster data (Table 3) regarding the stability
of the supramolecular structure. Polymorph 1IIA presented
a higher stabilization energy when compared to 1IA. This
information suggests that phase 1IIA is the most favorable
thermodynamically stable phase. However, it is worth mentioning that
the difference between the stabilization energies is only -0.73 kcal
mol–1 and, due to such a low value, it is risky
to classify which form is the “most stable” and, consequently,
the most thermodynamically favored phase during crystallization. This
low value in the energetic difference is in agreement with the expected
range for packing polymorphs, and higher values are expected for conformational
polymorphs.9,11 This corroborates the findings
obtained by Gavezzotti,35 according to
which lattice cohesion energies of polymorphs are usually
similar, with differences in a range of a few kJ mol–1.35

The high similarity observed
in both parameters (contact area and
stabilization energy) suggests classification of these polymorphs
as isoenergetic and isocontact. The similarity is even more evident
when the ratio between the stabilization energy and contact area of
the cluster (Gcluster/Ccluster) is observed, which shows values of −0.19
and −0.20 kcal mol–1 Å–2 for 1IA and 1IIA, respectively. Moreover,
the crystal packing efficiency18 was obtained,
and the results indicated another notable resemblance between the
polymorphs with values of 0.74 and 0.77, for 1IA and 1IIA, respectively.

An overlay of both supramolecular
clusters was used to assess the
comparison between both crystal phases (Figure 5) by using the geometric parameter as the
starting point. The overlay was applied by using the M1 molecule of
each polymorph as reference. Then, the supramolecular cluster of each
one was constructed.

Figure 5 Cluster overlay of polymorphs 1IA (red) and 1IIA (green), showing (a) high resemblance and the (b) subtle
differences.

High similarity between
the two clusters is shown in Figure 5a and reveals an almost perfect
overlap between systems from this viewpoint. The subtle difference
in crystal packing is demonstrated in Figure 5b, showing that some molecules are “inverted”
in the supramolecular cluster of 1IIA when compared to
those in 1IA, without higher displacement of the molecular
position. Moreover, it was possible to track eight dimers that are
involved in this “inversion”, which is M1···MN, where N = 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 18,
and 19. At this point, it is possible to question: how significant
is this inversion of eight molecules? To try to answer this question,
the total difference in energy values of these eight dimers between
the clusters was calculated. The result obtained was only −0.24
kcal mol–1 (−13.49 and −13.72 kcal
mol–1 for 1IA and 1IIA, respectively). In this manner, this considerable geometric difference
in crystalline packing did not promote any significant changes in
stabilizing energy. The inversion of the molecules requires only a
small amount of energy to occur, which demonstrates that there may
not have been a big “energy barrier” to form both polymorphs.
Despite obtaining such important quantitative information, it is still
not possible to assess when this inversion occurs.

To establish
the contribution (C and G) of each
dimer in relation to the total supramolecular cluster,
the raw data were normalized according to their N.17 The normalized stabilization energy
(NGM1···MN) and normalized
contact area (NCM1···MN) for both polymorphs are demonstrated in Figure 6. From the normalized values, the dimers
can be classified into four types according to each profile,17,20 which can be used as indicators of possible major intermolecular
interactions. Type I refers to directional interactions, with high
stabilization energy (NG) in a small contact area (NC). Type II presents
high stabilization energy in a large contact area. Type III presents
small values of stabilization energy and contact area. And type IV
presents small stabilization energy and high contact area.

Figure 6 Normalized contact area (NCM1···MN), normalized stabilization energy (NGM1···MN), and dimer classification of the supramolecular
cluster of both polymorphic forms. Normalized data were obtained by
NCM1···MN = N × (CM1···MN/∑CM1···MN) and NGM1···MN = N × (GM1···MN/∑GM1···MN).

After the normalization
process, a remarkable resemblance between
crystalline phases in relation to dimeric contribution in the contact
area and stabilization energy aspects (Figure 6) was observed. It is worth mentioning that
in this approach we compared all dimers involved in the crystalline
lattice and not just some considered important dimers (synthons or
motifs). Therefore, this approach allows a holistic analysis between
polymorphs and furnishes a consistent and reliable method to analyze
crystalline systems.

Most dimers presented values of NGM1···MN and NCM1···MN ≤ 1 (Figure 6) and both values correlated, which is typical behavior
of
type III. Two dimers presented type II characteristics with high stabilization
values in both polymorphs, possibly related to π···π
interactions. Two dimers showed values corresponding to type I, being
characteristic of strong (directional) hydrogen bonds.

Even
with the contact area and stabilization energy data, it was
only possible to assess the resemblance and a few minor differences
between polymorphic phases. Thus, it is necessary to examine even
further where the differences between the polymorphs lie, the degree
of similarity between these two polymorphic phases, and then compare
to other reported polymorphs.

Similarity Indices
To understand the similarity between
two supramolecular structures beyond qualitative comparisons, the
recently proposed supramolecular similarity indices (IX) were applied.16 The indices used geometric
(ID), contact area (IC), and energetic (IG) parameters, which were obtained by means of the supramolecular
cluster, to compare the structures (for further information, see the Supporting Information). A value near one (1.0)
indicates high similarity in the studied parameter, and lower values
indicate a major difference between systems. Geometric analysis was
carried out and considers the distances between all common non-hydrogen
atoms between the reference M1 molecule and MN molecules
in each considered cluster. Data were normalized by the product of
the N value and the number of atom–atom distances
between the monomers that constitute each considered dimer in the
calculations.16 Correlation was obtained
between the list of atom distances of each dimer in 1IA with the list of atom distances of the corresponding equivalent
dimers in 1IIA. Each dimer has a unique value for contact
area and stabilization energy, which is correlated with the equivalent
dimer of the other clusters. The values for the similarity indices
of the geometric, topological, and energetic parameters are presented
in Table 4.

Table 4 Similarity Indices between 1IA and 1IIA for the Geometric (ID), Contact
Area (IC), and Energetic (IG) Parameters, and
the Multiparameter Index of Similarity (IDCG)
comparison	ID	IC	IG	IDCG	
1IA vs 1IIA	0.670	0.980	0.977	0.809	
A high level of contact
area and stabilization energy similarity
between polymorphs was observed, with values near 1.0 (Table 4), which quantitatively shows
isocontact and isoenergetic behavior. Notably, this occurs regardless
of the low geometric index value (ID), which demonstrated
an intermediate-to-low value (0.670). This low value suggests a higher
level of difference between crystal phases. However, this is a result
of the subtle difference resulting from the inversion of some molecules,
as discussed in previous sections (Supramolecular Comparison).

The XPac software36,37 was used for the same comparison,
as it uses only geometric data. A dissimilarity index value of 1.2
was obtained, which is considered a high level of similarity (values
below 2.5).37 However, the same analysis
showed that it is similar in two dimensions. This occurs because the
software only considered a similar portion, i.e., the subcluster (supramolecular
construct) consisting of 10 molecules, and neglected the other molecules
constituting the crystal. Therefore, as demonstrated in a previous
study,16 the dissimilarity index data,
although quantitative, do not follow an appropriate trend of maximum
and minimum. Systems of high similarity (three-dimensional, 3D) with
values close to 10.0 and lower similarity values close to 1.0 are
observed. This happens because a different number of molecules in
each example is considered and does not allow a range of comparisons,
as observed in recent studies.38,39 In other words, the x values do not provide clear quantitative information regarding
complete crystal structure comparisons.16

The data furnished by the similarity indices can help quantitatively
show any differences in the supramolecular cluster between polymorphic
forms. A lower similarity in the geometric index (two-dimensional
similarity) was observed, despite very high contact area and stabilization
energy similarities. This analysis also indicates that the contact
area and energetic parameters are vital in reliably indicating degrees
of similarity between complete crystal structures, especially in polymorphs.

The multiparameter index of similarity (Imp) was used
to calculate a unique final value of similarity for this supramolecular
comparison by using the geometric, contact area, and energetic parameters
(IDCG). IDCG showed a high similarity value
(0.809) between polymorphic phases, i.e., it lies close to a border
region with an intermediate-to-high region of similarity (between
0.8 and 0.6).16 IDCG provided
a consistent value regarding the similarity between polymorphs, since
it considers the effect of the geometric difference and also carries
the inheritance of the high resemblance in the contact area and energetic
parameters.

Application of the Similarity Indices (IX) to Other
Examples
To evaluate whether the supramolecular similarity
indices (IX) are suitable to be used in polymorphs with
different degrees of similarity, several additional examples were
used to expand the analysis (Figure 7). The case of bisphenyl triazene polymorphs (1IA and 1IIA) has already been demonstrated,
in which structures with Z′ = 1 and 2D geometric
similarity were compared. Therefore, it was necessary to select examples
with higher Z′ (Z′
> 1) and that share higher geometric similarity to assess index
performance.
Examples that share 3D similarity, i.e., classified with the paradoxical
classification of quasi-isostructural polymorphs, were used. The phenomenon
of structures with Z′ higher than 1 shows
great interest in the field of crystal engineering; therefore, use
of these examples in the methodology of similarity indices is mandatory.
Comparisons between systems with distinct N were
also evaluated. Some of the models used are polymorphs that were reported
in studies on degrees of isostructurality, whereas others were without
any further discussions regarding the supramolecular environment or
comparisons. The codes used for each molecule used here follow the
previously described procedure (Figure 1).

Figure 7 Schematic representation of the structures used as models
to calculate
the similarity indices (IX).

The supramolecular clusters, contact area, stabilization
energy,
and overlays of all polymorphs used are described in the Supporting
Information (Figures S17–S76 and Tables S3–S44). In the cases where the Z′
values were higher than one, the reference molecule (M1) is indicated
by its different torsions (Supporting Information, Figures S11–S16). Each Z′ molecule
was considered an independent reference molecule (M1) and a supramolecular
cluster was constructed around each one. Compound 2 is
a copper complex with an N-oxide bisphenyl triazene as the ligand.
The choice for these two models relies on the observed crystal packing
of each one, which shared similarities in only one dimension. Crystalline
structure data can be found in the SI (Table S2).

Compounds 3 and 4, which were
reported
by Coles et al.13 and Chopra et al.,12 respectively, were chosen, since both studies
present important highlights regarding polymorphs with high degrees
of similarity. Coles et al.13 demonstrated
a high level of geometric similarity between 3-chloromandelic acid
polymorphs. The study was mainly performed using the XPac program.
Chopra et al.12 reported a case of high Z′ value for (Z)-2-fluoro-N′-phenylbenzimidamide polymorphs. The authors claimed
that the reported system presents quasi-isostructural structures (near-isostructurality)
and strong similarities among the interactions involved. In this study,
the average energy of neighboring molecules around the shell formed
from each Z′ was calculated. The energies
of the neighboring shell present a similar concept to that of the
supramolecular cluster17 and coordination
spheres.40−42 These two series of polymorphs were selected because
they are reported examples in the literature of polymorphs of high
similarity (3D). Thus, using them for the application of similarity
indices will aid in the pursuit for the frontiers of the phenomenon
of quasi-isostructurality in polymorphs. With the previous examples,
all dimensions of similarity (1D, 2D, and 3D) are covered. Other examples
were collected to possess enough structures in each region of similarity
and, thus, have a systemic view of the phenomenon.

Polymorphs
of compounds 5–8 were
used in two studies involving isostructurality. Coles et al.13 (2014) used XPac to obtain the similarity dimensions
and dissimilarity index (x) value of each comparison.
In addition, the authors compared them to a first study in which the
indices proposed by Fábián and Kálmán43 were used to identify the dimensions of isostructurality.
Thus, it is convenient to add these examples, which already have values
for the two methods reported in the literature, and apply the similarity
indices (IX). Structures that present high disorder in
their structures were not selected, which made any comparison unfeasible.
The structures of these polymorphs were reported in different studies.44−48

Structures of compound 9 were obtained from a
study
by Kubicki (2004).49 The author reported
new polymorphs through temperature variation experiments, in which
qualitative analysis of the crystalline networks indicated high similarity.
Examples from compound 10 were reported by Katrusiak
et al.50 (2015) in a study in which temperature
and pressure varied in obtaining different crystalline phases of pyrimidine
molecules.

In examples with Z′ >
1, it is necessary
to generate a cluster for each molecule of the asymmetric unit and
compare all clusters with each other. Only one cluster for a structure
whose Z′ = 2, for example, will not be enough
to represent all minimal information necessary to understand it as
a whole. Obviously, the two clusters of this example should have redundant
dimers, since part of a cluster will be present inside the other cluster.
However, this is the most practical approach to analyze these types
of systems and is conducted in this manner in other studies related
to the phenomenon.37

For structures
with Z′ > 1, a discussion
about the structures of compound 3 is shown as an example.
The contact area and and energetic data from the supramolecular cluster
show a significant similarity between clusters. Compound 3IA, when compared to 3II, has an energetic difference
of only −1.02 and −2.46 kcal mol–1, when compared to 3IIA and 3IIB, respectively.
The Gcluster/Ccluster parameter showed a difference of −0.009 and −0.014
kcal mol–1 Å–2 when comparing 3IA to 3IIA and 3IIB, respectively.
The relation between energy and contact area assesses the high degree
of similarity in these systems regarding the isocontact and isoenergetic
behavior.

The similarity indices between supramolecular clusters
were calculated
to determine the degree of similarity between the forms of each compound.
Index data regarding the geometric (ID), contact area (IC), and stabilization energy (IG) parameters are
shown in Figure 8 and
present values that are located at the top of the similarity range
previously proposed by us.16 All supramolecular
comparisons of compound 3 showed indices with values
above 0.9, which is an excellent value of similarity. In this sense,
the similarity indices quantitatively reflected the “reality”
of the cluster overlay of these polymorphs (for further information,
see Supporting Information—Table S45, Figures S77 and S78).

Figure 8 Similarity index data of the (a) geometric (ID), (b)
contact area (IC), and (c) stabilization energy (IG) parameters for all comparisons.

The 30 comparisons presented by the series of 10 polymorphs
demonstrate
that the geometric index (ID) presents a certain stability
in its values, regardless of the general degree of similarity. This
result corroborates the behavior already observed in our previous
study that proposed new descriptors,16 and
also when applied to some crystalline structures of rotaxanes.23 The range of values for ID is somewhat
narrow and indicates that the real minimum for this index should be
somewhere between 0.6 and 0.7. Once again, this demonstrates that
for a quantitative comparative index the sole use of the geometric
parameter has its limitations. The advantage of the geometric parameter
is that it defines the levels of isostructurality, whether in one,
two, or three dimensions. However, for further analysis, other parameters
that reflect the characteristics of supramolecular structures must
be taken into consideration, such as the contact area and stabilization
energy.

In general, the values of contact area and stabilization
energy
indices presented similar behavior (Figure 8b,c). Some systems showed high values of
similarity for contact area and energy, often presenting isoenergetic
and isocontact character, despite the low value for the geometric
index. This was the case of 1IA and 1IIA and some examples of structures 4I and 4II.

To facilitate interpretation of the comparisons, only one
final
value was used to reflect general similarity furnishing the final
contribution of each parameter to the phenomenon of structural similarity
in polymorphs, i.e., the multiparameter index, IDCG, was performed
(see the SI, Figure S78 and Table S45).
Salbego et al.16 (2018) proposed three
distinct regions of similarity, in which we can observe that the largest
portion of the comparisons remained in the intermediate region (14)
or high-similarity region (14) and the remaining two in the low similarity
region. As a result, two questions emerge from this analysis: the
first involves the issue that many comparisons are in border regions
of the proposed regions. At least five systems, which can be considered
between 1D and 2D in the isostructural question, present values between
0.7 and 0.6. The question is whether the proposed regions in the first
investigation are still viable.

The second question is the set
of different comparisons for the
same structure, a consequence of the presence of more than one molecule
(Z′ > 1), leading to the necessity of more
than one supramolecular cluster comparison. In these cases, we should
look for one final value to reflect all structure comparisons (i.e.,
compare the whole system). The values were observed in different regions
of similarity when using molecule A or molecule B of a considered
structure. One of the cases is the comparison of 4I and 4II, which are six comparisons and presented in regions of
high (2) and intermediate similarity (4). These two structures were
reported as quasi-isostructural by Dey et al.12 (2016) and have Z′ = 2 and Z′ = 3 in each structure, respectively. All comparisons were
expected to fall in the region of high similarity, as indicated by
the authors, although the obtained indices do not represent this behavior
in most of the comparisons. On the other hand, 3I and 3II presented all values in the region of high similarity,
which is in accordance with the isostructurality reported by Coles
et al.13 (2014).

This second question
is regarding the problem of analyzing structures
with Z′ > 1 when comparing the clusters
of
all fragments, as is usually done in the literature.13 To avoid analyzing more than one comparison of the same
structure and only compare the respective complete crystalline phases,
a deviation calculation of all values involved in the same comparison
between the crystalline phases (using the root mean square error)
was performed. The values obtained for the IDCG index,
with this new proposal, can be seen in Figure 9.

Figure 9 Multiparameter index (IDCG) considering
unique values
for each crystalline phase comparison.

There was a clear reduction in the comparisons: from 14 to
7 in
the region of high similarity, 14 to 10 in the intermediate region,
and maintaining 2 in the low-similarity region (Figure 9). Consequently, the letters representing
the molecules in the asymmetric unit were removed because there was
no further need. This new view of similarity data (Figure 9) showed a high correlation
with the one observed qualitatively when cluster overlapping was observed
(see the SI, Figures S48–S76), indicating
that the index reflected the structural reality presented when comparing
polymorphs. The values of the first six comparisons (Figure 9) reflect their isostructural
character and, consequently, isoenergetic and isocontact behavior.
The seventh comparison (1I vs 1II) demonstrated
a high level of similarity—despite being considered a geometrically
similar system in only two dimensions—with IDCG of
0.809. This value falls close to a border region between the region
of high similarity and intermediate ones. Again, the index reflects
this unique case of a 2D structure, but with a highly similar character
in the other two parameters.

The polymorphs that fall into the
intermediate region reflect their
2D or 1D character observed in the cluster overlay, especially the
so-called quasi-isostructural polymorphs by Dey et al.12 (2016), which present more characteristics of
intermediate similarity in this method. The similarity border that
is most concerning for classification purposes is the lowest region,
between intermediate and low similarity. The example of the polymorphs 7I, 7II, and 7III fall into this
category. A comparison between phases I and II presented a value of
0.706, whereas the two involving the polymorphs in phase III presented
values of 0.607 and 0.666. This discussion does not affect the conclusion
of the proposal, since the region of interest and greater importance
for studies that seek some application is the region of high similarity
and the upper border. A possible change of the proposed similarity
regions, shifting the border to 0.7 instead of 0.6, may be proposed
after a larger number of examples and studies.

Multilinear correlation
of all values of the indices (ID, IC, and IG) and values of the final IDCG index was carried
out to observe which parameter is the
most relevant for investigating the similarity of polymorphs. The
values in Figure 9 were
used, considering only a value by crystalline phase comparison. The
correlation obtained was IDCG = 0.438 IG + 0.313
IC + 0.227 ID + 0.017; R2 = 0.9990. From this correlation, it is possible to obtain
important information regarding the high contribution of the energy
parameter (45%) for the final value of similarity (IDCG), followed by the contact area index (32%). The geometric index
contributes around 23% to the final value of IDCG. The
multilinear correlation in the case of the polymorphs showed the same
trend presented in the previous study that used a series of tert-butyl pyrazoles.16 A slight
increase in geometric contribution in these systems and a consequent
decrease in the energy parameter was observed. Contact area parameter
contribution was the same in both investigations.

The results
reinforced that the multiparameter index can provide
the contribution of each of the parameters used (each distinct physical
meaning) in the series of structures studied, as initially proposed.16 Thus, the data corroborate the previously presented
conclusion, in which the geometric parameter alone did not provide
reliable data on similarity, since a high value of ID can
be observed even in less similar systems. The multilinear correlation
shows that the contact area and stabilization energy parameters are
more sensitive to reflect differences when comparing polymorphs.

Investigation of Intermolecular Interactions
A full
data collection of each type of interaction contribution was carried
out using stabilization energy fragmentation in atom–atom interaction
(GAI) analysis.19 For this, the polymorphs of compounds 1, 2, 3, and 4, which are structures that could
represent the three main regions of similarity, were selected. Thus,
the energy fragmentation in interaction types was performed for all
dimers that constitute the cluster of each considered polymorph. The
stabilization energies of each atom···atom interaction
were obtained using the GAI analysis,
following a procedure already reported in studies using different
kinds of molecules.20−22,51,52 This analysis correlates the electron density at the bond critical
point (ρ), obtained from quantum theory of atoms in molecules
(QTAIM)53 data, and the stabilization energy
between monomers that constitute the dimers of the cluster.

The importance of this study at an interaction level is directly
related to the possible properties of crystalline structures. Polymorphic
phases that maintain the same kind and proportion of interaction types
may be pointed out as systems with a high degree of similarity, and
similar properties may also be expected. Crystal structures that show
different interaction types or contributions—such as polymorphs
with bigger differences between phases—may lead to distinct
properties. Due to some polymorph characteristics sharing a high energy
similarity, the GAI analysis allowed us
to observe, in these small differences of raw energy values, whether
changes occur in the interactions involved. This kind of approach,
in our understanding, provides an in-depth analysis to understand
the similarity degree between crystal structures, since it considers
all intermolecular interactions involved.

The energetic contribution
of each interaction gave us helpful
insight into the most important intermolecular interactions between
molecules in the supramolecular cluster. The five different types
of interactions present in 1IA and 1IIA can
be seen in Figure 10a, and it is possible to observe the high degree of similarity between
the two phases.

Figure 10 Contribution of each type of interaction in polymorphs 1IA and 1IIA by means of GAI (a) and Hirshfeld (b) analyses.

It is fascinating that, despite the geometric difference
observed
between the two phases (2D similarity) (Figure 5) and motivated by the subtle difference
in the inversion of some molecules, differences in the types of interactions
involved in the crystalline packing are not observed. Regarding the
quantitative contribution of each interaction (Figure 10a), only a slight increase in the contribution
of the H···C interaction was observed in 1IA. In contrast, a lower contribution of the H···N interaction
in the 1IA form was observed when compared to 1IIA. In general, there is a clear domain of N···C and
H···C interactions for stabilization of the supramolecular
structure of both polymorphs, with contributions totaling around 50%
of the stabilization energy. The subtle differences in contribution
and types of interaction in 1IA and 1IIA imply a characteristic close to isoenergetic behavior, in this case,
isointeraction.

The contribution of the interactions of 1IA and 1IIA, from the fingerprints of the Hirshfeld
molecular surface
obtained by software CrystalExplorer,29,54,55 is demonstrated in Figure 10b. From this approach, we return to the
question of the quantitative data obtained, although it does not represent
the true nature of the crystalline lattice. Different from the GAI analysis (Figure 10a), a higher contribution of the H···H
contacts (55%) was observed, which is indicated, in this case, as
the most relevant one. Using the fragmentation method, this interaction
is indicated as the third interaction, with values close to 20%. Contrastingly,
H···N and N···C with values close to
9% were lower when compared to the GAI analysis. The data from the other clusters of compounds 2, 3, and 4 (see Supporting Information, Figures S82–S85) showed similar behavior,
in which an overestimation of the H···H contribution
is observed. Contribution analysis of the contacts (interactions)
across the Hirshfeld surface does not reflect the same results observed
by the GAI analysis, in which all intermolecular
interactions present in the crystal are considered. However, for further
conclusions in this particular topic, an investigation with an even
larger set of structures/models are needed.

Atom–atom
interactions using the energetic fragmentation
(GAI analysis) provide a good understanding
of the energy contribution of each type of interaction in crystal
stabilization. However, it depends on an extensive analysis of contribution
distribution (Figure 10a) to try to understand the similarities and differences of interactions
between two crystalline structures. When dealing with more than one
comparative system and/or systems with a high number of intermolecular
interactions, the difficulty in interpreting the results increases.
Thus, a proposal to “summarize” the comparison of interaction
contributions between two structures in only one final quantitative
and comparable number becomes necessary. In this manner, a new descriptor
called the similarity index of intermolecular interactions (IQ) was proposed.

To propose the new similarity index
regarding intermolecular interactions,
the GAI analysis was considered (Figure 10a), except that
the raw data (kcal mol–1) were normalized by the
number of total interactions types present in each cluster. This normalization
process, once again, allows different systems to be compared. The
similarity at the intermolecular interaction level (IQ)
between two supramolecular clusters A and B is obtained following eq 1. 1  In eq 1, NGAI is the normalized contribution of the considered
interaction type observed in cluster A. NGAIpredict is
the normalized contribution of the considered interaction presented
in cluster A and predicted from a linear equation from the equivalent
interaction of cluster B. Moreover, nint, is the number
of the considered intermolecular interactions types. This index (IQ) may contribute to act as a tool in the comparison of intermolecular
interaction types contribution between two crystalline structures.

Using the quantitative data from the fragmentation, an index is
established to show the change of interaction behavior between the
two compared crystals. In a system with the same kind of interactions
and similar contribution, the IQ index will show values
close to 1.0. On the other hand, comparison between systems with different
types of interactions and unrelated values of contribution will provide
lower IQ values. The step-by-step process to achieve the
IQ index is demonstrated in the Supporting Information
(Figures S79–S82). IQ was determined for each of the comparisons between the different
molecules of the asymmetric unit. Then, deviation among the values
was calculated to obtain only one value per polymorph comparison (Figure 11), as already discussed
for the IDCG index.

Figure 11 Intermolecular interaction similarity
index (IQ) for
the comparisons 1I vs 1II, 2I vs 2II, 3I vs 3II, and 4I vs 4II.

The values obtained from IQ (Figure 11) correspond very well to
the qualitative
analysis and corroborate the quantitative data previously obtained.
The three main regions of similarity defined for the other indices
can also be used for the IQ index. The similarity of interactions
was greater for quasi-isostructural systems, such as the 3I vs 3II comparison, indicating an isointeraction profile.
The other polymorphs 4IA, 4IIA, 2IA, and 2IIA presented values consistent with their characteristics
in their comparisons.

The comparison between 2I and 2II presented
a very low value of IQ, indicating significant changes
both in the types of interactions and in proportion of the interactions
common for both polymorphs (see the SI, Figure S82). The comparison between 4I and 4II indicated an intermediate level of similarity in intermolecular
interactions, which is not as high as the similarity indicated by
the authors.12 The well-defined regions
by the IQ index showed the versatility of this index and
its applications may be broader than the other indices.

The
comparison between 1I and 1II indicated
that the structural difference did not affect the similarity of the
system in relation to intermolecular interactions, leading to a high
value of 0.889 (isointeraction). This result corresponds well to the
analysis of intermolecular interactions (Figure 10), in which, in spite of the geometric difference
between crystalline phases, there was no change in the types of interactions
involved and no significant modification in the contributions of the
existing interactions. The IQ value was slightly lower
than the IG index, and this is probably because IQ is more sensitive to small changes between systems. The IQ value considers the subtle differences in intermolecular interactions,
whereas IG deals with a “general” energy
value, considering only the energy between monomers that constitute
the considered dimer.

To better understand the differences between
these two indices,
we can imagine a simpler system: two dimers A and B (one of cluster
A and another of cluster B) with values of −10.0 kcal mol–1 and NG values of 2.1 and 2.0. At first sight, this
particular comparison will lead to good correlation and high similarity,
thus a high IG value. Now we can consider that these same
two imaginary dimers A and B have 4 and 2 interaction types, respectively,
and that two interactions present in both clusters have different
values. This will lead to a large difference in intermolecular interactions
and, consequently, affect the IQ index.

This imaginary
case helps us understand the importance of IQ in comparing
crystalline structures, especially polymorphs,
since changes in interactions are directly correlated with changes
in the properties of materials. In the case of pharmaceuticals, the
same idea is valid: polymorphs may or may not have activity due to
subtle changes in intermolecular interactions. Therefore, having a
tool that quantifies and compares systems considering intermolecular
interactions and being able to be compared in the same range (metric)
becomes relevant.

Considering that the multiparameter index
(Imp) allows
the addition or subtraction of other parameters,16 one may question why not add the new IQ index
to the IDCG index, for example, forming the IDCGQ index. This would result in a greater dilution of the contributions
of each parameter in the final index, where each one would have an
initial theoretical contribution of 25% of the total value (before
33% in IDCG). For the example of 1IA and 1IIA, the multiparameter index IDCGQ would have
a value of 0.829. This higher value, when compared to the IDCG value (0.809), is expected, since we are adding a high value parameter
to an index that previously had two high values and one low (geometric)
value. As a result, it can be inferred that this issue of dilution
of parameter contribution, in a IDCGQ index, is reduced
(from 33 to 25%) by the influence of the geometric parameter (which
is the most distinct parameter in this case). In addition, the energy
factor is overestimated, since both IG and IQ bring the inheritance of the energy profile (each with its characteristics)
and present similar values in these polymorphs. This case would consider
the use of two indices for the same parameter, which may lead to erroneous
conclusions.

An additional issue to be considered is the validity
of feeding
an index with parameters of different natures. The original parameters
(ID, IC, and IG) come from dimer–dimer
differences of two clusters A and B, taking into consideration geometric
equivalence. In the case of IQ, the geometric equivalence
is unnecessary, since the final data of the cluster as a whole are
compared through the sum of the interactions present in all dimers
that constitute the cluster, then considering cluster-to-cluster differences.
Thus, the plausible and more coherent output is to use IQ as a single index.

The IQ index is an additional
data point in the interpretation
of conventional graphs of intermolecular interaction contribution
(Figure 10). The graphs
enable analysis by type of interactions, whereas the index provides
a single final value for the entire comparison, promoting a rapid
interpretation of the similarity region. Additionally, IQ can be used independently if the compared structures share some
level of geometric similarity, since it is a global balance of interactions.
For example, in a series of structures in which one wants to analyze
which structure resembles more closely in interactions with a certain
standard structure, for use in a given application, the IQ index can be used.

Conclusions
The bisphenyl triazene
polymorphs 1IA and 1IIA were characterized
regarding their physical properties. It was possible
to observe the difficulty in identifying each phase with the available
techniques due to the high similarity between them. Similarity indices
were applied for these new polymorphs and eight other series of distinct
polymorphs with different characteristics and number of molecules
in the asymmetric unit. The same similarity range proposed in a previous
investigation was confirmed in this study. The different regions of
similarity were determined within the phenomenon of polymorphism,
allowing the determination of the boundaries between the quasi-isostructural
systems for the other compounds.

The multiparameter IDCG index was used as a robust tool
to determine the total similarity within the polymorphism phenomenon.
High contribution of the energy parameter (45%) to the final value
of similarity (IDCG) was observed, followed by the contact
area index (32%). The geometric index contributed around 23% to the
final IDCG value. This information reinforces the importance
of the contact area and stabilization energy in assessing the degree
of similarity between crystalline structures.

A new descriptor
(IQ) based on the comparison of the
energetic contribution of intermolecular interaction types present
in each crystal structure was presented. Although only a few examples
were carried out, our index provides a proof-of-principle that this
descriptor reflects the nature of polymorphic intermolecular interaction
similarity. This descriptor may be a versatile and applicable tool,
since it can be used for systems that share no degree of similarity.
In this way, the use of similarity indices to compare complete crystal
structures may be a helpful tool for researchers in the crystal engineering
area.

Experimental Section
Single Crystal X-ray Diffraction (SC-XRD)
Single crystals
of compounds 1 and 2 were obtained by slow
evaporation of methanol at 25 °C. Diffraction measurement was
performed using a Bruker D8 Venture with a Photon 100 CMOS detector
with graphite monochromatized Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073
Å) for 1I, 1II and 2II, and Ag Kα radiation (λ = 0.56087 Å) for 2I. Absorption corrections were performed using multiscan
methods. Anisotropic displacement parameters for non-hydrogen atoms
were applied. The structure was solved and refined using the WinGX
software package.56 The structures were
refined based on the full-matrix least-squares method using the SHELXL
program.57 The ORTEP projections of the
molecular structures were generated using the ORTEP-3 program.56 Crystallographic information files (CIFs) for
the novel structures were deposited at the Cambridge Crystallographic
Data Centre (CCDC) under identification numbers 1885614 (1I), 1885618 (1II), 1885641 (2I), and 1885683
(2II). Crystallographic data can be observed in the Supporting
Information (Figure S1, Tables S1 and S2). The other structures used for this investigation can be found
at CCDC under the following identification numbers 97035113 (3I), 97035013 (3II), 98207412 (4I), 101640212 (4II), 17032744 (5I), 17033044 (5II), 20162045 (6I), 20162145 (6II), 120919646 (7I), 17497747 (7II), 17497847 (7IIIA), 17935948 (8I), 17936148 (8II), 24146449 (9I), 24146749 (9II), 24146949 (9III), 105929150 (10I), 105929750 (10II), 105930950 (10III), and 105931150 (10IV).

Thermal Analysis
The melting temperature and associated
enthalpy of fusion of polymorphs 1IA and 1IIA were determined using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) with
a MDSC Q2000 (T-zeroTM DSC technology, TA Instruments Inc.). Dry high-purity
(99.999%) nitrogen gas was used as the purge gas (50 mL min–1). For each experiment, around 1 mg of sample was crimped in hermetic
aluminum pans with lids. For each polymorphic phase, single crystals
previously confirmed by SC-XRD analysis were used. The heating rate
used for all samples was 5 °C min–1. The samples
were submitted to three heating–cooling cycles, with a temperature
range of −80 °C to the beginning of the decomposition
temperature observed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The TGA
analysis was performed on a TGA Q5000 (TA Instruments Inc.). The heating
rate used was 10 °C min–1 under an inert atmosphere
of N2 (50 mL min–1). The samples were
weighed on a Sartorius scale (M500P) with an accuracy of ± 0.001
mg. Data were treated using TA Universal Analysis 2000 Software, version
4.5 (TA Instruments Inc.).

Raman Spectroscopy
For each analysis,
one single crystal,
which was previously confirmed by SC-XRD analysis, was spread on a
mirror glass plate and analyzed with a Bruker Senterra micro-Raman
spectrometer. The best spectra were collected using 532 and 785 nm
wavelength lines with 2 and 10 mW of illumination power, respectively.
The exposure time was 3.0 s and two coadditions were taken. The scattered
beam was collected by an Olympus 20× objective.

Contact Area
Analysis
Voronoi–Dirichlet polyhedra
(VDP) was used in the ToposPro software for the construction of the
supramolecular clusters.34 The face of
the molecular VDP was considered a set of atomic VDP faces corresponding
to the adjacent contacts between the atoms of two molecules. From
this, we established that the area of the face of a VDP corresponds
to the interaction between two molecules. The considered parameter
granted by the software was the area (in Å2) in contact between
the molecules.

Quantum Mechanical Calculations
The stabilization energies
of the intermolecular interactions of compounds were determined by
single point calculations performed with geometries obtained from
X-ray diffraction data. To obtain the interaction energy, density
functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the Gaussian
09 software package58 at the ωB97x-D/cc-pVDZ
theory level (restricted Hartree–Fock—RHF) for structures
of compounds 1, 3–10. For structures 2IA and 2IIA, the calculations
were performed at the ωB97x-D/cc-pVDZ-PP theory level (unrestricted
Hartree–Fock—UHF). The counterpoise method of Boys and
Bernardi was employed to minimize the basis set superposition error.59 The energy value used was the electronic energy
furnished by Gaussian. The dimer energies (GM1···MN) were determined by
the energy values of the dimer energy (GM1+MN) minus the sum of the M1 molecule (GM1) and MN molecule (GMN) energies. All QTAIM analyses were
performed with the aid of the AIMALL program package.60 The wavefunctions used in the QTAIM analysis were generated
at the above described level of theory.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b03660.Crystallographic
data information, Raman spectroscopy
and thermal analyses, Hirshfeld surface, supramolecular cluster, contact
area and stabilization energy data, GAI analysis data, and all similarity indices data (CIF)

(CIF)

(CIF)

(CIF)

(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b03660_si_001.cif

 ao8b03660_si_002.cif

 ao8b03660_si_003.cif

 ao8b03660_si_004.cif

 ao8b03660_si_005.pdf

 The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the
Fundação de Amparo
à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio Grande do Sul (FAPERGS—DOCFIX:
18/2551-0000562-2; P.R.S.S.), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento
Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq; 405071/2016-7), and
Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de
Nível Superior (CAPES) for financial support. The fellowships
from CNPq (G.H.W., M.H., N.Z., H.G.B., and M.A.P.M.), CAPES (P.R.S.S.,
C.R.B., and T.O.) and FAPERGS (J.P.P.C.) are also acknowledged. The
authors also thank the Dra. Mariana M. Bassaco (Department of Chemical
Engineering of UFSM) and Prof. Sailer S. dos Santos (Department of
Chemistry) for kind assistance with PXRD and Raman analyses, respectively.
==== Refs
References
Kálmán A. ; Párkányi L. ; Argay G. 
Classification of the
isostructurality of organic molecules in the crystalline state . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 
1993 , 49 , 1039 –1049 . 10.1107/S010876819300610X .
IUCr. http://reference.iucr.org/dictionary/Isostructural_crystals (accessed Dec 14, 2018 ).
Eddleston M. D. ; Sivachelvam S. ; Jones W. 
Screening for polymorphs of cocrystals:
a case study . CrystEngComm 
2013 , 15 , 175 –181 . 10.1039/C2CE26496J .
Dziubek K. ; Podsiadło M. ; Katrusiak A. 
Nearly Isostructural Polymorphs of
Ethynylbenzene: Resolution of CH···π(arene) and
Cooperative CH···π(C⋮C) Interactions by
Pressure Freezing . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 12620 –12621 . 10.1021/ja074885r .17900119 
Orlando T. ; Salbego P. R. S. ; Taschetto C. L. R. ; Bonacorso H. G. ; Zanatta N. ; Hoerner M. ; Martins M. A. P. 
Polymorphism
in a Rotaxane Molecule: Intra- and Intermolecular Understanding . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2019 , 19 , 1021 –1030 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.8b01560 .
Chadha R. ; Bhandari S. ; Haneef J. ; Khullar S. ; Mandal S. 
Cocrystals
of telmisartan: characterization, structure elucidation, in vivo and
toxicity studies . CrystEngComm 
2014 , 8375 –8389 . 10.1039/C4CE00797B .
Chen P.-Y. ; Zhang L. ; Zhu S.-G. ; Cheng G.-B. 
A Comparative Theoretical
Study of Picric Acid and Its Cocrystals . Crystals 
2015 , 5 , 346 –354 . 10.3390/cryst5030346 .
Gelbrich T. ; Hursthouse M. B. 
Systematic investigation of the relationships
between
25 crystal structures containing the carbamazepine molecule or a close
analogue: a case study of the XPac method . CrystEngComm 
2006 , 8 , 448 –460 . 10.1039/b600753h .
Cruz-Cabeza A. J. ; Bernstein J. 
Conformational polymorphism . Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 2170 –2191 . 10.1021/cr400249d .24350653 
Tamura R. ; Miyata M.   In Advances in Organic
Crystal Chemistry ; Tamura R. , Miyata M.  , Eds.; Springer : Tokyo, Japan , 2015 .
Cruz-Cabeza A. J. ; Reutzel-Edens S. M. ; Bernstein J. 
Facts and fictions about polymorphism . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 8619 –8635 . 10.1039/C5CS00227C .26400501 
Dey D. ; Thomas S. P. ; Spackman M. A. ; Chopra D. 
‘Quasi-isostructural
polymorphism’ in molecular crystals: inputs from interaction
hierarchy and energy frameworks . Chem. Commun. 
2016 , 52 , 2141 –2144 . 10.1039/C5CC09741J .
Coles S. J. ; Threlfall T. L. ; Tizzard G. J. 
The Same but Different: Isostructural
Polymorphs and the Case of 3-Chloromandelic Acid . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2014 , 14 , 1623 –1628 . 10.1021/cg401655h .
Hume D.   In A Treatise of Human
Nature ; Andesite Press : Oxford, U.K. , 2015 .
Popper K.   In The Logic of Scientific
Discovery ; Taylor & Francis e-Library : London , 2005 .
Salbego P. R. S. ; Bender C. R. ; Hörner M. ; Zanatta N. ; Frizzo C. P. ; Bonacorso H. G. ; Martins M. A. P. 
Insights on the Similarity of Supramolecular
Structures in Organic Crystals Using Quantitative Indexes . ACS Omega 
2018 , 3 , 2569 –2578 . 10.1021/acsomega.7b02057 .31458545 
Martins M. A. P. ; Frizzo C. P. ; Martins A. C. L. ; Tier A. Z. ; Gindri I. M. ; Meyer A. R. ; Bonacorso H. G. ; Zanatta N. 
Energetic and topological
approach for characterization of supramolecular clusters in organic
crystals . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 44337 –44349 . 10.1039/C4RA06040G .
Frizzo C. P. ; Bender C. R. ; Tier A. Z. ; Gindri I. M. ; Salbego P. R. S. ; Meyer A. R. ; Martins M. A. P. 
Energetic and topological insights
into the supramolecular structure of dicationic ionic liquids . CrystEngComm 
2015 , 17 , 2996 –3004 . 10.1039/C5CE00073D .
Martins M. A. P. ; Meyer A. R. ; Tier A. Z. ; Longhi K. ; Ducati L. C. ; Bonacorso H. G. ; Zanatta N. ; Frizzo C. P. 
Proposal for crystallization
of 3-amino-4-halo-5-methylisoxazoles: an energetic and topological
approach . CrystEngComm 
2015 , 17 , 7381 –7391 . 10.1039/C5CE01295C .
Martins M. A. P. ; Salbego P. R. S. ; de Moraes G. A. ; Bender C. R. ; Zambiazi P. J. ; Orlando T. ; Pagliari A. B. ; Frizzo C. P. ; Hörner M. ; de Moraes G. A. ; et al. Understanding the crystalline formation of triazene N -oxides and
the role of halogen···π interactions . CrystEngComm 
2018 , 20 , 96 –112 . 10.1039/C7CE02015E .
Zimmer G. C. ; Pagliari A. B. ; Bender C. R. ; Salbego P. R. S. ; Orlando T. ; Hörner M. ; Zanatta N. ; Bonacorso H. G. ; Martins M. A. P. 
Insights on conformation
in the solid state: a case
study—s-cis and/or s- trans crystallization of 5(3)-aryl-3(5)-carboxyethyl-1-
tert -butylpyrazoles . CrystEngComm 
2018 , 20 , 5154 –5168 . 10.1039/C8CE00984H .
Pagliari A. B. ; Orlando T. ; Salbego P. R. S. ; Zimmer G. C. ; Hörner M. ; Zanatta N. ; Bonacorso H. G. ; Martins M. A. P. 
Supramolecular
Packing of a Series of N -Phenylamides and the Role of NH···O=C
Interactions . ACS Omega 
2018 , 3 , 13850 –13861 . 10.1021/acsomega.8b01801 .31458083 
Orlando T. ; Salbego P. R. S. ; Farias F. F. S. ; Weimer G. H. ; Copetti J. P. P. ; Bonacorso H. G. ; Zanatta N. ; Hoerner M. ; Berná J. ; Martins M. A. P. 
Crystallization Mechanisms Applied
to Understand the
Crystal Formation of Rotaxanes . Eur. J. Org.
Chem. 
2019 , 187010.1002/ejoc.201801870 .
Lego C. ; Neumüller B. 
Reaktionen von 1,3-Diphenyltriazenid mit Cu+ and Tl+ . Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
2011 , 637 , 1784 –1789 . 10.1002/zaac.201100227 .
Koike R. ; Higashi K. ; Liu N. ; Limwikrant W. ; Yamamoto K. ; Moribe K. 
Structural Determination
of a Novel Polymorph of Sulfathiazole–Oxalic Acid Complex in
Powder Form by Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy on the Basis of Crystallographic
Structure of Another Polymorph . Cryst. Growth
Des. 
2014 , 14 , 4510 –4518 . 10.1021/cg5005903 .
Bellur
Atici E. ; Karlığa B. 
Quantitative determination
of two polymorphic forms of imatinib mesylate in a drug substance
and tablet formulation by X-ray powder diffraction, differential scanning
calorimetry and attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy . J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2015 , 114 , 330 –340 . 10.1016/j.jpba.2015.06.011 .26099262 
Strachan C. J. ; Pratiwi D. ; Gordon K. C. ; Rades T. 
Quantitative analysis
of polymorphic mixtures of carbamazepine by Raman spectroscopy and
principal components analysis . J. Raman Spectrosc. 
2004 , 35 , 347 –352 . 10.1002/jrs.1140 .
Dračínský M. ; Procházková E. ; Kessler J. ; Šebestík J. ; Matějka P. ; Bouř P. 
Resolution of Organic Polymorphic
Crystals by Raman Spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2013 , 117 , 7297 –7307 . 10.1021/jp404382f .23721200 
Spackman M. A. ; McKinnon J. J. 
Fingerprinting intermolecular
interactions in molecular
crystals . CrystEngComm 
2002 , 4 , 378 –392 . 10.1039/B203191B .
Kupcewicz B. ; Małecka M. 
Role of Crystal Packing and Weak Intermolecular Interactions
in the Solid State Fluorescence of N-Methylpyrazoline Derivatives . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2015 , 15 , 3893 –3904 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.5b00512 .
Saikia B. ; Bora P. ; Khatioda R. ; Sarma B. 
Hydrogen Bond Synthons
in the Interplay of Solubility and Membrane Permeability/Diffusion
in Variable Stoichiometry Drug Cocrystals . Cryst.
Growth Des. 
2015 , 15 , 5593 –5603 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.5b01293 .
Khan I. ; Panini P. ; Khan S. U. D. ; Rana U. A. ; Andleeb H. ; Chopra D. ; Hameed S. ; Simpson J. 
Exploiting the Role
of Molecular Electrostatic Potential, Deformation Density, Topology,
and Energetics in the Characterization of S···N and
Cl···N Supramolecular Motifs in Crystalline Triazolothiadiazoles . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2016 , 16 , 1371 –1386 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.5b01499 .
Dey D. ; Chopra D. 
Evaluation
of the role of isostructurality in fluorinated
phenyl benzoates . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2017 , 17 , 5117 –5128 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.7b00421 .
Blatov V. A. ; Shevchenko A. P. ; Proserpio D. M. 
Applied
Topological Analysis of Crystal
Structures with the Program Package ToposPro . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2014 , 14 , 3576 –3586 . 10.1021/cg500498k .
Gavezzotti A. 
A Solid-State
Chemist’s View of the Crystal Polymorphism of Organic Compounds . J. Pharm. Sci. 
2007 , 96 , 2232 –2241 . 10.1002/jps.20870 .17568403 
Gelbrich T. ; Hursthouse M. B. 
A versatile
procedure for the identification, description
and quantification of structural similarity in molecular crystals . CrystEngComm 
2005 , 7 , 324 –336 . 10.1039/b502484f .
Gelbrich T. ; Threlfall T. L. ; Hursthouse M. B. 
XPac dissimilarity parameters as
quantitative descriptors of isostructurality: the case of fourteen
4,5′-substituted benzenesulfonamido-2-pyridines obtained by
substituent interchange involving CF3/I/Br/Cl/F/Me/H . CrystEngComm 
2012 , 14 , 5454 –5464 . 10.1039/c2ce25508a .
Fabbiani F. P. A. ; Dittrich B. ; Florence A. J. ; Gelbrich T. ; Hursthouse M. B. ; Kuhs W. F. ; Shankland N. ; Sowa H. 
Crystal structures
with a challenge: high-pressure crystallisation of ciprofloxacin sodium
salts and their recovery to ambient pressure . CrystEngComm 
2009 , 11 , 1396 –1406 . 10.1039/b822987b .
Dey D. ; Chopra D. 
Occurrence of 3D isostructurality
in fluorinated phenyl
benzamidines . CrystEngComm 
2017 , 19 , 47 –63 . 10.1039/C6CE01924B .
Kitaigorodskii A. L.   In Molecular
Crystals and Molecules ; Academic Press : NY , 1973 .
Gavezzotti a. 
Crystal packing
of hydrocarbons. Effects of molecular size, shape and stoichiometry . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 
1990 , 46 , 275 –283 . 10.1107/S010876818901308X .
Peresypkina E. V. ; Blatov V. A. 
Molecular coordination numbers in
crystal structures
of organic compounds . Acta Crystallogr., Sect.
B: Struct. Sci. 
2000 , 56 , 501 –511 . 10.1107/S0108768199016675 .
Fábián L. ; Kálmán A. 
Volumetric
measure of isostructurality . Acta Crystallogr.,
Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 
1999 , 55 , 1099 –1108 . 10.1107/S0108768199009325 .
Xia A. ; Selegue J. P. ; Carrillo A. ; Patrick B. O. ; Parkin S. ; Brock C. P. 
Two fluoradene
derivatives: pseudosymmetry, eccentric
ellipsoids and a phase transition . Acta Crystallogr.,
Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 
2001 , 57 , 507 –516 . 10.1107/S0108768101008631 .
Enjalbert R. ; Galy J. 
CH3CN: X-ray structural
investigation of a unique single crystal.
β → α phase transition and crystal structure . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 
2002 , 58 , 1005 –1010 . 10.1107/S0108768102017603 .
Katrusiak A. 
A new polymorph
of maleic hydrazide . Acta Crystallogr., Sect.
C: Cryst. Struct. Commun. 
1993 , 49 , 36 –39 . 10.1107/S0108270192004918 .
Katrusiak A. 
Polymorphism
of maleic hydrazide . Acta Crystallogr., Sect.
B: Struct. Sci. 
2001 , 57 , 697 –704 . 10.1107/S010876810101151X .
Kaftory M. ; Botoshansky M. ; Kapon M. ; Shteiman V. 
Irreversible single-crystal
to polycrystal and reversible single-crystal to single-crystal phase
transformations in cyanurates . Acta Crystallogr.,
Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 
2001 , 57 , 791 –799 . 10.1107/S0108768101014987 .
Kubicki M. 
Structural
phase transitions, and Br...N and Br...Br interactions in 1-phenyl-2-methyl-4-nitro-5-bromoimidazole . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 
2004 , 60 , 333 –342 . 10.1107/S0108768104005853 .
Patyk E. ; Podsiadło M. ; Katrusiak A. 
CH···N
Bonds and Dynamics
in Isostructural Pyrimidine Polymorphs . Cryst.
Growth Des. 
2015 , 15 , 4039 –4044 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.5b00657 .
Orlando T. ; Salbego P. R. S. ; Zimmer G. C. ; Pagliari A. B. ; Bender C. R. ; Rodrigues L. V. ; Bonacorso H. G. ; Zanatta N. ; Berná J. ; Martins M. A. P. 
Conformer Distribution in Rotaxanes Containing Nonsymmetric
Threads: A Systematic Approach . Eur. J. Org.
Chem. 
2018 , 2018 , 4978 –4990 . 10.1002/ejoc.201800991 .
Martins M. A. P. ; Rodrigues L. V. ; Meyer A. R. ; Frizzo C. P. ; Hörner M. ; Zanatta N. ; Bonacorso H. G. ; Berná J. ; Alajarín M. 
Density Functional Theory and Quantum Theory of Atoms
in Molecules Analysis: Influence of Intramolecular Interactions on
Pirouetting Movement in Tetraalkylsuccinamide[2]rotaxanes . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2017 , 17 , 5845 –5857 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.7b00944 .
Bader R. F. W.   In Atoms in Molecules:
A Quantum Theory ; Oxford University Press : Oxford, U.K. , 1990 .
Spackman Ma. ; Jayatilaka D. 
Hirshfeld surface analysis . CrystEngComm 
2009 , 11 , 19 –32 . 10.1039/B818330A .
Wolff S. K. ; Grimwood D. J. ; McKinnon J. J. ; Turner M. J. ; Jayatilaka D. ; Spackman M. A.   In CrystalExplorer ; University
of Western Australia , 2012 .
Farrugia L. J. 
WinGX and
ORTEP for Windows: An update . J. Appl. Crystallogr. 
2012 , 45 , 849 –854 . 10.1107/S0021889812029111 .
Sheldrick G. M. 
A short
history of SHELX . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A:
Found. Crystallogr. 
2008 , 64 , 112 –122 . 10.1107/S0108767307043930 .
Frisch M. J. ; Trucks G. W. ; Schlegel H. B. ; Scuseria G. E. ; Robb M. A. ; Cheeseman J. R. ; Scalmani G. ; Barone V. ; Petersson G. A. ; Nakatsuji H.  ; Gaussian
09 , revision C.01; Gaussian, Inc : Wallingford, CT , 2010 .
Boys S. F. ; Bernardi F. 
The calculation of
small molecular interactions by
the differences of separate total energies. Some procedures with reduced
errors . Mol. Phys. 
1970 , 19 , 553 –566 . 10.1080/00268977000101561 .
Keith T. A.  AIMAll , version 14.11.23; TK Gristmill
Software : Overland Park, KS , 2014 .

