
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03669Mini-ReviewCarbon Dots: Zero-Dimensional
Carbon Allotrope with Unique Photoinduced Redox Characteristics Liang Weixiong †Bunker Christopher E. *‡Sun Ya-Ping *†† Department of Chemistry
and Laboratory for Emerging Materials and Technology, Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina 29634, United States‡ Aerospace Systems Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 45433, United States* E-mail: christopher.bunker@us.af.mil.* E-mail: syaping@clemson.edu.06 01 2020 21 01 2020 5 2 965 971 30 10 2019 23 12 2019 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Carbon
dots (CDots) exploit and enhance the intrinsic
properties of small carbon nanoparticles. Their optical absorptions
and photoinduced redox characteristics are competitive with those
of conventional semiconductor quantum dots at one end and fullerenes
and other carbon nanomaterials at the other. Highlighted in this mini
review are the effective photon harvesting over a broad spectral range
by CDots and their subsequent excited-state charge transfer processes
and interactions, which have enabled their use as sensors, for photodynamic
effects, and in various energy conversion technologies.

document-id-old-9ao9b03669document-id-new-14ao9b03669ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Carbon dots (CDots),1 generally defined as small carbon nanoparticles with various
surface passivation schemes (Figure 1), exploit and enhance the intrinsic properties of
the carbon nanoparticles. Among various nanoscale carbon allotropes,
fullerenes have naturally taken the title of carbon nanomaterials
at the zero dimension (Figure 1). However, one may argue that fullerenes are, in fact, stoichiometrically
defined molecules of not only unique molecular architectures but also
distinct electronic structures and properties, fundamentally different
from carbon nanomaterials in other dimensions including carbon nanotubes
and graphene nanosheets, which obviously cannot be considered as molecules
in any stretch of the imagination. On the other hand, small carbon
nanoparticles share a key structural feature with carbon nanotubes
and graphene nanosheets, namely, the substantial presence of structural
and edge defects (Figure 1),2 which are clearly not possible
in fullerenes. Thus, the nanoparticles should really deserve the title
of nanoscale carbon at the zero dimension (Figure 1).

Figure 1 (Top) Cartoon illustration of a CDot, which
is generally a small carbon nanoparticle core with attached surface
passivation molecules in a configuration similar to that of a soft
corona-like shell. (Bottom) Carbon nanomaterials in different dimensions,
with the red circles marking some areas for potential structural and
edge defects.

Defects in small carbon nanoparticles
and their
one- and two-dimensional counterparts play a major role in the optical
and redox properties of these carbon nanomaterials. Upon the effective
passivation of the defects in small carbon nanoparticles for CDots,
these properties are greatly enhanced, as found and established experimentally.1,3 Among the more pronounced are the observed bright and colorful fluorescence
emissions of CDots, which have been investigated extensively for both
fundamental understanding and technological applications. Equally
interesting and valuable are the unique photoinduced redox characteristics
of CDots as both excellent electron donors and acceptors versus fullerenes
as potent electron acceptors only. Highlighted in this mini review
are the effective photon harvesting over a broad spectral range by
CDots and their subsequent excited-state charge transfer processes
and interactions, which have enabled their uses as sensors, for photodynamic
effects, and in various energy conversion technologies.

CDot Syntheses
CDots exploit and enhance the unique
properties of small carbon nanoparticles, which as discussed above
represent a distinct nanoscale carbon allotrope at the zero dimension
(Figure 1). Therefore,
in both the structure and composition of CDots, there must be the
dominance of nanoscale carbon particles/domains. To ensure such dominance,
the classical approach is to use pre-existing carbon nanoparticles,
specifically processed and selected, for the preparation of CDots,
as in the original finding.1 The carbon
nanoparticles can be sourced from various carbon soot samples produced
by laser ablation, arc discharge, and other methods, including those
available commercially that are marketed as “carbon nanopowders”.
For the required effective surface passivation in CDots, the carbon
nanoparticles are functionalized by organic molecules in chemical
and thermally induced reactions, including mostly the amidation of
carboxylic acid moieties on the nanoparticle surface in the former1,3 and likely radical additions in the latter.4

Among other syntheses in which the dominance of nanoscale
carbon particles/domains is evident are those based on the electrochemical
etching of graphite,5 the pyrolysis of
organic materials,6 and other high-temperature
carbonization strategies such as the treatment of acetylene in a chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) apparatus at 1000 °C.7 As these processing conditions generally exclude the presence
of any organic species in the resulting samples, additional surface
passivation of the nanoscale carbon particles/domains similar to the
functionalization approach discussed above may be needed for enhanced
optical and other properties.

In most studies reported in the
literature, however, the dot samples were prepared by “one-pot”
thermal processing of organic precursors, for which there must be
an implicit assumption that the thermal energy would partially carbonize
the precursor organic molecules, with the remaining organic species
serving the required passivation function. Such preparations are obviously
simple and quick, but there have been serious and growing concerns
on the structures and compositions in many of the dot samples thus
prepared8−11 because the applied thermal processing conditions have generally
been too mild for sufficient carbonization to ensure the required
dominance of nanoscale carbon domains in CDots. Almost by design,
the dot samples from the one-pot cooking of organic precursors at
mild temperatures (below 300 °C or even 200 °C) must be
complex mixtures of some nanoscale carbon domains with plenty of attached
and/or tangled organic species, which are impossible to remove via
dialysis or other separation methods. Among the one-pot samples, those
prepared at higher temperatures with longer processing times are probably
closer to classically defined CDots,11,12 whereas those
obtained by cooking at a temperature less than 200 °C for only
a few hours are heavily contaminated or dominated by complex organic
mixtures, including dye-like species created in the thermal reactions
or even red/near-IR dyes associated with the use of some specific
precursor organic mixtures.11 The dye contamination
or dominance in dot samples would complicate the understanding of
the observed properties,8−11 including those found in optoelectronic devices,
as organic dyes could serve many of the same functions as those expected
of CDots. Extreme caution must be exercised in the selection of processing
conditions for carbonization syntheses.

Absorption and Emission
Properties
CDots were originally
found and developed for their bright and colorful fluorescence emissions
that resemble those of conventional semiconductor quantum dots (QDs).
For photoexcitation, the optical absorptions of CDots are dictated
by electronic transitions in the core carbon nanoparticles (Figure 1), which are known
to be associated with π-plasmons. The core carbon nanoparticles
may be largely amorphous (for those harvested from some commercially
supplied “nanopowder” samples, for example) or more
graphitic (from samples produced by laser ablation under some conditions),
including those small few-layer graphene pieces often referred to
as “graphene quantum dots” in the literature.2 The absorptions are strong, covering the broad
UV to visible spectral region and extending into the near-IR, capable
of harvesting up to 65% or more of the solar radiation over 300–800
nm. More quantitatively, optical absorptivities of CDots in terms
of per molar concentration of carbon atoms (MC atom) in
the core carbon nanoparticles are 50–100 MC atom–1 cm–1 at 400–450 nm,
compared with 16 MC atom–1 cm–1 for C60 at its first absorption band maximum.
CDots are
also known for being among the very best two-photon absorbers in the
near-IR.

The bright fluorescence emissions of CDots are excitation-wavelength-dependent
in a rather characteristic pattern for both observed spectra and quantum
yields (Figure 2),3 and the pattern is consistent among CDots of
different surface functionalities and from different preparations
as long as the dominance of nanoscale carbon particles/domains in
the dot structures is ensured. Mechanistically, the photoexcited CDots
undergo rapid charge transfers for separated electrons and holes,
which are trapped at various surface sites stabilized by the surface
passivation (Figure 3). The radiative recombinations of the electrons and holes are responsible
for the fluorescence emissions, with the yields of the recombinations
for the formation of emissive excited states (Φ1)
reflected in the observed fluorescence quantum yields, ΦF = Φ1Φ2, where Φ2 represents emission yields from the emissive excited states
(Figure 3).11

Figure 2 Absorption spectrum (ABS) and fluorescence (FLSC) spectra
(inset, from the left corresponding to excitation wavelengths of 400
nm in 20 nm increments) and quantum yields at different excitation
wavelengths for EDA-CDots.3

Figure 3 Cartoon illustration (top) and state diagram (bottom)
on the mechanistic framework for CDots.

Photoinduced
Redox Characteristics
Carbon powdery materials
are typically used in reductive processes, such as the popular Pd/C
catalyst. However, photoexcited CDots are both excellent electron
donors and acceptors, as clearly demonstrated in the results of fluorescence
quenching by electron donor and acceptor molecules as quenchers. For
both fluorescence intensities (ΦF) and lifetimes
(⟨τF⟩, representing the averages in
multiexponential decays), the quenching is highly efficient, in general,
which has been attributed in part to the quenching radius beyond the
edge of an individual dot for reduced diffusion distance. Also commonly
observed has been the decoupling of the ΦF quenching
from the ⟨τF⟩ quenching, with the former
being much more efficient and seemingly beyond the diffusion-controlled
limit. In the mechanistic framework for CDots (Figure 3), there are roughly and effectively two
processes on different time scales, with yields of Φ1 and Φ2.13 The process
of Φ1 is orders of magnitude faster than that of
Φ2, as reflected experimentally by the fluorescence
rising (picoseconds) and decay (nanoseconds) times. The ⟨τF⟩ quenching is mostly dynamic in nature, affecting
only the Φ2 process, namely, decays of the emissive
excited states (Figure 3). On the other hand, the quenching of ΦF (Φ1Φ2) has a significant static component due
to higher than bulk near-neighbor concentrations of quencher molecules,
capable of affecting the Φ1 process via partially
interrupting the radiative recombinations (Figure 3).13 Similar decoupling
between ΦF and ⟨τF⟩
has also been found in other responses of CDots to external effects
beyond quenching, such as the enhancement in fluorescence emissions
when CDots are confined in a more restrictive environment like in
polymer films. The mechanistic account of the decoupling is important
to the understanding of many reported results on the sensing of metal
ions with CDots based on fluorescence quenching (see below).

A more vivid display of such decoupling is in the case of fluorescence
quenching due to the surface doping of CDots with a small amount of
noble metal like gold.14 The metal has
a high electron affinity and also right on the dot surface, capable
of soaking up the trapped electrons to interrupt the radiative recombinations
(Figure 3) in a purely
static fashion. Such static quenching, also referred to as “dark
quenching process” in photophysics textbooks for its not visible
in fluorescence decays, has no effects on ⟨τF⟩, as observed experimentally. Consistent with such a mechanistic
picture is that the noble-metal-doped CDots are excellent photocatalysts
for some of the most difficult energy conversion reactions, such as
the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into small organic
molecules.14,15

Relevant Applications
For technological applications,
CDots have been explored for their properties that are either uniquely
advantageous or competitive to those of fullerenes at one end and
conventional semiconductor QDs at the other. Highlighted below are
some representative relevant applications that take advantage of the
photoinduced redox characteristics of CDots.

Sensing
The highly
efficient charge transfer quenching
of fluorescence emissions has made CDots excellent sensors for both
electron-deficient and electron-rich substances. However, more popular
have been their uses in the sensing of electron-deficient analytes,
such as nitrotoluenes, as signature compounds for TNT and related
explosives. For example, EDA-CDots [EDA = 2,2′-(ethylenedioxy)bis(ethylamine)]
were explored for the detection of 2,4-dinitrotoluene (DNT) with the
highly efficient fluorescence quenching both in intensities (ΦF) and lifetimes (⟨τF⟩).13 The quenching of fluorescence intensities was
apparently beyond the diffusion control, which was attributed to static
quenching contributions associated with higher local DNT concentrations
around the CDots and the quenching radius larger than the average
radius of individual dots. The ⟨τF⟩
quenching was dynamic and still very efficient at the upper limit
of diffusion control. Thus, the former is more useful to the need
for high sensitivity, pushing the detection limit lower, whereas the
latter is valuable to the quantification of the analyte concentrations
above the detection limit.

The sensing of various metal cations
in many reported studies16 might be more
affected or dominated by the substantial or extreme static quenching
of fluorescence intensities, with the apparent Stern–Volmer
quenching constants as large as 530000 M–1.17 The overwhelming majority of these studies were
based on dot samples prepared in one-pot carbonization syntheses under
relatively mild processing conditions,16 which were nanoscale carbon domains mixed with abundant organic
species. As a result, such samples must be porous or even “sponge-like”,
capable of soaking up and/or adsorbing the metal cations to have much
higher local concentrations for the substantial or extreme static
quenching, responsible for the observed low detection limits. However,
a downside of the dominating static quenching would be the vulnerability
to minor changes in the sample structure and/or morphology in standard
versus analyte solutions, which could have major effects on the analyte
quantification based on standard curves.

Among some investigations
in which the dot samples were similar or close to those obtained from
pre-existing carbon nanoparticles, Chang and co-workers used the dot
sample from carbonizing l-cysteine hydrothermally at 300
°C for 2 h to detect various metal cations based on the quenching
of fluorescence intensities.18 For Co2+ in water and vitamin B12 samples, as an example,
the detection limit was reported to be as low as 10 nM. Huang and
co-workers used microwave-assisted carbonization of solid-state organic
mixture to prepare dot samples for the detection of Cr(VI) along with
various other metal cations in water.19 It was found that Zn2+ could actually enhance the fluorescence
emissions somewhat, in contrast to the quenching by Ag+, Cu2+, Fe3+, and especially Cr(VI). For Cr(VI),
the reported detection limit was as low as 120 nM. According to the
comparison between the effects of Cr(VI) on fluorescence intensities
and decays, the quenching was apparently all static.19 Interestingly, therefore, even for these dot samples of
likely more significant nanoscale carbon contents, there was still
the dominance of static quenching associated with high local concentrations
around the emissive entities in the samples.

Photocatalysis
The effective photon harvesting by CDots
in the visible spectrum and beyond and the photoexcited CDots serving
as both excellent electron donors and acceptors have prompted their
many uses in photocatalytic oxidation and reduction reactions. Mechanistically,
the photoexcitation of CDots results in the rapid charge transfers
and separation for the trapped electrons and holes (Figure 3), which could be exploited
for catalytic activities directly, such as the photocatalytic reduction
of CO2 and degradation of organics. The former represents
one of the most challenging yet extremely valuable photocatalytic
conversions. It was shown that the electrons could be concentrated
by doping the surface of CDots with noble metals to enhance substantially
the photocatalytic performance for much higher CO2 conversion
quantum yields.14,15 A surprising finding was the
dependence of the conversion quantum yields on CO2 concentrations.
In fact, for the use of gold-doped CDots as catalysts in liquid CO2 with visible light irradiation (405–720 nm), the quantum
yields estimated on the production of formic acid alone could reach
3–5%,15 thus among the best ever
achieved with conventional semiconductor and/or other photocatalysts
for the CO2 reduction. As known in the literature, the
best-performing semiconductor photocatalysts for CO2 conversion
were mixtures of several semiconductors of different band gaps, with
the implied need mechanistically for some kind of coordinated actions
of multiple catalysts. In this regard, the observed high performance
of CDots may be rationalized as being due to their broadly distributed
electronic transitions and charge transferred states in individual
dots, which are analogous to the catalyst configuration of combining
multiple semiconductors in a single nanostructure.

CDots and
derived photocatalysts have been popular in water splitting for hydrogen
molecules.20 In fact, the photocatalytic
reduction of CO2 in aqueous media could mechanistically
go through the route of hydrogen generation first, which then reduces
CO2 into small organic molecules. Interestingly, among
the reported studies on water splitting with the use of CDots as photocatalysts,
it seems that the outcomes are significantly dependent on the dot
samples used. For the CDot-based photocatalysts found to be highly
effective in the CO2 conversion,14,15 as discussed above, they were also capable of the photocatalytic
hydrogen generation from water under visible light14 but with a performance significantly poorer than that in
the CO2 reduction.

The dot structures of carbon composited
or combined with conventional semiconductors have been explored for
enhanced photocatalytic functions. In these catalyst configurations,
the nanoscale carbon domains serve as photosensizers for the semiconductors,
in addition to their own catalytic activities in some cases. For example,
various carbon–TiO2 composite dots have been prepared
as photocatalysts for the CO2 conversion, but there have
been no major breakthroughs in terms of enhanced catalyst performance
for much improved photoreduction outcomes. Similarly, the composite
dot structures of carbon with TiO2 were evaluated in photocatalytic
oxidation reactions, such as the popular uses in photocatalytic degradation
of organic dyes.

For example, Yu et al. prepared the carbon–TiO2 nanosheet composites as photocatalysts to degrade rhodamine
B under visible light.5 The degradation
experiments were relatively straightforward, in which the photocatalysts
in an aqueous rhodamine B water solution were irradiated by using
a 500 W xenon lamp. The decreasing concentration of rhodamine B with
the photoirradiation was determined every 20 min in optical absorption
measurements. The results led to the conclusion that the photocatalysts
were effective for the dye degradation purpose.

Optoelectronics
Conventional semiconductor QDs have
been widely used in optoelectronic devices, with famous examples including
“QLED” television sets and “quantum dot displays”
in general. They are also popular in various photovoltaic devices,
so are fullerenes, despite the generally poor photon-harvesting capabilities
of the widely used C60 derivatives like PCBM ([6,6]-phenyl
C61 butyric acid methyl ester). CDots resemble QDs in optical properties
and photoinduced redox characteristics, including the sharing of some
mechanistic features, and they also compete favorably with fullerenes.
Thus, CDots have been explored for their uses in various components
of optoelectronic devices.21

Rogach
and co-workers prepared two kinds of dot samples for light-emitting
diodes, one emitting white light and the other emitting blue light
with different applied voltages.22 The
dot syntheses were based on the thermal carbonization of the mixture
containing octadecene, 1-hexadecylamine, and citric acid with somewhat
more aggressive processing conditions of 300 °C for 3 h. The
fluorescent dots were used in the emissive layer of the devices (Figure 4). The maximum brightness
was 24 cd/m2 for the blue LED and 96 cd/m2 for
the white LED. The devices had a low turn-on voltage of 5 V. The white
LED could emit light in different colors under different voltages
(Figure 4).

Figure 4 Illustration
on the LED device with CDots (left) and electroluminescence spectra
for different applied voltages. Reproduced from ref (22). Copyright 2013 American
Chemical Society.

Yan et al. used a CVD
setup (acetylene as the feed
at 1000 °C) to prepare dot samples for the electron transporting
layer (ETL) in polymer solar cells (PSCs).7 The purpose was to overcome the limitations of the commonly used
ETL materials such as LiF and Ca for the higher thermal stability,
enhanced electron injection, and lower interface resistance in the
solar cells, as achieved in the study.7 Similarly, Cui et al. used the CVD-produced dot samples to prepare
composite films with poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT).23 As made evident by the quenching of fluorescence emissions,
there were electron transfer interactions in the composite films with
the dots as electron acceptors. The electron acceptor characteristics
of the dots were exploited for their combination with or replacing
the C60 derivative PCBM in the solar cells, and both were
found to be able to enhance the cell performance. It was concluded
that CDots could be used as an inexpensive alternative to C60 derivatives for the electron acceptor function in polymer solar
cells.23

Antimicrobial Function
CDots have been shown for their
visible-light-activated microbicidal functions,24 including the observed inhibition of bacteria like Escherichia coli under ambient room light, which
serves as an example for effectiveness. The antimicrobial actions
of CDots are similar to those of the widely used TiO2 nanoparticles
(except for the required UV excitation of TiO2), involving
the photoinduced generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Mechanistically,
the ROS generation could be associated with the initial charge-separated
species following the photoexcitation of CDots and/or the emissive
excited states from radiative recombinations (Figure 3). The available experimental results seem
to suggest contributions by both.

Similar to the photocatalysts
based on dot structures in which nanoscale carbon domains are composited
or combined with conventional semiconductors, as discussed above,
the carbon-based/derived hybrid nanostructures could be explored for
enhanced antimicrobial activities. In such nanostructures, the carbon
domains again serve the function of effectively harvesting visible
photons to sensitize the nanoscale semiconductors like TiO2 in the hybrids, in addition to their own ROS generation and related
antimicrobial actions.

CDots are intrinsically nontoxic, and
they can be produced from abundant and often renewable precursor materials,
amenable to microbial control in food/water safety and related applications
that require the microbicidal agents to be benign and also low or
ultralow costs.

Relationships to Carbon Nanomaterials in
Other Dimensions
The optical properties and photoinduced
redox characteristics of
CDots are associated with the passivated defects in the core carbon
nanoparticles or nanoscale carbon domains in the dots. Similar structural
and edge defects are present in carbon nanotubes and graphene nanosheets
(Figure 1), and their
passivation via chemical functionalization or in other schemes could
result in largely the same bright and colorful fluorescence emissions
and excited-state charge transfers.2 In
fact, the observation of bright green fluorescence from functionalized
carbon nanotubes preceded the finding of CDots. In all of the carbon
nanomaterials in different dimensions (except for fullerene molecules, Figure 1), the unavoidable
defects apparently play a critical role or even “it is all
about defects” in terms of the photoexcited state properties
and processes in these nanomaterials.2 In
this regard, each passivated defect area in the carbon nanostructures
may be considered phenomenologically equivalent to a CDot (Figure 5). Such a structural
view may help the fundamental understanding and technological exploitation
of the nanoscale carbon allotropes.

Figure 5 Cartoon illustration on the CDot-like/equivalent
functionalized defects in carbon nanomaterials, including the functionalized
small graphitic pieces.

Summary and Perspectives
CDots have emerged to represent
a rapidly advancing and expanding research field, with their properties
and potential applications competing broadly and in most cases effectively
with those of conventional semiconductor QDs and other carbon nanomaterials.
In the further development of this new and transformative carbon nanomaterial
platform, the relevant research community must have the courage and
determination to address the systemic issue of the incorrectly or
poorly prepared dot samples that are contaminated substantially or
nearly completely by dye-like species/mixtures. In this regard, the
dominant contents of carbon nanoparticles or nanoscale carbon domains
must be ensured in all dot samples, as required in the definition
of CDots. Nevertheless, with rightly prepared high-quality dot samples,
their highly competitive and/or novel uses across a number of important
technological areas may be envisaged.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Weixiong
Liang
obtained his B.S. degree in applied chemistry from Shantou University
in 2016. He has been a Ph.D. graduate student in chemistry at Clemson
University since 2017. His research projects are mostly on carbon
dots and related nanomaterials.

Christopher
E. Bunker received his B.S. and Ph.D. in chemistry from Virginia Tech
and Clemson University, respectively. He is currently a Principal
Research Chemist with the Air Force Research Laboratory at Wright-Patterson
AFB. His research covers carbon nanomaterials for energy and sensor
applications, high-temperature, high-pressure fuel chemistry, and
nanoenergetics for fuels and propellants.

Ya-Ping Sun earned his Ph.D. at Florida State University in 1989.
After postdoctoral training at University of Texas at Austin, he joined
the Clemson faculty in 1992. He has been the Frank Henry Leslie Chair
Professor of Natural & Physical Sciences since 2003. His research
interests are primarily in carbon-based nanomaterials.

Acknowledgments
Financial support from Air Force Office of Scientific
Research (through the program of Dr. Kenneth Caster) is gratefully
acknowledged.
==== Refs
References
Sun Y.-P. ; Zhou B. ; Lin Y. ; Wang W. ; Fernando K. A. S. ; Pathak P. ; Meziani M. J. ; Harruff B. A. ; Wang X. ; Wang H. ; Luo P. G. ; Yang H. ; Kose M. E. ; Chen B. ; Veca L. M. ; Xie S.-Y. 
Quantum-Sized Carbon
Particles for Bright and Colorful Photoluminescence . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 7756 –7757 . 10.1021/ja062677d .16771487 
Cao L. ; Meziani M. J. ; Sahu S. ; Sun Y.-P. 
Photoluminescence
Properties of Graphene versus Other Carbon Nanomaterials . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2013 , 46 , 171 –180 . 10.1021/ar300128j .23092181 
LeCroy G. E. ; Messina F. ; Sciortino A. ; Bunker C. E. ; Wang P. ; Fernando K. A. S. ; Sun Y.-P. 
Characteristic Excitation Wavelength
Dependence of Fluorescence Emissions in Carbon “Quantum”
Dots . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2017 , 121 , 28180 –28186 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b10129 .
Ren X. ; Liang W. ; Wang P. ; Bunker C. E. ; Coleman M. ; Teisl L. R. ; Cao L. ; Sun Y.-P. 
A New Approach in Functionalization of Carbon Nanoparticles
for Optoelectronically Relevant Carbon Dots and Beyond . Carbon 
2019 , 141 , 553 –560 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2018.09.085 .
Yu X. ; Liu J. ; Yu Y. ; Zuo S. ; Li B. 
Preparation
and Visible Light Photocatalytic Activity of Carbon Quantum Dots/TiO2 Nanosheet Composites . Carbon 
2014 , 68 , 718 –724 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2013.11.053 .
Wang F. ; Pang S. ; Wang L. ; Li Q. ; Kreiter M. ; Liu C.-Y. 
One-Step Synthesis of Highly Luminescent
Carbon Dots in Noncoordinating Solvents . Chem.
Mater. 
2010 , 22 , 4528 –4530 . 10.1021/cm101350u .
Yan L. ; Yang Y. ; Ma C.-Q. ; Liu X. ; Wang H. ; Xu B. 
Synthesis of Carbon Quantum Dots
by Chemical Vapor Deposition Approach for Use in Polymer Solar Cell
as the Electrode Buffer Layer . Carbon 
2016 , 109 , 598 –607 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2016.08.058 .
Xiong Y. ; Schneider J. ; Ushakova E. V. ; Rogach A. L. 
Influence of Molecular Fluorophores
on the Research Field of Chemically Synthesized Carbon Dots . Nano Today 
2018 , 23 , 124 –139 . 10.1016/j.nantod.2018.10.010 .
Khan S. ; Sharma A. ; Ghoshal S. ; Jain S. ; Hazra M. K. ; Nandi C. K. 
Small Molecular Organic Nanocrystals
Resemble Carbon Nanodots in Terms of Their Properties . Chem. Sci. 
2018 , 9 , 175 –180 . 10.1039/C7SC02528A .29629085 
Hinterberger V. ; Damm C. ; Haines P. ; Guldi D. M. ; Peukert W. 
Purification
and Structural Elucidation of Carbon Dots by Column Chromatography . Nanoscale 
2019 , 11 , 8464 –8474 . 10.1039/C9NR01029G .30990494 
Liang W. ; Ge L. ; Hou X. ; Ren X. ; Yang L. ; Bunker C. E. ; Overton C. M. ; Wang P. ; Sun Y.-P. 
Evaluation of Commercial
“Carbon Quantum Dots” Sample on Origins of Red Absorption
and Emission Features . C 
2019 , 5 , 70 10.3390/c5040070 .
Hou X. ; Hu Y. ; Wang P. ; Yang L. ; Al Awak M. M. ; Tang Y. ; Twara F. K. ; Qian H. ; Sun Y.-P. 
Modified Facile
Synthesis for Quantitatively Fluorescent Carbon Dots . Carbon 
2017 , 122 , 389 –394 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2017.06.093 .29176908 
LeCroy G. E. ; Fernando K. A. S. ; Bunker C. E. ; Wang P. ; Tomlinson N. ; Sun Y.-P. 
Steady-State and Time-Resolved Fluorescence
Studies on Interactions of Carbon “Quantum” Dots with
Nitrotoluenes . Inorg. Chim. Acta 
2017 , 468 , 300 –307 . 10.1016/j.ica.2017.05.058 .
Cao L. ; Sahu S. ; Anilkumar P. ; Bunker C. E. ; Xu J. ; Fernando K. A. S. ; Wang P. ; Guliants E. A. ; Tackett K. N. II; Sun Y.-P. 
Carbon
Nanoparticles as Visible-Light Photocatalysts for Efficient CO2 Conversion and Beyond . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 4754 –4757 . 10.1021/ja200804h .21401091 
Sahu S. ; Liu Y. ; Wang P. ; Bunker C. E. ; Fernando K. A. S. ; Lewis W. K. ; Guliants E. A. ; Yang F. ; Wang J. ; Sun Y.-P. 
Visible-Light Photoconversion
of Carbon Dioxide into Organic Acids in an Aqueous Solution of Carbon
Dots . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 8631 –8636 . 10.1021/la5010209 .24972094 
Gao X. ; Du C. ; Zhuang Z. ; Chen W. 
Carbon Quantum Dot-based Nanoprobes for Metal Ion Detection . J. Mater. Chem. C 
2016 , 4 , 6927 –6945 . 10.1039/C6TC02055K .
Gonçalves H. M. R. ; Duarte A. J. ; Esteves da Silva J. C.
G. 
Optical Fiber Sensor
for Hg(II) Based on Carbon Dots . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2010 , 26 , 1302 –1306 . 10.1016/j.bios.2010.07.018 .20675118 
Li C.-L. ; Huang C.-C. ; Periasamy A. P. ; Roy P. ; Wu W.-C. ; Hsu C.-L. ; Chang H.-T. 
Synthesis of Photoluminescent
Carbon Dots for the Detection of Cobalt Ions . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 2285 –2291 . 10.1039/C4RA11704B .
Cao M. ; Li Y. ; Zhao Y. ; Shen C. ; Zhang H. ; Huang Y. 
A Novel Method for
the Preparation of Solvent-Free, Microwave-Assisted and Nitrogen-Doped
Carbon Dots as Fluorescent Probes for Chromium(VI) Detection and Bioimaging . RSC Adv. 
2019 , 9 , 8230 –8238 . 10.1039/C9RA00290A .
Yu H. ; Shi R. ; Zhao Y. ; Waterhouse G. I. N. ; Wu L.-Z. ; Tung C.-H. ; Zhang T. 
Smart Utilization of Carbon Dots in Semiconductor Photocatalysis . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 9454 –9477 . 10.1002/adma.201602581 .27623955 
Yuan T. ; Meng T. ; He P. ; Shi Y. ; Li Y. ; Li X. ; Fan L. ; Yang S. 
Carbon Quantum Dots: An Emerging
Material for Optoelectronic Applications . J.
Mater. Chem. C 
2019 , 7 , 6820 –6835 . 10.1039/C9TC01730E .
Zhang X. ; Zhang Y. ; Wang Y. ; Kalytchuk S. ; Kershaw S. V. ; Wang Y. ; Wang P. ; Zhang T. ; Zhao Y. ; Zhang H. ; Cui T. ; Wang Y. ; Zhao J. ; Yu W. W. ; Rogach A. L. 
Color-Switchable
Electroluminescence of Carbon Dot Light-Emitting Diodes . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 11234 –11241 . 10.1021/nn405017q .24246067 
Cui B. ; Yan L. ; Gu H. ; Yang Y. ; Liu X. ; Ma C.-Q. ; Chen Y. ; Jia H. 
Fluorescent Carbon Quantum Dots Synthesized
by Chemical Vapor Deposition: An Alternative Candidate for Electron
Acceptor in Polymer Solar Cells . Opt. Mater. 
2018 , 75 , 166 –173 . 10.1016/j.optmat.2017.10.010 .
Meziani M. J. ; Dong X. ; Zhu L. ; Jones L. P. ; LeCroy G. E. ; Yang F. ; Wang S. ; Wang P. ; Zhao Y. ; Yang L. ; Tripp R. A. ; Sun Y.-P. 
Visible-Light-Activated Bactericidal Functions of Carbon
“Quantum” Dots . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 10761 –10766 . 10.1021/acsami.6b01765 .27064729

