
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146030010.1021/acsomega.9b01269ArticleColloidal Behavior of Cellulose Nanocrystals Grafted
with Poly(2-alkyl-2-oxazoline)s Gauche Cony Felisberti Maria Isabel *Institute of Chemistry, University of Campinas, P.O. Box 6154, 13084-971 Campinas, SP, Brazil* E-mail: misabel@unicamp.br.09 07 2019 31 07 2019 4 7 11893 11905 02 05 2019 26 06 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Polymer
grafting onto cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) has been used
as a tool to improve CNC dispersion in nonpolar solvents or polymeric
matrixes. The grafting of flexible polymer chains onto rigid particle
surfaces leads to significant modifications in colloidal behavior.
Here, poly(2-alkyl-2-oxazoline)s of well-defined molar mass and narrow
molar mass distribution were synthesized by cationic ring-opening
polymerization and grafted onto CNC surfaces, where the coupling reaction
was favored when partially hydrolyzed polymers were used (reaching
64% reaction yield). The particles grafted with polymer chains could
be redispersed in water after freeze-drying, producing stable dispersions,
and they were not cell-toxic up to 10 wt % aqueous dispersion. Colloidal
stability, nanostructure organization, and rheological behavior of
grafted CNC and CNC-grafted CNC mixtures were evaluated. The rheological
behavior of grafted nanoparticles, meanwhile, showed new features
when compared to original CNC dispersions. Aqueous CNC dispersions
showed a liquid crystal nematic organization and rheological behavior
characteristic of true gel (at 5 wt %) prior to drying. On the other
hand, nanoparticle dispersions behaved as weak gels upon the addition
of 10 wt % of CNC-g-(PEtOx95-s-Ei5) under the same conditions. Dispersions of CNC-g-P(PEtOx-s-Ei) particles obtained by redispersion
of freeze-dried particles behaved as a fluid, without the presence
of the nematic organization. Through oscillatory rheology and time-domain
NMR results, it can be concluded that polymer–water interactions
are dominant over CNC–water interactions, being responsible
for CNC nematic phase disruption. By introducing polymer chains, the
introduction of isotropic character modifies water organization, changing
the flow behavior of CNC-grafted with poly(oxazoline)s.

document-id-old-9ao9b01269document-id-new-14ao-2019-01269cccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Surface modification
of cellulose nanoparticles by polymer grafting
is responsible for the increase in the use of cellulose nanocrystals
(CNCs) and cellulose nanofibers for numerous applications.1−3 Due to the high number of hydroxyl groups on the surface of cellulose
particles, several routes can be adopted to improve reaction efficiency
and dispersion stability, which avoids aggregation of decorated nanoparticles.4

Classically, the grafting of hydrophobic
polymers onto CNC surfaces
has been used to enable their dispersion in nonpolar solvents, as
well in polymeric matrixes.3 On the other
hand, hydrophilic polymers (especially responsive polymers) are grafted
onto CNC surfaces for biomedical application purposes, imparting smart
properties to the nanocrystals.5,6

Independent of
the nature of the polymer or the CNC modification
pathway, charged groups and tethered polymers contribute to the stability
of aqueous CNC dispersions, reducing aggregation tendency.7−9 Surface modification can be quite advantageous; however, it does
not change the general consensus of avoiding CNC drying whenever possible.
Such a precaution is related to the aggregation of cellulose nanoparticles
when water is removed from their interface.7,8

Both particle stabilization and the drying process affect the rheological
behavior of these CNC-based materials, which is of extreme importance
from the point of view of characterization and processing. Moreover,
modifying CNCs by introducing polymer chains may impart relevant changes
in particle organization in dispersion, and knowledge of the rheological
behavior could be essential in revealing the dispersion of micro-
and nanostructures.

Poly(2-oxazoline) (POx)-functionalized CNCs
have shown promise
in the design of CNC-based drug delivery systems, as shown by Hou
and collaborators,10 who used POx as a
polymer brush on CNC surfaces for photothermal cancer therapy. In
this work, well-defined chains of poly(2-alkyl-oxazoline)s were grafted
onto CNCs with the main objective of forming responsive hydrogels
for biomedical applications. However, during redispersion of the modified
CNCs in water, some questions were raised about their colloidal stability,
such as their rheological behavior resulting from the structural organization
of the particles and the micro- and nanostructural changes that the
drying process brought to the system. Here, a grafted CNC is apparently
well redispersed in water; however, small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS)
and rheological measurements show that these dispersions did not present
the properties they had before drying. The interaction between the
poly(2-alkyl-oxazoline)s and water could be, in this case, the main
explanation for this behavior, as discussed throughout the paper.

Results
and Discussion
2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO)-Oxidized
CNCs
The CNC surface modification by TEMPO-mediated oxidation
was completely
characterized with reference to physicochemical properties to guarantee
the inner characteristics of the pristine crystals. This procedure
ensured a degree of oxidation (DO) of 0.05 (mol/mol of anhydroglucose
unit), achieved by calculating the ratio of the intensity of the carbonyl
absorption band (1736 cm–1) to that of the strongest
band at 1050 cm–1, intrinsic to the cellulose backbone
(Figure S1A). Similar results were obtained
by conductometry (Figure S1B and Table S1). In addition, due to the presence of carboxylic groups on the surface
of the oxidized CNCs, a ζ potential of −71.6 mV was observed
in aqueous dispersions, higher than the values displayed by CNCs before
the TEMPO-mediated oxidation, of about −63.9 mV (Table S1).

The surface modification did
not have any influence on the temperature of the maximum degradation
rate. However, a slight decrease in the initial thermal degradation
could be observed for the oxidized CNCs (Table S1), as already reported by other research groups.11,12 Pristine CNCs are highly crystalline and have been used as reinforcing
agents for numerous polymer matrixes.4 The
crystallinity index (CI) has been used to describe the relative amount
of crystalline material in cellulose13 and
herein, the CNCs showed a CI value of 83%, consistent with the values
commonly presented in the literature.14 After TEMPO-mediated oxidation, a slight decrease in crystallinity
to 76% was observed (Table S1). However,
this did not compromise the general integrity of the crystalline domains,
maintaining the CNCs’ high crystallinity to act as chemically
modified reinforcing agents.

The physical integrity of the oxidized
CNCs was confirmed by atomic
force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
(Figure S4), as the aspect ratio (L/d) is an important characteristic, having
an influence on several parameters such as the percolation threshold
and also intrinsic mechanical properties.15 The micrographs shown in Figure S4 confirm
that TEMPO-mediated oxidation preserves the integrity and shape of
the CNCs by introducing carboxylate groups at their surface. Further
information on the characterization results is given in the Supporting
Information (Figures S1–S4 and Table S1).

Synthesis of Poly(2-alkyl-2-oxazoline)s
The poly(2-alkyl-2-oxazoline)s
were synthesized by cationic ring-opening polymerization16,17 (Figure 1) and showed
a narrow molar mass distribution (Đ < 1.2),
determined by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) in chloroform (Table S2). More details of polymer synthesis
and characterization are presented in the Supporting Information. GPC and UV analysis (Figure S5) results indicated the occurrence of transfer reactions
as described by Warakomski et al.,18 which
are responsible for polymer branching. Poly(2-alkyl-2-oxazoline) branching
is not desirable because it imparts some changes to the polymer thermal
properties and to the behavior of aqueous solutions (lower critical
solution temperature, LCST). According to Flory–Fox,19 the glass transition temperature (Tg) of a polymer increases with its molar mass. The poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline)
(PEtOx) synthesized in this work, however, do not follow the Flory–Fox
model. As branching takes place, the free polymer volume increases,
contributing to decreased Tg (Figure S6). LCST, determined as the inflection
point of the curve obtained by high sensitivity differential scanning
calorimetry (HSDSC) (Figure S7), decreases
by 5 °C for branched polymers with a higher molar mass (Table S2), probably due to the increase in the
hydrophobic interactions between the polymer chains.

Figure 1 Synthesis of CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei).
(1) Oxidized CNC; (2) P(EtOx), (3) P(EtOx-s-Ei), and (4) CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei).

As uncontrolled branching imparts some changes in physicochemical
properties, linear homopolymers (PEtOx106, Table S2) were the choice for partial side chain
hydrolysis with diluted HCl solution20 to
obtain poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline-stat-ethylene imine)
(P(EtOx-s-Ei)) copolymers. The degree of hydrolysis
was determined by 1H NMR (Figures S8 and S9 for PEtOx106 and P(EtOx-s-Ei)—Supporting Information). Poly(ethyleneimine)
synthesis is facilitated via POx hydrolysis; however, this can result
in cytotoxicity and nonspecific interactions between polymer and cellular
or noncellular components when in vivo application is desired.21 To verify the possible toxicity of these materials,
P(EtOx-s-Ei) was evaluated regarding its in vitro
cytotoxicity against fibroblast cell line NIH-3T3 using the [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H]tetrazolium salt (MTS) assay. Results suggest that the
polymers obtained after partial hydrolysis were safe up to 10 wt %
in solution, with no significant differences in the number of viable
cells compared to the control group (Figure S10). Furthermore, 5 or 10% hydrolysis did not show any influence on
toxicity, enabling the application of these materials in biomedical
studies.

POx Grafting onto CNC Surfaces
Well-defined POx chains
were grafted onto the CNC surface by the peptidic coupling reaction
(Figure 1). The Fourier
transform infrared (FTIR) spectrum of freeze-dried CNC-g-POx showed two new features (Figure S11A): first, the displacement of the absorbed water band to 1627 cm–1 due to the overlap with a new band of the amide II
groups;22,23 and second, a relative decrease in the C=O
band (1736 cm–1) of the oxidized CNCs, which further
supports the coupling reaction between the primary amines of POx and
the carboxylic acids on the CNC surface. Covalent linkages between
CNC and POx were further confirmed by the ninhydrin qualitative test.24 The ninhydrin test is widely used for amino
acid determination analysis through the oxidation of primary amines.
Nonattached POx in solution with a primary amine as a terminal functional
group provides a purple-colored solution, due to the Ruhemann’s
purple complex formed from the condensation reaction between amine
and ninhydrin.

Functionalized CNC dispersions did not show color
changes after ninhydrin addition, unlike POx solution, which presented
the characteristic purple color indicative of a positive reaction
to primary amine (Figure S11).

To
further confirm the coupling reaction, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS) analysis was performed, as this technique is considered one
of the most sensitive tools to investigate surface modification of
CNCs.25 Since XPS is a highly sensitive
technique for atomic quantification in the solid state, it is suitable
for obtaining quantitative information about the surface constituents
and their chemical environment when the number of grafted polymer
chains is too low.26 The survey spectra
of oxidized CNC and CNC functionalized with PEtOx (Figure 2A,B) showed peaks at 288 and
533 eV, corresponding to carbon (C 1s) and oxygen (O 1s), respectively.
After the coupling reaction, surface modification was confirmed by
the appearance of a peak at 401 eV, which corresponds to nitrogen
(N 1s), proving that there is some POx on the CNC surface. The N 1s
XPS peak could be deconvoluted into three N peaks (Figure 2C): N1 at 401.8 eV, corresponding
to the tertiary amide of the polymer lateral chain; N2 at 400 eV,
corresponding to the secondary amide resulting from the coupling reaction
between the carboxylic acid of the oxidized CNC and the primary amine
at the end of the POx chain; and finally, N3 at 402.5 eV, attributed
to the secondary amine from ethylenediamine used as the termination
agent. The C 1s XPS peak can also be deconvoluted, as presented in Figure S12, showing an increase in the atomic
concentration of C1 in CNC-g-POx compared to unmodified
CNC, corresponding to the C–C/C–H linkages of the polymer
grafted onto the CNC surface.

Figure 2 (A) Survey XPS binding energy of TEMPO-oxidized
CNCs; (B) CNC-g-PEtOx; (C) N 1s XPS binding energy
of CNC-g-PEtOx; and (D) survey XPS of CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5).

XPS analyses were performed on
CNCs functionalized by P(EtOx-s-Ei) and, in this
case, a higher nitrogen contribution
was observed (Figure 2D). Indeed, the yield of the grafting reactions, calculated gravimetrically,
was significantly higher when partially hydrolyzed polymer chains
were used. Coupling reaction efficiency was 12% for PEtOx grafting
and between 58 and 64% when P(EtOx-s-Ei) was grafted
onto CNCs (the ninhydrin test proved no free polymer). The higher
hydrophilicity of partially hydrolyzed polymers and also the higher
availability of functional amine groups could be the keys to better
reaction yields.

The decrease in ζ-potential values from
−71.6 to −26.7
mV is also indicative of the coupling reaction, and results from the
presence of PEtOx chains on the CNC surface; for example, where negatively
charged carboxylic groups are replaced by neutral polymer chains.

The grafted CNCs were analyzed by TEM and atomic force microscopy-infrared
(AFM-IR). Although the pristine CNCs and TEMPO-oxidized CNCs presented
defined edges (Figure 3A), as shown by the TEM images, the edges of grafted CNCs were less
defined (Figure 3B)
and presented a tendency to aggregate under drying (polymer-coated
particles were well-dispersed in solution, as illustrated by the cryo-TEM
image in Figure 3C).
AFM-IR micrographs suggest that this low definition may be due to
the coating of the CNCs by the grafted polymers. Figure 3D illustrates CNC coated by
POx chains as flexible layers. With the IR laser adjusted to 1650
cm–1, it was possible to map amide groups from POx
lateral chains (Figure 3D); on the other hand, pristine CNCs did not show amide bands in
the analyzed range (Figure S13, Supporting
Information). Also, the presence of amide groups was only detected
over or around the crystals; no signals were detected in the background.
IR spectra collected in other parts of the image did not show bands
characteristic of amide, as verified by the control image of PEtOx
(Figure S14).

Figure 3 TEM images of (A) oxidized
CNC and (B) CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5); (C) the cryogenic electron
microscopy image of CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5); (D) AFM with infrared spectroscopy of
CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5); and (E) zoomed-in view of the analyzed regions.

Thermal Properties of CNC-g-POx
Thermal
properties such as degradation and glass transition temperatures can
be affected by polymer grafting onto the CNC surface. CNCs used in
this work showed thermal degradation with a maximum rate of mass loss
at 302 °C (Table S2), while PEtOx
degraded with a maximum rate at 411–426 °C (Table S1). Grafted POx modified the thermal profile
of these materials. Thermal degradation of polymers and crystals occurs
through different mechanisms and at different temperature ranges (Figure S15). One observed a reduction in the
temperature of the maximum degradation rate of POx from 421 to 385
°C when these polymers were grafted onto the crystal surface,
probably induced by pyrolysis of the CNCs. At temperatures higher
than 200 °C, cellulose is responsible for the formation of flammable
volatile compounds, changing the thermal diffusion mechanism in the
polymer matrix and accelerating the degradation of the grafted polymer.27

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
analyses, in turn, did not show any thermal event related to the presence
of CNC in the temperature range of −50 to 150 °C. The
predominance of strong hydrogen bonds in the cellulose structure does
not allow any thermal transitions before thermal degradation. According
to previous theoretical extrapolation studies, CNC glass transition
and melting temperatures would be 250 and 450 °C, respectively.28 Here, the DSC curves of CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei) showed a thermal transition related
to the glass transition temperature of around 70 °C (Figure S16), typical of hydrophilic poly(oxazoline)s.29 The difference between the glass transition
temperature of grafted (∼70 °C) and free polymer (∼45
°C) is considered a measure of polymer chain mobility. These
DSC curves suggest a loss of POx mobility after grafting onto rigid
rod-like CNC surfaces, resulting in an increase of 25 °C in the Tg value (Figure S16), because the higher the glass transition temperature, the lower
the chain mobility. This is in agreement with other polymer-grafted
CNC studies, which showed an increase in the glass transition temperature
due to the restricted mobility of the polymer chains grafted onto
the CNC surface.30−32

In Vitro Cytotoxicity Assay
Given
the potential of
responsive polymer-grafted CNCs in biomedical applications, the cytotoxicity
of pristine and CNC-g-POx was assessed using the
MTS assay on fibroblast cell line NIH-3T3 (Figure S17). The functionalization of the CNC surface by different
molecules has been carried out by different groups lately; however,
little attention has been paid to toxicity.33 To guarantee the safe use of CNC-based materials in biomedical applications,
it is important to evaluate the toxicity of these nanomaterials. Apparently,
no toxicity of CNCs was demonstrated upon dermal or oral administration.33 However, some aspects might affect the toxicity
of CNCs, such as the particle size and morphology, the degree of crystallinity,
colloidal stability and, in particular, surface chemistry. In this
last case, cytotoxicity is strongly dependent on the nature of the
tethered chains and the chemistry used to access this functionalization.
Preliminary evaluations have demonstrated that PEGylated CNCs are
nontoxic for human ovarian cancer cell line (HEYA8).34 Also, poly(2-aminoethylmethacrylate)-g-CNC toxicity was evaluated against mouse monocyte cells (J774A1)
and human breast adenocarcinoma cells (MCF-7).35 Even if no cytotoxicity to J774A1 cells was observed, an
unexpected increase in 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide reduction was observed, requiring further investigations and
demonstrating that such evaluations must be performed carefully case
by case.

In this work, the cell viability of fibroblasts at
different CNC-g-POx concentrations (0.1, 1, and 10
wt %) was evaluated after 24 h of incubation. There were no statistical
differences (p < 0.05) of cell viability between
the control (without CNC addition) and CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) (Figure S17). The presence of pristine and oxidized CNCs was
not evaluated in this work, given their well-known safety.33 The results indicated that even at the highest
concentration (10 wt %) CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) appeared to maintain cell viability
close to 100%. However, CNC-g-P(EtOx90-s-Ei10) at 10 wt % decreased cell proliferation
significantly after 24 h of incubation.

These preliminary results
showed that all modified CNCs were safe
in concentrations up to 1 wt % under the conditions tested in this
assay. In the case of CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5), higher concentrations could also be tolerated
by the cells (up to 10 wt %). It should be highlighted here that,
even though CNCs are considered nontoxic and the polymer used for
grafting had been tested and proved to be safe, the final product
imparted some cytotoxicity. The possible source of toxicity is unclear
at the moment. This open question will be investigated further in
more detail.

CNC-g-POx Particle Dispersion
CNC
particles are usually obtained by sulfuric acid hydrolysis.36 The presence of charged sulfate ester groups
on crystallite surfaces results in negatively charged particles and
stable aqueous dispersions at low ionic strengths, with unique colloidal
properties.37 With drying, CNC particle–particle
interactions are very strong and are dominated by hydrogen bonding
and attractive van der Waals forces,38 rendering
complete redispersion a challenge. Here, pristine CNC dispersion was
not reached after drying, even after sonication, whereas CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei) was completely dispersed
in water without extra energy requirement. Dispersions of mixtures
of CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei) with different
degrees of hydrolysis (5 and 10%) and different CNC mass ratios (0,
0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 10) were freeze-dried and redispersed in water at
0.01 wt % concentration. These dispersions and pristine CNC dispersions
were analyzed by dynamic light scattering (DLS). Figure 4 illustrates the mean diameter
and polydispersity index (PDI) of never-dried pristine CNCs and CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei) particles redispersed in
water as a function of the CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei) mass ratio.

Figure 4 (A) Mean diameter and (B) the polydispersity
index of never-dried
pristine CNCs and CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei) aqueous dispersions after freeze-drying and redispersion in
water (0.01 wt %) as a function of the CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei) mass ratio, determined by DLS.

Regardless of the degree of side chain hydrolysis of the
grafted
polymer, particle size (Figure 4A) and PDI (Figure 4B) of the redispersions resulted in similar behavior. Besides,
CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei)s favored pristine
CNC dispersion. The gradual addition of pristine CNCs to CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei) (CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei), 1:1–10:1, w/w) before freeze-drying
facilitated redispersion in water due to the steric effect of the
polymer grafted onto the CNC surface. CNC-g-P(EtOx-s-Ei)s particles showed a hydrodynamic radius (Rh) around 350–400 nm after freeze-drying and redispersion
in water (Figure 4A).
With the addition of pristine CNCs, Rh decreased as its concentration ratio increased, reaching a constant
value of around 150 nm, with a monomodal size distribution (Figure S18) and low PDI, close to the values
reached in never-dried pristine CNCs (red closed circles in Figure 4). The monomodal
particle size distribution (Figure S18)
suggests that the reduction in PDI is not due to the presence of smaller
particles (CNC), for which two particle populations should be observed.
Therefore, we believe that the presence of pristine CNC particles
behaves as a steric stabilizing agent, able to prevent the formation
of dynamic aggregates due to polymer chain entanglement. Dispersed
crystals in water, with no aggregates, were observed by cryogenic
microscopy, represented by the image of a CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) dispersion (0.1 wt %)
in Figure 3C.

Stable colloidal dispersions of modified CNCs were also obtained
by grafting hydrophilic polymers such as Jeffamine (a statistical
copolymer of ethylene oxide and propylene oxide)39 and poly(ethylene oxide)40 onto
a CNC surface. However, the ability of redispersion of these particles
after drying in aqueous medium solutions and the eventual colloidal
stability were not reported.

This ability to redisperse CNC
particles after drying is relevant
since many properties attributed to CNCs are based on their ability
to assemble spontaneously into ordered structures. Called a nematic
phase, such organization is reached above a critical concentration.
For CNC particles, a phase transition occurs from an isotropic phase
composed of particles distributed randomly to an anisotropic phase,
in which the needle-like particles point in the same direction, characterizing
a chiral nematic liquid crystalline phase. The critical volume fraction
of particles for this transition depends on superficial charges and
the aspect ratio of the nanoparticles.41,42 Here, the
nematic organization was observed through SAXS measurements for CNC
dispersions at 5 wt % concentration as a broad peak centered at q = 0.1 nm43 corresponding to
a period of ∼63 nm. This primary scattering peak is related
to the center-to-center separation distance between neighboring particles
(d = 2π/qpeak; q is the scattering vector).44,45 Then, the
addition of CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) (in a ratio of 10:1 CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5), w/w) into a CNC dispersion
imparts some tenuous structural changes, however, maintaining the
nematic phase (Figure 5). The shift of the scattering Bragg peak toward higher q in the presence of polymer-grafted CNCs indicates a slight decrease
in CNC interparticle distance to ∼57 nm. A secondary, less
intense scattering peak (q ∼ 0.2 nm) was also
observed, which can be related to the formation of anisotropic two-dimensional
CNC aggregates.46 CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) was the grafted
CNC of choice for further colloidal studies since no cytotoxicity
was observed up to 10 wt % and its colloidal behavior in aqueous dispersion
(size distribution, PDI) showed no significant difference compared
to CNC-g-P(EtOx90-s-Ei10).

Figure 5 Left: SAXS scattering measurements for (A) pristine CNC dispersion;
(B) CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) (10:1) dispersion; (C) CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) (10:1) redispersion
after freeze-drying; and (D) CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) dispersion. Right: gel tests
for (1) CNCs; (2) CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) (10:1); (3) CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) (10:1) redispersion
after freeze-drying and (4) CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5). Total CNC concentration 5 wt
% for all samples.

Although CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5)
showed a satisfactory dispersion in water after
freeze-drying, a CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) dispersion at 5 wt % did not show structural
nematic organization, being isotropic. Similarly, well-dispersed pristine
CNCs with CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) at a 10:1 ratio was isotropic at 5 wt % when the
physical mixture was redispersed in water after drying. A visual consequence
was apparent when the gel test was performed. Samples with the characteristic
nematic organization did not flow with time, while isotropic dispersions
behaved as a fluid of low viscosity (Figure 5). Investigation of the gravity-driven flowability
of CNC dispersions was made at different concentrations by Liu et
al.,45 whose work suggests that the gelation
threshold of CNCs is around 6 wt %, corresponding to the concentration
associated with structural organization dominated by the nematic phase.
There is an undoubted correlation between gelation and the presence
of a chiral nematic liquid crystalline phase. This should be an important
point of study and characterization for future applications when redispersion
of modified CNCs is required since grafted CNC organization and gelation
properties are influenced by the presence of tethered polymers.

Rheological Properties
Rheological properties of aqueous
dispersions of pristine CNCs and CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) were investigated in
the semidilute regime (5 wt %), in which particles are interacting,
resulting in self-assembly.47,48

Figure 6A presents the evolution of
complex viscosity as a function of angular frequency for the pristine
CNC dispersion, in which pristine CNCs are oriented in a nematic phase,
as shown by SAXS (Figure 5). A decrease in the complex viscosity was observed with increasing
angular frequency, characteristic of shear-thinning behavior and typical
of CNC dispersions.49,50 The applied stress led progressively
to the flowing of anisotropic domains as a result of particle orientation
in the flow caused by the shear. As a consequence, the liquid crystal
domains were broken up with a further increase in the frequency, causing
a decrease in the drag force, reducing viscosity.

Figure 6 (A) Complex viscosity
(η*), storage (G′),
and loss (G″) moduli as a function of oscillatory
frequency for pristine CNC dispersions; and (B) CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) (10:1) dispersions,
both at total CNC concentration of 5 wt %.

Oscillatory experiments were performed to understand the
rheological
behavior of the dispersions of pristine CNCs (rigid rod-like particles)
and grafted CNCs (rigid fillers with soft polymer chains in a brush-like
structure), prepared in different conditions.51,52 For pristine CNC dispersions, the magnitudes of G′ and G″ were almost independent of
frequency (Figure 6A). According to dynamic experiments, storage modulus (G′) values were greater than loss modulus (G″) values over the whole range of frequencies evaluated, corresponding
to elastic behavior.53 In addition, the
ratio of G″ to G′
(tan δ) was less than 0.1 in the range of angular frequency
studied (Figure S19A), meaning that the
sample is a true gel.12,54

The addition of CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5)
to the pristine CNC dispersion (CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5)
= 10:1, total CNC concentration in water of 5 wt %), on the other
hand, highlighted particular structural changes that were slightly
apparent in SAXS measurements (Figure 6B). First, G′ at rest (0.01
Hz) showed a remarkable decrease of almost 4 order of magnitude compared
to G′ of pristine CNC dispersions. This reduction
was accompanied by a decrease in viscosity of 3 orders of magnitude.
However, as the frequency increased to 0.03 Hz, a shear-thickening
behavior was observed. This behavior is probably related to the coil-to-stretch
transition experienced by the tethered polymer chains under oscillatory
shearing, wherein the molecule unravels to a nearly fully extended
state.55

Later, at the point where
angular frequency reaches the maximum
value of viscosity (0.03 Hz), a shear-thinning behavior was seen.
This happens because the effect of polymer rigidity on the viscosity
is no longer dominant over the shearing, so the alignment of the crystals
in the flow direction is established, followed by breaking of the
nematic organization.

tan δ values also showed
important changes over the
angular frequency range: the transition from liquid-like to solid-like
behavior was observed at the crossover frequency, at which tan δ
≅ 1 (Figure S19). Coincidentally,
this sol–gel transition occurred at the exact point at which
the shear-thinning behavior began. It is worth mentioning that at
low frequency the tan δ value was 5.75, characteristic
of a viscous liquid. When a higher frequency was applied tan δ
reached a value of 0.17, and the CNC dispersion in the presence of
10 wt % CNC-g-POx could be considered as a weak gel.54 Such low values reinforce the hypothesis that
the nanoparticle self-assembly was not present in these samples.

A CNC dispersion obtained from a physical mixture of pristine CNCs
and CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) followed by freeze-drying and redispersion in water (5 wt
%) showed a significant reduction in complex viscosity, G′ and G″ moduli, of 5, 8, and 4 orders
of magnitude, respectively. The CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) dispersion presented
similar behavior (Figure S20).

Finally,
one observed that the presence of pristine CNCs in the
CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) dispersion had a slight effect of increasing viscosity.
Both G′ and G″ values
increased with angular frequency, and G″ remained
higher or close to G′ over the whole angular
frequency range investigated. Even at higher frequencies, these materials
can be considered as liquid fluids, with no sol–gel transition,
whose complex viscosity increases as the angular frequency increases.
In this case, when the CNC nematic organization is not present, the
polymer coil-to-stretch transition is predominant in the dispersion
and is observed up to higher frequencies (blue and green circles in Figure S20).

Gel Structure
Despite CNC concentration remaining the
same in all studied dispersions, different flow behaviors were observed,
depending on the presence of polymer chains and the procedure of dispersion
preparation (never-dried CNCs or dispersion after freeze-drying).
It is known that CNC dispersions change progressively from an isotropic
structure to a biphasic isotropic and liquid crystalline structure,
to a liquid crystalline structure, and then to a gel-like structure
with increasing concentration.56 A true
gel-like flow behavior was observed for the pristine CNC dispersions
prepared at 5 wt %; however, similar behavior is not verified for
other dispersions.

Through time-domain NMR (TDNMR) analysis
one can better understand the difference between these flow behaviors
and predict the material network. One of the most common TDNMR applications
is the characterization of sol–gel transitions and hydrogels
where three-dimensional organization affects the magnetic relaxation
of the water hydrogens.57 Water mobility
is revealed depending on the spin–spin relaxation time (T2), in which the component with the shortest
relaxation time, in the range of T2 <
10 ms, is due to the bound water. The second component, with signals
in the range of 10–100 ms refers to immobilized water, while
the signals with the longest relaxation time (100–1000 ms)
are considered to be due to free water.58

Herein, the nematic liquid crystal organization remained stable
with the addition of CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) as observed by SAXS; however, an increase
in the relaxation time of the immobilized water (91 ms) compared with
the pristine CNCs dispersion (79 ms) was observed by TDNMR, which
indicates an increase in water mobility (Figure 7). The change of water mobility caused by
the presence of POx chains influences flow properties, leading to
a decay in viscosity and the rheological behavior of a weak gel at
high angular frequencies.

Figure 7 TDNMR spectra for (A) pristine CNC dispersion;
(B) CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5)
(10:1); (C) CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) (10:1) redispersion after freeze-drying;
and (D) CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) dispersion, all at a CNC total concentration of
5 wt %.

When CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) (10:1) dispersion
was subjected to freeze-drying,
followed by redispersion in water at the same concentration, a substantial
rheological alteration occurred (i.e., it flowed). In addition to
the lack of nematic phase, one observed an even greater increase in
the relaxation time related to the immobilized water (107 ms), which
indicates higher water mobility compared to the never-dried dispersion
(Figure 7). The dispersion
obtained from pure CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5), in turn, showed a similar flow behavior,
with even lower viscosity. The spectrum resolved by TDNMR analysis
shows that the water present in this system was predominantly free
water (705 ms, Figure 7). Moreover, a discrete signal around 10 ms indicates the presence
of bound water, characteristic of water tightly attached to macromolecules.58 This last result suggests that water–polymer
interactions became dominant and more important than those water–CNC
and CNC–CNC interactions after freeze-drying and redispersion
in CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) dispersion. Besides, in the case of pure CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) dispersion,
a higher concentration of polymer was present since no pristine CNC
was added, contributing to polymer–water interactions which
favored the appearance of the bound water in the system.

To
illustrate better the influence of particle interactions in
the rheological behavior of CNC dispersions in the presence of polymer
chains, Figure 8 shows
a possible CNC–polymer network organization based on rheological
behavior and water displacement, as discussed by Li et al.56

Figure 8 Schematic illustration of the proposed CNC organization
in water.
(A) Pristine CNC dispersion—nematic phase; (B) CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5)
(10:1)—nematic phase; (C) CNC/CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) (10:1) redispersion after
freeze-drying—isotropic medium; and (D) CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) dispersion—isotropic
medium.

Negatively charged CNCs with a
large number of hydroxyl groups
on the surface are able to interact with each other as well as with
adjacent water molecules. Due to the rigidity of CNC particles, the
network is composed of interactions between different crystals and
crystal-immobilized water molecules (Figure 8A). The presence of flexible polymer chains,
on the other hand, disrupts water organization. Physical entanglement
of polymer chains occurs, together with interactions between polymer
chains and water molecules. These interactions promote an increase
in the mobility of immobilized water without changing the anisotropy
of the dispersion (Figure 8B).

When freeze-dried material is redispersed in water,
particle organization
is controlled by polymer hydration and not by CNC electrostatic repulsion,
which results in an isotropic dispersion with increased water mobility
and interparticle distance increases, forming a less packed network
(Figure 8C). This hypothesis
is reinforced by the dispersion prepared only with CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) (Figure 8D), which contains
the same CNC concentration, however, contains a higher concentration
of P(EtOx95-s-Ei5). The presence
of hydrophilic polymers surrounding CNC particles prevents water immobilization
by the CNC network. In this case, water with a relatively higher degree
of freedom is dominant in the system, accompanied by the presence
of water bound to hydrophilic polymer chains.

Conclusions
Well-defined POxs were synthesized and successfully grafted onto
CNC surfaces by a grafting-to approach. Hydrolysis of PEtOx favored
grafting onto CNCs, increasing the reaction yield to 64%. CNC-g-POx, in turn, showed some thermal property changes compared
to starting materials. The polymer grafting onto CNCs caused a decrease
in the temperature of the maximum degradation rate of POx and an increase
in Tg of around 25 °C due to the
reduction in the polymer chain flexibility.

CNC-g-POx dispersions are safe at low concentrations
(0.1–1 wt %) according to the MTS assay performed on fibroblast
cells. On the other hand, a significant reduction in cell proliferation
was observed at higher concentrations of CNC-g-P(EtOx90-s-Ei10) (10 wt %), whereas no
toxicity was observed for CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5) under the same conditions. Dispersions
of modified CNCs by polymer grafting are stable, with no aggregation
and with particles presenting monomodal distribution. However, different
flow behavior properties were observed. A gel test showed that a pristine
CNC dispersion and a CNC/CNC-g-P(Etox95-s-Ei5) (10:1) dispersion did not flow
under the force of gravity, whereas dispersions prepared by redispersion
of freeze-dried samples in water flowed under stress or gravitational
field. SAXS measurements demonstrated that a nematic organization
could be responsible for the gel-like behavior observed for pristine
CNC and CNC/CNC-g-P(Etox95-s-Ei5) (10:1) dispersions. Such an organization seems to
be irreversibly broken during freezing.

Oscillatory rheology
assays revealed the influence of polymer chains
on flow behavior. Although a pristine CNC dispersion presented shear-thinning
behavior and a true gels character, a weak gel behavior was observed
after addition of CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5). The presence of tethered polymer chains
imparts rheological changes since shear-thickening behavior characteristic
of polymers was observed with increasing angular frequency for this
sample. TDNMR measurements, in turn, suggest that the mobility of
water molecules in the presence of polymer chains is also responsible
for the observed rheological behavior for modified CNCs. This highlights
new features of CNC-based hydrogel structures that are usually not
considered for this type of material. Water displacement was related
to polymer–water and CNC–water interactions, revealing
particle organization before and after freeze-drying of CNC-g-POx dispersions.

Experimental Section
Materials
Cellulose
nanocrystal dispersion (University
of Maine, 13 wt %) was used after extensive dialysis against deionized
water. Acetonitrile (Vetec, 99.9%), methyl p-toluenesulfonate
(MeOTs) (Sigma-Aldrich, 97%), and 2-ethyl-2-oxazoline (Sigma-Aldrich,
99%) were stored over calcium hydride and purified by vacuum distillation
prior to use. NaBr (Sigma-Aldrich, 99%), TEMPO (Sigma-Aldrich, 98%),
NaOCl solution (Vetec, 6%), NaCl (LAFAN, 99%), NaOH (Synth, 97%),
HCl (Cromaline Química Fina, 37%), calcium hydride (Acros Organics,
93%), ethylenediamine (Sigma-Aldrich, 99%), diethyl ether (Synth,
98%), N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC) (Sigma-Aldrich, ≥97%), N-hydroxysuccimide (NHS) (Sigma-Aldrich, 98%), Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Sigma-Aldrich), penicillin/streptomycin
solution (Sigma-Aldrich), fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich), and
[3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H]tetrazolium salt (MTS) (Promega, Wisconsin) were used
as received. Mouse fibroblast cell line (NIH-3T3) was obtained from
the culture collection of the National Laboratory of Biosciences (Campinas,
Brazil). Water was purified using a Synergy UV Millipore system. Dialysis
was conducted using a Spectra/Por6 MWCO 8 kDa membrane.

Synthesis
Oxidized
Cellulose (1)
Cellulose nanocrystals
were subjected to TEMPO-mediated oxidation as previously reported.11,40,59 Cellulose nanocrystal dispersion
was diluted to 1 wt % from stock dispersion. NaBr (0.32 g, 3.08 mmol)
and TEMPO (27 mg, 0.172 mmol) were added to 100 mL of this dispersion
(6.16 mmol anhydroglucose units) and magnetic stirring was applied
for 1 h. A 6% NaOCl solution (1 equiv per anhydroglucose unit) was
then added dropwise to the system under constant stirring. The pH
was maintained at 10 during the NaOCl addition using a 0.5 M NaOH
solution. Ethanol (4 mL) was added to stop the TEMPO reaction when
pH became constant, followed by the adjustment of the pH to 7 with
0.5 M HCl. The resulting dispersions were washed three times with
deionized water followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 10 000
rpm and redispersion. After dialysis against deionized water, a stable
colloidal dispersion was obtained.

Poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline)
(2)
In a typical
polymerization procedure, acetonitrile (12 mL) was introduced into
a dried Schlenk flask under vacuum. To this, depending on the degree
of polymerization of the POx, a specific amount of the initiator (MeOTs)
was added with a nitrogen-purged syringe, followed by the addition
of 2-ethyl-2-oxazoline (10 mL). The flask was then heated at 120 °C
for 1 h, the reaction was quenched by adding ethylenediamine (3 equiv)
and stirred at room temperature overnight. The polymer was precipitated
in diethyl ether and dried under vacuum.

Poly(2-ethyl-stat-ethylene imine) (3)
Poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline)
was dissolved in water in a
concentration of 100 g L–1, 6 M HCl was added (1:1,
water/HCl, v/v) and heated to 100 °C under reflux. After 2 h,
the solution was left to equilibrate at room temperature and a solution
of 2.5 M NaOH was slowly added until pH 8. Dialysis was performed
against deionized water for 3 days and poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline-stat-ethylene imine) copolymers were obtained after freeze-drying
as a white powder.

CNC-g-POx (4)
Grafting
of amine-terminated poly(2-alkyl-2-oxazoline)s (POx) was achieved
through peptidic coupling reaction by dissolving the pure polymer
to a 1 wt % carboxylated CNC (1:1, primary amine/carboxylic group)
at room temperature. EDC (5 equiv) and NHS (5 equiv) were added to
the dispersion and the reaction was run for 24 h. Grafted CNC was
purified by precipitation in 0.5 M NaCl solution to remove reagents
and nongrafted POx, followed by centrifugation (10 000 rpm/10
min), dialysis against deionized water, and freeze-drying. Grafting
yield was determined by gravimetry after dialysis and negative result
of ninhydrin qualitative test.

Chemical Characterization
The carboxyl content of oxidized
CNCs was determined by FTIR for freeze-dried CNC dispersions. FTIR
analyses were performed in an ATR mode on Agilent Cary 630 equipment
between 400 and 4000 cm–1, with a 4 cm–1 resolution. For conductometric analysis, the CNCs (70 mg) were dispersed
in 30 mL of deionized water and 0.1 M HCl was added (1 mL). After
5 min of dispersion in an ultrasonic bath, the dispersions were titrated
with 0.01 M NaOH. Typical titration curves (Figure S1, Supporting Information) showed the presence of strong acid
due to the excess of HCl and weak acid corresponding to the carboxyl
content, allowing the determination of the degree of oxidation (DO),
which was calculated as proposed by da Silva Perez et al.60

1H and 13C NMR solid
state spectra were obtained on a Bruker 400 spectrometer operating
at 10 kHz. The grafting of POx onto CNC surfaces was evaluated by
XPS for freeze-dried CNC-g-POx samples using a Thermo
K-Alpha XPS spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Inc.) with monochromatic
Al Kα X-ray radiation = 1486 eV. Spectra were collected at three
locations and elemental compositions were determined from low-resolution
survey measurements with 200 eV pass energy and 1 eV steps, whereas
high-resolution spectra were collected with 50 eV pass energy and
0.01 eV steps. Molar mass distribution and polydispersity of the polymers
were determined by GPC, performed on a Viscotek GPCmax VE2001 instrument
equipped with three Shodex columns (K-802, K-803, and K-804) and Viscotek
VE3580 refractive index and Viscotek UV 2500 detectors at 40 °C
using chloroform as the eluent at a flow rate of 1 mL min–1 and polystyrene standards for calibration.

Thermal Characterization
The thermal behavior of polymers
and CNCs was characterized by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) using
TA Instruments 2150 equipment under argon flow at 100 mL min–1. Analyses were performed from room temperature to 900 °C with
a heating rate of 10 °C min–1, after isotherm
at 80 °C until constant mass. Polymer phase transition analyses
were performed in a DSC Q2000TA instrument (New Castle, DE), using
the following program: (i) heating from 20 to 150 °C; (ii) isotherm
for 2 min; (iii) cooling from 150 to −50 °C; (iv) isotherm
for 10 min; (v) heating from −50 to 150 °C. The scans
were carried out at a rate of 20 °C min–1 and
the analyses were conducted under an argon atmosphere (50 mL min–1 flow rate). DSC curves were normalized by the mass
of the sample used in each analysis. The lower critical solution temperature
of POx aqueous solutions was determined by HSDSC, performed on a MicroCal
VP-DSC (Northampton, MA) calorimeter. Aqueous polymeric solutions
(20 mg mL–1) were added to a 0.5 mL cell and scanned
from 10 to 100 °C at a heating rate of 1 °C min–1. Data obtained were treated with Origin 7.0 software.

X-ray Diffraction
(XRD)
XRD patterns of CNCs and modified
CNC powders were recorded in the range of 2θ = 5–50°
at a scan speed of 2° min–1 in steps of 0.02°
with a Shimadzu XRD 7000 X-ray diffractometer. Cu Kα radiation
(λ = 0.1542 nm) was used with a generator voltage of 40 kV and
a current of 30 mA. The CI was determined by the peak height method,
using the following equation  where I1 is the
intensity of the peak at the minimum (2θ = 18.2) and I2 is the intensity of the peak associated with
the crystalline region of CNCs (2θ = 22.7).61,62

Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
AFM characterization
was performed using a NanoSurf Flex AFM microscope, under a controlled
atmosphere of <30% relative humidity by flowing N2 gas
into the chamber. Atomic force microscopy with infrared spectroscopy
(AFM-IR), in turn, was performed with a NanoIR2s Anasys microscope
from an infrared radiation source (Quantum Cascade Lasers—Daylight)
set up to follow the carbonyl (C=O) group from amide (1650
cm–1). A drop (10 μL) of a diluted aqueous
CNC dispersion (0.01 wt %) was deposited on a mica substrate and dried
overnight. The crystals were imaged in the intermittent contact mode
using a silicon cantilever having a nominal tip radius of <10 nm.

Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)
TEM images were
recorded in low-dose conditions using a TALOS F200C (Thermo Fischer
Scientific) microscope working at 80 kV equipped with a Ceta 16 M
4 k × 4 k pixel CMOS camera (Thermo Fischer Scientific). TEM
samples were prepared by the deposition of CNC-g-POx
dispersions (0.01 wt %) on a carbon 400 mesh copper grid (Ted Pella
Inc.) and removing the excess after 1 min, followed by staining with
a 1% uranyl acetate solution for 30 s.

Cryo-TEM images were
recorded in low-dose conditions, with a defocus range of 1–3
μm, using a TALOS F200C (Thermo Fischer Scientific) microscope
working at 80 kV equipped with a Ceta 16 M 4 k × 4 k pixel CMOS
camera (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Samples were prepared by deposition
of CNC-g-POx dispersions (0.1 wt %) onto a Lacey
Carbon 300 mesh copper grid (Ted Pella Inc.) in a controlled environment
vitrification system (Vitrobot Mark IV, Thermo Fischer Scientific—formerly
FEI) at controlled temperature (22 °C) in 100% humidity, blot
force of 5 and blot time of 2.5 s.

For both sample preparations,
grids were previously subjected to
a glow discharge treatment using an easiGlow discharge system (Pelco)
with 15 mA negative current for 10 s in air atmosphere to make them
hydrophilic. Sample preparation and data acquisition were performed
at the Electron Microscopy Laboratory/Brazilian Nanotechnology National
Laboratory (LNNano).

Cell Viability
MTS assay was performed
to evaluate
the cytotoxicity of partially hydrolyzed polymers (POx) and CNC-g-POx toward fibroblast cell line NIH-3T3. Fibroblasts were
seeded into 96-well plates at a density of 104 cells per
well. The cells in monolayers were treated with Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum, penicillin (100 U mL–1), streptomycin (100
μg mL–1) in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37 °C) with increasing concentration of POx and
CNC-g-POx (1, 5, 10%) for 24 h. Wells with serum-free
medium were used as a negative control and with dimethyl sulfoxide
aqueous solution (50%) as a positive control. For the MTS assay, the
CellTiter 96 AQueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay kit was
used following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 20
μL of the MTS reagent was added into each well and the cells
were incubated at 37 °C for 2 h. The absorbance was measured
at 490 nm with a PerkinElmer microplate reader. All experiments were
repeated twice, in triplicate. CNC-g-POx and its
concentration effects were tested using analysis of variance and significant
differences between the averages were determined by the Tukey test
at 95% probability with OriginPro 8.0 software.

Dynamic Light
Scattering (DLS) and ζ Potential
DLS and ζ potential
measurements were carried out with Zetasizer
Nano Series (NANO-ZS) equipment from Malvern Instruments for diluted
dispersions (0.01 wt %) of CNC, CNC-g-POx, and physical
mixtures of pristine and modified CNCs prepared by freeze-drying and
redispersion in water at 0.01 wt % in different mass ratios (CNC/CNC-g-POx, 0:1, 1:1, 2:1, 4:1, 10:1, w/w).

Small Angle
X-ray Scattering (SAXS)
CNC structural
organization was studied by SAXS from dispersions at a concentration
of 5 wt %. The measurements were performed using the SAXS beamline
at the Brazilian Synchrotron Light Source (LNLS), in Campinas, Brazil.
The wavelength used was 1.548 Å and the sample-to-detector distance
was 3 m. The measurements were taken at 25 °C and the sample
holder was a mica window cell with a spacing of 1 mm. Fit2D software
was used to subtract background and solvent scattering and the results
are expressed in terms of X-ray scattered intensity, I(q), versus the scattering vector q.

Rheology
The rheological behavior of CNC dispersions
was characterized in oscillatory mode (small amplitude oscillatory
shear, SAOS) using a Thermo Scientific HAAKE Mars III rheometer equipped
with plate–plate geometry (35 mm diameter and 1 mm gap). The
oscillatory experiments were carried out within the linear viscoelastic
range as determined by strain sweep measurements. The storage modulus
(G′) and loss modulus (G″)
were obtained from dynamic stress sweep spectra at 25 °C, in
the angular frequency range of 0.01–100 Hz.

Time-Domain
NMR (TDNMR)
TDNMR measurements were performed
on a Bruker Minispec mq20 NMR analyzer (Bruker Company) at a proton
resonance frequency of 20 MHz. Samples were placed in an 8 mm diameter
glass tube and inserted in the NMR probe, and the temperature at 30.8
± 0.2 °C was stabilized for 15 min. The spin–spin
relaxation time, T2, was measured using
the Carr–Purcell–Meiboom–Gill (CPMG) sequence,
with 90 and 180 proton pulses of 8.4 and 16.7 ms, respectively, and
echo time of 160 ms. The data were obtained in triplicate, in which
30 000 echoes were acquired with 16 scans with the time between
subsequent scans of 15 s. The fitting of the CPMG decay curves was
performed using the multi-exponential fit.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01269.FTIR and 13C NMR spectra, XRD diffraction
patterns, AFM and TEM images for pristine and oxidized CNCs; conductometric
titration curves for oxidized CNC; main characteristics for pristine
and oxidized CNCs; illustrative image of polymer color changes as
a function of time reaction; GPC chromatograms for PEtOx; maximum
of absorbance values of PEtOx aqueous solution; mechanism of chain
transfer reaction; DSC second heating scan for PEtOxs; HSDSC first
heating for PEtOx106 aqueous solution; 1H NMR
spectra for PEtOx and P(EtOx-s-Ei); cell viability
determined by the MTS assay for P(EtOx-s-Ei)s; FTIR
spectra for TEMPO-oxidized CNCs and after PEtOx grafting onto the
CNC surface; ninhydrin test; C 1s XPS binding energy for TEMPO-oxidized
CNCs and CNC-g-P(EtOx); AFM-IR for pristine CNCs
and PEtOx; TGA and dTGA curves for P(EtOx95-s-Ei5)100, CNC-g- P(EtOx95-s-Ei5)100 and pristine
CNC; DSC second heating scan for POx and CNC-g-POx;
cell viability determined by MTS assay for CNC-g-
P(EtOx-s-Ei)s; size distribution and tan δ
values for never-dried pristine CNCs and CNC + CNC-g-P(EtOx95-s-Ei5); complex
viscosity, storage (G′) and loss (G″) moduli as a function of oscillatory frequency
for pristine CNC-based dispersions (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01269_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
This manuscript
was written with contributions from all authors. All authors have
confirmed the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was sponsored by São Paulo Research Foundation
(FAPESP Grants Nos. 2017/03202-4 and 2015/25406-5). The authors are
grateful to the National Center for Research in Energy and Materials
(CNPEM), the Brazilian Nanotechnology National Laboratory (LNNano)
for the support during microscopy (cryo-TEM and AFM) and XPS analyses,
and the Brazilian Synchrotron Light Source (LNLS) for SAXS measurements.
We would like to thank the technician staff at the Institute of Chemistry,
Prof. Dr. Watson Loh for HSDSC analysis support, Prof. Dr. Edvaldo
Sabadini for rheological analysis contribution, Dr. Mateus Cardoso
for SAXS analysis orientation, Dr. Oigres Daniel Bernardinelli for
TDNMR support, and Dr. Marcos Mariano for valuable discussions.
==== Refs
References
Wohlhauser S. ; Delepierre G. ; Labet M. ; Morandi G. ; Thielemans W. ; Weder C. ; Zoppe J. O. 
Grafting Polymersf rom Cellulose
Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications . Macromolecules 
2018 , 51 , 6157 –6189 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.8b00733 .
Habibi Y. 
Key advances
in the chemical modification of nanocelluloses . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 1519 –1542 . 10.1039/C3CS60204D .24316693 
Kedzior S. A. ; Kiriakou M. ; Niinivaara E. ; Dubé M. A. ; Fraschini C. ; Berry R. M. ; Cranston E. D. 
Incorporating
Cellulose
Nanocrystals into the Core of Polymer Latex Particles via Polymer
Grafting . ACS Macro Lett. 
2018 , 7 , 990 –996 . 10.1021/acsmacrolett.8b00334 .
Kargarzadeh H. ; Huang J. ; Lin N. ; Ahmad I. ; Mariano M. ; Dufresne A. ; Thomas S. ; Gałęski A. 
Recent developments
in nanocellulose-based biodegradable polymers, thermoplastic polymers,
and porous nanocomposites . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2018 , 87 , 197 –227 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2018.07.008 .
Kan K. H. M. ; Li J. ; Wijesekera K. ; Cranston E. D. 
Polymer-Grafted
Cellulose Nanocrystals as pH-Responsive Reversible Flocculants . Biomacromolecules 
2013 , 14 , 3130 –3139 . 10.1021/bm400752k .23865631 
Brinatti C. ; Akhlaghi S. P. ; Pires-Oliveira R. ; Bernardinelli O. D. ; Berry R. M. ; Tam K. C. ; Loh W. 
Controlled
coagulation
and redispersion of thermoresponsive poly di(ethylene oxide) methyl
ether methacrylate grafted cellulose nanocrystals . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2019 , 538 , 51 –61 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2018.11.071 .30500467 
Khoshkava V. ; Kamal M. R. 
Effect of drying conditions on cellulose
nanocrystal
(CNC) agglomerate porosity and dispersibility in polymer nanocomposites . Powder Technol. 
2014 , 261 , 288 –298 . 10.1016/j.powtec.2014.04.016 .
Han J. ; Zhou C. ; Wu Y. ; Liu F. ; Wu Q. 
Self-assembling
behavior of cellulose nanoparticles during freeze-drying: Effect of
suspension concentration, particle size, crystal structure, and surface
charge . Biomacromolecules 
2013 , 14 , 1529 –1540 . 10.1021/bm4001734 .23544667 
Beck S. ; Bouchard J. ; Berry R. 
Dispersibility in water of dried
nanocrystalline cellulose . Biomacromolecules 
2012 , 13 , 1486 –1494 . 10.1021/bm300191k .22482888 
Hou L. ; Fang J. ; Wang W. ; Xie Z. ; Dong D. ; Zhang N. 
Indocyanine green-functionalized bottle brushes of poly(2-oxazoline)
on cellulose nanocrystals for photothermal cancer therapy . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2017 , 5 , 3348 –3354 . 10.1039/C7TB00812K .
Fraschini C. ; Chauve G. ; Bouchard J. 
TEMPO-mediated surface oxidation
of cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) . Cellulose 
2017 , 24 , 2775 –2790 . 10.1007/s10570-017-1319-5 .
Mariano M. ; Kissi N. E. ; Dufresne A. 
Cellulose
nanomaterials: size and
surface influence on the thermal and rheological behavior . Polímeros 
2018 , 28 , 93 –102 . 10.1590/0104-1428.2413 .
Park S. ; Baker J. O. ; Himmel M. E. ; Parilla P. A. ; Johnson D. K. 
Cellulose
crystallinity index: measurement techniques and their impact on interpreting
cellulase performance . Biotechnol. Biofuels 
2010 , 3 , 1010.1186/1754-6834-3-10 .20497524 
Kargarzadeh H. ; Mariano M. ; Gopakumar D. ; Ahmad I. ; Thomas S. ; Dufresne A. ; Huang J. ; Lin N. 
Advances in cellulose
nanomaterials . Cellulose 
2018 , 25 , 2151 –2189 . 10.1007/s10570-018-1723-5 .
Bras J. ; Viet D. ; Bruzzese C. ; Dufresne A. 
Correlation
between
stiffness of sheets prepared from cellulose whiskers and nanoparticles
dimensions . Carbohydr. Polym. 
2011 , 84 , 211 –215 . 10.1016/j.carbpol.2010.11.022 .
Hoogenboom R. 
Poly(2-oxazoline)s:
Alive and Kicking . Macromol. Chem. Phys. 
2007 , 208 , 18 –25 . 10.1002/macp.200600558 .
Legros C.  Engineering of Poly(2-oxazoline)s
for Potential Use in Biomedical Applications. Polymers ; Université de Bordeaux , 2014 .
Warakomski J. M. ; Thill B. P. 
Evidence for long
chain branching in polyethyloxazoline . J. Polym.
Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 
1990 , 28 , 3551 –3563 . 10.1002/pola.1990.080281303 .
Fox T. G. ; Flory P. J. 
Second-order
transition temperatures and related properties
of polystyrene. I. Influence of molecular weight . J. Appl. Phys. 
1950 , 21 , 581 –591 . 10.1063/1.1699711 .
Legros C. ; Lecommandoux S. ; Tam K. C. ; de Pauw-Gillet M.-C. ; Taton D. 
pH and redox responsive
hydrogels and nanogels made from poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline) . Polym. Chem. 
2013 , 4 , 4801 –4808 . 10.1039/c3py00685a .
Bus T. ; Englert C. ; Reifarth M. ; Borchers P. ; Hartlieb M. ; Vollrath A. ; Hoeppener S. ; Traeger A. ; Schubert U. S. 
3rd generation
poly(ethylene imine)s for gene delivery . J.
Mater. Chem. B 
2017 , 5 , 1258 –1274 . 10.1039/C6TB02592G .
Oh S. Y. ; Yoo D. I. ; Shin Y. ; Seo G. 
FTIR analysis of cellulose
treated with sodium hydroxide and carbon dioxide . Carbohydr. Res. 
2005 , 340 , 417 –428 . 10.1016/j.carres.2004.11.027 .15680597 
Barazzouk S. ; Daneault C. 
Amino acid and peptide
immobilization on oxidized nanocellulose:
spectroscopic characterization . Nanomaterials 
2012 , 2 , 187 –205 . 10.3390/nano2020187 .28348303 
Spackman D. H. ; Stein W. H. ; Moore S. 
Automatic recording
apparatus for
use in chromatography of amino acids . Anal.
Chem. 
1958 , 30 , 1190 10.1021/ac60139a006 .
Ferreira F. V. ; Pinheiro I. F. ; Gouveia R. F. ; Thim G. P. ; Lona L. M. F. 
Functionalized
Cellulose Nanocrystals as Reinforcement in Biodegradable Polymer Nanocomposites . Polym. Compos. 
2018 , 39 , E9 –E29 . 10.1002/pc.24583 .
Bel-Hassen R. ; Boufi S. ; Salon M. C. B. ; Abdelmouleh M. ; Belgacem M. N. 
Adsorption of silane onto cellulose
fibers. II. The
effect of pH on silanehydrolysis, condensation, and adsorption behavior . J. Appl. Polym. Sci 
2008 , 108 , 1958 –1968 . 10.1002/app.27488 .
Mariano M. ; Kissi N. E. ; Dufresne A. 
Melt processing
of cellulose nanocrystal
reinforced polycarbonate from a masterbatch process . Eur. Polym. J. 
2015 , 69 , 208 –223 . 10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2015.06.007 .
Dufresne A.  Nanocellulose –
From Nature to High Performance Tailored Materials , 1 st ed.; De Gruyter : Berlin , 2012 .
Wiesbrock F. ; Hoogenboom R. ; Leenen M. ; van Nispen S. F. G. M. ; van der Loop M. ; Abeln C. H. ; van den Berg A. M. J. ; Schubert U. S. 
Microwave-Assisted Synthesis of a 42-Membered
Library of Diblock Copoly(2-oxazoline)s and Chain-Extended Homo Poly(2-oxazoline)s
and Their Thermal Characterization . Macromolecules 
2005 , 38 , 7957 –7966 . 10.1021/ma050437x .
Zoppe J. O. ; Habibi Y. ; Rojas O. J. ; Venditti R. A. ; Johansson L.-S. ; Efimenko K. ; Österberg M. ; Laine J. 
Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
brushes grafted from cellulose nanocrystals via surface-initiated
single-electron transfer living radical polymerization . Biomacromolecules 
2010 , 11 , 2683 –2691 . 10.1021/bm100719d .20843063 
Wang J. ; Siqueira G. ; Müller G. ; Rentsch D. ; Huch A. ; Tingaut P. ; Levalois-Grützmacher J. ; Grützmacher H. 
Synthesis of new bis(acyl)phosphane oxide photoinitiators
for the surface functionalization of cellulose nanocrystals . Chem. Commun. 
2016 , 52 , 2823 10.1039/C5CC09760F .
Hatton F. L. ; Kedzior S. A. ; Cranston E. D. ; Carlmark A. 
Grafting-from cellulose
nanocrystals via photoinduced Cu-mediated reversible-deactivation
radical polymerization . Carbohydr. Polym. 
2017 , 157 , 1033 –1040 . 10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.10.064 .27987803 
Seabra A. B. ; Bernardes J. S. ; Fávaro W. J. ; Paula A. J. ; Durán N. 
Cellulose
nanocrystals as carriers in medicine and their toxicities: A review . Carbohydr. Polym. 
2018 , 181 , 514 –527 . 10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.12.014 .29254002 
Guo M. ; Her S. ; Keunen R. ; Zhang S. ; Allen C. ; Winnik M. A. 
Functionalization
of Cellulose Nanocrystals with PEG-Metal-Chelating Block Copolymers
via Controlled Conjugation in Aqueous Media . ACS Omega 
2016 , 1 , 93 –107 . 10.1021/acsomega.6b00055 .30023474 
Hemraz U. D. ; Campbell K. A. ; Burdick J. S. ; Ckless K. ; Boluk Y. ; Sunasee R. 
Cationic Poly(2-aminoethylmethacrylate)
and Poly(N-(2aminoethylmethacrylamide)
Modified Cellulose Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Characterization, and
Cytotoxicity . Biomacromolecules 
2015 , 16 , 319 –325 . 10.1021/bm501516r .25436513 
Beck-Candanedo S. ; Roman M. ; Gray D. G. 
Effect of reaction conditions on
the properties and behavior of wood cellulose nanocrystal suspensions . Biomacromolecules 
2005 , 6 , 1048 –1054 . 10.1021/bm049300p .15762677 
Oguzlu H. ; Danumah C. ; Boluk Y. 
Colloidal
behavior of aqueous cellulose
nanocrystal suspensions . Curr. Opin. Colloid
Interface Sci. 
2017 , 29 , 46 –56 . 10.1016/j.cocis.2017.02.002 .
Reid M. S. ; Villalobos M. ; Cranston E. D. 
Cellulose nanocrystal interaction
probed by thin film swelling to predict dispersibility . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 12247 –12257 . 10.1039/C6NR01737A .27256628 
Kloser E. ; Gray D. G. 
Surface grafting
of cellulose nanocrystals with poly(ethylene
oxide) in aqueous media . Langmuir 
2010 , 26 , 13450 –13456 . 10.1021/la101795s .20695591 
Azzam F. ; Heux L. ; Putaux J.-L. ; Jean B. 
Preparation by grafting
onto, characterization, and properties of thermally responsive polymer-decorated
cellulose nanocrystals . Biomacromolecules 
2010 , 11 , 3652 –3659 . 10.1021/bm101106c .21058640 
Azzam F. ; Heux L. ; Jean B. 
Adjustment of the Chiral Nematic
Phase Properties of Cellulose Nanocrystals by Polymer Grafting . Langmuir 
2016 , 32 , 4305 –4312 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b00690 .27054465 
Gray D. G. 
Recent
Advances in Chiral Nematic Structure and Iridescent Color of Cellulose
Nanocrystal Films . Nanomaterials 
2016 , 6 , 21310.3390/nano6110213 .
Davidson P. ; Penisson C. ; Constantin D. ; Gabriel J.-C. P. 
Isotropic, nematic,
and lamellar phases in colloidal suspensions of nanosheets . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2018 , 115 , 6662 –6667 . 10.1073/pnas.1802692115 .29891691 
Schütz C. ; Agthe M. ; Fall A. B. ; Gordeyeva K. ; Guccini V. ; Salajková M. ; Plivelic T. S. ; Lagerwall J. P. F. ; Salazar-Alvarez G. ; Bergström L. 
Rod packing
in chiral nematic cellulose nanocrystal dispersions studied by small-angle
x-ray scattering and laser diffraction . Langmuir 
2015 , 31 , 6507 –6513 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b00924 .26020691 
Liu Y. ; Agthe M. ; Salajková M. ; Gordeyeva K. ; Guccini V. ; Fall A. ; Salazar-Alvarez G. ; Schütz C. ; Bergström L. 
Assembly of cellulose nanocrystals
in a levitating drop probed by time-resolved small angle X-ray scattering . Nanoscale 
2018 , 10 , 18113 –18118 . 10.1039/C8NR05598J .30238947 
Uhlig M. ; Fall A. ; Wellert S. ; Lehmann M. ; Prévost S. ; Wagberg L. ; von Klitzing R. ; Nyström G. 
Two-Dimensional
Aggregation and Semidilute Ordering in Cellulose Nanocrystals . Langmuir 
2016 , 32 , 442 –450 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b04008 .26684549 
Fernandes S. N. ; Almeida P. L. ; Monge N. ; Aguirre L. E. ; Reis D. ; de Oliveira C. L. P. ; Neto A. M. F. ; Pieranski P. ; Godinho M. H. 
Mind the Microgap
in Iridescent Cellulose Nanocrystal
Films . Adv. Mater. 
2017 , 29 , 160356010.1002/adma.201603560 .
Gray D. G. 
Order and
gelation of cellulose nanocrystal suspensions: an overview of some
issues . Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A 
2018 , 376 , 2017003810.1098/rsta.2017.0038 .
Bercea M. ; Navard P. 
Shear dynamics of aqueous suspensions
of cellulose
whiskers . Macromolecules 
2000 , 33 , 6011 –6016 . 10.1021/ma000417p .
Nazari B. ; Kumar V. ; Bousfield D. W. ; Toivakka M. 
Rheology of cellulose
nanofibers suspensions: Boundary driven flow . J. Rheol. 
2016 , 60 , 1151 –1159 . 10.1122/1.4960336 .
Song Y. ; Zheng Q. 
Linear rheology of
nanofilled polymers . J.
Rheol. 
2015 , 59 , 155 –191 . 10.1122/1.4903312 .
Azzam F. ; Siqueira E. ; Fort S. ; Hassaini R. ; Pignon F. ; Travelet C. ; Putaux J.-L. ; Jean B. 
Tunable Aggregation
and Gelation of Thermoresponsive Suspensions of Polymer-Grafted Cellulose
Nanocrystals . Biomacromolecules 
2016 , 17 , 2112 –2119 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.6b00344 .27116589 
Barnes H. A. ; Hutton J. F. ; Walters K.  An Introduction to Rheology ; Elsevier , 1989 .
Pereira E.
A. ; Brandão E. M. ; Borges S. V. ; Maia M. C. A. 
Influence of
concentration on the steady and oscillatory shear behavior of umbu
pulp . Rev. Bras. Eng. Agric. Ambiental 
2008 , 12 , 87 –90 . 10.1590/S1415-43662008000100013 .
Larson R. G. ; Magda J. J. 
Coil-Stretch Transitions
in Mixed Shear and Extensional
Flows of Dilute Polymer Solutions . Macromolecules 
1989 , 22 , 3004 –3010 . 10.1021/ma00197a022 .
Li M.-C. ; Wu Q. ; Song K. ; Lee S. ; Qing Y. ; Wu Y. 
Cellulose
nanoparticles: structure – morphology – rheology relationships . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2015 , 3 , 821 –832 . 10.1021/acssuschemeng.5b00144 .
Li Y. ; Li X. ; Chen C. ; Zhao D. ; Su Z. ; Ma G. ; Yu R. 
Sol–gel transition characterization of thermosensitive
hydrogels
based on water mobility variation provided by low field NMR . J. Polym. Res. 
2017 , 24 , 2510.1007/s10965-017-1185-8 .
Abrami M. ; Chiarappa G. ; Farra R. ; Grassi G. ; Marizza P. ; Grassi M. 
Use of low
field NMR for the characterization of gels
and biological tissues . ADMET DMPK 
2018 , 6 , 34 –46 . 10.5599/admet.6.1.430 .
Saito T. ; Isogai A. 
TEMPO-mediated oxidation of native cellulose. The effect
of oxidation conditions on chemical and crystal structures of the
water-insoluble fractions . Biomacromolecules 
2004 , 5 , 1983 –1989 . 10.1021/bm0497769 .15360314 
da
Silva Perez D. ; Montanari S. ; Vignon M. R. 
TEMPO-Mediated Oxidation
of Cellulose III . Biomacromolecules 
2003 , 4 , 1417 –1425 . 10.1021/bm034144s .12959614 
Park S. ; Baker J. O. ; Himmel M. E. ; Parilla P. A. ; Johnson D. K. 
Cellulose
crystallinity index: measurement techniques and their impact on interpreting
cellulase performance . Biotechnol. Biofuels 
2010 , 3 , 1010.1186/1754-6834-3-10 .20497524 
Mariano M. ; Chirat C. ; Kissi N. E. ; Dufresne A. 
Impact of Cellulose
Nanocrystal Aspect Ratio on Crystallization and Reinforcement of Poly(butylene
adipate-co-terephthalate) . J. Polym. Sci., Part
B: Polym. Phys. 
2016 , 54 , 2284 –2297 . 10.1002/polb.24139 .

