
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145730010.1021/acsomega.7b00281ArticleAnhydrous Monoalkylguanidines in Aprotic and Nonpolar
Solvents: Models for Deprotonated
Arginine Side Chains in Membrane Environments Banyikwa Andrew
Toyi †Miller Stephen E. ‡Krebs Richard A. Xiao Yuewu §Carney Jeffrey M. ∥Braiman Mark S. *Chemistry Department, Center
for Science & Technology, Syracuse University, Room 1-014, Syracuse, New York 13244-4100, United States* E-mail: mbraiman@syr.edu.27 10 2017 31 10 2017 2 10 7239 7252 09 03 2017 22 08 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In
this study, the synthesis of crystalline dodecylguanidine free
base and its spectroscopic characterization in nonpolar environments
are described. IR as well as 1H and 15N NMR
spectra of the free base dissolved in aprotic solvents are substantially
different from the previously reported spectra of arginine, or other
monoalkylguanidinium compounds, at high hydroxide concentrations.
The current results provide improved modeling for the spectroscopic
signals that would be expected from a deprotonated arginine in a nonpolar
environment. On the basis of our spectra of the authentic dodecylguanidine
free base, addition of large amounts of aqueous hydroxide to arginine
or other monoalklyguanidinium salts does not deprotonate them. Instead,
hydroxide addition leads to the formation of a guanidinium hydroxide
complex, with a dissociation constant near ∼500 mM that accounts
for the established arginine pK value of ∼13.7.
We also report a method for synthesizing a compound containing both
phenol and free-base guanidine groups, linked by a dodecyl chain that
should be generalizable to other hydrocarbon linkers. Such alkyl-guanidine
and phenolyl-alkyl-guanidine compounds can serve as small-molecule
models for the conserved arginine–tyrosine groupings that have
been observed in crystallographic structures of both microbial rhodopsins
and G-protein-coupled receptors.

document-id-old-9ao7b00281document-id-new-14ao-2017-00281gccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Recent structural and
physiological studies have provided evidence
for a number of arginine side chains of integral membrane proteins
situated in nonpolar environments.1 The
exact H-bonding environments, energetics, and even protonation states
of all of these membrane-buried isolated arginines and arginine–tyrosine
groupings remain somewhat ill-defined. Three examples are as follows.

(1) In KvAP potassium channels, voltage gating carries four cationic
arginine side chains in the voltage-sensor paddles through the nonpolar
region of the lipid bilayer.2,3 (2) The conformational
change involved in the activation of G-protein-coupled receptors repositions
a conserved arginine in transmembrane helix III, from its initial
location in a salt bridge with a neighboring aspartate (or glutamate)
to the nonpolar interior of the protein, where it forms a H-bonded
interaction with a conserved tyrosine from transmembrane helix V.4,5 Prior to G-protein binding, this conserved arginine sits in a very
nonpolar environment and has no obvious counteranion.

(3) In
microbial rhodopsins (e.g., bacteriorhodopsin, bR), time-resolved
Fourier transform infrared spectra, including 15N-labeled
arginines, may have provided evidence for a transient deprotonation
of the guanidine group of a conserved arginine in helix III, specifically
in the M and/or N intermediates.6−8 Solid-state 15N NMR
spectra of M definitely also show a strong perturbation of this arginine,9 but were interpreted as showing evidence for
a new unusual H-bonding environment for guanidinium, rather than deprotonation.
X-ray crystal structures of M also show that the guanidino group of
this arginine transiently moves much closer to the phenolic oxygen
of an adjacent conserved tyrosine.10

The protonation and H-bonding states of arginines in such proteins
are not well understood, in part due to the difficulty in obtaining
unambiguous spectroscopic signals that can differentiate protonated
and unprotonated states of the arginine side chain, particularly in
completely aprotic environments, or in nonpolar environments with
very low concentrations of H-bonding partners. From computations,
it has been concluded that even at the center of a lipid bilayer,
the guanidinium group of arginine is likely to remain protonated.11−13 However, one challenge facing computational methods is that a necessary
experimental control is missing: a model system, for which the guanidine
group can be proved experimentally to deprotonate and computational
methods correctly predict the deprotonation.

Experimentally,
synthetic nonpolar single-helix peptides that readily
insert into a lipid bilayer have been modified to include arginine
in the middle of the α-helix.14−16 However, rather than
forcing its side chain to deprotonate, the result has been that the
single arginine remains protonated by forcing changes in the degree
of insertion and/or helix tilt angle.

Here, we describe the
synthesis of anhydrous monoalkylguanidine
free base, dodecylguanidine, in pure crystalline state using the general
approach shown in Scheme 1. The dodecyl substituent confers sufficient solubility in
nonpolar solvents to permit unambiguous identification of spectroscopic
signals from the deprotonated monoalkylguanidine (2).
The spectra signal a deprotonation, that is, a big change from the
corresponding monoalkylguanidinium, much bigger than that seen in
spectra previously obtained during high-pH arginine titrations in
aqueous solutions17−19 or even in previous measurements of guanidine “free
bases” in aprotic solvents, where water was not rigorously
excluded.20 This suggests that in the earlier
spectra the guanidinium group never deprotonated, but simply formed
a tightly bound hydroxide complex that produced minor spectral perturbations.

Scheme 1 General Method for Deprotonation of an Alkylguanidinium Bromide (e.g., 1) in Methanol Solution To Form the Corresponding Alkylguanidine
Free Base (e.g., 2)
Additional synthetic methods were developed to incorporate
>90% 15N isotope labels from thiourea into the guanidine’s
two terminal nitrogens, according to Scheme 2. This high level of isotope incorporation
has permitted valuable new spectroscopic modeling: not only 15N NMR chemical shift measurements, which can be used as markers for
deprotonated guanidines in several different environments, but also
clear identification in IR spectra of several guanidine-group vibrations
that depend strongly on protonation state and H-bonding environment.

Scheme 2 General Method for Incorporation of Isotope Labels from the Commercially
Available Labeled Thiourea into the Terminal Nitrogens of Monoalkylguanidines
The product with R1 =
CH3(CH2)11– is compound 1′.

These results in aggregate
indicate that in the presence of only
nonpolar aprotic solvent molecules along with a small (stoichiometric)
amount of water, the arginine side chain is likely to exist predominantly
as a stoichiometric guanidinium hydroxide complex. However, the question
remains: in such an environment, could a more lipophilic H-bond donor
displace water to form a H-bond pair with a deprotonated arginine
side chain? The biomolecule with requisite properties that comes to
mind is the phenolic side chain of tyrosine.

Again, there is
no prior model for such H-bonded neutral guanidine-phenol
groupings, isolated away from other H-bonding partners. Previous spectroscopic
modeling of tyr–arg side-chain interactions22 combined synthetic neutral poly-Tyr and poly-Arg polypeptides.
However, such polypeptides are insoluble in aprotic solvents. Furthermore,
although both amino and carboxy termini were protected, preventing
their participation in proton transfers, these model systems retain
numerous peptide linkages with H-bond donor and acceptor groups.22

Our goal was therefore to synthesize a
small molecule with a covalent
hydrocarbon linkage between phenol and dodecylguanidine groups, which
would permit modeling of a 1:1 H-bonded interaction between them in
aprotic solvent, without any possible interference from other acid/base
or H-bonding groups. The first small-molecule model compound we prepared
that met these criteria was p-phenolyl dodecylguanidine,
using the synthetic approach shown in Scheme 3.

Scheme 3 Overall Synthesis Scheme for (p-Phenolyl) Dodecylguanidinium
Bromide (14) and for the Corresponding 15N2-Labeled Compound (14′)
Not shown here is the deprotonation
step needed to form the corresponding free-base compounds 15 and 15′. This was carried out as in Scheme 1. Reagents and conditions:
(A) reflux, 8 h, H2SO4 (cat), methanol; (B)
Ba(OH)2 (1/2 equiv), 24 h, methanol; (C) 2 N HCl, ether;
(D) SOCl2, dichloromethane (DCM); (E) AlCl3,
anisole, CH2Cl2, DCM; (F) H2NNH2, tBuOK, 48 h, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO);
(G) LiAlH4, 5 h, THF; (H) PhP3, CBr4, 12 h, DCM; (I) potassium phthalimide, reflux, 2 h, dimethylformamide;
(J) H2NNH2, reflux, 12 h, absolute ethanol;
(K) S-methyl thiourea hydroiodide, 2 h, absolute
ethanol; (K′) S-ethyl thiourea-15N2 hydrobromide, 2 h, absolute ethanol; (L, L′)
48 % HBr, reflux, 6 h.

The ultimate goal of
this synthetic approach is to produce small-molecule
model compounds that will adopt a conformation with a singular intramolecular
phenol–guanidine H-bond in aprotic environments. Such model
compounds should allow the H-bonding interactions of arginine and
tyrosine to be modeled outside of proteins, by dissolving the model
compounds in aprotic solvents, micelles, and artificial membranes.

IR, 1H NMR, and solid-state 15N NMR spectra
of the newly synthesized (p-phenolyl) dodecylguanidinium
bromide (14, 14′) and the corresponding
free bases (15, 15′) as crystalline
solids are presented below. These spectra demonstrate that in the
solid state of the “free base,” proton transfer is essentially
complete from phenolate to guanidinium, to form zwitterions.

Our hypothesis that a different nonzwitterionic structure for 15 may prevail in membrane-like solvent environments is explored
in the accompanying paper.23 There, it
is determined spectroscopically that very strong stoichiometric H-bonding
of 15 occurs in aprotic solvents. Specifically, head-to-tail
H-bonded homodimer complexes of 15 readily form in DMSO,
with partial proton transfer from guanidine back to phenol. Similar
H-bonded heterodimer complexes of dodecylguanidine (2) with p-cresol are even soluble to ∼1 mM
in hexane.23 The latter complexes exist
nearly 50:50 as two main protomers in rapid equilibrium: not only
dodecylguanidinium/cresolate, but also fully neutral cresol/dodecylguanidine.

Thus, monoalkylated guanidine molecules, such as 1, complexed in aprotic solvents with phenols, either without or with
a covalent linkage as in 15, may serve as small-molecule
model compounds for tyr–arg groupings that might hypothetically
be buried in an overall neutral form into nonpolar environments.

Results
and Discussion
Spectroscopy of Small-Molecule Models for
the Deprotonated Arginine
Side Chain
In Figures 1–4, we present IR, 1H NMR, and 15N cross-polarized magic-angle spinning (CP-MAS)
data measured from dodecylguanidine free base 2. Included
also are comparison to the protonated version of the same molecule
(dodecylguanidine hydrobromide, 1) as well as to the
corresponding phenolyl-attached free base (15) and hydrobromide
(14). The dodecylguanidine free-base spectra are all
markedly different from previous spectra presented as arising from
the deprotonated, or partially deprotonated, monoalkylguanidine side
chain of arginine.7,9,17−20

Figure 1 IR
spectra of dodecylguanidine free base (2). Most
spectra were measured as saturated solutions in dry nonpolar solvents:
benzene (A); CCl4 (B); CH2Cl2 (C);
CHCl3 (D). An additional solution spectrum was measured
in water-saturated CHCl3 (E). A sixth spectrum (F), provided
for comparison, represents crystalline (p-phenolyl)-dodecyl-guanidine
free base (15) measured as a KBr pellet. Vertical scales
were matched to facilitate comparisons. (More extensive ranges of
these spectra from 1800 to 1100 cm–1, and also including
the corresponding 15N isotope-labeled compounds 2′ and 15′, are provided in Figures S-3–S-12 in Supporting Information.)

IR Spectra
Figure 1 presents IR spectra of monoalkylguanidines. Upon dissolving
the pure crystalline free base of dodecylguanidine (2) in a variety of nonpolar solvents (Figure 1A–E), the spectra show strong bands
near 1670, 1645, and 1605 cm–1. These three bands
are downshifted by 5–10 cm–1 upon isotope
labeling of the two terminal guanidine nitrogens (see spectra G–K
in Figure S-3 in Supporting Information). These isotope-sensitive
bands are therefore assigned as guanidine-group vibrations with predominantly
C–N stretch character.

The bandshapes in Figure 1 are significantly different
from those published previously as deprotonated monoalkylguanidine
solution spectra.6,20 In particular, a moderately strong 15N isotope-sensitive band at 1555–1560 cm–1 in earlier work6,20 is not reproduced in any of the
dodecylguanidine spectra measured in water-free nonpolar solvents
(Figure 1A–D).
A very clear 1556 cm–1 band was previously observed
when aqueous monoalkylguanidinium chloride was reacted with sodium
hydroxide and then extracted into chloroform.6,20 A
still weaker version of this band at a slightly higher frequency (near
1570 cm–1) has also been previously observed in
an aqueous solution of arginine at elevated pH.17 However, in the spectra of Figure 1A–D, the bands in the frequency range
1560–1530 cm–1 show little sensitivity to 15N labeling of the two terminal nitrogens (see spectra G–J
in Figure S-3 in Supporting Information). This is true even for the measurement in pure
chloroform (Figure 1D).

The samples in Figure 1A–D represent the anhydrous crystalline dodecylguanidine
free base dissolved in anhydrous aprotic solvents. The spectra previously
published as deprotonated monoalkylguanidine in chloroform6,20 did not use crystalline free base and did not utilize a rigorous
procedure for excluding water. The chloroform/water extraction method
used in producing the earlier samples suggests the likely presence
of a water/hydroxide that is H-bonded to the guanidine/guanidinium,
upshifting the 1530 cm–1 vibration (Figure 1D) and giving rise to the 15N isotope-sensitive band at 1555–1560 cm–1. A previous vibrational analysis of guanidine free base itself24 indicates that vibrations in the 1500–1600
cm–1 range are likely due to C–N–H
bends, which are both capable of mixing with the C–N stretches
at higher frequencies and susceptible to frequency shifts due to H-bonding.

The conclusion that earlier attempts at measuring IR spectra of
deprotonated alkylguanidine always included bound water and/or hydroxide
is also supported by our current 1H and 15N
NMR results (see below). It is further supported by the changes in
the IR spectrum when small amounts of water are added to the chloroform
solvent, as shown in Figure 1E. The presence of saturated H2O concentration
in the solvent used to dissolve the dodecylguandine is sufficient
to upshift the 1530 cm–1 band to ∼1540 cm–1 (Figure 1E). This broad 1540 cm–1 band then becomes
sensitive to 15N labeling of the two terminal nitrogens
(shifting to 1523 cm–1 in spectrum K in Figure S-3 in Supporting Information). The 1540 cm–1 frequency observed
in Figure 1E is not
upshifted quite as far as the ∼1555 cm–1 frequency
seen previously when monoalkylguanidinium salts in water were treated
with NaOH and then extracted with chloroform.6,20 However,
the presence of the dodecylguanidine during the earlier extractions6,20 undoubtedly led to higher water content in the chloroform phase,
as compared to the method used to prepare the sample for Figure 1E, which was to preequilibrate
pure chloroform and water and then use the chloroform phase to dissolve
crystalline anhydrous dodecylguanidine.

The ∼1555 cm–1 band in earlier work was
assigned to a mixed vibration, involving a significant component of
stretching of the two terminal C–N bonds, as evidenced by its
sensitivity to 15N isotope labeling.6,20 These
and other publications also documented that the corresponding protonated
alkylguanidinium halides never show absorption bands in the 1500–1600
cm–1 region when measured in solutions, whether
the solvent was water, methanol, or CHCl3.21 We have confirmed this result (see also Supporting Information).

It is evident from the results in Figure 1 that the guanidine vibrations are strongly
dependent on protonation state and H-bonding environment. This strong
sensitivity to protonation state and H-bonding, along with the fast
temporal resolution of IR spectroscopy, would seem to make IR the
spectroscopic technique of choice for analyzing the environment around
deprotonated guanidine. This is especially true when the guanidine
group of arginine is present in a fast proton-transfer equilibrium
with H-bonded partner(s), and protonated and deprotonated forms of
the guanidine may be rapidly interconverting on the subnanosecond
time scale.22

There are several additional
caveats that must be placed on this
conclusion. In particular, the results obtained for isolated molecules
in solution do not apply in crystalline solid samples. That is, both
protonated and unprotonated dodecylguanidine (1, 1′ and 2, 2′) show
clear bands in the 1600–1550 cm–1 region,
when they are measured in crystalline form as KBr pellets (see Figure S-1 in Supporting Information). The origin of these bands is unclear because
they show no sensitivity to 15N labeling of the two terminal
nitrogens and they are not seen when these compounds are dissolved
in a solvent. We conclude on the basis of this insensitivity that
they may be entirely unrelated to any kind of group vibration that
would occur for isolated arginine side chains in proteins. However,
until the origin of these bands is fully explained by a complete vibrational
assignment, including treatment of phonons in the crystal, there is
a small risk of ambiguity in the interpretation of arginine bands
that may be observed in this spectral region.

1H NMR Spectra
Figure 2A,B shows 1H NMR spectra of pure
crystalline dodecylguanidine redissolved in benzene-d6 or DMSO-d6. Here, we will
focus on the features that have not previously been observed—in
particular, the broad resonance of the NH protons, at δ = 3.56
ppm (benzene) or δ = 4.72 ppm (DMSO). The integrated area of
this peak in either Figure 2A or B is double that of the resonance at ∼2.9 ppm,
which itself corresponds to the two α-methylene protons, that
is, on the carbon immediately adjacent to the guanidine group.

Figure 2 1H NMR spectra of dodecylguanidine free base (2) at a
concentration of 4 mM in benzene-d6 (A)
and 80 mM in DMSO-d6 (B). Dodecylguanidinium
bromide (1) was measured at
a concentration of 100 mM in DMSO-d6 only
(C), due to insufficient solubility in benzene-d6. All samples were at 25 °C. This spectral region was
selected because no resonances were observed further downfield, and
upfield resonances included only those from the alkyl chain, DMSO
solvent, and tetramethylsilane (TMS) standard. In the original data
(not shown), the signal for the −CH2– group
next to the guanidine (3.08–2.88 ppm) was a well-resolved triplet
with J = 7.0 Hz splitting and 3–4 Hz line
width. The spectra were replotted here after various degrees of Fourier
smoothing, to simplify visualization of this α-methylene resonance
and the broader one from the four to five N–H protons (7.59–3.56
ppm, 100–300 Hz line widths), as well as smaller peaks near
3.5 ppm, on the same vertical scale. The resonance at 7.15 ppm in
A, due to residual protons on benzene-d6, still had to be truncated at ∼10% of its full height to
allow the solute resonances to be visualized. Other signals indicated
with smaller fonts represent additional solvent contaminants. See
text for details.

Therefore, the resonances
at δ = 3.56 and 4.72 ppm in Figure 2A,B, respectively,
correspond to the four guanidine-group NH protons, all of which are
chemically equivalent on the NMR time scale. This equivalence is likely
due to moderately rapid exchange between these four protons. The chemical
shift value of this peak is quite variable in different solvents,
as well as at different concentrations in the same solvent, particularly
in DMSO which invariably contains a small amount of water contaminant.
The guanidino chemical shift decreases from 4.72 at the highest measured
concentration (80 mM) and most water-free solvent (from a freshly
broken ampoule) monotonically down to near ∼3.5 in very wet
solvent. The bandwidth is 100 Hz in the driest DMSO (Figure 2B) and decreases as water is
added or as the concentration of solute is decreased. However, even
at the highest concentration and in the driest commercially available
DMSO-d6, the guanidine protons resonate
as a single band, with a width as large as that (∼100 Hz full
width at half-maximum) also seen in benzene-d6 (Figure 2A).
This could be a sign that a significant rate of exchange, responsible
for the broadening and coalescing of these four proton resonances,
can occur exclusively due to internal processes of the guanidine group.
Rapid tautomerization, through internal proton transfers between neighboring
imino (=NH) and amino (−NH2) groups, along
with rapid C–NH2 bond rotations, might account for
this exchange among these four protons.

Alternatively, the dodecylguanidine
free base could conceivably
form head-to-head dimers in aprotic solvents, analogous to those obtained
with carboxylic acids. Such symmetric H-bonded dimers are expected
to promote rapid concerted proton transfers. Transient formation and
dissociation of such dimers, even at the lowest concentration that
we measured in benzene-d6 (4 mM), might
also help to account for the chemical equivalence of all four guanidine
protons on the nmr time scale. Measuring even lower concentrations
has so far been impossible because of H/D exchange with the solvent
(discussed five paragraphs below).

In contrast, the spectrum
of dodecylguanidinium bromide (Figure 2C) shows three distinct,
but broad, resonances for the five guanidinium-group protons, centered
at δ = 7.6, 7.2, and 6.9. These have area ratios of 1:2:2 relative
to the α-methylene peak at δ = 3.08 (based on fitting
to Lorentzian bandshapes). The slower exchange of the guanidinium
protons is possibly related to the absence of any nitrogen with a
lone pair of electrons that can serve as a proton acceptor and to
the very weak basicity of bromide. The absence of a good proton acceptor
group in dodecylguanidinium bromide is expected to weaken its H-bonded
associations, in particular those that could induce head-to-head dimerization
in aprotic solvents. The lack of a proton acceptor would likewise
be expected to slow either dimer-mediated or internal proton-exchange
process, relative to the guanidine free base. In the free base, the
imino group is expected to be an excellent proton acceptor from the
other N–H groups due to the closely matched pKa values. An additional factor that could slow internal
exchange among the five guanidinium protons is the absence of C–N
single bonds. The partial-double-bond character of all three C–N
bonds is expected to hinder bond rotation, relative to the lower bond
order of C–NHR in the dodecylguanidine free base.

The
spectrum in Figure 2C is somewhat similar to the corresponding spectra of both
dodecylguanidinium chloride and dodecylguanidine, measured in chloroform-d, previously published by Xiao and Braiman.20 In the prior work, the guanidinium-group proton
resonances were a bit farther upfield, probably due to the less-polar
solvent (chloroform-d), as well as sharper, likely
resulting from the lower solvent viscosity. Nevertheless, the chemical
shift values of the α- and β-methylene groups were similar
at 3.15 and 1.61 ppm compared to the current values for the dodecylguanidinium
bromide salt at 3.08 and 1.43 ppm (the latter falling outside the
range of Figure 2).

The previous20 measurement of the 1H NMR spectrum of what was presented as dodecylguanidine in
chloroform-d is now clearly problematic, in light
of the data shown in Figure 2. In that earlier work,20 the chemical
shifts for the two −CH2– groups closest to
the “deprotonated” guanidino group were nearly unchanged
from those of dodecylguanidinium chloride. However, as noted in that
work,
the earlier sample had more water present in it; the N2-drying procedure used previously does not remove water from alkylguanidines
as thoroughly as crystallization from acetonitrile does. As a result,
the earlier spectrum corresponded at least in part to dodecylguanidinium
hydroxide. Furthermore, a sharp peak observed at ∼7.3 ppm,
assigned in that work20 to guanidine protons,
was instead likely due to unexpectedly large amounts of C1HCl3 present in the sample. This was formed by rapid exchange
of the dodecylguanidine protons into chloroform-d, with the corresponding replacement of most of the guanidine NH
protons by deuterium from the solvent.

We have now directly
measured the 1H/2H exchange
process between dodecylguanidine free base (2) and chloroform-d (Figure 3). In benzene solvent, at concentrations
of base and chloroform of 0.010 and 0.50 M, respectively, this process
occurs with a pseudo-first-order decay time of ∼3.4 min. The
estimated second-order rate constant for the rate-limiting step (which
is expected to be deuterium transfer from C2HCl3 to dodecylguanidine) is therefore ∼0.01 M –1 s–1. Although this is quite slow for a proton-transfer
rate constant, we conclude that the basicity of dodecylguanidine is
sufficiently high to partially deprotonate CHCl3, whose
pKa value is generally given as ∼16.

Figure 3 Time dependence
of the proton exchange in a sample, initially containing
0.010 M dodecylguanidine free base (2) in benzene-d6. Just after the measurement plotted as t = 0, an amount of chloroform-d was added
to give a concentration of 0.50 M; the next measurement (at t = 5 min) was made as quickly as the sample could be inserted
and the NMR instrument locked and shimmed. Temperature was 298 K.
Integrated areas of the measured C1HCl3 peak
at 6.1 ppm (blue diamonds) and 3.5 ppm for 100% benzene-d6 or 3.3 ppm for chloroform-d 0.5 M in
benzene-d6 (red squares) are plotted,
along with the best least-squares fits to single-exponential functions,
giving y = 4.4[1 – exp (−t/3.34 min)] for the blue plot and y =
5.8 exp (−t/3.52 min) for the
red plot.

Our results even provide evidence
for slower proton exchange of
the dodecylguanidine free base with benzene-d6. During the time period from 5 to 23 min in the measurement
summarized in Figure 3 (raw data in Supporting InformationFigure S-2), the benzene proton signal at 7.15
ppm increases by ∼11%. On the y-axis scale
of Figure 3, this corresponds
to a transfer of 0.4 protons,
that is, ∼40% of the protons transferred from dodecylguanidine
to the much lower concentration of chloroform-d in
the same time period.

In contrast to the earlier published 1H NMR spectra
in chloroform-d solvent, the sample and measuring
conditions presented in Figure 2A,B have mostly overcome the problem of exchange with solvent
deuterons and therefore represent the authentic 1H NMR
spectrum of dodecylguanidine free base. The sharp peaks in Figure 2B at δ = 3.50
and 3.15 ppm probably represent a very small amount of OH–, produced by the reaction of the minor contaminant of water in commercial
DMSO-d6 with the strong base dodecylguanindine.
Tentative assignment to OH– is based on the observation
that addition of microliter quantities of 2H2O to the NMR sample increased the size of both signals (data not
shown). For tetraalkylammonium hydroxides in DMSO, the signal of free
hydroxide shows some dependence on alkyl chain length, varying between
δ = 4.43 for tetramethyl and tetraethylammonium counterions
and δ = 4.56 ppm for tetrapropylammonium.25

On the basis of these new model compounds in Figure 2A,B, the deprotonated
guanidine group of
arginine is expected to show a single NH resonance in the range 3–5
ppm in the absence of external H-bond donors. Deprotonated arginine
is also expected to show a chemical shift near δ = 2.9 ppm for
the −CH2– group immediately adjacent to the
deprotonated guanidine. This is significantly upfield from the value
of δ = 3.08 for the protonated dodecylguanidinium ion (Figure 2C).

These characteristic
chemical shift values of monoalkylguanidine
free base can be used to identify deprotonated arginines in biological
environments. For such a purpose, our model compounds are more relevant
than arginine in the presence of high [OH–], for
which NMR measurements have never exhibited either the NH or −CH2– chemical shifts depicted in Figure 2A,B. This is not surprising for the NH protons,
which in the presence of high [OH–] are shifted,
weakened, and/or broadened to the point of undetectability. However,
not even the −CH2– resonance at δ =
2.9 in Figure 2A,B
has ever been observed for arginine at high hydroxide concentration.
Indeed, the methylene protons adjacent to the guanidinium group vary
only within the range of δ = 3.3–3.15 over the entire
pH range of 0–14.18,19 Over the more relevant
pH range 10–14, where the same authors18,19 (and others cited therein) have concluded that arginine’s
guanidinium group deprotonates, there is actually a drop of only about
∼0.05 ppm, from δ = 3.20 to 3.15 ppm. This is substantially
smaller than the 0.2 ppm shift we observe between the different protonation
states in Figure 2 and
therefore does not likely correspond to a full deprotonation. Instead,
the relatively small NMR chemical shift changes that occur in arginine
at high pH, and that are fitted well by a titration curve with an
apparent pKa of ∼13.3, likely correspond
to complexation of OH– to guanidinium, with a complexation
constant of ∼5 M–1, corresponding to pKb = 0.7. This conclusion also agrees with results
presented in the sections on IR (above) and 15N NMR spectroscopy
(below).

Solid-State 15N NMR
Figure 4A shows that in 15N2-labeled crystalline
dodecylguanidine free base 2′ there are distinct 15N chemical shifts for amino and imino nitrogens, at 49 and
110 ppm, respectively. Although the 110 ppm value is well within the
range that has been previously observed for imino nitrogens (e.g.,
in Schiff bases), such a large downfield shift of ∼60 ppm,
relative to dodecylguanidinium itself (Figure 4B), has not previously been observed for 15N in arginine or in any other monoalkylguanidine in aqueous
media. Recent NMR titration curves of aqueous arginine with an apparent
pKa of 13.8 showed a 15N resonance
for the terminal nitrogens that shifted downfield only by 22 ppm.19

Figure 4 Solid-state cross-polarized magic-angle spinning (CP-MAS) 15N NMR spectra of (A) crystalline dodecyl-guanidine-[15N2] free base, (B) crystalline dodecylguanidinium-[15N2] bromide, and (C) crystalline p-phenol-dodecyl-guanidine-[15N2] free base.

In fact, a previous model for
the deprotonated guanidine group,
namely, 15N2-arginine dissolved in DMSO/water
(1:1) at pH 13.8 and −80 °C, exhibited chemical shift
values of 51.6 and 43.3 ppm for the two terminal nitrogens of the
guanidino group.9 These are very close
to the single value 54 ppm that we measure for crystalline dodecylguanidinium
bromide (1′, Figure 4B) as well as the two values we observe for
crystalline 12-(p-phenol)-dodecylguanidine–15N2 (15′, Figure 4C). Our IR spectra of the latter
compound (Spectra F and L, Figure S-3 in Supporting Information) indicate that the proton is mostly transferred
from phenol to guanidine so that 15′ exists (at
least in crystalline state) as a guanidinium–phenolate zwitterion.
The solid-state NMR spectrum in Figure 4C is in agreement with this conclusion because it provides
no evidence for an imino group, as is evident in Figure 4A. The reason for the moderate
differences in the two observed chemical shifts is that compound 15′ evidently crystallizes with the two −NH2 groups in measurably different environments. By contrast,
compound 1′ crystallizes in such a fashion as
to give nearly identical environments for the two terminal nitrogens
so as to give rise to a single broad peak near 54 pm (Figure 4B).

From the results
in Figure 4, we conclude
that in authentic monoalklylguanidine free base
the crystal symmetry is such that there are two distinct classes of
terminal nitrogens: those with a C=NH bond and those with a
C–NH2 bond—and no rapid interconversion on
the NMR time scale. This conclusion is consistent with the measured
crystal structure of guanidine free base, in which each guanidine
has two C–NH2 groups and one clearly distinct C=NH
group with a significantly shorter bond length.18 The latter accepts a H-bond from a C–NH2 group on a different molecule, but the proton is shared unequally.

Challenges in Preparing Anhydrous Dodecylguanidine Free Base
Previous attempts to model deprotonated arginine spectroscopically
have all involved deprotonation of arginine itself or another monoalkylguanidinium
salt with aqueous hydroxide solutions. Spectra of the resulting samples
were obtained with6,20 or without9,18,19 subsequent extraction into an aprotic solvent.
However, these attempts gave only solutions, or amorphous solids,
with unknown levels of hydrations. Likewise, our (unpublished) attempts
to make crystallizable alkylguanidine free base in a butanol–water
mixture, by bubbling anhydrous NH3 through it, were unsuccessful.
One possible reason for the failure of all of these approaches to
give spectroscopic results similar to those shown in Figure 1A, 2A, or 3A is that guanidinium prefers to form
a bound hydroxo complex instead of deprotonating, in the presence
of high hydroxide ion concentration (with or without the additional
presence of water).21,24

On the basis of such observations,
deprotonation to form guanidine by raising the pH (i.e., increasing
the hydroxide concentration) is likely impossible in aqueous solutions,
or even in organic solvents containing a substantial mole fraction
of water. A frequently given textbook value for the pKa of arginine’s guanidine side chain, 12.5, actually
understates the value of 13.4–13.6 that has historically been
obtained from direct potentiometric titrations of monoalkylguanidinium
salts.29,30 More recently, direct potentiometric titrations
of arginine itself, coupled with NMR measurements, have consistently
yielded values of 13.6–13.8.18,19

However,
even potentiometric and NMR titration curves with a clear
break point do not suffice to establish the formation of deprotonated
guanidine in the presence of high aqueous hydroxide concentrations.
There is an intrinsic ambiguity to titrations in aqueous solution,
which can produce similar results for either deprotonation of a cation
at elevated pH or binding of OH– to form a cation–hydroxo
complex. For example, the formation of the hydroxo complex of magnesium
(in a DMSO/water mixture) causes an inflection point in its titration
curve at pH = 11.5 that mimics the shape expected for a deprotonation,
which is clearly not occurring.31 Potentiometric
and even spectroscopic changes for guanidinium at these high pH values
in water18,19 might likewise occur as a result of OH– binding, rather than deprotonation.

It appears,
in fact, that no previous experiment can be interpreted
unambiguously as having produced arginine, or any other monoalkylguanidine,
as the base with only four covalently attached H atoms, either as
a pure compound or in solution. In particular, previous NMR titration
experiments of arginine in aqueous solution18,19 produced changes in 15N or 1H chemical shifts
only half as big as we see between dodecylguanidinium and crystalline
dodecylguanidine, either directly in solid state (Figure 4) or dissolved into water-free
aprotic solvents (Figure 2). We conclude that all previous arginine titration experiments
in the presence of water are more likely to have produced a weakly
bound guanidinium hydroxide complex, which appears to have a dissociation
constant of ∼500 mM.

This broad generalization does not
apply to arylated guanidines,
nor to multiply alkylated guanidines, some of which have indeed been
shown spectroscopically to fully deprotonate in aqueous solution.
However, these related compounds have many inadequacies as models
for the arginine side chain. Thus, all previous attempts to model
the deprotonated arginine side chain spectroscopically have been,
at best, crude approximations.

Our procedures for preparing
crystalline dodecylguanidine free
base (2) were based on those of previous workers, who
successfully prepared guanidine itself for the first reported crystal
structure of this compound.26 They showed
that to obtain the free base a guanidinium salt must be water-free
prior to addition of a deprotonating agent (i.e., an external base).
Furthermore, the added base must not result in the formation of water,
that is, hydroxide is generally an unsuitable reagent, and this makes
water an unsuitable solvent. This is because the free base guanidine
itself is extremely basic and hydrolyzes water rapidly to form guanidinium
hydroxide. It has long been known that to remove the hydroxide ion
along with the proton attached to the guanidine group prolonged exposure
of guanidinium hydroxide to an extremely dry vapor phase is required,
which can be obtained only with a very strong desiccant, such as P2O5.24 It is to be expected
that the same problems apply to monoalkyl guanidines as to free guanidine
itself. An additional problem is that prolonged exposure to hydroxide,
a good nucleophile, along with a polar solvent, causes the monoalkyl
guanidino group to become hydrolyzed, forming substituted ureas.27

Forming a stable water-free crystalline
monoalkylguanidinium salt
is itself somewhat challenging because these compounds are themselves
quite hygroscopic. The best crystallization solvent appears to be
acetonitrile, in which alkylguanidinium salts are soluble only near
the boiling temperature. Cooling to room temperature then affords
a highly pure water-free crystalline material, which gives a clear
melting point and an elemental analysis matching as predicted.

Acetonitrile was previously used to crystallize the p-toluenesulfonate salts of alkylguanidines, giving elemental analyses
that match the solvent-free chemical formula.28 However, this was not an ideal guanidinium salt for our purpose
because the presence of such a complex counterion makes the interpretation
of the IR bands of the guanidinium group more difficult. Therefore,
we sought to prepare a simple halide salt of dodecylguanidinium using
similar crystallization procedures as described for the p-toluenesulfonate salts28 and were most
successful with the bromide. One advantage of the bromide salts is
that they are generated directly by the reaction of amines with S-alkylthiouronium bromides, which in turn can easily be
prepared from thiourea and bromoethane. The corresponding S-alkylthiouronium chlorides are not as easily prepared
because chloroalkanes are less susceptible to SN2 displacements.
The S-alkylthiouronium iodide is as easily prepared
as the bromide, but the resulting guanidinium iodides tend to be less
stable than the bromides, and rapidly discolor upon storage, probably
due to air oxidation of the iodide. Thus, when we prepared the iodide
at step (13) in Scheme 3, we found it most useful to immediately exchange the
counterion with bromide.

Our procedure for deprotonation of
the dried crystalline monoalkylguanidinium
salts followed the procedure for guanidinium itself26 with slight modification. Instead of ethanol, the solvent
used was dry methanol; and instead of preparing hydroxide-free sodium
ethoxide by adding Na to ethanol, we used potassium tert-butoxide, by simply dissolving the commercial material in well-dried
methanol, thus avoiding the hazards of sodium metal. In methanol,
the tert-butoxide serves as a strong base (pKa of t-butanol ≈17),
immediately abstracting a proton to form methoxide. Unlike hydroxide,
however, both methoxide and t-butoxide appear to
be sufficiently strong bases to deprotonate guanidinium but sterically
incapable of carrying out nucleophilic attack on the guanidino group.

Isotopic Enrichment of Guanidine’s Nitrogen Atoms (15N > 98%)
We demonstrated the utility of selective
isotope labeling guanidine compounds in measuring solid-state 15N NMR spectra (Figure 4). The formation of the guanidine group at a late step in
the synthesis of guanidine compounds (e.g., 14) simplifies 15N-enrichment at the two terminal nitrogens. The yield from
the subsequent steps can be maintained at a high level, conserving
the expensive enriched isotope.

In the synthesis of the alkylguanidiniums
from alkylamines, S-methyl thiourea hydroiodide and S-ethyl thiourea hydrobromide can be used nearly interchangeably.
The formation of the former (from thiourea and methyl iodide) is slightly
easier and less expensive than the latter (from thiourea and ethyl
bromide). However, the use of S-methyl thiourea hydroiodide
in the conversion of amines to guanidines required the extra step
of immediately substituting iodide with bromide because the alkylguanidinium
bromides were found to be more stable than the iodides upon storage
over several days, as mentioned above. When working with the expensive 15N isotope label, this added step led to unacceptable loss
of yield. Therefore, in the synthesis of the 15N-labeled
compounds (1′ and 13′), the
need for counterion exchange was circumvented using S-ethyl thiourea-15N2 hydrobromide.

We
attempted several other strategies (not shown in Scheme 3) to form guanidines from amines,
such as reacting the amine with CS2 to form a dithiocarbamate
intermediate. Reaction of this intermediate with natural-abundance
or 15N-ammonia was then attempted, to introduce the isotope
label. However, we never achieved consistent yields of guanidines
that could compete with the use of S-alkyl thiouronium
salts. The latter were easily prepared from 15N2-thiourea, which is (at least intermittently) commercially available.

We also showed that it was also possible to isotopically enrich
the amine −NH2 group to form anisole-dodecylamine-15N (12′), using commercially available
potassium 15N-pthalimide (Cambridge Isotope Labs). We have
characterized 12′ with low-resolution mass spectrometry
and IR spectroscopy to demonstrate the incorporation of the label
(data not shown) but have not yet used it to prepare guanidino compounds
(13, 14, or 15) with the internal
nitrogen carrying an15N label.

Design and Synthesis of
Phenolyl-Alkylguanidine Model Compounds
(15, 15′)
With considerable
effort, we were able to produce solutions of dodecylguanidine in aprotic
solvents but never in the presence of even small (stoichiometric)
amounts of water. The ubiquitous presence of water in biological systems
suggests that arginine deprotonation might never be observed physiologically.
It is questionable whether even the interior of a physiologically
formed lipid bilayer is an environment sufficiently water-free to
support formation of a deprotonated arginine side chain on its own,
rather than complexed with water as the guanidinium hydroxide. Computations
have indicated the likelihood of charged amino acids carrying water
into the membrane interior, producing “water defects”.13

What is less clear is whether another
strong H-bond donor that is less acidic than water, for example, the
side chain of tyrosine, might be able to displace water from such
an alkylguanidinium hydroxide inside the most nonpolar region of a
membrane or a protein. We have begun to address this question by synthesizing p-phenolyl-dodecylguanidine. The only previous examples
of a simple hydrocarbon linking a guanidine group covalently to a
phenolic compound are salts of N-guanyltyramine,
whose synthesis was previously reported using commercially available
tyramine as a starting material.32 Our
goal in synthesizing an analogue with a much longer, flexible aliphatic
linkage was to provide for the possibility of an unhindered internal
H-bond interaction, with or without proton transfer, between the guanidino–imino
group and the phenol–OH at opposite ends of the linker. Another
goal was to provide sufficient nonpolar surface area to permit this
compound to be dissolved in nonpolar environments. A third goal was
to choose methods that could easily be transferred to a wide variety
of different-sized hydrocarbon linkers.

The types of reactions
used in the synthesis (Scheme 3) have been described previously.32−37 However, in the Experimental Section, we
will highlight some changes in conditions that were important for
improving yields. Other strategic routes,
for example, starting with para-substituted phenols, might be expected
to give a higher yield with fewer steps. However, unlike the strategy
we devised, these other routes do not leave open as many options for
isotope labeling of the phenol ring, which may be eventually desirable
for additional spectroscopic or scattering experiments. For example,
it will eventually be useful to examine the position of the phenolic
proton within the H-bond by neutron scattering. For such a measurement,
it will be helpful to have all of the nonexchangeable protons replaced
with deuterons. This will be possible with our synthetic route because
the key starting materials (anisole and dodecane dicarboxylic acid)
are both commercially available with all C–H bonds deuterated.

We have not obtained any evidence that the specific dodecyl linker
described here provides sufficient steric flexibility to permit an
internal H-bond between phenol and guanidine. In fact, IR spectra
(Figure 1D,E) and the 15N NMR CPMAS spectrum (Figure 4B) of the crystalline product (15, 15′) show that the free base of this compound exists
predominantly in a zwitterionic form in this crystal. X-ray structures
in the accompanying paper23 demonstrate
that these zwitterions form head-to-tail H-bonded dimers in crystals.
Concentration-dependent spectroscopy supports formation of similar
dimers in DMSO solution above ∼30 mM. On the basis of the spectra,
these dimers show indication of an approximately 10–25% contribution
from the fully neutral species, that is, the nonzwitterionic protomers
of 15.

However, the accompanying paper23 also
shows that different results are observable for 1:1 mixtures of dodecylguanidine
(2) and p-cresol in even less-polar
solvents, for example, hexane. In such water-free environments, strong
intermolecular H-bonds are formed that correspond more closely to
a neutral H-bonded pair (phenol + guanidine). These pairs are in the
form of heterodimers, rather than internally H-bonded monomers, which
were the primary target of our synthesis of p-phenolyl-dodecylguanidine
here. Nevertheless, those results23 suggest
the hypothesis that strong H-bonding between arginine and tyrosine
side chains, when both are simultaneously forced to be buried near
each other in the nonpolar aprotic region of a membrane, might constitute
a rare biological environment that could bring about substantial deprotonation
of an arginine side chain. To test this hypothesis rigorously, it
must still be determined if there are any biphasic environments, in
which phenol (tyrosine) groups can form strong H-bonds to deprotonated
guanidine (arginine) groups when tethered inside the nonpolar region—even
stronger than those that water molecules can form, when the latter
are readily available from a nearby aqueous phase.

Conclusions
It is necessary to remove water and hydroxide rigorously from pure
monoalklylguanidines to deprotonate them significantly, even when
they are subsequently dissolved in otherwise nonpolar environments.
The same is expected for the side chain of arginine. By following
this guideline strictly, we have obtained crystalline dodecylguanidine
and demonstrated that the deprotonated guanidine group’s spectroscopic
properties are strikingly different from those previously reported
for aqueous arginine in the presence of high hydroxide concentrations.
Authentic spectra of pure recrystallized dodecylguanidine, measured
in dry organic solvents, are even different from those previously
published using noncrystalline dodecylguanidine samples, from which
tightly bound water could not be adequately removed merely by drying
under N2. All of the previously published spectra of what
were thought to be deprotonated arginine or monoalkylguanidine likely
correspond instead to tightly bound guanidinium hydroxide complexes.

Experimental
Section
Solution-State NMR Measurements
All 1H and 13C NMR (300 MHz) spectra were recorded at 25 °C in benzene-d6, chloroform-d (C2HCl3), or DMSO-d6. Chemical
shifts are presented in parts per million and are generally referenced
to TMS added as an internal standard. In some of the measurements
of synthesis intermediates, TMS-free solvent was used to simplify
the spectra near the alkyl chain resonances. In these cases, the chemical
shift scale was referenced to the residual CHCl3 peak at
7.27 ppm for 1H and 77.23 ppm for 13C (when
chloroform-d was used a solvent) and the DMSO residual
peaks at 2.50 ppm for 1H and 39.5 ppm for 13C (when DMSO-d6 was used as solvent). 1H splitting patterns are designated as singlet (s), doublet
(d), triplet (t), multiplet (m), and broad (br).

Solid-State 15N NMR Measurements
All solid-state 15N NMR cross-polarization magic-angle spinning (CP-MAS) measurements
were performed at Analytical and Technical Services at SUNY ESF using
a 300 MHz Bruker spectrometer with a 7 mm CPMAS probe with the sample
at 25 °C. The spinning rate was 4000 Hz; acquisition time, 0.02
s; number of data points, 484; delay between pulses, 5 s; sweep width,
400 ppm (12 165.450 Hz); 1H decoupling field, 47 200
Hz; and spectra were processed with a line broadening of 40 Hz. All
chemical shifts are referenced to an ammonium-15N2 sulfate standard (defined as 0 ppm).

IR Measurements
Spectra were obtained using a Nicolet
Magna IR 860 spectrometer using demountable liquid cells with two
BaF2 windows.

Data Analysis
Band-fitting and other
data manipulations
were performed using GRAMS software (Thermo Galactic). NMR bands were
fitted to pure Lorentzian shapes using two parameters for each band
(center and width), assuming a zero baseline.

Mass Spectrometry
Low-resolution (±0.1 amu) measurements
were performed at Analytical and Technical Services at SUNY ESF, on
a Thermo Scientific Polaris Q trap mass spectrometer, using a solid
probe with temperature ramp from 35 to 450 °C. High-resolution
mass
spectroscopy was performed by positive electrospray ionization on
a Bruker 12 T APEX-Qe FTICR-MS and Apollo II ion source at COSMIC
Lab, Old Dominion University.

Elemental Analyses
Combustion analysis for C/H/N was
performed by Complete Analysis Laboratories Inc. (Parsippany, NJ).

Chemical Syntheses
Solvents used were of reagent grade.
Except as noted, all materials were obtained from Aldrich Chemicals.

General
Notes on Crystallization during Purifications
Frequent crystallization
of intermediates turned out to be crucial
for removing unreacted starting materials, as well as side products.
All of the intermediates contain a long floppy alkyl chain, making
them susceptible to form oils or waxes upon drying. Failure to purify
these led to increasingly poor yields along the synthetic route.

Hexane turned out to be the crystallization solvent of choice for
products up through compound (12). That is, compounds 4, 6, 8–10,
and 12 are soluble in boiling hexane but precipitate
as white crystals at room temperature. Reaction conditions and solvents
used in these steps were polar and
produce polar contaminants via side reactions that are insoluble in
hexane. Upon selective extraction of the crude solid products with
hot hexane, these contaminants are left behind. Cooling of the hexane
solution produces pure crystals that give excellent melting points
and elemental analyses.

The guanidinium salts 13 and 14 were
insufficiently soluble in hexane, or any nonpolar solvent, to permit
crystallization. However, they were soluble in hot acetonitrile. As
noted above, crystallization from acetonitrile helps to remove water
from the very hygroscopic guanidinium group, allowing the isolation
of a pure crystalline sample. It should be noted, however, that unlike
dodecylguanidine free base (2) the free base of 12-(p-phenol) dodecylguanidine (15) (actually a
zwitterion in the crystal state, as shown above by IR and NMR measurements)
was not significantly soluble in acetonitrile and was only successfully
recrystallized from methanol.

Purification of Dodecyl
Guanidinium Bromide (1)
As described previously,19 the commercially
available dodecylguanidinium acetate salt (obtained from Agway as
the fruit-tree fungicide Syllit) was extracted from insoluble solids
and recrystallized with 2-propanol and dried. It was then converted
to the bromide salt by means of a simple two-phase ion-exchange procedure.
That is, 1-butanol and a (10-fold excess of) saturated aqueous NaBr
were added to the solid dry dodecylguanidinium acetate salt, and the
contents were thoroughly mixed. The phases were allowed to separate
completely and then the bottom aqueous layer was removed. Extraction
of the butanol phase with saturated aqueous NaBr was repeated once
more and then the remaining butanol phase was removed and dried completely.
The resulting solids were recrystallized from acetonitrile, filtering
out some residual NaBr when the acetonitrile solution was near its
boiling point. Upon cooling to room temperature, pure crystalline
dodecylguanidinium bromide (1) was obtained. 1H NMR (DMSO-d6) δ ppm 7.59–6.6
(br), 3.08 ppm (t, 2H), 1.43 ppm (t, 2H), 1.23 ppm (m, 18H), 0.83
ppm (t, 3H). 13C (DMSO-d6)
175.48, 31.968, 29.721, 29.692, 29.679, 29.647, 29.390, 29.295, 29.093,
26.708, 22.758, 14.575. Mp 71–73 °C. Elemental analysis
theoretical 50.65% C, 9.74% H, 13.63% N Experimental 50.58% C, 9.82%
H, 13.59% N.

Synthesis of Dodecylguanidinium-15N2 Bromide
(1′)
Dodecylamine, obtained from Fisher
Scientific, was reacted with a 1.4-fold molar excess of S-ethyl-thiourea-15N2 hydrobromide, prepared
as follows: 0.8 g (10.25 mmol) of thiourea-15N2 (15N = 98%), obtained from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories
(Cambridge, MA), and 1.56 g (14.38 mmol, i.e., 1.4 mol equiv) of bromoethane
were refluxed in 2-propanol for 20 min, then concentrated by evaporation
under dry N2 at room temperature, and placed in a freezer
(−20 °C) to induce crystallization. The crystals were
filtered and washed with cold diethyl ether (3×) and then dried
under vacuum. The mass of S-ethylthiourea-15N2 hydrobromide recovered is 1.74 g (91.86%). To reduce
losses of the expensive 15N isotope, this crude product
was used directly for guanidinium synthesis, without further purification.
Dodecylamine (0.3 g, 1.618 mmol) and crude S-ethylthiourea-15N2 hydrobromide (0.39 g, 1.3 mol equiv) were added
to 6.0 mL of an ethanol/water (1:1) mixture and heated under reflux.
The pH of the solution was monitored and periodically readjusted to
∼10.5 using 10 M sodium hydroxide. After 2 h, the solution
was allowed to cool to room temperature and air-dried. The product 1′ was recrystallized from acetonitrile and yielded
0.15 g (30.12%).

Synthesis of Dodecylguanidine Free Base (2) or
Dodecylguanidine-15N2 Free Base (2′)
Dodecyl guanidinium bromide (1 or 1′) was dissolved in warm methanol, at a concentration of ∼1
M. The solution was cooled to room temperature and then 1 mol equiv
of potassium tert-butoxide, also freshly dissolved
as a 1 M solution in dry methanol, was added slowly and dropwise,
with constant stirring. This caused the solution to become milky,
due to precipitation of KBr. The solution was stirred at room temperature
for another 20 min and then heated momentarily to the boiling temperature
of methanol. The hot solution was centrifuged briefly, and the clear
supernatant was transferred to another flask, leaving behind a pellet
of white KBr. The supernatant was concentrated and cooled under a
gentle stream of N2. This caused the dodecylguanidine free
base to precipitate from the cold methanol. When precipitate formation
slowed greatly, the remaining supernatant was removed, along with
dissolved tert-butanol. The residual free base (2) was recrystallized from fresh dry methanol and thoroughly
dried under N2. The resulting residue was further recrystallized
from acetonitrile. Mp 94.5–95 °C. IR, NMR—see Figures 1 and 2. Elemental analysis theoretical 68.12% C, 13.54% H, 18.34%
N; experimental 68.77% C, 12.79% H, 18.24% N. [C13H31N3, MW 156 + 31 + 42 = 229].

Synthesis
of (p-Phenolyl)-dodecyl Guanidinium
Bromide (14, 14′) and Corresponding Free Bases
(15, 15′)
We used a 13-step synthesis,
summarized in Scheme 3, for connecting phenol and guanidino groups by a hydrocarbon linker.

1,12-Dodecanedioic acid (3) was obtained from Fisher
Scientific. Mp 127.5–129 °C. 1H NMR (DMSO-d6) δ ppm 12.00 (s, 2H), 2.2–2.1
ppm (t, 2H), 2.6–2.4 ppm (m, 4H), 1.3–1.1 (m, 16H). 13C (DMSO-d6) δ (ppm) 174.48,
33.63, 28.83, 28.70, 28.52, 24.46.

Dodecanedioic acid dimethyl
ester (4) was synthesized
by refluxing 60.0 g of 1,12-dodecanedioic acid (3, 260
mmol) and 8 mL of concentrated sulfuric acid in 100 mL of methanol.
The progress of the reaction was monitored using IR. The reaction
was deemed complete after complete disappearance of the carboxylic
acid peak at ∼1700 cm–1 with simultaneous
appearance of the ester peak at ∼1742 cm–1. After cooling to room temperature, 300 mL of water was added and
the product was extracted 3× with 100 mL of benzene. Combined
benzene fractions were vacuum-dried, yielding 65.43 g (97.43%) of 4. 1H NMR (CHCl3) δ ppm 3.64 (s
6H), 2.30–2.25 (t, 4H), 1.61–1.57 (m, 4H), 1.25 (s,
16H). 13C (CHCl3) δ ppm 173.867, 50.980,
33.628, 28.891, 28.755, 28.660, 24.476. Mp 61–63 °C. [M]+
calculated for C14H2604 was 258;
found 258. Elemental analysis theoretical 65.11% C, 10.07% H. Experimental
64.97% C, 9.82% H.

Dodecanedioic acid monomethyl ester (5) was synthesized
by adding 65.43 g (253.6 mmol) of dodecanedioic acid dimethyl ester
(4) into 256 mL of 1 N Ba(OH)2 (126.8 mmol)
in methanol. The flask was capped immediately, and after thorough
mixing, the flask was left at room temperature for 24 h. The precipitated
barium salt was separated by suction filtration. The solid was then
transferred to a separatory funnel containing 30 mL of methanol, and
the contents were thoroughly mixed. Into this solution, 100 mL of
4 N aqueous HCl and 100 mL of diethyl ether were added. After thorough
mixing, the phases were allowed to separate and the ether phase was
removed. The remaining aqueous phase, together with precipitates of
barium salt, was extracted 2× more with ether. The ether phases
(300 mL in total) were combined and washed 3× with 100 mL of
water and then vacuum-dried. Mass of the monomethyl ester recovered
was 57.2 g (92.43%). 1H NMR (CHCl3) δ
ppm 3.60–3.59 (s, 3H), 2.30–2.20 (m, 4H), 1.55–1.54
(m, 4H), 1.20 (s, 12H). 13C (CHCl3) δ
ppm 180.412, 174.635, 51.684, 34.296, 34.263, 29.520, 29.385, 29.303,
29.212, 25.123, 24.841. Mp 48–49 °C. [M]+ observed was
at 244, matching the value calculated for C13H2404. Elemental analysis theoretical 63.93% C, 9.84% H.
Experimental 63.87% C, 10.01% H.

Dodecanedioic acid monochloride
monomethyl ester (6) was synthesized by slow addition
of 41.83 g of thionyl chloride
(351.6 mmol, 1.5 equiv) into 300 mL of dichloromethane containing
57.2 g (234.42 mmol) of dodecanedioic acid monomethyl ester (5). After the addition was completed, 5.0 mL of N,N-dimethylformamide was added dropwise as a catalyst.
The progression of the reaction was monitored by IR spectroscopy and
deemed complete after complete disappearance of the COOH carbonyl
absorbance at ∼1700 cm–1, with simultaneous
appearance of the acyl chloride peak near 1800 cm–1. Without extraction or purification, the acyl chloride product was
used for the subsequent synthesis step.

Synthesis of 11-(p-Methoxybenzoyl) Undecanoyl
Methanoate (7)
Into a stirred solution of 6 in CH2Cl2, 30.4 g of anisole (281.12
mmol, 1.2 equiv) was added, followed by slow addition of anhydrous
AlCl3 (350.98 mmol, 1.5 equiv), with rapid appearance of
a deep purple color and evolution of HCl gas. After gas evolution
ceased with further AlCl3 addition, the solution was stirred
for 5 h more. Then, 200 mL of water was added with vigorous stirring,
initially very slowly and dropwise, until evolution of HCl gas ceased
and the deep purple color disappeared. The CH2Cl2 and aqueous phases were allowed to separate. Then, the bottom (CH2Cl2) phase was collected, washed 2× with 100
mL of water, filtered, and dried. The solid residue was recrystallized
from hexane and dried, yielding 55.71 g (71.2%). 1H NMR
(CDCl3) δ ppm 7.91–7.94 (d, 2H), 6.90–7.27
(d, 2H), 3.85 (s, 3H), 3.65 (s, 3H), 2.86–2.91 (t, 2H), 2.26–2.31
(t, 2H), 1.58–1.74 (m, 4H), 1.27–1.31 (s, 12H). 13C NMR (CHCl3) δ ppm 199.563, 174.605, 163.501,
130.528, 113.852, 55.647, 51.666, 38.502, 34.306, 29.645, 29.604,
29.580, 29.418, 29.320, 25.137, 24.821. M.P 60–63 °C.
[M]+ calculated for C20H30O4 was
334; found 334. Elemental analysis theoretical 71.86% C, 8.98% H.
Experimental 71.74% C, 9.04% H.

Synthesis of 12-(p-Methoxyphenyl) Dodecanoic
Acid (8)
Compound 7 (4.96 g) was
dissolved in DMSO (80.0 mL). Into this solution, potassium tert-butoxide (2.0 mol equiv) and excess hydrazine monohydrate
(8.0 mol equiv) were added, and the mixture was refluxed for 48 h.
Then, the reaction was cooled to room temperature, and 0.1 M aqueous
HCl (50.0 mL) was added until the pH of the aqueous phase fell below
2.0. The product was extracted using CH2Cl2 (2
× 100 mL). The residual DMSO in the CH2Cl2 phase was removed by repeated extraction with water (3 × 50
mL). The CH2Cl2 phase was then removed and dried.
The dried sample was crystallized from hexane to afford 3.79 g of
compound 8 (yield, 79.95%). 1H NMR (DMSO-d6) δ ppm 11.99 (s, 1H), 7.09–7.06
(d, 2H), 6.83–6.80 (d, 2H), 3.7 (s, 3H), 2.5–2.49 (m,
2H), 2.20–2.14 (m 2H), 1.49–1.47 (d, 4H), 1.22 (s, 12H). 13C (DMSO-d6) δ (ppm) 174.55,
157.29, 134.19, 129.16, 113.62, 54.94, 34.25, 33.68, 31.28, 29.02,
28.89, 28.77, 28.60, 28.57, 24.52 Mp 73–75 °C. [M]+ observed
was at 306, matching the value calculated for C19H3003. Elemental analysis theoretical 74.5% C, 9.8%
H. Experimental 73.43% C, 10.23% H.

Synthesis of 12-(p-Methoxyphenyl) Dodecanol
(9)
Compound 8 (3.79 g) was added
slowly to a stirred THF solution (20.0 mL) containing LiAlH4 (4 mol equiv), leading to evolution of H2 with each portion
added. After addition was complete, the mixture was stirred 5 h more
at room temperature. Then, 40 mL of water was added slowly, followed
by addition of CH2Cl2 (50.0 mL). The resulting
slurry was vacuum-filtered, and the filtrate was placed in a separatory
funnel. The bottom (CH2Cl2) layer was collected
and dried. The resulting solid was recrystallized from hexane, affording
3.22 g of compound 9 (yield, 89.03%). 1H NMR
(CDCl3) δ (ppm) 7.05–7.02 (d, 2H), 6.78–6.75
(d, 2H), 3.73 (s, 3H), 3.6 (t, 3H), 2.51–2.45 (t, 3H), 1.53–1.48
(m, 4H), 1.24–1.20, (s, 16H). 13C (CDCl3) δ (ppm) 157.748, 135.262, 129.437, 113.819, 63.295, 55.447,
35.243, 33.009, 31.978, 29.834, 29.794, 29.725, 29.635, 29.479, 25.941.
Mp 64–66 °C. [M]+ calculated for C19H3202 was 292; found 292. Elemental analysis: theoretical
78.08% C, 10.96% H, experimental 78.28% C, 10.89% H.

Synthesis
of 12-(p-Methoxyphenyl) Dodecyl Bromide
(10)
Compound 9 (3.21 g) was dissolved
in CH2Cl2 (50.0 mL) containing CBr4 (1.2 mol equiv, 4.38 g) and placed in an ice bath. Into this solution,
triphenylphosphine (1.2 mol equiv, 3.46 g) was added slowly over ∼10
min. The solution was stirred at 0 °C for another 30 min before
being stored at room temperature overnight. The sample was then concentrated
by evaporating CH2Cl2 and then the concentrated
solution was poured into 100 mL of stirred hexane and filtered. The
filtrate was cooled to 0 °C, causing unreacted starting materials
and unwanted byproducts to precipitate but leaving liquid brominated
product in hexane. The cold hexane solution was filtered (again),
and the filtrate was then concentrated by blowing dry air being cooled
on ice. After complete evaporation of hexane, the pure liquid product
(10) was removed from residual solid contaminants. The
final mass obtained was 2.57 g (yield, 65.85%). 1H NMR
(CDCl3) δ (ppm) 7.13–7.10 (d, 2H), 6.87–6.83
(d, 2H), 3.8 (s, 3H), 3.45–3.40 (t, 2H), 2.59–2.53 (t,
2H), 1.89–1.85 (t, 2H), 1.62–1.57 (t, 2H), 1.45–1.41,
(t, 2H), 1.39–1.29, (s, 14H). 13C (CDCl3) δ ppm 157.775, 135.246, 129.444, 113.830, 55.450, 35.257,
34.296, 33.057, 31.989, 29.812, 29.791, 29.740, 29.649, 29.490, 28.988,
28.397. Mp 64–66 °C. [M]+ calculated for C19H31OBr was 354; found 354 (with nearby equal 356 peak
due to 81Br isotope).

Synthesis of 12-(p-Methoxyphenyl) Dodecyl Phthalimide
(11)
12-(p-Methoxyphenyl) dodecyl
bromide (10, 3.23 g) was added into 30.0 mL of N,N-dimethylformamide, followed by addition
of potassium phthalimide (1.5 mol equiv, 1.84 g), and the mixture
was refluxed for 2 h. The sample was allowed to cool to room temperature,
and 30 mL each of CH2Cl2 and water were added
and mixed. After separation, the CH2Cl2 layer
was removed and back-extracted twice with 30.0 mL of water to remove N,N-dimethylformamide and potassium salts
and then air-dried. Into the brownish solid, hexane was added and
then heated to boiling. In boiling hexane, the desired compound dissolves,
leaving behind insoluble contaminants. Crystallization of the cooled
supernatant yielded a white solid (10). 1H
NMR (CDCl3) δ ppm of 12-(p-methoxyphenyl)
dodecyl phthalimide 7.86–7.85 (d 2H), 7.71–7.68 (d,
2H), 7.12–7.07 (d, 2H), 6.85–6.80 (d, 2H), 3.79 (s,
3H), 3.71–3.66 (t, 3H) 2.57–2.50 (t, 3H), 1.68–1.66
(t, 2H), 1.57–1.55 (t, 2H), 1.28–1.26 (s, 16H). 13C
(CDCl3) δ ppm 168.738, 157.821, 135.339, 134.081,
132.458, 129.493, 123.402, 113.885, 55.508, 38.350, 35.298, 32.021,
29.853, 29.828, 29.807, 29.770, 29.733, 29.536, 29.450, 28.867, 27.128.
Mp 74–80 °C.

Synthesis of 12-(p-Methoxyphenyl)
Dodecylamine
(12)
Compound 11 was mixed with
excess hydrazine monohydrate (10.0 mL) in 50.0 mL of absolute ethanol
and refluxed for 24 h and then allowed to cool to room temperature.
Then, 100 mL of hexane was added, followed by addition of 100 mL of
2 M NaOH. The high-pH aqueous layer was separated and reextracted
with another 100 mL of hexane. Hexane fractions were combined and
dried, affording 1.23 g of the crystalline solid amine (yield, 46.6%). 1H NMR (CDCl3) δ (ppm) 7.11–7.09 (d,
2H), 6.85–6.82 (d, 2H), 3.80 (s, 3H), 2.71–2.66 (t,
2H), 2.57–2.52 (t, 2H), 1.60–1.55 (t, 2H), 1.44–1.42
(t, 2H), 1.27 (s, 16H), 1.1–0.9 (s, 2H) 13C (CDCl3) δ (ppm) 157.810, 135.298, 129.463, 113.862, 55.481,
42.521, 35.274, 34.170, 31.995, 29.838, 29.755, 29.512, 27.134. Elemental
analysis theoretical 78.62% C, 11.38% H, 4.5% N experimental 78.32%
C, 11.46% H, 4.69% N. [M]+ calculated for C19H33ON was 291; found 291.

Synthesis of 12-(p-Methoxyphenyl)
Dodecyl Guanidinium
Bromide (13)
The amine 12 (2.17
g, 7.48 mmol) was refluxed in 40 mL of absolute ethanol for 2 h, along
with 3.25 g (15.0 mmol) of S-methyl thiourea hydroiodide.
(The 2.17 g starting mass in this step is higher than the stated yield
from the previous step. Several repetitions of the earlier steps were
used to obtain this starting amount. Also, the reagent S-methyl thiourea hydroiodide was prepared as described above for S-ethylthiourea-15N2 hydrobromide
in the synthesis of dodecylguanidinium-15N2 bromide
(1′), except that methyl iodide was used instead
of ethyl bromide.) The pH of the solution was observed to decrease
as the reaction progressed. Constantly adjusting the pH to ∼10.5
(by adding 10 M aqueous NaOH) keeps the amine group deprotonated.
This makes it a better nucleophile. This procedure is an improvement
of what is reported in the literature,21 in which the reaction of alkylamine with an alkylthiourea hydroiodide
was done at 40 °C for 42.5 h (vs 2 h in this synthesis). Our
use of a pH-adjusted ethanol/water mixture instead of methanol, and
refluxing at a higher temperature, decreased the reaction time to
2 h in our synthesis (vs 42.5 h for the previous work) and improved
the yield to ∼50%, as compared to the reported 21%.28 Subsequently, the heat was turned off and the
ethanol and water were evaporated under a stream of dry air. To the
solid residue, 40 mL of 50:50 (v/v) 1-butanol/2 M aqueous NaBr was
added, with vortexing. This permitted the exchange of the counteranion
(here, I– being replaced by Br–), as described above for the analogous formation of dodecylguanidinium
bromide from the acetate salt. The phases were allowed to separate,
and the bottom (aqueous) layer was removed. The butanol phase was
dried and then the solid residue was recrystallized using CCl4. Filtering and drying yielded 1.4 g of compound 13 (46.77%). 1H NMR (DMSO-d6) δ (ppm) 7.11–7.09 (d, 2H), 6.85–6.82 (d, 2H),
3.2–3.0 (t, 2H), 2.57–2.52 (t, 2H), 1.60–1.55
(t, 2H), 1.44–1.42 (t, 2H), 1.27 (s, 16H), 13C (DMSO-d6) δ (ppm) 157.703, 157.241, 135.299,
129.424, 113.809, 55.444, 42.200, 35.230, 31.975, 29.873, 29.754,
29.495, 28.779, 27.001. Mp 78–82 °C.

Synthesis
of 12-(p-Methoxyphenyl) Dodecyl Guanidinium-15N2 Bromide (13′)
A similar procedure was followed as described above for compound 13, except for improvements in the workup to obtain a higher
yield with the more expensive isotope-labeled reagent. The starting
material, deprotonated amine (12), is easier to separate
from the desired product when recrystallizing from acetonitrile than
from CCl4. That is, both the guanidinium salt (13) and unreacted amine (12) are extracted into hot acetonitrile.
Upon cooling, only the guanidinium salt (13) precipitates,
leaving behind the unreacted amine (12) in the supernatant.
Therefore, after the solvent was removed by air drying, acetonitrile
was added and heated to boiling. The hot solution was decanted, leaving
behind only a small amount of unreacted S-ethyl thiourea-15N2 hydrobromide. The acetonitrile solution was
then cooled to room temperature, leading to crystallization of the
pure guanidinium salt (13′). The supernatant was
removed, and the crystalline solid was dried thoroughly under a gentle
stream of dry air. 1H NMR spectrum of this product is identical
to that of 12-(p-methoxyphenyl) dodecyl guanidinium
bromide (13).

Synthesis of 12-(p-Phenolyl) Dodecylguanidinium
Hydrobromide (14)
It was found that deprotecting
anisole after guanidinium synthesis is a better route than deprotecting
anisole first, then converting the phenol-dodecylamine to guanidinium
(14). This is likely because the phenol group competes
with the amine as a nucleophile reacting with the S-methyl thiourea salt. Fortunately, the demethylation conditions
described here have little adverse effect on the guanidinium group.
Even extending the deprotection reaction time from 638 to 12 or 24 h did not result in significant degradation
of the guanidinium group. Therefore, removal of the methyl group from 13 was achieved by adding 1.35 g of it to a flask containing
30 mL of 48% HBr and refluxing the contents for 6 h with continuous
stirring. Then, the flask was cooled to room temperature, leading
to precipitation of the product (14). The contents were
filtered and then the collected solid was washed with 50 mL of deionized
water and air-dried. The dried sample was recrystallized from boiling
acetonitrile over MgSO4 and then again filtered and air-dried,
yielding 0.68 g of compound 14. 1H NMR (DMSO-d6) δ (ppm) 9.08 (s, 1H), 7.48 (s, 1H),
6.6–7.4 (br), 6.92–6.95 (d, 2H), 6.66–6.63 (d,
2H), 3.08–3.06 (t, 2H), 2.49–2.42 (t, 2H), 1.60–1.4
(m, 7H), 1.23 (s, 16H), 13C (DMSO-d6) δ (ppm) 157.390, 155.844, 132.944, 129.641, 115.604,
41.373, 34.962, 31.987, 29.681, 29.629, 29.557, 29.268, 29.091, 26.698.
Mp 159–162 °C. Elemental analysis theoretical 41.5% C,
5.38% H, 16.15% N experimental 41.42% C, 5.29% H 16.08% N. High-resolution
mass spectroscopy exact mass (C19H33N3O)H+ = 320.269639u, mass observed 320.269057.

Synthesis
of 12′-(p-Phenolyl)
Dodecyl Guanidinium-15N2 Bromide (14′)
12-(p-Methoxyphenyl) dodecyl guanidinium-15N2 bromide (13′) was mixed
with 20.0 mL of 48% HBr and refluxed for 12 h with continuous stirring.
After 12 h, the solution was allowed to cool slowly to room temperature
and then held at 4 °C for few minutes and filtered. The resulting
brownish solid was washed with water to remove the colored impurities
and air-dried. Recrystallizations in acetonitrile were repeated until
both the precipitate and the acetonitrile filtrate were free of color.
The 1H NMR spectrum of this product is identical to that
of 12-(p-phenol) dodecyl guanidinium hydrobromide
(14).

Deprotonation of 14 and 14′ formed (p-phenolyl) dodecyl guanidine
free base (15) and (p-phenol) dodecyl
guanidine-15N2 free base (15′), respectively. The same procedures that were used above to deprotonate
the unlabeled compound dodecylguanidinium bromide (1)
were applied to its p-phenolyl-modified derivative,
in both natural-abundance isotope (14) and 15N-labeled forms (14′). However, a considerably
longer period of heating in methanol was necessary to dissolve the
initial compounds, as well as during recrystallization of the deprotonated
products—up to 30 min, as compared to 1–2 min for the
simple dodecylguanidine (2).

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00281.Figure S-1, additional
IR spectra of compounds 1, 1′, 2, 2′, and 15 in KBr pellets,
as well as 1 and 1′ in CCl4 solution; Figure S-2, raw time-dependent
NMR spectra corresponding to data in Figure 3; Figure S-3, IR spectra of Figure 1 in the main text, showing
a more complete spectral range from 1800 to 1100 cm–1, along with corresponding spectra of the 15N2-labeled compounds (1′, 15′); Figures S-4–S-12, individual spectra in Figure S-3A, B, C, D, E, G, I, J, and K, respectively, provided
to show the full vertical regions without truncation or overlap (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00281_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
∥ Chemistry Department, Christopher Newport University,
1 Avenue
of the Arts, Newport News, Virginia 23606, United States (J.M.C.).

Author Present Address
§ EMD Millipore, 80 Ashby Road, Bedford, Massachusetts
01730, United
States (Y.X.).

Author Present Address
‡ Chemical
Biology Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health Fort Detrick, 376 Boyle Street, Frederick, Maryland
21702-1201, United States (S.E.M.).

Author Present Address
† University
of Dodoma, College of Natural and Mathematical Sciences
(CNMS), Department of Chemistry, P.O. Box 259, Dodoma (A.T.B.).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
was supported by Syracuse University and by an NSF
REU award (0552753). Solid-state NMR experiments were performed by
and designed with the guidance of David Kiemle. The authors thank
Deborah Kerwood for assistance with solution-state NMR experiments,
and John Chisholm, Nancy Totah, Daniel Clark, James Hougland, and
Yang-Yeung Luk for use of reagents and apparatus, as well as for useful
discussions and guidance. The authors also thank Philip E. Storm for
additional help with the organic synthesis.
==== Refs
References
Hristova K. ; Wimley W. C. 
A look at arginine in membranes . J. Membr. Biol. 
2011 , 239 , 49 –56 . 10.1007/s00232-010-9323-9 .21107547 
Jiang Y. ; Lee A. ; Chen J. ; Ruta V. ; Cadene M. ; Chait B. T. ; MacKinnon R. 
X-ray structure
of a voltage-dependent K+ channel . Nature 
2003 , 423 , 33 –41 . 10.1038/nature01580 .12721618 
Jiang Y. ; Ruta V. ; Chen J. ; Lee A. ; MacKinnon R. 
The principle
of gating charge movement in a voltage-dependent K+ channel . Nature 
2003 , 423 , 42 –48 . 10.1038/nature01581 .12721619 
Scheerer P. ; Park J. H. ; Hildebrand P. W. ; Kim Y. J. ; Krausz N. ; Choe H. ; Hofmann K. P. ; Ernst O. P. 
Crystal structure
of opsin in its G-protein-interacting conformation . Nature 
2008 , 455 , 497 –502 . 10.1038/nature07330 .18818650 
Standfuss J. ; Edwards P. C. ; D’Antona A. ; Fransen M. ; Xie G. ; Oprian D. D. ; Schertler G. F. X. 
The
structural basis of agonist-induced
activation in constitutively active rhodopsin . Nature 
2011 , 471 , 656 –660 . 10.1038/nature09795 .21389983 
Xiao Y. ; Hutson M. S. ; Belenky M. ; Herzfeld J. ; Braiman M. S. 
Role of
Arginine-82 in Fast Proton Release during the Bacteriorhodopsin Photocycle:
A Time-Resolved FT-IR Study of Purple Membranes Containing 15N-Labeled Arginine . Biochemistry 
2004 , 43 , 12809 –12818 . 10.1021/bi049238g .15461453 
Hutson M. S. ; Alexiev U. ; Shilov S. V. ; Wise K. J. ; Braiman M. S. 
Evidence
for a perturbation of arginine-82 in the bacteriorhodopsin photocycle
from time-resolved infrared spectra . Biochemistry 
2000 , 39 , 13189 –13200 . 10.1021/bi000426q .11052671 
Hendler R. W. ; Meuse C. W. ; Braiman M. S. ; Smith P. D. ; Kakareka J. W. 
Infrared
and visible absolute and difference spectra of bacteriorhodopsin photocycle
intermediates . Appl. Spectrosc. 
2011 , 65 , 1029 –1045 . 10.1366/11-06302 .21929858 
Petkova A. T. ; Hu J. G. ; Bizounok M. ; Simpson M. ; Griffin R. G. ; Herzfeld J. 
Arginine Activity in the Proton-Motive Photocycle of
Bacteriorhodopsin: Solid-State NMR Studies of the Wild-Type and D85N
Proteins . Biochemistry 
1999 , 38 , 1562 –1572 . 10.1021/bi981968z .9931023 
Tanio M. ; Tuzi S. ; Yamaguchi S. ; Kawaminami R. ; Naito A. ; Needleman R. ; Lanyi J. K. ; Saito H. 
Conformational
changes of bacteriorhodopsin along the proton-conduction chain as
studied with 13C NMR of [3-13C]Ala-labeled protein:
arg(82) may function as an information mediator . Biophys. J. 
1999 , 77 , 1577 –1584 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(99)77005-0 .10465768 
Li L. ; Vorobyov I. ; MacKerell A. D. Jr.; Allen T. W. 
Is arginine
charged in a membrane? . Biophys. J. 
2008 , 94 , L11 –3 . 10.1529/biophysj.107.121566 .17981901 
Yoo J. ; Cui Q. 
Does arginine remain protonated in the lipid membrane?
Insights from
microscopic pKa calculations . Biophys. J. 
2008 , 94 , L61 –3 . 10.1529/biophysj.107.122945 .18199662 
MacCallum J. L. ; Bennett W. F. D. ; Tieleman D. P. 
Distribution
of Amino Acids in a
Lipid Bilayer from Computer Simulations . Biophys.
J. 
2008 , 94 , 3393 –3404 . 10.1529/biophysj.107.112805 .18212019 
Vostrikov V. V. ; Hall B. A. ; Greathouse D. V. ; Koeppe R. E. II; Sansom M. S. P. 
Changes in Transmembrane
Helix Alignment by Arginine
Residues Revealed by Solid-State NMR Experiments and Coarse-Grained
MD Simulations . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 5803 –5811 . 10.1021/ja100598e .20373735 
Gleason N. J. ; Vostrikov V. V. ; Greathouse D. V. ; Koeppe R. E. II
Buried lysine, but not arginine, titrates and alters transmembrane
helix tilt . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2013 , 110 , 1692 –1695 . 10.1073/pnas.1215400110 .23319623 
Thibado J. K. ; Martfeld A. N. ; Greathouse D. V. ; Koeppe R. E. II
Influence of High pH and Cholesterol
on Single Arginine-Containing
Transmembrane Peptide Helices . Biochemistry 
2016 , 55 , 6337 –6343 . 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00896 .27782382 
Venyaminov S. Yu. ; Kalnin N. N. 
Quantitative IR
spectrophotometry of peptide compounds
in water (H2O) solutions. I. Spectral parameters of amino
acid residue absorption bands . Biopolymers 
1990 , 30 , 1243 –1257 . 10.1002/bip.360301309 .2085660 
Orgován G. ; Noszal B. 
The complete microspeciation of arginine
and citrulline . J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2011 , 54 , 965 –971 . 10.1016/j.jpba.2010.11.023 .21168986 
Fitch C. A. ; Platzer G. ; Okon M. ; Garcia-Moreno E. B. ; McIntosh L. P. 
Arginine: Its pKa value
revisited . Protein Sci. 
2015 , 24 , 752 –761 . 10.1002/pro.2647 .25808204 
Xiao Y. ; Braiman M. 
Modeling amino acid side chains in proteins: 15N NMR spectra of guanidino groups in nonpolar environments . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 16953 –16958 . 10.1021/jp051279e .16853157 
Braiman M.
S. ; Briercheck D. M. ; Kriger K. M. 
Modeling Vibrational Spectra of Amino
Acid Side Chains in Proteins: Effects of Protonation State, Counterion,
and Solvent on Arginine C-N Stretch Frequencies . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1999 , 103 , 4744 –4750 . 10.1021/jp983011b .
Zundel G. 
Hydrogen bonds
with large proton polarizability in proteins - studies with model
systems . Recent Res. Dev. Phys. Chem. 
1998 , 2 , 501 –532 .
Banyikwa A. T. ; Goos A. ; Kiemle D. J. ; Foulkes M. A. ; Braiman M. S.  Experimental
and computational modeling of H-bonded arginine-tyrosine groupings
in aprotic environments ACS Omega 2017 , 10.1021/acsomega.7b00282 .
Jones W. J. 
The infra-red
spectrum and structure of guanidine . Trans.
Faraday Soc. 
1959 , 55 , 524 –531 . 10.1039/tf9595500524 .
Attri P. ; Venkatesu P. ; Kumar A. 
Temperature Effect on the Molecular
Interactions between Ammonium Ionic Liquids and N,N-Dimethylformamide . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2010 , 114 , 13415 –13425 . 10.1021/jp108003x .20925365 
Yamada T. ; Liu X. ; Englert U. ; Yamane H. ; Dronskowski R. 
Solid-state
structure of free base guanidine achieved at last . Chemistry 
2009 , 15 , 5651 –5655 . 10.1002/chem.200900508 .19388036 
Hellerman L. ; Stock C. C. 
Activation Of Enzymes:
V. The Specificity Of Arginase
And The Non-Enzymatic Hydrolysis Of Guanidino Compounds. Activating
Metal Ions And Liver Arginase . J. Biol. Chem. 
1938 , 125 , 771 –793 .
Onda M. ; Yoshihara K. ; Koyano H. ; Ariga K. ; Kunitake T. 
Molecular
Recognition of Nucleotides by the Guanidinium Unit at the Surface
of Aqueous Micelles and Bilayers. A Comparison of Microscopic and
Macroscopic Interfaces . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1996 , 118 , 8524 –8530 . 10.1021/ja960991+ .
Hall N. F. ; Sprinkle M. R. 
Relations Between The Structure And Strength Of Certain
Organic Bases In Aqueous Solution . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
1932 , 54 , 3469 –3485 . 10.1021/ja01348a001 .
Angyal S. J. ; Warburton W. K. 
The basic
strengths of methylated guanidines . J. Chem.
Soc. 
1951 , 2492 –2494 . 10.1039/jr9510002492 .
Gimblett F. G. R. ; Monk C. B. 
E.m.f. studies of electrolytic dissociation.
Part 7.-Some
alkali and alkaline earth metal hydroxides in water . Trans. Faraday Soc. 
1954 , 50 , 965 –972 . 10.1039/TF9545000965 .
Mekalanos J. J. ; Collier R. J. ; Romig W. R. 
Enzymic
activity of cholera toxin. I. New method of assay
and the mechanism of ADP-ribosyl transfer . J.
Biol. Chem. 
1979 , 254 , 5849 –5854 .447682 
Durham J.
L. ; McLeod D. J. ; Cason J. 
Methyl hydrogen hendecanedioate . Org. Synth. 
1963 , 4 , 635 10.1002/0471264180.os038.21 .
Mallesha L. ; Mohana K. N. 
Synthesis, antimicrobial and antioxidant
activities
of 1-(1,4-benzodioxane-2-carbonyl)piperazine derivatives . Eur. J. Chem. 
2011 , 2 , 193 –199 . 10.5155/eurjchem.2.2.193-199.282 .
Ianni A. ; Waldvogel S. R. 
Reliable
and Versatile Synthesis of 2-Aryl-Substituted
Cinnamic Acid Esters . Synthesis 
2006 , 2006 , 2103 –2112 . 10.1055/s-2006-942404 .
Baughman T. W. ; Sworen J. C. ; Wagener K. B. 
The facile preparation
of alkenyl
metathesis synthons . Tetrahedron 
2004 , 60 , 10943 –10948 . 10.1016/j.tet.2004.09.021 .
Sheehan J. C. ; Bolhofer W. A. 
An Improved Procedure
for the Condensation of Potassium
Phthalimide with Organic Halides . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
1950 , 72 , 2786 –2788 . 10.1021/ja01162a527 .
Chichak K. S. ; Peters A. J. ; Cantrill S. J. ; Stoddart J. F. 
Nanoscale Borromeates . J. Org.
Chem. 
2005 , 70 , 7956 –7962 . 10.1021/jo050969b .16277315

